Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 30
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits30jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits30jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits30jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 30 of 73.

---

HtUc- 

_  r..  7:r 

u 

J 

-1 

ICO 

■CM 


ico 


> 


T^; 


m 


.J=-   *J;  r^-Jt 


ij^^^^^E 


THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED  DOCUMENTS 


VOL.  XXX 


The  edition  consists  of  sev- 
en hundred  and  fifty  sets 
all  numbered 


No 


jtn. 


The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents 


Travels  and  Explorations 
OF  THE  Jesuit  Missionaries 

IN  New  France 

1610-1791 

THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY 
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES 

EDITED  BY 

REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES 

Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin 


Vol.   XXX 
HuRONS,  Lower  Canada:   1646 -1647 


CLEVELAND:     ZbC    JButtOWS    JBtOtbCtS 

Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii 


Copyright,    1898 

BY 

The  Burrows  Brothers  Co 


ALL    RIGHTS    RESERVED 


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland 


EDITORIAL  STAFF 


Editor 


Translators  . 


Assistant  Editor 


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites 
FiNLOw  Alexander 
Percy  Favor  Bicknell 
■  Crawford  Lindsay 
William  Price 
Hiram  Allen  Sober 
Emma  Helen  Blair 


Bibliographical  Adviser      Victor  Hugo  Paltsits 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XXX 

Preface  to  Volume  XXX         .  .  -9 

Documents: — 

LX.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  ....  en 
la  Novvelle  France,  es  annees  1645. 
&  1646.  [Chaps,  iv.-viii.,  Part  II., 
completing  the  document.]  Paul 
Ragueneau,  Des  Hurons,  May  i,  1646; 
\^  Jacques  de  la  Place  ?^  undated  .      17 

LXI.  Epistola  ad  R.  P.  Vincentium  Caraffa, 
Prsepositum  Generalem  Societatis 
Jesu,  Romae.  Carolus  Gamier;  Divae 
Marias  apud  Hurones,  May  3,  1647     .    146 

LXII.    Journal    des     PP.     Jesuites.      Hierosme 
Lalemant;    Quebek,  January -Decem- 
ber, 1647  .  .  .  .152 
LXIII.    Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe   ....   en 
la    Novvelle    France,    svr    le    Grand 
Flevve    de    S.    Lavrens    en    I'annee 
1647.    [Chaps,  i.-iii.,  first  installment 
of    document.]       Hierosme    Lalemant; 
Quebek,  October  20,  1647        .  .  205 
Bibliographical  Data:  Volume  XXX  .  299 
Notes        .            .            .            •            .            .303 


ILLUSTRATION  TO  VOL.  XXX 

I.     Photographic  facsimile  of  title-page,  Relation 

of   1647         .  .  .  .  -208 


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXX 


Following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  documents  con- 
tained in  the  present  volume : 

LX.  The  Relation  of  1645-46,  as  stated  in  the 
Preface  to  Vol.  XXVIII.,  is  in  two  parts  —  Part  I. 
(dated  at  Quebec,  October  28,  1646)  being  by  the  new 
superior  of  the  Canadian  missions,  Jerome  Lalemant; 
Part  II.  (dated  in  the  Huron  country,  May  i,  1646) 
being  the  annual  report  on  the  condition  of  the  Huron 
mission,  by  Ragueneau;  but,  at  the  close  of  Rague- 
neau's  seven  chapters,  Lalemant,  without  explana- 
tion, added  an  eighth,  on  the  Miscou  mission,  which 
of  course  was  not  written  by  Ragueneau,  but  from 
internal  evidence  seems  to  be  the  work  of  Father 
Jacques  de  la  Place.  In  Vol.  XXVIIL,  we  published 
the  opening  chapters  of  Part  I.,  —  this  part  being 
concluded  in  Vol.  XXIX.,  which  also  contained  the 
first  three  chapters  of  Part  II.  In  the  present  vol- 
ume, we  give  Chaps,  iv.-viii.  of  Part  II.,  concluding 
the  document, —  Chap.  viii.  being  the  account  of  the 
Miscou  mission. 

Continuing  his  narrative,  Ragueneau  relates  many 
instances  showing  "  the  constancy  and  courage  of  the 
Huron  church,  amid  the  opposition  of  the  infidels." 
The  native  Christians  cannot  be  moved  by  threats, 
so  the  pagans  resort  to  lies  and  slanders,  "  with 
which  they  fill  the  whole  country;  "  and  they  strive 
to  corrupt  the  morals  of  the   converts.     A  few  of 


10  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXX _ 

these  relapse,  in  consequence ;  but  most  remain  true  to 
their  profession.  One  man,  assailed  by  sensual  temp- 
tations, rolls  his  naked  body  in  the  snow  until  "  those 
infernal  flames  are  entirely  quenched;  "  others,  "  in 
order  to  stifle  that  same  fire  of  hell,"  apply  burning 
coals  to  their  bodies,  asking  themselves,  "  How 
couldst  thou,  wretched  man,  bear  an  eternal  fire,  if 
thou  canst  not  accustom  thyself  to  this  ? ' '  They 
find  in  prayer  their  chief  support  in  these  trials ;  one 
utters  an  ejaculatory  prayer  two  hundred  times  in  a 
single  night,  while  others  "  travel  alone  and  by 
unfrequented  routes,  in  order  to  converse  with  God." 
"  These  good  people  imagine  that,  in  France,  every 
one  breathes  nothing  but  holiness ;  that  the  conver- 
sation of  companies  is  only  of  God;  that  vice  keeps 
itself  concealed  there  and  would  not  dare  to  appear." 
The  Christians  hold  debates  with  the  infidels,  and 
often  make  sharp  retorts  to  the  latter;  indeed,  the 
pagans  are  "  astonished  to  see  that  many  who  pre- 
viously seemed  to  them  quite  ordinary  minds,  appear 
wholly  changed  when  they  have  become  Christians. ' ' 

Father  Bressani  at  last  reaches  Huronia,  having 
been  captured  by  the  Iroquois  when  on  his  way 
thither  in  1644,  but  afterward  escaping  and  being 
sent  back  to  Europe  by  the  Dutch,  He  soon  returns, 
however,  to  resume  his  missionary  labors;  and  his 
mutilated  hands  bear  eloquent  testimony  to  the  truths 
that  he  preaches. 

Ragueneau  recounts  many  expressions  of  devotion, 
resignation,  and  penitence,  uttered  by  these  so 
recently  savage  neophytes.  He  says:  "  Tears  are  so 
rare  in  these  countries,  with  respect  to  what  con- 
cerns men,  that  I  do  not  remember,  in  almost  nine 
years  that  I  have  lived  among  the  Savages,  to  have 


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXX  11 

seen  one  of  them  weep,  except  m  sentiments  of 
piety,  and  in  keen  contrition;  "  but  they  often  shed 
tears  upon  realizing  their  sins,  or  obtaining  new 
visions  of  God's  love.  The  missionaries  are  also 
consoled  by  the  knowledge  that  they  have  secured, 
by  baptism,  the  entrance  of  various  Iroquois  captives 
into  heaven ;  and  have  converted  some  strangers 
from  remote  tribes,  who  retain  and  practice  the  in- 
structions they  have  received.  A  sick  man  is  mirac- 
ulously cured  at  the  chapel  of  Ste.  Marie ;  another, 
on  his  death-bed,  has  a  vision  of  an  angel. 

The  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  con- 
ducted by  Pijart  and  Garreau,  who  spent  most  of  the 
year  with  the  Algonkins  under  their  care ;  in  this 
pastorate,  they  suffer  many  hardships  but  are  re- 
warded by  some  visible  results  of  their  work.  By 
the  conversion  of  two  Achirigouan  Indians,  encoun- 
tered here,  a  step  is  gained  toward  the  evangelization 
of  those  remote  tribes  about  the  Great  Lakes.  One 
of  these  men  is  baptized  "  at  the  end  of  six  weeks, 
although  we  expect,  in  the  case  of  most,  probations 
of  one  and  two  years."  The  Nipissirinien  Chris- 
tians, like  their  Huron  brethren,  meet  with  much 
opposition  and  scoffing  from  the  pagans;  but  their 
courage  is  wonderfully  sustained  by  the  direct  aid  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Father  Garreau  returns  from  this 
expedition  so  ill  that,  supposing  him  at  the  point  of 
death,  his  coffin  is  made ;  but  he  is  restored  to  health 
by  a  vow  offered  to  the  Virgin. 

The  Relation  ends  (Chap,  viii..  Part  II.)  with  an 
account  of  the  Miscou  mission,  probabl}''  by  Father 
Jacques  de  la  Place  —  certainly  not  by  Ragueneau. 
Two  Indian  families  have  become  sedentary  there, 
and  others  promise  to  follow  their  example.      The 


12  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXX 

details  of  several  baptisms  are  recounted.  One  of 
these  is  that  of  an  Eskimo,  a  slave  in  Gaspe  since  his 
childhood ;  abandoned  by  his  masters,  in  a  grievous 
illness,  he  is  restored  to  health  by  the  Fathers.  As 
a  result,  several  other  persons,  aged  or  crippled,  are 
cast  by  their  tribesmen  upon  the  charity  of  the  mis- 
sion, which  thus  has  a  little  hospital  to  support.  A 
treaty  of  peace  is  negotiated  at  Isle  Percee  between 
hostile  tribes  —  the  Betsiamites  north  of  the  St.  Law- 
rence, and  the  Micmacs  of  Gaspe  and  Acadia,  ' '  who 
bore  each  other  a  mortal  hatred."  The  proceedings 
at  this  conference  are  described  at  length.  This 
peace  will  aid  the  missionaries ;  for  they  all  find 
among  the  savages  an  increasing  willingness  to 
receive  baptism. 

LXI.  Garnier  writes  from  the  Huron  country 
(May  3,  1647),  a  letter  (in  Latin)  to  Caraffa,  the  new 
father  general  of  the  Jesuits,  congratulating  him  on 
his  election,  and  thanking  him  for  a  fatherly  and 
encouraging  letter  which  he  had  written  to  the  Huron 
mission.  He,  further,  advises  the  general  that 
Ragueneau  is  doing  admirable  work  as  superior 
therein,  and  deprecates  any  change  in  that  office. 
Garnier  mentions  the  slow  and  difficult  nature  of  their 
work  for  the  Hurons,  and  makes  an  earnest  appeal 
for  more  laborers  in  this  field. 

LXH.  The  Journal  des  Jcsuites  is  continued, 
giving  the  record  for  1647.  As  before,  Lalemant 
recounts  the  New-Year's  gifts  made  and  received  by 
the  Fathers.  More  than  forty  Indians  from  Three 
Rivers  join  their  tribesmen  at  Sillery,  which  increases 
the  population  of  that  colony  to  over  200.  A  French- 
man, named  Chastillon,  urgently  desires  to  marry  an 
Indian  girl  who  has  been  educated  by  the  Ursulines;, 


PREFACE  TO   VOL.  XXX  13 

but  she  refuses  to  accept  him  and  prefers  a  husband 
from  her  own  people.  A  ballet  is  danced  at  the 
warehouse,  February  27;  no  one  is  present  from  any 
of  the  religious  houses,  "  except  the  little  Marsolet." 
Early  in  March,  beer  is  brewed  "  for  the  first  time  " 
at  Sillery. 

The  ice  begins  to  thaw  on  March  1 1 ,  at  the  end  of 
"  a  winterless  winter,"  the  past  cold  season  having 
been  unusually  mild.  Ten  days  later,  news  comes 
of  a  treacherous  attack  by  the  Iroquois,  who  capture 
a  hundred  Algonkins.  At  St.  Joseph's  feast,  the 
usual  bonfire  is  omitted  —  partly  through  Lalemant's 
opposition;  he  "hardly  relished  this  Ceremony, 
which  had  no  devotion  attending  it."  During  this 
month,  all  the  timbers  for  the  Jesuits'  new  house  are 
hauled  to  its  site ;  the  foundations  of  this  building 
are  begun  on  June  12. 

Early  in  April,  the  Hurons  at  Quebec  decide, 
against  Montmagny's  advice,  to  attack  the  Iroquois; 
and,  soon  after,  comes  news  that  the  latter  have 
made  raids  upon  Montreal,  capturing  two  Frenchmen 
and  four  Hurons.  In  consequence,  Montmagny  gives 
the  aid  of  a  half-dozen  Frenchmen  to  an  expedition 
that  leaves  Sillery,  May  4,  to  attack  the  Iroquois. 

On  May  10,  the  first  fish  are  taken.  The  news  is 
brought,  on  June  5,  that  Father  Jogues  and  his  com- 
panion Lalande  have  been  murdered  by  the  Iroquois, 
and  that  Montreal  is  in  danger  from  these  implacable 
enemies.  The  Indians  at  Sillery  are  terrified  at  this, 
and  obtain  permission  to  retire  behind  the  palisades 
of  the  Jesuit  residence  there,  which  they  also  fortify 
more  thoroughly. 

Father  Bailloquet  arrives  from  France  on  the  first 
vessel  of  the  season   (June  25);  "that  same   vessel 


14  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXX 

brought  the  ist  Horse,  of  which  the  habitans  made  a 
present  to  Monsieur  the  governor."  A  few  days 
later,  that  official  is  requested  to  permit  the  election 
of  a  procuror  syndic  by  the  habitants;  they  are 
"  referred  to  the  general  assembly."  Toward  the 
end  of  the  month,  the  cannon  are  brought  back  from 
Fort  Richelieu,  which  is  now  abandoned.  The 
priest  of  the  Ursulines  attempts  to  set  his  owm  price 
on  some  beaver  skins ;  but  these  are  confiscated,  and 
taken  from  his  room. 

Early  in  July,  the  Abenakis  ask  that  Father  Dreuil- 
lettes  may  return  to  them;  but  this  is  refused,  be- 
cause the  Capuchin  fathers  ask  that  this  field  of  labor 
be  left  to  them.  On  the  19th,  a  consultation  is  held 
by  the  Jesuits,  concerning  ' '  the  Beaver  trade  carried 
on  at  Sillery."  The  matter  is  thus  decided:  "  That, 
if  the  warehouse  were  reasonable,  we  were  obliged  in 
conscience  not  to  divert  the  trade  elsewhere.  If  it 
were  not  reasonable,  we  might  with  conscience  dis- 
simulate—  the  habitans  having  the  right,  by  nature 
and  from  the  king,  to  trade.  That,  whether  the 
warehouse  were  reasonable  or  not,  we  were  not 
compelled  to  trade."  July  21,  the  habitants  elect 
Jean  Bourdon  as  their  procuror  syndic,  and  set  aside 
their  former  directors.  Some  men,  while  drinking 
and  smoking,  set  fire  to  the  building  where  they 
sleep,  and  one  Bastien,  a  servant  of  the  Jesuits,  and 
a  dissipated  fellow,  is  burned  to  death  while  drunk- 
en ;  consequently,  his  body  is  not  buried  in  conse- 
crated ground. 

This  year,  a  change  takes  place  in  the  government 
of  the  Canadian  colonies,  by  which  is  formed  a  coun- 
cil of  three  persons,  one  of  whom  is  to  be  the  supe- 
rior of  the  Jesuits.     Several  new  missionaries  arrive 


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXX  15 


this  year — Fathers   Bailloquet,    Grelon,   and  Bonin, 
and  some  lay  brethren. 

Early  in  September,  the  Sillery  Indians  return 
from  the  war-path,  bringing  one  Iroquois  captive, 
who  is  burned  at  Sillery.  ' '  He  lived  in  the  torments 
only  one  hour ;  his  body  was  thrown  into  the  water ; 
he  was  baptized,  and  died  piously."  This  year,  the 
Hurons  do  not  come  down,  largely  through  fear  of 
the  Iroquois.  In  November,  news  comes  that  the 
Abenakis,  w4th  whom  Dreuillettes  is  wintering,  are 
perishing  with  hunger.  Christmas  is  celebrated, 
as  usual,  with  many  religious  ceremonies.  }*lont- 
magny  and  Bourdon  make  several  presents  to  the 
Jesuits,  —  game,  fish,  and  Spanish  wine.  Their 
house,  begun  in  June,  is  ready  for  occupation  before 
New -Year's. 

LXIII.  The  Relation  of  1647  consists  of  but  one 
part, — written  by  Jerome  Lalemant,  as  superior,  and 
dated  at  Quebec,  October  20,  1647.  In  a  prefatory 
note,  Lalemant  mentions  the  renewed  incursions  of 
the  treacherous  Iroquois,  especiall}'  their  murder  of 
Father  Jogues  and  his  companion,  and  their  suc- 
cesses against  the  Algonkins,  which  enable  them 
to  block  the  upper  rivers  against  access  in  either 
direction.  Consequently,  the  report  for  the  Huron 
mission  has  not  reached  Quebec;  but  other  letters 
received  there,  by  wa}'  of  the  northern  tribes,  indi- 
cate that  the  Huron  church  is  flourishing  and  even 
increasing.  New  missionaries  are  demanded  there, 
whom  Lalemant  consents  to  send,  although  hesitat- 
ing to  risk  so  many  precious  lives. 

He  begins  the  Relation  proper  (of  which  we  have 
space  in  this  volume  for  but  the  three  opening  chap- 
ters) by  describing  the  treachery  of  the  Iroquois  — 


16  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXX 

the  Mohawks,  who  had  made  peace  with  the  French 
a  year  before,  being  the  first  to  break  it,  and  per- 
suading the  other  Iroquois  tribes  to  attack  the  French, 
Jogues  goes  on  a  third  expedition  to  these  savages,  to 
open  a  mission  among  them.  Hardly  has  he  reached 
them,  ere  he  dies  by  their  hands  (October  i8,  1646). 
Lalemant  proceeds  to  describe  the  subsequent  incur- 
sions of  the  Iroquois  into  Canada,  and  their  cruel 
treatment  of  their  captives;  on  one  of  these  raids, 
the  Christian  chief  Pieskaret  is  perfidiously  slain. 
He  also  narrates  the  trial  and  hardships  endured  by 
several  Algonkin  women  who  escaped  their  hands, 
and  succeeded  in  reaching  Quebec.  Some  Algon- 
kins  also  succeed,  on  one  occasion,  in  surprising  and 
killing  a  party  of  Iroquois. 

The  Editor  has,  of  late,  received  valuable  assistance 
in  investigations  in  French  archives,  from  Pere  Ca- 
mille  de  Rochemonteix,  S.J.,  of  the  Versailles  house 
of  the  order;  Dr.  Charles  H.  Haskins,  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Wisconsin ;  and  M.  A.  Vidier,  of  the  Biblio- 
theque  Nationale,  Paris. 

R.  G.  T. 

Madison,  Wis.,  September,  1898. 


LX   (concluded) 

Relation  of  164^-46 

Paris:    SEBASTIEN  ET  GABRIEL  CRAMOISY,    1647 


This  document  was   commenced   in  Volume  XXVIi!.;    it 
occupied  all  of  Volume  XXIX.,  and  is  herewith  completed. 


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 


[37]  CHAPITRE  IV. 

ESPREUUE     DE     LA     CONSTANCE     &     DU     COURAGE     DE 

CETTE    EGLISE,    PARMY    LES    OPPOSITIONS 

DES    INFIDELES. 

VN  des  premiers  Chrefliens  de  ce  pais,  parlant  il 
y  a  quelque  temps  \  vn  nouueau  Catechumene, 
qui  luy  demandoit  quelque  aduis  auant  que  de 
receuoir  le  Baptefme,  luy  refpondit;  Mon  frere.ie 
n'ay  que  deux  chofes  k  te  dire.  La  premiere  que 
iamais  tu  ne  feras  bon  Chreftien,  fi  tu  ne  fouffres 
beaucoup  d'iniures  &  de  calomnies  pour  ta  foy :  quand 
tu  te  verras  hay  des  infideles,  mefme  de  ceux  qui 
maintenant  ont  plus  d'amour  pour  toy,  alors  refiouis 
toy,  &  penfe  que  vrayment  tu  commences  a  eftre 
Chreftien.  La  feconde  que  tu  prennes  garde  a  ne 
te  pas  indigner  contre  ceux  qui  te  feront  fouffrir: 
prie  Dieu  pour  eux,  &  dis  luy  dans  ton  coeur  qu'il 
leur  faffe  mifericorde,  &  leur  donne  a  connoiflre  le 
mal-heur  dans  lequel  ils  viuent. 

En  effet  ce  bon  Chreftien  auoit  raifon;  [38]  car  il 
eft  vray  que  la  marque  la  plus  affeuree  que  nous 
ayons  en  ces  pais  de  la  foy  d'vn  Chreftien,  eft  de  le 
voir  incontinent  accueilly  de  la  calomnie:  &  fi  la  foy 
de  quelques-vns  nous  eft  douteufe,  fi  d'aucuns  apo- 
ftafient,  ayans  receu  le  Saint  Baptefme,  ce  font  ceux 
iuftement  qui  viuoient  le  plus  en  repos,  &  comme  ^ 
couuert  de  I'orage. 

Ignace  Oijakonchiaronk  vn  des  plus  riches,  &  des 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  1^ 


[37]  CHAPTER  IV. 

TRIAL   OF     THE     CONSTANCY     AND     COURAGE     OF     THIS 

CHURCH    AMID    THE    OPPOSITION   OF 

THE   INFIDELS. 

ONE  of  the  first  Christians  of  this  country,  speak- 
ing some  time  ago  to  a  new  Catechumen  who 
was  asking  of  him  some  advice  before  receiv- 
ing Baptism,  answered  him:  "  My  brother,  I  have 
only  two  things  to  say  to  thee.  The  first  is,  that 
thou  wilt  never  be  a  good  Christian  if  thou  dost  not 
suffer  many  insults  and  calumnies  for  thy  faith : 
when  thou  shalt  see  thyself  hated  by  the  infidels, 
even  by  those  who  now  have  most  love  for  thee,  then 
rejoice,  and  think  that  truly  thou  art  beginning  to 
be  a  Christian.  The  second,  that  thou  take  care  not 
to  be  indignant  at  those  who  shall  make  thee  suffer ; 
pray  to  God  for  them,  and  tell  him  in  thy  heart  that 
he  shall  show  mercy  to  them,  and  enable  them  to 
understand  the  wretched  condition  in  which  they 
live." 

Indeed,  this  good  Christian  was  right;  [38]  for  it 
is  true  that  the  surest  mark  that  we  have,  in  these 
countries,  of  the  faith  of  a  Christian,  is  to  see  him 
straightway  greeted  with  calumny.  And  if  the  faith 
of  some  seems  doubtful  to  us,  if  some  become  apostates 
after  receiving  Holy  Baptism, — they  are  precisely 
those  who  were  living  most  in  repose,  and  as  it  were, 
sheltered  from  the  storm. 

Ignace  Oiiakonchiaronk,  —  one  of  the  richest  and 


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES         [Vol.30 

plus  aimez  du  Bourg  de  S.  Ignace,  auant  qu'il  euft 
receu  la  foy ;  ne  la  pas  pluftoft  embraff^e,  qu'il  a  veu 
les  affedlions  de  tout  fon  Bourg  changees  pour  luy; 
on  a  cherche  les  occafions  de  raffomtner,  &  le  coup 
n'ayant  pas  reiiffi,  afin  de  pouuoir  plus  impunement 
s'en  defaire,  on  I'a  puiffammet  accufe  d'eftre  du 
nombre  de  ces  Sorciers  cachez,  qu'il  eft  permis  a  vn 
chacun  de  maffacrer,  comme  vne  vicftime  publique, 
&  la  caufe  des  maladies  qui  tirent  en  longueur,  &  dont 
on  ne  peut  obtenir  guerifon. 

Ce  bon  Chreftien  ne  s'eft  pas  eftonne,  fe  voyant 
attaque  de  fi  prez,  en  vne  chofe  fi  fenfible;  il  s'eft 
roidy  contre  cette  tempefte,  &  la  tentation  n'a  ferui 
qu'a  faire  eclatter  dauantage  fa  foy  &  fon  courage. 
[39]  le  commence  a  cognoiftre,  a-il  dit  tout  publique- 
ment,  que  mon  coeur  ne  me  trompe  pas,  &  que  ma 
foy  eft  veritable,  puis  qu'elle  eft  vn  obiet  de  haine: 
Si  on  a  pris  deffein  de  me  faire  perdre  ou  la  vie,  ou 
la  foy,  qu'on  fe  hafte  de  me  maffacrer  au  pluftoft. 
Mon  ame  ne  tient  point  h.  mon  corps,  &  ie  ne  feray 
pas  pour  parer  a  ma  mort;  ie  baifferay  la  telle 
deuant  celuy  qui  me  voudra  tuer  comme  Chreftien. 
Qu'on  ne  cherche  point  de  pretextes,  &  qu'on  ait 
auffi  peu  de  crainte  de  faire  en  ma  perfonne  vn  coup 
d'effay,  que  i'en  ay  de  le  receuoir:  on  verra  que  les 
Chreftiens  ne  palliffent  pas  a  la  mort,  &  que  leur 
foy  eft  h.  I'efpreuue  de  ce  qu'on  eftime  de  plus  effroy- 
able  en  ce  monde. 

Le  bon  eft  que  fon  zele  n'en  demeura  pas  Ik.  II 
a  conuerty  fa  famille,  fa  femme,  fes  enfans,  fes 
neueux ;  &  depuis  ce  temps-Ik,  il  ne  ceff e  de  publier 
aux  infideles  les  grandeurs  de  la  foy,  que  tons  admi- 
rent  en  luy,  mais  que  ceux  qui  n'ont  pas  fon  courage, 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i64S-4(>  21 

most  popular  men  in  the  Village  of  St.  Ignace,  before 
he  had  received  the  faith, —  no  sooner  embraced  it 
than  he  saw  the  affections  of  his  whole  Village 
changed  toward  him.  Opportunities  were  sought  for 
beating  him  to  death,  and, —  these  attacks  not  being 
successful, —  that  they  might  get  rid  of  him  with  more 
impunity,  he  was  vigorously  accused  of  being  in  the 
number  of  those  secret  Sorcerers  whom  every  one  is 
permitted  to  slay  as  a  public  victim,  and  as  the  cause 
of  diseases  which  become  protracted,  and  for  which 
a  cure  cannot  be  obtained. 

This  good  Christian  was  not  astonished,  seeing 
himself  so  closely  attacked  at  a  point  so  sensitive ; 
he  braced  himself  against  that  storm,  and  the  temp- 
tation has  served  only  to  give  more  luster  to  his  faith 
and  his  courage.  [39]  "  I  begin  to  know,"  he  said 
openly  in  public,  "  that  my  heart  does  not  deceive 
me,  and  that  my  faith  is  genuine,  since  it  is  an 
object  of  hatred.  If  they  have  formed  the  design  of 
making  me  lose  either  life  or  the  faith,  let  them 
hasten  to  slay  me  as  soon  as  possible.  My  soul  does 
not  cling  to  my  body,  and  I  will  not  attempt  to  parry 
my  death ;  I  will  lower  my  head  before  the  man  who 
shall  choose  to  kill  me  as  a  Christian.  Let  them  not 
seek  pretexts,  and  let  them  have  as  little  fear  to  deal 
the  first  blow  at  my  person,  as  I  have  to  receive  it; 
they  will  see  that  the  Christians  do  not  pale  at  death, 
and  that  their  faith  is  proof  against  that  which  is 
considered  most  frightful  in  this  world. ' ' 

The  good  thing  is,  that  his  zeal  did  not  stop  there. 
He  has  converted  his  family, —  his  wife,  his  children, 
and  his  nephews ;  and  since  that  time,  he  does  not 
cease  to  publish  to  the  infidels  the  excellence  of  the 
faith,  which  all  admire  in  him,  but  which  those  who 


22  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  JJ^SUITES  [Vol.30 

ne  peuuent  fe  refoudre  d'achepter  au  prix  des  calom- 
nies  dont  ils  le  voyent  perfecute. 

La  foy  ne  trouue  point  de  diftindtion  entre  les 
fexes.  Vne  femme  de  ce  mefme  [40]  Bourg,  nom- 
mee  Luce  Andotraaon,  s'eftant  rendue  Chreftienne, 
auoit  abandonne  vne  certaine  danfe,  la  plus  celebre 
du  pais,  a  caufe  qu'on  la  croit  la  plus  puiffante  fur 
les  Demons,  pour  procurer  par  leur  moyen  la  gueri- 
fon  de  quelques  maladies.  Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  cette 
danfe  n'eft  que  de  gens  choifis,  qui  y  font  admis 
auec  ceremonie,  auec  de  grands  prefens,  &  apres  vne 
proteftation  qu'ils  font  aux  grands  maiftres  de  cette 
Confrerie  de  tenir  fecrets  les  myfleres  qu'on  leur 
confie,  comme  chofes  faintes  &  facrees. 

Vn  Capitaine  fort  confiderable,  des  premiers  offi- 
ciers  de  ces  ceremonies  myfterieufes,  eftant  venu 
trouuer  cette  Chreftienne,  qui  auoit  renonce  a  leur 
danfe ;  I'ayant  tiree  a  part,  luy  dift  fecretement  qu'il 
venoit  luy  donner  aduis  du  deffein  qu'on  auoit  fur 
elle :  qu'en  vn  confeil  fecret  qu'auoient  tenu  les 
principaux  de  cette  danfe,  on  auoit  refolu  de  la  fur- 
prendre  cet  Efte  prochain  en  fon  champ,  &  luy  fendre 
la  tefte,  luy  enleuer  la  cheuelure,  &  couurir  par  ce 
moyen  le  meu[r]tre  qu'on  feroit,  le  foupgon  en  deuant 
tomber  fur  les  ennemis  Iroquois :  que  I'vnique  moyen 
de  parer  a  ce  coup,  efloit  [41]  d'abandonner  la  foy, 
&  rentrer  dans  la  danfe  dont  elle  eftoit  fortie, 

Cette  femme  fit  paroiftre  en  cette  occafion,  que  fa 
foy  eftoit  plus  forte  que  la  mort.  lis  m'obligeront, 
luy  dift-elle,  de  me  faire  mourir  pour  vn  fi  bon  fuiet; 
&  toy  tu  m'obliges  de  m'en  aduertir  en  ami;  car 
maintenant   ie    penferay    auec   plus    de    verity    que 


1646-47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  23 

have  not  his  courage  cannot  resolve  to  buy  at  the  cost 
of  the  calumnies  with  which  they  see  him  persecuted. 

The  faith  finds  no  distinction  between  the  sexes. 
A  woman  of  that  same  [40]  Village,  named  Luce 
Andotraaon,  having  become  a  Christian,  had  given  up 
a  certain  dance, —  the  most  celebrated  in  the  country, 
because  it  is  believed  the  most  powerful  over  the 
Demons  to  procure,  by  their  means,  the  healing  of 
certain  diseases.  Be  this  as  it  may,  that  dance  is 
only  for  chosen  people,  who  are  admitted  to  it  with 
ceremony,  with  great  gifts,  and  after  a  declaration 
which  they  make  to  the  grand  masters  of  this  Broth- 
erhood, to  keep  secret  the  mysteries  that  are  intrusted 
to  them,  as  things  holy  and  sacred.^ 

A  Captain  of  high  standing  among  the  chief  offi- 
cers of  these  mysterious  ceremonies,  came  to  find 
that  Christian  woman  who  had  renounced  their 
dance ;  having  taken  her  aside,  he  told  her  in  confi- 
dence, that  he  came  to  give  her  warning  of  the 
design  which  they  had  against  her.  He  said  that, 
in  a  secret  council  which  the  leaders  of  that  dance 
had  held,  they  had  resolved  to  surprise  her  the  next 
Summer  in  her  field,  to  split  her  head,  and  remove 
her  scalp, —  by  that  means  concealing  the  murder 
that  would  be  committed,  the  suspicion  of  it  being 
likely  to  fall  on  the  Iroquois  enemies.  He  told  her 
that  the  only  means  of  averting  this  blow  was  [41] 
to  abandon  the  faith,  and  come  back  into  the  dance 
from  which  she  had  gone  forth. 

This  woman  made  manifest,  on  this  occasion,  that 
her  faith  was  stronger  than  death.  "  They  will 
oblige  me,"  she  said  to  him,  "  by  making  me  die  for 
so  good  a  cause ;  and  thou  obligest  me  by  warning 
me  of  it  as  a  friend :  for  now  I  shall  think,  with  more 


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 

iamais,  que  ie  fuis  morte  au  monde,  &  que  ie  dois 
viure  &.  Dieu  feul. 

Nous  verros  c^t  Efte  quels  ferSt  les  effets  de  cette 
menace,  Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  les  grands  maiftres 
de  cette  danfe,  n'ont  pas  differe  fi  long-te[ni]ps  a  faire 
paroiftre  les  deffeins  qu'ils  ont  de  s'oppofer  aux 
progrez  de  la  foy.  lis  ont  follicite  plufieurs  Chre- 
ftiens  "k  renoncer  au  Chriltianifme,  &  fe  ranger  de 
leur  party :  leurs  pourfuittes  importunes,  leurs  pro- 
meffes,  leurs  menaces,  &  les  prefens  qu'ils  n'ont 
pas  ^pargne,  en  ont  emporte  quelques-vns  des  plus 
foibles:  mais  apres  tout,  Ie  petit  nombre  qui  s'eft 
laiffe  tomber,  nonobflant  tous  ces  grands  efforts,  nous 
a  fait  reconnoiftre  la  viue  foy  de  la  meilleure  part, 
&  a  ferui  pour  animer  les  bons  Chreftiens  [42]  dans 
I'atente  d'vne  guerre  plus  rude,  &  d'vn  combat  qui 
aille  iufqu'au  fang,  &  qui  nous  faffe  des  Martyrs, 
qu'ils  voyent  affez  ne  pouuoir  leur  manquer,  s'ils 
continuent  "k  eftre  fideles  k  leur  foy. 

Mais  il  femble  que  les  infideles  fe  defient  eux- 
mefmes  de  leurs  forces ;  ou  pluftoft  ils  iugent  bien 
que  la  foy  eleue  tellement  vne  ame,  au  deffus  de  tous 
les  malheurs  de  la  terre,  qu'elle  ne  peut  auoir  de 
crainte  d'vn  mal  qui  n'eff  pas  eternel.  Pour  done 
fapper  les  fondemens  de  nollre  foy,  ils  ont  tache  de 
les  6branler,  par  des  faufetez  qu'ils  controuuent,  & 
dont  ils  rempliffent  tout  Ie  pais. 

Tantoft  ils  font  courrir  Ie  bruit,  que  quelques 
Algon quins  font  retournez  fraifchement  d'vn  voyage 
fort  61oigne,  dans  lequel  s'eftans  6garez  en  des  pais 
iufques  alors  inconnus,  ils  ont  trouue  des  villes  fort 
peuplees,  habitues  feulement  des  ames  qui  autrefois 
auoient  vefcu  d'vne  vie  femblable  a  la  noftre:  que 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  46  25 

truth  than  ever,  that   I  am  dead  to  the  world,  and 
that  I  must  live  to  God  alone." 

We  shall  see  this  Summer  what  will  be  the  effects 
of  that  threat.  However,  the  grand  masters  of  that 
dance  have  not  long  deferred  the  revelation  of  the 
designs  which  they  have  of  opposing  themselves  to 
the  progress  of  the  faith.  They  have  solicited  many 
Christians  to  renounce  Christianity,  and  to  array 
themselves  on  their  side ;  their  importunate  pursuit, 
their  promises,  their  threats,  and  the  gifts  which 
they  have  not  spared,  have  carried  away  some  of  the 
weakest  of  these.  But,  after  all,  the  small  number, 
notwithstanding  all  these  great  efforts,  of  those  who 
have  allowed  themselves  to  fall  away,  has  caused  us 
to  recognize  the  lively  faith  of  the  majority,  and  has 
served  to  animate  the  good  Christians  [42]  in  the 
expectation  of  a  ruder  war,  and  of  a  combat  which 
may  proceed  even  to  blood,  and  which  may  make  for 
us  Martyrs;  these,  they  plainly  see,  cannot  fail  them 
if  they  continue  to  be  true  to  their  faith. 

But  it  seems  that  the  infidels  themselves  distrust 
their  forces;  or,  rather,  they  well  judge  that  the 
faith  so  lifts  a  soul  above  all  the  misfortunes  of  the 
earth,  that  it  can  have  no  dread  of  an  evil  which  is 
not  eternal.  In  order,  then,  to  sap  the  foundations 
of  our  faith,  they  have  tried  to  shake  them  by  false- 
hoods which  they  invent,  and  with  which  they  fill 
the  whole  country. 

At  one  time  the}^  circulate  the  rumor  that  some 
Algonquins  have  recently  returned  from  a  very 
distant  journey, —  in  which,  having  gone  astray  in 
countries  till  then  unknown,  they  have  found  very 
populous  cities,  inhabited  only  by  the  souls  which 
formerly  had  lived  a  life  similar  to  ours.    They  say  that 


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES         [Vol.30 

la  ils  ont  entendu  des  merueilles:  qu'on  leur  a 
affeur6  que  ce  sot  fables,  ce  qu'on  dit  du  Paradis  & 
de  [43]  I'Enfer:  qu'il  efl  vray  que  les  ames  font  im- 
mortelles; mais  qu'au  fortir  du  premier  corps  qu'ils 
•ont  eu,  elles  fe  voyent  en  liberte,  recouurent  vn 
corps  tout  nouueau,  plus  vigoureux  que  le  premier,  vn 
pais  plus  heureux,  &  qu'ainfi  nos  ames  a  la  mort 
quittet  leurs  corps,  k  la  fagon  de  ceux  qui  abandon- 
nent  vne  cabane  &  vne  terre  vf6e,  pour  en  chercher 
vne  plus  neufue  &  de  meilleur  rapport. 

D'autres  fois  il  efl  venu,  dit-on,  des  nouuelles  affeu- 
rees,  qu'il  efl  apparu  dans  les  bois,  vn  phantofme 
d'vne  prodigieufe  grandeur,  qui  porte  d'vne  main 
des  efpics  de  bled  d'Inde,  &  de  I'autre  grande  abon- 
dance  de  poiffon ;  qui  dit  que  c'eft  luy  feul  qui  a  cree 
les  hommes,  qui  leur  a  enfeign6  a  cultiuer  la  terre, 
&  qui  a  peuple  tous  les  lacs  &  les  mers  de  poiffon, 
afin  que  rien  ne  peufl  manquer  pour  le  viure  des 
hommes,  qu'il  reconnoiffoit  pour  enfans,  quoy  qu'eux 
ne  le  reconnuff ent  pas  encore  pour  leur  pere :  ainfi 
qu'vn  enfant  au  berceau,  qui  n'a  pas  le  iugement 
affez  ferme,  pour  reconnoiflre  ceux  aufquels  il  doit 
tout  ce  qu'il  [44]  efl,  &  tout  I'entretien  de  fa  vie. 
Mais  ce  phantofme  adioufloit,  difoit-on,  que  nos  ames 
eflant  fepa,rees  de  nos  corps,  auroient  alors  vne  plus 
grande  cognoiffance,  qu' elles  verroient  que  c'eft  de 
luy  qu  elles  tiennent  la  vie,  &  qu'alors  luy  rendant 
les  honneurs  qu'il  merite,  il  augmenteroit  &  fon  amour 
&  fes  foins  pour  elles;  qu'il  leur  feroit  du  bien  k 
toutes,  &  que  c'efloiet  des  faulfetez  de  croire  qu'il  y 
en  eufl  aucune  deflinee  pour  vn  lieu  de  fupplices, 
&  pour  des  feux  qui  ne  font  point  deffous  la  terre, 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i64S-4(>  27 

there  they  have  heard  wonders, —  that  they  have  been 
assured  that  these  things  which  are  said  of  Paradise 
and  of  Hell  are  fables ;  [43]  that  it  is  true  that  souls 
are  immortal,  but  that,  upon  exit  from  the  first  bodies 
which  they  had,  they  see  themselves  at  liberty,  and 
gain  entirely  new  bodies,  more  vigorous  than  the 
first,  and  a  more  blissful  country ;  and  that  thus  our 
souls,  at  death,  leave  their  bodies  in  the  manner  of 
those  who  abandon  a  cabin  and  an  exhausted  soil,  in 
order  to  seek  one  newer  and  more  productive. 

At  other  times  there  have  come,  it  is  said,  certain 
news  that  there  has  appeared  in  the  woods  a  phan- 
tom of  prodigious  size,  who  bears  in  one  hand  ears 
of  Indian  corn,  and,  in  the  other,  a  great  abundance 
of  fish ;  who  says  that  it  is  he  alone  who  has  created 
men,  who  has  taught  them  to  till  the  earth,  and  who 
has  stocked  all  the  lakes  and  the  seas  with  fish,  so 
that  nothing  might  fail  for  the  livelihood  of  men. 
These  he  recognized  as  children,  although  they  did 
not  yet  recognize  him  as  their  father, — just  like  an 
infant  in  the  cradle,  who  has  not  firm  enough  judg- 
ment to  recognize  those  to  whom  he  owes  all  that  he 
[44]  is,  and  all  the  support  of  his  life.  But  this  phan- 
tom added,  they  said,  that  our  souls,  being  separated 
from  our  bodies,  would  then  have  a  greater  knowl- 
edge ;  that  they  would  see  that  it  is  from  him  that 
they  hold  life ;  and  that  then,  upon  rendering  him  the 
honors  which  he  deserves,  he  would  increase  both  his 
love  and  his  cares  for  them, —  that  he  would  do  good 
to  them  all.  He  also  said  that  to  believe  that  any  one 
of  them  was  destined  to  a  place  of  torments  and  to  the 
fires,  which  are  not  beneath  the  earth,  were  false 
notions, — with  which,  nevertheless,  we  treacherously 
strive  to  terrify  them. 


28  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  SO 

dont   toutesfois   on    tache    faulfement   de   les    epou- 
uanter. 

Enfin  comme  il  eft  vray  que  le  menfonge  fe  de- 
guife  en  mille  fagons,  &  que  fouuent  plus  qu'il  y  a 
d  impudence,  plus  il  trouue  d'entr6e  dans  les  efprits; 
Sans  chercher  fi  au  loin  des  nouuelles  forgees,  on 
en  a  fait  venir  de  noftre  maifon  mefme :  &  ce  font 
celles  qui  ont  trouue  plus  de  creance,  qui  ont  le  plus 
epouuante  les  fimples,  &  qui  ont  fait  la  plus  puif- 
fante  rhetorique  des  ennemis  de  noftre  foy.  On  a 
dit  qu'vne  Chreitienne  Huronne,  de  celles  [45]  qui 
font  enterrees  en  noftre  cemetierre,  eftoit  refufcitee; 
qu'elles  auoit  dit  que  les  Frangois  eftoient  des  im- 
pofteurs :  que  fon  ame  en  effet  eftant  fortie  du  corps, 
auoit  efte  menee  au  Ciel ;  que  les  Frangois  I'y  auoient 
accueillie,  mais  a  la  fagon  qu'on  regoit  vn  captif 
Iroquois  a  I'entree  de  leurs  Bourgs,  auec  des  tifons 
&  des  torches  ardentes,  auec  des  cruautez  &  des 
fupplices  inconceuables.  Que  tout  le  Ciel  n'eft  rien 
que  feu,  &  que  la  le  contentement  des  Frangois,  eft 
de  bruler  tantoft  les  vns  tantoft  les  autres ;  &  qu'afin 
d'auoir  quantite  de  cesames  captiues,  qui  fontl'obiet 
de  leurs  plaifirs,  ils  trauerfent  les  mers,  ils  viennent 
en  ces  contrees,  comme  en  vn  pais  de  conquefte,  de 
mefme  qu'vn  Huron  s'expofe  auec  ioye  aux  fatigues, 
&  a  tons  les  dangers  de  la  guerre,  dans  I'efperance 
de  ramener  quelque  captif.  Que  ce  font  les  Chre- 
ftiens  Hurons,  Algonquins,  Montagnais,  qui  font  ainfi 
brulez  au  Ciel,  comme  captifs  de  guerre,  &  que  ceux 
qui  n'ont  point  voulu  en  ce  monde  fe  rendre  efclaues 
des  Frangois,  ny  receuoir  [46]  leurs  loix,  vont  apres 
cette  vie  en  vn  lieu  de  delices,  ou  tout  le  bien  abonde, 
&  dont  tout  le  mal  eft  banny. 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-  4^  29 

Finally, —  since  it  is  true  that  lying  disguises  itself 
in  a  thousand  ways,  and  that  often  the  more  impu- 
dence there  is,  the  more  it  finds  entrance  into  men's 
minds, — without  seeking  so  far  away  for  forged 
news,  some  was  made  to  come  from  our  very  house ; 
and  this  it  is  which  has  found  most  credit,  which  has 
most  awed  the  simple,  and  which  has  constituted  the 
most  powerful  rhetoric  of  the  enemies  of  our  faith. 
It  was  said  that  a  Huron  Christian  woman,  of  those 
[45]  who  are  buried  in  our  cemetery,  had  risen  again ; 
that  she  had  said  that  the  French  were  impostors ; 
that  her  soul,  having  left  the  body,  had  actually 
been  taken  to  Heaven ;  that  the  French  had  welcomed 
it  there,  but  in  the  manner  in  which  an  Iroquois 
captive  is  received  at  the  entrance  to  their  Villages, — 
with  firebrands  and  burning  torches,  with  cruelties 
and  torments  inconceivable.  She  had  related  that 
all  Heaven  is  nothing  but  fire,  and  that  there  the 
satisfaction  of  the  French  is  to  burn  now  some,  now 
others;  and  that,  in  order  to  possess  many  of  these 
captive  souls,  which  are  the  object  of  their  pleasures, 
they  cross  the  seas,  and  come  into  these  regions  as 
into  a  land  of  conquest,  just  as  a  Huron  exposes  him- 
self with  joy  to  the  fatigues  and  all  the  dangers  of  war, 
in  the  hope  of  bringing  back  some  captive.  It  was 
further  said  that  those  who  are  thus  burned  in  Heav- 
en, as  captives  of  war,  are  the  Huron,  Algonquin, 
and  Montagnais  Christians,  and  that  those  who  have 
not  been  willing  in  this  world  to  render  themselves 
slaves  of  the  French,  or  to  receive  [46]  their  laws, 
go  after  this  life  into  a  place  of  delights,  where 
everything  good  abounds,  and  whence  all  evil  is 
banished. 

This  risen   woman  added,   they  said,   that,   after 


30  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  30 

Cette  femme  refufcitee  adioultoit,  difoit-on,  qu'a- 
pres  auoir  efte  ainfi  tourmentee  dans  le  Ciel,  vn  iour 
entier,  qui  luy  f embloit  plus  long  que  nos  ann^es ;  la 
nuidt  eftant  venue,  elle  s'efloit  fentie  reueillee  des  le 
commecement  de  fon  fommeil:  qu'vn  certain  emeu 
de  compaffion  pour  elle,  luy  auoit  rompu  fes  liens  & 
fes  chaifnes,  &  luy  auoit  monftre  ^  I'ecart  vne  vallee 
profonde,  qui  defcendoit  en  terre,  &  qui  conduifoit 
en  ce  lieu  de  delices,  ou  vont  les  ames  des  Hurons 
infideles :  que  de  loin  elle  auoit  veu  leurs  bourgades 
&  leurs  champs,  &  auoic  entendu  leurs  voix,  comme 
de  gens  qui  danfent  &  qui  font  en  feil:in :  Mais  qu'elle 
auoit  voulu  retourner  en  fon  corps,  autant  de  tem'ps 
qu'il  en  falloit  pour  aduertir  ceux  qui  eftoient  la  pre- 
fens,  d'vne  nouuelle  fi  effroyable,  &  de  ce  grand  mal- 
heur  qui  les  attendoit  a  la  mort,  s'ils  continuoient  k 
croire  aux  impoftures  des  Fran9ois. 

Cette  nouuelle  f ut  bien-toft  repandue  [47]  par  tout : 
on  la  croyoit  dans  le  pais  fans  contredit:  a  faind; 
lofeph  on  la  faifoit  venir  des  Chreftiens  de  la  Con- 
ception; dans  le  Bourg  de  la  Conception  on  difoit 
qu'elle  venoit  de  S.  lean  Baptifte,  &  la  il  fe  difoit 
que  les  Chreftiens  de  faindt  Michel  en  auoient  decou- 
uert  le  fecret ;  mais  que  nous  auios  corrompu  k  force 
de  prefens,  ceux  qui  I'auoient  veu  de  leurs  yeux,  & 
qu'ils  ne  I'auoient  ofe  dire  qu'a  quelques-vns.de  leurs 
intimes.  En  vn  mot,  c'eftoit  vn  article  de  foy 
pour  tous  les  infideles,  &  mefme  quelques-vns  des 
Chreftiens  le  croyoient  quafi  a  demy. 

Lk  deff us  on  difoit  merueilles ;  &  pour  confirmer 
plus  folidement  cette  verite,  ils  difoient  qu'en  effet 
le  lieu  du  feu  n'eft  pas  le  centre  de  la  terre,  mais 
bien  le  Ciel,  ou  nous  voyons  monter  &  les  feux  & 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  31 


having  been  thus  tormented  in  Heaven  a  whole  day, — 
which  seemed  to  her  longer  than  our  years, —  the 
night  having  come,  she  had  felt  herself  roused,  near 
the  beginning  of  her  sleep;  that  a  certain  person, 
moved  with  compassion  for  her,  had  broken  her 
bonds  and  chains,  and  had  shown  her,  at  one  side,  a 
deep  valley  which  descended  into  the  earth,  and 
which  led  into  that  place  of  delights  whither  the 
souls  of  the  infidel  Hurons  go ;  that  from  afar  she 
had  seen  their  villages  and  their  fields,  and  had  heard 
their  voices,  as  of  people  who  dance  and  who  are 
feasting:.  But  she  had  chosen  to  return  into  her 
body,  as  long  as  was  necessary  to  warn  those  who 
were  there  present  of  such  terrible  news,  and  of  that 
great  misfortune  which  awaited  them  at  death,  if 
they  continued  to  believe  in  the  impostures  of  the 
French. 

This  news  was  soon  spread  [47]  everywhere;  it 
was  believed  in  the  country  without  gainsaying.  At 
saint  Joseph,  it  was  made  to  come  from  the  Chris- 
tians of  la  Conception ;  in  the  Village  of  la  Concep- 
tion, it  was  said  to  come  from  St.  Jean  Baptiste;  and 
there  it  was  reported  that  the  Christians  of  saint 
Michel  had  discovered  this  secret,  but  that  we  had 
corrupted,  by  many  presents,  those  who  had  seen  it 
with  their  own  eyes,  and  that  they  had  not  dared  to 
tell  it  except  to  some  of  their  intimates.  In  a  word, 
it  was  an  article  of  faith  for  all  the  infidels,  and  even 
some  of  the  Christians  almost  half  believed  it. 

Thereupon,  wonders  were  told;  and,  in  order  to 
confirm  this  truth  more  substantially,  they  said  that 
in  reality  the  place  of  the  fire  is  not  the  center  of  the 
earth,  but  rather  the  Sky,  to  which  we  see  fires  and 
flames  ascend.     They  added  that  the  Sun  was  a  fire, 


32  LES  RELA  TIONS  DBS  jtSUITES  [Vol.  30 

les  flammes :  on  adiouftoit  que  le  Soleil  efloit  vn  feu, 
&  que  s'il  fe  fait  fentir  de  fi  loin,  s'il  echauffe  &  s'il 
brule,  felon  qu'il  s'approclie  de  nous;  on  ne  peut  pas 
douter  qu'il  ne  faffe  vn  puiffant  incendie  dans  le 
Ciel,  &  qu'il  ne  fourniffe  des  flammes,  plus  qu'il 
n'en  faut  pour  bruler  [48]  tous  les  Hurons  que  les 
Frangois  taclient  d'y  enuoyer. 

Ces  faulfetez  «&  femblables  difcours  font  autant  de 
nuages,  dont  le  menfonge  tache  fans  ceffe  d'obfcur- 
cir  les  lumieres  de  noflre  foy;  qui  apres  tout  s'en 
rend  toujours  vidtorieufe,  mais  toutefois  ne  demeure 
iamais  fans  ennemy,  vn  broiiillarts  n'eftant  pas  fi.  toft 
diffip6,  qu'vn  autre  s'eleue  de  terre,  quelquefois  plu-s 
epois  &  plus  difficile  a  refoudre,  que  celuy  qui  I'a 
precede. 

Les  infideles  ayans  veu  tous  ces  refforts,  &  tant  de 
bateries,  leur  reiiffir  auec  peu  de  fuccez,  ont  eu 
recours  "k  ce  qu'ils  ont  iuge  de  plus  puiffant  dans  la 
nature,  &  a  des  armes,  dont  ils  ne  penfoient  pas  que 
la  foy  peuft  parer  les  coups.  lis  ont  incite,  mefme 
publiquement,  &  au  milieu  de  leurs  feftins,  des  fiUes 
debauchees  a  gaigner  le  coeur  des  Chreftiens;  efpe- 
rant  qu'ayans  perdu  la  chaftete,  leur  foy  n'en  feroit 
plus  fi  vigoureufe,  &  periroit  dans  les  debauches.- 
mais  fi  quelqu'vn  a  fait  paroiftre  de  ce  cofte-la,  que 
fa  foy  ne  I'euft  pas  tout  a  fait  detache  du  corps,  & 
I'eufl  laiffe  dans  le  nombre  des  hommes ;  [49]  le  cou- 
rage de  la  plus-part  a  fait  connoiftre  k  ces  tifons  d'en- 
fer,  que  leurs  feux  &  leurs  flammes  n'ont  point  de 
prife  fur  vn  coeur,  qui  eft  poffede  d'vne  chaleur  plus 
fainte.  Et  ce  qui  nous  a  paru  de  plus  aimable  en  la 
plufpart  de  ces  vidtoires,  eft  que  plufieurs  en  ces 
rencontres,  apres  auoir  imite  la  purete  du  tres  chafte 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  33 

and  that  —  if  he  makes  himself  felt  from  so  far,  if  he 
warms  or  burns  according  as  he  approaches  us  —  one 
cannot  doubt  that  he  makes  a  powerful  conflagration 
in  the  Sky,  and  that  he  furnishes  flames  more  than 
are  required  in  order  to  burn  [48]  all  the  Hurons 
whom  the  French  try  to  send  thither. 

These  falsehoods  and  similar  discourses  are  so 
many  clouds,  with  which  untruth  incessantly  strives 
to  obscure  the  light  of  our  faith,  which,  after  all, 
renders  itself  ever  victorious  over  them,  but  yet 
never  stays  without  an  enemy, —  one  fog  being  no 
sooner  scattered  than  another  rises  from  the  earth, 
sometimes  thicker  and  more  difficult  to  clear  away 
than  the  one  which  preceded  it. 

The  infidels,  having  seen  all  these  resources  and 
so  many  batteries  result  with  little  success  for  them, 
have  had  recourse  to  what  they  have  judged  most 
powerful  in  nature,  and  to  arms,  the  blows  of  which 
they  did  not  suppose  the  faith  could  parry.  They 
have  incited,  even  publicly  and  in  the  midst  of  their 
feasts,  lewd  girls  to  win  the  hearts  of  the  Chris- 
tians—  hoping  that,  having  lost  their  chastity,  their 
faith  would  no  longer  be  so  vigorous,  and  would 
perish  in  debauchery.  But  if  some  one  has  made  it 
appear,  on  that  side,  that  his  faith  had  not  altogether 
detached  him  from  the  body,  and  had  left  him  in  the 
number  of  men,  [49]  the  courage  of  most  has  given 
those  firebrands  of  hell  to  understand  that  their  fires 
and  their  flames  have  no  hold  on  a  heart  which  is 
possessed  of  a  more  holy  ardor.  And  what  has 
appeared  to  us  more  delightful  in  most  of  these  victo- 
ries is,  that  several  in  such  encounters,  after  having 
imitated  the  purity  of  the  most  chaste  Joseph,  judged 


34  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JltSUITES  [Vol.  30 

lofeph,   fe  iugeoient  mefme  criminels,   d'auoir  efle 
I'obiet  d'vne  pourfuitte  infame. 

II  faut,  difoit  vn  d'eux  la  larme  a  I'oeil,  que  depuis 
peu  le  diable  ayt  appergeu  que  ma  foy  fe  foit  affoiblie, 
puis  qu'il  cache  fi  peu  les  defCeins  qu'il  a  deffus  moy.- 
nos  ennemis  n'attaquent  pas  ouuertement  vn  Bourg, 
qu'ils  fgauent  eflre  de  bonne  deffenfe,  &  ayant 
raconte  a  celuy  de  nos  Peres  auquel  il  auoit  fon 
recours,  les  violences  qu'il  venoit  de  faire  pour  fe 
retirer  des  mains  de  quelques  impudentes :  II  y  a  cinq 
ans  que  ie  fus  pris  captif  des  Iroquois,  adioufta-il : 
mais  alors  i'eu  moins  de  frayeur,  quand  les  ennemis 
fe  ietterent  fur  moy,  que  ie  n'en  ay  fenti  a  I'abdrd 
de  ces  malheureufes. 

Voicy  a  ce  propos  vne  conuerfion  qui  me  femble 
alTez  remarquable.  Vne  de  ces  filles  d6baucliees 
ayant  veu  que  toutes  [50]  fes  pourfuittes  n'auoient 
rien  pu  fur  I'efprit  d'vn  ieune  Chreftien,  rentra  de- 
dans foy  mefme,  &  iugea  qu'il  falloit  que  noflre  foy 
fuft  quelque  chofe  d'excellent,  puis  que  mefme  en  vn 
age  qui  n'eftime  que  les  plaifirs,  elle  en  donnoit  de 
I'auerfion  &  de  I'horreur,  a  ceux  qui  I'auoient  em- 
brafC6e.  Elle  s'enquefta  d'vne  ieune  Chreftienne,  & 
luy  demanda  fi  en  effet  elle  croyoit  qu'il  y  eufl  vn 
Enfer;  &  comment  elle  pouuoit  eftre  affeuree  que 
les  Fran9ois,  qui  les  venoient  inftruire,  ne  leur 
diffent  point  des  menfonges.  Ie  le  croy  fermement, 
refpondit  la  Chreftienne;  mais  quand  bien  ce  feroit 
vne  chofe  douteufe,  la  feule  penfee  que  peut-eftre  il 
y  a  vn  Enfer  pour  ceux  qui  demeurent  infideles,  vous 
deuroit  faire  redouter  vn  malheur  fi  terrible :  autre- 
ment  nous  auons  tort  allant  dedans  nos  champs  tout 
le  long  de  I'Efte,  de  craindre  les  embufches  cachees 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  35 

themselves  criminal  even  to  have  been  the  object  of 
an  infamous  pursuit. 

"  It  must  be,"  said  one  of  them  with  tears  in  his 
eyes,  "  that  latterly  the  devil  has  perceived  that  my 
faith  has  become  weakened,  since  he  so  little  con- 
ceals the  designs  which  he  has  on  me ;  our  enemies 
do  not  openly  attack  a  Village  which  they  know  to 
be  well  defended."  And,  having  related,  to  that 
one  of  our  Fathers  to  whom  he  had  recourse,  the 
violent  means  that  he  had  just  employed  in  order 
to  withdraw  himself  from  the  hands  of  some  shame- 
less women,  he  added:  "Five  years  ago,  I  was 
taken  captive  by  the  Iroquois;  but  even  then,  when 
the  enemies  threw  themselves  on  me,  I  had  less 
terror  than  I  felt  at  the  approach  of  these  wretched 
creatures." 

Here  follows,  in  this  connection,  a  conversion 
which  seems  to  me  quite  remarkable.  One  of  those 
dissolute  girls,  having  perceived  that  all  [50]  her  en- 
deavors had  no  power  over  the  mind  of  a  young 
Christian,  returned  to  herself,  and  decided  that  our 
faith  must  needs  be  something  excellent,  since,  even 
at  an  age  which  values  only  pleasures,  it  gave  aver- 
sion and  horror  for  them  to  those  who  had  embraced 
it.  She  made  inquiry  of  a  young  Christian  girl,  and 
asked  her  if  she  really  believed  that  there  was  a  Hell ; 
and  how  she  could  be  sure  that  the  French,  who  came 
to  instruct  them,  did  not  tell  them  lies.  "  I  believe 
it  firmly,"  answered  the  Christian  girl;  "but  even 
though  that  should  be  a  doubtful  thing,  the  very 
thought  that  perhaps  there  is  a  Hell  for  those  who 
remain  infidels,  ought  to  make  you  dread  a  misfor- 
tune so  terrible.  Otherwise,  we  are  mistaken,  when 
we  go  into   our  fields    throughout    the   Summer,   in 


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES         [Vol.  .SO 

des  Iroquois,  puis  que  peut-eftre  au  plus  fort  de  nos 
craintes,  les  ennemis  ne  fongent  pas  a  nous, 

L'infidele  fut  tellement  touch6e  de  la  refponfe, 
que  du  depuis  cette  penfee  ne  put  fortir  de  fon  efprit, 
qu'au  moins  il  pouuoit  bien  fe  faire  qu'il  y  euft  dans 
les  [51]  Enfers,  vn  feu  prepare  pour  les  infideles,  & 
qu'en  ce  cas  elle  feroit  eternellement  malheureufe. 
Enfin  au  bout  de  deux  mois,  elle  vient  trouuer  vn  de 
nos  Peres,  pour  luy  demander  le  Baptefme:  Tu  es 
vne  debauchee,  luy  dit-il.  I 'ay  enuie  de  ne  le  plus 
eflre,  refpondit-elle ;  le  feu  d'Enfer  m'a  eftonne: 
auant  que  de  venir  a  toy,  i'ay  voulu  m'eprouuer  moy- 
mefme,  &  me  fuis  mife  dans  la  pratique  de  ce  que  ie 
veux  faire  efhant  Chreftienne.-  ie  ne  fgay  d'ou  peut 
venir  ce  changement,  mais  ie  me  fuis  trouu6e  toute 
autre,  en  ce  qui  me  donnoit  le  plus  d'apprehenfion 
de  ma  foibleffe:  Ce  que  i'ay  pratique  deux  mois, 
pourquoy  ne  pourray-ie  pas  le  continuer  toute  ma 
vie  ?  Quand  maintenant  vn  ieune  homme  m'aborde, 
ie  luy  dis  que  i'ay  defir  d'eftre  Chreftienne,  &  qu'il 
ne  doit  rien  efperer  de  moy:  Si  cela  me  fert  de 
deffenfe,  le  Baptefme  accroiftra  mes  forces.  Pour  le 
faire  court,  cette  nouuelle  penitente  ayant  continue 
cinq  ou  fix  mois  dans  fes  pourfuittes,  auec  vne  ferueur 
extraordinaire,  on  n'a  pu  la  differer  plus  long-temps 
en  vne  fi  iufte  demande :  elle  a  receu  auec  le  Bap- 
tefme, le  nom  de  Magdelaine. 

[52]  Vn  ieune  Huron  fort  craignant  Dieu,  qui 
depuis  plufieurs  annees  s'eft  maintenu  dans  le  Chri- 
ftianifme,  auec  vne  innocence  tout  "k  fait  aimable, 
eflant  follicite  de  fes  parens  ^  fe  marier;  luy  ayant 
efle  demande  s'il  connoiffoit  vne  certaine  hlle  qu'on 
parloit  de  luy  donner  pour  f emme :  Ie  n'en  regarde 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  164s  -  4^  37 

fearing  the  hidden  ambushes  of  the  Iroquois;  since 
perhaps,  at  the  very  height  of  our  fears,  the  enemies 
do  not  think  of  us." 

The  infidel  girl  was  so  touched  by  this  answer 
that,  from  that  time,  this  thought  could  not  leave 
her  mind,  that  at  least  it  might  well  be  the  case  that 
there  was  in  [51]  Hell  a  fire  prepared  for  the  infi- 
dels ;  and  that,  in  such  case,  she  would  be  eternally 
wretched.  Finally,  at  the  end  of  two  months,  she 
comes  to  find  one  of  our  Fathers,  in  order  to  ask  him 
for  Baptism.  "  Thou  art  a  corrupt  girl,"  he  said  to 
her.  "  I  desire  to  be  so  no  longer,"  she  answered; 
"  the  fire  of  Hell  has  confounded  me.  Before  com- 
ing to  thee,  I  wished  to  prove  myself ;  and  I  set  my- 
self to  practice  what  I  will  have  to  do  as  a  Christian. 
I  know  not  whence  can  come  this  change,  but  I  have 
found  myself  quite  different  in  what  gave  me  the 
most  apprehension  for  my  weakness.  Why  can  I  not 
continue  all  my  life  what  I  have  practiced  for  two 
months?  When  a  young  man  now  accosts  me,  I 
tell  him  that  I  have  a  desire  to  be  a  Christian,  and 
that  he  must  expect  nothing  from  me.  If  that  serves 
me  for  defense.  Baptism  will  increase  my  strength." 
To  be  brief,  this  new  penitent  having  continued  five 
or  six  months  in  her  endeavors,  with  an  extraordi- 
nary fervor,  one  could  not  put  her  off  longer  in  so 
just  a  request :  she  received,  with  Baptism,  the  name 
of  Magdelaine. 

[52]  A  young  Huron,  greatly  fearing  God,  who  for 
several  years  has  maintained  himself  in  the  Christian 
faith  with  an  innocence  altogether  delightful,  was 
solicited  by  his  relatives  to  marry.  Being  asked 
whether  he  was  acquainted  with  a  certain  girl  whom 
there  was  talk  of  giving  him  for  wife,  "  I  look  at  none 


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jflSUITES  [Vol.30 

aucune,  refpondit-il  a  vn  fien  oncle.-  car  ie  fyay  que 
Dieu  I'a  deJffendu ;  ie  deflourne  ma  veue  quand  quel- 
qu'vne  me  paroift  au  rencontre:  qu'on  me  donne, 
puis  qu'ainfi  eft,  qui  on  voudra,  pourueu  qu'on  m'af- 
feure  qu'elle  a  defir  de  mourir  en  la  foy,  &  qu'elle  a 
horreur  du  peche,  nos  amitiez  feront  bien-toft  liees, 
&  i'efpere  que  ce  ne  fera  pas  pour  les  rompre  legere- 
ment,  &  a  la  fa9on  des  infideles,  puifque  viuans  & 
I'vn  &  I'autre,  dans  les  defirs  de  plaire  a  Dieu,  nous 
tacherons  de  les  rendre  immortelles. 

Pour  finir  ce  Chapitre  ie  diray  que  nos  neges 
Huronnes  ont  efte  blanches  cet  hyuer,  de  la  chaftet6 
d'vne  ieune  Chreftien,  qui  fentant  en  fon  corps  vn 
feu,  dont  il  auoit  plus  d' horreur  que  de  celuy  d'En- 
fer,  &  des  tentations  fi  puiffantes,  qu'il  luy  fembloit 
que  tous  les  Demons  [53]  d'impurete  Ie  pofTedaffent : 
ne  f§achant  plus  quel  remede  apporter  a  vn  mal,  qu'il 
ne  pouuoit  fuyr,  ne  pouuant  fe  quitter  foi-mefme, 
enfin  tranfporte  d'vn  faint  defefpoir,  il  courrut  dans 
vn  bois  prochain,  fe  depoiiilla  tout  nud,  fe  ietta  dans 
les  neges,  s'y  roulla  vn  long-temps,  les  baignant  de 
fes  larmes,  &  pouflant  fes  prieres  au  Ciel,  auec  tant 
de  ferueur,  qu'ayant  perdu  quafl  tout  fentiment,  ces 
flammes  infernalles  fe  trouuerent  entierement  eftein- 
tes,  &  laifferent  fon  ame  auffi  vigoureufe  apres  cette 
vi(5toire,  qu'il  trouua  fon  corps  abbatu,  a  peine  luy 
reflant-il  alTez  de  forces,  pour  retourner  au  lieu  dont 
il  eftoit  party,  encore  apres  cela  ce  bon  ieune  Chre- 
ftien n'eftimoit  pas  auoir  eu  affez  d'horreur  de  cette 
tentation,  &  s'accufoit  de  lafchete,  de  n'auoir  pas 
affez  toft  eu  recours  a  ce  remede. 

I 'en  fcay  plus  d'vn  qui  fe  font  appliquez  fur  Ie 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  46  39 

of  them,"  he  answered  an  uncle  of  his;  "  for  I  know 
that  God  has  forbidden  it ;  I  turn  away  my  glances 
when  any  one  appears  to  me  in  a  chance  encounter. 
Let  them  give  me,  since  thus  it  is,  whomsoever  they 
will ;  provided  they  assure  me  that  she  has  a  desire 
to  die  in  the  faith,  and  that  she  has  a  horror  of  sin, 
our  affections  will  soon  be  united ;  and  I  hope  that  it 
will  not  be  for  the  purpose  of  breaking  them  lightly, 
and  in  the  manner  of  the  infidels, —  since  living,  both 
alike,  in  the  desire  of  pleasing  God,  we  shall  try  to 
render  them  immortal." 

To  finish  this  Chapter,  I  will  say  that  our  Huron 
snows  have  been  whitened,  this  winter,  by  the  chas- 
tity of  a  young  Christian,  who  —  feeling  in  his  body 
a  fire,  of  which  he  had  more  horror  than  of  that  of 
Hell,  and  temptations  so  powerful  that  it  seemed  to 
him  that  all  the  Demons  [53]  of  impurity  possessed 
him  —  no  longer  knew  what  remedy  to  apply  to 
an  evil  which  he  could  not  shun,  being  unable  to 
forsake  himself.  Finally,  transported  with  a  holy 
despair,  he  ran  into  a  neighboring  wood,  stripped 
himself  quite  naked,  threw  himself  into  the  snows, 
and  rolled  in  them  a  long  time, — bathing  them  with 
his  tears,  and  uttering  his  prayers  to  Heaven  with  so 
much  fervor  that,  having  lost  nearly  all  feeling,  those 
infernal  flames  became  entirely  quenched,  and  left 
his  soul  as  vigorous,  after  this  victory,  as  he  found 
his  body  dejected;  there  scarcely  remained  to  him 
enough  strength  to  return  to  the  place  whence  he  had 
started.  Even  after  that,  this  good  young  Christian 
did  not  deem  that  he  had  had  sufficient  horror  of  that 
temptation,  and  accused  himself  of  cowardice  for  not 
having  soon  enough  had  recourse  to  this  remedy. 

I  know  more  than  one  of  them  who  have  applied 


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  30 

corps  des  charbons,  &  de  tifons  ardens,  pour  eftouffer 
ce  mefme  feu  d'enfer,  fe  difans  a  eux-mefmes,  pour 
furmonter  la  tentation ;  &  quoy  pourrois-tu  malheu- 
reux  fupporter  vn  feu  eternel,  fi  tu  ne  peux  t'appri- 
uoifer  k  celuy-cy,  qui  n' en  eft  qu'vne  foible  peinture? 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  41 

upon  their  bodies  coals  and  burning  brands,  in  order 
to  stifle  that  same  fire  of  hell, —  saying  to  themselves, 
to  overcome  the  temptation :  '  *  And  how  couldst 
thou,  wretched  man,  bear  an  eternal  fire,  if  thou 
canst  not  accustom  thyself  to  this  one,  which  is  but  a 
feeble  painting  of  that  ? ' ' 


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.  SO 


[54]  CHAPITRE  V. 

BONS    SENTIMENS    DE    QUELQUES    CHRESTIENS. 

IL  y  a  quelques  temps  que  les  principaux  Chre- 
ftiens  de  nos  Eglifes  Huronnes,  s'eftans  trouuez 
de  compagnie,  fe  demanderet  les  vns  aux  autres, 
d'ou  ils  fe  fentoient  plus  puiffamment  fortifies  dans 
leur  foy ;  &  quel  ^  leur  auis,  eftoit  le  moye  le  plus 
efficace,  que  Dieu  leur  euft  donne  pour  refifter  aux 
tentations,  euiter  le  peche,  &  viure  vrayement  en 
Chreftien.  Les  vns  difoient  que  fortans  de  la  Com- 
munion, ils  fe  voyoient  tout  autres,  &  fentoient  bien 
que  lefus-Chrift  eftoit  le  maiftre  de  leur  coeur,  poffe- 
doit  leur  efprit  &  les  rendoit  robuftes.  Les  autres 
difoient  qu'apres  la  Confeffion,  ils  eftoient  tout  renou- 
uelles  &  femblables  "k  vn  voyageur,  qui  s'eflant  de- 
charge  d'vn  tres-pefant  fardeau,  fentoit  fes  forces 
reuenir,  &  courroit  mefme  en  vn  chemin,  duquel 
auparauant  il  n'euft  pas  pu  fe  retirer.  Mais  la  pluf- 
part  fe  trouuerent  d'accord,  que  la  [55]  priere  eftoit 
leur  plus  puillant  f upport ;  que  de  Ik  ils  tiroient  leur 
vigueur  &  leur  force,  qu'ils  s'y  fentoient  animez  tout 
d'vn  autre  efprit,  &  qu'il  leur  fembloit  que  s'ils 
venoient  k  en  perdre  Tvfage,  ils  perdroient  bien-toft 
la  crainte  du  peche,  &  en  fuite  la  foy. 

Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  nous  voyons  que  la  plufpart 
eftiment  la  priere,  comme  la  vie  de  leur  efprit,  & 
I'ame  de  leur  foy.  L'vfage  leur  en  efl  fi  frequent  & 
li  faint,   qu'ils  s'accufent  d'auoir  entrepris  quelque 


1646  -  47J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  4^  43 


[54]  CHAPTER  V. 

GOOD    SENTIMENTS    OF    SOME    CHRISTIANS. 

SOME  time  ago,  the  principal  Christians  of  our 
Huron  Churches,  happening  to  be  together, 
asked  one  another  whence  they  felt  themselves 
most  powerfully  fortified  in  their  faith;  and  what, 
in  their  opinion,  was  the  most  efficacious  means 
which  God  had  given  them  in  order  to  resist  tempta- 
tions, avoid  sin,  and  live  truly  as  Christians.  Some 
said  that  on  leaving  the  Communion  they  saw  them- 
selves quite  different,  and  felt  indeed  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  the  master  of  their  hearts,  possessed  their 
minds,  and  rendered  them  robust.  Others  said  that 
after  Confession  they  were  wholly  renewed,  and 
similar  to  a  traveler  who,  having  discharged  a  very 
heavy  burden,  felt  his  strength  come  back,  and  even 
ran  in  a  road  from  which  previously  he  could  not 
have  extricated  himself.  But  most  were  agreed, 
that  [55]  prayer  was  their  most  powerful  support; 
that  thence  they  drew  their  vigor  and  their  strength ; 
that  they  felt  themselves  animated  by  it  with  quite 
another  mind;  and  that  it  seemed  to  them  that,  if 
they  came  to  lose  the  use  of  it,  they  would  soon  lose 
the  dread  of  sin,  and  consequently,  the  faith. 

However  this  may  be,  we  see  that  most  of  them 
esteem  prayer  as  the  life  of  their  being  and  the  soul 
of  their  faith.  Their  use  of  it  is  so  frequent  and  so 
sacred  that  they  accuse  themselves  for  having  under- 
taken  anything  without   having  commended  them- 


44  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  30 

chofe,  fans  s'elire  recommandez  k  Dieu,  de  s'eflre 
mis  dans  le  trauail,  fans  lui  en  auoir  offert  les 
premices,  &  n 'auoir  pas  iette  affez  toft  leurs  penfees 
en  Illy,  fouffrans  quelque  douleur,  receuans  quelque 
iniure,  eftans  faifis  d'vne  trifteffe,  accueillis  d'vne 
maladie,  on  attaquez  de  quelque  mal. 

Non,  difoit  a  ce  propos  vn  Huron  tres-pauure, 
mais  tres-riche  en  fa  foy;  Les  Chreftiens  feroient 
les  plus  malheureux  de  la  terre,  s'ils  ne  fgauoient 
que  Dieu  les  void,  qu'il  eft  temoin  de  leurs  miferes, 
&  qu'il  6coute  leurs  prieres:  Mais  quand  nous  pen- 
fons  que  toutes  nos  trifteffes  fe  changeront  en  ioye, 
que  Dieu  nous  aime  [56]  dans  nos  plus  grandes  affli- 
dtions,  &  que  nous  tirerons  vn  bon-heur  eternel  de 
toutes  nos  fouffrances,  pourueu  que  nous  les  endu- 
rions  patiemment ;  le  recours  que  nous  auons  alors  k 
la  priere,  nous  confole  des  cette  vie,  &  nous  fait 
aimer  comme  vn  grand  bien,  ce  qu'on  croit  vn  grand 
mal :  ou  du  moins  a  la  veue  que  nous  auons  du  Para- 
dis  &  de  I'Enfer,  nous  fupportons  auec  douceur  les 
afflic5tions  de  cette  vie,  dans  cette  penf6e  veritable 
que  ne  deuants  pas  eftre  eternelles,  elles  ne  peuuent 
eftre  qu'vn  petit  mal. 

Vne  pauure  Chreftienne  eftant  interrogee  (i  elle 
offroit  ^  Dieu  fes  peines:  Helas!  refpondit-elle,  c'eft 
ma  feule  confolation.-  pourroit-il  bien  fe  faire  qu'vn 
Cbreftien  qui  croit  fermement  que  le  peu  qu'il  en- 
dure, pent  luy  valoir  vne  eternite  de  bon-heur,  s'il 
le  fouffre  pour  I'amour  de  Dieu,  vouluft  perdre  vne 
li  riche  recompenfe,  ne  fouffrant  qu'^  la  fafon  des 
infideles  &  des  beftes  farouches  qui  n'ont  point  la 
connoiiTance  d'vn  vray  Dieu? 

II  y  en  a  d'aucuns  qui  fe  feruent  de  leur  Chapelet, 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  45 

selves  to  God ;  for  having  begun  labor  without  hav- 
ing offered  to  him  the  first-fruits  of  it ;  and  for  not 
having  soon  enough  directed  their  thoughts  to  him 
on  suffering  some  pain,  receiving  some  injury,  being 
seized  with  a  sadness,  assailed  by  a  sickness,  or 
attacked  by  any  trouble. 

"  No,"  said  in  this  connection  a  Huron  who  was 
very  poor,  but  very  rich  in  his  faith ;  ' '  the  Chris- 
tians would  be  the  most  unhappy  on  the  earth  unless 
they  knew  that  God  sees  them,  that  he  is  witness  of 
their  miseries,  and  that  he  listens  to  their  prayers. 
But  when  we  think  that  all  our  sorrows  will  be 
changed  into  joy,  that  God  loves  us  [56]  in  our  great- 
est afflictions,  and  that  we  shall  derive  an  eternal 
happiness  from  all  our  sufferings,  provided  that  we 
endure  them  patiently, — the  recourse  that  we  then 
have  to  prayer  consoles  us  throughout  this  life,  and 
makes  us  love  as  a  great  benefit  that  which  is  con- 
sidered a  great  evil ;  or,  at  least,  in  the  view  that  we 
have  of  Paradise  and  Hell  we  endure  with  meekness 
the  afflictions  of  this  life,  in  this  true  thought,  that, 
as  they  are  not  to  be  eternal,  they  can  be  but  a  small 
evil." 

A  poor  Christian  woman,  being  asked  if  she  offered 
to  God  her  pains,  answered:  "  Alas!  that  is  my  only 
consolation.  Could  it  indeed  happen,  that  a  Chris- 
tian—  who  firmly  believes  that  the  little  which  he 
endures  can  procure  for  him  an  eternity  of  happi- 
ness, if  he  suffer  for  the  love  of  God  —  should  be 
willing  to  lose  so  rich  a  reward,  and  suffer  only  in 
the  manner  of  the  infidels  and  of  wild  beasts,  which 
have  not  the  knowledge  of  a  true  God?  " 

There  are  some  who  use  their  Rosaries,  in  order 
to  mark   how  many  times  they  have  uplifted  their 


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

pour  marquer  combien  de  fois  ils  auront  eleu^  leur 
coeur  a  Dieu;  s'efforgans  [57]  d'aller  fe  perfedtion- 
nants  de  iour  en  iour  en  vn  exercice  fi  faint,  &  qui 
leur  paroift  fi  aimable :  &  tel  fe  trouuera,  qui  dans 
I'efpace  d'vne  nuidt  aura  fait  deux  cents  fois  quelque 
oraifon  iaculatoire.  Quelques-vns  eftans  dans  leurs 
champs  de  bled  d'Inde,  afin  de  renouueller  plus  fre- 
quemment  I'offrande  qu'ils  font  a  Dieu  de  leur  tra- 
uail,  prendront  pour  fignal  qui  leur  en  doit  rafraichir 
la  memoire,  quelques  arbres  deuant  lefquels  ils 
paffent  tres-fouuent,  &  y  marqueront  fur  I'efcorce  ou 
bien  deffus  la  terre,  vne  croix  qu'ils  adorent  chaque 
fois  qu'ils  y  paffent.  D'autres  fe  contenteront  d'eftre 
fideles  a  Dieu,  autant  de  fois  qu'il  les  attirera  "k  foy 
dans  le  fond  de  leur  ame :  &  il  fe  trouuera  quelques- 
fois  que  tel  d'entr'eux  aura  efte  quafi  toufiours  en 
oraifon,  fans  penfer  y  eftre. 

le  n'ay  point  d'efprit,  difoit,  il  y  a  quelque  temps 
vn  excellent  Chreflien,  du  Bourg  de  la  Conception, 
nomme  lofeph  Taondechoren :  fi  toufiours  ie  voulois 
prier  Dieu,  ie  f erois  fans  ceff e  auec  luy ;  car  ie  fens 
bien  que  toufiours  il  attire  mon  coeur  k  foy :  ie  le  luy 
donne  au  mefme  moment,  &  me  contente  de  cela, 
mais  [58]  luy  ne  s'en  contente  pas:  ie  fens  qu'il  me 
dit  derechef  dans  le  fond  de  mon  ame,  qu'il  veut  que 
ie  fois  tout  "k  luy;  ie  luy  r6pond  qu'il  fyait  bien  que 
ie  ne  veux  eftre  qu'a  luy  feul,  qu'il  faffe  fur  moy  fes 
volontez,  &  qu'il  difpofe  de  ma  vie :  plus  ie  me  donne 
"k  luy,  plus  il  me  preffe  de  ne  pas  luy  refufer  ce  qu'il 
demande.  Tout  homme  qui  me  traitteroit  de  la 
forte,  me  feroit  importun,  &  fes  empreffemens  me  le 
redroient  infupportable :  &  toutesf ois  ie  ne  puis  & 
n'oferois  me   plaindre   de   la  rigueur  dont  Dieu  me 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  47 

hearts  to  God, —  striving  [57]  to  continue  perfecting 
themselves  from  day  to  day  in  an  exercise  so  holy, 
and  one  which  appears  to  them  so  lovable ;  and  one 
man  will  be  found  who,  in  the  space  of  one  night, 
will  have  uttered  two  hundred  times  some  ejacula- 
tory  prayer.  Some,  being  in  their  fields  of  Indian 
corn,  in  order  to  renew  more  frequently  the  offering 
which  they  make  to  God  of  their  work,  will  take,  as 
a  sign  which  is  to  refresh  their  memory  of  this, 
some  trees  before  which  they  pass  very  often;  and 
will  mark  there,  either  on  the  bark  or  else  upon  the 
ground,  a  cross,  which  they  adore  every  time  when 
they  pass  it.  Others  will  content  themselves  to  be 
faithful  to  God  as  many  times  as  he  shall  draw  them  to 
himself  in  the  depths  of  their  souls:  and  it  will 
sometimes  happen  that  certain  ones  among  them 
will  have  been  almost  constantly  in  prayer,  without 
intending  so  to  be. 

"  I  have  no  sense,"  said  some  time  ago  an  excel- 
lent Christian  of  the  Village  of  la  Conception,  named 
Joseph  Taondechoren ;  "if  I  would  always  pray  to 
God,  I  would  be  with  him  without  ceasing,  for  I 
certainly  feel  that  he  is  always  drawing  my  heart  to 
himself.  I  give  it  to  him  at  the  same  moment,  and 
content  myself  with  that;  but  [58]  he  is  not  content 
with  it.  I  feel  that  he  tells  me  again,  in  the  depth 
of  my  soul,  that  he  wishes  that  I  be  altogether  his; 
I  answer  him  that  he  knows  well  that  I  only  desire 
to  be  his  alone ;  that  he  shall  do  his  will  upon  me, 
and  that  he  shall  dispose  of  my  life.  The  more  I 
give  myself  to  him,  the  more  he  urges  me  not  to 
refuse  him  what  he  asks.  Any  man  who  should 
treat  me  in  that  way  would  be  annoying  to  me,  and 
his  persistencies  would  render  him   insufferable  to 


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.30 

traitte :  ie  voy  bien  que  ce  n'eft  qu'amour  &  bonte, 
&  qu'il  n'y  a  point  en  ce  monde  de  plaifir  femblable 
k  celuy  que  ie  fens,  lors  qu'il  me  laiffe  le  moins  en 
repos,  &  me  contraint  mille  fois  de  luy  dire,  que  ie 
fuis  tout  k  [l]uy. 

Vn  autre  nomm6  Andre  Ochiendarenouan,  nous 
difoit  que  la  chofe  vnique  en  ce  monde,  qui  luy  don- 
noit  vne  plus  vine  idee  du  grand  bon-heur  du  Para- 
dis,  eftoit  de  penfer  que  li  d6s  cette  vie,  en  difant 
ces  deux  mots,  lefus  taitenr,  lefus  ayez  pitie  de  moy ; 
il  reffentoit  tant  de  contentemens  en  fon  coeur,  qu'ils 
furpalToient  tous  les  plaifirs  enfemble,  que  iamais  il 
[59]  eufl  reffenty,  depuis  foixante  &  dix  ans  q\i'il 
efloit  au  monde ;  il  falloit  bien  que  dans  le  Ciel  il  y 
euft  des  contentemens  ineffables;  puifque  Dieu  fe 
referue  alors  k  nous  faire  iouyr  de  fes  mifericordes, 
&  que  les  plaifirs  que  nous  gouflons,  difants  a  Noftre 
Seigneur  qu'il  ait  piti^  de  nous,  ne  font  que  dans 
I'attente  de  ce  grand  bien,  que  nous  polTederons  dans 
le  Ciel,  dont  la  feule  efperance  remplit  fi  doucement 
tout  noftre  coeur  des  cette  vie. 

Vne  bonne  Chreftienne,  dans  vn  femblable  fenti- 
ment,  eflonna  puiffamment  vne  de  fes  parentes  infi- 
dele,  qui  I'exhortoit  a  renoncer  au  Chriftianifme,  & 
I'afTeuroit  qu'il  eftoit  hors  de  doute,  que  tout  ce  que 
nous  leur  prechios  du  Paradis,  n'eftoit  rien  que  des 
fables.  Laiff e-moy,  ie  te  prie,  mourir  paifiblemet  dans 
mo  erreur,  luy  refpondit  cette  bonne  Chreftienne: 
quand  bien  ie  ferois  trompee,  ce  qui  n'eft  pas,  ce 
feroit  vne  tromperie  bien  aimable :  Pourquoy  veux-tu 
me  rauir  vn  veritable  bien,  qui  n'eft  pas  feulement 
dans  I'attente,  &  dont  ie  fuis  en  polleffion  des  mainte- 
nant;  car  il  eft  vray  que  1' efperance  du  Paradis  me 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  49 

me:  and  yet  I  cannot,  and  would  not  dare  to,  com- 
plain of  the  rigor  with  which  God  treats  me.  I  see 
well  that  it  is  only  love  and  goodness ;  and  that  there 
is  not  in  this  world  a  pleasure  similar  to  that  which 
I  feel  when  he  leaves  me  least  in  repose,  and 
constrains  me  a  thousand  times  to  tell  him  that  I 
am  altogether  his." 

Another,  named  Andre  Ochiendarenouan,  told  us 
that  the  one  thing  in  this  world  which  gave  him  a 
most  lively  idea  of  the  great  happiness  of  Paradise,  was 
the  thought  that  if  in  this  life,  on  saying  these  two 
words,  Jesus  taitenr, —  "Jesus,  have  pity  on  me," — 
he  felt  so  much  contentment  in  his  heart,  that  it  sur- 
passed all  the  pleasures  together  which  ever  he  [59] 
had  felt  within  the  seventy  years  since  he  was  in 
the  world, —  it  must  indeed  be  that  in  Heaven  there 
were  ineffable  satisfactions,  since  God  awaits  that 
opportunity  to  make  us  enjoy  his  mercies ;  and  since 
the  pleasures  which  we  taste  in  telling  Our  Lord  to 
have  pity  on  us  are  only  while  we  await  that  great 
blessing  which  we  shall  possess  in  Heaven,  the  hope 
of  which  alone  so  sweetly  fills  our  whole  hearts 
throughout  this  life. 

A  good  Christian  woman,  in  a  similar  frame  of 
mind,  profoundly  astonished  one  of  her  infidel  kins- 
women, who  was  exhorting  her  to  renounce  Chris- 
tianity, and  was  assuring  her  that  it  was  beyond 
doubt  that  all  that  we  preached  to  them  of  Paradise 
was  nothing  but  fables.  "  Suffer  me,  I  beg  thee,  to 
die  peacefully  in  my  error,"  this  good  Christian 
answered  her;  "  even  though  I  should  be  deceived, — 
which  is  not  the  case, —  it  would  be  a  very  agreeable 
deception.  Why  do  you  wish  to  rob  me  of  a  real 
benefit,   which   is   not  alone  in  expectation,   but  of 


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.  30 

confole  d6s  cette  vie,  &  m'adoticit  tout  ce  qui  fans 
cela  nous  y  feroit  [60]  infupportable. 

Vn  de  nos  Peres  voyant  vn  bon  homme  fort  fimple, 
mais  excellent  Ctireflien,  qui  d'ordinaire  paffoit  vn 
tres  long-temps  en  f es  prieres ;  luy  en  demanda  la 
raifon.  Ce  bon  homme  luy  refpondit  fort  fimple- 
ment,  que  la  caufe  de  cette  longueur  prouenoit  de 
ce  qu'il  ne  fgauoit  pas  encore  bien  prier  Dieu,  qu'il 
eftoit  fouuent  remply  de  diftradtions ;  &  qu'afin  que 
le  diable  ne  gagnall  rien  fur  luy,  &  fe  laffaft  de 
I'interrompre,  il  recomman9oit  fes  prieres,  autant  de 
fois  qu'il  fe  voyoit  auoir  efte  diftraic5t.  Bien  rare- 
ment,  adiouftoit  ce  bon  homme,  mon  efprit  arriue 
iufqu'a  Dieu:  &  alors  ie  ne  m'appergois  pas  du  temps 
que  ie  mets  en  ma  priere,  car  mon  coeur  eft  fi  trani- 
porte  hors  de  foy,  que  ie  ne  fens  ny  chaud,  ny  froid, 
ny  douleur,  ny  ennuy,  &  n'ay  pas  mefme  vne  penfee 
des  chofes  de  la  terre ;  mais  feulement  que  Dieu  eft 
bon,  &  qu'il  eft  bon  d'eftre  auec  luy. 

Le  Pere  continua  a  luy  demander  k  quoy  eftoit 
femblable  ce  grand  plaifir  qu'il  rejQfentoit  alors.  Ie 
n'ay  rien  de  femblable,  refpondit-il,  tout  ce  que  i'ay 
congeu  de  contentemens  en  ce  monde,  n'eft  [61]  rien 
au  prix  d'vn  feul  moment  de  ces  delices,  que  Dieu 
me  fait  goufter:  ny  les  feftins,  ny  les  richeffes,  ny 
les  plaifirs,  dont  i'ay  maintenant  de  I'horreur,  &  lef- 
quels  autresfois  i'eflimois  les  plus  grands  du  monde. 
Si  toutefois,  adiouftoit-il,  on  me  contraignoit  de  dire 
quelque  chofe,  ie  ne  voy  rien  qui  me  femble  {\  appro- 
chant  de  ces  plaifirs  du  Ciel,  qu' eftoit  celuy  que  ie 
reffentois  autresfois  eftant  le  plus  afpre  a  la  chaff e, 
lors  que  ie  trouuois  quelque  cerf  arrefte  dans  mes 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  51 


which  I  am  in  possession  from  now  on?  for  it  is  true 
that  the  hope  of  Paradise  consoles  me  throughout 
this  life,  and  sweetens  for  me  everything,  which 
without  that  in  it  would  be  [60]  unendurable  to  us." 

One  of  our  Fathers,  seeing  a  good  man  —  very- 
simple,  but  an  excellent  Christian  —  who  usually 
spent  a  very  long  time  in  his  prayers,  asked  him  the 
reason  of  it.  This  good  man  answered  him,  very 
artlessly,  that  the  reason  for  this  slowness  proceeded 
from  the  fact  that  he  did  not  yet  know  how  to  pray 
well  to  God;  that  he  was  often  filled  with  distrac- 
tions; and  that, — in  order  that  the  devil  should 
gain  nothing  upon  him,  and  should  weary  of  inter- 
rupting him, — he  began  his  prayers  over  again, 
whenever  he  found  that  he  had  been  distracted, 
"Very  rarely,"  added  this  good  man,  "my  spirit 
makes  its  way  even  to  God;  and  then  I  do  not 
perceive  the  time  tliat  I  spend  in  my  prayer,  for  my 
heart  is  so  transported  beyond  itself,  that  I  feel 
neither  heat,  nor  cold,  nor  pain,  nor  weariness.  I 
have  not  even  a  thought  of  the  things  of  the  earth ; 
but  only  that  God  is  good,  and  that  it  is  good  to  be 
with  him." 

The  Father  continued  to  ask  him  what  this  great 
pleasure  was  like,  which  he  felt  at  those  times.  "  I 
have  nothing  like  it,"  he  answered;  "  all  the  satis- 
factions which  I  have  conceived  in  this  world  are 
[61]  nothing  in  comparison  with  a  single  moment  of 
these  delights  which  God  causes  me  to  taste, —  nei- 
ther the  feasts,  nor  the  riches,  nor  the  pleasures,  of 
which  I  now  have  a  horror,  and  which  formerly  I 
esteemed  the  greatest  in  the  world.  If,  however," 
he  added,  "  I  am  constrained  to  make  some  answer, 
I  see   nothing  which   seems  to   me   so  near  to  these 


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 

pieges,  ou  ayant  terraffe  quelque  ours,  que  i'auois 
pourfuiuy  long-temps  auec  bien  des  fatigues. 

Le  mefme  faifant  voyage  auec  fon  fils,  &  ayant 
veu  que  ce  ieune  homme  pafloit  I'ennuy  de  fon  chfe- 
min,  chantant  quelques  airs  indifferens:  Mon  fils,  luy 
dit-il,  ie  voy  bien  que  Dieu  n'eft  pas  le  plus  grand 
maiflre  de  ton  coeur;  tes  penfees  feroient  toutes  ^ 
luy,  &  d'vn  teps  auquel  pas  vn  ne  te  pent  interrom- 
pre,  tu  en  profiterois  pour  le  Ciel:  les  vents  ont 
emport^  ton  chant,  &  ont  en  mefme  temps  diffip6  tes 
plaifirs:  fi  tes  entretiens  euffent  efl6  auec  Dieu,  la 
grace  que  tu  euffes  acquife  par  tes  prieres,  te  fut 
demeuree  [62]  pour  vne  eternite. 

Dans  ce  mefme  efprit  d'oraifon,  d'aucuns  fe  met- 
tans  en  cbemin,  euiteront  les  compagnies,  &  predront 
des  routes  ecartees,  afin  de  s'entretenir  auec  Dieu,  & 
n'eftre  point  interrompus:  car  difent-ils,  ce  n'eft  pas 
icy  comme  en  France,  ou  ceux  qu'on  auroit  au  ren- 
contre, ne  nous  parleroient  que  de  Dieu.  Ces  bonnes 
gens  s'imaginent  qu'en  France  tout  le  monde  n'y 
refpire  que  la  faindtete,  que  I'entretien  des  compa- 
gnies n'eft  que  de  Dieu,  que  le  vice  s'y  tient  cache, 
&  n'oferoit  paroiftre,  &  qu'il  eft  autant  difficile  d'y 
trouuer  vne  perfonne  debauchee,  tout  le  monde  y 
eftant  Chreftien,  qu'il  eft  icy  dans  vn  monde  infidele, 
d'y  rencontrer  des  compagnies,  qui  n'ayent  leurs 
affedtions  que  pour  le  bien.  Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  leur 
vertu  ne  manque  pas  d'efpreuue  de  ce  cofte  la,  & 
ceux  qui  veulent  paroiftre  tou jours  ce  qu'ils  font, 
ont  befoin  de  courage. 

Vn  Chreftien  s'eftant  trouue  faifant  voyage,  dans 
vne  cabane  d'infideles,  ou  par  rencontre  on  tenoit  des 
difcours  de  raillerie  fur  noftre  foy,  fut  tente  forte- 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  164.5- 4(>  53 

pleasures  of  Heaven,  as  was  that  which  I  formerly- 
felt  when  most  eager  for  the  chase, —  when  I  found 
some  stag  caught  in  my  traps,  or  had  slain  some 
bear  which  I  had  long  pursued  with  many  fatigues." 
The  same  man, —  taking  a  journey  with  his  son, 
and  seeing  that  this  young  man  beguiled  the 
weariness  of  his  way  by  singing  some  indifferent 
airs,  said  to  him:  "  My  son,  I  see  well  that  God  is 
not  the  supreme  master  of  thy  heart ;  thy  thoughts 
would  all  be  his,  and,  of  a  time  in  which  no  one  can 
interrupt  thee,  thou  wouldst  make  profit  for  Heaven, 
The  winds  have  carried  away  thy  song,  and  have  at 
the  same  time  dissipated  thy  pleasures ;  if  thy  conver- 
sation had  been  with  God,  the  grace  which  thou  hadst 
acquired  by  thy  prayers  would  have  remained  with 
thee  [62]  for  an  eternity." 

In  this  same  spirit  of  prayer,  some,  upon  taking  the 
road,  will  avoid  company  and  will  take  sequestered 
routes,  in  order  to  converse  with  God,  and  not  to  be 
interrupted;  for  they  say:  "It  is  not  here  as  in 
France,  where  those  whom  we  might  meet  would 
speak  to  us  only  of  God."  These  good  people  imag- 
ine that  in  France  every  one  breathes  nothing  but 
holiness ;  that  the  conversation  of  companies  is  only  of 
God;  that  vice  keeps  itself  concealed  there,  and 
would  not  dare  to  appear ;  and  that  it  is  just  as  diffi- 
cult to  find  there  a  corrupt  person, — every  one  there 
being  a  Christian, — as  it  is  here,  in  an  infidel  world, 
to  meet  companies  who  have  their  affections  only  for 
the  good.  Be  that  as  it  may,  their  virtue  does  not 
lack  trial  in  that  direction;  and  those  who  wish  to 
appear  always  what  they  are  have  need  of  courage. 

A  Christian  having  found  himself,  while  making 
a  journey,  in  a  cabin  of  infidels,  where  there  chanced 


54  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES  [Vol.30 

ment  de  ne  prier  Dieu  qu'en  fecret,  le  temps  du  repas 
eftant  venu:  mais  s'eftant  [63]  apperceu  de  la  tenta- 
tion,  voulant  la  furmonter,  il  fe  mit  a  crier  fi  haut 
fon  Benedicite,  que  toute  la  compagnie  en  fut  furprife. 
Ceffez  de  vous  eftonner,  leur  dit-il ;  il  faut  que  vous 
f9achiez  que  i'ay  efte  combatu  de  deux  hontes  bien 
differentes:  la  premiere  eftoit  de  vous  autres,  dont 
ie  craignois  les  railleries :  la  f econde  a  efle  de  moy- 
mefme,  &  de  Dieu  qui  me  regarde,  deuant  lequel 
i'ay  eu  honte  de  n'ofer  paroiftre  Chreftien.-  Celle-cy 
a  efl6  la  plus  forte,  &  ^  caufe  que  la  premiere  me 
portoit  a  ne  prier  Dieu  qu'en  fecret,  la  f econde  m'a 
pouffe  ^  prier  Dieu  fi  haut,  que  tout  le  monde  fceuft 
que  ie  fuis,  &  veux  mourir  Chreftien,  que  ce  dont 
vous  vous  mocquez  eft  ma  gloire  &  le  plus  grand 
bon-heur  que  i'eftime  en  ce  monde, 

Vne  Chreftienne  nommee  Marthe  Aatio,  s'eftant 
trouuee  en  vn  voyage  auec  quatite  d'infideles,  n'ob- 
mettoit  iamais  de  prier  Dieu  matin  &  foir,  deuant  & 
apres  le  repas,  &  de  faire  le  figne  de  la  croix  fur 
deux  petits  gemeaux  qu'elle  allaitoit,  chaque  fois 
qu'elle  les  faifoit  traitter,  quoy  que  les  infideles  la 
monftraffent  au  doigt,  &  fen  mocquaffent  d'elle. 
Son  mary,  qui  n'eftoit  pas  Chreftien,  fe  mit  [64]  auffi 
de  la  partie  contr'elle,  difant  qu'elle  eftoit  affamee  de 
prier  Dieu,  &  qu'eflant  dans  leur  Bourg,  elle  courroit 
auffi  vifte  a  la  Meffe,  des  le  premier  fon  de  la  Cloche, 
que  fi  on  I'auoit  inuit^e  a  vn  feflin,  quittant  tout-la, 
quelque  trauail  qu'elle  euft  en  main. 

Ne  croyez  pas  que  ie  doiue  rougir  de  ce  reproche, 
refpondit  cette  bonne  Chreftienne ;  vous  pouuiez 
dire,  pour  affener  mieux  voftre  coup,  non  feulement 
que  ie  vais  aux  prieres,  comme  fi  on  m'auoit  inuitee 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  164J-46  55 

to  be  made  scoffing  remarks  about  our  faith,  was 
strongly  tempted  to  pray  to  God  only  in  secret,  when 
the  time  for  the  repast  had  come;  but  having  [63] 
perceived  the  temptation,  and  desiring  to  overcome 
it,  he  began  to  pronounce  his  Benedicite  so  loudly 
that  all  the  company  were  surprised.  "  Cease  to  be 
astonished,"  he  said  to  them;  "  you  must  know  that 
I  have  been  assailed  by  two  very  different  kinds  of 
shame.  The  first  was  on  account  of  you,  whose  rail- 
leries I  feared ;  the  second  was  on  account  of  myself 
and  of  God,  who  looks  at  me,  and  before  whom  I 
was  ashamed  not  to  dare  to  appear  a  Christian.  The 
latter  has  been  the  stronger,  and  because  the  first 
inclined  me  to  pray  to  God  only  in  secret,  the  second 
has  impelled  me  to  pray  to  God  so  loudly  that  every 
one  should  know  that  I  am,  and  will  die,  a  Chris- 
tian ;  that  what  you  mock  is  my  glory,  and  the  great- 
est happiness  that  I  esteem  in  this  world." 

A  Christian  woman  named  Marthe  Aatio,  having 
chanced  to  be  on  a  journey  with  a  number  of  infidels, 
never  omitted  to  pray  to  God  morning  and  evening, 
before  and  after  the  meal,  and  to  make  the  sign  of 
the  cross  on  two  little  twins  that  she  was  nurs- 
ing, each  time  when  she  gave  them  the  breast, 
although  the  infidels  pointed  their  fingers  at  her,  and 
made  sport  of  her.  Her  husband,  who  was  not  a 
Christian,  placed  himself  [64]  also  on  the  side  of  her 
opponents,  saying  that  she  was  famished  to  pray  to 
God;  and  that  when  in  their  Village,  she  ran  as 
quickly  to  the  Mass,  at  the  first  sound  of  the  Bell,  as 
if  one  had  invited  her  to  a  feast, —  leaving  every- 
thing as  it  was,  whatever  work  she  had  in  hand. 

"  Do  not  suppose  that  I  ought  to  blush  for  that  re- 
proach," answered  this  good  Christian;  "  you  could 


56  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES  [Vol.30 

a  vn  feftin,  mais  que  i'y  cours  encore  plus  vifte:  car 
en  effet  les  fellins  ne  me  font  quafi  rien,  depuis  que 
ie  f9ais  que  nous  auons  vne  ame  plus  precieufe  que 
nos  corps.  Si  vous  autres  infideles  quittez  tout  pour 
vn  bon  morceau,  fgachez  qu'vn  bon  Chreftien  iamais 
n'aura  de  honte  de  tout  quitter  pour  la  priere:  vous 
ne  fongez  rien  qu'a  la  terre,  &  nos  penfees  font  pour 
le  Ciel. 

La  mefme  allumant  du  feu,  vn  matin  qu'il  faifoit 
fort  froid,  remercioit  Dieu,  de  ce  qu'il  auoit  cree  les 
forefls,  &  les  bois  dont  les  hommes  puffent  fe  chauf- 
fer. Son  mary  voulut  fe  mocquer  d'elle :  Ton  pere, 
luy  dit-il,  pour  lequel  tu  allumes  ce  [65]  feu,  ne  te 
remercie  pas,  quoy  qu'il  te  voye;  comment  es-tu  li 
fimple,  de  remercier  Dieu  que  iamais  tu  n'as  veu? 
Ie  fuis  obligee  a  mon  pere,  repartit  la  femme,  &  le 
peu  que  ie  fais  en  cela  pour  luy,  n'eft  pas  confide- 
rable :  mais  les  faueurs  que  Dieu  nous  fait  font  coti- 
nuelles,  &  luy  n'a  pu  rien  receuoir  de  nous,  qui 
I'oblige  a  nous  faire  tant  de  bien.-  c'eft  affez  que  nous 
f9aclii6s  qu'il  nous  entend,  &  qu'il  nous  void,  quoy 
que  nous  ne  le  voyons  pas,  afin  d'eftre  obligez  a  luy 
faire  nos  remerciemens. 

A  ce  propos  ie  me  fouuiens  d'vne  repartie,  autant 
pleine  d'efprit  que  de  foy,  que  fit  il  y  a  quelque  temps 
vn  Chreftien,  nomme  Charles  Ondaaiondiont,  au 
blafpheme  d'vn  infidele.  Cet  infidele  reprochoit  aux 
Chrefliens  que  fi  Dieu  eftoit  tout-puiffant,  &  fi  ialoux 
de  fon  honneur,  il  deuoit  s'eftre  rendu  viflble,  afin 
d'ellre  reconnu  ce  qu'il  eft;  &  qu'il  euft  deu  d'vn 
cofte  ouurir  fon  Paradis,  a  noftre  veue,  &  de  1' autre 
I'Enfer;  afin  qu'en  effet  on  euft  redoute  fes  menaces, 
8c  defir6  fes  recompenfes,  qui  alors  nous  euffent  paru 


1646  -  47J  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  67 

say,  in  order  better  to  deal  yoiir  blow,  not  only  that 
I  go  to  prayers,  as  if  I  had  been  invited  to  a  feast, 
but  that  I  run  to  them  still  faster:  for,  in  truth,  the 
feasts  make  almost  no  impression  on  me,  since  I 
know  that  we  have  souls  more  precious  than  our 
bodies.  If  you  infidels  leave  everything  for  a  good 
morsel,  know  that  a  good  Christian  will  never  be 
ashamed  to  leave  everything  for  prayer ;  you  think 
of  nothing  but  the  earth,  and  our  thoughts  are  for 
Heaven." 

The  same  woman,  kindling  a  fire  one  morning 
when  it  was  very  cold,  thanked  God  because  he  had 
created  the  forests  and  woods,  wherewith  men  might 
warm  themselves.  Her  husband  wished  to  mock  at 
her.  "Thy  father,"  he  said  to  her,  "for  whom 
thou  lightest  this  [65]  fire,  does  not  thank  thee, 
although  he  sees  thee ;  why  are  thou  so  simple  as  to 
thank  God,  whom  thou  hast  never  seen?"  "  I  am 
under  obligation  to  my  father,"  answered  the  wife, 
"  and  the  little  that  I  do  for  him  in  that  is  not 
considerable ;  but  the  favors  which  God  does  for  us 
are  continual,  and  he  can  have  received  nothing  from 
us  which  obliges  him  to  do  us  so  much  good.  It  is 
enough  that  we  know  that  he  hears  us,  and  that  he 
sees  us,  although  we  do  not  see  him,  to  oblige  us  to 
render  him  our  thanks." 

In  this  connection,  I  remember  an  answer  as  full 
of  wit  as  of  faith,  which  a  Christian,  named  Charles 
Ondaaiondiont,  made  some  time  ago  to  the  blasphemy 
of  an  infidel.  This  infidel  was  taunting  the  Chris- 
tians, saying  that,  if  God  were  omnipotent  and  so 
jealous  of  his  honor,  he  ought  to  have  rendered  him- 
self visible,  so  as  to  be  recognized  for  what  he  is ;  and 
that  he  ought  to  have  opened  to  our  view,  on  one 


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES         [Vol.30 

veritables  &  n'euffent  [66]  point  laiffe  noftre  efprit 
dans  le  doute:  Mais  que  Dieu  s'eftant  tenu  cach6, 
ou  il  manquoit  d 'amour  pour  nous,  &  ne  recherchoit 
pas  d'eftre  honnore  des  hommes,  ou  que  pluftofl  il 
falloit  conclure  de  \k,  qu'il  n'eftoit  point  de  Dieu  au 
monde,  &  que  noftre  foy  ne  fubfiftoit  que  dans 
I'erreur. 

O  mal-heureux,  luy  repartit  ce  bon  Chreflien,  ^i  tu 
eftois  aueugle,  tu  dirois  done  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de 
Soleil  dans  le  Ciel?  mais  plufhoft  ne  deurois-tu  pas 
croire  ceux  qui  le  voyent,  8c  tacher  de  recouurer  la 
veue,  afin  de  iouir  d'vn  femblable  bon-heur?  Quit- 
tez  vos  vices  &  la  corruption  de  vos  mceurs ;  Alof s 
vous  cefCerez  d'eftre  infideles,  &  vous  auouerez  auec 
nous,  que  vrayement  il  y  a  vn  Dieu.-  vous  I'aimerez 
plus  que  fes  recompenfes,  &  vous  iugerez  raifon- 
nable,  que  quiconque  eft  fi  ofe  de  I'offenfer,  merite 
des  peines  eternelles. 

Mais  quoy,  luy  repliqua  cet  infidele,  auez  vous 
done  la  veue  de  ce  Dieu  que  vous  adorez?  Non, 
luy  refpondit  le  Chreftien ;  mais  nous  voyons  toutes 
les  chofes  de  ce  mode  qu'il  a  creees,  &  [6'/^^  nous 
pouuons  auffi  peu  douter  qu'il  eft  vn  Dieu;  qu'vn 
homme  fage  pourroit  douter  que  le  Soleil  eft  dans  le 
Ciel,  lors  qu'il  eft  couuert  de  nuees,  &  qu'il  eclaire 
ce  bas  monde,  quoy  qu'on  ne  le  voye  pas:  Nous  le 
verrons  h.  decouuert,  lors  que  les  nuages  feront  difll- 
pez,  que  nos  ames  feront  depoiiillees  de  leurs  corps. 

Mais  pourquoy  ne  s'eft-il  pas  des  maintenant  rendu 
vifible?  Afin,  refpondit  le  Chreftien,  que  des  per- 
fonnes  corrompues  comme  vous,  ne  puffent  pas  le 
voir. 

Les  anciens  du  pais  eitoient  affemblez  cet  hyuer 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  164s  -  4^  59 

side  his  Paradise,  and,  on  the  other,  Hell.  Then, 
indeed,  one  might  have  dreaded  his  threats  and  de- 
sired his  rewards, — which  then  would  have  appeared 
veritable  to  us,  and  would  not  have  [66]  left  our 
minds  in  doubt.  But,  he  said,  as  God  had  kept 
himself  concealed,  either  he  was  wanting  in  love  for 
us,  and  was  not  seeking  to  be  honored  by  men ;  or, 
rather,  one  must  thence  conclude  that  there  was  no 
God  in  the  world,  and  that  our  faith  was  founded 
only  in  error. 

"Oh,  wretched  man!"  answered  him  this  good 
Christian,  "  if  thou  wert  blind,  thou  wouldst  then 
say  that  there  is  no  Sun  in  the  Sky.  But  shouldst 
thou  not  rather  believe  those  who  see  it,  and  try 
to  recover  sight,  that  thou  mayst  enjoy  a  like  bless- 
ing? Leave  your  vices  and  the  corruption  of  your 
morals ;  then  you  will  cease  to  be  infidels,  and  you 
will  avow  with  us  that  truly  there  is  a  God.  You 
will  love  him  more  than  his  rewards ;  and  you  will 
judge  it  reasonable  that  whoever  is  so  presumptuous 
as  to  offend  him  deserves  eternal  pains." 

"  What  then?  "  replied  to  him  this  infidel,  "  have 
you  then  the  sight  of  this  God  whom  you  adore?" 
"  No,"  answered  him  the  Christian,  "  but  we  see  all 
the  things  of  this  world  which  he  has  created ;  and 
[67]  we  can  just  as  little  doubt  that  there  is  a  God, 
as  a  wise  man  could  doubt  that  the  Sun  is  in  the  Sky 
when  it  is  covered  with  clouds,  and  that  it  lights 
this  world  below,  though  we  see  it  not.  We  shall 
see  him  revealed  when  the  clouds  shall  be  scattered, 
when  our  souls  shall  be  divested  of  their  bodies. ' ' 

* '  But  why  has  he  not  rendered  himself  visible  from 
now  on?"  "So  that,"  answered  the  Christian, 
"  corrupt  persons,  like  you,  could  not  see  him." 


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES        [Vol.30 

pour  I'eledtion  d'vn  Capitaine  fort  celebre.  lis  ont 
couflume  en  femblables  rencontres  de  raconter  les 
hifloires  qu'ils  ont  appris  de  leurs  anceftres,  &  les 
plus  eloign^es ;  afin  que  les  ieunes  gens  qui  font  pre- 
fens  &  les  entendent,  en  puiffent  conferuer  la  me- 
moire,  &  les  raconter  h.  leur  tour,  lors  qu'ils  feront 
deuenus  vieux,  pour  ainfi  tranfmettre  h.  la  pofterite, 
I'hifloire,  &  les  annales  du  pais;  tachans  par  ce 
moyen  de  fuppl6er  au  defaut  de  I'efcriture,  &  des 
[68]  liures  qui  leur  manquent.  On  prefente  h.  celuy 
duquel  on  defire  entendre  quelque  chofe,  vn  petit 
faifceau  de  pailles  d'vn  pied  de  long,  qui  leur  feruent 
comme  de  iettons  pour  fupputer  les  nombres,  &  pour 
aider  la  memoire  des  affiftans ;  diftribuant  en  diuers 
lots  ces  mefmes  pailles,  felon  la  diuerfit6  des  chofes 
qu'ils  racontent. 

Le  rang  eftant  venu  "k  vn  vieillard  Chreftien  de 
raconter  ce  qu'il  f9auroit;  II  commence  k  deduire  la 
creation  du  monde,  des  Anges,  des  Demons,  du  Ciel 
&  de  la  terre,  auec  vne  fufpenfion  pleine  d'efprit,  qui 
tenoit  en  attente  toute  fon  affiftance,  eflant  bien 
auant  en  matiere,  &  toutefois  n'ayant  pas  encore 
nomm6  le  nom  de  celuy  qui  auoit  fait  ce  grand  chef- 
d'oeuure.  Lors  qu'il  vint  a  le  nommer,  &  dire  que 
Dieu,  que  les  Chreftiens  adorent,  eftoit  le  Createur 
du  monde.  Le  plus  ancien  Capitaine  des  affiftans 
luy  arrache  les  pailles  des  mains,  luy  impofe  filence, 
&  luy  dit  qu'il  a  tort  de  raconter  les  hiftoires  des 
Fran9ois,  &  non  pas  celles  des  Hurons:  Mais  que 
luy  va  raconter  la  pure  verite,  &  comment  [69]  il  eft 
arriu6  que  la  terre,  qui  eftoit  fubmergee  dans  les 
eaux,  en  ait  efte  pouffee  dehors,  par  vne  certaine 
Tortue  d'vne  prodigieufe  grandeur,  qui  la  fouftient 


1646  -  47J  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -46  61 


The  elders  of  the  country  were  assembled  this 
winter  for  the  election  of  a  very  celebrated  Captain. 
They  are  accustomed,  on  such  occasions,  to  relate 
the  stories  which  they  have  learned  regarding  their 
ancestors,  even  those  most  remote, —  so  that  the 
young  people,  who  are  present  and  hear  them,  may 
preserve  the  memory  thereof,  and  relate  them  in 
their  turn,  when  they  shall  have  become  old.  They 
do  this  in  order  thus  to  transmit  to  posterity  the 
history  and  the  annals  of  the  country, —  striving,  by 
this  means,  to  supply  the  lack  of  writing  and  of 
[68]  books,  which  they  have  not.  They  offer,  to  the 
person  from  whom  they  desire  to  hear  something,  a 
little  bundle  of  straws  a  foot  long,  which  serve  them 
as  counters  for  calculating  the  numbers,  and  for 
aiding  the  memory  of  those  present, — distributing  in 
various  lots  these  same  straws,  according  to  the  diver- 
sity of  the  things  which  they  relate. 

The  turn  having  come  to  a  Christian  old  man,  to 
tell  what  he  knew,  he  begins  to  narrate  the  creation 
of  the  world,  of  the  Angels,  of  the  Demons,  of 
Heaven  and  earth,  with  a  most  sagacious  reserva- 
tion, which  kept  all  those  present  in  a  state  of 
expectancy ;  for  he  was  far  along  in  the  matter,  and 
still  had  not  yet  given  the  name  of  the  one  who  had 
made  this  great  masterpiece.  When  he  came  to 
name  him,  and  to  say  that  God,  whom  the  Christians 
adore,  was  the  Creator  of  the  world,  the  eldest  Cap- 
tain of  those  present  seizes  the  straws  from  his 
hands,  imposes  silence  upon  him,  and  tells  him 
that  he  does  wrong  to  relate  the  stories  of  the 
French,  and  not  those  of  the  Hurons.  But,  he  says, 
he  is  going  to  relate  the  pure  truth,  and  how  [69]  it 
has  happened  that  the  earth,  which  was  submerged 


62  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES  [Vol.30 

&  qui  luy  fert  d'appuy;  fans  lequel  la  pefanteur  de 
cette  terre  la  feroit  abifmer  derechef  dans  les  eaux, 
&  cauferoit  en  ce  bas  monde  vne  defolation  generalle 
de  tout  le  genre  humain. 

Ce  bon  Chreftien,  auquel  on  auoit  inipof6  filence, 
&  qui  exprez  auoit  attendu  a  faire  paroiftre  fon  zele ; 
ayant  donne  quelque  temps  audience  a  la  fable  de 
ce  Capitaine  infidele,  luy  arrache  auffi  a  fon  tour  les 
pailles  de  la  main:  Tay-toy,  toy-mefme,  luy  dift-il, 
i'ay  voulu  t'ecouter  &  me  fuis  teu  fans  refinance, 
croyant  que  tu  nous  deuffe  enfeigner  quelque  chofe 
de  meilleur,  &  auffi  veritable  que  ce  que  ie  difois: 
mais  voyant  que  tu  ne  racontes  que  des  fables,  qui 
n'ont  point  de  fondement  que  le  menfonge,  i'ay  plus 
de  droit  de  parler  que  toy.  Oil  font  les  efcritures 
qui  nous  faff ent  f oy  de  ce  que  tu  dis  ?  Eftant  permis 
a  vn  chacun  de  controuuer  ce  qu'il  voudra,  eft-ce  [70] 
merueille  que  nous  ne  f9acliions  rien  de  veritable, 
puifque  nous  deuons  auouer  que  les  Hurons  ont  eft6 
menteurs  de  tout  temps?  Mais  les  Fran9ois  ne  par- 
lent  point  par  coeur,  ils  conferuent  de  toute  antiquite 
les  liures  Saints,  oil  la  parole  de  Dieu  mefme  eft 
efcrite;  fans  qu'il  foit  permis  a  aucun  d'y  alterer  le 
moins  du  monde,  s'il  ne  vouloit  s'expofer  a  la  con- 
fufion  de  fe  voir  d6menty  de  toutes  les  nations  de  la 
terre,  qui  cheriffent  cette  verite  plus  qu'ils  n'ont 
d'amour  pour  la  vie. 

Vn  Magicien  des  plus  fameux  de  ce  pais,  apres 
auoir  vomy  mille  blafphemes  contre  Dieu,  fe  vantoit 
infolemmet  qu'il  efloit  en  fon  pouuoir  de  procurer 
les  pluyes  en  temps  de  fechereffe,  les  arrefter,  lors 
qu'elles  feroient  trop  abondantes,  d'empefcher  les 
gel6es  qui  pourroient  nuire  a  leur  bledd'Inde;  en 


1646 -4T J  RELATION  OF  1645-4(3  63 

in  the  waters,  has  been  pushed  out  of  them  by  a  cer- 
tain Tortoise  of  prodigious  size,  which  sustains  it  and 
which  serves  it  for  support, — without  which  the 
weight  of  this  earth  would  again  engulf  it  in  the 
waters,  and  would  cause  in  this  world  below  a 
general  desolation  of  all  the  human  race.*^ 

This  good  Christian  upon  whom  they  had  imposed 
silence,  and  who  had  waited  expressly  to  manifest 
his  zeal,  having  for  some  time  given  audience  to  the 
fable  of  that  infidel  Captain,  also  in  his  turn  seizes 
the  straws  from  his  hand.  "  Be  silent  thyself,"  he 
said  to  him;  "  I  consented  to  listen  to  thee,  and  be- 
came silent  without  resistance, —  believing  that  thou 
wouldst  teach  us  something  better,  and  as  true  as 
what  I  was  saying.  But  seeing  that  thou  teilest 
only  fables,  which  have  no  foundation  but  lies,  I 
have  more  right  to  speak  than  thou.  Where  are  the 
writings  which  give  us  faith  in  what  thou  sayest?  If 
each  one  is  permitted  to  invent  what  he  will,  is  it 
[70]  strange  that  we  know  nothing  true,  since  we  must 
acknowledge  that  the  Hurons  have  been  liars  from  all 
time  ?  But  the  French  do  not  speak  by  heart ;  they 
preserve  from  all  antiquity  the  Sacred  books,  wherein 
the  word  of  God  himself  is  written,  without  permis- 
sion to  any  one  to  alter  it  the  least  in  the  world, —  un- 
less he  would  expose  himself  to  the  confusion  of  see- 
ing himself  belied  by  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  who 
cherish  this  truth  more  than  they  have  love  for  life." 

A  Magician,  among  the  most  famous  in  this  coun- 
try, after  having  vomited  a  thousand  blasphemies 
against  God,  was  insolently  boasting  that  it  was  in 
his  power  to  procure  the  rains  in  time  of  drouth ;  to 
stop  them  when  they  should  be  too  copious ;  to  pre- 
vent the  frosts  which  might  injure  their  Indian  corn. 


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES  [Vol.30 

vn  mot  il  fe  faifoit  I'arbitre  des  faifons  de  I'annee, 
pourueu  qu'on  euft  recours  a  luy,  &  qu'on  rendit 
homage  au  Demon  qu'il  inuoque.  Ce  fuperbe  voy- 
ant  qu'vn  Chreftien  Ik  prefent,  ne  temoignoit  pas 
comme  les  autres  aucune  marque  d'eftonnement,  [71] 
au  recit  de  tant  de  merueilles;  il  le  prit  a  party,  «& 
luy  dift  affez  groffierement  qu'il  eftoit  fans  efprit, 
de  n'admirer  pas  fon  pouuoir,  &  que  c'eftoit  vne 
marque  de  fa  folie  de  s'eftre  fait  Chreftien. 

En  effet,  luy  repartit  doucement  le  Chreftien,  ie 
n'ay  eu  que  de  la  companion  pour  toy,  entendant  ton 
difcours:  ie  ne  fuis  pas  toutesfois  opiniaftre,  &  fuis 
preft  d'admirer  tes  merueilles,  pourueu  que  ie  Ifes 
voye.  Fais  naiftre  icy  vne  montagne,  k  la  veue  de 
tout  le  monde  qui  nous  entend ;  alors  i'auoiieray  que 
vrayemet  ton  pouuoir  eft  grand :  Mais  fi  tu  ne  le 
peux  pas  faire,  laiffe  moy  adorer  celuy  feul  qui  a  fait 
toutes  les  montagnes :  enfeigne  nous  icy  les  principes 
de  ta  fageffe,  nous  verrons  fi  elle  eft  plus  adorable 
que  la  fienne :  Du  moins  fi  tu  f9ais  fes  commandemes, 
tu  auoiieras  qu'ils  font  plus  equitables  que  les  tiens. 
Ce  pauure  Magicien  fut  contraint  de  fe  retirer  auec 
fa  confufion,  &  depuis  n'y  eft  pas  retourne. 

Mais  ce  qui  eftonne  le  plus  les  infideles  en 
femblables  rencontres,  eft  [72]  qu'ils  voyent  que 
plufieurs,  qui  leur  fembloient  auparauant  des  efprits 
affez  mediocres,  paroiffent  tout  changez  lors  qu'ils 
font  deuenus  Chreftiens.  Et  en  effet  la  foy  eclaire 
beaucoup  vn  efprit,  le  fouftien  d'vne  bonne  caufe, 
fournit  la  bonte  des  raifons,  «&  nos  Sauuages 
prennent  affez  aifement  vne  tres-fainte  liberte,  lors 
qu'eftans  deuenus  Chreftiens,  ils  penfent  qu'ils  n'ont 
plus  k  craindre  en  ce  monde  que  Dieu  &  le  pech6. 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  4.6  65 

In  a  word,  he  made  himself  the  umpire  of  the  sea- 
sons of  the  year, — provided  that  the  people  had 
recourse  to  him,  and  rendered  homage  to  the  Demon 
whom  he  invokes.  This  arrogant  one,  seeing  that  a 
Christian  there  present  did  not,  like  the  others,  be- 
token any  sign  of  astonishment  [71]  at  the  recital  of 
so  many  marvels,  took  him  aside,  and  told  him,  very 
rudely,  that  he  was  without  sense,  not  to  admire  his 
power;  and  that  it  was  a  mark  of  his  madness,  that 
he  had  become  a  Christian. 

"  In  truth,"  gently  answered  him  the  Christian, 
"  I  have  had  only  compassion  for  thee,  hearing  thy 
discourse ;  I  am  not  obstinate,  however,  and  am  ready 
to  admire  thy  wonders,  provided  that  I  see  them. 
Cause  a  mountain  to  rise  here,  in  the  sight  of  every 
one  who  hears  us ;  then  I  will  acknowledge  that  truly 
thy  power  is  great.  But  if  thou  canst  not  do  it,  allow 
me  to  adore  him  alone  who  has  made  all  the  moun- 
tains. Teach  us  here  the  principles  of  thy  wisdom ; 
we  shall  see  whether  it  is  more  adorable  than  his. 
At  least,  if  thou  knowest  his  commandments,  thou 
wilt  admit  that  they  are  more  equitable  than  thine." 
This  poor  Magician  was  constrained  to  withdraw,  to 
his  own  confusion,  and  since  then  has  not  returned. 

But  what  most  astonishes  the  infidels,  on  such  occa- 
sions, is  [72]  that  they  see  that  many,  who  previously 
seemed  to  them  quite  ordinary  minds,  appear  wholly 
changed  when  they  have  become  Christians.  And, 
in  fact,  the  faith  greatly  enlightens  a  mind;  the 
support  of  a  good  cause  furnishes  excellence  of 
argument;  and  our  Savages  quite  easily  acquire  a 
very  blessed  liberty  when,  having  become  Christians, 
they  think  that  they  have  no  more  fear  in  this  world 
but  God  and  sin. 


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.30 

Voicy  vn  trait  de  foy  qui  m'a  pleu.  Nous  auions 
icy  auerty  quelques-vns  d'vn  eclipfe  de  Lune,  qui 
arriua  le  trentiefme  de  lanuier,  &  dont  le  commence- 
ment nous  parut  &,  dix  heures,  &  quarante  fix  minu- 
tes. Feftois  alors  dans  le  Bourg  de  la  Conception. 
On  ne  manque  pas  de  fortir  des  cabanes,  pour 
voir  ^s.  en  effet  1' eclipfe  feroit  telle  que  nous  1 'anions 
predite.  Vn  bon  Chreftien  fe  mit  a  prier  Dieu, 
durant  tout  ce  teps-la.  Le  ledemain  les  autres  luy 
demandans  pourquoy  il  n'eftoit  point  forty  pour  voir 
vne  eclipfe  fi  remarquable ?  Parce,  refpondit-il,  qu'il 
m'efl  venu  alors  dans  la  penfee  que  [73]  Dieu  ne 
nous  auoit  point  inuite  k  aller  voir  les  eclipf es ;  niais 
bien  qu'il  nous  auoit  promis  qu'il  auroit  plus  d'amour 
pour  nous,  plus  nous  donnerions  de  temps  a  la 
priere.  A  quoy  repliquant  vn  autre  Chreftien,  que 
pour  luy  il  I'eftoit  alle  voir,  "k  deffein  de  fe  confir- 
mer  dans  la  creance  qu'il  auoit,  que  ce  que  nous  leur 
enfeignions  de  la  future  refurredlion,  fe  trouuera  vn 
iour  autant  veritable,  que  ce  que  nous  leur  auions 
predit  de  cette  eclipfe,  auant  qu'elle  parut.  Et  moy, 
refpondit  le  premier,  ie  croy  fi  f ermement  tout  ce  que 
Dieu  a  reuele,  &  ce  qu'on  nous  enfeigne  des  chofes  de 
la  foy,  que  ie  n'ay  point  befoin  d'aller  madier  dans 
la  Lune  aucun  motif  de  ma  creance.  Si  nous  croyons 
ce  qu'on  nous  dit  des  villes  &  des  richeffes  de  la 
France,  fans  iamais  en  auoir  rien  veu ;  pourquoy  ne 
croiray-ie  pas  ce  que  Dieu  a  reuel6  du  Paradis,  & 
qu'vn  iour  nous  refufciterons.  II  faut  que  ceux  qui 
nous  viennent  enfeigner  en  foient  plus  affeurez,  que 
des  chofes  qu'ils  ont  veu  en  France;  puifque  ce  n'eft 
que  dans  la  veue  du  Paradis  qu'ils  ont  abandonne 
leurs  parens,  [74]  leur  patrie,  &  tout  ce  qu'il  pent  y 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1645 -4^  67 

Here  is  a  trait  of  faith  which  has  pleased  me.  We 
had  notified  certain  persons  here  of  an  eclipse  of  the 
Moon,  which  occurred  the  thirtieth  of  January,  and 
the  beginning  of  which  appeared  to  us  at  ten  o'clock 
and  forty-six  minutes.  I  was  then  in  the  Village  of 
la  Conception.  They  did  not  fail  to  leave  the  cabins, 
to  see  if  the  eclipse  would  really  be  such  as  we  had 
predicted  it.  A  good  Christian  set  himself  to  pray 
to  God  during  all  that  time.  The  next  day,  the 
others  asking  him  why  he  had  not  gone  out  to  see  so 
remarkable  an  eclipse,  he  answered:  "  Because  it 
then  came  to  my  thought  that  [73]  God  had  not  invited 
us  to  go  to  see  eclipses,  but  that  indeed  he  had  prom- 
ised us  that  he  would  have  more  love  for  us,  the  more 
time  we  should  give  to  prayer.  To  which  another 
Christian  replied,  that,  for  his  part,  he  had  gone  to 
see  it  on  purpose  to  confirm  himself  in  the  belief 
which  he  had,  that  what  we  taught  them  of  the 
future  resurrection  will  one  day  prove  just  as  true  as 
what  we  had  predicted  to  them  of  this  eclipse  before 
it  appeared.  "  And  as  for  myself,"  answered  the 
first,  "  I  believe  so  firmly  all  that  God  has  re- 
vealed, and  what  is  taught  us  of  the  things  of  the 
faith,  that  I  have  no  need  to  go  begging  in  the  Moon 
any  motive  for  my  belief.  If  we  believe  all  that 
they  tell  us  of  the  cities  and  of  the  riches  of  France, 
without  ever  having  seen  aught  of  them,  why 
shall  I  not  believe  what  God  has  revealed  of  Para- 
dise, and  that  one  day  we  shall  rise  again?  It  must 
be  that  those  who  come  to  teach  us  are  more  certain 
of  this  than  of  the  things  which  they  have  seen  in 
France ;  since  it  is  only  with  a  view  to  Paradise  that 
they  have  abandoned  their  relatives,  [74]  their  native 
land,  and  whatever  there  can  be  most  agreeable  in 


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.30 

auoir  de  plus  aimable  au  monde,  pour  venir  icy  auec 
nous  traifner  vne  vie  miferable. 

Le  Pere  Fran9ois  lofeph  Breffany,  que  nous  atten- 
dions  depuis  quatre  ans,  arriua  enfin  icy  aux  Hurons 
au  commencement  de  I'Automne  dernier.  S'il  n'eut 
point  efte  pris  captif  des  Iroquois  en  fon  premier 
voyage,  il  fgauroit  defia  la  langue  Huronne,  &  feroit 
vn  ouurier  forme :  Mais  il  f aut  auoiier  que  les  proui- 
dences  de  Dieu  font  aimables.  Les  cruautez  que 
luy  ont  veu  fouffrir  aux  Iroquois  quelques  Hurons 
qui  en  font  6cliappez,  &  fes  mains  mutilees,  fes  doigts 
couppez  I'ont  rendu  meilleur  Predicateur  que  nous 
ne  fommes,  d^s  le  point  de  fon  arriuee,  &  ont  feruy 
plus  que  toutes  nos  langues,  a  faire  conceuoir  plus 
que  iamais  h.  nos  Chreftiens  Hurons,  les  veritez  de 
noftre  foy. 

II  faut,  difoient  les  vns,  que  Dieu  foit  bien  aima- 
ble, &  merite  vrayement  luy  feul  d'eftre  obey,  puif- 
que  la  veue  de  mille  morts,  &  des  fupplices  mille 
fois  plus  effroyables  que  la  mort,  [75]  ne  peuuent 
arrefter  ceux  qui  nous  viennent  annoncer  fa  parole. 
S'il  n'y  auoit  vn  Paradis,  difoient  les  autres,  pour- 
roit-il  fe  trouuer  des  hommes,  qui  trauerfaffent  les 
feux  &  les  flammes  des  Iroquois,  pour  nous  retirer  de 
I'Enfer,  &  nous  mener  auec  eux  dans  le  Ciel?  Non, 
s'ecrioient  plufieurs,  ie  ne  fuis  plus  capable  d'eftre 
tente  fur  les  veritez  de  la  foy ;  ie  ne  f9ay  ny  lire  ny 
efcrire;  mais  ces  doigts  que  ie  voy  trongonnez,  font 
la  refponfe  h.  tous  mes  doutes ;  car  ie  ne  puis  douter 
que  celuy-1^  ne  foit  bien  affeur6  de  ce  qu'il  vient 
nous  enfeigner,  qui  ayant  effuye  de  fi  horribles  cru- 
autez, s'y  eft  expofe  pour  la  feconde  fois,  auffi  gaye- 
ment  que  s'il  n 'auoit  trouue  dans  fon  premier  voyage. 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  46  69 


the  world,   in    order   to   come   here   to   drag  out  a 
wretched  life  with  us." 

Father  Frangois  Joseph  Bressany,^  whom  we  had 
been  expecting  for  four  years,  finally  arrived  here 
among  the  Hurons  at  the  beginning  of  last  Autumn. 
If  he  had  not  been  taken  captive  by  the  Iroquois  on 
his  first  voyage,  he  would  already  know  the  Huron 
language,  and  would  be  a  trained  workman.  But  it 
must  be  acknowledged  that  the  providences  of  God 
are  ofracious.  The  cruelties  which  some  Hurons 
who  escaped  saw  him  suffer  among  the  Iroquois,  and 
his  mutilated  hands, — the  fingers  having  been  cut 
off, — have  rendered  him  a  better  Preacher  than  we, 
since  the  time  of  his  arrival,  and  have  served  more 
than  all  our  tongues  to  give  a  better  conception  than 
ever  to  our  Huron  Christians,  of  the  truths  of  our 
faith. 

"  It  must  be,"  said  some,  "  that  God  is  very  gra- 
cious, and  truly  deserves  that  he  alone  should  be 
obeyed, — since  the  sight  of  a  thousand  deaths,  and 
of  tortures  a  thousand  times  more  frightful  than 
death,  [75]  cannot  stop  those  who  come  to  announce 
to  us  his  word."  "  If  there  were  not  a  Paradise," 
said  others,  "  could  there  be  found  men  who  would 
traverse  the  fires  and  flames  of  the  Iroquois,  in  order 
to  withdraw  us  from  Hell,  and  to  lead  us  with  them 
to  Heaven?"  "  No,"  exclaimed  several;  "  I  can  no 
longer  be  tempted  regarding  the  truths  of  the  faith. 
I  can  neither  read  nor  write,  but  those  fingers  which  I 
see  cut  off  are  the  answer  to  all  my  doubts;  for  I 
cannot  question  that  that  man  is  well  assured  of 
what  he  comes  to  teach  us,  who,  having  experienced 
such  horrible  cruelties,  has  exposed  himself  to  them 
for  the  second  time,  as  cheerfully  as  if  he  had  found 


70  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

que  des  delices  en  fon  chemin,  Monftre  nous  feule- 
ment  tes  playes,  adiouftent-ils  au  Pere;  elles  nous 
difent  plus  ejfficacement  que  tu  ne  pourras  faire, 
quand  tu  f9auras  entierement  parler  de  noftre  langue, 
que  nous  deuons  feruir  &  adorer  celuy,  dont  tu 
attends  vn  iour  qu'il  te  rendra  &  la  vie  que  tu  as 
expofee  fi  franchement  pour  luy,  &  les  doigts  qu'on 
t'a  brule  11  cruellement,  [76]  enuoyant  icy  pour  fon 
feruice.  C'eft  ainfi  que  la  prouidence  de  Dieu  tire 
fa  gloire  de  nos  pertes,  &  que  la  foy  de  ces  bons 
Neophytes  va  s'affermiffant  de  foy-mefme,  trouuant 
de  iour  en  iour  de  nouueaux  motifs  de  croire  les 
veritez  que  nous  venons  leur  annoncer. 

Rene  Tfondihouanne,  parlant  vn  iour  du  tres-faint 
Sacrement  en  vne  affembl6e  de  Chreftiens ;  oiiy,  mes 
freres,  leur  difoit-il;  croyons  fans  aucun  doute  que 
lefus-Chrift  eft  en  I'Hoftie,  qu'il  eft  proche  de  nous, 
&  dedans  nous,  lors  que  nous  Communions.  II  s'eft 
voulu  cacher,  comme  vn  enfant  nouuellement  conceu 
dans  le  ventre  de  fa  mere :  Si  la  mere  ne  croyoit  pas 
que  fon  enfant  euft  vie,  lors  qu'il  eft  cache  k  fes 
yeux,  &  qu'elle  euft  trop  de  curiofite  pour  le  voir 
auant  terme,  iamais  elle  ne  le  pourroit  voir  que 
mort,  &  fe  feroit  mourir  foy-mefme:  Ainfi  quiconque 
refufera  de  croire  que  lefus-Chrift  eft  en  I'Hoftie, 
s'il  ne  le  void ;  iamais  ne  meritera  de  le  voir.  Atten- 
dons  que  luy  mef me  veille  fe  d^couurir ;  &  alors  nous 
I'enuifagerons  auec  autant  de  ioye,  qu'vne  mere  void 
fon  enfant,  dont  elle  a  patiemment  attendu  les 
momens,  fans  les  precipiter. 

\j'j'\  Cette  penf6e  me  furprit  beaucoup,  I'entendant 
de  la  bouche  de  ce  bon  Chreftien:  mais  ce  qui 
m'eilonne  le  plus,  &  ce  qui  me  feroit  incroyable,  fi  ie 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  71 

in  his  first  voyage  only  delights  along  his  way. 
Show  us  only  thy  wounds,"  they  add  to  the  Father; 
"they  tell  us — more  efficiently  than  thou  wilt  be 
able  to  do  when  thou  shalt  thoroughly  know  how  to 
speak  our  language  —  that  we  are  bound  to  serve 
and  adore  him  of  whom  thou  expectest  one  day  that 
he  will  restore  to  thee  both  the  life  which  thou  hast 
so  freely  exposed  for  him,  and  the  fingers  which 
they  burned  for  thee  so  cruelly,  [76]  while  journey- 
ing here  for  his  service."  It  is  thus  that  the  provi- 
dence of  God  draws  his  glory  from  our  losses,  and 
that  the  faith  of  these  good  Neophytes  continues  to 
grow  stronger,  spontaneously,  finding  from  day  to 
day  new  motives  for  believing  the  truths  which  we 
come  to  announce  to  them. 

Rene  Tsondihouanne,  speaking  one  day  of  the  most 
blessed  Sacrament  in  an  assembly  of  Christians,  said 
to  them:  "Yes,  my  brothers;  let  us  believe  with- 
out any  doubt  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  Host, — that 
he  is  near  us,  and  within  us,  when  we  receive  Com- 
munion. He  has  chosen  to  conceal  himself,  like  a 
child  newly  conceived  in  the  womb  of  its  mother.  If 
the  mother  did  not  believe  that  her  child  had  life 
when  it  is  concealed  from  her  eyes,  and  if  she  had 
too  much  curiosity  to  see  it  before  its  term,  never 
could  she  see  it  except  dead,  and  she  would  cause  her 
own  death.  Thus,  whosoever  shall  refuse  to  believe, 
unless  he  see  him,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  Host, 
never  will  deserve  to  see  him.  Let  us  wait  till  he 
himself  is  willing  to  reveal  himself;  and  then  we 
shall  behold  him  with  as  much  joy  as  a  mother  sees 
her  child  whose  time  she  has  patiently  awaited  with- 
out precipitating  it." 

{j'j^  This  thought  much  surprised  me,  hearing  it 


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.30 

ne  le  voyois  de  mes  yeux,  eft  ce  que  ie  puis  affeurer 
auec  verite,  que  telles  penf6es  viennent  pour  la  pluf- 
part  d'elles-mefmes  k  ces  bonnes  gens,  fans  que 
iamais  ils  les  ayent  entendu  d'aillieurs.  Ce  qui  me 
fait  auoiier  que  vrayement  leur  foy  eft  vn  ouurage 
de  Dieu  feul,  &  que  fa  main  n'eft  pas  racourcie  en 
ce  monde  nouueau,  auffi  peu  que  dans  le  refte  de  la 
terre. 

En  paffant  ie  diray  que  nos  Chrefties  ne  trouuent 
aucune  peine  a  croire  le  myftere  du  tres-faint  Sacre- 
ment.  Les  doutes  leur  viennent  quafi  vniquement 
touchant  les  veritez  du  Paradis,  de  I'Enfer,  &  de  la 
Refurredtion ;  Depuis  que  i'ay  creu  que  ie  refufcite- 
ray,  nous  difent  la  plufpart,  ie  n'ay  aucune  peine  k 
croire  le  refte  des  veritez  de  noftre  foy :  celuy  qui 
peut  ramaffer  les  parties  difQpees  d'vn  corps  reduit  en 
cendre,  n'a  plus  rien  qui  luy  foit  impoffible. 

En  fuitte  d'vne  foy  fi  vine,  on  ne  pourroit  croire 
fans  le  voir,  quelle  eft  I'innocence  de  la  plufpart  de 
ces  bons  Neophytes,  [78]  &  I'horreur  qu'ils  ont  du 
pech6,  iufques  la  que  plufieurs  nous  demandet  fou- 
uent,  fi  c'eft  vne  chofe  poffible  de  croire  vn  Paradis 
&  vn  Enfer,  &  auec  cela  pecher  mortellement.  Si 
qu'ayans  veu  quelque  Chreftien  commettre  quelque 
faute  notable,  nous  en  venans  faire  le  rapport;  au 
lieu  de  nous  dire  qu'ils  ont  veu  fon  peche:  Helas, 
nous  difent-ils,  vn  tel  a  auiourd'buy  perdu  la  veue 
du  Paradis  &  de  I'Enfer;  il  s'eft  oubli6  de  fa  foy,  & 
qu'il  y  a  vn  Dieu;  nous  I'auons  veu  reduit  au  rang 
des  infideles,  qui  croient  que  noftre  foy  ne  foit  rien 
que  des  fables. 

II  y  a  enuiron  trois  ans,  qu'vn  Capitaine  des  plus 
confiderables  de  tout  le  pais,  nomme  Maurice  Hotia- 


1646-47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  4^  73 

from  the  lips  of  this  good  Christian ;  but  what  aston- 
ishes me  most,  and  what  would  be  incredible  to  me 
if  I  did  not  see  it  with  my  own  eyes,  is  that  I  can 
assert,  with  truth,  that  such  thoughts  come  for  the 
most  part  spontaneously  to  these  good  people,  with- 
out their  ever  having  heard  them  from  others.  This 
makes  me  acknowledge  that  truly  their  faith  is  a 
work  of  God  alone,  and  that  his  hand  is  not  short- 
ened in  this  new  world,  any  more  than  in  the  rest  of 
the  earth. 

In  passing,  I  will  say  that  our  Christians  find  no 
difficulty  in  believing  the  mystery  of  the  most  blessed 
Sacrament.  Doubts  come  to  them  almost  exclusive- 
ly concerning  the  truths  of  Paradise,  of  Hell,  and  of 
the  Resurrection.  "  Since  I  believed  that  I  shall 
rise  again,"  most  of  them  say  to  us,  "I  have  no  diffi- 
culty in  believing  the  remaining  truths  of  our  faith ; 
he  who  can  gather  up  the  scattered  portions  of  a 
body  reduced  to  ashes,  has  nothing  left  that  is  impos- 
sible for  him." 

As  results  of  a  faith  so  lively,  one  could  not  be- 
lieve, without  seeing  it,  how  great  is  the  innocence  of 
most  of  these  good  Neophytes,  [78]  and  the  horror 
which  they  have  for  sin, —  even  to  the  extent  that 
several  often  ask  us  whether  it  is  a  possible  thing  to 
believe  a  Paradise  and  a  Hell,  and  withal  to  sin  mor- 
tally. So,  when  having  seen  some  Christian  commit 
any  notable  fault,  on  coming  to  make  us  the  report 
of  it,  instead  of  telling  us  that  they  have  seen  his 
sin,  they  say  to  us,  "  Alas!  such  a  one  has  to-day 
lost  the  sight  of  Paradise  and  of  Hell ;  he  has  forgot- 
ten his  faith,  and  that  there  is  a  God;  we  have  seen 
him  reduced  to  the  rank  of  the  infidels,  who  believe 
that  our  faith  is  nothing  but  fables." 


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

ouitaentonk  du  Bourg  de  la  Conception,  fe  fit  Chre- 
flien.  Tout  le  pais  eft  eflonne  de  voir  le  courage  & 
la  conflance  de  cet  homme  en  fa  foy,  &  plus  encore 
fon  innocence,  qui  fe  conferue  entiere,  au  milieu  des 
occafions  cotinuelles  qui  I'inuitent  au  pech6.  Quel- 
ques  Chreftiens  luy  demandoient  vn  iour,  comment 
il  pouuoit  viure  au  milieu  de  tant  de  dangers,  auec 
vne  fi  grande  innocence.  Mes  freres,  leur  dift-il,  la 
riuiere  qui  defcend  d'icy  k  QuebeK  n'eft  [79]  rien 
que  precipices,  &  toutefois  nous  y  faifons  pen  de 
naufrages,  parce  que  nous  fommes  toujours  fur  nos 
gardes,  &  "k  chaque  pas  nous  craignons  de  perdre  & 
nos  biens  &  nos  vies:  plus  qu'vn  canot  eft  charge 
des  marchandifes  precieufes,  plus  on  a  I'oeil  k  efqui- 
uer  les  rochers  &  les  goufres  qui  s'y  rencontrent. 
Depuis  que  i'ay  receu  le  faindt  Baptefme,  tout  mon 
threfor  eft  dans  mon  coeur,  &  ma  foy  font  mes  plus 
aymables  richeffes:  ie  redoute  plus  le  peche,  que 
nous  ne  craignons  les  naufrages;  a  cliaque  pas  ie 
fonge  que  i'ay  beaucoup  a  perdre,  &  que  ie  conduis 
vn  foible  vaiffeau,  mais  charge  toutefois  des  richeffes 
qui  viennent  du  Ciel ;  ie  preuoy  les  dangers,  ie  prie 
Dieu  qu'il  m'affifte,  ie  me  defie  de  moy,  &  me  confie 
en  fa  bonte;  &  iamais  ne  me  croiray  en  affeurance, 
que  ie  ne  fois  arriu6  dans  le  Ciel.  Qui  n'auroit  rien, 
ou  peu  de  chofe  k  perdre,  tomberoit  affez  aifement. 
Nous  auons  commence  cette  ann6e  durant  le  Ca- 
refme  d'expofer  a  nos  Chreftiens  I'Euangile  de  cha- 
que iour,  &  les  fruits  nous  en  ont  paru  tres-fenfibles. 
Vn  bon  vieillard  ayant  entendu  I'Euangile  de  la 
femme  adultere,  ne  put  pas  reprimer  ny  [80]  fes 
oris,  ny  fes  larmes.  Les  afTiftans  en  font  emeus 
d'vne  faindle  frayeur:  mais  ce  bon  homme  ne  fon- 


1 646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  46  75 

It  is  about  three  years  since  a  Captain,  one  of  the 
most  influential  in  all  the  country,  named  Maurice 
Hotiaouitaentonk,  of  the  Village  of  la  Conception, 
became  a  Christian.  The  whole  country  is  aston- 
ished to  see  the  courage  and  the  constancy  of  this 
man  in  his  faith,  and  still  more,  his  innocence,  which 
is  preserved  intact,  in  the  midst  of  the  continual 
opportunities  which  invite  him  to  sin.  Some  Chris- 
tians were  asking  him  one  day,  how  he  could  live  in 
the  midst  of  so  many  dangers,  with  so  great  inno- 
cence. "  My  brothers,"  he  said  to  them,  "  the  river 
which  goes  down  from  here  to  Quebek  is  [79]  noth- 
ing but  rapids;  and  yet  we  make  few  shipwrecks 
on  it,  because  we  are  always  on  our  guard,  and  at  each 
turn  we  fear  to  lose  both  our  goods  and  our  lives. 
The  more  a  canoe  is  laden  with  precious  wares,  the 
more  watchful  one  is  to  elude  the  rocks  and  the 
whirlpools  which  are  there  encountered.  Since  I  have 
received  holy  Baptism,  all  my  treasure  is  in  my  heart, 
and  my  faith  is  my  most  precious  wealth.  I  dread 
sin  more  than  we  fear  the  shipwrecks ;  at  each  step  I 
think  that  I  have  much  to  lose,  and  that  I  guide  a 
feeble  vessel, — but  one,  nevertheless,  laden  with  the 
riches  which  come  from  Heaven.  I  foresee  the 
dangers;  I  pray  God  that  he  assist  me;  I  distrust 
myself,  and  confide  in  his  goodness ;  and  never  shall 
I  believe  myself  in  safety,  till  I  have  arrived  in 
Heaven.  He  who  should  have  nothing  or  little  to 
lose  would  fall  quite  easily." 

We  began  this  year,  during  Lent,  to  expound  to 
our  Christians  the  Gospel  for  each  day,  and  the  fruits 
of  it  have  appeared  to  us  very  noticeable.  A  good 
old  man,  having  heard  the  Gospel  about  the  adulter- 
ous woman,  could  repress  neither  [80]  his  cries  nor 


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 

geant  a  rien  qu'k  Dieu,  s'abandonnoit  a  fa  douleur 
auec  autant  de  liberte,  que  s'il  euft  eile  feul.  Eftant 
reuenu  "k  foy,  on  I'interrogea  quelle  chofe  I'auoit 
toucli6?  La  fouuenance,  refpondit-il,  des  pechez  que 
ie  commettois  auant  que  de  connoiftre  Dieu !  O  que 
ne  fgauois-ie  point  lors  qu'il  me  voyoit,  iamais  ie 
n'euffe  eu  Ie  cceur  de  I'offencer.  I'ay  fenty  dans  Ie 
fond  de  mon  ame  qu'il  me  difoit  Ie  mefme  qu'a  la 
femme  adultere,  qu'il  ne  me  condamneroit  pas  pour 
ce  qui  eft  de  ma  vie  palTee :  &  Ie  moyen  de  contenir 
fes  larmes,  de  voir  apres  tant  de  pechez,  que  nonob- 
ftant  il  veut  m'aimer,  &  me  faire  mifericorde,  autant 
que  fi  i'euffe  emploie  toute  ma  vie  en  fon  amourf    * 

Vn  autre  s' eftant  laiffe  tomber  en  quelque  faute  de 
furprife,  vint  trouuer  des  Ie  point  du  iour  celuy  de 
nos  Peres  qui  I'inftruifoit.  Ie  te  prie  d'auoir  pitie 
de  moy,  luy  dit-il,  &  de  m'effacer  au  pluftoft  mon 
peche,  i'ay  paffe  toute  la  nuidt  en  prieres  &  en  lar- 
mes, fans  auoir  pris  vn  moment  de  fommeil.  Ceux 
de  ma  cabane  qui  ont  veu  mon  peche,  ont  efl6  t^moins 
de  mes  [8i]  [larmes:]  mais  Dieu  que  i'ay  offenfe,  a 
connu  celles  de  mon  coeur  qui  ont  efte  les  plus 
ameres:  i'efpere  qu'il  me  fera  mifericorde. 

Ayant  receu  I'abfolution,  il  fit  feftin  des  Ie  iour 
mefme,  auquel  il  appella  les  Capitaines  infideles,  fes 
parens,  &  tous  ceux  qui  auoient  eft6  ou  la  caufe,  ou 
temoins  de  fa  cheute.  Ie  vous  ay  affemble,  leur 
dift-il,  pour  vous  faire  fgauoir  les  regrets  que  i'ay 
de  ma  faute;  &  que  fi  i'ay  pech6,  i'ay  appris  qu'vn 
Chreftien  ne  pent  plus  auoir  de  repos,  ayant  offenfe 
Dieu,  pour  aggreer  aux  hommes :  Sgachez  que  de  ma 
vie  ie  ne  fuis  plus  pour  obei'r  en  rien,  de  ce  que  vous, 
&  qui  que  ce  foit,  me  demandera  contre  Dieu. 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  46  77 

his  tears.  Those  present  were  moved  thereat  with  a 
holy  awe;  but  this  good  man,  thinking  of  nothing 
but  God,  was  giving  himself  up  to  his  grief  with  as 
much  freedom  as  if  he  had  been  alone.  Having 
returned  to  himself,  they  asked  him  what  thing  had 
touched  him.  "  The  remembrance,"  he  answered, 
"  of  the  sins  which  I  committed  before  knowing  God! 
Oh,  why  did  I  not  know  then  that  he  saw  me?  never 
would  I  have  had  the  heart  to  offend  him.  I  have 
felt  in  the  depth  of  my  soul  that  he  was  saying  the 
same  to  me  as  to  the  adulterous  woman, — that  he 
would  not  condemn  me  for  what  pertains  to  my  past 
life ;  and  how  can  one  contain  one's  tears,  to  see, 
after  so  many  sins,  that  nevertheless,  he  is  pleased  to 
love  me,  and  to  show  me  mere)'-,  as  much  as  if  I  had 
employed  all  my  life  in  his  love  ? ' ' 

Another,  having  allowed  himself  to  lapse  inadvert- 
ently into  some  fault,  came  to  find,  as  early  as  day- 
break, that  one  of  our  Fathers  who  was  instructing 
him.  "  I  beg  thee  to  have  pity  on  me,"  he  said  to 
him,  "  and  to  efface  my  sin  as  soon  as  possible.  I 
have  spent  the  whole  night  in  prayers  and  in  tears, 
without  having  taken  a  moment  of  sleep.  Those 
of  my  cabin  who  saw  my  sin  have  been  witnesses  of 
my  [81]  tears;  but  God,  whom  I  have  offended,  has 
known  those  of  my  heart,  which  have  been  the  most 
bitter;  I  hope  that  he  will  show  me  mercy." 

Having  received  absolution,  he  made  a  feast  the 
same  day,  to  which  he  invited  the  infidel  Captains, 
his  relatives,  and  all  those  who  had  been  either  the 
cause  or  witnesses  of  his  fall.  "  I  have  assembled 
you,"  he  said  to  them,  "  in  order  to  let  you  know  the 
regrets  which  I  feel  for  my  fault;  and  that,  if  I  have 
sinned,  I  have  learned  that  a  Christian  can  have  no 


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 

Les  larmes  font  C  rares  en  ces  pais,  pour  ce  qui  eft 
des  hommes,  que  ie  ne  me  fouuiens  pas,  depuis  prez 
de  neuf  ans  que  ie  vis  parmy  les  Sauuages,  en  auoir 
veu  aucun  pleurer,  fmon  dans  des  fentimens  de  piet6, 
&  d'vne  conipon(5tion  li  vine,  qu'il  faut  auoiier  que  la 
grace  eft  plus  puiffante  fur  vn  coeur  anime  de  Dieu, 
que  toute  la  nature. 

A  propos  de  cet  efprit  de  contrition,  ie  me  fouuiens 
d'vn  auis  que  nous  donna  vn  bon  Chreflien,  nomme 
Pierre  Ahandation,  [82]  qui  m'a  paru  confiderable. 
Nous  leur  recommandons  fouuent  vne  priere  dans 
laquelle  eftoit  referme  vn  adte  de  contrition.  Si 
vous  nous  connoiffiez  dans  Ie  fond  de  nos  ames,  noiis 
dift  ce  bon  Chreflien,  vous  ne  nous  diriez  pas  que 
pour  hair  plus  parfaitement  nos  pechez,  il  faille  plu- 
ftoft  fe  feruir  d'vne  priere  que  d'vne  autre:  Ce  n'eft 
pas  icy  comme  en  France,  oil  vous  faites  confcience 
de  mentir,  mefme  aux  hommes:  mais  icy  nous 
fommes  accouftumez  de  tout  temps  au  menfonge ;  & 
en  fuitte  vous  deuez  craindre  que  nous  ne  mentions  k 
Dieu  mefme;  luy  difans  fauffement  que  nous  de- 
teftons  nos  pechez,  a  caufe  qu'ils  offenfent  fa  bonte 
vniquement  aimable;  quoy  qu'en  effet  noftre  coeur 
ait  encore  fon  attache  au  peche,  ou  qu'au  moins  nous 
ayons  plus  de  crainte  du  feu  d'Enfer,  que  nous  n'a- 
uons  de  veritable  amour  pour  Dieu.  Mais  pluftoft, 
fans  nous  donner  aucune  forme  de  priere ;  Dites  nous 
que  nous  deteftions  nos  pechez  de  tout  noftre  coeur, 
&  de  toutes  nos  forces,  &  que  Dieu  ne  regarde  pas 
fur  nos  levres,  mais  qu'il  penetre  dans  Ie  fond  de  nos 
ames,  fans  qu'aucun  Ie  puiffe  tromper:  [83]  Alors  ne 
nous  contentans  pas  d'vne  priere  qui  fortiroit  de 
noftre  bouche,   mais  employant  tous  les  efforts  de 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  4^  79 

more  rest,  when  he  has  offended  God  in  order  to 
please  men.  Know  that  during  my  life  I  will  no 
longer  obey  you  in  aught  that  you  or  any  one  who- 
soever shall  ask  me,  that  is  contrary  to  God's  law." 

Tears  are  so  rare  in  these  countries,  with  respect 
to  what  concerns  men,  that  I  do  not  remember,  in 
almost  nine  years  that  I  have  lived  among  the 
Savages,  to  have  seen  one  of  them  weep, — except  in 
sentiments  of  piety,  and  with  a  contrition  so  keen, 
that  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  grace  is  more 
powerful  than  all  nature  over  a  heart  animated  by 
God. 

With  reference  to  this  spirit  of  contrition,  I  re- 
member an  admonition  given  to  us  by  a  good 
Christian,  named  Pierre  Ahandation,  [82]  which  has 
appeared  to  me  worth  consideration.  We  often  recom- 
mend to  them  a  prayer  in  which  is  included  an  act 
of  contrition.  "  If  you  knew  us  in  the  depth  of  our 
souls,"  said  to  us  this  good  Christian,  "  you  would 
not  tell  U3  that,  in  order  to  hate  more  perfectly  our 
sins,  it  is  necessary  to  use  one  prayer  rather  than  an- 
other. It  is  not  here  as  in  France,  where  you  make 
scruples  of  lying,  even  to  men ;  but  here  we  are  from 
all  time  accustomed  to  lies.  Consequently,  you 
ought  to  fear  lest  we  lie  to  God  himself, —  telling  him 
falsely  that  we  detest  our  sins  because  they  offend 
only  his  lovable  goodness,  although  in  fact  our  heart 
still  has  its  attachment  to  sin ;  or,  at  least,  we  have 
more  dread  for  the  fire  of  Hell  than  we  have  genuine 
love  for  God.  But,  rather,  without  giving  us  any 
form  of  prayer,  tell  us  that  we  must  detest  our  sins 
with  all  our  hearts  and  with  all  our  strength ;  and 
that  God  does  not  look  upon  our  lips,  but  that  he 
penetrates    into  the   depths  of  our  souls,  insomuch 


80  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES         [Vol.30 

noftre  coeur  a  hair  fans  feintife,  renormite  de  nos 
pechez,  Dieu  nous  fera,  ie  croy,  mifericorde,  &  nous 
effor9ant  de  1' aimer,  il  nous  donnera  la  grace  de 
r aimer  tout  de  bon. 

Finiffons  ce  Chapitre  par  les  fentimens  d'vne  mere, 
en  la  mort  d'vn  enfant  qu'elle  auoit  vnique.  Mon 
Dieu,  luy  difoit  elle,  ie  ne  puis  me  plaindre  de  vous : 
mille  fois  ie  vous  ay  offert  &  ma  vie,  &  celle  de  ce 
mien  enfant,  que  i'aime  plus  que  moy;  fi  vous  pre- 
niez  &  I'vn  &  I'autre,  ie  verrois  la  fin  de  mes  maux, 
&  la  mort  me  feroit  auffi  douce,  qu'elle  me  femble 
maintenant  amere.  Mais  s'il  vous  plaift  vous  con- 
tenter  de  la  moiti6  de  mon  offrande,  que  puis-ie  dire 
en  ma  douleur,  finon  que  vous  eftes  Ie  maiftre,  &  que 
c'efl  a  nous  d'obeir:  Ce  m'efl  affez  que  ie  vine  dans 
I'efperance  qu'vn  iour  vous  me  ferez  mifericorde 
dans  Ie  Ciel,  afin  que  ie  croye  des  maintenant,  que 
tout  ce  qui  me  pent  arriuer  en  ce  monde,  venant  de 
voflre  part,  ne  pent  eftre  que  par  amour,  &  pour  mon 
bien. 

Non,  difoit  d'autres  fois  cette  pauure  [84]  mere 
affligee ;  ie  croy  que  Dieu  me  veut  eprouuer  de  la 
forte,  afin  de  me  contraindre  de  recourrir  a  fa  bont6. 
Hors  I'afilicftion,  i'eftois  come  affoupie  &  fouuent  ie 
m'oubliois  de  luy:  du  depuis,  ie  ne  fonge  qu'^  luy, 
k  caufe  qu'en  luy  feul  ie  retrouue  Ie  foulagement  de 
mes  peines.  D'autresfois  elle  fe  difoit  a  foy-mefme, 
dans  Ie  plus  fort  de  fa  douleur:  Puifque  Dieu 
preuoyoit  que  ma  fille  deuoit  mourir  auat  I'vfage  de 
raifon,  pourquoy  I'auoit-il  rendue  fi  aimable?  Pour- 
quoy  ne  la  prit-il  h.  foi  deslors  qu'elle  parut  au  monde 
&  qu'elle  eut  receu  Ie  Baptefme?  Ma  douleur  en 
eult  efte  plus  fupportable,  &  mon  enfant  euft  efte 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  ib45-4(>  81 

that  none  can  deceive  him.  [83]  Then,  not  contenting 
ourselves  with  a  prayer  which  would  issue  from  our 
lips,  but  employing  all  the  efforts  of  our  heart  in 
hating,  without  dissimulation,  the  enormity  of  our 
sins,  God,  I  believe,  will  show  us  mercy;  and, 
compelling  us  to  love  him,  he  will  give  us  the  grace 
to  love  him  in  good  earnest. ' ' 

Let  us  end  this  Chapter  with  the  feelings  of  a 
mother  on  the  death  of  a  child  who  was  her  only 
treasure.  "  My  God,"  she  said  to  him,  "  I  cannot 
complain  of  you.  A  thousand  times,  I  have  offered 
you  both  my  life  and  that  of  this  my  child,  whom  I 
love  more  than  myself ;  if  you  took  both  the  one  and 
the  other,  I  would  see  the  end  of  my  troubles,  and 
death  would  be  as  sweet  to  me  as  it  now  seems  to 
me  bitter.  But  if  you  please  to  content  yourself  with 
the  half  of  my  offering,  what  can  I  say  in  my  grief, 
save  that  you  are  the  master,  and  that  it  is  for  us  to 
obey?  It  is  enough  for  me  that  I  live  in  the  hope 
that  one  day  you  will  show  me  mercy  in  Heaven, — 
that  I  may  believe,  from  now  on,  that  everything 
which  can  happen  to  me  in  this  world,  coming  from 
you,  can  be  only  through  love  and  for  my  good." 

"  No,"  said  at  other  times  this  poor  [84]  afflicted 
mother,  "  I  believe  that  God  chooses  to  try  me  in 
this  manner,  so  as  to  constrain  me  to  have  recourse 
to  his  goodness.  Before  the  affliction,  I  was,  as  it 
were,  drowsy,  and  often  I  forgot  him;  since  then,  I 
think  only  of  him,  because  in  him  alone  I  find  solace 
for  my  pains."  At  other  times,  she  said  to  herself 
at  the  height  of  her  grief :  ' '  Since  God  foresaw  that 
my  daughter  was  to  die  before  the  age  of  discretion, 
why  had  he  rendered  her  so  lovable?  Why  did  he 
not  take  her  to  himself  as  soon  as  she  appeared  in 


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 

pluftoft  dans  le  Ciel:  Mais  fans  doute  qu'il  a  voulu 
que  mon  amour  creuft  auec  elle,  afin  que  me  la  rauif- 
fant,  ce  me  fuft  vn  coup  plus  fenfible.  Apres  tout, 
difoit-elle,  que  fes  faintes  volontez  foient  faites;  ie 
defire  qu'elles  foient  les  miennes,  &  m'y  foumets  de 
tout  mon  coeur. 

Le  fentiment  de  lofeph  Taondechoren,  oncle  de 
cette  pauure  mere  afflig^e,  ne  me  paroift  pas  moins 
aimable ;  lors  qu'apres  la  mort  de  deux  de  fes  petits 
enfans,  luy  eftant  demande  en  quel  eftat  [85]  eftoit  fon 
coeur,  il  refpondit,  que  depuis  qu'il  eftoit  Chreftien, 
il  n'auoit  iamais  reffenty  la  mort  d'aucun  de  fes 
parens ;  fi  bien  leurs  douleurs  &  leurs  maladies,  aiif- 
quelles  il  ne  pouuoit  ne  pas  compatir :  mais  qu'auffi- 
toft  qu'il  les  auoit  veu  morts,  fa  douleur  auoit  entiere- 
ment  ceffe,  dans  la  penf6e  qu'ils  alloient  eftre 
heureux  dans  le  Ciel,  qu'ils  prennoient  le  deuant  d'vn 
chemin  qu'il  efperoit  faire  luy-mefme,  &  qu'au  iour 
de  la  Refurredtion,  Dieu  les  reiiniroit  tons  enfemble, 
pour  iamais  plus  ne  fe  voir  feparez. 


1646 -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  4^  83- 

the  world  and  had  received  Baptism?  My  grief 
would  have  been  more  tolerable,  and  my  child 
would  have  been  sooner  in  Heaven.  But  no  doubt 
he  preferred  that  my  love  should  grow  with  her,  so 
that,  when  she  was  taken  away  from  me,  it  should 
be  a  blow  that  I  would  feel  more  keenly.  After  all," 
she  said,  "may  his  blessed  will  be  done;  I  desire 
that  it  be  mine,  and  submit  to  it  with  all  my  heart," 
The  sentiment  of  Joseph  Taondechoren,  the  uncle 
of  this  poor  afflicted  mother,  appeared  to  me  no  less 
excellent  —  when,  after  the  death  of  two  of  his  little 
children,  he  was  asked  in  what  state  [85]  was  his 
heart.  He  answered  that,  since  he  had  been  a 
Christian,  he  had  never  felt  the  death  of  any  of  his 
relatives, —  though,  indeed,  he  felt  their  griefs  and 
maladies,  for  which  he  could  but  have  compassion ; 
but  that,  as  soon  as  he  had  seen  them  dead,  his  grief 
had  entirely  ceased,  in  the  thought  that  they  were 
going  to  be  happy  in  Heaven ;  that  they  were  getting 
the  start  in  a  journey  which  he  hoped  to  make  him- 
self; and  that,  in  the  day  of  the  Resurrection,  God 
would  unite  them  all  together,  that  they  might  never 
more  see  themselves  separated. 


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 


CHAPITRE  VI. 

PROUIDENCE    DE    DIEU    SUR    QUELQUES   PARTICULIERS. 

IL  n'appartient  qu'a  Dieu  de  faire  le  choix  de  fes 
eleus,  &  nous  voyons  en  ces  pais,  autant  qu'en 
lieu  du  monde,  que  fa  prouidence  eft  fi  forte 
dans  fes  conduites,  &  fi  douce  dans  fon  execution; 
qu'aucun  ne  perira  de  ceux  qu'il  a  voulu  eftre  I'obiet 
de  fes  mifericordes,  fuffent-ils  feuls  au  milieu  des 
tenebres,  &  en  vn  [86]  lieu  abandonne  de  tout  fecours. 

Quantite  de  captifs  Iroquois,  que  nous  auons  bapti- 
f6  au  moment  de  leur  mort,  nous  en  font  foy.-  lors 
qu'au  milieu  des  flammes,  ils  ont  trouue  la  vie,  & 
fe  font  veus  enfans  de  Dieu :  heureux  dans  leur  mal- 
heur,  dans  lequel  cette  diuine  prouidence  les  auoit 
amoureufement  engagez,  pour  tirer  leur  falut  de 
leur  perte. 

II  y  a  fept  ou  hui(5t  ans,  que  nous  anions  icy  baptife 
vn  Andaftoeronnon  (ce  font  peuples  de  la  langue 
Huronne,  qui  demeurent  a  la  Virginie,  oil  les  An- 
glois  ont  leur  commerce.)  Depuis  ce  temps-la,  cet 
homme  eftant  retourne  en  fon  pais,  nous  croyons  que 
fa  foy  euft  deu  eftre  eftouffee  au  milieu  de  I'impiete 
qui  y  regne,  &  n'ayant  plus  aucun  fupport,  au  milieu 
d'vne  nation  tout  infidele,  &  tellement  eloignee  de 
nous,  que  mefme  nous  n' auons  pCi  depuis  cinq  ou  fix 
ans,  en  fgauoir  aucune  nouuelle. 

Cet  hyuer  nous  auons  appris  d'vn  Huron  qui  en 
eft  retourn6,  que  la  foy  de  cet  homme  eftranger  eft 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i64S -46  85 


CHAPTER  VI. 

PROVIDENCE   OF   GOD    OVER    CERTAIN    INDIVIDUALS. 

IT  belongs  only  to  God  to  make  the  choice  of  his 
elect,  and  we  see  in  these  countries,  as  much  as 
in  any  place  in  the  world,  that  his  providence  is 
so  strong  in  its  guidance,  and  so  gentle  in  its  execu- 
tion, that  none  will  perish  of  those  whom  he  has 
chosen  to  be  the  objects  of  his  mercies, — even  though 
they  were  alone  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  and  in  a 
[86]  place  destitute  of  all  assistance. 

A  number  of  Iroquois  captives,  whom  we  baptized 
at  the  moment  of  their  death,  give  us  faith  in  this, 
when  in  the  midst  of  the  flames  they  have  found  life, 
and  have  seen  themselves  children  of  God, — happy 
in  their  misfortune,  into  which  this  divine  providence 
had  lovingly  involved  them,  in  order  to  draw  their 
salvation  from  their  destruction. 

Seven  or  eight  years  ago,  we  had  here  baptized  an 
Andastoeronnon  (these  are  tribes  of  the  Huron  lan- 
guage, who  live  in  Virginia,  where  the  English  have 
their  trade).**  After  that  time,  this  man  having  re- 
turned to  his  own  country,  we  supposed  that  his  faith 
must  have  been  stifled  in  the  midst  of  the  impiety 
which  prevails  there,  since  he  had  no  longer  any 
support  in  the  midst  of  a  nation  wholly  infidel,  and 
so  remote  from  us  that  not  even  have  we  been  able, 
for  five  or  six  years,  to  learn  any  news  of  it. 

This  winter  we  have  learned,  from  a  Huron  who 
has  returned  thence,  that  the  faith  of  this  man  from 


86  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 

atiffi  vigoureufe  que  iamais,  qti'il  en  fait  profelTion 
publique,  &  continue  en  fon  deuoir  autant  que  s'il 
[87]  viuoit  parmy  vn  peuple  tout  Chreflien.  Nous 
luy  anions  donne  en  fon  Baptefme,  le  nom  d'Eflienne, 
fon  furnom  eft  Arenhouta. 

Le  Pere  lean  de  Brebeuf,  alia  fur  la  fin  de  I'Au- 
tomne  en  vn  lieu  nomme  Tangouaen,  oil  demeurent 
quelques  Algonquins,  &  ou  quelques  cabanes  de 
Hurons  fe  font  refugiees,  pour  y  viure  plus  ^  couuert 
des  incurfions  des  Iroquois :  car  c'eft  vn  pais  ecart6, 
&  entourre  de  tons  coftez  de  lacs,  d'eflangs  &  de 
riuieres,  qui  font  ce  lieu  inacceffible  a  I'ennenjy. 
Ce  fut  vn  voyage  extremement  penible  au  Pere,  &  a 
vn  ieune  bomme  Frangois  qui  I'y  accopagnoit:  mais 
leur  confolation  furpaffa  de  beaucoup  leurs  peines, 
de  trouuer  au  milieu  de  ces  forefts  perdues  &  de  ces 
vaftes  folitudes,  vne  petite  Eglife  qu'ils  eftoient  allez 
vifiter.-  ie  veux  dire  vne  famille  entiere  de  Chre- 
ftiens,  qui  trouuent  Dieu  dedans  ces  bois,  qui  y  viuent 
dans  r  innocence,  &  qui  receurent  ces  deux  hoftes 
comme  enuoyez  du  Ciel.  Le  chef  de  la  famille,  fa 
femme  &  leurs  enfans  ne  pouuoient  fe  contenter  de 
ioye,  de  voir  que  leur  cabane  fe  faifoit  la  maifon  de 
Dieu.  Tous  firent  denotement  les  deuoirs  [88]  de 
Chrelliens,  y  receurent  les  Sacremens,  &  eftimerent 
comme  facrez  tous  les  momens  d'vne  vifite  fi  heu- 
reufe:  auffi  pour  les  remplir  vtilement,  tous  leurs 
difcours  ne  furent  rien  que  du  Ciel;  ils  propofent 
leurs  doutes  au  Pere,  ils  le  tourmentent  auec  amour 
&  de  iour  &  de  nui(5t,  ils  I'importunent  faintement, 
&  quelque  fatigue  qu'il  puilTe  eftre,  d'vn  voyage  de 
cinq  ou  fix  iours,  ^  peine  luy  veulent-ils  permettre 


lfr46-47]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  87 


a  strange  land  is  as  vigorous  as  ever, — that  he  makes 
public  profession  of  it,  and  continues  in  his  duty  as 
much  as  if  he  [87]  lived  among  a  people  quite  Chris- 
tian. We  gave  him  in  his  Baptism  the  name  of 
Estienne ;  his  surname  is  Arenhouta. 

Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf  went,  toward  the  end  of 
Autumn,  to  a  place  named  Tangouaen,  where  dwell 
some  Algonquins,  and  where  some  cabins  of  Hurons 
have  taken  refuge,  in  order  to  live  there  more  shel- 
tered from  incursions  by  the  Iroquois;  for  it  is  a 
retired  country,  and  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  lakes, 
ponds,  and  rivers,  which  make  this  place  inaccessible 
to  the  enemy.  It  was  a  journey  extremely  difficult 
for  the  Father,  and  for  a  young  Frenchman  who 
accompanied  him  thither :  but  their  consolation  much 
surpassed  their  hardships,  when  they  found  in  the 
midst  of  those  profound  forests  and  those  vast  soli- 
tudes a  little  Church  which  they  had  gone  to  visit. 
By  this,  I  mean  a  whole  family  of  Christians,  who 
find  God  in  those  woods,  who  live  there  in  innocence, 
and  who  received  these  two  guests  as  though  sent 
from  Heaven.  The  head  of  the  family,  his  wife,  and 
their  children  could  not  moderate  their  joy,  to  see 
that  their  cabin  was  becoming  the  house  of  God. 
All  devoutly  performed  the  duties  [88]  of  Christians, 
received  the  Sacraments  there,  and  esteemed  as  sacred 
all  the  moments  of  so  blessed  a  visit.  Moreover, 
that  they  might  occupy  those  moments  profitably, 
all  their  discourses  were  of  nothing  but  Heaven ;  they 
propose  their  doubts  to  the  Father,  they  torment 
him  with  love  both  by  day  and  by  night,  they 
importune  him  piously;  and,  however  fatigued  he 
may  be  from  a  journey  of  five  or  six  days,  hardly  will 
they    allow    him    two    or    three    hours    of    repose. 


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES JASUITES         [Vol.30 

deux  ou  trois  heures  de  repos.  Echon,  luy  difent-ils 
(c'efl  le  nom  que  donnent  les  Hurons  au  Pere)  tu  es 
venu  icy  pour  nous;  nous  fommes  affamez,  c'efl  k 
toy  a  nous  raflafier  &  nous  faire  feftin.-  tes  difcours 
nous  donnent  la  vie,  Dieu  parle  auec  toy,  &  il  nous 
dit  au  coeur  ce  qui  fort  de  ta  bouche. 

Le  Pere  ayant  paffe  quelques  iours  en  cette  foli- 
tude,  fut  prefr6  de  hafler  fon  retour,  craignant 
d'eftre  furpris  des  glaces  &  de  I'hyuer  qui  commen- 
9oit,  &  qui  en  efifet  I'arrefta  en  chemin,  &  le  mit  en 
danger  de  mourir  &  de  faim  &  de  froid,  &  de  perir 
dans  les  lacs  &  riuieres  qu'ils  auoit  a  pafTer.  Ce  ne 
fut  pas  fans  de  bien  grands  reffentimens  de  part  & 
d'autre,  que  fe  fit  cette  feparation :  mais  le  [89]  Pafteur 
qui  a  vn  troupeau  difperfe,  eft  oblige  de  ne  pas 
s'arrefter  en  vn  lieu;  il  doit  fes  peines  egalement  k 
toutes  fes  brebis;  &  en  de  femblables  rencontres, 
nous  auons  la  confolation  de  fgauoir  &  de  voir  par 
effet,  que  Dieu  qui  feul  eft  le  grand  maiftre  du  trou- 
peau, fuppl^e  en  noftre  abfence,  &  que  fes  graces  & 
fes  lumieres  ne  manquent  point  ^  ceux  qui  entendent 
fa  voix,  qui  I'ont  fuiuie,  &  qui  veulent  luy  eftre 
fideles. 

le  dois  icy  rapporter  entre  les  prouidences  de  Dieu, 
celle  qui  nous  a  paru  en  I'appel  k  la  foy,  de  deux 
Athiftaeronnon,  c'eft  vne  nation  de  la  langue  Algon- 
quine,  extremement  peuplee,  que  nous  appellons  la 
Nation  du  feu,  qui  iamais  n'ont  veu  aucun  European, 
&  oil  iamais  le  nom  de  Dieu  n'a  penetre :  mais  il  fal- 
loit  qu'elle  rendit  homage  a  lefus-Chrift,  &  luy  offrit 
quelques  premices  de  ce  que  nous  efperons  qu'elle 
fera  vn  iour,  toute  Chreftienne.     Dieu  feul  en  con- 


1646  -  47J  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  89 

"  Echon,"  they  say  to  him  (this  is  the  name  which 
the  Hurons  give  the  Father),  "  thou  hast  come  here 
for  our  sake.  We  are  famished;  it  is  for  thee  to 
satisfy  us,  and  to  make  us  a  feast.  Thy  sayings 
give  us  life ;  God  speaks  with  thee,  and  he  tells  us  in 
the  heart  what  issues  from  thy  lips." 

The  Father,  having  spent  some  days  in  that  soli- 
tude, was  in  haste  to  accelerate  his  return,  fearing 
to  be  surprised  by  the  ice  and  the  winter  which  was 
beginning,  and  which  in  fact  stopped  him  on  the 
way,  and  placed  him  in  danger  of  dying  from  both 
hunger  and  cold,  and  of  perishing  in  the  lakes  and 
rivers  which  they  had  to  cross.  It  was  not  without 
profound  emotion,  on  both  sides,  that  this  parting 
took  place;  but  the  [89]  Pastor  who  has  a  scattered 
flock  is  obliged  not  to  stop  in  one  place, — he  owes 
his  care  equally  to  all  his  sheep.  But  in  such  en- 
counters we  have  the  consolation  to  know,  and  to  see 
by  actions,  that  God,  who  alone  is  the  great  master 
of  the  flock,  supplies  them  in  our  absence;  and  that 
his  graces  and  his  illumination  fail  not  to  those  who 
hear  his  voice,  who  have  followed  it,  and  who  choose 
to  be  faithful  to  him. 

I  must  report  here  among  the  providences  of  God 
that  one  which  has  appeared  to  us  in  calling  to  the  faith 
two  of  the  Athistaeronnon, —  a  nation  of  the  Algon- 
quin language,  extremely  populous,  which  we  call 
the  Nation  of  fire,  who  have  never  seen  any  Euro- 
pean, and  where  the  name  of  God  has  never  pene- 
trated. But  it  must  needs  be  that  this  tribe  should 
render  homage  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  offer  him  some 
first-fruits  of  what  we  hope  that  it  will  be  one  day, — 
wholly  Christian.  God  alone  knows  the  moments 
thereof,  and  we  shall  await  them  with  patience,  since 


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES         [Vol.  SO 

-noift  les  momens,  &  nous  les  attendrons  auec  patience, 
puifque  c'efl  fon  affaire,  plus  que  la  noftre.  Cepen- 
dant  il  nous  a  choifi  entre  mille  deux  ieunes  hommes 
de  cette  nation,  qu'il  a  tir6  de  leur  pais,  &  [90]  qu'il 
a  appelle  k  la  foy  par  des  voyes  toutes  pleines 
d'amour.  Nous  auons  donne  "k  I'vn,  le  nom  de  Louys : 
le  fecond  s'appelle  Michel,  du  nom  de  la  Miffion  de 
Saindt  Michel,  dans  laquelle  il  demeure,  fon  furnom 
eft  Exouaendaen. 

lis  font  tous  deux  captifs  de  guerre,  qui  ayans  efte 
pris  affez  ieunes,  ont  efte  conferuez  en  vie,  &  ont 
trouue  en  ce  pais  le  bon  heur  de  la  foy,  qui  leurf^it 
cherir  leur  captiuite,  plus  que  iamais  ils  n'ont  fenty 
d'amour  pour  leur  patrie.  Sur  tout  la  conduite  de 
Dieu  fur  le  fecond,  nous  a  paru  aimable. 

II  fut  touch^  au  coeur  des  la  premiere  fois  qu'il  en- 
tendit  parler  de  Dieu :  mais  comme  ceux  qui  I'auoient 
adopte  pour  fils,  eftoient  tous  infideles,  nous  ne  nous 
haftions  pas  de  luy  parler  fi  toft  du  Baptefme,  crainte 
qu'il  n'y  fuft  pas  affez  faintement  difpofe;  &  luy 
n'ofoit  le  demander,  s'en  eftimant  indigne,  ou  du 
moins  ne  iugeant  pas  qu'eftant  vn  pauure  abandonne, 
nous  voululTions  letter  les  yeux  fur  luy,  pour  vne 
grace  dont  il  voyoit  que  nous  t^moignions  tant  d'e- 
ftime.  II  tombe  la  delTus  malade  d'vne  langueur 
qui  I'alloit  confommant,  &  d'vne  efpece  [91]  de  para- 
lyfie,  qui  nous  obligea  de  luy  parler  comme  a  vn 
homme,  qu'il  falloit  au  pluftoft  difpofer  pour  le  Ciel. 
Ce  font,  refpondit-il,  les  defirs  de  mon  coeur:  &  fi 
vous  attendez  k  me  baptif er,  que  ie  meurre ;  volon- 
tiers  ie  verray  la  mort  auiourd'huy,  pour  me  voir  au 
pluftoft  Chreftien. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  91 

it  is  his  affair  more  than  ours.  Meanwhile,  he  has 
chosen  for  us,  among  a  thousand,  two  young  men 
of  that  nation,  whom  he  has  drawn  from  their  coun- 
try, and  [90]  whom  he  has  called  to  the  faith  by  ways 
all  full  of  love.  We  have  given  to  the  one  the  name 
of  Louys;  the  second  is  called  Michel,  from  the 
name  of  the  Mission  of  Saint  Michel,  in  which  he 
dwells.     His  surname  is  Exouaendaen. 

They  are  both  captives  of  war,  who,  having  been 
taken  when  quite  young,  have  been  preserved  alive, 
and  have  found  in  this  country  the  blessing  of  the 
faith, — which  makes  them  cherish  their  captivity 
more  than  they  have  ever  felt  love  for  their  native 
land.  Above  all,  the  guidance  of  God  over  the 
second  one  has  appeared  to  us  lovable. 

He  was  touched  to  the  heart  from  the  first  time 
that  he  heard  mention  of  God ;  but,  as  those  who  had 
adopted  him  as  a  son  were  all  infidels,  we  made  no 
haste  to  speak  to  him  so  soon  of  Baptism,  for  fear 
that  he  were  not  devoutly  enough  inclined  for  it. 
He,  besides,  did  not  dare  to  ask  it,  esteeming  him- 
self unworthy  of  it, — or,  at  least,  not  realizing 
that,  being  a  poor,  forsaken  one,  we  might  wish  to 
cast  our  eyes  on  him  for  a  grace  for  which  he  saw 
that  we  showed  so  much  esteem.  Thereupon  he 
falls  sick  with  a  languor  that  continued  to  consume 
him,  and  with  a  species  [91]  of  paralysis,  which 
obliged  us  to  speak  to  him  as  to  a  man  who  must  be 
prepared  as  soon  as  possible  for  Heaven.  "  These 
are,"  he  answered,  "  the  desires  of  my  heart:  and  if 
you  wait  until  I  die,  to  baptize  me,  gladly  will  I  face 
death  to-day,  in  order  to  see  myself  as  soon  as 
possible  a  Christian." 

His  thoughts  after  his  Baptism  were  no  longer  of 


92  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.30 

Ses  penfees  depuis  fon  Baptefme,  n'eftoient  plus 
que  du  Ciel,  il  ne  gouftoit  que  nos  myfteres,  & 
n'aimoit  plus  d'autres  entretiens  finon  de  Dieu.  Sa 
maladie  alloit  toufiours  croiffant,  &  pour  luy  rauir 
dans  le  plus  fort  de  fes  miferes,  I'vnique  confolation 
qui  luy  refloit  en  terre,  Dieu  permit  que  le  Pere  qui 
auoit  foin  de  cette  Miffion,  fuft  oblige  de  s'en  abf en- 
ter bien  long-temps ;  fans  que  nous  puffions  y  f up- 
pleer  par  autre  voye ;  pluGeurs  de  nos  Peres  eflans 
tombez  en  mefme  temps  malades,  &  les  autres  necef- 
faires  autres  part.  Durant  tout  ce  temps-Ik,  ce  pau- 
ure  languiffant  fut  tellement  abandonne  des  parens 
mefmes  qui  I'auoient  adopte,  que  tres  fouuent  il 
paffoit  les  iourn^es  entieres,  fans  auoir  rien  de  quoy 
manger,  non  pas  mefme  quelquesfois  de  I'eau,  pour 
efleindre  fa  foif,  durant  les  [92]  ardeurs  plus  excef- 
fiues  de  I'Efte.  Dieu  mefme  qui  fe  cache  fouuent  k 
ceux  qu'il  aime  dauantage,  fembla  fe  retirer  de  luy, 
ou  au  moins  il  ne  voulut  pas  qu'alors  fes  graces  luy 
fullent  fi  fenfibles. 

En  cet  abandon  fi  extreme,  vne  trifteffe  le  faififl, 
qui  le  mit  quafi  au  defefpoir,  n'ayant  pas  mefme  vn 
homme,  auquel  il  peufl  fe  plaindre  de  fon  mal.  Pour 
lors  il  ietta  fes  yeux  vers  le  Ciel,  &  fe  rellouuenant 
de  Dieu,  il  luy  dift  d'vne  voix  plaintiue,  &  vous  auffi 
mon  Dieu  voulez  vous  done  m'abandonner.  A  ce 
mefme  moment  il  entendit  comme  vne  voix  interi- 
eure,  qui  luy  dift  pour  refponfe:  Michel  ne  te  mets 
pas  en  peine  des  miferes  de  ton  corps,  fouuiens-toy 
que  ta  demeure  eternelle  n'eft  pas  icy,  mais  dans  le 
Ciel.  A  ces  paroles  il  fe  fent  tout  d'vn  coup  confole, 
&  tous  fes  ennuis  diffipez.-  &  dift  par  apres  au  Pere 


1646-47J  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  93 

aught  bnt  Heaven ;  he  enjoyed  only  our  mysteries, 
and  no  longer  loved  other  conversations  than  those 
about  God.  His  sickness  kept  continually  increas- 
ing; and  —  in  order  to  snatch  from  him,  at  the  height 
of  his  miseries,  the  sole  consolation  which  was  left  to 
him  on  earth  —  God  permitted  that  the  Father  who 
had  charge  of  that  Mission  was  obliged  to  absent 
himself  from  it  very  long,  without  our  being  able  to 
supply  it  by  other  means, —  several  of  our  Fathers 
having  at  the  same  time  fallen  sick,  and  the  others 
being  needed  elsewhere.  During  all  that  time, 
this  poor  languishing  man  was  so  forsaken  by  the 
very  parents  who  had  adopted  him,  that  very  often 
he  passed  whole  days  without  having  anything  to 
eat,  sometimes  not  even  water  to  quench  his  thirst 
during  the  [92]  most  excessive  heats  of  the  Summer. 
Even  God,  who  often  hides  himself  from  those  whom 
he  loves  the  most,  seemed  to  withdraw  from  him ;  or, 
at  least,  he  did  not  choose  that  at  that  time  his  favors 
should  be  so  perceptible  to  him. 

In  this  desolation  so  extreme,  a  sadness  seized  him, 
which  reduced  him  almost  to  despair, —  having  not 
even  one  man  to  whom  he  could  complain  of  his 
trouble.  Then  he  cast  his  eyes  toward  Heaven,  and, 
remembering  God,  he  said  to  him  in  a  plaintive 
voice:  "  And  you,  too,  my  God,  will  you  then  aban- 
don me?"  At  that  same  moment,  he  heard  as  it 
were  a  voice  within,  which  said  to  him  in  answer: 
"  Michel,  do  not  let  thyself  be  distressed  on  account 
of  the  miseries  of  thy  body ;  remember  that  thy  eter- 
nal dwelling  is  not  here,  but  in  Heaven."  At  these 
words  he  felt  himself  all  at  once  consoled,  and  all  his 
cares  dispelled;  and  he  said  afterward,  to  the  Father 
who  returned  to  visit  him,  that  then  indeed  God  had 


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.30 

qui  le  retourna  vifiter,  qu'alors  vrayment  Dieu  auoit 
pris  poffeflion  de  fon  coeur,  qu'alors  il  auoit  com- 
mence vrayment  de  le  connoiftre,  &  que  toufiours 
depuis  il  n'enuifageoit  fes  miferes  qu'auec  ioye,  fe 
fouuenant  qu'en  effet  il  feroit  heureux  dans  le  Ciel. 

Sur  tout  il  auoit  conceu  vne  affecftion  [93]  tres- 
tendre  enuers  la  Sainte  Vierge,  &  ne  manquoit  pas 
vn  iour  de  reciter  fon  Chapelet,  mefme  dans  le  plus 
fort  de  fon  mal, 

Dans  les  difcours  qu'on  luy  auoit  tenu,  il  auoit  efte 
fort  touchy  des  guerifons  miraculeufes  qui  fe  font  k 
Noftre-Dame  de  Laurette,  &  on  luy  auoit  dit  qu'en 
noftre  maifon  de  Sainte  Marie,  nous  y  gardions  vne 
tres-belle  image  de  cette  Sainte  Vierge.  En  fuitte 
de  cela  il  concent  vne  viue  efperance  que  s'il  pouuoit 
s'y  traifner,  ou  y  eftre  apporte,  il  y  efprouueroit  les 
mifericordes  de  Dieu.  II  prend  fon  temps  vn  iour 
d'Efle,  &  fe  hazarde  k  faire,  ce  qu'il  n'auoit  pas  entre- 
pris  depuis  deux  ans :  il  fort  de  fon  Bourg  &  fe  traifne 
le  mieux  qu'il  pent,  tantoll  a  quatre  pates,  tantoft  fur 
des  potances ;  Mais  les  forces  luy  manquent  bien-tofl. 
II  s'adreffe  ^  la  Sainte  Vierge,  &  felon  qu'il  va  redou- 
blant  fes  prieres,  il  fent  fes  forces  reuenir,  auec  vn 
furcroift  de  confiance  «&  de  courage.  Enfin  il  arriue 
cliez  nous,  ayant  employe  plus  de  quinze  heures  ^ 
faire  trois  lieues  de  chemin. 

Entrant  dans  noftre  Chapelle,  fon  coeur  eft  tout 
remply  de  ioye.  C'eft  icy,  [94]  penfe-il,  la  maifon 
de  Dieu:  c'efl  icy  qu'il  me  fera  mifericorde:  Mais 
toutesfois  il  n'ofe  demander  la  fante.  Mon  Dieu, 
dift-il,  vous  eftes  tout-puiffant,  faites  vos  volontez, 
&  n'ayez  pas  d'6gard  aux  miennes.     Mais  ie  croy,  & 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  4^  95 

taken  possession  of  his  heart,  that  then  he  had  begun 
truly  to  know  him;  and  that,  ever  since,  he  faced 
his  miseries  only  with  joy, —  remembering  that 
indeed  he  would  be  happy  in  Heaven. 

Especially  he  had  conceived  a  very  tender  affection 
[93]  toward  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  missed  not  a  day 
in  reciting  his  Rosary,  even  at  the  crisis  of  his  disease. 

Among  the  discourses  that  had  been  addressed  to 
him,  he  had  been  greatly  touched  by  the  miraculous 
cures  which  occur  at  Nostre  Dame  de  Laurette ;  ^  and 
he  had  been  told  that,  in  our  house  at  Sainte  Marie, 
we  kept  a  very  beautiful  image  of  that  Blessed  Vir- 
gin. In  consequence  of  that,  he  conceived  a  lively 
hope  that,  if  he  could  drag  himself  thither,  or  be 
brought  thither,  he  would  there  experience  the  mer- 
cies of  God.  He  chooses  his  time  one  Summer  day, 
and  ventures  to  do  what  he  had  not  undertaken  for 
two  years.  He  leaves  his  Village,  and  drags  him- 
self as  best  he  can,  now  on  all  fours,  anon  with  a 
staff;  but  strength  soon  fails  him.  He  addresses 
himself  to  the  Blessed  Virgin;  and,  according  as  he 
continues  to  increase  his  prayers,  he  feels  his  strength 
come  back,  with  an  increase  of  constancy  and  cour- 
age. Finally,  he  arrives  at  our  abode,  having 
employed  more  than  fifteen  hours  to  accomplish  three 
leagues  of  road. 

Coming  into  our  Chapel,  his  heart  is  all  filled  with 
joy.  "  Here,"  [94]  thinks  he,  "  is  the  house  of  God: 
it  is  here  that  he  will  show  me  mercy."  But,  never- 
theless, he  dares  not  ask  for  health.  "  My  God," 
he  said,  "you  are  all-powerful;  do  your  will,  and 
have  no  regard  for  mine.  But  I  believe,  and  doubt 
not  that  you  can  cure  me."  That  was  all  his 
prayer,  which   he  repeated  without  growing  weary. 


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.30 

ne  doute  point  que  vous  ne  puiffiez  me  guerir.  C'e- 
floit  Ik  toute  fa  priere,  qu'il  repetoit  fans  fe  laffer, 
auec  vne  ferueur  &  vn  refpedt,  qui  en  donnoit  a  tous 
ceux  qui  le  confideroient. 

Quoy  qu'il  en  foil,  I'effet  de  fa  priere  nous  fit 
paroiftre  qu'elle  auoit  efte  exaucee :  il  fe  trouua  par- 
faitement  guery,  &  ce  qu'il  eflima  luy  mefme,  plus 
que  fa  guerifon,  il  fut  alors  fi  eclair^  &  fi  remply  de 
Dieu,  que  iamais  il  n'auoit  veu  la  foy  ^v  belle,  iamais 
n'auoit  veu  fi  clairement  la  vanite  de  cette  vie ;  iamais 
n'auoit  tant  eltim6  le  bon-heur  qu'il  poffedoit  d'eftre 
Chreftien:  Auffi  eftoit-ce  de  ces  graces  interieur.es 
dont  il  fe  coniouift  auec  nous,  &  dont  il  remercioit 
Dieu,  plus  que  de  fa  fante. 

II  retourna  en  fon  Bourg  des  le  lendemain,  fans 
bafton  &  fans  ayde,  d'vn  pied  &  d'vne  demarche  auffi 
ferme,  que  fi  iamais  il  n'euft  eu  aucun  mal,  &  du 
depuis  fa  conftance,  fon  zele,  fa  deuotion,  &  Tamour 
[95]  qu'il  a  pour  ceux  qui  I'enfeignent,  &  qui  luy  ont 
appris,  dit-il,  "k  cognoiftre  fon  Dieu;  en  vn  mot  fa 
vie  exemplaire,  &  vrayement  digne  d'vn  Chreflien, 
en  vn  age  dans  lequel  la  nature  n'a  de  pante  qu'k  la 
debauche :  tout  cela  nous  fait  efperer  qu'il  n'en  de- 
meurera  pas  Ik,  &  qu'il  pourra  vn  iour  eftre  Apoftre 
de  fon  pais,  &  porter  vn  feu  plus  diuin  dans  la  nation 
du  feu. 

Quelques-vns  fe  rangent  a  la  foy  quafi  d'eux-mef- 
mes;  les  autres  ne  fe  rendent  qu'apres  de  longues 
reCftances:  les  vns  en  recherchent  long  temps  I'en- 
tr6e,  &  auec  bien  des  peines,  les  autres  fe  verront 
dans  le  Ciel  par  vn  rencontre  inopine,  &  comme  par 
hazard.     La  prouidence  de  Dieu  eft  6gale  pour  tous. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i64S- 4^  ^^ 

with  a  fervor  and  respect  which  was  imparted  to  all 
those  who  were  watching  him. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  the  effect  of  his  prayer  made 
manifest  to  us  that  it  had  been  heard, —  he  found 
himself  perfectly  cured;  and  —  what  he  himself 
esteemed  more  than  his  cure  —  he  was  then  so  en- 
lightened and  so  filled  with  God  that  never  had  he 
seen  the  faith  so  glorious,  never  had  he  seen  so  clear- 
ly the  vanity  of  this  life,  never  had  he  so  highly 
esteemed  the  blessing  which  he  possessed  in  being  a 
Christian.  Accordingly,  it  was  for  these  inward 
graces  that  he  rejoiced  with  us,  and  for  these  he 
thanked  God  more  than  for  his  health. 

He  returned  to  his  own  A^'iHage  as  early  as  the  next 
day,  without  a  stick  and  without  aid,  with  a  step  and 
gait  as  firm  as  if  he  had  never  had  any  ailment ;  and 
since  then  his  constancy,  his  zeal,  his  devotion,  and 
the  love  [95]  which  he  has  for  those  who  teach  him, 
and  who    have    taught    him,    he   says,    to  know  his 
God, — in  a  word,  his  exemplary  life,  truly  worthy  of 
a  Christian,  at  an  age  during  which  nature  has  no 
inclination  except  for  excess, —  all  that  causes  us  to 
hope  that  he  will  not  stop  there,  and  that  he  will  be 
able  one  day  to  be  an  Apostle  for  his  own  country, 
and  carry  a  more  divine  fire  into  the  nation  of  fire. 
Some  take  their  stand  for  the  faith  almost  of  them- 
selves; others  yield  themselves  up  only  after  long 
resistance.      Some   long   seek  the   entrance  thereto, 
and  with   many  pains ;  others  will  see  themselves  in 
Heaven  by  an  unexpected  encounter,   and  as  if  by 
chance.     The  providence  of  God  is  alike  for  all ;  but 
it  appears  to  us  more  gracious  in  the  case  of  the  latter, 
because  we  see  in  it  something  inexpressibly  more 
divine. 


98  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

mais  elle  nous  paroift  plus  aimable  en  ceux-cy,  a 
caufe  que  nous  y  voyons  ie  ne  f9ay  quoy  de  plus  diuin. 
La  conuerfion  d'vn  bon  vieillard  ag6  de  quatre- 
vingt  ans,  du  Bourg  de  faindt  lofeph,  eft  de  ce 
nombre.  Vn  de  nos  Peres  eftant  en  vne  cabane 
d'infideles,  entend  fonner  la  cloche,  qui  appelloit  les 
Chreftiens  ^  la  Meffe :  II  faut,  dift-il,  que  i'aille  aux 
prieres ;  &  adioufte  en  riant,  [96]  pour  vn  tel  (^nom- 
mant  ce  vieillard)  il  n'a  pas  enuie  d'y  venir.  Pour 
quoy  non,  refpond  I'infidele:  5a  que  i'aille  auec  toy/ 
Le  Pere  eft  furpris  de  voir  cet  homme  qui  le  fuit,  & 
fe  prefente  pour  entrer  auec  les  Chreftiens:  mais 
comme  il  croit  que  ce  ne  foit  qu'vn  trait  de  gaillar- 
dife,  il  le  renuoye  pour  vne  autre  fois.  Le  vieillard 
attend  patiemment  k  la  porte,  &  la  Meffe  finie,  de- 
mande  qu'on  ayt  pitie  de  luy,  &  qu'au  moins  on  luy 
apprenne  quelque  mot  de  priere.  Le  foir  il  fe  repre- 
fente,  &  continue  fans  fe  laffer  des  delays  qu'on  luy 
apportoit.  Enfin  fa  conftance  luy  fait  trouuer  entree 
au  lieu  deftine  pour  les  Catechumenes.  La  fefte  de 
Noel  eftant  venue,  cet  homme  preffe  qu'on  le  bap- 
tife:  le  Pere  voulant  eprouuer  dauantage  fa  foy,  & 
differer  plus  long-temps  fon  Baptefme,  le  renuoye  a 
noftre  maifon  de  faindte  Marie,  s'il  dehre  eftre  bapti- 
i€,  c'eftoit  I'obliger  k  vne  condition  impoffible  au 
iugement  du  Pere,  I'engageant  k  faire  vn  chemin  de 
cinq  ou  fix  lieues,  dans  le  temps  le  plus  rigoureux 
de  I'annee,  &  par  des  neiges  haultes  de  trois  &  quatre 
pieds,  d'ou  fouuent  les  ieunes  gens  les  plus  robuftes 
ont  peine  de  fe  retirer.  Mais  [97]  la  foy  de  ce  bon 
vieillard  luy  donna  des  forces,  &  toutes  ces  mon- 
tagnes  de  neiges,  ne  peurent  efteindre  fa  ferueur. 


1646 -47J  RELATION  OF  ib45-4(>  99- 

The  conversion  of  an  old  man  aged  eighty  years, 
of  the  Village  of  saint  Joseph,  is  of  this  number. 
One  of  our  Fathers,  being  in  a  cabin  of  infidels,  hears 
the  bell  ring  which  was  calling  the  Christians  to 
Mass,  "It  is  necessary,"  he  said,  "that  I  goto 
prayers;"  and  adds,  smiling,  [96]  "as  for  such  a 
one  "  (naming  this  old  man),  "  he  has  no  desire  to 
come  thither."  "Why  not?"  answers  the  infidel; 
"  come,  now,  let  me  go  with  thee!  "  The  Father  is 
surprised  to  see  this  man  following  him  and  present- 
ing himself  to  enter  with  the  Christians ;  but  as  he 
supposes  that  it  is  only  a  piece  of  merriment,  he 
sends  him  away  for  another  time.  The  old  man  pa- 
tiently waits  at  the  door,  and.  Mass  ended,  asks  that 
they  have  pity  on  him,  and  that  at  least  they  teach 
him  some  word  of  prayer.  At  evening,  he  presents 
himself  again,  and  continues  without  growing  weary 
of  the  delays  which  were  imposed  upon  him.  Final- 
ly, his  constancy  enables  him  to  find  admission  to 
the  place  intended  for  the  Catechumens.  The  feast 
of  Christmas  having  come,  this  man  urges  that  he  be 
baptized;  the  Father,  wishing  to  try  his  faith  still 
further,  and  to  postpone  his  Baptism  longer,  sends 
him  away  to  our  house  at  sainte  Marie,  if  he  desire 
to  be  baptized.  This  was  binding  him  to  a  condition 
that  was  impossible,  in  the  Father's  judgment, — 
obliging  him  to  make  a  journey  of  five  or  six  leagues, 
at  the  most  rigorous  time  of  the  year,  and  through 
snows  three  and  four  feet  deep,  from  which  often  the 
most  robust  young  men  find  it  hard  to  extricate 
themselves.  But  [97]  the  faith  of  this  good  old  man 
gave  him  strength,  and  all  those  mountains  of  snow 
could  not  quench  his  fervor. 

Seeing  himself  baptized,  he  thinks  no  more  but  of 


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

Se  voyant  baptife,  il  ne  fonge  plus  qu'k  la  mort:  il 
quitte  les  feflins  &  les  autres  diuertiffemens  les  plus 
licites,  craignant  de  s'y  voir  engag6  en  quelque  faute 
de  furprife:  fes  penfees  ne  font  que  de  Dieu,  tachant 
d'apprendre  les  prieres,  &  fe  faifant  inftruire  auec 
vne  fimplicite  d' enfant,  quoy  que  ce  fut  vn  homme 
d' excellent  iugement  «fe  de  confi deration  parmy  les 
liens.  Sa  memoire  luy  eftant  infidele,  en  vn  age 
plus  propre  k  oublier,  qu'a  apprendre;  fa  bonne 
volonte  luy  fournit  vn  moyen  qui  luy  feruit  de  liure 
&  d'efcriture.  II  euft  recours  "k  ceux  de  fa  cabane, 
quoy  qu'infideles:  Tu  me  feras  refouuenir  de  ces 
trois  mots,  difoit-il  k  fa  femme;  &  toy,  s'adreffant  k 
fa  fille,  n'oublie  pas  ces  trois  autres;  &  ainfi  alloit 
partageant  k  diuerfes  perfonnes  ce  qu'il  vouloit 
apprendre ;  fe  le  faifant  repeter  tres-fouuent,  &  rete- 
nant  pour  foy  ces  deux  mots,  Iesovs  taitenr,  lefus 
ayez  pitie  de  moy;  qui  eftoit  fon  aimable  priere,  & 
qu'il  repetoit  mille  fois  la  iourn6e. 

Alors  tout  le  Bourg  eftant  dans  le  plus  [98]  fort  des 
ceremonies  diaboliques,  &  d'vne  folemnite  fuperfti- 
tieufe,  que  les  infideles  nomment  Onnonhouaroi'a, 
c'eft  a  dire,  folie  publique  &  renuerfement  de  tefle: 
il  arriua  vne  puilTante  emeute  contre  les  Chreftiens, 
&  defia  on  auoit  leu6  la  hache  fur  celuy  de  nos  Peres 
qui  a  foin  de  cette  MifTion,  fi  vn  Chrellien  ne  fe  fuft 
iette  entre-deux,  pour  parer  ou  receuoir  lecoup:  & 
en  effet  quelques-vns  furent  rudement  frappez,  &  la 
hache  des  infideles  donna  quafi  ^  cette  Eglife  vn  mar- 
tyr; mais  elle  ne  fit  fon  coup  qu'^  demy,  n'ayant 
tire  que  le  fang,  &  non  pas  la  vie  toute  entiere,  d'vn 
bon  Chreftien,  nomme  Laurent  Tandoutfont. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i64S-4(>  101 

death ;  he  gives  up  the  feasts  and  the  other  diver- 
sions, even  the  most  lawful, —  fearing  to  see  himself 
unawares  involved  there  in  some  fault.  His  thoughts 
are  only  of  God,  as  he  tries  to  learn  the  prayers,  and 
has  himself  instructed  with  the  simplicity  of  a  child, — 
though  he  was  a  man  of  excellent  judgment,  and  of 
influence  among  his  own  people.  His  memory  being 
faithless  to  him,  at  an  age  more  apt  to  forget  than  to 
learn,  his  good  will  furnished  him  a  means  which 
served  him  as  book  and  writing.  He  had  recourse  to 
those  of  his  cabin,  though  infidels.  "  Thou  wilt  re- 
mind me  of  these  three  words,"  he  said  to  his  wife; 
"and  thou,"  —  addressing  his  daughter, —  "do  not 
forget  these  three  others."  And  thus  he  proceeded 
dividing  among  several  persons  what  he  wished  to 
learn,  having  it  repeated  to  him  very  often  and  retain- 
ing for  himself  these  two  words,  JESOUS  taitenr, — 
"  Jesus  have  pity  on  me,"  which  was  his  best-loved 
prayer,  and  which  he  repeated  a  thousand  times  a 
day. 

Then,  the  whole  Village  being  at  the  [98]  height 
of  diabolical  ceremonies,  and  of  a  superstitious  so- 
lemnity which  the  infidels  name  Onnonhouaroia, — 
that  is  to  say,  a  public  madness,  and  a  disorder  of 
the  brain, — there  occurred  a  dangerous  commotion 
against  the  Christians.  Already  the  hatchet  had 
been  raised  against  that  one  of  our  Fathers  who  has 
charge  of  that  Mission, —  if  a  Christian  had  not 
thrown  himself  between  them,  to  parry  or  to  receive 
the  blow.  In  fact,  some  were  rudely  struck,  and 
the  hatchet  of  the  infidels  almost  gave  to  this  Church 
a  martyr;  but  it  only  half  dealt  its  blow,  having 
drawn  only  the  blood,  and  not  the  whole  life,  of  a 
good  Christian  named  Laurent  Tandoutsont. 


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

Ce  bon  vieillard  fraichement  baptife,  a  la  nouuelle 
qti'il  eut  de  cette  efmeute,  fe  mit  k  chanter  inconti- 
nent "k  la  fagon  des  captifs  qui  font  deftinez  pour  les 
flammes,  accourut  vers  la  Chappelle  oii  eftoit  le  plus 
fort  de  la  f edition,  difant  pour  le  fuiet  de  fa  chanfon, 
I'iray  auiourd'huy  dans  le  Ciel,  ie  mourray  en  la 
compagnie  de  mes  freres,  lefus  aura  pitie  de  moy. 

En  effet,  il  eftoit  proche  de  fa  mort,  [99]  mais  non 
pas  d'vne  mort  fi  violente.  II  tombe  apres  cela 
malade,  &  auffi-toft  enuoye  querir  le  Pere,  le  prie  de 
le  difpofer  a  mourir  en  bon  Chreftien,  difant  qu'il  ne 
craignoit  que  le  peche,  ou  que  venant  ^  perdre  le 
iugement,  fa  femme  &  tons  fes  parens  infideles, 
n'euffent  recours  pour  fa  fante  au  diable  &  aux  fu- 
perftitions  du  pais.  II  les  appella  tous,  les  exhorta 
a  embraffer  la  foy,  &  leur  temoigna  qu'il  renongoit  k 
toutes  les  chofes  deffendues  aux  Chrefliens,  qu'il 
defiroit  eflre  enterre  en  terre  Sainte,  qu'il  mouroit 
volontiers,  &  dans  vne  ferme  efperance  d'eftre  a 
iamais  bien-heureux  dans  le  Ciel :  qu'ils  redoutaff ent 
le  feu  d'Enfer;  qu'il  ne  defiroit  plus  qu'on  luy 
parlafl  d'aucune  chofe  de  ce  monde,  qu'il  ne  vouloit 
fonger  qu'a  Dieu.  Et  en  effet,  il  ne  rendit  plus  du 
depuis  aucune  refponfe  a  fa  femme  &  "k  fes  enfans,  k 
plufieurs  queftions  qu'ils  luy  firent;  fon  coeur  demeu- 
rant  tout  entier  pour  les  chofes  du  Ciel,  &  fa  langue 
luy  eftant  fidele  en  ce  poindt,  iufqu'au  dernier  foii- 
pir,  qu'il  rendit  apres  ces  paroles,  qui  eftoient  celles 
de  fon  coeur,  [100]  lefus  ayez  pitie  de  moy. 

Vn  peu  auant  que  de  mourir  le  Pere  eftant  feul 
prez  de  luy,  ce  bon  Chreftien  luy  demanda  qui  eftoit 
vn  ieune  homme  d'vne  rare  beaute,  qui  fe  tenoit  k  fon 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  103 

This  good  old  man,  recently  baptized,  at  the  news 
that  he  had  of  that  commotion,  straightway  began  to 
sing  in  the  manner  of  the  captives  who  are  destined 
for  the  flames,  and  ran  toward  the  Chapel,  where  was 
the  brunt  of  the  sedition,  saying,  for  the  theme  of  his 
song,  "  I  shall  go  to-day  into  Heaven;  I  shall  die  in 
the  company  of  my  brothers ;  Jesus  will  have  pity  on 
me." 

In  fact,  he  was  near  his  death,  [99]  but  not  a  death 
so  violent.  He  falls  sick  after  that,  and  immediately 
sends  for  the  Father,  and  begs  him  to  prepare  him 
for  death  as  a  good  Christian  —  he  saying  that  he 
feared  only  sin,  or  that,  coming  to  lose  his  faculties, 
his  wife  and  all  his  infidel  relatives  might  have  re- 
course, for  his  health,  to  the  devil  and  to  the  super- 
stitions of  the  country.  He  called  them  all,  exhorted 
them  to  embrace  the  faith,  and  declared  to  them  that 
he  was  renouncing  all  the  things  forbidden  to  the 
Christians;  that  he  desired  to  be  buried  in  Holy 
ground;  that  he  died  willingly,  and  in  a  firm  hope 
of  being  forever  blessed  in  Heaven ;  that  they  should 
dread  the  fire  of  Hell ;  that  he  no  longer  desired  that 
one  should  speak  to  him  of  anything  in  this  world, — 
that  he  wished  to  think  only  of  God.  And,  in  fact, 
he  no  longer  from  that  time  rendered  any  answer  to 
his  wife  and  his  children,  to  several  questions  which 
they  put  to  him, —  his  heart  remaining  undivided  for 
the  things  of  Heaven,  and  his  tongue  being  faithful 
to  him  in  this  point,  even  to  the  last  sigh,  which  he 
breathed  after  these  words,  which  were  those  of  his 
heart,  [100]  "  Jesus,  have  pity  on  me." 

A  little  before  dying,  the  Father  being  alone  near 
him,  this  good  Christian  asked  him  who  was  the 
young  man,   of  rare  beauty,  who  stood  at  his  side. 


104  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

coile,  &  qui  feulement  a  le  voir,  luy  rauiffoit  le  coeur 
de  ioye.  Le  Pere  luy  refpondit  qu'il  n'y  auoit  per- 
fonne.  Non,  non,  repartit-il,  ie  n'ay  perdu  ny  les 
yeux,  ny  le  iugement,  ie  le  voy  tout  proche  de  toy, 
il  t'accompagne,  &  ie  connois  a  fon  vifage,  qu'il  vient 
pour  m'affifter  ^  bien  mourir:  ayez  tous  deux  foin 
de  mon  ame.  Nous  n'en  f9auons  pas  dauantage,  mais 
nous  n'ignorons  pas  que  les  Anges  Gardiens  de  ces 
bons  Neophytes,  ne  trauaillent  bien  plus  que  nous  a 
conduire  leurs  ames  au  Ciel. 

Voicy  vn  coup  de  la  mifericorde  de  Dieu.  Vn  des 
plus  grands  ennemis  de  la  foy,  dans  la  Miffion  de 
Saint  Ignace,  fe  trouuant  proche  de  la  mort,  fe  fent 
touche  du  Ciel,  a  la  premiere  veue  du  Pere  qui  alloit 
pour  luy  parler  de  fon  falut.  Helas,  dit-il  au  Pere, 
que  Dieu  efb  bon,  mefme  aux  impies,  puis  qu'il 
t'amene  icy  pour  me  faire  vne  [loi]  grace  a  la  mort, 
dont  ie  m'eftois  rendu  indigne:  Ie  luy  demande 
pardon  de  tout  mon  cceur,  &  ^  toy  ie  te  demande  le 
Baptefme,  ie  detefte  les  pechez  de  ma  vie  paff6e,  &  ie 
croy  fermement  les  veritez  que  vous  prefchez,  autant 
que  cy-deuant  i'en  reffentois  d'horreur,  &  que  ie 
blafphemois  contr'elles.  Hafte-toy  de  me  baptifer, 
car  fi  i'ay  vefcu  en  impie,  ie  veux  mourir  en  bon 
Chreftien.  Le  Pere  ejft  heureufement  eftonne ;  &  la 
maladie  le  preffant,  il  ne  peut  differer  plus  long- 
temps  le  Baptefme,  apres  lequel  le  malade  tomba 
bien-toft  comme  en  vne  agonie  mortelle. 

Vne  heure  auant  qu'il  rendit  I'ame,  les  infideles 
ayans  pris  a  party  le  Pere,  &  le  voulans  chaffer 
dehors,  ce  Moribon  retourne  tout  d'vn  coup  a  foy, 
recouure  la  parole,  prend  la  caufe  du  Pere,  &  fon  zele 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(}  105 

and  who,  merely  to  look  upon,  enraptured  his  heart 
with  joy.  The  Father  answered  him  that  there  was 
no  one.  "  No,  no,"  he  replied,  "  I  have  lost  neither 
eyes  nor  judgment:  I  see  him  quite  near  thee.  He 
accompanies  thee ;  and  I  know  by  his  face  that  he 
comes  to  help  me  to  die  well ;  do  both  of  you  have  a 
care  for  my  soul. ' '  We  know  nothing  more  of  this, 
but  we  are  not  ignorant  that  the  Guardian  Angels  of 
these  good  Neophytes  labor,  much  more  than  we,  to 
guide  their  souls  to  Heaven. 

Here  is  an  act  of  the  mercy  of  God.  One  of  the 
greatest  enemies  of  the  faith  in  the  Mission  of  Saint 
Ignace,  chancing  to  be  near  death,  feels  himself  in- 
fluenced from  Heaven,  at  the  first  sight  of  the  Father 
who  was  going  to  speak  to  him  of  his  salvation. 
"  Alas!  "  said  he  to  the  Father,  "  how  good  is  God, 
even  to  the  impious,  since  he  brings  thee  hither  in 
order  to  grant  me  [loi]  at  death  a  favor  of  which  I 
had  rendered  myself  unworthy!  I  ask  him  for 
pardon  with  all  my  heart,  and  of  thee  I  ask  Baptism. 
I  detest  the  sins  of  my  past  life,  and  I  firmly  believe 
the  truths  you  preach,  just  as  much  as  heretofore  I 
felt  horror  of  them,  and  blasphemed  against  them. 
Hasten  to  baptize  me ;  for,  if  I  have  lived  as  an 
impious  man,  I  wish  to  die  as  a  good  Christian." 
The  Father  is  astonished,  but  happily ;  and,  the  sick- 
ness urging  him,  he  can  no  longer  postpone  the 
Baptism,  after  which  the  patient  soon  fell,  as  it  were, 
into  a  death-agony. 

An  hour  before  he  gave  up  his  soul,  the  infidels 
having  gained  the  advantage  over  the  Father,  and 
trying  to  drive  him  out, — 'that  Dying  man  all  at  once 
returns  to  himself,  recovers  speech,  and  takes  up  the 
Father's  cause.     His  zeal  even  gave  him  quite  enough 


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.30 

luy  donna  bien  alTez  de  forces,  pour  dire  k  ces  impies 
d'vn  accent  vigotireux,  qu'ils  euffent  eux-mefmes  k 
fortir;  qu'ils  allaffent  a  leurs  femblables,  leur  annon- 
cer,  que  Dieu  faifoit  mifericorde  k  celuy  qui  auoit 
blafpheme  plus  qu'eux,  qu'ils  redoutaffent  [102]  ces 
flammes  d'Enfer,  s'ils  n'y  vouloient  bruler  pour  vne 
eternite:  que  pour  luy,  fon  ame  s'en  alloit  au  Ciel, 
qu'il  y  feroit  "k  iamais  bien-heureux,  &  qu'il  mourroit 
dans  cette  viue  confiance  des  infinies  bontez  de  Dieu. 
Apres  cela  il  tourna  fes  paroles  &  fes  yeux  vers 
le  Ciel,  auec  des  colloques  tout  remplis  de  foy  & 
d' amour,  &  en  finiffant  fes  prieres,  il  acheua  fa  vie. 
II  fe  nommoit  Fran9ois  Saentarendi. 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  4^  107 

strengfth  to  say  to  those  impious  ones,  in  energetic 
tones,  that  they  themselves  would  have  to  go  out; 
that  they  should  go  to  their  fellows,  to  announce  to 
them  that  God  was  granting  mercy  to  him  who  had 
blasphemed  more  than  they ;  that  they  should  dread 
[102]  those  flames  of  Hell,  unless  they  wished  to 
burn  in  them  for  an  eternity ;  that,  for  his  part,  his 
soul  was  on  its  way  to  Heaven ;  that  he  would  be 
forever  blessed  there,  and  that  he  would  die  in  this 
lively  confidence  of  the  infinite  goodness  of  God. 
After  that,  he  turned  his  words  and  his  eyes  toward 
Heaven,  with  colloquies  wholly  filled  with  faith  and 
love;  and,  in  finishing  his  prayers,  he  finished  his 
life.     He  was  named  Fran9ois  Saentarendi. 


108  LES  RE  LA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


CHAPITRE  VII. 

DE    LA    MISSION    DU    SAINT    ESPRIT. 

LE  Pere  Claude  Pi j art,  &  le  Pere  Leonard  Gareau, 
qui  auoient  hyuerne  auec  les  Algonquins,  fur 
les  riuages  de  noftre  grand  lac,  &  au  milieu 
des  neiges  qui  couuret  ces  pais  plus  de  quatre  ou  cinq 
mois,  fuiuirent  ces  mefmes  peuples  tout  le  long  de 
I'Efte,  fur  les  roches  nues  qu'ils  habitent,  expofez 
aux  ardeurs  du  Soleil,  &  ainfi  pafferent  auec  eux 
quafi  toute  I'annee  derniere. 

[103]  Dieu  voulut  fignaler  le  commencement  de 
leur  courfe  par  vne  grace  quil  leur  fit,  les  retirant 
tous  deux  des  portes  de  la  mort.  lis  nous  auoient 
quitte  k  la  fin  du  mois  de  Nouembre :  apres  quatre 
ou  cinq  iournees  de  chemin,  qu'ils  eurent  k  com- 
batre  les  vents,  les  neiges,  &  les  glaces  qui  commen- 
goiet  a  fe  former  de  toutes  parts,  ils  fe  virent  con- 
trains  de  quitter  leur  canot;  encore  eloignez  plus  de 
trois  lieues  du  lieu  ou  ils  pretedoiet  aborder.  lis  fe 
iettent  deflus  ces  glaces,  qui  pour  vn  teps  les  fou- 
ftiennent  auec  affez  de  fermete.-  mais  qu'elle  afleu- 
rance  fur  vn  pane  fi  infidele  ?  En  vn  moment  tout 
creue  fous  leurs  pieds,  &  fe  trouuent  dans  vn  abifme 
d'eau  fans  fond.  La  terre  leur  manquant,  ils  ont 
recours  au  Ciel,  &  a  Taffiflance  de  la  tres-Sainte 
Vierge :  A  ce  mefme  moment  vn  ieune  homme  de 
nos  domeftiques,  qui  les  accompagnoit,  &  vn  de  leurs 
Chrefliens  Sauuages,  qui  tous  deux  auoient  pris  le 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  4.6  109 


CHAPTER  VII. 

OF    THE    MISSION    OF   THE    HOLY    GHOST. 

FATHER  Claude  Pijart  and  Father  Leonard  Ga- 
reau,  who  had  wintered  with  the  Algonquins 
on  the  shores  of  our  great  lake,  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  snows  which  cover  these  countries 
more  than  four  or  five  months,  followed  those  same 
tribes  throughout  the  Summer,  upon  the  bare  rocks 
which  they  inhabit,  exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  Sun ; 
and  thus  spent  with  them  almost  all  the  past  year. 
[103]  God  chose  to  signalize  the  beginning  of  their 
expedition  by  a  favor  which  he  showed  them,  in 
withdrawing  them  both  from  the  gates  of  death. 
They  had  left  us  at  the  end  of  the  month  of  Novem- 
ber; after  four  or  five  days'  journey, — in  which  they 
had  to  combat  the  winds,  the  snows,  and  the  ice, 
which  was  beginning  to  form  in  every  direction, — 
they  saw  themselves  constrained  to  leave  their  canoe, 
still  distant  more  than  three  leagues  from  the  place 
where  they  were  aiming  to  land.  They  cast  them- 
selves upon  those  pieces  of  ice,  which  for  a  time  sus- 
tain them  with  sufficient  firmness :  but  what  assur- 
ance is  there  upon  a  pavement  so  faithless?  In  a 
moment  everything  breaks  beneath  their  feet,  and 
they  find  themselves  in  a  bottomless  depth  of  water. 
The  earth  failing  them,  they  have  recourse  to  Heav- 
en, and  to  the  assistance  of  the  most  Blessed  Virgin. 
At  this  same  moment,  a  young  man,  one  of  our 
domestics,    who  accompanied  them,  and  one  of  their 


no  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.30 

deuant,  font  eftonnez  regardant  en  arriere,  de  les 
voir  abifmez  dans  ces  glaces :  ils  craignent  de  perir 
eux-mefnies,  plus  qu'ils  n'ont  d'efperance  de  [104] 
pouuoir  leur  donner  fecoiirs,  ce  lieu  eftant  inacceffible. 
Ils  leur  iettent  quelques  cordes  du  plus  loin  qu'ils 
peuuent ;  mais  chaque  effort  qu'ils  font  pour  les  retirer 
du  naufrage,  ils  les  voyent  retomber  plus  lourdement 
dans  de  nouuelles  mines  de  cette  mer  glacee.  Enfin 
Noftre  Seigneur  les  affifta  lors  qu'ils  auoient  quafi 
perdu  toute  efperance;  ayans  trouue  vn  glace  affez 
ferme,  qui  les  recent  heureufement,  d'oii  par  apres 
tranfpercez  d'eau  de  toutes  parts,  &  demy  morts  de 
froid ;  ils  trouuerent  toutesf ois  le  moyen  de  f e  traif - 
ner  de  glace  en  glace,  de  danger  en  danger,  en  vn 
lieu  d'affeurance. 

II  falloit  qu'ils  deuffent  tons  la  vie  a  la  tres-Sainte 
Vierge.  Trois  iours  apres  ce  ieune  homme  Fran- 
gois,  qui  les  auoit  fecouru  fi  charitablement,  s'egara 
dans  les  bois  ayans  perdu  fes  piftes,  &  les  chemins 
que  la  neige  nouuellement  tombee  auoit  entierement 
couuert.  La  nuidt  venue  augmente  fon  mal-heur: 
d'arrefter,  c'euft  efte  pour  le  tran9ir  de  froid: 
plus  il  auance,  plus  il  s'egare,  ne  f9achant  plus  oil  il 
[105]  marchoit.  II  eft  errant  toute  la  nuidt,  &  iuf- 
qu'^  deux  heures  apres  midy  du  lendemain,  iour  de 
rimmaculee  Conception  de  la  Vierge.  Enfin  n'en 
pouuant  plus  de  froid,  de  faim,  de  I'affitude,  il  s'ar- 
refte  refolu  k  la  mort.  Mais  pour  mourrir  dans  les 
fentimens  de  deuotion,  qui  alors  poffedoient  dauan- 
tage  fon  coeur,  il  eut  recours  a  cette  Mere  de  miferi- 
corde,  luy  recitant:  Sub  tnum  prcefidium  conftiginms 
fan6la  Dei  genitrix:  En  mefme  temps  il  apper9oit  de 
loin,  vn  petit  rayon  de  chemin,  &  fe  fent  vn  furcroit 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  111 

Savage  Christians,  who  had  both  gone  on  ahead,  are 
astonished,  looking  back,  to  see  them  plunged  into 
those  masses  of  ice ;  they  fear  to  perish  themselves, 
more  than  they  have  hope  of  [104]  being  able  to  give 
them  help,  since  that  place  was  inaccessible.  They 
throw  some  ropes  to  them,  from  as  great  a  distance 
as  they  can ;  but,  at  each  effort  which  they  make  to 
withdraw  them  from  the  wreck,  they  see  them  fall 
back  more  heavily  into  new  ruins  of  that  icy  sea. 
Finally,  Our  Lord  assisted  them,  when  they  had 
almost  lost  all  hope,  and  they  found  a  piece  of  ice 
fairly  firm,  which  received  them  safely.  From  this, 
afterward,  soaked  with  water  clean  through,  and 
half -dead  with  cold,  they  nevertheless  found  means 
of  dragging  themselves  from  ice  to  ice,  from  danger 
to  danger,  to  a  place  of  safety. 

All  of  them  were  obliged  to  owe  their  lives  to  the 
most  Blessed  Virgin.  Three  days  afterward,  that 
young  Frenchman  who  had  so  charitably  succored 
them  went  astray  in  the  woods,  having  lost  his  trail 
and  the  roads,  which  the  newly-fallen  snow  had 
entirely  covered.  The  coming  night  augments  his 
misfortune;  to  stop,  would  have  been  to  chill  him 
with  cold ;  the  more  he  advances,  the  more  he  goes 
astray,  no  longer  knowing  where  he  [105]  is  walk- 
ing. He  is  wandering  the  whole  night,  and  even 
until  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day, — 
the  day  of  the  Immaculate  Conception  of  the  Virgin. 
Finally,  exhausted  with  cold,  hunger,  and  weari- 
ness, he  stops,  resolute  to  face  death.  But,  in  order 
to  die  in  the  sentiments  of  devotion  which  were  then 
further  possessing  his  heart,  he  had  recourse  to  that 
Mother  of  mercy,  reciting  to  her,  Sub  tuum  prcesidiuvi 
confugimus  sancta  Dei  gcnitrix.     At  the  same  time  he 


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

de  forces,  autant  qu'il  en  falloit,  pourfuiuant  cette 
route  egaree,  fortir  de  fon  egarement,  &  enfin  retrou- 
tier  les  deux  Pere.s,  &  les  Algonquins,  qui  deiia 
I'auoient  defefpere,  I'ayant  efte  chercher  par  tout,  & 
n'ayans  pu  le  rencontrer. 

La  ils  fe  firent  pour  eux  trois  vne  petite  cabane 
d'ecorces  de  bouleau,  fous  laquelle  ils  demeurerent 
iufqu'a  la  fin  des  neiges,  qui  fut  le  feptieme  de  May, 
&  das  laquelle  ils  furent  confolez  en  leur  extreme 
pauurete,  de  n'y  paffer  aucun  iour  fans  y  dire  la 
Meffe,  la  conftance  &  la  ferueur  de  leurs  Chreftiens, 
anima  leur  courage ;  leur  ioye  s'acreut  a  la  veue  de 
quelques  [io6]  enfans  qu'ils  enuoierent  au  Ciel, 
apres  le  faindt  Baptefme :  &  pour  recompenfer  abon- 
damment  toutes  leurs  peines,  il  plut  a  noftre  Sei- 
gneur les  benir  d'vn  petit  commencement  qu'ils 
donnerent  a  I'Eglife  des  Achirigouans. 

Outre  les  Nipiffiriniens,  auquels  depuis  quelques 
annees  on  auoit  annonce  la  foy,  &  dont  quelques-vns 
de  remarque  eftoient  defia  Chreftiens,  il  fe  trouua 
par  bon-heur  dans  c6t  hiuernement,  vne  autre  nation 
d' Algonquins,  nommez  Achirigouans;  dont  le  pais 
tire  vers  1' Occident,  approchant  des  peuples  du 
Sault,  des  Aoueatfiouaenronnon,  c'efl  a  dire  qui 
habitent  les  coftes  de  la  Mer;  &  d'autres  nations  tres 
nombreufes,  auec  lefquelles  ils  ont  leur  principal 
commerce,  &  de  tres-grandes  habitudes.  Nous  fou- 
haitions  depuis  long-temps  de  gaigner  a  la  foy  quel- 
qu'vn  de  cette  nation,  afin  par  ce  moyen  de  donner 
entree  a  I'Euangile  vers  tous  ces  autres  peuples,  qui 
iamais  n'en  ont  eu  connoiffance :  Mais  il  falloit  que 
ce  fufl  Dieu  qui  fift  le  coup,  &  qui  choifift  fon  temps, 
lors  que  nous  y  penfions  le  moins. 


1646-47J  RELATION  OF  ib45-4(>  113 


perceives  from  afar  a  little  streak  of  road,  and  feels 
an  increase  of  strength, — as  much  as  was  needed,  by 
following  up  this  isolated  route,  to  issue  from  his  be- 
wilderment, and  at  last  to  find  again  the  two  Fathers 
and  the  Algonquins,  who  had  already  despaired  of 
him,  having  gone  to  seek  him  everywhere,  and  not 
having  been  able  to  meet  him. 

There  they  made  for  these  three  a  little  cabin  of 
birch  bark,  under  which  they  sojourned  until  the  end 
of  the  snows, —  which  was  the  seventh  of  May, — and 
in  which  they  were  consoled  in  their  extreme  want 
by  not  passing  any  day  without  saying  Mass  in 
it.  The  constancy  and  fervor  of  their  Christians 
animated  their  courage;  their  joy  was  increased  at 
the  sight  of  some  [io6]  children  whom  they  sent  to 
Heaven,  after  holy  Baptism ;  and  in  order  to  recom- 
pense with  abundance  all  their  hardships,  it  pleased 
our  Lord  to  bless  them  with  a  little  beginning  which 
they  gave  to  the  Church  of  the  Achirigouans. 

Besides  the  Nipissiriniens, — to  whom,  for  some 
years  past,  the  faith  had  been  announced,  and  among 
whom  certain  notable  persons  were  already  Chris- 
tians,—  there  was  present,  by  good  fortune,  in  these 
winter  quarters  another  nation  of  Algonquins,  named 
Achirigouans.  Their  country  extends  toward  the 
West,  approaching  the  tribes  of  the  Sault;  the 
Aoueatsiouaenronnon, —  that  is  to  say,  "  who  inhabit 
the  coasts  of  the  Sea;  "^  and  other  very  numerous 
nations,  with  whom  these  have  their  principal  trade 
and  very  close  association.  We  had  long  been  desir- 
ing to  win  to  the  faith  some  one  of  this  nation,  that 
we  might,  by  that  means,  furnish  entrance  for  the  Gos- 
pel toward  all  those  other  tribes,  who  have  never  had 
acquaintance  with  it ;  but  it  was  necessary  that  God 


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Voi.  30 

Vn  de  ces  Achirigouans,  qui  auoit  entendu  [107] 
quelque  chofe  de  noftre  foy,  vint  fe  prefenter  ^  nos 
Peres.  le  ne  f9ay  qui  me  pouffe,  dift-il,  ie  ne  f§ay 
qui  m'eclaire,  &  qui  me  touclie  au  coeur,  mais  ie  voy 
bien  que  la  foy  eft  aimable,  ie  voy  bien  qu'il  y  a  vn 
Dieu,  &  ie  me  fens  des  forces  alTez  pour  me  refoudre 
a  I'honnorer,  &  a  luy  obei'r  en  tout  ce  que  vous  me 
direz  de  fa  part :  Ie  f uis  k  vous,  parce  que  ie  veux 
eftre  tout  a  luy:  Dites-moy  ce  que  i'ay  ^  faire,  & 
refufez  moy  de  m'inftruire,  fi  iamais  ie  refufe  de 
vous  obeir. 

Nos  Peres,  en  I'inftruifant,  trouuent  vn  efprit  tout 
difpofe  a  nos  myfteres,  vne  volonte  qui  ne  reiift'e  ^ 
rien,  &  vn  courage  qui  furmonte  &  qui  rompt  des  ce 
premier  moment,  tout  ce  qui  pent  s'oppofer  a  fa  foy : 
ils  voyent  bien  que  le  faind:  Efprit  eft  fon  Maiftre 
plus  qu'eux,  &  que  rendant  vn  coeur  fi  fouple,  il  ne 
demande  point  des  longueurs,  ny  les  retardemens 
ordinaires.  lis  le  baptifent  au  bout  de  fix  fepmai- 
nes,  quoy  que  nous  attendions  en  la  plufpart,  des 
epreuues  d'vn  &  de  deux  ans,  ils  luy  donnent  le  nom 
de  Leonard,  fon  furnom  Algonquin  eft  Mixifoumat.- 
&  pour  dire  de  luy  beaucoup,  &  quafi  tout,  en  peu 
de  mots;  du  depuis  on  n'a  pas  appergeu  [108]  en  luy 
aucune  ombre  de  faute. 

Le  lendemain  de  fon  Baptefme,  il  plut  k  Dieu 
r^prouuer  allez  rudement:  vn  fien  fils  vnique  encore 
a  la  mamelle,  tomba  grieuement  malade:  tons  fes 
parens  fongent  aufli  toft  a  recourir  au  diable,  & 
aux  fuperftitions  du  pais.  lis  reprochent  a  ce  nou- 
ueau  Chreftien,  que  fa  foy  commence  bien  toft  ^  atti- 
rer  le  malheur  deffus  fa  famille,  qu'il  quitte  la  priere, 
&  que  fon  enfant  guerira.     Non,   non,   dit-il;  mais 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  115 

should  be  the  one  to  give  the  impulse,  and  choose 
his  own  time  when  we  were  least  thinking  of  it. 

One  of  those  Achirigouans,  who  had  heard  [107] 
something  of  our  faith,  came  to  present  himself  to 
our  Fathers.  "  I  know  not  who  impels  me,"  said 
he;  "I  know  not  who  enlightens  me,  and  who 
touches  me  at  heart ;  but  I  see  well  that  the  faith  is 
desirable.  I  see  well  that  there  is  a  God;  and  I  feel 
strength  enough  to  resolve  to  honor  and  obey  him 
in  all  that  you  shall  tell  me  on  his  part.  I  am  yours, 
because  I  wish  to  be  altogether  his.  Tell  me  what 
I  have  to  do,  and  refuse  to  instruct  me  if  ever  I 
refuse  to  obey  you." 

Our  Fathers,  in  instructing  him,  find  a  spirit 
wholly  inclined  to  our  mysteries,  a  will  which  resists 
nothing,  and  a  courage  which  surmounts  and  which 
breaks,  from  this  first  moment,  everything  that  can 
oppose  itself  to  his  faith ;  they  see  well  that  the  holy 
Ghost  is  his  Master  more  than  they,  and  that,  render- 
ing a  heart  so  pliable,  he  does  not  require  long 
instruction,  or  the  usual  delays.  They  baptize  him 
at  the  end  of  six  weeks ;  although  we  expect,  in  the 
case  of  most,  probations  of  one  and  two  years.  They 
give  him  the  name  of  Leonard, — ^his  Algonquin  sur- 
name is  Mixisoumat ;  and  —  to  say  of  him  a  great  deal, 
and  nearly  everything,  in  few  words  —  since  then  we 
have  not  perceived  [108]  in  him  any  shadow  of  fault. 

The  day  after  his  Baptism,  it  pleased  God  to  try 
him  somewhat  severely ;  an  only  son  of  his,  still  at 
the  breast,  fell  grievously  sick.  All  his  relatives  im- 
mediately think  of  having  recourse  to  the  devil,  and 
to  the  superstitions  of  the  country.  They  reproach 
this  new  Christian,  that  his  faith  is  beginning  very 
soon  to  draw  misfortune  upon  his  family ;  they  tell 


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.30 

bien  plutofl  mes  prieres  le  gueriront,  fi  Dieu  le  veut. 
En  effet  il  fe  mit  en  priere,  &  fon  fils  recouura  vne 
fante  fi  prompte,  que  nos  Peres  ont  iuge  que  la  foy 
de  ce  bon  Neophyte  auoit  merite  cette  faueur  du  Ciel. 

Sept  ou  huit  mois  apres  ce  mefme  enfant  retomba 
vne  autre  f ois  malade ;  Ce  bon  Chreftien  voyant  fa 
femme  &  tons  fes  parens  defolez,  eut  recours  au 
mefme  Medecin :  Le  foir  en  faifant  fes  prieres,  Mon 
Dieu,  s'ecria-il,  Mon  fils  eft  plus  k  vous,  qu'kmoy; 
difpofez  comme  il  vous  plaira,  foit  de  fa  vie,  foit  de 
fa  mort,  car  rien  ne  vous  eft  impoffible :  le  lendemain 
matin  1' enfant  fe  trouua  parfaitement  guery. 

[109]  Vn  autre  iour  faifant  chemin  fur  les  glaces 
de  noftre  grand  lac,  auec  vn  infidele,  tons  deux 
chargez  de  bled,  autant  qu'ils  pouuoient  en  porter; 
fon  compagnon  tomba  fi  rudement,  &  fe  bleffa  fi  fort, 
que  demeurant  eftendu  fur  la  place,  &  faifi  d'vn 
affoupiffement  profond,  ce  bon  Chreftien  ne  fgauoit 
plus  quel  confeil  prendre,  fmon  de  quiter  la  fa  charge, 
&  traifner  comme  il  pourroit  deffus  les  glaces,  cet 
homme  eftropi6.  II  fe  jette  a  genoux  au  milieu 
de  cette  campagne  glacee,  &  leuant  les  yeux  vers  le 
Ciel :  Mon  Dieu,  dit-il,  vous  pouuez  le  guerir,  ie  vous 
en  prie,  fi  vous  agreez  ma  priere.  A  I'heure  mefme 
il  fe  vit  exauce.  Son  camarade  reuient  a  foy,  &  fe 
leue  auffi  vigoureux  que  fi  fa  cheute  &  fa  bleffure 
n'euit  efte  rien  qu'vn  fonge.  L'eftonnement  les 
faifit  egalement  tous  deux :  mais  le  Chreftien  prend 
la  parole,  &  reconnoiffant  bien  la  main  qui  faifoit  ce 
coup  de  merueille;  Mon  camarade,  luy  dit-il,  i'ay 
prie  Dieu  qu'il  euft  foin  &  de  toy  &  de  moy;  c'efl 
luy  qui  t'a  gueri,  commence  auiourd'huy  a  recon- 
noiitre  fon  pouuoir,  &  fi  tu  veux  qu'a  iamais  il  te 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -46  117 

him  that  he  shall  quit  prayer,  and  his  child  will  get 
well.  "No,  no,"  he  says;  "but  much  rather  my 
prayers  will  cure  him,  if  God  will."  In  fact,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  pray,  and  his  son  recovered  health  so  rapid- 
ly that  our  Fathers  have  concluded  that  this  good 
Neophyte's  faith  had  merited  this  favor  of  Heaven. 

Seven  or  eight  months  later,  this  same  child  again 
fell  sick.  That  good  Christian,  seeing  his  wife  and 
all  his  relatives  desolate,  had  recourse  to  the  same 
Physician.  At  evening,  on  saying  his  prayers,  he 
exclaimed,  "  My  God,  my  son  is  more  yours  than 
mine ;  dispose  as  you  shall  please,  of  either  his  life  or 
death,  for  nothing  is  impossible  with  you;  "  the  next 
morning  the  child  was  found  to  be  perfectly  cured. 

[109]  Another  day,  while  journeying  over  the  ice 
of  our  great  lake  with  an  infidel, — both  laden  with 
corn,  as  much  as  they  could  carry, — his  companion 
had  so  severe  a  fall,  and  wounded  himself  so  seri- 
ously, that  he  remained  prostrate  on  the  spot,  and 
was  seized  with  a  deep  stupor.  This  good  Christian 
no  longer  knew  what  counsel  to  take,  unless  to  leave 
there  his  load,  and  to  drag,  as  he  should  be  able, 
that  lame  man  over  the  ice.  He  throws  himself  on 
his  knees  in  the  midst  of  that  icy  plain,  and  says, 
lifting  his  eyes  toward  Heaven:  "  My  God,  you  can 
heal  him;  I  pray  you  to,  if  you  accept  my  prayer." 
At  the  very  time,  he  saw  that  he  had  been  heard. 
His  comrade  returns  to  himself,  and  rises,  as  vigor- 
ous as  if  his  fall  and  his  wound  had  been  nothing  but 
a  dream.  Astonishment  seizes  both  alike;  but  the 
Christian  begins  to  speak,  and,  well  recognizing  the 
hand  which  did  this  act  of  wonder,  ' '  My  comrade, ' '  he 
says  to  him,  ' '  I  have  prayed  to  God  that  he  should  take 
care  both  of  thee  and  of  me ;  it  is  he  who  has  healed 


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES         [Vol.30 

faffe  mifericorde,  fuy  moy  dedans  la  foy,  &  fay  toy 
inllruire  [no]  des  que  nous  ferons  arriuez.  lis  fe 
mettent  en  prieres,  ils  reprennent  leur  charge,  pour- 
fuiuent  leur  chemin:  &  cette  guerifon  fi  extraordi- 
naire fut  fcelee  de  la  marque  de  celles  qu'on  doit 
attribuer  a  Dieu  feul,  ramenant  a  nos  Peres  vn  bon 
catechumene  d'vn  manuals  infidele. 

Mais  la  ferueur  du  zele  qui  anima  I'Eglife  des  Ni- 
pilTiriniens  hyuernante  en  ce  mefme  lieu,  me  paroit 
vn  effet  non  moins  fenfible  des  graces  abondantes  du 
Saint  Efprit,  fur  cette  Miffion  qui  I'a  pris  nomme- 
ment  pour  fon  protedteur,  &  qui  porte  fon  nom. 

Tons  les  Demons  &  tout  I'Enfer  s'eftoient  ce 
femble  dechaifnez  contr'elle:  les  infideles  &  tons  les 
parens  des  Chreftiens  s'oppofoient  a  leur  foy  auec 
tant  d'opiniaftrete ;  qu'vn  iour  fe  voyans  tous  enfem- 
ble,  egalement  laffez  de  tant  d'attaques,  ils  fembloient 
perdre  coeur  &  fuccomber  dedans  ces  peines.  Leur 
filence  profond  ^  tout  ce  que  nos  Peres  pouuoient 
dire  pour  les  encourager,  leurs  vifages  abbatus,  «& 
leurs  foupirs  plains  de  langueur,  qui  eftoient  toute 
leur  refponfe,  montroient  [m]  affez  la  violence  de 
la  tentatio,  &  le  pen  de  refolution  qui  leur  reftoit 
pour  fouftenir  le  refte  de  I'orage  qui  alloit  toufiours 
augmentant.  Nos  peres  voyans  que  leurs  paroles 
n'entroient  pas  iufqu'au  fond  de  I'ame,  ont  leur 
recours  k  la  priere  &  a  I'affiftance  du  Ciel.  Apres  vn 
long  filence  de  part  &  d'autre,  voila  tout  d'vn  coup 
ces  Chreftiens  eclairez  tous  enfemble  d'vne  lumiere 
qui  leur  defcend  du  Ciel,  qui  remplit  leur  efprit,  & 
anime  leur  coeur  d'vn  courage  qui  leur  eft  inconnu. 
Et  quoy!  dirent-ils  tous  de  compagnie,  ou  fommes 
nous?     Que  penfons-nous?    Puifque  Dieu  fe  met  auec 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  119 

thee.  Begin  to-day  to  acknowledge  his  power;  and, 
if  thou  desire  that  he  shall  forever  show  thee  mercy, 
follow  me  in  the  faith,  and  have  thyself  instructed 
[no]  as  soon  as  we  shall  have  arrived."  They  be- 
take themselves  to  prayers ;  they  resume  their  load, 
and  pursue  their  way :  and  this  cure,  so  extraordinary, 
was  sealed  with  the  mark  of  those  which  one  must  at- 
tribute to  God  alone, — bringing  back  to  our  Fathers 
a  good  catechumen  instead  of  a  mischievous  infidel. 

But  the  fervor  of  the  zeal  which  animated  the 
Church  of  the  Nipissiriniens  wintering  in  this  same 
place  appears  to  me  a  not  less  perceptible  effect  of 
the  abundant  graces  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  this 
Mission,  which  has  taken  him  especially  for  its 
protector,  and  which  bears  his  name. 

All  the  Demons  and  all  Hell  had,  it  would  seem, 
unchained  themselves  against  it:  the  infidels,  and 
all  the  relatives  of  the  Christians,  were  opposing 
themselves  to  their  faith  with  so  much  stubbornness 
that  one  day  these,  seeing  themselves  all  together, 
equally  weary  of  so  many  attacks,  seemed  to  lose 
heart  and  to  succumb  within  these  difficulties.  Their 
profound  silence  at  everything  which  our  Fathers 
could  say  to  encourage  them,  their  dejected  faces, 
and  their  sighs  full  of  languor,  which  were  their 
whole  response,  showed  [in]  sufficiently  the  vio- 
lence of  the  temptation,  and  the  little  resolution 
which  remained  to  them  in  order  to  sustain  the  rest 
of  the  storm,  which  was  continually  increasing. 
Our  fathers,  seeing  that  their  words  enter  not  into 
the  depth  of  the  soul,  have  recourse  to  prayer  and  to 
the  assistance  of  Heaven.  After  a  long  silence  on 
both  sides,  lo,  all  at  once  these  Christians  are  enlight- 
ened, all  together,  with  a  light  which  comes  down 


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.30 

nous,  pourquoy  craignons-nous  nos  foibleffes?  Al- 
iens trouuer  nos  Capitaines  &  tons  les  infideles ;  & 
qu'ils  fyachent  ce  que  nous  fommes  maintenant,  ce 
que  nous  voulons  eftre,  &  quels  doiuent  eflre  ceux 
qui  apres  nous  embrafferont  la  foy. 

En  vn  mot,  le  Saint  Efprit  les  pofleda  fi  plaine- 
ment,  &  la  ferueur  de  leurs  refolutions  les  poulTa  li 
auant  dans  la  nuic5t,  qu'ils  [la]  pafferent  quali  entiere 
k  s'animer  de  ce  zele  qui  les  emportoit,  [112]  ne  trou- 
uans  plus  que  des  douceurs,  des  plaifirs,  &  les  delices 
de  leur  coeur,  en  tout  ce  qui  auparauant  leur  paroif- 
foit  infupportable.  En  fuite  de  cela  ils  fe  pref en- 
tent  d'eux-mefmes  a  faire  vne  confeffion  generale. 
Ce  fut  bien  aff ez  k  nos  Peres  de  fuiure  les  mouuemens 
du  Saint  Efprit;  lors  que  Dieu  parle  au  coeur,  il  vaut 
mieux  que  les  hommes  fe  taifent. 

Apres  leurs  deuotions,  ils  fe  leuent,  tous  animez, 
ils  vont  trouuer  les  principaux  de  leur  nation ;  &  le 
plus  conflderable  des  Chreftiens,  nomme  Euftache 
AlimouecKan,  prennant  la  parole  pour  tous,  poulTa 
fes  fentimens  auec  tant  de  ferueur,  qu'il  fut  aif6 
de  voir  que  Dieu  feul  auoit  fait  ce  changement  fi 
prompt,  qui  n' auoit  rien  de  la  nature. 

Vn  autre  bon  Chreftien,  nomme  Eftienne  Man- 
gouch,  voulant  rendre  cette  refolution  encore  plus 
publique,  fit  vn  feftin  fort  folemnel,  auquel  il  appella 
les  plus  notables  des  infideles,  &  ceux-lk  nomme- 
ment,  qui  ont  foin  parmy  eux  des  ceremonies  diabo- 
liques,  &  qui  confultent  les  Demons.  [113]  le  vous 
ay  appellez,  dit  ce  feruent  Chreftien,  pour  vous  faire 
fgauoir  nos  deffeins,  &  quels  nous  fommes  mainte- 
nant. Nous  eftions  des  demy-Chreftiens,  lors  que 
vos    calomnies    &    la    crainte     des    hommes,     nous 


1646-47J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  121 

to  them  from  Heaven,  which  fills  their  minds,  and 
animates  their  hearts  with  a  courage  which  is  un- 
known to  them.  "What!"  said  they  all  in  com- 
pany, "  where  are  we?  What  are  we  thinking? 
Since  God  sides  with  us,  why  do  we  fear  our  weak- 
ness? Let  us  go  to  find  our  Captains  and  all  the 
infidels;  and  let  them  know  what  we  are  now,  what 
we  wish  to  be,  and  what  are  to  be  those  who  after 
us  shall  embrace  the  faith." 

In  a  word,  the  Holy  Ghost  possessed  them  so  fully, 
and  the  fervor  of  their  resolutions  carried  them  so 
far  into  the  night,  that  they  passed  it  almost  entire- 
ly in  animating  one  another  with  this  zeal  which  was 
carrying  them  forward, —  [112]  finding  no  more 
aught  save  sweetness,  pleasures,  and  the  delights 
of  their  hearts  in  all  that  which  previously  appeared 
to  them  unendurable.  In  consequence  of  that,  they 
present  themselves  of  their  own  accord,  to  make  a 
general  confession.  It  was  indeed  enough  for  our 
Fathers  to  follow  the  impulses  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 
when  God  speaks  to  the  heart,  it  is  more  profitable 
that  men  keep  silent. 

After  their  devotions,  they  rise,  all  animated ; 
they  go  to  find  the  principal  persons  of  their  nation ; 
and  the  most  prominent  of  the  Christians,  named 
Eustache  Alimoueckan,  taking  the  floor  for  all,  ut- 
tered his  sentiments  with  so  much  fervor  that  it  was 
easy  to  see  that  God  alone  had  caused  this  so  speedy 
change,  which  had  nothing  of  nature  about  it. 

Another  good  Christian,  named  Estienne  Man- 
gouch,  wishing  to  render  this  resolution  still  more 
public,  made  a  very  solemn  feast,  to  which  he  called 
the  most  notable  among  the  infidels,  and  those  espe- 
cially who  have  charge  among  them  of  the  diabolical 


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.30 

donnoient  de  la  peine.  Perdez  maintenant  la  penfee 
d'ebranler  la  fidelite  que  nous  deuons  a  Dieu,  nous 
ferons  Chrefliens  tout  "k  fait,  &  n'aurons  plus  de 
crainte  que  de  Dieu  feul,  &  du  pecli6.  II  leur  fit  vn 
difcours  bien  long  des  excellences  de  la  foy,  du 
Paradis  &  de  I'Enfer,  &  des  commandemens  de  Dieu, 
adiouflant  a  chaque  chofe  deff endue,  que  pour  iamais 
ils  renongoient  a  ce  pech6,  &  que  plutofl  on  leur 
arracheroit  I'ame  du  corps,  que  de  leur  coeur  vn 
confentement  a  vne  offenfe  contre  Dieu. 

Quelques  infideles  ayans  voulu  propofer  leurs 
fentimens  contre  la  foy,  receurent  des  reparties  fi 
promptes  &  fi  preff  antes,  que  pas  vn  n' of  ant  plus 
s'oppofer  ^  eux,  en  fut  contraint  de  loiier  leur 
courage;  n'ayant,  dit-on,  qu'vne  chofe  k  fe  plaindre 
d'eux;  de  ce  que  leurs  parens  apres  leur  mort,  ne 
pourroient  plus  enfeuelir  leurs  corps,  felon  leurs 
anciennes  couftumes.  Peu  nous  importe  de  ce  qu'on 
fera  de  nos  corps  apres  la  mort,  refpondirent  [114] 
ces  bons  Chrefliens:  quelque  part  ou  nous  puiffions 
eftre,  Dieu  f^aura  nous  refufciter:  C'eft-lk  I'appuy 
de  noftre  foy,  &  I'vnique  penfee  que  nous  ayons  pour 
nos  corps,  apres  cette  vie. 

Depuis  ce  temps-Ik,  cette  petite  Eglife  a  toufiours 
augmente  fa  ferueur,  &  fur  tout  eft  entree  dans  des 
fentimens  d'vne  deuotio  particuliere,  k  I'endroit  de 
Noftre  Seigneur.  Quand  quelqu'vn  me  demande 
quelque  chofe,  ou  ie  voy  du  peche,  difoit  vn  iour  vn 
d'eux,  ie  le  refufe  &  m'en  retire  auec  horreur,  parce 
que  i'aime  lefus:  &  quand  on  me  prie  de  quelque 
chofe  que  ie  puis  accorder,  ie  me  porte  k  faire 
plaifir,  parce  que  i'aime  lefus,  &  ie  fonge  que  c'eft  k 
luy  feul,  que  ie  veux  plaire  iufqu'k  la  mort. 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  123 

ceremonies,  and  who  consult  the  Demons.  [113] 
"  I  have  called  you,"  says  this  fervent  Christian, 
"  in  order  to  have  you  know  our  designs  and  what 
we  are  now.  We  were  half-Christians  when  your 
calumnies  and  the  fear  of  men  gave  us  trouble. 
Lose  now  the  thought  of  shaking  the  fidelity  which 
we  owe  to  God, — we  will  be  Christians  altogether,  and 
will  have  no  more  fear  but  of  God  alone,  and  of  sin." 
He  gave  them  a  very  long  discourse  on  the  excellence 
of  the  faith,  on  Paradise  and  on  Hell,  and  on  the  com- 
mandments of  God, —  adding  to  each  forbidden  thing, 
that  they  forever  renounced  that  sin,  and  that  rather 
should  the  souls  be  wrested  from  their  bodies,  than 
from  their  hearts  a  consent  to  an  offense  against  God. 

Some  infidels,  having  attempted  to  propose  their 
sentiments  against  the  faith,  received  replies  so 
prompt  and  so  urgent  that  one,  not  daring  longer  to 
oppose  himself  to  them,  was  constrained  to  praise 
their  courage,  —  having,  he  said,  only  one  reason  to 
complain  of  them, —  that  their  relatives,  after  their 
deaths,  could  no  longer  bury  their  bodies  according 
to  their  former  customs.  "  Little  matters  it  to  us 
what  will  be  done  with  our  bodies  after  death, ' '  an- 
swered [114]  these  good  Christians;  "  wherever  we 
may  be,  God  will  know  how  to  raise  us  again.  That 
is  the  support  of  our  faith,  and  the  only  thought 
which  we  have  for  our  bodies  after  this  life." 

Since  that  time,  this  little  Church  has  constantly 
increased  its  fervor,  and,  above  all,  has  entered  into 
sentiments  of  special  devotion  with  respect  to  Our 
Lord.  "  When  any  one  asks  of  me  a  thing  in 
which  I  see  sin,"  said  one  of  them  one  day,  "  I 
refuse  him  and  withdraw  thence  with  horror,  because 
I  love  Jesus ;  and  when  one  begs  me  for  something 


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES         [Vol.30 

Nos  Peres  n'ont  pas  reueu  la  pliifpart  de  ces  bons 
Chreftiens,  depuis  I'Automne,  qu'ils  furent  contrains 
de  les  quitter  a  plus  de  quatre-vingt  lieues  d'icy.-  les 
Nipiffiriniens  ayans  pris  defCein  de  fe  diffiper  dans 
les  bois,  tout  le  long  de  cet  hyuer  dernier. 

Le  Pere  Gareau  tomba  malade  en  mefme  temps, 
d'vne  forte  fievre,  &  d'vne  dyffenterie,  k  quoy  le 
Pere  Claude  Pijart  &  le  Frangois  qui  les  accompa- 
gnoit,  ne  [115]  peurent  apporter  autre  remede,  en 
vn  lieu  abandonn6  de  tout  fecours  humain,  fmon  de 
trauailler  quafi  au  deffus  de  leurs  forces,  ramant  & 
de  iour,  &  f ouuent  dans  la  nui(5t ;  portant  fur  leurs 
efpaules  leur  canot  &  leur  bagage  dans  les  faults,  ou 
f ouuent  on  a  aff ez  de  peine  k  f e  porter  f oy-mefme ; 
pour  hafter  au  pluftoft  le  retour  de  ce  bon  Pere,  que 
fa  maladie  n'auoit  pu  difpenfer  de  ramer  quelques- 
fois,  pour  furmonter  la  rapidite  des  torrens  qui  fe 
trouuent  en  chemin;  &  qui  Tefpace  de  douze  ou 
treize  iours  que  dura  leur  nauigation,  auoit  efle 
continuellement  expof6  aux  ardeurs  du  Soleil,  aux 
pluyes,  aux  vens,  aux  iniures  de  I'air,  &  toufiours  le 
pied  dedans  I'eau.  AulTi  arriua-t'il  icy  tellement 
abbatu,  que  le  mal  furmontant  nos  remedes,  nous  le 
vifmes  en  peu  de  iours  fi  proche  de  la  mort,  que  le 
iugeans  tombe  dans  I'agonie,  qui  dura  plus  d'vn  iour 
entier,  fon  cercueil  eftoit  fait,  lors  qu'il  pluft  a 
Noftre  Seigneur  nous  le  rendre  comme  refufcit6, 
apres  vn  voeu  que  nous  luy  fifmes  en  I'honneur  de  la 
tres-Sainte  Vierge. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  125 

which  I  can  grant,  I  am  inclined  to  give  a  pleasure, 
because  I  love  Jesus;  and  I  think  that  it  is  he  alone 
whom  I  wish  to  please  even  till  death. 

Our  Fathers  have  not  again  seen  the  greater  part 
of  these  good  Christians  since  Autumn,  when  they 
were  constrained  to  leave  them  more  than  eighty 
leagues  from  here, — -the  Nipissiriniens  having  deter- 
mined to  disperse  themselves  through  the  woods, 
throughout  this  last  winter. 

Father  Gareau  fell  sick  at  the  same  time,  with  a 
violent  fever  and  a  dysentery,  to  which  Father  Claude 
Pijart  and  the  Frenchman  who  accompanied  them 
[115]  could  not  apply  other  remedy,  in  a  place  deso- 
late of  every  human  succor,  than  to  toil  almost  above 
their  strength, —  paddling  by  day,  and  often  into  the 
night;  bearing  on  their  shoulders  their  canoe  and 
their  baggage,  along  the  rapids,  where  often  one  has 
difficulty  enough  to  make  one's  own  way.  They  did 
this  in  order  to  hasten  as  much  as  possible  the 
return  of  this  good  Father,  whom  his  sickness  had 
not  been  able  to  dispense  from  paddling  sometimes, 
in  order  to  overcome  the  force  of  the  torrents  which 
occur  on  the  way ;  and  who,  for  the  space  of  twelve 
or  thirteen  days  that  their  voyage  lasted,  had  been 
continually  exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  Sun,  to  the 
rains,  to  the  winds,  to  injury  from  the  air,  and 
always  with  his  feet  in  the  water.  Accordingly,  he 
arrived  here  so  prostrated  that  the  illness  exceeded 
our  remedies.  We  saw  him  in  a  few  days  so  near  to 
death  that^  supposing  him  fallen  into  the  last  struggle, 
which  continued  more  than  a  whole  day,  his  coffin 
was  made ;  when  it  pleased  Our  Lord  to  restore  him 
to  us,  as  if  brought  again  to  life,  after  a  vow  which 
we  made  for  him  in  honor  of  the  most  Blessed  Virgin. 


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 


[ii6]  CHAPITRE  VIII. 

DE    CE    QUI    S'EST    PASSE    A    MISKOU. 

DEUX  families  de  Sauuages  Chreftiens,  compo- 
fees  de  feize  perfonnes,  efloient  des  I'an  palTe 
habituees  en  ce  lieu,  en  deux  maifons  fepa- 
rees,  &  bafties  a  la  Fran9oife,  vne  troifieme  plus 
nombreufe  nous  eft  venue  trouuer  au  commence- 
ment de  Septembre,  en  deffein  de  ioui'r  du  mefme 
bon-heur;  quelques  autres  nous  ont  promis  de  la 
fuiure  au  pluftoft,  &  plufieurs  perfonnes  particu- 
lieres  ont  receu  le  Saint  Baptefme  dans  1' extreme 
neceffite  en  cette  maniere.  Le  premier  iour  de  May 
le  Pere  Andre  Richard  eftoit  parti  de  Nepigiguit 
dans  vne  chalouppe,  accompagne  de  deux  Frangois, 
&  d'vne  famille  de  Sauuages.  Le  beau  temps,  &  le 
prompt  depart  des  glaces  auoit  fait  croire  que  toute 
la  cofte  feroit  libre,  comme  en  effet,  il  la  trouua 
iufqu'k  I'entree  du  Havre  de  MifKou,  qu'il  vit  ferm6 
d'vn  grand  banc  de  glace.  De  retourner  il  ny  auoit 
moyen,  le  vent  qui  eftoit  faulte  furieufement  au 
Nord-olieft  arreftoit  la  chalouppe,  &  I'entouroit 
cependant  d'vne  infinite  de  glaces  [117]  contre  lef- 
quelles  il  falloit  continuellement  combattre,  la  nuidt 
furuient  Ik  deffus  vn  danger  euident  de  perdre  la 
vie.-  I'vn  des  Sauuages  qui  n'eftoit  encore  baptife, 
quoy  que  fuffifamment  inftruit  demande  le  Baptefme, 
le  Pere  le  luy  accorde,  puis  tous  d'vn  commun 
confentement  ont  recours  a  Dieu  par  I'entremife  de 
Noftre   Dame,  a  laquelle   ils  font  voeu  de  ieufner  & 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  ^6  127 


[116J  CHAPTER  VIII. 

OF   WHAT    OCCURRED    AT    MISKOU. 

TWO  families  of  Christian  Savages,  composed  of 
sixteen  persons,  were  during  last  year  settled 
in  this  place,  in  two  separate  houses,  built  in 
the  French  fashion;  a  third,  more  numerous,  came 
to  find  us  at  the  beginning  of  September,  on  purpose 
to  enjoy  the  same  blessing;  and  some  others  have 
promised  us  to  follow  this  one  as  soon  as  possible. 
Several  individuals,  moreover,  have  received  Holy 
Baptism  in  extreme  necessity,  in  this  manner.  The 
first  day  of  May,  Father  Andre  Richard  had  started 
from  Nepigiguit  in  a  shallop,  accompanied  by  two 
Frenchmen  and  a  family  of  Savages.  The  fine 
weather  and  the  rapid  departure  of  the  ice  had  led 
to  the  belief  that  the  whole  coast  would  be  free ;  as, 
in  fact,  he  found  it  even  up  to  the  entrance  of  the 
Harbor  of  Miskou,  which  he  saw  closed  with  a  gfreat 
bank  of  ice.  There  was  no  way  of  return ;  the  wind, 
which  had  veered  furiously  to  the  Northwest,  was 
stopping  the  shallop  and  surrounding  it  meanwhile 
with  countless  blocks  of  ice,  [117]  against  which  it 
was  necessary  continually  to  struggle.  The  night 
comes  on,  and,  consequently,  an  evident  danger  of 
losing  life.  One  of  the  Savages  —  who  was  not  yet 
baptized,  although  sufficiently  instructed  —  asks  for 
Baptism ;  the  Father  grants  it  to  him ;  then  all  with 
a  common  consent  have  recourse  to  God  by  the  inter- 
vention of  Our  Lady,  to  whom  they  make  a  vow  to 


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 

Communier  en  fon  honneur,  s'ils  echapoient  de  ce 
danger.  lofeph  Nepfuget  reprend  la-deffus  courage, 
allege  la  chalouppe,  iette  quelques  barils  de  viure 
fur  les  glagons  flottans,  &  faultant  fur  les  glaces, 
fait  des  pef6es  auec  le  maft  foubs  la  chaloupe:  le 
vent  s'augmente,  &  preffe  fi  bien  les  glaces  qu'elles 
femblerent  aff ez  feures  pour  fe  fauuer  a  terre ;  ils  y 
fierent  leurs  vies,  laiffants  le  refte  a  I'abandon,  puis 
a  la  faueur  de  la  Lune,  &  de  leurs  auirons,  qui  leur 
feruoient  par  fois  de  pont  dans  le  deffaut  des  glaces, 
cheminerent  enuiron  vne  lieue,  &  arriuerent  "k  la 
pointe  du  iour  k  MifKou  pour  y  remercier  Dieu,  &  la 
Sainte  Vierge  de  la  faueur  receue :  ce  qu'ils  firent  tout 
a  loifir  dans  nollre  Chapelle.  Ce  fut  icy  que  noftre 
Neophyte  ne  pouuant  fe  contenir,  entretenoit  le  Pere 
[ii8]  des  fentimens  de  fon  cceur.  II  eft  maintenant 
temps,  difoit-il,  de  viure  en  homme  de  bien,  puifque 
i'ay  le  bon-heur  d'eftre  du  nombre  de  ceux  qui 
prient :  ie  t'affeure  que  tu  verras  par  eff et,  reftime 
que  ie  fais  de  la  priere.  II  a  tenu  fa  parole  iufques 
a  prefent,  &  s'eft  monftre  conftant  en  de  fafcheufes 
occafions;  quelques  libertins  I'ont  importune,  leurs 
rifees  pourtant,  &  leurs  mocqueries,  quoy  que  pic- 
quantes,  &  fenfibles,  ne  I'ont  point  ebranle,  on  a 
voulu  I'obliger  a  manger  de  la  chair  es  iours  defen- 
dus  par  I'Eglife,  luy  refufant  toute  autre  nourriture, 
mais  en  vain;  la  faim  &  toutes  les  importunitez, 
n'ont  ferui  qu'^  faire  paroiftre  fa  conflace:  il  fut 
nome  Pierre  lors  qu'on  luy  confera  les  ceremonies  de 
I'Eglife  en  noflre  Chapelle. 

La  feconde  perfonne  baptifee  cette  ann^e,  ell  vne 
petite  fille  aagee  enuiron  de  deux  ans:  fa  maladie 
nous  fit  confentir  au  defir  de  fes  parens,  qui  nous 
I'apporterent;    elle  fut  nomee   Louyfe,    Dieu   voulut 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  129 

fast  and  receive  Communion  in  her  honor,  if  they 
escape  from  this  danger.  Joseph  Nepsuget  there- 
upon resumes  courage,  lightens  the  shallop,  throws 
some  casks  of  provisions  upon  the  floating  pieces  of 
ice,  and,  jumping  upon  the  ice,  uses  the  mast  for  a 
lever  under  the  shallop ;  the  wind  increases,  and  so 
greatly  crowds  the  cakes  of  ice  that  they  seem 
secure  enough  to  escape  upon  to  the  land.  They 
trusted  their  lives  to  them,  leaving  all  else  adrift; 
then,  by  the  favor  of  the  Moon,  and  of  their  oars,  which 
served  them  at  times  as  a  bridge  in  the  gaps  of  the 
ice,  they  journeyed  about  a  league,  and  arrived  at  day- 
break at  Miskou, — there  to  thank  God  and  the  Blessed 
Virgin  for  the  favor  received,  which  they  did  wholly  at 
leisure  in  our  Chapel.  It  was  here  that  our  Neophyte, 
unable  to  contain  himself,  was  entertaining  the 
Father  [ii8]  with  the  sentiments  of  his  heart.  "  It 
is  now  time,"  said  he,  "  to  live  like  a  man  of  worth, 
since  I  have  the  happiness  to  be  of  the  number  of 
those  who  pray.  I  assure  thee  that  thou  wilt  see  by 
my  actions  the  esteem  that  I  have  for  prayer."  He 
has  kept  his  word  even  till  now,  and  has  shown  him- 
self steadfast  in  trying  encounters ;  some  libertines 
have  importuned  him, — their  derisions,  however, 
and  their  mockeries,  though  sharp  and  keenly  felt, 
have  not  shaken  him.  Some  have  tried  to  oblige 
him  to  eat  meat  on  days  forbidden  by  the  Church, 
refusing  him  all  other  nourishment;  but  in  vain, — 
hunger  and  all  importunities  have  served  only  to 
make  manifest  his  constancy.  He  was  named  Pierre 
when  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  were  conferred 
upon  him  in  our  Chapel. 

The   second   person   baptized   this  year  is  a  little 
girl,   aged  about  two  years;  her  sickness  caused  us 


130  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES         [Vol.30 

cette  petite  creature  pour  foy,  &  I'appella  quelque 
temps  apres:  c'eft  I'vnique  qui  eft  morte  apres  fon 
Baptefme, 

La  troifieme  eft  vne  ieune  femme  Montagnaife, 
qu'on  trouua  dans  vne  de  nos  riuieres,  fi  indifpofee 
de  fon  corps,  &  [119]  fl  bien  difpofee  pour  ce  qui 
touchoit  Tame,  qu'on  n'ofa  luy  denier  le  bien  qu'elle 
fouhaittoit,  &  que  fon  mari  qui  eft  de  noftre  baye, 
luy  procuroit  inftamment  auec  deffein  de  le  receuoir 
luy  mefme,  au  pluftoft. 

Vn  autre  Sauuage  des  plus  anciens  de  nos  coftes, 
nomme  Nidtouche  auoit  vn  bras  fi  enfle,  &  remply 
d'vlceres  que  les  Chirurgiens  Frangois  de  plufieurs 
nauires,  &  les  Sauuages  defefperoient  de  fa  vie,  k 
moins  que  de  luy  couper  promptement  le  bras, 
crainte  que  la  gangrene  ne  gagnaft  iufqu'a  I'ef- 
paule :  ce  qu'entendant  I'infirme  dit  refolument  qu'il 
aimoit  mieux  mourir,  que  de  permettre  qu'6  le  luy 
coupaft.  II  nous  demande  le  Baptefme,  &  ne  I'eut 
pas  plufloft  receu,  qu'il  commenga  h.  fe  mieux  porter 
auec  I'eftonnement  de  tous ;  il  iouit  maintenant  d'vne 
parfaite  fante,  &  a  promis  de  s'habituer  aupres  de 
nous,  afin  qu'on  difpofe  toute  fa  famille  a  receuoir 
le  Saint  Baptefme.  Le  Capitaine  de  nos  coftes  qui 
eft  defia  fuffifamment  inrtruit  auec  fa  famille,  nous 
a  promis  de  faire  le  mefme. 

le  ne  fgay  fi  ie  dois  mettre  au  nombre  de  nos 
families  Sauuages  habituees,  vne  maifon,  ou  pluftoft 
vne  cabane  de  charite  [120]  eftablie  proche  de  nous, 
contre  noftre  attente,  &  lors  que  nous  y  fongions  le 
moins;  toutesfois  comme  elle  eft  compofee  en  partie 
de  perfonnes  eftropiees,  &  qui  ne  peuuent  plus  mar- 
cher, elle  doit  eftre  plus  fedentaire  que  toutes  les 
autres,  lefquelles  s'eloignent  de  nous  prefque  tout  le 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  j645-4(>  131 

to  consent  to  the  desire  of  her  parents,  who  brought 
her  to  us,  and  she  was  named  Louyse.  God  chose 
this  little  creature  for  himself,  and  called  her,  some 
time  after;  she  is  the  only  one  who  has  died  after 
her  Baptism. 

The  third  is  a  young  Montagnais  woman,  who  was 
found  at  one  of  our  rivers,  so  indisposed  in  her  body, 
and  [119]  so  well  disposed  for  that  which  concerned 
the  soul,  that  one  dared  not  deny  her  the  blessing 
which  she  desired,  and  which  her  husband,  who  is 
of  our  bay,  was  urgent  to  obtain  for  her,  with  the 
purpose  of  receiving  it  himself  as  soon  as  possible. 

Another  Savage,  one  of  the  oldest  on  our  coasts, 
named  Nictouche,  had  an  arm  so  swollen  and  filled 
with  ulcers  that  the  French  Surgeons  of  several 
ships,  and  the  Savages,  were  despairing  of  his  life, — - 
unless  on  condition  of  promptly  amputating  his  arm, 
for  fear  lest  the  gangrene  should  reach  quite  to  the 
shoulder.  On  hearing  this,  the  sick  man  resolutely 
said  that  he  would  rather  die  than  permit  them  to 
cut  it  off.  He  asked  us  for  Baptism,  and  had  no 
sooner  received  it  than  he  began  to  improve,  to  the 
astonishment  of  all;  he  new  enjoys  perfect  health, 
and  has  promised  to  settle  near  us,  so  that  his  whole 
family  may  be  prepared  for  receiving  Holy  Baptism. 
The  Captain  of  our  coasts,  who  is  already  sufficiently 
instructed,  together  with  his  family,  has  promised 
us  to  do  the  same. 

I  know  not  whether  I  am  to  put  in  the  number  of 
our  sedentary  Savage  families  a  house,  or  rather  a 
cabin,  of  charity,  [120]  established  near  us,  contrary  to- 
our  expectation,  and  when  we  were  least  thinking  of 
it.  Nevertheless,  as  it  is  composed  partly  of  crippled 
persons,  who  cannot  longer  walk,  it  is  bound  to  be- 


132  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  30 

long  de  I'hyuer  pour  chaffer  a  I'eflan,  &  vne  bonne 
partie  des  autres  faifons  de  I'annee  pour  chaffer  aux 
Caftors.  En  voicy  le  commencement.  Vn  ieune 
efclaue  aage  d'enuiron  23.  ans,  Efquimau  de  nation, 
pris  en  guerre,  il  y  a  treize  ans,  feruoit  de  valet  ^ 
vne  famille  de  Sauuages;  ce  pauure  captif  tombe 
malade  en  la  cabane  de  fon  maiftre,  proche  de  noftre 
nouuelle  habitation,  &  eft  reduit  k  telle  extremite 
qu'il  reffembloit  pluftoft  h.  vne  fquelete,  qu'a  vn 
homme  viuant :  les  os  auoient  defia  perfe  la  peau  en 
quelques  parties  de  fon  corps,  &  pour  comble  de  fon 
mal-heur,  quelqu'vn  de  ceux  qu'il  auoit  nourry  par 
I'efpace  de  plufieurs  annees,  par  fes  fatigues  de  la 
chaffe,  auoit  par  vne  cruelle  compaffion  prepare  vne 
corde  pour  luy  ofter  ce  qui  luy  reftoit  de  vie:  le 
Pere  Martin  Lyonnes  qui  eftoit  feul  en  noftre  maifon 
auerti  de  cette  refolution,  s'oppofe  courageufement 
a  ce  [121]  qu'elle  ne  fuft  executee,  remonftre  que 
Dieu  eftoit  griefuement  offenfe  par  femblables 
adtions,  &  craignant  que  quelque  funefte  coup  de 
hache  ne  tombafl  fur  la  tefte  de  ce  pauure  languif- 
fant,  le  fait  promptement  porter  dans  noftre  maifon, 
le  place  fur  vn  lidt,  I'inftruidt,  &  en  eut  vn  tel  foin 
qu'il  commen9a  dans  peu  de  femaines  a  fe  mieux 
porter :  il  demande  de  retourner  en  la  cabane  de  fon 
maiftre,  oil  il  n'eut  pas  feiourne  quelques  iours,  qu'il 
retombe  plus  malade  qu'auparauant:  fon  infedlion  le 
rendoit  infupportable,  on  le  iette  hors  la  cabane,  & 
ell  abandonne  des  fiens,  il  a  recours  au  Pere,  le  fait 
demander,  on  I'affifte,  i'arriue  Ik-delTus  a  Nepigiguit, 
nous  vifitons  ce  pauure  abandonne,  qui  perfifte  a 
demander  le  Baptefme,  nous  acquiefyons  a  fa  de- 
mande, &  de  plus  luy  faifons  promptement  dreffer 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  164.3  -4^  133 

more  sedentary  than  all  the  others,  which  withdraw 
from  us,  during  nearly  all  the  winter,  in  order  to 
hunt  the  elk,  and  during  a  good  part  of  the  other 
seasons  of  the  year,  in  order  to  hunt  Beavers.  Here 
follows  the  beginning  of  it.  A  young  slave,  aged 
about  23  years,  an  Esquimau  by  nation,  taken  in  war 
thirteen  years  ago,  served  as  a  menial  to  a  family  of 
Savages.  This  poor  captive  falls  sick  in  his  master's 
cabin,  near  our  new  settlement,  and  is  reduced  to 
such  extremity  that  he  resembled  a  skeleton  rather 
than  a  living  man ;  the  bones  had  already  pierced 
the  skin,  in  some  parts  of  his  body.  And,  for  climax 
of  his  misfortune,  some  one  of  those  whom  he  had 
fed,  for  the  space  of  several  years,  by  his  toils  in  the 
chase,  had,  with  a  cruel  compassion,  prepared  a  rope 
to  take  from  him  what  remained  of  his  life.  Father 
Martin  Lyonnes,  who  was  alone  in  our  house,  being 
warned  of  this  resolution,  courageously  opposes  him- 
self against  [121]  its  accomplishment,  and  remon- 
strates that  God  was  grievously  offended  by  such 
actions.  Then,  fearing  lest  some  fatal  blow  of  the 
hatchet  might  fall  on  the  head  of  that  poor  languish- 
ing man,  he  has  him  promptly  carried  into  our  house, 
places  him  upon  a  bed,  instructs  him,  and  takes  such 
care  of  him  that  he  began  in  a  few  weeks  to 
improve.  He  asks  to  return  to  his  master's  cabin, 
where  he  had  sojourned  but  a  few  days  before  he 
falls  more  sick  than  previously:  his  infection  ren- 
dered him  unendurable ;  they  cast  him  out  of  the 
cabin,  and  he  is  forsaken  by  his  own.  He  has  re- 
course to  the  Father,  summons  him,  and  is  assisted ; 
at  that  time,  I  arrive  at  Nepigiguit:  we  visit  this 
poor  forsaken  one,  who  persists  in  asking  Baptism. 
We   acquiesce   in   his  request,  and   furthermore   we 


134  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  Jl^SUITES         [Vol.  30 

vne  cabane  dans  noftre  petite  cour  auec  vn  feu  entre- 
tenu:  ce  qu'ayant  confidere  fon  maiftre  qui  efloit 
fur  le  poindt  de  partir,  nous  dit  en  prefence  de 
plufieurs  Sauuages,  qu'il  ne  pouuoit  emmener  quand 
&  foy  fon  efclaue,  fans  le  mettre  en  euident  danger 
de  mourir  en  fa  chaloupe,  qu'il  nous  le  donnoit,  & 
nous  tranfportoit  tout  le  droit  qu'il  [122]  auoit  fur 
luy,  que  nous  en  euffions  foin,  &  qu'il  feroit  tou- 
fiours  noftre,  s'il  retournoit  en  fante.  Cecy  fe  paffa 
fur  la  fin  du  mois  d'Oc5tobre,  &  trois  mois  eftant  ecou- 
lez,  il  recouura  vne  fi  parfaite  fante,  que  1' ay  ant 
prefte  "k  vne  de  nos  families  Chreftiennes,  il  tua  fur 
la  fin  de  I'hyuer  plus  d'vne  douzaine  d'eflans. 

Le  foin  que  nous  prifmes  de  ce  pauure  abandonne 
donna  occafion  a  quelques  Sauuages  de  degrader  a 
vn  jet  de  pierre  de  noftre  maifon,  deux  femmes  fort 
vieilles,  &  incommodees  que  nous  anions  baptifees  vn 
peu  auparauant,  I'vne  defquelles  voyoit  iufqu'k  la 
troifieme  generation ;  &  fi  la  veue  ne  luy  diminuoit 
notablement  tous  les  iours  auec  I'efprit,  elle  verroit 
dans  peu  de  temps  iufqu'^  la  quatrieme:  I'autre 
n'eftoit  pas  fi  aagee,  mais  pour  le  moins  auffi  incom- 
modee  "k  raifon  des  vlceres  qui  luy  mangeoient  vne 
iambe,  I'vne  &  I'autre  eltoient  dans  I'impuiffance  de 
marcher :  nous  ne  vouluf mes  pas  les  laiff  er  mourir  de 
mifere  deuant  nos  yeux,  ny  faire  inftance  qu'on  les 
rembarquaft,  crainte  que  le  refus,  que  nous  euffions 
fait  de  les  afiifter,  n'euft  donne  occafion  a  ces  bar- 
bares  de  leur  decharger  pluftoft  vn  coup  de  hache 
fur  la  tefte,  que  [123]  de  prendre  la  peine  de  les 
traifner  fur  la  neige  tout  le  long  de  I'hyuer;  on  leur 
dreffe  done  vne  cabane,  puis  nous  les  pouruoyons  de 
nourriture,  &  de  quelques  autres  commoditez;  mais 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i645-4(>  135 

have  promptly  set  up  for  him  a  cabin  in  our  little 
courtyard,  with  a  fire  kept  up.  Having  observed 
this,  his  master,  who  was  on  the  point  of  going  away, 
tells  us  in  the  presence  of  several  Savages  that  he 
could  not  take  his  slave  at  the  same  time  with  him- 
self, without  placing  him  in  obvious  danger  of  dying 
in  his  shallop ;  that  he  gave  him  to  us,  and  conveyed 
to  us  all  the  right  that  he  [122]  had  over  him;  that 
we  should  take  care  of  him,  and  that  he  should 
always  be  ours,  if  he  returned  to  health.  This  oc- 
curred toward  the  end  of  the  month  of  October ;  and, 
three  months  having  elapsed,  he  recovered  a  health 
so  perfect  that,  having  been  lent  to  one  of  our 
Christian  families,  he  killed,  toward  the  end  of  the 
winter,  more  than  a  dozen  elks. 

The  care  that  we  took  of  this  poor  forsaken  man 
gave  occasion  to  some  Savages  to  set  down,  within 
a  stone's  throw  from  our  house,  two  very  old  and 
helpless  women,  whom  we  had  baptized  shortly 
before, — one  of  whom  saw  even  the  third  generation, 
and  if  her  sight  were  not  notably  diminishing  every 
day,  together  with  her  mind,  she  would  see  in  a  little 
time  even  the  fourth.  The  other  was  not  so  aged, 
but  was  at  least  as  helpless,  by  reason  of  ulcers 
which  were  eating  away  one  of  her  legs ;  both  were 
powerless  to  walk.  We  were  not  willing  to  let  them 
die  of  misery  before  our  eyes,  or  urge  that  they  be 
embarked  again,  lest  the  refusal  to  assist  them,  that 
we  might  have  made,  should  give  occasion  to  those 
barbarians  rather  to  deal  them  a  blow  of  the  hat- 
chet on  the  head,  than  [123]  to  take  the  trouble  of 
dragging  them  over  the  snow  throughout  the  winter. 
A  cabin  is  therefore  set  up  for  them ;  then  we  pro- 
vide them  with  food  and  some  other  conveniences. 


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J£SUITES         [Vol.30 

comme  la  nourriture  n'eft  que  la  moitie  de  la  vie  en 
ce  pais,  ou  I'hyuer  eft  froid  extraordi[nai]rement,  & 
que  nous  n'auions  que  deux  ieunes  feruiteurs  pour 
nous  fournir  de  bois,  &  faire  les  autres  chofes  necef- 
faires,  nous  fufmes  contrains  de  changer  nos  plumes 
en  des  baches,  pour  apprendre  le  meftier  de  bufche- 
ron,  afin  d'entretenir  iour  &  nuidt  vn  feu  capable 
dechauffer  des  perfonnes,  qui  fembloient  toufiours 
porter  vn  fais  de  glagons.  Que  leurs  parens  furent 
trompez  au  commencement  de  I'Efte,  lors  qu'ils 
trouuerent  en  affez  bonne  fante  celles  qu'ils  croy- 
oient  auoir  efte  mifes  en  terre  il  y  auoit  plufieurs 
mois,  ils  les  emmenerent  quand  &  eux  a  I'lfle  perfee, 
&  a  grande  peine  la  plus  vieille  eut  elle  efte  portee  k 
terre,  que  fes  plus  proches  la  rembarquerent,  &  1* em- 
menerent en  noftre  maifon,  pour  luy  faire  d6s  le  mi- 
lieu de  I'Efte  reprendre  fon  quartier  d'hyuer.  Vne 
autre  eftropiee  des  deux  iambes  d^s  fon  enfance  nous 
fut  emmenee  en  mefme  temps,  &  hui(5t  iours  apres 
[124]  vn  ellropie  d'vn  bras:  voila  le  commen[ce]ment 
de  noftre  cabane  de  charit6  qui  pent  tenir  lieu  d'vne 
quatrieme  famille,  qui  fera  plus  affidue  aupres  de 
nous  que  toutes  les  autres.  Retournons  au  chef  de 
noftre  troiheme  famille,  nomme  en  Sauuage  Ouanda- 
gareau,  qui  a  efte  en  fon  Baptefme  appelle  Ignace, 
par  Monfieur  Defdames,  qu'il  a  choifi  pour  fon  parain, 
au  nom  de  Monfieur  I'Abbe  de  la  Magdelaine,  &  des 
autres  MefQeurs  de  la  Compagnie  de  MifKou,  qui 
nous  entretiennent  noftre  nouuelle  habitation,  eftablie 
feulement  pour  la  conuerfion  des  Sauuages.  C6t 
homme  auoit  defia  procure  par  auance  le  Baptefme  ^ 
fept  de  fes  enfans,  &  maintenant  il  poffede  auec  fa 
femme   fon   fils  aifne,  &   fon   cadet,  le  mefme  bien, 


1 646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  164s  -46  137 

But  —  as  food  is  only  the  half  of  life  in  this  country, 
where  the  winter  is  extraordinarily  cold ;  and  as  we 
had  only  two  young  servants  to  furnish  us  with  wood, 
and  to  do  other  necessary  things  —  we  were  con- 
strained to  exchange  our  pens  for  axes,  in  order  to 
learn  the  woodman's  trade,  so  as  to  maintain  day  and 
night  a  fire  capable  of  warming  persons  who  seemed 
always  to  carry  a  burden  of  icicles.  How  their  rela- 
tives were  deceived  at  the  beginning  of  the  Summer, 
when  they  found  in  fairly  good  health  those  whom 
they  supposed  to  have  been  laid  in  the  ground  sev- 
eral months  agone !  They  took  these  women  along 
with  them  to  Isle  persee ;  with  great  difficulty  the 
elder  was  carried  ashore,  when  her  nearest  rela- 
tives embarked  her  again,  and  took  her  away  to  our 
house,  in  order  to  have  her  resume  her  winter-quar- 
ters in  the  midst  of  the  Summer.  Another  woman, 
crippled  in  both  legs  from  her  childhood,  was  brought 
to  us  at  the  same  time;  and,  eight  days  after,  [124] 
a  man  crippled  in  one  arm.  Such  is  the  beginning 
of  our  cabin  of  charity,  which  may  take  the  place  of 
a  fourth  family ;  they  will  be  more  constant  to  us 
than  all  the  others.  Let  us  return  to  the  head  of  our 
third  family,  named  in  the  Savage  tongue  Ouandaga- 
reau.  In  his  Baptism,  he  was  called  Ignace  by 
Monsieur  Desdames,  whom  he  has  chosen  for  his  god- 
father, in  the  name  of  Monsieur  the  Abb6  de  la  Mag- 
delaine,  and  of  the  other  Gentlemen  of  the  Company 
of  Miskou,  who  support  for  us  our  new  habitation, 
established  solely  for  the  conversion  of  the  Savages, 
This  man  had  already  procured,  before  this,  Baptism 
for  seven  of  his  children;  and  now  he  possesses  — 
along  with  his  wife,  his  eldest  son,  and  his  young- 
est,—  the  same  blessing  which  he  had  obtained  for 


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.  30 

qu'il  auoit  procure  a  fes  autres  enfans.  Le  bon  ex- 
emple  des  Montagnais  auec  lef quels  il  a  accouflum^ 
de  paffer  vne  bonne  partie  de  I'Efte,  luy  a  eft6  vn 
puiffant  motif  pour  s'affujetir  aux  loix  de  I'Euan- 
gile.  C'eft  vn  homme  fort  doux,  modere,  eftime 
tant  de  ceux  de  fa  nation,  que  des  Montagnais,  enne- 
mi  des  debauches,  &  amy  de  tons  les  Frangois:  ce 
qui  I'a  fait  choifir  ce  Printemps  auec  le  Capitaine  de 
Tadouffac,  &  le  Capitaine  de  la  Bai'e  [125]  des  Cha- 
leurs,  pour  eftre  mediateur  de  la  paix  entre  les  Betfia- 
mites  qui  habitent  les  terres  du  coft6  du  Nort  a  60. 
lieues  au  deffous  de  Tadouffac,  &  les  Sauuages  de  nos 
coftes,  &  de  celles  de  I'Acadie,  qui  fe  portoient  vne 
haine  mortelle.  Cette  paix  fut  concliie  k  I'lfle  Per- 
fee,  au  commencement  du  mois  de  luillet,  ou  par 
bon-heur  ie  me  rencontray,  k  deffein  d'affifter  tant 
les  Sauuages,  que  les  equipages  de  huidt  Nauires 
Fragois  deftitues  de  tout  fecours  fpirituel.  Voicy 
quelle  fut  la  difpofition  plus  prochaine  pour  redre 
cette  paix  de  longue  duree,  Le  Capitaine  de  Ta- 
douffac n6m6  Simon  Nechabeouit,  ou  autrement 
Boyer,  me  vint  trouuer  le  Samedy  dernier  iour  de 
luin,  pour  me  prier  de  le  reconcilier  le  lendemain 
matin  luy  &  toute  fa  troupe  auec  Dieu,  par  le  moyen 
du  Sacrement  de  Penitence:  i'aquiefce  k  fa  pieufe 
demande,  a  condition  toutesfois,  qu'il  aduertiroit  fes 
gens  de  s'expliquer  en  la  langue  Algonquine,  &  non 
Montagnaife,  laquelle  ie  n'eflimois  entendre  fufififam- 
ment  pour  leur  donner  fatisfadtion ;  a  grande  peine 
auois-je  pare  I'Autel  dans  la  tente  de  I'Admiral  des 
Nauires  pour  y  celebrer  la  faindle  MelTe,  que  ce  bon 
Capitaine  fe  jette  "k  mes  pieds,  les  mains  iointes  auec 
vne  grande  [126]  modeftie,  les  autres  Sauuages  plus 


1 64fi  - 47]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  - 4^  139 

his  other  children.  The  good  example  of  the  Mon- 
tagnais,  with  whom  he  has  been  accustomed  to  spend 
a  good  part  of  the  Summer,  has  been  to  him  a  power- 
ful incentive  for  subjecting  himself  to  the  laws  of  the 
Gospel.  He  is  a  man  very  gentle,  moderate,  and 
esteemed  not  only  by  those  of  his  own  nation,  but 
by  the  Montagnais;  -an  enemy  of  debauchery,  and  a 
friend  of  all  the  French.  These  considerations 
caused  him  to  be  chosen  this  Spring,  with  the  Cap- 
tain of  Tadoussac  and  the  Captain  of  the  Bay  [125] 
des  Chaleurs,  as  a  mediator  of  the  peace  between  the 
Betsiamites,  who  inhabit  the  lands  on  the  North 
side,  60  leagues  below  Tadoussac,  and  the  Savages 
of  our  coasts  and  those  of  Acadia,  who  bore  each 
other  a  mortal  hatred.  This  peace  was  concluded 
at  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  July,  at  Isle  Per- 
see^  —  where  by  good  fortune  I  chanced  to  be,  with 
the  object  of  assisting  both  the  Savages  and  the 
crews  of  eight  French  Ships,  destitute  of  all  spiritual 
help.  Here  follows  the  more  immediate  arrange- 
ment for  rendering  this  peace  of  long  duration.  The 
Captain  of  Tadoussac,  named  Simon  Nechabeouit, 
or  otherwise  Boyer,  came  to  find  me  on  Saturday, 
the  last  day  of  June,  in  order  to  beg  me  to  reconcile 
him  the  next  morning — and  with  him  his  whole 
band  —  to  God  by  means  of  the  Sacrament  of  Penance. 
I  acquiesce  in  his  pious  request,  —  on  condition,  how- 
ever, that  he  should  notify  his  people  to  explain 
themselves  in  the  Algonquin  language,  and  not 
Montagnais,  which  I  did  not  think  that  I  understood 
sufficiently  to  give  them  satisfaction.  But  hardly 
had  I  adorned  the  Altar  in  the  tent  of  the  Admiral 
of  the  Ships,  in  order  to  celebrate  there  holy 
Mass,  when  this  good  Captain  throws  himself  at  my 


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES         [Vol.30 

ages  le  fuiuent,  puis  les  ieunes  gens,  &  enfin  les 
femmes ;  ils  affifhent  apres  s'eftre  confeff6s,  a  la  faindle 
Meffe,  a  la  fin  de  laquelle  quelques-vns  communie- 
rent  auec  les  Frangois :  ie  leur  fis  chanter  en  fuitte 
leurs  prieres  en  langue  Algonquine,  &  afin  que  les 
Sauuages  de  nos  coftes  n'euffentoccafion  de  fe  plain- 
dre,  quoy  qu'ils  fuffent  peu  de  Chre flies  prefents,  ie  ne 
laiffay  pas  de  leur  faire  chanter  les  mefmes  Prieres 
en  leur  langue,  &  fur  les  mefmes  chants.  Nos 
Frangois  nouuellement  arriues  de  France  qui  n'auoient 
iamais  veu  de  Sauuages  frequenter  les  Sacrements, 
&  encore  moins  entendu  chanter  les  Prieres  ordi- 
naires  de  I'Eglife  en  langue  Sauuage,  pour  "ne 
frequenter  noftre  nouuelle  habitation  eloign^e  de 
trente  lieues  de  I'lfle  Perfee,  furent  fi  fenfiblement 
touches  de  deuotion  que  plufieurs  en  pleuroient 
de  tendreffe:  d'autres  difoient  qu'il  leur  fembloit 
eftre  tranfportes  en  quelque  Conuent  de  Religieufes, 
tant  les  Sauuages  chantoient  melodieufement :  quel- 
ques-vns affeuroient  qu'ils  ne  fe  fuffent  ennuyes  de 
les  entendre  chanter  depuis  le  matin  iufques  au  foir. 
Ces  nouueautez  font  fort  agreables  du  comencement : 
mais  pour  nos  Frangois  hyuernans  [127]  qui  demeu- 
rent  en  nos  habitatios,  &  font  accouftumes  k  voir  & 
entendre  chofes  femblables,  &  a  affifter  quelquesfois 
aux  inftruc5tions  qu'on  fait  toutes  les  Feftes  &  Diman- 
ches,  aux  Sauuages  de  Nepigiguit,  ils  s'ennuiroient 
"k  la  fin  de  fi  longues  deuotios.  Apres  que  ces  bos 
Chreftiens  eurent  fatisfait  a  leur  deuotion,  ils  fe 
difpoferent  a  traiter  de  la  paix  plus  par  effet,  que  par 
paroles,  le  Capitaine  des  Sauuages  de  nos  coftes  auec 
Ignace  Ouandagareau  chargent  vn  ieune  homme 
d'vn   fac  de  pourcelaine;    deux  autres  portent    fur 


1646-47J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  141 

feet,  his  hands  joined  with  great  [126]  modesty; 
the  elder  of  the  other  Savages  follow  him,  then  the 
young  men,  and  finally  the  women.  They  attend, 
after  having  confessed,  holy  Mass,  at  the  end  of 
which  some  received  communion  with  the  French; 
then  I  had  them  chant  their  prayers  in  the  Algon- 
quin language ;  and,  that  the  Savages  of  our  coasts 
might  not  have  occasion  to  complain,  I  failed  not, 
although  there  were  few  Christians  present  [among 
these],  to  have  them  chant  the  same  Prayers  in  their 
language  and  to  the  same  tunes.  Our  French 
people  newly  arrived  from  France, —  who,  on  account 
of  not  frequenting  our  new  settlement,  distant  thirty 
leagues  from  Isle  Persee,  had  never  seen  Savages 
frequent  the  Sacraments,  and  still  less  heard  the 
usual  Prayers  of  the  Church  chanted  in  a  Savage 
tongue, —  were  so  deeply  moved  by  devout  feeling 
that  several  of  them  wept  with  emotion.  Others 
said  that  it  seemed  as  if  they  were  transported  into 
some  Convent  of  Nuns,  so  melodiously  did  the  Sav- 
ages sing ;  some  asserted  that  they  would  not  have 
been  wearied  to  hear  them  sing  from  morning  until 
evening.  These  novelties  are  very  agreeable  at  the 
beginning ;  but  as  for  our  French  wintering  here, — 
[127]  who  dwell  in  our  settlements  and  are  accus- 
tomed to  see  and  hear  similar  things,  and  sometimes 
to  attend  the  instructions  which  are  given  on  all 
Feasts  and  Sundays  to  the  Savages  of  Nepigiguit, — 
they  would  finally  grow  weary  of  such  long  devo- 
tions. After  these  good  Christians  had  satisfied 
their  devotion,  they  prepared  themselves  to  treat  of 
peace,  more  by  action  than  by  words.  The  Captain 
of  the  Savages  of  our  coasts,  together  with  Ignace 
Ouandagareau,  loads  a  young  man  with  a  bag  of  porce- 


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.30 

leurs  efpaules  deux  douzaines  de  couuertes  neufues, 
quelques-vns  treize  belles  arquebufes,  de  la  pouldre, 
du  plomb,  &  quelques  epees  plus  longues,  &  larges, 
que  les  ordinaires ;  puis  firent  tout  porter  dans  vne 
grande  cabane,  ou  plufieurs  Sauuages  Montagnais, 
Algonquins,  trois  de  la  natio  des  Sorciers,  &  deux 
Betfiamites  eftoient  affembles.  Le  Capitaine  de  nos 
cofles  prend  la  parole,  au  nom  des  Capitaines  de 
I'Acadie,  &  de  la  Baye  de  Rigiboudtou  fon  parent, 
def quels  il  dit  auoir  conimiffion  de  traiter  la  paix, 
affeurent  qu'ils  auoient  tous  banny  de  leurs  coeurs 
I'ancienne  inimite,en  confirmation  dequoy  ils  offroient 
tous  ces  prefens  pour  temoigner  leur  bonne  affedlion. 
[128]  Simeon  Boyer  qui  feruoit  comme  de  truchement 
aux  Betfiamites,  refpond,  qu'ils  acceptoient  les 
prefents,  qu'ils  ne  feroient  a  I'aduenir  qu'vn  coeur: 
puis  fit  apporter  bon  nombre  de  paquets  de  peaux  de 
caflors,  dont  il  fit  prefent.  Le  refte  de  la  iournee  & 
quelques  autres  fuiuantes  fe  pafl^erent  en  dances, 
&  f eftins ;  nous  efperons  que  cette  paix  contribuera 
beaucoup  a  augmenter  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  veu  que  tous 
nos  Sauuages  femblent  auoir  de  1' inclination  a  rece- 
uoir  le  faindt  Baptefme,  qu'ils  rechercbent  comme 
vn  fouuerain  remede  a  leurs  indifpofitions,  &  mala- 
dies. C'eft  ce  que  i'ay  recognu  en  deux  Mifiions  que 
i'ay  fait  a  I'lfle  Perfee,  comme  auffi  le  Pere  Andre 
Richard  en  celle  qu'il  fit  ce  Printemps  en  la  Baie  des 
Chaleurs,  &  le  Pere  Martin  Lyonnes  en  celle  de  la 
Baie  de  Miramichi,  d'oii  il  retourna  tres  fatisfait  des 
Sauuages,  qui  fe  plaifent  par  tout  a  entendre  parler 
des  myfteres  de  noftre  fainc5te  Foy. 

FIN. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  164.5-4^  143 


lain ;  two  others  carry  on  their  shoulders  two  dozen 
new  blankets ;  others,  thirteen  fine  arquebuses,  pow- 
der, lead,  and  some  javelins  longer  and  broader  than 
usual.  Then  they  had  everything  carried  into  a  great 
cabin,  where  many  Savages  —  Montagnais.  Algon- 
quins,  three  of  the  nation  of  the  Sorcerers,  and  two 
Betsiamites  were  assembled.  The  Captain  of  our 
coasts  takes  the  floor  in  the  name  of  the  Captains  of 
Acadia,  and  of  him  of  the  Bay  of  Rigibouctou,  his 
kinsman,  from  whom  he  says  he  has  commission  to 
treat  for  peace ;  they  assert  that  they  all  have  ban- 
ished from  their  hearts  the  former  enmity,  in  con- 
firmation whereof  they  offered  all  these  presents  to 
testify  their  kind  affection.  [128]  Simeon  Boyer,  who 
served  as  interpreter  to  the  Betsiamites,  answered 
that  they  accepted  the  presents,  that  they  would  be 
for  the  future  only  one  heart ;  then  he  caused  to  be 
brought  a  goodly  number  of  bundles  of  beaver  skins, 
of  which  he  made  a  gift.  The  rest  of  the  day,  and 
several  others  following,  were  spent  in  dances  and 
feasts.  We  hope  that  this  peace  will  contribute 
much  to  augment  the  glory  of  God,  seeing  that  all 
our  Savages  seem  to  have  inclination  to  receive  holy 
Baptism,  which  they  seek  as  a  sovereign  remedy  for 
their  indispositions  and  sicknesses.  This  is  what  I 
have  observed  in  two  Missions  which  I  have  held  at 
Isle  Persee, —  as  also  have  Father  Andre  Richard, 
in  the  one  which  he  held  this  Spring  in  the  Bay  des 
Chaleurs ;  and  Father  Martin  Lyonnes,  in  that  of  the 
Bay  of  Miramichi,  whence  he  returned  greatly  sat- 
isfied with  the  Savages,  who  are  everywhere  pleased 
to  hear  mention  of  the  mysteries  of  our  holy  Faith.* 

END. 


LXI  — LXII 

Miscellaneous  Documents,  1647 

LXL —  Epistola  Patris  Caroli  Gamier  ad  R.  P.  Vincentium 
Caraffa,  Prspositum  Generalem  Societatis  Jesu, 
Rom^e;  Diva  Maria^  apud  Hurones,  36  Mali,  1647 

LXIL — Journal  des  PP.  Jesuites,  en  I'annee  1647 


SOURCES:  For  Doc.  LXL,  we  follow  Father  Martin's 
copy  (in  the  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal)  of  the 
original,  ex  MSS.  Soc.  Jes.  For  Doc.  LXIL,  we  follow 
the  original  MS.  in  the  library  of  Laval  University,  Quebec. 


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  3a 


Epistola  Patris  Caroli  Gamier  ad  Reverendissi- 

mum  Patrem  Vincentium  Caraffa,  Praeposi- 

tum  Generalem  Societatis  Jesu,  Romse. 

REVERENDE  ADMODUM  IN  CHRISTO  PaTER 
Pax  Christi 
Quam  Isetus  nobis  fuit  hie  nuntius  de  mandata 
Paternitati  vestrse  ab  optimo  Domino,  Societatis  suae 
cura,  tarn  jucundae  nobis  fnerunt  quas  ad  nos  scribere 
dignata  est  litterse,  quibus  paternam  in  nos  etsi 
longissime  remotos  filios  amorem  suum  testificari 
nobis  gravata  non  est,  quibusque  tantopere  nos 
hortatur  ad  strenue  laborandum  in  vinea  Domini. 
Profecto  non  mediocriter  [animum]  nobis  augeri  sensi- 
mus,  quotquot  hie  sumus  paterna  ilia  sua  exhorta- 
tione.  Neque  id  quidem  mirum  cuiquam  videri 
debet,  quam  enim  paternum  Paternitas  Vestra  in 
Societatis  filios  amorem  sentit  et  ostendit,  tam  pium 
et  liberis  Societatis  dignum,  in  Societatem,  ejusque 
superiores  animum  gerunt  quotquot  hie  degunt  e  nos- 
tris,  tantumque  abest  ut  quod  nonnulli  forte  in  Gallia 
sibi  persuadere  possent,  nescio  quid  inertiae  et  liber- 
tatis  ab  iis  quaeratur,  qui  in  has  regiones  veniunt,  ut 
potius  audeam  affirmare  me  nullibi  in  Gallia  tam 
genuinum  (quantum  judicare  possum)  Societatis 
nostrse  spiritum  agnovisse,  quam  hie  agnosco  in  nostris 


1646-47]        GARNIER   TO  FATHER  GENERAL  147 


Letter  of  Father  Charles  Gamier  to  the  Very 

Reverend  Father  Vincent  Caraffa,  General 

of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  at  Rome. 

VERY  Reverend  Father  in  Christ, 
Pax  Christi. 
As  it  was  joyful  news  to  us  who  are  here, 
that  the  most  kind  Lord  had  committed  to  your  Pater- 
nity the  charge  of  his  Society,^  so  we  were  pleased 
at  the  letters  which  you  deigned  to  write  to  us, —  in 
which  you  did  not  disdain  to  testify  your  fatherly 
love  for  us,  though  we  are  very  distant  sons ;  and  in 
which  you  so  earnestly  exhort  us  to  labor  strenuously 
in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  Indeed,  we  feel  that  we 
have  received  no  little  increase  of  courage,  for  every 
one  of  us  who  is  here,  through  this  your  fatherly 
exhortation  to  us.  Nor  ought  this,  indeed,  to  seem 
strange  to  any  one;  for  the  more  Your  Paternity 
feels  and  shows  a  fatherly  love  for  the  sons  of  the 
Society,  the  more  filial  a  spirit,  and  one  worthy  of 
the  Society's  children,  do  all  of  ours  who  live  here 
cherish  toward  the  Society  and  its  superiors.  And 
so  far  from  the  truth  is  it  —  what  some  perhaps  might 
imagine  in  France  —  that  a  certain  slothfulness  and 
independence  is  sought  by  those  who  come  into  these 
regions,  that  rather  I  dare  affirm,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  I  have  nowhere  in  France  (as  far  as  I  can  judge) 
known  so  genuine  a  spirit  of  our  Society  as  I  recog- 
nize here  among  all  of  ours.  So  sincerely  is  Christ 
sought  here  by  all,  such  harmony  of  minds  is  among 


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.30 

omnibus.  Tarn  sincere  ab  omnibus  hie  quseritur 
Christus,  tanta  est  inter  omnes  animorum  consensio, 
tanta  in  superiores  et  regulas  observantia,  ut  nihil 
hie  aliud  optandum  mihi  videatur,  quam  ut  qui  unus 
longissime  fratribus  meis  sum  absimilis,  ad  eorum 
virtutem  tandem  aliquando  aspirare  aggrediar,  ad 
quod  paternitatis  vestrse  preces  quam  possum  arden- 
ter  imploro. 

R"^.  P.  Pauli  Ragueneau,  Missionis  hujus  huronen- 
sis  superioris  tum  exemplum,  turn  industria  pluri- 
mum  omnino  conferunt  ad  tam  bonum  totius  missio- 
nis statum :  Sic  ut  sine  gravi  omnium  nostrum  atque 
adeo,  Missionis  totius  damno  non  putem  fieri  posse, 
ut  post  expletum  tertium  annum  alius  ei  sufficiatur, 
quin  im6  e  re  nobis  maxime  esset  ut  idem  R.  P. 
Ragueneau  per  multos  annos  missionis  hujus  curam 
gereret,  quod  et  sentio  de  superiore  totius  missionis 
canadensis  qui  est  P.  Hieronymus  Lallemant,  quem 
etiam  existimo  plurimum  expedire  totius  missionis 
administrationem  continuare.  At  de  R.  P.  Paulo 
Ragueneau  longe  evidentissimum  mihi. 

Quod  ad  externa  spectat,  strenue  laborant  nostri 
in  excolenda  commissa  nobis  ^  Domino  vinea,  quae 
quidem  majores  in  dies  fructus  proferet,  etsi  pede- 
tentim.  Tardum  enim  est  barbarorum  nostrorum  ad 
suscipiendam  fidem  ingenium,  et  ad  susceptam  fidem 
excolendam  jugem  ac  perennem  laborem  his  initiis 
exigit.  Non  tamen  poenitendum,  ciim  bene  multos 
hie  christianos  nobis  dederit  Deus  in  quibus  et  fides 


164(5-47]         GARNI ER   TO  FATHER  GENERAL  149 


all,  and  so  great  a  respect  for  the  superiors  and  the 
rules,  that  nothing  else  seems  to  me  to  be  desirable 
here, —  save  that  I,  who  alone  am  exceedingly  unlike 
my  brethren,  may  at  last  some  day  attempt  to  aspire 
to  their  virtue ;  for  which  I  implore,  as  ardently  as 
possible,  the  prayers  of  your  paternity. 

Both  the  example  and  the  activity  of  Reverend 
Father  Paul  Ragueneau,  superior  of  this  Huron 
Mission,  certainly  contribute  very  greatly  toward  so 
good  a  status  of  the  whole  mission, — so  much,  that  I 
think  it  could  not  be  without  serious  injury  to  all  of 
ours,  and  even  to  the  whole  Mission,  that,  after  hav- 
ing completed  his  third  year,  another  be  substituted 
for  him.  Nay  rather,  it  would  be  very  greatly  to 
our  advantage  that  this  same  Reverend  Father 
Ragueneau  should  exercise  the  charge  of  this  mission 
for  many  years.  This  is  also  my  opinion  in  regard 
to  the  superior  of  the  whole  Canadian  mission,  Father 
Hierosme  Lallemant ;  that  he  should  continue  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  whole  mission,  I  also  deem  highly 
advantageous.  But  this  is  far  more  evident  to  me  in 
the  case  of  Reverend  Father  Paul  Ragueneau. 

As  concerning  outside  matters, —  ours  diligently 
labor  in  cultivating  the  vineyard  assigned  to  us  by  the 
Lord,  which  indeed  will  yield,  though  slowly,  greater 
fruits  from  day  to  day.  For  the  natural  disposition 
of  our  barbarians  is  slow  to  admit  the  faith,  and 
requires,  during  these  beginnings,  a  continual  and 
perpetual  labor  for  cultivating  the  faith  when 
accepted.  Yet  we  need  not  be  dissatisfied,  since 
God  has  given  us  very  many  Christians  here,  in  whom 
shine  forth  both  faith  and  piety,  and  also  examples 
of  steadfast  courage.  But  —  what  is  most  serious 
for  us  —  we   are    in   the    utmost   want  of   laborers. 


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

et  pietas  et  solidae  etiam  virtutis  exempla  eluceant. 
Verum  quod  nobis  est  gravissimum,  in  summa  opera- 
riorum  penuria  sumus.  Quapropter  ad  Paternitatem 
vestram  Clamant  tum  liberi  sui,  turn  quos  in  Christo 
genuerunt  ipsi,  Summi'sque  precibus  efifiagitant,  ut 
sui  misereatur,  et  mittat  qui  nos  adjuvent:  Neque 
vero  est  quod  timeat  Paternitas  vestra,  ne  desit  nobis 
quo  sustentari  hie  possunt  tot  homines  societatis, 
neque  enim  ulla  est  in  eo  difficultas ;  ciim  longe  alia 
sit  hie  vivendi  ratio  qu^m  in  Gallia  ac  Italia.  At 
finem  hie  facio.  Interim  tamen  imploro  Paternitatis 
vestrse  SS.  Sacrificiorum  ac  precum  auxilium,  tum 
barbaris  nostris  omni  sane  commiseratione  dignis, 
tum  ei  qui  est 

Reverende  admodum  in  Xto  Pater, 
Minimus  ac  obsequentissimus 
in  Xto  filius  vester 
Carolus  Garnier. 

Data  ad  Divae  Mariae 
apud  Hurones  3^  maii  1647 


1646-47]         GARNIER   TO  FATHER  GENERAL  151 

Wherefore,  not  only  your  children,  but  also  those 
whom  they  themselves  have  begotten  in  Christ,  Cry 
aloud  to  your  Paternity :  and  entreat  with  their  most 
Earnest  prayers,  that  you  pity  them,  and  send  some 
to  aid  us.  Nor,  indeed,  is  there  cause  for  your 
Paternity  to  fear  lest  we  lack  means  wherewith  so 
many  men  of  the  society  can  be  supported  here ;  for 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  that  respect,  since  the  man- 
ner of  living  here  is  far  different  from  that  in  France 
and  Italy.  But  here  I  make  an  end.  Meanwhile, 
however,  I  implore  the  help  of  your  Paternity's  Holy 
Sacrifices  and  prayers :  both  for  our  barbarians,  who 
are  surely  worthy  of  all  pity,  and  for  him  who  is, 

Very  Reverend  Father  in  Christ, 
Most  humbly  and  obediently 
your  son  in  Christ, 
Charles  Garnier. 

Dated  at  Sainte  Marie 
among  the  Hurons,  the  3rd  of  May,  1647. 


152 


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.30 


Journal  des  Peres  Jesuites,  en  I'annee 

1647. 


Estretnes 


on  trait e  trots  ptres. 


L'AN    1647.    lANUIER. 

LE  i^*",  ie  fus  au  2.  coup  de  la  messe  saluer 
M"".  le  gouuerneur. 

les  Hospitalieres  enuoyerent  vne 
lettre  par  M^.  de  SK  Sauueur,  &  deux  boetes 
d'escorces  de  Citron  par  vn  homme. 

les  Vrsulines  vne  lettre  vn  barillet  de  pru- 
neaux,  Vn  Chapelet  &  vne  Image  en  papier 
scauoir  vn  Crucifix  en  grand  volume. 

On  nvf  enuoya  M.  le  gouu.  4.  Chapons  deux 
outardes  8.  pigeonneaux;  d'autres  d'autre 
volaille  enuiron  10.  ou  12. 

On  dit  a  Vespres  Les  litanies  du  nom  de 
lesvf. 

le  2.  Nvf  donnasmes  a  disner  a  M.  de  S^. 
Samieur  M'' .  le  prieiir  &  M.  Nicolet. 

On  enuoya  a  Sillery  vne  outarde  &  quatre 
chapons. 

Ie  donne  aux  Hospitalieres  vn  liure  du  p. 
bonnef  ons : 

Aux  Vrsulines  vn  tableau  de  S^  loseph : 

7.  ou  8.  paires  de  souliers  Sauuages  a  nos 
gar9ons. 

A  Pierre  vn  Chapelet  d'Albastre. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  J&SUITES 


153 


Journal  of  the  Jesuit  Fathers,  in  the  year 

1647. 


THE   YEAR    1 647,    JANUARY. 

ON  the  I  St,  I  went  at  the  2nd  bell  for 
mass  to  salute  Monsieur  the  governor. 
The  Hospital  nuns  sent  a  letter  by 
Monsieur  de  St,  Sauveur,  and  two  boxes  of 
Lemon-peel  by  a  man. 

The  Ursulines  sent  a  letter,  a  keg  of  prunes, 
A  Rosary,  and  a  paper  Image, —  to  wit,  a 
large-sized  Crucifix. 

There  were  sent  us,  by  Monsieur  the  govern- 
or, 4  Capons,  two  bustards,  and  8  young 
pigeons;  by  others,  some  10  or  12  pieces  of 
other  poultry. 

We  said  at  Vespers  The  litany  of  the  name 
of  Jesus. 

On  the  2nd,  We  gave  a  dinner  to  Monsieur 
de  St.  Sauveur,  Monsieur  the  prior,  and  Mon- 
sieur Nicolet. 

We  sent  to  Sillery  a  bustard  and  four  capons. 

I  gave  the  Hospital  nuns  a  book  of  father 
bonnefons'  -^^ 

To  the  Ursulines,  a  picture  of  St.  Joseph ; 

7  or  8  pairs  of  Savage  shoes  to  our  servants ; 

To  Pierre,  an  Alabaster  Rosary; 

To  Monsieur  de  St.  Sauveur,  the  Gospel  of 
father  de  montreuil,^^  a  cake  of  candle- wax, 
and  a  Penknife; 


New-Year's  gifts. 


We  regale  three 
priests. 


154  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


re  no  II  don  a  Sillery. 
2  pp. 


Hospitalieres   nvf 
donnent  a  disner 

Messagers. 


la  Purificdon 


A  Mons^  de  S^  Sauueur  I'Euangile  du  p. 
de  montreiiil  vn  pain  de  bougie ;  &  vn   Canif 

A  M.  le  prieur  vn  pain  de  bougie 

A  M.  Nicolet  vn  petit  pain  de  bougie 

A  St.  Martin  vn  pain  de  bougie,  vn  liure 
spirituel:  scauoir  L'Exercice  du  Xstien,  &  vn 
Cousteau  a  manche  d'argent 

A  M.  boutonuille  Secretaire  de  Mons*".  le 
gouu.  vn  Chapelet  musque  auec  vn  Agnvf 
Dei. 

AM.  de  Champigny  musicien  vn  beau 
Chapelet  auec  medaille  &  reliquaire. 

I'alle  le  4.  du  moys  a  Sillery ;  le  5.  au  matin 
se  fit  la  renouaon  du  p.  gabriel  lalement  &  du 
p.  defretat,  ie  fis  TExhortaon  la  veuille;  ils  ne 
firent  point  de  3  lours  de  recollection,  ils  se 
retirerent  le  soir  de  la  recreaon ;  ie  les  auois 
icy  a  Noel  fait  passer  les  festes  auec  titre  des 
3.  lours  de  recollection.  Ie  fis  festin  au 
Sauuages  &  leur  donne  6.  pains 

Le  7.  les  Hospitalieres  nvf  traiterent  ma- 
gnifiquement. 

Depuis  ce  lour  vinrent  force  messagers  des 
3.  riuieres :  D'ou  aussy  vinrent  demeurer  auec 
les  Sauuages  de  Sillery  plvf  de  40.  Sauuages, 
qui  faisoient  en  tout  plvf  de  200. 

1647.    FEBURIER 

Le  l^^  lour  se  fit  vn  salut  au  soir  des  lita- 
nies de  noe  Dame  en  I'honneur  de  la  feste,  on 
en  dit  la  moitie  iusques  a  causa  nostrae  laeti- 
tiae ;  &  le  lendemain  apres  benedic.  diio  on  re- 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES  155 


To  Monsieur  the  prior,  a  cake  of  candle- 
wax; 

To  Monsieur  Nicolet,  a  small  cake  of  can- 
dle-wax ; 

To  St.  Martin,  a  cake  of  candle-wax,  a 
spiritual  book  —  to  wit,  "The  Christian's  Ex- 
ercise," and  a  silver-handled  Knife; 

To  Monsieur  boutonville,  Secretary  to  Mon- 
sieur the  governor,  a  musk-scented  Rosary, 
with  an  Agnus  Dei ; 

To  Monsieur  de  Champigny,  the  musician,  a 
handsome  Rosary,  with  a  medal  and  reliquary. 

I  went  on  the  4th  of  the  month  to  Sillery. 
On  the  morning  of  the  5th  occurred  the  re- 
newal of  the  vows  of  father  gabriel  lalement 
and  of  father  de  fret  at;  I  gave  the  Exhortation 
the  day  before.  They  did  not  observe  the  3 
Days  of  recollection ;  they  withdrew  at  even- 
ing from  recreation.  I  had  had  them  observe 
the  feasts  here  at  Christmas,  counting  that  as 
3  Days  of  recollection.  I  made  a  feast  for  the 
Savages,  and  gave  them  6  loaves. 

On  the  7th,  the  Hospital  nuns  regaled  us 
magnificently. 

After  this  Day,  many  messengers  came 
from  3  rivers, — whence  also  came  to  dwell 
with  the  Savages  of  Sillery  more  than  40 
Savages;  these  made,   in  all,  more  than  200. 

1647,    FEBRUARY. 

On  the  ist  Day,  at  evening,  was  held  a 
benediction,  the  litany  of  our  Lady,  in  honor 
of  the  feast.  We  said  half  of  it,  as  far  as 
catisa  nostrcB  IcBtitice;  and  the  next  day,  after 


Refiewal  of  vows  at 
Sillery;  2  fathers. 


Hospital  nuns  give 
us  a  dinner. 

Messengers. 


Purification. 


156 


LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  30 


loofi.  de  Mr  le 
gouur. 


Constiticons  des 
Vrsulines. 

p.  Jer.  Lallemant. 

Mariage  de  fr.  auec 
sauuage 


depart  des  sauuages 


cominen9a  le  Kyrie  &  reprit-on  vas  spirituale. 

le  2^.  lour  de  la  Purificaon  Ton  fit  comme 
I'annee  precedente  excepte  que  M.  de  S^  Sau- 
ueur  vint  donner  vn  cierge  &  en  receuoir  selon 
les  rubriques  en  suite  ceux  qui  seruoient,  on 
porta  M.  le  gouu.  le  sien  a  sa  place,  toutes- 
fois  il  fit  la  moiti6  du  chemin  &  vint  iusques 
au  balustre  peut  estre  pouroit-on  vne  autre 
fois  le  luy  donner  en  gardant  les  rubriques. 

Au  Commencem^  de  ce  moys,  Mons''.  le 
gouuerneur  me  donna  ordre  p*".  receuoir  loott. 
au  magazin,  pour  estre  employes  en  oeuures 
pies. 

En  ce  mesme  temps  ie  commence  a  trauail- 
ler  aux  Constitutions  &  reiglemens  des  Vrsu- 
lines, a  leur  priere  &  sollicitaon. 

Ite  en  ce  mesme  temps  barbe  sauuage  semi- 
nariste  des  Vrsulines  apres  y  auoir  demeure 
4,  ans  en  estant  sortie  fut  recherchee  forte- 
ment  &  puissament  par  vn  frangois  nomme 
Chastillon  qui  pria  les  meres  de  la  vouloir  rete- 
nir  iusques  aux  vaisseaus,  il  donna  assurance 
de  sa  volonte  mettant  entre  les  mains  des  MM. 
vne  rescription  de  300.  tant  de  liures  dont  il 
consentit  que  lOott  fussent  appliquees  au  profit 
de  la  fille  encas  qu'il  manquast  de  parole : 
mais  il  se  trouua  que  la  fille  n'en  voulut  point 
&  ayma  mieux  vn  sauuage.  &  suiure  les 
volontes  de  ses  parens. 

le  14.  les  sauuages  partirent  pour  la  grande 
chasse. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES 


157 


benedicamus  domino,  we  began  the  Kyrie  again, 
and  resumed  vas  spirituale. 

On  the  2nd,  the  Day  of  the  Purification, 
we  did  as  in  the  preceding  year, — except  that 
Monsieur  de  St.  Sauveur  came  to  give  a  taper 
and  to  receive  some,  according  to  the  rubrics; 
afterward,  those  who  served.  Monsieur  the 
governor's  was  carried  to  his  place ;  however, 
he  went  half-way,  and  came  as  far  as  the  rail- 
ing. Perhaps  it  might,  another  time,  be 
given  to  him  conformably  to  the  rubrics. 

At  the  Beginning  of  this  month.  Monsieur 
the  governor  gave  me  an  order  for  drawing 
lOO  livres  at  the  warehouse,  to  be  employed 
in  pious  works. 

At  this  same  time,  I  began  work  upon  the 
Constitutions  and  regulations  of  the  Ursujines, 
at  their  request  and  solicitation. 

Item,  at  this  same  time,  barbe,  a  savage 
pupil  of  the  Ursuline  seminary,  after  having 
remained  there  4  years,  when  she  left  them 
was  eagerly  and  urgently  sought  in  marriage 
by  a  frenchman  named  Chastillon,^''^  who 
begged  the  mothers  to  consent  to  keep  her 
until  the  vessels  came.  He  gave  security  for 
his  wish  by  putting  into  the  Mothers'  hands 
an  order  for  300  livres,  of  which  he  agreed 
that  100  livres  should  be  applied  for  the  girl's 
benefit,  in  case  he  broke  his  pledge;  but  it 
happened  that  the  girl  would  not  consent  to 
have  him,  and  preferred  a  savage, —  following 
the  wishes  of  her  parents. 

On  the  14th,  the  savages  went  away  for  the 
great  hunt. 


100 II.  from  Monsieur 
the  governor. 


Constitutions  of  the 

Ursulines. 

Father  Jer.  Lalle- 

mant. 

Marriage  of  a 

frenchman  with  a 

savage. 


Departure  of  the 
savages. 


158 


LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


voyage  chez  M.  de 
Chauigny 


Acte  luridique  sur 
vn  tnariage 


balet 


bastiment 


bieire  a  Sillery 


le  6. 


le  15.  le  p.  de  Quen  alia  chez  M.  de  Cha- 
uigny auec  M.  de  la  Tour  &  5.  autres 
frangois,  on  y  deuoit  baptiser  vne  fille  venue 
nouuellement  au  monde.  ils  en  retournerent 
le  20. 

Sur  la  fin  de  ce  moys  furent  iettes  les  bancs 
de  quelque  mariage  sur  lequel  il  y  eut  quel- 
que  difficulte :  1' Acte  luridique  pour  leuer  la 
difficulte  e  au  greffe,  &  la  copie  entre  les 
mains  du  p.  Vimont ;  on  poura  voir  la  dedans 
la  forme  qui  pent  estre  obseru^e  en  sembla- 
bles  rencontres. 

le  27.  de  febur.  il  y  eut  vn  balet  au  maga- 
zin  c'estoit  le  mercredy  gras  pas  vn  de  nos 
pp.  ny  de  nos  ff.  ny  assista,  ny  aussy  des  filles 
de  r  hospital  &  des  Vrsul^®.  sauf  la  petite 
Marsolet. 

Sur  la  fin  de  ce  moys  on  commenga  a  trais- 
ner  les  i^^.  pieces  de  bois  sur  le  lieu  de  noe 
emplacem^ 

MARS.    1647. 

Au  commencem*.  de  ce  moys  fut  faite  p"". 
la  i^.  fois  de  la  bieire  a  Sillery. 

Les  lours  gras  les  saluts  furent  faits  sur  les 
quatre  heures,  apres  la  garde  leu^e  au  fort: 
comme  I'annee  passee;  on  n'y  chanta  que  le 
salut  ordinaire  du  S*.  Sacrement,  &  cela  alia 
bien.  le  fis  eolation  le  mardy  gras  aux  Musi- 
ciens  &  nos  PP.  de  Sillery  vinrent  disner  auec 
nvf.     cela  va  bien. 

le  Mercredy  des  cendres  on  fit  coe  Tan  passe, 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  J  ^SUITES 


159 


Legal  Act  concern- 
ing a  marriage. 


Ballet. 


On  the   15th,  father  de  Quen  went  to  Mon-  journey  to  Monsieur 
sieur  de  Chavigny's  with  Monsieur  de  la  Tour       ^^  Chavignfs. 
and  5  other  frenchmen;  they  were  to  baptize 
a  girl  there,  >vho  had  recently  come  into  the 
world.     They  returned  thence  on  the  20th. 

Toward  the  end  of  this  month  were  re- 
jected the  banns  of  a  certain  marriage,  regard- 
ing which  there  was  some  difficulty. ^'^  The 
Legal  Act  for  removing  the  difficulty  is  at  the 
record-office,  and  the  copy  in  the  hands  of 
father  Vimont ;  one  may  see  therein  the  form 
which  may  be  observed  in  similar  contingen- 
cies. 

On  the  27th  of  february,  there  was  a  ballet 
at  the  warehouse ;  it  was  the  Wednesday  in 
Shrovetide.  Not  one  of  our  fathers  or  breth- 
ren was  present;  also  none  of  the  sisters  of 
the  hospital  and  the  Ursulines,  except  the 
little  Marsolet." 

Toward  the  end  of  this  month,  we  began  to 
haul  the  ist  timbers  upon  the  spot  for  our  site, 

MARCH,   1647. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  month,  beer  was 
made  at  Sillery  for  the  ist  time. 

On  the  Days  of  shrovetide,  the  benedic- 
tions took  place  about  four  o'clock,  after  the 
shifting  of  the  guard  at  the  fort ;  as  last  year, 
we  sang  only  the  usual  benediction  of  the 
Blessed  Sacrament,  and  that  went  well.  I 
gave  a  collation  on  shrove  tuesday  to  the 
Musicians,  and  our  Fathers  at  Sillery  came  to 
dine  with  us;  that  is  a  satisfaction. 

On  ash   Wednesday,    we    did  the  same  as  The  6th. 


Building. 


Beer  at  Sillery. 


160  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

mais  cela  n'alla  point  bien;  il  faut  plustost 
Mercredy  des  cen-     faire  la  benediction  des  Cendres  solemnelle- 

ment  &  vne  basse  messe;  que  de  dire  vn 
haute  messe  &  ne  point  faire  la  benedictio 
solemnelle  des  Cendres.  pourquoy  ne  la 
fairoit-on  pas  aussy  bien  que  celle  des  rameaux, 
&  des  Cierges?  on  pouroit  apres  vne  ou  deux 
tabl^es  a  qui  on  auroit  donne  des  Cendres  pen- 
dant que  I'on  chanteroit,  commencer  vne  basse 
messe,  &  a  la  fin  s' en  retourner  a  la  sacristie 
puis  reuenir  donner  des  cendres  affin  que 
Mons*".  le  gouuern*^,  qui  en  auroit  pris  deuant 
la  messe  ne  fut  point  contraint  d'attendre:  on 
commence  par  luy  des  seculiers  a  donner  des 
cendres ;  on  le  va  trouuer  a  son  banc  coe  p*". 
couier  puis  on  recommence  les  tabl^es  coe  aux 
Communions. 
pillage  des  yroquois       le  1 1 .  vint  la  nouuelle   du  pillage  de  deux 

maisons  de  frangois  par  les  yroquois  proche 
des  3.  riu.  &  de  la  poursuite  des  Algonq.  par 
ces  yroquois:    ce  pillage  arriua  le   lour  des 
Cendres. 
hyuer douxds^degel.       Ce    mesme    II.    commenga    le    degel    d'vn 

hyuer  sans  hyuer  n'ayant  pas  fait  froid 
iusques  alors  en  sorte  que  la  plvf  part  du 
temps  on  eut  pu  dire  la  messe  sans  feu,  &  ie 
pense  que  le  vin  au  Calice  ne  gela  au  plvf 
qu'vne  fois. 
Algonquains  pris.         le  22.  vint  la  nouuelle  assuree  de  la  prise 

de  cent  Algonquains  ou  enuiron  par  les  trais- 
tres  hyroquois;  qui  ayant  hyuern^  I'an  passe 


i«46-47J    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  j£SUITES 


161 


last  year,  but  that  did  not  proceed  correctly ; 
one  should  rather  give  with  solemnity  the 
blessing  of  the  Ashes,  and  say  a  low  mass, 
than  say  a  high  mass  and  not  give  the  solemn 
blessing  of  the  Ashes.  Why  should  we  not 
give  it  as  well  as  that  of  the  palms  and 
Candles?  We  might,  after  one  or  two  rows  to 
whom  Ashes  had  been  given  during  the  sing- 
ing, begin  a  low  mass,  and  at  the  close  return 
to  the  vestry;  then  come  back  and  give 
ashes, —  so  that  Monsieur  the  governor,  who 
would  have  taken  some  before  mass,  should 
not  be  constrained  to  wait.  We  begin  with 
him,  of  the  laymen,  in  giving  ashes;  we  go 
to  find  him  at  his  bench,  just  as  for  receiving 
communion ;  then  we  begin  the  rows  again, 
as  at  Communions. 

On  the  I  ith  came  the  news  of  the  robbery 
of  two  frenchmen's  houses  by  the  yroquois, 
near  3  rivers,  and  of  the  pursuit  of  the  Algon- 
quains  by  these  yroquois:  this  robbery  oc- 
curred on  Ash  Wednesday. 

On  this  same  nth  began  the  thawing  of  a 
winterless  winter, —  there  having  been  no  cold 
weather  till  then ;  so  that  during  most  of  the 
time  one  might  have  said  mass  without  a  fire, 
and  I  think  that  the  wine  in  the  Chalice  froze 
only  once,  at  most. 

On  the  22  nd  came  the  certain  news  of  the 
capture  of  a  hundred  Algonquains,  or  there- 
about, by  the  treacherous  hyroquois, —  who, 
having  wintered  here  the  past  year,  and 
knowing  every  turn  and  byway,  came  to 
surprise  them  while  hunting. 


Ash  Wednesday. 


Robbery  by  the 
yroquois. 


Mild  and  thawing 
winter. 


Algonquains  taken. 


162 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


icy,  &  scachant  tvf  les  tours,   &  detours  les 
vinrent  surprendre  estant  a  la  chasse. 
Si.  Joseph  A  la  S'.  Joseph  on  ne  fit  point  de  feu  de  loye 

la  veuille,  coe  de  coustume;  i'en  fus  vne 
partie  cause,  comme  ne  goustant  guere  cette 
Ceremonie  qui  n'auoit  aucune  deuoon  qui 
I'accompagnast.  &  me  sembloit  qu'vn  salut  en 
I'honneur  du  S^  estoit  meilleur,  coe  en  effect 
il  fut  fait,  la  veuille  a  la  paroisse  &  le  lour  aux 
Vrsul^*,  ou  le  hie  vir  despiciens  fut  chante  en 
musique :  on  tira  cette  mesme  veuille  vn  coup 
de  Canon  a  vne  heure:  &  le  lour  a  1' Angel vf 
du  matin  4.  ou  5.  coups  de  Canon 

Annonciaon  A  I'annonciaon  on  tira  quelques  coups  de 

canon:  c' estoit  le  lundy  on  se  contenta  des 
vespres  du  dimanche  &  le  lour  apres  compile 
on  chanta  les  litanies :  ces  deux  festes  on  dit 
la  messe  a  I'ordinaire:  la  derniere  a  10.  h.  a 
la  fin  le  i'^''.  coup  de  vespre  &  deuant  11.  h. 
le  dernier 

Neufuaines.  On  fit  vne  neufuaine  deuant  I'Ann.  &  vne 

apres  p*".  les  affaires  du  temps,  elle  consis- 
toit  en  vne  oraison  extraordin.  a  la  messe  & 
les  litanies  a  Tissue. 

40.  heures.  Ite  on  fit  les  40.  h.  aux  maisons  religieuses 

le  vendr.  Samedy  &  Dim.  4^.  de  Quaresme  aux 
Vrsul^^.  la  sepmaine  d'apres  a  I'hospital.  les 
saluts  y  furent  faits  tvf  les  3.  lours;  au  i^"". 
vn  miserere  auec  des  oraisons  penitentialles ; 
puis  p''.  le  S'.  Sacrem^  le  dixit,  le  Tantu  ergo 
&   les    oraisons:   au    2°^.    le    Stabat,  le  lauda 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES 


163 


At  the  feast  of  St.  Joseph,  they  made  no 
Bonfire  on  the  day  before,  as  is  customary.  I 
was  partly  the  cause  of  this,  for  I  hardly  rel- 
ished this  Ceremony,  which  had  no  devotion 
attending  it ;  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  a  bene- 
diction in  the  Saint's  honor  was  better.  This, 
in  fact,  was  done  the  day  before,  at  the  parish 
church,  and,  on  the  Day,  at  the  Ursulines*, — 
where  the  hie  vir  despiciens  was  sung  with 
music.  On  that  same  vigil,  a  Cannon-shot 
was  fired  at  one  o'clock ;  and  on  the  Day,  at  the 
morning  Angelus,  4  or  5  Cannon-shots. 

At  the  annunciation,  they  fired  some 
cannon ;  this  was  on  monday.  We  limited 
ourselves  to  the  Sunday  vespers ;  and  on  the 
Day,  after  compline,  we  sang  the  litany.  On 
these  two  feasts  we  said  mass  as  usual, — the 
last  one  at  10  o'clock;  at  the  close,  the  ist 
bell  for  vespers,  and  before  1 1  o'clock  the  last 
one. 

We  held  a  novena  before  the  Annunciation, 
and  one  after  it  for  temporal  affairs ;  it  con- 
sisted of  a  special  prayer  at  mass,  and  of  the 
litany  at  the  end. 

Item,  we  observed  the  40  hours  at  the  re- 
ligious houses, — on  friday,  Saturday,  and  the 
4th  Sunday  in  Lent,  at  the  Ursulines' ;  the 
following  week  at  the  hospital  Benedictions 
were  held  there  every  3  Days:  on  the  ist,  a 
miserere,  with  penitential  prayers;  then,  for 
the  Blessed  Sacrament,  the  dixit,  the  Tantum 
ergo,  and  the  prayers.  On  the  2nd,  were 
sung  the  Stabat,  the  lauda  Hierusaletn,  Tantum 
ergo,   etc. ;  on  the   3rd,  the  pange  lingua,  and 


St.  Joseph. 


Annunciation. 


Novenas. 


40  hours. 


164 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


predicaons  du  P. 
Vimont. 


Vache  noyee 


retour  de  sauuages 


prise  de  2.  Hurons. 


bois. 


hebout  habitant. 


leuie  de  boucliers  des 
sauuages 


Hiertisale  Tantii  ergo  &c.  au  3°.  le  pange  lin- 
gua Magnificat,  a  1' hospital  on  chanta  vexilla 
au  lieu  de  pange  lingua. 

le  p  Vimont  prescha  pendant  le  Caresme, 
le  mercredy  aux  Vrsul^^.  le  vendredy  a 
I'hospital  a  Tissue  de  la  messe  de  matin :  le  p. 
deque  aux  Vrsul^^.  les  Dim.  &  festes;  &  le 
p.  gabriel  lalemant  a  beauport:  p*".  moy  ie 
trauaillois  aux  Constit.  des  Vrsul^^  selon  leur 
desir. 

Enuiron  ce  temps  se  noya  vne  de  nos  vaches 
pleines  dans  la  riuiere  de  S^  Charles;  elle 
enfon9a  dans  la  glace. 

Sur  la  fin  de  mois  retournerent  Noel  lean 
bapt.  &  autres  sauuages  de  Siller y  de  la  chasse, 
la  crainte  des  yroquois  les  fit  haster. 

De  5.  hurons  qui  estoient  all6s  a  la  chasse 
du  mesme  coste  du  sud  trois  reuinrent,  & 
firent  raport  que  deux  de  leur  compagnons 
auoient  este  pris  des  yroquois. 

Ce  moys  tout  le  bois  de  la  Charpente  de  noe 
maison  fut  apport6  sur  la  neige  par  nos  boeufs. 

M.  hebout  nvf  fournit  50.  cordes  de  bois 
pour  20ott. 

AURIL.    1647. 

Enuiron  le  8.  du  moys  arriue  vn  de  Kontran- 
dcvcn  des  3.  riu.  p*".  conuoquer  &  inuiter  tous 
les  Hurons  qui  estoient  icy  d'aller  a  la  guerre : 
ils  demanderent  a  tenir  conseil  chez  m.  le 
gouu.  ils  estoient  8.  Armand  portoit  la  pa- 
role qui  declara  a  m.  le  gouu.  le  dessein:  M. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES 


165 


Sermons  by  Father 
Vimont. 


Magnificat.     At  the  hospital,  they  sang  vexilla, 
instead  oi  pange  lingua. 

Father  Vimont  preached  during  Lent, —  on 
Wednesday  at  the  Ursulines',  on  friday  at  the 
hospital,  at  the  end  of  early  mass.  Father 
dequen  preached  at  the  Ursulines'  on  Sundays 
and  feasts;  and  father  gabriel  lalemant  at 
beauport;  —  as  for  me,  I  was  at  work  upon 
the  Ursulines'  Constitutions,  according  to 
their  desire. 

About  this  time  one  of  our  cows  with  calf 
was  drowned  in  the  St.  Charles  river;  she 
broke  through  the  ice. 

Toward  the  end  of  the  month,  Noel,  Jean 
baptiste,  and  other  savages  of  Sillery  returned 
from  the  chase;  the  fear  of  the  yroquois 
caused  them  to  hasten. 

Of  5  hurons  who  had  gone  to  the  chase  in   Capture  of  2  Hurons 
the  same  direction,  the  south,  three  returned 
and  reported  that  two  of  their  companions  had 
been  taken  by  the  yroquois. 

This  month,  all  the  Timber  for  our  house 
was  brought  over  the  snow  by  our  oxen. 

Monsieur  hebout  furnished  us  50  cords  of 
wood  for  200  livres. 


Cow  drowned. 


Return  of  the 
savages. 


Wood. 


Hebout  a  habitant. 


APRIL,    1647. 

About  the  8th  of  the  month  arrives  a  man 
of  Kontrande,en,^^  from  3  rivers,  to  convene 
all  the  Hurons  who  were  here,  and  invite  them 
to  go  to  war.  They  asked  to  hold  a  council 
at  monsieur  the  governor's;  they  were  8. 
Armand  was  the  spokesman,  who  declared 
to    monsieur    the    governor    their   purpose. 


Raising  of  savage 
shields. 


166 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


laques  Caulmont. 


sepmaine  Stf. 


le  gouu.  leur  dit  qu'ils  fissent  ce  qu'ils  vou- 
droient,  mais  que  sa  pens6e  a  luy  seroit  qu'ils 
attendissent  des  nouuelles  des  traitem*.  que  les 
Ennemys  auoient  fait  aux  Captif s :  &  que  de 
plvf  ce  seroit  bien  vne  meilleure  pensee  de 
prendre  le  chemin  de  leur  pays  &  s'en  aller 
donner  aduis  a  leurs  gens  qu'ils  soient  sur 
leur  garde:  les  Hurons  ne  parurent  guere 
contens  de  cette  response,  &  estant  sortis 
de  chez  M.  le  gouu.  ils  tinrent  conseil  par 
entr'eux  ou  ils  conclurent  la  guerre :  &  en 
effect  s'en  allerent  bientost:  ie  donne  vn 
Tapabor  &c  a  Armand.  ils  n 'allerent  que 
iusques  a  la  poterie. 

En  ce  temps  ie  tins  consulte  p'".  le  voyage 
du  p.  Daran  aux  Hurons,  qui  fut  conclu  en 
cas  qu'il  se"trouuast  de  bons  &  sages  mate- 
lots;  autrem^  qu'il  falloit  attendre  le  retour 
du  p.  logues. 

laques  Caulmont  me  fit  demander  si  ie  le 
voulois  receuoir  p"".  les  Hurons,  quil  y  demeu- 
reroit  volontiers  vn  an  'a  'I'espreuue,  ie  I'ac- 
corde;  &  aussytost  sa  terre  fut  vendue  1800II. 
par  luy  aux  Hospitalieres. 

le  Dimanche  des  rameaux  le  tout  alia  comme 
I'an  passe  excepte  que  i'y  chante  la  Passion 
tout  seul. 

les  hospitalieres  dirent  le  i^''.  &  le  3^  Noct. 
de  tenebres,  &  les  Vrsul^^  toutes  entieres :  il 
y  eut  faute  a  I'vne  &  a  1' autre  de  n'auoir  pas 
oste  leurs  paradis  ou  au  moins  de  ne  I'auoir 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES 


167 


Monsieur  the  governor  told  them  to  do  as 
they  chose,  but  said  that  it  was  his  opinion 
that  they  should  wait  for  news  of  the  En- 
emies' treatment  of  the  Captives;  and  that, 
moreover,  it  would  surely  be  a  better  plan  to 
proceed  to  their  own  country,  and  to  give 
warning  to  their  people  that  they  should  be 
on  their  guard.  The  Hurons  appeared  hardly 
satisfied  with  this  answer;  and,  having  left 
Monsieur  the  governor's,  they  held  a  council 
among  themselves,  at  which  they  decided 
upon  war;  and,  in  fact,  they  soon  went  away. 
I  gave  a  Storm-cap,  etc.,  to  Armand;  they 
went  only  as  far  as  la  poterie. 

At  this  time,  I  held  a  consultation  about 
father  Daran's  journey  to  the  Hurons.  This 
was  agreed  upon,  in  case  there  should  be 
found  good  and  prudent  boatmen ;  otherwise, 
he  must  wait  for  the  return  of  father  Jogues. 

Jaques  Caulmont  sent  to  ask  me  whether 
I  would  receive  him  for  the  Hurons, —  saying 
that  he  would  willingly  remain  there  a  year 
on  probation.  I  granted  this,  and  immedi- 
ately he  sold  his  land  to  the  Hospital  nuns, 
for  1, 800  livres. 

On  palm  Sunday,  everything  occurred  as 
it  did  last  year,  except  that  I  sang  the  Passion 
all  alone. 

The  hospital  nuns  said  the  ist  and  the  3rd 
Nocturn  of  the  tenebrce,  and  the  Ursulines 
the  complete  service.  There  was  a  mistake 
with  both  of  them,  in  not  having  removed 
their  paradise, —  or,  at  least,  in  not  having 
closed  it.     Each  one  went  thither  to  perform 


/agues  Caulmont. 


Holy  week. 


168  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


pas  ferm6,  chaqu'vn  y  alia  faire  ses  deuoons 
&  on  laissoit  le  S^  Sacrem^  surtout  a  rhospi- 
tal  ou  le  cierge  triangulaire  fut  allume  deuant 
le  paradis  de  blanc  &  esclatant,  &  non  pas 
deuant  I'Autel  du  S^  Sacrem*. 

le  leudy  on  commenga  icy  le  seruice  ou  la 
messe  a  lo.  h.  &  _^.  &  cela  alia  bien;  le  Ven- 
dredy  on  sonna  a  7.^  le  i^"^.  &  on  comme9a 
enuiron  8.  h.  cela  alia  bien.  i'y  chante  la 
passion  tout  seul  p*^.  ne  la  pouuoir  chanter  a 
trois. 
dr^festes  de  pasque        le  Samedy  tout  de  mesme  on  commenja  a 

8.  h.  &  cela  alia  bien  parce  qu'il  faut  que  "la 
paroisse  sonne  la  premiere :  M.  de  S^  Sau- 
ueur  dit  I'Exultet  mieux  que  I'an  passe  puis 
s'en  alia  au  lutrin  &  m'assista  tousiours  bien. 
le  soir  on  fit  vn  salut  a  la  paroisse  des  litanies 
de  noe  Dame  &  du  regina  Cceli  le  fis  vne 
faute  a  la  benediction  des  fonds,  ie  mis  les 
huiles  deuant  que  d'auoir  fait  I'asperges. 

M.  de  S*^.  Sauueur  manqua  au  lutrin  de 
dire  le  sanctvf  &  le  reste  sans  suiet,  il  auoit 
fait  le  mesme  faute  I'ann^e  d'auparauant. 

On  fit  salut  a  la  paroisse  le  dimache  au  soir, 
le  lundy  a  1' hospital  le  mardy  aux  Vrsul^^.  les 
religieuses  ne  chanterent  point  a  I'hospital; 
elles  chanterent  aux  Vrsul^^.  le  Tantu  ergo 
a  la  fin  du  Magnificat  &c.  Ie  croy  qu'il  seroit 
meilleur  qu'elles  chantassent  aussy  o  filii  & 
filiae. 
St.  Marc. "  le  lour  de  S*^.  Marc  tomboit  cette  annee  le 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  jASUITES  169 

her  devotions,  and  the  Blessed  Sacrament  was 
forsaken, —  especially  at  the  hospital,  where 
the  tapers  of  the  triangle  were  lighted  before 
the  paradise,  white  and  shining,  and  not 
before  the  Altar  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament. 

On  Thursday,  we  began  the  service  here, 
or  mass,  at  ^  past  lo,  and  that  went  well; 
on  Friday,  we  rang  the  ist  bell  at  )^  past  7, 
and  began  about  8  o'clock;  that  went  well. 
I  sang  the  passion  all  alone,  because  it  could 
not  be  sung  with  three  voices. 

On  Saturday,  likewise,  we  began  at  8  and  easier  festivals. 
o'clock;  and  that  went  well,  because  the 
parish  church  must  ring  first.  Monsieur  de 
St.  Sauveur  said  the  Exultet  better  than  last 
year ;  then  he  went  to  the  lectern  and  assisted 
me  well  throughout.  At  evening,  we  held  a 
benediction  at  the  parish  church, —  the  litany 
of  our  Lady,  and  the  regina  Cceli.  I  made  a 
mistake  at  the  blessing  of  the  fonts ;  I  put  in 
the  oils  before  having  said  the  asperges. 

Monsieur  de  St.  Sauveur  omitted  without 
reason,  at  the  lectern,  to  say  the  sane t us  and 
the  rest ;  he  had  made  the  same  mistake  the 
year  before. 

There  was  benediction  at  the  parish  church 
on  Sunday  evening ;  on  monday,  at  the  hospi- 
tal; on  tuesday,  at  the  Ursulines'.  The  nuns 
did  not  sing  at  the  hospital ;  they  sang  at  the 
Ursulines'  the  Tantum  ergo  at  the  end  of  the 
Magnifieat,  etc.  I  think  it  would  have  been 
better  if  they  had  also  sung  0  filii  et  filice. 

St.  Mark's  Day  fell  this  year  on  the  Thurs-  St.  Mark. 

day  after  easter.     It    was    asserted   that    the 


170 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


conseil  des  Sau- 
uages. 


la  guerre  reccom- 

mece  auec  les  yro- 

quois 


leudy  apres  pasque  II  eftoit  assure  que 
I'office  deuoit  estre  transfere,  &  la  feste  de- 
meurer,  on  douta  de  I'abstinece;  &  apres 
enqueste  faite  on  declara  qu'il  n'y  en  auoit 
point  tombant  dans  les  Dimanches  &  dans 
I'octaue  de  pasque.  on  douta  aussy  de  la 
procession,  &  il  ne  s'en  fit  point  a  cause  qu'il 
fut  reconnu  que  les  chemins  estoient  pleins 
d'eau:  il  seroit  plvf  coforme  aux  rubriques 
d'aller  en  procession  a  quelque  Eglise,  & 
peut  estre  d'y  dire  la  messe  des  rogaons ;  cela 
ne  fut  pas  fait,  mais  on  se  contenta  de  chan- 
ter les  litanies  deuant  la  messe,  &  de  dire  en 
suite  la  messe  haute  des  rogaons  sans  aucune 
Commemoraon  ny  de  la  feste  ny  de  I'octaue. 
on  douta  de  plvf  si  a  cause  qu'il  estoit  feste, 
il  falloit  faire  I'office  du  lour  du  leudy  de 
pasque  double;  &  il  fut  trouue  que  non,  que 
la  messe  toutesfois  se  deuoit  dire  coe  de  du- 
plici,  &  ob  concursu  populi  etia  in  missis  priua- 
tis  y  dire  la  Commem.  de  S^  Marc,  &  mesme 
le  Credo  si  d'ailleurs  il  n'y  eut  du  y  estre  dit, 

Nvf  dismes  ce  iour  la  p''.  salut  les  vespres 
du  S^  Sacrem^  expose. 

En  ce  mesme  temps  les  sauuages  deman- 
derent  a  tenir  Conseil  p*".  scauoir  les  pens6es 
de  M.  le  gouu.  sur  leur  affliction:  la  r°"^^  e 
aux  archiues  titulo  yroquois. 

Mais  le  27.  du  moys  arriua  lean  Amyot  qui 
auoit  este  enuoy^  des  3.  riu.  pour  porter  les 
nouuelles  a  montreal   de   ce   qui   s' estoit  icy 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  J  ^SUITES 


171 


office  was  to  be  transferred,  and  the  festival 
continued ;    we  doubted  about  the  abstinence ; 
and,  after  making  investigation,  we  declared 
that   there    was    none, —  the   day   falling   on 
Sundays  and  in  the    octave   of  easter.      We 
also  doubted  about  the  procession ;  and  none 
was   made,    because    it    was    found    that   the 
roads  were  full  of  water.     It  would  be  more 
conformable  to  the  rubrics  to  go  in  a  proces- 
sion to  some  Church,  and  perhaps  to  say  the 
rogation  mass  there;  that  was  not  done,  but 
we  contented  ourselves  with  singing  the  litany 
before  mass,    and   then   saying  the   rogation 
high    mass,     without     any    Commemoration 
either  of  the  feast  or  of  the  octave.     We  also 
doubted  whether,  because  it  was  a  festival,  it 
was  necessary  to  hold  the  office  for  the  Day 
of  Thursday  after  easter,   twice ;    and  it  was 
found  not  so, —  but,  however,  that  mass  should 
be   said   as    one   de  duplici,  and  ob  concursum 
popnli  etiam  in  missis  privatis,  the  Commemora- 
tion of  St.  Mark  should  be  said  thereat,  and 
even  the  Credo;  if,  indeed,  it  ought  not,  [in 
any  case,]  to  have  been  said  there. 

We  said  on  that  day,  by  way  of  benediction, 
vespers  with  the  Blessed  Sacrament  exposed. 

At  this  same  time,  the  savages  asked  to 
hold  a  Council  for  learning  the  sentiments 
of  Monsieur  the  governor  with  reference  to 
their  affliction ;  the  answer  is  in  the  archives, 
tittilo  yroquois. 

But,  on  the  27th  of  the  month,  arrived 
Jean  Amyot,^*^  who  had  been  sent  from  3 
rivers,  in  order  to  bear  tidings   to  montreal 


Council  of  the 
Savages. 


The  war  with  the 

yroquois  begins 

again. 


172  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


Chasse. 


Commencetn^.  du  bas- 
titnetit  des  offices. 


1647- 


benediction  de^ 
I'  Eg  Use  de  Sillery 


pesche 


"^Mort  dvnfrancois 
dans  les  eaux 


passe  I'hyuer  &  nvf  raporter  des  nouuelles  de 
ce  quartier-la  &  nvf  apprismes  que  des  le 
moys  de .  nou.  de  I'annee  passee  les  yroquois 
y  auoient  pris  deux  frangois  &  4.  hurons, 
la  1"  du  p.  le  leune  s'en  trouuera  dans  les 
Archiues,  titulo  Montreal 

Cette  nouuelle  fit  resoudre  M.  le  gouu.  de 
donner  5.  ou  6.  frangois  aux  sauuages  p*^. 
aller  auec  eux  a  la  petite  guerre,  ils  partirent 
de  Sillery  de  4.  de  May.  Chastillon  estoit 
leur  Chef. 

laques  lunier  va  a  la  chasse  auec  vn  de  nos 
hommes  il  y  demeure  10.  lours  raporte  31. 
grosses  pieces,  trois  perdrix,  trois  canars, 
dent  on  fit  le  festin  a  Sillery  p*".  la  benedic- 
tion. 

Sur  la  fin  de  ce  moys  on  commen9a  a  creu- 
ser  les  fondemens  de  noe  maison  ou  basti- 
ment. 

Le  27.  ie  partis  p"".  aller  aux  Exercices. 

MAY.     1647.    &    lUIN. 

le  8.  de  May  se  fit  la  benediction  de 
I'Eglise  de  Sillery. 

le  10.  se  prirent  les  i^""^.  poissons  par  M.  de 
S^  Sauueur  &  entr'autres  vn  saulmon.  noe 
f  pierre  ensuite  enuiron  le  1 5 . 

Enuiron  ce  temps  se  noya  vn  pauure  gar- 
jon;  nomme  raison,  on  destina  10.  escus  de 
ses  hardes  p''.  faire  dire  des  messes  p*".  luy 
par  M*".  de  S*.  Sauueur. 

le    14.   arriua  le  p.  duperon  des  3.  riu.  p*^. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  J&SUITES 


173 


concerning  what  had  occurred  here  through 
the  winter,  and  to  bring  back  to  us  news  from 
that  quarter;  and  we  learned  that,  since  the 
month  of  november  in  the  past  year,  the 
yroquois  had  taken  two  frenchmen  there,  and 
4  hurons.  The  letter  from  father  le  Jeune 
will  be  found  in  the  Archives,  titulo  Montreal. 

This  news  made  Monsieur  the  governor  re- 
solve to  give  5  or  6  frenchmen  to  the  savages, 
in  order  to  go  with  them  on  a  ho.stile  expedi- 
tion. They  started  from  Sillery  on  the  4th 
of  May ;  Chastillon  was  their  Chief. 

Jaques  Junier  goes  hunting  with  one  of  our 
men;  he  remains  10  Days,  and  brings  back 
31  head  of  large  game,  with  three  partridges 
and  three  ducks.  With  these  they  made  the 
feast  at  Sillery  for  the  consecration. 

Toward  the  end  of  this  month,  we  began  to 
dig  the  foundations  of  our  house,  or  building. 

On  the  27th,  I  left  to  make  a  Retreat. 

MAY,     1647,    AND    JUNE. 

On  the  8th  of  May,  the  consecration  of  the 
Church  at  Sillery  took  place. 

On  the  loth,  the  ist  fish  were  taken,  by 
Monsieur  de  St.  Sauveur,  and  among  others 
a  salmon ;  our  brother  pierre  took  some  after- 
ward,—  about  the  15th. 

About  this  time  a  poor  lad  was  drowned, 
named  raison.  We  set  aside  10  ecus  of  his 
effects,  for  having  masses  said  in  his  behalf 
by  Monsieur  de  St.  Sauveur. 

On  the  14th  arrived  father  duperon  from  3 
rivers,  in  order  to  supply  the  place  of  father 


Hunting. 


Beginning  of  the 
official  building. 

1647. 


Consecration  of  the 
Church  at  Sillery. 


Fishing. 


Death  of  a  french- 
man in  the  waters. 


174  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

arriuee  du  p.  du-     suppleer  a  la  place  du  p.  deque  a  Sillery,  au 
peron  regard  des  sauuages.     le  p  deque  va  a  Tadou- 

sak  auec  M.  Marsolet  le  26. 

le  mesme  lour  partit  le  p.  Viinont  p''.  vn 
voyage  a  beauport  &  beaupre  p''.  les  pasques. 
le  22,   partit  M"".  le  gouu.  &  moy  auec  luy 
p*".  les  3.  riu.     3  chaloupes 

depart  pr.  les  3.  riu.       le  24.  nvf  fusmes   rencontres   par   vn   Cha- 

pr.aller  a  laguerre.  loupe    des   3.   riu.    conduite    par  Crapaudiere 

qui  nvf  aduertit  de  la  prise  d'vn  Huron  par 
les  yroquois  a  la  riuiere  fauerel  le  lundy 
d'auparauant  la  minuict  du  2  5  au  26.  arriua  le 
p.  Dara  qui  nvf  donna  aduis  de  la  rencontre 
des  yroquois  par  nos  gens  qui  tenoient  assiges 
les  yroquois:  le  reste  de  I'histoire  se  trouuera 
dans  les  Archiues  titulo  yroquois. 

NouuellesdelaMort  le  4.  de  luin  nvf  repartismes  des  3.  riu.  le  5. 
du  pere  logues.  j^yf  arriuasmes  a  Quebek  le  mesme  lour  sur  les 
II.  heures  arriua  vne  Chaloupe  des  3.  riu. 
qui  donna  aduis  du  retour  du  fils  d'Ignace 
otoiiolti  des  yroquois  aux  3.  riu.  qui  assuroit 
entr'autres  la  mort  ou  plustost  le  massacre 
du  p.  logues  &  de  son  compagnon  Lalande  p*". 
lequels  le  lendemain  on  dit  vne  messe  haute 
des  morts. 

porcelaine  rendiie  a       En  ce  voyage  estant  chez  M,  de  Chauigny, 
la  picarde  ^^^  nommee  la  Picarde  me  demanda  700.  gr. 

de  porcelaine  qu'elle  auoit  iadis  donn6  au  p. 
debrebeuf,  i'en  auois  2200  ou  300.  que  ie 
portois  aux  3.  riu.  au  p.  buteux,  ie  luy  en 
raporte  les  700. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES 


175 


dequen  at  Sillery,  with  respect  to  the  savages. 
Father  dequen  goes  to  Tadousak  with  Mon- 
sieur Marsolet,  on  the  26th. 

On  the  same  Day,  father  Vimont  started  on 
a  journey  to  beauport  and  beaupre,  for  the 
easter  festivals. 

On  the  22nd,  Monsieur  the  governor  de- 
parted, and  I  with  him,  for  3  rivers;  3  shallops. 

On  the  24th,  we  were  met  by  a  Shallop  from 
3  rivers,  commanded  by  Crapaudiere,  who  noti- 
fied us  of  the  capture  of  a  Huron  by  the  yro- 
quois  at  the  river  faverel,  the  monday  before. 
At  midnight  of  the  25th  and  26th,  father  Daran 
arrived,  who  informed  us  that  the  yroquois 
had  been  encountered  by  our  people,  who  held 
the  yroquois  besieged ;  the  rest  of  the  account 
will  be  found  in  the  Archives,  titulo  yroquois. 

On  the  4th  of  June,  we  set  out  to  return 
from  3  rivers;  on  the  5th,  we  arrived  at  Que- 
bek.  The  same  Day,  about  1 1  o'clock,  a 
Shallop  arrived  from  3  rivers,  which  informed 
us  that  the  son  of  Ignace  otouolti  had  returned 
from  the  yroquois  to  3  rivers, —  who  an- 
nounced, among  other  matters,  the  death,  or 
rather  the  murder,  of  father  Jogues  and  his 
companion  Lalande,  for  whom  the  next  day 
we  said  a  high  mass  for  the  dead. 

On  this  journey,  while  with  Monsieur  de 
Chavigny,  a  certain  woman,  named  "  la 
Picarde,"  asked  me  for  700  porcelain  beads, 
which  she  had  formerly  given  to  father 
debrebeuf;  I  had  2200  or  300,  which  I  was 
carrying  to  3  rivers,  to  father  buteux, —  I 
returned  to  her  the  700. 


Arrival  of  father 
dupe  ran. 


Departure  for  j 
rivers,  to  go  to  war. 


News  of  the  Death  of 
father  Jogues. 


Porcelain  returned 
to  ''la  picarde." 


176  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  30 


Prieres  publiques. 
Litanies  de  la  S.   V. 


voyage  du  p.  p. 
piiart 


Pentecoste 


Prieres  en  ce  temps  ordonnes  p''.  les  neces- 
sit^s  publiques.  Litanies  de  la  Vierge  iusques 
a  la  Toussaincts  apres  la  messe,  auec  les 
oraisons  Concede  nos  Angeloru  de  S^  loseph 
de  pace :  les  f estes  &  Dimaches  les  chanter. 

Da  pace  aux  Saluts:  vne  oraison  extraor- 
din.  a  la  messe  ad  libitu  sed  ad  re :  Vne  messe 
par  moys  a  Quebek  &  a  Sillery  &  vn  Aue 
maris  Stella  apres  nos  litanies  du  soir  p*".  les 
Interests  particulier  de  noe  Comp'^. 

le  p.  piiart  partit  des  3.  riu.  le  29.  de  May 
veuille  de  I'ascension  p"".  aller  a  la  barque, 
qui  en  estoit  distante  d'vne  Lieiie,  dans  la- 
quelle  estoit  M*".  bourdon  &  30.  personnes  qui 
alloient  a  richelieu,  &  de  la  a  montreal ;  &  le 
p.  piiart  alia  p*'.  les  assister,  &  visiter  le  p.  le 
leune  a  montreal : 

La  Chaloupe  qui  aporta  les  nouuelles  de 
I'arriu^e  du  fils  d'Ignace  otoiiolti  repartit  le 
7.  de  luin  fortifies  de  soldats,  pour  donner 
auec  assurance  iusques  a  la  barque,  &  iusques 
a  montreal  porter  les  nouuelles  que  raportoit 
ce  fills  d'Ignace,  scauoir  que  surtout  on  en 
vouloit  a  montreal  &  que  200.  hommes  y 
estoient  all^s. 

la  veuille  de  la  pentecoste  se  fit  vn  salut  a 
la  paroisse  scauoir  le  Veni  creator,  le  veni 
S*^.  Sps.  &  le  regina  coeli. 

le  Dimanche  p^.  salut  les  litanies  a  vespres. 

le  lundi  aux  Hospital ;  le  mardy  aux  Vrsul*^. 
sur  les  5.  h.  p*".  salut  les  litanies  de  la  vierge 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  JESUITES  \Tt 


Prayers  were  ordered  at  this  time  for  pub- 
lic necessities :  the  Litany  of  the  Virgin  until 
All  Saints',  after  mass,  with  the  prayers 
Concede  nos  Angelormn^  of  St.  Joseph,  de  pace, — 
these  to  be  sung  on  feasts  and  Sundays. 

Da  pacem  at  the  Benedictions:  a  special 
prayer  at  mass,  ad  libitum,  sed  ad  rem;  One 
mass  a  month  at  Quebek  and  at  Sillery ;  and 
an  Ave  maris  stella,  after  our  evening  litany, 
for  the  special  Interests  of  our  Society. 

Father  pi j art  left  3  rivers  on  the  29th  of 
May,  the  vigil  of  the  ascension,  in  order  to 
go  to  the  bark, —  which  was  a  League  away, — 
in  which  were  Monsieur  bourdon  and  30  per- 
sons who  were  going  to  richelieu,  and  thence 
to  montreal ;  and  father  pijart  went  to  assist 
them,  and  to  visit  father  le  Jeune  at  montreal. 

The  Shallop  which  brought  the  news  of  the 
arrival  of  the  son  of  Ignace  otouolti,  set  out 
again  on  the  7th  of  June.  It  was  defended 
by  soldiers,  that  it  might  proceed  with  safety 
as  far  as  the  bark,  and  even  to  montreal,  in 
order  to  convey  the  news  which  that  son  of 
Ignace  was  reporting, —  to  wit,  that  there  was 
especial  ill  feeling  against  montreal,  and  that 
200  men  were  going  thither. 

On  the  eve  of  pentecost,  a  benediction  was 
held  at  the  parish  church, —  namely,  the  Vent 
creator,  the  veni  Sancte  Spiritus,  and  the 
regina  cceli. 

On  Sunday,  for  benediction  the  litany  at 
vespers. 

On  monday,  at  the  Hospital;  on  tuesday 
at  the  Ursulines',  abotit  5   o'clock,  for  bene- 


Public  prayers. 

Litany  of  the 

Blessed  Virgin. 


Father  p.  pijart' s 
journey. 


Pentecost. 


178 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


sauuages  a  Sillery 
se  fortifirent. 


Sauuages  de  Tadou- 
sak 


i^.  pierre  du  basti- 
ment. 


retour  du  pere 
Druilletes. 


&  le  veni  S*^.  Spiritus ;  il  y  eut  vne  faute  aux 
Vrsul^^.  scauoir  que  leur  ayant  laisse  dire  le 
i^*".  verset  de  veni  S*^^.  Spiritvf  elles  le  prirent 
trop  bas.  le  S^  Sacrem^  n'estoit  pas  expose 
aux  Vrsul^^.  les  deux  i^".  lours,  &  ne  le  de- 
uoit  estre  en  pas  vne  des  deux  maisons; 
mais  il  le  fut  les  deux  i^""®.  lours  a  I'hospital; 
vne  autrefois  il  sera  mieux  de  I'exposer 
le  lour  que  la  station  ou  salut  se  faira  chez 
elles. 

les  sauuages  de  Sillery  demanderent  de  se 
retirer  dans  les  pieux  de  I'enclos  de  la  maison 
de  Sillery ;  cela  leur  fut  accorde ;  ils  trauail- 
lerent  a  faire  vne  nouuelle  palissade :  M*".  le 
gouu.  aussy  y  alia  p*".  designer  la  place  d'vn 
fort  dans  les  champs. 

le  12.  de  luin  arriuerent  les  sauuages  de 
Tadousak  au  nombre  de  7.  Chaloupes:  qui 
apporterent  Y^^  du  p.  deque  de  I'estat  des 
affaires  de  la  mission  de  Tadousak  qui  se  trou- 
uera  dans  les  Archiues. 

Ce  mesme  lour  fut  mise  la  i^""^  pierre  au 
fondem*-.  du  corps  de  logis  des  offices  de  la 
maison  de  Quebek 

Le  16.  arriua  le  P.  Druilletes  a  Sillery  de 
son  voyage  apres  plvf  de  9.  moys  d'hyuer- 
nem^  auec  les  sauuages  Abnaquiois;  ce  qui 
en  peut  estre  sceu  se  trouuera  dans  les 
Archiues. 

le  20.  arriuerent  les  autres  Canots  Abna- 
quiois au  nombre  de  5.  ou  6. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES 


179 


diction :  the  litany  of  the  virgin  and  the  veni 
Sancte  Spiritus.  There  was  an  error  at  the 
Ursulines', —  in  this,  that,  being  allowed  to 
say  the  ist  verse  of  veni  Sa?icte  Spiritus,  they 
started  it  too  low.  The  Blessed  Sacrament 
was  not  exposed  at  the  Ursulines'  on  the  ist 
two  Days,  and  should  not  have  been,  at  either 
one  of  the  two  houses;  but  it  was,  on  the  ist 
two  Days  at  the  hospital.  Another  time,  it 
will  be  better  to  expose  it  on  the  Day  when 
the  station  or  benediction  shall  be  observed 
with  them. 

The  savages  of  Sillery  asked  permission  to 
retire  inside  the  palisaded  enclosure  of  the 
house  at  Sillery;  that  was  allowed  them,  and 
they  labored  to  make  a  new  stockade.  Mon- 
sieur the  governor  also  went  thither,  to  desig- 
nate the  site  for  a  fort  in  the  fields. 

On  the  1 2th  of  June,  the  savages  from  Ta- 
dousak  arrived,  to  the  number  of  7  Shallops ; 
they  brought  letters  from  father  dequen  con- 
cerning the  state  of  affairs  in  the  mission  of 
Tadousak,  which  will  be  found  in  the  Archives. 

This  same  Day,  the  ist  stone  was  laid  in 
the  foundation  of  the  main  official  building 
of  the  house  at  Ouebek. 

On  the  1 6th,  Father  Druilletes  arrived  at 
Sillery  from  his  journey,  after  more  than  9 
months'  wintering  with  the  Abnaquiois  sav- 
ages ;  what  can  be  known  of  it  will  be  found 
in  the  Archives. 

On  the  20th,  the  other  Abnaquiois  Canoes 
arrived,  to  the  number  of  5  or  6, 

And  the  next  day,  the  21st,  the  savages  of 


Savages  at  Sitlery 
fortify  themselves. 


Savages  from  Ta- 
dousak. 


ist  stone  of  the  build- 
ing. 


Return  of  father 
Druilletes. 


180 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


son  depart  auec  les 
sauuages 


7".  nouu.  de  f ranee. 


feste  Dieu. 


M.  d'Aunay  de 
rasilly. 


Hospital 


Arriude  d'vn  vais- 

seau  &*  du  p.  bail- 

loquet. 


Et  le  lendemain  2 1 .  partirent  les  sauuages 
de  Tad^sak  &  de  Sillery  p''.  aller  a  la  guerre, 
le  p.  Drui'lletes  auec  eux  iusques  aux  3.  riu. 
&  oultre. 

Ce  mesme  lour  21.  M.  de  lessar  retournant 
de  Tadb'sak  apporta  les  1^^.  nouuelles  de  f ranee 
apprises  du  Capitaine  le  feure  arriue  a  I'lsle 
percee.  ce  fut  vne  Chaloupe  de  sauuages  qui 
en  apporta  les  nouuelles ;  que  cinq  vaisseaux  se 
preparoient  p''.  venir :  que  la  paix  estoit  f aite 
en  france  &c. 

La  procession  du  S^  Sacrem\  fut  a  peu  pres 
coe  I'an  passe  deux  de  nos  PP.  y  porterent 
des  chasubles,  &  cela  orna  fort  la  procession : 
il  sera  bon  cy  apres  que  tvf  les  prestres  qui 
menoient  deuant  en  portent :  il  y  auoit  deux 
Anges  franfois  qui  menoient  au  milieu  d'eux 
vn  petit  sauuage;  cela  va  bien  &  c'est  asses, 
loliet  y  porta  vne  torche  a  la  place  des  mate- 
lots  qui  I'a  renuoyerent,  M.  Couillar,  m.  de 
maure  m.  de  la  fresnay,  Est^et  le  Daiz. 

Commencem^  de  commerce  de  lettres  auec 
M.  d'Aunay  rasilly,  le  p.  deque  luy  escriuit 
I'an  passe  p*".  r'auoir  vn  petite  sauuage  captif, 
il  luy  respondit  cette  annee  fort  honnestem^ 
&  son  Commis  au  Commis  de  Tadoussak. 

Incidit  in  dementiam  la  M.  de  S*^.  geneuieue 
a  riiospital. 

le  20.  de  luin  arriua  le  i^*^.  vaisseau  a  Ta- 
dousak  &  la  nouuelle  en  fut  apportee  icy 
le  23.   veuille  de  S^   lean,     ce  vaisseau  nvf 


J 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  Jj&SUITES 


181 


Tadousak  and  of  Sillery  started  to  go  to  war ; 
father  Druilletes  went  with  them  as  far  as  3 
rivers  and  beyond. 

This  same  Day,  the  21st,  Monsieur  de 
lessar,^^  returning  from  Tadousak,  brought 
the  ist  news  from  france, —  learned  from 
Captain  le  fevre,  who  had  arrived  at  Isle 
percee.  It  was  a  Shallop  of  savages  that 
brought  the  news, —  that  five  vessels  were 
making  ready  to  come;  that  peace  was  con- 
cluded in  france,  etc. 

The  procession  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament 
was  very  nearly  like  last  year:  two  of  our 
Fathers  wore  chasubles,  and  that  greatly 
adorned  the  procession.  It  will  be  well  here- 
after for  all  the  priests  who  march  at  the  head 
to  wear  them.  There  were  two  french 
Angels,  who  led  between  them  a  little  savage ; 
that  is  very  meet,  and  it  is  enough.  Joliet  ^^ 
carried  a  torch  therein,  in  place  of  the  sailors, 
who  refused  to  do  so.  Monsieur  Couillar, 
monsieur  de  maure,  monsieur  de  la  fresnay, 
and  Estwet  carried  the  Canopy. 

Beginning  of  a  correspondence  with  Mon- 
sieur d' Aunay  rasilly.^^  Father  dequen  wrote 
to  him  last  year,  in  order  to  recover  a  little 
captive  savage ;  he  answered  him  very  civilly, 
this  year;  and  his  Agent  wrote  to  the  Agent 
at  Tadoussak. 

Incidit  in  dementiam  Mother  de  Ste.  gene- 
vie  ve  at  the  hospital. 

On  the  20th  of  June,  the  ist  vessel  arrived 
at  Tadousak,  and  the  news  of  it  was  brought 
here    on    the  23rd,    St.    John's    eve.       This 


His  departure  with 
the  savages. 


ist  news  from 
france. 


Corpus  Christi. 


Monsieur  d' Aunay 
de  rasilly. 


Hospital. 

Arrival  of  a  vessel 

and  of  father  bail- 

loquet. 


182 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


feu  de  la  St.  lean 


ler.  Cheual  aporti. 


Procureur  Syndik 


depart  du  pere  bail- 
loquet  p^.  montreal. 


retour  des  sauuages 
de  la  guei-re 


drj  de  la  barque 


Confiscaon  de  Cas- 
tors chez  Mr  prieur 


grande  messe. 


apporta  le  p.  pierre  bailloquet  de  la  prouince 
de  bordeaux ;  &  noe  f .  nicolas  faulconnier  Mas- 
son;  le  25. 

On  fit  le  feu  de  la  S^  lean  coe  I'an  pass^, 
ie  n'y  assist^  pas.  Mons''.  de  S^  Sauueur  fit 
roffice. 

Ce  mesme  vaisseau  apporta  le  i^^.  Cheual, 
dont  les  habitans  faisoient  present  a  M*".  le 
gouuerneur. 

le  29.  les  habitans  furent  trouuer  M.  le 
gouu.  p"".  luy  demander  permission  d'eslire 
vn  procureur  Syndic,  ils  furent  renuoy6s'  a 
I'assembl^e  generalle :  cependant  il  y  eut  re- 
queste  presentee. 

le  dernier  de  luin  partit  le  p.  bailloquet  p"". 
Montreal  dans  vne  Chaloupe  conduite  par  M. 
de  la  Tour. 

Ce  mesme  lour  la  nuit  retournerent  les 
Sauuages  de  la  guerre  ou  visite  du  lac  &  auec 
eux  le  p.  Druilletes,  ils  ne  virent  rien, 

Vn  peu  auparauant  estoit  retournee  la  bar- 
que de  m.  bourdon  de  son  voyage  de  richelieu 
&  Montreal,  elle  remporta  de  richelieu  les 
Canons  encloiies. 

on  va  visiter  la  chambre  de  M.  le  prieur 
prestre  des  Vrsul^^.  &  on  luy  prend  plvf  de 
260.  liures  pesant  de  Castor;  apres  s'estre 
vante  qu'il  en  auoit  &  qu'il  ne  les  donneroit 
au  magazin  qu'a  bon  compte. 

Enuiron  ce  temps  on  commenga  a  chanter 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  j£SUITES 


183 


vessel  brought  us,  on  the  25th,  father  pierre 
bailloquet,^"  of  the  province  of  bordeaux,  and 
our  brother  nicolas  faulconnier,  a  Mason. 

They  made  St.  John's  fire,  the  same  as  last 
year.  I  was  not  present;  Monsieur  de  St. 
Sauveur  officiated. 

That  same  vessel  brought  the  ist  Horse,  of 
which  the  habitans  made  a  present  to  Mon- 
sieur the  governor. 

On  the  29th,  the  habitans  went  to  find 
Monsieur  the  governor,  in  order  to  ask  his 
permission  to  elect  a  procuror  Syndic.  They 
were  referred  to  the  general  assembly ;  mean- 
while, there  has  been  a  petition  presented. 

On  the  last  of  June,  father  bailloquet  started 
for  Montreal  in  a  Shallop  commanded  by 
Monsieur  de  la  Tour. 

This  same  Day,  at  night,  the  Savages 
returned  from  the  war,  or  a  visit  to  the  lake, 
and  with  them  father  Druilletes;  they  saw 
nothing. 

A  little  while  before,  monsieur  bourdon's 
bark  had  returned  from  its  voyage  to  richelieu 
and  Montreal ;  it  brought  back  from  richelieu 
the  Cannons,  spiked. ^^ 

The  room  of  Monsieur  the  prior,  the  Ursu- 
lines'  priest,  is  inspected,  and  more  than  260 
pounds'  weight  of  Beaver  skins  are  taken  from 
him,  after  he  had  boasted  that  he  had  some, 
and  that  he  would  give  them  to  the  ware- 
house only  for  a  good  sum. 

About  this  time,  we  began  to  sing  high  mass 
every  Sunday  and  feast-day  at  Quebek,  feel- 
ing ourselves  strong  enough  to  do  so,  and  the 


St.  John'' s  fire. 


ist  Horse  imported. 


Procuror  Syndic. 


Father  hailloquef  s 

departure  Jor 

montreal. 

Return  of  the  sav- 
ages from  war. 


and  of  the  bark. 


Confiscation  of 

Beavers  at  Monsieur 

the  prior' s. 


High  mass. 


184 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  30 


Conseil  des  Abna- 
qiiiois 


Capucins. 


depart  du  pere 
duperon. 

retour  du  p.  le 
leune 

Consulte  pr.  les  mis- 
sions 


la  messe  haute  tvf  les  Dimanches  &  festes  a 
Quebek,  nvf  sentans  asses  forts  p"".  le  faire  & 
la  fafon  ordinaire  qu'on  la  chantoit,  auec  vn 
veni  creator,  gloria,  Credo,  &  O  Salutaris  hostia , 
n'estant  pas  reguliere,  &  estant  capable  de 
choquer  ceux  qui  viennent  de  nouueau  [de] 
f ranee,  qui  s'attendent  de  trouuer  au  moins  en 
quelque  lieu  de  la  nouu.  france  vne  messe  d  e 
paroisse. 

1647.    lUILLET 

le  3.  ou  4.  les  Abnaquiois  demandent  a  me 
parler  p"".  me  remercier  du  voyage  du  p.  Druil- 
letes,  &  me  prier  de  le  laisser  retourner ;  mais 
les  derniers  venus  des  Abnaquiois,  ayant  ap- 
porte  lettres  des  P.  Capucins,  qui  nvf  prioient 
de  n'y  plvf  retourner;  ie  leur  refuse,  &  fis  la 
response  qui  se  trouuera  dans  vne  lettre  que 
i'escriuis  sur  ce  suiet  aux  Capucins. 

le  12.  partit  le  p.  duperon  p*".  Tadousak  p*". 
y  aller  assister  le  p.  dequen, 

le  16.  arriua  le  p.  le  leune  de  Montreal  &  le 
17.  se  fit  Consulte  sur  le  retour  du  p.  Driiil- 
letes  aux  Abnaquiois ;  sur  la  mission  d'hyuer 
a  Tadousak ;  sur  le  voyage  aux  Hurons ;  sur 
I'employ  du  p.  defretat,  &  du  p.  gabriel:  la 
resoMon  fut  que  si  les  Abnaquiois  reuenoient 
querir  le  pere  a  I'Automne  il  iroit:  P*".  Tadou- 
sak, il  n'en  falloit  point  parler  cette  annee, 
suppose  I'employ  du  p"".  Druilletes  aux  Abna- 
quiois: qu'on  iroit  aux  Hurons  data  occasione 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  J  ^SUITES  185 

usual  manner  in  which  we  sang  it, —  with  a 
veni  creator,  gloria.  Credo,  and  O  Saliitaris 
hostia, —  being  irregular,  and  likely  to  dis- 
please those  who  newly  come  from  france, 
who  expect  to  find,  at  least  in  some  place  of 
new  france,  a  parish  mass. 

1647,  JULY. 

On  the  3rd  or  4th,  the   Abnaquiois  ask  to   Council  of  the  Abna- 
speak  to  me,  in  order  to  thank  me  for  father  quiois. 

Drnilletes's  journey,  and  to  beg  me  to  allow 
him  to  return.  But  —  the  last  people  who 
came  from  the  Abnaquiois  having  brought 
letters    from    the     Capuchin      Fathers,     who  Capuchins. 

begged  us  not  to  return  again  —  I  refused 
them,  and  gave  the  answer  which  will  be 
found  in  a  letter  that  I  wrote  on  this  subject 
to  the  Capuchins. ^^ 

On    the    1 2th,    father    duperon    started    for  Departure  of  father 
Tadousak,  to  go  and  assist  father  dequen.  duperon. 

On  the  1 6th,  father  le   Jeune   arrived   from      Return  of  father 
Montreal;    and,  on  the    17th,  a   Consultation  le  Jeune. 

was  held  concerning  father  Driiilletes's  return 
to  the  Abnaquiois,  the  winter  mission  at  Consultation  respect- 
Tadousak,  the  journey  to  the  Hurons,  and  the  ^«<?"  ^^^  missions. 
employment  of  father  defretat  and  father 
gabriel.  The  decision  was  that,  if  the  Abna- 
quiois returned  to  ask  for  the  father  in  Au- 
tumn, he  should  go.  As  for  Tadousak,  it  was 
not  to  be  mentioned  this  year,  in  case  of 
father  Druilletes's  employment  among  the 
Abnaquiois.  It  was  decided  that  some  one 
should  go  to  the  Hurons,  data  occasione  com- 
nioda   et   rationabili;  and    that    father    gabriel 


186  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

commoda   &  raoabili:  que  le    p.    gabriel    se 
mettroit  au  montagnez;  &  le  p.   defretat  en 
france. 
pr,  la  traite.  le   1 9.   autre  Consulte  touchant  la  traite  de 

Castors  faite  a  Sillery ;  scauoir  s'il  I'a  falloit 
tolerer;  le  p.  le  leune,  le  p.  Vimont  &  moy  y 
estions  &  fut  dit 

1°.  que  si  le  magazin  estoit  raisonable  on 
estoit  oblige  en  conscience  de  ne  les  point 
diuertir  ailleurs. 

2°.  S'il  n'estoit  raisonable,  qu'on  pouuoit 
dissimuler  en  conscience,  les  habitans  ayant 
droit  de  nature,  &  du  roy  de  traiter. 

3°.     que  le  magazin  fut  raisonable  ou  non 
qu'il  ne  falloit  point  que  nvf  traitassions. 
arriuee  des  Algonq.       le   2  1.    arriuerent  les   Algonq.  de  la  petite 
Victorteux.  nation  auec  6.  Cheuelures  d'yroquois.     I'his- 

toire  s'en  voira  dans  les  Archiues. 
Procureur  Syndik  &!^       Ce  mesme  lour  se  fit  Eslection  d'vn  procu- 
requestes.  ^.^^j.  gyndic,  qui   fut  M.   bourdon,  qui  le  28. 

presenta  la  requeste  des  habitans  qui  metoient 
toutes  leurs  affaires  entre  les  mains  de  m.  le 
gouu.    attedant  quelque   establissem^   &  cas- 
soient  tvf  les  Esleus  &  Directeurs. 
mdrt  fiineste  Ce  mesme  28.  bastien  vn  de  nos  hommes,  & 

d'yurognes.  met  le     ^^  neigerie  s'estant   enyures   dans  noe  vieux 
feu  chez  nous. 

magazin,    ou     ils     couclioient,     quelques-vns 

estant  venus  petuner,  ietterent  le  feu  sur  de 

la  paille  qui  embrasa  le  logem^     le  feu  parut 

sur  la  minuit ;  la  neigerie  se  sauua ;  &  bastien 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  JESUITES 


187 


should  betake  himself  to  the  montagnais,  and 
father  defretat  to  f ranee. 

On  the  19th,  another  Consultation  was 
held,  regarding  the  Beaver  trade  carried  on  at 
Sillery, —  to  wit,  whether  it  should  be  toler- 
ated. Father  le  Jeune,  father  Vimont,  and  I 
were  present ;  and  it  was  said : 

1.  That,  if  the  warehouse  were  reason- 
able, we  were  obliged  in  conscience  not  to 
divert  the  trade  elsewhere. 

2.  If  it  were  not  reasonable,  we  might 
with  conscience  dissimulate, —  the  habitans 
having  the  right,  by  nature  and  from  the 
king,  to  trade. 

3.  That,  whether  the  warehouse  were  rea- 
sonable or  not,  we  were  not  compelled  to  trade. 

On  the  2 1  St,  the  Algonquains  of  the  petite 
nation  arrived,  with  6  yroquois  Scalps;  the 
narrative  will  appear  in  the  Archives. 

This  same  Day,  there  was  an  Election  of  a 
procuror  Syndic,  who  was  Monsieur  bourdon ; 
he,  on  the  28th,  presented  the  petition  of  the 
habitans.  They  placed  all  their  affairs  in  the 
hands  of  monsieur  the  governor,  pending 
some  settlement,  and  set  aside  all  the  Elected 
members  and  Directors. 

This  same  28th, —  bastien,  one  of  our  men, 
and  la  neigerie  having  become  drunk  in  our 
old  warehouse,  where  they  slept, —  certain 
men,  having  come  to  smoke,  dropped  fire 
upon  the  straw,  which  kindled  the  building. 
The  fire  appeared  about  midnight ;  la  neigerie 
escaped,  and  bastien  was  suffocated  and  half 
burned.     They  took  out  what  was  left  of  his 


Concerning  the 
trade. 


Arrival  of  the  Vic- 
torious Algon- 
quains. 

Procuror  Syndic  and 
petitions. 


Sad  death  of  a 

drunkard.     Fire 

started  at  our  house. 


188  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

y  fut  estouffe  &  a  demy  brusle,  on  retira  le 
reste  du  corps  que  nvf  ne  lugeasmes  point  a 
propos  d'enterrer  en  terre  Saincte,  estant  vn 
yurogne  manifeste  &  public  Incorrigible  & 
mort  sans  signe  de  penitence  dans  son  yuro- 
gnerie ;  en  suite  on  ne  fit  aucune  priere  publi- 
que  p*".  luy 
mate  lot  se  iette  dans       Quelque  moys  auparauant  s'estoit  precipite 

La  mer.   Eau  de  Vie  ^^^^  j^  ^^^  ^^  matelot  nomme  Charles,  a  Ta- 
refusie. 

dousak  apres  auoir  bu  4.  tasses  d'eau  de  vie, 

sur  le  refus  qu'on  luy  faisoit  de  luy  en  donner 

dauantage. 

La  St.  Ignace.  A  la  feste  de  S^  Ignace,  le  salut  se  fit  la 

veuille   a   7.    h.  du   soir.     scauoir   le  laudate, 

Iste    Confessor,    Similabo,    Magnificat,    Salue 

regina     cela  alia  bien. 

la  grande  Messe  le  lour  a  7.  h.  le  sermon  a 
I.  h.  &  demie  a  I'hospital,  &  ensuite  les  Ves- 
pres,  les  Hospital,  donnerent  la  Colaon  aux 
Musiciens  a  ma  requeste ;  le  salut  a  5.  h.  Aux 
Vrsul^^.  coe  la  veuille. 

la  veuille  on  tira  a  midy  vn  coup  de  Canon 
au  fort,  &  trois  le  lendemain  a  I'Angelvf  du 
matin. 

1647.    AOUST 

arriuie  des  Vazs-         le    i^*".    arriua   vne    Chaloupe    qui    dit    des 

nouuelles  de  I'arriuee  des  vaisseaus  au  moins 
de  I'Admiral  au  biq. 

le  5.  arriua  le  p.  Quentin;  &  le  6.  Deux 
vaisseaux  de  M*".  de  repentigny  &  vn  autre: 


seaux 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  JESUITES 


189 


fused  Brandy. 


St.  Ignatius. 


body,  which  we  did  not  Judge  proper  to  bury  in 
Consecrated  ground,  since  he  was  an  open  and 
public  drunkard, —  Incorrigible,  and  one  who 
had  in  his  drunkenness,  died  without  a  sign 
of  penance;  consequently,  no  public  prayer 
was  said  for  him. 

Some  months  before,  a  sailor  named  Charles  a  sailor  Jumps  into 
had  dashed  himself  into  the  sea  at  Tadousak,      ^-^^^  ^^^  '^^^»  ^^- 
after  having  drunk  4  cups  of  brandy,  upon 
the  refusal  of  his  demand  to  give  him  more. 

At  the  feast  of  St.  Ignatius,  the  benediction 
took  place  the  day  before,  at  7  o'clock  in  the 
evening, —  the  laudatc,  Iste  Confessor,  Similabo, 
Magnificat,  and  Salve  regina.     That  went  well. 

On  the  Day,  high  Mass,  at  7  o'clock;  the 
sermon  at  half-past  i  o'clock,  at  the  hospital: 
and  then  Vespers.  The  Hospital  nuns  gave 
the  Musicians  a  Collation  at  my  request.  At 
the  Ursulines',  benediction  at  5  o'clock,  like 
that  of  the  day  before. 

On  the  eve,  one  Cannon-shot  was  fired  at 
noon  at  the  fort ;  and  three  the  next  day  at 
the  morning  Angelus. 

1647,    AUGUST. 

On  the  I  St,  a  Shallop  arrived,  which  gave 
news  of  the  arrival  of  the  vessels  —  at  least, 
of  the  Admiral's  ship  —  at  biq.^ 

On  the  5th,  father  Quentin  arrived;  and,  on 
the  6th,  Two  vessels  of  Monsieur  de  repenti- 
gny,  and  one  other.  On  the  same  Day,  father 
pijart  arrived  from  3  rivers,  with  the  letters 
from  the  Hurons,  by  way  of  the  Aticamegues.^ 

On  the  same  6th, —  in   consequence  of  the 


Arrival  of  the 
Vessels. 


190 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  30 


Consulte 


Con  sell  de  trots 
Le  Sup*-,  en  est. 


le  mesme  lour  le  p.  piiart  des  3.  riu.  auec  les 
V^^  des  Hurons  par  les  Aticamegues. 

le  mesme  6,  sur  le  reiglem*^.  venu  de  france, 
qui  portoit  I'establissem^  d'vn  Conseil  de 
trois,  dont  le  Super"",  estoit  I'vn,  ie  fis  con- 
sulte p"".  scauoir  si  i'y  deuois  consentir;  le  p. 
Vimont,  le  p.  dendemare,  &  le  p.  le  leune  y 
estoient;  il  fut  conclu  qu'ouy;  qu'il  le  falloit 
faire:  ie  propose  le  voyage  de  france  d'vn  de 
nos  P.  p*".  les  affaires  des  Vrsul^^  Hospital, 
yroquois  &  validite  des  Sacremens  de  mariage, 
qu'on  nvf  disputoit  par  les  lettres  venues  de 
france  cette  annee. 

Ce  mesme  lour  6.  fut  mis  en  possession  le 
fermier  de  noe  dame  des  Anges 

le  14.  arriua  m.  godefroy  dans  son  vaisseau, 
ou  estoit  le  p.  grelon  &  noe  f.  bonnemer 

le  15.  se  fit  la  procession  apres  vespres, 
Mons*".  Nicolet  porta  la  Croix  deux  Enfans 
auec  surplis  auec  deux  Chandeliers;  les 
sauuages  suiuoient;  le  p.  le  leune  auec 
surplis  derriere:  puis  les  chantres  secu- 
liers.  suiuoit  M.  le  prieur  &  M.  de  S^  Sau- 
ueur;  puis  6.  de  nos  Peres  le  dernier  moy 
seul  auec  la  noe  dame  des  Vrsulines:  on 
ff.  poi7it  aux  proces-  alia    a   1' hospital    puis    aux    Vrsul^^.     nos    ff. 

ne  furent  pas  a  la  procession,  ie  declare 
qu'ils  n'y  deuoient  point  aller  nisi  moti  ab 
Obedientia,  liberu  tn  [i.e.,  tamen]  illis  postea 
relictu  vt  irent  post  cruce  in  habitu  suo 
ordinario. 


Le  Pr.  Grelon 


Assomptt'on 


ston. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DBS  PP.  J&SUITES 


191 


regulation  arrived  from  franco,  which  pre- 
scribed the  establishment  of  a  Council  of 
three,  of  whom  the  Superior  should  be  one, — 
I  held  a  consultation  in  order  to  know  whether 
I  was  to  consent  thereto;  father  Vimont, 
father  dendemare,  and  father  le  Jeune  were 
present;  it  was  decided  affirmatively, —  that 
this  must  be  done.  I  proposed  a  voyage  to 
france  by  one  of  our  Fathers,  in  behalf  of 
affairs  concerning  the  Ursulines  and  Hospital 
nuns,  the  yroquois,  and  the  validity  of  the 
Sacrament  of  marriage, —  which  was  contested 
with  us,  according  to  letters  that  came  from 
france  this  year.^^ 

This  same  Day,  the  6th,  the  farmer  at  nostre 
dame  des  Anges  was  put  in  possession. 

On  the  14th,  monsieur  godefroy  arrived  in 
his  vessel,  in  which  were  father  grelon  ^^  and 
our  brother  bonnemer. 

On  the  15th,  the  procession  took  place  after 
vespers.  Monsieur  Nicolet  bore  the  Cross; 
two  surpliced  Boys  followed,  with  two  Can- 
dlesticks; then  came  the  savages, —  father  le 
Jeune,  in  vSurplice,  behind  them ;  then  the 
lay  choristers.  Monsieur  the  prior  and  Mon- 
sieur de  St.  Sauveur  followed ;  then  6  of  our 
Fathers;  lastly,  I  alone,  with  the  virgin  of 
the  Ursulines.  We  went  to  the  hospital,  then 
to  the  Ursulines'.  Our  brethren  were  not  in 
the  procession ;  I  declared  that  they  should 
not  march,  nisi  nioti  ab  Obcdientia;  liber  tun 
tanicn  illis  postea  relictum  ut  ircnt  post  cruceni 
in  habitu  siio  ordinario. 

On  the  17th,  the  news  arrived  of  the  cap- 


Consultation. 


Council  of  three; 
The  Superior  is  one. 


Father  Grelon. 


Assumption. 


Brethren  not  in  the 
procession. 


L 


192 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  30 


prise  par  les  yro- 
quois 


vn  noye. 
claiide. 


Si.  Augustin. 
Vrsulines  fachSes. 


P.  Baunin 


yroquois  brusld  a 
Sillery. 


le  17.  arriua  la  nouuelle  de  la  prise  de  6.  ou 
7.  Algonq.  par  les  yroquois  a  la  poterie. 

le  20.  repartit  le  p.  de  Quen  auec  M.  Mar- 
solet  p^  Tadousak.  &  le  mesme  lour,  bour- 
get  s'en  retourna  auec  son  vaisseau. 

Vn  nomme  le  petit  Claude  se  noya  ce  moys 
icy. 

le  25.  retourna  le  p.  deque  de  my  chemin; 
les  poissons  blancs,  p''.  lesquels  ils  estoient 
repartis  s'en  estant  en  alles. 

le  28.  lour  de  S*.  Augustin,  ie  dis  la  grandee 
messe  a  1' hospital,  &  y  dis  vn  mot  a  I'Euan- 
gile  ex  piano  en  I'honneur  du  S*.  le  p. 
Vimont  y  prescha  I'apres  disnee  &  y  eut 
Salut:  les  Vrsul^®.  se  fascherent  vn  peu  de 
ce  que  ie  n'auois  pas  este  dire  la  messe  chez 
elles,  mais  outre  que  les  Hospital,  m'en 
auoient  parle;  il  semble  qu'on  leur  peut 
accorder  cette  feste,  les  Vrsul^''.  ayant  la  S*^. 
Vrsule.  .  le  p.  baunin  prescha  aux  Vrsul^^. 
I'apres  disnee,  &  3.  ou  4.  de  nos  Peres  y  dirent 
la  messe,  &  entr'autres  le  p*".  lyonne  la  grande 

le  p.  dendemare  &  le  p.  greslon  partirent  le 
26.  le  p.  gabr.  lalement  &  le  p.  baunin  le  29. 
p*".  les  3.  riuieres. 

1647.    SEPTEMBRE 

on  retourne  de  la  guerre,  ou  plusieurs  fran- 
9ois  furent  blesses,  vn  yroquois  pris  qui  fut 
brusU  a  Sillery  le  16.  M.  le  gouu.  le  tint  en 
prison  8.  ou  10.  iours,  enfin  les  sauuages  s'en- 


1646 -47J    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  JESUITES 


193 


ture  of  6  or  7  Algonquains  by  the  yroquois,  at 
la  poterie.^ 

On  the  20th,  father  de  Quen  set  out,  with 
Monsieur  Marsolet,  for  Tadousak;  and,  the 
same  Day,  bourget  returned  with  his  vessel. 

A  certain  man,  named  "  little  Claude,"  was 
drowned  here  this  month. 

On  the  25th,  father  dequen  returned  from 
the  middle  of  his  journey  —  \}iiQ  poissons  blancs 
[i.e.,  Attikamegues]  in  whose  behalf  they  had 
started,  having  gone  away. 

On  the  28th,  the  Day  of  St.  Augustin,  I 
said  high  mass  at  the  hospital,  and  therein 
said  a  word  at  the  Gospel,  ex  piano,  in  honor 
of  the  Saint.  Father  Vimont  preached  there 
after  dinner,  and  there  was  Benediction.  The 
Ursulines  were  somewhat  vexed  because  I  had 
not  gone  to  say  mass  at  their  house;  but  — 
besides  the  fact  that  the  Hospital  nuns  had 
spoken  to  me  in  the  matter  —  it  seems  that 
this  festival  may  be  granted  to  them,  the 
Ursulines  having  the  feast  of  Ste.  Ursula. 
Father  baunin'^  preached  at  the  Ursulines' 
after  dinner,  and  3  or  4  of  our  Fathers  said 
mass  there, —  and,  among  others,  father 
lyonne  said  high  mass. 

Father  dendemare  and  father  greslon  left 
on  the  26th;  father  gabriel  lalement  and 
father  baunin  on  the  29th,  for  3  rivers. 

1647.    SEPTEMBER. 

They  returned  from  war,  in  which  several 
frenchmen  were  wounded;  an  yroquois  was 
captured,   who  was  burned  at    Sillery    on  the 


Capture  by  the 
yroquois. 


One  drowned; 
Claude. 


St.  Augustin; 
Ursulines  vexed. 


Father  Baunin. 


Yroquois  burned  at 
Sillery. 


194 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  30 


depart  du  i^r,  vais- 
seau.     miskb'. 


depart  du  p.  Druil- 

letes  p^.  son  hyuer- 

netni. 

It.  pier  re  de  /'  Eg  Use. 


depart  /"'.  montreal 


depart  de  laflotte 


Hurons  non  desaen- 
dus. 

depart  de  la  dernier e 
barque. 


Commecemt.  de  neige 

prise  dufils  d'  Ignace 

&^  d'vn  autre. 


nuyant,  Mons"".  le  gouti.  le  leur  enuoya  il  ne 
fut  dans  les  tourmens  qu'vne  heure,  son  corps 
fut  iette  dans  I'eau:  il  fut  baptise  &  mourut 
bien. 

le  vaisseaii  de  I'Ange  gabriel  repart  le  19. 
on  estoient  le  p.  laplace  &  le  p.  richard  retour- 
nant  a  miski^  Mons''.  Macar  Commis  &  dorual 
soubs  commis. 

le  p.  gabriel  Drnilletes  le  21.  va  auec  les 
sauuages  de  Sillery  &  Tadoussac  p*".  hyuerner. 

le  24,  la  i^.  pierrea  I'Eglise  auec  les  Cere- 
monies du  Pontifical,  aiustees  comme  il  se  put. 

EN    OCTOBRE 

Enuiron  le  18.  partit  Mons*".  de  maisonn. 
auec  la  barque  de  Montreal. 

le  21.  partit  la  flotte  on  estoient  general  M. 
d'ailleboust  le  p.  Vimont  &  le  p.  Quentin  auec 
luy,  &  le  p.  defretat  dans  la  noe  Dame  auec 
Mons^  le  Tardif,  Ite  mons''.  Nicolet  &  Mons''. 
le  prieur  dans  d'autres  vaisseaux: 

les  Hurons  ne  descendirent  point  cette 
annee 

le  25.  partit  la  derniere  barque  pour  les  3. 
riu.  auec  le  P.  buteux  &  le  p.  duperon. 

EN    NOUEMBRE 

le  4.  commen9a  la  neige;  &  furent  pris  2. 
hurons  aux  3.  riu. 

le  25.  ou  26.  partirent  nos  gens  p''.  aller  au 
bois  demeurer  p*".  y  faire  la  charpente  du 
bastiment  nouueau. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  J^SUITES 


195 


Departttre  of  the 
ist  vessel;  miskou. 


1 6th.  Monsieur  the  governor  kept  him  in 
prison  8  or  lo  days;  finally,  the  savages  grow- 
ing impatient,  Monsieur  the  governor  sent  him 
to  them.  He  lived  in  the  torments  only  one 
hour;  his  body  was  thrown  into  the  water; 
he  was  baptized,  and  died  piously. 

The  vessel  called  the  Angc  gabricl  departs 
on  the  19th.  In  it  were  father  laplace  and 
father  richard,  returning  to  miskou ;  Monsieur 
Macar,  Agent;  and  dorval,  sub-agent. 

Father  gabriel  Druilletes,  on  the  21st,  goes  Departure  of  father 
with  the  savages  of  Sillery  and  Tadoussac  to     DmiUetesfor  his 
spend  the  winter. 

On  the  24th,  the  ist  stone  [was  laid]  at 
the  Church,  with  the  Pontifical  Ceremonies, 
arranged  as  well  as  possible. 


wmter  quarters. 

ist  stone  at  the 
Church. 


IN    OCTOBER. 

About  the  i8th.  Monsieur  de  maisonneuve 
departed  with  the  Montreal  bark. 

On  the  2 1  St,  the  fleet  sailed,  in  which  were 
general  Monsieur  d'ailleboust;  father  Vimont 
and  father  Quentin,  with  him;  and  father 
defretat,  in  the  nostre  Dame,  with  Monsieur  le 
Tardif.  Itew,  monsieur  Nicolet  and  Monsieur 
the  prior,  in  other  vessels. 

The  Hurons  did  not  come  down  this  year. 

On  the  25th,  the  last  bark  sailed  for  3 
rivers,  with  Father  buteux  and  father  duperon. 

IN    NOVEMBER. 

On  the  4th,  the  snow  began;  and  2  hurons 
were  captured  at  3  rivers. 

On  the  25th  or  26th,  our  people  went  away 


Departure  for 
montreal. 

Departure  of  the 
fleet. 


Hurons  have  not 

come  down. 

Departure  of  the 

last  bark. 


Beginning  of  snow; 
capture  of  the  son  of 
Ignace,  and  another. 


196 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


n.f.  Nic.  Noircler  a 
Sillery. 


Sauuages  du  p. 

Druilletes  nteurent 

de  fatm. 


St.  Xauier. 


Messe  p^.  mess,  de 
la  Compie.  icy  &^ 


a   V Hospital 


Enuiron  le  1 5.  retourna  la  barque  des  3.  riui- 
eres  qui  ramena  noe  f .  Nicolas  Noircler,  qui 
alia  demeurer  a  Sillery. 

Sur  la  fin  du  moys,  nvf  eusmes  nouuelles 
que  les  sauuages  auec  lesquels  estoit  le  p. 
Driiilletes  mouroient  de  faim,  &  que  9.  ou  10. 
estoient  desia  morts. 

EN    DECEMBRE 

La  feste  de  S*^.  fr.  xauier  tombant  cette 
annee  le  lundy;  on  fit  les  i".  Vespres  solem- 
nelles  le  Dimanche;  &  le  lundy  la  grande 
messe,  on  ne  publia  point  I'lndulgence,  parce- 
que  ie  fus  confirme  dans  mon  doute,  qu'il  n'y 
en  auoit  point,  on  tira  le  matin  trois  coups 
au  fort,  &  le  veuille  Mons^  enuoya  2.  bout, 
de  vin  d'Espagne  &  vn  cochon  de  laict;  le 
Veu  fut  renouuele  a  1' ordinaire,  le  soir,  entre 
les  litanies  &  I'Aue  maris  stella,  deuant  le  S^ 
Sacrem^  expos6 

le  3^.  du  moys  de  decembre  iour  de  mardy 
fut  dite  la  messe  des  morts  pour  Mess,  de  la 
Comp'^.  par  le  p.  le  leune  au  temps  ordinaire 
sans  autre  ceremonie,  &  sans  inuiter  Mons*".  le 
gouuerneur,  a  qui  toutesfois  par  occasion  en 
discours  familiers  ie  le  dis  quelque  temps 
auparauant.     v.  superiore  annu. 

I'hospital  s'estant  oublie  de  la  dire  au  mesme 
lour  que  I'an  passe  qui  fut  le  29.  de  nou.  la 
resoluon  fut  prise  de  la  dire  le  5.  de  decem- 
bre, &  coe  on  tarda  d' Inuiter  M.  le  gouuern''. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  JJiSUITES 


197 


to  live  in  the  forest,  in  order  to  prepare  the 
timber  there  for  the  new  building. 

About  the  15th,  the  bark  returned  from  3   Our  brother  Nicolas 
rivers,  which  brought  back  our  brother  Nicolas    Notrcler  at  Stllery. 
Noircler,  who  went  to  dwell  at  Sillery. 

Toward  the  end  of  the  month,  we  had  news  Savages  with  father 
that  the  savages  with  whom  was  father  Driiil-    Drmlletes  dying  of 
letes  were  dying  of  hunger,  and  that  9  or  10 
were  already  dead. 


IN    DECEMBER. 

The  festival  of  St.  frangois  xavier  falling 
this  year  on  monday,  we  held  the  ist  solemn 
Vespers  on  Sunday,  and  said  high  mass  on 
monday.  The  Indulgence  was  not  published, 
because  I  was  confirmed  in  my  suspicion  that 
there  was  none.  In  the  morning,  three  shots 
were  fired  at  the  fort;  and  on  the  eve,  Mon- 
sieur sent  2  bottles  of  Spanish  wine  and  a 
sucking  pig.  The  Vow  was  renewed  at  even- 
ing, as  usual, —  between  the  litany  and  the 
Ave  maris  stella,  before  the  Blessed  vSacra- 
ment,  exposed. 

On  the  3rd  of  the  month  of  december, — 
tuesday, —  the  mass  for  the  dead  was  said  in 
behalf  of  Messieurs  of  the  Company,  by  father 
le  Jeune,  at  the  usual  time,  without  other  cere- 
mony and  without  inviting  Monsieur  the  gov- 
ernor,—  to  whom,  however,  incidentally  in 
familiar  conversation,  I  mentioned  the  matter, 
some  time  previously.     Vide  siipcriorcin  annum. 

The  hospital  having  forgotten  to  say  it  on 
the  same  Day  as  last  year, —  which  was  the 
29th  of  november, —  the  decision  was  adopted 


St.  Xavier. 


Mass  for  messieurs 

of  the  Company 

here;  and 


At  the  Hospital. 


198  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

il  me  I'enuoya  signifier,  qu'il  s'estonnoit  qu'on 
ne  I'auoit  point  inuite  &  les  principaux  de 
Quebek.  ie  I'escriuis  a  la  M^.  sup.  de  I'hos- 
pital,  qui  y  enuoya  M^  de  S^  Sauueur;  ce 
fut  le  p.  de  quen  qui  dit  la  messe 
la  Conception  la  veuille  de  la  Conception  vn  Coup  de  Ca- 

non a  I.  h.  &  5.  le  matin  salut  Indulgence  &c. 
Mission  de  beauport.  le  9.  partit  le  p.  dequen  p^.  aller  en  Mis- 
sion a  beauport  le  reste  de  I'Aduent, 
mais  ayant  trouue  le  temps  trop  manuals 
pour  passer  le  Sault,  il  retourna  icy,  &  en 
repartit  le  lendemain  de  Noel  pour  continuer 
sa  mission. 
Noel  la  veuille  de  Noel  la  nuict  nvf  nvf  assem- 

blasmes  a  I'ordinaire  c'est  a  dire  a  w.yd 
nvf  y  chantasmes  hymnos  &  Cantica,  Haec 
dies  ou  haec  nox  e  &  puis  laudate  pueri: 
Sancta  &  Immaculata  &  (Isetatvf  su  in  his): 
Item  haec  nox  e  &  lauda  hierusale  dominii, 
repetant  le  tout  coe  Antiennes,  &  enfin  Noe 
noe  &c  &  a  I'issue  Te  deu  pendant  lequel 
nvf  fismes  sonner  la  messe  coe  presupo- 
sant  que  c'estoit  I'heure  de  minuict.  le 
fort  tira  5.  coups  au  Tedeu  la  predicaon  se 
fit  I'apresdisnee,  c'est  le  mieux  &  tout  cela 
alia  bien.  le  p.  le  leune  dit  la  messe  depuis 
6.}4  &  iusques  a  8.  moy  ma  troisieme  en- 
suite,  &  le  p.  dequen  a  10.  h.  il  y  eut  trois 
pains  benits,  Taillandiers,  Chirurgiens  &  bou- 
lengers: 

II  y  eut  saluts  coe  I'an  passe  aux  Hospital. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES  199 

to  say  it  on  the  5th  of  december.  And,  as  we 
delayed  Inviting  Monsieur  the  governor,  he 
sent  to  notify  me  that  he  was  astonished  that 
we  had  not  invited  him  and  the  principal 
persons  of  Quebek.  I  wrote  this  to  the 
Mother  superior  of  the  hospital,  who  sent 
Monsieur  de  St.  Sauveur  to  do  this.  It  was 
father  de  quen  who  said  the  mass. 

On  the  eve  of  the  Immaculate  Conception,    immaculate  Concep- 
a  Cannon-shot  at   i   o'clock,   and  at  5  in  the  tion. 

morning;  benediction.  Indulgence,  etc. 

On  the  9th,  father  dequen  set  out  on  a  Mis-   Mission  at  beauport. 
sion  to  beauport  for  the  rest  of  Advent ;   but, 
having  found  the  weather  too  severe  to  pass 
the  Rapid,  he  returned  here,  and  left  again  the 
day  after  Christmas,  to  continue  his  mission. 

On  Christmas  eve,  at  night,  we  assembled  Christmas. 

as  usual, —  that  is  to  say,  at  y^  past  11. 
We  sang  hymnos  et  Cantica, —  Hcsc  dies  or  kcec 
nox  est,  and  then  laudate  pueri,  Sancta  et  hn- 
maciilata,  and  (Icetatus  sum  in  his).  Item,  hcsc 
nox  est,  and  laiida  hierusaleni  dominuni, —  re- 
peating everything  in  the  manner  of  Anthems ; 
and,  lastly,  Noe,  noe,  etc. ;  and,  at  the  end, 
Te  deuin, —  during  which  we  had  the  bell 
rung  for  mass,  as  presuming  that  it  was  the 
hour  of  midnight.  The  fort  fired  5  shots  at 
the  Te  deiini.  The  sermon  took  place  after 
dinner;  that  is  best;  and  all  that  went  well. 
Father  le  Jeune  said  mass  from  y^  past  6, 
until  8;  I,  after  that,  my  third  mass;  and 
father  dequen  at  10  o'clock.  There  were 
three  consecrated  loaves, —  those  of  the  Tool- 
makers,  the  Surgeons,  and  the  bakers. 


200 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  30 


Le  P.  Lyonne. 


renouaon 


feux  a  Noel 


de  Pierre  Petit  &^  la 
groye. 


&  Vrsulines ;  &  p''.  ce  salut  haec  nox  e  ou  haec 
dies  laudate  &c  sancta  &  Immaculata,  \ti 
Noe  Tantu  ergo  sacramentu  &c.  le  S^  Sa- 
crem^  y  fut  expose  depuis  les  3.  h. 

le  lour  des  Innocens  se  fit  la  renouaon  a 
Quebek  ou  renouuelerent  le  /.  Martin  lyonne, 
le  p.  gabriel  lalement,  le  p.  Adrian  greslon,  noe 
f,  Nicolas  le  faulconier;  ie  fis  exhortaon 
la  veuille;  p''.  la  recollection  il  fut  libre 
de  se  retirer  ou  demeurer  en  recreaon.  nos 
ff.  faisoient  les  Exercices  en  ce  temps-la, 
i'enuoy^  ceux  qui  deuoient  renouueler  faire 
la  recreaon  auec  eux.  le  vendredy  veuille  de 
la  renouaon  on  fit  le  soir  coe  s'il  y  auoit 
abstinence,  mais  la  Colaon  fut  coe  la  veuille 
de  Noel. 

II  y  auoit  trop  de  chaudieres  a  I'Eglise  a  la 
messe  de  minuict  deux  suffisent  auec  celle  de 
M.  le  gouu.  &  elles  furent  allumees  trop  tard 
de  sorte  qu'il  les  fallut  faire  oster.  il  y  en 
auoit  5.  ou  6. 

Le  lour  de  S^  Est^.  se  presenterent  Petit  & 
la  groye  p"".  payer  le  cens  &  les  droits  seigneu- 
riaux  de  nos  terres  mais  sur  1' Instance  que  P. 
Petit  me  fit  d'aggreer  la  faute  qu'il  auoit  faite 
de  mettre  sa  maison  hors  de  sa  Concession  sur 
nos  terres;  &  le  refus  que  ie  luy  en  fis,  il 
differa  de  payer  disant  qu'il  vouloit  tout  quit- 
ter, &  son  compagnon  la  groye  qui  pretendoit 
a  sa  concession  en  cas  d'eschange,  attendit 
aussy  de  payer. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DES  PP.  /^SUITES  201 

There  were  benedictions,  as  last  year,  at  the 
Hospital  and  Ursuline  nuns' ;  and  for  this 
benediction,  kcBC  nox  est  or  Jicbc  dies,  laudate, 
etc. ;  sancta  et  Immaciilata;  a  Noe,  Tantimi  ergo 
sacr amentum,  etc.  The  Blessed  Sacrament 
was  exposed  there  from  3  o'clock. 

On  Holy  Innocents'  Day,  the  renewal  of  Father  Lyonne. 
vows  took  place  at  Quebek ;  at  which  were  re- 
newed the  vows  of  father  Martin  lyonne,  father 
gabriel  lalement,  father  Adrian  greslon,  and 
our  brother  Nicolas  le  faulconier.  I  made  an  Renewal  of  vows. 
exhortation  the  day  before ;  as  for  the  recol- 
lection, it  was  optional  to  withdraw  or  to 
remain  in  recreation.  Our  brethren  were 
making  a  Retreat  at  that  time ;  I  sent  those 
who  were  to  renew  their  vows  to  engage  in 
recreation  with  them.  On  friday,  the  vigil 
of  the  renewal,  we  proceeded  at  evening  as  if 
there  were  abstinence ;  but  the  Collation  was 
like  that  on  Christmas  eve. 

There  were  too  many  kettles  at  the  Church  Christmas  fires. 
for  the  midnight  mass,  —  two  are  enough, 
with  Monsieur  the  governor's, —  and  they 
were  kindled  too  late;  consequently,  it  was 
necessary  to  have  them  removed ;  there  were 
5  or  6  of  them. 

On  St.  Stephen's   Day,  Petit  and  la  groye  Of  Pierre  Petit  and 
presented  themselves  to  pay  the  rent  and  the  la  groye. 

seigniorial  dues  on  our  lands;  but  Pierre 
Petit  —  having  urgently  Requested  me  to 
overlook  the  mistake  that  he  had  made,  of 
putting  his  house  outside  of  his  own  Grant, 
and  on  our  lands;  and  I  having  refused 
him  —  deferred  the  payment,  saying  that  he 


202 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 


Catechisme 


J>resens 


paroissiens  a  Sil- 
lery. 


Maison  des  offices 
habttie. 


le  p.  le  leune  commen9a  le  Catechisme  a  la 
Toussaincts  ou  assistoient  les  pensionaires  des 
Vrsulines.  le  p.  lyonne  preschoit  aux  Vr- 
sul^*.  &  moy  a  1' ordinaire  a  la  Paroisse. 

M.  le  gouu.  &  M.  bourdon  Commis  general 
nvf  firent  force  presens  de  gibier  de  Viande, 
de  poisson,  &  entr'autres  d'vn  baril  de  vin 
d'Espagne. 

lis  estoient  6o.  ou  70.  paroissiens  ordinai- 
rem^  a  Sillery  sur  la  fin  de  cette  annee.  (quan- 
qua  non  ita  vocandi,  car  Sillery  ne  doit  nul- 
lem^  passer  pour  paroisse  sed  pour  maiso  de 
la  Compi^) 

Cette  annee  fut  habitue  la  maison  des  offices, 
qui  auoit  este  commencee  en  luin. 


1646-47]    JOURNAL  DBS  PP.  /^SUITES 


203 


wished  to  give  up  everything.  His  compan- 
ion, la  groye,  who  had  designs  on  his  conces- 
sion in  case  of  an  exchange,  also  waited  to 
pay. 

Father  le  Jeune  began  the  lessons  in  the 
Catechism  at  All  Saints',  at  which  the  Ursu- 
lines'  pupils  were  present.  Father  lyonne 
preached  at  the  Ursulines',  and  I,  as  usual, 
at  the  Parish  church. 

Monsieur  the  governor  and  Monsieur  bour- 
don, the  general  Agent,  made  us  many  pres- 
ents of  game.  Meat,  and  fish;  and,  among 
others,  a  cask  of  Spanish  wine. 

There  were  commonly  60  or  70  parishion- 
ers at  Sillery  about  the  end  of  this  year  {quan- 
quain  non  ita  vocandi;  for  Sillery  should  by  no 
means  pass  for  a  parish,  sed  for  a  house  of 
the  Society). 

This  year  the  official  house  was  occupied, 
which  had  been  begun  in  June. 


Catechism. 


Presents. 


Parishioners  at 
Sillery. 


Official  House  occu- 
pied. 


LXIII 

Relation  of  1647 

Paris:    SEBASTIEN  ET  GABRIEL  CRAMOISY,   1648 


Source  :  We  follow  a  copy  of  the  original  Cramoisy, 
in  the  possession  of  The  Burrows  Brothers  Company, 
Cleveland. 

Owing  to  the  length  of  the  document,  we  present 
herewith  but  the  first  three  chapters ;  the  remainder  will 
appear  in  Volumes  XXXI.  and  XXXII. 


msmam^ 


RELATION 

DE  CE  QVI  S'EST  PASSE'^ 

VE    PLVS    REMARqVABLE 

es  Miffions  des  Feres  dc  la 
Compagnie  de  I E  s  V  s, 
,  EN    LA 

NOVVELLE    FRANCE, 

SVR  LE   GRAND    FLEYVE 

DE  S.  Lavreks  enl'annee  1^47. 

Ennoyce  au  R.  P.  Prouincial  dc  la  Proi^insQ 

de  France. 

Parle. Suferieurdef  Mipons  de  la  mefme  Comj^a^nle^ 


A   PARIS, 

Y^EBASTIEN    CrAMOISY,^ 

'    Imprimeur  ordinaire  du  Roy,  't 
Chez^        &  de  la  Reyne  Rcgente, 


11 1 


E  T 


rue     %. 

.  lacqiics, 

faux  Ci- 

J '  ^  *■  I  cognes, 

V.  Gabriel  Cramoisy.   }     °'    * 

M.  DC.  XLv I n- 

Ayec  Privilbgf  ^v  Roy, 


RELATION 

OF  WHAT  OCCURRED 

MOST      NOTEWORTHY 

in  the  Missions  of   the  Fathers 

of  the  Society  of  Jesus, 

IN 

NEW    FRANCE, 

ON    THE    GREAT    RIVER 

OF  St.  Lawrence,  in  the  year  1647. 

Sent  to  the  Reverend  Father  Provincial  of 
the  Province  of  France. 

By  the  Superior  of  the  Missions  of  the  same  Society. 


PARIS, 

Sebastien   Cramoisy,\ 
.Printer  in  ordinaryto  the  King,/  rue  St.  Jac- 

Print-  J  ^    4.U    r-i  o        4-1  ques,atthe 

,  ,     <    and  to  the  Queen  Regent,    )  ^.    ,'  -:  ..  ^ 

ed  by  1  ^  (  Sign  or  the 

'^  ^  ^  \  Storks. 

GabrielCramoisy./ 

M.    DC.    XLVIII. 
By    Royal    License. 


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.30 


Table  des  Chapitres  contenvs  en  ce  Liure. 

RELATION  De  'ce  qui  s  eft  paj^e  en  la  Nouiielle 
France  fur  le  grand  fleuue  de  S.  Laurens,  en 
r annee  mil  fox  cens  qiiar ante- fept,     .  .        i 

Chap.  I.     De  la  perfidie  des  Hiroquois.        .  .       6 

II.  Quelqnes  femmes  fe  fauuent  du  pays  des  Hiro- 
quois. .  .  .  .  -25 

III.  Qtielques  Hiroquois  furpris  apres  vne  deffaite 
d'  Algonquins,  vne  feninie  tu'e  vn  Hiroquois  &  fe 
fauue.  .  .  .  .  -44 

IV.  Comnie  le  Pere  Ifaac  logues  fut  pris  des  Hiro- 
quois, &  de  ce  qiiilfouffrit  en  fa  premiere  entree 

en  leur  pays.      .  .  .  .  •      5^ 

V.  Dieu  confer ue  le  Pere  Ifaac  logues  apres  le 
ma ff acre  de  fon  compagnon,  il  T inftrnit  d'vne 
facon  bien  remarquable.  .  .  .82 

VI.  Le  Pere  eft  donnd pour  valet  a  des  chaff eurs,  il 
fouffre,  il  eft  confold,  il  exerce  fo7i  zele  en  fes 
voyages.  .  .  .  .  -95 

VII.  Le  Pere  fe  faime  des  Hiroquois  &  paffe  en 
France  par  I '  entremife  des  Hollandois,  il  repajfe 
en  Canada  oh  cftant  arriu^,  il  fait  vn  voyage  aii 
pays  des  Hiroquois.         .  .  .  .ill 

VIII.  Le  Pere  Ifaac  logues  retourne  pour  la  troi- 
foefme  fois  au  pays  des  Hiroquois,  oil  il  eft  mis  a 
mort.  ....       pag.    124 

IX.  Des  Chreftiens  de  Sain£l  lofeph  a  Siller y.        .    144 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  211 


Table  of  the  Chapters  contained  in  this  Book. 

RELATION  of  what  occurred  in  New  France  on 
the  great  river  of  St.  Laiurence,  in  the  year 
one  thousand  six  hundred  and  forty-seven.     .        i 
Chap.  I.      Of  the  treachery  of  the  Hiroguois.  .        6 

II.  Some  women  escape  from  the  country  of  the 
Hiroguois.  .  .  .  .  -25 

III.  Some  Hiroguois  surprised  after  a  defeat  of 
Algonguins;  a  woman  kills  a  Hiroguois,  and 
escapes.  .  .  .  .  -44 

IV.  How  Father  Isaac  Jogues  was  taken  by  the 
Hiroguois,  and  what  he  suffered  on  his  first 
entrance  into  their  country.         .  .  •      56 

\ .  God  preserves  Father  Isaac  Jogues  after  the 
murder  of  his  companion;  he  instructs  him  in 
a  very  remarkable  manner.         .  .  .82 

VI.  The  Father  is  given  as  servant  to  some  hunters; 
lie  suffers,  he  is  consoled;  lie  exercises  his  zeal 

in  his  journeys.  .  .  .  -95 

VII.  The  Father  escapes  from  the  Hiroguois  and 
proceeds  to  France,  through  the  intervention  of 
the  Dutch.  He  returns  to  Canada;  having 
arrived  there,  he  makes  a  journey  to  the  country 

of  the  Hiroguois.  .  .  .  .in 

VIII.  Father  Isaac  Jogues  returns  for  the  third 
time  to  the  country  of  the  Hiroguois,  zvhere  he 

is  put  to  death.  .  .  .       page   124 

IX.  Of  the  Christians  of  Saint  Joseph  at  Siller y.    144 


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.30 

X.  De  la  MiJ^ion  de  r Affoinption  au  pays  des 
Abnaqiiiois.        .  .  .  .  .176 

XI.  La  venue  des  Atticaniegues.     .  .       p^g-    194 

XII.  De  la  MiJ^ion  de  Sain£le  Croix  a  Tadonffac.   212 

XIII.  De  la  Rejidence  de  la  Conception^  aiix  trois 
Riiiieres.  .  .  .  .  .228 

XIV.  De  la  prife  &  de  la  mort  d'vn  Hiroquois  & 
de  quelques  autres  remarques,  qui  n'ont pit  trou- 
uer  place  fous  les  Chapitres  precedents.  .   251 

XV.  De  r habitatio7i  de  Mifcou.  .       p<^g-   262 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  ib47  213 

X.      Of  the  Mission  of  the  Assumption  in  the  country 

of  the  Abnaqiiiois.  .  .  .  .176 

XL      The  coining  of  the  Atticamegues.  .       page   194 

XII.  Of  the  Holy  Cross  Mission  at  Tadoussac.        .   212 

XIII.  Of  the  Residence  of  la  Conception,  at  three 
Rivers.  .  .  .  .  .228 

XIV.  Of  the  capture  and  death  of  a  Hiroquois; 
and  so'tne  other  observations  which  could  not  find 
room  under  the  preceding  Chapters.        .  .251 

XV.  Of  the  settlement  at  Miscou.  .       page  262 


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 


Extraid:  du  Priuilege  du  Roy. 

PAR  grace  &  priuilege  du  Roy,  il  eft  permis  k 
Sebaftien  Cramoify  Marchand  Libraire  lure 
en  rVniuerfit6  de  Paris,  &  Imprimeur  ordi- 
naire du  Roy  &  de  la  Reyne  Regente,  Bourgeois  de 
Paris,  d'imprimer  ou  faire  imprimer  vn  Liure  inti- 
tule, Relation  de  ce  qui  s' ejl  paf^d  de  plus  rcmarguable 
is  MiJ^ions  des  Peres  de  la  Conipagnie  de  Iesvs,  en  la 
Nouuelle  France,  fur  le  grand  fleuue  de  fain6l  Laurens,  en 
r annie  1647.  enuoyie  au  R.  P.  Prouincial  de  la  Prouince 
de  France,  par  le  Superieur  des  MiJ^ions  de  la  me/me 
Conipagnie.  Et  ce,  pendant  le  temps  &  efpace  de  dix 
ann^es  confecutiues,  auec  deffen[f]es  k  tous  Libraires 
&  Imprimeurs  d'imprimer  ou  faire  imprimer  ledit 
Liure,  fous  pretexte  de  deguifement  ou  change- 
ment  qu'ils  y  pourroient  faire,  k  peine  de  confif cation 
&  de  I'amende  port6e  par  ledit  Priuilege.  Donn6  k 
Paris  le  27.  lanuier  1648. 

Signe  par  le  Roy  en  fon  Confeil, 

CEBERET. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  215 


Extract  from  the  Royal  License. 

BY  grace  and  privilege  of  the  King,  Sebastien 
Cramoisy,  Sworn  Merchant  Bookseller  in  the 
University  of  Paris,  and  Printer  in  ordinary  to 
the  King  and  to  the  Queen  Regent,  Citizen  of  Paris, 
is  permitted  to  print,  or  cause  to  be  printed,  a  Book 
entitled.  Relation  de  ce  qui  s' est  passe  de  phis  reinarqua- 
ble  e's  Missions  des  Peres  de  la  Conipagnie  de  jESUS,  en  la 
Nouvelle  France,  sur  le  grand  fleuve  de  sainct  Laurens,  en 
r  anne'e  1647.  envoy e'e  au  R.  P.  Provincial  de  la  Province 
de  France,  par  le  Super ieur  des  Missions  de  la  mesme 
Compagnie.  And  this  during  the  time  and  space  of 
ten  consecutive  years,  with  prohibition  to  all  Book- 
sellers and  Printers  to  print,  or  cause  to  be  printed, 
the  said  Book,  under  pretext  of  disguise  or  change 
that  they  might  make  therein ;  under  penalty  of  confis- 
cation and  the  fine  imposed  by  the  said  License. 
Given  at  Paris,  the  27th  of  January,  1648. 

Signed  by  the  King  in  his  Council, 

CEBERET. 


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 


Permiffion  du  P.  Prouincial. 

NOVS  Eftienne  Charlet  Prouincial  de  la  Compa- 
gnie  de  Iesvs  en  la  Prouince  de  France, 
auons  accorde  pour  I'aduenir  au  Sieur  Seba- 
flien  Cramoify  Marchand  Libraire,  Imprimeur  ordi- 
naire du  Roy  &  de  la  Reyne  Regente,  rimpreffion 
des  Relations  de  la  Nouuelle  France.  Fait  ^  Paris 
ce  8.  Fevrier  1648. 

EsTiENNE  Charlet. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1647  217 


Permission  of  the  Father  Provincial. 

WE,  Estienne  Charlet,  Provincial  of  the  Society 
of  Jesus  in  the  Province  of  France,  have 
granted,  for  the  future,  to  Sieur  Sebas- 
tien  Cramoisy,  Merchant  Bookseller,  Printer  in  ordi- 
nary to  the  King  and  to  the  Queen  Regent,  the  right 
to  print  the  Relations  of  New  France.  Done  at 
Paris,  this  8th  of  February,  1648. 

Estienne  Charlet. 


218  LES  RELATIONS  DES  Jl^SUITES  [Vol.30 


[i]  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  paffe  en  la  Novvelle 
France  svr  le  grand  Fleuue  de  S.  Lau- 
rens, en  I'annee  mil  fix  cens 
quarante-fept. 

Av  R.  P.  Ejlienne  Char  let  Prouhicial  de  la  Compagnie  de  Iesvs, 
en  la  Prouince  de  France. 

MON  R.  PERE, 
La  Relation  de  cette  annee  que  i'enuoye  a 
voftre  Reuerence,  feruira  de  confirmation, 
que  I'eflat  de  la  vie  prefente  eft  le  regne  de  I'infla- 
bilite,  du  trouble  &  de  I'obfcurite:  &  que  tous  les 
temps  &  les  lieux  font  remplis  des  iugemens  de  Dieu 
incomprehenfibles  [2]  a  nos  efprits,  &  que  les  routes 
&  les  chemins  de  fa  Diuine  Majefte  pour  arriuer  a  vn 
but,  font  bien  differens  de  ceux  que  les  hommes 
auroient  choifi. 

Ces  deux  dernieres  annees,  les  fleurs  de  la  paix 
auec  les  Hiroquois  nos  ennemis,  nous  en  auoient 
fait  efperer  des  fruidts  agreables,  &  vne  heureufe 
recolte :  mais  la  perfidie  de  C3S  barbares  furuenant 
Ik-deffus,  comme  vne  grefle  fur  vn  champ  preft  ^ 
moiffonner,  femble  auoir  vn  peu  retard^  &  recule  nos 
efperances. 

Le  premier  efclat  de  cette  perfidie  eft  tombe  fur 
celuy  qui  le  meritoit  le  moins,  c'eft  le  P,  Ifaac  logues, 
qui,  comme  ie  le  mandois  I'an  paffe  a  voftre  Reue- 
rence, partit  d'icy  fur  la  fin  de  Septembre  1646.  pour 
s'en  retourner  pour  la  feconde  fois  en  fa  miffion  des 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  219 


[i]  Relation  of  what  occurred  in  New  France  on 

the  great  River  of  St.  Lawrence,  in  the 

year  one  thousand  six  hundred 

and  forty-seven. 

To  the  Rev.  Father  Estienne  Charlet,  Provincial  of  the  Society  of 
Jesus,  in  the  Province  of  France. 

MY  REVEREND  FATHER, 
The  Relation  for  this  year,  which  I  send 
to  your  Reverence,  will  serve  as  confirmation 
that  the  state  of  the  present  life  is  the  reign  of 
instability,  of  agitation,  and  of  obscurity :  and  that  all 
times  and  places  are  filled  with  the  judgments  of 
God,  incomprehensible  [2]  to  our  minds;  and  that 
the  roads  and  the  ways  of  his  Divine  Majesty  for 
arriving  at  a  goal,  are  very  different  from  those 
which  men  would  have  chosen. 

These  last  two  years,  the  flowers  of  the  peace  with 
the  Hiroquois,  our  enemies,  had  caused  us  to  hope 
for  some  agreeable  fruits  thereof,  and  a  fortunate 
ingathering;  but  the  treachery  of  those  barbarians 
coming  unexpectedly  thereupon,  like  hail  upon  a 
field  ready  to  reap,  seems  to  have  somewhat  retarded 
and  set  back  our  hopes. 

The  first  outburst  of  this  treachery  has  fallen  upon 
the  one  who  deserved  it  the  least, —  that  is,  Father 
Isaac  Jogues,  who,  as  I  sent  word  last  year  to  your 
Reverence,  left  here  toward  the  end  of  September, 
1646,  in  order  to  return  for  the  second  time  to 
his  mission  of  the   Martyrs   among    the    Hiroquois, 


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 

Martyrs  aux  Hiroquois,  ^  deffein  d'y  entretenir  la 
paix,  &  y  mefnager  Tinterefl  &  les  affaires  du  Para- 
dis:  mais  k  peine  auoit-il  mis  pied  a  terre,  que 
contre  tout  droidt  diuin  &  humain,  il  fut  traitt^  de 
captif  par  ces  bar  bares,  luy  &  fon  compagnon,  qui 
eftoit  vn  ieune  Frangois  feculier,  battus,  defpoiiillez, 
&  mis  k  nud;  &  conduits  en  cet  eflat  au  prochain  [3] 
bourg,  oil  le  lendemain  de  leur  arriuee  dixhuidtiefme 
du  mefme  mois  d'Odtobre,  le  P.  logues  fut  maiTacr6, 
&  fon  compagnon  pareillement :  Et  de  la  cet  orage 
croiffant,  nous  en  fufmes  furpris,  deuant  que  nous 
nous  en  fuffions  apper9eus :  &  les  bourgades  entieres 
de  nos  Chrefliens  &  autres  Sauuages  alliez  en  furent 
enleuez,  fans  parler  de  quelques  Frangois  &  Sauuages 
qui  en  furent  furpris  a  I'efcart. 

En  fuite  ces  perfides  reprenant  leurs  anciennes 
routes,  tiennent  les  aduenues  des  nations  plus  hautes 
bouchees:  ce  qui  me  fait  prefque  defefperer  de  pou- 
uoir  receuoir  cette  annee  la  Relation  des  Hurons  au 
moins  affez  "k  temps:  Dieu  toutefois  n'a  permis  que 
nous  fuffions  fruflrez  de  la  confolation  d'en  appren- 
dre  des  nouuelles  par  la  voye  des  nations  du  Nord ; 
nouuelles  qui  nous  font  bien  voir,  que  fi  les  routes 
&  les  voyes  de  Dieu  font  differentes  de  celles  des 
hommes  pour  arriuer  k  vne  fin,  elles  n'en  font  pas 
moins  affeurees. 

Les  fouffrances  &  le  maffacre  du  Pere  logues,  & 
de  tant  de  bons  Chrefliens,  tant  Fran9ois  que  Sau- 
uages, ne  paroiflront  iamais  aux  yeux  chaflieux  de  la 
nature,  vn  [4]  moyen  pour  arriuer  au  comble  de  nos 
fouhaits:  mais  fi  ce  que  nous  auons  tout  fujet  de 
croire,  Noftre  Seigneur  s'en  eft  voulu  feruir  come  du 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  221 

purposing  to  maintain  the  peace  there,  and  to  man- 
age there  the  interest  and  the  affairs  of  Paradise.  But 
hardly  had  he  set  foot  in  the  land  when,  against  all 
divine  and  human  law,  he  was  treated  as  a  captive 
by  those  barbarians;  he  and  his  companion,  who 
was  a  young  lay  Frenchman,  were  beaten,  robbed, 
and  stripped  naked,  and  led  in  that  condition  to  the 
next  [3]  village,  where,  the  day  after  their  arrival, 
the  eighteenth  of  the  same  month  of  October,  Father 
Jogues  was  murdered,  and  his  companion  likewise. 
And  the  storm  increasing  from  that  on,  we  were  sur- 
prised by  it  before  we  had  perceived  it ;  and  entire 
villages  of  our  Christians  and  other  allied  Savages 
were  carried  off  in  it,  without  speaking  of  some 
Frenchmen  and  Savages  who  were  thus  surprised  in 
lonely  places. 

Consequently,  those  perfidious  people,  resuming 
their  former  routes,  hold  the  approaches  to  the  upper 
nations  blocked,  which  makes  me  almost  despair  of 
being  able  to  receive,  this  year,  the  Relation  of  the 
Hurons, —  at  least,  soon  enough.  God,  nevertheless, 
has  not  permitted  that  we  should  be  frustrated  in  the 
consolation  of  learning  news  of  them,  by  way  of  the 
nations  of  the  North ;  news  which  enables  us  plainly 
to  see  that,  if  the  paths  and  ways  of  God  are  differ- 
ent from  those  of  men,  for  arriving  at  an  end,  they 
are  none  the  less  certain. 

The  sufferings  and  the  murder  of  Father  Jogues, 
and  of  so  many  good  Christians,  both  French  and 
Savage,  will  never  appear,  to  the  bleared  eyes  of 
nature,  a  [4]  means  for  arriving  at  the  consumma- 
tion of  our  desires ;  but  if,  as  we  have  every  reason 
to  believe.  Our  Lord  has  willed  to  use  them  as  the 
price  of  the  Spiritual  blessings  which  he  has  shed 


222  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES  [Vol.30 

prix  des  benedidtions  Spirituelles,  qu'il  a  verf6  cette 
annee  fur  toutes  nos  Miffions,  &  entr'autres  de  la  con- 
uerfion  &  du  Baptefme  de  plus  de  fix  cents  Sauuages, 
que  pouuons  nous  defirer  dauantage?  &  n'auons  nous 
pas  fujet  d 'adorer  la  Sageffe  &  puiffance  de  Dieu,  qui 
f9ait  tirer  la  vie  de  la  mort,  &  de  la  reprobation  des 
vns,  le  falut  &  la  confommation  de  fes  Efleus. 

Les  lettres  done  regeues  des  Hurons  nous  appren- 
nent,  que  la  fidelite  &  ferueur  de  leurs  Chreftiens  y 
eft  plus  grande  que  iamais;  qu'ils  y  ont  baptize  plus 
de  cinq  cents  perfonnes;  qu'ils  ont  reftably  &  eftably 
quelques  nouuelles  miffions ;  bref  que  I'ouurage  qu'ils 
ont  commence,  prend  fon  accroiffement,  &  que  le  fon 
de  I'Euangile  retentit  toufiours  de  plus  en  plus,  &  fe 
fait  entendre  des  Nations  plus  efloignees;  i'efpere 
que  toft  ou  tard  nous  en  verrons  le  detail.  Cepen- 
dant  ie  me  trouue  affez  en  peine :  ils  me  demandent 
auec  tant  d'inftance  fix  de  nos  Peres,  que  ie  ne  puis 
les  leur  refufer:  &  d'autre  cofte  [5]  i'ay  bien  de  la 
peine  k  me  refoudre  k  tant  rifquer  tout  d'vn  coup: 
ne  rie  rifquer  c'eft  tout  perdre;  &  on  ne  pent  rifquer 
auec  plus  d'affeurance  de  profit,  le  courage  &  la 
bonne  difpofition  de  ceux  qui  font  venus  de  France 
ces  deux  dernieres  annees,  &  qui  n'ont  pu  monter 
iufques  a  cette  heure  donnent  vn  grand  poix  pour  fe 
refoudre  d'en  enuoyer  pluftoft  plus  que  moins.  Ie 
prie  Dieu  qu'il  difpofe  le  tout  pour  le  mieux. 

D'autre  part  on  n'a  laiffe  efchapper  icy  bas  aucune 
occafion  d'y  feruir  le  Maiftre  qui  nous  met  en  befo- 
gne;  c'eft  ce  que  voftre  Reuerence  pourra  voir  plus 
en  particulier  en  cette  Relation,  qui  ie  m'alTeure  la 
conuaincra,    que    nous   auons    plus    de   befoing   que 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  223 

abroad  this  year  on  all  our  Missions, —  and  among 
others,  the  conversion  and  Baptism  of  more  than  six 
hundred  Savages, —  what  can  we  desire  further  ?  And 
have  we  not  cause  to  adore  the  Wisdom  and  power 
of  God,  who  knows  how  to  draw  life  out  of  death, 
and,  from  the  reprobation  of  some,  the  salvation  and 
the  perfection  of  his  Elect? 

The  letters,  then,  received  from  the  Hurons, 
inform  us  that  the  fidelity  and  fervor  of  their  Chris- 
tians are  greater  than  ever ;  that  they  have  baptized 
there  more  than  five  hundred  persons;  that  they 
have  reestablished  or  newly  established  several 
missions.  They  say,  in  short,  that  the  work  which 
they  have  commenced  is  beginning  to  increase,  and 
that  the  sound  of  the  Gospel  resounds  continually 
more  and  more,  and  makes  itself  heard  by  the  more 
distant  Nations.  I  hope  that,  sooner  or  later,  we 
shall  see  the  details  thereof.  Meanwhile,  I  find 
myself  in  considerable  difficulty.  They  ask  me 
with  so  much  urgency  for  six  of  our  Fathers,  that  I 
cannot  refuse  them;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  [5]  I 
have  much  trouble  in  bringing  myself  to  risk  so 
much  all  at  once.  To  risk  nothing  is  to  lose  every- 
thing, and  one  cannot  risk  with  more  assurance  of 
profit ;  the  courage  and  good  disposition  of  those  who 
have  come  from  France  these  last  two  years,  and 
who  hitherto  have  not  been  able  to  go  up,  give  great 
weight  to  the  resolution  of  sending  rather  more  than 
fewer  of  them.  I  pray  God  that  he  arrange  every- 
thing for  the  best. 

On  another  side,  no  opportunity  has  been  allowed 
to  escape,  down  here,  to  serve  the  Master  who  em- 
ploys us ;  this  is  what  your  Reverence  will  be  able 
to  see  more  especially  in  this  Relation.     It  will,  I 


224  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.  30 

iamais  du  fecours  de  fes  Sainc5ts  Sacrifices  &  Prieres, 
&  de  toute  la  Prouince,  aufquelles  ie  me  recom- 
mande,  &  toutes  nos  affaires  en  toute  humility  de 
toute  I'eftendue  de  mon  affedtion. 

De  Voftre  Reuerence, 
De  Quebek    ce  Tres-humble     &     tres-obeif- 

20.    d' 06lobre  fant  feruiteur,  felon  Dieu, 

[l]647,  HiEROSME   Lalemant. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  225 

am  assured,  convince  you  that  we  have  more  need 
than  ever  of  the  assistance  of  your  Holy  Sacrifices 
and  Prayers,  and  of  those  of  the  whole  Province, — 
to  which  I  commend  myself  and  all  our  affairs  in  all 
humility,  to  the  entire  extent  of  my  affection. 

Your  Reverence's 
From  Quebek,  this  Very  humble  and  very  obedi- 

20th    of   October  J  ent  servant  in  God, 

1647.  HiEROSME    LaLEMANT. 


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.30 


[6]  CHAPITRE  I. 

DE    LA    PERFIDIE   DES    HIROQUOIS. 

LE  24.  de  Septembre  de  I'an  paffe  1646.  le  Pere 
Ifaac  logues  partit  des  Trois  Riuieres,  pour 
aller  au  pais  des  Hiroquois  Agneronons  afin 
d'entretenir  la  paix  qu'ils  auoient  fi  folemnellement 
conclue  &  pour  cultiuer  «&  augmenter  la  femence  de 
I'Euangile  qu'il  auoit  commance  de  letter  dans  cette 
terre  malheureufe  &  ingratte,  deuant  qu'il  arriuafl 
en  ce  pais-lk,  ce  peuple  auoit  enuoye  des  prefens  aux 
Hiroquois  des  pais  plus  hauts,  que  nous  appellons 
Onondageronons  Siint8aronons  &  quelques  autres,  afin 
de  confirmer  fortement  leurs  alliances,  «&  coniurer  la 
ruine  des  Fran5ois,  «&  des  peuples  leurs  alliez.  Le 
fujet  de  cette  perfidie  prouient  a  mon  aduis  de  leur 
humeur  guerriere,  qui  ne  peut  demeurer  en  repos,  & 
de  la  gloire,  &  des  profits  qu'ils  tiroient  de  la  guerre, 
&  de  plus,  de  leur  fuperftition,  &  de  la  haine  que  les 
Hurons  captifs  leur  ont  donne  de  la  dodtrine  de  lef us- 
Chrift;  [7]  ces  captifs  nous  ayans  veu  I'opprobre  de 
tout  leur  pais,  a  raifon  des  maladies  contagieufes  & 
populaires,  dont  ils  nous  faifoient  Autheurs  par  nos 
prieres  qu'ils  appelloient  des  charmes ;  ont  iette  ces 
penfees  dans  I'efprit  des  Hiroquois;  que  nous  por- 
tions les  Demons,  que  nous  &  que  noflre  dodtrine 
ne  tedoit  qu'k  leur  ruine :  fi  bien  qu'ils  accuferent  le  P. 
Ifaac  logues  en  fon  premier  voyage  depuis  la  paix 
faite,  d'auoir  cache  des  forts  dans  vn  coffret,  oil  dans 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1647  227 


[6]  CHAPTER  I. 

OF  THE  TREACHERY  OF  THE  HIROQUOIS. 

THE  24th  of  September  of  last  year,  1646,  Father 
Isaac  Jogues  left  Three  Rivers  in  order  to  go 
to  the  country  of  the  Agueronon  Hiroquois,  to 
the  end  of  maintaining  the  peace  which  they  had  so 
solemnly  concluded,  and  in  order  to  cultivate  and 
augment  the  seed  of  the  Gospel  which  he  had 
begun  to  cast  into  that  wretched  and  thankless  land. 
Before  he  arrived  in  that  country,  this  people  had 
sent  presents  to  the  Hiroquois  of  the  upper  coun- 
tries,—  whom  we  call  Onondageronons,  Soiintzvaronons, 
and  some  others, —  in  order  strongly  to  confirm  their 
alliances,  and  to  form  a  conspiracy  for  the  ruin  of  the 
French  and  of  their  allied  tribes.  The  cause  of  this 
treachery  proceeds,  in  my  opinion,  from  their  war- 
like temper,  which  cannot  stay  at  rest,  and  from  the 
glory  and  advantages  which  they  drew  from  war; 
and,  furthermore,  from  their  superstition,  and  from 
the  hatred  which  the  captive  Hurons  have  given 
them  for  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ.  [7]  Those 
captives  —  having  seen  us  the  reproach  of  their 
whole  country,  on  account  of  the  contagious  and 
general  diseases,  of  which  they  made  us  the  Authors 
through  our  prayers,  which  they  called  charms  — 
have  cast  these  notions  into  the  minds  of  the  Hiro- 
quois, that  we  carried  the  Demons  and  that  we  and 
our  doctrine  tended  only  to  their  ruin ;  insomuch  that 
they  accused  Father  Isaac  Jogues,  on  his  first  journey 


228  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 

vne  petite  caiffe  qu'il  laiffoit  a  fon  hofle  pour  gage 
de  fon  retour.  Le  Pere  les  voyans  efmeus  prit  cette 
caiffe,  I'ouurit  deuant  eux,  &  leur  monllra,  &  lailTa 
tout  ce  qui  efloit  dedans.  La  maladie  s'eftant  depuis 
fon  depart  iettee  fur  leurs  corps,  comme  nous  auons 
apris  des  prifonniers  Sauuages  qui  fe  font  efchappez, 
&  les  vers  ayant  peut-eftre  endommagez  leurs  bleds, 
comme  tefmoigne  la  lettre  des  HoUadois;  ces 
pauures  aueuglez  ont  creu  que  le  Pere  auoit  lailTe 
le  Demon  parmy  eux,  &  que  tous  nos  difcours  &  tous 
nos  enfeignemens  ne  vifoient  qu'a  les  exterminer. 
Voilk  les  fujets  pour  lefquels  ils  ont  repris  la  guerre: 
fi  bien  que  le  bon  Pere  logues  maffacre  le  dix- 
huidtiefme  d'Odtobre,  [8]  a  eu  I'honneur  de  fymbo- 
lizer  auec  lefus-Chrift,  eftant  tenu  pour  vn  homme 
qui  auoit  le  Diable  auec  foy;  &  qui  fe  feruoit  de 
Belzebuth  pour  chaffer  les  Demos  de  leurs  ames  & 
de  tout  leur  pais,  ils  tuerent  a  mefme  temps  vn  ieune 
gar9on  qui  I'accompagnoit,  nomme  lean  la  Lande, 
natif  de  la  Ville  de  Dieppe. 

Incontinent  apres  ces  meurtres  dont  nous  n'auons 
eu  connoiflance  qu'au  Printemps,  ils  fe  refpandirent 
en  diuers  endroits  pour  prendre,  tuer,  &  maffacrer 
autant  de  Fran9ois,  d'Algonquins  &  de  Hurons 
qu'ils  pourroient.  Suiuons  les  dans  leurs  courfes,  & 
marquons  les  temps  de  leurs  attaques,  &  de  leur 
chalfe  aux  hommes. 

Le  dixfeptiefme  de  Nouembre  de  I'an  paff6,  trois 
Hurons  de  quatre  qui  eftoient  ^  Montreal  retournans 
de  la  chaffe,  nous  dirent  qu'ils  auoient  perdu  I'vn  de 
leurs  compagnons,  s'eftans  mis  en  deuoir  quelques 
lours  apres  de  Taller  chercher,  ils  furent  pris  par  vne 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  229 

after  the  conclusion  of  peace,  of  having  concealed 
some  spells  in  a  small  chest,  or  little  box,  that  he 
left  with  his  host  as  pledge  of  his  return.  The 
Father,  seeing  them  disturbed,  took  that  box,  opened 
it  before  them,  and  showed  them  and  left  with  them 
everything  that  was  in  it.  Sickness  having  fallen 
upon  their  bodies  after  his  departure,  as  we  have 
learned  from  the  Savage  prisoners  who  have  escaped, 
and  the  worms  having  perhaps  damaged  their  corn, 
as  the  letter  of  the  Dutch  testifies, —  these  poor  blind 
creatures  have  believed  that  the  Father  had  left  the 
Demon  among  them,  and  that  all  our  discourses  and 
all  our  instructions  aimed  only  to  exterminate  them. 
These  are  the  reasons  for  which  they  have  resumed 
the  war;  insomuch  that  the  good  Father  Jogues, 
murdered  on  the  eighteenth  of  October,  [8]  has  had 
the  honor  to  be  a  symbol  of  Jesus  Christ, —  being 
regarded  as  a  man  who  had  the  Devil  with  him,  and 
who  employed  Beelzebub  for  driving  out  the  Demons 
from  their  souls  and  from  all  their  country.  They 
killed  at  the  same  time  a  young  lad  who  accompanied 
him,  named  Jean  la  Lande,  a  native  of  the  City  of 
Dieppe. 

Immediately  after  these  murders,  of  which  we  had 
no  knowledge  until  Spring,  they  spread  themselves 
about  in  various  places,  in  order  to  capture,  kill,  and 
massacre  as  many  French,  Algonquins,  and  Hurons 
as  they  could.  Let  us  follow  them  in  their  raids, 
and  mark  the  times  of  their  attacks  and  of  their  chase 
after  men. 

The  seventeenth  of  November  of  last  year,  three 
Hurons  out  of  four  who  were  at  Montreal,  returning 
from  the  hunt,  told  us  that  they  had  lost  one  of  their 
companions;  having  undertaken  the  duty,  some  days 


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.30 

bande  d'Hiroquois  qui  eftoient  en  embufcade  dedans 
cefbe  Ifle;  on  nous  a  dit  depuis  qu'ils  eftoient  captifs 
au  pais  de  leurs  ennemis,  &  qu'on  n'auoit  apris 
aucune  nouuelle  de  leur  camarade  qu'ils  alloient 
chercher, 

[9]  Le  trentiefme  du  mefme  mois  iour  de  S.  Andre, 
deux  Fran9ois  s'efkant  vn  petit  ecartez  de  I'habitatio 
de  Montreal,  furent  pris  &  emmenez  par  ces  Barba- 
res ;  nous  en  auons  demande  des  nouuelles  aux  captifs 
efchappez  du  pais  des  Agneronons,  ils  n'en  ont  eu 
aucune  connoiffance,  ce  qui  nous  fait  conjedturer  que 
s'eitans  peut-eftre  defliez  pour  efuader,  ils  ont  efte 
repris  &  affommez,  ou  qu'ils  font  morts  de  faim  &  de 
froid  dedans  les  bois :  ou  que  ces  perfides,  ce  qui  efl 
plus  probable,  ne  trouuans  pas  de  viures  "k  leur  retour; 
car  la  faifon  eftoit  mauuaife,  les  aurot  tuez  & 
mangez  en  chemin :  le  bruit  a  couru  qu'on  auoit  veu 
leurs  cheuelures  dans  le  pais  des  Hiroquois. 

Le  cinquiefme  de  Mars  de  cette  annee  1647.  deux 
Algonquinsdes  Trois  Riuieres,  eftans  partis  auec  deux 
f  emmes  pour  aller  k  quatre  ou  cinq  lieues  de  Ik  querir 
la  chair  d'vn  Elan  tue  par  vn  Huron,  furent  renco- 
trez  par  vne  efcoiiade  d'Hiroquois  qui  les  faifirent, 
&  qui  apprirent  par  leur  moyen  I'eftat  des  Frangois 
aux  Trois  Riuieres,  &  les  endroits  ou  les  Algonquins 
eftoient  allez  depuis  peu  pour  leur  grande  chaff e. 

[10]  Le  lendemain  fixiefme,  qui  elloit  le  iour  des 
Cendres,  comme  tous  les  Frangois  eftoient  affemblez 
a  I'Eglife  pour  y  commancer  le  Seruice  de  la  Saindte 
Quarantaine,  ces  Barbares  vindrent  piller  deux  mai- 
fons  vn  petit  efcartez  du  fort,  on  tient  qu'ils  empor- 
terent  la  charge  de  plus  de  quinze  homes ;  plufieurs 
Frangois  auoient  referu6  en  cet  endroit  la  meilleure 


1646 -47J  RELATION  OF  i647  231 

afterward,  of  going  to  look  for  him,  they  were  taken 
by  a  band  of  Hiroquois,  in  ambush  on  that  Island.  We 
have  since  been  told  that  they  were  captives  in  the 
country  of  their  enemies,  and  that  no  news  had  been 
learned  of  their  comrade  whom  they  went  to  seek. 

[9]  The  thirtieth  of  the  same  month,  the  day  of 
St.  Andrew,  two  Frenchmen,  having  gone  a  little 
distance  from  the  settlement  of  Montreal,  were  taken 
and  carried  away  by  those  Barbarians.  We  have 
asked  news  of  them  from  the  captives  who  have 
escaped  from  the  country  of  the  Agneronons;  these 
have  had  no  knowledge  about  them.  This  makes  us 
conjecture  that,  having  perhaps  unbound  themselves 
in  order  to  escape,  they  have  been  taken  again  and 
beaten  to  death,  or  that  they  have  died  of  hunger  and 
cold  in  the  woods :  or  —  which  is  more  probable  — 
that  those  perfidious  ones,  finding  no  provisions  at 
their  return, —  for  the  season  was  bad, —  may  have 
killed  and  eaten  them  by  the  way.  The  rumor  has 
been  current  that  their  scalps  had  been  seen  in  the 
country  of  the  Hiroquois. 

The  fifth  of  March  of  this  year,  1647,  two  Algon- 
quins  of  Three  Rivers  —  having  started  with  two 
women  in  order  to  go  four  or  five  leagues  thence, 
to  bring  away  the  meat  of  an  Elk  killed  by  a 
Huron  —  were  met  by  a  squad  of  Hiroquois,  who 
seized  them,  and  who  learned  by  their  means  the 
condition  of  the  French  at  Three  Rivers  and  the 
places  where  the  Algonquins  had  recently  gone  for 
their  great  hunt. 

[10]  The  next  day,  the  sixth, — which  was  Ash 
Wednesday,  when  all  the  French  were  assembled  at 
the  Church  in  order  to  begin  there  the  Service  of 
Holy  Lent, —  those  Barbarians  came  to  plunder  two 


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.30 

partie  de  leurs  petits  meubles.  Au  fortir  de  la  Mefle 
ils  fe  trouuerent  denuez  d'habits,  de  couuertures,  de 
poudre,  de  plomb  &  d'arquebufes,  &  d'autres  chofes 
femblables,  ces  voleurs  ne  leur  ayans  rien  laiff6  que 
ce  qu'ils  ne  pouuoient  pas  emporter  la  refignation  & 
la  patience  des  affligez  fut  excellente,  &  la  charite 
des  autres  Fran9ois  rauifsate.  Les  vns  loiioient  Dieu 
dans  leur  perte,  &  les  autres  I'exaltoient  par  leurs 
charitez,  tel  n'auoit  que  deux  habits  qui  en  donna  vn 
tres-volontiers  par  aumofne.  Vn  autre  ayant  apris 
cette  nouuelle  fit  charger  vne  traifne  de  linge  &  d'ha- 
bits propres  pour  des  hommes  &  des  femmes,  &  s'en 
alia  luy  mefme  prefenter  ce  fecours  auec  fa  femme, 
s'excufant  aupres  de  ces  pauures  affligez,  s'il  leur 
oflfroit  h  peu  de  chofe ;  iamais  dit  vn  Pere  de  noflre 
[ii]  Copagnie  qui  fe  trouua  prefent,  ie  ne  congeu 
mieux  la  ferueur  &  la  charite  des  Chrefties  de  la  pri- 
mitiue  Eglife  que  dans  ce  rencotre  ou  chacun  s'effor- 
9oit  de  faire  "k  qui  mieux  mieux.  Ces  larrons  ayans 
mis  leur  butin  en  affeurance,  fe  diuiferent  en  deux 
bandes  pour  aller  trouuer  les  Algonquins  qui  chaf- 
foient,  les  vns  du  cofte  du  Sud,  les  autres  du  cofle  du 
Nord  de  la  grande  Riuiere,  comme  ils  auoient  apris 
de  leurs  captifs  les  endroits  ou  ces  pauures  gens 
s'efloient  retirez,  ils  trouuerent  aifement  leurs  piltes 
marquez  deflus  la  neige.  Ceux  qui  tirerent  au 
Nord  par  leurs  piftes  vindrent  en  leurs  cabanes: 
mais  tous  les  hommes  eftans  a  la  chaffe  ils  ne 
rencontrerent  que  des  femmes  &  des  enfans  s'eltans 
faifis  des  perfonnes  &  du  bagage,  fans  permettre 
qu'aucun  efchappaft,  dix  Hyroquois  s'en  allerent 
chercher  le  lieu  oil  eftoient  les  hommes,  ils  apper- 
^eurent  Simon  Piefcaret  qui  s'en  reuenoit  tout  feul 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  233 

houses  somewhat  isolated  from  the  fort.  It  is  esti- 
mated that  they  carried  off  what  would  load  more 
than  fifteen  men ;  for  several  Frenchmen  had  reserved 
in  that  place  the  greater  part  of  their  little  property. 
At  the  end  of  Mass,  they  found  themselves  stripped 
of  clothing,  blankets,  powder,  lead,  and  arquebuses, 
and  of  other  like  things, —  those  robbers  having  left 
them  nothing  save  what  they  could  not  carry  away. 
The  resignation  and  patience  of  those  afflicted  was 
excellent,  and  the  charity  of  the  other  French  was 
delightful.  Some  were  praising  God  in  their  loss, 
and  the  others  were  exalting  him  by  their  charities ; 
a  certain  man,  who  had  only  two  coats,  very  gladly 
gave  one  of  them  in  alms.  Another,  having  learned 
this  news,  had  a  sledge  laden  with  linen  and  clothing 
suitable  for  men  and  for  women,  and  went  in  person 
to  offer  this  assistance,  along  with  his  wife, —  excus- 
ing himself  to  those  poor  afflicted  people,  for  having 
offered  them  so  little.  "  Never,"  says  a  Father  of 
our  [ii]  Society  who  chanced  to  be  present,  "  did  I 
better  conceive  the  fervor  and  charity  of  the  Chris- 
tians of  the  primitive  Church,  than  on  this  occasion, 
when  each  one  was  striving  to  emulate  the  other." 
Those  thieves,  having  placed  their  booty  in  safety, 
divided  themselves  into  two  bands  in  order  to  go  and 
find  the  Algonquins  who  were  hunting, —  some  on 
the  South  side,  others  on  the  North  side,  of  the 
great  River.  As  they  had  learned  from  their  cap- 
tives the  places  whither  those  poor  people  had  gone, 
they  easily  found  their  tracks,  marked  upon  the 
snow.  Those  who  proceeded  to  the  North  by  their 
trail  came  to  their  cabins;  but,  all  the  men  being  at 
the  chase,  they  encountered  only  women  and  chil- 
dren.    Having  seized  persons  and  baggage,  without 


234  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  jASUITES         [Vol.30 

^  la  negligente,  ils  I'aborderent  en  trahifon,  con- 
noiffant  fort  bien  que  s'ils  raffailloient  k  defcouuert 
qu'ils  auroient  affaire  a  vn  homme  qui  ne  fe  rendroit 
pas  fans  combat:  comme  il  n'en  vit  que  dix  il  creut 
qu'ils  venoient  en  amis  &  en  vifite;  [12]  c'eft  pourquoy 
il  fe  mit  a  entoner  fa  chanfon  de  paix,  leur  tefmoi- 
gnant  de  la  joye  de  leur  venue,  ils  I'abordent  auec 
vn  beau  femblant:  mais  vn  perfide  &  deloyal  luy 
langa  fon  efpee  dans  les  reins,  &  le  tranfperga  d' outre 
en  outre ;  ce  pauure  homme  tomba  mort  fur  la  place, 
ils  luy  enleuent  la  cheuelure,  la  rapportent  aux 
cabanes,  &  auffi-toft  les  Hiroquois  vont  a  la  chaffe 
des  autres  qu'ils  eurent  bien  toft  rencontrez  &  furpris, 
voil^  difoit  vne  prif onniere  comme  nous  f uf mes  trahis, 
felon  que  nos  ennemis  mefmes  le  racomptent. 

Ceux  qui  marcherent  au  Sud  attaquerent  lean 
Tai^iskaron,  &  quelques  autres  Capitaines,  &  leur 
fuitte,  ces  pauures  gens  venoient  de  prier  Dieu  pour 
d^cabaner  &  pour  s'auancer  plus  auant  dans  les  bois, 
ils  eftoient  accompagnez  de  leurs  femmes  &  de  leurs 
enfans,  &  par  confequet  moins  difpofez  pour  fe  def- 
fendre.  Marie  femme  de  lean  Baptifte  Manit^nagSch, 
marchant  des  dernieres  auec  fon  enfant,  les  ayant 
apper9eus  comme  ils  fe  iettoient  fur  vn  Huron  qui 
tenoit  I'arriere-garde,  crie  a  fon  mary  qu'il  double  le 
pas,  pour  donner  aduis  a  ceux  qui  tenoient  le  deuant 
de  fe  mettre  en  deffence :  il  met  auffi-toft  la  [13]  main 
aux  armes,  &  tue  le  premier  Hiroquois  qui  marchoit 
en  tefte :  mais  il  f ut  bien  toft  maffacre  par  ceux  qui 
le  fuiuoiet.  L'ennemy  fe  repand  auCQ-toft  de  tous 
coftez,  enuironnant  ces  bons  Neophytes  &  ces  Cate- 
chumenes,  Bernard  ^apmangSck,  homme  adroit  & 
vaillant,  tue  le  premier  qu'il  eut  "k  la  rencontre:  mais 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1647  235 


allowing  any  one  to  escape,  ten  Hyroquois  went  to 
seek  the  place  where  the  men  were.  They  perceived 
Simon  Piescaret,  who  was  returning  all  alone  and 
carelessly ;  they  accosted  him  treacherously,  knowing 
very  well  that,  if  they  assailed  him  openly,  they 
would  have  to  deal  with  a  man  who  would  not  sur- 
render without  fighting.  As  he  saw  only  ten  of 
them,  he  supposed  that  they  were  coming  as  friends 
and  on  a  visit;  [12]  for  that  reason,  he  began  to  sing 
his  song  of  peace,  expressing  to  them  his  joy  at  their 
coming.  They  accosted  him  with  friendly  mien ;  but 
one  man,  treacherous  and  false,  thrust  a  javelin  into 
his  loins,  and  pierced  him  through  and  through. 
The  poor  man  fell  dead  upon  the  spot ;  the  Hiroquois 
remove  his  hair,  and  carry  it  back  to  the  cabins ;  and 
they  straightway  go  in  pursuit  of  the  others,  whom 
they  soon  encountered  and  surprised.  "  It  is  thus," 
said  a  captive  woman,  "that  we  were  betrayed,  ac- 
cording to  what  our  enemies  themselves  relate." 

Those  who  marched  to  the  South,  attacked  Jean 
Tawiskaron  and  some  other  Captains  and  their  follow- 
ers; these  poor  people  had  just  prayed  to  God,  in- 
tending to  leave  their  cabins  and  advance  farther 
into  the  woods.  They  were  accompanied  by  their 
wives  and  children,  and  were  consequently  less  pre- 
pared to  defend  themselves.  Marie,  wife  of  Jean 
Baptiste  Manitomiagouch,  —  walking  among  the  last, 
with  her  child, —  having  perceived  them  as  they 
were  casting  themselves  upon  a  Huron  who  marched 
as  rear-guard,  cries  to  her  husband  to  quicken  his 
pace,  in  order  to  give  warning  to  those  who  were  at 
the  front,  to  place  themselves  on  the  defensive.  He 
forthwith  lays  [  1 3]  hands  on  his  weapons,  and  kills  the 
first   Hiroquois,   who    was  marching   ahead;  but  he 


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.30 

il  fut  bien  toft  mis  k  mort,  fans  eftre  reconneu  des 
Hiroqnois,  qui  luy  auroient  donne  la  vie,  comrtie 
eftant  de  leur  nation.  Les  Algonquins  I'auoient  pris 
aff ez  ieune  auec  vn  fien  frere ;  tous  deux  eftoient  bap- 
tizez,  &  tous  deux  bons  Chreftiens ;  fon  frere,  nomme 
Pierre  Achkameg,  ayant  eft^  repris  par  les  Hiroquois, 
fe  trouua  en  ce  combat ;  ce  fut  luy  qui  fe  faifit  de  la 
femme  de  lean  Baptifte:  laquelle  I'ayant  reconneu, 
luy  demanda  auffi-toft,  s'il  n'y  auoit  pas  vn  Pere  de 
noftre  Compagnie  dans  les  Bourgades  Hiroquoifes? 
non  dit-il,  on  a  tue  les  Frangois  deuant  que  de  venir 
en  guerre;  cefte  pauure  femme  penfoit  defia  ^  fe 
confefler  quand  elle  feroit  arriuee  au  pais  des  enne- 
mis ;  bref  il  y  en  eut  de  bleffez  &  de  tuez  de  part  & 
d'autre:  mais  bien  peu  du  cofte  des  Hiroquois; 
pource  qu'ils  eftoient  fur  leurs  armes;  &  que  les 
Algonquins  [14]  furent  furpris  dans  vn  attirail  de 
femmes  &  d'enfans,  &  de  bagage;  fi  toft  que  les 
vainqueurs  eurent  fait  rendre  les  armes  aux  vaincus, 
&  qu'ils  eurent  garrotte  ceux  qui  eftoient  capables 
de  s'enfuir;  ils  fe  iettent  fur  les  vieillards,  &  fur  les 
enfans,  &  fur  les  femmes,  qui  n'eftoient  pas  capables 
de  les  fuiure;  ils  tranchent,  ils  coupent,  ils  taillent, 
ils  bruflent,  ils  mettent  tout  a  feu  &  a  fang;  ils 
battent,  ils  frappent,  ils  arrachent  les  ongles  a  ceux 
qu'ils  veulent  mener  en  triomphe  en  leur  pais;  vne 
pauure  femme  Algonquine,  voyant  vn  fien  parent 
fort  bleffe,  &  craignant  que  les  Hiroquois  ne  I'ache- 
uaffent,  I'enueloppe  fur  vn  traifneau,  &  le  tire  apres 
les  ennemis  tous  chargez  de  prifonniers  &  de  d6- 
poiiilles.  Ces  Barbares,  auant  que  de  fe  diuifer,  s'e- 
ftoient  donnez  le  rendes-vous  dans  vne  petite  riuiere 
du  lac  Saindt  Pierre,  ou  ceux-cy  arriuerent  les  pre- 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  ib47  237 

was  soon  murdered  by  those  who  followed  this  man. 
The  enemy  spreads  immediately  on  all  sides,  sur- 
rounding those  good  Neophytes  and  Catechumens. 
Bernard  Wapinangouch,  an  adroit  and  valiant  man, 
kills  the  first  one  whom  he  had  at  close  quarters ;  but 
he  was  soon  put  to  death,  without  being  recognized 
by  the  Hiroquois,  who  would  have  granted  him  his 
life,  as  being  of  their  nation.  The  Algonquins  had 
taken  him  quite  young,  with  a  brother  of  his;  both 
were  baptized,  and  both  good  Christians.  His 
brother,  named  Pierre  Achkameg,  having  been  recap- 
tured by  the  Hiroquois,  chanced  to  be  in  this  combat ; 
it  was  he  who  seized  Jean  Baptiste's  wife, —  who, 
having  recognized  him,  at  once  asked  him  whether 
there  were  not  a  Father  of  our  Society  in  the 
Hiroquois  Villages.  "  No,"  said  he,  "  the  French 
were  killed  before  we  came  to  war."  This  poor 
woman  was  already  thinking  of  confessing  when 
she  should  have  arrived  in  the  enemies'  country. 
In  short,  there  were  some  wounded  and  killed  on 
both  sides, —  but  very  few  on  the  side  of  the  Hiro- 
quois, because  they  were  in  arms;  whereas  the 
Algonquins  [14]  were  surprised  in  a  train  of  women 
and  children,  and  baggage.  As  soon  as  the  con- 
querors had  caused  the  conquered  to  give  up  their 
arms,  and  had  fast  bound  those  who  were  likely  to 
escape,  they  throw  themselves  upon  the  old  men,  the 
children,  and  the  women,  who  were  not  able  to  fol- 
low them.  They  slash,  they  cut,  they  gash,  they 
burn,  they  put  everything  to  fire  and  to  blood;  they 
beat,  they  strike,  they  tear  out  the  nails  of  those 
whom  they  wish  to  lead  in  triumph  into  their  coun- 
try. A  poor  Algonquin  woman,  seeing  a  relative 
of   hers    severely    wounded,    and    fearing    lest   the 


238  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  30 

miers ;  les  autres  qui  auoient  maffacre  Simon  Piefca- 
ret  parurent  le  lendemain,  menans  en  triomphe  leurs 
captifs,  auec  des  huees  barbaref ques ;  ces  pauures 
gens  ne  fgachant  rien  de  la  prife  de  leurs  amis  &  de 
leurs  alliez,  fe  regardans  les  vns  les  autres,  chargez 
de  playes  &  de  liens;  baifferent  [15]  les  yeux  en 
terre,  accablez  d'angoiffes  &  de  douleur.  lean 
Ta8ichkaron  qui  eftoit  du  nombre  des  prifonniers  ne 
perdit  point  coeur  dans  cette  grande  confternation ;  il 
fe  leue,  &  d'vn  regard  conftant  il  s'adreffe  ^  tous  les 
Chreftiens,  &  a  tous  les  Catechumenes ;  courage  leur 
dit-il  mes  freres,  ne  quittons  point  la  Foy  ny  la 
priere.  La  fuperbe  de  nos  ennemis  paffera  bien-toft; 
nos  tourmens  ne  feront  pas  de  longue  duree,  &  le 
Ciel  fera  nofkre  demeure  eternelle,  que  perfonne  ne 
branfle  dans  fa  creance ;  nous  ne  fommes  pas  delaif- 
f ez  de  Dieu  pour  eftre  mif erables ;  mettons  nous  "k 
genoux,  &  le  prions  de  nous  donner  courage  dans  nos 
tourmens.  Auffi-toft,  non  feulement  les  Chreftiens, 
mais  encore  les  Catechumenes,  &  les  parens  fe  iettent 
k  terre,  &  I'vn  d'eux  prononjant  les  prieres  a  haute 
voix,  tous  les  autres  le  fuiuirent  diftindtement  &,  leur 
ordinaire ;  ils  chanterent  en  fuitte  des  Cantiques  Spiri- 
tuels,  pour  fe  confoler  auec  noftre  Seigneur  dans 
leurs  angoiffes;  les  Hiroquois  les  regardoient  auec 
eflonnement,  I'vn  d'eux  fe  mettant  a  rire  Marie  ka 
makate^ing^etch  femme  de  lean  Baptifte.  Manit^nagi^ch 
dit  ^  Pierre  Achkameg'^.  dis  ^  tes  gens  [16]  qu'ils  ne 
fe  gauffent  point  d'vne  chofe  fi  Saindte?  c'eft  noftre 
couftume  de  prier  Dieu,  il  chaftiera  ceux  qui  le  mef- 
prifent;  ces  Barbares  ayant  apris  ce  qu'elle  difoit, 
s'efclatterent  en  rifee,  fe  mocquans  de  la  piete  &  de 
la  deuotion  de  leurs  captifs:   Pierre  Achkatneg,  deuenu 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  239 


Hiroquois  should  despatch  him,   fastens   him    upon 
a    sledge,    and   drags  him    after    the    enemies,   who 
were  all    laden    with    prisoners  and  spoils.      Those 
Barbarians,   before    separating,  had  appointed  their 
rendezvous  on   a  little  river  of   lake    Saint   Pierre, 
where  these   latter    ones    arrived    first;  the    others, 
who    had  murdered   Simon   Piescaret,  appeared  the 
next   day,   leading  in  triumph   their  captives,  with 
barbarous  hootings.     These  poor  people,    knowing 
nothing  of  the   capture  of  their  friends  and   allies, 
looking  at  one  another  burdened  with  wounds  and 
bonds,  lowered  [15]  their  eyes  to  the  ground,  over- 
whelmed with  anguish  and  pain.     Jean  TawicJikaron, 
who  was  of  the  number  of  the  prisoners,  did  not  lose 
heart  in  this  great  consternation;  he  rises,  and,  with 
a  steadfast  look,  he  addresses  all  the  Christians  and 
Catechumens.     "Courage!"   he  says  to  them ;  "my 
brothers,  let  us  not  forsake  the  Faith  or  prayer.     The 
arrogance  of  our  enemies  will  soon  pass  away,  our 
torments  will  not  be  of  long  duration,  and  Heaven 
will  be  our  eternal  dwelling.     Let  no  one  waver  in 
his  belief,  we  are  not  abandoned  of  God,  to  be  miser- 
able:   let  us  kneel   down   and  pray  him  to  give  us 
courage   in   our  torments."     Immediately,  not  only 
the   Christians,  but  also  the   Catechumens   and    the 
relatives,  fall  upon  the  ground;  and,   one  of   them 
pronouncing    the    prayers  in  a  loud    voice,    all    the 
others  followed  him  distinctly,  in  their  usual  way; 
they  next  sang   some   Spiritual  Hymns,  in  order  to 
console  themselves  with  our  Lord  in  their  anguish. 
The   Hiroquois  looked  at  them  with  astonishment; 
one  of  them  beginning  to  laugh,  Marie  ka  makate- 
wingwetch,  wife  of  Jean  Baptiste  Manitoiinagotich,  said 
to  Pierre  Achkameg,  "  Tell  thy  people  [16]  that  they 


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  3^ 

loup  parmy  les  loups  fut  touche,  il  baiffa  la  tefte  fans 
mot  dire,  refpecftant  les  prieres  qu'il  auoit  autrefois 
proferees  de  fa  bouche.  Les  femmes  ne  furent  point 
efpouuantees  de  ces  cris  &  de  ces  brocards;  celles 
qui  portoiet  leurs  enfans  auec  elles,  leur  faifoient 
faire  le  figne  de  la  Croix ;  &  pas  vn  petit  ou  grad  ne 
mangeoit  qu'il  ne  le  fit  en  face  de  leurs  ennemis,  ils 
fe  feruoient  de  leurs  doigts  pour  reciter  leur  chappe- 
let;  les  Hiroquois  leur  ayant  pille  &  enleue  tout  ce 
qu'ils  auoient  iufques  aux  plus  petites  marques  de 
leur  deuotion  auant  que  de  fortir  de  cette  riuiere,  ils 
bruflerent  tout  vif  cet  homme  qui  auoit  efte  bleffe, 
craignant  qu'il  ne  mourut  en  chemin  d'vne  mort 
moins  cruelle;  c'eft  chofe  eftrange,  comme  la  cru- 
aute  eft  douce,  &  quafi  naturelle  a  ces  Barbares. 
Nous  auons  apris  toutes  ces  particularitez  de  ceux 
qui  fe  font  fauuez  des  mains  &  du  pais  de  ces  perfides. 
[17]  Ils  nous  racomptoient  qu'vn  homme  s'eflant 
d'eftach6  auoit  efte  r'attrappe  dans  fa  fuitte,  &  qu'on 
luy  auoit  brufl6  la  plante  des  pieds  pour  I'empefcher 
de  fuyr  vne  autre  fois.  On  nous  a  affeure  que  ces 
Tyrans  crucifierent  vn  petit  enfant  baptiz6,  aage  de 
trois  ou  quatre  ans,  luy  eftendant  le  corps  fur  vne 
groffe  efcorce,  &  luy  pergant  fes  petites  mains  &  fes 
petits  pieds  auec  des  battos  pointus.  Ces  cruautez 
inoiiies  nous  font  afCez  entendre  que  ces  peuples  ne 
font  pas  loing  de  la  mefure  de  leurs  crimes. 

Ces  vi(5times  eftant  arriuez  dans  le  pais,  on  les 
recent  auec  les  cris,  auec  les  huees,  auec  les  bro- 
cards, auec  les  baftonnades,  &  auec  les  feux  ac- 
couftumez ;  on  auoit  fait  dreff er  deux  grands  6chaf- 
faux,  I'vn  fut  pour  les  hommes,  &  I'autre  pour  les 
femmes  qu'on  expofa  tons  nuds  k  la  rifee  des  petits 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  241 

must  not  jeer  at  a  thing  so  Holy.  It  is  our  custom 
to  pray  to  God;  he  will  punish  those  who  despise 
him."  Those  Barbarians,  having  learned  what  she 
was  saying,  broke  out  in  derision,  mocking  at  the 
piety  and  devotion  of  their  captives.  Yioxr^  Achkameg, 
who  had  become  a  wolf  among  the  wolves,  was 
touched ;  he  lowered  his  head  without  saying  a  word, 
respecting  the  prayers  which  he  had  formerly  uttered 
with  his  own  lips.  The  women  were  not  frightened 
by  these  shouts  and  taunts, —  those  who  carried  their 
children  with  them  had  them  make  the  sign  of  the 
Cross;  and  not  one,  small  or  great,  would  eat  without 
making  this  sign  in  the  presence  of  their  enemies. 
They  used  their  fingers  to  recite  their  rosary, —  the 
Hiroquois  having  pillaged  and  taken  away  from 
them  everything  that  they  had,  even  to  the  smallest 
tokens  of  their  devotion.  Before  leaving  that  river, 
they  burned  alive  that  man  who  had  been  wounded, 
fearing  lest  he  should  die  on  the  way,  by  a  death 
less  cruel;  it  is  strange  how  pleasant,  and  almost 
natural,  is  cruelty  to  these  Barbarians.  We  have 
learned  all  these  particulars  from  those  who  have 
escaped  from  the  hands  and  the  country  of  those 
treacherous  people.  [  1 7]  These  related  to  us  that  one 
man,  having  detached  himself,  had  been  overtaken 
in  his  flight ;  and  that  they  had  burned  the  soles  of 
his  feet,  in  order  to  prevent  him  from  fleeing  another 
time.  We  have  been  assured  that  those  Tyrants 
crucified  a  little  baptized  child,  aged  three  or  four 
years,  by  stretching  its  body  upon  a  great  piece  of 
bark  and  piercing  its  little  hands  and  feet  with 
pointed  sticks.  These  unheard-of  cruelties  give  us 
plainly  to  understand  that  these  peoples  are  not  far 
from  the  limit  of  their  crimes. 


242  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  SO 

&  des  grands.  Auffi-toft  qu'ils  furent  fur  ces  the- 
atres, ils  demaderent  tons,  &  hommes  &  femmes,  a 
parler  au  Pere  Ifaac  logues :  tant  pour  baptizer  les 
Catechumenes,  que  pour  entendre  les  Chreftiens  de 
confeffion,  Les  Algonquines  captiues  depuis  vn 
long-temps  en  ce  pais-lk,  s'approchoient  doucement 
de  leurs  compatriottes,  [i8]  &  leur  difoient  qu'on 
auoit  miferablement  maffacre  le  pauure  Pere.  Apres 
les  faluades  &  les  pourmenades  das  les  trois  Bourgs 
des  Agneronons,  ou  on  arrache  les  ongles  s'il  en  refte 
encore,  ou  on  couppe  les  doigts,  ou  on  frappe  fur  les 
playes;  en  vn  mot,  ou  la  rage  &  la  fureur  font 
dechaifnez :  on  donna  la  vie  aux  femmes  &  aux  filles, 
&  a  deux  petits  gar§ons ;  pour  les  hommes  &  pour 
les  ieunes  gens  capables  de  lancer  vn  jauelot  ou  vne 
efp6e,  ils  furent  diftribuez  en  diuerfes  Bourgades 
pour  y  el^re  bruflez,  boiiillis  &  roftis.  Le  Chreftien 
qui  faifoit  les  prieres  publiques  fut  grille  &  tourmen- 
te  d'vne  horrible  fagon:  iamais  au  rapport  d'vne 
perfonne  qui  le  veid  dans  fes  fouffrances,  il  ne  jetta 
aucun  cry,  ny  ne  donna  iamais  aucun  figne  d'vn  coeur 
abbattu ;  il  leuoit  les  yeux  au  Ciel  du  milieu  de  fes 
flammes,  regardant  fixement  le  lieu  oii  fon  ame  afpi- 
roit !  on  comman9a  de  le  tourmenter  deuant  le  Soleil 
couche,  &  on  le  brufla  toute  la  nuidt,  depuis  la  plante 
des  pieds  iufques  a  la  ceinture :  le  lendemain  on  le 
brufla  depuis  la  ceinture  iufques  k  la  tefte:  &  fur  le 
foir  les  forces  luy  manquant,  on  jetta  tout  fon  corps 
grille  dans  des  flammes.  [19]  Cette  rage  paffe  le 
naturel  des  hommes;  les  Demons  y  ont  bonne  part. 

II  y  auoit  parmy  cefte  ieuneffe  vn  enfant  aag6  d'en- 
uiron  15.  ou  16.  ans,  beau  comme  le  iour  dans  I'eftime 
des  Sauuages ;  les   Hiroquois  le  reueftirent  de  leurs 


1646-47]  RELA  TION  OF  1647  243 

Those  victims,  having  arrived  in  the  country,  were 
received  with  shouts,  with  jeers,  with  taunts,  with 
beatings,  and  with  the  customary  fires.  There  had 
been  set  up  two  great  scaffolds, —  one  for  the  men, 
and  the  other  for  the  women,  who  were  all  exposed, 
naked,  to  the  derision  of  small  and  great.  As  soon 
as  they  were  upon  these  stages,  they  all  requested, 
both  men  and  women,  to  speak  to  Father  Isaac 
Jogues, —  that  he  might  baptize  the  Catechumens, 
and  hear  the  Christians  in  confession.  Some  Algon- 
quin women,  who  had  long  been  captive  in  that 
country,  quietly  approached  their  fellow-countrymen 
[18]  and  told  them  that  the  poor  Father  had  been 
wretchedly  murdered.  After  the  greetings  and 
paradings  in  the  three  Villages  of  the  Agneronons, 
where  their  nails  are  torn  out,  if  any  are  still  left; 
where  their  fingers  are  cut;  where  they  are  struck 
upon  their  wounds, —  in  a  word,  where  rage  and  fury 
are  unchained, —  life  was  spared  to  the  women  and 
the  girls,  and  to  two  little  boys.  As  for  the  men 
and  the  youths  able  to  hurl  a  javelin  or  a  lance,  they 
were  distributed  through  various  Villages,  in  order 
there  to  be  burned,  boiled,  and  roasted.  The  Chris- 
tian who  said  the  public  prayers  was  broiled  and 
tormented  in  a  horrible  fashion ;  never,  according  to 
the  report  of  a  person  who  saw  him  in  his  sufferings, 
did  he  utter  any  cry,  or  give  any  sign  of  a  dejected 
heart.  He  raised  his  eyes  to  Heaven  in  the  midst 
of  his  flames,  looking  fixedly  at  the  place  whither 
his  soul  was  aspiring.  They  began  to  torment  him 
before  Sunset,  and  all  night  they  burned  him,  from 
the  soles  of  his  feet  up  to  the  waist.  The  next  day, 
they  burned  him  from  the  waist  to  the  head ;  and 
toward  evening,  his  strength  failing  him,  they  threw 


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.30 


plus  belles  robbes  &  I'ornerent  k  Tauantage,  prenans 
plaifir  de  voir  f es  demarches  &  f on  maintien ;  car  en 
effet  il  auoit  de  la  grace,  quelques-vns  gaignez  par  la 
tendreffe  de  fon  aage  &  par  la  beaute  de  fon  corps, 
parlerent  de  luy  donner  la  vie :  mais  leur  rage  eft 
trop  grande  contre  les  Algon quins ;  ils  le  defpoiiille- 
rent  comme  les  autres,  &  en  firent  leur  joUet  dedans 
les  flammes.  Retournons  s'il  vous  plaift  au  lieu  de 
leur  prife. 

La  deffaite  de  ces  pauures  gens  arriua  le  cinquiefme 
de  Mars :  cinq  perf onnes  f eulement  f e  f auuerent  de 
la  bande  de  Ta^izkaron ;  ils  vindrent  les  vns  apres  les 
autres  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  s'6crians  que  tous  leurs  gens 
eftoient  morts  ou  captif s ;  deux  de  ces  cinq  eftoient 
partis   des  le  grand  matin    pour   aller  k  la  chaff e: 
retournans   fur  le   foir,  ils  entendirent   de  loing  de 
grands    cris,  &  de  grandes  huees,   comme    des  per- 
fonnes  qui  fe  refioiiiffent  de  leur  proye,  &  qui  [20] 
font  dan9er  leurs  prifonniers,  felon  la  couilume  des 
Sauuages;  cela  les  eftonna,  ils  preftent  I'oreille  plus 
attentiuement,    ils  reconneurent   que   ces  bruits    ne 
procedoi[en]t  pas  de  leurs  gens;  c'eft  pourquoy  tour- 
nans  vifage   ils   s'en   courrurent  aux  Trois   Riuieres 
donner  aduis  de  leur  deffaite;    les  Fran9ois  furent 
touchez  au  dernier  point,  ils  donnerent  des  tefmoi- 
gnages   d'vne    douleur    auffi    fenfible,    comme    s'ils 
euffent  apris  la  mort  de  leurs  propres  parens,  les 
grands  exemples  de  vertu  que  quelques-vns  auoient 
donn6,  &  la  riche  difpofition  de  la  plufpart  k  receuoir 
le  Saindt  Baptefme,  frappans  leur  efprit  attendriffoit 
leur  coeur,  ils  faifoient  des  Panegyriques  de  ces  bons 
Neophytes,  qui  regrettoit  vn  Chreftien,  qui  vn  Cate- 
chumene?  plufieurs  defploroient  la  mifere  de  ceux 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  ib47  245 

his  whole  broiled  body  into  the  flames.  [19]  This 
rage  surpasses  the  nature  of  men ;  the  Demons  have 
a  large  part  in  it. 

There  was,  among  this  band  of  youth,  a  stripling 
aged  about  15  or  16  years, —  fair  as  the  day,  in  the 
esteem  of  the  Savages.  The  Hiroquois  clothed  him 
in  their  most  beautiful  robes,  and  adorned  him  to 
advantage,  taking  pleasure  in  seeing  his  gait  and 
deportment;  for,  in  truth,  he  had  grace.  Certain 
persons,  won  by  the  tenderness  of  his  age  and  the 
beauty  of  his  body,  talked  of  sparing  his  life ;  but 
their  rage  against  the  Algonquins  is  too  great ;  they 
stripped  him  like  the  others,  and  made  of  him  their 
plaything  in  the  flames.  Let  us  return,  if  you 
please,  to  the  place  of  their  capture. 

The  defeat  of  these  poor  people  occurred  on  the 
fifth  of  March ;  five  persons  alone  escaped  from  the 
band  of  Tazvizkaron.  They  came,  one  after  the  other, 
to  Three  Rivers,  crying  out  that  all  their  people 
were  dead  or  captive.  Two  of  these  five  had  started 
very  early  in  the  morning,  to  go  to  the  chase ; 
returning,  toward  evening,  they  heard  from  afar, 
fierce  yells  and  loud  jeers,  as  of  persons  who  rejoice 
in  their  prey,  and  who  [20]  are  making  their  prison- 
ers dance,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Savages. 
That  astonished  them ;  they  lent  ear  more  atten- 
tively, and  recognized  that  those  noises  did  not 
proceed  from  their  own  people;  therefore,  turning 
about,  they  hastened  to  Three  Rivers  to  give  notice 
of  their  defeat.  The  French  were  touched  to  the 
last  degree :  they  manifested  a  grief  as  keen  as  if 
they  had  learned  the  death  of  their  own  relatives. 
The  noble  examples  of  virtue  which  some  had  given, 
and  the  generous  disposition  of  most  to  receive  Holy 


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 

qui  auoiet  demande  I'entree  en  I'Eglife  de  Dieu,  & 
qui  ne  I'auoient  pas  obtenue,  pource  qu'on  les  vou- 
loit  tenir  dans  vne  plus  longue  efpreuue ;  on  regretta 
fur  tout  vne  femme,  qui  deuant  fon  depart,  voyant 
qu'vn  petit  enfant  a  la  mammelle  eftoit  deuenu 
orphelin,  fe  prefenta  pour  le  nourrir,  charite  bien 
extraordinaire  pour  vne  payenne !  &,  raifon  des  gran- 
des  difficultez  qu'ils  ont  [21]  d'efleuer  leurs  enfans. 
Leur  couflume  eftoit  jadis,  quand  vne  femme  laiffoit 
fon  petit  incapable  de  manger  &  de  marcher  tout 
feul,  de  le  tuer,  &  de  I'enterrer  dans  le  mefme 
fepulcre  de  fa  mere,  disas  qu'auffi  bien  mourroit-il, 
fi  quelque  nourriffe  fa  proche  parente  ne  s'en  vouloit 
charger. 

Au  refte  il  femble  que  Dieu  auoit  donne  aux 
Algonquins  des  prelTentimens  de  leur  mort ;  ces  deux 
femmes  qui  furent  prifes  les  premieres  eftant  parties 
des  Trois  Riuieres  fans  porter  leurs  colliers  de  por- 
celaines,  retournerent  fur  leurs  pas  pour  les  prendre : 
nous  tomberons,  difoient-elles  entre  les  mains  de 
I'ennemy,  peut-eftre  que  nos  colliers  nous  fauueront 
la  vie. 

Simon  Pieskaret  venant  prendre  conge  de  nos 
Peres,  leur  dit-il,  me  femble  que  ie  m'en  vay  k  la 
mort,  ie  fens  ie  ne  f9ay  quoy  qui  me  dit,  les  Hiro- 
quois  te  feront  mourir:  mais  ma  confolation  eft,  que 
ie  fuis  reconcilie  a  I'Eglife,  &  que  i'iray  au  Ciel  apres 
ma  mort. 

Bernard  ^apmang^ch  fe  confeffa  iufques  a  deux  fois 
deuant  fon  depart,  &  comme  on  luy  demandoit  la 
raifon  de  ce  foin  fi  extraordinaire,  on  m'appelle  dans 
les  bois  [22]  pour  y  mourir,  priez  pour  moy;  car  ie 
ne  reuiendray  plus.      Faites  moy  donner  vne   bale 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  ib47  247 

Baptism,  striking  their  minds,  softened  their  hearts, 
and  they  made  Panegyrics  on  those  good  Neophytes. 
One  lamented  a  Christian,  another  a  Catechumen; 
several  deplored  the  misery  of  those  who  had  asked 
for  admission  into  the  Church  of  God,  and  who  had 
not  obtained  it  because  it  was  desired  to  keep  them 
in  a  longer  probation.  There  was  especial  regret  for 
a  woman  who,  before  her  departure,  seeing  that  a 
little  child  at  the  breast  had  become  an  orphan, 
offered  herself  to  nurse  it, —  a  very  extraordinary 
charity  for  a  pagan,  on  account  of  the  great  difficul- 
ties which  they  have  [21]  in  bringing  up  their  chil- 
dren. Their  custom  was  formerly,  when  a  woman 
left  her  little  one  incapable  of  eating,  and  of  walking 
quite  alone,  to  kill  it,  and  bury  it  in  the  same  sepul- 
chre with  its  mother, —  saying  that  it  might  just  as 
well  die,  if  some  nurse  who  was  its  near  kinswoman 
would  not  take  charge  of  it. 

For  the  rest,  it  seems  as  if  God  had  given  to  the 
Algonquins  presentiments  of  their  death.  Those 
two  women  who  were  the  first  to  be  taken,  having 
started  from  Three  Rivers  without  wearing  their 
porcelain  collars,  retraced  their  steps  in  order  to  get 
these.  "  We  shall  fall,"  they  said,  "  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy ;  perhaps  our  necklaces  will  save  our 
lives." 

Simon  Pieskaret,  coming  to  take  leave  of  our 
Fathers,  said  to  them:  "  It  seems  to  me  that  I  am 
going  away  to  death.  I  feel  something  strange, 
which  tells  me,  '  The  Hiroquois  will  make  thee  die;  ' 
but  my  consolation  is,  that  I  am  reconciled  to  the 
Church,  and  that  I  shall  go  to  Heaven  after  my 
death." 

Bernard  Wapmangouch  confessed  even  twice  before 


248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.30 


pour  tuer  le  premier  Hiroquois  qui  me  voudra  tuer ; 
la  chofe  arriua  comme  il  I'auoit  pensee. 

Auguftin  Tchipak^ch  teint  ce  dif cours  ^  vn  Pere : 
Adieu  mon  Pere  pour  la  derniere  fois,  ie  ne  fgay 
qu'elle  ac5lion  de  grace  vous  rendre  pour  tant  de  bien- 
faits  que  i'ay  receu  de  voftre  charity,  aimez-moy  en- 
core apres  la  mort,  &  priez  pour  mo  ame  quand  vous 
apprendrez  que  ie  f  eray  entre  les  mains  de  nos  enne- 
mis,  afin  que  ie  ne  fois  pas  brufle  deux  fois. 

Vn  nomme  Kit8chi  dit  au  mefme  Pere,  voila  vn 
paquet  de  caftors  que  ie  te  prie  de  donner  k  vn  tel 
quand  tu  le  verras  en  ce  pais-cy?  oiiy:  mais  dit  le 
Pere  ces  caflors  ne  font-ils  pas  k  toy?  ils  n'y  font 
plus  refpond-il ;  car  ie  me  tiens  defia  mort. 

Le  Pere  qui  les  inftruifoit  pendant  I'Hyuer,  remar- 
qua  apres  leur  mort  que  fes  entretiens  plus  ordinaires 
eftoient  des  moyes  de  bien  mourir,  comme  il  fe 
faudroit  comporter  fi  on  eftoit  pris  des  Hiroquois, 
comme  il  faudroit  faire  profit  des  grands  tourmes 
qu'ils  font  fouffrir  k  leurs  prifonniers;  &  quoy  que 
fouuent  il  n'eut  pas  deffein  de  [23]  leur  parler  d'vn 
fujet  fi  trifte;  il  fe  trouuoit  ordinairement  engage 
dans  ces  difcours  fans  y  penfer.  Tons  ces  fentimens 
n'ont  pas  empef ch6  leur  mort,  il  eft  vray :  mais  ils 
ont  puiffamment  fortifi6  leurs  ames.  Dieu  difpofoit 
fes  efleus  par  ces  penfees,  aufquelles  on  n'adioutoit 
point  de  creance,  n'eli:ant  pas  donnez  pour  la  vie  du 
corps:  mais  pour  le  falut  des  ames.  Ie  f9ay  bien 
que  I'inconftance  des  Hiroquois  leur  pouuoit  bien 
donner  ces  deffiances:  mais  comme  elles  eftoient 
quafi  vniuerfelles,  &  dans  les  ames  les  plus  coura- 
geuf es ;  &  que  d'ailleurs  elles  operoient  des  adtions 
de  vie,  des  adtions  d'humilite,  des  affedtions  d'aller 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  249 

his  departure,  and  when  they  asked  him  the  reason 
of  this  so  extraordinary  care,  he  said :  "I  am  called 
into  the  woods  [22]  to  die  there;  pray  for  me,  for  I 
shall  come  back  no  more.  See  that  I  be  given  a  ball, 
in  order  to  kill  the  first  Hiroquois  who  shall  try  to 
kill  me."  The  matter  came  to  pass  as  he  had 
thought. 

Augustin  Tchipakouch  addressed  these  remarks  to 
a  Father:  "  Adieu,  my  Father,  for  the  last  time. 
I  know  not  what  act  of  thanks  to  render  you  for  so 
many  benefits  as  I  have  received  from  your  charity ; 
love  me  still  after  death,  and  pray  for  my  soul  when 
you  shall  learn  that  I  am  in  the  hands  of  our 
enemies,  so  that  I  be  not  twice  burned." 

A  certain  Kitouchi  said  to  the  same  Father :  ' '  There 
is  a  bundle  of  beaver  skins,  that  I  beg  thee  to  give 
such  a  one  when  thou  shalt  see  him  in  this  coun- 
try." "  Yes,  but,"  said  the  Father,  "  are  not  these 
beaver  skins  thine?  "  "  They  are  so  no  longer,"  he 
answers;  "  for  I  account  myself  already  dead." 

The  Father  who  was  instructing  them  during  the 
Winter  remarked,  after  their  deaths,  that  his  more 
usual  conversations  were  upon  the  means  for  dying 
well, —  how  one  should  behave,  if  one  were  taken 
by  the  Hiroquois ;  how  one  should  make  profit  from 
the  great  torments  which  they  cause  their  prisoners 
to  suffer;  and,  though  often  he  had  no  design  of  [23] 
speaking  to  them  on  a  subject  so  sad,  he  commonly 
found  himself  engaged  in  these  discourses  without 
intending  it.  All  these  feelings  have  not  prevented 
their  deaths,  it  is  true ;  but  they  have  strongly  forti- 
fied their  souls.  God  was  preparing  his  elect  by 
these  thoughts,  to  which  no  credence  was  attached, — 
they  being  given  not  for  the  life  of  the  body,  but  for 


250  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

au  Ciel ;  il  ne  faut  pas  douter  qu'elles  ne  priffent 
leur  fource  du  fang  de  lefus-Chrift,  d'ou  prouient  tout 
ce  qui  tend,  &  qui  nous  conduit  k  noflre  falut. 

Pour  conclufio,  ces  deloyaux  ont  fouuet  rode  "k  I'en- 
tour  de  I'habitation  des  Trois  Riuieres:  mais  bien 
plus  fouuent  a  I'entour  de  celle  de  Montreal;  ce  qui 
a  fait  que  Monfieur  d'Aillebourts  s'eft  brauement 
fortifie :  il  eft  loiiable  en  ce  point,  ayant  mieux  ayme 
quitter  quelques  ouurages  particuliers  fort  impor- 
tans,  que  de  manquer  au  public.  Les  habitans  des 
Trois  Riuieres  [24]  fe  font  auffi  reiinis  &  raffemblez, 
afin  de  refifter  plus  facilement  aux  courfes  &  aux 
vols  de  ces  Barbares. 

Or  il  ne  faut  pas  s'imaginer  que  la  rage  des 
Hiroquois,  &  la  perte  de  plufieurs  Chreftiens,  &  de 
plufieurs  Catechumenes  foient  capables  d'^uaciier  le 
myltere  de  la  Croix  de  lefus-Chrift,  ny  arrefter 
I'efficacite,  de  fon  fang.  Nous  mourrons,  nous  ferons 
pris,  nous  feront  bruflez,  nous  ferons  maffacrez,  paffe. 
Le  lit  ne  fait  pas  toufiours  la  plus  belle  mort,  ie  ne 
voy  icy  perfonne  baiffer  la  tefle,  au  contraire,  on 
demande  de  monter  aux  Hurons,  &  quelques-vns 
proteftent  que  les  feux  des  Hiroquois,  font  I'vn  de 
leurs  motifs  pour  entreprendre  vn  voyage  fi  dangereux. 

A  mefme  temps  que  Dieu  nous  a  battus  d'vn  cofl6, 
il  femble  nous  vouloir  confoler  de  1' autre.  Nos 
Peres  des  Hurons  nous  ont  mand6,  que  les  Sauuages 
d'Anaftoh6,  que  nous  croyons  eftre  voifms  de  la  Vir- 
ginie,  &  qui  auoient  autrefois  de  grandes  alliances 
auec  les  Hurons:  en  forte,  qu'il  fe  trouue  encore 
dans  leur  pais  des  gens  de  leurs  contrees.  Ces  Sau- 
uages dis-je,  ont  fait  entendre  ce  peu  de  paroles  aux 
Hurons;  nous  auons  apris  que  vous   [25]  auiez  des 


1646 -47 J  RELATION  OF  1647  251 

the  salvation  of  souls.  I  know  well  that  the  incon- 
stancy of  the  Hiroqiiois  was  quite  enough  to  give 
them  those  feelings  of  distrust ;  but  —  as  they  were 
almost  universal,  and  in  the  most  courageous  souls; 
and  as,  furthermore,  they  produced  moral  actions, 
acts  of  humility,  and  inclinations  for  going  to 
Heaven  —  one  must  not  doubt  that  they  took  their 
source  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  whence  proceeds 
everything  which  tends  toward,  and  which  leads  us 
to,  our  salvation. 

In  conclusion,  those  treacherous  people  have  often 
prowled  about  the  settlement  of  Three  Rivers,  but 
much  oftener  about  that  of  Montreal ;  which  has 
caused  Monsieur  d'Aillebourts  to  fortify  himself 
ably.  He  is  praiseworthy  in  this  respect, —  having 
preferred  to  give  up  some  very  important  private 
undertakings  than  to  be  wanting  to  the  public. 
The  settlers  at  Three  Rivers  [24]  have  also  joined 
and  assembled  themselves  together  that  they  may 
more  easily  resist  the  incursions  and  robberies  of 
those  Barbarians. 

Now  it  must  not  be  imagined  that  the  rage  of  the 
Hiroquois,  and  the  loss  of  several  Christians  and 
Catechumens,  are  capable  of  nullifying  the  mystery 
of  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  of  checking  the 
efficacy  of  his  blood.  We  shall  die,  we  shall  be 
captured,  we  shall  be  burned.  Granted;  but  the 
bed  does  not  always  make  the  most  glorious  death. 
I  see  no  one  here  lowering  his  head ;  on  the  contrary, 
people  ask  to  go  up  to  the  Hurons,  and  some  protest 
that  the  fires  of  the  Hiroquois  constitute  one  of  their 
motives  for  undertaking  so  dangerous  a  journey. 

At  the  same  time  when  God  has  scourged  us  on  one 
side,  he  seems  to  choose  to  console  us  on  the  other. 


252  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES         [Vol.30 

ennemis?  vous  n'auez  qu'a  nous  dire,  leuez  la  hache; 
&  nous  vous  affeurons,  ou  qu'ils  feront  la  paix,  ou 
que  nous  leur  ferons  la  guerre.  Les  Hurons  bien 
ioyeux  de  ces  belles  offres,  ont  enuoye  vn  Ambaffade 
vers  ces  peuples.  Le  Chef  de  c6t  Ambaffade,  eft  vn 
braue  Chreftien,  accompagne  de  huidt  perfonnes, 
dont  les  quatres  ont  embraff^  la  Foy  de  I E  s  v  s  - 
Christ;  ils  ne  f aut  pas  craindre  que  les  enf ans  de 
Dieu,  &  les  ouuriers  Euangeliques  manquent  de  fe- 
cours;  s'ils  ne  manquent  point  de  courage,  les  croix 
&  les  fouffrances,  font  la  marque  &  le  charadtere  de 
leur  miffion. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  253 

Our  Fathers  with  the  Hurons  have  sent  us  word 
that  the  Savages  of  Anastoh^, —  whom  we  believe 
to  be  neighbors  to  Virginia, ^^  and  who  had  formerly- 
close  alliances  with  the  Hurons,  insomuch  that  there 
are  still  found  in  the  Huron  country  people  from 
their  districts, —  those  Savages,  I  say,  have  conveyed 
these  few  words  to  the  Hurons:  "  We  have  learned 
that  you  [25]  had  enemies.  You  have  only  to  say  to 
us,  '  Lift  the  axe  ' ;  and  we  assure  you,  either  they  will 
make  peace,  or  we  will  make  war  on  them."  The 
Hurons,  very  joyful  at  these  fine  offers,  have  sent 
an  Embassy  to  those  peoples.  The  Chief  of  this 
Embassy  is  a  worthy  Christian,  accompanied  by  eight 
persons,  four  of  whom  have  embraced  the  Faith  of 
JesusChrist.  It  must  not  be  feared  that  the  chil- 
dren of  God  and  the  Gospel  laborers  lack  assistance ;  if 
they  are  not  wanting  in  courage,  crosses  and  suffer- 
ings are  the  mark  and  the  characteristic  of  their 
mission. 


254  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES         [Vol.30 


CHAPITRE  II. 

QUELQUES    FEMMES    SE    SAUUENT    DU    PAIS  DES    HIRO- 

QUOIS. 

IL  y  a  ie  ne  f^ay  quels  charmes  dans  le  pais  de 
noflre  nailTance,  qui  ne  permettent  pas  aux 
hommes  d'en  perdre  la  memoire.  Qui  auoit-il 
autrefois  de  plus  fplendide  que  la  ville  de  Rome?  ny 
de  plus  [26]  afpre  que  les  froids  &  les  glaces  de  ia 
Scythie?  &  cependant  vn  barbare  fuyoit  de  cette 
grande  ville,  pour  retourner  dans  la  rigueur  de  ces 
neiges.  Les  pais  des  Algonquins  n'a  efte  depuis 
quelques  ann^es  qu'vn  champ  de  morts  &  de  mala- 
des,  &  neantmoins  les  femmes  que  les  Hiroquois 
mettent  en  liberie  dans  leur  pais,  pour  les  marier  h. 
leurs  enfans,  ont  toufiours  vne  fi  grande  pante  &  vne 
fi  grande  inclination  vers  leur  patrie,  que  plufieurs  fe 
jettent  dans  d'horribles  dangers,  &  dans  des  peines 
&  des  trauaux  efpouuantables,  pour  la  reuoir.  En 
voicy  quelques  exemples. 

Le  huidtiefme  de  luin,  parut  vn  canot  au  deffus  de 
rhabitation  de  Montreal,  dans  lequel  on  ne  voyoit 
qu'vne  feule  persone,  s'eftant  approche  on  reconneut 
que  c'eftoit  Marie  Ka  makatei^ingb'ctch  femme  du  braue 
lean  Baptifte  Manit^nag^ch  maffacre  par  les  Hiro- 
quois; cette  pauure  creature  s'eftoit  fauuee  auec  des 
peines  qu'on  ne  pent  quafi  exprimer,  eftant  conduitte 
dans  la  chabre  de  Monfieur  &  Madamoifelle  d'Aille- 
bourts;  fes  yeux  firent  le  preabule  de  fa  harague, 


lft46-47]  RELATION  OF  1647  255 


CHAPTER  II. 

SOME    WOMEN    ESCAPE    FROM     THE    COUNTRY    OF    THE 

HIROQUOIS. 

THERE  are  unaccountable  charms  in  the  country 
of  our  birth,  which  do  not  allow  men  to  lose 
the  memory  thereof.  What  was  there  formerly 
more  splendid  than  the  city  of  Rome?  or  more  [26] 
harsh  than  the  cold  and  the  ice  of  Scythia?  And 
yet  a  barbarian  fled  from  that  great  city,  in  order  to 
return  to  the  rigor  of  those  snows.  The  country  of 
the  Algonquins  has  been,  for  some  years  past,  noth- 
ing but  a  field  of  dead  and  sick ;  and,  nevertheless, 
the  women  whom  the  Hiroquois  set  at  liberty  in  their 
country,  in  order  to  marry  them  to  their  children, 
have  always  so  great  a  desire  and  so  great  an  inclina- 
tion toward  their  native  land,  that  many  cast  them- 
selves into  horrible  dangers,  and  into  frightful 
difficulties  and  toils,  in  order  to  see  it  again.  Here 
are  some  examples  of  this. 

On  the  eighth  of  June,  a  canoe  appeared  above 
the  habitation  of  Montreal,  in  which  was  seen  only 
one  person.  Having  approached,  she  was  recognized 
as  Marie  Ka  makatewingwetch,  wife  of  the  worthy 
Jean  Baptiste  Manitounagouch,  murdered  by  the  Hiro- 
quois ;  this  poor  creature  had  escaped  with  toils  that 
can  hardly  be  expressed.  Being  led  into  the  room 
of  Monsieur  and  Madamoiselle  d'Aillebourts.  her  eyes 
made  the  preamble  of  her  address;  her  tears  and 
sobs  robbed  her  of  speech,  and  inspired  compassion 


256  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES         [Vol.  SO 

fes  larmes  &  fes  saglots  luy  deroboient  la  parole,  & 
donnoient  de  la  compaffion  k  tout  le  monde,  les  Peres 
la    [27]    confolent,    Madamoifelle    d'Aillebourts    qui 
efloit  de  fa  grande  connoiffance,  luy  dit  en  fa  langue 
qu'elle  ne  s'attriftat  point  puis  qu'elle  eftoit  parmi 
fes  parens  &  parmi  fes  amis,  &  c'efl  cela  mefme,  dit- 
elle,  qui  renouuelle  mes  pleurs  &  qui  rengrege  mes 
ennuis,  quand  ie  voy  les  perfonnes  &  les  lieux  ou 
ie  me  fuis  veue  tant  aymee  auec  mon  pauure  mary  & 
mon  enfant,  ie  ne  puis  tenir  mes  larmes ;  il  y  a  long- 
temps  qu'elles  eftoient  taries,  &   quand  ie  vous  ay 
veue  elles  font  forties  de  mes  yeux  malgr6  moy,  & 
Ik  deffus  elle  regardoit  d'vne  veue  toute  pleine  d'an- 
goifCe  ces  bonnes  Damoifelles  qui  la  carrefToient  auec 
beaucoup  de  tendreffe,  elle  faifoit  bien  fon  pouuoir 
de  fe  tenir  gaye:  mais  il  fallut  donner  k  1' amour  le 
loifir  de  refpandre  fes  pleurs,  &  de  vifiter  les  endroits 
de  cette  habitation,  ou  elle  auoit  receu  plus  de  joye 
pour  y  mefler  I'abfynte  de  fes  trifleffes.     Ayant  fatis- 
fait  a  la  nature  elle  nous  raconta  la  prife  des  Algon- 
quins  comme  nous  la  venous  de  coucher,  puis  elle 
nous  deduifit  la  fagon  dont  Dieu  s' efloit  feruy  pour 
la  tirer  du  pais  des  Hiroquois. 

Elle  auoit  defia  efte  vne  fois  prifonniere  au  pais 
des  hauts  Hiroquois,  nommez  [28]  Onondagueronons, 
quelques  Sauuages  de  cette  nation  I'ayant  reconneue 
dans  I'vne  des  bourgades  des  Agneronons,  ou  fa  vie, 
apres  le  bruflement  des  hommes  fembloit  eftre  en 
affeurance,  luy  dirent  qu'elle  fortit  de  la  bourgade 
qu'ils  luy  vouloient  parler,  s'eftant  vn  petit  efloignee 
fur  le  foir,  ils  I'enleuerent  partie  de  gv€  luy  promet- 
tans  merueille,  partie  de  force,  faifant  voir  qu'eflant 
fortie  de  leur  bourgade  elle  y  deuoit  retourner,  elle 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  257 

in  every  one.  The  Fathers  [27]  console  her,  and 
Madamoiselle  d' Aillebourts,  who  was  well  acquainted 
with  her,  tells  her  in  her  own  language  that  she 
should  not  grieve,  since  she  was  among  her  relatives 
and  friends.  "  And  it  is  that  very  thing,"  she  says, 
"which  renews  my  tears  and  which  aggravates 
my  troubles ;  when  I  see  the  persons  and  the  places 
where  I  have  seen  myself  so  well  loved  with  my 
poor  husband  and  my  child,  I  cannot  contain  my 
tears.  It  is  a  long  time  since  they  were  dried;  and, 
when  I  saw  you,  they  issued  from  my  eyes  in  spite 
of  myself ;  ' '  and  thereupon  she  looked  with  a  gaze 
all  full  of  anguish  at  those  good  Damoiselles,  who 
caressed  her  with  much  tenderness.  She  did  indeed 
use  all  her  power  to  remain  cheerful:  but  it  was 
necessary  to  give  love  the  leisure  to  shed  its  tears, 
and  to  visit  the  places  in  that  settlement  where  she 
had  received  most  joy,  in  order  to  dilute  there- 
with the  wormwood  of  her  sorrows.  Having  satis- 
fied nature,  she  related  to  us  the  capture  of  the 
Algonquins,  as  we  have  just  written  it;  and  then  she 
told  us  the  method  which  God  had  employed  in 
order  to  bring  her  from  the  country  of  the  Hiroquois. 
She  had  already  been  once  a  prisoner  in  the  coun- 
try of  the  upper  Hiroquois,  named  [28]  Onondague- 
ronons;  some  Savages  of  that  nation,  having  recognized 
her  in  one  of  the  villages  of  the  Agneronons,  where 
her  life,  after  the  burning  of  the  men,  seemed  to  be 
assured,  told  her  to  go  forth  from  the  village, —  that 
they  wished  to  speak  to  her.  Having  gone  a  little 
distance,  toward  evening,  they  carried  her  off, — 
partly  by  her  consent,  promising  her  wonders ;  partly 
by  force,  declaring  that,  having  left  their  village, 
she  was  bound  to  return  to  it.     She  well  knew  that 


258 


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES         [Vol.  30 


conneut  bien  qu'elle  auroit  fort  party  fi  elle  ne  s'ac- 
commodoit ;  c'eft  pourquoy  elle  leur  dit,  qu'elle  eftoit 
prefte  de  les  fuiure :  ils  la  font  cacher  dans  les  bois 
auec  affeurace  qu'ils  la  viedroient  repredre  le  lende- 
main  matin,  ils  n'y  manquerent  pas,  ils  remmenerent 
done  a  Ono7idague\  c'eft  le  nom  de  leur  bourgade ;  en 
chemin  il  falloit  paffer  par  Ononiote,  d'ou  eftoit  celuy 
qui  auoit  pris  cette  pauure  femme,  &  k  qui  elle 
appartenoit;  ces  Barbares  ayans  peur  qu'elle  n'y  fut 
reconnue,  luy  donnerent  vn  fac,  vn  pot  de  terre,  & 
vn  peu  de  viures,  8c  luy  dirent  qu'elle  fe  retiraft  dans 
le  bois,  &  qu'ils  la  viedroient  prendre  le  iour  fui- 
uant;  la  nuidt  venue,  elle  approcha  de  la  bourgade 
d'OnomoU,  ou  elle  entendit  les  oris,  les  huees  & 
les  [29]  rifees  de  ces  Barbares,  au  bruflemet  qu'ils 
faifoient  de  I'vn  de  fes  compatriottes.  Cette  pauure 
creature  fe  mifl  en  I'efprit  qu'on  luy  en  feroit  autant, 
pource  qu'elle  s'eftoit  defia  fauuee  de  la  bourgade  ou 
on  la  menoit,  &  qu'ils  ne  pardonnoient  quafi  iamais 
aux  fugitifs ;  elle  auoit  auffi  oiiy  a  fon  depart  quel- 
ques  ieunes  gens,  qui  ne  croyans  pas  qu'elle  enten- 
dit leur  langue,  fe  demandoient  I'vn  a  I'autre  qu'elle 
partie  du  corps  ils  trouueroient  la  plus  friande?  I'vn 
d'eux  la  regardant,  refpondit  que  les  pieds  cuits  fous 
la  cendre  eftoient  fort  bons.  Toutes  ces  chofes  luy 
donnerent  vne  crainte  qui  luy  fauua  la  vie,  elle  prend 
done  refolution  de  s'enfuir,  &  tout  fur  I'heure  elle 
fe  met  en  chemin,  marchant  toute  la  nuidt,  tirant, 
non  pas  vers  fon  pais:  car  elle  fe  doutoit  bien  qu'on 
la  pourroit  decouurir  h.  fa  pifte :  mais  elle  s'en  courut 
vers  la  bourgade  d'  Onondagti^,  tenant  le  chemin 
battu,  dont  elle  auoit  bonne  connoifCance ;  le  lende- 
main  ceux  qui  I'auoient  rauie  la  chercherent,  comme 


1646  -  47]  RELA  TION  OF  1647  259 

she  would  meet  strong  opposition  unless  she  com- 
plied ;  therefore  she  told  them  that  she  was  ready  to 
follow  them.     They  kept  her  concealed  in  the  woods, 
with  assurance  that  they  would  come  to  take  her  again 
the  next  morning,  which  they  failed  not  to  do :  they 
took  her  away  then  to  Onondague, —  the  name  of  their 
village.     On    the    way,    it    was    necessary    to    pass 
through   Onon'iot^,  whence  came  that  man  who  had 
taken  this  poor  woman,  and  to  whom  she  belonged. 
Those   Barbarians,    being  afraid  lest   she   might  be 
recognized  there,  gave  her  a  pouch,  an  earthen  pot, 
and  a  few  provisions,  and  told  her  that  she  should 
retire  into  the  woods,  and  that  they  would  come  to 
take  her  on  the  following  day.     Night  having  set  in, 
she   approached  the   village   of    Ononiote,  where   she 
heard  the  shouts,  the  jeers,  and  the  [29]  derisions  of 
those    Barbarians,  at    the   bonfire   which   they   were 
making  of  one  of  her  fellow-countrymen.     This  poor 
creature  took  it  into  her  head  that  they  would  do  the 
like  with  her,  because  she  had  already  escaped  from 
the  village  whither  they  were  leading  her,  and  be- 
cause they  scarcely  ever  pardoned  fugitives.     She  had 
also  heard,  at  her  departure,  some  young  men,  who, 
not  supposing  that  she  understood  their   language, 
were  asking  one  another  which  part  of  the  body  they 
would  find  the  most  dainty.     One  of  them,  looking 
at  her,  answered  that  the  feet  roasted  under  the  ashes 
were  very  good.     All  these  things  gave  her  a  dread 
which  saved  her  life.     She  then  takes  the  resolution 
to  flee,  and  immediately  she  starts  on  the  journey, 
walking  all  night, —  but  not  proceeding  toward  her 
own  country,   for  she  suspected  that  she  might  be 
discovered    by   her  trail ;    but  she   hastened    toward 
the  village  of   Onondagu^ ,  keeping  the   beaten   road, 


260  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  30 

il  eft  bien  croyable,  mais  en  vain.  Eflant  arriuee 
proche  de  la  bourgade,  elle  fe  cache  dans  les  bois  les 
plus  efpais,  comme  font  les  cedrieres  &  les  fapinieres 
qui  font  fort  frequentes  [30]  en  ces  contr6es,  elle  fut 
1^  dix  iours  &  dix  nuidts  fans  feu,  au  milieu  des 
neiges,  auec  vne  robe  mince  au  poffible,  &  fi  courte, 
&  fi  eftroitte,  que  fes  bras  &  fes  jambes  eftoient 
tous  nuds,  &  le  refte  de  fon  corps  tres-mal  couuert. 
Toutes  les  nuic5ts  elle  fortoit  de  fa  taniere  pour  s'en 
aller  chercher  oil  grapiller  dans  les  champs,  &  deffous 
la  neige  quelques  bouts  d'efpics  de  ble  d'inde  efchap- 
pez  de  la  main  des  moifConneurs,  elle  n'en  trouua 
qu'enuiro  plein  deux  petits  plats  pour  la  nourriture 
de  fon  voyage,  qui  deuoit  durer  plus  de  deux  mois. 
Cela  I'efpouuanta  fort,  adiouftez  que  tous  les  iours 
elle  voyoit  aller  8c  venir  des  Sauuages,  qui  paffoient 
fouuent  fort  proche  du  lieu  oil  elle  eftoit :  Elle  vit 
mefme  les  hommes  qui  1  auoient  enleuee,  non  fans 
peur  d'eftre  defcouuerte. 

Vn  grand  Hiroquois  ayant  fa  hache  fur  I'efpaule, 
s'en  vint  vn  certain  iour  tout  droit  a  elle;  la  pauure 
femme  h.  recours  h.  Dieu :  car  elle  ne  I'oublioit  iamais 
dans  fes  angoiffes,  comme  elle  prioit,  cet  homme  fe 
deftourne  tout  a  coup,  fe  iettant  dans  la  foreft  par  vn 
autre  endroit.  Or  comme  ces  craintes  &  ces  trances 
continuelles  I'affligeoient,  elle  fit  ce  raifonnement 
plein  [31]  d'erreur  a  la  verite :  mais  bien  pardonnable 
k  vne  pauure  femme  Sauuage.  le  fuis  morte,  c'eft 
fait  de  ma  vie,  il  n'y  faut  plus  penfer,  de  m'en  aller 
a  la  bourgade  pour  eftre  brufl^e,  ie  ne  puis  m'y 
refoudre  de  me  mettre  en  chemin  pour  me  fauuer,  ie 
mourray  de  famine  &  de  lagueur,  &  peut-eftre  feray- 
ie   rencontr6e   par  quelque    Hiroquois,   qui   me  fera 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1647  261 

with  which  she  was  well  acquainted.  The  next 
day,  those  who  had  abducted  her,  sought  her,  as 
may  well  be  supposed, —  but  in  vain.  Having  arrived 
near  the  village,  she  hides  herself  in  the  deepest 
woods,  such  as  are  the  cedar  and  spruce  thickets, 
which  are  very  frequent  [30]  in  those  regions.  She 
was  there  ten  days  and  ten  nights  without  fire,  in 
the  midst  of  the  snows,  with  a  dress  extremely  thin, 
and  so  short  and  so  scant  that  her  arms  and  her  legs 
were  all  bare,  and  the  rest  of  her  body  very  poorly 
covered.  Every  night  she  left  her  retreat,  that  she 
might  go  to  seek  or  glean  in  the  fields,  and  beneath 
the  snow,  some  broken  ears  of  Indian  corn,  escaped 
from  the  hand  of  the  reapers.  She  found  only  about 
two  little  dishfuls,  for  the  food  on  her  journey, 
which  was  to  last  more  than  two  months.  That 
greatly  terrified  her;  and  add  that  every  day  she 
saw  Savages  going  and  coming,  who  often  passed 
very  near  the  place  where  she  was.  She  even  saw, 
not  without  fear  of  being  discovered,  the  men  who 
had  carried  her  off. 

A  tall  Hiroquois,  having  his  hatchet  on  his 
shoulder,  came,  on  a  certain  day,  straight  toward 
her;  the  poor  woman  has  recourse  to  God, —  for  she 
never  forgot  him  in  her  sorrows.  While  she  was 
praying,  that  man  turns  aside  all  at  once,  entering 
the  forest  at  another  place.  Now  as  these  fears  and 
continual  apprehensions  were  afflicting  her,  she  made 
this  argument, —  full  [31]  of  error,  in  truth,  but  very 
pardonable  in  a  poor  Savage  woman.  "  I  am  dead; 
it  is  over  with  my  life.  I  must  no  longer  think  of 
going  to  the  village,  to  be  burned;  I  cannot  resolve 
to  set  forth  on  the  way  to  escape.  I  shall  die  with 
hunger  and  weakness;  and  perhaps  I  shall  be  met  by 


262  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 

paller    par    leurs  tourmets   ordinaires,   il  vaut  done 
mieux  mourrir  plus  doucemet:  ayant  fait  fa  priere, 
elle  attache  fa  ceinture  a  vn  arbre  ou  elle  tnonte, 
elle  fait  de  1 'autre  bout  vn  lacet  courat,  qu'elle  pafle 
^  fon  col  &  fe  ietta  k  bas.-  le  poids  du  corps  rompit 
la  corde  fans  luy  faire  grand  mal,  elle  la  racommode, 
I'efprouue,  &  en  fuitte  remote  vne  autre  fois:  mais 
Dieu  voulut  qu'elle  fe  rompit  pour  la  feconde  fois, 
elle  bien  eftonnee  commence  a  dire  a  part  foy  d'vn 
fens  raffis;  car  elle   croyoit  faire  vne  bonne  adtion, 
Guy:  mais  peut-eftre  que   Dieu  ne  veut  pas  que  ie 
meure?  afCeurement  il  me  veut  fauuer  la  vie?  mais 
ie  n'ay  pas  dequoy  viure  en  chemin?  n'eft  il  pas  affez 
puiflant  pour  m'en  faire  trouuer?  allons  difoit  elle, 
prions-le  de  me  conduire;  ayant  fait  fa  priere,  elle 
entre  dans  la  profondeur  de  ces  grands  [32]  bois,  fe 
conduit  a  la  veue  du  Soleil,  cherchant  le  chemin  de 
fon  pais?  la  voila  done  errante  dans  vn  horrible  foli- 
tude,  comme  il  y  auoit  encore  de  la  neige  fur  la  terre, 
elle  fouffroit  vne  faim  &  vn  froid  intolerable,  elle  ne 
mangea  en   dix   iours  que  ces  bouts  d'efpics  qu'elle 
auoit  glanee,   les  ayans  confommez,  elle  grattoit  la 
terre  pour  trouuer  de  petites  racines,  elle  efcorchoit 
les  arbres  pour  fuger  &  manger  la  petite  efcorce  inte- 
rieure ;  enfin  elle  rencontra  dans  vn  lieu  ou  des  chaf - 
feurs  Hiroquois  auoiet  cabane  vne  petite  hache  qu'ils 
auoient  abandonn^e  ou  oublie,  cela  luy  fauua  la  vie, 
fon  induftrie  luy  fit  faire  vn  fufil  de  bois,  auec  lequel 
elle  faifoit  du  feu  pendant  la  nuidl,  &  non  pendant  le 
iour,  elle  I'efteignoit  fi  toft  que  I'aurore  commengoit 
k  poindre,  de  peur  que  la  fumee  ne  parut  &  ne  la  def- 
couurit,  ayant  fait  mes  prieres,  difoit-elle,  ie  paffois 
la  nuidl  k  mager  des  tortues  que  ie  trouuois  dans  les 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1647  265 

some  Hiroquois,  who  will  make  me  pass  through  the 
usual    torments;    it    is    better,    then,    to    die    more 
quietly."     Having  said  her  prayer,  she  fastens  her 
belt  to  a  tree,  up  which  she  climbs;  she  makes  at 
the  other  end  a  running  knot,  which  she  slips  about 
her  neck,    and   throws  herself  down.      The  weight 
of  her  body  broke  the  cord  without  doing  her  great 
injury ;  she  mends  it,    tries  it,  and  then  climbs  up 
again ;  but  God  willed  that  it  should  break   for   the 
second  time.     She,    much   astonished,  begins  to  say 
apart  to  herself,  with  sober  sense, —  for  she  believed 
she  was  doing  a  good  act : —  ' '  Yes :  but  perhaps  God 
does  not  wish  me  to  die.     Surely,  he  wishes  to  save 
my  life;  but  I   have  not  wherewith   to  live   by  the 
way.     Is  he  not  powerful  enough  to  cause  me  to  find 
something?    Come,"  she  said,  "  let  us  entreat  him  to 
guide  me."     Having  said  her  prayer,  she  enters  into 
the    depth    of   those    great    [32]    woods,  and  guides 
herself  by  the  sight  of  the  Sun,  seeking  the  way  to 
her  own  country.     So  there  she  was,  wandering  in  a 
horrible   solitude;    as  there  was  still    snow    on  the 
ground,  she  suffered  an  intolerable  hunger  and  cold. 
She  ate,  in  ten  days,  nothing  but  those  ears  of  corn, 
which  she  had  gleaned;  having  consumed  them,  she 
scratched  the  earth  in  order  to  find  little  roots ;  she 
skinned  the  trees  in  order  to  suck  and  eat  the  thin 
inner  bark.     Finally,    she    came   across,    in  a   place 
where  some   Hiroquois  hunters  had  lodged,  a  little 
hatchet,    which   they   had  abandoned    or    forgotten. 
That  saved  her  life :  her  skill  enabled  her  to  make  a 
wooden  fire-stick,  with  which  she  made  fire  during  the 
night,  and  not  during  the  day  ;^*^  she  extinguished  it  as 
soon  as  the  dawn  began  to  break,  for    fear  that  the 
smoke  would  appear  and  reveal  her.    ' '  Having  offered 


264  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.30 

petites  riuieres,  k  me  chauffer,  &  a  dormir.  le  che- 
minois  &  ie  priois  Dieu  tout  le  iour,  que  de  tours  &  de 
detours  elle  fit  dans  ces  horribles  forefts!  que  d'e- 
garements!  elle  partit  peut-eftre  au  commencement 
d'Auril,  &  elle  n'arriua  a  Montreal  que  le  [33]  huidti- 
efme  de  luin,  elle  nous  difoit  que  deux  lunes  &  plus 
s'eftoient  paffees  dans  fon  voyage.  Le  mois  de  May 
arriuant  elle  defcouurit  des  chaffeurs  Hiroquois  fans 
eftre  appergeue;  ayant  reconneu  qu'ils  auoient  laiffe 
leur  canot  fur  le  bord  d'vne  riuiere,  elle  fe  iette  de- 
dans k  la  defrobee,  &  I'emmene :  mais  comme  il  eftoit 
trop  grand  pour  vne  perfonne  feule,  elle  le  racourcit 
&  I'accommoda  proprement  a  fon  vfage.  Enfin  elle 
fe  trouue  fur  les  riues  du  grand  Fleuue  de  Saint 
Laurens,  I'ayant  bie  confidere,  elle  iugea  qu'elle  eftoit 
plus  pres  des  Fran9ois  que  de  fon  pais,  qui  n'eft  pas 
loing  de  celuy  des  Hurons,  &  qu'il  eftoit  plus  facile 
de  defcedre  que  de  monter,  fi  bien  qu'elle  prend  le  cou- 
rant,  s'en  va  chaffant  d'Ifle  en  Ifle,  elle  tue  des  cerfs 
&  des  caftors,  elle  fait  vne  efpee  de  bois,  elle  en 
brufle  le  bout  pour  I'endurcir,  &  auec  cet  inftrument 
elle  prend  de  grands  efturgeons  de  cinq  k  fix  pieds 
de  longs.  Elle  prenoit  les  cerfs  en  cette  forte :  les 
ayat  fait  lan9er  a  I'eau,  elle  s'embarquoit  dans  fon 
petit  canot  les  pourfuiuoit  aifement,  &  en  les  abor- 
dant  elle  leur  d^chargoit  de  grands  coups  de  hache  fur 
la  tefte,  eftans  aux  abois  elle  les  tiroit  "k  bord  &  s'en 
feruoit  [34]  pour  fe  nourrir,  elle  trouua  quantite 
d'oeufs  de  diners  oyfeaux  de  riuieres,  elle  auoit  encore 
alTez  de  viande  boucan^e  &  quantite  de  ces  oeufs, 
quand  elle  mit  pied  a  terre  k  Montreal.  Voyant  le 
Pere  qui  I'auoit  inftruite,  ha!  mon  Pere,  luy  dit-elle, 
que  de  fois  i'ay  penfe  en  vous !  ie  difois  en  mon  coeur 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  265 

my  prayers,"  she  said,  "  I  would  spend  the  night  in 
eating  turtles  that  I  found  in  the  little  rivers ;  in  warm- 
ing myself,  and  in  sleeping.  I  traveled,  and  prayed 
to  God,  all  the  day."  What  turns  and  circuits  she 
made  in  those  horrible  forests!  what  wanderings! 
She  started  perhaps  at  the  beginning  of  April,  and 
she  arrived  at  Montreal  only  the  [33]  eighth  of  June; 
she  told  us  that  two  moons  and  more  had  passed  in 
her  journey.  When  May  came,  she  espied  some 
Hiroquois  hunters,  without  being  perceived ;  having 
noticed  that  they  had  left  their  canoe  on  the  bank  of 
a  river,  she  jumps  into  it  secretly,  and  pushes  it  off, 
but,  as  it  was  too  large  for  one  person  alone, 
she  shortened  it,  and  fitted  it  properly  for  her  use. 
At  last  she  finds  herself  on  the  banks  of  the  great 
River  of  Saint  Lawrence.  Having  well  considered 
it,  she  judged  that  she  was  nearer  to  the  French  than 
to  her  own  country,  which  is  not  far  from  that  of  the 
Hurons,  and  that  it  was  easier  to  go  down  than  to 
go  up.  Consequently,  she  takes  the  current,  and 
goes  hunting  from  Island  to  Island ;  she  kills  deer 
and  beavers;  she  makes  a  wooden  javelin,  and  burns 
the  end  of  it,  to  harden  it ;  and  with  this  weapon  she 
takes  great  sturgeons,  five  or  six  feet  long.  She 
took  the  deer  in  this  manner:  having  made  them 
rush  into  the  water,  she  would  embark  in  her  little 
canoe,  thus  easily  pursuing  them ;  and  on  approach- 
ing them,  she  would  deal  heavy  blows  of  the  hatchet 
on  their  heads,  as  they  stood  at  bay ;  then  she  would 
draw  them  on  board,  and  use  them  [34]  as  food.  She 
found  many  eggs  of  various  river  birds ;  she  had  still 
plenty  of  smoked  meat  and  a  quantity  of  those  eggs, 
when  she  landed  at  Montreal.  Seeing  the  Father 
who  had  instructed  her,  she  said  to  him:  "  Ah!  my 


266  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES         [Vol.30 

il  prie  pour  moy,  il  me  conduit  dans  mo  voyage,  il 
fera  que  ie  ne  m'efgare  point,  ie  priois  fort  fouuet 
celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  ie  me  feruois  de  mes  doigts  pour 
dire  mon  chapelet,  ie  penfois  incelTamment  a  ceux 
qui  croyent  &  qui  prient,  il  me  femble  que  ie  voyois 
Chaouerindamaguetch,  c'eft  vn  nom  que  les  Sauuages 
ont  donne  a  Madamoifelle  d'Aillebourts,  priat  Dieu 
pour  moy  en  la  chapelle ;  enfin  me  voila  parmy  mes 
parents.  La  joye  ayant  fuccede  aux  larmes  qu'elle 
verfa  abondamment  de  prime  abord,  elle  embralToit 
ces  Damoifelles  auec  plus  d'affedtion  qu'elle  n'eut 
fait  f es  plus  proches  parents ;  pour  conclufion  elle  f e 
confeffa  &  communia  auec  beaucoup  de  tendreffes." 

Cinq  iours  apres  fon  arriuee  vn  canot  parut  qui 
portoit  vne  ieune  femme  de  la  nation  des  poilTons 
blancs,  cette  bonne  Captiue  I'ayant  abordee  luy 
raconta  les  [35]  miferes  qu'elle  auoit  endurez  dans  fa 
captiuite:  mais  tout  ce  que  i'ay  fouffert,  luy  difoit- 
elle,  n'eft  rien  en  comparaifon  de  ce  que  tu  fouffriras 
en  Enfer  £i  tu  n'es  Chreftienne?  ie  Ie  fuis  refpondit- 
elle:  mais  i'ay  vn  mary  Paye,  qui  k  vne  autre  femme 
auec  moy,  &  qui  hait  extrem^ment  la  priere,  ie  Ie 
voudrois  bien  quitter;  tu  fais  bien,  luy  dit-elle:  car 
ton  mary  te  fera  quitter  la  Foy,  fi  tu  en  connoiffois  la 
valeur  tu  la  prefererois  a  toute  autre  chofe,  cette  vie 
n'eft  pas  confiderable,  celle  que  nous  attedons  efl 
bien  longue.  La  Foy  efl  vne  chofe  admirable,  elle 
ramaffe  les  nations  &  de  plufieurs  elle  n'en  fait 
qu'vne,  c'efl  la  Foy  qui  fait  que  les  Frangois  font  mes 
parents,  ils  m'ont  re9eu  &  ils  me  traittent  come  leur 
parente,  c'eft  la  Foy  qui  fait  que  ie  t'aime,  quel  fujet 
aurois-je  de  t'aymer?  tu  n'es  point  de  ma  nation;  ie 
n'ay  point  d'interreft  que  tu  demeure  ou  que  tu  t'en 


1646- 47J  RELATION  OF  i647        '  267 

Father,  how  many  times  I  have  thought  of  you! 
I  said  in  my  heart  '  He  prays  for  me,  he  guides  me 
in  my  journey ;  he  will  cause  that  I  go  not  astray. '  I 
very  often  prayed  to  him  who  has  made  all ;  I  used 
my  fingers,  to  say  my  rosary.  I  thought  incessantly 
of  those  who  believe  and  who  pray;  it  seemed  to 
me  that  I  saw  CJiaouerindamaguetch,'" — this  is  the 
name  which  the  Savages  have  given  to  Madamoiselle 
d'Aillebourts, —  "praying  to  God  for  me  in  the 
chapel.  At  last,  here  I  am,  among  my  kindred." 
Joy  having  succeeded  the  tears  which  she  shed 
abundantly  at  first,  she  embraced  those  Damoiselles 
with  more  affection  than  she  had  shown  her  nearest 
relatives.  In  conclusion,  she  confessed  and  received 
communion,  with  great  tenderness. 

Five  days  after  her  arrival,  a  canoe  appeared 
which  brought  a  young  woman  of  the  poisson  blanc 
nation.  This  good  Captive,  having  accosted  her, 
told  her  the  [35]  miseries  that  she  had  endured  in 
her  captivity.  "  But  all  that  I  have  suffered,"  she 
said  to  her,  "  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  what 
thou  wilt  suffer  in  Hell  if  thou  art  not  a  Christian." 
"  I  am  such,"  she  answered;  "  but  I  have  a  Pagan 
husband,  who  has  another  wife  besides  me,  and  who 
extremely  hates  prayer;  I  would  like  to  leave  him." 
"  Thou  doest  well,"  she  tells  her,  "  for  thy  husband 
will  make  thee  leave  the  Faith.  If  thou  knewest  its 
value,  thou  wouldst  prefer  it  to  everything  else. 
This  life  is  not  worth  regarding ;  the  one  which  we 
expect  is  very  long.  The  Faith  is  an  admirable 
thing;  it  gathers  up  the  nations,  and  of  many  it 
makes  only  one.  It  is  the  Faith  which  makes  the 
French  my  kinsmen  ;  they  have  received  me  and  they 
treat  me  as  their  kinswoman.     It  is  the   Faith  which 


268  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.30 


aille :  mais  ie  ne  fgay  comme  cela  fe  fait,  ie  fens  bien 
que  ie  t'ayme,  a  caufe  que  tu  crois  en  Dieu,  &  ie  ne 
f9aurois  m'empefcher  de  te  donner  vn  bon  confeil,  li 
tu  remonte  auec  ton  mary  dans  fon  pais,  tu  feras 
prife  des  Hiroquois:  &  puis  tu  tomberas  de  leurs 
feux  dans  Ie  feu  des  Demons,  c'eft  celuy  [36]  que  tu 
dois  craindre.  Ah  fi  tu  fgauois  que  c'efl  de  la  liberte 
tu  I'aimerois!  tu  n'a  pas  fenty  Ie  joug  de  la  capti- 
uite,  &  combien  c'eft  chofe  dure  &  fafcheufe  d'eftre 
pour  toufiours  efloignee  de  la  maif on  de  priere !  ceux 
qui  font  dans  cet  efclauage  portent  enuie  aux  petits 
oyfeaux,  Ah !  que  fouuent  ie  leur  difois  que  ne  puis- 
je  voler  comme  vous !  fi  ie  voyois  de  loing  vne  Mon- 
taigne, ie  luy  difois  en  mon  ame,  que  ne  fuis-je  au 
plus  haut  de  la  cime  pour  me  voir  efloignee  de  ma 
captiuite,  la  vie  eft  vne  mort  a  vn  captif :  mais  c'efl 
bien  pis  apres  la  mort ;  car  la  captiuite  eft  eternelle, 
la  conclufion  fut  que  cette  ieune  femme  quitta  celuy 
qui  fe  portoit  pour  fon  mary,  &  qui  en  effet  ne  I'eltoit 
pas,  &  enfin  ces  deux  bonnes  creatures  ayant  trouue 
vne  barque  qui  defcendoit  h.  Kebec  fe  mirent  dedans 
pour  aller  voir  leurs  parents  qui  demeuroient  en  la 
refidence  de  Saint  lofeph. 

Le  vingtiefme  du  mefme  mois,  on  entendit  vne 
voix  de  I'autre  cofte  de  la  riuiere,  vis  a  vis  de  I'habi- 
tatio  de  Montreal,  on  ne  fe  preffa  pas  d'y  aller :  pource 
que  les  Hiroquois  ont  donne  autrefois  de  ces  caffades, 
faifans  les  prifonniers  efchapez  pour  attirer  &  malTa- 
crer  ceux  qui  les  iroient  [37]  querir;  c'eftoit  vne 
pauure  captiue  qui  n'en  pouuoit  plus,  elle  cria  deux 
ou  trois  iours,  enfin  on  f'approcha  petit  a  petit,  & 
I'ayant  reconnue  on  I'embarqua.  II  n'eft  pas  croy- 
able  come  cette  pauure  creature  eftoit  deffaite,  c'eftoit 


1646-47]  RELA  TION  OF  1647  269 

makes  me  love  thee, —  what  reason  would  I  have 
to  love  thee  ?  Thou  art  not  of  my  nation ;  I  have  no 
interest  in  thy  staying  or  thy  going  away.  But  —  I 
know  not  how  that  comes  about  —  I  really  feel  that  I 
love  thee  because  thou  believest  in  God ;  and  I  can- 
not help  giving  thee  a  good  piece  of  advice.  If  thou 
go  up  with  thy  husband  to  his  country,  thou  wilt  be 
taken  by  the  Hiroquois ;  and  then  thou  wilt  fall  from 
their  fires  into  the  fire  of  the  Demons, —  that  is  the 
one  [36]  that  thou  must  fear.  Ah,  if  thou  knewest 
what  freedom  is,  thou  wouldst  love  it!  Thou  hast 
not  felt  the  yoke  of  captivity,  and  how  harsh  and 
grievous  a  thing  it  is  to  be  forever  distant  from  the 
house  of  prayer !  Those  who  are  in  this  bondage  are 
envious  of  the  little  birds.  Ah !  how  often  I  said  to 
them,  '  Why  can  I  not  fly  like  you !  '  If  I  saw  at  a  dis- 
tance a  Mountain,  I  said  to  it  in  my  soul,  '  Why  am 
I  not  at  the  top  of  its  crest,  in  order  to  see  myself 
removed  from  my  captivity  ? '  Life  is  death  to  a 
captive ;  but  it  is  much  worse  after  death,  for  that 
captivity  is  eternal."  The  conclusion  was  that  that 
young  woman  left  the  man  who  passed  as  her  hus- 
band, and  who  in  fact  was  not ;  and  finally  these  two 
good  creatures,  having  found  a  bark  which  was  going 
down  to  Kebec,  got  into  it  in  order  to  go  and  visit 
their  relatives  who  lived  in  the  residence  of  Saint 
Joseph. 

The  twentieth  of  the  same  month,  a  voice  was 
heard  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  opposite  the 
settlement  of  Montreal.  No  haste  was  made  to  go 
thither,  because  the  Hiroquois  have  formerly  perpe- 
trated such  tricks, —  acting  the  escaped  prisoners,  in 
order  to  attract  and  massacre  those  who  should  go 
[37]  to  seek  them;  but  this  was  a  poor  captive,  who 


270  LES  RELA  TIONS  BES  j£ SUITES  [Vol.  30 

vne  femme  puiffante  &  en  bon  point  deuant  fa  prife, 
elle  parut  pour  lors  fi  defnuee  de  chair,  fi  hideufe,  & 
li  foible,  qu'elle  eftoit  mefconnoiffable ;  elle  demanda 
des  fon  entree  fi  le  Pere  qui  inftruifoit  les  Sauuages 
n'efloit  pas  a  Montreal,  il  eftoit  deuant  fes  yeux 
&  elle  n'y  prenoit  pas  garde,  le  deffaut  de  nour- 
riture  luy  auoit  altere  le  cerueau,  on  I'auroit  prife 
pour  vn  vray  fquelette ;  comme  elle  n'auoit  ny  hache, 
ny  coufteau,  ny  canot:  mais  feulemet  vn  petit  bout 
de  ie  ne  fgay  quelle  eftoffe  toute  vfee  qui  ne  la  cou- 
uroit  qu'a  demy,  elle  auoit  fouffert  d'eftranges  tra- 
uaux,  on  luy  donne  k  manger  petit  a  petit,  on  la  fait 
repofer,  le  lendemain  ayant  repris  fes  efprits,  elle 
demande  encore  vne  fois  le  Pere  qui  1' auoit  inftruitte 
I'annee  precedente.  Helas!  difoit-elle,  n'eft-il  point 
icy?  il  te  parla  fi  long-temps  hier  au  foir  luy  dit 
I'Interprete,  faites-le  venir  ie  vous  en  prie,  le  Pere 
I'eftant  alle  trouuer,  elle  luy  dit  mon  Pere,  hier  ie 
n'auois  point  [38]  d'efprit,  ie  ne  me  fouuiens  pas  de 
t'auoir  veu,  inftruis-moy  ie  te  prie,  i'ay  attribu6  ma 
captiuite  aux  refiftances  que  ie  te  fis  I'an  paffe,  lors 
que  tu  me  voulois  enfeigner,  ie  n'ay  pas  laiffe  de 
prier  Dieu,  quoy  que  ie  ne  fuffe  pas  baptizee,  ie  di- 
fois  au  profond  de  mon  coeur  e'en  eft  fait,  ie  croiray, 
ie  me  feray  inftruire,  ie  prieray  tout  de  bon,  ie 
ne  veux  pas  mentir,  elle  nous  dit  qu'il  n'y  auoit 
que  deux  iours  qu'elle  eftoit  accouchee  quand  elle  fe 
fauna  des  Hiroquois,  que  fon  enfant  qu'elle  portoit 
dans  fon  f ein  mourut  bien  toft  apres,  le  laid:  luy  man- 
quant  faute  de  nourriture.  Elle  adiouftoit  que  les 
Hiroquois  faifoient  ellat  de  venir  en  grand  nobre, 
notamment  a  Montreal:  mais  ils  font,  difoit-elle, 
affligez  d'vne  maladie  populaire  qui  en  fait  mourir 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  271 

was  at  the  end  of  her  strength.  She  shouted  during 
two  or  three  days;  finally  some  men  approached, 
little  by  little,  and,  having  recognized  her,  took  her 
on  board.  It  is  not  credible  how  emaciated  this  poor 
creature  was;  she  was  a  vigorous  woman  and  in 
good  flesh,  before  her  capture;  she  then  appeared  so 
destitute  of  flesh,  so  hideous,  and  so  feeble,  that 
she  was  past  recognition.  She  asked,  as  soon  as 
admitted,  whether  the  Father  who  instructed  the  Sav- 
ages was  not  at  Montreal ;  he  was  before  her  eyes, 
but  she  took  no  notice  of  him;  the  want  of  food 
had  affected  her  brain;  and  one  would  have  taken 
her  for  a  real  skeleton.  As  she  had  neither  hatchet, 
knife,  nor  canoe,  but  only  a  little  scrap  of  I  know 
not  what  stuff,  all  worn  out,  which  only  half  covered 
her,  she  had  suffered  unusual  hardships.  They  give 
her  to  eat,  little  by  little,  and  make  her  rest;  the 
next  day,  having  recovered  her  spirits,  she  asks  yet 
again  for  the  Father  who  had  instructed  her  the  pre- 
ceding year.  "  Alas!  "  she  said,  "  is  he  not  here?" 
"  He  spoke  to  thee  so  long  last  evening,"  the  Inter- 
preter tells  her.  "  Have  him  come,  I  beg  you." 
The  Father  having  come  to  find  her,  she  says  to 
him:  "  My  Father,  yesterday  I  had  no  [38]  sense;  I 
do  not  remember  to  have  seen  thee.  Instruct  me,  I 
pray  thee.  I  have  attributed  my  captivity  to  the 
resistance  which  I  made  to  thee  last  year,  when  thou 
wished  to  teach  me ;  I  have  nevertheless  prayed  to 
God.  Although  I  was  not  baptized,  I  said  in  the 
depth  of  my  heart:  '  It  is  all  over;  I  will  believe,  I 
will  become  instructed,  I  will  pray  in  good  earnest, 
I  will  not  lie.'  "  She  told  us  that  it  was  only  two 
days  after  her  confinement  when  she  escaped  from 
the  Hiroquois;  and  that  her  child,  which  she  carried 


272  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.30 

vn  grand  nombre;  C'eft  la  couftume,  quand  quel- 
qu'vn  meurt  dans  leurs  cabanes  de  le  pleurer  vn  fort 
long-temps;  or  comme  i'eftois  adoptee  a  vne  faraille 
attaquee  de  cette  maladie,  nous  ne  faifios  que  pleu- 
rer tous  les  iours,  &  ie  difois  a  par[t]  moy,  fut-il 
ainfi,  que  ie  pleuraffe  fouuent  pour  le  mefme  fujet, 
elle  nous  confirma  tout  ce  que  Marie  nous  auoit  racon- 
t6  de  la  prife  des  Algoquins  &  de  la  mort  du  P. 
logues,  [39]  adiouftant  que  les  Hiroquois  contrai- 
gnoient  les  femmes  Algonquines  d'appliquer  des 
feux  fur  leurs  compatriotes  pour  les  brufler.  Eftant 
arriuee  au  faut  de  Saint  Loiiys,  qui  eft  vn  petit  au 
deffus  de  1' habitation  de  Montreal,  &  n' ay  ant  point 
de  canot  pour  le  paffer,  elle  lia  des  bois  par  enfem- 
ble :  mais  comme  elle  n'auoit  point  de  force  les  liens 
s'eftans  rompus  ou  deftachez,  elle  coula  plufieurs 
fois  a  fond,  reuenant  toufiours  au  deffus,  emportee 
dans  des  bouillons  d'eau,  qui  luy  deuoient  mille  fois 
caffer  la  tefte  cotre  des  roches,  fi  Dieu  ne  I'eut  tres- 
particulieremet  affiftee;  deux  femmes,  nous  difoit- 
elle,  fe  font  fauuez  deux  iours  deuant  moy,  les  Hiro- 
quois enragez  de  ce  que  nous  nous  euadions,  difoient 
que  fi  quelqu'vne  s'enfuyoit  encore  qu'ils  tueroient 
toutes  les  autres,  comme  ils  ne  fe  deffioient  pas  de 
moy  ^  caufe  de  mes  couches,  ie  me  fauuay  plus 
facilement,  faifant  femblant  d'aller  querir  du  bois 
dans  la  foreft. 

Le  vingt-quatriefme  du  mefme  mois  de  luin,  on 
entendit  encore  des  cris  "k  1' autre  bord  de  la  grande 
riuiere,  on  vit  auffi  des  feux,  quelques  ieunes  hom- 
ines y  courent  auec  vn  canot,  ils  trouuent  ces  deux 
femmes,  [40]  dot  cette  pauure  delabree  nous  auoit 
parl6,  or  encore  qu'elles  ne  fuffent  pas  das  vn  eftat 


1646-47]  RELA  TION  OF  1647  273 

in  her  bosom,  died  soon  afterward, —  her  milk  fail- 
ing,—  for  want  of  food.     She  added  that  the  Hiro- 
quois    were    planning    to    come    in    great    numbers, 
especially  to   Montreal:  "  But  they  are,"  she   said, 
' '  afflicted  with   a  general  malady,    which   causes  a 
great    number    of    them    to    die.     It  is  the   custom, 
when  any  one  dies  in  their  cabins,  to  mourn  for  him 
a  very  long  time :  now,  as  I  was  adopted  by  a  family 
attacked  with  that  disease,  we  did  nothing  but  weep 
every  day;  and  I  said  in  secret,  to  myself,   '  Would 
it  were  so  that   I   might  weep   often   for  the  same 
cause.'  "     She  confirmed  to  us  all   that  Marie  had 
told  us  of  the  capture  of  the  Algonquins  and  of  the 
death  of  Father  Jogues, —  [39]  adding  that  the  Hiro- 
quois  were  compelling  the  Algonquin  women  to  apply 
fires  to  their   fellow-countrymen,  in   order  to   burn 
them.     Having  arrived  at  the  rapids  of  Saint  Louys, 
which  are  a  little  above  the  settlement  of  Montreal, 
and  having  no  canoe  in  which  to  pass  it,  she  bound 
pieces  of  wood  together;  but,  as  she  had  no  strength, 
the  ties  burst  apart  or  unloosed  themselves,  and  she 
sank  several  times  to  the  bottom, —  always  coming 
up  again,  and  carried  along  in  the  seething  water, 
which  was  likely,   a   thousand  times,   to  break  her 
head  against  the  rocks,  if  God  had  not  most  espe- 
cially assisted  her.     "  Two  women,"  she  said  to  us, 
' '  escaped  two  days  before  me ;  the  Hiroquois,  enraged 
because  we  were  escaping,  said  that  if  any  one  fled 
again,  they  would  kill  all  the  others.     As  they  did 
not  distrust  me,    on   account  of  my  confinement,  I 
escaped  more  easily, —  pretending  to  go  to  get  wood 
in  the  forest." 

On  the  twenty-fourth  of  the  same  month  of  June, 
cries   were   again  heard   on   the   other   shore  of  the 


274  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

fi  pitoyable,  pource  qu'eftat  deux  elles  s'efloient 
fecourues  I'vne  I'autre,  elles  efloient  neantmoins 
grandement  abbattues,  I'ennuy  d'vne  fi  eftrange 
folitude  eft  bien  fafcheux;  n'auoir  autre  lit,  ny 
autre  couuert,  ny  autre  compagnie,  ny  autres  viures, 
que  le  lit,  le  couuert,  la  compagnie  &  le  viure  des 
beftes,  c'eft  mener  vne  vie  plus  miferable  que  la  vie 
des  beftes :  ces  deux  f emmes  trouuerent  le  moyen  de 
faire  du  feu:  mais  I'autre  n'eut  pas  I'inuetion,  n'ayat 
point  de  coufteau;  bref  apres  qu'on  les  eut  remis  en 
bon  point,  on  leur  donna  a  chacune  vne  robe  &  vn 
canot  d'ecorces  pour  aller  trouuer  leurs  maris  qui 
eftoient  a  Saint  lofeph  proche  de  Kebec. 

Le  feiziefme  de  luillet,  vne  autre  prifonniere  parut 
aux  Trois  Riuieres,  elle  auoit  tenu  vn  chemin  diffe- 
rent des  precedentes,  la  pauure  miferable  n'auoit  que 
la  peau  eftendue  fur  les  os,  fon  regard  eftoit  affreux, 
fes  yeux  paroiffoient  comme  enfon9ez  das  vne  tefte 
de  mort,  on  ne  voyoit  plus  de  joiies  fur  fon  vifage, 
fes  levres  colees  fur  les  machoires  reprefentoient 
pluftoft  vn  trefpaffe  qu'vne  perfonne  viuante,  [41] 
ayant  efte  charitablement  re9eue,  elle  raconta  leur 
prife  &  leur  voyage,  vne  femme  difoit-elle  de  noftre 
bande,  craignant  la  fureur  des  ennemis  me  parla  de 
fe  faire  mourir,  ie  vis  bien  que  cela  procedoit  de 
fureur,  ie  luy  refpondis  qu'il  fe  falloit  fauuer,  &  non 
pas  fe  deffaire :  mais  come  c'eftoit  vne  vraye  Megere 
ennemie  de  la  Foy,  elle  n'efcouta  point  ce  confeil, 
jettant  la  main  fur  fon  enfant,  elle  le  maffacra  &  le 
jetta  aux  pieds  des  Hiroquois;  puis  ayant  paffe  fa 
telle  dans  vn  licol,  elle  tiroit  d'vne  main  pour 
s'eftrangler,  &  de  I'autre  elle  fe  coupe  le  gofier  auec 
vn  coufteau.     Mais  helas !  elle  trouua  bien-toft  vn  feu 


i 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  164.7  275 

great  river;  some  fires  were  also  seen.  Some  young 
men  hasten  thither  with  a  canoe;  they  find  those 
two  women  [40]  of  whom  that  poor  shattered  crea- 
ture had  told  us.  Now,  although  they  were  not  in 
so  pitiful  a  plight, —  because,  being  two,  they  had 
assisted  each  other, — they  were,  nevertheless,  great- 
ly dejected.  The  weariness  of  so  strange  a  solitude 
is  very  trying ;  to  have  no  other  bed,  no  other  cover, 
no  other  company,  no  other  provisions,  than  the  bed, 
the  cover,  the  company,  and  the  living  of  beasts,  is 
to  lead  a  life  more  miserable  than  the  life  of  the 
beasts.  These  two  women  found  the  means  of  mak- 
ing fire;  but  the  other  had  not  that  contrivance, 
having  no  knife.  In  short,  after  they  had  been 
restored  to  good  condition,  they  were  each  given  a 
dress  and  a  bark  canoe,  in  order  to  go  and  find  their 
husbands,  who  were  at  Saint  Joseph,  near  Kebec. 

The  sixteenth  of  July,  another  prisoner  appeared 
at  Three  Rivers ;  she  had  followed  a  different  road 
from  that  of  the  two  preceding  ones.  The  poor 
miserable  creature  had  nothing  but  the  skin  stretched 
over  her  bones ;  her  look  was  frightful :  her  eyes 
appeared  as  if  sunk  in  a  corpse's  head;  one  no  longer 
saw  cheeks  upon  her  face;  her  lips,  glued  to  her 
jaws,  imaged  rather  one  deceased  than  a  living 
person.  [41]  Having  been  charitably  received, 
she  related  their  capture  and  their  journey.  "  One 
woman,"  she  said,  "  of  our  band,  fearing  the  fury  of 
the  enemies,  spoke  to  me  of  putting  herself  to 
death.  I  saw  well  that  that  proceeded  from  mad- 
ness ;  I  answered  her  that  it  was  necessary  to  escape, 
and  not  to  undo  oneself.  But  as  she  was  a  very 
Megera,  and  hostile  to  the  Faith,  she  heeded  not  this 
counsel.     Laying  hands  on  her  child,  she  murdered 


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.30 

plus  deuorant  que  celuy  des  Hiroquois.  II  y  auoit 
plufieurs  annees  qu'elle  refiftoit  k  Dieu,  fe  bandant 
centre  les  veritez  qu'on  luy  vouloit  enfeigner,  fa  vie 
pleine  de  cholere  &  d'animofite  contre  la  dodtrine  de 
lefus-Chrift,  ne  pronoftiquoit  qu'vn  defefpoir. 

Noftre  captiue  racontoit,  que  Dieu  luy  auoit  pre- 
fente  plufieurs  occafions  de  fe  fauuer  des  mains  de 
I'ennemy  deuant  que  d'arriuer  en  leurspais:  mais 
helas!  difoit-elle,  ie  ne  pouuois  abandonner  ma  fille 
qui  eftoit  prifonniere  auec  moy,  &  mieux  gardee  que 
moy.  L'amour  de  mon  enfant  &  [42]  I'amour  de 
ma  vie  combattoient  das  mon  coeur :  mais  enfin  ma 
fille  I'emporta  par  deffus  moy,  ie  creu  qu'eftant  arri- 
uez  dans  ce  pais  de  tourmens,  ie  pourrois  trouuer 
moye  de  nous  fauuer  toutes  deux.  En  effet  apres 
auoir  paff6  par  les  baftonades  &  par  les  autres  tour- 
ments,  k  la  reception  &  ^  I'entree  des  prifonniers, 
apres  la  mort  de  tous  les  hommes  &  de  quelques 
femmes,  on  nous  donna  la  vie ;  ma  fille  eflant  jeune 
&  afi!ez  agreable,  fut  bien  toft  mariee ;  les  Sauuages 
ne  font  point  de  difficulte  d'efpoufer  vne  eftrangere 
&  vne  captiue,  voire  mefme  il  y  en  k  qui  les  aiment 
dauantage;  pource  qu'elles  font  ordinairement  plus 
obeiffantes  &  plus  fouples.  Or  comme  ie  ne  penfois 
qu'k  ma  liberte,  ie  vay  trouuer  mon  pauure  enfant, 
ie  luy  decouure  mon  deffein,  nous  concliions  qu'il 
falloit  fortir  de  la  bourgade  fur  la  minuit,  ce  que 
nous  fifmes  affez  heureufement  fans  eftre  apper9eues, 
^  peines  eftions  nous  hors  des  portes  qui  ne  fer- 
moient  point,  que  nous  courufmes  de  toutes  nos 
forces,  depuis  la  minuit  iufqu'enuiron  les  cinq  heures 
du  foir:  comme  nous  penfions  vn  petit  refpirer,  nous 
apper9eumes  des  Hiroquois:  la  crainte  nous  fit  re- 


J 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  ib47  277 

it,  and  threw  it  at  the  feet  of  the  Hiroquois;  then, 
having  slipped  her  head  into  a  halter,  she  pulled 
with  one  hand  to  strangle  herself,  and  with  the 
other  she  cut  her  throat  with  a  knife."  But  alas! 
she  soon  found  a  more  devouring  fire  than  that  of 
the  Hiroquois.  For  several  years  she  had  resisted 
God,  hardening  herself  against  the  truths  that  it  was 
desired  to  teach  her;  her  life,  full  of  anger  and 
animosity  against  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,  prog- 
nosticated only  despair. 

Our  captive  related  that  God  had  offered  her 
several  opportunities  of  escaping  from  the  hands  of 
the  enemy,  before  arriving  in  their  country:  "  But, 
alas!"  she  said,  "  I  could  not  abandon  my  daugh- 
ter, who  was  a  prisoner  with  me,  and  better  guarded 
than  I.  Love  for  my  child  and  [42]  love  for  my  own 
life  were  struggling  in  my  heart,  but  finally  my 
daughter  carried  the  day  with  me;  I  supposed  that, 
having  arrived  in  this  country  of  torments,  I  could 
find  means  of  saving  us  both.  In  fact, —  after  pass- 
ing through  the  beatings  and  the  other  torments  at 
the  reception  and  at  the  entrance  of  prisoners, — 
after  the  death  of  all  the  men  and  of  some  women, 
they  gave  us  our  lives.  My  daughter,  being  young 
and  sufficiently  agreeable,  was  soon  married."  The 
Savages  make  no  difficulty  about  espousing  a  stranger 
and  a  captive ;  nay  even,  there  are  some  who  love 
them  the  more,  because  they  are  usually  more  obe- 
dient and  more  pliable.  "  Now,  since  I  was  think- 
ing only  of  my  liberty,  I  go  to  find  my  poor  child; 
I  reveal  to  her  my  design.  We  concluded  that  it 
was  necessary  to  leave  the  village  toward  midnight, 
which  we  did  quite  safely,  without  being  perceived. 
Hardly  were  we  out  of  the  gates,  which  did  not  shut, 


278  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  30 

trouuer  des  forces,  nous  [43]  nous  iettons  k  trauers  des 
halliers,  I'efpouuante  nous  fit  marcher  de  telle  forte 
que  nous  nous  f eparafmes ;  or  ie  ne  f gay  fi  nous  fufmes 
appergeues,  ie  ne  fgay  fi  ma  fille  eft  morte  dans  les 
bois,  ou  fi  elle  a  efte  reprife  par  ces  Barbares,  quoy 
que  e'en  foit,  ie  ne  I'ay  plus  veue  depuis  ce  temps-Ik, 
elle  auoit  prepare  vn  coufteau  pour  noftre  voyage,  & 
moy  cinq  petits  pains  cuis  fous  la  cendre,  c'eft  tout 
ce  que  i'ay  mange  depuis  ma  fuitte,  excepte  quelques 
fruits  fauuages  que  ie  rencontrois  de  temps  en  temps 
en  mon  chemin,  la  priere  eftoit  mon  vnique  confola- 
tion,  ie  n'auois  rien  pour  faire  du  feu,  mes  doits 
n'eftans  pas  alfez  forts  pour  faire  vn  fufil  a  la  fagon 
des  Hurons  les  guefpes  &  les  mouches  m'eftra- 
gloient;  enfin  Dieume  donna  I'inuention  de  faire  des 
bas  de  cbauffes  &  des  maches  de  feiiillages,  pour  me 
deffendre  de  leurs  piquures.  Nos  Peres  luy  donne- 
rent  vne  couuerture ;  car  k  peine  auoit-elle  dequoy 
cacher  la  moitie  de  fon  corps,  elle  fe  confeffa  auec 
de  grands  reffentiments  de  fes  offenfes,  tefmoignant 
d'ailleurs  vne  joye  &  vn  contentement  admirable  de 
fe  reuoir  parmy  les  croyans. 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  279 

when  we  ran  with  all  our  might,  from  midnight  until 
about  five  o'clock  in  the  evening.  When  we  were 
thinking  to  breathe  a  little,  we  perceived  some  Hiro- 
quois;  fear  made  us  recover  strength,  and  we  [43] 
rushed  through  thickets ;  terror  caused  us  to  proceed 
in  such  sort  that  we  became  separated.  I  know  not 
whether  we  were  perceived ;  I  know  not  whether  my 
daughter  has  died  in  the  woods,  or  whether  she  has 
been  taken  again  by  those  Barbarians:  whatever  the 
fact  may  be,  I  have  not  seen  her  again  since  that 
time.  She  had  prepared  a  knife  for  our  journey, 
and  I,  five  little  loaves  baked  under  the  cinders;  that 
is  all  that  I  have  eaten  since  my  flight,  except  some 
wild  fruits  that  I  came  across,  from  time  to  time,  on 
my  way.  Prayer  was  my  sole  consolation.  I  had 
nothing  to  make  fire  with, — my  fingers  not  being 
strong  enough  to  make  a  fire-stick  in  the  manner  of 
the  Hurons.  The  wasps  and  flies  kept  strangling 
me:  finally  God  showed  me  an  invention, —  making 
stockings  and  sleeves  of  foliage,  in  order  to  defend 
myself  from  their  stings."  Our  Fathers  gave  her 
a  blanket :  for  hardly  had  she  wherewith  to  hide  the 
half  of  her  body.  She  confessed,  with  great  regret 
for  her  sins, —  showing,  moreover,  an  admirable  joy 
and  contentment  on  seeing  herself  again  among  the 
believers. 


280  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.30 


[44]  CHAPITRE  III. 

QUELQUES    HIROQUOIS    SURPRIS  APRES  VNE  DEFFAITTE 

D'ALGONQUINS.       VNE    FEMME    TUE    VN 

HIROQUOIS   &    SE    SAUUE. 

LE  vingt-neufiefme  de  May,  arriua  ^  Montreal  vn 
canot  conduit  par  trois  Sauuages  de  la  petite 
nation  des  Algonquins;  ces  pauures  gens 
furent  bien  eftonnez,  apprenans  la  deffaitte  des  haut-s 
Algoquins,  dont  nous  auons  parle  cy-deffus;  ils 
auoient  neantmoins  de  fortes  coniedtures  de  la  perfidie 
des  Hiroquois.  Nous  auons,  difoient-ils,  remarque 
cet  Hyuer  vne  pifle  d'ennemis,  qui  nous  ont  approche 
de  bien  pres,  &  ce  qui  nous  a  donn^  de  I'eflonne- 
ment,  quelqu'vn  d'eux  ayant  rencontre  vne  attrape 
que  nous  anions  dreffee  pour  les  ours,  au  lieu  de 
nous  attendre  ou  de  chercher  nos  piftes ;  il  a  deften- 
du  I'attrape,  &  tellement  fepar6  les  pieces  qui  la 
compofoient,  que  nous  voyons  bien  qu'aucun  animal 
n'a  peu  faire  ce  d6bris.  C'eft  quelqu'vn  qui  nous  a 
voulu  donner  [45]  a  entendre  que  nous  nous  tinlTions 
fur  nos  gardes,  &  que  Tennemy  n'eftoit  pas  loing; 
cette  charite  n'eft  pas  comune  parmy  des  Barbares.  lis 
adiouftoient  qu'il  s'eftoit  iette  vne  certaine  maladie 
fur  les  Caribous,  qui  leur  faifoit  vomir  le  fang  par  la 
gueule,  demeurans  tout  courts  quand  on  les  pourfui- 
uoit.  lis  en  ont  veu  iufques  'k  cinq,  fix  &  fept  tom- 
ber  roides  niorts  en  vn  moment,  cela  les  a  tellement 
efpouuantez,  qu'ils  ont  refolu  de  quitter  leur  pais 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  ib47  281 


[44]   CHAPTER  III. 

SOME     HIROQUOIS     SURPRISED     AFTER     A     DEFEAT     OF 
ALGONQUINS;     A     WOMAN    KILLS    A    HIRO- 
QUOIS, AND  ESCAPES. 

THE  twenty-ninth  of  May,  there  arrived  at  Mont- 
real a  canoe  conducted  by  three  Savages  of 
the  petite  nation  of  the  Algonquins.  These 
poor  people  were  much  astonished  at  learning  the 
defeat  of  the  upper  Algonquins,  of  which  we  have 
spoken  herein  above ;  they  had  nevertheless  strong 
suspicions  regarding  the  treachery  of  the  Hiroquois. 
"  We  have,"  said  they,  "  noticed  this  Winter  a  trail 
of  some  enemies  who  have  approached  us  very  close- 
ly; and, —  what  has  caused  us  astonishment, —  some 
one  of  them  having  encountered  a  trap  which  we  had 
set  up  for  bears,  instead  of  awaiting  us  or  seeking 
our  trail,  he  took  down  the  trap,  and  so  separated 
the  pieces  which  composed  it  that  we  plainly  see 
that  no  animal  can  have  made  this  wreck.  It  is  some 
one  who  has  wished  to  give  us  [45]  to  understand 
that  we  should  be  on  our  guard,  and  that  the  enemy 
was  not  far  away."  Such  charity  is  not  common 
among  Barbarians.  They  added  that  there  had 
arisen  a  certain  disease  among  the  Caribous,  which 
made  them  vomit  blood  through  the  throat,  remain- 
ing quite  still  when  they  were  pursued.  They  have 
seen  as  many  as  five,  six,  or  seven  fall  stiff  in  death 
in  a  moment :  that  has  so  terrified  them  that  they 
have  resolved  to  leave  their  country  in  order  to  come 


282  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.30 

pour  venir  demeurer  aupres  des  Frangois.  Dieu 
retire  de  temps  en  temps,  ceux  qui  font  dans  le  fond 
des  terres  oti  on  ne  pent  aborder  pour  les  amener  a 
fa  connoiffance,  par  le  voifmage  de  ceux  qui  font 
capables  de  les  infhruire.  Ces  pauures  gens  ayant 
peur  de  rencontrer  les  Hiroquois  a  leur  retour, 
fupplierent  Monfieur  d'Aillebourts  de  les  fecourir  de 
quelques  armes,  bien  refolus  de  fe  battre  s'ils  trou- 
uoient  des  ennemis.  Monfieur  d'Aillebourts  creut 
qu'il  ne  les  falloit  pas  efconduire  en  vn  fujet  ^\.  im- 
portat ;  eftans  armez  ils  font  vn  tour  aux  Trois  Riui- 
eres,  &  de  la  remontent  en  leur  pais  fans  trouuer 
aucun  ennemy.  L'vn  d'eux  croyant  que  la  riuiere 
eftoit  toute  libre,  embarque  fa  femme  pour  voguer 
iufqu'a  [46]  I'lfle,  &  donner  aduis  aux  Sauuages  de 
ce  pais-lk,  que  leurs  parents  auoient  efte  pris  &  maf- 
facrez  vers  les  Trois  Riuieres :  &  par  confequet  qu'ils 
fe  tinffent  fur  leur  garde.  Comme  done  il  nauigeoit 
dans  fa  petite  gondole  d'efcorce,  il  apper9eut  de  loing 
vn  canot  d' Hiroquois,  fe  tournant  vers  fa  femme  qui 
gouuernoit  le  canot,  luy  dit,  aurois  tu  bien  le 
courage  de  me  fecoder,  i'ay  enuie  d'aller  attaquer  ce 
canot,  il  eftoit  peut-eftre  conduit  par  fept  ou  huicft 
hommes,  &  luy  eftoit  tout  feul :  mais  il  auoit  de  la 
refolution.  Sa  femme  luy  refpondit,  ie  vous  fuiuray 
par  tout,  ie  ne  veux  plus  de  vie  apres  voftre  mort ; 
ils  font  joiier  leurs  auiros  pour  attraper  ce  petit 
vaiffeau:  mais  deuant  que  d'eftre  defcouuerts,  ils 
virent  vn  peu  plus  loing  quatre  ou  cinq  canots  rem- 
plis  d'hommes,  cela  les  arrelta  ne  iugeans  pas  qu'il 
fe  falut  letter  temerairement  dans  les  fers  de  leurs 
ennemis.  Que  fera  done  ce  pauure  homme?  il  ne 
veut  pas  f uir :  il  ne  pent  paffer  outre  fans  mourir :  il 


1646  -  47 J  RELA  TION  OF  1647  283 

and  live  near  the  French.  God  withdraws  from 
time  to  time  those  who  are  in  the  remote  interior, 
which  we  cannot  approach,  in  order  to  lead  them 
to  his  knowledge  through  neighborhood  to  those 
who  are  competent  to  instruct  them.  These  poor 
people,  being  afraid  of  meeting  the  Hiroquois  on 
their  return,  besought  Monsieur  d'Aillebourts  to 
assist  them  with  some  arms, —  well  resolved  to  fight 
if  they  found  enemies;  Monsieur  d'Aillebourts  be- 
lieved that  they  ought  not  to  be  denied  in  a  matter 
so  important.  Being  armed,  they  make  a  journey 
to  Three  Rivers,  and  thence  go  up  again  to  their 
own  country,  without  finding  any  enemy.  One  of 
them,  supposing  that  the  river  was  quite  free,  em- 
barks his  wife  in  order  to  journey  as  far  as  [46]  the 
Island,  and  to  give  warning  to  the  Savages  of  that 
country,  that  their  relatives  had  been  taken  and 
massacred  toward  Three  Rivers ;  and  that,  in  conse- 
quence, they  should  be  on  their  guard.  As  he  was, 
then,  navigating  in  his  little  bark  gondola,  he  per- 
ceived from  a  distance  a  canoe  of  Hiroquois.  Turn- 
ing toward  his  wife,  who  was  steering  the  canoe,  he 
said  to  her:  "  Wouldst  thou  really  have  the  courage 
to  aid  me  ?  I  desire  to  go  and  attack  that  canoe. ' '  It 
was  conducted  by  perhaps  seven  or  eight  men,  and 
he  was  all  alone ;  but  he  had  resolution.  His  wife 
answered  him :  "  I  will  follow  thee  everywhere ;  I 
wish  no  more  of  life  after  thy  death."  They  ply 
their  paddles,  in  order  to  overtake  that  little  craft; 
but,  before  being  discovered,  they  saw,  a  little  be- 
yond, four  or  five  canoes  filled  with  men.  That 
stopped  them;  —  they  concluded  that  they  ought  not 
to  cast  themselves  rashly  into  the  irons  of  their 
enemies.     What,  then,  will  this  poor  man  do?     He  is 


284  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  30 

faut,  dit-il  a  fa  femme?  que  ie  f9ache  qu'elle  prife 
ont  faidl  ces  gens-lk ;  car  ie  vols  bien  a  leur  mine 
qu'ils  voguent  en  gens  vidtorieux ;  affeurement  ils 
ont  pris  de  nos  compatriottes ;  il  [47]  met  fa  femme  a 
terre,  puis  s'en  allant  de  I'autre  cofte  de  la  riuiere, 
comme  s'il  fut  venu  du  pais  des  Hiroquois;  il  tire 
vn  coup  d'arquebufe.  Les  Hiroquois  ne  Ie  voyans 
pas  bien,  &  croyans  peut-eftre  que  c'eftoit  quelque 
trouppe  de  leurs  foldats  qui  arriuoit  de  nouueau 
en  ce  quartier-la,  firent  quarante  cris,  tirans  quarate 
fois  ces  voyeles  du  fond  de  leur  eftomach  ^^^;  c'eft 
affez,  dit  c6t  Algonquin,  ie  n'en  voulois  pas  dauan- 
tage,  ie  f9ay  ce  que  ie  defirois,  affeurement  ils  tien- 
nent  quarante  de  nos  gens  prisoniers.  II  r'embarque 
fa  femme,  &  s'en  court  k  force  de  rames  vers  quel- 
ques  hommes  qu'il  auoit  quittez,  il  leur  raconte  ce 
qu'il  a  veu  &  entendu,  les  exhortant  a  fuiure  I'enne- 
my ;  fept  ieunes  hommes  fe  prefentent  k  luy,  ils  mo- 
tent  dans  deux  canots  &  s'en  vont  leftement  au  lieu 
oil  I'ennemy  eftoit.  II  n'y  a  point  de  chaffeurs  fi 
afpres  au  gibier,  que  les  Sauuages  Ie  sot  a  la  chalTe 
des  hommes;  il  n'y  k  point  de  chat  fi  adroit  pour  fe 
tapir,  &  pour  fe  cacher,  &  pour  fauter  fur  vne  fouris, 
qu'vn  Sauuage  eft  habile  pour  furprendre  &  pour  fe 
lan9er  fur  fa  proye ;  ils  f e  gliffent  doucement,  ils  re- 
marquent  les  piftes  de  leurs  ennemis,  les  vont  recon- 
noiftre  a  pas  de  loup;  ils  auiferent  dans  I'obfcurit^ 
cinq  cabanes  enfemble,  [48]  allons,  dirent-ils,  tiions 
&  mourons,  vendons  noflre  mort.  Vne  feule  cabane 
contenoit  plus  de  combattans  qu'ils  n'eftoient  d'af- 
faillans;  I'ordre  fut  que  fix  entreroient  dans  les  trois 
plus  grandes  cabanes,  deux  en  chacune,  &  les  deux 
autres  dans  les  deux  plus  petites.     II  y  auoit  deux 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  285 

not  willing  to  flee :  he  cannot  pass  on  without  dying. 
"  I  must,"  said  he  to  his  wife,  "  know  what  capture 
those  people  have  made ;  for  I  plainly  see  by  their 
bearing  that  they  journey  like  people  victorious. 
Surely,  they  have  taken  some  of  our  fellow-country- 
men." He  [47]  puts  his  wife  ashore;  then,  going  to 
the  other  side  of  the  river,  as  if  he  had  come  from 
the  country  of  the  Hiroquois,  he  fires  an  arquebus 
shot.  The  Hiroquois,  not  seeing  him  clearly,  and 
supposing  perhaps  that  it  was  some  troop  of  their 
own  warriors  which  was  newly  arriving  in  that  quar- 
ter, gave  forty  shouts,  drawing  forty  times  these 
vowel  sounds  from  the  pit  of  their  chests,  hee.  "  It 
is  enough,"  said  that  Algonquin ;  "  I  wanted  nothing 
more;  I  know  what  I  desired, — -they  certainly 
hold  forty  of  our  people  prisoners."  He  takes  his 
wife  on  board  again,  and  hastens  away,  by  dint  of 
paddling,  toward  some  men  whom  he  had  left;  he 
relates  to  them  what  he  has  seen  and  heard, 
exhorting  them  to  follow  the  enemy.  Seven  young 
men  offer  themselves  to  him ;  they  get  into  two 
canoes,  and  go  quickly  to  the  place  where  the 
enemy  was.  There  are  no  hunters  so  eager  for 
game  as  the  Savages  are  for  the  chase  of  men ;  there 
is  no  cat  so  adroit  to  crouch,  and  hide  itself,  and 
jump  upon  a  mouse,  as  a  Savage  is  shrewd  in  sur- 
prising and  rushing  upon  his  prey.  They  glide 
softly ;  they  notice  the  trail  of  their  enemies ;  they 
go  to  reconnoitre,  with  the  step  of  a  wolf.  They 
noticed  in  the  darkness  five  cabins  together;  [48] 
"  Come,"  they  said,  "  let  us  kill  and  die;  let  us  sell 
our  deaths."  A  single  cabin  contained  more  com- 
batants than  they  were  assailants :  the  order  was,  that 
six  should  enter  into  the  three  largest  cabins,  two  into 


286  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES         [Vol.30 

Chrefliens  das  ce  petit  nombre  qui  firent  leurs 
prieres,  comme  des  perfonnes  qui  croyoient  aller  k  la 
mort;  fur  la  minuit  ils  entrent  I'efpee  a  la  main,  ils 
tranfpercent  auec  vne  promptitude  admirable  ces 
pauures  endormis :  mais  par  mefgarde  ils  tuerent  vne 
femme  de  leur  nation  nouuellement  prife  par  ces  Bar- 
bares  ;  en  vn  mot,  ils  ofterent  la  vie  h.  dix  Hiroquois, 
ils  en  blefferent  beaucoup  d'autres,  &  deliurerent  dix 
perfonnes  captiues.  Le  combat  fe  fit  auec  vn  eftrage 
tintamarre,  qui  eftes-vous?  difoient  les  Hiroquois; 
les  autres  refpondoient  ^  coups  d'efpees ;  les  tenebres 
rendoient  cette  confufion  plus  horrible.  Vn  grand 
Hiroquois  perce  d'vn  coup  d'efpee,  fe  iettant  fur  ce- 
luy  qui  I'auoit  bleffe  rompit  I'efpee  en  le  colletant; 
I'Algonquin  s'eftant  deffait  de  fes  mains  le  pourfuit 
k  coups  de  pierres,  I'autre  I'ayant  r'atrappe  I'alloit 
perdre,  fi  fon  camarade  furuenant  [49]  ne  luy  eut 
donn6  vn  coup  qui  le  jetta  par  terre.  Les  prifon- 
nieres  mifes  en  liber[t]e,  s'efcrierent  ^  leurs  libera- 
teurs,  fauuez  vous,  il  y  a  quantite  d* Hiroquois  proche 
d'icy,  fi  le  jour  vous  defcouure  vous  eftes  perdus.  A 
ces  voix,  ils  arrachent  les  cheuelures  des  morts,  ils 
jettent  en  la  riuiere  de  gros  paquets  de  caftors  pris 
fur  les  Algonquins  par  ces  deloyaux,  comme  il[s]  ne 
les  pouuoi[en]t  pas  emporter,  ils  ne  vouluret  pas 
auffi  que  leurs  ennemis  s'en  feruiffent.  Enfin  ayans 
embarquez  les  persones  qu'ils  auoient  d^liurez,  ils  fe 
retirerent  en  lieu  d'affeurance.  II  ne  faudroit  pas 
grand  nombre  de  femblables  foldats  pour  donner  bien 
de  la  peine  aux  Hiroquois. 

Ces  captiues  fe  voyans  plainement  deliur^es  racon- 
terent  comme  elles  auoient  eft6  prifes.  Plufieurs 
Sauuages  des  pais  plus  hauts,  difoient-elles,  s'eftoient 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  287 

each  one,  and  the  two  others  into  the  two  smallest. 
There  were  two  Christians  in  this  little  number, 
who  said  their  prayers,  like  persons  who  thought 
they  were  going  to  death.  Toward  midnight  they 
enter,  javelin  in  hand;  with  an  admirable  prompt- 
ness, they  transfix  those  poor  sleeping  people;  but 
inadvertently  they  killed  a  woman  of  their  own 
nation,  recently  captured  by  those  Barbarians.  In  a 
word,  they  took  away  the  lives  of  ten  Hiroquois; 
they  wounded  many  others,  and  delivered  ten  cap- 
tive persons.  The  fight  occurred  with  a  strange 
hubbub.  "  Who  are  you?  "  said  the  Hiroquois;  the 
others  answered  with  javelin  thrusts ;  the  darkness 
rendered  this  confusion  more  horrible.  A  tall  Hiro- 
quois, pierced  by  a  javelin,  falling  upon  the  one  who 
had  wounded  him,  broke  the  weapon  in  grappling 
him.  The  Algonquin,  having  released  himself  from 
his  hands,  pursued  him  with  a  volley  of  stones ;  the 
other,  having  caught  him  again,  was  about  to  destroy 
him,  if  his  companion,  happening  thither,  [49]  had 
not  given  him  a  blow  which  felled  him  to  the  earth. 
The  captive  women,  being  set  free,  cried  to  their 
liberators :  ' '  Escape ;  there  are  many  Hiroquois  near 
here;  if  the  light  reveals  you,  you  are  lost."  At 
these  words,  they  tear  off  the  scalps  of  the  dead; 
they  throw  into  the  river  great  bundles  of  beaver 
skins  taken  from  the  Algonquins  by  those  treacher- 
ous people;  as  they  could  not  carry  these  away,  they 
were  also  not  willing  that  their  enemies  should  use 
them.  Finally,  having  embarked  the  persons  whom 
they  had  delivered,  they  retired  to  a  place  of  safety. 
It  would  not  take  a  great  number  of  such  warriors 
to  give  plenty  of  trouble  to  the  Hiroquois. 

Those  captives,  seeing  themselves  entirely  deliv- 


288  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

venus  ranger  a  I'lfle  pour  fe  joindre  aux  Hurons  qui 
deuoient  defcedre  vers  les  Frangois.  Trente  families 
auoient  deffein  de  s'arrefter  aupres  de  ceux  qui 
enfeignent  le  chemin  du  Ciel.  II  n'y  auoit  Sauuage 
qui  ne  fut  charge  de  pelteries  pour  achepter  fes 
petits  befoins  aux  magazins  du  pais.  Vn  Huron  pris 
[50]  depuis  quelques  anneespar  les  Hiroquois,  s'ellant 
fait  Capitaine  de  ces  voleurs,  les  a  conduit  au  lieu  oil 
nous  eftions,  ce  qu'il  a  fait  d'autant  plus  facilement, 
qu'il  auoit  vne  tres-grande  connoiffance  de  toutes  ces 
contrees.  Nos  gens  qui  ne  les  attendoient  pas  furent 
bien  eftonnez  quand  ils  les  virent  les  armes  en  la 
main,  ils  firent  au  commencement  quelque  refiftance : 
mais  ayans  veu  d'abord  trois  de  nos  hommes  &.  bas, 
tuez  k  coups  d'arquebufes,  ils  prirent  la  fuitte;  I'aua- 
rice  empefcha  les  Hiroquois  de  les  pourfuiure.  Leurs 
yeux  efbloiiis  par  le  grand  nobre  de  caftors  que  nous 
anions,  les  fit  penfer  au  pillage,  ce  qui  fauua  la  vie 
k  quantite  de  monde :  pour  nous  autres  qui  anions 
des  enfans,  nous  fufmes  bien-tofl  prifes.  Voilk, 
difoient-elles,  comme  s'eft  paffe  noftre  mal  heur. 

Outre  ces  dix  perfonnes  mifes  en  liberty  par  ces 
huitft  Algonquins,  vne  Amazone  prife  auec  les  autres, 
s'eft  brauement  fauuee  des  mains  de  ceux  qui  la 
tenoient  captiue.  II  y  auoit  defia  dix  jours  que  les 
Hiroquois  la  traif noient  auec  les  autres  prif onniers ; 
or  quoy  qu'elle  fut  liee  par  les  deux  pieds  &  par  les 
deux  mains  ^  quatre  [51]  pieux  fichez  en  terre,  & 
difpofez  en  croix  de  S.  Andre;  neantmoins  elle  prit 
refolution  de  fe  fauuer,  fentant  que  les  liens  de  I'vn 
de  fes  bras  ne  la  preffoit  pas  trop,  elle  fit  fi  bien 
qu'elle  mit  ce  bras  en  liberte;  ce  bras  libre  deftache 
bien-toft  les  cordes  qui   captiuoient  le   refte  de  fon 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  289 

ered,  related  how  they  had  been  taken.  "  Many 
Savages  of  the  upper  countries,"  they  said,  "had 
come  to  station  themselves  at  the  Island,  in  order  to 
join  the  Hurons  who  were  to  go  down  toward 
the  French.  Thirty  families  had  the  intention  of 
settling  near  those  who  teach  the  way  to  Heaven. 
There  was  not  a  Savage  who  was  not  laden  with 
peltries,  in  order  to  buy  his  little  necessaries  at  the 
stores  of  the  country.  A  Huron,  taken  [50]  some 
years  ago  by  the  Hiroquois,  having  become  Captain 
of  these  robbers,  led  them  to  the  place  where  we 
were, — which  he  did  the  more  easily,  because  he 
had  a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  those  regions.  Our 
people,  who  were  not  expecting  them,  were  much 
astonished  when  they  saw  them,  arms  in  hand;  they 
made,  at  the  start,  some  resistance,  but  having  seen, 
at  the  outset,  three  of  our  men  down,  killed  by 
arquebus  shots,  they  took  flight.  Avarice  prevented 
the  Hiroquois  from  pursuing  them,  their  eyes  being 
dazzled  by  the  great  number  of  beavers  that  we  had, 
which  made  them  think  of  pillage.  That  saved  the 
lives  of  many  people ;  as  for  those  of  us  who  had 
children,  we  were  soon  taken.  It  is  thus,"  they 
said,  "  that  our  misfortune  came  to  pass." 

Besides  these  ten  persons  set  at  liberty  by  those 
eight  Algonquins,  an  Amazon,  taken  with  the  others, 
has  bravely  escaped  from  the  hands  of  those  who 
held  her  captive.  For  ten  days,  the  Hiroquois  had 
been  dragging  her  with  the  other  prisoners;  now, 
though  she  was  bound  by  both  feet  and  both  hands 
to  four  [51]  stakes, —  fastened  in  the  earth,  and 
arranged  like  a  St.  Andrew's  cross, —  she  never- 
theless took  the  resolution  to  escape.  Noticing  that 
the  bonds  on  one  of  her  arms  did  not  press  her  very 


200  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES         [Vol.30 

corps,  tous  les  Hiroquois  dormoient  profondement ; 
la  voila  fur  fes  pieds,  elle  paffe  par  deffus  ces  grands 
corps  enfeuelis  dans  le  fommeil,  eftant  toute  prefte 
de  fortir,  elle  rencontre  vne  hache,  elle  s'en  faifit,  & 
pouffee  de  ie  ne  fgay  quelle  fureur  guerriere,  elle  en 
d^charge  vn  coup  de  toutes  fes  forces  fur  la  tefle 
d'vn  Hiroquois  couche  a  1' entree  delacabane;  c6t 
homme  fe  debat,  d'autres  s'efueillent,  on  allume  vn 
flambeau  d'efcorce,  on  voit  ce  miferable  plonge  dans 
fon  fang,  on  cherche  I'autheur  de  ce  meurtre,  on 
trouue  la  place  de  cette  femme  vuide,  &  la  hache  de 
cet  homme  enfanglantee,  chacun  fort  de  la  cabane, 
les  jeunes  gens  courent  de  part  &  d'autre :  mais  cette 
bonne  femme,  qui  apres  fon  coup  s'eftoit  iettee  dans 
vne  fouche  creufe  qu'elle  auoit  auparauant  bien 
remarquee,  efcoute  tout  leur  tintamarre,  non  fans  peur 
d'eftre  [52]  defcouuerte.  Enfin  voyat  que  les  cou- 
reurs  qui  la  cherchoient  s'eftoient  jettez  d'vn  coft6, 
elle  fort  de  fa  taniere  &  court  de  1' autre  tant  qu'elle 
pent ;  le  iour  eflant  venu,  ces  Barbares  font  vn  grad 
circuit  pour  decouurir  fes  piftes,  ils  les  trouuent,  ils 
la  pourfuiuent  deux  iours  entiers,  au  bout  defquels 
cette  pauure  creature  les  entendit  courant  tout  a  1' en- 
tour  du  lieu  ou  elle  efloit,  elle  creut  que  c'efloit  fait 
de  fa  vie ;  mais  de  bonne  fortune  ayant  rencontre  vn 
eflang  bafty  par  des  caftors,  elle  s'y  plonge,  ne  refpi- 
rant  que  de  temps  en  temps  &  fi  adroitement  qu'elle 
ne  fut  point  apperceiie.  Enfin  ces  coureurs  ennuyez 
s'en  retournerent  vers  leurs  gens  defefperans  de  la 
pouuoir  trouuer,  fe  voyant  libre  elle  fe  met  en  che- 
min,  paffe  trente-cinq  iours  dans  les  bois,  fans  robe, 
&  fans  habits,  n'ayant  qu'vn  petit  bout  d'ecorce 
d'arbre  pour  fe  cacher  a  fes  propres  yeux.     Elle  ne 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  291 

tightly,  she  managed  so  well  that  she  set  that  arm 
free;  this  free  arm  soon  detaches  the  cords  which 
held  captive  the  rest  of  her  body.  All  the  Hiroquois 
were  sleeping  profoundly ;  behold  her  on  her  feet. 
She  passes  over  those  great  bodies  buried  in  sleep ; 
being  all  ready  to  go  out,  she  comes  across  a  hatchet ; 
she  seizes  it,  and,  impelled  by  a  strange  warlike 
fury,  she  deals  a  blow  from  it,  with  all  her  might, 
upon  the  head  of  a  Hiroquois  lying  at  the  entrance 
of  the  cabin.  This  man  struggles,  and  others  are 
awakened;  they  light  a  torch  of  bark,  and  they  see 
that  wretched  man  plunged  in  his  own  blood.  They 
seek  the  author  of  this  murder;  they  find  that 
woman's  place  empty,  and  that  man's  hatchet 
covered  with  blood.  Every  one  leaves  the  cabin,  and 
the  young  men  run  hither  and  thither :  but  that  good 
woman,  who  after  her  blow  had  thrown  herself  into 
a  hollow  stump  which  she  had  previously  well  ob- 
served, listens  to  all  their  hubbub,  not  without  fear 
of  being  [52]  discovered.  Finally,  seeing  that  the 
runners  who  sought  her  had  darted  to  one  side,  she 
leaves  her  den,  and  runs  to  the  other  side  as  fast  as 
she  can.  The  day  having  come,  those  Barbarians 
make  a  great  circuit  in  order  to  discover  her  tracks; 
they  find  these,  and  pursue  her  two  whole  days,  at 
the  end  of  which  this  poor  creature  heard  them 
running  all  around  the  place  where  she  was.  She 
believed  that  it  was  over  with  her  life  ;  but  having, 
by  good  fortune,  encountered  a  pond  formed  by 
beavers,  she  plunges  into  it,  breathing  only  from  time 
to  time,  and  so  adroitly  that  she  was  not  perceived. 
Finally,  those  runners,  being  wearied,  returned 
toward  their  own  people,  despairing  of  being  able  to 
find  her.     Seeing  herself  free,  she  sets  forth  on  the 


292  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.30 

trouue  point  d'autres  hofteleries  que  des  grofeliers  & 
quelques  petits  fruits  fauuages,  ou  quelques  racines, 
elle  paffoit  les  riuieres  mediocres  "k  la  nage,  quand  il 
fallut  trauerfer  le  grand  fleuue,  elle  raff enibla  des  bois 
qu'elle  attacha  &  lia  [53]  fortement  auec  des  ecorces 
d'vn  arbre  dont  les  Sauuages  fe  feruent  pour  faire 
des  liens,  fe  trouuant  dans  vn  lieu  plus  affeure,  elle 
marchoit  fur  les  riues  du  grand  fleuue,  fans  f9auoir 
bonnement  oti  elle  alloit:  car  iamais  elle  n'auoit 
approche  d'aucune  des  habitatios  Fragoifes,  ny  peut- 
eftre  n'auoit-elle  iamais  veu  aucun  Frangois,  elle 
fgauoit  feulement  qu'on  les  venoit  voir  par  eau,  ^). 
bien  qu'elle  n'auoit  autre  guide  que  le  courant  de 
cette  grande  riuiere:  les  maringoins,  c'eft  ^  dire  les 
coufms,  les  mouches  les  guefpes,  la  deuoroient,  elle 
ne  s'en  pouuoit  deffendre  "k  caufe  de  fa  nudity ;  enfin 
ayant  trouue  vne  mefchante  hache,  elle  fe  baftit  vn 
canot  d'ecorce  pour  fe  mettre  dans  le  fil  de  I'eau,  & 
pour  regarder  de  part  &  d' autre,  fi  elle  ne  verroit 
point  de  maifons.  le  vous  laiffe  a  penfer  en  quel 
foucy  elle  pouuoit  eftre,  n' ayant  aucune  connoif- 
fance  du  lieu  qu'elle  cherchoit,  &  ne  f9achant  pas  ou 
le  grand  fleuue  qui  la  conduifoit  alloit  aboutir.  II 
eft  fi  large  en  plufieurs  endroits,  il  fait  de  fi  grandes 
ef paces  ou  de  fi  grandes  eftendues  d'eau  qu'il  eft 
difficile  du  milieu  de  fon  lit  de  voir  vne  maifon 
pof6e  deffus  fes  bords.  Enfin  ayant  [54]  trauerfe  le 
lac  S.  Pierre  qui  eft  proche  des  Trois  Riuieres,  elle 
apper9oit  vn  canot  de  Hurons  qui  alloient  k  la 
pefche,  elle  fe  iette  auffi-toft  dans  les  bois,  ne  pouuant 
reconnoiftre  s'ils  eftoient  amis  ou  ennemis,  adjouftez 
que  fa  pudeur  la  fit  cacher,  pour  ne  marcher  plus  que 
la  nuit.     En  effet  elle  fe  remit  en  chemin  fur  les  huit 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  i647  293 

way,  and  passes  thirty-five  days  in  the  woods,  with- 
out a  robe  and  without  clothing ;  having  only  a  little 
piece  of  the  bark  of  a  tree,  with  which  to  hide  her- 
self from  her  own  eyes.     She  finds  no  other  hostel- 
ries  than  currant  bushes  and  some  small  wild  fruits, 
or  some  roots.     She  crossed  the  smaller  rivers  by 
swimming ;  when  it  was  necessary  to  cross  the  great 
stream,  she  gathered  pieces  of  wood,  which  she  at- 
tached and  bound  [53]  stoutly  with  the  bark  of  a  tree 
which  the  Savages  use  for  making  cords.     Finding 
herself  in  a  safer  place,  she  walked  along  the  banks 
of  the  great  stream,  without  well  knowing  whither 
she  went,  for  never  had  she  approached  any  of  the 
French  settlements,  nor,  perhaps,  had  she  ever  seen 
any  Frenchman, —  she  only  knew  that  people  came 
to  see  them  by  water;  so  that  she  had  no  other  guide 
than  the  current  of  that  great  river.     The  mosqui- 
toes,—  that  is  to  say,  the  gnats, —  the  flies,  and  the 
wasps  were  devouring  her;    she   could  not  defend 
herself  from  them  on  account  of  her  nakedness.     At 
last,  having  found  a  wretched  hatchet,  she  built  her 
a  canoe  of  bark,  in  order  to  reach  the  current  of  the 
water,   and  to  look  from  side  to  side,  if  she  might 
not  see  some  houses.     I  leave  you  to  think  in  what 
anxiety  she  might  be,  having  no  knowledge  of  the 
place  which  she  sought,  and  not  knowing  where  the 
great  stream  which  guided  her  was  likely  to  end.      It 
is  so  broad  in  several  places,  it  makes  so  great  spaces 
or  expanses  of  water,  that  it  is  difficult,  from  the  mid- 
dle  of    its  bed,  to  see  a  house  located  on  its  shores. 
Finally,    having     [54]    traversed    lake    St.     Pierre, 
which   is  near  Three   Rivers,  she  perceives  a  canoe 
of  Hurons,  who  were  going  fishing.     She  straight- 
way   rushes    into    the    woods,    unable    to    recognize 


294  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.30 

heures  du  foir,  k  mefme  temps  qu'elle  decouurit  le 
fort  des  Frangois,  a  mefme  temps  elle  fut  reconnue 
par  quelques  Hurons  qui  tireret  droit  k  elle,  pour 
fgauoir  qui  elle  eftoit,  les  voyans  venir  elle  quitte  les 
bords  de  la  riuiere,  rentre  dans  le  bois,  leur  criant 
qu'ils  n'approchaffent  point,  qu'elle  eftoit  toute  nue, 
&  qu'elle  s'eftoit  fauuee  des  mains  de  I'ennemy.  Vn 
de  ces  Hurons  luy  iette  vn  capot,  &  vne  efpece  de 
robe,  I'ayant  veftue  elle  fort  du  bois  &  s'en  vient 
auec  eux  iufqu'en  la  maifon  des  Fran9ois.  Nos 
Peres  la  font  venir,  I'interrogent  fur  fon  voyage,  elle 
raconte  ce  que  ie  viens  de  dire  bien  ioyeufe  de  fe  voir 
en  liberte,  admirant  la  charite  de  ceux  qu'elle  auoit 
tant  cherchez  fans  f9auoir  le  lieu  de  leur  demeure. 
Elle  arriua  aux  Trois  Riuieres  le  vingt-fixiefme  de 
luillet  toute  deffaite  &  toute  maigre.  O  Dieu  qu'elles 
fouff ranees!  [55]  que  I'homme  eft  amateur  de  la  vie? 
Si  ces  croix  eftoient  prifes  pour  lefus-Chrifl,  qu'elles 
feroient  pretieufes  ?  Elle  n 'auoit  garde  de  les  fouffrir 
pour  fon  Dieu,  puis  qu'elle  n'en  auoit  iamais  eu  de 
connoiffance,  pour  ne  s'eftre  iamais  approchee  de 
ceux  qui  diftribuent  le  pain  de  vie  aux  pauures 
affamez. 

Mais  entrons,  s'il  vous  plaift,  dans  des  croix  bien 
plus  faintes,  dans  des  fouffrances  ardemment  defi- 
rees,  &  dans  vne  mort  plus  aymable  que  la  vie  mef- 
me. II  eft  temps  de  parler  du  maffacre,  ou  pluftofl 
du  martyre  du  Pere  Ifaac  logues.  Nos  pauures  Neo- 
phytes eftans  conduits  au  pais  de  leurs  ennemis  le 
demandoient  auec  amour,  comme  nous  auons  defia 
remarqu6  cy-deffus,  ils  vouloient  tirer  de  fes  mains 
&  de  fa  bouche  vn  paffe-port  pour  entrer  au  Ciel,  ou 
ce  bon  Pere  arriue  deuant   eux  moyennoit  aupres  de 


1646-47]  RELATION  OF  1647  295 

whether  they  were  friends  or  enemies;  add  that 
modesty  made  her  conceal  herself,  in  order  to  pro- 
ceed thereafter  only  by  night.  In  fact,  she  resumed 
her  journey  toward  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening:  and 
when  she  discovered  the  French  fort,  she  was  at  the 
same  time  recognized  by  some  Hurons,  who  moved 
straight  toward  her,  in  order  to  know  who  she  was. 
Seeing  them  come,  she  leaves  the  shores  of  the  river, 
and  returns  to  the  woods,  shouting  to  them  that  they 
should  not  approach, —  that  she  was  entirely  naked, 
and  that  she  had  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the  ene- 
my. One  of  those  Hurons  throws  her  a  mantle,  and 
a  sort  of  robe;  having  put  this  on,  she  leaves  the 
woods  and  comes  away  with  them  to  the  house  of 
the  French.  Our  Fathers  send  for  her,  and  question 
her  about  her  journey;  she  relates  what  I  have  just 
told, —  very  joyful  to  see  herself  at  liberty,  and 
admiring  the  charity  of  those  whom  she  had  so  ear- 
nestly sought  without  knowing  the  place  of  their 
dwelling.  She  arrived  at  Three  Rivers  on  the 
twenty-sixth  of  July,  greatly  exhausted  and  ema- 
ciated. O  God,  what  sufferings!  [55]  What  a  lover 
of  life  is  man !  If  these  crosses  were  accepted  for 
Jesus  Christ,  how  precious  they  would  be!  She  had 
no  thought  of  suffering  them  for  her  God,  since  she 
had  never  had  knowledge  of  him,  because  she  had 
never  come  near  to  those  who  distribute  the  bread 
of  life  to  poor  famished  ones. 

But  let  us  enter,  if  you  please,  into  crosses  much 
holier,  into  sufferings  ardently  desired,  and  into  a 
death  more  desirable  than  life  itself.  It  is  time  to 
speak  of  the  murder,  or  rather  the  martyrdom,  of 
Father  Isaac  Jogues.  Our  poor  Neophytes,  being  con- 
ducted to  the  country  of  their  enemies,  were  asking 


296  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.30 

fon  Dieu  la  benedi(5tion  qu'ils  ont  fait  paroiftre  dans 
I'excez  de  leurs  tourmens.  Deuant  que  de  parler  de 
fa  derniere  fouffrance,  difons  deux  petits  mots  en 
paffant  des  graces  qui  ont  precede  le  premier  moment 
de  fon  eternite.  Son  humilite  &  le  peu  de  fejour 
qu'il  a  fait  parmy  nous  en  ces  contrees  plus  baffes, 
[56J  nous  rauirons  vne  partie  de  fa  gloire  &  de  noftre 
confolation,  les  Peres  qui  I'ont  plus  long-temps  & 
plus  particulierement  connu  au  pays  des  Hurons, 
font  remplis  des  doux  fentimens  de  fes  vertus :  mais 
comme  ils  ne  font  pas  informez  de  fa  mort,  ils  n'ont 
point  encor  decouuert  le  threfor  que  nous  pourrons 
voir  en  fon  temps.  Commengons,  s'il  vous  plaifl, 
par  fa  premiere  entree  au  pays  de  fes  amertumes  & 
de  fes  douceurs :  de  fes  mefpris  &  de  fa  gloire. 


1646  -47]  RELA  TION  OF  1647  297 

for  him  with  love,  as  we  have  already  remarked 
herein;  they  wished  to  draw  from  his  hands  and  his 
lips  a  passport  for  entering  Heaven,  where  this  good 
Father,  having  arrived  before  them,  was  procuring 
near  his  God  the  blessing  which  they  have  made 
manifest  in  the  excess  of  their  torments.  Before 
speaking  of  his  last  sufferings,  let  us  say  a  few  brief 
words,  in  passing,  of  the  graces  which  preceded  the 
first  moment  of  his  eternity.  His  humility,  and  the 
brief  sojourn  that  he  made  among  us  in  these  lower 
countries,  [56]  will  rob  us  of  a  part  of  his  glory  and 
of  our  consolation ;  the  Fathers  who  knew  him  longer 
and  more  intimately  in  the  country  of  the  Hurons, 
are  filled  with  tender  appreciation,  of  his  virtues; 
but,  as  they  are  not  informed  of  his  death,  they  have 
not  yet  discovered  the  treasure  that  we  shall  be  able 
to  see  in  due  time.  Let  us  begin,  if  you  please,  with 
his  first  entrance  into  the  country  of  his  bitter  expe- 
riences and  his  delights,  of  his  humiliations  and  his 
glory. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA:  VOL  XXX 

LX 

For  particulars  of  this  document,  see  VoL  XXIX. 

LXI 

This  is  a  letter  written  in  Latin  by  Charles  Gar- 
nier  to  the  father  general,  dated  at  Ste.  Marie  of  the 
Hurons,  May  3,  1647.  The  original  MS.  rests  in 
the  archives  of  the  Society,  where  Father  Martin 
made  a  copy  of  it,  presumably  in  1858.  Martin's 
French  translation  of  his  Latin  apograph  was  pub- 
lished six  years  later  in  Carayon's  Premiere  Mission, 
pp.  226-228.  In  the  present  publication  we  follow 
the  apograph  itself,  now  in  the  archives  of  St.  Mary's 
College,  Montreal,  and  our  English  translation  is 
made  therefrom. 

LXII 

For  bibliographical  particulars  of  the  Journal  des 
J  ^suites,  see  Vol.  XXVII. 

LXIII 

Our  text  of  the  Relation  of  1647  (Paris,  1648)  is 
printed  from  a  copy  of  the  original  edition  in  the 
possession  of  The  Burrows  Brothers  Company,  Cleve- 
land. It  is  addressed  by  the  superior,  Jerome  Lale- 
mant,  to  the  provincial,  Estienne  Charlet;  and  his 
prefatory  letter  on  p.  5  is  dated  "  De  Quebek  ce  20. 
d'Odlobre  [i]647."     The  "  Priuilege  "  was  "  Donne 


300  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES 

a  Paris  le  27.  lanuier  1648,"  and  the  "  Permiffion  " 
was  "  Fait  a  Paris  ce  8.  Fevrier  1648."  This  annual 
is  generally  designated  as  "  H.  87  "  because  described 
in  Harrisse's  Notes,  no.  87. 

Collation:  Title,  with  verso  blank,  i  leaf;  "  Table 
des  Chapitres,"  pp.  (3);  "  Priuilege,"  p.  (i);  "  Per- 
miffion," with  verso  blank,  i  leaf;  Lalemant's  prefa- 
tory epistle,  pp.  1-5;  text,  pp.  6-276. 

All  copies  examined  have  pp.  210,  211,  214,  215, 
218,  219,  222,  and  223  mispaged  as  212,  213,  216, 
217,  220,  221,  224,  and  225,  respectively.  In  one 
copy  in  Lenox  Library  —  the  Lamoignon  —  p.  166  is 
mispaged  66 ;  and  the  Harvard  College  copy  has  p.  274 
misnumbered  244,  although  in  the  Burrows  copy 
and  in  both  Lenox  copies  the  pagination  is  correct  in 
this  particular  case.  In  all  copies  examined,  the 
caption  of  Chapitre  x.  is  misnumbered  ix. 

The  two  Lenox  copies  are  alike,  textually,  in 
every  particular;  and  a  careful  comparison  reveals 
also  an  exact  typographical  agreement.  But  the 
Lamoignon  copy  in  Lenox,  unlike  any  other  copy 
known  to  us,  has  the  following  repetition  of  "  DE  " 
in  the  title-page,  on  account  of  which  it  was,  un- 
doubtedly, canceled  as  soon  as  discovered  by  the 
printer.  The  eighth  and  ninth  lines  read  as  fol- 
lows: "  SVR  LE  GRAND  FLEVVE  DE  |  De  S. 
Lavrens  en  l'annee  1647."  In  the  Burrows  copy, 
as  well  as  in  the  corresponding  Lenox  copy,  the  "  i  " 
has  dropped  out  of  the  form  in  the  date  at  the  bottom 
of  p.  5.  The  Lenox  Lamoignon  copy,  which  is  un- 
doubtedly the  earlier  impression,  has  the  date  in  full 
"  1647."  On  p.  166,  the  last  line  in  both  of  the 
Lenox  copies  is  given  thus:  "  c'eft  pourquoy  il  luy 
dit,   mon  cher  amy  le  " — which  has  been  improved 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA:   VOL.  XXX  301 

in  the  Burrows  copy,  to:  "  c'eft  pourquoy  il  luy  dit 
mon  cher  amy.  Le."  On  p.  198,  in  the  Burrows  and 
the  Lamoignon  copies,  the  figure  i  of  the  paging 
has  slipped,  thus  driving  out  the  first  letter  of 
"  comme,"  in  the  first  line;  in  the  other  Lenox  copy 
this  break  in  the  form  has  been  repaired.  In  all 
copies,  misprints  are  numerous,  indicating  careless 
proofreading. 

Copies  of  this  Relation  may  be  found  in  the  follow- 
ing libraries :  Lenox  (two  variations).  Harvard,  New 
York  State  Library,  Laval  University  (Quebec), 
Library  of  Parliament  (Ottawa),  Brown  (private), 
Ayer  (private),  Bibliotheque  Nationale  (Paris),  and 
British  Museum.  Copies  have  been  sold  or  priced 
as  follows:  O'Callaghan  (1882),  no.  1225,  sold  for 
$28,  and  had  cost  him  $15;  Harrassowitz  (1882), 
priced  at  160  marks;  Barlow  (1890),  nos.  1293  and 
1294,  sold  for  $30  and  $27,  respectively;  Dufosse 
(1891-1896),  priced,  variously,  at  125,  150,  and  200 
francs. 


i 

I 


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXX 

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  member  of  note,  refer  to  pages 

of  English  text.) 

1  (p.  23). —  One  of  these  confreries  —  the  Mitawit,  or  "Grand 
Medicine  Society,"  of  the  Menomonee  tribe  —  is  described  at  length 
by  Hoflfman,  U.  S.  Bur.  Ethnol.  Rep.,  1892-93,  pp.  66-138. 

2  (p.  63). —  Regarding  the  turtle  in  Indian  mythology,  see  vol. 
xii.,  note  5. 

3  (p.  69). —  Bressani  had  arrived  m  Canada  four  years  previously, 
but  had  been  captured  by  the  Iroquois  on  his  way  to  Huronia,  in 
1644  (vol.  xxiii.,  note  10). 

4  (p.  85). —  Concerning  the  Andastes  tribe,  see  vol.  viii.,  p.  301. 

5  (P-  95)- — Laurette:  Lorette  (vol.  xviii.,  note  a^. 

6  (p.  113). —  For  information  regarding  these  tribes,  see  vol.  xv., 
note  7;  vol.  xviii.,  tiote  16. 

7  (p.  139). —  See  description  of  Isle  Percee,  in  vol.  ix.,  note  34. 

8  (p.  143). —  This  chapter  is  evidently  copied  from  the  annual 
report  of  the  Gaspesian  mission  sent  to  the  Quebec  superior;  and, 
from  personal  allusions  made  in  the  last  sentence  and  elsewhere, 
must  have  been  written  by  Father  Jacques  de  la  Place. 

9  (p.  147). —  This  refers  to  Caraffa's  election  as  general  of  the 
Jesuit  order,  which  event  occurred  Nov.  21,  1645.  Vincent  Caraffa, 
then  aged  sixty  years,  was  son  of  the  duke  of  Andria.  His  death 
took  place  June  8,  1649. 

10  (p.  153). —  Amable  Bonnefons  was  born  at  Riom,  and  at  the 
age  of  eighteen  became  a  Jesuit  novice  (1618).  He  was  employed 
in  Christian  instruction,  and  composed  numerous  devotional  works, 
which,  in  their  day,  were  much  read.  He  resided  a  long  time  in  the 
Maison  Professe  at  Paris,  and  died  there  Mar.  ig,  1653. —  Sommer- 
vogel's  Bibliotheque  de  la  Compagnie  de  fisus  (Brussels,  1890 -). 

11  (p.  153). —  Bernardin  de  Montereul  (Montreuil),  born  at  Paris, 
May  20,  1596,  became  a  Jesuit  at  the  age  of  twenty-eight.  His  work 
was  that  of  a  teacher  and  minister,  and  he  also  wrote  several  books, 
the  most  popular  (and  doubtless   the  one  mentioned  in  our  text) 


304  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES 

being  La  Vie  dv  Savvevr  dv  monde  (Paris,  1637).    He  died  at  Paris, 
Jan.  15,  1646. 

12  (p.  157). —  Jean  Mignot,  commonly  known  as  Chatillon,  was 
born  in  Normandy,  in  1628;  he  married,  in  1648,  six  months  after 
her  husband's  death,  Louise  Cloutier,  widow  of  Francois  Marguerie, 
and  by  her  had  thirteen  children.  The  date  of  his  death  is  not 
recorded,  but  must  be  earlier  than  1684. 

13  (p.  159). — This  marriage  was  that  of  Julian  Petau  and  Marie 
Peltier;  the  difficulty  mentioned  by  Lalemant  concerned  the  wom- 
an's previous  marriage  in  France,  and  is  explained  by  Vimont  in 
the  register  of  Notre  Dame  church  (quoted  by  Tanguay,  Diet. 
Genial.,  p.  477,  note). 

14  (p.  159). —  "The  little  Marsolet "  was  Marie,  eldest  daughter 
of  Nicolas  Marsolet  (vol.  v.,  note  35);  at  the  age  of  fourteen  (1652), 
she  married  Mathieu   d' Amours,  who  belonged  to   a    noble    and 
influential  family  in  Paris,  and  by  him  had  fifteen  children,  from- 
whom  are  descended  many  Canadian  families. 

15  (p.  165). —  Kontrande,en:  the  Huron  name  for  Cap  de  la 
Victoire  (vol.  xxix.,  Jtote  i),  or  Massacre;  written  by  Sagard 
Anthrandeen  {Canada,  Tross  ed.,  p.  696). 

16  (p.  171). —  Jean  Amyot  arrived  in  Canada  about  1635;  he  spent 
several  years  as  an  engage  of  the  Jesuit  mission  in  Huronia,  and 
was  interpreter  at  Three  Rivers  from  1645  until  his  death  in  1648. 

17  (p.  181). —  Etienne  de  Lessart,  born  in  1623,  came  from  Sens, 
in  the  provmce  of  Champagne,  to  Canada  in  1646.  In  April,  1652, 
he  married  Marguerite  Sevestre,  by  whom  he  had  twelve  children. 
He  died  in  April,  1703. 

18  (p.  181). —  This  was  probably  Jean  Joliet  (Jolliet),  a  wheel- 
wright in  the  employ  of  the  Company;  born  in  1574,  married  at 
Quebec  in  1639,  died  in  165 1.  One  of  his  sons  was  the  noted  ex- 
plorer, Louis  Joliet. 

19  (p.  181). — D'Aulnay  was,  at  this  time,  governor  of  Acadia:  he 
had  driven  La  Tour  from  that  province  in  1645  (vol.  xxviii.,  note  30), 
and,  after  concluding  a  peace  with  the  English  colony  at  Boston, 
Mass.,  he  obtained  from  the  French  government  (February,  1647) 
letters  patent  which  gave  him  almost  unlimited  power  in  Acadia. 
In  May,  1650,  he  was  accidentally  drowned  near  Port  Royal.  He 
had  governed  his  province  with  vigor  and  ability,  and  had  done 
much  toward  improving  its  condition  and  developing  its  resources. 
Opinions  of  his  personal  character  are  conflicting:  Denys  regards 
him  as  a  tyrant,  and  Garneau  as  a  mere  fur  trader ;  while  Moreau 
( Acadie  FrangoiseJ  praises  him  as  a  most  exemplary,  enlightened, 


NO  TES  TO  VOL.  XXX  305 

and  virtuous  ruler.  D'Aulnay  is  in  the  text  surnamed  Rasilly, 
probably  because  he  had  obtained  possession  of  the  Razilly  estates 
in  Acadia  (vol.  viii.,  note  2). 

Moreau  cites  (ut  supra,  p.  248)  a  memoir  written  in  1643  by 
D'Aulnay,  giving  an  account  of  what  he  had  then  accomplished  in 
Acadia. 

20  (p.  183). —  Pierre  Bailloquet  came  from  France  to  Canada  in 
1647,  and  remained  there  at  least  eighteen  years,  ministering  some- 
times to  the  French  on  the  St.  Lawrence,  sometimes  to  the  Indians 
of  Tadoussac  and  Gaspe.  The  last  mention  of  him  in  the  Journ. 
des  Jesuites  records  that  in  November,  1665,  he  was  stricken  by 
illness,  apparently  at  Cap  de  la  Magdeleine. 

The  brother  Nicolas  Faulconnier  remained  in  Canada  until  Sep- 
tember, 1658,  when  he  returned  to  France. 

21  (p.  183). —  The  fort  of  Richelieu,  built  by  Montmagny  at  the 
mouth  of  Richelieu  River,  was  abandoned  late  in  1645,  and  (prob- 
ably in  the  spring  of  1646)  was  burned  by  the  Iroquois. 

22  (p.  185). —  Regarding  the  Capuchins,  see  vol.  ii.,  nole  i\i.  The 
Acadian  missions  were  committed  to  the  care  of  this  order,  by 
Richelieu,  in  1633;  and  in  1640  he  endowed  a  school  for  the  Indian 
children  under  the  Capuchins'  instruction.  These  missions  were 
also  aided  by  D'Aulnay  (note  19.  ante).  Although  the  Capuchins 
requested,  as  mentioned  in  our  text,  that  Druillettes  be  not  sent  back 
to  the  Abenakis,  they  apparently  found,  soon  afterward,  that  they 
alone  could  not  properly  care  for  so  large  a  flock ;  for  but  a  year 
later,  they  asked  the  Jesuits  to  resume  their  mission  to  this  tribe. 
The  last  of  the  Capuchin  missionaries  in  Acadia,  Bernardin  de 
Crespy,  was  carried  away  by  an  English  invading  expedition  in 
1655. —  See  Shea's  Catholic  Church  in  Colonial  Days  (N.  Y.,  1886), 
pp.  236-243. 

23  (p.  189). —  Bic  Island  is  situated  near  the  southern  shore  of  the 
St.  Lawrence,  and  is  about  three  miles  long  by  three-quarters  of  a 
mile  in  width.  It  is  also  known  as  Islet  au  Massacre,  on  account  of 
a  massacre  thereon  of  some  200  Micmac  Indians  by  Iroquois.  The 
story  of  this  event  was  related  to  Cartier  at  Stadacona  (Quebec),  on 
his  second  voyage  to  Canada ;  this  legend  is  related  by  J.  C.  Tache 
in  Soirdes  Canadiennes,  vol.  i.  (Quebec,  1861),  pp.  27-96.  Opposite 
the  island  is  the  village  of  Bic,  in  Rimouski  County ;  it  is  the  landing- 
place  for  the  pilots  of  ocean-bound  steamers,  and  marks  the  limit  of 
the  river  navigation. 

24  (p.  189). —  Concerning  this  circuitous  postal  route,  see  vol.  ix., 
note  20. 

25  (p.   191). —  This  change    in    the    government  of    Canada  was 


306  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES 

established  by  a  royal  decree,  dated  Mar.  27,  1647,  which  is  charac- 
terized by  Ferland  {cours  d' Histotre,  p.  356)  as  "a  sort  of  con- 
stitutional charter,  guaranteeing  certain  liberties  to  the  habitants 
of  Canada."  For  references  thereon,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  57.  The 
council  referred  to  by  Lalemant  was  to  be  composed  of  three 
persons, — the  governor  of  the  country,  the  superior  of  the  Jesuit 
residence  at  Quebec,  and  the  governor  of  Montreal. 

26  (p.  191). —  Adrien  Grelon  was  born  at  Perigueux,  France,  in 
1617;  he  became  a  Jesuit  novice  at  Bordeaux,  Nov.  5,  1635;  and,  in 
1647,  he  was  sent  to  the  Canadian  mission.  He  remained  upon  the 
St.  Lawrence  one  year,  and  went  to  the  Huron  country  in  July,  1648. 
Here  he  ministered,  with  Garreau,  to  the  little  Indian  church  at  the 
village  of  St.  Mathias,  among  the  Tobacco  tribe,  and  remained  at 
his  post,  notwithstanding  the  ruin  of  the  Huron  mission,  until  the 
summer  of  1650;  he  then  descended  to  Quebec,  and  was  among 
those  sent  back  to  France  that  autumn  on  account  of  the  great 
burden  of  expense  laid  upon  the  Jesuits  at  that  time  by  the  neces- ' 
sity  of  caring  for  the  Huron  fugitives.  Grelon  died  in  France  in 
1697. 

The  brother  Florent  Bonnemer  was  in  Canada  in  September,  1659 ; 
but  it  is  uncertain  whether  he  remained  there  longer. 

27  (p.  193).  —  This  was  the  estate  granted  to  Jacques  le  Neuf  de  la 
Poterie  (vol.  viii.,  note  58), —  the  seigniory,  afterward  the  barony, 
of  Portneuf. 

28  (p.  193). — Jacques  Bonin  was  born  at  Ploermel,  France,  Sept. 
I,  161 7,  and,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  entered  the  Jesuit  novitiate,  at 
Paris.  His  studies  were  pursued  at  La  Fleche  and  Clermont ;  and 
his  prescribed  term  as  instructor  was  spent  at  Quimper  and  Rennes. 
Coming  to  Canada  in  1647,  he  was  sent  in  the  following  year  to  the 
Huron  mission,  and  was  probably  stationed  at  Ste.  Marie.  He  was, 
like  Grelon,  sent  back  to  France  in  the  autumn  of  1650. 

29  (p  253). —  Anastoh^:  the  Andastes  (vol.  viii.,  p.  301). 

30  (p.  263). —  For  methods  of  making  fire,  see  vol.  xxii.,  note  12. 


iiftiH^iWiiW^giimrwT'  ■._»■ 


:-:.;-.H!3;:f^;.:;f^--^^ 


'-|:^^55; 


