Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 32: Gaspe, Hurons, Lower Canada, 1647-1648
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits32jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits32jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits32jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 32 of 73.

---

a3 2.8 é 
t 8.88 tn a A 


yk 
Fs aye 
8) 85.89.88 ; . : : : #, ; | P 
& 2-8,8 5.2.8 
a 
ee eh | 


T8866 8 8.58 85°88 
1.3.8 8 8.8 2:3 4/8, 8/888 
58 €.6.8.6.8 2:8 


; > 
Re ee oN 


te * . oat ht 
858.8 2-6 2:8. 6:8 3 8 5.8% F J ot tt | 
B86. 8 88 F888 3.8. 28 ee Fe Fe eee " "et é 5 
3s ; 


my 


- 2.8.8 
PC ee ee 


i) 
SR ECE eee ee ee 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. oe D3. 


bbc 


FELIX MARTIN, S.J. 


{Enlarged from a daguerreotype.]} 


1, O$7 © occk hd 


wa" 


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 


1610-1791 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XXXII 
GasPE, HURONS, LOWER CANADA 
1647-1648 


CLEVELAND: Tbe Burrows Brotbers 
Company, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XCVIII 


hm 


ai 


Py 
} 


i CopyrIcHT, 1898 


‘i Tue Burrows Brotuers Co 
ms 


‘AS ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 2 ‘ REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
{f FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
Translators . ; 4 CRAWFORD LINDSAY 


WILLIAM PRICE 


| HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor . EMMA HELEN BLAIR 


Bibliographical Adviser VicTOR HuGo PALTSITS 


mes Men 


+ ve ft in 
WA § igus agg 


i 
tis 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXXII 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXXII . ; eR 
DOCUMENTS :— 


LXIII. Relation de ce qvis’est passé... . en 
la Novvelle France, svr le Grand 
Flevve de S. Lavrens en l’année 1647. 
[Chaps. xiv., xv., concluding the docu- 
ment.| Hzerosme Lalemant; Quebek, 
October 20, 1647 ; 17 


LXIV. Epistola ad R. P. Vincentium Caraffa, 
Prepositum Generalem Societatis Je- 
su, Rome. /oannes de Brebeuf; St. 
Mariz apud Hurones, June 2, 1648 58 
LXV. Journal des PP. Jésuites. Aierosme 
Lalemant; Quebek, sae ig Herren 
ber, 1648 P F oO 
LXVI. Relation de ce qvi s’est asst eas eee 
la Novvelle France, és années 1647. 
& 1648. [Chaps.i.—viii. of Part I., 
first installment of the document. ] 
Hierosme Lalemant; Quebec, October 
15, 1648 ; ; ; gat 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXXII . 307 


NOTES ; ? : , : «ga 


ina ¢<L> E 

KANS 
hi OS 
7 eS 


ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XXXII 


I. Portrait of Felix Martin, S.J.; enlarged 
from a daguerreotype ; Frontispiece 


II. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Rela- 


tion of 1647-48 114 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXII 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume: 


LXIII. This document, the Relation of 1647, was 
commenced in Vol. XXX. of our series, continued 
through Vol. XXXI., and is here concluded. In the 
fourteenth chapter, Lalemant describes various incur- 
sions of the Iroquois, and their method of warfare. 
One of them is captured by a French and Huron 
party, and delivered by Montmagny to his savage 
allies for vengeance, but with orders that they should 
not torment him too long or too cruelly. He is con- 
verted through the instructions of the Jesuits, and 
named after Father Isaac Jogues,— who, it is reported, 
was killed by this very man. ‘‘ As soon as he was 
baptized, he was delivered into the hands of the Sav- 
age Captain to whom Monsieur the Governor had 
given him, in order to exact Justice from him.’’ He 
is interrogated regarding Jogues’s death, but will not 
confess that it was he who killed the priest. He 
meets his fate with meekness, and in expectation of 
heaven. Through fear of the Iroquois, but six 
Hurons have come down this year, and of these, only 
two have escaped death or captivity. 

The settlement at Miscou is the subject of the final 
chapter of this Re/ation; and Lalemant gives an his- 
torical sketch of the Jesuit mission there, depicting 
the hardships and sufferings in which its foundations 


10 PREFACE TO VOL. XXXII 


were laid by Richard, De Lyonne, and the other 
self-denying Fathers who had carried the Gospel into 
this remote and barbarous region. The greatest 
obstacle to their labors was, at first, the insalubrious 
climate; but the Europeans are now inured to this 
danger, and no longer die from the prevalent disease 
of those regions, the scurvy. The mission is gain- 
ing ground, and five families have been received 
into the Christian fold. Various instances of piety 
and faith among these converts are related. 

LXIV. In this brief letter to the father general 
(written in the Huron country, June 2, 1648), Bré- 
beuf reports the Huron mission as, on the whole, 
prosperous; and he sees many openings for extend- 
ing its work. But the incursions of the Iroquois 
still continue, and threaten the ruin of the mission 
and of the Hurons; while the opposition of infidel 
savages is, at times, a great hindrance to the work. 

The chief object of Brébeuf’s letter is to urge that 
the rule for a triennial change of the superior of the 
mission be set aside in the case of Ragueneau, who 
is in every way most capable of filling that position, 
especially in leadership and executive ability. The 
father general is entreated, for the good of the mis- 
sion, to prolong Ragueneau’s term. 

LXV. The Journal des Jésuites is a rich quarry 
for the student of the economic and social history of 
New France. The record for 1648 contains much of 
interest, in this connection. 

As usual, New-year’s gifts are exchanged among 
the French residents. Chastillon is sent to the 
Hurons, ‘‘ to acquaint them with the state of affairs 
down here.’’ Father De Quen, sent on a mission to 
Beauport and other outlying settlements, finds there 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXII il 


““more than 200 souls, and over 140 Communicants.”’ 
The month of January sees at Quebec much sickness 
and death; and the winter is very mild. The work- 
men of the mission are employed in the woods, until 
Easter, in cutting timber for the Jesuits’ house. 
Other improvements are in progress at Quebec— 
barracks for the fort, and a parish church. 

At the Easter season, Lalemant makes public 
announcement of the penalties for neglect to receive 
communion. ‘Two interpreters, Amyot and Margue- 
rie, are drowned in the great river, on May 23. The 
Ursulines elect their superior, on June 3. On St. 
John’s day, Montmagny kindles the bonfire, and 
Lalemant recites various prayers. Abraham Martin 
goes to the seal-fishery, and in one day captures 
forty-two seals, which yield six casks of oil. The 
Sillery Indians go ‘‘ to 3 rivers, with the Intention of 
making war; it was only a farce, which ended in 
nothing, except eating bread and peas at the fort of 
3 rivers. The captive yroquois saw all that, and 
had good reason to make sport of it.” 

Bressani arrives from Huronia, on July 22, with 
letters from that mission; this year, 250 of the Hurons 
come down to Three Rivers, which gives opportunity 
for sending under their escort a reinforcement for 
the Huron mission; this includes five Fathers, a lay 
brother, and twenty workmen and soldiers. They 
also take a heifer, and a small piece of cannon. 

On August 14, letters arrive from France which 
appoint Louis d’Ailleboust governor-general of Can- 
ada, in place of Montmagny. The Tadoussac trade, 
this year, amounts to 250,000 livres; and the profit 
thereon, to 40,000 livres. 

In September, a drummer is brought from Mont- 


especially i in Li de a ie 
be married, when he died. His comrades were 
surprised at his modesty, for he made love like an 
Angel, as it were.” 

An Iroquois band comes to Montreal, pretending 
to seek peace and desire friendship; but they intend 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXII e 13 


treachery, which is frustrated only by Maisonneuve’s 
vigilance. Other instances of their cunning and 
treachery are related; and, in a raid near Three 
Rivers, they capture two Frenchmen. An escaped 
Huron gives the French residents valuable informa- 
tion concerning the designs of the Iroquois. In July, 
a large band of Iroquois hovers about Three Rivers, 
planning to surprise the French settlement there; 
but, opportunely, the Huron trading-fleet arrives, 
and defeats the Iroquois, killing many, and captur- 
ing a score of prisoners. Bressani and two other 
Frenchmen come down, with the Hurons. One of 
the fugitive Iroquois flees to Montreal, and, meeting 
a French lady, stretches out to her his arms. ‘‘ Those 
who know that the modesty and bashfulness of that 
good Lady cause her a terrible fear of those barbari- 
ans said, through the respect which they feel for her 
gentleness and virtue, that she had captured a Hiro- 
quois; and that she accomplished more with her 
prayers and her rosary, which she was saying at 
the time, than the soldiers with their swords and 
muskets.’’ Then are narrated the proceedings of a 
council held after this battle, upon the conclusion 
of which the Hurons return home, taking with them 
a number of Jesuits for the Huron mission. 
Lalemant occupies much space with the good 
actions and sentiments of Christian savages, showing 
their piety, devotion, and constancy,—even amid 
strong temptations and opposition. The missionaries 
are pleased to observe that the converted Indians 
‘‘are beginning to give quite a Christian character 
to the harmless usages that they have derived from 
their infidel ancestors.’’ One ‘‘ brings back to life”’ 
his dead nephew in order to remind himself that his 


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXXII 


nephew has not ceased to exist, but is only awaiting 
the final resurrection. 

Lalemant praises the charity and devotion of the 
nuns, who are doing so great and noble a work in 
Canada. The Ursulines ‘‘ refuse no girl, whether 
French or Savage,”’ and are giving many Indian chil- 
dren excellent training in piety and in the rudiments 
of knowledge. The Hospital nuns are “‘ greatly bur- 
dened this year, especially since the arrival of the 
ships,’’ on board of which a severe epidemic has pre- 
vailed; and the sisters have not accommodations or 
strength to care for all who apply for admittance into 
the hospital. Occasional mention is made of the 
Montreal colony. ‘‘ Only one Savage dwelt this year 
at Montreal, and he was blind; but, to compensate, 
he had virtue enough for twenty-five.’’ He praises 
God that he cannot see; ‘‘ for, otherwise, I would 
have been all my life a proud and arrogant man; I 
would have despised prayer; and the Hiroquois would 
have eaten me.” 

Although the Christian Indians have been more 
successful in war, this year, than in the past, they 
have been severely scourged by sickness and death. 
But they show great patience and devout resignation 
in these trials, and the old superstitious practices are 
almost unknown among them. Many have been 
healed by their faith and prayers. Father Druil- 
lettes now winters with the Algonkin tribes of the 
Lower St. Lawrence. Here he meets gratifying suc- 
cess in ministering to these wandering sheep, though 
he suffers great privations. 

This year, a large fleet of the Attikamégues come 
down to Three Rivers for instruction. They show 
great fervor and piety, not only while there, but in 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXII : 15 


their usual wandering course of life; and they have 
spread some knowledge of the Faith among many of 
the remote Northern tribes. 


We take pleasure in publishing, as the frontispiece 
to this volume, a portrait—the best now obtain- 
able — of the late Rev. Felix Martin, S.J., first rector 
of St. Mary’s College, Montreal. To the scholarly 
. enterprise and enthusiasm of Father Martin is largely 
due the accumulation of the rich store of documentary 
material for the study of New France, now in the 
archives of St. Mary’s. American historians owe 
him a debt of gratitude, and will be pleased, we 
think, to find his portrait appearing in connection 
with the present work. For a biographical sketch 
of this great collector, see Vol. IV., xote 40. 


Be Gyo. 
Mapison, Wis., October, 1898. 


a ares y i Fi fates ede 
| 40 Nein e 2 nfat ty sliced: a 


\ aati A 
v Z ? apes 
t at 


fei é 
4 rit 
LMM DD fase ye ‘ iat 
Fe 7 : 


Me is 
t i : d 4 


i a | 

Pi 7 id i) 

ya te eee 
i= 1 


LXIII (concluded) 


RELATION OF 1647 


PaRIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1648 


Commenced in Volume XXX., and continued through 
Volume XXXI.; the remaining two chapters (xiv., xv.) are 
herewith given, thus concluding the document. 


18 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 32 


[251] CHAPITRE XIIII. 


DE LA PRIERE [sc. PRISE] & DE LA MORT D’VN HIRO- 
QUOIS & DE QUELQUES AUTRES REMARQUES, 
QUI N’ONT PO TROUUER PLACE SOUS 
LES CHAPITRES PRECEDENS. 


ES Hiroquois paroiffans en diuers endroits fur 
L les riues de noftre grand fleuue, vne efcoiiade 
de Francois & de Sauuages entreprit de leur 
donner la chaffe. Il eft vray qu’il eft tres-difficile 
de joindre ces Barbares, pource qu’ils font tofijours 
aux aguets fur des pointes ot fur des caps releuez, 
decouurans de loin les vaiffeaux & leurs Nochers 
pour les furprendre ot pour les combatre s’ils font 
en petit nombre, que fi leurs forces font inegales, 
ils fe tiennent cachez dans les bois fans fe produire 
finon par brauades lors qu’ils [252] voyent bien que 
leur iambe leur donnent l’auantage par deffus 
nos armes; mais le temps viendra que les Francois 
aguerris 4 la fagon des Americains trouueront bien 
le moyen d’arrefter ces coureurs. 

Il n’y a pas long-temps qu’vne vingtaine de ces 
antropophages donnans la chaffe A quelques-vns de 
nos canots, vne chalouppe de noftre efcoiiade vint 
fondre fur eux, & les contraignit de gagner la terre, 
mais non pas de lafcher pied & de s’enfuir, s’eftans 
mis 41’abry de leurs canots ils font vne defcharge 
de leurs arquebufes fort A propos, & pendant que 
nos Francois cherchoient vn lieu auantageux pour 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647 . 19 


[251] CHAPTER XIIII. 


OF THE CAPTURE AND DEATH OF A HIROQUOIS; AND. 
SOME OTHER OBSERVATIONS WHICH COULD 
NOT FIND ROOM UNDER THE 
PRECEDING CHAPTERS. 


HE Hiroquois appearing in various places on 
oh the banks of our great stream, a squad of 
French and Savages undertook to give them 
chase. It is certainly very difficult to overtake those 
Barbarians, because they are always on the watch at 
the points or upon elevated headlands, discovering 
from afar the vessels and their Pilots in order to 
surprise them, or to combat them if they are in small 
force; but, if their forces are unequal, they stay con- 
cealed in the woods without presenting themselves,— 
unless through bravado, when they [252] see well 
that their legs give them the advantage over our 
weapons. But the time will come when the French, 
trained for war in the manner of the Americans, will 
easily find means to stop those runners. 

Not long ago, a score of these cannibals giving 
chase to some of our canoes, a shallop of our party 
went to attack them, and compelled them to go 
ashore, but not to give way and flee. Having placed 
themselves behind the shelter of their canoes, they 
promptly discharge their arquebuses; and while our 
French were seeking an advantageous place to dis- 
embark, those Barbarians in four minutes erected a 
little wooden fort, into which they shut themselves 


20 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 32 


defcendre, ces Barbares drefferent vn petit fort de 
bois en quatre momens, dans lequel ils fe renferment 
auec refolution de bié combattre; on les attaque 
vaillamment, mais en verité ils foutindrent le choc 
auec vn courage & vne d’exterité non attendué: 
mais au bout du conte fe croyans trop foibles pour 
refifter aux affauts qu’ils deuoiét attendre le iour 
fuiuant, ils demanderent qu’on ne tira{t point de part 
ny d’autre pendant la nuit, & cependant ils euade- 
rent a la fourdine deuant la pointe du iour; le Soleil 
paroiffant nos gens ne trouuerent [253] plus d’enne- 
mis a combattre; on cherche aux enuirons de leur 
redoute. Vn ieune Francois plus rempli de courage 
qu’il n’a de corps les voulans fuiure a la pifte en 
trouua vn caché dans le creux d’vn arbre: on le tire 
de ce fepulchre pour luy en donner vn autre: on 
l’interroge, il dit qu’il fe pouuoit fauuer auffi bien 
que les autres, mais que fon frere ayant efté bleffé, 
il s’eftoit caché pour le fecourir, qu’il y auoit fept 
Hiroquois fort bleffez, & qu’il croit que deux ont 
e{té tuez fur la place: on n’a point veu leurs corps, 
peut eftre qu’ils les ont emportez pour les brufler 
felon leur couftume: on trouua dans leur reduit 
quelques arquebufes bien plus fortes & bien plus 
longues que les nof{tres. Deux Sauuages de noftre 
efcotiade furent tuez, fix Francois bleffez, dont l’vn 
eft mort quelque temps apres, on les conduifit A 
l’Hoftel Dieu de Kebec, qui foulage extremément la 
Colonie Frangoife & Sauuage, ils y ont efté penfez 
& foulagez fort foigneufement. Ceux qui ont mis 
les armes en main 4 ces Barbares meriteroient le 
chaftiment deu 4 tous les crimes que l’auarice des 
vns & la furie des autres ont enfantez. 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 : 21 


with the resolution to fight stubbornly. They were 
valiantly attacked; but, in truth, they sustained the 
shock with unexpected courage and dexterity. After 
all, however, believing themselves too weak to resist 
the assaults which they must expect on the follow- 
ing day, they asked that there be no firing on either 
side during the night; and meanwhile they escaped 
stealthily, before daybreak. The Sun appearing, our 
people found no [253] more enemies to combat, 
though they made search all about their fortification. 
A young Frenchman, filled with more courage than 
physical strength, seeking to follow the enemy by 
their trail, found one of them concealed in the hol- 
low of a tree: he is drawn from that sepulchre, to 
be given another. Being questioned, he says that 
he could have escaped as well as the others, but that, 
his brother having been wounded, he had concealed 
himself in ordertoaid him. He says that there were 
seven Hiroquois severely wounded, and that he 
believes that two were killed on the spot; their bodies 
have not been seen,—it may be that they have car- 
ried them away to burn them, according to their 
custom. There were found in their redout some 
arquebuses, much heavier and far longer than ours. 
Two Savages of our band were killed, and six French- 
men wounded, one of whom died some time later. 
They were taken to the Hostel Dieu at Kebec,— 
which assists to the utmost the Colony, both French 
and Savage,—and were there nursed and aided with 
the greatest care. Those who put arms in the hands 
of these Barbarians would deserve the punishment 
due to all the crimes which the avarice of the one 
party and the fury of the other have engendered. 
This poor prisoner was taken first [254] to three: 


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 32 


Ce pauure prifonnier fut mené premierement [254] 
aux trois Riuieres & de la il fut conduit 4 Kebec 
pour eftre liuré 4 Monfieur le Gouuerneur, qui le 
donna quelques iours apres 4 vn Capitaine Sauuage, 
auec ordre de ne le point tourmenter fi long-temps 
qu’ils ont accoutumé, n’y de ne le point mettre dans 
vne fale nudité, ny d’en faire curée comme des 
chiens. Ce pauure homme fut conduit a Sillery le 
feiziefme Octobre de cette année 1647. on auoit def-ja 
commencé de l’inftruire, afin qu’il mourut Chreftien. 
On le fit entrer dans noftre petite maifon, on luy 
reprefente fortement les fupplices, & les recompences 
de l’autre vie, la bonté d’vn Dieu qui a donné fon 
Fils pour fauuer les hommes, & qu’en vertu de fon 
fang il peut eftre laué de fes crimes, & entrer au 
Ciel. Il faut cdfeffer que l’efprit de Iefus-Chrift 
foufle ot il luy plaift: Ce pauure homme nous efton- 
na tous, il donna de grands témoignages de fa creance, 
il demanda pardon a Dieu de fes offences: oiiy ie-croy 
difoit-il, ie veux aller au Ciel, ie fuis marry d’auoir 
fafché celuy quia tout fait, le{¥s pardonne moy, Ief¥s 
pardonne moy, difoit-il en fa langue, ne doutez point, 
adjoutoit-il, que ie ne croie de tout mon [255] coeur 
ce que vous m’enfeignez: Et puis qu’a voftre dire 
nous deuons tous paroiftre deuant Dieu, reprochez- 
moy pour lors m’a perfidie, fi mon cceur n’a pas 
maintenant la creance que ma bouche vous fait 
paroiftre. Ces belles difpofitions attendrirent tous 
ceux qui eftoient proches, on le baptifa, & on luy fit 
porter le nom du Pere Ifaac Iogues, que luy mefme 
auoit tué, comme on a dit. 

Incontinent qu’il fut baptifé, on le liura entre 
les mains du Capitaine Sauuage, a qui Monfieur le 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 23 


Rivers; and thence was conducted to Kebec, in 
order to be delivered to Monsieur the Governor. 
The latter gave him, afew days later, to a Savage 
Captain, with orders not to torture him as long as is 
their wont, or reduce him to a filthy nakedness, or 
make quarry of him like dogs. This poor man was 
conducted to Sillery on the sixteenth of October of 
this year, 1647; we had already begun to instruct 
him, that he might die a Christian. He was brought 
into our little house, and we forcibly represented to 
him the torments and the rewards of the other life, 
and the goodness of a God who has given his Son in 
order to save men; and told the prisoner that, by 
virtue of that Son’s blood, he could be washed from 
his crimes, and enter Heaven. It must be confessed 
that the spirit of Jesus Christ breathes where it 
pleases. This poor man astonished us all; he gave 
marked evidence of his belief, and asked pardon of 
God for his transgressions. ‘‘ Yes, I believe,’’ he 
said; ‘‘ I wish to go to Heaven, but I am grieved to 
have offended him who has madeall. Jesous, pardon 
me; Jesous, pardon me,”’ he said in his own language. 
““ Do not doubt,’’ he added, ‘‘ that I believe with all 
my [255] heart what you teach me. And since, 
according to your saying, we must all appear before 
God, reproach me then with my treachery, if my 
heart has not now the belief which my mouth declares 
to you.” These excellent inclinations softened all 
those who were near; he was baptized, and was made 
to bear the name of Father Isaac Jogues,— whom, as 
some said, he himself had killed. 

As soon as he was baptized, he was delivered into 
the hands of the Savage Captain to whom Monsieur 
the Governor had given him, in order to exact 


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Gouuerneur l’auoit donné pour en tirer Iuftice. Ce 
pauure homme dans 1l’effort de ces tourmens s’écria 
plufieurs fois Ief¥s, Ief¥s, il ne donna aucune iniure 
Aceux quiletourmétoient. C’eft la couftume de ces 
miferables nations de faire chanter les prifonniers 
dans leurs fupplices: celuy-cy n’vfa d’aucune bra- 
uade n’y d’aucune menace; il ne dit que ce peu de 
mots dans fa chanfon, Antaiok c’eft le nom en 
Sauuage du Frangois qui le prit, Antaiok eft caufe 
que ie vay au Ciel, i’en fuis bien ayfe. 

Or deuant que cette victime fut conduite au facri- 
fice, on l’'interrogea fur diuers points, dont voicy fes 
refponfes. Le Pere [256] Ifaac Iogues dit-il, n’a point 
efté tué par le cOmun confentement des trois bour- 
gades Hiroquoifes, il n’a point efté battu ny def- 
poiiillé, mais implement affommé, ie diray en paffant 
fur cét article, que nous adiouftons plus de Foy aux 
lettres enuoyées par les Hollandois, qu’aux paroles 
de ce prifonnier, pour ce qu’on ade grandes con- 
iectures que c’eft luy mefme qui a tué le Pere, 
d’autant qu’vn Huron qui s’eft fauué de ce pais 18, 
l'ayant veu entre les mains des Francois luy dit, 
Camarade que peux tu attendre de ceux qui t’ont 
pris, ayant mal’heureufemét aflommé vne perfonne 
qu’ils aimoient? de plus l’interprete luy demandant, 
comme s'‘appelloit celuy qui auoit maffacré le compa- 
gnon du Pere, il le nomma fans delay, mais quand 
on luy demanda le nom de celuy qui auoit ofté la 
vie au Pere, il baiffa la tefte fans rien dire. On le 
preffa deux iours durant fans qu’il ouurit la bouche, 
enfin il profera le nom d’vn Hiroquois. I1 adioufta 
que cette bonne femme, que le Pere Ifaac Iogues 
appelloit fa tante, & de laquelle il auoit receu 


——— 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 25 


Justice from him. This poor man, under the stress 
of his torments, exclaimed many times: ‘‘ Jesous, 
Jesous.’’ He offered noinsult to those who were tor- 
menting him. It is the custom of these wretched 
nations to make the prisoners sing, while in their 
tortures; this man used no bravado, or any threat, 
but uttered in his song only these few words: 
‘* Antaiok,’’—the name, in the Savage tongue, of the 
Frenchman who captured him,—‘‘ Antaiok is the 
cause of my going to Heaven; I am very glad of it.’’ 

Now, before this victim was led to the sacrifice, 
he was questioned on various points, to which his 
answers were as follows: Father [256] Isaac Jogues, he 
said, was not killed by the general consent of the three 
Hiroquois villages; he was not beaten or stripped, 
but simply struck down. I will say in passing, with 
reference to this matter, that we attach more Credence 
to the letters sent by the Dutch than to the words 
of this prisoner, because we have strong suspicions 
that it was he himself who killed the Father,— since 
a Huron, who has escaped from that country, having 
seen him in the hands of the French, said to him, 
** Comrade, what canst thou expect from those who 
have captured thee, having unluckily slain a person 
whom they loved?’’ Furthermore, when the inter- 
preter asked him how the man who had massacred 
the Father’s companion was called, he named him 
without delay; but when he was asked the name 
of him who had taken the Father’s life, he hung his 
head, without saying aught. He was urged during 
two days, but opened not his lips: finally, he uttered 
the name of a Hiroquois. He added that that good 
woman whom Father Isaac Jogues called his aunt, 
and from whom he had received some aid, said to 


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


quelques fecours, dit aux meurtriers, c’eft moy-mefme 
que vous tuez, que diront les deux autres bourgades, 
que vous [257] n’auez point confultées fur cette mort 
fi fubite & fi precipitée. 

On luy demanda qu’eftoient deuenus les deux 
Francois qui auoient efté pris 4 Montreal? il refpon- 
dit qu'ils n’auoient point paru dans leur pays, & que 
leur cheuelures feulement y auoient e{té apportées, 
il nomma les Hiroquois qui les auoiét pris & maffa- 
crez. Il dit en outre que trois Hurons auoient efté 
pris 4 Montreal, & qu’on leur auoit donné la vie, que 
deux s’eftoient fauuez & que le troifiefme auoit dit a 
fes deux compagnons qui le vouloient emmener, 
i’ayme trop ma mere elle m’a fauué la vie, ie ne la 
puis quitter; c’eftoit vne femme Hiroquoife 4 qui on 
l’auoit donné en la place de fes enfans & de fes 
parents tuez en guerre. Ce qui fuit n’a point d’autre 
liayfon que celle que la plume & le papier me 
donnent. 

Pendant la premiere guerre des Hiroquois, il y 
auoit dans Montreal vne chienne, qui iamais ne man- 
quoit d’aller tous les iours 4 la découverte, conduifant 
fes petits auec foy, & fi quelqu’vn d’eux faifoit le 
retif, elle le mordoit pour le faire marcher, bien 
d’auantage, fi quelqu’vn retournoit au milieu de fa 
courfe, elle fe [258] iettoit deffus luy 4 fon retour 
comme parchaftiment. Au refte fi elle éuentoit dans 
la découuerte quelques Hiroquois, elle tournoit court, 
tirant droit 4 la maifon en aboyant & donnant a con- 
noiftre, que l’ennemy n’eftoit, pas loing. Son attrait 
naturel eftoit la chaffe aux écurieux, mais fa cd{tance 
a faire la ronde tous les iours auffi fidelement que 
des hommes, commengant tanto{ft d’vn cofté, tantoft 


1647 — 48] RELATION OF 1647 . 27 


the murderers, ‘‘ It is I myself whom you kill; what 
will the two other villages say, whom you [257] have 
not consulted about this death, so sudden and so 
tash?’’ 

He was asked what had become of the two French- 
men who had been taken at Montreal. He answered 
that they had not appeared in their country, and that 
their scalps alone had been brought thither; he 
named the Hiroquois who had taken and slain 
them. He said, besides, that three Hurons had been 
taken at Montreal, and that their lives had been 
spared; that two had escaped, and that the third had 
said to his two companions who wished to take him 
away: ‘‘I love my mother too well; she has saved 
my life, and I cannot leave her.’’ ‘This was a Hiro- 
quois woman to whom they had given him, in place 
of her children and relatives killed in war. What 
follows this has no other connection than that which 
pen and paper give me. 

During the first war with the Hiroquois, there was 
in Montreal a bitch, which never failed to go scout- 
ing every day, taking her little ones with her; and 
if any one of them acted stubbornly, she would bite 
it, to make it go on. Nay, more, if one of the pups 
turned back in the midst of its run, she [258] would 
fall upon it at her return, as if by way of punish- 
ment. Moreover, if she scented, while on the patrol, 
some Hiroquois, she would turn short, moving 
directly homeward, barking, and announcing that 
the enemy was not far away. Her natural inclina- 
tion was for hunting squirrels; but her constancy in 
making the round every day as faithfully as men, 
beginning now on one side, now on the other; her 
perseverance in directing her little ones, and in 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


de l’autre, fa perfeuerance 4 conduire fes petits & a 
les punir, quand ils manquoient de fuiure fa fidelité 
4 tourner court, quand 1l’odeur des ennemis frappoit 
fon odorat, donnoit de 1’étonnement. 

La crainte des ennemis a éloigné cette année les 
Sauuages de Montreal, il ne s’y eft trouué que fix 
Hurons, dont les trois ont efté pris par les Agnero- 
nons, le quatriefme s’eft perdu, les deux autres l’ont 
efchappé belle. Ces bonnes gens ne fgauroient s’em- 
pefcher d’aller & la chaffe, auffi faut-il cdfeffer que 
c’eft leur plaifir & leur vie: s’eftans écartez quelques 
lieués de l’habitation; vn Francois qui les acc6pagnoit, 
les aydant A baftir leur cabane en bleffa vn d’vn 
grand coup de hache qu'il déchargea par megarde 
fur fa main, les voila tous [259] trois bien eftonnez, 
ils enueloppent la playe le mieux qu’ils peuuent, 
tirans au plutoft vers l’habitation pour faire penfer 
ce pauure homme, lequel fentant que la nature fe 
vouloit plaindre pour la grande douleur qu’il fouf- 
froit, s’animoit auec ces paroles, comment? me 
pourrois-je bien plaindre d’vn coup que Dieu m’a 
donné, puis qu’vne vanité me feroit chanter au milieu 
des feux, fii'eftois pris de mes ennemis? comme ils 
s’auancoient vers la maifon, ils trouuerent fur la 
neige vne pifte fraifchement batué par vne trouppe 
d’Hiroquois, qui venoient a la chaffe des hommes a 
Montreal; Ah! ie voy bien maintenant, dit ce pauure 
bleffé, que ce coup eft vn coup de la bonté de Dieu, 
ce n’eft point vn accident, fa bonté m’a fait perdre 
vne main pour nous fauuer la vie A tous trois, il eft 
vray que nous ne fommes pas encor en affeurance, 
nous pouuons rencontrer l’ennemy, dont nous auons 
veu les veftiges & les piftes, mon feul regret eft que 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 Ae 


punishing them when they failed to follow; and her 
fidelity in turning short, when the scent of the ene- 
mies caught her sense of smell,—all these caused 
astonishment. 

The fear of the enemies has kept away, this year, 
the Savages from Montreal: there have appeared 
there only six Hurons, three of whom have been 
taken by the Agneronons, the fourth has been lost, 
the two others have made a narrow escape. These 
good people cannot help going to the chase: it must 
also be acknowledged that that is their pleasure and 
their life. Having gone away some leagues from 
the settlement, a Frenchman who accompanied them, 
while aiding them to build their cabin, wounded one 
of them with a heavy blow of the axe, which he 
dealt inadvertently upon his hand. All [259] three 
are astounded; they wrap up the wound as best they 
can, proceeding as quickly as possible toward the set- 
tlement, in order to have that poor man cared for. 
He, feeling that nature would repine at the great 
pain which he suffered, animated himself with these 
words: ‘‘ How? could I indeed complain of a blow 
that God has given me, when vanity would make me 
sing in the midst of the fires, if 1 were taken by my 
enemies?’’ While advancing homeward, they found 
on the snow a trail freshly trodden by a troop of 
Hiroquois, who were coming to Montreal on the hunt 
formen. ‘‘ Ah! nowI plainly see,’’ said that poor 
wounded man, “‘ that this blow is dealt by the good- 
ness of God; it is not an accident,—his goodness 
has caused me to lose a hand, in order to save the 
lives of all three of us. It is true that we are not 
yet in safety,—-we may encounter the enemy, whose 
tracks and trail we have seen: my only regret is that 


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


ie ne fuis [pJoint confeffé il y a long-temps; fon 
compagnon s’atriftoit bien d’auantage: que deuien- 
dray-je, difoit-il, moy qui ne fuis pas encor baptifé: 
no{tre Seigneur les preferua de mauuais rencontre. 
Ce pauure [260] homme quoy qu’affez courageux 
d’ailleurs ne pouuoit fouffrir la main du Chirurgien, 
qui en verité luy faifoit de la douleur, car la playe 
eftoit grande, & en vn lieu bien fenfible: on luy 
reprocha qu'il n’auoit point de coeur, mon bras difoit- 
il, n’a point d’efprit, il fe retire quand il fent la dou- 
leur, n’en faites vous pas de mefme vous autres dans 
vos tourmens? l’interprete luy repliqua qu’on lioit 
en France ceux qui ne pouuoient fouffrir la cure de 
leurs bleffures: hé bien difoit-il, puis que ie fuis 
parmy les Frang¢ois, il faut m’accommoder 4 la Fran- 
coife, liez moy & me faites garder vos couftumes: En 
effet on le faifit fi bien, qu’il ne pouuoit plus remuer, 
ny fa main ny fon bras; iamais ce bon homme ne s’en 
fafcha s’imaginant qu’il fe falloit accommoder aux 
facons de faire des Francois, puis qu’il demeuroit 
auec eux; il endura plufieurs iours cette cure affez 
tude, fans donner aucun figne d’impatience. 

Son camarade ne fe pouuant tenir en repos, fe 
déroba pour aller tuer quelques caftors ou quelques. 
outardes, approchant d’vn petit eftang il vit leuer 
quantité de gibier tout effaré, il fe douta bien, qu’il 
eftoit battu de quelques chaffeurs, s’eftant [261] gliffé 
dans des joncs, il entendit des cris ot des chants d’oy- 
feaux qui fe re{pondoient les vns aux autres, la peur 
le faifit; car c’eft la couftume des Hiroquois & des 
autres Sauuages de s’entr’appeller les vns les autres. 
par des cris de chahuans pendant la nuict, & par le 
gazoiiillis de quelques autres oyfeaux pendant le iour, 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647 31 


I have not confessed for a long time.’’ His compan- 
ion was still more grieved. ‘‘ What will become of 
me,’’ he said, ‘‘ of me who am not yet baptized?’’ 
Our Lord preserved them from evilencounter. That 
poor [260] man, although sufficiently courageous 
otherwise, could not endure the hand of the Sur- 
geon,— who, in truth, caused him pain, for the 
wound was severe, and in a very sensitive place. 
They reproached him that he had no courage. ‘‘ My 
arm,’’ he said, ‘‘ has no sense; it shrinks away when 
it feels pain. Do not you others do the same, in 
your sufferings?’’ The interpreter answered him 
that in France they bound those who could not 
endure the cure of their wounds. ‘‘ Very well,’’ he 
said; ‘‘ since I am among the French, I must adapt 
myself to the French fashion; bind me, and make 
me keep your customs.’’ In fact, they seized him 
so effectually that he could no longer move either 
his hand or his arm; but never did this good man 
take offense,—imagining that he must adapt him- 
self to the French usages, since he lived with them. 
He endured for several days that severe treatment, 
without giving any sign of impatience. 

His companion, unable to remain at rest, stole 
away in order to goand kill some beavers or bustards. 
Approaching a little pond, he saw a quantity of 
game arise in great confusion; he suspected, indeed, 
that it was beaten up by some hunters. Having [261] 
slipped into the rushes, he heard some cries or songs 
of birds, which were answering one another; fear 
seized him, for it is the custom of the Hiroquois and 
other Savages to call one another by the cries of 
screech-owls during the night, and by the warbling 
of other birds during the day. Advancing a little 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


s’auangant vn petit d’auantage, il apperceut 7. ou 8. 
Hiroquois l’arquebufe fur l’efpaule chaffans fur les 
riues de cét eftang, il fe recommanda A Dieu: & fi 
tof{t qu’ils eurent pris vne route, il fe iette A l’oppofite 
pour fe mettre en lieu d’affeurance la chaffe aux 
beftes eft bien fouuent vne paffion, mais la chaffe aux 
hommes e{t vne rage parmi ces Barbares. 

Ce Huron dont ie viens de parler eft l’'vne des plus 
belles & des plus agreables humeurs qu’on fcauroit 
rencontrer, il fe met en toutes les poftures du monde 
pour agreer a fes hoftes, il fait le foldat le laboureur, 
l’artifan, auec vne fi grande naifueté, qu’il eftoit la 
recreation de tous les Francois, & bien fouuent quand 
ils fe rient de luy, il les gauffe fi adroitement, qu’ils 
ne s’en f{cauroient fafcher. 


1647 — 48] RELATION OF 1647 ' 33 


further, he perceived 7 or 8 Hiroquois, with arque- 
buses on their shoulders, hunting on the shores of 
that pond. He commended himself to God; and, as 
soon as they had taken one route, he hastened to the 
opposite one, in order to put himself in a place of 
safety. The hunt for beasts is very often a passion, 
but the hunt for men is a madness among these 
Barbarians. 

This Huron of whom I have just spoken is one of 
the most excellent and most agreeable characters 
that one could meet. He puts himself in all the 
positions in the world in order to please his hosts; 
he acts the soldier, the plowman, the artisan,—so 
very naively that he is the amusement of all the 
French; and very often, when they laugh at him, 
he banters them so cleverly that they cannot take 
offense at him. 


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


[262] CHAPITRE XV. 
DE L’HABITATION DE MISKOU. 


ISLE de Mifkou a enuiron 7. lieués de tour, elle 
L eft fituée dans le grand Golfe de fainct Lau- 
rens, par les 48. d. de latitude & par les trois 
cents fept de longitude le fol n’en eft pas bon; les 
eaux ny font pas faines, les bois n’y font ny fi grands 
ny fi beaux qu’en la terre ferme, elle abonde en 
perdrix & en lievres; il y auoit autrefois des Eflans, 
mais on les a tous exterminez. I] femble qu'elle ne 
foit confiderable que pour le trafic des peaux d’Eflans 
qu’on tire en quatité des Sauuages qui habitent trois 
grandes bayes du continent affez peu efloignées de 
cette ifle. La pefche y eft riche, les moulués s’y 
rencontrent en abondance; on en charge tous les ans 
comme auffi das les havres voifins plufieurs nauires 
qui les portent en France, en Portugal, en Italie & 
en plufieurs autres endroits. 

On commenga 1’an 1635. d’y dreffer vne habitation, 
les Pere Charles Turgis & Charles du Marché, y 
furent enuoyez [263] pour adminiftrer les Sacrements 
a vingt-trois Francois qui en deuoient ietter les fonde- 
ments, & pour remarquer les ef{perances qu’on pour- 
roit auoir de la conuerfion des Sauuages. Les fouf- 
frances furent quafi l’vnique occupation de tout ces 
pauures gens, la maladie les terraffa, & la mort en 
enleua vne grande partie. Le Pere du Marché fut 
contraint de repaffer en France, le Pere Turgis refifta 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 35 


[262] CHAPTER XV. 
OF THE SETTLEMENT AT MISKOU. 


HE Island of Miskou is about 7 leagues round; 
ae it is situated in the great Gulf of saint Law- 
rence, upon the 48th degree of latitude and 
the three hundred and seventh of longitude. Its soil 
is not good; the waters are not wholesome there; 
the woods there are neither as tall nor as beautiful 
as on the mainland; it abounds in partridges and in 
hares; there were formerly Elks, but they have all 
been exterminated. It seems that it is important 
only for the trade in Elk skins; these are obtained 
in abundance from the Savages who inhabit three 
great bays of the mainland, not far distant from this 
island. Fishing is plentiful there; cod are found in 
abundance, and every year, as also in the neighbor- 
ing harbors, many ships are laden with these fish, 
carrying them to France, Portugal, Italy, and many 
other regions. 

We began, in the year 1635, to build a settlement 
there; and Fathers Charles Turgis and Charles du 
Marché were sent thither [263] in order to adminis- 
ter the Sacraments to twenty-three Frenchmen who 
were to lay its foundations, and to observe the pros- 
pects that we might have for the conversion of the 
Savages. Sufferings were almost the only occupa- 
tion of all these poor people; sickness prostrated 
them, and death removed a great part of them. Fa- 
ther du Marché was constrained to return to France; 


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  {Vou. 32 


quelque temps, confolant fon petit bercail, efcoutant 
les vns de confeffion, fortifians les autres par les 
Sacrements de 1’ Euchariftie & de l’Extreme-Onction, 
enterrant ceux que la mort efgorgeoit. Mais enfin 
le trauail & le mauuais air qu’il prenoit aupres de ces 
pauures languiffans le ietta par terre auffi bien que 
les autres; fi fallut-il combattre iufqu’au dernier 
fofipir, il fe fait porter vers les malades & aupres des 
mourans, il les anime & les fortifie, il les encourage, 
& apres auoir enterré le Capitaine le Commis & le 
Chirurgien, en vn mot tous les Officiers & 8. ot 9. 
autres perfonnes de trauail, il y mourut luy-mefme, 
ne laiffant plus qu’vn malade 4a la mort, qu’il difpofa 
fainctement a ce paffage deuant que de rendre 1’efprit. 

[264] Le Pere Iacques de la place & le Pere Nicolas 
Gondoin, enuoyez l’année fuiuante en ces quartiers-la 
a deffain de faire vne maifon au Continent ot fe 
retire vne partie des Sauuages trouuerent l’ habitation 
des Francois toute defolée, il n’y reftoit que neuf 
perfonnes de vingt-trois, & encor fi foibles qu’il leur 
fallut demeurer la pour les fecourir. On nous a 
raconté que quelques Sauuages touchez de compaffié, 
tiroiét les corps morts de leurs lits pour leur donner 
fepulture, les Francois n’ayans pas la force de le 
faire. D’autres plus mefchans & plus barbares 
voyant tout le monde abbatu, voulurent piller le 
magazin, mais l’effort & l’adreffe des refchappez qui 
auoient plus de mine, comme on dit, que de jeu les 
en empefcherent. Or quoy qu'il en foit de la caufe 
de ces maladies, iln’y a pas long-temps qu’elles font 
bannies de cette ifle. Le Pere Gondoin, fut contraint 
de la quitter, le Pere Claude Quentin y perdit la fanté 
qu'il vint chercher 4 Kebec, apres auoir enfeuely vn 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 ne 


Father Turgis resisted for some time, consoling his 
little fold, hearing some in confession, strengthening 
others through the Sacraments of the Eucharist and 
Extreme Unction, and burying those whom death 
was slaying. But finally toil, and the infection that 
he contracted beside those poor languishing people, 
prostrated him as well as the others: yet he must 
resist, even to the last sigh. He has himself borne 
to the sick and beside the dying; he animates, 
strengthens, and encourages them; and, after hav- 
ing buried the Captain, the Agent, and the Surgeon, — 
in a word, all the Officers, and 8 or 9 workmen 
besides,— he died there himself, leaving only one 
person sick unto death, whom he holily prepared for 
that passage before yielding up his soul. 

[264] Father Jacques de la place and Father Nico- 
las Gondoin — sent the following year into those quar- 
ters for the purpose of establishing a mission on 
the Mainland, to which a part of the Savages might 
retire — found the French settlement quite desolated ; 
there were left in it only nine persons out of twenty- 
three, and so weak, moreover, that the Fathers must 
remain there, in order to assist these. We have been 
told that some Savages, touched with compassion, 
took the dead bodies from their beds in order to give 
them burial,—the French not having the strength 
to do so. Others, more wicked and barbarous, see- 
ing every one prostrated, tried to plunder the ware- 
house; but the energy and skill of those who had 
recovered from the malady— who had more counte- 
nance, as the saying is, than money to stake — pre- 
vented them from doing this. Now, whatever be 
the cause of these maladies, it is not long since they 
were banished from that island. Father Gondoin 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


ieune gargon qui l’affiftoit, le Pere Iean Dolbeau y 
deuint perclus de tous fes membres, & comme on le 
reportoit en France pour trouuer vn air plus doux il 
rencontra en chemin le Paradis, [265] le feu s’eftant 
pris dans les poudres du vaiffeau qui le portoit, 
l’enuoya dans le Ciel. 

L’an 1643. le P. Martin Lyonne, allant aux Hurons 
paffa par Mifks, & s’y arrefta voyant que le Pere 
André Richard demeuroit feul, par le depart de fon 
compagnon deuenu paralytique. Ce bon Pere fuiuit 
bien toft les traces & les veftiges des autres, il tomba 
malade l’année fuiuante au mois de May, & ne fut 
guery qu’au mois de Septembre. On le voulut ren- 
uoyer en France, pour n’eftre pas a l’efpreuue de 
cét air affez rude, & pour crainte que 1’ Hyuer fuiuant 
ne l’emporta{t, mais ayant tefmoigné beaucoup de 
refolution pour mourir en Canada, il y demeura, & 
a joiiy du depuis d’vne parfaitte fanté, qu’ila employée 
4 l’affiftance fpirituelle des Frangois, & 4 la céuerfion 
des Sauuages; il femble auoir enfeuely les maladies, 
car depuis ce temps-la elles n’ont point paru dans 
Mifks. 

Le Pere André Richard s’eftant trouué le plus fort 
de tous les Peres de noftre Compagnie enuoyez en ce 
pays de croix, s’appliqua fortement 4 1’étude de la 
langue des Sauuages, il les frequenta, les [266] fuiuit, 
& leur témoigna tant de bonne volonté, qu’ils le prirent 
en affection, le Pere Lyonne 14 puiffamment fecon- 
dé, le Pere de la Place s’eftant joint auec eux, 4 pris 
fa part du trauail, & tous trois ont ietté les fonde- 
ments d’vne petite Eglife, que noftre Seigneur benira 
s'il luy plaift. 

Monfieur l’Abbé de la Magdelaine, Chantre de la 


a 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 : 39 


was constrained to leave it; Father Claude Quentin 
lost his health there, which he came to seek at Kebec, 
after having buried a young lad who assisted him. 
Father Jean Dolbeau became crippled there in all 
his limbs; and when they carried him back to France, 
in order to find a milder air, he encountered Para- 
dise on the way,—[265] fire, having caught in the 
powder of the vessel which bore him, sent him to 
Heaven. 

In the year 1643, Father Martin Lyonne, going to 
the Hurons, passed by Miskou and stopped there, 
seeing that Father André Richard remained alone 
through the departure of his companion, who had 
become a paralytic. This good Father soon followed 
the path and footsteps of the others; he fell sick the 
following year, in the month of May, and was cured 
only in the month of September. We intended to 
send him back to France, that he might not be exposed 
to that somewhat harsh air, fearing that the follow- 
ing Winter might carry him off; but, having mani- 
fested much resolution to die in Canada, he remained 
there, and has since enjoyed perfect health,— which 
he has used for the spiritual assistance of the French, 
and for the conversion of the Savages. He seems to 
have buried the diseases, for since that time they 
have not appeared in Miskou. 

Father André Richard, having proved to be the 
hardiest of all the Fathers of our Society sent to that 
land of crosses, applied himself with energy to the 
study of the Savages’ language; he associated with 
them, [266] followed them, and showed them so 
much good-will that they conceived an affection for 
him. Father Lyonne has greatly assisted him; 
Father de la Place, having joined them, has taken 


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Saincte Chappelle de Paris: porté d’vn zele veritable- 
ment Chreftien, voulant cooperer 4 la conuerfion des 
Sauuages, donna les moiens a ces bons Peres de baftir 
vne habitation en la Baye des Chaleurs dans le Port 
de Nipigigsi, ot il les a fortement fecourus auec 
Meffieurs de la Copagnie de Mifkou. Deuant que 
céte habitation fut en eftat, les Peres y voulurent 
habiter pour fecourir les Sauuages, qui fe retirent 
plus ordinairement en cét endroit. Les neiges 
n’e{tant pas affez profondes pendat 1’Hyuer de l’an 
1644. pour arrefter les beftes fauuages, vne partie 
de ces pauures gens mourroient de faim, trois cabanes 
compofées de vingt-cing perfonnes fe vint ietter entre 
leurs bras, il fallut efpargner fur leur petite proui- 
fion, dequoy foulager la famine de tant de monde. 
Ils ont depuis dreffé de petites maifons [267] A la 
Frangoife, pour loger quelque familles inftruittes & 
baptifées par leurs foings, & par leur diligence. II 
femble que noftre Seigneur veille traiter ces pauures 
peuples d’vne facon plus douce, que ceux des nations 
plus hautes: car non feulement ils ne font point 
tombez en aucune affliction, depuis qu’ils ont receu la 
Foy, mais au contraire vous diriez qu’ils foient benis 
du Ciel & de la terre, leur chaffe & leur fanté s’eft 
a[ujgmentée, difent-ils, depuis leur conuerfion, en 
forte que les Payens s’en font mefme étonnez, & plu- 
fieurs ont demandé le baptefme cette année, mais on 
s’ef{t contenté de l’accorder 4 cing familles qui ont 
groffi le nombre de ces bons Neophytes. Leur 
changement fort notable, 4 donné de 1’eftonnement a 
nos Frangois, qui n’attendoient pas fi toftvn coup fi 
puiffant de la main de Dieu. 


ere 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647 41 


his share in the work; and all three have laid the 
foundations of a little Church, which our Lord will 
bless if it please him.? 

Monsieur the Abbé de la Magdelaine, Chanter of 
the Sainte Chappelle” at Paris,—impelled by a truly 
Christian zeal, and wishing to codperate in the con- 
version of the Savages,— gave to these good Fathers 
the means to build a residence on the Bay des Cha- 
leurs, at the Port of Nipigigwi,? where he has, with 
Messieurs of the Company of Miskou, greatly assisted 
them. Before that abode was ready, the Fathers 
chose to live there, in order to assist the Savages who 
usually retire to that place. The snows not being 
deep enough, during the Winter of the year 1644, 
to obstruct the wild beasts, a part of those poor peo- 
ple were dying of hunger. Three cabins, composed 
of twenty-five persons, came to throw themselves 
into the arms of the Fathers, who found it necessary 
to save, from their little store, provisions wherewith 
to relieve the hunger of so many people. They 
have since then erected little houses [267] in the 
French fashion, in order to lodge some families who 
have been instructed and baptized through their care 
and diligence. It seems that our Lord chooses to 
treat these poor tribes in a milder manner than those 
of the upper nations; for not only have they not 
fallen into any affliction since they have received the 
Faith, but, on the contrary, you would say that they 
are blessed of Heaven and earth. Their success in 
the chase and their health have increased, they say, 
since their conversion,—so that even the Pagans 
have been astonished, and several have asked for 
baptism this year; but we have contented ourselves 
with granting it to five families, who have increased 


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Les afflictions neantmoins ont eu leurs bons effets, 
elles ont amené a Iefus-Chrift le chef de l’vne de ces 
familles: il auoit prefté l’oreille 4 la voix des Peres 
qui publient fa Doctrine, mais il ne pouuoit fe re- 
foudre de l’embraffer, enfin les croix l’ont emporté 
malgré ces refiftances; il tint vn iour ce difcours en 
leur prefence. Il y a [268] quelques années qu’vne 
maladie contagieufe affligeant noftre pauure pays, 
i’en fus frappé auec plufieurs autres qui en mouru- 
rent, me voyant en danger i’eu recours 4 Dieu: ie le 
priay de tout mon coeur de me rendre la vie, faifant 
vn bon propos de pourfuiure mon baptefme, il me 
guerit, mais bien-toft apres ie m’oubliay de luy, non 
pas luy de moy, car pour me réueiller, il me ietta 
dans vn autre danger, comme ie pourfuiuois vn 
Eflan, ce grand animal fe fentant frappé de mon 
efpée que ie luy d’arday, fe tourne vers moy, fi 
promptement que ie ne pfi éuiter fa colere, m’ayat 
donné vn grand coup de 1’vn de fes pieds de deuant 
il me terraffa, & me laiffa pour mort, mes camarades 
furuenans bien étonnez deploroient ma mifere, reuenu 
4 moy, i’ay recours vne autrefois 4 celuy qui m’auoit 
def-ja guery, il me refufcite encor contre l’efperance 
de ceux qui ne penfoient qu’A mon tombeau; ie 
rentre dans mes premieres refolutions, mais la vertu 
me femblant trop fafcheufe, & l’obeyffance aux 
commandemens de Dieu vn peu rude, ie ne les 
garday pas, ma fanté me fit perdre les penfées du 
baptefme, mais enfin ie n’ay pti refifter au plus fort; 
il m’a remis [269] cét Hyuer au point d’ot il m’auoit 
tiré, c’eft a dire 4 deux doigts de la mort, me voyant 
dans cét extremité i’ay reffenty de grands regrets de 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647 43 


the number of these good Neophytes. Their very 
notable change has given astonishment to our French, 
who were not soon expecting so powerful an impulse 
from the hand of God. 

Afflictions, nevertheless, have their good effects; 
they have brought to Jesus Christ the head of one of 
those families. He had listened to the voice of the 
Fathers who publish Christ’s Doctrine, but he could 
not decide to embrace it. Finally, crosses carried 
the day, notwithstanding his resistance; and he spoke 
one day, in the presence of the Fathers, as follows: 
[268] ‘‘ Some years ago, a contagious disease afflict- 
ing our poor country, I was stricken with it, along 
with several others who died from it. Seeing myself 
in danger, I had recourse to God; I entreated him 
with all my heart to restore me my life, firmly resolv- 
ing to seek my baptism. He cured me, but soon 
after I forgot him; not so did he forget me, for, in 
order to arouse me, he placed me in another danger. 
As I was pursuing an Elk, that great animal, feeling 
himself struck by my javelin, which I hurled at him, 
turned upon me so suddenly that I could not avoid 
his rage. Having given me a sharp blow with one 
of his forefeet, he prostrated me, and left me for 
dead; my companions coming up, much astonished, 
deplored my misery. Upon regaining my senses, I 
again had recourse to him who had already cured 
me; and again he revived me, contrary to the expec- 
tations of those who thought only of my tomb. I 
returned to my first resolutions; but virtue seeming 
too difficult to me, and obedience to God’s command- 
ments rather hard, I did not keep them, and my 
health caused me to lose the thoughts of baptism. 
But at last I have not been able to resist the most 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 82 


mes defloyautez, ie luy ay demandé pardon, i’ay 
prote{té que ie ne ferois plus retif, il m’a refufcité 
pour la troifiefme fois: c’en eft fait ie luy veux 
obeyr; c’eft pour ce fujet que vous me voyez aupres 
de vous, ie n’en partiray point que mes pefchez ne 
foient lauez dans le fang de Iefus-Chrift; il a fi bien 
frappé a la porte, qu’elle luy a efté ouuerte; on l’a 
fait Chreftien auec fa mere, auec fes freres & fes 
foeurs. 

Vn Sorcier voulant épouuanter vn Chreftien, luy 
dit; i’ay appris de mon Demon, que 1’Hyuer pro- 
chain ta famille doit tomber dans vne horrible cala- 
mité, que ton petit fils mourra bien toft, qu'il n’y a 
plus de chaffe pour toy, & que tu vas eftre miferable: 
fi tu veux neantmoins obeyr 4 mes paroles, ie deftour- 
neray ce mal-heur de deffus ta tefte: donne moy les 
images que tu garde & vne bouteille de vin, & le 
Demon ne te fera aucun mal. Le Chreftien luy 
refpondit en fe moquant de fes fonges; i’apartiens a 
Dieu, que ie viue ott que ie meure, ie fuis a luy, ie 
luy ay def-ja donné [270] mes enfans, il les peut 
prendre quand il voudra, c’eft vn bon-heur pour 
moy, quils me deuacent en Paradis, ie ne crains 
point ton Demon: I] eft vray que fon fils tomba malade 
bien toft apres, & comme quelques perfonnes le 
preffoient d’obeir au Sorcier: ie n’en feray rien, 
repondit-il, qu’on porte mon fils aux Peres, & qu’ils 
prient Dieu pour luy, voila mon vnique recours. Sa 
femme l’apporta de quatre grades lieués loing, par- 
tie fur fes efpaules, partie le traifnant fur la neige, 
elle fe confefla & communia le iour de la Purifica- 
tion de la Vierge, & le lendemain remporta fon petit 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647 ier 


mighty; he set me back, [269] this Winter, to the 
point whence he had drawn me,—that is to say, 
within two fingers of death. Seeing myself in that 
extremity, I felt deep regret for my treachery. I 
asked his pardon, and protested that I would no 
longer be stubborn; he revived me for the third 
time. It is settled, and I intend to obey him. It is 
for this reason that you see me with you; I will not 
go away until my sins be washed in the blood of 
Jesus Christ.’’ He has so effectually knocked at the 
door that it has been opened to him; he has been 
made a Christian along with his mother, his brothers, 
and his sisters. 

A Sorcerer, wishing to terrify a Christian, said to 
him, ‘‘I have learned from my Demon that next 
Winter thy family is to fall into a horrible calamity; 
that thy little son will soon die; that there is no more 
hunting for thee, and that thou art going to be 
miserable. Nevertheless, if thou wilt obey my 
words, I will avert this misfortune from over thy 
head. Give me the images that thou keepest, anda 
bottle of wine, and the Demon will do thee no harm.”’ 
The Christian, mocking at his dreams, answered 
him: ‘‘I belong to God; whether I live or whether 
Idie, lamhis. I have already given him [270] my 
children,— he may take them when he will; it isa 
happiness for me that they go before me into Para- 
dise. I do not fear thy Demon.’’ It is true that 
his son fell ill, soon afterward; but, when some 
persons were urging him to obey the Sorcerer, he 
answered: ‘‘ I will do nothing of the kind; let them 
carry my son to the Fathers, and let them pray to 
God for him,—that is my only recourse.’’ His wife 
brought the child from a distance of four full 


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


fils fain & gaillard, noftre Seigneur recompenfant la 
Foy de la mere par cette guerifon, & la conftance du 
Pere par vne bonne chaffe pendant l’Hyuer. Le 
Sorcier at. contraire tomba dans la pauureté & dans 
la difette, fon arme luy creua dans fes mains, il fit 
peu de chaffe, durant l’Hyuer, & l’Efté fuiuant, il 
fut contraint de quitter le pays, pource que quelques- 
vns le foupgonnans d’auoir fait mourir leurs parens, 
le cherchoient 4 mort. 

Deux Sauuages Chreftiens eftant partis la veille 
de Noél, de leur cabane pour fe trouuer ala Meffe de 
minuit en la Chappelle [271] des Peres efloignée de 
trois lieués, rencontrerent en chemin la pifte d’vn 
grad Ours, la famine commengoit defia dans leur 
cabane, & Dieu fembloit leur donner le meilleur de 
tous les mets dont ils font eftat, car 1’Ours dans leur 
e{time paffe tous les autres animaux; ils s’arrefterent 
vn petit pour confulter fi leur deuotion 1’emporteroit 
par deffus leur mifere, ven mef{mement que la neige 
quitomboit pour lors les menagoit de cacher ces 
veftiges; il n’importe, dirent-ils, allons prier Dieu, 
c’eft luy qui nous a defcouuert la pifte de cette bette, 
c’ef{t luy qui nous la donne, il veut que nous en man- 
gions; en effet dit l’autre, nous pourrons bien apres 
pourfuiure cét Ours ou quelque autre que Dieu nous 
peut enuoyer, mais nous ne fgaurions recouurer la 
fefte de la naiffance de Iefus, quand cette nuit fera 
pafiée; ils s’en viénent a 1’Eglife, ils s’acquittent de 
leur deuoir, fe confeffent & fe communient auec 
beaucoup de pieté & fans precipitation, & puis auec 
la permiffion du Pere, ils reprirent leur route. Is 
n’eftoient pas loin qu’ils defcouurét vne autrefois 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647 ’ 47 


leagues,— partly on her shoulders, partly dragging 
him over the snow. She confessed and received 
communion on the day of the Purification of the 
Virgin, and the next day carried back her little son, 
well and sprightly,—our Lord recompensing the 
mother’s Faith by that cure, and the Father’s con- 
stancy by a successful hunt during the Winter. The 
Sorcerer, on the contrary, fell into poverty and want; 
his weapon broke in his hands; during the Winter 
he had little success in hunting; and, the following 
Summer, he was constrained to leave the country 
because some, suspecting him of having caused their 
relatives to die, were seeking his death. 

Two Christian Savages, having started from their 
cabin on Christmas eve, in order to attend the mid- 
night Mass in the Chapel [271] of the Fathers, three 
leagues distant, encountered on the way the trail of 
a great Bear. Famine was already beginning in 
their cabin, and God seemed to give them the best of 
all the meats upon which they depend,— for the Bear, 
in their estimation, surpasses all other animals. 
They stopped a little while, in order to consult 
whether their devotion would get the better of their 
misery,— seeing, likewise, that the snow which was 
then falling threatened to conceal from them those 
footprints. ‘*‘ No matter,’’ they said; ‘‘ let us go and 
pray to God. It is he who has revealed to us the 
trail of this beast; it is he who gives it to us, and he 
intends that we shall eat of it.’’ ‘‘ Indeed,’’ said 
one man, ‘‘ we shall easily be able afterward to pur- 
sue this Bear, or any other that God may send us; 
but we cannot recover the feast of the birth of Jesus, 
when this night shall be past.’’ They come to 
Church; they fulfill their duty, confess, and receive 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 32 


la pifte de cét Ours, ils la fuiuent & rencontre[ut] 
l’animal, ils le tuent & le font manger a leurs famille, 
fe [272] confirmans de plus en plus en la prouidence 
paternelle de leur Sauueur Iefus; car ainfi l’appel- 
lent-ils. 

Vn ieune Chreftien fe voyant mal’heureux a la 
chaffe rentre dans foy-mefme; d’ot me vient faifoit 
il 4 par foy cette difgrace? affeurement i’ay fafché 
Dieu: il s’examine va trouuer les Peres a leur habita- 
tion a vingt lieués de fa cabane, il fe confeffle auec 
beaucoup de regret de fes offences, il s’en retourne 
chez luy, il rencontre en chemin trois Eflans, il les 
pourfuit il les attrape & les met a mort, beniffant 
Dieu de luy auoir ouuert les yeux par vne fi aimable 
difgrace. 

Vn Catechumene ayant receu vn affront tres-fen- 
fible de l’vn de fes compatriotes, couuoit ie ne fcay 
qu’elle rancune dans fon cceur, ne cherchant que 
l’occafion de s’en venger, & comme il eftoit de confi- 
deration, il ne manquoit de boute feux & de gens 
qui luy offroient leur feruice contre fon ennemy, il 
en defcouurit quelque chofe au Pere qui 1’in{truifoit, 
le Pere prenant occafion de ces paroles du Pater, 
pardonnez nous nos offences céme nous pardonnons 
a ceux qui nous ont offenfé, l’aduertit ferieufement 
que Iefus defendoit la vengeance, [273] qu’il chaftioit 
rigoureufemét ceux qui ne vouloient point pardonner, 
& que s’il afpiroit au baptefme il deuoit regarder 
fon ennemy comme fon frere, cét homme admirant la 
beauté de cette Doctrine la receut & la pratiqua: car 
fi toft qu’il fut baptifé non feulement il pardonna 
cette iniure, mais il promit en outre d’aimer & de 


1647 —48] RELATION OF 1647 ' 49 


communion, with much piety and without haste; 
and then, with the Father’s permission, they resume 
their course. They had not gone far when they 
again discovered the trail of that Bear; they follow 
it, and encounter the animal, which they kill, and 
use as food in their family,—[272] becoming more 
and more confirmed in the fatherly providence of 
their Savior Jesus, for so they call him. 

A young Christian, seeing himself unsuccessful in 


the chase, communes with himself. ‘‘ Whence comes 
to me,’’ he said within his heart, ‘‘ this ill fortune? 
Surely, I have offended God.’’ He examines him- 


self, goes to find the Fathers at their residence, 
twenty leagues from his cabin, and confesses, with 
much sorrow for his transgressions. He returns to 
his abode, and meets on the way three Elks; he 
pursues them, overtakes them, and puts them to 
death,— blessing God for having opened his eyes 
through so kindly a check. 

A Catechumen, having received a very sharp affront 
from one of his fellow-countrymen, nursed I know 
not what rancor in his heart, seeking only an oppor- 
tunity for revenge; and, as he was a man of impor- 
tance, he did not lack firebrands, and people who 
offered him their service against his enemy. He 
revealed something of this to the Father who 
instructed him; the Father,—availing himself of 
those words in the Pater, ‘‘ Forgive us our offenses, 
as we forgive those who have offended us,’’— seri- 
ously warned him that Jesus forbade revenge, [273] 
and severely punished those who would not forgive; 
and that, if he aspired to baptism, he must regard his 
enemy as his brother. This man, admiring the 
beauty of that Doctrine, received and practiced it; 


PO ate 


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


proteger comme fon frere celuy qui l’auoit offenfé, 
priant le Pere de l’en affeurer de fa part. 

Vne femme Chreftienne fe trouuant en la compa- 
gnie de quelques Payens fut gauffée & mocquée fur 
fes deuotions: fon mary quoy qu’enfant de 1’Eglife 
ne pouuant fupporier ces rifées, luy dit qu’elle eftoit 
trop ardente, qu’elle deuoit moderer fon zele pour ne 
donner fujet 4 ceux qui auoient de trop grands yeux, 
d’auoir auffi vne trop grande bouche; ie veux croire, 
dit-elle, non A demi mais entierement, ie ne me de- 
mentiray iamais d’vn feul point de la Foy que i’ay 
receué de Dieu; on a beau fe rire, on A beau fe 
gauffer, rien ne m’eftonne, ie fuis Chreftienne: fon 
mary fort confolé luy dit, ie t’en aime dauantage, 
aye bon courage, ne quitte point le chemin ot tu 
es entrée. 

[274] Cette bonne ame preffée par fes amis de 
manger de la viande és jours deffendus 4 ceux qui 
ont quelque autre nourriture raifonnable, refpondit 
que la faim ne luy donnoit pas tant de peine, que 
l’obeiffance aux ordres de 1’Eglife luy donnoit de 
confolation, & comme vn de nos Peres l’aduertiffoit 
de l’intention de 1’Eglife fur ce commandement, elle 
luy refpondit, ie le fgauois bien, mais il me fembloit 
que Iefus me difoit en mon coeur, tiens bon tu n’en 
mourras pas, & tu n’en feras pas mefme incommo- 
dée; en effet elle fe porta tofijours fort bien elle eft 
infatigable au trauail. 

Vne femme eftant en trauail d’enfant, & fe voyant 
en danger de mort, eut recours 4 noftre Seigneur 
demandant non la vie, mais le baptefme pour fon 
enfant: Les femmes qui 1’affiftoient, ne croyans pas 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 * 61 


for, as soon as he was baptized, not only did he par- 
don that injury, but he promised withal to love, and 
to protect as his brother, the one who had offended 
him,— praying the Father to assure him of this, in 
his behalf. 

A Christian woman, finding herself in the com- 
pany of some Pagans, was jeered and mocked about 
her devotions. Her husband,—being unable, 
although a child of the Church, to endure such deri- 
sion,—told her that she was too ardent, and that she 
must moderate her zeal, in order not to give occasion 
to those who had too large eyes, to have also too 
large a mouth. ‘‘I wish to believe,’’ she said, ‘* not 
by half, but altogether; I will never belie a single 
point of the Faith which I have received from God. 
They may laugh, and mock, but in vain; nothing 
confounds me, for I am aChristian.’’ Her husband, 
much consoled, said to her, ‘‘I love thee the more 
for it; have good courage, and do not give up the 
path upon which thou hast entered.”’ 

[274] This good soul, urged by her friends to eat 
meat on days forbidden to those who have any other 
reasonable food, answered that hunger gave her not 
so much pain as obedience to the orders of the Church 
gave her consolation. When one of our Fathers 
informed her of the intention of the Church regard- 
ing this commandment, she answered him: “‘ I knew 
it well, but it seemed to me that Jesus said in my 
heart: ‘ Hold firm; thou wilt not die for it, and wilt 
not even be inconvenienced by it.’’’ In fact, she 
was always in very good health, and is indefatigable 
in work. 

A woman being in child-labor, and seeing herself in 
danger of death, had recourse to our Lord,—asking 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 32 


quelle en d’euft rechapper en donnent auis aux 
Peres qui luy enuoyerent vne Saincte Relique: cette 
femme Chreftienne l’ayant receué au milieu de fes 
grandes fouffrances auec beaucoup de foy, fe deliura 
d’vn enfant qui eut affez de vie pour receuoir le 
baptefme, & affez de bon-heur pour paffer du fein 
de fa mere au [275] fein de la gloire. Ses parents 
& fes voifines s’affligeans aupres d’elle, fur le trefpas 
de ce petit Ange, elle leur dit, qu’il neftoit pas 
temps de pleurer, mais de fe refjoiiir, & qu’elle fen- 
toit vne confolation au fond de fon ame, de ce qu’elle 
auoit vn enfant au Ciel: i’ay demandé, difoit-elle, 
fon baptefme a Iefus fon Sauueur & le mien, il me 
la accordé, n’eft-ce pas le fujet d’vne joye & d’vn 
contentement bien aymable? 

Pour conclufion les Peres de cette Miffion, qui ne 
baptifoient les Sauuages és premieres années que dans 
la neceffité, commengas depuis trois ans 4 voir vn 
fruit plus ample de leurs petits trauaux, par la cOuer- 
fi6 de plufieurs familles de Barbares, qui faifoient 
publique profeffion de noftre faincte Foy, & que leur 
noutielle Eglife auoit efté depuis trois mois acrué du 
nombre de quarante Sauuages baptifez folennelle- 
ment, furent obligez de monter 4 Kebec pour y con- 
ferer auec le Superieur de toutes nos Miffions; lequel 
ayant apris l’eftat de cette nouuelle Chreftienté, & 
le defir ardent qu’auoient plufieurs Sauuages fuffisa- 
ment inftruits de nos faincts Mifteres pour receuoir 
le Baptefme, renuoya [276] au mois de Septembre, 
les Peres Iaques de la Place, & André Richard pour 
les contenter, & Hyuerner auec eux, mais ils ont efté 
obligez de repaffer en France faute de barque, pour 
les tranfporter de 1’Ifle Perfée (ou eftoit anchré le 


Ee 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647 " 68 


not life, but baptism for her child. The women 
who were assisting her, not believing that she would 
recover, gave notice to the Fathers, who sent her a 
Sacred Relic. This Christian woman, having 
received it with much faith in the midst of her great 
sufferings, was delivered of a child which had suffi- 
cient life to receive baptism, and was fortunate 
enough to pass from the womb of its mother to the 
[275] bosom of glory. Her relatives and neighbors 
mourning beside her over the decease of that little 
Angel, she told them that it was not the time to 
weep, but to rejoice; and that she felt comforted in 
the depth of her soul that she had a child in Heaven. 
‘*T asked,’’ she said, ‘‘ for its baptism from Jesus, its 
Savior and mine; he has granted it tome. Is not 
this reason for delightful joy and satisfaction?’”’ 

In conclusion, the Fathers of this Mission,— who, 
in the first years, baptized the Savages only when 
in necessity,— began three years ago to see a more 
ample fruit of their little labors, through the 
conversion of several families of Barbarians, which 
were making public profession of our holy Faith. 
Seeing, also, that their new Church had been, within 
three months, increased by the number of forty Sav- 
ages, solemnly baptized, they were obliged to go up 
to Kebec, in order to confer there with the Superior 
of all our Missions. He—having learned the condi- 
tion of this new Christendom, and the ardent desire 
which several Savages, sufficiently instructed in our 
holy Mysteries, had for receiving Baptism —sent 
back, [276] in the month of September, Fathers Jaques 
de la Place and André Richard to satisfy them and 
to Winter with them; but they were obliged to cross 
over to France, for want of a bark to convey them 


ee le, ene 


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 32. " % 


natire qui les portoit) iufques A leur nouuelle 
habitation baftie parmy les Sauuages de la Baye des 
Chaleurs. Dieu donnera & cette nouuelle Eglife 
auffi bien qu’a toutes les autres telle benediction qu’il 
luy plaira. 


FIN. 


pT 
alee 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647 ~ 55 


from Isle Persée (where was anchored the ship which 
carried them) as far as their new residence, built 
among the Savages of the Bay des Chaleurs. God 
will give to this new Church, as well as to all the 
others, such blessing as he shall please. 


END. 


————— 


LXIV—LXV 


MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS, 1648 


LXIV.—Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad R. P. 
Vincentium Caraffa, Przepositum Generalem 
Societatis Jesu, Romz; St. Mariz apud Hurones, 
2 junii, 1648 

LXV.— Journal des PP. Jésuites, en l’année 1648 


SOURCES: For Doc. LXIV., we follow Father Martin’s 
transcript of the original, which latter rests in the archives of 
the Society ; the transcript is in the archives of St. Mary’s 
College, Montreal. In publishing Doc. LXV., we follow 
the original MS. in the library of Laval University, Quebec. 


—— se 


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad Reveren- 
dissimum Patrem Vincentium Caraffa, 
Przepositum Generalem Socie- 
tatis Jesu, Rome. 


EVERENDE A. IN X° PATER. 
R Pax Xi, 

Puto omnino supervacaneum scribere ad P. V. 
de statu hujus nostrz missionis huronice, cum ex of- 
ficio et abunde, ut opinor, preestiterit R. P. Paulus Ra- 
gueneau noster superior. Nunc ex una parte status 
rerum nostrarum optimus esse videtur; tum quia 
domi summa pax, unio et tranquillitas viget inter 
nostros et inter domesticos, tum etiam quia omnes 
pietati, virtuti et perfectioni in primis student, tum 
quia res christiana satis feliciter procedit, christianis 
magis magisque excrescentibus non solum numero 
sed etiam virtute, totque se aperuerunt occasiones 
longe lateque promulgandi evangelii, ut brevi tem- 
pore magnos progressus factura esset fides nisi opera- 
riorum summa penuria nostris desideriis, conatibus 
et occasionibus obstaret; quam ob causam instanter 
aR. P. P# petimus ut multos operarios ad excolen- 
dam hance vineam mittat que si unquam, antea 
videtur jam nunc ad messem albescere. Addo 
etiam, ad fortiorem spiri™™ nostrarum statum rerum 


1647-48] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 59 


Letter of Father Jean de Brébeuf to the Very Rev- 
erend Father Vincent Caraffa, General 
of the Society of Jesus, 
at Rome. 


ERY REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST, 
Pax Christi. 

I think it altogether superfluous to write to 
Your Paternity concerning the state of this our Hu- 
ron mission: since Reverend Father Paul Ragueneau, 
our superior, has officially and fully, as I suppose, 
discharged that duty. Now, in one aspect, the con- 
dition of our affairs appears to be most excellent,— 
because at home the utmost peace, union, and tran- 
quillity flourish among ours and those of our house- 
hold, and all apply themselves most diligently to 
piety, virtue, and perfection; and because the inter- 
ests of Christianity make very satisfactory progress, 
the Christians increasing more and more, not only in 
number but also in virtue. Moreover, so many 
opportunities for promulgating the gospel have dis- 
closed themselves, far and wide, that in a short time 
the faith would make great progress, did not the 
extreme dearth of laborers hinder our desires, efforts, 
and opportunities. For this reason, we urgently 
request that the Reverend Father Provincial send 
many laborers to cultivate this vineyard,— which, if 
ever before, seems now to be growing even white 
for harvest. I further note, as tending to the stronger 
condition of our spiritual affairs, prosperity in things 


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 82 


temporalium cursum prosperum, Etsi enim anno 
preterito nihil quidquam e Gallia nobis allatum sit, 
abundamus tamen adhuc, et superabundamus. Itaque 
ex his omnibus colligi potest, res nostras satis bene 
procedere, que est maxima Dei gratia. 

Ex altera vero parte multa et magna sunt omnino 
quz non solum res nostras impediunt, sed que etiam 
totius missionis ruinam videntur minitari. Istorum 
vero alia sunt nobis cum omnibus huronibus commu- 
nia, nempe hostes quos vero nomine Iroquenses 
vocamus qui partim vias occludunt et commercia 
impediunt, partim frequenter strage regionem hanc 
devastant, denique timore omnia complent. Alia 
autem impedimenta sunt nobis omnino propria 
nempe quorumdam huronum infidelium in nos odium, 
quod adeo excrevit ut paucis abhince diebus unum ex 
domesticis nostris occiderent, idem in nos prestituri, 
si se occasio dedisset. Verum hec postrema impedi- 
menta. Deus jam vertit in bonum et abunde ab 
omnibus huronibus nobis pro perpetrato homicidio 
satisfactum est, ex eoque tantum abest ut aliquid 
detrimenti fides acceperit, ut potius inde excreverit, 
adeo verum est diligentibus Deum omnia cooperari 
in bonum: Idemque de reliquis omnibus impedimen- 
tis futurum esse confidimus: Si enim Deus pro nobis 
quis contra nos. 

Unum est omnino quod imprimis me sollicitum — 
habet et de quo unico R. P. Ragueneau me voluit, ut q 
puto, scribere, nec vero pre modestia aut potuit aut . 


1647-48] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL " "Ol 


temporal; for although, in the past year, nothing 
whatever was brought to us from France, we never- 
theless up to this time abound, and more than 
abound. ‘Therefore, from all these things it may be 
inferred that our affairs proceed quite well,— which 
is a very great favor from God. 

But on the other hand there are, altogether, many 
and considerable influences which not only hinder 
our work, but seem even to threaten the ruin of the 
whole mission. Some of these, indeed, are common 
to us with all the hurons,—especially the enemy, 
whom we call by the name of Iroquois; they, on one 
hand, close the roads and obstruct trade, and, on the 
other, devastate this region by frequent massacre; 
in short, they fill every place with fear. Other 
hindrances, however, are altogether peculiar to us,— 
notably, the hatred toward us of certain infidel hu- 
rons, which has grown to the degree that a few days 
ago they killed one of our domestics. They were 
ready to offer the same treatment to us, if oppor- 
tunity had occurred. However, God has already 
turned these latter difficulties into good, and abun- 
dant satisfaction has been made to us by all the 
hurons for the homicide perpetrated. And the faith, 
far from receiving any detriment from this, has 
rather increased thereby,— so true it is that all things 
work together for good to those who love God. We 
trust that it will be the same with all remaining 
obstacles; for, if God be for us, who is against us? 

There is certainly one thing which gives me espe- 
cial anxiety; and about which alone Reverend Father 
Ragueneau, as I think, has desired me to write; nor, 
indeed, could or should he write it, through modesty. 
I fear, I say, lest the Bull of the Supreme Pontiff — 


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


debuit. Vereor, inquam, ne Summi Pontificis Bulla 
quz tunc cum Paternitas Vestra in Generalem erecta 
est fuit edita, de triennali potestate superiorum, nos 
cogat mutare superiorem, quod non poterit fieri in 
hoc statu rerum et temporum, sine notabili damno 
missionis. Sane is qui nunc preest R. P. Paul 
Ragueneau vere est in primis eximius et ut uno 
verbo dicam, omnibus numeris et partibus absolutus, 
qui non habet sibi hic similem, et nescio an in poste- 
tum habebit [for habeat]; cui missio multum omnino 
debet, utpote qui prudentissime, suavissime, fortissi- 
meque hactenus eam gubernat. Is autem est status 
rerum et temporum ut existimem eum solum et 
unicum esse, qui possit eam nunc pro dignitate guber- 
nare. homines enim multi sunt hic ex nostris viri 
sane religiosissimi et multis donis nature et gratiz 
illustres, sunt tamen omnes, meo judicio, multis parti- 
bus illo longe inferiores, tum in omnibus aliis tum 
maxime in gubernandi ratione et vero nemo est qui 
ante gubernavit. Quanquam si mnecessario alius 
superior esset eligendus, non videretur debere assumi 
nisi ex iis qui hic sunt, non autem ex aliis qui harum 
regionum experientiam nullam omnino habent. Qua- 
propter jam ab anno superiore scripseram ad R. P. 
Plem ut si fieri aliquo modo posset, continuaretur R. 
P. Ragueneau, in eoque situm esse momentum pro 
bono hujus missionis. Nunc autem wut existimo. 
Cauta [sc. jacta] est alea et expectamus hoc anno 
litteras, vel de ejus mutatione vel de continuatione. 


1647-48] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 63 


which was issued at the time when Your Paternity 
was elevated to the rank of General —respecting the 
triennial term of authority of superiors, may com- 
pel us to change our superior, which cannot be done 
in this condition of affairs and circumstances, with- 
out notable injury to the mission. Surely he who 
now presides, Reverend Father Paul Ragueneau, is 
in truth most excellent; and, to speak in a single 
word, is accomplished in every respect, and thorough 
in all duties. He has not his counterpart here, and 
I know not whether he will have in the future. The 
mission owes very much to him, for he has up to this 
time governed it most prudently, most benignly, and 
most vigorously. Such, moreover, is the condition 
of affairs and circumstances, that I regard him as 
the one and only man who can govern it now, as 
befits its dignity. For there are many men here, 
and among ours there are certainly men who are 
most devout, and illustrious for many gifts of both 
nature and grace; nevertheless, they are all, in my 
judgment, far inferior to him in many respects,—in 
all other things, indeed, but most of all in the matter 
of administration; and, in fact, there is no one who 
has governed before. For the rest, if necessity should 
compel the choice of another superior, it would seem 
that he ought to be taken only from those who are 
here, and not from others who have no experience 
whatever in these regions. Therefore, as early as 
last year I wrote to the Reverend Father Provincial 
that, if it could in any way be arranged, Reverend 
Father Ragueneau ought to be continued in office, 
and that in him lay the power for good in this mis- 
sion. Now, however, I suppose the die is cast; and 
we expect letters this year, concerning either his 


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vot. 82 


Quod si res esset adhuc in integro, quanto ego pos- 
sum, rogo et obtestor P. V. ut tempus ejus proroget. 
Non erunt semper eadem tempora, non erunt sem- 
per eedem necessitates. Poterit post aliud trienni- 
um aliquis alius succedere, si non pari cum fructu, 
at certe cum minori damno et periculo. hoc unum 
est quod a P. V. efflagito, paratus tamen ad omnia si 
aliter quam vellem eveniret. Quod enim volo, 
parum volo et in tantum volo in quantum ad Dei 
majorem gloriam cessurum est. Meum est propo- 
nere, Dei vero disponere. Peto preterea a V. P. ut 
benedictionem suam mihi impertiat. 
R. Ad. P. V* 
Servus humillimus atque Obedi- 
entissimus in X° 
JOANNES DE BREBEUF. 


Ex Residentia St. Mariz 
apud hurones in nova francia 
2 junii 1648. 


1647-48] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL cot 


transfer or his retention. But, if the matter be yet 
unsettled, I ask and beseech Your Paternity, as far 
as I can, to prolong his term. The times will not 
always be the same; the same necessities will not 
always exist. After another three years, some one 
else can succeed him, if not with equal usefulness, 
yet certainly with less injury and peril. This one 
thing is what I beseech of Your Paternity,— being 
ready, nevertheless, for all things, if it should hap- 
pen otherwise than I desire, for what I wish, I wish 
but little, and only in so far as it will conduce to the 
greater glory of God. It is mine to propose, but for 
God to dispose. I furthermore beg Your Paternity 
to bestow on me your blessing. 
Your Very Reverend Paternity’s 
Most humble and most Obedient 
Servant in Christ, 
JEAN DE BREBEUF. 
From the Residence of Ste. Marie, 
among the hurons, in new france. 
June 2, 1648. 


Estreines. 


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 32 


Journal des Péres Jésuites, en l’année 
1648. 


1648. IANUIER 


ES Hospitalieres enuoyerent le matin vne 
lettre par M. de St. Sauueur: & le soir 
d’auparauant wn petit quart de vin 

d’espagne d’enuiron 4. pots ie leur enuoyé 
vne lettre le mesme Iour & vn liure l’abregé 
du p. suffren. 

Ie donné a M. de St. Sauueur vne bougie 
& vn gerson, il demanda vne Calote que ie 
luy fit faire. 

les Vrsulines enuoyerent vne lettre, & vne 
croix de relique pour moy, vn pain de bougie 
au p lyonne, & au p. le Ieune; & a disner le 
Iour de la Circoncision. Ie leur enuoyé vne 
lettre, & vne Image dans vn quadre pour 
l’oratoire de leur Classe. 

Ie donné a Pierre celuy que tenoit le lutrain, 
vn Estuy, vne Image, Chapelet & liuret. 

A Monst. & Madame bourdon, vn reli- 
quaire, des heures & vn Abregé du p. suffren. 

A nos P. & ff. &c le soir vne grande Image 
enluminée de velin, & i’en enuoyé autant a 
Sillery. 

Nvf dismes apres vespres les litanies de 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 67 


Journal of the Jesuit Fathers, in the year 


1648. 


1648, JANUARY. 


HE Hospital nuns sent a letter in the 
morning by Monsieur de St. Sauveur, 
and, the evening before, a small keg of 

spanish wine,— about 4 pots. Thesame Day, 
I sent them a letter, and a book, —father 
suffren’s abridgment.® 

I gave Monsieur de St. Sauveur a wax taper 
and a gerson;® he asked for a Skullcap, 
which I had made for him. 

The Ursulines sent a letter and a relic-cross 
for me; a cake of candle-wax for father lyonne 
and father le Jeune; and a dinner on the Day 
of the Circumcision. I sent thema letter and 
an Image in a frame, for the oratory of their 
School. 

I gave Pierre,— him who kept the lectern,— 
a Box, an Image, a Rosary, and a little book. 

To Monsieur and Madame bourdon, a reli- 
quary, a book of hours, and an Abridgment 
of father suffren. 

To our Fathers and brethren, etc., we gave, 
in the evening, a great illuminated Picture in 
vellum; and I sent one like it to Sillery. 

After vespers, we said the litany of our 
Lady; and, the day before, that of the name 
of Jesus. 


New-year’s gifts. 


Jausse alarme de la 
Prise de louys 
Coutllar &c. 


Les roys. 


arriuée de Hurons 
de 3. riu. 


Jeu. 


Depart de Chas- 
tillon. 


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


node Dame. & la veuille celle du nom de 
Iesvf. 

On nvf vint aduertir le soir sur les 8. h. du 
desastre arriué ce 1°. Iour de l’an scauoir que 
quatre francois, louys, Couillart, Chastillon, 
delessar, & vn quatriéme estant allés au lac, 
que 3. auoient esté pris par les yroquois & que 
Chastillon seul s’estoit sauué; mais le lende- 
main les trois qu’on disoit auoir esté pris 
retournerent. 

Aux roys M. le gouuern™. enuoya Poule 
d’Inde, 2. & quatre Chapons, i’en enuoyé la 
moitié a Sillery 

Enuiron ce temps vinrent des 3. riu. 2. ou 
trois Hurons, qui nvf{ apporterent quelques 
lettres. 

le 7. le feu prit a la brasserie de l’habitaon. 

le 11. partit d’icy Chastillon soldat en la 
Comp‘*. des Hurons au nombre de 7. qui s’en 
retournoient aux 3. riu. Chastillon s’en alloit 
la pour se disposer au voyage des Hurons des 
le Commencem*. du printemps: il nvf laissa 
en depost vn bahu auec la Clef, & vne autre 
Clef d’un Coffre qu’il fit porter chez denys 
duquet: il me donna a entendre que si Dieu 
disposoit de sa personne on trouueroit dans 
son bahu le memoire de toutes ses affaires & 
disposions. il alloit comme deuant porter /a 
voix de m. le gouuerneur aux Hurons p*. leur 
faire scauoir l’estat des affaires d’icy bas auec 
ordre de ne faire & de ne dire que ce quele P 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 69 


They came to notify us, about 8 o’clock in 
the evening, of the disaster which happened 
on this 1st Day of the year, to wit, that four 
frenchmen—louys Couillart, Chastillon, de- 
lessar, and a fourth — having gone to the lake, 
3 had been taken by the yroquois, and Chastil- 
lon alone had escaped; but, on the next day, 
the three who were said to have been taken 
returned. 

At epiphany, Monsieur the governor sent 2 
Turkeys and four Capons; I sent half thereof 
to Sillery. 

About this time, 2 or three Hurons came 
from 3 rivers, who brought us some letters. 

On the 7th, fire broke out at the brewery of 
the settlement. 

On the 11th, Chastillon, a soldier, left here 
in Company with the Hurons, to the number 
of 7, who were returning to 3 rivers. Chastil- 
lon went thither to make ready for the jour- 
ney to the Hurons at the Beginning of spring. 
He left on deposit with us a trunk with its 
Key, and another Key to a Chest which he 
had carried to denys duquet’s.’ He gave me 
to understand that, if God disposed of his 
person, we would find in his trunk the state- 
ment of all his affairs and arrangements. He 
went, as it were, before, to bear monsieur the 
governor’s voice to the Hurons, in order to 
acquaint them with the state of affairs down 
here, and with orders to do and to say only 
what the Father Superior of the Hurons should 
command him. A few Days later, his Hat 
also was brought to me to be kept, and an 


A false alarm about 
the Capture of louys 
Couzllar, etc. 


Epiphany. 


Arrival of Hurons 
Jrom 3 rivers. 


Fire. 


Departure of Chas- 
tzllon. 


Mort de Ioseph 
huron. 


retour de la mission 
de beauport. 200. 
ames. 


Morts, malades; 


VOYAGES AUX 7. FIU. 


Seste de la Purifi- 
con. 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


Super’. des Hurons luy ordonneroit. on 
m’apporta quelques Iours apres son Chapeau 
encores a garder, & vne arquebuse pour 
laquelle auoir racommocée la fortune, forgeron 
demanda 7it. Io.s. 

le 17. mourut Ioseph A onchiarre de la 
Chaudiere blessé par hasar par son compa- 
gnon ochisentaete dont l’arquebuse se delascha 
contre sa lambe qu’il luy fallut couper, il fut 
apporté a l’hospital le dernier Iour de 1’an 
1647. fut baptisé le mesme Iour, puis receut 
deux fois l’absolution, & mourut le Iour 
susdit. il fut enterré au Cemetiere Commun 
dans vn Coffre a 1’Instance des ses Compa- 
gnons qui le trainerent sur vne traisne de 
V’hospital au Cemetiere. 

le 14. retourna le p. de quen de sa mission 
de beauport iusques au Cap de Tourmente 
& Isle d’orleans: il y trouua plvf de 200. ames 
& plvf de 140. Communians. 

Sur la fin de ce moys il y eut force morts & 
malades. 

Ité sur la fin de ce moys vint vn Huron des 
3. riu. que s’en retourna Incontinent apres 
auec vn autre. 


FEBURIER. 


La veuille de la purificion il n’y eut point 
de salut; le Iour apres le benedicamvf dfio 
de vespres on dit les Litanies de nde Dame; 
ce qui é bon d’estre obserué a toutes les festes 
de née dame. 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 71 


arquebus, for having mended which la for- 
tune, the blacksmith, asked 7 livres and 10 
sols. 

On the 17th, Joseph A onchiarre, of la Chau- 
diere, died, being accidentally wounded by 
his companion ochiwentaete, whose arquebus 
went off against his Leg, which had to be 
amputated. He was brought to the hospital 
on the last Day of the year 1647; he was bap- 
tized the same Day, then twice received abso- 
lution, and died on the above-mentioned Day. 
He was buried in the Common Cemetery, in 
a Coffin, at the Entreaty of his Companions, 
who drew him upon a sledge from the hos- 
pital to the Cemetery. 

On the 14th, father de quen returned from 
his mission at beauport, Cap de Tourmente, 
and the Island of orleans: he found there 
more than 200 souls, and over 140 Commu- 
nicants. 

Toward the end of this month, there were 
many dead and sick people. 

Item, toward the end of this month came a 
Huron from 3 rivers, who then Straightway 
returned, with another. 


FEBRUARY. 


On the eve of the purification, there was no 
benediction; on the Day, after the denedicamus 
domino for vespers, we said the Litany of our 
Lady,— which is good to be observed at all 
the feasts of our lady. 

We had about 100 small tapers, made by 
our brother Noircler, with Wax, wicks, etc., 


Death of Joseph, a 
huron. 


Return from the mis- 
Sion at beauport. 
200 Souls. 


Deaths; stick people. 


Journeys to 3 rivers. 


Feast of the Purifi- 
cation. 


funerailles de la 
Jemme de Drowin 
fille de Zacharie 


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


On fit faire de petits cierges enuiron vne 
100. par noe f. Noircler, de la Cire, mesche 
&c. de l’Eglise qui furent distribués cde l’an 
passé: mais il sera bien a propos d’establir 
au plustost qui se poura que le monde vienne 
prendre des Cierges selon les rubriques; ne 
gardant aucun ordre sinon de M. le gouu. & 
de ceux qui seront les plus proches du balus- 
tre, toutesfois il y a de la peine a cela si ce 
Iour-la on ne remue les bancs & qu’on ne 
fasse place. 

on ne prescha point a la messe la solemnité 
estant tombée en vn Dimanche y ayant eu 
Eau beniste, cela eut esté trop long; mais le 
Catechisme l’apres-disnée se fit sur le suiet 
de la feste. 

Ce mesme Iour mourut la femme de Droiiin, 
fille de M*t*. Zacharie, elle fut apportée le 4°. 
a l’hospital off on alla dire vespres des morts 
deux Peres auec les Chantres ordinaires de 
l’Eglise, & a l’issue de vespres on fit la Cere- 
monie a l’entour du Corps qui ensuite fut 
porté au Cimetiere, ils ne le voulurét pas trai- 
ner sur la traine, ils furent contraints de le 
porter a deux a raison des chemins estroits: 
on enuoya de la paroisse 4. cierges 4. torches; 
la Croix, & le Psautier: le lendemain on dit 
vne grande Messe a la paroisse, mais les 
parens furent aduertis qu’ils allassent Inuiter 
Poisson vn Artisan pour aydera dire la Messe 
auec Pierre qui estoit ouurier de l’habitaon 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 73 


from the Church, which were distributed in 
the same manner as last year. But it will 
certainly be expedient to arrange, as soon as 
possible, that the people come to get their 
Tapers according to the rubrics,— observing 
no order, unless for Monsieur the governor 
and those who shall be nearest the railing; 
yet there is difficulty therein, unless on that 
Day the benches are moved and room is 
made. 

We did not preach at mass; the festival 
having fallen on a Sunday, and there having 
been distribution of holy Water, it would have 
been too long; but the afternoon lesson in 
the Catechism turned upon the subject of the 
feast. 

This same Day, Drouin’s wife, daughter of 
Master Zacharie,® died; she was brought to the 
hospital on the 4th, where two Fathers, with 
the usual Church Choristers, went to say ves- 
pers for the dead; and at the end of vespers, 
they held the Ceremony over the Body, 
which was then carried tothe Cemetery. They 
did not wish to draw it on the sledge; they 
were constrained to bear it two by two, be- 
cause of the narrow roads. We sent from the 
parish church 4 tapers, 4 torches, the Cross, 
and the Psalter. The next day, a high Mass 
was said at the parish church; but the rela- 
tives were notified that they should go and 
Invite Poisson,’ an Artisan, to help say Mass, 
together with Pierre, who was a workman 
of the settlement, thereto appointed. We 
draped the Altar in black, and lighted 4 tapers ; 


Funeral of Drouin’s 
wife, the daughter 
of Zacharie. 


Hospitalieres. 


lours gras. 


Mercredy des 
Cendres. 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


destiné p*. cela: on paral’Autel de noir, & on 
alluma 4. cierges il n’y eut point de nos ff. a 
seruir. 

le mesme Zacarie & Drouin demanderent 
vne autre Messe pour le 8°. Iour d’apres, on 
leur accorda vne messe basse, mais il eut 
mieux vallu la leur donner le 3. le 8. ou le 
30. selon les rubriques. 

le 6. les MHospitalieres traiterent la mai- 
son magnifiquem'. & szpe alias multa mise- 
runt. 

Pour les Iours gras on enuoya icy du maga- 
zin & de la part de Mons*. le gouu. force 
viande quartier de Veau, orignac on en auoit 
tué quatre scauoir les Hurons qui hyuernoient 
icy au nombre de trois ou quatre sans ceux 
qui estoient aux 3. riu. 

On enuoya d’icy quatre bouteilles de vin 
d’hespagne pour les iours grasa Sillery, de 
celuy qu’on nvf auoit donné de l’hospital & du 
magazin, on en auoit enuoyé deux aupa- 
rauant. 

les devotions des 3. lours se passerent coe 
les années passées cela alla bien, il les faut 
continuer. 

le Mercredy des Cendres alla mieux que les 
deux années precedents. voicy cde l’on fit 
dont on donna aduis auparauant au peuple. 
le 1°. coup a7. h. (on le pouuoit sonner a 
6%.) le 2%. a 7% auquel temps on dit vne 
basse messe, a 1’issue de laquelle on sonna le 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 75 


there were none of our brethren to serve mass. 

The same Zacarie and Drouin requested 
another Mass for the 8th Day following; we 
allowed them a low mass, but it would have 
been better to give it to them on the 3rd, 
or the 8th, or the 30th, according to the 
rubrics. 

On the 6th, the Hospital nuns regaled 
the house magnificently, e¢ se@pe alias multa 
miserunt. 

For the Days of shrovetide, they sent hither 
from the warehouse and from Monsieur the 
governor, abundance of meat,—a quarter of 
Veal, and moose. Four moose had been killed 
by the Hurons who were wintering here, to 
the number of three or four, besides those 
who were at 3 rivers. 

We sent from here four bottles of spanish 
wine for the shrovetide days at Sillery, from 


that which had been given us from the 


hospital and from the warehouse: we had 
sent two bottles previously. 

The 3 Days’ devotions passed as in the 
former years; that went well, and they must 
be continued. 

Ash Wednesday went off better than in the 
two preceding years. We observed it as fol- 
lows, and gave notice to the people before- 
hand: the ist bell at 7 o’clock (they might 
ring it at 6%); the 2nd at 7%, at which time 
we said a low mass. At the end of this was 
rung the 3rd bell for high mass, at the Begin- 
ning of which the blessing and the distribu- 
tion of the Ashes took place,—monsieur de 


Hospital nuns. 


Shrovetide. 


Ash Wednesday. . 


Messagers des 3. riu. 


A beauport Messe 
&e. 


hyuer doux. 


St. Joseph & tl An- 
nonctaon. 


voyage a Amiot. 
Mort funeste d’un 


homme & son enter- 
_ remt. 


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


3°. coup de la grande messe au Commencem*. 
de laquelle se fit la benediction & la distribu- 
tion des Cendres, mons‘. de St. Sauueur me 
donnant & receuant des Cendres de moy selon 
les rubriques, puis nos ff. Mons*. le gouuern’, 
& puis le peuple sans Ceremonie venant au 
balustre, & pour ce faire commodem*. on osta 
les bancs qui pouuoient empescher; ce qui 
est necessaire: a l’issue de la grande Messe 
Mons’. de St. Sauueur dit la Sienne. 

Jintimé les predicions des Vendredys a 
l’hospital du p. bailloquet & des Mercredys 
aux Vrsul®. du p. lyonne. 

le dernier Iour de feburier reuinrent des 3. 
riu. quelques Hurons qui nvf apporterent des 
lettres, qui s’en retournerent 8. ou 10. Iours 
apres. 

On alla 4 beauport les festes & Dimanches 
& mesme le Iour des Cendres tant que la glace 
sur la riuiere le permit. 

l’hyuer de cette année fut encores plvf doux 
que celuy de l’an passé: on commenga a semer 
enuiron le temps de l’an passé. 


MARS. 1648. 


la St. Ioseph se passa tout cde l’an passé, 
cde aussy 1’Annonciaon; tout cela alla bien. 
Amyot arriue icy auec 3. Hurons le 27 
estant venu par Canot iusques au Cap rouge. 
le 30. fut accablé de la cheute d’vn autre vn 
nommé André de chez Mons". de Launay; il 
suruesquit 24. h. eut l’extreme Onction, fut. 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 77 


St. Sauveur giving me and receiving from me 
Ashes, according to the rubrics. Then our 
brethren, Monsieur the governor, and then 
the people, came to the railing without Cere- 
mony; and, to do this conveniently, they 
removed the benches which might be in 
the way,— which is necessary. At the end 
of high Mass, Monsieur de St. Sauveur said 
His. 

I announced the sermons—for Fridays, at 
the hospital, by father bailloquet; and for 
Wednesdays, at the Ursulines’, by father 
lyonne. 

On the last Day of february, some Hu- 
rons came back from 3 rivers, who brought 
us letters, and who returned 8 or 10 Days 
later. 

We went to beauport on feasts and Sun- 
days, and even on Ash Wednesday, as long 
as the ice on the river allowed it. 

The winter, this year, was still milder than 
that of last year: they began to sow about the 
same time as last year. 


MARCH, 1648. 


St. Joseph’s day passed quite as in last 
year; so, too, the Annunciation; all that went 
well. 

Amyot arrives here with 3 Hurons on the 
27th, having come by Canoe as far as Cap 
rouge. 

On the 30th, a certain André, from Mon- 
sieur de Launay’s, was crushed by another 
man’s fall. He survived 24 hours, received 


Messengers from 
3 rtvers. 


To beauport: Mass, 
ete. 


A mild winter. 


St. Joseph and the 
Annunciation, 


Amiot’s journey. 


Sad death of a man, 
and his burial. 


Gabory blessé 


Dimanche de la 
passion. 


Semaine Ste. 


& de Pasque 


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


apporté apres sa mort a Quebek ofi le degré 
de la Chapelle estant trop Incommode, il fut 
porté a vne des chabres des hommes des Vrsu- 
lines, ofi le prestre qui deuoit dire la messe 
le vint prendre, & estant posé a 1’Eglise des 
Vrsul®. auec deux torches & des cierges a 
l’entour du Corps, on y dit vne messe basse, 
ptiis la Ceremonie de l’issue fut faite & de la 
porté en terre au Cemetiere: en mesme temps 
Gabory, vn de nos hées de Sillery fut blessé 
de la mesme facon. 

Le Dimanche de la passion qui estoit le 29. 
on alla a 1’Hospital cde l’an passé, on y dit 
le Stabat, O crux aue, Aue regina ccelori 
Dfie saluii fac regé, cela fut a l’issue du 
Catechisme. 


AURIL. 


Le Dimanche des rameaux le tout alla com- 
me l’année precedente. 

Les Hospitalieres & Vrsul®*. chanterent 
toutes les Tenebres: 

Le Ieudy St. comme 1’année precedente 

Ité le Vendredy, excepté que Mons*. de St. 
Sauueur y chanta la Passion, parceque celuy 
qui officioit l’auoit preschée Immediatemt*. 
auparauant: on commenga la predicfon a 7. 
heures elle dura 2. h. & 4%. & de seruice fut 
acheué cée il falloit; 

le samedy le mesme que l’an passé le tout 
alla bien Mons’. de St. Sauueur m’assista tous- 
iours bien, le salut de mesme 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 79 


extreme Unction, and, after his death, was 
brought to Quebek,— where, the Chapel steps 
being too Inconvenient, he was borne to one 
of the men’s rooms at the Ursulines’. The 
priest who was to say mass went there to get 
him; and, when he was set down at the Ursu- 
lines’ Church, with two torches and candles 
about the Body, we said a low mass there; 
then the closing Ceremony took place, and he 
was borne thence to the ground in the Ceme- 
tery. At the same time, Gabory, one of our 
men at Sillery, was wounded in the same 
manner. 

On passion Sunday, which was the 29th, we 
went to the Hospital the same as last year. 
We said there the Stabat, O crux ave, Ave regina 
celorum, and Domine salvum fac regem; that was 
at the conclusion of Catechism. 


APRIL. 


On palm Sunday, everything occurred the 
same as last year. 

The Hospital and Ursuline nuns sang the 
Tenebre entire. 

Holy Thursday, the same as last year. 

Item, Good Friday, except that Monsieur 
de St. Sauveur sang the Passion, because he 
who was officiating had preached it Immedi- 
ately before. We began the preaching at 7 
o’clock; it lasted 2 and % hours, and the 
service was appropriately finished. 

Saturday, the same as last year; all went 
well. Monsieur de St. Sauveur assisted me 
well throughout; benediction, the same. 


Gabory wounded, 


Passion Sunday. 


Holy Week 


and Easter. 


Le douté auec 
@autres plof que 
Lamas s'il ne falloit 
pas nommer I’ Em- 
pereur le Vendr. & 
Samedy Sts. a peine 
trouué-te deux mis- 
sels gui s’accordas- 
Sent; te pris resolion 
de m’en esclaircir en 
France, & cependant 
ze dis cde un des 
mussels le pluf fauo- 
rable pr. la france. 


baptesme de 
Sa ondionrhens. 


retour a’ Amiot 
Arquebuse de 
Chastillon. 


depart de Monsr. de 
la Tour. 


bastiments 


Le f. Liegeois. 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


Le Dimanche de Pasque le p. le Ieune a 
Vissue de la 1°. & 2°. Messe fit pendant les 
Communions l’entretien du St. Sacrement; & 
la prediction fut remise a l’apres disnée a 
Vissue de Vespres, le salut a 5. h. %. tout 
cela alla bien. 

le lundy & le mardy le tout cde 1’an passé, 
excepté que les religieuses chantoient 1’o filii 
alternatiuemt, 

Nvf Inuitasmes le Mardy Mons". de St. Sau- 
ueur a disner, & aux autres qui assistoient au 
lutrin on leur donna quelque bouteille de vin. 

Sa,ondionrhens Huron du bourg de la 
Conception qui auoit hyuerné icy fut baptisé 
la veuille de Pasque, son parein M. de la 
fresnaye le nomma Charles. 

On fit faute aux Vrsul¢. a 1’Hospital & a Sil- 
lery de donner la Communion le Iour de pasque. 

les festes de pasque Amiot s’en retourna 
auec les Hurons; & Mons*. de la Tour qui 
alla en Chaloupe p*. faire la guerre; ie donné 
a Amyot l’Arquebuse de Chastillon selon ce 
qu'il m’en auoit escrit; ils ne partirent que 
le Ieudy 16. du moys d’Auril. 

Nos gens au. nombre de dix ou douze tra- 
uaillerent tout l’hyuer au bois iusques a Pas- 
que pour la charpente de la grande maison; 
le tout fut fait & apporté a Pasque: & a Pas- 
que on commenca a trauailler sur la place. 
nde f. Nicolas le fauconier auoit soin de la 
magonerie nde f. liegeots la surintendance de tout, 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 81 


On Easter Sunday, father le Jeune, at the 
end of the 1st and 2nd Masses, discoursed 
upon the Blessed Sacrament during the Com- 
munions; and the preaching was put off till 
afternoon, at the close of Vespers. Benedic- 
tion at 5% o’clock. All that went well. 

On monday and tuesday, everything oc- 
curred the same as last year, except that the 
nuns sang the o filiz responsively. 

On Tuesday, we Invited Monsieur de St. 
Sauveur to dinner; and to the others who 


With others, I 
doubted more than 
Ever,whetherit were 
not necessary to men- 
tion the Emperor on 
Good Friday and 
Holy Saturday. I 
found scarcely two 
missals that agreed. 
I resolved to en- 
lighten myself in 
france; and mean- 
while I followed one 
of the missals most 


assisted in the choir we gave a bottle or so /@vorable tofrance.1 


of wine. 

Sa ondionrhens, a Huron from the village 
of la Conception, who had wintered here, was 
baptized on Easter even; his godfather, Mon- 
sieur de la fresnaye, named him Charles. 

An error was committed at the Ursulines’, 
at the Hospital, and at Sillery, in giving 
Communion on easter Day. 

During easter week, Amiot returned with 
the Hurons, and Monsieur de la Tour, who 
wentinaShallop tomake war. I gave Amyot 
Chastillon’s Arquebus, as he had written me 
that I should do so. They did not leave till 
Thursday, the 16th of the month of April. 

Our people, to the number of ten or twelve, 
‘worked in the woods all winter until Easter, 
for the timber of the great house; all was 
done and brought thither at Easter; and at 
Easter they began to work upon the spot. 
Our brother Nicolas le fauconier had charge 
of the masonry; our brother liegeots, the superin- 
tendence of the whole work; and our brother 


Baptism of 
Sa ,ondionr hens. 


Return of Amiot. 
Chastillon’s Arque- 
bus. 


Departure of Mon- 
szeur de la Tour. 


Buildings. 


Brother Liegeozts. 


Eglise pour La 
paroisse 1648. 


yurognes punts 
Missions paschales. 


pointe de Leut. 


de Exconicaoe in eos, 
gut nd communical in 
paschate. 


St. Mare. 


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 82 


& noe f. Ambroise Cauuet du bois de menu- 
serie &c. 

En mesme temps on bastissoit vn corps de 
logis au fort; & vne Eglise pour la paroisse. 

Quatre ou 5. personnes furent mises sur le 
Cheualet p*. s’estre enyurée a Pasque. 

le p. bailloquet alla en ce mesme temps p*. 
la 1°. fois dire la messe a la pointe de leui, & 
apres a l’isle aux oyes (Mons*. de St. Sauueur 
a beaupré) 

L’octaue de Pasque I’intimé le Canon du 
Concile de lat[e]ran, & les peines portées con- 
tre ceux qui ne se communient a Pasque (de 
quo v. Cardin. de lugo t. de Euchar*.) viens 
ab Ecclesie ingressu arceatur, & moriens Ecclest- 
astica careat sepultura; ie donné 8. Iours de 
répit; & ensuite post octo dies declarandi 
erant incurrisse excommunicationé, seu potivf 
excommunicandat erantctii nd de facto essent 
excommunicati, sed excommunicandi, ergo 
ab habente potestaté, gud non habent parochi; 
quod si dicatur nos amplivf aliquid habere ci 
non mihi constaret, proposui non facere sed 
petere in gallia quid agendi, si nihil nobis ad 
solut™. difficultatii hoc anno adueniret. 

le 25. Iour de St. Marc le tout se passa cde 
l’année derniere; ie fus la veuille visiter les 
chemins de la procession aux Hospital. & 
Vrsulines, ils ne me parurent pas assez pas- 
sables pr’. faire la Procession auec bien-seance; 
toutesfois ie m’en repentis depuis, 1’ Eglise se 


OS ee 


1647-48] /OURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 83 


Ambroise Cauvet, of the timber for the join- 
ers, etc. 

At the same time, barracks were being built 
at the fort, and a Church for the parish. 

Four or 5 persons were put on the Cheva- 
let for becoming intoxicated at Easter. 

Father bailloquet went at this same season, 
for the ist time, to say mass at point levi; 
and afterward to the isle aux oyes (Monsieur de 
St. Sauveur to beaupré). 

On the octave of Easter, I announced the 
Canon of the Council of the lateran, and the 
penalties declared against those who do not 
receive communion at Easter (de guo vide Car- 
adinalem de lugo, titulo ‘‘ de Eucharistia”’ ),—vivens 
ab Ecclesia ingressu arceatur, et moriens Ecclesias- 
tica careat sepultura. I gave8 Days’ respite, and 
then post octo dies declarandi erant incurrisse 
excommunticationem, seu potius excommunicandi 
erant, cum non de facto essent excommunicati, sed 
excommunicandt, ergo ab habente potestatem, quam 
non habent parochi; quod si dicatur nos amplius 
aliquid habere cum non mthi constaret, proposut non 
facere, sed petere in gallia quid agendum, si nthil 
nobts ad solutionem difficultatum hoc anno adve- 
ntret. 

On the 25th, St. Mark’s Day, everything 
occurred the same as last year. I went, on 
the day before, to inspect the roads for the 
procession to the Hospital and Ursuline nuns’: 
they did not appear to me sufficiently passable 
to make the Procession in a becoming manner; 
nevertheless, I afterward repented this. The 
Church, it seems, and Usage, require greater 


Church for The par- 
tsh, 1648. 


Drunkards pun- 
ished. 


Paschal Missions. 
Point Levi. 


De Excommunica- 
tione in eos, qui non 
communicant in 
paschate. 


St. Mark. 


Sa 


voyage aux Hurons. 


retour du pere 
Daran Incom. 


Exercices spuels, 


renoudaon. 


St. Michel. 


retour du p. gabr. 
Driilletes & 
Sauuages. 


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


semble & la Coustume demandent de plvf 
grandes Incommodités que cela pour obmet- 
tre cette procession. 

Le 24. d’Auril partit des 3. riu. le Canot 
de Chastillon pour aller aux Hurons dans 
lequel il estoit auec deux sauuages Chres- 
tiens: rené Oheraenti, & Michel; ils furent 
conduits iusques a la riuiere des prairies par 
vne Chaloupe qui donna iusques a Montreal, 
dou le p. Daran partit pour nvf venir trouuer 
a raison d’vn commencem'. de descente de 
boyau. il arriua le 5. de May a Quebek 

le 26. i’allé a Sillery pt. commencer les 
Exercices, ie les commencé le 27. au soir. 


MAY 1648. 


le 7. se fit la renoudon a Sillery la veuille 
Abstinence, & Exhortion: Ce mesme Iour 
pour les 1%. Vespres de S*. michel v inuité les 
chantres; & donné a entendre a Mons". le 
gouuerneur & a d’autres cette deuotion. il 
s’y trouua & a l’issue on leur donna a tvf la 
Colaon en quatre departemens; a Mons’. le 


gouuerneur & plvf honnestes gens au 


refectoire, aux musiciens a la petite sale, 
aux matelots dans la menuiserie, & le 
reste soldats a la grande sale; cela alla bien 
Mons’. le gouu. vint en chaloupe, & s’en 
reuint a pied. j 

le 8. apres auoir dit la messe a Sillery, ie 
m’en reuins en canot, & le p. Druilletes estant 
retourné de son hyuernem*t. auec les sauuages 


1647-48] /OURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 85 


Inconveniences than that, for omitting this 
procession. 

On the 24th of April, Chastillon’s Canoe 
left 3 rivers to go to the Hurons; he himself 
was in it with two Christian savages,—rené 
Oheraenti and Michel. They were escorted 
as far as the river des prairies by a Shallop 
which proceeded to Montreal, whence father 
Daran started to come to us, on account of an 
incipient rupture. He arrived at Quebek on 
the 5th of May. 

On the 26th, I went to Sillery to begin the 
Retreat; I began it on the evening of the 27th. 


MAY, 1648. 


On the 7th, the renewal of vows took place 
at Sillery; Abstinence and Exhortation the 
day before. This same Day, for the 1st Ves- 
pers of St. michael I invited the choristers, and 
gave word of this devotion to Monsieur the 
governor and toothers. Hewas present; and 
at the conclusion we gave a Collation to them 
all in four divisions: to Monsieur the govern- 
or and the most respectable people, in the 
refectory; to the musicians, in the little hall; 
to the sailors, in the carpenter-shop; and to 
the remainder, soldiers, in the great hall. 
That went well. Monsieur the governor 
came in a shallop, and returned on foot. 

On the 8th, after having said mass at 
Sillery, I returned in a canoe; and, father 
Druilletes having on the same Day returned 
from his wintering with the savages, the 
same canoe brought him back to Sillery. 


Journey to the 
Hurons. 


Father Daran’s re- 
turn, Disabled. 


Spiritual Retreat. 


Renewal of vows. 


St. Michael. 


Return of father 
gabriel Driilletes 
and savages. 


depart du pere 
batlloguet. 


jin des Catechismes. 


Depart pour 
Tadousac. 


Hospital 
homme arresté. 


rog Gons 


Commencemt. de 
pesche. 


Mort ad Amyot Et de 
La margurie. 


Pourparler & ren- 
contres ad’ yroguozs. 


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 82 


le mesme Iour, le mesme canot le remenaa 
Sillery. 

le 12. partit la barque pour Montreal dans 
laquelle estoit le p. bailloquet, qui s’en alloit 
ala place du p. Daran. 

le 10. fut signifiée la fin ou vacances du 
Catechisme, qui alla fort bien iusques au 
bout: il y eut Catechisme iusques au 3°. 
Dimanche Inclusiue. 

le 14. partit le phlibot ou barque pour 
Tadousak dans lequel estoit le p. dequen & le 
p. lyonne qui y alloient en Mission. 

le 16. on s’assura de la personne de N. a 
l’hospital, pour Les raisons qui se trouueront 
a 1’Hospital ou dans les Archiues. 

le 17. Dim. des rogaons, on fit la Proces- 
sion apres Vespres a l’entour des Champs sur 
le Cap aux Diamans, & reuint-on par la grande 
allée; on y chanta les litanies, des saincts & 
de nde Dame, il y eut iustement ce qu’il fal- 
loit pour cela on reuint chanter a 1’Eglise le 
regina celt. Je donné la collation 4 M. de St. 
Sauueur au retour. 

le 18. se prit le 1%. Saulmon par M. de St. 
Sauueur, & deux iours auparauant on auoit 
pris du bar, & auparauant force carpes. 

le 23. se noyerent Amyot & Marguerie; La 
nouuelle en fut apportée par la barque qui 
reuint de Montreal apportant Mademoys. ~ 
d’Ailleboust & les nouuelles du pourparler q 
auec les yroquois a Montreal. cuivf historia — 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 87 


On the 12th, the bark sailed for Montreal,— 
in which was father bailloquet, who was going 
away in father Daran’s place. 

On the roth was indicated the close or vaca- 
tion of instruction in the Catechism, which 
went very well, even to the end; there was 
Catechism till the 3rd Sunday, Inclusive. 

On the 14th, the flyboat or bark for Tadou- 
sak sailed, in which were father dequen and 
father lyonne, who were going thither upon a 
Mission. 

On the 16th, they secured the person of N. 
at the hospital, for reasons which will be found 
at the Hospital, or in the Archives. 

On the 17th,—rogation Sunday,— we made 
the Procession after Vespers, round about the 
Fields, and over Cap aux Diamans, and re- 
turned by the main street; we sang the litany 
of the saints and of our Lady: there was just 
the space necessary for this. We came back 
to sing the regina celi at the Church. I gave 
a collation to Monsieur de St. Sauveur at the 
return. 

On the 18th, the 1st Salmon was caught by 
Monsieur de St. Sauveur; two days before, 
they had taken some maigre,"” and, before 
that, plenty of carp. 

On the 23rd, Amyot and Marguerie were 
drowned. The news of it was brought by the 
bark which came back from Montreal, bring- 
ing Mademoyselle d’Ailleboust and the news 
of the conference with the yroquois at Mont- 
real,—cujus historia will be seen in a letter 
from father Dendemare in the Archives. 


Departure of father 
bazlloguet. 


Close of the lessons 
in Catechism. 


Departure for 
Tadousac. 


Hospital; man ar- 
rested. 


Rogation Sunday. 


Beginning of fish- 
ertes. 


Death of Amyot 
And of La mar- 
Lurie. 


Negotiation and 
meetings with yro- 
guots. 


Sestes de pentec. 


Eslection, renou. 
vistte auxVrsules. 


Corps morts. 


Seste du St. Sacre- 
ment 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 32 


se voira dans vne lettre du p Dendemare dans. 
les Archiues. 

le 30. de May autre rencontre d’yroquois. 
aux 3. riuieres cuivf historia ibidem; & autres. 
ensuite. 


IUIN 1648. 


Le lundy & le mardy de la Pentecoste on 
ne fut point aux Vrsul*’. & Hospital cde les 
années precedentes propter defecti musicori, 
& que cela eut esté froid. 

En ce temps se fit l’oraison des 40. h. aux 
Vrsul*s. pour l’Eslection de la Sup. qui se fit 
le 3. de Iuin in pace & benedict*®. & leur 
renouaon le lundy 8. lendemain de la Trinité. 
i’entré dans la maison auec le p. le Ieune, & 
le p. Daran, p*. en faire la visite le 9. 

le 10. furent veus le corps d’Amyot proche 
de Sillery, & celuy de Marguerie, proche de 
Quebek, tvf deux furent enterrés le mesme 
Iour, l’vn a Sillery, l’autre a Quebek. 

le 11. feste du St. Sacrement se fit la pro- 
cession au temps & en la maniere des années 
precedentes le tout alla bien: 1°. Messe a 1’or- 
dinaire; le 2°. qui fut la grande ité a l’ordin. 
7%. 00 M. de St. Sauueur se trouua a l’issue 
se fit donc la procession née f Nicolas portoit 
la Croix, & Ioliet & Costé deux petits garcons 
en surplis aux Costés de la Croix auec coronne 
de fleurs en teste. Suiuoient les sauuages 
conduits par le p. le Ieune en surplis & estolle; 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 89 


On the 30th of May, another meeting with 
some yroquois, at 3 rivers, cujus historia tb1- 
dem, and others thereafter. 


JUNE, 1648. 


On monday and tuesday in Whitsun-week 
we were not at the Ursulines’ and Hospital as 
in the former years, propter defectum musico- 
rum; for the service would have been unin- 
teresting. 

At this time, the 40 hours’ devotion was 
observed at the Ursulines’ for the Election of 
the Superior, which occurred on the 3rd of 
June ix pace et benedictione; and the renewal of 
their vows took place on monday, the 8th, the 
day after Trinity. I entered the house with 
father le Jeune and father Daran, on the oth, 
to make the visitation. 

On the 1oth, the body of Amyot was seen 
near Sillery, and that of Marguerie near Que- 
bek; both were buried on the same Day— 
one at Sillery, the other at Quebek. 

On the 11th, the festival of the Blessed 
Sacrament, the procession took place at the 
time and in the manner of the former years. 
All went well: 1st Mass as usual; the 2nd, 
which was high mass, ztem, as usual, at 7% 
o’clock,—at which Monsieur de St. Sauveur 
was present. At the close, the procession 
then took place: our brother Nicolas bore the 
Cross; and Joliet and Costé, two little boys 
in surplices, were on either Side of the Cross, 
with wreaths of flowers on their heads. The 
savages followed, led by father le Jeune in 


festivals of pente- 
cost. 


Election; renewal of 
vows, visttation at 
the Ursulines’. 


Dead bodies. 


feast of the Blessed 
Sacrament. 


Tourneur 
Menusier 
Cordonter 
Tonnelzer 
serrurier 
Armurzter 
Charpentier 
Masson 
Taillandier 
boulenger 
Charon 
Cloutier 


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 82 


en suite douze torches de 12. mestiers puis 
quatre chantres laiques auec cierges; en suite 
Mons‘. de St. Sauueur en Chape puis le p. 
Daran & le p. greslon en Estolle & chasuble; 
suiuoit louys habillé en Ange par les Hospi- 
talieres; qui menoit par la main deux petits 
sauuages: Suiuoit beniamin en Ange habillé 
par les Vrsul**. qui portoit vn corporalier, au 
milieu de deux petits sauuages portant chan- 
deles de cire; Suiuoient deux de nos ff. qui 
portoient les encensoirs fumans, puis quatre 
de nos ff. aux 4. Coins du Daiz portant Sur- 
plis & Chandeliers d’argent: portoient le daiz 
M:. de Chauigny M. de la Tour M. bourdon, 
& Iean bapt. le Sauuage. Au costé du pres- 
tre p. Druilletes en Dalmatique, p. gabriel en 
estolle de Diacre. 

1*, faute ie ne deuois auoir de manipule ny 
moy ny les Diacres. 

2°. faute on ne‘chanta pas le Domine sal- 
ui fac regé au reposoir du fort; mais ne 
l’ayant pas preueu, ie ne dis que l’oraison du 
roy. 

3°. les sauuages que louys menoit estoient 
trop petits pour vn si long chemin. 

4t. Il y auoit des croix par tout sur les 
Autels, il n’en faut point. 

Les sauuages furent distribués aux Vrsul®. 
a l’hospital, & au Magazin, of apres auoir 


disné, on leur donna dequoy faire festin le : 
soir a Sillery; 20. a l’hospital, autant aux 


—e- 
——— 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 91 


surplice and stole; then, twelve torches, of 
12 trades; next, four lay choristers with 
tapers; then Monsieur de St. Sauveur, in 
Cope; then father Daran and father greslon 
in Stole and chasuble. Then followed louys, 
clad by the Hospital nuns asan Angel; and he 
led by the hand two little savages. Then 
followed benjamin as an Angel, dressed by the 
Ursulines; he bore a corporal-case between 
two little savages carrying wax candles. Two 
of our brethren followed, who bore smoking 
censers; then four of our brethren at the 4 
Corners of the Canopy, with Surplices and 
silver Candlesticks. Monsieur de Chavigny, 
Monsieur de la Tour, Monsieur bourdon, and 
Jean baptiste, the Savage, bore the canopy. 
Beside the priest walked father Druilletes in 
Dalmatic, and father gabriel, in a Deacon’s 
stole. 

Ist error: neither I nor the Deacons should 
have had maniples. 

2nd error: we did not sing the Domine sal- 
vum fac regem, at the temporary altar by the 
fort; but not having foreseen this, I said only 
the prayer for the king. 

3rd: the savages whom louys was leading 
were too small for so long a march. 

4th: There were crosses everywhere upon 
the Altars; there should be none. 

The savages were distributed at the Ursu- 
lines’, at the hospital, and at the Warehouse, — 
where, after having dined, we gave them 
wherewith to make a banquet at Sillery in 
the evening. There were 20 at the hospital, 


Turner 
Joiner 
Shoemaker 
Cooper 
locksmith 
Gunsmith 

Carpenter 
Mason 
Toolmaker 
baker 
Wheelwright 
Nailmaker. 


Nouuelles des 
Hurons. 


Jeu de la St. Tean. 


pesche de loup 
marin. 


guerre des 
Algonqguains. 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Vrsul®. les hommes seuls en plvf petit nom- 
bre au magazin. 

Ie douté sil n’eut point fallu donner des 
Coronnes a ceux qui portoient le daiz & autres. 

le 12. vinrent les nouuelles apportées par 
les Algong. & Hurons partis des 1’Automne 
passé pour hyuerner icy; les originaux s’en 
trouueront aux Archiues titulo hurons; leger 
ieune Enfant arriua en mesme temps, & 
demeura a Montreal apres auoir demeuré 
enuiron vn an aux Hurons. 

le 23. le feu se fit a l’ordinaire, i’y assisté, le 
p- le Ieune, & le P. greslon Mons’. le gouu. 
me vint querir sur les 8% nvf allasmes prome- 
ner en son Iardin, & sur les g. h. vn quart 
nvf allasmes au feu, Mons*. le gouu. le mit a 
son ordinaire; i’y chanté l’vt queant laxis 
apres le feu mis, le benedictvf. & l’oraison de 
St. Iean; le domine salut fac regé, & l’orai- 
son du roy, le tout sans surplis, nv{ en retour- 
nasmes a 10. h. 

Ce moys M*. Abraham auec deux de ses 
gendres s’en alla p’. la 1°. fois a la pesche des 
loups marins, il en prit la veuille de la St. 
Iean 42. a l’Isle rouge proche de Tadssac 
dont il fit 6. bariques d’huile 

Ité Noel auec ses gens s’en alla aux 3. riu. 
a Intétion de faire la guerre, ce ne fut qu’vne 
grotesque qui aboutit a rien, sinon a manger 
du pain & des pois du fort des 3. riu. les yro- 
quois captifs virent tout cela qui eurent bien 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 93 


and as many at the Ursulines’; the men alone, 
in less number, at the warehouse. 

I doubted whether we ought not to have 
given Wreaths to those who bore the canopy, 
and others. 

On the 12th came the news brought by 
the Algonquains and Hurons who started, as 
early as last Autumn, to winter here; the 
original accounts will be found in the Ar- 
chives, ¢ztu/o hurons. Leger, a young Lad, 
arrived at the same time, and remained at 
Montreal, after having lived about a year 
among the Hurons. | 

On the 23rd, the bonfire took place as usual; 
I was present, as were father le Jeune and 
Father greslon. Monsieur the governor came 
for me, about 8% o’clock. We went to walk 
in his Garden, and, about a quarter past 9, 
we went to the fire. Monsieur the governor 
set it, as was his wont; after the fire was 
started, I sang the ut gueant laxis, the benedic- 
tus, and St. John’s prayer; the domine salvum 
fac regem, and the prayer for the king,—all 
without surplice. We returned at 10 o’clock. 

This month, Master Abraham,” with two 
of his sons-in-law, went away for the Ist time 
to the seal-fishery; he took, on the eve of St. 
John’s day, 42 at Isle rouge, near Tadousac; 
from which he made 6 casks of oil. 

Item, Noel with his people went away to 3 
rivers, with the Intention of making war; it 
was only a farce, which ended in nothing, 
except eating bread and peas at the fort of 3 
rivers. The captive yroquois saw all that, 


News from the 
flurons. 


St. John’s bonfire. 


Seal-fishery. 


War of the Algon- 
guains. 


Nouuelles reres, de 
Srance. 


Entreprises des 
yroguots 


baptesme de Huron 


depart du p. Druil- 
letes pr. la guerre. 


Tempeste gui abast 
les mays. 


prieres extraordat- 
naires, 


procession 


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


suiet de s’en moquer: Noel & ses gens estant 
partis d’icy le 21. de Iuin retournerent le 3. 
de Iuillet. 


1648. IUILLET 


le 4. arriuerent les 1°*. nouuelles de france 
par les Montagnes de Sillery qui auoient 
donné iusques a Gaspé. 

Tout ce moys de [uillet arriuerent plusieurs 
choses aux 3. riu. qui concernoient les yro- 
quois & se trouueront dans les 1'** aux Archi- 
ues ou dans la relaon, entr’autres la prise de 
deux de nos frangois pierre le febure, & vn 
nepueu de M. de la poterie, Ité de quelques 
Hurons, la tuerie de quelques autres, & de 
deux Yroquois les nouuelles nvf en furent 
apportées le 16. par vne Chaloupe qui repar- 
tit le 17. auec vn grand bateau. 

Ce mesme 17. fut baptizé Pierre Onaatichiae 
dit Sansoucy Huron. 

Le 18. partirent les Sauuages p’. retourner 
a la guerre, le p. Druilletes alla auec eux. 

le soir du 17. il fit icy vn grain de vent auec 
pluye & tonnerre & le vent si furieux, qu’il © | 
ne semble pas pouuoir plvf, le may du fort & 
du magazin en tomba; on n’en sentit rien a 
Sillery mais seulement de la pluye. 

le 19. I’intime la procession; & les 40. heu- 
res aux deux maisons religieuses p*. employer 
toute la sepmaine en saincteté. 

la procession se fit vt in rituali tempore 
belli. 1°. aux Vrsul*’. 2°. a l’hospital; liberi 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 95 


and had good reason to make sport of it. Noel 
and his people, having left here on the 21st 
of June, returned on the 3rd of July. 


1648, JULY. 


On the 4th arrived the 1st news from france, ss¢ News from 
through the Montagnais of Sillery, who had france. 
gone as far as Gaspé. | 

During this whole month of July, several Feats of the yroquots. 
events occurred at 3 rivers which concerned 
the yroquois, and will be found in the letters 
among the Archives or in the relation,— 
among others, the capture of two of our french- 
men, pierre le febvre,* andanephew of Mon- 
sieur de la poterie. Jtem, of some Hurons; 
the slaughter of some others, and of two 
Yroquois. The news was brought to us, on 
the 16th, by a Shallop, which left again on 
the 17th, with a great boat. 

On this same 17th, Pierre Onaatichiae—a Baptism of a Huron. 
Huron, called ‘‘ Sansoucy ’’— was baptized. 49 

On the 18th, the Savages left, to return to Departure of father 
war; father Druilletes went with them. Druitletes for the 

On the evening of the 17th, there was a oy, Bure a pros- 
squall of wind here, with rain and thunder, srates the may-poles. 
and the wind so furious that, it seemed, it 
could hardly be stronger. The may-poles at 
the fort and the warehouse fell; nothing of 
this was felt at Sillery, but only rain. 

On the 19th, I announced the procession  Sfecial prayers. 
and the 4o hours’ devotion at the two reli- 
gious houses,— that the entire week might be 
spent in holiness. 

The procession took place ut im ritual Procession. 


go. heures. 


‘arriuée des hurons. 
du p. bressany. 


Lroqguois pris, tués 


depart pr. les 3. riu. 


retour du p. lyonne. 


St. Ignace 


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


- factti é Coadiut*. ire post crucé in habitu suo 


ordinario. 

les 40. h. commécerent & l’hospital le lundy 
par vne Messe solemnelle sur les 7. heures ofi 
le St. Sacrement fut exposé a la Communion, 
& dura exposé iusques au Salut a 7. h. du 
soir; & le 2" & 3°. Iour il fut exposé a 5. h. 
du matin iusques a 7. h. du soir le 1°. Iour au 
salut, le salut ordin. du St. Sacremt. le 2, 
Iour le misere[re] & Tanti ergo; & le 3°. 
les litanies du nom de Iesv{ de Tanti ergo 
auec plusieurs Oraisons Conuenables au temps 
& a la saison. 

le Ieudy on commenga le mesme aux Vrsul*. 
mais le 22. au Commencemt. de la Messe arri- 
ua le p. bressany qui apporta les 1" des 
Hurons, & la nouuelle de leur rencontre auec 
les yroquois, dont ils tuerent que prirent 30. 
Ou 35. 

les Hurons estant descendus au nombre de 
250. le p. le Ieune & moy (nullo alio Consul- 
tore presente) nvf resolusmes le depart p*. 
les Hurons des pp. Lalement, Daran, & gres- 
lon; de node f. Noircler, & du petit louys, & 
on se disposa p*. aller aux 3. riu. le 24. de 
Iuillet, nv{ en retournasmes le g. d’Aoust. 

le dernier du moys retourna le p. lyonne de 
sa mission de Tadoussac.—la feste se fit aux 
Vrsul®*. cde l’an passé aux Hospit*. excepté 
qu’a faute de Musiciens & de prestre, les reli- 
gieuses seules chanterent Vespres; & a faute 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 97 


tempore belli. ist, tothe Ursulines; 2nd, to the 
hospital: “éberum factum est Coadjutoribus tre 
post crucem, in habitu suo ordinarto. 

The 40 hours’ devotion began at the hos- 
pital on monday, with a solemn Mass about 7 
o’clock, when the Blessed Sacrament was 
exposed at the Communion, and remained 
exposed until the Benediction at 7 o’clock in 
the evening; and, on the 2nd and 3rd Days, 
it was exposed from 5 o’clock in the morning 
until 7 o’clock in the evening. On the ist 
Day, for benediction, the ordinary benedic- 
tion with the Blessed Sacrament; on the 2nd 
Day, the mzserere and Tantum ergo; and, on 
the 3rd, the litany of the name of Jesus, and 
the Zantum ergo, with several Prayers Appro- 
priate to the circumstances and the season. 

On Thursday, we began the same at the 
Ursulines’; but on the 22nd, at the Beginning 
of the Mass, arrived father bressany, who 
brought letters from the Hurons, and the 
news of their encounter with the yroquois, of 
whom they killed or captured 30 or 35. 

The Hurons having come down, to the 
number of 250, father le Jeune and I (nudllo alio 
Consultore presente) resolved upon the depar- 
ture for the Hurons of fathers Lalement, 
Daran, and greslon, of our brother Noircler 
and the little louys; and we made ready for 
going to 3 rivers on the 24th of July. We 
returned thence on the oth of August. 

On the last of the month, father lyonne 
returned from his mission at Tadoussac. The 
feast occurred at the Ursulines’, the same 


go hours. 


Arrival of the 
hurons, and of 
father bressany. 


Lroqguots captured, 
killed. 


Departure for 
3 rtVers. 


Return of father 
lyonne. 


St. Ignatius. 


Depart des francois 
des 3. riu. auec les 
Hurons. 


Pesche 


de Sansoucy Huron. 


Arriuée des 
nouuelles de france 


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 32 


de prestre on ne dit point de messe a la 
paroisse mais seulem‘. aux Vrsul®. 


AOUST. 1648. 


le 6. partirent des 3. riu. les 50. ou 60. 
Canots hurons qui embarquerent 26. frang¢ois 
dont les noms se trouueront dans les Archiues 
au Catalogue anniiel des maisons: 5. peres vn 
frere 3. Enfans, 9. trauaillans, & 8. soldats 
outre 4. qu’on deuoit prendre a Montreal; vne 
genisse, & vne petite piece de Canon. 

En ce mesme temps finit la pesche, celle du 
saulmon finit 15. Iours auparauant dont on 
salla 9. barils, & en mangeat-on ou distribua 
bien autant; a celle du saulmon succeda celle 
de l’esturgeon dont on en prit 27. fort grands 
& gros; & le Iour de St. Laurent on commenga 
d’aller a l’anguille. 

Au retour des 3. riu. le 9g. d’Aoust entraa: 
nde seruice Pierre homiaatichiai dit Sansoucy, 
lequel le lendemain me donna 21. liure pesant 
de Castor a cause que i’estois son Pere qui 
furent donnés au magazin. & estimés. 63T1. en 
argent, qui nvf furent affectés, & partant nvf 
sommes redeuables audit Sansoucy des sus- 
dites 63. 

le 14. la nuit du 13. au 14. le p. dequen arri- 
ua de Tadousac auec vn Chirurgien nommé 
belanger qui portoit les lettres du roy, pour 
le changemt. de gouuerneur, & tout ensemble 
les lettres apportées par 1’Admiral arriué a 
Tadousac le 8. 


om 


1647-48] /OURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 99 


as last year; at the Hospital nuns’, with the 
exception that for lack of Musicians and a 
priest, the nuns alone sang Vespers; and, for 
want of a priest, no mass was said at the 
parish church, but only at the Ursulines’. 


AUGUST, 1648. 


On the 6th, the 50 or 60 huron Canoes 
started from 3 rivers, which took on board 26 
frenchmen, whose names will be found in the 
Archives in the annual Catalogue of houses,— 
5 fathers, one brother, 3 Boys, 9 workmen, 
and 8 soldiers,—besides 4 that were to be 
taken at Montreal; a heifer and a small piece 
of Cannon. 

At this same time, the fishery ceased. That 
for salmon ended 15 Days before; of this fish 
they salted 9 kegs, and ate or distributed fully 
as many. The salmon-fishery was followed 
by that for sturgeon, of which they took 27, 
very large and fat; and, on the Day of St. 
Lawrence, they began to take eels. 

At the return from 3 rivers, on the gth of 
August, there entered our service Pierre 
honaatichiai, called ‘‘Sansoucy.’’ On the 
next day, he gave me 21 pounds’ weight of 
Beaver, because I was his Father; this was 
given to the warehouse and valued at 63 livres 
in silver, which were applied to us; and 
consequently we are accountable to the said 
Sansoucy for the aforesaid 63 livres. 

In the night between the 13th and 14th, 
father dequen arrived from ‘Tadousac with 
a Surgeon named belanger, who bore the 


Departure of the 
Srench from 3 
rivers, with the 
Hurons. 


Fishertes. 


Of Sansoucy, the 
Huron. 


pgs 


Arrival of the news 
Jrom france. 


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


Procession de le 15 se fit la procession cde l’an passé, 
danas excepté que ce fut nde f. Nicolas en Surplis 
qui porta la croix; les sauuages n’estoient 
pas nombre suffisant p'. faire corps, & ainsy 
ce qu'il y en auoit alla derriere; il y auoit 
deux Enfans en Surplis auec Chandeliers 
aux deux costés de celuy qui portoit la née 
Dame. 
le mesme lour le p. dequé repartit pour 
Tadousac; & on enuoya vn Canot a M. d’Ail- 
leboust. 
bentamin. beniamin vient des Vrsulines of il estoit 
chez nvf pour nvf seruir. 
Changemt. de le 20. Iour de St. bernard M. d’atlleboust 
inland moiiilla deuant Quebek & fut receu Gouuer- 
neur le factii de la Ceremonie s’en trouuera 
dans les Archiues. 

& arriuée du rer. le Iour d’auparauant arriuerent les 3. reli- 

Vaisseau. gieuses Hospitalieres, auec le p. Vimont qui 
retournoit de france, & vn gargon nommé 
Colivet. Ité vn nommé Pierre Oliueau Meus- 
nier on enuoyé pour tel; & Pierre biron qui 
fut eschangé auec Cartron qui estoit venu p'. 
M*. Macar. 

Voyage aux 3. riu. Le 24. partit vne chaloupe p*. les 3. riu. & 
Montreal, portoit les 1'**, & les ordres dans 
laquelle fut mis Daniel Cartron p*. aller seruir 
aux 3. riu. 

le Iour d’auparauant retourne la barque ~ 
qui ramena le petit Iean des 3. riu. qui fut — 
mis a Sillery. 4 


1647-48] /OURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 101 


letters from the king, respecting the change 
of governors; and all the letters brought by 
the Admiral arrived at Tadousac on the 8th. 

On the 15th the procession occurred,—like Procession for the 
last year’s, except that our brother Nicolas, Assumption. 
in Surplice, was the one who bore the cross. 

The savages were not in sufficient number to 
form in a body, and thus what there were 
of them went behind. There were two 
Surpliced Boys, with Candlesticks, on either 
side of him who bore the image of our Lady. 

On the same Day father dequen started 
again for Tadousac, and a Canoe was sent to 
Monsieur d’ Ailleboust. 

Benjamin comes from the Ursulines’, where Benjamin. 
he was, to our house, to serve us. 

On the 2oth, the Day of St. bernard, Change of govern- 
Monsieur ad ailleboust anchored before Quebek, git 
and was received as Governor: the account of 
the Ceremony will be found in the Archives. 

On the Day before, the 3 Hospital nuns™ and arrival of the 

arrived with father Vimont, who was return- 1st Vessel. 
ing from france, and a lad named Colivet. 
Item, a certain Pierre Oliveau, a Miller,—or 
sent as such,—and Pierre biron, who was 
exchanged with Cartron, who had come for 
Monsieur Macar. 

On the 24th, a shallop left for 3 rivers and /ourney to 3 rivers. 
Montreal, which bore the letters and orders; 
and Daniel Cartron was placed in the vessel 
to go and serve at 3 rivers. 

On the Day before, the bark returned and 
brought back from 3 rivers the little Jean, 
who was employed at Sillery. 


ae basile 


St. Augustin. 


Marie Magdel. 


Trazté. 


p. le Teune a Sillery 


Executeur de Lustice. 


102 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 32 


le 26. entrerent a nde seruice basile & son 
nepueu. 

le iour de St. Augustin ie dis la messe aux 
Vrsul®. le p. Vimont a 1’Hospital, ofi le St. 
Sacrem'. estoit exposé a raison des Indul- 
gences, qui n’ayant pas est¢é publiées a la paroisse 
Jurent affigées a l’ Arbre ou May public par 
M. de St. Sauueur (dit-on) sans m’en parler 
& hoc male. le p. Vimont prescha le 
matin publiquemt. a l’hospital, & le soir en 
particulier aux Vrsul*. il n’y eut point de 
saluts. 

le 29. repartit la barque p*. aller querir le 
reste des Castors aux 3. riu. & elle retourna 
le 6. de sept. la estoit mademoys. de la pote- 
rie &c & entr’autres Marie Magdelaine qui 
fut mise en pension chez barbe hybou, le 7. 
du mesme moys. 

la Traite cette année de Tadousac montoit 
a quarante mille liures de profit; & en tout 
enuiron a 250000!1. il y auoit 22400i1. pesant 
p’. le moins & plvf de 500. orignaux. 


1648 SEPTEMBRE 


le 3. le p. le Jeune vaa Sillery prendre la 
charge de la maison au retour des sauuages 
de leur voyage aux Canots. 

le 13. arriua M. de Tilly & Mons*. Vignar 
prestre des Vrsul®*. dans vne chaloupe. 

Enuiron ce temps fut amené de montreal 
vn tambour Conuictus crimine pessimo, a la 
mort duquel s’opposerent nos Peres qui 


a 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 1038 


On the 26th, basile and his nephew entered 
our service. 

On the day of St. Augustine I said mass at 
the Ursulines’, and father Vimont at the Hos- 
pital, where the Blessed Sacrament was ex- 
posed on account of the Indulgences. ‘These, 
not having deen published at the parish church, 
were posted on the public Tree or May-pole by 
Monsieur de St. Sauveur (they say), without 
speaking of the matter to me; et hoc male. 
Father Vimont preached in the morning at the 
hospital, publicly; and at evening in private at 
the Ursulines’. There were no benedictions. 

On the 2gth, the bark left again in order to 
go and get the remainder of the Beavers at 3 
rivers; and it returned on the 6th of septem- 
ber. There was mademoyselle de la poterie, 
etc.,— and, among others, Marie Magdelaine, 
who was placed at board with barbe hybou,” 
on the 7th of the same month. 

The Tadousac Trade this year amounted to 
forty thousand livres’ profit, and, in all, to 
about 250,000 livres. There were at least 
22,400 livres’ weight, and more than 500 moose. 


1648, SEPTEMBER. 


On the 3rd, father le Jeune goes to Sillery 
to take charge of the house, at the return of 
the savages from their journey in the Canoes. 

On the 13th, Monsieur de Tilly and Mon- 
sieur Vignar, the priest of the Ursulines, 
arrived in a shallop. 

About this time, there was brought from 
montreal a drummer, Convictus crimine pessimo, 


Of baszle. 


St. Augustine. 


Marie Magdelaine. 


Trade. 


Father le Jeune at 
Sillery. 


Executioner of 
Justice. 


Arrtiuée des 
Vatsseauxr. 


depart du rer. 
vaisseau. 


depart du p. lyonne 
du p. degué de Marie 
Magdelaine 


Prisonnters 


depart des derniers 
Vatsseaux 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


estoient a Montreal sed occulte; il fut done 
renuoyé icy & mis dans la prison: on luy pro- 
posa p*. se sauuer au moins des galeres d’ac- 
cepter l’office d’executeur de Iustice il 1’accepta, 
mais on mit son proces auparauant en estat, 
& puis en luy commua la sentence. 

le 20. arriua la nde Dame, & le 21. le 
St. Sauueur, & le Phlibot qui apportoit la de- 
charge de la fregate du Compte d’oignon; 
& ce mesme 21. la dernier Chaloupe des 
3. Saat 

le 23. repartit l’Admiral Commandé par 
Mons’. de Montmagny, ot estoit Mons'. 
godefroy Controoleur g™!, & Admiral au 
retour; & le p. Martin lyonne. & auec luy le 
Phlibot. 

le 29. partit vne Chaloupe p*. les 3. riu. of 
se mit le p. dequen. 

le 30. partit la barque de Montreal & dans 
icelle Marie Magdelaine. & le mesme Iour 
retourna le phlibot de Tadousac 


OCTOBRE. 


Des trois yroquois eschapés de 6. qui estoient 
prisonniers aux 3. riu. l’vn nommé le berger 
reuint & ramena Pierre le febure captif 
aux yroquois: l’histoire & sa suite se voira 
ailleurs. 

le 22. partirent les deux derniers vaisseaux, 
le nde dame, & le St. Sauueur dans lequel 
estoit née f. Liegeois; & le 28. le p. buteux & 
tous ceux des 3. riu. s’en retournerent. 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 105 


whose death our Fathers who were at Mont- 
real opposed, sed occulte; he was then sent hith- 
er and put in the prison. It was proposed to 
him, so that he might at least escape the galleys, 
to accept the office of executioner of Justice; he 
accepted it, but his trial was first disposed of, 
and then his sentence was commuted. 

On the 2oth, the zostre Dame arrived; on the 
21st, the St. Sauveur and the Flyboat, which 
brought the cargo of Count d’oignon’s frigate; 
and, on this same 2!Ist, arrived the last Shal- 
lop from 3 rivers. 

On the 23rd, the Admiral sailed again, Com- 
manded by Monsieur de Montmagny; on 
board were Monsieur godefroy,— Controller- 
general, and Admiral for the return,—and fa- 
ther Martin lyonne; and with it the Flyboat. 

On the 29th, a Shallop started for 3 rivers, 
and father dequen went on board. 

On the 30th, the Montreal bark sailed, and 
in it Marie Magdelaine; and on the same 
Day the flyboat returned from Tadousac. 


OCTOBER. 


Of the three yroquois who escaped on the 
6th, who were captives at 3 rivers, the one 
named le berger came back, and brought with 
him Pierre le febvre, a captive among the 
yroquois: the story and its continuation will 
appear elsewhere. 

On the 22nd, the last two vessels sailed, — 
the nostre dame and the St. Sauveur, in which 
was our brother Liegeois; and, on the 28th, fa- 
ther buteux and all those from 3 rivers returned. 


Arrival of the 
vessels. 


Departure of the 1st 
vessel, 


Departure of father 
lyonne, father de- 
guen, and Marie 

Magdelaine. 


Captives. 


Departure of the 
last vessels. 


Lubslé Coméce. 


Anguilles 


bastiment 


Neige 
Voyage des Hurons. 


Sauuages. 


S4, fr. xauter. 


On a deputs mandé 

gu'il y auott Indul- 

gece ala St. Xauier. 
tta est. 


Conception. 


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 32 


le 25. Commenga le Iubilé, le Dimache on 
fit procession apres vespres a l’hospital; & le 
Iour de St. Simon & St. Iude les sauuages 
vinrent icy en Procession. le Iour dela Tous- 
saincts— Procession aux Vrsul**. & le Diman- 
che. 15°. du Iubilé pour la closture d’iceluy 
Procession generale c’est a dire a toutes les 
deux maisons religieuses. 

Il y eut cette année peu d’anguille & bien 
de la disposition a la misere 

Cette année fut faite la moitiée du grand 
Corps de logis, & le fondement de la Caue. 


1648. NOUEMBRE 


la neige Commence a demeure le 18. 

deux Hurons viennent des 3. riu. le 24. & 
s’en retournent le 27. ou 28. 

les Sauuages ce moys se retirerent de Sil- 
lery, & firent vn fort dans le bois au bout de 
leurs deserts. 


DECEMBRE. 


A la St. Xauier ny a la Conception on ne 
tira point au fort; le p. Vimon publia a la I°. 
Messe l’Indulgence de St. Xauier, non expedit 
publicari a cause de 1’Indulgéce prochaine de 
la Conception, qui é feste; & les Indulgéces 
publiées vn Iour ouurier, n’estant point gar- 
dées rend les choses froides & peu estimées. 
le Tout se passe cde les années precedentes la 


veuille de la Conception salut, & le Iour a | 


l’issue de Vespres les litaies en Musique 


a 


1647-48] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 107 


On the 25th, the Jubilee Began; on Sunday 
we made a procession, after vespers, to the 
hospital; and on the Day of St. Simon and 
St. Jude the savages came here in Procession. 
On All Saints’ Day, a Procession to the 
Ursulines’; and on the Sunday, which was the 
15th day of the Jubilee, for the close of the 
same, a general Procession,—that is to say, 
to both the religious houses. 

There were few eels this year, and there 
was a great tendency to destitution. 

This year the half of the great main Build- 
ing was finished, and the foundation of the 
Cellar. 


1648, NOVEMBER. 


The snow Begins on the 18th. 

Two Hurons come from 3 rivers on the 
24th, and return on the 27th or 28th. 

The Savages withdrew from Sillery this 
month, and made a fort in the woods at the 
end of their clearings. 


DECEMBER. 


No salute was fired at the fort, either at 
the feast of St. Xavier, or at that of 
the Immaculate Conception. Father Vimon 
published at the 1st Mass the Indulgence of St. 
Xavier; non expedit publicari, because of the 
impending Indulgence for the Immaculate 
Conception, which is a festival; and, the Indul- 
gences published on a Workday, not being 
observed, become unimportant and of little 
value. Everything takes place as in the 
former years,— benediction on the eve of the 


Jubilee Begins. 


Eels. 


Building. 


Snow. 


Journey of the 
Hurons. 


Savages. 


St. francis xavier. 


Word has since been 
sent, that there was 
Indulgence for the 
Jeast of St. Xavier: 
ita est. 


Immaculate Con- 
ception. 


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou.82 


Mission a beaufort le p. Vimont alla en mission a beauport 
l’espace de 8. Iours la sepmaine des Ieusnes: 
il y auoit depuis le Sault allant en bas plvf de 
50. hdes portans armes. 

Perdrix blanches Il y eut cette année vne quantité prodigieuse 
de perdrix blanches. on en auoit tué a beau- 
port plvf de 1200. depuis vn moys. 

Matines & Messe de 1amesse de minuict fut precedée des mati- 
Minutct nes qui furent dites pour la 1°. fois & bien: il 
y eut grand monde & toute 1’ Eglise regorgeoit 
des le commencem't. de Matines qui com- 
mencerent a 10. heures, on sonna le dernier 
vn quart d’heure deuant, & on finit vn quart 
deuant Minuict; & ce quart fut employé heu- 
reusement a vn petit entretien qui ne s’estant 
fait que par hasar, fit voir que c’estoit vne 
chose a faire auec dessein. on chantales 3°. 
psalmes des Nocturnes en faux-bourdon; & 
les responds du dernier Nocturne en musique: 
en 1’Eleuaon musique auec violes & pendant 
les communions qui se firent par vn autre 
prestre, pendant que celuy qui auoit dit la 
grande messe, disoit vn 2°. Messe a voix basse; 
tout cela é bien comme cela. on n’eut point 

besoin de feu dans 1’ Eglise. 
on ne fut point aux Eglises les festes de 

Noel. 


1647-48] /OURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 109 


Immaculate Conception; and on the Day, at 
the close of Vespers, the litany with Music. 

Father Vimont went on a mission to beau- 
port for the space of 8 Days in the week of 
Fasts; from the Sault downward, there were 
more than 50 men bearing arms. 

There was a prodigious abundance of white 
partridges this year; more than 1,200 had 
been killed at beauport within a month. 

The midnight mass was preceded by matins, 
which were said for the 1st time, and well; 
there was a great concourse, and the whole 
Church overflowed even from the commence- 
ment of Matins, which began at 10 o’clock. 
The last bell was rung a quarter of an hour 
before, and we ended a quarter before Mid- 
night; and this quarter was happily spent in 
a little address which, though occurring only 
by chance, showed that it was athing to be done 
purposely. We sang the 3 psalms of the Noc- 
turns in faux-bourdon, and the responses of 
the last Nocturn with music; at the Eleva- 
tion, music with viols,—and so during the 
communions, which were administered by 
another priest,, while the one who had said 
high mass was saying a 2nd Mass in a low 
tone. All that is well, done thus. We had 
no need of fire in the Church. 

We were not in the Churches at the Christ- 
mas feasts. 


Mission at beauport. 


White Partridges. 


Matins and Mid- 
night Mass. 


- “he te oi oes ‘i i 


5S Tal nee per 


hy ites eae Oh BS Wed Weis ath 
imaige: 


bie vat i 
SHRINE C2 ¢ 


Ay 


Se ' 
sat Bt aed thong 
A ea om A ad 


* ah) uh Bid aus, 


LXVI 


RELATION OF 1647-48 


PaRIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1649 


SOURCE: We follow a copy of the original Cramoisy, in 
Lenox Library. 

Owing to its length, we publish herewith but eight chapters 
of Part 1.; the document will be concluded in Volume XXXIII. 


is ri 


eel : 


: oe MED VWOITA.LA + 


mi: 

ht «'t Asal} ; ‘ ~ { f fi xen’ VA ‘3 shite vi 
~rinndil zene 

' . : a) 
ALIANT NE PSU MED Oe a te dvperat oH a patent hag 


v 


Ee MERE T meee amp oe 


RE LATION 


DE CE QVIS'EST PAS SSE’ 
DE PLVSREMARQVABLE 
és Miflions des Peres de la 
Compagnie de IEsys, 

EN LAS 
NOVVELLE FRANCE, 
fh ANNEES 1647. & 1648. 


Enuoyée auR. P.Prouincial de la Prouince 
de France. 


Par le Supericur des M iftions dels mefine ne 
hie aes 


A P A R 1: $; 
S#easTIEN Cra eer AL 
. imprimeur ordinaire du Roys. 

Cher bc dela Reyne Regente,. ee le 


tae ey ts : 
6 eee iS 
4 Gasniti Cc RAMOIST. Bi Bove : 


s M. Dp C. 7 T¥ iN 4 omg dias 
fs c tg R 171 ia YD PR a: Ree oe 


ee 


ou 


Rie EA PON 


OF WHAT OCCURRED 


MOST REMARKABLE 
in the Missions of the Fathers 
of the Society of JESUS, 
IN 
NEW FRANCE, 
IN THE YEARS 1647 AND 1648. 


Sent to the Reverend Father Provincial of 
the Province of France. 


By the Superior of the Missions of the same 


Society. 
PA Rol Ss, 
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY,\ |. 

Print. \ Printer in ordinary to the King, suas roy ae 

5 ques, at the 
ed bs and to the Queen Regent, 

rT Peg ia Sign of the 

Storks. 
GABRIEL CRAMOISY. 


M. DC. XLIX. 
BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Table des Chapitres contenvs en ce Liure. 


ELATION de ce qui s’eft pafsé en la Nouuelle 
France Jur le grand Fleuue de Saint Laurent, 
en l'année mil fix cens quarante-huit. page 1 


CuHap. 1. De larriuée des vaiffeaux. oe: eae 
II. De ce gui s'eft pafsé entre les Francois & les 
Sauuages leurs alliez, & les Hiroquots. 12 
Ill. De l’arriuée des Hurons, & de la deffaite i 
quelques Hiroquots. ‘ 34 
IV. De quelques bonnes aétions & ve brcliaes romp 
Sentimens des Sauuages Chreftiens. : . Ae 
V. Continuation du mefme Sujet. ; + AOE 
VI. De quelques autres bonnes aétions des Sau- 
uages. : 79 
VII. De l’hyuernement ys Pere Gabriel Druilletes 
auec les Sauuages. ; ‘ ‘ : oe 
VIII. Des peuples nommez les Attiguamegues. Mee 


IX. De la Miffion de Sainte Croix 4 Tadouffac. . 130 
X. Diuerfes chofes qui n'ont ph eftre rapportées 
Sous les Chapitres precedens. , . 144 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 


117 


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book. 


ELATION of what occurred in New France, 
on the great River Saint Lawrence, in the 
year one thousand six hundred and forty- 


eight. . ; : .) page % 
CuHap. I. Of the arrival of the ships. page 4 
II. Of what passed between the French and the 
Savages, their allies, and the Hiroquots. 12 
III. Of the arrival of the Hurons, and of the 
defeat of some Hiroquots. a, SA 
IV. Of some good actions and some pare senti- 
ments of the Christian Savages. 47 
V. Continuation of the same subject. 61 
VI. Of some other good actions of the Savages. 79 
VII. Of the wintering of Father Gabriel Druil- 
letes with the Savages. - 94 
VIII. Of the tribes called the pri. one « Tig 
IX. Of the Mission of the Holy Cross at Tadous- 
DEE) js j F ; , . 130 
X. Various matters that could not be related in the 
foregoing Chapters. . 144 


1 
my 


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 32 


ELATION de ce qui s'eft pafsé en la Miffion 
R des Peres de la Compagnie de IESVS aux 
Hurons Pays de la Nouuelle France, és années 
1647. & 1648. ‘ . page 
CHAP. I. Situation du Pays des Kiudioni de leurs 
alliez, & de leurs ennemts. 
Il. De leftat general de la Miffion. 


III. De noftre maifon de Sainte Marie. . pag. 
IV. De diuerfes deffaites de nos Hurons par leurs 
ennemts. 


V. Dela Prouidence de Diex Jur vba Che fins 
pris ou tuez par les ennemis. 
VI. Des Bapte/mes de quelques Hievbounls pris en 


guerre par les Hurons. PPM oe 
VII. Des pour-parlers de paix entre les Hurons & 
Onnontaeronnons. 


VIII. Dvn Ambaffade des Hivons a Andafoe. 

IX. De lauancement du Chriftianifme dans les 
Miffions Hurones. ; 4 

X. Des Miffions Algonquines. 

XI. Bons fentimens de quelques Chreftiens. ; 

XII. Des principales Superftitids qu’ayent les 
Hlurons dans leur infidelité, & premierement 
leur fentiment touchant les fonges. ; 

XIII. Sentiment des Hurons touchant leurs ma- 
ladies. 

XIV. D’une ies de Sort dons les abide fe 
Seruent pour attirer le bon-heur. - page 


108 i 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 


119 


ELATION of what occurred in the Mission of 

R the Fathers of the Society of JESUS tin the 

Huron Country, in New France, in the years 

1647 and 1648. : = . page 

CuHaP. I. Situation of the Country of the Hurons; 
of their allies, and of their enemies. 

II. Of the general state of the Mission. P 

III. Of our house of Sainte Marie. . page 


IV. Of various defeats of our Hurons by their 
enemies. 


V. Of God’s Providence ey Ts some Christions 
captured or killed by the enemtes. 

VI. Of the Baptisms of some Hiroquois taken in 
war by the Hurons. . . page 

VII. Of the negotiations for lees between the 
Hurons and the Onnontaeronnons. 

VIII. Of an Embassy of the Hurons to A zeta 

IX. Of the progress of Christianity in the Huron 
Missions. ‘ ‘ , 

X. Of the Algonquin Mistone 

XI. Good sentiments of some Christians. 

XII. Of the chief superstitions of the Hurons in 
their infidelity; and, in the first place, their 
opinions respecting dreams. 

XIII. Opinions of the Hurons regarding their ane 
eases. 

XIV. Ofa Saale: of ee which the ariis use 
to bring good fortune. , . page 


108. 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 82 


XV. Sentiment qu’ont les Hurons des maladies 
gu'tls croyent venir par fortilege. De leurs 


Deuins & Magiciens. ‘ ; 
XVI. Quelle connoiffance auotent les Hurons in- 
fideles de la Diuinité. ; - page 


XVII. Du meurtre d'un Francois maffacré par les 
Hurons, & de la iuftice qui en a efté faite. 


» 12 a 


e I 20 4 , 


117 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 121 


XV. Opinion of the Hurons regarding diseases 
which they consider to be caused by witchcraft. 


Of their Soothsayers and Magicians. . 112 
XVI. What knowledge the pagan Hurons had of 
the Divinity. . . page 117 


XVII. Of the murder of a poy killed by 
the Hurons, and of the reparation that was 
made therefor. . : ’ . 120 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 32 


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy. 


AR grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis a 
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY Marchand Libraire 
Iuré en 1’ Vniuerfité de Paris, & Imprimeur ordi- 
naire du Roy & de la Reyne Regente, Bourgeois & 
ancien Efcheuin de cette Ville de Paris, d’imprimer 
ou faire imprimer vn Liure intitulé, Relation de ce 
qui s eft pafsé de plus remarquable és Mifsions des Peres 
de la Compagnie de IESVS, en la Nouuelle France, és 
années 1647. & 1648. enuopée au R. P. Prouincial de la 
Prouince de France, par le Superteur des Mifsions de la 
mefme Compagnie. Et ce, pendant le temps & efpace 
de dix années confecutiues, auec deffenfes 4 tous 
Libraires & Imprimeurs d’imprimer ou faire imprimer 
ledit Liure, fous pretexte de déguifement ou change- 
ment qu’ils y pourroient faire, 4 peine de confifca- 
tion & de l’amende portée par ledit Priuilege. Donné 
4 Paris en Decembre 1648. 
Par le Roy en fon Confeil, 
CRAMOISY. 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 128 


Extract from the Royal License. 


Y grace and Privilege of the King, permission 
B is granted to SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Book- 
seller under Oath in the University of Paris 
and Printer in ordinary to the King and to the Queen 
Regent, Burgess and ex-Alderman of this City of 
Paris, to print or to have printed a Book entitled: 
Relation de ce qui s'est passé de plus remarquable és Mis- 
sions des Peres de la Compagnie de JESUS, en la Nouvelle 
France, és années 1647. et 1648. envoyée au R. P. Pro- 
vinctal de la Province de France, par le Superteur des 
Missions de la mesme Compagnie. And this during the 
time and space of ten consecutive years, prohibiting 
all Booksellers and Printers from printing or causing 
to be printed the said Book, under pretext of dis- 
guise or change that they might make therein, on 
pain of confiscation and of the fine provided by the 

said License. Given at Paris, in December, 1648. 

By the King in Council, 
CRAMOISY. 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Permiffion du R. P. Prouincial. 


OVS Eftienne Charlet Prouincial de la Compa- 

N gnie de IESvs en la Prouince de France, 

auons accordé pour l’aduenir au fleur Seba- 

{tien Cramoify Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordi- 

naire du Roy & de la Reyne Regente, Bourgeois & 

ancien Efcheuin de cette Ville de Paris, 1’impreffion 

des Relations de la Nouuelle France. Fait 4 Paris 
ce 30. Decembre 1648. 

ESTIENNE CHARLET. 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 125 


Permission of the Reverend Father Provincial. 


of JESUS inthe Province of France, have 

granted for the future to sieur Sebastien 
Cramoisy, Bookseller, Printer in ordinary to the 
King and to the Queen Regent, and Burgess and ex- 
Alderman of this City of Paris, the printing of the 
Relations of New France. Done at Paris, this 30th 
of December, 1648. 


W” Estienne Charlet, Provincial of the Society 


ESTIENNE CHARLET. 


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


[1] Relation de ce qvi s’eft paffé en la Nov- 
velle France fvr le grand Fleuue de S. 
Laurent, en l’année mil fix 
cens quarante-huit. 


Av R. P. Eftienne Charlet Prouincial de la Compagnie de lesvs, 
en la Prouince de France. 


a al — ei is 


ON R. PERE, 
M Voicy noftre tribut annuel, vn petit plus 
gros que celuy de l’année paffée; auffi 1’a- 
uons-nous recueilly, non feulement des nations plus 
voifines, mais encores des plus éloignées. 

[2] Voftre R. verra dans ces deux Relations vn 
bon nombre de Sauuages baptizez; elle apprendra 
que la Foy iette fes racines bien auant dans le coeur 
des Croyans; que ceux qui l’ont embraffée commen- 
cent A faire corps, & a refifter aux Payens qui l’atta- 
quent, tantoft Aa la fourdine, tantoft 4 découuert; 
qu’elle a triomphé puiffamment dans les plus grands — 
dangers; que les Hiroquois ennemis communs des © 
Francois, & des Sauuages leurs alliez, ont plus perdu — 
que gagné cette année; que mal-gré leurs embufches, — 
& leurs armes, nous auons fait paffer du fecours — 
dans les contrées plus hautes; du moins croyons- — 
nous que quatre de nos Peres qui frappoient ala 
porte, depuis vn an ou deux, font entrez dans le pays — 
des Hurons auec vne vingtaine de Francois; que 
ceux qui nous crioient 4 l’ayde, & que nous ations 
fecouru autant que nous auons pfi, pour ne pas perdre 


a 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 127 


{1] Relation of what occurred in New France, 
on the great River St. Lawrence, in 
the year one thousand six 
hundred and forty-eight. 


To Reverend Father Estienne Charlet, Provincial of the Society 
of Jesus in the Province of France. 


Y REVEREND FATHER, 
Here is our annual tribute, which is some- 
what larger than that of last year; and, more- 
over, we have gathered it not only from among the 
neighboring nations, but also from those more 
distant. 

[2] Your Reverence will observe in these two Rela- 
tions that a goodly number of Savages have been 
baptized. You will find that the Faith strikes its 
roots very deep into the hearts of Believers; that 
those who have embraced it commence to form a 
body, and to resist the Pagans who attack it — some- 
times in secret, and sometimes openly; that it has 
been most triumphant in the greatest dangers; that 
the Hiroquois, the common enemies of the French 
and of the Savages who are their allies, have this 
year lost more than they have gained; that, in spite 
of their ambushes and weapons, we sent assistance 
to the upper countries,—at least, we think that four 
of our Fathers, who had been knocking at the door 
for a year or two, have entered the Huron country 
with a score of French; and that they who called to 
us for aid, and whom we have succored as much as 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 82 


vne fi belle occafion que celle qui fe prefentoit, atten- 
doient vn plus grand nombre d’ouuriers Euangeli- 
ques: c’eft la feule chofe qu’ils defirent & fouhaitent, 
& dont le manquement leur fera perdre les occafions 
de s’eftendre, auffi [3] bien qu’A nous icy bas, de 
continuer quelques Miffions que nous auions com- 
mencées. 

Voila M. R. P. fommairement ce que voftre R. 
verra plus en détail dans ces Relations, refte que ie 
prie tres-humblement voftre R. & tous nos Peres & 
Freres, de nous auoir pour recommandez A leurs 
faincts Sacrifices & prieres, &4 ce que nous foyons 
foigneux de nous maintenir, dans la fidele correfpon- 
dance de noftre part, aux deffeins adorables, de la 
Diuine Maje{té fur ces pauures peuples. 

De Voftre Reuerence, 
De Quebec ce 15. Seruiteur tres-humble & 
@’ Ogtobre 1648. tres-obeiffant en N.S. 
HIEROSME LALEMANT. 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 129 


we could, so as not to lose so excellent an opportu- 
nity as that which presented itself, expected a larger 
number of Gospel laborers. That is the only thing 
that they desire and need, and the want of it will 
cause them to lose opportunities of extending their 
work, and prevent [3] us who are down here from 
continuing some Missions that we had begun. 

Such, My Reverend Father, is a brief summary of 
what your Reverence will see in more detail in these 
Relations. All that remains for me to do is most 
humbly to entreat your Reverence, and all our Fa- 
thers and Brethren, to remember that we commend 
ourselves to their holy Sacrifices and prayers, that 
we may be careful, by faithful observance of our 
duty, to carry out the adorable designs of the Divine 
Majesty respecting these poor peoples. 

Your Reverence’s, 
From Quebec, this Very humble and very obe- 
15th of October,1648. dient servant in Our Lord, 
HIEROSME LALEMANT. 


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo.. 32 


[4] CHAPITRE I. 
DE L’ARRIUEE DES VAISSEAUX. 


L fait beau voir deux perfonnes de merite & de 
| vertu dans vn combat de deference, lors princi- 
palement qu’vne d’icelles met bas les interefts 

qui le porteroient 4 s’en difpenfer, s’il ne fortifioit 
fon courage par quelque penfée plus haute & plus 
releuée que celles du commun. Si toft que Mon- 
fieur le Cheualier de Montmagny, eut connoiffance 
des volontez du Roy, & de la Reyne, & qu’il euft 
appris par l’arriuée des vaiffeaux, que leurs Majeftez 
auoient pourueu Monfieur d’ Aillebouft du Gouuerne- 
ment du pays en toute l’eftendué du Fleuue de S. 
Laurent, non feulement il receuft cét ordre auec 
honneur, & auec refpect, mais de plus; il fit paroiftre 
vne genereufe magnanimité, faifant difpofer auec 


appareil, toutes les chofes neceffaires, pour la recep- © 


tion du nouueau Gouuerneur, qui fut en fuite receu 
par tous les ordres du pays, qui le complimenterent, [5] 
& les Sauuages mefmes voulurent eftre de la partie, 
luy faifant vne petite harangue, par la bouche d’vn 
Religieux de noftre Compagnie, qui les conduifoit. 
Sil’vn emporte nos regrets, & nous laiffe vne memoire 
eternelle de fa prudence, & de fa fageffe; l’autre, dont 
la vertu defia connué, en ce nouueau monde, nous 
donne, ie ne diray pas feulement vne efperance, 
mais comme vne affeurance, que les fruits defia bien 
auancez meuriront, & que le Royaume de Dieu 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 131 


[4] CHAPTER I. 
OF THE ARRIVAL OF THE SHIPS. 


T is a pleasure to see two persons of merit and 
| virtue vying with each other in deference,— 
especially when one of them lays aside the 
interests that might induce him to dispense with it 
did he not fortify his courage with some thought 
more worthy and more elevated than those of the 
commonalty. So soon as Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny became aware of the wishes of the King 
and the Queen, and learned on the arrival of the 
ships that their Majesties had appointed Monsieur 
d’Ailleboust to the Government of the country 
throughout the whole extent of the River St. Law- 
rence, he not only received the order with honor and 
respect, but he further manifested a generous mag- 
nanimity by making, with much display, all neces- 
sary preparations for the reception of the new 
Governor. The latter was afterward received by 
all orders of the country, who paid him their compli- 
ments. [5] Even the Savages wished to take part in 
it; and they delivered a short harangue to him 
through the mouth of a Religious of our Society, 
who accompanied them. If one carries away our 
regrets, and leaves us an everlasting recollection of 
his prudence and his wisdom, the other, whose vir- 
tue is already known in this new world, gives us, I 
may say, not only a hope but an assurance that 
the fruits that are already well advanced will come 


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


continuera de s’eftendre, & de s’emplifier dans ces 
contrées. I] n’obmet rien pour rendre le reciproque 
a fon Predeceffeur, ne pouuant trouuer affez d’hon- 
neur pour reconnoiftre le merite, & la vertu de ce 
braue Cheualier. 

Mais pour ne m’écarter de mon difcours, le pre- 
mier vaiffeau nous ayant confolé par le retour du 
Pere Barthelemy Vimont, & par la venué de trois 
bonnes Religieufes Hofpitalieres, qui refioiiirent in- 
finiment leur maifon, nous attrifta par le nombre des 
perfonnes malades, qu’on fit porter en cette maifon de 
charité, & de mifericorde. C’eft chofe rare que les 
maladies fe iettent [6] dans les vaiffeaux qui viennent 
ence pays, fila trauerfée eft vn peu rude pour les 
mers, elle n’a pas couftume d’alterer la fanté des corps. 
Quelque mauuais air pris en France, ou les grandes 
chaleurs qu’ils reffentirent approchans des Affores, ou 
la corruption des viures mal choifis, ou tout cela en- 
femble leur a caufé ie ne fcay quelle epidimie, quien 
a fait mourir quelques-vns, & en a tourmenté vn affez 
bon nombre. Monfieur de Repentigny fut enleué en 
moins de douze iours, mais auec vne benediction 
toute particuliere, fa mort, dit le Pere, qui l’a affifté 
iufque au dernier foufpir, a efté pretieufe deuant 
Dieu, tant il eftoit folidement refigné 4 fes volontez. 
La plus ieune des trois Religieufes, nommée la Mere 
Catherine de S. Auguftin, fut iufques aux portes de 
la mort, ou pluftoft iufques aux portes du Paradis; 
mais fon Epoux la voulat éprouuer plus l6g-temps 
dans les fouffrances luy rendit la fanté, fa vocation 
en ce nouueau monde eft affez remarquable, fon 
ardeur luy faifoit fouhaitter les Croix auec amour, & 
fon pere craignant les hazards s’oppofa fi fortement a 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 133: 


to maturity, and that the Kingdom of God will 
continue to extend itself and to increase throughout 
these regions. He spares no pains to return the 
compliment to his Predecessor; for he can find no 
honor great enough to acknowledge the merit and 
virtue of that brave Chevalier. 

But I must not digress from my subject. The first 
vessel that brought us consolation—through the 
return of Father Barthelemy Vimont, and the com- 
ing of three good Hospital Nuns, which caused great 
rejoicing in their house—also brought us sorrow 
through the number of sick persons on board, who 
were carried to that house of charity and mercy. It 
seldom happens that sickness breaks out [6] in the 
ships that come to this country; if the voyage be 
somewhat rough on the sea, it does not generally 
affect bodily health. Some infection caught in 
France, or the great heat that they experienced near 
the Azores, or the spoiling of badly selected food, or 
all these things together, brought on I know not what 
epidemic in this case, which caused the death of 
some, and suffering to a good many others. Mon- 
sieur de Repentigny was carried off in less than 
twelve days; but by a special blessing, his death, says 
the Father who attended him until he had drawn his 
last breath, was precious before God, so greatly 
resigned was he to his will. The youngest of the 
three Nuns called Mother Catherine de St. Augus- 
tin, was at the very gates of death,—or, rather, the 
gates of Paradise. But her Spouse wished to try her 
still longer by sufferings, and he restored her health. 
Her vocation to this new world is rather remarkable. 
Her zeal led her to desire Crosses with affection; 
and her father, who feared the danger, so strongly 


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


fon depart qu’il prefenta requefte [7] au Parlement de 
Roiien, pour l’empefcher de fortir du Content de la 
Mifericorde de Bayeux, ot elle eftoit Religieufe; 
cette pauure petite Colombe eftant dans les gemiffe- 
mens, & fes parens dans la refiftance, il arriua que 
fon pere iettant les yeux fur la Relation de l’an 
paffé, fut fi fortement touché en lifant les horribles 
tourmens que le bon Pere Ifaac Iogues a fouffert, 
que cela mefme qui fembloit le deuoir plus opiniatre- 
ment confirmer dans fes oppofitions, luy fit lafcher 
prife; Eft-il vray, dit-il, qu’on fouffre fi genereufe- 
ment pour Dieu, en ces contrées? Ie defire que mes 
deux filles y aillent, i’en refufois vne, & ie les donne 
toutes deux, c’eft icy ot il yeut ducdbat. Ces deux 
fceeurs Religieufes en mefme maifon, fe vouloient 
toutes deux facrifier, & il n’en falloit qu’vne, le S. 
Efprit fit tomber le fort, & la Croix fur la plus ieune, 
& les larmes, & les regrets fur l’aifnée. 

Les deux autres Religieufes appellées la Mere 
Anne de l’Affomption, & la Mere Ieanne de faincte 
Agnes, font parties l’vne de la Communauté des 
Meres Hofpitalieres de la ville de Dieppe, qui eft [8] 
la pepiniere des autres maifons, & qui nous a donné 
les premieres Religieufes de l’Hofpital de Quebec; 
l’autre eft venué de 1’Hoftel Dieu de Vennes en 
Bretagne. Dieu a brifé tous les obftacles qui leur 
empefchoit le paffage, & les a rendués faines & 
fauues dans leur petite maifon, qui attendoit ce 
fecours auec impatience. 

Les noutelles qui fe debitent A la venué des vaif- 
feaux reffemblent affez fouuent aux iours & aux 
années de Iacob, s’il y en a de bonnes, il y en a bien 
fouuent de mauuaifes, nous en auons appris vne 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 * 185. 


opposed her departure that he presented a petition 
[7] to the Parliament of Rouen to prevent her leaving 
the Convent of Mercy at Bayeux, where she was a 
Nun. This poor little Dove was in great distress, 
and her relatives were resisting her, when her father 
happened to cast his eye on the Relation of last year; 
and he was so deeply affected, in reading of the 
horrible tortures suffered by the good Father Isaac 
Jogues, that that which would apparently confirm 
him most stubbornly in his opposition caused him 
to relent. ‘‘Is it true,’’ he said, ‘‘ that they suffer 
so nobly for God in those countries? I wish my two 
daughters to go there. I refused one, and now I 
give them both.’’ On this point a contest arose. 
Those two sisters, who were Nuns in the same insti- 
tution, both desired to sacrifice themselves, while 
but one was needed. The Holy Ghost caused the 
lot and the Cross to fall to the younger, and the tears 
and regrets to the elder. 

The other two Nuns, called Mother Anne de 1’As- 
somption and Mother Jeanne de sainte Agnes, came, 
one from the Community of the Hospital Mothers of 
the city of Dieppe— which is [8] the nursery of the 
other houses, and which gave us the first Nuns for 
the Hospital of Quebec; the other from the Hostel 
Dieu of Vennes in Brittany. God overcame all the 
obstacles that impeded the journey, and brought 
them safe and sound to their little house, which 
impatiently awaited that aid. 

The news that is related on the arrival of the ships 
very often resembles the days and years of Jacob; 
if there be good news, there is also very frequently 
bad. We received one piece of information highly 
advantageous to many Savages of the upper nations.. 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


tres-fauorable pour quantité de Sauuages des nations 
plus hautes. Madame la Princeffe refpandant les 
bontez de fon coeur iufques aux derniers confins de 
ce nouueau monde, s’eft declarée Mere & fondatrice 
de la Miffion furnommée des Apoftres, en la nation 
vulgairement appellée du Petun: elle veut contri- 
buer 4 la conuerfion de ces peuples, & pendant que 
fon fils Monfeigneur le Prince amplifie le Royaume 
de France, elle veut eftendre les limites de l’Empire 
de Iefus-Chritft. 

Ie veux finir ce Chapitre par la mort [9] de deux 
ieunes Francois qui ont efté bien regrettez en ce 
pays, tant pour leur vertu que pour la cénoiffance 
quils auoient des lagues; l’vn defquels s’appelloit 
Francois Marguerie, & l’autre Iean Amiot, qui tra- 
uerfans le grand Fleuue deuant les trois Riuieres 
dans vn canot de Sauuages furent noyez a la veué 
des Frangois, fans que iamais on les puft fecourir. 
Ils eftoiét tous deux vaillans & adroits, & ce qui eft 
plus a prifer que tout cela, ils menoient vne vie fort 
innocente au iugement de tout le pays. Vne tem- 
pefte s’eftant éleuée leur canot d’ecorce qui ne valoit 
plus rien, s’entr’ouurit & leur fit perdre la vie. - 

Iean Amiot (c’ef{t celuy qui prit l’an paffé vn Hiro- 
quois, lequel chantoit ces paroles dedans les feux, 
Antaiok (c’eft ainfi que les Hiroquois & les Hurons 
le nommoient) eft caufe que ie vay au Ciel, i’en fuis 
bien aife, ie luy en fgay bon gré) defcendant a 
Quebec quelque temps deuant fa mort, pour obtenir 
congé de Monfieur le Gouuerneur, de mener vne 
efcoiiade de Frangois contre les Hiroquois, il prouo- 
qua tous les ieunes gens a la courfe, foit auec 
des raquettes aux [10] pieds, foit fans raquettes, 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 137 


Madame the Princess, the kindness of whose heart 
extends to the utmost confines of this new world, has 
declared herself the Mother and foundress of the 
Mission called that ‘‘ of the Apostles,’ in the nation 
commonly known as the Tobacco nation. She wishes 
to contribute to the conversion of those peoples; and, 
while her son Monseigneur the Prince enlarges the 
Kingdom of France, she tries to extend the limits of 
the Empire of Jesus Christ. 

I will finish this Chapter with the death [9] of two 
young Frenchmen, who have been greatly regretted 
in this country on account of both their virtue and 
their knowledge of languages. One was named 
Francois Marguerie, and the other Jean Amiot. 
While crossing the great River opposite three Rivers, 
ina Savage canoe, they were drowned in sight of 
the French, without its being possible to render them 
any assistance. Both were brave and skillful; and, 
what is to be prized above all, they led, in the opin- 
ion of the whole country, a most innocent life. A 
storm suddenly arose; their bark canoe, which was 
worthless, split open and caused them to lose their 
lives. 

It was Jean Amiot who last year captured a Hiro- 
quois who amid the fires sang these words: ‘‘ An- 
taiok ’’’ (thus the Hiroquois and Hurons called him) 
““is the cause of my going to Heaven. I am very 
glad of this, and am grateful to him for it.’’ While 
on his way down to Quebec some time before his 
death, to obtain leave from Monsieur the Governor 
to lead a party of French against the Hiroquois, he 
challenged all the young men toa race, either with 
snowshoes on their [10] feet, or without snowshoes. 
Some of them entered the lists against him, but he 


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


quelques-vns defcendirent en lice contre luy; mais 
ilremporta la victoire, fon humeur eftoit fi agreable, 
que les vaincus mefmes luy portoient de l’amour & 
du refpect. II eftoit adroit 4 deftourner les mauuais 
difcours, & 4 reprendre auec grace ceux qui iuroient, 
ou qui fe donnoient des imprecations, & par ce moyen 
empefchoit bien du mal, & n’offenfoit perfonne: car 
fon innocence, auec l’opinion qu’on auoit de fon 
courage, le mettoit 4 couuert. Il auoit vne deuotion 
tres-particuliere & tres-conftante 4 S. Iofeph, quwil 
auoit prife en la maifon de Sainte Marie aux Hurons, 
ot il a efté éleué. Comme il fe iettoit 4 toute heure 
dans les dangers, aux alarmes que nous donnoient 
les Hiroquois, il dit 4 vn de nos Peres, S’il arriue 
que ie meure, ie defire que ces bois & les autres 
materiaux que ie difpofe pour me faire baftir vne 
maifon, foient appliquez pour faire dreffer vne petite 
Chappelle 4 V’honneur de S. Iofeph. I] auoit fait voeu 
de iamais ne rien refufer de tout ce qui luy feroit 
demandé au nom de ce grand Saint, il luy dedioit 
fes courfes, fes voyages, fes combats, & [11] comme 
on parloit d’vn camp volant contre les Hiroquois: 
S’il m’eftoit permis, difoit-il, de nommer cette petite 
armée, ie l’appellerois l’armée de S. Iofeph. Ce 


chafte Epoux de la Vierge auoit obtenu Ace ieune 


guerrier vne pureté Angelique, ceux qui l’ont connu 


plus particulierement affeurent que iamais il n’eft © 


tombé en aucune coulpe mortelle, il s’eft trouué dans 
mille dangers, il a e{té fi fortement follicité, qu’il luy 


a fallu laiffer la robe, ou le manteau auffi bien que ~ 
l’ancien Iofeph, Dieu 1’a voulu mettre au rang des 
vierges. Il eftoit fur le point de fe marier quand il — 
eft mort, fes camarades s’eftonnoient de fa retenué: 


oh 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 139 


carried off the victory. He was so good-humored 
that even the vanquished loved and respected him. 
He was adroit in turning aside evil conversations, or 
in kindly chiding those who swore or indulged in 
imprecations; and by this means he prevented a 
great deal of harm, and offended no one—for his 
innocence, with his reputation for courage, protected 
him. He had a most special and constant devotion 
for St. Joseph, which he had acquired in the house 
of Sainte Marie, in the Huron country, where he 
was brought up. As he exposed himself hourly to 
the dangers and alarms that the Hiroquois caused us, 
he said to one of our Fathers: ‘“‘If I should die I 
desire that this timber and these other materials, 
which I am preparing in order to build a house, be 
employed in erecting a small Chapel in honor of 
St. Joseph.’” He had made a vow never to refuse 
anything that might be asked of him in the name 
of that great Saint. He dedicated to him his walks, 
his journeys, his battles; and, [11] when they spoke 
of a flying camp against the Hiroquois, he said: “‘ If 
I were permitted to name that little army I would 
call it the army of St. Joseph.’’ That chaste 
Spouse of the Virgin had obtained for that young 
warrior the purity of an Angel. Those who knew 
him most intimately assert that he had never fallen 
into any mortal sin, though he was exposed to a 
thousand dangers, and was so pressingly solicited 
that, like Joseph of old, he had to leave his robe or 
his mantle behind him. It was God’s will that he 
should rank among the virgins. He was about to 
be married, when he died. His comrades were 
surprised at his modesty for he made love like an 
Angel, as it were. 


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


car il faifoit l’amour en Ange, pour ainfi dire. 

Plufieurs ont creu que Dieu l’auoit rauy en fa 
ieuneffe, afin que le credit & l’eftime dans lequel 
il entroit par fon courage & par fon addreffe n’alte- 
raffent fon innocence, & ne fiffent brefche 4 fa vertu. 

Ie luy ay oiiy raconter, qu’eftant allé certain iour 
4 la chaffe, ot il y auoit des Hiroquois en embufcade, 
il fe fentit fail d’vne grande frayeur, ce qui ne luy 
arriuoit iamais: car il eftoit hardy au dernier [12] 
point, prudent neantmoins fondant fon courage fur 
l’appuy qu’il auoit en Dieu. I s’efforga plufieurs 
fois d’auancer, mais il ne faifoit que tournoyer dans 
les bois, en forte qu’il ne pfit iamais paffer outre, il 
s’addreffe 4 fon Pere S. Iofeph, & 4 mefme temps il 
dit &4 vn Huron qui l’accompagnoit, retirons-nous 


d’icy, il n’y fait pas bon: le lendemain quelques . 
Algonquins allans en ce lieu mefme, tomberent dans _ 


Vembufcade des Hiroquois. Pour conclufion, ce 
braue foldat de S. Iofeph a fait vingt-cing ou trente 
lieués de chemin apres fa mort, pour eftre enterré en 
la refidence de S. Iofeph. 


2 
Ong 


‘a 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 141 


Many have believed that God snatched him away 
in his youth, so that the credit and esteem that he 
gained by his courage and skill might not affect his 
innocence or break down his virtue. 

I have heard him relate that, having one day 
gone out hunting where some Hiroquois lay in 
ambush, he was seized with a great fear,—a thing 
that never happened to him, for he was brave to the 
last [12] degree, though prudent, for his courage was 
based upon the reliance that he placed in God. He 
endeavored several times to advance, but all he did 
was to move around in the woods, and he could never 
getany farther. He prayed to his Father, St. Joseph, 
and at the same time he said to a Huron who accom- 
panied him: ‘‘ Let us retire; it is not good to be 
here.’’ On the following day, some Algonquins 
who went to the same place fell into a Hiroquois 
ambush. In conclusion, that brave soldier of St. 
Joseph performed a journey of twenty-five or thirty 
leagues after his death, to be buried at the residence 
of St. Joseph. 


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


CHAPITRE II. 


DE CE QUI S’EST PASSE ENTRE LES FRANCOIS & LES 
SAUUAGES LEURS ALLIEZ, & LES HIROQUOIS. 


E dix-huictiéme de May deux canots d’ Hiroquois 

L ayans trauerfé le grand Fleuue 4 la veué du 
fort de Montreal, fe vindrent froidement defem- 
barquer [13] dedans I’Ifle: & fans faire paroiftre 
aucune apprehenfion, fept ou huit de leur bande 
tirerent droit au quartier des Francois. Monfieur de 
Maifon-neufue Gouuerneur de cette Ifle, fit auancer 
quelques foldats pour les reconnoiftre, ces Barbares 
les ayant apperceus, firent alte, & demanderent par 
figne a parlementer, on leur enuoye deux Truchemés 
qui s’arrefterent fort long-temps auec eux. Nous 
n’auons point de guerre auec les Francois, difoient-ils, 
nous n’en voulons qu’aux Algonquins, ceux-la feuls 
font nos ennemis, oublions le paffé, & renoiions la 
paix plus fortement que iamais. Nos Interpretes 
charmez par ces beaux difcours, les affeurent recipro- 
quement de la fincerité de nos penfées, & de la bonté 
de nos cceurs, bref ils vindrent iufques 4 ce point de 
confiance, que deux Hiroquois pafferent dans l’afcoii- 
ade des Francois, & l’vn des deux interpretes s’alla 
ioindre aux Hiroquois: car les vns & les autres ne 
fe parloient que de loin. Monfieur de Maifon-neufue 
craignant quelque furprife, fe tranfporta auec quel- 
ques foldats au lieu ou fe faifoit ce pour-parler, & 
ayant fait entendre a [14] 1’Interprete qui eftoit auec 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 143 


CHAPTER II. 


OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN THE FRENCH AND THE 
SAVAGES, THEIR ALLIES, AND THE HIROQUOIS. 


N the eighteenth of May, two canoes full of 
Hiroquois crossed the great River in sight of 
the fort of Montreal. They coolly landed 

{13] on the Island, and, without manifesting any 
apprehension, seven or eight of their band went 
straight to the French quarter. Monsieur de 
Maison-neufve, the Governor of the Island, sent out 
some soldiers to reconnoitre. When the Barbarians 
observed them, they halted, and made signs that they 
wished a parley. Two Interpreters were sent, and 
remained with them avery long time. ‘‘ We have 
no war with the French,’’ they said; ‘‘ we war only 
on the Algonquins who alone are our enemies. Let 
us forget the past, and renew peace more strongly 
than ever.’’ Our Interpreters were delighted with 
this fine speech, and reciprocally assured them of the 
sincerity of our thoughts, and the kindness of our 
hearts. In a word, they became so confident that 
two Hiroquois passed in among the party of French, 
while one of the two interpreters went to join the 
Hiroquois, for both sides spoke to one another only 
from a distance. Monsieur de Maison-neufve, who 
feared a surprise, went with some soldiers to the 
spot where this parley was going on; and, after 
having given [14] the Interpreter who was with the 
Hiroquois to understand that he should try to escape 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


les Hiroquois, qu’il tafcha{ft d’euader la nuit fuiuante, 
il emmena auec foy les deux Hiroquois auec deffein, 
quand l’Interprete fe feroit fauué, de les enuoyer a 
Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur. Ce pour-parler eftant 
rompu, chacun fe retira en fon quartier, 1’ Interprete 
paffa la nuit auec les Hiroquois, & les deux Hiro- 
quois auec les Francois, ce fut 4 s’enquerir de diuer- 
fes nouuelles. Les Hiroquois demandent qu’eft 
deuenu vn de leurs foldats fait prifonnier des Fran- 
cois 1’Automne dernier, l’Interprete ne voulant pas 
leur declarer comme ce pauure miferable auoit efté 
bruflé, tafcha de diuertir ce difcours, & d’eluder cette 
demande: mais 1’Hiroquois infiftant, il repartit, dites 
nous vous autres, qu’e{t deuenu le Pere Iogues, & vn 
Francois qui eftoit allé confidément en voftre pays 
fous la foy publique: les Hiroquois plus rufez, qu’ils 
ne paroiffoient, changerent de notte 4 cette repartie: 
parlons de chofes bonnes, replique l’vn des deux, 
vous verrez bien-toft a vos portes les plus anciens, & 
les plus confiderables de noftre pays demander la 
paix aux Francois, & pour marque de leur fincerité, 
ils ameneront [15] auec eux quelque Hollandois. [1 
faut auoiier, qu'il y ade la bonté, & de la fimplicité 
parmy les Frangois: on écoutoit ces difcours, auec 
autant de plaifir que s’il fuffent fortis d’vne bouche, 
& d’vn coeur innocent. 

Le lendemain comme le Truchement ne s’eftoit 
point fauué, foit que les moyens ne s’en fuffent pas 
prefentez, ou qu’il euft creu eftre obligé de garder fa 
parole, 4 des gens qui n’en ont point, & qui font pro- 
feffion de nous furprendre: on fut contraint pour le 
degager, de rendre les deux oftages, dont nous eftions 
faifis. Les Hiroquois ayans receu leurs gens, du 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 145 


on the following night, he took with him the two 
Hiroquois with the intention of sending them to 
Monsieur our Governor after the Interpreter should 
escape. The parley being ended, each one retired 
to his own quarters. The Interpreter passed the 
night with the Hiroquois, and the two Hiroquois 
with the French. Mutual inquiries were made for 
news; the Hiroquois asked what had become of one 
of their warriors, who had been taken prisoner by 
the French in the previous Autumn. The Inter- 
preter did not wish to tell them how the poor wretch 
had been burned, so he endeavored to turn the con- 
versation and to evade their question; but, when the 
Hiroquois persisted, he retorted: ‘‘ And you, tell us 
what has become of Father Jogues and a French- 
man, who went to your country confiding in the 
plighted word of the people.’’ The Hiroquois, who 
were more cunning than they seemed, changed their 
tune at this retort. “‘ Let us speak of pleasant 
things,’’ one of them replied. ‘‘ You will soon see 
at your gates the oldest and most prominent men of 
our country, who will come to ask the French for 
peace; and to prove their sincerity they are bringing 
[15] some Dutchman with them.’’ It must be 
admitted that there is goodness and simplicity among 
the French, who listened to these discourses with as 
much pleasure as if they came from innocent lips 
and hearts. 

On the following day, as the Interpreter had not 
effected his escape,— either because no opportunity 
of doing so presented itself, or because he considered 
that he was bound to keep his word with people who 
have none to keep, and who make a profession of 
surprising us,—we were obliged, in order to get 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  {Vot. 82 


retour defquels leur perfidie les faifoit douter, furent 
épris d'vne ioye fi fenfible, qu’ils s’approcherent fans 
armes de nos Francois, 4 la referue d’vn feul, qui 
fut plus deffiant que les autres: or comme nous 
eftions en plus grand nombre qu’eux, & bien armez, 
il eftoit bien ayfé de les prendre tous, fi on euft 
voulu. 

On nous a raconté qu’enuiron ce temps-la, vn Fran- 
gois s’eftant vn petit écarté de fa maifon, vn Hiro- 
quois qui eftoit aux embufches, attendit qu’il euft 
[16] defchargé fon arquebufe fur des tourterelles, 
qu’il pourfuiuoit, & &4 mefme temps il vint fondre 
fur luy, mais le Francois s’en dégagea brauement: 
fiez-vous aux belles paroles de cesinnocens. Pour 
conclufion, ils firent prefent de leur chaffe, & Mon- 
fieur de Maifon-neufue leur fit goufter du pain des 
Frangois, & pour marque des bonnes volontez qu’ils 
auoient pour nous, ils déroberent les filets qu’on 
auoit tendu dans la riuiere, en vn lieu affez proche 
du fort, ce fut leur dernier adieu. I1 ne faut pas 
attendre que les Hiroquois gardent iamais leur foy, 
s’ils ne font retenus par quelque intereft de crainte ou 
d’efperance, pource qu’ils n’ont point de Religion, & 
leur police n’ef{t pas telle qu’vn particulier ayant tué 
vn Francois pour fon plaifir, il en doiue apprehen- 
der aucun cha{timent. 

Si nous auions vn bon nombre d’Hiroquois entre 
nos mains, & qu’en les rendant on nous amenatt les 
principaux enfans du pays, la crainte qu’auroient les 
grands, qu’on ne fit du mal aux petits, les empefche- 
roient de nous attaquer mal 4 propos: mais tant qu’ils 
nous croiront incapables de leur faire aucun mal, 
ny de [17] leur procurer aucun bien d’importance, 


1647-48 } RELATION OF 1647-48 147 


him back, to give up the two hostages whom we had 
seized. When the Hiroquois received their people,— 
of whose return they had some doubts, owing to 
their own treachery,—they felt such joy that they 
approached our French unarmed, except one alone, 
who was more distrustful than the others. Now as 
we were more numerous than they, and well armed, 
it would have been very easy to capture them all, 
had we wished to do so. 

We have been told that, at about that time, 
a Frenchman had wandered a little distance from his 
house. A Hiroquois who lay in ambush waited until 
he had [16] discharged his arquebus at some pigeons 
that he was pursuing, and then rushed at him; but 
the Frenchman bravely extricated himself from the 
danger. And now rely on the fine words of those 
innocents! In conclusion, they gave us a present of 
their game, while Monsieur de Maison-neufve had 
them taste some French bread; and as a proof of 
their good-will toward us, they stole the nets that 
had been set in the river at a spot quite close to the 
fort; this was their last adieu. One must never 
expect the Hiroquois to keep their word, unless they 
be influenced by some motive of fear or of hope, 
because they have no Religion, and their government 
is not such that, when an individual kills a French- 
man for his pleasure, he need fear any punishment. 

If we had a considerable number of Hiroquois in 
our hands, and by delivering them up could obtain 
that the children of the principal men of the country 
be brought to us, the fear that the older ones would 
have of our doing an injury to the little ones would 
prevent them from attacking us unseasonably. But 
so long as they consider us incapable of doing them 


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 82 


nof{tre bonté ne nous mettra pas A couuert de leurs 
trahifons, & de leurs cruautez. Continuons s’il vous 
plaift noftre route. 

Le trentiéme du mefme mois de May quelques 
canots Francois, s’en allant vifiter leurs filets tédus 
a l’autre bord du grad Fleuue, vis a vis du fort des 
trois Riuieres, vn Hiroquois caché dans la forett, 
ayant apperceu leur chalouppe fe iette a l’eau pour 
l’aborder: comme il eftoit feul on le receut fans 
aucune deffiance, pendant qu'il fait tout fon poffible 
pour monftrer par geftes, qu’il eft amy des Francois. 
Vn Huron deuenu Hiroquois dans fa captiuité parut 
en terre, criant qu'on l’emmenait auec fon camarade: 
on l’aborde, on luy tend la main, on le fait entrer 
dans la chalouppe, ot il careffe les Frangois qui luy 
rendent le reciproque, mais auec vne bonté bien plus 
innocente. Sur ces complimens leur canot conduit 
par trois Hiroquois leurs compagnons, fe fit voir: on 
leur parle, on leur mon{tre bon vifage, on leur donne 
du poiffon, on les inuite de venir vifiter les Francois 
auec leurs camarades, mais ils fe tinrent toufiours 
[18] fur la deffiance. La chalouppe voyant cela fe 
retire, reportant ces deux prifonniers volontaires a 
Monfieur de la Poterie Gouuerneur des trois Riuieres, 
qui les ayant mis en lieu d’affeurance, ordonne a 
ceux qui conduifoient la chalouppe, de retourner au 
pluftoft auec du renfort, pour tafcher d’attirer les 
trois autres Hiroquois. On les trouua au mefme 
endroit qu’on les auoit quittez: or comme ils ne 
croyoient pas qu’il y eut des Sauuages auec nous, ils 


eftoient quafi fur le point de nous fuiure, quand vn A ; 


Huron venant 4 parler les efpouuenta fi bien, qu’ils 
prirent la fuite. Deux Hurons & vn Algonquin qui 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 149 


any harm, or of [17] procuring them any great advan- 
tage, our kindness will not protect us from their 
treachery and cruelty. Let us continue our route, 
if you please. 

On the thirtieth of the same month of May, some 
French canoes went to visit their nets that were set. 
on the other side of the great River, opposite the 
fort of three Rivers. A Hiroquois, who lay hidden 
in the forest, observed their shallop and swam out 
to it. As he was alone, he was received without any 
distrust; and he did his best to explain, by signs, 
that he was a friend of the French. A Huron, who 
had become a Hiroquois in his captivity, appeared 
on the bank and called out, asking to be taken with 
his comrade. They approached him, held out their 
hands to him, and took him on board the shallop, 
where he displayed much affection toward the French, 
who did the same to him, but in much more inno- 
cent kindness. While these compliments were going 
on, their canoe made its appearance, paddled by 
three Hiroquois, their companions. Our people 
spoke to them, received them kindly, offered them 
fish, and invited them to visit the French with their 
comrades; but they still kept [18] aloof. When 
those who were in the shallop saw this, they with- 
drew, bringing back those two voluntary prisoners 
to Monsieur de la Poterie, the Governor of three 
Rivers; he put them in a secure place, and ordered 
those who were in the shallop to return at once with 
a reinforcement, to endeavor to attract the three 
other Hiroquois. They were found at the same spot 
where they had been left. Now, as they did not 
think that there were any Savages with us, they 
were almost on the point of following us, when a 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 | 


s'e{toient gliffez parmy nos gens, coururent apres: 
l’Algonquin en attrape vn, qu'il voulut prendre vif, 
mais y trouuant trop de refiftance il le tué, & luy 
enleue la cheuelure qu’il rapporte pour marque de 
fa victoire, les deux autres fe fauuerent dedans les ; 
bois. ] 
Or apres plufieurs interrogations faites A ces deux 
prifonniers, le Huron a confeffé, qu’ayans fait leur 
chaffe proche de Richelieu, depuis le mois de Feurier 
iufques alors, ils auoient pris refolution deuant que 
de s’en retourner au pays, de [19] venir caffer la 
tefte a quelques Algonquins, s’ils en euffent ren- 
contré. Je croy qu’ils n’auroient non plus épargné 
les Frangois, s’il en fut tombé quelques-vns entre 
leurs mains. Pour l’Hiroquois il a protefté qu’eftant 
redeuable de fa vie aux Frangois, parce qu’ayant — 
e{té pris par vn Capitaine Algonquin Monfieur le 
Cheualier de Montmagny l’auoit racheté, & fait met- 
tre en liberté, dans le traité de la paix: Ila, dif-je, — 
prote{té que depuis ce temps-la, il auoit eu de l’amour 
& du refpect pour Onontio & pour tous les Frangois, 
& qu’il auoit receu vn coup au bras, dont il mon- 
{troit les marques, pour s’eftre oppofé A celuy qui 
mal-heureufement a maffacré le Pere Ifaac logues; 
& qu’apres la mort du Pere, il s’eftoit rendu prote- 
cteur du Francois qui l’accompagnoit, qu’il luy auoit | 
defendu de s’éloigner de luy, voyant bien que fa vie 
n’ef{toit pas en affeurance: mais ce ieune homme, 7 
difoit-il, s’eftant écarté pour chercher ie ne {gay quoy ut 
qu’il auoit apporté, fut aflommé d’vn coup de hache — 
par ceux qui l’efpioient. I’ay toufiours eu deffein, 
adiouftoit-il, de vous donner aduis de cette trahifon, f 
ie ne l’ay pfi faire [20] qu’A prefent que ie me fuis — 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 151 


Huron happened to speak, and that frightened them 
so much that they fled. Two Hurons and an Algon- 
quin, who had slipped in among our people, started 
in pursuit. The Algonquin caught one, whom he 
wished to take alive; but, meeting with too much 
resistance, he killed him and tore off his scalp which 
he brought back in token of his victory. The two 
others escaped into the woods. 

Now, after several questions had been put to the 
two prisoners, the Huron confessed that, after hav- 
ing hunted near Richelieu from the month of Febru- 
ary to that time, they had resolved before returning 
to their country, to [19] come and break the heads 
of some Algonquins, if they should meet any. I do 
not think that they would have spared the French 
one whit more, had any fallen into their hands. As 
to the Hiroquois, he protested that, as he owed his 
life to the French,— because, when he was captured 
by an Algonquin Captain, Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny had redeemed him and set him at liberty 
in the treaty of peace,—he protested, I say, that 
from that time he had felt love and respect for Onon- 
tio and for all the French; and that he had received 
a wound in the arm —of which he showed the scar — 
for having opposed him who unfortunately had slain 
Father Isaac Jogues. He added that, after the death. 
of the Father, he had become the protector of the 
Frenchman who accompanied him; that he had for- 
bidden him to go far from him, because he saw that 
his life was not safe; but that the young man, he 
said, had gone to get something, I know not what, 
that he had brought with him, and was killed with a 
hatchet by those who watched him. ‘‘I have always 
intended,’ he added, ‘‘to give you information 


| 
y | 
i 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


ietté entre vos mains. Quoy qu'il en foit de celuy- 
cy qui paroift plus reconnoiffant que les autres, il ne 
faut pas douter que les Hiroquois ne fiffent gloire de 
nous maffacrer, s’ils pouuoient, c’eft l’vne de leurs 
tufes de guerre, quand ils font rencontre de quel- 
ques compagnies compofées de plufieurs nations, de 
crier tout haut qu’ils n’en veulent qu’a 1’vne de ces 
nations, & partant qu’ils fupplient les autres de fe 
tenir en repos pendant le combat: en vn mot ils 
jotient toutes fortes de perfonnages, pour prendre 
toutes fortes de perfonnes. Leur force eft leur 
iuftice: leur intereft eft leur fidelité, & leurs fourbes 
leurs gentilleffes. Paffons outre. 

Le vingtiéme de Iuin deux canots d’Hiroquois 
ayas trauerfé le grand Fleuue en plein minuit, mirent 
pied a terre vn petit au deffous des trois Riuieres: 
quelques-vns des plus hardis s’approchans & la defro- 
bée vindrent fonder doucement, s’ils pourroient 
entrer dans vn lieu ou logeoit vn Frangois, lequel 
s’éueillant s’écria fortement qui va 14? ces Hiroquois 
ayans peur fe retirerent: mais comme ils n’eftoient 
éloignez du fort [21] qu’enuiron la portée d’vn fufil, 
la fentinelle les découurift, & voyant qu’ils ne refpon- 
doient pas a fes cris, elle en donne aduis au Caporal, 
qui fe doutant bien que c’eftoient des Hiroquois, 
fait monter le prifonnier voldtaire fur vn baftion: 
celuy-cy parlant en fa langue fut entendu de fes com- 
patriotes, Ie fuis viuant, leur dit-il, les Frangois me 
traitent en amy, il n’y a rien a craindre. A ces 


paroles ils demanderent qu’on leur enuoyaft vne- : 
chalouppe, ce qui fut promptement executé, ils 
n’oferent pas neantmoins l’aborder de fi pres; mais 3 


le chef de cette bande fe ietta A l’eau pour fe ioindre 


. 
» 
w 

5 


e 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 153 


of that treachery; but I have been unable to do 
so [20] until now, when I have cast myself into your 
hands.’’ However it may be as regards this one, 
who seems more grateful than the others, there is no 
doubt that the Hiroquois would have gloried in mas- 
sacring us if they could. It is one of their strata- 
gems of war, when they meet bands composed of 
several nations, to call out aloud that they are at war 
only with one of those nations, and therefore they 
beg the others to remain inactive during the battle. 
In a word, they act every sort of personage, in order 
to deceive all classes of persons. Their might is 
their right; their interest is their fidelity; and their 
treachery, their politeness. Let us proceed. 

On the twentieth of June, two canoes full of Hiro- 
quois crossed the great River at midnight and landed 
alittle below three Rivers. Some of the boldest 
approached stealthily and quietly, to see if they 
could enter a place where a Frenchman lodged. The 
latter awoke, and called out in a loud voice: ‘‘ Who 
goes there?’’ The Hiroquois were alarmed, and 
withdrew. But, as they were at a distance [21] of 
only about a gunshot from the fort, the sentry dis- 
covered them, and, finding that they did not answer 
his challenge, he notified the Corporal, who, suspect- 
ing that they were Hiroquois, brought the voluntary 
prisoner up to the bastion. He spoke in his own 
language and was heard by his countrymen. ‘‘I am 
alive,’’ he saidtothem. ‘‘ The French treat me like 
a friend; there is nothing to fear.’’ On hearing 


‘these words, they asked that a shallop be sent to 
them. This was promptly done; nevertheless they 


did not dare to approach it very closely; but the 


chief of the band threw himself into the water to 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


aux Francois, il fut aimablement receu & amené au 
fort auec fon compatriote, lequel ayant les fers aux 
pieds, les cacha de peur de l’eftonner 4 l’abord; 
quand ils furent tous deux dans le corps de garde, 
& qu’on les eut fait manger, alors ouurant fa robe, 
il defcouurit les marques de fa captiuité; fon cama- 
rade voyant ces iartieres de fer fe foufrit, mais ce ne 
fut pas A mon aduis, du bon du coeur: on les laiffa 
difcourir 4 leur aife, ils ne nous dirent pas quelles 
furent les premices de leurs difcours, mais en voicy 
[22] la conclufion. Noftre efcotiade, dit le nouueau 
venu, eft compofée de cent hommes, dont il yena 
quatre des anciens, & des plus notables de noftre pays, 
fi vous voulez donner liberté 4 mon camarade, ou fi 
vous le voulez conduire dans vne bonne chalouppe 
vers nos gens, il eft pour en amener quelques-vns 
auec foy: on fuiuit fes penfées. Ce prifonnier fut 
accompagné de deux chalouppes bien armées, & pour 
marque de noftre confiance, on luy permit d’entrer 
dans le camp de fes gens: d’ott apres vn long pour- 
parler, il reuint accompagné de deux de fes compa- 
triotes, qui l’ont volontairement fuiuy iufques au fort 
des Francois. Nous voila donc faifis de quatre pri- 
fonniers volontaires, comme on les fonda plus 4 
loifir, on reconnut qu’il y auoit de la fourberie en 
leurs paroles: car ils auoiierent, que cette bande 
n’eftoit que de vingt-neuf hommes, dans lefquels il 
n’y auoit aucun ancien, ny aucun homme d’affaire; 
que le bruit de la venué des anciens pour rechercher 


la paix eftoit faux, & qu’il ne fe falloit fier aux — 
Hiroquois que de bone forte. On iugea neantmoins ae F 
qu'il feroit A [23] propos que 1’vn des quatre retour- op 
naft en fon pays, pour aduertir les principaux : 

iF 


& 
De 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 155 


join the French. He was kindly received, and taken 
to the fort with his countryman, whose feet were 
fettered; he hid the irons at first, for fear of fright- 
ening him. When they were both in the guard- 
house, and had been given something to eat, he 
opened his robe and showed the other the marks of 
his captivity. When his comrade saw those iron 
garters, he smiled; but it was not, in my opinion, 
with the best of feeling. They were allowed to con- 
verse at will; they did not tell us what the first part 
of their discourse was, but here is [22] the conclusion: 
*‘ Our band,’’ said the newcomer, ‘‘ consists of a hun- 
dred men, four of whom are elders, and among the 
most notable of our country. If you will give my 
comrade his liberty, or if you will take him in a good 
shallop to our people, he will bring back some of 
them with him.’’ His suggestion was carried out. 
The prisoner was accompanied by two well-armed 
shallops, and, as a mark of our confidence, he was 
allowed to enter the camp of his people,— whence, 
after a long parley, he returned, accompanied by two 
of his countrymen who voluntarily came with him to 
the fort of the French. We were thus in possession 
of four voluntary prisoners. When they were ques- 
tioned more at leisure, it was seen that there was 
deceit in their words, for they admitted that the 
band consisted of only twenty-nine men, among 
whom there was no elder nor any man empowered to 
negotiate; that the rumor of the coming of the elders 
for the purpose of negotiating peace was false; and 
that the Hiroquois should not be trusted more than 
they deserved. Nevertheless, it was considered [23] 
advisable that one of the four should return to his 
own country, to inform the chief men among the 


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 32 


Hiroquois de la retention des trois autres, afin qu’ils 
ne fiffent aucun mauuais coup fur les Francois & fur 
leurs alliez. Quand il fuft queftion de choifir lequel 
des quatre feroit mis en liberté, ce fut 4 qui defere- 
roit cét honneur 4a fon compagnon, ils fe procuroient 
tous cette faueur, & pas vn ne la vouloit accepter, 
chacun vouloit courre le rifque de fa vie auec fes 
camarades, qu’ils croyoient en danger parmy les 
Francois. Pour lJincertitude du fuccez de cette 
affaire, enfin ils condamnerent le plus ieune 4 joiiir 
de cette liberté: il s’embarque donc auec le premier 
prifonnier, pour eftre conduit par nos Frangois vers 
fes compatriotes, qui le receurent a bras ouuerts: 
mais comme il vid fon camarade retourner aux Fran- 
cois, fuiuant les paroles qu’il en auoit donné, il quitte 
fes gens, & l’accompagne, difant qu’il vouloit efprou- 
uer la mefme fortune de ceux auec lefquels il auoit 
commencé de rifquer. Qu’au refte ceux qui retour- 
noient au pays auoient des langues, & qu ils pour- 
roient parler auffi bien comme luy. Voila [24] des 
gens adroits 4 furprendre des hommes auffi bien que 
des beftes: mais ils font tombez dans leurs propres 
lacets. 

Le troifiéme de Iuillet, le Huron qui s’eftoit rendu 
aux Frangois auec noftre premier prifonnier, comme 
nous auons remarqué cy-deffus, tefmoigna 4 quel- 
ques-vns de fes compatriotes, qu’il s’en alloit 4 Mont- 
real pour retirer des caftors mis en depoft entre les 
mains des Francois. On fut bien ayfe de cette occa- 
fion, afin de pouuoir donner aduis 4 Monfieur de 


Maifon-neufue des courfes de nos ennemis, & dela — 
retention des quatres prifonniers; mais ce perfide — 


n’alla pas loin fans rencontrer vne autre trouppe 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 157 


Hiroquois of the detention of the three others, so 
that they might not commit any foul deed against 
the French and their allies. When the time came 
to choose which of the four should be set free, each 
one tried to confer that honor upon his companion; 
each sought that favor for the others, and not one 
would accept it for himself; each one wished to risk 
his life with his comrades, whom they considered in 
danger among the French. Owing to the uncertain- 
ty of success in this matter, they finally condemned 
the youngest to enjoy that liberty. He therefore 
embarked with the first prisoner, to be conducted by 
our French to his countrymen, who received him 
with open arms. But when he saw his comrade 
return to the French, according to his plighted word, 
he left his people and accompanied him,—saying 
that he wished to share the fortune of those with 
whom he had just risked himself; that, moreover, 
those who were returning to their country had 
tongues, and could speak as well as he. These were 
[24] people skillful enough to surprise men, as well 
as animals; but they were caught in their own toils. 

On the third of July, the Huron who had surren- 
dered to the French with our first prisoner, as we 
have related above, told some of his countrymen that 
he was going to Montreal to get some beaver skins 
that he had deposited in the hands of the French. 
This opportunity was gladly seized for informing 
Monsieur de Maison-neufve of the inroads of our 
enemies, and of the detention of the four prisoners. 
But that perfidious Savage did not go far before he 
met another band of Hiroquois, for whom he was 
seeking. He gave them to understand that the four 
voluntary prisoners were very badly treated by the 


- 


” ® 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 82 F 


d’Hiroquois qu'il cherchoit, il leur fit entendre que 
les quatre prifonniers volontaires, eftoient fort mal 
traitez par les Francois, & que c’eftoit fait de leur vie, 
en fuitte de ce menfonge fi noir, & fi perfide. Le 
lendemain quatriéme du mefme mois de Iuillet, vn 
Algonquin ayant defcouuert la pifte de l’ennemy, en 
donna aduis 4 Monfieur de la Poterie qui en fit aduer- 
tir les habitans par le toxin, & par vne volée de canon 
fignal ordinaire pour fe tenir fur fes gardes, cing 
Hurons plus [25] proche du lieu ot les ennemis 
eftoiét déja aux prifes auec deux de nos Frangois qui 
gardoient du beftial coururent aux voix & aux cla- 
meurs des combatans, ils fe ioignent auec eux foufte- 
nant l’effort de plus de quatre-vingts hommes. A ce 
bruit on enuoye par eau deux chalouppes armées, 
mais deuant qu’elles arriuaffent au lieu du combat, les 
Hiroquois auoient defia tué vn Francois & vn Huron, 
& pris deux prifonniers Francois & deux Hurons, ils 
eftoient neantmoins fi épouuantez, ayant veu tomber 
fur le carreau deux de leurs gens tuez par vn Fran- 
cois, & quelques autres bleffez, qu'ils s’enfuyoient 
quoy qu ils fuffent pour le moins dix cotre vn. L’yn 
des deux prifonniers Frangois, eftoit nepueu de Mon- 

fieur de la Poterie, lequel s’eftant vn petit trop efloi- 

gné pour la chaffe, fe trouua pris dans les filets fans 

{cauoir cOme il y eftoit entré: le Huron tué eftoit 

bon Chreftien, il s’ef{toit confeffé le Dimanche prece- 

dent, comme auffi le Francois, les deux Hurons 

captifs ne font pas baptifez, pour les Fragois prifon- 

niers on leur rend grand tefmoignage de leur bonne > 
vie, ils font neantmoins vn petit en faute pour s’eftre 
trop expofé dans la [26] connoiffance qu’ils auoient aE 
de l’ennemy. Nos quatre prifonniers vol6taires ae ae 


ae Pe) 
wre 


a e 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 159 


French, and were sure to lose their lives. After so 
black and treacherous a falsehood, on the following 
day, the fourth of the same month of July, an Algon- 
quin discovered the tracks of the enemy; he notified 
Monsieur de la Poterie, who warned the inhabitants 
by the tocsin and by the discharge of the cannon, 
the usual signal for all to be on their guard. Five 
Hurons [25] who were nearest the spot where the 
enemies were already in conflict with two of our 
Frenchmen in charge of some cattle, ran up on hear- 
ing the voices and clamor of the combatants; they 
joined them and withstood the assault of more than 
eighty men. At the sound of the fight, two armed 
shallops were sent by water; but, before they could 
reach the scene of the combat, the Hiroquois had 
already killed one Frenchman and a Huron, and 
taken two French and two Hurons prisoners. Never- 
theless, they were so terrified when they saw two of 
their people fall upon the spot, slain by the hand of 
one Frenchman, and two others wounded, that they 
fled, although they were at least ten to one. One 
of the two French prisoners was a nephew of Mon- 
sieur de la Poterie, who had wandered a little too far 
while hunting, and had been caught in the toils 
without knowing how he had got there. The Huron 
who was killed was a good Christian, and had been 
to confession on the previous Sunday, as had also 
the Frenchman. The two Huron captives are not 
baptized; as to the French who are prisoners, there 
is strong evidence of their having led a good life. 
They are, nevertheless, somewhat to blame for hav- 
ing exposed themselves too much, [26] knowing the 
enemy as they did. When our four voluntary pris- 
oners heard of this defeat, they considered their own 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


apprenant cette deffaite, iugeoient de leur vie comme 
ils auroient fait de la noftre en cas pareil. Expediez 
nous, difoient-ils, nous fommes morts, ne nous faites 
point languir: quelques-vns d’eux demanderent qu’on 
les inftruifit deuant que de les mettre A mort, mais 
on leur fit entendre, que nous n’eftions pas fi preci- 
pitez dans nos penfées, & dans nos actions, comme 
font ordinairement les Sauuages: voicy vne autre 
alarme. 

Le quatorziéme du mefme mois, iour de faint Bona- 
uenture, parut vn homme & l’autre bord de la bour- 
gade des trois Riuieres, faifant voltiger en l’air vne 
couuerte, en forte qu’il fembloit demander qu’on 
l’allaft fecourir. On arme yvne chalouppe, mais 
comme elle retardoit trop 4 fon gré, il baftit vn petit 
caieul, fe met deffus, & tire droit 4 ceux qu’il le 
venoiét reconnoiftre, criant en langue Francoife, 
allons, allons, venez, venez, on creut a ces paroles, 
que c’e{toit l’vn de nos deux prifonniers Francois qui 
s’eftoit fauué, mais enfin on reconneuft que c’eftoit 
vn ieune Huron nommé Armand, qui pour [27] auoir 
efté noftre Seminarifte fe demefle vn petit, de la 
langue Francoife. Il auoit efté pris l’an paffé & con- 
duit au pays des Hiroquois, ot il a fouffert d’horribles 
tourmens. Comme il eft bien connu des Francois, 
chacun le receut & l’embraffa auec amour, apres 
auoir fatisfait briefuement aux demandes plus pref- 
fantes des Francois: menez moy, leur dit-il, en la 
maifon de priere, & me faites venir vn Pere, i’ay 
grande enuie de me confeffer, ie vous affeure quil — 
eftoit bien preparé: La Foy dans le dager faitdes 
merueilles; apres la Confeffion, & apres fa penitence 
qu’il voulut faire, deuant que de fortir de la Chapelle, 


Lo 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 161 


lives forfeited, as they would have regarded ours 
under similar circumstances. ‘‘ Despatch us,’’ they 
said; ‘‘ we are dead; do not make us linger in pain.” 
Some of them asked to be instructed before being 
put to death; but they were told that we were not so 
hasty in our judgments and actions as the Savages 
generally are. Here is another alarm. 

On the fourteenth of the same month, saint Bona- 
venture’s day, a man appeared on the other side of 
the village of three Rivers, waving a blanket in the 
air, as if he wanted some one to go to his assistance. 
A shallop was manned, but as it took too long to suit 
him, he made a small raft! on which he embarked 
and proceeded straight toward those who were going 
to reconnoitre, calling out in French: A/lons, allons! 
venez, venez!—‘‘ Come along! come, come!’’ On 
hearing these words, they thought that it was one of 
our two Frenchmen who had escaped; but finally 
they found that it was a young Huron, named Ar- 
mand, who, through [27] having been at our Semi- 
nary, speaks a little French. He had been captured 
the previous year, and taken to the Hiroquois coun- 
try, where he endured horrible tortures. As he is 
well known to the French, they received and 
embraced him affectionately. After having briefly 
answered the most pressing questions of the French, 
he said: ‘‘ Take me to the house of prayer, and 
bring me a Father; I am very anxious to confess.” 
I assure you that he was well prepared. Faith does 
wonders in the midst of dangers. After his Confes- 
sion, and after his penance, which he wished to 
perform before going out of the Chapel, he exclaimed, 
as if he breathed freely once more: ‘‘ Now I am free! 
Ah! how long I have desired to free myself from the 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


il s’écria, comme s'il eut refpiré de nouueau, c’eft 
maintenant que ie fuis libre, ah! qu’il y a long-temps 
que ie defirois de me defcharger du poids de mes 
offenfes, ah! que fouuent ie penfois dans ma capti- 
uité ala maifon de Dieu? Ie me recommandois aux 
prieres des Chreftiens qui font icy, & de ceux qui 
font en France. Et en fuite changeant de ton, il dit 
d’vn accent tout gay, & tout ioyeux: puis que nous 
auons fatisfait 4 l’efprit, penfons au corps. Si vous 
me voulez donner a difner, vous m’obligerez, [28] il 
y a vingt-quatre heures que ie n’ay mangé, Dieu f¢ait 
fi on luy en donna de bon ceeur. Or voicy les 
nouuelles qu’on a tiré de fa bouche. 

1. Qu il s’eftoit fauué d’vne bande d’Hiroquois 
compofée de cent hommes, & qu’ils tenoient les deux 
bords de la riuiere, trois lieués au deffous de noftre 
fort. 

2. Qu’ils auoient rencontré 4 deux iournées de leur 
pays, depuis enuiron quinze iours, les camarades de 
nos prifonniers voldtaires, que cette efcoiiade leur 
auoit dit, qu’ils alloient donner aduis au pays du bon 
traitement que nous faifions 4 quatre de leurs foldats, 
que nous auions entre nos mains, & que 1a-deffus ces 
nouuelles trouppes auoient changé leur deffein de 
guerre en vn defir d’empefcher qu’on ne fit aucun 
mal a leurs camarades, & qu’a cét effet ils s’eftoient 
cottifez entr’eux, iufques a la quantité de Porcelaine 
qu’il falloit pour remplir quatre coliers, qu’on deuoit 
prefenter A ceux qui auoient les prifonniers entre 
leurs mains. 

3. Quece deffein s’eftoit euanoiiy par le rencontre 
qu'ils auoient fait depuis huit iours, de ceux qui 
emmenoient nos deux prifonniers Fragois, que cette 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 163 


weight of my sins! Ah, how often in my captivity 
did I think of the house of God! I commended 
myself to the prayers of the Christians who are here, 
and of those who are in France.’’ And then, chang- 
ing his tone, he said in quite a gay and joyful accent: 
**Since we have relieved the mind, let us think of 
the body. If you will give me some dinner, you will 
oblige me. [28] I have eaten nothing for twenty- 


four hours.’’ God knows how cheerfully we gave 
him some. Here is the news we have received from 
his lips: 


1. That he had escaped from a band of Hiroquois 
consisting of a hundred men, who held both sides of 
the river for three leagues below our fort. 

2. That about a fortnight before, at a distance of 
two days’ journey from their own country, they had 
met the comrades of our voluntary prisoners; that 
band had told them that they were going to inform 
the country of the kind treatment that we gave four 
of their warriors who were in our hands; and that 
therefore these fresh troops had changed their war- 
like plans into a desire to prevent any harm being 
done to their comrades, and, for that purpose, had 
taxed themselves for the quantity of Porcelain beads 
that were needed to make up four collars which were 
to be presented to those who had the prisoners in 
their hands. 

3. That that plan was altered through their meet- 
ing, within eight days, those who were taking away 
our two Frenchmen whom they held captive; that 
that band was [29] angry with us through the perfidy 
of a Huron renegade of whom I have spoken in this 
Chapter. That treacherous Savage asserted that he 
had been commissioned by our prisoners to go and 


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 82 


bade eftoit [29] animée contre nous, par la perfidie 
d'vn Huron renegat, dont ie viens de parler en ce 
Chapitre, ce defloyal affeuroit qu’il auoit receu comif- 
fion de nos prifonniers d’aller donner aduis a leurs 
parens, qu’ils les tinffent au nombre des morts, tant 
ils eftoient mal traitez des Francois. Armand ne fe 
peut tenir de luy donner vn dementy: ie connois 
bien, dit-il, les Francois ils font gens qui tiennent 
leur parole, & qui abhorrent la cruauté. 
4. Il nous a rapporté que nos deux prifonniers, 
auoient encor leurs habits, quand il les a rencontrez, 
qu’on leur auoit feulement arraché quelques ongles, 
qu'il auoit demandé au plus grand, s’il vouloit refcrire 
aux trois Riuieres, & que luy-mefme luy auoit pre- 
paré de l’écorce qui fert de papier, & fait de l’ancre 
& fa mode, que le Francois refcriuit en effet & luy 
donna la lettre, mais que leur Capitaine la voulut 
auoir, de peur que le Huron ne prit de 1a occafion de 
fefauuer. Il adioufta que ceux qui conduifoient nos 
Francois, parloient de les conferuer fi nous confer- 
uions les Hiroquois, Dieu vueille qu’ils fe fouuiennent 
de cette parole, fi tant eft qu’elle foit fortie de leur 
bouche: car ils prennent [30] tant de plaifir 4 tour- 
menter les captifs, qu’il y a des recompenfes pour 
ceux qui exercent plus de cruautez en leur endroit, 
en forte que les plus grands bourreaux, font les plus 
habiles gens & les mieux recompenfez parmy eux. 
Enfin ce bon ieune homme nous a appris que fon 
efcoiiade deuoit defcendre A Quebec a la fourdine, 
pour furprendre nos Sauuages Chreftiens, & qu’ils 
n’ont pas deffein d’efpargner les Frangois, s’ils en | 
peuuent attrapper. 


Apres le rapport de toutes ces nouuelles, les quatre t 2 


= 


<r 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 165 


tell their relatives to consider them as dead, so badly 
were they treated by the French. Armand could 
not refrain from giving him the lie. ‘‘ 1 know the 
French well,’’ he said; ‘‘ they are people who keep 
their word, and who abhor cruelty.’’ 

4. He reported to us that our two prisoners still 
had their clothes on when he had met them; that only 
some of their nails had been torn out; that he had 
asked the taller of them if he would like to write to 
three Rivers, and that he himself had prepared some 
bark that serves as paper, and had made some ink in 
his own fashion; that the Frenchman had in fact 
written, and had given him the letter, but their Cap- 
tain wished to hold it, for fear that the Huron might, 
on account of it, seize the opportunity to escape. 
He added that they who conducted our French talked 
of keeping them alive, if we kept the Hiroquois. 
God grant that they remember that promise, if it has 
ever issued from their lips; for they take [30] so 
much pleasure in tormenting captives that there are 
rewards for those who display the most cruelty toward 
them, and the greatest butchers are considered most 
able and are best rewarded among this people. 

Finally this good young man told us that his band 
was to go down secretly, to Quebec to surprise our 
Christian Savages; and that they have no intention 
of sparing the French, if they can entrap any. 

After all the above news had been related, the 
four Hiroquois prisoners asked Monsieur de la Pote- 
rie to permit one of them to go and see these new 
warriors, to disabuse them of the wrong impressions 
that the wretched Huron renegade had conveyed to 
them. They said that by this means the hostile acts 
that they might yet commit against the French would 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 32 


prifonniers Hiroquois, demanderent 4 Monfieur de la 
Poterie qu’il fut permis 4 1’vn d’eux, d’aller voir ces 
nouueaux guerriers pour les defabufer des mauuaifes 
impreffions que ce miferable Huron renegat leur auoit 
donné, & que par ce moyen on empefcheroit les actes 
d’hoftilité qu’ils pourroient faire enuers les Frangois, 
que fi celuy qui eftoit delegué ne retournoit pas, 
qu’on tuaft les trois autres. Cette propofition ayant 
e{té acceptée on donne vn canot au plus ancien des 
prifonniers, qui tire droit 4 fes gens, & apres leur 
auoir parlé s’en reuint la nuit crier deuant la porte 
de fa prifon, ot eftant [31] entré, il dit que les Hiro- 
quois l’ayant apperceu s’eftoient mis aux deux coftez 
de la riuiere pour le furprendre, & qu’ils l’auroient 
peut-eftre offenfé, s’il ne fe fut fait connoiftre par fa 
voix, par fon nom & par fes chanfons; m’ayant 
reconneu, difoit-il, l’e{t6nement les a faifis, mais ils 
ont e{té bien plus furpris, quand ie les ay affeurez, 
que mes compagnons n’auoient non plus de mal que 
moy: alors ils ont tous inuectiué contre le Huron 
defloyal qui leur auoit donné de fauffes idées de la 
bonté des Francois, les voyant dans cette bonne dif- 
pofition ie leur ay dit, que le moyen de nous retirer 
de vos mains, eftoit de bannir tous actes d’hoftilité 
du quartier des Francois, & de ramener au pluftoft 
leurs prifonniers; enfin leur ayant fait entendre que 
ie m’eftois engagé au retour, i’ay pris mon congé, 
eux m’ayans promis au prealable qu’ils garderoient 
fidellement les aduis que ie leur donnois. Au refte 
ils f{upplient le Capitaine des Francois de leur enuoyer 
des viures & de faire tirer vn coup de canon 4 mon — 


entrée dans le fort, pour marque que ie fuis en lieu 7 : 


d’affeurance, & que ie n’ay fait rencontre d’aucuns 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 * 167 


be averted; and that, if he who should be delegated 
did not return, the three others might be killed. 
This proposition was accepted, and a canoe was given 
to the eldest of the prisoners who went straight to 
his people, and, after having spoken to them, he 
returned at night. He called out before the door of 
his prison, and when he had [31] entered, he said 
that when the Hiroquois perceived him they posted 
themselves on both sides of the river to surprise him; 
and they would probably have done him an injury, 
had he not made himself known by his voice, by his 
name, and by his songs. ‘* When they recognized 
me,’’ he said, ‘‘ they were seized with astonishment; 
but they were still more surprised when I assured 
them that my companions had suffered nomore harm 
than I. Then they railed against the treacherous 
Huron who had given them wrong ideas of the good- 
ness of the French. Seeing them so well disposed I 
told them that the best way to deliver us from your 
hands was to stop all hostile acts against the French, 
and to bring back their prisoners as soon as possible. 
Finally I gave them to understand that I was pledged 
to return and I took my leave after they had first 
promised me to follow faithfully the advice that I 
gave them. Moreover they begged the Captain of the 
French to send them provisions, and to order a can- 
non to be fired on my arrival at the fort to let them 
know that I have arrived safely, and have not come 
across any Algonquins on my return. [32] They 
were so afraid of that,’’ said the negotiator, ‘‘ that 
they gave me an arquebus with which to defend 
myself.” Monsieur de la Poterie, it is true, had the 
cannon fired; but he did not deem it advisable to 
send them food. On the following day two canoes 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vor. 32 __ 


Algonquins 4 mon retour: [32] ils en auoient fi grand 
peur, difoit ce negociateur, qu’ils m’ont donné vne 
arquebufe pour me defendre. Monfieur de la Poterie 
fit bien tirer vne volée de canon, mais il ne iugea 
pas 4 propos qu’on leur enuoyaft des viures. Le 
lendemain deux canots s’eftant deftachez de leur gros, 
fe prefenterent deuant le fort, vn petit au dela de la 
portée du canon, demandant des viures, leurs cama- 
rades leur donnerent mille iniures du haut d’vn 
baftion, leurs reprochant qu’ils ne les aymoient 
gueres, puis qu’ils n’alloient pas requerir les deux 
prifonniers Francois, qui feuls les pouuoient mettre 
en liberté, d’affeurer que ces prifonniers volontaires, 
n’ayent pas eu quelque intelligence auec leurs gens, 
& quelque defir de nous faire tomber dans leurs 
embufches, c’eft ce que ie ne puis faire, il eft bien 
probable que leurs allées & leurs venués, & leurs 
grands pour-parlers, n’ef{toient pas tofijours innocens, 
veu mefme qu’on nous efcrit des Hurons que les 
Hiroquois pris en ces quartiers-la, auoient declaré 
que leur deffein eftoit de furprendre cette année le 
fort des trois Riuieres, & que dans leurs chanfons ils 
donnoient également des [33] imprecations aux 
Francois & aux Algonquins. Quoy qu’il en {oit, ils 
attendoient le mal-heur qu’ils ne preuoyoient pas, le 
Chapitre fuiuant vous en donnera l’intelligence: mais 
auant que d’y entrer, ie coucheray vne nouuelle qu’on 
nous vient d’apporter. 

Le vingt-huitiéme du mefme mois de Iuillet, douze 
ou treize Hiroquois eftant en embufcade 4 Montreal — 
au coing d’vn bois voifin d’vne prerie, ott quel- — 
ques faucheurs coupoient & amaffoient du foin, & — 
d’autres ouuriers abattoient des brofailles, on entendit 


= 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ” 169 


detached themselves from their main body, came 
before the fort, just beyond the range of the cannon, 
and asked for food. Their comrades hurled a thou- 
sand insults at them from the top of a bastion,— 
reproaching them with not caring for them, because 
they did not goand get the two French prisoners who 
alone could set them free. I cannot positively assert 
that those voluntary prisoners had not some secret 
arrangement with their people, and some desire to 
make us fall into their ambushes. It is very prob- 
able that their going and coming, and their long 
parleys, were not always harmless,—especially as 
they write to us from the Huron country that the 
Hiroquois who were captured in that quarter had 
stated that it was their intention to surprise the fort 
of three Rivers this year; and that, in their songs, 
their imprecations were directed equally [33] against 
the French and the Algonquins. In any case, they 
awaited the misfortune that they did not foresee. 
The following Chapter will tell you of it; but, before 
commencing it, I shall write down an item of news 
that has just been brought to us. 

On the twenty-eighth of the same month of July, 
twelve or thirteen Hiroquois lay in ambush at Mont- 
teal, in the corner of a wood adjoining a meadow 
where some mowers were cutting and gathering hay, 
while other men were cutting down the brushwood. 
Suddenly the report of some arquebus shots was 
heard, which brought down a Frenchman; and then 
the barbarians, after giving a loud yell, were 
observed running as fast as they could to cut off the 
others. But our people were not frightened; they 
seized their arms, and fired three shots at those who 
showed themselves, causing one or two to drop, who 


Ay i 
: ¥ 
'’ 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


‘Se 
fl. 
n 
my, 
"i 
7 
— 


foudain quelques coups d’arquebufes, quiietterent par _ 
terre vn Francois, & en fuite on vid les barbares — 
iettans vn grand cry, courre 4 bride abatué pour cou- 
per chemin aux autres: mais nos gens ne s’eft6nant — | 
point, mettét la main aux armes, ils defchargent — 

trois coups fur ceux qui paroiffoient, en forte qu’on 
en vid tomber vn ou deux, qui furent bien-toft reti- — 
rez das le bois par leurs camarades. Cette prdpte a 
refiftance eftonna fi fort ces perfides, qu’ils difparu- 
rent en vn moment: ce pauure Francois qui fut tué, 
eftoit 1’vn des plus doux, & des plus hommes de bien 
de cette habitation. [34] Or iugez maintenant fi © 
ceux dont i’ay fait mention au commencement de 
ce Chapitre, eftoient bien innocens, promettans _ 
merueille aux Interpretes de Montreal. 


Te a ey eee 


Ree ie tie 


eh eat Pry 2 wm) 


1647-48) RELATION OF 1647-48 " da71 


were soon dragged into the wood by their comrades. 
This prompt resistance so astonished the perfidious 
foes that they disappeared in aninstant. The poor 
Frenchman who was killed was one of the gentlest 
and best men of that settlement. [34] Now you 
may judge whether those whom I mentioned at the 
beginning of this Chapter were so very innocent 
when they promised wonders to the Interpreters of 
Montreal. 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 82 


CHAPITRE III. 


DE L’ARRIUEE DES HURONS, & DE LA DEFFAITE DE _ 
QUELQUES HIROQUOIS. 


E dix-feptiéme iour de Iuillet de cette année 
L 1648. vne centaine d’Hiroquois, dont ie viens — 
de parler fur la fin du Chapitre precedent, 
n’ayant pas enuie de retourner en leur pays fans faire 
quelque notable expedition, s’approcherent a la por- 
tée du canon du fort des trois Riuieres; Quelques — 
Hurons, de ceux qui reftent en nos habitations pour _ 
la crainte de leurs ennemis, qui comme des lutins 2 
infeftent les bois & les riuieres, fe ioignirent auec 
nos Frangois, & auec vn petit nombre d’ Algonquins, 
s’en allerent 4a leur rencontre: les Hiroquois nous © 
voyans auancer s’arrefterent, faifans figne qu’ils 
vouloient communiquer auec nous A l’aimable, && 
mefme temps quelques-vns [35] d’entr’eux s’auance- 
rent entre les deux efcoiiades pour nous parler; les ; 
nof{tres 4 mef{me nombre les abordent, ils demandent ~ 
qu’on leur donne, ou qu’on leur vende des viures: on — 7 
leur pethons qu’ils aillent requerir nos prifonniers, — 
& qu’on leur dénera toute forte de contentement, ils 


vingts facs de bled d’Inde dedans leur fort. Nous” : : 
voyans donc fur nos gardes, ils fe retirerent fort ~ 
mefcontens, comme ils tournoient vifage, vn Huror i 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 173 


CHAPTER III. 


OF THE ARRIVAL OF THE HURONS, AND OF THE DE- 
FEAT OF SOME HIROQUOIS. 


N the seventeenth day of July of this year, 
() 1648, about a hundred Hiroquois—of whom 
I have spoken in the foregoing Chapter, and 

who had no wish to return to their own country with- 
out striking some blow worthy of notice — approached 
to within cannon-range of the fort of three Rivers. 
Some Hurons among those who dwell in our settle- 
ments through fear of their enemies,—who, like 
sprites, infest the woods and rivers,—joined our 
French, and, with a small party of Algonquins, went 
to meet them. When the Hiroquois saw us advanc- 
ing, they halted, and made signs that they wished to 
confer with us peaceably; and, at the same time, 
some [35] of them came forward between the two 
parties, to speak to us; our people, to the same 
number, approached them. They asked us to give 
or sell them some provisions. We replied that, if 
they would go and get their French prisoners, they 
would receive every satisfaction. They pretended 
to be pressed by hunger, but we have since learned 
that these appearances were assumed in order to 
surprise us, for we found more than eighty sacks of 
Indian corn in their fort. When they found that we 


were on our guard, they withdrew, greatly dissatis- 
fied. As they were turning away, a Huron, who was 


lve 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. ws) | 
captif de leur bande, ayant reconnu parmy nousyn __ 
fien compatriote, s’auanca doucement pour luy dire 
a l’oreille que nous eftions perdus, & que dans vn 
iour ou deux on nous deuoit inuiter 4 vn pour-parler, 
& qu’on nous enuelopperoit de tous coftez, que les 
Hiroquois difpofoient leurs armes pour ce fujet, cét 
aduis donné on fait bonne garde; fur le foir le pre- 
mier de nos prifonniers volontaires, qui auoit fouuent 
liberté d’aller voir fes compatriotes nos ennemis, 
retourna de leur camp, & nous dit de leur part que 
[36] nous ne nous arreftaffions point a certains faux 
bruits que quelques efprits mal faits pourroient 
femer, cOme ils auoient entreueu leur Hurd parler 
auec le noftre, ils fe doutoient que leur mefche ne 
fut découuerte: c’eft pourquoy la voulant mieux 
cacher, ils promirét qu’ils enuoyeroient le lendemain 
deux de leurs gens dans noftre fort pour traiter 
d’affaires, mais qu’ils fupplioiét qu’on les renuoyatt, 
quand on les auroit entendus: ils garderent 4 demy 
leur parole, noftre premier prisénier les eftat allé 
voir, retourna auec vn feul, qui fe difoit parent du 
fieur Caiture [sc. Coufture], jadis captif au pays de 
ces barbares. 

A mefme temps que ce nouuel entremetteur fe — 
difpofoit 4 fon retour, parurent quelques canots ~ 
voguans au Nord de la grande riuiere fur les riues ol 
font placez les Francois, & dans le mefme inftant on 3 
vid fur les bords qui font au cofté du Sud, les Hiro- 
quois s’embarquans a la foule donner la chaffe & — 
grands coups de rames 4 ces deux canots. On fonne 
le toxin, les Francois & les Sauuages font armezen 
vn moment, on court tat qu’on peut au fecours, mais _ 
quand nos gens furent proche du lieu ot ils auoient — 


| 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 175 


a captive with their band, recognized a countryman 
among our party; he approached him quietly, and 
whispered to him that we were lost; that in a day or 
two we would be invited to a parley, and be sur- 
rounded on all sides; and that the Hiroquois were 
preparing their weapons for that purpose. After 
receiving that warning, we kept a vigilant watch. 
At night, the first of our voluntary prisoners who 
was often allowed liberty to go and see his country- 
men, our enemies, returned from their camp, and 
told us on their behalf that [36] we were not to place 
any reliance on certain false rumors, that some evil- 
disposed persons might spread. As they had 
observed their Huron speaking with ours, they 
suspected that their plot was discovered; therefore, 
wishing to conceal it better, they promised that on 
the morrow they would send two of their people to 
our fort to transact business; but they begged us to 
send them back when we should have heard them. 
They half kept their word, for when our prisoner 
went to see them, he returned with only one who 
said that he was a relative of sieur Cousture who was 
formerly a captive in the country of those barbarians. 

At the same time that this new negotiator was 
preparing to return, some canoes appeared paddling 
to the North of the great river, along the banks 
where the French are settled; and, at the same 
moment, on the South bank the Hiroquois were 
observed embarking in numbers and paddling with 
all their might in pursuit of those two canoes. The 
tocsin was sounded; the French and the Savages 
armed themselves in an instant, and hastened to 
their assistance as fast as they could. But when 
our people came close to the spot where they had 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32. 


veu ces [37] canots, ils entendirent tout 4 coup vne 
grande defcharge de plufieurs arquebufes, fans pou- 
uoir difcerner fi c’e{toit vn veritable combat, ou vne 
feinte; car cela fe paffoit dans le bois. Se fouue- 
nans de l’aduis qu’on leur auoit donné, ils crfirent 
que c’eftoit vne rufe, c’eft pourquoy ils fe retirerent 
fur leurs pas. A peine eftoient-ils en leur pofte, 
qu’on fit courre vn bruit que deux cens Hurons 
venoient d’eftre deffaits, & que le chamaillis qu’on 
entendoit, prouenoit de ce combat. A ces nouuelles 
le fang fe glaca dans les veines, chacun baiffa la 
tefte fans mot dire, on fe croyoit quafi coupable de 
la mort de tant d’hommes, pour auoir creu qu’vne 
verité fut vne feinte ou vn fonge. Pendant que la 
trifteffe deuoroit le coeur des Francois, & des Sau- 
uages, voila paroiftre vn canot de Huron fuiuy de 
deux canots Hiroquois, qui fembloient le pourfuiure, 
chacun crie qu’on s’embarque pour donner fecours a 
ces pauures Hurons, deux canots promptement equip- 
pez vont au deuant, quantité de monde fe refpand 
fur la greue, le canot Huron voyant venir contre foy 
ces deux canots, crit d’abord que c’eftoit des Hiro- 
quois, il ne laiffe pas [38] d’auancer: enfin s’eftans 
reconnus, ils s’entre-faliient, tirans de compagnie ~ 
vers nos habitations; on trouua que ces deux canots — 
d’ Hiroquois, eftoient deux canots pris fur l’ennemy, — B 
& conduits par des Hurons, & dis le canot Huronon 
apperceut le Pere Francois Breffany, qui éleuant fa i 5 
voix deuant vn grand monde qui accouroit pour 

apprendre des nouuelles, s’écria fortement: allons i 
remercier Dieu, il nous vient de donner la victoire, 
nos Hurons ont deffaits les Hiroquois qui rodoient — 


lee a te ee ee ee eee ee ae. nt i i i Te ee _ 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 “197 


observed those [37] canoes, they suddenly heard a 
great discharge of many arquebuses, without being 
able to discern whether it was a real fight or a feint; 
for all this passed in the woods. Remembering the 
warning that had been given them, they thought 
that it was a stratagem and retraced their steps. 
Hardly had they reached their post when a rumor 
spread that two hundred Hurons had just been 
defeated, and that the fray that we heard arose from 
that combat. At this news the blood froze in their 
veins; all hung their heads, without saying a word; 
they considered themselves almost guilty of the 
death of so many men, through having mistaken 
a reality for a feint or a dream. While sorrow 
devoured the hearts of the French and the Savages, 
suddenly a Huron canoe appeared, followed by two 
Hiroquois canoes that seemed to be pursuing it. 
Each one called out to embark and help the poor 
Hurons. Two canoes were promptly manned and 
went to meet them, while many people spread them- 
selves along the beach. When those in the Huron 
canoe saw the two canoes approaching it, they 
thought at first that they contained Hiroquois; they 
continued [38] to advance; finally they recognized 
and saluted one another and went in company toward 
our settlement. It was found that those two 
Hiroquois canoes were two canoes that had been 
taken from the enemy, and were manned by Hurons. 
In the Huron canoe we perceived Father Francois 
Bressany, who lifted his voice before a great crowd of 
people that ran up to get news, and called out aloud: 
“Let us go and thank God, who has just given 
us the victory. Our Hurons have defeated the 
Hiroquois who prowled around your doors. Many 


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


demeurez fur le carreau, dix-huit ou vingt prifonniers - 
font dans les liens, & les ieunes gens d6nent la chaffe 
aux fuyards. La ioye de cette nouuelle épanoiiit 
d’autant plus les coeurs, que la trifteffe les auoit 
refferrez: on court 4 la Chapelle, on chante le 7¢ 
Deum, on embraffe le Pere, qui nous declara comme 
la chofe s’eftoit paffée. 

Les Hurons, difoit-il, ne defcendirent point l’an 
paffé aux Frangois pour la crainte des ennemis, qui 
d’vn co{té menacoient le pays, & de 1l’autre obfedoient 
tous les chemins: mais la neceffité de haches & d’au- 
tres marchandifes Frangoifes, [39] les contraignant 
de s’expofer 4 tous ces dangers, deux cent cinquante 
hommes conduits par cing braues Capitaines, ont pris 
refolution de mourir ou de paffer malgré toutes les 
refiftances de l’ennemy. Il ya dans cette trouppe 
des Chreftiens & des Cathecumenes iufques au nom- 
bre de plus de 120. iamais ces bons Neophytes n’ont 
manqué de faire publiquement leurs prieres deux 
fois le iour tous enfemble en la face de tous les Pay- 
ens. Les Hurons font bien quelquefois defcendus 
en plus grand nombre, mais iamais en fi bon ordre, 
apres auoir fait plus de deux cens lieués de chemin 
fans rien rencontrer, enfin s’approchans du fort des 
trois Riuieres, ils firent entrer leurs canots dans des 
iong's pour fe mettre en bonne conche, afin de paroiftre 
deuant les Frangois; c’eft 4 dire qu’ils fe peignoient 
la face de diuerfes couleurs, ils oignoient leurs che- 
ueux, en vn mot ils vouloient arriuer en bon ordre: 
quelques canots qui feruoient d’auant-garde s’eftans 
mis au large vers l’eau, furent 4 mefme temps defcou- 
uerts des Francois & des ennemis: ceux-cy qui — 
eftoient a l’autre bord de la riuiere, s';embarquent — 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 179 


enemies lie dead on the field; eighteen or twenty 
prisoners are in bonds, and the young men are pur- 
suing the fugitives.”” This glad news rejoiced our 
hearts all the more that sorrow had saddened them; 
all hastened to the Chapel, where the Ze Deum was 
chanted; then we embraced the Father who told us 
how it had occurred. 

The Hurons, he said, did not come down last year 
to the French through fear of the enemies, who 
on the one hand threatened the country, and on 
the other beset all the roads. But the necessity 
of obtaining hatchets and other French goods [39] 
compelled them to expose themselves to all those 
dangers. Two hundred and fifty men, led by five 
brave Captains, resolved to die, or to pass through 
in spite of all the enemy’s resistance. In that band 
there are Christians and Catechumens to the number 
of over 120. Those good Neophytes have never 
failed to say their prayers publicly twice a day, all 
together, in the presence of the Pagans. The 
Hurons have on former occasions come down in still 
larger numbers, but never in so good order. After 
a journey of over two hundred leagues without 
meeting any one, when they drew near the fort of 
three Rivers they pushed their canoes in among the 
tushes, to put themselves in proper attire previous 
to showing themselves before the French,— that is, 
they painted their faces in various colors; they 
greased their hair; in a word they wished to 
appear in orderly condition. Some canoes that acted 
as an advance-guard pushed out toward the open 
water, and were observed at the same time by 
the French and by the enemies. The latter, who 
were on the other side of the river, embarked with 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


d’vne vifteffe nompareille [40] pour venir fondre fur 
ces canots, & les Frangois courent tant qu’ils peuuent 
fur la greue pour les fecourir, mais eftans arriuez, 
comme i’ay defia dit pendant le combat qui fe faifoit 
dans le bois, ils fe retirerent penfans que ce fuft vne 
feinte; l’auant-garde des Hurons ayant apperceu 
l’ennemy, en donne promptement aduis aux Capi- 
taines, qui quittent auffi-toft leurs huiles & leurs 
peintures pour prendre les armes: ils courent de 
toutes leurs forces vers l’endroit ot les Hiroquois fe 
deuoient defembarquer, mais eftans arriuez trop tard, 
ils fe raffemblent & fe difpofent en demy cercle ou 
en demy-lune, pour fouftenir le premier choc de 
leurs ennemis, & pour les enfermer, en cas qu’on en 
vint aux mains & aux efpées. Les Hiroquois s’en 
viennent de furie fans toutefois faire leurs cris & 
leurs huées ordinaires, qui feruent de trompettes & 
de tambours, pour ofter la peur au foldat, & pour 
intimider l’ennemy; eftans quafi 4 brufle-pourpoint, 
comme on dit, ils firent vne defcharge de leurs arque- 
bufes, que nos Hurons effuyerent fe couchans par 
terre, la defcharge faite ils approcherét la tefte 
baiffée, ne croyans [41] pas trouuer tant de refiftances: 
mais les Hurds fe releuans, & faifans leurs grands 
cris, & faliians en mefme temps les ennemis 4 grands 
coups de fufils, ces pauures gens furpris s’enfuyrent 
de part & d’autre, excepté vne efcoiiade qui voulut 


joiier des coufteaux; mais elle fut bien-to{t enuelop- — 


pée par nos gens, & fi les Hurons qui faifoient le 


fond du demy cercle n’euffent point lafché le pied au — | 
premier bruit des arquebufes, pas vn n’en fut refchap- 
pé, mais les poltrons leur ouurirent vne porte par ou 


' 


plufieurs euaderent. Trois Francois fe trouuerent 


i 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 181) 


unequaled celerity, [40] to swoop down on those 
canoes; while the French ran, as fast as they could,. 
along the beach to succor them. But they arrived, 
as I have already said, during the fight that was 
going on in the woods, and retired, thinking that it 
was afeint. When the advance-guard of the Hurons. 
perceived the enemy, they immediately gave notice 
to the Captains who at once threw aside their oils 
and paints to seize their weapons. They ran, as 
fast as they could, to the spot where the Hiroquois 
were to disembark, but they arrived too late; so they 
collected and disposed themselves in the form of a 
semi-circle or crescent, to meet the first assault of the 
enemy, and to hem them in should they come to. 
blows and lance-thrusts. The Hiroquois advanced 
furiously,— without, however, uttering their usual 
yells and war-cries, which serve them as trumpets. 
and drums to dispel the warriors’ fear and to intimi- 
date the enemy. When almost close enough to 
scorch their doublets, as the saying is, they fired a 
volley from their arquebuses, which our Hurons. 
received lying on the ground; after delivering their 
volley, they charged, not expecting [41] to meet 
with so much resistance. But the Hurons rose, and, 
uttering loud yells, they received their enemies with 
heavy discharges from their pieces; those poor peo- 
ple were taken by surprise, and fled in every direc- 
tion, with the exception of one squad who tried to 
defend themselves with their knives; but they were 
soon surrounded by our people. And, if the Hurons 
at the base of the crescent had not given way at the 
first report of the arquebuses, not one of the enemy 
would have escaped; but those cowards left a door 
open by which many got away. Three Frenchmen 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 82 


en ce combat, le Pere Brefflany qui couroit par tout 
donnant courage aux Hurons, & prenant garde fi — 
quelqu’vn n’auoit point befoin de fon affiftance, les — 
deux autres combatirent vaillamment; mais quandon 
vint 4 fe mefler, ils demeurerent tout court, ne fea- 
chans plus fur qui frapper: car ils ne diftinguoient 
pas les Hiroquois d’auec les Hurés. L’vn de ces 
deux Francois voyant vn Hiroquois épouuanté, il 
l’aborde, luy frappe fur l’efpaule: courage mon 
frere, luy dit-il, combattons vaillamment, il le pre- 
noit pour vne perfonne de noftre party, mais vn 
Huron furuenant fe iette fur luy, & 1l’emmena, 
dequoy le Francois demeura [42] eftonné: ce prifon- 
nier par apres chantoit qu’il auoit efté pris par vn — 
Francois, s’imaginant que celuy qui luy auoit frappé _ 
fur l’efpaule, luy auoit dit, tu es mon prifonnier. Le 
combat finy, les plus alegres fuiuent les fugitifs, ils 
en prénent, ils en tuent, ils apportent des teftes & © 
des perruques; mais le defir de paroiftre, & de fe q 
rafraifchir aux trois Riuieres, apres les fatigues d’vn ~ q 
chemin de plus de deux cens lieués, les empefcherent i) | 
de pourfuiure toute leur victoire: car vn grand i 
nombre fe fauua. | 
On nous a refcrit de Montreal, que 1’vn de ces fuy- 
ards ayant couru iufques-la, & trauerfé la riuiere, 
s’eftoit allé rendre aux Frangois: il entra iufques 
dans la cour de l’hofpital, fans rencontrer autre per- 
fonne que Madamoifelle de Boulogne foeur de Mada- __ 
moifelle d’Aillebouft, A laquelle il tendift les bras: 
ceux qui fgauét que l’honnefteté & la pudeur de 
cette bonne Damoifelle luy donne vne crainte épou-— 
uentable de ces barbares, difoient par vn refpect 


a 


ae 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 "183 


were present in that battle,— Father Bressany, who 
ran about everywhere, inspiring the Hurons with 
courage, and watching carefully to see if any one 
needed his assistance; and two others, who fought 
bravely, but, when the mélée began, they stopped 
short, not knowing whom to strike for they could 
not distinguish the Hiroquois from the Hurons. 
One of these two Frenchmen observed a terrified 


Hiroquois; he went up to him, clapped him on the 


shoulder, and said to him: ‘‘ Courage, my brother! 
let us fight bravely.’’ He took him for one of our 
party; but a Huron came up, fell upon him, and took 
him away, whereat the Frenchman was [42] aston- 
ished. That prisoner afterward sang that he had 
been captured by a Frenchman; for he imagined 
that he who had clapped him on the shoulder had 
said tohim: ‘‘ Thou art my prisoner.’’ When the 
battle was over, the swiftest warriors pursued the 
fugitives, some of whom they captured and killed, 
bringing back their heads and scalps; but the desire 
of appearing and refreshing. themselves at three 
Rivers, after the fatigues of a journey of over two 
hundred leagues, prevented them from completely 
following up their victory, and a great many escaped. 

They wrote to us from Montreal that one of the 
fugitives ran as far as there, crossed the river, and 
went to surrender to the French. He entered the 
courtyard of the hospital without meeting any one 
except Madamoiselle de Boulogne, sister of Mada- 
moiselle d’Ailleboust,’® to whom he held out his 
arms. ‘Those who know that the modesty and bash- 
fulness of that good Lady cause her a terrible fear of 
those barbarians said, through the respect which they 
feel for her gentleness and virtue, that she had 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 32 


pris vn Hiroquois, & qu'elle faifoit plus d’expedition 
par fes prieres & par fon chapelet qu’elle recitoit 
pour lors, que les foldats par leurs [43] efpées & par 
leurs moufquets. 

Apres cette deffaite le Pere Breffany prit le deuant, 
Ome nous auons dit, pour apporter ces bonnes nou- 
uelles 4 nos Francois: les Hurons fuiuirent quelque 
temps apres en bon ordre amenans leurs prifonniers, 
& les faifans chanter & danfera leur facon. I1 faifoit 
beau voir enuiron foixate canots defcendre douce- 
ment fur le grand Fleuue, & tous les Hurons graue- 
ment affis faire vne cadence auec leurs voix & auec 
leurs auirons aux chan[t]s & aux airs de leurs enne- 
mis; mais c’eftoit chofe trifte & lugubre de ietter 
les yeux fur ces victimes, qui feront peut-eftre la 
pafture des flammes & des ventres de ces barbares. 

Ils donnerent vn prifonnier aux Algonquins, qui 
l’expedierent bien-toft, difans qu’il falloit quitter 
leurs anciénes cruautez. Les Hurons voyant leur 
douceur tefmoignerent que bien-toft tout le monde 
fe feroit baptizer en leur pays, & qu’ils prendroient 
pour lors les fagons de faire des Chreftiens. Ils 
brfilerent vn Huron renegat pris entre les Hiroquois, 
i’apprends que la haine qu’ils conceurent contre luy 
prouenoit de ce qu’il auoit quitté la Foy parmy les 
ennemis, & que cela les fit refoudre a le traiter 
d’vne facon [44] extremement cruelle. 

Quand tout ce monde, fe fut vn petit rafraifchy, 
& que Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny fut 
arriué aux trois Riuieres, on commenga 48 traiter 


d’affaires, les principaux s’eftas trouuez en vn cdfeil 
porterent quatre paroles reprefentées par cinq pre- 
fens. Il faut remarquer en paffant que la chofe qui 


a 
i 
‘a 
im 


) 
_ 
| 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 185 


captured a Hiroquois; and that she accomplished 
more with her prayers and her rosary, which she was 
saying at the time, than the soldiers with their [43] 
swords and muskets. 

After that defeat Father Bressany went on ahead, 
as we have stated, to carry the welcome news to our 
French. The Hurons followed some time afterward, 
in good order, bringing their prisoners and making 
them sing and dance after their fashion. It wasa 
fine sight,— about sixty canoes floating quietly down 
the great River, and all the Hurons gravely seated 
in them, keeping time with their voices and their 
paddles to the songs and airs sung by their enemies. 
But it was a sad and doleful sight to cast one’s eyes 
on the victims who will perhaps become food for the 
flames, and for the stomachs of the barbarians. 

They gave a prisoner to the Algonquins, who soon 
despatched him saying that their old cruelties must 
be abandoned. When the Hurons observed their 
gentleness, they said that before long every one 
would be baptized in their country, and they would 
then adopt the usages of the Christians. They 
burned a Huron renegade, who had been taken 
among the Hiroquois. I learn that the hatred that 
they had conceived for him arose from the fact of his 
having abandoned the Faith among their enemies; 
and this decided them to treat him in a [44] very 
cruel manner. 

When all those people had refreshed themselves 
to some extent, and Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny had arrived at three Rivers, they 
began to discuss affairs. The chief men, who were 
Present at a council, brought four words, represented 


% 


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Now 82 — 


paffe pour parole & pour prefent dans les affemblées 
publiques, doit eftre vn petit confiderable. Le pre- 
mier de ces prefens n’eftoit qu’vn falut, & vn hon- 
neur qu’ils rendoient 4 Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, 
&atous nos Francois. Le fecond, vne priere d’ouurir 
les magazins pour le commerce. Le troifiéme, vne 
fupplication de diminuer le prix des marchandifes. 
Le quatriéme, & le cinquiéme, vne action de graces, 
de ce qu’on prenoit la peine de les aller inftruire 
dans leur pays parmy tant de dangers, au trauers de 
tant d’ennemis, qui ne menacent que de feu & de 
flammes. Ils faifoient deux prefens pour ce fujet: 
dautant, difoient-ils, que la chofe eftoit bien d’vne 
autre importance, que tout ce qui eft fur la terre. 
Ils nous coniuroient de perfeuerer conftamment, 
faifant voir que le pays auoit de grandes affections 
pour [45] vne doctrine, qui promettoit vne vie auffi 
douce en fes delices que longue en fa durée. 
Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny leur fit auffi 
des prefens reciproques, vn entr’autres pour raffermir 
les efprits du pays, ébranlez pour le meurtre commis 
en la perfonne d’vn Francois. Les Hurons donne- 
rent milles iniures aux meurtriers, fi bien que Mon- 
fieur de Montmagny voyant qu’ils improuuoient ce 
forfait pour lequel ils auoient fatisfait felon les loix 
de leur pays, il leur tefmoigna par ce prefent, que 
ce mort eftoit refufcité dans fon efprit; I] fit vn autre 
prefent pour les inuiter fortement 4 tenir la parole 
qu’ils auoient donnée, d’entendre volontiers les Predi- 


cateurs de l’Euangile. C’eft chofe eftrange que les — 


hémes ne fe rendent 4 Dieu pour 1’ordinaire que par hI | 
des fleaux, depuis que les peftes, les guerres & les — 


famines fe font iettez fur ces peuples, on a reconnu ‘ 


a) 


1647-48) RELATION OF 1647-48 187 


by five presents. It should be observed, by the way, 
that what passes for a word and for a present at public 
meetings must be of some considerable value. The 
first of these presents was but a salute and an honor 
that they paid to Monsieur the Governor, and to all 
our French. The second, a request that the ware- 
houses be opened for trade. The third, a prayer 
that the price of the goods be reduced. The fourth 
and the fifth were in thanksgiving for the trouble 
taken in going to teach them in their country amid 
so many dangers, and throughso many enemies who 
threaten but fire and flames. They gave two pres- 
ents for that purpose, because, they said, that was of 
much greater importance than anything else on earth. 
They begged us to persevere constantly, stating that 
the country had a great affection for [45] a doctrine 
that promised a life as sweet in its delights as it was 
of long duration. 

Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny also gave 
them presents in return,—one, among others, to 
soothe the minds of the country that had been dis- 
turbed on account of the murder committed on the 
person ofa Frenchman. The Hurons uttered a thou- 
sand insults against the murderers, so that Monsieur 
de Montmagny — seeing that they disapproved of the 
crime, for which they had given satisfaction accord- 
ing to the laws of their country —showed them by 
this present that in his mind the dead man had come 
to life again. He gave another present to urge them 
earnestly to keep the promise that they had given, 
that they would willingly listen to the Preachers of 


the Gospel. It is a strange thing that, as a rule, 


Men yield to God only through calamities. Since 


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 82 


les predeftinez d’auec les reprouuez: ceux-cy font 
morts comme des beftes, les autres ont preffé d’eftre 
faits enfans de Dieu, & vn grand nombre font 
montez dans les Cieux. 

Enfin toutes les affaires e{tat terminées, ces bonnes 
gens remonterent dans leurs [46] petits nauires 
d’écorces, emmenans auec eux outre le Pere Breflany 
quatre autres Peres de noftre Compagnie, & vn de 
nos Freres; fgauoir eft le Pere Gabriel Lalemant, le 
P. Iacques Bonin, le P. Adrian Greflon, le P. Adrian 
d’Aran, & noftre F. Nicolas Noirclair, accompagnez 
de 25. ou 30. Francois. C’'eft vne grande benediction 
de voir le courage & le zele de ces bons Peres, le 
fang & la mort de ceux qui les ont precedez les ani- 
ment, leur ioye paroiffoit fi grade fur leurs vifages, 
qu’on euft dit qu’ils s’en alloient tous prendre 
poffeffion d’vne Couronne, & d’vn Empire; & ce qui 
me femble encore plus eftonnant, c’ef{t que dans ces 
rencontres il fe trouue de ieunes gens qui portez par 
l’exemple de ces bds Peres veulent entrer dans les 
mefmes rifques, proteftans que l’amas [sc. l’amour] 
du falut des ames, & no pas l’efpoir d’vn lucre paffa- 
ger leur fait entreprendre vn voyage fi long, fi rude 
& fi dangereux. 

Nous auons appris depuis leur depart que cette 
petite armée de Hurons fe trouuant vers la pointe 
de l’Ifle de Montreal, s’ef{toit diuifée; les vns voulans 
paffer par l’habitation des Frangois qui font dans 


cette Ifle, comme ils l’auoient promis & Monfieur 


nof{tre Gouuerneur; les autres [47] voulans prendre 


l’autre co{té pour eftre le plus court, le plus facile, 
& le moins dangereux. Nous craignds fort que — 
cette feparation ne foit caufe de leur mal-heur: car — 


, 
u 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 189 


plagues, war, and famine have fallen on these peo- 
ples, the elect have been distinguished from the 
reprobate; the latter have died like beasts, while 
the former have hastened to become children of God 
and a great many have ascended to Heaven. 

Finally, when all these matters were concluded, 
those good people embarked in their [46] little bark 
vessels, taking with them, in addition to Father 
Bressany four other Fathers of our Society, and one 
of our Brethren,— namely, Father Gabriel Lalemant, 
Father Jacques Bonin, Father Adrian Greslon, Fa- 
ther Adrian d’Aran, and our Brother Nicolas Noir- 
clair,—together with 25 or 30 Frenchmen. Itisa 
great blessing to see the courage and zeal of those 
good Fathers. The blood and the deaths of those 
who have preceded them animate them; so great joy 
showed itself on their countenances that one would 
have said that they were all about to take possession 
of a Crown and an Empire. And what seems to me 
still more surprising is, that on such occasions young 
men are to be found who, incited by the example of 
the good Fathers, wish to run the same risks, and 
who protest that zeal for the salvation of souls, and 
not the hope of transitory lucre, makes them under- 
take so long, so rough, and so dangerous a journey. 

We have learned since their departure that, when 
this small army of Hurons reached the point of the 
Island of Montreal, it divided. Some wished to 
pass by the settlement of the French who are on that 
Island, as they had promised Monsieur the Governor; 
while the others [47] wished to take the other side 
as being shorter, easier, and less dangerous. We 
greatly fear that this division will bring misfortune 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


les Hiroquois irritez par leur perte, ne fe tien¢ 
pas en repos, il leur fera facile de perdre ces pauure: 


Seigneur qu’il foit leur guide dans le deftour 
chemins, leur appuy dans les fatigues, & leur bras & 
leur force das les combats. . 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 191 
e ‘upon them; for the Hiroquois, who are irritated by 
their losses, will not remain at rest; it will be easy 
_ for them to destroy those poor people if they find 
_ them separated. I pray Our Lord to be their guide 
__ in their devious paths, their support in their fatigues, 
and their arm and their strength in battle. 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


CHAPITRE IV. 


DE QUELQUES BONNES ACTIONS & DE QUELQUES BONS 
SENTIMENS DES SAUUAGES CHRESTIENS. 


Lya quelque temps qu’vn Sauuage des nations 
| plus hautes ayant efté baptizé en danger de 
mort, receut de la main de Dieu la vie du corps 

& la vie de l’ame, quafi tout enfemble: mais s’eftant 
écarté du lieu ot il deuoit prendre vne inftruction plus 
particuliere & plus 4a loifir, il s’oublia bien fort de 
fon deuoir, fi bien que nous eftant venu voir derechef 
il parut en affez mauuaife pofture, mais la veué des 
bons Chreftiens le toucha, & luy donna quelque enuie 
d’entrer en 1’Eglife, d6t [48] luy-mefme fe iugeoit 
fort indigne: vn bon Chreftien le voyant tout penfif 
luy dit, fuis moy, & fais ce que tu me veras faire. 
Prefente 4 Dieu la mefme priere que ie luy feray, 
1a-deffus fe iettant 4 genoux fur l’entrée de la Cha- 
pelle, qui eftoit toute remplie de monde, il baifa plu- 
fieurs fois la terre demandant publiquement pardon & 
Dieu, & fuppliant l’affemblée de ioindre leurs prieres 
auec les fiennes pour obtenir la remiffion de fes offen- 
fes, & de celles de fon camarade, auquel comme il le 
vid profterné par terre, il addreffa ces paroles: parle 
dans ton coeur, & reconnoift que tu n’es pas digne de © 
baifer ny marcher fur la terre de cette maifon. Fais. 
toy ce reproche a toy mefme, & dis au profond de ; 
ton ame; Ie fuis vn vermiffeau rampant deffus la 


terre qui ne merite pas que les hommes penfent a — 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 193 


CHAPTER IV. 


OF SOME GOOD ACTIONS AND SOME GOOD SENTIMENTS 
OF THE CHRISTIAN SAVAGES. 


OME time ago, a Savage of the upper nations, 
who was baptized when in danger of death, 
received from the hand of God both the life of 

the body and the life of the soul, almost at the same 
time. But having wandered from the place where 
he was to have been instructed more thoroughly and 
more at leisure, he forgot his duty to such an extent 
that, when he came to see us again, he was in a some- 
what bad frame of mind. But the sight of the good 
Christians touched him, and inspired him with a 
desire to enter the Church, of which [48] he con- 
sidered himself most unworthy. A good Christian 
who saw that he was very pensive, said to him: 
“Follow me and do what thou shalt seemedo. Offer 
to God the same prayer that I shall offer to him.” 
Thereupon, he knelt at the entrance of the Chapel, 
which was crowded with people; he kissed the ground 
several times, and publicly asked pardon from God,— 
supplicating those who were assembled to unite their 
prayers to his, in order to obtain the remission of his 
sins and of those of hiscomrade. To the latter, when 
he saw him prostrate on the ground, he addressed 
these words: ‘‘ Speak in thy heart, and acknowledge 
that thou art not worthy to kiss or to walk on the 
floor of this house. Reproach thyself with this, and 


_ Say in the depths of thy soul: ‘ I am a worm, creeping 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 32 


moy. Oferoy-ie donc me prefenter deuant Dieu? 
mais puis qu’il eft bon, & que i’ay regret de mes 
malices, il aura compaffion de moy. Voila vne lecon 
bien preignante. Le bon fut dans ce rencontre, 
qu’vn Sauuage eftranger amy du penitent voyant 


fon camarade en cette pofture crit qu’il eftoit obligé 


de s’humilier auffi bien que les autres: cecy n’eft 
[49] qu’vn petit efchantillon de ce qui fe paffe de 
temps en temps. Cette ferueur n’eftant ny comman- 
dée ny contrainte, eft loiiable 4 1’occafion des Payens 
qui attribueroient au corps de 1’Eglife les deffauts 
des membres; mais parlons d’autres chofes. 

Vn Pere de noftre Compagnie arriué depuis vn an 
en ces contrées, efcrit des trois Riuieres A Quebec, 
en ces termes: Ie voudrois pouuoir réfermer icy vn 
efchatillon de la cdfolatid que ie reffens actuelle- 
mét voyant dans noftre habitation vne affemblée des 
cing ou fix principales natids de ce nouueau monde 
quafi tous Chreftiens chanter chacun en fa langue les 
lotianges du grand Maiftre des Sauuages & de ceux 
qui ne le font pas. I’ay leu & releu autresfois les 
Relations fur ce fujet, & toufiours auec admiratid & 
auec fatisfaction, mais donnez moy la liberté de vous 
dire que i’ay commencé 4 les moins eftimer, tant les 
copies approchent peu de leur original, c’eft vn des 
{fpectacles qui fe concgoiuent mieux qui [sc. qu’ils] ne 
fe defcriuent. 

Vn autre dit qu'il a pris vn fouuerain plaifir dans 


vn combat, ou dans vne emulation qui s’eft fait entre 


plufieurs Sauuages. Quantité d’eftrangers eftans 


venus 4 [50] S. Iofeph, faifoient parade de leurs 
chanfons de guerre, on entédoit tous les iours leurs 
cabanes retentir de leurs voix, qui ne paroiffoient 


“fg 


1647-48 } RELATION OF 1647-48 195 


_ beneath the soil, and do not deserve that men should 
think of me. Can I, then, dare to present myself 
before God? But since he is good, and I am sorry 

for my sins, he will have compassion on me.’”’ 
Here is a very pregnant lesson. The best thing on 
that occasion was that a strange Savage, a friend of 
the penitent, who saw his comrade in that position, 
thought that he also was obliged to humiliate himself 
as well as the others. This is [49] but a slight 
sample of what occurs from time to time. As this 
fervor is neither commanded nor compulsory, it is 
praiseworthy as regards the Pagans, who might 
attribute to the body of the Church the faults of its 
members. But let us speak of other things. 

A Father of our Society, who arrived in these 
countries a year ago, writes from three Rivers to 
Quebec in these terms: ‘‘I would like to enclose 
with this a specimen of the consolation that I now 
experience when I actually see in our settlement an 
assembly of five or six of the principal nations of 
this new world, who are almost all Christians,— sing- 

| ing, each in their own tongue, the praises of the 
great Master of both Savages and those who are not 
Savages. Formerly, I read the Relations on this 
| subject over and over again, and always with admi- 
tation and satisfaction. But permit me to tell you 
that I am beginning to esteem them less, so slightly 
do the copies resemble the original. It is one of 
those spectacles that are more easily imagined than 
described.” 

Another says that he has taken the greatest pleas- 
ure in watching a contest or emulation that has been 
carried on among the Savages. A number of stran- 
gers who came to [50] St. Joseph made a parade of 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 32 


refpirer que Mars, & que fes armes: les Chreftiens 
voulans abaiffer l’orgueil de ces fanfarons, fe mirent 
a entonner leurs airs & leurs cantiques fpirituels, 
auec tant de grace & tant de deuotion, qu’ils me char- 
moient, dit le Pere, & quoy quiils les reiteraffent 
affez fouuent, ils me paroiffoient tous les iours plus 
beaux. Il’ne faut pas attendre beaucoup de fuite en 
ce Chapitre, les bés fentimens ont plus d’amour que 
de Retorique. 

Vn bon Neophyte s’eftat rencontré bien loin dans 
les bois auec vn mélange de Chreftiens & de Payens, 
les inuitoit tous les iours de venir aux prieres qu'il 
faifoit publiquemét en fa cabane, les auertiffant des 
iours de Fefte, pour les folennifer d’vne facon plus 
particuliere que les autres iours, recitat tous enfem- 
ble leurs prieres chantans des cantiques & difans 
leurs chapelets en vne cabane deftinée pour cela, 
pre{tat l’oreille aux anciens qui voudroient difcourir 
en faueur de la Foy. Ce bon homme voyant que 
quelques-vns moins feruens ne 1’efcoutoiét qu’a demy, 
[51] leur difoit nettement leurs veritez: quand vous 
ferez 4 S. Iofeph vous irez aux prieres comme les 
autres, on vous croira bien feruent & on fera trompé, 
Aa qui eft-ce que vous croyez? eft-ce 4 Dieu ou aux 
Peres qui nous enfeignent? fi vous croyez en Dieu, 


pourquoy ne le priez vous pas aufii bien parmy les — 

arbres que parmy les hommes? C’eft Dieu quia 
fait les arbres auffi bien que les hémes, il eft par 
tout. Si vous croyez feulement aux hommes, vous. 4 
n’irez pasauCiel. Ces Peres font deshommescomme 
nous, ils ne nous difent pas croyez en nous, mais ils 
nous difent croyez en Dieu, ils ne font que des — . 


ee 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 197 


their war-songs. Every day their cabins resounded 
with the noise of their voices, that breathed of noth- 
ing but Mars and his arms. The Christians, who 
wished to lower the pride of these boasters, began to 
intone their hymns and canticles with so much grace 
and devotion ‘‘ that they charmed me,” says the Fa- 
ther; ‘‘ and, although they repeated them very often, 
they seemed more beautiful to me every day.’’ Much 
sequence must not be expected in this Chapter, for 
good sentiments contain more love than Rhetoric. 

A good Neophyte who found himself far away in 
the woods, with a medley of Christians and Pagans, 
invited them every day to come to the prayers that 
he publicly offered in his cabin,— notifying them of 
the Festivals, that these might be observed in a more 
solemn manner than the other days, by singing 
hymns and saying their beads in a cabin set apart 
for the purpose, and by listening to the elders who 
might wish to speak in favor of the Faith. When 
this good man saw that some, who were less fervent, 
only half listened, [51] he plainly told them the truth 
about themselves. ‘‘ When you will be at St. 
Joseph, you will go to prayers like the others; you 
will be considered very fervent, and they who think 
so will be mistaken. In whom do you believe? Is 
it in God, or in the Fathers who teach us? If you 
believe in God, why do you not pray to him as much 
among the trees as among men? God has made the 
trees as well as men. He is everywhere. If you 
believe only in men, you will not go to Heaven. 
The Fathers are men as we are; they do not say: 
“Believe in us;’ but they say to us: ‘ Believe in 
God.’ They are only Interpreters, they are like 
people who relate true tales.” 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Interpretes, ils font femblables 4 des gens qui 
racontent de veritables nouuelles. 

Dans ces entrefaites, vn Payen s’eftant gliffé la 
nuit en la cabane de ce bon Neophyte pour recher- 
cher vne fille ou vne femme felon leur ancienne 
couftume, cét homme vrayement Chreftien, le reprit 
auec vne liberté, & auec vn zele Apoftolique; le 
Payen n’ofant luy faire aucun mal, pource qu'il eft 
homme d’authorité, fe donna foy-mefme, par vne 
rage & par vne ie ne f¢ay quelle phrenefie, vn coup 
de couteau dans la cuiffe, noftre Neophyte [52] voy- 
ant le fang couler en abondance, luy dit: quoy done 
mes paroles font-elles changées en vn couteau? 
Adieu, ie m’en vay, ie voy bien que fi ie vous par- 
lois plus long-temps mes paroles deuiendroient vne 
ef{pée qui vous tueroit; & 1a-deffus il plie bagage & 
s’en va chaffer en vn autre endroit, ot fa femme & 
fa fille tomberent malades, luy qui portoit toufiours 
de l’eau benite auec foy, en donna vn petit a boire 
A fa femme; & en forma le figne de la Croix, fur le 
front & fur la poitrine de fa petite fille, leur difant 
portez voftre coeur 4 Dieu, & luy dites, guery moy, 
fi tu me veux guerir, tu peu tout, fi tu dis de moy, 
qu’elle guerife, ie gueriray. Si tu ne veux pas me 
guerir, fuis ta penfée, ie ne crois pas en toy pour 
rauoir la fanté. Ie me mis 4 genoux aupres d’elle, 
adioutoit-il, & ie dy 4 celuy qui a tout fait, elles font 
malades, tu les vois bien, fais tout ce que tu voudras 
faire, fi tu dis qu’elles gueriffent, tu me feras plaifir. 
Si tu ne dis mot, ie ne diray que ces deux paroles, — 
mene les au Ciel. Ie ne fgay pas, faifoit-il, ce que — 
penfe celuy qui a tout fait, mais ie fcay bien que — 


l’vne guerit foudainement, & l’autre fe porta mieux: ie | 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 199 


Meanwhile, a Pagan had crept at night into the 
cabin of this good Neophyte, to seek some girl or 
woman, according totheirformer custom. This truly 
Christian man reproved him with an Apostolic free- 
dom and zeal. The Pagan— who did not dare to do 
him any injury, because he is a man of authority — 
inflicted, through some fury or I know not what 
frenzy, a knife-wound in his own thigh. When our 
Neophyte [52] saw the blood flowing abundantly, 
he said to him: ‘‘ What, have my words turned into. 
aknife? Adieu; I am going away. I see very well 
that, if I were to speak much longer to you, my 
words would soon become a javelin that would kill 
you.’’ Thereupon, he decamped and went to hunt 
in another place, where his wife and his daughter 
fell ill. As he always carried holy water with him, 
he gave a little of it to his wife to drink; and with 
some more of it he made the sign of the Cross on 
the forehead, and on the breast of his little girl, say- 
ing to them: ‘‘ Lift up your hearts to God and say 
to him: ‘ Cure me, if it be thy will. Thou canst do. 
all things. If thou say of me: ‘‘ Let her be cured!”’ 
I shall be cured. If thou wilt not cure me, follow 
out thy own purpose. Ido not believe in thee only 
that my health may be restored.’’’ ‘‘I knelt beside 
her,’’ he added, ‘‘ and I said to him who has made: 
all: ‘ They are sick, as thou seest well. Do all as 
thou willest. If thou say that they will be cured, 


thou wilt do mea pleasure. If thou say not a word, 


I will say but this: ‘‘ Take them to Heaven.”’ I 
know not,”’ said he, ‘‘ what are the thoughts of him 
who has made all; but I do know that one of them 
was suddenly cured and the other became better at 
once, and shortly [53] afterward she recovered her: 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 32 


auffi-toft, & incontinent [53] apres recouura fa pleine 
fanté. Dieu s’entretient volontiers auec les fimples. 

Ce bon homme voulant retourner ce Printemps en 
la refidence de S. Iofeph, quelques Sorciers, ou plu- 
{to{t quelques Charlatans de Gafpé, luy dirét qu'il 
periroit dans les glaces, en effet la grande riuiere en 
charioit vn figrad ndbre qu’elle en paroiffoit quafi 
toute couuerte: mais fi tu veux, luy dirent ces Ion- 
gleurs, nous efcarterons les glaces, inuoquons noftre 
Demon, par nos chants & par nos tambours. Vous 
e{tes bien trompez, leur refpondit-il, le Demon a-il 
fait les glaces, pour en difpofer? ie m’en vay prier 
celuy qui les a fait tout deuant vous, & fe mettant a 
genoux, il profere ces paroles, toy qui eft bon, & qui 
a tout fait, tu determine de ces glaces auffi bien que 
de tout autre chofe; ce n’eft point le mefchant Mani- 
tou qui en determine, c’eft toy qui eft tout puiffant, 
fi tu veux que nous partions demain prend ces pen- 
fées que les glaces s’en aillent, & il n’y en aura plus: 
fi tu ne veux pas que nous partions, nous dirons, il 
eft le maiftre, ne partons pas. Le lendemain, chofe 
A la verité bien remarquable, foit que les glaces 
qu’on voyoit ce iour 14, [54] fuffent les dernieres, ou 
que Dieu par fa bonté, les euft deftournées a l’autre 
bord de ce grand Fleuue: quoy que c’en foit, la 
riuiere parut toute libre, & noftre Chreftien fe moc- 
qua des Sorciers. Hé bien, difoit-il, vos chan[t]s & 
vos Manitous, font-ils maiftres des glaces? parts fi tu 
veux, luy repliquent-ils, mais fi tu parts tu es perdu, 
car il en reuiendrad’autres, quit’abifmeront. Celuy 


qui les‘a deftournées, refpond-il, a-il perdu fa puif- 


fance? ne peut-il pas empefcher leur retour? ils par- 
tirent, & enfin arriuerent 4 bon port. 


— x 


rad 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 201 


health.’’ God willingly converses with the simple. 

When this good man wished to return in the Spring 
to the residence of St. Joseph, some Sorcerers, or 
rather Charlatans, of Gaspé told him that he would 
perish in the floating ice. In fact, there was such a 
quantity of it in the great river that it seemed to be 
covered thereby. ‘‘ But,’’ said the Jugglers, ‘“‘ if 
thou wish, we will turn away the ice-floes. Let us 
invoke our Demon with our chants and our drums.’’ 
‘‘ You are greatly mistaken,’’ he replied. ‘‘ Has the 
Demon made the ice, that he can dispose of it? I 
am going to pray, right before you, to him who has 
made it.” And kneeling down he uttered these 
words: ‘‘O thou who art good and who hast made 
all, thou disposest of that ice as of everything else. 
It is not the wicked Manitou who disposes of it, but 
thou who art all-powerful. If thou will that we 
depart to-morrow, ordain that the ice may disappear, 
and there will be no more. If thou will not that we 
should leave, we will say: ‘Thou art the master; 
let us not depart.’’’ On the morrow, truly a most 
remarkable fact,— either because the ice-floes that 
were seen that day [54] were the last, or because God 
in his goodness diverted them to the other side of 
the great River,—in any case, the river was quite 
free, and our Christian laughed at the Sorcerers. 
‘‘Well!’’ said he, ‘‘are your songs and your Mani- 
tous the masters of the ice-floes?”” ‘‘ Depart, if thou 
wilt,’’ they replied; ‘‘ but if thou depart thou art 
lost, for others will come that will overwhelm thee.’’ 
‘‘ Has he who has turned them away,”’ he retorted, 
“lost his power? Can he not prevent them from 
returning?” They set out, and finally reached port 
safely. 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 32 


Vne ieune fille aagée de 17. ou 18. ans, recherchée 
de quantité de perfonnes, pource qu’elle auoit le 
corps & l’efprit fort bien fait, tomba griefuement 
malade, fe voyant en danger de mort, elle fit cette 
priere 4 Noftre Seigneur. Ie fuis bien aife d’eftre 
malade & de mourir deuant que d’auoir ef{té mariée, 
c’eft toy que i’aime, ie n’aime pas les hommes. 
Determine de moy comme tu voudras, ie te remercie 
de ce que ie fuis malade, & de ce que ie fouffre, & de 
ce que ie mourray: car tu le veux, & i’en fuis bien 
contente, la Vierge me prefentera 4 toy apres ma 
mort. Quelque langueur qu’euft cette pauure enfant, 
elle fe dreffoit [55] plufieurs fois le iour en fon feant 
pour offrir 4 Dieu fes prieres, & pour reciter fon 
chapelet. Souuent on entendoit fortir ces paroles de 
fa bouche, ny la mort ny les maladies, ny les fouf- 
frances ne m’affligent point, mais ie fuis trifte de ce 
que ie ne puis aller en la maisé de prieres auec les 
autres, n’auray-ie point cette confolation deuant mon 
trépas, d’y entrer pour receuoir celuy que ie verray 
bien-toft au Ciel? Elle auoit vn fi grand foin de la 
pureté de fon ame, qu’elle demandoit a fe confeffer 
tous les iours. Celuy qui l’a plus particulierement 
affiftée, dit que iamais elle n’a commis aucune faute 
mortelle, que fon coeur eftoit veritablement innocent, 
elle ne prenoit plaifir qu’au difcours de 1’ Eternité: 
quelque peu de temps deuant fa mort ayant receu 
tous les Sacremens de 1’Eglife, elle fut tourmentée 
de deux ou trois conuulfions tres-violentes: puis reue- 


nant A foy, elle s’adreffa au Pere qui la veilloit® 


qui prioit aupres d’elle. Adieu mon Pere, luy dit- 
elle, d’vn iugement & d’vne parole auffi ferme que 


iamais. Adieu, vos prieres font exaucées, retirez 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 208 


A young girl 17 or 18 years of age, who was sought 
in marriage by many persons because of her well- 
formed body and her excellent qualities, fell danger- 
ously ill. Seeing herself in danger of death, she said 
this prayer to Our Lord: ‘‘ I am very glad to be sick, 
and to die before having been married. It is thee 
whom I love; I love not men. Dispose of me as 
thou will. I thank thee because I am ill, and because 
I suffer, and because I shall die; for thou willest it 
and I am well pleased. The Virgin will present me 
to thee after my death.’’ However weak that poor 
child was, she [55] sat up several times a day to say 
her prayers to God, or to recite her rosary. ‘These 
words were frequently heard to fall from her lips: 
“Neither death, nor sickness, nor sufferings any 
longer afflict me; but I am sad because I cannot go 
to the house of prayer with the others. Shall I not 
have the consolation, before I die, of entering it to 
receive him whom I shall soon see in Heaven?’’ So 
careful was she of the purity of her soul that she 
asked to be allowed to confess every day. He who 
especially attended her says that she never com- 
mitted any mortal sin; that her heart was truly inno- 
cent; that she took pleasure only in things relating 
to Eternity. A short time before her death, after 
she had received all the Sacraments of the Church, 
she was tormented by two or three very violent 
convulsions. When she regained consciousness, she 
spoke to the Father who watched her and prayed 
beside her: ‘‘ Adieu, my Father,’’ she said to him 
with her mind and her speech as clear as ever; 
“ Adieu, your prayers are granted. Withdraw when 
you please. Here is Jesus my Spouse, who takes 
me to Heaven;’’ and thereupon she expired. Flesh 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (VoL. 32 i 
af 


vous quand il vous plaira, voila Iefus mon Epoux qui . 


m’emmene dans le Ciel, & 1a-deffus elle expira. La 
chair & [56] le fang ne luy auoit pas donné ces fenti- 
mens: car elle eftoit fille d’vn tres-mauuais pere, que 
Dieu auoit exterminé de la terre par vn chaftiment 
public, quelle rage & ce mauuais homme de voir du 
milieu des flammes fon enfant au milieu de la gloire 
qu’il a perdué pour s’eftre toufiours bandé contre la 
Foy & contre la verité, dont il auoit vne grande 
connoiffance. 

Les Religieufes de l’Hofpital qui ont toufiours eu 
quelques malades Francois, ont auffi nourry tout l’hy- 
uer vne petite cabane de Sauuages qui nous ont bien 
donné de l’edification: ces bonnes Meres ne man- 
quoient point auec leur ferueur accouftumée de les 
faire prier Dieu tous les iours en leur langue, faifans 
la charité des deux mains & pour le corps & pour 
l’ame: ie me fouuiens, qu’allant vifiter ces pauures 
gens, vne femme difoit de temps en temps, mais mon 
Pere qui eft au Ciel me pard6nera-il mes offenfes, ie 
me hais moy-mefme, ie voudrois qu’on me defchirat 
de ce que ie l’ay fafché. Ie fuis fouuent trifte, difoit 
vne autre de ce que ie n’ay point d’efprit, ie ne 
{caurois retenir les prieres qu’on nous fait faire tous 


les iours: quand on demadoit A quelqu’vn d’eux s’il © 


y auoit [57] long-temps qu’il ne s’eftoit confeffé, s’il 


auoit paffé quinze iours fans le faire, ilfe plaignoit — 
difant qu’on ne l’efcoutoit pas affez fouuent: il faut — 


ay 


aduoiier que fi les Hiroquois n’éloignoient point nos 


Neophytes de nos habitations, & files eftrangers ne fe vi 
venoiét point mefler auec eux, qu’on auroit des ames _ 


choifies pour leur candeur & pour leur fimplicité. Le 


Capitaine de Tadouffac eftant malade a S. lofeph, 


—EE———————— 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 205 


and [56] blood had not inspired her with those senti- 
ments for she was the daughter of a very bad father 
whom God had removed from the face of the earth by 
a public punishment. What fury must not that man 
feel on seeing from amid the flames his child in the 
midst of glory? which he had forfeited through hav- 
ing ever been leagued against the Faith and against 
the truth, of which he had a considerable knowledge. 

The Nuns of the Hospital, who have always had 
some sick French people under their care, also fed 
throughout the winter a small cabinful of Savages, 
who edified us greatly. The good Mothers with 
their accustomed zeal did not fail to make them pray 
to God every day in their own language; with both 
hands they bestowed charity, not only for the body 
but for the soul. I remember that, when I visited 
those poor people, a woman said from time to time: 
* But will my Father who is in Heaven pardon my 
sins? I hate myself. I would like to be torn to 
pieces for having offended him.’’ ‘‘ I am often sad,”’ 
said another, ‘‘ because I have no sense. I cannot 
remember the prayers that we are made to recite 
every day.’’ When any one of them was asked 
whether it was [57] a long time since he had con- 


_ fessed, if a fortnight had passed without his having 


done so, he would complain that he was not heard 
often enough. It must be admitted that, if the Hiro- 
quois did not keep our Neophytes away from our 
settlements, and if strangers did not come and mix 
with them, we would have choice souls as regards 
their candor and their simplicity. The Captain of 
Tadoussac was ill at St. Joseph, and he showed that 
God triumphs in the midst of barbarism. The 


: Father who has charge of the Savages went to visit 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


fit paroiftre que Dieu triomphe au milieu de la bar- 
barie: le Pere quia foin des Sauuages 1’allant vifiter, 
il luy dit: mon Pere, toute mon efperance eft en Iefus: 
voila ce que ie luy dit fort fouuét, tu fgay tout, tu 
connois tout, me voila, difpofe de moy. Eftant porté 
4 1’Hofpital, le Pere luy tefmoignant vn grand defir 
qu’il retourna en fanté, il luy dit monftrant vn’ 
Crucifix, qu’il auoit fait mettre deuant fes yeux: voila 
celuy qui determine, il le faut laiffer faire: le lende- 
main il tefmoigna par quelques paroles qu’il eut bien 
voulu retourner en fanté: mais voyat que ce defir 
croiffoit, il fe douta que le Demon le vouloit tromper, 
il fe cdfeffa deux fois ce iour-la recherchant fes plus 
petites fautes auec autant de lumiere qu’en pourroit 
auoir vn Religieux: puis s’adreffant au [58] Pere luy 
dit vn iour deuant fa mort, affeurement i’ay veu vn 
Demon, cela m’a efpouuanté: mais ie luy ay dit, que 
ie croyois en celuy qui a tout fait que pour luy ie le 
mefprifois, il a difparu tout a coup, i’ay auffi efté 
troublé par quelques fonges: mais ie me fuis fouuenu 
que ceux qui croyoient en Dieu ne croyoient plus en 
leurs fonges, me voila pour le prefent dans vne grande 
paix, ie voy bien que celuy qui a tout fait veut que 
i’aille auec luy i’en fuis content, c’eft a luy d’en 
determiner. Tefmoigne aux Sauuages qui font allez 
en guerre que ie fuis fort aife d’aller au Ciel, c’eft 
chofe eftrange que des hommes éleuez dans la barbarie 
meurent auec vne fi grande confiance, qu’on diroit 
qu’ils voyent de leurs yeux le bien qu’ils vont poffe- 
der: on le fit prier Dieu pour Madame la Fondatrice ~ 
de cét Hofpital, ce qu’il fit les mains iointes & les - 
yeux éleuez au Ciel dans vne pofture qui faifoit voir 1 
qu’il eftoit touché: ces bonnes gens ne ne Q 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 207 


him, and he said to him: ‘‘ My Father, all my hopes 
rest in Jesus. This is what I often say to him: 
‘Thou knowest all; here I am; dispose of me.’”’ 
When he was taken to the Hospital, the Father told 
him that he wished very much that his health might 
be restored, Pointing to a Crucifix, which he had 
caused to be placed before his eyes, he said: ‘‘ It is 
he who will decide; he must be allowed to do as he 
wills.’’ On the following day he said in a few words 
that he would have liked to recover his health, but 
when he found that that desire grew on him, he sus- 
pected that the Devil wished totempt him. He con- 
fessed twice that day, seeking for his slightest faults 
with as much discernment as a Religious could have 
had; then addressing himself to the [58] Father, he 
said, a day before his death: ‘‘I certainly saw a 
Demon; he frightened me but I told him that I be- 
lieved in him who has made all; and that, as for him, 
I despised him. He disappeared all at once. I was 
also troubled by dreams; but I remembered that they 
who believed in God no longer believed in dreams. 
At present, I feel a great peace. I see very well 
that it is the will of him who has made all that I 
should go with him; and I am happy todo so. It 
is for him to decide. Tell the Savages who have gone 
to war that I am well pleased to go to Heaven.”’ It 
is a strange thing that men brought up in barbarism 
should die with so great confidence. One would say 
that they see with their eyes the happiness that they 
are toenjoy. When made to pray to God for Madame 
the Foundress of the Hospital, he did so with clasped 
hands, and with his eyes lifted up to Heaven, ina 
position that showed that he was touched. Those 
good people do not philosophize as much as do our 


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


point tant que nos Europeans, quand ils ont vne 
fois receu la Foy, & qu’ils croyent en fuite que 
celuy qui obeira aux volontez de Dieu fera fauué, & 
que s’il commet quelque offenfe elle luy fera pardon- 
née s'il eft vrayement [59] contrit & confeffé, ils 
s’attendent que Dieu fera infailliblemét de fon cofté 
ce qu’il a promis, & en verité ils ont raifon. Ie feray 
icy mention, pour conclufion de ce Chapitre, d’vne 
ceremonie des Sauuages qui nous a donné de la con- 
folation: car ils commencent de donner vn habit tout 
Chreftien aux fagons de faire indifferentes qu’ils ont 
tirées de leurs parens infideles. On a veu fouuent 
dans les Relations precedentes que c’eftoit la cou- 
{tume des Sauuages de refufciter les morts qui eftoiét 
parmy eux ou gens de confideration, ou qu’ils 
aymoient beaucoup pendant leur vie, cela fe fait 
encor afin que les orphelins ne foient pas delaiffez. 
Car celuy 4 qui on donne le nom de leur pere, fe 
charge des enfans. Wn Capitaine Chreftien de S. 
Iofeph, voulant refufciter vn flen parent fit vn feftin, 
ot. fe trouuerent enuiron 50. conuiez. C’eft par 
parentefe dans les feftins & par des prefens qu’ils 
font la plufpart de leurs affaires. Tout le mdde 
ayant pris fa place qui eft la premiere qu’il ren- 
contre, ce Capitaine harangua en ces termes; fi ie 
n’eftois Chreftien, & fi ie n’auois la creance que 
nous deuons tous refufciter, i’aurois bien fujet de 
m’atrifter dans la [60] perte que ie fis l’an paffé de 
mon nepueu, fa mort affligeroit mon coeur, mais 
puis que la vie ne nous eft oftée que pour nous 


e{tre rendué, puis que nous deuons nous reuoir & — 


nous rencétrer derechef, ce n’eft pas vne mort, c’eft 
vne abfence, & par confequent ie prend cette 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 209 


Europeans. When once they have received the 
Faith, and when they believe that he who obeys 
God’s commands will be saved, and that, if he com- 
mits a sin, it will be forgiven, provided he be really 
[59] contrite and have confessed, they expect that 
God on his part will infallibly do what he has prom- 
ised; and, in truth, they areright. I shall here men- 
tion, as the conclusion of this Chapter, a ceremony 
of the Savages that has afforded us consolation, for 
they are beginning to give quite a Christian charac- 
ter to the harmless usages that they have derived 
from their infidel ancestors. It has often been men- 
tioned in the previous Relations that it was the cus- 
tom of the Savages to bring back to life those among 
them who were persons of note, or who were greatly 
beloved by them during their lifetime. This is still 
done, in order that the orphans may not be aban- 
doned; for he to whom the name of their father is 
given takes charge of the children. A Christian 
Captain of St. Joseph who wished to bring one of 
his relatives back to life, gave a feast at which about 
50 guests were present. I should say, in passing, 
that it is by means of feasts and presents that most 
of their affairs are transacted. When each one had 
taken his place,— which is always the first he finds, — 
this Captain delivered the following harangue: 
*“ Were I not a Christian, and had I not the belief 
that we shall all rise again, I would have every 
reason to grieve for the [60] loss of my nephew last 
year; his death would sadden my heart. But —inas- 
much as life is taken away from us only to be again 
restored, as we are to see and meet one another 
again —it is not a death, but an absence; and con- 
sequently I take this resurrection of my nephew, that 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


refurrection que ie fais de mon nepueu pour marque 
de la veritable refurrection que nous attendons. C’eft 
donc vn tel que i’adopte pour mon nepueu, & qui me 
fera fouuenir que mon nepueu n’eft pas mort. La- 
deffus il fit vn beau prefent au nouuel adopté, lequel 
repartit fort 4 propos. Ce prefent qui me fait fouue- 
nir de l’article de noftre creance fur lequel eft fondé 
la Foy de noftre refurrection, me remet auffi en 
memoire que ie fuis Chreftien: ie le fuis en effet, & 
ie tiens auec vous & auec tous ceux qui font baptifez, 
qu’il ne faut point s’attrifter de la mort de ceux qui 
doiuent reuiure vne autrefois, & partant refioiiyffons 
nous, non pas du portraict de la refurrectid que nous 
exprimons par noftre ceremonie, mais de la veritable 
refurrection que nous attendons: apres les harangues 
il fallut chanter felon leur couftume, l’vn des plus 
confiderables éleuant fa voix chanta vn de leurs [61] 
airs, dont voicy les paroles: celuy qui me doit refuf- 
citer, c’eft celuy qui me confole: voila toute fa 
chanfon compofée de diuers tons fur lefquels il appli- 
quoit toufiours les mefmes paroles. Dieu vueille 
qu’ils changent ainfi d’eux-mefmes leurs anciennes 
couftumes, en des actions plaines de deuotion & de 
pieté. 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 211 


I now accomplish, as a symbol of the true resurrec- 
tion to which we look forward. Therefore, I adopt 
such a one for my nephew; and he will remind me 
that my nephew is not dead.’’ ‘Thereupon, he gave 
a handsome present to the newly-adopted one who 
replied, most appropriately: ‘‘ This present, which 
recalls to me the article of our creed on which the 
Faith of our resurrection is founded, also reminds 
me that Iam aChristian. Iam one, in truth, and I 
hold with you, and with all who are baptized, that 
we must not grieve for the death of those who are 
to live again. Let us therefore rejoice, not in the 
image of the resurrection that we express by our cere- 
mony, but in the true resurrection to which we look 
forward.’’ After these harangues, they had to sing, 
according to their custom. One of the most notable 
lifted up his voice and chanted one of their [61] 
songs, of which the following are the words: ‘‘ He 
who is to bring me back to life is he who consoles 
me.’ That was the whole of his song, consisting 
of various tunes, to which he always adapted the same 
words. God grant that they may of themselves 
change their ancient customs into actions replete with 
devotion and piety. 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


CHAPITRE V. 
CONTINUATION DU MESME SUJET. 


N Capitaine Sauuage abordant vn Pere de noftre 
Compagnie, luy dit: ie te prie mon Pere de 
venir auec moy en la maifon des filles vierges, 

qui enfeignét nos enfans: le Pere luy refpondit que 
ces bonnes filles l’entendroient, & qu’il n’auoit pas 
befoin d’interprete: ie leur veux, repartit-il, cOmuni- 
quer vne affaire d’importance. Comme ils eftoient 
tous deux au parloir auec la Mere Superieure de ce 
petit Seminaire, ce bon Neophite tira vne petite 
croix de cuiure, qui fe pouuoit ouurir & fermer, & 
leur dit, tout ce qui eft fur la terre, n’eft rien, ce 
qui regarde le Ciel eft de prix & de valeur. Cette 
petite croix voudroit bien cdtenir vne parcelle [62] 
des os facrez qu’on honore fur les Autels, dont les 
ames font en Paradis: iugez tous deux fi ie fuis digne 
d’en porter, c’eft vn grand affaire, il n’en fera que 
ce que vous aurez determiné. La Superieure bien 
edifiée de cette pieté, luy accorda fa demande, dont 
ce bon Neophite fe fentoit autant obligé comme s’il 
eut fait rencontre d’vn grand threfor. 


Ces bonnes Meres font extremement charitables, © 
les difficultez du pays ne les eftonnent point, leur 


Seminaire ne refufe aucune Francoife ny aucune fille 


Sauuage, l’aumofne fe fait chez elles en tout temps, — : 
leur coeur eft plus grand que leurs biens. Les pen- 
fionaires en France ne greuent point les Monafteres _ 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 213 


CHAPTER V. 
CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 


SAVAGE Captain approached a Father of our 
Society, and said to him: ‘‘I beg thee, my 
Father, to come with me to the house of the 


virgin sisters who teach our children.’’ ‘The Father 
told him that those good maidens would understand 
him, and that he needed nointerpreter. ‘‘ I wish,’’ 


he replied, ‘‘ to speak to them on a matter of great 
importance.’’ When they were both in the parlor 
with the Mother Superior of this little Seminary, the 
good Neophyte drew out a small copper cross that 
could open and shut, and said to them: ‘‘ All that is 
on earth is nothing; what relates to Heaven is of 
value and consequence. This little cross would like 
to contain a particle [62] of the sacred bones that are 
honored on the Altars, of those whose souls are in 
Paradise. Consider, both of you, whether I am 
worthy to bear it; it isan important matter; what- 
ever you decide shall be done.’’ The Superior, who 
was greatly edified by such piety, granted his request, 
for which the good Neophyte was as grateful as if 
he had found a rich treasure. 

The good Mothers are exceedingly charitable; the 
difficulties of the country do not frighten them; their 
Seminary refuses no girl, whether French or Savage; 
alms are bestowed at their house at all times; their 
hearts are greater than their possessions. Boarders 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 82 


ot elles font inftruites, ce n’eft pas de mefme en 


’ 


t 


Canadas, il faut non feulement nourrir & inftruire les _ 


petites feminariftes, mais il les faut habiller, & 4 
leur depart leur faire de bonnes aumofnes, & fouuent 
encor a leurs parens, tant ils font pauures. Iln’ya 
pas long-temps, qu’vne petite Huronne fortant de 
cette fainte & charitable maifon, pour eftre reconduite 
en fon pays, ces bonnes Meres non feulement l’habil- 
lerent de pied en cap, mais ils firent encor [63] des 
prefens a fes parens, pour marque du contentement 
que cét enfant leur auoit donné. Ce n’eft pas tout, 
il fallut fournir de viures pour elle & pour ceux qui 
la venoient querir: en vn mot, vous diriez qu’elles 
feroient volontiers tous les frais neceffaires pour les 
mener & pour les conduire iufques en Paradis. 

Vne autre Seminarifte Algonquine, ayant efté nour- 
rie, éleuée & entretenué plufieurs années dedans ce 
Seminaire, ces bonnes Meres luy ont donné fes petits 
meubles pour fon mariage, & leur charité paffant au 
dela des mers, a obtenu fon mariage d’vne Dame de 
merite, dont la pieté eft peut-eftre defia recompenfée 
au centuple deffus la terre, & le fera vn iour dedans 
les Cieux. C’eft vrayement rechercher la gloire de 
Noftre Seigneur, de pouruoir aux neceffitez d’autruy, 
dans les befoins d’vne maifon incommodée. 

Elles nourriffoient vn Huron, dont la vertu a rauy 
tous ceux qui le céno[i]ffoient, quelque froid qu’il fit 
pendant tout l’hyuer il ne manquoit iamais de paffer 


au trauers des neiges & des glaces, pour venir enten- 
dre vne Meffe a la paroiffe deuant le iour, nonobftant — 
qu’il fe trouuaft par [64] apres a celle qui fe dit tous — 
les iours dans 1l’Eglife de ces bonnes Meres: cSt 


homme paffoit tous les iours vn temps fi notable a 


1647 —48] RELATION OF 1647-48 215 


in France are no burden on the Monasteries where 
they are educated, but it is otherwise in Canadas. 
Not only must the little seminarists be fed and 
taught; they must also be clothed, and, on their 
departure, considerable alms are given them and 
oftentimes also to their parents, so poor are they. 
Not long ago, when a little Huron girl left this holy 
and charitable house to be taken back to her own 
country, the good Mothers not only clothed her from 
head to feet, but they also gave [63] presents to her 
parents, to manifest the satisfaction that the child 
had given them. That is not all; food had to be 
provided for her and for those who came for her; in 
a word, you would say that they would cheerfully 
incur all the expense necessary to lead and to conduct 
them to Paradise. 

Another Algonquin Seminarist had been fed, edu- 
cated, and cared for during many years at the Semi- 
nary; the good Mothers gave her the small articles 
of furniture that she needed on the occasion of her 
matriage, and their charity went beyond the seas to 
obtain her marriage portion from a Lady of merit, 
whose piety is probably already rewarded a hundred- 
fold on earth, and will be one day in Heaven. It is 
truly seeking the glory of Our Lord, to provide for 
the necessities of others amid the needs of a house 
that is itself in straitened circumstances. 

They fed a Huron whose piety delighted all who 
knew him. However cold it might be throughout 
the winter, he never failed to go through snow and 
ice to hear a Mass in the parish church before day- 
light, notwithstanding the fact that he afterward 
went [64] to that which was said every day in the- 


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 32 


genoux, que les Frangois en demeuroient eftonnez, 
& edifiez, il ne feauoit que c’eftoit de fe mettre en 
colere, fes plus grads mefcontentemens eftoient fon- 
dez fur ce qu’on ne luy parloit pas affez long-temps 
a fon gré des veritez Eternelles: il eft retourné cette 
année en fon pays, nous efperons que fa ferueur 
profitera 4 fes compatriotes. 

Quelques Sauuages s’accufoient vn iour d’auoir le 
coeur tout remply de malice, le Pere qui les efcoutoit 
leur demanda fi cette malice faifoit vn long feiour 
dedans leurs ames: non pas refpondent-ils, mais 
cependat elle ne laiffe pas d’y entrer; mais encor, 
pourfuit le Pere, que faites vous, quand vn fi mau- 
uais hofte vous viens vifiter? pour moy, difoit 1’vn, 
quand ie fens que la colere vient efchauffer mon 
coeur, ie dis 4 mon ame, ceux qui prient & qui croyent 
ne fe mettent point en colere, & aufii-toft ce feu 
s’amortift, & quelquefois il s’efteint tout A coup. Ie 
fuis plus mefchant, difoit fon compagnon; car il me 
vient des penfées de haine, des penfées [65] fales, qui 
gaftent tout mon cceur; mais que fais-tu dans ce 
rencontre, dit le Pere, i’ay peur, re{pondit-il, & ie me 
mets a prier Dieu, & tout cela s’en va, le faint Efprit 
eft vn grand Maiftre, il en fait plus en vn moment, 
quand il luy plaift, que les Docteurs en cent ans. 

Si ie dis que des ieunes hommes follicitez par de 
mauuaifes creatures ont fait triompher la grace de la 
nature, i’vferay de redites, quoy que la chofe foit 
toute nouuelle. 

Vne perfonne malade au milieu de ces bois, fe 


trouua dans des angoiffes & dans des preffes quila _ 
iettoient A deux doigts du defefpoir. Son pauure © 


corps abattu voulant fommeiller, fon ame apperceut . 


iJ 
J 
= 
z 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 * 217 


Church of the good Mothers. That man daily 
remained upon his knees so long a time that the 
French were astonished and edified. He knew not 
what it was to be angry; his greatest discontent arose 
from his not being spoken to about Eternal truths as 
long as he would have liked. He returned this year 
to his own country and we trust that his fervor will 
benefit his countrymen. 

Some Savages accused themselves one day, saying 
that their hearts were full of malice. The Father 
who heard them asked them whether that malice 
dwelt long in their souls. ‘‘ No,” they said; ‘‘ but 
still it enters them.’’ ‘‘ Butagain,’’ said the Father, 
*‘ what do you do when so bad a guest visits you?”’ 
‘‘For my part,’’ said one, ‘‘ when I feel that anger 
comes to inflame my heart, I say to my soul: ‘ They 
who pray and who believe do not get angry;’ and at 
once the fire cools down and is sometimes completely 
extinguished.” ‘‘ I am more wicked,’’ said his com- 
panion; ‘‘for thoughts of hatred and thoughts of 
lewdness come to me, [65] which soil the whole of 
my heart.’’ ‘‘ But what dost thou on such occa- 
sions?’’ asked the Father. ‘‘ lam afraid,’ he replied; 
*“then I commence to pray to God, and all passes 
away.’’ The holy Ghost is a great Master; he does 
more in one moment, when he pleases, than the 
Doctors in a hundred years. 

Were I to say that some young men, when solicited 
by vile creatures, have caused grace to triumph over 
nature, it would be merely a repetition although the 
affair is quite recent. 

A person who was sick in the midst of the woods 
suffered pain and anguish that brought her to the 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


vn Pere, qui s’approchant d’elle, l’inftruifit fur le 
bon-heur des fouffrances, & fur la cruauté de cette 
miferable vie, cette pauure creature fut fi confolée, 
& fi remplie de courage en vn inftant, qu’elle deffioit 
toutes les afflictions de la terre & de 1’Enfer. 

Vn Capitaine Sauuage voyat qu’vn ieune héme 
fembloit méprifer les aduis d’vn Pere, f¢ais-tu bien 
que ce n’ef{t point la crainte de la mort, ny le defir 
de la vie, ny [66] l’efperance d’aucun bien de la 
terre qui m’a fait embraffer la priere? depuis que 
i’ay la Foy, ie ne crains plus rien. Apprends done 
que i’ay parlé au Capitaine des Francois, & que ie l’ay 
fupplié de bannir tous ceux qui refiftent 4 la verité, 
ou qui la quittent. Parle maintenant? que fais-tu? 
quel eft ton deffein? c’eft ton coeur & ta bouche qui 
te rendront coupable ou innocent? qui te retiendront, 
ou qui te chafferont d’icy? 

Le mefme entrant dans vne cabane ot il y auoit 
plufieurs Payens, leur fit ce petit difcours; mais 
encor qui vous empefche d’ouurir les yeux a la 
verité? vos oreilles ne font-elles pas percées? ce qu’on 
dit eft-il fi monftrueux qu’il n’y puiffe entrer? fi la 
priere e{t bonne que ne l’embraffez-vous? ie vois bien 
ce qui vous arrefte. Vous craignez qu’apres voftre 
Baptefme, vous ne tombiez dans quelque yurognerie, — 
fi vous trouuez de la boiffon? mais eft-il poffible que 
la feule penfée des dommages que ces boiffons nous 
caufent, ne vous puiffe empefcher d’en goufter? 
tenez ferme, vous furmonterez ce demon des eftour- 
dis & des fous. 

Vn Nipifirinien fe fit Predicateur aupres [67] d’vn 
Capitaine de fa nation nouuellement arriué a S. 
Iofeph: comme il eut apperceu que ce Capitaine 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 219 


verge of despair. As her poor afflicted body wished 
to slumber, her soul perceived a Father, who ap- 
proached, and taught her the joy of suffering and the 
cruelty of this miserable life. The poor creature 
was so consoled and so filled with courage in an 
instant, that she defied all the afflictions of earth and 
of Hell. 

A Savage Captain, observing a young man who 
seemed to pay little heed to the advice of a Father, 
said to him: ‘‘ Knowest thou that it is not the fear 
of death, or the desire of living, or [66] the hope of 
any earthly good, that has induced me to embrace 
prayer? Since I possess the Faith I no longer fear 
anything. Learn therefore that I have spoken to 
the Captain of the French and have begged him to 
banish all who resist the truth or who abandon it. 
Speak now! What dost thou? What is thy inten- 
tion? Thy heart and thy mouth will make thee 
guilty or innocent, will retain thee or expel thee 
hence!”’ 

The same man went into a cabin where there were 
several Pagans, and made this short speech to them: 
“ But, again, what prevents you from opening your 
eyes to the truth? Are not your ears pierced? Is 
what we say so monstrous that it cannot enter them? 
If prayer be good, why do you not embrace it? I 
see very well what prevents you. You fear that 
after your Baptism you will fall into drunkenness if 
you find any liquor. But isit possible that the mere 
thought of the injury that those liquors cause us 
cannot prevent you from tasting them? Keep firm 


_and you will overcome that demon of the thought- 


less and the foolish.’’ 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 32 


preftoit l’oreille aux difcours que luy tenoit vn de 
nos Peres, il luy dit apres que le Pere fut forty de fa 
cabane: ces gens font admirables, ils quittent leur 
pays, & s’en viennent du bout du monde pour nous 
apprendre le chemin du Ciel, iamais ils ne demandent 
rien, mais ils donnent, & par tout ot ils font, ils font 
la mefme chofe, ce que 1’vn l’enfeigne 1l’autre 1’en- 
feigne, pour moy i’ay trouué leur doctrine fi iufte & 
fi raifonnable, que ie l’ay embraffée, ie les ayme, & 
ie les honore comme mes plus proches parens. Ce 
bon Neophyte iettoit dans cette ame, la premiere 
couche fur laquelle on a depuis tiré de beaux portraits. 

Vn autre Abnaquiois de nation, fe trouuant aupres 
d’vn Ethechemin fort malade, voyant que fes cama- 
rades auoiét quelque deffein de le chanter & dele 
fouffler 4 leur mode, luy dit: mon cher amy, c’eft en 
vain que tu auras recours au forceleries, ou pluftoft 
aux badineries de ton pays, le Dieu que les Chreftiens 
honorent, t’a creé, luy feul te peut [68] guerir. Ces 
paroles dites en fon temps, le toucherent fi bien que 
fes gens le voulans medicamenter & leur fagon, c’eft 
a dire par des cris & par des tintamarres, dont ils fe 
feruent pour chaffer le demon qui fait mourir les 
hommes, iamais le malade n’y voulut obeir; c’eft a 
celuy qu’on adore en ce lieu cy, qu’il faut auoir 
recours, difoit-il, le demon ne me fgauroit guerir, 
fes parens s’addrefferent 4 nos Peres, & leur dirent, 
nous vous abandonnons noftre pauure camarade, vous 
connoiffez celuy qui a tout fait, dites luy qu’il le 
gueriffe, & l’affeurez que nous croirons en luy. le 
ne {cay pas fi ces pauures abandonnez tiendront leur 
parole en leur pays, mais ie fgay bien que Dieu a 
guery leur compatriote contre leur attente. 


f 


ee 


a 


_ 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 221 


A Nipisirinien became a Preacher to [67] a Cap- 
tain of his nation who had recently arrived at St. 
Joseph. As he had observed that the Captain listened 
to the discourse of one of our Fathers, he said to 
him, after the Father had gone out of his cabin: 
‘Those people are admirable; they leave their coun- 
try and come from the end of the world to teach us 
the road to Heaven. They never ask for anything, 
but they give; and, wherever they are, they do the 
same thing,— what one teaches, the other teaches. 
For my part, I have found their doctrine so just and 
so reasonable that I have embraced it. I love and 
honor them as my nearest relatives.’’ This good 
Neophyte gave to that soul the first coat, upon which 
fine portraits have since been drawn. 

Another who was of the Abnaquiois nation was 
with a very sick Ethechemin. When he saw that 
his comrades intended to sing and to breathe on him 
in their fashion, he said to him: ‘‘ My dear friend, 
in vain wilt thou have recourse to those sorceries, or 
tather those follies, of thy country. The God whom 
the Christians honor has created thee; he alone can 
[68] cure thee.’’ ‘These words, said opportunely, so 
touched him that when his people wished to doctor 
him in their way,—that is, by yells and uproar, of 
which they make use to drive away the demon who 
causes the death of men,—the sick man would never 
listen to them. ‘‘It is he who is adored in this 
place,” he said, ‘‘to whom we must have recourse; 
the demon cannot cure me.’’ His relatives applied 
to the Fathers, and said to them: ‘‘ We leave our 
poor comrade with you. You know him who has 
made all; tell him to cure him, and assure him that 


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


Vn Frangois allant de Quebec a Saint Iofeph, 
apperceut de loin vn Sauuage, qui le deuancoit, 
c’eftoit vn Chreftien, qui ne penfoit eftre veu que de 
l’ceil, duquel on ne fe peut cacher, il leuoit les yeux 
au Ciel, s’entretenant auec Dieu, tenant fon chapelet 
en main, & fe mettant 4 genoux auec vne deuotion 
qui penetroit non feulement le coeur du Frangois, [69] 
mais qui fans doute gagnoit celuy qui ne peut refifter 
a l’amour. 

Il n’eft pas iufques aux enfans qu’ils ne tefmoi- 
gnent par fois quelques fentimens de deuotion, vn 
petit garcon aagé de 8.49. ans, a dit plufieurs fois 
ces paroles 4 fa mere voyant qu’elle ne preffoit point 
fon baptefme. Ma mere, cela n’eft pas bié que vous 
ne foyez pas baptifée, elle ira aw feu ma mere dit mon 
coeur, & 14-deffus ie fuis trifte, cette femme racontoit 
cela de fon fils, adiouftant qu’elle ne pouuoit fgauoir 
ot il auoit appris toutes les prieres qu’il recitoit tous 
les matins & tous les foirs, fans que perfonne luy 
commandaft. Le pauure petit ramaffant par fois des 
fleurs auec fon camarade, les venoit prefenter a vn 
de nos Peres pour eftre mifes deffus l’Autel. Le 
Pere agreant cette petite deuotion, les faifoit entrer 
dans 1’Eglife ot ces petits Anges offroient & leurs 
prieres & leur prefent 4 Noftre Seigneur. 

Vne petite Seminarifte des Meres Vrfulines, pref- 
fant fort qu’on la fit communier deuant que d’eftre 


rendué a fes parens, prit en cachete vn petit Agnus 


appartenant a l’vne de fes compagnes, fa maiftreffe 
l’ayant furprife la tanga; vous eftes [70] indigne de 


la communion, luy dit-elle, allez, confeffez vous, vous | 


deuriez ieufner pour vn fi gros peché: cette pauutia 
enfant l’ayant fait contre l’attente de fa bonne 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 223 


we will believe in him.”” I know not whether those 
poor abandoned people will keep their word in their 
own country, but I do know that God cured their 
countryman, contrary to their expectations. 

A Frenchman who was going from Quebec to Saint 
Joseph perceived from afar a Savage who was walk- 
ing before him. He was a Christian who thought 
that no eye could see him except that from which 
one cannot hide. He raised his eyes to Heaven and 
spoke to God, holding his rosary in his hand, and 
kneeling, with a devotion that not only touched the 
heart of the Frenchman, [69] but also no doubt won 
him who cannot resist love. 

Even the children sometimes manifest feelings of de- 
votion. A little boy aged between 8 and 9g years sev- 
eraltimes said these words to his mother when he saw 
that she did not hasten her baptism: ‘‘ My mother, 
it is not right that thou shouldst not be baptized; my 
heart says: ‘My mother will go into the fire;’ and 
then I am sad.’’ The woman related this of her son, 
adding that she did not know where he had learned 
all the prayers that he recited every morning and 
every night, without being commanded by any one. 
The poor little fellow sometimes picked flowers with 
his comrade, and brought them to one of our Fathers 
to be placed on the Altar. The Father was pleased 
at this simple devotion and made them enter the 
Church where those little Angels offered both their 
prayers and their gift to Our Lord. 

A little Seminarist of the Ursuline Mothers, who 
was very anxious to receive communion before being 
sent back to her parents, secretly took a small Agnus 
belonging to one of her companions. Her mistress 
caught her and chided her, saying: ‘‘ You are [70] 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


mai{treffe, luy vint dire, i’ay fait ce que vous m’auiez 
ordonné, que faut-il faire encore afin que ie ne fois 
point priuée de lacommunion. Cen’eft pas vn petit 
courage a vn enfant de ieufner, & notammét A vn 
enfant Sauuage, qui tient de fes parens, lefquels ont 
autant de pante au manger que les yurongnes au boire. 

Les enfans des Sauuages font de petits finges, auffi 
bien que les enfans de l’Europe, ils imitent tout ce 
qu’ils voyent faire. [1 eft croyable que depuis que 
les fondemens de ce nouueau monde font iettez, ils 
n’auoient iamais reprefenté aucune proceffion, mais 
comme ils en voyent de temps en temps, ils ont com- 
mencé d’en faire a leur mode: il y a peu de iours 
qu’vne bande de ces petits innocens fut veué marcher 
en ordre, l’vn portoit vne Croix, l'autre portoit vne 
banniere, d’autres des chandeliers faits 4 la Sauuage 
ou 4 la naturelle, quelques-vns chantoient & d’autres 
fuiuoient deux a deux comme ils auoient veu faire, 
tout cela nous apprend [71] que le Chriftianifme fe 
fonde, & s’eftablit parmy ces peuples. Les Hiro- 
quois gaftent tout, ils efcarrent les oiiailles de leur 
bercail, ils les éloignent de leurs Pafteurs, ils les 
baniffent de leur petite Eglife, en vn mot ce fleau eft 
bien rude. Dieu foit beny en tout temps & en tous 
lieux, il fe faut foumettre a fes ordres, il permet que 
fon Eglife foit affligée: mais il voudroit bien que 
ceux qui ont le pouuoir de la fecourir leuaffent 1’eften- 
dard pour fa gloire. Changeons de propos. 

On demanda 4 vn ieune Sauuage, qui parloit de la 


grande perfidie des Hiroquois, & de l’horrible carnage — 
qu’ils ont fait de ceux de fa nation, quel fentiment 
il auoit de ces mal-heureux. Ie prie fouuent Dieu 
pour eux, refpondit-il, & ie dis dans mon coeur, ie } 


q 


i 
[ 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 925 


unworthy of communion; go and confess; you should 
fast for so grievous a sin.’’ The poor child did so, 
contrary to the expectation of her good mistress, and 
came to her, saying: ‘‘ I have done what you ordered 
me to do. Is there anything else to be done, that I 
may not be deprived of communion?” It requires 
no slight courage in a child to fast, and especially 
a Savage child, who takes after its parents; and 
they are as addicted to eating as drunkards are to 
drinking. 

The children of the Savages, like those of Euro- 
peans, are little monkeys; they imitate everything 
they see done. It may be believed that, since the 
foundations of this new world were laid, they had 
never had any processions; but, as they see some 
from time to time, they have commenced to form 
processions in their own fashion. A few days ago, a 
small band of these little innocents was observed 
marching in order; one bore a Cross, another a ban- 
ner, others candlesticks made in the Savage fashion 
or naturally formed. Some sang, while others 
walked two by two, as they had seen us do. All 
this teaches us [71] that Christianity is becoming 
founded and established among these peoples. The 
Hiroquois spoil everything,—they scatter the sheep 
from their fold, and keep them away from their Pas- 
tors; they banish them from their little Church; in 
a word, that scourge is very heavy. God be praised 
at all times, and in all places; we must submit to his 
orders. He allows his Church to be afflicted, but 
it is his desire that those who have power to succor 
it should raise the standard for his glory. Let us 
change the subject. 

A young Savage who spoke of the great perfidy of 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 32 _ 


voudrois qu’ils fuffent baptifez, ils auroient de lef- 
prit, ils iroient au Ciel: voila mon fentiment. Ces 
penfées ne font pas communes 4a tous les Sauuages, 
ils font vindicatifs au dernier point enuers leurs enne- 
mis, auffi eft-il vray, qu’il n’eft pas poffible de les 
aimer hors de Dieu. 

Ce Sauuage a bien monftré qu’vn efprit plus puif- 
fant que celuy du monde, & [72] de la chair refidoit 
en fon coeur. Puifque nous pouuons, difoit-il, témoi- 
gner 4 Noftre Seigneur l'amour & l’honneur que 
nous luy portons par nos fouffrances, il me femble 
que c’eft vne chofe bonne de fouffrir, & fouuent mon 
ame en a des defirs. Le Pere quia foin de fa con- 
fcience venant de voir vn malade, luy dit vn iour, ie 
fuis trifte voyant cette perfonne que i’ayme, & que 
tu ayme auffi, fouffrir fi rudement, & fi long-temps. 
Et moy, repart ce Sauuage, ie m’en refioiiy, ne m’as- 
tu pas enfeigné, adioufta-il, que ceux qui fouffrent 
font aymez de Dieu? pourquoy donc s’affliger d’eftre 
aymé de celuy qui eft tant aymable. Le Pere luy 
accorda qu’il auoit raifon, & confeffa au fond de fon 
coeur que le Sauuage auoit agy par grace, & luy par 
vn mouuement de compafiion naturelle. 

Vn ieune garcon voyant que fes gens retournoient 
de la chaffe, s’écria voila qui va bien, ie mangeray 
auiourd’huy de la viande fraifche. Sgais-tu bien, 
luy dit quelqu’vn, que les Chreftiens n’en mangent 
point auiourd’huy. Tu as raifon, refpondit-il, non 
feulement, ie n’en mangeray point, mais ie ne veux 
pas feulement [73] la regarder. Ayant fceu que les 
Chreftiens ieufnoient les Quatre Temps & le Carefme, ~ 


il vouloit A toute force les imiter, on luy refpondit — 


qu'il n’auoit point encor l’aage qui porte cette 


‘i 
: ae 
» 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 227 


the Hiroquois and of the horrible massacre that they 
had made of his countrymen, was asked what his 
sentiments were respecting those wretches. ‘“‘I 
often pray to God for them,’’ he replied, ‘‘ and I say 
in my heart that I wish they would be baptized, and 
that they would have sense, and would goto Heaven. 
Those are my sentiments.’ Such thoughts are not 
common to all the Savages, who are vindictive to the 
last degree against their enemies. It is also true 
that it is impossible to love enemies, if one be out- 
side of God. 

This Savage gave evidence that a spirit more 
powerful than that of the world and [72] of the 
flesh dwelt in his heart. ‘‘ Inasmuch,” he said, ‘‘ as 
we can show Our Lord by our sufferings the love 
and honor that we have for him, it seems to me that 
it is a good thing to suffer, and my soul often desires 
it.”’ The Father who directs his conscience said 
to him one day, on his return from visiting a sick 
person: ‘‘ I feel sorry when I see that person, whom 
I love, and whom thou also lovest, suffering so much 
and so long.’’ ‘‘ And I,’ replied the Savage, ‘‘ rejoice 
atit. Hast thou not taught me,” he added, ‘‘ that 
those who suffer are beloved by God? Why there- 
fore should one be sorry at being loved by him who 
is so lovable?”’ The Father admitted that he was 
Tight, and acknowledged in the bottom of his heart 
that the Savage had acted through grace, and he 
through a natural feeling of compassion. 

A young boy, seeing his people on their return 
from hunting, exclaimed: ‘‘ All goes well; to-day I 
shall eat fresh meat.” ‘‘ Knowest thou not,’’ said 
some one to him, ‘‘ that Christians eat none to-day?”’ 
““'Thou art right,’’ he replied; ‘‘ not only will I not 


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


obligation. Si ie n’y fuis pas obligé, repart-il, auffi 
ne m’eft-il pas defendu? on luy permit ce qui eftoit 
raifonnable conformément a fes forces & a fa facon 
de vie. S’eftant couché certain iour fans fouper, il 
fe leua auec vn grand appetit, l’ayant tefmoigné a 
quelqu’vn de nos Peres, il luy fit donner du pain, il 
le prit mais il n’y toucha pas, comme on luy en eut 
demandé la raifon, ie n’ay pas encor fait-il entendu 
la Meffe, oiiy, mais on la dira bien tard? hé bien ie 
n’en mouray pas pour cela, refpondit-il; eftant allé 
fur le foir vifiter quelques Hurons en leur cabane, ils 
luy prefenterent 4 manger: or comme il ieufnoit, & 
que d’ailleurs c’eft méprifer vn Sauuage de refufer 
ce qu’il vous donne, il mangea mais fi peu qu'il 
n’outre-paffa point ce qu’on peut prendre en vne 
colation, fes hoftes s’en apperceuant luy reprefente- 
rent qu’vn bon courage ne fe deuoit pas rendre fi toft, 
que le manger eftoit naturel & important 4 l"homme, 
a [74] cela point de repartie, finon qu’il ne falloit pas 
le preffer de manger dauantage. 

Il n’eft demeuré qu’vn feul Sauuage cette année a 
Montreal, & encor eftoit-il aueugle; mais en recom- 
penfe il auoit de la vertu pour vingt-cinq: ah! que 
fouuent, difoit-il, ie benis Dieu de ce qu’il m’a 
rauy les yeux, fans cela i’aurois ef{té toute ma vie 
vn orgueilleux, & vn fuperbe, i’aurois mefprifé la 
priere, & les Hiroquois m’auroient mangé. 

Comme il auoit pris refolution de ne point petuner 
le iour qu’il cOmunieroit, ce qui eft affez difficile 4 
vn Sauuage qui prefere le tabac au boire & au man- 
ger, le Pere qui en auoit foin luy dit vn iour qu’ille _ 
pourroit bien tromper & contreuenir en cachete a fes 
refolutids, il repartit fort gentiment, tromperois-ie 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 229 


eat any, but I do not even wish [73] to look at it.”’ 
Having learned that the Christians fasted on Ember- 
days and in Lent, he wished by all means to imitate 
them. He was told that he was not old enough to 
be obliged to do so. ‘‘If I be not obliged,’’ he 
replied, ‘‘ neither am I forbidden to do so.” He 
was permitted to do what was reasonable, consider- 
ing his strength and his manner of living. Having 
gone to bed supperless one night, he awoke with a 
great appetite; he told one of our Fathers of it, and 
was given a piece of bread. He took it but did not 
touch it; when he was asked the reason he said: ‘‘ I 
have not yet heard Mass.’’ ‘‘ Yes, but it will be said 
very late.’’ ‘‘ Well, Ishall not die on that account,’’ 
he said. At night he went to see some Hurons in 
their cabin, and they offered him something to eat. 
Now as he was fasting, and as it is an insult toa 
Savage to refuse what he gives you, he ate, but so 
little that he did not exceed what is usually eaten at 
acollation. His hosts noticed it, and told him that 
a good courage should not yield so soon; and that 
eating was natural to and necessary for man. To 
[74] this he gave no answer, except that they were 
not to press him to eat any more. 

Only one Savage dwelt this year at Montreal, and 
he was blind; but, to compensate, he had virtue 
enough for twenty-five. ‘‘ Ah,’’ he said, ‘‘ how 
often I praise God for having deprived me of my 
sight! for, otherwise, I would have been all my life 
a proud and arrogant man; I would have despised 
prayer; and the Hiroquois would have eaten me.’’ 

As he had taken the resolution not to smoke on the 
day that he received communion,— which is a rather 
difficult thing for a Savage, who prefers tobacco to 


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vor. 32 — 


Dieu fi ie trompois vn homme? Ce n’eft pas a toy 
mon Pere a qui i’ay fait cette promeffe, c’eft Dieu 
qui ne peut eftre trompé. Et c’eft pour cela, fit-il, 
que ie ne vay pas vifiter les foldats Francois le iour 
que i’ay communié, pource qu’ils m’inuiteroient a 
petuner. 

Le Pere le menant vn iour 4 1’Hofpital dans vn 
temps qu’il neigeoit, & qu’il [75] faifoit fort froid, il 
prit fon bonnet d’vne main & fon chapelet d’vne 
autre, difons, fit-il au Pere noftre chapelet, puis que 
nous fommes enfemble, cette deuotion attendrit le 
Pere. Eftant vne autre fois aupres du Pere qui reci- 
toit fes Heures Canoniales, il demeura vn affez long- 
temps fans fe mouuoir; le Pere ayant bien exercé fa 
patience, luy demanda 4 quoy il auoit appliqué fon 
e{prit, pendant tout ce temps-la. Ie me refioiiiffois 
en mon coeur, de ce que tu beniffoit celuy qui a tout 
fait, mon ame luy difoit, ie fuis bien aife que ceux 
qui te connoiffent te lotient & te refpectent. Mais 
quelquesfois ie fuis fi trifte de ce que ie l’ay fafché, 
& de ce que ie ne fgaurois le loiier, comme vous 
autres que mon cceur en eft malade, & mon ame ne 
{cait de quel cofté fe tourner. Il me femble par fois 
qu’vne perfonne me parle au fond du coeur, & cepen- 


dant elle ne profere aucune parole; m’entends-tu 


bien, difoit-il au Pere? congois-tu bien ce que ie veux 
dire, lors que i’entends cette parole dans mon coeur, 
adiouttoit-il, qui n’eft pas pourtant vne parole, mon 
ame eft toute trifte d’auoir fafché [76] Dieu, & mes 
yeux fe mettent 4 pleurer, fans que i’y prenne garde, 


d’autresfois ie fuis tout ioyeux, & mes yeux ne laiffent — 


pas de ietter des larmes, cela ne m’arriuoit point 


deuant mon Baptefme. 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 231 


food and drink,—the Father who had charge of him 
told him one day that he might deceive him, and 
break his resolution in secret. He made a very neat 
reply: ‘‘ Could I deceive God, even if I deceived a 
man? It is not to thee, my Father, that I made that 
promise, but to God, who cannot be deceived. That 
is why,’’ he said, ‘‘I do not go to visit the French 
soldiers on the day that I have received communion, 
because they would invite me to smoke.”’ 

The Father took him to the Hospital one day, when 
it was snowing and [75] very cold; he held his cap 
in one hand and his rosary in the other. He said to 
the Father: ‘‘ Let us say our rosary, since we are 
together.’’ This devotion affected the Father. On 
another occasion, when he was near the Father, who 
was reciting his Canonical Hours, he remained for a 
considerable time without moving. The Father, 
who had well tried his patience, asked him how he 
had employed his mind during that time. ‘“‘I 
rejoiced in my heart, because thou wert praising him 
who has made all. My soul said to him: ‘I am glad 
that they who know thee praise and honor thee.’ 
But sometimes I am sad because I have offended him; 
and, because I cannot praise him as you do, my heart 
is sick, and my soul knows not which way to turn. 
At times it seems to me that a person is speaking to 
me in the depths of my heart, and yet he says nota 
word. Dost thou hear me well?’’ he said to the 
Father. ‘‘ Dost thou understand well what I wish 
to say? When I hear the word in my heart,’’ he 
added, ‘‘ which nevertheless is not a word, my soul 
is quite sad at having offended [76] God, and my 
eyes begin to weep before I realize it. At other 
times I am quite joyful, and yet tears fall from my 


‘232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Le Pere ne luy voulant pas permettre fi fouuent la 
Communion, il s’en plaignoit amoureufement: tu ne 
{cais pas mon Pere combien mon ame eft trifte, fi tu 
le fgauois tu luy donnerois ce qu’elle demande. Vn 
Francois luy ayant rompu le bafton dont il fe feruoit 
pour fe conduire, fon cceur fut émeu, & il fe retira 
en fa cabane fans mot dire, mais il s’en reuint bien- 
tof{t trouuer le Pere. Ie n’ay pas d’efprit, luy fit-il, 
ie me fuis fafché, ie m’en vay a l’Eglife prier pour 
celuy qui a rompu mon bafton. Et toy mon Pere 
prie pour moy, car ie fuis plus coupable que luy. 
Mais tu me deuois aduertir, quand tu as veu que ie 
me voulois fafcher, ie te prie mon Pere, ne t’en 
oublie pas vne autre fois. Ce bon garcgon s’ennuyant 
d’eftre tout feul de fa nation 4 Montreal, a voulu 
defcendre aux trois Riuieres, il eft croyable qu’il 
payera en bonne monnoye la petite confolation qu’il 
efpere de fes gens. 

[77] Il y a peu de iours qu’vne femme s’eftant 
fauuée du pays des Hiroquois, nous vint dire qu’vn 
demon la tourmentoit, & qu’on la mit pour quelque 
temps auec les Vrfulines, qu’elle efperoit trouuer fa 
deliurance parmy ces bonnes ames. Ie me confeffe- 
ray & me communieray, elles prieront pour moy, 
difoit-elle, & ie feray guerie: fon regard, tant fes 
yeux eftoient effarez, faifoit peur. Les Meres s’en 
chargerent auec benediction, au bout de quelques 
iours cette pauure creature nous vint dire qu'elle 
eftoit toute libre, & que Dieu l’auoit guerie en la 
maifon des vierges. Ie m’en rapporte 4 ce quien 
eft. 

Nous auons vn malade & S. Iofeph, il fera au Ciel — 
comme nous efperéds, quand on lira ce Chapitre en 6 


i 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 238 


eyes. This did not happen to me before my Baptism.” 

As the Father would not allow him to receive 
Communion as frequently as he wished, he com- 
plained lovingly: ‘‘ Thou knowest not, my Father, 
how sad my soul is. If thou knewest thou wouldst 
grant it what it asks.” A Frenchman broke the 
stick that he used to guide his steps; his heart was 
troubled, and he withdrew into his cabin, without 
saying a word; but he soon came out, and went to 
the Father. ‘‘I have no sense,’’ he said; ‘‘ I have 
been angry; I am going to the Church to pray for 
him who broke my stick. And thou, my Father, 
pray for me, for I am more guilty than he. But 
thou shouldst have warned me when thou sawest 
that I was about to get angry. I beg thee, my 
Father, not to forget to do so another time.”” The 
good man, who felt lonely at being the only one of 
his nation at Montreal wished to go down to three 
Rivers. It is probable that he will pay in good coin 
for the little consolation that he hopes to obtain from 
his people. 

[77] A few days ago, a woman who had escaped 
from the country of the Hiroquois came to us, say- 
ing that a demon tormented her; and she asked us 
to place her for a time with the Ursulines, because 
she hoped to obtain her deliverance among those 
good souls. ‘‘I shall confess and receive commun- 
ion; they will pray for me,’’ she said, ‘‘ and I shall 
be cured.” Her look inspired fear, so wild were her 
eyes. The Mothers took charge of her with bless- 
ings. After a few days the poor creature came to 
tell us that she was quite free, and that God had 
cured her in the house of the virgins: I merely relate 
what happened. 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


France. Il faut confeffer que Dieu fait des miferi- 
cordes 4 qui bon luy femble, cét homme d’vn naturel 
brufque & violent, a fait quelques efcapades depuis 
fa naiffance en l’Eglife. Il nous a tefmoigné que 
iamais il n’en a fait qu’auffi-toft il n’ait reffenty les 
effets de la Iuftice de Dieu: voicy, dit-il, le dernier 
coup que i’ay peché, i’ay fcandalifé les Chreftiens, 
i’ay repris mes fuper{titions anciennes, pluftoft pour 
contenter [78] quelques perfonnes que pour aucune 
creance que i’aye en ces badineries, mais Dieu enfin 
m’a terraffé, il m’a remply de douleurs, depuis les 
pieds iufques au fommet de la tefte; Il luy addreffe 
fouuent ces paroles, 6 qu'il eft raifonnable que ie 
fouffre! ie ne m’en fafche point. Toy qui as tout 
fait determine du temps, & de la grandeur de mes 
maux. Ie n’ay qu’vne penfée: i’ay peché, ie veux 
fouffrir. Ne fais qu’vne fouffrance des tiennes &: 
des miennes, peijkoutour, peijkoutour, n’en fais 
qu’vne, n’en fais qu’vne, & tire le payement que 
ie te dois pour mes offenfes. Comme nous luy 
portafmes le Viatique en fa cabane, & que nous luy 
donnafmes 1l’Extreme-Onction, il s’addreffa a fes 
gens, & leur dit, ie n’ay plus de forces pour parler, 
mais i’ay encor affez de coeur pour pleurer le fcan- 
dale que ie vous ay donné, ne retenez auctunes pen- 
{ées de mes mauuais exemples. Ie ne fuis pas trifte 
de mes fouffrances, mais ie le fuis bien fort d’auoir 
fafché Dieu, & d’auoir efté mefchant parmy les 
hommes. Ie pardonne A ceux qui m’ont preffé de 
reprendre mes anciennes chanfons, dont ie me feruois 
pour parler [79] au demon? pardonnez-moy auffitamt 
de mauuaifes paroles, & tant de mauuaifes actions 
que i’ay commifes, & dont vous auez connoiffance, — 4 = 


2 
a 4 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 885 


We have a sick man at St. Joseph who will be 
in Heaven, we hope, when this Chapter will be read 
in France. It must be admitted that God grants 
mercies wherever it seems good to him. This man, 
who was of a rough and violent character, has been 
guilty of some escapades since he has been born into 
the Church. He has told us that he never committed 
one without at once feeling the effects of God’s 
justice: ‘‘ Behold,’ he said, ‘‘the last time that I 
sinned, I gave scandal to the Christians; I returned 
to my former superstitions, more to satisfy [78] some 
persons than through any belief that I had in such 
follies. But at last God has cast me down; he has 
filled me with pains from my feet to the top of my 
head.’’ He often says these words to God: ‘‘ Oh! it 
is but right that I should suffer; I am not angry at 
it. Thou who hast made all, determine the period 
and the extent of my sufferings. I have but one 
thought: I have sinned; I wish to suffer. Make but 
one suffering of thine and mine; peizkoutour, peitkou- 
tour,—tmake but one, make but one; and take the 
payment that I owe thee for my sins.”” When we 
took the Viaticum to him in his cabin, and gave him 
Extreme Unction, he spoke to his people, and said: 
“‘T have no more strength to speak, but I still have 
enough heart to weep for the scandal that I have 
given you. Retain no remembrance of my evil 
examples. Ido not grieve for my sufferings, but I 
am very sorry for having offended God, and for hav- 
ing been wicked among men. I pardon those who 
have urged me to return to my old songs that I used 
for speaking [79] to the demon. Pardon me also 
both for the many evil words that I have said, and 
the many evil actions that I have committed, and of 


“é 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Nou. 82 


ie n’en puis plus, la parole me manque, priez Dieu 4 
pour moy, mon cceur me dit que i’iray au Ciel, puif- 
que Dieu eft bon; Ie me fouuiendray de vous autres, — y 
mais chaffez du milieu de vos cabanes les mefchans, 
de peur qu’ils ne vous peruertiffent. Ie ne doute — 
pas que le Ciel ne fe refioiiiffe de la conuerfion de cét 
homme, & que le fein d’Abraham ne foit ouuert Ace 
pauure Lazare, ou ce pauure Iob couuert de playes& 
de douleur. 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 237 


which you have had knowledge. I am exhausted; 
speech fails me; pray toGod forme. My heart tells 
me that I shall go to Heaven, for God is good. I 
will remember you, but drive the wicked away from 
amid your cabins, lest they should pervert you.’’ I 
have no doubt that Heaven rejoices at the conversion 
of this man, and that Abraham’s bosom is opened to 
this poor Lazarus, or this poor Job, covered with 
sores and full of pain. 


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


CHAPITRE VI. 


DE QUELQUES AUTRES BONNES ACTIONS DES 
SAUUAGES. 


E ne fais aucune diftinction, entre les Sauuages de 

| faint Iofeph, & les Sauuages des trois Riuieres. 
Ce n’ef{t pas que les vns & les autres n’ayent de 
laffection, pour les lieux, ot ils ont choifi leur 
demeure; mais leurs ennemis les pourfuiuent de fi 
pres, qu’ils fe iettent comme des pigeons effarez, 
dans le premier, & le plus affeuré colombier qu'ils 
[80] rencontrent; Quelques familles voyans ce debris, 
s’arrefterent aux trois Riuieres auec refolution de 
viure conftamment 4 la Frangoife. Le plus appa- 
rent d’entr’eux, dit a 1’vn de nos Peres au defpart de 
fes compatriotes; Ie pourrois m’enfuir auffi bien que 
les autres, & viure comme eux de chaffe & de pefche: 
mais mon ame m’ef{t plus chere que mon corps. Ie 
vois bien que ie fouffriray, & que n’ayant rien que du 
bled, qu’il me faudra femer & recueillir auec beau- 
coup de peine, ie meneray vne vie fort maigre; mais 
il n’importe, pendant que mon corps ieufnera, mon 
ame s’engreffera mangeant le pain de vie, dont ie 


ferois plus long temps priué, fi ie m’efcartois de vos 
habitations. Ces bonnes gens ont efté benis en 
toutes facons, la terre & les forefts, & les eaux, leurs © 


ont fourny des viures par deffus leurs attentes, & le 


Ciel les a comblez de fes richeffes. Leur Capitaine 
dicta le Printemps deux lettres 4 vn Truchement, i 


aii 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 239 


CHAPTER VI. 


OF SOME OTHER GOOD ACTIONS OF THE 
SAVAGES. 


MAKE no distinction between the Savages of 

saint Joseph and the Savages of three Rivers. 

Both have an affection for the spots that they 
have selected as dwelling-places; but their enemies 
pursue them so closely that, like frightened pigeons, 
they fly to the first and safest dovecot that they [80] 
find. Some families, seeing this breaking-up, stopped 
at three Rivers, with the intention of always living 
in the French fashion. The most notable among 
them said to one of our Fathers, on the departure of 
his countrymen: ‘‘ I could flee as well as the others, 
and live as they do, by fishing and hunting; but my 
soul is dearer to me than my body. I see very well 
that I shall suffer, and that, as I have nothing but 
corn, I shall have to sow and harvest with much 
labor. I shall lead a very poor existence; but never 
mind,— while my body will fast, my soul will fatten 
by eating the bread of life, of which I would be 
deprived for a still longer time, were I to wander 
from your settlements.’’ These good people were 
blessed in every way; the earth, the forests, and the 
waters have supplied them with food beyond their 
expectations, and Heaven has showered its wealth 
upon them. Last Spring, their Captain dictated two 
letters to an Interpreter, to be sent to Quebec to a 
Father of our Society, in which that good Neophyte 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


pour eftre enuoyées 4 Quebec, 4 vn Pere de noftre 
Compagnie, dans lefquelles ce bon Neophyte pro- 
teftoit, qu’il n’auoit rien tant 4 cceur que de viure 
felon les loix, & felon les volontez de fon Dieu. 

[81] Comme ils demeurent au milieu des Francois, 
il arriua qu’vn ieune homme les allant vifiter pendant 
leur repas, ils luy prefenterent vn morceau de chair 


de caftor, celuy-cy le prit & le mageaft fans donner 


la benediction, vne femme s’en eftant apperceué, luy 
dit, fi mon petit fils ne prioit pas Dieu deuant que de 
manger, ie le chaftierois, ce Francois tout honteux, 
fe voulut excufer, mais dans fon coeur il fe condam- 
noit foy-mefme. 

Vne autrefois vn Pere entrant dans leurs cabanes, 


trouua vne ieune femme toute efplorée, luy en ayant 


demandé la raifon, mon nepueu fit-elle, eft mort, 
voila le fuiet de mes larmes. Quoy déc, repart le 
Pere, croyois-tu que fon corps fut immortel/ ce n’eft 
pas de fon corps que ie m’attrifte, c’eft fon ame qui 
caufe mes douleurs & mes regrets, comme il eft mort 
fans confeffion, ie crains qu’il ne foit dans les enfers. 
Quitte cette apprehenfion, & prie pour luy, dit le 
Pere, car comme il auoit receu le Baptefme, & qu'il 
craignoit d’offenfer celuy qui a tout faict, il eft croy- 
able qu’il n’eft pas damné, mais qu’il pourroit bien 
[82] eftre en Purgatoire. I’ay bien eu repart-elle, 


cette penfée, i’ay defia prié pour luy, i’ay recité trois — 
fois mon chappellet, i’ay inuoqué les Saincts qui font — 
au Ciel, i’ay imploré le fecours des petits enfans — 
morts apres leur baptefme, i’ay prié ceux de noftre © 
nation qui font en Paradis, mais tout cela eft peu de — 
chofe. Dis-moy, mon Pere, ce que ie puis faire felon — 
ma condition pour le foulagement de cette ame, & ie 


le feray de bon coeur. 


SURAT CHOON 


Tbbva C. witha tom uel 


ee 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ier 


protested that he had nothing more at heart than to 
live according to the laws and the commands of his 
God. 

[81] As they live in the midst of the French, it 
happened that a young man went to visit them dur- 
ing their meal, and they offered him a piece of beaver 
meat. He took it, and ate it without asking a bless- 
ing. A woman who observed this said to him: ‘If 
my grandson did not pray to God before eating, I 
would punish him.’’ The Frenchman was quite 
ashamed, and tried to excuse himself; but in his 
heart he condemned himself. 

On another occasion, a Father entered their cabins 
and saw a young woman weeping bitterly. He asked 
her what the reason was. ‘‘ My nephew is dead,”’ 
she said; ‘‘ that is the cause of my tears.” ‘‘ What,”’ 
replied the Father, ‘‘ didst thou think that his body 
was immortal?’’ ‘‘It is not for his body that I 
grieve; it is his soul that causes my sorrow and 
regret, for he died without confession, and I fear that 
he may be in hell.”” ‘‘ Give up that apprehension, 
and pray for him,” said the Father; ‘‘ for, as he had 
received Baptism, and feared to offend him who has 
made all, it is probable that he is not damned, but 
that he may [82] be in Purgatory.’’ ‘‘ I have thought 
of that,” she replied, ‘‘and I have already prayed 
for him; I have recited my rosary three times; I 
have invoked all the Saints in Heaven; I have im- 
plored the assistance of the little children who have 
died after their baptism; I have prayed to those of 
our nation who are in Paradise; still all that is but 
little. Tell me, my Father, what I can do, within 
my power, for the relief of that soul, and I will 
cheerfully do it.” 


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


Vn Huron eftant defcendu 4 Kebec, & s’en allant 
a la chaffe, fut bleffé & la iambe d’vn coup d’arque- 
bufe defbadé par mefgarde par vn fien compagnon, 
on le porta auffi-toft a l’hofpital, ot il fut prompte- 
ment penfé, mais ce coup eftoit fi fafcheux, qu'il luy 
fallut coupper la iambe: or comme il vit qu’on luy 
accordoit le baptefme, pource qu’il eftoit en danger 
de mort, il s’efcria, que ce coup eft fauorable qui 
m’ouure les portes de la vie, les Hiroquois, fi ie 
n’euffe point efté bleffé, m’auroient peut-eftre ietté 
dans les enfers, & ce coup me porte en Paradis? les 


Meres le confolant fur l’efperance de recouurer [83] 


fa fanté, vous faites, leur dit-il, voftre poffible, mais 
ie fens bien que ie fuis mort, ie ne crains plus ce 
paffage, puis que ie fuis baptifé, ie m’en vay au ciel, 
ou ie prieray pour vous, & pour la perfonne qui vous 
a faict venir en ce pais icy. Ces bonnes Filles n’ou- 
blient pas leur bonne Mere, il n’y entre aucun malade 
en leur maifon, il n’en part aucun, qui ne foit chargé 
de prier Dieu pour elle. Ce braue Neophite qui 
mourut le 18. de Ianuier, ne s’oubliera pas au ciel de 
la parolle qu’il a donnée fur terre. 

L’ Hofpital a efté fort chargé cette année,notamment 
depuis la venué des vaiffeaux, il faut confeffer que 
ces bonnes Filles, ne font iamais plus contétes, que 


lors qu’elles exercent les fonctions de leur Inftitut 
par des charitez veritablement heroiques; Si a-il 
fallu éconduire quelques malades a la venué des 
Nauires, le lieu ny leurs forces ne pouuant fuffir a 


tout. Mais ne nous éloignons point des Sauuages. 


Voicy vne loiiange d’autant plus affeurée qu’elle 
eft fortie de la bouche d’vn ennemy. Quelqu’vn 
difant aux [84] Hiroquois prifonniers, que fi nous ne ~ 


q 
f 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 243 


As a Huron who had come down to Kebec was 
about to go out hunting, he was wounded in the leg 
by a shot from an arquebus, the trigger of which 
was inadvertently pulled by a companion. He was 
at once carried to the hospital, where his wound was 
promptly dressed; but it was so severe that his leg 
had to be amputated. Now, as he was granted bap- 
tism because he was considered in danger of death, 
he exclaimed: ‘‘ What a happy accident, that opens 
the gates of life to me! Had I not been wounded, 
the Hiroquois would perhaps have cast me into hell, 
while this blow takes me to Paradise.’’ The Mothers 
sought to console him with the hope that he would 
recover [83] his health. ‘‘ You are doing your best,’’ 
he said, ‘‘ but I feel that Iam dead. I no longer fear 
the passage, for, as I am baptized, I am going to 
heaven, where I shall pray for you and for the per- 
son who has sent you to this country.” Those good 
Daughters do not forget their good Mother. Nota 
sick person enters their house, nota person leaves it, 
without being charged to pray to God for her. That 
worthy Neophyte, who died on the 18th of January, 
will not forget in heaven the promise that he made 
on earth. 

The Hospital has been greatly burdened this year, 
especially since the arrival of the ships. It must be 
confessed that these good Maidens are never happier 
than when they are performing the duties of their 
Institute, by deeds of charity that are truly heroic. 
Nevertheless, some sick persons had to be refused on 
the arrival of the Ships, for neither the room at their 
disposal, nor their strength, could suffice for all. But 
let us not wander from the Savages. 

Here is praise which is all the truer that it comes 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


tirions aucune vengeance de leur perfidie, cela ne 
prouenoit pas d’vn deffaut de courage, mais d’vn defir 
que nous ations de leur ouurir les yeux pour 1’eter- 
nité. Qu’au refte ceux qui cognoiffoient Dieu, ne 
craignét point la mort, puis qu’elle leur ouure la porte 
a vne vie bien plus agreable que celle-cy. Tu as 
raifon, dit 1’vn des Hiroquois, nous en auons veu 1’ex- 
perience de nos yeux en la perfonne d’Ondeffon, c’eft 
ainfi qu’ils appelloient le Pere Ifaac Iogues, & mefme 
encore en plufieurs Algonquins que nous auons bru- 
flez, ils fe moquoient des tourmens & dela mort. Et 
depuis vn an, nous auons admiré le courage, & la 
refolution d’vn nommé d’Apmang’ch, c’eftoit vn 
braue Chreftien appellé Bernard en fon baptefme. 
Ie me trouuay, adioufte 1’Hiroquois, au combat, ot 
ilfut mis 4 mort. L’vn de mes camarades l’ayant 
recogneu luy dit, qu’on luy donneroit la vie, s’il fe 
vouloit rendre, comme il eftoit d’vne nation alliée 
des Hiroquois Agneronons, on luy auroit tenu parolle. 
Mais il ref{pondit d’vne voix forte & d’vn accent [85] 
courageux, ie ne puis me rendre & des perfides & a 
des poltrons qui ne fe fient qu’A leur nombre & a 
leurs furprifes. Ie ne veux point de la vie. Si quel- 
qu’vn d’entre vous a du cceur, qu’il audce, & qu’il 
donne des preuues de fon courage contre moy. Vn 
de nos guerriers, que nous tenions pour vn Demon 
part auffi-to{t pour luy porter vn coup d’efpée: mais 
Bernard l’ayant efquiué, le tranfperce en vn moment, 
& comme il tomboit a terre, il luy fend la tefte d’vne 
hache d’armes. Nos gens enragez, difoit 1’ Hiro- 
quois, luy tirerent vn coup de fufil 4 la cuiffe, & le 
percerent par le cofté d’vn coup de fleche, fe fentant 
bleffé il s’efcrie en langue Hiroquoife, treue, de 


bw ee 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ' 245 


from the mouth of an enemy. Some one said to the 
[84] Hiroquois prisoners that, if we did not take any 
revenge for their treachery, it was not through want 
of courage, but through our desire to open their eyes 
to eternity; that, moreover, those who know God 
fear not death, because it gives entrance to a life 
much more agreeable than this one. ‘‘ Thou art 
right,’’ said one of the Hiroquois. ‘‘ We have seen 
it with our own eyes in the person of Ondesson,’’— 
thus they called Father Isaac Jogues,— ‘‘ and even in 
several Algonquins whom we burned; they scorned 
torture and death. And, within the year, we have 
admired the courage and resolution of one Apman- 
gouch;’’ this was a brave Christian who was named 
Bernard at his baptism. ‘‘I was present,’’ said the 
Hiroquois, ‘‘ at the fight in which he was killed. 
One of my comrades, who recognized him, told him 
that we would give him his life if he would sur- 
render, as he belonged to a nation that is allied to 
the Agneronon Hiroquois; and we would have kept 
our word. But he replied in a loud voice andina 
[85] bold tone: ‘I cannot yield to treacherous foes. 
and to cowards who rely solely on their numbers and 
their surprises. I do not wish tolive. If any one 
among you has any spirit, let him come forward and 
give proof of his courage against me.’ One of our 
watriors, whom we considered a very Demon, started 
at once and tried to strike him with his javelin; but 
Bernard avoided the blow, ran him through in a 
moment, and, as he fell, split his head with his war- 
hatchet. Our people were enraged,’’ said the Hiro- 
quois; ‘‘they discharged a gun into his thigh and 
pierced his side with an arrow. Finding himself 
wounded, he called out in the Hiroquois tongue: ‘A 


“246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


grace, pour vn moment. Donnez-moy vn petit de 
loifir, laiffez-moy parler 4 celuy qui a tout fait, ie 
m’en vay auec luy au Ciel; pour vous autres qui ne 
le cognoiffez pas, vous ferez precipitez dans des 
flammes au fond des abifmes. A ces parolles tout le 
monde fait alte, luy fe met 4 genoux, il éleue fes 
mains & fes yeux vers le Ciel, parlant hautement, 
mais en langue Algonquine que nous n’entendids 
[86] pas, nous eftions tous dans 1’eftonnement, enfin 
la priere acheuée, qui dura affez long temps, il nous 
enuifage d’vn regard affeuré, faites ce que vous vou- 
drez nous dit il, ie n’ay point de regret de fouffrir 
vne mort qui me donne la vie. [Ils le tranfpercerent 
de quelques coups d’efpées fur la place. Voila de 
verité vn fainct & genereux courage. 

Vn Pere de noftre Compagnie rencontrant vne 
femme Sauuage fort infirme, qui venoit 4 la Meffe 
parmy les neiges, lui dit qu’elle ne feroit pas obligée 
mefme vn iour de Fefte, de fortir de fa cabane dans 
vn temps fi rude, & auec vne fi grande infirmité! 
helas, refpddit-elle, n’eft-il pas raifonnable, que tant 
que i’auray vn peu de force, pour me traifner en la 
maifon de priere, ie vienne honorer Dieu. il me refte 
fi peu de vie, que ie ne la fcaurois mieux employer, 
qu’a feruir vn fi bon Maiftre: oiiy mais, luy dit le 
Pere, tu augmenteras tellemét ta maladie que tu en 
pourrois bien mourir. I’ay eu autrefois, refpondit- 
elle, de grandes craintes de la mort, mais depuis que 
i’ay eu cognoiffance d’vne vie bien plus heureufe, 
que [87] celle que nous menons fur la terre, & que 
mon ame a efté lauée des eaux du baptefme, i’ay 
perdu cette apprehenfion, car il me femble que fi — 
i’auois peur de la mort, i’aurois peur d’entrer dans © 


2 os 


1647 —48] RELATION OF 1647-48 


truce, I pray you, for an instant. Give me a little 
leisure; let me speak to him who has made all. I 
am going with him to Heaven. Asto you who know 
him not, you shall be cast into flames in the bottom 
of the pit.’ At these words all stopped; he knelt 
down, and raised his hands and his eyes to Heaven, 
speaking aloud,—but in the Algonquin tongue, 
which we did not understand. [86] We all were 
astonished. Finally, when he had finished his prayer 
which lasted for some time, he looked at us with a 
steady gaze and said: ‘Do what you will; I feel no 
regret at suffering a death that gives me life.’ They 
pierced him on the spot with some lance-thrusts.’’ 
Truly that was a holy and generous courage. 

A Father of our Society met a very infirm Savage 
woman, who was coming to Mass in the midst of the 
snow. Hetold her that she would not be obliged, 
even on a Festival day, to go out of her cabin in such 
rough weather and in her great infirmity. ‘‘ Alas!’’ 
she replied, ‘‘is it not right that, so long as I have 
a little strength to drag myself to the house of 
prayer, I should come to honor God? So little life 
is left to me that I cannot employ it better than in 


serving so good a Master.” ‘‘ Yes,’’ said the Father, 
“but thou aggravatest thy disease to such an extent 
that thou mightest die of it.’’ ‘‘ Formerly,’ she 


replied, ‘‘I greatly feared death; but, since I have 
had a knowledge of a much happier life than [87] 
that which we lead on earth, and since my soul has 
been washed in the waters of baptism, I have lost 
that apprehension, for it seems to me that, if I 
dreaded death, I would fear to enter into the joys 
of the other world. I have this belief and this ex- 
pectation that, if I obey God and ask him to pardon 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 32 


les ioyes de l’autre vie. I’ay cette croyace & cette 
attente qu’en obeyffant & Dieu, & en luy demandant 
pardon de mes offenfes, ie le verray au Ciel, Dieu a 
donné vne grande benedictid a cette famille, non 
feulement cette femme eft en fanté, mais elle eft 
refpectée des Frangois & des Sauuages pour fa grande 
modeftie, & pour fa charité, on regarde fon mary 
comme l’exemple des croyans, tant il eft ferme en 
la Foy. 

Ie ne m’eftonne point, fi ceux qui n’entendent pas 
les Sauuages, & qui ne fgauroient penetrer dans leur 
coeur, ne leur portent pas de refpect: car en verité 
ils n’ont aucuns attraits agreables 4 la nature, ils 
font libres & independans au dernier point, ils n’ont 
ny politeffe, ny entretien, ny ciuilité parmy les Fran- 
cois, les huilles dont ils fe graiffent, bleffent les nari- 
nes, & la pauureté de leurs habits & de leurs cabanes 
choque la veué. Il n’y a que la pure grace [88] que 
Dieu refpand fur eux qui les rend aymables; or cette 
grace n’ef{t ordinairement cogneué qu’A ceux qui voy- 
ent la face de leur interieur, ceux mefmes qui les 
entendent, ont parfois de la peine 4 les fupporter, 
tant leurs fagons de faire font efloignées des noftres: 
mais quand ils preftent l’oreille 4 leurs Confeffions, & 
a la defcharge de leur coeur, ils fentent pour eux des 
tendreffes, & des affections toutes cordiales, voyant 
l’Efprit de Dieu agir en Pere, en Maiftre, en Amy 
& en Efpoux das des ames qui ne refpiroient que la 
barbarie. L’empreffement que nous apportent les 
Vaiffeaux, ne me permettent pas de reuoir ce Chapi- __ 
tre, ott i’ay parlé de la maladie d’vn fecond Iob pour 
fa patience; il me faut coucher icy quelques fenti- 
mens dont Dieu l’a beny a fa mort, cét homme 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 "249 


my sins, I shall see him in Heaven.’’ God has 
showered many blessings on that family,—not only 
is the woman in good health, but she is respected 
by the French and by the Savages for her great 
modesty and her charity; while her husband is looked 
upon as an example to the believers, so steadfast is 
he in the Faith. 

I am not surprised that they who do not under- 
stand the Savages, and who cannot penetrate into 
their thoughts, should have no respect for them; 
for in truth they have no attractions that are pleas- 
ing to nature. They are free and independent to the 
last degree; they have neither politeness, nor con- 
versation, nor civility with the French; the oils with 
which they grease themselves offend the nostrils, 
and the poverty of their clothes and of their cabins 
offends the sight. Only the pure grace [88] that 
God gives them makes them lovable; now this grace 
is generally known only to those who see into their 
souls, and even those who understand them find it 
difficult sometimes to endure them, so different are 
their ways from ours. But when such persons listen 
to their Confessions, and to the outpouring of their 
hearts, they feel a cordial tenderness and affection 
for them, when they see that the Spirit of God acts 
as a Father, as a Master, as a Friend, as a Spouse, 
in souls that breathed but barbarism. The haste 
that the departure of the Ships causes us does not 
permit me to review the Chapter in which I have 
spoken of the sickness of a second Job as regards 
patience; so I must set down here some sentiments 
with which God blessed his death. This man, who 
for some years had not been liked by his country- 
men, found himself abandoned by all. In the midst 


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


n’ef{tant depuis quelques années aucunement aymé 
de fes compatriotes fe vid delaiffé de tout le monde, 
Au milieu de fes afflictions nous eftions quafi feuls 
qui le vifitions, auffi nous difoit-il que nous eftions 
fon vnique confolatié deffus la terre, apres auoir long 
temps fouffert vn Purgatoire [89] affez rude, apres 
auoir enduré en penitent, il entra dans ie ne fcay 
quelle angoiffe amoureufe, en forte qu’il ne paroiffoit 
plus auoirde peine que de l’abfence de fon Dieu. 
Quand te verray-ie, luy difoit-il fort fouuent, Kik¥i- 
rsmir: Ie fuis en peine de toy, ton abfence m’afflige; 
ah fut-il ainfi que ie fuffe auec toy? ie ne me fafche 
point de mes fouffrances: mais ie ne puis fupporter 
ton abfence. Ie l’ayme, & ie ne le voy point! parle 
vn peu de moy, 6 mon Dieu, & dis ces parolles, qu’il 
vienne, qu’il me voye, & ie feray content, car ie 
feray auec toy. Pour moy i’ay la croyace, que fi vn 
Athée, ou vn libertin auoit cogneu cét homme dans 
fa fanté, en fa maladie & en fa mort, qu’il feroit 
contraint d’auoiier qu’il n’y a qu’vn Dieu, qui puiffe 
transformer vn cceur fi doucement & fi fortement, 
& qui puiffe mefler les ioyes du Ciel auec ces amer- 
tumes de laterre. Apres tout, il n’y a que le Ciel, 
& vn homme ou deux {ur la terre, qui ait eu cognoif- 
fance de ces operations, le refte du méde, ny Grec, 
ny Francois, ny Barbare, n’ont rien veu de ce qui fe 
paffoit dans le fecret de cette ame. 

[90] Combien de fois auons nous veu des perfonnes 
éplorées, nous aborder auec ces parolles, mon coeur 
eft trifte, & ie ne puis dormir en repos, de ce que 
ma fille fe veut marier auec vne perfonne qui n’eft 
pas encore baptifée. Ie fens autant de douleurs 
voyant mes gens s’efloigner du baptefme, comme Pi | 


is 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 "951 


of his afflictions we were almost the only persons 
who visited him. Therefore he told us that we were 
his sole consolation on earth. After having for a 
long time suffered a severe Purgatory, [89] and after 
having endured as a penitent, he fell into I know 
not what loving anguish, and seemed to have no 
longer any sorrow but that caused by the absence of 
his God. ‘‘ When shall I see thee?’’ he frequently 
said to him; ‘‘ Kzkwiroumir,—I am anxious for thee; 
thine absence afflicts me. Ah, would that I might 
belong to thee! I am not angry at my sufferings, 
but I cannot bear thine absence. I love thee, and I 
see thee not. Speak to me a little, O my God! and 
say these words: ‘ Let him come; let him see me;’ 
and I shall be satisfied, for I shall be with thee.’’ 
For my part, I believe that, if an Atheist or a liber- 
tine had known that man in health, in his illness, 
and in his death, he would have been compelled to 
admit that there is but one God who can transform 
a heart so gently and so firmly, and who can mingle 
the joys of Heaven with the bitterness of earth. After 
all, there can be but Heaven, and a man or two on 
earth, who have had any knowledge of these work- 
ings; the rest of the world—whether Greek, or 
French, or Barbarian—have not seen what passed 
in the secret recesses of that soul. 

[90] How many times have we seen persons weep- 
ing bitterly who have approached us with such words 
as these: ‘‘ My heart is sad, and I cannot sleep in 
peace, because my daughter wishes to marry a per- 
son who is not yet baptized.’’ ‘‘I feel as much pain 
when I see my people keep aloof from baptism, as 
if I abandoned my country and my own life.’’ ‘‘ For- 
merly I imagined that death was the greatest of all 


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


fi ie m’efloignois de mon pais, & de ma propre vie. 
Autrefois ie m’imaginois que la mort eftoit le plus 
grand de tous ces maux, & ie la trouuerois mainte- 
nant agreable. Ie n’ay qu’vne triftefle au monde, 
c’eft que ie ne fgaurois retenir ces prieres, & que ie 
ne fgay ce qu’il faut dire a Dieu: il me femble que 
mon coeur luy parle, mais ma bouche ne fcauroit 
prononcer ce qu’il dit: ces fruicts ne viennent pas du 
crfi de la nature, ils ne fe treuuent & ne fe ciieillent 
qu’au iardin de la grace. 

Ce nouueau monde eft de mefme nature que 
l’ancien, il a fes biens & fes maux auffi bien que 
l’Europe. Ceux-cy predominoient en 1’ Amerique, 
auffi bien qu’és autres parties de 1’Vniuers. Ie ne 
{cay ou la guerre, les maladies & les autres fleaux 
ont pris leur premiere [91] origine, mais ie fgay bien 
quils affligét ces Sauuages auffi bien que les Fran- 
cois. Depuis que la Foy s’eft venué loger parmy 
ces peuples, tout ce qui fait mourir les hommes s’eft 
trouué dans ces contrées? quoy qu’ils n’ayent pas eu 
le deffous cette année dans leurs guerres, ils n’ont 
pas pourtant iotiy de la paix. Les maladies ont 
partagé leurs iours auec la fanté, mais Dieu dans ces 
viciffitudes s’eft toufiours monftré leur Pere, la petite 
verolle qui fit vn carnage eftrange il y a neuf ans, a 
fait du bien 4 quelques ames en affligeant leurs 
corps, autrefois on n’entendoit que des tambours, des 
cris, des hurlemens, on ne voyoit que des feftins & 
des furries [sc. fueries] dans ces cabanes, ott eftoiét — 


les malades, on ne fgait quafi plus, és endroits ou — 


refident les Chreftiens, que font deuenus ces chanfons © 
& ces tintamarres, nos malades ont eu recoursa 
Dieu, mais auec tant de confiance, que cette contagion 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 * 258 


ills, and now I would find it agreeable.’’ ‘‘I have 
but one sorrow in the world and that is that I cannot 
remember these prayers and know not what to say 
to God. Itseemsto me that my heart speaks to him, 
but my mouth cannot pronounce what it says.’’ Such 
fruits are not of the growth of nature; they are found 
and gathered only in the garden of grace. 

This new world is of the same nature as the old; 
it has its good and its bad aspects, as well as Europe. 
The latter predominate in America, as well asin 
other parts of the World. I know not where war, 
disease, and other plagues had their [91] origin; but 
I do know that they afflict these Savages, as well as 
the French. Since the Faith has come to dwell 
among these peoples, all things that make men die 
have been found in these countries. Although they 
have not been defeated in their wars this year, still 
they have not enjoyed peace. Sicknesses have divided 
their days with health; but in these vicissitudes God 
has always shown himself their Father. The small- 
pox that caused such havoc nine years ago did good 
to some souls, while afflicting their bodies. Former- 
ly, one heard nothing but drums, cries, and yells; 
one saw nothing but feasts and sweats in the cabins 
where the sick lay. But now one hardly knows, in 
the places where the Christians reside, what has 
become of all those songs and noises. Our sick have 
recourse to God, but with such confidence that that 
contagion— which, as a rule, is fatal to aged per- 
sons—has not carried off one; and they attribute 
this good fortune to him who holds both life and 
death in his hands. 

{92] I cannot conclude this Chapter without men- 
tioning a little girl who remained for two years at 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 32 


mortelle aux perfonnes 4gées pour l’ordinaire, n’en 
a emporté pas vn, elles attribuent ce béheur a celuy 
qui a la vie & la mort entre fes mains. 

[92] Il ne faut pas finir ce Chapitre fans faire men- 
tion d’vne petite fille, qui a demeuré deux ans au © 
feminaire des Meres Vrfulines, le pere de cét enfant — 
ayant apris que fa fille faifoit des merueilles pour 
fon age, fe mit en chemin pour la venir voir, ayant 
fait plus de cent lieués de chemin, il fut rencontré & 
mis 4 mort par les Hiroquois, c’eft [sc. cet] enfant en 
ayant oiiy le vent, paya le tribut que la nature exige 
en ces occafions, mais comme on luy euft dit, que 
fon pere s’eftoit fait baptifer depuis qu’elle ne l’auoit 
veu, & qu’il eftoit au Ciel, cette nouuelle fe changea 
fi fort en vn moment, qu’elle n’euft plus que des 
ioyes pour fon falut, fes parens réchapés du combat 
l’ont emmenée, & depuis fon départ quelques femmes 
fauuages venans voir les Meres Vrfulines, leur ont 
dit que cét enfant les auoit inftruites, & leur auoit — 
apris a reciter leur Chapelet, Dieu fgait fi ces bonnes 
filles gouftoient auec delices les fruits de cette ieune 
plante cultiué de leurs mains. ; 

Parlant hier A vne femme qui a languy fort long- 
temps 4 S. Iofeph dans [93] vne maladie quelle croy- | 
oit mortelle, ie luy demanday fi fes douleurs, & fa — 
pauureté ne luy auoient pas bien caufé de la trifteffe. 
& fi la crainte de la mort n’auoit pas bien fouuent — 
troublé fon ame, elle ne me refpondit rien fur la _ 
pauureté, parce que nous l’auions vn petit fecourué, 
mais elle me dit ces parolles, d’vn accent qui faifoit — 
voir, que fa bouche s’accordoit auec fon coeur. Ie 
t’affeure, mon Pere, que ie n’ay eu aucune trifteffe 
en mon ame, dans toute ma maladie, il me femble | 


_— ———— 


er ee Mw 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 " 255 


the seminary of the Ursuline Mothers. The father 
of the child heard that she was doing wonders, for 
her age; and he set out to goandsee her. After he 
had journeyed over a hundred leagues, he was met 
and killed by the Hiroquois. When the child received 
the news, she paid the tribute required by nature on 
such occasions; but when she was told that her 
father had been baptized since she had seen him, 
and that he was in Heaven, the news appeared, ina 
moment, under so different an aspect, that she felt 
nothing but joy for his salvation. Her relatives, who 
had escaped from the fight, took her with them; and 
since that time some savage women have come to 
see the Ursuline Mothers, and have told them that 
that child had instructed them, and had taught them 
to recite the Rosary. God knows with what delight 
those good maidens tasted the fruits of the young 
plant that had been cultivated by their hands. 
Yesterday, while speaking to a woman who has 
been ill for a long time at St. Joseph, with [93] a 
disease that she considered mortal, I asked her 
whether her pains and her poverty had not caused 
her much sorrow, and whether the fear of death had 
not often troubled her soul. She gave no answer as 
regards poverty, because we had given her some 
slight assistance; but she said these words to me, in 
a tone which showed that her lips were in accord 
with her heart: ‘‘I assure thee, my Father, that 
throughout my illness I have felt no sorrow in my 
soul; it seemed to me that I was glad to suffer. As 
for death, so far was I from having any dread of it 
that, on the contrary, it seemed agreeable tome. I 
said in my heart: ‘I am near the house of prayer, I 
am near the Fathers who care for my soul; and, if I 


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


que i’eftois bien aife de fouffrir pour la mort, tant 
s’en faut que i’en euffe aucune aprehéfion, qu’au 
contraire elle me paroiffoit agreable. Ie difois en 
mon cceur, Ie fuis aupres de la maifon de prieres, ie 
fuis aupres des Peres qui ont foin de mon ame, & fi 
ie meurs dans les bois ie feray priuée de leurs fecours, 
cette penfée me ddnoit des defirs de la mort, mais 
noftre Seigneur ne l’a pas voulu; elle difoit cela dans 
l’Eglife, ot elle fe venoit confeffer & communier, 
pour fe prefenter 4 celuy qu’elle aime en verité, afin 
qu'il difpofaft de tout ce quelle eft felon fa tres- 
faincte volonté. [94] Cette petite Eglife baftie en la 
refidéce de fainct Iofeph, donne bien de la confola- 
tion A ces bons Neophites, & auec raifon, car ils ont 
leur Seigneur aupres d’eux, & la ftructure en eft 
affez gentille, quoy que les vitres, pour ainfi dire ne 
foient que de toille, & qu’elle n’ait encore ny Sacri- 
{tie ny clocher, elle ne laiffe pas de contenter la 
veué, & de donner de la deuotion a tous ceux qui la 
voyent, Dieu beniffe les perfonnes qui ont contribué 
a fa fabrique, & qui ont part a fes petits ornemens, ~ 
nos bons Chreftiens ne les oublieront pas deuant 


Dieu. 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 . 257 


die in the woods, I shall be deprived of their assist- 
ance.’ That thought inspired me with a desire to 
die, but our Lord would not permit it.” She said 
this in the Church, where she came to confess and 
receive communion, to present herself before him 
whom she truly loves, in order that he might dispose 
of her entirely according to his most holy will. 
[94] This little Church built at the residence of 
saint Joseph gives much consolation to the good 
Neophytes, and with reason; for they have their Lord 
with them. The building is very neat; although the 
windows, if one may call them thus, are only of 
linen, and it has as yet neither Sacristy nor steeple, 
it does not fail to please the eye, and to inspire devo- 
tion in all who see it. May God bless the persons 
who have contributed toward its erection, and who 
have a share in its modest ornaments. Our good 
Christians will not forget them before God. 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


CHAPITRE VII. 


DE L’IUERNEMENT DU PERE GABRIEL DRUILLETES 
AUEC LES SAUUAGES. 


OICY le troifiefme Hyuer que le Pere Gabriel 
V Druilletes a paffé auec les Sauuages, dans des 
trauaux capables A la verité, de terraffer le 
corps d’vn Geant, mais tres propres & tres-auanta- 
geux pour efleuer vn efprit qui [95] a de l’amour 
pour la Croix. Les Hiroquois Agneronons qui n’ai- 
ment guere les Frang¢ois, qui haiffent les Hurons, & 
qui font enragez contre les Algonquins, contraignent 
ces derniers, de s’écarter bien loin de nos habitations 
pour faire leurs grandes chaffes: mais cdme la plus- 
part, de ceux qui demeurent aupres de nous, font 
Chreftiens; ils demandent ordinairement A leur 
depart, que quelqu’vn des Peres qui entendent leur 
langue, les accdpagne, pour n’e{tre priuez, dans leurs 
longues fatigues, des principaux exercices de la Reli- 
gion Chreftiéne, qu’ils ont nouuellement embraffée. 
Le Pere Gabriel leur ayant efté accordé, huict cha- 
louppes & plufieurs canots, tous remplis de Sauuages, 
nous l’enleuerent le 22. de Septembre de l’an paffé 
1647. pour le conduire 4 quatre-vingt, ou a cét lieués 
de Kebec, dans le pais des Ombres, pour ainfi parler, 
c’e{t A dire dans des montagnes affreufes, & parmy 
des foref{ts ou le Soleil ne regarde iamais la terre qu’a 
la dérobée. 
Cette petite Armée s’eftant répandué, qui deca 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 * 259 


CHAPTER VII. 


OF THE WINTERING OF FATHER GABRIEL DRUILLETES 
WITH THE SAVAGES. 


HIS is the third Winter that Father Gabriel 
Druilletes has passed with the Savages,— doing 
work that, in truth, might prostrate the body 

of a Giant; but very well adapted and most advan- 
tageous for uplifting a mind that [95] has an affection 
for the Cross. The Agneronon Hiroquois, who have 
but little love for the French, who hate the Hurons, 
and who are enraged against the Algonquins, compel 
the latter to wander far away from our settlements 
in order to carry on their great hunts. But, as most 
of those who dwell near us are Christians, they gen- 
erally ask, when they depart, that one of our Fathers 
who understands their language may accompany 
them, that they may not, during their long and 
fatiguing journeys, be deprived of the principal exer- 
cises of the Christian Religion which they have 
recently embraced. Father Gabriel having been 
given to them, eight shallops and several canoes, all 
filled with Savages, bore him away from us on the 
22nd of September of last year, 1647, to take him 
eighty or a hundred leagues from Kebec, into the 
land of Shades, so to speak,—that is to say, amid 
frightful mountains and forests, where the Sun never 
looks upon the earth, except by stealth. 

This small Army, which had scattered here and 
there on the great river, [96] rallied soon afterward 


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 82 . 
4 


qui dela fur le grand fleuue, [96] fe r’allia bien toft 
apres vers Tadouffac, proche d’vne petite riuiere 
nommée des Sauuages Ksabahiganan. Le Pere voy- 
ant fon troupeau reiiny luy diftribué le pain de la 
parolle, & de la doctrine de noftre Seigneur, en forte 
que la ferueur s’eftant iettée parmy fes oiiailles, quel- 
ques-vnes qui pour s’eftre trop écartées du Bercail, 
auoiét perdu la faueur & le gouft des chofes faintes, 
rentrerent en appetit, voyant l’auidité de ceux qu’on 
ne pouuoit affouuir, tant ils prenoient de plaifir és 
difcours de la vie eternelle. 

Vne femme Payenne qui s’eftoit fauuée depuis peu 
du pais & de la captiuité des Hiroquois, s’alla ietter 
a fes pieds, le fuppliant de la baptifer deuat que de 
s’engager plus auant dans vn fi fafcheux voyage. Le 
Pere qui fgauoit bien qu’elle auoit efté inftruite, & 
que fon orgueil l’auoit empefché d’embraffer vne 
creance, qui fait profeffion de l’humilité, luy deman- 
da d’ot prouenoit ce changement fi foudain; 1’affli- 
ction, répondit-elle, m’a donné de l’efprit. Si toft 
que ie me vis entre les mains de nos ennemis, ie 
penfay en [97] mon cceur, il me chaftie, Celuy quia 
tout fait, pource que i’ay bouché mes oreilles a fa 
parolle; & au plus fort de mes tourmens, ie luy ~ 
difois: Aye pitié de moi, ie n’ay point d’efprit de 
t’auoir fafché, fais que ie reuoye la terre des Croy- 
ans, afin que ie fois baptifée. Noftre Seigneur ayant 
exaucé fa priere, le Pere luy donna tout fur l’heure 
l’accompliffement de fon defir. 

Le 8. d’Octobre ils fe mirent tous en priere, deman- 
dans a Dieu vn temps fauorable, pour trauerfer la 
grande riuiere, qui eft large de huict a dix lieuésen | 
cét endroit ; cette grace leur fut accordée, ils fe feparent qi 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ; 261 


in the vicinity of Tadoussac, near a small river called 
Kwabahiganan by the Savages. When the Father 
saw his flock again gathered together, he distributed 
to them the bread of the word and doctrine of our 
Lord, so that his sheep were inspired with fervor. 
Some who, because they had wandered too far from 
the Fold, had lost taste and relish for holy things, 
felt their appetite return when they saw the avidity 
of those who could not be satisfied, so great was 
the pleasure that they took in discourses relating to 
eternal life. 

A Pagan woman who had escaped a short time 
before from the country and the captivity of the 
Hiroquois, threw herself at his feet, begging him to 
baptize her before going any further on so rougha 
journey. The Father who well knew that she had 
been instructed, and that her pride had prevented 
her from embracing a creed which makes a profession 
of humility, asked her whence this sudden change 
arose. ‘‘ Affliction,’’ she said, ‘‘ has given me sense. 
As soon as I saw myself in the hands of our enemies, 
I thought in [97] my heart: ‘He who has made all 
punishes me because I closed my ears to his word;’ 
and in the worst of my tortures I said to him: ‘ Have 
pity on me; I had no sense in offending thee; per- 
mit me again to see the land of the Believers, so that 
I may be baptized.’’’ Our Lord having granted her 
prayer, the Father granted her, upon the spot, the 
fulfillment of her desire. 

On the 8th of October, they all prayed and asked 
God for favorable weather to enable them to cross 
the great river, which at that spot is from eight to 
ten leagues wide. That favor was granted them; 
they separated once more, to meet again, at a certain 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 82 


vne autrefois pour fe trouuer das quelque temps 
au rendez-vous qu’ils s’eftoient donnez. Le Pere 
fit rencontre en ce rendez-vous, de quelques Sauuages 
qui eftoiét partis dés le commencement de Septem- 
bre, il leur adminiftre les Sacremens de la Penitence, 
& de l’Euchariftie auec vne ioye, & vne fatisfaction 
reciproque de part & d’autre. Les meres apportoient 
leurs petits enfans, les vns pour les baptifer, les 
autres qui l’eftoient defia, pour les veoir dans leurs 
[98] maladies: or quoy que quelques-vns paruffent 
moribons, entr’autres vn hydropique, duquel on 
n’attendoit que la mort: Si eft-ce que le Pere leur 
ayant donné de l’eau benite, & recité fur eux quel- 
ques prieres de l’Eglife, noftre Seigneur les guerit 
tous auec l’eftonnement de ces bons Neophytes. 

Ayans faict peu de feiour en cét endroit, ils tirent 
tous vers vne ritiiere appellée en Sauuage Kaparipa- 
taouangak, c’eft a dire, terre percée, parce que l’em- 
bouchure par ot elle fe iette dans le grand fleuue, 
ne paroift qu’vne petite ouverture de terre, & cepen- 
dat cette riuiere eft fort large & fort belle au dela 
de ce détroit. Ce fut és enuirds de cette Riuiere, 
que cette petite armée fe ietta dans les terres, qui 
d’vn coité qui d’autre pour aller declarer la guerre 
aux Caftors, aux Elans & aux Ours, habitans de ces 
grandes forefts. 

L’Efcotiade qui emmena le Pere, compofée de 
cinquante bouches, fans conter les plus petits enfas, 
laiffa deux Chalouppes fur les riues de cette Riuiere, 
que nous croions eftre celle que nos Frangois 
appellent la Riuiere de [99] Mantane, & fuiuans 
les bords du grand fleuue, ils marcherent quatre 
iournées par vn chemin, plus fortement paué, que 


oY aera! 
—- 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 263 


time, at the rendezvous that they had appointed. 
There the Father met some Savages who had started 
at the beginning of September; he administered to 
them the Sacraments of Penance and the Eucharist, 
with mutual joy and satisfaction on both sides. The 
mothers brought their little children,—some, to be 
baptized; others, who were already baptized, that he 
might see them in their [98] sicknesses. Now, 
although some appeared to be dying,— among others, 
one who was afflicted with dropsy, and for whom 
death only was expected,—nevertheless, when the 
Father had given them holy water, and had recited 
some of the prayers of the Church over them, our 
Lord cured them all, to the astonishment of those 
good Neophytes. 

After a short stay in that spot they proceeded 
toward a river called by the Savages Kaparipataouan- 
gak—that is to say, land that is pierced; because the 
mouth through which it falls into the great river 
seems to be only a small opening in the land, and yet 
the river is very wide and very fine beyond that nar- 
tow passage.” It was in the vicinity of this River 
that that small army went inland,—some in one 
direction, and some in another,—to wage war on 
the Beavers, Elks, and Bears, the denizens of those 
great forests. 

The Party that carried the Father with it—con- 
sisting of fifty mouths, besides the smaller children — 
left two Shallops on the banks of this River, which 
we believe to be that called by our French the River 
of [99] Mantane; and, following the shore of the 
great river, they walked for four days along a road 
more firmly paved than that from Paris to Orleans, 
but not so flat or so even. There were rocks laid by 


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 32 


celuy de Paris 4 Orleans, mais non pas fi plat, & fi 
vny, c’eftoient des roches pofées par les mains de la 
Nature, qui fe plaift a la varieté, les vnes étoient 
tranchantes, les autres emouffées, il yen auoit de 
rondes & de quarrées, de hautes & de baffes; en vn 
mot c’étoit vn chemin de fer, & apres tout, il falloit 
porter fur fon dos, les maifons ot on vouloit loger, 
& les viures qu’on vouloit manger, pour les licts on 
les trouue par tout, celuy quia fait la terre, les roches, 
& les bois, a bafty les mattelas & les trauerfains, dont 
on fe fert en la fuitte des Sauuages. 

Enfin le 7. de Nouembre, cette petite trouppe fait 
alte, pour prendre vn peu de repos, deuant que 
d’entrer dans ces grandes forefts, ot leurs trauaux 
deuoient redoubler, ceux qui portoient la batterie de 
cuifine, compofée de quelques chaudieres, s’arreftent; 
les viuandiers, qui n’auoient plus qu’vn peu de pois, 
& vn peu de bled d’Inde au fond de leurs facs le pro- 
duifent, les [100] femmes font la cuifine fans beurre, 
fans viande, fans greffe, fans huile, fans fel & fans 
vinaigre, l’appetit fupplée a tous les ragouts, il paffe 
deuant toutes les fauces & deuant tous les faupiquets 
des meilleures tables de la France. On difna sas 
pain & sas vin: pour le fouper, il y auoit defia long- 
temps qu’on n’en parloit plus. Au milieu de ce 
fe{tin vn Capitaine s’écrie, prenés courage, c’eft 
pour la derniere fois que nous nous feruirons de nos 
chaudieres, il n’y a point icy de porcs-Epics, les 
Caftors y font rares, la neige n’eft pas affés haute 
pour prendre 1’Elan, il fe faut refoudre a la faim, 
ayés l’ame forte & dure, refiftés au trauail; Apres 


cette harangue tous les Chrétiens preuoians les — 
peines & les fatigues ot ils s’alloient engager, non — 


ee ee ee 


fae eet 


— 


——s —— ae ee a ad 
eS SESS 


a 


1647-48] | RELATION OF 1647-48 ‘265 


the hands of Nature, which takes pleasure in variety; 
some were sharp, others blunt; some round, and 
some square; some high, and some low. Ina word, 
it was a road of iron; and, after all, they had to 
carry on their backs the houses in which they were 
to lodge, and the food that they wished to eat; as for 
beds, they are found everywhere. He who has built 
the earth, the rocks, and the woods, has also made 
the mattresses and bolsters which one must use in 
following the Savages. 

Finally, on the 7th of November, the little band 
halted to take a short rest before entering the great 
forests, where their labors would be doubled. Those 
who carried the cooking utensils, consisting of some 
kettles, stopped; the sutlers, who had nothing left 
but a few peas and a little Indian corn, in the bottom 
of their pouches, produced these; the [100] women 
cooked the food without butter, without meat, with- 
out fat, without oil, without salt, and without vine- 
gar. Appetite supplies the place of all sauces; it 
surpasses all the condiments and appetizers of the 
best tables in France. They dined without bread 
and without wine; as for supper, such a thing had 
not been mentioned fora long time. In the middle 
of this feast a Captain called out: ‘‘ Take courage, 
this is the last time we shall use our kettles. There 
are no Porcupines; Beavers are scarce, and the snow 
is not deep enough for capturing Elk. We must be 
prepared for hunger; be brave and stout of heart, 
and persevere in your labors.’”’ After this harangue, 
all the Christians, who foresaw the trouble and 
fatigues in which they were to be involved, not only 
accepted them cheerfully but they also offered them 
to our Lord that he might be pleased to stay the fury 


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


feulement ils les accepterent de bon coeur, mais en 
outre ils les offrirét 4 noftre Seigneur, afin qu’il lui 
pltit arrefter la fureur des Hiroquois qui les baniffent 
d’auprés de fa maifon, c’eft a dire, d’auprés de 
1’Eglife qu’on leur a baftie, ils reitererent cette méme 
priere au iour de la naiffance, & au iour de la mort de 
noftre Sauueur. 

[101] Enuiron ce temps-la deux Hurons & vn 
Algonquin craignans d’eftre égorgés par la famine, 
fe débanderent, tirans vers Kebec; mais ils n’arriue- 
rent pas tous trois & bon port, l’Algonquin mourut 
en chemin; les deux autres nous aias abordés le 26. 
de Nouembre, nous dirét que la faim & la maladie 
faifoient mourir ces pauures gens; On leur demanda 
file Pere n’auoit point récrit, ils répondirét qu’ils ne 
l’auoient point veu a leur depart, en effet, ils auoient 
pris l’occafion de fon abfence, pour luy derober vn 
peu de pruneaux, & vn peu de refain, dont il foula- 
geoit les malades. 

Tous ceux qui viennét en la Nouuelle France co- 
gnoiffent affés les Monts de noftre-Dame, pource que 
les Pilotes & les Mattelots eftans arriués a l’endroit 
du grand fleuue, qui répond a ces hautes montagnes, 
baptifent ordinairement par recreation les nouueaux 
paffagers, s’ils ne détournent par quelque prefent ; 
l’innondation de ce baptéme, qu’on fait couler en 
abéddance deffus leurs teftes. C’eft parmy ces grands 
precipices, ot le Pere, & toute fa bande, [102] mar- 
choient, grimpoient, rouloient cherchans au pais de 
la mort les moiens de fofitenir leur vie. 

Tout le monde étant dans l’effroy, le pauure Perea ~ 
recours A Dieu, il fait prier les Chrétiens, il les 
exhorte a fe confier en la bonté de celuy, qui fe 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 267 


of the Hiroquois, who banish them from the neigh- 
borhood of his house—that is to say, of the Church 
that has been erected for them. They repeated the 
same prayer on the anniversaries of the birth and 
the death of our Savior. 

[101] About that time, two Hurons and an Algon- 
quin, who feared that they would die of hunger, left 
the band and proceeded toward Kebec; but all three 
did not arrive there safely. The Algonquin died on 
the road; while the two others, who reached us on the 
26th of November, told us that hunger and sickness 
were killing those poor people. They were asked 
whether the Father had not written, and they replied 
that they had not seen him before their departure. 
In fact, they had taken advantage of his absence to 
rob him of a few prunes and raisins with which he 
telieved the sick. 

All who come to New France are sufficiently fa- 
miliar with the Mountains of nostre-Dame,” because, 
when the Pilots and Sailors reach that part of the 
great river which is opposite those mountains, they 
generally amuse themselves by baptizing the new 
passengers, unless, by means of a present, they turn 
aside the flood of that baptism, which is made to pour 
in abundance over their heads. It was amid those 
high precipices that the Father and all his band [102] 
marched, climbed, and rolled over, seeking in the 
land of death the means of sustaining their lives. 

Every one was frightened; the poor Father had 
recourse to God; he made the Christians pray and 
exhorted them to confide in the goodness of him who, 
_ because he gives himself as food to his children, will 
not refuse them life and the preservation of their 
bodies. In fact, they found every day not enough 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


donnant en nourriture a fes enfans, ne leur refufera pas 
la vie, & la conferuation de leurs corps; en effet ils 
trouuerent tous les iours non pas dequoy viure, mais ~ 
dequoy ne pas mourir, qui apportoit vne gelinotte, — 
qui vn lieure, qui vn pore-Epic: bref, il n’y eut aucun 
iour que Dieu ne leur donnat quelque petite chofe; 
or comme l’hyuer s’auancoit fort ils fe trouuerent 
bien en peine, ne fcachant pas cdme ils pourroient 
marcher fur les neiges, n’ayans point de peaux dét 
ils f6t les raquettes, qui leur feruét a cét vfage. I 
atriua par bd-heur que Noél Negabamat aiat oiiy la 
fainte meffe le iour de Saint Francois Xauier, voulut 
faire vn effay de fon agilité & de fes forces anciennes 
il prend fon cartier pour la chaffe auffi bien que les 
ieunes gens, Dieu luy fit rencontrer vn grand Ori- 
gnac, il le pourfuit, il l’attrappe, [103] il le tué, & 
apres auoir remercié noftre Seigneur de cette grace, 
il donne la chair aux plus neceffiteux, & la peau aux 
femmes pour faire des raquettes, ce qui réjouit 
merueilleufement tous les chaffeurs. & 
La fefte de 1’Enfant nouueau né s’approchant ils © 
batirent vne petite Eglife, ot ils fe confefferent tous, — 
& fe communierent a la meffe de minuit, auec vne 
ioie & vne cdfolation de leur ame, qui fut bien-toft 
{uiuie d’vne allegreffe de leurs fens: car il tomba tant # | 
de neige, qu’ils en eurent fuffifamment pour tuér 
leurs grandes beftes, mais comme ils en trouuoient — 
peu, ils furent contraints de fe feparer en deux ban-— 
des, Georges Etouet Capitaine de Tadouffac, donna 
le quartier plus abondant en chaffe 4 Noel Negaba- 
mat, par vne charité vraiement Chrétienne, & par q 
vne cofitume qui n’a rien de barbare au milieu de la 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 269 


to live on, but enough to keep them from dying; one 
would bring in a grouse, another a hare or a Porcu- 
pine. Ina word, there was not a day that God did 
not give them some little thing. Now, as winter 
was approaching, they were in great trouble; for 
they knew not how they could walk on the snow, 
because they had none of the skins with which they 
make snowshoes that they use for that purpose. It 
happened fortunately that Noél Negabamat, after 
hearing holy mass on the feast of Saint Francis 
Xavier, felt impelled to make a trial of his former 
agility and strength. He selected his own hunting- 
ground as also did the young men. God made him 
encounter a great Moose, which he pursued, caught, 
[103] and killed. After thanking our Lord for the 
favor, he gave the flesh to the most needy, and the 
skin to the women, to make snowshoes with; this 
wonderfully rejoiced all the hunters. 

As the festival of the new-born Child approached, 
they built a little Church, in which all confessed and 
received communion at midnight mass, with joy and 
consolation in their souls. These feelings were soon 
followed by cheerfulness of heart, for so much snow 
fell, that they had enough for killing the large 
animals. But, as there were but few of these, they 
were compelled to divide into two bands. Georges 
Etouet, the Captain of Tadoussac, gave the district 
most abounding in game to Noel Negabamat, through 
purely Christian charity, and in accordance with a 
custom that savors naught of barbarism, though in 
the very midst of Barbarians; it is this, that the 
Captains of a country always give the advantage to 
the Captains of other nations who come to hunt in 
their district. 


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


tofijours l’auantage aux Capitaines des autres nations, 
qui viennent chaffer en leur diftric. 

Ce Capitaine prie le Pere de l’accompagner [104] 
das fes fouffrances, ie fcay bien, mon Pere, luy 
difoit-il, que tu patiras. auec moy: car il n’y a quafi 
point d’animaux au lieu ot nous allons, tous les bons 
endroits font remplis de chaffeurs, il ne refte en ce 
quartier-cy, que cette vallée, ot peut eftre nous 
trouuerons la mort, mais perfonne ne la craint en ta 
compagnie, le Pere n’auoit garde de reculer en cette 
occafion, il le fuit, & fans preuoir le futur, il le dif- 
pofe par fes entretiens 4 vne fainte mort, qu'il a 
trouuée au milieu de 1’Eté, dans 1’Hépital de Kebec, 
ou il fe fit apporter deux ou trois iours deuant fon 
trépas. 

Mais pour ne m’écarter de mon chemin, comme 
les Chaffeurs de ce Capitaine trouuoient de quoy 
viure paflablement, quatre cabanes d’vn autre quar- 
tier fe vindrent ietter entre leurs bras, crians a la 
faim, pource qu'il n’y auoit ny Elans ny Caftors,. a 
difoient ils, dans leur diftric, Georges Etouet leur fit * 
vn feftin de tabac, c’eft a dire, qu’il leur prefenta | 
dequoy petuner, n’aiant pas de viures fuffilamment 
pour tant de monde. II n’eft pas croiable combien — 
les Sauuages font charitables en [105] ces rencontres, & 
on ne tanga point ces bonnes gens, de ce qu’ils cour-_ } | 
roient fur les marches d’autruy, on leur fait part de > | 
tout ce qu’il ya dans les cabanes, ce bon Capitaine i 
leur dit, courage, mes freres, courrons mefmes rif- ve | 
ques, fouffrons & mourrons tous de compagnie noftre — 
confolation eft que nous auons noftre Pere auec nous. 4 
Sa charité l’oblige A fouffrir, & l’engage a la mort 
auffi bien que nous. " 


« 4 
4 
, 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 : 271 


That Captain begged the Father to accompany him 
[104]in his sufferings. ‘‘I know well, my Father,’’ he 
‘ said to him, ‘‘ that thou wilt have to suffer with me; 
for there are hardly any animals in the place where 
we are going; all the good spots are full of hunters; 
there remains in this quarter only that valley, where 
we shall perhaps find death, but no one fears it in 
thy company.’’ The Father would not draw back, 
in that emergency. He followed him, and, without 
foreseeing the future, he prepared him by his con- 
versations for a holy death which came to him in the 
middle of the Summer at the Hospital of Kebec, 
whither he caused himself to be carried two or three 
days before his decease. 

But, not to wander from my road, when that Cap- 
tain’s Hunters found enough wherewith to live fairly 
well, four cabins from another quarter came, and 
threw themselves into their arms, crying that they 
were starving,— because, they said, there were nei- 
ther Elks nor Beaversin their own district. Georges 
Etouet gave them a tobacco feast,—that is, he gave 
them something to smoke as he had not sufficient 
food for so many people. Itis incredible how chari- 
table the Savages are on [105] such occasions. These 
good people were not reproved because they ran over 
other people’s marches; they were made to share 
whatever was in the cabins. This good Captain said 
to them: ‘‘ Courage, my brothers! let us run the 
same risks; let us all suffer and die in company. 
Our consolation is that we have a Father with us. 
His charity compels him to suffer, and exposes him 
to death, as well as ourselves.”’ 

The Father encouraged them by relating several 
miracles that the Son of God had performed,—such 


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 32 


Le Pere les anima, leur racontant plufieurs miracles 
que le Fils de Dieu auoit fait, comme la multiplica- 
tion des pains, vous eftes baptifés en fon Nom, leur 
difoit-il, vous eftes fes enfans, il eft Tout puiffant, 
confiés-vous en luy, il nous tirera tous de ce danger. 
Ces bons Neophytes animés par les parolles de leur 
Pere, prennent courage, ils trauaillent tous les iours 
depuis le matin iufques au foir, chaffans de tous 
co{tés, Dieu les affifta par deffus leur attente, ils 
eurent tofiiours dequoy entretenir leurs forces, auec 
1’étonnemét de ceux qui chaffoient és endroits plus 
abondans; Quelques Paiens fe confians en leur Mani- 
tou, furent quatre iours [106] fans manger, & a peine 
trouuerent ils dequoy traifner leur pauure & mifera- 
ble vie, ils confefferent tous au Printéps que la bande 
du Pere auoit moins fouffert que les autres, quoy 
qu’elle eut eu fon depart és endroits les plus fterils 
de toutes ces contrées. 

Enfin apres auoir bien rodé par ces monts affreux, 
ils defcendirent vers la fource de la Riuiere de Man- 
tane, dont i’ay fait mention au commencement de ce 
Chapitre; ils cheminerent fur ce fleuue glacéiufques 
au 3. de Mars, qu’ils arriuerent 4 fon emboucheure, 
ot ils auoient laiffé leurs Chalouppes, ils s’attendirent 
les vns les autres iufques au 14. d’Auril, iourauquel 
ils s’embarquerent pour tirer droit 4 Tadouffac, ot : | 
ils moiiillerent l’ancre le dernier du mef{me mois, & __ 
en partirent le 7. May, comme leur Eglife fituée — 
en lance de Saint Iofeph eft dediée au glorieux 
Archage Saint Michel, ils auoient demandé a noftre 
Seigneur de s’y pouuoir trouuer le iour de fa fefte, 
la chofe fembloit quafi impoffible: car il falloit faire | 
en vn iour & demy quarante lieués, ce qui ne fe fait 


~~ 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ' 273 


as the multiplication of the loaves. ‘‘ You are bap- 
tized in his Name,’’ he said; ‘‘ you are his children. 
He is Almighty; confide in him, and he will extricate 
us all from this danger.” The good Neophytes, 
animated by the words of their Father, took cour- 
age; they worked every day from morning till night, 
hunting in all directions. God assisted them beyond 
their expectations; they always had sufficient to 
keep up their strength, to the surprise of those who 
hunted in places where game was more abundant. 
Some Pagans, who confided in their Manitou, were 
four days [106] without eating, and barely found 
enough to drag on their poor and miserable exist- 
ence. They all admitted, in the Spring, that the 
Father’s band had suffered less than the others, 
though it had proceeded into the most barren re- 
gions of all those countries. 

Finally, after having wandered through those 
dreadful mountains, they descended toward the 
source of the River of Mantane, which I mentioned 
at the beginning of this Chapter. They walked on 
the ice of that river until the 3rd of March, when 
they reached its mouth, where they had left their 
Shallops. They waited for one another until the 
14th of April, on which day they proceeded to 
Tadoussac, where they anchored on the last day of 
the same month, and then started from it on the 7th 
of May. As their Church situated in the cove of 
Saint Joseph is dedicated to the glorious Archangel 
Saint Michael,*! they had asked our Lord that they 
might be there on the day of his feast. This seemed 
well-nigh impossible, for it was necessary to go forty 
leagues in a day and a half,—a thing that some- 
times requires a [107] month to accomplish. But 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


pas quelquefois en vn [107] mois, mais le vent les 
fauorifa tellement, qu’ils eurent 1l’accompliffement 
de leurs fouhaits. Lors qu’ils aborderent deuat 
Kebec, le Pere qui les auoit accompagnés, prenant 
vn Crucifix en main, éleua fa voix & leur fit rendre 
graces 4 Dieu a la veué de nos Frangois, qui voids ce 
patuiure Pere les pieds nuds, & le corps entouré d’vne 
couuerture 4 la facon des Sauuages, & entendans les 
prieres de ces bons Neophytes, furent touchés fi 
fenfiblemét, que quelques-vns en pleuroiét A chaudes 
larmes. Dieu foit beny pour vn iamais, fi les peines 
ala pourfuitte de ces pauures peuples font grades, 
les confolations ne font pas petites, quia iamais donné 
quoy que ce foit auec amour, qui n’ait receu le cen- 
tuple, de celuy qui nous fait trop d’honneur d’agréer 
nos petits trauaux? 

Ce bon Pere s’étant vn petit rafraichy nous confola 
par fes difcours, les Sauuages auec lefquels i’ay 
hyuerné, difoit-il, ne font plus enfans en la Foy. 
I’ay trouué en eux vne fermeté & vne confiance 
entiere dans les dangers. Ils font bien plus deuots 
enuers le faint [108] Sacrifice de la Meffe que les 
années precedentes, ils fe font méntrés plus doux & 
plus courtois en mon endroit qu’ils n’auoient iamais 
fait, auffi faut-il confeffer que Dieu leur a feruy de 
Pere, d’vne fagon toute particuliere & toute aimable. 

Vn Sauuage accablé d’vn abcés qui le mettoit a 
deux doigts de la mort, eut recours 4 Dieu par cette 
priere bien courte, mais bien cordiale. Toy qui as 
tant fouffert pour nous, tu peux tout, ie ne te dy pas 
gueris moy, c’e{t 4 toy d’en determiner, fi tu le fais, 


ie t'en remerciray en la communion; fitunele fais 


pas, ie ne laifferay pour cela de croire en toy. Et 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 : 275 


the wind favored them to such an extent that their 
wishes were granted. When they arrived before 
Kebec the Father who had accompanied them took a 
Crucifix in his hand, and, lifting his voice, he made 
them return thanks to God, in full view of our 
French,— who, when they saw the poor Father with 
naked feet, and his body covered with a blanket in 
the fashion of the Savages, and heard the prayers of 
the good Neophytes, were so deeply moved that 
some of them wept freely. May God be praised for- 
ever. If there be great trouble in following these 
poor people, there is likewise no slight consolation. 
Who has ever given anything through love, without 
having been rewarded a hundredfold by him who 
does us too much honor in being pleased at our little 
labors? 

When the good Father had rested a little, he com- 
forted us by his discourses. ‘‘ The Savages with 
whom I wintered,’’ he said, ‘‘ are no longer children 
in the Faith. I found in them firmness and entire 
confidence amid dangers. ‘They have a much great- 
er devotion for the holy [108] Sacrifice of the Mass 
than in previous years; they have showed them- 
selves much more gentle and courteous toward me 
than they have ever been; and it must be admitted 
that God has been a Father to them in a most special 
and loving manner.”’ 

A Savage who suffered from an abscess, which 
brought him to death’s door, had recourse to God by 
means of this prayer,— short, indeed, but most heart- 
felt: ‘‘ Thou who hast suffered so much for us, thou 
canst do all. I do not tell thee to cure me. Itis 
for thee to decide. If thou do this, I will thank thee 
in the communion; if thou do not, I will not cease to 


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


toy Marie, Mere de lefus, fi tu dis 4 ton Fils, gueris- 
le; j’iray plater vne Croix en fon honneur, au fom- 
met de ces hautes montagnes. I1 fut guery dans 
l’octaue de fon immaculée Conception. 

Sa petite fille étant fort malade, fa femme promit 
a fainte Terefe, dont elle portoit le nom, de cOmunier 
le iour de la fefte, qui eftoit bien proche, 4 mefme 
temps que la mere communioit la fille guerit fou- 
dainement. 

[109] La fille de Noél Negabamat, nommée Marie 
Magdelaine, fut atteinte d’vn mal qui reffembloit 4 
vne poffeffion plfit6t qu’a vne maladie, fes agitations 
donnoient de l’épouuante aux Sauuages; le pere & 
la mere l’offrirent 4 noftre Seigneur. Tu m’auois 
donné quantité d’enfans, difoit ce bon Neophyte, tu 
me les as oftés, fi tu veux prendre celle-cy, elle eft a 
toy, on dit qu’elle eft morte, mais tu la peux refufci- 
ter, fais tout ce que tu voudras. Le pere voiant cet 
enfant agée d’enuiron huit ans, dans de grandes 
fouffrances, exhorte fes parens d’entédre neuf fois 
la Sainte Meffe, & de communier vne fois dans cette 
neufuaine pour le foulagement de leur fille, il plait a 
Dieu que la pauure enfant fut foulagée de fes grandes 
douleurs, & quelque temps apres leur retour auprés 
de leur maifon de priere, elle guerit de toutes fes 
maladies, qui fembloient eftre enracinées iufques 
dans la moéle de fes os. 

Vne femme fut deux iours en trauail d’enfant, 
chofe extraordinaire aux femmes Sauuages, qui accou- 
chent affez fouuent toutes feules, comme il eft [110] 
encore arriué cette année, car vne catecumene arri- 
uant la premiere 4S. Iofeph, fe deliura de fon fruit, 
& l’accommoda & 1l’emmaillota toute feule, le portant 


4 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ~~ ae 


believe in thee on that account. And thou, Mary, 
Mother of Jesus, if thou say to thy Son, ‘ Cure him,’ 
I will erect a Cross in his honor on the summit of 
these high mountains.’’ He was cured in the octave 
of her immaculate Conception. 

His little daughter was very sick and her mother 
promised saint Theresa, whose name she bore, to 
receive communion on the day of her feast, which 
was approaching. At the very moment that the 
mother received communion, the girl was suddenly 
cured. 

[109] The daughter of Noél Negabamat, named 
Marie Magdelaine, was attacked by a disease that 
resembled a possession more than a sickness; her 
fits inspired the Savages with terror. Her father 
and mother offered her up to our Lord. ‘‘Thou 
hadst given me many children,’’ said this good Neo- 
phyte; ‘‘ and thou hast taken them away. If it be thy 
will to take this one, she is thine. She is said to be 
dead, but thou canst bring her back to life; do what- 
ever may be thy will.’’ When the father saw the 
child, who was about eight years old, suffering great 
pain, he exhorted the parents to hear Holy Mass nine 
times, and to receive communion once during that 
novena, for the relief of their daughter. God was 
pleased to relieve the poor child of her great suffer- 
ings; and some time after their return near their 
own house of prayer, she was cured of all her dis- 
eases, which seemed rooted in the very marrow of 
her bones. 

A woman was in labor for two days, an extraordi- 
nary thing among the Savage women, who are 
frequently delivered without assistance,—as [110] 
happened, moreover, this year, in the case of a 


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 32 


elle mefme en fa cabane, celle cy dont ie fais men- 
tion, fouffroit d’vne facon fi eftrange, que tout le 
méde la tenant pour morte, elle fit fon feftin d’adieu; 
mais le Pere ayant appellé les Sauuages, pour offrir a 
Dieu le facrifice de fon fils, A ce qu’il euft pitié de 
cette pauure creature, le iour n’eftoit pas paffé que 
l’Enfat eftoit né, & la mere fans douleur & fans 
maladie. 

Le Pere auoit porté vn peu d’onguét contre les 
brilures, les bonnes gens s’en feruoient contre les 
engeleures, & gueriffoient fi promptement qu’ils en 
e{toient eftonnés. Les femmes Agées fe voyans en 
vn pais fi affreux, ne croioient pas iamais pouwuoir 
grimper au fommet des montagnes par ot il falloit 
paffer, mais fe recommandans a leurs bons Anges, 
elles affeuroient que leurs ames en reffentoiét de la 
ioye, & leurs corps du foulagement notable. 

Il arriua vne chofe agreable au fommet de 1’vn de 
ces grands monts, vne [111] femme toute racourcie 
de vieilleffe, s’eftant traifnée iufques 1a, les Chaffeurs 
fe voulant recréer l’apellerent au feftin, & luy dirent 
no{tre Mere, nous nous eftonnons comme tu as peu 
furmonter tant de difficultés, Nipimsfehix Nit’ An- 
gelin, refpondit elle, c’eft mon bon Ange qui m’a 
fait marcher, & qui m’a conferuée dans les froids, 
dans les fatigues & dans la famine, cela eft vray, 
dirent-ils, & c’eft pour cela qu’il faut que tu change 
de nom auec cette grande métagne, vous eftes tous 
deux de mefme 4ge, d’orefnauant tu t’appelleras 
Ouabafk, c’eft le nom de cette montagne, & tous 
ceux qui entendrét parler de toy, s’eftonneront comme 
en ton Age tu aye pfi venir de Kebec iufques aux 
monts de noftre Dame. 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 . 279 


catechumen who arrived the first of all at St. Joseph; 
she delivered herself of her child and dressed and 
wrapped it up, all alone, carrying it herself into her 
cabin. She whom I mention suffered to such an 
extent that every one thought she would die, and 
she gave her feast of adieu. But the Father called 
the Savages together, to offer to God the sacrifice of 
his son, that he might have pity on the poor crea- 
ture; and, before the day was over, the Child was 
born, and the mother free from pain and sickness. 

The Father had taken with him some ointment for 
burns, which the good people used for frost-bites; 
and they were cured so promptly that they were 
astonished. When the aged women found them- 
selves in so dreadful a country, they did not believe 
that they would ever be able to climb to the summit 
of the mountains that had to be crossed; but they 
recommended themselves to their good Angels, and 
asserted that their souls were thereby filled with 
joy, while their bodies felt marked relief. 

A pleasing incident occurred on the summit of one 
of those great mountains. A [111] woman who was 
bent with age, had dragged herself thus far. The 
Hunters wishing to divert themselves, invited her to 
a feast and said to her: ‘‘ Our Mother, we are 
astonished that thou hast been able to overcome so 
many difficulties.”” Nipimousehik Nit’ Angelin, she 
replied; ‘‘ It is my good Angel who has enabled me 
to walk; who has preserved me amid cold, fatigue, 
and famine.’’ ‘‘ That is true,’’ they said, ‘‘ that is 
why thou must change names with this great moun- 
tain. Youare both of thesameage. In future thou 
shalt be called Ouabask ’’—that is the name of the 
mountain —‘‘ and all who will hear of thee shall be 


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 82 


Ie ferois trop long fi ie voulois remarquer toutes __ 
les autres particularités qui fe font rencontrées ence __ 
voyage, ie concluds ce Chapitre auec ces deux mots, 
qu’il falloit veritablemét que Iefus Chrift fouffrit 
pour fauuer les ames, car s’il les efit racheptées par 
des delices, qui eft-ce qui’ iamais les feroit venu 
chercher iufques dans le fin [112] fond de la barbarie, 
au pais des neiges & des glaces, de la faim & de la 
mort mefme. 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 , 281 


astonished that at thy age thou couldst come from 
Kebec as far as the mountains of nostre Dame.’’ 

It would take too long, were I to relate all the 
other things that occurred on this journey. I shall 
conclude this Chapter with these few words: that it 
was certainly necessary that Jesus Christ should have 
suffered to save these souls, for, had he redeemed 
them by means of pleasures, who would ever have 
come to seek them in the very [112] depths of 
barbarism, in the land of snow, of ice, of famine, and 
even of death? 


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 32 


CHAPITRE VIII. 
DES PEUPLES NOMMEZ LES ATTIGUAMEGUES. 


L femble que l’innocence bannie de la plus part 
des Empires & des Royaumes de 1’ Vniuers, s’eft 
retirée dans les grands bois ot habitent ces 

peuples; leur nature a ie ne fgcay quoy des bontez du 
Paradis Terreftre deuat que le peché y entrat: leurs 
exercices n’ont rien du fafte, ny de l’ambition, ny 
de l’auarice, ny des plaifirs, qui corrompent nos villes. 
Depuis que le Baptefme les a faits difciples du Sainct 
Efprit, ce Docteur fe plait auec eux, il les enfeigne 
hors du bruit des barreaux, & des Louures, il les fait 
plus fgauans fans liures, que n’ont iamais efté tous 
les Ariftotes auec leurs grands volumes. 

Ils font defcendus cette année en [113] trois 
bandes, la derniere eftoit de quarante Canots. Ils 
rencontrerent aux trois Riuieres enuiron quatre cens 
Sauuages, qui leur firent vne faliie gentille de quan- 
tité d’arquebufades. Ces bons Neophites leur ayant 
refpondu par vne ripofte bien adroite, entrerent tous 
dans la Chapelle; ce fut leur premiere vifite, & 14 par 
vn gros cart d’heure, ils rendirent graces 4 Dieu de 
ce qu’il les auoit amenés iufques dans fa maifon. Ils 
auoient cependant abanddéné leurs canots & tout leur 
petit bagage au bort du grand fleuue, fe comportans 
comme ils font dans leurs grandes forefts, ot iamais 
aucun larron n’a e{té ny reconnu ny pris, ny pendu. 
Ils fe trouuerent enuironnés d’yn grand ndbre de A 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 e 283 


CHAPTER VIII. 
OF THE TRIBES CALLED THE ATTIGUAMEGUES. 


T seems as if innocence, banished from the major- 

| ity of the Empires and Kingdoms of the World, 
had withdrawn into these great forests where 
these people dwell. Their nature has something, I 
know not what, of the goodness of the Terrestrial 
Paradise before sin had entered it. Their practices 
manifest none of the luxury, the ambition, the ava- 
rice, or the pleasures that corrupt our cities. Since 
Baptism has made them disciples of the Holy Ghost, 
that Doctor is pleased to be with them; he teaches 
them, far from the noise of tribunals and of Louvres; 
he has made them more learned, without books, than 
any Aristotle ever was with his ponderous volumes. 
This year, they came down in [113] three bands, 
the last consisting of forty Canoes. At three Rivers 
they met about four hundred Savages, who received 
them with a neat salute of many arquebus shots. 
These good Neophytes returned this greeting very 
skillfully, and then they allenteredthe Chapel. That 
was their first visit; and there, for a good quarter of 
an hour, they returned thanks to God for having 
brought them to his house. Meanwhile, they had 
left their canoes and all their little effects on the 
bank of the great river,— behaving as they do in 
their great forests where no thief has ever been recog- 
nized, taken, or hanged. They found themselves 
surrounded by a great number of Hurons; and 


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


Hurons, & neantmoins quoy que ces peuples ne 
laiffent ordinairement que ce qu’ils ne peutent 
emporter, ces bons Neophites ne recognurent pas 
qu’on leur eut pour lors rien derobé. 

Aians faliié noftre Seigneur ils vindrent voir le 
Pere qui a coutume de les in{truire depuis vn long- 
temps, chacun luy apportoit fon petit prefent, qui 
vn [114] petit plat de bois, qui vne petite écuelle 
d’écorce, qui vn morceau de chair boucanée, vn mer- 
cier ne feroit ny riche ny chargé de toutes leurs 
petites denrées, defquelles on accommode d’autres 
Sauuages, pource que rien de tout cela n’eft 41’vfage 
des Francois. 

I] arriua vne chofe agreable dans ces petites offran- 
des. Vne femme voiant que quelques Francois 
portoient des galands a leurs chapeaux s’addreffe au 
Pere auec ces paroles: Mon Pere voila bien des Fran- 
¢gois qui n’ont pas tant d’efprit que toy, qui font 
chargés de braueries par la tefte, ie ne fcaurois fouf- 
frir que tu n’en porte pas auffi bien que les autres, 
en voicy 4 noftre mode, que ma fille te prefente: & 
14 deffus elle prend le chapeau du Pere fans autre 
ceremonie, pour y mettre vne bande de leurs ouura- 
ges de pore €pic teint en fort belle écarlatte. Le 
Pere fouriant voulut retirer fon chapeau, mais elle 
tint ferme: de bonne fortune ce paffement fait a la 
Sauuage fe trouua trop court pour entourrer fon cha- 
peau, elle vouloit 4 toute force le faire alonger, le — 
Pere l’ayant remerciée, luy fit voir [115] quece n’eftoit — 
pas vn mefpris de fon prefent, mais vne bien-fceance 
pour luy, de ne s’en pas feruir. | 

Ces offrandes faites le Pere pour les regaler, & — 
pour les bien veigner leur donna du bled d’Inde pour ~ 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ; 285 


nevertheless—although those people never, as a 
tule, leave behind them anything that they can 
carry away—these good Neophytes did not then 
observe that anything had been stolen from them. 

After saluting our Lord, they came to see the 
Father who has for a long time been in the habit of 
instructing them. Each one brought his little pres- 
ent: one, a [114] small wooden dish; another, a little 
bark vessel; a third, a piece of smoked flesh. A 
mercer would be neither rich nor overloaded with all 
their petty wares, which are bestowed upon other 
Savages, because none of those things are used by 
the French. 

A pleasing incident occurred in connection with 
these little offerings. A woman observed that some 
of the French wore tassels on their hats, and she 
spoke to the Father, saying: ‘‘ My Father, here are 
many Frenchmen who have not as much sense as 
thou, for their heads are loaded with ornaments. I 
cannot bear that thou shouldst not have some, as well 
as the others; here is one, according to our fashion, 
that my daughter presents thee.’’ Thereupon she 
took the Father’s hat without further ceremony, to 
fasten on it a strip of their work made with porcu- 
pine quills dyed a very bright scarlet. The Father 
smilingly tried to recover his hat, but she persisted. 
Fortunately, this Savage trimming was too short to 
go around his hat; she did her best to stretch it, but 
the Father thanked her, and explained to her [115] 
that it was not through disdain of her present, but 
through propriety on his part that he could not use it. 

When these offerings had been given, the Father, 
in order to regale and welcome them, gave them 
some Indian corn wherewith to have a feast in their 


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


faire vn petit feftin 4 leur fagon; celuy qui le receut 
dit aux autres, remercions Dieu de ce qu'il a produit 
ce bled, & de ce qu’il a ddné la volonté au Pere de 
nous en faire part; & fur le champ, ils firent vne 
petite oraifon qu’ils prononcerent tout haut, d’vne 
voix & d’vn accent tout plain de modeftie & de 
deuotion. 

Pendant que quelques-vns preparoient le feftin, 
les autres ba{tiffoient leurs maifons ou leurs cabanes, 
& dans trois ou quatre heures, ils furent tous logez, 
& le banquet tout fait dreffé & accomply. 

Cela fait, chacun vint rendre compte de fa con- 
fcience, ie ne fcay fi dans les Monafteres les plus 
reformez, il fe trouue beaucoup de perfonnes plus 
finceres, & plus candides que ces bonnes gens, qui 
n’ont de commerce qu’auec Dieu & auec les animaux 
de leurs grands bois; l’innocence qui fe lit fur [116] 
leur vifage, & qu’on remarque en leurs actions, donne 
de la ioye & de la confufion a ceux qui en ont 
connoiffance. 

Le Pere en les communiquant fit trois remarques, 
qui donnent vn bel argument de leur deuotion, & de 
la vigueur de leur foy. Pas vn deux, dans le cours 
de huit & ou neuf mois, n’auoit perdu fon chapelet, 
quoy qu’ils euffent couru en diuers endroits comme 
des pefcheurs, & des chaffeurs qui font en action per- 
petuelle, & que d’ailleurs, pour n’eftre attachés a 
aucune chofe d’icy bas, ils oublient d’ordinaire quel- 
que piece de leur bagage en tous les endroits ot ils 
cabanent. Ie dis bien dauantage, les meres deman- — 
doient des chappelets pour leurs petits enfans, leur — 
pendant au col comme vne Relique, leur faifant 
baifer, & le recitant de fois A autres pour ces — 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 287 


fashion. He who received it said to the others: ‘* Let 
us thank God for having produced this corn, and for 
having made the Father willing to give us some.’’ 
Thereupon they said a short prayer, which they 
pronounced aloud in a voice and with an accent full 
of modesty and devotion. 

While some were preparing the feast, the others 
erected their houses or cabins; and in three or four 
hours they were all lodged, and the banquet was all 
prepared and finished. 

When this was done, each one came to give an 
account of his conscience. I know not whether in 
Monasteries of the strictest discipline there are many 
persons more sincere and more candid than those 
good people, who have dealings only with God, and 
with the animals of their great forests. The inno- 
cence that one reads upon [116] their countenances 
and observes in their actions, causes joy or confusion 
to those who have a knowledge of it. 

The Father, in conversing with them, observed 
three things which afford a striking proof of their 
devotion and of the vigor of their faith. Not one of 
them, in the course of eight or nine months, had lost 
his rosary, although they had wandered in various 
places as fishermen and hunters who are in perpetual 
motion; and although, moreover,—since they have 
no attachment for anything here below,—they gen- 
erally forget some article of their baggage wherever 
they encamp. I can say, further, that the mothers 
requested rosaries for their little children, and hung 
them around their necks like a Relic, making them 
kiss them and reciting the prayer from time to time 
for those little innocents, so that they might not be 
deprived of the blessing attached to it. 


288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 32 


petits innocens, afin qu’ils ne fuffent pas priués de la 
benediction de cette priere. 

Secondement ils n’ont iamais oublié les iours de 
feftes, qu’on leur a marqués dans leur petit calen- 
drier, faifant le matin, 4 midy, & au foir vne petite 
affemblée, pour offrir 4 Dieu leurs deuotions, [117] 
leurs prieres, & pour entonner leurs Cantiques d’vn 
mefme accord & d’vn mefme cceur. 

En troifiefme lieu, en tous les endroits, & en toutes 
les compagnies ot ils fe font rencontrés, ils ont publi- 
quement profeffé la creance qu’ils ont en Iefus-Chritft, 
en telle fagon que les Hurons qui ont efté en traite, 
c’eft a dire en marchandife dans leur pais, font 
retournés fi edifiés & fi étonnés, que nos Peres qui 
font en leurs Bourgades, nous en ont rendu des tef- 
moignages pleins de confolation. Ce n’eft pas tout, 
ils prefchent la foy fi fortement dans les nations 
errantes qui habitent au Nord, que ces peuples atti- 
rés 4 l’odeur des verités Ch[r]étiennes, les fuiuent, & 
nous viennent voir pour boire comme en la fource, 
ce qu’ils ont gofité dans les ruiffeaux. Cette année 
nous en auons baptifé quelques-vns comme Saint 
Philippe baptifa 1’7Eunuque de la Reine de Candace 
apres vne feule communication, tant ils eftoient 
folidement inftruits, & faintement difpofés, par ces 
notitueaux predicateurs de 1’Euangile; & ce qui fem- 
ble affés eftonnant, les [118] femmes ne cedent point 
aux hommes en cét office: comme elles font naturelle- 
ment affectueufes, & plus preffantes, elles ont moins 
de refpects humains dans ces nouueautés fi faintes, & 
fi vtiles A ces peuples, qui croupiffoient depuis tant 
de fiecles dans les ombres de la mort. 

Quelques-vns de leurs difciples ont fi plainement 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ; 289 


In the second place, they have never forgotten the 
festival days that were marked out for them on their 
little calendars; they met together in the morning, 
at noon, and at night, for a short time to offer to 
God their devotions [117] and their prayers, and to 
intone their Hymns, with a common accord and with 
one heart. 

In the third place, in whatever spot or in whatever 
company they may have been, they have publicly 
professed their belief in Jesus Christ; so that the 
Hurons who have gone to trade in their country have 
come back so edified and astonished that our Fathers 
who are in their Villages have given us testimony 
thereof that is full of consolation. That is not all: 
they preach the faith so strenuously among the 
wandering tribes that dwell in the North that those 
people are attracted by the odor of Christian virtues, 
and follow them,—coming to us to drink, at the 
source, what they have tasted in the streams. This 
year we have baptized some as Saint Philip baptized 
the Eunuch of Queen Candace,—after a single con- 
versation,— so solid was the instruction that they 
had received, and so holy their preparation by those 
new preachers of the Gospel. And what seems quite 
astonishing is, that the [118] women are in no respect 
behind the men in the performance of that duty. As 
they are naturally affectionate and more pressing, 
they have less of worldly respect in connection with 
these strange things, which are so holy and so useful 
to these people, who have remained for so many 
centuries in the shadows of death. 

Some of their disciples have given such satisfac- 
tion to our Fathers, and have asked with such grace 
and persistence for baptism, that they have won it 


290 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


fatisfait A nos Peres, & ont demandé de fi bonne grace, 
& auec tant d’inftance le baptefme, qu’ils 1l’ont 
emporté auec vne ioye de leur coeur, qui fe peut bien 
fentir, mais non pas exprimer, & auec vne telle édifica- 
tion de quelques-vns de nos Frangois, qu’ils en eftoient 
rauis; vn de nos Peres qui n’auoit point encore veu 
ce {fpectacle, s’écria ie n’euffe iamais creu en France 
ce que ie voy de mes yeux en Canada. Quand tous 
les trauaux de nos Peres n’auroient produit que ce 
fruit d’vne année, ie les trouuerois recompenfés au 
centuple. 

Vn Francois ayant logé vne famille de ces bons 
Sauuages en fa maifon, dit quelques temps apres a 
vn de nos Peres, qu’il ne voudroit pas pour la moitié 
[119] de fon bien n’auoir donné le couuert a ces hoftes. 
Quand on me racomptoit qu’ils prioient Dieu les 
matins & les foirs, qu’ils donnoient la benediction 
deuat leurs repas, qu’ils faifoient d’autres exercices 
de deuotion, i’écoutois cela comme des comptes fais 
a plaifir: mais les aiant tenus quelques iours en ma 
maiso, mes yeux ont veu ce que mes oreilles ne pou- 
uoient croire; ie confeffe que i’ay efté edifié, confus, 
& étonné, ils emploioient plus de la quatriefme partie 
d’vne heure en leurs prieres du foir, auec vne paix & 
vne modeftie rauiffante, les meres faifoient le figne 
de la Croix fur leurs petits enfans, en les leuans, & 
en les couchans: bref ie dis auec étonnement, que 
1’Efprit de Dieu les inftruit dans les bois, au dela de 
tout ce que i’aurois peu penfer: mais confiderons en 
détail, quelques-vnes de leurs actions. 

Vn Chrétien aagé de trente ans, fe voiant priué 
de fa femme, chargé de trois enfans, fe remaria dans — 
les bois A vne Chrétienne, fans en donner aduis aux 


ere | \ 
ME en 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 : 291 


with a joyfulness in their hearts that can be felt but 
not expressed, and so greatly to the edification of 
some of our French, that they were delighted. One 
of our Fathers, who had never yet seen that specta- 
cle, exclaimed: ‘‘I would never have believed in 
France what I see with my own eyes in Canada. 
Even if all the labors of our Fathers had produced 
but this fruit of one year, I would consider that they 
were rewarded a hundredfold.’’ 

A Frenchman who lodged a family of those good 
Savages in his house said, some time afterward, to 
one of our Fathers that he would not for half [119] 
of what he owned, have refrained from giving lodg- 
ings to those guests. ‘‘ When I was told that they 
prayed to God night and morning, that they asked a 
blessing before their meals, and that they performed 
other devotional exercises, I listened to it all as to idle 
tales. But, when I had kept them in my house for 
some days, my eyes witnessed what my ears could 
not believe. I confess that I was edified, confused, 
and astonished. Their evening prayers occupied 
more than a quarter of an hour, and were said with 
delightful quiet and modesty. The mothers made 
the sign of the Cross on their little children, when 
they awakened them and when they put them to 
bed.’’ In a word, I say with surprise that the 
Spirit of God instructs them in the woods beyond 
anything that I could have thought. But let us 
consider some of their actions in detail. 

A Christian, thirty years of age, who had lost his 
wife and found himself burdened with three children, 
took a Christian woman as his second wife, in the 
woods, without notifying the elders, who were not 
far distant from the quarter where he was. On the 


292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32. 


anciens qui n’eftoient pas éloignés de fon cartier, le 
Dimanche enfuiuant, [120] il fe tranfporte en la 
cabane qui feruoit de chappelle, s’é{tant mis 4 genoux 
deuant vn Crucifix qui paroiffoit au milieu de cette 
Eglife décorce, le plus confiderable des Chreftiens 
prit la parole au nom de toute l’affemblée, & luy dit 
qu'il auoit fait vne faute notable de fe marier fans en 
donner aduis 4 1’Eglife, qu’il auoit fort fcandalifé 
tous les creans, & par confequent qu’il eftoit indigne 
de fe trouuer en leur compagnie; qu’il pouuoit prier 
Dieu en fon particulier: mais que fa faute ne feroit 
point expiée, que par vne bonne confeffion qu’il 
feroit, lors qu’ils iroient aux trois Riuieres. Ce 
pauure héme fe retira fans mot dire, & quelques 
mois apres eftant defcendu vers les FrAgois, il fe vint 
prefenter pour receuoir telle penitence qu’il plairoit 
au Pere de luy impofer, il vouloit fe fuftiger foy- 
mefme deuant tous ceux de fa nation, mais on luy 
permit feulement de leur demander pardon. Ses 
Compatriotes le voiant dans cette humiliation, luy 
dirent, c’eft maintenant que tu as fatisfait 4 Dieu, & 
a fon Eglife, & que tu pouras prier auec nous. Plaife 
a noftre [121] Seigneur que ce feu nes’éteigne iamais, 
& que celuy qui doit brufler le monde, le trouue 
encore en fa vigueur. 

L’ E{té precedent on auoit baptifé vne ieune femme, 
qui eftant de retour en fon pais, tomba dans vne 
grande maladie, voiant qu’elle perdoit fes forces, elle 
fut faifie d’vne grande angoiffe, croiant qu'elle s’en 
alloit mourir fans confeffion, iamais, difoit-elle, ie ne 
me fuis encore confeffée, fi Dieu m’eut pris inconti- 
nent apres mon baptefme, ie ferois confolée: mais ie 
ne me puis refoudre 4 la mort fans m’e{tre purifiée 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 " 28 


following Sunday, [120] he went to the cabin that 
served as a chapel; there he knelt before a Crucifix 
that stood in the middle of that Church built of bark. 
The chief man among the Christians spoke in the 
name of the whole assembly, and told him that he 
had committed a grievous fault in marrying without 
giving notice in the Church; that he had greatly 
scandalized all the believers and, therefore, was un- 
worthy to remain in their company; that he could 
pray to God in private but that his sin could be 
expiated only by a good confession, which he should 
make when they returned to three Rivers. The poor 
man withdrew without saying a word, and, when he 
came down to the French settlements some months 
afterward, he presented himself to receive whatever 
penance the Father would be pleased to impose on 
him. He wished to flog himself before all the mem- 
bers of his tribe, but he was permitted only to beg 
their pardon. When his Countrymen saw him in 
that humiliation, they said to him: ‘‘ Now thou hast 
given satisfaction to God and to his Church, and 
thou mayst pray with us.’’ Would to our [121] 
Lord that this fire may never die out and that that 
which is to burn the world may still find it in all its 
vigor. 

In the preceding Summer, we had baptized a young 
woman who, on returning to her own country, fell 
very ill. When she saw that she was losing her 
strength, she was seized with great anguish because 
she believed that she would die without confession. 
‘‘T have never yet confessed,’ she said. ‘‘ If God 
had taken me immediately after my baptism, I would 
have been consoled; but I cannot make up my mind 
to die without being purified in the Sacrament of 


294 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


dans le Sacrement de penitence. Dieu ne me fera t’il 
point cette grace, de voir encore vne fois fa maifon, 
& de m’y confeffer! vne fienne amie luy dit qu’elle fe 
confeffait 4 noftre Seigneur. Ie 1’ay defia fait, repon- 
dit-elle, mais ie ne feray point cdtente, que ie ne 
quitte mes offéces aupres de ceux que Dieu a eftablis 
en fon Eglife pour nous abfoudre de fa part. Elle 
& fon mary redoublerent leurs voix, & leurs prieres, 
pour obtenir cette grace. Noftre Seigneur eft veri- 
tablement tout puiffant, mais l’humilité, la confiance 
& l’amour peuuét [122] tout fur fa bété, cette femme 
s’eft fi bié traifnée qu’en fin elle eft venué aux trois 
Riuieres, & lors qu’elle entra dans noitre chapelle, 
vous euffiez dit qu’elle commencoit de refpirer, c’eft 
maintenat, s’écria-elle, que ie fuis contéte, 6 toy qui 
es tout bon, ie te remercie de m’auoir conferuée iuf- 
ques a ce moment, ie ne te demande plus la vie, laiffe 
moy confeffer, & puis fais ce que tu voudras; le Pere 
qui luy prefta l’oreille, affure qu’aé peine trouua-il en 
cette ame aucun fuiet de luy donner 1’abfolution, 
non qu’elle ne fe cognut, & qu’elle ne s’expliquaft fort 
nettement, mais pour l’innocence de fa vie. Traitant 
par apres auec elle en difcours familier la voiant fi 
pure & fi candide il prit plaifir de luy faire quelques 
que{tids, ne crains-tu point la mort luy dit-il? Ie la 
craignois deuant ma confeffion, mais maintenant ie 
l’aime. Si les Hiroquois te prenoient en remontant 
en ton pais que dirois-tu? ie parlerois 4 Dieu dans 
mes tourmens, & luy dirois, ce que ie fouffre paffera 
bien-toft, & ma gloire fera eternelle, fortifie-moy, 
toy qui tes fait mon parent, & qui as [123] voulu 
mourir pour moy. Ne te faches-tu point d’eftre 
malade? le moyé de me facher, puis que Dieu le veut 


1647 -48] RELATION OF 1647-48 295 


penance. Will not God grant me the grace of see- 
ing his house once more, and of confessing myself 
there?’’ A friend of hers told her to confess to our 
Lord. ‘‘I have already done so,’’ she replied, ‘‘ but 
I shall not be content until I leave my sins with those 
whom God has established in his Church, to absolve 
us in his name.’’ She and her husband united their 
voices and their prayers to obtain that grace. Our 
Lord is truly all-powerful; but humility, confidence, 
and love can [122] do everything with his goodness. 
This woman was so carefully dragged along that at 
last she came to three Rivers; and, when she entered 
our chapel, you would have said that she was begin- 
ning to breathe again. ‘* Now,’’ she exclaimed, ‘‘ I 
am content. O thou who art good, I thank thee for 
having preserved me up tothismoment. Ino longer 
ask thee for life. Let me confess myself and then 
let thy will be done.’’ The Father who heard her 
states that he found in that soul hardly anything that 
needed absolution,— not that she did not understand 
herself, and that she did not explain herself very 
clearly, but on account of the innocence of her life. 
While speaking afterward with her in familiar con- 
versation, when he saw her so pure and so candid,. 
he took pleasure in putting some questions to her. 
‘*Fearest thou not death?’’ he said to her. “I 
feared it before my confession, but now I love it.’’ 
*‘If the Hiroquois were to take thee while going 
back to thy own country, what wouldst thou say?’’ 
‘*T would speak to God amid my tortures and I would 
say to him: ‘ My sufferings will soon pass away, and 
my glory will be eternal; strengthen me, thou who 
hast made thyself my relative, and who hast [123] 
been pleased to die for me.’”’ ‘‘ Art thou not sorry 


296 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


ainfi? ie l’ay dy fouuét, me voila, fais tout ce que tu 
voudras, ie n’ay point d’efprit, c’eft toy qui feais 
bien ce qu’il faut faire. Ne crois-tu point que la 
creance & la priere que tu as embraffée, t’ayent fait 
malade? cette tentation eft affez ordinaire aux Sau- 
uages, car vous diriez que de receuoir la Foy, & eftre 
perfecutée, c’eft vne mefme chofe. Helas! répondit- 
elle, ie n’ay garde de penfer que la priere m’ait caufé 
cette affliction, & cette maladie, puis qu’elle eft mon 
foulagement & ma force; ie fens tous les iours que 
mon coeur eft dans la ioye quand il prie, ou qu’il 
penfe 4 Dieu. Ie crains bien fort que plufieurs de 
ces contrées du Nord ne fe viénent affeoir a la table 
d’Abraham, d’Ifaac & de Iacob & que les enfans du 
Royaume n’en foient bannis. 

Vn petit enfant eftant tombé malade pendant I’hi- 
uer, vn des Iongleurs ou Sorciers du pais fe prefenta 
pour le guerir auec fes cris, & auec fes hurlemens. 
Le pere de 1’enfant baiffa la tefte [124] fans mot dire, 
la mere voiant que ce Charlatan demandoit ie ne fcay 
quelle recompenfe pour medicamenter fon enfant a 
fa mode, luy dit, s’il eftoit en ta puiffance de l’en- 
chanter contre ma volonté, ie te donnerois ce que tu 
demande afin que tu ne le fiffe pas: & quand ie fgau- 
rois que ton art luy pourroit rendre la fanté, i’aime- 
rois mieux le voir expirer deuant mes yeux, que de 
le voir en fanté partes remedes. Tous les Chreftiens 
loiierent hautement fa foy & fa cd{tance, & elle pour- 
fuiuant fa pointe leur dit, or fus aions recours a Dieu, 
mettons nous tous a genoux 4 l’entour de 1’enfant, 
offrons nos prieres & nos defirs 4 Dieu, recitons tous _ 
noftre chapelet, & laiffons faire le maiftre de la vie, _ 
s’ille guerit nous l’en remercierons, s’il ne le fait 4 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 ; 297 


at being sick?’’ ‘‘ How can I be sorry when God 
wills itso? I have often said: ‘ Here I am, do what- 
ever may be thy will. I have no sense; it is thou 
who knowest what should be done.’”’ ‘‘ Thinkest 
thou not that the belief and prayer that thou hast 
embraced have caused thy illness?’’ That tempta- 
tion is quite common among the Savages, for you 
may say that to receive the Faith and to be perse- 
cuted are the same thing. ‘‘ Alas!”’ she replied, 
‘*T never think that prayer has brought this afflic- 
tion and this sickness on me, for it is my relief and 
my strength. I feel every day that my heart is joy- 
ful when it prays, or when it thinks of God.’’ I 
greatly fear that several of these Northern countries 
will come and sit at the table of Abraham, of Isaac, 
and of Jacob, while the children of the Kingdom will 
be banished from it. 

A little child fell ill during the winter, and one of 
the Jugglers or Sorcerers of the country presented 
himself to cure it with his cries and yells. The 
father of the child held down his head, [124] without 
saying a word. When the mother saw that the 
Charlatan was asking I know not what reward for 
doctoring her child in his fashion, she said to him: 
‘* Were it in thy power to enchant her against my 
will, I would give thee what thou askest, not to do 
it; and, even if I knew that thine art could restore 
her health, I would rather see her expire before my 
eyes, than see her recover through thy remedies.” 
All the Christians highly praised her faith and con- 
‘stancy, while she, pursuing her point, said to them: 
'“*Now, then, let us have recourse to God; let us all 
‘kneel around the child; let us offer our prayers and 
our desires to God; let us all recite our rosaries and 


298 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 32 


pas aul moins aurons nous cette confolation, que fon 
ame n’aura point e{té falie par les inuocations du 
demon: & qu’elle fera pour vn iamais agreable a 
Dieu dedans le Ciel. Il pleut a noftre Seigneur 
d’accorder 4 la foy des parens la vie & la fanté de 
leur enfant, cette femme fait plus de fruit parmy ces 
pauures [125] peuples, que ne feroient dix grads 
Docteurs. 

Elle amena au Pere fept ou huit femmes auec leurs 
enfans & les prefenta tous au Baptefme, le Pere les 
interroge, & les trouue vrayement inftruites, mais il 
n’accorda neantmoins cette faueur qu’aux enfans, & 
A trois de ces Catechumenes qu’il auoit inftruites 
affés legerement & depuis quatre années, il fut bien 
e{tonné quand il les entendit rendre cdpte de ce qu’il 
leur auoit enfeigné, & des moyens dont elles s’eftoient 
feruies pour conferuer en leur coeur l’amour & le 
defir de la priere, & l’affection au fainct Baptefme. 
Voulant éprouuer la plus feruente, & qui paroiffoit la 
mieux née, il luy dit que le Sacrement qu’elle deman- 
doit, ne s’accordoit qu’a de grands courages. Ie ne 
fuis, répondit-elle, qu’vne femme, mais s’il falloit 
paffer au trauers des Hiroquois pour obtenir le Bap- 
tefme, il me femble que i’y pafferois libremét, vous 
voiés que ie m’en retourne dans les bois, & que peut 
e{tre ie mourray cét hiuer, attenderez-vous 4 me 
baptifer apres ma mort? quel regret auriés-vous [126] 
de m’auoir refufé ce Sacrement fi on vous rapportoit 
que ie fuis paffée de cette vie fans l’auoir receu? 

Mais encore luy dit le Pere, quelle gratification 
attends-tu de nous autres, quand tu feras auec nous 
dans vne mefme Eglife? Tu fcais bien, repart-elle, 
que ny moy ny mon mary ne vous auons encore iamais 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 299 


leave the master of life to do as he wills. If he cure 
her, we will thank him for it; if not, we shall at 
least have this consolation, that her soul will not 
have been soiled by invocations to the devil, and 
that she will be forever acceptable to God in Heav- 
en.’’ Our Lord was pleased to grant to the faith of 
the parents the life and health of their child. That 
woman does more good among these poor [125] 
people than ten great Doctors would. 

She brought to the Father seven or eight women 
with their children, and presented them all for Bap- 
tism. The Father questioned them and found them 
well instructed; nevertheless, he granted that favor 
only to the children, and to three of these Catechu- 
mens whom he had instructed to a slight extent 
four years ago. He was greatly astonished when 
he heard them repeat what he had taught them, and 
the means that they had taken to preserve in their 
hearts love and desire for prayer, and affection for 
holy Baptism. Wishing to try the most fervent one, 
and her who seemed of the highest birth, he said to 
her that the Sacrament that she asked for was granted 
only to those who displayed great courage. ‘‘ lam 
but a woman,”’ she replied, ‘‘ but if it were necessary 
to pass through the Hiroquois to obtain Baptism it 
seems to me that I would pass boldly. You see that 
Iam going back to the woods and that perhaps I 
shall die this winter. Will you wait until I am dead 
to baptize me? What regret you would feel [126] at 
having refused me that Sacrament, if you were told 
that I had passed away from this life without having 
received it!” 

‘* But again,’’ the Father said to her, ‘‘ what reward 
dost thou expect from us, when thou shalt be with 


300 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


rien demandé, finon d’eftre faits enfans de Dieu, c’eft 
l’vnique de nos importunités. En verité mon Pere, 
fi on vendoit le Baptefme, ie l’achepterois quoy qu’il 
me deut cofiter, & ie fuis affurée que mon mary eft 
dans les mefmes fentimens: c’eft affés, dit le Pere, 
vous ferés toutes deux baptifées. Dieu feait fi la’ 
ioye s’empara du coeur de cette bonne funamite: pour- 
fuiuons noftre route. Vn Capitaine de cette nation 
fouhaittoit le Baptefme depuis deux ans, le Pere luy 
demanda ce qu’il faifoit pour s’y difpofer, i’éloigne 
de mon coeur, & de ma bouche tout ce qui me femble 
eftre mauuais, & fi quelque chofe me paroit eftre 
agreable 4 Dieu, c’eft cela que i’aime. Ie {cay toutes 
les prieres que tu as enfeignées, ie les recites fort 
fouuent, & [127] il ne fe paffe aucun iour de fefte que ie 
ne dife trois fois mon chappelet, ouy, mais as-tu vne 
forte creance des chofes qui te font enfeignées? il faut 
mon Pere, que tu fgache, qu’auparauant que i’euffe 
ouy parler de la doctrine que vous enfeignés, i’auois 
quelques fois paffé huit ans fans venir voir les 
Francois, la crainte des Agnerronons m’enfermoit les _ 
paffages, mais aiant appris de mes gens qui vous | 
venoient voir, l’importance de ces veritez, i’ay paffé 
4 trauers de tous les dangers, ie vous fuis venu prefter 
l’oreille, & du momét que i’appris de ta bouche, 
qu’il y auoit vne autre vie de ioie ou de douleur, & 
qu'il falloit que noftre ame fut lauée dans les eaux 
du Baptéme, i’ay fouhaitté ces eaux fi ardemment, 
que ie ne te laifferay iamais en repos que tu ne me 
les aye accordées; mes Compatriotes me voyant fortir 
de mon pais m’ont dit le dernier adieu, croians que 
ie m’allois ietter entre les mains des Hiroquois, mais 
i’'ay refpondu que les demons eftoiét pires que les 


1647 - 48] RELATION OF 1647-48 301 


usin the same Church?’’ ‘‘ Thou knowest well,”’ 
she replied, ‘‘ that neither my husband nor I have 
ever asked you for anything except to be made chil- 
dren of God. Thatis our sole request. Truly, my 
Father, if Baptism were sold, I would buy it, no mat- 
ter what it might cost me; and I am sure that my 
husband has the same feeling.’’ ‘‘ That is enough,’’ 
said the Father, ‘‘ you shall both be baptized.”” God 
knows what joy took possession of the heart of that 
good shunamite. But let us proceed. A Captain 
of that tribe had desired Baptism for two years. The 
Father asked him what he was doing to prepare 
himself for it. ‘‘I keep away from my heart and 
from my mouth everything that seems to me to be 
evil; and, if anything appears to me to be agreeable 
to God, that is what I love. I know all the prayers 
that thou hast taught; I recite them very frequently; 
and [127] not a festival day passes that I do not say 
my rosary three times.’’ ‘‘ Yes, but dost thou firmly 
believe all the things that are taught thee?” ‘‘ Thou 
must know, my Father, that before I had heard any 
one speak of the doctrine that you teach, I had some- 
times passed eight years without coming to see the 
French; fear of the Agnerronons barred the way to 
me. But when I learned the importance of these 
truths, from my people who came to see you, I passed 
through all those dangers. I came to listen to you, 
and from the moment that I learned from thy lips 
that there was another life, of joy or of pain, and that 
it was necessary that our souls be cleansed in the 
waters of Baptism, I have so earnestly desired those 
waters that I will never leave thee any rest until 
thou hast granted them tome. When my Country- 
men saw me leave my country, they bade me a final 


302 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 32 


Hiroquois, & qu’il valoit mieux eftre prisOénier de 
ceux-cy que d’étre efclaue du malheureux Manitou, 
[128] cela n’eft-il pas veritable? difoit-il au Pere. 

Tres-veritable: mais apres tout, que penfe-tu des 
Mifteres de noftre creance? En voicy ma penfée: 
La terre n’e{t pas de prix ny de valeur, le Ciel n’eft 
pas beau, le Soleil n’eft point luifant ny admirable; 
ce que tu nous enfeigne de la vie qui ne meurt iamais, 
eft precieux, il eft beau, il eft admirable, voila ce 
que ie penfe: c’eft leur facon de s’énoncer. 

Mais encore, pourfuit le Pere, qu’eft-ce qui te 
porte 4 croire ces verités? peut eftre que tu t’en rap- 
porte 4 mes paroles? Pourquoy dis-tu cela? n’és-tu 
pas vn homme comme les autres? ne nous as-tu pas 
dit, que tu n’eftois qu’vn interprete? que ta bouche 
empruntoit la parole de celuy qui a tout fait? c’eft a 
celuy-l4 que ie croy & non pas aux hommes; c’eft 
pour fon amour que ie defcendray de temps en temps 
malgré tous les perils des eaux, des hommes & des 
demons. Ces épreuues n’eftoient que trop fuffifantes 
pour luy donner le Baptefme auec confolation de 
tous co{tés. Or il arriua que les Hurons qui [129] 
e{toient aux trois Riuieres luy déroberent 1’vn de fes 
Canots, ce qui luy deuoit eftre fort fenfible, car il ne 
pouuoit reporter fon bagage en fon pais, il en fit fes 
plaintes au Pere, qui auffi-toft s’en voulut mettre 
en peine, mon Pere ne faifons point de bruit, luy dit 
ce bon Neophite, ie t’ay voulu donner aduis de ma 
perte, afin que tu dife en public, que le larcin eft 
mefchant, & qu’il ne fe doit iamais trouuer és endroits 
ott reigne la priere. Le Pere luy portant compafiion 
luy repliqua qu'il pourroit recognoiftre fon Canot a 
l’embarquement des Hurons qui deuoient partir dans 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 3038 


adieu, thinking that I was going to throw myself into 
the hands of the Hiroquois; but I replied that the 
demons were worse than the Hiroquois and that it 
was better to be a captive with the latter than to be 
a slave of the wretched Manitou. [128] Is not that 
true?’’ he said to the Father. 

‘Most true; but after all, what thinkest thou of the 
Mysteries of our creed?’’ ‘‘ This is what I think. 
The earth has neither price nor value, the Sky is not 
beautiful, the Sun is neither bright nor admirable; 
what thou teachest us about the life that never 
dies is precious, is fine, is admirable. That is what 
I think.’’ Such is their manner of expressing 
themselves. 

‘* But again,” continued the Father, ‘‘ what leads 
thee to believe these truths? Perhaps thou confidest 
in my words?’’ ‘‘ Why sayest thou that? Art thou 
not a man like the others? Hast thou not told us 
that thou wert but an interpreter; that thy lips con- 
veyed the words of him who has made all? Itisin 
him that I believe, and not in men; for his love I 
will come down from time to time, in spite of all the 
perils of waters, of men, and of demons.’’ These 
tests were more than sufficient to obtain Baptism for 
him, with consolation from all sides. Now it hap- 
pened that the Hurons who [129] were at three Rivers 
stole one of his Canoes. This must have been a 
great loss to him, for he could not convey his bag- 
gage back to his own country. He complained to 
the Father, who wished to see about the matter. 
** My Father, let us not make any noise about it,’’ the 
good Neophyte said to him. ‘‘ I wished to give thee 
notice of my loss, so that thou mightest say in public 
that theft is a wicked act, and that such things should 


304 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 32 


peu de iours. Quand ie defcouurirois le larron, ie 
n’aurois pas le coeur de luy faire vn affront fi public; 
& fi ie luy faifois, il en faudroit venir aux mains: car 
ie voudrois emporter de force, ce qu'il ne quitteroit 
iamais de bon gré; le tumulte eft vne chofe mauuaife, 
n’en parlons plus mon Pere, en effet iamais fa 
bouche ne s’en eft plainte depuis ce temps-la. 

Ie fermeray ce chapitre par vne fimplicité merueil- 
leufement naifue. Apres que les peres & meres fe font 
cofeffés, [130] ils font confeffer les enfans qui font 
capables de ce Sacremét, mais pour ceux qui n’ont 
pas encore le difcernement, leurs meres les apportent 
aux Confeffeurs, & difent deuant eux leurs petites 
malices, qu’elles font aduoiier 4 leurs enfans, leur 
faifant demander vne penitence qu’elles accomplif- 
fent elles-mefmes pour leurs petits. Ce procedé fi 
innocent eft A mon auis agreable aux hommes & aux 
Anges & 4 Dieu mefme. 


1647-48] RELATION OF 1647-48 305 


never occur in places where prayer reigns.’’ The 
Father, who felt compassion for him, told him that he 
might recognize his Canoe at the embarkation of the 
Hurons, who were to start in a few days. ‘‘ Even if 
I discovered the thief, I would not have the heart to 
offer him so public an affront; and, if I did so, we 
would have to come to blows, for I should try to take 
away by force what he would never give up willing- 
ly. Quarrels are bad things. Let us say no more 
about it, my Father.’’ In fact, from that time, no 
complaint ever issued from his lips. 

I shall close this chapter with an instance of 
wonderfully naive simplicity. After the fathers and 
mothers have confessed, [130] they make such of 
their children as are fit to receive that Sacrament go 
to confession. But, as regards those who have not 
sufficient discernment, their mothers bring them to 
the Confessors, and relate in their presence their 
petty acts of naughtiness, and make them ask fora 
penance, which they themselves perform for their 
little ones. To my mind, this innocent proceeding is 
agreeable to men, to the Angels, and to God himself. 


% 


pea Ch) 


i 
i 


eee 
’ 


Cath midi 
tis la 
int; 


bens) 
ea | 


bf 


LET SLi STE TOE Ceara 


| ten wri biden “Dieters mr ak 
r . ror , thee oT aerrh ey 


" n . 
- 7 = Rat ie WM 7 Le 


Va 


»! 
a 
( 
5 
ded 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXXII 


LXIII 


For particulars of this document, see Vol. XXX. 


LXIV 


This is a Latin letter written by Jean de Brébeuf 
to the father general (Caraffa), dated at Ste. Marie 
of the Hurons, June 2, 1648. The original MS. rests 
in the archives of the Society, where, presumably in 
1858, Father Martin made a copy of it. Six years 
later, Martin translated it into French, and in that 
form it was published in Carayon’s Premiere Mission, 
Pp. 229-232. We follow Martin’s Latin apograph, 
now in the archives of St. Mary’s College, Montreal, 
and our English translation is made therefrom. 


LXV 


For a bibliographical account of the /ournal des 
Jésuites, see Vol. XXVII. 


LXVI 


In reprinting the Relation of 1647-48 (Paris, 1649), 
we follow a copy of the original Cramoisy edition 
in the Lenox Library —known there as the Lamoi- 
gnon copy. The volume is a composite, consisting 
of two parts. Part I. is the usual general report 
from Jerome Lalemant, as superior, to Estienne 
Charlet, the provincial of the Society in France. 
Lalemant dates his prefatory epistle, ‘‘ De Quebec 


308 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


ce 15. d’Octobre 1648.’’ Part II., also addressed to 
the provincial, is. the customary Huron report, by 
Paul Ragueneau, who dates his introductory letter, 
*“Des Hurons ce 16. Auril 1648.’’ The royal au- 
thority was granted ‘‘en Decembre 1648;’’ and the 
ecclesiastical permission was ‘‘ Fait & Paris ce 30. 


Decembre 1648.’’ ‘This annual is generally referred 
to as ‘‘ H. 89,’’ because described in Harrisse’s Votes, 
no. 89. 


Collation: ‘Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Table 
des Chapitres,’’ pp. (4); ‘‘ Priuilege,’’ with ‘‘ Per- 
miffion’’ on the verso, 1 leaf; Lalemant’s letter, pp. 
1-3; text of Part I., pp. 4-158; a blank leaf to com- 
plete sig. K; half-title to Part II., with verso blank, 
1 leaf; Ragueneau’s letter, pp. 3 and 4; text of Part 
II., pp. 5-135, with verso of p. 135 blank. There 
is no mispaging; but in Part I. an italic font is used 
for the numeration of pp. 81-158. A careful com- 
parison of the Lenox copy with the Ayer (formerly 
also a Lenox copy), and of the two copies in Harvard, 
reveals a complete textual and typographical agree- 
ment. 

Copies of this Relation may be found in the follow- 
ing libraries: Lenox, Harvard, New York State 
Library, Laval University (Quebec), Library of Parlia- 
ment (Ottawa), Brown (private), Ayer (private), Bib- 
liothéque Nationale (Paris), and British Museum. 
Copies have been sold or priced as follows: O’Cal- 
laghan (1882), no. 1226, sold to Library of Parliament, 
Ottawa, for $61, and had cost him $58.75 in gold; 
Harrassowitz (1882), lacking the title-page, priced at 
50 marks; Dufossé (1889 and 1891), priced at 500 and 
450 francs, respectively. This annual is not as 
common as are many of the others. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXXII 309 


Note:— We are indebted to Edward E. Ayer, Esq., 
of Chicago, for a list of original Cramoisys in his 
private library. Of the Relations thus far described 
by us, he has all save the first—the Bridve Relation 
of Paul le Jeune (Paris, 1632). Subsequent ones will 
be noted in due course of procedure. Since the pub- 
lication of our Vol. II., he has also secured in France 
acopy of Lescarbot’s excessively rare Relation Derniere 
(Paris, 1612). This and the Harvard copy are the 
only ones known to us to exist in America. 


" 4, ve 
p 


rae 
tie » \ 
cepa ll. BREF 


3 P oe Rll tes 
iTS A OK Cee 


Pian i 
a i, 


: 


NOTES TO VOL. XXXII 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 


I (p. 41).— For sketches of these missionaries, see: Quentin, Rich- 
ard, Turgis, and Du Marché, vol. viii., zo¢es 10, 17-19; De la Place 
and Gondoin, xxi., zote 5; Lyonne and D’Olbeau, xxiv., mofes 9, 12. 


2 (p. 41).— The Sainte Chapelle is a part of the group of edifices 
comprising the Palais de Justice, in Paris, and was built by the 
royal St. Louis (1242-47). He is said to have expended upon the 
building and upon the relics and their shrines, an amount equivalent 
to over 3,000,000 francs, at the present value of money. The chapel 
was, in later times, enriched by numerous and costly gifts. It has 
to a great extent been restored, during the present century. Full 
descriptions of the building and its treasures, and its historical 
associations, are given in Hzst. of Parzs (Whittaker, 1827), vol. ii., 
pp. 111-116; and Hare’s Walks in Paris, pp. 272-278. 

3 (p- 41).— Wipigigwi: see vol. xxiv., note 11. 

4 (p. 67).— Quar?, as here used, indicates ‘‘a small cask, con- 
taining not a quarter, but about half as much as a cask of ordinary 
size’’ (Littré). The Zot is a measure containing two pints,— the 
French pint, however, being equivalent to .934 of a litre, or 1.64+ 
English pints. 

5 (p. 67).— Jean Suffren was a noted Jesuit preacher, born Nov. 
30, 1571. He was confessor to Marie de Médicis and Louis XIII; 
but, according to Sommervogel, ‘‘ his frankness was incompatible 
with the intrigues of the court. He remained attached to the Queen- 
mother, whom he followed to Belgium and England. He died at 
Flushing, Sept. 15, 1641, while traveling with that princess from 
London to Cologne, whither she was going to seek an asylum.’’ He 
wrote various religious works, chief among which was L’ Année 
Chrestienne (Paris, 1640-42). 

6 (p. 67).— Gerson: see vol. xxv., note 3. 

7 (p. 69).— Denis Duquet, born in 1605, married at Quebec (1638) 
Catherine Gautier, then barely eleven years old; they had eleven 
children. In October, 1672, fiefs were granted to him and his eldest 


312 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


son, on the rivers St. Lawrence and Vilieu, which later were united 
as the fief of Maranda, in Lotbiniére County. 


8 (p. 73).— This was Anne, daughter of Zacharie Cloutier (vol. 
XXvii., mofe 9); she left three children. Robert Drouin, her hus- 
band, was a native of Perche, France; it was for their marriage that 
the first recorded nuptial contract in New France was drawn up 
(July 16, 1636). Drouin took as his second wife Marie Chapelier 
(1649); they lived successively at Three Rivers, Orléans Island, and 
Chateau Richer, at which last place Drouin died, in 1685. 


9 (p. 73).—Jean Poisson, a native of Perche, married (about 
1644) Jacqueline Chamboy. In August, 1652, he was captured by 
the Iroquois. His son, Frangois, obtained the fief of Gentilly. 


10 (p. 81).— Reference is here made to the head of the Holy 
Roman Empire, then Ferdinand III., a German prince. Founded 
by Charlemagne in the year 800, the Holy Roman Empire — under 
successive rulers, Salic, Saxon, Suabian, and German— was long 
the temporal arm of the ecclesiastical power in Europe. It came to 
an end Aug. 6, 1806, when the Emperor Francis II. resigned the 
imperial dignity, and retired to the government of his hereditary 
dominions, under the title ‘‘ Emperor of Austria.”’ 

Lalemant’s hesitancy to mention the Emperor in the church 
prayers arose from the fact that France, involved in the Thirty 
Years’ War, was at this time in conflict with that monarch. These 
hostilities were not ended until the Peace of Westphalia, Oct. 24, 
1648. 


I1 (p. 87).—A fish of the genus Sczena, the species most com- 
mon on the North Atlantic coast is popularly termed ‘‘ weakfish.”’ 


12 (p. 93).—Abraham Martin (nicknamed L’Ecossais, ‘‘the 
Scotchman,’’) was born in 1589; he came to Canada in 1614. In the 
previous year, he had married Marguerite Langlois; but it is not 
known whether she came with him, or later. His family lived with 
him after 1620, and they were among the few French colonists who 
remained in Quebec after its surrender to the English in 1628. Mar- 
tin was for many years an engagé of the Hundred Associates, who 
granted him lands on the heights of Quebec, afterward known as 
the ‘‘ Plains of Abraham.’’ In 1647, he is mentioned as “royal 
pilot.’”’ He died in September, 1664, leaving a numerous family; 
one of his daughters married the explorer De Groseilliers (vol. 
XXvViii., mote 32). 

13 (p. 95).— Pierre Lefebvre, born 1616, married Jeanne Aunois. 
In April, 1647, he obtained a grant of land, which was afterward 
merged in the fief of Gentilly (note 9, ante). 


14 (p. to1).— These three nuns were Anne de l’Assomption, from 


NOTES TO VOL. XXXII 313 


Dieppe; Jeanne Thomas de Ste. Agnes, from Vienne; and Marie 
Long-Pré de St. Augustin, from Bayeux. 


15 (p. 103).— This woman, Barbe Hubou (Hybou) was married to 
Jean Millouer (surnamed Dumaine); she died Oct. 31, 1651. Four 
weeks later, Millouer married Jeanne le Roy. 


16 (p. 107).—In the original MS., at this place, two lines were 
written, and afterward crossed out; they read thus, when trans- 
lated: ‘‘e¢ hoc male, for there was no such indulgence; and, even 
if there had been.”’ 


17 (p. 161).— Cazeul: Apparently another form of the familiar 
French-Canadian cajeu or cageux, which, though not found in the 
dictionaries, is used by the peasants to mean ‘‘a small raft,’’— 
probably a diminutive of cage, the French-Canadian term for large 
rafts of logs or square timber. Cage is used by the voyageurs and 
lumbermen in place of ¢rain-de-bo7s, the proper French term. All 
the old and modern dictionaries give cage as a synonym of une, 
“‘a top,’’—z.e., foretop or maintop of a vessel. As in shipwrecks 
these gratings were usually put on rafts of spars, etc., to form a 
sort of deck, it is possible that the word cage might have come to 
mean ‘‘a raft,’’ among the Norman and Breton sailors. — CRAWFORD 
Linpsay. 


18 (p. 183).— This Mlle. de Boulogne (Boullongne) was apparently 
the sister of Madame d’Ailleboust, whose maiden name was Barbe 
de Boulogne. Tanguay makes Barbe the daughter of Gertrude 
Philippe, who became an Ursuline nun Dec. 2, 1648; but this seems 
to be an error. As more accurately stated by Sulte (Canad.- 
Frangats, vol. ii., p. 126), Barbe had an elder sister, Philippine Ger- 
trude, who came to Canada with the family of D’ Ailleboust. Upon 
entering the Ursuline convent, Philippine took the name of Mother 
St. Dominique. It is maintained by Mr. Pierre G. Roy, editor of 
Bulletin des Recherches Historigues, of Lévis, Que., that D’Aille- 
boust ‘and Barbe had no children; but Tanguay and Sulte affirm 
that it was their daughter Barbe who married De'Lauson, the gov- 
ernor (vol. xxiii., zo¢e 16). 

Ig (p. 263).— Mantane River is now called Matane; it enters the 
St. Lawrence 200 miles below Quebec. On some early maps, it was 
named Riviére de Caen. 

20 (p. 267).— Concerning the Nétre-Dame Mountains, see vol. ii., 
note 54. 

21 (p. 273).—St. Michael’s day occurs on Sept. 29; but, on the 
church calendar, May 8 is marked ‘ Apparition de St. Michel, 
archange.’’— CrawFrorD Linpsay. 


ee Ul 
py iP 


P + dhe patna gran hacat! fetes 
<a , 4) : ‘ 
1 : digas 
y i ay ni y 
' . } ‘i. h is 
\y ‘ ] vy ay af 
i : F i f sais AMA 
sich ty ae ‘ 
; Ls j ¢ 
4 
® 
. > 
} 
) 
ri 
4 
t 
v’ it 


be ye ¥en . ey al in 
: f Te i a _ 
) , ' \ F De ‘ad A ‘ 7) <a 


im “a 1 ee Pe Lea biu Ris dang ill (‘Ah a 


Fa ner Lae Coat Ay eBi: 


: ones bres “8 ae 


* &..4 i ee Pe Pe ee ® €& 
* 2.8.4.8 68, 6, 2.8, 8.3.86, 8,8 


2.2, 2.28.3.8.8.8 

. : 2.8 &. 28.8 ? a, 8.8.3.5 
athe Net ak tar take eae tt tay tet Te EO : 2606.6) 8. 8) 858.8. 8.8.8, 8.88. 8.8 8.4.8 8 6.8. 8.8. 8G. 8.8 2.8.8.8 
It bat rt Ao e eee 8) 6.8yad 8a eee eee el Ape eee 8 


j ih a a8 

a vest wea 
ot et be ‘ 10 0,8,07858.5,0.8,8 

8.8.88. “ eet et att ig 


iets 


La 
a 
= 


as 

* : 
ay 

Ms 


Ce ee 
igigls 
pigtz 


a 
ms 


ot, 


