Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 27: Hurons, Lower Canada, 1642-1645
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits27jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits27jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits27jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 27 of 73.

---

w 
C1 - 

  
  U') 
f f=--=-__ 
  
i
--- 
  
(,)= 

  -== <O 
"': '=""'- 0 
CJ) 
... 

  --- - <0 
I-
""'" 
Cñ _ 
  
a: = 

  =('1) 
z 
::I 

. 
-. .- 

. 
. 
- 

. 

... 

.- 

. 

.- 

. 

. 
. 

.-. . 

, 
. 
. . 
1" , . 
.JI;!:: 
. '- 
... ... 
. . .. 
. . . 

  , .'- . . 
..... 
, ì . 
  
.. \I . 
. . . f ,J l' 
. 
. 

'! 

.... 


  . 
" 
  "- t}t . 
- -., -. ;II .. . . 
. ' .."..... .... 

. 
. 

:- 

. 
:. 


f 
31i 
, 
  # 13 
..; 

. 
v, :L '1 

M I( 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 

VOL. XXVII 


,\ßHAEL 
  
",. ,,- 

  't 

  
  

  LIBRARY 
  

  ':-'I 

  D 

  
  
Iÿl} O"' 


The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 
No._ 
  _t2_} 

AJIP 



, 

'" 

/, 
. 


h. gq,
" 

Tt 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 

TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT lVIISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 

1610- 1 79 1 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 

Vol. XXVII 
HURONS, LOWER CANADA: 1642- 1645 

CLEVELAND: ttbe :fSUtfOWS :fSrotberß 
aomvan)?, PUBLISHERS, M DCCCXCVIII 


COPYRIGHT, 1898 
BY 
THE BURROWS BROTHERS Co 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 

Th Imþeria/ Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 

Editor 

Translators. 

Assistant Editor 
Bibliographical Adviser 

REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
r FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 
CRAWFORD LINDSAY 
WILLIAM PRICE 
HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
EMMA HELEN BLAIR 
VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXVII 

PREFACE TO VOLUME XXVII 9 
DOCUMENTS:- 
LIII. Relation de ce qvi s'est passé en la Nov- 
velIe France, és années 1643. & 1644. 
[Chap. vi. to end of Part II., completing 
the document.] HÙrosme Lalemant/ Des 
H urons, September 21, 1643, and March 
3 I, 1 6 44 1 9 
LIV. Journal des PP. Jésuites. HÙrosme Lale- 
mant
. Quebek, September-December, 
16 45 73 
LV. Relation de ce qvi s'est passé en la Nov- 
velIe France, és années 1644. & 1645. 
[Chaps. i.- xi.] Barthelemy Vimont,. 
Quebec, October I, 1645 . 12 3 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXVII . 3 0 7 
NOTES . 3 11 



".."."'\.\\\"nIUI / 
f " 
  
  .- 
"



' t . & 
  
" x 
  ; '" . -
" ..1'..... 
  "'. 
, .:.: ," -. Ã ' : \
,(a 
" ; ,"". I S 
  
  
" 
  
  .J \. 1 
, , Þ It.#: J !. 
j
/ "11"_ .",,' III 


  \ ",y" :t 



  

ILLUSTRATIONS TO YOLo XXVII 

1. Reduced facsimile of Brief of Pope Urban 
VIII., dated February 18, 1644, granting 
a plenary indulgence . Facing 106 
II. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Re- 
lation of 1644-45 . Iz6 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume. 
LIII. Part I. of this Relatz"on, written by the 
superior, Vimont, was given in V ols. XXV. and 
XXVI.; Part II., sent to Vimont from the Huron 
country by Jerome Lalemant, was commenced in 
Vol. XXVI., and is here concluded. 
Continuing his survey of the Huron missions for 
16 4 2 -43, Lalemant states that lack of workers has 
prevented the Jesuits from carrying on their labors, 
begun two years before, among the Neutral Nation; 
some of the Christian Hurons, however, have preached 
among them, meeting with considerable success. At 
the end of the winter, one hundred of this tribe visit 
the Jesuits in the Huron country, and are so pleased 
with what they see and hear that they promise the 
Fathers a favorable reception by their people. 
A sanguinary attack by this tribe upon the Mas- 
coutens, last summer, is described. The latter con- 
stitute a nation more populous than the Neutrals, 
Hurons, and Iroquois, all together; they speak an 
Algonkin dialect, and offer a vast field for missionary 
labor. 
The station of 81. Jean Baptiste is still in charge 
of Daniel. A notable increase in the number of 
conversions is reported; and several instances of 


10 

PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

devotion and piety are related. Driven hither by 
the murderous Iroquois, many Algonkins from the St. 
Lawrence valley have taken refuge with the Hurons; 
and in their behalf is established the mission of Ste. 
Elizabeth, in charge of Ménard. He soon finds ready 
access to them, and they listen to him willingly; 
several conversions occur among them. 
The final chapter describes the labors of Pijart and 
Ménard, begun in the previous summer, among the 
Nipissing Algonkins. They meet a friendly recep- 
tion; but on attempting to rebuke the superstitious 
and licentious practices of the natives, much opposi- 
tion is aroused, and the missionaries are even threat- 
ened and assaulted. In December, these and several 
other Algonkin tribes come to winter among the 
Hurons, and Pijart continues his instruction to them. 
He secures some conversions, and baptizes several at 
the point of death. 
It will be remembered (see Preface to Vol. XXV.) 
that the original Huron report for 1642 -43 was cap- 
tured by the Iroquois; and the second draft thereof 
reached Quebec too late, in the autumn of 1643, to 
be sent to France from Quebec, for insertion in the 
RelatÙm of that year. In publishing this belated copy 
in the Relation of 1643 - 44, the account of affairs in 
the Huron mission is brought up to date by a supple- 
mentary letter from Lalemant to his provincial, dated 
March 31, 1644. In this epistle, Lalemant reports 
that the Iroquois have closed all passage by the 
rivers to Quebec; many of the Hurons, attempting to 
descend thither, have been slaughtered or captured, 
or have barely escaped with their lives; and their 
country has been continually harassed by the foe. 
Largel y as a result of the war, a severe famine has 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

Jl 

helped still further to desolate this afflicted land,- 
" prevailing among all the tribes for over a hundred 
leagues around." There is hardly enough Indian 
corn for sowing the fields. Fortunately, the Jesuits 
have a good supply of corn; and this enables them 
to exercise toward the starving Indians a charity that 
wins their affection. On the whole, the church has 
been strengthened, rather than injured, by these 
afflictions. The mission stations have become resi- 
dences, and the chapels have been everywhere 
enlarged. The Christians are notably more numer- 
ous, and even the Infidels are less hostile. 
LIV . We here commence the publication of the 
Journal des Jésuites,-as its title indicates, a brief rec- 
ord, from day to day, of events occurring in the Jesuit 
residence at Quebec, and written by the superior in 
charge. It is prefaced by an outline of affairs in 
Canada, as they existed at the time when Jerome 
Lalemant came down to Quebec (September, 1645), 
to replace Vimont as superior of the Canadian mis- 
sion. The Journal itself commences October 17, 
1645, and continues to June 21, 1668, with some gaps 
between 1654 and 1656; we shall present its con ten ts 
in yearly installments,- the portion giyen in this 
volume embracing September to December, 1645. 
The Relatz'ons were formal accounts, carefully edited 
in Quebec and in Paris, and avowedly published for 
the purpose of attracting money and recruits for the 
missions of New France; it is to the letters and other 
informal documents of the period, that we must look 
for side lights with which to illumine the heroic pic- 
ture of the Jesuits in New France. Among the mass 
of material of this character which will be supplied 
in the present series, no document will be more 


12 

PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

serviceable to historians of the period than the Jour- 
nal des J ésuites, which is the more valuable because 
obviously not intended for the public eye. 
In his introductory note on the" state of the coun- 
try" when he arrived at Quebec in September, 1645, 
Lalemant says that the Hundred Associates had just 
ceded the fur trade to the French colonists on the S1. 
Lawrence. At Montreal, " there remain, of notable 
persons," only Ð' Ailleboust and his family, and 
Mlle. Mance. Le J eune and J ogues are assigned to 
that post for the winter. Coûture, the donné who 
had been captured with J ogues, two years before, by 
the Iroquois, returns from an embassy to the Mo- 
hawks, with whom he has been negotiating a peace. 
Fort Richelieu is almost abandoned, only eight or 
ten soldiers being left there. A list of the appoint- 
ments at the various mission stations is given. 
Here the Journal proper begins. Following are 
the principal entries: The fleet departs for France, 
October 24, "laden, as is estimated, with 20,000 
pounds' weight of Beaver skins for the habitans, and 
10,000 for the general company, at a pistole, or ten 
or eleven francs, a pound. to The soldiers sent last 
year to the Huron country return, this September, 
to Montreal, with a valuable cargo of furs. "A dis- 
pute over this having arisen between the habitans, 
lately put in possession of the trade, and the mes- 
sieurs of the general Company, they agreed to employ 
the proceeds in building a church and clergy-house, 
for which 6,000 livres were specially set aside." 
They make up for this, however, by allowing the 
Jesuits only thirty crowns apiece for the maintenance 
of these soldiers during the past year; "they caused 
us thereby a loss of more than 2,500 livres." Some 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

13 

of the Hurons wintering at Sillery steal from a 
Frenchman; they are "intimidated with the anger 
of Monsieur the Governor at his return." 
Complaint is made of the Huron Atironta and his 
family, who lodge at the hospital, that they take the 
place of the sick there. A wedding, at which Le 
J eune officiates, causes Chavigny to lose one of his 
men, for which he blames the priest; but it appears 
afterward that he was wrong in complaining of Le 
Jeune. A house for the Jesuits at Montreal is ready 
for erection, when orders come from France that all 
the workmen must at once begin work on Madame 
de Bullion's hospital. Maisonneuve finds it hard to 
tell this news to the Fathers; Lalemant says: "I 
took it upon myself to do so, and to persuade them 
to regard the matter favorably; afterward, they flung 
the cat at my legs, as if I were the one who had 
hindered that work." 
November 15, Vimont obtains Des Chastelets's 
consent that the prohibition of trade with the Indians 
shall not apply to the Jesuits, but that they must 
carry it on quietly. "The Algonquins of Sillery 
inflict on themselves severe disciplines for having 
been several times drunk; but they complain much 
and stoutly that the French get drunk and are bad, 
and that not a word is said about it." At a wed- 
ding, " there were two violins, for the first time." 
:Much curious information is given, incidentally, 
about the values of wages, food, peltries, etc. Lale- 
mant notes the great expenses incurred for the 
Sillery establishment,- nearly a thousand écus,- 
while the revenues therefrom are 1lz'1. 
December 3, the Ursulines send a dinner to the 
Fathers -" a perfect banquet, indeed." " About 


14 

PR.A'FACE TO VOL XXVII 

this time, we began to make bread at the house, not 
only because that made for us at the warehouse oven 
was not good, but because we wished to use the corn 
of the land, which they did not use at the ware- 
house." The religious ceremonies observed on the 
various church festivals of the month are described,- 
especially those at Christmastide. Two great kettles 
filled with fire have been furnished by the warehouse, 
to warm the chapel; through neglect to remove these 
after mass, the floor beneath them catches fire, early 
in the morning, but it is fortunately seen by the 
Jesuits' cook, who quietly extinguishes the fire. 
Two Frenchmen create a scandal by getting intoxi- 
cated, while waiting for the midnight mass. The 
Jesuits vigorously denounce this, "because the sav- 
ages said: 'They make us take the discipline when 
we get drunk, and they say nothing to the French.' 
Nothing further was required than this public 
expression; Monsieur the governor had them put 
on the chevalet, exposed to a frightful Northeast 
wind. " 
Lalemant finds that his predecessor, Vimont, had 
granted to the two convents of nuns twelve arpents 
of the best meadow lands owned by the Jesuits, for a 
term of six years. He blames Vimont for this; but 
the latter soon afterward obtains a retrocession of the 
land, as appears by a marginal note in the text. 
LV. The Relation of 1644-45 co
sists of but one 
part (dated at Quebec, October I, 1645), written by 
Vimont, because his successor, Jerome Lalemant, 
had not arrived in time to perform the task; it is 
supplemented by a letter from Lalemant, dated in 
the Huron country, :May 15, 1645, and treating of the 
mission in that quarter. "\Ve present the first eleven 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

15 

chapters of the Relatz"oll in this volume; it will be 
concluded in VoL XXVIII. 
The great event of the year, says Vimont, is the 
peace which has just been concluded with the dreaded 
Iroquois. "Another blessing" to the country is the 
cession of the fur trade to the habitants by the Com- 
panyof New France and the Montreal Associates, 
respectivel y. 
Much space is this year devoted to the pious utter- 
ances and behavior of the Christian Indians. Some, 
who become intoxicated, are shut out from the 
church, and kneel by the door, in the midst of rain 
and mud. The Father orders some boards to be 
brought for them to kneel on, that they may not soil 
their clothing; but they decline this relief. Some 
even refuse to enter the church when he gives them 
permission, so humble and contrite are they. 
One of these neophytes, while on a trading trip, 
meets a small tribe who have thus far had no inter- 
course with the French. He preaches to them, and 
so arouses their interest in the new religion that they 
help him erect a large cross on the banks of a river, 
where he promises to meet them in the following 
spring. 
The new Christians persist in their religious duties, 
despite the scorn and jeers of their heathen compan- 
ions. They resist the numerous temptations to 
anger, licentiousness, and superstition. They pa- 
tiently suffer hunger, sickness, and affliction; and 
comfort one another in those troubles. At Tadous- 
sac, one man is suddenly cured of an illness, and 
claims that he has been in heaven, where he has seen 
Jesus, who has given him a message to his tribes- 
men. This man has seen the book in which are 


16 

PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

inscribed all their names, and the record of their 
sins; also he has seen hell itself, and men burn- 
ing in the infernal fires. To all this, the Indians 
listen with the utmost attention, and in profound 
silence; it frightens the wicked, and consoles the 
good, and has excellent results. Some of them 
surprise their priest by inflicting the discipline upon 
themselves,- of their own accord, and in public. 
This arouses a contagion of fervor among those 
assembled: "the penance was so general that the 
innocent wished to share it with the guilty. Even 
the children were not spared; their fathers and moth- 
ers made them approach the altar, took off their 
little garments, and begged him who held the whip 
to chastise them. These poor victims went there 
cheerfully, and without shrinking, or shedding one 
little tear, they received the blows from the whip, 
which were gently delivered on their innocent flesh. 
Some of the mothers even struck with their Rosa- 
ries, in the manner of the discipline, their little 
children still at the breast. This flagellation would 
have been too long had not the Father put an end to 
it; he consoled them, assured them of the pardon of 
their sins, and warned them not to perform any other 
public penance without the advice of their Confess- 
ors." Afterward," the discipline was hung up on 
a nail in the Chapel," as a warning. 
A party of Sillery Indians go into the woods for 
their usual great hunt; and, at their request, Father 
Dreuillettes goes with them as their spiritual guide. 
They greatly edify him by their zeal in observing an 
religious duties, especially at Christmas. The poor 
Father becomes blind through the smoke of the cab- 
ins. An Indian woman attempts with a bit of rusty 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII 

17 

iron to remove this difficulty, but to no avail. Fi- 
nally, his sight is suddenly restored through an appeal 
to the intercession of the Virgin. 
Vimont relates the particulars of several Iroquois 
raids upon Fort Richelieu, also of a retaliatory incur- 
sion made by the Algonkins, in which they capture 
two Iroquois prisoners; contrary to the usual savage 
cnstom, these prisoners are not harmed, but are kind- 
ly treated, and are delivered to Montmagny. He 
orders another Iroquois, who had been kept at Three 
Rivers, to be liberated and sent back to his own coun- 
try. This man returns (July 5) with ambassadors, 
who negotiate a treaty of peace with both French 
and Hurons. These envoys bring back Coûture, 
who had been captured with Jogues, and restore him 
to the French. Ten days are spent in the prelimi- 
naries of a peace, which is finally ratified, early in 
September, at a general council of the Hurons, 
Algonkins, and French, who meet deputies from the 
Iroquois. The proceedings by which this treaty is 
made, with the speeches, gifts, and feasts accom- 
panying, are given in much detail. The Iroquois 
envoys depart September 23, leaving three of their 
number with the French as hostages. 

R. G. T. 


IADISON, WIS., July, 1898. 


LI I I (concluded) 

RELATION OF 1643-44 

PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 16 45 

Chaps. i.- viii. of Part I. were given in Volume XXV.; in 
Volume XXVI. were given the remainder of Part I., and the 
first five chapters of Part II. (the Huron report); we here- 
with present the remainder of Part II., thus completing the 
document. 


20 

LES RELATIO
YS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

[IIOJ CHAPITRE VI. 

DE LA MISSION DES ANGES AUX ATIOÜENDARONK, OU 
NATION NEUTRE. 

L E peu de nombre que nous fommes efiant à peine 
fuffifant pour cultiuer les bourgades qui nous 
font plus voifines, nous n'auons pû continuer 
l'infiruétion de la Nation neutre, où i1 y a deux ans 
que nous iettâmes les premieres femences de l'Euan- 
gile. Quelques Chrefiiens Hurons y ont efté en noftre 
place, y ont fait Ie deuoir d' Apofires, & peut efire 
auec plus de fuccés pour Ie prefent que nous n'euffions 
fait par nous mefmes. 
Efiienne Totiri du bourg de S. Iofeph accompagné 
d'vn fien frere s' efians arreftez dans les bourgades 
plus frontieres, trouuerent des oreilles fi difpofées à 
les entendre, qu'à peine auoient-ils trois ou quatre 
heures dans la nuiét pour prendre leur fommeil. 
lIs portoient leur chapelet au col, & comme la curiofité 
picque autant ces peuples barbares, qu'elle [III] 
fait en Europe les Natiõs plus ciuilifées, cette nou- 
ueauté en des perfonnes qui d'ailleurs en tout leur 
reffemblët, faifoit qu'à chaque bourgade on leur en 
demandoit la raifon. C'eft, difoient-ils, vne des 
marques, que nous reconnoiffons pour maifire celuy 
qui feul a creé Ie Ciel & la terre. II nOllS eft inui- 
fible, quoy qu'il rempliffe tout Ie monde, & que luy 
feul foufiienne toutes chofes, ainfi que l'ame remplit 
nos corps, les viuifie & les fouftient, quoy qu'elle 
mefme iamais ne paroiffe à nos yeux. En fuite ils 


1642- 4õ] 

RELA TION OF I64.J-44 

21 

[110] CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE MISSION OF THE ANGELS AMONG THE A TI- 
OUENDARONK OR NEUTRAL NATION. 

O DR small number being barely sufficient to at- 
tend to the villages that are nearest to us, we 
have been unable to continue the instruction 
of the neutral Nation, where two years ago we sowed 
the first seeds of the Gospel. Some Christian Hurons 
went there in our stead and performed the duty of 
Apostles, perhaps with more success for the present 
than we ourselves could have had. 
Estienne Totiri, of the village of 81. Joseph, 
accom panied by one of his brothers, stopped in one of 
their villages nearer th frontier, and found ears so 
well disposed to listen to them that they had barely 
three or four hours at night for sleep. They carried 
their rosaries around their necks, and, as curiosity 
excites these barbarous peoples, as it [I I I] does 
the most civilized Nations in Europe, such a novelty, 
in persons who in all other respects resemble them, 
caused them to be asked the reason thereof at every 
village. "It is," they said, "one of the signs that 
we acknowledge as our master him who alone has 
created Heaven and earth. He is invisible to us, 
although he fills the whole world; and he alone main- 
tains all things, as the soul fills the body, vivifies and 
sustains it, though it never appears to our eyes." 
Afterward, they expounded the principal mysteries 
of the Faith. But what touched those people more 


22 

LES RELA TIOiVS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

alloient deduifans les principaux myfieres de la Foy. 
:Mais ce qui touchoit dauantage ces peuples, efioit la 
crainte de ces feux qu'on diíoit leur efire inéuitables, 
s'ils n'adoroient ce grand maifire de la nature. Et 
pourquoy done, repartoient-ils, n'a-t'on continué de 
nous venir infiruire? pourquoy nous donnez vous la 
connoiffance de ce malheur qui nous attend, fi on ne 
vient en mefme temps pour nous en deliurer? autre- 
ment nous donnant cette crainte que iufqu'icy nous 
n'auions pas, c'efi pour nous rendre miferables dés 
cette vie, auant que [112] nous Ie foyons en !'autre. 
Barnabé Otfinnonannhont excellent Chreftien du 
bourg de S. Michel ayant penetré iufqu'au fond du 
pais, y a fait vn plus long feiour; & comme il efi de 
grande authorité parmy ces peuples, fon zele y a 
donné bien plus de iour aux veritez de nofire Foy, & 
fon exemple a prefché plus fortement que fes dif- 
cours. 11 refufa publiquement des defirs d'vne femme 
effrontée, qui demandoit de luy ce que fa confcience 
ne luy pouuoit permettre, quoy que les coufiumes de 
ces pais l'y condamnaffent, & qu'on appelle icy vertu, 
ce qui deuant Dieu n'efi qu'vn crime. 11 a eu mille 
combats à rendre contre ceux mefme qu'il cheriffoit 
Ie plus, ayant toufiours confiamment refufé d'obeyr 
à leurs fonges, qui efi Ie Dieu de tous ces peuples. 
Et comme on luy reprochoit que la Foy efioit vn 
ioug infupportable, l'obligeãt de rom pre ainfi les 
droits de l'amitié, & Ie priuer des plus grands plaifirs 
de la vie. Non, difoit-il, fi pour aller en Paradis ie 
fçauois vn chemin couuert de precipices, i'irois tefie 
baiffée & m'efiimerois trop heureux de [113] mourir 
en la peine. A quelque prix que nous gagnions vn 
bon-heur eternel, nous ne rauons qu'à bon marché. 


1642-45] 

RELA T10N OF I643-44 

23 

than all was the fear of those fires that they were told 
they could not avoid, unless they adored the great 
master of nature. "And why, " replied they, " have 
they not continued to come and instruct us? Why 
do you give us the knowledge of this misfortune 
that awaits us if no one come at the same time to 
deliver us from it? Otherwise by inspiring us with 
that fear, that we have not had till now, it is enough 
to make us miserable even in this life, before [I 12] 
we are in the other. ' , 
Barnabé Otsinnonannhont, an excellent Christian 
of the village of St. Michel, who penetrated to the 
heart of the country, made a ìonger stay there; and, 
as he has great authority among these tribes, his zeal 
has given much more publicity to the trut
s of our 
Faith, and his example has preached more forcibly 
than his words. He publicly refused the desires of 
a shameless woman, who asked him to do what his 
conscience could not permit, although the customs of 
this country sentenced him to it, and here they call 
a virtue what, before God, is but a crime. He had 
to fight a thousand battles against those even whom 
he held most dear; for he always firmly refused to 
obey their dreams, which are the God of all these 
peoples. And when they reproached him, saying 
that Faith was an intolerable yoke, as it compelled 
him thus to sever the bonds of friendship, and to 
deprive himself of the greatest pleasures of life, 
" No," said he, "if, in order to reach Paradise, I 
knew of a road full of precipices, I would coura- 
geously advance, and would consider myself only too 
happy if [113] I perished in the effort. At whatever 
price we win eternal happiness, we always acquire it 
cheaply." 


24 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Enfin lors qu'il fut preit de fon retour il fe vit 
obligé de donner Ie Baptefme à vne fienne fille qu'il 
Iaiffoit en ce païs-Ià, où il a grand nombre de parens. 
Mais fouuiens-toy ma fille, luy difoit-il, de conferuer 
precieufement la grace que tu reçois par Ie Baptefme. 
Quand Ie Diable on les langues impies te poufferont 
au mal, penfe que Dieu te voit, quoy que ton pere 
foit abfent; & fi cette confideration ne l' arrefie, refou- 
uiens-toy au moins de celle-cy; Que la plus grande 
douleur que tu puiffe caufer à ton pere, eft de com- 
mettre vn peché qui te doiue à iamais feparer d'auec 
luy. 
Sur la fin de l'hyuer vne bande d'enuiron cent per- 
fonnes de ces peuples de la Natiõ Neutre font venus 
nous vifiter en ce païs. Ils y ont veu l'Eglife naif. 
fante des Hurons, fe font informez de nos Chrefiiens 
des chofes de la Foy, nous les auons infiruits nous 
mefmes, & s'il faut croire à leur parole, ils s'en font 
retournez auec vn regret que nous ne leur tenons 
[114] compagnie; & des promeffes que leur païs ne 
fera pas de refifiance à receuoir la Foy, auffi tofi 
qu'ayans fuffifamment fait bréche icy dans les Hu- 
rons, nous aurons Ie moyen de donner iufqu'à eux. 
Dieu veüille que cette femence porte fruiéts en fon 
tern ps. 
Ces peuples de la Nation neutre ont toufiours 
guerre auec ceux de la Nation du feu encore plus 
éloignez de nous. Ils y allerent l'Efté dernier en 
nombre de deux mille, y attaquerent vn bourg bien 
muny d'vne paliffade, & qui fut fortement defendu 
par neuf cens guerriers qui foufiinrent l'affaut; en fin 
ils Ie forcerent aprés vn fiege de dix iours, en tuerent 
bon nombre fur la place, prirent huit cens captifs, 


1642-45] 

RELA TIO
V OF L64.J-44 

2.3 

Finally, when the time drew near for his return, 
he found himself obliged to give Baptism to a daugh- 
ter of his, whom he left in that country, where he has 
a great many relatives. "But remember, my daugh- 
ter," he said to her, " carefully to preserve the grace 
that thou receivest through Baptism. When the 
Devil, or impious tongues, shall impel thee to evil, 
think that God sees thee, although thy father be 
absent. And if that consideration do not stop thee, 
remember at least this one - that the greatest sorrow 
thou canst cause thy father is to commit a sin that 
will separate thee from him forever." 
At the end of the winter, a party of about one 
hundred persons of these peoples of the Neutral Na- 
tion came to visit us in this country. They saw here 
the nascent Church of the Hurons; they questioned 
our Christians on matters of the Faith; we instructed 
them ourselves; and, if we may trust their word, 
they went away regretting that we could not [114J 
accompany them, and promising that their country 
would offer no resistance to the reception of the 
Faith. As soon as we shall have made a sufficient 
breach here among the Hurons, we shall be able to 
go to them. God grant that this seed may bear fruit 
in due time. 
These peoples of the neutral Nation are always at 
war with those of the Nation of fire, who are still 
farther distant from us. They went there last Sum- 
mer to the number of two thousand, and attacked a 
village well protected by a palisade, and strongly 
defended by nine hundred warriors who withstood 
the assault. Finally, they carried it, after a siege of 
ten days; they killed many on the spot, and took 
eight hundred captives,-men, women, and children. 


26 

LES RELA TIONS DES JJ!:SUITES 

[VOL. 27 

tant hommes que femmes & enfans, aprés auoir bruílé 
foixante & dix des plus guerriers, creué les yeux & 
cerné tout Ie tour de la bouche aux vieillards, que 
par aprés ils abandonnent à leur conduite, afin qu'ils 
traifnent ainfi. vne vie miferable. V oila Ie fleau qui 
depeuple tous ces pais: car leur guerre n'eft qu'à 
s' exterminer. 
Cette Nation du feu eft plus peuplée [I IS] elle feule 
que ne font tous enfemble ceux de la Nation Neutre, 
tous les Hurons & les Iroquois ennemis des Hurons: 
elle contient grand nombre de villages qui parlent la 
langue Algonquine, qui regne encore plus auant. La 
vie nous manquera pluftoft que des nations nouuelles 
à conquefter à Iefus-Chrift; & il faut que la Foy 
adouciffe ces peuples, ainfi. qu'elle commence d'apTÌ- 
uoifer ceux de mefme langage qui habitent vers Ie 
Septentrion. Au moins quelques Hurons dignes de 
foy, qui tous les ans vont trafiquer auec des nations 
Algonquines qui y font répanduës çà & là, nous ont 
fait Ie rapport qu'ils en ont trouué de Chreftiens qui 
fe mettent à genoux comme nous, ioignent les mains, 
regardent vers Ie Ciel, prient Dieu foir & matin, 
deuant & aprés Ie repas: & la meilleure marque de 
leur Foy, eft qu'Ï1s ne font plus méchãs ny deshon- 
neftes comme ils eftoient auparauant. lIs les ap- 
pellent Ondoutaoüakeronnon. Ce font peuples enui- 
ron cent lieuës dans les terres au de[[us du Saguené 
tirant au N ort, qui ayans receu quelque inftruétion 
les vns à Tadouffak, les [116] autres aux Trois Riui- 
eres, où ils ne vont que comme des oifeaux de paffage, 
portent dedans leurs bois, leurs lacs & leurs monta- 
gnes folitaires la Foy & la crainte de Dieu, qui trouue 
fon feiour par tout. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I6./-3-44 

27 

After having burned seventy of the best warriors, 
they put out the eyes and girdled the mouths of all 
the old men, whom they afterward abandoned to 
their own guidance, in order that they might thus 
drag out a miserable life. Such is the scourge that 
depopulates all these countries; for their wars are 
but wars of extermination. 
This Nation of fire alone is more populous [I 15] 
than all the Neutral Nation, all the Hurons, and all 
the Iroquois, enemies of the Hurons, put together. 
It consists of a large number of villages, wherein is 
spoken the Algonquin language, which prevails still 
farther on. Life will fail us rather than new nations 
to conquer for Jesus Christ. And it is necessary that 
the Faith should soften these tribes, as it is com- 
mencing to tame those of the same language who 
live toward the North. At least, some trustworthy 
Hurons, who go every year to trade with the Algon- 
quin tribes scattered here and there, have informed 
us that they have met Christians who kneel as we 
do, clasp their hands, raise their eyes to Heaven, and 
pray to God night and morning, and before and after 
meals. And the best evidence of their Faith is that 
they are no longer wicked and dishonest, as they 
formerly were. They call them Ondoutaouakeron- 
non. These are people about a hundred leagues 
above the Saguené, toward the North, who have 
been instructed - some at Tadoussak, [I 16] and others 
at Three Rivers, where they go merely as birds 
of passage, bearing with them into their solitary 
woods, lakes, and mountains the Faith and the fear 
of God, which finds its abode everywhere. 


28 

LES Rl:."LA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

CHAPITRE VII. 

DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT lEAN BAPTISTE AUX AREN- 
DARONNONS. 

L E Pere Antoine Daniel a continué dans Ie foin 
de cette Miffion, qui cette année a eu dans fon 
reffort les bourgs de S. lean Baptifte & de S. 
Ioachim, & vn troifiéme éloigné d'enuiron fix lieuës, 
qui porte Ie nom de S. Ignace. Dieu a par tout aug- 
menté Ie nombre des Chreftiens & des Catechumenes: 
mais pour rapporter quelque chofe plus en particu- 
lier de cette Eglife. 
Vn bon vieillard Chreftien aagé de plus de cent 
ans, ayant appris que les ennemis s'approchoient de 
fon bourg pour l'enleuer par force, fe réioüiffoit au 
milieu des frayeurs publiques & des pleurs [117] qu'il 
entendoit de tous coftez, difant aux Infideles qu'à ce 
coup il alloit eftre heureux, & ioüir des plaifirs que 
fa Foy luy faifoit efperer. 
Dans ce mefme efprit de la Foy vne femme Chre- 
ftienne qui venoit de perdre la veuë, & fentoit des 
douleurs quafi infupportables, chantoit au plus fort 
de fon mal, que la penfée du Paradis adouciffoit fes 
peines, que fa mifere trouueroit vne fin, mais que la 
ioye qu'elle efperoit dedans Ie Ciel iamais ne finiroit. 
V n ieune homme Chreftien qui I' an paffé fe voy- 
ant pourfuiuy d'vne bande Iroquoife, s'eftoit ietté 
quafi par defefpoir derriere vn arbriffeau où il trouua 
la vie lors qu'il n'attendoit que la mort, nous racon- 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I643-44 

29 

CHAPTER VII. 

OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JEAN BAPTISTE AMONG 
THE ARENDARONNONS. 

F ATHER Antoine Daniel has continued in charge 
of this Mission, which this year has had within 
its province the villages of St. Jean Baptiste, 
of St. J oachiln, and of a third, about six leagues 
distant, that bears the name of St. Ignace. God has 
everywhere increased the number of the Christians 
and Catechumens. But let us give more particulars 
respecting that Church. 
A good old man-a Christian, over a hundred 
years old-heard that the enemy were approaching 
his village to carry it by storm. He rejoiced amid 
the public alarm, and the weeping [I 17J that he heard 
on all sides, saying to the Infidels that this time he 
would be happy and enjoy the pleasures that his 
Faith led him to hope for. 
In this same spirit of Faith, a Christian woman 
who had just lost her sight, and felt almost unbear- 
able pain, sang while her sufferings were keenest, 
that the thought of Paradise alleviated her trouble; 
that her misery would come to an end, but the joy 
that she hoped to feel in Heaven would never cease. 
A Christian young man, last year, saw himself 
pursued by a band of Iroquois, and threw himself, 
almost in despair, behind a bush, where he found 
life when he expected only death. He told us that, 
in the midst of his fears, he was about to call out to 


30 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

toit qu'au milieu de fes craintes il fut tout fur Ie point 
d'appeller l'ennemy, fongeant qu'aprés la mort il feroit 
heureux dans Ie Ciel. NIon Dieu, difoit-il dans Ie 
fond de fon cæur, c'eft vous qui me cachez icy, l'en- 
nem y eft à vingt pas de moy, fi vous n' aidiez à me 
couurir ferois-ie icy en feureté? Difpofez de ma vie 
felon qu'il vous plaira. Si ie fçauois vos volontez ie 
me prefenterois moy [118] mefme, & leur dirois qu'ils 
me bruílaffent, & alors ie vous offrirois mes tourmens. 
Ie ne vous demande, mon Dieu, rien que Ie Ciel, où 
ie puiffe à iamais vous voir comme vous me voyez 
maintenant. Ce ieune homme eft venu bien fouuent 
de dix & douze lieuës pour entendre la Meffe; & 
comme c'eftoit en vn temps dangereux pour la crainte 
des ennemis, & que nous luy difions qu'il auoit tort 
de s'expofer à ce peril fans bonne compagnie: Et 
quoy, nous difoit-il, Dieu n' eft-il pas auec moy? fi 
ie fuis tué en chemin pourrois-ie mieux mourir? N'i- 
rois-ie pas droit dans Ie Ciel? Puis-ie craindre la 
mort, quoy que ie marche au milieu des perils, m'en- 
tretenant dans ces penfées. 
Les parens d'vn ieune Neophyte luy ayant propofé 
vn party qui luy eftoit aduantageux, Iuy demanderent 
fi la fille luyagreoit. V ous ne regardez qu'au dehors, 
leur dit-il, ce que ie veux aimer ne fe voit point des 
yeux. A-t'elle de bonnes penfées pour Ie Ciel? 
Eft-elle difpofée de mourir en la Foy? Son cæur 
eft-il à Dieu? Aimera-t'elle fon falut? Si cela eft 
[119] ie l'aime: fans cela iamais elle ne me fera rien. 
V n Capitaine Chrefiien des plus confiderables du 
bourg de S. lean Baptifie, ayant parlé publiquemët 
en faueur d'vn fonge de quelque fien amy, en fut 
incontinent touché au cæur. ray fafché Dieu, dit-il 


1642 - 45] 

RELA TION OF I643-44 

31 

the enemy, thinking that after death he would be 
happy in Heaven: ' , My God, " he said in the depths 
of his heart, "it is you who hide me here. The 
enemy are twenty paces from me. If you did not 
help me to conceal myself, would I be safe here? 
Dispose of my life as you please. If I knew your 
will, I would present myself, [118] and tell them to 
burn me; and then I would offer you my torments. 
I ask of you nothing, my God, but Heaven, where I 
may ever see you as you see me now." This young 
man came very frequently from a distance of ten or 
twelve leagues to hear Mass; and, as it was a dan- 
gerous time, owing to fear of the enemies, we told 
him that he was wrong in exposing himself to that 
danger without being in a numerous company. 
" What," said he, " is not God with me? If I were 
killed on the road, could I die a better death? Would 
I not go straight to Heaven? Can I fear death, even 
when walking in the midst of peril, while I have such 
thoughts? " 
The parents of a young Neophyte proposed to him 
a marriage that was advantageous for him and asked 
him if the girl pleased him. "Y ou look only at the 
outside," he said to them. "What I wish to love 
cannot be seen with the eyes. Has she good thoughts 
regarding Heaven? Is she disposed to die in the 
Faith? Does her heart belong to God? Will she 
cherish her salvation? If so, [119] I love her; if not, 
she will never be anything to me." 
A Christian Captain, one of the leading men of the 
village of St. Jean Baptiste, who had spoken publicly 
in favor of a dream of one of his friends, was at once 
touched to the heart. "I have offended God," he 
said to the Father; "my sin deserves to be punished; 


32 

LES RELA TI01VS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

au Pere, mon peché merite punition; & comme il a 
efié public ne crains point de m'ordonner vne peni- 
tence publique, parle & ie t'obeïray. Le Pere luy 
ordonne d'efire huiét iours fans fe trouuer à aucun 
fefiin. C'efioit Ie condamner à vn ieufne plus efiroit 
qu'au pain & à l'eau, & l'obliger plus de dix fois Ie 
iour de refpondre à tous les Infideles, qu'il faifoit 
penitence de fon peché. Quelquefois il efioit plus 
de trois heures aprés midy auant qu'il eufi rompu 
fon ieufne, à caufe que les fefiins qui fe faifoient en 
fa pro pre cabane empefchoient Ie repas ordinaire. 
Le Pere s'en efiant apperceu voulut luy relafcher fa 
penitence. Mon frere, luy repartit ce Capitaine, tu 
n'as pas affez de courage, tu te défies trop de nous 
autres; non, non, ne mol1is point. Ie prens plaifir à 
me punir [120] de mon peché, il faut acheuer iuf- 
qu'au bout: Quiconque offenfe Dieu efi trop heureux 
d'en efire quitte à fi bon marché. 
Ie penfois finir ce Chapitre par la conuerfion d'vn 
magicien Ie plus fameux qui foit en ces païs. La 
crainte de l'Enfer auoit ce femble touché fon cæur: 
defia il auoit ietté publiquement dedans Ie feu fes 
charaéteres, il auoit protefié en la pre fence mefme 
des Infideles, que iamais les Demons n'auroient plus 
de part auec luy, que Dieu feul meritoit d'efire adoré 
de to us les hommes, que les Diables en effet ne con- 
fpirent qu'à nofire mal-heur. Mais auant qu'il eufi 
receu Ie fainét Baptefme, il efi retourné à fon vomif- 
fement; & la honte qu'il a maintenant d'auoir décre- 
dité fon art, fait qu'il blafpheme contre Dieu plus 
horriblement que iamais, qu'il fe donne à tous les 
Demons: quoy que de fois à autres fa confcience 
l'ayt preffé de venir nous demander pardon. Ie prie 


] 642- 4,') J 

RELA TION OF IÓ43-44 

33 

and, as it was a public one, fear not to order me to 
do penance publicly. Speak, and I will obey thee." 
The Father ordered him to abstain from going to any 
feast for a period of eight days. This meant con- 
demning him to a fast stricter than if on bread and 
water, and compelled him, more than ten times a day, 
to reply to all the Infidels that he was doing penance 
for his sins. Sometimes it was past three in the 
afternoon before he broke his fast, because the feasts 
that were given in his own cabin prevented him from 
taking his usual repast. When the Father perceived 
this, he wished to relax his penance. ' , My brother, " 
replied the Captain to him, "thou hast not enough 
courage; thou mistrustest us too much. No, no, do 
not waver. I take pleasure in punishing myself 
[120] for my sin; I must serve my penance to the 
end. Whosoever offends God is only too happy to 
be so easily forgiven." 
I thought that I would conclude this Chapter with 
the conversion of a magician, the most famous one 
in this country. The fear of Hell seemed to have 
touched his heart. He had already publicly thrown 
his charms into the fire; he had protested, in the 
presence even of the Infidels, that the Demons would 
never have anything to do with him, that God alone 
deserved to be loved by all men, and that, in truth, 
the Devils conspired together only for our misfor- 
tune. But, before he received holy Baptism, he 
returned to his vomit; and the shame that he now 
feels for having cast discredit on his art makes him 
blaspheme against God more horribly than ever, and 
give himself up to all the Demons,- although from 
time to time his conscience has urged him to come 
to us and ask pardon. I pray our Lord that he may 


34 

LES RELA TIOl\?S DES .I.f;SUITES 

[VOL. 27 

nofire Seigneur quïl en tire fa gloire: mais pour 
dire Ia verité, il femble que ce malheureux foit du 
nombre des reprouuez; en vn mot il voudroit [12 I] 
bien efire tout à Dieu dans Ie Ciel, & tout au Diable 
fur Ia terre. 


1642-4.")] 

RELA TION OF IÓ43-44 

35 

derive his own glory therefrom; but, to tell the 
truth, it seems that this unfortunate man is num- 
bered among the reprobates. In a word, he would 
wish [12 r] to belong entirely to God in Heaven, and 
entirely to the Devil on earth. 


36 

LES RELA TI01VS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE LA MISSION DE SAINTE ELIZABETH AUX ALGON- 
QUINS ATONTRATARONNONS. 

L ES Iroquois qui fe font craindre fur Ie grand 
fieuue de S. Laurent, & qui tous les hyuers 
depuis quelques années ont efié dans ces vafies 
forefis, à la chaffe des hommes, ont fait quitter aux 
Algonquins qui habitoient les cofies de ce fieuue, 
non feulement leur chaffe, mais auffi leur païs, & les 
ont reduit cet hyuer à fe ranger icy proche de nos 
Hurons, pour y viure plus en affeurance; fi bien que 
s'efiant trouué vne bourgade entiere de ces pauures 
Nations errantes & fugitiues auprés du bourg de 
fainét lean Baptifie, nous nous fommes veus obligez 
de leur donner quelque affifiance, & de ioindre pour 
cet effet au P. Antoine Daniel qui auoit foin de la 
Miffion Huronne, dont i'ay par1é dans Ie Chapitre 
precedent, Ie P. René Menard, [122] qui ayant fuffi- 
famment l'vfage de l'vne & l'autre langue, auoit en 
mefme temps Ie foin de cette Miffion Algonquine, à 
laquelle nous auons donné Ie nom de fainte Eliza- 
beth. 
Dans ce ram as de peuples qui d'ordinaire n'ont 
point d'autre maifon que les bois & les fieuues, il 
s'efi trouué dix ou douze Chrefiiens qui autrefois ont 
efié baptifez aux Trois Riuieres ou à Kebec, & 
d'autres qui iamais n'auoient oüy parler de Dieu. 
Le Pere aprés quelques vifites n' eut pas beaucoup 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r643-44 

37 

CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE MISSION OF SAINTE ELIZABETH AMONG THE 
ATONTRATARONNON ALGONQUINS. 

T HE Iroquois, who make themselves dreaded on 
the great river St. Lawrence and who every 
winter for some years past have been hunting 
men in these vast forests, have compelled the Algon- 
quins who dwelt on the banks of the river to aban- 
don not only their hunting grounds, but also their 
country, and have reduced them this winter to come 
here near our Hurons, in order to live more in safe- 
ty,-so much so, that a whole village of these poor 
wandering and fugitive Tribes came near the village 
of saint Jean Baptiste. We were obliged to give 
them some assistance, and for that purpose to asso- 
ciate with Father Antoine Daniel- who had charge 
of the Huron Mission of which I have spoken in the 
preceding Chapter-Father René Menard,[122] who, 
having a sufficient knowledge of both languages, 
had, at the same time, charge of this Algonquin Mis- 
sion, to which we have given the name of sainte 
Elizabeth. 
Amid this gathering of people-who, as a rule, 
have no other abode than the woods and the rivers- 
there were ten or twelve Christians who had for- 
merly been baptized at Three Rivers or at Kebec, 
and others who had never heard of God. 
The Father had not much trouble in winning the 
hearts of all after a few visits. "Take courage," 


38 

LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

de peine à leur gagner à tous Ie cæur. Prens cou- 
rage, luy difoiet-ils, tu dis vray qu'il eft raifonnable 
d'auoir recours à ce grand Maiftre de nos vies: en- 
feigne nous ce qu'il faut dire pour qu'il entende nos 
prieres; ne te laffe point de parler, & iamais nous ne 
ferons las de t'entendre, quoy que nous n'ayõs pas 
tant d'efprit, ne laiffe pas d'auoir pitié de nous. 
AjJlz"cìz'o dat intellec?um, la mifere a ce femble ouuert 
leur efprit; & fi la crainte des Iroquois ne rendoit la 
demeure proche des François redoutable, ie croy 
qu'en peu d'années on en feroit [123J vn peuple tout 
Chreftien. Au moins deferent-ils beaucoup à nos 
paroles, & la plufpart fe rendent fouples à la raifon. 
Le Pere ayant appris qu'vn Infidele auoit deux 
femmes, dont l'vne eftoit Chreftienne, parle à cet 
homme de la griefueté de fa faute, de la grandeur de 
Dieu qu'il offenfoit, & des peines d'enfer qui luy 
eftoient inéuitables s'il continuoit dans ce peché. 
Mon frere, repart l'Infidele, ie reconnois la verité de 
ce que tu m'enfeigne, mais ie ne me fens pas encore 
affez fort pour obeïr entierement à Dieu: ie luy 
obeïray en partie, & dés maintenant ie renonce à 
l'vne de ces femmes, & ne veut retenir que celIe qui 
croit en Dieu, prie Ie qu'il ait pitié de moy. 
Vne mere Infidele cõmandoit à fa fille de fe trou- 
uer à vn feftin fuperftitieux, OÙ les ceremonies 
demandent qu'on n 'y affifte que tout nud. Le P. 
Menard ayant entendu ce commandement impudique 
repred & la mere & la fille. Nos Capitaines nous Ie 
commandent, repliquent-elIes: Oüy mais Dieu Ie de- 
fend, & ce feu qui bruf1e à iamais les pecheurs f era 
vôtre [124J fupplice, fi vous refufez de luy obeïr. A 
ce mot ces femmes demeurent fans replique, & 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r643-44 

39 

they said to him, "thou say est truly that it is right 
to have recourse to that great 11aster of our lives. 
Teach us what we should say, so that he may hear 
our prayers. Do not weary of speaking to us; we 
shall never be tired of listening to thee, although we 
have not much sense; fail not to have pity on us." 
AjJlictio dat illtellectllm - misfortune seems to have 
opened their minds; and, if dread of the Iroquois did 
not make them fear to live near the French, I think 
that in a few years we would make [123] an entirely 
Christian people of them. At least, they pay much 
deference to our words, and most of them are becom- 
ing amenable to reason. 
The Father heard that an Infidel had two wives, 
one of whom was a Christian. He spoke to that man 
of the grievousness of his sin; of the greatness of 
God, whom he offended; and of the pains of hell, 
that would inevitably be his fate if he continued in 
that sin. "11y brother," replied the Infidel, "I 
acknowledge the truth of what thou teachest me; 
but I do not yet feel strong enough to obey God 
completely. I will obey him partly; and from this 
moment I give up one of my wives, and will keep 
only her who believes in God. Pray him to have pity 
on me." 
An Infidel mother commanded her daughter to be 
present at a superstitious feast, at which the ceremo- 
nial required that they should attend quite naked. 
When Father Menard heard of this shameless order, 
he reproved the mother and the daughter. "Our 
Captains command it," they replied. ' , Yes, but 
God forbids it; and the fire that burns sinners for- 
ever shall be your [124] punishment if you refuse to 
obey him." To these words, the women made no 


40 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

n' oferent pas mefme fortir de leur cabane pour aller 
voir cette ceremonie, ayant appris que Dieu y feroit 
offenfé. 
Vne femme lnfidele eítant tombée griefuement 
malade, on Iuy dit que nous auions recours à Dieu en 
nos affiiétions, comme à celu y qui nous en pouuoit 
deliurer, qu'elle Ie priaít de tout fon cæur, & que 
peut eítre il auroit pitié d'elle. Le mefme Pere qui 
l'auoit enfeignée paffant par là deux iours aprés, & 
s'eftonnant de Ia veoir trauailler auffi fortemêt que 
les autres; cette femme l'appelle, luy dit qu'il n'eft 
pas vn menteur, que vrayement Dieu eít tout puif- 
fant, & que l'ayant prié, en mefme temps elle s'eft 
veuë guerie. Puis luy parlant plus en fecret, elle 
adiouíte que fon efprit efioit en peine, que Ie mef- 
chant Manitou luy efioit apparu la nuiét, l'auoit me- 
nacée de la mort fi elle ne luy faifoit vn facrifice, & 
que publiquement elle n'aduoüaít tenir de luy la vie. 
Tu fçais, luy repartit Ie Pere, que Dieu feul t'a 
guery, n'obeis [125] pas à ce Demon qui cherche les 
moyens de te perdre pour vn iamais. N on, non, 
replique cette femme, ie veux honorer Dieu, ie Ie 
prieray toute ma vie, & iamais ie ne m'oublieray de 
luy. EUe eít tres-bien difpofée au Baptefme, & toute 
fa famille n'efi pas ef10ignée du Royaume de Dieu. 
D'aucuns fuiuoient Ie Pere de cabane en cabane, 
ne pouuans fe laffer de l'entendre parler de Dieu: 
d'autres Ie venoient trouuer reglément tous les foirs 
& matins, quelque orage & tempefie qu'il yeuít au 
plus fort de l'hyuer, quoy que ces cabanes Algon- 
quines fuffent éloignées du bourg de S. lean Baptifie 
vn quart de lieuë de tres-mauuais chemin; & c'efioit 
vne confolation à nos Peres de voir en leur Chapelle 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1643-44 

41 

answer; and they did not even venture to go out of 
their cabin to witness the ceremony, when they heard 
that God would be offended by it. 
An Infidel woman fell grievously ill. She was 
told that we had recourse to God in our afflictions as 
to one who could deliver us from them; that she 
should pray to him with all her heart, and that per- 
haps he would have pity on her. The same Father 
who had taught her passed that way, two days after, 
and was surprised to see her working as hard as the 
others. The woman called him, and told him that 
he was not a liar; that, in truth, God is all-powerful; 
that she had prayed to him, and at the same time she 
was cured. Then, speaking more privately to him, 
she added that her mind was in trouble,- that the 
wicked Manitou had appeared to her during the night, 
and had threatened her with death if she did not offer 
a sacrifice to him, and publicly avow that she owed 
her life to him. "Thou knowest," said the Father 
to her, "that God alone has cured thee; obey [I2SJ 
not that Demon who seeks the means of damning 
thee forever." "N 0, no," replied the woman, "I 
wish to honor God; I will pray to him all my life, 
and I will never forget him." She is very well 
disposed to Baptism, and all of her family are not far 
from the Kingdom of God. 
Some followed the Father from cabin to cabin, 
being never weary of hearing him speak of God. 
Others went regularly to see him, every night and 
every morning, no matter how stormy or tempes- 
tuous the weather in the depth of winter. Although 
these Algonquin cabins were distant from the village 
of St. Jean Baptiste a quarter of a league, and the 
road was very bad, it was consoling to our Fathers 


42 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Dieu adoré en mefme temps en ces deux langues 
differentes, Huronne & Algonquine, & par des 
peuples qui n'auoient rien de commun que Ia Foy. 
La conduite de Dieu s'efi particulierement fait pa- 
roiftre fur quelques-vns qui ont receu Ie fainét Bap- 
tefme, & entre autres fur vn guerrier qui receut dans 
ces [126] eaux íacrées Ie nom d'Antoine. Cet homme 
s'efi échapé plus de huit fois des mains de l'ennemy, 
& depuis fon enfance fa vie n'a efié qu'vne fuite de 
combats & d'auantures qui fuccedoient les vns aux 
autres. Encore depuis peu, i1 n'y a pas fix mois, 
qu'eftant entre les mains des Iroquois qui auoient 
defia commencé d'exercer deffus luy leur rage, il trou- 
ua Ie moyen de couper fes liens, & fe fauuer tout 
nud dans Ie plus profond de la nuit, faifant plus de 
cent lieuës dans des routes égarées, n' ayant pour 
toute nourriture que les herbes & les racines qu'il 
trouuoit dans Ie milieu des bois. Dés lors, dit-il, ie 
remerciay Dieu fans Ie connoifire, car iamais ie 
n'auois receu d'infiruétion: feulement il y a quelques 
années qu'vn de mes camarades me dit, qu'il y auoit 
vn grand Maifire de tout ce monde qu'il falloit ado- 
rer. Ie m'efiois oublié de luy, mais lors que ie me 
vis miferable, il fut tout mon refuge, i'attendois de 
Iuy du fecours, & me voyant échapé des terreurs de 
la mort, & des feux qui m' efioiêt preparez, ie recon- 
nus qu'à luy feul i'efiois obligé de ma vie. Le Pere 
rayant [127] entendu parler de la forte quafi en 
mefme temps qu'il arriua; Mais fçais-tu, luy dit-il, 
les defIeins de Dieu deff us toy. Ce n' eft pas affez 
que tu Ie reconnoiffe, mais il veut que tu l'aime, & 
que Iuy ayant obey icy bas fur la terre tu fois heu- 
reux à iamais dans Ie Ciel. Ces paroles entrerent 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1643-44 

43 

to see God worshiped in their Chapel at the same 
time in two different languages, the Huron and the 
Algonquin, and by nations who had nothing in 
common but the Faith. 
The guidance of God has manifested itself particu- 
larly in the case of some who have been granted 
holy Baptism, and, among others, a warrior who 
received in those [126] sacred waters the name of 
Antoine. This man had escaped more than eight 
times from the hands of the enemy; and, ever since 
his birth, his life has been but one series of combats 
and adventures that succeeded one another. Quite 
recently, not TII0re than six nlonths ago, while in the 
hands of the Iroquois, who had already commenced 
to vent their fury on him, he found means to cut his 
bonds and to flee,- quite naked, in the dead of 
night,-making his way for over a hundred leagues 
by devious paths, with no other food than the grasses 
and roots that he found in the woods. "From that 
moment," he said, " I thanked God, without know- 
ing him, for I had never received any instruction,- 
onl y, some years ago, one of my comrades told me 
that there was a great Master of the whole world, who 
must be adored. I had forgotten about him; but, 
when I saw myself so wretched, he was all my ref- 
uge. I looked to him for help; and, when I found 
that I had escaped the terrors of death and of the 
fires prepared for me, I recognized that to him alone 
did I owe my life." When the Father [127] heard 
him speak in that manner, almost as soon as he ar- 
rived, he said to him, " But knowest thou the designs 
that God has for thee? It is not enough that thou 
shouldst acknowledge him; he also wishes thee to 
love him, that, after obeying him here on earth, 


44 

LES RELA TIO.XS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

fi auant dans l'ame de ce pauure captif fi fouuent 
échapé de la mort, que dés lors i1 prit feu, fe refolut 
d'efire Chrefiien, & du depuis quelque refifiãce qu'il 
ait trouué, quelques difficultez qui fe foient prefen- 
tées, iamais i1 ne s'efi démenty de fes faintes refolu- 
tions. 
Vn autre quafi de mefme aage qui luy tint compa- 
gnie au Baptefme, prit Ie nom de René. Ce ieune 
homme ne fut pas plufiofi retourné de la chaffe qu'il 
vint trouuer Ie Pere. Efface moy ie te prie mes 
pechez, luy dit-il, nous fommes dans de continuels 
dangers de nos vies, où irois-ie n'efiant pas baptifé? 
ie crains plus l'enfer que la mort, ie fuis tout refolu 
de feruir Dieu; & quoy qu'il arriue iamais ie ne 
l'offenferay: i1 voit la fincerité de mon cæur, & ie 
croy qu'il efi content de moy, ne me fois pas plus 
rigoureux [128] que luy. En effet fes adions n'ont 
point démenty fes paroles, & toûiours il s'efi com- 
porté en Chrefiien mefme auant que de l' efire. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r643-44 

45 

thou shouldst be happy forever in Heaven." These 
words entered so deeply into the soul of the poor 
captive, who had so often escaped from death, that 
he at once ardently resolved to be a Christian. And 
ever since, no matter what opposition he may have 
encountered, whatever difficulties have arisen, he 
has "never belied his holy resolutions. 
Another of about the same age, who kept him 
com pany at Baptism, took the name of René. That 
young man had no sooner returned from hunting 
than he went to the Father. "\Vipe away my sins, 
I beg of thee, II he said. "Weare in continual dan- 
ger of our lives. \Vhere would I go, if I were not 
baptized! I dread hell more than death. I am quite 
resolved to serve God, and, whatever may happen, I 
will not offend him. He perceives the sincerity of 
my heart, and I think that he is satisfied with me. 
Be not more rigorous [128] than he." Indeed, his 
actions have not belied his words; and he has always 
behaved as a Christian, even before becoming one. 


46 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

CHAPITRE IX. 

DE LA MISSION DU S. ESPRIT AUX ALGONQUINS NIPIS- 
SIRINIENS. 

Q VOY que la langue Huronne ait vne tres-grande 
efienduë & foit commune à quantité de 
peuples que la Foy n' a iamais éclairé; elle fe 
trouue toutefois tellement ramaffée au milieu d'vne 
infinité de Nations répanduës çà & là à l'Orient, à 
rOccident, au Septentrion, au Midy, qui toutes ont 
l'vfage de la langue Algonquine, qu'i1 femble que 
les peuples de la langue Huronne ne foient quafi que 
comme au centre d'vne vafie circonference remplie 
de peuples Algonquins. Et ainfi nofire peine n' eft 
pas de trouuer icy de l'employ, mais plûtofi dans Ie 
peu d'ouuriers que nous fommes, de nous refoudre 
en queUe part nous deuons plufiofi appliquer nos 
trauaux. 
[129] Finiffant la Relation de ran paffé, ie dy que 
le P. Claude Piiart & Ie P. René Menard s'efioient 
depuis peu de iours embarquez auec les Nipiffiriniens 
pour continuer de les infiruire en leur pais, éloigné 
du lieu où nous fommes enuiron de foixante & dix 
lieuës. Ils y ont demeuré depuis Ie mois d' Auril 
iufqu'au mois de Septembre; ou pour mieux dire ils 
ont fuiuy tout ce temps-là ces peuples fans demeure, 
dans les bois, dans les fleuues, dans les rochers & 
dans les lacs, n'ayans pour abry qu'vne efcorce, pour 
paué qu'vne terre humide; ou la pente de quelque 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1643-44 

47 

CHAPTER IX. 

OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST AMONG THE 
NIPISSIRI
IEN ALGONQUINS. 

A LTHOUGH the Huron language is very widely 
spoken and is common to a number of peoples 
whom Faith has never enlightened, neverthe- 
less it is so concentrated in the midst of a multitude 
of Tribes,-scattered here and there, to the East, to 
the West, to the North, and to the South,- who all 
speak the Algonquin 
anguage, that the tribes of the 
Huron tongue almost seem to be only at the center, 
as it were, of a vast circumference filled with Algon- 
quin tribes. Consequently, our trouble is not to find 
employment here, but rather, considering our small 
number of laborers, in deciding where it were better 
that we should apply our labor. 
[ 12 9J In concluding the Relation of last year, I 
said that Father Claude Pijart and Father René 
Menard had embarked a few days before with the 
Nipissiriniens, in order to continue instructing them 
in their own country, which is distant about seventy 
leagues from the place where we are. They remained 
there from the month of April to the month of 
September; or, rather, during all that time they fol- 
lowed those homeless people in the woods and on the 
rivers, over the rocks and across the lakes,-having 
for shelter but a bark hut; for flooring, but the damp 
earth or the slope of some uneven rock, which served 


48 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

rocher inégal, qui fert & de table & de fiege & de 
liét, de chambre & de cuifine, de caue & de grenier, 
de Chapelle & de tout. En vn mot on y mene vne 
vie où on apprend bien toft que la Nature fe contente 
de peu: & s'il faut quitter fa maifon en quelque lieu 
qu'on aille, il fe trouue qu'on n'a rien perdu, & qu'en 
moins d'vne demie heure on s'efi bafiy vn logement 
entier. 
Les Peres commencerent leur infiruétion par les 
principaux Capitaines, fed 1lon /IOS elegit Dominus; 
mais Dieu ne [130J commence pas fes ouurages par 
ce qui éc1ate Ie plus, 11 faut qu'vne pauure vieille 
aueugle l'emporte, & reçoiue toute la premiere les 
benediétions qui decoulent du Ciel. La grace s'em- 
para de fon cæur & changea bien toft la nature: c' e- 
fioit vn efprit orgueilleux & plein de raillerie, qui fe 
mocquoit des chofes de la Foy, Dieu ne l'eut pas fi 
toft touchée qu'elle ne fuft plus ce qu'elle efioit; fes 
paroles ne font que douceur, elle refpeéte nos my- 
fieres, elle fouhaite Ie Bapteíme; enfin l'ayant receu, 
& íe voyant dans Ie bon-heur des enfans de Dieu, 
elle ne fonge qu'au Ciel. C'efioit vn plaifir, difent 
nos Peres, de Ia voir Ie iour qu' elle venoit pour eftre 
baptifée, par vn temps afIez rude, par vn chemin de 
roches où elle s'égaroit à caufe de fon aueuglemêt, 
& où fans doute elle eufi perdu courage, fi fa ferueur 
ne luy euft rendu ces peines agreables, & ces égare- 
mens pleins d' amour. 
Vne femme infidele en trauail d'enfant efioit de- 
puis deux iours dans Ie defefpoir de Ia vie, Les 
Medecins ou plûtofi les Sorciers du païs ayans épuiíé 
tout [131J leur art, & iugeans que la mere & l'enfant 
n'en pourroient refchaper, vinrent trouuer nos Peres, 


1642 - 45] 

RELA T10N OF I643-44 

49 

as table, seat, bed, room, kitchen, cellar, garret, 
Chapel, and all. In a word, one leads there a life in 
which one soon learns that Nature is content with 
little; and, if one has to abandon his house wherever 
he goes, he finds that he has lost nothing, and in 
less than half an hour he has erected a complete 
lodging. 
The Fathers commenced their instruction with 
the principal Captains; sed non Iws elegit DomÙlus, but 
God does not [130] commence his works by that which 
makes most display. It was necessary that a poor 
old blind woman should be preferred and be the first 
to receive the blessings that flow from Heaven. 
Grace took possession of her heart, and soon changed 
her nature; she had a proud and mocking spirit, 
which scoffed at the things of the Faith. No sooner 
had God touched her, than she was no longer what 
she had been. Her words were all gentleness; she 
respected our mysteries; she desired Baptism. Final- 
ly, when she had received it, and found herself in 
the happy condition of the children of God, she 
thought only of Heaven. "It was a pleasure," our 
Fathers say, " to see her on the day when she came 
to be baptized,-in rather severe weather, over a 
rocky road where she lost her way, owing to her 
blindness; and where, no doubt, she would have lost 
courage if her fervor had not made such difficulties 
agreeable to her, and made of her wanderings a 
means of showing her love." 
An infidel woman, in the pains of childbirth, was 
for two days in despair of her life. The Medicine 
men, or rather the Sorcerers of the country, had 
exhausted [131] their arts; and, thinking that the 
!nother and child could not escape death, they sought 


50 

LES RELATIONS DES.lÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

Eft-it done vray, leur dirent-ils, que celuy que vous 
honorez foit plus puiffant que nos Demons? qu'il 
fafIe paroiftre fon pouuoir, priez-le qu'il refufcite 
cette femme qui a perdu Ie iugement, & va perdre la 
vie; au moins qu'elle fe deliure de fon fruiét auant 
que de mourir. S'il entend vos prieres vous difpofe- 
rez de I'enfant, vous Ie pourrez inftruire, vous Iuy 
dõnerez Ie Baptefme, & pas vn ne vous refiftera. 
Nos Peres fe tranfportent où eftoit la malade, la 
recommandent à Dieu & aux prieres de S. Ignace. 
Ce grand Sainét fut bien toft exaucé; fur l'heure 
mefme cette femme mourante fe deliure tres-heu- 
reufement de fon fruiét, l' enfant fe trouue plein de 
vie, la mere reuient en fanté, tous en donnent Ia 
gloire à Dieu, & reconnoifIent que c'eft luy qui feul 
merite d'eftre adoré. 
II n'eft pas difficile de faire que ces peupIes ayent 
recours à Dieu dans leurs neceffitez; & fi les Hereti- 
ques qui veulent que la Foy fans les æuures nous 
iuftifie, [132J venoient en ces païs enfeigner leur 
erreur, ils trouueroient nos fauuages de tres-bon 
accord auec eux: car pourueu qu' on les laiffe viure en 
barbares, ils fe feront bien toft Chreftiens. Mais 
quand nous leur difons que pour honorer Dieu & 
eftre heureux au Ciel, il faut abandonner Ie vice, 
viure en homme & non pas en befte, fonger plus à 
nos ames qui font immortelles qu'à vn corps qui pour- 
rira aprés la mort; enfin qu'il faut les bonnes æuures 
auec la Foy, c'eft ce qui leur femble fafcheux, ce qui 
Ies efpouuante & les rebute de la fainteté de nos 
myfteres, & cela feul nous les rend ennemis. 
Nos Peres l'efprouuerent bien toft au milieu de ce 
peuple errant, car lors qu'il fallut en venir au point, 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1643-44 

51 

our Fathers: " Is it true," they said to them, " that 
he whom you honor is more powerful than our 
Demons? Let him manifest his power. Entreat him 
to bring back to life this woman, who has lost the 
use of her senses, and is about to lose her life,-at 
least, that she may be delivered of her child before 
she dies. If he grant your prayers, you shall dis- 
pose of the child; you may instruct it and administer 
Baptism to it, and no one will oppose you." Our 
Fathers went to the place where the sick woman was, 
and recommended her to God and to the prayers 
of St. Ignatius. That great Saint was not long 
unheard. At that very hour, the dying woman was 
happily delivered of her child, who was fun of life. 
The mother's health returned; all gave glory to God, 
and acknowledged that it was he alone who was 
worthy of being adored. 
It is not difficult to induce these people to have 
recourse to God in their necessities; and if the Here- 
tics, who claim that Faith without works can justify, 
[132J were to come to this country to teach their 
error, they would find our savages quite in accord 
with them. For, if they were allowed to live as 
barbarians, they would soon become Christians. But, 
w hen we tell them that, in order to honor God and 
to be happy in Heaven, they must abandon vice; live 
as men, and not as beasts; think more of their souls, 
that are immortal, than of a body that will rot after 
death; finally, that with Faith good works are 
needed,-that is what seems difficult to them, what 
frightens and repels them from the holiness of our 
mysteries; and that alone makes them hostile to us. 
Our Fathers soon experienced this, amid this nomad 
people. For, when it was necessary to come to the 


-52 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

décrediter Ie vice, reprendre ceux qui auoient deux 
femmes, defendre Ie recours aux fuperftitions diabo- 
liques, ce fut lors qu'ils trouuerent plus de refifiance, 
qu'il y eut à combatre plus fortement; que les fup- 
pofts du Diable & ceux qui paffent icy pour Magi- 
ciens fe rendirent plus infolens à blafphemer contre 
la Foy, à vfer de menaces, & faire quelque chofe de 
plus. [133J Quiconque vienne icy doit apporter fon 
ame entre fes mains, & attendre la mort peut efire 
autant de la rage d'vn Algonquin ou d'vn Huron, 
que d'vn ennemy Iroquois. Vn barbare qui ne craint 
aucune iufUce ny de Dieu ny des hommes, a bien tofi 
fait vn mauuais coup. 
Vn de ces fuppofts de Satan s'efiant vn iour mis 
en colere contre vn des Peres, fe ietta furieufement 
fur luy, & l'ayant terraffé efioit aprés pour l'efiran. 
gler. Le Pere appellant Dieu à fon fecours fut enten- 
du de quelqu'vn qui de bon-heur n'efioit pas eíloigné, 
& qui ayant horreur d'vne méchanceté fi noire fe 
ietta fur cet homme, Iuy arracha la proye des mains, 
& enfin errefta fon crime. 
Ces refifiances n'empefchoient pas que quelques- 
vns, mefme des principaux, ne goufiaffent Ies chofes 
de Dieu, ne fe fiffent affiduement infiruire, & n' euffent 
recours aux prieres qu'ils faifoient dans vne Cha- 
pelle, qui n'auoit rien de riche qu'vn Autel où les 
Anges adoroient tous les iours ce qu'ils voyent de 
plus augufte dans Ie Ciel. Mais nos Peres ne voyans 
pas encore en tout cela rien d' affez fort [134 J pour les 
fondemens d'vne Eglife, qui doiuent efire folides, fi 
on veut baftir quelque chofe qui foit de durée; & 
ayans appris que ces peuples deuoient hyuerner icy 
dans Ies Hurons, fe refolurent de ne baptifer rien 


1642 -45] 

RELA 1 IOJ.V OF I64J-44 

53 

point,-to cast discredit on vice, to reprove those who 
had two wives, to forbid recourse to diabolical super- 
stitions,- then they encountered more opposition, 
and had to contend more arduously; then the instru- 
ments of the Devil, and those who pass here for 
Magicians, became more insolent in blaspheming 
against the Faith, in making use of threats, and in 
doing something more. [I 33J "\Vhoever comes here 
must carry his life in his hands, and expect death,- 
perhaps as much from the fury of an Algonquin or 
of a Huron as of an Iroquois foe. A barbarian, who 
dreads the justice neither of God nor of man, will 
very readily commit a crime. 
One of these instruments of Satan one day became 
angry with one of the Fathers, rushed furiously on 
him, threw him down, and tried to strangle him. 
The Father called on God to succor him, and was 
heard by some one who fortunately was not far away, 
and who, having a horror of so black a crime, threw 
himself on the man, tore his victim from his hands, 
and prevented this crime. 
These acts of opposition did not hinder some, even 
among the principal persons, from relishing matters 
pertaining to God. They assiduously obtained 
instruction and attended the prayers said in a Chapel 
which had nothing rich in it but an Altar whereon 
the Angels adored every day the most august object 
of their vision in Heaven. But our Fathers did not 
see, as yet, in all this anything sufficient [134J for 
the foundations of a Church, which must be solid, if 
we wish to build anything lasting on them; and, 
when they heard that these tribes were to winter 
here in the Huron country, they resolved to baptize 
only those whom they saw in danger of death, and 


-54 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

que ceux qu'ils voyoièt en danger de mort, & diffe- 
rerent à efprouuer les autres pendant tout Ie cours 
de l'hyuer. 
En effet fur la fin de Decembre non feulement les 
Nipiffiriniens, mais auffi plufieurs autres de ces Na- 
tions errantes & de mefme langue Algonquine qui 
habitent fur les riuages de nofire mer douce, arri- 
uerent quafi à nos portes, drefIerent leurs cabanes 
afIez proches de nous: & Ie Pere Claude Piiart qui 
feul alors nous reftoit de la langue Algonquine 
continua de les infiruire. 
Le premier qui receut Ie Baptefme en eftat de 
pleine fanté, fut vn Capitaine de guerre nommé Ali- 
moueskan. C' efioit vn naturel fougueux & fuperbe, 
principalement en noftre endroit: La Foy en a fait 
vn agneau & l'a rendu méconnoifIable. II prit Ie 
nom d'Euftache lors qu'il fe fit Chreftien, & du de- 
puis i1 a tourné [135] tellement fon courage à fe vain- 
cre foy mefme, à méprifer les railleries des Infideles, 
à refifter à leurs attaques, que quelques efforts 
qu'ayent apporté les plus ennemis de la Foy pour 
l'engager à quelque faute, iamais ils n'ont pû rien 
gagner fur luy. Vn iour qu'on l'entraifnoit par force 
en vn lieu dont fa feule Foy luy pouuoit donner de 
l'horreur; voyãt qu'il n'euft pû vaincre en comba- 
tant, il fe deliura par la fuite des mains de ceux qui 
vouloient Ie perdre en l'aimant. Souuent il a quitté 
les compagnies pour ce fuiet; il a forty brufquement 
des fefiins au milieu des ceremonies, quoy que par- 
my ces peuples cela foit iugé pour vn crime. Mais, 
difoit-il, i' aime mieux eftre criminel aux yeux de 
tous les hõmes qu'aux yeux de Dieu. II prie publi- 
.quement foir & matin en fa cabane, & ne rougit en 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r643-44 

55 

to put off the others for a probation during the whole 
course of the winter. 
Indeed, at the end of December, not only the 
Nipissiriniens but also several others of these nomad 
Tribes, and of the same Algonquin language, who 
dwell on the shores of our fresh-water sea, came 
almost to our doors. They set up their cabins quite 
near us; and Father Claude Pijart, who was the only 
one left us able to speak the Algonquin tongue, 
continued to instruct them. 
The first who received Baptism while in full health 
was a war Captain, named Alimoueskan. He was 
of an impetuous and arrogant character, especially 
toward us. Faith has made a lamb of him, and has 
changed him beyond recognition. He took the name 
of Eustache when he became a Christian; and since 
then he has so exerted [135J his courage in conquer- 
ing himself, in scorning the banter of the Infidels, 
and in repelling their attacks, that, whatever efforts 
the enemies of the Faith have made to induce him to 
commit sin, they have never been able to overcome 
him. One day, while he was being dragged by 
force to a place for which his Faith alone could 
inspire him with horror, when he saw that he could 
not win by fighting, he escaped by flight from the 
hands of those who sought to effect his ruin through 
love. He has often left the company of people on 
that account. He has abruptly come away from 
feasts in the midst of the ceremonies, although that 
is considered an offense among these peoples. 
cc But," he said, cc I prefer to be a criminal in the 
eyes of all men than in the sight of God." He prays 
publicly, night and morning, in his cabin, and is 
never ashamed to appear a Christian in any place. 


56 

LES RELA TfONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

aucun lieu de paroiftre Chreftien. Comm[ e J quel- 
ques railleurs Iuy reprochoient que fa Foy Ie rendoit 
efc1aue, & que c'eftoit trop s'abaiffer d'obeïr au Pere 
qui l'enfeignoit; Et bien, dit-il, ie ne veux plus luy 
obeïr, mais ie veux obeïr à Dieu duquel il porte Ia 
parole. Ie n'ay plus qu'vne [136J crainte en ce 
monde, difoit-il vne fois, de perdre la grace du Bap- 
tefme, c'eft l'entretien de mes penfées, & Ie defir qui 
regne plus dedans mon cæur. 
Vne faueur du Ciel en attire bien toft vne autre, 
& les graces de Dieu ne s'arreftent pas à vn feut 
Celuy qui fuiuit au Baptefme ce Capitaine, fut ap- 
pellé Eftienne, fon furnom eft Mangouch. C'eft vn 
homme d'vne fort douce humeur, qui auoit defia con- 
noiffance de nos myfteres pour auoir quafi toufiours 
efté Ie Maiftre de nos Peres en la langue: mais il les. 
fçauoit sãs les croire, & ce qu'il auoit entendu du 
Paradis & de l'Enfer iamais n'auoit fait de bréche 
en sõ cæur. 
Quand Dieu anime vne parole elle a mille fois 
plus d'effet que la plus forte Rhetorique des Ariftotes 
& Cicerons. Le P. Charles Raymbaut paffant 
l'Efté dernier par les Nipiffirinies, languiffant d'vne 
maladie dõt il mourut, eftãt arriué à Kebec, ne dit 
que trois lignes à cet hõme qui percerent fon cæur. 
Mangouch, luy dit-il, tu voy bien que ie m'en vay 
mourir, c'eft maintenant que ie ne voudrois pas te 
mentir: ie t'affeure qu'il y a [137] là bas vn feu qui 
bruílera eternellement les mécroyans. Cet homme 
auoit entendu mille fois cette verité, mais alors ilIa 
redouta: il demeura fans repartie, quoy que fan cæur 
fut plus fortement agité que iamais. Sans doute, 
conc1ut-il deílors en foy mefme, cela eft vray, il 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I643-44 

57 

When some scoffers reproached him, saying that 
Faith made him a slave, and that it was lowering 
himself too much to obey the Father who taught 
him. "\V ell," said he, " I do not wish to obey him 
any longer, but I wish to obey God, whose word he 
bears. ' , "I have now but one [1 36J fear in this 
world, " he said on one occasion, "and that is that I 
may lose the grace of Baptism. That is the occupa- 
tion of my thoughts, and the strongest desire of my 
heart. ' , 
One favor from Heaven soon attracts another, and 
the graces of God do not stop at a single person. 
He who followed this Captain in Baptism was named 
Estienne; his surname is IYlangouch. He is a man 
of very sweet temper, who had already some knowl- 
edge of our mysteries through having nearly always 
been the Teacher of the language to our Fathers. 
But he knew them without believing them, and what 
he had heard of Paradise and of Hell had never 
effected a breach in his heart. 
When God gives life to words, they have a thou- 
sand times more effect than the most forcible Rhet- 
oric of an Aristotle or a Cicero. Father Charles 
Raymbaut spent last Summer with the Nipissiriniens, 
and while he was suffering from the disease that 
killed him after his arrival at Kebec, he said but a 
few words to this man, which pierced his heart. 
" Mangouch," he said to him, " thou seest well that 
I am about to die; and at such a moment I would 
not tell thee a lie. I assure thee that there is [137J 
down below a fire that will burn the wicked forever." 
This man had heard this truth a thousand times, but 
this time he feared it. He did not reply, although 
his heart was more strongly agitated than ever. 


58 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

faut que i'obeïffe à Dieu; mais qui dénoüera les liens 
qui me tiennent enchaifné? en vn mot i1 fe fentoit 
trop foible, & voyoit fa mifere fans pouuoir encore 
en f ortir. 
Enfin la grace a acheué fon coup. Cet hyuer lors 
qu'vn certain des plus confiderables de toute la 
Natiõ, que Dieu auoit touché tout Ie premier, perdit 
courage, & refufa fur Ie point d'efire baptifé Ie bon- 
heur des enfans de Dieu, celuy-cy prit fa place, fut 
tout changé en vn moment; i1 brifa tout d'vn coup 
fes chaifnes, rompit Ie næud de fa captiuité, fe mit 
à prier Dieu publiquement, renonça aux fuperfti- 
tions du païs, fe mocqua de tous ceux qui s' oppofe- 
rent à fon deffein; & i1 parut en fa perfonne, qu'en 
vn moment Ie S. Efprit donne plus de force à vn 
cæur dont il veut prendre poffeffion, qu'il n'êtoit [13 8 ] 
rem ply de foibleffe lors qu'il efioit abandonné aux 
lafchetez d'vne nature corrompuë. 
Sa ferueur efi accreuë depuis fon Baptefme; il va 
toufiours montant dans cet efprit de Foy qui anime 
fon zele, qui enflamme fa charité, qui viuifie tout ce 
qu'il fait, & par tout Ie donne à connoifire pour 
excellent Chrefiien. 11 a gagné fa femme à Dieu, & 
luy mefme l'infiruit pour la difpofer à la grace. 
Non, dit-il quelquefois, ie ne fens plus de peine à 
rien, toutes chofes me font faciles, & il m'efi aduis 
que ie marche dans vn chemin tout applany fçachãt 
ce que ie fçay. Quand mefme ceux qui m'ont in- 
firuit fe banderoient tous contre moy, & me chaffe- 
roient de la com pagnie des Chrefiiens i' aurois 
recours à Dieu, i1 feroit ma conduite, & toufiours ie 
viurois dans l'efperance que voulant efire tout à luy, 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I643-44 

59 

"Beyond a doubt," he concluded in his own mind, 
"that is true. I must obey God. But who will 
loosen the chains that keep me captive? " In a word, 
he felt himself too weak, and saw his misfortune 
without being able, as yet, to extricate himself 
from it. 
Finally, grace crowned its work. Last winter, 
when one of the most important personages of the 
Nation, whom God had touched first of all, lost 
courage and, just as he was on the point of being 
baptized, refused the happiness of the children of God, 
this man took his place, and was quite changed in a 
moment. He suddenly broke his chains, and burst 
the bonds of his captivity. He began to pray to God 
publicly; he renounced the superstitions of the coun- 
try; he laughed at those who opposed his designs; 
and it was manifest in his person that in one moment 
the Holy Ghost gives, to a heart of which he wills to 
take possession, strength greater than was [138] the 
depth of its weakness, when abandoned to the base- 
ness of a corrupt nature. 
His fervor has increased since his Baptism, he con- 
tinues to progress in the spirit of Faith, that ani- 
mates his zeal, that inflames his charity, that gives life 
to everything that he does, and makes him known 
everywhere as an excellent Christian. He has won 
his wife over to God, and teaches her himself, to 
prepare her for grace. "N 0, " he sometimes says, 
" I no longer find difficulty in anything. Everything 
is easy to me, and I feel that I walk in a road all 
smoothed, knowing what I know. Even if those who 
have taught me should league themselves against me, 
and should drive me away from the company of the 
Christians, I would have recourse to God. He would 


60 

LES RELA TIOf\lS f)ES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

quoy que fiffent les hommes, luy feul auroit pitié de 
moy. 
Quelques autres perfonnes font efbrãlées de ces ex- 
emples, & donnent efperance de quelque bon fuccez; 
mais nous ne iugeons pas qu'il faille fe preffer auec 
[139] des fauuages, ny leur confier la fainéteté de nos 
myfieres fans quelque forte efpreuue. Cependant 
on ne laiffe pas d'enuoyer toufiours dans Ie Ciel des 
ames innocentes, & quelquefois auec tant de bon- 
heur, qu'il efi aifé de voir que les conduites de la 
diuine prouidence font par tout adorables, & en tout 
lieu remplies d'amour pour fes Efleus. Ce font 
autant d' Aduocats dans Ie Ciel, autant d'interceffeurs 
auprés de Dieu, qui en fin fléchiront fa mifericorde 
& attireront fa benediétion fur ces peuples. 


1642 -45] 

RELA TION OF I643-44 

61 

be my guide, and I would always live in the hope 
that, as I wish to belong entirely to him, he alone 
will have pity on me, no matter what men may do." 
Some other persons are moved by these examples, 
and give us hopes of fair success; but we do not con- 
sider that we should be in haste with [139] savages, 
or confide our holy mysteries to them without some 
thorough test. 11eanwhile, we fail not at least to 
send to Heaven some innocent souls, and occasion- 
ally with so much happiness that it is easy to see 
that the ways of divine providence are adorable every- 
where, and are in all places full of love for his Elect. 
These are so many Advocates in Heaven; so many 
intercessors with God, who in the end will cause his 
mercy to incline, and will call down his blessing on 
these peoples. 


62 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

Lettre de M. DC. XLIV. 

M ON REVEREND PERE, 
I'adreffois l'an paffé la Relation à voftre 
Reuerence, mais les porteurs ayans efté pris 
ou défaits en chemin par les ennemis, les Anges du 
Ciella conduifirent heureufement entre les mains du 
P. Ifaac Iogues, pour luy feruir de quelque confola- 
tion dans fa captiuité, & luy faire voir les fruiéts de 
fes trauaux & fouffrãces Apoftoliques. Nous [14 0 ] 
en enuoyâmes depuis vne fecõde copie, nous ne fça- 
uons encore ce qu'elle eft deuenuë. Nous auons tout 
fuiet de craindre que les mefmes accidens n'arriuent 
cette année; c'eft pourquoy pour effayer toutes les 
voyes poffibles de faire fçauoir à voftre Reuerence de 
nos nouuelles, n' ayãt pû encore receuoir des me- 
moires plus amples de nos Peres, pour vne nouuelle 
Relation, voicy par auance vn mot qui pourra dõner 
quelque idée de l'eftat prefent des affaires de Dieu 
en ce païs. 
La guerre y a continué fes rauages ordinaires pen- 
dant l'Efté: les Iroquois ennemis de ces peuples ont 
bouché tous les paffages & les auenuës de la Riuiere 
qui conduit à Kebec; & de ceux que la neceffité des 
marchandifes de France auoit contraint de fermer 
les yeux à ces dangers, plufieurs y font demeurez; 
les autres pour la plufpart font retournez tout nuds 
ou percez d'arquebufades, aprés auoir efchapé fept 
ou huit fois les mains & la cruauté de ces barbares. 
La defolation n'eftoit pas moindre fur Ie païs; de 


1642-45] 

RELA TJON OF I643-44 

63 

Letter of M. DC. X LI V. 

M y REVEREND FATHER, 
Last year, I sent the Relation to your Rev- 
erence; but when the bearers were captured 
or killed on the way by the enemies, the Angels 
of Heaven happily made it fall into the hands of 
Father Isaac J ogues, to serve him as some consolation 
in his captivity, and to show him the fruits of his 
Apostolic labors and sufferings. We [140J afterward 
sent a second copy, but we do not know what became 
of it. vVe have every reason to fear that the same 
accidents will happen this year. Therefore, in order 
to attempt every possible means of giving your Rev- 
erence some news of us, since I have not received 
more ample notes from our Fathers for a new Rela- 
tion, I now send a few words in advance, to give you 
some idea of the present state of the affairs of God 
in this country. 
War continued its usual ravages during the Sum- 
mer. The Iroquois, who are the enemies of these 
tribes, have closed all the passages and avenues of 
the River that leads to Kebec; and of those whom 
the necessity of obtaining goods from France had 
compelled to close their eyes to these dangers, many 
have fallen therein. 1vlost of the others have come 
back entirely naked, or pierced with arquebus balls, 
after having escaped seven or eight times from the 
hands and the cruel ties of those barbarians. 
There was no less desolation throughout the 


64 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

pauures femmes fe font trouuées prefque tous les 
iours affommées [141] dans leurs champs; les bourgs 
dans les allarmes continuelles, & toutes les troupes 
qui s'eftoient leuées en bon nombre pour aller don- 
ner la chaffe à l'ennemy fur les frontieres, ont efté 
défaites & mifes en déroute, les captifs emmenez à 
centaines, & fouuent nous n'auons point eu d'autres 
courriers & porteurs de ces funeftes nouuelles, que 
de pauures mal-heureux efchapez du milieu des 
flammes, dont Ie corps demy bruf1é, & les doigts des 
mains coupez, nous donnoiet plus d'affeurance que 
leur parole mefme, du malheur qui les auoit accueilly 
eux & leurs camarades. 
Ce fleau du Ciel en eftoit d'autant plus fenfible 
qu'il eftoit accompagné de celuy de la famine, vniuer- 
felle parmy toutes ces Nations à plus de cent lieuës à 
la ronde: Ie bled d'Inde, qui eft icy l'vnique fouftien 
de la vie, y eíloit fi rare, que les plus accommodez 
à peine en auoient-ils pour enfemencer leurs terres; 
plufieurs ne viuoient que d'vn peu de gland, de poti- 
rons, & de chetiues racines qu'ils alloient fouuent 
chercher bien loin en des lieux de maffacre, & qui 
n'eftoient [142] batus que des pas de l'ennemy. 
N ous auons tiré cet auantage de la neceffité publi- 
que, que Dieu par vne prouidence toute particuliere 
nous ayant pourueu à fuffifance de bled du pais, nous 
a en mefme temps donné vne belle occafion de faire 
connoiftre à nos Chreftiens par des effets bien fenfi- 
bIes, l'étroite vnion que nous contraétons auec eux 
par l'efprit de la Foy. Noftre maifon, dans laquelle 
nous auons vne efpece d'hofpital hors de noftre 
appartement, leur a toufiours el1:é ouuerte; ils y font 
venus fe rafraifchir de temps en temps les vns aprés 


1642 - 45] 

RELA TION OF I643-44 

65 

country. Nearly every day, unfortunate women were 
killed [141J in their fields. The villages were in a 
state of continual alarm, and all the troops that were 
raised in good numbers to pursue the enemy over the 
frontiers were defeated and routed; captives were 
taken by hundreds, and frequently we had no other 
couriers and bearers of these dismal tidings but poor 
unfortunates who had escaped from the midst of the 
flames, whose half-burnt bodies and mutilated fingers 
convinced us, more than their words, of the misfortune 
that had fallen on them and on their comrades. 
This scourge of Heaven was all the more felt as 
it was accompanied by that of famine, which is 
universal among all these Tribes for over a hundred 
leagues around. Indian corn, which is the sole staff 
of life here, was so scarce that those who had the 
most had hardly enough for sowing their fields. 
Many lived only on a kind of acorn, on pumpkins, 
and on paltry roots which they often went to seek 
very far away, in places where they were exposed 
to massacre and which were [142J covered only with 
the enemies' tracks. 
We have derived this benefit from the public neces- 
sity, that God, by a special providence, had furnished 
us with a sufficient supply of the corn of the coun- 
try; and this gave us, at the same time, a fine oppor- 
tunity of showing our Christians by very perceptible 
effects the close union that we contract with them 
through the spirit of Faith. Our house, in which 
we have a sort of hospital outside of our apartments, 
has always been open to them. They have come 
there from time to time, and one after another, to 
recruit their strength, so that they might afterward 
more easily work in their fields. The Infidels were 


66 

LES Rl...
LA TIONS DFS JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

les autres, pour trauailler par aprés plus aifément 
à leurs champs. Les Infideles ont efié viuement 
touchez de cette charité inufitée parmy eux, & 
plufieurs en font deuenus excellens Chrefiiens. 
Des moyens efiudiez par la prudence humaine font 
trop bas pour conduire des entreprifes que Dieu re- 
garde comme fiennes. La guerre, la famine, les perfe- 
cutions, toutes ces tempefies qui fembloient plus que 
iamais deuoir abattre Ie Chrifiianifme, l' ont puiffam- 
ment [143] efiably. Contre l'ordinaire des années 
precedentes, nos Peres ont eu autant & plus d'employ 
pendant l'efié que durant l'hyuer: nos Miffions ont 
efié changées en Refidences, les Chapelles agrandies 
par tout: faute de cloches il nous a fallu pendre de 
vieux chaudrons à l'infiance & à la follicitation de 
nos Chrefiiens: les cimetieres ont efié benis, les 
proceffions dans les bourgs, les funerailles felon la 
coufiume de I' Eglife, les Croix erigées & adorées 
folennellement à la veuë des barbares. 
Les anciens Chrefiiens menent vne vie irrepro- 
chable & pleine de fainteté, les bons fentimens que 
Dieu leur donne plus que iamais nous font connoifire 
que Ie fainét Efprit prend tous les iours vne nouuelle 
& pI us forte poffeffion de leurs cæurs. Ils font l' office 
de Dogiques en I' abfence de nos Peres. Dans leurs 
guerres & leurs chaffes eftans mefmes en grandes 
troupes, font faire les prieres publiques, & marcher 
Ie feruice diuin auffi exa<.'tement, que s'ils efioient 
dans leur Eglife; infiruifent & baptifent aUec beau- 
coup de fatisfaétion & [144J edification dans les dan- 
gers; remplifíent les Nations efirangeres où ils vont 
en marchandife de l'odeur de leur vertu, y prefchent 
la fainteté de la loy Chrefiienne, font naifire par tout 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1643-44 

67 

greatly touched by such charity, which is unusual 
among them; and many of them have become excel- 
lent Christians. 

lethods elaborated by human prudence are too 
inferior to carry out undertakings that God considers 
as his own. 'Yar, famine, persecutions, all these 
storms that seemed more likely than ever to over- 
whelm Christianity, have greatly [143] strengthened 
it. Contrary to the usual experience of previous 
years, our Fathers have had as much and more occu- 
pation during the summer than during the winter. 
Our 
Iissions have been changed into Residences, 
and the Chapels have been everywhere enlarged. 
Through lack of bells, we have had to hang up old 
caldrons, at the request and solicitation of our 
Christians. The cemeteries were blessed; proces- 
sions were held in the villages and funerals \vere 
solemnized according to the custom of the Church; 
Crosses were erected and solemnly adored, in the 
sight of the barbarians. 
The older Christians lead a life that is irreproach- 
able and full of godliness. The good sentiments, 
with which God inspires them more than ever, show 
us that the holy Ghost every day takes new and 
stronger possession of their hearts. They perform 
the office of Dogique,l in the absence of our Fathers. 
In their wars and on their hunts, even when they are 
in large bands, they offer public prayers, and hold 
divine service, as strictly as if they were in their 
Church; they instruct and baptize, with much satis- 
faction and [14-4-] edification, in times of danger; the 
reputation of their virtue pervades the foreign Tribes 
with whom they trade; they preach there the hoH- 
ness of the Christian law; they inspire everywhere 


-68 

LES RELA TIO.VS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Ie defir de ioüir du bon-heur qu'ils poffedent, & nous 
ouurent infenfiblement la porte à plufieurs grands 
peuples qui ne pouuoient entendre nofire nom fans 
fremir, & ne nous auoient regardé par Ie paffé, que 
comme des perfonnes qui leur portoient malheur. 
Pour ce qui efi des nouueaux Chrefiiens, Ie nom- 
bre en a efié notablement plus grand cette année que 
les precedentes. Les Infideles mefmes humiliez & 
rendus plus dociles par l'affiiétion, nous femblent 
beaucoup moins éloignez du Royaume de Dieu. En- 
fin Ie corps des Chrefiiens a prés de fortes épreuues 
du Ciel, fe va rendant confiderable & commence à 
emporter Ie defIus en quelques bourgs. Sur quoy vn 
des plus notables de ce païs [e plaignant vn iour 
à vn Capitaine Chrefiien, de l'empire que prenoit 
infenfiblement la Foy fur les coufiumes de leurs 
ancefires, & di[ant qu'il feroit à [145] propos de s'op- 
pofer au plufiofi au cours de l'Euangile; cela eufi 
efié bon dans les commencemens, dit ce braue Neo- 
phyte, mais maintenant que les chofes font fi auan- 
cées, cette entreprife feroit tout à fait au deffus des 
forces humaines: il nous [era plus ai[é à nous de con- 
uertir ce qui refie encore dans l'infideIité, qu'à vous 
de nous faire quitter nofire refolution, & abandon- 
ner la Foy. 
Dieu veri fie ce bon courage, auant que d'en venir 
à ce point, nous auons encor de puiffans obfiac1es à 
rompre, l'infiabilité inueterée dans les mariages ne 
feroit pas vn des moindres, fans la charité de quel- 
ques perfonnes, aufquelles nous fommes redeuables 
d'vn bon nombre de familIes Chreitiennes, que nous 
n'aurions iamais gagnées à Dieu fans ces affifiances 
temporelles," & nous auons tous fujet d'efperer que 


1642- 45] 

RELA TIO.N OF I643-44 

69- 

the desire of en joying the blessing tbat they possess, 
and imperceptibly open the door for us to many great 
nations wbo could not hear our name without a shud- 
der, and who had looked upon us in the past only as 
persons who brought misfortune upon them. 
As for the new Christians, their number has been 
much greater this year than in previous ones. Even 
the Infidels, who are humiliated and made more 
docile by affliction, seem to us to be less distant from 
God's Kingdom. Finally, the body of Christians, 
after heavy trials sent by Heaven, is becoming more 
considerable, and begins to be in the majority in 
some of the villages. Concerning this, one of the 
most important personages of this country complained 
one day, to a Christian Captain, of the sway that the 
Faith was imperceptibly gaining over the customs of 
their forefathers, and said that it would be [145] ad- 
visable to oppose the course of the Gospel as soon as 
possible. "That would have answered at the begin- 
ning," said the brave Neophyte; "but, now that 
matters are so far advanced, such an undertaking 
would be completely beyond human strength. It 
will be easier for us to convert those who still remain 
infidels, than for you to make us abandon our resolu- 
tion and give up the Faith." 
May God confirm what that courageous heart has 
said. Before obtaining it, we have still great ob- 
stacles to overcome, of which the inveterate insta- 
bility of marriages would not be the least, but for the 
charitable assistance of certain persons, to whom we 
are indebted for a goodly number of Christian fami- 
lies, whom we would never have won over to God 
without such temporal assistance. And we have 
every reason to hope that our Churches will continue 

\ 


70 

LES RELATIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

nos Eglifes iront toufiours croiffans par tout, tandis 
que ces fources de pieté ne tariront point: vn mari- 
age bien efiably nous donne fouuent quinze ou feize 
Chreftiens. 
1Iais la plus forte efpine que nous [146] ayons, eft 
que les ennemis de ces peuples ayãs Ie deffus par Ie 
moyen des arquebufes qu'ils ont de quelques Euro- 
peãs, nous fommes maintenans comme inuefiis & 
affiegez de tous cofiez, fans pou uoir foulager la mi- 
fere d'vne infinité de peuples, qui viuent encore dans 
l'ignorance du vray Dieu,' ny receuoir mefme du 
fecours de la France qu'auec des peines incroyables. 
Nous attendons vniquement du Ciel, l'aplaniffement 
de ces difficultez & les prieres, & les væux qu'on fera 
pour nous, & pour tant de pauures Barbares, feront 
fans doute les affiftances les plus afIeurées qu'on nous 
puiffe rendre. Au moins fi Ie malheur des temps 
empefche que tous les effets de la charité de tant 
d'ames fainétes, ne viennent iufques à nous, tant de 
larmes qu'elles verfent nuiét & iour deuant les facrez 
Autels, leurs foufpirs & leurs gemiffemens penetre- 
ront malgré la rage des Iroquois, iufques au plus haut 
des Cieux, pour y crier mifericorde en faueur de tant 
de Nations racheptées du precieux fang du Fils de 
Dieu. Nous [174 i.e., 147] falüons taus humble- 
ment vofire Reuerence, & nous rec01:nmandons 
affeétueufement à fes SS. SS. & PP. 
De V. R. 

Des Hurons, ce der- 
nier de .ðfars, 1644. 

Tres-humble & tres-obeyfIant 
feruiteur en N. Seigneur. 
HIEROSME LALEMANT. 

) 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r64.J-44 

71 

to grow everywhere, as long as such pious sources 
are not exhausted. A well-established marriage 
often gives us fifteen or sixteen Christians. 
But our sharpest thorn [146J is, that the enemies 
of these tribes have the advantage over them through 
the arquebuses that they obtain from certain Euro- 
peans. We are now, as it were, invested and be- 
sieged on all sides, without being able to relieve the 
misery of a multitude of peoples who, as yet, live in 
ignorance of the true God. N or can we receive aid 
from France without incredible trouble. To Heaven 
alone do we look for the removal of these obstacles; 
and the prayers that will be said and the vows that 
will be made for us, and for so many poor Barbari- 
ans, will, no doubt, be the surest assistance that can 
be given us. At least, if the misfortunes of the 
times prevent the effects of the charity of so many 
saintly souls from coming to us, all the tears that 
they shed night and day before the sacred Altars, 
their sighs and groans, will, in spite of the fury of 
the Iroquois, reach to the highest Heavens, and cry 
for mercy in favor of so many Nations redeemed by the 
precious blood of the Son of God. We [174 i.e., 147J 
all send our humble salutations to your Reverence, 
and affectionately commend ourselves to your Holy 
Sacrifices and Prayers. 
Your Reverence's 
From the Huron Coulztry, 
thz's last of March, 1644. 
Very humble and very obedient 
servant in Our Lord, 
HIEROSME LALEMANT. 

\ 



LIV 

JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 

Septembre - Decembre, 16 45 

SOURCE: We follow the original MS., in the possession of 
Laval University, Quebec. 


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 75 

Sz" Vacat Annates nostrorulJZ audire Laborum/ 
Ante anllOS clauso Componet Vesper olympo, 
Quàm, þrz"má repetens ab orz"gine, sÙlguta tradam. 
Quæ regz"o Z"n terri's, nostrz" tam plena Laborz"s .'l 
Dz"spz'ce sacratas llOstrorum ex ordiJle pugnas/ 
Beltàque jam famâ totum Vulgata per orbem J . 
Et Laceros artus, ambustáque corpora jlammi's. 
Juratus præclaram Huronum exsândere gentem 
lroqueus, 11lulta vasta bat cæde COIOllOS: 
Hostz"bus occz"sis, pessumdedÜ AlgonquÙlOs. 


H. Laleme1r! 
r645. 

76 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

Estat du päys lors que i'y arriue en Sept. 
16 45'. 

Ie 7. a montreal; Ie rD. aux 3. riu.; Ie I er. d'oct. a Sil- 
lery, & Ie 2. a Quebek. declart suþer e . 
Ie 16. de seþ!. a 8.h. du 
soir aux 3. riu 

L E moys precedent scauoir au moys 
d' Aoust arriuerent 5. Vaisseaux dont 
Mons r . de repentigny estoit admiral; la 
nouuelle principale qu'ils apporterent fut que 
Messieurs de la Compie. generale auoient cedé 
la traite aux Habitans moyen ant certaines 
Conditions portées par leurs Conuentions qui 
sont dans nos Archiues, agente regina & 
nobis impellentib. 
Ensuite les Inuentaires furent faits, & les 
Hurons arriuerent auec moy heureusem t . Ie 
10. de sept. apres toutes les publicãons faites; 
de sorte que tous les Castors s'en allerent aux 
Habitans. Montreal auoit fait Ses Conuen- 
tions a part auec les habitans, & sembloit 
s'estre dechargé sur eux de la plu part de ses 
obligãons: 11 ne demeura a Vilmarie que 
Mons r . d' Alibour sa femme & sa sæur Made. 
Manse de considerables; Ie P. Ie Ieune a la 
requeste de Mons r . de Ia Dauuersiere Intendant 
des affaires de montreal en France, & Ie P. 
Iogues y furent destinés pour y hyuerner. Ie 


1642-45] .I0UR
VAL DES PP. .IÉSUITES 77 

State of the country when I arrive there, 
in September, 1645'- 

The 7th at 1JlOlztreal; the Ioth at 3 rivers; the Ist of Oc- 
tober at Sillery,' and the 2nd at Quebek. Declared 
suþerior the I6th of Seþtember, at 8 
o'clock in the evening, at 3 rivers. 

I N the month preceding,-to wit, in the 
month of August,- 5 Vessels arrived, of 
which Monsieur de repentigny was ad- 
miral; the principal news that they brought 
was that Messieurs of the general Company 
had ceded the right of trade to the Habitans, 
on certain Conditions conveyed by their Agree- 
ments, which are in our Archives, age1zte regz'- 
na et 1lObis z'mþellentz"bus. 2 
Next the Inventories were taken; and the 
Hurons arrived with me prosperously, on the 
loth of September, after all the announce- 
ments were published; so that all the Beavers 
went to the Habitans. Montreal had made 
Its own Agreements privately with the habi- 
tans, and seemed to have fulfilled, with respect 
to them, most of its obligations. There re- 
mained at Vilmarie, of notable persons, only 
Monsieur d' Alibour, his wife and sister, and 
Mademoiselle Manse. Father Ie J eune, at 
the request of Monsieur de la Dauversiere, 
Intendant of the affairs of montreal in France, 
and Father J ogues, were appointed to winter 
there; father buteux and father J ogues had 

Hierosllle Lalemozt 
I645. 


78 LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

p. buteux & Ie p Iogues y auoient hiuerné 
auparauant. mons r . de maisonneuue qui com- 
mandoit a montreal repassa cette année en 
france pr. la mort de son pere. 
En mesme temps que i'arriue ou estoit en 
attente du retour de quelques françois & Cap 
tifs qu'on auoit enuoyé aux Annieronons pour 
traiter la paix; ils retournerent icy auec Cous- 
ture Ie 17. d u mesme moys de Sept & en 
repartirent Ie 22. les Hurons & les Algonq. 
s'estoient trouués a ce pourparler de paix, & 
auoient pris resolilon de reconduire Ies An- 
nieronons a leur päys; mais estant arriuer a 
richelieu, ils s'en reuinrent; il n'y eut que 
Cousture auec 4. Annieronons & trois Hurons 
qui passerent outre. 
Enuiron Ie 12. d'oct. on tua trois ou quatre 
Montagnes qui estoient a Ia chasse, on eut 
peur que ce ne fussent Annieronons, toutes- 
fois on pensa que ce pouroient bien estre des 
sokokiois, dont on avoit tué i1 y a quelques 
années quelquesvns: i1 y auoit pour Iors cinq 
Annieronons: qui hyuernoient auec les mon- 
tagnes & Algonquains qui n'eurent aucun 
mal; mais Piscaret, Cap. Algonquain qui en 
auoit deux ou 3 en sa charge, iugea a propos 
de renuoyer les fiens: tant pour euiter tous 
les hasars 
& fûreurs des ieunes gens, que pro 
donner aduis a Anniés de ce qui se passoit, on 
en donna aduis a Cousture, affin que si c'es- 
toient Annieronons, i1 sceut qu'en cas qu'on 


1642-45] .JOURNAL DES PP. .JÉSUITES 7 

wintered there before. Monsieur de maison- 
neuve, who commanded at montreal, went 
back to france this year on account of the 
death of his father. 3 
At the very time when I arrived, they were 
expecting the return of some frenchmen and 
Captives, who had been sent to the Anniero- 
nons to treat for peace; they returned here 
with Cousture the 17th of the same month of 
September, and went away again on the 22nd. 
The Hurons and the Algonquains had been 
present at this peace conference, and had 
adopted a resolution to escort the Anniero- 
nons back to their country; but, having 
arrived at richelieu, they returned; only Cous- 
ture, with 4 Annieronons and three Hurons, 
went beyond. 
About the 12th of October, three or four 
Montagnais were killed, who were hunting; 
it was feared that these slayers might be An- 
nieronons, although it was thought that they 
might well be sokokiois, of whom some had 
been killed a few years ago. There were, at 
that time, five Annieronons, who were winter- 
ing with the montagnais and Algonquains; 
these suffered no harm, but Piscaret, an Algon- 
quain Captain, who had two or 3 of them in his 
care, deemed it advisable to send back his,- 
both to avoid all risks, and the fury of the 
young men, and to give warning to Anniés of 
w hat was going on. They notified Cousture 
of this, to the end that, if the offenders were 
Annieronons, he might know that, in case 
satisfaction were made, the peace would not 


1ziJe f. Claude 
Jove," 

80 LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

satisfit, la paix ne seroit point rompue. vn 
de ceux que Pi skaret auoit enuoyé n'alla pas 
loin: i1 reuint aussy tost craignant dit il les 
Algonquains. 
Richelieu fut presque abandonne scauoir a 
la reserue de 8 ou 10 soldats. nos PP. den- 
demare & Ioseph duperon en reuinrent sur la 
fin de septem bre: & personne n' alIa a leur 
place pour y demeurer Mons f . de Sennetaire 
qui y commandoit s'en retourna en france: 
mons f . de Champhlour, qui a commendoit aux 
3-riu. s'en retourna aussy; a sa place fut mis 
pour vn temps Mons f . bourdon & enfin mons f . 
de la poterie y alIa pf. y commender: Ie p. 
buteux y fut mis sup. p de noüe, p. p. piiart 
procureur des Hurons & Ie p. Joseph duperon; 
& trois hommes. 
A Sillery fut mis Ie p. de Quen Ie p. Masse 
& Ie p. druilletes vn frere et quatre hommes 
A Quebek, Ie p. hierosme lalemant Super f . 
p. Vimont, & p. dendemare, trois de nos fI. & 
vn homme.-nos fI. liegeois, Ambr. Cauuet, 
& P. feauté-Ie P Quentin Procureur alloit 
& venoit dans les vaisseaux Ie f. liegeois estoit 
son Compagnon qui faisoit office de Procureur 
dans Ie päys; i1 reuenoit de france fresche- 
ment y ayant demeuré vn an. 
Les 3. hommes qui estoient aux 3. riu. 
gangnoient 10011. l'vn se nommoit xstiennot; 
l'autre mathieu Chouré, & Ie 3 e . Ant. desrosiers. 
A Sillery les deux mercenaires a 10011. aussy 


1642-45] JOUR1YAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 81 

be broken. One of those whom Piskaret had 
sent did not go far; he came back immedi- 
ately,-fearing, he said, the Algonquains. 
Richelieu was almost abandoned,-to wit, 
with the exception of 8 or 10 soldiers. Our 
Fathers dendemare and Joseph duperon re- 
turned thence, toward the end of September; 
and no one went to stay there in their place. 
Monsieur de Sennetaire, who commanded 
there, returned to france: monsieur de 
Champhlour, who commanded at 3 rivers, 
also returned; :Monsieur bourdon was placed 
for a time in his stead; and finally monsieur 
de la poterie went thither as commandant. 
Father buteux was appointed superior there; 
with him were father de noüe, father p. pijart, 
procuror for the Hurons, father Joseph dupe- 
ron, and three men. 
At Sillery were stationed father de Quen, 
father Masse and father druilletes, a brother, 
and four men. 
At Quebek, father hierosme lalemant, Su- 
perior; father Vimont and father dendemare, 
three of our brethren, and one man-our 
brethren liegeois, Ambroise Cauvet, and P. 
feauté. Father Quentin, Procuror, went and 
came in the vessels: brother liegeois was his 
Companion, who performed the duties of Pro- 
curor in the country; he had recently returned 
from france, having sojourned there a year. 
The 3 men who resided at 3 rivers re- 
ceived 100 livres; one was named chrestien- 
not, the second, mathieu Chouré, and the 3d, 
Antoine desrosiers. At Sillery, the two hired 

Our brother Claude 
Joyer. 


Archives. 

82 LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES [VoL.2ï 

se nommoient Simeon, & l' autre la neigerie: 
les deux Domestiques ad vitã, Iaques Iunier 
& robert hache. A Quebek i1 n 'y auoit que 
Pierre Gontier Domest. ad Vitam: on verra 
dans les Archiues la Condition des Domest. 
ad vitam & leur histoire. 


16-12-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 83 

men, also at 100 livres, were appointed-one 
Simeon, and tbe other la neigerie: the two 
Domestics ad 'vitam, Jaques Junier and robert 
hache. At Quebek there was only Pierre 
Gontier, as Domestic ad Vitam: we shall see 
in the Archives the Status of the Domestics 
ad vitam, and their history. 

Archives. 


..-l(stÙn u ( entre a ilre 
seruice 

Four 

habits de sauuage 
þ.... Ie roy. 

deþart des vazs- 
seaux. 

84 LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

Iournal commencé 1645. 

OCTOBRE 
L E 17. fut receu a nõe seruice Chrestien- 
naut a trente escus de gages par an & 
fut enuoyé aux 3. riu. pro y seruir de 
Cuisinier & Cousturier en vn mot de tout: I1 
estoit passé de france icy dans Ie bord de 1L 
de repentigny & y auoit receu du mesconten- 
tement, de sorte qu il auoit resolu de se 
retirer dans les bois plustost que de re- 
passer: il n'y eut point de marché par escrit 
auec Iuy. 
Ie 19. on commença a faire vn four chez nvf 
[i.e., nous] apres en auoir demandé la per- 
mission aux 11M. de la maison. 
Ie mesme lour sortit de la maison vne 
petite quaisse ou estoient 3. ou 4. habits de 
sauuages accomplis; pour estre presentés au 
roy par M. de repentigny; sur ce que Ie roy 
auoit tesmoigné desirer qu'on luy enuoyat 
quelque chose de par deça. Ie magazin en 
auoit fait Ia plvf grande depence. 1fJ 
Ie 29. partirent les vaisseaux cinq en nom- 
bre chargés a ce que l'on tient de vingt mille 
liures de Castor pesant pro les habitans, & de 
dix mille pro la Compie. geale a vne pistole ou 
dix ou onse francs la liure. mons r . de repen- 


1642-45] .JOURNAL DES PP. .JÉSUITES 85 

Journal begun, 1645'. 

OCTOBER. 
O N the 17 th , Chrestiennaut was received 
into our service, at wages of thirty écus 
a year, and was sent to 3 rivers in 
order to serve there as Cook and Clothier,-in 
a word, for everything. He had come hither 
from france in Monsieur de repentigny's 
retinue, and had become discontented there, 
so that he had resolved to retreat to the woods 
rather than go back [ to France]; there was no 
written contract with him. 
On the 19th, we began to build an oven at 
our house, after having asked permission from 
Messieurs the owners of the house. 4 
On the same Day, there left the house a 
little box in which were 3 or 4 savage gar- 
ments, all complete, to be presented to the 
king by Monsieur de repentigny,- because the 
king had expressed a desire that something 
from over here should be sent him. The ware- 
house had borne the main expense thereof. 
On the 29th, the vessels sailed, five in num- 
ber,-laden, as is estimated, with twenty 
thousand pounds' weight of Beaver skins for 
the habitans, and ten thousand for the general 
Company, at a pistole, or ten or eleven francs, 
a pound. Monsieur de repentigny was admi- 
ral; his brother, monsieur de Till y, 5 com- 
manded the vessel of Montreal, in which 

Chrestiennaut ellters 
our service. 

Oven. 

Savage garments 
for the kitzg. 

Deþarture of the 
vessels. 


Chaþelle þrestle a 
Jb'. Nicolet þtre. &c 
rendüe &0 reþrestée 
infra. 

on va a beauþré. 
JI. de St. Sauueur. 

S6 LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

tigny en estoit admiral; son frere mons r . de 
Tilly commãdoit Ie vaisseau de Montreal dans 
lequel repassoit Mons r . de maisonneuue; & 
mons r . Godefroy vn autre vaisseau; on tira 
trois coups du fort lorsque mons r . de re- 
pentigny en fortit prenant congé de mons r . Ie 
gouu. & trois du magazin lorsqu'il s'embarqua 
dans la chaloupe; reciproquem t . tous les 
vaisseaux: leuant l'ancre saluerent mons r . Ie 
Gouuerneur. 
Le P. Quentin procureur ordinaire; & nôe 
f. dominique skot venu des Hurons pour 
son Infirmité de polmon, passerent dans l' Ad- 
miral 
Ie 25. partit mons r . Ie Gouuerneur pro aller 
a I' Isle aux oyes, oû il faisoit trauailler à la 
terre & yauoit 7. ouuriers: il laisse mons r . de 
Chauigny pro Son lieutenant, & me donna vn 
papier cacbeté pro dans lequel estoit l'ordre a 
garder en cas qu'il vint faute de luy: il mena 
auec soy mons r . Nicolet prestre & me fit prier 
de luy prester vne chapelle gande: on luy en 
donna vne où il y auoit calice d' Argent, cha- 
suble neuue, fort belle nape & grande, belle 
ausbe & tout Ie reste a l' auenant, il desira sur 
tout qu'on Iuy donnast bougie & hosties: bref 
rien n'y manquoit. 
Ce mesme lour partit mons r . de St. Sauueur 
pour beaupré; messieurs de cette Compie. luy 
donne 25. escus par an pour y faire quelques 
voyages & y auoir Ie soin du spirituel & tem- 


1642-45] .fOURNAL DES PP. .fÉSUITES 87 

Monsieur de maisonneuve was returning; and 
monsieur Godefroy, another vessel. Three 
shots were fired from the fort, when monsieur 
de repentigny left it, having taken leave of 
monsieur the governor; and three shots from 
the warehouse, when he embarked in the shal- 
lop. All the vessels, upon weighing anchor, 
saluted, in their turn, monsieur the Governor. 
Father Quentin, procuror in ordinary, and 
our brother dominique skot - who had come 
from the Hurons, because of his Infirmity of 
the lungs-went over in the Admiral's ship. 
On the 25th, monsieur the Governor set out 
to go to the Isle aux oyes, where he was cul- 
tivating the land, and had thereon 7 work- 
men. He left monsieur de Chavi gny 6 as 
His lieutenant, and gave me a sealed paper, 
in which was the order to be observed in case 
any accident befell him. He took with him 
monsieur Nicolet,7 priest, and sent the request 
to me to lend him a fur1lished oratory. He 
was given one in which there was a Silver 
chalice, a new chasuble, a very beautiful and 
large cloth, and a handsome alb, and every- 
thing else in keeping; he especially desired 
that he be given a candle and hosts; in short, 
nothing was wanting. 
This same Day, monsieur de St. Sau- 
veur 8 left for beaupré; messieurs of this Com- 
pany give him 25 écus a year to make some 
trips thither, and to have charge there of spirit- 
ual and temporal affairs. This has been done 
with our consent, in order to provide mean- 
while for a priest at the hospital; but that will 

Oratory lent to L
fon- 
sieur Nicolet, þriest, 
etc.; delivered, and 
described infra. 

Triþ to beauþré. 
Jfonsieur de St. 
Sauveur. 


Manage 

desseitz de baslir 
I' Eglise EI VJl 
þrésbitere 

Payeme1z1 de deþe1zce 
des soldals aux 
Hurons. 

88 LES RELA TIONS DES ./É'SUITES [YOLo 27 

porel; ce qui s'est fait auec nõe consentem t . 
pour pouruoir cependant de prestre a 1'hospi- 
tal: mais cela ne sera que pro vn an, on mande 
vn autre prestre en france pro l'hospital a la 
place de m. de St. Sauueur. 
Ie 26. fut marié françois Marguerie auec la 
fille de 
Ire. Zacharie Ie P. Vimont fut inuité 
aux nopces & yalla. 
22. Soldats ayant esté enuoyes aux Hurons 
en 1644. enuoyes de france par la royne auec 
plusieurs autres pro Ie bien du päys laquelle 
pro ce suiet auoit donné cent mille francs: ils 
logerent chez nvf aux Hurons & vescurent a 
nõe table; ils retournerent vn an apres iour 
pour iour: car estant arriués aux Hurons Ie 7. 
de Sept. ils arriuerent a montreal auec 60. 
canots Hurons Ie 7. de Sept. de l' annee 
d'apres: ils reuinrent chargés de quantité de 
Castors pour trente ou 40. mille francs. Sur 
quoy y ayant eu dispute entre les habitans 
mis nouuellem t . en possession de la traite & 
messieurs de la Compie. gñle, ils s'accorderent 
d'employer Ie prouenu a bastir vne Eglise & 
presbytere pro Iequel en particulier six mille 
liures furent destinées, sauf a nvf d'y adious- 
ter si bon nvf sembloit. Au reste n'y ayant 
rien de pIvf raisonable que de nvf donner Ia 
nouriture destinée pro ces soldats, qui pouuoit 
monter a ca 200tl. par teste on ne nvf en don- 
na que trente escus par teste y compris tous 
Ies autres fraits d'auoir refait les armes assis- 


1642-45] .fOURNAL DES PP. .fÉSUITES 89 

be only for one year; another priest is sent 
by those in france for the hospital, in the 
pl
ce of monsieur de St. Sauveur. 
On the 26th, françois 
1arguerie was mar- 
ried to the daughter of :1Iaster Zacharie; 9 Fa- 
ther Vimont was invited to the wedding, and 
went thither. 
22 Soldiers had been despatched to the Hu- 
rons in 1644,- sent from france with several 
others, for the good of the country, by the 
queen, who for this purpose had given a hun- 
dred thousand francs. While among the H u- 
rons, they lodged at our house, and lived at 
our table. They returned a year later, to the 
very day; for, having arrived among the 
Hurons the 7th of September, they arrived at 
montreal, with 60 Huron canoes, on tbe 7th 
of September in the following year; they 
came back laden with a quantity of Beavers, 
to the amount of thirty or 40 thousand francs. 
A dispute over this having arisen between the 
habitans lately put in possession of the trade 
and messieurs of the general Company, they 
agreed to employ the proceeds in building a 
Church and clergy-house, for which six thou- 
sand livres were specially set aside,-with 
the proviso that we might add to the same if 
we were so disposed. 110reover,-as it was 
no more than reasonable to give us the main- 
tenance inten.ded for these soldiers, which 
might amount to about 200 livres apiece,- 
they gave us only thirty écus apiece, includ- 
ing in this all the other expenses of having 
repaired the arms, aided the sick, etc.; they 

Marriage. 

Planfor building 
the ChurcA And a 
clergy-house. 

Payment of outlay 
for soldiers among 
the Hurons. 


Charles Ie Moyne 

Nicolas G(ffar 

þleinte des Hurons 
hiuernans a 
Sitlery. 

II se trouue que la 
þleinte estoit þlus 
gra1zde que Ie mal; 

: Hurons hyuernans 
a I' hosþital. 

90 LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

té les malades &c on nvf fit tort de plvf de 
deux mille 500 liures. 
rescription donnée en mesme temps a mons r . 
du Chesne onc1e de Charles Ie Moyne de 20 
escus que nvf donnions a son nepueu pro Ie 
seruice de quatre ans rendu aux Hurons; on 
l'habilla & Iuy donnat-on du Hnge honeste- 
ment, il fut enuoye aux 3-riu. soldat & Inter- 
prete. 
Nicolas Giffar qui aussy en qualité d'Enfant 
nvf auoit serui 4. ans aux Hurons eut vn 
habit honneste, & vn autre de toile pro Ie con- 
seruer, du linge honnestem t . & 50tt. dont nvf 
luy demeurasmes redeuabIes; il fit marché 
auec Mre. Zacharie charpentier pro estre auec 
luy 5. ans moyenant 4ott. de gages: ils eurent 
tous deux quelques profits de Castors: 
Sur la fin du moys il y eut de grandes 
pleintes des Hurons qui hiuernoient a Sillery 
auec les Algonq. scauoir entr'autres choses 
que ils auoient plusieurs fois monté par la 
fenestre du logis de Gadois, & auoient pris du 
cochon salé dedans; qu'ils auoient battu ledit 
gadois qui auoit despouillé quelques vns de 
quelque mechant bout de Couuerture: Ie 
remede qu'on y apporta fut de les Intimider 
de la colere de m. Ie Gouu. a son retour, & 
de Ies porter a quelque satisfaction. 
Atironta sa femme son petit fils; & Iaques 
Acharo, Hurons, logeoient a l'hospital; nvf 
leur fournissions vne partie des viures, ble & 


1642-45] .fOURNAL DES PP. .fÉSUITES 91 

caused us thereby a loss of more than two 
thousand 500 livres. 
An order was given at the same time to 
monsieur du Chesne,10 uncle of Charles Ie 
Moyne, for 20 écus, which we were giving 
his nephew for four years' service rendered 
among the Hurons. He was clothed and de- 
cently supplied with linen, and was sent to 3 
rivers as soldier and Interpreter. 
Nicolas Giffar-who also, in the capacity of 
a Lad, had served us 4 years among the Hu- 
rons - had a decent coat and another of linen 
to keep it clean; sufficient body linen; and 
50 livres, for which we were in debt to him. 
He made a bargain with Master Zacharie, 
carpenter, to be with him 5 years, in consid- 
eration of 40 livres in wages. They both 
had some profits from Beavers. 
Toward the end of the month, there were 
great complaints of the Hurons who wintered 
at Sillery with the Algonquains,- to wit, 
among other things, that they had several 
times climbed through the window of the Ga- 
dois dwelling, and had taken some of the salt 
pork therein; that they had beaten the said 
gadois,l1 who had stripped certain ones of some 
wretched scrap of Covering. The remedy ap- 
plied thereto was to Intimidate them with the 
anger of monsieur the Governor at his return, 
and to induce them to make some satisfaction. 
Atironta, his wife, his grandson, and Jaques 
Acharo, Hurons, were lodging at the hospi- 
tal; we furnished them a part of their provi- 
sions,-wheat and Eels; they supplied their 

Charles Ie MOYlze. 

Nicolas Gf./far. 

Comþlaint about the 
Hurolzs witztering 
at Szllery. 

It aþþears that the 
cry was worse than 
the hurt. 

Hurons wintering at 
the hosþital. 


retour de mr'. Ie 
Gouuerneur. 

Czerges à 
I' Eglise 

M ariage de Noþce. 

ðastiment þr'.1ZOS P P. 
a Montreal 

materiaux emþloïez 
þour L'hoþital... 

92 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

Anguille ils faisoient leurs bois: on se plei- 
gnit qu'ils y tenoient la place des malades. 
Ie 29. retourna mons r . Ie Gouuerneur, on 
tira trois coups du magasin a son arriuée. 
Ce mesme lour on aporta nouuelle de nou- 
uelles frayeurs & apprehensions des Algonq.. 
pour de nouueaux massacres; commençoient a 
penser que c' estoient en effeét Annieronons. 
Ie 30. fut arresté qu'on n'allumeroit plvf 
qu'vn Cierge dans nos Chapelles pendant la 
Messe, au moins les lours ouuriers. 
Sur la fin du moys d'oct. Ie p. Ie Ieune & Ie 
p. buteux s'en retournant de Quebek pro les 
3. riu. & Montreal: marierent en chemin vn 
nommé N opce auec la fille d'vn nommé Picar 
qui estoient pour lors chez mons r . de Chauigny 
& puis demeurerent chez :Mons r . de la pote- 
rie: mons r . de Chauigny se ressentit de ce 
changem t . & s'en prenoit au p. Ie leune, mais 
i1 parut depuis que Mons r . de Chauigny auoit 
tort de se pleindre du p. Ie leune. 
Lors que i'arriué a montreal on auoit pre- 
paré vn logis de charpente pour nos PP. & 
il sembloit qu'il n'y eut plvf qu'a Ie leuer; 
comme on en estoit sur Ie poinét, les vaisseaux 
arriuerent, qui aporterent nouuelle & ordre de 
france a ceux qui commandoient a Montreal, 
d'employer tous les ouuriers a 
utre chose 
scauoir a dresser vn hospital pro lequel on 
auoit touché de grands deniers des les années 
precedentes & cependant il n'yauoit rien de 


1642-45] /OURNAL DES PP. /ÉSUITES 93 

wood. Complaint was made that they took 
the place of the sick there. 
On the 29th, monsieur the Governor re- 
turned; three shots were fired from the ware- 
house, at his arrival. 
This same Day, word was brought of new 
terrors and apprehensions, on the part of the 
Algonquins, concerning fresh massacres; they 
were beginning to think that these slayers 
were indeed Annieronons. 
On the 30th, it was decided that no more 
than one Candle should be lighted in our Chap- 
els during Mass,-at least, on working Days. 
Toward the end of the month of October, 
father Ie J eune and father buteux, while re- 
turning from Quebek to 3 rivers and Mont- 
real, married by the way a certain Nopce and 
the daughter of one Picar,]2 who were at that 
time with monsieur de Chavigny; after this, 
they lived with 
lonsieur de la poterie. 
fon- 
sieur de Chavigny resented this change, and 
blamed father Ie J eune for it; but it appeared 
afterward that Monsieur de Chavigny was 
wrong in complaining of father Ie J eune. 
vVhen I arrived at montreal, they had pre- 
pared a timber dwelling for our Fathers, and 
it seemed that there was nothing more to be 
.done than to raise it; but, when they were on 
the point of doing so, the vessels arrived, 
bringing word and orders from france to those 
who commanded at Montreal, to employ all 
the workmen for other things,- namely, in 
erecting a hospital, for which large funds had 
been received in the preceding years; and yet 

Return of monsieur 
the Govenzor. 

Candles itz the 
ChurcA. 

Marriage of Noþce. 

BUt1ditzg for our 
Fathers at irlontreal. 

Materials usedfor 
the Hosþital. 


fermiers des 3, 
riuieres 

ordre de /a Cõnion, 
p. Ie gouuenzeur. 

94 LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

commencé: jJ/Olls"'. de maisonneuue qui estoit 
pro lors a :Montreal, auoit de la peine de dire 
cette nouuelle a nos PP. ie me chargé de Ie 
faire & de leur faire trouuer bon: depuis on 
me ietta Ie chat aux iambes, comme si c'estoit 
moy qui l'auois empesché. 
Aux 3. riu. il y auoit deux fermiers tenant 
nos terres per modü Vnivf; ils n'y vaquoient 
qu'a demy, trauaillant ailleurs pour eux: on 
mit en deliberãon si on reprendroit les terres 
pro les gouuerneur, & il fut dit qu'ouy: les 
fenniers y condescendirent volontiers, & 
dans l'lmpuissance de trouuer des hommes 
pro nvf, cõe on voulut les porter ales re- 
prendre, ils n 'y voulurent point entendre; 
on fut done contraint de faire les terres nvf 
mesme. 
Arriuant icy on donnoit la Cõnion. 1 0 . a 
11 r . Ie Gouuerneur & puis on s'en alloit com- 
mencer par où il falloit: ne m'estant pas fait 
lnstruire la dessus la Ie. fois ie ne commencé 
pas par 11la Gouuern r . ayant esté aduerti de 
la coustume ie commencé par luy la 2 e . fois; 
mais luy mesme m'ayant dit qu'il en estoit 
choqué, ie fis depuis cõe la Ie. fois, & ainsy il 
cõnie Ie dernier de la Ie. tablée a son rang 
selon la place oû il se met. 
NOUEMBRE 
11 y eut grande messe Ie lour de la Touss. 
& Ie lour des morts. 


1642-45] .fOURNAL DES PP. .fÉSUITES 95 

no beginning had been made. Monsieur de 
maisonneuve, who was then at Montreal, found 
it hard to tell this news to our Fathers; I 
took it upon myself to do so, and to persuade 
them to regard the matter favorably; after- 
ward, they fiung the cat at my legs, as if I 
were the one who had hindered that work. 
At 3 rivers, there were two farmers hold- 
ing our lands per mod2l1n Unius; they only half 
attended to the land, working elsewhere for 
themselves. We deliberated whether we 
should take back the lands, in order to man- 
age them, and it was decided to do so. The 
farmers willingly agreed; and when, in view 
of our Inability to find men for ourselves, we 
sought to incline them to take back the land, 
they would not listen to it; we were then 
constrained to cultivate the lands ourselves. 
vVhen I arrived here, Communion was 
given 1st to Monsieur the Governor, and then 
they proceeded in the proper order. Not 
having Informed myself in the matter the 
1st time, I did not begin with Monsieur the 
Governor. Having been apprised of the cus- 
tom, I began with him, the 2nd time; but he 
himself having told me that he was thereby 
offended, I did afterward the same as the 1St 
time, and thus he receives communion the last 
at the 1st round, in his turn, according to the 
place which he himself takes. 

NOVEMBER. 
There was high mass on All Saints' Day 
and on all souls' Day. 

Farmers at 3 
rivers. 

Order of Communion 
for the governor. 


Accordazlles 

Chaþelle þrestée þ" 
VIZ alZ 

M aYÍage 

dOlzné a madle 
gijJ ar 

Changemetzt de 
Pierre GOlztier 
  de 
mathieu Chourel. 

PreselZs acceþtés, 
nüisent 

96 LES RELA TIO
VS DES /ÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

Le 4. nvf fusmes lnuités Ie p. Vimon & moy 
d'assister au Contract de mariage de la fille de 
Mons r . Giffar, nvf y assistasmes mais nous n'y 
signasmes point. M. Ie gouu. & plusieurs 
autres signerent. 
Ie 6. :Mons r . Nicolet rem porta de rechef vne 
chapelle garnie de tout a 1'lsle aux oyes, il y 
auoit calice d'argent doré. chasuble de damas 
blanc &c. on luy donna deux pains de bougie, 
3. Images gran des en papier: on luy presta 
deux liures, la vie de 1. X. & l'abregé de 
dupont. 
Ie 7. se maria 
1. de launay auec la fille de 
pinguet; Ie p. Vimon assista aux nopces. 
Ie 12. on donne a Mad. giffar de l' estoffe 
noire de vieille sotanne pr. doubler des 
manches. 
Ce mesme lour arriua Pierre Gontier des 3. 
riu. que robert hache estoit allé querir dans 
vn Canot pro faire icy la cuisine, a la place de 
nos ff qui y auoient trop de peine: on enuoya 
pour soulager nos PP. a sa place mathieu 
Chourel qui demeuroit icy. 
Ie p. de Quen sup. a Sillery se trouua en 
peine pour auoir pris quelques Castors d'vne 
vieille & de sa parenté, qui Ie prenoient a la 
place d'vn de leur parens tué; tous les lours 
ces nouueaux parens 1'accabloient de deman- 
des comme celuy qui leur deuoit faire tout ce 
que Ie defunct leur faisoit, il les fallut nourir 
loger &c pendant l'hyuer. 


1642-45] .JOURNAL DES PP. .JÉSUITES 97 

On the 4th, we were Invited, father \Timon 
and I, to witness the marriage Contract of 
Monsieur Giffar's daughter; we were present, 
but we did not sign it. Monsieur the govern- 
or and several others signed. 
On the 6th, Monsieur Nicolet again took 
away an oratory completely furnished, to the 
Isle aux oyes; there was a gilded silver chal- 
ice, a chasuble of white damask, etc. We 
gave him two cakes of candle wax, and 3 
large paper Images; and we lent him two 
books - the life of Jesus Christ, and the 
.abridgment of dupont. 13 
On the 7th, 110nsieur de launay married 
the daughter of pinguet; father Vimon was 
present at the wedding. 
On the 12th, we give :Mademoiselle giffar 
some black stuff from an old cassock, for 
lining sleeves. 
This same Day, Pierre Gontier arrived from 
3 rivers, whom robert hache had gone to 
fetch in a Canoe, to do the cooking here, 
in the place of our brethren, who found 
it too hard; to relieve our Fathers, we 
sent in his place mathieu Chourel, who lived 
here. 
Father de Quen, superior at Sillery, found 
himself embarrassed, for having accepted 
some Beavers from an old woman and her 
kindred, who were adopting him in the place 
of one of their relatives, who was killed. 
Every Day, these new relatives overwhelmed 
him with requests, as one who was expected 
to do for them all that the deceased was accus- 

Marriage Contract. 

Oratory lent for a 
year. 

Marriage. 

Given to mademoz: 
selle gijfar. 

Exchange of Pi'erre 
Gontier and mathi'eu 
Chourel. 

Gifts:acceþted are an 
injury. 


Pl'. .Ia traite des 
Castors 

Neiges 

A{ ariage 

reliques données þar 
nous a I' hosþital. 

Confirmãon de la 
ruþture de þaix. 

98 LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

Le 15. de nou. Ie bruit estant qu'on s'en 
alloit icy publier la defense qui auoit esté 
publiée aux 3. riu. que pas vn n'eut a traiter 
auec les sauuages: Ie p. Vimon demanda a 
Mons T . des Chastelets Commis gëal si nvf 
serions de pire condition soubs eux que soubs 
Messieurs de la Com pie. ? la Conclusion fut 
que non, & que cela iroit pro nví a l'ordinaire 
mais que nvf Ie fissions doucem t . Ie p. Vimont 
luyadiousta qu'on en donneroit aduis au p. 
buteux, & M. des Chastelets Ie trouua bon. 
Ce mesme lour commencerent les neiges a 
demeure il auoit puissament neigé Ie lour de 
8 te . Vrsule Ie 2 I. d'oct. mais cela ne dura pas. 
Ie 2 I. se fit Ie mariage & les nopces de 
Marie Giffar & du fils de },{ons r . de Maure, oû 
Ie p. Vimon assista. 
Enuiron ce temps furent données par nous 
de belles reliques a l'hospital, elles n'estoient 
point enchassées & depuis plusieurs années 
estoient sans véneràon & reliquaire, & les 
hospitalieres auoient des reliquaires, sans 
reliques. 
En ce temps aussy se sauua des Ennemys 
Annieronons vn Ieune Algonquain & vn peu 
apres vn Huron qui y estoient captifs ils rap or- 
toient que les Annier..n'auoient aucune bonne 
volonté pro les Algonquains: on :dit, que Ie 
Ieune Algonq. deuant que partir se voyant seul 
dans la Cabane amassa tout ce qu'il y auoit & 
surtout les peaus & brusla tout; ils confir- 


1642-45] .JOURNAL DES PP. .JÉSUITES 99 

tomed to do; they had to be fed, lodged, etc., 
during the winter. 
The 15th of November,- the rumor prevail- 
ing that the prohibition was about to be 
published here which had been published at 3 
rivers, to the effect that no one was to trade 
with the savages,-father Vimon asked Mon- 
sieur des Chastelets, general Manager, wheth- 
er we would be in worse condition under them 
than under Messieurs of the Company. The 
Conclusion was that we would not be, and 
that this matter would proceed for us as usual, 
but that we should carry it on quietly; father 
Vimont added that we would notify father 
buteux, and Monsieur des Chastelets approved 
this. 14 
This same Day, the lasting snows began: it 
had snowed heavily on the Day of 81. Ursule, 
the 21st of October, but that did not remain. 
On the 2 I st occurred the marriage and the 
nuptials of 1iarie Giffar and the son of Mon- 
sieur de 
Iaure,15 at which father Vimon was 
present. 
A bou t this time, some excellent relics were 
given by us to the hospital; they were not 
enshrined, and for several years had been 
without veneration and reliquary; and the 
hospital nuns had reliquaries, without relics. 
At this time also, a Young Algonquain 
escaped from the Annieronon Enemies, and a 
little later a Huron, who were captives there; 
they reported that the Annier had no good 
will for the Algonquains. It is said that the 
Young Algonquain, before going away, seeing 

Concerning the 
Beaver trade. 

Snows. 

Marriage. 

Relics given by us to 
the hosþital. 

Confirmation of the 
breach of þeace. 


disciþlines þar les 
A 19onquins. 

Cha11gement de 
Cloche a la paroisse. 

M arzage de Guyon- 

Vn Chirurgien a 
Sillery 

Tabernacle þrest! 

Meubles de sacristie 
vendus 

100 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

moient que c'estoient les Annieronons qui 
auoient ou fait ou fait faire Ie massacre du 
moys passé. 
Les Algonq. de Sillery font de rudes disci- 
plines pro s'estre enyurés plusieurs fois: mais 
se pleignent fort & ferme que les françois 
s'enyurent & sont vilains & qu'on n'en dit 
mot. 
Le 25. fut mise a la paroisse vne plus grosse 
cloche au lieu de la petite qui y estoit. 
Le 27. 11ariage de la fille de Mons r . Coüil- 
lar auec Le fils de lean Guion: Ie p. Vimont 
assista aux nopces, il y eut deux violons pro 
la Ire. fois. 
\Tn nommé dubok soldat Empyrique fut inui- 
té d' aller voir les malades de Sillery pour 3 
ou 4. lours: II fut logé chez nvf sans en 
rien communiquer au Superieur & hoc 
male; & y demeura depuis Ie 20 6 . ou enui- 
ron de nouembre iusques au 22. de lanuier: 
la chose ne reussit pas; lnuisus barbaris et 
gallis. 
Ce moys icy au Commencem t . on presta Ie 
Tabernacle de nõe dame des Anges aux Vrsu- 
lines, excepté les Anges qui furent prestés a 
la paroisse pro ornem t . de leur Autel. 
On vendit aussy ce mays icy a la paroisse 
pour pres de 400tl. de meubles ou ornemens 
d'Eglise dont ils se seruoient, & la separation 
de meubles fut faite, & les Catalogues dres- 
sés. 


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 101 

himself alone in the Cabin, piled up whatever 
there was, especially the skins, and burned 
everything. They confirmed the idea that it 
was the Annieronons who had either com- 
mitted or instigated the massacre in the past 
month. 
The Algonquains of Sillery inflict on them- 
selves severe disciplines for having been 
several times drunk; but they complain much 
and stoutly that the french get drunk and are 
bad, and that not a word is said about it. 
On the 25th a larger bell was placed in the 
parish church, instead of the small one which 
was there. 
On the 27th, Marriage of the daughter of 
Monsieur Couillar to The son of Jean Guion; 16 
father Vimont was present at the nuptials; 
there were two violins, for the 1st time. 
One dubok-a soldier, and an Empiric- 
was invited to go and see the sick at Sillery 
for 3 or 4 Days: he was lodged with us, 
without giving any information thereof to the 
Superior, et flOC male/ and he stayed there 
from the 20th of November, or thereabout, 
until the 22nd of January. The affair was 
not a success- InvtSus barbaris et gallis. 
At the Beginning of this month, the Taber- 
nacle of nostre dame des Anges was lent to 
the Ursulines,- except the Angels, which 
were lent to the parish church as ornament 
for their Altar. 
There was sold, also during this month, to 
the parish church, nearly 400 livres' worth of 
Church furniture or ornaments, which they 
t 

Acts of disciþline by 
the A 19onquins. 

Change of Bells at 
the þarish church. 

Marriage of Guyon. 

A Surgeon at 
Sillery. 

Loan of Tabernacle. 

Vestry Furniture 
sold. 


Messe anniuersaire 
de I' hosþit ale 

Dons aux sauuages. 

defense de traiter 

On commence a ven- 
dre Ie botS. 

fourniture de botS 

Valeur du þain 

assemblies du Ven- 
dredy,de 1ireInstitut. 

102 LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

la messe, qui se deuoit dire du St. Esprit a 
1'hospital pro messieurs de la Compie. gene- 
ralle, Ie dernier lour de ce moys, fut remise 
au lendemain qui estoit Ie Vendredy. 
On donna plusieurs choses aux sauuages Al- 
gonq. ce moys icy par les mains du p. Vimont, 
entr'autres deux bariques de pois; quelques 
estoffes, &c. ces sauuages estoient Noel & 
lean bapt. cõe ie croy. outre cela on ne rece- 
uoit rien du reuenu de Sillery, & cependant 
on y faisoit vne depence de près de mille 
escus; on nourrissoit aussy 3. ou 4. hurons a 
1'hospital, scauoir Atironta sa femme, son fils, 
& Jaques Acharo. 
Ie 26. du moys fut affichée la défence de 
traiter aucune pelleterie mais de porter au 
magazin Ie tout qui Ie feroit valoir aux por- 
teurs. cette defense longtemps auparauant 
auoit esté faite aux 3. riuieres. 
Cette année on commença a vendre Ie bois 
& celuy qui Ie fournissoit par les maisons en 
auoit 30. s. de la corde s'il Ie prenoit sur les 
terres d'autruy, mais de celuy qu'il prenoit sur 
ses terres, il en auoit 2tl. c'estoit done dix sols 
la corde. 
On nvf fournit du bois a l' ordinaire Ie plvf 
souuent deux traines par lour. 
Le pain valoit au magazin en ce temps 15 
sols 
Les vendredys vne demy heure deuant la 
Colãon nvf nvf assemblions pour lire quelque 


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 103 

used there; also the classification of the fur- 
niture was made, and the Lists were drawn up. 
The mass of the Holy Ghost, which was to 
be said at the hospital for messieurs of the 
general Company, on the last Day of this 
month, was postponed till the next day, which 
was Friday. 
Sundry things were given to the Algonquain 
savages this month by the hand of father Vi- 
mont,- among others, two kegs of peas, some 
stuffs, etc.: these savages were, I believe, 
Noel and Jean baptiste. Besides that, we 
received nothing in the way of revenue from 
Sillery, and yet we incurred an expense there 
of nearly a thousand écus; we also fed 3 or 
4 hurons at the hospital,- to wit, Atironta, 
his wife, his son, and Jaques Acharo. 
On the 26th of the month was posted the 
order not to trade any peltry, but to carry 
everything to the warehouse, which would 
pay the bearers its value; this prohibition had 
been made long before at 3 rivers. 
This year they began to sell wood; and the 
man who furnished it through the houses had 
3 0 sols a cord for it, if he took it from the 
lands of others; but, for that which he took 
from his own lands, he had 2 livres,- which 
is, therefore, ten sols a cord [more]. 
They furnish us with wood as usual: most 
frequently, two sledges a Day. 
Bread, at this time, was worth 15 sols at 
the warehouse. 
On Fridays, a half-hour before Supper, we 
assembled to read something about our 

Anniversary Mass 
at the hosþztal. 

Gifts to the savages. 

Prohibition of trade. 

Sale of wood 
begins. 

Suþþly of wood. 

Value of bread. 

Friday assemblies of 
our Institute. 


SI. Eloy 

SI.fr. Xauier 

Vrsulines nv/enuoy- 
en! a disner. 

104 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

chose de nostre Institut, ou qui y eut du ra- 
port; nvf Ie faisions tous les Vendredys dans 
la veüe qu' apres pasque il seroit difficile de Ie 
fa ire pour les diuerses absences & voyages: 
nví commençasmes par la lecture du 3 e . traité 
de rodriguez de la Compe. & on l'Interrom- 
poit de fois a autre pour lire Ie sommaire & 
autres choses qu on lit tous les moys chez nvf;. 
nvf y estions trois PP trois ff & vn de nos 
Domestiques. 

DECEMBRE 1645. 
Ie ler. ceux de la forge vinrent demander Ie 
vin de la St. Eloy. ils estoient quatre, on 
leur donna quatre chapelets, & au maistre vne 
bouteille de vin. 
Ie 2 Dd . a la messe St. fro xauier, on dit vne 
grande messe, oû nos ff seruirent en surplis; 
on intima Ie Dimanche auparauant les Indul- 
gences & Mons r . Ie Gouuerneur fit sonner Ie 
matin au poinct du lour la Diane, & tirer vn 
coup de canon; il n'y eut autre Ceremonie ce 
Iour-Ia: on y renouuela a la maison Ie veu de 
la Conception & a cet effect on fu t dire 
deuant Ie St. Sacrem t . les litanies & aux Vrsu- 
lines la veuille. 
Ie 36. les Vrsulines enuoyerent a disner a la 
maison; mais vn festin accompli: c'estoit Ie 
ler. Dim. de l' Aduent que Ie P. Dendemare 
commença a y prescher & moy aux Hospi- 
talieres. 


1642-45] JOUR.NAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 105 

Institute, or bearing thereon; we did so 
every Friday, considering that after easter 
it would be difficult to do this, because of 
the various absences and journeys. We be- 
gan with the reading of the 3rd treatise of 
rodriguez,17 of the Society; and we Inter- 
rupted it from time to time, in order to read 
the summary and other things which are 
read every month with us; we were three 
Fathers, three brethren, and one of our 
Domestics. 

DECEMBER, 1645. 
On the 1st, those of the forge came to ask 
for the wine for the feast of St. Eloy. They 
were four: we gave them four rosaries, and 
to the master a bottle of wine. 
On the 2nd, at the mass of St. françois 
xavier, high mass was said, at which our 
brethren served in surplices. On the Sunday 
before, the Indulgences were announced; and 
l\Ionsieur the Governor had the Reveille 
sounded in the morning at Daybreak, and a 
gun fired; there was no other Ceremony on 
that Day. At the house, the vow of the 
Conception 18 was then renewed; and to this 
end the litany was said before the Blessed 
Sacrament,- and, the day before, at the U rsu- 
lines' . 
On the 3rd, the Ursulines sent dinner to the 
house,- a perfect banquet, indeed. It was 
the 1st Sunday in Advent when Father Den- 
demare began to preach there, and I to the 
Hospital Nuns. 

St. Eloy. 

St. franfoi's Xavier. 

Ursulines send us 
dinner. 


Cltaþelle a beauþor! 
1645 

Jain/ail a la 
maison 

four de la Concep- 
tion. 

Commencem t . de 
saluts, prieres 
extraordinaires. 

106 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

Ie 4 e . on enuoya vne Chapelle complete a 
beauport dont Ie calice estoit d'estain, i1 fut 
rompu, & on Ie refit & reconsacra. 
Enuiron ce temps on commença a faire Ie 
pain a la maison tant a cause que celuy qu'on 
nvf faisoit au four du magazin n 'estoit pas 
bon; que parce qu'on se vouloit seruir du blé 
du päys dont on ne seruoit point au magazin. 
Ie 8. lour de la Conception Ie matin au point 
du lour on tira vn coup de Canon, & a 
l'Eleuãon de la grande :Messe trois autres: ie 
pub1ié Ie Dimanche d'auparauant Indulgence 
pleniere, en vertu de la bulle de Paul. 56. qui 
ê [i.e., est] aUK Hurons par Iaquelle Indulgence 
pleniere ê accordée à to utes nos Eglises Ie 
lour du Patron ou Titulaire de l'Eglise. Ay- 
ant leusné la veuille, on ne fit point absti- 
nence Ie lour, qui estoit vendredy. 
Ie 7. premier leudy de l'Aduent commen- 
cerent les saluts du St. Sacrement auec quatre 
cierges; Ie salut consiste aUK vespres du lour, 
du St. Sacrement a commencer par Ie pange 
Lingua. & yadioustant quelques oraisons con- 
uenables aUK necessités du temps. Cette de- 
uõon succeda aux Litanies de nõe Dame qu' on 
disoit tous les lours a l'issue des messes, & 
qui dura iusques aux Aduents; on retint 
toutesfois les Litanies de nõe Dame tous les 
samedys a l'Issue des messes, dont il y en auoit 
vne principale qui deuoit estre tousiours de 
Beata autant qu'il se pouroit, ou auec com me- 



. 
  4 " i1l 
} 
  ... . 'J .--. 
. j 't /r. 
  -:"\ 

  
,. 
  
  
  
., ... i 
  l 1 ;. ;
. 

  
  
\3!. 
  
ë* 1 j 1 i'
; 
-.. 
  
  
  1 

  
  
  
  
0; ! 0 
  J 

  
!: f f ..;; \..... :;. 
--:; 
  ( 
  "i, 
  
  
. ;J; r t: :: 
1 J 1 
j 
  
  
  
J . J J 
  
-2. - 
  í 
k 
.ì 'I'll A 1' í 
t '^ S -l 1 
J J ,r.t .J 
-s 
-j 
  'Þ 

  :i 
  - -J i 

  r 1:1 :f:t 

  It' f 
  îi't 
r .t 
. 
  ] 
  

  
  -1 
  -r 
  1.f 

  ! 4J . 
. fl. 
Þ-o J j 7 -1 1. 
  
>: .f) ".p i u 
Po, 1' 
  4 
  ""@ 

  Hi t f 1f 

  't b6 fj 

  
  
  
  .!'J 
1'r d 
e J '!- .1 
  
  
  t 
{tit: l tl 
  

  
I t.1 r.l, i 
  

  } j /'} 
  .;'''' " 
  
3f' 

  3- 
: tlt
it (} 
- ..$ 
  i 
  i'..! 
  

illi!T4 

  <>'1, 1 ì f 1 
t t 

i 1J1 
i -. 1: '-; J J. i. 
. 
  ." 
  ? 
  " 
< 't-. (' 

1 
...... 

  

  



1642-45J JOURNAL DES PP. jÉ:SUITES 107 

On the 4th, we sent a complete Chapel to 
beauport, in which the chalice was of pewter; 
it was broken, but was repaired, and conse- 
crated anew. 
About this time we began to make bread at 
the house,- not only because that made for 
us at the warehouse oven was not good, but 
because we wished to use the corn of the land, 
which they did not use at the warehouse. 
On the 8th,- Day of the Conception,-a 
Cannon was fired in the morning at Daybreak, 
and three others at the Elevation during high 
Mass. On the Sunday previous, I announced 
plenary Indulgence, by virtue of the bull of 
Paul 5th, which is among the Hurons,- 
whereby plenary Indulgence is granted to all 
our Churches on the Day of the Patron or 
Titular Saint of the Church. Having Fasted 
the day before, we did not observe abstinence 
on the Day itself, which was Friday. 
On the 7th,-first Thursday in Advent,- 
the benedictions of the Blessed Sacrament 
with four candles began; the benediction con- 
sists, of the vespers of the Day, of the Blessed 
Sacranlent, beginning with the paJlge LÙlgua, 
and some prayers are added, suitable to the 
exigencies of the time. This devotion took 
the place of the Litany of our Lady, which 
was said every Day at the end of the masses, 
up to the season of Advent; nevertheless, the 
Litany of our Lady was said every Saturday at 
the End of the masses,-among which there 
was a principal one, which was always de 
Beata, so far as possible: or, if not possible, 

Chaþel at beauþort, 
I61-5. 

Bread made at the 
house. 

Day of the C01lceþ- 
lion. 

Beginning of bene- 
dictions; sþecial 
þrayers. 


Dimanches de I' A d- 
uent dans les octaues 

II est mieux de ne 
þointfaire de Com- 
memo a 7lesþres & 
de se contenter de 
dire à la fin Ie Tan- 
tü ergo sacrame1ztü 
þr. salut auec l'orai- 
son du 51. 5acrem t . 
& l'oraison Devf 
refugíü 1ïrum 
& vir/us &c. 

108 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

morãon s'il ne se pouuoit, au lieu de Congre- 
gãon ou Confrerie du Rosaire. 
Le 9. on fut en doute si a cause des octaues 
de St. fro Xauier & de la Conception i1 falloit 
aux Dimanches de l' Aduent mettre du Violet & 
dire gloria, & il Se trouua que selon Ies rubri- 
ques, il falloit du Violet & ne point dire gloria. 
Le 17. Commença Ie Iubilé accordé par In- 
nocent. X. on ne fit point icy de Procession, 
mais Ie matin de ce Dimanche qui estoit Ie 3 e . 
de l' Aduent apres l' eau beniste faite & iettée, 
on commença ';HZ Vellt' Creator: pendant lequel 
Ie St. Sacrement fut exposé, & en suite on dit 
la gran de messe du Dimanche auec paremens 
violets & sans Gloria, auec Commemorãon 
du St. Sacrement: pendant Ie Veni creator 
lors qu'on exposoit Ie St. Sacrement on tira 
trois Coups de Canon; les 3. stations estoient 
Ia paroisse de Quebek, les Hospitalieres & les 
Vrsulines: les Vespres furent dites par les 
prestres debout & nue teste, & tout Ie peuple 
en ayant esté aduerti auparauant se tint debout 
ou a genoux, Mons r . Ie Gouuerneur se tint 
deb out ; Ie tout suiuant l'aduis donné Ie 
Dimanche d'auparauant de l'honneur extraor- 
dinaire qu'il falloit rendre au St. Sacrem t . lors 
qu'il ê exposé conformement au Ceremonial 
des Euesques chez Gauantus: au commen- 
cem t . de Vespres, il n'y eut que deux cierges 
allumés, & au :Magnificat on en alluma 6. 
autres pour Ie salut qui se fit en suite de Ves- 


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 109 

with commemoration, instead of the Congre- 
gation or Brotherhood of the Rosary. 
On the 9th, we were in doubt whether, be- 
cause of the octaves of St. françois Xavier and 
of the Conception, it was required to wear 
Violet and say the gloria on the Sundays in 
Adyent; and it was found that, according to 
the rubrics, Violet was required and not the 
glon:a. 
On the 17th, Began the Jubilee granted by 
Innocent X. "\Ve made no Procession here, 
but on the morning of that Sunday,-which 
was the 3rd in Advent,-after the holy water 
had been blessed and sprinkled, we began a 
Veni Creator, during which the Blessed Sacra- 
ment was exposed; and then we said the 
Sunday high mass, with violet vestments 
and without the Gloria, with Commemoration 
of the Blessed Sacrament. During the Velli 
creator, while the Blessed Sacrament was 
being exposed, three Cannon Shots were fired; 
the 3 stations were the parish church of Que- 
bek, the Hospital, and the Ursuline Convent. 
Vespers were chanted by the priests, standing 
and bareheaded; and all the people, having 
been previously notified thereof, stood or 
knelt, :Monsieur the Governor standing,-all 
conforming to the notice given the Sunday 
before, concerning the extraordinary honor 
which must be rendered to the Blessed Sacra- 
ment when it is exposed, conformably to the 
Ceremonial of the Bishops in Gavantus. 19 At 
the beginning of Vespers, there were only two 
candles lighted, and at the i1lag1l1ficat 6 others 

Sundays in Advent 
within the octaves. 

It is better not to 
make a Commemora- 
tion at vesþers, mzd 
to stoþ with sayÙzg 
at the close, the Tan- 
turn ergo sacramen- 
tum for benediction, 
with the þrayer of the 
Blessed Sacrament 
and the þrayer Deus 
refugium nostrum et 
virtus, etc. 


110 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

pres par vne commemorãon du St. Sacrement 
o sacrú Conuiuift auec l'oraison; apres la- 
quelle on dit l'Alma redemptoris &c. apres 
quoy on donna la benediction au peuple auec 
Ie St. Sacrement, on y fit vne faute de ne 
point chanter pour lors Tantü ergo Sacramen- 
tft pendant lequel se deuoient faire les encen- 
semens sans dire I' oraison: on finit par vn 
laudate, & Ie sermon se fit apres. Ie St. Sacre- 
ment ne fut exposé que les Dimanches & 
festes de la quinzaine, les lours ouuriers il ne 
l'estoit pas. Les Vrsulines entr'autres firent 
de belles aumosnes d' Estoffe aux pauures 
françois & sauuages. pour nvf nos Aumosnes 
principales furent de 7. pains, chaqu'vn de la 
valeur de 15. sols pour autant de personnes 
que nvf estions a cette maison de Quebek. 
cela toutesfois fut changé en estoffes souliers 
& Hnge dont les pauures gens auoient plvf 
de besoin. Mons r . Ie Gouuerneur aussy fit de 
belles aumosnes, 1 0 . de deux pistoles a donner 
sur Ie champ dont vne pour les pauures fran- 
çois fut changée en estoffe,l'autre fut laissée 
a la disposiõn du p. dequë pro les pauures 
sauuages de Sillery. 2 0 . il donna charge a 
Mons r . des Chastelets de donner ce que nvf 
luy demanderions pro les pauures iusques a la 
concurrence de 200tl. 
les saluts se faisoient aux religions a quatre 
heures l'vne apres l'autre Indifferemment se- 
Ion la commodité du Superieur qui preschoit 


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 111 

were lighted for the benediction, which oc- 
curred after Vespers, with a commemoration 
of the Blessed Sacrament: 0 sacrum C01IViviU'11l, 
with the prayer. After this, was said the 
Alma redemptoris, etc., and then we gave the 
benediction to the people, with the Blessed 
Sacrament,-a mistake was made herein, by 
not singing just then the Tallt2111l ergo Sacra- 
mentum, during which the incense should be 
burned without saying the prayer; we ended 
with a laudate, and the sermon was preached 
afterward. The Blessed Sacrament was 
exposed only on Sundays and feasts within the 
fortnight; on "\vorking Days, it was not. The 
Ursulines among others, gave noble alms of 
Cloth to the french and savage poor; as for 
us, our chief Alms were 7 loaves, each of the 
value of 15 sols, for as many persons as we 
were in this house at Quebek,- however that 
was exchanged for cloth, shoes, and linen, of 
which things the poor people had more need. 
:1Ionsieur the Governor also gave generous 
alms: 1st, two pistoles, given upon the spot,- 
one of which, for the french poor, was ex- 
changed for cloth; the other was left to the 
disposition of father dequen, for the poor sav- 
ages of Sillery. 2nd, he gave orders to Mon- 
sieur des Chastelets to give what we should 
ask of him for the poor, up to the amount of 
200 livres. 
The benedictions were held at the religious 
orders at four o'clock, one after the other,- 
Indifferently. according to the convenience of 
the Superior; he preached at one of them, and 


Clremonies suþþlées 
Ö-- In. Communion 
de Caterine femme 
d'Atironta. 

Ceremonies a lafeste 
de Noel. 

112 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

a l'vne des deux & ensuite n'en partoit bien 
qu'apres Ie salut & puis alloit a l'autre, & 
Mons r . Ie Gouuerneur & Ie monde suiuoit. 
Ie 23. de Dec. furent supplées les Cere- 
monies de baptesme a Caterine femme d' Ati- 
ronta, & a son fils mathieu aagé de deux ans; 
ce fut dans la chapelle de Quebek ils se tin- 
rent dans Ie banq de ]Vrons r . Ie gouuerneur 
au commencement & furent par Ia Introduits 
a l'Eglise. 
lonsr. Tronquet secretaire de 
mons r . Ie Gouuerneur fut Ie parain du petit, 
& Madame de la ferté nouuelle mariée fille 
de mons r . Giffar fut la maraine de Caterine, 
qui fit sa Ire. Comon a 1finuit. 
Ie I er . coup de la messe de minuit sonna a 
vnse heures, Ie 2 0D . vn peu deuant la demye & 
pro lors on commença a chanter deux airs, Ve- 
nez mon Dieu &c & Chantons noe &c. l\1ons r . 
de la ferté faisoit la basse St. martin Ioüoit du 
vioIon, il yauoit encores vne fluste d'alemagne 
que ne se trouue pas d'accord quand se vint a 
l'Eglise: nvf eusmes fait vn peu deuant minuit; 
on ne laissa pas de chanter Ie Te Deü, & vn 
peu apres on tira vn coup de canon pro Signal 
de minuit ou commença la messe; Ie pain be- 
nist se fit lors que Ie prestre alla pro ouurir son 
liure. Ce fut Ie I er . depuis plusieurs années 
qu'il auoit esté intermis pro les preferences 
en la distribüon que chaqu'vn pretendoit. 
Le renouuelement s'en fit par la deuõon des 
taillãdiers qui eurent deuõon de Ie faire a la 


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JÉSUITES 113 

then withdrew only after the benediction, and" 
then went to the other; and Monsieur the 
Governor and the people followed. 
On the 23rd of December, the Ceremonies Ceremonies com- 
of baptism were completed upon Caterine, þleted, and ISt Com- 
. f f A . d h h . munion of Caterine, 
WI e 0 ttronta, an on er son mat leu, ;F,F At . t 
w2.t e 0., zron a. 
aged two years; this took place in the chapel 
at Quebek; they sat in Monsieur the govern- 
or's pew, at the start, and were thereby In- 
troduced to the Church. :Monsieur Tronquet, 
secretary to monsieur the Governor, was 
godfather to the little one; and :1iadame de 
la ferté, the newly-married daughter of 
monsieur Giffar, 15 was godmother to Caterine, 
who received her 1st Communion at Midnight. 
The I st stroke of the midnight mass rang Ceremonies at the 
at eleven o'clock, the 2nd, a little before the feast of Christmas. 
half-hour; and then they began to sing two 
airs- Venez, '}!toll Dieu, etc., and Chantons noe, 
etc. :l\Ionsieur de la ferté sang the bass; St. 
martin 20 Played the violin; there was also a 
german flute, which proved to be out of tune 
when they came to the' Church. We had fin- 
ished a little before midnight; they neverthe- 
less sang the Te Deum, and a little later a can- 
non shot was fired as the Signal of midnight, 
when mass began; the bread was blessed 
when the priest went to open his book. This 
was the 1st bread blessed for several years, 
during which it had been stopped, on account 
of the precedence in its distribution, which 
everyone claimed. The renewal of the cus- 
tom was caused by the devotion of the tool- 
makers, whose devotion urged them to have 


.Danger du feu. 

114 LES RELA TIO.l'lS DES .IÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

messe de minuit; & les esprits se trouuerent 
disposés a remettre cette coustume; 
fonsr. Ie 
Gouuerneur eut Ie chanteau pro Ie faire Ie Di- 
manche d'apres: ce que l'on fit pro obuier aux 
brouilleries des preferences pretendues fut 
d'ordonner qu'en ayant donné au prestre & au 
Gouuerneur, on donneroit a tout Ie reste 
comme i1 viendroit & se trouueroit a l'Eglise, 
commençant tantost par en haut, & tantost 
par en bas. 
Mons r . Ie Gouuerneur auoit donné ordre de 
tirer a l'Eleuãon plusieurs coups de Canon 
lors que ñre f. Ie sacristain en donneroit Ie 
Signal, mais i1 s'en oub1ia, & ainsy on ne tira 
point: Ie monde Communia a la fin de la 
grande messe, apres laquelle s'en dit vne 
basse. 
II y auoit quatre chandeles dans l'Eglise 
dans des petits chandeliers de fer en façon de 
Goncole & cela suffit. II y auoit en outre 
deux grandes chaudieres fournies du magazin 
pleines de feu pour eschaufer la chapelle; 
elles furent allumées auparauant sur Ie pont, 
on auoit donné ordre de les oster apres la 
messe, mais cela ayant esté negligé Ie feu prit 
la nuit au plancher qui estoit au dessoubs de 
l'vne des chaudieres dans laquelle i1 n'y auoit 
pas au fond assez de cendre, mais par bon- 
heur dirigente Dño Ie feu ne parut que sur 
les 5. h. du matin au dessus de ñre sale ou 
refectoire & cuisine dans laquelle estoit pierre 


1642-45] .I0UR,NAL DES PP. .IÉSUITES 115 

it during midnight mass; and people's minds 
were disposed to restore this custom. 1\lon- 
sieur the Governor received the chanteau 21 
that he might furnish it on the Sunday fol- 
lowing: what was done to obviate the compli- 
cations of the preferences claimed was, to 
order that after a portion had been given to 
the priest and to the Governor, all the others 
should receive as they might come and chance 
to be in the Church: beginning now in front, 
and now in the rear. 
:Monsieur the Governor had given orders to 
fire several Cannon shots at the Elevation, 
when our brother the sacristan should give 
the Signal; but he forgot it, and thus there 
was no salute. The people received Commun- 
ion at the end of high mass; after which a low 
mass was said. 
There were four candles in the Church in 
small iron candlesticks in the form of a 
Bracket, and that is enough. There were, be- 
sides, two great kettles full of fire, furnished 
by the warehouse in order to warm the chap- 
el; they were kindled beforehand, on the 
bridge. Directions had been given to remove 
them after mass, but, that having been neg- 
lected, the fire caught in the night on the 
floor which was under one of the kettles, in 
which there were not enough ashes at the 
bottom. But fortunately, dirigellte DOlllÙlO, 
the fire did not appear till toward 5 0' clock in 
the morning, above our hall or refectory, and 
kitchen, in which was pierre gontier, our 
Cook,- who, perceiving this, immediately 

Danger of fire. 


on va a beauþort 

Sauuages gãgnent 
Ie IubtU. 

On ferme Ie lubilé. 

116 LES RELA TIO.l'lS DES J

'SUITES [VOL. 27 

gontier ñre Cuisinier qui s'aperceuant de cela 
monta aussy tost & sans autre bruit esteignit 
Ie feu. 
on dit la grande messe du lour sur les 8. 
heures, & deuant & apres deux prestres dirent 
leur trois messes. 
a vespres on chanta quelques pscaumes en 
faux- bourdon. 
Le P. Vimont apres auoir assisté au Salut 
des Hospitalieres s'en alIa a beauport pro ceux 
qui n'auoient pu venir icy; il Y fut 3. lours. 
Le 26. lour de St. Estienne La bourgade de 
Sillery vint icy en procession faire ses stations 
pro gangner Ie lubilé deux de nos hommes por- 
toient la bani ere & la croix, les PP. de Quen 
& dreuilletes vinrent auec eux en Surplis & 
dominau, & entre'eux deux toute la troupe des 
sauuages Xstiens au nombre de plus d'vne 
centaine. ils vinrent a leun en vn temps 
grandement froid, & sten retournerent sans 
manger. on leur fit festin au retour a Sillery 
de la part de 1Ions r . Ie Gouuerneur: ils 
chanterent par tout fort melodieusement, & 
dirent vne dizaine de leur chapelet. 
Le dernier lour de l' an se firma Ie I ubilé ; 
nvf pensasmes faire procession, mais Ie temps 
d'hyuer n'est nullem t . commode pour cela. 
on se contenta done de faire Ie salut a l' ordi- 
naire a l'issue de vespres, on tira trois coups 
de Canon lors qu'on donna la benediction auec 
Ie St. Saerement, & on alIa aux maisons 


1642-45] ./OURNAL DES PP. ./ÉSUITES 117 

went up and, without other noise, put out the 
fire. 
High mass for the Day was said at 8 0' clock, 
and, before and afterward, two priests said 
their three masses. 
At vespers, some psalms were chanted in 
faux-bourdon. 
Father Vimont, after being present at the 
Benediction at the Hospital Nuns', went away 
to beauport, for those who had not been able 
to come here; he was there 3 Days. 
On the 26th, Day of S1. Stephen, The 
village of Sillery came here in a procession to 
make its stations in order to gain the Jubilee: 
two of our men bore the banner and the cross; 
Fathers de Quen and dreuilletes came with 
them, in Surplices and dominoes, and between 
them the whole troop of Christian savages to 
the number of more than a hundred. They 
came Fasting, at an extremely cold season, 
and returned without eating. A feast was 
given them on their return to Sillery, on the 
part of :Monsieur the Governor. They sang 
very melodiously everywhere, and said a 
decade of their rosaries. 
On the last Day of the year, the Jubilee 
was closed; we thought of making a proces- 
sion, but the winter season is not at all con- 
venient for that; accordingly, we were con- 
tent with giving the benediction as usual at 
the end of vespers. Three Cannon shots were 
fired when the benediction with the Blessed 
Sacrament was given, and we went to the 
religious houses to give the benedictions in 

Triþ to beauþort. 

Savages gain the 
Jubilee. 

The ./ubilee is closed. 


á(/ftculté sur Ie þai'n 
benito 

Ius/lee de deux 
yurongnes. 

on va a rlehelieu 

118 LES RELA TI01VS DES .I
3UITES [VOL. 27 

religieuses faire Ie salut pareillement, & fermer 
Ie Iubilé, on ne tira point. 
Le pain benit du Dimanche fut transporté 
au lundy, iour de Ia Circoncision. 11ons r . Ie 
Gouuerneur Ie donna; il y eut quelque parolle 
en suite a qui on Ie donneroit apres luy, & il 
fut trouué plví a propos de Ie donner aux deux 
marguillers, 11ons r . Giffar & Mons r . des Chas- 
telets, & puis commencer par Ie haut de la 
coste de Ste. geneuieue, comme par vne rüe; 
puis reuenir par en bas, comme par vne autre 
rue, & continüer de la sorte Ie p. Vimont en 
dressa vn Catalogue. 
Deux de nos françois s'estant mis a boire, 
attendant la messe de minuit, s'enyurerent 
auec beaucoup de scan dale de quelques fran- 
çois & sauuages qui les virent, on prescha 
fortement contre, a raison de ce que les 
sauuages disoient on nví fait prendre la disci- 
pline, quand nví nví enyurons & on ne dit 
rien aux françois. i1 n'en falloit pas dauan- 
tage que ce qui en fut dit en public. I\lons r . 
Ie gouuerneur les fit mettre sur Ie cheualet 
exposes a vn Nord est espouuantable. 
Ie p. de noüe partit du 3. riu. Ie Dimanche 
deuant Noël pro aller a richelieu leur faire 
gangner Ie lubilé. i1 y demeura 12. lours, & 
en raporta, qu'il y auoit quelque espece de 
necessité qu'on y retournast pour empescher 
bien du desordre & de la brouillerie 
Sur la fin de l' année, les Y rsulines & Hos- 


1642-45J .I0UR./VAL DES PP. .IÉSUITES 119 

like manner, and to close the Jubilee; there 
was no salute. 
The bread blessed on Sunday was distrib- DijJiculty about the 
uted on 1Ionday, day of the Circumcision; consecrated bread. 
Monsieur the Governor gave it. There was 
some discussion afterward as to whom it 
should be given after him; and it was found 
more suitable to give it to the two church- 
wardens, Monsieur Giffar and Monsieur des 
Chastelets, and then to begin at the top of the 
side of Ste. genevieve, as in case of a street; 
then to return from behind, as if by another 
street, and to continue in that way. Father 
\lïmont drew up a List for them. 
Two of our french having begun to drink, .Ius/ice to two 
while waiting for the midnight mass, became drunkards. 
intoxicated, with much scandal to some french- 
men and savages who saw them. We preached 
vigorously against it, because the savages said: 
" They make us take the discipline when we 
get drunk, and they say nothing to the 
french. " Nothing further was required than 
this public expression; Monsieur the governor 
had them put on the chevalet, exposed to a 
frightful Northeast wind. 
Father de noüe started from 3 rivers the Triþ to richelieu. 
Sunday before Christmas, in order to go to 
richelieu, and have them gain the Jubilee; he 
remained there 12 Days, and reported that 
there was some sort of necessity to return 
there, in order to prevent much disorder and 
confusion. 
Toward the end of the year, the U rsulines 
and Hospital Nuns showed me a document by 


Concession de þrairze 
aux religÙuses 

Ie þ. Vimont luy 
mesme reþara Ie 
tout þuis aþres; 
voyez cy aþres 
au moys de 
Iuin. 

sauuages Xstiens 
hiu. a Szllery. 

120 LES RELA TIO.l'lS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 27 

pitalieres me firent voir vn escrit, par lequel 
Ie p. Vimont mon predecesseur leur avoit 
donné & cedé pour 6. ans 6. arpents de prez a 
chaqu'vne sur les meilleures prairies que nvf 
eussions: scauoir depuis la riuiere de la Ca- 
bane aux Topiers 12. arpens en tirant vers 
Mons r . Giffar Ie don estoit signé du moys 
d'Auril ou de May 1645. vn an presq. apres 
qu'il auoit receu les patentes de son succes- 
seur, qu'on attendoit en ce temps-Ià: apres 
auoir veu les papiers, ie les rendis sans les 
approuuer ou Improuuer, ne Iugeant pas a pro- 
pos de rien faire dauantage; au fond i'y trou- 
uois deux choses a redire. l'vne qu'il eut fait 
ce don pour 6. ans se deuant contenter au plvf 
de Ie faire pour vn an; l'autre qu'il leur eut 
cedé cela pour vn temps notable gratis sans 
aucune charge cõe d'vn x e . ou xx e . OU xxx e . 
II y auoit a Sillery cette année enuiron 167. 
ames, tous Xstiens ou Catecumenes; 98. de 
Communians, 47. non capable de Confession, 
14. capable de la seule Confession, Ie reste 
passoit pro Cateculnene 


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. .IÉSUITES 121 

which father Vimollt, my predecessor, had 
given and ceded to them, for 6 years, 6 arpents 
of grazing land to each convent, on the best 
natural meadows that we had,-to wit, from 
the river of the Cabin to the Topiers,22 12 
arpents, in the direction of Monsieur Giffar. 
The grant was signed in the month of April or 
of May, 1645, almost a year after he had re- 
ceived the letters patent of his successor, who 
was expected at that time. After seeing the 
papers, I returned them without approving 
or Disapproving them,- not Judging it advis- 
able to do anything further. In reality, I 
found two things to criticize therein,- one, 
that he had made this gift for 6 years, whereas 
he should have been content to make it for 
one year, at the most; the other, that he had 
made them such a concession for a consider- 
able time, gratuitously, without any charge- 
as, for instance, a tenth, or twentieth, or 
thirtieth. 
There were at Sillery, this year, about 167 
souls, all Christians or Catechumens,- 9 8 
Communicants, 47 not qualified for Confes- 
sion, ]4 qualified for Confession alone, the 
rest were considered Catechumens. 

Grant of meadow 
land to the nuns. 

Father Vimont hIm- 
self recovered the 
whole subsequently; 
see hereinafter 
under the month of 
June. 

Christian savages 
wintering at SllIery. 



LV 

RELATION OF 1644-45 

PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1646 

SOURCE: We follow a copy of the original Cramoisy edi- 
tion, owned by The Burrows Brothers Company, Cleveland, 
a duplicate of the one at Lenox Library (H. 84). 
Chaps. i.- xi. are given in the present volume; the 
remainder of the document will appear in Volume XXVIII. 




RELATION 

DE CE QyI 5 J1 ESX P A-SSE 
EN LA 
NOVVELLE FRANCE 
és Années J644- & 164j'. 

. I 

  N V 0 Y E E A V R. PERE 
. t 
Prouincial de la Compagnie de 
I E S V s en la Prouince de France. 

P-4Y Ie P. BAll THE LE MY V I MONT de 
Ú mifme Comp.1gnie Superieur de 14 
.Reßdel1ce de },:thtc. 
,t1 

A PAR I .5, 
( s EJ3ASTIEN CRAMOISV, ) " .. 
· ImprimeluordinaireduRoYII . ruê:' S.Ia.:; 
Cbc:z &. de l:íl. Rcync Regcnte_ }q
cs, aU1l 
..... E T , CltOgnCS, 
.lGAÐRIEL CR"AMOISY. J 

1( 

M. DC. XLVI. 
A P Y-.C p f} l...v 1 T .... 
  
  

- 4- 


RELA TION 

OF WHAT OCCURRED 
IN 
NEW FRANCE, 
in the Years 16 44 and 1645'. 

SENT TO THE REV. FATHER 
Provincial of the Society ofJ ESUS 
in the Province of France. 

By Father BARTHELEMY VI MONT of 
the same Soâety, Superzor of the 
Residence of Kebec. 

PARIS, 
j SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY.1 
. Printer in ordinary to the King ! ru ë St. Jac- 
Pnnt- and to the Queen Regent.' q
es, at the 
ed by l ' SIgn of the 
AND Storks. 
. GABRIEL CRAMOISY. 

M. DC. XLVI. 
BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


128 

LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Table des Chapitres contenus en ce Liure. 

R ELATION de ce qui s' eft paßI en la nouuelle 
France, Is annles 1644. & 1645. . page 
Chapitre I. De l' ejlat general de la miffion. 2 
Chap. II. De quelques bonnes aélions, & de quelques 
bons fentimens des Sauuages Chrejlz"ens. 7 
Chap. III. Continuation du mefme fujet. IS 
Chap. IV. Suite du mefme fujet. 25 
Chap. V. De quelques aélions plus remarquables. 32 
Chap. VI. De l'hyuernement d'vn Pere auec Üs 
Sauuages. 48 
Chap. VII. De quelques furprifes faites par l
s 
Hiroquois. 62 
Chap. VIII. De quelques prz/onnz"ers Hiroquois. 68 
Chap. IX. Traitl de la Paix entre les François, 
HiroquotS & autres nations. 82 
Chap. X. Suite du Traitl de la Paix. 102 
Chap. XI. De la derniere affemblle tenuë pour /a 
Paix. 115 
Chap. XII. De ce qui s' eft paßI à Mifcou. 124 
Lettre du P. Hierofine Lalemant, efcrite des Hurons 
IJJ4 R. P. Prou'indal de la Compagnie tk 
I E S V S . I 36 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-4.5 

129 

Table of the Chapters contained in this Book. 

R ELATION of what occurred in new France, 
in the years 1644 and 1645. . page 
Chapter I. Of the general state of the mission. 2 
Chap. II. Of some good actions and some good 
sentiments of the Christian Savages. 7 
Chap. III. Continuation of the same subject. 15 
Chap. IV. Continuation of the same subject. 25 
Chap. V. Of some especially remarkable actions.. 3 2 
Chap. VI. Of the wintering of a Father among the 
Savages. 4 8 
Chap. VII. Of some surprises by the Hiroquozs. 62 
Chap. VIII. Of some Hiroquois prison
rs. 68 
Chap. IX. Treaty of Peace between the French, 
the Hiroquois, and otller nations. 82 
Chap. X. Continuation of the Treaty of Peace. 102 
Chap. XI. Of the last meeting held for the Peace. I 15 
Chap. XII. Of what occurred at Miscou. 1 2 4 
Lllter from Father Hierosme Lalemant, written 
from the Huron country to the Revertnd 
Father Provincial of the Society of J E S us. 13 6 


130 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. !7 

Extraiét du Priuilege du Roy. 

P AR Grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis à 
SEBASTIEN C RAMOIS Y Marchand Libraire 
Iuré en l'Vniuerfité de Paris, & Imprimeur 
ordinaire du Roy, d'imprimer au faire imprimer vn 
Liure intitulé, Relat'ion de ce qui s' ejl paßI en la Nou- 
uelle France Is annles mz'l fix cens quarante-quatr & 
quarante-Únq, elluoyle au R. P. ProuinÚal de la Compa- 
gnÙ de IE S V S en la ProuÙlce de France, par Ie P. Bar- 
thelemy Vz'mont de la me/me CompagnÙ, & SuperÙur de 
la Refidence de Kebec: & ce pendant Ie temps & efpace 
de fept années confecutiues, auec deffenfes à taus 
Libraires & Imprimeurs d'imprimer ou faire impri- 
mer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de déguifement ou 
changement qu'ils y pourront faire, à peine de confif- 
cation & de l'amende portée par Iedit Priuilege. 
Donné à Paris Ie vnziéme Decembre 1645. 
Par Ie Roy en fan Confeil, 
CRAMOISY. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF J644-4.5 

131 

Extract from the Royal License. 

B y Grace and Privilege of the King, permission 
is granted to SE BASTI EN C RA M 0 IS Y, Book- 
seller under Oath in the University of Paris 
and Printer in ordinary to the King, to print or to 
have printed a Book entitled: Relatz"on de ce qui s' est 
pass! ell la Nouvelle France Is années mil szx cens qua- 
rante-quatre et quarante-dnq, envoyée au R. P. Provin- 
cial de la CompagnÙ! de J E S U S en la Prov'ince de France, 
par Ie P. Barthelemy Vi11l0nt de la mesme CompagnÙ!, et 
SuperÙ!ur de la ResÙlence de Kebec; and this during the 
time and space of seven consecutive years; prohibit- 
ing all Booksellers and Printers to print or to have 
printed the said Book, under pretext of disguise or 
change that they might make therein, on pain of con- 
fiscation of the copies, and of the fine provided by 
the said License. Given at Paris, the eleventh of 
December, 1645. 

By the King in Council, 
CRAMOISY. 


132 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Permiffion du P. Prouincial. 

N OVS ESTIENNE BINET Prouincial de la Com- 
pagnie de IE S V S en la Prouince de France, 
auons accordé pour l'aduenir au fieur Sebaftien 
Cramoify Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordinaire 
du Roy, l'impreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle 
France. Fait à Paris Ie 26. Mars 1638. 
ESTIENNE BINET. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OJ' r644-45 

133 

Permission of the Father Provincial. 

W E, ESTIENNE BINET, Provincial of the 
Society of J E S U S in the Province of France, 
have granted for the future to sieur Sebas- 
tien Cramoisy, Bookseller and Printer in ordinary to 
the King, the printing of the Relations of New 
France. Done at Paris, the 26th of March, 1638. 
ESTIENNE BINET. 


134 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSU.ITES 

[V OL. 27 

[1] Relation de ce qui s'eft paffé en la Novvelle 
France, es Annees 16 44. & 16 45. 

M ON REVEREND PERE, 
Voila nofire Relation que i'enuoye encore 
cette Année à vofire Reuerence. Le R. P. 
Hierofme Lallemant nofire Superieur efiant arriué fi 
tard, qu'il ne luy a pas efié poffible d'y vacquer: ie 
croy que les nouuelles de cette Année donneront de 
la confolation à V o fire Reuerence, & à tous ceux qui 
pre
nent quelque part dans les affaires de l'efiablifIe- 
ment du Royaume de Dieu en ces contrées; il plaira 
à V. R. nous ayder [2] à en remercier la diuine 
Bonté, & à obtenir les graces necefIaires pour nous 
rendre dignes de fes faueurs 
De V. R. 

De Quebec, ce 
1. d'Ollobre, 1645. 

Tres-hum ble & tres- 
obeifIant feruiteur, 
en N. Seigneur, 
BARTHELEMY VIMONT. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

135 

[I] Relation of what occurred in New France, in 
the Years 1644 and 164,. 

M y REVEREND FATHER, 
Here is our Relation that I send this Year 
again to your Reverence. Reverend Father 
Hierosme Lallemant, our Superior, arrived so late 
that he was unable to attend to it. I think that this 
Year's news will give consolation to Your Reverence, 
and to all who take any interest in the affairs of the 
establishment of God's Kingdom in these countries. 
Your Reverence will be pleased to help us [2] to thank 
the divine Goodness for it, and to obtain the neces- 
sary graces to make us worthy of his favors. 
Your Reverence's 
Most humble and most 
obedient servant in 
Our Lord, 
BARTHELEMY VIMONT. 

From Quebec, thz's 
ut of October, 1645. 


136 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

CHAPITRE PREMIER. 

DE L'ESTAT GENERAL DE LA MISSION. 

D IED foit beny dans Ie temps & dans l'Eternité, 
Ie fang refpandu pour IESVS-CHRIST dans 
les pays des Iroquois, meílé auec les prieres & 
les væux de tant d'ames fainétes, qui s'interefIent 
pour l'amplification de fon Royaume en ce nouueau 
Monde nous a enfin produit la Paix auec ces Bar- 
bares. Le P. Ifaac Iogues & Ie P. François BrefIani 
à fon retour ont embrafIé comme amis ceux qui [3] 
ont déchiré leurs corps, arrachés leurs ongles & coup- 
pez leurs doigts, en vn mot ceux qui les ont traitez 
en tygres, ce coup eft venu du Ciel, nous verrons 
tantoft cõme la chofe s'efl pafIée. Voila vne grande 
porte ouuerte aux Croix & à l'Euangile, dans plu- 
fieurs Nations fort peuplées pourueu qu'on y puifIe 
entretenir des ouuriers Euangeliques. Pendant que 
Monfieur Ie Cheualier de Montmagni noftre Gouuer- 
neur traittoit cette Paix auec fa prudence ordinaire, 
Ie pays pofIedoit vn autre bon-heur dont it n'a eu 
connoifIance qu'à la venuë des vaifIeaux. Meffieurs 
de la Compagnie de la Nouuelle France voulant pro- 
curer la conuerfion des Sauuages, & amplifier la Colo- 
nie Françoife, luy ont remis entre les mains Ie trafic 
de la Pelterie, que Sa Majefté leur auoit accordé, 
n'ignorant pas que la force des François fera l'apuy 
des nouuelles Eglifes qu'on tafche d'engendrer à 
I E S V S - C H R 1ST dans cette extremité du Monde. 


1642-4J>] 

RELA TION OF r6#--I5 

137 

CHAPTER FIRST. 

OF THE GENERAL Sf ATE OF THE MISSION. 

G OD be praised in time and in Eternity; the 
blood shed for J E S U S C H R 1ST in the coun- 
try of the Iroquois-mingled with the pray- 
ers and vows of so many holy souls, who are inter- 
ested in the spread of his Kingdom in the new 
World-has finally brought us Peace with those Bar- 
barians. Father Isaac J ogues and Father François 
Bressani, on their return, embraced as friends those 
who [3] had lacerated their bodies, torn out their 
nails, and cut off their fingers,-in a word, those who 
had treated them as tigers would. This event was 
due to Heaven; we shall presently see how it came 
to pass. This is a wide gateway opened for Crosses 
and to the Gospel in many very populous Nations, 
provided we can maintain Evangelistic laborers there. 
While Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagni, our 
Governor, was treating for this Peace with his usual 
prudence, the country possessed another blessing, 
which came to its knowledge only when the ships 
arrived. The Gentlemen of the Company of New 
France, wishing to procure the conversion of the 
Savages, and to increase the French Colony, returned 
into His Majesty's hands the traffic in Furs that he 
had granted them,- being fully aware that the 
strength of the French would be the support of the 
new Churches that we endeavor to beget to J ES us 
CHRIST at this extremity of the World. Now as 


138 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

Or comme cette Colonie efi encor en fon Enfance, 
Meffieurs de Monfireal zelé pour la Conuerfion de ces 
peuples, ont auffi fait paroiftre l'excez de leur amour 
& de leur charité enuers la Colonie [4] Françoife. La 
Reyne dont les bontez ne font point limitées par les 
born,es de l'Europe, s'efi nettement declarée la Mere 
& la Proteétrice de fes fujets François & Sauuages 
de ces contrées. Toutes ces benediétions font d'au- 
tant plus douces qu'il y a d'amertumes dans vn pais 
tout remply d'horreur & de barbarie, car il faut auoüer 
que ces peuples font extremement efioignez de la 
courtoifie Françoife, & qu'il faut des Heros, des 
Hercules, & des Geans pour combattre des Monfires, 
des Hydres, & des Demons. Les Sauuages qui fe 
trouuent ordinairement dans toutes nos habitations, 
depuis Tadoufac iufques à Monftreal, ont efté culti- 
uez auec vn grand foin, & auec beaucoup de peines 
en diuers endroits. Les Vrfulines & les Hofpitali- 
eres fe font acquittées de leurs fonétions auec des 
ioyes & des contentemens dignes de leurs courages; 
celles-cy ont efté affligées par de longues maladies de 
leurs Sæurs, & les premieres ont trouué vn nouuel 
employ pour l'infiruétion des Sauuages. Les femmes 
Chrefiiennes demanderent à vn Pere de noftre 
Compagnie s'il n'y auroit pas de moyen que quel- 
qu'vne de ces bonnes [5] Meres vint demeurer auec 
elles pour les faire prier Dieu, cela n'efiant pas dans 
la bien-feance, elles leurs enuoyerent l'vne de leurs 
Seminariftes, qui s'efi fort bien acquittée de fon 
petit deuoir. 
Les Peres de noftre Compagnie ont trãuaillé auec 
fuccez. Les Sauuages de plufieurs petites Nations 
fe font petit à petit approchées, & Ie bruit de l'Euan- 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

139 

this Colony is, as yet, but in its Infancy, the Gentle- 
men of 1fontreal, zealous for the Conversion of these 
peoples, have likewise manifested the excess of their 
love and of their charity toward the French Colony. 
[4J The Queen, whose kindness is not limited by the 
boundaries of Europe, has distinctly declared herself 
the Mother and Protectress of her French and Savage 
subjects in these countries. All these blessings are 
the sweeter, since there are bitter experiences in a 
country so filled with horrors and barbarism; for it 
must be admitted that these peoples are very far from 
having the French courtesy, and that Heroes, Her- 
cules, and Giants are needed to fight Monsters, 
Hydras, and Demons. The Savages who are usually 
found in all our settlements, from Tadousac to Mont- 
real, have been fostered with much care, and with 
much trouble in various ways. The Ursulines and 
the Hospital Nuns have performed their duties with 
joy and content worthy of their courage. The latter 
have been afflicted by long illnesses of their Sisters; 
and the former have found a new employment, in 
the instruction of the Savages. The Christian wom- 
en asked a Father of our Society if it would not be 
possible to have one of these good [5] Mothers reside 
with them, to make them pray to God. As this 
would not be proper, they sent them one of their 
Seminarists, who has very wen performed her little 
task. 
The Fathers of our Society have labored with suc- 
cess. The Savages of many small Tribes have grad- 
ually drawn near, and the fame of the Gospel is 
spreading to the remotest depths of the thickest for- 
ests, where Barbarism has its lair. We will not say 
anything in particular of the various residences, or of 


140 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

gile fe va refpandant iufques dans Ie fonds des plus 
épaiffes forefts, où la Barbarie fait fon repaire. N ous 
ne parlerons point en particulier des diuerfes refi- 
dences ny des diuerfes Miffions de noftre Compagnie, 
de peur d'vfer de redites, les chofes qui fe paffent de 
nouueau ont tant de raport auec celles qui ont defia 
efté efcrites, que Ie danger du degouft nous rendra 
fuccints de plus en plus: fi bien que nous ne touche- 
rons en cette Relation que quelques fentimens, & 
quelques aétions des plus feruens Chreftiens, fans 
fpecifier s'ils font de Monftreal, de Sainét Iofeph, ou 
de Tadoufac; Et en fuite nous verrons les Ceremo- 
nies qui fe font faites dans Ie traitté de la Paix auec 
les Iroquois. Comme nous eftions dans cette ayma- 
ble occupation, qui depuis long-temps auoit plutoft 
efté [6] l'objet de nos fouhaits que de nos attentes, 
Dieu nous voulut donner la ioye toute entiere: Car 
Ie Reuerend P. Hierofme Lallemant qui eft venu 
prendre la charge de toute noftre Million, auec vne 
bonne trouppe de Hurons, parmy lefquels il y auoit 
vne trentaine de braues Chreftiens qui ont tenu les 
premiers rangs dans les harangues & dans les affaires 
qu'on a cõcIu auec Ies Iroquois. Que Ie Dieu d'Ifraël 
foit beny à iamais pource qu'il nous a cõbIé de fes 
plus grandes mifericordes il fçait abaiffer & releuer 
quand il luy plaift, mais au bout du compte ce nou- 
uel écIat eft vn rayon de la Montagne de Thabor où 
on ne parle que des excés de IE S V S - C H R 1ST, il ne 
faut pas fucrer nos trauaux, Ie falut des hommes s'eft 
operé en la Croix, on ne fçauroit Ie procurer par autre 
voye, C'eft par ce chemin feul qu'on ameine les ames 
à Dieu, & qui n'y veut point entrer, n'a que faire de 
paroiftre parmy les Sauuages. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

141 

the various Missions of our Society, for fear of repe- 
tition; the new events that occur are so similar to 
those which have already been written of, that the 
fear of causing distaste will make us more and more 
concise,- so much so that, in this Relation, we will 
mention only some sentiments and some actions of 
the most fervent Christians, without specifying 
whether they belong to 
Iontreal, to Saint Joseph, or 
to Tadousac. And afterward we will see the Cere- 
monies that were observed in the negotiation of the 
Peace with the Iroquois. \Vhile we were engaged 
in that pleasant occupation. which had long been 
more [6] the object of our desires than of our expec- 
tations, God chose to give us the fullest joy. For 
Reverend Father Hierosme Lallemant came to take 
charge of the whole of our Mission, with a consider- 
able band of Hurons, among whom were some thirty 
worthy Christians, who occupied the foremost rank 
in the harangues, and in the affairs that were con- 
cluded with the Iroquois. Praised forever be the God 
of Israel, because he has showered his greatest 
mercies upon us. He can both humble and exalt 
when he pleases; but, after all, this new light is a 
ray from l\lount Tabor, where the death-sufferings of 
JESUS CHRIST alone are mentioned. Our labors 
must not be sweetened; the salvation of mankind 
was effected on the Cross and it cannot be obtained 
in any other way. It is by that road alone that souls 
can be brought to God; and he who has no desire to 
enter upon it need not make his appearance among 
the Savages. 


142 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

[7] CHAPITRE II. 

DE QUELQUES BONNES ACTIONS & DE QUELQUES BONS 
SENTI MENS DES SAUUAGES CHRESTIENS. 

I ' VSERA Y de redites fi ie fais mention des prieres 
que font les Chreftiens tous les foirs & tous les 
matins. Leur chaffe & les Iroquois les ont eíloi- 
gnez de l'Eglife pendant tout l'hyuer; mais ny les 
bommes ny les Demons ne les ont pû empefcher de 
rendre à Dieu leur petit deuoir. Ils emportent auec 
eux dans les bois vn memoire ou vn petit Cathalogue 
des iours de Fefte, qu'ils gardent auec beaucoup de 
ref peét pour des hommes naiz & nourris dans les 
forefts comme des beftes. Ils s'affemblent tous dans 
vne Cabane, font leurs prieres publiquement, ils 
chantent quelque Cantique Spirituel, & l'vn d'eux 
tiendra par fois quelques diícours fur quelques points 
de noftre creance, ces Affemblées n'empefchent pas 
que chacun ne prie encor en fa Cabane à fon réueil 
[8] & à fon coucher, s'ils font proches de l'Eglife, la 
cloche les appelle tous les iours à la Meffe, & les fait 
venir fur Ie foir aux prieres & à l'inftruétion. Cela 
va fon train en forte neantmoins que les vns marchent 
bien plus vifte que les autres. 
Retournant de leur longues chaffes ils fe confeffent 
ordinairement deux fois deuant que de fe Commu- 
nier, ils difent pour raifon que leur memoire eft 
courte, qu'ils n'ont point de papier ny d'ancre comme 
nous pour marquer leurs fautes, & que s'ils en obmet- 


1642-45J 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

143 

[7] CHAPTER II. 

OF SOME GOOD ACTIONS AND OF SOME GOOD SENTI- 
MENTS OF THE CHRISTIAN SAVAGES. 

I WOULD only use repetitions were I to mention 
the prayers said by the Christians, every night 
and morning. Their hunting and the Iroquois 
kept them away from the Church throughout the 
winter, but neither men nor Demons could prevent 
them from performing their minor duties toward 
God. They take with them to the woods a memo- 
randum or short Catalogue of the Festival days, 
which they observe with much respect, for men born 
and brought up in the forests like beasts. They all 
assemble in one Cabin, say their prayers publicly, 
and sing a Hymn, and sometimes one of them win 
give a discourse on some points of our belief. These 
Meetings do not prevent each one from saying his 
prayers again in his Cabin, on rising [8] and on going 
to sleep. If they are near the Church, the bell caBs 
them every day to Mass, and summons them at even- 
ing for prayers and instruction. This goes on regu- 
larly-in such manner, however, that some advance 
much faster than others. 
When they return from their long hunts, they usu- 
ally confess themselves twice before receiving Com- 
munion. They give as a reason for this that their 
memory is short; that they have neither paper nor 
ink, as we have, wherewith to write down their sins; 
and that, if they omit some through forgetfulness at 


144 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUfTES 

[VOL. 27 

tent quelques vnes par oubly à la premiere Confef- 
fion, qu'ils s.en pourront fouuenir à la feconde, quel- 
ques-vns fe feruent des grains de leurs Chappelets 
pour memoire locale. V ne bonne fème doüée d'vne 
auffi grande fimplicité qu'elle a peu de memoire, 
abordant vn Pere luy dit auec vne ingenuité toute 
aymable: voilà tous mes pechez, elle monfiroit enui- 
ron vne dixaine de fon Chappelet, ils font tous fur 
ces grains, difoit-elle, & les maniant les vns apres 
les autres comme fi elle eufi fait fa priere, elle 
s'accufoit comme coupable de beal1coup de chofes 
innocentes. 
Vne autre enuoye fon mary pour s'excufer [9J fi 
elle ne venoit point à la fainte Table comme elle 
auoit promis, elle a oub1ié, difoit fon mary, vn gros 
peché: & ie croy qu'il auoit charge de Ie dire au 
Pere; mais cette bonne fenlnle efiant venuë elle 
mefme, Ie Pere la fit Communier, ayant reconnû la 
crainte & la fimplicité innocente du mary & de la 
femme. 
Vn ieune homme ayant ordre de fe Communier, 
car pour l'ordinaire ils ne s'aprochent point de ce 
diuin Sacrement qu'on ne leur permette, fe vint auffi 
excufer difant, qu'il vouloit pre parer fon cæur & 
ieufner plufieurs fois, & s'attrifier long-temps de fes 
pechez deuant que de receuoir fon Seigneur. Quel- 
ques-vns prient leurs Confeffeurs de leur enioindre 
de bonnes Penitences, de les faire ieufner, tefmoi- 
gnans de grands regrets d'auoir fafché Dieu comme 
ils parlen t. 
Vn Capitaine ayant trouué Ie moyen d'auoir du 
vin, en donna à boire à quelques-vns de fes amys, 
l'vn d'eux s'enyura: Cela nous eítant rapporté nous 


1642 -45] 

RELA TION OF I644-4í 

145 

the first Confession, they will be able to remember 
them at the second. Some of them use the beads of 
their Rosaries as a local reminder. A good woman, 
whose simplicity is as great as her want of memory, 
approached a Father one day, and said to him, with 
most pleasing ingenuousness, "Here are all my 
sins;" and she showed him about a decade of her 
Rosary. "They are all on those beads," she said; 
and, passing them one after another through her 
fingers, as if she had been saying her prayers, she 
accused herself of having committed many harmless 
things. 
Another sent her husband to bear her excuses [9] 
for not having approached the holy Table as she had 
promised. "She has forgotten," said her husband, 
" a great sin; " and I think that he had been charged 
to tell it to the Father, but the good woman herself 

me, and the Father gave her Communion, having 
recognized the fear and innocent simplicity of the 
husband and wife. 
A young man who had obtained permission to 
receive Communion-for, as a rule, they do not 
approach that divine Sacrament unless we allow them 
to do so-also came to excuse himself, saying that he 
wished to prepare his soul, to fast several times, and 
to sorrow for his sins a long while, before receiving 
his Lord. Some beg their Confessors to give them 
hard Penances, and to make them fast; and they 
manifest great regret for having made God angry, as 
they say. 
A Captain found means to procure wine, and gave 
some of his friends a portion of it to drink, so that 
one of them became intoxicated. When we were in- 
formed of this, we protested against such disorderly 


146 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

criõs contre ce defordre. Ce Capitaine vint trouuer 
Ie Pere qui a foin de la refidence, & luy dit: C'efi 
moy qui ay cõmis Ie peché, ne criez point ie vous 
prie contre ce pauure [10] Homme, c'efi moy qui en 
dois faire la Penitence. Le Dimanche fuiuant tout 
Ie monde efiant allé à la :Meffe, ce Capitaine fe mit 
à genoüil deuant rAutel, & teuant fa voix, s'écria, 
toy qui as tout fait ie t'ay fafché ayes pitié de moy, 
ne prends point de mefchantes penfées pour mon 
peché, ie Ie detefie, ie fuis bien marry de l'auoir com- 
mis: là deffus il iette vn collier de deux ou trois 
mille grains de Porcelaine fur Ie marchepied de 
l' Autel, voila pour reparer ma faute & fecourir les 
pauures. V oila pour empefcher que perfonne ne me 
fuiue dans vn fi mauuais exemple. Ie fuis trifie iuf- 
ques au fond de mon cæur d'auoir fafché Dieu. Le 
Pere qui eftoit defia vefiu pour commencer la 1Ieffe, 
fe tourna vers Ie peuple & expliqua aux François qui 
fe trouuerent prefent, ce que difoit ce bon Neophyte, 
cela les edifia to us & en toucha quelques-vns. On 
luy rendit vne partie de fon prefent & on employa 
l'autre pour Ie fecours de quelques neceffiteux. 
La faute qui fuit me femble plus coupable, mais 
auffi femble-elle plus fortement reparée. Quelques 
Sauuages Chreítiens ayant trouué ce Printemps vn 
vaiffeau [I I] Bafque au deffus de Tadouffac, achepte- 
rent du vin & quelques-vns en burent auec excez. 
Le Pere qui a foin d'eux ayãt appris ce defordre leur 
dit, qu'ils n'entreroient point à l'Eglife, qu'ils 
n' euffent expié leur offenfe. I1s fe tindrent to us à 
la porte vn iour de Fefte, que les François & les Sau- 
uages y entroient Ie lieu eftant fangeux: car it pleu- 
uoit aétuellement pour tors. Ils fe mirent à deux 


1642 - 4;>] 

RELA TION OF L644-45 

147 

conduct. The Captain came to the Father who 
has charge of the residence and said to him: "It is 
I who have committed the sin; do not, I beseech 
you, upbraid that poor [10] Man; it is I who must do 
Penance for it." On the following Sunday, when 
everyone had gone to Mass, this Captain knelt before 
the Altar, and, raising his voice, exclaimed: "Thou 
who hast made all, I have angered thee. Have pity 
on me. Let not my sin lead thee to think badly of 
me; I detest it, and I am very sorry for having com- 
mitted it." Thereupon he threw a collar of two or 
three thousand Porcelain beads on the step of the 
Altar, saying: "This is to atone for my sin, and to 
succor the poor; this is to prevent everyone from 
following my bad exam pIe. I am sorry in the very 
depths of my heart for having angered God." The 
Father, who was already robed in his vestments to 
begin Mass, turned toward the people and eXplained 
to the French who were present what the good Neo- 
ph yte had said. This edified them all, and touched 
some of them. A portion of his present was given 
back to him, and the remainder was employed in 
succoring some needy persons. 
The following offense seems to me more culpable, 
but also it seems to have been more thoroughly atoned 
for. Some Christian Savages, last Spring, came 
across a Basque ship [I I] above Tadoussac, from 
which they bought wine; and some of them drank 
to excess. The Father who has charge of them heard 
of this bad conduct, and told them that they could 
not enter the Church until they had atoned for their 
offense. They all remained outside the door on a 
Festival day, while the French and Savages went in. 
The spot was muddy, for it was actually raining at 


148 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

genoux dans la fange, Ie Pere donnant charge qu' on 
aportaft quelques planches de peur qu'ils ne faliffent 
leurs habits: Non, mon Pere, difent-ils, nous en 
meritons bien dauantage, nous auons fafché celuy qui 
a tout fait. I1s demandent publiquement pardon à 
Dieu, fe reconnoiffant indignes d'entrer dans fon 
Eglife; ils prierent neãtmoins qu'on euft pitié d'eux, 
& qu'on les receut en la compagnie des autres, priez 
pour nous, difoient-ils, à ceux qui eftoiêt dans l'E- 
glife, on fit en effet vne petite Oraifon publique, puis 
Ie Pere leur dit que Dieu eftant plein de bonté, leur 
permettoit l'entrée en fa :MaÌÍon. Quelques-vns 
entrent auffi-toft, mais d'autres fe fafchans contre 
eux-mefmes de leur faute, fe mirent dans l'eau 
fangeufe [12] qui eftoit hors l'Eglife, & s'écrierent, 
nous n'entrerons pas mon Pere, nous auons trop faf- 
ché Dieu, il n'importe que nous foyons dans la fange, 
& que la pluye tombe fur nous, nous fommes indi- 
gnes d'efire en la compagnie de ceux qui ayment 
Dieu. Le Pere fut furpris & attendit voyant cette 
ferueur, illes laiffa faire, fi bien qu'ils pafferent tout 
Ie temps de la Meffe dans cette aétion d'humilité & 
de Penitence. Ces deuotions font bonnes dans vne 
Eglife naiffante; afin que les Payens connoiffent que 
les pechez des Chreftiens ne prouiennent pas de leur 
doétrine, mais de leur foibleffe. 
Ce n'efi pas tout, Ie Capitaine de cette efcoüade 
voulant fubir la mefme ignominie que fes gens, difant 
qu'encor qu'il ne fe fuft pas enyuré, que neantmoins 
il auoit bû, & qu'il eftoit coupable. La conclufion 
fut, que quelques-vns en trans dans l'Eglife ietterent 
fur Ie marche-pied de I' Autel quelques aumofnes qui 
feruirent pour donner à manger aux plus pauures. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF z644-45 

14 

the time; but they knelt on both knees in the mud. 
The Father gave orders to bring them some boards 
to kneel on, that they might not soil their clothes. 
"No, my Father,''' they said; " we deserve much 
more, for we have angered him who has made all." 
They publicly begged pardon of God, acknowledging 
themselves to be unworthy to enter his Church. 
They nevertheless prayed us to have pity on them, 
and to admit them in the company of the others. 
" Pray for us," they said to those who were in the 
Church. In fact, we said a short public Prayer, and 
then the Father told them that, as God was all kind- 
ness, he would allow them to enter his House. Some 
of them entered at once; but others, who were angry 
with themselves on accoutlt of their sin, took their 
places in the muddy water [12] outside of the Church, 
and cried out: "We will not enter, my Father; we 
have too deeply offended God. It matters not that 
we are in the mud, and that the rain falls on us. We 
are unworthy to be in the company of those who love 
God. ' , The Father was surprised and touched, on 
observing such fervor; he left them alone, and they 
passed the whole time of Mass in this posture of 
humility and Penance. Such devotions are good in 
a nascent Church, in order that the Pagans may know 
that the sins of Christians come not from their doc- 
trine but from their own weakness. 
That is not all; the Captain of that band wished to 
submit to the same ignominy as his people, saying 
that, although he had not become intoxicated, he had 
nevertheless drunk, and was guilty. The conclusion 
was that some of them on entering the Church threw 
on the steps of the Altar some alms which served to 
provide food for the poorer ones. 


150 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Apres cette Penitence I'vn de ces bons Neophytes 
venant vifiter Ie Pere en particulier, luy diíoit auec 
vn oppreffement de poitrine, falloit-il que i'offenfaffe 
Dieu [13] fi lourdemet, ie n' auois pas en cor foüille 
mon Baptefme, ie ne m' eftois pas encore beaucoup 
efcarté du chemin, Ie Diable ma trompé, Ia boiffon 
m'a renuerfé l'efprit. Ie n'ay point de bien quand 
ie penfe à mon peché, il pouffoit ces paroles entre- 
couppées de fanglots qu'il tafchoit de cacher, mais 
la trifteffe Ie decouuroit. 
Ie ne fçay, difoit vn autre, fi ce qui m'anime eft 
bon quand ie fuis en Ia Chappelle, & que ie penfe à 
mes pechez, Ies Iarmes me viennent aux yeux, ie 
fens mon vifage tout mouïllé, & ie dis en moy-mefme, 
C' eft mon cæur qui doit pleurer & non pas mes yeux, 
ceia eft-il bon, difoit-il, car ceia m'arriue affez fou- 
uent pour Ies pechez que i'ay commis deuant mon 
Baptefme: Ie fens ces mefmes regrets quand ie voy 
que mes gens n'obeyffent pas bien à Dieu. 
\Tne femme veufue fort pauure & delaiffée, fe 
maria à Ia façon des Sauuages, elle fe Iaiffa cajoler 
par vn Payen qui la trompa, elle eut vn tel regret de 
fa faute, qu'apres en auoir demandé pardon publique- 
ment en l'Eglife, elle difoit au Pere que fentant Ies 
douleurs de fa groffeffe elle fouhaittoit Ia mort pour 
expier fon crime: [14] ie prie Dieu tous Ies iours, 
faifoit-elle, qu'il me chaftie: quand ie voy des 
femmes qui fe mocquent de moy; quand ie Ies entend 
fe gauffer de mon peché ie dis à part moy, i' ay bien 
merité ceIa, ie ne réponds rien, ie demeure to ute 
confufe, c' eft Ia raifon que ie fouffre toute ma vie, 
i'auois belle peur qu'on me chaffaft pour toufiours 
de Ia maiíon des Prieres. Comme elle alloit quel- 


1642-45] 

RELA TIO.N OF I644-45 

151 

After that Penance, one of these good Neophytes 
came to see the Father in private, and said to him, 
with his heart oppressed with woe: "Alas, that I 
should offend God [13] so grievously! I had not yet 
defiled my Baptism; I had not yet strayed far from 
the road. The Devil deceived me, and the liquor 
upset my mind. I have no comfort when I think of 
my sin." He uttered these words mingled with sobs, 
which he tried to repress, but his sorrow revealed 
itself. 
" I know not," said another, " whether what ani- 
mates me is good. When I am in the Chapel, and 
think of my sins, tears come to my eyes; I feel my 
face quite wet, and I say to myself: ' It is my heart 
that should weep and not my eyes. ' Is that good? " 
said he, "because it often happens to me for sins 
that I committed before my Baptism. I feel these 
same regrets, when I see that my people do not obey 
God as they should." 
A widow, who was very poor and forsaken, was 
married in the fashion of the Savages. She allowed 
herself to be cajoled by a Pagan, who deceived her. 
She felt such regret for her fault that, after asking 
pardon publicly in Church, she said to the Father 
that when she felt the pains of her pregnancy she 
wished for death, in order to expiate her crime. [14] 
" I entreat God every day," she said, " to punish me. 
When I see women who scoff at me, when I hear 
them jesting about my sin, I say to myself: 'I have 
well deserved this.' I answer nothing and remain 
quite ashamed. It is just that I should suffer all my 
life. I was greatly afraid that I would be expelled 
forever from the house of Prayer." When she some- 
times went to the U rsulines, she kept her child away 


152 

LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

ques-fois aux Vrfulines elle ef1oignoit fon enfant de 
la grille, de peur qu'on ne Ie vift; mais ce pauure 
petit s'eftant vn iour produit foy-mefme par fes cris, 
Ia Religieufe qui Iuy parloit Iuy demanda innocem- 
ment fi c'eftoit fon enfant & fi elle s'eftoit remariée, 
la pauure femme rougit & confeffa fon peché auec 
tant de douleur & de pudeur, que cette bonne Mere 
en refta edifìée au dernier point; Elle Iuy difoit 
qu' elle auoit efté fortement tentée de tuer fon enfant 
& de fe faire mourir foy-mefme, mais qu'elle n'auoit 
pas vouiu offenfer Dieu, & qu'il valloit mieux qu'elle 
beuft la honte de fon peché que d'en commettre vn 
autre. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

153 

from the grating, lest some one might see it. But 
the poor little thing made its presence known one 
day, by crying; and the Nun who was speaking to 
her innocently asked her if that were her child, and 
if she were married again. The poor woman blushed, 
and confessed her sin with such sorrow and modesty 
that the good :Mother was edified to the highest 
degree. She told her that she had been strongly 
tempted to kill her child, and to bring about her own 
death; but that she did not wish to offend God, and 
it was better to bear the shame of her sin than to 
commit another. 


154 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

[IS] [CHAPITRE IlL] 

CONTINUATION DU MESME SUIET. 

V N bon Neophyte ayãt penetré bien auant dans 
les terres du cofté du Nord, rencontra Ie Capi- 
taine d'vne petite Nation qui n'a aucun com- 
merce auec les François, finon par l'entre-mife des 
Sauuages qui nous font voifins; Cét homme qui eftoit 
aUé en ce pays-Ià pour trafiquer fe fit de Marchand 
Predicateur, il parle de Dieu à ces nouueaux hoftes; 
illeur fait ententre que fon Fils s'eft fait Homme, & 
qu'it eft venu iufques à ce point d'amour pour fes 
freres que de perdre la vie fur vne Croix: Et comme 
il vit que ces Auditeurs prenoient gouft à cette nou- 
ueUe Doétrine, il les prie de mettre la main auec luy 
pour dreíIer dans les terres ce grand Memorial de 
noftre Salut, auffi-toft dit auffi-toft fait, ils fe mettent 
en aétion, ils abattent vn grand arbre, & l'ébranchent 
auec plus d'affeétion que d'induftrie, ils eDeuent vne 
gran de Croix fur les riues d'vn beau fleuue où ils 
s'eftoient rencontrez. Ie me feruy, difoit ce nou- 
ueau Charpentier, de quelque os de [16] Cerf que 
i' appointy comme des doux pour atacher Ie trauers de 
cette Croix que nous plantafmes en vn lieu fort émi- 
nent & fort aifé à découurir de bien loin: Ie leur dis 
que ce bois leur porteroit bon-heur, que les Demons 
Ie craignoient, que c'eft là qu'ils fe doiuent aíIem- 
bIer, & que c'eft en ce lieu que ie les viendrois trou- 
uer Ie Printemps prochain. Ie fentois, difoit ce bon 


1642-45] 

RELA TIO.N OF I644-45 

155 

[15] [CHAPTER 111.] 

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 

A GOOD Neophyte, who had penetrated very far 
inland toward the North, met the Captain of 
a small Tribe which has no intercourse with 
the French except through the Savages who are our 
neighbors. This man, who had gone to that country 
to trade, from a Merchant became a Preacher. He 
spoke of God to these new hosts; he explained to 
them that his Son had been made Man, and had 
loved his brothers to such an extent as to give up his 
life on a Cross. And, when he saw that his Auditors 
relished this new Doctrine, he begged them to help 
him erect in that land the great Memorial of our Sal- 
vation. No sooner said, than done; they set to work 
at once, cut down a large tree, from which they 
remove the branches with more affection than skill, 
and raise a great Cross on the banks of a fine river 
where they had met each other. "I made use," 
said this new Carpenter, "of some bones of [16] a 
Deer that I sharpened to a point, like nails. to hold 
the transverse piece of this Cross, which we planted 
in a very prominent place where it can easily be seen 
from a great distance. I told them that that tree 
would bring them happiness; that the Demons feared 
it; that they must assemble at that spot; and that I 
would come and meet them there next Spring. I 
felt," said the good Christian, "pleasure and joy in 
my heart while I labored at that holy Work. I said 


156 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

Chreftien, vn plaifir & vne ioye dedans mon cæur 
trauaillant à ce faint Ouurage. Ie difois à IE S V S tu 
es bon, fecoures ces pauures peuples, tu es mort pour 
eux, ouures leurs yeux, fais qu'ils te connoiffent & 
qu'ils croyent en toy. Cette ame eft bien choifie, 
elle a des fentimens qui ne font pas du commun. 
Mademoifelle d' Alibour demandoit certain iour à 
vn bon Neophyte quelles penfées il auoit eü voyant 
les Iroquois arriuez aux trois Riuieres pour traitter de 
la Paix, à cette demande il prit fon Tapabort, ioignit 
les mains eDeuant les yeux au Ciel, il parut grande- 
ment touché! helas difoit-il, [ie difois] en mon 
cæur parlant à celuy qui a tout fait, ces gens ne te 
connoiffent pas, la paix leur apportera de grãds biens, 
car ils feront inftruits & nous ferons auec [17] eux 
dans Ie Ciel. Ie ne me refiouys pas tant de me voir 
deliuré de la main & de la dent de ces peuples fort 
cruels, comme de les voir en la difpofition d'eftre 
faits enfans de Dieu, nous ne ferons plus qu'vne 
mefme chofe auec eux; voila, faifoit-il, ce que ie 
penfois. Monfieur d' Alibouft fut rauy voyant des 
fentimens fi épurez dans l'ame d'vn Barbare. II 
faut auouër que la grace fait d'eftranges metamor- 
phofes. 
Ce mefme homme eftoit eftrangement addonné à 
petuner, cette paffion eft fi gran de qu'il fe trouue 
des François mefmes qui vendêt iufques à leurs habits 
pour y fatisfaire. Ce nouueau Chreftien voyãt que 
cette fumée luy eftoit inutile s'en eft tellement abfte- 
nu qu'on diroit qu'il n'a iamais aymé cette herbe. 
II ne s'eft pas fait feulement violence en ce point: 
mais fouuent il a pafíé les iours entiers fans rien 
manger du tout, pour garder Ie Commandement de 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

157 

to J E S US: 'Thou art good; help these poor people. 
Thou didst die for them; open their eyes; make them 
know thee and believe in thee.'" This is indeed 
a chosen soul, and its sentiments are out of the 
common. 
Mademoiselle d' Alibour one day asked a good Neo- 
phyte what his thoughts were when he saw the Iro- 
quois arrive at three Rivers to negotiate the Peace. 
On hearing this question, he took off his Cap, clasped 
his hands, raised his eyes to Heaven, and seemed 
greatly touched. "Alas!" exclaimed he, "I said 
in my heart, speaking to him who has made all: 
'These people know thee not. Peace will bring 
them great blessings, for they will be taught and we 
shall be with [17] them in Heaven. I rejoice, not 
so much at seeing myself delivered from the hands 
and teeth of those so cruel people, as at seeing them 
disposed to become children of God. We shall here- 
after be but one with them.' That," said he, " is 
what I thought." :Monsieur d' Aliboust was delighted 
to find sentiments so refined in the soul of a Barba- 
rian. It must be admitted that grace effects strange 
transformations. 
This same man was singularly addicted to smok- 
ing. This passion is so great that there are French- 
men themselves who sell even their clothes to gratify 
it. When this new Christian saw that that smoke was 
useless to him, he abstained from it to such an extent 
that one would have said that he never cared for this 
plant. Not only on this point has he done violence 
to himself, but he has frequently passed entire days 
without eating anything, in order to keep the Com- 
mandment of the Church which orders its Children 
to abstain from meat on certain days. As a rule, he 


158 

LES R.l!.LA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

l'EgIife, qui ordonne à fes Enfans I'abftinence de 
viande en certains iours
. pour l'ordinaire il fe contente 
d'vn peu de pain & d'eau, ou de pois pour rendre 
cette obeyffance, quoy qu'on Iuy faffe entendre que 
Ia neceffité l'en difpenfe. 
[18] Vn Capitaine Chreftien parlant à vn Payen 
qui I'eftoit venu vifiter & qui entreprenoit vn grand 
voyage, Iuy dit, d'y moy ie te prie nettement queUe 
eft ta penfée touchant la priere: II y a long-temps 
que ie t'ay dit que ie priois du fond du cæur: ie t'ay 
preffé autre-fois de prendre noftre Creance, & tu ne 
m'as pas refpondu; fi tu lne donnois quantité de 
viures & de robbes ie ne m'en refiouyrois pas, mais fi 
tu me difois, ie croy en Dieu, mon cæur feroit efpa- 
noüy. Pour moy ie ne fuis pas capable de te donner 
confeil, va t' en neantmoins auec cette penfée de moy, 
que ie perdrois plutoft toutes chofes & la vie que la 
Foy. 
Vn impie debatant contre vn Pere fur Ia verité de 
noftre Doétrine, & apres plufieurs paroles s' écriant 
que nos prieres faifoient mourir Ies Sauuages, vn 
Chreftien qui eftoit là prefent ne fe pouuant plus 
taire efleua fa voix tout en colere, ne parle plus en 
ces termes, dit-il à cét homme infidelle, c'eft voftre 
impieté qui gafte tout, c'eft voftre incredulité qui 
nous tuë, vous retenez Ies Demons auec vous. Mon 
Pere, adiouftoit-il, i'ay toufiours eu cette penfée, que 
la malice & l'infidelité [19] de ces gens-Ià nous 
perdoient, ie leur ay fouuent dit, & il s'en trouue 
en cor qui ofe nous faire ce reproche. 
Ce mefme Chreftien qui eft Attikameg de nation, 
fe trouuant dans l'affemblée de fes Compatriotes, 
dont la plus part n'eftoient pas encore baptifez, & 


1642-45] 

RELA TIO.N OF I644-45 

159 

contents himself with a little bread and water, or 
peas, in order to observe such obedience, although 
he is given to understand that necessity dispenses 
him from it. 
[18] A Christian Captain, speaking to a Pagan who 
had come to see him and who was about to go on a 
long journey, said to him: "Tell me clearly, I beg 
thee, what thou thinkest of prayer. It is a long time 
since I told thee that I prayed from the bottom of 
my heart; formerly I urged thee to adopt our Belief, 
and thou didst not answer me. If thou wert to give 
me a quantity of food and of robes, I would not 
rejoice at it; but if thou saidst to me, 'I believe in 
God,' my heart would be delighted. For my part, I 
am not able to give thee advice. Go, however, with 
this thought of me, that I would rather lose every- 
thing, even life itself, than the Faith." 
An impious man was arguing against a Father 
respecting the truth of our Doctrine; and, after much 
talk, he cried out that our prayers caused the Sav- 
ages to die. A Christian who was present could no 
longer keep silent, and, raising his voice in anger, he 
said to that infidel man: "Speak no longer in such 
terms. It is your impiety that spoils all; it is your 
incredulity that kills us. You retain the Demons 
with you. My Father," he added, " I have always 
had this thought that the malice and infidelity [19] 
of those people would be our ruin. I have often told 
them so, and there are still some of them who 
venture to cast that reproach at us." 
This same Christian, who is of the Attikameg tribe, 
was present at a meeting of his Countrymen, most 
of whom were not yet baptized; and, when he 
saw that a Father wished to preach to them, he 


160 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

voyant qu'vn Pere les vouloit prefcher, il Ie preuint 
pour les difpofer à receuoir ce qu'on leur diroit. Mes 
pares, leur dit-il, vous fçauez bien qu'encor que ie 
fois efloigné de noftre pays ie ne laiffe pas d'eftre de 
voftre Nation; mais prenez garde que la parenté 
d'icy bas eft bien courte: nous ferons bien-toft 
feparez les vns des autres, rencontrons-nous au Ciel. 
Efcoutez Ie Pere, ie vous affeure que ce qu'il dit eft 
veritable, i1 vous enfeignera Ie moyen d'eftre con- 
tent & bien-heureux à tout iamais. 
Cét homme qui ne fe produit que dans les occa- 
fions, parlant à quelques ieunes Cadets, leur difoit, 
ie vous ayme parce que vous croyez en Dieu, mon 
plus grãd contentement eft de vous voir conftant en 
la Foy. I'ay fait plufieurs folies deuant que d'eftre 
baptifé, ne me confiderez pas en ma ieuneffe, mais 
apres mon baptefme, ie n'ay plus qu'vne femme & ie 
publie [20] hautement que ie n'en veux pas d'autre; 
ne tombez pas dans les defauts que i'ay commis 
deuant que de reconnoiftre Dieu; vous eítes mes 
neueux, mais ma plus forte parenté eft dans la Foy. 
V n tel, qu'il nommoit, quoy qu'il foit d'vne nation 
ennemie de la noftre ne me felllble plus eftranger: 
Ie Ie tiens pour mon parent, parce qu'i1 croit forte- 
ment en Dieu. 
Vne femme s'accufoit vn iour de ce qu'elle fentoit 
vne alienation contre fon pere, celuy qui l'efcoutoit 
luy en demandant la raifon, elle refpondit: 11 n'ayme 
point la Foy, i1 ne veut pas croire en Dieu, i1 me 
femble que quelqu'vn me dit en mon cæur, ce n'eft 
point-Ia ton pere, il n'y a plus que Dieu qui foit ton 
Pere, i'ay tafché de me forcer, mais ie ne fçaurois 
aimer celuy qui n'ayme pas Dieu. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

161 

forestalled him, that he might prepare them to listen 
to what should be told them. "My relatives," he 
said to them, 'c you know well that, though I am far 
from our own country, I still belong to your Tribe. 
But observe that relationship here below is very short; 
we shall soon be separated from one another,- 
let us meet in Heaven. Listen to the Father; I 
assure you that what he says is true. He will teach 
you how to be content and happy forever." 
This man, who introduces himself only when 
opportunity presents, while speaking to some young 
Relatives, said to them: eel love you, because you 
believe in God; my greatest happiness is to see you 
constant in the Faith. I committed many follies 
before I was baptized. Consider not what I was in 
my youth, but what I have been since my baptism. 
I have no more than one wife, and I proclaim [20] 
aloud that I do not desire another. Fall not into the 
errors that I committed before I acknowledged God. 
You are my nephews; but my closest relationship is 
in the Faith. Such a one "-naming him-" al- 
though he belongs to a tribe that is hostile to ours, 
no longer seems a stranger to me; I consider him as 
a relative, because he believes firmly in God." 
A woman accused herself one day of feeling es- 
trangement against her father. He who heard her 
asked the reason of it, and she replied: " He loves 
not the Faith; he will not believe in God. It seems 
to me that some one says to me in my heart, 'That 
is not thy father; God alone is thy Father.' I have 
tried to force myself to it, but I cannot love one who 
does not love God." 
It must be admitted that God has his elect every- 
where, and that Faith produces powerful effects in 


162 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

II faut auoüer que Dieu a fes eíleus par tout, & 
que la Foy a de puiffans effeéts dans les ames les 
plus fauuages. Vn ieune homme grand chaffeur & 
grand coureur s'efiant fort long-temps eíloigné du 
lieu où il auoit efié inftruit, a paffé l'hyuer en tres- 
mauuaife compagnie; mais fa confiance & fa fermeté 
en la Foy, l'ont fait marcher droit où les autres ont 
bronché. [2 I] II n'a pas manqué vn foir ny yn matin 
de faire fes prieres à genoüil, & en public tant qu'il 
a efié en fanté, fa femme prioit auec luy. II eftoit 
parmy des Payens, & auec des hommes de my Apo- 
fiats. IIs fe gauffoient de luy, ils l'excitoient à chan- 
ter des chanfons fuperítitieufes, dont ils fe feruent 
pour auoir recours au Demon. IIs luy reprochoient 
qu'il ne trouueroit aucune bonne chaffe. Ce bon 
ieune homme n'a iamais bronché en fa creance, ny 
du cæur, ny de la parole, ny d'aucun gefie, l'exemple 
de ceux qui tomboient, les railleries de ceux qui 
Ie gauffoient n'ont iamais pû l'efbranler. Ie luy 
demandois fi du moins fon cæur n'eftoit point quel- 
ques-fois fecoüé, point du tout refpondit-il: ie fen- 
tois affez fouuent de la trifieffe & de la douleur de 
mes pechez; mais il me femble que i'auois vne telle 
force dans mon cæur pour la priere & pour la Foy, 
que i'efiois plus touché de compaffion pour ces pau- 
ures gens, à caufe de leur incredulité & de leur badi- 
neries, que ie n'en auois d'auerfion pour les mefpris 
qu'ils faifoient de moy: Auffi eft-il vray que ce ieune 
homme efi fils de l'vn des plus genereux Chreftiens 
de la reduétion de S. Iofeph. 
[22] Sa femme accoucha dans ce grand eí1oigne- 
ment, l'enfant difoit-il, ne paroiffoit quafi pas eftre 
viuant, on me dit qu'il eftoit mort, que e'en efioit 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

163 

the most savage minds. A young man, who was a 
great hunter and a great runner, was away for a long 
time from the place where he had been instructed, 
and passed the winter in very bad company. But 
his constancy and firmness in the Faith kept him 
straight, where others wavered. [2IJ He did not fail, 
a single night or morning, to say his prayers on his 
knees, and in public, so long as he was in good 
health; his wife prayed with him. He was among 
Pagans, and with men who were half Apostates. 
They scoffed at him; they urged him to sing super- 
stitious songs which they use when they have recourse 
to the Devil. They reproached him, saying that he 
would not be fortunate in his hunting. This good 
young man never faltered in his belief, either in 
heart or by word or deed. The example of those 
who feU, the raiUery of those who scoffed, could 
never shake him. I asked him if at least his courage 
had not been sometimes weakened. "N ot at aU," 
he replied, " I very often felt sorrow and regret for 
my sins; but it seems to me that I had in my heart 
such strength for prayer and for Faith that I was 
more touched with compassion for these poor people, 
on account of their incredulity and their jests, than I 
felt aversion for the contempt with which they 
treated me. " I t is true that this young man is the 
son of one of the bravest Christians of the reduction 
of 81. Joseph. 
[22J His wife was delivered of a child in that very 
remote region. "The child," he said, "appeared 
to be barely alive. They told rne that he ,vas dead- 
that it was all over with him. I knelt and offered 
him to God, begging him that he might at least be 
spared until he could be baptized. God granted my 


164 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

fait; ie me mis à genoux & Ie prefentay à Dieu, Ie 
fuppliant qu'il fift en forte pour Ie moins qu'il pût 
eftre baptisé: Dieu exauça ma priere, car tout fou- 
dainement l'enfant reprit vie, auec l'eftonnement de 
tous ceux qui eftoient dans la Cabane. 
II fe trouua dans cette Compagnie quelques Chre- 
ftiens, que l'exemple de la parole de ce bon Neo- 
phyte animerent, il les fouftint & les fit perfeuerer 
en la Foy. Et mefme il eft croyable que ces demy- 
Apoftats qui par apres firent Penitence, y furent atti- 
rez par la vertu & par la conftance de ce 'þraue foldat 
de IESVS-CHRIST. Sur tout il confola vn pauure 
malade fort perfecuté de ces impies, ils Ie gauffoient 
& excitoiet à auoir recours au Demon, Ie bon malade 
dit qu'il aimoit mieux mourir. Le Pere racontant 
vn iour l'hiftoire de lob en prefence de ce bon Neo- 
phyte, il fe mit à rire, entendant les reproches que 
luy faifoit fa femme: voilà iuftement, fit-iI, tout ce 
qu' on me crioit cét hyuer. Tu mourras, me difoit- 
on, fi tu prie Dieu, tu [23] ne gueriras iamais fi tu 
ne chãte vne chanfon qui eítoit pour implorer Ie De- 
mõ. Les Sauuages difent fort peu ce qui fe paffe en 
eux. Si on n'eut racõté par occafiõ l'hiftoire de lob, 
nous n'aurions pas eu la connoifsãce de la generofité 
de ce braue Athlete. 
Ie fermeray ce Chapitre par quelques aétions d'vn 
ieune garçon nouuellement baptifé. Au commence- 
ment, difoit-il, que i'ay oüy parler de la priere, i'ay 
voulu mettre en pratique'ce qu'on me préchoit. I'e- 
ftois auec des Algonquins proches voifins des Hurons, 
voulant done Ie foir faire ma petite priere, tout Ie 
monde fe prift à rire, plufieurs fe gauffoient tout 
hautement de moy,' Tu n'as point d'efprit, me difoit- 


164
-45] 

RELA TIOJ.V OF 1644-45 

165 

prayer, for all of a sudden the child's life was 
restored. to the astonishment of all who were in the 
Cabin.' , 
There were in this Band some Christians whom the 
example of this good Neophyte's testimony encour- 
aged; he sustained them, and made them persevere 
in the Faith. And we may even believe that those 
semi-Apostates who afterward did Penance were 
attracted to it by the virtue and constancy of that 
brave soldier of J E S U S C H R 1ST. Above all, he 
consoled a poor sick man who was greatly persecuted 
by the ungodly. They jeered at him and urged him 
to have recourse to the Demon; the good sick man 
said that he would rather die. One day, the Father 
related the story of Job, in the presence of this good 
Neophyte. He began to laugh and, on hearing his 
wife's reproaches, said: "All that is exactly what 
they shouted at me this winter. 'Thou wilt die,' 
they said to me, ' if thou pray to God; thou [23J wilt 
never be cured unless thou sing ." a song which was 
to implore the aid of the Demon. The Savages say 
very little of what passes in their minds. If we had 
not by accident related the story of Job, we would 
not have had any knowledge of the courage of that 
brave Athlete. 
I will close this Chapter with some actions of a 
young boy but newly baptized. " \Vhen I first heard 
prayer mentioned," he said, "I wished to put into 
practice what was preached to me. I was with some 
of the Algonquins who are near neighbors to the 
Hurons. At night, when I wished to say my little 
prayer, everyone began to laugh, and many jeered 
aloud at me. 'Thou hast no sense,' they said to me. 
, To whom speak est thou? \Vhere is he? Dost thou 


166 

LES RELA TIO
VS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

on, à qui parle-tu, où eft-il? Ie vois-tu, te Iaiffe-tu 
amufer par ces eftrangers nouueaux venus! Ie ne 
difois mot à tout cela. Le Iendemain voulant man- 
ger, ie commençay à prier Dieu, ils fe miret vne 
autre-fois à rire à gorge dépIoyée: Ià-deffus I'vn de 
mes parens me dit, mon neveu, tu n'a pas d'efprit, 
tu ne t'eftonne de rien, tu n'entends pas ces gens-Ià 
qui fe mocquent de toy. Ie ne voulu pas pourtant 
quitter ma priere; ils continuerent leurs gaufferies: 
eft-il fou, difoient-ils? ie ne [24J perdis pas courage 
pour cela, ie ne me cõtentay pas de croire tout feul: 
ie m'efforçay de gagner vne mienne petite fæur, 
ie Ia tiray à part & luy dit, ma fæur, que dirois-tu, 
fi on t'enfeignoit à prier Dieu, elle me refpondit, ie 
ne veux pas prier car ie mourrois; Ie moyen de 
parler à celuy qu'on ne voit pas. Le Pere qui m'in- 
ftruifoit m'auoit donné vne petite fonnette, ma fæur 
la voyant me la demande, ie luy dis que ie la luy 
donnerois fi elle vouloit prier: non dit-elle, ie ne 
prieray point, car ie mourrois, & fi tu prends la fon- 
nette ne mourras-tu point? non ie n'en mourray pas, 
fit-elle, alors ie luy repliquay, fi tu ne meurs pas pour 
prendre vne fonnette qui vient de la main des Fran- 
çois? pourquoy mourrois-tu receuant d'eux la priere 
qui eft bien meilleure? elle ne repartit rien pour lors; 
enfin ie luy donnay ma fonnette pour la gagner, mais 
en ce méme temps ie la quittay pour venir çà bas. 
Ce ieune Neophyte rendant compte de fa confci- 
ence à celuy qui Ie dirigeoit, luy difoit quelques-fois, 
en verité, mon ame n'a point d'efprit: elle fort quel- 
ques-fois de fon chemin fans rien dire, ie ne la fens 
pas partir; & puis m'auifant tout à coup [25J qu'elle 
s'égare ie Ia ramene. Quelques-fois il eft fi fort 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

167 

see him? Dost thou allow thyself to be tricked by 
those strangers who have recently come here?' To 
all this I answered not a word. On the following 
day, as I was about to eat, I began to pray to God; 
again they commenced to laugh immoderately. 
Thereupon one of my relatives said to me: 'My 
nephew, thou hast no sense; thou art not surprised 
at anything; hearest thou not those people who are 
scoffing at thee?' Nevertheless, I would not give 
up my prayer. They continued their banter. 'Is 
he mad?' they said. 1 [24] did not lose courage for 
an that. I did not content myself with merely 
believing; I endeavored to win over my little sister. 
1 took her to one side, and said to her: ':M y sister, 
what wouldst thou say if thou wert taught to pray 
to God?' She replied, '1 do not wish to pray, for 1 
would die. How can one speak to him whom one 
does not see? ' The Father who instructed me had 
given me a little bell; when my sister saw it, she 
asked me for it. 1 told her that 1 would give it to 
her if she would pray. 'N 0,' she said, ' 1 will not 
pray, for 1 would die.' 'And if thou takest the bell, 
wilt thou not die?' 'N 0, 1 shall not die,' she said. 
'Then,' 1 replied, ' if thou wilt not die because thou 
takest a bell that comes from the French, why 
shouldst thou die for receiving prayer from them, 
which is very much better?' She answered nothing 
then. Finally, 1 gave her my bell to win her; but, 
at the same time, 1 left her to come down here." 
While this young Neophyte was baring his con- 
science to his director, he said: "Sometimes, in 
truth, my soul has no sense. It sometimes leaves its 
path, without saying anything,- 1 do not notice its 
going; and when, all of a sudden, 1 observe [25] 


168 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

touché du rapport qu'on luy fait de quelques Hifioires 
facrées, que les larmes luy tom bent des yeux. En- 
fin it ne fçauroit fouffrir vne chofe qu'il penfe efire 
griefue qu'il ne s'en décharge au plutofi par la 
Confeffion. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1614-45 

169 

that it wanders, I bring it back." Sometimes he is 
so affected by the recital of some sacred Stories, that 
tears fall from his eyes. Finally, he cannot do 
anything that he considers wrong, without at once 
unburdening himself of it through Confession. 


170 

LES RELATIO
YS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

CHAPITRE IY. 

SUITE DU MESME SUJET. 

N OUS auons eu peu de malades cette année & 
encor moins de morts. La maladie auroit 
bien-toft tout égorgé fi elle perfeueroit dans la 
fureur où nous l'auons veuë. 
Vne bonne femme vrayement Chreftienne fut prife 
d'vn mal affez violent, fi toft qu'elle en fentit l'effort, 
elle dit à l'vne de fes compatriotes, ie vous prie de 
me faire voir Ie Pere, ie voudrois bien me confeffer 
& me difpofer à la mort pendant que ie fuis encore 
en mon bon fens. Le Pere l' alIa vifiter, & voyant 
qu'elle n'eftoit loin de la Chappelle, illuy fit cõduire 
pour luy donner Ie faint \Tiatique. [26J Vn malade 
parmy les Sauuages eft bien-toft leué & bien-toft 
couché: Cette pauure creature s'eftant confeffée, dit 
au Pere, ie n' en puis plus les forces me manquent: ie 
ne fuis pas trifte pour me voir proche de la mort, 
mon corps eft abbatu; mais mon ame eft contente, 
i1 me femble que ie m'en vais au Ciel, rien ne me 
trouble, la mort ne me fais point de peur. Ie fouffre 
beaucoup mais cela fe paffera bien-toft, i'ay toufiours 
dans l'efprit les dernieres paroles que mon fils me 
dit en mourant, il m'appella & me dit, ma Mere, ie 
m'en vayau Ciel, croyez fortement en Dieu, ne quit- 
tez iamais la Foy, ne perdez point l'Efperance que 
vous auez en celuy qui a tout fait, pour moy ie meurs 
dans la creance de mon Baptefme, nous nous verrons 
au Ciel fi vous perfeuerez dans la Foy: i'ay toufiours 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1644-45 

171 

CHAPTER IV. 

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 

W E have had but few cases of sickness this year, 
and still fewer deaths. Disease would soon 
have killed all, had it continued to rage as 
furiously as we have seen it do. 
A good and truly Christian woman was attacked 
by a rather violent illness. As soon as she felt its 
stress, she said to one of her countrymen: "I beg 
you to bring a Father to me. I would like very 
much to confess, and to prepare myself for death, 
while I still have possession of my senses." The 
Father went to visit her, and, seeing that she was 
not far from the Chapel, he had her carried thither, 
in order to give her the holy Viaticum. [26J A sick 
person among the Savages is soon raised and soon 
bedded. When this poor creature had confessed, 
she said to the Father: "I am exhausted; my 
strength fails me. I am not sorry to see myself near 
death; my body is cast down, but my soul is con- 
tent; it seems to me that I am going to Heaven. 
Nothing disturbs me; death causes me no fear; I 
suffer much, but that will soon pass. I have always 
in mind the last words that my son said to me, when 
he was dying. He called me and said: ' My Moth- 
er, I am going to Heaven; believe firmly in God; 
never abandon the Faith; do not lose the Hope that 
you have in him who has made all. For my part, I 
die in the belief of my Baptism that we shall see each 


172 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

ces paroles grauées dans mon cæur de puis la mort de 
mon fils, i'efpere que ie Ie verray bien-toft: car en 
verité il croyoit fortement en Dieu. Elle fe confeffa 
& reçeut Ie Viatique dans vn grand oppreffement de 
poitrine. Ce qui n' empefchoit pas de dire de fois à 
autre IE S V S ma regIe & mon Capitaine, ie croy en 
voftre parole: vous eftes dãs mon [27] cæur, quoy 
que vous ne paroiffiez pas, ie Ie croy, oüy en verité, 
ie Ie croy: determinez de moy comme il vous plaira, 
ie vous verray, ie vous verray. Eftant reconduite 
en fa Cabane, Ie Pere luy porta quelque temps apres 
l'Extreme-Onétion, elle ne donna iamais aucun indice 
ny de trifteffe ny de crainte, vous euffiez dit qu'elle 
eftoit affeurée du lieu où elle alloit. En effet fi nous 
procedons auec amour & auec fimplicité deuant 
Dieu, nous pafferons de la mort à la vie comme on 
paffe de l'Hyuer dans Ie Printemps. 
Vn bon Chreftien la voyant fort oppreffée luy dit, 
Charité, c'eft ainfi qu'elle fe nommoit, ne t'affiige 
point, i'ay toufjours eu cette penfée de toy que tu 
croyois fortement en Dieu, fi cela eft ne t'attrifte 
point: car tu iras bien-toft au Ciel, fois conftante en 
la Foy iufques au dernier foûpir. :Mi entian, refpon- 
dit-elle, Ka nont niteponetauzin. Ie fuis dans cette 
difpofition, ie ne croiray plus à demy, ie croy tout 
de bon: c'eft pourquoy ie ne fuis point trifte, ie m'en 
vay au Ciel, ie Ie croy, elle mourut dans cette ferueur. 
Quelqu'vn des Peres ayant rencontré vne femme 
qui portoit du bois à vn malade, [28] luy dit apres 
auoir loüé fa charité, quand vous faites quelque 
bonne aétion enuers voftre prochain, il faut que vous 
difiez en voftre cæur, ie m'en yay porter du bois à 
man Sauueur IE S V s. Ie m'en vay faire du feu, ie 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r6.t/4-45 

173 

other in Heaven if you persevere in the Faith.' I 
always have those words graven in my heart, since 
my son's death. I hope that I shall soon see him, 
for, in truth, he firmly believed in God." She con- 
fessed herself and received the Viaticum, while she 
had a great oppression on her chest. This did not 
prevent her from saying, from time to time, " J E S U S 
my guide and my Captain, I believe in your word; 
you are in my [27] heart, although you appear not. 
I believe it; yes, in truth, I believe it. Do with me 
as you will. I shall see you; I shall see you." 
When she was taken back to her Cabin, the Father 
some time afterward carried to her Extreme Unc- 
tion. She never betrayed the slightest sign of sor- 
row or of fear. You would have said that she was 
sure of the place to which she was going. Indeed, 
if we proceed with love and simplicity before God 
we shall pass from death to life as from Winter to 
Spring. 
A good Christian, who saw that she was greatly 
oppressed, said to her: "Charité,"-such was her 
name,-" be not afflicted. I have always had this 
thought of thee that thou believest firmly in God. 
If that be the case, be not sorrowful, for thou wilt 
soon go to Heaven; be constant in the Faith to the 
last breath." Aft' elltz'all, she replied, Ka 1l0nt nÜe- 
pOlletauzill; "I am in that disposition, I will no 
longer only half believe; I believe fully. That is 
why I am not sad. I am going to Heaven; I believe 
it. " She died while in that fervor. 
One of our Fathers met a woman carrying wood to 
a sick person. [28] He said to her, after having 
praised her charity: "\Vhen you do a good action 
toward your neighbor, you must say in your heart, 


174 

LES RELA TIOl'lS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

vay luy donner à manger, ie Ie vay foigner & pen- 
fer, car il a dit que ce qu'on feroit au moindre des 
fiens qu'ille recompenferoit, comme s'il efioit fait à 
fa propre perfonne. Cette pauure femme refpondit, 
mon Pere ie penfois aétuellement à ce que vous dites, 
& comme Dieu m'affiige moy-mefme, & qu'il m'a 
ofié la pluf-part de mes enfans, & que les autres font 
malades, ie dis en mon cæur, il n'importe encore 
qu'il m'éprouue, Aiantch nigatepouet, ie croiray 
dauantage, c'efi à Iuy à determiner du tout. 
Vne femme efiant venuë de Tadoufac à S. Iofeph, 
en partie pour fe confeffer & com munier, fifi paroifire 
vne grande innocence; depuis que ie fuis baptifée, 
difoit-elle, i'ay tafché d'aymer IE S V s, i' ay fouuent 
la penfée de ne Ie iamais fafcher; en verité i'ayme 
la priere. Ie dis à part moy dans mon cæur, ceux 
qui font baptifez ne font plus de mal, ie n'en veux 
point [29] faire, fur tout, ie ne me mets point en colere 
quoy qu'on me faffe, ma fille efi mariée à vn Payen qui 
efi tres-colere, il l'a voulu precipiter de fon canot 
dans la riuiere: ie voulus entrer en colere contre Iuy, 
mais ie dy dans mon cæur, ie fafcheray celuy qui a 
tout fait. Ie me retins, ie ne dis mot, i'efiois feule- 
ment honteufe & confufe, voyant comme il traitoit 
ma fille, mais ie ne me mis point en colere. 
Vn Capitaine voyant embarquer quelques perfon- 
nes de fes gens, leur dit tout haut en peu de paroles 
à leur depart, prenez vn efcrit des Peres comme 
vous efies Chrefiiens, & ne Ie dem
ntez point, priez 
Dieu tous les foirs & tous les matins, ne vous mettez 
point en colere, vous femmes obeïffez à vos maris, 
fur tout, qu'on fçache que vous aymez la priere, & 
que vous ne pouuez commettre aucun mal. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

175 

, I am going to carry wood to my Savior J E S US; I 
am going to light a fire: I am going to give him food; 
I am going to attend him and to dress his wounds; , 
for he has said that what might be done to the 
least of his brethren, he would reward as if it were 
done to him. ' , The poor woman repJied: " My Fa- 
ther, I was really thinking of what you say; and- 
as God aftlicts me myseH, and has taken most of my 
children from me, while the others are sick - I say 
in my heart that it matters not if he try me still 
further. Az'antch nz'gatepouet; I will believe even 
more. It is for him to decide all things." 
A woman who came from Tadousac to St. Joseph- 
in part, that she might confess and receive commun- 
ion-displayed great innocence. "Since I have 
been baptized," she said, "I have endeavored to 
love J E S US; I often think of never offending him. 
In truth, I love prayer. I say to myself in my 
heart, 'Those who are baptized no longer do evil; I 
do not wish [29] to do any; above all, I do not get 
angry, whatever may be done to me. My daughter 
is married to a Pagan who is very quick-tempered; 
he tried to throw her out of his canoe into the river. 
I was ready to get angry with him; but I said in my 
heart, 'I shall offend him who has made all.' I 
restrained myself, and said not a word; I was mere- 
lyashamed and covered with confusion when I saw 
how he treated my daughter, but I did not get 
angry.' , 
A Captain saw some of his people embark, and 
said a few words aloud to them on their departure: 
" Take a writing from the Fathers, as you are Chris- 
tians, and be not unfaithful to it. Pray to God, 
every night and every morning. Do not get angry; 


176 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Vn bon Neophyte de la nation des Attikameg, 
racontoit fes petites deuotions auec vne fimplicité 
toute aimable; quand ie fonge que Dieu eft par tout 
ie reffens vn grand plaifir, quand ie porte les yeux au 
Ciel, quand ie regarde les arbres, les oifeaux, les 
riuieres, les animaux: il me femble que mon cæur 
eft tout plein de [30J ioye, connoiffant que toutes ces 
chofes viennent du Tout-puiffant. II m' eft auis 
que ie fuis comme vn homme riche, que ie poffede 
beaucoup. connoiffant ce que i' auois ignoré fi long 
temps, ie dy dans mon cæur, Ie l'admire, ie l'ayme, 
& puis ie me trouue tout content & tout ioyeux. 
Ce bon homme adiouftoit qu'eftant allé bien auant 
dans les terres, il rencontra quelques Sauuages qui 
n'auoient iamais veu de François, & qui n'auoient 
iamais ouy parler de Dieu. Or comme nous faifions 
nos prieres tous les foirs & tous les matins, ils nous 
efcoutoient: car nous parlions tout haut, ils s' efton- 
noient & admiroient ce que nous difions. lIs furent 
furpris voyant vne petite Image qu'on nous auoit 
donnée. Ie me rencontray, difoit-il, vne autre-fois 
auec des Payens qui fe mocquoient de la priere, ils 
nous dirent que nous priaffions & qu'eux fe ferui- 
roient de leurs tambours & de leurs chants, & qu'on 
verroit laquelle des deux bandes trouueroit plutoft de 
la chaffe, nous difmes que nous ne croyons pas en 
Dieu pour manger & pour viure en terre, nous ne 
laiffafmes pas de prier Dieu qu'il nous aidaft. Ces 
miferables penferèt mourir [31J de faim, & nous ne 
manquafmes point de viures. Quand i'allois à la 
chaffe ie me mettois à genoüil au milieu de mon 
chemin fur la neige, & ie difois à Dieu tu as fait les 
animaux, tu en difpofe, fi tu m'en veux donner ie 


1642-45] 

RELA Tlf?N OF r6M--1-5 

177 

you women, be obedient to your husbands. Above 
all, let it be known that you love prayer, and that 
you cannot commit any eviL" 
A good Neophyte, of the Attikameg tribe, related 
his minor devotions with a most agreeable simplicity: 
" When I think that God is everywhere, I feel great 
pleasure; when I raise my eyes to the Sky, when I 
look at the trees, the birds, the rivers, the animals, 
it seems to me that my heart is quite full of [30] 
joy; for I know that all these things come from the 
Almighty. I think that I am, as it were, a rich man, 
that I own a great deal. Knowing what I had been 
ignorant of so long, I say in my heart, 'I admire 
him, I love him;' and then I feel quite content and 
very joyfuL" 
This good man added that, having penetrated very 
far inland, he met some Savages who had never seen 
any French, and had never heard of God. "Now 
when we said our prayers every night and every 
morning, they listened to us, for we spoke aloud; 
and they were both astonished and delighted at what 
we said. They were surprised when they saw a 
little Picture that had been given us. On another 
occasion," he said, " I met some Pagans, who laughed 
at prayer. They told us to pray, while they would 
have recourse to their drums and their songs; and 
we should see which of the two bands would find 
game the sooner. We said that we do not believe 
in God merely for the purpose of eating, and of liv- 
ing on earth. We did not fail to entreat God to help 
us. Those wretches nearly died [3 I] of hunger, and 
we never were in want of food. When I went 
out to hunt, I knelt in the middle of my path on 
the snow, and said to God, 'Thou hast made the 


178 

LES RELA TIONS DES .I É SUITES 

[VOL. 27 

croiray en toy, fi tu ne m'en donne point ie ne Iaif- 
feray pas de croire. Pendant que ie cheminois il me 
venoit en l'efprit, où eftois-tu i1 y a cent ans? d'où 
es-tu prouenu, tu n'eftois point & te voila, en verité 
cela eft admirable, ayme done celuy qui a tout fait, 
ie l'ayme me femble, difoit-i1. 
Vn de nos Peres demandant à vn petit Sauuage 
aagé de cinq ans, où eftoit fon pere, l' enfant Ie 
monftra de la main: mais fon pere luy dit: Mon fils 
regarde Ie Ciel, voila où eft ton Pere, c'eft Dieu qui 
eft ton vray Pere, & pourfuiuant il adioufta, ie te 
donne tous les iours à celuy qui a tout fait, & ie Ie 
prie de te faire Religieux afin que tu Ie fçache prier: 
car ma plus grande trifteffe en ce monde eft, que ie 
ne fçay pas bien comme il Ie faut prier; ie penfe 
quafi toufiours à luy, & I'ayme ce me femble, mais ie 
ne fçay pas beaucoup de chofes qu'iIIuy faut dire! 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

179 

animals; thou disposest of them. If thou choose to 
give me some, I will believe in thee; if thou give me 
none, I will still believe.' While I walked along, 
this idea came to my mind: 'vVhere wast thou a 
hundred years ago? Whence didst thou come? 
Thou wast not, and here thou art. In truth, it is 
admirable. Love, therefore, him who has made 
al1. ' It seems to me that I do love him," he said. 
One of our Fathers asked a little Savage, five years 
old, where his father was. The child pointed to him 
with his hand, but his father said to him: "My son, 
look up to Heaven; that is where thy Father is. It 
is God who is thy true Father;" and continuing, he 
added, " I give thee every day to him who has made 
an; and I beg him to make thee Religious, so that 
thou mayst know how to pray to him,-for my great- 
est sorrow in this world is that I do not know how 
to pray aright to him. I think nearly always of him, 
and it seems to me that I love him; but I do not 
know many things that should be said to him." 


180 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

[3 2 ] CHAPITRE V. 

DE QUELQUES ACTIONS PLUS REMARQUABLES. 

L 'ESPRIT de IESVS-CHRIST eft vn Eípritpur, 
vn efprit qui defiruit Ia nature & qui fait viure 
la grace; vn eíprit qui prend íes delices & fon 
repos non dans Ia panne & dans Ie fatin, mais dans 
vne ame enrichie d'vne amoureufe crainte. Vn 
ieune homme Sauuage affez difgracié de Ia nature, 
car il eft rude en paroles, & fes recreations paroiffent 
des coleres & des rebus, eftant plufieurs fois follicité 
íecrettement par vne femme Payenne, il ne Iuy fit 
qu'vne íeule refponfe: Tu n'as point d'efprit, tu 
viens trop tard, ie fuis baptiíé, ie prie Dieu, ie ne 
fçaurois plus cõmettre ces crimes. Vn ieune garçon 
prié par vne fille fe mit encor mieux à couuert, car 
íans raiíonner auec Ie ferpent il s'enfuit comme 
Ie chafte Iofeph. Vne femme veufue affez ieune 
inuitée par vn ieune homme fut íaifie de crainte & 
d'eípouuante, s'eftonnant qu'vn homme qui auoit tant 
oüy parler de l'Enfer, y voulut [33] defcendre pour 
vn plaifir fi paffager. 
Vn bon Chreftien qui receut Ie nom d'Ignace en 
fon Baptefme, tomba malade d'vne fievre violente 
cét efté dernier: II prie auffi- toft qu' on faffe venir Ie 
Pere pour íe confeffer, & voyant qu'il tardoit trop íe 
fait porter à la Chappelle, par vn de fir qu'il auoit de 
íoulager íon ame deuant que de penfer fon corps. 
De là on Ie porte dans vne petite Cabane d' écorces 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

181 

[32] CHAPTER V. 

OF SOME ESPECIALLY REMARKABLE ACTIONS. 

T HE Spirit of JESUS CHRIST is a pure Spirit- 
a spirit that destroys nature, and causes grace 
to live; a spirit that finds its de1ight and its 
repose, not in plush and satin, but in a soul enriched 
with loving fear. A young man, a Savage, who is 
somewhat ill favored by nature,- for he is harsh in 
speech, and his recreations seem to consist in fits of 
anger and in riddles,- was several times solicited in 
secret by a Pagan woman. He gave her but one 
answer: "Thou hast no sense; thou comest too 
late,- I am baptized; I pray to God. I can no 
longer commit those sins." A young boy, who was 
tempted by a girl, escaped the danger still better; 
for, without arguing with the serpent, he fled like 
the chaste Joseph. A widow, still young, who was 
tempted by a young man, was seized with fear and 
horror,- being astonished that a man who had heard 
so much of Hen should be willing [33] to go there 
for so fleeting a pleasure. 
A good Christian, who received the name of Ignace 
at his Baptism, fell ill of a violent fever last sum- 
mer. He at once requested that the Father be sent 
for, to confess him; and, seeing that he delayed too 
long, he had himself carried to the Chapel, through 
the desire that he felt to relieve his soul before 
thinking of his body. From there he was carried 
to a small bark Cabin, separated from the others, that 


182 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

feparée des autres qui luy feruit d'infirmerie. Le 
Pere Ie vifite fouuent, Ie confole, Ie veille la nuit, 
l'affifie felon fon petit pouuoir de ce qu'il a dans la 
miffion de Tadouffac, où il n'y a que ce qu'on y 
porte. Les Sauuages à fon exemple luy rendent les 
mefmes deuoirs de charité: vn entr'autre Ie confolant 
luy tenoit ce difcours: vous endurez beaucoup mon 
frere, luy dit-il, prenez courage & fouffrez paifible- 
ment vofire mal, i'ay efié malade iufques à la mort 
cét byuer, ie n'ay iamais demandé la fanté à Dieu, 
ie l'ay toufiours prié de faire fa volonté en moy, & 
m'en fuis tres-bien trouué, me voila encor fain & 
gaillard & dans la refolution de Ie feruir Ie refie de 
mes iours: faites-en de mefme, & vous ferez con- 
tent; puis fe mit à [34] genoüil, fit fa petite priere 
pour Ie malade & s'en retourna. Vn autre, d'abort 
qu'il entra dans la Cabane voyant Ie malade dans de 
grandes conuulfions, luy demanda où efioit fon plus 
grand mal, Ie malade luy faifant figne que c'efioit à 
l'efiomach, il moüil1a fon poux de fa faliue, marqua 
quelques fignes de Croix fur cette partie prononçant 
ces paroles: Seigneur, ie ne fais pas cecy en vain, 
i'ay appris que vous auez infiniment fouffert efiant 
attaché à la Croix: ie vous f u pplie qu' en confidera- 
tion de ces fouffrance. vous foulagiez cel1es de ce 
pauure tnalade. V n autre Chrefiien voyant Ie ma- 
lade en danger de mourir demanda aux affifians s'il 
s' efioi t confeffé, & com bien de fois depuis fa mala- 
die, oüy, luy dit-on, il s'efi acquitté fouuent de ce 
deuoir, il n'y a done plus rien à craindre, refpondit- 
il; s'il perd Ie corps i1 fauuera l'ame qui vaut cent 
mille fois mieux que Ie corps. Ignace tefmoignoit 
que telles vifites luy efioient agreables, il prioit fes 


1642-
5] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

IB& 

served him as an infirmary. The Father visits him 
often, consoles him, watches over him at night, assists 
him as far as the slender resources of the Tadoussac 
mission permit, where there is only what we carry 
there. The Savages, following his example, did him 
the same charitable services. One, among others, in 
order to console him, spoke to him as follows: "You 
suffer much, my brother; take courage, and endure 
your sickness with patience. I was sick unto death 
this winter. I never asked God for health,- I always 
begged him to do his win unto me, and I was all the 
better for it. Here I am, quite healthy and hearty 
again, and resolved to serve him for the remainder of 
my days. Do likewise, and you will be content." 
Then he [34J knelt down, said a short prayer for the 
sick man, and went away. Another, as soon as he 
entered the Cabin, saw the patient in strong convul- 
sions, and asked him where he felt the most pain. 
The sick man made him a sign that it was in his 
stomach. He moistened his thumb with his saliva 
and made some signs of the Cross on that part, 
pronouncing these words: "Lord, I am not doing 
this without a purpose; I have learned that you 
suffered infinite torture while attached to the Cross; 
I beg you, in consideration of those sufferings, to 
relieve those of this poor sick man." Another Chris- 
tian, seeing the patient in danger of death, asked 
those who were present if he had confessed, and how 
many times he had done so from the beginning of 
his illness. " Yes," he was told: "he has often 
acquitted himself of that duty." "Then, there is 
nothing to fear, " he said. "If he lose his body he 
will save his soul, which is worth a thousand times 
more than the body." Ignace showed that such 


184 

LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

gens de l'entretenir de femblables difcours. Com me 
il commençoit defja à fe mieux porter & qu'il eut 
quitté fon infirmerie d'écorce pour fe loger auec les 
autres, il luyarriua vne chofe bien eftrange. [35] 
11 fut faifi de ie ne fçay que I entoufiafme dans Ie plus 
profond filece de la nuit, il fe leue fubitemet fur fon 
feant, puis fe met à genoüil, leue les mains & les 
yeux vers Ie Ciel, en s'écriant, ie viens du Ciel, ie 
fuis guary, IE S V S m'a donné la vie, ie l'ay veu de 
mes yeux. A ce bruit ceux de la Cabane & du 
voifinage s'éueillent, on vient voir ce que c'eft, on 
demande au conualefcent ce qu'il veut dire par trois 
& quatre fois, à toutes ces demandes point d'autre 
refponfe que ces paroles, ie viens du Ciel, ie fuis 
guary, ray veu IE S V S; illes dit & redit toute la nuit 
iufques au matin qu'il prit vn peu de repos, apres 
deux ou trois heures de fommeil il fe met à genoüil 
derechef & prie quelqu'vn de fa Cabane d'appeller 
tous les Sauuages pour leur dire vn mot de la part 
de Dieu. 11 ne fallut que cette parole pour leur faire 
croire que cét homme eftoit reffufcité, ils y courent 
tous pour Ie voir & l'oüir parler. Ignace voyant vne 
fi belle affemblée commence fon difcours comme il 
auoit fait à minuit. Ie viens du Ciel, mes amis, leur 
dit-il, IESVS m'a donné la vie ie l'ay veu de mes 
yeux, il m'a fait voir des chofes eftranges auec cõman- 
demet de vous en faire Ie rapport. [36] 11 ma mon- 
ftré vn grand Liure où font efcrits d'vn cofté les 
vices qu'il a en horreur, comme l'yurognerie, Ie 
peché de la chair, la communication auec Ie Diable 
& plufieurs autres qu'il nomma, & de l'autre cofté 
du liure, il m'a fait voir ceux qui d'entre-vous font 
les plus fujets à ces pechez, chacun eft efcrit dans ce 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

185 

visits were agreeable to him. He begged his people 
to entertain him with similar discourses. When he 
began to get better, and was able to leave his bark 
infirmary, to lodge with the others, a very strange 
thing happened to him. [35] He was seized with I 
know not what enthusiasm, in the deepest silence of 
the night. He rises at once to a sitting posture, 
then kneels dow"n, and raises his hands and his eyes 
to Heaven, exclaiming: "I come from Heaven; I am 
cured; J E S U s has given me life. I have seen him 
with my own eyes." On hearing the noise, those in 
the Cabin and in the neighborhood awake; they 
come to see what is the matter; they ask the con- 
valescent, three or four times, what he means. To 
all these questions he gives no other answer than 
these words: " I come from Heaven; I am cured; I 
have seen J E S us. " He repeats them over and 
over again, during the night, until toward morning, 
when he gets a little rest. After sleeping two or 
three hours, he again kneels down and requests one 
of those in his Cabin to summon all the Savages, that 
he may give them a message from God. It needed 
but these words to make them believe that the man 
had risen from the dead. They all hasten to see 
him, and to hear him speak. When Ignace sees so 
large an assemblage, he commences to speak as he 
had spoken at midnight. "I come from Heaven, 
my friends," he says to them. " J E S U s has given 
me life; I saw him with my own eyes. He showed 
me wonderful things, and commanded me to relate 
them to you. [36] He showed me a great Book, in 
which are written on one side the vices of which he 
has a horror, such as drunkenness, the sin of the 
flesh, communication with the Devil, and many 


186 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 21 

liure qui plus, qui moins, vous vn tel (Ie nommant 
par fon nom) vous y eftiez beaucoup efcrit, voftre 
Maffinahigan, c'eft à dire voftre efcriture, eft grand, 
i1 y a quelque chofe qui ne va pas bien dans voftre 
affaire, vous n'allez pas droit, vous n'auez pas foin 
de corriger la ieuneffe quand el1e fait mal. Vn tel 
qui eft baptisé ne croit que du bout des levres, la foy 
qu'il a s'arrefte à la gorge & ne paffe pas iufques au 
cæur, il n'y a point d'apparence qu'illa garde long- 
temps. Vn tel n'eft pas beau coup efcrit dans ce 
liure; i1 eft homme de bien & fa femme auffi, tous 
deux vont droit au Ciel. Vn tel qui a quitté fa 
femme prend Ie chemin de I' Enfer, & eft en danger 
d'y aller s'il ne s'amende, car fon papier eft bien long, 
& il Y a bien de l'efcriture pour luy. lamais vous 
ne viftes des gens plus attentifs ny vn plus profond 
filence. Cét homme [37] de l'autre monde pourfuït; 
IE S V S m'a fait voir, difoit-il, à fa main droite vne 
chofe qui n'a point fon pareil en beauté, c' eft vne 
lumiere en comparaifon de qui Ie Soleil n'eft que 
tenebres, vn lieu de plaifirs & de contentemêt, enfin 
Ie fejour de Dieu mefme & de tous les Biê-heureux. 
C'eft là où i ay veu les enfans de nos gens, qui font 
morts incontinent apres leur baptefme, mais i'y ay 
veu fort peu d'hommes & de femmes Sauuages bap- 
tifez. A fa main gauche il m'a découuert vn feu 
qui m'a fait trembler de peur, dont nous parle fou- 
uent Ie Pere qui nous enfeigne; mais qui eft tel qui 
[sc. qu'il] n'y a point de paroles qui en puiffe expri- 
mer la rigueur. C'eft dans ce feu que i'ay veu 
bruíler les Sauuages qui ne croyent point en Dieu, & 
ceux qui croyans en luy ne luy ont point obey en cette 
vie: i'y ay auffi veu des François, ô que Ie nombre eft 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

187 

others that he named. And. on the other side of 
tbe book, he made me see those among you who are 
most addicted to those sins. Each one is inscribed 
in that book,- some for more, some for less. You, 
such a one" (calling him by his name), "were in- 
scribed there very often. Your Massinahigan," that 
is to say, your account, "is a long one. There is 
something in your conduct that is not right. You do 
not go straight; you are not sufficiently careful to 
correct the young people when they do wrong. Such 
a one is baptized but his belief does not extend be- 
yond his lips. His faith stops at his throat, and does 
not reach his heart; it is not probable that he will 
long retain it. Such a one is not often inscribed in 
the book; he is a good man, and his wife is also a 
good woman; both are going straight to Heaven. 
Such a one, who has abandoned his wife, takes the 
road to Hell, and is in danger of going there if he 
do not amend his ways; for his account is a very long 
one, and there is much writing about him." Never 
have you seen people more attentive, or in greater 
silence. This man [37] from the other world con- 
tinued: "J E S us showed me," he said, " on his right 
hand a thing that has not its equal for beauty. It is 
a light compared with which the Sun is but dark- 
ness, a place of pleasure and of happiness,- in a 
word. the abode of God himself and of all the Blessed. 
There I saw the children of our people, who have 
died immediately after their baptism; but I observed 
there but few Savage men and women who have 
been baptized. On his left hand, he showed me a 
fire that made me tremble with fear,-of which the 
Father who teaches us often speaks, but which is 
such that no words can express its intensity. In that 


188 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

grand des vns & des autres. IE S V S efioit au mi1ieu 
d u Paradis & de I' Enfer, i1 m' a monfiré fes mains & 
fes pieds percez de gros cloux, puis m'a dit deux ou 
trois mots. Ignace, me difoit-il, ce que vous auez 
enduré pendant vofire maladie n'efi rië, c'efi moy 
qui ay fouffert pendant à la Croix pour vous, moy 
[38] qui fuis vofire Createur & vofire Roy. Quand 
ie vous enuoye quelque affiiétion, la faim, la foif, la 
maladie, la pauureté, fouffrez cela patiemment pour 
moy & à mon exemple. 
En fuitte de cela Ignace fit vne petite Infiru6tion 
à fon auditoire; II faut mes freres, leur dit-il, nous 
affembler tous les foirs dans vne grande Cabane pour 
chanter les loüanges de Dieu, & nous exhorter les 
vns les autres à Ie feruir fidellement. II faut tous 
les matins apres vos prieres en particulier que vous 
fortiez de vos Cabanes & que vous vous promeniez 
en difant vos Chappelets, & que vous imitiez Ie Pere 
qui fe retire dans Ie bois tous les matins pour prier 
Dieu. N' oubliez point la benedi6tion & I' aétion de 
graces en vos repas; foyez foigneux de corriger vos 
enfans, & de faire plus d'efiat de la foy que Dieu vous 
a donnée que de vos vies, ainfi finit Ie Sermon, & 
chacun fe retira chez foy en vn profond filence. 
Quoy qu'il en foit de cete vifiõ, foit qu'elle paffe 
pour veritable, foit qu'il n'y ait que de l'imagina- 
tion: il efi toufiours vray de dire qu'elle a produit 
de bons fruits dans les efprits de tous ceux qui en 
ont [39] oüy Ie rapport. Les mefchans en ont efié 
efpouuantez & les bons confolez; Ie vis pour lors les 
pauures Sauuages de Tadouffac bien changez, dit Ie 
Pere qui a foin de cette Million. Ie les ay veus fon- 
dre à la foule Chrefiiës & Payens dans la Chappelle 


1642-45J 

R.E"LA TION OF I644-45 

189 

fire I saw the Savages burning who believe not in 
God, and those who, while believing in him, have 
not obeyed him in this life. There also I saw 
Frenchmen. Oh! how great is the number of both. 
J E S U s stood between Paradise and Hell. He showed 
me his hands and his feet, pierced by great nails, 
and then he said a few words to me. 'Ignace,' he 
said, , what you have endured during your illness is 
nothing. It is I who suffered, while hanging on the 
Cross for you- I [38J who am your Creator and your 
King. When I send you any affliction,- hunger, 
thirst, sickness, poverty,-suffer it patiently for me, 
and in imitation of my example.' " 
After that, Ignace delivered a short Instruction to 
his audience: "We must, my brothers," he said, 
"assemble every night in a large Cabin, to sing 
God's praises and to exhort one another to serve 
him faithfully. Every morning, after saying your 
prayers in private, you must come out of your Cabins 
and walk about reciting your Rosaries, and imitate the 
Father who withdraws into the woods every morn- 
ing to pray to God. Do not forget to ask a blessing 
and to return thanks at your meals. Be careful to 
correct your children, and to think more highly of 
the faith that God has given you than of your lives." 
Thus ended the Sermon, and each one withdrew to 
his home in profound silence. 
However it may be as regards this vision,-whether 
it be true or whether it be only imagination,-it is 
nevertheless a fact that it produced a good effect 
upon the minds of all who [39J heard it related. The 
wicked were frightened and the good were consoled 
by it. " For the time, I found the poor Tadoussac 
Savages greatly altered," says the Father who has 


190 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

pour y faire des prieres extraordinaires; ie les ay 
veus fe promener Ie foir & Ie matin difant leurs 
Chappelets auec vne deuotion toute particuliere; ie 
les ay oüy parler à Dieu la nuit, fe promenant à 
I' entour de la Chappelle, auec des paroles animées de 
deuotion, & fortant d'vn cæur qui fembloit efire veri- 
tablement contrit. Ha mon Pere! me difoit vn des 
plus zelez, qu'Ignace m'a donné d'épouuante par fon 
difcours, il me femble que ie m'éueille d'vn pro- 
fond fommeil, i'ay efié aueugle iufques icy & ie 
commence à ouurir les yeux, il me femble que i'efiois 
mort, & ie commence à viure auiourd'huy, & quoy que 
ie fois baptifé il y a defia deux efiez, il m'efi aduis 
toutes fois que ie ne l'ay pas encore reçeu en Chre- 
íHen. Vne chofe fi. nouuelle fut incontinent diuul- 
guée parmy les Sauuages de Silleri & des trois 
riuieres, dont les mieux difpofez en furent viuement 
touchez. 
[4 0 ] Les Chrefiiens de la mefme Million firent vne 
faute affez pardonnable dont ils firent vne penitence 
publique incontinent apres à la porte de l'Eglife; 
mais ayant apris du Pere qui les enfeigne quelques 
exemples de ceux qui font penitence pour leurs 
pechez dont quelques-vns ieufnent au pain & à l'eau, 
d'autres fe flagellent quelques fois, quelques-vns font 
de grandes aumofnes & de longues prieres, & d'au- 
tres meurent de regret & de douleur de leurs fautes, 
efiimerent que la penitence qu' on leur auoit donnée 
à faire efioit trop petite, & que la fatisfaétion qu'ils 
auoient faite publiquement n'efioit point égale à leur 
de1it. lIs fe refolurent tous d'vn commun confente- 
ment d'en faire vne plus grande, & de fe flageller à 
l'imitation de ces faints Penitens dont ils auoient 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

191 

charge of that :Mission. cc I saw them come in 
crowds, both Christians and Pagans, to the Chapel, 
to say special prayers there. I saw them walking 
about night and morning, reciting their Rosaries, 
with most special devotion. I heard them speaking 
to God at night, while walking round the Chapel, 
with words full of devotion and coming from hearts 
which seemed truly contrite. 'Ah, my Father,' 
one of the most zealous would say to me, 'how 
Ignace has frightened us by his discourse. It seems 
to me that I am awaking from a profound slumber; 
I have been blind hitherto, and I am commencing to 
open my eyes. It seems to me that I was dead and 
to-day I am beginning to live; and, although I was 
baptized two summers ago, I nevertheless think that 
I have not yet received that Sacrament as a Chris- 
tian should.''' An occurrence so novel was quickly 
made known among the Savages of Silleri and of 
three rivers, the best disposed among whom were 
deepl y touched by it. 
[40] The Christians of the same :Mission committed 
a somewhat pardonable offense, for which they at 
once did public penance at the Church door. But 
having learned, from the Father who teaches them, 
some examples of those who do penance for their 
sins,- some of whom fast on bread and water, others 
scourge themselves a certain number of times, others 
give considerable alms and say long prayers, while 
others die of sorrow and regret for their sins,- they 
considered that the penance that they had been given 
to perform was too light, and that the public atone- 
ment which they had made was not adequate to the 
offense. They all resolved, by common consent, to 
perform a harder one and to scourge themselves in 


192 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

oüy parler. IIs font fur Ie champ vne gran de difci- 
pline de cordes affez groffes pleine de gros næuds 
qu'ils lient au bout d'vn bafion pour feruir de poi- 
gnée, ils la gardent toute la nuit, & Ie lendemain 
matin s' efians affemblez au fon de la voix du Pere 
qui les appelle à la Meffe: vn des plus confiderables 
entre les Chrefiiens pria tout Ie monde indifferem- 
ment de fe [41J trouuer à l'Eglife, auffi bien les infi- 
delles que les baptifez, pour oüyr vn mot d'impor- 
tance qu'il auoit à leur dire. II y auoit pour lors à 
Tadouffac 6. ou 7. nations differentes qui fe trouue- 
rent dedans ou proche de la Chappelle: alors cét 
homme zelé fe leua au milieu de l'affemblée & tint 
ce difcours. Ie crains fort, dit-il, q
e Ie peuple de 
Tadouffac ne foit point fauué; ie voy que c' efi vn 
peuple trop mefchant, & que iufques icy apres tãt 
de fautes qu'il a fait, il n'a donné aucun ou fort peu 
de tefmoignages de fon amandemët, Tenez, regar- 
dez, voila comme la terre efi faite, difoit-il, mon- 
ftrant fa main fermée, la terre eft ronde cõme mon 
poin: elle efi par tout habitée à ce qu'on nous dit, & 
n'y a prefque point de lieux où il n'y ait des fidelles 
qui croyent fortement en Dieu. II n 'y a que ce bout 
du monde, où l'on trouue bien peu de Chrefiiens, & 
encor ceux qui font profeffion de l'efire font fi foi- 
bles dans la foy, que Ie Demon a bon marché d' eux 
quand il les attaque. Les François qui croyent en 
Dieu font comme vne forte muraille, Ie Diable trouue 
de la refifiance quand il s'en approche: mais ceux de 
Tadouffac font comme ce mefchant [42J drap percé 
(c'efioit vn vieil drap qui feruoit de courtine à l'Eglife 
faute de quelque autre chofe meilleure) nous fOlnmes 
difoit-il comme ce drap troüé, Ie Demon paffe tout 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

193 

imitation of the holy Penitents of whom they had 
heard. They at once made a great discipline of 
heavy cords, full of large knots, which they tied to 
the end of a stick, to serve as a handle. They kept 
it all night, and on the following day, when they 
assembled at the sound of the Father's voice calling 
them to Mass, one of the leading Christians begged 
everyone, without distinction,- [41] both the infidels 
and the baptized,-to go to the Church to hear some- 
thing of importance that he had to tell them. There 
were at the time at Tadoussac 6 or 7 different tribes 
who were in or near the Chapel. Then this zealous 
man stood up in the middle of the assembly, and 
spoke as follows: " I greatly fear," he said, "that 
the people of Tadoussac will not be saved; I see that 
they are too wicked a people, and that, after commit- 
ting so many offenses, they have as yet manifested 
but few, if any, signs of improvement. Here, look, 
see how the earth is made," he said, showing his 
closed hand; "the earth is round, like my fist; it 
is everywhere inhabited, we are told, and there is 
hardly a place where there are not faithful ones who 
firmly believe in God. It is only at this end of the 
world that there are very few Christians; and even 
those who profess to be such are so weak in the faith, 
that the Devil easily overcomes them when he attacks 
them. The French who believe in God are like a 
strong wall; the Devil meets with resistance when 
he approaches it. But those of Tadoussac are like 
that shabby, [42] torn cloth" (this was an old cloth 
that served as curtain in the Church, for want of 
something better). "Weare," said he, "like that 
cloth, full of holes; the Devil passes through our 
hearts as my finger passes through that hole. That 


194 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

au trauers de nos cæurs, comme mon doigt fait au 
trauers de ce trou. Ce malin efprit fait de nous ce 
qu'il veut, pour moy ie crains fort qu'il ne m' arrefie 
en chemin & qu'il ne m'attrappe au milieu de ma 
courfe. Que fi iamais ie vay au Ciel, Ie Pere qui 
nous enfeigne y fera fi haut qu'à peine Ie pourray-je 
voir; car que faifons nous pour y aller. Or fus, ie 
defire monfirer plus de c.ourage dorefnauant, ie veux 
fatisfaire pour mes fautes & marcher droit Ie refie 
de mes iours: là-deffus il tire cette gran de difcipline 
qu'il cachoit deffous fa robbe la monfirant à toute 
l'affemblée, & ef1euant Ie ton de fa voix, ce n'efi pas- 
là Ie feu d'Enfer que i'ay merité, difoit-il, ce n'efi 
qu'vne petite paille en comparaifon de ce qu'on 
fouffre là-bas dans la demeure des Demons. Quand 
on mettroit mon corps en fang auec ce foüet & qu'on 
defchireroit ma chair de coups, ie ne croirois pas 
pourtant auoir payé mes debtes & fatisfait à la iufiice 
de Dieu; mais ie fçay qu'il efi infiniment [43J bon & 
qu'il fait mifericorde à ceux qui luy demandent 
pardon de cæur. Tenez, dit-il, au Capitaine, voila 
la difcipline que ie vous mets entre les mains & mes 
efpaules nuës que ie vous prefente, frappez & ne 
m'épargnez point. Le Capitaine obeyt fur l'heure à 
fa parole, & luy defcharge fur Ie dos vne grefie de 
coups, ce penitent demande humblement pardon à 
Dieu de fes fautes pendant qu'on Ie flagelle, & fe 
iette par terre pour la baifer, & fe releuant inuite 
tous les Chrefiiens à fuiure fon exemple, il erie, 
venez tant que vous efies de coupables, venez vous 
prefenter deuant l' Autel, venez fatis-faire à la iufiice 
de Dieu. On ne difputa pc>int qui pafferoit Ie pre- 
mier, les plus proches furent les premiers, chacun 


1642 - 45] 

RELA TION OF z644-45 

195 

evil spirit does with us as he wishes. For my part, 
I greatly fear that he will stop me on the way, and 
catch me in the midst of my career. And, if ever I 
go to Heaven, the Father who teaches us will be so 
high up that I shall hardly be able to see him. For 
what are we doing, in order to get there? Now, then, 
I wish to manifest more courage in future. I wish 
to atone for my sins and to walk straight for the 
remainder of my days." Thereupon he drew out the 
great discipline, that was hidden beneath his robe; 
and showing it to the whole assembly, and raising 
his voice, he said, "This is not that Hell-fire that I 
have deserved. It is but a little straw, in compari- 
son with what is suffered down below in the abode 
of the Demons. Even if my whole body were cov- 
ered with blood from this whip, and my flesh were 
torn by blows, I would not even then consider that I 
had paid my debts and satisfied God's justice. But 
I know that he is infinitely [43] good, and has mercy 
on those who ask pardon of him with all their hearts. 
Here," said he to the Captain, "here is the disci- 
pline that I place in your hands, and here are my 
bare shoulders that I present to you. Strike, and 
spare me not. " The Captain at once took him at his 
word, and delivered a shower of blows on his back. 
The penitent humbly begged pardon of God for his 
sins while he was being scourged, and threw himself 
on the ground, to kiss it: and, on rising, he urged 
all the Christians to follow his example. He cried 
out, " Come, all ye who are guilty; come and pre- 
sent yourselves before the Altar. Come and satisfy 
the justice of God." There was no dispute as to 
who should go first. The nearest went the first; 
they all came up, one after another, to perform their 


196 

LES RELATIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

s'approcha fil à fil pour faire fa penitence, chacun 
determina de ce qu'il vouloit donner & de ce qu'il 
vouloit receuoir; les vns demandoient qu' on leur 
donnafi vingt coups, les autres dix, les autres plus, 
les autres moins. Le Pere qui efioit fur Ie point de 
celebrer la Meffe fut furpris à la veuë de cette nou- 
uelle deuotion, qu'il n'attendoit pas d'vn peuple qui 
ne fçait encore ce que c'efi que de [44J fouffrir pour 
Dieu. 11 ne la voulut pas interrompre fur l'heure de 
peur de s'oppofer aux mouuemens du fainét Efprit; 
mais feulement il prit garde qu'elle ne paffafi les 
termes de la prudence & qu'il n'y eut point d'excez. 
La penitence fut fi generale, que les innocens y 
voulurent auoir part auffi bien que les coupables, les 
enfans mefmes ny furent point efpargnez, les peres 
& les meres les faifoient approcher de I' Autel, les 
dépoüilloient de leurs petites robbes, & prioient celuy 
qui tenoit Ie fouët en main de les chafiier à difcretion 
felon leur aage & leurs forces; allegant que ce chafii- 
ment eítoit defia deu à leur defobeyffance. Ces 
pauures viétimes s'y en alloient de bon cæur fe met- 
toient à genouï1 deuant l' Autel, ioignoient les mains 
& receuoient fans branler & fans ietter vne petite 
larme, les coups de fouët qu'on defchargeoit douce- 
ment fur leurs chairs innocentes. 11 fe trouua mefme 
des meres qui chafiierent de leurs Chappelets à guife 
de difcipline leurs petits enfans qui pendoient encore 
à la mamelle. Vn bon vieillard Chrefiien qui venoit 
de l'habitation de faint Iofeph, & ne faifoit que [45J 
d'arriuer à Tadouffac, fe trouua fort à propos à cette 
fainte Ceremonie, il en fut fi fort touché qu'il cria 
tout haut qu'il efioit pecheur & qu'il vouloit faire 
penitence auec les autres; il s'auance en difant ces 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF ZÓ44-45 

197 

penance; each one decided what he wished to give 
and what he wished to receive. Some asked to be 
given twenty blows, others ten,- some more, some 
less. The Father, who was about to say Mass, was 
surprised at the sight of this new devotion, which he 
did not expect from a people who know not yet what 
it is to [44] suffer for God. He did not wish to inter- 
rupt it at once, for fear of opposing the workings of 
the holy Ghost. He merely took care that it did not 
go beyond the bounds of prudence, and that there 
were no excesses. The penance was so general, that 
the innocent wished to share it with the guilty. Even 
the children were not spared; their fathers and 
mothers made them approach the Altar, took off their 
little garments, and begged him who held the whip 
to chastise them at his discretion, in proportion to 
their age and strength,-alleging that this chastise- 
ment was already due to their disobedience. These 
poor victims wen t there cheerfully; they knelt be- 
fore the Altar, clasped their hands, and, without 
shrinking or shedding one little tear, they received 
the blows from the whip, which were gently deliv- 
ered on their innocent flesh. Some of the mothers 
even struck with their Rosaries, in the manner of 
the discipline, their little children still at the breast. 
A good old man-a Christian, who came from the 
settlement of saint Joseph and who had only just 
[45] arrived at Tadoussac-happened, very oppor- 
tunely, to be present at this holy Ceremony. He 
was so touched by it that he cried out aloud that he 
was a sinner and wished to do penance with the 
others. He came forward, as he uttered these words, 
prostrated himself on the ground, presented his bare 
shoulders, and received at once what he fervently 


198 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

paroles, íe profierne en terre, preíente íes efpaules 
nuës, & reçoit à l'infiant ce qu'il demandoit auec fer- 
ueur. Le lendemain il s'en retourne dans fon canot 
à Sillery d'où il efioit party. Enfin celuy qui atten- 
dit Ie dernier fut Ie mieux payé: ce fut tout à deffein 
qu'illaiffa paffer les autres deuant luy, & qu'il choi- 
fit Ie dernier rang, afin de faire fa penitence plus à 
fon aife & auec plus de confufion. C'efi à moy, dit 
ce braue champion de IESVS-CHRIST, c'efi à moy 
à payer à mon tour, ie fuis Ie plus mefchant, il faut 
que ie fois plus chafiié que les autres, ie fuis Ie plus 
criminel ie veux efire Ie plus mocqué. Frappez fur 
moy hardiment, dit-il à celuy qui tenoit la difcipline, 
tandis que ie me pourmeneray dans I' Eglife pour 
boire la confufion & pour efire l'opprobre du monde; 
auffi-tofi dit auffi-tofi fait, il fe promene Ie mieux 
qu'il peut par la Chappelle, & l'autre Ie fuit toufiours 
[46] frappant & flagellant, à chaque coup qu'on luy 
donnoit il difoit des paroles qui faifoient quafi fondre 
en larmes toute l'affifiance. Ie vous fupplie, Sei- 
gneur, que ce que ie fens maintenant fur nla chair 
par les coups de foüet que ie fens, effacent les pechez 
que i'ay efcry mal à propos fur vofire liure. Sei- 
gneur, ayez pitié de ce pauure homme, difoit-il vne 
autrefois, qui a merité l'Enfer, & qui vous demande 
pardon. Ie vous abandonne mon corps & man ame 
& vous promets de vous efire plus fide1le à l'aduenir 
moyennant vofire grace. Cette flagellation eutt efié 
trop longue fi Ie Pere n'y eufi mis fin, qui les confola 
les voyant dans cét efiat de penitence, & les affeura 
du pardon de leurs fautes fi leurs cæurs refpondoient 
à leurs parolles & à leurs aétions; ils les aduertit 
qu'ils n'euffent plus à faire de penitence publique 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF ZÓ44-45 

199 

asked for. On the following day, he returned in his 
canoe to Sillery, whence he had come. Finally, he 
who waited until the last was the best paid. He 
purposely allowed the others to pass before him, and 
chose the last place, so as to perform his penance 
more leisurely and with more humiliation. "It is 
my turn," said this brave champion of J E S us 
C H R 1ST, "it is my turn to atone. I am the most 
wicked of all; I must be punished more than the 
others. I am the most criminal; I wish to be the 
most scorned. Strike me boldly," he said to him 
who held the discipline, "while I walk about in the 
Church, to endure the shame and be an object of 
opprobrium to all." No sooner said, than done. He 
walked as best he could through the Chapel, while 
the other followed him, ever [46] striking and scourg- 
ing him. At every blow that was given him, he 
uttered words that almost caused all present to melt 
in tears. "I beg you, Lord, that what I now suffer 
in my flesh, by the blows from the whip that I feel, 
may wipe out the sins that I have so wrongly caused 
to be inscribed in your book." "Lord," he said at 
another time, "have pity on this poor man who has 
deserved Hell and who asks your pardon. I resign 
my body and my soul to you, and promise you to be 
more faithful in future with the help of your grace. ,. 
This flagellation would have been too long, had not 
the Father put an end to it. He consoled them, 
when he saw them in so penitent a condition; and 
he assured them of the pardon of their sins, if their 
hearts responded to their words and their actions. 
He warned them not to perform any other public 
penance without the advice of their Confessors. The 
conclusion was, that they must live better, and show 


200 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

fans Ie confeil de leurs Confeffeurs. La conc1ufion 
fut qu'il failloit mieux viure, & monftrer plus de 
courage à combattre Ie vice dorefnauant, & là-deffus 
on pendit la difcipline à vn dou de la Chappelle, pour 
auertir qu'elle eftoit-Ià, pour [47] chaftier publique- 
ment ceux qui feroient quelque fcandale public. 
Quatre ou cinq ieunes gens s'en eftoient allez à la 
chaffe & ne s'eftoient pas trouuez à cette publique 
fatisfaétion & generale, ils ne furent pas fi-toft de 
retour qu'on les inuita de faire comme les autres, 
puis qu'ils eftoient coupables. Ils ne fe firent pas 
tirer I' oreille, ils fe prefenterent tous au commence- 
ment de la 11:effe, & fatisfirent au contentement & à 
I' edification de tous les Chreftiens. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1644-45 

:W1 

more courage in fighting against vice, in future; and 
thereupon the discipline was hung up on a nail in 
the Chapel, as a warning that it was there to [47] 
chastise publicly those who should be guilty of any 
public scandal. 
Four or five young men had gone out hunting, and 
were not present at this public and general atone- 
ment. No sooner had they returned when they were 
asked to do as the others had done, since they also 
were guilty. They did not hesitate; but all presented 
themselves at the beginning of Mass, and made their 
atonement to the satisfaction and edification of all 
the Christians. 


202 

LES RELATIONS DES.lÉSUITES 

[VOL 27 

[48J CHAPITRE VI. 

DE L'HYUERNEMENT D'VN PERE AUEC LES SAU- 
UAGES. 

V NE bonne efcoüade de Sauuages Chreftiens fe 
difpofans pour leur grande chaffe & pour fa ire 
leur prouifion de chairs d' Elan, me prierent 
de leur donner vn Pere de noftre Compagnie qui les 
accompagnaft, ils apportoient pour raifon que les Iro- 
quois les pourfuiuans par tout, ils eftoient contraints 
de s'ef1oigner de plufieurs iournées de la maifon de 
prieres, & que dans leur fejour de plufieurs mois, ils 
fouhaittoient ardemment d'auoir quelqu'vn auec eux 
qui leur pût adminiftrer les Sacremens & leur enfei- 
gner Ie chemin du Ciel. Le P. Gabriel Druilletes 
leur fut accordé, il fut bien-toft equippé, tout fon 
bagage eftoit renfermé dans vne petite caiffe ou dans 
vn petit coffret qui ne contenoit que les ornemens 
neceffaires pour dire la fainte Meffe; Ie voila chargé 
de tous fes meubles & [49J d'vne bonne refolution de 
bien fouffrir, car quiconque s'embarque auec ces peu- 
pIes ne fera iamais logé dans tout fon voyage qu'à 
l'enfeigne de la Croix; il eut pour compagnon vn 
ieune François qui ne Iuy pouuoit donner autre 
confolation que de Ie feruir à l' AuteI; comme Ie gros 
des Sauuages auoient pris Ie deuant, deux ieunes 
hommes l'enleuerent dans vn petit batteau d'écorfe, 
& Ie porterent en peu de iours où iis s'eftoient donné 
Ie rendez vous. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1644-45 

203 

[48] CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE WINTERING OF A FATHER AMONG THE SAV- 
AGES. 

A CONSIDERABLE band of Christian Savages 
who were preparing for their great hunt t and 
for securing their provision of Elk meat, 
begged me to give them a Father of our Society, to 
accompany them. They alleged as a reason that, as 
the Iroquois pursued them everywhere, they were 
compelled to remain at a distance of several days' 
journey from the house of prayer; and that, during 
their sojourn of several months, they ardently desired 
to have some one with them who could administer 
the Sacraments to them, and teach them the way to 
Heaven. They were given Father Gabriel Druil- 
letes. He was soon equipped; all his baggage was 
contained in a small box or trunk which held only 
the necessary supplies for saying Jvlass. Behold 
him, then, loaded with all his movable effects, and 
[49] animated by a noble resolution to suffer much; 
for whosoever embarks with these people will never 
be lodged throughout his journey elsewhere than at 
the sign of the Cross. He had for companion a 
young Frenchman, who could give him no other con- 
solation than to serve him at the Altar. As the main 
body of the Savages had preceded him, two young 
men took him in a little boat of bark, and in a few 
days brought him to the appointed rendezvous. 


204 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Auffi-toft que ce canot parut chacun accourt fur les 
riues du grand fleuue, c'eft à qui tefmoignera plus 
de ioye de la venuë du Pere, on Ie careffe non à la 
mode de la Cour, mais à la mode de la fincerité & 
de la franchife. Noël Negabamat que ces bons 
Neophytes ont choifi pour leur Capitaine, harangua 
publiquement, declarant d'vne voix haute & forte les 
fujets qui auoient amené Ie Pere, les befoins qu'ils 
en auoient, les biens qu'ils pouuoient recueillir de fa 
prefence & de fa conuerfation, les obligations qu'ils 
luy auoient de s'eftre voulu rendre compagnon de 
leu[ r]s grands trauaux pour les inftruire: bref it 
exhortoit tous fes gës auec [50] vne gran de ferueur de 
rendre toute forte d'obeyffance & de refpeét aux 
volontez de leur Pere. 
Tous ceux qui deuoient marcher de compagnie 
eftans raffemblés on leue Ie camp, on met toutes les 
maifons en rouleaux, c'eft à dire qu'on plie les écor- 
oes qui compofent les baftimens, on quitte les bords 
de la grande ri uiere où Ie païs des poiffons, pour 
entrer dans la region des Elans, des cerfs. des caftors 
& des autres animaux, aufquels ils alloient declarer 
la guerre. Ie ne parleray point de leur façon de 
camper ny de leurs armes ny de leurs chariots de 
bagages qui ne font autres que leurs dos ou des trai- 
neaux de bois fort legers, quand la terre eft couuerte 
de neige. Ie ne parleray non plus de diuerfes fortes 
de beftes qu'ils rencontrent dans leurs grandes forefts, 
ny leurs couftumes ou de leurs façons de faire, tout 
eel a eft décrit dans les Relations precedentes, ie tra- 
ceray feulement vn petit crayon de la pieté & de la 
deuotion que ces bans Neophytes exercent dans leurs 
grands bois. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r614-45 

205 

As soon as the canoe appeared, all hastened to the 
banks of the great river, and vied with one another 
in expressing their joy at the arrival of the Father. 
He was welcomed, not in the fashion of the Court, 
but with sincerity and frankness. Noël Negabamat, 
whom these good Neophytes have chosen for their 
Captain, delivered a public harangue, declaring in a 
loud and strong voice the reasons that had brought 
the Father there; the need that they had of him; 
the benefits that they might derive from his presence 
and conversation; the obligations that they owed him 
for having consented to become their companion in 
their great labors, in order to instruct them. In a 
word, he exhorted all his people with [50] great fer- 
vor to show every obedience and respect to the wishes 
of their Father. 
\Vhen all who were to travel together were as- 
sembled, the camp was broken; all the houses were 
rolled up-that is to say, the bark of which these 
buildings are made was folded up; they quitted the 
banks of the great river, or the fish country, to enter 
the region of Elk, of deer, of beaver, and of other 
animals, against which they were proceeding to wage 
war. I will not speak of their mode of earn ping, or 
of their weapons, or of their baggage,- wagons, 
which are no other than their own backs, or very 
light wooden sleds when the ground is covered with 
snow. N either will I speak of the various kinds of 
beasts that they find in their great forests, or of their 
customs, or of their methods of doing things; all 
these have been described in the preceding Rela- 
tions. I will merely give a slight sketch of the piety 
and devotion practiced by these good N eoph ytes in 
their great forests. 


206 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL 27 

On ne man quoit iamais tous les foirs & tous les 
matins de faire les prieres en [5 I] public dans vne 
cabane deftinée à cét effet. Les peres & les meres y 
amenoient leurs enfans aufquels on donnoit vne 
petite inftruétion qui les confolloit merueilleufement. 
Quelques-vns plus feruens déroboient de leur fom- 
meil pour Ie donner à Dieu, fe leuant plutoft ou fe 
couchant plus tard que les autres pour s' entretenir 
auec luy dans leurs prieres. 
Les hommes demandoient au Pere fa benediétion 
deuant que de fortir de la cabane pour aller à leur 
chaffe, les femmes en faifoient autant deuant que de 
s'engager dans leur trauail, & les vns & les autres 
remercioient noftre Seigneur à leur retour de les 
auoir affiftez, & ceux-là mefme qui retournoient fans 
auoir rien pris beniffoient Dieu d'auffi bon-cæur, 
com me s'ils euffent fait vn tres-heureux rencontre. 
Lors qu'il n'y auoit plus de chaffe en quelques 
endroits & qu'ils decabanoient pour porter plus auant 
dans ces grandes forefts leurs pauillons d'écorces, Ie 
Pere eí1euoit vn Crucifix, tout Ie monde fe mettoit à 
genoux, & iettans les yeux fur cette image de vie, 
ils chantoient auec vne deuotion toute fimple & toute 
rauiffante, [52] les Litanies des attributs de Dieu, ils 
prioient leur Sauueur d'eftre leur guide & leur con- 
duéteur, & leur force dans les fatigues qu'ils alloient 
prendre auec amour & fatisfaétion de leurs pechez, 
cela fait chacun fe mettoit en chemin portans ou 
traifnans tout l'attiral de leur camp. Sur le midy 
Ie Capitaine faifoit faire alte pour prendre vn petit 
de repos & pour reparer fes forces dans vne hofiele- 
rie couuerte de la voûte du Ciel, abbriée de deux ou 
trois millions d'arbres, où les fieges ne font que de 
la neige, où la boiffon ne coufte qu' à prendre dans vn 


1642 -45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

207 

They never failed, every night and every morning, 
to say their prayers in [5 I] public, in a cabin set apart 
for the purpose. Fathers and mothers brought their 
children there, and we gave them a slight instruction 
that wonderfully consoled them. Some of the most 
fervent gave up a portion of their slumbers for God, 
rising at an earlier or retiring at a later hour than 
the others, to hold converse with him in their prayers. 
The men asked the Father for his blessing, before 
leaving the cabin to go out hunting; the women did 
likewise, before commencing their labors; and all 
thanked our Lord on their return for having assisted 
them. Even those who came back empty-handed 
praised God as heartily as if they had met with very 
great success. 
When there was no longer any game in a place, 
and they broke their camp to carry their bark pavil- 
ions still deeper into the great forests, the Father 
held up a Crucifix; all knelt down and, casting their 
eyes on that image of life, they sang with very 
simple and most delightful devotion [52] the Litanies 
of the attributes of God. They begged their Savior 
to be their guide, their leader, and their strength, in 
the fatigues that they were about to undergo with 
love, and in satisfaction for their sins. This done, 
each one would set out on his way, carrying or haul- 
ing all their camp equipage. Toward noon, the 
Captain would call a halt for the purpose of taking a 
little rest and of restoring their strength in a hostelry 
roofed in by the vault of Heaven, sheltered by two 
or three million trees,-where the seats are but the 
snow; where the beverage costs but the trouble of 
taking it from a brook after the ice has been broken, 
or of dipping it from a kettle in which snow has been 


208 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

ruiffeau apres qu'on en a fendu la glace, ou bien à 
puifer dans vne chaudiere en laquelle on fait fondre 
de la neige, où pour tout partage & pour tous mets 
vous n'auez qu'vn morceau de boucan fans pain, 
quafi auffi dur que du bois & auffi infipide que de la 
filace. Apres tout la ioye & Ie contentement s'y ren- 
contre, & ces bonnes gens font mille fois plus fatis- 
faits que ces bouches deli cates qui ont plus d'amer- 
tumes de I' excez d'vn grain de fel, que de plaifir de 
la delicateffe des mets les plus friands. Enfin on 
fort de ces hofieleries fans mettre la main à la bource, 
[53] tout y efi dans la franchife du premier fiecle. 
Mais pour reprendre nofire route quand Ie Soleil 
approche de fan declin on s'arrefie au lieu Ie plus 
auantageux qu'on rencontre pour camper, la place 
choifie, chacun met bas fon fardeau, on quitte fa 
traifne, & fe mettant à genoux on remercie Dieu de 
fes bontez & d'auoir conferué toute la bande, & puis 
on dreffe Ie bafiiment où on doit loger, qui en deux 
ou trois heures efi mis en fa perfeétion. 
Le Pere a celebré la fainte Meffe quafi tous les 
iours, & fi quelqu'vn preuoyoit qu'il n'y peufi affifier 
fi matin, it Ie venoit prier de retarder vn petit, 
l'affeurant qu'il fe prefferoit dans fan ouurage. 
Les Fefies & les Dimanches efioient gardées tres- 
fainétement, ces bons Neophytes fe confeffoient & 
fe communioient auec vne ioye incomparable, admi- 
rans l'excez des bontez de celuy qui ne dedaignoit 
pas la baffeffe de leurs huttes & de leurs cabanes. 
Les Sauuages ont vne deuotion particuliere à la 
nuit qui fut éclairée de la [54] naiffance du Fils de 
Dieu, il n'y eut pas vn d'eux qui ne voulut ieûner 
Ie iour qui la precede. Ils bafiirent vne petite 


1642-45] 

RELA T10N OF IÓ14-45 

209 

melted; where for your share, and for all viands, you 
have but a piece of smoked meat without bread, 
almost as hard as wood and as insipid as tow. After 
all, joy and content are found there; and these good 
people are a thousand times more easily satisfied than 
those dainty mouths that find more bitterness in the 
excess of a single grain of salt than they find pleas- 
ure in the delicacy of the choicest viands. Finally, 
one quits these hostelries without putting his hand 
into his purse; [53J everything there is as free as in 
the first age of the world. 
But, to resume our route: when the Sun approaches 
its decline, they stop at the most suitable place they 
find for camping. \Vhen the spot is chosen, each 
one lays down his burden, or quits his sled, and 
kneeling down, they thank God for his goodness and 
for having preserved the whole band. Then they 
put up the buildings in which they are to dwell and 
which are completed in two or three hours. 
The Father said holy Mass nearly every day; and, 
if anyone foresaw that he would be unable to attend 
so early, he would come and ask him to delay it a 
little, assuring him that he would hasten his work. 
The Festivals and Sundays were observed in a 
most holy manner. These good Neophytes confessed 
and received communion with matchless joy, admir- 
ing the excessive goodness of him who did not 
disdain the lowliness of their huts and cabins. 
The Savages have a particular devotion for the 
night that was enlightened by the [54J birth of the 
Son of God. There was not one who refused to fast 
on the day that preceded it. They built a small 
Chapel of Cedar and fir branches in honor of the 
manger of the infant J E S US; they wished to perform 


210 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Chappelle de branches de Cedre & de fapin en l'hon- 
neur de la creiche du petit IE S V s; ils voulurent faire 
quelques penitences pour fe mieux difpofer à Ie rece- 
uoir dans leurs cæurs en ce iour [acré, & ceux-là 
mefme qui eftoient efloignez de plus de deux iour- 
nées [e trouuerent à point nommé pour chanter des 
Cantiques en l'honneur de l'Enfant nouueau né, & 
pour s'approcher de la table OÙ 51 a voulu eftre Ie 
mets adorable: ny l'incommodité de la neige, ny la 
rigueur des froids ne pût eftouffer l' ardeur de leur 
deuotion, cette petite Chappelle leur fembloit vn petit 
Paradis. 
lIs prierent Ie Pere de faire pour leur confolation & 
pour leur inftruétion dans leurs Chappelles volantes, 
tout ce que nous faifons dans nos Eglifes fixes & 
arreftées, leur donnant des cendres beniftes Ie premier 
iour de Carefme; its auoient Ie cæur & la bouche 
pleins de tres-bons fentimens de pieté; its reçoiuent 
les Ceremonies dans vne fi grande droiture & dans vne 
fi gran de fimplicité, [55] comme des gens qui croient 
que tout Ie monde en goufte les bons effets. lIs 
portoient des rameaux comme des palmes de viétoire 
tout rem pHs de ioye des triom phes de IE S V S - 
C H R 1ST en [on entrée dans la ville de Ieru[alem. 
Ayant veu celebrer à Kebec la fefte du grand faint 
Iofeph, patron de toute la N ouuelle France, auec des 
feux de ioye, ils voulurent luy rendre cét honneur, 
Ie cedre ny les autres bois ne leurs pouuoient man- 
quer dans ces grandes forefts. 
Sçachans que IE S V S - C H R 1ST s'eftoit premiere- 
ment donné aux hommes fous les efpeces de pain & 
de vin Ie iour qui precedoit fa mort, its tefmoigne- 
rent de grands fentimens de fon amour, & apres luy 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF IÓ14-45 

211 

some penance, to prepare themselves for better re. 
ceiving him into their hearts on that holy day; and 
even those who were at a distance of more than two 
days' journey met at a given place to sing Hymns in 
honor of the newborn Child and to approach the 
table whereat it was his will to become the adorable 
food. Neither the inconvenience of the snow nor 
the severity of the cold could stifle the ardor of their 
devotion. That small Chapel seemed to them a little 
Paradise. 
They begged the Father, for their consolation and 
instruction, to do in their flying Chapels all that we 
do in our permanent and stationary Churches, by 
giving them blessed ashes on the first day of Lent. 
Their hearts and mouths were filled with the most 
pious sentiments. They received the Rites with the 
utmost sincerity and the greatest simplicity, [55] like 
people who believe that everyone feels the good 
effects thereof. They carried branches as palms of 
victory, full of joy for the triumphs of J E S U S 
C H R I ST at his entrance into the city of Jerusalem. 
As they had seen the festival of the great saint 
Joseph, the patron of all New France, celebrated at 
Kebec with bonfires, they wished to pay him the 
same honor; cedar and other woods of all kinds could 
not fail them in these great forests. 
Knowing that J E S U S C H R 1ST had first given him. 
self to man under the appearances of bread and wine, 
on the day that preceded his death, they manifested 
deep gratitude for his love; and, after returning to 
him a thousand thanks, they very humbly begged his 
pardon, all together, for not having paid him all the 
homage of respect and honor due to that adorable 
victim and to that divine Sacrifice. 


212 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

auoir rendu mille aétions de graces ils luy demande- 
rent tres-humblement pardon tous enfemble de ce 
qu'ils n'auoient pas rendu tous les deuoirs de refpeét 
& d'honneur à cette adorable viétime & à ce diuin 
Sacrifice. 
Ils firent vne aétion Ie Vendredy Sainét la plus 
genereufe qu'on pouuoit quafi attendre d'vn Sauuage, 
apres auoir adoré la Croix qu'ils firent repofer fur 
vne belle robbe de caftor eftenduë en forme de tapis, 
[56J fe fouuenans que cét aimable Sauueur auoit prié 
pour ceux qui Ie mettoient en Croix; ils luy ad- 
drefferent cette petite Oraifon du profond de leur 
cæur, parlans pour ceux qui les bruf1ent, qui les 
roítiffent & qui les mangent. Seigneur, pardonnez à 
ceux qui nous pourfuiuent auec tant de fureur, qui 
nous font mourir auec tant de rages, ouurez leurs 
yeux ils ne voyent goutte, faites qu'ils vous connoif- 
fent & qu'ils vous ayment, & alors eftans vos amys 
ils feront les noftres & nous ferons tous vos enfans: 
ie ne doute point que tous ces bons fentimens n'ayent 
beaucoup contribué à la paix dont its ioüiffent main- 
tenant. L'hyuer fe paffa dans ces courfes affez 
innocentes & dans ces exercices de pieté. Si-toft 
que la chaleur du Printemps commença d'amollir les 
neiges, its retournerent vers les riues du grand fleuue 
où ils auoient laiffé leurs canots & leurs chalouppes. 
La premiere aétion qu'ils firent fortans de ces forefis, 
fut de charpenter comme ils pûrent vne grande Croix, 
les Capitaines y mirent la main les beaux premiers, 
& la voulurent eux-mefmes porter fur leurs efpaules 
iufques en vn lieu fort eminent [57J où ils la plan- 
terent: fi toft qu' elle fut arborée, its adorerent en ce 
bois facré celuy qui l'auoit fanétifié par fa mort, & Ie 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF LÓ44-45 

213 

On Good Friday, they performed the most gener- 
ous act that could be expected from a Savage. After 
having adored the Cross, which they laid upon a 
fine beaver robe, spread out like a carpet, [56J they 
remembered that the amiable Savior had prayed for 
those who had placed him on the Cross; and they 
said this short Prayer to him from the depth of their 
hearts, speaking of those who burn, roast, and eat 
them. "Lord, forgive those who pursue us with 
such fury, who put us to death so cruelly. Open 
their eyes, for they see not. Make them know and 
love you; and then, when they are your friends, they 
will be ours, and we shall all be your children." I 
have no doubt that these good sentiments contributed 
in a great measure toward obtaining the peace that 
they now enjoy. The winter passed in these inno- 
cent excursions and these pious exercises. As soon 
as the warmth of the Spring began to thaw the snow, 
they returned to the banks of the great river, where 
they had left their canoes and shallops. The first 
thing that they did, on issuing from the forest, was 
to frame a great Cross, as best they could. The 
Captains were the first to lend a hand, and they 
wished to carry it themselves on their shoulders to a 
very conspicuous place, [57J where they planted it. 
As soon as it was erected, they adored in that sacred 
wood him who had sanctified it by his death, and 
offered it to his Father in thanksgiving for having 
preserved them all throughout the winter. They 
went now and then to kneel before that divine stand- 
ard, and to say their simple prayers in such words 
as these: " Lord, we wish to show you by this rood, 
which we have erected in your honor, that you are 
the Master of these great forests; that you reign 


214 

LES RELATI01YS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

prefenterent à fon Pere en aétion de graces de ce 
qu'il les auoit tous conferuez pendant l'hyuer. Ils 
alloient parfois flechir Ie genoüil deuant ce diuin 
efiendart faifans leurs petites prieres en ces termes; 
Seigneur, nous defirons témoigner par ce bois que 
nous auons erigé en vofire honneur, que vous efies Ie 
Maifire de ces grandes forefis, que vous regnez fur la 
mer & fur la terre par Ie merite de vofire Croix, & 
que par vos fouffrances vous auez payé nos debtes & 
effacé nos offenfes. 
Voilà des fubiets d'vne grande confolation au mi- 
lieu de la Barbarie, mais certes i1 faut achepter ces 
plaifirs de l'efprit auec de grandes fatigues du corps, 
coucher fur la belle terre tapiffée de quelques 
branches de fapin, n'auoir entre la tefie & la neige 
qu'vne écorce épaiffe d'vn tefion, viure autant parmy 
les chi ens que parmy les hommes: car tout efi pef1e 
méle dans leurs cabanes, ieûner par fois les Diman- 
ches plus rigoureufement que Ie Vendredy fainét, 
n'auoir pour boiffon [58] que celIe qui efi commune 
aux animaux les plus delaiffez de la terre, ne man- 
ger pour l'ordinaire que des viandes qui ne font pas 
tant viure qu'elles empefchent de mourir, n'auoir 
pour cuifinier que la faleté, compagne infeparable 
de leur extreme pauureté, fouffrir les gaufferies & les 
mépris de ceux qui ne font pas baptifez, & des enfans 
qui ne voyant en vn François aucune perfeétion de 
Sauuages & ne pouuant encor reconnoifire les vertus 
d'vn genereux Chrefiien, méprife au dernier point ceux 
qui ne font pas bons mulets de charge. La Philofo- 
phie & la Theologie n' on t point de cours dans ces 
grands arbres, les jambes des cerfs & les forces des 
bæufs tiennent les premiers rangs parmy ces peuples. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF z6f.4-45 

215. 

over sea and land, through the merits of your Cross; 
and that by your sufferings you have paid our debts, 
and wiped out our sins." 
Such matters give great consolation in the midst 
of Barbarism, but assuredly such pleasures of the 
spirit must be purchased at the cost of much bodily 
fatigue. One must sleep on the bare ground cov- 
ered with a few fir branches. having between one's 
head and the snow merely a piece of bark of the 
thickness of a teston; live as much among the 
dogs as with men, for everything is promiscuous in 
their cabins; fast sometimes on Sundays more rigor- 
ously than on good Friday; have no other beverage 
[58J than that which is common to the most neglected 
creatures on earth; eat, as a rule, meats which stave 
off death rather than sustain life; have no other cook 
but uncleanliness, the inseparable companion of their 
extreme poverty; endure the jests and the scorn of 
those who are not baptized, and of the children, 
who- because they do not see in a Frenchman any 
of the perfections of a Savage, and cannot recog- 
nize the virtues of a generous Christian - despise to 
the last degree those who are not good beasts of bur- 
den. Philosoph y and Theology have no currency 
amid these great trees; legs like those of the deer, 
and strength like that of oxen, hold the first rank 
among these peoples. 
All this, with some Baptisms which the Father 
administered in the midst of the woods, seasoned 
with the piety of the good Neophytes. of which I 
have spoken, gave some satisfaction to a man who 
loves sufferings. But smoke was his greatest Cross. 
That half Element, or that imperfect mixture, which 
retains the heat of the fire and the malignancy of 


216 

LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Tout cela auec quelques Baptefmes que Ie Pere a 
fait au milieu des bois, affaifonné de la pieté des 
bons Neophytes dõt ie viens de parler, a donné du 
contentement à vn homme amateur des fouffrances, 
mais la fumée a efté fa plus grande Croix, ce demy 
Element ou ce mixte imparfait qui retient l'ardeur 
du feu, la malignité d'vn air empefté deffeicha fi 
bien les yeux de ce pauure Pere qu'il en deuint [59] 
aueugle, au commencement il ne voyoit qu'vne con- 
fufion d' objets, fans rien diftinguer en particulier, 
fi bien que voulant fortir hors de la Cabane i1 paffoit 
quelques-fois au trauers du feu placé au beau milieu 
de ces tanieres: d'autre-fois il trefbuchoit aux pieds 
de quelques-vns, appreftant à rire à ceux-Ià mefme 
qui luy portoient compaffion. Enfin il perdit entiere- 
ment la veuë, en forte qu'il ne fe pouuoit plus con- 
duire. Les Sauuages furpris de cét accident voyant 
qu' outre la perte de fes yeux, il fouffroit vne fi 
eftrange douleur qu'il en perdoit les forces, confulte- 
rent entre-eux s'ils ne l'enuelopperoient point comme 
vn paquet, pour l'attacher fur leurs traifnées & Ie 
tirer comme Ie refte de leur bagage: Le Pere les 
entendant fe mit à rire & les affeura que s'ils luy 
vouloient donner vn guide qu'il auoit encor affez de 
vigueur pour les fuiure, ils luy donnent vn enfant 
auquelle pauure Pere obeïffoit comme vn efcolier à 
fon precepteur. Ce n'eft pas tout, ils firent vne 
affemblée fur fa maladie, dont Ie refultat fut que s'il 
fe vouloit affuiettir à leurs remedes qu'il pourroit 
guerir; ce bon Pere ne refpirant que l'abandon leur 
[60] obeït veritablement à l'aueugle, là-deffus vne 
femme eftant choifie pour faire cette cure, fe leua de 
fa place & luy dit fors [de] la Cabane, mon Pere 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF z644-45 

217 

tainted air, so completely dried up the eyes of the 
poor Father that he became [59] blind. At the 
beginning, he could see objects only confusedly, 
without being able to distinguish anything in detail,- 
so that, when he wished to go out of the Cabin, he 
sometimes walked through the fire, which is placed 
in the very center of these dens. At other times, he 
stumbled over the feet of some, exciting merriment 
in those even who had compassion on him. Finally, 
he lost his sight completely, so that he could no 
longer guide his steps. The Savages were surprised 
at this accident when they saw that, in addition to 
the loss of his sight, he suffered such pain that his 
strength failed him. They consulted among them- 
selves whether they should not wrap him up like a 
parcel, tie him on their sleds, and haul him like the 
rest of their baggage. vVhen the Father heard them, 
he began to laugh, and assured them that, if they 
would give him a guide, he had still enough strength 
to follow them. They gave him a child, whom the 
poor Father obeyed as a pupil does his teacher. That 
is not all. They held an assem bl y concerning his 
disease, the result of which was that, if he would sub- 
mit to their remedies, he might be cured. The good 
Father, breathing only renunciation, [60] in truth 
blindly obeyed them. Thereupon a woman who was 
selected to effect the cure, rose from her place and 
said to him: "Go out of the Cabin, my Father; open 
thine eyes, and look at the Sky." The poor blind 
man obeyed without a word. When he had assumed 
the attitude required, this fine oculist armed with a 
bit of knife blade, or of rusty iron, scraped his eyes 
till a little humor flowed from them. N ever had the 
poor Father suffered so much. The hand of the 


218 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

ouure les yeux, regarde Ie Ciel, ce pauure aueugle 
obeyt fans replique, efiant done en la pofiure qu' on 
Ie demandoit, cette belle oculifie armée d'vn mor- 
ceau de canif ou de fer tout roüillé, luy racle les 
yeux, en forte qu'elle en fit tomber vne petite hu- 
meur, iamais ce pauure Pere ne fouffrit tant, la main 
de cette operatrice n'efioit pas fi leg ere qu'vne plume, 
& elle n'auoit non plus de dexterité que de fcience. 
Enfin Ie malade efiant defefperé de ces braues 
Medecins, qui auoient plus de bonne volonté que 
d'experience & que d'indufirie; s'addreffe à celuy qui 
luy auoit donné les yeux, & Ie prie de les luy rendre 
vne autre fois fi c'efi pour fa gloire; il conuie les 
Sauuages de faire la mefme demande en cas que fa 
veuë leur pût efire profitable, ils s'affemblent tous 
au lieu defiiné pour faire leurs prieres, ils prennent 
la fainte Vierge pour leur Aduocate, Ie malade fça- 
chant par cæur l'vne des Meffes qui fe difent en fon 
honneur, la commença, comme [61J s'il eufi voulu 
dire vne Meffe feiche, auec vne gran de confiance que 
Ie Pere des lumieres luy donneroit quelque foulage- 
ment dans fon mal. Or foit que Ie moment de fa 
guerifon fufi venu, ou que Dieu voulut exaucer les 
prieres des enfans en faueur de leur Pere par l'inter- 
ceffion de leur 11ere, quoy que e'en foit, vn rayon 
brillant deffilla tout à coup les yeux de ce pauure 
aueugle, & luy rendit fi parfaitement l'vfage de la 
veuë au milieu de la 11effe, qu'il n'a reffenty depuis 
ce temps-Ià ny douleur ny incommodité, ny des 
neiges ny de la fumée, & apres plufieurs mois de 
fouffrances i1 efi reuenu plain de fanté en nofire mai- 
fon, bien ioyeux d'auoir efié quelque temps Sauuage 
pour l'amour de IESVS-CHRIST. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF L644-45 

219 

operator was not as light as a feather, and she 
possessed no more skill than science. 
Finally, when the patient had been given up by 
his worthy Physicians, whose willingness was great- 
er than their experience or their skill, he addressed 
himself to him who had given him his eyes, and 
begged him to give them to him a second time, if it 
were for his glory. He asked the Savages to make 
the same request in case his sight might be of 
advantage to them. They all met at the appointed 
spot to say their prayers, and took the blessed Virgin 
as their Advocate. The patient knew by heart one 
of the Masses that are said in her honor. He began 
it as [61] if he wished to say a blank Mass, with great 
confidence that the Father of light would grant some 
relief for his illness. Now, whether the time for his 
cure had come, or whether God willed to grant the 
prayers of the children on behalf of their Father 
through the intercession of their Mother, in any case, 
a bright ray suddenly opened the eyes of the poor 
blind man, and so fully restored to him the use of 
his sight, in the middle of the Mass, that ever since 
then he has not felt pain or discomfort, either from 
snow or from smoke; and, after suffering for several 
months, he returned full of health to our house,- 
happy indeed at having been for some time a 
Savage for the love of JESUS CHRIST. 


220 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

- 

[62] CHAPITRE VII. 

DE QUELQUES SURPRISES FAITES PAR LES IROQUOIS. 

I ' A YMEROIS quafi autant eftre affiegé par des Lu- 
tins que par des Iroquois, les vns ne font gueres 
plus vifibles que les autres, quand ils font ef1oi- 
gnez on les croit à nos portes, & lors qu'ils fe iettent 
fur leur proye on s'imagine qu'ils font en leur pays. 
Ceux qui ont habité dans les forefts de Richelieu & 
de Montreal ont efté releuez & renfermez plus eftroit- 
tement qu'aucun Religieux, ny aucunes Religieufes 
dans les plus petits Monafteres de la France. 11 eft 
vray que ces Croates n'ont point paru cette année à 
Montreal, on n'auoit pas toutes-fois d'affeurance 
qu'ils en fuffent beaucoup ef1oignez, Pour Richelieu, 
voicy comme ils s'en font approchez. 
Le 14. Septembre de l'an paffé vn foldat trauail- 
lant par diuertiffement à la portée d'vn moufquet du 
Fort, en vn petit champ [63] qu'il difpofoit pour y 
planter du bled d'inde, quatre ou cinq Iroquois for- 
tant d'vne embufcade fe iettent fur luy fans luy faire 
aucun mal. Ce ieune homme aymant mieux mourir 
par Ie fer que par Ie feu, fe lie fi fortement à vne 
fouche & à quelques racines, que iamais ils ne purent 
l'en tirer, enragez de voir fa refiftance luy defchar- 
gent ie ne fçay combien de coups de haches d'armes 
fur la tefte, & voyans qu'ils eftoient découuerts du 
Fort, & qu'on tiroit defia deffus eux, ils quittent ce 
pauure homme penfant l'auoir maffacré, luy prenant 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1644-45 

221 

[62] CHAPTER VII. 

OF SOME SURPRISES BY THE IROQUOIS. 

I WOULD almost as soon be besieged by Goblins 
as by the Iroquois; the latter are hardly more 
visible than the former. When they are far 
away, we think they are at our doors; and when they 
fling themselves on their prey, we imagine that they 
are in their own country. The people who dwelt in 
the forests of Richelieu and of 1'Iontreal were brought 
in and shut up more closely than any Religious or any 
N un in the smallest Monasteries of France. It is true 
that these Croats did not make their appearance at 
Montreal this year, but nevertheless there was no 
assurance that they were very far away from there. 
As regards Richelieu, observe how they approached it. 
On the 14th of September of last year, a soldier 
was working for amusement, at a distance of a mus- 
ket shot from the Fort, in a small field [63] that he 
was tilling in order to plant indian corn therein, when 
four or five Iroquois rushed from an ambush, and 
threw themselves on him, without doing him any 
harm. The young man, preferring to die by steel 
rather than by fire, clung so firmly to a stump and 
to some roots, that they could not succeed in drag- 
ging him away from these. Furious at his resistance, 
they discharged I know not how many blows from 
their war hatchets upon his head; and, finding 
that they were 0 bserved from the Fort, and that 
some shots were already being fired at them, they 


222 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

courage voulut s'auancer vers Ie Fort; mais deux 
Iroquois l'apperceuant tournerent vifage, luy donnent 
encor deux grands coups d'efpée au trauers du corps, 
& fi la crainte d'eftre furpris par les François ne les 
eut faifi, ils luy auroient couppé & enleué la peau de 
la tefte auec fa cheuelure qui eft l'vn des grands 
trophées des Sauuages. On penfoit que cét homme 
eftoit mort, Ie Chirurgien accourut & arrefta fon fang 
fort à propos, s'expofant aux embufcades des ennemis 
qui tiroient dedans Ie bois: la premiere aétion que 
fit ce bon ieune homme eftant remis [64J parmy les 
François, ce fut de demander vn Pere pour fe 
confeffer, cela fait il fit fon teftament en faueur des 
pauures, aufquels il donnoit tout fon petit meuble. 
Or iaçoit qu'il eut deux coups à la tefte, deux au bras 
& quatre dans Ie corps qu'on iugeoit tous mortels, il 
guerit neantmoins fauorifé de Dieu. 
Quelque temps apres cette furprife on entendit 
dans vne If1e voifine des cris de ioye & d' allegreffe 
redoublez par dix ou douze fois pour marque du 
nombre des Hurons que les Iroquois auoient pris 
ou maffacrez vn peu plus haut que Richelieu, ceux 
qui refterent de cette defaite fe vindrent refugier 
vers les François. It y eut entre autres vn Huron 
nommé Henry Aonkerati qui nous affeura qu'il s'eftoit 
efchappé des mains & des liens de fes ennemis, & que 
deux autresfois en cette mefme année Dieu l'auoit 
conferué dans la déroute de fes gens. 
Le feptiefme de Nouembre vn ieune homme qui 
commandoit aux ouuriers du Fort, eftant forty feul 
pour tirer fur quelque gibier quafi à la porte de nos 
François, fut enuironné des ennemis cachez dans des 
broffailles, fut mis à [65] mort tres-mal-heureufement. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF z644-45 

223 

abandoned the poor man, thinking that they had killed 
him. He, taking courage, undertook to advance 
toward the Fort but two Iroquois observed him. 
They turned back, and gave him two sharp thrusts 
of javelins through the body; and, if they had not 
been seized with the fear of being surprised by the 
French, they would have cut and removed his scalp 
with his hair, which is one of the great trophies of 
the Savages. They thought that the man was dead; 
but the Surgeon hastened to the spot, and most 
opportunely stopped the bleeding,- exposing himself 
to the ambuscades of the enemy, who fired from the 
woods. This good young man's first act, when he 
returned [64] among the French, was to ask for a 
Father to confess him. When this was done, he 
made his will in favor of the poor, to whom he gave 
the few effects that he possessed. Now although he 
had received two wounds on the head, two on the 
arm and four in the body,-all of which were con- 
sidered mortal,- he nevertheless recovered, through 
God's favor. 
Some time after this surprise they beard, on an 
Island in the vicinity, cries of joy and delight repeated 
ten or twelve times. to show the number of Hurons 
whom the Iroquois had taken or massacred a little 
above Richelieu. Those who fled from this defeat 
sought refuge with the French. Among others, 
there was a Huron named Henry Aonkerati, who 
assured us that he had escaped from the hands and 
the bonds of his enemies; and that, on two other 
occasions during the same year, God had preserved 
him when his people had been routed. 
On the seventh of November, a young man who 
was at the head of the workmen of the Fort, went 


224 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Ils Ie dépoüillerent tout nud & Iuy enleuerent Ia che- 
uelure auec la peau de la tefie. Comme l' on vit que 
ce ieune homme tardoit, & qu'on eut apperceu deux 
canots Iroquois fur la gran de Riuiere: on creut qu'ils 
l'auroient furpris & emmené vif auec eux; on erie, 
on l'appelle par fon nom, point de refponfe; on tire 
Ie canon fur les coureurs: mais en vain, trois iours 
apres les Corbeaux croaçans à I' entour de fon corps 
dõnerent aduis du lieu où il efioit, on y va, on Ie 
trouue efiêdu fur la terre, tranfpercé de coups d'ef- 
pée, trempé dans fon fang, & defia vn petit endom- 
magé du bee des oifeaux: la guerre des Sauuages 
n'efi non plus la guerre des François, que la guerre 
des Parthes n'efioit point la guerre des Romains. 
Les Peres qui efioient en cette habitation enterrerent 
ce pauure homme, & offrirent à Dieu plufieurs fois 
Ie faint Sacrifice de la Meffe, fuppleans à la charité 
qu'auroient eu pour luy fes parens s'il efioit mort en 
fon pays. 
Le douziéme de Decem bre la terre efiant couuerte 
d'vn pied de neige, comme on ne penfoit quafi plus 
à ces chaffeurs d'hommes, & que Ie froid fe faifoit 
[66] fentir, fept foldats forti rent pour aller querir du 
bois de chauffage, ayant chargé leur traifneau & Ie 
tirant fur la neige, vne bande de ces Lutins fe ietta 
fur eux à l'improuifie, les plus lefies & les moins 
embaraffez fe deprirent du cordage qu'ils auoient 
enlaffé dans leur corps pour traifner leur charge, & 
fe fauuerent à la courfe dans leur retranchement: 
Celuy qui efioit Ie plus fortement lié au traifneau 
fut attrapé. Ces barbares luy donnerent de grands 
coups de leurs maffes armées d'vn fer trenchant, & 
l'ayant renuersé par terre luy coupperent vne partie 


1642-45] 

RELATION OF r644-45 

225 

out alone to shoot game, almost at the door of our 
French. He was surrounded by the enemies, who 
lay hidden in the brushwood, and was put to [65] a 
most miserable death. They stripped him entirely 
naked, and tore off his hair with his scalp. When 
it was noticed that the young man delayed his return, 
and when two Iroquois canoes were seen on the great 
River, they thought that he had been surprised and 
carried off alive by them. They shouted, and called 
him by his name, but received no answer. The can- 
non was fired at the fleeing foes, but in vain. Three 
days afterward, Crows, croaking around his body, 
indicated the spot where he was. They proceeded 
thither, and found him stretched out on the ground, 
pierced by javelin thrusts, bathed in his own blood, 
and his body already slightly injured by the birds' 
beaks. The warfare of the Savages is no more the 
warfare of the French than the warfare of the Par- 
thians was that of the Romans. The Fathers who 
were at that settlement buried the poor man, and 
offered to God the holy Sacrifice of the Mass several 
times, supplying the charity that his relatives would 
have displayed had he died in his own country. 
On the twelfth of December, the earth was cov- 
ered with snow to the depth of a foot. As we had 
hardly a thought of those manhunters, and as the 
cold made itself [66] felt, seven soldiers went out to 
get firewood. When they had loaded their sled, and 
were hauling it over the snow, a band of those Imps 
unexpectedly rushed on them. The more active 
ones, and those who were the least encumbered, 
released themselves from the ropes that they had put 
around their bodies in order to haul their load, and 
saved themselves by running toward their entrench- 


226 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

de Ia peau de Ia tefte qu'ils emporterent auec Ie poil, 
Ia íentinelle ayant donné aduis, on décharge des 
fufils íur eux, ce qui les contraignit de íe retirer, 
croyant que ce pauure homme eftoit mort, en effet il 
n'auoit plus de mouuement: mais comme on eut mis 
Ie feu au canon pour Ie décharger fur les ennemys, 
il s'éueilla & commença à fe traifner, on courre vers 
Iuy on Ie trouue bleffé à la tefte de 7. ou 8. grands 
coups de hache d'armes que tout Ie monde croyoit 
eftre mortels: vous euffiez dit que les yeux n' eftoient 
plus en leur place & Ie íang qui Ie trempoit de tout 
coftez [67] Ie rendoit horriblement affreux; ayant 
vne partie de la tefte découuerte de fon poil & de fa 
peau, on I appe11e, on luy parle, il n'auoit plus de 
connoiffance tous fes fens eftoiêt perdus, il n'auoit 
plus qu'vn mouuement animal qui Ie faifoit traiíner 
cà & là fans raiíon, Ie Chirurgien l'ayant fait porter 
dans Ie Fort, en eut vn fi bon foin qu'il eft mainte- 
nant en pleine fanté: il fut trois iours fans aucune 
connoiffance, & vn fort long-temps en danger à caufe 
que Ie crafne eftoit enfoncé & que les contufions 
eftoient fort grandes. Depuis ce temps-Ià les Fran- 
çois auoient pour cloiftre vne palliffade de pieux 
d'vne bien petite eftenduë; mais enfin les Ambaffa- 
deurs Iroquois arriuans au commencement de Iuil- 
let, rompirent la clofture de ces pauures reclus, qui 
n'ayant pas tous Ie don d Oraifon ne prenoient pas 
trop de plaifir en vn fi petit monaftere. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF ró44-45 

227 

ment. One, who was the most securely fastened to 
the sled, was taken prisoner. The barbarians struck 
him heavy blows with their clubs, armed with a sharp 
piece of iron; and, after throwing him down, they 
cut off a portion of his scalp which they carried off 
with the hair on it. The sentry gave the alarm, and 
shots were fired at them from muskets. This caused 
them to retreat, believing that the poor man was 
dead. In fact, he was quite motionless. But just as 
fire was applied to the cannon, to discharge it at 
the enemies, he roused himself, and began to drag 
himself along. They ran toward him, and found on 
his head 7 or 8 great wounds, inflicted with war hat- 
chets, which everyone considered mortal. You 
would have said that his eyes were no longer in their 
place; and the blood that covered him all over [67] 
gave him a horrible appearance; a portion of his 
head was stripped of its hair and its scalp. They 
called him by name, and spoke to him. He was 
unconscious, and entirely deprived of his senses, and 
was animated merely by an animal instinct that led 
him to drag himself here and there, without purpose. 
The Surgeon had him carried to the Fort, and attended 
him so well that he is now in good health. He was 
unconscious for three days, and was for a long time 
in danger, owing to the skull having been driven in, 
while the contusions were very serious. From that 
time, the French had for a cloister a palisade of 
stakes, of very small extent. But finally the Iroquois 
Ambassadors came at the beginning of July, and put 
an end to the confinement of these poor hermits, 
who, since not all had the gift of Prayer, did not find 
much pleasure in so small a monastery. 


228 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

[68] CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE QUELQUES PRISONNIERS IROQUOIS. 

L A Relation de l'an paffé portoit que les Hurons 
ayans pris prifonniers trois Iroquois, en auoient 
donné vn aux Algonquins & mené les deux 
autres en leur pays. Les Algonquins firent prefent 
à Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur de celuy qui leur eftoit 
eícheu. 11 eftoit demy mort 
  demy bruí1é: mais Ie 
íoin qu'on en prit Ie remit en fanté. 
Ce Printemps quelques Sauuages en amenerent 
deux autres, aufquels ils ne firent aucun mal, fça- 
chans bien que les François ne fe plaifent point à la 
cruauté; voicy comme la choíe fe paffa. Sept Algon- 
quins allant à la chaffe des Iroquois firent traifner 
leurs canots íur la glace iufques à Richelieu pour 
prendre la riuiere qui vient du pays des Iroquois, & 
qui eft plutoft dégelée que Ie grand fleuue, eftant 
entrez dans vn grand lac d'où íort cette riuiere: ils 
abordent vne HIe [69] pour y chercher leur proye; 
l'vn d' eux eftant aux aguets, entend tirer vn coup 
d'arquebufe, il en donne la nouuelle à fes Cama- 
rades, Ie maiftre de ces chaffeurs cornman de qu'on 
prenne fa refeétion; mangeons, dit-il Camarades, 
pour la derniere fois: car quoy qu'il arriue il faut 
plutoft mourir que de fuyr, ayant bien difné vn nom- 
mé lvlakons s'eftant écarté pour découurir l'ennemy, 
vit deux canots qui íembloient tirer droit à eux, ce 
íont rapporta-il des guerriers, tant mieux, repliqua 


1642 - 4.') J 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

229 

[68J CHAPTER VIII. 

OF SOME IROQUOIS PRISONERS. 

T HE Relation of last year stated that the Hurons, 
after having taken three Iroquois prisoners, had 
given one to the Algonquins, and taken the 
two others to their own country. The Algonquins 
presented to Monsieur the Governor the one that had 
been given them. He was half dead, and half 
burned; but the care that they gave him restored 
him to health. 
Last Spring, some Savages brought in two others, 
to whom they did no harm,-knowing well that the 
French do not like cruelty; this event occurred thus: 
Seven Algonquins went to hunt for Iroquois; they 
dragged their canoes on the ice as far as Richelieu, 
to take the river which flows from the Iroquois coun- 
try, in which the ice melts sooner than in the great 
river. Having entered a large lake, whence this river 
flows, they landed on an Island [69J to seek their 
quarry. One of them, who was watching, heard an 
arquebus shot, and notified his Comrades. The 
leader of these hunters ordered them to take their 
repast. "Let us eat," he said, " for the last time, 
Comrades; for, whatever happens, we must die rather 
than retreat." When they had partaken of a good 
dinner, one, whose name was Makons, went away 
alone, to look for the enemy; he saw two canoes, 
that seemed to be coming straight toward them. 
" They are warriors," he reported. "So much the 


230 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUJTES 

[VOL. 27 

vn Chreftien nommé Bernard homme de bien & 
courageux, il y a plus d'hõneur de vaincre des gens 
armez que des courreurs de beftes. Diefcaret qui con- 
duifoit cette petite efcoüade fa va mettre iuftement où 
ces deux canots venoient aborder, Ie premier qui por- 
toit cinq Ese. íept] hommes approchant & ne peníant 
point à cét embuícade íe veit falüé de fix coups d'ar- 
quebufes, qui furent fi adroitement defchargez qu'ils 
renueríerent fix hommes, & Ie feptiéme fe fauua à la 
nage tirant vers l'autre canot qui venoit derriere. 
Ce canot ayant pris ce fuyart ne perdit point cæur, i1 
fe deftourne de ía route pour aller aborder l'Ifle par 
vn autre [70] endroit & combattre à terre; mais nos 
Algonquins leur vont coupper chemin par dedans le 
bois, ils eftoient huit íoldats dans ce fecond batteau 
bien deliberez de venger la mort de leurs gens; mais 
vn coup d'arquebuíe renuerfant l'vn de ces guerriers, 
fit auffi renuerfer Ie canot dans l'eau, comme ils 
auoient pied, ils reprennent courage, ils íe prefen- 
tent pour aborder la terre, nos Algonquins leur vont 
à la rencontre, ils fe batent vaillamment de part & 
d'autre; mais Dieu donnant l'auantage à nos gens, 
ils renuerferent quatre Iroquois dans l' eau & les 
maffacrerent à mefme temps: les trois autres redou- 
tans les vainqueurs tournerent vifage; mais Bernard 
pouríuiuit Ie plus grand, & luy donnant vn petit coup 
d'eípée dans les reins, luycrie, Camarade rends-toy, 
autrement tu es mort. L'autre qui eftoit plus ieune 
fut bien-toft attrapé, & Ie troifiéme íe fauua: voila 
comme fept hommes en tuerent vnze & en amenerent 
deux prifonniers. Le Combat ceffé les viétorieux vont 
chercher les corps morts; ils enleuent la cheuelure 
de leurs tefies, & puis s'embarquent pour leur retour. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF ró44-45 

231 

better," replied a Christian named Bernard, a worthy 
and brave man; "there is more honor in vanquish- 
ing armed men than hunters of animals." Diesca- 
ret, who led this little band, placed himself at the 
very spot where the two canoes were about to touch 
the shore. When the first approached, carrying 
seven men, who had no idea of the ambush, it was 
received with a volley from six arquebuses, whose 
shots were so skillfully fired that they laid low six 
men, while the seventh escaped by swimming to the 
other canoe, which came behind. The men in this 
canoe picked up the fugitive, and did not lose heart. 
They altered their course, so as to land on the Island 
at another [70] spot, and to fight on shore; but our 
Algonquins ran through the woods, to cut them off. 
There were in this second boat eight warriors, fully 
resolved to avenge the death of their people; but an 
arquebus shot overthrew one of these warriors, and 
this also upset the canoe in the water. As they 
secured a footing, they regained courage, and tried 
to reach land. Our Algonquins advanced to meet 
them, and both sides fought bravely; but God gave 
the advantage to our people. They threw down four 
Iroquois in the water, and killed them at the same 
time. The three others, fearing the victors, turned 
to flee; but Bernard pursued the tallest of them, and 
giving him a slight javelin thrust in the loins, he 
called out to him: "Surrender, Comrade, or thou 
art a dead man." The other, who was younger, was 
soon caught, while the third escaped. In this man- 
ner seven men killed eleven, and took two prisoners. 
The Combat over, the victors went to seek the dead 
bodies, scalped them, and embarked on their return 
journey. The younger of the two [71] prisoners 


232 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Le plus ieune de ces deux [71] prifonniers eftant lié 
trop eftroittement s'en plaignit; vn Algonquin luy 
refpondit, Camarade, il femble que tu ignore les loix 
de la guerre, illes íçait bien, repart íon Compagnon, 
il a veu pleurer plufieurs de vos gens, pris & bruf1ez 
dans noftre pays, il ne craint point ny vos menaces ny 
vos tourmens. L' Algonquin croyant qu'il parloit 
iníolemment pour vn prifonnier, luy defchargea deux 
ou trois coups: mais Ie prifonnier ne rabaiffant rien de 
íon courage fe mit à chanter, difant: que fes parens 
trouueroient bien Ie moyen de vanger fa mort. 11 y a 
peut-eftre cinquante ans qu'aucun prifonnier Sauuage 
n'a efté fi doucement traitté, on ne les battit point 
dauantage, on ne leur arracha point les ongles, on 
ne leur couppa aucun doigt, qui font les premieres 
careffes que les Sauuages font à leurs priíonniers. 
Vn iour deuant que d'arriuer à fainét lofeph où ils 
furent amenez, Dieskaret enuoya vn ieune homme 
donner aduis au Pere qui a íoin des Sauuages de ce 
lieu, qu'il arriueroit bien-toft, & qu'il ameneroit des 
prifonniers à Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur, & aux Chre- 
ftiens Sauuages fes amis; on les entendit [72] plutoft 
qu'on ne les vit; car ils s'en venoient chantans dans 
leurs canots, chacun accourt íur Ie bord du grand 
fleuue, les priíonniers eftoient debout dançans à leur 
mode au bruit des auirons & au fon de la voix des 
vainqueurs. Les cheuelures de ceux qui auoient 
efté tuez au combat, attachez au bout de certains 
baftons, voltigeoient en l'air au gré du vent comme 
des flouettes, approchant de nos riues il fe fit vne 
íalue d'arquebufades de part & d'autre auec affez 
d'adrefíe. lean Baptifte Etinechkaouat les voyãt 
tous prefts de mettre pied à terre, fit faire halte, & 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

233 

found that his bonds were too tight, and complained 
of it. An Algonquin replied to him, "Comrade, 
thou seemest ignorant of the rules of war. ' , "He 
knows them well," replied his Companion; "he has 
seen many of your people weep who have been taken 
prisoners, and have been burned in our country. He 
fears neither your threats nor your tortures." The 
Algonquin considered that he spoke insolently for a 
prisoner, and gave him two or three blows. But the 
prisoner did not lose courage, and began to sing, 
saying that his friends would find means to avenge 
his death. It is perhaps fifty years since any Sav- 
age prisoner has been so gently treated. They did 
not beat them any more, nor tear out their nails, nor 
cut off their fingers, which are the first attentions 
that the Savages pay to their prisoners. One day, 
before they arrived at saint Joseph, whither they 
were taken, Dieskaret sent a young man to inform 
the Father who has charge of the Savages at that 
place that he would soon arrive, and would bring 
prisoners to Monsieur the Governor and to the Chris- 
tian Savages, his friends. They were heard [72] 
sooner than they were seen, for they came on, sing- 
ing in their canoes. Everyone ran to the bank of 
the great river. The prisoners were erect, dancing 
in their fashion to the noise of the paddles and to 
the sound of the conquerors' voices. The scalps of 
those who had been killed in the fight, attached to 
the ends of some sticks, fluttered in the air at the will 
of the wind, like vanes. As they neared the shore, 
a salvo of musketry was fired on either side with 
considerable skill. When Jean Baptiste Etinechka- 
ouat saw that they were all ready to land, he called 
a halt, and, raising his voice, he addressed these few 


234 

LES RELATIOIVS DES ./ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 2ï 

releuant fa voix addreffa ce peu de paroles au Capi- 
taine qui amenoit ces captifs. N ous prenons plaifir 
de te voir, tu t'es vaillamment comporté, chacun fe 
refioüit de ta venuë, tu ne pouuois rien apporter de 
plus agreable à nos yeux que ces dépoüilles de nos 
ennemis dont tu t'és enrichy. Tu fçais bien que 
nous procedons maintenant d'vne autre façon que 
nous ne faifions iadis, nous auons ietté par terre 
toutes nos vieilles couftumes: C' eft pourquoy nous te 
receurons en paix fans faire tort aux prifonniers, 
fans les frapper ny endommager en [73] quelque 
façon que ce foit. Ce Capitaine fe leuant debout en 
fon canot, refpondit en peu de mots: Ie fuis dans 
voftre penfée, i'ay donné ma parole qu'on n'offenfe- 
roit point les prifonniers, refjoüiffons nous paifible- 
ment, chantons faifons feftin, dançons, voilà difoit- 
iI, de fujets d'allegreffes, monftrant les cheuelures 
& les prifonniers affis parmy les Algonquins dans 
leurs canots. Le Pere qui auoit charge des Sauuages 
fit auffi fa petite harangue, loüant les guerriers de 
leur courage & les congratulant de leur douceur, leur 
remonftrant que c'eftoit Ie propre des chiens & des 
loups de deuorer leur proye: mais que les hommes 
deuoient eftre humains, notamment enuers leurs 
femblables; qu'au refte il auoit donné aduis à 
Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur de leur arriuée, & qu'il auoit 
enuoyé vne efcoüade de foldats pour les bien vei- 
gner, & là-deffus les foldats firent vne defcharge de 
leurs armes qui plût grandement aux Sauuages. Ces 
complimens faits, les prifonniers defcendirent des 
canots, comme ils n' entendoient point la langue 
Algonquine, ils auoient belle [74] peur qu'on ne les 
falüaft à l'entrée des Cabanes à grands coups de 


164 - 45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

235 

words to the Captain who brought the prisoners: 
" \\T e take pleasure in seeing thee; thou hast behaved 
valiantly. All rejoice at thy coming; thou couldst not 
bring anything more agreeable to our eyes than these 
spoils of our enemies with which thou hast enriched 
thyself. Thou knowest well that we now proceed in 
a different fashion than we formerly did. We have 
overturned all our old customs. That is why we 
receive thee quietly, without harming the prisoners, 
without striking or inj
1fing them in [73J any way." 
The Captain stood up in his canoe, and replied in a 
few words: "I am of your mind. I gave my word 
that the prisoners would not be harmed. Let us 
rejoice peacefully; let us sing, feast, and dance. 
These, ,. said he, "are cause for joy," - showing the 
scalps, and the prisoners sitting among the Algon- 
quins in their canoes. The Father in charge of the 
Savages also delivered a short harangue, praising 
the warriors for their courage, congratulating them 
upon their gentleness, and showing them that it 
was for dogs and wolves to devour their quarry, but 
that men should be humane, especially toward 
their fellow creatures; he told them, moreover, that 
he had notified Monsieur the Governor of their 
arrival. and that he had sent a squad of soldiers 
to welcome them. Thereupon, the soldiers dis- 
charged their pieces, which greatly pleased the Sav- 
ages. When these compliments had been paid, the 
prisoners disembarked from the canoes. As they did 
not understand the Algonquin language, they great- 
ly [74] feared that, on entering the Cabins, they 
would be received with heavy strokes from cudgels, 
with blows from whips and ropes, with slashes from 
knives, and with burning firebrands, according to 


236 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

bafton, auec des coups de foüets & de cordes, auec 
des taillades de coufteaux, auec des tifons ardens 
felon leur couftume. 11 n'y a pas long-temps que les 
Sauuages venans de la guerre & amenans des pri- 
fonniers, les filles & les femmes voyant les canots fe 
iettoient à l'eau toute nuës pour attraper ce qu'elles 
pourroient des dépoüilles de l'ennemy. Ces info- 
lences font bannies de la refiden
e de faint Iofeph. 
11 n'y eut qu'vn ieune homme, encor n'eftoit-il pas 
entierement nud, qui fe lançant dans la riuiere & 
faifant Ie plongeon paffa fous Ie canot du Capitaine, 
lequel pour recompenfe luy donna l'vne des arque- 
bufes qu'il auoit enleué fur les Iroquois, tous les 
autres ne branilerent point, les prifonniers furent 
receus paifiblement comme dans leurs maifons. Les 
ieunes filles vindrent demander congé au Pere de 
dancer & de fe rejoüyr, ce qu'il leur fut aifément 
accordé; on planta les eftendars, c' eft à dire les teftes 
volantes fur les cabanes, & tout Ie monde fit feftin & 
fe refioüit à fa mode. 
[75] Ie diray en paffant que ce n'eft pas peu auoir 
gaigné fur les Sauuages, d'empefcher quïls ne def- 
chargeaffent leur colere fur ceux qui les traittent auec 
vne fureur diabolique quand ils les tiennent. 11 fe 
rencontra vne vieille à qui la veuë de ces nouueaux 
hoftes faifoit bien mal au cæur: elle n'ofa neant- 
moi[nJs les toucher fans en auoir permiffion, s'addref- 
fant au Pere, elle luy dit; mon Pere permettez moy 
de careffer vn petit les prifonniers, c'eft vn terme 
irronique, dont ils fe feruent les voulant tourmenter; 
ils ont tué, bruilé, mangé mon pere, mon mary & 
mes enfans. Permettez mon Pere que ie les careffe, 
Ie Pere luy ayant reparty qu'en effet ces Iroquois 


1642-45J 

RELA TION OF .r644-45 

237 

their custom. Not long ago, when the Savages 
returned from war and brought prisoners with them, 
the girls and women, on seeing the canoes, would 
throw themselves into the water, stark naked, to catch 
what they could of the enemy's spoils. Such un- 
seemly conduct is banished from the residence of 
saint Joseph. There was only one young man, and 
even he was not quite naked, who threw himself into 
the river and dived under the Captain's canoe. The 
latter rewarded him by giving him one of the arque- 
buses that he had taken from the Iroquois. None 
of the others stirred. The prisoners were received 
as peaceably as in their own houses. The young 
girls came and asked the Father to give them permis- 
sion to dance and enjoy themselves, which was will- 
ingly granted. The standards-that is, the flying 
scalps-were fastened on the cabins; and all feasted 
and made merry in their fashion. 
[75] I may say, in passing, that it is no little hold 
gained over the Savages, to hinder them from 
venting their fury on those who, when they hold 
them, treat them with fiendish cruelty. There was 
an old woman to whom the sight of these new guests 
was exceedingly un welcome; however, she did not 
dare to touch them without permission. Addressing 
herself to the Father, she said: "My Father, allow 
me to caress the prisoners a little." This is an iron- 
ical expression they use when they wish to torture 
them. "They have killed, burned, and eaten my 
father, my husband, and my children. Permit me, 
my Father, to caress them." The Father replied to 
her that it was true that the Iroquois had done her 
great injury; but that she also had offended God, and 
that with what measure she meted to her enemies so 


238 

LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

l'auoient bien offenfée; mais auffi qu'elle auoit fafché 
Dieu, & qu'à la mefme mefure qu'elle mefureroit fes 
ennemis Dieu la mefureroit, qu' elle trouueroit Ie 
pardon fi elle pardonnoit, & la vengeance fi elle fe 
vengeoit. Cette pauure femme ne repartit autre 
chofe, finon ie ne leur feray done point de mal. 
En ce mefme temps Ie Pere demandant par ren- 
contre à vne autre femme fi [76] elle aymoit N oftre 
Seigneur, cette fême qui eft d'vn naturel extreme- 
ment vindicatif, & qui autre-fois eftoit comme enra- 
gée contre les Iroquois, refpondit d'vn bon accent: 
I'ayme Dieu plus que ie ne hai les Iroquois: c'eft ce 
feul amour que ie luy porte qui n'empefche de leur 
faire reffentir les torts qu'ils m'ont faits. Ie fuis 
reftée feule d'vne groffe famille, ie fuis pauure & 
abandonné, ils m'ont mis en cét eftat, ayant roily & 
mangé tous mes parens & tous mes amys, en e:fIet, 
mon cæur veut hayr ces gens-Ià, difoit-elle; mais il a 
plus d'amour pour Dieu qu'il n'a de hayne & d'auer- 
fion pour eux: c' eft pourquoy ie ne leur veus aucun 
mal, r'entrons s'il vous plaift en difcours. 
Le fecond iour apres l'arriuée de ces prifonniers, 
Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur fe tranfportant à la refidence 
de S. Iofeph bien accompagné, entra dans noftre 
petite maifon, où fe trouuerent auffi les vainqueurs, 
les vaincus & les autres Sauuages. Dieskareth parla 
en cette forte; c'eft à vous à qui i'addreffe ma parole, 
vous qui n'eftes qu'vne mefme chofe, vous qui n'a- 
uez [77] qu'vn mefme fecret, vous qui vous vous par- 
lez à l'oreille: C'eft au Capitaine des François, c'eft 
à vous qui depuis trois ans eftez deuenus François, 
c'eft à toy Negabamat, c'eft à toy Etinechkaouat, à qui 
i'addreffe ma voix, vous n'eftes qu'vn mefme confeil, 


1642-45J 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

239 

would God measure it to her; that she would find 
forgiveness if she forgave, and vengeance if she 
revenged herself. The poor woman said not another 
word in repl y, except these: "Then I will do them 
no harm." 
At the same time, the Father casually asked an- 
other woman whether [76] she loved Our Lord. 
This woman- who is exceedingly vindictive, and had 
been almost insanely furious against the Iroquois- 
replied in a gentle tone: " I love God more than I 
hate the Iroquois; that love alone which I bear to 
him prevents me from making them feel the injuries 
that they have done to me. I am the only one 
remaining of a large family; I am poor and forsaken. 
They have placed me in that condition for they 
roasted and ate all my relatives and all my friends. 
In fact, my heart would hate those people," she 
said; "but it has more love for God than hatred and 
aversion for them. That is why I wish them no 
evil." Let us return to our subject, if you please. 
On the second day after the arrival of these prison- 
ers, Monsìeur the Governor proceeded to the resi- 
dence of St. Joseph, well accompanied, and en- 
tered our modest house, where were also the victors, 
the vanquished, and the other Savages. Dieskareth 
spoke as follows: "It is to you that I address my 
words, you who are but one and the same thing, you 
who have [77] but one secret, you who whisper into 
each other's ears. It is to the Captain of the French, 
and to you who in the past three years have become 
French,- to thee, N egabamat; to thee, Etinechka- 
ouat-to whom I address my voice; you are but one 
council. Listen to me " (he named the two Captains 
who are at saint Joseph). "Although I have no 


240 

LES R1!."'LA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. ".l7 

efcoutez-moy (il nommoit les deux Capitaines qui 
font à faint Iofeph) encor que ie n'aye point d'efprit, 
fouffrez que ie vous parle, apres ce preambule il 
expliqua Ie deffein qu'il auoit eu allant à la guerre, & 
Ie bon rencontre que Ie Ciel luy auoit fait faire, & 
pour conclufion il dit: i'ay veu, i'ay tué, i'ay pris, 
i'ay amené, les voila prefens, i'entre dans vos pen- 
fées, elles font bonnes, ie penetre dans vos cæurs, 
vous qui n'auez qu'vne mefme demeure, qui n'auez 
qu'vn mefme aduis, foyez les Dieux de la terre, met- 
tez la paix par tout, donnez Ie repos à tout Ie pays; 
puis mettant la main fur les teftes des prifonniers 
qui eftoient liez deuant Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur: les 
voila tous entiers fans eftre offenfez, ie vous les Iiure, 
difpofez-en felon vos penfées. 
Bernard fe leuant parla en ces termes; [78] ie con- 
firme tout ce qu'a dit celuy qui vient de haranguer, & 
pour prouuer que fa parole eft veritable, & que Iuy 
& moy vous don nons ces prifonniers: ie vay ietter au 
feu leurs liens & Ie coufteau qui les couppera & toute 
ma colere: difant cela, il tire vn coufteau couppe 
les liens, & iettant tout dans Ie feu, ie n'ay plus, 
dit-il de paffion que pour la paix, & ayant fait leuer 
debout les prifonniers, les prefenta à Monfieur de 
Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur: lequel leur fit ref- 
pondre par fon interprete qu'il honoroit leur vaillance 
& leur courage, qu'illes auoit toufiours aimez, notam- 
ment ceux qui eftoient deuenus fes freres & fes pa- 
rens par Ie Baptefme, qu'au refte il ne vouloit pas 
que fon aétion de graces pour Ie prefent qu'ils Iuy 
faifoient fut vne parole toute nuë, qu'il la vouloit 
reueftir de robbes & armer de poudre & de plomb, 
parlant conformement à leur façon de fenoncer, & là 


H\4')-4.
1 

RELA TION OF .r644-45 

241 

sense, allow me to speak to you." After this pre- 
amble, he explained the design that he had had in 
going to war, and the good fortune that Heaven had 
sent him; and in conclusion he said: "I have seen, 
I have killed, I have captured, I have brought back; 
here they are present. I enter into your thoughts; 
they are good. I penetrate into your hearts, you who 
have but one abode and the same opinion. Be the 
Gods of the earth; cause peace to reign eveTYW here; 
give rest to the whole country." Then, laying his 
hand on the heads of the prisoners, who lay bound 
before Monsieur the Governor, "Here they are, 
uninjured and without harm; I deliver them to you; 
do as you think best with them." 
Bernard arose and spoke in these terms: [78] 
" I confirm all that has been said by him who has 
just harangued us; and, to prove that his words are 
true, and that he and I give you those prisoners, I 
will cast into the fire their bonds, the knife that will 
cut them, and all my anger." As he said this, he 
drew a knife and cut the bonds; and, throwing the 
whole into the fire, he said: "I have no longer any 
passion, but for peace;" and, making the prisoners 
stand up, he presented them to Monsieur de Mont- 
magny our Governor. He replied to them, through 
his interpreter, that he honored their valor and their 
courage; that he had always loved them, especially 
those who had become his brothers and his relatives 
through Baptism; moreover, that he did not wish 
that his thanks for the present which they were giving 
him should be but a bare word; that he wished to 
clothe it with robes, and arm it with powder and 
lead,-speaking in their mode of expressing them- 
selves,-and then he gave them handsome presents. 


242 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

deffus, i1 leur fit de beaux prefens. Les Iroquois 
qui iufques alors auoient gardé Ie filence incertains 
du fuccez de ce confeil & des harangues qui [sc. qu'ils] 
n'entendoient pas cõmmencerent à changer [79] de 
pofture & de vifage, l'vn d'eux, homme grand & 
bien-fait fe prefente deuant Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur, 
s' écriant; voila qui va bien, mon corps eft deliuré de 
la mort, ie fuis retiré du feu. Onontio tu m'as donné 
la vie, ie t' en remercie, ie ne m' oublieray iamais de 
ce bien-fait, tout mon pays en fera reconnoiffant, la 
terre va eftre toute belle, la riuiere fera toute calme 
& toute vnie, & la paix nous fera tous amys. Ie n'ay 
plus d'ombre deuant mes yeux. Les ames de mes 
anceftres luaffacrez par les Alguonquins font difpa- 
ruës, ie les ay fous mes pieds. Onontio il faut 
auoüer que tu es bon & que nous fommes mefchans; 
mais noftre colere eft partie, ie n' a y pI us de vigueur 
que pour la ioye & pour la paix, & difant cela il fe 
mit à dancer d'vne façon vn peu differente de celIe 
de nos Sauuages. 11 chantoit, i1 fe remuoit, il eften- 
doit les bras, i1 les eíleuoit en haut comme apoftro- 
phant Ie Ciel, il fe mettoit à genoüil, & dançoit en 
cette pofture, leuant les yeux & les bras vers Ie Ciel, 
puis fe leuant tout à coup prend vne hache, i1 entre 
comme en furie, & en fe deftournant [80] ietta fa 
hache au feu, difant: voilà ma colere à bas, adieu la 
guerre, ie pofe les armes, ie fuis voftre amy pour ia- 
mais. 8'il y a dans ces peuples des aétions barbares, 
il y a des penfées dignes de l'efprit des Grecs & des 
Romains. 
La Ceremonie faite, chacun fe retira en fon quar- 
tier, les prifonniers demeurerent en liberté: en forte 
neantmoins que quelques foldats François les veil- 


1642-45J 

. RELA TION OF r644-45 

243 

The Iroquois, who had remained silent up to that 
moment,- being uncertain as to the result of the 
council, and of the harangues that they heard and 
could not understand,- began to change [79] their 
attitudes and countenances. One of them, a tall 
and well-shaped man, presented himself before Mon- 
sieur the Governor, exclaiming: "This is well, my 
body is delivered from death; I am withdrawn from 
the fire. Onontio, thou hast given me life; I thank 
thee for it,- I shall never forget this kindness. The 
whole of my country will be grateful for it; the 
earth will be quite beautiful, the river will be quite 
calm and smooth, and peace will make us all friends. 
I have no longer any shadow before my eyes. The 
souls of my ancestors killed by the Alguonquins have 
disappeared; I have them under my feet. Onontio, 
it must be admitted that thou art good and that we 
are wicked, but our anger has departed; I no longer 
have any ardor except for joy and peace." As he 
said this, he began to dance, in a fashion somewhat 
different from that of our Savages. He sang, he 
shook himself; he spread out his arn1S and raised 
them aloft, as if addressing himself to Heaven; he 
knelt down and danced in that posture, raising his 
eyes and arms to Heaven. Then, suddenly rising, 
he took a hatchet and seemed to fly into a rage; and, 
turning to one side, [80] he threw the hatchet into 
the fire, saying: "There is my anger cast down: 
farewell to war; I lay down my arms; I am your 
friend forever." If there be barbarous actions 
among these peoples, there are also thoughts worthy 
of the spirit of the Greeks and Romans. 
The Ceremony over, each one withdrew to his 
own quarters. The prisoners remained at liberty, 


244 

LES RELA TIOJ.VS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

loient, ce que nos Sauuages mefmes ne pouuoient 
fupporter, difant, qu'il ne failloit pas craindre qu'ils 
fe fauuaffent & qu'on les tiendroit pour des poltrons 
en leur pays, d'auoir eu peur de ceux qui leurs 
auoient donné la vie. I'ay fouuent remarqué que les 
Sauuages naturellement volages & inconftans font 
tres-feruens dans quelques coufiumes de leur pays. 
Cecy fe paffa Ie dix-huitiefme de May, bien-toft 
apres :Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur renuoyant ces Iroquois 
aux trois riuieres,ordonna au fieur de Chanflour d'équi- 
per Ie prifonnier Iroquois qu'on auoit tenu tout l'hy- 
uer, & de l' enuoyer en fon pays porter les nouuelles 
de ce qui fe [81] paffoit icy, auec ordre de dire aux 
Capitaines des Iroquois que Onontio fe refentant de la 
courtoifie qu'il auoit receu dteux, lors qu'ils luy 
ramenerent deux prifonniers François, non feulement 
il1'auoit retiré de la main des Alguonquins; mais qu'il 
luy auoit donné la liberté comme il auoit defia fait à 
vn SOKoKiois leur amy & allié, qu'au refte il auoit 
encor deux prifonniers pleins de fanté, & qu'il eftoit 
tout preft de les rendre apres les auoir entendu parler 
fur ce fujet, que 1'occafion d'applanir la terre & de faire 
vne paix vniuerfelle entre toutes les Nations, eftoit 
toute belle, qu'ils en feroient comme bon leur fem- 
bleroit. Le Chapitre fuiuant nous fera voir Ie fuccez 
de ce voyage. 


1642-45] 

R1:.'LA TION OF I644-45 

24.") 

except, however, that some French soldiers watched 
them. This our Savages themselves could not bear, 
saying that there was no need to fear that they would 
escape, and that they would be considered as cowards 
in their own country if they were afraid of those who 
had given them life. I have often remarked that the 
Savages, who are naturally fickle and inconstant, 
are very earnest as regards some customs of their 
coun try. 
This happened on the eighteenth of May. Shortly 
afterward, Monsieur the Governor sent these Iro- 
quois back to three rivers, and ordered the sieur de 
Chanflour to equip the Iroquois prisoner that had 
been kept all winter, and to send him to his own 
country to carry the news of what was [81J passing 
here. This prisoner was also ordered to tell the Cap- 
tains of the Iroquois that Onontio was grateful for the 
courtesy that he had received from them when they 
sent back to him two French prisoners; and that, not 
only had he released him from the hands of the 
Alguonquins, but that he had given him his liberty as 
he had already done to a Sokokiois, their friend and 
ally; that, moreover, he had two other prisoners full 
of health, and that he was quite prepared to give up 
these, after having heard them speak on the subject; 
that this was a most excellent opportunity to smooth 
the earth, and to bring about universal peace among 
all the Nations; and that they might do as seemed 
good to them. The following Chapter will show us 
the success of that journey. 


246 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSVITES 

[VOL. 27 

[82] CHAPITRE XI. [i.e., ix.] 

TRAITTÉ DE LA PAIX ENTRE LES FRANÇOIS, IROQUOIS 
& AUTRES NATIONS. 

L E cinquiéme iour de I uillet, Ie prifonnier Iro- 
quois mis en liberté & renuoyé en fon pays, 
comme i'ay dit au Chapitre precedent, parut 
aux trois Riuieres accompagné de deux hommes de 
confideration parmy ces peuples deleguez pour venir 
traitter de paix auec Onontio (c'efi ainfi qu'ils nõment 
:Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur[)], & tous les François & tous 
les Sauuages nos alliez. 
V n ieune homme nommé Guillaume Coufiure qui 
auoit efié pris auec Ie Pere Ifaac Iogues, & qui depuis 
ce temps-Ià efioit refté dans Ie pays des Iroquois les 
accompagnoit; fi-tofi qu'il fut reconnu chacun fe 
ietta à fon col, on Ie regardoit comme vn homme 
reffufcité qui donne de la ioye à tous ceux qui Ie 
croyoient mort, ou du moins en danger de paffer Ie 
refie de fes iours dans vne tres-amere & [83] tres-bar- 
bare captiuité. Ayant mis pied à terre, il nous infor- 
ma du deffein de ces trois Sauuages, auec lefquels il 
auoit efié renuoyé, Ie plus remarquable des trois 
nommé Kiotfeaeton, voyant les François & les 
Sauuages accourir fur Ie bord de la riuiere, fe leua 
debout fur l'auant de la Chalouppe qui l'auoit amené 
depuis Richelieu iufques aux trois Riuieres. II eftoit 
quafi tout couuert de Pourcelaine, faifant figne de la 
main qu'on l'efcoutaft, il s'écria, mes Freres, i'ay 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

247 

[82] CHAPTER XI. [i.e., ix.] 

TREATY OF PEACE BETWEEN THE FRENCH, THE IRO- 
QUOIS, AND OTHER NATIONS. 

O N the fifth day of July, the Iroquois prisoner 
who had been set at liberty and sent back to 
his own country, as I have said in the fore- 
going Chapter, made his appearance at three Rivers 
accompanied by two men of note among those people, 
who had been delegated to negotiate peace with 
Onontio (thus they name Monsieur the Governor), and 
all the French, and all the Savages who are our allies. 
A young man named Guillaume Cousture who had 
been taken prisoner with Father Isaac Jogues, and 
who had since then remained in the Iroquois coun- 
try, accompanied them. As soon as he was recog- 
nized all threw their arms around his neck; he was 
looked npon as a man risen from the dead, who 
brought joy to an who thought him dead,-or, at 
least, that he was in danger of passing the remainder 
of his days in most bitter and [83] cruel captivity. 
As soon as he landed, he informed us of the design of 
the three Savages with whom he had been sent back. 
When the most important of the three, named Kiotse- 
aeton, saw the French and the Savages hastening to 
the bank of the river, he stood up in the bow of the 
Shallop that had brought him from Richelieu to three 
Rivers. He was almost completely covered with 
Porcelain beads. :Motioning with his hand for 
silence, he caned out: " My Brothers, I have left my 


248 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

quitté mon pais pour vous venir voir, me voila enfin 
arriué fur vos terres, on m'a dit à mon depart que ie 
venois chercher la mort, & que ie ne verrois iamais 
plus ma patrie; mais ie me fuis volontairement 
exposé pour Ie bien de la paix: ie viens done entrer 
dans les deffeins des François, des Hurons & des 
Alguonquins, ie viens pour vous communiquer les 
penfées de tout mon pays, & cela dit, la Chalouppe 
tire vn coup de pierrier, & Ie Fort refpond d'vn coup 
de canon pour marque de réjoüiffance. 
Ces Ambaffadeurs ayans mis pied à terre, furent 
conduits en la chambre du [84] fieur de Chanflour, 
lequel leur fit fort bon accueil; on leur prefenta quel- 
ques petits rafraifchiffemens, & apres auoir mangé & 
petuné, Kiotfaeton qui portoit toufiours la parole, dit 
à tous les François qui l'enuironnoient, ie trouue 
bien de la douceur dans vos maifons, depuis que i'ay 
mis Ie pied dãs voftre pays ie n'ay veu que de la 
refioüiffance, ie voy bien que celuy qui eft au Ciel 
veut conc1ure vne affaire bien importante, les hommes 
ont des efprits & des penfées trop differentes pour 
tomber d'accord, c'eft Ie Ciel qui reünira tout. Ce 
mefme iour on enuoya vn canot à :Monfieur Ie Gou- 
uerneur pour l'informer de la venuë de ces nouueaux 
hoftes. 
Cependant & eux & les prifonniers qui n'eftoient 
pas encor rendus auoient toute liberté de s'aller pro- 
mener où ils vouloient. Les Alguonquins & les Mon- 
tagnais les inuitoient à leur feftins, & petit à petit 
ils s'accouftumoient à conuerfer enfemble. Le fieur 
de Chanflour les ayant bien traittez, certain iour leur 
dit qu'ils eftoient parmy nous comme dans leur pays, 
qu'il n'y auoit rien à craindre [85] pour eux, qu'ils 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

249 

country to come and see you. At last I have reached 
your land. I was told, on my departure, that I was 
going to seek death, and that I would never again 
see my country. But I have willingly exposed my- 
self for the good of peace. I come therefore to enter 
into the designs of the French, of the Hurons, and 
of the Alguonquins. I come to make known to 
you the thoughts of all my country." 'Vhen he had 
said this, the Shallop fired a shot from a swivel gun, 
and the Fort replied by a discharge from the can- 
non, as a sign of rejoicing. 
When those Ambassadors had landed, they were 
conducted into the room of the [84] sieur de Chan- 
flour, who gave them a very cordial reception. 
They were offered some slight refreshments, and, 
after they had eaten and smoked, Kiotsaeton, who 
was always the spokesman, said to all the French 
who surrounded him, " I find much pleasure in your 
houses. Since I have set foot in your country, I 
have observed nothing but rejoicing. I see very 
well that he who is in the Sky wishes to bring to a 
conclusion a very important matter. The minds and 
thoughts of men are too diverse to fall into accord; 
it is the Sky that will combine al1." On the same 
day, a canoe was sent to Monsieur the Go,'ernor to 
inform him of the arrival of these new guests. 
Meanwhile, both they and the prisoners who had 
not yet been given up had full liberty to wander 
where they willed. The Alguonquins and Monta- 
gnais invited them to their feasts, and they gradually 
accustomed themselves to converse together. The 
sieur de Chanflour treated them very well; one day 
he said to them that they were with us as if in their 
own country; that they had nothing to fear; [85] 


25u 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

efioient dans leur maifon. Kiotfaeton repartit à 
ce compliment auec vne pointe affez aiguë & affez 
gentile: Ie te prie, dit-il à l'Interprete, de dire à ce 
Capitaine qui nous parle qu'il vfe d'vne grande men- 
terie en no fire endroit, du moins eft-il affeuré que 
ce qu'i1 dit n'eft pas veritable: & là-deffus il fit vne 
petite paufe pour laiffer former l'eftonnement. Puis 
i1 adioufta; ce Capitaine me dit que ie fuis icy comme 
dans mon pays, cela eft bien ef10igné de la verité: 
car ie ne ferois ny honoré ny careffé dans mon pays, 
& ie voy icy que tout Ie monde m'honore & me ca- 
reffe, il dit que ie fuis comme dans ma maifon; c' eft 
vne efpece de menterie: car ie fuis mal-traitté dans 
ma maifon; & ie fais icy tous les iours bonne chere: 
ie fuis continuellement dans les feftins, ie ne fuis 
done pas icy comme dans mon pays, ny comme dans 
ma maifon; i1 fit quantité d'autres reparties qui 
tefmoignoient affez qu'i1 auoit de l'efprit. 
Enfin Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur eftãt arriué de 
Quebec aux trois Riuieres, apres auoir confideré les 
Ambaffadeurs, leur [86] donna audiance Ie douziéme 
Iuillet. Cela fe fit dans la cour du Fort où l'on fit 
efiendre de grandes voiles contre l'ardeur du Soleil; 
voicy comme Ie lieu eftoit difpofé, d'vn cofté eftoit 
Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur, accompagné de fes gens, 
& du Reuerend Pere Vimont Superieur de la J\1iffion. 
Les Iroquois eftoient affis à fes pieds fur vne grande 
écorce de pruffe, i1s auoient tefmoigné deuant l'affem- 
blée qu'i1s fe vouloient mettre de fon cofté pour 
marque de l'affeétion qu'ils portoient aux François. 
A 1'0ppofite efioient les Algonquins, les Montagnais 
& les Attikamegues, les deux coftez eftoient fermez 
de quelques François & de quelques Hurons. Au 


1642-45] 

RELA TIOJ.V OF I644-45 

251 

that they were in their own house. Kiotsaeton 
replied to this compliment by a very well-pointed 
and neat retort. "I beg thee," he said to the Inter- 
preter, " to say to that Captain who speaks to us that 
he tells a great falsehood with respect to us; at 
least, it is certain that what he says is not true." 
And thereupon he paused a little, to let the wonder 
grow. Then he added: "That Captain tells me that 
I am here as if in my own country. That is very 
far from the truth. I would be neither honored nor 
treated with such consideration in my own country, 
while here every one honors me and pays me atten- 
tion. He says that I am as if in my own house; that 
is a sort of falsehood, for I am maltreated in my 
house, and here I fare well every day,- I am con- 
tinually feasting. Therefore I am not as if I were 
in my own country or in my own house." He in- 
dulged in many other repartees which clearly showed 
that he had wit. 
Finally, Monsieur the Governor came from Quebec 
to three Rivers; and, after having seen the Ambassa- 
dors, [86] he gave audience to them on the twelfth of 
July. This took place in the courtyard of the Fort, 
over which large sails had been spread to keep off 
the heat of the Sun. Their places were thus ar- 
ranged: on one side was :Monsieur the Governor, 
accom panied by his people and by Reverend Father 
Vimont, Superior of the Mission. The Iroquois sat 
at his feet, on a great piece of hemlock bark. They 
had stated before the ass em bly that they wished to 
be on his side, as a mark of the affection that they 
bore to the French. 
Opposite them were the Algonquins, the :Monta- 
gnais, and the Attikamegues; the two other sides 


252 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

milieu il y auoit vne grande place vn peu plus longue 
que large, où les Iroquois firent planter deux perches, 
& tirer vne corde de l'vn à l'autre pour y pendre & 
attacher les paroles qu'ils nous deuoient porter, c'efi 
à dire, les prefens qu'ils nous vouloient faire, lefquels 
confifioient en dix-fept colliers de pourcelaine, dont 
vne partie efioit fur leurs corps: l' autre partie efioit 
renfermée [87J dans vn petit fac placé tout aupres 
d'eux, tout Ie monde efiant affemblé & chacun ayant 
pris place, Kiotfaeton qui efioit d'vne haute fiature 
fe leua & regardant Ie Soleil, & puis tournant fes 
yeux fur toute la Compagnie, il prit vn collier de 
porcelaine en fa main, commençant fa harangue d'vne 
voix forte: Onontio prefie l'oreille, ie fuis la bouche 
de tout mon pays, tu efcoute tous les Iroquois enten- 
dant ma parole, mon cæur n' a rien de mauuais, ie 
n'ay que de bonnes chanfons en bouche, nous auons 
des tas de chanfons de guerre en noftre pays, nous 
les auons toutes iettées par terre, nous n'auons plus 
que des chants de refjoüiffance, & là deffus il fe mit à 
chanter, fes compatriotes refpondirent, il fe pourme- 
noit dans cette grande place comme deffus vn theatre, 
il faifoit mine geftes, il regardoit Ie Ciel, i1 enuifa- 
geoit Ie Soleil, il frottoit fes bras comme s'il en eut 
voulu faire fortir la vigueur qui les anime en guerre, 
apres auoir bien chanté, il dit que Ie prefent qu'il 
tenoit en main, remercioit Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur 
de ce qu'il auoit fauué la vie à Tokhrahenehiaron, 
[88] Ie retirant I' Automne paíIé du feu & de la dent 
des Alguonquins, mais il fe plaignit gentiment de ce 
qu .on l'auoit renuoyé tout feul dans fon pays, fi fon 
canot fe fut renuerfé, fi les vents l'euffent fait fub- 
merger, s'il eut efié noyé, vous euffiez long temps 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

253 

were closed in by some French and some Hurons. 
In the center was a large space, somewhat longer 
than wide, in which the Iroquois caused two poles to 
be planted, and a cord to be stretched from one to 
the other on which to hang and tie the words that 
they were to bring us,-that is to say, the presents 
they wished to make us, which consisted of seven- 
teen collars of porcelain beads, a portion of which 
were on their bodies. The remainder were en- 
closed [87] in a small pouch placed quite near them. 
When all had assembled and had taken their places, 
Kiotsaeton who was high in stature, rose and looked 
at the Sun, then cast his eyes over the whole Com- 
pany; he took a collar of porcelain beads in his hand 
and commenced to harangue in a loud voice. "Onon- 
tio, lend me ear. I am the mouth for the whole of 
my country; thou listen est to all the Iroquois, in 
hearing my words. There is no evil in my heart; I 
have only good songs in my mouth. We have a mul- 
titude of war songs in our country; we have cast 
them all on the ground; we have no longer anything 
but songs of rejoicing." Thereupon he began to 
sing; his countrymen responded; he walked about 
that great space as if on the stage of a theatre; he 
made a thousand gestures; he looked up to Heaven; 
he gazed at the Sun; he rubbed his arms as if he 
wished to draw from them the strength that moved 
them in war. After he had sung awhile, he said 
that the present that he held in his hand thanked 
Monsieur the Governor for having saved the life of 
Tokhrahenehiaron, [88] when he drew him last Au- 
tumn out of the fire and away from the teeth of the 
Alguonquins; but he complained gracefully that he 
had been sent back all alone to his own country. "If 


254 

LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

(VOL. 27 

attendu Ie retour de ce pauure homme abyfmé, & 
vous nous auriez accufez d'vne faute que vous-mefmes 
auriez faite: Cela dit, il attach a fon collier au lieu 
defiiné. 
En tirant vn autre il l'attacha au bras de Guil- 
laume Coufiure, en difant tout haut, c'efi ce Collier 
qui vous ramene ce prifonnier: ie ne luy ay pas 
voulu dire efiant encor dans Ie pays; va t'en mon 
Neueu, prends vn Canot & t'en retourne à Quebec, 
mon efprit n'auroit pas efié en repos, i'aurois tou- 
fiours penfé & repenfé à par[t] moy, ne s'efi-il pas 
perdu, en verité ie n'aurois pas eu d'efprit fi i'euffe 
procedé en cette forte. Celuy que vous auez ren- 
uoyé a eu toutes les peines du nlonde en fon voyage, 
i1 commença à les exprimer; mais fi pathetiquement 
qu'il n'y a tabarin en France fi naïf que ce Barbare. 
II prenoit vn bafion, Ie mettoit fur [89] fa tefie 
comme vn paquet, puis Ie portoit d'vn bout de la 
place à l'autre, reprefentant ce qu'auoit fait ce pri- 
fonnier dans les faults & dans Ie courrant d'eau, auf- 
quels efiant arriué, il auoit tranfporté fon bagage 
piece à piece, il alloit & reuenoit reprefentant les 
voyages, les tours & retours du prifonnier, il cher- 
choit [see s'échouoit] contre vne pierre, il reculoit 
plus qu'il n'auançoit dans fon canot, ne Ie pouuant 
foufienir feul contre les courans d'eau, il perdoit cou- 
rage, & puis reprenoit fes forces, bref, ie n'ay rien 
veu de mieux exprimé que cette aétion, encor (difoit- 
il) fi vous l'euffiez aidé à paffer les faults & les mau- 
uais chemins, & puis en vous arreftant & petunant fi 
vous l'euffiez regardé de loin vous nous auriez con- 
folé, mais ie ne fçay où efioit voftre penfée, de ren- 
uoyer ainfi vn homme tout feul dans tant de dangers, 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

255 

his canoe had been upset; if the winds had caused 
it to be submerged; if he had been drowned, you 
would have waited long for the return of the poor 
lost man, and you would have accused us of a fault 
which you yourselves would have committed." 
When he had said this, he fastened his collar in the 
appointed spot. 
Drawing out another, he tied it to the arm of Guil- 
laume Cousture, saying aloud: "It is this Collar that 
brings you back this prisoner. I would not have said 
to him, while he was still in our country: 'Go, my 
Nephew; take a Canoe and return to Que bee. ' My 
mind would not have been at rest; I would always 
have thought over and over again to myself, ' Is he 
not lost?' In truth, I would have had no sense, had 
I acted in that way. He whom you have sent back 
had all the difficulties in the world, on his journey. " 
He began to express them, but in so pathetic a 
manner that there is no merry-andrew in France so 
ingenious as that Barbarian. He took a stick, and 
placed it on [89] his head like a bundle; then he car- 
ried it from one end of the square to the other, repre- 
senting what that prisoner had done in the rapids 
and in the current of the water,-on arriving at 
which he had transported his baggage, piece by 
piece. He went backward and forward, showing the 
journeys, the windings, and the turnings of the pris- 
oner. lIe ran against a stone; he receded more than 
he advanced in his canoe, because alone he could not 
maintain it against the current. He lost courage, 
and then regained his strength. In a word, I have 
never seen anything better done than this acting. 
" Again" (said he), " if you had helped him to pass 
the rapids and the bad roads, and then if, while 


256 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

ie n'ay pas fait Ie mefme.; Allons mon nepueu, dit-il 
[sc. dif-ieJ, à celuy que vous voyez deuant vos yeux, 
fuis-moy, ie te veux rendre dans ton pays au peril 
de ma vie, voila ce que difoit Ie fecond collier qu'il 
attach a aupres de I' autre. 
La troifiéme tefmoignoit qu'ils auoient [90] ad- 
ioufié quelque chofe du leur, aux prefens que Mon- 
ÍÌeur Ie Gouuerneur auoit donné au captif, qu'il auoit 
renuoyé en leur pays, & que ces prefens auoient efié 
difiribuez aux Nations qui leur font alliées pour 
arrefier leurs haches pour faire tomber des mains de 
ceux qui s'embarquoient pour venir à la guerre, 
leurs armes & leurs auirons. II nomma toutes ces 
Nations. 
Le 4. prefent efioit pour nous affeurer que la pen- 
fée de leurs gens tuez en guerre ne les touchoit plus. 
qu'ils mettoient leurs armes fous leurs pieds. I'ay 
paffé, difoit-il, aupres du lieu où les Algonquins nous 
ont maffacrez ce Printemps. I'ay veu la place du 
combat où ils ont puny [sc. pris] les deux prifonniers 
qui font icy, i'ay pafíé vifie, ie n'ay point voulu voir 
Ie fang refpandu de mes gens, leurs corps font encor 
fur la place, i'ay defiourné mes yeux de peur d'irri- 
ter ma colere, puis frappant la terre & prefiant 
l'oreille, i'ay oüy la voix de mes Ancefires maffacrez 
par les Alguonquins, lefquels voyans que mon cæur 
efioit capable de fe venger, m'ont crié d'vne voix 
amoureufe, mon petit fils, [91] mon petit fils, foyez 
bon, n'entrez point en fureur, ne penfez plus à moy: 
car il n'y a plus de moyen de nous retirer de la mort, 
penfez aux viuans, cela efi d'importance, retirez ceux 
qui viuent encor du glaiue & du feu qui les pourfuit, 
vn homme viuant vaut mieux que plufieurs trefpaffez; 


1642-45] 

R ELA TION OF I644-45 

257 

stopping and smoking, you had looked after him 
from afar, you would have greatly consoled us. But I 
know not where your thoughts were, to send a man 
back quite alone amid so many dangers. I did not 
do that. 'Come, my nephew,' I said to him whom 
you see before your eyes; 'follow me, I wish to bring 
thee to thy own country, at the risk of my life.' " 
That is what was said by the second collar, which he 
tied near the first. 
The third showed that they had [90 J added some- 
thing of their own to the presents that Monsieur the 
Governor had given to the captive whom he had sent 
back to their country; and that those presents had 
been distributed to the Tribes who are their allies to 
arrest their hatchets, and to cause the weapons and 
paddles to fall from the hands of those who were 
embarking to go to war. He named all those Tribes. 
The 4th present was to assure us that the thought 
of their people killed in war no longer affected them; 
that they cast their weapons under their feet. "I 
passed," he said, " near the place where the Algon- 
quins massacred us last Spring. I saw the spot 
where the fight took place in which they captured 
the two prisoners who are here. I passed by quick- 
ly; I did not wish to see my people's blood that had 
been shed. Their bodies still lie in that place. I 
turned away my eyes for fear of exciting my anger; 
then, striking the earth and listening, I heard the 
voice of my Forefathers massacred by the Alguon- 
quins. \Vhen they saw that my heart was capable 
of seeking revenge they called out to me in a loving 
voice: ' :My grandson, [91J my grandson, be good; 
do not get angry. Think no longer of us for there 
is no means of withdrawing us from death. Think 


258 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

ayant oüy ces voix, i'ay paffé outre & m'en fuis venu 
à vous pour déliurer ceux que vous tenez encor. 
Le cinquiefme fut donné pour nettoyer la riuiere, 
pour chaffer les canots ennemys qui pourroient trou- 
bIer la nauigation. II faifoit mille geftes comme s'il 
euft amaffé les vagues, & donné vn calme depuis 
Quebec iufques au pays des Iroquois. 
Le fixiéme pour aplanir les faults & les cheutes 
d'eau où les grands courrans qui fe treuuent fur les 
riuieres fur lefquels il faut nauiger pour aller en leur 
pays. I'ay penfé perir, difoit-il, dans des boüillons 
d'eau, voila pour Ies appaifer, & auec fes mains & 
fes bras il vniffoit & arreftoit les torrens. 
Le feptiéme eftoit pour donner vne grande bonace 
au grand Lac de Sainét [92] Louys, qu'il faut trauer- 
fer; voilà, difoit-il, pour Ie rendre vny comme vne 
glace, pour appaifer Ies vents & temperer la colere 
des eaux, & puis ayant par fes geftes rendu Ie 
chemin fauorable, il attach a vn collier de porcelaine 
au bras d'vn François, & Ie tira tout droit au trauers 
de la place pour marque que nos canots iroient fans 
peine en leur pays. 
Le huitiéme faifoit tout Ie chemin qu'il faut faire 
par terre, vous euffiez dit qu'il abbattoit des arbres, 
qu'il couppoit des branches, qu'il repouffoit des bois, 
qu'il mettoit de Ia terre és lieux plus profonds. 
Voila, difoit-il, Ie chemin tout net, tout poly, tout 
droit, il fe baiffoit vers Ia terre, regardant s'il n'y 
auoit plus d"'épines, ou de bois, s'il n'y auoit point de 
bute qu'on pût heurter en marchant. C'en eft fait, 
on verra la fumee de nos bourgades depuis Quebec 
iufques au fonds de noftre pays, tous Ies obftac1es 
font oftez. 


164
-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

259 

of the living,-that is of importance; save those who 
still live from the sword and fire that pursue them; 
one living man is better than many dead ones.' 
After having heard those voices I passed on, and I 
came to you, to deliver those whom you still hold." 
The fifth was given to clear the river, and to drive 
away the enemy's canoes, which might impede navi- 
gation. He made use of a thousand gestures, as if 
he had collected the waves and had caused a calm, 
from Quebec to the Iroquois country. 
The sixth was to smooth the rapids and waterfalls, 
or the strong currents, that occur in the rivers on 
which one must sail to reach their country. "I 
thought that I would perish," he said, " in those boil- 
ing waters. This is to appease them;" and with 
his hands and arms he smoothed and arrested the 
torrents. 
The seventh was to produce a profound calm on 
the great Lake Saint [92J Louys that has to be crossed. 
C C Here," he said, C C is something to make it smooth 
as ice, to appease the winds, and to allay the anger 
of the waves." Then, after having by his gestures 
rendered the route easy, he tied a collar of porcelain 
beads on the arm of a Frenchman, and pulled him 
straight across the square, to show that our canoes 
could go to their country without any difficulty. 
The eighth performed the whole journey that had 
to be made on land. You would have said that he 
felled trees; that he lopped off branches; that he 
pushed back the bushes; that he put earth in the 
deepest holes. "There," said he, c, is the road, 
quite smooth and quite straight." He bent toward 
the ground, looking to see whether there were any 
more thorns or bushes, and whether there were any 


260 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Le neufiéme eft.oit pour nous enfeigner que nous 
trouuerions du feu tout prefi dans leurs maifons, que 
nous n'aurions pas la peine d'aller querir du bois, 
que [93] nous en trouuerions de tout fait, & que ce 
feu ne s'eft.eindroit iamais ny iour ny nuit, que nous 
en verrions la c1arté iufques dans nos fouyers. 
Le dixiéme fut donné pour nous lier tous enfemble 
tres-eft.roittement, il prit vn François enlaça fan bras 
dans Ie fien, & vn Alguonquin de l'autre, & s'eft.ant 
ainfi lié auec eux, voila Ie næud qui nous attache 
infeparablement, rien ne nous pourra def-vnir. Ce 
colier eft.oit extraordinairement beau, quand la foudre 
tomberoit fur nous elle ne pourroit nous feparer, car 
fi elle couppe ce bras qui vous attache à nous, nous 
nous faifirons incontinent par l'autre, & là-deffus il fe 
retournoit & faififfoit Ie François & l' Alguonquin par 
leur deux autres bras, les tenant fi ferme qu'il paroiffoit 
ne vouloir iamais quitter. 
L'vnziéme inuitoit à manger auec eux. Noft.re 
pays eft. remply de poiffon, de venaifon, de chaffe, 
tout y eft. plein de cerfs, d'Elans, de caft.ors, quittez, 
difoit-il, quittez ces puans pourceaux qui courent icy 
parmy vos habitations, qui ne mangent que des faletez, 
& venez manger de bonnes viandes auec nous, Ie che- 
min eft. frayé, [94] il n'y a plus de danger, il faifoit 
les geft.es conformement à fon difcours. 
II eíleua Ie douziéme collier pour diffiper tous les 
nuages de l'air, afin qu'on vift. tout à découuert que 
nos cæurs & les leurs ne fuffent point cachez, que Ie 
Soleil & la verité donna(fent iour par tout. 
Le treiziéme fut pour faire reffouuenir les Hurons 
de leur bonne volonté; il y a cinq iours, difoit-il, 
c' eft. à dire cinq années, que vous auiez vn fac remply 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

261 

mounds over which one might stumble in walking. 
" It is all finished. We can see the smoke of our 
villages, from Quebec to the extremity of our coun- 
try. All obstacles are removed. " 
The ninth was to tell us that we would find fires 
all lighted in their houses; that we would not have 
the trouble of seeking for wood,- that [93J we would 
find some already cut; and that the fire would never 
go out, day or night,- that we would see its light, 
even in our own homes. 
The tenth was given to bind us all very closely 
together. He took hold of a Frenchman, placed his 
arm within his, and with his other arm he clasped 
that of an Alguonquin. Having thus joined himself 
to them, " Here," he said, " is the knot that binds us 
ins
parably; nothing can part us." This collar was 
extraordinarily beautiful. "Even if the lightning 
were to fall upon us, it could not separate us; for, if 
it cuts off the arm that holds you to us, we will at 
once seize each other by the other arm." And 
thereupon he turned around, and caught the French- 
man and the Alguonquin by their two other arms,- 
holding them so closely that he seemed unwilling 
ever to leave them. 
The eleventh invited us to eat with them. "Our 
country is well stocked with fish, with venison, and 
with game; it is everywhere full of deer, of Elk, of 
beaver. Give up," said he, "those stinking hogs 
that run about among your houses, that eat nothing 
but filth; and come and eat good meat with us. The 
road is cleared; [94J there is no longer any danger." 
He accompanied his discourse with appropriate 
gestures. 
He lifted the twelfth collar, to dispel the clouds in 


262 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSU.lTES 

[V OL. 27 

de porcelaine & d'autres prefens tous preparez pour 
venir chercher la paix, qui vous a defiourné de cette 
penfée? Ce fac fe renuerfera, les prefens tomberont 
ils fe cafferont, ils fe diffiperont & vous perdrez 
courage. 
Le quatorziéme fut pour preffer les Hurons qu'ils 
fe hafiaffent de parler, qu'ils ne fuffent point hon- 
teux comme des femmes, & que prenans refolution 
d'aller aux Iroquois, qu'ils paffaffent par Ie pays des 
Alguonquins & des François. 
Le quinziéme fut pour témoigner qu'ils auoient 
toufiours eu enuie de ramener Ie Pere Ie Iogues & Ie 
P. Breffani, que c'efioit leur penfée, que le P. Ie 
Iogues leur fut dérobé, & qu'ils auoient donné Ie P. 
[95] Breffani aux Holandois, pour ce qu'il l'auoit 
defiré, s'il eufi eu patience ie l'aurois ramené, que 
fçay-je maintenant où il efi? peut-efire efi il mort, 
peut efire efi-il noyé, nofire deffein n'efioit pas de 
Ie faire mourir. Si François Marguerie & Thomas 
Godefroy, adjoufioit-il, fuffent refiez en nofire pays, 
ils feroient mariez maintenant, & nous ne ferions plus 
qu'vne Nation, & moy ie ferois des vofires. Le P. Ie 
Iogues entendant ce difcours, nous dit en foufriant, 
Ie bucher eftoit preparé fi Dieu ne m'eut fauué, cent 
fois ils m'ont ofté la vie, ce bon homme dit tout ce 
qu'il veut, Ie P. Breffani nous dit Ie mefme à fon 
retour. 
Le feiziéme fut pour les receuoir en ce pais icy 
quand ils y viendroient, & pour les mettre à couuert 
pour arrefter les haches des Alguonquins & Ies canons 
des François; quand nous ramenâmes vos prifonniers 
il y a quelques années, nous penfions eftre de vos 
amys, & nous entendifmes des arquebufes & des 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

263 

the air, so that all might see quite plainly that our 
hearts and theirs were not hidden; that the Sun and 
the truth might light up everything. 
The thirteenth was to remind the Hurons of their 
good will. "It is five days ago," he said,- that is 
to say, five years,-" since you had a pouch filled 
with porcelain beads and other presents, all ready to 
come and seek for peace. What made you change 
your minds? That pouch will upset, the presents will 
fall out and break, they will be dispersed; and you 
will lose courage." 
The fourteenth was to urge the Hurons to make 
haste to speak,-not to be bashful, like women; and, 
after taking the resolution to go to the Iroquois coun- 
try, to pass by that of the Alguonquins and of the 
French. 
The fifteenth was to show that they had always 
desired to bring back Father Ie J ogues and Father 
Bressani; that they had thought that Father Ie Jogues 
had been stolen from them, and that they had given 
Father [95] Bressani to the Dutch because he had 
desired it. "If he had had patience, I would have 
brought him back. How can I know now where he 
is? Perhaps he is dead; perhaps he is drowned. It 
was not our intention to put him to death. _ If Fran- 
çois Marguerie and Thomas Godefroy," he added, 
" had remained in our country, they would be mar- 
ried by this time; we would be but one Nation, and I 
would be one of you." vVhen Father Ie J ogues heard 
this discourse, he said with a smile: "The stake 
was all prepared; had not God preserved me, they 
would have put me to death a hundred times. This 
good man says whatever pleases him." Father Bres- 
sani told us the same thing on his return. 


264 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

canons fiffier de tous coftez: cela nous fit peur, nous 
nous retirafmes, & comme nous auons du courage 
pour la guerre, nous prifmes refolution d' en donner 
des preuues pour Ie Printemps [69 i.e., 96] fuiuant... 
DOUS parufmes fur vos terres, & prifmes Ie P. Ie 
Iogues auec des Hurons. 
Le dix-feptiéme prefent efioit Ie collier propre 
que Honatteniate portoit en fon pays. Ce ieune 
homme efioit l'vn des deux prifonniers derniers, fa 
mere qui efioit tante du P. Iogues au pays des Iro- 
quois, enuoya fon collier pour celuy qui auoit donné 
la vie à fon fils, cette bonne femme apperceuant que 
Ie bon Pere qu' elle appelloit fon Neveu efioit en ce 
pays.cy, en fut fort refioüye & fon fils encore plus; 
car il parut toufiours trifie iufques à tant que Ie P. 
Iogues fut defcendu de Montreal, alors il commença 
à refpirer & à fe monfirer gaillard. 
Apres que ce grand Iroquois eut dit tout ce que 
deffus, i1 adjoufia, ie m'en vay paffer Ie refie de 
l'efié en mon pays en jeux, en dances, en réioüif- 
fance pour Ie bien de la paix: mais i'ay peur que 
pendant que nous danferons les Hurons ne nous vien- 
nent pincer & importuner. Voilà ce qui fe parra en 
cette affemblée, chacun auoüa que cét homme efioit 
pathetique & eloquent, ie n'ay recueilly que quelques 
pieces comme decoufuës tirées [97J [de la] bouche de 
l'interprete, qui ne parloit qu'a bafions rompus, & non 
dans la fuitte que gardoit ce Barbare. 
II entonna quelque chanfons entre fes prefens, il 
dança par refioüiffance, bref, il fe monfira fort bon 
Aéteur, pour vn homme qui n'a d'autre efiude que 
ce que la nature luy a apris fans regIe & fans precep- 
tes. La conc1ufion fut que les Iroquois, les François, 


1642-4ú] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

265 

The sixteenth was to receive them in this country 
when they came to it, and to protect them; to stay 
the hatchets of the Alguonquins and the cannons of 
the French. "When we brought back your prison- 
ers, some years ago, we thought that we were your 
friends, and we heard arquebus and cannon shots 
whistling on all sides of us. That frightened us; we 
withdrew; and, as we have courage for war, we took 
the resolution to give proofs of it the following 
Spring; [69 i.e., 96] we appeared in your land, and 
captured Father Ie J ogues, with some Hurons. 
The seventeenth present was the very collar that 
Honatteniate wore in his country. This young man 
was one of the two prisoners last captured. His 
mother, who had been Father Jogues's aunt in the 
Iroquois country, sent his collar for him who had 
given her son his life. \Vhen the good woman 
learned that the good Father whom she called her 
Nephew was in this country, she greatly rejoiced, and 
her son still more so; for he always seemed sad until 
Father Jogues came down from Montreal when he 
commenced to breathe freely and be in good spirits. 
When this great Iroquois had said all that is men- 
tioned above, he added: "I am going to spend the 
remainder of the summer in my country in games, 
in dances, in rejoicing for the good of peace; but I 
fear that, while we dance, the Hurons will come to 
taunt and importune us." That is what occurred at 
that assembly. Everyone admitted that this man 
was impassioned and eloquent. I gathered only 
some disconnected fragments, taken from the [97] 
mouth of the interpreter who spoke only in a desul- 
tory manner and did not follow the order observed 
by the Barbarian. 


266 

LES RELA TIOl'.lS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

les Alguonquins, les Hurons, les )lontaignets, & les 
Attikamegues danceroient tous, & fe refioüyroient 
auec beaucoup d'allegreffe. 
Le lendemain Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur fit fefiin à 
tous ceux de ces Nations qui fe trouuerent aux trois 
riuieres, pour les exhorter tous enfemble & de bannir 
toutes les deffiances qui les pourroient diuifer. Les 
Iroquois tefmoignerent toute forte de fatisfadion, ils 
chanterent & dancerent felon leur coufiume, & Kiot- 
faeton recõmanda fort aux Alguonquins & aux Hurons 
d'obeyr à Onontio, & de fuiure les intentions & les 
penfées des François. 
Le quatorziéme du mefme mois Monfieur Ie 
Gouuerneur refpondit aux pre fens des Iroquois, par 
quatorze prefens qui auoient tous leurs fignifications, 
& [9 8 ] qui portoient leurs parolles, Les Iroquois les 
accepterent tous auec de grands tefmoignages de 
fatisfadion qu'ils faifoient paroifire par trois grands 
cris, pouffez à mefme temps du fond de leur efiomach 
à chaque parolle ou à chaque prefent qui leur efioit 
fait. Ainfi fut concluë la paix auec eux à condition 
qu'ils ne feroient aucun aéte d'hoítilité auec les Hu- 
rons, ou enuers les autres Nations nos alliées, iufques 
à ce que les principaux de ces Nations qui n'efioient 
pas pre fens euíIent agy auec eux. 
Cette affaire efiant heureufement concluë, Pieska- 
ret fe leuant fit vn prefent de quelque pelterie à ces 
Ambaffadeurs, s'écriant que c'efioit vne pierre ou vne 
tombe qu'il mettoit deffus la foíIe de ceux qui efioient 
morts au dernier combat, afin qu'on ne remuafi plus 
leurs os, & qu' on perdit la memoire de ce qui leur 
efioit arriué fans plus iamais pen fer à la vengeãce. 
Noël Negab[a]mat fe leua en fuitte, il mit au milieu 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

267 

He sang some songs between his gifts; he danced 
for joy; in a word, he showed himself to be a very 
good Actor, for a man who has learned but what 
nature has taught him, without rule and without 
precept. The conclusion was that the Iroquois, the 
French, the Alguonquins, the II urons, the Monta- 
gnais, and the Attikamegues all danced and rejoiced 
with much gladness. 
On the following day, :Monsieur the Governor gave 
a feast to all belonging to those Nations who were at 
three rivers, to exhort them all together and to ban- 
ish all distrust that might set them at variance. The 
Iroquois manifested their satisfaction in every way; 
they sang and danced according to their custom, and 
Kiotsaeton strongly urged the Alguonquins and 
Hurons to obey Onontio, and to follow the intentions 
and the thoughts of the French. 
On the fourteenth of the same month, :Monsieur 
the Governor replied to the presents of the Iroquois 
by fourteen gifts, all of which had their meanings 
and [98] which carried their own messages. The 
Iroquois accepted them all with great marks of satis- 
faction, which they manifested by three loud cries, 
uttered at the same time from the depths of their 
chests, at each word or at each present that was 
given them. Thus was peace concluded with them, 
on condition that they should commit no act of hos- 
tility against the Hurons, or against the other Nations 
who are our allies, until the chiefs of those Nations 
who were not present had treated with them. 
vVhen this matter had been brought to a happy 
conclusion, Pieskaret arose and made a present of 
some furs to the Ambassadors, exclaiming that it 
was a rock or a tombstone that he placed on the 


268 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

de Ia place cinq grandes peaux d'Elans, voila dit-il 
aux Iroquois, dequoy vous armer les pieds & les 
iambes, de peur que vous ne vous bleffiez au retour, 
s'il refioit encore quelque pierre au chemin [99] que 
vous auez applany. II en prefenta encore cinq autres 
pour enfeuelir les corps de ceux que Ie combat auoit 
fait mourir, & pour appaifer la douleur de leurs pa- 
rens & amys qui ne les pourroient fouffrir fans fepul- 
ture, qu'au refie que luy & fes gens qui font à Sillery 
n'ayant qu'vn mefme cæur auec leur frere aifné 
1'1onfieur Ie Gouuerneur, ils ne faifoient qu'vn prefent 
auec Ie flen. Finalement on tira trois coups de canon 
pour chaffer Ie mauuais air de la guerre, & fe refioüyr 
du bonheur de Ia paix. 
Quelque temps apres cette affemblée vn Huron mal 
bafiy abordant Ie Capitaine Iroquois, qui auoit tou- 
flours agy & par1é, luy voulut ietter quelque deffiance 
des François; mais ce Capitaine luy repartit genti- 
ment en ces termes: I'ay la face peinte & barboüillée 
d'vn cofié, & de l'autre cofié ie l'ay toute nette, ie 
ne voy pas bien clair du cofié que ie fuis barboüillé, 
de l'autre i'ay Ia veuë bonne, Ie cofié peint efi Ie 
cofié des Hurons, ie n'y voy quafi goutte, Ie cofié 
net efi Ie cofié des François; i'y voy clair comme en 
plein midy, eel a dit il íe teut, & cét efprit mal-fait 
demeura confus. 
[110 i.e., 100J Sur Ie foir Ie R. P. Vimont Supe- 
rieur de la Mifflon, ayant fait venir les Iroquois dans 
nofire maifon, leur fit quelques petits prefents, leur 
donna du petun ou tabac, & à chacun vn beau calu- 
met ou vne pippe pour Ie prendre. Kiotfaeton luy 
fit vn remerciement plein d'efprit, quand ie fuis party 
de mon pays i'ay abandonné ma vie, ie me fuis 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF z644-45 

269 

grave of those who had been killed in the last fight, 
so that their bones might no longer be disturbed; 
and that the remembrance of what had happened 
might be forgotten, and revenge might no longer be 
thought of. 
Then N oël N egabamat arose; he laid down in the 
middle of the square five great Elk skins. "There," 
he said to the Iroquois, " is something wherewith to 
.cover your feet and your legs, lest you might hurt 
them on your return journey, if any stone should 
remain in the road [99] that you have made smooth." 
He also gave them five others to serve as shrouds for 
those who had been killed in the battle, and to allay 
the grief of their relatives and friends, who could 
not bear to have them left unburied. He said, more- 
over, that as he and his people at Sillery were invited 
in heart with their elder brother Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor, they gave but one present with his. Finally 
three shots were fired from the cannon, to drive 
away the foul air of war, and to rejoice at the happy 
advent of peace. 
Some time after this meeting, an ill-disposed Hu. 
ron accosted the Iroquois Captain who had always 
been the agent and spokesman, and sought to inspire 
him with distrust of the French. But the Captain 
nobly replied to him in these terms: "My face is 
painted and daubed on one side, while the other is 
quite clean. I do not see very clearly on the side 
that is daubed over; on the other side my sight is 
good. The painted side is toward the Hurons, and 
I see nothing; the clean side is turned toward the 
French, and I see clearly, as in broad daylight." 
Having said this he remained silent; and that evil- 
minded man was covered with confusion. 


270 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

expofé à la mort, fi bien que ie vous fuis redeuable de 
ce que ie fuis encor viuant. Ie vous remercie de ce 
que ie voy encore Ie Soleil, ie vous remercie de ce 
que vous m'auez bien receu, ie vous remercie de ce 
que vous m'auez bien traitté, ie vous remercie de 
toutes les bonnes conc1ufions que vous auez prifes, 
toutes vos paroles nous font extremement agreables, 
ie vous remercie de vos prefens, vous nous auez 
couuers depuis les pieds iufques à la tefte, il ne nous 
reftoit plus que la bouche de libre, & vous l'auez 
rem ply d'vn beau calumet, & refioüye de la faueur 
d'vne herbe qui nous eft tres-douce, ie vous dis done 
adieu, non pour long-temps; car vous aurez bien-toft 
de nos nouue11es: quand nous ferions naufrage dans 
les eaux, quand nous ferions bien fubmergez, ie [101] 
ne croy pas que les Elemens ne rendiíIent quelque 
témoignage à nos compatriotes de vos bien-faits: & 
ie m'aíIeure que quelque bon genie nous a deuancé, 
& que nos compatriotes ref fen tent defia vn auant- 
gouft des bonnes nouuelles que nous leur a110ns 
porter. 
Le Samedy quinziéme ils partirent des trois Riui- 
eres, 
1onfieur Ie Gouuerneur leur donna deux ieunes 
garçons François, tant pour les aider à reconduire 
leurs canots, & leurs pre fens que pour tefmoigner la 
confiance qutil auoit en ces peuples. 
Le Capitaine Kiotfaeton voyant tous fes gens 
embarquez eí1eua fa voix, & dit aux François & aux 
Sauuages qui eftoient fur les riues du grand fleuue. 
Adieu mes freres, ie fuis de vos parens, ie m' en vay 
rapporter de bonnes nouuelles en noftre pays, puis 
fe retournant vers 110nfieur Ie Gouuerneur, Onontio 
ton nom fera grand par toute la terre, ie ne penfois 


1642 -45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

271 

[IIO i.e., 100] Toward evening, Reverend Father 
Vimont the Superior of the :Mission caused the 
Iroquois to be brought to our house, where he pre- 
sented to them some small gifts; he gave them some 
petun, or tobacco, and to each of them a handsome 
calumet or pipe wherewith to smoke it. Kiotsaeton 
thanked him very wittily: "When I left my coun- 
try, I gave up my life and exposed myself to death, 
so that I am indebted to you for being still alive. I 
thank you that I still see the Sun; I thank you for 
having received me well; I thank you for having 
treated me well. I thank you for all the good con- 
clusions to which you have come; all your words are 
very agreeable to us. I thank you for your presents; 
you have covered us from our feet to our heads. 
Only our mouth remained free and you have filled it 
with a fine calumet and have gladdened it with the 
flavor of a plant that is very pleasing to us. I there- 
fore bid you adieu, but not for long; you will soon 
hear from us. Even if we are wrecked in the 
waters, even if we are quite submerged, I [101] think 
that the Elements will in some way bear witness to 
our countrymen of your kind deeds; and I am con- 
vinced that some good genius has gone before us, 
and that our countrymen already have a foretaste of 
the good news that we are going to bring them. " 
On Saturday, the fifteenth, they started from three 
Rivers. Monsieur the Governor gave them two 
young French lads, both to help them to take back 
their canoes and their presents, and to manifest the 
confidence that he had in those people. 
\Vhen the Captain Kiotsaeton saw that his people 
had embarked, he raised his voice, and said to the 
French and to the Savages who were 0:1 the banks of 


272 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

pas reporter ma tefte que i'auois hazardée ie ne pen- 
fois pas qu'elle deuft refortir de vos portes, & ie m'en 
retourne chargé d'honneur, de prefens, & de bien- 
veillance. :Mes freres parlant aux Sauuages, obeyffez 
[102] à Onontio & aux François, ils ont Ie cæur & les 
penfées fort bonnes, tenez-vous bien vnys auec eux 
& vous accommodez à leurs façons de faire, vous 
aurez bien-toft de nos nouuelles. Les Sauuages ref- 
pondirent par vne gentile falue d'arquebufades, & Ie 
Fort tira vn coup de canon, ainfi fe termina leur Am- 
baíIade. Dieu faíIe reüffir Ie tout pour fa plus grande 
gloire. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

273 

the great river: "Adieu my brothers; I am one of 
your relatives. I am going to carry back good news 
to our country." Then, turning to Monsieur the 
Governor, "Onontio, thy name shall be great 
throughout the earth; I did not think that I would 
take back my head that I had risked,- I did not 
think that it would go forth from your doors; and I 
am going back loaded with honor, with gifts, and 
with kindness. My brothers, ' , speaking to the 
Savages, "obey [102] Onontio and the French. 
Their hearts and their thoughts are good; remain 
united with them and accommodate yourselves to 
their customs. You will soon have news from us." 
The Savages replied by a fine salvo of musketry, 
and the Fort fired a cannon shot. Thus ended their 
Embassy. May God cause all this to succeed for his 
greater glory. 


274 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

CHAPITRE X. 

SUlTTE DU TRAlTTÉ DE LA PAlX. 

I L eftoit neceffaire pour conclure & pour affeurer la 
paix dans ce nouueau monde que les deputez 
des Iroquois, les deputez des Hurons & les prin- 
cipaux Capitaines de trois ou quatre peuples Alguon- 
quins fe trouuaffent tous enfemble, en vn mefme 
endroit auec Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur, & que toutes ces 
Nations qui parlent de trois ou quatre langues diffe- 
rentes qui ont des humeurs fi eíloignez les vns des 
autres, & qui depuis tant d'années, [103] fe mangent, 
fe deuorent & fe bruílent comme des enragez, fiffent 
vne aétion de tres-grande fageffe, & que tant de bar- 
bares inhumains trouuaffent de la douceur pour s'ac- 
corder, bref, il faUoit pour mettre tout dans l'affeu- 
ranee que les vns allaffent vifiter les autres dans leur 
propre pays, tout cela fembloit impoffible à l'indu- 
ftrie humaine: mais quand Dieu fe meíle d'vne affaire 
il ne peut mãquer de conduite. Les ames faintes & 
efpurées qui fouftiennent ces pauures peuples par 
leurs prieres & par leurs yæux ont faits ce grand 
ouurage. Iamais toutes ces Nations qui ont de cou- 
flume de nous venir voir tous les ans, n'eftoient def- 
cendus fi tard, & fi elles fuffent arriuées plutoft elles 
n'auroient pû remonter les Ambaffadeurs Iroquois 
qui tenoient Ie næud de l'affaire entre les mains n'y 
eftans pas. N ous eftions tous les iours dans l'attente, 
philofophans de loin fur les fujets qui pouuoient 


1642- 4,'>] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

275 

CHAPTER X. 

CONTINUATION OF THE TREATY OF PEACE. 

T o conclude and to secure peace in this new world, 
it was necessary that the delegates of the Iro- 
quois, those of the Hurons, and the principal 
Captains of three or four Alguonquin tribes, should 
meet all together at some place with Monsieur the 
Governor; in order, too, that all these Nations,- 
who speak three or four different languages, whose 
dispositions are so distinct one from another, and 
who for so many years [103] have been eating, 
devouring, and burning each other like madmen,- 
should perform an act of the utmost wisdom, and 
that so many inhuman barbarians should find enough 
gentleness to agree together. In a word, to make 
everything sure, it was necessary that each should 
visit the others in their own country. All this 
seemed impossible to human skill. But, when God 
interposes in a matter, it cannot lack direction. The 
holy and pure souls who support these poor peoples 
by their prayers and by their vows have accomplished 
that great work. Never had all these Nations who 
are accustomed to come and see us every year, 
come down so late; and, if they had arrived sooner, 
they could not have gone up again,- for the Iroquois 
Ambassadors, who held the knot of this matter in 
their hands, were not here. We expected them 
every day, speculating from afar upon the reasons 
that could have caused so extraordinary a delay. 


276 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

caufer vn retardement fi extraordinaire. II n' efioit 
defcendu pas vn feu I canot, ny des Alguonquins, ny 
des Nipifi[ri]niens, ny des Hurons pour nous donner 
quelque connoiffance de ce qui fe paffoit en ce pays 
plus haut, chacun en [104] parloit felon fon genie & 
conformement à fon inclination. Les vns difoient 
que tous les François qui efioient montez au pays des 
Hurons auec nos Peres efioient maffacrez, que Ie 
Demon auoit parlé à quelques Sauuages, & par con- 
fequent qu'il ne faUoit plus attendre de nouueUes de 
ces contrées-Ià, d'autres plus enclins à prendre de 
bonnes penfées conieéturoient que ces peuples de- 
uoient venir en grand nombre, & qu'il faUoit beau- 
coup de temps pour les affembler. Cependant la fai- 
fon fe paffoit, & nos doutes fe vouloient changer en 
defefpoir, quand tout à coup on vit paroifire fur Ie 
fleuue de fainét Laurens foixante canots de Hurons 
chargez de François & de Sau uages & de pelteries. Le 
Pere Hierofme LaUemant attendu & fouhaitté depuis 
vne année toute entiere, & dauantage efioit dans 
cette belle Compagnie, qui refioüyt infiniment tous 
ceux qui fouhaittent Ie bon-heur du pays, & Ie falut 
de ces peuples. Les foldats François que la Reyne 
auoit enuoyez l'année paffée retournoient en bonne 
fanté, plus chargez de vertu & de connoiffance des 
veritez Chrefiiennes qu'ils n'en auoient embarquez 
[105] au fortir de la France. Les principaux Capi- 
taines des Hurons ramenoient l'vn des deux Iroquois 
qu'ils auoient pris prifonniers l'année d'auparauant 
au pres de Richelieu, auec deffein de Ie prefenter à 
Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur, comme ils ont fait, ainfi que 
nous allons voir. Ces Capitaines auoient ordre de 
tout leur pays de traitter plainement de la paix, & 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF .1644-45 

277 

Not a single canoe had come down, whether from the 
Alguonquins, the Nipisiriniens, or the Hurons, to 
bring us any news of what was going on in the upper 
country. Each one [104] spoke of it according to his 
own idea and in accordance with his own inclination. 
Some said that all the French who had gone up to 
the Huron country with our Fathers had been massa- 
cred; that the Devil had spoken to some Savages, 
and that consequently we need not expect any news 
from those countries. Others, who were more in- 
clined to take a favorable view of the matter, con- 
jectured that these tribes would come down in great 
numbers, and that it required a great deal of time to 
assemble them. 11eanwhile, the season was passing 
away, and our doubts were about to change to 
despair, when all of a sudden we saw upon the river 
saint Lawrence sixty Huron canoes, laden with 
French, with Savages, and with furs. Father 
Hierosme Lallemant - whose arrival had been ex- 
pected and desired for a whole year and more - was 
in this fine Company, which greatly rejoiced all who 
had at heart the welfare of the country and the salva- 
tion of these peoples. The French soldiers whom 
the Queen had sent out last year came back in good 
health, better supplied with virtue and with the 
knowledge of Christian truths than when they had 
embarked [IDS] to leave France. The principal 
Captains of the Hurons brought back one of the two 
Iroquois whom they had taken prisoners in the 
previous year, near Richelieu, with the intention of 
presenting him to Monsieur the Governor; this 
they did, as we shall see. These Captains had 
orders from the whole of their country to enter into 
full negotiations for peace! and to follow the judg- 


278 

LES RELA TI01VS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

de fuiure les penfées d'Onontio. A mefme temps 
les Alguonquins des Nations plus hautes arriuerent; 
mais fi à propos qu' on eut dit que quelque puiffance 
fuperieure eut enuoyé des ouuriers pour les faire 
paroiftre à point nommé. Tout cecy fe paffoit aux 
trois Riuieres, où ils ne manquoit plus que les Iro- 
quois qui auoient donné paroUe de fe trouuer dans 
peu de temps, s'ils euffent retardé quelques iours ce 
grand nombre de Sauuages, Attikamegues, 11onta- 
gnais, Alguonquins de l'Ifle de la Nation d'Iroquet, 
& autres Hurons fe fuffent bien-toft defilez & diffipez 
fans efperance de les pouuoir r'aUier de long-temps. 
Mais Dieu prenoit plaifir de les faire venir tous les 
vns apres les autres au moment Ie plus à propos qu'on 
eut pû choifir. Les :Montagnais s'y [106] trouuerent 
fur la fin du mois d' Aouft, quelques Alguonquins y 
arriuerent quelque temps apres. Les Hurons yabor- 
derent Ie dixiéme Septembre, les Sauuages de rIfle 
& d'autres nations y defcendirent deux ou trois iours 
auparauant. l\lonfieur Ie Gouuerneur y monta Ie 
douziéme du mefme moys, on n'attendoit plus que 
les deputez des Iroquois. Enfin Ie quinziéme il parut 
vn canot qui portoit cinq hommes de cette Nation, 
lefquels nous affeurerent que les prefens d'Onontio 
auoient efté portez en leur pays pour la confirmatiõ 
de la paix, & qu'en peu de iours on verroit quelques 
Ambaffadeurs deleguez pour luy porter cette parole. 
En effet Ie dix-feptiéme du mefme mois nous en 
vifmes quatre, l'vn defquels haranguant fur Ie bord 
du fleuue felon leur couftume, donna bien de la ioye 
à to us les François, & à plus de quatre cent Sauuages 
de diuerfes nations qui fe trouuerent pour lors aux 
trois Riuieres. l\lonfieur Ie Gouuerneur les ayant 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

279 

ment of Onontio. At the same time, the Alguon- 
quins of the upper Tribes arrived, and so opportunely 
that one would have said that some higher power had 
sent workmen to make them appear at an appointed 
spot. All this happened at three Rivers, where only 
the Iroquois were wanting, who had given their word 
that they would be there in a short time. Had they 
delayed but a few days, this great concourse of 
Savages - Attikamegues, Montagnais, Island AI- 
guonquins and those of the Iroquet Tribe, and others, 
H urODS - would soon have been dispersed and 
scattered, without any hope that we could again 
assemble them together for a long time. But God 
took pleasure in making them come, one after 
another, at the most opportune time that could have 
been chosen. The Montagnais [106J arrived there 
about the end of August; some Alguonquins came 
shortly afterward. The Hurons landed on the tenth 
of September; the Island Savages and other tribes 
came down two or three days before. Monsieur the 
Governor came up on the twelfth of the same month. 
They waited only for the Iroquois delegates. Fi- 
nally, on the fifteenth, a canoe appeared, bearing five 
men of that Nation, who assured us that the presents 
of Onontio had been taken to their country for the 
confirmation of the peace, and that in a few days we 
should see some Ambassadors delegated to bring 
him word to that effect. In fact, on the seventeenth 
of the same month, we saw four of them,-- one of 
whom delivered a harangue on the bank of the river, 
according to their custom,- causing joy to all the 
French and to more than four hundred Savages of 
various tribes who were then at three Rivers. 
:i\Ionsieur the Governor perceived them from afar, 


280 

LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

apperceus de loin enuoya au deuant vne efcoüade de 
foldats pour empefcher Ie defordre, les foldats s'e- 
ftans mis en haye les Iroquois paíIerent au trauers fans 
eftre oppreíIez d'vn grand nombre [107] de perfonnes 
qui les regardoient de tous coftez, apres s'eftre 
rafraifchis Ie refte de la iournée on tint confeil Ie 
lendemain en la façon que ie l'ay marqué au Cha- 
pitre precedent. Ie n'ay que faire de reïterer fi 
fouuent que les paroles d'importance en ce pays- 
cr font des prefens, fuffit de dire que celuy qui 
harangue ne faifant point de prefens, parle en ces 
termes. 
Ie n'ay point de voix, ne m'efcoutez pas ie ne parle 
point, ie n'ay en main qu'vn auiron pour vous rame- 
ner vn François, qui a dans fa bouche la parole de 
tout noftre pays. II parloit du François dont i'ay 
fait mention cy-deíIus, qui auoit efté pris auec Ie 
Pere Ie Iogues, auquel les Iroquois auoient confié 
leurs prefens, c'eft à dire leurs parolles. Ce Fran- 
çois tira dix-huit prefens to us compofez de porcelaine 
aufquels il donna cette explication. 
Le premier difoit qu'Onontio auoit vne voix de 
tonnerre, qu'il fe faifoit entendre par tout, & qu'au 
bruit de fa parole tout Ie pays des Iroquois auoit ietté 
les armes & les haches, mais fi loin au delà du Ciel, 
qu'il n'y auoit plus de bras au monde aíIez longs 
pour les retirer de là. 
[108] Le fecond difoit que les armes eftans hors de 
la veuë des hommes qu'il fe faUoit vifiter fans crainte 
ioüiíIans de la douceur de la paix. 
Au troifiéme prefent, voilà dit-il, reprefentans les 
Iroquois, vne natte ou vn lit pour vous coucher molle- 
ment quand vous viendrez en noftre pays; car eftans 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

281 

and sent a squad of soldiers to meet them and to 
prevent disorder. The soldiers formed in two lines 
and the Iroquois passed through them without being 
impeded by a large number [107] of persons who 
gazed at them on all sides. They rested for the 
remainder of the day, and a council was held on the 
morrow in the same manner that I have related in 
the previous Chapter. It is needless for me to repeat 
so often that words of importance in this country are 
presents. Suffice it to say that, as he who harangued 
gave no presents, he spoke in these terms: 
" I have no voice; do not listen to me. I speak 
not; I hold in my hand only a paddle to bring you 
back a Frenchman in whose mouth is the message 
from all our country." He spoke of the Frenchman 
whom I have mentioned above, who had been taken 
prisoner with Father Ie Jogues, to whom the Iroquois 
had confided their presents,- that is to say, their 
words. This Frenchman drew out eighteen presents, 
all consisting of porcelain beads, of which he gave 
this explanation: 
The first said that Onontio had a voice of thunder, 
that he made himself heard everywhere, and that at 
the sound of his words the whole Iroquois country 
had thrown away their weapons and their hatchets,- 
but so far beyond the Sky that there were no arms in 
the world long enough to draw them back from there. 
[108] The second said that, as the arms were 
beyond the sight of men, they ought to visit each 
other without fear while they enjoyed the sweets of 
peace. 
At the third present, ., Here," he said, represent- 
ing the Iroquois, " is a mat or bed on which you can 
lie softly when you come to our country; for, as we 


282 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. '27 

freres nous ferions confus fi nous ne vous traittions 
pas felon vos merites. 
Au 4. ce n'efi pas affez d'auoir vn bon lit, Ies nuits 
font froides, voila dequoy allumer vn bon feu & 
vous tenir chaudement, marqués en paffant que les 
Sauuages couchent ordinairement prés du feu. 
Au fixiéme [sc. cinquiéme], que feruiroit-il d'auoir 
vn bon lit, & d'efire deffus couchez chaudement fi 
vous n' eftiez bien nourris; ce pre fen t vous affeure 
qu'on vous fera feftin, & que vous trouuerez Ie 
pot au feu à voftre arriuée, i1 parloit toufiours aux 
François. 
Au fixiéme, voila vn peu d'onguent pour guerir les 
bleffures que les François fe font faits aux pieds, 
allans dans leurs pays heurtans contre des pierres ou 
contre des racines qu'on y rencontre affez fouuent. 
[109] Au 7. i1 dit que depuis Ie lieu où on quitte 
l'eau pour prendre terre, il y auoit bien trente lieuës 
de chemin iufques en leurs bourgades, & qu'il falloit 
porter tout Ie bagage à pied, que les François ayans 
eu de la peine, ce prefent adouciffoit vn petit leurs 
efpaules déchirées par la pefanteur des paquets. 
Au 8. voila pour donner affeurance aux François 
que s'ils fe veulent marier en leurs pays qu'ils y 
trouueront des femmes comIne eftans leurs amis & 
alliez. 
Au 9. comme les Alguonquins auoient dit au pre- 
mier voyage des Iroquois, que les principaux de leur 
Nation eftant abfens ils ne pouuoient donner aucune 
parole affeurée. Ce prefent fut fait afin qu'ils parlaf- 
fent tous, & qu'ils ne s'excufaffent point les vns fur 
les autres; mais qu'ils dec1araffent nettement leurs 
pref ens. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

283 

are brothers, we would be ashamed if we did not 
treat you according to your deserts. " 
At the 4th, " It is not enough to have a good bed; 
the nights are cold; here is something with which 
to light a good fire, and to keep yourselves warm." 
Observe, in passing, that the Savages usually sleep 
close to the fire. 
At the fifth, " Of what use would it be to have a 
good bed and to lie warmly covered on it if you were 
not well fed? This present assures you that you will 
be feasted there, and will find the pot boiling on your 
arrivaL" He spoke always to the French. 
At the sixth, " Here is a little ointment to heal 
the wounds which have been inflicted on the feet of 
the French, while they walked in their country, by 
stumbling against the stones or the roots that are 
very often found there." 
[109] At the 7th, he said that, from the place 
where they leave the water to take to the land, there 
was a distance of fully thirty leagues to be gone 
over before reaching their villages, and that all the 
baggage had to be carried on foot; that, as the 
French had had some difficulty, this present would 
slightly relieve their shoulders that were chafed by 
the weight of their packs. 
At the 8th, ., This is to assure the French that, if 
they wish to marry in this country, they will find 
wives here, since we are their friends and allies." 
At the 9th, as the Alguonquins had stated, at the 
first journey of the Iroquois, that they could not say 
anything positive during the absence of the chief 
men of their Nation, this present was given that all 
might speak, and that they might not cast the blame 


284 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL 27 

Au 10. voila dit celuy qui les expliquoit pour faire 
parler les Hurons, & pour tirer leurs fentimens du 
fond de leurs cæurs. 
L' onziéme prefent difoit que les principaux. Iro- 
quois ne faifoient rien que petuner en leurs pays, 
qu'ils auoient toufiours Ie calumet en la bouche. Ils 
vouloient dire qu'ils attendoient la parole des AI- 
guonquins [I 10J & des Hurons. 
Au 12. ils difoient que les ames de leurs parens 
tuez en guerre s'eftoient fi profondement retirez dans 
Ie centre de la terre, que iamais plus ils n'y pour- 
roient penfer, c'eft à dire qu'ils auoient effacé la 
vengeance de leur cæur. 
Au 13. ils ont obeï à la voix de Monfieur Ie Gouuer- 
neur qui auoit ordonné qu'on fufpendit les armes & 
qu' on each aft les haches, c' eft pourquoy ils ont paffé 
tout l' efté en dances & en feftins fans penfer à la 
guerre. 
Au 14. Ils veullent fçauoir au plutoft s'ils conti- 
nueront leurs dances, & par confequent ils defirent 
que les Alguonquins & les Hurons fe haftent de par- 
ler, c' eft à dire de porter des prefens en leur pays 
s'ils veulent la paix. 
Le 15. eftoit pour adoucir les fatigues des François 
qui auoient efté en leur pays, lefquels faifans dili- 
gence de rapporter à Onontio des nouuelles des Iro- 
quois, auoient pris beaucoup de peine. 
Le 16. prioit Onontio de faire retourner dans Ie 
pays des Iroquois vne femme de leur pays, qui auoit 
efté prife en guerre par les Alguonquins, & donnée 
aux [I I I] François. Cette femme fut menée en 
France il y a quelques années, & apres auoir efté 
inftruite & baptifée, elle eft morte au Conuent des 


1642-45J 

Rr.""LA TION OF I644-45 

285 

from one to the other, but clearly declare their 
presents. 
At the loth, "This," said he who explained 
them, "is to make the Hurons speak, and to draw 
their sentiments from the depth of their hearts." 
The eleventh present said that the Iroquois chiefs 
did nothing but smoke in their country, and that 
their calumets were always in their mouths. They 
wished to say that they awaited the word of the 
Alguonquins [110] and of the Hurons. 
At the 12th, they said that the souls of their rela- 
tives who had been killed in war had withdrawn so 
far into the center of the earth that they could never 
think of them again,- that is to say, that they had 
wiped out vengeance from their hearts. 
At the 13th, they obeyed the voice of Monsieur 
the Governor, who had ordered that hostilities be 
suspended, and that the hatchets be hidden. For 
that reason, they had passed the summer in dancing 
and feasting, without thinking of war. 
At the 14th, they wished to know as soon as possible 
if they should continue their dances; and, conse- 
quently, they desired that the Alguonquins and the 
Hurons should hasten to speak,-that is to say, to 
carry presents to their country,- if they wished for 
peace. 
The 15th was to lessen the fatigues of the French 
who had been in their country, who had used much 
diligence and had taken much trouble to bring news 
from the Iroquois to Onontio. 
The 16th begged Onontio to have a woman of the 
Iroquois country sent back to it, who had been taken 
in war by the Alguonquins and given to the [I I I] 
French. This woman was taken to France some 


286 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Carmelites de Paris, auec de grandes marques de fon 
falut, comme il a efié remarqué és Relations prece- 
dentes. 
Le 17. prioit Onontio de fonder les Hurons & les 
Alguonquins, & de dire nettement qu'elle efioit leur 
penfée touchant la paix ou la guerre. 
Le 18. efioit vn excufe de ce qu'ils n'auoient pas 
ramené vn petit François qu'ils tiennent encor en leur 
pays. Il n'efi point captif, difoit-il, il reuiendra 
auec ceux qui porteront la parole des Alguonquins & 
des Hurons. 
Ces pre fens faits, Ie plus remarquable des Iroquois 
fe leua, & tirant de fon fac quelques pre fens de porce- 
laine, parla en ces termes. 
Au premier prefent qu'il tenoit en la main, & qu'il 
monfiroit à toute l'affemblée, fe promenant par la 
place, dit que fon pays efioit plein de Hurons & de 
femmes Alguonquines (car pour les hommes Alguon- 
quins ils ne leur donnoient iamais la vie) qu'au refie 
ces hommes & ces [112] femmes efioient affis fur des 
bufches ou des pieds de bois hors de leurs bour- 
gades, c'efi à dire, qu'ils n'efioient point retenus & 
qu'ils efioient tous prefis de retourner en leur pays, 
ainfi que Ie bois fee qui n'a point de racines fur 
lequel ils font allis, peut efire facilement tranfporté. 
Au 2. prefent i1 dit que la petite Huronne appellée 
Therefe, qui auoit efié prife fort ant du Seminaire 
des Vrfulines comme on la ramenoit en fon pays 
efioit toute prefie d'efire deliurée, & que fi les Hurons 
entroient dans la paix, qu'elle s'en retourneroit auec 
eux fi elle vouloit, finon ql1 'ils la retiendrolent comme 
vn enfant nourrie de la main des François, pour 
preparer leur manger quand ils iroient en leur pays. 


1642-45] 

RELA TIOiV OF I644-45 

287 

years ago and t after having been instructed and bap- 
tized, she died at the Convent of the Carmelites of 
Paris with evident marks of salvation, as has been 
stated in the previous Relations. 
The 17th begged Onontio to sound the Hurons 
and Alguonquins, and get them to say clearly what 
their opinion was respecting peace or war. 
The 18th was an excuse for not having brought 
back a little Frenchman whom they still detain in 
their country. "He is not a prisoner t ' t he said, " he 
will return with those who shall bear the word of the 
Alguonquins and Hurons. tO 
When these presents had been made, the chief man 
among the Iroquois arose, and, drawing from his 
pouch some presents of porcelain beads, he spoke in 
these terms: 
At the first present,- which he held in his hands, 
and showed to the whole assembly, while he walked 
about the square t - he said that his country was full 
of Hurons and of Alguonquin women (for, as regards 
the Alguonquin men, they never spared their lives); 
that, however, those men and [112] women were 
seated on logs or on stumps of trees outside of their 
villages,-that is to say, they were not detained, and 
were all ready to return to their country like the 
dried trees on which they sat, which have no roots 
and can easily be removed. 
At the 2nd present, he said that the little Huron 
girl called Therese - who had been captured just 
after she had left the Seminary of the U rsulines, 
while she was being taken to her own country-was 
quite ready to be delivered up; and that, if the 
Hurons joined in the peace, she would return with 
them, if she wished; if not, that they would keep 


288 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

(VOL. 27 

Le 3. porto it que to us les prefens que Mr Ie Gou- 
uerneur auoit fait aux premiers Ambaffadeurs auoient 
efté portez felon fon ordre à toutes les Nations qui 
leur font alliées. Illes nomma toutes. 
Au 4. II dit qu'Onontio auoit enfanté Ononjote, 
c' eft vne bourgade qui leur eft alliée, mais q u' eftãt 
encore enfãt il n'auoit pû parler, que fi M. Ie Gou- 
uerneur en auoit foin il deuiendroit grãd & qu'il par- 
leroit. [I 13] II vouloit dire, que Ie prefent fait à 
cette bourgade eftoit petit pour traiter vne paix 
d'importance, & qu'ille faUoit aggrandir pour auoir 
leur parole. Ce difcours finy, l'Hiroquois fe mit à 
chanter & à danfer, il prit vn François d'vn cofté, vn 
Algonquin & vn Huron de l'autre, & fe tenant tous 
liez auec les bras, ils danfoient à la cadence, & chan- 
toient d'vne voix forte vne chanfon de paix, qu'ils 
pouffoient du fond de leur eftomach. 
Apres cette danfe vn Capitaine Huron, nommé 
lean Baptifte Atironta, bon Chreftien, fe leua & ha- 
rangua fort & ferme. C'en eft fait, dit-il, nous fommes 
freres, la conc1ufion eft prife, nous voila tous parens, 
Hiroquois, Hurons, Algonquins & François. nous ne 
fommes plus qu'vne mefme chofe. N e trahy per- 
fonne, dit-il à l'Hiroquois, pour nous autres fçachez 
que nous auons Ie cæur droit. Ie t'entend, refpon- 
dit l' Hiroquois, ta parole eft bonnet tu me trouueras 
veritable. Et puis eíleuant Ie dernier prefent il 
s'efcria, tout Ie pais qui nous fepare eft remply 
d'Ours, de Cerfs, d'Elans de Caftors, & de quantité 
d'autres beftes, pour moy ie fuis aueugle, ie chaffe à 
1'auenture, quand i'ay tué [114] vn Caftor, ie penfe 
auoir fait vne grande prife: mais vous parlant des 
Algonquins, qui auez des yeux c1air-voyans, vous ne 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

289 

her as a child brought up by the hand of the 
French, in order to prepare their food when they 
went to their own country. 
The 3rd meant that all the gifts that Monsieur the 
Governor had given to the first Ambassadors had been 
carried, according to his orders, to all the Tribes 
who are allied to them. He named all these. 
At the 4th, he said that Onontio had given birth 
to Onon jote - this is a village that is allied to 
them - but that, as it was still only a child, it could 
not speak; 23 that, if Monsieur the Governor took care 
of it, it would grow and speak. [I 13] He meant that 
the present made to that village was a small one for 
negotiating an important peace, and that it must be 
increased, in order to get their promise. When this 
discourse was ended, the Hiroquois began to sing 
and to dance. He took a Frenchman on one side, 
an Algonquin and a Huron on the other; and, hold- 
ing one another by the arms, they danced in time, 
and sang in a loud voice a song of peace which they 
uttered from the depths of their chests. 
After this dance, a Huron Captain named Jean 
Baptiste Atironta, a good Christian, arose and har- 
angued loudly and resolutely. "It is done," he 
said; "we are brothers. The conclusion has been 
reached; now we all are relatives,- Hiroquois, 
Hurons, Algonquins, and French; we are now but 
one and the same people. Betray no one," he said 
to the Hiroquois. "As for us, know that we have 
sound hearts." "I hear thee," replied the Hiro- 
quois; "thy word is good; thou wilt find me true." 
Then, raising the last present, he exclaimed, "All 
the country that lies between us is full of Bears, of 
Deer, of Elk, of Beaver, and of numerous other 


290 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

faites que lancer l' efpée & voila la befie à bas. Ce 
prefent vous inuite à la chaffe, nous joüirons de 
vofire indufirie, nous ferons roftir les animaux dans 
vne mefme broche, & nous mangerons d'vn cofié, & 
vous de l'autre. 
Vn Algonquin repartit à cela: Ie ne puis plus par- 
ler, mon cæur a trop de joye, i'ay de grandes oreil- 
les, & tant de bons difcours y entrans à la foule me 
noyent de plaifir. II eft vray que ie ne fuis qu'vn 
enfant, cét [sc. c'efi] Onontio qui ales gran des 
paroles en bouche, c'efi Iuy qui fait la terre, & qui 
reüoüit tous les hommes. 
Pour conclufion de ce confeÍl Monfieur Ie Gouuer- 
neur fit remercier ces trois Nations des bonnes 
paroles qu'elles auoient données, les exhortans de 
tenir ferme dans leurs deffeins, & les affeurant qu'il 
leur feroit toufiours amy & parent fidel. 


1642-45] 

RELA TIOiV OF I644-45 

291 

animals. For my part, I am blind; I hunt at hap- 
hazard; when I have killed [114] a Beaver, I think 
that I have secured a great prize. But you," speak- 
ing of the Algonquins, "who are clear-sighted, you 
have but to throw a javelin, and the animal falls. 
This present invites you to hunt, we shall benefit by 
your skill; we shall roast the animals on the same 
spit, and we shall eat on one side, and you on the 
other.' , 
An Algonquin replied to this: "I can no longer 
speak; my heart is too full of joy. I have large 
ears and so many good words crowd in there that 
they drown me in pleasure. It is true that I am but 
a child. It is Onontio who has great words in his 
mouth; he it is who makes the earth, and who 
rejoices all men." 
At the conclusion of this council, Monsieur the 
Governor caused these three Nations to be thanked 
for the good words that they had given, exhorting 
them to remain firm in their purposes, and assuring 
them that he would always be their. friend and 
faithful relative. 


292 

LES RELA TIOiVS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 27 

[lIS] CHAPITRE XI. 

DE LA DERNIERE ASSEMBLÉE TENUË POUR LA PAIX. 

L E vingtiéme du mefme mois de Septembre, fut 
tenuë la derniere affemblée entre les François, 
les Algonquins qui comprennent plufieurs 
petites Nations, les Hurons & les Hiroquois. V oicy 
en peu de mots tout ce qui s'y paffa de plus remar- 
quable. 
Monfieur Ie Cheualier de Montmagny ayant receu 
tous les prefens dont il eft fait mention au Chapitre 
precedent, les fit diuifer en trois parts, s'accommo- 
dant aux coufiumes de ces peuples. Et apres auoir 
fait parler fes Truchemens, il en offrit vne partie 
aux Hurons, vne autre partie aux Algonquins, & la 
troifiéme fut pour les François. N ottez en paffant 
qu'il faUoit parler en quatre forte[s] de langues. en 
François, en Huron, en Algonquin, & en Hiroquois. 
On trouue icy des Interpretes de toutes ces langues. 
Ces prefens faits Monfieur [116] Ie Gouuerneur en 
fit deux autres aux Hiroquois, l'vn pour effuyer les 
larmes des parens de la femme Hiroquoife qu'ils 
auoient demandé, & qui eftoit morte en France; 
l'autre pour repofer fes os en fon pais, ou pour la 
faire reuiure, faifant porter fon nom à quelque autre 
femme. De plus il en fit encore deux autres 
aux Hurons & aux Algonquins, pour les inuiter 
de dire librement leurs penfées fur Ie deffein de la 
paix: car c'eftoit luy, à proprement parler qui en 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF I644-45 

293 

[llsJ CHAPTER XI. 

OF THE LAST MEETING HELD FOR THE PEACE. 

O N the twentieth of the same month of Sep- 
tember, the last meeting was held between 
the French, the Algonquins,- who comprise 
several petty Tribes,- the Hurons, and the Hiro- 
quois. Here, in a few words, are all the most 
remarkable things that occurred. 
When Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny had 
received all the presents mentioned in the foregoing 
Chapter, he had them divided into three portions, in 
accordance with the usages of these peoples; and, 
after having made his Interpreter speak, he offered 
one portion to the Hurons, another portion to the 
Algonquins, while the third was for the French. 
Observe, in passing, that it was necessary to speak in 
four different languages.,- in French, in Huron, in 
Algonquin, and in Hiroquois; we have here Inter- 
preters of all those languages. vVhen these gifts had 
been presented, lvlonsieur [I 16J the Governor gave 
two others to the Hiroquois,- one to wipe away the 
tears of the relatives of the Hiroquois woman whom 
they had asked for, and who had died in France; the 
other that her bones might be laid to rest in her own 
country, or that she might be brought back to life, 
by making some other woman bear her name. 
Moreover, he also gave two others to the Hurons 
and to the Algonquins, to invite them to express their 
thoughts freely with reference to the peace; for it 


294 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

eftoit l'autheur, & qui la procuroit à ces peuples. 
A cette parole vn Capitaine Huron s'éleua & dit, 
qu'auparauant que de refpondre à la voix d'Onontio, 
illuy vouloit faire prefent de la part de tout fon pais 
d'vn Hiroquois prifonnier qu'il auoit tefmoigné defi- 
rer dés l'année precedente: il prend done ce prifon- 
nier d'vne main, & de l'autre il tenoit vne branche de 
Porcelaine en bafton, & paffant au trauers de la 
place met ce pauure Hiroquois au pied de Monfieur 
Ie Gouuerneur, auec cette Porcelaine qui reprefentoit 
fon lien, marque de fa captiuité. 
Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur ayant agreé ce prifonnier, 
Ie fit conduire auffi-toft auec [II 7J fon lien de Porce- 
laine au quartier ou eftoient affis les Hiroquois, luy 
donnant la liberté, & Ie remettãt entre les mains de 
fes Compatriotes. Ce ieune foldat fit affez paroifire 
à fa mine qu'il prenoit grand plaifir de fe voir douce- 
ment conduit vers fon Capitaine, apres auoir efchap- 
pé Ie feu & la dent de fes ennemis, qui deuiennent 
fes amis. 
Cette ceremonie faite, Ie Capitaine Huron refpondit 
à la fommation de Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur par 
quatorze prefens qu'il fit aux Hiroquois, dont voicy 
l'explication. Ces pre fens eftoient compofez de 
peaux de Caftors, & de Porcelaine. 
Au premier, voila, dit-il. Ie lien du prifonnier qui 
s'efchappa de nos mains, l' Automne paffé. V ous 
fçaurez en paffant que les Hurons auoient pris trois 
Hiroquois auprés de Richelieu, qu'ils en auoient 
donné vn aux Algonquins, lequel fut mis par apres 
entre les mains de Mr Ie Gouuerneur. I1s menerent 
les deux autres dans leur pais. En chemin l'vn de ces 
deux prisõniers s'efchappa: mais Ie froid, la faim & 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

295 

was he, properly speaking, who was the author of it 
and who procured it for these peoples. 
At this speech, a Huron Captain arose and said 
that, before replying to the words of Onontio, he 
wished, on behalf of all his country, to make him a 
present of a Hiroquois prisoner whom he had ex- 
pressed a desire to have in the previous year. He 
therefore took this captive with one hand, and with 
the other he held a branch of Porcelain on a stick; 24 
and, walking across the square, he brought the poor 
Hiroquois to the feet of 
lonsieur the Governor, 
with this Porcelain, that represented his bonds, the 
mark of his captivity. 
Monsieur the Governor accepted the prisoner, and 
had him taken at once, with [117] his bond of Por- 
celain beads, to the quarter where the Hiroquois 
were seated,- giving him his liberty, and placing 
him in the hands of his Countrymen. This young 
warrior showed sufficiently by his countenance that 
he felt much pleasure at seeing himself gently led 
toward his Captain, after having escaped the fire and 
the teeth of his enemies, who had become his friends. 
This ceremony over, the Huron Captain replied to 
the summons of Monsieur the Governor by fourteen 
presents, which he gave to the Hiroquois, and of 
which the following is an explanation. These 
presents consisted of Beaver skins and Porcelain 
beads. 
At the first, " Here," said he, II are the bonds of 
the prisoner who escaped from our hands last 
Autumn." You must know, in passing, that the 
Hurons had taken three Hiroquois near Richelieu; 
that they had given one of them to the Algonquins, 
who was afterward handed over to Monsieur the 


296 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OLe 27 

la mifere Ie firent mourir dans les bois. 11 eftoit 
d'vne bourgade nommée Ononjoté, animée au der- 
nier poind contre les Hurons: [I 18] dautant que ces 
peuples dans vn combat exterminerent quafi tous les 
hommes de cette bourgade, laquelle fut contrainte 
d'enuoyer demander aux Hiroquois, nommez Agnier- 
ronons, auec lefquels nous auons fait la paix, des 
hommes pour fe marier aux filles & aux femmes qui 
efioiët refiées fans maris, afin que leur nation ne 
perit point. C'efi pourquoy les Hiroquois nomment 
cette bourgade leur Enfant/ Et pource que Monfieur 
Ie Gouuerneur leur a enuoyé des prefens, & fait la 
paix auec ceux qui les ont repeuplez, ils Ie nomlnent 
auffi Ie Pere de cette bourgade. Rentrons, s'il vous 
plaifi, en difcours. Ce Capitaine Huron offrit done 
les liens de ce prifonnier efchappé. pour marque qu'on 
ne l'auroit pas fait mourir, & qu'on auoit deffein de 
Ie mettre en liberté. 
Au fecond prefent, voila, dit-il. pour reporter les 
os de vofire enfant dans fon païs. C'efi la coufiume 
des Hurons de decharner les os de leurs gens, & de 
les porter auec ceux de leurs parens, en quelque 
quartier du monde qu'ils meurent. 
Au troifiéme, voicy Ie lieu qui raffemblera ces os, 
& qui vous les fera rap porter plus aifément: En vn 
mot, il les vouloit [119] confoler & effuyer leurs 
larmes à la façon des Barbares qui font des pre fens . 
aux parens de leurs amis trefpaffez. 
Au quatriéme pour marque que nous fommes amis, 
ce prefent fera vn chemin de vos bourgades dans les 
nofires. 
Le cinquiéme faifoit l'ouuerture des portes de 
leurs villages & de leur maifons. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

297 

Governor; and had taken the two others to their own 
country. One of these two captives escaped on the 
way, but he died in the woods of cold, hunger, and 
exposure. He belonged to a village called Ononjoté, 
that was angered to the last degree against the 
Hurons; [118] for that nation had, in a battle, exter- 
minated nearly all the men of that village, which 
was compelled to send to the Hiroquois- who are 
called Agnierronons, and with whom we have made 
the peace - for men to marry the girls, and the 
women who were left without husbands, so that their 
tribe might not become extinct. That is why the 
Hiroquois call that village their Child; and, because 
Monsieur the Governor had sent them presents, and 
made peace with those who had repeopled their 
village, they also called him its Father. Let us 
return to our subject, if you please. The Huron 
Captain therefore offered the bonds of the prisoner 
who had escaped, as a token that they would not 
have put him to death, and that they had intended 
to set him at liberty. 
At the second present, "This," said he, "is to 
carry back the bones of your child to his country." 
I t is the custom of the Hurons to remove the flesh 
from the bones of their people, and to place them 
with those of their relatives, in whatever quarter of 
the world they may die. 
At the third, " Here is the bond that will bind 
those bones together, and enable you to carry them 
more easily." In a word, he wished [119] to console 
them and to wipe away their tears, according to the 
fashion of the Barbarians, who give presents to the 
relatives of their deceased friends. 
At the fourth, he said, " This is a token that we 


298 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Le fixiéme les inuitoit d'aller vifiter quelques pri- 
fonniers Hiroquois que les Hurons tenoient en leur 
pays, c'eftoit leur demander qu'ils portaffent des 
pre fens pour les aller requerir en affeurance. 
Le feptiéme, comme les Hiroquois auoient dit dans 
l'affemblée precedente que Ononjoté eftoit leur en- 
fant, & l'enfant de Mr Ie Gouuerneur, & qu'il ne fça- 
uoit pas encore parler: Voila, dit ce Capitaine, pour 
luy faire vn berceau denotant que les Hurons defi- 
roient la paix auec cette bourgade. 
Le huiétiéme fut donné pour faire tomber toutes 
les armes & toutes les haches qui fe pourroient encor 
trouuer dans les mains des Iroquois. 
Le neufiéme pour arracher leur bouclier de deffus 
leur dos où ils Ie portent ordinairement l'auançant ou 
l'efloignant comme [120] ils veuUent dans Ie combat. 
Le dixiéme pour mettre bas leur Etendart de 
guerre. 
Le vnziéme pour arrefter Ie bruit de leurs arque- 
buzes. 
Le douziéme pour effacer la peinture de leur vifage, 
les Sauuages ont couftume quand ils vont en guerre 
de fe peindre de diuerfes couleurs & de s'huyler ou 
de fe greffer la tefte & Ie vifage/ Voila, dit-il, pour 
emporter les taches de voftre vifage & de vos yeux 
afin que Ie iour foit tout beau & tout ferain. 
Le treiziéme fut pour brifer la chaudiere dans la- 
queUe ils faifoient boüillir les Hurons qu'ils pou- 
uoient attraper en guerre pour les manger. 
Le quatorziéme demandoit qu' on preparaft vne 
natte c'eft à dire vn liét ou vn logis aux Hurons qui fe 
deuoient bien-toft tranfporter au pays des Hiroquois. 
Tous ces prefens, adjoufta-il, ne font rien, nous 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF L614-45 

299 

are friends; this present will make a road from your 
villages to ours." 
The fifth opened the gates of their villages and the 
doors of their houses. 
The sixth invited them to go and see some Hiro- 
quois prisoners whom the Hurons detained in their 
country. This was asking them to bring presents so 
as to go and claim them in safety. 
At the seventh,- as the Hiroquois had said at the 
previous assembly that Ononjoté was their child 
and the child of :Monsieur the Governor and that it 
could not yet speak,-" Here," said the Captain, 
" is something to make a cradle for it," meaning 
that the Hurons wished for peace with that village. 
The eighth was given to cause all the weapons and 
all the hatchets that might still be in the hands of 
the Iroquois, to drop. 
The ninth was to snatch their shields from their 
backs, where they generally carry them, moving 
them backward and forward as [120 ] they please in 
battle. 
The tenth was to lower their war Standard. 
The eleventh, to stop the reports of their arque- 
buses. 
The twelfth, to wash away the paint from their 
faces. These Savages are accustomed, when they 
go to war, to paint themselves in various colors, and 
to oil or grease their heads and faces. "Here, " 
said he, "is something to remove the stains from 
your faces and your eyes, so that the day may be 
quite fine and serene." 
The thirteenth was to break the kettle in which 
they boiled the Hurons whom they took in war, in 
order to eat them. 


300 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

en auons bien d'autres dans nofire pays qui vous 
attendent. 
Les Hurons ayans refpondu à la demande de :Mon- 
fieur Ie Gouuerneur, & témoigné par tous ces prefens 
qu'ils fouhaitoient la paix, vn Algonquin fe leua & 
fit [12 I] quelques prefens, dont voicy la fignification. 
Au premier iettant vn paquet de Cafiors, voila 
pour me faire connoifire, & de queUe nation ie fuis, 
moy qui demeure dans des maifons volantes bafiies 
de petites efcorces, c'efi ainfi qu'ils difiinguent les 
Algonquins Errans d'auec les Hurõs fedentaires. 
Au deuxiéme, ce prefent arrefiera vos plaintes, i1 
efiouffera vos reffentimès & fera difparoifire Ie fang 
refpandu dans nos riuieres & dans les voftres des 
Algonquins & des Hiroquois. 
Ce troifiéme prefent nous donnera libre entrée dans 
vos maifons ayans brifé les portes de vos bourgades. 
Le quatriéme, voila pour petuner les vns auec 
les autres Hiroquois & Algõquins dans vne mefme 
pipe, comme font les amis qui prennent du tabac par 
enfemble. 
Le cinquiéme nous fera nauiger dans vn mefme 
vaiffeau, ou dans vn mefme canot, en forte que n'e- 
fiant plus qu'vn il ne faudra plus qu'vne méme bour- 
gade, vne mefme maifon, vn mefme Calumet & vn 
mefme canot. Le refie de nos paroles ou de nos 
prefens fera porté en vofire pays, voila comme i1 finit 
fon difcours. 
[122] Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur fit parler en fuite 
les interpretes, offrant vn prefent qui donnoit affeu- 
ranee aux Hiroquois qu'il tiendroit la main que ces 
deux grandes nations tinfent leur paroles. 
II fit encor vn autre prefent pour efire porté dans la 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF 1644-45 

301 

The fourteenth asked that a mat - that is to say, a 
bed or a lodging - be prepared for the Hurons who 
would soon go to the Hiroquois country. 
"All these presents," he added, " are nothing; we 
have many others in our country, which await you." 
"\Vhen the Hurons had replied to the demand of 
Monsieur the Governor, and had manifested by all 
these presents that they desired peace, an Algonquin 
arose and gave [12 I] some presents, of which the 
following is the meaning: 
At the first, he threw down a bundle of Beaver 
skins. "This is to show who I am, and to what 
nation I belong,- I who live in traveling houses built 
of small pieces of bark." Thus they distinguish the 
"\Vandering Algonquins from the Hurons, who are 
sedentary. 
At the second, " This present will stop your com- 
plaints; it will subdue your anger, and will cause our 
rivers and yours to wash away the blood that has 
been shed by Algonquins and by Hiroquois." 
" This third present will give us free entrance to 
your houses, after breaking down the gates of your 
villages. " 
At the fourth, " Here is something wherewith to 
smoke with one another, both Hiroquois and Algon- 
quins, in the same pipe, as friends do who use 
to bacco together. " 
" The fifth will make us sail in the same ship or 
in the same canoe; so that, as we shall be but one 
people, but one village, one house, one Calumet, and 
one canoe will be needed. The remainder of our 
words, or of our presents, will be carried to your 
country." Thus he ended his speech. 
[122] Monsieur the Governor afterward made the 


302 

LES R.l!.LA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

bourgade d'On[on]joté, afin de donner des nouuelles 
à fon enfant (pour s'accommoder à leurs termes) 
qu'il auoit defir d'embellir toute la terre, & de l'ap- 
planir en forte qu'on peuft aller par tout fans trefbu- 
cher & fans trouuer aucun mauuais rencontre. 
Le Capitaine Hiroquois ayant receu ces prefens 
fe leue & regardant Ie Soleil & puis toute l'affemblée, 
Onontio, dit-il, tu as diffipé tous les nuages, l'air eft 
ferain, Ie Ciel paroift à defcouuert, Ie Soleil eft bril- 
lant, ie ne vois plus de trouble, la paix a tout mis 
dans Ie Calme, mon cæur eft en repos, ie m'en vais 
bien content. 
Onontio, ayant fait exhorter tous ces peuples à la 
conftance & à la fidelité, rompit l'affemblée, & Ie 
lendemain il fit vn feftin à plus de quatre cens 
perfonnes à la façon des Sauuages. 
V oila qui va bien, difoient tous les conuiez, nous 
mangeons tous enfemble, & [123] n'auons plus qu'vn 
mefme plat. Le Reuerend Pere Hierofme Lalemant 
qui eftoit party des Hurons dans Ies craintes de ren- 
contrer des Hiroquois, les vid d'vn æil tout plein de 
ioye dans ces affemblées. 11 eftoit rauy voyant vn 
changement fi miraculeux, il en fit benir Dieu & en 
public & en particulier. 
Enfin Ie 23. de Septembre ces Ambaffadeurs Hiro- 
quois accompagnez de deux François, de deux Algon- 
quins & de deux Hurons, s'en retournerent en leurs 
pays, laiffant parmy nos Sauuages, maintenant leurs 
alliez, trois hommes de leur nation, comme pour 
hoftages ou plutoft pour marque d'amitié. 
Que Ie Dieu des Dieux foit beny à iamais, que fon 
Nom foit glorieux dans toutes les Contrées de la 
Terre. Si ces Barbares qui pour ne pas connoiftre 


lö42 - 45] 

RELA TIO
V OF r644-45 

303 

interpreters speak, offering a present that assured 
the Hiroquois that he would see that those two great 
nations kept their word. 
He also gave another present to be carried to the 
village of Ononjoté, so as to give news to his child 
(making use of their own terms), that he desired to 
make the whole earth beautiful, and to smooth it so 
that one might walk everywhere without stumbling, 
and without meeting any misadventure. 
"\Vhen the Hiroquois Captain had received these 
presents, he arose and, looking at the Sun and then 
at the entire assembly, he said: "Onontio, thou 
hast dispersed the clouds; the air is serene, the Sky 
shows clearly; the Sun is bright. I see no more 
trouble; peace has made everything Calm; my heart 
is at rest; I go away very happy. .. 
Onontio caused all these nations to be exhorted to 
remain constant and faithful; then he broke up the 
meeting, and on the following day he gave a feast, 
in the fashion of the Savages, to more than four 
hundred people. 
"Things are going well," said all the guests; 
"we eat all together, and [123] we have but one 
dish." Reverend Father Hierosme Lalemant who 
had started from the Huron country with the fear 
of meeting Hiroquois, watched them at these assem- 
blies with eyes full of joy. He was delighted to see 
so miraculous a change, and praised God for it both 
in public and in private. 
Finally, on the 23rd of September, these Hiroquois 
Ambassadors, accompanied by two Frenchmen, two 
Algonquins, and two Hurons, returned to their own 
country, leaving among our Savages, who were now 
their allies, three men of their nation as hostages, or 
rather as pledges, of their friendship. 


304 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 27 

Dieu n'ont guere de iufiice, ny de fermeté ne trou- 
blent cette paix concluë pour les François & bien 
auancée pour les Sauuages, i1 yaura moyen d'aller 
fouffrir pour IE S V S - C H R 1ST dans vn grand nombre 
de peuples. 


1642-45] 

RELA TION OF r644-45 

305 

Praised forever be the God of Gods; may his 
Name be glorified in all the Countries of the Earth. 
If these Barbarians-who, because they know not 
God, have hardly any equity or stability - do not 
disturb this peace,- which is concluded, as far as 
the French are concerned; and in a very advanced 
state, as regards the Savages,- it will be possible to 
go and suffer for JESUS CHRIST in a great many 
nations. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: YOLo XXYII 

LIII 

For particulars of this document, see VoL XXV. 
LIV 

In publishing the Jourllal des Jésu , itcs we follow 
the original manuscript in the library of Laval Uni- 
versity, Quebec. It covers the period from Septem- 
ber, 1645. to June, 1668, excepting some lacunæ 
between February 5, 1654, and October 25, 16 5 6 . 
This manuscript belonged originally to the archives 
of the old Jesuit Fathers at their house in Quebec, 
and was found there after the death of their last 
survivor, Father Jean Joseph Casot, who died March 
16. 1800. Afterward it disappeared, but was recov- 
ered about the year 1815, when Andrew "\Villiam 
Cochran, civil secretary to Governor Sir John Cope 
Sherbrooke, accidentally discovered it in an obscure 
corner of his office. After Mr. Cochran's death- 
which occurred on July I I, 1849 - his widow pre- 
sented it to George Barthélemy Faribault, of Quebec. 
1vlr. Faribault died December 21, 1866, and by his 
last will and testament bequeathed all of his books, 
manuscripts, paintings, and engravings, relatiye to 
the history of Canada, to the Seminary of Quebec. 
The original of the Jourllal des Jésuites thus passed to 
the Seminary, and is now among the matchless 
treasures of the library of Laval University. 
There is evidence that the Journal was continued 


308 LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

down to 1755; but the manuscripts of this continua- 
tion, which must have comprised at least two more 
volumes, have disappeared. In 1897, the Abbé Henri 
R. Casgrain, of Laval University, made special 
researches for the missing volumes in England 
among the heirs of William Smith, the historian of 
Canada - but without success. Smith had quoted 
from it under date of December 20, 1710, and again 
under 1752; and in his preface he specially mentions 
"the j esuits' journals" among the sources from 
which he derived "valuable information." Mgr. 
Thomas E. Hamel, librarian of Laval University, 
writes us, May 7, 1898, that he is under the impres- 
sion that Mr. Smith had only access to the manu- 
scripts, and was not the owner of them; and that it 
is only by mere chance that the missing volumes 
can be found - if, in fact, they have not perished 
al together. 
In 1871 the Journal des Jésuites was first printed 
under the editorship of the Abbés Laverdière and 
Casgrain; but after a few copies, perhaps about sixty, 
had been distributed. a fire broke out in the printing 
establishment of the publisher, Léger Brousseau, 
and nearly all the remaining copies were consumed. 
A few of them (Henry C. 11urphy says twelve, but a 
penciled memorandum in the copy in the Wisconsin 
Historical Society's library says forty), which were 
singed and water-stained, were afterward bound up, 
and are now occasionally met with. A description 
of this printed edition follows: 
Le I journal I des I jésuites I publié I d'après Ie 
manuscrit original conservé aux archives I du Sémi- 
naire de Québec I par 11[
I. les abbés Laverdière 
et Casgrain I 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DA TA: VOL. XXVII 309 

A Québec I Chez Léger Brousseau, Imprimeur- 
Éditeur, 7, rue Buade. I 187 1 I 
Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; "Préface," pp. 
v. - x.; " Errata," with verso blank, 1 leaf; calendar 
from 1645 to 1668, twelve unnumbered leaves-com- 
prising signatures A- F in twos; ten Latin hex- 
ameters with verso blank, I leaf; text, pp. 3 - 36 I ; 
p. 362 blank; "Table des 1Iatières," pp. 3 6 3 - 4 0 3. 
In 1893, J. 1\1. Valois, of Montreal, published a 
reprint of the 1871 edition; but omitted the leaf of 
errata. In some cases the errata were corrected in 
the text, though not always; and in one case (p. 17 2 , 
1. 29), an insertion was made for a transposition. 
The cover-title of the Montreal edition is dated 
1893; but the title-page has the date 18 9 2 . 
Copies of the 1871 edition have been sold or priced 
as follows: :Murphy sale (1884), no. 1349, sold for 
$8; auction sale of Bangs & Co., New York, Nov. 
I I, 1895, for 89.50; and priced by Raoul Renault 
(1898), at $30. The 1893 reprint is worth about $5. 
LV 

In reprinting the text of the Relation of 16 44-45 
(Paris, 1646), we follow a copy owned by The Bur- 
rows Brothers Company, Cleveland, and which is a 
duplicate from the collection in the Lenox Library. 
The " Pri uilege " is dated "Donné à Paris Ie vnziéme 
Decembre 1645;" and the date of "Permiffion" 
follows the form of that of the Relation of 1638, and 
reads "Fait à Paris Ie 26. lVlars 1638. ESTIEl':\E 
BI
ET." It is generally designated as "H. 84," 
because described in Harrisse's Notes, no. 84. 
Collation: Title, with verso blank, I leaf; "Table 
des Chapitres," pp. (2); "Priuilege," with " Per- 


31U LES RELA TIOJllS DES JÉSUITES 

million" on the verso, I leaf; one blank leaf. 
completing sig. ã in four; text of Vimont's Relation, 
pp. 1- 135; Jerome Lalemant's Huron Relatz'on, pp. 
136-183; verso of p. 183 blank. PP.96, 100, and 180 
are mispaged 69, 110, and 80, respectively. 
Copies of this Relation may be found in the follow- 
ing libraries: Lenox, Harvard, Brown (private), Ayer 
(private), New York State Library, Laval University 
(Quebec), Bibliothéque Nationale (Paris), and the 
British 1Yluseum (two copies, both badly cut at bot- 
tom). The Henry C. :Murphy copy was sold with 
others en bloc in 1884: at the Barlow sale (1890), a 
copy, no. 1290, sold for $29; and a Lenox duplicate 
was sold by Bangs & Co., of New York, on April 29, 
1895, for $32.50. This annual does not come into 
the market as generally as do some of the others. 
\Ve have searched in vain for data in several Parisian 
booksellers' catalogues, covering a period of several 
years. 


NOTES TO YOLo XXVII 

(Figures in þarEntheses,jollowing number of 1tote, refer to þages 
of E1tglish text.) 

1 (p. 67).- Dogique: thus explained by Father Martin, Douniol's 
Rdations Inédilt's de fa NOltvelle-Frmzu (Paris, 1861), t. i , p. 158, 
nolL': "The name which, in foreign l\Iis
ions, is given to those of 
the natives who instruct their countrymen. It would appear that 
there were in Canada dogiques or catechists not only among the 
men, but also among the women. ,. 
2 (p. 77).- The terms of this cession are stated in vol. viii., 
note 57. 
3 (p. 79),- D' Alibour is but a variant of D' Ailleboust (vol. xxiii., 
note 16). Concerning Dauversière and Maisonneuve, see vol. xxi., 
note 4. A sketch of Jeanne Mance is given in vol. xxii., note 7. 
4 (p. 85).- Regarding this house, Laverdière says (Quebec ed. 
of Journal, p. 7, 1tote): "The Jesuit Fathers were still lodged in 
the house belonging to the Hundred Associates, who had lent it 
to them after the fire of 1640. This house must have been situated 
near the site of the Anglican church." 
5 (p. 85).- Charles Ie Gardeur, sieur de Tilly (the name of the 
family estate in Normandy), the younger brother of Pierre Ie Gar- 
deur de Repentigny (vol. viii.. 1tote 57), was born in 1616, and came 
to Canada at the age of twenty. These, with Le Neuf de la Poterie 
and Charles D' Ailleboust, were among the most prominent Cana- 
dian habitants and the first to be ennobled,- all four receiving this 
honor from the king in 1666. Tilly married (Oct. I, 1648) Geneviève 
J uchereau, by whom he had fifteen children. At his marriage, he 
received, as his wife's dowry. the estate of St. Michel de Sillery, 
which later became the property of the Seminary of Quebec. He is 
mentioned in August, 1653, as deputy from Côte Ste. Geneviève for 
the election of the syndic of Quebec; and in 1663, and during 
several years afterward, as a member of the Sovereign Council. 
He was also one of those associated with Godefroy (vol. ix., note 4) 
in the Tadoussac trade. He died in November, 1695. 
6 (p. 87).-" François chavigny de Berchereau, of creancee, 
Champagne, came to Canada about 1640. He established himself at 


312 

LES RELATIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

Sillery, where estates had been granted to him; his influence in New 
France was great,- Montmagny appointed him his representative, 
during the former's absences from Quebec. As he came from the 
same province as Maisonneuve, Mlle. Mance, and Mlle. Bourgeois, 
and was, besides. their personal friend, his advice was sought by 
the founders of Montreal as well as by those of Quebec. While on 
a voyage to France for the sake of his health, he died at sea, in 
1651. "- SuIte's Can. Français, vol. ii., p. 80. chavigny married 
Eléonore de Grandmaison, whose third husband was Jacques Gour- 
deau (vol. xi., ?tote 12). 
ï (p. 87).- Gilles NIcolet, a secular priest, came to Canada prob- 
ably in 1640 or 16.p. He officiated for several years at Beauport 
and other outlying settlements where churches were not yet estab- 
lished, and returned to France in October, 1647. 
8 (p. 8ï).- St. Sauveur was another secular priest; see sketch in 
vol. xxiv., note 7. 
9 (p. 89).- This was Zacharie Cloutier, a carpenter, who came 
to Quebec with Giffard (1634). He had a wife and five children; 
one of the daughters married François Marguerie (vol. x., ?tote 4), 
and a son married Marie, daughter of Abraham Martin. Cloutier 
settled at Chateau-Richer; his death occurred in September, 1677. 
10 (p. 91).- Charles Ie Moyne (Lemoine), a native of Dieppe, 
France (born 1624), came to Canada about 1641, at the instance of 
his uncle, Adrien du chesne (vol. viii., note 68). As stated in our 
text, Le Moyne spent four years among the Hurons, in the service 
of the Jesuits. Returning thence, he settled at Montreal, about 
1646 or 1647, soon afterward receiving lands there; for many years, 
he served as interpreter for the colony, also as captain of its militia. 
He was a brave soldier, and often repelled the attacks of the Iro- 
quois, with whom, in 1653, he negotiated a peace. Two years later, 
he was captured by them; but they were so impressed by his courage 
that they sent him home after three months, unharmed. He was 
one of :\fontreal's most prominent citizens, and for his public serv- 
ices was ennobled by Louis XIV. (1668),-under the title Sieur de 
Longueuil, from the seigniory of that name granted him in 1657, 
and augmented in 1672. He also obtained (1664) the islands Ste. 
Hélène and Ronde; and (1673) chateauguay. Le Moyne married 
(1654) an adopted orphan, named Catherine Tierry, aged thirteen. 
They had fourteen children, most of whom achieved distinction in 
civil or military affairs; among these were Iberville, the noted ex- 
plorer, and Bienville, the founder of New Orleans. Sieur Ie Moyne 
died at Montreal, in 1683. 
II (p. 91).- Pierre Gadois, a native of Perche, came with his 


iYOTES TO VOL. XXVII 

313 

family to Canada about 1640, or perhaps somewhat earlier. He 
resided for a time at Sillery, but afterward removed to Montreal, 
where in J 648 he obtained land. He was the first settler in that 
colony, and died there in October, 1667, leaving several children. 
12 (p. 93).- René Mézeray (Mézier),- nicknamed Noce,- born 
in 16II, emigrated from Normandy to Canada about 1636. The 
marriage here mentioned was his second,- his first wife having died 
childless; at this time, he was living on the estate of M. de Chavigny. 
About 1650, he obtained lands at Cap Rouge; and, in 1656, another 
grant from Charles de Lauson. In 1681, Mézeray was living III the 
seigniory of Godarville; he died near Quebec, in March, 1695. 
His father-in-law on this occasion was Pierre Garemand,- nick- 
named" the Picard," from his native province. He was captured 
by the Iroquois in 1653, and probably burned to death. 
13 (p. 97).- Luis de la Puente, a Spanish Jesuit.-" generally 
known, outside Spain, under the names of Dupont, or de Ponte" 
(Sommervogel),-was born at Valladolid, Nov. II, J554. At the age 
of twenty, he became a Jesuit novice; and, after completing his 
studies, composed numerous devotional works. The most widely- 
read of these is flleditaciones de los iJ'fysterios de mustra Sancta 
Fe (ValladoJid, 1605). Translations of this work into nine different 
languages are enumerated by Sommervogel. The" abridgment .. 
referred to in the text is probably either the Rifectoir sþirituel du 
æuvru du R. P. Louys du Pont (Paris, 1621),-a French translation 
by a priest named Claude Godeme; or, Comþendium medita- 
tzonum,-a Latin version from the Meditaclones, by the Jesuit P. 
Ximenez (1620). De la Puente died at Valladolid, Feb. 16, 1624. 
14 (p. 99)'- Noël Juchereau, sieur des chastelets, born in the 
vicinity of Chartres, France, came to Quebec in 1632. He was a 
licentiate in the legal profession; SuIte conjectures that he was act- 
ing .. in the interests of Rosée and cheffauIt, who desired to obtain 
from the Hundred Associates a grant of part of the New France 
trade. " Estates near Quebec were granted to J uchereau, who, 
being unmarried, conferred them upon his nephews. He is men- 
tioned in our text as" general agent,"-of the Company of France, 
according to Laverdière; but of the Association of Habitants, in 
SuIte's opinion. The latter statement seems the more probable, 
since Des chastelets made his last voyage to France (1647) as a dele- 
gate of the habitants, to secure certain changes in their govern- 
ment. He died there, soon aft
rward. 
15 (p. 99).- Marie Françoise, eldest daughter of Sieur Giffard, 
was but eleven years and five months old at the time of her mar- 
ïiage. Her husband was Jean ]uchereau de la Ferté, eldest son of 


314 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

Jean Juchereau, seigneur du Maure,- the latter being a brother of 
Noël, sieur des Chastelets (note 14, allte). 
16 (p. 101).- Jean Guyon was the name of two men who came 
with Giffard,- both from Mortagne, in Perche, and both masons 
by trade. To one of these men Giffard gave the fief of Buisson; his 
wife was Mathurine Robin, and their children married into promi- 
nent colonial families; he died in May, 1663. The other Guyon was 
an educated man, and often drew up legal and official documents; 
little else is known of him. 
17 (p. 105).-There were numerous Jesuit writers of this name; the 
one here referred to was doubtless Alonso Rodriguez, born at Valla- 
dolid, Spain, in 1537. He entered the novitiate at the age of twenty, 
and his priestly life was spent in the colleges of Monterey. Montilla, 
and Cordova; his death occurred at Seville, Feb. 21, 1616. His 
principal work was Exercicio de Perfecion, y virtudes cristianas 
(Seville, 1609), divided into three parts; it was translated into many 
languages, European and Oriental. The book mentioned in the 
text was probably the French version by Paul Duez, Pratiqve de 
la Peifection et des vertvs chrestiennes (Paris, 1621), which went 
through numerous editions. 
18 (p. 105).- II By this vow, the Jesuit Fathers bound themselves 
to say twelve masses a year (for those who were priests), or twelve 
rosaries (for those not ordained), and always to fast on the eve of 
the feast of the Immaculate Conception; this was done in order to 
obtain, through the intercession of the blessed Virgin, the conver- 
sion of the peoples in this new world.- See Relation of 1635 (at the 
end), and of 1636 (chap. ii.)."-Queb. ed. ofJourn., p. 16, note. 
19 (p. 109).-Barthélemi Gavanti, an Italian ecclesiastic (15 6 9- 
1638), was consulter of the Congregation of Rites, and general of 
the Barnabites. He wrote several books; that mentioned in the 
text is either Praxis viszïationis eþiscopalis (Rome, 1628), or 
111 tl1luale Eþiscoþorum (Paris, 16..J.7). 
20 (p. 113).- This was another name for Martin Boutet (said by 
Tanguay to be a professor of mathematics), apparently an immi- 
grant from Saintes, France. In 1651, he opened a school for the 
children of the French colonists at Quebec. He had two daughters, 
of whom one married Charles Philippau; the other became an 
Ursuline nun. 
21 (p. 115).- Chanteau: thus defined by Bescherelle: II The 
piece of the consecrated bread which is sent to the person who is to 
furnish the bread on the Sunday following, or on the next feast-day. 
The þain bénit generally consisted of flat, round loaves of sweetened 
bread, piled one upon another, and decreasing in size to the top, the 


NOTES TO VOL. XXVII 

315 

last and smallest being called the chanteau; this was given to the 
person who was to furnish the bread next time. If furnished by 
wealthy persons, the þain bénit was a very elaborate structure, 
sometimes resembling a church steeple, or other object."-CRAW- 
FORD LINDSAY. 
22 (p. 121).-"This name was originally given-and probably 
derived from the first persons who here erected a cabin - to the 
little river Chalifour, which passes near the Insane Asylum; on 
account of this latter circumstance, it is now called · River of 
Fools.' "- Queb. ed. of Journ., p. 23, ftOte. 
23 (p. 289),- Ononjote: the chief village of the Oneidas (vol. 
viii., pp. 299, 3 00 ). 
24 (p. 295).- For information reg-arding porcelain (wampum), see 
vol. viii., note 70. Cf. Holmes's" Beads as Currency," U. S. Bur. 
Ethn. Reþ., 1880-81. pp. 234-255. 
Opinions differ as to the meaning of the term .. branches of por- 
celain. " Holmes translates it "strings," as used by Lafitau; but 
he says that the latter's use of this and other terms is somewhat 
confusing. Slafter (Prince Chamþlain, vol. iii., p. 150, note) says 
that" branches were strings of white shells," as distinguished from 
the purple. E. E. Taché thinks that they were twigs or sticks 
strung with large beads. to represent ropes. Crawford Lindsay has 
seen, among old specimens of wampum, small beads strung on a 
long thread which was closely wound round a pliable stick or 
twig. He also mentions information given him by an educated 
Indian from Lorette, .. who says that he has frequently seen these 
porcelain branches. They consist of large beads strung on the fiber 
of the ortie (urtica, the nettle ),- which is very tough, and which 
the squaws treated like flax, making from it strong threads,- or on 
slender thongs of caribou hide. Several of these branches are 
united on one stem, like the twigs of a tree-branch. Each, he says, 
represents a þarole, or word, of a discourse." Dionne thinks that 
beads were strung upon the branches of a twig, which, being pli- 
able, would simulate the withes used in binding prisoners. 




::::;:r: 

J 

:r 


  

..J: 



  

..- 

- 

. 

. 
- 


  

- 
. 
- 
.. 

.. 

.. .. 
- 
. . 
. . ... 
.. .. 
. 
- 
...-.-... 
. .... - 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
... 
. .. 
. . .- 
. . . 
.- . .. 

. 
. 

. 
. 

.. 

.. 


  

. 
. 

. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. . 
. 

.... . 
. 
. . . 
. . 
. 
. . 
. 
. 
. 
.. 

. 
. 
. 
... 
.. 
... 
..... 
...... 
.... 

  -: 
  .- 
.-... :. ..... 
,. . 

. 
. 
. 

. 
- . 
.. . 
. ......- 
. . 
.-. .. .-. 
. ... 
.. .. 
. . 

. 
- 

- 
- 


