Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 24: Lower Canada and Iroquois, 1642-1643
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits24jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits24jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits24jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 24 of 73.

---

SMR. 




THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 



VOL. XXIV 






The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 



No. 




^, fi^^^^ 



The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 



Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS. WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 



Vol. XXIV 
LOWER Canada and Iroquois: 1642- 1643 



CLEVELAND tTbe Burtows JSrotbera 
Company, publishers, mdcccxviii 



Copyright, 1898 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 



ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 



The Imperial Press, Cleveland 



EDITORIAL STAFF 



Editor 



Translators 



Assistant Editor 



Reuben Gold Thwaites 
FiNLOw Alexander 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
Hiram Allen Sober 
Emma Helen Blair 



Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 



CONTENTS OF VOL. XXIV 

Preface to Volume XXIV . . -9 

Document: — 

LI. Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la Novvelle 
France, en I'annee 1642. & 1643. [Chaps, 
iv.-xii., second installment of the docu- 
ment.] Barthelemy Vimont; undated . 19 

Notes ...... 309 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 



The Relation of 1642-43 (Document LI.) was writ- 
ten wholly by Vimont, the superior — the manuscript 
for the intended Huron part having been captured 
by the Iroquois. In Vol. XXIII. , we presented the 
first three chapters ; Chapters iv. - xii. are herewith 
given, and the remaining two chapters will appear 
in Vol. XXV. 

In continuing his account of the Sillery mission, 
Vimont describes the manner of life of the Indians 
settled there, and, as usual, relates numerous in- 
stances of their piety and zeal, A woman says twice 
as many prayers for the soul of Father Raymbault 
as for that of her own daughter, in order that he may 
be first released from Purgatory, as " his prayers 
will get her out sooner than mine." A man who 
speaks contemptuously of the faith is severely dis- 
ciplined by the Christian Indians. An old woman, 
who stays at home one feast day, imitates the church 
ceremonies as closely as she can, and thus " has mass 
in her own cabin." A young man, tempted to sin, 
not only resists stoutly, but severely flogs his entire 
body, by way of penance, for fear lest he have erred ; 
and, in deep distress, he begs the Fathers to punish 
him to the utmost. These Christian Indians also are 
doing much, by words and by example, for the con- 
version of their neighbors, the Attikamfegues. Chap- 
ter iv. closes with a letter from an Indian to his 



10 PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 



benefactor in France, written in his own language 
and his own forms of expression. 

The Sillery Indians are especially severe on the 
women who leave their husbands. An instance of 
this sort having occurred, they secure permission 
from Montmagny to build a little prison of their own 
at Sillery, in which the woman is placed, with an 
injunction to entreat God to make her more sensible 
and obedient. Here, in the depth of winter, she is 
kept twenty-four hours, without fire or blanket, or at 
first, without other bed than the bare ground ; through 
Father de Quen's intercession she is afterward given 
a little bread, and some straw to rest on. " Toward 
evening, they judged it proper to release her; it was 
enough for inspiring terror in this poor creature, and 
was a little beginning of government for these new 
Christians. The punishment sufficed for this young 
woman, and for several others." Several of the men 
no longer strike their wives in anger, but gently 
reprove them, or even patiently endure without reply. 

Charles Meiachkawat takes back to the Abenakis 
a prisoner from that region, and winters with them; 
he eagerly embraces this opportunity to preach to 
them the Christian faith, but, as they have no ac- 
quaintance with the French people, and are much 
addicted to drunkenness, his sermons have not much 
effect. He goes with the Abenakis to visit an Eng- 
lish settlement, where a heretic tries to dispute his 
religious belief; but Charles warns him that he 
" will burn in hell, for despising what God has made 
and ordered." An Abenaki chief follows Charles 
back to Sillery, where he is baptized, with Mont- 
magny acting as his sponsor in the name of the 
grand master of Malta. 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 11 

A party of Attikamegues, sixty in number, come 
to Sillery, persuaded thereto by the converted chief 
Jean Baptiste ; they are delighted to receive instruc- 
tion from the Fathers, and presents from Mont- 
magny. Half of them have been baptized, and the 
remainder are catechumens; the baptism of many 
has been deferred until they shall be weaned from 
their superstitions. Vimont recounts various details 
of these conversions, and acts of piety and zeal. One 
man finds in his cabin a French drum, and forthwith 
tears it to pieces, "although it is not bad, lest it 
cause the others to remember their drums and for- 
bidden superstitions." These Attikamegues urge 
the Jesuits to send a missionary to their country. 
As usual, the Fathers find their chief encouragement 
in the children, who are docile and intelligent. 

Great is the joy of the Sillery Christians at the 
conversion of their Attikamegue friends, and they 
fervently exhort these to remain in the Faith. When 
the latter set out on their annual hunt, they bid a 
grateful and touching farewell to Father Buteux, 
their teacher. In the spring, they return to Three 
Rivers for further instruction, and many new bap- 
tisms occur. The Sillery colony is doing much 
toward the conversion of the savages ; but its progress 
is greatly hindered by their poverty, which forces 
them to keep up their nomadic life, and by their 
dread of the Iroquois, whose cruelty and boldness 
continually increase. 

Vimont relates how the Huron seminary at Notre- 
Dame des Anges was suspended, no appreciable 
result of its influence appearing among the savages. 
The Fathers of the Huron mission send down to Sil- 
lery two young men of that tribe for instruction, and 



12 PREFACE TO WL. XXIV 



Brebeuf is detailed to take charge of them. With 
Montmagny's aid, and that of the Hospital nuns, the 
mission is able to maintain, in all, six of these 
Hurons, who are promising pupils, — older and more 
intelligent than those at Notre-Dame des Anges had 
been. Details of their characteristic traits, conver- 
sion, and devout behavior are given by the superior. 
Encouraging results are reported from the mission 
at Tadoussac, which has been supported, for the past 
year, by the generosity of the Duchess d'Aiguillon. 
In answer to the entreaties of the Indians, a priest 
was sent to them in the spring, — Father de Quen. 
While waiting for him, they appoint a " master of 
prayers," — a young man who had wintered at Sil- 
lery,— and under his direction they offer public pray- 
er, twice a day ; he is provided with a heavy knotted 
whip, " to beat those who fail to be present at pray- 
ers." When De Quen arrives, they welcome him 
most hospitably, and urge him for immediate bap- 
tism ; but he judiciously defers that rite * ' until the 
coming of the ships, or till Autumn," for all except 
two married pairs, "who live peaceably." A sick 
child is cured by prayer, after its father has surren- 
dered his " pouch of magic." The zealous " master 
of prayers ' ' thereupon is ' ' impelled by the spirit of 
God: he suddenly goes away into all the cabins; 
ransacks all the bundles, and inspects all the pouches ; 
takes all these spoils of the fiend to the Chapel, and 
makes a present of them to God." The Father, 
overjoyed thereat, assembles the savages and makes 
them a feast; then orders them to burn these " im- 
plements of impiety," which they do; " then, having 
all together thanked God, and sung a hymn in token 
of rejoicing, they go away, well content. 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 13 

Nevertheless, the Father is greatly tried by the 
drunkenness, and consequent licentiousness, prevail- 
ing among these Tadoussac nations. At one of their 
assemblies, a zealous neophyte publicly rebukes 
these disorders, and an old woman names aloud 
the persons she knows to be guilty. All these, and 
others who are suspected, are summoned before a 
council, and severely questioned. They are advised 
to mend their ways, and to consult the parents and 
the priests in all love affairs, which they promise to 
do, and go away, " very well satisfied on both sides." 
De Quen is obliged to return to Sillery, but is 
replaced by Buteux ; the latter finds the Indians well 
disposed, but dreads the results of their intemper- 
ance, arising from their illicit traffic with the French 
fur traders, for intoxicating liquors. 

The Indians of Miscou have heard of the mission, 
and are " beginning to sigh for their salvation." A 
letter from Andre Richard gives an account of his 
labors among these Micmacs. He mentions hearing 
the confession of a woman who had been baptized 
at Port Royal, by Father Biard, some thirty years 
before. The savages give Richard a friendly recep- 
tion, and build a chapel for him, where they offer 
prayers every day under his direction ; he finds them 
honest, intelligent, and affectionate. A new mission 
station is to be established at the Nepegiguit river. 
Richard relates the illness of his colleague D'Olbeau, 
and the kind assistance rendered them by Desdames, 
commandant at Miscou; also, the coming of De 
Lyonne, — who, stopping at Miscou on his way to the 
Huron mission, consents to take D'Olbeau's place. 

Vimont proceeds to describe the noble work of the 
Hospital nuns, whose generous devotion and assist- 



14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 

ance is of the utmost aid in the coloni2!ation of the 
savages, — indeed, " it bears a good part of the ex- 
penses and burdens thereof, — and I know not yet if 
the colony could subsist without this help. ' ' About 
a hundred savages have been received in the hospital 
the past year, representing nearly all the tribes 
between Lake Huron and the Gulf of St. Lawrence. 
Some of these have been converted, and Vimont 
relates many particulars of their virtue and piety. 
The hospital cares for not only the bodies but the 
souls of the savages; for instruction in the catechism 
and prayers is given there regularly, which " often 
makes a Chapel and a School of the sick ward, as well 
as of our house at Sillery. ' ' The entire time of one 
nun, and more or less that of several other persons, 
is required ' ' to answer these visits and pious impor- 
tunities." Their expenses have been great; but 
the Duchess d'Aiguillon has generously aided them. 
During the past year, the mission station at Three 
Rivers has been in the charge of Le Jeune, " sent 
there to see if he could subdue the Pride of those 
people" (the haughty Upper Algonkins). They, 
being insolent and mischief-making, " give him 
plenty of exercise ; ' ' but, when they go to Fort 
Richelieu for their annual hunt, he as " a good pas- 
tor, goes after his flock." At the fort, he finds Fa- 
ther De Noue, Br^beuf 's comrade in the first Huron 
mission (1626), — now growing old, but still full of 
zeal and devotion, — who is the spiritual adviser of 
the French garrison. Le Jeune could do much for 
the Indians under his charge there, were it not for 
the wretched Upper Algonkins; they cling to their 
superstitions, and torment the Christians in every 
way. " The Father, with his little band of faithful 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 15 

ones, vigorously opposed them, — now by dint of 
arguments, again by ridiculing their foolish notions ; 
that made them die with spite." In return, they 
accuse the missionaries of having taken away their 
success in hunting, nullified the predictions of their 
soothsayers, and caused their deaths, — all through 
the introduction of this new religion. "Besides," 
they say, " if you called to prayers only once in ten 
days, we would have some respite ; but you have no 
regard to either rain, or snow, or cold, — every day 
you are heard shouting for the prayers. It is a 
strange thing that you cannot remain quiet. ' ' Some 
conversions are secured, notwithstanding all these 
hindrances. Moreover, the ringleader of the opposi- 
tion is, by the judgment of God, suddenly prostrated 
by a most painful illness ; but the exhortations of Le 
Jeune finally soften his hard heart, and, returning 
soon after to Montreal, he, with others of his tribe, 
is there baptized by the Jesuits. 

The Montreal colony promises to be a great assist- 
ance to the missionary enterprise, especially since the 
Indians are being attracted thither by the prospect 
of aid from the French against the Iroquois. There 
are about fifty-five settlers, among whom prevail 
great peace, virtuous conduct, and excellent govern- 
ment. A great rise in the river, at the Christmas 
season, threatens to destroy the settlement. Mai- 
sonneuve has public prayers offered, and makes a 
vow himself to carry a cross up the neighboring 
mountain, if God please to avert the ruin with which 
they are menaced. The flood stops at the very gate 
of the settlement, and then gradually subsides. 
Maisonneuve fulfills his vow on Epiphany, and bears 
on his shoulders a heavy cross for the distance of a 



16 PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 

league, following a solemn procession. At the 
summit of the mountain, the cross is planted in the 
ground, mass is said by Father Du Peron, and Ma- 
dame de la Peltrie is the first to receive communion 
on this spot, — which becomes thereafter the objec- 
tive point of many pilgrimages. The Montreal 
colonists, notwithstanding the severe climate, and 
the inconveniences attending a new settlement, have 
universally enjoyed excellent health ; and their piety 
and devotion render their life there " a picture of 
the primitive Church." The Indians would settle 
there in great numbers, if but the Iroquois could be 
subdued or pacified ; and Vimont regards this danger 
as a menace to the prosperity of the colony itself. 
He quotes a letter from Du Peron, concerning the 
Indians who come to Montreal. One of these, a 
nephew of the Island chief Tesswehat, is converted 
and baptized, and becomes sedentary, — receiving 
from the Association a piece of ground ; from Maison- 
neuve, the name of Joseph ; and from Madame de la 
Peltrie, a gun. Soon after, Tesswehat unexpected- 
ly arrives at Montreal and follows his nephew's 
example, receiving baptism under the name of Paul. 
As he was one of those who had so troubled Le Jeune 
at Three Rivers and Fort Richelieu, his conversion 
is regarded as of the utmost importance, and much 
is hoped from this newly-made Christian. 

Pieskaret, the Sillery chief, — for some time 
mourned as having been slain by the Iroquois, — 
comes back victorious, and great is the rejoicing 
thereat. The ice breaks up precisely in time to pre- 
vent the Iroquois from pursuing a Huron band across 
the St. Lawrence. 

Vimont describes the country, forces, and methods 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIV 17 



of war, of the Iroquois ; among these, the Agniers or 
Mohawks are the fiercest, boldest, and most danger- 
ous. They are now harassing the Hurons, and all the 
dwellers along the St. Lawrence, — making raids by- 
small parties, and at all seasons of the year ; attack- 
ing alike all other tribes and the French ; and enabled 
to do so by the supply of firearms received from the 
Dutch traders. Rumors come from France that the 
Dutch expect by this means to drive out the French 
from Canada. Vimont cannot believe that they have 
such a plan, but considers them responsible for not 
stopping this practice. The superior describes vari- 
ous Iroquois incursions, especially that in which 
Jogues is made a prisoner. The Huron chief Joseph, 
escaping their hands, returns to Quebec, and relates 
the particulars of Jogues' s captivity and Goupil's 
murder. A letter from the captive priest is brought 
to Three Rivers by an Iroquois envoy ; Jogues warns 
the French of the treacherous plans laid for them by 
their crafty foe, and urges them to forestall these, 
without regard for the safety of himself or his fellow 

captives. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., June, 1898. 



LI (continued) 

Relation of 1642-43 

Paris : SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1644 



Chaps, i.-iii. were presented in Volume XXllI.; we 
herewith give chaps, iv.-xii., leaving the conclusion of the 
document for Volume XXV. 



20 



LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



[41] CHAPITRE IV. 

DE LA FAgON DE VIURE DES CHRESTIENS DE SIL- 
LER Y. 

PENDANT le temps que les Sauuages ont eft6 
^ Sillery, ils y ont frequents les Sacremens 
auec autat d'affiduit^ & de ferueur que nos 
Fran9ois h. Quebec, ils ont pris auffi vn fingulier plai- 
fir d'aller quelquefois ^ Quebec fe Communier & fe 
ioindre h. cette facr6e Table auec nos Francois, dont 
la deuotion les refiouyt & edifie grandement. 

Quoy qu'on faffe le foir les prieres publiques en la 
Chapelle, plufieurs pourtant ne laiffent pas de les 
faire encor vne [42] ou deux fois en leur cabane, & 
tout haut; ce qui a donne fubiet de les appeller les 
Cabanes des Priants. 

Les petits enfans eftans malades, les parens les 
apportent quelquefois a la Chapelle, & les prefentent 
^ Dieu, comme ^ celuy qui en eft le maiflre, & le 
tout auec vne grande refignation. C'eft k vous, Sei- 
gneur, cet enfant, difent-ils, faites en comme il vous 
femblera bon, ie vous I'offre. Voicy les termes pro- 
presd'vne mere qui auoit fa fille malade: mo Dieu 
vous pouuez tout, fi vous voulez ma fille guerira, fi 
vous ne le voulez pas, i'en fuis contente, faites 'ce 
qu'il vous plaira, i'aimeray toufiours ce que vous 
ferez. Dieu leur rend quelquefois la fante en confi- 
deration de cette faincfte refignation, quelquefois auffi 
en la vertu de I'eau benifle qu'on leur donne ^ boire. 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 ' 21 



[41] CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE MANNER OF LIVING AMONG THE CHRISTIANS 
AT SILLERY. 

WHILE the Savages have been at Sillery, they 
have frequented the Sacraments there with 
as much diligence and fervor as our French 
at Quebec ; they have also taken a singular pleasure 
in going occasionally to Quebec to receive Commun- 
ion and to associate, at that sacred Table, with our 
French, whose devoutness greatly delights and 
edifies them. 

Though public prayers are said at evening in the 
Chapel, many none the less make it a point to say 
them again once [42] or twice in their own cabins, 
and that audibly, — which has given occasion for 
calling them the Cabins of those who Pray. 

When the little children are sick, the parents some- 
times bring them to the Chapel, and present them to 
God, as to him who is their master ; and all this with 
great resignation. "Yours, Lord, is this child," 
they say; " do with it as it shall seem good to you, 
I offer it to you." Here are the very words of a 
mother whose daughter was sick : ' * My God, you can 
do all things; if you will, my daughter will recover; 
if you are not willing, I am content. Do as it shall 
please you ; I will always love what you shall do. 
God sometimes restores their health to them, in con- 
sideration of this holy resignation, — sometimes, also, 
by virtue of the holy water which is given them to 



22 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

En voicy vne exemple. Vn ieune Sauuage de Ta- 
douflac fut atteint d'vne forte pleurelie, au bout de 
fix ou fept iours, fes gens I'apporterent de Tadouffac 
aux Religieufes Hofpitalieres a Sillery, c'efl; k dire 
de quarante lieues loin: on le penfe auec grand foin, 
on le feigne deux ou [43] trois fois : mais le mal eft 
plus fort que les remedes: ce pauure gar9on fe 
voyant defefpere, fe leue comme il put, fe traine ^ la 
Chapelle, fait fes prieres, le pere qui fe trouua Ik, luy 
fait boire de I'eau benifte, & recite I'Euangile fut 
[sc. fur] luy, puis le renuoye en fon lit, il commence 
auffi-toft k fe mieux porter, & dans peu de temps fort 
de I'Hofpital en fante, auec I'eftonnement de fes 
Compatriotes. 

Les Sauuages font fort peu recognoiffans de leur 
naturel, fur tout enuers les Europeans: le Chriftia- 
nifme les forme peu k peu h. cette vertu. Mofieur le 
Gouuerneur retournant Tan paffe du fort de Riche- 
lieu, apres Taflaut rude & inopine que les Hyro- 
quois y donnerent, & oil ils furent fort mal traitez, 
nos Sauuages allerent de leur propre mouuement le 
faluer, & porterent deux prefens, I'vn pourle remer- 
cier de ce qu'il auoit expofe fa vie pour eux, & auoit 
chalfe leurs ennemis, 1 'autre pour effuyer nos larmes 
de la prife du Pere Iogue[s], & de nos hommes par 
les Hyroquois. 

Vn de nos principaux Chreftiens difcourans auec 
vn Sauuage nouellement [44] defcendu a Sillery, 
vit vn de nos Peres qui palfoit par Ik, voila, dit-il, 
ceux qui nous enfeignent, & nous apprennent le 
chemin du Ciel, ils n'efpargnent rien pour cet effet : ils 
s'appauuriffent pour nous, ils deuiennent malades 
pour nous: fi tu paffes icy I'Hyuer, tu cognoiftras 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 ' 23 

drink. Here follows an example. A young Savage 
of Tadoussac was attacked with a violent pleurisy ; 
after six or seven days, his people brought him from 
Tadoussac to the Hospital Nuns at Sillery, — that is 
to say, from a distance of forty leagues. He is nursed 
with great care, and they bleed him two or [43] three 
times ; but the disease is stronger than the remedies. 
This poor fellow, seeing himself in a desperate pass, 
rises when his strength permits, drags himself to the 
Chapel, and says his prayers ; the father who chanced 
to be there makes him drink holy water, and recites 
the Gospel over him, then sends him back to his bed. 
He straightway begins to mend, and in a short time 
leaves the Hospital, in good health, to the astonish- 
ment of his fellow Countrymen. 

The Savages are scantily grateful in their natural 
state, especially toward the Europeans; Christianity 
trains them, little by little, in this virtue. Monsieur 
the Governor coming back last year from the fort of 
Richelieu, after the severe and unexpected assault 
made upon it by the Hyroquois, — wherein they were 
very badly treated, — our Savages went of their own 
impulse to greet him, and carried two gifts. One 
was to thank him for having exposed his life for 
them, and having driven away their enemies; the 
other, to wipe away our tears for the capture of 
Father Jogues and our men by the Hyroquois. 

One of our principal Christians, discoursing with 
a Savage newly [44] come down to Sillery, saw one 
of our Fathers who was passing that way. " There," 
said he, " are those who teach us, and show us the 
way to Heaven. They spare ho pains for this pur- 
pose, — they make themselves poor for us, they be- 
come sick for us ; if thou spend the Winter here, thou 



24 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.24 

par effet la verite de ce que ie te dis ce qu'ils nous 
enfeignent eft d'importance, ils nous deffendent tout 
ce qui eft mauuais, les feftins a tout manger, I'inuo- 
cation des demons, la croyance aux fonges, la multi- 
plicite des femmes dans le mariage, & en vn mot 
toutes nos mefchantes couftumes qui nous donnent 
& nous iettent dans vn feu apres la mort, c'eft vn 
feu, difoit-il, qui ne s'efteindra iamais; dont celuy 
qui nous efchauffe icy fur terre n'eft qu'vn leger 
crayon, il eft efpouuentable dans fa dur^e eternelle: 
ceux qui y vont bruflent fans efperance d'en fortir. 

Vne femme ayant ouy difcourir du Purgatoire, & 
qu'il y auoit peu de perfonnes qui allaffent en Para- 
dis, fans paffer par le feu, fut touchee & fe mit a 
prier Dieu inftamment pour fa fille deffunte [45] 
depuis peu, le pere fgachant fa deuotion, luy demanda 
ce qu'elle faifoit pour la fille defundte, ie dis tons les 
lours trois Chapellets (dit-elle) I'vn pour ma fille, & 
deux pour le Pere qui eft mort, il y a quelques iours 
(c'eftoit le Pere Raymbault) Et pourquoy deux pour 
ce dernier, & vn feulement pour ta fille, luy repart le 
Peres? s'il eft vray, dit-elle, ce que vous enfeignez 
que peu de ges vont au Ciel fans aller auparauant das 
le Purgatoire, ce Pere qui vient de mourir, quoy que 
tres hommes de bien, y aura peut-eftre efte pour 
quelque temps, & ie dis deux Chapellets pour luy, 
afin que Dieu le deliure au plutoft, & qu'eftant au 
Ciel il prie pour ma fille. Ses prieres la feront 
pluftoft fortir que les miennes. 

On aura affez remarque es precedentes Relations 
que la grande tentation des Sauuages, eft que le 
Baptefme & la priere les font mourir. Vn certain ap- 
pell^ Fran9ois Kok8eribabougouz voyant vn de nos 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 25 

wilt know by experience the truth of what I tell 
thee. What they teach us is of importance; they 
forbid us everything that is bad, — the feasts where 
all the food is eaten, the invocation of evil spirits, 
the belief in dreams, the multiplicity of wives in 
marriage, and, in a word, all our wicked customs 
which betray us and cast us into a fire after death. 
That is a fire," he said, " which will never go out, 
of which the one that warms us here on earth is 
only a faint outline. It is terrible in its eternal dura- 
tion ; those who go into it burn, without hope of 
getting out of it. ' ' 

A woman having heard a discourse on Purgatory, 
and that there were few persons who went into Para- 
dise without passing through the fire, was touched, 
and began to entreat God urgently for her daughter, 
deceased [45] not long ago. The father, knowing 
her piety, asked her what she did for her deceased 
daughter. " I repeat the Rosary three times every 
day " (she said), " once for my daughter, and twice 
for the Father who died a few days ago ' ' (that was 
Father Raymbault). " And why twice for the latter, 
and only once for thy daughter? " rejoins the Father. 
"If it be true," said she, " what you teach, — that 
few people go to Heaven without first going into 
Purgatory, — this Father who has just died, although 
a very good man, will perhaps have been there for 
some time; and I say two Rosaries for him, in order 
that God may release him as soon as possible, and 
that, being in Heaven, he may pray for my daugh- 
ter. His prayers will get her out sooner than mine." 

It may have been sufficiently remarked in the pre- 
ceding Relations that the great temptation of the 
Savages is, that Baptism and prayer cause them to 



26 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.24 



Peres entrer dans fa cabane, I'attaque & luy demande 
s'il ne fgait pas enfin la caufe pourquoy ils meuret 
ainfi tons, depuis quelques annees qu'on leur [46] a 
parle de noftre foy, il infinuoit aflez clairement que 
la priere & le baptefme en efloit la caufe, & parloit 
auec orgueil, & mefpris de la foy, II eft affez 
hautain de fon naturel, le Pere fe fentit oblige de 
refuter le difcours de cet homme comme mefchant 
& fcandaleux, & reprendre quant & quant fon orgueil 
& fa fuperbe: mais au lieu de s'humilier, il tire fon 
Chapellet, & le iette au feu, en la prefence de tous 
ceux de la cabane, & du Pere mefme : nos bos Neo- 
phytes ayant entendu cette adtion en furent entiere- 
ment indignez, ils vont le trouuer, & luy remontrent 
viuement fa faute, & I'incitent h. faire penitence, 
mais la crainte & la confufion le retenoient; ils 
retournent deux & trois fois, & font fi bien qu'il fe 
prefente pour receuoir telle penitence qu'on iugeroit 
conuenable: on affemble les Sauuages k la Meffe 
dans la Chapelle de I'Hofpital, il eftoit cabane fort 
proche, on le fait demeurer k la porte comme indigne 
d'entrer 'k I'Eglife, apres quel que efpace de temps on 
I'appelle, il fe met &, genoux deuant I'Autel, demande 
pardon k Dieu, & k la tres-faindte [47] Vierge ; puis 
k tous fes Compatriotes qu'il auoit fcandalifez, les 
coniure de I'ayder par leurs prieres ^ fatisfaire ^ Dieu 
pour fa faute, ce qu'ils firet tout haut & tous enfem- 
ble: apres on luy commande de baifer trois fois la 
terre: le pauure homme touche de regret tient fa 
bouche colee contre terre: iufqu'^ ce qu'on le force 
de fe releuer: le Pere luy donne vn autre chappellet 
en figne de fa reconciliation, & tous alTiftent h. la 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 27 

die. A certain man called Fran9ois Kokweribabou- 
gouz, seeing one of our Fathers enter his cabin, 
accosts him, and asks him if he does not at last know 
the reason why they all die thus, within the few 
years since they [46] have been told of our faith. He 
insinuated quite plainly that prayer and baptism 
were the reason, and spoke with pride, and contempt 
for the faith. He is somewhat haughty by nature, 
so the Father felt himself obliged to refute this man's 
utterance as wicked and scandalous, and reprove 
then and there his pride and haughtiness ; but instead 
of humbling himself, he takes his Rosary and throws 
it into the fire, in the presence of all those in the 
cabin, and of the Father himself. Our good Neo- 
phytes, having heard of this action, were thoroughly 
indignant ; they go and find him, sharply set before 
him his fault, and urge him to do penance, but fear 
and confusion restrained him. They return two and 
three times, and succeed so well that he presents 
himself to receive such penance as should be judged 
suitable. They assemble the Savages at Mass in the 
Chapel of the Hospital, which his cabin was very 
near; they make him stay at the door, as being 
unworthy to enter the Church. After some space of 
time they call him ; he kneels before the Altar, asks 
pardon of God and of the most blessed [47] Virgin, 
then of all his fellow Countrymen whom he had 
scandalized; he entreats them to aid him by their 
prayers to atone to God for his fault, — which they 
do aloud, and all together. Next, they bid him kiss 
the earth three times; the poor man, touched with 
sorrow, holds his lips glued against the earth, until 
they compel him to rise. The Father gives him 
another rosary, in token of his reconciliation, and 



28 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 



faincfte Meffe auec vne joye & deuotion fenfible. A 
la fin Noel TeKb'erimatcli Capitaine des Algonquins 
f e leue & parle ainfi ^ f es gens en ton fort & haut : 
Mes nepueux refiouylTons-vous, noftre frere efhoit 
entre les mains du Diable & s'il fuft mort, I'Enfer 
eftoit fa demeure pour iamais; & Dieu Ten a deliure: 
il eftoit mort & le voila viuant, refiouyffons-nous de 
ce que nous fgauons maintenant les moyens d'appaifer 
la col ere de Dieu, perfeuerons dans la priere ; & quoy 
qu'il femble que nous mourions tous, croyons forte- 
ment & fmcerement iufques k la mort & ayons efpe- 
rance en celuy qui a tout fait. Apres cette petite 
[48] exhortation le pere leur donna la benedidtion k 
tous & les renuoya fort contens & ioyeux, cet homme 
s'ell tres-bien comporte depuis ce temps la toute fa 
famille eft Chreftienne, II me preffe h. prefent de luy 
faire vne petite maifon pour I'an prochain. 

Le iour de faindt lean I'Euangelifte il fift vn temps 
fort rude, le froid les vents & la neige fembloient 
vouloir tout perdre, c'eft chofe efpouuantable de voir 
I'air en ces teps-lk. Les Sauuages eftoient pour lors 
cabanes fur la montagne dans le bois : on ne croyoit 
pas qu'ils puffent venir k la MelTe, on enuoya leur 
dire qu'ils ny eftoient pas obligez: que fi les plus 
robuftes vouloient venir, qu'ils le pouuoiet par deuo- 
tio, mais tous y vinret k leur ordinaire. Vne vieille 
Algonquine demeura dans fa cabane pour garder 
quelques petits enfans, & fe comporta comme fi elle 
euft efle k la Meffe, elle eftendit vne image de noftre 
Seigneur, fe mift k genoux deuant auec les enfans, 
recita fon chappellet, fe leua comme on fait ^ I'Euan- 
gile, adora noftre Seigneur comme on fait "k I'eleua- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 



29 



all join in holy Mass with manifest joy and fervor. 
At the end, Noel Tekwerimatch, Captain of the 
Algonquins, rises and speaks thus to his people, in a 
strong and loud tone: " My nephews, let us rejoice; 
our brother was in the hands of the Devil, and, if he 
had died, Hell was his dwelling forever; but God 
has delivered him thence, — he was dead, and behold 
him living. Let us rejoice that we now know the 
means of appeasing the wrath of God. Let us per- 
severe in prayer, and though it seem that we all die, 
let us believe stoutly and sincerely, even to death, 
and let us have hope in him who has made all 
things." After this brief [48] exhortation, the fa- 
ther gave the blessing to them all, and sent them 
away very contented and joyful. This man has 
behaved very well, since that time : his whole family 
is Christian. He urges me at present to make him 
a little house for next year. 

On the day of saint John the Evangelist, the 

weather was very severe ; the cold, the winds, and 

the snow seemed likely to destroy everything. ^ It is 

something awful to see the weather at such times. 

The Savages were lodged at that time in cabins on 

the mountain, in the woods. We did not suppose 

that they could come to Mass, and sent them word 

that they were not obliged to,— that, if the most 

robust wished to come, they might do so, through 

devotion; but all came as usual. An old Algonquin 

woman stayed in her cabin, to look after some little 

children, and behaved as if she had been at Mass. 

She set up an image of our Lord, knelt before it with 

the children, recited her beads, rose as is customary 

at the Gospel, adored our Lord as is done at the 

elevation, and sang as [49] they are accustomed to 



30 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

tions, chata come [49] ils ont accouftume apres la 
Meffe, fi bien que quand le Pere I'alla voir, elle luy 
dift qu'elle auoit efle k la Meffe dans fa Cabane, le 
Pere I'interroga, comment, & aprit ce que ie viens 
de dire. 

Vne femme Chreftienne appellee Louyfe auoit vne 
fille malade qu'elle cheriffoit comme fa vie propre, 
elle la porte k I'Hofpital, les Religieufes qui aymoient 
fa mere k raif on de fa vertu n'y efpargneret rien : 
mais nonobftant le remedes fa maladie redoubloit, 
deux Sauuageffes payennes la viennent voir, puis fe 
tournant vers la mere Ik prefente & fort affligee, luy 
promettent de guerir la fille, fi elle veut permettre 
qu'elles la penfent k leur fagon: c'eft k dire qu'elle 
la chantent, la foufflent, & la zonglent auec leurs 
tambours : mais il faudroit, dif ent elles, la porter dans 
les bois: car autrement ceux qui ont des robbes 
noires le fgauroient, & nos medecines feroient inu- 
tiles : au refte tiens pour certain que ta fille guerira, 
fi tu nous obeis : k Dieu ne plaif e repartit cette bonne 
Chreftienne, que I'on fafCe quelque chofe h. ma fille, 
qui foit cotre la loy de Dieu, [50] [ie] craindrois bien 
plutoft que cela ne la fift mourir, & quand mefme ie 
f9aurois qu'elle gueriroit de vos medecines, ie ne le 
permettrois pas, puis que Dieu le deffend, il n'im- 
porte que ma fille meure, pourueu qu'elle aille au 
Ciel. Ces deux femmes fortirent bien eftonnees, & 
ne parlerent plus de rien : il pleut a Dieu d'appeller 
k foy cette petite creature & d'approuuer la conftance 
de la mere, laquelle en demeura affligee au poffible : 
mais nullement efbranlee en la foy, quoy que ce foit 
la troifieme qu'elle a perdue depuis qu'elle a receu 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 31 

do after Mass, — insomuch that, when the Father 
went to see her, she told him that she had been to 
Mass in her Cabin ; the Father asked her how, and 
learned what I have just related. 

A Christian woman, called Louyse, had a sick 
daughter whom she cherished as her own life. She 
carried her to the Hospital ; the Nuns, who loved her 
mother on account of her virtue, spared no pains; 
but, notwithstanding the remedies, her sickness in- 
creased. Two Savage women, pagans, come to see 
her; then, turning toward the mother, there present 
and much afflicted, they promise her to cure her 
daughter, if she will allow them to treat her in their 
fashion, — that is to say, that they sing over her, 
blow on her, and juggle for her with their drums. 
" But it would be necessary," they say, " to carry 
her into the woods ; for otherwise, those who have 
black gowns would know it, and our medicines would 
be useless. For the rest be assured that thy daugh- 
ter will recover, if thou obey us." " God forbid," 
replied that good Christian woman, "that you do 
anything to my daughter which is against the law of 
God, — [50] I would much sooner fear that that would 
make her die; and even though I knew that she 
would recover by your medicines, I would not allow 
it, since God forbids it. No matter if my daughter 
die, provided she go to Heaven." Those two women 
went away much astonished, and had not a word 
more to say. It pleased God to call to himself that 
little creature, and to approve the mother's con- 
stancy ; she remained in the utmost affliction thereat, 
but not at all shaken in the faith, although this is 
the third she has lost since she received Baptism. 
May not this kind of affliction, recurring in many 



32 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

le Baptefme. Cette efpece d'afflidtion fe retrouuant 
en quantite de families Chreftiennes, eft-ce pas vne 
puiffante efpreuue que Dieu leur enuoye, & ^ nous 
auffi ? Sa fille mourut das les bois : car ayant enfin 
receu quelque foulagement a I'Hofpital, fa mere qui 
efloit obligee k quelque voyage, la traifna "k leur fa9on, 
comme elle peuft, le mal redoublat dans les bois 
I'emporta, elle n'eftoit agee que de huidt ou a neuf 
ans : fa mere rapporta fon corps k Sillery pour eflre 
enterre auec fes parens. Elle nous difl qu'elle auoit 
admire les penfees & difcours [51] de fa fille ^ la 
mort, premieremet elle tefmoigna qu'elle euft bien 
defire de voir encor vne fois vn des Peres, pour rece- 
uoir vn mot de confolation en ce paffage, que neant- 
moins elle fe confole en Dieu. Apres elle remercia 
fa mere du foin & de la peine qu'elle auoit pris d'elle, 
pendant tout le cours de fa maladie, & luy promift 
en recompenfe de prier Dieu pour elle apres fa mort. 
Son frere aifne I'eftant venu voir, elle luy recom- 
manda de faire eftat de la foy & des prieres, & come 
elle auoit apprins qu'il n'eftoit pas bien auec fa 
femme, elle le coniura de la fupporter en fon humeur, 
qu'il fe gardaft bien de la quitter iamais, qu'il euft 
patience, que luy qui eftoit homme, fe deuoit mon- 
flrer plus fage. le ne fjay pas oti cet enfant de neuf 
ans au plus auoit apris tout cela, le S. Efprit la 
faifoit parler par deffus fon age. 

A peine croira on ce que ie vay dire d'vn Neophyte 
Sauuage, puis qu'il s'en rencontra fi peu parmy nos 
Chreftiens d' Europe qu'ils le peuffent faire. Vn 
ieune Sauuage Chreftien fut puiffamment tente par 
vne femme qui le pourfuiuit [52] dans les bois, & le 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 33 

Christian families, be a severe test which God sends 
to them, and to us also? Her daughter died in the 
woods; for, having finally received some relief at the 
Hospital, her mother, who was obliged to go on a 
journey, dragged her along in their fashion, as best 
she could ; the sickness, increasing in the woods, car- 
ried her off; she was only eight or nine years old. 
Her mother brought her body back to Sillery to be 
buried with her kinsfolk. She told us that she had 
marveled at the ideas and utterances [51] of her 
daughter at her death. In the first place, she asserted 
that she would have much desired to see one of our 
Fathers once again, so as to receive a word of con- 
solation at that change; but that, nevertheless, she 
consoled herself in God. Then she thanked her 
mother for the care and pains that she had taken for 
her, during the whole course of her sickness, and 
promised, by way of reward, to pray to God for her 
after her death. Her eldest brother having come to 
see her, she charged him to rely on the faith and the 
prayers; and, as she had heard that he was not on 
good terms with his wife, she besought him to en- 
dure the woman in her temper, — that he should take 
care never to leave her, that he should have patience, 
that he, being a man, ought to show himself wiser. 
I know not where this child, of nine years at the 
most, had learned all that ; the Holy Ghost made her 
speak beyond her years. 

You will hardly believe what I am about to say of 
a Savage Neophyte, since so few would be found 
among our Christians of Europe who could do like- 
wise. A young Christian Savage was mightily 
tempted by a woman who pursued him [52] in the 
woods, and solicited him to do evil, with as much 




34 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

follicita k mal faire auec autant d'impudence que de 
charmes & d'attraits, elle y employa tout. Le bon 
ieune homme luy refifte fortement la reprend, luy 
remonftre que Dieu voit tout; qu'il les regarde, cela 
ne la rend pas plus fage, elle redouble iufques ^ 
deux & trois fois, le diable trauaille de fon cofle, & 
ioint fes forces auec celles de la femme, attaque le 
coeur de ce pau[u]re Neophyte, ex[c]itant en luy la 
paffion & le preilant viuement, le voila tente dehors 
& dedans, il refifte pourtant courageufemet, inuoque 
I'affiftance de Dieu, & puis fentant que le danger 
croifCoit, s'enfuit dans les bois, & abandonne cette 
malheureufe creature, eftant lors feul & k I'efcart fe 
met k genoux, prie Dieu, luy demande pardon, prend 
des verges & fe defpoiiillant nud fe chaftie rudement 
par tout le corps, c'eftoit au milieu des neiges, & au 
coeur de I'Hyuer que les arbres fendent de froidr 
mais la peur d'auoir manque, & la crainte de la ten- 
tation le font refoudre a cette penitence, ils n'en 
demeure pas 1^, il court k Quebec oti il auoit entendu 
que le Pere qui cofeffe les Sauuages eftoit alle, il 
entre [53] chez nous tout defole, & fe iette aux pieds 
du Pere, luy racote fa tentatio, & le dager oti il a 
efte auec autat de regret que s'il euft comis le peche : 
les foufpirs & les larmes entrecoupoiet toutes fes 
paroles, il demade penitence: mo Pere, dit-il, ne 
m'efpargnez pas, ie vous prie dites moy ce qu'il faut 
faire, pour appaifer Dieu, ie fuis tout preft de vo^ 
obei'r quad vous me doneriez vne penitece capable de 
m'ofter la vie: 6 Dieu que ie mourrois volotiers pour 
celk! le Pere le cofola fort, eftat luy-mefme grade- 
ment cofole d'vne telle ferueur, & le r'enuoya auec 



1 642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 35 

indecency as with charms and attractions; she em- 
ployed every means thereto. The good young man 
resists her stoutly, — he reproves her, and shows her 
that God sees all, and that he looks at them. This 
makes her none the better; she renews the tempta- 
tion even two and three times. The devil works, on 
his side, and joins his forces to those of the woman; 
he attacks the heart of this poor Neophyte, exciting 
passion in him, and fiercely urging him. Behold 
him tempted without and within ; he nevertheless 
resists courageously, invokes the aid of God, and 
then, feeling that the danger is increasing, flees 
into the woods and abandons that wretched creature. 
Being then alone and retired, he kneels down, prays 
to God, and asks his pardon; he takes rods, and, 
stripping himself naked, severely chastises his whole 
body. It was in the midst of the snows, and in the 
heart of Winter, when the trees split with cold ; but 
the fear of having erred, and the dread of the temp- 
tation, make him resolve upon this penance. He 
stops not with that ; he hastens to Quebec, whither 
he had heard that the Father who confesses the Sav- 
ages had gone; he enters [53] our abode, in great 
distress, and casts himself at the Father's feet, telling 
him his temptation, and the danger in which he has 
been, with as much sorrow as if he had committed 
the sin. Sighs and tears interrupted all his words ; 
he asks penance. " My Father," he said, " spare me 
not ; I beg you, tell me what I must do to appease 
God, I am quite ready to obey you, though you 
should give me a penance capable of taking away 
my life. O God, how gladly would I die for that! " 
The Father greatly comforted him, being himself 
much consoled by such a fervor, and sent him away 



36 



LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 24 



vne penitence bien legere, & femblable a celle que 
plufieurs Ss. ont impofee en tel cas. 

Les Chrefties de Sillery ont contribue notablement 
de paroles & d'exeple k la conuerfion des Attica- 
meges, ils prenoiet le teps de faire les prieres publi- 
quemet en leur cabane, quad les Atticameges les 
venoiet voir : ils deffendoiet aux ieunes ges de cette 
natio de vifiter la nuidt les filles qu'ils recherchoiet en 
mariage, felo leurs vieilles couflumes, ils ne les inui- 
toient iamais aux feftins, que pour parler de Dieu & 
de la priere, come tons les principaux [54] tat de cette 
natio que de ceux de Sillery efloient vn iour allem- 
bl^s en vn feftin (ces feftins ne confiftet d' ordinaire 
qu'en deux chaudieres de bleds diuers auec vn mor- 
ceau d'oreignac ou de caftor) lean Baptifte qui auoit 
efte autheur des Atticameges prit la parole, & dift, 
ie ne fgauois autrefois ce que vouloient dire les Fran- 
9ois, quand ils nous parloient de Dieu: ie penfois 
qu'ils mentoient: mais i'ay recogneu qu'ils difent 
vray, & qu'en effet il y a vn Maiftre qui a tout fait, 
& qui gouuerne tout, & qui doit chaftier les mefchans 
d'vn feu eternel, & recompenfer k iamais les gens de 
bien au Ciel, le Capitaine des Atticameges tefmoigna 
vn grand contentement de ces paroles, & exhorta 
tons ces ieunes gens a bien apprendre ce que on leur 
enfeigneroit. 

Nous auons baptife ^a-bas enuiron cent Adultes, 
fans les enfans: voicy les paroles d'vn des chefs de 
Tadouflac: I'Automne paffe en la Chapelle des Vrfu- 
lines, auec quelques-vns de ces gens il parloit en vn 
confeil de Sauuages auat fon Baptef me : il y a trois 
ans que i'efcoute les Peres auec attention, & approuue 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 37 

with a very light penance, similar to that which 
several Saints have imposed in such case. 

The Christians of Sillery have notably contributed, 
by words and by example, to the conversion of the 
Atticameges ; they took the opportunity to say pray- 
ers publicly in their cabins, when the Atticameges 
came to see them: they forbade the young men of 
that nation to visit by night the maidens whom they 
sought in marriage, according to their old customs ; 
they never invited them to the feasts except to speak 
of God and of prayer. When all the principal men, 
[54] both of that nation and those of Sillery, were one 
day assembled at a feast (these feasts usually consist 
of nothing but two kettles of sundry grains, together 
with a piece of elk or of beaver), Jean Baptiste, who 
had been sponsor for the Atticameges, made a speech 
and said : " I formerly knew not what the French- 
men meant, when they spoke to us of God ; I thought 
that they were lying: but I have recognized that 
they speak true, and that in fact there is a Master 
who has made all things, who governs all, and who 
is to punish the wicked with an eternal fire, and to 
recompense the good people forever in Heaven." 
The Captain of the Atticameges betokened a great 
satisfaction with these words, and exhorted all those 
young men to learn well what should be taught 
them. 

We have baptized down here about a hundred 
Adults, without the children. Here are the words 
of one of the chiefs of Tadoussac, who last Autumn 
in the Chapel of the Ursulines, in company with 
some of those people, spoke in a council of Savages 
before his Baptism: " For three years I have been 
listening to the Fathers with attention, and approv- 



S8 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 24 

leurs difcours: i'ay pour cela attedu k me [55] faire 
baptifer iufque icy, parce que le Baptefme eft vne 
chofe importante "k laquelle il faut ferieufement pen- 
fer : quand on eft vne fois baptife, on ne pent plus 
reculer, il faut marcher, droit & viure en bon Chre- 
ftien: quelques-vns vous difent haftez vous de me 
baptifer, & puis au bout d'vn mois ou deux, ils 
perdent leur ferueur, & ne font quafi plus d'eftat de 
leur baptefme. le fens mon coeur qui me dit qu'il 
voudroit eftre Chreftien, il y a long temps, il ayme la 
priere, & neantmoins il n'ofe vous preller: c'efl done 
"k vous, mes Peres, d'en difpofer, voyez, efprouuez 
moy, & fi vous me iugez tel qu'il faut, vous me ferez 
vn plaifir extreme de me mettre au nombre des Chre- 
flies, & ie tafcheray d' eftre fidelle k Dieu, ie ne fuis 
pas feul, voicy plufieurs de mes gens qui attendent 
la mefme faueur : interrogez les tous les vns apres les 
autres, & voyez fi ie dis la verite, & fi eux-mefme 
font difpofez, comme il faut. Apres fon baptefme, 
& celuy de fa femme, il fut marie folemnellement k 
I'Eglife, quatre autres de fes gens auec leurs femmes 
receurent la mefme faueur des deux Sacremens de 
baptefme & du mariage. 

[56] Ie croy quit ne /era pas nial a propos de fernier ce 
Chapitre par vne lettre qu'vn Neophyte Chrejlien a di£l^e 
de foy-meftne pour ejire enuoy^e en France, h vn homme 
de conjideration fon bien-fa^eur, voyez fes propres termes 
& la faqon de s'enoncer. 

I? ADMIRE ce que vous faites, de ce que vous vouliez 

Nimakaterindam Ka tien, ka 8icli 

auoir piti^ de moy, de ce que vous vouliez auoir 

clia«erimien ka 8icli clia8erimacli 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 39 

ing their sermons; I have therefore waited to [55] 
be baptized, until this time, because Baptism is an 
important matter, upon which one must seriously 
think. When one is once baptized, one can no more 
retreat, one must walk straight, and live as a good 
Christian. Some tell you, ' Make haste to baptize 
me ; ' and then, after a month or two, they lose their 
fervor, and make scarcely any more account of their 
baptism. I feel my heart telling me that it would 
like to be Christian, this long time past; it loves 
prayer, and nevertheless it dares not urge you : it is 
for you, then, my Fathers, to dispose of it. See, try 
me, and if you judge me suitable, you will do me a 
very great pleasure to put me in the number of the 
Christians, and I will try to be faithful to God. I 
am not alone, — here are several of my people who 
await the same favor; ask them all, one after the 
other, and see if I speak the truth, and if they them- 
selves are properly inclined." After his baptism and 
that of his wife, he was solemnly married at the 
Church ; four others of his people, with their wives, 
received the same favor — the two Sacraments of 
baptism and of marriage. 

[56] / thifik that it will not be amiss to close this 
Chapter with a letter which a Christian Neophyte has 
dictated, by himself, to be sent to France, to a man of 
consideration, his benefactor; you see his own terms and 
manner of expression. 

I MARVEL at what you are doing, in that you are pleased 

Nimakaterindam Ka tien, ka wich 

to have pity on me, that you are pleased to have 

chawerimien ka wich chawerimach 



40 



LES RELA TIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 24 



pitie de ma femme & de mes enfans, nous ne fommes 

Nib' gaie ninithanifak Nikokbatifimin 

pas capables de vous remercier, celuy qui tout fait, 

Ki nak^mirang miffi Ka Kichitbtch 

c'eft celuy qui vous payera: tous les iours nous prions 

mi Ke kichikb'k kachigakir kigagarb'n- 

pour vous, i'ay dit au P. Vimont vines [sc. ecriuds] 

tambrimin Nitira Pere Vimont Maffi- 

vous : car ie n'y attends [sc. entends] rien : ie vous donne 

nahiker kit ketna nikikerindan, kimirir 

mon f ac a Petun : fut-il ainli qu' autre chofe ie vous 

nikachtipitagan, katira kotak nita mi- 

puiff e donner : vous luy ef crir^s, mon enfant 

riram kiga maffmahamaba. Ninitchanis 

lacques qui fe nomme, remercie voftre fils 

laques ka irintch bnakbmar khikbifis 

[57] lofeph qui eft appell^ il priera pour 

lofephet ka irintch bga gagarbnta- 

luy. Vous faites bien de ce que vous voulez auoir 

ma8ar. Kberatch entien ka bich Cha8e- 

piti6 de nous : f ortement nous croyons fut-il ainli que 

rimiang fbnka nitepb'etamin kat nita 

nous vous puffions voir en voftre pays, nous nous 



bapmirang 

verrons au Ciel: 

bantimin 8ak8ing 

Ie Pere Ie leune, 
kakina P. Ie leune 

auec les filles de I'hofpital, 
ikbefenfak 

maifon tout aupres 

kibam pechkliicli 

ie les honoreray, 

niga manatchihock, 

de ce qu'il en eft arriu6 d'eux, 

Ninch ka michagabatch 



endrakieg niga kichka- 

il vous expliquera tout 

kiga irbtamakba 

ie fuis comme demeurant 

kbnt nibintiKemack 
ce n'eft que comme vne 
k8nt peiik mi- 
nous demeurons toufiours 
nit'apimin eapitch 

nous fommes bien aifes 

nimir8erindamin 

vne qui efl 

peiik Ka 



1642-43] 



RELA TION OF 1642-43 



41 



pity 



able 



on my wife and children. We are not 

Niou gaie ninithanisak Nikokwatisimin 

to thank you ; he who does all, 

Ki nakoumirang missi Ka Kichitoutch 

it is he who will reward you ; every day we pray 

mi Ke kichikouk kachigakir kigagaroun- 

for you. I have said to Father Vimont: " Do you 

tamourimin Nitira Pere Vimont Massi- 

write this, for I understand nothing about it: '1 give you 

nahiker kir ketna nikikerindan, kimirir 

my Tobacco pouch ; should there be some other thing I 

nikachtipitagan, katira kotak nita mi- 

could give you, write to him. My child, 

riram kiga massinahamawa. Ninitchanis 

who is named, thanks your son, 

ka irintch otinakoumar khikwisis 

who is called ; he will pray for 

ka irintch ouga gagarounta- 

You do well in that you are pleased to have 

ka wich Chawe- 



Jacques 

Jaques 
[57] Joseph 

Josephet 

him. 

mawar. 



Kweratch entien 

pity on us ; firmly we believe. Would it were so that 

rimiang sounka nitepwetamin kat nita 

we could see you in your own country ; we shall 

wapmirang endrakieg niga kichka- 



see each other in Heaven. 

bantimin wakwing 

Father le Jeune. 

kakina P. le Jeune 

with the sisters of the hospital ; 

ikwesensak 

house, quite near 

kiwam pechkhich 

I shall honor them, 
niga manatchihock, 

that two of them have arrived, — 

Ninch ka michagawatch 



To you he will explain all, 

kiga iroutamakwa 

As it were, I am dwelling 
kotmt niwintikemack 

it is just like one 

kount peiik mi- 

we dwell. Always 

nit'apimin eapitch 

We are very glad 

nimirwerindamin 

one who is 

peiik Ka 



42 



LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



qui eft grande 

Ka Kin« fitch 

afin qu'elles 

itchi Ki- 

qu'elles ayent 

cha«e- 

de ce 

Ka 



petite I'autre 

agachinchitcli Kotak 

cela va bien de ce qu'elles font arriuees, 

K^eratch Ka tnicliaga«atch 

nous enfeignent & _ ^^^^ _ 

kinoliama«iiammt8a gaie itchi 

piti6 de nous. Nous fommes bien aifes 

rimiiamiiit«a. Nimir«erindamin 

qu'elles ont compaffion des malades car nous au- 

cha«erima«atch eak^firittii Ketna mi- 

[58] tres nous n'auons point cette couftume. nous nous 

ra«int nitichirini«akifimin Nipaki- 

abandonnons nous autres, quelquefois nous eftran- 

ritimin niraHint Naniki^tb'n«z ni- 

glons les malades: voila autrefois 

piskit^nebirenanak eakb'fitiik mi ta«ch 

comme nous f aifions ; voila pourquoy nous f om- 

echirini^akifiang mi ka 8ntchi mir8e- 

mes bien aifes de ce qu'elles font arriuees icv les 

rindamang 

veftues de b[l]anc: 

8abakoretiik 
puis ce temps-li 

ak« 

Nous admirons 

nimakaterindamin 

leur pays, 

«8atch endraki^atch 
trauailler ; pleuft a Dieu 

nita arokeC kat 



ki ak8 



icy 

ka michagaSatch «ndoire ka 

depuis qu'elles font arriuees c'eft de- 

michagabatch mi 

qu'elles ont compaffion de nous. 

cha«erimiiomint8a 

de ce qu'elles ont quitt6 

ka nagatahunt 

ie fuis aag6 ie ne puis plus 

Nifafikiska mini- 

qu'vn European m'ay- 

peiik «emichtig«ch «it- 



(Jaft a defricher la terre. 

chihitch itchi Kitikeian. 



1642-43] 



RELA TION OF 1642-43 



43 



little, 

agadiinchitch 

It is good for us 

Kweratch 

may teach us 



the other who is tall. 

Kotak Ka Kinousitch 

that they have arrived, so that they 

Ka michagawatch itchi Ki- 

and so that they may have 

kinohamawiiamintwa gaie itchi chawe- 

We are very glad that 

Nimirwerindamin Ka 

for the sick, for we oth- 

eakousirittii Ketna nii- 

we have not that custom, — we 

nitichiriniwakisimin Nipaki- 

we people ; sometimes we stran- 

nirawint Nanikoutounouz ni- 

the sick. It was thus formerly 

eakousitiik mi taouch 

that is why we are 

mi ka ountchi mirwe- 

that they have arrived here who 

ka michagawatch oundoire ka 

Since they have arrived, it is 

ki akou michagawatch mi 

that they have compassion on us. 

chawerimiiomintwa 



pity on us. 

rimiiamintwa. 

they have compassion 

chawerimawatch 

[58] ers, 

rawint 
forsake one another, 
ritimin 
gle 
piskitounebirenanak 

we were wont to do : 

echiriniwakisiang 

very glad 

rindamang 
are robed in white, 
wabakoretiik 
since that time 
akou 

We wonder 

nimakaterindamin 

their own country. 

ouwatch endrakiwatch 
would to God 
arokesi kat 



work; 

nita 

aid me 
chihitch 



that they have left 

ka nagatahunt 

I am old, — I can no more 

Nisasikis ka mini- 

that a European would 

peiik wemichtigouch wit- 



to cultivate the land. ' ' 
itchi Kitikeian.^ 



44 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



[59] CHAPITRE V. 

CONTINUATION DU MESME SUBIECT. 

ESTIENNE Pigarouich dont il eft parle aux pre- 
cedentes Relations nous a donne cette annee 
des tefmoignages de fon zele & de fa vertu, 
auffi remarquables que iamais. 11 arriua vn iour vne 
querele dans vne famille Chreflienne entre le mary 
& la f emme : ils f e f rapperent afTez rudement : Eftiene 
entre en la cabane & parle au mary en cette forte : il 
faut que les hommes ayent plus d'efprit que les 
femmes & qu'ils doptent mieux leur colere: vn bon 
moyen d'appaifer vne femme quand elle crie, c'eft de 
ne luy dire mot, ou bien fortir de la cabane, & la 
laifler crier toute f eule ; ie me fuis bien trouue de ce 
remede : quelquefois ie fais encor mieux, au lieu d'en 
fortir, ie luy fais [60] vne le9on fort doucement, eft- 
ce-la, luy dif-ie, ce qu'on vous enfeigne tous les iours 
& bien fafche toy: mais f9aclie que tu prens le 
chemin d'Enfer, & que tu feras bruflee par ta colere, 
ie trouue fouuent qu'elle s'appaife & fe prend k rire. 
Get home parmy fon zele eft ioyeux & agreable : il 
efloit vn iour dans vne cabane de Sauuages, ou Ton 
parloit de ce que les Peres auoient enfeign6 touchant 
le Sacrement de Conf efflon ; il f e mit k leur f aire vne 
queftion k tous les vnes apres les autres, f9auoir fl 
pour les pechez qu'ils auoient commis, on leur don- 
noit pour penitence de fe letter du haut du grand 
faut de Montmorency en bas (c'eft vn precipice d'eau 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 45 



[59] CHAPTER V. 

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 

ESTIENNE Pigarouich, of whom there is mention 
in the preceding Relations, has given us this 
year manifestations of his zeal and of his vir- 
tue, as remarkable as ever. There arose, one day, 
a quarrel in a Christian family between the husband 
and the wife : they struck each other quite violently. 
Estienne enters the cabin and speaks to the husband 
in this wise: " Men should have more sense than 
women, and should better control their anger. A 
good way to appease a woman, when she scolds, is 
to say not a word to her, or else to go out of the 
cabin and let her scold all alone ; I have had good 
success with this remedy. Sometimes I do still better ; 
instead of going out, I give her [60] a lesson very 
quietly. ' Is that,' I say to her, ' what you are taught 
every day? Very well, be angry: but know that 
thou art taking the way to Hell, and that thou wilt 
be burned by thine own anger. ' I often find that 
she becomes quiet and begins to laugh." 

This man, with all his zeal, is merry and agree- 
able. He was one day in a cabin of Savages, where 
mention was made of what the Fathers had taught 
concerning the Sacrament of Confession; he pro- 
ceeded to put a question to them all, one after the 
other, — to wit: if, for the sins which they had com- 
mitted, the penance were appointed them to cast 
themselves from top to bottom of the great fall of 



46 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

qui tombe d'vne motagne pres Quebec) le feroient- 
ils? refpondirent tous qu'ouy, pourueu qu'on leur 
enioignift, & moy auffi, dit-il, qui fuis le plus grand 
pecheur de tous, ie redoute I'Enfer, & crains fort que 
mes pechez ne m'y attirent, ie me foucie peu que 
mon corps foit englouti dans [6i] I'eau, mais ie 
fouhaite ardemment que mon ame aille au Ciel. 

La ftabilite du mariage ell vn des poindts des plus 
difficiles dans la conuerlion, & arreft des Sauuages, 
nous auons bien de la peine k I'obtenir & k le main- 
tenir. Vne ieune femme voulant abandonner fon 
mary fans iufte fubiedl, les principaux & plus zelez 
Sauuages s'allemblerent, & prierent Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur de leur permettre de faire vne petite prifon 
k Sillery, & y enfermer quelque temps cette femme, 
& la mettre en fon deuoir. Eftienne Pigarouich en 
prend la commiffion & la faidt faifir, & comme elle 
fut k la porte de la prifon, il luy tint ce difcours: ma 
niepce, prie bien Dieu toute la nuidt, tu auras du 
loifir, demande luy que tu deuienne fage, & que tu 
ne fois plus opiniaftre, endure cette prifon pour tes 
pechez, prends courage ; fi tu veux eftre obeylTante, 
tu n'y demeureras pas long-temps, elle entre fort 
paifiblement, fe laiffant conduire comme vn agneau, 
& demeura 1^ toute la nuidt ^ plate terre [62] fans feu 
& fans couuerture, c'eftoit le fecond iour de lanuier, 
au plus rude teps de I'hyuer: le lendemain matin le 
Pere de Rinen \sc. Quen] la fut vifiter auec Eftienne, 
& luy fift donner vn peu de pain & de la paille pour 
fe repofer, le Pere la voulut faire fortir vn peu de 
temps pour fe chauffer en vne chambre prochaine, 
puis la remettre en fon cachot, mais le Sauuage luy 
dift qu'elle deuoit endurer cela pour fes f antes, & 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 47 

Montmorency (this is a cataract of water which falls 
from a mountain near Quebec),'- would they do it? 
All answered " Yes, provided we were so enjoined." 
"And I too," said he, " who am the greatest sinner 
of all ; I dread Hell, and greatly fear that my sins 
may draw me into it: I care little that my body be 
swallowed up in [61] the water, but I ardently desire 
that my soul go to Heaven." 

The stability of marriage is one of the most per- 
plexing questions in the conversion and settlement 
of the Savages ; we have much difficulty in obtaining 
and in maintaining it. A young woman wishing to 
leave her husband without just cause, the principal 
and most zealous Savages assembled, and begged 
Monsieur the Governor to allow them to make a little 
prison at Sillery, and there to lock up this woman 
for some time, and bring her to her duty. Estienne 
Pigarouich undertakes this commission, and has her 
seized; and as she was at the door of the prison, he 
addressed her as follows: " My niece, pray earnestly 
to God all night, — thou wilt have leisure; ask him 
that thou mayst become sensible, and that thou mayst 
no longer be self-willed. Endure this prison for thy 
sins. Take courage ; if thou wilt be obedient, thou 
wilt not stay there long." She entered very peace- 
ably, suffering herself to be led like a lamb, and 
stayed there all night, flat on the ground, [62] with- 
out fire and without covering ; it was the second day 
of January, at the severest season of the winter. 
The next morning. Father de Quen went with Es- 
tienne to visit her, and saw to it that she was given 
a little bread, and some straw to rest on. The Fa- 
ther wished to have her go forth a little while, to 
warm herself in a neighboring room, then to put her 



48 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 24 

luy mefme I'encouragea k porter patiemment cette 
penitence : fur le foir pourtant on lugea "k propos de 
la deliurer, c'eftoit affez pour donner de la terreur ^ 
cette pauure creature, & vn petit commencement de 
police k ces nouueaux Chreftiens, ioint que la melan- 
cholie fe mettant dans I'efprit d'vn Sauuage, il en 
vient ^ de grandes extremitez, & fouuent ^ vne mort 
violente, le chaftiment a feruy k cette ieune femme, 
& k plufieurs autres. 

Le mefme Eftienne Pigarouich s'en vint trouuer 
vn de nos Peres, le lendemain de Noel de grand 
main, & luy dift : voila leur f efte, voila le iour de 
mon patron S. Eftienne, que pouray-ie [63] faire pour 
riionorer, le pere luy donna quelques enfeignemens, 
& fur tout luy fift voir comme faindt Eftienne auoit 
parle feruemment de Dieu, & donn6 fa vie pour la 
foy; il s'en va, & apres auoir entendu la Meffe, & 
Communis denotement, il inuite plufieurs Sauuages 
baptifez, & autres aulTi en vn feftin qu'il leur fift en 
I'honneur de faindt Eftienne fon Patron. Puis il leur 
parle ainfi, vous fcauez aflez mon nom de Baptefme, & 
vous auez ouy raconter auiourd'huy k la Meffe ce 
qu'a fait faindt Eftienne, eftat en ce monde, pluft a 
Dieu que ie I'imitaffe en fa vie & en fa mort, comme 
ie fais en fon nom, k tout le moins ie le veux faire 
en quelque chofe, c'eft k dire parlant de Dieu, & de 
la foy: c'eft done ce que ie fais maintenant, vous 
conuiant & coniurant tous, que nous viuions & mou- 
rions en la foy, que nous auons profeffee, & pour 
vous autres qui n'eftes pas baptifez, le feftin eft pour 
vous faire cognoiftre mon nom de Baptefme, c'eft 
Eflienne, ouy i'ayme le nom d'Eftiene, auffi m'eft 
il plus honorable, que celuy de Pigarouich, on ne 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 49 

back in her cell ; but the Savage told him that she 
ought to endure that for her faults, and he himself 
encouraged her to bear this penance patiently. To- 
ward evening, nevertheless, they Judged it proper 
to release her ; it was enough for inspiring terror in 
this poor creature, and was a little beginning of 
government for these new Christians, — moreover, 
melancholy fixing itself in the mind of a Savage, he 
comes to great extremities therein, and often to a 
violent death. The punishment sufficed for this 
young woman, and for several others. 

The same Estienne Pigarouich came to find one of 
our Fathers, very early on the morrow after Christ- 
mas, and said to him : ' * That was their feast ; here 
is the day of my patron St. Stephen, — what can I 
[63] do to honor him? The father gave him some 
instructions, and especially showed him how saint 
Stephen had spoken fervently of God, and given his 
life for the faith. He goes away, and, after having 
heard Mass, and devoutly received Communion, 
he invites several baptized Savages, and others also, 
to a feast which he prepared for them in honor of 
saint Stephen, his Patron. Then he speaks to them 
as follows: " You know very well my Baptismal 
name, and you have heard related to-day at Mass, 
what saint Stephen did while in this world. Would 
to God that I might imitate him in his life and in his 
death, as I do in his name! At the very least, I wish 
to do so in some respect, — that is, by speaking of 
God and of the faith. This is, accordingly, what I 
am now doing, inviting and entreating you all, that 
we live and die in the faith which we have professed ; 
and, for you others who are not baptized, the feast 
is to acquaint you with my name of Baptism, which 



60 



LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 24 



cognoift le dernier [64] qu'icy proche parmy quelque 
nombre de Sauuages que nous fommes : fi ie paffois 
la mer & que Ton me demandaft mon nom, on ne 
m'entendroit pas, fi ie difois, Pigarouich, mais fi ie 
nommois Eftienne, incontinent on fcauroit que ie fuis 
amy de Dieu, & de tous ceux qui prient, 8c que ie 
porte vn nom qui eft chery & prife au Ciel, & par 
toute la terre, c'eft done en confideration de ce nom 
& de celuy dont nous faifons auiourd'huy la fefte que 
ie fais feftin : Nous autres quand on nous donne le 
nom de quelqu'vn qui eft mort, pour en conferuer le 
memoire, on nous oblige par confequent des I'heure 
mefme d'imiter celuy que nous faifons reuiure, ne 
vous eftonnez done pas fi ie parle maintenant & 
prends la hardieffe de vous enfeigner, ie ne le fais 
que dans le defir que i'ay que tous nos ges embrallent 
la foy, & obeyffent k Dieu, & c'eft ce que defiroit 
Saindl Eftienne, en enfeignant ceux de fa nation, 
plufieurs feftins faits de la forte cette annee n'ont 
pas pen feruy k confirmer la ferueur de nos Chre- 
ftiens. Au [65] refte ils ne confiftent pour I'ordinaire 
qu'en vne grande chaudiere ou deux de bled d'Inde, 
ou de poids, auec vn cartier d'orignac ou de caftor, 
felon le nombre des conuiez, & ils les font pour 
s'entre-foulager en leur pauurete, & fe faire la cha- 
rite les vns aux autres, fi bien que faire vn feftin, 
c'eft icy k prefent le mefme que donner k manger 
^ ceux qui font en neceffite, & exercer vn ac5te de 
mifericorde. 

Nos Algonquins Chreftiens allerent vn iour ^ la 
chalfe auec quelques ieunes gens Atticameges nou- 
uellement arriuez, & qui n'auoient encor guere 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 51 

is Estienne. Yes, I love the name of Estienne, and 
it is also more honorable for me than that of Piga- 
rouich: the latter is known [64] only hereabout, 
among our small number of Savages. If I crossed 
the sea, and were asked my name, they would not 
understand me if I said Pigarouich ; but, if I called 
myself Estienne, straightway they would know that 
I am a friend of God, and of all those who pray, and 
that I bear a name which is cherished and prized in 
Heaven and throughout the earth. It is therefore 
in consideration of this name, and of him whose feast 
we celebrate to-day, that I am giving a feast. Among 
us, when we are given the name of some one who is 
dead, so as to preserve his memory, we are conse- 
quently obliged from that very hour to imitate him 
whom we cause to live again. Therefore, be not 
astonished if I now speak, and make bold to teach 
you; I do so only in the desire that I have, that all 
our people embrace the faith and obey God ; and that 
is what Saint Stephen desired, in teaching those of 
his nation." Several feasts prepared on that plan 
this year have served not a little to confirm the fer- 
vor of our Christians. In [65] fine, these generally 
consist of nothing but a great kettle or two of Indian 
corn, or of peas, with a quarter of moose or of bea- 
ver, according to the number of those invited, and 
they make them in order to comfort one another in 
their poverty, and to bestow charity upon one anoth- 
er, — insomuch that to make a feast is at present the 
same here as to feed those who are in necessity, and 
to exercise an act of mercy. 

Our Christian Algonquins went to the hunt one 
day with some young men of the Atticameges, newly 
arrived, who had as yet but little affection for the 



m LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

d'affedtion pour la foy, ils virent la pifbe de deux 
orignaux qui alloient I'vn a gauche, 1' autre k droidl, 
vn des Atticameges dift a nos Chrefliens, qui fera- 
ce de vous autres Chreftiens, qui nous baillera ^ 
manger? lequel tu[e]rez-vous des deux Orignaux? 
Eftienne entendit bien que cet homme vouloit taxer 
la priere, & mettoit fon efperance en fes fuperfti- 
tions, auec lefquelles il pretendoit inuoquer le demon, 
& faire bonne challe: il prift done la parole, & dift. 
Ce n'eft pas nous S^(>\ qui donnerons a manger, c'eft 
celuy qui gouuerne tout, nous efperons en luy, & 
non pas en nos iambes ny en nos tambours, s'il veut 
que nous prenions les premiers des orignaux, cela 
arriuera, nonobftant vos longleries, s'il veut que ce 
foit vous qui en preniez, il fera ainfi. Nous allons 
le prier qu'il nous affifte, & puis qu'il en difpofe, 
comme il voudra, alors il fit mettre tous fes compa- 
triotes k genoux, & les fit prier Dieu: les Attica- 
megues partiret les premiers pour fuiure les piftes 
d'vn de ces deux orignaux: mais en vain, ils furent 
obligez de retourner fans auoir rien rencontre, apres 
vn extreme I'afiitude. Les Algonquins partirent 
feulement fur le haut du iour, & fur le midy ils 
attraperent la befte qu'ils fuiuoiet, & la tuerent, puis 
retournats fur les piftes des Atticamegues, trouuerent 
encor I'autre, & la mirent a mort, «& retournerent 
fort ioyeux vers les Atticamegues, leur laifl^ant k tous 
vne tres-bonne odeur de noftre faindte foy, & vn 
defir du Baptefme. 

Vn des premiers Sauuages de TadoufTac nomme 
Achille, en fon Baptefme [67] par Monfieur le 
Cheualier de L'ifle, s'arrefta ^ Sillery, & y faifoit vne 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 53 

faith. They saw the trail of two moose, going one 
to the left, the other to the right. One of the Atti- 
cameges said to our Christians, " Which of you 
Christians shall it be, who will give us to eat? which 
of the two Moose will you kill?" Estienne plainly 
understood that this man wished to accuse prayer, 
and that he was putting his own hope in his supersti- 
tions, with which he pretended to invoke the evil 
spirit, and secure success in hunting. Accordingly, 
he made a speech, saying: "It is not we [66] who 
will give to eat, — it is he who governs all; we hope 
in him, and not in our legs or in our drums. If he 
will that we take the first of the moose, that will 
happen, notwithstanding your Juggleries; if he will 
that you be the ones to take them, it will be so. We 
are going to pray him to assist us ; and let him then 
dispose the matter as he will." Then he caused all 
his fellow countrymen to kneel and pray to God ; the 
Atticamegues were the first to follow the trail of 
one of those two moose: but in vain; they were 
obliged to return without having found anything, 
after extreme fatigue. The Algonquins set out only 
toward the middle of the day, and about noon they 
caught the beast which they were following, and 
killed it; then, returning upon the trail of the Atti- 
camegues, they found also the other, and put it to 
death, and returned very gayly to the Atticamegues, — 
leaving all of them an excellent opinion of our 
holy faith, and a desire for Baptism. 

One of the foremost Savages of Tadoussac — named 
Achille, at his Baptism, [67] by Monsieur the Cheva- 
lier de L'isle'^ — settled at Sillery, and there main- 
tained one of the best families. Some time after his 
baptism, he was attacked by a languishing sickness, 



,64 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

des meilleures families, quelque-temps apres auoir 
efte baptife, il fut attaque d'vne maladie languiffante, 
qui luy dura plus de deux ans & demy, pendant 
lefquels il tefmoigna toufiours vne grande conftance 
en la foy, & vne grande refignation k la volonte de 
Dieu: le mal redoublant, on le porte ^ I'Hofpital, Ik, 
oil il exerce des adtions de vertu fignalee, il eft meur 
pour le Ciel, Dieu I'appelle k foy, les Sauuages en 
demeurerent extr[em]emet affligez : car il efloit re- 
marquable parmy eux, & I'aymoient fort. Eftienne 
Pigarouich les voyant tons alTis autour du deffundt 
defolez au poffible, & les teftes baifCees, en figne de 
triftelTe, leur dift, mes freres, prenez courage, ne vous 
attriftez pas trop, nous n'auons pas embralle la foy, 
afin de viure long- temps gk-bas dans la terre: mais 
afin de bien viure, & d'aller au Ciel, I'excez de la 
triftelfe ne vaut rien, & defplaift k Dieu, & vous 
apportera du mal, que voftre triftefle foit courte & 
moderee, ne croyez vous pas que I'ame de cet homme 
qui [68] vient de mourir, & a creu fortement en Dieu, 
eft au Ciel, ou y fera bien-toft, pourquoy doncque 
pleurez vous? ne faut-il pas que nous mourrions 
tons? cette vie n'eft pas plus longue que le bout du 
doigt: mais celle que nous attendons n'a point de 
fin: c'eft ce que nous enfeigne la priere, faites en 
eftat, & la gardez conftamment parmy toutes les 
fafcheufes rencontres. Ce dif cours partant d'vn coeur 
feruent, & prononce d'vn ton ferme, effuya les larmes 
de ces pauures gens, & leur fift leuer les teftes qui 
tenoient bailees entre leurs mains. 

Charles Meiafk^at nous fournit encore cette annee 
dequoy confoler ceux qui ayment nos Sauuages. II 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 55 

whicli lasted more than two years and a half, during 
which he continually manifested a great constancy 
in the faith, and a great resignation to the will of 
God. The malady increasing, they carry him to the 
Hospital ; there, where he exercises acts of notable 
virtue, he is ripe for Heaven, and God calls him to 
himself. The Savages were extremely afflicted at 
this, for he was remarkable among them, and they 
loved him much. Estienne Pigarouich, seeing them 
all seated about the dead man, utterly desolate, with 
their heads bowed in token of sorrow, said to them : 
" My brothers, take courage ; do not grieve too much. 
We have not embraced the faith in order to live long 
here below, on the earth: but in order to live well, 
and go to Heaven. The excess of sorrow is of no 
avail; it displeases God, and will bring you harm; 
let your sorrow be brief and moderate. Do you not 
believe that the soul of this man who [68] has just 
died, and who has stoutly believed in God, is in 
Heaven, or will be there soon? why then do you 
weep? Must we not all die? This life is not longer 
than the tip of the finger; but the one which we 
expect has no end. That is what prayer teaches us ; 
make account of it, and observe it constantly amid all 
grievous occurrences." This speech, proceeding 
from a fervent heart, and pronounced in a firm tone, 
dried the tears of those poor people, and made them 
lift their heads, which they were holding bowed 
between their hands. 

Charles Meiaskwat this year again gives us occa- 
sion to comfort those who love our Savages. He is 
from Tadoussac, and lives at Sillery, in one of the 
houses built on the French plan. He landed from a 
journey to the three Rivers, a few days after the 



66 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.24 

eft de Tadouffac, & refide "k Sillery en vne des mai- 

fons bafties a la Fran9oife, il arriua d'vn voyage des 

trois Riuieres, peu de iours apres la mort de 

Monfieur Nicollet, la premiere nouuelle qu'il entendit, 

fut celle-1^, il leue incontinent les yeux au Ciel, prie 

Dieu pour fon ame, va droidt ^ noftre Eglife dire fon 

Chap[e]let pourledeffund;,&delk ^ la Chappelle [69] 

de I'Hofpital, oil il en fift autant, puis il vient nous 

voir chez nous, & trouuant le Pere de Quen en meil- 

leure fante qu'il ne I'auoit laiffe en partant, il luy 

dift ces mots, Mon Pere i'ay prie Dieu pour vous 

tous les iours, ie luy ay dit, mon Dieu guariffez le 

Pere qui nous enfeigne, fi vous voyez que cela foit 

bien, que fi vous voulez qu'il meure, faite qu'il aille 

droidt au Ciel : apres cel^ il demanda au Pere, ce qu'il 

falloit faire pour expier entierement vne faute dont 

il s'eftoit defia confeffe, le Pere luy expliqua les trois 

fortes de fatisfadlions, I'aumofne, I'oraifon, & le 

ieufne, le lendemain il s'en va ^ I'Hofpital voir les 

malades: I'vn defquels luy demanda vn drap, il fort 

fans delay, s'en va ^ Kebec, achete vn drap au ma- 

gazin, & I'apporte k ce malade, il a depuis toufjours 

continue cette charite enuers les pauures, & les 

infirmes, & prend vn fmgulier plaifir ^ les confoler & 

leur parler de Dieu. 

L'an palle eftant en Carefme dans les bois pour y 
faire fa chaffe & fa prouifion [70] de viande boucanee, 
il faifoit fa cuifme k part, afin de ne point manger de 
viande en Carefme, vn iour comme il faifoit cuire vn 
peu de poilTon dans vne petite chaudiere, fa femme 
qui n'eft pas Chreftienne, & qui efl d'vn humeur hau- 
taine, ietta de depit vne poignee de cendre dans la 



1642 - 43J RELA TJON OF 1642 - 43 57 



death of Monsieur Nicollet ; the first news that he 
heard was that. He straightway lifts his eyes to 
Heaven, prays to God for his soul, goes straight to 
our Church to recite his Rosary for the deceased, and 
thence to the Chapel [69] of the Hospital, where he 
does the same. Then he comes to see us at our abode, 
and finding Father de Quen in better health than he 
had left him on going away, he said to him these 
words: " My Father, I have prayed to God for you 
every day, I have said to him, ' My God, heal the 
Father who teaches us, if you see that that be well ; 
but if you will that he die, make him go straight to 
Heaven.' " After that, he asked the Father what he 
must do in order thoroughly to expiate a fault of 
which he had already made confession. The Father 
explained to him the three kinds of atonement — 
alms, prayer, and fasting. The next day he goes 
away to the Hospital to see the sick, one of whom 
asked him for a sheet ; he goes out without delay, 
proceeds to Kebec, buys a sheet at the store, and 
brings it to the sick man. Since then, he has always 
continued this charity toward the poor and the infirm, 
and takes a singular pleasure in comforting them, 
and in speaking to them of God. 

Last year, being in the woods during Lent, to hunt 
and make his provision [70] of smoked meat, he did 
his own cooking apart, so as not to eat meat in Lent. 
One day, when he was cooking a bit of fish in a small 
kettle, his wife, who is not Christian, and who is of 
a haughty temper, spitefully threw a handful of 
ashes into the kettle, mocking him and prayers : our 
good Charles, without growing angry or saying a 
single word, empties the kettle, goes after some wa- 
ter, and puts it back on the fire ; throwing, by that 



58 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.24 

chaudiere, fe mocquant de luy & des prieres: noftre 
bon Charles fans fe fafcher ny dire vn feul mot, 
vuide la chaudiere, va querir de I'eau, & la remet fur 
le feu, iettant par cet acte de patience vn bon verre 
d'eau fur la cholere, & I'orgueil de fa femme, qui 
n'ofa depuis rien faire. 

Voyant fon frere qui s'en alloit k la chaff e, & quel- 
ques autres Algonquins Chreftiens qui alloient au 
fort de Richelieu, il leur donna k tous chacun vne 
braffee de pourcelaine, large de trois doigts: c'eft vn 
prefent de valeur parmy eux, afin qu'ils fiffent tou- 
fiours eftat de la priere, & priffent garde de ne fe 
point perdre parmy les Algonquins de la haut, puis 
tirant [71] fon frere h. part (il s'appelle Euftache, & 
eft fort bon Chreftien) il luy bailla fon Crucifix, & 
luy dift, mon frere, priez toufiours deuant le Cruci- 
fix, & puis quand vous aurez prie baifez-le auec 
amour & refpedt, fouuenez vous de moy en vos pri- 
eres, & prenez courage : reuenez le plutoft que vous 
pourrez, afin d'eftre enfeignez, fouuenez-vous que 
Dieu eft par tout, & qu'il vous void toufiours, ne 
faites rien de mal, gardez les Dimanches, & les 
Feftes, ayez a cet effedt vn papier qui les marque, 
pour moy ie ne fgay encor ou i'iray, ie feray ce que 
me dira celuy qui commande icy, ie ne difpofe pas 
de ma perfonne, & ie ne le veux pas faire : Car ie 
f9ay que Dieu veut que nous defpendions de ceux 
qu'il a mis c'k-bas en fa place. I'iray k la chafl^e du 
cofle qu'il me dira, puis ie remmeneray le prifonnier 
en fon, pays, fi on m'en donne la commiffion, au cas 
que ie ne vous voye plus, ie vous fais heritier de tout 
mon petit meuble, de mon lidt, de mes rets, de [72] 



i 
i 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 59 

act of patience, a full glass of water over the anger 
and the pride of his wife, who after that dared to do 
nothing. 

Seeing his brother going away to the hunt, and 
some other Christian Algonquins, who were going to 
the fort of Richelieu, he gave to each one of them an 
arm's length of porcelain, three fingers wide, which 
is a present of value among them, — so that they 
should always have regard for prayer, and take care 
not to go astray among the Algonquins up there. 
Then, taking [71] his brother aside (whose name is 
Eustache, and who is a very good Christian), he gave 
him his Crucifix, and said to him: '* My brother, 
pray constantly before the Crucifix, and then, when 
you shall have prayed, kiss it with love and respect. 
Remember me in your prayers, and take courage; 
return as soon as you can, so as to be taught. Re- 
member that God is everywhere, and that he sees 
you always ; do nothing wrong ; keep Sundays and 
Feast days: have for this purpose a paper which 
marks them. As for me, I know not yet where I 
shall go ; I will do what he who commands here shall 
tell me. I do not dispose of my own person, and I 
do not wish to ; for I know that God wishes that we 
depend on those whom he has put here below in his 
place. I will go to the hunt in the direction that he 
shall tell me ; then I will guide the prisoner back to 
his own country, if they give me that commission. 
In case I do not see you again, I make you heir to all 
my little furniture, to my bed, to my nets, to [72] 
my French dishes; you are already with me in pos- 
session of the little French house which the Fathers 
have given us. If I go as far as the country of the 
Albenaquiois, with the prisoner whom I am to leave 



60 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 24 

mes plats Fran§ois, vous eftes delia auec moy en 
pofTeffion de la petite maifon Frangoife, que les Peres 
nous ont donnee, li ie vay iufque au pays des Albena- 
quiois auec le prifonnier que ie dois quitter Ik, ie 
voudrois bien auoir vn interprete, pour leur parler de 
Dieu & de la foy, ie le ferois bien volontiers. 

Cet homme femble plein de I'efprit de Dieu en fes 
paroles, & en fes adtions, Dieu luy accorda fon delir: 
car il euft pour compagnon de fon voyage vn ieune 
homme natif du pays des Abenaquiois mefme, & qui 
parle fort bien leur langue, & eft bon Chrellien, il 
ont tons deux remene le prifonnier, & ont hyuerne 
aux Abenaquiois, oil Charles a efficacement prefche 
la loy de Dieu: mais comme ces gens n'ont cognoif- 
fance ny commerce auec autre perfonne qu'auec quel- 
ques Anglois habituez Yk, & font forts fubiets k I'y- 
rongnerie, par le moyen de la boiffon qu'ils traitet 
auec les heretiques, & auec les nauires de la cofte, 
les difcours de noftre bo Chreflien n'euret pas tant 
d'effet, vn des [73] Capitaines Abenaquiois pourtant 
la fuiuy & a protefke qu'il abandonnoit fon pays pour 
refider icy, & fe faire inflruire, afin d'eftre Baptif6, 
il y trauaille maintenant & femble d'vne humeur 
docile, & defirer fortement le Baptefme: Tiffue le 
fera voir: il le faut efprouuer k loifir, I'experience 
nous apprend icy & aux Hurons que la multitude de 
Sauuages baptifez, & peu efprouuez ne fert pas beau- 
coup k I'auancement du Chriftianifme, nous voyons k 
I'ceil qu'vn Sauuage bien efprouu6, bien conuerty & 
conflant en fa refolution, fait beaucoup plus pour 
eftendre la foy & attirer toute vne nation, qu'vne 
multitude lafche & inconflante. 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 <31 

there, I would like to have an interpreter, in order 
to speak to them of God and of the faith : I would do 
so very gladly." 

This man seems full of the spirit of God in his 
words and in his deeds. God granted him his de- 
sire : for he had as companion on his journey a young 
man who is a native of that very country of the Abe- 
naquiois, who speaks their language very well, and 
is a good Christian. These two led back the prison- 
er, and wintered with the Abenaquiois, where 
Charles efficaciously preached the law of God ; but — 
as those people have no acquaintance or commerce 
with any one else, except with some English who are 
wont to go there ; and are much given to drunken- 
ness by means of the liquor that they get in trade 
with the heretics, and with the vessels of the coast — 
the discourses of our good Christian had not so much 
effect. One of the [73] Abenaquiois Captains, how- 
ever, followed him and protested that he was forsak- 
ing his own country in order to dwell here and obtain 
instruction, so as to be Baptized, He is working to 
that end now, and seems of a docile temper, and 
very desirous of Baptism; the result will appear, — 
we must prove him at leisure. Experience teaches 
us here and among the Hurons, that the multitude 
of Savages baptized and little tried, serves not much 
for the advancement of Christianity ; we see clearly 
that one Savage well tried, well converted, and con- 
stant in his resolution, does much more to extend 
the faith and attract a whole nation, than a weak and 
inconstant multitude. 

Our good Charles, while with the Abenaquiois, 
went with them to visit the English in their settle- 
ment.'* He took them for Frenchmen, — the Savages 



62 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

Noftre bon Charles eftant aux Abenaquiois, fut 
auec eux vifiter les Anglois en leur habitation, il les 
prenoit pour des Franjois, ils ne f^auent pas encor 
diflinguer les Europeans, ny de nation, ny de reli- 
gion : Charles done croit aller voir des Frangois : eftant 
entre il tire fon Chapellet, & en fait monftre : vn An- 
glois prend la parole, & luy dit, c'eft le Diable qui a 
trouue ce que tu [74] tiens, c'eft vne inuention du 
demon: Charles fans fe troubler le regarde, & luy 
dit: mais c'eft le diable qui le fait parler & luy met 
fes paroles en la bouche, tu mefprifes le fils de Dieu 
& fa Mere. L'Anglois ne fceut que dire voyant vn 
homme fi refolu, «& qui n'entendi autre raifon que fa 
foy. Charles tire de rechef vne belle image : car il 
eft fourny de toutes les inftrudlios de deuotion : I'he- 
retique le voyant luy monrtra vn vieil linge a terre, 
& luy dift, ce que tu tiens ne vaut pas mieux que 
cela. Charles le regarde de rechef, & luy dift. 
Crois-tu que Dieu te voye & t'entends. S^ais-tu bien 
que tu bruleras dans I'enfer, puifque tu mefprifes ce 
que Dieu a fait & ordonne, depuis ce temps-Ik les 
heretiques le laifferent en paix. 

Ce bon homme a eu la confolation de voir baptifer 
le Capitaine Abnaquiois qui le fuiuit. Ce chapitre 
eftoit defia efcrit quand ce Profelyte preffant fon 
baptefme fe vit enrichy d'vn furcroy de faueur qu'il 
n'attendoit pas: car Monfieur le Cheualier de Mont- 
magny voulut ellre fon Parain, au nom du Grand [75] 
Maiftre de Malte : Ce Prince vrayment zel6 pour 
lefus-Chrift, luy refcriuant, I'exhorte de continuer 
fon zele, & de redoubler fa ferueur, pour la gloire du 
Roy du Ciel, & pour le feruice de fa Maiefte tres- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 63 

do not yet know how to distinguish the Europeans, 
either by nation or by religion ; Charles therefore be- 
lieves that he is going to see some Frenchmen, Hav- 
ing entered, he takes his Beads, and shows them ; an 
Englishman addresses him, saying: " It is the Devil 
who invented that which thou [74] boldest ; it is an 
invention of the evil spirit," Charles, without being 
disturbed, looks at him, and says to him: " But it is 
the devil who makes him speak, and puts his own 
words into his mouth. Thou despisest the son of 
God and his Mother," The Englishman knew not 
what to say, seeing a man so rfesolute, who under- 
stood no other argument than his own faith. Charles 
again draws forth a beautiful image ; for he is fur- 
nished with all the instructions for devotion. The 
heretic, seeing him, showed him an old rag on the 
ground, and said to him, " What thou boldest is 
worth no more than that." Charles looks at him 
again, and says to him: '* Believe this, that God sees 
and hears thee. Know certainly that thou wilt burn 
in hell, since thou despisest what God has made and 
ordered." After that time, the heretics left him in 
peace. 

This good man has had the comfort of seeing the 
Abnaquiois Captain who followed him, baptized. 
This chapter was already written when that Prose- 
lyte, urging his baptism, saw himself enriched with 
an increase of favor, which he was not expecting, — 
for Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny wished to 
be his Godfather, in the name of the Grand [75] Mas- 
ter of Malta. This Prince, truly zealous for Jesus 
Christ, writing back to him, exhorts him to continue 
his zeal, and to increase his fervor, for the glory of 
the King of Heaven, and for the service of his most 



64 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.24 

Chreflienne, qui I'honorant comme il dit, d'vn Gou- 
uemement temporel, le fauorife bien dauantage, luy 
donnant vn employ oil il y a tant de Couronnes a 
amaffer pour I'Eternit^: aufll eft-il vray que ce braue 
Cheualier ne laiffe perdre aucune fleur ny aucune 
perle qui puiHe feruir pour les efloffer. 






4 



I 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 



65 



Christian Majesty,— who, honoring him, as he says, 
with a temporal Government, favors him much more 
by giving him an office in which there are so many 
Crowns to gather for Eternity. It is certain, more- 
over, that this worthy Chevalier allows no flower or 
pearl to be lost, which can serve as material for 
these. 



66 



LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol. 24 



[y^] CHAPITRE VI. 

DE LA VENUE DES ATTICAMEGES & DE LEUR BAP- 

TESME. 

LES Atticameges font vne des Nations que nous 
auons au Nort, ils demeurent k trois ou quatre 
iournees du grand fleuue dans les terres. L'au- 
tomne paffe 1642. treize canots faifant enuiron foi- 
xante perfonnes, defcendirent en traite aux trois 
riuieres, c'eftoient mefnages entiers contre I'ordinaire 
de ces peuples qui n'enuoyent que les plus robuftes 
en ces voyages, k raifon de I'extreme difficult^ des 
chemins. Mais comme ils auoient vn deffein plus 
releu^ que celuy de la traite, & qui leur eftoit infpire 
de Dieu, les families entieres en voulurent iouyr. En 
voicy I'occafion, lean Baptifle Capitaine des Monta- 
gnets, & refidens ^ Sillery, & qui tire luy mefme fon 
origine du pays des Atticameges, [77^ fut touchy dVn 
zele & defir de leur Salut. II inuita done leur Capi- 
taine auec prefens felon fa couftume, pour venir voir 
I'habitation de Sillery, & les defers qu'on leur a fait, 
& enfemble entendre parler de la Loy de Dieu : ils 
accepterent les prefens & fe refolurent d'obeyr. Le 
Pere Buteux qui efloit aux trois riuieres, quand ils 
y arriuerent, les confimia dans leur refolution, ils 
defcendent done ^ Sillery fur le commencement de 
Nouembre 1642. & fe cabanent pres de lean Baptifte. 
Tons nos Chreaiens les receuret auec beaucoup de 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 67 



[76] CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE COMING OF SOME ATTICAMEGES, AND OF THEIR 

BAPTISM. 

THE Atticameges are one of the Nations whom 
we have in the North ; they live three or four 
days' journey from the great river, inland. 
Last autumn, 1642, thirteen canoes, containing about 
sixty persons, came down to the trade at the three 
rivers; they were entire households, contrary to the 
usual practice of those peoples, who send only the 
most robust on such journeys, on account of the 
extreme difficulty of the roads. But as they had a 
nobler object than that of trade, and one which was 
inspired in them of God, these families wished to 
attain it all together. This was the occasion of their 
coming: Jean Baptiste, Captain of the Montagnais, 
a resident at Sillery, and himself deriving his origin 
from the country of the Atticameges, [y7'\ was moved 
with a zeal and desire for their Salvation. Accord- 
ingly, he invited their Captain, with gifts according 
to his custom, to come and see the habitation of Sil- 
lery, and the clearings that have been made for them, 
and together hear mention of the Law of God ; they 
accepted the gifts, and resolved to obey. Father 
Buteux, who was at the three rivers when they ar- 
rived there, confirmed them in their resolution ; they 
then come down to Sillery toward the beginning of 
November, 1642, and encamp near Jean Baptiste. 
All our Christians received them with much charity ; 



68 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 24 

charite, chacun fe cotife pour leur fournir leur petite 
prouifio d'anguilles, & de bled d'inde. Voicy la 
fa§on, vn des principaux Neophytes fort de fa cabane 
fait vne criee publique de la part du Capitaine, 
remonflrant la venue de ces bonnes gens & leur 
deffein: cela fuffit, chacun court k fon petit magalin, 
pred vn bo paquet & leur porte fans delay & gayemet. 
Le Capitaine Atticamege auec cinq ou fix des plus 
remarquables, s'en vient k Quebec pour faluer Mon- 
feigneur le Gouuerneur, & luy rendre raifon de leur 
arriuee [78] lean Baptifle & Noel Tek^erimatch auec 
deux de nos Peres les accompagnerent, ils remon- 
flrent done comme lean Baptifte leur a parl6 de 
noftre faindte foy, & du fecours que les Fran9ois leur 
donnoient du grand foing que Mofieur le Gouuerneur 
prend de ceux qui veulent croire en Dieu, que c'eft 
ce qui les a amenez : qu'apres auoir efl6 inftruits & 
baptifez, ils retourneroient en leur pays porter les 
nouuelles k leurs Compatriotes, Monfieur le Gouuer- 
neur les recent auec beaucoup d'affedtion, les encou- 
ragea d'efcouter les Peres, & bien apprendre ce qui 
efloit de leur Salut, puis ioignant les effedts aux 
paroles, leur fait donner vne bonne prouifion de bois 
& de gallette: ils s'en retournent a Sillery tous rauis 
de ioye & fe mettent k elludier auec ardeur, le Cathe- 
chifme & les prieres, le Pere Buteux fut leur maiftre. 
La moitie ont efte baptifez, tous les autres font Cate- 
cumenes & dans vn fort defir du mefme bon-heur. 
Mais on les differe pour de iuftes raifons, il efl bo 
d'efprouuer long-temps les Sauuages fur tout quand 
on fe doute que I'intereft teporel [79] les porte, ou 
qu'ils font plus attachez a leurs erreurs; il n'v a 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 69 

each one taxes himself in order td furnish them their 
little store of eels and of Indian corn. It is done in 
this fashion: one of the principal Neophytes goes 
forth from his cabin, and makes a public proclama- 
tion on the part of the Captain, representing the 
coming of these good people, and their design. 
That is enough ; each one runs to his little store- 
house, takes a goodly bundle, and carries it to them 
without delay, and cheerfully. The Atticamege 
Captain, with five or six of the most notable persons, 
proceeds to Quebec, to greet Monseigneur the Gov- 
ernor, and render him account of their arrival. [78] 
Jean Baptiste and Noel Tekwerimatch, with two of 
our Fathers, accompanied them. They then relate 
how Jean Baptiste has told them of our holy faith, 
and of the help which the French were giving them ; 
of the great care which Monsieur the Governor takes 
of those who are willing to believe in God, — that 
this is what has brought them ; that, after having 
been instructed and baptized, they would return to 
their own country to carry the news to their fellow 
Countrymen. Monsieur the Governor received them 
with much affection, encouraged them to listen to 
the Fathers, and to learn thoroughly that which con- 
cerned their Salvation; then, adding deeds to words, 
he sees to it that they are given a good supply of 
wood and of biscuit. They return to Sillery, quite 
carried away with joy, and proceed to study with 
ardor the Catechism and the prayers ; Father Buteux 
was their teacher. The half have been baptized ; all 
the others are Catechumens, and exceedingly desir- 
ous of the same blessing. But they are put off for 
good reasons ; it is well to try the Savages a long 
time, — especially when one suspects that temporal 



70 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

nation pour barbare qu'elle foit qui n'ayt ces fuperfti- 
tions. Ceux-cy dont il eft queftion, mettent toute 
leur confiance en leurs tambours, leurs f eflins & leurs 
fu[e]ries qu'ils font pour inuoquer le manitou & pour 
chaffer la maladie & la faim, ces erreurs qui ne fem- 
blent que les niaiferies, les poffedoiet puiffammet, ils 
ne croyoiet pas eux-mefmes s'e pouuoir iamais def- 
faire, ils approuuoient pour la plus part la priere, 
comme chof e bonne & neceffaire : mais au refte ne 
vouloiet pas quitter leurs fuperftitions, croyans que 
c'efloit s'expofer aux miferes qu'ils redoutoient le 
plus, I'exemple des Chreftiens de Sillery, & I'inftru- 
a;ion continuelle les a defabufez & leur a peu ^ peu 
arrache cette fottife de I'efprit auec les inftrumens 
dont ils f e feruoient pour les pratiquer : la marque la 
plus certaine que quelqu'vn vouloit doner de fa bone 
volote, eftoit d'apporter fon tabour aux peres qui les 
enfeignoiet, plufieurs le firent d^s le comencement 
de I'hyuer & fe redirent capables d'eftre enrolls au 
nombre [80] des enfans de Dieu, ie toucheray icy ce 
qui s'efl paffe de plus remarquable au Baptefme de 
quelques-vns. 

Le premier qui y fut receu, fut vn appell6 Ani- 
koutchi nomm6 Michel en fon Baptefme, c'efl vn 
ieune homme aage d'enuiron 25. ans qui a apporte 
vn foin incroyable a fe faire inftruire, & h. receuoir 
ce qu'on luy difoit: toutes fes penfees n'efloient que 
de la priere, voire fes fonges; fi bien qu'en dormant, 
il luy fembloit efcouter quelque inflrudtion, ou repe- 
ter ce qu'il auoit appris. Vn iour le Pere le voulant 
moderer, luy difl qu'il ne vint pas fi fouuent, & qu'il 
fe degouteroit de la priere, ii on I'inflruifoit fi long- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 71 

interest [79] moves them, or that they are more 
attached to their errors; there is no nation, however 
barbarous, which has not its superstitions. The lat- 
ter class in question put their whole confidence in 
their drums, their feasts, and their sweats, which 
they make in order to invoke the manitou, and to 
drive away sickness and hunger. These errors, 
which seem nothing but silly nonsense, possessed 
them thoroughly, — they themselves did not believe 
they could ever get rid of them. Most of them 
approved prayer as something good and necessary : 
but, for the rest, they were not willing to quit their 
superstitions, believing that this was to expose them- 
selves to the miseries which they dreaded most. The 
example of the Christians of Sillery, and continual 
instruction, have undeceived them and have, little 
by little, plucked away this folly of the understand- 
ing, and with it the instruments which they used for 
practicing their superstitions. The most certain 
mark of his good will that any one wished to give, 
was to bring his drum to the fathers who were teach- 
ing them; several did so at the beginning of the 
winter, and rendered themselves capable of being 
enrolled in the number [80] of the children of God. 
I will here allude to the more notable incidents 
which occurred at the Baptism of certain persons. 

The first who was thus received, was one called 
Anikoutchi, named Michel at his Baptism; he is a 
young man about 25 years old, who has displayed 
incredible care to be instructed, and to receive what 
was said to him. All his thoughts were wholly of 
prayer, and even his dreams ; insomuch that while 
sleeping it seemed to him that he was listening to 
some instruction, or repeating what he had learned. 



72 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 24 

temps, ne crains pas cela, dit-il, tu ne m'en f§aurois 
tant dire comme i'en defire, ie me puis bien fouler de 
viande ou d' autre chofe, mais non pas de ce qui 
touche la foy: c'eft ce qui me plaift, c'eft ce que ie 
cheris par delTus toutes les chofes du monde, tout ce 
que ie vols de beau parmy vous autres Fran9ois, ne 
me touche point: il n'y a que voflre foy & voflre 
fa9on de prier Dieu, qui me rauit Ie coeur: ie ne 
fouhaitte que cela de [8i] vous, comme il euft apris 
qu'vn certain, dont ie parleray cy-apres, auoit appor- 
te fon tambour au Pere, il s'y en vint auffi, & luy 
dift: comment tu ne m'as pas demande Ie mien? Ie 
voila, ie I'auois defia iette, ie ne f9ais ou: dis moy, 
s'il y a quelque autre chofe ^ quitter, afin d'efhre 
mieux difpofe k mon baptefme, dis Ie moy au plu- 
tofl : car ie fuis pres de I'executer. Ie ne me foucie 
plus de ce que pourroient dire de moy ceux de ma 
nation : ie ne voudrois pas en tout autre chofe leur 
defplaire ; mais en ce qui eft de la foy & du feruice 
de Dieu, il m'importe peu de leur plaire ou defplaire. 
lis fe mocquet de moi, de ce que ie vay quelquefois 
coucher chez vous, ie ne m'en mets guere en peine, 
ie Ie fais pour gagner Ie temps, & I'occafion: tu n'as 
pas de loifir Ie long du iour, que tu vifites les Ca- 
banes; la nuidt tu as Ie temps de m'enfeigner. Vn 
foir tout tard, Ie Pere retournant des Cabanes oti il 
auoit fait I'inflrudtion, tomba du haut en bas d'vne 
montagne fort gliffante, & enfon9a dans les neiges, 
la cheute fut affez rude & dangereufe. Ce bon ieune 
homme qui I'accompagnoit [82] afin d'aprendre tou- 
fiours quelque bon mot, Ie voyant en c6t eftat, & vne 
petite lanterne a fa main, pour fe fauuer des preci- 



1642 -43J RELATION OF 1642-43 73 

One day, the Father, wishing to moderate him, told 
him that he should not come so often, and that he 
would lose his taste for prayer, if he were taught so 
long. " Fear not that," he said; " thou couldst not 
tell me so much of it as I desire. I can indeed sur- 
feit myself with meat or other things, but not with 
that which concerns the faith ; that is what I like, 
that is what I cherish above all things in the world. 
Whatever beautiful thing I see among you French, 
touches me not : it is only your faith and your man- 
ner of praying to God, which ravishes my heart ; I 
desire only that from [81] you." When he had 
learned that a certain man, of whom I shall speak 
hereinafter, had brought his drum to the Father, he 
came on the same errand, and said to him : ' ' Why 
hast thou not asked for mine? here it is; I had 
already thrown it away, I know not where ; tell me 
if there is anything else to be given up, so as to be 
better prepared for my baptism ; tell me at once, for 
I am ready to carry it out. I care no more for what 
those of my nation might say of me ; I would not in 
anything else displease them, but in that which is 
of the faith and of the service of God, it matters little 
to me to please or displease them. They mock at 
me because I sometimes go to spend the night with 
you, but I scarcely vex myself for that, I do so in 
order to gain time and opportunity; thou hast no 
leisure during the day, when thou art visiting the 
Cabins ; at night thou hast the time to teach me. ' ' 
One evening, quite late, the Father, returning from 
the Cabins where he had given instruction, fell from 
top to bottom of a very slippery hill, and sank 
in the snows ; the fall was quite severe and danger- 
ous. This good young man — who was accompany- 



74 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

pices de glaces & de neiges; s'efcria, 6 que les Sau- 
uages qui ne veulent pas croire, ne voyent ils la peine 
que vous prenez pour eux, ils iugeroient par Ik que 
la priere eft vne chof e de confequence ; & en effect 
plufieurs de fes compatriotes eftoient touchez, voyas 
qu'on ne s'epargnoit ny foir ny matin parmy des 
chemins & des teps fi rudes, pour les enfeigner. Ce 
ieune home done fut choill auec vne ieune fille fa pa- 
rente, aag^e d'enuiron quinze ans, fort modefte, d'vn 
bon efprit, & bien inftruite, afin d'eftre, comme les 
premices de la foy entre les autres de cette nation du 
Nort. Nous priafmes Mofieur le Gouuerneur d'hono- 
rer leur baptefme, & de feruir de Parain, il le fit fort 
volontiers, & choifift pour cet effet I'Hofpital confa- 
Qx€ au precieux fang de lefus-Chrift. Les principaux 
Sauuages s'y trouuerent tous. Ce ieune homme & 
cette ieune fille eftoient rauis d'aife de leur bon- 
heur, ils refpondirent "k toutes les queftions & [83] 
interrogations auec vne hardieffe & modeftie qui ne 
reffentoit rien du Sauuage. Monfieur le Gouuerneur 
donna le nom de Michel au ieune homme, nous efpe- 
rons que le glorieux Archange protedteur de toute 
I'Eglife, eftend[r]a fon bras & fa force pour la def- 
fence de ces nouueaux Chreftiens du Nord, & de ces 
peuples les plus delaiffez du monde. La fille fut 
nommee Marie. Apres le baptefme Monfieur le 
Gouuerneur fit vn feftin remarquable pour le pays, k 
quarante des premiers Sauuages. Les Atticamegues 
le remercierent, & luy tefmoignerent vn grand con- 
tentement de voir cet heureux commencement parmi 
leur nation. En voicy vn autre qui n'a pas tefmoigne 
moins d'ardeur & de courage en fon baptefme: c'eft 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 75 

ing him, [82] so as to be always learning some good 
word — seeing him in this plight, with a small lan- 
tern in his hand in order to save himself from the 
precipices of ice and snow, exclaimed: " Oh, that the 
Savages who will not believe might see the pains 
that you take for them ; they would judge by that, 
that prayer is a thing of consequence." And, in 
fact, several of his fellow countrymen were touched, 
seeing that no pains were spared either morning or 
evening, amid roads and weather so rough, in order 
to teach them. This young man was then chosen, 
together with a young girl his kinsmaid, about fif- 
teen years old, very modest, of a good mind, and 
well instructed, — that they might be, as it were, the 
first fruits of the faith among the others of that nation 
of the North. We begged Monsieur the Governor 
to honor their baptism, and to serve as Godfather; 
he did so very willingly, and chose for this purpose 
the Hospital consecrated to the precious blood of 
Jesus Christ. The principal Savages were all there. 
This young man and this young girl were delighted 
with their good fortune ; they answered all the ques- 
tions and [83] interrogations with a confidence and 
modesty that indicated nothing of the Savage. Mon- 
sieur the Governor gave the name of Michel to the 
young man; we hope that the glorious Archangel, 
protector of the whole Church, will stretch forth his 
arm and his might, for the defense of these new 
Christians of the North, and of these peoples, the 
most forsaken in the world. The girl was named 
Marie. After the baptism, Monsieur the Governor 
made a feast, remarkable for the country, for forty 
of the leading Savages. The Atticamegues thanked 
him, and showed him their great satisfaction at 



76 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.24 

vn appelle Antoine ou OiiabaKoiiachits, aage d'enui- 
ron cinquante ans : ce f ut luy qui le premier de tous 
apporta fon tambour au Pere, apres I'auoir ouy dif- 
courir vn foir h. I'ordinaire des chofes de Dieu, il s'ef- 
cria tout haut, il eft vray tu as raifon, & ie protefte 
deuant tous ceux qui m'efcoutent que ie ne veux 
plus auoir de recours au diable, [84] ny k mes fuper- 
ftitions, ie les defauoiie, & en quitte tous les inftru- 
mens, & veux eflre baptif6, tien voilk mon tambour, 
il le iette deuant tous, & comme ce fut le premier 
qui fift publiquement «& hardiment cette adlion, il fut 
fort loiie de tous les Chreftiens. C6t homme a de 
grands fentiments des chofes de Dieu & de la foy, il 
n'y a rie, difoit-il vn iour, qui m'atrifte tant que 
de voir que i'ay fi long-temps obey au diable, & n'ay 
pas cognu celuy qui a tout fait, & qui conferue tout, 
& i'ay fi peu de chofe pour I'lionorer & le prier. Ah! 
que ne fuis-ie comme mes enfans qui eftans encor 
ieunes, ont I'efprit vif & la memoire bonne, pour 
retenir ce qu'on leur enfeigne. Ie me veux fouuent 
fafcher contre eux de ce qu'ils ne m'enfeignent pas 
tant, comme ie voudrois. C'eftoit vn plaifir de voir 
c6t homme aag6 de cinquante ans fe faire inftruire 
par vne fienne petite fille de dix ans, il la faifoit 
feoir aupres de luy, repetoit apres elle fon Pater, fon 
Aue, & toutes les prieres, fe faifoit interroger du 
Catechifme, comme vn Efcolier par fon Maiftre, il 
fut baptif6 ^ noftre-Dame des [85] Anges, auec vne 
fmguliere confolation de nos Peres qui y alTifteret. 
II faifoit vn froid violent, & tel que plufieurs en ont 
eu quelquefois les bouts des pieds & des mains gelees, 
il demeura les mains iointes pendant toutes les 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 77 

seeing this happy beginning among their nation. 
Here is another who has shown no less of ardor and 
courage in his baptism; he is one called Antoine, 
or Ouabakouachits, aged about fifty years, — it was he 
who the first of all brought his drum to the Father. 
After having heard him discourse one evening, as 
usual, concerning the things of- God, he exclaimed 
aloud: "It is true; thou art right; and I protest 
before all those who are listening to me, that I will 
no longer have recourse to the devil, [84] or to my 
superstitions. I disavow them and give up all the 
instruments thereof, and wish to be baptized. See, 
there is my drum ; " he throws it down before all, 
and, as he was the first to do this action publicly and 
boldly, he was much praised by all the Christians. 
This man has high opinions of the things of God and 
of the faith. " There is nothing," he said one day, 
" which so saddens me as to see that I have so long 
obeyed the devil, and have not known him who has 
made all, and who preserves all; and I have so little 
wherewith to honor him and pray to him. Ah! why 
am I not like my children, who, being still young, 
have a quick wit and a good memory for retaining 
what is taught them. I am often inclined to be 
angry at them, because they do not teach me as much 
as I would like." It was a pleasure to see this man, 
fifty years old, being taught by his own little girl of 
ten years; he would make her sit beside him, and 
repeat after her his Pater, his Ave, and all the 
prayers; and would have her question him in the 
Catechism, like a Pupil by his Teacher. He was 
baptized at nostre-Dame des [85] Anges, with especial 
consolation to our Fathers who were there present. 
It was intensely cold weather, — so much so that 



78 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.24 

ceremonies du Baptefme, & refpondit toufiours auec 
vn fentiment de deuotion & d'humilite, qui parroiffoit 
en tout fon exterieur. On baptifa apres luy fon fils, 
aag^ de fept ou huidt ans, il voulut encor affifter "k 
toute la ceremonie, & I'encourager par paroles & par 
geftes ^ f e comporter modeftement en cette adtion : 
^ la fin il luy dift, mon fils prend courage, c'eft main- 
tenant qu'il faut eftre ennemy de tout ce que Dieu 
deffend, c'eft maintenant qu'il faut eftre fage, aprend 
bien les prieres, & les retiens, afin de me les enfei- 
gner: Cet homme eft vn des plus confiderables des 
Atticameges ? 

En voicy vn troifiefme appell6 Oiieratchenon, qui 
merite icy place: c'eft le coufin de Michel, duquel 
i'ay parl6 cy-deuant, il eft d'vn naturel hardy, & en- 
trant, ce qui a fait differer fon Baptefme affez long- 
temps : mais les grandes [86] inftances qu'il en a fait, 
luy ont ouuert la porte : il eft vray que Ton auroit de 
la peine a croire tout ce qu'il a fait pour paruenir ^ 
fon deffein. Du commencement qu'il eut refolu de 
pourf uiure le baptefme : il alia chercher fon tambour 
enfeuely, ie ne fgay ou dans les neiges, & vint trou- 
uer le Pere: tien luy dift-il, voil^ ce qui a eft6 autre- 
fois ma plus grande attache : puis que ie le quitte, 
i'abandonne toutes mes fuperftitions, ne crains point 
de me baptifer: ie fuis marie, ma femme veut eftre 
baptifee, mon fils I'eft defia, & ma mere aufii, qui 
t'empefche done de me faire le mefme : fois alTeur^ 
de moy, ie n'auray iamais honte de profelTer la foy, 
depuis que ie f9ais les prieres, ie les ay fait dire 
publiquement chez moy le matin, & le foir : dis moy fi 
tu defire encor quelque chofe, ie le feray. Ie te veux 



1642-43] RELATION OF ib42-43 79 

several persons sometimes had the extremities of 
their feet and hands frozen by it. He remained, with 
clasped hands, during all the ceremonies of the Bap- 
tism, and always answered with a sense of devotion 
and of humility, which appeared in his whole bearing. 
They baptized after him his son, seven or eight years 
old; he further wished to be present at the entire 
ceremony, and to encourage him by words and by 
gestures to behave himself modestly in this action. 
At the end, he said to him: " My son, take courage; 
it is now that you must be enemy of everything 
which God forbids ; it is now that you must be wise. 
Learn the prayers well, and remember them, so as 
to teach them to me." This man is one of the most 
considerable of the Atticameges. 

Here is a third, called Oueratchenon, who deserves 
place here: he is the cousin of Michel, of whom 
I have spoken previously. He is of a bold and 
forward nature, which has caused his Baptism to be 
deferred a considerable time ; but the great [86] en- 
treaties that he made for it, have opened the door to 
him, — indeed, one would find it hard to believe all 
that he has done in order to attain his object. As 
soon as he had resolved to seek baptism, he went in 
quest of his drum, buried somewhere in the snows, 
and came to find the Father. " See," he said to him, 

that is what was formerly my greatest attachment ; 
since I give it up, I forsake all my superstitions. 
Fear not to baptize me; I am married, — my wife 
wishes to be baptized, my son is so already, and my 
mother also ; what then hinders you from doing the 
same to me? Be assured of me, I shall never be 
ashamed to profess the faith. Since I have known 
the prayers, I have had them said openly at my 



80 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

encor efprouuer, luy dift le Pere, il patieta quelque 
temps, puis interpofa par plufieurs fois les Religi- 
eufes, afin d'interceder pour luy, & voyant qu'on 
differoit encor, il va trouuer le Pere en particulier, & 
luy dift, or 9k fi ie meurs fans baptefme ^ qui en fera 
la faute, tu en repondras [87] k Dieu: car ie le fou- 
haitte auec ardeur, i'ay fait tout ce que tu m'as dit, 
i'ay apris tout ce que tu m'as enfeigne, ie le f§ay par 
coeur, & me voila preft ^ en faire encor dauantage, & 
mourir plutoft que rien faire contre la foy, ou la quit- 
ter: & apres tout celk tu me refufe, & que feray-ie, 
s'il me faut demeurer tout c6t hyuer fans eftre bap- 
tife, & courir les dangers de mon falut, i'ayme mieux 
hyuerner icy aupres de toy, fi tu en 6s content, enfin 
11 fift tant qu'il obtint le baptefme, & fut nomm6 lean, 
il s'eft tres-bien comporte depuis ce temps 1^. Vn 
iour de Dimache, fur le tard le Pere entrant en fa 
cabane, le trouua recitant fon Chapellet fort denote- 
ment. Sa priere eftant finie, c'eft dit-il, pour fatis- 
faire S, la faute que i'ay faite de n'auoir pas auiour- 
d'huy affift6 k la Melfe, eftant alle depuis cinq iours 
"k la chafle, pour nourrir ma famille. Le Pere luy 
dift qu'il n'y auoit point de faute, puis qu'il n'auoit 
pen retourner S, temps, il eft vray, dift-il: mais 
pourtat il faut fatisfaire de ce que ie n'y ay pas aflift^. 
Vn lien camarade fe pleignant k luy de ce qu'il ne 
fcauoit pas les prieres, & ne les pouuoit [88] retenir, 
ce n'eft pas de merueille, luy dift-il: car tu ne crois 
pas fermement & de coeur ce qu'on t'enf eigne, & 
ainfi tu ne te mets pas en peine de I'apprendre, ton 
efprit ne s'y applique qu'a demi, pour moy ie fuis 
affeur^ dans mon coeur, que ie crois & tiens pour 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 81 

house, morning and evening; tell me if you desire 
anything further, and I will do it." "I wish to 
prove you further," said the Father. He was patient 
for some time, then several times brought forward 
the Nuns to intercede for him ; but, seeing that we 
still deferred, he goes to find the Father in private, 
and says to him : * ' Come now, if I die without 
baptism, who will be to blame? Thou wilt answer 
for it [87] to God, for I desire it with ardor. I have 
done all that thou hast told me ; I have learned all 
that thou hast taught me, — I know it by heart; and 
behold me ready to do still more, and to die, rather 
than do aught against the faith, or give it up; and, 
after all that, thou refusest me. And what shall I 
do, if I must still continue all this winter without 
being baptized, and incur dangers to my salva- 
tion? I would rather winter here near thee, if thou 
art so satisfied." Finally, he did so much that he 
obtained baptism, and was named Jean ; he has be- 
haved himself very well since that time. One Sun- 
day, toward evening, the Father, entering his cabin, 
found him reciting his Rosary very devoutly. His 
prayer being done, " This," he said, " is in order to 
atone for the fault which I have committed by not 
having been present to-day at Mass, having gone 
five days ago to the hunt, in order to feed my fami- 
ly." The Father told him that there was no fault 
in this, since he had not been able to return in time. 
*' It is true," he said; "but nevertheless I must 
make amends, because I was not present there." A 
comrade of his, lamenting to him that he did not 
know the prayers, and could not [88] remember 
them, — " It is no wonder," Jean said to him; " for 
you do not firmly and heartily believe what is taught 



82 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

certain tout ce que Ton nous enfeigne, & ainfi i'em- 
ploye toutes mes forces, pour le comprendre & le 
retenir, & en effedt il s'appliquoit auec tant d'effort 
qu'il conceut & aprit par coeur tout le Pater en moins 
d'vne demie-heure, au refte qui cognoiftra les Sau- 
uages, s'eftonnera de la liberte qu'il eut ^ reprendre 
fon camarade: car ie diray en paffant, que c'eft vne 
chofe eflonnante du refpedl que les Sauuages fe 
portent en ce poindl I'vn h. I'autre, quoy qu'ils foient 
priuez de rhumilite, & ayet vne entiere liberty, de 
faire & dire tout ce qu'ils veulent dans leurs cabanes, 
toutesfois en ce qui efl de fe reprendre, ils y vont 
auec vne circofpecJtion, & prudence eftrange. 

Deux autres furent baptifez en la Chappelle des 
Vrfulines, Guillaume Pataoiiabi & Anne fa femme 
tous deux [89] aagez d'enuiron vingt-cinq ans, il fe 
font rendus fignal6s non feulemet ^ apprendre les 
prieres: mais encor ^ les enfeigner aux autres. 
Quant le Pere comme5a de les inftruire, ils cotoient 
les poindls & les demandes fur leurs doigts : mais le 
nombre venant k furpaffer celuy des doigts, ils les 
marquoiet fur des efcorces faifants certaines figures 
qui leur reprefentoient le fens de quelques article, & 
s'appliquoient auec grande contention pour le com- 
prendre &le retenir, & puis r enfeigner aux autres. La 
femme auoit encor fa mere aagee d'enuiron cinquante 
ans, d'vn fort bon naturel, & qui fembloit nay pour la 
deuotion : mais au refte qui auoit vn extreme peine 
k retenir ce qu'on luy enfeignoit. Cette femme done 
fe mit ^ ayder fa mere auec vn grand zele: cette 
bonne vieille aulii s'y appliqua de coeur, en forte 
qu'auec le fecours de fa fille, elle apprit par coeur en 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 83 

you, and so you do not exert yourself to learn it, — 
your mind applies itself only by half. As for me, I 
am assured in my heart that I believe and hold for 
certain all that they teach us, and thus I employ all 
my powers in order to understand it and retain it." 
And, in fact, he applied himself with so much effort 
that he understood and learned by heart the whole 
Pater in less than a half-hour. Moreover, one who 
shall understand the Savages will be astonished at 
the liberty that he took in reproving his comrade ; 
for I will say, in passing, that it is astonishing, what 
respect the Savages show to one another in this 
regard. Although they are void of humility, and 
have an entire freedom to do and say whatever they 
like in their cabins, nevertheless, in the matter of 
reproving one another, they proceed with a strange 
circumspection and prudence. 

Two others were baptized in the Chapel of the 
Ursulines : Guillaume Pataouabi and Anne his wife,, 
both [89] aged about twenty-five years. They have 
signalized themselves, not only in learning the pray- 
ers, but also in teaching them to the others. When 
the Father began to instruct them, they would count 
the points and the questions on their fingers; but, 
the number coming to exceed that of the fingers, 
they would mark them on pieces of bark, making 
certain figures which represented for them the sense 
of some clause ; they would apply themselves with 
great intensity to understand it and retain it, and 
then to teach it to the others. The wife had also her 
mother, about fifty years old, very good-natured, and 
who seemed born for devotion, — but who had, withal, 
extreme difficulty in retaining what was taught 
her. This woman then began to aid her mother 



84 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

moins de trois on quatre iours le Pater, I'Aue, & le 
Credo. Le mary n'en fifl pas moins de fon cofl6: 
car ayant vn fien frere d'vn efprit groffier, mais de 
bonne volont6, il paffoit la meilleure partie du iour 
^ rebatre [90] aupres de luy les prieres & rinftrudtion, 
& ^ les luy faire repeter auec vne patience admirable 
& qui ne pouuoit proceder que d'vne vraye charity 
depuis leur Baptefme, ils nous ont donn6 de beaux 
exemples de vertu. 

Le Mary entrant vn iour en fa cabane vit vn tam- 
bour fait h. la Fran9oife, il le prend & le met en 
pieces, difantie fgaybien que celan'eft pas manuals: 
mais pourtant il ne le faut pas garder de peur de 
faire refouuenir les autres de leurs tabours & fuper- 
flitions deffendues. II n'y a rien, difoit-il vn iour, 
qui ne me faffe refouuenir de Dieu de quelque cofte 
que i'aille, ie ne peux rien voir qui n'ayt efte fait de 
luy, & oh. fa puiffance & fa bonte n'apparoiflent, la 
veue des creatures me fert pour croire qu'il y a vn 
Dieu qui les a faidls & pour I'aymer. Comme il fut 
preft k partir pour retourner en fon pays, le fieur 
Tronquet qui auoit eft6 fon parin luy fift vn prefent: 
ce bon Sauuage demeura quelque temps fans mot 
dire, puis fe tournant vers le Pere Buteux Ik prefent 
luy tint ce difcours. Ie ne fgay en qu'elle confidera- 
tion cet honnefte homme [91] fait ce prefent, fi c'eft 
pour m'inuiter "k garder la Foy, il ne faut que le feu 
d'Enfer pour m'arrefter & me tenir en mon deuoir: 
£i c'eft affin que ie me fouuienne de luy, ie ne m'en 
f9aurois oublier, fi ie n'oublie le nom de Guillaume 
qu'il m'a donne, «& que ie cheris infiniment: fi c'eft 
pour monftrer fa liberalite en mon endroit, ie ne 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 85 

with a great zeal ; the good old woman also applied 
herself heartily, so that, with the help of her daugh- 
ter, she learned by heart, in less than three or four 
days, the Pater, the Ave, and the Credo. The hus- 
band did no less on his side : for, having a brother of 
his, — of a gross mind, but having goodwill, — he 
would spend the best part of the day in rehearsing 
[90] beside him the prayers and the instruction, and 
in making him repeat them, with an admirable 
patience, which could proceed only from a true char- 
ity. Since their Baptism, they have given us noble 
examples of virtue. 

The Husband one day, entering his cabin, saw a 
drum made on the French pattern ; he takes it and 
tears it to pieces, saying, " I know well that that is 
not bad ; but yet I must not keep it, for fear of caus- 
ing the others to remember their drums and forbid- 
den superstitions." " There is nothing," he said 
one day, "which does not remind me of God; in 
whatever direction I go, I can see nothing which has 
not been made by him, and wherein his power and 
his goodness do not appear. The sight of creatures 
helps me to believe that there is a God who has 
made them, and to love him." When he was ready 
to go away, on the return to his own country, sieur 
Tronquet,^ who had been his godfather, made him a 
present. This good Savage remained some time 
without saying a word, then, turning toward Father 
Buteux, there present, he spoke to him as follows : 
" I know not on what account that excellent man 
[91] makes me this present; if it be to engage me to 
keep the Faith, it needs no more than the fire of 
Hell to check me, and hold me in my duty. If it be 
to the end that I remember him, I could not forget 



86 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

peux autre chofe que le remercier, ce que ie fais de 
coeur & le prie de croire que iamais ie ne quitteray 
la foy en laquelle il m'a feruy de parain: ceux qui 
eftoiet 1^ prefens, n'attendoient pas cette ref ponce 
fur le champ d'vn Sauuage. 

Le Capitaine des Atticamegues [n]e fut pas Bap- 
tife pour lors, il auoit bonne volonte : mais non pas 
toutes les difpofitions necellaires fa femme le deuan- 
5a & obtint le Baptefme par fa ferueur, & fa conftance 
& depuis gagna fi bien fon mary qu'elle le faifoit 
prier Dieu foir & matin, & I'obligea doucement de 
quitter fon tambour, qu'on croyoit qu'il n'abandon- 
,neroit iamais qu'a la mort; tant il y efloit attache & 
,fe vantoit d'auoir conferue fa vie & celle de fes gens 
par [92] les longleries qu'il fait auec cet inftrument. 
-Or quoy qu'il le quittaft, on differa pourtant iufques 
,au prin-temps fon Baptefme, affin de le rendre plus 
f olide : voicy vn cas de confcience que fa femme pro- 
pofa au Pere, lors qu'elle eftoit prefle k partir, fi mon 
mary, dift-elle qui n'eft pas encor Baptife veut faire 
quelque feftin oil le Diable foit honore, ie feray obli- 
gee fel5 noftre couftume d'aprefter la chaudiere, que 
feray-ie Ik deffus: ce fera bien fait, dit le Pere de n'y 
pas mettre la main & de dire h. ton mary que tu as 
renonce au Diable, & qu'il en doit faire autat. Que 
fi neatmoins tu iugeois qu'il te deufl molefter au 
s'alterer contre la Foy, pour ce fubiet: tu pourrois te 
comporter comme k I'ordinaire, fans pretendre autre 
chofe qu'obeyr k ton mary, & luy apprefter k man- 
ger. Arriue qui voudra, dift-elle, ie fuis toute refo- 
lue de n'en rien faire, celuy qui a tout faidt, me 
-■donnera des forces. 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 87 

him, unless I forget the name of Guillaume which 
he has given me, and which I cherish infinitely. If 
it be to show his liberality toward me, I can do noth- 
ing else than thank him, which I do heartily, and 
beg him to believe that I will never give up the faith 
in which he has served me as godfather." Those 
who were there present were not expecting this 
answer on the spot, from a Savage. 

The Captain of the Atticamegues was not Baptized 
at that time ; he had good will, but not all the neces- 
sary preparation. His wife outstripped him, and 
obtained Baptism by her fervor and her constancy ; 
and she then so effectually gained her husband that 
she made him pray to God evening and morning, and 
gradually obliged him to give up his drum, — which, 
it was believed, he would never abandon till death, 
so attached was he to it; and he kept boasting of 
having preserved his own life and those of his peo- 
ple by [92] the Juggleries that he performed with that 
instrument. Now, although he gave it up, his Bap- 
tism was nevertheless deferred until the spring, so 
as to render him more steadfast. Here is a case of 
conscience which his wife proposed to the Father, 
when she was ready to go away: " If my husband," 
said she, ' ' who is not yet Baptized, wishes to make 
some feast at which the Devil shall be honored, I 
shall be obliged, according to our custom, to prepare 
the kettle; what shall I do in that event?" "It 
will be well," says the Father, "not to have a 
hand in it, and to tell thy husband that thou hast 
renounced the Devil, and that he ought to do the 
same. But if, nevertheless, thou shouldst judge 
that he might molest thee, or weaken toward the 
Faith on that account, thou couldst behave as usual, 



88 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

Vn bon vieillard (c'eftoit le plus aage de la troupe) 
s'eftant venu confeffer auant que partir, dift au Pere, 
c'eft pour la derniere fois que ie te parleray, mon 
[93] corps s'en va en pouriture, ie le laifferay dans 
les bois : mais mon ame ne peut mourir ; prend cou- 
rage h. prier Dieu pour moy. Penfe en ton coeur que 
ie feray mort auec la Foy, & le defir d'aller au Ciel : 
quoy qu'il arriue ie ne reprendray iamais mes fuper- 
ftitions : en verite ie te remercie de mon Baptefme & 
de m'auoir appris le chemin du Ciel, que te redray-ie 
pour la peine que tu as de m'enfeigner? fi i'auois 
des forces pour aller k la chaffe, ie te ferois prefent 
du premier Oreignac que ie tuerois, il ne me refte 
rien qu'vn petit fac k petun, que i'ay ornay & enioli- 
uay come tu vois : le voil^, ie te le donne. Le Pere, 
luy refpondit en fouriant, ie t'enfeigne pour Dieu & 
pour r amour que ie porte h. ton ame & non pour tes 
biens, garde le, i'attens la recompenfe de Dieu, 
aye courage & perfeuere conftament, affin d'aller au 
Ciel. 

Vne bonne vieille apres fon Baptefme ayant ouy 
raconter quelque chofe des grandeurs de la France, 
dift au Pere : ie croy que tout ce que vous dittes de 
voftre pays, eft vray, mais ce n'eft pas ce que ie 
defire le plus, i'ayme mieux le [94] Paradis que tout 
cela: fi i'y fuis vn iour comme i'efpere, ie verray 
tout le monde, & ce qui eft encor de plus beau que 
le monde: en verite ie foupire apres cette maifon 
eternelle & voudrois y pouuoir mener tous mes gens 
auec moy ie brufle d'vn defir de les voir tous conuertis : 
6 que ie voudrois bien fgauoir tout ce que tu fgais : 
i'enfeignerois mes enfans & mes nepueux, qui font 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 89 

without claiming anything else than to obey thy 
husband and prepare for him to eat. " " Come what 
will," said she, " I am quite resolved to do nothing 
for such a feast ; he who has made all will give me 
strength." 

A good old man (he was the oldest of the band), 
having come to confess before going away, said to 
the Father : " It is for the last time that I shall speak 
to thee, my [93] body is going into decay. I shall 
leave it in the woods ; but my soul cannot die ; take 
courage to pray God for me. Think in thy heart 
that I shall have died in the Faith, and in the desire 
of going to Heaven ; whatever happens, I will never 
take back my superstitions. Truly, I thank thee for 
my Baptism, and for having taught me the way to 
Heaven, — how shall I repay thee for thy trouble in 
teaching me? If I had strength to go to the hunt, I 
would make thee a present of the first Moose that I 
should kill. I have nothing left but a little tobacco 
pouch, which I have ornamented and beautified as 
thou seest; there it is, I give it to thee." The Fa- 
ther answered him, smiling: " I teach thee for God, 
and for the love that I bear to thy soul, and not for 
thy goods; keep it, I await the recompense from 
God. Have courage and persevere constantly, so as 
to go to Heaven." 

A good old woman, after her Baptism, having 
heard some account of the grandeurs of France, said 
to the Father: " I believe that all thou sayest of thy 
country is true, but that is not what I desire the 
most, — I prefer [94] Paradise to all that. If I am 
there some day, as I hope, I shall see all the world, 
and what is still more beautiful than the world. In- 
deed, I sigh after that eternal house, and would I 



90 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

Ik haut dans les bois, ou ils viuent comme des befles, 
prends courage toy qui es amy de Dieu, k nous enfei- 
gner! 6 fi tu te pouuois embarquer au prin-temps 
auec nous, tu nous inflruirois dans noftre pays, que 
ferons-nous fans Mefle, fans Confeffion & fans mai- 
ftre ? Ce dernier f entiment auquel nous ne pouuions 
pas encor fatisfaire eftoit commun k tous ces pauures 
ges, & nous tiroit les larmes des yeux : mais pourtant 
ce n'efloit pas ce qui nous afifligeoit le plus. Le peu 
de moyen que nous anions de les deffendre eux & les 
autres Sauuages centre les Hiroquois leurs ennemis, 
nous donoit bien plus viuemet au coeur, & detrempoit 
la joye que nous anions de leur conuerfion, d'vne 
amertume extreme: [95] i'en parleray cy-apres. le 
reuies encor vn peu k cette bonne vieille : quand on 
faifoit les prieres, elle ne pouuoit permettre qu'au- 
cun de fes Compatriotes fulTet affis, elle les exhortoit 
k ioindre les mains & fe tenir modeftement & fi c'e- 
ftoient des enfans elle prenoit elle mefme leurs mains 
& leur faifoit ioindre durant les prieres. Voyant 
entrer le Pere en fa cabane, elle difl k fon fils, voicy 
le Pere, prends courage & faits ce que tu as refolu : 
au mefme temps le ieune homme tire fes deux tam- 
bours & les donne au Pere auec ces parolles, tien 
voila mes tambours, ie les quitte : la mere adioufta, 
cela veut dire qu'il renonce au Diable & demande le 
Baptefme : cela eft vray, dift le fils, & ie croy qu'on 
me I'accordera, quand ie fgauray les prieres: mais 
puifque ie te donne la chofe en laquelle i'efperois 
beaucoup pour ma confolation, il faut aulTi que tu me 
dones vne chofe que tu cheris grandement, ie veux 
dire vn Chappellet pour honorer la Mere du Fils de 



1642-43] RELATION OF T642- 43 91 

could lead thither all my people with me. I burn 
with a desire to see them all converted. Oh, but I 
would like to know all that thou knowest ! I would 
teach my children and my nephews, who are up there 
in the woods, where they live like beasts. Take 
courage, thou who art a friend of God, to teach us! 
Oh, if thou couldst embark with us in the spring, 
thou shouldst instruct us in our own country ! What 
shall we do without Mass, without Confession, and 
without a teacher?" This last sentiment, which we 
were not yet able to satisfy, was common to all these 
poor people, and drew tears from our eyes; but 
yet it was not that which most grieved us. The 
slight means that we had to defend them and the 
other Savages against the Hiroquois, their enemies, 
gave us much keener pangs at heart, and tempered 
the joy that we had at their conversion, with extreme 
bitterness; [95] I will speak of it subsequently. I 
recur a little more to that good old woman ; while 
prayers were being said, she could not permit that 
any of her fellow Countrymen should be seated, — 
she would exhort them to fold their hands, and 
demean themselves modestly ; and if they were chil- 
dren, she would herself take their hands, and make 
them fold them during the prayers. Seeing the Fa- 
ther enter her cabin, she said to her son: " Here is 
the Father; take courage, and do what thou hast 
resolved." At the same time, the young man draws 
forth his two drums, and gives them to the Father, 
with these words: " See, there are my drums, I give 
them up. ' ' The mother added : ' ' That means that he 
renounces the Devil and requests Baptism." " That 
is true," said the son, " and I believe that it will be 
granted me, when I shall know the prayers : but since 



«2 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

Dieu : le Pere luy en promift vn, 11 toft qu'il auroit 
appris a le dire, ce qui fut bien toft fait: il n'eft pas 
croyable cobien [96] ces bonnes gens font port^s ^ 
cette deuotion de dire leur Chappellet en I'honneur 
du Fils de Dieu & de fa tres-Saindte Mere, & com- 
bien ils font paflionnes d'en auoir, fur tout qui foient 
vn peu gros & beaux pour les porter pedus k leur 
col. Voicy vne chofe qui fera honte a plufieurs en- 
fants de France : le Pere demandoit vn iour a vne 
petite fille fi elle vouloit aller au Ciel, & ou voudrois- 
ie aller done, fift elle : mais dift le Pere en riant, les 
filles qui n'obeiffent point k leurs parens comme toy 
ne vont pas au Ciel: & comment dis-tu cela toy? 
puifque tu pries & que tu enfeignes qu'il ne faut pas 
mentir ny detradter? tu fais I'vn & I'autre, tu ments 
& tu paries mal de moy : car ie ne defobey iamais k 
mes pares, & n'ay garde de le faire k prefent que ie 
cognois Dieu & ayme la priere. La Mere qui eftoit 
la prefente, la feconda : vn autre fe mit de fon cofte 
& toute la cabane euft efte centre le Pere, s'il n'euft 
confeff6 qu'il auoit dit cela en riant & pour I'efprou- 
uer. 

Les enfans qu'on a Baptif6s k I'vfage de raifon, ont 
donn6 des tefmoignages [97] d'vn bon efprit, ils con- 
goiuent promptemet, retiennent aifement, & fe font 
rendus fort affidus au Catechifme ; ce qui n'a pas peu 
feruy pour les plus grands qui ont appris les prieres 
des plus petits, il eft arriu6 fouuent que le Pere 
voulant apprendre le Pater, I'Aue, & le Credo, k des 
perfonnes aages, ils luy difoient : ie fcay defia tout 
cela, mon fils ou ma fille me I'ont appris, ce moyen a 
tres bien reiiffi: mais il faut auoiier que le grand 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 93 

I give thee the thing in which I was hoping much 
for my consolation, thou must also give me a thing 
which thou greatly cherishest, — I mean a Rosary, in 
order to honor the Mother of the Son of God." The 
Father promised him one, as soon as he should have 
learned to say it, which was soon done. It is incred- 
ible how much [96] these good people are inclined to 
this devotion of saying their Rosary in honor of the 
Son of God and of his most Blessed Mother, and how 
eager they are to have them, — especially those which 
are rather large and handsome, to wear them sus- 
pended about their necks. Here is an incident which 
will cause shame to many children of France: the 
Father was one day asking a little girl if she wished 
to go to Heaven. " And where, then, should I wish 
to go?" said she. " But," said the Father, smiling, 
" girls who, like thee, do not obey their parents, do 
not go to Heaven." " And why dost thou say that, 
since thou prayest, and teachest that we must not lie 
or slander? Thou dost both, — thou liest, and thou 
speakest ill of me ; for I never disobey my parents, 
and am careful not to do so, now that I know God 
and love prayer." The Mother, who was there 
present, seconded her; another put himself on her 
side, and the whole cabin would have been against 
the Father, if he had not confessed that he had said 
that in jest, and in order to try her. 

The children who have been Baptized at years of 
discretion, have given evidences [97] of a good mind; 
they quickly apprehend, retain easily, and have 
become very diligent in the Catechism ; which has 
been not a little useful for the older ones, who have 
learned the prayers from the younger. It has often 
happened that, the Father wishing to teach the 



94 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

defir qu'ils ont eu d'apprendre, & leur bo naturel y 
ont bien feruy. Le Pere entrant le foir en la cabane 
du Capitaine, pour y faire les prieres & I'inftrudtion, 
on alloit incontinent aux autres cabanes les aduertir ; 
chacun venoit, tons fe mettoient k genoux ioignoient 
les mains & fermoient les yeux pour prier & repeter 
auec plus d'attention, fi quelqu'vn ne quittoit pas 
incontinet la befongne qu'il auoit en main, il eftoit 
rudement repris : vne petite fiUe ayant voulu mettre 
vn pruneau en fa bouche qu'on luy auoit done pour 
auoir bien refpondu, trois ou quatre la frapperent fur 
le champ, & la firent quitter: vne autre fille aagee de 
[98] fept ans, voyant fa foeur aifnee badiner auec ie 
ne f9ay quoy qu'elle tenoit en fa main, luy arracha 
difant, c'eft le Diable qui te met cela en main. Quant 
le Pere expliquoit quelque poindt, chacun marquoit 
fur fes doigts fi toft qu'il ouuroit la bouche: c'efloit 
vn plaifir de les voir tous leuer les mains en I'air & 
plier les doigts felon le nombre des proportions qu'il 
faifoit, & comme cela n' eftoit pas aflez capable 
d'aider la memoire, la plus part peignoient ou faifoiet 
des marques fur des efcorces auec de la peinture 
rouge, k la fin ils perfuaderent au Pere de figurer 
luy-mefme fur vn papier, ce qu'il leur deuoit expli- 
quer : il faifoit done certaines marques ou lettres qui 
fignifioiet le fens des chofes: chacun voyant le papier 
attache au haut de la cabane le deuoroit des yeux : le 
Pere auec vne baguette leur montroit ce que vouloit 
dire chaque lettre ou figure, apr6s qu'il auoit parl6 
ceux qui penfoient auoir copris, prenoient la baguette 
& en repetat, faifoi[e]nt comme ceux qui expliquet 
des enigmes, cette fa9on iointe a leur ferueur & 



1642-43] RELATION OF J642-43 95 

Pater, the Ave, and the Credo to persons of age, 
they would say to him : " I know all that already ; 
my son or my daughter has taught it to me." This 
method has succeeded very well; but one must 
acknowledge that the great desire to learn which 
they have had, and their good nature, have availed 
much therein. The Father entering the Captain's 
cabin at evening in order to hold prayers and instruc- 
tion there, they would go straightway to the other 
cabins to notify them. Every one would come; all 
would kneel, fold their hands, and close their eyes 
in order to pray and repeat with more attention. If 
any one did not immediately quit the task that he 
had in hand, he was severely reproved. A little girl 
having wished to put in her mouth a prune that had 
been given her for having answered well, three or 
four struck her forthwith, and made her stop. An- 
other girl, aged [98] seven years, seeing her elder 
sister toying with something or other that she held 
in her hand, seized it from her, saying, "It is the 
Devil who puts that in thy hand. ' ' When the Father 
was explaining some point, each one would note it 
on his fingers, as soon as he opened his lips. It was 
a pleasure to see them all raise their hands in the 
air, and bend their fingers, according to the number 
of the propositions that he made ; and as that was not 
quite sufficient to aid the memory, most of them 
would paint or draw marks on pieces of bark, with 
red paint. At last, they persuaded the Father him- 
self to represent on a paper what he had to explain 
to them. He would therefore make certain marks 
or characters, which signified the meaning of these 
things; each one, seeing the paper fastened aloft in 
the cabin, devoured it with his eyes; the Father, 



96 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.24 

bonne volenti, ne feruoit pas [99] pen k leur faire 
comprendre les myfleres de noftre faindte Foy: les 
Chrefliens de Sillery eftoient remplis de ioye de 
voir vn tel fuccez parmy leurs allies, & y contribu- 
oient de leur cofte puiffammet. Vn entre autre alloit 
vn iour criant tout haut autour des cabanes : Attica- 
megues prenez courage croyez fermemet, fi c'eft tout 
de bon que vous croyez: vous priferez la Foy par 
deffus toutes les chofes du monde : nous I'experimen- 
tons maintenant en vous autres nous qui croyons 
defia depuis quelques Annees, nous fentons combien 
c'efl vn grand bon heur de cognoiftre Dieu & f9auoir 
le chemin du Ciel, les femmes Algonquines en fai- 
foient autant de leur cofte : le Pere en rencontra vn 
iour vne appellee Angelique qui les exhortoit, il I'en- 
couragea & luy dift : tu fais bien ; cotinue, elle repart 
ie le fais de bon coeur: mais que f9auroit dire vne 
pauure vieille comme moy, finon de leur apprendre 
^ dire le Chappellet, & de le reciter moy-mefme pour 
eux, cette humilite eftoit loiiable : mais au fond quand 
nous I'entendions expliquer les mifteres de noflre 
[100] faindte Foy, elle nous rauilToit, elle demandoit 
fouuent aux Peres & bien que font les Atticamegues, 
croyent ils fermement? f9auent-ils les prieres ? pleuft 
k Dieu qu'eux & tons les Sauuages euffent vn 
coeur femblable au mien, ils auroient enuie d' aimer 
Dieu dauantage qu'ils ne font. Cette bonne vieille 
a quelques parens Atticamegues, elle a voulu aller 
hyuerner auec eux dans leurs pays, pour les ayder 
k prier Dieu, & a retenir ce qu'ils auoient appris. 
Le foir auant qu'ils partiflent pour leur grande 
challe, le Pere Buteux leur fut dire k dieu: tons 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 97 

with a stick, would show them what each character 
or figure meant. After he had spoken, those who 
thought they had understood would take the stick ; 
and, repeating, would do like those who explain 
enigmas. This method, joined to their fervor and 
good will, served not [99] a little to make them un- 
derstand the mysteries of our holy Faith. The Chris- 
tians of Sillery were filled with joy to see such a 
result among their allies, and, on their side, vigor- 
ously contributed thereto. One, among others, went 
about, one day, shouting aloud round the cabins: 
" Atticamegues, take courage; believe firmly. If 
it is in earnest that you believe, you will prize 
the Faith above all things in the world. We now 
experience it in you others, — we who have already 
believed for several Years ; we feel how great a bless- 
ing it is to know God and learn the way to Heaven." 
The Algonquin women did the like, on their side ; 
the Father one day met one of these, called Ange- 
lique, who was exhorting them. He encouraged 
her, and said to her : ' ' You do well ; continue. ' ' She 
answers, " I do so with a good heart : but what can 
a poor old woman like me tell them, except to teach 
them to say the Rosary, and to recite it for them 
myself?" This humility was praiseworthy; but, in 
reality, when we heard her explain the mysteries of 
our [100] holy Faith, she delighted us. She often 
asked the Fathers, " Well, what are the Atticamegues 
doing? Do they believe firmly? do they know the 
prayers? Would to God that they and all the Sav- 
ages had a heart like mine ; they would desire to love 
God more than they do." This good old woman has 
some Atticamegue kinsfolk; she wished to go and 
winter with them in their own country, in order to 



98 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

s'affemblerent en vne cabane & luy tefmoigne- 
rent des reffentimens capables de fendre le coeur, 
il les confola, & leur fift voir le changement que 
Dieu auoit opere en eux la grande obligation 
qu'ils auoient d'en remercier la diuine bonte & de 
1 'aimer, la fidelite qu'ils luy auoiet promife, les chafti- 
mens dont Dieu puniroit ceux qui abandonneroient 
la Foy, & fe comporteroient mal dans le Chriftia- 
nifme : puis il leur fift deux prefens pour les faire 
reffouuenir de deux chofes, le premier fut vn Cruci- 
fix, pour les [loi] aduertir de conferuer la Foy toute 
leur vie, & fe fouuenir que le fils de Dieu eftoit mort 
pour eux, le fecond fut vn baflon fee qui n'eftoit bon 
qu'a mettre au feu, adiouftant que ce feroit le mefme 
de ceux qui n'obeiroient pas "k Dieu, qu'ils feroient 
comme vn bois mort, & brufleroient k iamais dans 
I'Enfer, k la fin fe firent les prieres auec vne grande 
ferueur, le Pere diftribua des Catalogues ^ plufieurs, 
pour cognoiflre les iours de feftes & les garder, les 
femmes attendoient le Pere au fortir de la cabane 
pour luy dire k dieu, la femme du Capitaine prift la 
parolle & la meflant de larmes, luy dift: en verit6 
nous auons vn grand regret de te quitter, & que 
ferons nous fans maiftre dans les bois? ^ Dieu Pere 
Buteux, & que fera vne pauure idiote comme moy 
fans meffe, fans Confeffion & fans aucun qui nous 
enfeigne, les autres femmes n'en difoient pas moins, 
& toutes dirent k Dieu les mains ioindtes criant : prie 
Dieu pour nous & pour nos pares, il fallut enfin que 
le froid & la nuidt les f eparaft : voila vne partie de 
ce qui s'eft paffe de plus confiderable [102] en I'in- 
ftrudtion & au Baptefme des Atticamegues pendant 



1642 - 43] RELA TJON OF 1642 - 43 99 

help them pray to God, and remember what they had 
learned. The evening before they set out for their 
great hunt, Father Buteux went to say farewell to 
them ; all assembled in one cabin, and showed him a 
gratitude fit to break the heart. He consoled them, 
and made them see the change which God had 
wrought in them; the great obligation which they 
had to thank the divine goodness therefor, and to 
love it ; the fidelity which they had promised him ; 
the chastisements wherewith God would punish those 
who should forsake the Faith, and behave them- 
selves ill in Christianity. Then he made them two 
presents, in order to remind them of two things : the 
first was a Crucifix, to [loi] warn them to keep the 
Faith all their life, and to remember that the son of 
God had died for them. The second was a dry stick, 
which was good only to put in the fire, — adding, 
that it would be the same with those who should not 
obey God ; that they would be like dead wood, and 
would burn forever in Hell. At the end, the pray- 
ers were said with a great fervor. The Father dis- 
tributed Catalogues to several, that they might know 
the days of feasts, and observe them. The women 
were awaiting the Father at the exit from the cabin, 
in order to say farewell to him. The Captain's wife 
spoke, and, mingling tears with her words, said to 
him : " In truth, we feel a great regret to leave thee; 
and what shall we do without a teacher in the woods ? 
Adieu, Father Buteux, — and what will a poor idiot 
like me do, without mass, without Confession, and 
without any one to teach us ? " The other women 
said no less to him, and all said "Adieu" with 
clasped hands, exclaiming: " Pray to God for us and 
for our kinsfolk." Finally, the cold and the night 



100 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

I'hyuer, ils font retournez au prin-temps aux trois 
riuieres, pour iouir des Sacremens, & apprendre de 
plus en plus les chofes de la Foy, & faire Baptifer 
ceux qui eftoient les mieux difpofez, entre lefquels 
a efl6 le Capitaine auec deux de fes filles mariez, ie 
ne fgay li i'auray loillr d'en dreffer vn memoire auant 
le depart des Nauires : quand la donation de feu Mon- 
fieur de Sillery n'auro[i]t iamais produit autre bien, 
ie crois qu'il eft tres fatisfait dans le Ciel, il eft vray 
que Dieu a donne des le commencement fa bene- 
diction fur le Chriflianifme de Sillery, «& continue 
toufiours k verfer fes graces fur les Sauuages Chre- 
fliens qui y refident : mais leur arreft y efl puifTam- 
ment combattu de deux coftez. L'vn eft la peur des 
Hiroquois qui vont croiffant en armes, en forces & 
en cruaute, 1 'autre eft la pauurete du pays & des Sau- 
uages qui les rend errans, & les oblige a courir pour 
chercher leur vie : & ie ne f^ay fi on pourra continuer 
les fecours & les moyens qu'on nous donne pour 
remedier ^ ce [103] mal, & faire vn arreft qui puiffe 
eftre ftable de foy-mefme, la benedidtion que Dieu a 
donn6 fur les commencemens, nous fait efperer vn 
bon progrez & vne heureufe fin. 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 101 

had to separate them. Such is a portion of the most 
noteworthy incidents [102] in the instruction and at 
the Baptism of the Atticamegues during the winter. 
They returned to the three rivers in the spring, in 
order to enjo}- the Sacraments, to learn more and 
more about the things of the Faith, and to have those 
Baptized who were the best prepared, — among whom 
was the Captain with two of his married daughters. 
I know not whether I shall have leisure to draw up 
an account of it before the departure of the Ships. 
Even if the donation of the late Monsieur de Sillery 
had never produced any other good, I believe that he 
is well satisfied in Heaven. It is true that God has, 
from the start, given his blessing upon the Chris- 
tianity of Sillery, and still continues to pour his 
graces upon the Christian Savages who dwell there ; 
but their settlement at that place is greatly hindered 
in two directions. One obstacle is the fear of the 
Hiroquois, who are increasing in arms, in forces, 
and in cruelty ; the other is the poverty of the coun- 
try and of the Savages, which makes them roving, 
and obliges them to wander in search of their living ; 
and I know not whether the succor and the means 
which are given us in order to remedy this evil can 
be continued, [103] and a settlement be made which 
can be stable of itself. The blessing which God has 
given upon the beginnings, makes us hope for a suc- 
cessful advance and a happy end. 



102 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol. 24 



CHAPITRE VII. 

DES HURONS QUI ONT HYUERNE A QUEBEC & A SIL- 

LERY. 

LE Seminaire des Hurons qui auoit efle eftably k 
noltre-Dame des Anges, il y a quelques An- 
nies pour efleuer des enfans de cette nation, 
fut interrompu pour de iuftes raifons & nomement 
par ce que Ton ne voyoit pas de fruic5l notable parmy 
les Sauuages, c6men9ant I'inftrudtio d'vn peuple par 
des enfans, 1' experience nous I'a faidt cognoiftre, 
voicy vne occafion qui nous a oblige de reftablir 
comme vne nouuelle fa9on de Seminaire : mais plus 
aifee & pour des perfonnes plus aagees & plus capables 
d'inflrudlion, Dieu veille que les courfes des Hiro- 
quois ne nous empefchent pas de continuer. 

[104] Vne ieune homme de ceux qui auoient efte 
autrefois au premier Seminaire des Hurons a N. 
Dame des Anges, s'eftant trouue en vne grande 
tepefte, au milieu de leur grand lac, fill: vceu ^ Dieu 
s'il rechapoit de mener vne vie plus reglee & plus 
parfaidte, fon voeu eft exauce, il eft deliur6 contre 
toute apparence humaine, il va trouuer nos Peres qui 
eftoient aux Hurons & leur comunique fon voeu & fa 
refolutio, on y pefe, on delibere, on fe refout enfin 
de le tirer hors de so pais, ou il eftoit en plus grand 
danger, & de I'enuoyer 9k bas affin qu'il fut mieux 
ayde, & qu'il peuft voir I'exeple des Fra9ois & des 
Algonquins de Sillery: on luy donna pour compa- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 103 



CHAPTER VIL 

OF THE HURONS WHO WINTERED AT QUEBEC AND 

SILLERY. 

THE Seminary of the Hurons, which had been 
established at nostre-Dame des Anges some 
Years ago, in order to educate children of that 
nation, was interrupted for good reasons, and espe- 
cially because no notable fruit was seen among the 
Savages; our experience in beginning the instruc- 
tion of a people with the children, has made us 
recognize this fact. Here is an occasion which has 
obliged us to reestablish a Seminary in a new 
fashion, as it were, — but easier, and in behalf of 
persons, older, and more capable of instruction. 
God grant that the incursions of the Hiroquois may 
not hinder us from continuing. 

[104] A young man, of those who had formerly 
been at the first Seminary of the Hurons at Nostre 
Dame des Anges, happening to be in a great storm, 
in the midst of their great lake, made a vow to God, 
if he escaped, to lead a more regular and orderly 
life. His vow is heard, — he is delivered, contrary 
to every human probability; he goes to find our 
Fathers who were with the Hurons, and imparts to 
them his vow and his resolution. They think there- 
on ; they deliberate ; they finally resolve to take him 
out of his own country, where he was in greater dan- 
ger, and to send him down here, so that he should 
be better aided, and that he might see the example 



104 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

gnon vn autre ieune homme Huron, lequel defiroit 
de fe faire Chreftien: ils arriuerent tous deux k 
Sillery, I'an palI6 le mois de Septembre, ce fut ^ 
cette occalion que i'arreftay derechef le Pere lean 
de Brebeuf qui auoit hyuerne icy I'an precedent, 
& qui n'eftoit pas encor remont^, afin de les inftruire 
& d'en prendre la charge, plufieurs autres ieunes gens 
Hurons qui elloiet defcedus en traitte, fe prefenteret 
[105] aulTi k nous pour eftre receus & eftre inftruits: 
mais le peu de viures que nous auons, ne nous per- 
mettant pas d'en admettre dauantage, vne partie d'i- 
ceux fut contrainte de s'en retourner en leurs pais, 
& r autre de fe ioindre aux Algonquins pour aller 
pendant I'hyuer a la chaffe ou k la guerre auec eux. 
Toutesfois la charite de Monfieur le Gouuerneur & 
des Meres Hofpitalieres nous a donne moyen d'en 
adioindre trois aux deux premieres, & baptifer ceux 
qui ne I'eftoient pas chez nous, auec I'aide que i'ay 
dit, nous en auons log6 & entretenu quatre, & vers 
le Printemps vn fixiefme qui eft furuenu, tous vni- 
uerfellement parlant, nous ont fort edifie, ils eftoient 
toufiours des premiers k la Mefle & aux prieres, & 
en fortoient les derniers au foir & au matin, ils ne 
manquoient pas de faire leurs prieres affez longues ^ 
deux genoux, foit qu'ils fuffent k la maifon, foit qu'ils 
fuflent dedans les bois k la chaffe plufieurs fois le 
iour ils alloient k la Chappelle, pour prier Dieu, & 
faluer le faindt Sacrement, ils n'euflent eu garde de 
rien encommencer, [106] fans auoir fait au prealable 
le figne de la Croix : Tous depuis leur baptefme n'ont 
pas manqu6 de f e Conf eff er & Comunier au moins tous 
les Dimanches, & plufieurs d'entre eux s'alloient. 
ConfeHer fi tofl qu'ils penfoient auoir commis quel- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 105 

of the French and of the Algonquins of Sillery. 
They gave him for companion another Huron young 
man, who desired to become a Christian ; both these 
arrived at Sillery last year, in the month of Septem- 
ber. It was on that occasion that I again detained 
Father Jean de Brebeuf , who had wintered here in 
the preceding year, and who had not yet gone up 
again, in order to instruct them and to take charge 
of them. Several other Huron young men, who had 
come down to trade, presented themselves [105] also 
to us, in order to be received and instructed; but, 
the scanty provisions that we have not permitting us 
to admit any more, part of them were constrained to 
return to their own country, and the others, to join 
the Algonquins in order to go during the winter to 
the hunt or to the war with them. 

Nevertheless, the charity of Monsieur the Govern- 
or and of the Hospital Mothers has given us means 
to add three to the first two, and to baptize those 
with us who were not baptized. With the help that 
I have mentioned, we have lodged and maintained 
four of them, and toward the Spring, a sixth, who 
came unexpectedly. Generally speaking, all have 
greatly edified us ; they were always among the first 
at Mass and at prayers, and were the last to leave, 
both at evening and in the morning. They failed 
not to say their prayers, quite long, on both knees, 
whether they were at home or hunting in the woods. 
Several times in the day they went to the Chapel, to 
pray to God and salute the blessed Sacrament ; they 
would take care not to begin anything [106] without 
having first made the sign of the Cross. All, since 
their baptism, have not failed to Confess themselves 
and receive Communion at least every Sunday ; and 



106 LE5 RELATIONS DES J^aUJTES [Vol.24 

que faiitc vn peu notable: tout le long de I'hyuer, ils 
alloicnt tous les Dimaches h Quebec, pour aflilter h. la 
grade Meffe, ^ quoy ils n'ont pas manqu^, quelque 
temps qu'il ayt fait, quoy qu'il y ait enuiron deux 
lieuSs, & qu'il falluft partir pour I'ordinaire auant le 
iour, pendant la rigueur de I'hyuer: mais le defir de 
plaire h. Dieu, & le contentement qu'ils receuoient h 
voir la deuotion de nos Fran9ois affemblds en I'Eglife, 
faifoit qu'ils ne trouuoient rien difficile. De plus la 
paix & I'vnion, en laquelle ils ont vefcu par enfem- 
ble, & auec nos Fran9ois & les Sauuages Algonquins, 
& les feruices qui rendoient volontiers: monftroient 
affez ce que pent la force de la foy, & de la grace 
diuine quand clle s'ell empar^e des coeurs mefme 
Sauuages. Voila ce qui a efl6 commun h. tous, voicy 
ce qu'il y a de particulier. Celuy qui a [107] don^ 
occafio h toute 1 'affaire ell vn noni^ Armat AndeSa- 
rakcn qui n'a pas peu feruy par fes exemples & fes 
paroles k Tinltrudlion des autres, & h. les encourager 
k bien faire. Noftre Seigneur luy a communique 
par intcruallc dc grands dcfirs dc fon falut, & mefme 
qucl(|Ucfois d'abandonncr le monde, & d'entrer en 
Religion, laquelle il cognoift fort bien, & dillingue 
d'auec la vie commune: mais elle demande vne 
longue efprcuue, eflre Sauuage, & eftre Religieux 
font chofes qui femblent bien repugnantes; toutefois 
la grace de Dieu & le teps pourront tout apporter. 
Cc icune homme vint vn iour de c6t Hyuer trouuer 
le Perc Brcbcuf, k la fin dc fa Meffe, & luy tint ce 
difcours; Mon Pcre i'ay grande cnuie de bien faire 
& de me fauuer, i'ay entierement refolu cela: car ie 
Grains ces feux qui bruflent inceffamment fous terre, 
& qui ne s'elteignent iamais. Pour paruenir oil ie 



1642 - 48] JRELA TION OF 164*- 43 107 

several of them went to Confess themselves as soon 
as they thoug^ht they had committed any notable 
fault. Throujj^hout the winter, they went every Sun- 
day to (Juebec, in order to attend high Mass, from 
which they have not been absent, whatever the state 
of the weather, — although the distance is about two 
leagues, and though they were usually obliged to .start 
before daylight, during the rigor of the winter; but 
the desire of pleasing God, and the satisfaction that 
they received in seeing the devotion of our French, 
assembled in the Church, caused them to find noth- 
ing difficult. Moreover, the peace and unity in which 
they have lived together, and with our French and 
the Algonquin Savages, and the services which they 
willingly rendered, showed well enough what the 
power of faith and of the divine grace can do when 
it has gained possession of even Savage hearts. The 
foregoing is what was common to all; here follows 
what is individual. The one who [107] gave occa- 
sion for the whole enterprise is a certain Armant 
Andewaraken, who has aided not a little, by his deeds 
and his words, in the instruction of the others, and 
in encouraging them to do well. Our Lord has 
imparted to him, at intervals, great desires for his .sal- 
vation, — and sometimes even to forsake the world 
and to enter into Religion, which he knows very 
well, and separates from the common life; but it 
requires a long probation, — to be a Savage and to be 
a Religious are things which seem very repugnant; 
nevertheless, the grace of God, and time, will avail 
to compass everything. This young man came one 
day of last Winter to find Father Brebeuf , at the end 
of his Mass, and spoke to him as follows: " My Fa- 
ther, I have great desire to do right and to save my- 



108 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUlTES [Vol.24 

pretens, ie voudrois bien demeurer toufiours auec 
vous, & ne retourner point aux Hurons, oil il y a 
grade peine de fe fauuer, les occafions de pecher font 
frequetes dedans nos bourgades: [io8] la liberte y 
eft grande, ie fuis pourtant determine d'obeir & de 
faire tout ce que Ie Pere Superieur ordonnera: s'il 
me commandoit d'aller aux Hyroquois, i'irois tres- 
volontiers fans aucune efcorte, & mefme s'il me 
commandoit de me letter "k corps perdu dedans cette 
riuiere qui paffe Ik deuant, ie Ie ferois auffi toft. 
C'eft ainll qu'il parloit, ne regardant pas k la chofe 
qui de f oy eft illicite : mais (Implement au comman- 
dement: au refte difoit-il, que Ie Pere Superieur me 
dife ce qu'il me conuient faire, ie fuis affeur6 que ce 
fera la volont6 de Dieu, & par ainfi i'y acquiefceray. 
ArchiendafT^, c'eft k dire Ie Pere Hierofme I'Alle- 
mant qui eft Superieur aux Hurons, m'a adrelle a luy. 
Ie f^ay bien que vous auez encor d'autres Superieurs 
en France: mais c'eft luy qui tient icy la place de 
Dieu, & qui me dira ce qu'il faut que ie fafle. Le 
Pere Superieur luy fift dire qu'il loiioit fort fon deflein 
& fa deuotion, qu'il perfeueraft courageufement, 
que nous aurions toufiours vn foin tres-particulier de 
luy, que pour ce qui eft de demeurer Ik bas cbez 
nous, on y penferoit, [109] & on le recommanderoit 
k Dieu, & qu'il fift le mefme de fon cofte : on confulta 
apres les prieres faites, & on trouua meilleur qu'il 
retournafl encor en fon pais, & qu'eftant craignant 
Dieu, comme il eft, «& affift^ de nos Peres, ce feroit 
le meilleur pour luy & pour les Compatriotes. II 
s'eft eftudi6 fortement k la mortification de fes mouue- 
mens & inclinations : f ouuent il f e fentoit porte k dif- 
puter, & quelquefois il s'emportoit a quelques paroles : 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 109 

self; I have wholly resolved that, for I fear those fires 
which burn incessantly beneath the earth, and which 
are never extinguished. In order to attain what I 
desire, I would like to live always with you, and not 
return to the Hurons, where there is great difficulty 
in saving oneself, — the opportunities for sin are 
frequent in our villages, [108] and the liberty in 
them is great. I am nevertheless determined to 
obey, and to do everything which the Father Supe- 
rior shall order. If he commanded me to go to the 
Hyroquois, I would go very willingly, without any 
escort ; and even if he commanded me to cast myself, 
at the loss of life, into this river which passes yonder 
before us, I would do so at once." Thus he spoke, 
not looking at the thing which in itself is illicit, but 
simply at the command. * ' Moreover, ' ' he said, * ' let 
the Father Superior tell me what I ought to do; 
I am sure that it will be the will of God, and there- 
fore I shall acquiesce therein. Archiendass6 " — 
that is to say, Father Hierosme I'Allemant, who is 
Superior among the Hurons — ' * has addressed me to 
him. I know well that you have still other Superi- 
ors in France ; but it is he who here takes the place 
of God, and who will tell me what I must do." The 
Father Superior sent him word that he greatly praised 
his design and his devotion ; that he should persevere 
courageously; that we would always have a most 
special care for him ; that, with reference to living 
down there with us, we would think of it, [109] and 
we would recommend the matter to God, and that 
he, on his part, should do the same. There was a 
consultation after prayers were done, and it was 
found best that he should return again to his own 
country, — that God-fearing, as he is, and assisted by 



no LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

mais incontinent il rentroit en foy-mefme, & fe 
taifoit tout court, fe fouuenant qu'il auoit refolu de 
bien faire. Vn iour, ayant eu quelque diflferend auec 
vn de nos Fran§ois, non feulement il s'en alia incon- 
tinent Confeller, mais il alia demander pardon a celuy 
qu'il auoit offenc6, en rembralifant tendrement, & du 
depuis il luy a rendu tous les feruices qu'il a peu. 

Le premier qui a profit^ de ces exemp[le]s, a efte vn 
ieune homme nomm6 Saoiiaretchi, qui efloit defcen- 
du auec luy, il eft d'vn excellent naturel, doux, 
pailible, obeiHant, laborieux, & doiie d'vn bon efprit;. 
au moyen dequoy il a promptement [no] apris toutes 
les prieres. II fut baptife la veille de Noel, en la 
Chappelle des Meres Vrfulines, & nomme Ignace par 
Monlieur Martial Piraube, «& la nuidl mefme de cette 
grande Fefte, il fift fa premiere Communion, & de- 
puis ce temps-1^ il a toufiours continue h. fe confefler 
& Communier tous les Dimanches, auec beaucoup de 
deuotion : fon defir h. fe faire inftruire, a paru notam- 
met en ce poindt. Ses camarades vers le comence- 
ment du Carefme, ayant pris refolution d'aller k la 
chaff e de Lorignac, il dift pour luy qu'il n'iroit pas, 
& qu'il n'eftoit pas venu de li loin pour aller h. la 
cbaffe : mais afin de cognoiflre Dieu, & apprendre ^ 
le feruir, & qu'il ne faifoit eflat d'aucune autre chofe 
que de cela; que c'eft ce qu'il pretendoit remporter 
k fon retour, non pas des peaux Dorignac, ou autres 
chof es : fa deuotion particuliere a eft6 de ieufner tous 
les Samedis, pour fe difpofer ^ la Communion du 
Dimanche, & ^ effedtuer promptement tout ce qui luy 
eftoit commande. Le Baptefme de ce ieune homme 
nous fait efperer la Conuerfion de beaucoup d'autres : 
[in] car outre qu'il eft fort exemplaire & fort zel6,. 



1642-48] RELATION OF 1642-43 111 

our Fathers, this would be the best for him and for 
his fellow Countrymen. He has mightily applied 
himself to the mortification of his impulses and 
inclinations ; often he felt himself prone to dispute, 
and sometimes he would grow angry at certain 
words ; but straightway he would return to himself, 
and stop short in silence, remembering that he had 
resolved to do right. One day, having had some 
difference with one of our Frenchmen, he not only 
went straightway to Confess, but he went to ask 
pardon of the one whom he had offended, embracing 
him tenderly ; and since then he has rendered him 
all the services in his power. 

The first to profit by these examples has been a 
young man named Saouaretchi, who had come down 
with him; he is of an excellent disposition, — gentle, 
peaceable, obedient, industrious, — and endowed with 
a good mind, by means of which he has quickly [no] 
learned all the prayers. He was baptized on Christ- 
mas eve, in the Chapel of the Ursuline Mothers, and 
named Ignace, by Monsieur Martial Piraube. On 
the very night of that great Feast, he received his 
first Communion ; and since that time he has always 
continued to confess himself and receive Communion 
every Sunday, with much devotion : his desire to be 
instructed has notably appeared in this point. His 
comrades, toward the beginning of Lent, having 
taken the resolution to go hunting for the Moose, he 
said that, for his part, he would not go ; and that he 
had not come from so far in order to go hunting, but 
in order to know God, and learn to serve him, and that 
he made account of no other thing than that ; that it 
was this which he aspired to carry away at his return, 
and not skins of Moose, or other things. His 



112 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 24 

il apartient k vne des plus groffes & nombreufes 
families des Hurons, qui defia eft toute affectionnee 
^ la foy, & qui n'attend, ce femble, que le Baptefme 
de ce ieune homme, pour fe letter apr^s luy dedans 
ces faindtes eaux. 

Enuiron la-my-Ianuier vn des autres Hurons, qui 
auoient pris party parmy les Algonquins de I'lfle, & 
qui auoient demeur^ iufques alors auec eux, aupres 
du fort de Richelieu, defcendit expres k Sillery, pour 
fe faire inftruire en la foy, le bourg d'ou il eft natif 
fe nomme Arrente, il eft nepueu d'vndes Capitaines: 
mais ce qu'il le rend encor plus recommandable, eft 
qu'il eft extremement doux & fouple k tout. II a 
I'efprit & le iugement fort bon, doux & obeiffant au 
pofGble. 

Les Meres Hofpitalieres I'ont loge & nourry, auec 
vne charite qui embrafle toutes fortes de nations. 
C'eft merueille combien il leur a donn6 de content6- 
ment, dans tous les feruices qu'on a defir6 de luy, 
lefquels il a rendu auec vne gaite, promptitude & 
conftance, qui [112] feroit honte k plulieurs Fran9ois: 
fon affedtion enuers la foy s'eft rendue remarquable, 
non feulement en ce qu'il venoit conftamment foir & 
matin trouuer le Pere, pour fe faire inftruire : mais 
auffi en ce qu'ayant eft6 inftruidt de quelque nouuelle 
priere ou lejon, il la repetoit & ru[m]inoit, & tant & 
fi long- temps, qu'il la f9auoit auant que de partir: en 
forte qu'il n'eftoit nullement befoin de luy redire 
deux fois vne mefme chofe, il ne manquoit point tous 
les foirs, & tous les matins d'aller dans la Chapelle 
de I'Hofpital, pour y faire fes prieres, & y demeuroit 
vne bonne efpace de temps. II fut baptif6 ^ I'Hof- 
pital, le 8. de Mars, & nomm6 Pierre par Monfieur de 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 113 

particular devotion has been to fast every Saturday, 
in order to prepare himself for Sunday Communion, 
and for the prompt performance of all that was com- 
manded him. The Baptism of this young man causes 
us to hope for the Conversion of many others; [m] 
for, besides that he is very exemplary and very zeal- 
ous, he belongs to one of the largest and most nu- 
merous families of the Hurons, which already is thor- 
oughly attached to the faith, and which awaits, it 
seems, only the Baptism of this young man in order 
to plunge after him into those blessed waters. 

About the middle of January, one of the other Hu- 
rons, who had gone to live among the Algonquins of 
the Island, and who until then had remained with 
them near the fort of Richelieu, came down to Sil- 
lery, expressly to be instructed in the faith. The 
village of which he is native is named Arrente,^ and 
he is nephew to one of the Captains ; but what com- 
mends him still more, is his extreme gentleness and 
docility in every respect. He has very good wit 
and judgment; mild and thoroughly obedient. 

The Hospital Mothers have lodged and fed him, 
with a charity which embraces all sorts of nations. 
It is remarkable how much satisfaction he has given 
them in all the services which have been desired of 
him; these he has rendered with a cheerfulness, 
promptness, and constancy that [112] would cause 
shame to many Frenchmen. His affection toward 
the faith has made itself noteworthy, — not only in 
that he constantly came, evening and morning, to 
find the Father, in order to be instructed ; but also 
in that, having been instructed in some new prayer 
or lesson, he would repeat and meditate upon it, and 
that so much and so long, that he knew it before 



114 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

Repentigny, qui luy a toufiours depuis tefmoign6 
beaucoup d' affection. 

Enuiron la my Feurier deux autres ieunes hommes 
Hurons, natifs du mefme bourg, que le precedent, & 
pouffez du mefme defir de fe faire enroller au nom- 
bre des Chreftiens, abandonnerent aulTi les Algon- 
quins au fort de Richelieu, pour s'en venir chercher 
le Pere de Brebeuf, afin d'eftre par luy inftruits, [113] 
[nous] les receumes encor chez nous : faute de lieu 
nous fuf mes contrains de les loger auec nos oeuuriers : 
I'vn fe nommoit Atarohiat, & I'autre Atokouchioiiani. 
L'enuie d'eftre au pluftofl baptifes, leur enflama 
tellement le defir de fe faire inftruire, qu'ils eurent 
apris toutes les prieres & le Catechifme en fort peu 
de temps, & I'vn d'iceux, efmeu de ce vehement defir 
d'apprendre, ne voulut pas fe diuertir pour aller h. la 
chaff e auec fes Camarades, difant; Le temps que 
nous auons pour demeurer icy, eft trop court. le 
defire I'employer k me faire inftruire, & puis 
d'ailleurs, ie n'ay pas la plus heureufe memoire du 
monde, ie ne fuis defcendu icy pour aller a la chaffe, 
& pour manger de la viande; fi i'auois en enuie d'en 
manger, ie n'auois qu'a demeurer auec les Algon- 
quins, Ik-haut k Richelieu, la ou la chaffe eft bien 
meilleure qu'icy, voyant qu'ils f9auoient bien les 
prieres, ils demanderent fi ardamment le Baptefme, 
difant, entre autre chofe qu'ils craignoient qu'allant 
fouuent das les bois, fur les eaux, & autres lieux 
dagereux, il ne leur arriuaft quelque mal-heur, [114] 
qu'enfin on leur accorda, ce fut dans I'Eglife de 
Quebec oii ils furent baptifez fort folemnellement le 
lour de I'Annonciation de noftre-Dame, auquel auffi 
ils Communierent pour la premiere fois, felon I'vfage 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 H^ 

going away. Hence there was no need of telling 
him the same thing twice over. He failed not to go 
into the Chapel of the Hospital every evening and 
every morning, in order to say his prayers there; 
and stayed there a good space of time. He was 
baptized at the Hospital, the 8th of March, and was 
named Pierre by Monsieur de Repentigny, who since 
then has ever shown him much affection. 

About the middle of February, two other Huron 
young men — natives of the same village as the 
preceding, and impelled by the same desire to have 
themselves enrolled in the number of the Chris- 
tians — also abandoned the Algonquins at the fort 
of Richelieu, in order to come in quest of Father de 
Brebeuf, so as to be instructed by him. [113] We 
received them, moreover, at our abode ; for want of 
room we were constrained to lodge them with our 
workmen ; one was named Atarohiat, and the other^ 
Atokouchiouani. The longing to be baptized as soon 
as possible, so greatly kindled in them the desire to 
be instructed, that they had learned all the prayers 
and the Catechism in a very little while ; and one of 
them, moved with this vehement desire to learn, was 
not willing to divert himself by going to the hunt 
with his Comrades, saying: " The time that we have 
for staying here is too short : I desire to employ it 
in obtaining instruction; and then, besides, I have 
not the happiest memory in the world. I have not 
come down here to go hunting; and, as for eating 
meat, if I had cared to eat any, I had only to stay 
with the Algonquins up there at Richelieu, where 
the hunt is much better than here." Seeing that 
they knew the prayers well, they requested Baptism 
so ardently, — saying, among other things, that they 



116 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

de I'Eglife. Monlieur de faindt Sauueur donna le 
nom de lofeph a Atarohiat, & Monfieur de la Vall6e, 
celuy de Ren6 k Atokouchioiian j . 

I'ay dit qu'on les auoit baptifez le plus folemnelle- 
ment qu'on auoit peu, & ce, ^ deffein; parce que cela 
a beaucoup d'effedt fur les efprits des Sauuages, & 
n'eft pas enuers eux vn petit motif de credibilite. A 
ce propos apres le baptefme de ces deux derniers, le 
Pere de Brebeuf ayant men6 tous les Hurons chez 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur pour le remercier de tant de 
bien & d'honneur qu'il leur faifoit, il leur demanda 
en fa prefence k tous, les vns apres les autres, qui eft 
ce qui les toucboit le plus, & les portoit dauantage a 
ambraffer la foy, le premier dift que ce qui le frap- 
poit dauantage eftoit de conflderer la toute-puilTance 
de Dieu, k qui rien n'eft impolTible, & de pefer aux 
[115] oeuures merueilleufes qu'il a fait, depuis le 
commencement du monde, comme eft d'auoir tire du 
neant tant de creatures, d'auoir fait pafTer les enfans 
d'Ifrael au trauers de la mer-rouge "k pied fee, les 
auoir nourry de la Manne, I'efpace de quarante ans, 
auoir raffafie plufieurs mille perfonnes, auec cinq 
pains & deux poiflons, auoir refufcite le Lazare, mort 
de quatre iours, & vne infinite d'autres merueilles 
femblables. 

Vn autre dilt que ce qui le touclio[it] bien-fort 
eftoit de voir des hommes [&] des filles Religieufes, 
quitter leur pay[s] ou ils eftoient bien "k leur aife, & 
fans danger, pour venir en des lieux ou il n'y a que 
des dangers, & des incommoditez incroyables, & tout 
cela pour les inftruire & les gagner a Dieu. 

Mais la plufpart refpondit, que ce q[ui] leur don- 
noit dauantage dans les yeu[x] eftoit de voir tout ce 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 117 

feared lest, going often into the woods, upon the 
waters, and into other dangerous places, there might 
happen to them some misfortune, — [114] that finally 
it was granted them. It was in the Church of 
Quebec where they were baptized, very solemnly, the 
day of the Annunciation of our Lady, when they also 
received Communion for the first time, according to 
the custom of the Church. Monsieur de saint Sau- 
veur ^ gave the name of Joseph to Atarohiat ; and Mon- 
sieur de la Vallee, that of Rene to Atokouchiouani. 

I have said that they had been baptized as solemn- 
ly as possible, — and this designedly, because that 
has much effect upon the minds of the Savages, and 
is to them, not a slight incentive to belief. To this 
end, after the baptism of these two latter, Father de 
Brebeuf — having led all the Hurons before Monsieur 
the Governor, in order to thank him for so much 
kindness and honor as he did them — asked them in 
his presence, all in succession, what that is which 
touched them the most, and most inclined them to 
embrace the faith. The first said, that what struck 
him chiefly was, to consider the omnipotence of God, 
with whom nothing is impossible; and to think of 
the [115] marvelous works which he has done, from 
the beginning of the world, — as, to have drawn so 
many creatures out of nothing ; to have caused the 
children of Israel to pass through the red sea with 
dry feet ; to have fed them with the Manna for the 
space of forty years ; to have satisfied several thou- 
sand persons with five loaves and two fishes ; to have 
raised Lazarus from the dead, four days after death ; 
and countless other like wonders. 

Another said that what touched him very strongly 
was, to see men and Religious maids leave their own 



il8 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.24 

•que Ton faifoit pour honorer Dieu, quand nous voy- 
ons, difoient-ils, tout le monde s'alTembler, icy les 
Dimanches & les Feftes, pour ouyr la Mefle, & pour 
prier Dieu, quand nous voyons les Confeffions & 
Communion [i i6] frequente & pratiquee auec tant de 
deuotion, quand nous confiderons ce que Ton fait pour 
les Sauuages, comme on leur fai(5t des champs, comme 
on leur baftit des maifons, comme on les alTifte au 
corps & en Tame, c'efl ce qui nous fait dire que la 
foy eft vne chofe importante, & que ce que vous en- 
feign ez eft veritable. Vers le Printemps il en arriua 
vn fixiefme, qui auoit efte baptif^ en pafTant par 
Montreal, auec quelques Algonquins, il logea pour 
I'ordinaire k I'Hofpital, auec Pierre fon Camarade, 
& tafcha de recompenfer auec fa ferueur le peu de 
temps qu'il auroit, & de fe faire inftruire auant fon 
Baptefme, II a donn6 toute forte de contentement 
au Pere Brebeuf, le peu de temps qu'il a peu I'auoir 
pour fon Maiftre. Voyla I'eftat auquel ont efl6 nos 
cinq ou fix penfionnaires Hurons, qui feroient fans 
doute en plus grand nombre, fi les moyens eftoient 
plus grands, au refte vne chofe leur a caufe de la 
crainte, & donne de la peine, f9auoir le retour en 
leurs pays: car difoient-ils, tandis que nous ferons 
icy parmy vous, il ne [i 17] nous eft pas quafi poffible 
d'offencer Dieu, voyant tant de bons exemples de 
vertu, & point de vices: mais en noftre pays: c'eft 
tout au contraire, on ne f§ait que c'eft que de bien 
faire, c'eft vn chaos de confufion & de defordre, & 
puis difoient les derniers baptifez, il n'y a quafi en- 
core perfonne en noftre bourg, ny des circonuoifins, 
qui ait folidement embraffe la foy, nous fommes les 
premiers & les vniques. C'eft ainfi qu'ils parloient 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 119 

country, where they were much at their ease, and 
without danger, in order to come to places where 
there is nothing but dangers and incredible incon- 
veniences, — and all that in order to instruct them, 
and win them to God, 

But the most part answered that what mainly 
attracted their attention was, to see all that was done 
to honor God. '' When we see," said they, " every 
one assemble here on Sundays and Feasts, in order 
to hear the Mass and to pray to God ; when we see 
Confessions and frequent Communions, [116] observed 
with so much devotion ; when we consider what is 
done for the Savages, — how fields are prepared for 
them, how houses are built for them, how they are 
assisted in body and soul, — that is what makes us 
say that faith is something important, and that what 
you teach is true." Toward Spring there arrived a 
sixth, who had been baptized in passing through 
Montreal, together with some Algonquins. He 
lodged, as a rule, at the Hospital, with Pierre, his 
Comrade, and tried to compensate with his fervor for 
the little time that he should have, and to become 
instructed before his Baptism. He has given every 
sort of contentment to Father Brebeuf , in the short 
time that he could have him for his Teacher. Such 
has been the status of our five or six Huron board- 
ers, who no doubt would be more numerous if the 
means were greater. Howbeit, one thing has caused 
them fear and given them pain, — to wit, the return 
to their country; " For," they said, " while we shall 
be here among you, it [i 17] is hardly possible for us 
to offend God, seeing so many good examples of vir- 
tue, and no vices : but in our own country, it is quite 
the contrary, — one knows not what it is to do right; 



120 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

& qu'ils reprefentoient le danger, auquel ils fe croy- 
oient d'offencer la diuine Maiefte : & en effedt ils ont 
iufte fubiedt de craindre, & nous auffi : & qnand bien 
quelqu'vn d'eux viendroit k trebucher, il ne s'en 
faudroit pas eftonner. Nous efperons toutefois en la 
diuine bont6 qu'elle les conferuera, & qu'elle per- 
fedtionnera ce qu'elle a commence. lis partirent 
tous vers la-my-Iuin, pour retourner en leur pays, 
en la compagnie d'enuiron fix-vingts autres Hurons, 
qui eftoient venus en traite. Cette fagon de Semi- 
naire eft aifee, & fe peut faire ^ petis frais, & eft 
excellente, choififfant nombre de ieunes gens de vingt 
[ii8] ou vingt-cinq ans, de bonne volont6, & bon 
efprit, & les cultiuant vn Automne, & vn Hyuer par- 
my nos Frangois, & nos Chreftiens Algonquins, leur 
faifant voir & goufter la profeffion du Chriftianifme 
parmy nous, & parmy des gens de leur pays mefme, 
& puis les renuoyant fous la Garde, & la conduite de 
nos Peres, qui font aux Hurons: mais ie ne f9ay fi la 
rage des Hiroquois ne nous priuera point de cette 
confolation, & eux d'vn fi grand bon-heur. Si les 
Hurons eftoient gagnez, la nation des Neutres, & 
autres voifines ne tarderoit gueres k fuiure. Les Hu- 
ros qui font venus en traitte, nous ont dit que ce font 
^ prefent les principaux du pays qui fe font inftruire.. 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 121 

it is a chaos of confusion and of disorder. " " And 
then," said the one last baptized, " there is as yet 
scarcely any one in our village, or in those round 
about, who has solidly embraced the faith. We are 
the first and the only ones." Thus they spoke, and 
represented the danger wherein they believed them- 
selves to be, of offending the divine Majesty. In 
fact, they have just cause to fear, and we also ; and 
if, indeed, some one of them should happen to 
stumble, we must not be surprised. Nevertheless, 
we hope in the divine goodness that it will preserve 
them, and that it will perfect what it has begun. 
They all went away toward the middle of June, in 
order to return to their own country, in the company 
of about six-score other Hurons, who had come for 
trade. This plan of Seminary is easy, and can be 
realized at small expense, and is excellent, — choos- 
ing a number of young men, of twenty [118] or twen- 
ty-five years, of good will and good intelligence, and 
training them one Autumn and one Winter among 
our French and our Algonquin Christians; causing 
them to see and to taste the profession of Christian- 
ity among us, and among people of their very coun- 
try ; and then sending them away, under the Guard 
and the guidance of our Fathers who are with the 
Hurons. But I know not whether the rage of the 
Hiroquois will not deprive us of this consolation; 
and them, of so great a good fortune. If the Hu- 
rons were won over, the nation of the Neutrals, and 
others neighboring, would hardly be slow to follow. 
The Hurons who have come for trade have told us 
that these who are being instructed are, at present* 
the principal men of the country. 



122 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 



[119] CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE LA MISSION DE TADOUSAC. 

1L y a trois ans que nous commenfames cette Mif- 
fion, nous allions chercher des nations bien loin, 
& quittions 1^ nos voiCns, cela prouenoit de 
leur mauuaife difpofitio, & de I'auerfion qu'ils tefmoi- 
gnoient aux chof es de la f oy : mais depuis quelques 
ann^es, Dieu en ayant touche d'entre eux fortement, 
ils font venus fouuent nous voir, & demander d'eftre 
inftruits, puis enfin nous ont pri^ & coniur6 d'aller 
en leur pays paffer quelques mois de I'annee, ce qui 
a tres-bien reiiffi, en forte que quantity de petites 
nations circonuoifines, efmeues du bruidt & de I'ex- 
emple de ces premiers, font forties de ces grandes 
forefts du Nort, comme de pauures brebis efgarees 
& perdues, pour chercher elles-mefmes le Pafleur, & 
fe fauuer de la gueule des loups. Ces pauures [120] 
gens, ayant ouy la parole de Dieu, & gouft6 fa dou- 
ceur, s'en retournoient d'auec nos Peres en leur pays 
pleins de regret & de deplaifir, de n'auoir perfonne 
qui cultiuaft cette femence celefte, qu'ils emportoient 
en leurs coeurs ; chacun au moins remettoit de retour- 
ner le Printemps, & I'Efte, & prioit le Pere qui les 
enfeignoit, de reuenir auffi lu -mefme en ce temps- 
1^. Madame la Ducheffe d'Aiguillon nonobftant les 
eftranges fujets de douleur & trifteffe qu'elle a eu, 
& qui euffent abattu le courage d'vne infinite d'au- 
tres, n'a pas laifle d'eftendre fes foins, & fes affedtions 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 123 



[119] CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE MISSION AT TADOUSAC. 

IT is three years since we began this Mission ; we 
were going in quest of nations very distant, and 
were leaving our neighbors there; that pro- 
ceeded from their bad disposition, and from the 
aversion which they showed for the things of the 
faith. But within some years past, God having 
strongly influenced some of them, they have often 
come to see us, and to ask to be instructed; then, 
in fine, they begged and entreated us to go into their 
country, to spend some months of the year. This 
has succeeded very well, — insomuch that many little 
nations round about, moved by the rumor and the 
example of the former ones, have issued from these 
great forests of the North, — like poor sheep, stray- 
ing and lost, — in order themselves to seek the Pas- 
tor, and save themselves from the jaws of the wolves. 
These poor [120] people, having heard the word of 
God, and tasted its sweetness, returned from the 
company of our Fathers into their own country, full 
of regret and affliction at having no one to cultivate 
that heavenly seed which they carried away in their 
hearts. Each one counted on returning at least in 
the Spring and in the Summer, and begged the Fa- 
ther who taught them to return himself also, at that 
time. Madame the Duchess d'Aiguillon, notwith- 
standing the unusual causes of grief and sadness that 
she has had, and that would have prostrated the 



124 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUJTES [Vol.24 

ordinaires fur nos Miffions, & nommement fur celle- 
cy de Tadoufac. Le P. Charl. Lalemat m'efcrit de 
France qu'entendant les larmes & les plaintes des 
Sauuages de ces quartiers-1^, fur ce qu'ils auoient fi 
peu fouuent des perfonnes pour les inllruire, elle a 
fourny dequoy entretenir cette annee, les Peres 
neceflaires a cete miflion. Auant que nous euffios eu 
cette nouuelle, nous auions preuenu fes penfees, «& 
le P. de Quen y efloit all6 d6s le Prin-teps, auec vn 
heureux fuccez : en voicy le somaire. 

[i2i] Si toft que les Sauuages eurent entendu la 
nouuelle que le Pere venoit en Canot, ils enuoyerent 
vne troupe de ieunes gens au deuat auec vne chaloup- 
pe, qu'ils auoient pour Tembarquer, & comme il mit 
pied k terre, ils firent tous paroiftre vne merueilleufe 
ioye auec des reproches amoureufes d'vn trop long 
retardement contre la parolle qu'il leur auoit donn6e 
de fe trouuer 'k Tadoufac d6s le commencement du 
prin-temps : puis ils f e mirent k luy raconter ce qu'ils 
auoient fait en 1' attendant. Car voyant qu'il tardoit, 
ils auoient choifi vn ieune Sauuage fort bon Chre- 
flien venu de Sillery depuis peu, & I'auoient eftably 
maiftre des prieres, il auoit appris h. Sillery celles du 
matin & du foir auec la fa9on de dire le Chappellet. 
Le Capitaine luy parla, & luy fit entendre comme il 
auoit eu charge du Pere fl toft que les Sauuages fe- 
roient arriu^s ^ Tadoufac au prin-temps de les affem- 
bler tous dans vne grande cabane deux fois le iour, 
le matin & le foir, pour y prier Dieu publiquement 
qu'ils ne fgauoient encore gueres de chofes: que pour 
luy, ayat hyuern^ [122] k Sillery, il auoit eu la com- 
modity d'apprendre, & auoit veu la pratique des pri- 
eres qu'ils fupplioient d'en prendre la charge, que tous 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 125 

courage of countless others, has none the less ex- 
tended her care and her customary affection toward 
our Missions, and notably upon this one at Tadousac. 
Father Charles Lalemant writes to me from France 
that, hearing the tears and the complaints of the Sav- 
ages of those quarters, because they so seldom had 
persons to instruct them, she has furnished means for 
supporting, this year, the Fathers necessary to that 
mission. Before we had received this news, we had 
anticipated her thoughts, and Father de Quen had 
gone thither as early as Spring, with excellent 
success ; here follows a summary thereof. 

[121] As soon as the Savages had heard the news 
that the Father was coming by Canoe, they sent a 
band of young men to meet him with a shallop which 
they had, in order to put him on board ; and as he 
landed, they all showed a wonderful joy, — together 
with loving reproaches because of too long a delay, 
contrary to the word which he had given them, to be 
at Tadousac by the beginning of spring; then they 
proceeded to relate to him what they had done while 
waiting for him. For, seeing that he was late, they 
had chosen a young Savage, — a very good Christian, 
recently come from Sillery, — and had appointed him 
master of prayers. He had learned at Sillery those 
for morning and evening, together with the manner 
of reciting the Rosary. The Captain spoke to him, 
and gave him to understand how he had received 
charge from the Father, as soon as the Savages should 
have arrived at Tadousac in the spring, to assemble 
them all in a large cabin, twice a day, morning and 
evening, in order there to pray to God in public ; that 
as yet, they knew very little, — but, as for him, hav- 
ing wintered [122] at Sillery, he had had the oppor- 



126 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

feroient obliges de luy obeir. Apres luy auoir tenu 
ce difcours il luy mit vn grad fouet de corde ^ gros 
noeuds entre les mains pour toucher fur ceux qui 
manqueroient de fe trouuer aux prieres. 

De plus par vne fimplicite innocente voyant que 
ceux qui inflruifent parmy nous, portent vne cou- 
ronne "k la tefte, ils luy en firent vne penfant que 
cela fuft necellaire. Ce bon Neophyte exerga fa 
charge auec vn grand zele & vn grand foing, les 
affemblant tous foir & matin, pronongant tout haut 
les prieres, recitant auec eux le Chappellet, & leur 
enfeignant ce qu'il fjauoit, auec vn grand contente- 
ment de tous ces bonnes gens & vne grande edifica- 
tion de quelques Frangois, qui eftoient defcendus au 
prin-temps de Kebec k Tadoufac. Le Pere les cogra- 
tula fort k ces bones nouuelles, & prit ce ieune 
gar9on pour fon copagnon, ne luy oftant rien de fa 
charge que la Couronne qu'il auoit k la tefte. 

[123] La premiere chofe que fit le Pere, fut vne 
criee par toutes les cabanes qu'on amenaft tous les 
enfans auant I'vfage de raifon qui n'eftoient pas 
encore baptifez, afin de leur conferer ce facrement, ce 
qui fut bien-toft execute par la diligence & piet6 des 
parents, qui en furent rauis d'aife: ils les amenerent 
k la Chapelle, c'eft vne pauure mafure baftie ^ la 
hafte par les Fran9ois, qui font la defcharge des Na- 
uires k Tadoufac, & qui "k faute d' autre lieu, fert de 
Chappelle. Cela fait, le Pere allemble en particu- 
lier tous les Chreftiens, & leur fait exhortation, tous 
fe confeffent auec vne finguliere confolation & de- 
uotion, il ne donna pourtant k cet abord la Commu- 
nion qu'k ceux qu'il iugea les plus capables, ils 
affiftoient tous les matins aux prieres, & k la Meffe, 



1 642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 127 

tunity to learn, and had seen the practice of prayers ; 
and they besought him to take charge thereof, say- 
ing that all would be obliged to obey him. After hav- 
ing spoken thus to him, he put in his hands a heavy 
whip of cords, with large knots, in order to beat 
those who should fail to be present at the prayers. 

Furthermore, with an innocent simplicity, having 
seen that those who instruct among us wear the ton- 
sure on their heads, they made him one, thinking that 
that was necessary. This good Neophyte exercised 
his charge with great zeal and great care, — assem- 
bling them all, evening and morning; pronouncing 
aloud the prayers, reciting with them the Rosary, 
and teaching them what he knew, — to the great satis- 
faction of all those good people, and to the great 
edification of some Frenchmen who had come down, 
in the spring, from Kebec to Tadousac. The Father 
heartily congratulated them upon these good tidings, 
and took that young lad for his companion, remov- 
ing nothing from his office but the Tonsure that he 
had on his head. 

[123] The first thing that the Father did, was to 
make a proclamation through all the cabins, that they 
should bring all the children under the age of discre- 
tion, who were not yet baptized, so as to confer upon 
them this sacrament, — which was soon executed by 
the diligence and piety of the parents, who were 
transported with delight. They brought them to 
the Chapel, a poor hut, — built in haste by the French, 
who unlade the Ships at Tadousac, — which, for want 
of other room, serves as Chapel. That done, the 
Father privately assembles all the Christians, and 
makes an exhortation to them; all confess them- 
selves with singular comfort and devotion ; neverthe- 



128 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

entendoient I'inftrudtion qui fe faifoit h, TEuangile, 
apres laquelle les Cathecumenes fortoient. La plus 
grande partie du iour fe palloit k enfeigner en parti- 
culier, les hommes & les femmes, k faire le Cate- 
chifme aux enfants, k difpofer ceux qui demandoiet 
le Baptefme, k apprendre par coeur le [124] Pater, 
rAue, le Credo, & ce qu'il faut dire foir & matin, de- 
quoy ils font tres auides. Sur la fin du iour ils s'af- 
fembloient derechef en la Chappelle ; le Pere faifant 
vn cry au milieu de ce petit village portatif, vous 
eufliez veu tous ces pauures gens hommes & femmes, 
grands & petits fortir ^ la foule de leurs taudis, quit- 
ter leur befongne, & leurs ieux, & courir ^ la Chap- 
pelle pour faire les prieres, & efcouter la dodtrine 
Chreftiene. Tous ceux qui n'efloient pas encore 
Baptifez, prelToient auec importunite pour obtenir ce 
bon-heur, ils s'entrencourageoient, & fe demandoient 
I'vn k 1 autre quand feras-tu baptife? vn d'entre-eux 
fameux forcier, difoit vn iour au Pere ie voy bien 
que vous differez toufiours mon baptefme a deffein, 
vous croyez que ie le demande par feinte, & fans de- 
fir de quitter mes mauuaifes couftumes que vous me 
reprochez, il n'importe: differez tant que vous vou- 
drez, efprouuez-moy tant qu'il vous plaira, enqueftez- 
vous de ma vie, ie ne perderay pas pourtant courage, 
ie ne laifl!eray pas d'efperer, & vous importuner, & 
affifter [125] aux prieres: le Pere le confola, & luy 
donna efperance: mais il n'ofa pas s'y fier encores: 
ie I'ay defia dit plufieurs fois, on ne fgauroit trop long 
temps efprouuer les Sauuages, ils en font beaucoup 
mieux par apres. Le Pere fe refolut done de 
pourfuiure leur inflrudtion, & leur efpreuue, & les 
differer quaC tous ^ la venue des vaiffeaux, ou ^ 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 129 

less, on that first occasion, he granted Communion 
only to those whom he judged most fit therefor. 
They were present every morning at prayers and at 
Mass, and heard the instruction which was given after 
the Gospel, after which the Catechumens went out. 
The greatest part of the day was spent in teaching 
the men and the women, in private ; in rehearsing 
the Catechism to the children, preparing those who 
requested Baptism, and teaching by heart the [124] 
Pater, the Ave, the Credo, and what must be said 
evening and morning, for which they are very eager. 
Toward the end of the day, they assembled again in 
the Chapel ; upon the Father making a proclamation 
in the midst of that little portable village, you would 
have seen all those poor people, men and women, 
great and small, issuing in a crowd from their hovels, 
leaving their work and their sports, and running to 
the Chapel in order to say the prayers and listen to 
the Christian doctrine. All those who were not yet 
Baptized, were urging with importunity, to obtain 
this blessing ; they would encourage one another and 
inquire of one another, " When shall you be bap- 
tized?" One of them, a famous sorcerer, said one 
day to the Father, " I see well, that you always 
put off my baptism on purpose ; you believe that I 
request it as a pretense, and without desire of giving 
up my bad practices, with which you reproach me. 
No matter, — put it off as long as you will ; try me as 
much as you like ; inquire about my life. I shall 
nevertheless not lose courage ; I shall not cease to 
hope, and to importune you, and to attend [125] 
prayers." The Father consoled him and gave him 
hope, but dared not trust him as yet ; I have already 
said several times, that one cannot try the Savages 



130 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

I'Automne, il choilifl pourtant deux homines, & deux 
femes chefs de deux bones families: qui viuoiet 
fort paifiblemet pour leur coferer ces eaux falutaires, 
tons leurs enfants eftoient defia baptifez. Vn de ces 
quatre s'entretenant vn iour familierement auec le 
Pere, luy racontoit quelque traits de la diuine Proui- 
dence fur fa vie, i'ay toufiours eft^ heureux h. la 
chaffe, difoit-il, quand i'allois vifiter les attrapes que 
i'auois faittes pour prendre des Caftors & des Ours, 
ie trouuois toufiours ma proye, «& ne retournois ia- 
mais vuide, cela m'eflonoit fort, veu que mes cama- 
rades ne prenoient fouuent rien, ie difois h. part moy : 
mais qui eft celuy 1^, qui me donne ^ manger fi libe- 
ralement, fans doubte il m'ayme & me veut du bien, 
[126J ie le voudrois bien cognoiftre pour Ten remer- 
cier, 1^ deflus vous ayant entendu parler, comme il 
y a vn Dieu, qui a tout fait, & qui gouuerne tout, 
i'ay penfe incontinent que c'eftoit celuy qui me don- 
noit ^ manger, & m'attiroit h. fa cognoiflance par ce 
foing qu'il auoit de moy. Ie n'ofois pas pourtant 
vous demander le Baptefme, n'eftant pas encor allez 
inftruit, & doutant mefme a par moy, fi ie pourrois 
executer ce que vous nous apprenez, viuant vne 
bonne partie de I'annee dans les bois, ou nous 
fommes contraints de chercher noftre vie. Mais k 
prefent que ie fuis fuffifamment inftruit, & que vous 
m'affeurez que ie peux honorer ce grand Dieu par 
tout, & dans les bois mefmes, attendant qu'il en 
ordonne autrement, ie defire I'aymer & le feruir toute 
ma vie, & vous prie de me donner le Baptefme, qui 
en eft I'entr^e: Get homme done fut Baptife auec fa 
femme, & en fuitte furent mariez en faffe d'Egliffe, 
auec c^t autre mefnage, dont i'ay fait mention. Vne 



1642 - 43 J RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 131 

too long, — they are much the better for it afterward. 
The Father then resolved to continue their instruc- 
tion and their probation, and to put off nearly all of 
them till the coming of the vessels, or till Autumn ; 
he chose, nevertheless, two men and two women, 
heads of two good families, who were living very 
peaceably, — in order to grant them those salutary 
waters; all their children were already baptized. 
One of these four, familiarly conversing one day with 
the Father, told him some instances of the divine 
Providence over his life. ' ' I have always been fortu- 
nate in hunting, " said he ; " when I went to visit the 
traps that I had made in order to catch Beavers and 
Bears, I would always find my prey, and never 
returned empty-handed, — that astonished me greatly. 
Seeing that my comrades often took nothing, I would 
say to myself apart: ' But who is that one, who gives 
me to eat so liberally? No doubt he loves me and 
wishes me well; [126] I would much like to know 
him, in order to thank him for it.' Thereupon, hav- 
ing heard you mention how there is a God, who has 
made everything, and who governs all, I straightway 
thought that it was he who gave me to eat, and was 
attracting me to his acquaintance by this care that 
he had for me. Nevertheless, I did not dare to ask 
you for Baptism, not yet being sufficiently instructed, 
and even doubting within myself whether I could 
accomplish what you teach us, — living a good part 
of the year in the woods, where we are constrained 
to seek our living. But, now that I am sufficiently 
instructed, — and that you assure me that I can honor 
this great God everywhere, and even in the woods, 
until he order otherwise, — I desire to love him and 
to serve him all my life ; and I beg you to give me 



132 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 24 

ieune veufue fort bien difpofee, les fuiuit, & tous en- 

femble tefmoignerent vne deuotion & ioye fmguliere. 

[127] Le Pere auoit pri^ Monfieur Marfolet qui eftoit 

party deuant luy, pour venir k Tadoufac, que s'il ren- 

controit quelque malade k la mort, il le baptifaft. Si 

toft qu'il y fut arriu6, il va par les cabanes, il trouue 

vn pauure vieillard qui combattoit auec la mort: 

depuis quelques iours, & n'attendoit qu'vn heureux 

moment de la Diuine Prouidence pour luy ceder. 

Le lleur Marfolet luy parle I'inftruidt, luy demande 

s'il veut eftre baptif^, que le Pere luy en a donne 

commiffion: c'eft ce que i'attens dit-il, & ce que ie 

defire pour partir de ce monde: on le Baptife, & 

incontinent apres il meurt, & s'en va au Ciel prendre 

la place que cette eau Sacr^e luy dona. Vn enfant 

tomba malade le lendemain de fon Baptefme: fes 

parens I'aymoient vniquement, c'efkoit toute leur 

cofolation, on appelle le Pere de Quen pour le vifi- 

ter, & prier Dieu pour fa fant6, il y va, il trouue ce 

pauure enfant fort mal, & fon Pere & fa Mere triftes 

au polTible, ils n'eftoient pas encore Cbreftiens, & le 

Pere eftoit vn vieillard fort addonne aux fonges & 

fuperftitions : le [128] Pere de Quen fait quelques 

prieres pour le malade, & tafche de confoler le Pere 

& la Mere: mais tout cela auoit peu d'effedt, voicy 

entrer de bonne fortune vn des Neophytes de Sillery 

qui auoit emmene le Pere h. Tadoufac, il s'addreffe 

au vieillard, & I'exhorte de mettre fon efperance en 

celuy qui a tout fait, que luy feul pent rendre la fan- 

t6 a fon fils, & non pas le Diable ennemy de tous les 

hommes, mais que s'il defire d eftre exauc6, il faut 

qu'il renonce au padte qu'il a auec ce malin efprit, 

qu'il abandonne fes fuperftitions, & qu'il donne 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 133 

Baptism, which is the entrance thereto. ' ' This man, 
then, was Baptized with his wife, and afterward they 
were married, conformably to the Church, along with 
that other household of which I have made mention. 
A young widow, very well disposed, followed them, 
and all together showed a singular devotion and joy. 
[127] The Father had requested Monsieur Marso- 
let^ — who had started before him, in order to come 
to Tadousac — that, if he encountered any one sick 
unto death, he should baptize him. As soon as the 
sieur had arrived there, he goes through the cabins ; 
he finds a poor old man who had been struggling 
with death for several days past, and was expecting 
only a happy moment from the Divine Providence, 
in order to yield to it. The sieur Marsolet speaks to 
him, instructs him, asks him if he wishes to be bap- 
tized, — saying that the Father has given him this 
commission. " That is what I await," he said, ** and 
what I desire, in order to depart from this world." 
He is Baptized, and straightway afterward he dies, 
and goes thence to Heaven, to take the place which 
that Sacred water gave him. A child fell sick the 
morrow of its Baptism : its parents loved it singu- 
larly, — it was their whole consolation. They call 
Father de Quen to visit it, and to pray to God for its 
health. He goes thither, he finds this poor child 
very sick, and its Father and Mother extremely sad; 
they were not yet Christians, and the Father was an 
old man, much given over to dreams and supersti- 
tions. [128] Father de Quen offers some prayers for 
the sick, and tries to console the Father and the 
Mother, but all that had little effect. At this point, 
by good fortune, enters one of the Neophytes of 
Sillery, who had conducted the Father to Tadousac. 



134 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

prefentement an Pere les inftruments dont il fe fert, 
ie I'ay defia fait, refpond-il, i'ay iett6 mon tambour, & 
ie vendis hier aux Fran9ois vne robbe fuperftitieufe 
que i'auois fait peindre, comme ie I'aiiois veue en 
fonge pour ma sate; voil^ qui va bien, repart Ie 
Neophyte, mais il faut encore donner Ie fac que vous 
tenez cache, c'eft 1^ oil eft Ie refte de vos maudits 
inftruments, k ce mot ce bon homme fut furpris, 
c'eftoit luy arracher Ie coeur que de luy enleuer ce 
paquet, oh. il auoit enueloppe Ie refte de fa magie : 
[129] mais qu'euft-il fait, il craignoit plus la mort de 
fon fils encore que la perte de ce fac. II Ie prend 
done, & Ie met entre les mains du Pere, tremblant de 
tout Ie corps, comme s'il euft deu perdre tout ce 
qu'il auoit au monde; alors Ie Pere commande h. tons 
les Sauuages de fe mettre k genoux, & prier Dieu 
pour la fante de cet enfant, ils Ie font, & pendant vn 
Crucifix au deflus de fa tefte, ^ la place du fac de 
magie, il pluft k Dieu que la fievre diminuaft deflors, 
& Ie lendemain I'enfant eftant guery, fes parens I'em- 
menerent ^ I'Eglife, fort confolez, & prierent Ie Pere 
de les inftruire, & difpofer au baptefme, ce qu'il fift, 
mais il n'ofa pas encore leur confier Ie Sacrement, 
remarquant en eux de fois k autres quelque attache 
k leurs fonges & fuperftitions. 

Voicy en fuitte de cette hiftoire vne action gene- 
reufe de ce bon Neophyte, qui auoit charge des pri- 
eres auant I'arriuee du Pere, comme Ie Vieillard euft 
donn6 fon fac de magie, ce ieune Chreftien fe fou- 
uint que Ie Pere auoit prefch6 Ie iour d'auparauat, 
qu'il ne falloit point eftre hypocrite, ny croire h. 
demy, & [130] donner feulement vne partie de fes 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 135 

He addresses himself to the old man, and exhorts 
him to put his hope in him who has made all, — that 
he alone can restore health to his son, and not the 
Devil, the enemy of all men ; but that, if he desires 
to be heard, he must renounce the compact which he 
has with that evil spirit ; he must abandon his super- 
stitions, and presently give the Father the instru- 
ments which he uses. " I have done so already," he 
answers ; * * I have thrown away my drum ; and yes- 
terday I sold to the French a superstitious robe that 
I had had painted, as I had seen it in a dream, for 
my health." " That is very well," replies the Neo- 
phyte; " but you must still give the pouch which 
you keep concealed ; that is where the rest of your 
cursed instruments are." At this word, the good 
man was surprised ; it was tearing his heart out, to 
take from him this bundle, in which he had envel- 
oped the remainder of his magic, — [129] but what 
could he do? he dreaded his son's death still more 
than the loss of this pouch. He takes it, according- 
ly, and puts it in the Father's hands, trembling in all 
his body, as if he had had to lose all that he had in 
the world. Then the Father commands all the Sav- 
ages to kneel, and to pray God for the health of this 
child ; they do so, and, — suspending a Crucifix above 
his head, in the place of the pouch of magic, — it 
pleased God that the fever should decrease from that 
time. The next day, the child being cured, his par- 
ents brought him to the Church, much consoled, and 
prayed the Father to instruct them, and prepare 
them for baptism ; this he did, but he dared not yet 
bestow upon them this Sacrament, observing in them 
from time to time some attachment to their dreams 
and superstitions. 



136 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

inftruments diaboliques, cachant I'autre, qu'il falloit 
tout donner, qu'il iroit luy-mefme vn de ces iours en 
faire la vifite par les cabanes. Ce bon Neophyte 
done &, la veue du fac du Vieillard, fe fent pouliC6 de 
I'efprit de Dieu, s'en va fubitement dans toutes les 
cabanes, foiiille tous les paquets, vifite tous les facs, 
emporte fans refiftance luy feul toutes ces defpoiiil- 
les du demon, les porte h. la Chapelle, & en fait vn 
prefent k Dieu. Le Pere tout ioyeux de cet heureux 
coup, appelle les principaux Sauuages, leur fait vn 
feftin, fe confole auec eux, & leur monftrant en vn 
monceau tous ces mif erables inftruments : voila leur 
dift-il, ce qui retient le diable parmy vous; voila les 
cordes dont il vous lie, fus mettez y le feu, bruflez- 
les. Le Pere leur fait vn prefent de petun, & 
chacun allumant fon calumet, iette le feu quant & 
quant dans ces meubles d'impiete, puis ayant tous 
enfemble remercie Dieu, & chants vne chanfon, en 
figne de refioiiiffance, ils s'en vont fort contens. 

Outre les fuperftitions, ils ont encore [131] d'autres 
vices, qui nous donnent bien de la peine, ils font 
pafllonnez au dernier point de la boiflon, & s'en- 
yurent facilement, quand ils en peuuent traiter, de 
\k s'enfuiuent les pechez deshonneftes, fur tout en 
la ieunelle. Ceux qui leur vendent du vin ou de I'eau 
de vie, font vn tord irreparable ^ leur falut. Vn 
Neophyte zel6 fifl vn traidt hardy fur ce fubiedt. Le 
Pere ayant vn iour acheu^ fon exhortation : ce Chre- 
flien fe leua, & demanda permiffion de dire vn mot 
h. rallemblee. Ouy da, dit le Pere, parlez : nous vous 
efcouterons. C'eft vn bruidt qui court fit-il, que la 
ieunelle f e desbauche k present, qu'on va voir les filles 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 137 

Here follows, as sequel to this story, a generous 
action of that good Neophyte who had charge of the 
prayers before the Father's arrival. When the Old 
Man had given up his pouch of magic, this young 
Christian remembered that the Father had preached, 
the day before, that they must not be hypocritical, 
nor believe by half, and [130] give only a part of 
their diabolical instruments, hiding the other, — that 
they must give all ; that he himself would go, one 
of these days, to make a search for these among the 
cabins. This good Neophyte, then, at the sight of 
the Old Man's pouch, feels himself impelled by the 
spirit of God ; he suddenly goes away into all the 
cabins; ransacks all the bundles, and inspects all the 
pouches ; carries off without resistance, himself alone, 
all these spoils of the fiend; conveys them to the 
Chapel ; and makes a present of them to God. The 
Father, overjoyed at that excellent action, calls the 
principal Savages, makes them a feast, and takes 
comfort with them ; and showing them, in a single 
heap, all those wretched instruments, " There," said 
he to them, " is what keeps the devil among you; 
there are the cords with which he binds you, — put fire 
beneath them, and burn them." The Father makes 
them a present of tobacco, and each one, lighting his 
calumet, then and there throws the fire into these 
implements of impiety; then, having all together 
thanked God, and sung a hymn in token of rejoicing, 
they go away, well content. 

Besides the superstitions, they have still [131] 
other vices, which give us much trouble. They are 
to the last degree passionately fond of drink, and are 
easily intoxicated, when they can trade for any; 
thence follow the indecent sins, especially in the 



138 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.24 

la nuidt, que les fiUes deuiennent follaflres & fans 
efprit, qu'il y a des hommes parmy nous, qui veu- 
lent auoir deux femmes, ce n'eft pas Ik ce que nous 
auons promis k Dieu, il faut empefcher que le mal 
n'aille plus auant: pour moy ie ne veux pas faire du 
Capitaine, n'y encore moins du Do(5leur: mais i'ay 
de la peine k tenir mon coeur & ma lange, quand 
ie vois, qu'on ferme les yeux k vn mal cognu, il 
faudroit que ceux qui f^auent ces coureurs [132] de 
nuidt, & ces perfonnes qui ne fe contentement pas 
d'vne femme, les declaraffent publiquement : vne 
bonne vieille qui eftoit au Sermon, touchee de la 
crainte de Dieu, prend la parole, & nomme tout haut 
ceux qu'elle cognoiffoit. On fort fur le champ de 
la Chappelle, on s'allemble dans la plus grande 
cabane, on y appelle le Pere, vn Neophyte va luy- 
mefme chercher les gargos & les filles qu'on auoit 
nommez, & d'autres qu'on foup9onnoit, les oblige 
d'entrer; on les interroge tous, ils auoiient franche- 
ment deuant toute I'aff emblee telles vifites : mais ils 
proteltent que ce ne font que recherches de mariage 
accouftumees parmy eux, fi cela eft, dift, noftre bon 
Chreftien, declarez vos affedtions k vos parens, pre- 
nez leur aduis, & celuy du Pere, de peur que vous ne 
vous repentiez, quand vous ferez liez dans le mariage, 
& qu'ainfi vous ne vous quittiez auec fcandale, vifitez- 
vous le iour, & non la nuidt, la foy & la priere nous 
deffendent cette couftume: ils le promirent, & s'en 
allerent fort contents de part & d' autre. Cela n'a 
pas peu feruy. 

[133] Ce mefme Neophyte fut blelTe I'Automne 
dernier, par la cheute d'vn gros arbre qui tomba fur 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 139 

youth. Those who sell them wine or brandy do an 
irreparable wrong to their salvation, A zealous 
Neophyte dealt a bold stroke in this matter. The 
Father, having- one day finished his exhortation, this 
Christian arose, and asked permission to speak a 
word to the assembly. '' Certainly," said the Fa- 
ther; " speak, — we will listen to you." '* It is a cur- 
rent rumor," said he, ''that the young people are 
becoming corrupt, at present, — that the men go to 
see the girls at night ; that the girls become wanton 
and witless ; that there are men among us who wish 
to have two wives. That is not what we have prom- 
ised to God ; we must prevent the evil from proceed- 
ing further. As for me, I do not wish to act the 
Captain, nor still less, the Doctor : but I can hardly 
restrain my heart and my tongue, when I see that 
your eyes are closed to a known evil. Such as 
know those who stroll [132] at night, and those 
persons who are not content with one wife, ought 
to declare them publicly." A good old woman who 
was at the Sermon, touched by the fear of God, 
speaks, and names aloud those whom she knew. 
They immediately leave the Chapel ; they assemble 
in the largest cabin, and call the Father thither. A 
Neophyte goes in person to seek the youths and girls 
who had been named, and others who were suspected, 
and obliges them to enter. All are questioned ; they 
avow frankly before the whole assembly such visits, 
but they protest that they are only suits of marriage, 
customary among them. ' ' If that be the case, ' ' said 
our good Christian, " declare your affections to your 
parents; take their advice and that of the Father, 
lest you repent when you shall be bound in marriage, 
and thus leave one another with scandal. Make 



140 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

luy, tout an travers du corps, & le mift en danger de 
fa vie: Dieu le deliura ponrtant, quoy qu'il luy foit 
refte vne douleur d'eftomach continuelle: 11 toft 
qu'il fe fut retire de ce manuals pas, 11 remercia Dieu 
de luy auoir conferu6 la vie, & s'humilia quand & 
quand, recognoiffant que ce mal luy eftoit arriu6 
pour chaftiment de fa faute, de ce que commen^ant 
fon trauail, il ne I'auoit pas offert "k Dieu, felon fa 
couftume, & propofa de ne plus rien entreprendre, 
fans r auoir prefente ^ Dieu, & implore auparauant 
fon alTiftance. Le Pere eftant arriue k Tadoufac, il 
le vint incontinent trouuer pour fe confeffer, puis 
s'entretint auec luy des bons fentiments que Dieu 
luy auoit donne pendant I'Hyuer ; ie vous diray fran- 
chement, dift-il, la penfee que i'eus, quand ie fus 
blelfe, afin que vous la redreffiez, fi elle n'eft pas 
bonne: ie difois k Dieu, Seigneur ie voudrois bien 
guerir, & viure iufques au Prin-temps, afin de voir 
encore vne fois les Peres qui m'ont [134] inftruidt. 
Ie fyay, mon Dieu, que ie vous ay offenc6, & qu'il 
y a quelque chofe das mon coeur qui vous d6plaift, 
li ie meurs auant la venue du Pere ie ne pourray 
me confelfer, & cela m'empefchera peut-eftre de 
vous aller voir au ciel, voilk ce qui m'afflige, & qui 
fait que ie vous demande la prologation de ma vie, 
iufques au Prin-temps ou ie verray le Pere, s'il 
garde fa promelle, faites neantmoins mo Dieu tout 
ce qu'il vous plaira, vous eftes le maiftre de la vie, 
ie vous demande pardon des pechez que i'ay comis, 
ie defire d'y fatisfaire, & des maintenant ie me refous 
de ne point manger tout ce iourd'huy pour chaftier 
ma chair: ie fentiray la faim dans I'abondance de 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 141 

your visits by day, and not by night ; the faith and 
prayer forbid us this custom." They promised it, 
and went away very well satisfied on both sides. 
That aided not a little. 

[133] This same Neophyte was wounded, last Au- 
tumn, by the fall of a great tree, which fell upon 
him, right across his body, and put him in danger of 
his life; God nevertheless delivered him, though 
there has remained with him a chronic pain in the 
stomach. As soon as he had released himself from 
this mishap, he thanked God for having spared his 
life, and then and there humbled himself, — acknowl- 
edging that this injury had happened to him for 
punishment of his fault, because, on beginning his 
work, he had not offered it to God, according to his 
custom, — and proposed to undertake nothing further, 
without having presented it to God, and first im- 
plored his assistance. The Father having arrived at 
Tadousac, this man immediately came to find him, 
in order to confess himself ; then conversed with him 
of the good thoughts which God had given him 
during the Winter. " I will tell you frankly," said 
he, " the thought that I had when I was wounded, so 
that you may correct it if it is not good. I said to 
God: ' Lord, I would like to get well, and live till 
Spring, so as to see once again the Fathers who have 
[134] instructed me. I know, my God, that I have 
offended you, and that there is something in my 
heart which displeases you ; if I die before the com- 
ing of the Father, I shall not be able to confess my- 
self, and that will hinder me, perhaps, from going to 
see you in heaven. That is what grieves me, and 
makes me ask you for the extension of my life until 
Spring, when I shall see the Father, if he keeps his 



142 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

viande, que nous auons a prefent, afin d'appaifer 
voftre colere: il adioufta que ce iour-lk qu'il auoit 
ieufn6, il employa quafi tout en prieres, & nomement 
^ reciter fon Chapellet, en fe pourmenat feul das les 
bois, au plus grand froid de I'hyuer, & fans appro- 
clier du feu, le Pere I'encouragea fort k la perfeue- 
rance, & au zele qu'il auoit pour empefcher les vices; 
il en fit autant enuers les Capitaines, & les princi- 
paux [135] Sauuages, il ne demeura pas plus d'vn 
mois & demy en cette miffion, laquelle les Chreftiens 
de Sillery me contraignirent d'interrompre : depuis 
i'y ay enuoye le P. Buteux k I'arriuee des nauires,, 
afin de continuer ce faindt ouurage, & nommement 
pour empefcher les defordres de la boiffon, que les 
Sauuages traictent en cachette auec les Fran5ois, qui 
font dans les nauires, nonobftant les deffences & les 
chaftimens de Monfieur le Gouuerneur: la paffion de 
quelque pelleterie, les aueugle & les fait tomber en 
cette faute, qui perd les ames & les corps de ces pau- 
ures peuples. lis s'appergoiuent bien eux-mefmes, 
que la boiffon leur caufe des maux infinis. C'eft 
pourquoy les Chreftiens ont prie nos Peres de faire 
tout ce qu'ils pourroient, pour empefcher que les 
Fran9ois ne traitaffent ny vin ny eau de vie "k leur 
gens. Monfieur de Courpon Admiral de la flotte, y 
apporta toutes les diligences poflibles d^s fon arriuee, 
faifant paroiftre vne ioye bien fenfible de la conuer- 
fion de ces pauures peuples, luy mefme a voulu eflre 
le Parain de quelques-vns. 

[136] Voicy vn mot que m'en efcrit de T[ad]oufac 
le Pere Buteux. Les Sauuages d'icy font fort bien \ 
les Capitaines me contentent grandement: mais il y 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 143 

promise. Do, nevertheless, my God, all that you 
shall please ; you are the master of life. I ask your 
pardon for the sins which I have committed ; I desire 
to atone for them, and from now on I resolve not to 
eat anything throughout this day, in order to chasten 
my flesh ; I will experience hunger in the abundance 
of meat that we have at present, so as to appease 
your anger.' " He added that he employed nearly 
all that day that he had fasted, in prayers, and 
especially in reciting his Rosary, walking alone in 
the woods, in the greatest cold of the winter, and 
without approaching the fire. The Father strongly 
encouraged him in perseverance, and in the zeal that 
he had for preventing vicious practices; he did the 
same with the Captains and the principal [135] Sav- 
ages. He remained not more than a month and a 
half in that mission, which the Christians of Sillery 
constrained me to interrupt. Since then, I have sent 
thither Father Buteux at the arrival of the ships, in 
order to continue that holy work, and especially 
to prevent the disorders arising from the liquor which 
the Savages secretly trade for with the French who 
are in the ships, notwithstanding the prohibitions and 
the punishments of Monsieur the Governor. The 
passion for a few pelts blinds them, and makes them 
fall into this offense, which destroys the souls and 
the bodies of these poor peoples. They themselves 
perceive well that drink causes them infinite evils. 
This is why the Christians have begged our Fathers 
to do all that they can, in order to prevent the 
French from trading either wine or brandy to their 
people. Monsieur de Courpon, Admiral of the fleet, 
applied all possible diligence herein from the time 
of his arrival, — manifesting very evident joy at the 



144 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

a bien k craindre que le vin & I'eau de vie ne faffent 
de grand maux, i'y apporteray tout le remede poffi- 
ble, i'attendray pour c6t effedt iufques apres 1' Affomp- 
tion de noftre-Dame ^ m'en retourner, ie m'en vais 
en baptifer quelques-vns k cette arriuee des vaiffeaux, 
defquels nous auons eu nouuelle, ce iourd'huy fep- 
tiefme d'Aouft a midy. Voila pour le prefent I'eftat 
de la miffion de Tadoufac, qui eft I'entree de toutes 
les autres qui font dans cette grande riuiere. Les 
Sauuages de Gafp^ & Miskou, qu'on rencontre encore 
deuant eux, venants de Frace, en ont eu le bruit, & 
comencent a fouhaitter la foy, & foufpirer apres leur 
falut. Voicy ce qu'en efcrit au Pere le leune, le 
Pere Richard qui demeure k MifKou, auec le Pere 
Lionne arriu6 cette annee de France. 

A " * • le remercie affectueufement V. R. des ef- 
crits qu'elle m'a enuoy6s de la langue [137] Monta- 
gnefe, i'en feray Dieu aidat mon profit. Pen ay par- 
couru quelque chofe, ou i'ay remarqu6 quafi la mefme 
fagon de s'enoncer, quoy que les mots foient tous 
autres parmy les Sauuages de ces coftes. Ie vous 
ay defia efcrit par Nb'dagaro vn de nos bons Sauuages 
qui s'en va voir fes parens & amis par de-1^: car il 
fe dit M6tagn6s. I'efpere que I'exemple de fes Copa- 
triotes & les inftrudtions de nos Peres luy feront 
vtiles. II a de bonnes volontez, prie volontiers Dieu, 
fe comporte fagement, regoit les aduis & inftrudtions 
Chreftiennes qu'on luy donne. Ie le tiens pour I'vn 
de ceux qui receura des premiers la Foy. Ie defire- 
rois qu'il apprehendaft I'importance de fon Salut, & 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 145 

conversion of these poor peoples. He himself has 
consented to be the Godfather for some of them. 

[136] Here is a word on the subject, which Father 
Buteux writes to me from Tadousac : ' ' The Savages 
here are doing very well ; the Captains content me 
greatly ; but there is much reason to fear that wine 
and brandy are causing great evils. I will apply all 
the remedy possible ; I will wait, to accomplish this, 
until after the Assumption of our Lady, to return 
hence. I am going to baptize some of them at the 
arrival of the vessels, of which we have had news. 
This day, the seventh of August, at noon." Such, 
for the present, is the state of the mission at Tadou- 
sac, which is the entrance to all the others that are 
along this great river. The Savages of Gasp6 and 
Miskou, whom one meets still ahead of these, on 
coming from France, have had the rumor of it, and 
begin to desire the faith, and to sigh after their 
salvation. Here is what Father Richard — who lives 
at Miskou, together with Father Lionne, arrived this 
year from France^ — writes on the subject to Father 
le Jeune. 

^^IV/Iy Reverend Father, 

i V 1 I thank Your Reverence affectionately, for 
the writings that you have sent me concerning the 
language [i 37] of the Montagnais ; I shall find in them, 
God helping, my profit. I have perused them, to 
some extent, and in them I have remarked much the 
same fashion of utterance, though the words are quite 
different among the Savages of these coasts. I have 
already written to you by Noudagaro, one of our 
good Savages who is on his way to see his relatives 
and friends yonder, — for he says that he is Monta- 



146 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

du moyen de I'obtenir, & ne fe flattaft point du pre- 
texte de prier Dieu, comme fi cela fuffifoit a le faire 
homme de bien. le vous le recommande, quantity 
de nos Sauuages non feulement de cefte Baye, mais 
de toute la cofte, montent ^ Tadoufac, quelques-vns 
particulierement des ietines pourront doner iufques 
^ Kebec, & par delk pour aller en guerre cotre les 
Hiroquois. [138] le me refioui's que fans y penfer 
ils trouuent de grandes occafions d'entrer en co- 
gnoiffance de la Foy. La Miffion de Tadoufac aura 
vn beau champ ^ trauailler, qui donnera fon fruidt 
en fon temps, toft ou tard la parole de Dieu aura fon 
effedt, que diriez-vous que ie confeffay il y a quelque 
temps vne pauure femme qui auoit efl6 baptifee par 
le R. P. Biar[d] au commencement que les Fran9ois 
habiterent ces coftes. Cette pauure creature eftant 
t6b6e malade, au comencemet de I'hyuer, fuft con- 
trainte de fuiure ou plufloft f e laifler porter & traif ner 
apres fes gens das les bois, ou elle languift tout I'hy- 
uer. Au prin-teps ie la reuis en pauure eftat delTei- 
chant & mourant peu "k peu. Nous la fecourufmes 
de ce que nous anions. I'appris cependant qu'elle 
auoit efte baptifee au Port Royal, fon fils me I'af- 
feure, elle me la confirme, & m'en donne des mar- 
ques, & touche des circonflances qui me le font 
croire. Ie I'inftruis de nouueau es myfteres de la 
Foy. Ie la confeffe, elles s'en va auec quelques fiens 
parens qui arriuerent Ik, & peu de iours apres on 
nous rapporta fon corps [139] que nous enterrafmes 
auec les ceremonies de I'Eglife, ainfi la Prouidence 
diuine conduifit cette pauure creature au poindt 
de fon bon-heur par des voyes & rencontres admi- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 147 

gnais. I hope that the example of his fellow Coun- 
trymen, and the instructions of our Fathers, will be 
useful to him. He has good inclinations, prays will- 
ingly to God, behaves himself discreetly, and receives 
the Christian advice and instructions which are given 
him. I hold him for one of those who will first 
receive the Faith. I would that he might apprehend 
the importance of his Salvation, and of the means to 
obtain it, and not flatter himself with a pretext of 
praying to God, as if that were enough to make him 
a man of worth. I commend him to you. A num- 
ber of our Savages, not only from this Bay, but from 
all the coast, are going up to Tadousac; some par- 
ticularly of the youth, may proceed as far as Kebec,, 
and beyond, in order to go to war against the Hiro- 
quois. [138] I rejoice that, without realizing it, they 
find excellent opportunities for entering into knowl- 
edge of the Faith. The Mission at Tadousac will 
have a fine field for work, which will yield its fruit in 
its season ; sooner or later, the word of God will have 
its effect. What do you say to this? I confessed, 
some time ago, a poor woman who had been baptized 
by the Reverend Father Biard when the French first 
inhabited these coasts. ^° This poor creature having: 
fallen sick at the beginning of the winter, was 
constrained to follow — or rather to be carried and 
dragged after — her people into the woods, where she 
languished all the winter. In the spring, I saw her 
again, in a forlorn plight, withering away and dying 
by slow degrees. We assisted her with what we 
had. I learned, however, that she had been bap- 
tized at Port Royal, — her son assures me so; she 
confirms it to me, and gives me tokens of it, and 
refers to circumstances which make me believe it. L 



148 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

rabies. V. R. fe fouuient elle du rencontre qu'elle 
enft I'an paff6 d'vne partie de nos Sauuages? C'e- 
ftoient des guerriers, qui ne laillerent pourtat de fe 
vater de prier Dieu, ils m'ont fait recit de I'accueil 
qui leur fut fait, mais ceux qui demeurerent, firent 
plus fagement. Eftat venus icy, ils m'obligeret de 
tenir la parole que ie leur auois donee de les aller 
voir I'efte, s'ils fe trouuoient enfemble. Ie ne leur 
peus refufer. Ie fus auec noftre gar9on, ils me 
baftirent promptement vne cabane approchante de 
la forme de nos baftimens, qui deuoit principalemet 
feruir de Chappelle, ou ils s'afsebloiet foir & matin 
pour faire les prieres que ie c6men9ois, «& ils me fui- 
uoient mot k mot, apres Ie figne de la Croix, ie recitois 
en Latin Ie Pater. Puis en leur lague la mefme orai- 
fon. I'adiouftois vne priere en leur langue cotenat les 
principaux adtes qu'ils deuoiet faire, toutes lefquel- 
les prieres ils difoient apres moy. [140] Le foir 
i'adiouftois vn petit mot d'inftruc5tion Chreftienne, ce 
que ie ne pouuois li commodement le matin, car les 
femmes, les enfans, & ieunes gens n'eftoient pas fi 
matineux que les homes qui fe diligentoient d'ache- 
uer leurs canots, fi bien qu'il fut k propos de les 
affembler d6s le grand matin pour prier Dieu : & puis 
fur les fept ou liuic5t heures les femmes & la ieunefle 
fe rangeoient "k la Chappelle pour faire le mefme. 
La difette & la neceffite les obligeoient d'acheuer 
promptemet leurs canots. Si eft-ce pourtant qu'ils 
ne voulurent pas y trauailler le Dimanche: mais 
demeurerent en repos, & fe couurirent de leurs plus 
beaux veflements. On les pourra a mon aduis aife- 
ment maintenir dans I'obferuance des commande- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 149 

instruct her anew in the mysteries of the Faith ; I 
confess her. She goes away with some relatives of 
hers who arrived there, and, not many days after, 
they brought back to us her body, [139] which we 
buried with the ceremonies of the Church ; thus the 
divine Providence conducted this poor creature to 
the height of her blessedness, by ways and coinci- 
dences that are admirable. Does Your Reverence 
remember the encounter that you had, last year, 
with a party of our Savages? They were warriors, 
who nevertheless boasted of praying to God. They 
gave me an account of the reception which they had 
met; but those who remained acted more wisely. 
Having come here, they obliged me to keep the 
word which I had given them, of going to see them 
in the summer, if they happened to be together : I 
could not refuse them, — I went with our servant. 
They promptly built me a cabin, approaching the 
shape of our buildings, which was chiefly to serve 
as a Chapel, where they assembled evening and morn- 
ing in order to say the prayers which I would begin, 
and they followed me word for word. After the sign 
of the Cross, I recited, in Latin, the Pater; then, in 
their language, the same prayer. I added a prayer 
in their language, containing the principal acts which 
they were to perform; all these prayers they said 
after me. [140] In the evening I added a brief 
word of Christian instruction, which I could not do 
so conveniently in the morning; for the women, chil- 
dren, and young people were not so early as the 
men, who were diligently working to finish their 
canoes, — insomuch that it was best to assemble them 
very early in the morning to pray to God ; and then, 
toward seven or eight o'clock, the women and youth 



150 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

mens de Dieu, & de I'Eglife, lors principalement 
qu'on fera auec eux. lis ont cette penfee qui eft veri- 
table, que faire profeffion d' adorer Dieu, c'eft mener 
vne vie irreprochable. Vne ieune gar9on me defro- 
ba vn peu de Petun que i'auois pour les gratifier, 
lors que cela fuft defcouuert, comment, difoient-ils, 
il prie Dieu, & il defrobe? [141] c'eft le premier lar- 
recin que i'ay veu parmy eux. Car ils ont les mains 
fort nettes du bien d'autruy. Vn autre me parlant 
d'vn certain qui fait eftat de prier Dieu, & s'amufoit 
pourtant k boire, comment, dit-il, cela s'accorde-il 
bien prier Dieu & s'enyurer? que ne luy reproches 
tu? que ne pred-il exeple fur vo^* autres PP? le les 
ay trouues allez curieux, lis m'ont fait quantite de 
queftions fur des chofes artificielles & naturelles ; la 
cognoilTance defquelles les a fl fort refjouis, qu'ils fe 
fiattent d'vne efperance d'eftre bien toft f9auans en 
tout, par noftre moyen. lis nous aiment & ref- 
pedtent, & noftre conflderation les retient en deuoir. 
le t'obeiray, me difoit vn iour vn des plus renom- 
mez de la cofte, & £i tu demeures auec nous, ie ne 
m'amuferay plus h. boire. Ie te croiray & fuiuray tes 
aduis, nous verrons fi luy & les autres font homes 
de parole ! car vn grand homme de bien nous f ournit 
trois hommes, pour aller baftir vne petite maifon 
parmy eux, nous I'allons commencer dans vne riuiere 
qu'ils appellent Nepegig^it ^18. lieues de cette habi- 
tation. Si [142] i'eulle fceu cela, i'en euffe peut- 
eftre retenu quelques-vns qui s'en vot voyager & 
paller I'eft^ d'vn coft6 & d'autre. II y a pourtant 
tel qui m'a donn6 parole de fe ranger aupres de nous, 
lors qu'il entendra que nous y baftirons, tel m'a 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 151 

took their places in the Chapel, in order to do the 
same. Dearth and necessity obliged them to finish 
their canoes promptly. It is a fact, however, that 
they were not willing to work at them on Sunday, 
but remained at rest, and put on their finest cloth- 
ing. It will be easy, in my opinion, to maintain 
them in the observance of the commandments of God 
and of the Church, — especially by living with them. 
They have this notion, which is true, that to make 
profession of adoring God is to lead an irreproach- 
able life. A young lad stole from me a little Tobac- 
co that I had for gratuities to them ; when that was 
discovered, 'How?' said they, 'he prays to God, 
and he steals! ' [141] This is the first theft that I 
have seen among them; for they have hands very 
clean of others' property. Another speaking to me 
of a certain man who makes account of prayer to 
God, and yet amused himself by drinking, ' How,* 
said he, ' does that agree well, to pray to God and 
to get drunk? Why dost thou not rebuke him? 
Why does he not take example from you Fathers? ' I 
have found them quite curious ; they have asked me 
many questions about things both natural and artifi- 
cial, — the knowledge of which has so greatly pleased 
them that they flatter themselves with a hope of 
soon being versed in everything, by our means. 
They love and respect us, and consideration for us 
keeps them dutiful. ' I will obey thee,' said to me 
one day one of the most renowned on the coast; 
' and if thou remainest with us, I will no longer 
amuse myself by drinking; I will believe thee, and 
will follow thy advice. ' We shall see whether he 
and the others are men of their word, for a great man 
of worth furnishes us three men, in order to go and 



152 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

reproche le trop de delay que nous y apportions. II y 
a, difoit ce Capitaine, long teps que tu nous promets 
de venir auec nous, «& maintenant que voicy le prin- 
temps, tu nous remets encore, pour moy ie ne fais 
point comme cela, quand i'ay dit vne chofe, elle 
vaut faidle. Ces bonnes gens ne cognoiffent pas les 
difficultez de femblables entreprifes. Monlieur Def- 
dames Capitaine icy depuis quatre ans, a toufiours 
fort oblige cette Miffio, mais particulierement cette 
annee, pendant la maladie du R. P. Dolbeau qui a 
efte longue & dangereufe. II en fut attaque k Noel, 
& a train6 & languy tout 1 byuer dans de grandes & 
diuerf es douleurs ; au prin-temps ie veux dire enui- 
ron le mois d'Auril, ces douleurs le quittant, I'ont 
lailTe dans vne impuilTance des bras & des mains qui 
ne luy permet de celebrer la faindte Melle. [143] 
Or pendat tout ce temps Monfieur Defdames I'a li 
charitablement & puiHamment affifl6 en tout, qu'il 
luy doit en partie, la conferuation de fa vie. Cepen- 
dant la Prouidence de Dieu qui gouuerne toutes 
chofes efficacemet & doucement, voulant retirer le P. 
Dolbeau de ce pays icy, pour s'en feruir ailleurs felon 
fes defleins, a conduit icy le Pere Lyonne par des 
voyes bien particulieres, pour prendre fa place, & 
trauailler en cette vigne frudtueufement. II eft vray 
qu'il eftoit pour les Hurons, mais voyant la necelTite 
ou nous eftions, & qu'il eftoit k propos que le Pere 
Dolbeau retournaft en France pour la conferuation 
de fa vie, & recouurement de fa fante, comme il ne 
cherche que Dieu & ne fe foucie pas du lieu oil il 
trauaille k fa gloire, il a volontiers confenty & aggre6 
de demeurer icy. Ie le recommande affedtueufe- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1643 -43 1 53 

build a little house among them ; we are going to 
begin it in a river which they call Nepegigwit," 18 
leagues from this settlement. If [142] I had known 
that, I would perhaps have retained some who go 
away on journeys and to spend the summer in one 
place or another. One, however, has given me his 
word to locate himself near us, when he shall hear 
that we are building there ; another has reproached 
me for the too long delay that we made therein. 
* Long ago, ' said this Captain, ' thou didst promise 
to come with us ; and, now that spring is here, thou 
still puttest us off. As for me, I do not act like that ; 
when I have said a thing, it is as good as done.* 
These good people do not recognize the difficulties 
of such enterprises. Monsieur Desdames, Captain 
here these four years past, has always greatly accom- 
modated this Mission, — but particularly this year, 
during the sickness of the Reverend Father Dolbeau, 
which has been long and dangerous. ^^ He was 
attacked by it at Christmas, and he lingered and 
languished all winter in great and various pains. In 
the spring, — I mean to say, about the month of 
April, — these pains, quitting him, left him in an 
impotence of the arms and hands which does not 
allow him to celebrate holy Mass. [143] Now, dur- 
ing all this time. Monsieur Desdames has so chari- 
tably and efficiently assisted him in everything, that 
he owes him, in part, the preservation of his life. 
However, the Providence of God, which governs all 
things efficaciously and gently, wishing to withdraw 
Father Dolbeau from the country here, in order to 
make use of him elsewhere according to its designs, 
has led hither Father Lyonne by very singular ways, 
to take his place and work profitably in this vine- 



154 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

ment au SS. SS. & prieres de Voftre Reuerence, ce 
que fait auffi de Voflre Reuerence, 

Seruiteur tres-humble en N. S. 

Andr6 Richard. 

[144] Non feulement les Sauuages de ces cartiers-1^ 
ont ouy parler de noftre faindte Foy, mais aufsi quan- 
tity de petites nations du Nord, dont en voicy les 
nos. Les KaKouchakhi, ceux qui fe trouuent ^ 
Maouatchihitonnam, c'efl le lieu ou les Hurons font 
leur affemblees venans traitter auec les Nations du 
Nord. Les Mikouachakhi les Outakouamiouek. Les 
Miftafmiouek, Oukefefligouek, Mouchaouaouafliiri- 
nioek. Ounachkapiouek, Efpamichkon, Aflourega- 
migoukh, Oueperigoueiaouek. Oupapinachiouek, 
Oubeflamiouek, Attikamegouek. Les Chrefliens de 
faindt lofeph & de TadoulTac, ont port6 le nom de 
lefus-Chrift, dans toutes ces petites Nations auec 
lef quels ils ont quelque commerce. Le iour qu'ils 
commencent de voir, croiftra auec le temps iufques 
^ fon Midy. 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 1 55 

yard. It is true that he was bound for the Hurons; 
but, — seeing the necessity in which we were, and 
that it was expedient that Father Dolbeau should 
return to France for the preservation of his life and 
recovery of his health, — as he seeks only God, and 
cares not about the place where he works to his 
glory, he has gladly consented and agreed to stay 
here. I commend him affectionately to the Holy 
Sacrifices and prayers of Your Reverence, as does 
also Your Reverence's 

Most humble Servant in Our Lord, 

Andr6 Richard." 

[144] Not only the Savages of those quarters have 
heard mention of our holy Faith, but also many little 
nations of the North, the names of which follow : the 
Kakouchakhi, those who are at Maouatchihiton- 
nam, — the place where the Hurons hold their assem- 
blies, coming to trade with the Nations of the North ; 
the Mikouachakhi, the Outakouamiouek, the Mistasi- 
niouek, Oukesestigouek, Mouchaouaouastiirinioek, 
Ounachkapiouek, Espamichkon, Astouregamigoukh, 
Oueperigoueiaouek, Oupapinachiouek, Oubestami- 
ouek, Attikamegouek.^^ The Christians of saint 
Joseph and of Tadoussac have carried the name of 
Jesus Christ into all these little Nations, with whom 
they have some commerce. The day that they begin 
to see will increase, with time, even to its Noon. 



156 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.24 



[145] CHAPIT[R]E IX. 

DE L'HOSPITAL. 

TOVT le Canada a fondu en dueil k la nouuelle 
de la mort du Roy, & de Monfeigneur le Car- 
dinal : mais cette maifon de Mif ericorde en a 
plus de fubiedt qu'aucun autre ; veu la triftefle arriuee 
en fuitte k Madame la Ducheffe d'Eguillon, qui en eft 
la fondatrice : fa douleur a perce viuement le coeur 
de ces bonnes Religieufes, qu'elle a cileries come vne 
mere fes enfans, & ie ne f9ay quad leurs larmes 
s'efluiront: mais enfin il faut que la refignation & 
conformite k la volont6 de Dieu, que cette Dame pra- 
tique fi hautement parmy des accidens fl funeftes, 
appaif e auCQ & calme le coeur des Religieuf es : Nous 
deuons efperer que la diuine bont6 remediera k tous 
ces mal-heurs. Dieu eft Pere des affligez, & des 
pauures, il en a vn foin particulier, & y prend fes 
delices: & ceux qui ont "k prefent le pouuoir en main, 
imitent fortement [146] cette charite de Dieu, comma 
ils en tiennet la place §k-bas en terre, nous le fja- 
uons bien: mais venons k ce qui s'eft palI6 en cette 
maifon de Mif ericorde, outre Tornement & la con- 
folation qu'elle donne k toute la Colonic, elle fert 
d'vn fort appuy ^ I'arrefl des Sauuages, & emporte 
vne bonne partie des frais & du fardeau, la Bour- 
gade de Sillery eft encore petite : mais ie doute fort 
11 sas cette maiso, qui s'y eft eftablie : elle euft peu 
arriuer k I'eftat ou elle eft, & ie ne f9ay encore fi 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 157 



[145] CHAPTER IX. 
OF THE HOSPITAL. 

ALL Canada melted in grief at the news of the 
death of the King and of Monseigneur the 
Cardinal ; but this house of Mercy has more 
cause for it than any other, — considering the sad- 
ness which in consequence befalls Madame the 
Duchess d'Eguillon, who is its founder. Her sorrow 
has keenly pierced the heart of these good Nuns, 
whom she has cherished as a mother her children, 
and I know not when their tears will be dried ; but 
the resignation and conformity to the will of God, 
which that Lady so nobly practices amid events so 
disastrous, must also at least soothe and calm the 
hearts of the Nuns. We are bound to hope that the 
divine goodness will remedy all these misfortunes. 
God is the Father of the afflicted and of the poor; he 
has a special care for them, and in them takes his 
delight ; and those who have at present the power in 
hand, closely imitate [146] this charity of God, as 
they take his place here below on earth, — we know 
it well. But let us come to what has occurred in 
this house of Mercy. Besides the adornment and 
consolation which it gives to the whole Colony, it 
serves as a strong support to the settlement of the 
Savages, and bears a good part of the expenses and 
burden thereof. The Village of Sillery is still small, 
but I doubt very much if, without this house which 
has been established there, it could have reached 



168 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

elle pourroit f ubiifler fans cet aide : il en a bien coufte 
des incommoditez k ces bonnes filles: la iournee d'vn 
homme qui ne reuient pas icy k moins de trente & 
quarante fols, a efte fouuent employee pour aller k 
Quebec querir vn peu d'herbe, ou vne demie dou- 
zaine doeufs pour les malades: mais le defir qu'elles 
ont eu d'exercer leurs fodtions enuers les Sauuages, 
& contribuer a leur arreft, felon I'eftendue de leur 
vocation, les a fait abandonner leur baftiment de 
Quebec, auec toutes fes commoditez, comme il les 
auoit, fait abandonner la France, veu nommement 
que [147] les Fran9ois eftant malades n'ont pas de 
peine d'aller k Sillery: mais les Sauuages malades 
font incapables d'aller k Quebec, & ainfi c'euft efte 
vn Hofpital de Sauuages fans Sauuages : la peur des 
Hiroquois n'ayant pas empefche tant d'bonefles per- 
fonnes de I'vn & I'autre fexe d'aller k Montreal, & 
autres endroits de la grande Riuiere, pour y confa- 
crer k Dieu fi fainc5lement leur vie: quoy que les 
Hiroquois en foient voilins, & rodet tout autour, n'a 
pas deu auoir effect k vne lieue ou deux de Quebec, 
pour empefcher vne communaute Religieufe de fes 
fun(5tions, & d'vn bien pour lequel feul elle venoit 
en ce nouueau monde, & que les Sauuages deliroient 
ardemment. Au refte leur baftimet de Quebec s'a- 
cheue peu k peu, afin que s'il furuient quelque acci- 
dent, elles puiffent felon la prudence & le confeil s'y 
retirer, & H les Fran9ois fe multiplient dauantage, 
elles puiffent faire vn petit Hofpital fepare pour leurs 
fecours, qui ne nuiroit pas k celuy des Sauuages, & 
aduanceroit la colonic. 

Les Religieufes ont receu & affifte [148] cette an- 
nee en 1' Hofpital, enuiron cent Sauuages de diuerfes 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 159 

the state in which it is; and I know not yet if it 
could subsist without this help. It has indeed cost 
inconveniences to these good sisters ; the day's time 
of a man, which amounts here to no less than thirty 
or forty sols,^^ has often been employed for going 
to Quebec in quest of a few herbs or a half-dozen of 
eggs for the sick ; but the desire that they have had 
to exercise their offices toward the Savages, and to 
contribute to their settlement, in accordance with 
the scope of their vocation, has caused them to aban- 
don their building at Quebec, with all its conven- 
iences, as that desire had caused them to abandon 
France, — seeing, especially, that [147] the French, 
when sick, have no difficulty in going to Sillery; 
but the sick Savages are unable to go to Quebec, and 
thus it would have been a Hospital for Savages, with- 
out Savages. The fear of the Hiroquois not having 
hindered so many worthy persons of both sexes from 
going to Montreal and other places on the great 
River, in order there to consecrate so piously their 
lives to God, — though the Hiroquois are near by, 
and prowl all about, — it was not likely to have effect 
a league or two from Quebec, so as to impede a Reli- 
gious community in its offices, and in a benevolence 
for which alone it came into this new world, and 
which the Savages were ardently desiring. More- 
over, their building at Quebec is being finished, little 
by little, — so that, if any accident occurs, they can 
prudently and advisedly retreat thither; and, if the 
French multiply further, they can establish a little 
separate Hospital for their succor, which would not 
injure that of the Savages, and would advance the 
colony. 

The Nuns have received and assisted [148] in the 



160 



LES RELA TIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 24 



nations Montagnez, Algonquins, Atticamegues, Ab- 
naquiois, Hurons, ceux de Tadoufac & du Saguen^, 
& de quelques autres natios plus efloignees. A 
I'heure que i'efcris ce memoire, il y a vne feme affli- 
gee d'vne maladie lente, que le Pere Buteux y amena 
dernieremet, retournat de Tadoufac, laquelle ea de 
plus de treize ou de quatorze iournees, auant dans 
les terres du Sagu6n6, & eft venue ^ deffein non 
feulemet d'eftre fecourue en fon mal: mais de co- 
gnoiftre Dieu, & de voir I'exemple des Frangois. 
Cmq ou ^i:iL ouuriers Frangois ont auffi efte foulagez 
en cette maifon de charity, ils auoient eft6 frapez du 
mal de terre au fort de Richelieu, & en danger d'en 
mourir, s'ils n'vfent trouu6 vn bon fecours: voil^ ce 
qui eft du general de cette maifon: venons h ce qui 
eft de particulier plus remarquable, les miferes & les 
maladies des Sauuages me rendront plus long que ie 
ne voudrois. Fay defia parle cy-deffus de la mort 
d'vn append Achille Sauuage, en voicy quelques par- 
ticularitez qui regardent [149] I'Hofpital. Lors qu'il 
commen9a de s'alliter, il eftoit cabane dans les bois 
^ deux cens pas de Sillery. Le P. Buteux, I'allant 
vifiter vn matin, le trouua k genoux aux pieds de fon 
lit. C'eft h dire fur le bout d'vne efcorce, ou d'vne 
couuerture deuant vn Crucifix qu'il auoit pendu k fa 
cabane, il pria le Pere de s'afToir vn peu, & de luy 
donner loifir d'acheuer fa priere, apres laquelle il fe 
confeffa auec grand fentiment de deuotion, puis dift 
au Pere: ie ne m'atrifte pas de ma maladie: mais 
deux chofes me font de la peine, I'vne eft que ie ne 
puis plus dire mon Chappellet, la tefte me manque 
en vne fi longue priere, I'autre eft que ie fuis efloi- 
gn6 de I'Eglife, & ne peux aller h. la MefTe. Le Pere 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 161 

Hospital, this year, about a hundred Savages of vari- 
ous nations : Montagnais, Algonquins, Atticamegues, 
Abnaquiois, Hurons, those of Tadousac and the 
Saguene, and of some other nations, more distant. 
At the time I write this report, there is a woman 
afflicted with a slow disease, whom Father Buteux 
lately brought hither, on returning from Tadousac. 
She is from a region above thirteen or fourteen days 
distant, far within the lands of the Sagu^n6, and has 
come on purpose, not only to be aided in her mala- 
dy, but to know God and see the example of the 
French. Five or six French workmen have also 
been relieved in this house of charity ; they had been 
stricken with the land disease, at the fort of Riche- 
lieu, and were in danger of dying from it, if they 
had not found kind help. Thus much is general, 
concerning this house : let us come to what is most 
remarkable in details ; the miseries and the diseases 
of the Savages will render me more tedious than I 
could wish. I have already spoken above, of the 
death of one called Achille, a Savage; here follow 
some particulars which concern [149] the Hospital. 
When he began to take to his bed, he was in a cabin 
in the woods, two hundred paces from Sillery. Fa- 
ther Buteux, going to visit him one morning, found 
him kneeling at the foot of his bed, — that is to say, 
on the end of a piece of bark or of a blanket, — before 
a Crucifix that he had suspended in his cabin. He 
begged the Father to be seated a little while, and to 
give him leisure to finish his prayer, after which he 
confessed himself with a great feeling of devotion ; 
then he said to the Father : " I do not grieve for my 
sickness ; but two things cause me pain : one is, that 
I can no longer say my Rosary, — my head fails me 



162 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

luy dift que pour fon Chapellet, il n'en deuoit pas 
eflre en peine que c'eftoit affez qu'il en dift vne 
dixaine par interualle, ou mefme fift quelque autre 
priere plus courte pour fe recommander k Dieu, & fe 
refigner k fa volenti, & quand k ce qui eft de fon 
efloignement de I'Eglife qu'il donneroit ordre qu'on 
I'aportaft h. I'Hofpital ou k vne cabane tout proche 
d'ou il pourroit [150] affifter k la MefTe quand il 
auroit vn peu de forces. Le Pere en aduertit les 
principaux Sauuages qui I'apporterent incontinent ^ 
I'Hofpital, & luy drefferent auffi vne petite cabane 
tout proche de la porte, afin de s'y retirer s'il vouloit, 
il edifia extremement les Religieufes & les Sauuages 
par fa patience & fa deuotion, quad on luy apporta 
le viatique, il eftoit en cette petite cabane: les Sau- 
uages accompagnerent le precieux Corps de noflre 
Seigneur, & enuironnerent le petit taudis auec vne 
merueilleufe piete & modeftie: depuis ce temps-Ik 
noftre malade ne parla plus que du ciel & de I'eter- 
nite, il for9oit fouuet fa voix, & s'ecrioit tout haut 
pour former les adtes de vertu qu'on luy recomman- 
doit, il demanda au Pere qui I'affiftoit s'il verroit pas 
au Ciel fa fille morte depuis peu, & ceux qu'il auoit 
aime ck-bas en terre? Le P. I'afTeura, qu'ouy & que 
tous les gens de bien s'entre-verroient, & fe commu- 
niqueroient dans le Ciel: cette refponce le confola 
fort. Vne heure auant que mourir, il coniura inftam- 
ment le Pere d'exhorter les Fran9ois & les Sauuages 
a ce [151] qu'ils priaffent Dieu pour fon ame, fi toft 
qu'il feroit paffe de cette vie. Ce qui luy fut libe- 
ralement accorde: car il n'eut pas plutoft expire que 
les Sauuages s'affemblerent & porterent fon corps en 
la Chapelle autour de luy : le Pere de Quen y eftoit 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 1 63 

in SO long a prayer ; the other is, that I am far from 
the Church, and cannot go to Mass." The Father 
told him that, as for his Rosary, he should not be in 
distress, — that it was enough that he should say ten 
beads at intervals, or even make some other and 
shorter prayer, in order to commend himself to God, 
and resign himself to his will ; and, as for his dis- 
tance from the Church, he would give orders that he 
should be carried to the Hospital, or to a cabin quite 
near, whence he might [150] attend Mass when he 
should have a little strength. The Father notified 
the principal Savages, who brought him straightway 
to the Hospital, and also put up for him a little cabin 
quite near the door, so as to withdraw thither if he 
wished. He extremely edified the Nuns and the 
Savages by his patience and his devotion ; when they 
brought him the viaticum, he was in that little cab- 
in ; the Savages accompanied the precious Body of 
our Lord, and surrounded the little hovel with a 
marvelous piety and modesty. From that time, our 
patient spoke of nothing but heaven and eternity ; he 
frequently strained his voice, and shouted aloud, in 
order to utter the acts of virtue which they recom- 
mended to him. He asked the Father who was as- 
sisting him, if he would see in Heaven his daughter, 
who died a little while ago, and those whom he had 
loved here below on earth. The Father assured 
him, "Yes;" and that all good people would see 
one another and communicate together in Heaven. 
This answer greatly consoled him. An hour before 
dying, he urgently besought the Father to exhort the 
French and the Savages that [151] they should pray 
to God for his soul, as soon as he should have passed 
from this life, — which was liberally granted him: 



164 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

qui les confola dans leur triftelTe: car cet homme 
eftoit vn des plus conliderables. La conftance & 
vertu de la femme eft remarquable auffi bien que 
celle du mary, li toft qu'ils eurent receu tous deux le 
fecond Baptefme, Dieu les efprouua & affligea par la 
mort d'vne fille qu'ils aymoiet vniquement: peu 
apres, le mary tombe malade, languit deux ans & 
demy, & meurt : il reftoit vn fils aag6 de quatre ans 
"k cette bonne veufue, pour toute confolation huidt 
iours apr6s que fon mary eft mort, 1' enfant eft atta- 
qu6 de maladie, & meurt entre les bras de fa pauure 
mere, auec tout cela elle eft ferme & conftante en la 
foy, & dit qu'elle y mourra, que Dieu eft le Maiftre, 
qu'il eft bon, & qu'elle aymera toufiours ce qu'il or- 
donnera, elle demeure maintenant auec vn fien frere 
nomm6 Thomas, fort bon Chreftien, & vit dans vne 
grande patience [152] & humilite. Vn iour, come ie 
voulois aller ^ Quebec, en Canot, ie la priay de me 
mener auec vn autre Sauuage, qui eftoit Ik, elle me 
refpondit: vrayement c'eft bien k moy d'entrepren- 
dre cela maintenant, & qui fuis-ie k prefent? vne 
poignee de terre inutile. 

On a parl€ fouuent das les precedetes Relations de 
Pierre Tregatin: fa vertu I'auoit rendu recomman- 
dable quelque temps auant qu'eftre baptife, il eftoit 
demeure boiteux d'vne bleffure qu'il fe fift en 
courant dans les bois, fes gens I'auoient abandonn^ au 
coin d'vne ance ou pointe de terre, ou nos Peres le 
trouuerent k demy mort, fans cabane & fans viures, 
& fans autre habit qu'vn morceau de couuerture qui 
luy couuroit vne partie du corps. lis le porterent 
chez nous, & le trai(5terent le mieux qu'ils peurent, 
& apres I'auoir inftruit, le baptiferent: enfin les 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 165 

for he had no sooner expired than the Savages assem- 
bled and carried his body into the Chapel near by. 
Father de Quen was there, who consoled them in 
their sadness : for this man was one of the most influ- 
ential. The constancy and virtue of the wife is 
remarkable as well as that of the husband ; as soon 
as they had both received the second Baptism, God 
tried and afflicted them by the death of a daughter 
whom they singularly loved; shortly after, the hus- 
band falls sick, languishes two years and a half, and 
dies. There remained to this good widow, for her 
whole consolation, a son, aged four years; eight 
days after her husband has died, the child is attacked 
by sickness, and dies in its poor mother's arms. 
With all that, she is firm and constant in the faith, 
and says that she will die in it; that God is the 
Master, and that he is good ; and that she will always 
love what he shall order. She now dwells with a 
brother of hers, named Thomas, a very good Chris- 
tian, and lives in great patience [152] and humility. 
One day, when I wished to go to Quebec by Canoe, 
I begged her to take me, with another Savage who 
was there. She answered me : " Truly, I am a likely 
one to undertake that now ; and what am I at pres- 
ent? a handful of useless earth." 

There has been frequent mention in the preceding 
Relations, of Pierre Tregatin ; his virtue had made 
him commendable. Some time before being bap- 
tized, he had become lame from a wound that he 
incurred while running in the woods ; his people had 
abandoned him in the corner of a cove, or point of 
land, where our Fathers found him half dead, with- 
out cabin and without provisions, and without other 
clothing than a piece of blanket, which covered a 



166 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

Religieufes venat en Canada, il trouua vne heureufe 
demeure en la maifon de charite, il y paffa deux ou 
trois Hyuers, pendant lefquels nos Peres conferoient 
auec luy de la langue Algonquine, & luy apprenoient 
enfemble les chofes [153] de Dieu: de maniere qu'il 
les entendoit parfaitement bien, & qui plus eft y 
conformoit fa vie, & feruoit de vray Predicateur par 
fes paroles & fes exemples. 

Les Sauuages en vne de leur affembl^e I'eftablirent 
Capitaine ou Maifhre des Prieres, c'eftoit k luy dans 
les Confeils de parler des affaires de Dieu, de remon- 
trer ce qui eftoit expedient : 1^ deffus & aduertir ceux 
qui manqueroient publiquement k leur deuoir, fur 
tout aux prieres. Le premier iour de Septembre il 
tomba malade & fut apporte a I'Hofpital, & y mou- 
rut au bout de trois Sepmaines qu'il employ a a fe 
preparer k la mort, auec des adtes de vertus heroiques, 
il fe confeffoit fort fouuent, il appelloit chaque iour 
au moins vne fois, vn de nos Peres pour parler de 
Dieu & de fa confcience, ie ne me foucie point de 
viure, difoit-il, ie n'ayme point mon corps, i'ayme 
la mort, de bon coeur ie la fouhaitte quand il plaira 
k Noftre Seigneur : il Communioit fouuent : mais il 
redoubla fa deuotion & fa ferueur pour fa derniere 
Communion, apres laquelle il demada aufii & recent 
r Extreme- Ondtio: [154] il pria les Religieufes 
qu'elles le fiffent enterrer k la Fran9oife, dans vn drap 
limplement. II prit fon petit fils aag^ feulement de 
fix mois entre fes bras, luy donna fa benedidtion, & 
dift qu'il le donnoit ^ nos Peres, pour eftre inftruit : 
deux heures auant fa mort, il appella la Mere Supe- 
rieure & luy dift Ningay Ninnip, ma Mere, c'eft k ce 
coup ie vay mourir: fais prier Dieu pour mon ame, 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 167 

part of his body. They carried him to our house, 
and treated him as best they could; and, after hav- 
ing instructed him, they baptized him. Finally, the 
Nuns coming to Canada, he found a happy abode in 
the house of charity. He spent two or three Win- 
ters there, during which our Fathers conferred with 
him concerning the Algonquin language, and together 
taught him the things [153] of God, so that he un- 
derstood them perfectly well, — and what is more, 
conformed his life to them, and served as a true 
Preacher by his words and his examples. 

The Savages, at one of their assemblies, appointed 
him Captain or Master of the Prayers ; it was his 
place, in the Councils, to speak of the affairs of God, 
to point out what was expedient therein, and warn 
those who should be openly wanting in their duty, 
especially in the prayers. The first day of Septem- 
ber, he fell sick, and was carried to the Hospital, and 
died there at the end of three Weeks, — which he 
employed in preparing himself for death, with heroic 
acts of virtue. He confessed himself very often ; he 
called one of our Fathers at least once each day, in 
order to speak of God and of his conscience. " I care 
not to live," said he; " I do not love my body, — I 
love death ; with good heart I wish it, when it shall 
please Our Lord." He frequently received Commun- 
ion; but he redoubled his devotion and his fervor 
for his last Communion, after which he also requested 
and received Extreme Unction. [154] He begged 
the Nuns that they should have him buried in the 
French manner, simply in a sheet. He took his 
little son, only six months old, in his arms, gave him 
his blessing, and said that he gave him to our 
Fathers, in order to be instructed. Two hours before 



168 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.24 

ce n'eft point icy noftre pays, noflre demeure eft au 
Ciel: i'efpere que Dieu m'y mettra, il demanda le 
Crucifix & I'Apoftropha auec des paroles fi amou- 
reufes qu'il tira les larmes des Religieufes, il fut pris 
d'vne defaillance, pendant ces Colloques, & en vn 
inftant alia de la terre au Ciel. 

Vn nomme Marc-Antoine, duquel on parla I'an pafT6 
entre les malades, n'a point releue de fa maladie qui 
le confomma, en forte qu'il ne luy reftoit que les os 
& la peau, laquelle mefme fe deftachoit en diuers 
endroits du corps: mais il auoit toufiours le vifage 
gay & ioyeux, il eftoit log6 dans vne cabane "k la 
porte de I'Hofpital, toute fa maladie [155] ne fut 
qu'vne cotinuation de patiece & de deuotion, on le 
faifoit prier Dieu fans cefTe, neantmoins il eftoit im- 
polTible de le conteter en ce poindt, il enuoyoit k tous 
propos fa f emme aux Religieufes leur dire : venez ; 
celuy qui eft malade veut prier Dieu, les Religieufes 
craignoient de le lafler, mais au contraire il fe plai- 
gnoit qu'on ne le faifoit pas prier Dieu, & quoy que 
les prieres qu'on luy faifoit dire, fuilent longues, ils 
les repetoit toufiours auec ferueur aulTi bien k la fin 
qu'au commencement, iamais on ne I'entendoit dire 
c'eft affez, il auoit toufiours fon Chappellet, & fi par 
hazard il luy tomboit ou s'egaroit, il falloit renuerfer 
le lidt & la cabane pour le chercher: quand il n'eut 
plus affez de force pour le dire, il le pedit k fon col, 
& le touchoit fans ceffe auec les mains, & prenoit vn 
fingulier plaifir qu'on le recitaft aupres de luy, il ne 
paffoit aucun iour qu'il ne priaft Dieu pour leurs 
bienfadteurs, & pour ceux qui auoient eftably cette 
maifon de charity : c'eft la priere qu'il faifoit actuelle- 
ment quand il entra en I'agonie, laquelle I'emporta 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 169 

his death, he called the Mother Superior and said to 
her: Ningay Ninnip, — " My Mother, this time I am 
going to die; have prayer offered to God for my 
soul. Not here is our country, — our dwelling is in 
Heaven ; I hope that God will place me there. ' ' He 
asked for the Crucifix, and Addressed it with words 
so loving that he drew tears from the Nuns. He was 
taken with a faintness, during these Colloquies, and 
in an instant went from the earth to Heaven. 

A certain Marc-Antoine, who was mentioned last 
year among the sick, did not recover from his mala- 
dy, which consumed him so that he was reduced to 
bones and skin, — which even detached itself on 
various parts of the body ; but he always had a gay 
and joyful countenance. He was lodged in a cabin 
at the door of the Hospital. His entire sickness 
[155] was but one continuation of patience and devo- 
tion. They had him pray to God without ceasing; 
nevertheless it was impossible to content him in this 
respect, — he would send his wife to the Nuns at every 
opportunity, in order to tell them, " He who is sick 
wishes to pray to God." The Nuns dreaded to 
fatigue him, but, on the contrary, he complained that 
they did not make him pray to God ; and though the 
prayers which they had him say were long, he would 
always repeat them with fervor, as well at the 
end as at the beginning. They never heard him 
say, "It is enough." He always had his Rosary; 
and, if by chance it fell from him, or was misplaced, 
they had to turn the bed and cabin upside down in 
order to find it. When he no longer had strength 
enough to say it, he hung it to his neck, and inces- 
santly touched it with his hands, and took a singular 
pleasure in their reciting it near him. Not a day 



170 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

li [156] doucement qu'k peine le vit-on paller: il feroit 
difficile d'expliquer les foings qu'en prenoit fa femme, 
& les charitez qu'elle luy a rendues I'efpace d'vn an 
ou deux, qu'il a e£t6 malade; les Religieufes en 
demeuroient extremement edifices, & I'affiftoient elle 
mefme auec grande affedtion. 

Vne bonne veufue appellee Louyfe, vrayment Hof- 
pitalierie d'affedlion (nous en auons parle autrefois) 
auoit vne fienne fille nomme Vrfule, qui eftoit mariee 
^ vn Capitaine de Tadoufac : cette ieune femme tom- 
ba malade, & apres deux ou trois ans de langueur, 
s'alita enfin h. Sillery, & fe vint retirer h. I'Hofpital, 
demeurant tantoft dans la falle commune, tantoft 
dans la cabane proche. Ses langueurs fe terminerent 
en des douleurs violentes: fa bone mere en eut des 
foins inimaginables : mais le premier eftoit de I'ex- 
horter ^ la patiece : ma fille, difoit elle, fouffre pai- 
fiblemet, ne te fafche pas, affin que tu ne donne point 
d'entr6e au peche, & au malin efprit das ton coeur, 
& que tu allies au Ciel : ma fille penfe ainfi de Dieu, 
il a tout faidt, il [157] gouuerne tout: il m'ayme, ie 
fuis contete de ce qu'il m'enuoye la maladie, ie croi- 
ray toufiours en luy, ie I'aymeray toufiours: voila ce 
que tu peferas en to coeur, il fut neceffaire de luy 
doner le viatique ; elle eftoit lors en fa cabane pres la 
porte de I'Hofpital, la bone Louyfe orna cette petite 
maifon d'efcorces, come vne oratoire: mais tout k la 
Sauuage, elle tendit tout autour des robes de Caftor, 
& d'Oreignac, toutes neufues & bie matachi^es, elle 
mift la plus belle fur le lic5t de la malade, elle 
couurit tout le placher de fueillage, & le baud de la 
cabane auffi, elle alia aux Religieufes emprunter vn 
Crucifix & deux chandeliers auec les cierges, & les 



1642-48] RELATION OF 1642-43 171 

passed that he did not pray to God for their bene- 
factors, and for those who had established this house 
of charity, — this is the prayer that he was actually 
saying when he entered the death struggle, which 
carried him off so [156] gently that they hardly saw 
him pass away. It would be difficult to express 
the care taken by his wife, and the charities which 
she rendered him, for the space of a year or two 
during which he was sick ; the Nuns were extremely 
edified by it, and themselves assisted her, with great 
affection. 

A good widow called Louyse — truly a Hospital 
nun in affection (we have spoken of her before) — 
had a daughter named Ursule, who was married to a 
Captain of Tadousac. This young woman fell sick, 
and, after two or three years of debility, finally took 
to bed at Sillery, and retreated to the Hospital ; stay- 
ing now in the common ward, again in the neighbor- 
ing cabin. Her languors ended in violent pains; her 
good mother's attentions were inconceivable; but 
the first one was to exhort her to patience. "My 
daughter, ' ' she said, ' ' suffer peaceably ; do not be 
angry, so that thou mayst not give admission to sin 
and to the evil spirit in thy heart, and that thou 
mayst go to Heaven. My daughter, think thus of 
God: ' He has made all, he [157] governs all. He 
loves me ; I am content that he sends me sickness. I 
will always believe in him, I will always love him.' 
That is what thou shouldst think in thy heart." It 
was necessary to give her the viaticum ; she was then 
in her cabin near the door of the Hospital. The 
good Louyse adorned this little house with bark, like 
an oratory; but, quite in the Savage fashion, she 
hung all around it robes of Beaver and of Moose, 



172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.24 

mift proche du lidt de fa fille, tout le voilinage acco- 
pagna le S. Sacremet auec grad refpedl & deuotion, 
la malade entedant fonner la clochette qui fert de 
lignal pria fa mere de la dreffer fur so lidt, affin d'ho- 
norer le Corps de N. S. Si tofl qu'elle eut Comunie, 
fa mere s'approcha & luy dift, or fus ma fille, c'eft 
maintenat que I. C. eft en ton coeur, prend courage, 
remercie le fortement: & puis appellant vne des Re- 
ligieufes, elle luy dift, ayde la [158] a faire fes prieres, 
elle preffa qu'on luy donnaft rExtre[me]-On(5tion, 
apres laquelle elle mourut fort tranquillement fa 
mere la fift enterrer auec toute la folemnit^ poffible 
k vn Sauuage, & mifl dans fa foffe tout ce qu'elle 
auoit de plus precieux en Caftor, Porcelaine, & autres 
meubles dont ils font eftat, & comme les Religieufes 
luy remontroient fa pauurete & celle des Sauuages, 
& que cela ne feruoit de rien aux morts, elle luy dift 
& vous autres vous auez bien enterr6 voftre foeur 
Religieufe (c'eftoit la mere de faindte Marie morte il 
y a deux ans) auec fon bel habit & auec tout I'hon- 
neur que vous auez peu, fi ce que ie fais, offengoit 
Dieu, ie le quitterois : mais puifque Dieu ne le defif end 
pas, ie veux honorer les morts. II pleufl k Noftre 
Seigneur efprouuer encor vn autre fois, cette bonne 
veufue: elle auoit defia perdu deux filles, vne troi- 
liefme tomba incontinent malade, & comme c'eftoit 
le commencement de I'hyuer & de leur chaff e, elle 
pria fa mere de la mener auec elle dans les bois, oil 
elle mourut peu apres : mais auec la piete & les f en- 
timens [159] de deuotion, dont i'ay parl6 cy-deuant. 
Sufiit de dire icy que cela n'efbranla point la bonne ■ 
Louyfe, laquelle rapportat le corps de fa fille de dedas 
les bois, & le donnant aux Religieufes pour le faire 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 173 

wholly new and finely embroidered. She put the 
most beautiful one on the bed of the sick woman; 
she covered the whole floor with leaves, and also the 
top of the cabin ; she went to the Nuns to borrow a 
Crucifix and two candlesticks, with the tapers, and 
put them near her daughter's bed. The whole neigh- 
borhood accompanied the Blessed Sacrament with 
great respect and devotion. The sick woman, hear- 
ing the sound of the bell, which serves as signal, 
begged her mother to raise her upon her bed, so as 
to honor the Body of Our Lord. As soon as she had 
received Communion, her mother approached and 
said to her: " Come, now, my daughter; it is now 
that Jesus Christ is in thy heart. Take courage; 
thank him heartily;" and then, calling one of the 
Nuns, she said to her, " Help her [158] to say her 
prayers." She urged that they should give her Ex- 
treme Unction, after which she died very tranquilly. 
Her mother had her buried with all the solemnity 
possible to a Savage, and put in her grave all that 
she had most precious in the way of Beaver, Porce- 
lain, and other articles of which they make account. 
When the Nuns pointed out to her her poverty, and 
that of the Savages, and that that availed nothing for 
the dead, she said to them : * * But you people certainly 
buried your sister Religious ' ' (it was the mother de 
sainte Marie, deceased two years ago) " with her 
beautiful robe, and with all the honor that you could. 
If what I do offended God, I would renounce it ; but, 
since God forbids it not, I wish to honor the dead." 
It pleased Our Lord to try this good widow once 
again; she had already lost two daughters, — a third 
fell suddenly sick ; and, as it was the beginning of 
the winter and of their hunt, she begged her mother 



174 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

enterrer pres de fa foeur, leur dift, ie ne fuis point 
trifle ie me refiouis dauantage de I'affeurance que i'ay 
que mes filles font au Ciel, que ie ne ferois de les voir 
viure en ce monde, Dieu eft noftre Pere ktous: ie 
I'aymeray & tout ce qu'il fera. Ce fentiment excel- 
lent de la conformity k la volonte de Dieu eft 
bien auant imprime dans Ie coeur de plufieurs de nos 
Neophytes. 

La femme d'vn appell6 Vincent Xauier fils du pre- 
mier Sauuage errant qui s'eft arreft6 k Sillery, tom- 
ba malade vn an apres fon mariage, & languit plus 
de deux ans. Enfin elle fut contrainte de garder Ie 
lidt, elle vint k I'Hofpital ou elle furpaffa encor la 
patience des autres : car pendant tout Ie temps qu'elle 
y fut, on ne I'entendit iamais demander chofe aucune 
ny fe plaindre, except^ Ie dernier iour de fa vie, & 
encor fort peu, quoy que d'ailleurs elle fufl d'vn [i6o] 
efprit fort vif & agiflant : elle auoit toufiours ^ fon 
cofl6 vne fienne petite fille aagee de deux ans & 
demy, & quoy qu'elle fut preffee de mal, elle ne 
laiffoit pas de la faire prier Dieu au temps accouftu- 
m^, & de I'inftruire : comme elle fe fentit proche de 
fa fin, elle appella fon mary, luy parla auec beau coup 
d'affedtion, & puis luy bailla fa petite fille qu'elle ne 
voulut plus voir depuis ce temps Ik, ne penfant qu'k 
bien mourir: ce qu'elle fift heureufement, ayant 
receu tons fes Sacremens. Sa fille demeura quelque 
temps k la maif on de fon Pere : mais comme il alloit 
fouuent k la chalTe, la pauure enfant demeuroit come 
abandonnee: ceux qui la gardoient n'en auoient pas 
de foing: elle s'efchappoit & entroit pour 1' ordinaire 
k I'Hofpital ou les Religieufes la carrelfoient, & luy 
donnoient a manger, fon Pere enfin la mena aux 



1642 -4S] RELATION OF 1642-43 175 

to take her with her into the woods, where she died 
soon after, but with the piety and the sentiments 
[159] of devotion whereof I have spoken heretofore. 
Suffice it to say here, that that did not shake the 
good Louyse, who, bringing back the body of her 
daughter from within the woods, and giving it to 
the Nuns, in order to have it buried near her sister, 
said to them: " I am not sad. I rejoice more in the 
assurance which I have that my daughters are in 
Heaven, than I would to see them living in this 
world. God is the Father of us all ; I will love him, 
and all that he shall do." This excellent sentiment 
of conformity to the will of God is deeply imprinted 
in the hearts of many of our Neophytes. 

The wife of one Vincent Xavier, son of the first 
roving Savage who settled at Sillery, fell sick a year 
after her marriage, and languished more than two 
years. Finally, she was constrained to keep her 
bed; she came to the Hospital, where she surpassed 
the patience even of the others, for, during all the 
time that she was there, she was never heard to ask 
for anything or to complain, — except the last day 
of her life, and then very little; although, moreover, 
she was of a [160] very quick and active mind. She 
had always at her side a little girl of hers, aged two 
years and a half ; and though she was beset by sick- 
ness, she failed not to have the child pray to God at 
the usual time, and to instruct her. When she felt 
herself near her end, she called her husband, spoke 
to him with much affection, and then gave him her 
little girl, whom she would no longer see from that 
time, — thinking only of dying well, which she did 
happily, having received all her Sacraments. Her 
daughter lived for some time at her Father's house; 



176 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.24 

Vrfulines, lefquelles la receurent auec toutes forte 
d'affedtion : elle y eft k prefent & donne vne fort 
bonne efperance ; voila comme ces deux communau- 
tez s'entre-foulagent & defpencent auec grande 
charite ce quell es re9oiuent [i6i] de Noftre ancienne 
France, pour le bien & la confolation de ces pauures 
peuples. 

Vne femme appellee Marguerite auoit vn mal de 
iambes depuis plulieurs annees qui la contraignoit de 
palTer tous les hyuers a I'Hofpital, ou dans vne cabane 
proche: I'Hyuer dernier, elle euft enuie de fuiure les 
chalTeurs, pour manger de la viande fraiche (on n'en 
void encor guere en ce pays icy fans chalTe) fon 
mary, la charge fur fa traine, & la tire gayement apres 
foy tous les iours fur des montagnes de neiges : mais 
fa iambe fe pourrilTant, il la ramena ^ I'Hofpital: ils 
auoient grande peur que 1' ordure & la puanteur 
de fes playes n'empefcliaft les Religieufes de la 
receuoir: mais ils furent bien-toft deliurees de leur 
crainte, quand ils virent que ces bonnes filles la rece- 
uoient auec plus de ioye que les autres. Si toft 
qu'elle fut arriuee, elle demande "k fe confefTer, la 
gangrene fe mift en fon mal, & I'emporta en peu de 
temps apres auoir receu denotement tous fes Sacre- 
mens. 

Vne ieune veufue nommee Charity, [162] fort pau- 
ure : mais tres-vertueuf e auoit trois enfans Baptifez, 
I'aifn^ s'efloit marie, fa femme & luy efloient ma- 
lades, les deux autres eftoient alTez infirmes, la bonne 
Charity feule eftoit forte & vigoureufe: elle s'en 
vient Cabaner tout I'Hyuer pr^s de I'Hofpital, pour 
eftre fecourue, elle ne demeure pas pourtant oyfeufe, 
elle fait I'Hofpitaliere, elle mefme, & rend toute 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 \11 

but, as he went often to the hunt, the poor child 
remained as though forsaken, — those who kept her 
took no care of her. She would escape, and usually 
enter the Hospital, where the Nuns caressed her, and 
gave her food. Her Father at last took her to the 
Ursulines, who received her with all manner of affec- 
tion; she is there at present, and gives very good 
promise. Thus do these two communities relieve 
each other, and expend with great charity that which 
they receive [161] from Our old France for the weal 
and the consolation of these poor peoples. 

A woman called Marguerite had had a disease of 
the legs for several years, which constrained her to 
spend all the winters at the Hospital, or in a neigh- 
horing cabin. Last Winter, she desired to follow 
the hunters, in order to eat fresh meat (scarcely any 
is as yet seen in the country here, without hunting). 
Her husband loads her on his sledge, and draws her 
cheerfully after him every day, over mountains of 
snow ; but, her leg festering, he brought her back 
to the Hospital. They had great fear that the filth 
and the stench of her sores might prevent the Nuns 
from receiving her; but they were soon delivered 
from their dread, when they saw that these good 
-daughters received her with more joy than the 
others. As soon as she had arrived, she asked to 
confess herself; gangrene occurred in her disease, 
and carried her off, a short time after having devout- 
ly received all her Sacraments. 

A young widow named Charite, [162] very poor, 
but very virtuous, had three Baptized children, — the 
eldest had married. His wife and he were sick, the 
two others were quite feeble ; the good Charite alone 
was strong and vigorous. She comes to lodge in a 



178 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

raffiflance poffible ^ cette pauure troupe, elle va au 
bois, & a Teau, elle fait la cuifine, elle pafTe les 
peaux, elle fait les fouliers, fi on tue quelque Orignac 
h. trois & quatre lieues, elle prend fa treine, & va 
querir fon fardeau fur les neiges. Sa belle fille eftoit 
la plus malade, & n'efloit pas encore Baptifee, & 
n'en tefmoignoit pas mefme enuie, elle prie Dieu 
fans celfe pour elle, elle I'exhorte, elle importune 
nos Peres, & les Religieufes, pour Tencourager k la 
foy, enfin elle obtint de Dieu ce quelle demandoit: 
car cette ieune femme deux iours auant que mourir 
enuoya fon mary chez nous, k dix heures du foir f rap- 
per a la porte, & demander vn Pere, i'y allay auec le 
Pere Buteux; Dieu luy auoit [163] change le coeur, 
elle preffe pour eftre Baptifee. Helas, difoit-elle, 
eft-il pas temps, haftez-vous, ie veux eftre baptifee, 
ie le fouhaitte, ce n'eft pas pour auoir la fant6 du 
corps, ie ne me foucie pas de la vie, ie demade le 
baptefme, pour obeir k Dieu & aller au Ciel, li toft 
qu'elle I'euft obtenue elle en tefmoigna vne grade 
ioye, nonobftant fes violentes douleurs, & mourut 
incontinent apres dans le contentement. 

C'eft alTez parle des morts, difons vn mot de ceux 
qui ont loge tous en cette maif on ou y ont recouure la 
fant6, les deux aueugleffes qui s'y retirent fouuet, y 
ont paff6 I'hyuer dernier, elles auoient chacun vne 
petite fille pour les conduire, dont la plus aagee qui 
eftoit de neuf h. dix ans, auoit vn efprit excellent & 
la memoire heureufe: elle apprift tout le Catechifme 
& les prieres en fort peu de temps. Vn iour elle fifl 
vne faute qui fembla affez groffe k noflre aueugleffe, 
laquelle a la confcience fort tendre, elle la reprift 
rudement, & luy ordonna de ne point fortir de I'Hof- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 179 

Cabin all Winter, near the Hospital, in order to be 
assisted; however, she does not stay idle, she acts 
the Hospital nurse herself, and renders all the assist- 
ance possible to that poor company. She goes for 
wood and for water, she does the cooking, she dresses 
the skins, she makes the shoes; if they kill some 
Moose three or four leagues away, she takes her 
sledge and goes to seek her burden, over the snows. 
Her daughter-in-law was the most sick, and was not 
yet Baptized, and showed not even a desire for it. 
She prays to God for her, without ceasing ; she ex- 
horts her, she importunes our Fathers and the Nuns 
to encourage her in the faith. Finally, she obtained 
from God what she was requesting; for this young 
woman, two days before dying, sent her husband to 
us, at ten o'clock in the evening, to knock at the door 
and ask for a Father. I went thither with Father 
Buteux. God had [163] changed her heart, — she 
urges to be Baptized. " Alas," she said, " is it not 
time? Make haste; I wish to be baptized, — I desire 
it. It is not to have health of body,— I care not for 
life ; I ask baptism in order to obey God and go to 
Heaven." As soon as she had obtained it, she mani- 
fested great joy, notwithstanding her violent pains, 
and died immediately afterward, in contentment. 

This is enough said of the dead ; let us say a word 
of those who have, every one, lodged in this house, 
or have recovered their health in it. The two blind 
women who often retreat thither, spent last winter 
therein ; they had each a little girl to lead them. 
The elder of these, who was nine or ten years old, 
had an excellent mind and a happy memory; she 
learned the whole Catechism and the prayers in very 
little time. One day, she committed a fault which 



180 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

pital tout ce iour-lk, e[l]le obeit exac5tement, & mef- 
me ne [164] changea pas de place qu'on ne luy euft 
-command^, elle difoit quelquefois aux Religieufes. 
Regarde c6t enfant: elle eft ma parente, ie I'ayme 
comme ma fille: mais ie n'ayme point fon corps c'eft 
Ion ame que i'affecftione: c'eftoit vn grand contente- 
ment d' entendre comme elle luy expliquoit les my- 
fteres de noftre faindte foy, & les belles inftrudtions 
■qu'elle luy donnoit: elle va quelquefois aux trois 
Riuieres, paffer vne bonne partie de I'eft^, & y faidt 
vn grand fruidt parmy ces infideles. 

Vn ieune homme Huron, comme i'ay dit cy-defTus, 
a hyuern6 en cette maifon de Charity. Voicy ce que 
i'en ay appris de particulier depuis les Chapitres pre- 
cedents. Le iour qu'il fut baptif^ en la Chapelle de 
I'Hof pital, il fe leua des deux heures du matin, 
employant tout ce temps-Ik k prier Dieu, iufques k 
fon baptefme, qui fut fur les neuf ou dix heures. 
Depuis qu'il fut Chreftien, fa deuotion redoubla, il fe 
leuoit aflez matin, mettoit tout le temps en prieres 
iufques \ la MefTe, qui fe difoit enuiron les fept 
heures & demie, le foir eftant retourne, [165] d'auec 
le Pere Brebeuf , ou il auoit defia faidl les prieres auec 
les Hurons fes camarades, il les recommen9oit auec 
les Algonquins en la fale des malades, «& puis pour la 
troifiefme fois, il entroit dans la Chapelle des Reli- 
_gieufes, & y demeuroit fouuent pendant tout le teps 
de leur Matines, & fi de hazard la Chapelle efkoit 
fermee, il fe mettoit k genoiiil kla porte, & quelque 
bruit qu'on fift dans I'Hofpital, il demeuroit k faire 
fes prieres paifiblement. 

Voicy comme le Socoquiois fait prifonnier par les 
Algonquins dont i'ay parl6 cy-deflus, arriua en cette 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 181 

seemed quite immense to our blind woman, who has 
a very tender conscience; she reproved the child 
severely, and ordered her not to leave the Hospital 
all that day. She punctually obeyed, and did not 
even [164] change the place which had been assigned 
to her. This woman said sometimes to the Nuns : 
" Look at that child, — she is my relative; I love her 
as my daughter, but I do not love her body, — it is 
her soul that I cherish. ' ' It was a great satisfaction 
to hear how she explained to her the mysteries of 
our holy faith, and the excellent instructions that 
she gave her. She sometimes goes to the three Riv- 
ers, to spend a good part of the summer, and there, 
gathers much fruit among those infidels. 

A Huron young man, as I have said above, has 
wintered in this house of Charity; I have learned 
about him the following particulars, since the pre- 
ceding Chapters. The day that he was baptized in 
the Chapel of the Hospital, he rose at two o'clock in 
the morning, employing all that time in praying to 
God, even until his baptism, which was toward nine 
or ten o'clock. After he had become a Christian, 
his devotion redoubled; he would rise quite early, 
spend all the time in prayers until Mass, which was 
said about half past seven. Having returned at 
evening [165] from Father Brebeuf, where he had 
already said the prayers with the Hurons, his com- 
rades, he recommenced them with the Algonquins in 
the ward of the sick; and then, for the third time, 
he entered the Chapel of the Nuns, and often stayed 
there during the entire time of their Matins. If by 
chance the Chapel was closed, he would kneel at the 
door; and no matter what noise occurred in the 
Hospital, he remained to say his prayers quietly. 



182 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.24 

maifon, le neufiefme de Nouembre I'an pafle, fi toft 
qu'il fut debarqu6 vis k vis de I'Hofpital, les Sau- 
uages de Sillery allerent au deuant pour le receuoir 
auec Charit6, ils le menerent en toutes leurs mai- 
fons, & cabanes, I'vne apres Tautre, & le firent dan- 
cer en toutes : mais auec douceur & amitie ; il obei't 
par tout, quoy qu'il euft le corps tout couuert de 
playes & blelTures: apres cela deux des principaux 
Sauuages I'amenerent k I'Hofpital, ou il fut receu 
des Religieufes auec grande ioye [i66] on appelle le 
Chirurgien: toute la fale fe trouua pleine de Sau- 
uages, pour voir en quel eflat eftoient fes playes, il 
auoit tous les ongles arrachez, de trois doigts coupez 
tout nouuellement le pus en fortoit, les vers y four- 
milloient, il auoit vn pied perc6 d' outre en outre, 
auec vn bafton, il auoit les deux poignets des mains 
liez iufques aux os, auec des cordes, «& le corps brufl^ 
& perce d'alefnes en diuers endroits: ie me trouuay 
k ce fpe(5tacle, la premiere veue nous fit tranfir, il 
endura qu'on le penfaft fans iamais dire vn feul mot, 
ny monftrer aucun figne de douleur, il declaroit par 
fignes la fajon dont on 1' auoit ainfi traidt^, fans 
tefmoigner aucun mefcontentement contre ceux qui 
I'auoient mis en ce piteux eftat: il y auoit de bonne 
fortune a I'Hofpital vn malade Abnaquiois baptif6, 
& appell6 Claude, qui entendoit bien le Socoquiois: 
ce pauure miferable fut extrem^ment confol6 de fa 
rencontre, & comme il s'eftonnoit k I'abbord de voir 
les Religieufes luy tefmoigner tant de charity ; ce 
bon Chreftien luy expliqua comme toute leur occu- 
pation n'eftoit [167] que d'affifter & fecourir les 
pauures, & les malades, & qu'elles gardoient toute 
leur vie, la virginity : cela luy frappa I'efprit, il fut 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 183 

I will relate how the Socoquiois ^^ made prisoner 
by the Algonquins, of whom I have previously spok- 
en, arrived in this house the ninth of November, last 
year. As soon as he had landed opposite the Hospi- 
tal, the Savages of Sillery went forward to receive 
him with Charity. They led him into all their 
houses and cabins, one after the other, and made 
him dance in all, — but with gentleness and friend- 
ship. He obeyed throughout, although he had his 
body all covered with wounds and sores. After that, 
two of the principal Savages led him to the Hos- 
pital, where he was received by the Nuns with great 
joy. [166] They call the Surgeon; the whole ward 
was full of Savages, in order to see in what state his 
wounds were. He had all his nails torn out; matter 
was issuing from three fingers, quite recently cut, 
and the worms were swarming therein ; he had one 
foot pierced through and through with a stick; he 
had both wrists of his hands tied, even to the bone, 
with cords; and his body was burned, and pierced 
with awls in sundry places. I was present at this 
sight ; the first view made us chill with horror. He 
endured the dressing of his wounds without ever 
saying a single word, or showing any sign of pain; 
he made known by signs the manner in which they 
had thus treated him, without betokening any dis- 
pleasure against those who had put him in this piti- 
ful condition. By good luck, there was at the Hos- 
pital a sick Abnaquiois, baptized, and called Claude, 
who well understood Socoquiois. This poor wretch 
was extremely comforted to meet him; and, as he 
was astonished, at first, to see the Nuns show him so 
much charity, this good Christian explained to him 
how their whole occupation was [167] only to assist 



184 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

remis en affez pen de temps, & renuoye en fon pays, 
pour tefmoigner I'affedtion des Fran9ois & Sauuages 
enuers luy, ce font autat d'auancouriers de TEiiagile 
que Dieu enuoye h. fes peuples. 

Quatre Hurons eftant defcendus des trois Riuieres 
^ Sillery, vn deux rechappe nouuellement des mains 
des Hyroquois tomba malade, fes Camarades I'amene- 
rent k I'Hofpital, & y logerent auffi eux-mefmes, 
n'ayant point d'autre retraite: ces bonnes gens tef- 
moignerent fur leur vifage vne grande ioye de ren- 
contrer fi ^ propos vn lieu de cliarit6 : la maladie de 
leur compagnon en vint ^ I'extremit^, on le defefpe- 
roit: defia deux d'etr'eux ne bougeoiet de fes coftez 
pour I'affifter. Cette charit6 ne leur eft pas ordi- 
naire, les chofes de Dieu gaignent peu k peu fur leurs 
coeurs, quad les Religieufes donnoient quelque chofe 
au malade, tous les trois autres ne manquoient iamais 
de les en remercier k leur fagon ordinaire, ho, ho, 
ho, s'il le falloit leuer ou [i68] remuer, ils fe prefen- 
toient incontinent, & quelquesfois luy ont fouftenu 
la tefte ou le corps, quatre ou cinq heures de fuite,. 
fans fe laffer: I'vn d'entr'eux fgauoit les prieres, il 
eftoit auec les deux autres en la Chappelle, foir & 
matin, pour les dire, puis s'en alloit en faire autant 
pr6s de ce malade, qui prioit incontinent qu'on le 
drelfaft fur fon lit, pour les dire auec plus de refpedt, 
il pleuft ^ N. Seig. luy redre la fant6, & leur donner 
moyen h. tous de retourner en leur pays : ie ne dis rie 
du Catechifme qu'on a fait en ce lieu vne bone 
partie de I'annee, tatofh aux malades, tatofl aux 
pauures, tatofl aux enfas. Ten ay parl6 cy-deflus, ie 
diray feulement que le delir que les Sauuages grads 
& petits ont d'aprendre le Catechifme & les prieres, 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 185 

and succor the poor and the sick, and that they ob- 
served virginity ail their life. That greatly impressed 
his mind. He was restored in a fairly short time, 
and sent back to his own country, in order to show 
the affection of the French and Savages toward him. 
These are so many precursors of the Gospel, that 
God sends to his peoples. 

Four Hurons having come down from the three 
Rivers to Sillery, one of them, newly escaped from 
the hands of the Hyroquois, fell sick ; his Comrades 
led him to the Hospital, and also lodged there them- 
selves, not having other shelter. These good people 
expressed in their faces their great joy at so oppor- 
tunely encountering a place of charity. Their com- 
panion's sickness came to a crisis, and they were 
despairing of him ; by that time two of them stirred 
not from his side, in order to assist him. This char- 
ity is not usual with them : the things of God gain 
little by little upon their hearts. When the Nuns 
gave anything to the sick man, all the three others 
never failed to thank them for it, in their usual fash- 
ion — " Ho, ho, ho." If it were necessary to lift or 
[168] move him, they straightway presented them- 
selves; and they sometimes supported his head or 
body four or five hours in succession, without becom- 
ing fatigued. One of them knew the prayers, — he 
was with the two others, in the Chapel, evening and 
morning, to say them ; then he went away to do the 
same near that sick man, who straightway begged 
that they should raise him up on his bed, in order to 
say them with more respect. It pleased Our Lord to 
restore his health, and to give all of them means to 
return to their own country. I say nothing of the 
lessons in the Catechism which were given in this 



186 



LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



fait fouuent vne Chapelle, & vne Efcole de la fale 
des malades, auffi bien que de noftre maifon de Sil- 
lery, ils entrent fans ceffe, & difent: enfeigne moy, 
fais-moy prier Dieu : vne Religieufe ea alTes & fainte- 
met occupee k fatisfaire k ces vifites, & importunitez 
pieufes: & en effet outre celles qui affiftent les 
malades, il en a fallu eflablir d'autres pour ceux qui 
demandent [169] k reciter les prieres, & apprendre le 
Catechifme, la comodite du lieu y fert beaucoup, les 
maifons de ces bonnes gets touchent au baftimet de 
I'Hofpital, & n'ont qu'vne court comune, ils entret ^ 
tous propos quand il font ^ Sillery, & difent ! ie veux 
prier Dieu, ie veux appredre, inftruy-moy. O que 
cette importunity eft agreable, quoy qu'elle attire 
par neceffit^ des frais notables! mais que faire, toute 
la Miffion n'eft que pour cette fin, cela confole & 
eftonne tout enfemble, en vn pays & en vn lieu 
depourueu de tout. Voicy ce que la Mere Superieure 
efcriuoit fur ce fubiet, en vne lettre il y a quelques 
iours ; ie ne fyay, dit elle, ce que nous fairons auec 
le temps, les Sauuages font pauures, ils font fubiets 
k vne infinite de maladies, leur vertu n'en eft pas 
moindre, mais leur fecours en eft plus difiicile : les 
Hofpitaux de France ont efte fondez par les Roys les 
Princes & les Princeffes bien richement, & auec tout 
cela ils ne fubfifteroient pas, fi les Euefques & les 
perfonnes de merite n'y faifoient de bonnes aumof- 
nes, fi les Parlemens & les Prefidiaux [170] n'y appli- 
quoiet les amendes; 1' Ocean nous exclud de tous ces 
fecours: il fe trouue en France des perfonnes qui 
entreprenent icy faindtement vn & deux Semina- 
riftes, d'autres I'entretien & foulagement d'vne 
famille Sauuage, mais peu de perfonnes pefent k 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 



187 



place a good part of the year,— now to the sick, 
anon to the poor, again to the children. I have 
spoken of them before; I will only say that the 
desire of the Savages, great and small, to learn the 
Catechism and the prayers, often makes a Chapel 
and a School of the sick ward as well as of onr house 
at Sillery. They enter incessantly, and say : " Teach 
me; have me pray to God." One Nun is amply and 
blessedly occupied in answering these visits and 
pious importunities ; and, in fact, besides those who 
assist the sick, it has been necessary to establish 
others for those who request [169] to recite the pray- 
ers and to learn the Catechism. The convenience 
of the place is of much service herein ; these good 
people's houses adjoin the building of the Hospital, 
and have but one common court. They come in on 
every occasion, when they are at Sillery, and say: 
" I wish to pray to God; I wish to learn, — instruct 
me." Oh, how agreeable is this importunity, al- 
though it necessarily leads to considerable expenses! 
But what shall be done? The entire Mission is only 
for this end ; that comforts and astonishes, all at once, 
in a country and in a place destitute of everything. 
See what the Mother Superior wrote on this subject, 
in a letter some days ago: " I know not," she says, 
" what we shall do in course of time. The Savages 
are poor ; they are liable to countless diseases : their 
virtue is none the less, but their succor is more diffi- 
cult. The Hospitals of France have been founded by 
Kings, Princes, and Princesses, very richly ; and with 
all that, they would not subsist if the Bishops and 
persons of merit did not bestow generous alms on 
them, and if the Parliaments and the Tribunals [170] 
did not apply the fines to them : the Ocean excludes 



188 



LES RELA TIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol. 24 



Tentretien d'vn malade, & a le fournir de linges ou 
de couuertures. Dieu a des voyes qui nous font 
inconnues, & fes moyens fe trouueront quand il luy 
plaira. Quelques honneftes perfonnes nous I'ont fait 
efprouuer, cette annee: Dieu en foit k iamais benift; 
nous eaions au bout, la neceffit^ de logis & la mifere 
des pauures nous auoit oblige h, des debtes : noftre 
chere fondatrice, nonobflant le fubiedt de fes dou- 
leurs, n'a pas laiff^ d'appliquer fes foins, & nous en 
deliurer de la plus grolTe partie: fa charite ne s'efl 
iamais laffee, noflre confolation efl qu'elle en voit 
les fruits tres agreables, & en iouyt auec nous : voila 
les penfees de ces bonnes fiUes parmy leur pauuret^. 
le veux finir ce Chapitre par les parolles que le 
bon Charles Meca Skoiiat [sc. Meiafkotiat] [171] a 
fouuent tenu aux malades, les venant vifiter quand 
il efl k Sillery : vous autres (dit-il) qui efles malades, 
n'eflimez pas que la maladie foit vne chofe mauuaife, 
ne penfez pas en voflre coeur, voila qui va mal de ce 
que nous fommes affligez, mais penfez ainfi de Dieu, 
c'eft noflre Pere ^ tons; il nous a fait, il nous ayme, 
c'efl pour noflre bien qu'il nous enuoye la maladie, 
il nous mettra dans le Ciel & nous donnera vne vie 
qui ne meurt iamais, voila ce que vous penferez de 
Dieu. Ay6s done courage ne vous attriflez pas, 
croyez fortement, ce que vous endurez prendra bien- 
toft fin: mais voftre ioye durera ^ iamais dans le 
Ciel. 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 ^89 

lis from all these aids. There are in France persons 
who holily maintain here one or two Seminary 
pupils, — others, who undertake the support and relief 
of a Savage family ; but few persons think of the sup- 
port of a patient, and of furnishing him with linen or 
bedding. God has ways which are unknown to us, 
and these means will be found when it shall please 
him. Some worthy persons have made us experience 
that, this year; God be forever blessed for this. We 
were in extremity, — the necessity for lodgings, and 
the misery of the poor, had obliged us to incur debts ; 
our dear foundress, notwithstanding her occasion for 
sorrow, nevertheless applied her care, and delivered 
us from the main part of them. Her charity has 
never grown weary ; our consolation is that she sees 
the very pleasant fruits thereof, and enjoys them 
with us." Such are the thoughts of these good 
sisters amidst their poverty. 

I wish to finish this Chapter with the words which 
the good Charles Meiaskouat [171] has often addressed 
to the sick, on coming to visit them when he is at 
Sillery. " You " (said he) " who are sick, deem not 
that sickness is an evil thing, — do not think in your 
heart : ' It is a bad affair, that we are afflicted ; ' 
but think thus of God : * He is the Father of us all, — 
he has made us; he loves us; — it is for our good 
that he sends us sickness. He will place us in Heav- 
en, and give us a life which never dies. ' That is 
what you should think of God. Have courage, 
then, — do not be grieved; believe firmly; what you 
endure will soon have an end, but your joy will last 
forever in Heaven." 



190 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 



[172] CHAPITRE X. 

DE CE QUI S'EST PASSE AUX TROIS RIUIERES & AU 
FORT DE RICHELIEU. 

IE mets ces deux lieux en vn Chapitre, par ce qu'ils 
ont couru mefme rifque des Hiroquois, & ont 
receu les mefmes Sauuages lefquels ont paffe 
I'annee, partie en vn de ces lieux, partie en I'autre: 
ceux qui ont demeure en ces deux habitations, ont 
eft6 les Algonquins d'en-haut, autant fuperbes & 
difficilles h. gouuerner (comme i'ay defia remarque) 
que ceux de deuers Quebec font humbles & dociles. 
L'an palTe incontinent apres le depart des Nauires, 
qui fut le feptiefme d'Odlobre, i'euoyay le Pere le 
leune demeurer aux trois riuieres, pour voir s'il 
pourroit dompter I'Orgueil de ces gens Ik, & les 
reduire k lefus-Chrifl : fon zele & fa vertu alTez co- 
gneue me donnerent aifement cette [173] penf^e, il 
n'y fut pas pluftoft arriu6 que ces miferables luy don- 
nerent bien de I'exercice, les deux principaux chefs 
eftoient vn appell6 Tef^efatch homme ruf6, fuperbe, 
ennemy des fagons de faire des Frangois & du Chri- 
ftianifme, I'autre eftoit vn apoftat nomm6 Abdon 
plein d'efprit: mais mefchant & hardy, ces deux 
hommes gouuernoient les Algonquins d'en-haut, & 
taf chant k leur letter le mefme efprit qui les poffe- 
doit, feignoiet par interualle d'aymer la Foy, & les 
Francois, & puis ils faifoient tout le contraire en par- 
ticulier, & f ouuent en public : il y auoit neantmoins 



1642-43] RELATION OF I642-4J 191 



[172] CHAPTER X. 

OF EVENTS AT THE THREE RIVERS AND AT THE 
FORT OF RICHELIEU. 

I BRING these two places into one Chapter, be- 
cause they have incurred like peril from the 
Hiroquois, and have received the same Savages, 
who have spent the year partly in one of these places, 
partly in the other. Those who have lived at these 
two settlements have been the upper Algonquins, — 
just as proud, and difficult to govern (as I have already 
remarked), as those from about Quebec are humble 
and docile. Last year, immediately after the depar- 
ture of the Ships, — which was the seventh of Octo- 
ber, — I sent Father le Jeune to live at the three 
rivers, in order to see if he could subdue the Pride 
of those people, and bring them to Jesus Christ. 
His well-known zeal and virtue readily inspired me 
with this [173] idea. He had no sooner arrived there 
than those wretches gave him plenty of exercise. 
The two principal chiefs were: one, Teswesatch,^^ — 
a crafty, proud man, and an enemy to the French 
usages and to Christianity ; the other was an apostate 
named Abdon, full of intelligence, but wicked and 
bold. These two men governed the upper Algon- 
quins; and, striving to infuse into them the same 
mind which possessed themselves, they feigned, at 
intervals, to love the Faith and the French, and then 
they did the very contrary in private, and often in 
public. There were, nevertheless, among that band 



192 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

parmy la troupe quelques ames choifies de Dieu. 
L'an paffe le 19. d'Oc5tobre, Abdon auec fa troupe 
retournant de la guerre amena aux trois Riuieres vn 
prifonnier qui n'eftoit pas Hiroquois : mais leur voi- 
lin & amy : les voila incontinent dans la ref olution 
de le brufler, on leur remontre qu'il ne faut pas 
multiplier les ennemis, & qu'ils deuoient maintenant 
quitter toutes ces cruautez : mais ils f e mocquent du 
Pere, & de tous ceux qui leur en parlent, percent vn 
pied "k ce pauure [174] homme auec vn bafton, luy 
arrachent les ongles des doigts k belles dents, il ten- 
doit la main & donnoit les doigts comme fi-il n'euft 
rien fenty, ils luy lient les deux poignets des mains 
auec des cordes k neuds coulans, & quatre ieunes 
hommes tiroient & bandoient les cordes de toutes 
leurs forces, defchirants & emportants la chair des 
bras iufques aux os, la douleur le fait tomber en 
foibleffe ; ils cellent de le tourmenter luy iettent de 
I'eau, luy donnent k mager pour le faire reuiure aux 
tourments, le bois efloit delia prepare pour le brufler, 
& la nuidt de cette tragedie, s'alloit commencer: mais 
le foir de bonne fortune il arriua vn canot de Que- 
bec, auec des lettres de Monfieur le Gouuerneur au 
fieur des Rochers qui commande aux 3. riuieres, afin 
qu'il rachetafl & deliurafl le prifonnier, ce qu'il fift 
auec bien de la peine : car la rage & la vengeance 
poffedoient le coeur de ces Barbares: cette affaire 
expediee, le Pere s'applique k I'inftrudtion des Sau- 
uages, s'oppofe aux mutins & encourage a la perfe- 
uerance, ceux qui auoient bien commence, le [175] 
mal-heureux Teft^oaths {sc. Tefi^efatch] deffendoit 
publiquement ^ fes gens qu'ils n'allaffent k la mefle. 
Le Pere eftant vn iour pres de la dire, & voyant que 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 1 93 

some souls chosen of God. Last year, on the 19th 
of October, Abdon with his troop, returning from 
the war, brought to the three Rivers a prisoner who 
was not Hiroquois, but their neighbor and friend: 
behold them suddenly resolving to burn him. They 
are admonished that they must not multiply their 
enemies, and that they ought now to give up all those 
cruelties ; but they mock at the Father, and at all 
those who mention it to them. They pierce one foot 
of this poor [174] man with a stick, and atrociously 
tear out his finger-nails, — he held out his hand and 
gave his fingers, as if he had felt nothing ; they tie 
both his wrists with cords with running knots, and 
four young men pull and fasten the cords with 
all their might, tearing and removing the flesh of his 
arms even to the bones. The pain causes him to fall 
in a swoon; they cease to torture him, throw water 
upon him, and give him food, in order to revive him 
for the torments ; the wood was already prepared for 
burning him, and the night of this tragedy was about 
to begin. But at evening, by good fortune, there 
arrived a canoe from Quebec, with letters from Mon- 
sieur the Governor to sieur des Rochers, who com- 
mands at the 3 rivers, — to the end that he should 
ransom and release the prisoner, — which he did with 
much difficulty, for rage and vengeance possessed 
the hearts of those Barbarians. This business de- 
spatched, the Father applies himself to the instruction 
of the Savages, opposes the mutinous, and encourages 
to perseverance those who had begun well. The 
[175] miserable Teswesatch publicly forbade his peo- 
ple to go to mass. The Father being one day ready 
to say it, and seeing that no one came, leaves the 
Church ; and having perceived from a distance some 



194 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

perfonne ne venoit, il fort de TEglife & ayant apper- 
ceu de loing quelques ieunes filles qui s'approchoient 
auec crainte, il leur demande? pourquoy elles n'en- 
troient pas? le Capitaine a crie publiquement, difent 
elles, qu'il tueroit ceux qui y viendroient venez : dift 
le Pere, ne craignez rien, les Frangois vous deffen- 
dront : vne eftant entree les autres f uiuirent, & enfin 
tous vinrent k la Meffe : ils ne tarderent guere aux 
trois riuieres auffi n'y font-ils pas encor refidens, & 
n'y ont aucune maifon ftable. Sur la fin de Nouem- 
bre ils prirent quelque refolution d'aller h. Mont- Real 
pour y faire leur chaffe, pendant tout I'hyuer: mais 
ayant entendu que quelques-vns de leurs compagnons 
qui y eftoient alles pen de temps auparauant redef- 
cendoient pour demeurer au Fort de Riche-lieu, ils 
les allerent trouuer pour hyuerner Yk tous enfemble, 
& fe tenir compagnie foit k la chaffe, foit k la guerre. 
[176] Ce feroit vn grad bo-heur que ces gens Yk fe 
peuffent vne fois fixer & arrefter en quelque bonne 
habitation, comme les autres ont fait h. Sillery: le 
Pere le leufne faifant I'office d'vn bon pafteur, va 
apres f on troupeau & le fuit quittant les trois Riuieres 
pour tirer auec eux vers Riche-lieu, comme ils eftoient 
en chemin vn certain Sauuage bon Chreftien fait 
vne criee a cinq cabanes, que le Pere accompagnoit. 
Efcout^s moy tous, dift-il, voicy de pauures veufues 
qui viennent hyuerner auec nous, elles viennent pour 
auoir a manger, il les faudra fecourir de noftre 
chaffe, efcoutez moy derechef : ie vois bien que nous 
ne fommes pas au bout de nos mal-heurs, nous auons 
des gens de bien auec nous, & nous n'en fommes pas 
meilleurs: voicy vn homme qui a paff^ le grand 
Ocean pour parler pour nous, afin qu'on nous affiftafl: 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 195 

young girls who were approaching with fear, he asks 
them why they did not come in. " The Captain has 
publicly announced," they say, "that he would kill 
those who should go thither." The Father said, 
" Fear nothing; the French will defend you." One 
having entered, the others followed; and finally all 
came to Mass. They tarried not long at the three 
rivers, — so they are not yet resident there, and have 
no fixed abode there. Toward the end of Novem- 
ber, they took a sort of resolution to go to Mont- 
Real, in order to make their hunt there during all 
the winter; but, having heard that some of their 
companions, who had gone thither shortly before, 
were coming down again in order to stay at Fort 
Riche-lieu, they went to find them, so as to winter 
there all together, and keep one another company, 
either in the chase or in war. [176] It would be a 
great blessing if those people could once become 
fixed and settled in some suitable residence, as the 
others have done at Sillery. Father le Jeusne, per- 
forming the office of a good pastor, goes after his 
flock and follows it, leaving the three Rivers in order 
to move with them toward Riche-lieu. As they were 
on the way, a certain Savage, a good Christian, 
makes a public statement to five cabins which the 
Father accompanied. " Listen to me, all of you," 
said he ; " here are poor widows who come to winter 
with us ; they come to have food ; we shall have to 
help them with our hunting. Listen to me again ; I 
see well that we are not at the end of our bad luck ; 
we have worthy people with us, and we are none the 
better for it. Here is a man who has crossed the 
great Ocean in order to speak for us, to the end that 
we should be assisted; but we do not listen to him 



196 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 24 

mais nous ne I'efcotitons pas comme il faut; le mal- 
heur vient de ce que nos Capitaines ne croyent pas 
en Dieu, que s'il en donne aduis en fon pays, le 
Maffmaigan, c'eft k dire leur Efcriture, empefchera 
le bie qu'on nous [177] procure. Sus doc vous autres 
qui croyez en Dieu, & vous qui auez enuie de croire, 
vniffons nous, & tenons ferme pour la foy, & efcou- 
tons le Pere. Cela dit, il s'embarque, & arriue le 
mefme iour au fort de Richelieu, le fieur de Chamfe- 
lourt \sc. Chamflour], qui y commandoit, recent le 
Pere auec vne affedtion toute extraordinaire qu'il a 
continuee tout Thyuer, le fecourant fortement dans le 
deffein d'attirer ces peuples k lefu-Chrift. Le Pere 
de Noiie qui y eftoit pour auoir foin des Fran9ois, 
fut rauy d'aife d'auoir auec foy le Pere, pour enfei- 
gner les Sauuages. Voicy leur occupation, pendant 
I'Hyuer & I'ordre qu'ils gardoient tons les matins. 
Au point du iour le Pere de Noiie difoit la Meffe, k 
laquelle affifloient les Francois & les Sauuages Chre- 
fliens. Le fieur de Normanuille (c'eft ce ieune home, 
qui a eft6 autrefois pris des Hiroquois, & qui fift I'an 
paffe le voyage de France auec le Pere le Ieune) leur 
faifoit faire les prieres tout haut au commencement 
de la Meffe, il entend fort bien la langue. Pendant 
ce temps 1^ le Pere en enfeignoit quelques-vns en 
particulier [178] ou les efcoutoit de Confeffion, puis 
les menoit k la Chappelle ou il leur difoit la Meffe, «& 
faifoit Communier ceux qui en eftoient capables, & 
ainfi il les prenoit tous les vns apres les autres : la 
Melfe eftant finie, il allembloit quelque ieunes gens, 
pour leur faire le Catechifme. La plus grande partie 
du iour leur petite chambre eftoit pleine, & ce 
n'ei^oit quafi qu'vne inftrucftion continuelle. Sur le 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 197 

as we ought. The misfortune comes from the fact 
that our Captains do not believe in God ; so that if 
he gives information of this in his own country, the 
Massinaigan, — that is to say, their Writing, — will 
hinder the benefit that is being [177] procured for 
us. Up, then, you who believe in God, and you who 
have desire to believe ; let us unite, and make a stand 
for the faith; and let us heed the Father." That 
said, he embarks, and arrives the same day at the 
fort of Richelieu. The sieur de Chamflour, who 
commanded there, ^" received the Father with an 
affection quite extraordinary, which he continued 
throughout the winter, — efiiciently assisting him in 
the design of drawing these peoples to Jesus Christ. 
Father de Noiie, who was there in order to have care 
of the French, was delighted to have the Father with 
him, to teach the Savages. Here follows their occu- 
pation during the Winter, and the order that they 
observed every morning. At daybreak, Father de 
Noiie ^^ said Mass, at which were present the French, 
and the Christian Savages. The sieur de Norman- 
ville ^^ (this is the young man who was formerly taken 
by the Hiroquois, and who, last year, made the voyage 
to France with Father le Jeune) had them say the 
prayers aloud, at the beginning of Mass ; he under- 
stands the language very well. During that time, the 
Father taught some of them in private, [178] or heard 
them in Confession, then led them to the Chapel, 
where he said Mass for them, and gave Communion 
to those who were fit for it; and so he took them all, 
one after another. Mass being over, he assembled 
some young people, to instruct them in the Cate- 
chism. The greater part of the day, their little 
room was filled ; and it was practically one continual 



198 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 24 



foir le Pere prenoit vne partie des cabanes, & le 
fieur de Norma[n]iiille I'autre, & ainfi on faifoit prier 
tout le monde : la priere eftoit ordinairement f uiuie 
d'vne exhortation, & d'vn Cantique en leur langue. 
Voila I'ordre qu'ils ont gard6 pedant I'Hyuer, iufques 
^ ce que les Sauuages quitterent ce lieu, pour aller a 
Mont- Royal, & aux trois Riuieres. Voyons quelques 
ac5lions particulieres. 

Vn Sauuage Chreflien eflant malade tomba dans 
vne grande foibleffe, on le penfoit mort, fa tante qui 
I'affiftoit, luy demada s'il ne fe fouuenoit de rien 
pendant cette foibleffe, & ou il penfoit aller apres fa 
mort, ou auec fes pares deffundts ou auec les croyas, 
il moftra le Ciel auec [179] la main, puis s'efforgat de 
parler, ie m'en vay 1^, dit-il, i'ay veu le lieu ou ie 
dois aller, 1^-deffus il meurt. Vne femme Chre- 
ftienne vifitee la nuidt, & fortement folicitee par vn 
mefchant homme repartit, toufiours ie refpedte mon 
Baptefme, & ie ne veux iamais fafcher Dieu. 

Vn Dimanche le Pere ayant confeffe ceux qui vou- 
loient Communier, comme il retardoit ^ dire la Meffe, 
retenu par cette occupation, vn Payen fift feftin, & 
y conuia la plufpart des Chreftiens qui s'eftoient con- 
feffez, ils y vont tous, & pas-vn ne fe trouue "k la 
Meffe qu'on alloit dire. Le Pere bien eftonne de- 
mande oti eftoient ceux qui fe vouloient Communier, 
les autres refpondirent tout haut qu'ils efloient au 
feftin, cela le fafcha d'abord, il crie contre eux, & 
contre leur couftume, il loiie ceux qui efloient pre- 
fens, & blafme les abf ens : mais il luy f allut bien-tofl 
apres changer de ton, & de notte: car la feconde 
Meffe eflant fonnee, voicy tous les conuiez qui vien- 
nent dire au Pere, qu'ils Communiroient a cette 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 -43 199 

instruction. Toward evening, the Father took one 
part of the cabins, and the sieur de Normanville the 
other ; and thus they had all the people pray. The 
prayer was usually followed by an exhortation, and a 
Hymn in their own language. Such was the order 
that they observed during the Winter, until the Sav- 
ages left that place, to go to Mont-Royal and to the 
three Rivers. Let us note some special good deeds. 

A Christian Savage, being sick, fell into a heavy 
swoon ; they thought him dead. His aunt, who was 
assisting him, asked him if he remembered nothing 
during that faintness ; and where he thought to go 
after his death, — with his deceased relatives, or with 
the believers? He pointed to Heaven with [179] his 
hand; then, speaking with an effort, " I am going 
there, * ' he said ; " I have seen the place where I am 
to go;" thereupon he dies. A Christian woman, 
visited at night, and urgently solicited by a wicked 
man, answered: " Always I respect my Baptism, and 
I will never offend God." 

One Sunday, the Father having confessed those 
who wished to receive Communion, — as he was 
delaying to say Mass, being detained by that 
occupation, — a Pagan made a feast and invited to it 
the greater part of the Christians who had confessed 
themselves. They all go to it, and not one is pres- 
ent at Mass, about to be said. The Father, much 
astonished, asks where those were who wished to 
receive Communion. The others answered aloud, 
that they were at the feast. That angered him at 
first ; he denounces them and their custom ; he praises 
those who were present, and blames the absent. But 
he soon afterward had to change his tone and key; 
for, the second Mass having rung, behold all the 



200 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

Meffe-1^: Comment dit le Pere, ne venez-vous pas 
du feftin? ouy dea [i8o] nous en venons: mais nous 
n'auons point mang6, nous auons garde tout le mets 
qu'on nous a donne, & I'auons porte a nos families, 
fans y goufler. Le Pere furpris par cette refponce, 
leur rendit autant de loiiange, qu'il leur auoit donne 
deblafme: car il ne penfoit pas qu'on demeuraft k 
ieun, au milieu du feftin. 

Voicy vne a(5tion pleine de conftance, en vne aage 
tendre : vne ieune fille aagee d'enuiron fept ans, ioii- 
ant auec fes compagnes, recent vn coup de pierre au 
front, tirant vers le nez, qui luy en couppa la chair 
iufques aux os, eflant toute remplie de fang, elle fe 
prefente k so Pere, lequel fans s'efmouuoir ny crier 
cotre ceux qui auoiet bleff^ fa fille, I'enuoya ^ celuy 
qui penfe les Frangois, & continua vne partie qu'il 
auoit commenc^e au ieu, on I'ameine droidt chez 
nous, on appelle le Chirurgie, lequel ayat vifit6 la 
playe, dift, qu'il la falloit coudre, la crainte qu'on 
auoit que 1' enfant ne peuft fupporter la douleur, 
nous fift refoudre d'appeler fon Pere, il vient ayat 
perdu la partie, & fans en eftre de plus mauuaife 
humeur, on luy difl qu'il faut recoudre la [i8i] playe 
de fon enfant, & que cela luy fera bien du mal (Nita- 
nai Chibiner) ma fille luy dift-il, fouffre conftam- 
ment, monflre que tu as du courage, la pauure enfant 
fe prefente au Chirurgien arm6 de fil & d'efguille, il 
faidt plufieurs poindts de coufture h. la chair, fans que 
iamais elle difl vn feul mot, ny branlaft, quoy qu'elle 
ne fuft, ny liee, ny tenue, feulement elle roidifl^oit le 
bras, & encor non pas k toutes les fois qu'on luy per- 
9oit la chair: ce qui fe faifoit auec grande difficult^ 
h. caufe du manuals endroit ou eftoit la blelTure, ce 



1642 -43 J RELATION OF 1642-43 201 

guests, who come to tell the Father that they would 
receive Communion at that Mass. "How?" said 
the Father, " are you not coming from the feast?" 
" Certainly, [180] we are coming from it: but we 
have not eaten; we have kept all the food which 
they gave us, and have carried it to our families, 
without tasting it." The Father, surprised by this 
answer, gave them as much praise as he had given 
them blame ; for he did not think that they would 
stay fasting in the midst of the feast. 

Here is an act full of constancy, at a tender age: a 
young girl aged about seven years, playing with her 
companions, received a blow from a stone, in her 
forehead, near the nose, which cut her flesh even to 
the bone. Being all covered with blood, she pre- 
sented herself to her Father, who, without becom- 
ing excited, or reproaching those who had wounded 
his daughter, sent her to the one who attends the 
French, and continued a play that he had begun in 
a game. They lead her straight to us; they call the 
Surgeon, who, having examined the wound, said 
that it must be sewed. The dread we had, that the 
child could not bear the pain, made us resolve to call 
her Father; he comes, having lost the game, and 
without being in the worse temper for it. They tell 
him that it is necessary to sew up the [181] wound 
of his child, and that that will cause her much pain. 
' ' (Nitanai Chibiner) — My daughter, ' ' said he to her, 
" suffer with constancy; show that you have cour- 
age." The poor child presents herself to the Sur- 
geon, who is armed with thread and needle. He 
takes several stitches in the flesh, without her ever 
saying a single word, or flinching, although she was 
neither bound nor held ; she only stiffened her arm, — 



202 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

courage en vn enfant de fept ans eft remarquable. 

Vn ieune Chreftien vint dire au Pere : ie ne puis 
plus durer icy, il faut que i'aille Ik-bas a Sillery, 
auec les croyans : on ma rompu mon Chapellet, on f e 
mocque de moy, quand ie prie Dieu, on me faidl mille 
niches, permettez moy de loger chez vous en voftre 
maifon, iufqu'a ce que les chofes foient paifibles. 

Le Pere appela vn ieune homme Chreftien qui fe 
gouuernoit affez mal, il le menace des chaftimens de 
Dieu, & I'inuite a fe recognoiltre, comme il ne [182] 
difoit mot. Le Pere luy demande ce qu'il penfoit, 
i'ay vne penfee qui ne vaut rien, dill;-il: le Pere I'ex- 
cite k ouurir fon coeur, refpond moy, auparauat dift-il : 
vn tel, eft-il damne ou fauue? il parloit d'vn autre 
ieune homme Chreftien, mort depuis peu, qui s'eftoit 
mal comport^ vn temps, & auec lequel il auoit grande 
amitie. Le Pere fut eftonne de cette demande, & ne 
refpondit pas. Le Sauuage recharge, dis moy vn tel 
eft-il damne? non dit le Pere: car il s'eft recognu ^ 
fa mort. Ie penfois, dit-il qu'il fuft damn6? & pource 
que ie I'aymois, ie voulois courrir mefme fortune 
que luy : mais s'il eft fauue, il faut que ie m'amende : 
car ie veux eftre auec luy, apres ma mort ; a quatre 
iours del^ il fe vint confeffer, & nous dift, il y a 
quatre iours que ie penfe fans cefCe k ma confcience, 
ie ne veux plus offencer Dieu. La bont6 diuine fe 
fert de toutes fortes de moyens pour le falut de fes 
efleus. 

Vne petite efcoiiade de Sauuages voulut partir 
pour aller k la guerre, au pays des Hyroquois : vn de 
la troupe qui efloit Chreftien, les amena aux Peres, 
[183] pour entendre vn mot d' exhortation, apres la- 
quelle il prift luy-mefme la parole, & s'adreffant aux 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 203 

and even that, not every time they pierced her flesh, 
which was done with great difficulty, on account of 
the unfavorable place where the wound was. This 
courage in a child of seven years is remarkable. 

A young Christian came and said to the Father : " I 
cannot stay here longer; I must go yonder to Sil- 
lery, with the believers. They have broken my 
Rosary, they mock at me when I pray to God ; they 
play me a thousand tricks. Permit me to lodge with 
you in your house, until matters be peaceable." 

The Father called to a Christian young man, who 
was behaving himself quite badly ; he threatens him 
with the punishments of God, and bids him come to 
his senses. As he [182] said not a word, the Father 
asks him of what he was thinking. ' ' I have a thought 
which is of no account," said he. The Father urges 
him to open his heart: " First answer me," said 
he, — "such a one, is he damned or saved?" He 
spoke of another Christian young man, lately de- 
ceased, who had behaved badly for a time, and with 
whom he had had great friendship. The Father was 
astonished at this question, and made no answer. 
The Savage tries again: " Tell me, is such a one 
damned?" "No," said the Father; "for became 
to himself at his death." " I thought," said he, 
" that he was damned, and, because I loved him, I 
was willing to incur the same risk as he ; but if he 
is saved, I must reform; for I wish to be with him 
after my death." Four days from then, he came to 
confess, and said to us : " These four days, I have been 
thinking incessantly of my conscience ; I do not wish 
to offend God further." The divine goodness uses 
all sorts of means for the salvation of its elect. 

A small squad of Savages wishing to start for the 



204 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

Chrefliens, leur dift, prenons courage, mes freres, 
tenons ferme, faifons tons les iours nos prieres, ne 
foyons point honteux, li I'vn de nous prie feul, la 
honte enfin le fera taire, li nous prions tous enfemble, 
nous en ferons plus forts, & peut-ellre qu'a noftre 
exemple, les Payens priront come nous. Comme ils 
furent pres de partir, ils allerent tous enfemble k la 
Chappelle, & leur priere finie, fe rendirent fur le 
fleuue glace, Ik ils fe mettent en rond, & leurs Capi- 
taines les ayant harenguez, ils chantent & danfent k 
la veue des Fran§ois qui eftoient dans le fort : il les 
faifoit beau voir veflus h. la foldate, & quafi en maf- 
quarade de France, les vns auoient le vifage peint de 
rouge, les autres de bleu, les autres de noir, quelques- 
vns de toutes les couleurs: ils auoient des efpees 
amanchees en forme de demy-pique, plulleurs auoient 
des corcelefts, piques, & entrelaffez de petits baftons, 
les autres auoient des boucliers faits de bois, il y en 
auoit quelques-vns qui auoient [184] des arquebufes, 
tous auoient les pieds armez de bonne raquettes, pour 
courir fur les neiges : leurs iambes font les pouruoi- 
eurs de leur armee, ils ne mangent pour 1 'ordinaire 
en chemin que les animaux qu'ils rencontret & qu'ils 
tuent, ils auoient auec eux vne femme qui s'eftoit 
fauuee I'a pafle des mains & du pays des Hyroquois, 
laquelle les deuoit mener aux endroidts ou les enne- 
mis ont accouftum6 de faire leur chaff e pendant I'Hy- 
uer. Les voilk done partis gayement fans apprehen- 
lion des trauaux horribles, & du froid infuportable, 
n'ayans autre retraicfte que les bois, ny autre lict que 
la neige, & la glace, & eflant contraints de palfer plu- 
fieurs iours fans faire du feu, de peur d'eftre d6cou- 
uerts. Les Chrefliens firent conftamment leurs pri- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 205 

war in the country of the Hyroquois, one of the band, 
who was a Christian, led them to the Fathers, [183] 
in order to hear a word of exhortation ; after which 
he himself took the floor, and, addressing himself 
to the Christians, said to them : ' ' Let us take cour- 
age, my brothers; let us hold firm, let us sa}' our 
prayers every day, let us not be ashamed. If one of 
us prays alone, shame will finally cause him to be 
silent; if we pray all together, we shall be the 
stronger for it, and perhaps by our example the Pa- 
gans will pray as we do." When they were about to 
start, they went all together to the Chapel ; and, their 
prayer ended, they betook themselves to the frozen 
stream. There they form in a ring, and, their Cap- 
tains having harangued them, they sing and dance 
in the sight of the French who were in the fort. 
They made a smart appearance, dressed like soldiers, 
'and somewhat as in a masquerade of France. Some 
had their faces painted with red, others with blue, 
others with black, some with all the colors. They 
had javelins with handles, in the shape of a half- 
pike; many had corselets, stitched, and interlaced 
with small sticks; others had shields made of wood. 
There were some who had [184] arquebuses, — all 
had their feet equipped with good snowshoes, to run 
on the snows ; their legs are the purveyors of their 
army. They do not usually eat while on the way, 
save the animals which they encounter and kill. 
They had with them a woman, who had escaped the 
preceding year from the hands and the country of 
the Hyroquois; she was to lead them to the places 
where the enemy have been accustomed to carry on 
their hunt during the Winter. Behold them, then, 
setting out gayly, without apprehension of the 



206 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.24 

eres en chemin : mais les Payens qui auoient promis 
de ne faire aucune fuperftition, confulterent le diable 
k leiir mode, approchans du pays des ennemis, & ils 
fe diuiferent & firent deux petites bandes dont I'vne 
euft quelque fuccez, I'autre fut furprife la nuidt dans 
fon fommeil, fans [185] faire le guet. Au bruidt de 
I'ennemy, & aux coups des arquebufes, chacun s'ef- 
ueille, & fe voyant rudement attaqu^, prend la fuitte: 
quelques-vns furent tuez fur la place, les autres s'ef- 
chaperent k demy nuds, quelques-vns eurent les pieds 
gelez iuf ques aux os : ils rencontrerent de bon-heur 
r habitation de Mont- Real, ou ils furent receus auec 
beaucoup de charite, fans cela, ils eftoient morts, & 
ce fut auffi vn coup heureux pour leur ame, comme 
ie diray cy-apres: cette ieune femme qui les condui- 
foit fe fauua pendant la meflee, elle ne reueint que 
long-temps apres les autres, fuyant loing dans les 
bois: elle n'auoit ny bonnet, ny foiiilliers, ny man- 
ches, ny bas de chauffes: pour tout habit, elle n'auoit 
qu'vn bout de couuerture, qui k peine luy couuroit la 
moiti6 du corps contre le froid extreme : elle marcha 
trente iours en cet eftat, fur la neige, fans voir vne 
eftincelle de feu : on ne f^ait ce qu'elle a peu manger 
durant ce temps-Ik: elle paffa vis a vis de I'habitation 
de Montreal, de I'autre cofte de la grande Riuiere, & 
y demeura fix ou [186] fept iours k crier tant qu'elle 
pouuoit, afin qu'on la vint paffer : mais voyant qu'elle 
n'eftoit pas entendue: elle fut en fin contrainte de 
tirer vers le fort de Richelieu, oii elle arriua "k demy- 
morte : la charite des Fran9ois luy rendill la vie & 
les forces: cent hommes (difoient quelques-vns) 
fullent morts des trauaux, qui n'ont peu tuer vne 
femme. 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 207 

horrible toils and of the intolerable cold, — having no 
other retreat than the woods, nor other bed than the 
snow and the ice, and being constrained to spend 
several days without making fire, for fear of being 
discovered. The Christians steadfastly said their 
prayers by the way ; but the Pagans, who had prom- 
ised to perform no superstitious rite, consulted the 
devil in their fashion, on approaching the enemy's 
country. They separated, and formed two small 
bands, one of which had some success ; the other was 
surprised at night in its sleep, without [185] keeping 
watch. At the noise of the enemy, and at the shots 
of the arquebuses, each one awakes, and seeing him- 
self rudely attacked, takes flight. Some were killed 
on the spot, the others escaped, half naked ; some 
had their feet frozen even to the bone. Fortunately, 
they came upon the settlement of Mont-Real, where 
they were received with much charity. But for that, 
they were dead ; and it was also a happy event for 
their souls, — as I shall tell hereafter. That young 
woman who was guiding them escaped during the 
fight ; she returned only a long time after the others, 
fleeing far into the woods. She had neither cap, nor 
shoes, nor sleeves, nor stockings; for all clothing, 
she had only a bit of blanket, which hardly protected 
half her body against the extreme cold. She walked 
thirty days in this condition, over the snow, without 
seeing a spark of fire ; there is no knowing what she 
could have eaten during that time. She passed 
opposite the settlement of Montreal, on the other side 
of the great River, and stayed there six or [186] 
seven days, shouting as loudly as she could, so that 
they might come and ferry her across; but seeing 
that she was not heard, she was finally constrained 



208 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

Vn des Algonquins de I'lfle ayant rencontr6 vn des 
Chreftiens de deuers Quebec, il en fut fi bien edifie, 
qu'il paffa quali toute la nuidt ^ I'entendre parler de 
Dieu, arriuant de la k Richelieu, il va trouuer le 
Pere, & luy racompte cet entretien qu'auec beau- 
coup de confolation ce bon homme faifoit: il me 
difoit, courage, quittons nos vieilles couftumes, nous 
voyons bien que nous eftions des aueugles, nos yeux 
commencent de s'ouurir, ne les f ermons plus : cette 
vie n'efl pas longue, ne fais plus aucune mauuaife 
fuperftition, defiie toy de tes Compatriotes les Algon- 
quins de Ik-haut, ils ne font pas portez "k la foy, [187] 
& tons ceux qui femblent parmy eux approuuer les 
prieres, ne les ayment pas: garde toy de les imiter, 
& li tu veux croire, fais-le de coeur. Voila, dit-il, 
les difcours que m'a tenu c6t homme, nous y auons 
employe vne bonne partie de la nuidt : cela me tient 
bien au coeur. 

Toutes ces bonnes adtions eftoient grandement tra- 
uerf ees par la mefchante vie de ces miferables Algon- 
quins, d'en haut, ce n'eftoient que fuperftitions, par- 
my eux ce n'eftoient qu'iniures & calomnies enuers 
nos Chreftiens. Le Pere auec fa petite troupe de 
fidelles les combattoit puiflamment, tantoft ^ force 
de raifons, tantoft en fe riant de leurs fottifes : cela 
les faifoit mourir de depit. C'eft chofe eftrange 
difoient-ils, que depuis que la priere eft entree dans 
nos cabanes, nos anciennes couftumes ne nous fer- 
uent plus de rien : & ce pendant nous mourrons tons 
k caufe que nous les quittons. Fay veu le temps, 
difoit vn d'eux, que mes fonges eftoient vrays, quand 
i'auois veu des [188] Orignaux ou des Caftors en 
dormant, i'en prenois. Quand nos Deuins fentoient 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 209 

to move toward the fort of Richelieu, where she 
arrived half dead. The charity of the French 
restored her life and her strength ; a hundred men 
(said some) would have died from the hardships 
which could not kill one woman. 

One of the Algonquins of the Island, having met 
one of the Christians from near Quebec, was so much 
edified that he spent nearly all the night in hearing 
him speak of God. Arriving thence at Richelieu, 
he goes to find the Father, and relates to him this 
conversation, which that good man held with him to 
his great comfort: " He said to me, ' Courage; let us 
give up our old customs. We see well that we were 
blind; our eyes are beginning to open, let us not 
close them again. This life is not long ; practice no 
more any evil superstition. Beware of thy fellow 
Countrymen, the upper Algonquins: they are not 
inclined to the faith, [187] and not all those among 
them who seem to approve the prayers, love them. 
Take care not to imitate them, and if thou wilt 
believe, do so heartily.' Such," said he, " were the 
words addressed to me by that man ; we spent a good 
part of the night thus; that possesses my heart." 

All these good deeds were greatly thwarted by the 
wicked conduct of those wretched upper Algon- 
quins, — there was nothing but superstitions among 
them ; there was naught but outrages and calumnies 
against our Christians. The Father, with his little 
band of faithful ones, vigorously opposed them, — 
now by dint of arguments, again by ridiculing their 
foolish notions; that made them die with spite. " It 
is a strange thing," said they, "that since prayer 
has come into our cabins, our former customs are no 
longer of any service ; and yet we shall all die because 



210 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.24 

venir Tennemy, cel^ fe trouuoit veritable: on fe dif- 
pofoit k le receuoir; maintenant, nos fonges & nos 
propheties ne font plus veritables, la priere nous a 
tout gaft6: d'autres s'en prenant k nous des chafti- 
ments que Dieu leur enuoyoit, difoient : nous voyons 
bien que Dieu eft fafcli6 contre nous, & qu'il a rai- 
fon: car nous ne faifons pas ce qu'il dit, dautant qu'il 
nous femble difficile, nous luy defobeiffons : & ainli 
il entre en colere contre nous & nous tue : mais vous 
autres vous en eftes la caufe : Car fi vous demeuriez 
en voftre pays fans nous parler de Dieu, il ne nous 
diroit mot, puifque nous ne le cognoiftrions pas, n'y 
fes volontez : vous feriez done bien mieux de vous 
en retourner en voftre pays, & de demeurer en repos : 
car c'eft vous qui nous tuez, deuant que vous vinfiez 
icy, les Frangois ne difoient point tant de prieres : ils 
ne faifoient que le figne de la Croix, & encor tous ne 
le [189] f9auoient pas faire: ils n'auoient point toutes 
ces prieres que vous introduifez, c'eft vous qui auez 
amene toutes ces nouueautez, & qui les apprenez aux 
Sauuages & leur renuerfez la ceruelle & les faidtes 
mourir, & encor fi vous n'appelliez aux prieres que 
de dix iours en dix iours vne fois, on auroit quelque 
relafche: mais vous n'auez efgard ny ^ pluye ny ^ 
neige, ny k froid, tous les iours on vous entend crier 
aux prieres: c'eft chofe eftrange que vous ne pouuez 
demeurer en repos, le Pere leur remonftroit que fi on 
ne les enfeignoit, & qu'on les laiffaft dans le repos 
qu'ils difent-ils brufleroient eternellement dansl'En- 
fer, & que le danger de leur Salut nous obligeoit de 
les preff er : mais la plus part s'opiniaftroient dauan- 
tage, & enragoient de d^pit contre le Pere, & difoiet 
qu'il eftoit plus grand forcier que leurs gens, qu'il 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 211 

we give them up." " I have seen the time," said one 
of them, " when my dreams were true; when I had 
seen [188] Moose or Beavers in sleep, I would take 
some. When our Soothsayers felt the enemy coming, 
that came true; there was preparation to receive 
him. Now, our dreams and our prophecies are no 
longer true, — prayer has spoiled everything for us." 
Others, blaming us for the punishments which God 
was sending them, said: " We see well that God is 
angry at us, and that he is right, — for we do not do 
what he says ; inasmuch as it seems hard to us, we 
disobey him, and so he becomes angry with us and 
kills us. But you, you are the cause of it: for if you 
had lived in your own country without speaking to 
us of God, he would not say a word to us, since we 
would not know him or his will. You would then do 
much better to return to your country and live at 
rest; for it is you who kill us. Before you came 
here, the French did not say so many prayers ; they 
only made the sign of the Cross, and even then, all 
did not [189] know how to make it. They did not 
have all those prayers which you are introducing ; it 
is you who have brought in all these novelties, and 
who teach them to the Savages, and overturn their 
brains and make them die. Besides, if you called to 
prayers only once in ten days, we would have some 
respite: but you have no regard to either rain, or 
snow, or cold ; every day you are heard shouting for 
the prayers. It is a strange thing that you cannot 
remain quiet. " The Father remonstrated with them, 
that if one did not teach them, and if one left them in 
the quiet that they mentioned, they would burn eter- 
nally in Hell, and that the danger of their Salvation 
obliged us to urge them. But the majority became 



-212 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

en falloit deffaire le pays, qu'ils auoient affomm6 
trois forciers k I'lfle, qui n'auoient pas tant faidt de 
mal que luy : on eut quelque peur qu'ils n'executaffent 
leur mauuaife penfee: mais la Diuine bonte ne le 
permit pas, [190] ains an contraire elle tira de grands 
bies de leur malice: car cet apoftat dont i'ay parl6 
cy-deuant, voyant ce refroidiffement des Fran9ois, & 
fur tout de Monfieur de Chamflour enuers luy & 
enuers tons ceux qui perfecutoient la Foy, feignit de 
s'y monftrer affecftionne, & donna quelque tefmoi- 
gnage de fe vouloir conuertir. Le lieur de Cham- 
flour pour I'obliger dauantage, luy dona dequoy faire 
feftin a fes gens: c'eft la d'ordinaire qu'ils mani- 
feflent leurs volontez : mais ce miferable au lieu de 
fe declarer du party de lefus-Chrift, fe monftra plus 
que iamais du party du Diable, & cria dans le feftin 
contre la priere, & contre ceux qui fe faifoiet bapti- 
fer: cette perfidie depleut extremement non feule- 
ment aux Sauuages Chreftiens, plufieurs defquels 
eftoiet du banquet : mais encor aux Payens mefmes, 
dont I'vn des principaux, & qui auoit efl6 des plus 
obftinez vint chez nous fe declarer ouuertement & 
■demader le baptefme : mo pere, dit-il, ie fuis du no- 
bre des croyats, e'en eft faidt h. prefent il y a long 
teps que ie vo^ efcoute, ie ne vo^ ay iamais dit bap- 
tifez [191] moy, ie le dis maintenat, ie ne peux fouf- 
frir la perfidie de cet home, ie veux eftre baptife, & 
le cotrecarer s'il ne fe red. Le pere luy refpodit r 
vous venez en bon teps demander le baptefme, quand 
il eft perfecut^ : c'eft la marque d'vn bo coeur : faidtes 
feftin & declarez voftre volonte; il n'y manque pas, 
les conuiez affembles, il s'efcrie: il y a plus de cinq 
.ans que ie refifte ^ Dieu, ie trouuois bonne la dodtrine 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 215- 

still more obstinate, and were furious with spite 
against the Father, and said that he was a greater 
sorcerer than their own people ; that the country must 
be cleared of such ; that they had clubbed three sor- 
cerers at the Island, who had not done so much harm 
as he. There was some fear lest they should carry 
out their evil thought : but the Divine goodness did 
not permit it, — [190] on the contrary, it drew great 
benefits from their malice. For that apostate of 
whom I have previously spoken — seeing this cold- 
ness of the French, and especially of Monsieur de 
Chamflour, toward him and toward all those who 
were persecuting the Faith — feigned to show him- 
self favorable toward it, and gave some indication 
of wishing to become converted. The sieur de 
Chamflour, in order to oblige him further, gave him 
wherewith to make a feast for his people, — it is 
there, as a rule, that they manifest their intentions ; 
but this wretch, instead of declaring himself on the 
side of Jesus Christ, showed himself more than ever 
on the side of the Devil, and, at the feast, denounced 
prayer, and those who were going to be baptized. 
This treachery not only very greatly displeased the 
Christian Savages, several of whom were at the 
feast, but even the Pagans themselves, — of whom 
one of the principal men, who had been among the 
most obstinate, came to us to declare himself openly, 
and to request baptism. " My father," said he, " I 
am of the number of the believers : it is all settled, 
now. I have listened to you for a long time, — I 
have never said to you, ' Baptize [191] me; ' I say so 
now. I cannot suffer that man's treachery ; I wish 
to be baptized, and to thwart him unless he gives in." 
The father answered him : ' ' You come at a good 



214 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

que les Peres enf eignoient : mais elle me fembloit 
difficile & ne pouuois me refoudre de la fuiure : le 
coup eft iett6, c'eft tout de bon: ie veux eftre bap- 
tife & obeyr h. Dieu: c'eft pour vous declarer mon 
delTein que ie vous ay inuitez, il employa encore 
quelque temps k fe faire inftruire, & puis fut baptif6 
auec beaucoup de confolation de fon cofte & du 
noftre. 

Vn autre Sauuage dot la femme eftoit defia Chre- 
ftienne, le fuiuit au baptefme, auec vne fiene petite 
fille, celuy-cy eftoit d'vn fort bon naturel & doux, 
vif au refte & des meilleurs coureurs d'entr'eux: 
auant qu'il fuft baptife, le fieur de Norma[n]uille luy 
demanda s'il n'auoit iamais [192] eu auerfion de la 
Foy, ouy dit-il, quant on me parloit de Dieu. Ie me 
riotte [sc. riois] maintenant, c'eft tout mon contente- 
ment d'en entendre parler, & ie fuis fafche en mon 
coeur quand ie vois quelqu'vn, qui ne veut pas efcou- 
ter fa parolle, il me femble que depuis que ie veux 
croire, ie deuiens cholere, & que ie le feray tout h. 
faidt, quand ie feray baptife : car ie ne pourray fuppor- 
ter qu'on dife rien contre Dieu, & qu'on mefprife la 
priere, le malheureux apoftat mouroit de depit, de 
voir ces bonnes a(5tions que Dieu tiroit de fes man- 
uals delleins, la bonte & iuftice diuine fe firent lors 
paroiftre enfemble fur cet home, par I'entremife de 
la mere des mifericordes, h. qui on eut recours : car 
on prioit Dieu fans celTe pour luy. Au plus fort de 
fon impiete, le voila faifi en vn inftant par tout le 
corps d'vne douleur li pergate & fi violente qu'elle 
approchoit de la rage & de la fureur : il eft entiere- 
ment abattu : mais no pour cela gagne encore k Dieu 
le corps eft dompte: mais I'ame perfifte en fa malice. 



1642-43] RELATION OF ib42-43 215 

time to request baptism, when it is persecuted ; that 
is the token of a good heart. Make a feast, and de- 
clare your intention." In this he fails not ; the guests 
assembled, he exclaims: " For more than five years 
I have resisted God; I found the doctrine good, 
which the Fathers were teaching, but it seemed hard 
to me, and I could not resolve to follow it. The die 
is cast, it is all in earnest; I wish to be baptized and 
obey God, — it is to declare to you my purpose, that 
I have invited you." He spent some time further in 
being instructed, and was then baptized, with much 
consolation on his side and on ours. 

Another Savage, whose wife was already a Chris- 
tian, followed him to baptism, together with a little 
girl of his. This man was very good-natured and 
gentle; quick withal, and one of the best runners 
among them. Before he was baptized, the sieur de 
Norman ville asked him if he had never [192] had 
aversion for the Faith. ' ' Yes, ' ' he said, ' * when they 
spoke to me of God, I laughed in scorn. Now, it is 
my whole contentment to hear him spoken of, and I 
am grieved in my heart when I see any one who is 
not willing to listen to his word. It seems to me 
that, since I have chosen to believe, I become angry, 
and that I shall be so altogether, when I shall be 
baptized ; for I shall not be able to endure that they 
say aught against God, and that they despise prayer. 
The wretched apostate was dying with chagrin to 
see these good results which God was deriving from 
his bad designs. The divine goodness and justice 
then conjointly appeared upon this man, through the 
mediation of the mother of mercies, to whom they 
had recourse : for they prayed to God for him with- 
out ceasing. At the climax of his impiety, behold 



216 LES RELATIONS DBS J^SUITES [Vol.24 

on enuoye appeller le Pere pour le voir, il y vient & 
le regarde [193] comme vn obiecit de la cholere de 
Dieu, & dans des poftiires d'vn homme qui fouffre 
vn petit Enfer: ce n'eft point la maladie qui me tiet, 
difoit-il, ie n'y auois aucune difpofition, c'eft le 
Demon qui me caufe ces douleurs, par I'etremife de 
quelqu'vn, on me procure la mort: il vouloit accufer 
le Pere d'eftre caufe de fon mal, fon frere qui eil;oit 
Ik prefent, en difoit autant, le Pere fe mift la dellus 
k declarer come la Loy de Dieu, nous deffendoit de 
procurer & mefme delirer du mal a persone, qu'il 
offenferoit Dieu s'il leur fouhaittoit la maladie ou la 
mort ; qu'au contraire il fouhaittoit & procuroit leur 
bien, qu'au refte il fe pouuoit bien faire que cette 
maladie ne fuft pas naturelle que Dieu voyoit tout, 
qu'il iettoit les yeux fur luy, quand il crioit contre 
les prieres qu'il efcoutoit toutes fes paroles, qu'il 
penetroit dedas fon coeur, qu'il luy donnoit ce coup 
pour luy faire recognoiftre fa faute, que les douleurs 
qu'il fouffroit & eflimoit infuportables n'eftoient rien, 
en comparaifon des horribles fupplices qu'il fouffri- 
roit aux Enfers, s'il continuoit das fes perfidies que 
[194] s'il vouloit fe recognoiftre, Dieu n'eftoit que 
douceur, & luy feroit mif ericorde : cela fift impreflion 
fur fon efprit, & [il] fupplia le Pere de prier Dieu pour 
luy, «& de I'enfeigner, le mal luy dura quelque, iours, 
pendant lefquels nos Peres I'affiflerent de tout leur 
poffible, & le recommanderent inftamment "k la tres- 
faindte Vierge, il guerit foudainement comme il eftoit 
foudainement tombe malade : depuis ce temps-Ik, il 
ne fift plus rien cotre la Foy, ains au contraire il fe 
mift k la proteger, 1 'autre chef aufsi nom6 Teil^eatch 
fut efpouuant^, & n'ofa remuer dauantage. Sur la 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 217 

him instantly seized throughout his body with a pain 
so piercing and so violent that it bordered on rage 
and fury; he is utterly prostrated, but not, as yet, 
thereby gained to God. The body is conquered, but 
the soul persists in its malice. They send to call the 
Father to see him ; he comes thither and sees him, 
[193] as it were, an object of the wrath of God, and 
in the attitude of a man who suffers a little Hell. 
" It is not the sickness which holds me," said he, " I 
had no tendency toward that. It is the Demon who 
causes me these pains ; by the agency of some one, 
they are procuring my death." He sought to accuse 
the Father of being the cause of his trouble; his 
brother, who was there present, said the like. The 
Father proceeded thereupon to declare how the Law 
of God forbade us to procure, or even to desire, harm 
to any one ; that it would offend God if he should 
wish them sickness or death ; that, on the contrary, 
he was desiring and procuring their good ; that, in 
fine, it might well be that this sickness was not nat- 
ural, — that God saw everything, and was casting his 
eyes upon him when he denounced the prayers ; that 
God listened to all his words ; that he penetrated with- 
in his heart ; that he gave him this blow, in order to 
make him recognize his fault ; that the pains which 
he suffered, and accounted intolerable, were nothing 
in comparison with the horrible tortures that he would 
suffer in Hell, if he continued in his treacheries; 
that, [194] if he would come to his senses, God was 
altogether mildness, and would show him mercy. 
That made an impression on his mind, and he 
entreated the Father to pray to God for him and to 
teach him. The pain remained with him several 
days, during which our Fathers assisted him in all 



218 



LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 24 



fin de Feurier, ils partirent tous deux du Fort de 
Richelieu, auec vne petite trouppe de leurs gens, 
pour aller k I'lfle de Montreal, ils arriuerent k 1' ha- 
bitation nomm^e Ville-Marie fur le commencement 
de Mars Ik oti les Peres du Perron & Poncet qui y 
ont hyuern6, les voyant plus fouples & qui tefmoi- 
gnoient vne particuliere affectio k ce lieu, & fouhait- 
toient de s'y habituer, trouuerent "k propos de les 
baptifer auec plufleurs de leurs gens comme nous 
verrons au Chapitre fuiuant. 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 219 

possible ways, and urgently commended him to the 
most blessed Virgin. He recovered suddenly, as he 
had suddenly fallen sick ; from that time he did noth- 
ing more against the Faith, but, on the contrary, he 
began to protect it. The other chief, too, named 
Tessweatch, was awed, and dared not stir further. 
Toward the end of February, they both started from 
Fort Richelieu, with a small band of their people, in 
order to go to the Island of Montreal. They arrived 
at the settlement named Ville- Marie, toward the be- 
ginning of March ; and there. Fathers du Perron and 
Poncet, who have wintered there, — seeing them 
more tractable and manifesting a special liking for 
that place, and desiring to resort thither, — found it 
opportune to baptize them, with several of their 
people, as we shall see in the Chapter following. 



220 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 24 



[195] CHAPITRE XL 

DE CE QUI S'EST PASSE A MONTREAL. 

CEST ^ prefent que Ton voit les vceux de Tan- 
cienne France exaucez, & que le temps de 
grace eft venu en ce bout du monde, ou la 
fagelle & bont6 Diuine commence k fe faire fentir li 
benignement dans les coeurs, que fans bruit, & fans 
voix les anciens habitans de ces contrees y font inui- 
tez & attirez fortement par les chaifnes d'amour, que 
le f eul S. Efprit imprime dans leurs coeurs : ils enuoy- 
oient icy de toutes parts, leurs couriers pour nous 
alfeurer qu'ils fe veulent rendre aux touches du Ciel, 
& s'arrefter pour ce fubiet en ce lieu, tous de compa- 
gnie. Nos PP. des Hurons nous ont efcrit que les 
Sauuages de leur quartier, y auroient deuace les 
Fra9ois, s'ils y eufset peu trouuer vn lieu d'alfurance, 
ou azyle tel que [196] celuy qui y eft defia k prefent, 
quoy que petit, en comparaifon de ce qui eft ^ efpe- 
rer k I'auenir. Ils mandent qu'ils font perpetuelle- 
ment "k en parler, & que toft ou tard ils y viendront 
tous: nonobftant la crainte des Iroquois, fi Ton y eft 
fort de fecours temporel contre I'ennemy : voila de 
belles moiffons. 

Le gros des Frangois qui font icy, eft compofd de 
gens bien differents k la verity de condition d'aage 
& de naturels, pour eftre quafi tous de diuers pays : 
mais ils ne font qu'vn en volonte, vifans tous k vn 
mefme but de la gloire de Dieu, & au falut de ces 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 221 



[195] CHAPTER XI. 

OF OCCURRENCES AT MONTREAL. 

IT is now that we see the prayers of old France 
heard, and that the time of grace has come to 
this end of the world, — where the Divine 
wisdom and goodness begins to make itself felt so 
benignly in hearts that, without noise and without 
speech, the former inhabitants of these countries are 
invited to it and strongly drawn by the chains of 
love, which the Holy Ghost alone is fastening upon 
their hearts. They sent here their messengers from 
every direction, to assure us that they wish to yield 
to the influences of Heaven, and, for that purpose, 
to settle in this place, all in company. Our Fathers 
with the Hurons have written to us that the Savages 
of their quarter would have anticipated the French 
here, if they could have found a place of safety, or 
asylum, such as [196] the one which is already there 
at present, though small in comparison with what is 
to be hoped for the future. They send word that 
they are perpetually speaking of it, and that sooner or 
later they will all come thither, notwithstanding the 
dread of the Iroquois, if there is strong temporal 
succor against the enemy. Behold glorious harvests. 
The bulk of the French who are here is composed 
of people very different, indeed, in respect to age 
and character, — almost as if they were all of differ- 
ent countries. But they are only one in intention, all 
living for one and the same object, the glory of God, 



222 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.24 

pauures Sauuages, & ie puis dire que leur vertu a 
feruy k la conuerlion de plufieurs qui ont efl6 gagnez 
^ Dieu par I'affedtion qu'ils leur ont tefmoigne. Croy- 
riez vous bien que plulieurs des ouuriers qui trauail- 
lerent icy, d^s leur depart de France ne fe font pro- 
pof6 autre motif que celuy de la gloire de Dieu, & 
de leur falut en vn lieu retire des occafions de mal 
faire? la feule penfee qu'ils contribuent autant qu'ils 
peuuent au falut des ames, les fait trauailler de fi bon 
courage, qu'il ne leur arriue [197] iamais de fe plain- 
dre. Aulli ont ils efl6 coduits par vn Getil-bomme 
de merite, que Dieu femble auoit tres-particuliere- 
ment infpir^, & appelle pour le feruir en ce lieu, tant 
il a d'afife(5tion, & pour I'eflabliffement de la Colonic, 
& pour le falut des Sauuages : il me fuffit de dire que 
c'eft Monlieur de Chomadeu de Maifon-neufue : fa 
modeftie ne me permettant pas d'en dire dauantage. 
Depuis le depart des vailTeaux de I'an pafle, vne 
des chofes des plus remarquable, qui fe trouue dan& 
I'habitation de Montreal, eft la grande vnion, & la 
bonne intelligence de tous ceux qui y demeurent. 
II y a enuiron cinquante cinq perfonnes de diuers 
pays, de differentes humeurs, de diuerfes conditions, 
& tous d'vn mefme coeur & dans vn mefme dellein 
de feruir Dieu. Chacun s'eft fi bien acquitte de fon 
deuoir enuers Dieu & les hommes, qu'on n'a trouu6 
aucun fubiedt de fe plaindre, I'efpace de dix mois 
entiers: le commandement a efte doux & efficace, 
Tobeiflance ayfee, & la deuotion aymee de tous vni- 
uerfellemet. Si bien que celuy qui commande dans 
[198] cette habitation a receu vne fatisfadlion grade- 
de fes ges, tat des fujets que de leur Capitaine, & 
ceux qui gouuernet I'Eglife, vn cotetemet entier des 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 223 

and for the salvation of these poor Savages; and I 
may say that their virtue has served for the conver- 
sion of many, who have been won over to God through 
the affection which these have betokened for them. 
Could you really believe that several of the work- 
men who labored here, from the time of their depar- 
ture from France have entertained no other motive 
than that of the glory of God, and of their salvation 
in a place withdrawn from occasions of evil-doing? 
The very thought that they are contributing, as far 
as they can, to the salvation of souls, makes them 
work with such good courage, that it never occurs to 
them [197] to complain. Moreover, they have been 
conducted by a Gentleman of merit, whom God 
seems to have most specially inspired, and called to 
serve him in this place, — so much affection has he, 
for both the establishment of the Colony and the sal- 
vation of the Savages, It is enough for me to say that 
this is Monsieur de Chomadeu de Maison-neufve, — his 
modesty not permitting me to say more. 

Since the departure of the vessels, last year, one 
of the most notable things which prevails in the 
habitation of Montreal is the thorough unity and the 
good understanding among all those who dwell there. 
There are about fifty-five persons of various coun- 
tries, different temperaments, and diverse condi- 
tions, — and all of the same heart, and with the same 
design of serving God. Each one has so well dis- 
charged his duty toward God and men, that no cause 
of complaint has been found, in the space of ten 
whole months. The government has been gentle 
and efficient, obedience easy, and worship universally 
loved by all, — so much so, that he who commands in 
[198] this settlement has received a great satisfaction 



224 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

vns & des autres. On y a frequents les Sacremes, 
auec profit, efcoute la parole de Dieu auec affiduite, 
& continue les prieres ordinaires auec edification: 
I'exemple de M. de Maifon-neufue, «& des autres 
perfonnes de confideration, qui font-la, n'ont pas peu 
contribu6 k cela. Les Sauuages voyans vne fi grande 
paix entre les Fran9ois, en ont eft6 bien edifiez ont 
ay me leur vertu, & en ont bien parle. 

Dieu nous a fait voir le foin qu'il a de cette habita- 
tion, la deffendant cet hyuer contre les eaux, qui par 
vne creiie extraordinaire la menacerent d'vne ruine 
totale, s'il n'en n'euft par fa prouidence arrefte le 
cours : elles couurirent vn peu de temps les prairies 
& les lieux voifins du fort : chacun f e retire k la veiie 
de cette inondation qui s'augmentoit toufiours dans 
I'endroit le plus affeure, on a recours aux prieres. 
Monfieur de Maifon-neufue fe fent poulI6 interieure- 
met, d'aller planter vne Croix au bord de la [199] pe- 
tite riuiere, au pied de laquelle eft baftie 1' habitation, 
qui commen9oit k fe deborder, pour prier fa diuine 
Maieft6 de la retenir dans fon lieu ordinaire, fi cela 
deuoit eftre pour fa gloire, ou de leur faire cognoiftre 
le lieu, ou il vouloit eftre feruy par ces Melfieurs de 
Montreal, a fin d'y mettre le principal eftablifl^e- 
ment, au cas qu'il permit que les eaux vinfent h. 
perdre ce qu'on venoit de comencer: il propofa auffi- 
toft ce f entimet aux Peres, qui le trouuerent bon : il 
I'efcrit fur vn morceau de papier, le fait lire publi- 
quement, afin qu'on recognufl la purete de fon inte- 
tion, s'en va planter la Croix, que le P. benift, au 
bord de la riuiere auec I'efcrit qu'il attache au pied: 
s'e retourne auec promelle qu'il fait h. Dieu, de porter 
vne Croix luy feul fur la montagne de Mot-royal: 



1642-43] RELATION OF i64£-43 225 

from his people, — from the subordinates as well as 
from their Captain; — and those who govern the 
Church, entire contentment from all parties. The 
people have frequented the Sacraments there with 
profit, listened to the word of God with diligence, 
and continued the usual prayers with edification. 
The example of Monsieur de Maison-neufve, and of 
the other persons of distinction who are there, has 
not a little contributed thereto. The Savages, see- 
ing so great peace among the French, have been 
much edified by it, have loved their virtue, and have 
spoken well of it. 

God has shown us the care that he has for this 
settlement, by defending it this winter against the 
waters, which, in an uncommon flood, threatened it 
with total ruin, if he had not, by his providence, 
stayed their course. They covered, for a little while, 
the meadows and the places near the fort ; at the 
sight of this inundation, which was continually 
increasing, every one withdraws into the safest place. 
They have recourse to prayers. Monsieur de Mai- 
son-neufve feels himself inwardly prompted to go 
and plant a Cross at the edge of the [199] little river, — 
at the foot of which the settlement is built, and which 
was beginning to overflow, — in order to entreat his 
divine Majesty to confine it in its usual place, if that 
should be for his glory; or to acquaint them with 
the place where he wished to be served by those 
Gentlemen of Montreal, — to the end of establishing 
the principal settlement there, in case he permitted 
that the waters should come to destroy the one that 
had just been started. He forthwith proposed this 
sentiment to the Fathers, who found it good; he 
writes it on a piece of paper, has it read publicly, so 



226 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

s'il luy plaifl accorder fa demande. Les eaux neant- 
moins ne laifTerent pas de palTer outre : Dieu voulant 
efprouuer leur foy. On les voyoit rouler de groffes 
vagues, coup fur coup, remplir les foflez du fort, & 
monter iufques k la porte de I'habitatio, & fembler 
deuoir engloutir tout fans [200] refource: chacun 
regarde ce fpedlacle fans trouble, fans crainte, fans 
murmure; quoy que ce fut au cceur de I'Hyuer, en 
plein minuidt, & lors mefme qu'on celebre la Naif- 
f ance du Fils de Dieu en terre : ledit fieur de Maif on- 
neufue ne perd pas courage, efpere voir bien-tofl 
I'effet de fa priere, qui ne tarda guere: car les eaux 
apres s'eflre arreftees peu de teps au feiiil de la porte, 
fans croiftre dauantage, fe retirerent peu k peu, met 
les habitans hors de danger, & le Capitaine dans 
I'execution de fa promeffe. 

II employe fans delay fes ouuriers, les vns h. faire 
le chemin, les autres ^ couper les arbres ; les autres 
k faire la Croix, luy-mefme met la main k I'oeuure, 
pour les encourager par fon exemple. Et le iour 
eftant venu, qui fut le iour des Roys, qu'on auoit. 
choifi pour cette ceremonie, on benifl la Croix, on 
fait Monfieur de Maifon neufue premier foldat de la 
Croix, auec toutes les ceremonies de I'Eglife, il la 
charge fur fon efpaule, quoy que tres-pefante, mar- 
che vne lieue entiere, charge de ce fardeau, fuiuant 
la Proceffion, & la plante fur la cime de la [201] mon- 
tagne. Le Pere du Perron y dift la MelTe, & Madame 
de la Pelletterie y communia la premiere. 

On adore la Croix & de belles Reliques qu'on y 
auoit enchalfe dedans, & depuis ce temps-la, ce lieu 
fut frequent^ par diners pelerinages. Ainfi il fem- 
ble que le zele, la deuotion, & la charite de tons ces 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 227 

that they might recognize the purity of his intention ; 
goes to plant the Cross, which the Father blesses, at 
the edge of the river, with the writing which he 
attaches to the foot. He returns, with a promise, 
which he makes to God, to bear a Cross himself alone 
upon the mountain of Mont-royal, if he please ta 
grant his request. The waters nevertheless con- 
tinued to pass beyond, God wishing to prove their 
faith. They were seen to roll great waves, one after 
the other, fill the moats of the fort, and rise even to 
the gate of the settlement, — seeming liable to swal- 
low up everything, without [200] remedy. Every 
one surveys this spectacle without agitation, without 
dread, without complaint, — although it was in the 
heart of the Winter, at full midnight, and at the 
very time when the Nativity of the Son of God is 
celebrated on earth. The said sieur de Maison- 
neufve does not lose courage and hopes soon to see 
the effect of his prayer, which was not long delayed ; 
for the waters, after having stopped a little while at 
the threshold of the gate, without swelling further, 
subsided by degrees, put the inhabitants out of danger, 
and set the Captain to the fulfillment of his promise. 
He employs the workmen, without delay, — some 
to make the road, others to cut the trees, others to 
make the Cross. He himself takes a hand in the 
work, in order to encourage them by his example. 
And the day having come, — it was Epiphany, which 
they had chosen for this ceremony, — they bless 
the Cross ; they make Monsieur de Maison neufve first 
soldier of the Cross, with all the ceremonies of the 
Church. He loads it upon his shoulder, although 
very heavy; walks a whole league, freighted with 
this burden, following the Procession ; and plants it 



228 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.24 

Meffieurs qui fe font affociez en France k ce pieux & 
noble delTein, s'eft refpandue & communiquee k tous 
ceux qui ont demeure par de-9k en leur habitation, 
lefquels ont efte touchez bien particulierement de 
Dieu, & ont tefmoigne auoir receu beaucoup de 
faueurs & graces du Ciel, puifque la vie qu'ils y ont 
menes I'Hyuer, a eft6 vne image de la primitiue 
Eglife. Tous y ont vefcu auec ioye, fouffrans les 
incommoditez d'vne nouuelle demeure, en vn pays 
defert, ou pas-vn n'a efle malade; ce qui ne s'eft 
encor iamais remarqu6 en aucune nouuelle habitation 
par de9k. Le lieu eft beau, la terre graffe, & les 
prairies en quantity : les Sauuages s'y plaifent ex- 
trem^ment, & y demeureroient volontiers, fi on auoit 
oft6 le danger des ennemis, [202] ou mefnage la paix 
auec eux : fans cela ie ne vols pas qu'il y ait moyen 
que les Sauuages s'y puilTent fixer & arrefter, ny 
que les Hurons ayent la liberty d'y defcendre, ny 
que la colonic des Franjois y puiffe profperer. Ie 
fuis oblige de parler auec cette fmcerite. 

Quant aux Sauuages qui ont frequente cette habita- 
tion: voicy ce que m'en efcrit le Pere du Peron, qui 
y a pafTe tout I'Hyuer; Ie puis dire auec verite qu'ils 
n'ont pas plutoft commence k cognoiftre la purete du 
dellein de MelTieurs de Mont-real, qu'ils en ont efte 
touchez viuement, la croyance qu'ils ont quafl par 
tout que Mont- Real n'eft eitably que pour le feul 
bien des Sauuages, eft le plus fort attrait, que Ton 
aye icy pour les porter k Dieu : ce font des chaif nes 
d'amour, qui nous les attachent fortement, & font 
qu'on ne trouue plus de refiftance dans leurs coeurs, 
comme par le paffe, lis difent tous que c'eft icy ou ils 
veulent croire & eftre baptifez, & non feulement ceux 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 229 

on the summit of the [201] mountain. Father du 
Perron said Mass there, and Madame de la Pelletterie 
was the first to receive communion there. 

They adore the Cross, and some honored Relics 
which they had enshrined in it ; and from that time 
this place was frequented in sundry pilgrimages. 
Thus it seems that the zeal, the devotion, and the 
charity of all those Gentlemen who have associated 
themselves in France with this pious and noble 
design, has been spread abroad and imparted to all 
those who have lived on this side in their settlement. 
These have been very specially moved by God, and 
have testified that they have received many favors 
and graces from Heaven, — since the life which they 
have led there, this Winter, has been a picture of the 
primitive Church. All have lived there with joy; 
though suffering the inconveniences of a new dwell- 
ing in a desert country, not one there has been sick^ 
which has thus far never been remarked in any new 
settlement on this side. The place is fair, the land 
rich, and the meadows abundant: the Savages are 
extremely well pleased with it, and would gladly live 
there, if the danger of the enemy were removed, 
[202] or peace with them concluded. Without that, 
I do not see that there is a way for the Savages to 
become fixed and settled there, or that the Hurons 
will have freedom to come down thither, or that the 
colony of the French can prosper there. I am obliged 
to speak with this frankness. 

As for the Savages who have frequented this set- 
tlement, here follows what is written to me of them, 
by Father du Peron, who has spent the whole Win- 
ter there: " I can say with truth, that they no sooner 
began to recognize the integrity of the purpose of 



230 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.24 

qui ont defia eu le bon-heur d'y demeur[er] ou paffer : 
mais mefme ceux des nations plus eloignees au deflus 
de nous, [203] par le feul recit qu'ils en ont ouy. 
Voicy ce qui s'eft palTe de plus remarquable k leur 
regard. 

Sur la fin de Feurier arriua k Mont- Real, vne bande 
de vingt-cinq hommes allans k la guerre contre les 
Iroquois, & les femmes & enfans s'arrefterent icy. 
A deux ou a trois iours de W voicy encore venir vne 
autre bande pour la chaffe, laquelle y eft fi excel- 
lente, que les Sauuages nous difent tons qu'ils y 
auroient demeure, il y a long-temps en grad nobre, 
s'ils y eulTent eu, comme "k prefent, vn lieu de refuge 
contre les Iroquois, nos proches voifms. Celuy qui 
conduifoit cette bade, a efte le premier homme qui 
y a efte baptife & mari6 en face d'Eglife : il fe nomme 
8mafafik8eie, & par fon nom de baptefme lofeph, 
pour luy faire porter le nom de la premiere famille 
que ces MefTieurs de Mont- Royal ont done pour les 
Sauuages: ceftui-cy n'auoit point encore paru a 
Mont- Royal, il venoit pour le cognoiftre, il I'euft 
fait en moins d'vn iour : car ayant entedu le deffein 
de cette habitation, il en fut foudain touch^, tefmoi- 
gna le dellr qu'il auoit de [204] s'arrefter enfin apres 
tant d'annees de vie vagabonde, aggrea les propofl- 
tions qu'on luy fift, d'vn champ, & de deux hommes 
qui y trauailleroient vne annee entiere pour le mettre 
en train, il demada inftamment d'eftre inftruit: 
comme on vift que cet homme y alloit tout de bo, 
fans differer, on le mena fur les lieux, ou il choifit 
luy-mefme la place, & y met tout aufll-toft fes deux 
hommes en befoigne. II fouhaittoit fort que fon 
oncle, Capitaine de la nation de I'lfle, celebre parmy 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 231 

Messieurs of Mont-real, than they were keenly 
touched by it. The belief which they have nearly 
everywhere, that Mont- Real is established only for 
the sole benefit of the Savages, is the strongest attrac- 
tion that we have here to incline them to God ; these 
are chains of love, which bind them to us potently, 
and cause resistance to be no longer found in their 
hearts, as in the past. They all say that here is 
where they will believe and be baptized, — and not 
only those who have already had the advantage of liv- 
ing or passing there, but even those of the more 
distant nations above us, [203] solely through the 
account that they have heard of it. Here follows 
what has occurred of most note with respect to them. 
" Toward the end of February, there arrived at 
Mont-Real a band of twenty-five men, going to the 
war against the Iroquois; and the women and chil- 
dren stopped here. Two or three days thereafter, 
lo, still another band comes, for the chase, which is 
so excellent there that the Savages all tell us that 
they would have lived there long ago, in great num- 
ber, if they had had there, as at present, a place of 
refuge against the Iroquois, our near neighbors. He 
who was leading this band was the first man to be 
baptized and married there conformably to the 
Church ; he is named Oumasasikweie, and in his bap- 
tismal name, Joseph, in order to have him bear the 
name of the first establishment which these Gentle- 
men of Mont- Royal have given for the Savages. 
This man had not yet appeared at Mont- Royal; he 
was coming to get acquainted with it, and had done 
so in less than one day, — for, having heard the pur- 
pose of this settlement, he was suddenly interested 
in it ; indicated the desire that he had of [204] at last 



232 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

ces nations, & nommemet celles d'en-haut, nomme 
Teff Delias, & des Fra5ois, le Borgne de I'lfle, fuft 
aduerty de la gratification qu'on luy faifoit, & nous 
prioit d'en efcrire par nos premieres lettres g'k-bas 
aux trois Riuieres, ou il deuoit aller : le bon-homme 
fuft bien eftonn6 de voir fon delir accompli, quali 
auffi-toft qu'il I'euft conceu: car pen de temps apres 
Teffyehas arriue fur les glaces, viet droit au Fort, & 
nous furprift. D'abord, il dift, qu'il venoit pour fe 
faire inftruire & baptifer : & entendat ce qu'on venoit 
de faire k fon nepueu, promet de s'arrefter icy, & luy 
& les fies: ^ 7. ou 8. iours de la, so nepueu 8mafafi- 
kyeie, [205] fe voyant prelle par fes gens de partir 
le ledemain pour aller ^ la chaff e, n'y voulut point 
aller fans Dieu : ainfi il en parla "k fa feme, & nous 
viennet prier de copagnie qu'6 les baptife, & marie 
ce mefme iour, ce que nous fifmes auec les circo- 
fpedtios, & inflruc5tios requifes, «& a ce necellaires en 
tel cas. M. de Maifon-neufue auec I'heritage de la 
premiere famille, luy dona le no de lofeph, & 
Madame de la Peltrie fa Marraine vne arquebufe, fa 
femme furnomee en fa lague MitigKkWe fut nomee 
leanne par M. de Pifeaux. De Ik nous tiros ces 2. 
Sauuages a part, pour leur parler particulieremet de 
Dieu, & entras das la chabre de m. de Maiso neufue 
ou eftoiet les pP cofiderables, ces bones ges comace- 
ret en leur prefence k no^* tefmoigner la ioye de leur 
coeur, de fe voir Chrefties, & Frangois, difoient-ils, 
iufques k en fouhaiter I'habit, & la demeure, & pour 
marque de la grace qu'ils auoiet receue, nous les 
vifmes qu'ils s'entredifoiet I'vn 1' autre, contre la 
refolutio de tous leurs gens qui deuoiet partir le 
ledemain, retardos no^ autres icy deux iours, pour 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 233 

settling down, after so many years of roving life: 
accepted the terms which they made him, of a field 
and of two men who should labor in it a full year, in 
order to put it in working condition ; and urgently 
requested to be instructed. As it was seen that this 
man was in good earnest, without delay they led him 
to the locality, where he himself chooses the place, 
and immediately sets his two men at work upon it. 
He greatly wished that his uncle, Captain of the 
nation of the Island, celebrated among these nations, 
and especially the upper ones, — named Tesswehas, 
and by the French, ' le Borgne of the Isle,* ^^ — should 
be apprised of the favor that was done to him ; and 
begged us to write of it by our first letters down here 
to the three Rivers, where he was to go. The good 
man was much astonished to see his desire fulfilled 
almost as soon as he had conceived it: for shortly 
after, Tesswehas arrives over the ice, comes straight 
to the Fort, and surprises us. At the outset, he 
said that he came to be instructed and baptized ; and 
hearing what they had just done for his nephew, 
promises to settle here, both himself and his family. 
About 7 or 8 days later, his nephew Oumasasikweie, 
[205] seeing himself urged by his people to start the 
next day in order to go to the hunt, would not go 
without God. He spoke of it, therefore, to his wife, 
and they came together to beg us that they be bap- 
tized and married that same day, — which we accorded, 
with the circumspection and instructions requisite 
and necessary thereto in such case. Monsieur de 
Maison-neufve, with the heritage of the first family, 
gave him the name of Joseph: and Madame de la 
Peltrie, his Godmother, an arquebus. His wife, 
sumamed in her language Mitigoukwe, was named 



234 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol. 24 

pouuoir Fefler pour la i. fois auec les Fran9ois, le 
[206] Dimanche qui eftoit le iour fuiuant. 

Le 9. iour de Mars le Borgne de I'lfle premier 
Capitaine de tous ces pays, & fa femme apres les dif- 
politions requifes pour le Baptefme le receuret enfin 
auec admiration de tous nos Fran9ois, & de tous ces 
gens qui auoient veu autrefois cet homme fi efloigne 
de ce qu'il faifoit, s'eflimant "k prefent heureux du 
nom de Chreflien, qu'on luy alloit donner. Monfieur 
de Maifon-Neufue auec Madamoifelle Manfe, le nom- 
merent Paul, & fa femme fut nommee Magdelaine 
par Madame de la Peltrie, & Monfieur de Puifeaux. 
Toutes les ceremonies en furent faites auec grande 
folemnit6 ^ caufe du grand progres qu'on en doit 
efperer, pour la gloire de Dieu. Le Pere Poncet par 
la k tout le monde de la grande bont6 de Dieu enuers 
cet homme : les larmes de ioye qui parurent fur plu- 
fieurs vifages firent bien cognoif[t]re que les coeurs 
eftoient remplis de contentement, le pere ne pouuoit 
quafi parler, tant il eftoit toucM. Apres qu'ils eurent 
receu la benedidtion du Mariage, Monfieur de Maifon- 
Neufue donna vne [207] belle arquebufe ^ Paul auec 
les chofes neceflaires pour s'en feruir, les fift difner 
auec nous, & apres difner, fift vn grand feftin a tous 
les Sauuages, oil tous les Frangois affifterent, qui 
eftoient fi refiouys qu'il n'eft pas pofsible de plus, 
de voir vne fi grande mifericorde de Dieu. L'on a 
toufiours eftim6 que le gain de c^t homme eftoit plus 
k prifer, que d'vn grand nombre d'autres, iamais on 
n'a dout6 que s'il fe conuertifl!oit vne fois, qu'il ne fift 
parfaidtement bien, veu les grands talents naturels 
que Dieu luy a donn6. Auparauant qu'il fuft Chre- 
ftien, Dieu luy auoit fait vne grande grace, k fgauoir 



1 642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 235 

Jeanne by Monsieur de Piseaux. Then we take these 

2 Savages aside, in order to speak to them privately 
of God ; and entering into the room of Monsieur de 
Maison neufve, where the most considerable persons 
were, these good people began, in their presence, to 
testify to us the joy of their hearts at seeing them- 
selves Christians, — and French, they said, even to 
desiring the dress and the dwelling of these. And, 
in token of the grace which they had received, we 
saw them exchange words together, opposing the 
resolution of all their people, who were to start the 
next day : ' Let us tarry here two days, in order to 
be able to Feast for the ist time with the French, on 
the [206] Lord's Day,' which was the day following. 

" The 9th day of March, le Borgne of the Isle, first 
Captain of all these countries, and his wife, after the 
preparations requisite for Baptism, finally received 
it, to the admiration of all our French, and of all 
those people who had formerly seen that man so 
removed from what he was now doing, — esteeming 
himself happy, at present, in the name of Christian, 
which they were about to give him. Monsieur de 
Maison-Neufve, with Mademoiselle Manse, named 
him Paul; and his wife was named Magdelaine by 
Madame de la Peltrie and Monsieur de Puiseaux. 
All the ceremonies thereof were performed with great 
solemnity, on account of the great progress which is 
to be hoped from them for the glory of God. Father 
Poncet spoke to all the people of the great goodness 
of God toward this man; the tears of joy which 
appeared on several faces showed plainly that their 
hearts were filled with contentment. The father 
could scarcely speak, so much was he touched. After 
they had received the blessing of Marriage, Monsieur 



236 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

de permettre que fes enfans fuflent baptifez, & outre 
cela il a efle caufe que beaucoup d'autres I'ont efte, 
lefquels font prefque tous morts, & pour luy il ne le 
vouloit point eftre du tout ; d'autre cofle il a beau- 
coup retarde la gloire de Dieu, les Sauuages prenant, 
exemple fur luy, mais il y a apparence qu'il le 
reparera. 

Voicy le chemin dont Dieu s'eft feruy pour le tirer 
h. foy, lequel eft bien au deffus de toute prudence 
humaine: car [208] lors que Ton ne penfoit k rien 
moins que de le voir icy, veu I'auerfion qu'il en auoit 
tefmoigne fur la fin de I'eft^, le voila cependant arri- 
u^ icy le premier iour de Mars, il frappe h. la porte 
de la chambre de Mofieur de Maifon-Neufue: lofeph 
fon nefueu que i'enfeignois en ma chambre, & qui 
nous auoit dit, deux heures auparauant, qu'il eut 
bien defire que le Borgne fon oncle eut fceu ce bon 
traittement qu'il auoit receu de nous, & qu'il fouhait- 
teroit qu'on luy en efcriuit : il ne pouuoit croire qu'il 
fut venu, auparauant que I'auoir veu, tant il le croy- 
oit eftre eloigne de venir icy: le Borgne nous dit 
qu'eftat party de Richelieu, pour aller aux trois Ri- 
uieres, il auoit tout d'vn coup pris refolution de venir 
icy auec fa femme, & fa fille, nonobftant les dangers: 
I'vnique fujet qui m'ameine, difl il, c'eft la priere, 
c'eft icy ou ie defire prier, eftre inftruit & baptif^, que 
fi vous ne I'aggr^es pas, ie m'en iray aux Hurons, oil 
les robes noires qui y font autour des Algonquins 
m'enfeigneront, comme i'efpere. 

Monfieur de Maifon-neufue, touche [209] de voir 
c6t homme, & refolu de n'efpargner aucune chofe 
qui fuft en fon pouuoir, pour la conuerfion de ce pau- 
ure Sauuage, nous fupplie de luy dire de fa part, que 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 237 

de Maison-Neufve gave a [207] fine arquebus to 
Paul, with the articles necessary for its use, and 
had them dine with us ; and after dinner, he made 
a great feast to all the Savages, where all the 
French were present, — who were so rejoiced that it 
is not possible to be more so, to see so great a mercy 
of God. It has ever been thought that the conquest 
of that man was more to be prized than that of a 
great number of others ; it was never doubted that, 
if he were once converted, he would do thoroughly 
well, in view of the great natural talents which God 
has given him. Before he was a Christian, God had 
done him a great favor, — to wit, in permitting that 
his children should be baptized ; and besides that, he 
has been the occasion for many others to be, who are 
nearly all dead; but, as for him, he did not wish to 
be, at all. On the other hand, he has much retarded 
the glory of God, the Savages taking pattern after 
him; but there is a probability that he will make 
amends for that. 

" Behold the way which God has used for drawing 
him to himself, which is far above all human pru- 
dence; for — [208] when we were thinking of any- 
thing else than of seeing him here, considering the 
aversion which he had shown for it toward the end of 
the summer — there he was, nevertheless, having 
arrived here the first day of March. He knocks at 
the door of the room of Monsieur de Maison-Neufve. 
Joseph, his nephew, whom I was teaching in my 
room, — and who had told us, two hours before, that 
he had much desired that le Borgne, his uncle, might 
have known what good treatment he had received from 
us ; and that he wished we would write to him of it, — 
could not believe that he had come, before having seen 



238 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

s'il auoit enuie de fe faire inftruire & s'arrefter, il 
n'auoit que faire d'aller plus loin qu'en ce lieu cy, oh. 
il I'affifleroit de tout fon poffible, & I'aymeroit comme 
fon frere: cet homme luy tefmoigna beaucoup de 
reff entimet de ces oflfres : cependant nous tafchafmes 
de ne perdre aucun moment de temps, pour trauail- 
ler h. fa conuerfion, de laquelle delors il nous donna 
bonne efperance, affiflant toufiours aux prieres & 
inftrudtions, & ^ tons les baptefmes de tous fes gens, 
il procedoit tant auec Monfieur de Maifon-neufue, 
qu'auec nous, auec fi grande prudence qu'il n'eft pas 
poffible de I'exprimer: on la veu efcouter des deux 
heures ce caticees [sc. le catechifme] que nous luy 
difions, fans dire vn feul mot, pour mieux penfer ^ 
ce qu'il auoit h. faire: il tefmoignoit tant de defir 
d'eftre inftruidl qu il fe faifoit inftruire de tous 
indifferemment, difant fon Pater auec les vieilles & 
enfans: Ma fille, difoit-il, les [210] n'a pas d'efprit, de 
ne me vouloir pas enfeigner ce qu'elle f9ait: C'eftoit 
Ik fon vnique & important affaire, & autrefois indi- 
gne, k fon aduis, de fes penfees, il portoit fes gens k 
faire comme luy: en vn mot Dieu qui vouloit eftre 
le Maifhre de ce coeur, luy donna de grandes difpofi- 
tions pour la foy : en fuitte dequoy il nous dift, ie 
n'ay iamais promis Ik-bas de me faire baptifer, mais 
de me faire inftruire: mais a prefent ie vous le 
promets. La nuidt enfuiuant, il dift k fes gens la 
refolution qu'il auoit prife, & la parole qu'il auoit 
donnee, il paffa le refte de la nuidt h. haranguer 
tous les Sauuages oii il dift des merueilles de la 
foy, pour les encourager tous, improuua fon proced6 
paffe, & difl qu'il efperoit que Dieu I'aideroit 
eftant Chreftien, k mieux faire a I'aduenir. Le 



\ 



] 642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 239 



him : so averse did he suppose him to be to coming 
here. Le Borgne told us, that having left Richelieu 
to go to the three Rivers, he had all at once resolved 
to come here with his wife and his daughter, not- 
withstanding the dangers. ' The single purpose 
which brings me, ' said he, ' is prayer. It is here 
that I desire to pray, to be instructed and baptized ; 
but, if you do not agree to it, I will go away to the 
Hurons, where the black robes who are there with 
the Algonquins will teach me, as I hope.' 

" Monsieur de Maison-neufve, touched [209] to see 
this man, and resolved to spare nothing which was 
in his power, for the conversion of this poor Savage, 
entreats us to tell him, on his part, that if he desired 
to become instructed and settled he had no occasion 
to go further than this place, where he would assist 
him to the best of his ability, and would love him as 
his brother. This man showed him much gratitude 
for these offers ; meanwhile, we strove to lose not a 
moment of time, to work for his conversion, of 
which, thenceforth, he gave us good hope, — always 
attending the prayers and instructions, and all the 
baptisms among his people. He acted both toward 
Monsieur de Maison-neufve and toward us, with so 
great prudence that it is not possible to express it ; he 
has been known to listen two hours to those lessons in 
the catechism that we were repeating to him, with- 
out saying a single word, — in order the better to 
think upon what he had to do. He betokened so 
much desire to be instructed that he had himself 
taught by all, impartially, saying his Pater with the 
old women and children. ' My daughter,' said he, 
[210] ' has no sense, not to be willing to teach me 
what she knows.' That was his exclusive and 



240 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

lendemain, il nous vint troiiuer le Pere Poncet, & 
moy, nous demande inftamment le Baptefme, que 
nous luy accordafmes pour le voir dans la meilleure 
difpofition, que nous I'aurions pen iamais fouhaitter, 
9a me dit alors, ce bon-homme, plein de ioye de cette 
bone nouuelle, meine nous [211] en ta chambre, ma 
femme & moy, pendant que les autres s'en iront k la 
Meffe du Pere, tu nous inflruiras \k, de ce que nous 
deuons refpondre k la ceremonie du Baptefme: 9a 
hafte-toy : car il y en aura iufques a la nuic5t, tant il 
te faudra baptif er de perfonnes : tu auras affez affaire 
auffi bie que le Pere, pource tout le log du iour ne 
pent fatisfaire k mes gens, qui veulent tous eftre bap- 
tif ez, k quoy luy ayant fatisfaidt, il les mene k I'E- 
glife, les met entre les mains du Pere, qui auant qu'en 
partir, les fift enfans de Dieu, leur verfant I'eau & le 
S. Efprit fur la tefte. En fuitte Monfieur de Maifon- 
neufue, pour I'arrefter icy, luy donna la mefme con- 
dition qu'il auoit fait ^ lofeph, & met deux hommes 
pour trauailler pour lui, qui auec les deux autres, fai- 
foiet quatre, & s'il euft peu, euft fait encore dauan- 
tage pour vne affaire de telle importance. Si toft 
qu'il a eft6 baptif6. Ton a recognu tout vifiblement 
de tres-grands effects de la grace de Dieu fur luy : 
Nous prenions plaifir k le confiderer & entendre par- 
ler des bons fentimens que le S. Efprit luy donnoit, 
touchant la grace du [212] Baptefme, Ton voyoit en 
luy vn vifage d'autant plus refolu k tenir bon pour 
la foy, qu'il y auoit eft6 long temps fort contraire, 
au lieu que Paul Teff^ehat efloit I'homme du monde 
le plus fuperbe auparauant fon Baptefme, li toft qu'il 
a efte Chreftien, Dieu luy donna la douceur & I'hu- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 241 



important business, though formerly unworthy, in 
his opinion, of his thoughts. He inclined his people 
to do like him; in a word, God, who willed to be the 
Master of that heart, gave him excellent inclinations 
for the faith, in consequence of which he said to us, 
' I never promised, down there, to be baptized, but to 
be instructed ; but now I promise you it. ' The fol- 
lowing night, he told his people the resolution which 
he had taken, and the word that he had given; he 
spent the rest of the night in haranguing all the 
Savages, wherein he told wonders of the faith, to 
encourage them all ; deprecated his past behavior ; and 
said that he hoped that God would aid him, being a 
Christian, to do better in future. The next day, he 
came to find us, — Father Poncet and me, and urgent- 
ly asked us for Baptism, which we granted him upon 
seeing him in the best disposition that we could ever 
have wished. ' Come,' then said to me this good 
man, full of joy for this good news, * lead us [211] to 
thy room, — my wife and me, — while the others go 
to the Father's Mass. Thou shalt instruct us there, 
in what we are to answer at the ceremony of Bap- 
tism. Come, make haste; for there will be some, 
even till night, — so many persons thou wilt have to 
baptize. Thou wilt have plenty to do, as well as the 
Father; because the entire day cannot satisfy my 
people, who all wish to be baptized.' Having satis- 
fied him therein, he leads them to the Church, and 
puts them in the Father's hands, — who, before leav- 
ing, made them children of God, pouring the water 
and the Holy Ghost upon their heads. Thereafter, 
Monsieur de Maison-neufve, to settle him here, 
assigned him the same estate that he had granted to 
Joseph, and appointed two men to work for him, — 



242 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

milit^ d'vn petit enfant, fe faifant inflruire, mefme 
par fa petite fille, auec vne douceur nompareille, & 
fimplicit^ Chreftienne, qui le rend fouple k toutes 
nos volontez: il eft fi zel6 & ardent h. apprendre ce 
qui luy eft neceffaire pour fon falut, qu'il trouuoit 
les iours trop cours, & couchoit fouuent chez nous, 
afin de fe faire inflruire pendant la nuidt, iamais ie 
n'ay veu vn homme auoir tant d'affedtion d'eftre 
inflruidt : il apportoit vne diligece & application nom- 
pareille k apprendre par coeur les prieres, en pronon- 
gant tous les mots fur fes doigts, y pallant les nuidts 
entieres; nous ne pouuions le laffer, quoy que nous 
y f ulTios quelquef ois iuf que h. la minuic5t : il parloit 
fouuent h. tous fes gens d'embrafler la foy, refutoit 
r ignorance de nos myfteres qu'ils apportoient en 
excufe, [213] par fon exemple qu'il leur alleguoit, leur 
difant, que quand ils feroient baptifez, ils appren- 
droient plus aif^ment. II recognoilToit auec eftonne- 
ment qu'il y auoit quelqu'vn dedans luy qui I'inftrui- 
foit, & luy fuggeroit ce qu'il deuoit dire k Dieu: 
fouuent il arriue des merueilles en ces bonnes gens, 
fans qu'ils s'en appergoiuent. 

Ce bon homme nous difoit qu'autant de fois qu'il 
s'efueilloit la nuidl, il prioit pour fes ieunes gens qui 
efloient k la guerre : la priere que ie fais, difoit-il, ie 
la repete, comme apres vn autre, qui m'enfeigne 
interieurement : car ie ne fgay encore rien pour 
parler ^ Dieu : voicy comme ie dis. Toy qui as tout 
fait, aide k nos ieunes gens, deffends les contre nos 
ennemis : tu peux tout, donne leur courage pour les 
vaincre : Voil^ qui f eroit bo fi nos ennemis croyoiet 
en toy, pour les aider aufli bien que nous qui efperos 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 243 

who, with the two others, made four; and, if he had 
been able, he would have done still more for a mat- 
ter of such importance. As soon as he was baptized, 
one recognized, quite visibly, very great effects of 
the grace of God upon him. We took pleasure in 
observing him, and in hearing him speak of, the 
good feelings which the Holy Ghost was granting 
him, respecting the grace of [212] Baptism. One 
saw in him a countenance all the more resolved to 
hold fast for the faith, that he had been for a long 
time very averse to it. Whereas Paul Tesswehat 
was the most haughty man in the world, before his 
Baptism, God gave him, as soon as he became a 
Christian, the gentleness and the humility of a little 
child, — having himself instructed even by his little 
daughter, with a gentleness unequaled, and a Chris- 
tian simplicity which renders him pliable to all our 
wishes. He is so zealous and ardent to learn that 
which is necessary to him for his salvation, that he 
found the days too short, and often stopped over 
night with us, so as to be instructed during the night. 
Never have I seen a man have so much partiality for 
being instructed ; he bestowed a diligence and appli- 
cation unparalleled, in learning by heart the pray- 
ers, — enumerating all the words on his fingers, and 
spending whole nights therein. We could not weary 
him, although we were at it sometimes even till 
midnight. He often spoke to all his people about 
embracing the faith ; refuted the excuse which they 
offered, of ignorance of our mysteries, [2 1 3] by his 
own example, which he cited to them, — telling them 
that when they should be baptized, they would learn 
more easily. He recognized with astonishment that 
there was some one within him who instructed him, 



244 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.24 

en toy, ils ne t'honoret point, abandone les, & nous 
deffends nous autres, qui voulons maintenant croire 
en toy. Deux ou trois iours apres fon Baptefme, 
allant a la chalTe auec vn ieune Huron qu'il tient 
chez [214] foy par charity, depuis I'Efte paff6, fe 
voyat bien auant dans le iour, fans auoir rien pris, il 
fe met k genoux, & prie en cette forte; Toy grand 
efprit, qui cognois tout, ne vois-tu pas bien que ie 
n'en pourray venir k bout, fi tu ne m'aides, tu peux 
tout, aide moy done, & k I'inftant voila qu'il entend 
du bruit, le fuit & tue auec fon compagnon deux 
vaches & vn orignac. Sa ferueur aux prieres eft 
incoparable, il n'eft pas plutoft appelle qu'il vient, 
premier & appelle & preffe les autres de s'y rendre 
promptement, il fe rend fi fouple a tout, que mefme 
il n'ofoit partir, pour aller icy autour k la chaffe, k 
caufe que nous luy anions dit, qu'on I'inflruiroit plus 
amplement apres fon Baptefme, il n'eft honteux aux 
Catechifmes que Ton fait en public, de repeter comme 
vn enfant, ce qu'il f9ait du Pater, & excite fes gens 
^ y ref pondre hardiment : bref il f e trouue k tout, ce 
que nous faifons en I'Eglife, k tons les Baptefmes de 
fes gens, les Feftes apres que nous anions chant6 
les Vefpres, il nous venoit auffi folliciter de le faire 
prier & chanter ^ part, il experimentoit la douceur de 
[215] I'efprit du Chriftianifme, & nous difoit que les 
cruautez qu'ils exer9oient contre leurs ennemis, luy 
defplaifoient, il ne ceffoit de louer la charit6 de M. 
de Maifon neufue noftre Capitaine, la bie-veillace des 
Dames qui font icy, la bonte de tous nos gens, & la 
douceur dont nous vlions enuers eux, & que ce qu'ils 
entendoient dire d'vn Dieu plein de bonte & miferi- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 245 



and prompted him what he should say to God. Often 
there happen marvels in these good people, without 
their perceiving it. 

" This good man told us that, as many times as he 
awoke at night, he prayed for his young men who 
were in the war. ' The prayer which I offer, ' said 
he, ' I repeat as though after another, who teaches 
me within; for I know nothing, as yet, to say to 
God. See how I speak: "Thou who hast made 
everything, help our young men, and defend them 
against our enemies. Thou canst do everything; 
give them courage to overcome them. Lo, that 
would be good if our enemies believed in thee, so as 
to help them, as well as us who hope in thee ; but 
they do not honor thee; forsake them, and defend 
us who wish now to believe in thee." ' Two or 
three days after his Baptism, going to the hunt with 
a young Huron, — whom he has kept with [214] him 
through charity, since last Summer, — finding himself 
quite late in the day without having taken aught, he 
kneels and prays as follows: ' Thou great spirit, who 
knowest everything, seest thou not well, that I shall 
never succeed unless thou helpest me ? Thou canst 
do everything; help me then; ' and, at that instant, 
lo, he hears a noise, follows it, and, with his com- 
panion, kills two cows and a moose. His fervor in 
prayers is incomparable ; he is no sooner called than 
he comes the first, and calls and urges the others to 
gather thither promptly. He makes himself so pli- 
able to everything, that he did not even dare to start, 
in order to go to the chase hereabout, because we had 
said to him that he should be instructed more fully 
after his Baptism. He is not ashamed, at the lessons 
in the Catechism which are given in public, to repeat, 



246 LES RE LA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 24 

corde pour les hommes les rauilloit, & que ce qui les 
auoit le plus louche, eftoit la cognoillance qu'on leur 
donnoit de la bonte de Dieu, & que c' eftoit cela qui 
les auoit tous gagnez, & faifoit qu'ils eftoiet tous en 
noftre difpofition : il conceuoit de grandes efperances 
de la conuerfion des autres peuples, auf quels i'efpere 
que fon exemple ne feruira pas de peu, pour les 
ranger k robeiflance de la foy. En vn mot il s'eft 
comporte icy en vray Chreftien. 

Vn certain foir eftant venu en noftre f alette, il fe 
mift imperceptiblement k y prefcher deux bonnes 
femmes qui y eftoient. Le difcours qu'il leur tinft, 
eftoit rauiffant, & comme la plus forte raifon qu'elles 
alleguoient, pour n'eftre [216] pas encore baptifez, 
eftoit qu'elles n'eftoient pas inftruites, il leur refpon- 
dit, quand vous ferez baptifez vous en apprendrez en 
vn iour plus que vous n'en euffiez fait en quinze iours 
car Dieu vous y aidera. II ne veut pas aller k la 
chaffe auec les autres homes, quoy qu'il en foit prelim 
par les fiens mefmes, fi i'y vais, difoit-il, toutes les 
femmes & enfans m'y voudront fuiure, i'ayme mieux 
demeurer, pour leur donner le moyen d'eftre inftruits 
aupres de vous autres, & moy auffi : & en effet il le 
fit, fe redant aflidu k toutes les inftrudtions publiques 
& particulieres, & preffant luy-mefme les autres. 
Que ne fift-il autour de fon ieune Huron qu'il entre- 
tient? il luy redifoit tout ce qu'il entendoit & f9auoit 
de nos myfteres, il eftoit rauy de le voir en la difpo- 
fition de vouloir eftre Chreftien comme luy : enfin il 
fift fi bien que nous le baptif afmes, apres auoir remar- 
qu6 en luy la difpofition necefl!aire en tel cas. II fut 
nomm^ lofeph : comme on luy demandoit en d'eftail. 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 247 

like a child, what he knows of the Pater, and incites 
his people to answer boldly therein. In short, he is 
present at everything that we do in the Church, and 
at all the Baptisms of his people. At the Feasts, 
after we had sung Vespers, he also came to be- 
seech us to have him pray and sing apart. He was 
experiencing the gentleness of [215] the spirit of 
Christianity, and told us that the cruelties which 
they practiced against their enemies displeased him. 
He did not cease to praise the charity of Monsieur de 
Maison neufve, our Captain ; the benevolence of the 
Ladies who are here ; the kindness of all our people, 
and the mildness that we use toward them. He 
declared that what they heard said of a God full of 
goodness and mercy toward men delighted them; 
and that what had most touched them was the knowl- 
edge that we gave them of the goodness of God, that 
it was that which had won them all,, and which caused 
them all to be at our disposal. He conceived great 
hopes for the conversion of the other peoples, — with 
whom, I hope, his example will serve not a little in 
subduing them to the obedience of the faith. In a 
word, he has behaved here like a true Christian. 

" A certain evening, having come to our little hall, 
he began, imperceptibly, to preach to two good 
women who were there. The discourse that he ad- 
dressed to them was delightful ; and, as the strongest 
reason which they adduced for not [216] yet being 
baptized, was that they were not instructed, he 
answered them: ' When you are baptized, you will 
learn in one day more than you could have done in 
fifteen days, for God will help you.' He is not will- 
ing to go to the chase with the other men, although 
he is urged to do so even by his own people. ' If I 



248 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.24 

s'il croyoit les articles du Credo, il refpondit en vn 
mot de bo cceur, ie crois tout: Ton voyoit [217] fur 
fon front ie ne fcay quelle ioye li extraordinaire, que 
chacun des Frangois Ie vouloit voir, pour en tirer de 
la confolation, fa modeftie & fes mains continuelle- 
ment iointes de fi bonne fa§on, nous parloient aflez, 
& faifoient voir qu'il prifoit grandement la grace 
qu'il alloit receuoir. 

Vn ieune homme de la nation d'Iroquet, nomme 
ChinaJi^icli, merite qu'on en dife vn mot en paffant: 
il y a vn an a ce Prin-temps qu'il defcendit de fon 
pays, & vint aux trois Riuieres, efquippe en guerre, 
auec vne vingtaine de fes gens, & entr'autres Ie Capi- 
taine des Nipiffiriniens, nomm6 8iKaff 8mint : ce ieune 
homme ayant parmy fes gens, reputation de vaillant, 
& bon chaffeur, eftoit defia recommendable, & fon 
humeur gaye tout ce qu'il fe pent, & libre, Ie faifoit 
aimer de tous aux trois Riuieres : il m'auoit tefmoi- 
gne pendant vn ou deux mois, vn grand deflr de 
croire, & venoit fort fouuent nous voir pour eftre 
inftruit. AulTi toft qu'il fut icy, & bie, dit-il, c'efl 
tout de bo qu'il faut que tu m'enfeignes, & que tu 
me baptifes, [218] i'en ay vne fi grande enuie, que ie 
feray tout ce que tu me diras, iufques la mefme que 
fi tu me dis que ie quitte mo Demon, qui me faidt 
prendre a la cbaffe, tout ce que ie veux, ie fuis pres 
k Ie faire, quoy que ie I'ayme bien, i'ay ieufn6 fept 
iours entiers, fans rien manger du tout pour I'auoir, 
ie I'ayme come mon corps, auffi eft-ce ainfi qu'il I'ap- 
pelloit : Ce fut icy on ceux qui y eftoient pref ents, 
viret vn grand effort du Diable, fur cet homme, pour 
deftourner Ie coup de pied qu'il luy vouloit donner; 



J 



1642 - 43J RELA TJON OF 1642 - 43 249 

go thither, ' said he, ' all the women and children will 
wish to follow me ; I prefer to stay, in order to give 
them the means of being instructed with you, and 
myself also. ' And, in fact, he did so, being assidu- 
ous in attendance at all the public and private instruc- 
tions, and personally urging the others. What did 
he not do in the case of his young Huron, whom he 
is maintaining? He repeated to him all that he 
heard and knew of our mysteries; he was delighted 
to see him inclined to wish to be a Christian, like 
himself. In fine, this young man did so well that 
we baptized him, after having observed in him the 
disposition necessary in such case. He was named 
Joseph. When they asked him in detail whether he 
believed the articles of the Credo, he answered in one 
word, with good heart : ' I believe all. ' There was 
seen [217] on his brow a sort of joy, so extraor- 
dinary that each one of the French wished to see 
him, in order to derive consolation from it. His mod- 
esty, and his hands continually clasped in so pious a 
manner, told us enough, and showed that he greatly 
prized the grace which he was about to receive. 

' ' A young man of the Iroquet nation, named China- 
wich, deserves that a word be said of him, in passing. 
It is a year ago, this Spring, since he came down 
from his own country, and went to the three Rivers, 
armed for war, with a score of his people, — and 
among others, the Captain of the Nipissiriniens, 
named Wikassoumint. This young man, having 
among his people the reputation of one valiant and a 
good hunter, was already commendable; and his 
temper, extremely cheerful and frank, made him 
loved by all at the three Rivers. He had indicated 
to me, during one or two months, a great desire to 



250 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.24 

car il commenga k rinftant k tourner les yeux en la 
tefte, & deuint peniif , nous regarda affreufement, ioi- 
gnant toufiours pourtant les deux mains, & continu- 
ant ^ me refpondre affez doucement & pertinemment 
k ce que ie luy demandois, mais iamais nous ne pumes 
tirer de luy qu'il renon9aft fur I'heure k fon ennemy 
cacli6, & comme nous le preffions de nous le doner, 
qu'autrement il ne feroit point baptif^, voila qui 
feroit bon, difoit-il, s'il paroilToit, il eft dans moy 
fans que ie le voye, quelque fois il m'apparoift en 
fonge, de nuidt comme vne femme nue, [219] & me 
parle quelque mot tout bas, quand ie fuis das les bois, 
fi ie penfe que ie veux tuer telle befte, auffi-toft i'en 
vois vne, ie cours & la tue, mais quoy, luy dif-ie, ne 
le fens tu point maintenant, non non dit-il, mais ie 
le crains k prefent? prends courage luy difmes-nous, 
Dieu t'aidera, efpere en luy, apres t'on baptefme 
toutes ces craintes s'efuanouyront. Le Diable qui 
le poffedoit, fans qu'il s'en apperceut, I'empefclia de 
nous donner pour ce iour la parole de cofentement 
que nous luy demandios pour renoncer a fon Demon : 
I'exemple de Paul Teff^ehat qui fuft baptize le len- 
demain, le fortifia enfin, & le fift retourner a nous 
apres midy, nous demandant auec de tres grandes 
inftances le baptefme, & promettant en fuitte de 
bonne fa9on de renoncer entierement & quitter fon 
Diable & toutes fes iongleries defendues, ce qu'il fift 
courageufement, apres quoy on le baptiza & noma 
lacques. Ainfi toft apres, d'affreux qu'il eftoit aupa- 
rauant, il parut gay & ioyeux au poffible, il ne fga- 
uoit quelle chere nous faire, il nous rendoit tous les 
offices qu'il pouuoit, [220] il dit ^ Monfieurde Maifon- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 251 

believe ; and he came very often to see us, in order 
to be instructed. As soon as he was here, * Well, 
then,' said he, 'it is in good earnest that thou must 
teach me and baptize me ; [218] I have so great a 
desire for it that I will do all that thou shalt tell 
me, — even so far that if thou tell me to give up my 
Demon, who causes me to take all that I desire in 
hunting, I am ready to do so, though I love him 
well. I have fasted seven whole days, without eat- 
ing anything at all, in order to possess him ; I love 
him as my body,' — indeed, it is thus that he called 
him. It was at this point that those who were there 
present saw a great effort of the Devil upon this 
man, to turn aside the kick that the latter wished to 
give him ; for he straightway began to roll his eyes 
in his head, became pensive, and looked at us fright- 
fully, — nevertheless, continually clasping his hands, 
and continuing to answer me quite gently and 
pertinently to what I was asking him. But we 
could never draw from him that he should immedi- 
ately renounce his concealed enemy ; and, when we 
urged him to give him to us, — as otherwise he could 
not be baptized, ' That would be good,' said he, ' if 
he would appear; he is in me without my seeing 
him. Sometimes he appears to me in a dream at 
night, like a naked woman, [219] and speaks to me 
some word quite softly. When I am in the woods, 
if I think that I wish to kill this or that beast, im- 
mediately I see one; I run and kill it.' ' But what?' 
I say to him, * dost thou not feel him now? ' ' No, 
no,' said he; 'but I fear him at present.' 'Take 
courage,' we said to him, ' God will help thee; hope 
in him ; after thy baptism all thy fears will vanish. ' 
The Devil, who was possessing him without his 



252 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.24 

neufue, que s'il vouloit, il demeureroit toufiours 
icy, pour feruir d'interprete aux Hurons, pour les 
inftruire, afin qu'ils fullent baptifez? Puis-ie aller ^ 
la guerre contre les Iroquois, me demanda-il? Ouy, 
difmes nous, & li i'en prenois quelqu'vn, & qu'on le 
voulut tourmenter, que ferois ie? y contriburois-ie 
du mien? non, dit-il, de foy-mefme, ie le tuerois fur 
le champ : ce font Ik des efifets bien grands de la 
grace receue par le baptefme, depuis lequel il s'eft 
toufiours comporte en vray Chreftien ; Ie luy ay veu 
faire icy des traits rauilTans pour la f oy : mais la 
crainte de m'engager en de trop longs difcours, ou 
ie me iette imperceptiblement, m'empefche d'en dire 
autre chofe. 

Apres le Baptefme de ceux-cy, nous-nous fentif- 
mes incontinent obligez le Pere Poncet & moy, "k 
fatisfaire aux inftantes demandes de quantity d'autres 
perfonnes, & ce, en vn temps que nous les penlions 
plus eloignez de nous faire telles propofitions ; puif- 
que c'efloit au retour d'vne bade de quinze guerriers^ 
qui [221] auoient efte mis en fuitte par I'ennemy, qui 
les auoit furpris la nuidt, ou il y en euft 4. tant pris 
que tuez, & quelques-vns de bleffez, des vnze qui 
retourneret tous nuds & delabrez, & fans armes, auec 
la croyance ferme que PiesKaret, & liuic5t autres de 
leurs gens qui faifoient vne petite bande k part, k 
vne demie-iournee d'eux, & plus proche du pays de 
I'ennemy, auoient efte tous furpris, ou tuez fur la 
place, alTeurans en auoir veu les armes entre les 
mains des Iroquois, qui les auoiet attaquez. Ce fut 
icy k tous vn grad fubiet de confternation, & vn pau- 
ure temps k gaigner quelque chofe pour la foy aupres- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 253 

perceiving it, prevented him from giving us, for that 
day, the word of consent that we were asking him, to 
renounce his Demon. The example of Paul Tesswe- 
hat, who was baptized the next day, finally strength- 
ened him, and caused him to return to us after noon, 
requesting from us baptism very urgently, and then 
promising, in a suitable manner, to renounce entirely 
and give up his Devil and all his forbidden juggler- 
ies, — which he did courageously; — after which he 
was baptized, and named Jacques. As a result, pres- 
ently afterward, frightful though he was before, he 
appeared extremely gay and joyful. He knew not 
what welcome to give us; he rendered us all the 
services that he could ; [220] he said to Monsieur de 
Maison-neufve that if he wished, he would always 
live here, to serve as interpreter for the Hurons, in 
order to instruct them, so that they might be bap- 
tized. ' May I go to the war against the Iroquois? ' 
he asked me. ' Yes,' we said. * And if I captured 
some one of them, and they wished to torture him, 
what would I do, — would I take part therein? — No,' 
said he, of his own accord; ' I would kill him on the 
spot.' Those are very great results of the grace 
received through baptism. Since then, he has 
always behaved like a true Christian, — I have seen 
him perform here delightful acts for the faith ; but 
the fear of engaging myself in too long discourses, 
into which I lapse imperceptibly, prevents me from 
saying aught else of them. 

" After the Baptism of these, we felt ourselves 
immediately obliged, Father Poncet and I, to satisfy 
the urgent requests of many other persons, — and 
that at a time when we thought them most averse to 
making us such propositions. For it was at the return 



254 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

des Sauuages : ceux qui les cognoiffent, f9atient affez^ 
que femblables rencotres leur donnet fujet de renuer- 
fer le Chriftianifme, attribuans tous leurs malheurs 
au Baptefme: on n'ofe pas feulement dire vn mot 
pour lors, crainte de donner occafion h. quelque eflour- 
dy, de dire ou faire quelque chofe mal k propos pour 
la foy: cependant come les affaires de Dieu font 
d'vne telle nature, que fouuent ce que la raifon 
humaine y penfe contraire, c'eft iuftement [222] ce 
dont il en tire plus de gloire, nous pouuons dire qu'il 
en a fait de mefme icy, car nous auons plus tire de 
profit de leur mal-heur que de leur profperite, tous 
ces pauures guerriers ne font pas pluftoft de retour, 
qu'ils demandent les vns apres les autres, qu'on les 
inflruife & baptife, & ceux entre autres qui auoient 
efte des premiers h. faire des iongleries & fe feruir du 
Diable pour leur gueule eftoient les plus feruents ^ 
nous en preffer, nous eftions tous eftonnez qu' en- 
trans en leur cabane fans leur vouloir quafi rien dire, 
ils nous y incitoient, & nous donnoient de belles 
occafions de parler de Dieu, de recourir k luy dans 
la neceffit6. Venes fouuent nous vifiter difoient-ils, 
nous fommes tous refolus a croire en Dieu & ^ luy 
obeyr. Le temps nous tardoit de voir icy de retour 
Paul Teffouehat qui eftoit fraifchement all6 h. la 
chaffe pour deux ou trois iours, afin de remarquer 
comme il fe comporteroit, on craignoit qu'il ne 
parlafl au defauantage de la Foy : mais tant s'en faut il 
prit de Ik occafion, ainfi que i'entendis moy mefme 
de dehors, de prefcher [223] fes gens en fa cabane, 
il auoit plus de fubiecft de s'affliger qu'aucun : car outre 
quatre de fes fort proches parents, il voyoit vne par- 



i 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 255 

of a band of fifteen warriors, who [221] had been put 
to flight by the enemy, who had surprised them by 
night, — wherein there were 4 captured or killed, 
and some wounded of the eleven who returned. All 
these were naked and wretched, and without arms, 
in the firm belief that Pieskaret and eight others of 
their people, — who formed a small detached band, 
half a day from them, and nearer the country of the 
enemy, — had all been surprised, or killed on the 
spot, asserting that they had seen their arms in the 
hands of the Iroquois, who had attacked them. This 
was to all a great cause of consternation, and a poor 
time to gain anything for the faith, with respect to 
the Savages; those who know them, know well 
enough that such accidents give them occasion to 
attack Christianity, as they attribute all their misfor- 
tunes to Baptism. One dare not so much as say a 
word to them just then, for fear of giving cause to 
some thoughtless fellow to say or do something inop- 
portune for the faith. However, as the affairs of 
God are of such nature that, often, that which human 
reason thinks adverse to them is precisely [222] that 
by which he derives from them more glory, we may 
say that he has done the same here ; for we have 
derived more profit from their misfortune than from 
their prosperity. All those poor warriors have no 
sooner returned than they request, one after the 
other, to be instructed and baptized; and those, 
among others, who had been among the first to prac- 
tice juggleries, and make use of the Devil for their 
throats, were among the most fervent to urge us in 
the matter. We were all astonished, that, on enter- 
ing their cabin, almost without intending to say any- 
thing to them, they pressed us to talk, and gave us 



256 



LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



tie de fes gens perdus; cependant parmy toutes fes 
afflidtions, il tint toufiours ferme en la priere, & ne 
manqua point d'affifter k fon ordinaire h. toutes les 
chofes que nous faifions en I'Eglife, & tefmoignoit 
dans fon afflidtio beaucoup de cofolatio, de voir que 
fes ges fe portoiet k I'imiter au bien, il ne nous fer- 
uit pas peu k les encourager k tenir bon, ils firent fi 
bien que dans le refte du mois de Mars, il y en eut 
affez bon nombre, h qui en confcience on ne pouuoit 
refufer cette grace, pour eftre tres-bien difpofez. 

Des auffi-toft qu'on s'apperceuoit de quelque petit 
meflange d'intereft temporel, en ceux qui fe rengeants 
au bien nous demandoient le baptefme, c'efloit affez 
pour nous lier les mains, ainfi qu'il arriua au frere de 
lofeph, a Micliaketchits & plufieurs autres qui fai- 
foient voir par 1^ qu'ils n'apprehendoient pas affez 
la grace du baptefme : comme la plus grande faueur 
qu'on leur put faire. [224] le m'oubliois quaff d'vn ■ 
bon trait de Paul Teffouehat dans le reffentiment I 
qu'il auoit des obligations de fon baptefme, il s'en 
Vint treuuer Monfieur de Maifon-Neufue, pour le 
remercier de ce qu'il y auoit ayd6 de ff bon coeur, & 
luy dit, que pour luy il vouloit acbeuer le refte de fes 
iours aupr6s de luy, voulant par vne demeure coti- 
nuelle recompenfer le peu de temps qu'il auoit k 
viure, & que quand 11 voudroit aller en traitte aux 
trois Riuieres qu'il luy demanderoit conge, & f9au- 
roit de luy s'il I'auroit pour agreable. Monfieur de 
Maifon-Neufue, le remercia de ce tefmoignage 
d'affe(5tion, & luy dit qu'il ne defiroit pas le gefner, 
& qu'il pouuoit aller hardiment ou il luy plairoit, & 
pour tant de temps qu'il voudroit, qu'il ne I'en 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 257 

excellent opportunities to speak of God, and of hav- 
ing recourse to him in extremity. ' Come often to 
visit us,' they said; 'we are all resolved to believe 
in God, and to obey him.' The time was long for 
us, to see here, on his return, Paul Tessouehat, — 
who had recently gone to the hunt, for two or three 
days, — in order to remark how he would demean 
himself. It was feared that he might speak to the 
disadvantage of the Faith; but, far from it, he took 
occasion therefrom, as I myself heard from without, 
to preach [223] to his people in his cabin. He had 
more cause to grieve than any one ; for besides four 
of his very near relatives, he saw a part of his peo- 
ple destroyed. However, amid all his afflictions, he 
always held firm in prayer, and failed not to be pres- 
ent, in his usual way, at everything that we did in the 
Church ; and he manifested, in his affliction, much 
consolation to see that his people were inclining to 
imitate him in the right. He aided us, not a little, 
in encouraging them to persevere. They did so well 
that, in the remainder of the month of March, there 
was a fairly good number of them to whom, in con- 
science, one could not refuse that grace, on account 
of being very well disposed. 

" As soon as any slight mixture of temporal inter- 
est was perceived in those who, taking their stand 
for the right, asked us for baptism, that was enough 
to tie our hands. It happened thus to the brother of 
Joseph, to Michaketchits, and several others, who 
thereby showed that they did not sufficiently appre- 
hend the grace of baptism, as the greatest favor that 
could be done to them. [224] I was almost forgetting 
a good trait of Paul Tessouehat, — the gratitude that 
he had for the obligations of his baptism. He came 



258 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

aymeroit iamais moins, iugeant bien pour la gloire 
de Dieu, que cefte liberty eftoit plus auantageufe, en 
effedl elle le rauit, & nous I'attacha plus fortement 
que iamais. 

le dirois volontiers icy vn mot d'vn chacun en par- 
ticulier pour faire voir plus clairement que ce n'eft 
pas I'induftrie [225] humaine qui a oper^ en cette 
affaire : mais Dieu f eul qui fe fert des perfonnes, des 
lieux & des temps, comme il luy plaift, & a fa fa9on, 
centre la prudence humaine : la crainte de m' engager 
en vn trop long difcours m'arrefte. 

Sur le commencement d'Auril vne bonne partie 
des Sauuages eftans partis pour aller dans les bois, 
tant pour la chaffe des Caftors que pour y faire des 
Canots, Paul eftant refl6 auec quelque autre, voila 
qu'on appergoit ^ I'autre bord de la riuiere, quelques 
perfonnes qui defcendoient ^ nous, & cherchoient 
paffage pour paffer fur les glaces, on ne tarda pas k 
recognoiftre par le nombre, que c'eftoit la bande de 
Piefcaret, & de fes gens qu'on auoit pleur6 come 
morts lefquels retournans vidtorieux auec vne tefte 
de I'ennemy, venoient changer le deiiil en ioye. Paul 
enuoye querir ceux qui eftoient fraifchement partis, 
delegue diuers Ambaffadeurs vers ceux qui eftoient 
dans les bois, on re9oit les vidtorieux, on les traitte 
on danfe auec eux, Paul demande qu'on les face tous 
prier de compagnie dans la Chappelle k [226] quelque 
temps de la, il reuient chez nous auec Pieskaret, & 
deux ou trois autres des plus confiderables, deman- 
dans k parler k Monfieur de Maifon-neufue. Piefca- 
ret fit le rapport du refultat de leur confeil tenu le 
foir en leur cabane : mais Paul ayant cognu que cet 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 259 

to find Monsieur de Maison-Neufve, to thank him for 
having aided therein with so good a heart ; and said 
to him that, for himself, he wished to finish the 
remainder of his days near him, — desiring, by a 
steadfast abode, to make amends for the little time 
he had to live ; and that, when he might wish to go 
for trade to the three Rivers, he would ask leave of 
him, and would learn from him whether he would 
consent thereto. Monsieur de Maison-Neufve thanked 
him for this manifestation of affection, and told him 
that he did not desire to restrain him, and that he 
could go boldly where he pleased, and for as long as 
he would, and that he would never love him less for 
it, — rightly judging that for the glory of God such 
liberty was more advantageous. In fact, it delighted 
him, and attached him to us more strongly than ever. 

" I would gladly say a word here of each one in 
particular, in order to show more clearly that it is 
not human ingenuity [225] which has operated in this 
matter, but God alone, — who uses persons, places, 
and times as he pleases and in his own way, con- 
trary to human wisdom. The fear of involving 
myself in too long a discourse restrains me. 

" Toward the beginning of April, a good part of 
the Savages having started to go into the woods, 
both to hunt Beavers and to make Canoes there, — 
Paul having remained, with one other man, — they 
suddenly perceive on the other side of the river some 
persons who were coming down to us, and seeking 
passage, to cross on the ice. They were not slow to 
recognize, by the number, that it was the band of 
Piescaret and his people, who had been mourned 
as if dead, — but who, returning victorious, with a 
head of the enemy, came to change the mourn- 



260 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

homme auoit deduit 1' affaire tout d'vne tire, & auec 
embarras de paroles, fe mit luy-mefme k nous en 
redire les poindts d'vne fa9on nette & claire, que ce 
qui eftoit arriu6 dans cette derniere guerre ou ils 
auoient perdu quatre perfonnes, & les armes de la 
plus part des autres, les mettoient en vn eftat de 
changer I'ordre de leurs affaires, qu'ils s'eftoient pro- 
pofez, que 1^ deffus ils auoient refolu d'aller tons aux 
trois riuieres, ou les autres eftoient, iufques "k la fin 
de I'efte, tant pour faire tons enfemble le dueil des 
morts, que pour deliberer en commun ce qu'ils fe- 
roient 1^ deffus, de plus qu'ils vouloient voir pour la 
derniere fois, fl on leur tiendroit la promeffe de leur 
donner fecours contre noftre ennemy commun. 

Enfin pour concluflon ces bonnes [227] gens comme 
perfonnes qui fe fentoient grandement obliges, com- 
mencerent k faire des remerciments k leur mode fort 
gentils: ils ne fgauoient que dire ny que faire pour 
tefmoigner le reffentiment qu'ils auoient de la cour- 
toifie & bien-veillance de Monfieur de Maifon neufue : 
il y a trois ans, difoit Paul, que i'auois ouy parler de 
ce deffein, nous I'admirions & defirions, & mainte- 
nant nous voyons ce que nous attendions. Monfieur 
de Maifon-neufue pour refponce k leur confeil, leur 
fit entendre qu'ils eftoient en pleine liberty, ne les 
defirant pres de foy que pour leur bien, & que toutes- 
fois & quantes qu'ils viendroient icy, ils y trouue- 
roient toufiours vn coeur ouuert, & preft k leur don- 
ner tons les fecours & faueurs poffibles, qu'ils allaffent 
hardiment ou il leur plairoit. lis partent done tous 
le lendemain pour les trois riuieres fur les glaces qui 
comman9oient de toutes parts k fe defprendre, & 



1 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 261 

ing into joy. Paul sends in quest of those who 
had recently started, and commissions various Am- 
bassadors to those who were in the woods; they 
receive the victorious, they treat them, they dance 
with them. Paul requests that we have them all. 
pray together in the Chapel, [226] some time later. 
He returns to us with Pieskaret, and two or three 
others of the most considerable men, asking to speak 
to Monsieur de Maison-neufve. Piescaret makes the 
report of the result of their council, held at evening 
in their cabin; but Paul, having learned that this 
man had related the affair in a long-drawn style, 
and with intricate sentences, himself proceeds to 
repeat to us the points of it, in a manner concise and 
clear. It was to the effect that what had happened 
in this last war, — wherein they had lost four per- 
sons, and the weapons of most of the others, — put 
them in a position to change the order of their affairs 
which they had proposed for themselves; that there- 
upon they had resolved all to go to the three rivers, 
where the others were, until the end of the sum- 
mer, — both to celebrate, all together, the mourning 
for the dead, and to deliberate in common what they 
would do thereafter ; moreover, that they wished to 
see, for the last time, whether the promise would be 
kept to them, of giving them assistance against our 
common enemy. 

" Finally, in conclusion, these good [227] people, as 
persons who felt themselves greatly obliged, began 
to give thanks in their manner, which was very polite ; 
they knew not what to say or do, to show the grati- 
tude which they had for the courtesy and benevo- 
lence of Monsieur de Maison neufve. * It is three 
years,' said Paul, ' since I had heard mention of this 



•262 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 

reftoient delia vis h. vis de nous; & ce d€s aulTi-toft 
apres le retour de Pief caret & de fa bande, laquelle ne 
fut pas pluftoft palTee fur la glace, quele [228] grand 
chenail fe rompit & boucha le paffage k I'ennemy qui 
ainfi. que nous auons appris du depuis par les Hurons 
fauu^s des mains des Iroquois, pourfuiuirent ceux- 
cy, & fulTent mefme venus iufques b. nos portes, fans 
les glaces qui deriuoient defia bien fort. De tous 
les Sauuages il ne nous en demeura qu'vn nomm6 
Pachirini qui eftoit areft6 par les pieds, depuis leur 
desfaitte, il auoit toufiours voulu demeurer chez nous 
auec deux autres malades dans le petit Hofpital que 
nous y anions dreff^ pour les bleffez, tant pour y 
eftre mieux panfez ; que pour y eftre mieux inftruidts, 
en eflfedt & luy & les autres y receurent les gueri- 
fons du corps & de Tame, ce dernier le mefme iour 
qu'il fut baptize, qui fut le leudy faindt, recent aulTi 
en mefme temps le Sacrement de rEuchariftie, qu'il 
ne pouuoit receuoir de fa vie, en meilleure difpofl- 
tion. II nous feruit icy pendant fept ou liuic5t iours, 
qu'il refta apres les autres, k faire quelques d^cou- 
uertes de pays icy autour: nous fufmes auec luy k 
I'autre bord de noftre [229] grande riuiere, ou tant 
foit peu au delTus de nous k I'embouclieure d'vne 
petite riuiere affez profonde, il y a les plus beaux 
lieux du monde pour les habitations Fran9oifes, tout 
foifonne en prairies, force chaffe & pefche, les 
arbres fort beaux tres bonne terre, il n'y a que 
I'ennemy h. craindre, & de baffe eau le portage des 
viures : mais plus bas il y a de mefme cofte de tres- 
belles Ifles de grand abord propres a eltre habit6es. 
le ne diray rien icy de plufieurs autres baptefmes 



1 642 - 43J RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 263 

project; we admired and desired it, and now we see 
what we were expecting.' Monsieur de Maison- 
neufve, in answer to their council, gave them to un- 
derstand that they were at full liberty, — not desiring 
them near him, except for their benefit; and that, 
whenever and as often as they should come here, they 
would always find a heart open and ready to give 
them all the assistance and favors possible ; that they 
should go boldly where they pleased. They all start, 
therefore, the next day, for the three rivers, over 
the ice, which was everywhere beginning to break 
up. It had already done so, across from us, — and 
that immediately after the return of Piescaret and 
his band, which had no sooner crossed on the ice than 
the [228] main channel broke open, and stopped the 
passage for the enemy. They — as we have since 
learned by the Hurons saved from the hands of the 
Iroquois — pursued these, and would have come even 
to our gates, but for the ice, which was already drift- 
ing rapidly. Of all the Savages, there remained 
with us but one, Pachirini, detained because of the 
condition of his feet. Since their rout, he had al- 
ways wished to live with us, together with two other 
patients, in the little Hospital which we had erected 
there for the wounded, — both in order to be better 
cared for there, and to be more thoroughly instructed ; 
in fact, both he and the others received in it healing 
for the body and for the soul. This last one, the 
same day that he was baptized, which was Holy 
Thursday, received also at the same time the Sacra- 
ment of the Eucharist, which he could not, in his 
life, receive in better disposition. He served us here, 
during the seven or eight days that he remained 
after the others, in making some discoveries of the 



264 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.24 

d'enfans qui furent fais icy I'Automne palT^, & k ce 
prin-temps, contentons-nous de dire, qu'k Mont-real 
autant qu'en aucun autre lieu, Dieu y a fait fentir de 
tres grands effedts de fa grace, tant fur les Sauuages 
que fur les Francois, ainfi que nous auons veu cy- 
deuant. 

Nous auons veu fraifchement Mont-real auoir efl6 
I'azile des Hurons refugies, & le falut de quantite 
d'autres de diuerfes nations ou Ton a commence k le 
cognoiftre, & fouhaitter le bon-heur d'y eftre, nom- 
mement ces nations d'en [230] haut, fi nous en croy- 
ons a ce que nous en efcriuent nos Peres des Hurons, 
& nommement ceux qui y font pour les Algonquins, 
dent voicy les propres termes. 

Nous auons recogneu par experience que Ville- 
Marie peut beaucoup pour contribuer a la conuerfion 
des Sauuages, nommement Algonquins, ayantenmain 
les biens fai(5ts qui font des charmes puiffants fur les 
ames groffieres, «& telles que font celles de nos Cana- 
dois, il n'y en a point qui aye tant entendu parler de 
I'acceuil que Ton y fait aux Sauuages, que celuy qui 
les a veu au retour, & a eu fon departement d'hyuer 
k leur rendez vous ordinaire dans les Hurons : ie ne 
doute nullement qu'apres ce qu'ils m'en ont dit, fi le 
lieu auoit plusd'affeurance, qu'ils ne quittaff ent pour 
toufiours ce pays icy pour compofer "k Mont Royal 
vne bourgade, & y amalfer ceux de I'lfle, & les autres 
nations efparfes, qui fe voyent eftre la proye des en- 
nemis icy, & fur la riuiere ou ils ont leur habitudes r 
ils ne demandent pas mieux que d'auoir [231] vn lieu 
de refuge, alleure oil ils puiffent viure, & fe ramaffer: 
cela fera comme i'efpere, & ne fgauroit eftre alTez 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 265 

country hereabout. We went with him to the other 
shore of our [229] great river, where, but a little 
above us, at the mouth of a small river, somewhat 
deep, there are the fairest places in the world for the 
French settlements. Everything abounds, — mead- 
ows, plenty of hunting and fishing ; the trees are very 
beautiful, the soil very good; there is only the enemy 
to fear, and at low water, the portage of provisions. 
But lower down there are, on the same side, very 
beautiful Islands, of ample approach, suitable to be 
inhabited. 

" I will say nothing here of several other bap- 
tisms, of children, which occurred here last Autumn 
and this spring; let us be content to say that at 
Mont-real, as much as in any other place, God has 
made perceptible very great effects of his grace, both 
upon the Savages and upon the French, as we have 
seen above." 

We have recently seen that Mont-real has been the 
asylum of the refugee Hurons, and the salvation of 
many others of various nations in which the people 
have begun to know it, and to desire the happiness 
of being there, — especially those nations from [230] 
above, if we believe what our Fathers with the 
Hurons write to us of them, and especially those 
who are there for the Algonquins, whose own words 
are as follows : 

" We have ascertained by experience, that Ville- 
Marie can do much to contribute to the conversion 
of the Savages, notably Algonquins, — having in 
hand the benefits which are powerful charms upon 
rude souls, and such as those of our Canadians. 
There is no one who has heard so much spoken of 
the reception which is there given to the Savages, 



266 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

toll pour le bien d'vne nation, la plus pauure & 
miferable que i'aye veue. 

II y a icy autour de nous quantite d'Algonquins 
qui ne cherchent que rendez-vous affeur6, ou ils 
puiffent chaffer & viure hors des dangers des enne- 
mis, ou ils font k toute heure, ils viennent icy haut 
pour chercher lieu de refuge, ne le trouuant pas fur 
la grande riuiere, ou font toutes leurs habitudes, s'il 
n'euft faidt fi chaud k Mont-royal, ils y feroient defia, 
& y euffent deuanc6 les Frangois, ce lieu leur agreant 
plus que tout autre. Maintenant qu'ils vous y croy- 
ent, ils ne parlent d'autre chofe, & quand ils nous 
voyent, ils n'ont autre entretien. C'eft-la difent-ils, 
ou nous voulons obeyr k Dieu, & non pas icy. le ne 
doute point de leur recit, que ce qu'ils y virent, I'an 
paff6 en remontant icy n'aye beaucoup ayd6 k esbran- 
ler leurs coeurs, & penfe que fi I'affaire [232] eft bien 
conduitte, dans peu d'ann^es les Sauuages fe renge- 
ront a Ville- Marie, en beaucoup plus grand nombre 
qu'ils ne font a Sillery, ce ne f9auroit eftre affez toft 
pour eux & pour nous: Car quand bien les Mata- 
ouachkariniens, Onontchateronons, Kinonchepirinik, 
i^e^efkariniens, ceux de I'lfle, & autres qui parlent 
I'idiofme de Ik bas, & s'vniffent icy I'hyuer, proche 
des Hurons, iroient k Mont- Royal, nous aurions en- 
core outre les Nepiffiriniens, Archirigouans, Archou- 
guets, tons les Algonquins vniuerfellement du lac 
des Hurons, qui font encore en grand nombre. C'efl 
k vous autres qui eftes fur les lieux d'auifer aux 
moyens d'attirer ces peuples, & les conferuer. 

La liberality fans doute eft la meilleure chaifne 
qu'on puiffe apporter k gaigner leurs coeurs, nomme- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 267 

as that one who has seen them at their return, and 
has had his winter allotment of labor at their usual 
rendezvous among the Hurons. I have no doubt, 
according to what they have told me of this, that, if 
the place had more security, they would forever 
leave this country here, in order to form a village at 
Mont Royal, and gather there those of the Island, 
and the other scattered nations, who see themselves 
to be the prey of the enemy here, and on the river 
where they have their haunts. They ask nothing 
better than to have [231] a secure place of refuge, 
where they can live and rally together. That will 
be, as I hope ; and it cannot be soon enough for the 
good of a nation the poorest and most wretched that 
I have seen. 

* ' There are about us, here, many Algonquins who 
seek but a safe rendezvous, where they can hunt and 
live free from danger of the enemy, in which they 
are at all times. They come up here to seek a place 
of refuge, not finding it on the great river, where all 
their haunts are. If it had not been so hot at Mont- 
royal, they would be there already, and would have 
anticipated the French, — that place suiting them 
better than any other. Now that they believe you 
there, they speak of nothing else ; and, when they 
see us, they have no other conversation. ' There,' 
they say, ' is where we wish to obey God, and not 
here.' I do not doubt, from their story, that what 
they saw there last year, on their way up here, has 
much assisted in moving their hearts; and I think 
that, if the affair [232] be well managed, in a few 
years the Savages will take their stand at Ville-Marie 
in much greater number than they are at Sillery ; it 
cannot be soon enough for them and for us. For even 



268 



LES RELA TIONS DES j6SUITES [Vol. 24 



ment dans la mifere ou ils font: car ie n'ay point veu 
d'Algonquins fi pauures & necefliteux, que ceux-lk. 
Ce font d'ailleurs gens fort traitables. 

[233] Voila deux efchantillons de lettres de nos 
Peres des Hurons, que i'ay rapportez, mot pour mot, 
qui nous font cognoiflre que le deflein de Mont- Real 
eft de grande confequence, pour la conuerfion de ces 
pays: les grandes efperances qu'on en a conceu par 
le paff^, ne feront pas vaines, Dieu aidant, & pour 
moy ie crois qu'on n'en f5auroit tant conceuoir de 
bien qu'il y en a, & aura \ I'aduenir. 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 269 

though the Mataouachkariniens,'^ Onontchateronons, 
Kinonchepirinik, Weweskariniens, those of the Is- 
land, and others, — who speak the dialect of that 
region, and unite here in winter near the Hurons, — 
should go to Mont-Royal, we should still have, 
besides the Nepissiriniens, Archirigouans, Archou- 
guets, — all the Algonquins, in general, from the lake 
of the Hurons, who are still in great number. It 
is for you, who are on the spot, to think of the means 
for attracting these peoples and preserving them. 

" Liberality, no doubt, is the best chain that one 
can apply to win their hearts, especially in the misery 
that they are in, — for I have not seen Algonquins so 
poor and necessitous as those yonder. They are, 
withal, very tractable people." 

[233] Such are two specimens of letters from our 
Fathers with the Hurons, which I have reported 
word for word, — which give us to understand that 
the project of Mont- Real is of great consequence for 
the conversion of these countries. The great hopes 
that have been conceived thereof, in the past, will 
not be vain, God helping; and, for my part, I believe 
one cannot conceive all the good there is in the 
enterprise, and will be in future. 



270 



LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



[234] CHAPITRE XII. 

DES COURSES DES HIROQUOIS, & DE LA CAPTIUIT]g 
DU PERE lOGUES. 

ILy a deux fortes d'Iroquois: les vns voifms des 
Hurons, & en pareil nombre qu'eux, ou mefme 
plus grand, ils s'appellent Sant8eronons. Autre- 
fois les Hurons auoient le deffus, k prefent ceux-cy 
I'emportent, & pour le nombre & pour la force: les 
autres demeuret entre les trois Riuieres, & les Hiro- 
quois d'en-haut, & s'appellent Agneronos; il n'y a 
en ceux-cy que trois villages: faifant enuiron fept ou 
huidt cens hommes d'armes, I'habitation des Hollan- 
dois ea proche d'eux, ils y vont faire leur traidtes 
fur tout d'arquebufes, ils en ont h. prefent trois cens, 
& s'en feruent auec addreffe & hardieffe. Ce font 
ceux-cy qui couret fur nos Algonquins & Montagnets, 
& [235] guettet les Hurons par tons les endroits de la 
Riuiere, les maffacrats, les brulats, & emportants 
leur Pelterie, qu'ils vont vendre aux Hollandois, pour 
auoir de la poudre & des Arquebufes, & puis rauager 
tout & fe rendre maiflres par tout : ce qui leur eft 
affez facile, fi la France ne nous donne fecours. Car 
diuerfes maladies contagieufes, ayant confomme la 
plus grande partie des Montagnets & Algonquins, 
qui nous font voifins, ils n'ont rien h. craindre de ce 
cofte la : & d'ailleurs les Hurons qui defcendent, ve- 
nants en traidte, & non en guerre, & n'ayants aucune 
Arquebufe, s'ils font recontrez, comme il arriue d'or- 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 271 



[234] CHAPTER XII. 

OF INCURSIONS BY THE HIROQUOIS, AND THE CAPTIV- 
ITY OF FATHER JOGUES. 

THERE are two divisions of Iroquois, — the one, 
neighbors of the Hurons and equal to them in 
number, or even greater, are called Santwero- 
nons. Formerly, the Hurons had the upper hand ; 
at present, these prevail, both in number and in 
strength. The others live between the three Rivers 
and the upper Hiroquois, and are called Agneronons.^^ 
There are among these latter only three villages, 
comprising about seven or eight hundred men of 
arms. The settlement of the Dutch is near them ; ^"^ 
they go thither to carry on their trades, especially in 
arquebuses ; they have at present three hundred of 
these, and use them with skill and boldness. These 
are the ones who make incursions upon our Algon- 
quins and Montagnais, and [235] watch the Hurons 
at all places along the River, — slaughtering them, 
burning them, and carrying off their Peltry, which 
they go and sell to the Dutch, in order to have pow- 
der and Arquebuses, and then to ravage everything 
and become masters everywhere, which is fairly easy 
for them unless France gives us help. For, sundry 
contagious diseases having consumed the greater 
part of the Montagnais and Algonquins, who are 
neighbors to us, they have nothing to fear on that 
side; and, moreover, the Hurons who come down, — 
coming for trade, and not for war, and having not 



^ ^^^ I^ELATIONS D ESJ£SU/T£S [Vol. 24 

dinaire, ils n'ont autre defifence que la fuitte: & s'ils 
font pris. ils fe laiffent Her & maffacrer comme des 
moutons. Les annees precedentes, les Iroquois ve- 
noient en affez groffes troupes en certains teps de 
I'Eft^, & laiffoient apres la Riuiere libre: mais cette 
annee prefente ils ont change de delTein. & fe font 
diuifez en petites troupes de vingt, trente, cinquante. 
& de cent au plus, par tons les paffages & endroits de 
la Riuiere, & quad vne bade [236] s'en va, I'autre luy 
fuccede. Ce ne font que petites troupes bien armees, 
qui partent fans ceffe, les vnes apres les autres du 
pays des Iroquois, pour occuper toute la grande 
Riuiere, & y dreffer par tout des embufches. dont ils 
fortent h. I'impourueu & fe ietteat indifferemmet fur 
les Montagnets, Algonquins, Huros, & Frangois: on 
nous a efcrit de France, que le deffein des Holladois 
eft de faire tellemet barceler les Frafois par les Iro- 
quois, qu'ils les cotraignent de quitter & abandoner 
tout, & mefme la conuerfion des Sauuages. le ne 
puis croire que ces Meffieurs de Hollande, eftant fi 
vnis k la France, ayent cette malheureufe pefee : mais 
la pratique des Iroquois y eaant £i coforme, ils 
doiuent y apporter remede en leur habitation, comme 
M. le Gouuerneur a fait icy, empefchat fouuet nos 
Sauuages d'aller tuer des Hollandois, ce qui leur efl 
tres-facile: autrement ils auront de la peine a fe pur- 
ger, & fe mettre hors du tort. Or voicy le miferable 
fuccez des courfes des Iroquois cette annee. 

Le 9. de May dernier, fi tofl que les glaces furent 
parties de deffus la grande [237] Riuiere, huic5l Al- 
gonquins defcendans de deuers les Hurons dans deux 
canots: tons chargez de pelterie, fe mirent ^ terre, 
vn matin ^ quatre lieues des trois Riuieres, pour faire 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 273 



one Arquebus,— if they are met, as usually happens, 
have no other defense than flight; and, if they are 
captured, they allow themselves to be bound and 
massacred like sheep. In former years, the Iroquois 
came in rather large bands at certain times in the 
Summer, and afterward left the River free : but, this 
present year, they have changed their plan, and have 
separated themselves into small bands of twenty, 
thirty, fifty, or a hundred at the most, along all the 
passages and places of the River ; and when one band 
[236] goes away, another succeeds it. They are mere- 
ly small troops well armed, which set out incessantly, 
one after the other, from the country of the Iroquois, 
in order to occupy the whole great River, and to lay 
ambushes along it everywhere; from these they 
issue unexpectedly, and fall indifferently upon the 
Montagnais, Algonquins, Hurons, and French. We 
have had letters from France that the design of the 
Dutch is to have the French harassed by the Iroquois, 
to such an extent that they may constrain them to 
give up and abandon everything, — even the conver- 
sion of the Savages. I cannot believe that those 
Gentlemen of Holland, being so united to France, 
have this wretched idea; but, the practice of the 
Iroquois being so consistent with it, they ought to 
apply to it a remedy in their settlement, as Monsieur 
the Governor has done here, — often preventing our 
Savages from going to kill the Dutch. That is very 
easy for them; otherwise, they will have difficulty in 
clearing themselves and in exculpating themselves 
from the wrong. Now here is the miserable result 
of the incursions of the Iroquois this year. 

The 9th of last May, as soon as the ice was gone 
from the surface of the great [237] River, eight 



274 LES RELATIONS DBS JASUITES [Vol.24 

vn peu de feu : il auoit gele affez fort toute la nuidt, 
& auoient ram6 pendant les tenebres, craignant la 
furprife de leur ennemis. A peine auoiet-ils eft6 
demie heure ^ fe rafraifchir, que dix-neuf Iroquois 
fortent du bois, & fe iettent fur eux, tuent deux 
hommes, & amenent les autres captif s, auec toute leur 
pelterie. Le Pere Buteux auoit paff^ par \k, il n'y 
auoit que deux iours dans vn canot, accompagn^ de 
trois Hurons. C'eft miracle comme il ne fut apper- 
ceu, & pris auec fes compagnons, les dix-neuf Iro- 
quois n'efloient pas feuls, on en apperceut d'autres 
a fix ou fept lieues au deffus, tirat vers le fort de 
Richelieu. 

Vn mois apres qui fut le neufiefme de luin, vne 
autre bande de quarente fift fon coup a Mont- Real, 
& aux enuirons, ils eftoient en embufcade a demy- 
lieue, au deffus de I'habitatio du Mot-Real das I'lfle 
mefme k cent pas de la Riuiere, ils y auoient dreffe 
vn petit fort des leur arriuee, qui fut peu de iours 
auparauant [238] de 1^ ils guettoient les Hurons fur la 
Riuiere, & les Fran9ois du Mont- Real, fur terre, pour 
en furprendre quelques-vns h. I'efcar autour de 1' habi- 
tation, tout leur reiiffit a fouhait : car le fufdit iour 
neufiefme de luin, ils apperceurent foixante Hurons 
defcendans dans treize canots, fans Arquebuf es, & fans 
armes : mais tous chargez de pelteries, qui venoient 
au Mont- Real, & dela aux trois Riuieres ^ leur trait te : 
ils portoient les lettres de nos Peres des Hurons, & 
vne copie de leur Relation, Les quarante Hiroquois 
fortent du bois, fe iettent deffus, les efpouuentent de 
leurs Arquebufes, les mettent en fuitte, en prennent 
vingt-trois prisoniers, auec leur canots, & la pelterie : 
le refte fe fauue, 8c tafche de gagner 1' habitation du 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 276 



Algonquins, coining down from toward the Hurons in 
two canoes, all laden with peltry, landed one morning 
four leagues from the three Rivers, in order to make 
a little fire ; it had frozen quite hard all night, and 
they had paddled during the darkness, fearing 
surprise from their enemies. Hardly had they been 
half an hour refreshing themselves, when nineteen 
Iroquois issue from the wood, and fall upon them, 
kill two men, and take the others captive, with all 
their peltry. Father Buteux had passed by there 
only two days before, in a canoe, accompanied by 
three Hurons. It is a miracle that he was not 
perceived and taken, with his companions. The 
nineteen Iroquois were not alone ; others were seen 
six or seven leagues above, moving toward the fort 
of Richelieu. 

A month later, which was the ninth of June, an- 
other band of forty made its attack at Mont- Real and 
the environs; they were in ambush half a league 
above the settlement of Mont-Real, on the Island 
itself, a hundred paces from the River. They had 
erected a little fort there at the time of their arrival, 
which was a few days before; [238] thence they 
were watching the Hurons on the River, and the 
French of Mont- Real on land, in order to surprise 
any of them who might be scattered about the set- 
tlement. Everything succeeded for them to their 
wish; for on the aforesaid day, the ninth of June, 
they perceived sixty Hurons coming down in thirteen 
canoes, — without Arquebuses and without arms, but 
all freighted with peltries, — who were coming to 
Mont-Real, and from there to the three Rivers, for 
their trade. They carried the letters of our Fathers 
with the Hurons, and a copy of their Relation. The 



276 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 24 

Mont- Real. Les Hiroquois ne s'arreftent pas la, ils 
baillent leur vingt-trois prifonniers, tous nuds k gar- 
der, a dix de leur camarades bien armez, & en enuoy- 
ent dix autres fe letter fur cinq Frangois, qui trauail- 
loient ^ vne charpente, k deux cents pas de 1' habita- 
tion, tandis que les vingt qui reftent, fe prefentent 
[239] deuant le fort, & y donnet vne faulTe attaque, 
par vne defcharge de plus de cent coups d'arque- 
bufes : ce qui donna loifir aux autres dix de furpren- 
dre nos cinq Fran9ois, dont ils en alTommerent trois, 
k qui ils efcorchent la tefle, & enleuent les cheue- 
lures, & amenent les deux autres captifs, puis fe vont 
reioindre k leur compagnons, & tous enfemble fe ren- 
dent h. leur fort, oh. les deux Frangois furent liez & 
mis auec les Hurons captifs. Les Hiroquois paffe- 
rent la nuidt k fe refioiiir de leur prife, & en confulter 
ce qu'ils feroient. Le matin venu, ils fe riiet fur 
les prifonniers Hurons, & en affommerent treize, 
quafi fans choix, ils en referuent dix en vie, auec nos 
deux Fran9ois, & puis s'en vont aux canots prendre 
des robes de Caftor, fans nombre, «& apres en auoir 
charg^ tout ce qu'ils pouuoient, en laiffent encor plus 
d'vne trentaine fur la place, & palTent ainfi la Riui[e]re, 
triomphans de ioye, & chargez de riches defpoiiilles. 
Nos Fran9ois de I'habitation les regardent trauerfer, 
fans y pouuoir apporter aucun remede. Huidl ou 
dix iours apr^s vn des deux Francois [240] prifon- 
niers fe fauua a la fuitte, feignant h. fon hofle d'aller 
chercher du bois, pour faire la chaudiere, il rapporta 
que les Iroquois ne leur auoient fait aucun mal depuis 
leur prife, & ne les auoient tenus liez que deux iours, 
qu'ils leur fignifioiet qu'ils auoient defia des Frangois 
prifonniers, & que tous enfemble laboureroiet la terre 



1642-43] RELATION OF t642-43 277 



forty Hiroquois issue from the wood, fall upon them, 
frighten them with their Arquebuses, put them to 
flight, and take twenty-three of them prisoners, with 
their canoes and the peltry; the rest escape, and 
strive to reach the settlement of Mont-Real. The 
Hiroquois do not stop there ; they give their twenty- 
three prisoners, all naked, into the charge of ten of 
their comrades, well armed, and send ten others to 
fall upon five Frenchmen, who were working at some 
carpentry, two hundred paces from the settlement. 
Meanwhile the twenty who remain present them- 
selves [239] before the fort, and make a false attack 
on it, with a discharge of more than a hundred 
arquebus shots; this gave leisure to the other ten 
to surprise our five Frenchmen, Three of these 
they beat to death, — scalping them, and carrying 
away their hair, — and take the two others captive ; 
then they go to rejoin their companions, and all 
together betake themselves to their fort, where the 
two Frenchmen were bound, and put with the cap- 
tive Hurons. The Hiroquois passed the night in 
rejoicing over their prize, and in consulting as to 
what they should do with it. Morning having come, 
they rush upon the Huron prisoners, and beat 
thirteen of them to death, almost without selection. 
They reserve ten of them alive, along with our two 
Frenchmen, and then go away to the canoes to get 
robes of Beaver without number; and after having 
loaded all that they could of these, they leave even 
more than thirty on the spot, and thus cross the Riv- 
er, triumphant with joy, and laden with rich spoils. 
Our French of the settlement see them cross, with- 
out being able to offer any remedy. Eight or ten 
days later, one of the two French [240] prisoners 



278 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.24 

en leur pays. Au refte en ces rencontres & atta- 
ques, il ne fant pas parler de fortir fur I'ennemy: 
car comme on ne fgait pas leur venue, ny leur nom- 
bre, & qu'ils font cachez dans les bois, ou ils font 
duits k la courfe bien autremet que nos Fran9ois, les 
forties ne feruiroient qu'a fouffrir de nouueaux maf- 
facres: car d'ordinaire vne petite partie attaque, 
& r autre demeure en embufcade dans le gros du 
bois. 

Ceux des Hurons qui fe peurent fauuer k la fuitte, 
arriuerent fil "k fil, "k I'habitation du Mont-Real, par- 
tie fur le foir, partie le lendemain, tous nuds, & don- 
nerent des nouuelles de leur funefle accident, appre- 
nant auffi le noftre: on m'a efcrit du Mont- Real, que 
les cinq Fran9ois qui ont eft6 pris ou tuez : comme 
[241] s'ils euHent preueu leur mort, s'y difpofoient 
par des adtes fignalez de vertu, & par la frequentation 
des Sacrements dont ils s'elloient approchez, peu de 
iours auparauant, & quelques-vns le iour mefme de 
leur prife. 

Pendant que cette troupe de quarente, eftoient k 
Mont-Real, & y faifoient ces rauages, vne autre de 
pareil nombre eftoit dans le lac Saindt Pierre, au 
deffous du fort de Richelieu, & le douziefme de luin 
fe vint caper dans vn ancien fort, faic5t il y a quatre 
ans par les Iroquois, ^ trois ou quatre lieues des trois 
Riuieres, du cofte mefme de I'habitation. lis auoient 
auec eux trois ou quatre Hurons, pris I'an pafl^ auec 
le Pere logues: entre lef quels eftoient deux freres 
de ce grand lofeph, [connu] par la Relation des 
Hurons & par fa vertu: tous deux s'efchaperent de la 
bande des Iroquois, & s'en vinrent fur le foir aux 
trois Riuieres, oil de bonne fortune, ils trouuerent le 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 164^ - 43 279 

escaped by flight, — pretending to his host to go to 
fetch some wood, in order to prepare the kettle. He 
reported that the Iroquois had not done them any 
harm since their capture, and had kept them bound 
only two days ; that they signified to them that they 
already had French prisoners, and that all together 
were tilling the soil in their country. For the rest, 
in these encounters and attacks, one must not speak 
of making a sally upon the enemy; for, as neither 
their coming nor their number is known, and as they 
are concealed in the woods, — where they are trained 
for running, very differently from our French, — the 
sallies would avail only to undergo new massacres ; 
for usually a small party attacks, and the others 
remain in ambush in the thick of the woods. 

Those of the Hurons who could escape by flight 
arrived in single file at the settlement of Mont- 
Real, — partly toward evening, partly the next day, 
and all naked, — and gave news of their disastrous 
accident, also learning ours. I have had letters from 
Mont- Real that the five Frenchmen who were cap- 
tured or killed, as [241] if they had anticipated their 
death, were preparing themselves for it by notable 
acts of virtue, and by attendance at the Sacraments, — 
which they had approached a few days previously, 
and some, the very day of their capture. 

While this band of forty were at Mont- Real, and 
were making these ravages there, another of like 
number was on lake Saint Pierre, below the fort of 
Richelieu ; and on the twelfth of June they came to 
encamp in an old fort, made four years ago by the 
Iroquois, three or four leagues from the three Riv- 
ers, on the same side as the settlement. They had 
with them three or four Hurons, taken the year 



280 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.24 

Pere de Brebeuf, a qui ils raconterent force nou- 
uelles. Que le P. Iogue[s] eftoit encor en vie, que 
I'an pafr6 apres fa prife, pouuant s'enfuyr, il ne le 
voulut pas [242] faire, pour ne fe feparer pas des Hu- 
rons captifs, qu'apres le combat: il baptifa tousles 
prifonniers qui n'attendoiet que la mort, & ne refpi- 
roient que le Ciel, que fur le champ le Pere & les 
deux Fran9ois Coufture & Rene Goupil, receurent 
plulieurs coups de poing, & coups de bafton: mais 
que le pire traidtement qu'on leur fift, fut k la ren- 
contre de deux cents cinquate Iroquois, qui retour- 
noient de leur attaque de Richelieu, oil ils perdirent 
cinq de leur gents, & plufieurs furent bleffez. On 
ne les lia pas pourtant par les chemins qu'k leur 
entree dans le village, qu'on les mift tous en chemife 
& on leur fift plufieurs affronts & outrages, qu'on 
leur arracha la barbe, qu'on leur enleua les ongles, 
leur bruflant apres les bouts des doigts dans des calu- 
mets tous rouges de feu, qu'on couppa le poulce gau- 
che au Pere Iogue[s], qu'on luy efcrafa auec les dents, 
I'index de la main droitte, dont pourtant il fe fert vn 
peu k prefent ; qu'ils donnerent la vie k tous les Hu- 
rons, except^ k deux qui furent bruflez ; que la petite 
Therefe Seminarifte [243] des Vrfulines eftoit fort 
recherchee en mariage, qu'elle auoit demeur^ pr6s 
de fon oncle nomme lofeph, qui eft celuy qui s'eftant 
efchapp6, racontoit toutes ces nouuelles au Pere de 
Brebeuf, que Ren6 Goupil fe promenant pres du 
village auec le Pere logues, & priat Dieu tous deux 
enfemble, fut affomme d'vn coup de hache par vn 
Iroquois, qui venoit d'apprendre la mort de quel- 
ques-vns des fiens tuez, au Fort de Richelieu, Que le 



1642-43] RELATION OF jb42-43 281 

before with Father Jogues, among whom were two 
brothers of that great Joseph, known through the 
Relation of the Hurons, and by his own virtue. 
Both escaped from the band of the Iroquois, and 
came toward evening to the three Rivers, where by 
good fortune they found Father de Brebeuf , to whom 
they related plenty of news: that Father Jogues was 
still alive; that last year after his capture, though 
able to escape, he would not [242] do it, in order not 
to separate himself from the captive Hurons till after 
the combat ; he baptized all the prisoners, who were 
expecting nothing but death, and longed only for 
Heaven. They said that immediately the Father and 
the two Frenchmen, Cousture and Ren6 Goupil,^ re- 
ceived many blows with fists and clubs ; but that the 
worst treatment which was dealt them was at their 
encounter with two hundred and fifty Iroquois, who 
were returning from their attack on Richelieu, where 
they lost five of their people, and several were 
wounded. Yet they were not bound while on the 
road, except at their entrance into the village, when 
they were all stripped to their shirts, and received 
many affronts and outrages, — their beards were 
plucked out, their nails were torn out, the tips of 
their fingers being afterward burned in calumets all 
red with fire. Father Jogues had his left thumb 
cut off, and they crushed with their teeth the index 
finger of his right hand, which nevertheless he uses 
a little at present. We were told they spared the 
lives of all the Hurons except two, who were burned ; 
that the little Therese, the Seminarist [243] of the 
Ursulines, was much sought after in marriage ; that 
she had lived near her uncle named Joseph, who is 
the one who, having escaped, was relating all these 



282 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.24 

Pere Iogue[s] voyant tomber Ren6 ^ fes pieds, fe 
mift k genoux, & prefenta fa tefle a 1' Iroquois, qui 
fe contenta d'en auoir tu6 vn, que Guillaume Cou- 
fture dans le combat ne voulut pas s'enfuyr, ny fe 
feparer d'auec le Pere, que le Pere a demeur6 tout 
I'hyuer, en la cabane d'vn Capitaine Iroquois, fans 
auoir efl6 donn6 ^ perfonne, apres la prife contre 
leur couflume ; & qu'ainfi il leur eft toufiours libre 
de le faire mourir, qu'il a palTe I'liyuer auec vn feul 
capot rouge pour tout habit, ayant neantmoins liberty 
d'aller aux trois Villages, confoler & enfeigner [244] 
les Hurons & les captifs, que les Iroquois ne I'enten- 
doient pas volontiers parler de Dieu, que Coufture a 
eu le pied gele de froid, que deux HoUandois dot I'vn 
efloit mont6 "k cheual; efloient venus au village, oil 
efloit le pere logues, & auoient tafcli6 de le rachep- 
ter: mais que les Iroquois n 'auoient voulu y enten- 
dre, qu'vn des Iroquois de cette bande auoit efte 
charge d'vne grande lettre par le pere logues, pour 
nous donner; que les Iroquois parloient de les 
ramener: mais que luy ny les autres n'en croyoient 
rien. 

Voicy ce que lofeph racontoit de foy mefme: ie 
priois Dieu continuellement difoit-il, au Pere Bre- 
beuf, mes doigts me feruoiet de chappelet que ie 
parcourois tous les iours, ie faifois mon examen, & 
confeffois mes pechez ^ Dieu, comme quand ie me 
confeffe k vous autres, ie m'entretenois fans celTe 
auec Dieu, & luy parlois en mon coeur comme fl nous 
euffions eft6 deux, qui euflent parl€ enfemble, & 
ainfi ie ne m'ennuyois point, 11 quelquefois on me 
donnoit k faire feflin, ie le faifois fans aucune cere- 
monie, [245] & les Iroquois me laiffoient faire. Ie 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 283 



tidings to Father de Brebeuf . He said that Ren6 Gou- 
pil, walking near the village with Father Jogues,— 
both praying to God together, — was struck down 
with a blow of a hatchet by an Iroquois, who had just 
learned the death of some of his people, killed at the 
Fort of Richelieu ; that Father Jogues, seeing Rene 
fall at his feet, fell on his knees and offered his head to 
the Iroquois, who was content with having killed one 
of them. Guillaume Cousture, in the combat, would 
not flee or separate himself from the Father; the 
latter abode all the winter in the cabin of an Iroquois 
Captain, without having been given to any one after 
the capture, — contrary to their custom, — and thus 
it is always free to them to kill him; he passed 
the winter with a single red cape for all his cloth- 
ing. He had, nevertheless, liberty to go to the three 
Villages, to console and teach [244] the Hurons and 
the captives ; the Iroquois did not willingly hear him 
speak of God. These Hurons said that Cousture had 
his foot frozen with cold ; that two Hollanders, one 
of whom was mounted on horseback, had come to 
the village where father Jogues was, and had tried 
to ransom him, but that the Iroquois would not listen 
to it ; that an Iroquois of that band had been charged 
with a long letter, by father Jogues, to give to us; 
that the Iroquois spoke of conducting them back, 
but that he and the others put no faith in it. 

Here follows what Joseph related of himself: " I 
prayed to God continually," said he to Father Bre- 
beuf ; ' ' my fingers served me for a rosary, which I 
rehearsed every day. I made my examination, and 
confessed my sins to God, as when I confess to you ; 
I conversed incessantly with God, and spoke to him 
in my heart as if we had been two who had talked 



284 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 

connois bien que Dieu m'a fauue la vie: car ayant 
eft;6 donne ^ des gets qui n'auoient pas affez de 
moyens pour me fauuer la vie, donnant des prefents 
felon noflre couftume, il fift qu'ils ne m'accepterent 
pas, & que ie fus pour la f econde fois donne k vn autre 
qui auoit le moyen & la volonte de me deliurer de la 
mort. Si toft que ie penfois auoir pecli6, i'allois 
trouuer le Pere logues pour m'en confefler. Pour 
ce qui eft du Pere, difoit-il, il fait fes prieres tout 
ouuertement : mais pour nous il nous dif oit que nous 
priaffions tous bas, que les Iroquois n'auoiet pas 
encore de I'efprit. Le Pere, adiouftoit-il, leur parle 
de Dieu: mais ils ne I'ef content pas, il n'a qu'vn 
petit liure de prieres & Coufture I'autre, il adioufta 
encor qu'il auoit eft6 deux fois ^ I'habitation des Fla- 
mands, & fon frere quatre fois, d'ou il racontoit beau- 
coup de chofes de leur traittes, maifons &c. Mais 
ce qu'il auoit remarque fur tout, c'eft que comme on 
luy eut donn6 h. manger, & qu'il eut fait le ligne de 
la Croix, vn Hollandois luy difl que cela [246] n'eftoit 
pas bien : & en effedt, dift-il, ils ne le font pas comme 
vous, ils petunent & boiuent fans celTe, i'attendois 
dit-il, au foir qu'ils allaffent prier Dieu enfemble, 
comme vous faidtes : mais il n'y venoient point; voila 
ce que lofeph raconte. 

Reuenons h. la bande de nos Iroquois d'ou il s'eftoit 
ef chappy auec fon frere, & vn autre troifiefme qui 
arriua peu apres, les Iroquois ne voyant plus les trois 
Hurons, & fe doutants de ce qui eftoit, qu'ils s'eftoiet 
retirez aux trois riuieres, creuret eflre defcouuerts & 
s'en retournerent en leur pays : mais en mefme temps 
d'autres leur fuccederent dans le mefme lac S. Pierre 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 285 

together, and thus I was not weary. If sometimes 
they gave me wherewith to make a feast, I did so 
-without any ceremony, [245] and the Iroquois let me 
do it. I know well that God has saved my life ; for, 
having been given to people who had not sufficient 
means to save my life, by giving presents according 
to our custom, — he caused that they did not accept 
me, and that I was, for the second time, given to 
another, who had the means and the wish to deliver 
me from death. As soon as I thought I had sinned, 
I went to find Father Jogues in order to confess. As 
regards the Father," he said, " he offers his prayers 
quite openly ; but as for us, he told us that we should 
pray quite low, — that the Iroquois had as yet no 
sense. The Father," he added, " speaks to them of 
God : but they do not listen to him ; he has only one 
little book of prayers, and Cousture the other. ' ' He 
added withal, that he had been twice at the habita- 
tion of the Flemings, and his brother four times; 
whence he related many things of their trade, houses, 
etc. But what he had remarked above all was that, 
when they had given him to eat, and he had made 
the sign of the Cross, a Hollander said to him that 
that [246] was not well; "And, in fact," he said, 
"they do not do so, like you. They smoke and 
drink without ceasing. I was expecting," said he, 
* * that in the evening they would go to pray to God 
together, as you do, but they did not come to that." 
That is what Joseph relates. 

Let us return to the band of our Iroquois from 
which he had escaped with his brother, and a third 
who arrived shortly after. The Iroquois, no longer 
seeing the three Hurons, and suspecting what the 
matter was, — that they had withdrawn to the three 



286 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.24 

au deffus des trois riuieres : en forte que les Hurons 
qui s'efloient fauuez k Mont real, & qui defcedoient 
aux 3. riuieres, furet derechef rencotrez & pourfui- 
uis : mais il pleuft ^ Dieu les deliurer quoy qu'auec 
des peines infinies: car la plus part quittant leur 
canots, fe ietterent dans les bois, & vinret tous nuds 
aux trois riuieres par des chemins effroyables : quel- 
ques autres Hurons captif s des annees precedentes qui 
[247] eftoient auec ces dernieres bandes d' Iroquois, 
s'efchapperent & vinrent aux trois riuieres, & con- 
firmerent tout ce que leurs compagnons auoient dit, 
nommement qu'on parloit dans le pays, d'amener le 
Pere logues, & le rendre aux Frangois : mais comme 
on cognoift la perfidie des Iroquois, perfonne n'en 
croyoit rien. Monfieur le Gouuerneur pourtant qui 
fouhaittoit la deliurance du Pere, & la paix, fi elle 
efloit raifonnable, equippa quatre chalouppes, & s'en 
alia prepare pour la guerre ou la paix, aux trois 
riuieres ; & de Ik au Fort de Richelieu pour voir li 
les Iroquois fe prefenteroient ou fur la riuiere ou de- 
uant les habitations : mais rien ne parut, fi tofl qu'ils 
apperceuoient les chalouppes, ils entroient plus auant 
dans les bois, & les chalouppes pafT6es, ils retour- 
noient fur le bord de I'eau, guettoient les Algonquins 
& Hurons. Monfieur le Gouuerneur mettoit fouuent 
pied "k terre pour remarquer leur trace, & voir s'il 
en rencontreroit quelque trouppe dans leurs Forts 
accouflumez, pour les y attaquer. A deux lieues au 
deflus de Riche-lieu, [248] il trouua vn chemin fait 
de nouueau das le bois qui tenoit enuiron deux lieues, 
par oil les Iroquois trauerfoient & couppoient vne- 
pointe de terre pour venir de leur riuiere dans celle. 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 ' 287 

rivers, — believed they were discovered, and returned 
to their country. But, at the same time, others suc- 
ceeded them in the same lake of St. Pierre, above the 
three rivers; so that the Hurons who had escaped 
to Mont real, and who were coming down to the 3 
rivers, were again met and pursued. But it pleased 
God to deliver them, though with infinite hardships ; 
for most of them, leaving their canoes, rushed into 
the woods and came all naked to the three rivers, by 
frightful roads. Some other Hurons, captives of for- 
mer years, who [247] were with these latter bands of 
Iroquois, escaped and came to the three rivers, and 
confirmed all that their companions had said, — espe- 
cially that there was talk in the country of bringing 
hither Father Jogues and restoring him to the 
French; but, as the treachery of the Iroquois is 
known, no one believed a word of it. Monsieur the 
Governor, however, who desired the Father's deliver- 
ance, and peace if it were reasonable, equipped four 
shallops and went, prepared for war or peace, to the 
three rivers, and thence to the Fort of Richelieu, in 
order to see if the Iroquois would present themselves 
on the river or before the habitations. But nothing 
appeared ; as soon as they perceived the shallops, they 
entered further within the woods; and, the shallops 
having passed, they returned to the edge of the wa- 
ter, and kept watch on the Algonquins and Hurons. 
Monsieur the Governor often landed, in order to 
examine their trail, and to see if he might encounter 
some band of them in their customary Forts, in 
order to attack them there. Two leagues above 
Riche-lieu [248] he found a road newly made in the 
woods, which extended about two leagues, whereby 
the Iroquois traversed and cut off a point of land in 



288 



LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



de S. Laurens, portants leur canots & bagage fur 
leurs efpaules, & ne point palTer deuant le Fort de 
Riche-lieu. Si Monfieur le Gouuerneur euft eu les 
foldats qu'il efperoit de France, il euft fans doubte 
donne iufques dedans le pays des Iroquois, auec 200. 
ou 300. Algonquins & Montagnets qui s'offroient ^ 
luy faire compagnie, & ie croy que c'euft efte auec 
vn tres bon effedt, & qu'il euft cotraindt ces Barbares 
orgueilleux a vne paix honnefte, ou les euft entiere- 
ment domtez. II ne faut pas que ce que i'ay dit cy- 
deffus, donne de la terreur extraordinaire : quand les 
Iroquois ont rencontre de la refiftance, ils ont lafche 
le pied auffi toft, ou pluftoft que les autres. Les Al- 
gonquins eftant en nombre raifonnable les ont faidt 
fouuent trembler & fuyr. Reuenons h. leurs courfes 
de cette annee, nonobftant lefquelles les Algonquins 
ne laiffoient pas d'aller ^ la chaffe, [249] ils ne peu- 
uent fe paffer de ces exercices fans mourir de faim, 
la terre ne leur done pas encore affez, il vaut autant, 
difent-ils, mourir de la main ou du fer des Iroquois, 
que d'vne cruelle faim. Le 30. luillet fept ieunes 
Algonquins allerent h. la chaffe vers Mont-real, ils 
eftoient quafi tous Chreftiens, ils rencontrerent deux 
canots Iroquois, I'vn defquels, ou il y auoit douze 
hommes, courut incontinent fur eux: ces bons ieunes 
hommes ne s'efpouuanterent point ; le Pere le leune 
leur auoit dit en partant, fi vous fuyez la mort, vous 
la trouuerez, fi vous la cherchez, elle vous fuyra: re- 
commandez-vous k Dieu li vous rencontres les enne- 
mis : ils fe feruent de ce confeil, ils prient Dieu fer- 
uemment en leur coeur, & nagent droit tant qu'ils 
peurent vers les Iroquois qui defchargent fur eux, dix 



i 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 289 



order to come from their river into that of St. Law- 
rence, bearing their canoes and baggage on their 
shoulders, and not to pass before the Fort of Riche- 
lieu. If Monsieur the Governor had had the soldiers 
for whom he was hoping from France, he would no 
doubt have proceeded even into the country of the 
Iroquois, with 200 or 300 Algonquins and Monta- 
gnais who offered themselves to keep him company ; 
and I believe that this would have produced a very 
good effect, and that he would have constrained those 
proud Barbarians to an honest peace, or have entirely 
subdued them. What I have said herein above, need 
not give extraordinary terror; when the Iroquois 
have encountered resistance, they have given way 
as soon as, or sooner than, the others. The Algon- 
quins, being in reasonable number, have often made 
them tremble and flee. Let us return to their incur- 
sions of this year, notwithstanding which the Algon- 
quins failed not to go to the chase; [249] they cannot 
forego that exercise without dying from hunger. 
The land does not yet yield enough for them ; " As 
well," they say, " die by the hand, or by the iron of 
the Iroquois, as of a cruel hunger." The 30th of 
July, seven young Algonquins went to the chase 
toward Mont-real, — they were nearly all Christians; 
they encountered two Iroquois canoes, one of which, 
in which there were twelve men, ran straightway 
upon them. These good young men were not fright- 
ened ; Father le Jeune had said to them on leaving : 
"" If you flee death, you will find it; if you seek it, it 
will flee from you. Commend yourselves to God, if 
you meet the enemy. " They observe this counsel, — 
they pray to God fervently in their hearts, and 
paddle with all their might straight toward the Iro- 



290 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

ou douze coups d arquebuze, fans autre effect que de 
percer vn canot & bleffer vn Algonquin par le pied ; 
les Algonquins s'aduancent touliours & defchargent 
deux ou trois arquebufes qu'ils auoient, & renuerfent 
deux Iroquois bleffez a mort dans leur cannot, & les 
[250] contraignent de fe mettre tous k terre, & de fe 
retirer, li ces leunes Algonquins euffent eu de la 
pouldre pour continuer & pourfuiure dauantage, ils 
euflent tue la plufpart de la bande, mais nous auons 
toufiours eu peur d'armer trop les Sauuages ; pleufl 
'k Dieu que les Holandois euffent fait le mefme, & ne 
nous euffent pas forcez a donner des armes mefmes 
^ nos Chreftiens: car iufques ^ prefent on n'en a 
traitt6 qu'k ceux-lk. 

Le 15. d'Aoufl vingt Algonquins partirent des trois 
riuieres, pour aller k la chaffe vers Richelieu, eftant 
dans le lac de S. Pierre, a fept ou huidt lieues de 
rhabitation, k remboucheure d'vne riuiere appellee 
faindl Francois, ils fe diuiferent en deux bandes pour 
chaffer mieux, I'vne qui eftoit compof^e de douze, 
rencontre incontinent vingt Iroquois bien armes, les 
voila aux prifes, premierement auec les arquebufes, 
les Iroquois en auoient au double, puis auec I'efp^e, 
enfin auec le coufteau : quelques-vns de part & d'au- 
tre font tuez, les Algonquins fe voyants plus foibles, 
prennent la fuitte: trois auec vn Huron qui fe [251] 
trouua en leur compagnie, font faits prifonniers, ils 
en bruflerent vn, Dieu fift la grace k 2. autres qui 
eftoient Chreftiens de s'efchapper, ils nous rapporte- 
rent que les Iroquois eftoient quafi tous bleffez, & 
quelques vns a mort, "k mefme temps que cela fe 
paffoit dans le lac de S. Pierre, il y auoit 2. autres 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 291 

quois, who discharge upon them ten or twelve arque- 
bus shots, without other effect than to pierce one 
canoe and to wound one Algonquin in the foot. The 
Algonquins continually advance, and discharge two 
or three arquebuses that they had; they prostrate 
two Iroquois, wounded to death in their canoe, and 
[250] constrain them all to go ashore and retreat. If 
these Young Algonquins had had powder to continue 
and pursue further, they would have killed most of 
the band ; but we have always been afraid to arm the 
Savages too much. Would to God that the Holland- 
ers had done the same, and had not compelled us 
to give arms even to our Christians, — for hitherto, 
these have been traded only to the latter. 

The 15th of August, twenty Algonquins left the 
three rivers in order to go to the chase toward Riche- 
lieu. When in the lake of St. Pierre, seven or eight 
leagues from the settlement, at the mouth of a river 
called saint Fran9ois, they separated themselves into 
two bands, in order to hunt better. The one, which 
was composed of twelve, straightway encounters 
twenty Iroquois, well armed ; then they were in close 
conflict, — first with the arquebuses, of which the 
Iroquois had twice as many, then with the javelin, 
finally with the knife. Some on both sides were 
killed; the Algonquins, seeing themselves weaker, 
took flight; three, with a Huron who [251] happened 
to be in their company, were made prisoners. They 
burned one of these; God granted the favor to 2 
others, who were Christians, to escape. They re- 
ported to us that the Iroquois were nearly all 
wounded, and some, to death. At the same time 
when that was occurring in the lake of St. Pierre, 
there were 2 other bands of Iroquois, who were 



292 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.24 

trouppes d' Iroquois qui rodoiet autour du Fort de 
Riche-lieu ils auoient auec eux vn Huron captif , mais 
Iroquois d'affedlion, celuy cy fe mift feul das vn canot, 
& s'aduanga vers le Fort, & demanda k parler: on le 
regoit, on le fait entrer, on luy demade qui il eft & 
ce qui I'ameine, il refpond qu'il eft Iroquois, & qu'il 
veut traitter de paix pour luy & pour fes compa- 
gnons, il prefente quelques caftors k cet effect : on 
luy demande s'il a nouuelle du Pere logues, il tire 
vne lettre de fa part & la prefente, puis demande k 
s'en retourner, on luy dit que la lettre s'addreffe k 
Mr. le Gouuern. qui eft ^ Kebec, ou aux 3. riuieres, 
& qu'il faut qu'il attede refpoce, il demade qu'6 tire 
vn coup de cano, ce qu'o fift & incotinet fes cama- 
rades paroillent en 3. ou 4. canots: ils nagent tou- 
fiours pour [252] venir vers le Fort, on leur crie qu'ils 
s'arreftet par trois ou quatre fois; h. quoy n'obeyffant 
point, on tire fur eux : ce qui les contraignit de fe 
mettre k terre, & s'enfuyr dans les bois abandon- 
nants leur canots & bagage, on ne f9ait point s'ils ont 
efte tues ou bleffes. 

Peu de iours apres, vne trouppe d'enuiron 100, Iro- 
quois parut au mefme lieu dans vnze grads canots, ils 
auoient paffe au deffus Mont-real, y eftoient demeu- 
rez plufieurs iours en embufches, s'eftoient prefentez 
deuant I'habitation, & foubs couleur de quelque figne 
de paix, auoient tafch^ d'attirer pr6s d'eux quelques 
Algonquins de la nation d'Iroquet, qu'on auoit enuoy6 
parlementer de loing, fur lefquels ils defchargerent 
en trahifon plus de cent coups d'arquebufe: mais 
graces k Dieu fans effedt, ils eftoient depuis defcen- 
.dus k Richelieu oil fe voyans defcouuerts, ils fe reti- 



I 



1642-43] RELATION OF J642-43 293- 



prowling about the Fort of Riche-lieu ; they had with 
them a captive Huron, but an Iroquois by affection. 
The latter took his place alone in a canoe, and ad- 
vanced toward the Fort, and requested to speak ; they 
receive him, — they have him enter, they ask him 
who he is, and what brings him. He answers that 
he is an Iroquois, and that he wishes to treat of peace 
for himself and for his companions; he presents 
some beavers with this object. They ask him if 
he has news of Father Jogues; he draws forth a 
letter from him and presents it, then asks to return. 
They tell him that the letter is addressed to Mon- 
sieur the Governor, who is at Kebec or at the 3. 
rivers, and that he must wait for an answer; he re- 
quests that they fire a cannon shot, which is done, 
and straightway his comrades appear in 3 or 4 canoes. 
They paddle vSteadily, in order to [252] come toward 
the Fort; they are hailed to stop, three or four 
times, — which not obeying, they are fired upon ; that 
constrained them to go ashore, and flee into the 
woods, abandoning their canoes and baggage ; it is 
not known whether they were wounded or killed. 

Not many days later, a band of about 100 Iroquois 
appeared at the same place, in eleven great canoes ; 
they had crossed above Mont-real, had remained 
there several days in ambush, and had presented 
themselves before the settlement. There, under 
pretext of some sign of peace, they had essayed to 
attract near them some Algonquins of the Iroquet 
nation, who had been sent to parley at a distance, 
upon whom they treacherously discharged more than 
a hundred arquebus shots, — but, thanks to God, 
without effect. They had afterward come down to 
Richelieu, where, seeing themselves discovered, 



294 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

rerent. Voicy la coppie de la lettre du Pere logues 
efcrite des Iroquois, que ce Huron dont i'ay parle, 
apporta & dona k Monfieur de Champ-flour : elle s'ad- 
drefle ^ Monfieur le Gouuerneur, [253] c'eft vn grand 
dommage que les trois autres qu'il nous efcriuoient 
auparauant ont efl6 perdues. 

Monfieur, voicy la 4. que i'efcris depuis que ie fuis 
aux Iroquois. Le temps & le papier me manquent, 
pour repeter icy ce que ie vous ay defia mande tout 
au long, Couflure & moy viuons encor. Henry (c'eft 
vn de ces deux ieunes hommes qui furent pris ^ 
Mont-real) fut amen6 la veille de faindt lean, il ne 
fut pas charge de coups de bafton "k 1* entree du vil- 
lage comme nous, ny n'a point eu les doigts couppez 
come nous ; il vit & tous les Huros amenez auec luy 
dans le pays ; f oyez fur vos gardes par tout, toufiours 
nouuelles trouppes partent, & faut fe perfuader que 
iufques das I'Automne, la riuiere n'eft fans ennemis, 
il y a icy pres de trois cents arquebufes, fept cent 
Iroquois: ils font adroits "k les manier, ils peuuet 
arriuer aux trois riuieres par diuers fleuues, le Fort de 
Richelieu leur donne vn peu plus de peine, mais ne 
les empefche pas tout k faidt. Les Iroquois difent 
que fi ceux qui ont pris & tue les Frangois a Mont- 
real, [254] euffent fceu ce que vous auez faidt en reti- 
rant le Sokokiois que vous auez deliur^ des mains des 
Algonquins, ils n' euffent pas faidt cela, ils eftoient 
partis au milieu de I'hyuer, & deuant que la nouuelle 
en vint: Neantmoins tout fraifchement il eft party 
vne trouppe, & I'homme de Mathurin (le Pere Bre- 
beuf le cognoift bien) y eft, & conduit la bande comme 
k noflre prife de I'an paff6. Cette trouppe defire & 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 295 

they retreated. Here follows a copy of the letter 
from Father Jogues, written from the Iroquois, which 
that Huron of whom I have spoken, brought and 
gave to Monsieur de Champ-flour : it is addressed to 
Monsieur the Governor. [253] It is a great pity that 
three others, which he wrote to us previously, have 
been lost. 

" Monsieur, here is the 4th that I have written 
since I am with the Iroquois. Time and paper fail 
me to repeat here what I have already conveyed to 
you at great length. Cousture and I are still living. 
Henry (one of those two young men who were taken 
at Mont-real) was brought here the eve of saint 
John's day. He was not loaded with blows from 
clubs at the entrance to the village, like us, nor has 
he had his fingers cut, like us; he lives, and all the 
Hurons brought with him into the country. Be on 
your gfuard everywhere ; new bands are always leav- 
ing, and we must persuade ourselves that, until the 
Autumn, the river is not without enemies. There 
are here nearly three hundred arquebuses, and seven 
hundred Iroquois ; they are skilled in handling them. 
They can arrive at the three rivers by various 
streams; the Fort of Richelieu gives them a little 
more trouble, but does not hinder them altogether. 
The Iroquois say that if those who took and killed 
the French at Mont-real [254] had known what you 
have done, — in redeeming the Sokokiois whom you 
delivered from the hands of the Algonquins, — they 
would not have done that; they had started in the 
midst of the winter, and before the news of it came. 
Nevertheless, quite recently there has departed a 
band, and the man of Mathurin (Father Brebeuf 
knows him well) is in it, and leads the band, as at 



296 



LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.24 



a deffein de prendre des Fran9ois, auffi bien que des 
Algonquins, Que noare confideration n'empefche de 
faire ce qui eft a la gloire de Dieu. Le deffein des 
Iroquois autant que ie peux voir, eft de prendre s'ils 
peuuent tous les Hurons, & ayant mis k mort les plus 
confiderables, & vne bonne partie des autres, ne faire 
des deux qu'vn feul peuple & vne feule terre. I' ay 
vne grande compaffion de ces pauures gents, dont 
plufieurs font Chrefties, les autres Catecumenes, & 
difpofez au baptefme : quand eft-ce qu'on apportera 
remede k ces mal-heurs? quand ils feront tous pris? 
Fay receu plufieurs lettres des Hurons [255] auec la 
Relation prife aupres de Mont-real. Les Hollandois 
nous ont voulu retirer : mais en vain : ils taf chent de 
le faire encor ^ prefent, mais ce fera encor comme ie 
croy auec la mefme illue. Ie me confirme de plus 
en plus k demeurer icy tant qu'il plaira ^ Noftre 
Seigneur, & ne m'en aller point, quand mefme I'occa- 
fion s'en prefenteroit. Ma prefence confole les Fran- 
cois Hurons & Algonquins. I 'ay baptife plus de 
foixante perfonnes, plufieurs defquels font arriuez 
au Ciel. C'eft la mon vnique confolation & la volon- 
X.€ de Dieu, k laquelle tres volontiers ie conioidls la 
mienne. Ie vous fupplie de recommander qu'on faffe 
des prieres, & qu'on dife des meffes pour nous, & fur 
tout pour celuy qui defire eft;re ^ iamais. 

MONSIEVR, 

Voftre tres-liumble feruiteur Ifaac 
logues de la Compagnie de 
Iesvs. 
Du village des Iroquois le 30. 
luin 1643. 



1642 -43 J RELATION OF 1642-43 297 

our capture last year. This troop desires and pur- 
poses to take some French, as well as Algonquins. 
Let not regard for us prevent from doing that which 
is to the glory of God. The design of the Iroquois, 
as far as I can see, is to take, if they can, all the Hu- 
rons ; and, having put to death the most considerable 
ones and a good part of the others, to make of them 
both but one people and only one land. I have a 
great compassion for these poor people, several of 
whom are Christians, — the others Catechumens, and 
ready for baptism ; when shall a remedy be applied 
to these misfortunes? when they shall all be tak- 
en? I have received several letters from the Hurons, 
[255] with the Relation taken near Mont-real.^ The 
Dutch have tried to ransom us, but in vain ; they are 
still endeavoring to do so at present, but it will again 
be, as I believe, with the same result. I become 
more and more resolved to dwell here as long as it 
shall please Our Lord, and not to go away, even 
though an opportunity should present itself. My 
presence consoles the French, the Hurons, and the Al- 
gonquins. I have baptized more than sixty persons, 
several of whom have arrived in Heaven. That is 
my single consolation, and the will of God, to which 
very gladly I unite my own. I beg you to recom- 
mend that prayers be said, and that masses be offered 
for us, and above all for the one who desires to be 
forever, 

MONSIEUR, 

Your very humble servant, Isaac 
Jogues, of the Society of 
Jesus. 
" From the village of the Iroquois, the 30th 
of June, 1643." 



298 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.24 

[256] Cette lettre a plus de fuc que de parolles, la 
tiffure en eft excellente quoy que la main qui en a 
form6 les charadteres, foit toute dechir^e, elle eft 
compofee d'vn ftile plus fublime que celuy qui fort 
des plus pompeufes ecoles de la Rhetorique: mais 
pour mieux cognoiftre les richefles de celuy qui la 
tracees, il en faut confiderer la pauuret^. Quelques 
Hurons faits prifonniers auec ce bon Pere, s'eftans 
fauu6s ce printemps dernier des mains des Iroquois, 
nous ont fait conceuoir la riche liberte de ce pauure 
captif , & nous voulans depeindre les baffelTes ou les 
hommes I'ont iette, nous ont donn6 vne belle idee de 
fes grandeurs. Les Iroquois I'ayant pris le 2. iour 
d'Aouft 1642. le traifnerent en leur pays auec des cris 
& des hu^es de Demons, qui emportent leur proye, 
il fut falu^ de cent baftonnades k 1' entree de la Bour- 
gade, ou il fut premierement conduit: il n'y eut fils 
de bonne mere qui ne iettaft la patte ou la griffe fur 
cette pauure vidtime : les vns le f rappoient a grands 
coups de cordes, d'autres k coups de baftons, les vns 
luy tiroient & [257] emportoient les cheueux de la 
tefte, les autres par derifio luy arrachoient le poil de 
la barbe: vne femme, ou plutoft vne Megere, luy 
prend le bras & luy couppe, ou plutoft luy fcie auec 
vn coufteau, le poulce de la main gauche : elle fait 
vn cerne & s'en va rechercher la iointure, auec moins 
d'induftrie: mais auec plus de cruaute qu'vn boucher 
n'en exergoit fur vne befte morte : bref elle luy def- 
cbarne & enleue tout le gros du poulce, vn autre luy 
mord vn des doigts de la main droite, offence I'os, & 
rend ce pauure doigt perclus & inutil, d'autres luy 
arrachent les ongles, puis mettent du feu fur I'extre- 
mite de ces pauures doigts, defpoiiilles, pour rendre 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 299 

[256] This letter contains more substance than 
words; its construction is excellent, although the 
hand which formed its characters is all torn; it is 
composed in a style more sublime than that which 
proceeds from the most pompous schools of Rhetoric ; 
but in order better to understand the riches of him 
who traced it, one must consider his poverty. Some 
Hurons, made prisoners with this good Father, hav- 
ing escaped this last spring from the hands of the 
Iroquois, have given us an idea of the rich liberty of 
this poor captive ; and, wishing to depict to us the 
abasement into which men have thrown him, have 
given us a noble idea of his grandeur. The Iroquois, 
having taken him the 2nd day of August, 1642, 
dragged him into their country, with the shouts and 
hootings of Demons who carry off their prey. He 
was greeted with a hundred beatings at the entrance 
to the Village where he was first conducted; there 
was no good mother's son who did not fling his paw 
or claw on this poor victim, — some struck him with 
heavy blows of cords, others with blows of sticks; 
some pulled and [257] carried away the hair of his 
head; others, in derision, tore out the hair of his 
beard. A woman, or rather a Megera, takes his arm 
and cuts off, or rather saws off, with a knife the 
thumb of his left hand; she cuts a gash, and goes in 
quest of the joint, with less skill, but with more cru- 
elty than a butcher exercises upon a dead beast ; in 
short, she lacerates and removes the whole mass of 
the thumb. Another bites one of the fingers of his 
right hand, injures the bone, and renders that poor 
finger crippled and useless; others tear out his nails, 
then put fire on the end of those poor fingers, — laid 
bare, in order to render the martyrdom more keenly 



300 



LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.24 



le martyre plus fenfible. A tous ces maux le pauure 
Pere n'eufl point d'autre Medecin, ny d' autre Chi- 
rurgien, que la patience, point d'autre vnguent que 
la douleur, point d'autre enueloppe que I'air, qui 
enuironnoit fes playes : ce n'efl pas tout, ces 
Barbares luy arrachent fa foutane, ils le defpouil- 
let, & pour couurir fa nudite, luy iettent vn bout 
d'vne vieille peau, chargee de falet^ & de puanteur, 
il s'en couure la moiti6 [258] du corps, il a les pieds 
& les iambes nues, les bras nuds, la tefte nue : il a 
pour maifon des 6corces, la terre eft fon lit, & fon 
matelas; le bout d'vne peau ou d'vn capot qui luy 
fert de robe, pedant le iour, luy fert encor de cou- 
uerture pendant la nui(5t; fon viure n'eft pour I'ordi- 
naire copofe que d'vn peu de farine de bled d'Inde 
boiiillie das I'eau fans fel; fes oreilles sot battues de 
mille gaufleries, de mille brocards, & de mille in- 
iures, que ces Barbares vomifTent contre les Frangois, 
& cotre les Sauuages Chreftiens, & contre nos 
alliez. Prens courage, mon nepueu, luy dira vn 
Capitaine, en fe gauffant, ne t'afflige point, tu 
verras bie toft icy quelques-vns de tes freres, qui 
te viendront tenir compagnie. Nos guerriers ont 
enuie de manger de la chair des Francois, tu en pour- 
ras goufter auec nous : voila comme on nous a depeint 
ce Martyr viuant, ce Cofeffeur fouffrant, c6t homme 
riche das 1' extreme pauuret^, ioyeux & content dans 
le pays des douleurs, & de la trifteff e : en vn mot ce 
lefuitte veftu ^ la Sauuage, ou plutoft k la fainc5t lean 
Baptif[t]e: ruminons ie vous prie ces paroles: [259] 
Que nojire conjideration (dit-il) n empefche point de /aire 
ce qui eji a la gloire de Dieu. C'eft k dire, n'ayez point 
d'efgard k ma vie, regardez moy, comme vn home 



1642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642 - 43 301 

felt. For all these pains, the poor Father had no 
other Physician or other Surgeon than patience ; no 
other salve than pain, no other cover than the air 
which surrounded his wounds. This is not all, — 
those Barbarians tear off his cassock; they strip him, 
and, to cover his nakedness, throw at him a bit of an 
old skin, charged with filth and stench. He covers 
half [258] of his body with it; he has his feet and his 
legs bare, his arms bare, his head bare. He has for 
house some pieces of bark ; the earth is his bed and 
his mattress; a fragment of skin, or of a cape, which 
serves him as robe during the day, still serves him 
as cover during the night. His living, as a rule, is 
composed only of a little meal of Indian corn, boiled 
in water without salt. His ears are assailed with a 
thousand jeers, a thousand taunts, and a thousand 
insults, — which those Barbarians vomit against the 
French, against the Christian Savages, and against 
our allies. " Take courage, my nephew," a Captain 
will say to him, jeering; " be not grieved, thou wilt 
soon see some of thy brothers here, who will come 
to keep thee company. Our warriors desire to eat of 
the flesh of the French, — thou wilt be able to taste it 
with us." Behold how they have depicted to us this 
living Martyr, this suffering Confessor, this man rich 
in extreme poverty, joyful and contented in the land 
of pains and sadness, — in a word, this Jesuit clothed 
like a Savage, or rather like saint John the Baptist. 
Let us meditate, I beg you, upon these words: [259] 
Let not regard for lis (he says) prevent from doing that 
which is to the glory of God. That is to say, " Have 
not regard for my life ; regard me as a man already 
dead. I know well that if you illtreat the Iroquois, 
I am murdered, — I no longer account myself among 



302 



LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 24 



defia mort: ie fgay bien que ^i vous traitez mal les 
Iroquois, ie fuis maffacr^, ie ne me conte plus entre 
les viuans; ma vie eft ^ Dieu, faites tout ce que vous 
iugerez de plus ^ propos, pour fa gloire. Que lefus- 
Chrift eft puiffant das vn bon coeur ! fa bont6 ne f e 
laiffe pas vaincre, elle fait gloire de triompher dans 
Ie plus grand abandon. Ie me confirme de plus en plus 
(adioufte-il) a demeurer icy, tant gu'il plaira h nojlre 
Seigneur, & h ne m' en point aller, quand me/me roccafion 
s'en pre/enteroit: Que cette generofit6 eft agreable ^ 
Dieu! ca homme dont tous les fens n'ont que des 
obiets de douleur, dit qu'il ne fe fauueroit pas quand 
il Ie pourroit faire. Ma pre fence {^OMTiM\t-\\) confole 
les Francois, les Hurons & les Algonquins. II y a deux 
Francois captifs auec ce bon Pere, quantite de 
Hurons, & quantity d'Algonquins, dont quelques-vns 
font Chreftiens, & les autres ont enuie de I'eftre: 
voudriez-vous bien que ce [260] coeur plein de feu,, 
que ce Pafteur plein d'amour abandonnaft fes ouail- 
les: certes il n'eft point larron, ny mercenaire: pour 
commettre vne i:i grande perfidie, encore que ces pa- 
roles nous ayent tir^ les larmes des yeux, elles n'ont 
pas laiffe d'augmenter la ioye de noftre coeur: il y 
en a qui luy porte plus d'enuie que de compaffion, 
quitter les creatures pour Dieu, ce n'eft pas vn mau- 
uais change. Fay Baptif^ plus de foixante per/onnes. 
Nous croyons que ce font des Hurons, & des Algon- 
quins fes concaptifs, & peut-eftre encore quelques 
petits enfans Iroquois mourans, qui prient Dieu dans 
les cieux, pour leurs parens, c'eji la mon vnique con/ola- 
tion, & la volontd de Dieu, a laquelle tres volontiers ie 
conioints la mie7ine. Voicy de riches paroles! mais 
encore qui pourroit confoler ce pauure Pere, fmon 



1 642 - 43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 308 

the living. My life is God's; do all that you shall 
judge most suitable for his glory." How powerful 
is Jesus Christ in a pious heart ! His goodness does 
not allow itself to be vanquished, it makes a glory 
of triumphing in the greatest desolation. / become 
more and more resolved (he adds) to dwell here as long as 
it shall please our Lord, and not logo atvay, even though the 
opportunity should present itself. How agreeable is 
such generosity to God ! This man, all whose senses 
have nothing but objects of pain, says that he would 
not escape though he could do so. My presence (he 
continues) consoles the French, the Hurons, and the Al- 
gonquins. There are two captive Frenchmen with this 
good Father, many Hurons, and many Algonquins, — 
some of whom are Christians, and the others desire to 
be : would you, indeed, that this [260] heart full of fire, 
that this Pastor full of love, should abandon his 
sheep? Surely he is not a thief or hireling, to com- 
mit so great a treachery. Although these words 
have drawn the tears from our eyes, they have not 
failed to augment the joy of our hearts : there is one 
of us who feels toward him more envy than compas- 
sion ; to give up creatures for God, is not a bad ex- 
change. / have Baptized more than sixty persons. We 
suppose that these are Hurons and Algonquins, his 
fellow captives ; and perhaps further, some little Iro- 
quois children, dying, who pray to God in the heav- 
ens for their parents, — that is my single consolation, 
and the zvill of God, to which very gladly I unite my own. 
These are glorious words ! But moreover, who could 
console this poor Father, if not the one who alone is 
left for him, and whom the whole Universe cannot 
ravish from him ! The two Frenchmen who are with 
the Father give us astonishment, — that one, espe- 



304 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.24 

celuy qui luy eft refte feul, & que tout I'Vniuers ne 
luy fgauroit rauir ! Les deux Fran5ois qui font auec 
le Pere, nous donnent de reftonnement, celuy notam- 
ment qui fe nomme Guillaume Coufture: ce ieune 
liomme fe pouuoit fauuer: mais la penfee luy en 
eftant venue, non, dit-il, ie [261] veux mourir auec 
le Pere, ie ne le f9aurois abandonner, ie fouffriray 
volontiers le feu & la rage de ces tygres, pour I'a- 
mour de lefus-Chrift, en la compagnie de mon bon 
Pere, c'eft parler en homme vrayement fidelle, auffi ne 
s'eftoit-il pas iette dans ces dangers, pour aucune 
confideration temporelle. La lettre porte qu'il eftoit 
party des Iroquois, vne troupe conduite par rhomme 
de Mathurin, c'eft a dire par vn Huron pris des Iro- 
quois, & qui a perdu I'affedtion de fon pays, & de fes 
compatriotes, aufquels il fait la guerre maintenant, 
comme il f9ait les endroits ou ils doiuet paller, il les 
va attendre & furprendre au palTage, ce fut ce mife- 
rable reni6, qui deffit les Hurons, auec lefquels le 
Pere fe rencontra, on I'appelle rhomme de Mathurin, 
pour ce qu'il ramena des Hurons, deuant qu'il fut 
pris des Iroquois, vn braue ieune homme qui portoit 
ce nom, lequel apres s'eftre bien comporte auec nos 
Peres, en ce bout du monde, eft repaffe en France, 
pour fe donner ^ Dieu, dans le faindt Ordre des Reue- 
rends Peres Capucins, ou il k fait profeffion. 

[262] Au refte cette lettre eftoit efcrite partie en 
Fran9ois, partie en Latin partie en langue Sauuage, 
afin que fi elle tomboit entre les mains de quelque 
autre, que de celuy auquel elle s'adrelloit, il ne put 
aifement defcouurir les bons aduis que le Pere 
nous donne. 

Monfieur le Gouuerneur qui eftoit aux trois Ri- 



1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 305 

cially, who is named Guillaume Cousture. This 
young man was able to escape ; but the thought of it 
having come to him, — " No," he says, " I [261] wish 
to die with the Father ; I cannot forsake him ; I will 
gladly suffer the fire and the rage of these tigers, for 
the love of Jesus Christ, in the company of my good 
Father. " That is speaking like a truly faithful man, 
as, indeed, he had not thrown himself into these 
dangers for any temporal consideration. The letter 
states that there had started from the Iroquois a band 
led by the man of Mathurin, — that is to say, by a 
Huron taken by the Iroquois, who has lost affection 
for his country and his fellow countrymen, on whom 
he now makes war. As he knows the places where 
they are to pass, he goes to await and surprise them 
at the passage; it was this miserable renegade 
who defeated the Hurons with whom the Father 
happened to be. They call him " the man of 
Mathurin," because he brought back from the 
Hurons, before he was taken by the Iroquois, a worthy 
young man who bore that name ; who, after having 
well conducted himself with our Fathers in this end 
of the world, crossed back to France, in order to give 
himself to God in the holy Order of the Reverend 
Capuchin Fathers, wherein he has made profession. 

[262] Furthermore, this letter was written partly 
in French, partly in Latin, partly in the Savage 
tongue, so that if it fell into the hands of some one 
else than the one to whom it was addressed, he could 
not easily discover the good counsel which the 
Father gives us. 

Monsieur the Governor, who was at the three Riv- 
ers, made answer to the letter of Father Jogues ; I 
wrote to him also, quite at length, and sent Father 



^^ ^^^ RELATIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol. 24 

uieres, fifl refponce k la lettre du Pere logues, ie luy 
efcriuis auffi bien an long, & enuoyay le Pere Bre- 
beuf ^ Richelieu, pour conferer auec ce Huron fur 
fon retour aux Iroquois: mais le pauure homme nous 
mift en vne nouuelle peine bien grander car crai- 
gnant que les Iroquois dans le pays ne le priffent 
pour efpion, & pour auoir quelque intelligence auec 
nous, il declara tout net, qu'il ne retourneroit plus 
aux Iroquois: mais aux Hurons: & n'y euft moyen 
de luy perfuader autre chofe: {, bien que nous 
demeurafmes priuez de cette confolation ; & le Pere 
logues encore plus que nous n'ayant aucune refponce, 
ny nouuelle de noftre pays, & peut-eflre en danger 
[263] d'eflre mis k mort, fur le foup9on que les Bar- 
bares auront, qu'on aura fait quelque mal au Huron 
captif, qui eftoit de leur bande. I'efpere pourtant 
que noftre bon Dieu qui I'a conferu6 iufques icy, con- 
tinuera fes mifericordes, «& fe feruira de la vertu de 
ce Pere, pour le falut de ces peuples, & pour quelque 
bon effedt, que fa diuine prouidence cognoift. 



i 



1642-43] RELA TION OF 1642-43 307 

Brebeuf to Richelieu in order to confer with that 
Huron about his return to the Iroquois. But the 
poor man placed us in a new difficulty, a very great 
one, — for, fearing lest the Iroquois in the country 
should take him for a spy, and for having some 
intelligence with us, he declared very plainly that he 
would return no more to the Iroquois, but to the 
Hurons ; and there was no way of persuading him to 
anything else. Consequently, we remained deprived 
of that consolation, and Father Jogues still more than 
we, — having no answer or news from our country, 
and perhaps in danger [263] of being put to death 
upon the suspicion which the Barbarians will have, 
that some harm may have been done to the captive 
Huron who was of their band. I hope, however, 
that our good God, who has preserved him hitherto, 
will continue his mercies, and will employ this 
Father's virtue for the salvation of these peoples, and 
for some good result which his divine providence 
knows. 



NOTES TO VOL. XXIV 

(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages' 
of English text.) 

1 (p. 43). — Cf. the two prayers in Montagnais given by Le Jeune 
in vol. vii., pp. 152-157. See also Trumbull's valuable contribution 
to Algonkin comparative grammar, "Notes on Forty Versions of 
the Lord's Prayer in Algonkin Languages," Amer. Philol. Soc. 
Trans., 1872 (Hartford, 1873), pp. 113-218. 

2 (p. 47).— The falls of Montmorency are at the mouth of Mont- 
morency River, nine miles below Quebec; they are about 250 feet in 
height, but only 50 wide. Electric light and power for the city of 
Quebec are derived from this cataract. It was named by Champlain 
(1608), probably for Henri de Montmorency, constable of France. 

3 (P- 53)-— This man was baptized at Quebec, Nov. 4, 1640, by Le 
Jeune. For description of the baptismal register at Sillery, see vol. 
XX., note 10. 

4 (p. 61).— Numerous settlements had been begun in Maine, by 
this time,— Piscataqua (Kittery) and Monhegan Island, 1622 ; Saco, 
1623; Sagadahoc, Damariscotta, and Pemaquid, probably about the 
same time. Robert Gorges in 1624 established a colony at Aga- 
menticus (York). Two years later a trading post was located at 
Penobscot (Castine); and, in 1628, one on the Kennebec, not far 
from Casco Bay. 

5 (p. 85).— Guillaume Tronquet was Montmagny's secretary, 
probably during most of the latter's term as governor. He is also 
mentioned as exercising the functions of a notary at Quebec, in 
1644-46. 

5 (p. ii3)._For location of Arent6 (Aronte) see vol. x., note 23. 

7 (p. 117).— Jean le Sueur, a secular priest, came to Canada in 
1634, with Gifiard (vol. vi., note 8); his other title was derived from 
a parish in Normandy, which he had served. Saint Sauveur de 
Thury. In 1645 - 46, he was missionary at Cote de Beaupre, and later 
officiated in the chapel at C&teau Ste. Genevieve. In March. 1646, 
he became joint proprietor, with Jean Bourdon, of the fief St. 
Francis (vol. xi., note 11). The Journ. des Ji suites frequently 



310 LES RELA TIONS DES j£S UITES 

mentions him. up to 1660. One of the suburbs of Quebec is named 
St. Sauveur, for this priest. 

8 (p. 133). — Marsolet is sketched in vol. v., note 35. 

9 (p. 145). — Martin de Lyonne, born at Paris, May 13, 1614, en- 
tered the Jesuit novitiate Dec. 8, 1629, at Nancy. His studies were 
pursued at Pont-a-Mousson (1631-34) and Rome (1638-42), the 
interval being spent as instructor at Sens and Charleville. Having 
spent his last year of probation at Rouen, at its close (1643) he 
joined the Canada mission. He labored therein during the re- 
mainder of his life, — during most of that period at Miscou and other 
posts along the coast, from Cape Breton to Gaspe Bay. He made 
several voyages to France during that time ; on his return from the 
last of these (1657), he went to labor in the mission station of 
Chedabouctou, in Acadia, where he finally died, Jan. 16, 1661, a vic- 
tim of his devotion in attending the sick, during an epidemic of 
scurvy. 

For account of Richard, see vol. viii. , note 1 7. 

10 (p. 147). — The labors of Father Biardare recounted at length in 
vols, i.-iii. of this series. 

11 (p. 153). — Nepegigwit (now Nipisiguit, or Nepisiquit) : a river, 
100 miles in lengfth, flowing into Bathurst Bay, N. B. ; noted for 
salmon fishing, and for the beauty and grandeur of its scenery. 
Twenty miles above its mouth are the Great Falls, 140 feet in height. 

The settlement of this name was an early trading and fishing 
post, at the mouth of the river. The Rdcollet missionaries of 
Aquitaine (vol. iv., note 22) first labored here (1619-24); later, the 
Capuchins, for a time; the Jesuits, 1642-61. Some years later, the 
RecoUets returned to this field, notable among whom was the mis- 
sionary Le Clercq (vol. iii., note 45); they remained here till near 
the close of the century. Bishop Laval took great interest in the 
Acadian and Gaspesian missions, and sent thither priests from the 
Seminary of Quebec, during many years. Denys, the governor of 
Acadia (vol. ix., note 26), had his residence here for several years 
(1661-71?). In 1692, the French at this settlement were expelled by 
the natives. Except for a Scotch trading post maintained here, 
about 1766-76, Nipisiguit seems to have remained uninhabited by 
Europeans until 181 8, when the present city of Bathurst was founded 
by Sir Howard Douglas at this place. Much valuable information, 
descriptive and historical, concerning this region is given by Dionne, 
in "Miscou," Can.-Frangais, vol. ii., pp. 515-519- 

12 (p. 153). — Jean d'Olbeau was bom at Langres in i6o3. A 
student in the Jesuit college there, he entered the novitiate of that 
order Oct. 16, 1628. Having spent the usual term as instructor, at 



NOTES TO VOL. XXIV 811 

Vannes and Caen (1630-34), and at Moulins (1638-39), and studied 
theology at La Fleche (1634-38), he spent his last year at Rouen; 
at its close (1640), he began his missionary labors at Miscou. There 
he remained till 1643, when broken health forced him to return to 
France; on the voyage thither, he was drowned (vol. viii., note 17). 
For sketch of Desdames, see vol. xii., note 26. 

13 (p. 155). — Few of these small Montagnais tribes can now be 
identified. They inhabited the Saguenay valley, and the region 
northward, watered by that and neighboring streams, to the water- 
shed between the St. Lawrence and Hudson Bay. 

14 (p. 159). — Sol: the early name of the French coin now known as 
sou; derived from Ital. soldo (Lat. solidus) ; the twentieth part of 
the old livre, and now the twentieth part of a franc. 

15 (p. 183). — Socoquiois (Sokokis): an Abenaki tribe, settled along 
the Saco river. They were at enmity with the Mohawks, and, 
before Philip's war, had a strong fort on the bank of the Ossipee, 
to repel the attacks of the latter. Among their sagamores was the 
noted Squanto, who burned the English settlement at Saco, Sept. 18, 
1675. Eventually, this tribe removed, with other Abenakis. to 
Canada (vol. xii., note 22). 

16 (p. 191). — For sketches of several chiefs bearing this name, see 
vol. viii., note 30. 

17 (p. 197). — Champflour is noticed in vol. xx., note 14. 

18 (p. 197). — For sketch of De None, see vol. iv., note 31. 

19 (p. 197). — Regarding De Normanville, see vol. xxi., note i. 

20 (p. 269). — Mataouchkariniens: the savages resident along the 
Madawaska River (vol. xviii., jiote 14). 

21 (p. 271). — Santweronons: the Sonnontouan or Seneca tribe (vol. 
viii., note 21). 

22 (p. 271).— This settlement of the Dutch was close to the site of 
the present city of Albany. It was first begun as a fortified trading 
post, in 1614, on Castle Island; the buildings were so injured by a 
freshet, four years later, that they were abandoned. In 1623, a new 
fort, named Orange, was built on the west side of the Hudson ; and, 
seven years later, a colony was brought over from Holland by the 
patroon Kiliaen Van Rensselaer, Johannes de Laet, and others, 
who settled these people in the vicinity of the fort, giving the colony 
the name of Rensselaerswyck. Its first minister, who came in 1642, 
was Johannes Megapolensis. a clerg>-man of great learning and 
piety ; he exercised much kindness and charity to the captive Jesuit 
Jogues (vol. ix., note 41). 

Full particulars regarding this and other early Dutch settlements 



312 



LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES 



on the Hudson are given by O'Callaghan, in vol. i., of Hist. New 
Netherlands. 

23 (p. 281).— Rene Goupil, a young French surgeon, born in Anjou, 
was for several months a Jesuit novice at Paris ; but, his health not 
permitting him to study for the priesthood, he came to Canada, 
apparently in 1640, as a donne in that mission. He remained at or 
near Quebec for two years, part of the time caring for the sick at 
the hospital. In August, 1642, he set out with Jogues for the Huron 
mission ; but, on the way, they were captured by the Iroquois, and 
taken to the country of that tribe. Goupil was Jogues's companion 
in captivity for a short time; but was slain (Sept. 29, 1642) by an 
Iroquois. A sketch of his life, written by Jogues, will appear in 
vol. xxviii. of this series. 

Concerning Couture, see vol. xxi., note 22. 

24 (p. 297).— Of this lost Relation another copy was made at the 
Huron mission, and sent to Quebec; arriving there too late for that 
year's Relation, it appeared in that for 1644, q. v. 



i 


z 


III 




1 









MmWQ 

1.4 



•1 







c 



