Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 22: Quebec and Hurons, 1642
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits22jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits22jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits22jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 22 of 73.

---

bd 
rt, a) ' 
part ti is 


| it aes tie sebed 4, beubyg ) | args tay 


ie, 8) ee bt et Tt ; . Su 
tithe baateaceaets HEE 


ret} 
one e358 
i pith: 


. 
aa, anges 
‘i, ai iH 
" 
§ ‘ 
: ey 


a : 
: Pitre, et Met} 
; Me 


a! 
ges 


ays, 
ny 


5,8) a)8 
en 
8,8, 858,8 


: ; E $8, Besyey Spee, Fe 

s.¢, 2,598 Guz ; od y 85 ? #- 8) 208,858 8808), 8.8.8 
68.68 2 " hed 6.0.8, 8)800,8. 8.8.8.8 

He: buS4s Ned beg tg tet 22:8 


ee ad 5,8. mae 
68:8 se eye 


41109 S.TAVHOIW “LS 40 ALISHSAINN 


mn FF 
Vv od Vy 
SM 


4 . 
4! 


, vt 
a es? VAM ‘ 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


a ores 
——$—$< et 


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 


1610-1791 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 


REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XXII 
QUEBEC AND HURONS: 1642 


CLEVELAND: Tbe Burrows Brotbers 
Company, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XVIII 


ed - a er aay a\\, 


sasamoaid) heillt hits St0m el 


CopyRIGHT, 1898 AYONT BS 
BY - ' ~*~? 4 4 
Tus Burrows BrotHers Co el il 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED r 
' ie 
| 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor ; . REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
( FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERcY FAVOR BICKNELL 


WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 


Translators . : 4 
CRAWFORD LINDSAY 
WILLIAM PRICE 
| HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor . EMMA HELEN BLAIR 


Bibliographical Adviser VicTOR HuGo PALTSITS 


he , 3 + 
Bi | L auieS \ one 


1 65 TU. vasivhA, feoivieaegeinaianes 


. 7 if 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXII 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXII 5 | 
DOCUMENT :— 


XLVIII. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la 
Novvelle France, en l’année 1642. 
[Part I., and Chap. i. of Part II.] 
Barthelemy Vimont; Kebec, October 
4, 1642. Hierosme Lalemant,; Ste. Ma- 
rie aux Hurons, June 10, 1642 -) 4 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXII wets 
NOTES ; ; i , ; «337, 


a, 


ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XXII 


Photographic facsimile of title-page, e- 
lation of 1642 ; ; ¢ : 
Facsimile of handwriting of Joseph Imbert 
du Peron ‘ : . Facing 


22 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 


The Relation of 1642 (Document XLVIII.), com- 
menced in the present volume is, like most of those 
which have gone before, in two parts. Part I. (the 
Quebec report) is by Barthélemy Vimont, superior of 
the Quebec residence, who dates his preliminary note, 
October 4; Part II. (the Huron report) is from the 
pen of Jerome Lalemant, and is dated at Ste. Marie, 
in the Huron country, June 10. It may be neces- 
sary again to remind our readers that the several 
reports which together form the Relation of each year, 
were first edited by the superior at Quebec, before 
transmission to France; and, before publication, 
were again freely edited by the provincial in Paris. 

Vimont announces the successful issue of Le 
Jeune’s mission to France (in 1641) to ask aid in de- 
fending the colony against the Iroquois. These sav- 
ages ‘‘ have sworn a cruel war against the French;”’ 
they have recently defeated a Huron band, capturing 
many prisoners, among whom is Father Jogues. 
The Quebec colony has passed the year in quiet, 
health, and comfort. A good beginning has been 
made in raising grain and cattle. The nuns and 
missionaries are all in good health, and devoted to 
their work. But ‘‘the Iroquois have, as usual, acted 
like fiends; they have been in the field Winter, 
Spring, and Summer. They have massacred many 
Hurons and Algonquins; they have captured French- 


10 PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 


men, and killed some of them; they hold one of our 
fathers as a prisoner.” There is but one conclu- 
sion — peace must be made with these barbarians, or 
they must be destroyed. 

Vimont relates in detail the pious sentiments and 
deeds of ‘‘ the new Christians,’’ especially those at 
St. Joseph (Sillery). Among them, all the rites and 
customs of the church are faithfully observed; it is 
even necessary to restrain their ardent desire to par- 
take often of the sacraments. They leave their elk 
hunt to come to Quebec for Easter; and even return 
from the woods in a blinding snowstorm, for St. An- 
drew’s day. They will not eat meat on fast days, 
and carefully observe those days on which labor is 
not allowed. Going to fight the Iroquois, they re- 
solve to take no prisoners alive, so that the usual tor- 
ments may be averted from these. Accordingly, they 
kill the enemies, and bring home their spoils and 
scalps; upon reaching St. Joseph, they visit the 
house of God before entering their own cabins. 
They weep over their sins, and one man goes far- 
ther,—he tells Father Buteux, ‘‘ Awaking in the 
night, and remembering my sin, I arose, went into 
the woods, and cut branches from the trees, with which 
I beat and scourged myself until I was exhausted. 
I have a great desire to do so again, when I shall 
have made my Confession.’’ The Father gives him 
‘fa penance three times as severe as I would have 
given to a Frenchman for the same offense;’’ where- 
upon this penitent says: ‘‘Is that all that thou dost 
appoint to me for so great a sin? Make me endure 
something that will torment my body; command me 
to fast.’ This same man, apparently, afterward 
cuts his fingers with a knife ‘‘to show them that 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 11 


those who are baptized should not commit any bad 
action.’’ 

A young woman, baptized, has left her husband. 
The Christian Indians decide thus: ‘‘ Good advice has 
not brought her to her senses; a prison will do so.”’ 
Thereupon, they capture her in the woods, whither 
she has fled, tie her with ropes, and take her in a 
canoe to Quebec, to be there imprisoned. Finding 
“that she must enter either a dungeon or her hus- 
band’s house, she humbly begged to be taken back 
to Saint Joseph, promising that thenceforward she 
would be more obedient.’’ 

A man who is granted baptism brings the Father, 
asa proof of his sincerity, his private manitou, or 
fetich,—a stone wrapped in down. Another is con- 
verted by his brother, Charles Meiachkawat, who 
exhorts him to give up gambling,—‘‘at least in 
excess.’’ ‘‘Even the young men desire to obtain 
baptism, almost by force, so as to enter Heaven by 
violence.’’ One man, fearing that baptism will cause 
his death, yet longing for it, spends four years in 
slavery to this groundless fear, but finally decides to 
receive baptism, even if he should die from it. ‘‘He 
is now baptized, and Baptism has not yet sent him 
to Paradise.’’ One of his dreams afterward causes 
him great anxiety; but one of the Fathers ‘‘adroitly 
turns it into ridicule, and the Devil’s malice van- 
ishes in smoke.” A young woman talks with a Pagan 
suitor, contrary to her parents’ prohibition. A fam- 
ily council tries her case; one thinks her worthy of 
death; but she is finally sentenced to be flogged at 
Quebec next day. This punishment (the first of its 
kind in this tribe) is inflicted by the judge who had 
decreed it, in the presence of many Indians; he then 


12 PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 


warns the young girls who gaze at this spectacle that 
the same, and even more severe, fate awaits them if 
they be not obedient. The girl who was thus pun- 
ished now goes to the Fathers, and entreats baptism, 
which is given her at the Ursuline chapel; she has 
gained this grace by the humility and patience with 
which she received her punishment. The young 
man in the case ‘‘fumes with rage, seeing himself 
deprived of a prey that he had already devoured in 
his heart.” He complains to his father that the 
Christian Indians have illtreated him. The father 
is full of fury, and threatens to assault the Christians; 
but Montmagny warns this savage that he must not 
molest the Christians,—that he could not attack 
them without also attacking him. ‘‘ Such a sermon, 
preached in a Fort armed with cannon, has its effect; 
Faith triumphs over Ungodliness, and Belial is van- 
quished by Jesus Christ.’’ Two Hurons spend the 
winter at St. Joseph, where they are instructed and 
baptized by Father Brébeuf. They return to their 
own country, promising to do all they can to convert 
their tribesmen; and are sent away by their Algon- 
kin fellow Christians with gifts and loving words. 
The superior then gives an account of the hospital 
at Quebec, synopsized from the letters of its superior, 
Marie de St. Ignace. Over three hundred savages 
have been aided or nursed by these nuns, whose 
charity and devotion are regarded by the Indians as 
marvelous. Many of the sick are converted and bap- 
tized, several dying most piously; various instances 
of this sort are recounted in detail. The Indians are 
grateful for the kindness and nursing of the nuns, 
who praise the docility and patience of their proté- 
gés. Vimont remarks of their enthusiasm: ‘‘ One 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 13 


must have good eyes to see only Jesus Christ in 
the Savages. I know well that virtue is lovable 
everywhere; but it is more agreeable under plush 
and satin, and in cultivated minds and cleanly bodies, 
than it is under rags, and in persons who do not 
know what rudeness is because they have not even 
the elementary principles of politeness. In enthusi- 
asm I expect perseverance only from Jesus Christ 
himself. Their sex does not possess such constancy ; 
it may, however, like St. Paul, do everything through 
him who sustains and fortifies it.’’ 

During the year, the hospital ‘‘ has dispensed over 
four hundred and fifty medicines. Our supply of 
drugs is exhausted; but our hearts are still quite 
whole, so that we can rejoice at the Baptism of these 
good souls. A score of them were made Christians 
this year, in our Hospital and in our Chapel. Twelve 
of the leading families among the savages have come 
to dwell in four houses that have been built quite 
close to ours; this is enough to make us love the resi- 
dence of St. Joseph.’’ Some of the Indian women 
“are excellent Hospital sisters. They carry the sick, 
assist and relieve them, and prepare their sagamité, 
or food, in their own fashion, better than we our- 
selves.’’ The hospital is a resort for all the savages; 
its ‘‘ little Church serves as their Parish Church and 
Oratory,’’ and there the Jesuit Fathers instruct many, 
especially the women and children. ‘‘ There is no 
question so deep or so lofty, within the scope of a 
girl’s mind, that these young Neophytes do not 
understand and answer it most suitably.”’ 

The Ursuline Seminary is also doing a noble work. 
The Indian girls there are bright and docile, and 
their piety is edifying. ‘‘ These children have such 


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 


a regard for purity that, when they go out walking, 
they avoid meeting men.’’ A Frenchman gives his 
hand to a pupil of the Seminary, to lead her; when 
she is laughingly reproached for allowing a man to 
touch her hand, she begins to weep, and repeatedly 
washes her hands,—so often, that, as she says, ‘‘ it 
is impossible that anything can remain of the harm 
that he may have done me.’’ Vimont adds, *‘ Such 
innocence is most amusing.’’ These girls observe all 
pious duties with the utmost strictness; ‘‘ not a fort- 
night passes without their asking to make a confes- 
sion.”’ Seeing the nuns go into retreat, they build 
near the house a little cabin of boughs, and there 
spend most of their time in praying. They also 
imitate the nuns in stricter fasting on Good Friday; 
and finally beg, as a special grace, that they be 
allowed to take the discipline. ‘‘They are allowed 
to practice this devotion only very seldom, and after 
importunities that are as agreeable to God as is the 
mortification itself.” One of these girls, Thérése, a 
daughter of the Huron Christian, Joseph Chihwa- 
tenhwa, takes every occasion to preach to her coun- 
trymen. One of them, though converted, pretends, 
in order to tease her, that he no longer cares for the 
Faith. Believing him, she is sad to think that the 
Devil has deceived him and he no longer wishes 
to go to Heaven; ‘‘raising her voice, and using 
threats, with a toss of her head that betrays her sor- 
row and her zeal, she says: ‘If I could have broken 
the grating, I would have beaten him.’ How inno- 
cent is such fervor!’’ Thérése, returning to her own 
country, is taken prisoner by the Iroquois, with her 
parents and Father Jogues; but Vimont trusts that 
God will provide the good mothers with other Huron 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 15 


pupils. This is the first mention, in the Re/ations, of 
Jogues’s captivity. 

Vimont now describes an enterprise of which ‘‘ Our 
Lord is certainly the Author’ —the establishment of 
a colony upon the Island of Montreal, under the Sieur 
de Maisonneuve. He, with about thirty-five ladies 
and gentlemen, has formed the pious design to 
make this island a center for missionary labors among 
the savages,— making them sedentary and agricul- 
tural, instructing them in the Faith, and otherwise 
civilizing them. On May 17 of this year (1642), the 
Society of Montreal takes possession of the island, 
and consecrates it to this holy purpose, under the 
special protection of the Virgin Mary. Certain 
Indians, sojourning there a few months later, tell 
Vimont and Maisonneuve that their ancestors lived 
there, but were driven away by the Iroquois. Some 
of them promise to accept the invitation, given them 
by the French, to return to their former home and 
cultivate the soil. Vimont thinks that not many of 
them will ever be induced to come to Montreal, 
unless their Iroquois enemies are either conquered 
or pacified. 

The superior relates the growth of the Jesuit mis- 
sion at Tadoussac, and advises that a residence should 
be built there, at which two priests may reside from 
spring to autumn—the only season in which they 
would find the wandering savages at this port; their 
ministrations are also needed by the French who 
travel there every summer. Such a residence would 
also be a focus of influence among the tribes of 
the Saguenay and others inland,—thus aiding both 
religion and commerce. 

The Tadoussac mission was begun by the Chris- 


16 PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 


tian Indians of St. Joseph, who endeavored to con- 
vert their countrymen. The latter became interested 
in the Christian faith, and applied to the Jesuits at 
Quebec for a priest, in accordance with which request 
Father de Quen was sent tothem. The Indians re- 
ceive him gladly, build him a bark chapel and house 
combined, and are regularly instructed. There are 
over fifty converts; and prayers are offered in the 
cabins night and morning, and even in public. The 
Father has to contend, at times, with their old notion 
that baptism causes death. Savages from the Sague- 
nay invite him to go to their country, to instruct 
them. As hecannot do this, he invites them to visit 
him every year at Tadoussac; his words are accom- 
panied with presents—‘‘ some awls to pierce their 
ears, so that they may not resist his words; and 
tobacco, in using which they are also to burn their 
old customs, to adopt better ones.’’ The mission- 
aries have by this time become experts in the forms 
of forest diplomacy. 

Reports from André Richard show an encouraging 
field of labor among the Micmacs, at Miscou. These 
Indians desire a permanent missionary among them, 
and entreat that “‘fire water’’— wine and brandy — 
be not sold to them by the whites. The Company 
of New France forbid the sale of these liquors at Que- 
bec; but certain Frenchmen evade this prohibition, 
when they have opportunity. Vimont makes an 
eloquent appeal to his countrymen, as Christians, to 
abstain from such traffic. 

The French in Canada are cheered by the erection 
of Fort Richelieu on the Sorel, for the purpose of 
checking the inroads of the Iroquois, who are an ever 
dangerous and most harassing enemy. They have 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 17 


attacked the Algonkins of the Allumettes Islands, 
killing and eating many, and making captives of 
others. Their horrible cruelties, as related by sur- 
vivors who escaped, are graphically described; well 
may their hearers say, ‘‘ These are not men; they: 
are wolves.’ It is a standing grievance with the 
French, that these fiendish enemies are supplied with 
arms by the Dutch. The Iroquois make a raid on an 
Iroquet band; and, worst of all, they attack a Huron 
party returning home from Three Rivers (August 2, 
1642), and capture several of them, besides Father 
Jogues and two young Frenchmen who accompany 
him. To this blow is added the capture of several 
other Christians,—notably, of Joseph Chihwaten- 
hwa’s daughter and brother, the latter his worthy 
successor. 

During the erection of Fort Richelieu, it is attacked 
by 300 Iroquois; but Montmagny and his soldiers, 
who are there to protect the workmen, drive them off 
after a fierce conflict, one Frenchman being killed 
and fourwounded. Thisrepulse hasa salutary effect 
on the barbarians, whose raids are somewhat checked 
by this, and by the erection of the fort. 

Vimont closes his report for the year, by an account 
of various savage customs and superstitions. These 
relate to the numerous changes of name among 
the Indians; the use and value of presents—the 
language of the tribes—in both social and political 
intercourse; remedies employed in sickness; and the 
nature of eclipses. 


In the first chapter of his Huron report, Jerome 
Lalemant outlines the present condition of that 
mission. The cessation of the ravages of smallpox 


18 PREFACE TO VOL. XXII 


among the Hurons had at first given the Jesuits a 
favorable opening for their labors; but the dreaded 
Iroquois have added another scourge to this wretched 
land. They come by stealth at all seasons and at all 
hours, and there is no safety outside the palisades of 
the villages. The Hurons attempt to resist, but most 
of their expeditions end only in disaster. Even 
when going down to Three Rivers to trade, they are 
in constant dread of these fierce enemies, who con- 
tinually infest the Ottawa and St. Lawrence, and who 
are now superior to all other savages by reason of the 
firearms they procure from the Dutch. 

With all these obstacles to their work, the mission- 
aries are nevertheless consoled by the growing piety 
and devotion manifested in the little Huron church. 
This is ascribed to the working of the Holy Ghost 
upon these savage hearts, to the merits of pious 
souls in France, and lastly to the prudent conduct of 
Montmagny, to whom ‘‘ We and the Guardian Angels 
of this Country are greatly indebted.’’ This wise 
ruler, following savage customs, makes numerous and 
well-chosen gifts to the Hurons who go down to 
trade, ‘‘in token that the Truths we preach to them 
are firmly established.” The desired effect is pro- 
duced upon their minds, and the missionaries find 
their audiences notably increased, in all the villages. 


RY GT 
Mapison, Wis., May, 1898. 


XLVIII 


RELATION OF 1642 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1643 


SOURCE: We reprint from a copy of the original Cramoisy 
edition, in the possession of The Burrows Brothers Company, 
Cleveland. 

The Relation consists of two parts. We herewith give 
Part I., and chap. i. of Part Il. ; the remainder of Part II. 
will be included in Volume XXIII. 


, co 
Ba > CP! 
at aad 
Lapa 


- 
' 
ie 


CU 
fa 


y Ll y 


a 


ete 


SiGe 

i DAP potbe 

HOY i. A, 
E SVig) i OWN FS Se el 
i. hie. Pest, hoe) (CUS Ga it re | ine 


. ) FS \ 


Set Gees oH 
= Sn EET To ~~" eS ee! 
Pe srs x = <. Pee geass Bay 
. 5 a Se x . S 
~ : a ~ « a : 
~ 
:; . * . = 
. a F, 6 . ? ’ = x ? 
, +e ‘ : ; 
” 
’ 


DE CE QVISEST PASSE’ 
EX Ns EA 


NOVVELLE FRANCE 
EN. LANNEB ieqiy | 


Enuoyéeau R.P.LEAN. FILL EAV | 
Prouincial dela Compagnie de Lesys 
en la Prouince de. France, ” 


Par le R. P. BakTHELEMy Vim Oni de | 
la mefme Compagnie , Superieur de la sas 
eee a idence de Aue rg “4 


4 NSA, shy 
: gE x. (ou 


Be ch. Pp A Ct R s. 
Fhe Se¥srite Ceamors¥ , Im roca ee 
ve oer 


| du ee sah hans cole oe 
ae Me DC» XLUL. one se 
PORT. Bs Aue Printlese du hen Se eh 
eo se : ae iis 


RELATION 


OF eet SCCUnne. 
NEW FRANCE 


IN THE YEAR 1642. 


Sent to Reverend Father JEAN FILLEAU, 
Provincial of the Society of JESUS 
in the Province of France. 


By REVEREND FATHER BARTHELEMY VIMONT 
of the same Society, Superior of the 
Residence of Kebec. 


PART S* 


SEBASTIEN Cramotsy, Printer in ordinary to the 
King, rué St. Jacques, at the Sign of the Storks. 


M. DC. XLIII. 
By Royal License. 


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


Table des Chapitres contenvs en ce Livre. 


Re" TION de ce qui seft paffé en la nouuelle 


France en l’ Année 1642. . pag. 1. 
Chap. I. De? Eftat General du Pie 6 
II. Des bonnes aétions & bons Sentiments des nou- 
ueaux Chrefitens, : II 
III. Continuation des bons ‘yentinehes oe os isthe 
actions des Chreftiens, jo 
IV. De quelques Baptefmes en la Refi eae de s. 
Lofeph, : 46 
¥, Continuation des Bapietonis 62 
VI. Du Baptefme de deux Hurons qui ont pase 
l’ Hyuer en Kebec, : : SB eg 
VII. Del Ho/pital, go 
VIII. Du feminarre des Vijulaies, : 107 
IX. Du deff[ein de Mefsieurs de Montreal, Pe 
X. De la Mifsion de fainéte Croix & Tadouffac, 135 
XI. Des fortifications commencées fur la riutere 
des Hiroquois, & des guerres de ces peuples, . [755] 


XII. De leurs couftumes & de leurs fuperftitions. [184] 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 


25 


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book. 


ELATION of what occurred in new France, in 
R the Year 1642. . - page 
Chap. I. Of the General State of the Country, 
II. Of the good actions and nie sentiments of 
the new Christians, ‘ 
III. Continuation of the good sentiments and ei 
actions of the Christians, 
IV. Of some Baptisms in the rear ed of St. 
Joseph, ’ 
Y Continuation of the Jubilee: 
VI. Of the Baptism of two Hurons who pine 
the Winter at Kebec, ‘ : 
VII. Of the Hospital, 
VIII. Of the seminary of the Leeutiees : 
IX. Of the project of the Gentlemen of Montreal, 
X. Of the Mission of the holy Cross at Tadoussac, 
XI. Of the fortifications commenced on the river 


IT 


77 
go 
107 
123 


IFS 


of the Hiroquois, and of the wars of those peoples, [155] 
XII. Customs and superstitions of the Savages, [184] 


\ 


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy. 


AR Grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis A 
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Marchand Libratre Luré, 
Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, Directeur de 0 Impri- 

merie Royalle du Chafteau du Louure, & Efcheuin de 
nofire bonne ville de Paris, d’ Imprimer ou faire Im- 
primer, vn liure intitulé, Relation de ce qui seft paffé 
en la Nouuelle France en l’ Année mil fix cents quarante 
deux, enuoyée au R. P. IEAN FILLEAV Prouincial de 
la Compagnie de IESVS en la Prouince de France par le 
R. P. BARTHELEMY VIMONT de la mefme Com- 
pagnie, Superieur de la Refidence de Kebec; Et ce pen- 
dant le temps & efpace de cing ans confecutifs, auec 
deffences A tous Libraires & Imprimeurs, a’ Imprimer 
ou faire Imprimer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de de- 
guifement, ou changement qu’ils y pourroient faire 
& peine de confifcation & de l’amende portée par 
ledit Priuilege. Donné a Paris le 9. Ianuier 1643. 
Par le Roy en fon Confeil. 
DEMONCEAVX. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 27 


Extract from the Royal License. 


Y the Grace and Prerogative of the King, permis- 
B sion is granted To SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Sworn 
Bookseller, Printer in ordinary to the King, Di- 
rector of the Royal Printing House of the Castle of the 
Louvre, and Alderman of our good city of Paris, to Print 
or have Printed a book entitled: Relation de ce qui s'est 
passé en la Nouvelle France en l Année mil six cents qua- 
rante deux, envoyée au R.P. JEAN FILLEAU Provin- 
cial de la Compagnie de JESUS en la Province de France 
par le R.P. BARTHELEMY VIMONT de la mesme 
Compagnie, Superieur de la Residence de Kebec ; and this 
for the space and period of five consecutive years, all 
Booksellers and Printers being prohibited from Print- 
ing or having Printed the said Book, under pretext 
of any alteration or change that they may make in 
the same, under penalty of confiscation, and of the 
fine provided by the said License. Given at Paris, 
the 9th of January, 1643. 
By the King in Council, 
DEMONCEAUX. 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


Permifsion du R. P. Prouincial. 


OUS IEAN FILLEAV Prouwincial de la Com- 
pagnie de IESvs en la Prouince de France, 
auons accordé pour l’aduenir au fieur SEBAS- 

TIEN CRAMOISY, Marchand Libraire Iuré, Imprimeur 
ordinaire du Roy Directeur de 1’Imprimerie Royalle 
du Chafteau du Louure & Efcheuin de la ville de 
Paris, l’impreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle 
France. Fait A Paris le 7. Ianuier 1643. 

IEAN FILLEAV. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 29 


Permission of the Reverend Father Provincial. 


E, JEAN FILLEAU, Provincial of the So- 

y y ciety of JESUS, in the Province of France, 

have granted for the future to sieur SEBAS- 

TIEN CRAMOISY, Sworn Bookseller, Printer in ordi- 

nary to the King, Director of the Royal Printing 

House of the Castle of the Louvre and Alderman of 

the city of Paris, the printing of the Relations of New 
France. Done at Paris, the 7th of January, 1643. 
JEAN FILLEAU. 


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Now 22 


[1] Relation de ce qui s’eft paffé en la Novvelle 
France en l’Année 1642. 


Pax Chrifti 
Les affaires de ce pais m’ayant obligé d’en- 
uoyer en France vn de nos Peres, pour reprefenter 
l’eftat auquel les courfes des Hirocois reduifent 
cette Eglife naiffante, ie me perfuadé que celuy qui 
auoit le plus trauaillé 4 l’eftablir, feroit plus propre 
pour faire entendre l’importance du fecours qui nous 
eftoit neceffaire, pour s’oppofer aux effors de ces Bar- 
bares. Eten effect ie ne me fuis pas trompé, car pen- 
dant ce peu de temps [2] qu’il a feiourné en France, 
il a veu plufieurs perfonnes de qualité, aufquelles il a 
faict connoiftre les grandes richeffes {pirituelles que 
1’on peut efperer de ces vaftes contrées, oti fe retrouue 
vn nombre quafi innombrable de Nations, qui n’at- 
tendent que la publication de l’Euangile pour em- 
braffer la Foy, & reconnoiftre leur Createur; & que 
cela auroit efté executé au moins en partie, n’eftoient 
les grands ob{tacles que nous forment les demons, 
qui voyans que tous les Frangois qui font en ces der- 
niers confins du monde, viuent beaucoup plus faincte- 
ment qu’ils ne faifoient en France, & que les 
Sauuages, leurs anciens fuiects, vont quittants de 
iour en iour, arment leurs fuppofts pour la deffence 
de leur Empire. 
Or pource qu'il falloit vn puiffant fecours, pour 


M ON REVEREND PERE, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 31 


{1] Relation of what occurred in New France, 
in the Year 1642. 


Pax Christi. 

The state of affairs in this country having 
compelled me to send one of our Fathers to France, 
that he might represent the condition to which the 
incursions of the Hirocois reduce this newborn 
Church, I was convinced that he who had labored the 
most to establish it, would be the best person to 
explain the importance of the aid which we need to 
resist the efforts of these Barbarians.! And, in truth, 
I was not mistaken; for, during the short time [2] 
that he remained in France, he saw many persons of 
quality to whom he made known the great store of 
spiritual treasure that may be expected in these vast 
countries wherein are found a number, almost beyond 
count, of Nations who await but the preaching of the 
Gospel, to embrace the Faith and to acknowledge their 
Creator. He also explained to them that this would 
have been done, at least in part, had it not been for 
the great obstacles arrayed against us by the demons, 
who—seeing that all the French at this far end of 
the world live ina much more holy manner than they 
did in France; and that the Savages, their former 
subjects, abandon them daily—arm all their forces 
for the defense of their Empire. 

Inasmuch as vigorous aid was needed to subdue the 
insolence of these demons, he had to apply to-persons 


M Y REVEREND FATHER, 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


reprimer 1l’infolence de ces demons, il eftoit neceffaire 
qu’il s’addreffat A des perfonnes qui euffent & l’af- 
fection & le pouuoir pour tout ce qui regarde ce nou- 
ueau monde: Il s’addreffa donc 4 Madame la Ducheffe 
d’Eguillon qui prend fi bonne part a la Conuerfion 
des peuples de ce pais, que par vne deuotion toute 
particuliere qu’elle a au fang [3] tres-adorable de 
IESvs CHRIST, a fondé vne maifon de Miferi- 
corde, pour y receuoir les Sauuages malades, & leur 
faire reffentir les effects de ce fang pretieux. Ce fut 
donc elle qui entreprit d’en parler 4 Monfeigneur le 
Cardinal de Richelieu, & luy reprefenter les dangers 
ott fe trouuoit la Foy de lIESvS-CHRIST & la Colo- 
nie des Francois en ces contrées, fi on ne s’efforgoit 
de refifter aux Hirocois, ce qui luy fucceda fi heu- 
reufement, qu’elle obtint vn puiffant fecours contre 
nos ennemis. 

Auec ce fecours, le Pere s’embarqua fort confolé 
d’auoir remarqué en France tant de zele pour le falut 
des pauures Sauuages, non feulement dans 1’efprit 
de ceux qui fequeftrez du monde, font profeffion 
d’vne vie toute confacrée 4 l’auancement du feruice 
de Dieu, mais encore en plufieurs autres perfonnes 
de qualité, qui non contentes de luy tefmoigner la 
part qu’elles prenoient en la Conuerfion des peuples 
de ce pais, ont de plus voulu contribuer a l’entretien 
des Miffionnaires, & fournir de quoy arrefter les Sau- 
uages errans & vagabons; Dieu qui fe plaift en ces 
ceuures de charité ne manquera pas de leur en tenir 
compte, & de les recompenfer au centuple. La [4] 
ioye que les Frangois & Sauuages ont fenty par deca 
a la venué de ce fecours, n’eft pas conceuable; la 
crainte qu’on auoit des Hiroquois auoit tellement 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 33 


who possessed both the desire and the power in 
regard to all that relates to this new world. He 
addressed himself, therefore to Madame the Duchess 
d’Eguillon, who takes such an interest in the Conver- 
sion of the peoples of this country that, through a 
special devotion which she has for the most adorable 
blood [3] of JESUS CHRIST, she has founded a 
house of Mercy, in which the sick Savages may be 
received and be made to feel the effects of that pre- 
cious blood. She it was, therefore, who undertook 
to speak of the matter to Monseigneur the Cardinal 
de Richelieu, and to represent to him the dangers to 
which the Faith of JEsus CHRIST, and the French 
Colony in these countries, were exposed, if efforts 
were not made to repel the Hirocois. She succeeded 
so well that she obtained powerful aid against our 
enemies. 

With this assistance the Father embarked, greatly 
consoled at having found in France so much zeal for 
the conversion of the poor Savages, not only in the 
minds of those who have withdrawn from the world, 
and lead a life entirely devoted to the furtherance of 
God’s service, but also in several others, persons of 
quality,— who, not content with manifesting the in- 
terest they take in the Salvation of the people of this 
country, were also pleased to contribute to the sup- 
port of the Missionaries, and to provide for the set- 
tling of the wandering and nomad Savages. God, 
who takes pleasure in such charitable works, will not 
fail to give them credit for it, and to reward them a 
hundredfold. [4] It is impossible to conceive the joy 
felt by the French and Savages over here at the 
arrival of this help; the dread of the Hiroquois had 
so disheartened them that all lived in fear of death. 


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 22 


abbatu les cceurs, qu’on ne viuoit que dans les 
apprehenfions de lamort; mais fi tof{t que la nouuelle 
fut venué qu’on alloit dreffer des fortifications fur 
les auenués des Hiroquois, toute crainte ceffa, chacun 
reprit courage, & commenga a marcher tefte leuée, 
auec autant d’affeurance que fi le Fort euft defia efté 
batty. 

Il eft vray que ces fortifications auront d’excellens 
effets; mais comme ils ne tranchent point le mal par 
la racine, & que les Barbares font la guerre 4 la fagon 
des Scythes & des Parthes, la porte ne fera point 
pleinement ouverte 4 IESVS CHRIST, & les dan- 
gers ne s’éloigneront point de noftre Colonie, iufques 
a ce qu’on aye ou gaigné ou exterminé les Hiro- 
quois. 

Du refte i’efpere que voftre Reuerence aura vne 
folide ioye & confolation dans le commencement de 
fa charge, fi elle peut trouuer le loifir de ietter les 
yeux fur la Relation que ie luy enuoye; elle y verra 
fainctement accomplis les defirs qu’elle fait [5] pa- 
roiftre dans la lettre auec laquelle il luy a pleu nous 
confoler & encourager. 

Il eft vray que cette ioye fera detrempée de quel- 
que trifteffe, voyant la rage des Hiroquois vray fleau 
de noftre Eglife naiffante, qui perdent & confom- 
ment nos Neophytes auec les armes & le feu, & qui 
ont iuré vne cruelle guerre 4 nos Francois: [Ils 
bouchent tous les paffages de noftre grande Riuiere, 
empefchent le commerce de ces Meffieurs, & mena- 
cent de ruiner tout le pays. Le Pere Iogues, s’il n’a 
efté tué fur le champ en la défaite des Hurons, eft 
prifonnier entre leurs mains, auec deux de nos dome- 
{tiques Francois, & vingt-trois Hurons Chreftiens ou 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 35 


But, as soon as news came that fortifications were to 
be erected on the roads by which the Hiroquois come, 
all fears were dispelled. Every one took courage 
once more, and walked about with head erect, and 
with as much assurance as if the Fort were already 
built. 

It is true that these fortifications will have an ex- 
cellent effect; but—as they do not strike at the root 
of the evil, and as these Barbarians carry on war in 
the fashion of the Scythians and Parthians—the 
door will not be fully opened. to JEsus CHRIST, 
and danger will not be averted from our Colony, un- 
til the Hiroquois are either won over or exterminated. 

However, I trust that your Reverence will feel 
real joy and consolation, at the beginning of your 
term of office, if you find leisure to glance at the Re- 
lation that Isend you. You will see therein that the 
wishes expressed [5] in the letter by which you were 
pleased to console and encourage us, have been 
piously accomplished. 

It is true that this joy will be mingled with some 
sorrow at observing the fury of the Hiroquois,—the 
real scourge of our newborn Church,—who destroy 
and burn our Neophytes by arms and fire, and who 
have sworn a cruel war against our French. They 
block all the roads leading to our great River; they 
impede the trade of the Gentlemen of the Company, 
and threaten to ruin the whole country. Father 
Jogues,* if not killed on the field when the Hurons 
were defeated, is a prisoner in their hands, with two 
of our French servants and twenty-three Hurons, 
most of whom are Christians or Catechumens. This, 
thanks be to God! has not made us lose courage nor 
destroyed the hope of converting these Peoples; only, 


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


Catechuménes pour la plus-part. Cela, graces a 
Dieu, ne nous a point abbatu le courage, ny fait 
perdre l’efperance de la conuerfion de ces Peuples, 
mais feulement nous oblige d’auoir recours aux pri- 
eres & faincts facrifices de V. R. que ie luy demande 
tres-particulierement, comme eftant, 
DOV > i 

Tres-humble & tres-obeiffant 

feruiteur, 

BARTHELEMY VIMONT. 


A Kebec, ce 4. d’Octobre 1642. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 37 


it compels us to have recourse to the prayers and 
pious sacrifices of Your Reverence, which I ask very 
particularly, as being 
Your Reverence’s 
Most humble and most obedient. 
servant, 
BARTHELEMY VIMONT. 


Kebec, this 4th of October, 1642. 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


[6] CHAPITRE PREMIER. 
DE L’ESTAT GENERAL DU PAIS. 


E premier vaiffeau qui eft arriué cette année a 
Kebec donna vne fauffe alarme, & ternit la 
ioye que la venué des Nauires 4 couftume de 

caufer dans le coeur des Francois & des Sauuages. 
La flotte du Sel, difoit-il, a efté deffaicte par les 
Dunquerquois, & Monfieur de Courpont qui trauer- 
foit la Manche 4 mefme temps 4 efté pris ou coulé a 
fonds, fi bien qu’on faifoit tout ceux de l’equippage 
ou morts ou prifonniers. Cette nouuelle affligeoit 
tout le monde, mais quand on fceut que tous les 
vaiffeaux eftoient arriués 4 bon port, le contentement 
fuft dautant plus doux que la trifteffe auoit efté plus 
fenfible. Toute la Colonie a paffé l’hyuer en bonne 
fanté, Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny noftre 
Gouuerneur toufiours l’aimable & toufiours 1’aimé, 
tient tout dans la paix, dans le repos & dans le bon 
ordre; chacun l’honore & le refpecte auec plaifir, s’il 
y a quelque [7] mécontent, c’eft fon intereft dereglé 
& fa paffion qui le tourmente. Nous n’auons point 
icy d’autres ennemis que nous mefme, le refte eft peu 
de chofe. Les procés, l’ambition, l’auarice, la faleté, 
les defirs de fe vanger qui font les demons de 
l'Europe, ne paroiffent quafi point icy, nos bois ne 
[f{]ont pas propres pour allumer leurs feux. 

Les bleds ont efté fort beaux, quelques habitans 
en recueilloient maintenant plus qu’ils n’en auoient 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 39 


[6] CHAPTER FIRST. 
OF THE GENERAL STATE OF THE COUNTRY. 


HE first ship that arrived this year at Kebec 
7 caused a false alarm, and clouded the joy to 
which the arrival of the Vessels usually gives 
rise in the hearts of the French and of the Savages. 
The Provision fleet, it was said, had been defeated 
by the Dunkirkers, and Monsieur de Courpont, who 
was crossing the Channel at the same time, had been 
captured or sunk; and it was told that all the crew 
had been killed or made prisoners. This news caused 
great sorrow to every one; but, when it was learned 
that all the ships had arrived safely, the satisfaction 
was all the sweeter that the sadness had been more 
deeply felt. The entire Colony has enjoyed good 
health during the winter. Monsieur the Chevalier 
de Montmagny, our Governor, ever kind and ever 
beloved, maintains all things in peace, quiet, and 
good order. Every one is pleased to honor and 
respect him. If any one be [7] dissatisfied, it is be- 
cause his inordinate self-interest and passions torment 
him. We have no other enemies here but ourselves; 
the rest does not amount to much. Lawsuits, ambi- 
tion, avarice, lust, the desire for revenge,— which 
are the evil spirits of Europe,—are rarely seen here; 
our forests are not suitable for lighting their fires. 
The cereals have proved very successful; some 
residents now harvest more than they require for the 
food of their families and of their cattle, which thrive 


-40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


de befoin pour la nouriture de leur famille & de leur 
beftial, qui fe porte tres-bien en ce pais cy. Le 
temps viendra que tous en auront. Labor improbus 
omnia vincit. Les trauaux font grands on ne peut 
fans peine faire vn nouueau pais. Les faifons de 
cultiuer la terre font icy plus courtes qu’en France, 
quoy que nous foyons en mefme degré d’eleuation 
que la Rochelle. 

La vertu, la douceur & la ioye ont fait leur feiour 
dans les maifons dediées 4 Dieu: des filles tendres & 
delicates qui craignent vn brin de neige en France, 
ne s’e{tonnent pas icy d’en voir des montagnes. Vn 
Frimas les enrumoit en leurs maifons bien fermées, 
&vn gros & grand & bien long hyuer armé de neiges 
& de [8] glaces depuis les pieds iufques a la tefte, ne 
leur fait quafi autre mal, que de les tenir en bon 
appetit. Voftre froid humide & attachant eft im- 
portun, le noftre eft plus piquant: mais il eft quoy 
& ferain & &4 mon aduis plus aggreable quoy que plus 
rude. 

Nous ations ¢a bas quatre demeures ou refidences, 
nof{tre R. P. Superieur, & le pere Iacques de la Place 
ont fait leur fejour plus ordinaire 4 Kebec, le pere 
Edmon [sc. Enmond] Maffe, & le pere Anne Denoiie 
a nof{tre Dame des Anges, le P. Iean de Brebeuf, 
le pere de Quen, & le pere Iofeph du Peron 4a S. 
Iofeph. Le pere Iacques Buteux, & le pere Iofeph 
Poncet aux trois riuieres. Tous nos peres & nos 
freres ont ioiiy d’vne aggreable & paifible fanté, 
chacun 4 trauaillé felon fa vocation faintement, le 
grand Maiftre les recompenfera & la fin de la iournée 
felon le prix & la valeur de leurs actions. 

Pour conceuoir le bon ott le mauuais eftat du pays, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 41 


very wellinthis country. The time will come when 
all will have food. Labor itmprobus omnia vinctt. 
Much work has to be done; a new country cannot be 
built up without trouble. The seasons for cultivat- 
ing the soil here are shorter than in France, although 
we are on the same degree of latitude as la Rochelle. 

Virtue, gentleness, and joy have made their abode 
in the houses dedicated to God. Tender and delicate 
maidens, who dread a snowflake in France, are not 
frightened when they see mountains of them here. 
A Frost would, in their well-closed houses, give them 
acold; while a severe and very long winter, armed 
with snow and [8] ice from head to foot, does them 
no other harm than to keep them in good appetite. 
Your damp and clinging cold is troublesome; ours is 
sharper, but it is calm and clear, and, to my mind, 
more agreeable, although more severe. 

We have four dwellings or residences here. Our 
Reverend Father Superior and father Jacques de la 
Place have usually made their abode at Kebec; 
father Enmond Masse and father Anne Denoué at 
nostre Dame des Anges; Father Jean de Brebeuf, 
father de Quen, and father Joseph du Peron, at St. 
Joseph; father Jacques Buteux and father Joseph 
Poncet at the three rivers.? All our fathers and 
brethren have enjoyed pleasant and undisturbed 
health. Each has worked piously in accordance with 
his vocation; the great Master will reward them at 
the close of the day’s labor according to the worth 
and value of their deeds. 

In order to understand the good or bad state of the 
country it is necessary to consider not only the 
French, who constitute the soundest part of it, but 
also the Savages who are our friends, and those who 


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Wot. 22 


il ne faut pas feulement ietter les yeux fur les Fran- 
cois qui en font la plus faine partie, mais encor fur 
les Sauuages qui nous font amis, & qui nous font 
ennemis. Ceux cy que nous appellons Hiroquois [9] 
ont fait demons &4 leur ordinaire, ils ont efté en cam- 
pagne 1’Hiuer le Printemps & l’Efté; ils ont maffa- 
cré plufieurs Hurons & plufieurs Algonqueins; ils 
ont pris des Frangois, ils en ont tué, ils tiennent vn 
de nos peres prifonniers, on a mis 4 mort de leurs 
gens. Ie deduiray tout cecy en particulier plus bas: 
ie n’ay maintenant que quatres paroles a dire fi on 
n’a la paix auec ces Barbares, ou fi on ne les deftruit 
le pays n’e{t pas en bonne pofture, la porte fera tou- 
fiours fermée a Iefus Chrift dans les Nations plus 
hautes, & les chemins feront toufiours infectés de ces 
lutins. Mais parlons de chofes meilleures, voyons en 
general les deportemens des nouueaux Chreftiens, 
notamment de S. Iofeph qu’on appelle vulgairement 
Sillery. 

La frequentation des Sacremens l’auidité qu’ont 
ces bons Neophytes de la parole de Dieu, l’obferuance 
qu’ils rendent 4 fes commandemens, leur diligence 
pour affifter 4 la S. Meffe tous les iours, les chafti- 
mens qu’ils commencent d’exercer fur les delin- 
quantes, leur zele pour la deffence & pour l’ampli- 
fication de la foy, font autant de marques que Iefus 
Chrift s’affermit [10] dans leurcceur. Tous les matins 
& tous les foirs on fonne pour les prieres qui fe font 
publiquement dans la Chapelle par l’vn des Peres. 
Ceux qui vont 4 la chaffe prient Dieu tous en com- 
mun dans leurs Cabanes, l’vn deux pronongant tout 
haut les prieres & les autres le fuiuans mot a mot. 
Ils n’entreprennent aucun voyage qu’ils ne fe mettent 


aimee 


1642] RELATION OF 16g2 : 43 


are our enemies. The latter, whom we call Hiro- 
quois, [9] have, as usual, acted like fiends. They 
have been in the field Winter, Spring, and Summer. 
They have massacred many Hurons and many Algon- 
queins; they have captured Frenchmen, and have 
killed some of them. They hold one of our fathers 
as a prisoner; some of their own people have been 
put to death. I shall speak of all this in detail, 
further on. I have now but four words to say: ‘If 
we do not have peace with these Barbarians or if we 
do not destroy them, the country will not be in a 
state of safety; the door will always be closed to 
Jesus Christ in the Nations which dwell higher up; 
and the roads will always be infested by these imps. 
But let us speak of pleasanter things; let us con- 
sider, generally, the behavior of the new Christians, 
especially those at St. Joseph, commonly called 
Sillery. 

Their frequent reception of the Sacraments, the 
avidity that these good Neophytes have for God’s 
word, their observance of his commandments, their 
assiduity in attending Holy Mass every day, the pun- 
ishments that they are beginning to inflict on delin- 
quents, their zeal for the defense and propagation of 
the faith,—all these are so many proofs that Jesus 
Christ is taking firm hold [10] in their hearts. Every 
morning and every evening, the bell is rung for pray- 
ers, which are said publicly in the Chapel by one of 
the Fathers. Those who go out hunting, pray to 
God in common in their Cabins; one of them says the 
prayers aloud, and the others repeat them after him, 
word by word. They never start on a journey with- 
out setting themselves right with God; and the first 
thing they do on their return is to go to the chapel 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


bien auec Dieu, & la premiere action qu’ils font a 
leur retour, c’eft d’entrer en la chapelle, & de luy 
rendre graces de les auoir conferués; s’ils paffoient 
vn mois fans purifier leur coeur dans les Sacremens 
de Penitence & d’Euchariftie, ils fe plaindroient au 
pere qui les corrige, il les faut moderer en ce point, 
les conferuer dans le refpect qu’ils doiuent a ces 
grands myfteres. C’eft leur donner de la ioye que de 
leur annoncer le iour d’vne fefte folennelle: ils taf- 
chent de les remarquer par les faifons, ils demandent 
vn Catalogue des iours ou vn petit Calendrier notam- 
ment quand ils vont a la chaffe, ot en marchandife 
pour vn temps vn peu notable, ils effacent les iours 
marqués 1’vn aprés l’autre remarquans fort bien ceux 
qui ne font point de trauail, ils recognoiffent les iours 
de ieufnes & d’abftinences [11] de viandes pour les 
garder eftroitement, s’ils en ont le moien. 

Ils ont horreur de leurs anciennes fuperftitions, fi 
quelqu’vn les inuite 4 quelque dance, ou a quelque 
feftin qui ne foit pas dans la modeftie Chreftienne, 
nous aymons la priere refpondent ils, nous auons 
quitté ces folies pour iamais plus ne les reprendre. 
En voila fuffifamment pour cognoiftre en gros 1’état 
de ces bons Neophytes, venons au detail & defcen- 
dons plus en particulier. 


1642] RELATION OF s6g2 45 


and thank him for having preserved them. Were 
they to pass a month without purifying their hearts 
in the Sacraments of Penance and the Eucharist, they 
would complain to the father who is their director. 
It is necessary to restrain them on this point, and to 
hold them in the respect that they owe to these great 
mysteries. To announce the day of a solemn festi- 
valis to give them joy; they strive to observe the 
feasts according to the seasons,—they ask for a List 
of the days, or for a small Calendar, especially when 
they go to hunt or to trade for any length of time. 
They strike off the days marked on it, in succession, 
observing very closely those on which no work is 
allowed. They look out for the days of fast and 
abstinence [11] from meat, in order to keep them 
strictly, if they have the means of doing so. 

They have a horror of their former superstitions. 
If any one invite them to a dance or to a feast which 
is not in accordance with Christian modesty, they 
reply: ‘‘ We love prayer; we have abandoned those 
follies, nevermore to resume them.” This is suffi- 
cient to show, in a general manner, the state of these 
good Neophytes. Let us now enter into details, and 
give more particulars. 


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES _ [Vot. 22 


CHAPITRE II. 


DES BONNES ACTIONS & DES BONS SENTIMENS DES 
NOUUEAUX CHRESTIENS. 


ON omnis qui dicit mihi Domine, Domine, intrabit 
in regnum celorum: Ceux qui inuoquent le 
faint No de Dieu, n’entreront pas tous au 

Royaume des Cieux; ce n’eft pas affez de leuer les 
mains au Ciel, il faut qu’elles foient pleines de 
hyacinthes, pour prefenter vn facrifice agreable a 
Dieu. En vn mot, il faut des actions & [12] non des 
paroles feulement pour eftre le bien venu en Paradis, 
reconnoiffons nos Chreftiens 4 leurs ceuures. 

Le iour de Pafques tombe ordinairement au temps 
que les Sauuages font leur prouifion de chair d’Elan. 
Quelques-vns d’entr’eux auoient tant d’enuie de fe 
communier en ce grand iour, qu’ils abandonnerent 
le lieu de leur chaffe & de leur fecherie, & tirerent 
droit 2 Kebec, ot ils penfoient arriuer le Samedy 
Sainct, mais le mauuais temps les en empefcha. Le 
iour fuiuant on les vit paroiftre dés le matin fur le 
fleuue glacé, s’écrians aux approches: C’eft auiour- 
d’huy que Iesvs-CuRistT eft reffufcité, il eft ainfi 
marqué dans noftre papier, nous fommes venus pour 
nous confeffer & pour nous communier. Ils fe iettent 
dans la Chappelle des Vrfulines, demandent fi la 
Meffe eft dite; quelques-vns eurent affez de temps 
pour fe confeffer, on differa les autres au lendemain. 

C’eft vn plaifir de voir quelquefois ces bonnes gens 
aborder A Kebec ou & S. Iofeph, dans leurs petits 


1642] ‘RELATION OF 1642 47 


CHAPTER II. 


OF THE GOOD ACTIONS AND GOOD SENTIMENTS OF 
THE NEW CHRISTIANS. 


ON omnis qui dicit miht Domine, Domine, intrabtt 

N in regnum celorum. Not all those who invoke 

the holy Name of God will enter the Kingdom 
of Heaven. It is not sufficient to lift one’s hands to 

Heaven; they must be full of hyacinths, to offer up 
a sacrifice agreeable to God. Ina word, actions, and 
[12] not words only, are needed to make us welcome 
in Paradise. Let us recognize our Christians by 
their works. 

_ Easter Sunday generally falls at the time when the 
Savages secure their supply of Elk meat. Some of 
them were so anxious to receive communion on that 
great day, that they left their hunting grounds, and 
the place where they were drying the flesh, and came 
straight to Kebec, which they hoped to reach on 
Holy Saturday; but they were prevented by bad 
weather from doing so. On the following day, we 
observed them early in the morning on the frozen 
river, calling out as they came near: ‘‘ It is on this 
day that JESUS CHRIST rose again; it isso marked 
on our paper. We have come to confess our sins, 
and to receive communion.’’ They hastened to the 
Chapel of the Ursulines, and asked whether Mass 
had been said. Some had time to make their confes- 
sion, and the others were put off till the following 
day. 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


Nauires d’efcorces, qu’ils emportent fur leurs épaules 
ou fur leurs teftes hors du courant de l’eau, puis s’en 
vont A l’Eglife, & entendent la faincte [13] Meffe. 
Cela fait ils remettent leur Nauire 41’eau, fe rembar- 
quent & s’en retournent fans mot dire au lieu de leur 
pefche ou de leur chaffe, bien ioyeux d’auoir rendu 
\ Dieu & A fon Eglife le deuoir d’vn bon & fidele 
Chreftien. I’appréds que nos Frangois ont efté 
extremement edifiez cét hyuer, voyans ces nouuelles 
plantes chargées du fruict d’vne prompte obeiffance, 
au premier fon de la cloche a 1’Eglife. 

Ie n’ay guere veu (dit le Pere de Quen qui m’a 
mis ces memoires en main) depuis que ie fuis en la 
Nouuelle France, des iours plus fafcheux & plus 
rigoureux que celuy de fainct André de l’année pre- 
cedente, la neige tomboit en abondance, & le vent 
la pouffoit comme des tourbillons ou comme vne 
pluye blanche, mais fi épaiffe, qu'on ne voyoit ny le 
Ciel ny la terre. Ie croyois que nos Chreftiens qui 
s’eftoiét retirez dans le bois A caufe du froid, & pour 
fe difpofer A leur grande chaffe, ne viendroient point 
4 la Meffe ce iour-la, ils en eftoient affes difpenfez 
pour l’iniure du temps, & pour la difficulté des che- 
mins; ie fus bien eftonné quand ie vy toute la Chap- 
pelle remplie: ie lotiay leur courage, & leur fis en- 
tendre que ces actions fi genereufes [14] eftoient bien 
agreables 4 Dieu. 

Ie croy, pourfuit le pere que c’eft de cét adorable 
Sacrifice, que ces bonnes ames tirent des lumieres 
pour recognoiftre la beauté de noftre creance, & des 
forces pour refifter aux attaques de leurs compatri- 
otes & de la charité, pour leur porter compafiion & 
les attirer A la participation de leur bon-heur. Ce 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 49 


It is a pleasure to see, sometimes, these good 
people land at Kebec or at St. Joseph, in their little 
Vessels of bark, which they carry on their shoulders 
or on their heads out of the current of water; they 
then go to the Church and hear holy [13] Mass. 
This done, they replace their Vessels in the water, 
reémbark, and return without a word to their fishing 
places or hunting grounds, greatly rejoiced at hav- 
ing accomplished the duty of a good and faithful 
Christian toward God and his Church. I hear that 
our French were greatly edified last winter when 
they saw these new plants, bearing the fruit of 
prompt obedience, at the first sound of the Church 
bell. 

“Since I have been in New France” (says Father 
de Quen, who has handed me these notes) ‘‘I have 
never seen more disagreeable or more stormy weath- 
er than we had on saint Andrew’s day of the previous 
year. Snow fell in abundance, and the gale drove 
it about like a whirlwind or like a white rain, but so 
thick that we could see neither the Sky nor the earth. 
I thought that our Christians— who had withdrawn 
into the woods on account of the cold, and to prepare 
for their great hunt—would not come to Mass on 
that day; the inclemency of the weather and the 
difficult roads were a sufficient excuse for their not 
doing so. I was greatly astonished when I saw the 
Chapel filled; I praised their courage, and told them 
that such brave deeds [14] were very pleasing to 
God. 

‘‘T consider,’’ adds the father, ‘‘that it is from that 
adorable Sacrifice that these good souls derive light 
to see the beauty of our faith; strength, to resist 
the attacks of their countrymen; and charity, to have 


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo. 22 


nous eft (difent-ils) vn regret bien fenfible de voir 
nos Parens & nos Alliez dans vn opiniaftre efclauage 
de Sathan. Ils fe moquent de nous: mais nous ne 
les hayffons pas pourtant. Nous abhorrons leurs 
facons de faire, nous deteftons leurs fuperftitions, 
fans vouloir aucun mal A leurs perfonnes. Is font 
fachez de ce que nous croyons en Dieu: mais ils ont 
beau faire la priere nous eft plus chere que la vie, 
nous mourrons pluftoft que de la quitter. 

Les Neophytes de Sainct Iofeph ayans appris la 
mort des Algonquins par les Hiroquois, voulurent 
confoler ceux qui reftoient de la défaite {uiuant leurs 
anciennes couftumes, qu'ils fanctifierent d’vn zele 
vrayement Chreftien. Ils font vn grand feftin, inui- 
tent tous les hauts Algonquins qui les eftoient venus 
voir, leur portent [15] trois paroles, c’eft a dire, leur 
font trois prefens: le premier fut donné pour effuyer 
les larmes qu’ils verfoient fur la mort de leurs gens: 
le fecond, pour faire reuiure le neueu de l’vn des 
principaux Algonquins: le troifiéme, qui eftoit le 
plus beau, fut donné pour attacher a la priere ceux 
qui fembloient y auoir prefté l’oreille, & qui ne 
l’auoient pas encor embraff{ée, & pour les inuiter tous 
A receuoir la Foy de IESvs-CHRIST. Ces hauts 
Algonquins, que Dieu va contraignant d’auoir recours 
Aluy par des fleaux qui les exterminent aggreerent les 
deux premiers prefens, & mirent la troifiefme en 
fequeftre pour deliberer par entr’eux s’il le falloit 
accepter: car qui touche vn prefent parmy les Sau- 
uages s’engage A faire ce que dit le prefent. Vn de 
la bande, voyant que ce prefent parloit de Dieu, & 
qu’il inuitoit ceux A qui on le faifoit de le prier dit 
tout haut, ie n’ay plus de tefte, ie ne fgaurois prier: 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 51 


compassion on them, and to strive to make them 
share their happiness. ‘It is a matter of deep 
regret’ (they say) ‘to see our Relatives and Friends 
so persistent in their slavery to Satan. They laugh 
at us, but still we do not hate them. We abhor their 
methods, we detest their superstitions, without wish- 
ing any evil to their persons. They are angry 
because we believe in God. But in spite of all they 
can do, prayer is dearer to us than life. We would 
rather die than give it up.’”’ 

When the Neophytes of Saint Joseph heard of the 
death of the Algonquins slain by the Hiroquois, they 
sought to console those who survived the defeat, 
according to their old customs, which they sanctified 
with truly Christian zeal. ‘They held a great feast, 
to which they invited all the upper Algonquins who 
had come to see them. They brought them [15] 
three words,—that is to say, they gave them three 
presents. The first was given to dry the tears that 
they shed for the death of their people; the second, 
to bring back to life the nephew of one of the chief 
Algonquins; the third, and the finest, was given to 
win over to prayer those who seemed to have lent 
ear to it, but had not yet embraced it, and to induce 
them to receive the Faith of JESUS CHRIST. 
These proud Algonquins—whom God will compel 
to have recourse to him by the scourges which 
exterminate them— accepted the first two presents, 
and put the third aside in order to deliberate together 
whether they should accept it,— for whosoever takes 
a present, among the Savages, binds himself to do 
what the present expresses. One of the band —see- 
ing that this present spoke of God, and called upon 
those to whom it was offered to pray to him —said 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


les Hiroquois, m’ayant ofté la tefte m’ont rauy 1’ef- 
prit. Ie ne vis plus, tous mes compatriotes font 
mors. Quand ie verray de grandes chaudieres boiiil- 
lantes remplies de la chair de nos ennemis, quand 
mon eftomach & mon ventre en [16] feront farcis, 
alors l’efpritmereuiendra. La rage & la vengeance, 
qui font l’appanage des Demons, regnent dans les 
coeurs de ces Barbares, qui de loups deuiennent des 
agneaux quand le Baptefme les a reueftus de la grace 
de Iefus-Chrift. 

Vne petite efcoiiade de ces bons Neophytes, vou- 
lant faire paroiftre que la Foy n’ofte point le courage 
a ceux qui l’embraffent, prennent refolution d’aller 
a la guerre auec les payens, chacun s’y difpofe de 
fon cofté. Les Chriftiens ont recours & Dieu, les 
payens font des feftins & des dances plaines de fuper- 
{tition, ils criét, ils chantent, ils heurlent, ils font 
mille poftures d’hommes enragés pour s’animer con- 
tre leurs ennemis, les voila tous partis de compagnie, 
a peine font ils 4 my-chemin que les enfans de Belial 
s’efloignent des enfans de Dieu, ou par mefpris ot 
par crainte d’entrer dans le pays de leurs ennemis, 
ils quittent la penfée de chaffer aux hommes s’addon- 
nant aux maffacres des beftes, nos bons Neophytes 
pourfuiuans leur pointe decouurent fecrettement vne 
bande d’Hyroquois, proportionés A leurs forces. Ils 
s’arretent tout court, confultent par enfemble s’ils les 
prendront vifs ou [17] s’ils les mettront A mort, en 
cas que Dieu leur donne la victoire? D’vn cofté la 
gloire de ramener des prifonniers viuans, leur frappe 
les yeux, c’ef{t le plus doux plaifir dont puiffe ioiiir 
vn Sauuage, de traifner aprés foy fon ennemy lié & 
garroté, pour en faire vn fpectacle de ioye & de 


“ae 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 . 53 


in a loud voice: ‘‘I no longer have a head; I could 
not pray; the Hiroquois, by taking away my head, 
have deprived me of my mind. When I shall see 
great kettles boiling, filled with the flesh of our ene- 
mies, when my stomach and my belly [16] shall be 
stuffed with it, then my mind will return.” Rage 
and revenge, which are the appanage of Demons, 
reign in the hearts of these Barbarians, who from 
wolves become lambs when Baptism has clothed 
them with the grace of Jesus Christ. 

A small party of these good Neophytes, wishing 
to show that the Faith does not deprive of courage 
those who embrace it, resolved to go to war with the 
pagans. Both sides prepared for it in their own 
way. The Christians had recourse to God, while the 
pagans resorted to feasts and dances full of supersti- 
tions. They cried aloud, they sang, they yelled, 
they assumed a thousand postures of men enraged, 
in order to excite themselves against their enemies. 
All startedincompany. Hardly had they gone half- 
way when the children of Belial separated from the 
children of God—either through a misunderstand- 
ing, or through fear of entering their enemies’ coun- 
try. They gave up the idea of hunting men, and 
took to killing animals. Our good Neophytes, pur- 
suing their design, secretly discovered a band of 
Hyroquois about equal to their own forces. They 
stopped short, and consulted together whether they 
should take them alive or [17] put them to death, in 
case God gave them the victory. On the one hand, 
the glory of bringing back prisoners alive dazzled 
their minds; for the sweetest pleasure that a Savage 
can enjoy is to drag his enemy after him, bound and 
fettered, to make a joyful and triumphant exhibition 


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


triomphe dans fon pais: D’autre cofté ces bons 
Neophytes fe doutans bien qu’ils ne pourroient ar- 
refter la rage, & la fureur de leurs compatriotes qui 
fe dechargeroit. fur ces victimes de mort, iugerent 
qu'il valoit mieux leur ofter la vie tout d’vn coup, que 
de remporter la gloire d’hommes vaillants aux 
defpens d’vne cruauté diabolique qu’on leur feroit 
fouffrir: ils fe lacent donc fur leur proye, tuent ceux 
quils ont a la rencontre, & fe voyant maiftres de 
leurs corps & de leur bagage, fe iettent 4 deux genoux 
par terre, rendent grace 4 Dieu de la victoire, enleuent 
les defpoiiilles & la cheuelure de leurs ennemis 
vaincus: & s’en reuiennent triomphans 4 fainct Iofeph, 
vifitants la maifon de Dieu deuant que d’entrer dans 
leurs Cabanes. Cela donna de la confufion aux infi- 
delles, qui fe gauffoient d’eux dans leurs tintamares, 
difans qu’a faute d’imiter leurs hurlemens [18] ils 
n’aprocheroient pas de leur proiieffe. 

Vn Chreftien gardoit en cette forte l’ab{tinence de 
viandes és iours que l’Eglife l’ordonne; s'il prenoit 
du poiffon fur la fepmaine: il le faifoit fecher & le 
gardoit pour ces iours 14; fi la pefche ne luy eftoit pas 
fauorable, il acheptoit du pain des Francois, dont il 
fe contentoit pour tout mets auec vn peu d’eau: s'il 
eftoit 4 la chaffe dans les bois, & qu’il n’[e]uft que de 
la viande, il enduroit la faim tant qu’il pouuoit, puis 
fe voyant contraint de manger pour ne point mourir, 
il fe mettoit 4 genoux & difoit A Dieu: toy qui as tout 
faict, pardonne moy fi ie t’offence, ie n’en ay point 
d’enuie, tu feais bien que ceft A contre-cceur, & par 
contrainte que ie mange de la chair, tu ne veux pas 
que ie meure il faut donc que ie mange: Ie le vay 
donc faire au nom du Pere, & du Fils, & du fainct 
Efprit. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 : 55 


of him in his own country. On the other hand, 
these good Neophytes were very doubtful whether 
they could stay the anger and fury of their country- 
men which would be vented on these victims of 
death, and decided that it would be better to kill 
them at once than to earn renown as valiant men at 
the expense of the diabolical cruelty that the pris- 
oners would be made to suffer. They, therefore, 
rushed on their prey, killed those whom they met, 
and, finding themselves masters of their bodies and 
of their baggage, fell on their knees and thanked 
God for the victory. They then removed the spoils 
and scalps of their vanquished foes, and returned in 
triumph to saint Joseph, visiting the house of God 
before entering their own Cabins. This confounded 
the infidels, who had taunted them in their own 
noisy demonstrations,— saying that, unless the others 
imitated their yells, [18] they could never attain their 
prowess. 

A Christian observed, in the following manner, 
abstinence from meat on the days appointed by the 
Church. When he caught any fish during the 
week, he dried it and kept it for those days. If his 
fishing was not successful, he bought bread from the 
French, and took no other food but that, with a little 
water. When he was hunting in the woods and had 
nothing but meat, he endured hunger as long as he 
could; and when he was compelled to eat to keep 
himself alive, he would kneel down and say to God: 
“Thou who hast made all things, pardon me if I 
offend thee. I have no desire to do so, for thou 
knowest that it is against my will, and through neces- 
sity that I eat meat; thou dost not wish me to die,. 
consequently I must eat. I will therefore do so in © 


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


Ce mefme Neophyte ayant rencontré vne femme 
Chreftienne bien’malade eflongnée de nos habitations, 
il luy rendit tous les debuoirs poffibles, il fe trouue a 
fa mort luy donne les bons aduis que Dieu luy in- 
{pire, & pendant que les femmes l’enfeueliffent il fait 
la foffe, il baftit vne Croix le mieux qu’il peut, la 
plante A vn [16i.e., 19] bout du Sepulcre, faict apporter 
le corps & l’ayant pofé tout proche de la Croix, il fait 


mettre tout le monde 4 genoux & parlant 4 haute 


voix, il prononce cette priere: Toy qui as tout faict 
ayes pitié de cette femme qui vient de mourir, elle 
croyoit en toy, fais luy mifericorde, oublie fe[s] pe- 
chez, & porte fon ame au Ciel, & toy bonne femme 
qui és morte, prie pour nous, quand tu feras la haut 
prie pour ceux qui font baptifez, affin qu’ils gardent 
la foy, prie pour les autres, affin qu’ils croyent en 


celuy qui a tout faict. Sa priere acheueé tous les 


Chreftiens, quieftoient prefens reciterent leur chape- 
let pour cette pauure creature: cela faict ce bon 
Neophyte couure la foffe, recite encore deux fois fon 
chapelet deuant que de partir du lieu, puis s’en va 
dans la Cabane de la deffuncte ot il parle fi haute- 
ment de la vie eternelle, & du bon-heur de cette 
femme, en ce qu'elle eftoit morte Chreftienne quils 
en demeurent tous confolés. 

Quant il fortoit de fa Cabane pour aller a la chaffe, 
il attachoit vn petit Crucifix qu’on luy a déné fous 
vn morceau décorce en forme d’appenty: Et parloit 
& Dieu, les deux genoux en terre & les mains iointes: 
[20] toy qui peux tout, donne moy a manger ie t’en 
prie, nourris mes gens, ils font 4 toy, tu les as for- 
més: rien ne t’e{t impoffible, donne leur 4 manger, 
ils te difent comme moy, donne nous 4 manger, tu és 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 57 


the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
holy Ghost.” 

This same Neophyte met with a Christian woman, 
who was very ill, and far away from our settlements. 
He rendered her every possible service, was present 
at her death, and repeated to her all the good coun- 
sels with which God inspired him. While the wom- 
en were enshrouding her, he dug a grave, made a 
Cross as well as he was able, and planted it at 
[16 i.e., 19] the head of the Grave. He then had the 
body brought and, laying it quite close to the Cross, 
he made all kneel, and said this prayer aloud: ‘‘Thou 
who hast made all things, have pity on this woman 
who has just died; she believed in thee; have mercy 
on her, forget her sins, and take her soul to Heaven. 
And thou, good woman, who art dead, pray for us. 
When thou art above, pray for those who are bap- 
tized, so that they may persevere in the faith; pray 
for the others, that they may believe in him who has 
made all.’’ His prayer ended, all the Christians 
present recited the rosary for the poor creature. 
When this was done, the good Neophyte filled in the 
grave and twice recited his rosary before leaving the 
spot. He then went to the Cabin of the deceased, 
where he spoke so highly of eternal life and of that 
woman’s happiness in having died a Christian, that 
all were greatly consoled thereat. 

Whenever he left his Cabin to go out hunting, he 
hung upa small Crucifix that had been given to him, 
under a piece of bark set up like a penthouse and 
spoke to God, both knees on the ground, and his 
hands clasped together, saying: [20] ‘“‘Thou who 
canst do all, give me food, I beg of thee. Feed my 
people; they are thine,—thou hast created them; 


a ogee Se I ee 


nn" 


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


noftre pere, ils difent vray: car tu és noftre pere, fi 
tu nous donnes 4 manger nous croyons toufiours en 
toy, fi tu n’en donnes point, tu és le maiftre, nous ne 
laifferons pas de croire en toy & de t’obeyr & de 
t’aymer. 

Vne bonne vieille difoit a l’vne de fes filles qui 
tiroit 4 la mort: mon enfant crois bien fort en celuy 
qui A tout fait, S8vKa S&nKa, bien fort bien fort, tuiras — 
au Ciel, & la tu ne mourras plus, tu verras celuy qui 
eft noftre pere, il te donnera vne vie toute nouuelle 
qui ne fe confommera iamais. Courage, ma fille, tes 
peines finiront bien-tof{t, dans peu de temps tu feras 
bien aife. Quand tu feras dans la maifon de celuy 
qui eft maiftre de la vie, tu luy diras ayés pitié de 
ma mere, ayez pitié de mes freres & de mes fceurs, 
afin qu’ils viennent icy auec moy, dis luy qu'il prenne 
de bonne penfees pour nous. Aprez la mort de cette 
enfant, cette bonne vieille rencontrant le pere qui 
l’auoit baptifée, luy dift: ma pauure [21] fille 4 qui 
vous atiiez donné le baptefme, eft au Ciel, elle a bien 
obey A Dieu; ce n’eftoit point vne babillarde, ny vne 
coureufe, elle ne fe métoit point en colere, elle eftoit 
toute paifible, elle ne mecontentoit perséne. Depuis 
qu’elle fut Chreftienne, fon chappelet ne luy fortoit 
plus des mains; c’eft pourquoy ie luy ay pendu au 
col a fa mort & l’ay enfeuely auec elle dans s6 tébeau: 
ie fuis vn peu trifte de ce que ie ne la voy plus; mais 
i’ay bien plus de regret de l’vn de mes petits enfans 
qui e{t mort fans baptefme, & lors foupirat elle adiofi- 
toit helas, ot fera ce pauure petit enfant? 

Vn nouueau Chreftien ayant cOmis quelque offence, 
aborde vn pere auec ces paroles, ie fuis trifte i’ay 
fafché Dieu, fi ie fgauois ce qu’il faut faire pour 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 59 


nothing is impossible to thee. They say to thee, as 
I do: ‘Give us food; thou art our father.’ They say 
truly, for thou art our father. If thou givest us 
food, we will always believe in thee; if thou dost 
not give us any, thou art the master,— we will still 
believe in thee, obey thee, and love thee.’’ 

A good old woman said to one of her daughters, 
who was nigh unto death: ‘‘ My child, believe very 
firmly in him who has made all things, Sounka, 
Sounka; very firmly, very firmly. Thou wilt go to 
Heaven, and there thou wilt die no more; thou wilt 
see him who is our father; he will give thee an 
entirely new life, which will never come to an end. 
Courage, my daughter, thy pains will soon be over; 
in a short time thou wilt be very joyful. When thou 
art in the house of him who is the master of life, 
say to him: ‘Have pity on my mother; have pity 
on my brothers and sisters, that they may come here 
with me.’ Tell him to think kindly of us.’’ After 
this child’s death, the good old woman met the 
father who had baptized her, and said to him: ‘‘ My 
poor [21] daughter, to whom you granted baptism, 
has gone to Heaven. She obeyed God well; she 
was not a talebearer nor a gadabout; she never got 
angry; she was always quiet, and never offended 
any one. Since she has been a Christian, her rosary 
never left her hands; for that reason I hung one 
about her neck at her death, and buried it with her 
in her grave. I am somewhat sorrowful, because I 
no longer see her; but I grieve much more for one 
of my little children who died without baptism.’’ 
And, sighing deeply, she added: ‘‘ Alas! where will 
that poor little child be?’’ 

A new Christian, who had committed some offense, 


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


l’appaifer, ie l’appaiferois: dites, le moy, m6 pere car 


ie fuis trifte, la douleur dont fon coeur eftoit oppreffé 


paroiffoit fur fon vifage. Il falloit luy dit le pere, te 
mettre A genoux auffi-t6t que tu as recognu ton 
peché, & prier Dieu qu’il te le pardonnaft pour 
l’amour qu’il porte 4 fon fils qui eft mort pour toy. 
I’ay fait cela, repart ce bon Neophyte, mais helas! 
c’e{t peu de chofe pour appaifer le grad Capitaine que 
i’ay fafché, en difant ces paroles, [22] les groffes 
l’armes [sc. larmes] luy tomberent des yeux, les fouf- 
pirs & les fanglos fortant de fa bouche luy ofterét la 
parole, & luy firent differer fa Confeffion au lende- 
main. Il ne pouuoit proferer que ces trois mots, i’ay 
fafché Dieu. 

Vn autre alla bien plus auant: voicy comme en 
parle le Pere Buteux qui ma donné ce memoire: ce 
bon-homme m'attendit 4 genoux vne groffe demy- 
heure aprés ma Meffe, & voyant que ie voulois 
fortir, il m’arrefte: i’ay fafché Dieu, ie me veux 
Confeffer, il me paroiffoit tout tranfporté de douleur: 
m’eftant fouuenu la nuict de mon peché, difoit-il, ie 
me fuis leué, i’ay entré dans les bois & couppant des 
fions d’arbres, ie me fuis fi long-temps battu & 
fuftigé que ie n’en pouuois plus, quand ie me feray 
Confeffé i’ay bien enuie d’en faire dauantage, tu me 
diras ce qu’il faut faire pour payer Dieu & pour l’ap- 
paifer. Ie l’entens de Confeffion dit le Pere, il eftoit 
touché iufques aux larmes, ie luy donnay vne peni- 
tence trois fois plus rude que ie n’aurois faict a vn 
Francois pour vne mefme offence. Eft-ce 14 me fift 
il tout.ce que tu m’ordonnes pour vn fi grand peché, 
fais moy porter quelque chofe [23] qui me déchire le 
corps, commande moy de ieufner; ne crains point, ie 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 61 


went to a father with these words: ‘‘I am sorry; I 
have displeased God. If I knew what must be done 
to appease him, I would appease him. Tell me, my 
father, what to do, for I am sad.” The sorrow that 
oppressed his heart was apparent on his face. ‘‘ Thou 
shouldst,’’ said the father, ‘‘ have knelt down as soon 
as thou didst recognize thy sin, and entreated God to 
pardon thee, through the love that he bears to his 
son who died for thee.’’ ‘‘I did so,” replied the 
good Neophyte; ‘‘ but, alas! that is very little to 
appease the great Captain whom I have offended.’’ 
As he said these words, [22] great tears fell from his 
eyes; the sighs and sobs issuing from his mouth 
prevented his speaking, and caused him to put off 
his Confession to the following day. He could say 
only these words: ‘‘ I have offended God.”’ 

Another went much further; hear what Father 
Buteux says of it, who gave me this account: ‘‘ This 
good man waited for me on his knees for a long half- 
hour after my Mass, and, seeing that I was about to 
go out, he stopped me, saying: ‘I have offended 
God. I wish to make Confession.’ He seemed to 
me quite carried away with grief. ‘ During the 
night,’ he said, ‘I remembered my sin; I arose, 
went to the woods, and cut branches from the trees, 
with which I beat and scourged myself until I was 
exhausted. I have a great desire to do so again, 
when I shall have made my Confession. Thou shalt 
tell me what must be done to make amends to God, 
and to appease him.’ I heard his Confession,”’’ 
said the Father; ‘‘ he was affected to tears. I gave 
him a penance three times as severe as I would have 
given to a Frenchman for the same offense. ‘Is 
that all,’ he said, ‘that thou dost appoint to me for 


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


t’obeiray, i’ay fafché Dieu, ie le veux appaifer. Le 
Pere luy repart: ie ne veux pas que tu ieufnes 
auiourd’huy ny demain: ce font des iours de rejouif- 
fances, on fera feftin dans vos Cabanes pour lV arri- 
uée du Pere le Ieune que Dieu nous a rendu, c’eft 
pour cela dit ce bon homme, qu'il faut que ie ieufne 
affin que ie fouffre dauantage, iay fafché Dieu, il 
ne faut pas que ie me rejouyfle auec les autres, ie 
m’abfenteray bien aifement de ces feftins, & fi ie 
m’y doibs trouuer, ie feray bien femblant de manger 
fans que perfonne s’en appergoiue. Ce bon Penitent 
pouuoit bien dire: Dolor meus im confpeciu meo femper, 
mes yeux enuifageants mon offence ne voyent que 
des obiets de douleur. 

Ce n’eft pas tout il me vint trouuer en ma cham- 
bre, fi toft que ie fus arriué pour me faire part de fes 
regrets: du moins ie coniecture que c’e{t le mefme, 
dont le Pere faict mention en fon memoire, il me 
monftre fes mains toutes fanglantes, il s’eftoit faict 
des taillades bien cuifantes aux doits, & comme ie 
luy en demandois la raifon! Ah mon Pere ie fuis 
bien trifte i’ay [24] fafché Dieu & ie fuis caufe que 
d'autres, l’ont faché, ie me fuis decouppé les doigts 
pour leur monft[rjer qu'il ne falloit pas faire ce que 
i’ay fait, & pour leur apprendre que ceux qui font 
baptifés ne doiuent plus commettre aucune mauuaife 
action. 

Vn autre papier qu’on ma mis entre les mains 
parle en cette fagon: l’vn des deux Capitaines de la 
refidence de S. Iofeph, eft fi touché de Dieu & fi zelé 
pour la foy qu’il reffent les moindres fautes que fes 
gens commettent, il n’a point de repos qu'il n’y ait 
mis ordre, il n’y a pas long-temps que fe venant con- 


— 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 . 63 


so great asin? Make me endure something [23] that 
will torment my body; command me to fast. Fear 
not,—I will obey thee; I have offended God and I 
wish to appease him.’’”’ The Father replied: ‘‘I do 
not wish thee to fast to-day, nor to-morrow; for 
these are days of rejoicing. A feast will be held in 
your Cabins in honor of the arrival of Father le 
Jeune, whom God has given back to us.” ‘‘ It is for 
that reason,’’ said the good man, “‘ that I must fast, 
so that I may suffer more. I have offended God; I 
must not rejoice with the others. I will very gladly 
keep away from these feasts; and, if I must be pres- 
ent at them, I will make pretense to eat, without any 
one noticing it.’’ This good Penitent might well 
say: Dolor meus in conspectu meo semper; ‘‘My eyes, 
beholding my offense, see but subjects for sorrow.”’ 
That is not all; he sought me in my room, as soon 
as I arrived, to inform me of his grief,—at least, I 
imagine that he is the same whom the Father men- 
tioned in his account. He showed me his hands all 
bleeding. He had made very painful cuts in his 
fingers, and, when I asked him the reason of this, he 
said: ‘‘ Ah, my Father, I am very sad; I have [24] 
offended God and I am the cause of others offending 
him. I have cut my fingers, to show them that what 
I did should not have been done; and to teach them 
that those who are baptized should not commit any 
bad action.”’ % 
Another paper that has been handed to me relates 
the following: ‘‘One of the two Captains of the 
residence of St. Joseph is so moved by God, and 
so zealous for the faith, that he feels the slightest 
faults committed by his people, and has no rest until 
he has set things right. Not long ago, he came for 


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


foler auprés de l’vn des peres qui font en cette refi- 
dence, il luy difoit: ie iotiy d’vne paix & d’vn repos 
tranquille dedans mon ame, quand ie vois que mes 
gens honorent la priere, il me femble que mon cceur 
eft en vn banquet; mais quand ie vois quelqu’vn s’e- 
carter du droit chemin ie m’afflige, mon coeur n’eft 
point a fon aife il eft céme vn homme qui eft mal 
affis, ie ne dors plus d’vn bon fommeil, ie ne fais que 
fonger aux moyens d’y apporter remede. Sa femme 
qu’ila gagnée a Dieu ne luy cede pas maintenant en 
pieté; eftant malade il y a quelque temps vn pere 
l’alla vifiter auec le Sieur [25] Giffart qui fert de 
Medecin 4 Kebec, apres luy auoir touché le poulx & 
confideré fa maladie il luy fit dire qu’elle prift cou- 
rage, qu’elle ne s’atriftaft point pour ce que fa mala- 
die n’ef{toit point mortelle, cette femme regardat le 
Pere cOme étonnée, luy dit; Cét homme feait-il bien 
que ie fuis baptifée? I1 le fcait bien, dit le Pere. 
Pourquoy donc, replique-elle, me dit-il que ie prenne 
courage, & que ie ne m/attrifte point, & que ie n’en 
mourray pas? Dieu n’eft-il pas mon Pere? [n’]eft-ce 
pas luy qui determine de ma vie? pourquoy donc 
m’attrifter de ce que fera mon Pere? qu’il en faffe 
comme il voudra, ile{t le Maiftre; ie fuis Chreftienne, 
ie ne m’attrifteray point. Le Medecin n’attendoit 
pas vne telle réponfe d’vne femme qui eft née dans 
la barbarie; il y en a de plus experts en France que 
luy, 4 qui on n’a iamais fait vne femblable réponfe. 

Vn Sauuage nouuellement baptifé, fe voyant affailly 
& viuement piqué fur quelque different qu’il auoit 
auec l’vn de fes compatriotes, retint fa parole; & fen- 
tant que fon coeur bondiffoit, Tout beau, difoit-il en 
foy-mefme, il vaut mieux perdre ce que l’on me dif- 
pute & tout ce que [26] i’ay de vaillant, que de falir 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 65 


consolation to one of the fathers who are at this resi- 
dence, and said to him: ‘I enjoy peace and tranquil 
repose in my soul when I see that my people honor 
prayer,—it seems to me that my heart is at a ban- 
quet; but, when I see any one stray from the right 
path, I am afflicted at it. My heart is not at ease, 
but is like a man who is uncomfortably seated; I do 
not sleep soundly, and do nothing but think of the 
means of remedying the evil.’ His wife, whom he 
has won over to God, now does not yield to him in 
piety. When she was ill, some time ago, a father 
went to visit her with Sieur [25] Giffart who is 
employed asa Physician at Kebec. After feeling her 
pulse and considering her disease, he had her told to 
take courage and not to be unhappy, because her 
malady was not mortal. The woman looked at the 
Father as if astounded, and said to him: ‘ Does that 
man know that I am baptized?’ ‘ He knows it well,’ 
said the Father. ‘ Then,’ she replied, ‘ why does he 
tell me to take courage, not to be unhappy, and that 
I shall not die? Is not God my Father? Is it not he 
who decides about my life? Why, then, grieve at 
what my Father shall do? Let him arrange as he 
will; he is the Master. I am a Christian, and I will 
not be unhappy.’ The Physician did not expect 
such an answer from a woman born in a state of 
barbarism. There are in France more experienced 
physicians than he, to whom such an answer -has 
never been given.”’ 

A newly-baptized Savage, who was offended and 
greatly nettled in a dispute with one of his country- 
men, held his tongue, and, feeling his heart filled 
with rage, he said to himself: ‘‘ Gently; it is better 
to lose what we are disputing about, and everything 


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


mon Baptefme. I] s’en alla de ce pas trouuer le Pere 
qui l’auoit baptifé, pour luy demander ce qu’il feroit 
a fon coeur qui vouloit eftre mefchant. Le Pere fut 
bien edifié de fa bonté. Dieu beniffe tous ceux qui 
par leurs prieres, ou par leurs fecours, font tomber la 
pluye du Ciel fur cette nouuelle vigne, en verité elle 
porte de bons fruits. 

Vn ieune Sauuage marié depuis peu de temps, fe 
fentit tété de quitter fa femme, & cette penfée le 
iette dans vne profonde trifteffe. Le Diable luy 
reprefente le plaifir qu’il y a de changer vne femme 
qu’on hait, en vne autre qu’on aime. Son bon Ange 
luy fait voir que la contrainte qu’on fe fait dans les 
temps, eft recompenfée d’vn bonheur eternel. II fe 
fouuient de la parole qu’il a donnée A Dieu & a fon 
époufe, il veut eftre fidele, & neantmoins il fe fent 
porté a l’infidelité; il s’en va trouuer fon Directeur, 
& le prie de chercher quelque remede & fa tentation, 
qu’il eftime eftre vn grand peché. Le Pere le mene 
deuant le Sainct Sacrement, le fait prier Dieu, il 
demande qu’on l’entende en Confeffion. Les groffes 
larmes luy tombent des yeux. La fimple penfée de 
changer [27] de femme luy paroift vn fi grand crime, 
qu'il prie qu’on l’enuoye en prifon, & qu’on le mette 
en vne baffe foffe, ou qu’on le face publiquement 
fuftiger. Se voyant éconduit de fa demande, il fe 
gliffe dans vne chambre proche de la Chappelle, & 
auec vne corde qu’il rencontre, il fe frappe fi rude- 
ment par tout le corps, que le bruit en vint iufques 
aux oreilles du Pere: il accourt, & luy defend vne fi 
rude penitence. Le Diable qui n’aime point 1l’efprit 
de mortification le quitta bien toft, & fa tentation 
s’éuanoiiyt. 

Nous auons toufiours creu que les mariages des 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "3 


[26] of any value that I own, than to disgrace my 
Baptism.’’ He went at once to the Father who had 
baptized him, to ask him what he should do to his 
heart that wished to be wicked. The Father was 
greatly edified at his goodness. May God bless all 
who by their prayers, or by their aid, cause the rain 
to fall from Heaven on this new vine. Verily, it 
bears good fruit. 

A young Savage, recently married, felt tempted to 
leave his wife, and the thought caused him deep 
sorrow. ‘The Devil pictures to him the delight of 
changing a wife whom one hates for another whom 
one loves. His good Angel shows him that the re- 
straint exercised in this life is rewarded by happiness 
throughout eternity. He remembers the word that 
he has plighted to God and to his wife; he wishes 
to be faithful, but, nevertheless, he feels himself 
inclined toward infidelity. He goes to his Director, 
and begs him to find some remedy against his tempta- 
tion, which he regards as a great sin. The Father 
takes him before the Blessed Sacrament, and makes 
him pray to God. He asks that his Confession be 
heard. Great tears fall from his eyes. The mere 
idea of changing [27] his wife seems to him so great 
a crime that he entreats to be sent to prison and to 
be put in a dungeon, or to be publicly flogged. See- 
ing his request refused, he slips into a room near the 
Chapel, and, with a rope that he finds, he beats him- 
self so hard all over the body that the noise reaches 
the ears of the Father, who runs in and forbids so 
severe a penance. The Devil, who loves not the 
spirit of mortification, soon left him, and his tempta- 
tion vanished. 

We have always been of opinion that the mar- 


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


Sauuages nous donneroient de la peine; la liberté de 
tenir plufieurs femmes, & d’en changer quand on 
veut, eft vn grand obftacle 4 la Foy, mais il n’eft pas 
infurmontable; la grace eft plus puiffante que la na- 
ture. Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny voulant 
donner vne grande idée de ce Sacrement a4 ces bons 
Neophytes, honore affez fouuent leurs mariages, fai- 
fant dreffer vn beau feftin le iour de leurs nopces, ot 
fe trouuent quelques vns des principaux de nos Fran- 
cois, apres auoir affifté aux faincétes ceremonies de 
l’Eglife. La on ne manque [28] pas de parler de la 
{tabilité du Mariage, de l’importance qu’il y a d’obeir 
4 Dieu en ce poinct. Les Capitaines Sauuages font 
les premiers 4 donner de la crainte aux nouueaux 
mariés, de fe feparer: ces béne[s] gens ont vne candeur 
& vne fimplicité qui feroit bien nouuelle en France. 
Le Preftre qui fait les ceremonies de ce Sacrement, 
ef{tant fur le poinct de tirer le confentement des deux 
parties, s'il fe rencontre 14 quelque Sauuage de con- 
fideration & zelé, il s’écrie tout haut; Attends, mon 
Pere, ie veux parler: 14 deffus s’addreffant 4 1’époux 
& A 1’époufe qui font debout deuant 1’ Autel, il leur 
dit; Prenez garde, il n’y a plus qu’vn pas a faire; fi 
vous vous auancez dauantage, il n’y a plus moyen de 
reculer. Voftre parole eft vn lien qui vous va vnir fi 
étroittement, qu'il ne vous fera plus permis de le 
coupper; fermez la bouche fi vous ne voulez point 
ef{tre liez; fi vous parlez, que vos paroles foient de 
fer, que iamais elles ne fe rompent; vous eftes encore 
libres, perfonne ne vous force; mais fi vous parlez, 
nous vous contraindrons de garder voftre parole: Or 
fus parlez donc, ou vous taifez 4 la bonne heure: 
puis fe tournant vers le Preftre, pourfuis; [29] Mon 
Pere, pourfuis, i’ay finy mon difcours. Cette ron- 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 2 ae 


riages of the Savages would give ustrouble. The 
liberty of having several wives, and of changing them 
at pleasure, is a great obstacle to the Faith, but it is 
not insurmountable. Grace is more powerful than 
nature. Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, 
who wishes to give these good Neophytes a high 
opinion of that Sacrament, frequently honors their 
marriages with his presence. He has a fine feast 
prepared on the wedding day, which is attended by 
many of the principal among our French, after they 
have been present at the holy ceremonies of the 
Church. On these occasions we do not neglect [28] 
to speak of the stability of Marriage, as well as the 
importance of obeying God on that point. The Cap- 
tains of the Savages are the first to frighten the new- 
ly-married couples against separating. The candor 
and simplicity of these good people would be some- 
thing quite novel in France. When the Priest who 
officiates at the ceremonies of this Sacrament is about 
to question both parties as to their consent, if there 
be any Savage of importance present who is zealous, 
he calls out: ‘‘ Stay, my Father, I wish to speak.’’ 
Then, addressing the bridegroom and the bride who 
are standing before the Altar, he says to them: 
“Take care; there is but one more step to be taken, — 
if you go any further, you can never draw back. 
Your word is a bond that will unite you so closely 
that you will no longer be permitted to sever it. 
Keep your mouths closed, if you do not wish to be 
bound. If you speak, may your words be of iron, 
that they may never break. You are still free,—no 
one compels you; but if you speak, we will force you 
to keep your word. Now then, speak, or be silent, 
as you please.’’ Then, turning towards the Priest, 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


deur reffent ces vieux Siecles dorez, ott la nature 
marchoit reueftué d’vne fimplicité plus agreable que 
tous les artifices des Nations les plus polies. 

Puis que ie fuis tombé fur ce fujet, i’en feray la 
conclufion de ce Chapitre. Voicy vne nouuelle fagon 
de fe rechercher en mariage. Ona dit autrefois qu’vn 
Sauuage Payen faifant l’amour & vne fille, l’alloit 
voir la nuict, luy demandoit en fecret fi elle l’auoit 
pour agreable. Si la fille répondoit qu’elle ne fe 
vouloit pas marier, le ieune homme ne paffoit pas 
outre: fi elle répondoit, qu’il ne falloit pas s’addref- 
fer A elle pour cette affaire, il faifoit fes pourfuites. 
Or comme nous auons puiffammét crié contre cette 
facon de faire, les Chreftiens l’ont improuuée; fi bien 
qu’ils s’addreffoient A nous pour demander vne fille, 
mais voicy comme quelques-vns fe comportent 4 pre- 
fent. Ils peignent vn ieune homme & vne ieune 
fille fur vne écorce fe tenans par la main, en la pofture 
quils font dans 1’Eglife quand ils fe marient, & le 
feruiteur enuoye ce tableau a fa maiftreffe par quel- 
qu’vn de fes amis. 

Or iacgoit que ce portrait ne foit pas [30] d’Appel- 
les, la fille neantmoins entend bien ce qu’il veut dire. 
Si elle agrée le ieune homme, elle prend le tableau: 
fi elle dit qu’elle n’entend rien A cette peinture, c’eft 
4 dire que le ieune homme fe doit pouruoir ailleurs, 
& qu’il a fon congé: & n’ayez pas peur qu'il s’aille 
battre en duel contre celuy qu’il verra eftre le bien- 
venu: ila plus de coeur que de fe laiffer gourmader 
Ala paffion qu’il auoit pour vne fille: c’eft foibleffe 
de [fe laiffer] vaincre par le tyran de l’amour, ou par 
le demon de la haine. Ce feruiteur éconduit ira 
congratuler a fon camarade, qui fera bien venu 
aupres de fa maiftreffe. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 71 


‘“Go on, [29] my Father, go on; I have finished my 
speech.” This plain speaking reminds one of the 
golden Age of old, when nature was clothed in a 
simplicity more agreeable than all the artifices of the 
most polished Nations. 

While I am on this subject, I will conclude this 
Chapter with it. Here is a new way of seeking a 
person in marriage. It has already been stated that, 
when a Pagan Savage wooed a maiden, he went to 
see her at night, and asked her in secret if she would 
accept him. If the maid replied that she did not 
wish to marry him, the young man went no further. 
If she replied that he was not to address her about 
the matter, he pressed his suit. Now, as we have 
vigorously rebuked such conduct, the Christians dis- 
approve of it, and they apply to us to ask for a maid; 
but observe how some of them now act. They paint 
on a piece of bark a young man and a maiden, hold- 
ing each other by the hand, in the position that they 
assume in Church when they get married; and the 
swain sends this picture to his mistress by one of his 
friends. 

Now, although this portrait may not be painted 
[30] by Apelles, the maiden knows very well what it 
means. If she accepts the young man, she takes the 
picture. If she says that she does not at all under- 
stand the painting, it means that the young man 
must look elsewhere, and that he is rejected. Do 
not fear that he will fight a duel with him whom he 
sees welcomed. He has more spirit than to let him- 
self be dominated by his passion for a maid; to allow 
oneself to be vanquished by the tyrant of love or the 
demon of hatred, is weakness. The rejected suitor 
will go and congratulate his comrade who shall be 
welcome to his mistress. 


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


CHAPITRE III. 


CONTINUATION DES BONS SENTIMENS & DES BONNES 
ACTIONS DES CHRESTIENS. 


9VN des Peres qui enfeignent les Sauuages en la 
refidence de S. lofeph, lifant certain iour vne 
lifte des pechez aufquels ces peuples font fub- 
jets deuant leur Baptefme, comme il vint 4 parler 
de leurs [31] fuperftitions, des inuocations qu’ils 
faifoient des Demons, ou des Genies du iour, d’vn 
certain pacte tacite qu’ils ont auec le Diable, par le 
moyen d’vne pierre myf{terieufe, dont on a parlé 
autres fois. Vn bon Chreftien s’écria; Voila, mon 
Pere, ce qui fe garde encore parmy nous; allons dans 
les cabanes, cherchons par tout, nous trouuerons quel- 
ques-vnes de ces petites Idoles cachées, perfonne ne 
s’en fert aupres de vous; mais ceux qui en ont, les 
portent auec eux dans les bois; le Diable les tente, 
& leur fait croire qu’ils feront mal-heureux s’ils les 
iettent, qu’ils ne feront pas bonne chaffe, & par ce 
moyen il les tient toufiours 4 la cadene. Ie ne dis 
pas cecy pour aucun mal que ie leur fouhaitte, le 
defir que i’ay qu’ils éloignent les Demons de leurs 
cabanes, & qu’ils prennent le chemin le plus droit du 
Paradis, me fait tenir ce difcours. 

Cét homme eft fi zelé pour la conuerfion des Sau- 
uages, qu’il s’en alla ce printemps bien auant dans 
les terres vers vne Nation qui n’aborde quafi point 
les Frangois pour leur faire des prefens, & pour les 
inuiter 4 embraffer la Foy [32] de IESVS-CHRIST. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 73 


CHAPTER III. 


CONTINUATION OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS AND GOOD 
ACTIONS OF THE CHRISTIANS. 


NE of the Fathers who teach the Savages at the 
residence of St. Joseph, read out one day 
a list of the sins to which these peoples are 
liable before their Baptism. When he spoke of 
their [31] superstitions,— of their invocations to the 
Demons, or to the Genii of the light;* of a certain 
tacit compact that they have with the Devil by means 
of a mysterious stone, which we have already men- 
tioned,— a good Christian called out: “‘ That, my 
Father, still remains among us. Let us go into the 
cabins and look about everywhere; we shall find some 
of those little Idols hidden away. No one makes 
use of them before you, but those who have any, 
carry them with them into the woods. The Devil 
tempts them, and makes them believe that they will 
be unlucky if they throw them away,—that they 
will not have a successful hunt; and, by this means, 
he keeps them always in chains. I do not say this 
because I wish them evil; my desire that they should 
send away the Demons from the cabins, and take the 
straightest road to Paradise, makes me speak.’’ 

This man is so zealous for the conversion of the 
Savages that he went last spring very far inland, to 
a Nation that hardly ever approaches the French, to 
give them presents, and to urge them to embrace the 
Faith [32] of Jesus CHRIST. He had already 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


Il y fut defia l’an paffé auec vn tres-heureux fuccés, 
voicy comme le Pere Ragueneau m’en efcrit céte 
année: nos Hurons qui l’Efté paffé allerent en traitte 
4 Ondstasaka (ie croy que ce font les peuples du Sagné 
oti alloit ce bon Neophyte) nous ont raporté que foir 
& matin ils voyoient faire les prieres, & qu’on y 
chantoit les mefmes chofes que Charles Tfondatfaa 
auoit entendu chanter aux Chreftiens de S. Iofeph. 
D’ott les Hurons concliient que ces peuples croyent 
en Dieu, & que la Foy eft defia en poffeffion de tous 
les pais Septentrionnaux Dominus benedicat, fans doute 
conuertifans bien vne nation, on aduance beaucoup 
la conuerfion des autres, aufquelles mefme on ne 
trauaille pas. I’en fuis tout conuaincu auffi bien 
que V.R. ce font des paroles du pere. 

Ce mefme Neophyte a vne deuotion toute particu- 
liere aux images des faints: il en a quelques vnes 
qu’il conferue auec vn tres grand foing. Les def- 
pliant certain iour deuant l’vn de nos Frang¢ois, il les 
baifoit toutes auec vne grande humilité: Mais quand 
il vint aux Crucifix, ille baifa trois fois; Voila, difoit- 
il, le portrait [33] de celuy que i’ayme par deffus toute 
chofe, il luy rendoit vn fi grand honneur, qu’on 
voyoit bien qu'il auoit de l'amour pour celuy qui en 
a tant eu pour tous les hommes. 

Ce pauure homme fe voyant lié auec vne femme, 
autant éloignée de la Foy que fon mary l’honore, la 
quitta en vn beau matin, fe feruant du priuilege que 
luy donne fainct Paul. Quelques Chreftiens s’en 
formalifent; ils luy reprochent qu’il ne croit que du 
bout des levres; qu’vn vray Chreftien ne doit iamais 
abandonner fa femme. Le voila tout affligé; car il 
ne peut auoir d’amour pour vne femme qui n’en a 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 5 


gone there last year, and had met with very great 
success. This is what Father Ragueneau writes me 
about it this year: ‘‘ Our Hurons who went last Sum- 
mer on a trading expedition to Ondoutawaka® (I 
think that it is the peoples of the Sagné where this 
good Neophyte went) have informed us that, even- 
ing and morning, they heard the prayers recited and 
the same things sung that Charles Tsondatsaa had 
heard sung by the Christians of St. Joseph. Hence 
the Hurons conclude that those people believe in God 
and that Faith is already in possession of all the 
Northern countries. Dominus benedicat. Of course, 
by thoroughly converting one nation we greatly 
further the conversion of others for which we do not 
even labor. I am quite convinced of this, as well as 
Your Reverence.’’ Such are the words of the father. 

This same Neophyte has quite a special devotion 
for the images of the saints; he has some of these, 
which he preserves with the greatest care. While 
he was unfolding them one day before one of our 
Frenchmen, he kissed them all with great humility. 
But when he came to the Crucifix, he kissed it three 
times. ‘‘ Here,’’ he said, “‘is the likeness [33] of 
him whom I love above all.’’ He paid it so much 
honor that one could well see that he loved him who 
has had such love for all men. 

This poor man, being united to a wife who was as 
averse to the Faith as her husband honored it, left 
her one morning, making use of the privilege that 
saint Paul gives him. Some Christians found fault 
with this, and reproached him,— saying that his faith 
was but lip service, and that a true Christian should 
never leave his wife. He was greatly afflicted, for 
he could not love a woman who did not love God, 


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 22 


point pour Dieu, & qui d’ailleurs a vn naturel altier 
& fort fuperbe.. Sa triftefle luy dure iufques a la 
nuict, & V’empefche de prendre vn bon fommeil; a 
chaque fois qu’il fe réueille, il prie Dieu qu’il luy 
faffe connoiftre fa volonté, fe difpofant 4 reprendre 
{a femme ou 2 la rebuter, felon qu'il luy plairoit d’en 
ordonner; il s’endort fortement dans cette penfée, 
& voit en fonge vne troupe de Frangois, & deux 
Peres de noftre Compagnie, qui luy difoient; Quitte 
cette femme, elle ne veut point auoir d’efprit. 
S’eftant réueillé 14 [34] deffus, il fe tient dans la 
refolution de iamais plus ne l’aborder en ayant vne 
auerfion nompareille. Comme il vit neantmoins que 
quelques-vns s’en edifioient mal, il dift au Pere qui le 
dirige; Si vous me commAadez de m’affeoir vne autre 
fois aupres de celle qui s’eft fi fouuent moquée de 
Dieu, & qui m’a traité long-temps comme fon valet, 
ie quitteray mes fentimens pour prendre les vottres: 
ie ne fais point d’eftat de mes fonges ny de mes incli- 
nations: ie pourrois me fouruoyer fi ie fuiuois mes 
penfées & mes affections: ie marcheray en affeurance 
tandis que ie me laifferay conduire par celuy que 
Dieu m’a donné pour guide. Le Pere eftonné voyat 
ce courage & cette folidité, dans 1’ame d’vn homme 
dont la douceur n’a aucun rapport 4 l’acrimonie d’vne 
femme gauffeufe & méprifante; ie prie Dieu qu'il luy 
change cette humeur: elle fe fait maintenant inftruire 
X bon efcient, auoiiant qu’en effet elle s’ef{t mocquée 
des prieres, qu’elle en auoit de l’horreur; mais que 
fon ame eftant changée, elle a pris d’autres fenti- 
mens. Le bon Neophyte s’eft remis aupres d’elle a 
condition, qu’il la quittera pour iamais, fi elle ne 
tient ferme en la Foy. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 77 


and who, moreover, was of a very arrogant and over- 
bearing disposition. His sorrow lasted until night, 
and prevented him from sleeping soundly. When- 
ever he awoke, he prayed to God to manifest his will 
to him,— being prepared to take back his wife, or to 
send her away, as God might be pleased to order. 
He fell asleep, greatly impressed with that idea; and, 
in a dream, he saw a band of Frenchmen, with two 
Fathers of our Society, who said to him: ‘‘ Leave 
that woman; she will not be reasonable.’’ There- 
upon he awoke [34] and adhered to his resolution 
never to see her again, having a supreme aversion 
for her. However, as he saw that some were far 
from being edified at this, he said to his Father 
director: ‘‘If you order me to sit down once more 
beside her who has so often scoffed at God, and who 
has so long treated me as her lackey, I will give up 
my ideas to follow yours. I do not value either my 
dreams or my inclinations. I might go astray if I 
followed my own thoughts and my affections; I shall 
walk in safety, so long as I allow myself to be led 
by him whom God has given me for my guide.”’ 
The Father was astonished at seeing such courage 
and such firmness in the soul of a man whose gentle- 
ness is not in keeping with the ill humor of a jeer- 
ing and scornful woman. I pray that God may 
change her temper. She is now receiving instruc- 
tion quite willingly,— admitting that, in reality, she 
had scoffed at the prayers because she had a horror 
of them; but that her mind has changed, and that 
she has adopted other sentiments. The good Neo- 
phyte has returned to her on condition that he will 
leave her forever, if she is not firm in the Faith. 

[35] A little girl answered the questions of the 


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


[35] Vne petite fille ayant tres-bien répondu aux 
demandes du Catechifme, le Pere qui l’interrogeoit 
luy donnant quelque petite recompenfe, dift tout 
haut, pour l’encourager 4 bien faire vne autre fois, 
qu’il eftoit marry de ce qu’il ne trouuoit rien dans 
fes threfors, qui fuft digne de reconnoiftre vne fi 
belle & fi riche réponfe: vne femme Sauuage l’en- 
tendant s’écria: Helas! mon Pere, c’eft vn grand 
threfor que l’inftruction: vous faites cét enfant bien 
riche, quand vous luy apprenez 4 connoiftre Dieu; il 
vaut mieux fcauoir le chemin du Ciel que de poffeder 
tous les biens de la terre. Ie croy que cette bonne 
femme eftoit parente de celle qui dift tout haut a 
noftre Seigneur, Beatus venter qui te portauit, & vbera 
que fuxifii: elle gouftoit cette verité de 1’Efcriture, 
Omne aurum, tn comparatione ilius, arena eft exigua. 

Vne autre femme aueugle piqua viuement vn Infi- 
dele qui fe gauffoit des Chreftiens: ce miferable voy- 
ant que ces bons Neophytes s’embarquoient vn Di- 
mache au matin, pour venir entendre la grande Meffe 
a Kebec, s’embarqua auffi en mefme temps: & au 
depart il s’écria, I’ay plus d’amour que vous autres 
pour mes parens: [36] & moni{trant de fa main le lieu 
ott le Soleil fe couche: C’eft 14 ot font allez mes An- 
cef{tres, c’e{t 1A ot ie veux aller, c’eft 1a ot doiuent 
aller mes compatriotes qui ont de l’efprit, & non pas 
dans vos Eglifes. Cette bonne aueugle l’entendant, 
luy repartit: Si tu as tant d’amour pour tes compa- 
triotes, pourquoy les as-tu abandonnez cét hyuer a la 
mercy des Hiroquois; tu auois peur d’ef{tre chauffé: 
fi tu auois de l’efprit, tu craindrois bien dauantage le 
feu d’Enfer ot tu dois aller, que le feu des Hiro- 
quois: tu n’es pas fait pour neant: celuy qui t’a creé 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 79 


Catechism very well, and the Father who examined 
her gave her a slight reward, saying aloud—to en- 
courage her to do well another time—that he was 
sorry that he could find nothing in his treasures 
worthy of rewarding such good and full answers. 
A Savage woman, hearing him, exclaimed: ‘‘ Ah, my 
Father, instruction is a great treasure. You make 
that child very rich when you teach her to know 
God. It is better to know the road to Heaven than 
to own all the wealth of the earth.’’ I think this 
good woman was related to that one who called out 
to our Lord: Beatus venter quit te portavit et ubera que 
suxistt. She approved that saying of the Scriptures: 
Omne aurum, in comparattone illius, arena est exigua. 
Another woman, who was blind, sharply rebuked 
an Infidel who scoffed at some Christians. When 
the wretch saw these good Neophytes embark on a 
Sunday morning, for the purpose of hearing high 
Mass at Kebec, he also embarked at the same time; 
and, as they started, he called out: ‘‘I have more 
love for my forefathers than you have.” [36] And, 
indicating with his hand the place where the Sun 
sets, he said: ‘‘ That is where my Ancestors have 
gone, and that is where I wish to go. Thatis where 
my countrymen who are wise should go, and not into 
your Churches.” The good blind woman, hearing 
him, replied: ‘‘ If thou hast such love for thy coun- 
trymen, why didst thou abandon them last winter to 
the mercy of the Hiroquois? Thou wert afraid of 
being burned. If thou hadst sense, thou wouldst 
have a still greater fear of the fire of Hell, to which 
thou wilt go, than of the fire of the Hiroquois. Thou 
wert not made for nothing. He who created thee 
will pay thee in money of fire or of glory, after thy 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


te payera en monnoye de feu ou de gloire apres ta 
mort. Cette bonne aueugle voit bien clair és chofes 
de la Foy, fa vie eft fort innocente. 

Victor sechkiné voulant aller en traite, fe vint pre- 
fenter ati Sacrement de Penitence. Apres auoir fait 
fes deuotions, il dift A fon Confeffeur, Mon Pere, 
prie Dieu pour moy & pour ma femme, & pour mon 
enfant; ie feay par experience ce que peut la priere 
faite fans faintife: tu vois ma petite fille, Dieu me 
l’a dénee deux fois: eftat cet hyuer dans les bois pour 
faire noftre grande chaffe, elle tomba malade, en 
{forte que ie n’en attédois plus rien que la mort: [37] 
ma femme ne faifoit que pleurer: les larmes, luy 
dis-je, ne reffufciteront pas voftre enfant: ayons 
recours 4 celuy qui nous l’a dénée, & le prions de 
nous la donner encor vne autre fois: ils fe mirent a 
genoux, & firent cette petite oraifon, plus pleine de 
coeur que de paroles: Toy qui as tout fait & qui con- 
ferues tout, c’eft toy qui as formé cét enfant, & qui 
nous l’as donée: elle eft malade, tu la peux guerir, 
gueris-la donc fi tu veux, fi elle vit, elle croira en 
toy, elle t’obeira quand elle fera grande; fi tu ne la 
veux pas guerir, ie ne laifferay pas de croire en toy; 
ie n’en diray pas vn mot dauantage car tu es le Mai- 
{tre, fais tout ce que tu voudras. Le lendemain, 
difoit le bon Neophyte, ma fille eftoit en auffi bonne 
fanté que tu la vois maintenant. 

Les Sauuages retournans de leur grande chaffe, 
l’vn de nos Peres affembla les principaux, & leur 
dift, Qu’il eftoit fort edifié de ce qu’ils remedioient 
aux defordres qui fe rencontrent de temps en 
temps parmy eux; mais qu'il s’étonnoit comme 
ils permettoient qu’vne ieune femme baptifée ne 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 81 


death.” This good woman sees very clearly, n 
matters of the Faith; her life isa very innocent one. 

Victor Wechkiné, intending to start on a trading 
expedition, came to present himself for the Sacra- 
ment of Penance. After he had performed his devo- 
tions, he said to his Confessor: ‘* My Father, pray 
to God for me, for my wife, and for my child. I 
know by experience what sincere prayer can do. 
Thou seest my little daughter; God has given her 
to me twice. While we were in the woods last win- 
ter on our great hunt, she fell sick, so that I no longer 
expected aught but death. [37] My wife did noth- 
ing but weep. I said to her: ‘ Tears will not bring 
your child back to life. Let us have recourse to him 
who gave her to us, and beg him to give her to us 
once more.’’’ ‘They knelt down and said this short 
prayer, more abounding in feeling than in words: 
‘‘Thou who hast made all, and who preservest all 
things, it is thou who didst create this child and give 
her to us. She is sick; thou canst cure her. If thou 
wilt, cure her; if she lives, she will believe in thee; 
she will obey thee when she grows up. If thou wilt 
not cure her, I will still believe in thee; I will not 
say another word, for thou art the Master; do every- 
thing according to thy will.’’ ‘On the following 
day,’’ said the good Neophyte, ‘‘my daughter was 
in as good health as you see her now.” 

When the Savages returned from their great hunt, 
one of the Fathers called the chief men together, 
and told them that he was greatly edified because 
they had put a stop to the disorderly conduct that 
occasionally occurred among them; but that he was 
astonished at their permitting that a young baptized 
woman should live apart from her husband. The 


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


demeuraft point auec fon mary. Le Capitaine fous 
la iurifdiction duquel [38] eftoit cette femme, 
répondit; Qu’il auoit tenté toutes fortes de voyes 
pour la remettre en fon deuoir, & qu’il auoit perdu 
fes peines; qu’il feroit neantmoins encor vn effort. 
Au fortir de cefte Affemblée, dit il, confulte tes 
gens en particulier, & leur demande ce qu’il faut 
faire dans cette defobeiffance; ils concluént tous a la 
rigueur: les bons aduis ne luy ont peu donner de 
l’efprit, vne prifon luy en donnera, difoientils. Deux 
Capitaines ont cdmiffion de l’amener a Kebec, & de 
prier Monfieur le Gouuerneur de la faire mettre dans 
vne baffe foffe. Ils fe mettét en deuoir d’executer 
leur mandement, ils entrent dans la cabane oi elle 
ef{toit; mais les ayant apperceus, & fe doutant du 
faict, elle s’échappe, & s’enfuit dans les bois, & eux 
apres. L’ayant attrappée, ils luy declarent qu’elle 
eft condinée A vne prifon, iufques a ce que lef- 
prit luy foit venu. Comme elle fe vouloit défaire de 
leurs mains ils la lient, & la tranfportent dans vn 
canot pour la mener 4 Kebec. Quelques ieunes 
hommes Payés voyans cette violence, qui eft en hor- 
reur aux Sauuages, & plus éloignée de leurs fagons 
de faire, que le Ciel n’eft éloigné de la terre, vferent 
de menaces, témoignans [39] qu’ils tuéroient celuy 
qui mettroit la main fur cette femme: mais le Capi- 
taine & fes gens qui eftoient Chreftiens, répondirent 
hardiment: Qu’il n’y auoit rien qu’ils ne fiffent, & 
qu’ils n’enduraffent pour faire rendre obeiffance a 
Dieu. Cette refolution ferma la bouche aux Infideles, 
la femme fut conduite 4 Kebec; mais quand elle vit 
qu’il falloit entrer dans vne baffe foffe ou dans la mai- 
fon de fon mary, elle prie bien humblement qu’on la 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 83 


Captain under whose jurisdiction [38] this woman 
was, replied that he had tried all sorts of means to 
make her return to her duty, and that his trouble 
had been in vain; that he would, nevertheless, make 
another effort. ‘‘After this Assembly,’’ said the 
Father, ‘‘consult thy people privately, and ask them 
what is to be done in such a case of disobedience.”’ 
They all decided upon harsh measures. ‘‘ Good ad- 
vice,’’ said they, “‘ has not brought her to her senses; 
a prison will do so.’’ ‘Two Captains were ordered to 
take her to Kebec, and to request Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor to have her putin a dungeon. They prepared 
to carry out their orders, and entered the cabin where 
she was. But she saw them coming and, suspecting 
their errand, she escaped and fled to the woods, 
whither they followed her. Having caught her, 
they told her that she was condemned to prison until 
sense should come to her. As she tried to break 
away from them, they bound her and placed her in 
a canoe, to take her to Kebec.. Some Pagan young 
men, observing this violence,— of which the Savages 
have a horror, and which is more remote from their 
customs than Heaven is from earth,— made use of 
threats, declaring [39] that they would kill any one 
who laid a hand on the woman. But the Captain 
and his people, who were Christians, boldly replied 
that there was nothing that they would not do or 
endure, in order to secure obedience to God. Such 
resolution silenced the Infidels. The woman was 
taken to Kebec; but when she saw that she must 
enter either a dungeon or her husband’s house, she 
humbly begged to be taken back to Saint Joseph, 
promising that thenceforward she would be more 
obedient. Such acts of justice cause no surprise in 


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


remeine 4 Sainct Iofeph, promettant qu’elle fe ren- 
droit de 1A en auant plus obeiffante. Ces actions de 
iuftice ne donnent en France aucun étonnement, 
pource que c’eft l’ordinaire de proceder par ces voyes; 
mais parmy ces peuples, ou chacun fe croit auffi libre 
dés fa naiffance, que les beftes fauuages qui courent 
dans leurs grandes forefts. C’eft vn prodige, ou 
pluftoft vn miracle, d’y voir vn commandement ab- 
folu, ou quelque action de rigueur & de iuftice. 
Quelques Sauuages ayans appris qu’en France on 
mettoit A mort les malfaicteurs, nous ont bien fouuent 
reproché que nous eftions des mefchans; que nous 
faifions mourir nos compatriotes; que nous n’auions 
[40] point d’efprit. Ils demandoient fi les parens de 
ceux qu’on condamnoit 4 la mort, n’en tiroient point 
vengeance. Les Infidelles font encore dans les mef- 
mes fentimens: mais les Chreftiens connoiffent de 
plus en plus, l’importance qu’il y a d’exercer la Iuftice. 

Vn certain Neophyte fort zelé pour la Foy, preffant 
vne action de pieté, vn autre luy dit? arefte toy, on 
t’en voudra mal, ceux qui ne font point baptifés te 
hairont, il n’importe, refpondit-il, ie ne crains point 
la mort, qu’ils me tiient, qu’ils me maffacrent, ie ne 
quitteray pas vne bonne action pour leur impieté, ma 
vie n’eft pas fi pretieufe que la Foy. 

I’ay faict mention dans la Relation precedente d’vn 
certain Huron, nommé Charles Tfondatfaa qui fut 
Baptifé l'année derniere, en la petite Eglife de S. 
Iofeph; ce bon Neophyte eft venu cette année auec 
quelques autres de fes compatriotes, vifiter les Chre- 
{tiés de céte Eglife, ces bonnes gens leur ont faict 
mille careffes, ils les ont inuitez aux feftins, & apres 
plufieurs témoignages de bien veillance iufques a ce 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 85 


France, because it is usual there to proceed in that 
manner. But, among these peoples—where every 
one considers himself, from his birth, as free as the 
wild animals that roam their great forests—it is 
a tharvel, or rather a miracle, to see a peremptory 
command obeyed, or any act of severity or justice 
performed. Some Savages, having heard that, in 
France, malefactors are put to death, have often 
reproached us, saying that we were cruel,—that we 
killed our own countrymen; and that we had [40] no 
sense. They asked whether the relatives of those 
who were condemned to death did not seek ven- 
geance. The Infidels still have the same ideas; but 
the Christians are learning, more and more, the 
importance of exercising Justice. 

A certain Neophyte, who was very zealous for the 
Faith, was diligently performing a pious action, 


when another said to him: ‘‘ Stop! some will be 
angry with thee; those who are not baptized will hate 
thee.” ‘‘ It matters not,’’ he replied; ‘‘I do not fear 


death. Let them kill me, let them slay me; I will 
not give up a good action for their ungodliness. My 
life is not so precious as the Faith.”’ 

In the preceding Relation, I mentioned a certain 
Huron, named Charles Tsondatsaa, who was Bap- 
tized last year in the little Church of St. Joseph. 
This good Neophyte came this year, with some 
others of his countrymen, to visit the Christians of 
this Church; and these good people showed them 
many kindnesses. They invited them to feasts, and, 
after many declarations of good will,—including, 
moreover, a mutual exchange of presents,—a Cap- 
tain [41] of St. Joseph stopped them after the public 
prayers which are said daily in the Chapel, at which the 


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


faire des prefens reciproques les vns aux autres: Vn 
Capitaine [41] de S. lofeph, les arefta apres les 
prieres publiques qui fe font tous les iours, en la 
Chapelle, ot les Hurons & les Algonquins affiftoient; 
& addreffant fa parole 4 Charles Tfondatfaa, luy ditt, 
mon frere? tu fgais bien que tu fus baptizé l’année 
paffée dans cette Eglife, c’eft icy que tu fus faict 
noftre frere, il faut que ie te dife les penfées 
qu’auoit mon coeur, lors que ie te vy remonter en ton 
pais. Cét homme eft baptifé, difois-je A part-moy, 
il eft faict enfant de Dieu; voila qui va bien, mais 
que deuiendra-il, quand il fera auec ceux de fa na- 
tion, qui ne croient point en Dieu? comment refiftera- 
il aux attaques qu’on luy liurera de tous coftés? I’a- 
uois cette penfée 14 de toy. Mon ame eftoit en l’air 
fans appuy, ne fcachant ce que tu deuiendrois. Tay 
eu de lacrainte pour toy tout lHyuer. Ie fouhaitois 
le Printemps pour apprendre de tes nouuelles, quand 
on m’a dit que tu defcendois, & que tu viuois en bon 
Chreftien, ma crainte s’e{t efuanouie, mon ame s’eft 
affermie, mon cceur se{t refiouy: voyla vn braue 
homme, i’auois céte penfée 14 de toy, mais c’eft Dieu 
qui a faict tout cela, difoit mon cceur, c’eft Dieu qui 
[42] luy a donné de la force & du courage, c’eft luy 
qu’il en faut remercier, c’eft mon frere ce que nous 
auons faict pour l’amour de toy. 

A cette petite harangue, Charles refpondit en cette 
forte: mon frere, depuis mon Baptefme ie n’ay iamais 
chancelé en la Foy; mes pieds ont tenu ferme, mon 
corps n’a point branflé: ie n’ay point eu de penfée de 
quitter la priere, & ie ne la quitteray iamais, c’eft 
celuy qui porte la terre, comme tu dis, qui m’a aydé, 
il eft tout preft de m’ayder encore, car il eft bon: ie 
voudrois bien que tous mes Compatriottes fuffent 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 87 


Hurons and Algonquins were present, and, address- 
ing Charles Tsondatsaa, he said to him: ‘‘My broth- 
er, thou knowest well that thou wert baptized last 
year in this Church; here thou wert made our broth- 
er. I must tell thee the thoughts that were in my 
heart when I saw thee return to thy own country. 
‘ This man has been baptized,’ I said to myself; ‘ he 
has been made a child of God. This is well; but 
what will become of him when he shall be with those 
of his nation who do not believe in God? How will 
he resist the attacks that will be made on him from 
all sides?’ I had that thought of thee. My soul 
was in a state of trouble and helplessness, not know- 
ing what would become of thee. I feared for thee 
during the whole Winter. I was anxious for the 
arrival of Spring, to get news of thee. When I 
heard that thou wert coming down, and that thou 
didst live like a good Christian, my fears were dis- 
pelled, my soul regained courage, my heart rejoiced. 
‘He is a brave man!’ That is what I thought of 
thee. ‘ But it is God who has done all this,’ said my 
heart; ‘it is God who [42] has given him strength 
and courage; it is he who should be thanked for it.’ 
This, my brother, is what we have done for love of 
thee.” 

To this short harangue, Charles replied thus: 
‘‘ My brother, since my Baptism, I have never wa- 
vered in the Faith. My feet have remained stead- 
fast; my body has not moved. I have never hada 
thought of abandoning prayer, and I shall never 
abandon it. Itis he who holds the earth in his hand, 
as thou sayest, who hashelped me. He is still quite 
ready to help me, for he is good. I heartily wish 
that all my Countrymen might be of the same mind; 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


dans la mefme volonté: ils y viendront petit a petit, 
i’en connois plufieurs qui honorent la priere, mais 
nous fommes enuiron vne trentaine d’hommes fais, 
qui ne branflons non plus que vous autres, nous auons 
tenu ferme cét Hyuer contre les affauts des mefcre- 
ans, on nous a liuré mil combats; nos efprits n’ont 
point efté renuerfés: fus-donc, mon frere, prend cou- 
rage, & tous tes gens auffi: ne foyés plus en crainte, 
la moitié de nous mefmes ne croit pas feulement, nous 
croyons tous entiers: priés [43] Dieu pour nous 
pendant noftre voyage. Cela dit, ils fe feparerent. 

Les Chreftiens de fainct lofeph pafferent encor plus 
auant, aians appris que le Reuerend Pere Vimont 
montoit aux trois riuieres, & qu’il trouueroit 1A des 
Hurons Chreftiens, ils le prierent de faire porter auec 
foy, quelques pacquets de leur viande boucanées, 
pour en faire vn banquet 4 ces bons Neophytes, en 
temoignage de l'amour & de 1’affection qu’ils auoient 
pour eux, cela fe fit en noftre maifon, auec la ioye de 
ces nouueaux enfans de Dieu; qui furent d’autant 
plus edifiés de cette charité, qu'elle n’eft pas com- 
mune parmy les Barbares, lefquels n’aiment que leur 
nation, faifant vn extreme mefpris des autres. 

Ie concliieray ce chapitre par vn acte de recon- 
noiffance auffi naif, qu’il eft naturellement expliqué. 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur montant A la riuiere des 
Hiroquois, pour donner ordre qu’on y commencaft 
les fortifications, dont i’ay déja parlé: vn Capitaine 
Chreftien l’alla trouver, & luy tint ce langage. Nous 
autres Sauuages, comme nous n’auons point efté efle- 
ués en [44] voftre pais, nous ne fcauons pas les hon- 
neurs qu’on rend aux grands Capitaines qui trauail- 

lent pour la deffence du pais. Ie ne fcais donc ce 
que ie dois faire & encore moins ce que ie dois dire, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ' 89 


they will come to it, little by little. I know several 
who honor prayer; but we are about thirty grown 
men who do not waver more than you do. We 
remained firm last Winter, against the assaults of the 
wicked. A thousand attacks were made upon us, 
but our courage was not overthrown. Come, then, 
my brother, take courage, and all thy people also. 
Fear no longer. Weare not half believers only; we 
believe entirely. Pray [43] to God for us during our 
journey.’’ ‘This said, they parted. 

The Christians of saint Joseph went still further. 
Having learned that Reverend Father Vimont was 
going up to the three rivers, and that he would find 
Christian Hurons there, they begged him to take 
with him some packages of their smoked meat, in 
order to give a banquet to those good Neophytes, as 
a token of the love and affection they had for them. 
This was done in our house, amid the joy of these 
new children of God,— whose conduct in this act of 
charity was all the more edifying that it is unusual 
among these Barbarians, who love only their own 
nation, and have a supreme contempt for others. 

I will conclude this chapter by relating an act of 
gratitude as artless as it is naturally expressed. 
When Monsieur the Governor went up to the river 
of the Hiroquois to give orders for commencing the 
fortifications of which I have already spoken, a Chris- 
tian Captain went to him and made him this speech: 
** We Savages, since we were not brought up in [44] 
your country, do not know what honors are paid to 
great Captains who work for the defense of the land. 
Therefore, I know not what I should do, and stillless 
what I should say. I seek, and I find nothing on 
my tongue but these few words: ‘ Go, great Captain, 


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES _ [Wot. 22 


ie cherche & ie ne trouve rien fur ma langue que ces 
deux paroles, va t’en grand Capitaine, & parts 4 la 
bonne heure, fois le Maiftre de la terre, & le Confer- 
uateur du pays: Celuy qui peut tout & qui eft tout 
bon, foit toufiours auec toy? Voyla ce que me dit ma 
langue, mais voicy ce que i’ay dans ma penfée: pleutt 
a Dieu, que nous fuffions icy vne grande trouppe & 
que de toutes nos voix, il ne s’en fift qu’vne forte 
& puiffante; laquelle fe faifant entendre par tout 
l’vniuers pronongaft ces paroles. Adieu, le Con- 
feruateur du pays 4 la bonne heure que tu entre- 
prennes noftre deffence, vas t’en heureufement & re- 
tourne auec plus de ioye affin que nous puiffions tous 
nous efcrier: il eft de retour noftre Capitaine, il eft 
de retour le Conferuateur du pays: c’eft par fon 
moyen que les femmes & les enfans que tout le monde 
eft encore en vie. Car fans fa protection l’ennemy 
nous auroit empefché de Planter, de Cultiuer, & de 
Recuellir nos bleds: voila ce [45] que ie fouhaiterois 
qui te fuft dit par tous les hommes de ces contrees; 
mais quoy nous n’auons plus de voix, les maladies & 
les ennemis ont arraché nos langues, nous te difons 
neantmoins encore vne fois. Adieu, le Conferua- 
t{eJur du pays? Celuy qui a tout faict foit le guide 
& la conduite de ton vaiffeau. Cette eloquence n’eft 
pas tiree de la Rhetorique d’Ariftote, ou de Ciceron: 
mais d’vne efcole plus aimable & plus candide. 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur leur ayant témoigné de la 
ioye de leurs bonnes volontez, leur demanda ce qu’ils 
pretendoient faire durant l’Efté, tu ne dois point faire 
cette interrogation: tu és noftre Capitaine, com- 
mande, il y along-temps que nous fommes refolus de 
t’obeyr; c’eft la refponce qu’ils luy firent & qui 
fermera ce Chapitre. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 a! 


and may thy journey be successful. Be the Master 
of the land and the Preserver of the country. May 
he who can do all things and who is all goodness, be 
ever with thee!’ That is what my tongue tells me, 
but this is what I have in my mind,— would to God 
that we were here in great numbers and that all our 
voices were united in one, loud and strong, which 
would make itself heard throughout the world, pro- 
nouncing these words: ‘Farewell, Preserver of the 
country, it is well and good that thou undertakest 
our defense. Go in happiness, and return with still 
greater joy, so that we may all cry out: ‘‘Our Cap- 
tain has returned, the Preserver of the country has 
returned! It is through him that the women and 
children, and all the people, are still alive; for, with- 
out his protection, the enemy would have prevented 
us from Planting, Cultivating, and Harvesting our 
corn.’’’ That is [45] what I would desire all the 
men of these countries to say to thee. But, although 
we have no more voice,—for sickness and our ene- © 
mies have torn out our tongues,—nevertheless, we 
say to thee once more: ‘ Farewell, Preserver of the 
country! May he who has made all things be the 
guide and conductor of thy ship.’’’ Such eloquence 
is not derived from the Rhetoric of Aristotle or of 
Cicero, but from a school more lovable and candid. 

Monsieur the Governor having assured them of his 
pleasure at their good will, asked them what they 
intended to do during the Summer. ‘‘ Thou shouldst 
not ask such a question. Thou art our Captain,— 
command; we have long been resolved to obey thee.”’ 
Such was the answer they gave him, and it shall 
close this Chapter. 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


[46] CHAPITRE IV. 


DE QUELQUES BAPTESMES EN LA RESIDENCE 
DE SAINCT IOSEPH. 


N a baptifé enuiron cent perfonnes cette année, 
fi le nombre n’eft pas: fi grand que la prece- 
dente il ne s’en faut pas étonner: car la plus 

part des Sauuages qui font en cette refidence, font 
defia Chreftiens, & les Hiroquois empefchent forte- 
ment que les peuples qui font dans les terres, ne fe 
viennent ioindre 4 ces bons Neophytes: ils ont effaré 
yne bonne partie des Algonquins, qui eftoient aux 
trois riuieres: mais les fortifications qu’on a com- 
mancees les pourrét rappeller. Entrons en difcours. 
Vn homme de confideration parmy les Sauuages, 
s’eftant fait inftruire en la foy, fouhaitoit le Baptefme 
auec ardeur, comme il vit qu’on le retardoit pour 
l’efprouuer, il s’adreffe au Pere, & luy parle en ces 
termes: pourquoy, remettez vous mon Baptefme 
iufques au printemps, vos penfées ne vont pas droit, 
vous me iettez encore dans les attrappes, & dans les 
filets [47] des Demons, voicy le temps de noftre chaffe 
qui s’approche, ie m’en vay dans les bois pour faire 
ma prouifion de chair d’Elan: le Diable voyant bien 
que ie ne fuis pas encore enfant de Dieu, m’attaquera 
derechef, & me preffera fortement de reprendre mes 
anciennes fuperftitions, & les malices que i’abhorre 
maintenant, le moyen que ie luy refifte eftant feul? 
Ie tomberay infailliblement, fi ie n’ay Dieu pour 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 93 


[46] CHAPTER IV. 


OF SOME BAPTISMS IN THE RESIDENCE OF 
SAINT JOSEPH. 


E have baptized about one hundred persons 

\/ \/ this year. If the number be not as great 
as in the previous one, it is not surprising; 

for most of the Savages in this residence are already 
Christians, and the Hiroquois effectually prevent the 
people living inland from coming to join these good 
Neophytes. They have frightened away a good 
part of the Algonquins who were at the three riv- 
ers; but the fortifications that have been commenced 
there may bring them back. Let us begin our rela- 
tion. A man of some consideration among the Sav- 
ages had been instructed in the faith, and ardently 
desired Baptism. When he saw that it was delayed 
in order to test his sincerity, he addressed the Father 
and spoke to him as follows: ‘* Why do you put off 
my Baptism till the spring? Your ideas are not 
right. You again throw me into the snares and nets 
[47] of the Demons. The time of our hunt is ap- 
proaching, and Iam going into the woods to get my 
supply of Elk meat. The Devil, seeing very well 
that I am not yet a child of God, will attack me once 
more and will urge me strongly to resume my former 
superstitions and the evil things that I now abhor. 
What means have I to resist him, alone? I shall 
inevitably fall, if I have not God for my Protector, 
and I can have him only by my Baptism. Why, 


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


mon Protecteur, & ie ne le puis auoir que par mon 
Baptefme. Pourquoy, donc me refufez vous ce bon- 
heur: puis que ie crois en luy de toutes mes forces, 
& de toute l’eftendué de mon pouuoir? Vous iugez 
peut eftre 4 ma fagon que ie fuis fuperbe, que ie me 
laiffe emporter 4 ma colere. Ne mefurez pas mon 
coeur A ma parole, fi ma voix eft rude, mon cceur eft 
doux. Ie n’ay iamais dit qu’vne parole rude 4 ma 
premiere femme, i’en eftois par apres fi confus que 
ie ne fcauois ott me mettre: ne craignez point que ie 
fois changeat: mon mariage aura de la conftance auffi 
bien que ma foy, la femme que i’ay maintenant eft 
Chreftienne, vne mefme creance nous liera iufques 
a la mort. 

Le Pere voyant cette grande difpofition [48] le 
baptifa: le Sieur Oliuier commis General de Meffieurs 
de la nouuelle France, le nomma Emery; fi tof{t que 
fon cceur fut purifié dans le fang de 1’Agneau, la 
ioye s’en empara & le defir de donner des preuues de 
{a conftance, luy firent apporter les de[r]nieres Reli- 
ques de fes fuperftitions: C’eftoit vne Pierre qu’ils 
tiennent bien precieufe, enueloppee dans vn fin 
Duuet; ils s'imaginent qu’elle leur porte bon-heur, 
qu’elle les rend heureux ou 4 la chaffe, ou au ieu, ou 
Ala guerre, comme i’ay fouuent remarqué ailleurs: 
s’adreffant donc au Pere? voila (dit-il) ce que nous 
cheriffons dauantage, i’ay trouué cette Pierre dans la 
gorge d’vn Elan. Ie la conferuois auec amour, ie la 
regardois comme mon apuy: mais maintenant que ie 
fuis enfant de Dieu, toute ma confiance eft en luy. 
Iauois preffé le Pere le Ieune de me baptifer deuant 
qu’il s’embarquaft pour aller en France; il me de- 
manda fi ie n’auois point auec moy quelque petit 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 95 


therefore, do you refuse me this happiness, since I 
believe in him with all my might and with all my 
power? You may perhaps think, from my manner, 
that I am arrogant, that I let myself be carried away 
by anger. Do not judge my heart by my words; if 
my voice be harsh, my heart is soft. I never said 
more than one unkind word to my first wife; and 
afterwards I was so ashamed that I did not know 
where to put myself. Do not fear that I shall be 
fickle. My marriage will be constant as well as my 
faith; my present wife is a Christian,—the same 
creed will bind us together till death.’’ 

The Father, seeing this earnest purpose, [48] bap- 
tized him. Sieur Olivier, the General manager of 
the Gentlemen of new France, named him Emery. 
As soon as his soul was cleansed in the blood of the 
Lamb, joy took possession of it; and this, with the 
desire to give proofs of his constancy, led him to 
bring the last Relic of his superstition. This was a 
Stone, which they consider very precious, wrapped 
up in fine Down. They think that it brings them 
good fortune, and renders them successful in the 
chase, or at play, or in war, as I have frequently 
remarked elsewhere. Addressing the Father, ‘‘ Be- 
hold ”’ (said he) ‘‘ this is what we prize above all. I 
found this Stone in the throat of an Elk. I treasured 
it lovingly; I looked upon it as my support. But, 
now that I am a child of God, all my confidence is in 
him. I had pressed Father le Jeune to baptize me 
before he embarked for France. He asked me if I 
had not some little Manitou about me; I said that I 
had not. I lied; I was still attached to that supersti- 
tion which I now detest.’’ © 

Eustache Koukinapou, a young Savage about 


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


Manits, ie luy dis que non, ie mentois; i’auois encor 
de l’attache a cette fuperiftition, que ie detefte main- 
tenant. 

Euftache KsKinaps ieune Sauuage 4gé d’enuiron 
trente ans, paroiffoit autrefois [49] grand gauffeur, 
& par confequent fort éloigné de la foy: Car 1l’efprit 
de Dieu ne s’accorde pas bien auec vn efprit altier & 
bouffon. Le Baptefme l’a Metamorphofé, il doit fon 
bon-heur a fon frere Charles Meiachka¥at, homme 
vrayement Chreftien Predicateur deIESVS-CHRIST. 
Depuis fon Baptefme il a tellement pourfuiuy fon 
frere, qu'il luy a fait quitter fes erreurs pour em- 
braffer la verité: voicy comme il l’exhortoit vn peu 
deuant fon Baptefme. Mon frere ie ne vous parle 
plus de nos anciennes fagons de faire, vous auez quit- 
té toutes les refueries, il ny a plus qu’vn poinct qui 
vous maiftrife: C’eft le ieu; voila voftre paffion & 
vo{tre demon, il le faut quitter tout a fait fi vous 
voulez eftre bon Chreftien, & du moins en retraicher 
l’excez, de telle forte qu’il ne vous gourmande ia- 
mais, faictes prefentement cette refolution deuant 
que de mettre le pied dans 1’Eglife, pour y eftre fait 
enfant de Dieu, determinés vous fortement de quitter 
la partie? Si toft que vous fentirez que voftre coeur 
veut eftre mefchant, ne permettez point qu’il s’e- 
chauffe fur le ieu, quittez tout, il vaut mieux tout 
perdre que de fafcher Dieu. Nous auonscouftume 
[50] auparauant que de verfer les eaux Sacréesdu 
Baptefme, fur les Catechumenes, de leur faire pro- 
duire quelques actes, de douleur & d’amour. Charles 
voyant fon frere fur le poinct de les receuoir, s’ecrie? 
mon frere dites au plus profond de voftre ame, ce 
que ma bouche va proferer; Ouy mon Dieu, vous 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 a 


thirty years of age, formerly appeared to be [49] a 
great banterer, and consequently very averse to the 
faith; for the spirit of God is not in accord with a 
haughty and buffoonish mind. Baptism has com- 
pletely Changed him. He owes his happiness to his 
brother, Charles Meiachkawat, a truly Christian 
man, a Preacher of JESUS CHRIST. Ever since 
his Baptism, he has so persistently urged his brother 
that he has made him abandon his errors to embrace 
the truth. Observe how he exhorted him shortly 
before his Baptism: ‘‘ My brother, I no longer speak 
to you of our old customs; you have given up all 
those idle fancies. There is but one thing that is 
your tyrant, and that is gambling; it is your passion 
and your evil spirit. You must give it up entirely 
if you wish to be a good Christian; at least, you must 
restrain excess therein, so that gaming may never 
master you. Take that resolution now, before put- 
ting your foot in the Church to be made a child of 
God. Resolve firmly to leave the game. As soon 
as you perceive that your heart wishes to be wicked, 
do not allowit to be excited by play. Abandon 
everything; it is better to lose all than to offend 
God.’’ It is our custom, [50] before pouring the 
Sacred waters of Baptism on the Catechumens, to 
make them utter some acts of contrition and of love. 
When Charles saw his brother on the point of doing 
so, he called out: ‘‘ My brother, repeat from the 
depths of your soul what my lips shall now utter: 
‘Yes, O my God! you see my heart. I believe in 
your Holy Word; it is in earnest that I intend to 
obey you,— my resolution is taken. How could I 
lie, when you see everything? Forget my sins; 
have mercy on me. I wish to offend you no more. 


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


voiés mon cceur, ie croy en voftre S. Parole, c’eft 
tout de bon que’ ie vous veux obeyr, la refolution en 
eft prife: cdment pourois-ie mentir puifque vous 
voiez tout? Oubliés mes pefchez, faites moy miferi- 
corde, ie ne vous veux plus fafcher, vous eftes bé, 
vous ne rebutés point ceux qui ont efperance en vous, 
Chaserimits, Chaterimit’, ayez pitié de moy, ayez 
pitié de moy. Ce bon Cate[c]humene eftoit 4 deux 
genoux, les mains iointes, les yeux colés au Ciel: 
repetant comme vn petit enfant de mot, 4 mot, tout 
ce que fon frere luy faifoit dire, auec vn fentiment 
tout plein de deuotion. Sa femme qui n’auoit guere 
d’inclination au Baptefme: voyant fon mary Chre- 
{tien, voulut bien-toft apres iouyr du mefme bon- 
heur qui luy fut auffi accordé. 

Il n’eft pas iufques aux ieunes gens, qui ne vueil- 
lent quafi par force obtenir le Baptefme, [5 i.e., 51] 
afin d’entrer au Ciel par violence. Vn ieune Algon- 
quin demandoit le Baptefme depuis deux ans: comme 
on le voit d’vne humeur efueillée, on craint qu’il ne 
s’oublie de fon deuoir; parfois on le rebute, d’autres- 
fois pour ne le ietter dans vn trop grand éloignement, 
on luy donne quelque efperance. Ce bon garcon 
tient toujours ferme, il demande, il preffe, il fait fi 
bien qu’on luy promet le Baptefme dans certain iour. 
Le voila dans vne ioye qui luy change le vifage, il 
e{t eloquent en actions de graces; mon cceur, fait il, 
ne fe comprend pas, il ne feait ce qu’il dit, tant il 
eft fatis-faict: puis la crainte de ne pas ioiiir fi-toft 
de ce bon-heur, le faififant: ie voy bien ce que c’en 
eft, vous me tromperés auffi bien que le Pere qui eft 
allé en France, il m’auoit promis le Baptefme, il ne 
me l’a point donné: vous en ferez tout de mefme on 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 99 


You are good, you do not repel those who hope in 
you. Chawerimitou, Chawerimitou, have pity on 
me, have pityonme.’”’ The good Catechumen knelt 
on both knees,—his hands clasped and his eyes 
raised to Heaven,— repeating word for word, like a 
little child, what his brother made him say, witha 
deep feeling of devotion. His wife, who had but 
little inclination for Baptism, seeing her husband a 
Christian, soon afterward desired to enjoy the same 
happiness, and this was granted to her also. 

Even the young men desire to obtain Baptism, 
almost by force, [5 i.e., 51] so as to enter Heaven by 
violence. A young Algonquin had been asking 
Baptism for two years. As we saw that he had a 
sprightly disposition, we feared that he might forget 
his duty. Sometimes we refused him; at other times 
he was given some hope, so as not to estrange him too 
much. The good youth persisted; he asked, he 
urged, until he was promised Baptism on a certain 
day. His joy was such as to alter the expression of 
his face; he was eloquent in his thanksgiving. 
‘“ My heart,’’ said he, ‘‘ does not understand itself; 
it does not know what it is saying, so satisfied is it.”’ 
Then, as the fear of not at once enjoying this happi- 
ness seized him, he would say: ‘‘I see very well 
what it is; you will deceive me, like the Father who 
has gone to France. He promised me Baptism, and 
did not grant it tome; you will do the same.’’ In 
vain we reassured him, he was always in doubt. 
When the day arrived, as they were about to call 
him, he came out of his Cabin, very sad. ‘‘You will 
yet deceive me,”’ he said, ‘‘ is it really true that you 
will grant me that favor?’’ When he saw that we 
were preparing in good earnest, then he felt in his 


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


a beau l’affeurer, il eft toufiours dans le doute. Le 
iour venu comme on lalla appeller, il fortit de fa 
Cabane tout penfif; vous me tromperez encor, s’ecrie- 
il, feroit ce bien tout de bon que vous m’accordez 
cette faueur, comme il vit qu’on y procederoit 4 bon 
efcient, c’eft lors que fon [52] ame reffentit ce que 
fa bouche ne pouuoit dire, il fe comporte maintenant 
en vray fils de l’Eglife du grand Dieu. 

Vn autre plus ieune Sauuage qui auoit efté noftre 
Seminarifte, lors que nous penfions qu’il failloit com- 
mencer par la ieuneffe, fans fe mettre beaucoup en 
peine de ces vieilles fouches, defquelle on n’atten- 
doit ny feiiilles, ny fleurs, ny fruict, preffa fi bien 
fon Baptefme qu’il l’emporta le iour du glorieux S. 
Francois Xauier, Apoftre des Indes Orientales; le 
pauure enfant au fortit du Seminaire, fe trouuant par- 
my de mauuaifes compagnies auoit quitté toutes les 
penfées de la Foy, voire mefme il sembloit l’auoir 
en horreur difant nettement aux Peres qui luy en 
parloient, qu’il ne vouloit iamais eftre baptifé. La 
graine de 1’Euangile iettee dedans fon ame, & cachée 
pour vn temps ayant receu vne Rofée du Ciel, & vn 
Rayon fauorable germa fecrettement, pouffa par 
apres au dehors, & puis porta des fruicts. Ses parens 
le veulent empefcher d’eftre Chreftien, il tient fi 
ferme qu'il l’emporte, & pour marque que fa Con- 
uerfion venoit d’en-haut, il change en vn moment de 
compagnie auparauant [53] qu'il fut baptizé, il eftoit 
honteux en la prefence des Chreftiens, il ne frequen- 
toit que ceux qu'il croioit ennemis de la Foy, fi-toft 
que fon coeur fut touché, il s’élogne des paiens, & 
prend pour camarades les enfans de Dieu, & de fon 
Eglife. 


—— 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 101 


[52] soul what his lips could not utter. He now be- 
haves like a true son of the Church of the great God. 

Another younger Savage, who had been a pupil of 
our Seminary,—at the time when we thought that 
we must begin with the young people, without trou- 
bling ourselves much about the old stocks, from which 
we expected neither leaves, nor flowers, nor fruit,— 
asked so urgently for Baptism that he was granted 
it on the feast of the glorious St. Fran¢ois Xavier, 
the Apostle of the East Indies. When the poor boy 
left the Seminary, he found himself in bad com- 
pany, abandoned all thought of the Faith, and even 
seemed to have a horror of it, saying plainly to the 
Fathers who spoke to him about it, that he would 
never be baptized. The seed of the Gospel cast into 
his soul, and hidden away for a long time, was 
watered by the Dews of Heaven; a beneficial Ray 
caused it to germinate secretly; afterward, it shot 
outward, and then bore fruit. His parents tried to 
prevent him from becoming a Christian. He re- 
mained so firm that he gained his point; and, to show 
that his Conversion came from Heaven, he at once 
changed his companions. Before [53] he was bap- 
tized, he was ashamed in the presence of Christians, 
and associated only with those whom he believed to 
be enemies of the Faith. As soon as his heart was 
touched, he gave up the society of the pagans and 
took for comrades the children of God and of his 
Church. 

In the preceding relations, I mentioned a certain 
Savage who could not make up his mind to be Bap- 
tized, although he approved of the doctrine of Jesus 
Christ. ‘‘ I shall die,’’ (he said,) ‘‘ as soon as I shall 
be a Christian.’’ He gave this reason for it: ‘‘ Some 


102 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 22 


I’ay parlé dans les relations precedentes, d’vn 
certain Sauuage lequel ne fe pouuoit refoudre au 
Baptefme? quoy qu’il approuuatt la doctrine de Iefus- 
Chrift, ie mourray (difoit-il) fi-toft que ie feray Chre- 
{tien, il en d6énoit cette raifon. Quelque temps apres 
la mort d’vn ieune Francois, qui a donné le nom a 
l’vn de mes enfans baptifé; cdme i’eftois dans vne 
grande maladie: ie vy fon ame qui m’inuitoit au 
Ciel. Eftant reuenu 4a moy ie conclud, que ie ne 
manquerois pas d’y aller fi-toft que la porte me feroit 
ouuerte: Or comme vous me difiés que le Baptefme 
eftoit la porte du Ciel, ie ne me haftois pas tant d’y 
entrer voyant qu’il falloit paffer par la mort. Le 
chemin n’eft guere agreable, quoy que le terme en 
foit rauiffant: mais c’en eft faict, ie fuis refolu a la 
mort en me refoluant au Baptefme, vous me dictes 
bien que cette porte de la vie, ne me conduira pas a 
la mort: en arriue [54] ce qui pourra le Baptefme 
e{tant vne chofe de telle importance, ie donneray 
volontiers ma vie pour iouir des biens qu’il apporte 
&vne ame. Il ne manquera pas d’efpreuues & de 
tétations deuant que d’en venir 18, le diable 1’affaillit 
par des fonges, qui font toute la Theologie de ces 
pauures Barbares. Vn iour eftant allé a la chaffe 
des Caftors: comme il vouloit prendre fon repos, il 
entendit vne voix 4 ce qu’il raconte, qui luy dift: tu 
es mort, fi tu te fais baptifer: Adioutés 4 cela vn 
erreur, qu'il auoit dans la tefte auffi bien que quel- 
ques autres Sauuages, fcauoir eft que les Chreftiens 
nouuellement baptifés, font bien toft attaqués de la 
mort, ou de quelque puiffante maladie: s’ils s’écar- 
tent tant foit peu des promeffes qu’ils font 4 Dieu, 
de garder fes volontés: Or comme il ne penfoit pas 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ~ 108 


time after the death of a young Frenchman,— who 
had conferred his name upon one of my children, 
that had been baptized,—I saw, while I was very 
sick, his soul, which called me to go to Heaven. 
When I recovered my senses, I concluded that I 
would not fail to go there as soon as the door should 
be opened to me. Now, as you told me that Bap- 
tism was the door of Heaven, I was in no haste to 
enter, seeing that I had to pass thither by death. 
The road is not very pleasant, though its end is most 
delightful. But that is all over; in resolving to re- 
ceive Baptism, I am resolved to die. You assure me 
that this door of life will not lead me to death; what- 
ever may happen, [54] since Baptism is a matter of 
such importance, I will gladly give my life to enjoy 
the blessings that it brings to the soul.’’ He will 
have no lack of trials and temptations before he 
comes to that. The devil assails him with dreams, 
which are the whole Theology of these poor Bar- 
barians. One day, while he was hunting Beavers 
and wished to take his rest, he heard a voice —as he 
relates — which said to him: ‘‘ Thou art a dead man 
if thou art baptized.’’ Add to this the erroneous 
idea that he had in his head, like some other Sav- 
ages,—namely, that newly-baptized Christians are 
soon attacked by death, or by some serious illness, if 
they fail, however slightly, in keeping the promise 
they have made to God to follow his will. Now, as 
he did not consider that he had sufficient strength to 
observe the Laws of Christianity, and to render so 
strict an obedience, he looked upon Baptism in the 
same light as we look upon death or illness. 

A virtuous wife is a great gift. This good Sav- 
age had received [55] such a favor from Heaven; his 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


auoir affez de force, pour garder les Loix du Chrifti- 
anifme, & pour'rendre vne fi parfaicte obeyffance, il 
regardoit le Baptefme du mefme ceil, qu’on regarde 
la mort ou la maladie. 

C’eft vn grand prefent qu’vne femme vertueufe; 
le bon Sauuage auoit receu [55] cette faueur du Ciel, 
fa femme agiffoit auprés de Dieu & des hommes pour 
fa Conuerfion: deuant qu'elle fut baptifée elle auoit 
vne crainte eftrange que fon mary ne l’abandonnatt: 
fi-toft qu’elle fe vit dans la liberté des enfans de Dieu, 
elle perdit tellement cette apprehenfion, qu’elle 
parloit mefme de le quitter, s’il ne fe rangeoit dans 
le Bercail de Iefus-Chrift; lors qu'il luy tefmoignoit 
quelque amour ou quelque acte de bien-veillance; ie 
m’eftonne, difoit-elle, comme vous pouués m’aymer, 
puifque i’ay vne creance fi differente de la voftre, 
que ne me chaffés vous, pour prendre quelque Pay- 
enne qui aille auec vous dans les feux? Cela n’eft 
pas bien que nous allions aprés noftre mort, en des 
lieux fi differens, vous dans les Enfers, & moy dans 
les Cieux; elle le gagnoit par douceur luy apprenoit 
A prier Dieu foir & matin, & 4 reciter fon Chapelet: 
comme il chantoit parfois en refuant dans fon fom- 
meil, elle l’eueilloit de peur qu’il ne dift quelque 
chanfon fuperititieufe. Cet homme qui croioit au 
fond de fon coeur, que les veritez [56] qu’on luy pref- 
choit, eftoient Solides: & qui d’ailleurs ne fe pouuoit 
deffaire de cette penfée, que le Baptefme luy ouuri- 
roit pluftoft la porte du Ciel, qu’il n’auoit enuie d’y 
aller; fouffroit d’eftranges prefles & de grandes 
gehennes d’efprit: mais enfin apres les tranchees de 
quatre ans d’efclauage, il enfante fa liberté, il prend 
cette refolution: quand ie deburois mourir, il faut 


—— ~ 
ai 
> 


1642] RELATION OF rbg2 105 


wife strove with God and men for his Conversion. 
Before she was baptized, she was in great dread lest 
her husband might leave her. As soon as she en- 
joyed the freedom of the children of God, she lost 
that dread so completely that she even spoke of leav- 
ing him if he did not enter the Fold of Jesus Christ. 
Whenever he gave her any mark of affection or of 
kindness, she would say: ‘‘I am surprised that you 
can love me, since my belief is so different from 
yours. Why do you not send me away and take 
some Pagan woman, who will go into the fire with 
you? It is not well that, after our deaths, we should 
go toso different places,— you to Hell and I to Heav- 
en.’’ She won him over by kindness, teaching him 
to pray to God night and morning, and to recite the 
Rosary. When he sometimes sang while dreaming 
in his sleep, she would awake him, for fear that he 
might sing some superstitious song. This man,— 
who, in the bottom of his heart believed that the 
truths [56] that were preached to him were Real, 
and who, moreover, could not divest himself of the 
notion that Baptism would open the door of Heaven 
to him sooner than he desired to go there,— was a 
prey to unusual anxiety and great gehennas of soul. 
But finally, after four years of travail in slavery, he 
gave birth to his freedom, and took this resolution: 
“Even if I should die, I must be baptized.’’ Through 
the grace of our Lord he is now baptized, and Bap- 
tism has not yet sent him to Paradise; I pray God 
that it may do so some day. The poor man was 
much afraid of finding too soon what happens but . 
too late to good souls. Heu mihi quia incolatus meus 
prolongatus est! a pious person has said. Hardly was 
he born anew 7m agua et Spiritu sancto than, speaking 


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


que ie fois baptifé: I] l’eft maintenant par la grace 
de noftre Seigneur; & le Baptefme ne l’a pas encore 
mis en Paradis: ie prie Dieu qu’il l’y mette quelque 
iour. Le pauure homme auoit bien peur de trouuer 
trop toft ce qui n’arriue que trop tard aux bonnes 
ames. Heu mihi quia incolatus meus prolongatus eft! 
Difoit vn bon coeur. A peine auoit il pris vne nou- 
uelle naiffance: zz agua & Spiritu fancio, qu’il s’écria 
parlant A celuy qui l’auoit faict Chreftien. Mon Pere 
vous m’auiez deliuré du feu, vous m’auez obligé plus 
fenfiblement, que fi vous me deliuriés des mains des 
Hiroquois armées de feux pour me confommer, le 
feu qui ne s’efteint iamais, eft bien plus ardant que 
celuy qui ne peut viure fans aliment. [57] Me voila, 
difoit-il, dans le bon chemin, le Ciel viendra quand 
il voudra. 

A quelque temps de 1a, les Demons le voulurent 
encor troubler par quelque fonge, il s’en vint en vn 
matin trouuer le Pere, & luy dift: Si ie croyois a 
mes refueries, ie ferois bien épouuenté: I’ay veu 
cette nuict dans mon fommeil 1’vn de vos dometti- 
ques, le couteau en la main tout preft de me tuer. 
Ie luy criay deuant qu'il m’abordaift, As-tu deffein 
de m’ofter la vie? Ie l’ay en effet, me répondit-il. 
Cela prouient-il de ton chef, ou de la malice de quel- 
que autre perfonne? Les Peres auec qui ie demeure, 
m’ont commandé de te mettre 4 mort. Approche 
donc, luy dis-je, maffacre-moy, ie ne quitteray point 
la Foy, quoy qu’ils me faffent perdre la vie. Ie 
m’arre{te tout court, & luy fe iettant fur moy, me 
donne deux grands coups de couteau. Ie m’éueille 
en furfaut tout troublé d’vn fonge fi funefte. Le 
Pere voulant diuertir fon imagination de la crainte, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "107 


to him who had made him a Christian, he exclaimed: 
‘My Father, you have delivered me from the fire; 
you have laid me under a much deeper obligation 
than if you had freed me from the hands of the Hiro- 
quois, armed with brands to burn me. The fire that 
never dies is much more ardent than that which can- 
not live without being fed. [57] Here I am,” he 
added, ‘‘in the right road. Heaven will come when 
it will.”’ 

Some time afterward, the Demons again tried to 
trouble him withadream. He came one morning to 
the Father and said to him: ‘‘If I believed in my 
dreams, I would be much frightened. Last night, 
in my sleep, I saw one of your servants holding a 
knife in his hand, ready to kill me. I called out to 
him before he reached me: ‘ Dost thou intend to 
take my life?’ ‘I do, indeed,’ he answered. ‘Is it 
of thine own accord, or is it suggested by any other 
one’s malice?’ ‘The Fathers, with whom I dwell, 
have ordered me to put thee to death.’ ‘ Approach, 
then,’ I said; ‘kill me. I will not abandon the 
Faith, although they may take my life.’ I stopped 
short; he then fell on me, and gave me two great 
stabs with his knife. I awoke with a start, greatly 
disturbed by so ominous a dream.” In order to di- 
vert his mind from fear, the Father adroitly turned 
his dream into ridicule. ‘‘ Let us see,”’ said he, 
““whether the blows are mortal. He whom thou 
didst see in thy dreams is a Surgeon. Let us call 
him to dress the wounds that he has inflicted, and to 
pour [58] balm on them.” Those who were present 
began to laugh, and the Devil’s malice vanished in 
smoke. 

I will conclude this Chapter with the Baptism of 


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


tourna dextrement ce fonge en rifée: Voyons, dit-il, 
fi les coups font mortels. Celuy que tu as veu dans 
tes refueries eft Chirurgien, appellons le pour panfer 
les playes qu'il a faites, & pour y appliquer [58] du 
batime. Ceux qui eftoient prefens fe mirent 4 rire, 
& la malice du Diable s’en alla en fumée. 

Ie concluéray ce Chapitre par le Baptefme de deux 
Sauuages, aufquels la mort d’vne femme & d’vne 
foeur ont donné la vie. En verité Dieu eft étonnant, 
fa bonté n’a point de limites, & fa puiffance eft fans 
bornes. Ce quia éloigné & qui éloigne encore quel- 
ques Sauuages de la Foy, c’eft cela mefme qui en 
attire quelques autres. Vne ieune femme Chreftienne 
doiiée d’vn bon naturel enrichy de la grace, mourut 
en fes couches. On luy fait fes funerailles auec 
honneur au Cimetiere de Sainct Iofeph. Apres cette 
ceremonie, vn des Peres qui ont foin des Sauuages, 
fe tranf{porte dans la cabane de la defuncte, pour 
confoler les parens, fait vn difcours du bon-heur des 
Chreftiens: Nous ne mourons qu’A demy nous autres, 
difoit-il, il n’y a que le corps de cette bonne femme 
qui foit reduit 4 la mort & au tombeau: fon ame eft 
viuante eftant lauée des eaux du Baptefme: s’eftant 
repentie de coeur, & confeffée de fes offenfes, nous 
croyons qu’elle eft montée toute pure dans les Cieux; 
veu mefme qu’elle a enduré fort [59] patiément les 
douleurs de fa maladie. [1 ne faut pas pleurer ceux 
qui font dans les plaifirs, mais bien ceux qui ne croy- 
ent point en Dieu, car ils defcendent en la maifon des 
flammes & des Demons. Le frere de cette pauure 
femme nouuellement enterrée, au lieu de reprocher 
au Pere que le Baptefme auoit fait mourir fa foeur, 
fut touché: Il eft temps de fe rendre, fit-il, ie 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 See 


two Savages, to whom the death of a wife and of a 
sister gave life. Verily God is marvelous; his good- 
ness knoweth no limits, and his power is without 
bounds. What has kept and still keeps some Savages 
away from the Faith is the very thing that attracts 
others to it. A young Christian woman, endowed 
with a good disposition enriched by grace, died in 
childbirth. She was buried with honor in the Ceme- 
tery of Saint Joseph. After the ceremony, one of 
the Fathers in charge of the Savages went to the 
cabin of the deceased, to console the relatives, and 
spoke of the happiness of Christians. ‘‘ We,” he 
said, ‘‘ only half die; it is only the body of this good 
woman that is brought down to death and to the 
grave. Her soul lives, because it has been cleansed 
by the water of Baptism. As she repented in her 
heart, and confessed her sins, we believe that she 
has gone all pure to Heaven, especially as she en- 
dured [59] the pains of her illness most patiently. 
We must not weep for those who are happy, but for 
those who do not believe in God, for they descend 
into the abode of fire and of Demons.”’ The brother 
of the poor woman who had just been buried, instead 
of blaming the Father by saying that Baptism had 
caused his sister’s death, was touched. ‘‘ It is time 
to submit,’ he said; ‘‘ I have been fighting for two 
years; I must let myself be vanquished by God.” 
He was baptized, and named Victor. To be van- 
quished in such a fight is to be victorious. His wife 
wished to join him, and showed herself as zealous as 
her husband, so as to keep him company in the Faith 
and in grace; I pray God that she may do likewise 
in glory. 

The husband of this young Christian woman, who 


110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 22 


combats depuis deux ans: il me faut laiffer vaincre 
a Dieu. On le baptife, on le nomme Victor. C’eft 
e{tre victorieux que d’eftre vaincu dans ce combat. 
Sa femme veut eftre de la partie, elle fe monftre auffi 
zelée que fon mary, pour luy tenir compagnie en la 
Foy & en la grace: ie prie Dieu qu’elle luy tienne 
en la gloire. 

Le mary de cette ieune femme Chreftienne qui 
mourut, voulant donner la vie Aa fon enfant, eftoit a 
la chaffe, pendant ce funefte accident: eftant de re- 
tour on luy dift que fa femme eft dans le tombeau, 
que les Peres l’ont fecourué a fa mort; qu’ils l’ont 
honorée 4 fes funerailles, & qu’ils ont grandement 
confolé fes parens, affeurant qu’elle eftoit en lieu de 
delices, & qu’il ne falloit pas s’attrifter de fon bon- 
heur. Le ieune homme demeure d’abord [60] tout 
eftonné, la trifteffe & la ioye partagent fon coeur. [1 
fort tout a l’heure de fa cabane, s’en va au Cimetiere, 
fe met A deux genoux fur la foffe ou fur le tombeau 
de fa femme, joint les deux mains, & fait cette pri- 
ere: Toy qui as tout fait, loge dans ta maifon celle 
que tu m’auois donnée: ie ne veux point d’autre lieu 
que celuy ot tu as mis fon ame, ie te promets que ie 
me feray baptifer. Il fe leue, s’en va droit en noftre 
petite maifon, entre les mains jointes dans la cham- 
bre de l’vn de nos Peres: Tu fens bien mon cceur, 
luy dift-il, tu penetre dans ma péfée: Ma fille [sc. 
femme] eftoit fille de Dieu, elle eft au Ciel, c’eft 1a 
ott ie veux aller apres ma mort: hafte-toy de me bap- 
tifer, ie ne veux point aller au pais des Demons, le 
Ciel eft ma patrie. Le Pere craignant que l’amour 
d’vne femme ne le touchaft plus fortement que le 
defir de plaire 4 Dieu, & iouyr de fa gloire, luy parle 


1642] “RELATION OF 1642 111 


died in giving birth to her child, was away hunting 
when the sad event occurred. On his return, he 
was informed that his wife was in the grave; that 
the Fathers had assisted her at her death, had hon- 
ored her at her funeral, and had greatly consoled her 
relatives, assuring them that she was in an abode of 
bliss, and that they should not be sorrowful for her 
happiness. At first the young man was [60] quite 
stunned; his heart was divided between sorrow and 
joy. Shortly afterward, he issued from his cabin, 
went to the Cemetery, fell on his knees by the grave 
or tomb of his wife, clasped his hands, and said 
this prayer: ‘‘ Thou who hast made all things, take 
into thy house her whom thou hadst given to me. 
Ido not wish for any other dwelling than that in 
which thou hast placed her soul; I promise thee that 
I will have myself baptized.” He arose, came 
straight to our little house, and entered with clasped 
hands into the room of one of our Fathers. ‘‘ Thou 
knowest well my heart,” he said to him, ‘‘ thou 
enterest into my mind. My wife was a daughter of 
God. She is in Heaven; that is where I wish to go 
after my death. Hasten to baptize me; I do not 
wish to go to the land of Demons; Heaven is my 
country.’’ The Father, fearing that love for a wom- 
an moved him more strongly than the desire of pleas- 
ing God and of enjoying his glory, spoke to him at 
first about getting instructed, and then tried him 
for a sufficiently long time to see whether the thought 
of Baptism would not disappear with the remem- 
brance of his wife. His sorrow grew less, but his 
desire increased from day to day. Finally, as he 
was in haste to go out hunting and as he was put off 
to a future [61] day, he crossed the great River. 


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


premierement de fe faire inftruire, 1’éprouue affez 
long temps pour voir fi la penfée du Baptefme ne 
s’effacera point auec la penfée de fa femme. La 
trifteffe fe diminué, & fon defir accroift de iour en 
iour. Enfin fe voyat preffé d’aller 4 la chaffe, comme 
on le remettoit en vn autre [61] temps, il paffe la 
grande Riuiere; mais vn remords luy touchat le 
ceeur, il rebrouffe chemin, s’en vient a Kebec: Ie 
m’en vais, dift-il au Pere qui eftoit 14, pour vn affez 
long-temps dans les bois, ie ne fgaurois paffer outre 
fans Baptefme. Que feait-on qui ce qui me peut 
arriuer? Ie fuis perdu fi ie meurs fans cette grace: 
baptife-moy, ie te prie, ne me fais point languir 
dauantage. Le Pere voyant cette ferueur, comme 
d’ailleurs il eftoit bien inftruit, luy donna 1l’accom- 
pliffement de fes defirs, luy faifant porter le nom 
d’Auguftin. Il a paffé l’hyuer auec de ieunes frip- 
pons, qui n’ont en rien ébranlé fa foy & fa conftance. 
Il prenoit fouuent la Croix de fon chapelet, difant 
ces paroles: IESvS fortifie-moy, aye pitié de moy: 
éloigne de moy les Demons qui me veulent tromper, 
toute mon efperance eft en toy: Benedicius Dominus 
Deus Ifrael, quia vifitauit & fecit redemptionem plebis 


Sue. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "BB 


But his heart was seized with remorse; he retraced 
his steps, and came to Kebec. ‘‘I am going,” he 
said to the Father who was there, ‘‘ to the woods for 
along time. I cannot go without Baptism. Who 
knows what may happen to me? I am lost if I die 
without that grace. Baptize me, I pray thee; do not 
leave me to long for it any more.’’ The Father, 
observing such fervor,—and as, moreover, he was 
well instructed,— granted his wish, and gave him 
the name of Augustin. He spent the winter with 
young rascals, who were tunable to shake either his 
faith or his constancy. He would often clasp the 
Cross of his rosary, and repeat these words: ‘‘ JE- 
SUS, strengthen me, have pity on me; drive away 
from me the Demons who seek to deceive me. All 
my hope is in thee.’’ Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel, 
guia visttavit et fecit redemptionem plebis sue. 


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


[62] CHAPITRE V. 
CONTINUATION DES BAPTESMES. 


OVT le monde ne va pas au Ciel d’vn mefme 
T air, les vns y vont gayement quoy que par la 
croix, les autres quafi par force, Compelle eos 
intrare. Voicy vne ieune fille qui eft entrée en 1’E- 
glife de Dieu 4 coups de bafton, ie ne fcay quelle 
voye noftre Seigneur luy fera tenir pour entrer en 
fon Paradis. 

Vnieune homme Payen desja marié, la recherche, & 
la veut auoir pour feconde femme. Cette fille en l’ab- 
fence de fes parens s’y accorde. Eux bien eftonnez, 
a leur retour tancent la fille, & difent au ieune 
homme; Qu’eftant marié, il ne doit pretendre Aa vne 
feconde femme; que la polygamie n’eft plus en vfage 
a Sainct Iofeph, ot la plus-part des Sauuages font 
Chreftiens; que leur paréte ne fe mariera iamais 
qu'elle ne foit baptifée, & qu’elle n’époufera iamais 
qu’vn Chreftien. Ce compagnon eftant frappé d’vn 
amour aueugle, congedie fa premiere femme, demande 
qu’on [63] l’inftruife, mais les parens fe doutans bien 
que tout cela ne procedoit que d’vn ame de chair, 
enuoyét la fille au Seminaire des Vrfulines, pour y 
e{tre in{truite en la crainte de Dieu: elle y demeure 
vn mois entier, auec fatisfaction de part & d’autre. 
Ces bonnes Meres ont de l’induftrie 4 gaigner le coeur 
des Sauuages. Enfin fes plus proches parens ayans 
befoin de fon feruice, la rappellent, l'amour déreglé 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 . 


[62] CHAPTER V. 
CONTINUATION OF THE BAPTISMS. 


LL do not go to Heaven in the same manner. 
Some go thither gladly, though by the cross, 
while others are almost forced to go. Compelle 

cos intrare. Here is a young girl who has entered 
the Church of God by dint of blows. I do not know 
what path our Lord will make her take to enter his 
Paradise. 

A Pagan young man, who was already married, 
sought her in marriage and wished to have her for 
his second wife. In the absence of her relatives, the 
girl agreed to it. Ontheir return, they were utterly 
astounded, upbraided the girl, and told the young 
man that, as he was already married, he should not 
desire a second wife,—that polygamy is no longer 
the custom at Saint Joseph, where the majority of 
the Savages are Christians; that their relative would 
never marry until she were baptized, and would 
never marry any one but a Christian. Her com- 
panion, being blindly in love, put aside his first wife 
and asked to be [63] instructed. But the relatives, 
who suspected that this proceeded only from a.car- 
nal mind, sent the girl to the Seminary of the Ursu- 
lines to be instructed in the fear of God. She re- 
mained there an entire month, to the satisfaction of 
all parties. These good Mothers are skillful in win- 
ning the hearts of Savages. Finally, as her nearest 
relatives needed her services, they took her home. 


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


ne s’arrache pas d’vn coeur en fi peu de temps. La 
fille n’auoit pas grande ardeur, mais le ieune homme 
brufloit. A peine eft-elle de retour qu'il la cajolle; 
on fe défie, on la veille, la paffion eft precipitée. Ce 
ieune frippon la rencontrant fur le foir, la pourfuit; 
elle ne pouuant efquiuer ce rencontre, fe gliffe dans 
vne maifon Francoife: il entre apres elle, 1’entretient 
vn affez long-temps: dans le retardement on croit 
qu’elle eft enleuée, qu’elle a de l’affection pour cét 
homme: on fe fafche contre elle; & au moment qu’on 
la menace, elle paroift dans fa cabane. Ses parens 
ialoux de fon abfence en vne heure fi indué, pourfui- 
uent leurs plaintes: ils s’affemblent trois ou quatre 
pour luy faire fon procez, tous plaidoient contre elle, 
& le premier qui parla [64] fe feruit de ces termes: 
On nous enfeigne que Dieu aime l’obeiffance: nous 
voyons les Fran¢ois dans cette pratique, ils font vn 
tel cas de cette vertu, que fi quelqu’vn d’entr’eux 
vient 4 y manquer, il eft puny fans delay: les parens 
chaftient leurs propres enfans, & les maiftres leurs 
feruiteurs: ils font cela pour appaifer Dieu, qui eft 
offenfé par la defobeiffance, pour rendre la ieuneffe 
plus fage & plus foupple: & pour donner de la crainte 
aux mefchans, puis [que] nous fommes Chreftiens 
auffi bien que les Francois; il faut faire ce qui eft 
agreable a Dieu auffi bien qu’eux: vous fcauez qu'il 
y ades-ia long-temps que nous defendds a l’vne de 
nos filles, d’aimer vn certain ieune homme Payen, 
nous l’auons éloignée quelque temps pour luy faire 
perdre cette affection, nous l’auons fait in{truire pour 
eftre baptifée, elle n’a point encor d’efprit, ie croy 
que la rigueur luy en donnera, mais ie ne fgay quel 
chaftiement on luy pourroit donner. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ee 


Inordinate love cannot be eradicated from a heart in 
so short a time. The girl was not very eager, but 
the young man was consumed with passion. Hardly 
had she returned, than he sought to cajole her. Sus- 
pecting him, she was watched; his passion was ren- 
dered headlong. The young rascal, meeting her in 
the evening, followed her. As she could not avoid 
this encounter, she slipped into a Frenchman’s house. 
He entered after her and talked with her for a long 
time. During this delay, it was thought that she 
had been abducted, and that she loved this man. 
They were angry with her and just as they uttered 
threats against her, she entered herowncabin. Her 
relatives, who were anxious about her absence at so 
unseasonable an hour, continued their complaints; 
three or four of them met together to call her to 
account. All argued against her, and the first who 
spoke [64] made use of these words: ‘‘ We are taught 
that God loves obedience. We see the French prac- 
ticing it; they have such a regard for that virtue 
that, if any one of them fail in it, he is punished. 
Parents chastise their own children, and masters 
their servants. They do this to appease God who is 
offended by disobedience; to render youth wiser and 
more tractable; and to inspire the wicked with fear. 
Since we are Christians like the French, we must do 
what is agreeable to God, as they do. You know 
that for a long time we have forbidden one of our 
girls to love a certain Pagan young man. We sent 
her away for a while, to make her lose that affec- 
tion; we have had her instructed, so as to be bap- 
tized. She has not yet any sense. I think that 
severe measures will give her some, but I do not 
know what punishment we should inflict on her.” 


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


Vn autre prenant la parole: Si elle eftoit, dit-il, 
ma propre fille, il y a long-temps qu’elle auroit de 
lefprit, ou qu’elle feroit hors du monde; on luya 
defendu de parler 4 ce ieune homme, elle n’a pas 
obey, il [65] la faut chaffer de nos cabanes, & defen- 
dre 4 tous ceux qui font icy de la reuoir, ou de luy 
donner 4 manger: voila vn bon zele, mais il n’eft pas 
JSecundium /cientiam: 11 ne connoift pas affez la foibleffe 
d’vn pauure coeur humain; cela tient plus de la ri- 
gueur d’Elie, que de la douceur de IESVS-CHRIST. 
Vn troifiéme opinant plus fauorablement, dift; Que 
la faute n’eftoit point fi griefue, & qu’il fuffifoit de 
fuftiger la fille, & qu’il ne falloit point conclure a fa 
mort, fur vn fuiet 4 la verité d’importance, mais non 
pas ficriminel. La voix de ce dernier fut fuiuie: on 
appelle la fille, on luy intime fa fentence, on luy dit 
qu’elle fe refolue a eftre fuftigée, pour ne s’eftre pas 
rendué obeiffante. Cette pauure creature baiffe les 
yeux en terre fans mot dire. A quelque temps de 
1a, elle dift 4 vne perfonne de confiance, que lors 
qu'elle fe vid condamnée a ce fupplice, elle difoit au 
fond de fon cceur; Et bien ie fouffriray cela patiem- 
ment pour mon offenfe; i’obeiray fans replique; peut 
ef{tre que quand on verra ma patience & mon obeif- 
fance en chofe fi fafcheufe & fi inufitée parmy nous, 
qu’on m/’accordera le Baptefme, que ie demande il y 
a fi [66] long-temps, fi ce chaftiement me fait iotiyr de 
ce bien, il me caufera vn grand bon-heur. 

La fentence portée, il ne fallut point de Sergens 
ny d’Archers pour la conduire au lieu du fupplice. 
On luy dift qu’elle fe trouue le lendemain 4 Kebec, 
elle s’y en alla tout froidement auec fes compagnes. 
Celuy qui l’auoit condamnée A cette amende, luy- 


| 


1642] RELATION OF t6gz2 119 


Another, addressing them, said: ‘‘ If she were my 
own daughter, she would have had sense long ago, 
or she would have been out of the world. She was 
forbidden to speak to that young man; she did not 
obey; [65] she must be driven away from our cabins 
and all who are here must be forbidden to see her 
again, or to give her anything to eat.’’ Such zeal is 
good, but it is not secundim scientiam. It does not 
sufficiently recognize the weakness of a poor human 
heart; it bears more resemblance to the severity of 
Elias than to the mildness of JESus CHRIST. A 
third one, more lenient in opinion, said that the 
offense was not so serious,—that it would be suffi- 
cient to flog the girl, and that they should not decide 
upon her death for a matter which was, to be sure, 
important, but was not of so criminal a nature. The 
opinion of this last person was followed. The girl 
was called, and informed of her sentence; she was 
told to prepare to be flogged because she had not 
been obedient. The poor creature cast her eyes on 
the ground, and said not aword. Some time after- 
ward, she told a person, in confidence, that when she 
saw herself condemned to that punishment, she said 
in the depths of her heart: ‘‘ Well, I will suffer it 
patiently for my offense; I will obey without saying 
a word. Perhaps, when they observe my patience 
and obedience in a matter so grievous, and so unu- 
sual among us, they will grant me Baptism, which I 
have asked for so [66] long atime. If this punish- 
ment enable me to obtain that blessing, it will cause 
me great joy.” 

The sentence having been pronounced, neither 
Sergeants nor Archers were needed to take her to 
the place of punishment. She was told to be in 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


mef{me luy fit payer: il arme fa main d’vne poignée 
de fions ou de verges bien friandes, & luy en donne 
bien ferré fur les épaules, en la prefence de plufieurs 
Sauuages. La pauure patiente ne fit paroiftre aucun 
figne de douleur, fi bien de honte & de confufion. 

Ce Iuge & cét executeur de Iuftice tout enfemble, 
adioufte vne petite harangue 4 ce chaftiement; Vous 
auez veu, dift-il aux ieunes filles qui regardoient ce 
{pectacle, le traitement que ie viens de faire 4 voftre 
compagne, le mefme & vn plus rigoureux vous attend 
fi vous n’eftes obeiffantes. Voila la premiere puni- 
tion de main-mife, que nous ayons exercée fur ceux 
de noftre Nation, nous fommes refolus de continuer, 
s'il fe trouue quelqu’vn parmy nous qui fe rende 
defobeiffant ou [67] refractaire. Les yeux & les 
oreilles de ces pauures filles, eftoient frappez a 
mefme temps d’vn éclair & d’vn tonnerre, qui leur 
faifoient craindre qu’vn femblable careau de foudre 
ne tomba({t fur leurs teftes ou fur leurs épaules, tout 
fe paffa dans 1’étonnement. 

L’année precedente les nouueaux Chreftiens firent 
mettre vn Sauuage en prifon: cette année ils ont fait 
dauantage; car cefte punition me femble bien feuere 
pour la premiere. Ceux qui connoiffent la liberté & 
l’independance de ces peuples, & l’horreur qu’ils ont 
du joug & de la feruitude, diront qu’vne petite touche 
du Ciel, & vne petite grace eft plus forte & plus 
puiffante que les canons & les armes des Roys & des 
Monarques, qui ne les pourroient fléchir. 

Il femble qu’apres cette vergongne, il ne falloit 
qu’vne cauerne a cette pauure fille: elle s’en va au 
fortir de fon fupplice, trouuer l’vn des Peres qui ont 
foin des Sauuages, & luy demande le Baptefme auffi 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ~ i 


Kebec on the following day, and she went there 
quite calmly, with her companions. He who had 
sentenced her to this penalty himself made her pay it. 
He took in his hand a bundle of very pliable shoots 
or wands, and with these showered blows on her 
shoulders, in the presence of many Savages. The 
unfortunate sufferer showed not a sign of pain, or 
indeed of shame or confusion. 

This Judge and executor of Justice, all in one, 
added a short harangue to the punishment. ‘‘ You,’’ 
he said to the young girls who gazed at the spec- 
tacle, ‘‘ have witnessed the treatment that I have 
dealt to your companion; the same, and even more 
severe, awaits you if you be not obedient. This is 
the first punishment by beating that we have in- 
flicted upon any one of our Nation. Weare resolved 
to continue it, if any one among us should be disobe- 
dient or [67] refractory.’’ The eyes and ears of the 
poor girls were struck at the same time as if by light- 
ning and thunder, which made them fear that a simi- 
lar thunderbolt might fall on their heads, or on their 
shoulders. All were amazed at what had happened. 

During the previous year the new Christians hada 
Savage put in prison. This year they have done 
more, for this last punishment seems to me very 
severe to be the first. Those who know the freedom 
and independence of these peoples, and the horror 
they have of restraint or bondage, will say that a 
slight touch of Heaven and a little grace are stronger 
and more powerful than the cannons and arms of 
Kings and Monarchs, which could not subdue them. 

One would think that, after such shame, the poor 
girl would need nothing but a cavern. As soon as 
her punishment was over, she went to one of the 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


froidement que fi rien ne fe fuft paffé; & auec vne 
telle in{tance, qu’il en demeura tout eftonné, & fort 
fatisfait: la confcience d’auoir fouffert cette peine 
[68] auec vn grand coeur, luy donnoit plus de liberté 
de parler, que l’affront ne luy caufoit de honte: vne 
faincte action faite dans lignominie, réjoiiit lame 
auffi bien que celle qui fe fait dans la gloire. Le 
Pere l’examine, la trouue tres-bien inftruite; il veut 
neantmoins differer fon Baptefme: mais comme elle 
s’eftoit foufmife 4 ce tourment, dans 1’efperance que 
fon humilité & fon obeiffance obtiendroient cette fa- 
ueur, elle preffe fortement, proteftant que iamais elle 
n’aura d’affection pour aucun Payen; & ne donnera 
plus de fujet de trifteffe 4 fes parens. Et bien donc, 
luy fit le Pere, trouuez-vous demain matin en 1’E- 
glife des Meres Vrfelines. La voila plus remplie de 
ioye de cette parole, que de melancholie d’auoir efté 
fi mal traitée. 

Elle s’en retourne dans fa cabane toute gaye, & 
deuant que le Soleil fuft leué, elle auoit des-ja fait 
vne demie lieué de chemin, pour fe trouuer auec fes 
compagnes au lieu qu’on luy auoit affigné. La Mere 
Superieure bien eftonnée de la voir fi remplie de ioye 
de fi bon matin, luy en demande la raifon: Ie dois eftre 
baptifée auiourd’huy dans voftre Eglife: [69] voila 
le fujet de ma venué & de mon contentement. Mais 
fcauez-vous bien [ce] que c’eft que Baptefme, luy re- 
part la Mere? C’eft vne eau, répond-elle, qui lauera 
tous mes pechez, qui embellira mon ame, & qui me 
fera enfant de Dieu. Ce qui fe paffa hier, ne vous 
a-il point laiffé quelque reliqua de trifteffe dans 
lame? La penfée que i’auois de fouffrir pour IESvs 
CHRIST, me fit boire cette honte auec plaifir & le 


i] 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 (an 


Fathers in charge of the Savages and asked him for 
Baptism, as calmly as if nothing had happened, and 
with such persistence that he was utterly astonished 
and greatly pleased. The consciousness of having 
submitted to that punishment [68] with much cour- 
age gave her greater liberty to speak than the affront 
caused her shame. A holy action performed in 
ignominy rejoices the soul as much as one performed 
in glory. The Father questioned her and found her 
very well instructed. He wished, however, to defer 
her Baptism; but, as she had submitted to the tor- 
ment in the hope that her humility and obedience 
would gain her that favor, she urged him persistent- 
ly, protesting that she would never have an affection 
for any Pagan, and would never cause sorrow to her 
relatives. ‘‘ Very well, then,’’ said the Father, 
““come to-morrow morning to the Church of the 
Ursuline Mothers.’’ These words filled her with 
joy greater than the sorrow that she had felt at being 
so harshly treated. 

She returned to her cabin quite joyfully, and be- 
fore the Sun rose, she had already walked half a 
league, to be present, with her companions, at the 
place assigned to her. The Mother Superior, who 
was quite astonished to see her so glad, and so early 
in the morning, asked the reason thereof. ‘‘I am 
to be baptized to-day in your Church. [69] That is 
the cause of my coming, and of my joy.” “ But,”’ 
said the Mother, ‘‘ do you really know what Baptism 
is?’’ “‘It is a water,’’ she replied, ‘‘ which will wash 
away all my sins, will beautify my soul, and make 
me a child of God.’”’ ‘‘ Has not what happened yes- 
terday left some remnant of sorrow in your soul?’’ 
“The thought that I had of suffering for Jesus 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


contentement, que ie reffens 4 prefent du bon-heur 
que ie vay poffeder, ne peut fouffrir aucune trifteffe 
dans mon cceur. Le Pere arriue 14 deffus, il fe 
difpofe 4 la faire Chreftienne, l’interroge, elle répond 
auec ioye, la baptife, elle fut nommée Angele. 

Ce procedé fut approuué de ceux qui aiment la 
priere, c’ef{t 4 dire des Chreftiens, mais les Infideles 
ne le peurent fupporter, ils accufent les Neophytes 
decruauté. Le ieune homme qui eftoit paffionné pour 
cette fille, & qui fe voyoit priué d’vne proye qu'il 
auoit des ia deuorée dans fon cceur, fumé de colere, il 
fe va plaindre 4 fon pere qui eftoit pour lors aux 
trois Riuieres, luy dift que les [70] Chreftiens l’ont 
maltraité, qu’il en veut auoir la raifon. Cét homme 
plein de fureur fe tranfporte auffi-toft 4 Sainct Iofeph, 
ne menace pas moins que d’affommer vne partie de 
ceux qui croyent en Dieu: on luy fait voir que fon 
fils fe plaint 4 tort, qu’on ne luy a fait aucun affront; 
& que s’il honore la priere, comme il en fait le fem- 
blant, il a fujet d’eftre content du chaftiement qu’on 
a fait a la fille: mais cela n’appaife point la fureur 
d’vn homme extraordinairement paffionné. 

Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny, noftre Gou- 
uerneur, toufiours femblable 4 foy mefme, & toufiours 
zelé pour l’amplification de la Foy, le fit appeller, & 
luy fit dire par fon Interprete, Qu’il fe donnaft bien 
de garde de rien attenter contre les Chreftiens; qu’il 
ne les peut attaquer qu’a moins de choquer fa propre 
perfonne; qu'il n’eft qu’vne mefme chofe auecque 
tous ceux qui croyent en IESvS-CHRIST, & quil 
aime la priere. Cette predication faite dans vn Fort 
armé de canon, eut effet. Pour conclufion la Foy 
triompha de l’impieté, & Dagon fe vid abbatu deuant 


_—— es 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "196 


CHRIST made me swallow that shame with pleas- 
ure; and the comfort that I now feel on account of 
the happiness I am about to possess, cannot allow any 
sorrow in my heart.’’ Thereupon the Father arrived, 
prepared himself to make her a Christian, and ques- 
tioned her; she answered gladly, was baptized, and 
was named Angele. 

These proceedings were approved by those who 
love prayer,—that is to say, by the Christians; but 
the Infidels could not brook them, and accused the 
Neophytes of cruelty. The young man, who pas- 
sionately loved the girl, and who saw himself de- 
prived of a prey that he had already devoured in his 
heart, fumed with rage. He went to complain to 
his father who was then at the three Rivers, and told 
him that the [70] Christians had maltreated him and 
that he wished to obtain satisfaction for it. That 
man, filled with fury, came at once to Saint Joseph 
and threatened with nothing less than death a por- 
tion of those who believe in God. He was informed 
that his son complained without reason,—that no 
affront had been offered him; and that, if he honored 
prayer as he pretended to do, he would be satisfied 
with the punishment inflicted on the girl. This, 
however, did not appease the fury of a man who was 
passionate to an extraordinary degree. 

Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, our Gov- 
ernor, who is ever true to his character, and ever 
zealous for the extension of the Faith, had him 
brought into his presence, and bade his Interpreter 
tell him that he must be very careful not to make 
any attempt against the Christians; that he could 
not attack them without attacking him personally; 
that he himself was but one with those who believe 


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


[71] Arche, & Belial vaincu par IESVS-CHRIST. 

I’ay dit cy-deffus que les Hiroquois auoient écarté 
les Sauuages des trois Riuieres 4 la referue d’vn petit 
nombre, defquels le Pere Buteux, qui a fait fa de- 
meure plus ordinaire en cette refidence, parle en cette 
forte: Nous auons eu peu de familles cét hyuer, ce 
peu neantmoins nous a contenté, pour auoir prefté 
l’oreille auec fruict 4 la parole de Dieu; tous ont efté 
baptifez grands & petits: & apres le Baptefme ils 
ont frequenté les Sacremens, auec toute la fatisfaction 
qu’on pourroit defirer. 

Le premier de cette petite bande, qui eft homme 
de confideration parmy les fiens, m’ayant long-temps 
prié de le baptifer: ie paroiffois n’auoir point d’o- 
reilles pour luy: plus il me preffoit, plus ie le ren- 
uoyois rudement pour éprouuer fa conftance. Luy 
ennuyé de ce rebut, me dift vn certain iour: Ie ne 
perdray point courage pour voftre refus: Vous n’eftes 
pas feul 4 qui Dieu a donné le pouuoir de baptifer: 
Ie defcendray 1a bas, & ie trouueray d’autres Peres, 
qui me feront plus fauorables, & qui auront de meil- 
leures [72] volontez pour moy que vous n’auez: le 
crains neantmoins dans le retardement, de tomber 
en quelque faute qui me rende indigne du Baptefme. 
Si i’eftois enfant de Dieu, il me donneroit des forces 
pour marcher droit: I’ay peur encore que le malin 
Efprit ne fe ferue de mes Compatriotes, ennemis de 
la priere, pour me rappeller 4 mes anciennes fagons 
de faire. Si i’eftois Chreftien, la refolution feroit 
prife; ils perdroient leurs forces, & i’augmenterois 
en courage. Ie ne pourrois plus douter qu’il ne faluft 
obeir A Dieu: & voila pourquoy ie vous preffe de me 
baptifer. Qui feait, luy dis-je, fi vous ne demandez 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 a 


in JESsus CHRIST, and that he loved prayer. Such 
a sermon, preached in a Fort armed with cannon, 
hadits effect. Toconclude, Faith triumphed over un- 
godliness, and Dagon was cast down before [71] the 
Ark, and Belial was vanquished by JESUS CHRIST. 
I have stated above that the Hiroquois had caused 
the Savages to remove from the three Rivers, with 
the exception of a small number, of whom Father 
Buteux, who has usually dwelt at that residence, 
writes as follows: ‘‘ We have had but few families 
this winter. These few have, however, given us 
satisfaction for they have listened with profit to the 
word of God. All, both great and small, have been 
baptized, and, after Baptism, have received the Sacra- 
ments frequently, with all desirable satisfaction. 
‘‘'The first of this little band, who is a man of 
consideration among his people, had for a long time 
requested me to baptize him. I seemed never to 
have ears for him; the more he pressed me, the 
more roughly I repelled him, to test his constancy. 
Tired of this rejection, he said to me one day: ‘I 
will not lose courage because of your refusal. You 
are not the only one to whom God has given the 
power of baptizing. Iwill go down below, and I 
shall find other Fathers who will be more favorable 
to me and who will be better [72] disposed toward 
me than you are. I fear, however, that during this 
delay, I may fall into some sin which will make me 
unworthy of Baptism. If I were a child of God, he 
would give me strength to walk straight. I still fear 
that the evil Spirit will make use of my Countrymen, 
who are foes to prayer, to tempt me back to my old 
habits. If I were a Christian, my resolution would 
be taken; they would lose their strength, and my 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 22 


point le Baptefme par quelque confideration tempo- 
relle? Quoy donc? repartit-il, ne fuis-je pas chaf- 
feur? ma vie dépend-elle des Francois? fuis-je ma- 
lade ou en neceffité? Non non, ce n’eft point l’attéte 
des biens de la terre, qui me fait embraffer voftre 
creance, mais vne crainte de tomber dans les tour- 
mens preparez a nos offenfes, & vn defir d’aller au 
ciel apresma mort. Ie fens vne telle ardeur pour 
ioiiir de ce bien, que quand ie fgaurois que la mort 
fuiuroit mon Baptefme; ie tiédrois ferme fans recu- 
ler d’vn feul pas. [73] Cette ferueur animée par la 
refiftance qu’on luy faifoit, 1’a mis dans l’accompliffe- 
ment de fes fouhaits. A peine, eftoit-il Chreftien, 
qu’on luy apporta nouuelle qu’vn bon nombre de 
Sauuages de fa nation; auec lefquels il s’eftoit voulu 
retirer fur la fin de 1’Automne, auoient efté pris, tuez, 
maffacrez, bruflez, roftis & boiiillis par les Hiro- 
quois! ah mon Dieu, s’efcria il, que vous ay ie fait, 
de m’auoir arre{té icy bas, parmy vos enfans ot i’ay 
euité la mort du corps, & trouué la vie de l’ame; 
ceftoit fait de moy pour iamais. Si ie fuffe monté 
la haut comme i’en auois le deffein. I1 entre tout 
de ce pas en la Chapelle, comme faifi de fraieur, & 
tout rempli de recognoiffance, il remercie Dieu d’vne 
faueur, & d’vne grace fi fignalée & fi particuliere. 
C’eft vne confolation bien douce de voir mainte- 
nant auec quelle Charité, les Chreftiens procurent 
le Baptefme, aux pauures malades qu’ils voyent en 
danger de mort, il y a peu d’années qu’il nous falloit 
courir apres eux; encor quand on les auoit attrappez, 
on ne les pouuoit mettre dans la voye de leur falut: 
les Neophytes bien zelés nous deliurét 4 prefent d’vne 
partie de ces [74] foins, ce n’eft pas vn petit creue- 


i 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "199 


courage would increase. I would no longer doubt 
that it is necessary to obey God, and that is why I 
urge you to baptize me.’ ‘Who knows,’ said I, 
‘whether you are not asking Baptism for some tem- 
poral consideration?’ ‘ What!’ replied he, ‘am I 
not a hunter? Does my livelihood depend on the 
French? Am I sick, or in need? No, no; it is not 
the expectation of earthly gifts that leads me to 
embrace your faith; it is the fear of falling into the 
torments prepared for our sins, and the desire to go 
to heaven after my death. I feel such a longing to 
enjoy that blessing that, even if I knew that death 
would follow my Baptism, I would remain firm, 
without drawing back a single step.’ [73] Such fer- 
vor, excited by the resistance opposed to it, brought 
about the fulfillment of his wishes. Hardly had he 
become a Christian when news was brought to him 
that a good many Savages of his nation, with whom 
he had wished to dwell in the Autumn, had been 
taken,— killed, massacred, burned, roasted, and 
boiled by the Hiroquois. ‘Ah, my God!’ he cried, 
‘what have I done for you that you should keep me 
here below amid your children, among whom I have 
escaped the death of the body and found the life of 
the soul? I would have been lost forever, had I gone 
up there as I had intended.’ He went at once to the 
Chapel, as if overcome with fear, and, with deep 
gratitude, returned thanks to God for so signal and 
special a favor and grace.”’ 

It is a very sweet consolation to see, at present, 
with what Charity the Christians procure Baptism 
for the poor sick ones whom they see in danger of 
death. A few years ago, we had to run after them. 
Even when we caught them, we could not put them 


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


coeur, d’entendre que des ames eftans toutes proches 
des portes du Paradis: foiét precipitées dds le fond 
des aby{mes, quatité de Sauuages ayant negligé ou 
mefprifé le Baptefme, lors qu’ils le pouuoiét receuoir, 
font morts bien loin de nous, auec ces regrets & auec 
ces plaintes, que ne fuis-ie maintenant aupres des 
Peres, ie ne mourois pas comme vn chien, les bons 
Chreftiens les fecourans [sc. fecourent] dans cette 
extremité, en voicy deux exemples. 

Vne trouppe de Sauuages s’eftoient retirez dans 
les bois pour faire des canots, vne pauure femme 
tébe foudainemét dans vne fi grade foibleffe, qu’on 
la tient pour morte, les Chreftiens commanderent 
auffi-to{t 4 deux ieunes hémes de s’embarquer pour 
aller querir vn Pere afin de la baptifer, il falloit vo- 
guer plus de trois lieux fur l’eau en plaine nuict, les 
ieunes gens rament de toutes leurs forces, ils arriuent 
aS. Iofeph, demandent vn Pere aulec empreffemét: 
le Pere Buteux qui fe trouua pour lors en cette refi- 
dence, prend auec luy vn ieune Chirurgien, & court 
apres fa proye, il arriue aux Cabanes enuiron vne ou 
deux heures apres minuict, trouue la malade fans 
poux, [75] vne grande euacuation de fang luy auoit 
of{té les forces & la parole, le Chirurgien luy donne 
vne potion cordiale, elle reuient a foy, le Pere la 
veut in{truire: mais vn Sauuage Chreftien & rauy de 
la voir encore en vie, luy parle de Dieu auec vne 
telle éloquence, que le Pere prenoit plaifir de 1’ef- 
couter, & touts les autres Sauuages l’admiroient. Le 
iour cependant s’approche, & le Pere voyant la malade 
hors de danger, fait prier Dieu dans la Cabane, 
donne vn petit mot d’exhortation a tous les affiftans, 
puis demande qu’on le reporte 4 S. Iofeph, pour dire 


| 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 131 


on the road to their salvation. The Neophytes, 
truly zealous, now relieve us of a portion of this 
[74] care. It is rather heartbreaking when we hear 
that souls, which were quite close to the gates of 
Paradise, have been cast down into the depths of 
the abyss. Many Savages, who had neglected or 
despised Baptism when they could have received it, 
have died very far away from us, with these regrets 
and complaints: ‘‘ Oh that I were near the Fathers 
now! I would not die like a dog.’’ The good 
Christians succor them in theirextremity. Here are 
two examples. 

A band of Savages had retired into the woods for 
the purpose of making canoes, when a poor woman 
suddenly falls into so complete prostration that she 
is regarded as if dead. The Christians at once order 
two young men to embark, and fetch a Father to bap- 
tize her. It was necessary to cross more than three 
leagues of water in the dead of night. The young 
men paddle with all their might; they arrive at St. 
Joseph, and urgently inquire for a Father. Father 
Buteux, who was then at that residence, takes a 
young Surgeon with him, and hastens after his prize. 
He reaches the Cabins about an hour or two after 
midnight, and finds the patient pulseless; [75] a great 
discharge of blood had deprived her of strength and 
of speech. The Surgeon gives her a cordial draught, 
and she recovers consciousness. The Father wishes 
to instruct her; but a Christian Savage, delighted to 
see her still alive, tells her of God with such elo- 
quence that the Father takes pleasure in listening to 
him, and all the other Savages admire him. Dawn 
approaches, and the Father, seeing the patient out 
of danger, offers prayer to God in the Cabin, gives 


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


la faincte Meffe. Iean Baptifte Etinechksat, qui 
s’e{toit monftré le plus zelé pour le falut de cette 
pauure femme, luy-dift, comment mon Pere vous 
n’auez pas encore fait ce pourquoy on vous a fait 
venir, & vous parlés de vous en retourner, demeurés 
s'il vous plaift, ne quittez point cette pauure femme 
quelle ne foit Chreftienne, le Pere luy dift, que le 
Chirurgien affuroit qu’elle n’en mouroit pas, & qu’d 
la baptiferoit auec les fainctes Ceremonies, & auec 
plus de fruit quand ils feroient de retour 4 S. lofeph, 
cette raifon le contenta & le Pere s’embarque auec les 
Nochers dans vne efcorce fagonnée [76] en gondolle, 
bien ioyeux de voir tant de Charité en ces bons 
Neophytes. 

Voicy vne autre exemple de ferueur & de zele, qui 
n’a pas tant de paroles: mais il y a bien autant de 
fubitance. 

Vn ieune Algonquin eftant defcendu ce prin-temps 
2 Tadoufac tombe malade, croiant que fa maladie 
e{toit mortelle: il s’ecrie/ helas fi i’eftois 4 Kebec, ie 
ne mourois pas fans Baptefme. A cette voix deux 
Chreftiens l’embarquent, luy font faire trente fix ou 
quarante lieiies: fur le grand fleuue, malgré la pluie, 
les vents & les vagues, expofant le corps pour 
fauuer l’ame. 

Pour conclufion, ie puis affeurer qu’il y a peu de 
Sauuages, de ceux qui frequentent ordinairement la 
refidence de S. Iofeph, qui n’ayent enue d’embraffer 
la Foy de Iefus Chrift, & ceux 14a & les autres vien- 
dront auec le temps, ie dicts auec le temps, noftre 
ardeur Francoife voudroit quafi recueillir, deuant 
que d’auoir femé. 


Te ee 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 188 


a few words of exhortation to all present, and asks 
to be taken back to St. Joseph, that he may say 
holy Mass. Jean Baptiste Etinechkwat, who had 
shown the most zeal for the salvation of this poor 
woman, said to him: ‘‘ Howisthis, my Father? You 
have not yet done that for which we brought you 
here, and you speak of going back; remain here, if 
you please, and do not leave this poor woman until 
she is a Christian.’’ The Father told him that the 
Surgeon assured him that she would not die, and 
that she could be baptized with the holy Rites, and 
to better advantage, when they should return to 
St. Joseph. This argument satisfied him, and the 
Father embarked with the Boatmen in a bark vessel 
shaped [76] like a gondola, quite pleased at finding 
such great Charity in these good Neophytes. 

Here is another instance of fervor and zeal which 
does not take so many words to relate, but which 
contains quite as much substance. 

A young Algonquin who last spring went down 
to Tadousac, fell ill there. Thinking that his dis- 
ease was mortal, he exclaimed: ‘‘ Alas! if I were at 
Kebec, I would not die without Baptism.’’ On hear- 
ing this, two Christians put him in a canoe, and con- 
veyed him for thirty-six or forty leagues on the great 
river, in spite of the rain, the wind, and the waves, 
exposing the body to save the soul. 

In conclusion, I can assert that there are but few 
Savages, among those who usually frequent the resi- 
dence of St. Joseph, who are not desirous of 
embracing the Faith of Jesus Christ; and these, with 
the others, will come in time. I say, in time; our 
French ardor would almost desire to reap before 
having sown. 


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


[77] CHAPITRE VI. 


DU BAPTESME DE DEUX HURONS, QUI ONT PASSE 
L’HYUER A KEBEC. 


ES affaires de la miffion, retenant 4 Kebec le 
i Pere Iean de Brebeuf, tres verfé en la langue 
Huronne, on inuita quelques Hurons de ceux 
qu’on iugeoit moins éloignez de la Foy, de paffer vn 
hyuer aupres de luy, afin de fe faire profondement 
inftruire: la difficulté du retour dans vne faifon, qui 
commengoit de-ja de faire fentir les rigueurs d’vn 
froid, qu’on dit auoit efté tout extraordinaire cette 
année, fembloit leur debuoir faire accepter cette 
offre: mais Dieu auoit ietté les yeux fur deux pau- 
ures brebis égarees, qu’il vouloit ramener a fa berge- 
rie, fa prouidence eft auffi adorable qu’elle eft fecrete, 
on prie quelques-vns de ces pauures Barbares de 
demeurer, ils n’ont peu ioiiyr de cette faueur, on les | 
éconduifit: quelques vns eftans defia partis, retour- 
nent fur leurs pas: mais on les renuoye, on vouloit 
choifir les efprits les mieux faits, [78] & pour y pren- 
dre garde de trop prez, il n’en refta ny bon ny mau- 
uais. Les voila tous partis, ils auoient def-ja faict 
plus de cinquante lieués quand vn nomme Atondo, 
& vn autre appellé Oxkhuksandoron, quittent leurs 
compagnés rebrouffent chemin, & s’en viennent 
retrouuer les Francois, leur deffein n’eftoit pas de fe 
faire in{truire: mais Dieu les renuoioit pour le fubiet, 
ils craignoient la rigueur du froid, & Dieu les vouloit 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 " 18 


[77] CHAPTER VI. 


OF THE BAPTISM OF TWO HURONS WHO PASSED THE 
WINTER AT KEBEC. 


S Father Jean de Brebeuf, who is well versed 
Hay in the Huron language, was detained at Kebec 
by the affairs of the Mission,—some Hurons, 
among those who were considered less averse to the 
Faith, were invited to spend a winter near him, so as 
to be thoroughly instructed. The difficulty of re- 
turning at a season that already began to make us 
feel the severity of cold weather— which is said to 
have been quite extraordinary this year—seemed 
likely to compel them to accept this offer. But God 
had cast his eyes on two poor stray sheep, that he 
wished to bring back to his fold. His providence is 
as adorable as itis secret. Some of these poor Barba- 
rians were requested to remain, but they were un- 
able to enjoy that favor and were allowed to go. 
Some of them, who had already started, retraced their 
steps, but they were sent back because we wished to 
choose only those who were the best disposed; [78] and 
because we were too careful, neither good nor bad 
remained with us. They all went away, and had 
already gone more than fifty leagues, when one 
Atondo, and another named Okhukwandoron, left 
their companions, retraced their steps, and came 
back to the French. They had no intention of plac- 
ing themselves under instruction; but God sent them 
back for that purpose. They dreaded the severity 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


éloigner de l’ardeur des flammes, ils venoient pour 
prendre quelque plaifir, allant 4 la chaffe auec les 
Sauuages de ca bas: & eux mefmes ont efté pris 
heureufement, & arref{tez dans des pieges qui les ont 
mis en liberté, on les fit defcendre a fainct Iofeph 
proche de Kebec, ot eftoit le Pere de Brebeuf: il n’y 
auoit plus d’apparence de les congedier, le froid les 
auroit égorgés en chemin. Ils font receus a bras 
ouuerts, comme ayans leurs patentes fignees de la 
Charité, & de la bonté du grand Dieu; le Pere les 
entreprend auec fa douceur ordinaire, & auec vn 
fuccez plus heureux beaucoup qu’on n’attendoit. 
Si-tof{t que les deux bons Sauuages furent éloignez 
du bruit, & du tumulte de leurs [79] dances, leurs 
yeux & leurs oreilles changeans d’obiets, leur coeur 
changea d’affection. On dit que le pur amour de- 
mande vn coeur tout pur; c’eft a dire vn coeur tout 
vuide & defoccupé, la Foy en fait quafi de mefme, a 
mefme temps qu’vn efprit fe détache de fes erreurs; 
la Foy s’en empare & luy fait voir des veritez rauif- 
fantes; nos deux Hurons qui n’auoient pre{té l’oreille 
a la doctrine de Iefus-Chrift dans leur pais, que pour 
l’abhorrer & pour s’en moquer, voyans des Sauuages 
batis cOme eux, detefter leurs anciennes fupertfti- 
tions, & mener vne vie toute nouuelle, font touchez, 
ils approuuent cette faincte nouueauté, ils l’honorét, 
ils font curieux d’apprendre, les voila en appetit, ils 
confiderent en repos les veritez Chreftiennes, ils fe 
font dire & redire les prieres: enfin ils agiffent auec 
Dieu, ils luy parlent, & il leur refpond ils deman- 
dent, & il les exauce? bref la Foy entre la premiere 
dans leur ame, l’efperance la fuit, l’eftonnement 1’ac- 
compagne, & tous trois produifent la recognoiffance. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 137 


of the cold, and God wished to keep them away from 
the heat of the flames. They came back to have 
some pleasure in hunting with the Savages down 
here; and they themselves were fortunately caught, 
and taken in traps which set them at liberty. They 
were brought down to saint Joseph, near Kebec, 
where Father de Brebeuf was. There was no longer 
any color for sending them away, for the cold would 
have killed them on the road. They were received 
with open arms, having their credentials signed by 
Charity, and by the goodness of the great God. The 
Father took charge of them with his usual kindness, 
and with much greater success than was expected. 
As soon as these two good Savages were removed 
from the noise and tumult of their [79] dances, as 
the objects of their sight and hearing changed, the 
affections of their hearts changed also. It is said 
that pure love requires a pure heart,— that is to say, 
a heart empty and unoccupied. It is almost the 
same with Faith. At the very moment that a mind 
detaches itself from its errors, Faith takes possession 
of it, and shows it delightful truths. When our two 
Hurons—who had listened to the doctrine of Jesus 
Christ in their own country only to loathe it and 
mock at it—-saw Savages, made like themselves, 
detesting their former superstitions and leading an 
entirely new life, they were touched,— they approved 
and honored this pious novelty, and became desirous, 
even eager, to learnit. They considered the truths 
of Christianity at leisure. They caused the prayers 
to be repeated to them over and over again. Final- 
ly, they appealed directly to God; they spoke to 
him, and he answered them; they asked, and he 
granted their request. In short, Faith entered first 


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


Comment eft-ce, difoient ils, que Dieu nous a rame- 
nez ca bas pour le cognoiftre? & pour ouyr parler de 
chofes fi grandes, pour eftre inftruis de fes volontez 
& de fes [80] commandemens: c’eft le grand maiftre 
de la vie, il luy faut obeyr. 

Pour moy difoit Atondo, i’ay ef{té pris autres-fois 
des Hiroquois, ie m’echappay de leurs mains, & mon 
camarade fut mis 4 mort. le tombay certain iour du 
haut d’vn arbre, & ie fis tant de foubrefauts que i’en 
debuois mourir; eft-il poffible que Dieu m’ait voulu 
conferuer la vie, pour le cognoiftre & pour ioiiir de 
tant de biens dedans le Ciel, dont on nous parle? 
Quoy donc? veray ie mon fils en ce lieu de plaifir & 
de gloire, fon ame y eft defia. C’eft vous qui l’auez 
baptifé, difoit il au Pere; l’eftime de ce bon-heur 
croiffoit tous les iours en eux, 4 mefure qu’ils en 
recognoiffoient la grandeur. 

En vn mot, eftant bien in{ftruits, ils demandent le 
Baptefme, le Pere de Brebeuf les éprouue: ils font 
coftans, ils proteftent que iamais ils n’auront aucun 
commerce, auec les fuperftitions & auec les malices 
de leur pais, qu’ils auront l’efprit conftant quand ils 
feront Chreftiens, & qu’ils n’apprehenderont plus 
aucun danger. On les baptife folennellement, Mon- 
fieur de Maifon-neufue appelle Paul celuy qui fe 
nommoit Atondo, & Madamoifelle Mance [81] donna 
le nom de lean Baptifte [a] Okhuksandoron, ils répon- 
dirent hardiment a toutes les demandes qu’on leur 
fit: fi-toft qu’ils furent lauez de ces eaux Sacrées, ils 
rendirent mille actions de grace 4 Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur, & aux Francois des careffes, & des biens- 
faicts, & des fecours qu’on leur auoit rendu pendant 
tout l‘hyuer: Mais la plus grande faueur, & la plus 


| 


; 
9 
7 
uF 
a 
5 
§ 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 189 


into their souls; hope followed it accompanied by 
awe; and the three together produced gratitude. 
‘* How is it,’’ said they, ‘‘ that God has brought us 
down here to know him, and to hear such great 
things spoken of, to be instructed as to his wishes 
and his [80] commandments? He is the great master 
of life, and must be obeyed.”’ 

‘* As for me,’’ said Atondo, ‘‘I was once taken 
prisoner by the Hiroquois; I escaped from. their 
hands, but my comrade was put to death. On one 
occasion, I fell from the top of a tree, and the shock 
was so severe that I was nearly killed. Is it possible 
that God willed to preserve my life, in order that I 
might know him, and enjoy so many blessings in the 
Heaven of which they tell us? What! shall I see my 
son in that abode of bliss and glory? His soul is 
there already. It is you,’’ he said to the Father, 
‘‘who baptized him.’’ Their estimation of that 
blessing increased day by day, as they acknowledged 
its greatness. 

In a word, when they were fully instructed, they 
asked for Baptism. Father de Brebeuf tried them; 
they were constant, protesting that they would never 
more have anything to do with the superstitious and 
evil practices of their country; that they would have 
steadfast courage when they were Christians; and 
that they feared no danger. They were solemnly 
baptized; Monsieur de Maison-neufve gave the name 
of Paul to him who was called Atondo, and Made- 
moiselle Mance‘ [81] gave the name of Jean Baptiste 
to Okhukwandoron. They replied confidently to all 
the questions put to them. As soon as they were 
cleansed in those Sacred waters, they returned a 
thousand thanks to Monsieur the Governor and to the 


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


fignalée que vous nous ayez pfi faire, difoient-ils: 
c’eft de nous auoir accordé le fainct Baptefme, & de 
nous auoir faict porter deux beaux noms que nous 
carefferons, & que nous cherirons iufques au tom- 
beau, noftre coeur ‘ne peut contenir la ioye que nous 
reffentons, de nous voir deliurez de l’Enfer: nous ne 
voyons plus d’accidens ny de mort qui foit a crain- 
dre; nous viuons dans l’efperance de poffeder de fi 
grands biens apres cette vie. Vous apprendrez 
difoient-ils l’an prochain des nouuelles de nos de- 
portemens, & vous fgaurez que nous aurons vefcu 
conformément 4 la promeffe que nous en auons 
faite en nof{tre Baptefme. nen ake 

Ie prie Dieu qu’il beniffe leurs fainctes refolutions, 
les bonnes gens, dit le Pere, fe font tres bien 
comportez pendant tout [82] l’hyuer, ils n’ont derobé 
perfonne: c’eft vn miracle qu’vn Huron ne foit point 
larron, ils fe font volontiers occupez dans quelq; 
trauail, ou diuertis par la chaffe, ils fe font montrez 
fort recognoiffans du bon accueil qu’on leur a fait. 
Tis fe font volontairemét, & fort étroitement ab{tenus 
de viande depuis leur Baptefme, qui fut en Carefme, 
iufques 4 Pafques? Nonobftant les grandes occa- 
fions qu’ils eurent de rompre cette abftinence, ils 
ieufnoient les iours qu’on leur permetoit, ils eftoient 
fort portez a la priere, & grandement auides des dif- 
cours, & des inftructions qui touchoient leur falut; 
ils fe Confefferét & Communierent a Pafques pour la 
premiere fois: Monfieur le Gouverneur les fit mettre 
afes coftez a la fainte Table; pour leur témoigner 
l’eftat qu’il faifoit de cette viande adorable, & de ce 
Myitere tout plein d’amour. 

Voicy les raifons qui ont induit ces deux bons 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 : 141 


French for the favors, the benefits, and the assistance 
bestowed on them during the winter. ‘‘ But,’’ said 
they, ‘‘the greatest and most signal favor that you 
could have conferred on us, is that you have accorded 
us holy Baptism and have given us two honorable 
names which we will love and cherish even to the 
grave. Our hearts cannot contain the joy that we 
feel at being delivered from Hell. We no longer see 
any accidents or death to be dreaded. We live in 
the hope of possessing such great blessings after this 
life. Next year,’’ said they, ‘‘ you will receive in- 
formation of our conduct; and you will know that we 
shall have lived according to the promise that we 
made at our Baptism.”’ 

I pray God to bless these holy resolutions. ‘‘ These 
good people,’’ says the Father, ‘‘ have behaved very 
well throughout [82] the winter. They have not 
stolen from any one.’’ It isa miracle that a Huron 
should not beathief. They have cheerfully engaged 
in various kinds of work, and have been diverted by 
hunting. They have shown themselves very grate- 
ful for the kind reception given them. They volun- 
tarily and very strictly abstained from meat from the 
time of their Baptism, which was in Lent, until Eas- 
ter. In spite of the ready opportunities that arose 
for breaking this abstinence, they fasted on the days 
assigned to them for this purpose. They were great- 
ly addicted to prayer, and very eager to listen to 
sermons and instructions concerning their salvation. 
They Confessed their sins and received Communion 
at Easter, for the first time. Monsieur the Governor 
had them placed beside him at the holy Table to 
show them how highly he esteemed that adorable 
food, and that Mystery so replete with love. 


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


Neophytes, 4 embraffer noftre creance: premiere- 
ment les attraits & le bon accueil de Monfieur le 
Cheualier de Montmagny, affaifonnés de quelques 
prefens faits en bonne faifon, leur gagnoient le coeur, 
& leur donnoient de l’eftime, d’vn homme qu’ils 
voyoient fort honoré de nos [83] Francois? Confide- 
rans d’ailleurs qu’il ne faifoit que des chofes qui re- 
gardent l’éternité, & qu’il n’aymoit que ceux qui les 
embraffent. Cela leur faifoit croire que la Foy eftoit 
quelq; grandeur, puis qu’vn tel Capitaine la refpectoit 
auec tant d’amour, honorant ceux qui la prefchent & 
qui la recoiuent. 

Secondement les actions des nouueaux Chreftiens, 
de S. Iofeph les rauiffoient, ils contemploiét des 
homes de mefme pafte qu’eux, & de mefme eftoc, 
fe cotenter d’vne feule féme, fouler aux pieds leurs 
anciénes fuper{titions, ne cOmettre aucun viole viure 
come des agneaux, eftre portez a la priere, deuenus 
charitables: ils en voyoiét baptifer de téps en temps 
auec folénité on faifoit publiquement des mariages 
en leur prefence das la Chapelle, tout cela frappat 
leurs yeux, touchoit fortement leur coeur. 

En troifiefme lieu, la pieté de nos Fran¢ois, & nom- 
mément des meres Vrfulines, & des Hofpitalieres, 
qu'il n’euffent iamais pi comprédre s’ils ne l’euffét 
veué de leurs propres yeux, & reffenty en leurs pro- 
pres perfonnes, leur a déné vn grand cécept de noftre 
Religid. C’eft en effet vne entreprife, hardie pour 
des filles tédres & delicates [84] de brauer les dangers 
de l’Occean, pour venir porter la Croix de Iefus- 
Chrift, en ce bout du méde, le courage monf{tre que 
le Dieu, pour l’amour duqutel on quitte la douceur, 
pour viure dans la rigueur, eft vn grand Dieu. Vne 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 143 


Behold the reasons which induced these two good 
Neophytes to embrace our belief. In the first place, 
the attractions and the kind reception of Monsieur 
the Chevalier de Montmagny, heightened by some 
presents given in good season, won their hearts, and 
inspired them with esteem for a man whom they saw 
so greatly honored by our [83] French. Moreover, 
when they considered that all his acts were performed 
with a view to eternity, and that he loved only those 
who did the same, this led them to think that Faith 
must be something grand, since so great a Captain 
respected it with so much love, honoring those who 
preach and who receive it. 

In the second place, the actions of the new Chris- 
tians of St. Joseph delighted them. They contem- 
plated men of the same stamp and of the same stock 
as themselves, content with one wife only, trampling 
on their old superstitions, committing no violence, 
living like lambs, addicted to prayer, and become 
charitable. They saw some of them baptized, from 
time to time, with solemnity; and marriages were 
sometimes publicly celebrated in the Chapel, in their 
presence. All this struck their eyes and greatly 
touched their hearts. 

In the third place, the piety of our French,—and 
especially that of the Ursuline mothers and of the 
Hospital Nuns, which they could never have under- 
stood had they not seen it with their own eyes, and 
felt its effects in their own persons,— gave them a 
high opinion of our Religion. It is, indeed, a ven- 
turesome undertaking for tender and delicate women 
[84] to brave the dangers of the Ocean in order to 
carry the Cross of Jesus Christ to this extremity of the 
world. Their courage shows that the God for love 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


petite fille Huronne qui eftoit au Seminaire des meres 
Vrfulines, fort zeleé pour le falut de fa nation, les a 
fort touchez. 

I’ay toufiours creu que le zele d’vn Gouuerneur, la 
bonté des Francois, la pieté des nouueaux Chreftiens, 
la Charité des Religieufes, deuoient feruir de leuain 
pour faire leuer vne grande maffe: le bruit de ces 
nouueautez fe refpand das tous les peuples de ces 
contrees, & ces vertus fructifieront vn iour dans des 
lieux bien plus hauts que Kebec. Si nos grands 
fleuues eftoiét libres, les nations les plus éloignees 
viendroient contépler ces merueilles, & des a prefent 
il n’y defcend aucun Sauuage qui ne vueille voir les 
filles Vierge[s]._ L’explication du cOmandement de 
noftre Seigneur, de s'aymer les vns les autres, quoy 
qu’on foit de diuerfes contrees, fit fouuent dire a 
nos deux Hurons, 6 que cela eft beau! que ces veri- 
tez font agreables! ils les admiroient d’autant plus, 
que tous ces peuples n’ont quafi point d’amour que 
pour leur nation, [85] ils fe refpectent grandement 
les vns les autres: mais ils font vn tres grand 
mefpris, de tous les étrangers. 

Deux veritez principalement toucherent viuement 
ces deux nouueaux Chreftiens; lors qu’ils n’eftoiét 
encor que Catechuménes, 1’vne eftoit [que] sas la 
Foy, & fans l’obferuatid des c6mandemés de Dieu; ils 
fe deuoiét refoudre 4 brufler eternellement dans les 
brafier[s] d’vn feu veritable; Celuy que nous voyés de 
nos yeux, n’en eftant que la peinture. A iamais 
difoiét-ils! brufler 4 iamais! Si nous ne potuons 
tenir le bout du doigt das vn petit feu qui n’eft que 
peinture, qui n’a ny force, ny vigueur, ny duree, a 
céparaifon de ces flames deuorantes & eternelles; que 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "145 


of whom a life of ease is abandoned for one of hard- 
ships, isa great God. A little Huron girl who was 
at the Seminary of the Ursuline mothers, and was 
very zealous for the salvation of her nation, produced 
a great impression on them. 

I have always believed that the zeal of a Governor, 
the kindness of the French, the piety of the new 
Christians, and the Charity of the Nuns, would serve 
as a leaven to cause the rising of a great mass. The 
fame of these novel traits is spreading throughout all 
the nations of these countries, and these virtues will 
bear fruit some day in places far beyond Kebec. If 
our great rivers were free, the most distant tribes 
would come here to contemplate these marvels; and, 
as it is, not a Savage arrives here who is not anxious 
to see the Virgin sisters. The explanation of our 
Lord’s command to love one another, even when 
belonging to different countries, often caused our two 
Hurons to exclaim: ‘‘ Oh, how beautiful that is! 
How pleasant are suchtruths!’’ They admired them 
all the more that all these peoples have scarcely 
any love for any nation but their own. [85] They 
highly respect one another but have a very great 
contempt for all strangers. 

Two truths, in particular, greatly impressed these 
two new Christians when they were still but Cate- 
chumens. One was that without Faith and obedi- 
ence to God’s commandments, they must make up 
their minds to burn eternally in a furnace of real 
fire,—that which we see with our eyes being only 
the image thereof. ‘‘ Forever,” they would say, 
‘*to burn forever! If we cannot hold the tip of the 
finger in a little fire,—that is but an imitation, with- 
out strength, vigor, or duration, in comparison with 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


ferds nous fi nos crimes nous y iettent? L’vn d’iceux 
ef{tant 4 Kebee, le veille du grand S. Iofeph patron 
de la nouuelle France: comme on faifoit des feux de 
reiouyffance en fon hdneur, il fut fi epouuaté, voyat 
que le feu s’€paroit en vn inf{tant d’vne machine arti- 
ficielle, qu'il s’enfuit foudain cherchat vn abry contre 
ces flammes: cette vaine crainte apprefta a rire A toute 
la cOpagnie, ce bon héme voyat voltiger ces feux, ne 
fcauoit ot fe mettre: l’affurace des Francois 1’éton- 
noit autat que la [86] viuacité des flammes, que le 
tonnere des canons, & que la viteffe des fufees. Cette 
peur luy fift du bien, & luy en fait encor, quand il y 
penfe: fi vn petit feu-folet qui difparoit en vn inftant, 
m’a tant efpouuanté, quelle fera l’horreur de ces 
brafiers de 1’Enfer, qui ne s’efteindront iamais/ 
brufler eternellement: c’eft difoit-il, vn long terme, 
c’eft ce qui m’eftonne. 

L’autre verité qui les a portez a Dieu, c’eft le peu 
de durée de cette vie, & la baffeffe des creatures: 
nous ne sOmes icy que comme dans vne Cabane de 
paffage, nous courons 4 la mort, nous n’emporterons 
rien atuiec nous: ces biens pour lefquels nous trauail- 
lons tant, sechappent de nos mains, & on nous en 
promet d’eternels nous ferids de grands fous de 
les meprifer. Les viures que vous nous donnéz, 
faifoient-ils, fe confument, nos robes s’vfent, nos 
bonnets fe deteignent, & perdent leur luftre, & leur 
beauté; tout fe paffe, tout s’altere, le bon heur du 
Ciel ne fe chagera iamais, 4 ce que vous dites, il fau- 
droit n’auoir point d’efprit pour ne pas afpirer a ces 
grands biens. Vne fi riche nouuelle, & vne fi grande 
verité, touche bien vn cceur nouuellement éclairé 
de la Foy. Le 6. de May: ces [87] deux nouueaux 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "ar 


those devouring and everlasting flames,— what shall 
we do when our sins cast us into those?’’ One of 
them was in Kebec on the eve of the feast of the 
great St. Joseph, the patron of new France. There 
were fireworks in honor of the occasion; and he 
was so terrified when he saw the fire take posses- 
sion, in an instant, of an artificial contrivance, that 
he suddenly ran away, seeking a refuge against the 
flames. Such needless fear made all present laugh. 
When the good man saw the fire leap high, he did 
not know where to put himself. The self-possession 
of the French astonished him as much as the [86] 
vivacity of the flames, the thunder of the cannon, 
and the rapid flight of the rockets. This fright did 
him good, and still does so when he thinks of it. ‘‘If 
a little will-o’-the-wisp like that, which disappears in 
a moment, has frightened me so much, what will be: 
the horror of those fires of Hell that will never die 
away? To burn eternally! That,’’ said he, ‘‘is a 
long time, and that is what amazes me.”’ 

The other truth which has led them to God is the 
short duration of this life, and the inferiority of 
created beings. ‘‘ We are here as in a temporary 
Cabin; we are hastening towards death. We shall 
take nothing with us; these good things, for which 
we work so hard, escape from our hands, and we are 
promised everlasting gifts; we would be great fools 
to refuse them. The food that you give us,”’ said 
they, ‘‘is consumed; our clothing wears out; our head- 
dresses fade, and lose their lustre and their beauty. 
Everything passes away, everything changes. The 
happiness of Heaven will never change, you say. 
One must have no sense at all, who does not as- 
pire to such great blessings.’’ So glorious tidings, 


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


enfans de Iefus-Chrift, quitterent la refidence de S. 
Iofeph, pour remonter aux Hurons, les Chreftiens de 
cette bourgade encommencée les voyans fur leur 
depart, leur rendirét ce témoignage de leur amitié, ils 
font apporter la chair d’vn grand Elan Bouccanée, & 
vn autre gros paquet de viande, puis l’vn des princi- 
paux prenat la parole, immediatemét apres les prieres 
qui fe font publiquemét dans la Chapelle, leur dift: 
Mes freres nous ations vne ioye tres fenfible de vous 
voir maintenant enfans de Dieu; il n’y a rien dequoy 
nous faffids plus d’état que du Baptefme & de la pri- 
ere: pour vous donner vn gage affuré de l’amour que 
nous vous portds & du contentement que nous auons 
de voir nos freres, par les eaux du Baptefme: voicy 
vn Elan que nous vous prefentons, accédpagné des 
morceaux que nous tends les plus delicats dans nos 
fef{tins: c’eft vn petit foulagement dans les fatigues 
d’vn long chemin que vous auez a faire. Au refte 
nous nous promettds que vous ferez ferme & con{tas 
dans la Foy, nous attendons cela de voftre courage: 
mais nos defirs vont encor plus auants nous fouhait- 
terions que par vof{tre entremife toute voftre bour- 
gade ioitiit du [88] bon-heur, que vous auez trouué ca 
bas parmy nous; afin que nous ne fuffions plus qu’vn 
coeur & qu’vne bouche. 

A cette harangue plus eloquente en Algonquin, 
que ie ne l’ay couchée en Francois: Paul Atondo 
repartit encor plus elegammét en fon lagage. Mille 
actids de graces, mes freres, de vos prefens, ils parlét, 
ils publiét vof{tre bonté, ils ne ferdt pas muets en 
noftre pais: nous n’y toucherons point dans le cours 
de noftre voyage. I1 faut que tout le pais les voye, 
que les principaux en gouftét dans vn feftin que nous 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 449 


and so grand a truth, have a great effect on a heart 
recently enlightened by the Faith. On the 6th of 
May, these [87] two new children of Jesus Christ left 
the residence of St. Joseph, to return to the Hu- 
rons. When the Christians of this newly-founded 
village saw them about to depart, they paid them 
this tribute of their friendship. They caused the 
Smoked flesh of a great Elk to be brought, and an- 
other large package of meat. Then one of the chief 
men addressed them, immediately after the prayers 
that are publicly recited in the Chapel and said: ‘“‘ My 
brothers, we have much pleasure in now seeing you 
children of God. There is nothing that we value 
more highly than Baptism and prayer. To give you 
a sure pledge of the love that we bear you, and of 
the satisfaction that we feel in seeing you our broth- 
ers through the waters of Baptism, here isan Elk 
which we present to you, together with the morsels 
that we consider most delicious in our feasts. It 
will be a slight assistance amid the fatigues of the 
long journey that you are about to take. Moreover, 
we are convinced that you will be firm and constant 
in the Faith; we expect that from your courage. 
But our wishes go still further. We hope that, 
through your agency, all your village will enjoy the 
same [88] blessing that you have found here among 
us, so that we may have but one heart and one 
mouth.”’ . 

To this harangue—which was more eloquent in 
the Algonquin tongue than I can render it in French — 
Paul Atondo replied still more eloquently, in his 
own language: ‘‘ A thousand thanks, my brothers, 
for your gifts. They speak; they publish your kind- 
ness. They will not be dumb in our own country; 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


ferons, ot voftre amour & voftre liberalité feront les 
principaux mets. Nous vous remercids auffi des 
careffes que vous nous auez faites, pendat tout cét 
hyuer: vous nous auez inuitez a vos feftins; iln’ya 
Maifon ny Cabane ot nous n’ayds efté receus auec 
ioye, tout le mdde nous a témoigné du coeur & de 
l'amour? Pour ce qui cdcerne la creance que nous 
auons embraffée auec vous: c’eft vne affaire impor- 
tant qui regarde le Ciel, nous quitterons la vie plutoft 
que la Foy. Il me femble que ie ne voy plus rien a 
craindre ca bas en terre, puifque ie ne vois plus rien 
a perdre: quitter la vie pour ioiiir d’vn bé-heur eter- 
nel, ce n’e{t pas vne perte c’eft [89] vn riche acqueft. 
Il y a quatre ans qu’Achiandafe & Oracha, c’eft ainfi 
qu’ils nomment le Pere Ier6me 1’Alemand, & le Pere 
Charles Garnier, nous eftans venus voir dans noftre 
Bourgade pour nous inftruire, me prefferent de me 
faire baptifer: leurs difcours ne me plaifoient pas. 
Ie leur enuoyois mes neveux & mes niepces pour les 
occuper; pour moy ie rejettois cette affaire, iugeant 
qu'il en falloit remettre la deliberation en autre 
temps; mais pour le prefent, mon cceur fent vn tel 
plaifir & vne telle force, qu'il m’eft aduis que rien 
ne peut ébranler ma Foy. Ce que ie dy de moy, 
vous le deuez penfer de mon compagnon, puis qu’vne 
feule bouche vous dit les penfées & les refolutions de 
nos deux cceurs. Nous auons conclud par enfemble, 
qu’auffi-toft que nous aurons mis le pied dans noftre 
pays, nous ferons vn feftin le plus folennel qu’il nous 
fera poffible; & 14 nous declarerons publiquement 
deuant les plus apparens de noftre Bourgade, que 
nous fommes baptifez; que nous renongons a toutes 
nos folies; que nous abhorrons nos anciennes facons 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 " Wk 


we will not touch them during our journey,—the 
whole country must see them; the chief men must 
taste them at a feast that we shall give, at which 
your love and your generosity will be the principal 
dishes. We thank you also for all the favors that 
you have done us throughout the winter. You have 
invited us to your feasts; there was not a House or 
a Cabin in which we were not received with joy; 
every one has shown us friendship and affection. 
As to the belief which we have embraced with you, 
it is an important matter, which concerns Heaven. 
We will give up life rather than the Faith. It seems 
to me that I no longer see anything to dread down 
here on earth, since I no longer see anything to lose. 
To give up life, in order to enjoy eternal happiness, 
is not a loss but [89] a great gain. It is four years 


since Achiandase and Oracha’’—thus they name 
Father Jer6me 1’Alemand and Father Charles Gar- 
nier —‘‘ came to see us in our Village to instruct us, 


and urged me to be baptized. Their discourse did 
not please me; I sent them my nephews and nieces, 
to occupy them. As for me, I rejected the matter, 
thinking that its consideration should be deferred to 
some other time. But, at present, my heart feels 
such pleasure and such strength that I think that 
nothing can shake my Faith. What I say for myself, 
you must think also of my companion; for one mouth 
tells you the thoughts and resolutions of both our 
hearts. We have agreed together that, as soon as 
we set foot in our own country, we will give as sol- 
emn a feast as possible, and there we will declare 
before the most important people of our Village that 
we are baptized; that we renounce all our follies; 
that we abhor our former customs, which are full 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


de faire pleines de fuperftitions; que la conclufion 
eft prife de viure & mourir dans [90] l’obeiffance de 
la Foy que nous auons embraffée, & qu’on ne nous 
parle plus de ce qui nous en pourroit éloigner. Ce 
n’e{t pas tout, nous prefferons viuement nos conci- 
toyens de fe faire baptifer. I’ay quantité de parens, 
plufieurs neveux, & plufieurs niepces; i’offre tout 
cela A Iefus-Chrift; i’efpere qu’ils feront les premiers 
qui me prefteront loreille. Apres cette harangue, 
les Neophytes tous remplis de ioye, fe feparerent 
pour fe reuoir vn iour dedans les Cieux, s’ils ne fe 
rencontrent plus deffus la terre: Benediétus Deus in 
donis fuis, & fanctus in omnibus operibus Suis. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 * 153 


of superstitions; that we have taken the resolution 
to live and die in [90] obedience to the Faith that we 
have embraced; and that they must no longer speak 
to us of anything which might separate us from it. 
That is not all. We will strongly urge all our coun- 
trymen to be baptized. I have a number of rela- 
tives, many nephews and nieces; I offer them all to 
Jesus Christ. I hope that they will be the first to 
listen to me.’’ After this harangue, the Neophytes 
separated, full of joy, to see one another some day 
in Heaven, if they do not again meet onearth. Be- 
nedictus Deus in donts suts et sanctus in omnibus opertbus 
suis. 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES _ [Vou. 22 


CHAPITRE VII. 
DE L’HOSPITAL. 


E bel ordre qui fe garde dans les maifons de 

i l’Hofpital de Dieppe & de Vannes, eft rauif- 

fant. Noftre Hofpital de Canadas, pour eftre 

au milieu de la Barbarie, n’a pas moins de pieté: 

difons-en deux mots en ce Chapitre, que ie tireray 

des memoires que la Mere Marie de S. Ignace a 
tracez. 

[91] Elle commence par vne tres-humble recon- 
noiffance & par des actions de graces toutes cordiales 
enuers leur chere Fondatrice Madame la Ducheffe 
d’Aiguillon. Que ferions-nous, dit-elle, fans les fe- 
cours extraordinaires de cette Dame, fes dépenfes en 
ces derniers confins du monde font exceffiues. Les 
pierres dont on dreffe les baftimens, font plus cheres 
que le marbre, quoy que perfonne ne les vende. Le 
nombre des Sauuages qui a efté plus grand cette 
année en la bourgade encommencée de Sainct lofeph, 
nous a fait exercer la charité enuers trois cens per- 
fonnes ou enuiron, comprenant les malades & valetu- 
dinaires, & les pautures qui ont befoin de noftre fe- 
cours. Il ne nous eft pas poffible de ne point étendre 
le coeur & la main vers ces bons Neophytes, qui nous 
ont donné autant de confolation cette année, & encore 
plus, puis qu'ils eftoiét en plus grand nombre que les 
precedentes. La charité du Reuerend Pere Vincent 
[sc. Vimont], & des autres Peres qui ont cultiué ces 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 . je 


CHAPTER VII. 
OF THE HOSPITAL. 


HE admirable order that prevails in the Hospital 
‘% houses of Dieppe and of Vannes is delightful. 
Our Hospital in Canada, though in the center 
of Barbarism, is equally godly. In this Chapter, we 
will say a few words about it, which I take from the 
memoirs written by Mother Marie de St. Ignace. 
[91] She begins by very humbly expressing her 
gratitude and by returning heartfelt thanks to their 
beloved Foundress, Madame the Duchess d’Aiguil- 
lon. ‘‘ What could we do,”’ she says, ‘‘ without that 
Lady’s wonderful help? Her outlays at these fron- 
tiers of the world are enormous. The stones of 
which our buildings are constructed are more costly 
than marble, though no one sells them. The num- 
ber of the Savages, which has been greater this 
year in the newly-founded village of Saint Joseph, 
has caused us to exercise charity towards three hun- 
dred persons, or thereabout, including the sick and 
convalescent, and the unfortunates who require our 
aid. It is impossible for us not to let our hearts 
soften, and not to extend our hands towards these 
good Neophytes who have given us as much consola- 
tion this year, and even more, because their number 
has been greater than in former ones. The charity 
of Reverend Father Vimont and of the other Fathers 
who have fostered the growth of these new plants, 


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


-nouuelles plantes, nous a feruy d’vn puiffant attrait 
pour exercer nos fonctions auec ioye & auec plaifir: 
mais defcendons plus en particulier, & difons deux 
mots [92] des malades. La mort en a fait paffer fix 
au Ciel: les dernieres paroles de leur vie font pour 
l’ordinaire les oraifons qu’on leur fait faire, pour 
l’application du fang de l’Agneau, fur les grandes 
ames qui leur procurent le mefme bien. 

Vn ieune garcon A4gé d’enuiron quinze ans fut por- 
té a l’Hofpital; il n’eftoit point baptifé, & ne paroif- 
{foit point dans la difpofition de l’eftre deuant fa 
mort; car il eftoit tourmenté ou de grandes conuul- 
fions, ou plongé dans vn fommeil letargique, fi bien 
qu’on ne pouuoit auoir aucune raifon de luy. Les 
Meres luy donnent vne potion pour luy réueiller les 
fens; fi toft qu’il eut auallé le breuuage, il ouure les 
yeux, & regarde les affiftans; le voila plein de con- 
noiffance. On luy demande s’il ne veut pas eftre 
baptifé: Ouy da, répondit-il, adiouftant d’autres pa- 
roles qui témoignoient fon defir. A peine a il donné 
fon confentement, qu’il retombe dans des conuulfions 
plus violentes qu’auparauant. On croit qu’il expire, 
on le baptife tout fur le champ. Ses parens, quoy 
que Payens, s’écrient: Nous voila contens, car c’eft 
pour le falut de fon ame que nous l’auons amené, & 
non pas pour la guerifon de fon [93] corps. La mort 
qui fembloit le vouloir engloutir, luy donna encor le 
loifir de faire vn grand amas de merites, deuant que 
de le faire paffer au Ciel, on luy fait prendre la meil- 
leure nourriture qu’on peut en ces pauures contrées: 
il reprend fes forces, on luy donne les fainctes cere- 
monies du Baptefme en la Chappelle de 1’ Hofpital, 
auec le nom de Daniel. Au bout de trois femaines, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 157 


has served us as a powerful incentive to perform our 
duties with joy and pleasure. But let us enter into 
particulars, and say a few words [92] about the sick. 
Death has carried off six of these to Heaven. The 
last words that they utter in life are generally the 
prayers that we make them say in order to have the 
blood of the Lamb apply to the noble souls who 
procure them the same blessing.” 

A young boy, about fifteen years of age, was 
brought to the Hospital. He had not been baptized, 
and did not seem likely to be in a fit condition there- 
for before his death; for he was either seized with 
severe convulsions, or plunged in a lethargic sleep, 
so that it was impossible to gain any answer from 
him. The Mothers gave him a potion, to restore his 
senses. As soon as he had swallowed the draught, 
he opened his eyes, and looked at those who stood 
around him. He had quite recovered consciousness. 
He was asked whether he did not wish to be bap- 
tized. ‘‘Oh yes,’’ he replied, adding other words 
that manifested his desire. Hardly had he given 
his consent than he fell into convulsions, more violent 
than before. They thought that he was expiring, 
and baptized him on the spot. His parents, though 
Pagans, exclaimed: ‘‘ Now we are glad, for it was 
to save his soul that we brought him, and not to 
cure his [93] body.’’ Death, which seemed ready 
to devour him, yet gave him leisure to lay upa gteat 
treasure of merits before he went to Heaven. The 
best food that can be procured in these poor coun- 
tries was given to him, and he regained his strength. 
The holy rites of Baptism were administered to him 
in the Chapel of the Hospital, and he was named 
Daniel. At the end of three weeks or a month, dur- 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


ou vn mois, qu'il eut efté fecouru auec des cceurs 
pleins de charité, le bon ieune Neophyte s’en retourne 
voir fes parens: la fluxion le reprend 4 quelque temps 
de 14 auec plus de rigueur qu’auparauant: il tombe 
dans vne hydropifie mortelle: il eft auec cela trauaillé 
d’vne fi grande oppreffion, qu’il fut deux mois entiers 
fans fe pouuoir coucher, demeurant toufiours en fon 
feant dans vne mefme pofture. I] eftoit deffait comme 
la mort mefme, il fouffroit des douleurs tres vifibles, 
& cependant iamais nous ne l’entendions plaindre, 
difent les Meres, il ne demandoit aucun fecours ny 
aucun foulagement; il eft vray que fon mal eftoit tres- 
amer, mais fa patience n’eftoit que douceur. II fe 
communia fouuent pendant fa maladie, & tous lesiours 
il purifioit fon ame dans le Sacrement [46 i.e., 94] 
de Penitence, tant il eftoit amoureux de la pureté. 
Il goufte maintenant la verité de ces paroles; Beatz 
mundo corde, quoniam ipfi Deum videbunt. 

Vn autre Sauuage couuert de playes mortelles de- 
puis les pieds iufques a la tefte, fe voyant dans cette 
Maifon de charité, fe comportoit iuftement comme 
cét impie, qui prioit Dieu qu’il euft pitié de fon corps, 
mais pour fon ame, qu il en fift comme il luy plai- 
roit. Celuy-cy ne vouloit point ouyr parler du Bap- 
tefme, finon A condition que Dieu luy rendift la fanté. 
Les Peres qui vifitent 1’ Hofpital, le voyans dans cette 
opinia{treté, le quitterent pour quelque temps, fans 
luy parler de fon falut. Vne bonne femme Chre- 
{tienne l’allant vifiter, lentretient fi a propos de la 
briefueté de cette vie, des recompenfes & des chafti- 
mens qui nous attendent en l’autre, qu'il ouure les 
yeux demandant le Baptefme auec inftance. On 
l’éprouue quelque temps, il perfeuere dans fa de- 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 , 2 


ing which he received succor from hearts filled with 
charity, the good young Neophyte went back to see 
his parents. Some time afterward, the fluxion re- 
turned, with greater severity than before. He was 
afflicted with a fatal dropsy, and also with so great 
an oppression that for two whole months he was 
unable to lie down, and had to remain all the time 
sitting in the same position. He was so emaciated 
that he looked like death itself. He evidently suf- 
fered great pain; and yet, the Mothers say, ‘‘ We 
never heard him complain.’”’ He never asked for any 
help or any relief. It is true that his disease was 
very painful, but he was all patience and meekness. 
He received communion frequently during his ill- 
ness, and every day he cleansed his soul in the Sacra- 
ment [46 i.e., 94] of Penance, so much did he love 
purity. He now realizes the truth of these words: 
Beati mundo corde, quoniam ipst Deum videbunt. 
Another Savage was covered with deadly sores from 
his feet to his head; and when he found himself in 
this Abode of charity he behaved exactly like that 
impious man who prayed God to have pity on his 
body, but to do as he pleased with his soul. This 
one would not hear of Baptism, except on the condi- 
tion that God would restore him to health. When 
the Fathers who visit the Hospital saw him so stub- 
born, they left him for a while without speaking to 
him of his salvation. A good Christian woman came 
to see him, and spoke so appropriately about the 
shortness of this life, and the rewards and punish-. 
ments that await us in the next, that he opened his 
eyes and urgently asked for Baptism. He was tried 
for some time longer, but he persevered in this re- 
quest, which was granted him. He died and, dying, 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


mande, on luy accorde, il meurt, & en mourant il 
fait voir qu’il eftoit du nombre des predeftinez. Les 
mifericordes de Dieu font étonnantes, fes iugemens 
font des aby{mes; vn Barbare en vn moment eft laué 
[95] dans le Sang de l’Agneau, & dans vn autre 
momét, il paffe de l’extremité de la baffeffe, dans vn 
tres-haut degré de gloire; & du bout d’vn precipice 
eternel, il entre dans vne affeurance qui ne fera 
iamais ébranlée. 

Vn ieune enfant agé de dix ou douze ans, qui auoit 
receu le nom de Guillaume en fon Baptefme; eftant 
tombé malade, fut tranfporté en cette Maifon de mi- 
fericorde: fi toft qu'il y fut, il ne ietta quafi plus les 
yeux fur fes parens, qui l’auoient retiré comme par 
force de noftre Seminaire. Son contentement eftoit 
de voir le Pere qui l’auoit inftruit, d’ouyr parler de 
Dieu, & de luy prefenter fes petites prieres. [1 auoit 
vn Parrin en France homme de merite & de condi- 
tion, qui prendra plaifir de voir paffer de cette vie 
dans la Maifon du grand Dieu, vn petit Ange mor- 
tel, muny de tous les Sacremens de 1’Eglife, animé 
d’vne deuotion qui femble furpaffer fon age. Ayant 
receu 1’Extreme-Onction on luy fait baifer vne Croix 
d’argent, enrichie d’vne piece de la vraye Croix, 
qu’vne Dame de 1’ Abbaye de Fréteuraut a donnée a 
Iefus-Chri{ft, pour eftre prefentée a tous ceux qui 
mourroient [96] en l’Hofpital de la Nouuelle Frace, 
ce pauure enfant la prend, l’'embraffe, la careffe, 1’a- 
poftrophe auec des paroles fi tendres & affectueufes, 
qu’il nous attendriffoit, dit la Mere qui a couché les 
memoires. Il demande qu’on la luy pende au col, 
on luy obeit: mais comme il baiffoit 4 veué d’ceil, & 
qu’on craignoit que ce gage qui luy eftoit fi cher ne 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ~ ee 


showed that he was of the number of the predestined. 
God’s mercies are wonderful, his judgments are 
abysses; a Barbarian is at one moment washed [95] 
in the Blood of the Lamb, and the next moment he 
passes from extreme degradation to a very high 
degree of glory, and from the brink of an eternal 
precipice he enters into a state of safety that never 
will be disturbed. 

A young child, aged about ten or twelve years, 
who had received the name of Guillaume at his Bap- 
tism, fell sick, and was brought to this House of 
mercy. As soon as he was there, he hardly looked 
at his parents, who had taken him almost by force 
from our Seminary. His great pleasure consisted in 
seeing the Father who had instructed him, in hear- 
ing God spoken of, and in offering up his little pray- 
ers to him. He had a Godfather in France, a person 
of merit and condition, who will be pleased to see a 
little mortal Angel pass from this life to the Man- 
sion of the great God, provided with all the Sacra- 
ments of the Church, and animated by a devotion 
which seems beyond his years. When he had 
received Extreme Unction, a silver Cross was given 
him to kiss, that was enriched with a fragment of 
the true Cross, presented to Jesus Christ by a Lady 
of the Abbey of Frontevraut in order that it might 
be tendered to all who should die [96] in the Hospital 
of New France. The poor child took it, kissed and 
embraced it, and addressed it with words so tender 
and loving ‘‘ that he touched our hearts,’’ says the 
Mother who has written these memoirs. He asked 
to have it hung about his neck, and his request was 
granted. As he was visibly sinking, and they were 
afraid that this token, so dear to him would hurt him, 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo1. 22 


le bleffaft, on luy voulut ofter, veu mefme qu’on croy- 
oit qu’il euft perdu le fentiment. S’eftant apperceu 
qu’on luy rauiffoit fon threfor; Laiffez-moy, dit il, 
mon IESvVs; & embraffant derechef, & baifant cette 
faincte Relique, & ce figne adorable de noftre re- 
demption, il rend fon ame & celuy qui l’auoit donnée 
pour luy en vne Croix; Pretiofa in con/pectu Domint 
mors Sanctorum etus. 

Les trois autres qui ont finy leurs iours en noftre 
Hofpital, pourfuit la Mere, font partis de ce monde 
apres auoir receu tous leurs Sacremens; & ie dirois 
quafi volontiers, que leur pieté, leur deuotion, & 
l’innocence de leur vie depuis leur Baptefme, nous 
ont laiffé des marques affeurées de falut. Difons 
deux mots des bons fentimens de ceux qui ont trou- 
ué la fanté du corps & l’embonpoint de l’ame en cette 
petite Maifon. 

[97] Vn ieune homme allant a la faincte Meffe, fe 
laiffa tomber fi rudement en chemin, qu’il demeura 
tout court fur la place: on court a luy, on l’enleue, 
on le porte a 1’Hofpital, on le fait panfer, Le 
premier étourdiffement du corps eftant paffé, on luy 
dit que fon mal n’eft pas mortel: Ce n’eft pas, 
répond-il, A quoy ie penfe: ie me mets peu en peine 
de la vie: i’ay dit 4 Dieu dans ma cheute, Fais tout 
ce que tu voudras; determine de moy fi tu veux que 
ie meure, i’en fuis content, ie feray bien aife de te 
voir. Pourrois je bien eftre marry d’aller au Ciel? 
que fais-je cd bas en terre? ce n’eft pas mon pays. 
Ce ieune homme ne reffembloit pas a celuy qui ne 
vouloit pas aller au feftin, difant; Vxorem duxt, ded 
habe me excufatum: Vay pris femme, difpenfez-moy 
de la quitter fi toft. Il n’y auoit que huict iours qu’il 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 168 


they endeavored to take it from him, especially as 
they thought he had lost consciousness. Perceiving 
that they were removing his treasure from him, he 
said: ‘‘ Leave me my JESUS;” and while embrac- 
ing and kissing once more the holy Relic and 
adorable symbol of our redemption, he gave back his 
soul to him who had given his for him upon a Cross. 
Pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors Sanctorum ejus. 

‘The three others who ended their days in our 
Hospital,’ continues the Mother, ‘‘ quitted this world 
after having received all the Sacraments, and I can 
say with pleasure that their piety, their devotion, 
and the innocence of their lives after their Baptism 
have afforded us convincing proof of their salvation.”’ 
Let us say a few words about those who have found 
health of body and vigor of soul in this little House. 

[97] A young man who was going to holy Mass, 
had so severe a fall on the road that he remained 
motionless on the spot. Those who saw him has- 
tened to raise him and carried him to the Hospital, 
where he was cared for. When the first physical 
shock had passed, he was informed that his injury 
was not mortal. ‘‘I am not thinking of that,’’ he 
said; ‘‘ I care but little for life. When I fell, I said 
to God: ‘ Do whatever thou wilt; I am satisfied; I 
shall be very glad to see thee.’ Could I be sorry to 
go to Heaven? What am I doing down here on 
earth? It is not my country.’’ This young man 
was not like him who would not go to the feast, say- 
ing: Uxorem duxi, ideé habe me excusatum, ‘‘I have 
married a wife; I pray thee hold me excused from 
leaving her so soon.” He had been married only a 
week, and was already willing to abandon his earthly 


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


s’e{toit marié, & il eftoit des-ja tout preft de quitter 
les nopces de la terre, pour aller aux nopces de 
1’Agneau dans le Ciel. 

Vne femme vrayement Chreftienne, fit vn tel mé- 
pris de la vie, dans l’efperance qu’on luy donnoit de 
fa guerifon, qu’elle étonna tous les affiftans: car a 
mefme téps elle auoit fes deux petites filles 4 fes 
deux [98] coftez, dont la plus ieune n’a pas plus d’vn 
an. Cét enfant ne trouuant pas dequoy étancher fa 
foif dans le fein de fa mere, fe tuoit de pleurer; 1’au- 
tre, qui a peu moins de quatre ans, iettoit des larmes 
capables d’attrifter vn bon coeur. Cette mere pa- 
roiffoit fi tranquille dans fa maladie & dans les pleurs 
de fes enfans, qu’on l’euft prife pourinfenfible. Elle 
ne l’eftoit pas neantmoins, difent les Meres; car elle 
faifoit fon poffible pour les faire fecourir, nous les 
recommandant auec vn coeur de mere. Voila vos 
Meres, difoit elle a l’aifnée, elles ne vous abandonne- 
ront point, foyez bien obeiffante. Cette pauure 
petite commengoit des-ja de nous reconnoiftre, & de 
nous faliier autant de fois que nous entrions dans 
l’Hofpital. Dieu a rendu la fanté a cette bonne 
femme, qui mene vne vie fort innocente. 

On difoit certain iour 4 vn pauure malade, que 
c'eftoit fait de fa vie; que fon mal eftoit plus fort 
que les remedes; & que le regime qu’on luy ordon- 
noit, ne feruoit qu’a luy donner vn peu de trefue auec 
la mort. Et bien, fit il, ma vie n’eft pas en ma dif- 
pofition, que celuy qui a tout fait en ordonne comme 
il luy plaira, il en eft le [99] Maiftre; viure ou mou- 
rir, e{tre fain ou malade, me font vne mefme chofe. 
Vne autre fois, parlant de l’obeiffance que les ma- 
lades doiuent rendre 4 ceux qui les gouuernent, que 


1642] RELATION OF i642 ~ 165 


nuptials to go to the marriage feast of the Lamb in 
Heaven. 

A truly Christian woman had such a contempt for 
life, when informed that she might expect to be 
cured, that she astonished all who were present; for 
at that very time she had, on either side of her, her 
two little girls, [98] the younger of whom was not 
more than a year old. As this child could not find 
in her mother’s breasts any milk to quench her thirst, 
she began to weep; while the other who was a little 
under four years of age, shed tears enough to cause 
sorrow toakind heart. The mother seemed so calm, 
in spite of her sickness and of her children’s weep- 
ing, that she might have been considered unconscious. 
*“She was not so, however,’’ say the Mothers, ‘‘ for 
she did her best to have succor given to them, recom- 


mending them to us with a mother’s heart. ‘ Here 
are your Mothers,’ she said to the elder, ‘ they will 
never abandon you. Be very obedient.’ The poor 


little thing was already beginning to know us, and 
to greet us whenever we entered the Hospital. God 
restored health to this poor woman, who leads a most 
blameless life.’’ 

One day, a poor sick man was told that his life 
could not be saved,—that his illness was stronger 
than the medicines and that the regimen which was 
ordered for him could only procure him a short 
truce with death. ‘‘ Well,” he said, ‘‘ my life is not 
at my own disposal; let him who has made all order 
it as he pleases; he is the [99] Master of it. To live 
or to die, to be healthy or to be sick, are all the same 
tome.’’ On another occasion, while speaking of the 
obedience which the sick should render to those who 
have charge of them, he said: ‘‘ Whether I remain 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


ie demeure icy, difoit-il, ou qu’on me reporte en nos 
cabanes, ie garderay toufiours ce qu’on m’aura ordon- 
né, ie veux ref{fpecter mon corps, & ne luy point 
donner ce qui luy feroit nuifible, puis que Dieu ne le 
veut pas en effet. Si les Sauuages luy apportoient 
quelques petits fruits, il demandoit permiffion d’en 
vfer. Et fi on luy répondoit que les fruits nujfoient 
a fa fanté, il n’y touchoit pas, ayant cette force fur 
foy bien extraordinaire 4 vn Sauuage, de temperer 
fes appetits. Ce ieune homme a fait rencontre d’vne 
femme doiiée de tres-beaux talens; elle eft extreme- 
ment douce & vereconde, charitable au poffible. Son 
mary a toufiours e{té malade depuis qu’ils font en- 
femble, cela ne l’a point éloignée felon la couftume 
ordinaire des Sauuages: elle luy a rendu toutes les 
vifites & toute l’affiftance qu’on pourroit attendre 
d’vne femme nourrie au milieu de l’Europe, auec vne 
modeftie & vne charité tout a fait rauiffante. 

[100] Deux pauures femmes aueugles paffent vne 
grande partie de l’année en la Maifon de Dieu, toutes 
deux font fort portées a la vertu; mais il y en a vne 
particulieremét qui goufte Dieu d’vne bonne fagon. 
S’eftant retirée pour vn temps parmy les fiens, vn 
Sauuage l’attaqua viuement, & la pourfuiuit long- 
temps, luy promettant merueilles fi elle vouloit con- 
defcendre a fes affections tres-impures. lamais cette 
femme, quoy qu’affez ieune, ne branfla; elle tint tou- 
fiours ferme, rebuttant conftamment cét homme per- 
du. Il luy reprefente fa pauureté, luy dit qu’elle eft 
fans appuy, & qu'il luy donnera toute forte d’affiftance. 
I’aime mieux, répond elle, eftre pauure, que de faf- 
cher Dieu: ie ne fuis point delaiffée comme vous 
dites, les filles de la maifon de la Charité font mes 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 167 


here or whether I am taken back to our cabins, I will 
always do what I have been ordered to do. I wish 
to respect my body, and to give it nothing that might 
injure it, since indeed God does not wish that.’’ If 
the Savages brought him any little gift of fruit, he 
would ask permission to eat it. And if he were told 
that the fruit would injure his health, he would not 
touch it,—having sufficient self-control to restrain 
his appetite, which is truly extraordinary in a Savage. 
This young man has a wife endowed with very fine 
gifts. She is very gentle and retiring, and as char- 
itable as possible. Her husband has been sick ever 
since their marriage, but this has not induced her to 
leave him according to the general custom of the 
Savages. She has paid him all the visits, and given 
him all the attention, that could be expected from a 
woman brought up in the center of Europe; and with 
a modesty and charity altogether delightful. 

[100] Two poor blind women pass a great part of 
the year in the House of God. Both are very virtu- 
ous, but one of them in particular loves God in ex- 
cellent fashion. Having withdrawn among her own 
people for a while, a Savage eagerly assailed her, and 
persecuted her for a long time, promising her won- 
derful things if she would yield to his base affections. 
Never did this woman waver, though still young; 
she remained ever firm, constantly repelling this 
corrupt man. He spoke of her poverty, and told her 
that she had no one to support her, and that he would 
give her every kind of help. ‘‘I would rather be 
poor,’’ she said, ‘‘ than offend God. I am not for- 
saken, as you say. The sisters at the house of Char- 
ity are my good Mothers; I need no aid, with them.”’ 
Such actions are the fruit of the tree of life. It is 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


bonnes Meres: ie ne manque point de fecours aupres 
d’elles. Ces actions font des fruits de l’arbre de vie, 
il n’y a que Iefus-Chrift qui puiffe donner cette con- 
{tance aux Francois & aux Sauuages, aux Romains 
& aux Barbares. 

Ie m’oubliois quafi d’vn Francois attaqué d’vne 
hydropifie, qui fut iugée mortelle du Medecin. Les 
bonnes Religieufes [101] l’ayans receu en 1’ Hofpital, 
le traiterent auec tant de foin & tant de charité, iuf- 
ques a chercher par tout ce qui le pouuoit foulager, 
qu’il en guerit, fi bien qu’il eft maintenant homme 
de bon trauail. Quelqu’vn luy demandant par apres 
comme il fe portoit, & quel traitement il auoit receu 
de ces bonnes Filles, il fut vn peu de temps fans par- 
ler; puis les larmes luy tombant des yeux: Helas 
Monfieur! fit-il, ie ne meritois pas d’eftre receu dans 
vne fi faincte Maifon: les foins que les bonnes Meres 
ont eu de moy, & la charité qu’elles ont exercée en 
mon endroit, me confondent & m’attendriffent quand 
i’y penfe. 

Il n’eft pas feul porté d’affection & de reconnoif- 
fance vers ces bonnes ames, les Sauuages les aiment 
vniquement, ils fe glorifient de les auoir aupres 
deux; Noél Negabamat, l’vn des deux Capitaines de 
S. Iofeph autrement de Sillery, l’a fouuent témoigné 
au R. P. Superieur, le fuppliant pour marque de fon 
amour, de luy donner fon departement dans 1’vne 
des maifons qu’on a fait baftir pour les Sauuages 
proche de 1’Hofpital. La charité & la liberalité que 
cette Maifon fait paroiftre a l’endroit des malades, 
luy ont fait fouhaiter le [102] voifinage. Ceux qui 
demeurent en mefme endroit, ont choifi leur fepulture 
dans l’emplacement de ces bonnes Meres, en témoi- 


_ _ 


ee 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ~ 169 


only Jesus Christ who can grant such constancy, 
either to French or to Savages, to Romans or to 
Barbarians. 

I had almost forgotten a Frenchman who was 
attacked by dropsy, which was considered mortal by 
the Physician. The good Nuns [101] received him 
into the Hospital, and treated him with such care 
and such charity, even to seeking everywhere for 
what might procure him relief, that he was cured, 
and is now able to do a good day’s work. Some time 
afterward, he was asked by a person how he was, 
and what treatment he had received from the good 
Nuns. He was unable to reply for a while; then, 
with tears flowing from his eyes, he said: ‘‘ Oh, Sir! 
I was not worthy to be received in so holy a House; 
the care that those good Mothers took of me, and 
the charity that they exercised toward me, confound 
and affect me when I think of them.” 

He is not the only one who feels affection and 
gratitude toward these good souls. The Savages 
love them above all, and are proud to have them 
near them. Noel Negabamat, one of the two 
Captains of St. Joseph, otherwise called Sillery, has 
often told the Reverend Father Superior so,— beg- 
ging him, as a mark of his affection, to allot him 
room in one of the houses that have been built for 
the Savages near the Hospital. The charity and 
liberality displayed by this House toward the sick 
have made him desire to be in its [102] vicinity. 
Those who reside in the same locality have selected 
their burial places in the grounds belonging to the 
good Mothers, in token of their affection. Although 
there is nothing to fear, at present, in the houses of 
Kebec or of St. Joseph, nevertheless, if any false 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


gnage de leur affection. Quoy qu'il n’y ait rien a 
craindre pour.le prefent dans les maifons de Kebec 
ny de S. lofeph, fi ne&tmoins il arriue quelque 
fauffe allarme des Hiroquois, auffi-toft les Sauuages 
courent a 1’ Hofpital pour affeurer leurs Meres, difent- 
ils, des preuues de la bonté de leur cceur. 

Ie ferois trop long de rappeller tous les fentimens 
qu’ont les bonnes Meres de la docilité & de la pa- 
tience de leurs malades, il faut auoir de bons yeux 
pour ne voir que Iefus Chrift dans les Sauuages, 


Gratior eft pulchro veniens in corpore virtus. 


Ie fcay bien que la vertu eft aimable par tout, mais 
elle eft plus agreable fous la panne & fous le fatin, 
& dans des ames & des corps bien polis, que fous des 
haillons & dans des perfonnes qui ne conoiffent point 
d’inciuilitez, pource qu’ils n’ont pas feulement les 
premiers principes dela ciuilité. Queles Hofpitalieres 
aiment conftammét des malades & des pauures, & les 
Vrifulines, des Seminariftes & des femmes Sauuages, 
dans lefquels on ne void que Iefus-Chrift [103] tout 
pur, fans aucun attrait qui flate les fens: c’eft vn 
attrait dont ie n’attens la perfeuerance que de lefus- 
Chrift mefme. Leur fexe n’a pas cette conftance, il 
peut tout neantmoins auffi bien que S. Paul, en celuy 
qui le fouftient & qui le fortifie. 

Elles fe réjoiiiffent maintenant de voir la ferueur 
des nouueaux Chreftiens: leur deuotion nous rauit, 
difent-elles, leur pieté nous tire les larmes des yeux, 
leur vifite nous donne des contentemens bien doux. 
C’eft vne ioye pleine de tendreffe, dit la Mere de 
1’Hofpital, de voir ces bons Neophytes accompagner 
le Sainct Sacrement qu’on porte aux malades, le 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 171 


alarm is given about the Hiroquois, the Savages at 
once run to the Hospital to give their Mothers, they 
say, a proof of their kind feelings toward them. 

I should be too tedious were I to relate all the ap- 
preciation that the good Mothers have of the docility 
and patience of their sick. One must have good 
eyes to see only Jesus Christ in the Savages: 


Grattor est pulchro veniens in corpore virtus. 


I know very well that virtue is lovable everywhere, 
but it is more agreeable under plush and satin, andin 
refined minds and cleanly bodies, than it is under rags 
and in persons who do not know what rudeness is be- 
cause they have not even the elementary principles of 
politeness. The love constantly felt by the Hospital 
Nuns for the sick and the poor, and by the Ursulines 
for the pupils of their Seminary and for the Savage 
women,—in whom they see but Jesus Christ [103] 
alone, without any attraction that pleases the senses, — 
is an enthusiasm in which I expect perseverance 
only from Jesus Christ himself. Their sex does not 
possess such constancy; it may, however, like St. 
Paul, do everything through him who sustains and 
fortifies it. 

At present, they are greatly delighted at seeing 
the fervor of the new Christians. ‘‘ Their devotion 
rejoices us,’’ they say; ‘‘their piety moves us to 
tears; their visits give us sweet satisfaction.’’ ‘‘ We 
feel a most tender joy,’’ says the Mother of the Hos- 
pital, ‘‘ when we see these good Neophytes accom- 
panying the Blessed Sacrament, as it is carried to the 
sick, with torches in their hands; when we see these 
poor people, on their return from hunting, take up 
their lodgings in the Ward of our Hospital, and 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


flambeau en la main. De voir ces pauures gens ve- 
nans de la chaffe, prendre logis dans la Sale de noftre 
Hofpital, & d’y paffer plufieurs iours, auec vne paix 
& vne intelligence admirable. Leurs licts font bien 
toft preparez, nous n’en auons precifément que ce 
qu'il en faut pour vn petit nombre de malades. Ils 
iettent quelques bouts de peaux fur le paué, & ayans 
fait leurs prieres, ils dorment auffi bien 14 deffus que 
fur la plume & furle duuet. Si le bon Dieu nous 
enuoye quelques matelas & quelques couuertures, il 
nous deliurera du creue-cceur [104] que nous auons 
de les voir plus durement coucher en noftre maifon 
que dans leurs cabanes. 

Nos plaifirs font de les fecourir, nous auons donné 
cette année plus de quatre cens cinquante medecines, 
nos drogues font épuifées, mais nos coeurs font encore 
tous entiers pour nous réjoiiir du Baptefme de ces 
bonnes ames. Vne vingtaine ont efté faits Chre- 
{tiens cette année, tant en noftre Hofpital qu’en 
nof{tre Chappelle, n’eft ce pas pour chanter le Ze 
Deum laudamus de bon coeur? Douze familles des 
principales entre les Sauuages, fe font venués loger 
en quatre maifons qu’on a bafties tout proche de la 
noftre; c’e{t bien pour nous faire aimer la demeure 
de S. Ilofeph: noftre petite Eglife leur fert de Parroiffe 
& d’Oratoire: ils la rempliffent affez fouuent, & la 
Sale des malades & nos cceurs d’vne deuotion tres- 
douce & tres fenfible. 

Les Sauuages qui ne fcauoient que c’eftoit de vifi- 
ter les malades, apprennent le meftier de charité. 
Nous voyons quelques bonnes femmes excellentes 
Hofpitalieres: elles tranfportent les malades, les fe- 
courent, les foulagent & leur appreftent [105] mieux 


VOU fh tek lea 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 * 178 


pass several days there in admirable peace and good- 
fellowship. ‘Their beds are soon made, for we have 
only sufficient for a limited number of the sick. 
They throw a few pieces of skin upon the floor, and, 
when they have said their prayers, they sleep as 
well on them as on feathers or down. If the good 
God would send us some mattresses and some blan- 
kets, he would relieve us from the distress [104] that 
we feel when we see them sleeping on harder beds 
in our house than they have in their own cabins. 

‘‘Our pleasure is to succor them. ‘This year we 
dispensed over four hundred and fifty medicines. 
Our supply of drugs is exhausted; but our hearts are 
still quite whole, so that we can rejoice at the 
Baptism of these good souls. A score of them were 
made Christians this year, in our Hospital and in our 
Chapel. Is not this enough to make us chant the 
Te Deum laudamus with all our hearts? Twelve of 
the leading families among the Savages have come 
to dwell in four houses that have been built quite 
close to ours; this is enough to make us love the 
residence of St. Joseph. Our little Church serves 
as their Parish Church and Oratory. They quite fre- 
quently fill it, as well as the sick Ward; and they 
fill our hearts with a very sweet and most tender 
devotion. 

‘“The Savages, who did not know what it was to 
visit the sick, are learning the practice of charity. We 
find some good women, who are excellent Hospital 
Sisters. They carry the sick, assist and relieve them, 
and prepare [105] their sagamite, or food, in their 
own fashion better than we ourselves. One of our 
keenest regrets is to see the poverty of the country. 


— 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


leurs fagamites, ou le manger, 4 leur mode, que nous 
autres. L’vne de nostrifteffes bien fenfibles eft de voir 
la pauureté du pais: on ne tué que tres-rarement du 
beftial: les reftaurens, les confommez, & les autres 
nourritures fucculentes, capables de remettre vn ma- 
lade, & mille autres douceurs dont la France abonde, 
ne fe rencontrent point en noftre Maifon. Voila de 
fainctes penfées, voila des affections bien pures, des 
actids bien nobles, & vne charité toute d’or. Ie leur 
fouhaitte vne riche perfeuerance; Qui perfeuerauerit 
ufque ad finem, hic faluus erit, nous auons tout fujet 
d’attendre cette gloire. 

Ce n’eft pas tout, on inftruit ces bonnes gens dans 
nof{tre Chappelle, & dans noftre Sale. I’y ay comp- 
té par fois, dift la bonne Mere, iufques 4 cinquante 
& foixante filles. Le R. P. Superieur & le Pere de 
Quen ont fait le Catechifme en diuers temps, les Sau- 
uages s’y trouuoient tres-volétiers, recommandans 
& leurs enfans de nous vifiter, afin que nous leur 
remiffions en memoire ce que les Peres leur auoient 
enfeigné. Ils leur racontoient ordinairement quel- 
que belle hiftoire, que les enfans rendoient le lende- 
main fi fidellement, que [106] i’euffe fouhaitté qu’on 
les euft ouys du milieu de la France, afin que les 
Francois participaffent a l’admiration qu’ils nous 
donnent. Il] n’y a queftion fi haute & fi releuée dont 
vne fille foit capable, que les ieunes Neophytes ne 
concoiuent, & n’en rendent raifon tres-pertinemment. 
On en baptifa vne entre autres, agée d’enuiron vingt 
ans: fon coeur fut comblé d’vne telle ioye, qu’il 
paroiffoit quafi 4 fon vifage qu’on luy venoit d’ouurir 
le Ciel; elle demeura auec nous le refte du iour, ne 
pouuant fe fouler de nous dire le contentemét que 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 175 


Cattle are very seldom slaughtered. Restoratives, 
broths, and other succulent foods suited for restoring 
a sick person, and a thousand other comforts that 
abound in France, are not to be found in our House.’’ 
These are holy thoughts, most pure affections, most 
noble actions, and a charity entirely golden. I wish 
them an abounding perseverance. Qui perseveraverit 
usque ad finem, hic salvus eritt. We have every reason 
to expect that such glory will be theirs. 

That is notall. ‘‘ These good people are instructed 
in our Chapel and in our Ward. I have sometimes 
counted there,’’ says the good Mother, ‘‘ as many as 
fifty or sixty girls. The Reverend Father Superior 
and Father de Quen have taught the Catechism at 
various times. The Savages attended very willing- 
ly, and advised their children to visit us, in order 
that we might refresh their memories on the subjects 
taught them by the Fathers. They generally related 
some interesting story which the children repeated 
so faithfully on the following day that [106] I could 
have wished that they might be heard in the midst 
of France, so that the French people might share the 
admiration that they make us feel. There is no ques- 
tion so deep or so lofty, within the scope of a girl’s 
mind, that these young Neophytes do not understand 
and answer it most suitably. One was baptized, 
among others, who was about twenty years of age. 
Her heart was filled with such joy that it almost 
seemed, from her countenance, as if Heaven had just 
been opened to her. She stayed with us for the re- 
mainder of the day, and could not sufficiently tell us 
the content that she felt in her soul at finding her- 
self cleansed from all her sins, and numbered among 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


reffentoit fon ame, de fe voir lauée de toutes fes 
offenfes, & d’eftre mife au nombre des Enfans de 
Dieu. Tray, difoit elle, tous les iours 4 la Saincte 
Meffe, i’aimeray Dieu de tout mon cceur, ie le prie- 
ray fouuent; i’éloigneray toute malice de ma penfée; 
& fiie tombe en quelque offenfe, ie me confefferay 
tout auffi-toft. Noftre Seigneur luy donne la grace 
de tenir ferme dans ces fainctes refolutions. Amen, 
Amen. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 "1% 


the Children of God. ‘I will hear Holy Mass every 
day,’ she said; ‘I will love God with all my soul, 
and pray to him frequently; I will drive every evil 
thought from my mind; and, if I fall into any sin, I 
will confess it at once.’ May our Lord grant her 
grace to remain steadfast in these holy resolutions.” 
Amen, Amen. 


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


[107] CHAPITRE VIII. 
DU SEMINAIRE DES VRSULINES. 


VTANT qu'il eft difficile de rencontrer des filles 
A feculieres, armées d’vn bon dot, pour foufte- 
nir le Seminaire des Sauuages eftably 4 Kebec: 
foubs la conduite des meres Vrfulines, autant feroit- 
il aifé de trouuer des Religieufes profeffes, toutes 
preftes de trauerfer l’Ocean, & de donner leur vies 
pour le falut de ces pauures enfans: & s'il en falloit 
vn auffi grand nombre; que faincte Vrfule conduifoit 
de Vierges en Bretagne; ie croy que la France les 
pourroit fournir, tant il ya de zele & d’ardeur en 
toutes leurs maifons. Non feulement les Vrfulines; 
mais vn grand nombre d’autres Religieufes de diuers 
ordres, bruflent d’vn feu tout pur de venir confacrer 
leurs trauaux A Iefus-Chrift en ce nouueau monde, 
& confumer leur vies fur 1’Autel de la Croix. Omnia 
mihi licent, fed non omnia expediunt, tout ce qui eft 
bon, n’eft pas expedient: defirer vn grand [108] bien, 
fans empefchement, & auec vne douce indifferance, 
& vne humble foufmiffion aux volontez de Dieu, c’eft 
vne marque que le S. Efprit en eft 1’ Autheur. 

Quoy que c’en foit, il ne femble pas a propos d’ex- 
clure aucun monaftere de Religieufes Vrfulines, de 
quelque endroit ou congregation qu'il foit, d’enuoyer 
en cette nouuelle vigne de noftre Seigneur, quelque 
profeffe de fa communauté; mais pour autant qu’on 
n’en peut pas tirer de toutes les maifons, n’en eftant 


— 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ' 179 


[107] CHAPTER VIII. 
OF THE SEMINARY OF THE URSULINES. 


IFFICULT as it is to find, among the laity, 
girls provided with good endowments to main- 
tain the Seminary for Savages established at 

Kebec under the management of the Ursuline moth- 
ers, it would be as easy to find professed Nuns quite 
willing to cross the Ocean to devote their lives to the 
salvation of these poor children. And if as greata 
number were required as that of the Virgins whom 
saint Ursula led into Brittany, I think that France 
could supply them, such are the zeal and ardor that 
prevail in all their houses. Not only the Ursulines, 
but a great many other Nuns, of various orders, burn 
with a most pure desire to come and consecrate their 
labors to Jesus Christ in this new world, and to con- 
sume their lives on the Altar of the Cross. Omnia 
mihi licent, sed non omnia expediunt,; all that is good is 
not expedient. To desire a great [108] blessing with- 
out hindrance, and with gentle indifference and 
humble submission to God’s will, is a proof that the 
Holy Ghost is the Author thereof. 

In any case, it does not seem advisable to exclude 
any monastery of Ursuline Nuns— whatever may be 
the place or the congregation to which it belongs — 
from sending any professed Nun of its community 
to this new vineyard of our Lord. But, because such 
cannot be taken from all the houses, since so great a 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


pas befoin d’vn fi grand nombre: il en faudroit laiffer 
le choix entier 4 ceux de qui cét affaire depend, fans 
plaintes & fans ialoufie, acceptant comme de la main 
de noftre Seigneur, ce que ces perfonnes de vertu & 
de verité; en auroient determiné deuant Dieu. 

Il eft plus que tres raifonnable, que tous les Con- 
uents d’Vrfulines de France foient vnis de coeur & 
d’affection, au petit Seminaire de Canadas. Il ya 
quelque iours qu’vne perfonne de bon fens difoit, 
qu'il feroit tres facile de faire fubfifter le petit Semi- 
naire de Kebec, & d’amplifier le nombre de leur Semi- 
nariftes Sauuages. I1 faudroit difoit c’eft [sc. cet] 
homme d’efprit, que [109] toutes les filles qui fe ren- 
dent Vrfulines en France, donnaffent a leur entrée 
vne piftole d’aumofne 4 ce petit Seminaire, fi elles 
en donnoient deux, on ne les refuferoit pas; & par ce 
moyen il n’y auroit aucune Vrfuline qui ne cooperaft 
au falut des Sauuages. Voila vn moyen de faire 
preuue de la verité de leur zele. Que fi elles veulent 
ioiiir de cette benediction, c’eft ainfi que ie l’appelle 
pource qu’il eft impoffible que le Ciel ne recognoiffe 
ce qui fe faict, pour l’application du fang de lESvs 
CHRIST. Elles auront ayfement cognoiffance de 
celuy qui traitte en France, les affaires de ces bonnes 
filles & de leur Seminaire, par l’entremife de la mere 
Superieure des Vrfulines de Paris, oude Tours. Mais 
entrons en matiere. 

Comme on eut demandé aux Vrfulines, ce qui 
touche leur Seminaire pour l’inferer dans la Relation. 
Voicy ce que la Superieure refpondit au Pere, qui 
luy en fit la demande. 

Mon Reuerend Pere, ie vous enuoye quelques pe- 
tites remarques pour fatisfaire a l’obeyffance; I’ay eu 


ey 
: 
ia 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 181 


number are not required, the selection must be left 
entirely to those upon whom this matter depends,— 
without complaint or jealousy, accepting as from the 
hand of our Lord, whatever decision those virtuous 
and sincere persons may come to before God. 

It is entirely reasonable that all the Convents of 
Ursulines in France should be united in heart and in 
affection with the little Seminary of Canada. It is 
but a few days since a person of excellent judgment 
said that it would be very easy to maintain the little 
Seminary at Kebec, and to increase the number of 
their Savage Pupils. ‘‘ For this it would be neces- 
sary,’’ said this sensible man, ‘‘ that [109] all the 
girls who become Ursulines in France should, on 
entering, give a pistole as alms to this little Semi- 
nary. If they were to give two, these would not be 
refused. By this means there would not be an Ursu- 
line who would not contribute to the salvation of 
the Savages.’’ Here is a way to prove the sincerity 
of their zeal. And, if they wish to enjoy this bless- 
ing,—I call it so because it is impossible that Heav- 
en should ignore what is done for the application 
of the blood of JESUS CHRIST,—they can easily 
ascertain who the person is that has charge in France 
of the affairs of these good women and of their 
Seminary, through the mother Superior of the Ursu- 
lines of Paris or of Tours. But let us return to our 
subject. ; 

The Ursulines were requested to tell us about their 
Seminary in order that the same might be inserted 
in the Relation; and this is what the Superior replies 
to the Father who made the request: 

‘“My Reverend Father, I send you a few short 
observations, to meet the obligations of my obedi- 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


de la difficulté a m’y refoudre, pour ce que fi on 
vouloit dire toutes les chofes; qui peuuent donner de 
[110] l’edification dans les actions de nos filles, ce 
ne feroit iamais faict: vous fgauez d’ailleurs le gros 
du Seminaire: & combien il y entre des filles tant 
paffageres que fedentaires, vous fgcauez dis-je mieux 
que moy, fi Dieu peut eftre glorifié dans les petits 
feruices, que fes feruantes luy rendent en la perfonne 
des pauures petites Sauuages. Ie fcay bien que nous 
fommes peu fatisfaites de tout ce que nous faifons, 
n’eftant que des feruantes inutiles, moy tres particu- 
lierement; comme vous en atiez tres bonne cognoif- 
fance, c’ef{t ce qui me faifoit fouhaitter que vous ne 
fiffiez aucune mention de nous, fuffit que Dieu qui 
e{t nof{tre Pere: fgache auec quel amour nous feruons 
nos Neophytes; c’eft affez que luy feul cognoiffe ce 
qui fe paffe dans cette petite maifon, fans qu’il foit 
produit aux yeux des hommes, nous fommes trop 
heureufes que nos petites fatigues fe paffent a la 
feule veiie de noftre Maiftre qui eft fi bon qu’il nous 
faict efperer le pardon de toutes nos fautes: aydez 
moy en particulier 4 l’obtenir de fa bonté, &c, cette 
lettre a femblé digne de ce lieu, venons au détail. 
On auroit de la peine a croire que de petites [111] 
filles Sauuages, fe rendiffent ponctuelles aux temps 
des prieres & des inftructions, fi les yeux ne voy- 
oient cette verité; il n’y a naturel fi farouche que la 
douceur, la grace & léducation ne poliffe. On entend 
fouuent auec plaifir ces petites Sauuages, entonner 
vn motet dans le Choeur des Religieufes, pendant 
l’éleuation du S. Sacrement, & mefme encore chan- 
ter quelques fois auec elles pendant leurs Vefpres: 
Il n’y a pas de doute que fi on auoit dequoy en loger 


i? 
iF 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 7 738 


ence. I have had some difficulty in making my deci- 
sion therein, because, if we undertook to relate all 
that is [110] edifying in the conduct of our nuns, we 
would never have done. Moreover, you know about 
our Seminary in general, and how many girls enter 
it, both as transient pupils and as boarders. You 
know better than I do, I say, whether God can be 
glorified in the petty services that his servants ren- 
der unto him in the persons of the poor little Sav- 
ages. I know very well that we are but little satis- 
fied with all that we do, being only useless servants, — 
I myself most especially, as you are very well aware. 
That is what made me wish that you would not men- 
tion us. It suffices that God, who is our Father, 
should know with what love we serve our Neophytes; 
it suffices that he alone should know what passes in 
this little house, without its being shown to the eyes 
of men. Weareonly too happy that our slight labors 
should be performed under the eyes of our Master 
alone, who is so good that he leads us to hope for the 
pardon of all our offenses. Assist me in particular 
to obtain this from his goodness,’’ etc. This letter 
has seemed worthy of being inserted here. Let us 
enter into details. 

It would be hard to believe that little [111] Savage 
girls would attend punctually at the hours set apart 
for prayers and for instruction, if one’s eyes did not 
behold the fact. There is no nature so wild that 
gentleness, grace, and education cannot polish. “We 
frequently hear with pleasure these little Savages 
chanting a motet in the Nuns’ Choir, during the 
elevation of the Blessed Sacrament, and even singing 
with them sometimes during their Vespers. There 
is no doubt that if the means were at hand to lodge a 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


vn nobre, qu’on les rendroit auffi adroittes, & auffi 
gentilles que nos Europeannes, ce n’ef{t pas ce qu’on 
cherche a prefent, mais bien de grauer dans leurs 
coeurs 1’Amour & la crainte de celuy dont elles ont 
maintenant cognoiffance. C’eft a quoy vifent les 
trauaux de ces bonnes meres, auquels noftre Seigneur 
femble donner fa benediction. 

Ces enfants ont de fi grandes inclinations 4 la pure- 
té, que fi elles fortent pour fe promener, elles fuyent 
la rencontre des hommes, & font fi foigneufes de fe 
couurir auec vne telle decence, que leur maintien s’é- 
loigne bien des fagons de faire des Sauuages. Vn 
Francois prefentant la main & vne Seminarifte pour la 
conduire, comme [112] on luy reprochoit par rifée, 
que voulant eftre toufiours vierge, elle s’eftoit laiffée 
toucher la main 4 vn homme, cette enfant fe mift a 
pleurer; elle entre en colere contre celuy qui l’auoit 
conduite, s’en va vne & deux fois, lauer fes mains, 
pour effacer tout le mal qu’elle pourroit auoir con- 
tracté par cette action innocente; ayant belle peur 
que cela ne l’empefchaft d’eftre Vierge, comme on 
ne cognoiffoit point fa penfée, & qu’on redoubloit de 
temps en temps ce petit reproche; ne me dites plus 
cela, repliqua elle; la larme 4 1’ceil: i’ay tant laué 
mes mains, qu'il n’eft poffible qu’il foit re{té quelque 
chofe, du mal qu’il m’auroit peu caufer, cette inno- 
cence e{t plaine de recreation. 

Deux petites filles Seminariftes, s’eftant retirées 
chez leur parens, les {uiuirent dans leur grande chaffe 
l’hyuer dernier, l’vne faifoit prier Dieu dans la Ca- 
bane, & l’autre faifoit chanter des cantiques fpiritu- 
els, que les meres leur auoient appris en langue Al- 
gonquine, le temps qu’elles auoient de refte de leur 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 * 185 


number of them, they would be made as dextrous 
and as well-mannered as our Europeans. It is not 
this that is sought at present, but rather to write 
upon their hearts the Love and fear of him whom 
they now know. It is to that end that the efforts of 
these good mothers are directed, to whom our Lord 
seems to have given his blessing. 

These children have such a regard for purity that, 
when they go out walking, they avoid meeting men; 
and they are so careful to cover themselves with 
decency, that their deportment is very different from 
the customs of the Savages. A Frenchman gave his 
hand to a pupil of the Seminary, to lead her. When 
[112] she was laughingly reproached because she, 
who wished to remain ever a virgin, had allowed a 
man to touch her hand, the child commenced to 
weep; she grew angry with him who had led her; 
and went once or twice to wash her hands, in order 
to remove any evil that she might have contracted 
by such an innocent action, being greatly afraid that 
it would prevent her from being a Virgin. As they 
did not understand her thoughts and renewed, from 
time to time, this petty reproach, she would reply, 
with tears in her eyes: ‘‘ Say that to me no more. 
I have washed my hands so often, that it is impos- 
sible that anything can remain of the harm that 
he may have done me.” Such innocence is most 
amusing. 

Two little Seminary girls, who had gone back to 
their parents, went with them last winter on their 
great hunt. One of them made the family pray to 
God in their cabin, while the other made them sing 
the hymns that the mothers had taught them in the 
Algonquin tongue. The leisure that they had from 


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


petites occupations, elles l’employoient 4 lire & a 
efcrire. Les Seminariftes ont vne telle paffion pour 
l’efcriture, que fi parfois on leur refufe de s’aller 
[113] promener, elles demandent que pour le moins 
on leur permette d’efcrire. 

Ces deux pauures petites, qui eftoient 4 la chaffe 
auec leurs gens, auoient des regrets fi fenfibles, de 
fe voir fi long-temps priuées des Sacremens de Con- 
feffion & de Communion, qu’elles témoignerent leur 
douleur par des lettres toutes pleines d’affection & 
de pieté, qu’elles écriuirent par dega. 

Il ne fe paffe iamais quinze iours qu’elles ne de- 
mandent a fe confeffer. elles font tous les foirs vne 
exacte recherche de leur confcience; mais auec vne 
telle candeur, qu’elles difent publiquement les fautes 
qu’elles ont remarquées en leur examen; que fi elles 
en oublient quelqu’vne qui ait paru au dehors, celle 
quien aura la connoiffance dira tout haut; Ma Soeur, 
vous ne vous fouuenez pas de telle faute; deman- 
dez-en pardon a Dieu. Ce procedé ne les offenfe 
point, le bon accord & la bonne intelligence qu’elles 
ont par enfemble, leur eft quafi naturelle. 

La petite Marie Magdelaine (c’eft l’vne des pre- 
mieres Seminariftes) ayant efté aduertie d’vne faute 
d'enfant, dont elle ne fe donnoit pas de garde, fut 
faifie d’vne [114] trifteffe, qui parut fur fon vifage 
iufques A ce qu'elle fe fuft confeffée; faifant voir que 
la douleur d’auoir fafché Dieu, la touchoit [plus] que 
la confufion & la honte d’auoir failly. 

Deux de nos Filles 4gées d’enuiron huict a neuf 
ans (dift la Mere) ont preffé quafi vn an durant leur 
Maiftreffe, de les difpofer 4 la Communion: fe voy- 
ans rebutées, elles s’adreffent 4 moy, me fuppliant 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 187 


their slight occupations, they spent in reading and 
writing. The Seminarists are so passionately fond 
of writing that sometimes, when they are refused 
permission to go out [113] walking, they ask to be at 
least allowed to write. 

These two poor little girls, who were out hunting 
with their people, felt so keen regret at being so 
long deprived of the Sacraments of Confession and 
Communion, that they manifested their sorrow by 
means of letters replete with affection and piety, 
which they wrote while away in the woods. 

Not a fortnight passes without their asking to make 
their confession. They carefully examine their con- 
science every evening, but with such candor that 
they relate in public the sins that they have discov- 
ered in their examination. And if they forget any 
one that has been noticed by the others, she who has 
observed it will say aloud: ‘‘ My Sister, do you not 
recollect such or such a sin? Ask pardon of God for 
it.’’ This does not offend them. The harmony and 
good understanding which exist among them seem 
almost natural to them. 

Little Marie Magdelaine (one of the first pupils of 
the Seminary), who was reproved for some childish 
fault, to which she had paid no attention, was afflicted 
with a [114] sorrow which manifested itself on her 
countenance until she had confessed herself,— there- 
by showing that the regret for having offended God 
affected her more than the shame and disgrace of 
having erred. 

““Two of our Girls, aged about eight or nine”’ 
(says the Mother) ‘‘ pressed their Teacher for nearly 
a year to prepare them for Communion. When they 
were refused, they came to me and begged me, with 


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 22 


atiec beaucoup de careffes, de leur accorder cette 
faueur. Leur ayant dit qu’elles eftoient trop ieunes, 
elles ne perdent point courage. Le Reuerend Pere 
Vimon[t] les eftans venués voir pendant 1’Aduent, 
pour leur donner quelque inf{truction, elles fe iettent 
A fes pieds, & le coniurent de leur donner Noftre Sei- 
gneur, du moins au temps de Pafques. Le Pere leur 
promit qu’elles iouyroient de ce bon-heur fi elles 
eftoient bien fcauantes. Il n’eft pas croyable com- 
bien cette réponfe les réjoiiit; mais la peur qu’elles 
eurent de ne pas bien répondre aux interrogations 
qu’on leur deuoit faire de ce grand myftere, les porta 
X me venir trouuer tous les iours, pour me prier a 
jointes mains de les inftruire. Enfin elles ont iouy 
de leur defir, Noftre [115] Seigneur s’eft emparé de 
leurs cceurs, la preparation & la ferueur qu’elles ont 
apportée a cette action toute diuine, nous donnoit 
autant d’étonnement que d’edification. 

Comme c’eft noftre couftume de nous retirer par 
fois huict ou dix iours pour faire les exercices fpiri- 
tuels, c’eft A dire, pour traiter auec Dieu des affaires 
de Veternité, les Sauuages ne nous voyans point, 
difent que nous nous cachons. Les Meres s’eftans 
done cachées en cette forte, la petite Seminarifte 
Huronne fe voulut auffi cacher, elle fe retire dans vn 
petit bocage qui eft dans la clofture, fe fait vne 
efpece de cabane, & paffe vne bonne partie de la iour- 
née a prier Dieu: l’vne de fes compagnes layant 
trouuée, luy demande ce qu’elle fait 14; Ie me cache, 
fit elle, comme les Meres pour prier Dieu pour moy, 
pour vous, pour les Francois, & pour les Sauuages. 
Celle-cy le va dire 4 fes compagnes; elles accourent 
aufii-toft, elles fe font toutes vne petite maifon de 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 189 


many endearments, to grant them that favor. I told 
them that they were too young, but they did not lose 
courage. When Reverend Father Vimont came 
to see them during Advent, to give them some 
instruction, they threw themselves at his feet, and 
prayed him to give Our Lord to them at least at Eas- 
ter. The Father promised that they should enjoy 
that happiness if they studied very well. It is diffi- 
cult to believe how this answer filled them with joy; 
but the fear that they might be unable properly to 
answer the questions that would be put to them, 
respecting that great mystery, induced them to come 
and see me every day, and to beg me, with clasped 
hands, to teach them. Finally their desire was ful- 
filled, and Our [115] Lord took possession of their 
hearts. The preparation and the fervor that they 
displayed in that divine action astonished as much 
as it edified us. 

“It is our custom to withdraw into retirement at 
times, for eight or ten days, for the performance of 
spiritual exercises,—that is to say, for the purpose 
of conferring with God on the affairs of eternity; 
and when the Savages do not see us, they say that 
we are hiding ourselves. The Mothers having thus 
hidden themselves, the little Huron Seminarist 
wished also to hide. She withdrew into a small 
grove that lies within the cloister, made herself a 
kind of cabin, and passed the greater part of the day 
in praying to God. One of her companions found 
her there, and asked her what she was doing. ‘I 
am hiding,’ she said, ‘like the Mothers, to pray to 
God for myself, for you, for the French, and for the 
Savages.’ The other told her companions of this, 
and at once they all, except the two youngest, has- 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


fueillages, excepté les deux plus ieunes: elles fe 
renferment dans cette verdure, gardant le filence, 
employant vne bonne partie de leur temps a faire 
prieres, & reciter leur [116] Chapelet, auec autant 
d’affection que des perfonnes meures & plus Agées. 

Le iour du Vendredy Sainct, les petites Semina- 
riftes voyans ieufner les Meres plus rigoureufement 
qu’ l’ordinaire, les voulurent imiter: elles cachent 
donc ce qu’on leur donnoit 4 manger, les vnes fe 
contentent d’vn peu de pain boiiilly dans de l’eau 
toute pure, les autres ne mangent que du pain tout 
fec, fans iamais vouloir faire colation le foir. Ce 
n’eft pas tout, elles fe iettent aux pieds de la Mere, 
& la prient de leur permettre de prendre la difcipline: 
le congé donné, ces pauures enfans firent paroiftre 
vne ferueur qui ne ‘reffentoit rien de l’humeur des 
Barbares: on ne leur permet cette deuotion que tres- 
rarement, & apres des importunitez auffi agreables a 
Dieu que la mortification mefme. 

Vn iourentr’autres fupplians & preffans auec vne 
importunité extraordinaire qu’on leur accordaft cette 
faueur, on leur demanda pourquoy elles vouloient 
prendre fur elles vn chaftiment fi rigoureux, elles 
répondirent; Que noftre Seigneur l’auoit pris le pre- 
mier, & que fes fouffrances leur donnoient des defirs 
de [117] fouffrir pour le falut de fes [sc. leurs] compa- 
triotes, & pour leurs propres offenfes. Ces fenti- 
mens ne viennent pas dans le iardin de la nature, 
fans eftre bien arrofez de la grace. 

I’ay dit cy-deffus que deux Hurons auoient paffé 
l’hyuer A Kebec, 1’vn des motifs qu’ils eurent d’em- 
braffer la Foy de Iefus-Chrift, fut de voir le zele 
d’vne ieune Seminarifte leur compatriote. Cét 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 * 191 


tened to make a little house, of leafy branches. They 
shut themselves up amidst this verdure, observed 
silence, and spent a good portion of their time in 
praying and in reciting the [116] Rosary, with as 
much devotion as mature and more aged persons 
show. 

‘On Good Friday, when the little Seminarists saw 
the Mothers fasting more strictly than usual, they 
wished to imitate them. They, therefore, concealed 
the food that was given them; some contented them- 
selves with a little bread boiled in pure water; the 
others ate only dry bread, without touching their 
evening collation. That was not all. They cast 
themselves at the feet of the Mother, and begged 
her to allow them to take the discipline. Having 
received permission to do so, these poor children 
manifested a fervor which indicated nothing of the 
moods of Barbarians. They are allowed to practice 
this devotion only very seldom and after importuni- 
ties that are as agreeable to God as is the mortifica- 
tion itself. . 

‘On one occasion among others, while they were 
supplicating and pressing with extraordinary persist- 
ence to be allowed that favor, they were asked why 
they wished to take upon themselves such severe 
punishment. They replied that our Lord had first 
received it, and that his sufferings inspired them 
with the desire to [117] suffer for the salvation of 
their countrymen, and for their own sins. Such 
sentiments do not grow in nature’s garden without 
being well watered by grace.’’ 

I have already mentioned that two Hurons spent 
the winter in Kebec. One of the reasons that in- 
duced them to embrace the Faith of Jesus Christ was 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 22 


enfant agée d’enuiron treize 4 quator[zje ans, leur 
parloit de Dieu, & de la grandeur de nos myfteres, 
auec vne fi douce eloquence naturelle, tirée de 
l’affection de fon coeur, que ces bonnes gens en 
eftoient puiflamment touchez, en forte que l’vn de 
leurs plaifirs eftoit de la vifiter de temps en temps. 
L’vn d’eux confiderant la ferueur de cette ieune Chre- 
{tienne, la voulut efprouuer: comme il eftoit fur le 
poinct d’eftre baptifé, & qu’il voyoit que cét enfant 
en eftoit dans la ioye; il fait du refroidy, il dit qu’il 
a de la peine 4 croire ce qu’on enfeigne, & qu'il ne 
penfe plus au Baptefme. A ces paroles voila cette 
ieune fille en feu, elle entre dans vne faincte cholere, 
elle s’écrie; Que penfes-tu faire, miferable! qui eft- 
ce qui a troublé tes penfées? veux-tu aller dans 1’En- 
fer auec les Demons? [118] Peut eftre que tu mour- 
ras cette nuict, & que tu te trouueras auec eux auant 
qu’il foit iour, le Diable t’a renuerfé la tefte. Ce 
bon homme paroiffoit auffi froid que cét enfant eftoit 
bruflante. Il fait femblant que tout cela ne le touche 
point, & qu’il ne fe foucie plus de croire en Dieu: la 
pauure petite s’en prend a fes yeux; elle quitte cét 
homme, s’en va trouuer les Meres toute éplorée. [1 
eft perdu, difoit-elle, ie fuis trifte, il ne veut plus 
croire en Dieu; le Diable l’a trompé, il ne veut plus 
aller au Ciel. Puis redoublant fa voix, & vfant de 
menaces, auec vn tour de tefte qui monftroit fa 
douleur & fon zele; Si i’euffe peu rompre la grille, 
difoit-elle, ie l’aurois battu. Que cette faueur 
[sc. ferueur] eft innocente/ que le Dieu du Ciel eft 
aimable! . 
Les Meres ayans découuert la feinte de cét homme, 
la voulurent confoler, mais elle n’en pouuoit croire; 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 | » 198 


the sight of the zeal of a young Seminarist, their 
countrywoman. ‘This child, who was about thirteen 
or fourteen years old, told them of God, and of the 
greatness of our mysteries, with such gentle native 
eloquence inspired by the affection of her heart, that 
these good people were greatly touched by it, and 
one of their pleasures was to visit her from time to 
time. One of them, on observing the fervor of this 
young Christian, wished to test it. As he was on 
the eve of being baptized, and as he saw that the 
child rejoiced at it, he pretended that he had become 
indifferent, saying that he found it difficult to believe 
what was taught him, and that he no longer thought 
of Baptism. On hearing these words, the young 
girl became greatly excited; she was seized with a 
holy anger, and exclaimed: ‘‘ What art thou think- 
ing of doing, thou wretch? What has disturbed thy 
thoughts? Dost thou wish to go to Hell with the 
Demons? [118] Perhaps thou wilt die this night, 
and wilt find thyself with them before day breaks. 
The Devil has turned thy head.” The good man 
seemed as cool as the child was ardent; he pretended 
that all this did not affect him, and that he no longer 
cared to believe in God. The poor little creature 
blames her own eyes; she leaves this man, and goes, 
all disconsolate, to the Mothers. ‘‘ He is lost,’’ she 
said; ‘‘I am very sad. He will no longer believe 
in God. The Devil has deceived him; he no longer 
wishes to go to Heaven.’’ Then, raising her voice, 
and using threats, with a toss of her head that be- 
trayed her sorrow and her zeal, she said: ‘‘ If I could 
have broken the grating I would have beaten him.” 
How innocent is such fervor; how lovable is the God 
of Heaven! 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


il fallut que le Pere de Brebeuf 1’affeuraft que cela 
s’eftoit fait par artifice. 

Il ne venoit aucun Huron a Kebec, que [la] ieune fille 
ne le prefchait, & fouuent auec fruit. En voicy vn 
exemple authentique. Wn Pere de noftre Compagnie 
écriuant du pays des Hurons, A la Mere qui a inftruit 
[119] cette petite Huronne, luy tient ce langage: I’ef- 
pere que Dieu benira voftre petite Terefe: vos 
exemples luy feruiront toute fa vie, plus que tout ce 
qu’on luy pourroit dire. Quelques Hurons du Bourg 
de Sainct Iofeph, qui defcendirent l’an paffé 4 Kebec, 
font retournez fi fatisfaits de quelques entretiens 
quwils ont eus auec elle, qu’ils ne fgauoient ce qu’ils 
deuoient plus admirer, ou vne petite fille Huronne, 
qui leur prefchoit vn Dieu, vn Paradis, & vn Enfer, 
ou les fainctes filles qui l’auoient in{truite, & qui luy 
auoient tourné l’efprit vers le Ciel. C’eft ainfi qu’ils 
m’en parloient cét Hyuer. Et dans vne autre lettre, 
deux de nos Neophytes font remontez ¢a haut, telle- 
ment edifiez de la vertu & de la faincteté qu’ils ont 
remarquée 14 bas, & principalement en voftre Mai- 
fon, qu’il y a vn plaifir nompareil de les entendre 
fur ce fujet, & notammét fur les loitianges de Terefe. 
Elle eft, difent-ils, fi conftante, fi bien inftruite, fi 
aimée, fi feruente en la Foy, qu’a la voir on ne diroit 
pas qu’elle fuft Huronne: ce fera le plus grand efprit 
des Hurons quand elle fera de retour; celle qui l’a 
in{truite eft fans doute vn des plus grands efprits de 
la France. En vn [120] mot, ce qu’ils ont veu par- 
my les Chreftiens de Kebec, leur fait condamner la 
folie des Hurons, & leur fait benir Dieu de les auoir 
éclairez du flambeau de la Foy, i’efpere qu’ils con- 
tinuéront ¢a haut a bien faire. Ce font les paroles 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 6195 


The Mothers, discovering this man’s deception, 
tried to console her, but she could not believe them; 
Father de Brebeuf was compelled to assure her that 
a trick had been played upon her. 

No Huron came to Kebec without this young girl 
preaching to him, and frequently with good effect. 
Here is an authentic instance of it. A Father of our 
Society, writing from the country of the Hurons to 
the Mother who taught [119] this little Huron, says: 
‘‘T hope that God will bless your little Terese; your 
examples will serve her, for life, more than all that 
can be said to her. Some Huronsof the Village of 
Saint Joseph, who went down last year to Kebec, 
have returned so satisfied with some conversations 
that they had with her, that they did not know 
which they should most admire,—a little Huron 
girl who preached to them about God; a Paradise 
and a Hell; or the holy virgins who had taught her, 
and turned her thoughts towards Heaven. Thus 
they spoke to me of her, last Winter.” And, in 
another letter, he says: ‘‘ Two of our Neophytes have 
returned here, so edified by the virtue and holiness 
which they observed there, and especially in your 
House, that it gives us the greatest pleasure to hear 
them speak on the ‘subject and, above all, on the 
praises of Terese. ‘She is,’ they say, ‘ so steadfast, 
so well taught, so beloved, so fervent in the Faith, 
that on seeing her, one would not take her for a Hu- 
ron. She will be the greatest mind among the Hu- 
rons when she shall return. She who taught her is 
doubtless one of the greatest minds of France.’ In 
a [120] word, what they have seen when among the 
Christians of Kebec makes them condemn the folly 
of the Hurons, and bless God for having enlightened 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


du Pere. La vertu parle fans dire mot, elle eft 
comme les Cieux, guz enarrant gloriam Dei, qui pu- 
blient la grandeur de Dieu en toutes fortes de lan- 
gues, fans mot dire. 

Cette bonne femme Seminarifte Huronne eftant 
aux trois Riuieres, écriuit vn mot de fa main a la 
Mere Superieure: le voicy rendu en Fran¢ois, comme 
elle l’a couché en Huron. 


M* bonne Mere, ie fuis fur le poinct de partir. 

Ie vous remercie de ce que vous atiez eu tant 
de foin de moy, & de ce que vous m’auez enfeigné 4 
bien feruir Dieu. Seroit-ce pour peu de chofe que ie 
vous remercie? Iamais ie ne m’en oublieray. 


Deux iours apres qu’elle eut mis cette lettre entre 
les mains du Pere Iofeph du Peron, elle fut prife des 
Hiroquois auec fes parens, & auec le Pere Ifaac 
Iogues, & [121] deux de nos Frangois. 

Si ie ne reconnoiffois vne autre conduite fur la 
terre que celle des hommes, ie dirois que la premiere 
Seminarifte que les Meres Vrfulines ont eué du pais 
des Hurons, feroit la derniere, & qu’il n’y auroit plus 
rien A efperer de ce cofté 1a. Ie ne fgay pas le futur, 
ie ne fus iamais Prophete; mais ie fgay bien que fi 
Dieu nous gouuerne toufiours comme il a commencé, 
elles en doiuent attendre d’autres en fon temps de ce 
mefme pays-la, pourueu qu’elles ayent dequoy les 
nourrir. 

Ie trouue dans leur memoire, que l’vne de leurs 
filles Algonquines s’en eftant enfuye chez fes parens, 
ne fut pas loin que la tentation qui l’auoit fait fortir 
en cachette, la quitta; elle ouure les yeux, reconnoit 


ST en ec BEE Stet 
: Paes 2 o: 


- 


Co + bases ‘ yao 
“8 ( / “* S % te 


FACSIMILE OF HANDWRITING OF JOSEPH IMBERT DU PERON, S.J. 


we 


i 
ao 


TTF Se ee ee ae 


Serta errk bis 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 197 


them with the torch of Faith. I hope they will 
continue to do well up here.’’ Such arethe Father’s 
words. Virtue speaks without uttering a syllable. 
It is like the Heavens guz enarrant gloriam Dei, which 
publish God’s greatness in all tongues, without 
saying a word. 

When this good Huron Seminarist was at the 
three Rivers, she sent a letter in her own handwrit- 
ing tothe Mother Superior. Here is a translation of 
it in French, as it was written in Huron: 


‘ ‘MM’ good Mother, I am about toleave. I thank 
you for having taken such care of me, and 

for having taught me to serve God well. Do I thank 

you for a trifling matter? I shall never forget it.’’ 


Two days after she had placed this letter in the 
hands of Father Joseph du Peron, she was taken 
prisoner by the Hiroquois with her parents, with 
Father Isaac Jogues and [121] two of our Frenchmen. 

If I knew of no other guidance on earth than that 
of men, I would say that the first Seminarist that the 
Ursuline Mothers have had from the country of the 
Hurons would be the last, and that nothing more 
could be expected from that quarter. I do not know 
the future,—I was never a Prophet; but I do know 
that if God always guides us as he has from the be- 
ginning, they may expect other pupils, at such time 
as he judges best, from the same country, provided 
they have the wherewithal to feed them. 

I find in their memoir that one of their Algonquin 
girls, who had run away to her parents, had not 
gone far before the temptation which had induced 
her to go away clandestinely, left her. Her eyes are 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


fa faute, retourne au Seminaire, prie qu’on la recoiue, 
mais on luy fait la fourde oreille: elle infifte, on la 
rebutte; la pauure enfant fe gliffe dans la Maifon auec 
les Seminariftes paffageres, fe va ietter aux pieds de 
la Mere Superieure, la coniure 4 iointes mains de la 
tenir comme auparauant au nombre des Seminariftes 
fedentaires: On m’a follicitée, difoit-elle, de vous 
quitter, iiay mal fait, ie ne m’enfuiray plus, ie feray 
[122] obeiffante: c’eft tout de bon que ie veux eftre 
inf{truite. On luy fait grace, on l’admet dans la Mai- 
fon, on Vhabille 4 la Francoife, elle garde fa parole, 
donnant 4 connoiftre que Dieu & fon cceur auoient 
parlé auffi bien que fa bouche. 

Nous ne parlons point, dift la Mere qui a fourny ces 
memoires de nos Seminariftes paffageres, ny de leurs 
bons fentimés, ny des vifites frequentes & continu- 
elles d’vn tres-grand nombre de Sauuages, ny des 
petits fecours que nous leur rendons inceflamment; 
il n’eft pas quafi poffible de les voir fi riches & fi pau- 
ures des biens de la terre, fans fe réjoiiir de leur 
bon-heur, & fans [foulager] leurs miferes. Nous ne 
faifons aucune mention des grands témoignages 
d’affection qu’ils nous rendent, nous voyds en ces 
contrées pour les fecourir. Nous ne difons rien de 
ceux qui ont efté faits Chreftiens en noftre petite 
Chapelle, des inf{tructions que nous leur donnons a 
noftre grille, & dans le lieu ot nous enfeignons nos 
Seminariftes. Il y ena qui fe viennent confoler auec 
nous fur leurs petites affaires; d’autres nous vifitent 
pour s’entretenir des grandeurs & des bontez de Dieu. 
Nous laiffons tous ces bons fentimens [123] pour le 
gros de la Relation, nous contentant de dire deux 
mots des Seminariftes, que nous auons inceflamment 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 ‘199 


opened; she sees her error, returns to the Seminary, 
and begs to be admitted; but they turn a deaf ear to 
her. She persists, but is refused. The poor child 
slips into the House with the transient Seminarists, 
throws herself at the feet of the Mother Superior, 
and, with clasped hands, entreats that she will admit 
her, as before, to the ranks of the permanent Semina- 
rists. ‘‘ I was solicited to leave you,’’ she said; ‘‘I 
did wrong. I will never run away again; I will 
be [122] obedient. I really wish to be taught.’’ She 
was forgiven, admitted into the House, and clothed 
in the French fashion. She kept her word, showing 
that God and her heart had spoken as well as her lips. 

‘We say nothing,’’ writes the Mother who has 
supplied these memoirs, ‘‘ of our transient Semina- 
rists, or of their good sentiments; or of the fre- 
quent and constant visits paid by a great number of 
Savages; or of the slight assistance that we always 
give them. It is hardly possible to see them so rich, 
and so poor in worldly goods, without rejoicing at 
their welfare and relieving their misfortune. We 
do not mention the great proofs of their affection 
that they give us, upon seeing that we are here in 
this country to succor them. We say nothing of 
those who have been made Christians in our little 
Chapel; of the instruction that we give them at the 
grating, and in the room where we teach our Semi- 
narists. Some come to us to be comforted about their 
little personal affairs; others visit us to converse 
about the greatness and goodness of God. We leave 
all these good sentiments [123] for the bulk of the 
Relation, contenting ourselves with saying a few 
words about the Seminarists whom we have always 
with us in our cloister. Those nuns who will suc- 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


auec nous dans noftre clofture. Ces filles qui vien- 
dront quelque iour apres nous, & qui n’auront pas 
veu l’étrange incommodité que nous receuons d’vn 
petit coin de maifon, ot il faut faire toutes les fon- 
ctions d’vn grand Monaftere, ignoreront peut-eftre 
nos ioyes auffi bien que nos peines. 


¢ 1642] RELATION OF 1642 201 


ceed us some day, and will not have witnessed the 
great inconvenience that we experience in a small 
house, wherein all the occupations and duties of a 
large Monastery have to be performed, will probably 
be ignorant of our joys as well as of our troubles.”’ 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


CHAPITRE IX. 
DU DESSEIN DE MESSIEURS DE MONTREAL. 


N grand homme de bien n’ayant iamais veu la 
Nouuelle France que deuant Dieu, fe fentit 
fortement infpiré d’y trauailler pour fa gloire. 

Ayant fait rencontre d’vne perfonne de mefme coeur, 
ils enuoyerent l’an 1640. vingt tonneaux de viures, 
& d’autres chofes neceffaires pour commencer en fon 
temps vne nouuelle habitation en 1’Ifle de Montreal. 
L’année derniere ils firent paffer quarante hommes 
commandez par le fieur de Maifonneufue, [124] Gen- 
til-homme Champenois, pour ietter les fondemens de 
ce genereux deffein. Cette entreprife paroiftroit 
autant temeraire, qu'elle eft faincte & hardie, fi elle 
n’auoit pour bafe la puiffance de celuy qui ne manque 
iamais A ceux qui n’entreprennent rien qu’au branfle 
de fes volontez; & qui f¢auroit ce qui fe paffe pour 
faire reiiffir ce grand affaire, iugeroit auffi-toft que 
Noftre Seigneur en eft veritablementl’autheur. Mais 
difons deux mots de cette Ifle deuant que de paffer 
outre. 

On compte depuis l’emboucheure du Golphe de 
Sainct Laurens, iufques au Forillon de Gafpé, ot le 
Golphe fe reftreffit, & fe fait riuiere, foixante lieués. 
Depuis le Forillon de Gafpé iufques 4 Tadouffac, 
quatre-vingts dix lieués; depuis Tadouffac iufques a 
Kebec, quarante lieués; depuis Kebec iufques aux 
trois Riuieres, vingt-huict ou trente lieués; depuis 
les trois Riuieres iufques au Fort de Richelieu, qu’on 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 * 203 


CHAPTER IX. 
OF THE PROJECT OF THE GENTLEMEN OF MONTREAL. 


GREAT and good man, who had never seen 
New France except in the presence of God, 
felt strongly inspired to work there for his 

glory. Having met with a person animated by the 
same spirit, they shipped, in the year 1640, twenty 
tons of food and other necessaries for the purpose of 
founding, in due time, a new residence on the Island 
of Montreal. Last year they sent over forty men 
under the command of the sieur de Maisonneufve, 
[124] a Gentleman of Champagne, to lay the founda- 
tions of this generous undertaking. Such an enter- 
prise would have seemed as rash as it was holy and 
daring, had it not been based upon the power of him 
who never fails those who undertake nothing except 
under the impulse of his will. And every one who 
learns what is being done to carry out this great 
design successfully will at once see that Our Lord is 
certainly the author thereof. But let us say a few 
words about that Island before going any further. 
They count sixty leagues from the entrance of the 
Gulf of Saint Lawrence to the Forillon of Gaspé,® 
where the Gulf narrows and becomes a river; ninety 
leagues from the Forillon of Gaspé to Tadoussac; 
forty leagues from Tadoussac to Kebec; twenty- 
eight or thirty leagues from Kebec to the three 
Rivers; twelve leagues from the three Rivers to the 
Fort of Richelieu, now being built on the River of 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 22 


baftit fur la Riuiere des Hiroquois, douze lieués; 
depuis cette Riuiere iufques 4 Montreal, douze autres 
lieués: fi bien que depuis l’emboucheure du grand 
fleuue & du Golphe Sainct Laurens, iufques a cette 
Ifle, on y compte prés de deux [225 i.e., 125] cens 
lieués; & toute cette grande étendué d’eau eft naui- 
gable, en partie par de grands Vaiffeaux, en partie 
par des Barques. 

L’Ifle de Motreal a enuiron vingt lieués de tour, elle 
eft baignée d’vn cofté du grand fleuue Sainct Lau- 
rens, & de l’autre de la riuiere des Prairies Ces deux 
grands fleuues fe ioignans enfemble font comme deux 
lacs ou deux grands eftangs. Aux deux bouts de 
cette Ifle, il y a quantité d’autres Ifles plus petites, 
fort agreables: la plus belle apres l’Ifle de Montreal, 
ceft l'Iflede IlEsvs. II fort des terres vne autre pe- 
tite riuiere du co{té du Nord, nommée des Francois, 
la riuiere de l’Affomption, & des Sauuages staragau- 
efipi, laquelle fe iette dans cette grande étendué 
d’eau qui fe rencétre a la pointe plus baffe de Mont- 
real: toutes ces eaux fe raffemblans & marchans de 
compagnie, prennent le nom du grad fleuue Sainct 
Laurens: Quinze lieués plus bas, tout aupres de 1’em- 
boucheure de la riuiere des Hiroquois, qui vient du 
co{té du Midy, ce grand fleuue s’ouure & fe dilate 
derechef, & fait le lac que nous appellons de Sainct 
Pierre, qui peut auoir quatre ou cinq lieués de large, 
& fept ou huict de long, eft parfemé de quantité de 
[126] belles Ifles: d’vn cofté & de l’autre il fe ré- 
treflit, pour reprendre vne autre fois le nom du fleuue 
de Sainct Laurens, 4 deux lieués ou enuiron, plus 
haut que l’habitation, & que le fleuue des trois 
Riuieres. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 205 


the Hiroquois; twelve more leagues from that River 
to Montreal. Sothat, from the entrance of the great 
river and Gulf of Saint Lawrence to that Island, they 
count nearly two [225 i.e., 125] hundred leagues; 
and the whole of that great stretch of water is navi- 
gable,—in part by great Ships, and in part by Barks. 

The Island of Montreal has a circumference of 
about twenty leagues.’ It is bathed on one side by 
the great river Saint Lawrence, and on the other by 
the river des Prairies. These two great rivers unite 
and form, as it were, two lakes or large ponds. At 
each end of this Island, there are many smaller 
Islands that are very pleasant. The finest, after the 
Island of Montreal, is the Isle of JESUS. Another 
small river flows from inland on the North side, 
called by the French the river of the Assumption and 
by the Savages Outaragauesipi, which falls into that 
wide expanse of water which lies at the lower point 
of Montreal. The whole of these waters, uniting 
and flowing together, take the name of the great river 
Saint Lawrence. Fifteen leagues below,—quite 
near the mouth of the river of the Hiroquois, which 
comes from the South,—the great river again widens 
and expands, and forms the lake that we call lake 
Saint Pierre, which may be four or five leagues wide, 
and seven or eight long, and is studded with a num- 
ber of [126] beautiful Islands. It then narrows on 
both sides, resuming once more the name of river 
Saint Lawrence, about two leagues above the settle- 
ment and the river of the three Rivers. 

But, to return to our Island, I may say, in passing, 
that the aspect of a fine mountain which stands there 
has given it the name of Montreal or Mont-royal. 

Jacques Cartier, the first of our French who dis- 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


Mais pour remonter 4 noftre Ifle, ie diray en 
paffant que l’afpect d’vne belle montagne qui s’y 
rencontre, luy a fait porter le nom de Montreal, ou 
Mont-royal. 

Iacques Cartier, qui eft le premier de nos Frangois 
qui la découuerte, écrit qu’il y rencontra vne ville 
nommée Ochelaga. Cela s’accorde bien a ce qu’en 
difent les Sauuages, qui la nomment Minitik 8ten en- 
tagsgiban, l’Ifle ot il y auoit vne ville, ou vne bour- 
gade, les guerres en ont banny les habitans. 

Elle donne vn accés & vn abord admirable a toutes 
les Nations de ce grand pais, car il fe trouue au Nord 
& au Midy, au Leuant & au Couchant des riuieres qui 
fe iettent dans les fleuues de Sainct Laurens, & dans 
la riuiere des prairies qui enuironnent cette Ifle; de 
forte que fi la paix eftoit parmy ces peuples, ils pour- 
roient aborder 14 de tous coftez, Omnia tempus habent, 
tout fe fera auec le temps. 

Ces Meffieurs qui entreprennent de [227 1.e., 127] 
faire adorer Iefus-Chrift dans cette Ifle, firent cét 
Hyuer dernier vne action vrayement Chreftienne. Ce 
font perfonnes de vertu, de merite & de condition, 
gens qui font profeffion de feruir Dieu publiquement; 
que ces termes me font agreables (feruir Dieu pu- 
bliquement) ne rougir point pour les baffeffes de 
Iefus-Chrift, & ne fe point enfler pour les grandeurs 
de la terre. Ces Ames d’élite s’eftans raffemblées en 
la grande Eglife de Noftre Dame de Paris, ceux qui 
portent le fainct charactere, difent la faincte Meffe, 
& les autres fe communierent 41’ Autel de cette Prin- 
ceffe tout chargé de miracles, ayans le Sauueur du 
monde auec eux, ils dédierent & confacrerent a la 
Saincte Famille 1’Ifle de Mont-real, defirans qu'elle fe 


é 
re 
:. 
ie 
ve 


1642] RELATION OF 1642. * 207 


covered it, writes that he found on it a village called 
Ochelaga. This fully agrees with the accounts of the 
Savages, who call it ‘‘ Minitik outen entagougiban,” 
‘‘the Island on which stood a town or a village.”’ 
The wars have banished its inhabitants.” 

It gives access and an admirable approach to all 
the Nations of this vast country; for, on the North 
and South, on the East and West, there are rivers 
which fall into the river Saint Lawrence and the 
river des prairies that surround the Island. So that, 
if peace prevailed among these peoples, they could 
land thereon from all sides. Omnia tempus habent; 
all will be done in time. 

The Gentlemen who have undertaken to [227 
i.e., 127] have Jesus Christ adored on this Island, 
performed a truly Christian action last Winter. They 
are persons of virtue, of merit, and of condition, 
people who profess to serve God publicly,— how 
pleasant those words (to serve God publicly) are to 
me!—not to blush for the humiliations of Jesus 
Christ, and not to be puffed up by worldly honors. 
These noble Souls having assembled in the great 
Church of Nostre Dame, at Paris, those who had taken 
holy orders said holy Mass, and the others received 
communion at the Altar of that Princess, which is 
fraught with miracles. Having the Savior of the 
world with them, they consecrated the Island of 
Mont-real to the Holy Family, desiring that it should 
thereafter bear the name of Nostre Dame de Mont- 
real. But let us listen, if you please, to what a vir- 
tuous person who hides from men, but who is well 
known to the Angels, writes on this subject. 

“‘As more ample information is desired regarding 
the particular circumstances of this Society, here is 


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


nommaf{t dorefnauant Noftre Dame de Mont-real: 
Mais écoutons, s’il vous plaift, ce qu’vne perfonne de 
vertu, qui fe cache aux hommes, & qui eft bien 
connué des Anges, efcrit fur ce fujet. 

Puis qu’on defire quelque inftruction plus ample 
des particularitez de cette Societé, voicy ce que i’en 
puis dire. Enuiron trente-cing perfonne de condi- 
tion fe font vnies pour trauailler 4 la conuerfion [128] 
des pauures Sauuages de la Nouuelle France, & pour 
tafcher d’en affembler bon nombre dedans 1’Ifle de 
Mont-real qu’ils ont choifie, eftimans qu’elle eft pro- 
pre pour cela, leur deffein eft de leur faire baftir des 
maifons pour les loger, & défricher de la terre pour 
les nourrir, & d’établir des Seminaires pour les 
inftruire, & vn Hoftel-Dieu pour fecourir leurs ma- 
lades. Tous ces Meffieurs & Dames s’affemblerent 
vn Ieudy vers la fin du mois de Feurier de cette 
année 1642. fur les dix heures du matin en l’Eglife 
de Noftre Dame de Paris, deuant 1’ Autel de la Saincte 
Vierge, ot vn Preftre d’entr’eux dift la faincte Meffe, 
& communia les affociez qui ne portent point le Cha- 
ractere. Ceux qui le portent celebrerent aux Autels 
qui font a l’entour de celuy de la Saincte Vierge: 14 
tous enfemble ils confacrerent 1’Ifle de Mont-real a la 
Saincte Famille de Noftre Seigneur, IEsvs, MARIE 
& IOSEPH, fous la protection particuliere de la 
Saincte Vierge ils fe confacrerent eux-mefmes, & 
s’vnirent en participation de prieres & de merites, 
afin qu’eftans conduits d’vn mefme efprit, ils trauail- 
lent plus purement pour la gloire de Dieu, & pour le 
[129] falut de ces pauures peuples, & que les prieres 
qu’ils feront pour leur conuerfion, & pour la fanctifi- 
cation d’vn chacun defdits Affociez, foient plus agre- 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 * 209 


what Iam able to tell you about it. About thirty- 
five persons of condition have joined together to 
labor for the conversion [128] of the poor Savages of 
New France, and to endeavor to gather a goodly 
number of them on the Island of Mont-real, which 
they have chosen as a suitable place for their object. 
Their intention is to have houses built, in which to 
lodge them; to till the soil, in order to feed them; 
to establish Seminaries for their instruction, and a 
Hostel-Dieu for succoring their sick. All these 
Gentlemen and Ladies met together one Thursday, 
toward the end of the month of February of this 
year, 1642, at ten o’clock in the morning, in the 
Church of Nostre Dame at Paris, before the Altar of 
the Blessed Virgin. There a Priest among their 
number said holy Mass, and gave communion to the 
associates who had not taken Orders; those who had, 
said Mass at the Altars around that of the Blessed 
Virgin. There, all together, they consecrated the 
Island of Mont-real to the Holy Family of Our Lord, 
Jesus, MARY, and JOSEPH, under the special 
protection of the Blessed Virgin. They also conse- 
crated themselves, and joined in a participation of 
prayers and good works; so that, being animated by 
one and the same spirit, they may labor more sincere- 
ly for the glory of God and for the [129] salvation of 
those poor peoples, and that the prayers that they 
may say for their conversion, and for the sanctifica- 
tion of each of the said Associates, may be more 
agreeable to the divine Majesty. We all hope that 
your Reverence will take part in this work, and will 
go in person to help those poor Infidels and to make 
them know their Creator.’’ 

These Gentlemen will permit me to tell them, by 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 22 


ables a fa diuine Maje{té, nous efperons tous que 
vo{tre Reuerence embraffera cét ouurage, & qu'elle 
ira en perfonne aider ces pauures Infidelles, pour 
leur faire connoiftre leur Createur. 

Ces Meffieurs me permettront de leur dire en paf- 
fant, qu’on ne mene perfonne a Iefus-Chrift que par 
la Croix; que les deffeins qu’on entreprend pour fa 
gloire en ce pays, fe concoiuent dedans les dépenfes 
& dedans les peines, fe pourfuiuent dedans les contra- 
rietez, s’acheuent dedans la patience, & fe couron- 
nent dedans la gloire. 

La precipitation dans cét affaire ne vaut rien; le 
zele y e{t excellent, la bonne conduite extremement 
requife, & la patience mettra la derniere main a ce 
grand ouurage. 

Le quinziéme d’Octobre de l’année derniere 1641. 
iour dédié a la memoire de Saincte Terefe, vnique- 
ment aimée & amante de la Saincte Famille, Mon- 
fieur le Gouuerneur, le R. P. Vimont & plufieurs 
[130] autres perfonnes bien verfées en la connoiffance 
du pays, arriuerent au lieu qu’on a choifi pour la 
premiere demeure qui fe doit faire dedans cette belle 
Ifle, que i’appellerois volontiers 1I’Ifle-Saincte, puis 
que tant d’Ames d’élite l’ont fi fainctement confacrée 
a la Saincte Famille. 

Le dix-feptiéme de May de la prefente année 1642. 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur mit le fleur de Maifon-neufue 
en poffeffion de cette Ifle, au nom de Meffieurs de 
Mont-real, pour y commencer les premiers baftimens: 
le R. P. Vimont fit chanter le Veni Creator; dift la 
faincte Meffe, expofa le Sainct Sacrement, pour 
impetrer du Ciel vn heureux commencement a cét 
ouurage: l’on met incontinent apres les hommes 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 211 


the way, that no one is brought to Jesus Christ 
except through the Cross; that the plans that are 
formed for his glory in this country are conceived in 
expense and in trouble, are carried out amid difficul- 
ties, are completed by patience, and are crowned in 
glory. 

Precipitation in such matters is useless, zeal is 
excellent, good management is greatly needed, and 
patience will put the finishing touch to this great 
work. 

On the fifteenth of October of last year, 1641, the 
day dedicated to the memory of Saint Theresa,— 
greatly beloved by and a great lover of the Holy 
Family,— Monsieur the Governor, Reverend Father 
Vimont, and several [130] other persons, well versed 
in knowledge of the country, arrived on the spot 
chosen for the first dwelling to be erected on this 
beautiful Island, which I would readily call the Holy 
Isle, as so many elect Souls have so piously conse- 
crated it to the Holy Family. 

On the seventeenth of May of the present year, 
1642, Monsieur the Governor placed the sieur de 
Maison-neufve in possession of the Island, in the name 
of the Gentlemen of Mont-real, in order to commence 
the first buildings thereon. Reverend Father Vi- 
mont had the Veni Creator chanted, said holy Mass, 
and exposed the Blessed Sacrament, to obtain from 
Heaven a happy beginning for the undertaking. 
Immediately afterwards, the men were set to work, 
and a redout was made of strong palisades for pro- 
tection against enemies. 

On the twenty-eighth of July, a small party of 
Algonquins, who were passing that way, stopped 
there for several days. The Captain brought his 


a I te 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


en befongne: on fait vn reduit de gros pieux, pour 
fe tenir 4 couuert contre les ennemis. 

Le vingt-huictiéme de Iuillet vne petite efcoiiade 
d’Algéquins paffant en ce quartier 14, s’y arrefterent 
quelques iours: vn Capitaine prefenta fon fils au 
Baptefme 4gé d’enuiron quatre ans: le Pere Iofeph 
Poncet le fit Chreftien, & le fieur de Maifon-neufue 
& Mademoifelle Mance le nommerent Iofeph, au nom 
de Meffieurs [131] & de Mef-dames de Noftre Dame 
de Mont-real. Voila le premier fruit que cette Ifle 
a porté pour le Paradis, ce ne fera pas le dernier, 
Crefcat in mille millia. 

Le quinziéme d’Aouft on folemnifa la premiere 
Fefte de cette Ifle-Saincte, le iour de la glorieufe & 
triomphante Affomption de la Saincte Vierge. Le 
beau tabernacle que ces Meffieurs ont enuoyé, fut 
mis fur l’Autel d’vne Chapelle, qui pour n’eftre 
encor baftie que d’écorce, n’en eft pas moins riche. 
Les bonnes Ames qui s’y rencontrerent, fe commu- 
nierent. On mit fur l’Autel les noms de ceux qui 
fouftiennent les deffeins de Dieu en la Nouuelle 
France, & chacun s’efforga de bannir l’ingratitude de 
fon coeur, & de fe ioindre auec les Ames fainctes, 
qui nous font vnies par des chaifnes plus pretieufes 
que l’or & que les diamans, chanta le Ze Deum en 
action de graces, de ce que Dieu nous faifoit la grace 
de voir le premier iour d’honneur & de gloire; en vn 
mot, la premiere grande Fefte de Noftre Dame de 
Mont-real, le tonnerre des canons fit retentir toute 
l’Ifle, & les Demons, quoy qu’accouftumez aux fou- 
dres, furent épouuantez d’vn bruit qui parloit de l’a- 
mour que nous [132] portons a la grande Maiftreffe, 
ie ne doute quafi pas que les Anges tutelaires des 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 213 


son, aged about four years, to be Baptized. Father 
Joseph Poncet made him a Christian, and the sieur 
de Maison-neufve and Mademoiselle Mance named 
him Joseph on behalf of the Gentlemen [131] and 
Ladies of Nostre Dame de Mont-real. This is the 
first fruit that this Island has borne for Paradise; it 
will not be the last. Cvrescat in mille millia. 

On the fifteenth of August was celebrated the first 
Festival of this Holy Isle, the day of the glorious 
and triumphant Assumption of the Blessed Virgin. 
The fine tabernacle sent out by the Gentlemen was 
placed upon the Altar of a Chapel which, as yet, is 
built only of bark, but which is none the less valu- 
able. The good Souls who were there received com- 
munion. ‘The names of those who are carrying out 
God’s designs in New France, were laid upon the 
Altar. All endeavored to banish ingratitude from 
their hearts, and to unite with those pious Souls who 
are joined to us by chains more precious than gold 
and diamonds. The Ze Deum was sung in thanks- 
giving to God for granting us the grace of seeing the 
first day of honor and of glory,—in a word, the first 
great Festival of Our Lady of Mont-real. The thun- 
der of the cannons caused the whole Island to reécho, 
and the Demons, although accustomed to thunder- 
bolts, were frightened by a voice which spoke of the 
love that we [132] bear to the great Mistress. I have 
no doubt that the tutelary Angels of the Savages 
_and of these countries must have marked down that 
day in the annals of Paradise. After the instruction 
given to the Savages, there was a fine Procession after 
Vespers, in which those good people took part,— 
quite astonished at seeing so pious a ceremony, at 
which we did not omit to pray to God for the King, 


ei 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vou. 22 


Sauuages & de ces contrées, n’ayent marqué ce iour 
dans les faftes du Paradis. Apres l’inftruction faite 
aux Sauuages, fe fit vne belle Proceffion apres les 
Vefpres, en laquelle ces bonnes gens affifterét, bien 
étonnez de voir vne fi faincte ceremonie, ot on 
n’oublia pas a prier Dieu pour la perfonne du Roy, de 
la Reyne, de leurs petits Princes, & de tout leur 
Empire; ce que les Sauuages firent auec beaucoup 
d’affection. Et ainfi nous vnifmes nos voeux auec 
tous ceux de la France. 

Apres la Fefte on fut vifiter les grands bois qui 
couurent cette Ifle; & eftans amenez 4 la montagne 
dont elle tire fon nom, deux des principaux Sauuages 
de la troupe, s’arreftans fur le fommet, nous dirent 
qu ils eftoient de la nation de ceux qui auoient autre- 
fois habité cette Ifle: puis en étendant leurs mains 
vers les collines qui font 4 l’Orient & au Sud de la 
montagne; Voila, faifoient-ils, les endroits ot il y 
auoit des Bourgades remplies de tres-grande quantité 
de Sauuages; les Hurons, qui pour lors nous eftoient 
ennemis, ont chaffé nos Anceftres de cette contrée, 
les vns [133] fe retirerent vers le pays des Abnaqui- 
ois, les autres au pays des Hiroquois, & vne partie 
vers les Hurons mefmes, & s’vniffans auec eux; & 
voila comme cette Ifle s’eft rendué deferte. Mon 
grand-pere, difoit vn vieillard, a cultiué la terre en 
ce lieu-cy: les bleds d’Inde y venoient tres-bien, le 
Soleil y eft tres-bon: & prenant de la terre auec fes 
mains; Regardez, difoit il, la bonté de la terre, elle 
e{t tres-excellente. On ne s’oublia pas 14 deffus de 
les inuiter, & de les preffer de retourner en leur 
pays, & de leur declarer le deffein des Capitaines, 
qui enuoyent icy du monde pour les fecourir, leur 


4 
q 


tah = 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 215 


for the Queen, for their little Princes, and for the 
whole of their Empire. This the Savages did with 


much affection. And thus did we unite our desires. 


with all those of France. 

After the Festival, we visited the great forest which 
covers this Island; and when we had been led to the 
mountain from which it takes its name, two of the 
chief Savages of the band stopped on its summit, and 
told us that they belonged to the nation of those who 
had formerly dwelt on this Island. Then, stretch- 
ing out their hands towards the hills that lie to the 
East and South of the mountain, ‘‘ There,’’ said they, 
‘‘ are the places where stood Villages filled with great 
numbers of Savages. The Hurons, who then were 
our enemies, drove our Forefathers from this coun- 
try. Some [133] went towards the country of the 
Abnaquiois, others towards the country of the Hiro- 
quois, some to the Hurons themselves, and joined 
them. And that is how this Island became deserted.’’ 
“My grandfather,” said an aged man, “tilled the 
soil on this spot. Maize grew very well on it, for 
the Sun is very strong there.’’ And, taking in his 
hands some earth, he said: ‘‘ See the richness of the 
soil; it is excellent.”” Thereupon we did not fail to 
invite and urge them to return to their country, and 
to inform them of the plans of the Captains who send 
people here to succor them, promising that assistance 
would be given them to build their little houses, and 
to till the soil, of which work they have lost the 
habit. One of them, named Atcheast, the father of 
little Joseph,—who seems a peaceable man, and 
who has a wife as staid as himself,— assured us that 
he would return in the Spring with all his family. 
The others were equally willing, but were afraid to 


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


promettant qu’on les aideroit a baftir de petites 
demeures, & 4 défricher la terre dont ils ont perdu 
Vhabitude. S’eftans quafi rendus errans de feden- 
taires qu’ils eftoient, ils promirent qu’ils traitteroient 
de cét affaire en leur pays. L’vn d’eux nommé 
Atchea{ft, pere du petit Iofeph, homme qui paroift 
paifible, & qui a fait rencontre d’vne femme auffi 
pofée que luy, affeura qu’il retourneroit au Prin- 
temps auec toute fa famille. Les autres eftoient 
dans la mefme volonté, mais ils n’oferent iamais 
donner parole de s’arrefter icy pour défricher la 
terre, la [334 i.e., 134] crainte des Hiroquois leurs 
ennemis, leur donne trop de terreur; non pas qu’ils 
ne foient affeurez aupres de nos habitations, mais ils 
n’oferoient s’écarter pour leur chaffe ou pour leur 
pefche. Les ennemis peuuét aifément venir aux 
aguets, & dreffer des embufches 4 ceux qui s’écartent 
tant foit peu des lieux de defenfe: fi bien que i’ay de 
la peine 4 croire qu’il y ait iamais grand nombre de 
Sauuages 4 Noftre Dame de Mont-real, que les Hiro- 
quois ne foient domtez, ou que nous n’ayons la paix 
auec eux. Il faut efperer que cela fe pourra faire, 
nonobftant les difficultez prefentes. On follicitera 
tant le Ciel en l’vne & l’autre France, qu’en fin le 
Dieu du Ciel & de la terre, donnera fa benediction A 
cette pauure terre, Et videbit omnis caro falutare fuum. 
Amen, Amen. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 217 


give their word that they would settle here to till the 
soil, as the [334 i.e., 134] dread of their enemies, 
the Hiroquois, caused them too much terror. Not 
that they do not feel secure near our houses, but they 
would be afraid to leave them for the purpose of 
fishing or hunting. Their enemies can easily lie in 
wait for them and prepare ambushes for those who 
wander any distance from the defended places. So 
that I have some difficulty in believing that there 
will ever be a very large number of Savages at Nostre 
Dame de Mont-real, until either the Hiroquois are 
subjugated, or we make peace with them. Let us 
hope that this may come to pass, in spite of present 
difficulties. So many prayers will be addressed to 
Heaven in either France, that at length the God of 
Heaven and earth will grant his blessing to this poor 
country. Et videbit omnis caro salutare suum. Amen, 
Amen. 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


[135] CHAPITRE X. 
DE LA MISSION DE SAINCTE-CROIX A TADOUSSAC. 


OVR faire porter de bons fruits a cette nouuelle 
Pp vigne, il faudroit dreffer vne Maifon a Tadouf- 
fac, ot deux Peres de noftre Compagnie def- 
cendroient au Printemps, & n’en fortiroient qu’A 
l’Automne, ils feroient autant de bien aux Francois 
qui font 1a tout 1’ Efté, qu’aux Sauuages; ils rallie- 
roient quelques petites Nations qui font éparfes cd 
& 14 dans les terres qui ne demandent pas mieux que 
d’eftre inftruites. Cette Maifon ne nuiroit pas au 
deffein de Meffieurs de la Nouuelle France, pour 
plufieurs raifons; joint que les Sauuages de Tadou- 
fac, ceux du Sagne, les Berfiamites, les Papinachi¥e- 
khi prient auec inftance qu’on la faffe baftir; affeu- 
rans que les peuples plus éloignez y aborderoient de 
tous coftez pour y eftre inftruits; & par mefme 
moyen, pour iouyr du commerce des Frangois. Mais 
venons [136] au fujet de ce Difcours. 

On a desja remarqué, que les nouueaux Chreftiens 
de Sainct Iofeph ont donné les premieres atteintes 
aux Sauuages de Tadoufac. Aucommencement qu’ils 
leur parlerent de Dieu, ils furent mocquez & baffoiiez 
comme des gens qui n’auoient point d’efprit d’auoir 
quitté leurs anciennes fagons de faire; ces bons 
Neophytes fouffrans auec patience, & auec vne douce 
humilité. 

Les iniures & les affronts qu’on leur faifoit, tou- 


| 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 219 


[135] CHAPTER X. 
OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY CROSS AT TADOUSSAC. 


N order that this new vine may bear good fruit, a 
House should be erected at Tadoussac, to which 
two Fathers of our Society would go down in 

the Spring, and return only in the Autumn. They 
would do as much good to the French, who are there 
all Summer, as to the Savages. They would collect 
together some small Nations that are scattered here 
and there throughout the country, and who ask noth- 
ing better than to receive instruction. Such a House 
would not interfere with the plans of the Gentlemen 
of New France, for many reasons. Moreover, the 
Savages of Tadousac, those of the Sagne, the 
Bersiamites, and the Papinachiwekhi, earnestly beg 
that it be built,— asserting that the more distant 
tribes will come in from all sides to receive instruc- 
tion, and, by the same means, to trade with the 
French. But let us come [136] to the subject of this 
Relation. 

It has already been mentioned that the new Chris- 
tians of Saint Joseph made the first attempts at con- 
verting the Savages of Tadousac. At first, when they 
spoke of God, they were jeered and scoffed at, as 
people who had no sense, for having given up their 
old customs,—these good Neophytes enduring pa- 
tiently, and with sweet humility, the insults and 
affronts offered to them. 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


cherent le coeur des Infideles d’autant plus fortement, 
qu’ils ne defifterent point de leurs exercices, nonob- 
{tant tous les rebuts qu’ils fouffroient de leurs Com- 
patriotes. La Foy a du pouuoir, quand elle fait ren- 
contre d’vn bon cceur. Ces Barbares admirans petit 
A petit la beauté de noftre creance, vindrent prier a 
Kebec qu’on leur enuoyaft quelqu’vn pour les in- 
{truire: on leur accorda vn Pere l’année paffée; ils 
ont rechargé au Printemps, & le Pere lean de Quen, 
quia connoiffance de la langue Montagnefe, leur a 
efté donné: efcoutons ce qu'il nous dira de fon voy- 
age. Les Sautuages, dit-il, témoignerent vne ioye 
vniuerfelle A mon arriuée, [137] ils me drefferent 
vne cabane a part, qui feruit de Chapelle & de mai- 
fon tout enfemble. I’y celebrois tous les iours la 
faincte Meffe, ot tous les Chreftiens affiftoient. I’y 
faifois l’eau benifte; tous les Dimanches i’y ay bap- 
tifé quelques Catechumenes auec les ceremonies de 
lEglife. I’y aflemblois les hommes & les femmes, 
& les enfans par diuerfes bandes a part, pour les 
inftruire. Il s’y trouua cinquante Chreftiens, qui fe 
confefferent & la Pentecofte. Les fatigues qu’on 
fouffre parmy ces peuples, font adoucies par les doux 
fruits qu’on recueille de la femence qu'on iette dans 
leur coeur. 

Ces bones gens voulas faire quelque diftinctio entre 
les iours cOmuns, & les iours qu’on refpecte, comme 
ils parlent, s’affembloient les Feftes & les Dimanches 
apres le difner dans leur Chapelle d’écorces, pour 
reciter tout haut leur Chapelet auec le Pere; & apres 
auoir rendu ce petit tribut a Noftre Dame, ils chan- 
toient vn Hymne en fon honneur, compofé en leur 
langue. Si quelqu’vn, pour quelque empefchement, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 221 


This conduct touched the hearts of the Infidels, 
all the more because the Christians did not desist 
from their exercises, in spite of all the rebuffs that 
they experienced from their Countrymen. Faith is 
powerful, when it encounters a good heart. These 
Barbarians began little by little to admire the beauty 
of our creed, and came to Kebec to ask that some one 
be sent to instruct them; a Father was given to them 
last year. They returned to the charge in the 
Spring, and Father Jean de Quen, who understands 
the Montagnais language, was sent tothem. Let us 
hear what he tells us of his journey. ‘‘* The Sav- 
ages,’ he says, “‘manifested universal joy at my 
arrival. [137] They put up a cabin for me, apart 
from the others, which served at once as a Chapel 
and asa house. Every day I said therein holy Mass, 
which was attended by all the Christians, and sprin- 
kled the holy water; and every Sunday I baptized 
in it some Catechumens, with the rites of the Church. 
I assembled the men, women, and children therein 
in separate groups, for instruction. There were fifty 
Christians there, who confessed their sins at Pente- 
cost. The hardships that one has to undergo among 
these peoples are mitigated by the sweet fruit 
obtained from the seed sown in their hearts.”’ 

These good people—who desired to establish a 
distinction between the ordinary days and the days 
to be respected, as they say—vused to meet after 
dinner on Festivals and on Sundays, in their bark 
Chapel, to recite aloud the Rosary with the Father. 
After rendering this slight tribute to Our Lady, they 
would sing a Hymn in her honor, composed in their 
own language. If any one were prevented, for any 


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


ne pouuoit affifter au diuin Sacrifice, il reparoit cette 
perte fi toft qu’il eftoit libre, par vne priere qu’il 
venoit faire [138] en cette petite Eglife, ot il recitoit 
fon Chapelet 4 deux genoux deuant que d’en fortir. 

Le Pere leur difant qu’a la verité c’eftoit chofe 
bien agreable 4 Dieu d’entendre tous les iours la 
faincte Meffe; neantmoins qu'il ne fe fafchoit pas 
quand on s’en abfentoit les iours de trauail: 1’vn 
d’entr’eux prenant la parole, luy dift; Mon Pere, 
ne nous dy point que Dieu n’eft pas fafché fi nous 
n’affiftons point 4 la faincte Meffe; dy-nous feulement 
qu’il agrée que nous nous y trouuions; cela fuffit 
pour nous y faire venir; les pareffeux fe pourroient 
preualoir de la moitié de ton difcours. 

Les prieres fe font le foir & le matin dans les ca- 
banes, auec vne telle confolation de ces bonnes gens, 
que quelques Sauuages du Saguene fe voulans em- 
barquer pour retourner en leur pays, vinrent querir 
le Pere dés le poinct du iour, pour les faire prier 
Dieu deuant leur depart. Il n’y a pas long-temps 
que les Sauuages auoient encor de la honte de prier 
Dieu publiquement, maintenant on ne rougit plus 
pour fe mettre & genoux, pour ioindre les mains, 
pour prier hautement; c’eft vn blafme de n’aimer 
point la priere. Cechangement [139] donne bien de 
la confolation 4 ceux qui ont veu l’horreur qu’auoient 
ces Barbares de noftre faincte Foy, & les rifées qu’ils 
fa[ijfoient de ceux qui la prefchent. Le Diable ne 
laiffe pas encor de donner des terreurs a quelques- 
vns. Ce mal-heureux efprit leur auoit perfuadé que 
le Baptefme leur eftoit fatal; qu’ils ne pouuoient 
quitter les couftumes de leurs Anceftres, fans quitter 
la vie. Cette tromperie regne encor dans les coeurs 


‘ 
‘ 
: 
4 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 223 


reason, from being present at the divine Sacrifice, 
he made up for the omission as soon as he was free 
to do so, by a prayer said [138] in this little Church, 
where he recited the Rosary on his knees before 
going out. 

When the Father told them that, in truth, it was 
very pleasing to God to hear holy Mass every day, 
but that, nevertheless, he was not angry when any 
one absented himself from it on working days, one 
of them addressed him and said: ‘‘ My Father, do 
not tell us that God is not angry if we are not present 
at holy Mass; tell us only that he is pleased when 
we are there. That is enough to make us come. 
The sluggards may take advantage of the half of thy 
discourse.” 

Prayers are said night and morning in the cabins, 
with such consolation to these good people that when 
some Savages of the Saguene were about to embark 
to return to their own country, they came to find the 
Father at break of day, to pray to God with them 
previous to their departure. Not long ago the Sav- 
ages were still ashamed to pray to God in public; 
now they are not ashamed to kneel down, to clasp 
their hands, and to pray aloud. Not to love prayer 
is considered blameworthy. Such a change [139] 
gives great consolation to those who have seen the 
abhorrence that these Barbarians had for our holy 
Faith, and the jests that they directed at those who 
preach it. The Devil still causes terror to some. 
That evil spirit had persuaded them that Baptism 
was fatal to them, and that they could not forsake 
the customs of their Ancestors without giving up 
their lives. This erroneous idea still prevails in the 


ae 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


de quelques-vns. Le Pere voulant baptifer quelques 
ieunes garcons de la trouppe qui eftoient bien 
inftruits, & qui auoient defiré ce Sacrement, [ils] fe 
retirerent au poinct qu’on les vouloit faire Enfans de 
Dieu. L’vn deux retourna bien toft apres incité par 
fes camarades, quile menacoient de 1l’Enfer. L’au- 
tre fut plus endurcy. Ie fuis-mort, fait-il, fi ie me 
fais baptifer; depuis que i’en ay eu la volonté, mon 
ceil a commencé a me faire mal (vne fluxion luy eftoit 
tombée fur l’vn de fes yeux.) Si ie ne fuis [sc. me 
fais] Chreftien, c’eft fait de moy, ie ne verray pas le 
Printemps prochain, ie mourray cét Hyuer dedans 
les bois, Vnus affumetur, alter relinquetur: le choix 
& le rebut que Dieu fait des hommes eft dans les 
tenebres, auffi bien que dans l’equité. 

[140] Tay parlé cy-deffus du Baptefme d’vn nom- 
mé Emery Tchames. Ce bon Neophyte fe retire 
ordinairement 4 Tadouffac; s’il continué comme il a 
commencé, il aidera puiffamment fes Compatriotes 
a fe ranger fous les drappeaux de la verité. Ie l’ay 
veu fouuent, dit le Pere, vne demie heure entiere 
apres les prieres communes, priant Dieu les mains 
jointes, & les genoux en terre, pof{ture tres-penible 
aux Sauuages; auec vne telle ferueur, qu’on voyoit 
bien que fon coeur alloit plus vifte que fes levres. 
La nuict me promenant a l’entour des cabanes, ie 
lay par fois apperceu dans cette pofture, fans qu’il 
euft cdnoiffance que ie le regardaffe. Son oraifon 
faite en fecret, eftoit bien connué de celuy qui change 
des pierres en des enfans d’Abraham quand il luy 
plaift, Dieu 1’éprouua par vne maladie, qui luy donna 
fujet de fe fortifier en la Foy. Le Diable prit fon 
temps, il le voulut troubler dans fon fommeil. I 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 295 


minds of some of them. ‘The Father wished to bap- 
tize some young boys of the band, who were well 
instructed and who had desired that Sacrament; but 
they drew back just as they were about to be made 
Children of God. One of them returned soon after, 
incited thereto by his companions, who threatened 
him with Hell. The other was more hardened. ‘I 
shall die,’’ he said, ‘‘ if I get baptized. Since I have 
been wishing for it, my eye has commenced to pain 
me” (one of his eyes had become inflamed). If 1 
become a Christian, it is all over with me. I shall 
not see next Spring. I shall die next Winter in the 
woods.” Unus assumetur, alter relinquetur. God's 
selection and rejection of men are accomplished in 
secret, as well as in equity. 

[140] I have already spoken of the Baptism of one 
Emery Tchames. That good Neophyte usually lives 
at Tadoussac. If he continue as he has begun, he 
will greatly assist his Countrymen to range them- 
selves under the banners of truth. ‘‘I have often 
seen him,’’ says the Father, ‘‘ spend a full half-hour 
after the prayers in common, praying to God with 
clasped hands and on his knees,—a position that is 
very painful for Savages,— with such fervor that it 
was easy to see that his heart went faster than his 
lips. While walking around the cabins at night, I 
have sometimes found him in that position, without 
his being aware that I was observing him.’’ His 
prayer, said in secret, was well known to him who 
changes stones into children of Abraham when it 
pleases him. Godtried him by means of an illness, 
that gave him occasion to fortify himself in the 
Faith. The Devil chose his own time; he wished 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


vid en fonge vne perfonne qui luy difoit; Fais vn 
feftin 4 tout manger: fi tu veux guerir, mets des 
plumes d’Aigles fur ton corps en la facon que ie te 
diray: tu es mort fi tu n’obeis; fur tout ne prie plus, 
c’eft la priere qui te fait malade. [141] Ce bon 
homme fut bien étonné a fon réueil. Les Sauuages 
n’ont point de plus forte creance que les fonges, ce 
font leurs Oracles, aufquels ils obeiffent comme & 
vne fouueraine Diuinité. Il raconte A fa femme ce 
qu’ila veu; Il n’importe, fait-il, que ie meure, iamais 
ie ne reprendray ce que i’ay quitté; c’eft le Diable 
qui me veut tromper, i’éprouueray s’il a du pouuoir 
fur moy. Quand ie verrois la mort deuant mes yeux, 
ie n’obeiray iamais 4 ce qu’il m’a commandé, ie veux 
e{tre fidelle 4 Dieu, a la vie, & Ala mort. Wn fonge 
en France n’eft qu’vn fonge, mais c’eft icy vn poinct 
de Theologie, ou vn article de Foy: il faut vne grace 
bien forte pour le faire méprifer. Enfin ce bon Neo- 
phyte guerit: N. Seigneur luy ayat rendu la fanté, il 
mena fes deux enfans en la cabane du Pere, les ex- 
horta fortement a bien viure, A fe rendre obeiffans, 
& a fe faire inftruire pour le Baptefme. Ie ne vous 
contrains point, difoit-il, d’embraffer la Foy, cela fe 
doit faire auec vne frache vol6té; mais fi vous voulez 
cofoler voftre pere, entrez dans le chemin du Ciel ot 
ie fuis a prefent: i’ay de la peine A vous voir dans 
les tromperies du Diable, dépefchez vous d’eftre en- 
fas de Dieu; [142] ie fgay bien qu’on vous fera long- 
temps demander le Baptefme, pour la crainte qu’on 
a que vous ne vous mariez a quelque Infidele, mais 
ie penfe auoir affez d’authorité fur vous pour empef- 
cher ce coup. 

L’inconftance des mariages, & la facilité de fe 


; 
: 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 227 


to attack him in his sleep. He saw, ina dream, a 
person who said to him. ‘‘ Prepare an eat-all feast; 
if thou wilt be cured, put Eagles’ feathers on thy 
body, in the manner that I shall tell thee; thou art 
a dead man if thou dost not obey. Above all, pray 
no more; it is prayer that has made thee ill.’’ [141] 
The good man was greatly astonished when he 
awoke. The Savages have no stronger belief than 
dreams; they are their Oracles, which they obey as 
a sovereign Divinity. He related to his wife what 
he had seen. ‘‘ No matterif I have todie,’’ he said; 
*‘T will never return to what I have abandoned. It 
is the Devil who seeks to deceive me. I will find 
out whether he has any power over me. Even if I 
saw death before my eyes, I would never do what he 
has commanded me; I will be faithful to God, in life 
and unto death.” In France, a dream is only a 
dream; but here it is a point of Theology, or an 
article of Faith,—it requires great grace to set it at 
naught. Finally, this good Neophyte was cured. 
When Our Lord had restored’ him to health, he 
brought his two children into the Father’s cabin, and 
urgently exhorted them to lead a good life, to be 
obedient, and to be instructed for Baptism. ‘‘I do 
not compel you,” he said, ‘‘ to embrace the Faith, for 
that must be done of your own free will. But, if 
you wish to please your father, enter into the road to 
Heaven, in which I now am. Iam sorry to see you 
under the spells of the Devil; hasten to become 
children of God. [142] I know well that you will be 
kept for a long time asking for Baptism, owing to 
the fear of your marrying Infidels; but I think that 
I have sufficient authority over you to prevent such 
an act.’”’ 


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


repudier les vns les autres, font vn grand obftacle a 
la Foy de Iefus-Chrift; on n’ofe baptifer les ieunes 
gens, quoy qu’ils foient tres-bien difpofez, pource 
que l’experience nous apprend que la couftume de 
quitter vne femme ou vn mary fafcheux, eft puiffante. 
Vne bonne femme auoit vne fille Aagée d’enuiron 
quinze ans; la fille eftoit mieux inftruite que la mere, 
pource qu’elle auoit plusde memoire. Le Pere don- 
na le Baptefme 4 la mere, & le refufa a la fille; mais 
c’ef{toit chofe agreable de voir la fille feruir quafi de 
Maraine 4 fa mere; car cette bonne vieille ne fe fou- 
uenoit quafi plus des réponfes qu’elle deuoit faire. 
Sa fille luy fuggeroit auec vne grande ioye de voir fa 
mere Chreftienne, & vne trifteffe d’eftre priuée du 
mefme bon-heur. Cette bonne femme eftant bapti- 
{ée difoit A fa fille, quand elle ne pouuoit affifter a 
la Meffe pour fes infirmitez; [143] Mon enfant, va- 
t’en dire au Pere qu’il prie pour moy en la Chapelle; 
& que fi i’y pouuois aller, que ce feroit toute ma con- 
folation. Les feftins 4 tout manger, les Sorciers, les 
tambours, les chanfons & les dances fuperititieufes 
ne paroiffent quafi plus. Les pierres fortileges qui 
rendent les hommes heureux au jeu, ou a la chaffe, 
n'ont plus de credit que parmy quelques opiniaftres, 
qui ne les produifent qu’en cachette, craignans d’eftre 
mocquez des fideles. Ils apprehendent mefme de 
chanter & de danfer en leurs feftins, de peur d’appro- 
cher de leurs anciennes fuper{titions. Vn Neophyte 
eftant prié de chanter & de dancer en vn banquet ot 
il y auoit des Sauuages de quelques autres Nations, 
fe leua debout, & dift ces paroles deuant que de com- 
mencer; Vous fcauez tous que i’ay receu la Foy; c’eft 
vn prefent de celuy qui a tout fait, que i’efpere de 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 229 


The inconstancy of marriages and the facility with 
which they divorce each other, are a great obstacle 
to the Faith of Jesus Christ. We do not dare to 
baptize the young people, though they may be very 
well disposed, because experience teaches us that 
the custom of abandoning a disagreeable wife or hus- 
band has a strong hold on them. A good woman 
had a daughter about fifteen years of age, who was 
better instructed than her mother, because her mem- 
ory was better. The Father administered Baptism 
to the mother, and refused it to the daughter. But 
it was pleasant to see the latter acting as a sort of 
Godmother to her parent; for the good old woman 
could hardly remember the answers that she had to 
give. Her daughter prompted her,—very joyfully, 
because she saw her mother a Christian; and sorrow- 
fully, because she was deprived of the same happi- 
ness. When this good woman was baptized, she 
would say to her daughter, whenever her infirmities 
prevented her from attending Mass: [143] ‘‘ My 
child, go and tell the Father to pray for me in the 
Chapel; and that, if I could go there, it would be all 
my consolation.’’ Feasts at which all gorge them- 
selves, Sorcerers, drums, superstitious songs and 
dances, are almost no longer seen. The charmed 
stones that make men lucky at play, or in the chase, 
are held in esteem only by some stubborn persons, 
who produce them in secret only, for fear of being 
jeered at by the faithful. They are even afraid to 
sing and dance at their feasts, lest they might be 
drawn towards their former superstitions. A Neo- 
phyte who was urged to sing and dance at a feast, 
at which Savages of other Nations were present, 


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


conferuer iufques au dernier fofipir de ma vie: I’ay 
mis bas toutes nos anciennes fuper{ftitions pour en 
iouyr: ie les ay renuerfées, pour iamais plus ne les 
redreffer: que fi vous me voyez maintenant chanter 
par vne pure recreation, & pour bienueigner les nou- 
ueaux hoftes qui nous font [144] venus voir; 14 deffus 
il entonne fa chanfon. 

Les Sauuages chantent pour l’ordinaire les vns 
apres les autres en leurs feftins; & pendant que l’vn 
d’eux crie ou chante tant qu’il peut, les autres répon- 
dent par vne forte refpiration, ne pouffans que cette 
voix au fond de l’eftomach, H6, hd, hé; frappans 
auec leurs cueilliers ou auec des baftons fur leurs 
plats d’écorces, ou fur quelque autre chofe. [Ils gar- 
dent vne affez bonne cadence, s’accordans bien dans 
leurs chants & dans leurs dances. Apres que le Neo- 
phyte dont ie viens de parler, eut acheué fa chanfon, 
vn autre Chreftien entonna la fienne; mais ayant 
apperceu le Pere dans la cabane, il s’écrie au milieu 
de fon chant; Mon Pere, fi ce que ie fais eft mau- 
uais, dites-le moy, ie le quitteray prefentement fans 
paffer plus auant. Le Pere voyant bien qu’il n’y 
auoit aucune fuperftition en ce banquet, luy permit 
d’acheuer fa chanfon. 

Pendant le fejour que fit le Pere 4 Tadouffac, quel- 
ques canots de diuerfes Nations y aborderent bien 
diuerfement difpofez pour la Foy. Quelques Algon- 
quins de l’Ifle extremement fuperbes, & par confe- 
quent [145] fort éloignez de Dieu, apporterent du 
détourbier 4 la publication de 1’ Euangile, les feftins a 
tout manger, les tambours, les dances, les jeux recom- 
mencerent 4 leur arriuée. Le Pere attaqua le Capi- 
taine qui toleroit ces defordres, iufques 4 fe bander 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 231 


stood up and, before commencing, said: ‘‘ You all 
know that I have received the Faith. It is a gift 
from him who has made all things, and I hope to 
retain it until I draw my last breath. I have aban- 
doned all our old superstitions, in order to enjoy it; 
I have cast them away, never to take them up again. 
You now hear me sing merely for amusement, and 
to welcome the new guests who have [144] come to 
see us.’’ Then he began his song. 

The Savages generally sing one after the other, at 
their feasts. While one is yelling or singing as loud 
as he can, the others reply by a deep respiration, 
uttering this sound only from the depths of their 
chests, “‘ Hd, ho, h6,’’— striking with their spoons or 
with sticks on their bark plates, or on some other 
object. They observe the cadence fairly well, keep- 
ing good time in their songs and dances. After the 
Neophyte of whom I have just spoken had finished 
his song, another Christian began to sing. But, ob- 
serving the Father in the cabin, he called out in the 
middle of his chant: ‘‘ My Father, if what Iam doing 
is wrong, tell me, and I will stop at once without 
going any further.’’ As the Father saw very well 
that there was no superstition in this feast, he 
allowed him to finish his song. 

During the Father’s stay at Tadoussac, some 
canoes put in there containing men of various Na- 
tions, who are differently disposed towards the Faith. 
Some Algonquins of the Island, who are very arro- 
gant and consequently [145] very averse to God, dis- 
turbed the preaching of the Gospel. Feasts at which 
all gorge themselves, drums, dances, and games 
began again on their arrival. The Father upbraided 


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


publiquement contre luy, les Sauuages de Tadouffac 
fe fentans appuyez de l’authorité & du zele du Pere, 
barricaderent les portes de leurs cabanes, pour em- 
pefcher la ieuneffe de commettre aucune infolence. 
Ces Barbares ont vne couftume tres-abominable, fi 
quelques guerriers, ou quelques ieunes gens paffent 
en quelque quartier ot il y ait des Sauuages, il leur 
e{t permis d’aller vifiter la nuict les cabanes, & d’a- 
border les filles. Or iagoit que le plus fouuent tout 
fe paffe en fimples difcours; comme il s’y commet 
auffi des defordres, nous crions puiffamment contre 
ces fagons de faire: fi bien que les Chreftiens & les 
Catechumenes, & mefme encor ceux qui ont quelque 
bone inclination pour la Foy, refiftent 4 cette impu- 
dence. Or les Sauuages de Tadouffac n’ofans pas 
defendre publiquement l’entrée de leurs cabanes A la 
ieuneffe Algonquine, faifoient ranger toutes les filles 
[146] en vn quartier 4 part, commandans aux ieunes 
Montagnais de coucher a l’entrée des cabanes, qu’ils 
fermoient contre leurs couftumes; car iour & nuict 
les cabanes font ouuertes, n’ayans le plus fouuent 
qu’vne peau volante pour toute porte. Ils attachoient 
auffi des fonnettes aux autres endroits par ott on pou- 
uoit entrer, afin que ce bruit réueillaft ceux qui fe- 
roient dans la cabane, & que ces impudens fe voyans 
découuerts, s’en retournaffent fans paffer plus auant: 
les autres canots qui vinrent du Sagne & d’autres 
quartiers, apporterent des hommes bien plus mo- 
deftes, des efprits plus pofez; en vn mot des ames 
aufquelles il femble qu’il ne manque qu’vn peu de 
fecours temporel, pour eftre predeftinées. Quelques- 
vns d’eux ayans ouy parler des grands biens de l’au- 
tre vie, & des horribles tourmens qui font preparez 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 233 


the Captain who tolerated this disorderly conduct, 
even going so far as publicly to side against him. 
The Savages of Tadoussac, feeling that they were 
supported by the Father’s authority and zeal, barred 
the doors of their cabins to prevent the young men 
from being guilty of any insolence. These Barba- 
rians have a most abominable custom. Whenever 
any warriors or any young men go into any place 
where there are Savages, they are allowed to visit 
the cabins at night, and to accost the girls. Now, 
although in most instances they merely indulge in 
conversation, still, as unseemly actions are also com- 
mitted, we strongly inveigh against this custom; so 
that the Christians and Catechumens, and also those 
who have a leaning towards the Faith, oppose such 
immodest conduct. Now, as the Savages of Tadous- 
sac did not dare publicly to forbid entrance to their 
cabins to the young Algonquin men, they made all 
the girls retire [146] to a separate place, ordering the 
young Montagnais men to sleep at the entrances of 
their cabins, which they closed, contrary to their 
custom,—for their cabins are open day and night, 
having only a loosely hanging skin foradoor. They 
also fastened bells at other places by which an 
entrance might be effected, so that those who were in 
the huts would be awakened by the noise; and the 
profligate fellows, finding themselves discovered, 
would retire without going any further. The other 
canoes, which came from the Sagne and other places, 
brought men much more modest, and with better 
regulated minds,—in a word, with souls, which 
seem to need only a little temporal aid in order to be 
saved. Some of them who had heard of the great 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


aux Infideles, difoient au Pere; Que ne venez-vous 
nous inftruire en noftre pays? Vous faites plufieurs 
iournées de chemin, pour courir apres des peuples 
qui vous fuyent, qui font remplis de fuperftitions; en 
vn mot qui vous méprifent, & qui vous haiffent; & 
vous nous abandonnez, nous autres qui fommes quafi 
a voftre porte, [147] qui vous honorons, & qui fou- 
haittons embraffer ce que vous enfeignez. I’ay des- 
ja entendu quelque chofe de voftre creance, dift leur 
Capitaine, Iefus m’a guery d’vne maladie qui m’al- 
loit porter au tombeau. Vn Sauuage de Sainc 
Iofeph proche de Kebec, s’eftant trouué auec moy il 
y a deux ans, m’enfeigna qu’il falloit auoir recours 
a luy dans nos befoins; qu’il eftoit bon, & qu’il eftoit 
tout-puiffant. Me voyat donc 4 deux doigts de la 
mort, ie le priay de m’affifter, il me guerit; & ceux 
qui eftoient frappez du mefme mal que moy, & qui 
ne l’inuoquerent pas, en moururent. Si on pouuoit 
dreffer vne petite maifon 4 Tadouffac, comme i’ay 
dit, tous les reliquats de ces petites Nations qui font 
dans les terres, fe viendroient 14 faire inftruire, & 
le commerce des Francois n’en feroit que meilleur. 
Or iacoit qu’on ne puiffe pas bien aifément in{ftruire 
ny recueillir les Sauuages fans ce petit accommode- 
ment, le Pere ne laiffa pas neantmoins de les inuiter 
a fe trouuer tous les ans 4 Tadouffac: & pour mieux 
garder la couftume de ces peuples, il mit vn prefent 
entre les mains d’vn Chreftien, pour eftre fait au nom 
de tous [148] les Neophytes de Sainct Iofeph: car 
comme il a efté dit fouuentefois és Relations prece- 
dentes, les prefens font les paroles de ce pays-cy. 
Ce bon Neophyte diuifa le prefent en deux: & quand 
tout le monde fut entré en la cabane ot fe deuoit 


1642] RELATION OF 162 235 


blessings of the other life, and of the horrible 
torments prepared for Infidels, said to the Father: 
‘* Why do you not come and instruct us in our coun- 
try? You have to travel several days, run after peo- 
ple who flee from you, who are full of superstitions, — 
in a word, who despise and hate you; while you 
abandon us, who are almost at your door, [147] who 
honor you, and who wish to embrace what you 
teach.’’ ‘‘I have already heard something about 
your belief,’’ said their Captain; ‘‘ Jesus cured me 
of an illness that was taking me to my grave. A 
Savage of Saint Joseph, near Kebec, who was with 
me two years ago, taught me that we should have 
recourse to him in all our necessities; that he was 
good and all-powerful. When I saw myself within 
two finger-lengths of death, I begged him to assist 
me. Hecured me; and all who had the same dis- 
ease that I had, and who did not pray to him, died.”’ 
If we could build a small house at Tadoussac, as I 
have already said, all the remnants of the smaller Na- 
tions who live inland, will come there to be instructed 
and the trade of the French will gain by it. 

Now, although it is not easy to instruct or receive 
Savages without this slight accommodation, never- 
theless the Father invited them to come to Tadous- 
sac every year; and, the better to follow the custom 
of these people, he placed a present in the hands of 
a Christian, to be given in the name of all [148] the 
Neophytes of Saint Joseph,—for, as already stated 
in these Relations, presents constitute the speech of 
this country. The good Neophyte divided the pres- 
ent into two; and, when all had entered the cabin 
where the Assembly was to be held, he commenced 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


tenir 1’ Affemblée, il commence fa harangue en ces 
termes: Il n’y a pas long-temps que nous n’auions 
point d’yeux, nous étendions les mains comme des 
aueugles; & nous ne trouuions rien qui ne nous por- 
taft dans des precipices, non feulement nos paupieres 
eftoient fermées, mais nos oreilles eftoient aufii bouf- 
chées, nous n’entendions rien de ce qui fe dit au Ciel. 
Enfin la parole a percé nos oreilles, & defillé nos 
yeux. Pleuft 4 Dieu que vous vifflez ce que nous 
voyons, & ce que nous entendons, & ce que nous 
admirons! Ces chofes font auffi étonnantes, qu’elles 
font veritables. Ce n’eft pas moy qui les vous decla- 
rera, ce fera le Pere qui eft venu icy pour vous in- 
ftruire. Et afin que vos oreilles ne refiftent point a 
fes paroles, il vous prefente par mes mains des poin- 
cons ou des alefnes, pour les percer 14 deffus, il tire 
le premier prefent, & le iette deuant ceux qu’il inui- 
toit & embraffer la Foy. Apres [149] cela, il conti- 
nué fa harangue: Ce n’eft pas affez d’auoir les oreil- 
les percées, & d’écouter ce qu’on vous dira; il faut 
quitter vos anciennes couftumes & vos fuper{titions ; 
car il ne faut pas mefler les chofes bonnes auec les 
mauuaifes. Ie ne vous inuite a rien que nous n’ayons 
fait; nous auds bruflé tous nos chants, toutes nos 
dances, toutes nos fuperftitions, & tout ce que le 
Diable auoit enfeigné A nos anceftres, afin que vous 
brufliez auffi les voftres auec autant de facilité. Voi- 
cy du petun que le Pere vous prefente, que vous 
mettrez en feu; en le confommant, vous confomme- 
rez vos anciennes facons de faire, pour en prendre 
de meilleures: & en difant cela, il tire quelques pains 
de petun qui compofoient le fecond prefent. 

Le Capitaine répondit auec vne grande modettie; 


. 
z 
5 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 237 


his harangue in these words: ‘‘ It is not long since 
we had no eyes; we stretched out our hands like the 
blind, and found nothing except what led us toward 
precipices. Not only were our eyelids closed, but 
our ears were also shut, and we heard nothing of 
what is said in Heaven. Finally, the word pierced 
our ears and opened our eyes. Would to God that 
you could see what we see, and hear what we hear 
and admire! These things are as wonderful as they 
are true. I shall not tell you of them; but the Fa- 
ther will, who has come here to instruct you. And 
in order that your ears may not refuse to hear his 
words, he gives you by my hands some awls, with 
which to pierce them.’”’ Thereupon he drew out the 
first present, and threw it down before those whom he 
invited to embrace the Faith. Then [149] he con- 
tinued his harangue: “‘ It is not enough to have your 
ears pierced, and to listen to what will be said to you. 
You must abandon your old customs and supersti- 
tions; for you cannot mix good things with bad. I 
do not ask you to do anything that we have not our- 
selves done. We have burned all our songs, all our 
dances, all our superstitions and everything that the 
Devil had taught our forefathers. In order that you 
may also burn yours as easily, here is some tobacco 
which the Father gives you, and to which you will 
set fre. When you burn it, you will burn your old 
customs, to adopt better ones.’’ And, as he said 
this, he drew out some cakes of tobacco, which 
constituted the second present. 

The Captain replied with great modesty: ‘‘ You 
treat me like a person of consideration, although I 


am but a little grain of dust. ‘It is a Captain to 


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


Vous me traitez comme vne perfonne de confidera- 
tion, cependant ie ne fuis qu’vn petit grain de pou- 
dre. C’eft vn Capitaine 4 qui nous parlons. Vous 
auez, dift-il, cette penfée-la de moy, & vous vous 
trompez, ie fuis vn homme en peinture. II ya long- 
temps que ie vy, mais ie n’ay que cela, que ie fuis 
viuant; ie n’ay point d’efprit, & ie ne pretloy pas 
[150] quand i’en pourray auoir; ie voudrois que quel- 
qu’vn m’en pfift donner, afin de pouuoir reconnoiftre 
les biens que le Pere & vous tous m’auez faits: Mes 
oreilles font desja percées, ie me rends a4 fa femonce: 
ie vay brufler toutes mes vieilles couftumes, mais ie 
n’ay pour le prefent que ma voix. Quand ie feray 
de retour en mon pays, ie feray l’ouuerture de voftre 
propofition 4 mes gens; i’ef{fpere qu’ils la receuront, 
& que ma voix groffira, & que mes oreilles s’agran- 
diront pour vous écouter, & pour vous remercier de 
vos prefens. Voila comme fe termina cette Affem- 
blée. 
- Nous nous fommes toufiours icy perfuadez que la 
Foy fe répandroit petit 4 petit dans toutes ces con- 
trées, par l’entremife des premiers Sauuages conuertis. 
Vous verrez par la lettre que nous en écrit de Mif- 
kau, le R. Pere Richard, que nous ne nous fommes 
pas trompez. II dit donc dans la lettre qu’il a écrite 
par dega, que les peuples de la Baie de[s] Chaleurs, 
quils nomment Reftgsch, & d’autres encore qui font 
plus éloignez, fe veulent entierement conuertir, & 
s’arrefter pour cultiuer la terre, 4a l’imitation des 
Neophytes. 

De Sainct Iofeph proche de Kebec, les [151] allant 
vifiter ce Printemps, dift le Pere, ie fus fort confolé 
&la veué d’vne grande Croix, qu’ils auoient plantée 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 239 


whom we speak.’ You have that idea of me,” he 
said; ‘‘ but you are mistaken, for I am but the sem- 
blance of aman. I have lived for a long while, but 
all that I can say is that I am alive. I have no sense, 
and I do not foresee [150] when I shall have any. I 
wish that some one would give it to me, so that I 
might recognize the gifts that the Father and all of 
you have given me. My ears are already pierced; I 
yield to his summons. I will burn all my old 
customs; but at present I have only my own voice. 
When I shall return to my country I will mention 
your proposal to my people. I hope that they will 
accept it, that my voice will become louder, and 
that my ears will open still wider to hear you and to 
thank you for your presents.’’ So this Meeting 
ended. 

We have always persuaded ourselves here that the 
Faith was gradually spreading in these countries by 
means of the first Savages who have been converted. 
You will see by the letter that Reverend Father 
Richard” has written to us from Miskau on the sub- 
ject, that we have not been mistaken. He says, in 
the letter that he wrote from there, that the tribes 
of the Baie des Chaleurs, whom they call Restgouch, 
and others still more distant, all wish to be con- 
verted, and to settle down to till the soil in imitation 
of our Neophytes. 

‘When I went from Saint Joseph near Kebec 
[151] to visit them last Spring,’’ says the Father, ‘‘I 
was greatly consoled at seeing a large Cross that they 
had planted before their cabin. They pressed me to 
remain with them, in order to instruct them, assuring 
me that they really wished to believe in God. They 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


deuant leur cabane. Ils me prefferent de demeurer 
auec eux pour les inftruire, m’affeurans que c’eftoit 
tout de bon qu’ils vouloient croire en Dieu. Ils me 
dirent encore, que ie fiffe venir des ouuriers de 
France, pour les aider 4 baftir de petites demeures, 
& quwils leur donneroient des pelleteries en payement 
de leur trauail. Mais qui voudroit demeurer auec 
vous autres, leur dift-il? Pourquoy non? répondit- 
il, notamment fi on ne nous vend plus de vin, ny 
d’eau de vie. Efcris en France, & mande aux Capi- 
taines qu’ils enuoyent icy des vaiffeaux; qu’on n’ap- 
porte plus de ces poifons qui nous perdent, qui nous 
oftent l’efprit, & nous font mourir deuant nos iours; 
qu’on faffe icy comme a Kebec, ot il n’eft pas permis 
de vendre aux Sauuages de cette eau de feu. [ls 
auoient prié que la Barque qui les va voir pour le 
commerce, n’apporta{t point de ces boiffons; mais 
nos Francois ne fe fcauroient tenir d’en vendre, & 
les Sauuages d’en acheter, quand Joccafion s’en 
prefente; notamment la ieuneffe, qui commet mille 
infolences dans [152] fon yurongnerie. Les plus 
agez auoient affeuré, qu’ils mettroient aux fers ceux 
qui s’enyureroient. 

Vn ieune homme fort & robufte ayant perdu 1’ef- 
prit dans ces boiffons, entra tout nud dans la cabane 
ot fe tenoit 1’Affemblée, fit vne brauade au Capi- 
taine, le défiant de le lier, ou de le faire lier d’vne 
chaifne de fer qu’il portoit luy-mefme fur fes épau- 
les, menacant de tuer le premier qui l’aborderoit. 
Helas! ne fcauriez-vous, m’écrit le Pere, trouuer 
quelque remede a4 ces defordres? ie ne doute nulle- 
ment que ces pauures peuples ne {uiuiffent l’exemple 
de vos Montagnais. Si ces Meffieurs, de qui le com- 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 241 


also told me to have workmen brought out from 
France, to help them to build small dwellings, and 
that they would pay for their work in furs.” ‘* But 
who could live with you?’’ said he tothem. ‘*‘ Why 
not?’’ they replied, ‘‘ especially if they no longer 
sell us wine or brandy. Write to France, and tell 
the Captains to send ships here, and not to send us 
any more of those poisons that destroy us, that take 
away our senses, and cause us untimely death. Let 
the same be done here as at Kebec, where it is not 
permitted to sell this fire water to the Savages.’’ 
They had begged that the Bark that goes to trade 
with them should not bring any such liquors. But 
our French cannot refrain from selling, nor the Sav- 
ages from buying it, whenever an opportunity pre- 
sents itself,— especially the young men, who are 
guilty of a thousand acts of insolence when [152] 
drunk. The elders had asserted that they would put 
in irons all who became intoxicated. 

A young man, strong and robust, bereft of his 
senses through drink, entered, entirely naked, the 
cabin where the Assembly was being held, defied 
the Captain, and challenged him to bind or to have 
him bound with an iron chain that he himself carried 
on his shoulders, threatening to kill the first one who 
approached him. ‘‘ Alas,’’ the Father writes me, 
‘‘can you not find some remedy for such disorders? 
I have no doubt that these poor people would’ fol- 
low the example of your Montagnais if these Gentle- 
men, who control the trade, would prevent any more 
of these death-dealing waters from being sold to 
them. I have not the honor of knowing them. Per- 
haps they have not been informed of these disorders.” 


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


merce dépend, vouloient empefcher qu’on ne leur 
vendift plus de ces eaux de mort. Ie n’ay pas l’hon- 
neur de les connoiftre; peut-eftre ne font-ils pas in- 
formez de ces defordres. Ceux qui entretiennent le 
commerce auec nos Sauuages font loiiables, car ils ne 
permettent point qu’on leur apporte de ces mal heu- 
reufes boiffons. Ie ne croy pas que ceux qui les de- 
bitent, regoiuent iamais de grandes benedictions du 
Ciel, puis qu’ils mettent vn obftacle au Sang de Iefus 
Chrift, 1’empefchant de fanctifier ces pauures Ames. 
Les [153] Sauuages m’ont dit fouuentefois, qu’ils n’a- 
chetoient pas nos boiffons pour aucun gouft qu’ils 
y trouuaffent, ny pour aucune neceffité qu’ils en 
euffent, mais fimplement pour s’enyurer, s’ima- 
ginans dans leur yureffe, qu’ils font perfonnes de 
confideration, prenans plaifir de fe voir redouter de 
ceux qui ne gouftent point de ce venin. Or ie de- 
mande s’il eft permis 4 vn Chreftien, de vendre 4 vn 
Sauuage ce qui le rend comme vne beite, ce qui le 
change en vn Lion, & qui l’empefche de receuoir la 
Foy de Iefus-Chrift. Des Sauuages de ces quartiers- 
la, ont apporté iufques A Tadouffac des barils tous 
pleins d’eau de vie: de Tadouffac ils font venus iuf- 
ques a Kebec, & ont caufé cette année de tres-grands 
defordres parmy nos Sauuages. Voila comme ce 
venin fe communique. Mais acheuons la lettre du 
Pere: Le flambeau, dit-il, qui eft allumé 4 Kebec, 
éclatte iufques icy; ceux qui ont approché de fa 
lueur, en difent des merueilles, loiians les trauaux 
de nos Peres enuers les Montagnais. Ie vous prie 
de m’enuoyer les prieres & les exercices de deuotion 
qu’on leur fait faire. Vne partie de nos Sauuages 
entendent la langue [154] Montaignaife. Enuoyez- 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 243 


Those who carry on the trade with our Savages are 
worthy of praise, for they do not allow any of those 
wretched liquors to be brought to them. I do not 
think that those who sell it ever receive any great 
blessing from Heaven, since they raise an obstacle 
against the Blood of Jesus Christ, by preventing it 
from sanctifying these poor Souls. The [153] Sav- 
ages have told me many a time that they did not 
buy our liquors on account of any pleasant taste that 
they found in them, or because they had any need 
of them, but simply to become intoxicated,— imag- 
ining, in their drunkenness, that they become per- 
sons of importance, taking pleasure in seeing them- 
selves dreaded by those who do not taste the poison. 
Now, I ask, is it permitted to a Christian to sell toa 
Savage what makes him like a beast, changes him 
into a Lion, and prevents him from receiving the 
Faith of Jesus Christ? Some Savages from that 
quarter have brought barrels full of brandy to Ta- 
doussac; from Tadoussac they have come to Kebec, 
and this year have caused the greatest disorders 
among our Savages. Behold how the poison spreads. 
But let us conclude the Father's letter. ‘‘ The 
flame,’’ he says, ‘‘ that has been kindled at Kebec 
shines as far as here. Those who have approached 
its light speak marvels of it, and praise the work of 
our Fathers among the Montagnais. I beg you to 
send me the prayers and the devotional exercises 
that they recite. A portion of our Savages under- 
stand the Montagnais language. [154] Send me 
also, if you please, the Hymns that you make them 
sing. But, are those hymns adapted to the air of the 
Savage songs? I would also gladly ask for the Pater, 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


moy auffi, s’il vous plaift, les Cantiques {pirituels 
que vous leur faites chanter. Mais quoy? ces chan- 
fons tiennent-elles de l’air des chanfons Sauuages? 
Ie demanderois encor volontiers le Pater, 1’Aue & le 
Credo, tournez en voftre langue. Ie fouhaitterois 
bien dauantage, fi ie ne craignois d’eftre importun. 
Ce font les paroles du Pere, qui confirment que ces 
peuples, parmy lefquels nous trauaillons, attireront 
les autres 4 la connoiffance du grand Dieu. Si toft 
que les Hurons auront pleinement receu Iefus-Chritft, 
le feu fe portera dans les grandes Nations du Midy. 
Le Diable qui preuoit ces grands biens, employe tous 
fes Demons & tous fes fuppofts, pour nous fermer la 
porte. 


7 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 245 


the Ave, and the Credo, translated into your tongue. 
~ Icould wish for a great deal more, if I did not fear 
_ to be importunate.”” Such are the words of the Fa- 
ther, which attest that these peoples, among whom 
we labor, will attract others to the knowledge of the 
great God. As soon as the Hurons shall have fully 
received Jesus Christ, the flame will spread to the 
great Nations of the South. The Devil, who fore- 
sees these great blessings, makes use of all his 
Demons and of all his instruments to close the door 
to us. 


246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


[155] CHAPITRE XI. 


DES FORTIFICATIONS COMMENCEES SUR LA RIUIERE 
DES HIROQUOIS, & DES GUERRES DE 
CES PEUPLES. 


ONSIEVR le Cheualier de Montmagny noftre 
Gouuerneur, ayant appris que fa Majefté & 
fon Eminence enuoyoient des hommes pour 

fortifier le pays, fit auffi-toft difpofer la charpente 
d’vne Maifon, deuant mefme que les vaiffeaux, qui 
deuoient apporter les ouuriers, euffent paru; fe 
doutant bien que fi on attendoit leur venué, qu’ils ne 
pourroient loger deuant 1’Hyuer au lieu ot 1’on de- 
fire pofer ces fortifications. Pendant que les char- 
pentiers trauaillent 4 Kebec; il monte quarante lieués 
plus haut; il s’en va vifiter la Riuiere des Hiroquois, 
remarquer vne place fort propre pour baitir vne 
Fortereffe qui commande l’emboucheure de ce fleuue, 
par ot il fe gorge dans la grande riuiere de Sainct 
Laurens. [1 fait monter des barques qui portent les 
chofes [156] neceffaires pour ce deffein. <A peine a-il 
commencé, que les Hiroquois veulent étouffer cét 
ouurage en fa naiffance, comme nous dirons tout 
maintenant, quand i’auray parlé de ce que ces Bar- 
bares ont fait pendant l’Hyuer, & mefme encor au 
Printemps, pour venir 4 leurs petites guerres de 1’Ifle; 
ie dis petites, pource qu’ils viennent par efcoiiades 
& par furprifes: mais cela e{t bien fi importun, qu’il 
n’y a combat auquel on ne vouluft pluftoft defcendre, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 247 


[15s] CHAPTER XI. 


OF THE FORTIFICATIONS COMMENCED ON THE RIVER 
OF THE HIROQUOIS, AND OF THE WARS 
OF THOSE PEOPLES. 


ONSIEUR the Chevalier de Montmagny, our 
Governor, having learned that his Majesty 
and his Eminence were sending out men to 

fortify the country, at once caused the framework of 
a House to be prepared, even before the ships that 
were to bring the workmen made their appearance, — 
strongly suspecting that, if he waited for their 
arrival, it would be impossible to lodge them before 
the Winter at the spot where these fortifications 
were to be erected. While the carpenters were 
working at Kebec, he ascended forty leagues higher, 
visited the River of the Hiroquois, and marked a 
most suitable site for the erection of a Fortress, 
which should command the mouth of that river by 
which it is discharged into the great river of Saint 
Lawrence. He caused the barks bearing what was 
[156] needed for the purpose to be sent up the river. 
Hardly had he commenced than the Hiroquois tried 
to stifle the project at its birth, as I shall shortly 
telate, when I shall have spoken of what those Bar- 
barians did during the Winter, and even again in the 
Spring, to come to their petty wars on the Island. I 
say ‘‘ petty,’’ because they come by bands and by 
surprise; but this is so harassing, that there is no 
battle we would not wage rather than see ourselves 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


que de fe voir toufiours en danger d’eftre furpris de 
ces voleurs, lefquels ne font la guerre qu’a la facon 
des larrons, qui affiegent les grands chemins ne fe 
découurans point qu'ils ne voyent leurs auantages: 
fuiuons-les donc dans leurs courfes. 

Sur la fin de l’Automne de l’année paffée, les 
Sauuages qui eftoient aux trois Riuieres, craignans 
l’abbayement des chiens, fe ietterét dans la gueule des 
loups, ne fe tenans pas affeurez aupres des Francois, 
ils fe diuiferent en deux efcoiiades, dont 1’vne defcen- 
dit 4 Sainct Iofeph proche de Kebec, ot Noftre Sei- 
gneur leur a conferué a tous la vie du corps, & donné 
a quelques-vns la vie de l’ame: l’autre méta [157] 
bien haut dans le pays des Algonquins, ot les Hiro- 
quois les ont efté maffacrer. Deux prifonniers échap- 
pez des griffes de ces Barbares, ont raconté ce qui 
fuit: Nos ennemis, difoient-ils, nous ont rapporté 
qu’ils eftoient fortis deux cens hommes bien armez 
de leur pays; qu’ils s’eftoient diuifez en deux 
bandes, dont 1l’vne deuoit venir épier & furprendre 
quelques Francois, aupres de l’habitation des trois 
Riuieres, mais la mort de deux des plus hardis de 
leurs Capitaines qui furuint en chemin, fut prife a 
mauuais augure, & leur fit croire que ce mal-heureux 
prefage auroit fon effet s’ils paffoient outre. Ils s’en 
retournerent donc en leur pays fans rien faire. L’au- 
tre efcotiade marche fur les glaces & fur les neiges, 
s’auance iufques 4 l’Ifle, furprend quelques cabanes 
de Sauuages, tué ceux qu’ils trouuent au premier 
rencontre, & en emmenent de viuans tant qu’ils peu- 
uent en leur pays, pour eftre le joiiet de leur rifée, 
& la pafture des flammes & de leur eftomach. Nous 


e{tids de la partie, difoient les deux pauures miferables 


\ 
A 


et 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 249 


always in danger of being taken unexpectedly by 
these robbers, who carry on war only like footpads 
who besiege highways, never showing themselves 
except when they find their advantage. Let us, 
therefore, follow them in their incursions. 

About the end of Autumn of last year, the 
Savages who were at the three Rivers, fearing the 
baying of dogs, threw themselves into the jaws of 
wolves. Not considering themselves sufficiently se- 
cure in the vicinity of the French, they divided into 
two bands. One of these went down to Saint Joseph, 
near Kebec, where Our Lord preserved, for them 
all, the life of the body, and gave to some life for 
their souls. The other band ascended [157] far 
into the country of the Algonquins, whither the 
Hiroquois followed and massacred them. Two pris- 
oners, who escaped from the clutches of those Bar- 
barians, related the following: ‘‘ Our enemies,”’ they 
said, ‘‘ have told us that they came forth from their 
country to the number of two hundred men, well 
armed, and divided into two parties. One was to 
lie in wait, and surprise some Frenchmen near the 
settlement of the three Rivers; but the death of two 
of the bravest of their Captains, which happened on 
the way, was considered a bad omen, and led them 
to believe that the evil presage would be fulfilled if 
they went any further. They therefore returned -to 
their own country, without doing anything. The 
other party marched on the ice and snow as far as 
the Island, where they surprised some cabins of Sav- 
ages, killed those whom they first met and took away 
alive as many as they could to their own country, to 
become the objects of their sport, and food for the 
flames and for their stomachs. We were of this 


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


garrotez, comme le refte des prifonniers: nos ennemis 
nous faifoient mille interrogations en chemin; ils 
nous parloient [158] de ceux qui portent des robbes 
noires, ils nous demandoient combien de Francois 
e{toient morts au combat qu’ils rendirent l’année 
precedente aux trois Riuieres: & quand nous leur 
difions, que tant s’en faut qu’aucun y mouruft, que 
perfonne n’y receut aucune bleffure, ils nous appel- 
loient des menteurs: Nous tuafmes, nous faifoient- 
ils, plus de cent Francois (& cependant il n’y en auoit 
que foixante & cing en cette écarmouche;) nous les 
retournerons voir ce Printemps, au nombre de fept 
cens combatans, pour compter combien il y en a 
encor de refte. Pour toy, mon oncle, difoient-ils au 
plus agé des deux, tu es mort, tu iras bien toft au 
pays des ames; tu leur diras qu’elles prennent bon 
courage, qu’elles auront en bref bonne compagnie, 
car nous allons enuoyer en ces quartiers tout le refte 
de ta Nation; cette nouuelle que tu leur porteras leur 
fera fort agreable. C’eft ainfi qu’ils fe gauffoient 
d’vn vieillard qui n’a pas moins de malice qu’eux, 
mais qui a plus de fineffe. Les Hollandois, auec 
lefquels nous trafiquons, adiouftoient: Ils nous ont 
promis du fecours contre les Frang¢ois, nous les irons 
voir bien armez. 

[159] Ces deux prifonniers fe fauuerent bien toft 
apres leur prife, mais voicy des femmes 4 qui les 
Hiroquois auoient donné la vie, lefquelles ayans paffé 
le refte de 1’Hyuer auec ces Barbares, fe font en fin 
échappées de leurs mains & de leur pays. Efcou- 
tons-les parler de leur mef-auenture, Quis talia fando 
temperet a lacrymis? dift le Pere Buteux, 4 qui l’vne 
de ces pauures captiues en a fait le recit. 


\ 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 251 


number,’’ said the two poor wretches, ‘‘ bound like 
the other prisoners. Our enemies put a thousand 
questions to us, on the way. They spoke to us [158] 
of those who wear the black robes. They asked us 
how many Frenchmen had been killed in the fight 
that they had had last year at the three Rivers. And 
when we told them that not only had not a single 
one died, but that not one had been wounded, they 
called us liars. ‘ We killed,’ they said, ‘more than 
a hundred Frenchmen.’’’ (And yet there were only 
sixty-five in that skirmish.) ‘‘*‘ We will go back to 
see them in the Spring, to the number of seven hun- 
dred fighting men, to count how many of them re- 
main. As for thee, my uncle,’ they said to the elder 
of the two, ‘ thou art a dead man; thou wilt soon go 
to the land of spirits. Thou shalt tell them to have 
courage, that they will soon have a goodly company, 
for we are going to send the remainder of thy 
Nation to that quarter; the news that thou wilt take 
them will be very agreeable to them.’” Thus did 
they scoff at an old man who has not less malice but 
more cleverness than they have. ‘‘ The Dutch, with 
whom we traffic,’”’ they added, ‘‘ have promised to 
assist us against the French; we shall go well armed 
to see them.” 

[159] These two prisoners escaped soon after their 
capture, but here are women to whom the Hiroquois 
granted their lives, and who, after spending the 
remainder of the Winter with those Barbarians, 
effected their escape at last from their hands and 
from their country. ‘‘ Let us hear what they have 
to relate of their misadventure; Quzs talia fando tem- 
peret & lacrymis?’’ says Father Buteux, to whom one 
of these poor captives related the story. 


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2 


Ces pauures Algonquins eftoient en leur pays caba- 
nez au fond de leurs grands bois, en vn lieu ot peut- 
e{tre les Hiroquois n’auoient iamais efté; voila pour- 
quoy ils ne penfoient qu’a leur chaffe, & non a fe 
defendre de ces Barbares; lefquels ayans découuert 
les piftes de ces chaffeurs, les approchent a la déro- 
bée, pour les maffacrer dans leur premier fommeil, 
la nuict commengant de couurir les arbres & les 
hommes de fes tenebres, & d’enfeuelir la plus-part 
de ces bonnes gens dans le repos. Vne femme en fe 
couchant s’écrie, C’eft fait de nous, les Hiroquois 
nous tuént. Ie ne fcay par quel inftinct elle profera 
ces paroles; quoy que c’en foit 4 mefme temps ces 
tigres entrent les armes 4 la main dans leur cabane, 
en faififfent [160] quelques-vns par les cheueux, 
d’autres par le milieu du corps. Quelques-vns 
s’éueillans au bruit, & fe voulans mettre en defenfe, 
font auffi-toft maffacrez. La guerre fut bien toft 
faite, les Hiroquois trouuans ces pauures gens des-ja 
liez du fommeil & de la peur, les garrottent auec de 
bonnes cordes, hommes, femmes & enfans, & en 
moins d’vne heure fe rendent maiftres de leur vie, 
de leurs petites richeffes, & de leurs cabanes. Se 
voyans victorieux, ils dreffent leur foupper dans la 
maifon des vaincus. Les vns apportent du bois, 
d’autres vont querir de l’eau. On met les grandes 
chaudieres fur le feu. La boucherie n’eft pas loin. 
Ils démembrent ceux qu’ils viennent de maffacrer, 
les mettent en pieces, & les iettent pieds & jambes, 
bras & teftes dans la marmitte, qu’ils font boiiillir 
auec atitant de ioye, que les pauures captifs qui 
re{toient en vie, auoiét de creue-cceur voyans que 
leurs compatriotes feruoient de curée a ces Loups- 


- —————— 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 253 


These poor Algonquins were in their own coun- 
try, living in huts in the depths of their great for- 
ests, in a place where, in all probability, no Hiroquois 
had ever been. That is why they thought of noth- 
ing but their hunting, and not of defending them- 
selves against those Barbarians. When the latter 
came upon the tracks of the hunters, they crept upon 
them stealthily, to massacre them in their first sleep. 
When night began to conceal trees and men with its 
darkness, and to wrap most of these good people in 
slumber, a woman called out as she was about to lie 
down: ‘‘It is all over with us; the Hiroquois are 
killing us.”” I know not by what instinct she uttered 
those words; be that as it may, at the same time 
those tigers entered their cabin, with arms in their 
hands, and seized them, [160] some by the hair and 
others about the body. Some who were awakened 
by the noise, and who tried to defend themselves, 
were at once slaughtered. The fight was soon over, 
and the Hiroquois finding the poor people already 
overcome by sleep and fright, bound them with 
strong cords,—men, women, and children; and, in 
less than an hour, were masters of their lives, of 
their little wealth, and of their cabins. Seeing them- 
selves victorious, they prepared their supper in the 
house of the vanquished. Some brought wood, and 
others went for water. Great kettles were placed 
over the fire. The shambles were not far away. 
They dismembered those whom they had just slaugh- 
tered, cut them in pieces, and threw the feet, legs, 
arms, and heads into the pot, which they set to boil 
with joy as great as the sorrow felt by the poor 
captives who remained alive, when they saw their 

_ countrymen serving as the quarry of these Were- 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vo. 22 


garoux. Les femmes & les enfans pleuroient amere- 
ment, & ces demy-Demons prenoient plaifir 4 ces 
chanfons lugubres. Le foupper eftant cuit, ces 
loups deuorent leur proye; qui feiette fur vne cuiffe, 
qui [161] fur la poitrine. Les vns fuccent la moélle 
des os, les autres ouurent vne tefte pour en tirer la 
ceruelle. En vn mot ils mangent les hommes, auec 
autant d’appetit & plus de ioye, que les chaffeurs ne 
mangent vn Sanglier ou vn Cerf. 

Pendant ce beau feftin le iour s’approche; ces loups 
e{tans remplis d’vne viande qu’ils tiennent pour deli- 
cate, & emmenent leurs prifonniers, vne femme nom- 
mée Kicheuigskse, ne pouuant fuiure la bande, fut 
affommée fur le champ. Plufieurs hommes & plu- 
fieurs femmes fouhaitoient fon bon heur, car elle en 
fut quitte pour bien peu. Pour moy, difoit celle qui 
a raconté cette hiftoire, fii’euffe efté baptifée, i’au- 
rois eftimé 4 faueur de mourir de la forte; mes yeux 
n’auroient pas e{té contraints de voir les horribles 
{fpectacles, & les cruautez étranges qu’ils ont veu. 

Entre toutes les femmes prifonnieres nous eftions 
trois, qui auions chacun vn petit enfant d’enuiron 
deux mois: nous n’auions pas fait grand chemin, 
que ces mal-heureux nous les rauirent. Ah mon 
Pere/ difoit-elle, ne t’étonne pas fi ie pleure mainte- 
nant, ie iettay bien d’autres larmes quand ils arra- 
cherent de mon fein [162] mon pauure petit fils: 


| 


mais helas! fi ie ne fgauois que tu nous porteras c6- 


paffion, ie ne pafferois pas outre. Ils prirent nos 
petits enfans, les attacherent 4 vne broche, les pre- 
fenterent au feu, & les firent roftir tous vifs deuant 


nos yeux. N’eftoit que i’efpere que vous autres — 


Francois, tirerez vengeance de ces cruautez, ie ne 


i 


i 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 255 


wolves. The women and children wept bitterly, and 
those half Demons took pleasure in hearing their 
doleful chants. When the supper was cooked, these 
wolves devoured their prey; one seized a thigh, an- 
other [161] a breast; some sucked the marrow from 
the bones; others broke open the skulls, to extract 
the brains. In a word, they ate the flesh of men 
with as much appetite as, and with more pleasure 
than, hunters eat that of a Boar or of a Stag. 

Daylight had approached during this fine feast. 
When those wolves had gorged themselves on a meat 
that they consider delicate, they took away their 
prisoners. A woman named Kicheuigoukwe, who 
was unable to keep up with the band, was at once 
knocked on the head. Many men and women envied 
her good fortune, for she had escaped from her mis- 
ery very easily. ‘‘ As for me,’’ said she who told 
the story, ‘‘if I had been baptized, I would have 
considered it a mercy to die thus; my eyes would 
not have been forced to see the horrible sights and 
unnatural cruelties that they have witnessed. 

‘‘ Among all the captive women, we were three 
who had each a little child, about two months old. 
We had not journeyed far before those wretches 
robbed us of them. Ah, my Father,”’ she said, ‘‘ be 
not surprised if I weep now. I shed many tears 
when they tore from my bosom [162] my poor little 
son. But alas! if I did not know that thou wilt have 
compassion on us, I would say no more. They took 
our little children, placed them on spits, held them 
to a fire, and roasted them before our eyes. DidI 

not hope that you Frenchmen will wreak vengeance 
| _ for such cruelties, I would be unable to speak. Those 
‘poor little ones knew not as yet the fire, when they 


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


pourrois parler. Ces pauures petits ne connoiffoient 
pas encor le feu, quand ils en fentirent l’ardeur: ils 
nous regardoient, & fe tuoient de pleurer: noftre 
coeur fe fendoit les voyans tous nuds brufler a petit 
feu: nous nous efforcions de les retirer, mais en 
vain, car nos liens & ces Barbares nous en empef- 
choient. Hé! tuez-les, difions-nous; tuez les, mef- 
chans que vous eftes; que vous ont fait ces petits 
innocens? Ils n’auoient point d’oreilles, point de 
pitié; ils fe rioient de nos larmes & de nos vains 
efforts. Ce ne font pas des hommes, ce font des 
loups. Apres qu’ils eurent fait mourir ces pauures 
petits par le feu, ils les tirerent de la broche ot ils 
e{toient liez, les iettent dans leurs chaudieres, les 
font boiiillir, & les mangent en noftre prefence. Ie 
vous confeffe, dit le Pere, qui nous a mandé cette 
tragedie, que voyant les larmes de [163] cette pauure 
mere; & entendant ces cruautez inouyes, Commota 
Sunt vifcera mea. Ile fus touché iufques au cceur. 
Mais pourfuiuons noftre chemin; fuiuons ces prifon- 
niers, & voyons quel accueil on leur fera dans les 
bourgades Hiroquoifes. 

*. Quand cette bande lugubre arriua au grand Sault 
de la chaudiere, c’eft vn fleuue qui fe precipite tout 
a coup dans la Riuiere des trois prairies, au deffus 
de Mont-real, vne femme prifonniere voyant vn en- 
droit de ce fleuue qui n’eftoit point glacé, fe iette 
dedans par defefpoir, aimant mieux perir dans les 
eaux, que de mourir dans le feu; la rapidité du cou- 
rant la reietta d’abord. Les Hiroquois accourent, la 
veulent fauuer d’vn precipice; pour la ietter dans vn 


abyfme: mais l’ayans trouuée aux abois, ils l’affom- 


merent, & luy couppent la tefte, emportans fa cheue- 


| 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 257 


felt its heat. They looked at us, and cried with all 
their might. Our hearts were broken when we saw 
them roasting, all naked, before a slow fire. We 
tried to drag them away, but in vain, for our bonds 
and those Barbarians prevented us. ‘O! kill them,’ 
we cried, ‘ kill them, wretches that you are. What 
have these poor little innocents done to you?’ They 
had no ears, no pity; they laughed at our tears, and 
at our fruitless efforts. They are not men; they are 
wolves. After they had put the poor little babes to 
death by fire, they drew them off the spit to which 
they were fastened, threw them into their kettles, 
boiled them, and ate them in our presence.”’ ‘‘ I con- 
fess,’’ says the Father who has written to us of this 
tragedy, ‘‘that when I saw the tears shed by [163] 
that poor mother and listened to such unheard-of 
cruelties, Commota sunt viscera mea. I was touched 
to the heart.’’ But let us continue our journey; let 
us follow these prisoners, and see what reception 
awaits them in the Hiroquois villages. 

When the dismal band reached the great Falls of 
the chaudiere,—this is a river which suddenly falls 
into the River of the three meadows, above Mont- 
teal,—a captive woman, observing a spot where the 
stream was not entirely frozen over, cast herself into 
it in her despair, preferring to perish in the water 
rather than to die by fire. At first the rapidity of 
the current threw her out. The Hiroquois ran up, 
wishing to save her from a precipice in order to cast 
her into an abyss. But when they saw her at the 
last extremity, they clubbed her to death and cut off 
her head, taking her scalp. It would occupy too 
much time to relate all the incidents that occurred 
on the way. Let us hasten. 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Voxr. 22 9 


lure. Ie ferois trop long fi ie m’arreftois A toutes 
les particularitez de leur chemin; haftons-nous. 

Les victorieux & les vaincus continuans leur route, 
deux ieunes hommes prirent le deuant pour donner 
aduis de la victoire. Auffi-toft vn grand nombre de 
perfonnes viennent au deuant iufques A vne iournée 
[164] de chemin, les femmes apportent du bled d’Inde, 
& d’autres viures qu’elles prefentent a ces guerriers. 
Il fallut faire alte & la veué de ces viuandieres: on 
fait dancer les prifonniers hommes & femmes, & la 
nuict fe paffa dans ces cris de réjoiiiffance. 

Le lendemain arriuans proche d’vne Bourgade, ils 
trouuerent vne grande cabane toute preparée, elle 
ef{toit meublée de feux & de braziers qu’on auoit faits 
en diuers endroits. Quelques Demons y attendoient 
les prifonniers qu’on amenoit en triomphe, liez & 
garrottez comme de pauures victimes de la mort. 
Vn monde d’hommes, de femmes & de petits enfans, 
les enuironnoient, faifans retentir 1’air d’vn fon auffi 
lugubre aux vaincus, qu’il ef{toit agreable aux victo- 
rieux. Entrans dans cét Enfer on les falué de grands 
coups de bafton; on leur paffe vne corde au poignet 
de la main, que les plus robuites d’entr’eux ferrent 
auec vne fureur enragée. Cette douleur eft tres- 
fenfible. On les taillade par les bras, on les découppe 
par le dos & par les épaules: on leur couppe les 
doigts, aux vns plus, aux autres moins, non auec vn 
couteau, mais auec des écailles de poiffon, afin que 
le tourment foit [165] plus cruel, plus long & plus 
fenfible. Cette pauure creature qui s’eft fauuée, a 
les deux pouces couppez, ou pluftoft hachez. Quand 
ils me les eurent couppez, difoit-elle, ils me les vou- j 
lurent faire manger; mais ie les mis fur mon giron, 


1642] ‘RELATION OF 1642 259 


While victors and vanquished pursued their route, 
two young men went on in advance, to convey the 
news of the victory. A great many persons came at 
once to meet them a full day’s [164] journey. The 
women brought Indian corn and other food, which 
they offered to the warriors who had come to a halt 
on the arrival of these vivandieres. The prisoners, 
both men and women, were made to dance, and the 
night passed amid shouts of rejoicing. 

On the following day, as they approached a Vil- 
lage, they found a large cabin all prepared; it was 
furnished with fires and fireplaces, prepared in vari- 
ous places. Some Demons were waiting there for 
the captives, who were brought in triumph, tied and 
bound like poor victims of death. A crowd of men, 
women, and little children surrounded them, rending 
the air with sounds as dismal to the vanquished as 
they were pleasant to the victors. When they en- 
tered this Hell, they were received with heavy blows 
from sticks; cords were tied around their wrists, 
which the strongest among their foes tightened with 
enraged fury. The pain of thisis very severe. Their 
arms were slashed; their backs and shoulders were 
gashed; their fingers were cut off,— on some, many; 
on others, few,—not with knives, but with scales 
of fishes, so that the torture might be [165] more 
cruel, more lasting, and more painful. The poor 
creature who escaped, had both her thumbs cut, or 
tather hacked off. ‘‘ When they had cut them 
off,’’ she said, ‘‘ they wished to force me to eat them; 
but I put them on my lap, and told them that they 
could kill me if they liked, but that I could not obey 
them.’’ 

After this first reception, food was brought to them, 


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


& leur dis qu’ils me tuaffent s’ils vouloient, que ie 
ne leur pouuois obeir. 

Apres ce premier falut ils leur apportent 4 manger 
pour leur dénner nouuelles forces, afin de les tour- 
menter plus long téps, & en faire leurs joiiets, comme 
les Demons font des ames damnées. Ils comman- 
dent aux hommes de chanter, & aux femmes de dan- 
cer. Ils nous déchirent & arrachent nos robes, difoit 
cette pauure creature, ils nous expofent toutes nués 

la rifée & aux cris de toutes leurs Bourgades: ils 
nous font dancer en cette pofture aux voix & aux 
chants de nos compatriotes, Wu/fica in luctu importuna 
narratio. Helas/ quelle ioye peut auoir vn coeur en 
vne dance au milieu des Demons? 

Adrian Earimitagsfitch, c’eftoit vn braue Chre- 
{tien, homme bien fait, lequel, s’il euft preffenty fon 
mal-heur, auoit fort preffé le Pere Buteux de le 
baptifer deuant qu’il remonta{t en fon pays; Pource, 
difoit-il, [166] que ie pourray tomber entre les mains 
de mes ennemis. Ce bon Neophyte eftant captif 
auffi bien que les autres; & ayant receu commande- 
ment de chanter les femmes, n’entonna auec fes 
camarades, que des chanfons Hiroquoifes [sc. Fran- 
coifes?]. Dequoy les Barbares s’étonnans, luy deman- 
derent pourquoy il ne chantoit point ala facon des 
Algonquins. Iln’ya plus, dit-il, d’Algonquins, nous 
fommes maintenant Francois; les Francois font nos 
vrais amis. le croy, remarque le Pere, qu’il vouloit 
dire, que les Algonquins fe faifoient tous Chreftiens, 
& qu’il ne pouuoit s’exprimer qu’en difant qu’ils 
eftoient amis des Francois. On luy couppa les 
doigts, non de trauers comme les autres, mais de 
long, pour luy donner plus de douleur: en vn mot, on 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 261 


to give them new strength,—in order to torment 
them longer, and to make them their playthings, as 
the Demons do with the souls ofthe damned. They 
ordered the men to sing, and the women to dance. 
‘They tore and pulled off our garments,’’ said this 
poor creature; ‘‘ they exposed us, entirely naked, to 
the jeers and howls of all their Villages. They 
made us dance in that condition, to the voices and 
songs of ourcountrymen.”’ Musica in luctu importuna 
narratio. Alas! what joy can a heart feel in a dance 
amid Demons? 

Adrian Earimitagousitch was a worthy Christian, 
a powerful man, who, as if he had foreseen his 
misfortune, had strongly urged Father Buteux to 
baptize him before he returned to his own country, 
‘“ because,” said he, [166] ‘‘I might fall into the 
hands of my enemies.’’ This good Neophyte was a 
prisoner, as well as the others; and on being ordered 
to sing of women, he, with his comrades, sang only 
Hiroquois [sc. French?] songs. The Barbarians were 
astonished at this, and asked him why he did not 


sing in the Algonquin fashion. ‘‘ There are no 
longer,’ said he, ‘‘any Algonquins. We are now 
French; the French are our true friends.” ‘‘I 


think,” says the Father, ‘‘ that he meant to say that 
all the Algonquins were becoming Christians, and 
that he could express his meaning only by saying 
that they were friends of the French.’’ They cut 
his fingers,—not across, like the others, but length- 
wise, so as to make him suffer more. Ina word, he 
was put to death like a man of importance, that is, 
with the most exquisite torture. He said to a young 
Algonquin woman whom he saw, shortly before his 
death: ‘‘If ever you see the French, tell them that 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


le fit mourir en homme de confideration, c’eft A dire 
auec des tourmens plusexquis. Il dift a quelque ieune 
femme Algonquine, qu’il apperceut vn peu deuant fa 
mort. Si vous voyez iamais les Francois, dites-leur 
que ie les aime en mourant; & que ie me fouuiendray 
d’eux au dernier periode de ma vie, & de ce qu’ils 
m’ont dit, & de ce quils m’ont enfeigné. On fit 
mourir les prifonniers en diuerfes Bourgades, c’eft 
[167] pourquoy cette bonne femme ne les vid pas 
tous fouffrir. Efcoutons ce qu’elle a de refte A nous 
dire de ceux qu'elle a veus. 

La nuict s’eftant paffée dans les ioyes & dans les 
trifteffes. On fit dés le matin monter ces pauures 
patiens fur vn grand échaffaut dreffé tout exprés, afin 
qu’ils peuffent eftre veus de tout le monde, & qu'il 
n’y eut ny petit ny grand qui ne vift de fes yeux les 
nouuelles cruautez qu’on leur deuoit faire endurer. 
Ces Demons s’arment de fambeaux & de tifons; les 
plus petits les appliquent fous les pieds de ces mife- 
rables, par les ouuertures de 1’échaffaut; les autres 
les portent aux cuiffes & coftez: en vn mot, aux 
endroits les plus fenfibles, on commande aux femmes 
captiues de brufler leurs marys & leurs compatriotes: 
elles répondent, Qu’elles n’en feroient rien. Il n’y 
eut que la fille d’vn nommé Aseffenipin appellé des 
Fragois, le charbon qui brufla indifferemment les 
hommes & les femmes captiues. Elle s’imaginoit 
que cette cruauté luy donneroit la vie, mais au con- 
traire, elle luy caufa vne mort plus rigoureufe qu’aux 
autres. Vndes prifonniers ne faifant paroiftre au- 
cun figne de douleur dans le fort de fes tourmens 
[168] & de fes fupplices. Les Hiroquois piquez de 
rage de voir fa conitance, qu’ils prennent 4 mauuais 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 263 


I loved them till death, and that I shall remember 
them at the last period of my life, as well as what 
they have told me and what they have taught me.’’ 
The prisoners were put to death in different Villages, 
and that is [167] why this good woman did not see 
them all suffer. Let us hear what she still has to 
tell us of those whom she saw. 

The night passed amid joy and sorrow. In the 
early morning, the poor sufferers were made to ascend 
a large scaffold erected for the purpose, so that they 
might be seen by all the people, and that no one, 
either great or small, should fail to witness the new 
cruelties that they should be made toendure. Those 
Demons armed themselves with torches and fire- 
brands. The smallest among them applied these to 
the soles of the feet of the unfortunates, through 
openings in the scaffold, while the others applied 
them to their thighs and sides,—in a word, to the 
most sensitive parts of the body. The captive wom- 
en were ordered to burn their husbands and their 
countrymen. They replied that they would not. 
There was only the daughter of one Awessenipin — 
called by the French ‘‘ the coal’’ — who burned the 
captive men and women indifferently. She imag- 
ined that such cruel conduct would save her life; but, 
on the contrary, it brought on her a more painful 
death than on the others. One of the prisoners 
manifested not the least sign of pain, in the height 
of his torments [168] and sufferings. The Hiroquois 
were furious with rage on observing this firmness, 
which they consider an evil augury—for they be- 
lieve that the souls of the warriors who despise them 
will make them pay dearly for the death of their 
bodies; seeing, I say, such firmness, they asked him 


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


augure; car ils croyent que les ames des guerriers 
qui méprifent leur rage, leur feront bien payer la 
mort de leurs corps: Voyans, dis-je, cette coniftance, 
ils luy demandent pourquoy ils ne crioyent [sc. il ne 
crioit] point: Ie fais, répond-il, ce que vous ne feriez 
pas, fi on vous traitoit auec la mefme fureur que vous 
me traittez: le fer & le feu que vous appliquez fur 
mon corps, vous feroient crier bien haut, & pleurer 
comme des enfans, & ie ne branfle pas. A ces pa- 
roles ces tigres fe iettent fur cette victime 4 demy 
bruflée; ils luy enleuent la peau de la tefte, & iettent 
fur fon crane tout fanglant, du fable tout rouge & 
tout bruflant de feu. Ils le precipitent en bas de 
l’échaffaut, & le trainent 4 l’entour des cabanes. En 
cét equipage il paroiffoit comme vn monftre; il n’a- 
uoit que du fang & du fable ardent pour des cheueux; 
fes yeux, & toute fa face, eftoient couuerts de feux 
& de fang: fon corps tout tailladé & tout rofty, fes 
mains fans doigts; en vn mot, won erat vulneri locus. 
Les playes fe couuroient les vnes les autres. Cét 
objet qui euft donné de l’horreur aux hommes, [169] 
donnoit de la ioye 4 ces Demons, qui pour dernier 
acte de leur cruauté, fendent la poitrine 4 ceux qu’ils 
veulent mettre aA mort; leur arrachent le coeur & le 
foye qu ils font roftir; leur couppent les pieds & les 
mains, les font cuire partie fous la cendre, partie 
auec vne broche deuant le feu; bref ils les font roftir 
& boiiillir, & puis les mangent auec vne delicieufe 
tage, homo homini lupus; Vhomme deuient vn loup 
enuers vn homme, quand il fe laiffe gouuerner aux 
Demons. Helas! feroit-il bien poffible, que le Pere 
&les Francois, dont ie vay bien toft parler, fuffent 
traitez de la forte par ces Barbares qui les ont pris, 
& emmenez depuis peu en leur pays! 


i} 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 265 


why he did not cry out. ‘‘I do,’’ he replied, ‘‘ what 
you could not, if you were treated with the same 
cruelty that you show me. The iron and the fire 
that you apply to my body would make you cry out 
very loud, and weep like children, while I do not 
flinch.’’ On hearing these words, those tigers threw 
themselves on their half-consumed victim, tore off 
his scalp, and cast sand, heated red-hot and burning 
with fire, on his bleeding skull. They threw him 
off the scaffold, and dragged him around the cabins. 
In that condition he looked like a monster; he had 
only blood and hot sand for hair; his eyes and his 
entire face were covered with fire and gore; his body 
was all slashed and roasted; his hands were finger- 
less,—in a word, non erat vulneri locus. The wounds 
overlapped one another. Such a sight, which would 
have caused horror to men, [169] rejoiced those De- 
mons, who, as their final act of cruelty, cut open the 
breasts of those whom they wish to kill, tear out 
their hearts and their livers, which they roast; they 
cut off their feet and their hands, which they cook 
partly under the embers, partly on a spit before the 
fire; in short, they roast and boil them, and then 
they eat them with delighted rage. Homo homini 
lupus; man becomes a wolf to other men, when he 
allows himself to be governed by Demons. Alas! 
can it be possible that the Father and the French- 
men, of whom I will soon speak, have been treated 
in like manner by the Barbarians who have recently 
taken and carried them off to their country? 

,! I learn that they killed only the men and the more 
| _ aged women, sparing about thirty of the younger 
ones in order that they might dwell in their coun- 
try, and marry as if they had been born there. The 


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


I’apprends qu’ils ne tuerent que les hommes & 
les femmes plus agées, donnans la vie 4 vne tren- 
taine des plus ieunes pour viure dans leur pays & fe 
marier, comme fi elles y auoient pris leur naiffance. 
Les deux qui fe font fauuées, s’attendoient au mefme 
fupplice qu’elles voyoient faire aux autres; mais on 
leur dift qu’elles n’en mourroient pas, qu’on fe con- 
tentoit de les auoir bruflées auec des flambeaux, & 
tailladées par tout le corps. 

La fureur de ces lions s’eftant appaifée [170] dans 
le fang de leurs ennemis, ces pauures femmes refte- 
rent auec leurs bleffeures & auec leurs brufleures, fans 
y mettre autre emplaftre, ny appliquer autre remede 
que la patience. Elles paffent l’Hyuer dans les 
fouffrances & dans les trifteffes comme de pauures 
efclaues, entendans tous les iours les rodomontades 
que faifoient ces Barbares contre les Francois & con- 
tre les Algonquins, qu’ils veulent entierement exter- 
miner, ace qu’ils difent, fe fentans appuyez & armez 
des Hollandois. 

Au Printemps, trois cens Hiroquois fe difpofans a 
la guerre, on fe fert de ces femmes pour porter leurs 
farines, ou leurs munitions de bouche. L’occafion fe 
prefentant de fe fauuer, elles 1’empoignent, fe gliffent 
dans ces grandes fore{ts, fe perdent le plus qu’elles 
peuuent dans ces bois pour fe mieux retrouuer. Elles 
pafferent les premiers dix iours fans manger; au 
bout defquels ayans fait rencontre de quelques beftes 
fauuages, qu’vne efcotiade d’Hiroquois, qui venoit en 
guerre auoit tuées, & a demy mangées, en enleue- 
rent de longues pieces, qui leur firent grand plaifir. 
Elles faifoient du feu auec des fufils de bois de cedre, 
qui font fort communs aux [171] Sauuages. Elles 


[ 
i 
i 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 267 


two who escaped expected the same torture that they 
saw the others suffer; but they were told that they 
should not die,—that their foes would rest satisfied 
after having burned them with torches, and gashed 
their bodies all over. 

The fury of those lions being appeased [170] with 
the blood of their enemies, these poor women re- 
mained with their wounds and their burns, without 
putting on any plaster or applying any other remedy 
but patience. They passed the Winter in suffering 
and sorrow, as wretched slaves, daily hearing the 
bluster of those Barbarians against the French and 
Algonquins, whom they wish to exterminate com- 
pletely, so they say, knowing that they are supported 
and armed by the Dutch. 

In the Spring, three hundred Hiroquois prepared 
for war, and these women were employed in carry- 
ing their meal or provisions. An opportunity for 
escaping presented itself; they at once seized it, and 
crept away into the deep forest, losing themselves 
as much as possible in the woods, the better to find 
their way home again. ‘They had no food for the 
first ten days, after which they found some wild 
animals that a band of Hiroquois on their way to 
war, had killed and half consumed. They cut off 
long strips of flesh from these, which gave them 
much pleasure. They produced fire by means of fire- 
sticks made of cedar wood, which is very common 
among the [171] Savages.” Afterward, they caught 
some Beavers, and crossed great rivers, enduring 
sufferings and hardships sufficient to kill men. 
Finally, they reached the three Rivers almost naked; 
their poor bodies were all torn by the thorn bushes 
_ and by the fatigues of the journey, and their minds 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


prirent par apres quelques Caftors, pafferent de 
grandes riuieres, fouffrirent des peines, & endurerent 
des trauaux capables de tuer des hommes. En fin 
elles arriuerent quafi toutes nués aux trois Riuieres: 
leur pauure corps eftoit tout déchiré des halliers & 
des fatigues du chemin, & leur ame accablée de 
crainte & de peur d’eftre rencontrées de leurs enne- 
mis qui battoient la campagne, ou pluftoft qui 
couroient les grandes forefts. Si toft qu’elles virent 
leurs compatriotes, elles fe mirent 4 pleurer. Le 
Pere Buteux arriuant 1a deffus; Ah mon Pere! firent- 
elles, Dieu nous a bien fecourués, nous l’auons prié 
tous les iours de noftre captiuité, c’eft luy qui nous 
a deliurées. A ces paroles toutes les femmes Chre- 
{tiennes qui les écoutoient, donnerent mille loiianges 
a Dieu, exaltans leur Foy & leur croyance. Voila 
ce qu’ont fait les Hiroquois cét Hyuer 

Ce Printemps ils ont fait des courfes dans la nation 
d’Iroquet; voicy ce que i’ay appris du fuccés de leurs 
armes. E(ftant monté aux trois Riuieres, ie vis ari- 
uer l’vn des Capitaines de cette nation, nommé Gari- 
aradi, aux approches des cabanes; il [172] s’écria par 
trois fois 4 pleine tefte; Hé hd. Le filence s’eftant 
fait par tout, les Hiroquois, dit-il, nous ont tuez ce 
Printemps; ils ont enleué deux familles: mon neveu 
e{t du nombre, difoit ce Capitaine. C’eft la couftume 
de ces Peuples de faire retentir 4 leur arriuée, les 
bonnes ou mauuaifes nouuelles. 


Cét Efté, c’eft A dire le fecond iour du mois — 


d’Aouft: douze Canots de Hurons remontans en leur 
pais, & remenans atiec eux le Pere Ifaac logues qui 
eftoit defcendu ¢a bas pour les affaires de la Miffion: 


furent attaquez & deffaicts d’vne trouppe d’Hyro- — 


i, 
ty 
on 

Wy 


'z 
: 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 269 


were filled with fear and dread of being encountered 
by their foes, who were beating the country or, rath- 
er, scouring the great forests. As soon as they saw 
their countrymen, they began to weep. Father 
Buteux then came up, and they said to him: ‘‘Ah, 
my Father! God has greatly succored us. We prayed 
to him every day during our captivity; it is he who 
has delivered us.’’ At these words, all the Christian 
women who heard them gave a thousand praises to 
God, extolling their Faith and their belief. That is 
what the Hiroquois did last Winter. 

In the Spring, they made raids against the Iroquet 
nation. This is what I have learned of the success 
of their arms. Having gone up to the three Rivers, 
I witnessed the arrival of one of the Captains of that 
nation, named Gariaradi. As he approached the cab- 
ins, he [172] called out three times in a loud voice: 
““H6 hod.” Having obtained silence, he said: ‘‘ The 
Hiroquois, this Spring, have killed some of our 
people, and carried off two families. My nephew is 
of the number,’’ said this Captain. It is the custom 
of these People to call out aloud, upon their arrival, 
the good or bad news that they bring. 

Last Summer,—that is, on the second day of the 
month of August,—twelve Canoes full of Hurons re- 
turning to their country, and taking back with them 


_ Father Isaac Jogues—who had come down here on 


business connected with the Mission — were attacked 
and defeated by a band of Hyroquois, armed by the 
Dutch with good arquebuses, which they can use as 
well as our Europeans. The Father was taken pris- 
oner by those Barbarians, with two young French- 
men who accompanied him.” Of twenty-three Hu- 
rons, some were massacred, while some were bound 


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2 


quois, armez par les Hollandois de bonnes arquebufes; 
defquelles il fe feruent auffi bien que nos Europeans, 
le Pere fut pris de ces Barbares auec deux ieunes 
hommes Frangois; qui l’accompagnoient, vingt trois 
Hurons furent en partie maffacrez, en partie liez, & 
garrotez auec le Pere, pour eftre conduits au pais de 
ces Barbares qui en feront peut eftre vne curée plus 
fanglante, que les chiens ne font d’vncerf. Dieu 
foit beny 4 iamais: du courage qu’il a donné au Pere 
& de la pitié qu’il a départy 4 ces deux ieunes hom- 
mes Francois: Si ces tigres les [173] bruflent, s’ils 
les rotiffent, s’ils les font boiiillir, s’ils les mangent, 
ils leurs procureront de plus doux rafraichiffemens 
en la maifon du grand Dieu: pour l’amour duquel 
ils s’expofoient & ces dangers? Voila le prix & la 
monnoye auec laquelle Iefus-Chrift a achepté le falut 
des Grecs, & des Barbares: c’eft auec la mefme mon- 
noye qu'il leur faut procurer l’application de fon 
fang. Vne partie de Hurons faits prifonniers font 
Chreftiens, peut eftre qu’ils donneront quelque bonne 
impreffion de la foy; du grand Dieu a ces peuples, 
qu’on gagneroit pour le Ciel auffi aifement que les 
autres: Si les Hollandois qui fe font habituez en 
la co{te de l’Acadie qui appartient au Roy: n’en 
empefchoient l’abord & l’accez aux Predicateurs de 
1’ Euangile. 

On enuoyoit par ces douze Canots, le petit ameuble- 
ment de nos Peres qui font aux Hurons, & la plus 
grande partie de ce qui eftoit neceffaire pour leurs 
Chappelles, pour leurs viures, & pour les befoins de 
trente trois perfonnes que nous entretenons en cette 
extremité du monde, pour procurer la conuerfion de 
ces peuples: tout cela eft tombé entre les mains de 


é 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 271 


and tied, with the Father, to be carried away to the 
country of those Barbarians who will perhaps make 
a more bloody quarry of them than hounds do of a 
stag. God be forever blessed for the courage that 
he has given to the Father, and for the piety that he 
has bestowed upon these two young Frenchmen. If 
those tigers [173] burn them, if they roast them, if 
they boil them, if they eat them, they will procure 
for them sweeter refreshment in the house of the 
great God, for love of whom they expose themselves 
to such dangers. Such is the price and such the coin 
with which Jesus Christ has bought the salvation of 
Greeks and Barbarians; it is with the same coin that 
the application of his blood must be procured for 
them. A portion of the Hurons who have been made 
prisoners are Christians. Perhaps they will convey 
a good impression of the faith of the great God to 
those peoples, who would be won over to Heaven 
as easily as others, if the Dutch, who have settled 
on the coast of Acadia which belongs to the King, 
did not prevent the Preachers of the Gospel from 
approach and access to them. 

We were sending, by those twelve Canoes, the 
modest outfit of our Fathers who are with the Hu- 
rons, and the greater portion of what they require 
for their Chapels, for their food, and for the needs 
of thirty-three persons whom we maintain at that 
extreme end of the world for the conversion of those 
peoples. All these things have fallen into the hands 
of those [174] barbarians. Deus dedit, Deus abstulit, 
sit nomen Domini benedictum. 

The poor Fathers will chiefly regret the loss of the 
letters written to them by several persons of merit. 
The Hyroquois have scattered them about here and 


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 22 


ces [174] barbares: Deus dedit Deus abftulit fit nomen 
Domini benedigium. 

Ces pauures Peres regretteront fur tout les lettres, 
que plufieurs perfonnes de merite leurs efcriuoient, 
les Hyroquois les ont iettez ca & 1a fur le bord de la 
riuiere, les eaux les ont emportées, & ainfi les voila 
priuez de la douce communication de ces perfonnes 
d’elites & de vertu, les voleur[s] de grands chemins 
leur ont defrobé cette confolation. 

Vnze canots de Hurons chargez d’hommes & de 
pelteries, defcendans aux trois riuieres, s’arefterent 
quafi 4 mefme temps dans vne Ifle, 4 cinquante lieiies 
au deffus de noftre Dame de Montreal, pour chaffer 
au cerf & aux vaches Sauuages: ils mirent en embuf- 
cade vne partie de leurs hommes pour fe ietter fur 
les bef{tes qui fe lanceroient dans la riuiere: pendans 
que la plus groffe trouppe s’en alloit courant, & 
criant dans cette Ifle pour efpouuanter ces animaux. 
Les Hyroquois furuenant fe iettent fur cette embuf- 
cade & l’enleuent en vn moment, leurs camarades 
bien eftonnez veulent courir apres: mais craignans 
que les ennemis ne fuffent en nombre, & qu’ils ne 
leur drefaffent quelque [175] embuche dans les bois: 
ils abandonnent leurs compagnons 4 la mercy des 
loups, & fe diuifans en deux bandes, les vns remon- 
tent aux Hurons, & les autres defcendent aux trois 
riuieres, pour donner aduis que les chemins eftoient 
affiegez en diuers endroits, pene selaut Super iniguos 
pacem peccatorum videns, iamais ny les Algonquins ny 
les Hurons n’ont eu tant de recours a Dieu, qu’ils ont 
maintenant; & iamais ils n’ont efté accablez de plus 
grands mal-heurs: plus nous auangons dans la 
Foy, & plus auant marchons-nous dans les Croix; il 


| 


; 
o | 
i 

f 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 273 


there, on the bank of the river, and the waters have 
carried them away; and the Fathers are deprived of 
pleasant communications from those distinguished 
and virtuous persons. The highway robbers have 
taken this consolation away from them. 

Eleven Huron canoes, loaded with men and furs, 
that were going down to the three rivers, stopped at 
about the same time at an Island fifty leagues above 
nostre Dame de Montreal, to hunt deer and Wild 
cows. They placed a portion of their men in am- 
bush, to fall upon the animals that might rush to the 
river, while the greater part of the band ran yelling 
about the Island to frighten the game. The Hyro- 
quois came unexpectedly, flung themselves upon the 
men in ambush, and carried them away in a mo- 
ment. Their comrades, greatly astonished, would 
have pursued them; but, fearing that their foes were 
in great number, and were preparing for them some 
[175] ambush in the woods, they abandoned their 
companions to the mercy of the wolves, and, divid- 
ing into two parties, one returned to the Hurons, 
while the other came down to the three rivers to 
give information that the roads were beset in various 
places. Pent zelavi super iniquos pacem peccatorum 
videns. Never have the Algonquins or the Hurons 
had such recourse to God as now, and never have 
they been afflicted with greater misfortunes. The 
more we advance in the Faith, the more do we walk 
amid Crosses. It seems as if everything were about 
to perish—at the very moment, perhaps, when God 
intends to save everything. Through such hopeless- 
ness he leads us to hope; and his powerful hand 
sustains us more strongly in the midst of upheavals. 

That good Joseph, so distinguished among the 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


femble que tout veut perir, au temps peut-eftre que 
Dieu veut tout fauuer; c’eft par ces defefpoirs qu'il 
nous conduit dans l’efperance, & fa main puiffante 
nous fouftient plus fortement dans les bouluerfemens. 

Ce bon Iofeph tant fignalé parmy les Hurons, n’eut 
pas plufto{t commencé de prefcher Iefus-Chrift & fes 
compatriotes, qu’il fe vid miferablement maffacré dans 
vne furprife de fes ennemis. Ce coup deuoit, felon 
les apparences humaines, confirmer fon frere dans 
l’éloignemét & dans l’auerfion qu’il auoit de noftre 
creance, a moment que nous penfions qu’il deuft 
fulminer [176] contre Iefus-Chrift; c’eft en ce mo- 
ment qu’il fe fit baptifer en fon nom. 

A peine eft-il Chreftien que le voila dans la fer- 
ueur; il deuient Predicateur auffi bien que fon frere, 
Ludicia Det abyffus multa: i1 nous vient voir ¢a bas, il 
fait des actions d’vn vray enfant de Dieu; nous ay- 
ant confolé par fa prefence, il s’en retourne en fon 
pays. Le lendemain qu’il nous quitte il eft pris, lié 
& garroté, & emmené des Hiroquois; & pour aug- 
menter fon mal-heur & noftre trifteffe, il remenoit 
auec foy fa petite niepce, tres-bien in{truite au Semi- 
naire des Meres Vrfulines, auec efperance qu’elle 
feroit merueilles en fon pays. Cette petite brebis 
e{t deuorée de ces tygres. Quand les Iuifs virent 
Iefus Chrift mort, ils ne s’attédoient pas de voir for- 
tir de fon Sang vne armée de geans Chreiftiens, qui 
ont fait adorer fon fainct Nom dans tout 1’ Vniuers; 
Periculis fluminum, periculis latronum, pericults tn ttine- 
re, periculis in ciuitate, foris pugne, intus timores. C’eft 
par 14 que fainct Paul a prefché Iefus-Chrift; c’eft 
dans la foibleffe que Dieu triomphe de la force; c’eft 
par les dangers qu’il nous mene dans l’affeurance, & 


‘ 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 275 


Hurons, had no sooner begun to preach Jesus Christ 
to his countrymen, than he was miserably slain 
during an unexpected attack of his enemies. Accord- 
ing to all human probabilities, this blow should have 
confirmed his brother in his dislike and aversion for 
our belief. At the very moment when we thought 
that he would storm [176] against Jesus Christ, he 
asked to be baptized in his name. 

Hardly had he become a Christian, than he was 
seized with a pious ardor, and became a Preacher 
like his brother. /udicia Dei abyssus multa. He 
came to see us down here, and his conduct was that 
of atrue child of God. Having consoled us by his 
presence, he returned to his own country. The day 
after he left us, he was taken prisoner, bound, and 
carried away by the Hiroquois. To add to his mis- 
fortune and to our sorrow, he was taking back with 
him his little niece, who had been very well taught 
in the Seminary of the Ursuline Mothers, in the hope 
that she would do wondersin herown country. This 
little lamb was devoured by the tigers. When the 
Jews saw Jesus Christ dead, they did not expect to 
see issue from his Blood an army of Christian giants, 
who have caused his holy Name to be adored through- 
out the World. Periculis fluminum, periculis latronum, 
pericults in ttinere, periculis in civitate, foris pugne@, intus 
timores. Thus did saint Paul preach Jesus Christ. It 
is by weakness that God triumphs over strength, 
through dangers he leads us to safety, and through 
lowliness he will raise us to [177] greatness. Old 
France will come to the aid of her Younger sister; 
those who have the power will deem it an honor to 
use it for Jesus Christ and to press onward. 

On the 13th day of August, Monsieur the Govern- 


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vox. 22 


par la baffeffe, qu’il nous fera monter A [177] la 
grandeur, l’Ancienne France donnera fecours A fa 
Cadette: ceux qui ont le pouuoir en main, tiendrét 4 
honneur de l’employer pour Iefus Chrift & paffer 
outre. 

Le 13. iour d’Aouft Monfieur le Gouuerneur arriua 
alariuiere des Hiroquois, pour commencer ce Fort 
au lieu qu’il auoit defigné. on fait joiier les haches 
dans cette grande foreft: on renuerfe les arbres, on 
les met en pieces, on arrache les fouches, on defigne 
la place, on y dit la premiere Meffe. Apres la bene- 
diction faite, les canons retentiffent, vne falue de 
moufquets honore ces premiers commencemens fous 
les aufpices de noftre grand Roy, & fous la faueur 
de fon Eminéce. Sept iours apres le premier coup 
donné, comme tout le monde S’occupoit A dreffer vne 
palliffade pour fe mettre A couuert de lennemy, vne 
trouppe de trois cens Hiroquois fe gliffant A pas de 
larrons dans ces foref{ts, donna bien de l’exercice; & 
fi Monfieur le Gouuerneur n’euft efté prefent, tous 
les ouuriers eftoient taillez en pieces. Ces Barbares 
fe diuiferent en trois bandes; & nonobftant qu’ils 
viffent trois Barques A l’ancre, ils fe ietterent fur 
nous auec vne fureur fi étrange, qu’il fembloit qu’ils 
deuffent [178] tout enleuer d’vn premier coup. Aufii 
toft chacun court aux armes; vn Caporal nommé Du 
Rocher eftant en garde, voyat qu’ils mettoient des-ja 
le pied dans le retranchement, s’auance la tefte baiffée 
auec quelques Soldats, & les repouffe courageufement. 
Les bales de moufquets & d’arquebufes fifflent de 
tous coftez. Monfieur le Gouuerneur eftant fur l’eau 
dedans fon Brigantin, fe fait porter au pluiftoft a terre 
fur vn batteau; il entre dans le reduit qui n’eftoit pas 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 277 


or arrived at the river of the Hiroquois, to com- 
mence the Fort on the site that he had selected. 
Axes were wielded in the great forest, trees were 
hewn down and cut in pieces, the stumps were pulled 
out; the spot was indicated, and the first Mass said 
there. After the benediction, the cannons thun- 
dered, and a salvo of musketry did honor to this first 
beginning under the auspices of our great King and 
the favor of his Eminence. Seven days after the 
first stroke had been given, while all were engaged 
in erecting a palisade for protection against the 
enemy, a band of three hundred Hiroquois stole like 
thieves through the forest and gave plenty of occu- 
pation. Had not Monsieur the Governor been pres- 
ent, all the workmen would have been cut to pieces. 
The Barbarians divided themselves into three parties, 
and, although they saw three Barks at anchor, they 
rushed upon us with so unusual fury that it seemed 
as if they would [178] carry everything at the first 
onset. At once all rushed to arms. A Corporal 
named Du Rocher, who was on guard, seeing that 
they were already setting foot in the entrenchment, 
charges them with some Soldiers, and bravely repulses 
them. The balls from the muskets and arquebuses 
whistle on all sides. Monsieur the Governor, who 
was on the water, aboard his Brigantine, is conveyed 
ashore in a boat, as quickly as possible, and enters 
the redout, which was not yet in a good state of 
defense. Our Frenchmen were greatly astonished 
at seeing the courage and resolution of enemies who, 
in the minds of those who do not know them, pass 
for being timid, but who perform deeds of the utmost 
hardihood; but their attack was bravely repelled. A 
tall Hyroquois,— wearing a headdress or a sort of 


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


encore en eftat de fe bien defendre. Nos Francois 
font bien étonnez de voir le courage & la refolution 
d’'vn ennemy, qui paffe dans l’efprit de ceux qui ne 
le connoiffent pas, pour timide, & qui fait des actions 
d’vne tres-grande hardieffe; bien attaqué, bien de- 
fendu. Vn grand Hyroquois portant vn pennache, 
ou vne efpece de couronne de poil de cerf, teint en 
écarlatte, enrichy d’vn collier de pourcelaine, s’auan- 
¢geant trop, eft couché par terre tout roide mort d’vne 
moufquetade. Vn autre receut fept poftes dans fon 
bouclier, & bien autant dansfon corps. Nos Fracois 
e{tans animez, fe ruént auec vn tel carnage, qu’ils 
font lafcher pied 4 ces Barbares. L’vn d’eux grande- 
ment [179] bleffé, iette fon arquebufe & fe fauue, 
l'autre abandonne fa maffe d’armes; plufieurs quit- 
tent leurs boucliers, trouuans plus d’affeurance en 
leurs pieds, qu’en leurs rondaches; ils firent neant- 
moins leur retraitte auec conduite, fe retranchans 
dans vn Fort qu’ils auoient fecrettement dreffé A vne 
lieué ou enuiron au deffus de nous. On trouua par 
apres des haches & d’autres armes que les bleffez 
auoient laiffées, auec du fang qui rougiffoit leur 
trafle. Nos Soldats les loiioient de leur generofité, 
ne penfans pas que des gens qui portent le nom de 
Sauuages, euffent les armes fi bien enla main. Tel 
S'auanca pour mettre le pied dans vne barque, 
d’autres tirerent dans la redoute par les meurtrieres 
mefmes. Vn Caporal, nommé Des lauriers, fut tué; 
& le fieur Martial Secretaire de Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur, receut vn coup d’arquebufe dans 1’épaule: 
trois autres Francois furent bleffez, dont l’vn a vn 
coup qui luy paffe d’vne joué a l’autre. 

Cét affaut qui dura affez long temps, eut deux bons 


1642] RELATION OF 162 279 


crown of deer skin, dyed scarlet, and enriched with 
a collar of porcelain beads,— who advanced too far 
was smitten to the earth, quite dead, by a volley of 
musketry. Another received seven leaden balls in 
his buckler, and as many in his body. Our French- 
men, full of courage, charged with such fury that 
they drove back the Barbarians. One of these, who 
was severely [179] wounded, threw down his arque- 
bus and fled; another abandoned all his weapons; 
several dropped their shields, trusting more to their 
feet for safety than to their bucklers. They, never- 
theless, effected their retreat in good order, intrench- 
ing themselves in a Fort that they had secretly 
erected, aleague or soabove us. Hatchets and other 
weapons were afterwards found, which the wounded 
had left behind, with the blood that reddened their 
tracks. Our Soldiers praised their bravery, not think- 
ing that people who are called Savages could use 
their arms so well. One Hiroquois went so far as to 
set foot on a bark; others fired into the redout 
through the very loopholes. A Corporal named Des 
lauriers was killed; sieur Martial, the Secretary of 
Monsieur the Governor, received an arquebus shot 
in the shoulder. Three other Frenchmen were 
wounded; one received a blow which pierced from 
one cheek to the other. 

This assault, which lasted quite a long while, had 
two good effects. The first was to check those Bar- 
barians, and to prevent them, not only from coming 
to carry off our Christian Savages from our very 
doors, but [180] also from coming to surprise the Hu- 
rons and Algonquins who pass down the great river 
daily to visit us. In the second place, our Soldiers 
learned that they had to be constantly on their guard 


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


effets; 1’vn fut d’arrefter ces Barbares, & de les em- 
pefcher non feulemét de venir chercher nos Sauuages 
Chreftiens iufques auprés de nos portes, mais [180] 
encor de venir furprendre les Hurons & les Algon- 
quins, qui paffent tous les iours dans ce grand fleuue 
pour nous venir vifiter. De plus, nos Soldats appri- 
rent qu’il fe falloit défier d’vn ennemy, qui fond 
comme vn oifeau deffus fa proye, qui fait la guerre 
en larron, & qui attaque en vaillant homme. 

On ne manqua pas de faire entendre aux Sauuages 
qui eftoient affemblez aux trois Riuieres, ce qui 
s'eftoit paffé. On leur monftra les dépoiiilles de 
lennemy; on leur fit entendre que le deffein du Roy 
& de fon Eminence dans ces fortifications, n’eftoit que 
pour defendre ceux qui regoiuent noftre faincte Foy; 
que ces grands Capitaines obeiffoient 4 Dieu; qu’ils 
honoroient la priere; qu’ils n’auoient befoin d’aucune 
chofe du pays des Sauuages; que leur feule & vnique 
penfée dans les fecours qu’ils leur donnoient, n’eftoit 
autre que de leur faire reconnoiftre & adorer le Dieu 
du Ciel & de laterre. Wn Capitaine prenant la 
parole; C’eft A ce coup, dit-il, que vous eftes vraye- 
ment nos amis, puis que vous défaites nos ennemis. 
l’ay quafi creu iufques 4 maintenant, que vous auiez 
quelque fecrette intelligence auec [181] les Hiroquois, 
mais le fang que vos armes ont tiré de leurs veines, 
condamne mes paroles. Le iour fuiuant, cét homme 
jadis tres-mefchant, & tres-grand ennemy de la Foy, 
nous vint trouuer, & nous dift; Ie m’en vay querir 
le Capitaine de 1’Ifle; Si iufques A maintenant mes 
oreilles ont efté boftichées, elles feront dorefnauant 
ouuertes; ma bouche a plus de mefchanceté que mon 
coeur n’en auoit. Ie trouuois bon dans le fond de 


‘7, 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 281 


against an enemy who pounces like a bird on its 
prey, who wars like a robber, and who attacks like 
a brave man. 

We did not fail to communicate the news of what 
had happened, to the Savages assembled at the three 
Rivers. The spoils of the enemy were exhibited to 
them, and they were informed that the object of the 
King and of his Eminence in erecting those fortifica- 
tions was merely to defend those who receive our 
holy Faith; that those great Captains obeyed God, 
and that they honored prayer; that they required 
nothing from the country of the Savages; that the 
sole and only idea that they had in giving them this 
help was to make them acknowledge and adore the 
God of Heaven and of earth. A Captain addressed 
us, and said: ‘‘ This time you are really our friends, 
since you have defeated our enemies. Hitherto I 
almost believed that you had some secret intelligence 
with [181] the Hiroquois; but the blood that your 
arms have drawn from their veins condemns my 
words.’’ On the following day, this man, who was 
formerly very wicked and a very great enemy of the 
Faith, came to us and said: ‘‘ I am going to seek the 
Captain of the Island. If my ears have been closed 
until now, they will hereafter be opened. My mouth 
has more wickedness than my heart had. In the 
depth of my soul, I found that what you taught was 
good, but I could not submit myself to it. Nowl 
really wish to embrace prayer.” 

The other Algonquins who have come down to the 
three Rivers have promised wonders. If they keep 
their word, Heaven will rejoice, for it is interested 
in the conversion of a sinner. 

Finally, this place, where fear dwelt, will now be 


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


mon ame, ce que vous enfeigniez, mais ie ne pouuois 
pas m’y foufmettre; C’eft maintenant tout de bon 
que ie veux embraffer la priere. 

Les autres Algonquins, qui font defcendus aux 
trois Riuieres, ont promis des merueilles. S’ils 
tiennent leur parole, le Ciel s’en réjoiiyra, puis qu’il 
s’intereffe en la conuerfion d’vn pecheur. 

Enfin ce lieu ot logeoit la crainte, fera vne maifon 
d’affeurance. Ces Barbares remontas en leur pays, 
dépeignoient leurs victoires fur les arbres qui bor- 
doient l’emboucheure de leur Riuiere. Ils plantoient 
fur fes riues les teftes de ceux qu’ils auoiét maffacrez. 
Ils griffonnoient le vifage de leurs prifonniers. La 
figure du pauure Pere Ifaac logues, y paroiffoit entre 
les autres, [182] & maintenant on y voit le grand 
Eftendart des predeftinez. C’eft vne haute Croix, 
que Monfieur le Gouuerneur fit éleuer fur les ruines 
de leurs trophées, iuftement le iour de l’Exaltation de 
la Saincte Croix, auec vne pieté & vne confolation 
tres-fenfible de nos Francois, /u hoc figno vinces. Ie- 
fus-Chrift fera noftre victoire. 

Apres la prife du P. Ifaac Iogues par les ennemis, 
auec deux ieunes hommes Francois, vn Algonquin 
tint ce difcours au Pere Iacques Buteux: C’eft a ce 
coup qu’on verra bien fi les Hiroquois vous craignét, 
s’ils ont peur de vos arquebufes; s’ils redoutent vos 
canons, ou bien s’ils vous méprifent. Si toft que ton 
Frere fera arriué en leur pais, les Capitaines s’affem- 
bleront; & fi le nom Frangois leur fait peur, voicy 
comme ils parleront: Ne mangeons point la chair des 
Frangois, cette chair n’eft pas bonne 4 manger, c’eft 
[vn] poifon qui nous fera mourir fi nous en gouitons; 
remenons-les a leurs freres & 4 leurs compatriotes. 


; 
: 


1642) RELATION OF 1642 283 


an abode of safety. When the Barbarians returned 
to their own country, they painted their victories on 
the trees along the mouth of their River,—they set 
upon its banks the heads of those whom they had 
massacred; they made rough drawings of the faces 
of their prisoners. The picture of poor Father Isaac 
Jogues appeared there among the others. [182] 
But now we see there the great Standard of the elect. 
It is a high Cross that Monsieur the Governor caused 
to be erected over the ruins of their trophies, on the 
very day of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, with 
very manifest piety and devotion on the part of our 
Frenchmen. Jn hoc signo vinces; Jesus Christ will be 
our victory. 

After the capture of Father Isaac Jogues by the 
enemy, with two young Frenchmen, an Algonquin 
made this speech to Father Jacques Buteux: ‘‘ This 
time we will see whether the Hiroquois fear you; 
whether they are afraid of your arquebuses; whether 
they dread your cannons, or whether they despise 
you. As soon as thy Brother reaches their country, 
the Captains will assemble, and, if the French name 
frighten them, they will speak thus: ‘ Let us not eat 
the flesh of the Frenchmen; that flesh is not good 
food,—it is a poison, that will kill us if we taste it. 
Let us take them back to their brothers and country- 
men.’ That is what they will say, if they fear you; 
and in the Spring they will bring back thy Brother 
and the two Frenchmen whom they hold captive. 
If, on the contrary, they despise you, they will call 
out, on the arrival of thy Brother [183] and of the 
Frenchmen who accompany him: ‘ Now let us eat, 
let us see how the flesh of the French tastes; let us 
swallow them all whole.’ Thereupon they will burn 


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


Voila ce qu’ils diront s’ils vous craignent, & au Prin- 
temps ils rameneront ton Frere, & les deux Francois 
quwils tiennent prifonniers: que fi au contraire ils 
vous ont a mépris, ils s’écrieront 4 la veué de ton 
Frere, [183] & des Francois qui l’accompagnent; ¢a 
mangeons, voyons quel gouft a la chair des Francois; 
auallons les tous entiers. La deffus ils les brufle- 
ront, ils leur feront fouffrir mille tourmens, ils les 
mettront en pieces, ils les ietteront par quartiers 
dedans de grandes chaudieres, ils les mangeront auec 
delices, tout le monde en voudra goufter. Et quad 
ils feront bien faouls, voila de bonne viande, diront- 
ils, cette chair eft delicate, il en faut manger. Vn 
Capitaine haranguant excitera la ieuneffe d’aller a la 
chaffe des Francois, pour faire de femblables feftins 
dans leur pays, alors il n’y aura habitation de Fran- 
cois ott ils ne viennent dreffer des embufches pour 
les furprendre, & les mener 4 leur boucherie. Cela 
s’appelle parler & agir en Sauuage. Ie voy peu de 
perfonnes de nous autres, qui ne foient dans le 
danger d’auoir pour fepulchre l’eftomach de ces 
Barbares, fi Dieu ne nous met a l’abry des hautes 
puiffances. 


1642] _ RELATION OF 1642 285 


them; they will make them suffer a thousand tor- 
ments; they will cut them in pieces and throw them 
by quarters into great kettles; they will eat them 
with pleasure; every one will want to taste them. 
And when they are full to repletion, they will say: 
‘That is good meat, that flesh is delicate; we must 
eat some.’ A Captain will harangue, and incite the 
young men to go and hunt Frenchmen, so as to have 
similar feasts in their country. Then there will not 
be any French dwelling near which they will not lie 
in ambush, to surprise and carry them off to their 
shambles.’’ This is what is called speaking and 
acting like a Savage. I see but few among us who 
are not in danger of having the stomachs of those 
Barbarians for a sepulchre, if God do not protect us 
from the high mightinesses.“ 


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES __[Vou. 22 


[184] CHAPITRE XII. 
DE LEURS COUSTUMES, & DE LEURS SUPERSTITIONS. 


L fe trouue des Sauuages chargez d’autant de 
| noms que quelques Europeans, font chargés de 
diuers tiltres & de diuerfes qualitez. Donc de 
mef{me qu’en France, il ya des noms propres pour 
les hommes, & d’autres pour les femmes, ainfi en 
eft il parmy les Sauuages, le nom d’vn homme ne 
fe donne point 4 vne femme: il femble que la nature 
a enfeigné cette diftinction a toutes les nations de la 
terre; ces noms font tirez par la plus part des chofes 
naturelles? comme des animaux, des Poiffons, des 
Saifons, en vn mot de tout ce qui tombe fous les 
fens: l’vn s’appellera Arimschtigsan la tefte de 
Chien, l’autre DechinKinagadich vn petit Bouclier, 
lautre SmithiKens 1’Epine, & ainfi du refte. 

On donne le nom a vn enfant quelque temps apres 
fa naiffance, paffant de 1’enfance en l’adolefcence, il 
change de nom comme les Romains changoient de 
tobe, [185] il prend vn autre nom en l’aage viril, & 
puis encor vn autre en la vieilleffe: fi bien qu’ils en 
ont de rechange felon leurs aages, échapant de quel- 
que danger ou fortant de quelque grande maladie: 
ils prennent vn nom qu’ils croyent leur debuoir eftre 
de meilleur augure que celuy qu’ils auoient. Les 
Sorciers ou Deuins feront quelquefois changer de 
nom a quelque malade, s’imaginant quafi que la mort 
ou le Manito’ qui vouloit attaquer cét homme, ne le 


\ 

i 
4 
; 
"] 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 287 


[184] CHAPTER XII. 
CUSTOMS AND SUPERSTITIONS OF THE SAVAGES. 


HERE are Savages who bear as many names as 
ap the various titles and divers qualities with 
which some Europeans are encumbered. As 
in France there are names peculiar to men, and 
others to women, so, among the Savages, the name 
of a man is not given to a woman. It seems as if 
nature had taught this distinction to all the nations 
of the earth. These names are mostly derived from 
natural things; as, for instance, from animals, from 
Fishes, from the Seasons,—in a word, from every- 
thing that affects the senses. One will call himself 
Arimouchtigwan, ‘‘ the Dog’s thead;’’ another, De- 
chinkinagadich, ‘‘ a small Buckler;’’ a third, Oumi- 
thikens, ‘‘ the Thorn,’’ and so on. 

A child’s name is given to him shortly after his 
birth. When he passes from childhood to adoles- 
cence, he changes his name as the Romans changed 
their robes. [185] He takes another name when he 
attains manhood, and still another in old age; so that 
they change their names according to their ages. 
When they escape a danger or recover from an ill- 
ness, they take a name which they think will be of 
better augury than the one they had. The Sorcerers 
or Soothsayers will sometimes make a sick man change 
his name, thinking that death, or the Manitoou that 
tried to attack the man, will no longer know him 


288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 22 


cognoiftra plus fous vn nouueau nom. En vn mot 
ils croyent qu’il y a des noms mal-heureux, & d’au- 
tres bien-heureux: vn fonge eft capable de faire chan- 
ger le nom 4 vn homme. On a dit fouuent qu’on 
faifoit reuiure les trepaffez, faifant porter leurs noms 
aux viuans, cela fe fait pour plufieurs raifons, pour 
refufciter la memoire d’vn vaillant homme, & pour 
exciter celuy qui portera fon nom A imiter fa-gene- 
rofité, pour tirer vengeance des ennemis; car celuy 
qui prend le nom d’vn homme tué en guerre, s’oblige 
de venger fa mort, pour fecourir la famille d’vn 
homme mort: d’autant que celuy qui le fait reuiure & 
qui le reprefente, porte toutes les charges du deffund, 
nourriffant fes [186] enfans comme s'il eftoit leur pro- 
pre Pere, en effect ils l’appellent leur Pere, & luy 
fes enfans. Vne mere ou vn parent qui ayme 
tendrement fon fils ou fa fille; ou quelqu’vn de fes 
proches, le fait refufciter par vne affection de le voir 
auprés de foy: tranfportant l’amour qu’elle portoit 
au deffunct, A celuy ou a celle qui fe charge de fon 
nom: cette ceremonie fe fait en vn feftin folemnel en 
prefence de plufieurs conuiez, celuy qui fait reuiure 
le trepaffé; fait vn prefent a celuy qui doit prendre 
fa place: il luy met parfois vn collier de Pourcelaine 
au col, s’il l’accepte il prend le nom du trepaffé, & 
fe met a dancer le beau premier pour marque de 
refiouiffance. Il n’y a point de Nations qui n’afpi- 
rent a l’immortalité: mais il ny a que les vrais Chre- 
{tiens qui l’obtiennent. 

vn homme qui aymoit fa femme, ou vne femme 
fon mary & qui refpecte fes alliez, fera quelquefois 
trois ans fans fe remarier, pour témoigner fon amour; 
que s'il fe marie bientoft apres fa mort, fans s’eftre 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 289 


under a new name. In a word, they believe that 
there are unlucky names, and others that are lucky. 
A dream is sufficient to make a man change his name. 
It has often been said that the dead were brought 
back to life by making the living bear their names. 
This is done for several reasons,—to revive the 
memory of a brave man, and to incite him who shall 
bear his name to imitate his courage; to take revenge 
upon the enemies, for he who takes the name of a 
man killed in battle binds himself to avenge his 
death; to assist the family of a dead man, because 
he who brings him back to life, and who represents 
him, assumes all the duties of the deceased, feeding 
his [186] children as if he were their own Father — 
in fact, they call him their Father, and he calls them 
his children. Mothers or other relatives who love a 
son, or a daughter, or any of their kindred, cause 
such persons to be resuscitated, through a desire to 
see them close by them,—transferring the affection 
that they felt for the deceased to the persons who 
take their names. This ceremony takes place ata 
solemn feast in the presence of many guests. He 
who brings back the dead to life makes a present to 
him who is to take his place. He sometimes hangs 
a collar of Porcelain beads around his neck. If the 
latter accept, he takes the name of the deceased, 
and begins to dance before all the others, as a mark 
of rejoicing.» There is not a Nation that does 
not aspire to immortality but true Christians alone 
obtain it. 

A man who loved his wife—or a wife who loved 
her husband—and who respects her relatives, will 
sometimes remain three years without remarriage, 


290 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 22 


accorde auec les amis de la deffuncte, le plus proche 
de fes parens le pillera & luy oftera tout ce qu'il 
poffede au premier rencontre, & cét homme fe laiffe- 
ra emporter [187] tout fon bagage fans mot dire, 
telle eftant la couftume du pais. 


Les prefens parmy les peuples font toutes les affai-. 


res du pais: ils effuient les larmes, ils appaifent la 
colere, ils ouurent la porte dans les pais étrangers, 
ils deliurent les prifonniers, ils refufcitent les morts, 
on ne parle quafi & on ne refpond que par des pre- 
fens: C’eft pour cela que dans les harangues, le pre- 
fent paffe pour vne parole, on fait des prefens pour 
animer les hommes 4 la guerre, pour les conuier A la 
Paix: pour attirer vne famille ou vne nation & venir 
prendre place & demeurer auprés de vous, pour fatis- 
faire ou payer ceux qui ont receu quelque iniure, ou 
quelque bleffure, notamment s'il y a eu du fang 
répandu. Les prefens qu’on fait pour la mort d’vn 
homme, qui auroit efté maffacré font en grand nom- 
bre; & remarquez, s'il vous plaift, que ce n’eft pas 
ordinairement l’affafin qui les fait: mais fes parens 
fa bourgade ou fa nation, felon la qualité ou la con- 
dition de celuy qui a efté mis A mort. Ne penfez 
pas neantmoins que ce procedé, donne quelque liberté 
aux e{prits mutins, de faire vn mauuais coup, tant 


sen faut, la peine dans laquelle vn [188] meurtrier © 


iette tout vn public, les retient puiflamment. Aiou- 
tez que s’il eft rencontré des parens du deffunct: de- 
uant qu'il ait fatisfait, il eft mis 4 mort fur le champ 
fans autre forme de iuftice. 

Les prefens parlent comme i’ay dit: ils font tous 
fignificatifs, ceux qui deliurent vn prifonnier de 
guerre: luy font trois prefens; comme trois colliers 


a 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 291 


to show his love. But if he marries again shortly 
after her death, without coming to an agreement 
with the friends of the deceased, the nearest of her 
relatives will rob him and strip him of all he pos- 
sesses at their first meeting; and that man will allow 
[187] all his property to be taken from him without 
saying a word, for such is the custom of the country. 

Presents among these peoples despatch all the 
affairs of the country. They dry up tears; they 
appease anger; they open the doors of foreign coun- 
tries; they deliver prisoners; they bring the dead 
back to life; one hardly ever speaks or answers, 
except by presents. That is why, in the harangues, 
a present passes for a word. Presents are given to 
excite men to war; to urge them to make Peace; to 
attract a family or a nation to come and reside near 
you; to satisfy or indemnify those who have suffered 
an injury or received a wound, especially if blood has 
been shed. The presents given on account of the 
death of a man who has been killed are very numer- 
ous. And observe, if you please, that it is not usu- 
ally the assassin who gives them, but his relatives, 
his village, or his nation, according to the quality or 
condition of the person who has been put to death. 
Do not imagine, however, that this proceeding gives 
any liberty to violent persons to do an evil deed. So 
far from that, the trouble caused by a [188] murderer 
to an entire community exercises a powerful restraint 
over them. Moreover, if any relatives of the de- 
ceased come across the murderer before satisfaction 
has been given, they put him to death at once, with- 
out any form of trial. 

Presents speak, as I have already stated. They all 


292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


de Pourcelaine, pour brifer les trois liens dont il eft 
garotté, l’vn par les Iambes, l’autre par les bras, & 
le troifiefme par le milieu du corps. 


Si quelques Sauuages étrangers, paffent par les 


terres d’vn Capitaine nouuellement mort, & non en- 
cor refufcité, on les arrefte, on leur dit, que le corps 
du deffunct trauerfe la Riuiere, c’eft 4 dire, qu’il faut 
faire des prefens pour le releuer pour rendre le paf- 
{age libre, & pour arrefter les pleurs de fes amis. 
Ils ont des medecines naturelles, qu’on peut appeller 
interieures, & exterieures; les interieures confiftent 
en des potions, qu’ils tirent de quelques fimples; fans 
les compofer ny les mefler, ils pillent par exemple de 
petittes branches d’vne efpece de Sapin, les font boiiil- 
lir & en boiuent le [189] fuc ou le ius, qui leur fert 
de vomitoire: ils font le mefme des branches de Ce- 
dres, d’vne efpece de racine femblables aux naueaux 
de France, d’autre petites branches d’vn bois fort 
amer, d’vne efpece d’ozeille fauuage & de quelques 
autres fimples: dont nous n’auons point de cognoif- 
fance. 

Voicy vne partie de leurs remedes exterieurs, s’ils 
ont quelque tumeur en quelque endroit que ce foit: 
ils vfent d’vne efpece de fcarification, decouppans la 
partie malade auec vn coufteau; ne pouuant croire 
que pour guerir la tefte, il faille feignerle bras. Ils 
mettent parfois fur la fcarification quelques herbes, 
ou quelques racines pilées pour feruir d’ongan re{trin- 
geant quand le fang eft fuffifamment efcoulé. 

Voicy vne inuention que la France n’a pas encore 
trouué, vn homme ayant perdu 1’vn de fes yeux par 
vne fluxion, fe guerit en cette forte, il arrache ceft 
ceil & met en fa place l’ceil d’vn Aigle; mais comme 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 293 


have their meaning. Those who deliver a prisoner 
of war, give him three gifts; such, for instance, as 
three collars of Porcelain beads, to break the bonds 
that tied him,—one by the Legs, another by the 
arms, and the third by the middle of the body. 

If any strange Savages pass by the land of a 
Captain who has recently died, and has not yet been 
brought back to life, they are stopped and told that 
the body of the deceased is crossing the River; this 
means that presents must be given to raise him up, 
to give him a free passage, and to dry the tears of 
his friends. They have natural medicines which 
may be called internal and external; those that are 
internal consist of potions, that they obtain from 
simples, without compounding or mixing them. For 
instance, they strip small branches from a species of 
Fir, which they boil, and then drink the [189] sap or 
juice, which serves as an emetic. They do the same 
with the branches of Cedar; with a small root, like 
the French turnip; with other small branches of a 
very bitter tree; with a species of wild sorrel; and 
with other simples, of which we have no knowledge. 

Here are some of their external remedies. If they 
have a tumor at any spot, they employ a sort of scari- 
fication, cutting into the affected part with a knife; 
for they cannot believe that, in order to cure the 
head, one must bleed the arm. Sometimes they ap- 
ply herbs or roots to the scarified part, to serve as an 
astringent ointment, when sufficient blood has flowed. 

Here is an invention which has not yet been dis- 
covered in France. A man who had lost one of his 
eyes, through inflammation, cured himself in this 
way. Hetore out that eye, and put the eye of an 


294 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


il ne rempliffoit pas toute la concauité, il le change 
en vn ceil de Tortiie, cét ceil eftant troublé & luy 
faifant voir les obiets confufément, il le iette & fe 
[190] fert de l’ceil d’vn Hiiart (c’eft vn oyfeau de 
Riuiere) cét ceil eftoit fi vif qu’il luy faifoit voir le 
fond des lacs & des fleuues, fur lefquelles il naui- 
geoit, & luy decouuroit tous les poiffons, grands & 
petits qui s’y rencontroiét. Comme il paffoit fur des 
abyfmes d’eau la diftance efpouuentable de fon petit 
canot iufques au fond de ces abyfmes luy donnoit 
tant de terreur, qu’il fut contraint de quitter cét ceil 
d’oyfeau, & de prendre l’ceil de fon Chien, qui 
s’adapta fi proprement qu’il s’en feruit le refte de fes 
iours, auec autant de facilité que de fon ceil naturel: 
c’eft vne femme aueugle qui raconte cette hiftoire 
de fon grand Pere: elle n’eft non plus croyable en 
ce qui touche les yeux, qu’en ce qui concerne les 
couleurs. 

La Relation de l’an 1634. rapporte que les Sau- 
uages, s’imaginent que la Lune eft mariée au Soleil, 
qu'elle en avn fils, & quand elle le prend entre fes 
bras qu'elle paroift Eclipfée. D’autres difent qu’elle 
fouffre de grandes douleurs, & qu'elle eft en danger 
de mort, quand elle paroift dans cette noirceur. Il 
y en a qui fe mettent 4 dancer ou a chanter pour luy 
donner quelque foulagement: ils prennent les Eclip- 
fes [191] pour des augures de mortalité, de guerre ou 
de maladie; mais cét augure ne precede pas toufiours 
le mal-heur qu’il pronoftique, il le fuit parfois: car 
les Sauuages ayant veu l’Eclipfe de Lune, qui a paru 
cette année 1642. dirent qu’ils ne s’eftonnoient plus 
du maffacre, que les Hiroquois auoient fait de leurs 
gens pendant l’hyuer, ils en voyoient la marque & 


——— «2a 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 295 


Eagle in its place. But, as it did not quite fill the 
cavity, he changed it for the eye of a Turtle. As 
the latter was dim, and made him see objects imper- 
fectly, he threw it away and [190] used the eye of a 
Loon (this is a River bird). This eye was so keen 
that it enabled him to see the bottom of the lakes 
and rivers over which he paddled, and showed him 
all the fishes, both great and small, that were in 
them. When he passed over the great depths of 
water, the frightful distance from his little canoe to 
the bottom of those depths inspired him with such 
terror that he was obliged to discard that bird’s eye, 
and to take the eye of his Dog, which suited him so 
well that he used it for the rest of his days, with as 
much ease as his own naturaleye. It was a blind 
woman who related this story of her Grandfather. 
She is not more credible regarding eyes than she is 
concerning colors. 

The Relation of 1634 states that the Savages im- 
agine that the Moon is wedded to the Sun; that she 
has borne him a son; and that, when she takes the 
latter in her arms, she appears Eclipsed. Others 
say that she suffers great pain and is in danger of 
death when she appears in that shadow. Some of 
them dance and sing, to give her relief. They con- 
sider Eclipses [191] as omens of mortality, of war, 
or of sickness; but this augury does not always pre- 
cede the evil that it predicts. Sometimes it follows 
it, for the Savages who saw the Eclipse of the Moon 
that appeared this year, 1642, said that they were 
no longer astonished at the massacre of their people 
by the Hiroquois during the winter. They had 
before them the token and the sign of it, but a little 
too late to put them on their guard. 


296 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


le figne: mais vn peu trop tard pour s’en donner de 
garde. 

A propos de cette Eclipfe: voicy ce qu’en difent 
ceux qui l’ont obferuée &4 Kebec 4S. Iofeph & aux 
trois Riuieres le 4. d’Auril fur les fept heures & 
demie du foir, la Lune commenga de fe couurir, & 
l’Eclipfe fut toute plaine enuiron les huict heures, & 
trois quarts, elle demeura en cet eftat iufques 4 dix 
heures & vn quart du foir, & pour lors elle commen- 
ca petit a petit a fe decouurir. 


FIN. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 297 


In connection with that Eclipse, this is what those 
say who observed it at Kebec, at St. Joseph, and at 
the three Rivers. Onthe 4th of April, at about half 
past seven in the evening, the Moon began to be 
covered, and the Eclipse was complete at about a 
quarter to nine. It remained in that condition until 
a quarter past ten in the evening, and then gradually 
commenced to be visible. 


END. 


1 rl See ee ee 


298 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


. ss 


Relation de ce qvi seft paffé en la Miffion des 
Hurons. Depuis le mois de Juin de l’année 
1641. jufques au mois de Juin de l’année 
1642. Enuoyée au R. Pere IEAN 
FILLEAV Prouincial de la Com- 
pagnie de IESvs, en la 
Prouince de France. 

M. DC. XLIII. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 299 


Relation of what occurred in the Mission of 
the Hurons from the month of June of the 
year 1641, to the month of June of the 
year 1642. Sent to Reverend Father 
JEAN FILLEAU, Provincial of 
the Society of JESUS in the 
Province of France. 

M. DC. XLIII. 


300 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


Relation de ce qvi s’eft paffe, en la Miffion des 
Hurons depuis le mois de luin 1641 
iufques au mois de luin 1642. 


Chap. I. E l’efiat du Pays & du Chrifit- i 
ant{me en General, pag. 1 [i.e., 5] . 
II. De la matfon ou Refidence fixe Y 


de Sainéie Marie, : re 
Ill. De la Mision de S. Marie, aux Atavonbhee: | 
nons, ; 26 \ 
IV. Dela Atijston de la acapibon, Aux sain. h 
ouantan, 28 ¥ 
V.  Quelques ons Yauermedts ie Justauts Chre- ? 
Jtiens de cette mefme Mifsion, . 4o , 
VI. Des deportements de quelques Chrefiiens en 
particulier, de cette mefme Mifsion, : 5I 
VII. Exercices ordinaires des Chreftiens de la ey 
me Miffion, : 70 
VIII. De la Mifsion de s. Iofeph aux tlingasss 
nongnahak, ; > &4 [i.e., 82] 
IX. Perfecutions des Cancieiens de la mefme 
Mifsion, . ‘ 96 [i.e., 94] 
X. De la Mission de faint Tean Baptifte, aux 
Arendaenhronon, . ‘ 108 [i.e., 206] 
XI. Diuerfes chofes qui n'ont ph eftre r'apportées 
aux Chapitres precedens, . : 730 [1.e., 128] 


XII. Dela Mifsion du S. E/prit aux Algonquins 
plus voyfins des Hurons, . ; 150 [i.e., 148] 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 301 


Relation of what occurred in the Mission of the 
Hurons from the month of June, 1641, 
to the month of June, 1642. 


Chap. I. F the state of the Country and of 
Christianity in General, page 1 [i.e., 5] 
II. Of the house or permanent 


Residence of Sainte Marie, » abled 
III. Of the Mission of Ste. Marie among the 
Ataronchronons, 26 
IV. Of the Mission of a Conception among the 
Atignaouantan, 28 
V. Of the good sentiments re some Joy ESA oy 
this same Mission, ; » ae 
VI. Of the conduct of some Ehidieias im PREM 
lar, of this same Mission, 51 
VII. Usual exercises of the Cirteiaks a the same 
Mission, 70 
VIII. Of the Mission af St. Joseph among the 
Attingueenongnahak, ; ; &4 [i.e., 82] 
IX. Persecutions of the Christians of the same 
Mission, i . 96 [i.e., 94] 
Pie (OF, the Mission of ie John the Baptist 
among the Arendaenhronon, ; 708 [i.e., 106] 
XI. Divers matters which could not be related in 
the foregoing Chapters, ‘ 730 [i.e., 128] 


XII. Of the Mission of the Holy Ghost among 
the Algonquins that are the nearest to the Hu- 
rons, ‘ ‘ ; ; 150 [i.e., 148] 


302 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 22 


[3] ON R. PERE, 
Les premieres Années qu’on a trauaillé 


pour la Foy dans ce Pais, les maladies 
nous ayant obligé d’employer le plus fort de nos 
foins pluftof{t pour des Ames qui f’enuoloient incon- 
tinent au Ciel, que pour les Adultes en fanté, qui 
puffent former vne Eglife au milieu de cette Barba- 
rie; On nous écriuit de France qu’on attendoit des 
Adultes, qui receuans la Foy la laiffaffent pour heri- 
tiere a leur pofterité. Il a pleu a4 noftre Seigneur 
cette derniere Année, donner l’accompliffement a des 
defirs fi raifonnables, par vn bon nombre d’ Adultes, 
qui non feulement ont embraffé la Foy, mais ont paffé 
par les épreuues, qui nous ont fait connoiftre que les 
Anges [4] y ont plus trauaillé que nous: & que nous 
pouuons efperer que cet Ouurage eftant du Ciel, ira 
fe perfectionnant de plus en plus iufqu’au poinct 
que le fouhaitent ceux qui demandent que Dieu foit 
adoré par toute la Terre. C’eft ce que nous efperons 
particulierement de 1’affiftance des faincts Sacrifices 
& prieres de V.R. & par fon moyen, de celles de 
toute la Prouince, aufquelles nous nous recomman- 
dons de toute noftre affection. 


De V.R. 
De Sainéte Marie aux Seruiteur tres-humble, & 
Hurons ce 10. de Iuin tres-obeiffant en N. S. 


1642. HIER. LALLEMANT. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 303 


[3] Y REVEREND FATHER, 
M During the first Years in which we la- 
bored for the Faith in this Country, the 
prevalence of diseases compelled us to devote our 
greatest attention rather to the Souls that soared at 
once to Heaven than to Adults in good health, who 
might form a Church in the midst of this Barbarism. 
We therefore received letters from France telling us 
that Adults were expected, who, receiving the Faith, 
would leave it as an inheritance to their posterity. 
Our Lord has been pleased during the past Year to 
grant the fulfillment of such reasonable desires by 
the accession of a goodly number of Adults, who 
have not only embraced the Faith but have gone 
through trials which have shown us that the Angels 
[4] have worked more for it than we have, and that 
we may hope that this Work, which is of Heaven, 
will continue to improve more and more, even to the 
degree desired by those who pray that God may be 
adored throughout the whole Earth. This is what 
we especially hope from the assistance of the holy 
Sacrifices and prayers of Your Reverence, and, 
through you, of those of the entire Province, to which 
we recommend ourselves with all our affection. 


Your Reverence’s 


From Sainte Marie Most humble and most obedi- 
among the Hurons, the ent servant in Our Lord, 
10th of June, 1642. HIER. LALLEMANT. 


304 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 22 


[5] CHAPITRE I. 


DE L’ESTAT DV PAYS & DU CHRISTIANISME EN 
GENERAL. 


ES fleaux de Dieu fe font fait fentir les vns apres 
L les autres a2 ce pauure Peuple Barbare: la ter- 
reur & l’effroy de la Guerre ont fuiuy apres les 
maladies mortelles, qui dans les Années precedentes, 
mirent le dueil & la defolation par tout. Des troupes 
qu’ils auoient mis fur pied pour aller battre 1’ Enne- 
my dans fes terres, les vnes ont efté diffipées par la 
mauuaife intelligence qui fe trouua parmy eux, les 
autres ont e{fté mifes en fuite, aucunes y font pref- 
que demeurées toutes entieres dans les embufches 
qu’on leur auoit dreffé: en vn mot quafi toutes leurs 
entreprifes ne leur ont efté que funeftes. 

Diuerfes bandes ennemies s’eftans coullées dans le 
Pais, a la faueur des bois [6] & de la nuict, y ont par 
tout, & quafi en toutes les faifons de 1’Année, fait des 
maffacres dautant plus redoutables, que pas vn ne 
s’en void exempt; les femmes mefmes & les enfans 
&lamammelle n’eftans pas en affeurance a la veué 
des palliffades de leurs Bourgs. Et mefme quelque- 
fois tel ennemy aura bien le courage, eftant tout nud 
& n’aiant qu’vne hache & la main d’entrer de nuict 
luy feul dans les Cabanes d’vn Bourg, puis y ayant fait 
quelque meurtre de ceux qu’il y trouue endormis, de 
prendre la fuite, pour toute defenfe contre cent & 
deux cens perfonnes qui le pourfuiuront vn & deux 
iours entiers. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 305 


[5] CHAPTER I. 


OF THE STATE OF THE COUNTRY AND OF CHRISTIAN- 
ITY IN GENERAL. 


HE scourges of God have fallen, one after the 
a) other, upon this poor Barbarous People; the 
terror and dread of War have followed the 
fatal diseases which in previous Years caused mourn- 
ing and desolation everywhere. Of the troops raised 
to fight the Enemy in his own country, some were 
scattered in consequence of the disunion that existed 
among them; others were put to flight; some per- 
ished almost to a man in the ambushes prepared for 
them; in a word, nearly all their expeditions have 
ended only in disaster. 

Various parties of the enemy, who have crept into 
the Country under the cover of the woods [6] and of 
night, have everywhere and at almost all seasons of 
the Year committed massacres which are all the more 
to be dreaded since no one feels safe from them. 
Even women, and children at the breast, are not in 
security within sight of the palisades of their own 
Villages. Nay, more,—a foe will sometimes be 
brave enough — quite naked, and with only a hatchet 
in his hand—to penetrate alone at night into the 
Cabins ofa Village; then, after murdering some of 
those who are sleeping therein, he will take to flight 
as his‘ only defense against a hundred or two 
hundred persons who will pursue him for one or 
two entire days. 


306 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 22 


De plus, lors que nos Hurons defcendét aux Trois- 
Riuieres ou 4 Kebexk, pour y porter leurs Caftors, 
quoy que tout ce chemin ne foit remply que de faults 
& de precipices, & que fouuent on y faffe naufrage, 
toutefois ils y craignent bien moins les dangers de 
Veau que du feu. Car toutes les Années les Iroquois 
leur dreffent de nouuelles embiiches, & s’ils les pren- 
nent vifs, ils exercent fur eux toute la cruauté de 
leurs fupplices; & ce mal eft quafi fans remede: car 
outre qu’allans [7] pour le trafic de leurs peleteries, 
ils ne font pas équipez pour la guerre, les Iroquois 
ayans maintenant l’vfage des armes a feu qu’ils achep- 
tent des Flamans qui habitent leurs Coftes; vne feule 
décharge de cinquante ou foixante arquebufes, eft 
pour donner 1’épouuante A mille Hurons qui defcen- 
droient de compagnie, & les rendre la proye d’vne 
Armée ennemie, qui les attendroit au paffage. 

Nous efperons que le Ciel applanira ces hautes 
Montagnes, qui feroient pour arrefter en peu d’An- 
nées non feulement tout le commerce des Hurons 
auec nos Frangois, mais auffi le cours de 1’Euangile. 
Au moins on nous fait entendre de France que ceux 
a qui Dieu a donné le pouuoir de tout faire ce qu'ils 
entreprennent, & dont la pieté s’eftend plus loin que 
les bornes de 1’Europe, jettent quelquefois leur pen- 
fée fur les neceffitez de ce Pais, & enuifagent le Salut 
de ces pauures Peuples, comme vn Ouurage qui n’eft 
pas indigne de leurs foings; puis qu’il a coufté auffi 
cher au Sauueur de nos Ames, que la conuerfion des 
autres Peuples de la Terre. 

[8] Pour ce qui eft de l’Eftat du Chriftianifme en 
ces Contrées, ie puis dire auec verité que l’Eglife s’y 
fortifie en nombre, & plus encore en Saincteté: Que 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 307 


Moreover, when our Hurons go down to the Three 
Rivers or to Kebek, to convey their Beaver skins 
there, although the whole length of the road is full 
of rapids and precipices, on which they are frequent- 
ly wrecked, they nevertheless fear the dangers of 
water much less than those of fire. For every Year 
the Iroquois prepare new ambushes for them, and, 
if they take them alive, they wreak on them all the 
cruelty of their tortures. And this evil is almost 
without remedy; for, besides the fact that, when 
they are going [7] to trade their furs, they are not 
equipped for war, the Iroquois now use firearms, 
which they buy from the Flemings, who dwell on 
their Shores. A single discharge of fifty or sixty 
arquebuses would be sufficient to cause terror to a 
thousand Hurons who might be going down in com- 
pany, and make them the prey of a hostile Army 
lying in wait for them as they pass. 

We hope that Heaven will remove these great 
Mountains, which in a few Years would not only 
put an end to all the trade of the Hurons with our 
French, but also to the spread of the Gospel. At 
least, we have received information from France that 
those to whom God has given power to carry out all 
that they undertake, and whose piety extends beyond 
the boundaries of Europe, sometimes think of the 
necessities of this Country, and look upon the Salva- 
tion of these poor Peoples as a Work not unworthy 
of their attention, since it has cost as dear to the 
Savior of our Souls as the conversion of the other 
Nations of the Earth. 

[8] As to the State of Christianity in these Coun- 
tries, I may truly say that the Church is gaining 
strength in numbers and still more in Godliness; that 


308 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 22 


le fainct Efprit y trauaille vifiblement autant peut \ 
eftre qu’en aucun lieu de ce Nouueau Monde, & qu’en i 
des perfonnes nourries dés le berceau parmy les | 
exemples de Vertu & de Religion, on admireroit la ) 
Foy, la Pieté & le courage, dont nous fommes té- i 
moins en quelques-vns de nos Barbares, qui ne re- ; 
{pirent rien plus ardemment que le Ciel, depuis que ; 
Dieu a pris poffeffion de leur coeur. Auffi iamais 
nous n’auons veu plus clair dans la facon de les 
in{truire, & iamais 1’Euangile n’a efté icy annoncée 
plus paifiblement que depuis enuiron huict mois. 

Ces faueurs nous venant du Ciel, & fans doute par 
les merites de tant de fainctes Ames, qui font mille 
fois plus aupres de Dieu pour la Conuerfion de ces 
Peuples, que nous-mefmes qui y fommes employez: 
Il n’y a que celuy feul qui connoift le fecret des coeurs, 
qui fgache affeurément qu’elle part vn chacun y a; 
mais les caufes moins efloignées eftant d’ordinaire [9] 
les plus connués, ie me tiens obligé de reconnoiftre 
que Nous & les Anges Tutelaires de ce Pais, deuons 
beaucoup a la Pieté de M* le Cheualier de Mont- 
magny noftre Gouuerneur, qui non content de nous 
maintenir fortement dans les fonctions de noftre Mi- 
niftere au milieu de ce Peuple Infidele, trouue auffi 
des moyens dignes de fa prudence, d’y authorifer les 
veritez de noftre Foy. 

Nos Barbares, pour Barbares qu’ils foient, ne laif- i 
fent pas d’auoir apris dans le liure de la Nature, les i 
voyes de fe maintenir & conferuer contre leurs Enne- 
mis: Ils ont des affidez & penfionnaires parmy les 
Nations eftrangeres, qui leurs découurent les deffeins 
qui fe forment contre-eux, qui leur donnent aduis 
des Armées qui font en campagne & des routes 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 309 


the working of the holy Ghost is probably as visible 
here as in any place in this New World; and that, 
even in persons brought up from the cradle amid 
examples of Virtue and Religion, one would admire 
the Faith, the Piety, and the courage that we wit- 
ness in some of our Barbarians, who desire nothing 
more ardently than Heaven, ever since God took 
possession of their hearts. Consequently, we have 
never seen more clearly how to instruct them, and 
the Gospel has never been expounded here more 
peacefully, than since about eight months. 

These favors come to us from Heaven, and doubt- 
less through the merits of so many pious Souls, who 
are a thousand times more acceptable in the eyes of 
God for the Conversion of these Peoples than are we 
ourselves who are employed therein; and he alone, 
who knows the secrets of hearts, can tell the share 
that each one performs. But, as the least remote 
causes are usually [9] the best known, I am con- 
strained to admit that We and the Guardian Angels 
of this Country are greatly indebted to the Piety of 
Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, our Govern- 
or,— who, not content with effectively supporting 
us in the functions of our Ministry in the midst of 
these Infidel Peoples, also. finds means, worthy of his 
prudence, to give authority among them to the truths 
of our Faith. 

Our Barbarians, although they are Barbarians, 
have yet learned from the book of Nature, how to 
maintain and defend themselves against their En- 
emies. They have trustworthy agents in their pay 
among foreign Nations, who inform them of the 
plots that are laid against them, of the Armies that 
are in the field, and of the routes that they will 


310 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 22 


qu’elles doiuent tenir. Mais la couftume du Pais eft 
que celuy qui donne ces aduis, enuoye quelque 
prefent affez confiderable pour affeurer la verité de 
fes paroles. 

Conformément & cette couftume, receué parmy ces 
Peuples, Monfieur le Gouuerneur ayant confideré que 
les prefens qu’on auoit faits par le paffé aux Hurons 
[10] defcendans en Traite, n’auoient efté que fous le 
titre de l’alliance qu’on defiroit faire auec eux, jugea, 
l’E{té dernier, que les prefens qu’il leur feroit, pour- 
roiét auoir meilleur effet s’ils leur eftoient ddnez fous 
ce titre: Que les Veritez que nous leur prefchons 
eftoient tres-affeurées. En effet jamais prefens n’ont 
ef{té plus auantageux pour la Foy. Car outre qu’au 
retour des Canots, tout le Pais ayant apris ce qui 
s’eftoit paffé 14 bas, conceut que les chofes que nous 
venons leur annoncer font receués par toute la Terre 
pour Veritez tres-affeurées, (ce que fouuent plufieurs 
ont reuoqué en doute, a caufe que les premiers Fran- 
cois qu’ils ont conneu, difoient-ils, ne leur auoient 
point parlé de Dieu:) Nous en auons de plus tiré cet 
auantage, que iamais nous n’auons eu plus d’Audi- 
ence dans tous les Bourgs & Cabanes, ott nous auons 
e{té pour enfeigner ces Peuples. 


1642] RELATION OF 1642 311 


follow. But the custom of the Country requires that 
he who gives this information should send a present 
of some value, to vouch for the truth of his words. 

In accordance with this custom, which is followed 
among these Peoples, Monsieur the Governor con- 
sidered that the presents that had been made in the 
past to the Hurons [10] who came down to Trade, 
were given solely on account of the alliance that we 
sought with them; and he judged, last Summer, that 
the presents which he would give them would have 
a better effect if they were given as a token that the 
Truths which we preach to them are most certain. 
Indeed, never have gifts been of such advantage to 
the Faith; for,—in addition to the fact that, when 
the Canoes returned, the whole Country, on learn- 
ing what had happened down there, conceived the 
idea that the matters that we come to announce to 
them are received throughout the World as well- 
established Truths (which some frequently doubted, 
because, they said, the first Frenchmen whom they 
had known had said nothing to them about God),— 
we have derived from them this further benefit, that 
never have we had larger Audiences in all the 
Villages and Cabins where we have gone to teach 
these Peoples. 


Sina t 


\ a ’ ie. 
via jute “WOACIV Rhee 


hn Says 
vk 
ae camer ‘ pay) Sa eal 


pe Le : er oe Aces ERNTStJHOD orth pret tle 


: y 4 beet it % 34 Toye wich’ 
; ¢ F ld BOW PY CHA ae” 
- tt : orn Fe 

>} PPLE Pe Dees D6) 


¥ ‘ F if 


it 
Ma 
BA fy 


va 


AW 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXII 


XLVIII 


The Relation of 1642 (Paris, 1643) is of a composite 
character, consisting, like most of its predecessors, 
of two parts. Part I., the Quebec report, is by the 
superior, Barthélemy Vimont. In the two preced- 
ing Relations (of 1640 and 1640-41), Vimont’s name 
appears on the title-pages, but he was merely the offi- 
cial sponsor in these instances, for in each case the 
Quebec part was written by Le Jeune, his predeces- 
sor in office. Vimont’s prefatory letter to the provin- 
cial in France is dated ‘‘ A Kebec, ce 4 d’Octobre 
1642.’’ Part II. is Jerome Lalemant’s annual report 
on the Huron mission, and is dated ‘‘ De Saincte 
Marie aux Hurons ce 10. de Iuin 1642.’’ The provin- 
cial issued his ‘‘ Permifsion’’ at ‘‘ Paris le 7. lanuier 
1643,'’ and the royal authority or ‘‘ Priuilege”’ was 
granted at ‘‘ Paris le 9. Ianuier 1643." This Relation 
is sometimes called ‘‘ H. 80,’’ because a description 
of it is given in Harrisse’s (Votes, no. 80. 

For the text of the document, we have had re- 
course to a copy of the original Cramoisy edition in 
the possession of The Burrows Brothers Company, 
Cleveland. This copy differs from those in Lenox 
Library, in being bound (by some modern purchaser) 
in two volumes,—the Quebec section forming vol. 
i., and the Huron part vol. ii.; the ‘‘ Table des Cha- 
pitres,’’ in two leaves which were originally bound 
together, has been separated, each volume being 


314 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


given its appropriate leaf. Otherwise, the Burrows 
copy is like Lenox’s ‘‘ Lamoignon”’ copy in Part I., 
but like Lenox’s ‘‘ Bancroft’’ copy in Part II. (see 
textual variations, below). 

Collation of H. 80 (Lamoignon), in Lenox: Title, 
with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Table des Chapitres’’ to 
Part I., pp. (2); table to Part II., beginning ‘‘ Rela- 
tion de ce qvi s’est passe,” pp. (2); ‘‘ Priuilege,’’ 
with the ‘‘ Permifsion’’ on the verso, 1 leaf; text to 
Part I. (Vimont’s Relation), pp. 1-191, with verso of 
p- 191 blank. Part II. (Lalemant’s Huron Relation): 
Half-title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; text, pp. 3-170. 
The pagination is quite erratic. In Part I., pp. Io, 
51, 94, 125, 127, and 134 are mispaged as 16, 5, 46, 
225, 227, and 334, respectively. Ina second copy at 
Lenox, and in Harvard College copy, p. 94 is mis- 
paged 64, and not 46 asin the Lamoignon copy. In 
Part II., the pagination of pp. 76 and 77 is omitted 
entirely, and p. 120 is misnumbered 20. 

Upona careful comparison of the Lamoignon and 
Bancroft copies in Lenox, we have discovered the 
following textual variations: 


LAMOIGNON. BANCROFT. 
PaRT I. ParRT I. 
P. 89, 1. 3, reads: ‘‘1l’Ale- P. 89, 1. 3, reads: ‘‘Lale- 
mand ’”’ mant’’ 
P. gt, 1. 23, reads: ‘‘Vincent’’ P. gt, 1. 23, reads: ‘‘Vimont’’ 
Part II. ParT II. 
P. 133, 1. 16, reads: ‘‘entre- P. 133, l. 16, reads: ‘‘entre- 
prédre’’ pérdre’”’ 


Copies of this Re/ation may be found in the follow- 
ing libraries: Lenox (two variations), Harvard, Ar- 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXII 315 


chives of St. Mary’s College (Montreal), Laval Uni- 
versity (Quebec), Brown (private), New York State 
Library, and the British Museum. Copies have been 
sold or priced as follows: O’Callaghan (1882), no. 
1221, sold for $25, and had cost him $37.50 in gold; 
Harrassowitz (1882), priced at 125 marks; Barlow 
(1890), no. 1284, sold for $10; and Dufossé (1891 and 
1892), priced at 125 and 150 francs. * 


’ : a. i 
wig) ea a 
Pore poeta Ad 
Peres Ci gl ih 

, 


icy ig re I Dd 


NOTES TO VOL. XXII 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 


I (p. 31).— This was Le Jeune; for particulars of his errand, see 
Lalemant’s letter to Charlet (vol. xxi., doc. xlv.). 

2 (p. 35).— For sketch of Jogues, see vol. ix., zofe 41. 

3 (p. 41).— Joseph du Peron, brother of Francois (vol. xiv., mote 
17) came to Canada in the summer of 1640; his missionary labors 
were carried on in the settlements on the St. Lawrence. In 1642, 
he was employed at Sillery; the following winter and spring, he 
spent at Montreal. Various references to him in Journ. des Jésuttes 
show that from 1645 to 1653 (in which latter year he sailed for 
France) he was at Fort Richelieu, Three Rivers, Sillery, Quebec, 
and Tadoussac, successively. His final departure for France was 
apparently in September, 1658. 

For sketches of the other missionaries here mentioned, see: 
Massé, vol. i., zo0fe 39; De Noué, vol. iv., zote 31; Brébeuf, vol. iv., 
note 30; Buteux, vol. vi., mote 5; De Quen, vol. viii., mote 15; 
Vimont, vol. xv., zofe 19; Poncet, vol. xv., ote 20; De la Place, 
vol. xxi., note 5. 

4 (p- 73).—The manner in which these demons, or genii, are 
invoked, is described by Le Jeune in vol. vi., pp. 163-173. 

5 (p. 75).—Ondoutawaka: Laverdiére notes (index to Quebec 
edition of Re/atzons) the similarity of this tribal name to Ondata- 
wawat, one of the numerous forms of Outawazs (Ottawa). 


6 (p. 95).— By this stone is meant the personal ‘ manitou ”” (in 
modern parlance, ‘‘ medicine’’) of the savage,—a wide-spread and 
ineradicable superstition among the Indian tribes. Cf. the descrip- 
tion given by Le Jeune, in vol. vi., p. 221; vol. xii., pp. 13,15. The 
Récollet Le Clercq obtained a medicine-bag from a noted ‘‘ juggler,’’ 
under similar circumstances, which he thus describes (Re/. Gas- 
peste, pp. 346-349): ‘‘ Here is an inventory of what I found in this 
little pouch of the Devil; it was made from the skin of a moose’s 
head,— entire, except the ears, which had been cut off. There 
was, first, the Ouahich of this Juggler, which was a stone the size 
of a nut, wrapped up in a box which he called ‘ his Demon’s house.’ 


318 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


A piece of bark, on which was a hideous figure, wrought in black 
and white porcelain beads, which represented some hardly recog- 
nizable monster, neither a man or any animal, unless it were the 
shape of a little Quinquajou, which was ornamented with black and 
white beads,—‘ that,’ say the Jugglers, ‘is the master Devil, or 
Ouahich.’ . . .’’ The ‘‘quinquajou’’ mentioned above is the 
carcajou, or wolverene (Gu/o duscus, Linn.), abundant in Eastern 
Canada, especially in Labrador. 

Parkman says (_/esuzts, p. lxxi., zofe 2) that he himself ‘‘ has seen 
a Dahcotah warrior open his medicine-bag, talk with an air of 
affectionate respect to the bone, feather, or horn within, and blow 
tobacco smoke upon it as an offering.’’ He also characterizes this 
superstition as ‘‘ mere fetich-worship.”’ 


7 (p. 139).— Jeanne Mance, one of the founders of Montreal (vol. 
xxi., mote 4), was born about 1606, at Nogent-le-Roi, France, the 
daughter of an honorable and influential family. From earliest 
childhood, she exhibited great piety and devotion, although not feel- 
ing called upon to enter a convent; while still young, the death of 
both parents rendered her mistress of her own actions. Hearing, 
in April, 1640, of the Canadian enterprises undertaken by Madame 
de la Peltrie and the Duchess d’Aiguillon, her own vocation was 
suddenly revealed to her, and she finally decided to go to Canada. 
Becoming one of the members of the Society of Montreal, she was 
requested by Madame de Bullion to take charge of the hospital to be 
founded by the latter at Ville-Marie; and she accompanied thither 
Maisonneuve’s expedition in 1641. The Hétel-Dieu was erected in 
1644, on the site it still occupies, though the buildings have been 
thrice consumed by fire. Mlle. Mance was at one time the main 
support of the Montreal colony. Besieged by the Iroquois in 1651, 
and at all times exposed to their incursions, the new settlement was 
in danger of destruction; Mlle. Mance furnished to Maisonneuve 
22,000 livres from the hospital endowment, with which to raise and 
equip soldiers for defense of the town. In the following year, she 
visited Paris, and procured the reorganization of the Montreal 
Society, which had become greatly reduced in both numbers and 
funds. Later, she had much to do with bringing from France the 
Sulpitian priests and the nuns of St. Joseph; for the latter, she pro- 
cured an endowment from Madame de Bullion. The establishment 
of these nuns, her administration of the hospital (in which they 
succeeded her, after her death), and her share in the management 
of the colony’s affairs, placed great burdens upon the shoulders of 
Mile. Mance; but she discharged her duties with enthusiasm, 
conscientious devotion, and excellent practical judgment. Her 
death occurred in June, 1673. 


NOTES TO VOL. XXII 319 


8 (p. 203).— This was Cape Forillon, at the entrance to Gaspé 
Bay (vol. iii., zo¢e 45). George Johnson, Esq., of Ottawa, Dominion 
statistician, who has made a specialty of Canadian place-names, 
says of it: ‘‘ Forillon extends about three miles into the sea, be- 
tween the cove of Cape Rosier and the bay of Gaspé. It is the re- 
mains of a mountain, the half of which has fallen into the sea, after 
being eaten away by the ice and water; what is left is as perpen- 
dicular as a wall. Possibly the name conveys the idea of the 
mountain being thus cleft by the action of the water, boring holes 
in its substance. The peninsula, extending three miles into the 
sea, looks like a gigantic drill, such as is used in blasting rock; this 
also may have suggested the name. From either standpoint, we 
are warranted in deriving ‘ Forillon’ from the French verb forer, 
‘to bore,’ or ‘to pierce.’ ”’ 

9 (p. 205).— Concerning Montreal Island, see vol. xii., zofe 13. 

10 (p. 207).— These early inhabitants of Montreal are supposed to 
have been the Iroquets (vol. v., mote 52). 

II (p. 239).— For sketch of Richard, see vol. viii., mote 17. 

12 (p. 267).— This method of fire-making is mentioned by Le Jeune 
in vol. vi., page 217, as also that by percussion of flint and iron 
(vol. xii., zo¢e 8). Both methods are fully described by Hough, as 
cited in preceding reference (U. S. Nat. Mus. Rep., 1887-88, pp. 
531 — 587). 

13 (p. 269).— These Frenchmen were the Jesuit donnés, René 
Goupil and Guillaume Cofiture, concerning whom fuller information 
will be given subsequently. 

14 (p.285).— High mightinesses: a title applied to the members 
of the States-General of Holland; Vimont apparently refers not only 
to these, but to the Dutch officials in the settlements along the 
Hudson River. 

15 (p. 289).— Concerning the resuscitation of the dead, see vol. 
xvii., ote 7. 


ie bo LD tadewny 
; ed a Nn 


ee bags 
hohe ae? we” 


poe 


SS 


eae 


a 


1s 


a 
cla as : 


4 all 


ian d& 


476.8 @.8c8eh.2 
4.6.8, 8,8) 8.2 


1") 
2 


aus 


8 


; 
LY 


Leu 
aseceys 


! Ly é 

B88 ay rt) 

i eae a 
a at 

ave 


6.808) 
met 
6.84 


8 ie in : . : e: Ff ta : hi 9! a Mt Pri 


iy 


: 


Perrine | ease se ceiee 8, au 3 Sr iit 


ss atarareaaeagels | sata | Aree th 
Sa Segaeactatectsicdareguegetatautgeeqaigtastatoivtentatetns atatttatnicts ttt 


Mt 


ery 
gets ith 


