Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 20: Hurons and Quebec, 1640-1641
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits20jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits20jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits20jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 20 of 73.

---

rt 
uae 


ey 

aoe ri gy! 
a8 Bib MH 7} a8 o - 

oeueie 558) aye 
ant et ian 
ueseataas peespatpectce 


rs selects | 
i acdc boa gege ayes et 
me re Sete state Me 
is ‘ Pe a bt Ie 
j Sy $3 Pherae | 38 a 
tf ae aaa ‘eoeue 
; Pt i 5 


aes 


ice i 


ue pia Mee 
Sy the rea 
é ata 

#8 )8 me 8,8y 


ae Mm) 


8, 5n8y8,8 
6. 5)8 
2:8,8 8) 8 


8) 
it hy & 
3.7 Uae gaye ge zest 
& 88 8) S 5 8,8 
¢, 898. 6,8,% LF) 


6.8/8, 8 y8,* 
Pht oot pet tL ee 
Peet tet Set ae tS Th 


2 bee, 2.8 )8)9 
28 8, 8)8.8 hal 
g 6, 828,81" 


OF ee. 88.8 Rhee 
Th bys 
&.= 8 3 #.6 


ga 8908 88 8.8 
Pet et at al Tat LOIN IL bl hee 


Le Tt Td al tt eee 6 6, Reyer ee 
5 aay 8888808 Peele OL ee 
109 § W'S 4O ALISUSAIN Peer ‘ 


a 
s.2+e.2 s ¥ 8% 


é j 
d 
: 
"| 
. 


| | THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


J ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. 43 


Lo Brceanrleheuser 


1, Siu 
The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 


1610-1791 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XX 
HURONS AND QUEBEC: 1640-1641 


CLEVELAND: Tbe Burrows Brotbers 
Company, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XCVIII 


CopyRIGHT, 1898 
BY ) 
Tue Burrows Brotuers Co i 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


i 


\ paeeey owes th, 708 Ub Eite 
DIES RTE 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


_ Editor , : REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
f FINLOW ALEXANDER 


PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 
Translators . , {+ CATHARINE S. KELLOGG 
CRAWFORD LINDSAY 


WILLIAM PRICE 


| HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor . EMMA HELEN BLAIR 


Bibliographical Adviser VicToR HuGo PALTsITs 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XX 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XX ; ‘ gy 
DOCUMENTS :— 
XLI. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la Nov- 
velle France, en l’année 1640. [Chaps. 
ix., x. of Part II., and postscript, com- 
pleting the document.] /erome Lale- 
mant; Des Hurons, May 27 and August 
3, 1640 P : ; ee 
XLII. Lettre a son Frére. Charles Garnier; 
Sainte-Marie aux Hurons, June 23, 
1641. ; ; ; . 88 
XLII. Excerpta Epistola ad R. P. Mutium 
Vitelleschi, Przpositum Generalem 
Societatis Jesu, Rome. /oannes de 
Brébeuf; Kebec, August 20, 1641 <) 308 
XLIV. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la Nov- 
velle France, és années 1640. et 1641. 
[Introduction, and Chaps. i.—viii. of 
Part I.] Paul le Jeune; Kebec and 
Paris, undated é F Taos 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XX . . 301 
NOTES ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘ » 305 


= 


ILLUSTRATION TO VOL. XX 


Photographic facsimile of title-page, Relation 
of 1640-41 


- IIo 


PREFACE TO VOL. XX 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume: 


XLI. The Relation of 1640 is the joint product of 
Le Jeune, who wrote at Quebec (under date of Sep- 
- tember 10) the portion dealing with the field of the 
lower St. Lawrence, and of Jerome Lalemant, who 
wrote from the Huron country (under date of May 
27) of the year’s work in that far-away mission. In 
Vol. XVIII., we gave the first ten chapters of Le 
Jeune’s narrative (Part I. of the document); in Vol. 
XIX. this part was concluded, and eight chapters 
were published of Lalemant’s report (Part II.). We 
herewith give Chapters ix. and x., thus closing the 
document. 

In Chapter ix., Lalemant describes the founding of 
the mission of St. Jean Baptiste. At first, the Fa- 
thers are welcomed; but soon their troubles begin,— 
the demons prompt the natives to perform all their 
customary superstitious rites more freely than ever, 
and to drive out the strangers. A friendly chief calls 
a council at which the missionaries may refute the 
slanders spread about them; fortunately, Joseph 
Chihwatenhwa arrives in time to speak at this con- 
clave, and his eloquence appeases the tumult fora 
season. As usual, most of their converts are among 
the dying; of these, is an Algonkin whose tribe are 
wintering with the Hurons. 


10 PREFACE TO VOL. XX 


The final chapter of this Re/ation describes the 
new mission to the Tobacco Nation, conducted by 
Garnier and Jogues; ‘‘this mission has been the 
richest of all, since crosses and sufferings have been 
most abundant therein." There the Fathers are per- 
secuted on every side,— they can with difficulty obtain 
sufficient food to support life; they are feared and 
reviled by almost all the people; they are driven 
from village to village, sometimes forced to leave a 
house in the middle of the night; and are repeatedly 
threatened with death. Many bands from the Neu- 
tral Nation flee hither for refuge from the famine 
that prevails in their own country, and many die of 
hunger; but the Fathers succeed in baptizing nearly 
all of these unfortunates, thus ensuring their future 
blessedness. While thus wandering through the 
villages of the Tobacco Nation, the missionaries re- 
ceive an unexpected reinforcement in the good Chih- 
watenhwa, who leaves his own family to God's care, 
that he may join and aid the Fathers in their itiner- 
ancy. While the smallpox epidemic was at its height, 
these Jesuits were in excellent health; but, now that 
it is decreasing, they are attacked by scurvy, but 
fortunately recover. 

Lalemant had closed his narrative May 27, and, 
according to custom, sent it to his superior (Vimont) 
by the spring fleet of canoes which proceeded down 
the Ottawa River to the great fur market at Three 
Rivers. He was able, this year, to send a postscript 
dated August 3, which reached Quebec before the 
Relation for the year had been forwarded to France 
(in September). This letter relates the sad death of 
Joseph Chihwatenhwa, who had been killed and 
scalped by the Iroquois. This is a grief to the mis- 


PREFACE TO VOL. XX 11 


sionaries, but they console themselves by saying: 
‘* Since the Saints have more power when they are 
in heaven than here below on earth, we are bound 
to believe that we have gained more than we have 
lost by his death.’’ 


XLII. This is a letter written by Father Charles 
Garnier, from the mission of Ste. Marie, in the Huron 
country, under date of June 23, 1641, to one of his 
brothers in France. After many pious exhortations 
and reflections, and a reference to another brother, 
“*a prodigal,’’ the writer describes missionary work 
among the savages, mentioning the frequent hard- 
ships and dangers to which the Jesuits are exposed. 
He closes with a request that his brother will send 
him some medicinal seeds, with instructions as to 
their use and culture. 


XLIII. This isa letter by Brébeuf to the Father 
General, written at Quebec, August 20, 1641. Only 
fragments thereof have been preserved to us, and 
these chiefly relative to the Huron mission. He 
praises the peace, strict discipline, and order that pre- 
vail in the missionary household, especially among 
their donnés. The Huron church contains about 
sixty members,—a number slowly increasing. The 
two new missions —to the Algonkins and the Neutral 
Nation—are mentioned; and the writer praises 
Chaumonot’s zeal, and his ability in learning the 
native tongues. 

XLIV. Although Vimont is now superior of the 
Jesuit missions in New France, the Quebec portion 
(Part I.) of the Relation of 1640-41 is written by Le 
Jeune, and the Huron narrative (Part II.) by Jerome 
Lalemant,—the same as with the preceding Re/ation, 


12 PREFACE TO VOL. XX 


of 1640. In the present volume, we give the first 
eight chapters of Part l., leaving the document to be 
concluded in our Vol. XXI. 

Le Jeune’s narrative is without date; Lalemant’s 
was concluded May 16, 1641, and sent down by the 
spring fleet to Quebec. Le Jeune was despatched to 
Paris in the autumn, as an envoy from the governor 
and colonists, on various matters touching their in- 
terests, and took with him the MS. of the Relation of 
1640-41. Inan introductory note, written in Paris, 
he explains this circumstance. In the Relation prop- 
er, he begins by describing the work of the Ursulines; 
they not only teach the French girls of the colony, but 
have alittle seminary of young Indian girls. One of 
these has married, and was given her clothes and 
furniture by the nuns; four others are nearly ready 
to marry, and donations are needed for aiding them. 
Two more nuns, who could furnish some funds for 
the support of the convent, would be welcomed. Ex- 
tracts from the letters of the nuns are given, showing 
the intelligence, amiability, and piety that character- 
ize these Indian girls. They are quite weaned from 
savage customs, and even from their own mothers. 
Madame de la Peltrie sustains this enterprise with 
undiminished ardor, and does all she can for the 
Indian families as well. 

Le Jeune then narrates the progress of affairs at 
St. Joseph de Sillery, the new settlement of Indian 
converts. The Christians are zealous, and resolve 
(unknown to the Fathers) that any Indian in this 
village who commits a fault, however slight, shall be 
punished by imprisonment and fasting. Several 
instances are given of their enforcement of this rule,— 
sending the offender to Quebec, with a request to the 


PREFACE TO VOL. XX 13 


governor that he be placed in a dungeon. Some, 
indeed, are so eager to defend the faith before unbe- 
lievers, that they provoke the latter to rage; and the 
Fathers find it necessary to recommend to them more 
discretion and mildness. The Algonkins of the Island 
endeavor to beguile these Christians away from St. 
Joseph, but they refuse to leave the place. One 
young woman is full of grief because she had chosen 
matriage, instead of becoming anun. A man, who 
has not yet received instruction, abandons the use of 
tobacco, and the ‘‘ eat-all’’ feasts and other supersti- 
.tions; he also begins to preach to his countrymen that 
they must believe in God and listen to the mission- 
aries. He induces the Tadoussac Indians to send to 
Quebec for Jesuit teachers; and when one is sent 
there, ‘‘this good Neophyte,’’ armed with a pistol, 
stands guard over the Father when he goes for a 
walk, lest some harm should befall him. Heis, after 
a time, duly instructed and baptized; and Charles 
Meiachkawat becomes a notable and influential 
Christian. 

Le Jeune proceeds to give detailed accounts of 
various conversions, baptisms, and pious acts among 
the neophytes both at Sillery and Three Rivers. 
One of these, named Achilles, ‘‘ was very haughty 
before his baptism, but God has changed him into a 
little lamb.” He refuses to leave St. Joseph with 
Makheabichtichiou,—a guasz convert, mentioned in 
earlier Relations; the latter ‘‘is wretchedly slain 
in the country of the Abnaquiois, and his family 
is ruined.” Another notable convert is a Huron, 
who has come down to Quebec with Brébeuf and Du 
Peron; he is baptized at Sillery with great ceremony, 
as Charles Sondatsaa. Montmagny, who acts as his 


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XX 


sponsor, presents to him a handsome arquebus, and. 
exhorts him to spread the faith among his country- 
men; while the Sillery converts give him powder to. 
use with his gun. He is very grateful, and avers 
that he will never give up the faith he has professed.. 
‘‘We have nothing,’’ he says, ‘‘so precious as our 
porcelain collars; if I were to see a score of them 
glittering before me, to entice me into sin, I would 
turn away my eyes, and my heart would loathe them. 
In our Villages, we value highly certain garments 
and robes; if what we call beauty should present me 
with one of these robes, in order to corrupt me, I 
would say to her, ‘If the God whom I adore wishes. 
me to use these garments, he will cause me to find 
them by other ways,—sin is banished from my heart; 
it must never reénter there.’ ”’ 

The narrator, commenting on the influence of these: 
converts, says: ‘‘ Indeed, I have observed that one 
truly Christian Savage, who is zealous for the faith, 
accomplishes more among his people than do three 
Jesuits.’’ He next describes the good work that the 
Hospital nuns are performing, at their house near 
Sillery. They not only aid the savages in illness, 
but through this are doing much to keep them seden- 
tary, as the missionaries desire. Aid has generously 
been given to the hospital by a lady of rank in 
France, by the Hundred Associates, and by another 
friend. The Sisters gather in old persons who have 
been abandoned by the savages; they care for all 
who are sick, both French and Indians; they succor 
many needy poor; and even instruct several children 
who are too far away to go to the Ursulines at Que- 
bee. They have cared for sixty-eight sick persons 
during the past year, of whom only four have died, 


PREFACE TO VOL. XX : 15 


and seven have been baptized. The Indians show in 
sickness astonishing patience and gentleness, and 
often most pious devotion. ‘The Sillery savages are 
in many ways under the care of the nuns; and vari- 
ous instances of their simplicity and naiveté are 
recounted. Accustomed to divide with one another 
their food, they also think it necessary to share the 
medicines prescribed,— all impartially drinking from 
the cup allotted to one. A portrait of the Duchess 
d’Aiguillon is sent to the hospital, and the women 
and children all imitate the posture of prayer in 
_ which the lady is depicted; then, bowing low to her 
picture, they kiss it ‘‘ with more simplicity and can- 
dor than grace. It is not the custom of the savages 
to salute one another with a kiss; but as Madame de 
la Peltrie often embraces and kisses these poor girls 
on meeting them, these good creatures imagine that 
they must imitate her, in order to do right.’’ The 
death of one of the nuns is recorded— Mother de 
Sainte Marie, ‘‘a dear dove,’’ whose health has been 
frail during all her stay in Canada; she dies (March 
5) apparently from consumption, but her physician 
states that ‘‘ she had three mortal diseases.”’ 

The writer proceeds to relate the history of the 
mission at Three Rivers, which ‘‘ has been beaten 
this year by more kinds of winds than pilots and 
mariners have marked on their wind roses or on their 
charts.’’ Three Rivers is a rendezvous for all the 
tribes of the upper St. Lawrence and Ottawa region, 
who are not only often ignorant of the missionaries and 
their designs, but are usually involved in jealousies 
and quarrels with one another. They also practice 
the pagan superstitions and customs that the Fathers 
have labored to suppress among their neophytes, and 


16 PREFACE TO VOL. XX 


thus greatly disturb the little church at this place. 
Father Buteux, in attempting to stop one of these 
heathen rites, is roughly treated, and threatened with 
death. The church now numbers about eighty per- 
sons, many of whom console the Fathers by their 
steadfastness in the truth. On the whole, “‘in spite 
of the attacks of the Devil, the Unbelievers are open- 
ing their eyes by degrees, so that they are becoming 
softened and tamed, giving us hopes of their con- 
version.”’ 

A beginning is made in reaching the Attikamegues, 
a peaceful tribe, who occasionally ‘‘ make their ap- 
pearance like flashes of lightning ’’ at Three Rivers, 
for trading. Some of these Indians are baptized, 
and thus carry news of the faith to their tribesmen. 
Detailed accounts are given of various baptisms at 
Three Rivers; among these is Pieskars (Piescaret), a 
chief of the Island tribe, a man of much influence 
and ability. 


The following have recently rendered valuable 
assistance to the editor, in addition to those already 
mentioned: Mgr. C. A. Marois, vicar-general of the 
archdiocese of Quebec; Rev. B. Th. Garneau, secre- 
tary to the archbishop of Quebec; Rev. A. Lalle- 
mand, S.J., Société des Bollandistes, Brussels, Bel- 
gium; Rev. Dr. S. H. Frisbee, S.J., of Woodstock 
College, Woodstock, Md.; Rev. T. Charaux, S.J., 
Sault-au-Récollet, P. Q.; Rev. C. M. Widman, §5.J., 
of St. Charles College, Grand Coteau, La.; Hon. 
John Russell Young, librarian of Congress, Washing- 
ton; and Richard R. Elliott, Esq., Detroit. 


RE 
Mapison, Wis., April, 1898. 


XLI (concluded) 


RELATION OF 1640 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1641 


Chaps. ix., x. of Part II., completing the document. The 
earlier portions of this document will be found in Volumes 
XVIII. and XIX. 


18 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


[145] CHAPITRE IX. 


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT IEAN BAPTISTE AUX 
ARENDARONONS. 


ES Arendaronons font vne des quatre nations qui 
- compofent ceux qu’&A proprement parler on 
nomme Hurons: elle eft la plus Orientale de 
toutes, & eft celle qui la premiere a découuert les 
Francois, & 4 qui en fuite appartenoit la traitte felon 
les loix du pays. Ils en pouuoient iouir feuls, neant- 
moins ils trouuerent bon d’en faire part aux autres 
[146] nations, fe retenant toutefois plus particuliere- 
ment la qualité de nos aliez, & fe portans en cette 
confideration A la protection des Frangois, lors que 
quelque malheur eft arriué. C’eft ot feu monfieur 
de Champlain s’arrefta plus long temps au voyage 
qu'il fit icy haut, il y a enuiron 22. ans, & ot fa 
reputation vit encore dans l’efprit de ces peuples 
barbares, qui honorent mefme apres tant d’années 
plufieurs belles vertus qu’ils admiroient en luy, & 
particulierement fa chafteté & continence enuers les 
femmes. Pleuft a Dieu que tous les Frangois qui 
les premiers font venus en ces contrées luy euffent 
ef{té femblables: nous n’en rougirions pas fifouuent 
aupres de nos Sauuages, qui nous obiectent les impu- 
dicitez & les desbauches de plufieurs, comme fi c’eftoit 
vne marque infaillible que ce dont nous les menagons 
de l’enfer ne foient rien que des fables, puis que ces 
premiers Francois qu’ils ont cogneu n’en auoient 
point de crainte. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 . 19 


[145] CHAPTER IX. 


OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JEAN BAPTISTE TO THE 
ARENDARONONS. 


HE Arendaronons are one of the four nations 
which compose those whom, properly speaking, 
we call Hurons; itis the most Eastern nation of 

all, and is the one which first encountered the French, 
and to which, in consequence, the trade belonged, 
according to the laws of the country. They could 
enjoy this alone; nevertheless, they found it good to 
share it with the other [146] nations,— retaining for 
themselves, however, more especially the character 
of our allies; and on this account inclining to protect 
the French when some disaster has happened. This 
is where the late monsieur de Champlain stopped 
longest on the voyage that he made up here, about 
22 years ago; and where his reputation still lives in 
the minds of these barbarous peoples,— who honor, 
even after so many years, many excellent virtues 
which they admired in him, and in particular his 
chastity and continence with respect to the women. 
Would to God that all the French who first came to 
these regions had been like him! we would not so 
often blush for them in the presence of our Savages, 
who oppose to us the immodesties and the debauches 
of several, as if this were an infallible proof, that 
what we threaten them with, concerning hell, is 
nothing but fables,— inasmuch as those first French- 
men whom they knew had no fear thereof. 


“20 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Cette alliance fi particuliere que ces peuples Aren- 
daronons ont auec les Francois nous auoit fouuent 
donné la penfée [147] de leur aller communiquer les 
richeffes de l’Euangile, mais le deffaut de langue 
nous auoit toufiours empefché de pouffer iufques 1a, 
nous eftant trouuez engagez de premier abord a 
noftre premiere demeure, qui eftoit fituée a l'autre 
extremité du pays toute oppofée. 

Cette année nous eftant trouuez affez forts pour 
cette entreprife, nous y auons commencé vne miffion, 
qui a eu dans fon reffort trois bourgs: de S. lean 
Baptifte, de S. Ioachim, & de Saincte Elizabeth. Les 
Peres Antoine Daniel & Simon le Moine en ont eu le 
foin. 

Ils firent leur premiere demeure & la plus ordinaire 
dans le bourg plus peuplé de S. Iean Baptifte, y ayant 
plus A trauailler: D’abord ils expoferent en plein 
confeil le deffein de leur venué, qui fut approuué 
& receu vniuerfellement de tout le monde: on ne 
parloit rien que de croire & d’embraffer la Foy, les 
cabanes leur eftoient ouuertes, & mefme a l’enuy I’vn 
de l’autr[e]: ces bonnes gens les venoient inuiter, 
& leur prefentoient auec vn coeur d’amy toutes les 
douceurs dont ils peurent s’imaginer. 

[148] La maladie qui auoit defia commencé dans ce 
bourg, fe rengregea apres l’arriuée de nos Peres: 
l’affection & la confiance de ces pauures barbares fem- 
bloit en mef{me temps f’accroiftre en leur endroit: vn 
ou deux grains de raifins fecs, plein le paulme de la 
main d’eau a demy fucrée, l’affiftance qu’on tafchoit 
de donner aux malades foit par confeil, foit allant 
demander l’aumofne dans les cabanes des plus riches 
‘pour ceux qui eftoient dans la pauureté, c’eftoient 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 21° 


This so special alliance which these Arendaronon 
peoples have with the French had often given us the 
thought [147] of going to impart to them the riches 
of the Gospel; but our deficiency in the language 
had always prevented us from advancing to that 
point,— having found ourselves occupied from the 
outset in our first abiding place, which was situated 
at the other end of the country, quite opposite to 
these. 

This year, having found ourselves strong enough 
for this enterprise, we began a mission there, which 
' has had three villages in its department,— St. Jean 
Baptiste,’ St. Joachim, and Sainte Elizabeth.” Fa- 
thers Antoine Daniel and Simon le Moine have had 
the care of them. 

They made their chief and most usual abode in 
the more populous village of St. Jean Baptiste, hav- 
ing most work to do there. At the first, they set 
forth in open council the purpose of their coming, 
which was approved and universally received by 
every one: people spoke of nothing but believing, 
and embracing the Faith; the cabins were open to 
them, and even emulously so: these good people 
came to invite them, and offered them with a friend- 
ly heart all the kindnesses they could imagine. 

[148] The disease,-which had already begun in this 
village, increased after the arrival of our Fathers: 
the affection and the confidence of these poor barba- 
rians seemed at the same time to increase toward 
them; one or two raisins, the palm of the hand full 
of half-sweetened water, the assistance which they 
tried to give the sick, either by counsel or by going 
to ask alms in the cabins of the more wealthy for 
those who were in poverty,— these were the charms 


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES _ [Vot. 20 


des charmes d’vne charité qui iamais n’auoit efté veué 
dans ces bourgs. 

Cependant on faifoit doucement les affaires de 
Dieu, les enfans eftoient baptifez lors qu'on les 
iugeoit en danger, les adultes receuoient 4 coeur 
ouuert les paroles du ciel, & a peine s’en trouuoit-il 
qui dans le peril de la mort ne voulut fonger au falut 
de fon ame: les parens mefmes lors qu’ils auoient 
quelque malade venoient en aduertir nos Peres. 

Quelques effects de la bonté de Dieu fur ces 
pauures barbares leur redoublerent encore 1’affection 
qu’ils auoient pour nous. Vnieune homme des plus 
grands [149] chaffeurs & guerriers du pays, & des 
mieux aparentez de tout ce bourg, fuft mis fi bas par 
la maladie qu’on defefperoit entierement de luy; il 
fut inftruit & baptifé par vn de nos Peres, qui fit 1a 
vne courfe fur la fin du mois de Septembre: peu 
apres il retourne en fanté contre toute efperance: 
mais il demeure aueugle, & il luy refte vne fluxion 
infuportable qui luy gaite les yeux. Vn mois apres 
nos deux miffionnaires ef{tant arriuez en ce bourg vifi- 
terent ce Neophyte, il benift Dieu d’eftre guery, 
mais il deplore fa mifere d’auoir perdu la veué, fans 
laquelle il ne peut plus aymer la vie: on l’exhorte a 
efperer en Dieu a qui rien n’eft impoffible; il pro- 
te{te qu’il croit, en preuue de fa croyance il fe defait 
d’vne tortué, qui eft comme le luth & le violon de 
leur concerts, dont il fe feruoit a la chaffe pour inuo- 
quer l’affiftance de fon demon: on luy applique fur 
les yeux de l’eau benifte auec vn figne de croix. pro- 
ferant ces paroles: Celuy que tu as pris pour maiftre, 
Noftre Seigneur, le Pere, le Fils, & le S. Efprit te 
gueriffe: Il pleuft 4 Dieu benir fa Foy, la fluxion 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 23 


of a charity which had never been seen in these 
villages. 

Meanwhile, the affairs of God were quietly man- 
aged; the children were baptized when they were 
considered in danger; the adults received with open 
heart the words of heaven, and hardly was one found 
who in the peril of death would not think of the sal- 
vation of his soul; even the relatives, when they had 
some sick patient, would come to notify our Fathers 
thereof. 

Some effects of God’s goodness over these poor 
barbarians increased still more their affection for us. 
A young man,—one of the greatest [149] hunters 
and warriors in the country, and one of the best 
connected in all this village,— was brought so low 
by the disease that they wholly despaired of him; he 
was instructed and baptized by one of our Fathers, 
who made a journey thither toward the end of the 
month of September. Shortly after, he returns to 
health, contrary to all hope; but he remains blind, 
and there stays with him an intolerable inflammation 
which spoils his eyes. A month later, our two mis- 
sionaries, having arrived in this village, visited this 
Neophyte: he blesses God that he is cured, but he 
bewails his misery for having lost his sight, without 
which he can no longer love life. They exhort him 
to hope in God, with whom nothing is impossible; he 
protests that he believes; in proof of his belief, he 
gives up a tortoise shell,— which is, as it were, the 
lute and the violin of their concerts,— which he used 
in hunting, in order to invoke the aid of his demon.? 
They apply to his eyes some holy water, with a sign 
of the cross, uttering these words: ‘‘ May he whom 
you have taken for master, Our Lord,—the Father, 


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


fe [150] diffippe, la douleur ceffe, il n’y a plus d’aueu- 
glement, la veué retourne en fon entier. [1] luy 
re{toit encore quelques fiftules fur le vifage & fur le 
corps: on luy laiffa quelque peu de cette eau benifte 
pour s’en feruir de temps en temps, inuoquant Noftre 
Seigneur, l’'efpace de neuf iours, en l’honneur des 
neuf chceurs des Anges, auec promeffe d’en venir 
rendre grace 4 Dieu dans la Chappelle que nos Peres 
auoient dreffé dans la cabane du principal capitaine 
de ce bourg chez lequel ils eftoient logez. Le ciel 
continua fes faueurs fur ce pauure ieune homme, il 
fe trouua du tout guary auant le temps, & pour n’en 
eftre pas ingrat il fit vn feftin folemnel, ot: le monde 
eftant affemblé, il protefta publiquement qu'il tenoit 
du Dieu des croyans la veué, la fanté, & la vie. Ce 
ieune homme s’appelle Ononrouten, & fut nommé 
Charles en fon baptefme. 

Les faueurs de Dieu n’en demeurent pas 14; vne 
fienne petite fille tomba malade & en danger de mort, 
pour vn certain charbon qui la mangeoit iufques aux 
os: il prie qu’on la baptife, on ne peut pas [151] luy 
refufer, elle fe trouue apres fon baptefme entierement 
guerie. 

Vne autre femme de la mefme cabane eftoit fuffo- 
quée d’vne cholique furieufe qui luy fit rendre par 
des vomiffemens eftranges tout ce qu’elle auoit dans 
le corps: apres cela elle perdit le fentiment, & defia 
fes parens la comptoient pour morte. Nos Peres y 
accoururent & luy mirent deuant les yeux vne image 
de Noftre Seigneur; on eft tout eftonné que les fens 
luy reuiennent, elle parle & entend, on la baptife 
auec toute forte de fatisfaction. Apres cela on luy 
donne vn peu d’eau benifte, & on l’exhorte 4 mettre 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 25 


the Son, and the Holy Ghost, cure you.”’ It pleased 
God to bless his Faith; the inflammation [150] is scat- 
tered, the pain ceases, there is no more blindness, 
sight returns entire. There still remained to him 
some sores on the face and on the body; they left with 
him a little of that holy water to use from time to 
time,— invoking Our Lord for the space of nine days, 
in honor of the nine choirs of Angels,— with the 
promise to come and render thanks to God in the 
Chapel which our Fathers had erected in the cabin of 
the principal captain of that village, with whom they 
were lodged. Heaven continued its favors upon this 
poor young man; he found himself altogether cured 
before the time, and, in order not to be thankless, he 
made a solemn feast,at which, the company being 
assembled, he openly declared that he had from the 
God of the believers his sight, his health, and his 
life. This young man is called Ononrouten, and he 
was named Charles at his baptism. 

The favors of God do not stop there. A little girl 
of his fell sick, and into danger of death, from a cer- 
tain carbuncle which was consuming her even to the 
bone; he begs them to baptize her—they cannot 
[151] refuse him; after her baptism she finds herself 
entirely cured. 

Another woman of the same cabin was oppressed 
by a violent colic, which made her yield up, by 
strange vomitings, everything that she had in her 
body: after that, she lost feeling, and her kinsmen 
already accounted her dead. Our Fathers hastened 
thither, and put before her eyes an image of Our 
Lord; they are utterly astonished that her senses 
come back to her,—she speaks and hears; they bap- 
tize her with entire satisfaction. After that, they 


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


fa confiance en Dieu. Le lendemain elle eft fur pied, 
elle trauaille comme auparauant, & dit tout haut a 
tout le monde que c’eft Dieu feul qui l’a guerie. 
Elle fut nommée Marie en fon baptifme, fon nom 
Huron eft Atatafé, 

Chez l’hofte ot logeoient nos Peres, deux y receu- 
rent vne femblable guerifon, & pour action de grace 
les parens firent deux fe{tins publics 4 la Chreftienté, 
ott au lieu de leurs chanfons de guerre ou de fonges, 
le Pater nofter en Huron y [152] fut chanté, & quel- 
ques autres prieres, qui rauirent en admiration toute 
l’affiftance. Vne voix Francoife qui a de l’harmonie 
l’emporte au deffus de tous leurs heurlemens. 

Quelques autres coups du ciel femblables 4 ceux 
cy, retentirent bien haut par toutes les cabanes, ot 
en fuitte nos Peres eftoient receus & veus d’vn ceil 
qui n’auoit du tout rien de Sauuage. 

La maladie ne laiffe pas d’y faire fes rauages, tout 
ce beau & grand bourg deuient vn hofpital funefte. 

C’euft efté bien merueille fi les puiffances de l’en- 
fer n’euffent point trauerfé les affaires de Dieu: il 
faut bien que le diable deffende fon royaume qu’il a 
poffedé de tout temps, & ce n’eft pas fans refiftance 
qu'il en doit eftre expulfé. 

Vn homme de ce mefme bourg eftoit durant tout 
ce temps 1a occupé ala pefche, vn demon s’apparut 
a luy fous la forme d’vn beau & grand ieune homme: 
Ne crains point, dit cet efprit fuperbe, ie suis le 
mai{tre de la terre que vous autres Hurons honorez 
fous le nom de loufkeha, c’eft moy que les Francois 
[153] appellent mal 4a propos Iefus, mais ils ne me 
cognoiffent pas. Il’ay pitié de voftre pays que i’ay 
pris foubs m’a protection, ie te viens enfeigner & les 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 27 


give her a little holy water, and they exhort her to 
put her trust in God. The next day she is on her 
feet,—she works as before, and says aloud to every 
one that it is God alone who has cured her. She was 
named Marie at her baptism; her Huron name is 
Atatasé. 

With the host with whom our Fathers lodged, two 
received a similar cure, and by way of thanksgiving 
the parents made two public feasts in the Christian 
style,—at which, instead of their war songs or songs 
of dreams, the Pater noster in Huron [152] was sung, 
and some other prayers, which carried away all those 
present, in admiration. A French voice with har- 
mony in it excels all their howlings. 

Some other acts of heaven, similar to these, were 
loudly sounded through all the cabins,— where, in 
consequence, our Fathers were received and regarded 
with an eye which had no Savage aspect whatever. 

The disease, nevertheless, makes its ravages there; 
this entire village, flourishing and large, is becoming 
a woeful hospital. 

It would have been a wonder indeed, if the powers 
of hell had not crossed the affairs of God; the devil 
must needs defend his kingdom which he has pos- 
sessed from all time, and it is not without resistance 
that he is to be expelled from it. 

A man of this same village was, during all that time, 
engaged in fishing; a demon appeared to him under 
the form of a tall and handsome young man. ‘‘ Fear 
not,’’ said this haughty spirit; ‘‘ I am the master of 
the earth, whom you Hurons honor under the name 
of louskeha;* I am the one whom the French [153] 
wrongly call Jesus, but they donotknowme. Ihave 
pity on your country, which I have taken under my 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


caufes & les remedes de voftre mal-heur: ce font les 
eftrangers qui feuls en font la caufe; ils courent 
maintenant deux A deux par tout le pays auec deffein 
de refpandre le mal par tout: ils n’en demeureront 
pas 1A, apres cette verole qui maintenant depeuple 
vos cabanes, fuiurdt de certaines choliques qui en 
moins de trois iours emporteront tous ceux que cette 
maladie n’aura pas enleué. Vous pouuez preuenir ce 
mal-heur; chaffez de voftre bourg les deux robes 
noires qui y font. Pour ceux qui maintenant font 
attaquez de la verole, ie veux que tu me ferue 4 les 
guerir: fais quantité d’vne telle eau, cours au pluftoft 
au bourg, & dis aux anciens qu’ils portent & diftri- 
buent cette potion pendant toute la nuict, & alors 
toute la ieuneffe & les Capitaines de guerre iront fai- 
fant les furieux par toutes les cabanes: mais ie veux 
qu’on continué iufques a l’aube du iour: apres cela 
le demon difparoitft. 

[154] Ce pauure homme accourt incontinent au 
bourg, donne aduis de tout ce qu’il fcait: 1a deffus 
les Anciens affemblent deux & trois fois le confeil: 
ces ceremonies diaboliques font receués auec appro- 
bation; fur le foir on n’entend par toutes les rués que 
le cry des Capitaines, qui exhortent la ieuneffe a faire 
brauement les fols. Ce fut alors que cét efprit de 
trouble triompha dans fon regne: Comme nos mif- 
fionnaires ef{toient logez dans la cabane du principal 
Capitaine, ce fut 14 que commenga le premier acte de 
cette comedie, il falut que nos Peres rompiffent leur 
petite retraitte pour la faincte Meffe, afin de preue- 
nir ce qu’euffent fait ces fols: car on iuge le plus 
vaillant celuy qui fait mieux l’enragé. Ce n’eftoient 
qu’heurlemens par tout, rien que trouble & folie: 


? 2 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 29 


protection; I come to teach you both the reasons and 
the remedies for your misfortune. It is the stran- 
gers who alone are the cause of it; they now travel 
two by two throughout the country, with the design 
of spreading the disease everywhere. They will not 
stop with that; after this smallpox which now depop- 
ulates your cabins, there will follow certain colics 
which in less than three days will carry off all those 
whom this disease may not have removed. You can 
prevent this misfortune; drive out from your village 
the two black gowns who are there. As for those 
who are now attacked by the smallpox, I wish you to 
serve me in curing them; prepare a quantity of such 
a water, run as fast as possible to the village, and 
tell the elders to carry and distribute this potion dur- 
ing the whole night. Then all the youth and the 
war Captains will go acting like madmen through all 
the cabins; but I wish them to continue even till the 
dawn of day,— after that, the demon disappears.”’ 
[154] This poor man straightway hastens to the 
village, and gives warning of all that he knows; 
thereupon the Elders twice and thrice assemble the 
council. These diabolical ceremonies are received 
with approbation; toward evening, one hears in all 
the streets nothing but the shout of the Captains, who 
exhort the youth to act bravely as madmen. Then it 
was that this spirit of trouble triumphed in his reign. 
As our missionaries were lodged in the cabin of the 
principal Captain, it was there that the first act of this 
comedy began; our Fathers were obliged to break up 
their little retreat for the holy Mass, to the end of 
preventing what these mad fellows would have done, 
for he is judged the most valiant who best acts the 
maniac. Everywhere were heard only howlings,— 


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


mais la rigueur du froid f’acroift, ces mafcarades fe 
retirent vn peu apres my-nuict, qui fut caufe que ces 
nouueaux Apothiquaires (c’eftoient fix des Anciens 
qui portoient en filence vne grande chaudiere pleine 
de cette eau diabolique, dont ils faifoient boire tous 
les malades.) Ces medecins [155] d’enfer cefferent 
de faire leur ronde, pource que les folies des ieunes 
gens auoient ceffé. La nuict du lendemain il falut 
fatisfaire au diable, & recommencer tout de nouueau. 
Cette nuict fut celle de Noel, durant laquelle le 
demon fut obey punctuellement. 

En fuite de cela ce Prince de luxure commanda 
des danfes & des feftins infames durant tous ces 
faincts iours confacrez 4 la memoire du petit IESVS, 
Roy de pureté, & de fon cher difciple le bien aimé 
pour fa virginité. 

Voila les ames de ces pauures barbares poffedées 
du demon, les ver[i]tez de noftre Foy ne trouuent 
plus paffage en leur efprit, leur affection pour nous 
fe change en haine. Cét efprit de menfonge qu’ils 
honorent comme le maiftre de leur terre les ayant 
affeurez que nous feuls eftions la caufe de leur ruine, 
les portes des cabanes commencét a eftre fermées 4 
nos Peres, on redoute leur veué, comme fi vn feul de 
leurs regards faifoit mourir tous les enfans, on les a 
en horreur, & 4 peine trouuent-ils quelqu’vn qu[i les 
fup]|porte. 

[156] De iour en iour les efprits f’aigriffent dauan- 
tage, les faux bruits qui venoient des nations voifines 
augmentent leurs foupgons, eftant receus pour veri- 
tables: & de certains fuppofts du diable confirmoient 
toutes ces medifances, affeurant auoir veu en fonge 
des robes noires, maintenant hors la paliffade du 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 a 


nothing but agitation and madness; but the rigor of 
the cold increases,—these masqueraders withdraw a 
little after midnight. On that account these new 
Apothecaries (they were six of the Elders who bore 
in silence a great kettle full of that diabolical water, 
whereof they made all the sick people drink), these 
physicians [155] of hell, ceased to make their round, 
because the follies of the young men had ceased. The 
morrow night it was necessary to satisfy the devil, 
and begin again, quite afresh. This night was that 
of Christmas, during which the demon was punctu- 
ally obeyed. 

_ In consequence thereof, this Prince of wantonness 
ordered infamous dances and feasts during all those 
holy days, consecrated to the memory of the infant 
Jesus, King of purity, and of his dear disciple, the 
well-beloved for his virginity. 

Behold, then, the souls of these poor barbarians 
possessed by the demon; the truths of our Faith no 
longer find access to their mind; their affection for 
us is changed into hatred. This spirit of deceit, 
whom they honoras the master of their land, having 
assured them that we alone were the cause of their 
ruin, the doors of the cabins begin to be closed to our 
Fathers; the sight of them is dreaded, as if a single 
one of their looks caused all the children to die; they 
are held in abomination, and they hardly find any 
one who tolerates them. 

[156] From day to day, their minds become further 
embittered; the false reports which came from the 
neighboring nations augment their suspicions, being 
received as true; and certain tools of the devil con- 
firmed all these slanders,—declaring that they had 
seen black gowns in a dream,—now without the 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


bourg, ores fur le bord du lac; qui déueloppoient de 
certains liures d’ot fortoiét des efteincelles de feu 
qui fe refpandoient par tout, & fans doute caufoient 
cette maladie peftilentielle. 

Il n’y a pas iufques dans la cabane ot nos deux 
miffionnaires fe retiroient qu’on ne les regarde de 
mauuais ceil, que nuict & iour on leur obiecte les 
bruits qui courent d’eux, que tout le monde, & prin- 
cipalement vne megere, qui eft la maiftreffe de la 
maifon, ne les traitte de pis en pis, afin deles obliger 
de fortir au pluftoft: leur hofte eft feul qui les fup- 
porte: mais il les prie en amy de fe tenir clos & 
couuerts pour la crainte qu’il a de quelque mauuais 
coup. 

Vn fi grand & fi fubit changement n’eft pas dificile 
acomprendre 4 qui fongera [157] que le Sauueur du 
monde fut blafphemé de tous les Iuifs, & traitté 
comme vn mal-faicteur, qui peu de iours auparauant 
l’auoient receu dedans leur ville, & auoient recogneu 
vne partie de fes grandeurs. 

Au refte c’eft vne chofe eftrange que mefme ceux 
qui peu auparauant auoient receu leur guerifon du 
ciel, & qui n’ofoient pas le nier, fe refroidiffent dans 
la Foy apres toutes ces menées de fatan, & perdent 
les idées de Dieu & des obligations qu’ils ont en fa 
bonté. Comme vn de nos Peres en faifoit vn iour des 
reproches a celuy qui auoit fi heureufement recouuré 
la veué par la force de l’eau benifte: Mais, luy dit 
ce barbare, comment luy ay-ie vne fi grande obliga- 
tion? que luy a-il coufté &4 me rendre la veué? tu ne 
t’es feruy que d’eau froide: ce n’eft pas 18 vn remede 
bien difficile. C’eft pour cela mal heureux, luy dit- 
on que tu deurois admirer fon pouuoir, & aimer fa 


™ - — 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 . 33 


palisade of the village, now on the shore of the 
lake,— who were unfolding certain books, whence 
issued sparks of fire which spread everywhere, and 
no doubt caused this pestilential disease. 

Even in the cabin whither our two missionaries 
retreated, they are looked upon with an evil eye; 
night and day they are confronted with the rumors 
which are current about them. Every one, and 
especially a Megera who is the mistress of the house, 
treats them worse and worse, in order to oblige them 
to leave as soon as possible; their host is the only 
one who tolerates them, but he begs them, as a 
friend, to remain shut in and concealed, because of 
the dread which he feels, of some evil deed. 

So great and sudden a change is not difficult to 
understand, if one will reflect [157] that the Savior 
of the world was blasphemed by all the Jews, and 
treated like a malefactor,—although a few days 
before they had received him in their city, and had 
acknowledged a part of his dignities. 

Howbeit, it is a strange thing that even those who 
shortly before had received their cure from heaven, 
and who dared not deny it, grow cold in the Faith 
after all these intrigues of satan, and lose their ideas 
of God and of the obligations which they are under 
to his goodness. When one of our Fathers was one 
day reproaching with this the man who had so hap- 
pily recovered sight by the virtue of holy water, this 
barbarian said to him: ‘‘ But how am I so greatly 
obliged to him? what did it cost him to restore my 
sight? You used nothing but cold water: that is not 
a very difficult remedy to obtain.’’ ‘‘ That, wretched 
man,’’ he says to him, ‘‘ is why you ought to admire 
his power and love his goodness, which has rendered 


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 20 


bonté, qui t’a rendu fi facile ta guerifon, fans te com- 
mader comme font vos demons, qui toutefois font 
impuiffans, des cerfs, des chiens & des ours en facri- 
fice. [158] Scache donc que s’il a tant de pouuoir a 
te faire du bien, il n’en aura pas moins & te chaftier, 
fi tu ne le fers fuiuant ta promeffe. A cela point de 
repartie: vn efprit dont le diable a repris poffeffion, 
n’eft plus capable d’eftimer les grandeurs de Dieu, 
qu’auparauant il adoroit. 

Nonobftant tout cela nos miffionnaires fuiuent leur 
pointe Atironta leur hofte qui les ayme, & qui 
portant le nom du premier Capitaine Huron qui ait 
rencontré les Francois, en a auffi la charge & le pou- 
uoir; les affifte de tout ce qu’il peut pour affembler 
vn confeil des Anciens du bourg, ot ils puiffent 
publiquement faire paroiftre leur innocence, & refuter 
ces calomnies. 

Par vn heureux rencontre Iofeph Chihouatenhoua, 
cét excellent Chreftien dont nous auons parlé au 
chapitre precedent, arriue en ce mefme bourg pour 
affifter nos Peres en ce dont ils voudront fe feruir de 
luy pour la publication de 1’Euangile: le confeil fe 
tient, le P. Antoine Daniel refute les calomniateurs, 
& parle d’vn accent fi fort, que pas vn ne luy ofe ref- 
pondre. lofeph Chihouatenhoua [159] prend apres 
la parole, & paffe plus de deux heures entieres 4 
parler des myfteres de noftre Foy. Ces anciens 
Capitaines fe trouuent tout furpris de voir vn ieune 
homme parler en maiftre vn langage nouueau: ils ne 
peuuent que l’admirer, ils approuuent les veritez de 
nof{tre Foy, tous les commandemens de Dieu leur 
femblent raifonnables: en vn mot ils fe condamnent 
eux-mefmes, & d’aucuns f’écrioient qu’il faudroit 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 35 


your cure so easy, without commanding you—as do 
your demons, who nevertheless are impotent—the 
sacrifice of stags, dogs, and bears. [158] Know, 
then, that if he has so much power to do you good, 
he will not have less power to chastise you if you do 
not serve him according to your promise.’’ To that, 
no reply; a mind whereof the devil has regained 
possession is no longer capable of estimating the 
greatness of God, whom he before adored. 
Notwithstanding all that, our missionaries pursue 
their point; Atironta, their host, who loves them,— 
and who, bearing the name of the first Huron Cap- 
tain who met the French, has also his charge and his 
power,°— assists them as far as he can to assemble a 
council of the Elders of the village, at which they 
can publicly demonstrate their innocence and refute 
these calumnies. 
By a happy coincidence, Joseph Chihouatenhoua — 
that excellent Christian of whom we spoke in the 
preceding chapter —arrives in this same village, to 
assist our Fathers in such manner as they shall 
choose to employ him for the publication of the Gos- 
pel. The council is held; Father Antoine Daniel 
refutes the slanderers, and speaks with so much em- 
phasis that not one dares to answer him. Joseph 
Chihouatenhoua [159] afterward begins to speak, and 
passes more than two entire hours in discoursing on 
the mysteries of our Faith. Those old Captains are 
greatly surprised to see a young man speak like a 
master, in anew language; they can but admire him. 
They approve the truths of our Faith, all the com- 
mandments of God seem reasonable to them,—ina 
word, they condemn themselves; and some exclaim 
that all the earth ought to heed such great concerns, 


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Not 20 


que toute la terre écoutaft de fi grandes affaires, & 
des difcours d’vne telle importance. Mais au bout, 
quel aueuglement! pas vn n’embraffe les veritez 
qu’il recognoift, pas vn ne prend pour luy le confeil 
qu’il approuue. 

Toutefois cette affemblée & le fuccez qui en fut 
fauorable pour nous, appaifa quelque peu les efprits; 
les ombrages qu’ils auoient contre nous fe diminuerét 
de beaucoup: on commence 4 receuoir nos Peres 
affez paifiblemét dans la plufpart des cabanes, & eux 
continuent 42 annoncer le nom de Dieu aux fains & 
aux malades. Quelques efprits de ceux qui ne font 
point en maladie le gouftent, & [160] mefmes quel- 
ques-vns defirent le baptefme: mais nous n’y allons 
pas fi vifte, il faut les efprouuer, autrement nous 
nous mettrions en danger de faire plufieurs baptifez, 
mais bien peu de Chreftiens. 

La mifericorde de Dieu parut dauantage fur les 
malades, dans le feul bourg de fainct Iean Baptifte 
plus de 140. y furent baptifez, dont la plufpart font 
morts, & entr’autres 40. petits enfans, dont le falut 
e{t hors de doute. Les iugemens de Dieu font tou- 
fiours adorables. Voicy ce que m’en efcriuent les 
Peres de cette miffion. 

D’aucuns recoiuent le baptefme auec vne ioye indi- 
cible, & ne feauent comme exprimer la grace qu’ils 
reffentét par des coloques amoureux, tantoft a noftre 
Crucifix, tantoft a4 l’Image du Sauueur du monde. 
Helas! (difoit entr’autres vn ieune homme de 25. 
ans) 6! le maiftre de nos vies, tu voy que ie n’ay 
point d’efprit, & que ie ne puis parler: dy moy donc 
ce qu’il te plaift que ie te die. Et d’autres quafi en 
mefme temps blafphement contre Dieu, ayant leur 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 37 


and speeches of such importance. But, at the end, 
what blindness! not one embraces the truths which 
he acknowledges, not one adopts for himself the 
advice which he approves. 

Nevertheless, this assembly and its result, which 
was favorable to us, appeased their minds somewhat; 
the grievances which they had against us, greatly 
diminished; they begin to receive our Fathers quite 
peaceably in most of the cabins, and the latter con- 
tinue to announce the name of God to them, to the 
whole and to the sick. Some minds, of those who 
are not in disease, relish this, and [160] some even 
desire baptism; but we do not proceed so fast,— they 
must be tried; otherwise we should run the risk of 
having many people baptized, but very few Chris- 
tians. 

The mercy of God further appeared over the sick; 
in the single village of saint Jean Baptiste, more than 
140 were baptized, most of whom are dead,—and 
among others, 40 little children, whose salvation is 
beyond doubt. The judgments of God are always 
adorable. Here follows what the Fathers of this 
mission write to me in the matter. 

‘‘Some receive baptism with an unspeakable joy, 
and know not how to express the grace that they 
experience, by means of loving colloquies, now be- 
fore our Crucifix, now before the Image of the Savior 
of the world. ‘ Alas!’ (said, among others, a young 
man of 25 years) ‘O! thou master of our lives! thou 
seest that I have no sense, and that I cannot speak; 
tell me, then, what it would please thee that I should 
say.’ And others, almost at the same time, blas- 
pheme against God, having their souls on their lips. 
Lately, a war Captain, when we spoke to him of hell, 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 20 


ame fur leurs leures. Dernierement vn Capitaine 
de guerre, lors que nous luy parlions de l’enfer, fe 
[161] mocquoit de ces feux. Ces flammes 1a ne bru- 
flent pas pour moy, difoit ce brauache, la mort me 
redoute, ie la cherche partout, & elle me fuit: ma 
plus ordinaire prouifion eft la chair de nos ennemis. 
Ce pauure mal-heureux fut bien toft emporté de la 
mort, fans iamais fe vouloir recognoiftre. Vn pau- 
ure enfant eft mort au milieu de noftre cabane, fans 
que iamais nous ayons pfi le baptifer. Plufieurs 
autres bien eloignez de nous en des cabanes efcartées 
au milieu des campagnes, n’attendoient que noftre 
venué pour expirer quafi entre nos mains, & font allez 
ioiiir au Ciel de celuy qui ne les auoit fait que pour 
les fauuer. D’aucuns nous fermant leurs cabanes 
nous contraignent d’entrer en vne autre ou nous ne 
pretendions pas d’aller: nous y trouuons vne ame a 
qui rien ne manque finon le baptefme pour qu'elle 
foit le mefme iour en paradis. D’autres que nous 
ne cherchions pas nous appellent chez eux, & fans y 
penfer nous donnent le moyen de procurer le falut 
d’vn pauure homme qui defia auoit vn pied dedans 
l’enfer. En vn mot, les Anges [162] nous affiftent a 
acroiftre le nombre des bien-heureux. Nous ne 
pouuons attribuer 4 d’autre puiffance qu’a des efprits 
tutelaires des hommes le cas qui fuit. 

Pendant que le fonge ou pluftoft le diable fe fait 
obeyr dans noftre propre cabane par vn defordre ou 
folie vniuerfelle de tout le peuple, & qu’en fuitte il 
nous interromp[e] le cours de nof{tre exercice, vn capi- 
taine des Algonquins qui hiuernent 4 vn demy quart 
de lieué d’icy, nous vient chercher en hafte: vn mien 
frere, nous dit-il, fe meurt de la contagion, venez ie 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 : 39 


[161] mocked those fires. ‘ Those flames do not burn 
for me,’ said this braggart; ‘ death dreads me; I seek 
it everywhere, and it shuns me; my most usual pro- 
vision is the flesh of our enemies.’ This poor wretch 
was soon carried off by death, without ever consent- 
ing to acknowledge himself in error. A poor child 
died in the midst of our cabin, and we were never 
able to baptize it. Several others, far removed from 
us, in isolated cabins in the midst of the fields, await- 
ed only our coming in order to expire almost in our 
hands; and they have gone to enjoy in Heaven him 
who had made them only to save them. Some, clos- 
ing their cabins to us, constrain us to enter another, 
into which we were not intending to go; we find 
there a soul which lacks nothing but baptism, in 
order to be the same day in paradise. Others, whom 
we were not seeking, call us to their house, and, 
without realizing it, give us the means to procure 
the salvation of a poor man who already had one foot 
in hell. In a word, the Angels [162] assist us to in- 
crease the number of the blessed. We cannot attrib- 
ute to other power than to guardian spirits of men, 
the following occurrence: 

‘While the dream, or rather the devil, is being 
obeyed in our own cabin by a tumult or general mad- 
ness of the whole people, and while he consequently 
interrupts the course of our exercise, a captain of 
the Algonquins, who are wintering an eighth of a 
league from here, comes to seek us in haste. ‘A 
brother of mine,’ he tells us, ‘is dying of the con- 
tagion; come, I beg you, and visit him while he is 
still alive; come and teach him the way to heaven, 
for he desires it.’ We hasten thither; we instruct 
him, more from the heart than from the lips; his 


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vo. 20 


vous prie le vifiter tandis qu’il eft encore en vie: 
venez luy enfeigner le chemin du ciel, car il le defire. 
Nous y courons, on l’in{truit plus de coeur que de 
bouche: fon frere voyant qu'il ne nous entendoit 
qu’A demy, fe met de la partie, (car il entend paffable- 
ment le Huron) & nous fert d’interprete. Nous nous 
feruons de quelques prieres Algonquines que nous 
auions par efcrit de nos Peres qui font aux Trois 
Riuieres, & entre autres de l’acte de contrition, que 
ce moribond repetoit de fi bon coeur, qu’enfin nous 
l’appellons Felix au baptefme, [163] de fait il mourut 
peu d’heurés apres. Ces bonnes gens nous parlerent 
de l’enterrer 4 nof{tre mode, comme nos Peres font 
aux Trois Riuieres: mais la faifon n’en eft pas 
encore venué. Iufques icy la lettre. 

I’efpere que dans quelque temps nous aurons icy 
haut des ouuriers qui fgauront la langue Alguonquine, 
& qui pouront non feulement affifter quelques bandes 
d’Algonquins qui viennent hyuerner chaque année 
proche de nos Hurons: mais paffer outre 4 deux & 
trois cens lieués d’icy, ot la langue des Algonquins. 
fe fait entendre. 

Les deux bourgs de fainct Ioachim & de faincte 
Elizabeth donnerent auffi de l’exercice 4 nos ouuri- 
ers euangeliques, la maladie ayant regné efgalement 
par tout. La plus grande peine que nous y auons, 
m’efcrit vn de nos Peres, n’e{t pas 4 deuorer les pau- 
uretez de ces miferables: mais c’eft d’entrer dans. 
leurs efprits, que nous voyons manifeftement eftre 
la plufpart poffedez de quelque demon: iufques la 
que d’aucuns a4 noftre abord heurlent par fois céme 
des loups; [164] lefquels i’ay experimenté fe taire 
court lors qu’exterieurement nous les exhorcifons per 
Dominum noftrum Iefum Chrifium. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 41 


brother, seeing that he only half understood us, joins 
the party (for he passably understands Huron), and 
serves us as interpreter. We use some Algonquin 
prayers that we had in writing from our Fathers who 
are at the Three Rivers,—and, among others, the 
act of contrition, which this dying man repeated with 
so good a heart that at last we called him Felix, in bap- 
tism: [163] in fact, he died a few hours later. These 
good people spoke to us of burying him in our man- 
ner, as our Fathers do at the Three Rivers: but the 
time for that has not yet come.’’ Thus far the letter. 
_ I hope that after a while we shall have workmen 
up here who shall know the Alguonquin language, 
and who will be able not only to assist some bands 
of Algonquins who come to winter each year near 
our Hurons, but to pass beyond, two and three 
hundred leagues from here, where the language of 
the Algonquins is generally understood. 

The two villages of saint Joachim and sainte Eliza- 
beth also gave exercise to our evangelistic workers, 
the disease having prevailed in all places alike. 
‘“ The greatest difficulty we have,”’ one of our Fathers 
writes to me, ‘‘ is not that of consuming the poverty 
of these wretches, but that of entering into their 
minds, which we see manifestly possessed, for the 
most part, by some demon,—even to the extent that 
some, at our approach, sometimes howl like wolves: 
[164] these, as I have proved, quickly become silent 
when we outwardly exorcise them per Dominum 
nostrum Jesum Christum. 


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


CHAP. X. 


DE LA MISSION SURNOMMEE DES APOSTRES AUX 
KHIONONTATERONONS. 


ES K[h]ionontater[on]ons, qu’on appelle la na- 
tion du Petun, pour l’abondance qu’il y a de 
cette herbe, font eloignez du pays des Hurons, 

dont ils parlent la langue, enuiron douze ou quinze 
lieués tirant & l’Occident: ils ont eu autresfois de cru- 
elles guerres les vns contre les autres; mais ils font 
maintenant en tres-bonne intelligence, & depuis peu 
ont renouuellé leur alliance, & fait nouuelle confede- 
ration contre quelques autres peuples leurs ennemis 
communs. 

Nous auons pris cette occafion pour y annoncer 
leuangile, & y arborer fi nous pouuons le drappeau 
de Iefus-Chrift. [165] C’a efté la cinquiefme de nos 
miffions, que nous auons nommé la miffion des 
Apoftres. Le fort en eft efcheu au Pere Charles 
Garnier, & au P. Ifaac Iacques [sc. Iogues]. Voicy 
les noms quw’ils ont donné 4 neuf bourgs qu’ils y 
ont rencontré, fainct Pierre & fainct Paul, fainct An- 
dré, fainct Iacques, fainct Thomas, fainct Iean, fainct 
Iacques & fainct Philippe, fainct Barthelemy, fainct 
Matthieu, fainct Simon & fainct Iude. 

Cette miffion a efté la plus riche de toutes, puis 
que les croix & les fouffrances y ont ef{té plus abon- 
dantes. Voicy ce que m’efcriuirent nos Peres des 
commencemens qu’ils y eurent. 

Enfin nous voila arriuez, Dieu mercy, au dernier 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 43 


CHAP. X. 


OF THE MISSION SURNAMED ‘‘ OF THE APOSTLES,’’ TO 
THE KHIONONTATERONONS. 


HE Khionontateronons, who are called ‘‘ the na- 
T tion of the Tobacco,’’ from the abundance of 
that plant there, are distant from the country 
of the Hurons— whose language they speak — about 
twelve or fifteen leagues toward the West. These 
nations formerly waged cruel wars against one an- 
other; but they are now on very good terms, and have 
recently renewed their alliance, and made a new 
confederation against some other peoples, their com- 
mon enemies. 

We have taken this opportunity to announce the 
gospel to them, and to plant there, if we can, the 
standard of Jesus Christ. [165] This, which we have 
named the mission of the Apostles, has been the fifth 
of our missions. The lot for it fell to Father Charles 
Garnier and to Father Isaac Jogues. Here are the 
names which they have given to nine villages that 
they have encountered there: saint Pierre and saint 
Paul,® saint André, saint Jacques, saint Thomas, saint 
Jean, saint Jacques and saint Philippe, saint Barthe- 
lemy, saint Matthieu, saint Simon and saint Jude. 

This mission has been the richest of all, since the 
crosses and the sufferings have been most abundant 
therein. Here is what our Fathers write to me of 
their beginnings in it. 

‘* Here we have at last arrived, thank God, at the 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 20 


& principal bourg de noftre diftrict, auquel nous 
auons donné le nom de fainct Pierre & fainct Paul. 
N’ayant peu trouuer aucun Sauuage au bourg de la 
Conception pour venir auec nous, les chemins eftans 
alors trop mauuais pour des gens qui ne cherchent 
pas Dieu; nous fufmes contraints de partir feuls pre- 
nant nos bons Anges pour guides. Sur le milieu du 
chemin, n’ayant [166] pf trouuer vn certain deftour 
qui nous euft conduit 4 quelques cabanes qui font vn 
peu Al’efcart, nous fufmes furpris de la nuict dans 
vne fapiniere: nous eftions en vn lieu humide & ne 
pouuions en aller chercher vn plus fec: nous eufmes 
affez de peine & nous amaffer quelques morceaux de 
bois pour faire vn peu de feu, & quelques branches 
feiches pour nous coucher deffus: la neige nous 
menacoit d’efteindre noftre feu, mais elle ceffa incon- 
tinent. Dieu foit beny, nous paffafmes la nuict fort 
doucement. Le lendemain matin nous rencontrafmes 
quelques pauures cabanes dans les champs, mais ils 
n’auoient point de bled. Y trouuant compagnie 
pour venir dans le pays nous ne la voulufmes perdre, 
pource que les chemins eftoient fort difficiles 4 raifon 
des neiges nouuellement tombées qui auoient effacé 
les piftes, Nous partifmes donc & allafmes par de 
bien mauuais chemins en vn bien mauuais temps a 
vn petit village que nous nommafmes S. Thomas; 
nous fifmes bien vne lieué a la feule clarté de la 
neige, & arriuafmes vers les huict heures du foir 
auec bon [167] appetit, n’ayant pas mangé en toute 
la iournée que chacun vn morceau de pain. Nous 
n’auions aucun deffein fur ce bourg 1a pluftoft que 
fur vn autre: mais ayant pris la compagnie des Sau- 
uages qui fe prefenta, & les ayant fuiuis, nous arri- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 45 


farthest and principal village of our district, to which 
we have given the name of saint Pierre and saint 
Paul. Not having been able to find any Savage at 
the village of la Conception to come with us,— the 
roads being then too bad, for people who are not 
seeking God,—we were constrained to start alone; 
taking our good Angels for guides. About the mid- 
dle of the journey, not having [166] been able to find 
a certain detour which would have led us to some 
cabins which are a little isolated, we were surprised 
by night in a fir grove. We were in a damp place, 
and could not go from it to seek a drier one; we had 
trouble enough to pick up some pieces of wood to 
make a little fire, and some dry branches to lie down 
upon: the snow was threatening to put out our fire, 
but it suddenly ceased. God be blessed, we spent 
the night very quietly. The next morning we came 
across some poor cabins in the fields, but they had 
nocorn. Finding company there to come into the 
country with, we were not willing to lose it, because 
the roads were very difficult on account of the new- 
ly-fallen snows, which had obliterated the trails. 
Accordingly, we set out, and went by many bad 
roads, at a very bad season, to a little village which 
we named St. Thomas; we made easily a league by 
the mere light of the snow, and arrived about eight 
o’clock in the evening, with good [167] appetite,— 
not having eaten all day, save each a morsel of bread. 
We had no design on that village, rather than on 
another: but having taken what company of Savages 
there offered, and having followed them, we arrived, — 
no doubt, where God was leading us, for the salva- 
tion of a predestined soul which awaited nothing 
but our coming, in order to die to all its miseries. 


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


uafmes fans doute ot Dieu nous conduifoit, pour le 
falut d’vne ame predeftinée, qui n’attédoit rien que 
noftre venué pour mourir 4 toutes fes miferes. Lors 
que nous eftions en peine de fgauoir f’il n’y auoit 
point quelque malade qui preffat, vn ieune homme 
nous vint prier d’aller déner quelque douceur a 
vne de fa cabane; nous y allons, & trouuons vne 
pauure femme qui n’en peut plus; elle fut inftruite, 
& receut heureufement auc la Foy la grace du Bap- 
tefme, peu apres elle fe vit dans la gloire. Il n’y 
auoit dans tout le village que celle-la qui euft befoin 
de noftre fecours. Nous courufmes 4 quelques autres 
petits bourgs, ot on nous dit qu’il y auoit des ma- 
lades: nous en auons baptifé quelques-vns: les brebis 
de Noftre Seigneur font bien efgarées ca & 1a. Nous 
auons rencontré quelques perfonnes qui d’abord gou- 
{tent bien l’euangile, [168] Dieu leur faffe la grace 
de l’embraffer tout a fait. Nous receufmes de la con- 
folation il ya deux ou trois iours, voyant qu’vne fille 
qui fe venoit engager de parole 4 vn ieune garcon, 
ayant vn peu apres entendu parler de Dieu & des 
peines d’enfer, f’alla coucher feule, difant: Il nous 
void mefme la nuict. 

Arriuant en ce bourg nous ne fgauions pas qu'il y 
auoit vn petit enfant de la nation neutre, aagé de 
cing ans, que fes parens ont apporté fraichement icy, 
ott la faim les fait refugier; il y auoit long temps 
que chaque iour on croyoit que ce feroit le dernier de 
fa vie: de 45. ou 50. cabanes, fans penfer 4 luy, nous 
vifitafmes d’abord celle ot eftoit ce petit eftranger, 
& le baptifafmes: il fe vit incontinent hors de ban- 
niffement, & heureux dedans fa patrie. Ce font la 
les premices de cette nation neutre & celuy qui tout 
le premier a efté arroufé du fang de Iefus-Chrift. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 : 47 


While we were at a loss to know whether there was 
not some person critically ill, a young man came to 
beg us to go and give some relief to one in his cabin. 
We go thither, and find a poor woman at the last 
pass: she was instructed, and happily received with 
the Faith the grace of Baptism; shortly after, she 
beheld herself in glory. In the whole village there 
was only that one who had need of our help. We 
ran to some other little villages, where they told us 
that there were sick people: we baptized some of 
them,— Our Lord’s sheep are much scattered, hither 
and yon. We have met some persons who at first 
indeed relished the gospel: [168] God grant them the 
grace to embrace it altogether. We received conso- 
lation two or three days ago, seeing that a girl, who 
came to pledge herself to a young man, having a little 
later heard mention of God and the pains of hell, 
went to lie down alone, saying, ‘ He sees us even at 
night.’ 

“On arriving in this village, we knew not that 
there was a little child of the neutral nation, aged 
five years, whom its parents have recently brought 
here, where hunger causes them to take refuge; for 
a long time, it was each day believed that that would 
be the last of its life. Out of 45 or 50 cabins, with- 
out thinking of it, we first visited the one in which 
was this little stranger, and baptized him; he straight- 
way saw himself out of exile and happy in his native 
land. Those are the first fruits of this neutral nation, 
and this was the very first one to be sprinkled with 
the blood of Jesus Christ. 

‘“This whole country is filled with evil reports 
which are current about us. The children, seeing 
us arrive at any place, exclaim that famine and dis- 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


Tout ce pays eft remply de mauuais bruits qui 
courent contre nous, les enfans nous voyant arriuer 
quelque part, f’efcrient que la famine & la maladie 
[169] viennent: quelques femmes f’enfuyent, d’autres 
nous cachent leurs enfans, quafi tous nous refufent 
l’hofpitalité, qu’ils accordent a des peuples les plus 
incogneus. Nous n’auons pti trouuer maifon pour 
Noftre Seigneur, n’ayant pfi trouuer aucun lieu ot 
nous puiffions dire la Meffe. Noftre hofte qui eft le 
premier Capitaine de ce pays, & qui par vne prudence 
naturelle auoit paru affez paifible, nous voyant prier 
Dieu les matins & les foirs 4 genoux, en fin ne pfit 
fe tenir vne fois de nous faire paroiftre ce qu’il auoit 
fur le coeur. Il commence donc a parler, mais d’vne 
voix de confeil, c’eft 4 dire haute & intelligible. C’eft 
veritablement maintenant que ie crains & que ie 
parle: Que font maintenant ces demons autre chofe 
que des forts pour nous faire mourir, & acheuer ce 
que la maladie a laiffé de refte en cette cabane: on 
me l’auoit bien dit que c’eftoient des forciers, mais ie 
le croy trop tard: c’ef{t vne chofe que 1’on ne voit point, 
que des perfonnes qui viennent loger chez quel- 
qu’vn, paffent la nuict dans des poftures aufquelles 
nos yeux ne font aucunement accouftumez. [170] 
Iugez de quel ceil on nous voit en vne cabane ott on 
a de fi belles idées de nous? A peine peufmes nous 
remettre cét efprit. On nous traitte tres-mal pour 
nous obliger de fortir. C’eft bien tout finous auons 
ce qui fuffit 4 viure: noftre faim nous accompagne 
d’ordinaire depuis le matin iufques au foir: mais ces 
bonnes gens ne voyent pas que ce qui nous arrefte 
e{t plus precieux que tout ce qu’ils concoiuent de 
douceurs en ce monde. I1 n’ya point prefque de 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 : 49 


ease [169] are coming; some women flee, others hide 
their children from us; almost all refuse us the hos- 
pitality which they grant even to the most unknown 
tribes. We have not been able to find a house for 
Our Lord,—not having been able to find any place 
where we can say Mass. Our host,—whao is the chief 
Captain of this country, and who through a natural 
prudence had appeared quite peaceable,—on seeing 
us pray to God mornings and evening's on our knees, 
finally could not refrain, on one occasion, from reveal- 
ing to us what he had on his heart. He begins, 
therefore, to speak, but in a council voice,—that is 
to say, loud and distinct: ‘ Truly, it is now that I 
fear and speak. What are now these demons but 
spells to make us die, and finish what the disease has 
left over, in this cabin? They had told me, indeed, 
that these were sorcerers, but I believe it too late. 
This is a thing unknown —that persons who come to 
lodge at one’s house pass the night in postures to 
which our eyes are nowise accustomed.’ [170] Imag- 
ine with what looks they regard us in a cabin where 
they have such fine ideas of us!—we could hardly 
tranquilize this mind again. They treat us very ill, 
in order to oblige us to leave. It is, in sooth, all, if 
we have what suffices for life,—our hunger usually 
attends us from morning till evening; but these 
simple people do not see that what retains us here is 
mUre precious than all that they conceive in the way 
of pleasuresinthis world. There is hardly any corn 
in this village, and, nevertheless, every day some 
Attiouandarons arrive (they are those of the neutral 
nation),— bands of men, women, and children, all 
pale and disfigured, whom famine drives hither. 
Fleeing famine, they here find death, or rather a 


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


bled en ce bourg, & neantmoins tous les iours arri- 
uent des Attiouandarons (ce font ceux de la nation 
neutre) des bandes d’hommes, de femmes & enfans, 
tous haures & defigurez, que la famine chaffe icy: 
fuyant la famine ils trouuent icy la mort, ou pluftoft 
vne vie bien-heureufe; car nous auons l'oeil que pas 
vn ne meure fans baptefme. Entre ceux-la a efté vn 
petit enfant d’vn an, quifembloit pluftoft vn monftre 
qu’vn homme: il fut heureufement baptifé, Dieu ce 
femble ne luy conferuoit la vie que par miracle, afin 
qu’eftant laué dans le fang de Iefus-Chrift il benift a 
iamais fes mifericordes. 

[171] Tandis que nous tafchons de rendre quelque 
honneur A Dieu, le diable continué de fe faire adorer: 
encore hier dans no{ftre cabane on luy fit vn facrifice 
folennel: tout le monde y eftant affemblé, on ietta 
plufieurs fois du petun & de la graiffe dans le feu, 
faifant plufieurs inuocations: & tout cela pour la 
guerifon d’vn malheureux que fon demon priué afflige 
d’vne certaine maladie, pource qu’il ne luy a pas 
obey en quelques feftins qu’il luy auoit ordonné. 

Ejt-ce merueille qu’on nous ait en horreur dans vn 
lieu ot les diables font recogneus pour maiftres. 
Noftre hofte veut qu’on y baricade fa porte tous les 
foirs, crainte que de nuict on ne nous faffe quelque 
violence: car fi on nous tuoit dans fa maifon il en 
auroit les reproches, mefme de ceux qui ne fouhai- 
tent que noftre mort. Ce n’eft pas ce qui nous 
affeure: nous auons vne protection plus puiffante, 
quoy que moins vifible 4 ces pauures infideles 

Iufques icy les Peres. 

Ce ne furent 1a que les commencemens de leurs 
fouffrances: dans les autres [172] bourgs comme les 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 ; 51 


blessed life, for we see to it that not one dies with- 
out baptism. Among those people was a little child 
of one year, who seemed rather a monster than a 
human being. It was happily baptized; God, it 
seems, preserved its life only by miracle, so that, 
being washed in the blood of Jesus Christ, it might 
bless his mercies forever. 

[171] While we try to render some honor to God, 
the devil continues to be adored; even yesterday, in 
our cabin, they made him a solemn sacrifice. All 
the people being assembled there, they repeatedly 
threw tobacco and fat into the fire, making several 
invocations; and all that for the cure of a wretch 
whom his private demon afflicts with a certain dis- 
ease, because he has not obeyed him in the matter of 
some feasts which he had commanded him. 

““Is it a wonder that we are held in abomination 
at a place where the devils are acknowledged as mas- 
ters? Our host orders that his door be barricaded 
every evening, fearing lest they do us some violence 
by night; for, if they killed us in his house, he would 
have the reproaches to bear for it, even from those 
who desire naught but our death. It is not this 
which assures us; we have a more powerful protec- 
tion, although less visible to these poor infidels.’’ 

Hitherto the Fathers. 

Those were only the beginnings of their sufferings: 
in the other [172] villages, since the rumors were 
continually increasing, they had more to endure; they 
had not been two days in a place before people could 
no longer suffer them, and it was necessary to change 
their location. Some Hurons, who went thither from 
time to time to effect some trades, incensed minds 
against them, and even did their utmost to the end 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


bruits alloient toufiours f’augmentant, ils eurent plus 
A endurer: ils n’auoient pas efté deux iours en vn 
lieu qu’on ne pouuoit plus les fouffrir, & qu’il falloit 
changer de place. Quelques Hurons qui alloient 1a 
de fois & autres y faire quelques traittes animoiét les 
efprits contre eux, & mefme firent leur poffible afin 
que l’on f’en deffift au pluftoft. Tantoft vn homme 
qui fe refueille auec effroy au milieu de la nuict, leur 
commande de fortir hors de fa cabane: tantoft on 
vient de dehors auffi en pleine nuict crier 4 leur porte 
que le lendemain matin ils ne paroiffent pas dans le 
bourg: comme ils fortent d’vn bourg prenant la route 
de quelque autre, on les preuient, & on va donner 
aduis aux vilages prochains qu’on ait 4 leur en refu- 
fer l’entrée: les Capitaines viennent qui leur defen- 
dent d’y mettre le pied, & les menacent qu’on leur 
fendroit la teite fi feulement ils en approchoient. 

Leur plus grand crime eft qu’ils portent la Foy & 
le nom de Iefus par tout, qu’ils defendent les cere- 
monies diaboliques; que faifant leurs prieres ils 
enforcellent [173] les villages. Mais leur ioye & con- 
folation eft celle-lA mefme, de fe voir ainfi rebutez 
pour le nom de Iefus, non feulement dans les con- 
feils, mais des bourgs & des maifons particulieres, 
de fe voir en l’horreur de ceux dont ils recherchent 
le falut au peril de leur vie, endurant la faim, le 
froid, les pluyes & les neiges: en vn mot toutes 
les iniures des faifons & des temps: de fe voir 
menacez quafi A tout moment de mourir comme des 
malfaicteurs. Non eft feruus maior domino fuo. Si le 
Sauueur du monde a efté traitté de la forte, les 
feruiteurs n’ont-ils pas fujet de fe glorifier felon Dieu 
portant les liurées de leur maiftre. 


7 
1 
, 
j 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 wee 


that they be got rid of as soon as possible. At one 
time a man who awakens with terror in the middle of 
the night, commands them to go forth from his cab- 
in; again, some one comes from outside,—also in 
the dead of night,—to shout at their door that the 
next morning they shall not appear in the village. 
As they leave one village, taking the way to some 
other, they are forestalled, and one goes to give 
warning to the next villages that they are to refuse 
them entrance; the Captains come to forbid them to 
set foot there, and threaten them that their heads 
would be split if they so much as approached. 

Their greatest crime is that they carry the Faith 
and the name of Jesus everywhere; that they forbid 
the diabolical ceremonies; that while saying their 
prayers they bewitch [173] the villages. But their 
joy and consolation is that very thing,— to see them- 
selves thus repelled for the name of Jesus, not only 
in the councils, but also by the villages and private 
houses; to see themselves the abomination of those 
whose salvation they seek, at the peril of their own 
lives; enduring hunger, cold, the rains, and the 
snows,—in a word, all the inclemencies of the seasons 
and weather: to see themselves threatened, almost at 
every moment, with dying as malefactors. Non est 
servus major domino suo. If the Savior of the world 
was treated like that, have not his servants cause to 
glorify themselves in God, while bearing their mas- 
ter’s livery? 

Thereupon, one of our missionaries falls sick,— the 
fever seizes him, and some other inconveniences; 
God must indeed be their physician, their food, and 
their all, on these occasions,— since everything fails 
them therein. 


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


La deffus vn de nos miffionnaires tombe malade, la 
fieure le faifit, & quelques autres incommoditez: il 
faut bien que Dieu foit leur medecin, leur nourriture, 
& leur tout en ces rencontres, puis que 14 tout leur 
manque. 

A peine eft-il aucunement foulagé de fon mal, 
qu’il faut partir a ieun dés les trois heures du matin, 
pour aller & vn autre bourg 4 vnze & douze lieués de 
1a, [174] ot les affaires de Dieu les appellent. Vn 
peu de pain du pays, fi toutefois c’e{t pain vne maffe 
de farine de bled d’Inde detrempée dedans 1’eau fans 
leuain, qui ne vaut pas le pain qu’on fait en France 
pour les chiens, quelque nom qu’on luy donne: ce 
peu qu’ils portent de nourriture fe gelle en chemin, 
& toutefois il faut f’en contenter, & faire par neceffité 
onze lieués n’ayant pas mangé en toute la iournée 
gros comme le poing de ce manger fi delicat: peu 
sen faut qu’ils ne demeurent de foibleffe: mais 
Noftre Seigneur les affifte, & enfin ils fe traifnent 
parmy les neiges, & arriuent bien tard au lieu qu’ils 
pretendoient, remplis de fueur d’vn cofté, & de 
l’autre plus qu’a demy gelez. Quelques ames efga- 
rées cA & 14 qu’on met dans le chemin du ciel lors 
qu’elles font fur le poinct d’eftre abyfmées dedans 
l’enfer, meritent mille fois plus que ces trauaux, puis 
qu’elles ont coufté plus cher au Sauueur du monde. 

Lors que nos Miffionnaires eftoient dans ces perfe- 
cutions, lofeph Chihouatenhoua, dont nous parlons 
fouuent, [175] parce que fon zele & fon courage luy 
ont fait prendre bonne part en toutes nos fouffrances; 
ce bon Chreftien voulant eftre de la partie quitte fa 
femme & fes enfans, abandonne entre les mains de 
Dieu le foin de fa maifon au temps que tout leur 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 55 


Hardly is he somewhat relieved from his sickness, 
when it is necessary to start,—fasting, as early as 
three o’clock in the morning,—in order to go to 
another village eleven or twelve leagues thence, [174] 
whither the affairs of God callthem. A little bread 
of the land,—if, however, that be bread; a mass of 
Indian corn meal soaked in water without leaven, 
which is not worth the bread which in France they 
make for the dogs; whatever name one give it,— this 
little food which they carry freezes on the way; and 
yet they must be content with it, and of necessity 
‘make eleven leagues without having eaten in the 
whole day a lump as large as the fist, of this so deli- 
cate fare. They almost stop, from weakness, but 
Our Lord assists them; and finally they drag them- 
selves through the snows, and arrive very late at the 
place whither they are bound —on the one hand, cov- 
ered with sweat, and, on the other, more than half 
frozen. Some souls gone astray here and there, 
which are put in the way to heaven when they are 
on the point of being swallowed up in hell, deserve 
a thousand times more than these labors; since they 
have cost the Savior of the world dearer than that. 

While our Missionaries were under these persecu- 
tions, Joseph Chihouatenhoua,—of whom we often 
speak, [175] because his zeal and his courage have 
caused him to take a good share in all our suffer- 
ings,—this good Christian, wishing to be of the par- 
ty, leaves his wife and his children, and gives over 
into the hands of God the care of his house at the 
time when all their village was most afflicted with 
disease. This poor family was every day expecting 
the visitation of Our Lord; the poor mother, in par- 
ticular was in apprehension for her children,— well 


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


bourg eftoit plus affligé de maladie. Cette pauure 
famille attendoit tous les iours la vifite de Noftre 
Seigneur: la pauure mere particulierement eftoit 
dans l’apprehenfion pour fes enfans, voyant bien que 
fon mary eftant eloigné elle demeuroit priuée d’vn 
fort appuy, & {pirituel & temporel. Vn de nos Peres 
qui eftoit 14 voulant la confoler luy dit que ce voyage 
feroit court, de douze ou quinze iours au plus. He- 
las, dit-elle, nos enfans feront morts dans cét efpace 
de temps fans qu’il ait appris la nouuelle de leur ma- 
ladie. Ma femme, refpondit le mary, pour qui me 
prenez-vous? ie ne fuis rien du tout, hé de quoy fer- 
uiroit icy ma prefence? Quand mes enfans feroient 
malades tout ce que ie pourrois faire ce feroit d’en 
auoir du reffentiment, & donner de la peine 4 mon 
efprit pour tafcher de les [176] foulager: mais cela 
& rien c’eft tout vn: c’eft aA Dieu feul qu'il appar- 
tient de conferuer ou rendre la fanté a qui il luy 
plaift; pour nous nous n’auons qu’a tafcher de luy 
plaire en toutes nos actions: c’eft ce qui me fait 
feparer maintenant d’auec vous; il me fuffit que ce 
foit fa volonté: pour ce qui eft de noftre famille, il 
en aura le foin, s’il luy plaift: & puis voila mes freres 
les Iefuites qui demeurent auec vous; quand ie ferois 
icy, le meilleur que ie peuffe faire ce feroit de fuiure 
leur confeil: tenez voftre efprit en repos. Deuant 
que de partir il fe confeffa & communia, & fur le 
poinct de la feparation il fe mit 4 deux genoux dans 
fa cabane, pour offrir 4 Dieu & luy recommander fa 
famille. 

Il partit 14a deffus, lors qu’il faifoit vn temps ter- 
tible, le froid fendoit les arbres, vn vent furieux luy 
donnoit en face, mais le feu de fa charité fut plus 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 57 


seeing that, her husband being at a distance, she 
would remain deprived of a strong support, both 
spiritual and temporal. One of our Fathers who was 
there, wishing to console her, said to her that this 
journey would be brief,—twelve or fifteen days at 


most. ‘‘ Alas,’’ she said, ‘‘ our children will have 
died in that space of time, without his having learned 
the news of their illness.’’ ‘‘ My wife,’’ answered 


the husband, ‘‘ whom do you take me for? I am noth- 
ing at all, and what would my presence avail here? 
Should my children be sick, all that I could do would 
be to feel distressed for them, and grieve my spirit, 
in order to try to [176] relieve them; but that and 
nothing are all one. To God alone it belongs to 
preserve or to restore health to whom he pleases; as 
for us, we have only to try to please him in all our 
actions. That is what makes me leave you now; it 
is enough for me that it is his will. As for our fam- 
ily, he will take care of it, if he please: and then 
here are my brothers the Jesuits who remain with 
you. Even if I were here, the best that I could do 
would be to follow their advice; keep your mind at 
rest.’’ Before starting he confessed and received 
communion; and at the moment of the separation he 
knelt down in his cabin, to offer and commend his 
family to God. 

Thereupon he went away, while it was terrible 
weather; the cold was cracking the trees; a furious 
wind was blowing in his face; but the fire of his 
charity was stronger than all these inclemencies. 
Having joined our missionaries, they begin to scour 
the hamlets and villages; having arrived at the first 
one, very weary and fatigued, they present them- 
selves to enter a [177] cabin, but the door is shut on 


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


fort que toutes ces froidures. S’eftant joint a nos 
miffionnaires ils commencent & parcourir les bourgs & 
vilages; eftans arriuez au premier, bien las & fati- 
guez, ils fe prefentent pour entrer en vne [177] 
cabane, on leur ferme la porte: ils f ’addreffent a vne 
autre, ils y recoiuent vn pareil refus: enfin ce Chre- 
{tien les mene chez quelques fiens parens, mais ils 
font contrains de defloger le 1édemain, apres auoir 
fait en ce bourg quelques baptefmes. Eftans abor- 
dez en vne autre bourgade, la porte du Capitaine 
leur eft incontinent fermée; il falut que ce bon Chre- 
{tien euft encore recours chez vn de fes parens: ce 
ne fut pas fans des reproches qu’on luy fit de fe ran- 
ger atiec des gens qui eftoient les plus grands forciers 
de la terre: mais il fceut bien les releuer. Cela 
n’empefcha pas que la nuict eftant venué vn ieune 
homme de la cabane ne fe mit en furie, foit qu'il fut 
poffedé du diable, {oit qu’il le contrefit. Il iette les 
tifons des feux de cofté & d’autre, il brufle ce qu’il 
trouue, mefme de plus precieux; les barbares fe 
cachent ott ils peuuent. Ce phrenetique vient iufte- 
ment fe ietter en la place ot font nos miffionnaires: 
mais par bon-heur ils venoient de s’enretirer. Comme 
ce fol eftoit 14 A faire mille tours d’enragé, cherchant 
des yeux ceux 4 qui il en vouloit, [178] on l’aduertit 
doucement du lieu ot ils s’eftoient retirez. Noftre 
Iofeph ayant eu affez bonne oreille pour entendre cét 
aduis: Quoy donc, s’efcria-il, ce fol A de l’efprit, & 
vous confpirez auec luy? Nonobftant ce frenetique, 
foit vray, foit contrefait, va de fureur au lieu ott 
eftoit vn de nos Peres, qui fe retire en mefme temps, 
& fort de la cabane pour trouuer quelque gifte ail- 
leurs au milieu dela nuic&t. Dieu feait quels eftoient 
les deffeins de ce fol: mais il fut incontinent guery. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 59 


them; they apply at another, they receive there a 
like refusal. Finally, this Christian leads them to 
some relatives of his, but they are constrained to 
dislodge the next day, after having effected some 
baptisms in this village. Having reached another 
village, the Captain’s door is immediately closed to 
them; this good Christian is again obliged to have 
recourse to one of hiskinsmen. This was not without 
reproaches which they administered to him for tak- 
ing the part of people who were the greatest sorcerers 
on earth; but he knew well howtomeetthem. That 
did not prevent, when night had come, a young man 
of the cabin from falling into a fury; either he was 
possessed by the devil, or he pretended to be. He 
throws all the firebrands hither and thither; he burns 
what he finds, even things most precious; the bar- 
barians hide themselves where they can. This fren- 
zied man then comes, to fall upon the very place 
where our missionaries are; but by good fortune 
they had just withdrawn from it. As this lunatic 
was in the act of performing a thousand mad freaks 
there, looking for those against whom he had a 
grudge, [178] he is quietly informed of the place 
whither they had withdrawn. Our Joseph, having 
had good enough ears to hear this information, ex- 
claimed: ‘‘ What, then? this lunatic has his senses, 
and you are conspiring with him!’’ Nevertheless 
this madman, true or counterfeit, goes in fury to the 
place where one of our Fathers was, who at the same 
time withdraws and leaves the cabin, in order to find 
some shelter elsewhere, in the middle of the night. 
God knows what were this crazy man’s designs: but 
he was forthwith cured. 

In another village, where some days before our 


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 20 


En vn autre bourg, ot quelques iours auparauant 
nos Peres auoient efté affez bien accueillis, tout le 
monde leur refufoit le gifte, & toutefois la nuict 
ef{toit bien proche: lors qu’ils ne {cauoient ot aller, 
eftant tous tranfis de froid & tous mouillez, vn bon 
vieillard qu’ils auoient autrefois inftruit, & qui auoit 
goufté la parole de Dieu, {’approche d’eux: & quoy 
ta porte nous fera elle auffi fermée, luy dirent-ils? 
Venez, 2 la bonne heure, refpondit ce vieillard. 
C’eftoit vn eftranger d’vne nation ennemie, qu’ils 
appellent Atfiftaehronons, Nation du feu, qui [179] 
ayant efté pris captif dés fon bas aage, receut la vie, 
& Phabitua parmy eux. Von eft inuentus nifi hic alte- 
nigena qui daret laudem Deo. Ce bon homme receut 
auidemment les paroles de falut, toutesfois comme 
nous ne nous preffons pas tant pour les baptefmes, 
on le remit & vne autre fois. 

Ce fut dans le bourg principal de fainct Pierre & 
fainct Paul ot eftans retournez y faire vne feconde 
vifite, ils ne peurent trouuer aucun qui voulut les 
admettre: les portes leur font fermées d’abord, mefme 
de ceux qui du commencement auoient tefmoigné 
quelque pieufe affection pour la Foy: ils n’entendent 
que des menaces & des maledictions; les femmes s’ef- 
crient tout haut, ot font maintenant ceux qui difoient 
que fi ces habillez de noir retournoiét ils leur fen- 
droient la tefte. Les heures fe paffent, & plus ils fe 
prefentent a de cabanes, plus ils font refufez. Les 
enfans crient apres eux comme apres des forciers: 
enfin la nuict s’approche & les oblige de fortir de ce 
bourg, of pas vn n’auoit efté trouué digne de les 
receuoir; ils n’eftoient pas bien [180] loin, qu’vne 
trouppe infolente de ieunes gens les {uit la hache 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 ' 61 


Fathers had been quite well received, every one 
refused them shelter; and yet the night was very 
near, while they knew not where to go, being chilled 
through with cold, and all wet. A good old man 
whom they had formerly instructed, and who had 
relished the word of God, approaches them. ‘‘ How 
now,’’ they said to him, ‘‘ will your door be closed 
to us also?”’ ‘‘ Come, and be welcome,’’ answered 
this old man. He was a stranger,—from a hostile 
nation which they call Atsistaehronons, ‘‘ Nation of 
fire,’’"’— who, [179] having been taken captive in his 
early years, received his life, and came to be at home 
among them. Von est inventus nist hic alienigena qut 
daret laudem Deo. This good man eagerly received 
the words of salvation; however, as we make no great 
haste about baptisms, he was put off till another 
time. 

It was in the principal village of saint Pierre and 
saint Paul, where, having returned to make a second 
visit, they could find no one who would admit them. 
The doors are at first closed to them, even by those 
who at the start had shown some pious affection for 
the Faith: they hear naught but threats and maledic- 
tions. The women exclaim aloud, ‘‘ Where are now 
those who said that, if these black-robed men returned, 
they would split their heads?’ The hours pass, and 
the more they appear before the cabins, the more 
they are refused; the children scream after them, as 
after sorcerers. Finally, night comes on, and obliges 
them to leave this village, where not one had been 
found worthy to receive them; they were not very 
[180] far when an insolent band of young men pur- 
sues them, hatchet in hand, to massacre them. The 
captain of this village had exhorted them to that at a 


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 20 


en main pour les maffacrer. Le capitaine de ce bourg 
les auoit exhorté A cela dans vn feftin ot ils eftoient 
tous affemblez. Ie ne fcay fi ce fut vn bon-heur ou 
mal-heur pour nous, que ces barbares fe mirent vn 
peu trop tard en chemin, & ne peurent pas les attein- 
dre: peut-eftre noftre fang feroit plus pour la con- 
uerfion de ces peuples, que toutes nos fueurs. 

Le lendemain le capitaine de ce mal-heureux bourg 
vint trouuer nos Miffionnaires au vilage ot ils s’eftoi- 
ent retirez pour faire fes excufes: mais il auoit bien de 
la peine A fe purger. Ce fut lors que noftre Iofeph 
Chiouatenhoua fit plus paroiftre fon courage, & rele- 
ua bien ce capitaine, qui s’eftonnoit de ce que nous 
appellions les chofes de la Foy affaires d’importance. 
Ce Chreftien donc prenant la parole, luy dit: C’eft 
bien vous autres capitaines qui ignorez ce que c’eft 
qu’affaires d’importance; c’ef{t vous qui auez ren- 
uerfé noftre pays nous feparant des maximes & bons 
reglemens de nos anceftres; ce font ces robes noires 
icy [181] que vous mefprifez qui fcauent ce que c’eft 
qu’affaires d’importance, & qui viennent pour nous 
l’apprendre. Ie veux bien que tu fgache que c’eft 
moy que par derifion on appelle partout Le croyant: 
on penfe me maudire, & c’eft 14 ma plus grande 
gloire: ie fuis vn tel, i’ay tels & tels parens en ton 
bourg, ie fais profeffion de fuiure les bons enfeigne- 
mens que ces miens maiftres me donnent: nous n’a- 
uons point d’efprit tous tant que nous fommes; nous 
[sc. nos] penfées ne s’eftendent pas plus loing que 
cette vie; ceux qui croyent iettent leurs efperances 
fur vne eternité de biens qui affeurement les atten- 
dent; pour vous autres qui eftes toufiours infidelles, 
vous n’attendez pas des miferes apres voftre mort, & 


f 
\f 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 ; 63 


feast where they were all assembled. I know not 
whether it was a good fortune or a bad fortune for 
us, that these barbarians set forth a little too late, 
and could not overtake them; perhaps our blood 
would do more for the conversion of these peoples 
than all our sweat. 

The next day, the captain of this wretched village 
came to find our Missionaries in the village whither 
they had retreated, in order to make his excuses; but 
he had much difficulty in clearing himself. Then it 
was that our Joseph Chiouatenhoua most revealed 
his courage, and finely criticized this captain, who 
was astonished that we called the things of the Faith 
matters of importance. This Christian, then taking 
up the matter, said to him: ‘‘It is really you cap- 
tains, who know not what are matters of importance; 
you are the ones who have overturned our country 
by separating us from the maxims and good regula- 
tions of our ancestors; it is these black gowns here, 
[181] whom you despise, who know what matters of 
importance are, and who come to teach us the same. 
I would have thee know that I am the one who am 
everywhere, in derision, called ‘ The believer:’ they 
think to curse me, and that is my greatest glory. I 
am that man; I have such and such kinsmen in thy 
village; I make profession of following the good 
instructions which these my teachers give me. We 
have no sense, as many as we are; our thoughts 
extend no further than thislife. Those who believe 
found their hopes upon an eternity of good things 
which assuredly await them; as for you who are 
always infidels, you do not expect miseries after your 
death, and yet they will be inevitable for you unless 
you open your eyes to your wretchedness. You 


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


toutefois elles vous feront inéuitables fi vous n’ouurez 
les yeux 4 voftre mal-heur: vous chaffez ceux qui 
vous ayment plus qu’eux mefmes, puis que leur vie 
leur eft moins precieufe que voftre falut qu’ils vien- 
nent procurer de fi loing auec tant de trauaux. Nos 
anceftres ont efté en quelque facon excufables s’ils 
n’ont pas adoré ce grand maiftre qui a-creé le monde, 
pas vn ne [182] leur enfeignoit: mais vous ferez cent 
mille fois plus punis qu’eux, puis que vous voulez 
demeurer dedans voftre mifere, quoy qu’on tafche 
& vous en retirer. Tout ce que ptit refpondre ce 
capitaine fut de dire, Cela eft vray, & deftourner le 
propos ailleurs. 

Voila comme 1’Euangile a e{té receué de ces pau- 
ures barbares: Ce n’eft pas qu’on ne trouue quafi 
toufiours en quelque bourg qu’on aille quelque ame 
a retirer du precipice, & dont le falut qu’on procure 
rend pleines de douceur toutes les amertumes qu’il 
faut par neceflité deuorer: & en cela ce qui confole 
dauantage eft qu’on y void fenfiblement la main de 
Dieu. 

Entrant dedans vn bourg (m’efcrit le Pere Garnier) 
i’apprens qu’on preparoit feftin en vne cabane, au 
nom d’vn enfant qui fe meurt, ie m’y prefente, i’y 
trouue auffi-toft mon refus; ie me retire & recom- 
mande 4 Noftre Seigneur ce petit innocent: quelque 
temps apres fes parens m’enuoyent inuiter au feftin, 
& ce auant qu’on allaft. inuiter le commun: i’entre, 
ie trouue place tout proche du [183] malade: faifant 
femblant de luy tafter la veine de la tempe pour re- 
cognoiftre l’eftat de fa fanté, i’arroufe heureufement 
fon ame du fang de lIefus-Chrift, qui l’appella a foy 
pour affifter au banquet eternel. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 65 


drive out those who love you more than themselves, 
since their lives are less precious to them than your 
salvation, which they come to obtain, from so great 
a distance, with so many labors. Our ancestors have 
been in some sort excusable if they have not adored 
this great master who has created the world, for no 
one [182] taught them; but you will be a hundred 
thousand times more severely punished than they, 
since you choose to remain in your misery, although 
one try to draw you outof it.’’ All that this captain 
could answer was to say, ‘“‘ That is true,’’ and turn 
the subject of conversation elsewhere. 

- You see how the Gospel has been received by these 
poor barbarians. Not that we do not almost always 
find, in whatever village we go to, some soul to draw 
away from the precipice, and whose salvation, which 
we procure, fills with sweetness all the bitterness 
which must needs be swallowed. And what further 
consoles us in that is, that we see manifestly the 
hand of God therein. 

““ On entering a village’’ (Father Garnier writes to 
me) “‘I learn that a feast is being prepared in 
a cabin, in the name of a dying child. I present 
myself there; I straightway meet with a refusal. 
I withdraw, and recommend this little innocent to 
Our Lord; some time after, his parents send to invite 
me to the feast; and that before they went to 
invite the public. I go in, and find a place quite 
near the [183] patient; pretending to feel the vein 
of his temple, in order to ascertain the state of his 
health, I fortunately sprinkle his soul with the blood 
of Jesus Christ, who called him to himself to be pres- 
ent at the feast everlasting. 

‘‘In another village, shortly after I had arrived, I 


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


Dans vn autre vilage, peu apres y eftre arriuez, ie 
fais rencontre d’vn petit enfant de dix iours; ie voy 
bien qu’il n’eft pas pour cette vie mortelle, ie le 
baptife le lendemain il eft au ciel. 

Faifant vne excurfion en vn autre petit bourg, ie 
trouue vn enfant de deux iours, dont la mere eftoit 
venué d’vn autre bourg faire fes couches en celuy- 
cy: cét enfant n’eftoit né que pour eftre heureux, car 
il mourut bié toft apres le fainct baptefme que ie luy 
conferay 4 la faueur d’vne bonne femme, quia de 
bonnes inclinations pour la Foy, & que Dieu en 
mefme temps n’auoit ce femble amené de dix lieués 
loin pour autre fujet que pour me rendre cette afsi- 
{tance. Iufques icy le Pere. 

Ces prouidences fi aimables de Dieu, & plufieurs 
autres femblables coups de falut pour quelques ames 
predeftinées, [184] nous font bien recognoiftre que 
nous ne fommes pas tout feuls, & qu’il y a mille per- 
fonnes dans la France qui leuent les mains au ciel, 
tandis que nous fommes au combat: Ce fera dans 
l’eternité ot nous verrons 4 qui appartiennent les def- 
poiiilles que nous emportons icy fur les puiffances de 
lYenfer. Tant de voeux & tant de faincts defirs pour 
la conuerfion de ces peuples, des mortifications fi fre- 
quentes & fi continués qui fe font a cette intention, 
& particulierement trois mille Meffes qui fe difent 
pour le mefme fujet le fecond Dimanche de chaque 
mois, & des communions innombrables qui fe font a 
mefme iour: (faueur qui nous a efté fainctement moy- 
ennée par vne perfonne de grand merite, qui femble 
n’e{tre au monde que pour obliger le ciel & la terre.) 
c’eft fans doute ce qui flechit le coeur de Dieu, & luy 
fait verfer deffus nous tant de graces. I] eft ce fem- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 67 


run across a little child of ten days; I well see that 
it is not for this mortal life; I baptize it, and the 
next day it is in heaven. 

‘‘ Making an excursion to another little village, I 
find a child of two days, whose mother had come 
from another village to be confined in thisone. This 
child had been born only to be happy, for it died 
soon after holy baptism, which I conferred on it by 
the favor of a good woman who is well disposed 
toward the Faith, and whom God, it seems, had at 
the same time brought from ten leagues’ distance, 
for no other purpose than to render me this assist- 
ance.”’ Thus far the Father. 

These so gracious providences of God, and several 
other like acts of salvation for some predestined 
souls, [184] cause us plainly to discern that we are 
not all alone, and that there are a thousand persons 
in France who lift their hands to heaven while we are 
in the fight. In eternity we shall see to whom the 
spoils belong which we conquer here from the powers 
of hell. So many vows and so many holy desires 
for the conversion of these peoples; so frequent 
and so continuous mortifications, which are borne 
for this object; and especially three thousand Masses 
which are said for the same purpose on the second 
Sunday of each month, and countless communions 
which are received on the same day (a favor which 
has been devoutly obtained for us by a person of 
great merit, who seems to be in the world only to 
oblige heaven and earth),— all this, no doubt, is what 
moves God’s heart, and causes him to pour upon us 
so many graces. He is, it would seem, gently com- 
pelled,—this great God,—not to refuse to so power- 
ful an effort of prayers, a number of souls. Who 


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


ble doucement forcé ce grand Dieu a4 ne pas refufer 
avn fi puiffant-effort de prieres vn nombre d’ames. 
Qui fcait fi voyant que ces peuples n’euffent pas fait 
profit dans la fanté des paroles de [185] leur falut, il 
n’a point permis toutes ces maladies, pour attirer a 
foy par cette voye ceux qu'il auoit choifis? N’eft-il 
pas raifonnable de croire que 450. enfans qui font 
morts apres le baptefme, ont efté rauis de ce monde, 
erainte que la malice n’altera{t la blancheur de leur 
innocéce: & pourquoy ne penferons nous pas que des 
peuples eftrangers ott iamais nous n’auons mis le 
pied, qui cette année font venus mourir entre nos 
mains, chaffez de leur pays par la famine, n’ayent 
ef{té conduits fans qu’ils y penfaffent du fainct Efprit, 
qui a voulu part ce moyen fournir & accomplir ce 
nombre d’ames qu’il deuoit mettre au ciel en vertu 
de toutes ces prieres. 

Il faut confeffer que nous ne pouuons pas refpondre 
du futur, & qu’enuifageant ces affaires des yeux de 
la chair, on n’y voit pas le iour que plufieurs y defire- 
roient. Mais quoy, c’eft l’ouurage de Dieu, c’eft luy 
feul qui en voit le terme, & qui en cognoift les moy- 
ens: c’e{t A nous ale fuiure, & non pas 4 le preuenir. 
Il faut feruir vn maiftre felon fa volonté, & quoy 
qu'arriue, e{tre content pourueu [186] qu’il le foit: 
c’ef{t la gloire de Dieu que les chofes; aillent comme 
ille veut. Souulent nous auangons le plus lors que 
nous croyons ef{tre bien reculez: nots auons veu en 
plufieurs malades que nous auons beaucoup gaigné a 
les inf{truire lors qu’ils eftoient en fanté, quoy qu’a- 
lors il nous fembloit auoir perdu tout noftre temps: 
plufieurs ont adoré 4 l’heure de la mort celuy qu’ils 
blafphemoient durant leur vie. La parole de 1’Euan- 


——_ 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 69 


knows whether—seeing that these peoples would 
not have profited in health by the words of [185] 
their salvation—he has not permitted all these dis- 
eases in order to draw to himself in this way those 
whom he had chosen? Is it not reasonable to believe 
that 450 children, who have died after baptism, have 
been snatched from this world for fear that mischief 
should alter the whiteness of their innocence? And 
why shall we not think that strange tribes, among 
whom we have never set foot,— who this year have 
come to die in our hands, being driven from their 


country by famine,—have been led, without their 


thinking of it, by the holy Ghost, who has wished by 
this means to furnish and complete that number of 
souls which he was destined to put in heaven by 
virtue of all these prayers? 

It must be acknowledged that we cannot answer for 
the future, and that by contemplating these affairs 
with eyes of the flesh, one does not see the light in 
them which many would desire therein. But what 
then? this is God’s work; he alone sees the end of it 
and knows the means for it; it is for us to follow 
him, and not to anticipate him. One must serve a 
master according to his will, and, whatever betides, 
be content, provided [186] that he be so: it is the 
glory of God that things go as he wills. Often we 
advance the most when we think we are far behind; 
we have seen, in the case of several sick people, that 
we have gained much by instructing them when they 
were in health, although at the time it seemed to us 
that we had lost all our labor; several have adored, 
at the hour of death, him whom they blasphemed dur- 
ing their lives. The word of the Gospel germinates 
when the holy Ghost wills to render it fruitful; it is. 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES __[Vot. 20 


gile germe quad le fainct Efprit la veut rendre feconde: 
c’ef{t a nous feulement a la femer auec fidelité, & at- 
tendre les momens du ciel. Plufieurs qui ne voyent 
nos Hurons que de quinze cens lieués d’icy, s’impa- 
tientent qu’ils ne foient defia tous conuertis, & pen- 
fent qu’il ne faut que parler des grandeurs de la Foy 
pour les rendre adorables: d’autres defefperent quafi 
du falut de ces pauure barbares, voyant qu’ils font fi 
efloignez des fentimens non feulement de la Foy, 
mais mefme de la raifon, Ie prierois volontiers les 
premiers de fonger qu’il n’y a point de pays fur la 
terre qui fe foit fi toft conuerty. Si des peuples ciui- 
lifez ont ef{té des fiecles [187] entiers 4 recognoiftre 
IEsvs CHRIST, peut-on raifonnablemét exiger vne 
plus prompte obeiffance des peuples qui font nez dans © 
la barbarie? S’ils les confideroient de pres, ils pren- 
droient pour vn vray miracle que mefme vn feul euft 
efté conuerty: car il femble que ny 1’Euangile, ny 
1’Efcriture faincte n’ayent efté compofez pour eux. 
Non feulement les mots leur manquent pour expri- 
mer la faincteté de nos myfteres, mais mefme les 
paraboles & les difcours plus familiers de Iefus-Chrift 
leur font inexplicables: ils ne fgauent ce que c’eft 
que fel, leuain, chafteau, perle, prifon, grain de 
moutarde, tonneaux de vin, lampe, chandelier, flam- 
beau: ils n’ont aucune idée des Royaumes, des Roys, 
& de leur majefté: non pas mefme de paitteurs, de 
troupeaux & de bergerie: en vn mot l’ignorance 
qu’ils ont des chofes de la terre femble leur fermer 
le chemin du ciel. Les motifs de credibilité pris de 
laccompliffement des propheties, des miracles, des 
Martyrs, des Conciles, des faincts Docteurs, des 
hiftoires tant facrées que profanes, de la faincteté de 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 71 


for us merely to sow it with fidelity, and await 
heaven’s moments. Many who only see our Hurons 
fifteen hundred leagues from here are impatient that 
they are not already all converted, and think that one 
must simply speak of the grandeur of the Faith in 
order to render it adorable; others almost despair of 
- the salvation of these poor barbarians,—seeing that 
they are so removed from the sentiments not only of 
the Faith, but even of reason. I would earnestly 
entreat the former to reflect that there is no country 
on earth which has been converted so soon. If civi- 
lized peoples have been whole centuries [187] in 
acknowledging JESUS CHRIST, can one reasonably 
demand a readier obedience from the peoples who 
have been born in barbarism? If they considered 
them closely, they would accept for a real miracle 
the fact that even a single one had been converted; 
for it seems that neither the Gospel nor holy Scrip- 
ture has been composed for them. Not only do words 
fail them to express the sanctity of our mysteries, 
but even the parables and the more familiar discourses 
of Jesus Christ are inexplicable tothem. They know 
not what is salt, leaven, stronghold, pearl, prison, 
mustard seed, casks of wine, lamp, candlestick, torch; 
they have no idea of Kingdoms, Kings, and their 
majesty; not even of shepherds, flocks, and a sheep- 
fold,—in a word, their ignorance of the things of the 
earth seems to close for them the way to heaven. 
The grounds for credence, taken from the fulfill- 
ment of the prophecies; from miracles, Martyrs, 
Councils, holy Doctors, histories both sacred and 
profane; from the holiness of [188] the Church, and 
from the external’ splendor which renders it vener- 
able to the greatest Monarchs of the world,—all that 


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


[188] l’Eglife, & de l’éclat exterieur qui la rend vene- 
rable aux plus grands Monarques du monde; tout 
cela n’a point icy de lieu: par ot la Foy peut-elle 
entrer dans leur ef{prit? 

Mais toutefois ce feroit impieté de defefperer du 
falut de ces peuples, le fang de Iefus-Chrift a efté 
refpandu pour eux: la main de Dieu n’eft pas racour- 
cie; fi des pierres il en peut fufciter des enfans 
d’ Abraham, s’il peut rendre les {teriles fecondes, pour- 
quoy ne pourra-il pas tirer de ces deferts, & du pro- 
fond de cette barbarie des hommes qu’il formera felon 
fon coeur, & qu'il placera parmy les Choeurs des 
Anges? Ce qu’on a veu dans les autres contrées du 
monde, ce que nous mefmes nous voyons icy de nos 
yeux doit animer nos efperances, & faire que nous 
prenions des fentimens dignes de la bonté de Dieu. 

Il eft vray que la plufpart de ces pauures barbares 
s’endurciffent dans leurs pechez, & fe rendent de 
iour en iour plus indignes des graces de Dieu; il eft 
vray qu'ils fe mutinent 4 toute occafion contre la main 
du medecin gui veut guerir leur [189] mal, nous pre- 
nant pour la caufe de toutes leurs miferes, & s’exci- 
tant les vns les autres A nous faire mourir; il eft fans 
doute que toutes les raifons humaines nous font pa- 
roi{tre de plus en plus de nouuelles difficultez en cét 
ouurage: mais c’eft de cela mefme que nous tirons 
nos plus puiffans motifs pour efperer contre toute 
efperance, auffi bien que faifoit Abraham. Nous 
recognoiffons euidemment que c’eft Dieu qui conduit 
nos affaires, & pas vn ne le peut nier qui ouurira les 
yeux [aux] chofes que nous voyons iournellement. 
Ces barbares defiroient quafi tous noftre mort, auffi 
paffionnément qu’ils fouhaittent la conferuation de 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 73 


has no place here; where can the Faith enter their 
minds? 

But, nevertheless, it would be impiety to despair 
of the salvation of these peoples,— the blood of Jesus 
Christ has been shed for them; the hand of God is 
not shortened. If from stones he can raise up 
children to Abraham, if he can render the barren 
fruitful, why will he not be able to draw from these 
deserts, and from the depth of this barbarism men 
whom he will train according to his heart, and whom 
he will place among the Choirs of Angels? What 
has been seen in the other regions of the world, what 
we ourselves see here with our own eyes, should 
animate our hopes, and cause us to entertain senti- 
ments worthy of the goodness of God. 

It is true that most of these poor barbarians grow 
hardened in their sins, and become from day to day 
more unworthy of God’s graces; it is true that they 
rebel, on every occasion, against the hand of the 
physician who wishes to cure their [189] disease,— 
taking us to be the cause of all their miseries, and urg- 
ing one another to make us die. It is beyond doubt 
that all human reasons more and more disclose to us 
new difficulties in this work: but from that very thing 
we derive our most powerful motives for hoping 
against all hope, as well as did Abraham. We mani- 
festly discern that it is God who guides our affairs, 
and not one can deny this who will open his eyes to 
things which we see daily. These barbarians near- 
ly all desired our death as passionately as they 
craved the preservation of their own lives; in their 
speeches they talked of nothing but slaughtering 
us,—that was an ordinary theme of their councils; 
nothing in the world is so easy to them, and even 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


leur vie; ils ne parloient dans leurs difcours que de 
nous maffacrer, c’eftoit vn fujet ordinaire de leurs 
confeils: rien au monde ne leur eft fi facile, & mefme 
ils euffent pfi le faire fans que deuant les hommes on 
leur euft imputé ce crime. Nous ne viuons que de 
ce qu’eux mefmes nous vendent & nous viennent 
apporter en noftre maifon: qui les a contraint de le 
faire? Ils ont l’vfage du poifon; ne pourroient-ils 
pas [190] chaque iour en mefler dans ce qu’ils nous 
apportent? Ils fe tuent affez fouuent les vns les 
autres, & ces meurtres s’imputent aux ennemis, qui 
tout le long de l’efté & de l’automne font aux 
embufches fur les chemins; qui les retient de nous 
maffacrer durant ces temps, que nous courons de 
bourg en bourg fans armes ny defenfe, quelquefois 
feuls, & au plus deux de compagnie? N’eft-ce pas 
Dieu qui leur ferme les yeux? n’eft-ce pas luy qui 
nous protege, & qui veut que nous ne doutions pas 
du foin qu’il a de nous; & que luy feul eft noftre 
fortereffe, nos canons, nos armées, noftre pouruoy- 
eur, no{tre tout. Nous voyons qu’il prend fon temps 
& fes momens 4 l’heure mefme qu’il le faut: il nous 
donne l’accez aupres de ceux qu'il veut tirer a foy, 
quoy que la terre & l’enfer s’y oppofe, & cela fe fait 
auec tant de fuauité & d’efficace, qu'il eft aifé de 
iuger que c’e{t vn coup de cette main qui touche for- 
tement d’vne extremité a vne autre, & va difpofant 
de tout auec douceur. 

Lors que la maladie rauageoit ce pays, nos ouuriers 
Euangeliques iouyffoient [191] d’vne fanté plus 
robui{te que iamais en leur vie ils n’auoient eu: la 
maladie ayant ceffé, & par confequent la neceffité 
n’ef{tant plus de courir de bourgade en bourgade pour 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 75 


they might have done it without having had this 
crime imputed to them before men. We live only 
on what they themselves sell us, and come to bring 
us in our house: who has constrained them to do 
this? They have the use of poison; could they not 
[190] each day mix some in what they bring us? 
They kill one another quite frequently, and these 
murders are imputed to the enemies, who through- 
out the summer and autumn are in ambushes along 
the roads; who restrains them from slaughtering us 
during those times when we journey from village to 
village,— without arms or defense, sometimes alone, 
and, at most, two together? Is it not God, who 
shuts their eyes? is it not he who protects us, and 
who wills that we shall not doubt the care that he 
has for us; and that he alone is our fortress, our can- 
nons, our armies, our purveyor, our all? We see 
that he takes his opportunity and his moments at 
the very hour when there is need of it; he gives us 
access to those whom he wishes to draw to himself, 
though earth and hell oppose; and that is done with 
so much ease and effectiveness that it is easy to 
judge that this is an act of that hand which strongly 
influences from one extremity to the other, and 
continues to arrange everything quietly. 

While the disease was ravaging this country, our 
Evangelistic workers enjoyed [191] a more robust 
health than they had ever had in their lives; the 
disease having ceased,—and consequently there 
being no longer necessity to hasten from village to 
village, in order to succor those poor infidels at the 
hour of death,— we saw ourselves caught by the legs, 
and attacked by the land disease [scurvy]. Did not 
that adorable providence thus ordain? In a word, we 


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


fecourir ces pauures infideles 4 l’heure de la mort, 
nous nous fommes veus arreftez par les jambes, & 
attaquez du maldeterre. N’eft-ce pas cette adorable 
prouidence qui en a ordonné de la forte? Envn mot 
nous ne fommes que les inftrumens de ce bras tout- 
puiffant, c’eft Dieu qui eft le maiftre, fes deffeins ne 
demeurent iamais imparfaits: puis donc que iufques 
icy les commencemens font de luy, ne deuons nous 
pas efperer qu’il accomplira fon ouurage. Et ainfi 
que les Hurons confpirent noftre mort, que les moyens 
humains nous manquent pour fouftenir icy nos vies, 
que les ennemis de ces peuples f’accroiffent comme 
ils font toutes les années, leur coupent le chemin 
qu’ils tiennent pour defcendre 4 Kébec, & en ce fai- 
fant nous priuent du peu de fecours que nous tirons 
de 14. Que tout l’enfer & les demons fe foufleuent 
contre la Foy & contre ceux qui la publient, nos con- 
fiances & nos [192] penfées de paffer plus auant n’en 
diminueront pas d’vyn poinct, puis qu’elles ont pour 
appuy la Croix de Iefus-Chrift, qui doit en fin fub- 
iuguer tout le monde, & fe faire adorer des Anges, 
des hommes & des enfers. 


Depuis la Relation, voicy vne lettre venué des 
Hurons, addreffée au R.P. Vimont, qui merite de 
faire partie de ce prefent narré. 


M* REUEREND PERE, 
Pax Chrifit. 

Il femble que les derniers canots qui doiuent def- 
cendre n’attendent 4 partir que pour nous donner 
moyen de faire fcauoir 4 V. R. vne nouuelle qui ie 
m’affeure la furprendra autant qu'elle nous a furpris: 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 77 


are but the instruments of that almighty arm; God 
is the master; his designs never remain unperfected. 
Since, then, hitherto the beginnings are from him, 
should we not hope that he will complete his work? 
And thus, while the Hurons conspire for our death; 
while human means fail us to maintain our lives 
here; while the enemies of these peoples increase as 
they do, every year; while they cut off for them the 
way, which they hold, for going down to Kébec, and 
by so doing deprive us of the little aid which we 
derive thence; while all hell and the demons rise up 
against the Faith and against those who announce 
it; our confidence, and our [192] thoughts of passing 
on beyond, will not diminish by one jot, since they 
have for support the Cross of Jesus Christ, who must 
finally subjugate all the world, and be adored by 
Angels, men, and the regions of hell. 


Since the Relation, here follows a letter which has 
come from the Hurons, addressed to Reverend Fa- 
ther Vimont; which deserves to go with the present 
narrative. 


M* REVEREND FATHER, 
Pax Christt. 

It seems that the last canoes which are to go down 
are waiting to start, only to give us means of acquaint- 
ing Your Reverence with a piece of news which I 
am sure will surprise you as much as it has surprised 
us,—and will cause you to put in the number of the 
profound secrets and of the adorable dispensations 
of the divine providence, that which we cannot 
consider without astonishment. 

I was preparing to write to Your Reverence for 


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


& luy fera mettre au nombre des fecrets profonds & 
des difpofitions adorables de la diuine prouidence, ce 
que nous ne pouuons confiderer fans eftonnement. 

Ie me difpofois & efcrire 4 V. R. pour la derniere 
fois de cette prefente année, [191 i.e., 193] par la 
voye de Iofeph Chihouatenhoua noftre bon Chreftien, 
& voila que le mefme papier dont il deuoit eftre le 
porteur, eft employé pour porter a V. R. la nouuelle 
de fa mort. 

Hier fur le foir, deuxiefme du courant, lors qu'il 
trauailloit en fon champ a couper quelques arbres, 
deux Hiroquois, ennemis des Hurons fortirent du 
bois prochain ou ils fe tenoient en embufche, & s’e- 
{tans ruez deffus luy, le percerent d’vne longue efpée, 
puis l’ayat abbattu de deux coups de hache fe retire- 
rent promptement a la fuite, apres luy auoir enleué 
fa cheuelure felon leur couftume, pour l’emporter en 
triomphe dans leur pays. Comme on vit en fa mai- 
fon qu’il tardoit 4 reuenir, on fe douta de ce qui eftoit 
arriué; & en effect ayant efté pour le chercher, on 
trouua au lieu mefme fon cadaure eftendu roide mort, 
& enfeuely dansfonfang. Il yadel’apparence qu’ils 
ne l’eurent pas fans refiftance, & les anciens du bourg 
apres la vifite du lieu, ont iugé par le foulement de 
la place & le p[ijetillement du bled, qu’il auoit rendu 
du combat, & [192 i.e., 194] que les ennemis n’en 
fuffent venus 4 bout s’ils n’euffent eu vne longue 
e{pée dont ils l’atteignirent. Sans doute que cette 
mort, quoy que fubite 4 ce bon & excellent Chretftien, 
ne le prit pas 4 l’impourueu: car outre qu’il eftoit 
continuellement en la grace de Dieu, comme affeu- 
rent ceux qui ont eu foin de fon ame, & entendu fes 
confeffions, qui d’vn cofté {’eftonnoient des lumieres 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 79 


the last time in this current year, [191 i.e., 193] by 
the hand of Joseph Chihouatenhoua, our good Chris- 
tian; and now the same paper of which he should . 
have been the bearer is used to carry to Your Rever- 
ence the news of his death. 

Yesterday, toward evening, the second of this 
month, while he was working in his field to cut down 
some trees, two Hiroquois, enemies of the Hurons, 
issued from the neighboring wood, where they lay in 
ambush, and having rushed upon him, pierced him 
with a long javelin. Then, having felled him with 
_two blows of a hatchet, they promptly retreated in 
flight, after having removed his scalp according to 
their custom, in order to carry it away in triumph to 
their country. When it was seen, in his house, that 
he was late in coming back, they suspected what had 
happened; and in fact, having gone to look for him 
they found at the very place his body outstretched, 
stone-dead, and covered with his blood. There are 
indications that they did not take him without re- 
sistance; and the eldersof the village, after visiting 
the place, have inferred by the marks of feet round 
about, and from the trampling of the corn, that he 
had shown fight, and [192 i.e., 194] that the enemies 
would not have succeeded if they had not had a long 
javelin with which they reached him. No doubt this 
death, although sudden for this good and excellent 
Christian, did not take him unprepared: for, besides 
the fact that he was continually in the grace of God,— 
as those affirm who had charge of his soul and heard 
his confessions, who on the one hand were astonished 
at the enlightenment which God gave him concern- 
ing his least failings; and on the other hand admired 
the tenderness of his conscience and his fidelity in 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


que Dieu luy donnoit de fes moindres deffauts: & 
d’autre part admiroient la tendreffe de fa confcience, 
& fa fidelité 4 refpondre aux gracesde Dieu. Ce iour 
14 mefme dés le matin il s’eftoit mis 4 deux genoux a 
fon ordinaire au milieu de la cabane, recommendant 
fon ame a Dieu, & s’offrant auec toute fa famille a 
tout ce qu’il plairoit 4 Noftre Seigneur difpofer de 
luy ou des fiens. Sur le midy eftant forty de fa 
cabane auec trois de fes petits niepces pour aller en 
fon champ, il ne fift que les inf{truire par le chemin, 
puis eftant arriué fur le lieu, & y voyant les fruidcts 
de la terre extraordinairement beaux; Mettons nous 
A genoux, dit-il, & remercions Dieu de ces biens qu’il 
nous donne: [193 i.e., 195] c’eft bien le moins que 
nous puiffions faire, puis que fans ceffe il continué 
fes benedictions deffus nous. Apres quils eurent 
prié Dieu il leur fift cueillir quelques citroiiilles, & au 
pluitoft les renuoya toutes trois chargées 4 la maifon, 
leur difant qu’ils n’eftoient pas en lieu affeuré; que 
pour luy il alloit dans les bois coupper quelques 
baftons de Cedre pour acheuer le canot qui le deuoit 
porter 4 Kébec, & qu’au retour il continueroit a tra- 
uailler dans fon champ le refte de la iournée, ce tra- 
uail eftant neceffaire. Mais quoy! c’eftoit 14 mefme 
oti quelques heures apres la mort le deuoit trouuer. 

Dimanche dernier il eftoit venu en noftre maifon, 
efloignée maintenant de la fienne d’enuiron trois 
lieués, auec fa femme & fes deux enfans, pour y faire 
fes deuotions 4 fon ordinaire. Apres s’eftre confeffé 
& communié il auoit fait venir & auoit offert 4 Noftre 
Seigneur les premiers fruicts de ce mefme champ ot 
depuis il a efté tué: & Dieu fans doute accepta dés 
lors & le don & celuy qui faifoit l’offrande, l’ayant 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 81 


responding to the graces of God,—on that very day, 
promptly in the morning, he had knelt as was his 
wont in the middle of the cabin, commending his 
soul to God and offering himself, together with his 
whole family, to whatever it should please Our Lord 
to dispose for him or his. ‘Toward noon, having left 
his cabin with three of his little nieces, to go to his 
field, he did nothing but instruct them by the way; 
then having reached the place, and seeing there the 
fruits of the earth, uncommonly flourishing: ‘‘ Let 
us kneel,” he said, ‘‘ and thank God for these good 
things which he gives us; [193 i.e., 195] it is the 
very least that we can do, since he continues his 
blessings upon us without ceasing.’’ After they had 
prayed to God, he had them gather some squashes; 
and, as soon as possible, he sent them back, all three 
burdened, to the house,— telling them that they were 
not in a secure place; that, as for him, he was going 
into the woods to cut some sticks of Cedar to finish 
the canoe which was to carry him to Kébec; and that 
on his return he would continue to work in his field 
for the rest of the day, this work being necessary. 
But what! there it was, in fact, where death was to 
find him several hours later. 

Last Sunday, he had come to our house,—now 
distant about three leagues from his,— with his wife 
and his two children, in order to offer his devotions 
there as usual. After having confessed and received 
communion, he had sent for and had offered to Our 
Lord the first fruits of that same field in which he 
has since been killed; and God no doubt even then 
accepted both the gift and him who was making the 
offering,— having found him ripe [194 i.e., 196] for 
heaven,— inasmuch as so few days later he has willed 


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


trouué meur [194 i.e., 196] pour le ciel; puis que fi 
peu de iours apres il a voulu le cueillir du parterre 
de fon Eglife militante pour le mettre dans la triom- 
phante. Ceux qui auront leu les Relations prece- 
dentes, & celles de cette année n’auront pas de la 
peine a le croire; Dieu n’auoit pas commence & con- ' 
duit fi auant vn ouurage fi rare pour ne pas continuer 
deffus luy fes mifericordes autant & plus 4 l’heure de 
la mort qu'il n’auoit fait pendant fa vie. Ceux qui 
ont cogneu de plus prés ce bon Chreftien, & qui l’ont 
pratiqué eux mefmes, me rendent tefmoignage qu'il 
auoit vne prefence de Dieu quafi continuelle, qu’il 
agiffoit en tout auec des intentions dignes d’vn coeur 
vrayement Chreftien: & que fi quelquesfois fon efprit 
s’efgaroit le moins du monde hors de la voye des 
Saincts, il fe retrouuoit incontinent, & fe confondoit 
de fes fautes legeres comme d’autant de crimes qu’il 
commettoit dans l’amour de celuy fans lequel il 
n’euft pas voulu refpirer vn moment. Pour moy ie 
puis dire en verité, que i’admirois en luy de iour en 
iour les puiffans effects de la grace qui poffedoit 
entierement [195 i.e., 197] fon coeur, & que ie ne fou- 
haitte point d’autre recompenfe apres cette vie, que 
le lieu ot ie crois afleurément que foit fon ame. 

Il eft vray que nous efperions beaucoup de luy pour 
la conuerfion de ces peuples, dont il s’eftoit rendu 
Apoftre durant le cours de cette année; mais puis 
que les Saincts ont plus de pouuoir lors qu’ils font 
dans le ciel qu’icy bas fur terre, nous deuons croire 
que nous auons plus gaigné que perdu a fa mort. 
Nous verrons en fon temps ce qu’elle produira. 

Puis que le temps me preffe, & que les canots font 
fur le point de partir, ie fuis contraint de rompre icy, 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 83 


to gather him from the garden of his Church militant, 
in order to put him in the one triumphant. Those 
who may have read the preceding Relations and the 
ones for this year will have no difficulty in believing 
this; God had not begun and conducted so far for- 
ward so rare a work not to continue upon him his 
mercies as much and more, at the hour of death, than 
he had done during his life. Those who have been 
most closely acquainted with this good Christian, and 
who have themselves tested him, render me the evi- 
dence that he had an almost continual sense of the 
presence of God, that in everything he acted with 
intentions worthy of a truly Christian heart. They 
say that if, at times, his mind strayed in the least 
from the way of the Saints, he straightway recovered 
himself, and was confounded by his slight faults as 
by so many crimes that he was committing against 
the love of him without whom he would not have 
wished to breathe a moment. As for me, I can say 
in truth that I admired in him from day to day the 
powerful effects of the grace which wholly possessed 
[195 i.e., 197] his heart; and that I desire no other 
recompense after this life than the place in which I 
certainly believe his soul is. 

It is true that we hoped much from him for the 
conversion of these tribes, whose Apostle he had 
made himself during the course of this year; but 
since the Saints have more power when they are 
in heaven than here below on earth, we are bound 
to believe that we have gained more than lost at 
his death. We shall see in due time what it will 
produce. 

Since time presses me, and as the canoes are on 
the point of starting, Iam constrained to stop here, 


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


& n’en pas dire dauantage, quoy qu'il y ait des chofes 
qui n’ayant deu eftre publiée d’vn homme auant fa 
mort, couronnée du bon de perfeuerance, meriteroient 
d’eftre icy adiouftée, pour faire aduoiier a tout le 
monde que Dieu eft admirable dans fes Saincts, 
autant en cette barbarie qu’en autre lieu du monde: 
mais fi elles ne font cogneués en terre elles le feront 
dans le ciel: c’eft 12 ot fans ceffe nous benirons 
[196 i.e., 198] Dieu de fes mifericordes qu'il va exer- 
cant fur cette pauure barbarie, & fur ceux qu'il veut 
yemployer. V.R. continué, s’il luy plaift, par fes 
faincts facrifices & prieres de nous ayder a ne nous 
en pas rendre indignes. 
De V. R. 
Tres-humble & obeiffant feruiteur, felon 
Dieu, HIEROSME LALEMANT. 


Des Hurons, ce 3. 
d’Aouft 1640. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640 85 


and say no more; although there are things which — 
though not proper to publish of a man before his 
death, crowned with the good of perseverance — would 
deserve to be added here, in order to cause all the 
world to admit that God is admirable in his Saints, 
no less in this land of barbarism than in any other 
place in the world. But, if these things are not 
known on earth, they will be in heaven: there we 
shall ceaselessly bless [196 i.e., 198] God for his 
mercies which he continues to exercise over this poor 
barbarous people, and over those whom he wills to 
employ for them. Your Reverence will continue, if 
you please, by your holy sacrifices and prayers to aid 
us to render ourselves not unworthy thereof. 
Your Reverence’s 
Very humble and obedient servant in 
God, HIEROSME LALEMANT. 


From the Hurons, this 3rd 
of August, 1640. 


XLII — XLII 


Two LETTERS OF 1641 


XLIJ.—Lettre du P. Charles Garnier 4 son Frére ; Sainte- 
Marie aux Hurons, 23 juin, 1641 


XLIII.— Excerpta Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad 
Przpositum Generalem; Kebec, August 20, 1641 


SOURCE: Document XLII. is from a contemporary copy 
of the original letter, in French, made by a member of the 
Garnier family, in France. Document XLIII. consists of 
extracts from Brébeuf’s letter in Latin, made from the 
original in 1858, by Father Felix Martin ; this apograph is in 
the archives of St. Mary’s College, Montreal; an indorse- 
ment thereon, by Father Martin, shows that the letter was 
written at Quebec, August 20, 1641. 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 20 


Lettre du P. Charles Garnier a son Frere. 


ON TRES CHER FRERE 
M Notre Sgt. Vous remplisse le Coeur de son 
St. amour 

Jay de 1a Consolation 6 [sc. non] seulement a regeuoir 
de Vos letres mais aussy a vous enuoyer des miennes. 
Cest pour quoy Ce ma eté vne Mortification que vous 
nayez regu celles que Je vous auois ecrites il y a deux 
ans je Croy quelles auront ete perdues dieu soit beni 
de tout j aurois sans doute bien plus de Consolation a 
vous ecrire si j auois a v6 [sc. vous] mander quelque 
Notable auancemt. que jeusse fait ou po [sc. pour] 
ma perfection particuliere ou pour la Conuersion des 
Sauuages Coe [sc. comme] Vous Croyez que jay fait, 
mais patience ma Consolation est que de tout Ce que 
je vO manderay vous entirerez sujet de louer honorer 
et aymer Dieu dauantage. Je suis dans vn employ 
tout diuin Benissez en dieu a jamais et de tout 
votre Coeur son Infinie misericorde me fait mil et mil 
graces po me Conduire a la perfection que requiert 
Cet Employ q© Votre Coeur defaille dans les Elans d’a- 
mour Ge v6 jettez vers Cette souueraine bonté Jesuis 
tres Infidel a Correspondre a Ces graces Innombrables 
fachez v6 Contre moy auec Dauid admirez la patience 
de Dieu et Consolez Vous de Ce g& né auons a faire 
avn si bon Mr., qui ne se lasse point et né appelle a 
soy Il nese rebute point de Nos stupidites Imperti- 
nences et Malices Courage mon tres cher frere si 


eee 


1640-41] GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 89 


Letter from Father Charles Garnier to his Brother. 


Y DEAREST BROTHER,— 
M May Our Lord fill Your Heart with his 
Holy love. 

I feel Consolation not only in receiving Your let- 
ters, but also in sending you my own. Therefore It 
was a Mortification to me that you did not receive 
those that I had written to you two years ago: I Sup- 
pose they may have been lost; God be blessed in 
all. I would, no doubt, have much more Consolation 
in writing to you if I had some Notable progress to 
announce to you that I might have made,—either 
toward my individual perfection, or toward the 
Conversion of the Savages,— As You Think I have 
done. But patience! my Consolation is that from 
Whatever I shall communicate to you, you will de- 
rive reason to praise, honor, and love God the more. 
Iam in an occupation wholly divine: Bless God for 
it forever, and with all your Heart; his Infinite mer- 
cy shows me a thousand, thousand favors to Lead me 
unto the perfection which This Occupation requires. 
Let Your Heart break in the Transports of love that 
you pour forth toward That sovereign goodness. I 
am very Faithless in Responding to These Innumer- 
able favors; be angry At me, with David admire the 
patience of God, and Console Yourself That we have 
to deal with so good a Master, who wearies not, and 
calls us to himself. He is not repelled by Our stu- 
pidities, Impertinences, and Evil actions. Courage, 


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 } 


nous auons passé deux ans Voir six Voir trente a 
faire la sourde Oreille, Croyons et Esperons qe demain 
nous Commencerons a ouvrir l’oreille a Cette Voix si | 
aymable et sipatiente Et pour quoy je Vous prie ne 
le Croyrions n6 pas aynsy ptisque nO voyons et sca- 
uons que le patient Irsus nd appelle encore Mais 
d’un appel amoureux et qui 1l’emportera mais nous ne 
scauons pas quand esperons tousjours que Ce sera au 
plutost 6 je ne Croy pas que né fassions plus grande 
faute au seruice de Dieu que de perdre Courage que 
de laisser a battre nd Coeur par la deffiance et la pusil- 
lanimité tous les autres pechez ne sont rien au prix 
de Celuy la au moins il ny en a point qui empesche 
tant nd [sc. notre] auangemt que Ces bas sentimens 
de la Bonte de Dieu enuers n6, et bien souuent Cest 
par Ce péché que le Diable Ce [sc. Se] saisit de Notre 
Cceur po y faire entrer par apres tous les autres mon 
Cher frere n6 [n’Jeffrayons point pd n’auoir auangé 
ny meme po auoir reculé il ny a presque point d’ame 
a qui Cela n’arriue quelque fois mais Courons aux 
desseins que Dieu a detirer sa Gloire de Ces Infideli- 
tez Vos souffrances et Incommoditez purgeront v6 [sc. 
votre] Coeur Esperez le ainsy quoy quil Vous sem- 
ble que V6 les preniez bien mal Je prie dieu qu’il 
no face la grace de trouuer par tout la paix de Votre 
Coeur Je Croy que vé deuez auoir de la Consolation 
a lire les autresde Mr. de Salles Je ne scay si vous 
auez veu vn Certain petit liure Intitulé.... 
, a Ee es Res Cest Vn petit tresor de Consolation 
que Ce Petit liure mais la source de toutte douceur 
et tout le soutien de Nos Coeur Cest JEsvs au st. 
sacremt. et ne dittes point G¢ Vous ne s auouerez point 
Ce pain de Vie tenez seulemt. bon a v6 entretenir 


es - 


1640-41] GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 91 


my dearest brother; if we have spent two years— 
Even six, Even thirty —in turning a deaf Ear, let us 
Believe and Hope that to-morrow we shall Begin to 
open our ears to This Voice, so gracious and so 
patient. And why, I beg You, should we not thus 
Believe, since we see and know that the patient JESUS 
still calls us? But with a loving call, and one which 
will gain the day, only we know not when; let us hope, 
at all events, that It will be as soon as possible. Oh, 
I do not Believe that we can commit a greater fault 
in the service of God, than to lose Courage, and to 
allow our Hearts to be cast down by distrust and 
-pusillanimity. All the other sins are nothing in 
comparison with That one,—at least, there is none 
which so much impedes our progress as These low 
opinions of the Goodness of God toward us; and very 
often It is by That sin that the Devil seizes Our 
Hearts in order to let into them afterward all the 
others. My Dear brother, let us not be alarmed for 
not having advanced nor even for having receded; 
there is hardly any soul to which That does not 
sometimes happen. But let us Hasten to the pur- 
poses which God has for deriving his own Glory from 
These Unfaithful acts; Your sufferings and Incon- 
veniences will purge your Heart. Hope this, there- 
fore, although it seem to You that You take them 
very ill. I pray God to grant you the grace to find 
everywhere the peace of Your Heart. I Think that 
you must find Consolation in reading the other 
[works] of Monsieur de Salles. I know not whether 
you have seen a Certain little book Entitled .... 
Meee Peri ee It is A little treasure of Consolation, 
This Little book; but the source of all sweetness, 
and the whole support of Our Hearts is JESUS in the 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20: 


quelque temps apres la St. Messe et a quelques Visites 
du st. sacremt. auec Cet Hoste tout aymable selon 
que Vos occupations Vous le permettent adorons le 
et Embrassons le protestons luy que né sommes a luy 
malgre nd meme, et quil fasse de Nous ce quil luy 
plaira pardonnez moy mon Cher frere prenez que 
Cest a moy seul que je parole en Cette lettre et non 
a vous et ainsy prenez moy po vn fol Caril est vray 
que jextrauague mais priez dieu quil me change et 
alors Comme je Croy je v6 ecriray quelque chose de 
bon tel que je suis je ne laisse pas de prier dieu pd 
v6 et pd notre pauure frere prodigue et je le fais sou- 
uefit Je ne scay si vO atiez re¢cu tous deux l’an passe 
mes letres par lesquelles je vo mandois q¢ Je priois 
N.S. d’auoir pd agreable 1’Intention que j’auois que 
Certain nombre de messes que je dirois au temps de 
Votre mort a tous deux si dauanture v6 partez de- 
uant moy Vous fussent appliquez Helas Ce pauure 
prodigue ne rentrera til point dedans soy prions le 
Pere et la Mere des misericordes d’auoir pitie de luy. 

P6 vo dire quelques nouuelles de Ce pays vO scau- 
rez que no auons eté Cette année treize prestres de 
Notre Compagnie scauoir est les R. P. hierosme Lal- 
lemant N. superieur Le P. Brebeuf le P Lemercier 
Le P. Daniel Le P. Raimbault et le P. Claude Pijart 
qui vinrent l’an passé de Quebec pé Instruire quel- 
ques Nations Algonquinnes et non huronnes qui sont 
en Ces quartiers Cy le P. Jogues Le P Le Moyne Le 
P. du Peron Le P. Chaumonot Le P. Chastelin Le P. 
Pierre Pijart et moy qui nd sommes partages 1’ hiuer 
dernier en six Missions Le P. brebeuf et Le P. Chau- 
monet sont allez ala Nation Neutre nation ou on n’a- 


1640-41] GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 93 


blessed sacrament. And say not that You do not 
relish This bread of Life: deem it only good to con- 
verse for some time after the Holy Mass, and at some 
Visits to the blessed sacrament, with This wholly 
gracious Host, according as Your occupations allow 
You this. Let us adore and Embrace him; let us 
protest to him that we are his in spite of ourselves, 
and let him do with Us what he shall please. Par- 
don me, my Dear brother,— assume that It is myself 
alone to whom I speak in This letter, and not to you, 
and thus take me for a lunatic; For it is true that 
I rave; but pray to God to change me, and then, As 
I Believe, I shall write to you something good. Such 
as I am, I do not fail to entreat God for you, and for 
our poor prodigal brother; and I do so often. I 
know not whether you both received my letters last 
year, by which I informed you that I was entreating 
Our Lord to accept the Intention which I had, that a 
Certain number of masses that I would say at the 
time of Your death,—in case of you both, if per- 
chance you depart before me,— should be applied to 
You. Alas, will This poor prodigal not return to 
himself? Let us pray the Father and the Mother of 
mercies to have pity on him. 

To tell you some news of This country, you shall 
know that we have been thirteen priests of Our So- 
ciety This year: to wit, the Reverend Father hierosme 
Lallemant, Our superior; Father Brebeuf, Father 
Lemercier, Father Daniel; Father Raimbault, and 
Father Claude Pijart, who came from Quebec last 
year to Instruct some Algonquin and non-Huron 
Nations in These quarters; Father Jogues, Father 
Le Moyne, Father du Peron, Father Chaumonot, 
Father Chastelin, Father Pierre Pijart, and myself,— 


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20° 


uoit point encor eté porter 1 Euangile qui est Eloi- 
gnee de Notre Maison de Cinq ou six Journées de 
Chemin dont il en faut coucher 4 dans la Campagne 
Cette nation Comprend enuiron 40 bourgs nos peres 


en ont parcourus enuiron vne douzaine, mais auec 


bien des souffrances et des Calomnies, qui produiront 
quelques j6 [sc. jour] leurs fruits C’est nd Esperance 
Cette Mission a pd Patrons les SS. Anges. le P. 
Daniel et le P. le Moyne ont Continué la mission 
qu’ils auoient Commencé l’an passe aux Arendaen- 
hronon et de plus ont pris charge du bourg de St. 


Joseph ou ils ont entretenus quelques bons chrestiens. 


quy y sont Le RP. lalemant auec le P. LeMercier 
on[t] pris pd partage la mission de la Conception qui 
tire son nom du bourg de la Conception que les sau- 
uages appelle Ossossané ou nd auons eu autre fois 
vne Cabanne et maintenant ny auons plus q’une 


petitte chapelle ou nd assemblons quelques bons. 


chrestiens que n6 auons dans Ce bourg. Cesta leur 
Instruction que s’est occupé Cette hyuer Le R. P. 
Lallement auec Le P. Le Moine auec bien de la Con- 
solaon. Vous auez appris par la Rellation que l’an. 


passé le bon Joseph Chiohoarehra qui a eté Notre 


premier et notre bon Chrestien demeurant en Ce 
bourg fut tué 1’Esté passé par les Ennemis dans son 


Champ Cestoit dans Ce Chrestien que n6 ations notre: 


Esperance apres Dieu et si nous n’auions 1’ Experi- 
ence de la prouidence particuliere dont dieu nd Con- 
duit icy nd eussions pensé que l’Eglise naissante de 
Cette pauure barbarie, alloit etre estoufé par la mort 
de son fils ainé mais dieu nous Conduit icy par la 
Voye aymable du depouillemt. des Creatures et Il veut 
que notre apuy soit en luy seul. I] a donc suscité le 


1640-41] GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 95 


who distributed ourselves last winter among six Mis- 
sions. Father brebeuf and Father Chaumonet went 
to the Neutral Nation,— where we had not yet been 
to carry the Gospel,—which is Five or six Days’ 
Journey Distant from Our House; on 4 of which 
one must sleep in the Field. This nation Includes 
about 40 villages; our fathers have made the round 
of about a dozen of these, but with many sufferings 
and Calumnies, which will some day produce their 
fruits,—such is our Hope. This Mission has for 
Patrons the Holy Angels. Father Daniel and Father 
le Moyne have Continued the mission which they 
had Begun last year among the Arendaenhronon, 
and have furthermore taken charge of the village of 
St. Joseph, where they have sustained some good 
Christians who are there. The Reverend Father 
lalemant and Father Le Mercier have taken for their 
portion the mission of la Conception, which takes its 
name from the village of la Conception, which the 
savages call Ossossanié, where we formerly had a 
Cabin; now we have there only a little chapel, where 
we assemble some good Christians that we have in 
That village. It is in their Instruction that The 
Reverend Father Lallement has been occupied This 
winter, with Father Le Moine, to their great Con- 
solation. You have learned by the Relation that 
last year the good Joseph Chiohoarehra, who was 
Our first and our good Christian, dwelling in This 
village, was killed the past Summer by the Enemies, 
in his own Field. It was in This Christian that we 
had our Hope, after God; and if we had not Experi- 
ence of the special providence with which God Guides 
us here, we might have thought that the incipient 
Church of This poor barbarian land was about to be 


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


frere de ce ch. Chrestien qu'il nd a esté pd prendre 
sa place et se faire bon Chrestien; toutte leur famille 
no donne bien de la Consolaon Cest au bout de leur 
Cabanne que n6 auons fait vne petitte chapelle ou n6 
allons de temps en temps leur dire la messe. 

Le P. Jogues et Le P. du Peron ont eu pé partage 
la mission de Ste. Marie qui Comprend 5 bourgs dicy 
alentour, ou ils ont travaille auec bien de la peine et 
de la patience. Le P. Raimbaut et le P. Pierre Pi- 
jart demeurant a la maison alloient tous les jours 
Voir les nipissiriniens Cest une nation Algonquine 
qui etoit Venu passer l’hiuer en Ce pays a Cent pas 
de Notre Maison. ils y alloient pour apprendre leur 
langue et leur donner 1 Instruction quils pouuoient 
en Ce Commencemt destude qu’ils font de leur 
langue ils leur ont apprise a chanter quelques belles 
prieres, que les bonnes gens ont appris fort Volon- 
tiers quelquns d’entre eux tesmoignent auoir quel- 
ques dispositions a la foy, les deux Peres s’en sont 
allez auec eux en leur pays quy est a Cing Journees 
d’icy ou y passerent leté a les Instruire Le P. Pierre 
Pijart et Moy auons eté enuoyés a la mission des 
Apostres Cest a La Nation du Petun ou jauois desja 
passé l’hyuer precedent nous y auons eté fort mal 
recus la rere, année la seconde nous y auons ete vus 
d’assez bon ceil dieu mercy nous en trouuons qui nd 
ecoutent. la patience et la perseuerence 1’emporte- 
ront Dieu aydant il est vray que Ces Missions sont 
remplies de Croix et dans la difficulté des Chemins 
pendant l’hyuer et po le viure le vestir le logemt. la 
fumée &c mais la principalle peine Cest la Captiuite 
dans laquelle on est pd faire ses prieres et prendre 
un peu de repos hors le tracas, outre la priuation de 


1640-41] GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 97 


smothered by the death of her eldest son; but God 
Guides us here through the gracious Way of depriv- 
ing us of Creatures, and He desires that our support 
be in him alone. He has therefore raised up the 
brother of this dear Christian,—as he was to us,—to 
take his place, and become a good Christian; their 
whole family gives us much Consolation. In the end 
of their Cabin we have made a little chapel, whither 
we go from time to time to say mass for them. 
Father Jogues and Father du Peron have had for 
their portion the mission of Ste. Marie, which 
Comprises 5 villages hereabout, where they have 
labored with much difficulty and patience. Father 
Raimbaut and Father Pierre Pijart, remaining at the 
house, went every day to See the nipissiriniens — 
This is an Algonquin nation which had Come to 
spend the winter in This country, a Hundred paces 
from Our House. They went thither to learn their 
language, and give them what Instruction they could 
at This Beginning of their own study of their lan- 
guage; they have taught them to chant some excel- 
lent prayers, which the good people have learned 
very Willingly. Some among them bear witness of 
having some inclination for the faith; the two 
Fathers have gone with them to their own country, 
which is Five Days’ Journey from here, where they 
spent the summer in Instructing them. Father 
Pierre Pijart and I have been sent to the mission of 
the Apostles; This is in The Tobacco Nation, 
where I had already spent the preceding winter. We 
were received very ill there the ist year; in the sec- 
ond, we have been regarded in a tolerably favorable 
manner; thank God, we find some who listen to us. 
Patience and perseverance will win the day, God 


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


la messe quon ne dit point ou fortraremt. nd auons 
pensé mourir deux fois dans les chemins vne fois Ce 
fut sur Vn lac glacé ou le soir meme que né6 l’atons 
passe deux sauuages moururent de froid O Mon 
cher frere priez pour n6 qu’il nd Conserue et fortifie 
le Courage quil nd donne né en auons bien besoin 
nd auons par sa Bonte anoncé son nom cet hyuer a 
quinze mil sauuages et il y en a eu fort peu de Con- 
uertis on en a batisé en tout enuiron vne Centaine 
presque tous dans la Maladie mais Cependant no voy- 
ons le progrez qui se fait nd sommes assurez que 
dieu est auc nd nd le voyons Clairemt. mais il nous 
Conduit pas a pas il nd a donne beaucoup de benedic- 
tions sur nd Maison ou nous sommes trente francoise. 
il y a de la Consolation auoir nos domestiques secu- 
liers d’habit mais religieux de Coeur sa prouidence 
no paroist bien particuliere a n6 faire trouuer Ce qui 
no est necessaire po la viure le jt. de St. Joseph notre 
bon patron né visme dans notre maison notre proui- 
sion de Bled pd vn An esperons esperons mon cher 
frere que Ces benedictions seront suiuies de la grande 
benediction que né attendons sur Ces terres maudites 
priez pd nd et priez tous Ceux quy ayment J.C. de 
l’Interesser dans l’affaire qu’il nd amise entre leur 
mains nd remercions entre autres bien particulieremt. 
le R P. Prosper de Sa charité nd le prions de Conti- 
nuer, nos PP. m’ont promis de prier pour vo Comme 
vous les en priez je vO remergie du memoir que vO 
maués enuoyé des remedes les plus faciles vous ne 
Croyez pas qui ne laisent pas de né etre difficiles po 
la plus part dans la disette de Ce pays neamoins je 
v6 en remercie d’aussy bon Coeur que si no les 
pouuions pratiquer mais je vous prie de m’enuoyer 


1640-41] GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 99 


helping. It is true that These Missions are filled’ 
with Crosses,— both in the difficulty of the Roads 
during the winter, and as regards food, clothing, 
lodging, the smoke, etc.; but the chief trouble is the 
Bondage that one is in with reference to saying one’s 
prayers and taking a little rest away from the bustle, 
besides the privation of mass, which is said not at 
all, or very seldom. We have twice come near 
dying in the roads: once It was on A frozen lake, 
where two savages died from cold on the very even- 
ing when we passed. O My dear brother, pray for 
us that he may Preserve us and strengthen the Cour- 
age which he gives us; we have much need of it. 
We have, through his Goodness, announced his name 
this winter to fifteen thousand savages, and there 
have been very few Converted; we have baptized in 
all about a Hundred,— nearly all during the Disease. 
But Yet we see the progress which is being made; 
we are assured that God is with us,— we see it Clear- 
ly,— but he Guides us step by step. He has given 
us many blessings upon our House in which we 
have been thirty Frenchmen: there is Comfort in 
having our domestics,—laymen in dress but reli- 
gious in Heart. His providence appears to us very 
special in causing us to find What is necessary to us 
for living; on the day of St. Joseph, our good 
patron, we saw in our house our provision of Corn 
fora Year. Let us hope, let us hope, my dear broth- 
er, that These blessings will be followed by the great 
blessing which we expect upon These accursed lands. 
Pray for us, and entreat all Those who love Jesus 
Christ, to Interest him in the matter which he has 
placed for us in their hands; among others, we very 
especially thank the Reverend Father Prosper for 


tay STA Ole SUNGR i 
ao | sf 12) a ea > vs 
* ry aA |i i : 
re heres Ce PA ae . Tr. 
, i Vi esa a 


100 = LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


quelques graines medicinales Céme les purges, et _ 
quelques autres semblables si vé en Cultiuez les 
plantes chez vous et me mendez la Culture et usage 
je termine ora pro me sine fine quisuis&c mn 
C..Ga 


-de St Marie aux hurons ce 23 
juin 1641. 


1640-41] GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 101 


His charity; we beg him to Continue. Our Fathers 
have promised me to pray for you As you beseech 
themto. Ithank you for the memorandum which you 
have sent me of the easiest remedies: you do not 
Realize that they are nevertheless, for the most part, 
difficult for us, in the dearth of This country; how- 
beit, I thank you for them with just as good a Heart 
as if we could employ them. But I beg you to send 
me some medicinal seeds, As the purgatives, and 
some other like sorts; if you Cultivate the plants at 
home, please inform me of their Cultivation and 
use. I close: ora pro me sine fine, who am, etc. 


C. G. 


From Ste. Marie, of the hurons, this 23rd 
of June, 1641. 


102 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


Excerpta Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad 
Reverendissimum Patrem Mutium Vitel- 
leschi, Preepositum Generalem 
Societatis Jesu, Rome. 


UOAD nostros qui apud hurones degunt magna 
pax et unio inter eos viget. . . . Dis- 
ciplina religiosa non solum ut in magnis 

collegiis profecto observatur, augetur q. in dies regu- 
larum omnium exacta custodia. 

Nostri etiam domestici omnes ad perfectionem pro 
viribus contendunt, maxime vero qui se socios dede- 
runt. Caterum quod ad id genus houm omnino 
hisce in regionibus non solum utile sed necessari- 
NE. ie ak 
habemus apud hurones ecclesiam 60 circiter capiti- 
bus constantem et quorum virtute et fervore magnam 
consolationem accipimus. crescit autem paulatim | 
numerus, et perget, ut speramus, in dies si modo | 
constantes fuerimus. 

Preeterea major quotidie campus sese aperit in quo 
excurrat nostrorum zelus et industria. Duas hoc 
anno de novo instituimus missiones unam ad eos 
Algonquinos quos Nipissirini nominamus quorum 
ingenia satis . . . videntur: alteram ad eam 
nationem quam Neutram vocamus in qua magna est 


1640-41] BREBEUF TO THE GENERAL 103 


Extracts from a Letter of Father Jean de Brébeuf 
to the Very Reverend Father Mutius Vi- 
telleschi, General of the Society 
of Jesus, at Rome. 


ONCERNING ours who live with the Hu- 

(& Tons, great peace and union prevails among 

them. . . . Religious discipline is not 

only observed, in fact, as in the great colleges,— but 

the punctual observance of all the rules is also 
increased from day to day. 

Indeed all of our household strive toward perfec- 
tion according to their powers,— chiefly, of course, 
those who have given themselves to be associates 
[Fr. donnés]. For the rest, as for this class of men, 
who in these regions are certainly not only useful, 
but necessary ; 

We have among the Hurons a church consisting 
of about 60 members, whose virtue and fervor give 
us great consolation. Moreover, the number increases 
little by little, and will continue, as we hope, from 
day to day,—if only we are steadfast. 

Besides, a greater field opens daily, wherein the 
zeal and activity of ours may exercise itself. We 
have established two new missions this year,— one 
among those Algonquins whom we name Nipissirini, 
whose native qualities seem sufficiently ; 
the other, in that nation which we call Neutral, in 
which there is a great harvest: for there are in it 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


messis sunt enim in ea fere 40 pagi frequentibus in- 
colis referti. Postrema autem hzc missio P. Calmo- 
noto mihiq. obtigit. Quinque menses in ea degimus 
et sane multa passi sumus, a paucis quidem bene au- 


diti, a pluribus vero moleste, et calumniis et injuriis 


affecti, sed tamen digressi a primoribus ad reditum 
invitati. Egregiam ut spero Xo navabit operam P. 
Calmonotus in has regiones magnos enim jam fecit 
progressus in lingua hujus gentis non parum diversa ab 
lingua huronica. Virest omninoegregius. . . . 


1640-41] BREBEUF TO THE GENERAL 105 


almost 40 villages, filled with many inhabitants. 
Now this last mission fell to the portion of Father 
Calmonotus [Fr. Chaumonot] and me. We spent 
five months therein, and in truth we suffered much. 
Few, indeed, lent us a willing ear; many vexed, 
calumniated, and wronged us; yet, when we left 
them, we were invited by the principal men to return. 
Father Calmonotus will, I hope, render distinguished 
service to Christ in these regions: for he has already 
made great progress in the language of this people,— 
_ not a little different from the Huron language. He 
is altogether a superior man. 


XLIV 


RELATION OF 1640-41 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1642 


SOURCE: Title-page and text reprinted from a copy of the 
original Cramoisy edition, in the possession of The Burrows 
Brothers Company, Cleveland. 

The document consists of two parts: Part I. (with an 
introduction written in Paris) is by Le Jeune, and the first 
eight chapters thereof are herewith given; Part II. (the 
Huron report) is by Jerome Lalemant, and will be given in 
Volume XXI., together with the remainder of Part I. 


ns ie, 
* Envoy au Ry peri! Prouincial de tele 
~ Compagnie delzsvs, dela = * 
Prouince de France, sees 


< leP. Rakonaceue Tin MO NT ‘de la moje 
ci jaiotaly esi Rh eee she oe 


a Chis SEBASTIEN CRaMotsy 5 Imprimeur or ‘loeate sine 
5 ee sau poate 5; nee a ea es 


Pes 


os | Avec 2 PRIV UL GE oy E Ror JS 


RELATION 


OF WHAT OCCURRED 
IN 


NEW FRANCE, 
IN THE YEARS 1640 AND 1641. 


Sent to the Reverend Father Provincial of 
the Society of JESUS, of the 
Province of France. 


By FATHER BARTHELEMY VIMONT of the same 
Society, Superior of the Residence of Kebec. 


PARIS, 


SeBasTIEN Cramoisy, Printer in ordinary to the 
King, rué St. Jacques, at the Sign of the Storks. 


M,. DC. ALN, 
BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Table des Chapitres contenvs en cette Relation. 


E la Refidence de Noftre Dame de Recouurance 
a Kebec, & du Seminaire des Vrfulines, 


Chapitre I. . page 5 
De la Refidence de Sainé Iofeph, Chap. IT: mnie 3 
Continuation de ce qui s’eft pafsé entre les Sauuages 
de la Refidence de S. Iofeph, Ch. III. 5) ae 
De quelques baptefmes plus fignalés, en la Refidence 
de S. Iofeph, Chap. IV. i 49 
Du baptefme d’vn Huron en la Refi eure [de] s. 
Tofeph, proche Kebec, Chap. V. ; ae 
De l Hofpital, Chap. V1. ; Tahal: & § 
De la Refidence de la Conception, aux Trots Reaper 
Ch. VII. ; 106 


De quelques baptefmes en i Ref eae de la tsa: 
tion, aux Trois Riuteres, Chap. VIII. zzz [i.e., 122] 
De la prife de deux Francois, conduits au pais des 
Hiroquois, & de leur retour aux Trois Riuteres, 
Chap. if)!" : SO 
De la deliurance des prifonniers ice & be pour- 
parler de paix, auec les Hiroquois,Chapit. X. 153 
De la guerre des Hiroquois, Ch. X1. : . 167 
D’vne Mifsion faite a Tadouffac, Chap. XII. | Ee 
Des bonnes efperances, & des obftacles, de la con- 
uerfion des Sauuages, Ch. XIII. , . 202 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 


113 


Table of Chapters contained in this Relation. 


F the Residence of Nostre Dame de Recouvrance 
at Kebec, and the Seminary of the Ursulines, 
Chapter I. . page 

Of the Residence of Saint SF seh ae II. 

Continuation of what occurred among the Savages 
of the Residence of St. Joseph, Ch. III. 

Of some very remarkable baptisms at the Residence 
of St. Joseph, Chap. IV. 

Of the baptism of a Huron at the RA. of St. 
Joseph, near Kebec, Chap. V. 

Of the Hospital, Chap. VI. : 

Of the Residence of la Conception at the T, Pies 
Rivers, Ch. VII. 

Of some baptisms at the Residence of la Conidbtian 


106 


at the Three Rivers, Chap. VIII. = zzz [i.e., 722] 


Of the capture of two Frenchmen, who were taken 
to the country of the Hiroquots, and their return 
to the Three Rivers, Chap. IX. 

Of the deliverance of the French prisoners, and the 
parley concerning peace with the Hutroquors, 
Chapter X. 

Of the war with the Pietsneds, Ch. XI. 

Of a Mission held at Tadoussac, Chap. XII. 

Of the good prospects for the conversion of the 
Savages, and obstacles thereto, Ch. XIII. 


136 


T53 
167 
182 


202 


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Table des Chapitres contenus en la Relation, de 
ce qui s’eft paffé dans le pais des Hurons, de- 
puis le mois de luin de l’année 1640. 
iufques au mois de luin 1641. 


ay Leftat general du Chrifttant/me en ces con- 


trées, Ch. I. ‘ 5 

De la Refidence fixe, & Mission os Sainte 
Marie, Ch. II. ; hs he 

De la Mifsion de la Conception aux Aviigeahawlons: 
ou Nation des Ours, Ch. IIl. . 17 


Des Mifsions de S. lofeph aux Sediavuacainbaahads 
& de S. Lean Paes aux Avrenderonons, 


Ch. IV. ; 33 
De la Mifsion des Apeleveds aux KWnaontaieiaevdiles 

ou Nation du petun, Ch. V. : 39 
De la Mifsion des Anges aux AttiSandarons, ou 

Nation neutre, Ch. VI. : . [46] 


De la Mifsion du Sainét Pad aux Nipif rintens, 
Rs i de : ; ; . [86] 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 115 


Table of Chapters contained in the Relation of 
what occurred in the country of the Hurons, 
from the month of June, in the year 1640, 
to the month of June, 1641. 


EF the general condition of Christianity in these 


countries, Ch. I. ; 5 

Of the permanent Residence and Mission of 
Sainte Marie, Ch. II. . 12 

Of the Mission of la Conception, to the Attiona: 
wantans, or Nation of the Bear, Ch. III. at £7 


Of the Missions of St. Joseph to the A ttingueenongna- 
hak, and of St. Jean Baptiste to the Aren- 


deronons, Ch. IV... 33 
Of the Mission of the Apostles to the Fy yd te 

nons, or tobacco Nation, Ch. V. ; 39 
Of the Mission of the Angels to the A cidinaarres: 

or neutral Nation, Ch. VI. . . [46] 
Of the Mission of the Holy Ghost to the Nipisivi. 

ntens, Ch. VII. ; t ; . [86] 


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Permiffion d’imprimer. 


de Irsvs, en la Prouince de France, fuiuant le 

Priuilege qui nous a ef{té octroyé par les Roys 
Tres Chreftiens Henry III. le 10. May 1583. Henry 
IV. le 10. Decembre 1605. & Louys XIII. a prefent 
regnant, le 14. Fevrier 1612. par lequel il eft defendu 
4 tous Libraires & Imprimeurs, de n’imprimer aucun 
Liure de ceux qui font compofés par quelqu’vn de 
nof{tre Compagnie, fans permiffion des Superieurs 
d’icelle: Permettons a Sebaftien Cramoify Marchand 
Libraire, & Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, d’imprimer 
la Relation de ce qui s’eft pafsé en la Nouuelle France, és 
annés 1640. & 1641. tant de fois, & en telle forme & 
caractere que bon luy femblera, auec pouuoir auffi 
d’imprimer toutes autres Relations de ladite Nouuelle 
France, qui feront enuoyées de par deca. En foy 
dequoy nous auons figné la prefente: A Paris ce 20. 
Decembre 1641. 


N OUS Iacques Dinet, Prouincial de la Compagnie 


IACQVES DINET. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 117 


Permission to print. 


E, Jacques Dinet, Provincial of the Society of 
\W JEsuS, in the Province of France, pursuant to 
the Privilege which has been granted to us 
by the Most Christian Kings, Henry III., May 10, 
1583; Henry IV., December 10, 1605; and Louys 
XIII., now reigning, February 14, 1612, by which 
all Booksellers and Printers are forbidden to print 
any of those Books which are composed by any one 
of our Society, without permission from the Supe- 
riors of the same,— permit Sebastien Cramoisy, 
Bookseller, and Printer in ordinary to the King, to 
print the Relation de ce qui s'est passé en la Nouvelle 
France, és annés 1640. et 1641., aS many times, and 
in such form and type as shall seem good to him; 
with power also to print all other Relations of the 
said New France, which shall be sent therefrom. 
In testimony of which we have signed the present: 
At Paris, this 20th of December, 1641. 
JACQUES DINET. 


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


[1] Relation de ce qvi s’eft paffé en la Nouuelle 
France, és années 1640. & 1641. 


ON R. PERE, 

M Ie fais quafi comme celuy, qui ayant efcrit 

fes lettres, en eftoit luy-mefme le porteur: 
Tay tracé en la Nouuelle France les Chapitres fui- 
uans, & ie les viens moy-mefme prefenter 4 V.R. 
La flotte qui a fait trauerfer 1’Ocean 4 ce peu de 
lignes, nous a embarqués trois de noftre Compagnie, 
le Pere Nicolas Adam, que la charité de V. R. a r’ap- 
pellé pour fes infirmités; le Pere Claude [2] Quentin, 
qu’elle a auffi mandé pour trauailler aux affaires de 
la Miffion: Et moy qui parois fans eftre attendu, 
mais non pas fans ef{tre enuoyé. Monfieur le Cheua- 
lier de Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur, les princi- 
paux Francois de noftre Colonie, le R.P. Vimont 
noftre Superieur, & tous nos Peres; les Sauuages 
mefmes m’ont condamné d’entreprendre ce voyage 
pour le bien public & commun. Nous eftions quatre 
vaiffeaux de compagnie commandés par le fleur de 
Courpon, homme vaillant & bon nauigateur: Vne 
tempefte nous fepara au fortir du golfe de fainct 
Laurens, de forte que nous ne nous fommes point 
veus depuis, ny rencontrés en mer. Le vaiffeau qui 
portoit le Pere Claude Quentin ayant pris la manche 
de fainct Georges pour celle qui fepare 1’Angleterre 
de la France, a demeuré longtemps fans paroiftre; 
mais enfin Dieu l’a conduit 4 bon port. Nous ren- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 119 


[1] Relation of what occurred in New France, in 
the years 1640 and 1641. 


Y REVEREND FATHER, 

I do almost as he who, having written his 

letters, should be himself the bearer of them. 

I sketched in New France the following Chapters, and 
I come myself to present them to Your Reverence. 
The fleet which conveyed these few lines across the 
Ocean took on board three of our Society,— Father 
Nicolas Adam, whom the kindness of Your Rever- 
ence has recalled on account of his infirmities; Father 
Claude [2] Quentin, whom you have also summoned 
that he may labor in the affairs of the Mission; and 
myself, who appear without being expected, but not 
without having been sent. Monsieur the Chevalier 
de Montmagny, our Governor, the principal French- 
men of our Colony, the Reverend Father Vimont, our 
Superior, and all our Fathers,— the Savages, even,— 
have sentenced me to undertake this voyage for the 
public and common good. We were a company of 
four vessels commanded by the sieur de Courpon, a 
brave man, and a good sailor. A storm separated us 
on leaving the gulf of saint Lawrence, so that we 
neither saw each other afterward, nor met at sea. 
The vessel which carried Father Claude Quentin, 
having taken the channel of saint George for that 
which separates England from France, did not appear 
for a long time; but, at last, God has brought it 
safely to port. We met on nearing land a great mast 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


contrafmes aux approches des terres vn grand mait, 
& d'autres pieces'du débris de quelques nauires per- 
dus aux coftes de France ou d’Angleterre. Quoy 
que c’en foit, ie ne voy qu’vn feul bien fur la mer, 
c’eft que vous [3] eftes 4 tous moments dans vne 
dependance de Dieu plus grande & plus immediate, 
pour ainfi dire; & par confequent plus douce que fur 
la terre: Mais pourfuiuons noftre route, V. R. verra 
dans la fuitte de ce difcours, comme Dieu va exau- 
cant les grandes prieres qu’on fait pour les pauures 
Sauuages, comme il va beniffant les fecours qu’on 
leur donne; mais elle verra auffi comme les Demons 
ne dorment pas, comme ils s’efforcent de tout perdre; 
ces maudits efprits voyans que leurs anciens fujets 
les quittent, que les ames fainctes, & que les grands 
de la terre & bien cheris du ciel, s’employent pour 
faire ouurir la porte 4 1’Euangile dans de vaftes con- 
trées que nous découurons tous les iours, remplies de 
Nations bien peuplées, & toutes fedentaires, arment 
tous leurs fuppofts tant qu’ils peuuent, pour détruire 
ce qui eft fi fainédtement commencé, pour ruiner la 
Colonie Francoife, & pour fermer toutes les auenués 
de falut A toutes ces ames qui n’ont iamais ouy 
parler de Iefus-Chrift. Les Chapitres fuiuans feront 
voir les grandes oppofitions qu’ils nous forment. 
Cependant ie confoleray voftre R. l’affurant [4] qu’elle 
a des fujets en ce Nouueau Monde, qui courent a 
grands pas a la faincteté: Dieu leur depart fes 
faueurs en abondance, les difficultés les animent, la 
difette eft leur trefor, les dangers leur affurance, les 
fouffrances leurs delices, la mort en la Croix leur 
attente, & le Dieu des viuans leur grande recom- 
penfe. I’efpere qu’auffi-toft que ie me feray acquitté 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 121. 


and other pieces of wreckage, from ships lost on the 
coasts of France or of England. At all events, I see 
but one single good upon the sea, which is, that you 
[3] are every moment in a dependence upon God 
greater and more immediate, so to speak, and conse- 
quently sweeter, than when upon land. But let us 
pursue our way. Your Reverence will see in the con- 
tinuation of this narrative how God continues to heed 
the fervent prayers that are offered for the poor Sav- 
ages, how he blesses the help that is given them; 
but you will also see that the Demons do not sleep, 
that they exert themselves toruin everything. These 
accursed spirits,—seeing that their old subjects are 
forsaking them, that the holy souls, and the great 
ones of earth, and those well beloved by heaven, 
are employed in opening a door to the Gospel in the 
vast regions that we discover every day, filled with 
very populous and sedentary Nations,— strengthen, as 
much as is possible, all their agents to destroy that 
which is so devoutly begun, to ruin the French Colo- 
ny, and to close every avenue of salvation to all these 
souls that have never heard of Jesus Christ. The 
following Chapters will show the great opposition 
that they raise against us. However I will comfort 
your Reverence, assuring you [4] that you have sub- 
jects in this New World, who make rapid progress 
in holiness; God bestows his favors upon them abun- 
dantly, difficulties stimulate them, dearth is their 
treasure, dangers their security, sufferings their de- 
light, death for the Cross their expectation, and the 
God of the living their great reward. I hope that, 
as soon as I have executed my mission, Your Rever- 
ence will give me my Passport, that I may return to 
the New World and die in a new country, or among 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


de ma commiffion, V. R. me donnera mon Paffeport 
pour retourner en ce Nouueau Monde, & mourir dans. 
vn nouueau pais, ou parmy ces bons Neophytes qui 
m’ont rauy le coeur par leur pieté, & par leur deuo- 
tion; ie les reeommande tous, & tous les ouuriers de 
l’Euangile, & toute la Colonie Frangoife, a fes faincts 
Sacrifices, & aux prieres des ames fainctes, qui hono- 
rent le tres aimable lefus. 
De V. R. 
Tres-humble & obeiffant feruiteur en 
nof{tre Seigneur, Paul le Ieune. 


a 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 123 


these good Neophytes who have ravished my heart 
by their piety and their devotion. I commend them 
all, and all the laborers of the Gospel, and all the 
French Colony, to your holy Sacrifices, and to the 
prayers of the holy souls who honor the most lovable 
Jesus. 
Your Reverence’s 
Very humble and obedient servant in 
our Lord, Paul le Jeune. 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vor. 20 


[5] CHAPITRE PREMIER. 


DE LA RESIDENCE DE NOSTRE-DAME DE RECOUURANCE 
A KEBEC, & DU SEMINAIRE DES 
VRSULINES. 


9EST en ce Chapitre que ie deurois parler de la 

‘& vertu de nos Francois, mais il fuffit de dire, 
que la paix, le repos, & la tranquillité que 

nous poffedons, & le bon exemple de ceux qui nous 
commandent, auec 1’éloignement des occafions du 
peché, nous mettent dans le chemin du Ciel fans 
grande recherche: fi bien que fi quelqu’vn de ceux 
qui meurent en ces contrées, fe damne, ie croy qu’il 
fera doublement coupable: car tout nous porte a la 
Vertu, & le chemin du vice eft icy tout plein de 
honte, & de vergongne, c’eft affez pour cét article. 
Difons deux mots du Seminaire des Meres Vrfulines. 
Deux braues filles armées d’vn bon dot, [6] pour ay- 
der a baftir la Maifon qu’elles font commencer cette 
année a Kebec, & qui leur couftera bon, feroient bien 
receties en leur Monaftere qui renferme plus de ioye 
dans fon petit pourpris, que les Palais des Cefars 
dans leur grande eftendué. On dit qu’& peine fe 
trouuera-t’il des filles feculieres qui veiiillent porter 
leurs biens, & paffer leur vie en ce Nouueau Monde, 
foit parmy les Filles de la Mifericorde dans 1’ Hofpi- 
tal, foit dans la maifon des Vrfulines. Quoy donc? 
ef{t-il poffible que tout ce qu’il y auoit de filles gene- 
reufes en l’ancienne France, foit paffé en la Nou- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 125 


[5] CHAPTER FIRST. 


OF THE RESIDENCE OF NOSTRE DAME DE RECOU- 
VRANCE AT KEBEC, AND THE SEMINARY 
OF THE URSULINES. 


N this Chapter I ought to speak of the virtue of 
| our French people; but it is sufficient to say that 
the peace, the repose, and the tranquillity that 

we possess, and the good example of those who rule 
us, with the absence of opportunities for sin, put us 
in the way to Heaven without great effort,—so that, 
if any one of those who die in these lands be lost, I 
believe that he will be doubly guilty; for everything 
inclines us to Virtue, and the path of vice is here 
altogether full of shame and disgrace. Enough of 
this matter. Let us say a few words about the Semi- 
nary of the Ursuline Mothers. Two courageous 
sisters, provided with a suitable endowment,— [6] 
to aid in building the House which they are com- 
mencing this year at Kebec, and which will cost them 
dear,— would be well received in their Monastery, 
which contains more joy in its little enclosure than 
the Palaces of the Cesars in their great extent. It 
is said that there will scarcely be found secular sis- 
ters who would consent to bring their fortunes and 
spend their lives in this New World, either among 
the Sisters of Mercy in the Hospital, or in the house 
of the Ursulines. Indeed! is it possible that all the 
generous sisters that were in old France have come 
over into the New? and that there are no longer 


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20: 


uelle? & qu'il ne fe trouue plus de coeurs affés hardis, 
pour fuiure les veftiges de ces premieres Amazones? 
c’e{t ce que ie ne puis croire; du moins puis-je affurer 
que fi on vouloit des Religieufes profeffes, qu’on en 
trouueroit dix pour vne: Ouy, mais elles manque- 
roient d’employ; non pas fi les Sauuages s’arreftent, 
comme ils s’y prennent fort bien, Dieu mercy. Ma- 
dame de la Pelterie qui a vn coeur vrayement gene- 
reux, & toutes fes filles font leur poffible pour 
auancer ce deffein, auffi me femble-t’il que noftre [7] 
Seigneur les fauorife: car il fe trouue quelques per- 
fonnes en France de merite & de vertu, qui prennent 
cette deuotion, vrayement chreftienne, de marier 
quelques Seminari{tes; ils enuoyent, par exemple, 
cent efcus pour luy faire vne petite maifonnette, & 
voila vne famille arref{tée, auec quelque autre aide 
qu’on luy donne, de cultiuer vn peu de terre pour 
fon viure. Ils ont quatre Seminariftes quafi toutes 
preftes a marier, ie prie Dieu qu'il les fauorife d’vn 
heureux rencontre. Si cette pieté touche le coeur de 
plufieurs, les Sauuages quitteront les bois pour nous 
venir ioindre, & les parens donneront leurs enfans 
au Seminaire, pour pouuoir entrer dans ces maifons, 
& pour ioiiyr de cette aumofne enregiftrée dans les 
cahiers du grand Dieu. 

Au refte, l’occupation de ces bonnes Meres eft 
tres-vtile, & le fera encor plus dorefnauant, quand 
elles feront bafties. Outre les petites Francoifes 
qu’elles inftruifent, elles ont de petites Seminariftes 
fedentaires; ces enfans feront bien plus fermes en la 
foy que les autres, car elles font dans vne continu- 
elle inftruction, elles [8] ne voyent rien qui ne les 
portealavertu. Nous auons marié cette année Mag- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 127 


found hearts brave enough to follow the footprints 
of these first Amazons? That is what I cannot be- 
lieve; at least, Ican affirm that if we wished professed 
Nuns, we could find ten for one. ‘‘ Yes, but they 
would lack employment.” Not if the Savages become 
sedentary, to which they are very well disposed, 
thank God. Madame de la Pelterie, who has a truly 
generous heart, and all her sisters, do their best to 
advance this plan; also it seems to me that our [7] 
Lord favors them; for there are found in France 
some persons of merit and virtue, who perform this 
truly christian office of providing for the marriage 
of some Seminarists. They send, for instance, one 
hundred écus to build one of them a little house; and 
behold a household established, with some other help 
that may be given it, to cultivate a little land for its 
support. There are four Seminarists, very nearly 
ready to marry. I pray God that he will favor them 
with a fortunate opportunity. If such piety touch 
the hearts of many, the Savages will quit the forests 
to come to us; and the parents will give their chil- 
dren to the Seminary, that they may be able to enter 
these houses, and to enjoy this charity recorded in 
the books of the great God. 

Moreover, the work of these good Mothers is very 
useful, and will be still more so hereafter, when they 
shall be established. Besides the little French girls 
whom they teach, they have the little permanent 
Seminarists; these children will be much firmer in 
the faith than the others: for they are under con- 
tinual instruction, they [8] see nothing that does not 
influence them to virtue. We have married this year 
Magdeleine de saint Joseph Amiskweian, who was 
‘taken from their Seminary; this young woman went 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2 


deleine de fainct Iofeph Amifk¥eian, tirée de leur 
Seminaire; Cette ieune femme fortit bien couuerte 
de leur maifon, les Meres luy donnerent fon petit 
ameublement; bien-toft apres elle donna des preuues 
d’vne foy viue & animée de la charité, eftant aux 
trois Riuieres elle fut recherchée & follicitée de plu- 
fieurs ieunes hommes payens; mais fa conftance les 
rebutta, & fit voir que Iefus-Chrift a des graces plus 
fortes que la nature: comme elle vit que certains Ion- 
gleurs fouffloient & chantoient vn fien frere malade, 
elle ne fit que pleurer: fi toft qu’on eut chaffé ces 
Charlatans, la pauure enfant fe mit 4 rire, témoignant 
par fes larmes l’horreur qu’elle auoit de leurs an- 
ciennes fuperftitions, & mon{trant par fa ioye le plai- 
fir qu’elle prenoit de voir fon frere dans les penfées 
d’auoir recours 4 Dieu. Elle porte le nom de la B. 
Mere Magdeleine de fainct Iofeph Carmelite, cette 
ame faincte honorée de Dieu par plufieurs miracles, 
a procuré fur la terre le dot du mariage de cette ieune 
Neophyte, ie ne doute nullement [9] qu’elle ne parle 
puiffamment pour elle dedans les cieux, & pour ceux 
qui trauaillent en cette vigne, qu’elle a tant cherie. 

Outre ces Seminariftes arreftées, nous en enuoyons. 
d’autres paffageres, veftués ala Sauuage, qui demeu- 
tent quelque temps en cette petite maifon, pour y 
eftre inftruites fur les Myfteres de noftre creance. 
Ces ieunes filles ayant pris quelque bonne teinture en 
cette Maifon, s’en retournent par apres chés leurs pa- 
tens. Quand ces bonnes Meres feront logées plus au 
large, elles auront encor vne autre occupation, les. 
filles & les femmes qu’on voudra baptifer, iront paffer 
quelque iours deuant leur baptefme en leur Mona- 
{tere, pour y apprendre auec plus de repos la doctrine 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 | 129 


out from their house well clothed, and the Mothers 
gave her her little furniture. Very soon after, she 
gave proofs of a faith strong and animated by love; 
while she was at the three Rivers she was courted 
and entreated by several young pagans, but her con- 
stancy repelled them, and showed that Jesus Christ 
has attractions stronger than nature. When she saw 
certain Jugglers breathe upon her sick brother, and 
sing to him, she only wept; as soon as these Char- 
latans had been driven away, the poor child began 
to laugh, indicating by her tears the horror that she 
-had for their ancient superstitions, and showing by 
her joy the pleasure she took in seeing her brother 
inclined to have recourse to God. She bears the 
name of the Blessed Mother Magdeleine de saint 
Joseph, the Carmelite. That holy soul, honored of 
God by many miracles, has procured upon earth the 
marriage portion of this young Neophyte; Iam quite 
sure [9] that she speaks powerfully for her in the 
heavens and for those who labor in this vineyard, 
which she so greatly loved. 

Besides these permanent Seminarists, we send oth- 
ers, who are transient, and clothed in Savage fashion, 
who remain some time in this little house, that they 
may be instructed in the Mysteries of our belief. 
These young girls, having received some good im- 
pression in this House, go back afterwards to their 
parents. When these good Mothers shall dwell in 
more spacious quarters, they will have still another 
occupation,—the girls and women who are admitted 
to baptism will go to spend several days in their Mon- 
astery, before their baptism, in order to learn there 
with more quiet the doctrine of Jesus Christ; even 
the Neophytes can go there, to prepare themselves 


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


de Iefus-Chrift; voire mefme les Neophytes y pour- 
ront aller, pour fe preparer plus fainctement a la 
faincte Communion: Or encor qu’elles foient logées 
a l’eftroit, elles ne laiffent pas d eftre fouuent vifitées 
par de bonnes femmes Sauuages preffées de la faim, 
les Meres les font prier Dieu, leur difent vn bon mot, 
les font manger, puis les renuoyent auec cette double 
aumofne: Mais defcendons plus [10] en particulier, & 
difons deux mots des petites Seminariftes, fuiuant le 
memoire que leurs bonnes Meres m’ont enuoyé. 

Ces petites creatures ont vn fi grand defir de fe 
faire inftruire, qu’elles difent par fois a leur maiftreffe 
qu’elle les chaftie, fi elles manquent 4 leur deuoir; & 
fi quelqu’vne tombe en quelque faute, elle fe jette 
auffi-toft A genoux pour en demander pardon. Vn de 
nos Peres eftant defcendu ce Printemps 4 Tadouffac, 
4 la requefte des Sauuages, les deux plus grandes 
Seminariftes luy efcriuirent de leur propre main, 
témoignant d’vn cofté vne grande confolation de ce 
qu’il inf{truifoit leurs compatriotes; & de l’autre, vn 
defir de fon retour; le Pere leut ces deux lettres en la 
prefence des Sauuages, leur monf{trant comme leurs 
enfans eftoient capables du Maffinahigan auffi bien 
que les noftres; ils prenoient ces lettres, les tournoient 
de tous coftés, les regardoient auec attention comme 
s’ils les euffent pfi lire, ils faifoient dire & redire ce qui 
eftoit couché dedans, bien ioyeux de voir que noftre 
papier parloit leur langue, car ces enfans efcriuoient 
en Sauuage. C’eft vn plaifir de voir les [11] filles 
plus grandelettes & les mieux inftruites, s’accofter 
des Seminariftes paffageres, leur expliquer la doctrine 
de Iefus-Chrift, fe feruir des mefmes interrogations 
qu’on leur fait, dechiffrer vne image, raconter genti- 


—————— rr —<“‘—OSOSC;C™CC~— 


aero 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 131 


more devoutly for holy Communion. Now, although 
they are straitened for room, they are sure to be 
often visited by the simple Savage women when 
goaded by hunger; the Mothers have them pray to 
God, speak a good word to them, feed them, and 
then send them away with this double alms. But 
let us come down more [10] to details, and let us say 
a few words of the little Seminarists, following the 
account that the good Mothers have sent me. 

These little creatures have so great a desire to be 
instructed, that they sometimes tell their teacher that 


she may chastise them, if they fail in their task; 


and, if one of them commit any fault, she throws 
herself immediately on her knees to ask pardon for 
it. One of our Fathers having gone down to Tadous- 
sac this Spring, at the request of the Savages, the 
two tallest Seminarists sent letters to him in their own 
writing,— expressing on the one hand a great satis- 
faction that he was instructing their countrymen; 
and, on the other, a desire for his return. The Fa- 
ther read these two letters in the presence of the Sav- 
ages, showing them that their children were capable 
of Massinahigan as well as ours. They took these 
letters, turned them on all sides, and looked at them 
with attention, as if they had been able to read them; 
they made him read over and over what was written 
therein, and were very glad to see that our paper 
spoke their language, for the children wrote in the 
Savage tongue. It isa pleasure to see the [11] largest 
and the best-taught girls approach the transient Sem- 
inarists, explain to them the doctrine of Jesus Christ, 
use the same questions that have been put to them, 
study out a picture, relate prettily a story, and win 
the attention of those who listen to them. 


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


ment vne hiftoire, & fe concilier l’attention de celles 
qui les écoutent. 

Si les actions exterieures font des indices des mou- 
uemens & des affections du coeur, ces enfans croiffent 
tous les iours en la deuotion & en la vertu, elles font 
tous les foirs 1’examen de leur confcience, & s’entr’ad- 
uertiffent auec paix de leurs petits defauts; elles ont 
vn tres-grand foin de rechercher leurs offenfes quand 
il fe faut confeffer; il y en a vne quin’a pas plus de 
huict ans, qui parle aux plus petites, les aide a s’exa- 
miner, & leur recommande fur tout de ne cacher au- 
cun peché. Ie puis rendre bon témoignage de leur 
confcience; mais ie puis affurer auec fincerité, que ie 
n’ay entendu aucun enfant Francois de leur age, ny 
deca ny dela 1’Ocean, qui ouurit fon coeur plus nette- 
ment, & qui en reconntit mieux les petits plis & replis; 
en vn mot, les Sauuages fe confeffent parfaitement 
bien; c’eft chofe admirable [12] comme ils congoi- 
uent l’importance de ce Sacrement, cela m’a par fois 
donné de 1’étonnement, de voir que les barbares 
connoiffent ce que les heretiques ignorent, ou veulent 
ignorer. 

La veille de l’Affomption de la faincte Vierge, vn 
Pere ayant ouy en confeffion la petite Anne Marie 
Negabamat, cette enfant luy dit apres 1l’abfolution, 
N8fai eapitch ni-sich tiffarasi; Mon pere, ie veux tou- 
fiours e{tre vierge, ne me faites point fortir de cette 
Maifon, ie defire d’y demeurer toute ma vie; fes pa- 
roles toucherent le Pere, fe reffouuenant des refiftan- 
ces qu’elle luy auoit faites, iufques 1a qu'il la prit 
vne fois, & fit femblant de la jetter dans la riuiere, 
voyant qu’elle ne vouloit pas obeir a fes parens, qui 
luy commandoient de demeurer auec ces bonnes 
Filles. 


—— —-- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 133. 


If outward acts be an index of the motions and 
affections of the heart, these children are growing” 
every day in devotion and in virtue; they make 
every evening their examination of conscience, and 
quietly warn one another of their little faults. 
They take great care to search out their offenses, 
when they must confess; there is one who is no more 
than eight years old, who speaks to the smallest 
ones, helps them to examine themselves, and charges 
them above all not to conceal any sin. I can render 
good testimony to their conscientiousness; and in- 
deed I can affirm with sincerity, that I have heard no 
French child of their age, either on this side of the 
Ocean, or on the other, who opens the heart more 
frankly, and who knows better its most hidden 
recesses. In a word, the Savages make a thoroughly 
good confession; it is admirable, [12] their appre- 
hension of the importance of this Sacrament. I am 
sometimes amazed to see that barbarians know what 
heretics ignore or wish to ignore. 

On the eve of the Assumption of the blessed Vir- 
gin, a Father having heard the confession of little 
Anne Marie Negabamat, this child said to him after 
absolution: Nousaz eapitch nt-wich tissarawi. ‘* My 
father, I wish to be always a virgin; do not make 
me leave this House, I wish to live here all my 
life.’’ Her words touched the Father, as he remem- 
bered the opposition that she used to make to him, 
until he took her once and pretended to throw her 
into the river, seeing that she was not willing to 
obey her parents, who bade her remain with these 
good Sisters. 

Agnes Chabwekwechich, hearing the Mother Su- 
perior speak of the great sufferings of our Lord, 


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


Agnes Chabseksechich entendant parler la Mere 
Superieure des grandes fouffrances de noftre Sei- 
gneur, s’écria; helas! s'il n’euft payé pour nous, nous 
ferions tombées au feu apres noftre mort, en verité 
ie l’aime plus que moy-mefme; les autres témoigne- 
rent auffi qu’elles l’aimoient: [13] quelqu’vne s’en- 
.quefta fi Dieu n’eftoit pas affés bon pour pardonner 
aux méchans Manits, la Mere leur répondit, que les 
Demons eftoient fuperbes, & que s’ils fe pouuoient 
humilier que Dieu leur feroit mifericorde. 

Les grandes neiges & les froids tous glacés ne font 
pas capables d’éteindre l’ardeur d’vne ame qui aime 
Tefus-Chrift; Madame de la Pelterie, qui n’a point 
de confolation plus fenfible que de vifiter les Sau- 
uages, s’en vint 4 S. Iofeph au trauers des neiges 
pour affifter 4 la Meffe de minuict auec les nouueaux 
Chreftiens, elle amena auec foy deux ou trois Semi- 
nariftes; ces enfans eftans de retour en la Maifon, 
Agnes fe mit 4a raconter ce qu’vn Pere auoit dit de 
la Naiffance du petit Iefus, en la Predication qu'il fit 
aux Sauuages fur ce My{tere; elle exprimoit les 
geftes, difoit la Mere Superieure, moni{troit le rebut 
que les Bethleemites faifoient de la faincte Vierge, 
auec vne indignation contr’eux, & vne compaffion 
pour la Mere & pour 1’Enfant, elle décriuoit le petit 
Tefus dedans fa creiche auec des paroles qui atten- 
driffoient les bonnes Meres. 

[14] On auoit dreffé dans le Seminaire vne petite 
creiche, les enfans ne ceffoient d’aller voir le petit 
Iefus qui y repofoit, elles fe tenoient a genoux 
aupres de luy, portoient de petites écorces allumées, 
faute de chandelles de cire; fouuent elles font des 
bouquets & des chappeaux de fleurs qu’elles vont 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 135 


exclaimed: ‘‘ Alas! if he had not atoned for us, we 
would fall into the fire after our death; truly, I love 
him more than I do myself.’’ The others also de- 
clared that they loved him. [13] Some one inquired 
if God were not good enough to pardon the wicked 
Manitous; the Mother answered that the Demons 
were proud, and that, if they could humble them- 
selves, God would be merciful to them. 

Heavy snows and freezing cold are not able to 
extinguish the ardor of a soul which loves Jesus 
Christ. Madame de la Pelterie, who has no greater 


solace than to visit the Savages, went to St. Joseph 


through the snows, so as to be present at the mid- 
night Mass with the new Christians; she took with 
her two or three Seminarists. When these children 
had returned to the House, Agnes began to relate 
what a Father had said of the Birth of the little Jesus, 
in the Sermon that he preached to the Savages on 
this Mystery. ‘‘ She reproduced his gestures,’’ said 
the Mother Superior, ‘‘ and showed how the Bethle- 
hemites repulsed the blessed Virgin, with indigna- 
tion against them and compassion for the Mother 
and for the Child;’’ she described the little Jesus in 
the manger, with words which moved the good 
Mothers. 

[14] They had set up in the Seminary a little man- 
ger: the children went incessantly to see the little 
Jesus that was lying there, they remained upon their 
knees near him, and carried little pieces of lighted 
bark, for want of wax candles. They often make 
bouquets and garlands of flowers which they offer to 
the image of the blessed Virgin, upon whom they 
call with the most tender love. 

One day, having met together, they made a little 


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


prefenter a l'image de la faincte Vierge, qu’elles 
apof{trophent auec des affections fort tendres. 

S’eftant vn iour raffemblées elles firent vne petite 
cabane de feiiillages, la tapifferent de verdure, A leur 
facon, puis allerent demander congé a4 la Mere Supe- 
rieure dy paffer la nuict, la Mere les en voulant 
deftourner, leur dit qu’elles auroient peur, & que la 
porte de cette cabane ne fermoit point. Nous ne 
craignons rien, firent-elles, nous porterons auec nous 
l’Image de Iefus & de la faincte Vierge, & le mef- 
chant Manits ne nous pourra aborder; nous n’auons 
pas peur des ames des trefpaffez; car ceux qui meu- 
tent, s’ils font bien bons, s’en vont au Ciel; s’ils 
n’ont pas payé & fatisfait pour leurs offenfes, ils 
vont en Purgatoire, s’ils font bien mefchans, ils vont 
en Enfer; ils ne fortiront pas de 14 [15] pour nous 
venir trouuer, fi le Diable s’approche de noftre cabane 
nous prierons Dieu, & il le fera fuir: la Mere 
adjoufte dans fon memoire, cette refponfe m’eftonna, 
il s’en faut beaucoup que nos petites Francoifes 
foient fi prefentes 4 elles, quoy qu’on les in{ftruife 
fans ceffe. 

Il y a vne petite Huronne parmy les Algonquines, 
e{tant interrogée fi elle auoit encor fa mere, celle 
que i’ay en mon pais n’eft plus ma chere mere, ref- 
pond cét enfant, parce qu'elle ne croit point en Dieu, 
c’e{t vous qui eftes mes vrayes Meres puis que vous 
m’in{truifés, cette petite Neophyte fut long-temps 
auec le bon Charles Sondatfaa la veille de fon Bap- 
te{me, elle luy parloit des biens qu’on recoit dans 
ces eaux facrées, des grandes recompenfes que Dieu 
donne 4 ceux qui luy obeiffent, des horribles chafti- 
mens qu'il exerce fur les fuperbes, & fur les rebelles; 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 137 


cabin of boughs, lined it with green leaves, in their 
own fashion, and then went to ask leave of the Mother 
Superior to spend the night there. The Mother, 
wishing to dissuade them from it, told them they 
would be afraid, and that the door of this cabin did 
not shut. ‘‘ We fear nothing,”’ said they, ‘‘ we shall 
carry with us the Images of Jesus and the blessed 
Virgin, and the wicked Manitou will not be able to 
come near us. We do not fear the souls of the 
departed; for those who die, if they are truly good, 
go to Heaven; if they have not expiated their sins 


-and atoned for them, they go to Purgatory; if they 


are very wicked, they go to Hell,—they will not 
leave that place [15] to come to us. If the Devil 
come near our cabin, we will pray to God, and he 
will make him flee.’”” The Mother adds in her ac- 
count: ‘‘ This reply astonished me; our little French 
girls are far from being so self-possessed; although 
they are continually instructed.’”’ 

There is a little Huron girl among the Algonquins; 
on being asked if she had still her mother, ‘‘ She 
whom I have in my country is no longer my dear 
mother,’’ answered the child, ‘‘ because she does not 
believe in God; it is you who are my true Mothers, 
since you instruct me.” This little Neophyte was 
a long time with the good Charles Sondatsaa, the 
night before her Baptism; she spoke to him of the 
benefits that are received from the holy water, the 
great rewards that God gives to those who obey him, 
and the horrible chastisements that he visits upon 
the proud and upon the rebellious; she urged him 
‘strongly to induce the little Huron girls to come and 
Stay at the Seminary; she said a thousand good 
things of it. ‘‘ These virgin Sisters love us so 


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 20: 


elle le preffe fort d’exciter les petites Huronnes de 
venir demeurer au Seminaire, elle en difoit mille 
biens: Ces Filles vierges nous ayment tant, difoit- 
elle, ce font vrayement nos meres, nous ne manquons 
de rien auec [16] elles; Cét homme fage & ferieux 
fe plaifoit fi fort au difcours & 4 la conuerfation de 
cette ieune fille, A4gée d’enuiron douze ou treize ans, 
qu'il y paffa plus de deux heures & demie. 

Si quelque perfonne de fon pais la vient vifiter, 
elle ne s’enquefte point de fes parens, ny de ce qui 
fe paffe parmy fes proches, mais elle demande fi les 
Hurons n’ont point enuie de croire en Dieu, s’ils ne 
quittent point leurs dances & leurs chants fuperfti- 
tieux, s'ils confultent toufiours les Diables. 

Vn fien parent l’interrogeant, fi elle ne vouloit 
point retourner en fon pais: Non, dit-elle, ie n’y 
penfe plus, ie me trouue fort bien ot ie fuis: Ma 
fille tu ne fais pas bien, luy dit-il, il ne faut pas que 
tu penfes a toy feule quand tu feras bien in{truite, il 
faut venir inftruire tes compatriotes: voila comme 
les enfans les plus Sauuages deuiennent enfans de 
Dieu; qu’il foit beny 4 iamais par toutes les nations. 
de la terre. 

La bonne Madame de la Pelterie qui a ietté les 
fondemens de ce petit Seminaire, a fujet de benir 
Dieu de ce qu’il l’a [17] choifie pour vn ouurage qui 
luy eft fi agreable: Mais fon coeur eft grand, les de- 
firs qu’elle a de raffembler les peres & meres, encor 
errants, pour ayder a4 fauuer les enfans, luy font fou- 
haitter vn trefor deffus fes forces; elle ne ceffe de 
vifiter ces bonnes gens, elle leur parle des yeux, ne 
pouuant leur parler de la langue, elle leur parleroit 
bien plus volontiers des mains; Et fi elle pouuoit 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 139 


much,” said she; ‘‘ they are truly our mothers, we 
lack for nothing with [16] them.’’ This wise and 
serious man was so extremely pleased with the dis- 
course and the conversation of this young girl, about 
twelve or thirteen years old, that he spent more than 
two hours and a half with her. 

If any one from her own country comes to see her, 
she does not inquire for her parents, nor about what 
happens among her relatives; but she asks if the 
Hurons have no desire to believe in God, if they do 
not give up their dances and their superstitious 
_ chants, and if they still consult the Devils. 

When one of her relatives asked her if she did not 
wish to return to her own country, ‘‘ No,”’ said she,. 
‘‘T no longer think of it, I am very well satisfied 
where I am.’’ ‘‘ My daughter, you are not doing 
right,’’ said he to her; ‘‘ you must not think only of 
yourself; when you are well instructed you must 
come and teach your countrywomen.” Behold how 
the most Savage children become the children of 
God; may he be blessed forevermore among all the 
nations of the earth! 

Good Madame de la Pelterie, who laid the founda- 
tion of this little Seminary, has cause to bless God 
that he has [17] chosen her for a work which is so 
acceptable to him. But her heart is large; the wish 
that she has to gather together the still wandering 
fathers and mothers, in order to aid in saving the 
children, makes her long for a treasure beyond her 
own means. She does not cease to visit these poor 
people; she speaks to them with her eyes not being 
able to speak to them in their language. She would 
speak to them much more willingly with her hands: 
and if she were able to practice the trades of a mason 


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 20 


exercer le meftier de maffon & de charpentier pour 
leur dreffer de petites demeures, & de laboureur pour 
les ayder 4 cultiuer la terre, elle s’y employeroit auec 
autant d’ardeur qu’elle voit de bonnes difpofitions en 
ces peuples pour s’arrefter; mais fes bras font foibles 
auffi bien que les noftres. Deus Dominus fortitudo 
noftra in eternum. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 141 


and of a carpenter, so as to erect for them little 
dwellings, and to plough, in order to aid them in cul- 
tivating the land, she would exert herself therein 
with an ardor in proportion to the good disposition 
she sees in these peoples to settle down; but her 
arms are weak, as wellas ours. Deus Dominus fortt- 
tudo nostra tn @ternum. 


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


CHAPITRE II. 


DE LA RESIDENCE DE SAINCT IOSEPH. 


re{te de ceux qui ne font [18] point baptifés, & 
qui fe retirent en cette Bourgade encomman- 
cée, n’ont point d’alienation de la foy, les prieres fe 
font publiquement, & dans les cabanes, & dans les 
maifons, & dans la chapelle, les Sacremens font en 
honneur, & plufieurs ne fcauroient garder aucune 
offenfe qu’ils croyent tant foit peu griefue, fur leur 
ceeur, fi toft qu’ils penfent eftre bleffés, quoy que 
legerement, ils ont recours aux remedes facrés, que 
Dieu a laiffés en fon Eglife. On ne fouffre aucun 
deffaut public, les Neophytes font fortement liés 
par enfemble, auec vn zele qu’on n’auroit iamais 
ozé efperer des Sauuages: car c’eft chofe eftrange 
comme ces peuples font froids, & efloignés de noftre 
chaleur, & de noftre promptitude; mais defcendons 
plus en particulier: @ fructibus eorum cognofcetis eos. 
Les Chreftiens plus zelés s’affemblerent 4 noftre 
defceu durant cét hyuer, pour traiter par entr’eux, 
des moyens de fe conferuer en la foy; l’vn d’eux 
hara[n]guant, dit, qu’il faifoit plus d’eftat des prieres, 
c’eft ainfi qu’ils parlent, que de la vie, & qu’il mour- 
roit plutof{t que de les quitter; [19] l’autre dit, qu’il 
defiroit qu’on le punift & qu’on le chaftiaft, en cas 
qu'il fe dementift de la parole qu’il auoit donnée a 
Dieu; vn troifiefme s’efcria, qu’il falloit mettre en 


Ves nombre des Chreftiens croift tous les iours, le 


prifon celuy qui tomberoit dans quelque faute, & 


a 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 143 


CHAPTER II. 
OF THE RESIDENCE OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


HE number of Christians is increasing every day; 
“i the rest of the people, who are [18] not bap- 
tized, and who have taken refuge in this Vil- 
lage just started, have no alienation from the faith. 
Prayers are offered publicly; also in cabins, and in 
houses, and in the chapel the Sacraments are honored. 
Many are unable to bear upon their hearts any trans- 
gression that they consider in the least serious; as 
soon as they think that they have offended, even 
slightly, they have recourse to the sacred remedies 
which God has left to his Church. No public fault 
is allowed; the Neophytes are strongly bound to- 
gether with a zeal that one would not have dared to 
hope for from Savages,—for it is strange how cold 
these peoples are, and how far removed from our 
warmth and hasty disposition. But let us come down 
to more details: a fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos. 

The most zealous Christians met during this win- 
ter, unknown to us, in order to confer together upon 
the means of keeping themselves in the faith. One 
of them, in making an address, said that he thought 
more highly of prayers— itis thus that they speak — 
than of life, and that he would rather die than give 
them up; [19] another said that he wished he might 
be punished and chastised in case he forfeited the 
word he had given to God; a third exclaimed that 
he who should fall into any error must be put into 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


qu'il le falloit faire ieufner quatre iours fans boire 
ny manger: les actions de iuftice, qu’ils voyent par 
fois exercer contre les delinquans, leur donnent ces 
penfées: Charles MeiachkKasat tout nouuellement 
baptifé fe trouua dans cette affemblée, non feulement 
cela ne l’épouuenta point, ains au contraire il en fut 
confolé: ie fuis des voftres, leur dit-il, tout ce que 
vous concliierés m’aggréera, c’eft tout de bon que ie 
croy en Dieu, & fi vous aués quelque croyance, que 
ie doiue perdre coeur, ie vous donne dés a prefent la 
liberté de me lier, & de me tenir en prifon: mais 
mon cceur me dit que ie marcheray droit, & que ce 
que iay embraffé auec tant d’affection, ne fortira 
iamais de ma penfée. 

Cette affemblée fe fit dans le filence de la nuict: & 
le matin ils nous en vindrent donner aduis; nous re- 
partifmes qu’ils procedoient auec trop de feuerité, que 
la douceur [20] auoit plus de pouuoir fur les efprits, 
que la force; qu’vne femme tout fraichement nous 
auoit dit, que ce qui la retardoit de preffer fon bap- 
tefme eftoit, qu'elle ne croyoit pas pouuoir viure fi 
fainctement que les Chreftiens, & qu’elle ne fcauroit 
venir tous les iours 4 la Meffe, comme ils faifoient 
dans les rigueurs de V’hyuer, eftans par fois affés 
efloignés de l’Eglife; & la neige, & la grefle, & le 
froid, affiegeant le chemin; Que fera-ce donc, leur 
difions nous, fi on parle de prifon a des gens foibles, 
& non encor éclairés du flambeau de la foy; ils ne 
laifferent pas de pourfuiure leur pointe, & de dire tout 
haut, qu’ils auoient fait vn complot par entr’eux, 
que le premier de leur nombre qui tomberoit dans 
quelque faute, tant foit peu notable, fubiroit la pri- 
fon & le ieufne: cela époutenta les foibles, & le 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 145 


prison, and made to fast four days without eating or 
drinking. The acts of justice that they see from 
time to time exercised on delinquents, give them 
these ideas. Charles Meiachkawat, who was very 
recently baptized, was in this assembly; not only did 
that not frighten him, but, on the contrary, he was 
comforted by it: ‘‘I am one of you,” said he to 
them; ‘‘all that you shall decide upon will please 
me. It is in earnest that I believe in God; and if 
you have any conviction that I shall lose courage, I 
now give you liberty to bind me and to hold me in 


-prison; but my heart tells me that I shall walk 


straight, and that what I have embraced with so 
much affection will never leave my mind.”’ 

This meeting took place in the silence of the night, 
and in the morning they came to give us information 
of it. We answered that they proceeded with too 
much severity; that mildness [20] had more power 
over souls than force; that a woman had very recent- 
ly said to us that what hindered her from urging her 
baptism was, that she did not believe she could live 
so devoutly as did the Christians, and she would not 
be able to come every day to Mass as they did, in all 
the severity of the winter, when they were some- 
times rather far from the Church, and snow, hail, 
and cold besetting the way. ‘‘ What will happen, 
then,’’ we said to them, ‘‘ if you speak of prisons to 
people who are weak, and not yet enlightened by the 
torch of faith?’’ ‘They did not cease to pursue their 
point, and to say resolutely that they had formed a 
plan among themselves, that the first of their number 
who should commit any fault, however inconsider- 
able, should suffer imprisonment and fasting. This 
frightened the weak, and the report spread among 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


bruit courut parmy les infidelles, que les Sauuages 
Chreftiens auoient des chaifnes, & des liens tout 
pre{ts pour garotter les refractaires. Quelques Pay- 
ens nous dirent qu’on ioiioit a tout perdre, & que les 
Sauuages fe tueroient les vns les autres; tout cela nous 
confoloit fort: car nous [21] prenions plaifir de voir 
l’vnion des Chreftiens; il eft bien plus aifé de tem- 
perer la ferueur que de l’allumer: II eft bon que les 
Sauuages fentent ces feux, mais il ne faut pas con- 
defcendre 4 tous leurs defirs, les fagons de faire d’vn 
peuple ne fe changent pas fi toft, il faut proceder 
auec dexterité, douceur, & patience. 

Quelque temps apres ces refolutions prifes, vn de 
nos Peres e{tant entré dans la cabane d’vn des princi- 
paux Sauuages qui les auoient receués & approuuées; 
ce bon-homme enuifagea le Pere d’vn ceil trifte, & 
luy dit, Nikanis, ie fuis en cholere, i’ay fafché Dieu, 
i’ay penfé m’en aller rendre prifonnier 4 Kebec, 
pour paffer quatre iours fans boire ny manger, fui- 
uant ce que nous auons refolu, mais i’attens que tu 
m’y enuoyes; le Pere a ces paroles fut furpris, ne 
fcachant que refpondre; cét homme le voyant penfif, 
luy dit, tu n’as point de coeur, tu te deffies de nous 
autres, tu ne tiens pas affés ferme; tu t’imagines que 
fi tu nous enioignois ces penitences, que nous ne les 
ferions pas; éprouue-le tout maintenant en ma per- 
fonne, commande moy d’aller en prifon, donne moy 
[22] vn mot d’efcrit afin que la porte me foit ouuerte, 
& tout a l’heure ie parts en ta prefence. Le Pere 
luy demande, fi fa faute meritoit bien vn tel chafti- 
ment: ouy, dit-il, i’ay fafché Dieu, mon peché eft 
grand, i’ay frappé ma femme auec cholere, il eft vray 
qu’elle m’a irrité; car ce matin m’en allant a la 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 147 


the unbelievers that the Christian Savages had chains 
and bonds all ready to bind the refractory. Some 
Pagans told us that they were risking the ruin of 
everything, and that the Savages would kill one an- 
other. All this consoled us much, for we [21] took 
pleasure in seeing the union of the Christians; it is 
much more easy to temper fervor than to kindle it. 
It is well that the Savages feel these ardors, but we 
must not yield to all their desires; the customs of a 
people do not change so soon,—it is necessary to 
proceed with skill, gentleness, and patience. 

Some time after these resolutions were taken, one 
of our Fathers having entered the cabin of one of 
the chief Savages who had received and approved 
them, this simple man looked at the Father with a 
sad eye, and said to him: ‘“‘ Nikanis, I am angry, I 
have grieved God. I havethought of going to Kebec 
to surrender myself asa prisoner, that I may spend 
four days without food or drink, according to that 
upon which we resolved; but I am waiting for thee 
tosend me there.’’ The Father was surprised at these 
words, not knowing what to reply; this man, seeing 
him thoughtful, said to him: ‘‘ Thou hast no cour- 
age; thou art distrustful of us all; thou art not firm 
enough; thou imaginest that if thou enjoinest these 
penances upon us, we would not do them. Make the 
trial now, in my case,— command me to go to prison; 
give me [22] a note, so that the door may be opened to 
me, and this instant I will set off in your presence.”’ 
The Father asked him if his fault really merited 
such a chastisement. ‘‘ Yes,’’ said he, ‘‘I have 
grieved God; my sin is great. I struck my wife in 
anger; it is true that she irritated me, for, this morn- 
ing, in going to Mass, I told her that she should fol- 


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Meffe, ie luy ay dit qu’elle y vint apres moy, ne 
l’ayant point veué, ie l’ay frappée A mon retour; ie 
ne veux perfonne auec moy, difoit-il, qui ne prie 
Dieu: ouy mais, luy fit le Pere, tu feais bien qu'il 
n’e{t pas iour de fefte, & qu'elle n’a point d’ obligation 
d’affifter auiourd’huy a la faincte Meffe? II eft vray, 
refpond-il, mais puis que c’eft mieux fait d’y affifter, 
elle le deuoit faire, veu mefme que ie l’y auois inui- 
tée, & que c’ef{t noftre couftume de 1l’entendre tous 
les iours, ie meriteneantmoins chaftiment, car ie me 
fuis laiffé emporter 4 ma cholere, donne moy vn mot. 
de lettre afin que ie faffe penitence de mon peché; le 
Pere fe mit 1a-deffus 4 excufer cette faute, & A temoi- 
gner que cette bonne femme eftoit bien marrie d’a- 
uoir defobey, qu’elle aimoit fon mary, & que iamais 
chofe femblable ne luy arriueroit: [23] Cette pauure 
creature prenant la parole, dit, d’vne voix pleine de 
douceur & de regret, mon Pere, i’ay en mon coeur ce 
que vous aués en la bouche, & puis fe teut: La con- 
clufion fut, que dés le lendemain au poinct du iour, 
ils fe vindrent confeffer tous deux: mais ce qui nous 
eftonna fort, fut que cette bonne femme iamais ne 
s’excufa, quoy que fon mary luy dit ou reprochatt, 
& cependant elle auoit vn grand fujet d’excufe; car 
elle nous dit depuis que quand fon mary l’appella 
pour aller 4 la Meffe, qu’elle ne l’auoit pas entendu, 
neantmoins de peur de le fafcher, elle aima mieux 
fe rendre coupable, que de s’excufer. 

A quelque temps de 14, vn ieune homme eftant 
tombé dans vne faute affés lourde, car il s’eftoit eny- 
uré, vn Chreftien fon parent delibera de le faire 
mettre en prifon: comme on en demandoit aduis a 
celuy dont ie viens de parler, il repliqua, ie n’ay 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 149° 


low me; not having seen her, I struck her on my 
return. I wish no person with me,” said he, ‘‘ who 
does not pray to God.”’ “‘ Yes,’’ the Father answered 
him, ‘‘ but you know well that it is not a holy day 
and that she is under no obligation to be present to- 
day at holy Mass.”’ “‘ It is true,’ he replied, “‘ but, 
since it is better to be present there, she ought to: 
have gone—considering too that I had invited her, 
and that it is our custom to hear it every day. 
Nevertheless, I merit chastisement, for I have let 
myself be carried away by my indignation; give me 


a note, so that I may do penance for my sin.’’ The 


Father thereupon began to excuse this fault, and to 
show that this good woman was indeed grieved at 
having disobeyed, that she loved her husband, and 
that a similar thing would never happen to her 
again. [23] This poor creature, beginning to speak, 
said, with a voice full of mildness and regret: ‘‘ My 
Father, I have in my heart what you have on your 
lips;’’ and then she was silent. The conclusion 
was that the very next day at dawn they both came 
to confession; but what extremely astonished us was 
that this good woman never excused herself, what- 
ever her husband said to her, or however he re- 
proached her. Notwithstanding, she had an excel- 
lent reason for excuse; for she told us afterwards 
that when her husband called her to go to Mass, she 
did not hear him; nevertheless for fear of offending 
him, she had preferred to appear guilty, rather than 
to excuse herself. 

Some time thereafter, a young man having fallen 
into a somewhat gross fault, for he became intoxicated, 
one of his Christian relatives resolved to have him 
put into prison. When they asked the opinion of 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


point de parole fur ce fujet, i’ay merité chaftiment, 
on ne me l’a pas donné, ie n’y puis condamner vn 
autre. En effet, il ne voulut iamais declarer fon 
aduis; on ne laiffa pas d’enuoyer ce ieune étourdy a 
[24] Kebec, monfieur le Gouuerneur le fit mettre 
dans vne baffe foffe, A la requefte des Sauuages, il y 
fut mis iuftement la veille de Noél, & le lendemain 
de cette grande fefte, cing des principaux Chreftiens 
allerent trouuer monfieur de Montmagny, & I’vn 
d’eux luy tint ce difcours: Voila les deux plus pro- 
ches parens du prifonnier, fgauoir eft Noél Negaba- 
mat, & Charles MeiachkKasat, il y a long-temps que 
le premier eft déliuré des chaifnes du Diable; pour 
le fecond, il a efté mis tout recemment en liberté 
par le fainct Baptefme; mais quant 4 celuy que vous 
aués fait emprifonner, il eft garotté de tous co{tés, 
le Diable le tient fortement lié, car il n’eft pas encor 
baptifé, & fon peché merite vne double prifon; au 
refte, fes parens vous prient d’en faire iuftice, car 
eftans Chreftiens ils veulét garder toutes les loix de 
Dieu, ils fe departent entierement de fa parenté. 
Voila vn coup capable d’étonner tous ceux qui con- 
noiffent les fagons de faire des Sauuages, lefquels ne 
{cauroient fouffrir qu’on touche leurs alliés; mais 
Dieu a plus de force que la nature: Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur repartit, qu’il le [25] feroit venir deuant foy, 
qu’il luy donneroit de bons aduis, & de la terreur; & 
que s'il retomboit dans fa faute, qu'il ne manqueroit 
pas de le faire reprendre vne autre fois; tout fe pafla 
auec prudence, & auec fruict: Ce pauure homme 
eftant forty de prifon, nous vint auffi-toft trouuer a 
{ain Iofeph, il nous dit, qu’il n’improuuoit point ce 
que les Francois & les Sauuages auoient fait, qu’au 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 151 


him whom I have just mentioned, he replied: ‘‘I 
have not a word to say on the subject. I merited 
chastisement, it was not given to me; I cannot con- 
demn another to it.” Indeed, he was never willing 
to declare his opinion; however, they sent the 
thoughtless young man to[24] Kebec. Monsieur the 
Governor had him put in a dungeon, at the request 
of the Savages: he was put there on the very eve of 
Christmas, and the day following that great festival 
five of the principal Christians went to monsieur de 
Montmagny and one of them made this speech to 
- him: ‘‘ Here are the two nearest relatives of the pris- 
oner, that is to say, Noél Negabamat, and Charles 
Meiachkawat; it isa long time since the first one was 
delivered from the chains of the Devil; as for the sec- 
ond one, he has been very recently set at liberty by 
holy Baptism. But as for him whom you have had 
imprisoned, he is pinioned on all sides,—the Devil 
holds him fast bound, for he is not yet baptized, and 
his sin merits a double prison; nevertheless, his rela- 
tives pray you to do justice to him, for, being Chris- 
tians, they wish to keep all the laws of God; they 
entirely renounce his relationship.” This is an act 
fit to astonish all those that know the customs of the 
Savages, who cannot endure that any one should 
touch their kinsmen; but God has more power than 
nature. Monsieur the Governor replied that he [25] 
would have him brought before him, and that he 
would give him good advice, and would frighten 
him; and that, if he should again commit the fault, 
he would not fail to have him again arrested. All 
went on with discretion and profit. This poor man 
having left the prison, came immediately to us at 
saint Joseph; he said to us that he did not disap- 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


commencement cela l’auoit fort irrité, mais qu’ayant 
connu que c’ef{toit pour fon bien, qu’il s’eftoit appai- 
fé; ie m’amenderay, difoit-il, le Capitaine m’a donné 
de bons aduis, ie les garderay; il m’a fait entendre 
qu’il auoit de longs bras, & qu’encor que i’allaffe a 
Tadouffac ou aux Trois Riuieres, qu’il atteignoit 
iufques 14, & encor plus loing; ie luy ay promis que 
ie ne le mécdtenterois plus, & que ie me rendrois 
obeiffant, c’eft la parole que ie vous donne auffi, & 
que ie garderay; mais ha{tés-vous de me baptifer, 
afin que ie deuienne plus fage. 

Eftant de retour en fa cabane, les principaux Sau- 
uages l’allerent trouuer fur la nuict, & luy parlerent 
en cette forte: Tu fcais bien que tu t’es meflé de for- 
tileges, [26] mais comme nous fommes maintenant 
Chreftiens, nous ne craignons plus tes inuocations de 
Demon, tes menaces & tes forts ne nous donnent 
plus l’épouuante; au refte, il faut que tu fcaches que 
c’e{t nous qui t’auons fait mettre en prifon, c’eft nous 
qui auons prié noftre Capitaine de t’arrefter, fois 
maintenant plus fage, quitte tes fagons de faire; fi 
tu veux croire en Dieu & receuoir fa Loy, nous t’ai- 
merons, & te protegerons par tout; finon, dés 4 pre- 
fent nous renon¢gons a ta parenté, & 4 ton amitié: fi 
tu veux perfeuerer en ta malice, tu feras bien de 
t’éloigner; car fi quelqu’vn te met 4 mort, comme 
tu en as efté defia dans les dangers, nous ne ven- 
gerons point ta mort. A ces paroles, cét homme 
qui auoit cofitume de donner de la terreur aux autres 
par fes iongleries, & par fon impudence, fe trouua 
bien eftonné: Vous m’aués fait plaifir, refpondit-il, 
ce que vous aués fait ne tend qu’a mon bien, ie l’ay 
defja dit 4 noftre Capitaine, ie feray plus retenu & 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 153 


prove of what the Frenchmen and the Savages had 
done,— that in the beginning it had greatly irritated 
him, but, having known that it was for his good, he 
was appeased. ‘‘I shall improve,’’ said he; ‘‘ the 
Captain has given me good advice, and I shall pay 
attention to it. He has made me understand that 
he has long arms, and that, although I might go to 
Tadoussac or to the Three Rivers, he could reach as 
far as there, and still further; I have promised him 
that I would no longer displease him and that I would 
become obedient. That is the word I give you also, 
and which I shall keep; but hasten to baptize me, 
so that I may become wiser.”’ 

Having returned to his cabin, the chief Savages 
went to him toward night, and spoke to him in this 
manner: ‘‘ Thou knowest well that thou hast meddled 
with sorcery; [26] but as we are now Christians, we 
no longer fear thy invocations of the Demon,— thy 
threats and thy charms no longer give us dismay. 
Besides, thou must know that it is we who have had 
thee put in prison, it is we who have begged our 
Captain to arrest thee; be wiser now, abandon thy 
usages. If thou wilt believe in God, and accept his 
Law, we will love thee and protect thee everywhere; 
if not, from this time forth we renounce thy kinship 
and thy friendship. If thou wilt persist in thy wick- 
edness, thou wouldst do well to go away; for, if any 
one put thee to death, of which thou hast been already 
in danger, we will not avenge thy death.’’ At these 
words, this man, who was wont to give terror to 
others by his deceit and by his impudence, was quite 
confounded. ‘‘ You have done me a kindness,’’ he 
responded; ‘‘ what you have done tends only to my 
good. I have already said this to our Captain. I 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20: 


plus difcret d’orefenauant, la refolution en eft prife; 
pour mes fortileges, c’eft vne chofe que i’ay defia 
abandonnée, & que ie ne reprendray iamais: Voila le 
[27] premier coup de iuftice que les Sauuages ayent 
fait exercer; il les faut petit a petit, & auec adreffe, 
ranger dans la foufmiffion. 

Voicy d’autres actions auffi remarquables que les 
precedentes, quelques Sauuages de l’Ifle, & autres 
endroits, eftans defcendus a4 fainct Iofeph, les Chre- 
{tiens voyans que ces nouueaux hoftes n’auoient pas 
dequoy difner, firent vne cueillette par entr’eux, & 
fournirent iufques 4 douze cens anguilles boucannées, 
diuifées en douze gros pacquets; ayans raffemblé 
cette aumofne ilsnous enuoyent querir, pour fcauoir 
fi elle feroit agreable 4 Dieu; les pauures gens n’a- 
uoient pas trop de viures pour eux; mais comme on 
leur recommande les actions de charité, ils fe cottife- 
rent ioyeufement les vns les autres: Ayans donc 
enuoyé querir quatre des principaux Sauu[a]ges nou- 
uellement venus, ils leur mirent cette aumofne entre 
les mains, pour eftre diftribuée 4 tous ceux qui en 
auoient befoin; nous approuuafmes fort cette bonté, 
elle ne fera pas fans recompenfe, Dieu la benira au 
centuple. 

[28] Cette charité n’empefcha pas, que ces nou- 
ueaux hoftes, naturellement fuperbes & orgueilleux, 
n’euffent diuerfes prifes auec les Chreftiens de fainct 
Iofeph, & quafi toufiours pour la Religion; voicy — 
trois ou quatre paroles qui donnent & connoif{tre la 
grande vanité, & l’infuportable fuperbe du Capitaine 
de ces Infulaires. Nous eftant venu voir pendant le 
fejour qu’il fit 4 St. Iofeph, il nous tint ce difcours: 
T’auois quelque deffein de paffer icy l’hyuer, mais on 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 155 


shall be more restrained and more discreet hereafter; 
my resolution is made. As for my sorcery, it is a 
thing that I have already abandoned, and which I 
shall never take up again. This is the [27] first act 
of justice that the Savages have administered; little 
by little, and with tact, they must be brought into 
submission. 

Here are other deeds as remarkable as the preced- 
ing ones. Some Savages of the Island, and of other 
places, having come down to saint Joseph, the Chris- 
tians, seeing that the new guests had nothing for 
dinner, made a collection among themselves, and 
furnished as many as twelve hundred smoked eels, 
divided into twelve large packages; having gathered 
together this alms, they sent for us to know if it 
would be acceptable to God. ‘The poor people had 
not too many provisions for themselves; but, as acts 
of charity are recommended to them, every one con- 
tributed joyfully. Having then sent for four of the 
chief of the recently-arrived Savages, they put this 
gift into their hands, to be distributed to all those 
who were in need. We greatly approved this kind- 
ness; it will not be without reward,— God will bless 
it a hundredfold. 

[28] This charity did not prevent these new guests, 
naturally haughty and proud, from having several 
quarrels with the Christians of saint Joseph, and 
almost always on account of Religion. The few fol- 
lowing words reveal the great vanity and insupport- 
able pride of the Captain of these Islanders. Having 
come to see us during the stay that he made at St. 
Joseph, he held this discourse with us: ‘‘ I had some 
intention of spending the winter here, but I am told 
that neither your Captain loves me nor do you. Per- 


t 
im, 
ve 
ly 
Y 
i’ 
‘ae 


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


me dit que voftre Capitaine, ny vous autres auffi, ne 
m’aimés pas; peut-eftre ne fgaués vous pas que ie 
commande dés ma ieuneffe, que ie fuis nay pour 
commander, fi tof{t que i’ouure la bouche, tout le 
monde m’écoute; auffi eft-il vray que ie fouftiens, & 
que ie conferue tout le pais pendant la vie de mes 
petits enfans, & de mes neueux, c’eft ainfi qu'il 
nomme fes gens, les Hurons mefmes me preftent 
Yoreille, & ie commande parmy eux, ie les regle, 
comme eftant Capitaine, ie ne dy mot ¢a bas, les 
autres parlent, mais il ne fe fait rien que ce que i’ay 
dans la penfée; ie fuis comme vn arbre, les hommes en 
font les branches, [29] aufquelles ie donne la vigueur: 
Voir vn homme tout nud, qui n’a ny chauffure aux 
pieds, ny autre habit qu’vn méchant bout de peau, 
qui n’abrie que la moitié de fon corps, difgracié de 
la nature n’ayant que la moitié de fes yeux, car il eft 
borgne, fec cOme vn vieil arbre fans feiiilles; voir, 
dif-je, vne fquelette, ou plutoft vn gueux, marcher 
en Prefident, & parler en Roy, c’eft voir Vorgueil & 
la f{uperbe fous des haillons: Ce Thrafon, & vne par- 
tie de fes gens eftans dans cette difpofition, furent 
bien-toft aux prifes auec nos Chreftiens, ils leur 
reprochoient que la foy & les prieres faifoient mou- 
rir les hommes; que depuis que quelques-vns s’e- 
{toient fait baptifer; que les maladies auoient regné 
parmy eux; & qu’A mefme temps qu’on leur a enfei- 
gné vne autre croyance que celle de leurs peres, a 
mefme temps la mort les a exterminés; qu’vne partie 
de ceux qui fe font faits Chreftiens, s’entendent auec 
les Francois pour perdre tout le pais des Sauuages; 
ils apportent des exemples qu’ils croyent fort puif- 
fans: Vn tel, difoit-il, ayant deux femmes, & n’ay- 


aa 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 157 


haps you do not know that I have ruled from my 
youth, that I was born to rule. As soon as I open 
my mouth, every one listens to me; it is also true 
that I bear up and maintain the whole country during 
the life of my grandchildren and my nephews,’’— it 
is thus he calls his people. ‘‘ Even the Hurons give 
ear tome, and I command among them; I rule them, as 
if I were Captain. I say not a word over there,—the 
rest speak; but there is nothing done except that 
which I have in my mind. I am like a tree,—men 
are the branches thereof, [29] to which I give vigor.” 


‘To see a man wholly nude, who has neither covering 


for the feet, nor other raiment than a wretched bit 
of pelt, which screens only the half of his body; ill- 
favored by nature, having only half his eyes, for he 
is blind in one, and dried-up like an old tree without 
leaves,—to see, I say, a skeleton, or rather a raga- 
muffin, bear himself like a President, and speak like 
a King, is to see haughtiness and pride under rags. 
This Thraso and part of his people being in this 
mood, very soon came to disputing with our Chris- 
tians. They taunted them, saying that faith and 
prayer made men die; that since some had been bap- 
tized, maladies had prevailed among them, and that, 
when they were taught another belief than that of 
their fathers, at that very time death exterminated 
them; that a part of those who have become Chris- 
tians are concerting with the French to ruin the 
whole country of the Savages. They cite examples 
that they consider very forcible. ‘‘ Such a one,’’ 
they said, ‘‘ having two wives, and not being inclined 
to obey the Captain of the French, fell [30] sick im- 
mediately; others died suddenly, who had abandoned 
their ancient customs.’’ The Christians thereupon 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Not 20 


ant pas voulu obeir au Capitaine des Francois, eft 
tombé [30] malade tout fur l’heure, d’autres font 
morts fubitement ayans quitté leurs anciennes fagons 
de faire; Les Chreftiens 1a-deffus fe defendent, quel- 
ques-vns auec trop de zele; fi les prieres vous tuent, 
allés vous-en ailleurs, & ne demeurés point auec 
nous, chacun fe trouue bien icy de croire en Dieu, & 
d’auoir quitté fes vieilles malices. Ce n’eft pas la 
foy qui nous extermine, mais nos pechés, & notam- 
ment voftre infidelité; c’eft vous qui vous faites 
mourir, retenans les Demons au milieu de vous par 
vos méchantes actions; fcachés que nous ne vous crai- 
gnons nullement, & que nous ne quitterons iamais la 
croyance que nous auons embraffée. L’affaire en 
vint A tel point fans que nous en euffions connoiffance, 
que les Infidelles parlerent d’affommer quelques-vns 
des croyans: Ce qu’eftant venu aux oreilles d’vn des 
principaux Chreftiens, il sen alla fur la nuict trouuer 
les ieunes gens baptifés, & leur dit; on parle de 
meurtre, tenés ferme en la foy, fi on veut maffacrer 
quelqu’vn pour fa croyance, il ne faut point mettre 
la main aux armes, fouffrons la mort pour lefus- 
Chrift noftre Capitaine: [31] mais fion nous veut tuer 
par inimiti¢é particuliere, ou par enuie, il fe faut 
defendre courageufement: Nous ne fcetimes point ce 
procedé que long-temps apres, & encor par accident; 
ie vous laiffe & penfer fi la refolution des Chre{tiens 
nous confola. Benediétus Deus in aeternum, les Sau- 
uages paroiffent froids comme la glace, mais Dieu ne 
laiffe pas d’échauffer & de brufler leur coeur quand il 
luy plaift. 

Dans ces entrefaites, vn Chreftien ayant parlé fort 
hautement, les autres nous en vindrent donner aduis, 


a 
{ 
i 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 159 


defended themselves, some with too much zeal: “‘ If 
prayers kill you, go away elsewhere, and do not 
temain with us; every one here finds his advantage 
in believing in God, and in having forsaken his old 
wickedness. It is not faith that exterminates us, but 
our sins, and especially your unbelief; it is you who 
cause your own death, retaining the Demons in your 
midst by your wicked acts; know that we do not fear 
you at all, and that we shall never forsake the faith 
that we have embraced.”” The matter came to such 
a point, without our having knowledge of it, that 
the Infidels spoke of beating to death some of the 


believers. When this was heard by one of the lead- 


ing Christians, he went towards night to the baptized 
young men, and said to them: ‘‘ They are talking of 
murder; keep firm in the faith. If they wish to 
Massacre any one for his belief, he must not touch 
his arms,—let us suffer death for Jesus Christ our 
Captain. [31] But if they try to kill us from indi- 
vidual enmity, or from envy, we must defend our- 
selves courageously.’’ We knew this proceeding 
only a long time afterwards, and even then by acci- 
dent; I leave you to imagine how much the firmness 
of the Christians consoled us. Benedictus Deus in 
@ternum ; the Savages appear as cold as ice, but God 
is sure to warm and fire their hearts when it pleases 
him. 

In the meantime, a Christian having spoken very 
boldly, the others came to inform us of it, saying 
that he provoked the Unbelievers too much; we sent 
for him that we might recommend to him mildness 
and discretion. He said these words to us: ‘‘ Are 
you now teaching us another doctrine than that which 
you taught us formerly?’’ ‘‘ No, indeed,” said we 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 20 


difans qu’il prouoquoit trop les Infidelles: nous le 
fifmes venir pour luy recommander la douceur & la 
difcretion: Il nous dit ces paroles; Enfeignés-vous 
maintenant vne autre doctrine que celle que vous 
nous aués enfeignée par cy-deuant? Non pas, luy 
difmes-nous; Ne nous aués-vous pas dit, repliqua-t’il, 
que quand il s’agiffoit de la foy, il falloit tenir bon, 
& parler hardiment, & mon{trer qu’on ne craignoit 
point la mort; & que fion mourroit pour fa creance, 
qu’on iroit tout droit au ciel; C’eft cela, adioutta-t’il, 
qui m’a fait parler haut, ils nous reprochent que nous 
les faifons mourir, [32] quittans les couftumes de nos 
ancef{tres, & que nos prieres tuent les Sauuages, & 
1a-deffus ils nous menacent; ie leur ay dit que ie ne 
les craignois pas, ny tous leurs Demons, que ie les 
deffiois de me tuer, que ie croirois malgré qu’ils en 
euffent, & qu’ils s'en allaffent d’auec nous, s’ils auoient 
peur de nos prieres: Son zele nous pleut; mais nous 
luy recommandafmes de 1’affaifonner de douceur, & 
que cette rigueur n’attiroit pas des efprits aigris par 
leurs malheurs. 

A quelques mois de 1a, le mefme Chreftien ayant 
fceu que fa liberté en auoit fortement irrité quelques- 
vns, & qu’ils machinoient fa mort, a ce qu’on luy rap- 
portoit, il s’en alla trouuer Monfieur le Gouuerneur, 
pour luy demander vn cas de confcience, car comme 
il s’agiffoit de mort, & qu'il fgait bien que nous ne 
portons point les armes, il s’imagina que c’eftoit a 
celuy qui commande aux foldats, & qui fait profeffion 
des armes, de fatisfaire 4 fa demande, vn de nos 
Peres de fainct lofeph, fe trouua par rencontre ce 
iour 14 A Kebec, l’ayant apperceu il le pria de l’intro- 
duire chés Monfieur le Gouuerneur, [33] auquel il 


a 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 161 


to him. ‘‘ Did you not tell us,” he replied, ‘‘ that 
when it was a question of faith, we must stand fast, 
and speak boldly, and show that we did not fear 
death? and that if we died for our belief, we should 
go straight to heaven? Itisthat,’’ added he, ‘‘ which 
made me speak boldly. They reproach us with caus- 
ing their death [32] by forsaking the customs of our 
ancestors, and with killing the Savages by our pray- 
ers; and for that reason they menace us. I told 
them that I did not fear them, nor all their Demons,— 
that I dared them to kill me; that I should believe, 


however much they might dislike it; and that they 


should go away from us, if they feared our prayers.’’ 
His zeal pleased us, but we exhorted him to temper 
it with mildness, and told him that this severity 
would not attract hearts embittered by their misfor- 
tunes. 

Some months after, the same Christian — having 
learned that his freedom had greatly irritated some 
of them, and that they were plotting his death, as he 
had been told— went to Monsieur the Governor to 
ask him about a case of conscience; for, as it was a 
question of death, and knowing well that we do not 
carry arms, he imagined that it belonged to him who 
commands soldiers, and has a military profession, to 
answer his question satisfactorily. One of our Fa- 
thers of saint Joseph was present by chance that day 
in Kebec, and this man, seeing him, begged to be 
conducted to the residence of Monsieur the Governor, 
[33] to whom he had a few words to say. Being in 
his presence, he asked how he ought to comport him- 
self in case any one attacked him and wished to put 
him to death. ‘‘ Since I am a Christian,’’ said he, 
“I wish to do all that a good Christian should do; if 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


auoit vn petit mot a dire; eftant en fa prefence il luy 
demanda comme il fe deuoit comporter, en cas que 
quelqu’vn l’attaquaft, & le vouluft mettre 4 mort: 
Puis que ie fuis Chreftien, difoit-il, ie veux faire tout 
ce que doit faire vn bon Chrie]f{tien; s'il fe faut 
defendre, ie me defendray; s’il faut pofer les armes, 
ie les poferay: Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny 
luy demanda s’il auoit des ennemis, & 4 quel propos 
il faifoit cette demande: ie fuis le premier de ma 
nation, refpondit-il, qui me fuis fait Chreftien, ceux 
de mon pais, voyant que i’ay quitté leur party, croy- 
ent que les prieres & la foy que i’ay embraffée leur 
caufe les grandes maladies qui les ont quafi tous 
exterminés, voyla pourquoy ils me haiffent 4 mort: 
Monfieur le Gouverneur luy ayant donné la refolution 
de fon doute, ce bon homme luy dit: tous les iours, 
fi to{t que ie fuis leué ie dy a Dieu, fi on me tué pour 
ce que ie croy en toy, i’en feray bien aife, ie feray 
bien content de mourir, ie luy dy le mefme a la 
Meffe tous les iours, & ie fens dans mon coeur que ie 
ne les crains pas tous tant qu’ils font; car ils ne fgau- 
roient [34] toucher 4 mon ame, leur rage ne peut 
tomber que fur mon corps; fi quelqu’vn m’attaque 
pour quelque autre fujet que pour la foy, il ne fera 
pas le bien venu. I1 difoit cela d’vne fagon fi gaye 
& fi refolué, qu’il recrea Monfieur le Gouuerneur, 
lequel admirant fon courage & fa bonne difpofition, 
luy tefmoigna que fi on l’attaquoit pour la foy, qu’on 
s’'attaquoit a fa propre perfonne, n’ayant qu’vne 
mefme creance & gqu’vn mefme Dieu auec luy: cela 
refioiiit merueilleufement ce pauure Neophyte, qui 
s’en alla auffi content que s’il euft gaigné vn grand 
Empire. En voyla fuffifamment pour ce Chapitre. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 163 


he must defend himself, I will defend myself; if he 
must lay down arms, I will lay them down.’’ Mon- 
sieur the Chevalier de Montmagny asked him if he 
had any enemies, and why he made this inquiry. 
‘‘T am the first of my nation,’’ he answered, ‘‘ to 
become a Christian; those of my country, seeing that 
I have left their party, believe that the prayers and 
the faith which I have embraced cause the great dis- 
eases that have almost exterminated them; this is 
why they hate me unto death.” Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor having given him the solution of his doubt, 
this good man said to him: ‘‘ Every day, as soon as 
I have risen, I say to God, ‘ If they kill me because I 
believe in thee, I shall be very glad,—I shall be well 
pleased to die.’ I tell him the same every day at 
Mass; and I feel in my heart that I do not fear the 
whole of them however many there be, for they will 
not be able [34] to touch my soul,—their rage can 
fall only upon my body. If any one attack me for 
other cause than for the faith, he will not be received 
with open arms.’’ He said this in so cheerful and 
determined a manner, that he delighted Monsieur the 
Governor, who, admiring his courage and his good 
disposition, let him know that, if he were attacked 
for the faith, he himself, in his own person would be 
attacked,—- since he had the same faith and the same 
God as he. That wonderfully cheered this good 
Neophyte, who went away as content as if he had 
gained a great Empire. Enough of that for this 
Chapter. 


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


CHAPITRE III. 


CONTINUATION DE CE QUI S’EST PASSE ENTRE LES 
SAUUAGES DE LA RESIDENCE DE SAINCT IOSEPH. 


E Diable qui voit bien que l’arreft des Sauuages 
A errans, eft le plus court chemin, & le plus 
affuré de leur falut, bande toutes fes forces 

pour détruire ce [35] que Dieu a fi heureufement 
commencé. Les Sauuages de l'Ifle dont i’ay parlé 
cy-deffus, eftans fur le point de fe retirer de Sainct 
Iofeph, ot ils eftoient venus pour vn peu de temps, 
ne vouloiét pas fe feparer auec aigreur de nos Chre- 
{tiens, & de nos Catechumenes: Ils firent ioiier vn 
reffort qui auroit bien fait du mal, fi Dieu n’euft don- 
né de la conftance A ces bons Neophytes; ils les inui- 
tent donc a vn feftin, & leur difent, que la priere eft 
bonne, qu’il eft vray que noftre doctrine eft vn peu 
rude, notamment touchant les Mariages, mais qu’e- 
{tant receué de quelques vns, les autres la pouuoient 
auffi embraffer auec le temps, & que pour faciliter 
l’affaire, & pour vne plus grande vnion des vns auec 
les autres, il feroit A propos qu'ils demeuraffent tous 
enfemble, qu’il falloit choifir quelque lieu plus éloi- 
gné-de Kebec, que n’eftoit Sainct Iofeph pour mille 
raifons qu’ils alleguoient, que les Peres feroient atiec © 
eux pour les inftruire, & que petit a petit chacun fe 
rendroit aux facons de faire des Frangois: bref ils 
tefmoignerent vne grande amitié, & vn grand defir 
que les Chreftiens quittaffent leur demeure [36] pour 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 165 


CHAPTER IiIl. 


CONTINUATION OF WHAT OCCURRED AMONG THE 
SAVAGES OF THE RESIDENCE OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


HE Devil, who sees well that the settling down 
a of the roving Savages is the shortest and sur- 
est way of their salvation, bends all his ener- 

gies to destroy that [35] which God has so happily 
begun. The Savages of the Island, of whom I have 
spoken above, being upon the point of withdrawing 
from Saint Joseph, whither they had come for a 
little time, did not wish to depart on bad terms with 
our Christians and our Catechumens. They put in 
operation a scheme which would have done much 
harm, if God had not given constancy to these good 
Neophytes; they invited them to a feast, and said to 
them, that prayer was good, that our doctrine was 
indeed rather harsh, particularly touching Mar- 
riages,— but, as it had been received by some of 
them, the others might also embrace it in time. 
They said that, in order to facilitate the matter, and 
to bring about a closer union with each other, it 
would be fitting that they should all live together, 
and that they must choose some place more distant 
from Kebec than Saint Joseph was, for a thousand 
reasons which they pleaded; that the Fathers should 
be with them, to instruct them; and that, by degrees, 
each one would yield himself to the customs of the 
French. In short, they expressed a great friendship 
and a great desire that the Christians should aban- 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


s’en aller loger auec eux en quelque autre endroit; 
c’eftoit vn coup fourré de l’Ennemy de Dieu & des 
hommes, qui fe feruoit de la bouche de l’eloquence 
d’vn miferable borgne, qui ne voit que la moitié de la 
terre, & rien du tout de la beauté du ciel. Nos Neo- 
phytes ayans entendu ce difcours, nous en vindrent 
faire le rapport: Il ne fut pas difficile de leur faire 
voir la malice de Satan, & l’inconftance de ceux qui 
les inuitoient; c’eft pourquoy l’vn d’eux dans vne 
affemblée qu’ils firent fur ce fujet, leur dit ces pa- 
roles: Si ie ne croyois pas en Dieu ie vous pourrois 
fuiure, mais le coup eft donné; i’ay refpondu a Dieu, 
& luy ay dit, que ie luy obeirois; & ainfi ie ne puis 
m’éloigner du lieu ot nous fommes inftruits de fes 
volontés: Vn autre adioufta, vous dites que vous tien- 
drés ferme au lieu que vous voulés choifir, & ie vous 
auife que la foy feule vous donnera de la conftance, 
ie vous connois bien, vos teftes, ny vos pieds n’auront 
point d’arreft iufques & ce que vous croyés en Dieu. 
Ces Algonquins eftans retournés aux trois Riuieres, 
enuoyerent inuiter les Sauuages [37] de Sainct lofeph 
d’aller Ala guerre auec eux: celuy qui porta la pa- 
role, vfa de ces termes: Voicy vn coup d’Eftat pour 
les prieres & pour la foy que vous aués embraffée, les 
Algonquins de 1’Ifle, & de la petite Nation, difent 
que fi vous les voulés accompagner a la guerre, qu'ils 
fe feront tous baptifer au retour, & qu’ils embraffe- 
ront les prieres. Jean Baptifte Etinechkasat refpon- ‘ 
dit au nom de tous; voftre harangue n’eft pas dans 
fon luftre, vous l’aués mife a l’enuers: vous dites, 
allons & la guerre, & puis nous nous ferons baptifer; 
renuerfés voftre parole, & dites; Faifons nous bapti- 
fer, & puis allons tous de compagnie a la guerre; fi 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 167 


don their abode [36] and go to dwell with them in 
some other place. It was an underhand thrust of 
the Enemy of God and man, who used the eloquent 
speech of a wretched one-eyed man, who sees only 
half of the earth, and nothing at all of the beauty of 
heaven. Our Neophytes, having heard this dis- 
course, came to give us an account of it. It was not 
difficult to make them see the malice of Satan, and 
the instability of those who invited them; that is 
why one of them, in a council they held concerning 
this matter, said these words to them: “‘ If I did not 
believe in God, I might follow you, but the step is 
taken,—I have responded to God, and told him that 
I would obey him; and thus I cannot leave the place 
where we are taught his will.’’ Another added: 
“You say that you will remain firm in the place that 
you shall choose; but I warn you that faith alone 
will give you steadfastness. I know you well; nei- 
ther your head nor your feet will have any check 
until you believe in God.’’ 

These Algonquins having returned to the three 
Rivers, sent to invite the Savages [37] of Saint 
Joseph to go with them to war: he who brought the 
word, used these terms: ‘‘ Here is a Masterly stroke 
for the prayers and the faith that you have chosen; 
the Algonquins of the Island and of the petite Nation 
say that, if you will accompany them to the war, 
they will all be baptized on their return, and they 
will adopt the prayers.’”’ Jean Baptiste Etinechka- 
wat responded in the name of all: ‘‘ Your argument 
is not properly stated,—you have inverted your 
words: you say, ‘ Let us go to the war, and then we 
will be baptized;’ reverse your language, and say: 
“Let us be baptized, and then let us all go together 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Not. 20 


vous parlés ainfi, voftre difcours ira droit, vous ne 
vous mettrés pas en danger de vous perdre; & Dieu 
nof{tre pere voyant fes enfans enfemble, aura de 
bonnes penfées pour nous: Ce difcours en fon lan- 
gage n’a rien de barbare, & ces fentimens ne fe 
trouuent que dans vn coeur vrayement Chreftien. 
Quelques vns de nos Neophytes ne laifferent pas 
de les accompagner, quoy qu’auec peine, a caufe de 
leurs fuperftitions: Voicy ce que l’vn d’eux nous en 
racontoit [38]Afon retour. Partant de Sainct Iofeph: 
nous allafmes prier Dieu 4 la Chapelle: paffant par 
les trois Riuieres nous confeffafmes nous autres qui 
eftions baptifés, & vn peu au dela les mefcroyans 
firent vn feftin de deux chiens, ils chanterent & 
hurlerent felon nos anciennes couftumes, & tout cela 
pour tuer des ennemis. Ie leur difois prou que cela 
ne feruoit de rien, mais ils s’en mocquoient; ils con- 
{ulterent cinq fois les Diables dans leur tabernacles, 
pendant tout ce temps 14 nous nous retirafmes a part 
faifant nos prieres 4 genoux, vn Sattuage non encor 
baptifé fe mit de noftre cofté, renongant au Sabbat 
des infideles. A la derniere confulte les ennemis 
nous enuironnerent, fi toft que nous en eufmes le 
vent mes Iongleurs quittent leurs tabernacles, & 
gaignent au pied; Ie leur criay tout haut, & leur de- 
manday ce que leur auoient feruy leurs demons; mon 
difcours ne fut pas long, car il fe fallut fauuer auffi 
bien que les autres, les vns gaignent les bois, les 
autres les eaux, nous nous embarquafmes fur le grand 
lac, fur lequel voguoit l’Ennemy, nous paffafmes & 
repafiafmes [39] dans les dangers fans eftre defcou- 
uerts; Ie priois Dieu dans mon ame de tout mon 
coeur, il me fembloit que ie fentois dans moy ie ne 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 169 


to the war.’ If you speak thus, your speech will be 
straightforward; you will not put yourselves in dan- 
ger of being lost, and God our father, seeing his 
children together, will have favorable opinions of 
us.’’ This speech, in his own language, was not at 
all barbarous; and these sentiments are found only 
in a truly Christian heart. 

Some of our Neophytes, however, accompanied 
them,—although with sorrow, on account of their 
superstitions. This is what one of them related to 
us [38] on hisreturn: ‘‘ Setting out from Saint Joseph, 
we went to the Chapel to pray to God; passing 
through the three Rivers, we who were baptized con- 
fessed; and a little further on the unbelievers made 
a feast of two dogs; they chanted and howled accord- 
ing to our old customs, and all that for the sake of 
killing the enemy. I said plainly to them that that 
would avail nothing, but they mocked at it; five 
times they consulted the Devils in their tabernacles. 


During all that time we withdrew apart, kneeling in 


prayer; a Savage not yet baptized sided with us, 
renouncing the Sabbat of the infidels. At the last 
consultation, the enemies surrounded us; as soon as 
we had wind of it, my Jugglers quitted their tents, 
and took to their heels. I cried aloud to them and 
asked them of what use their demons had been to 
them; my speech was not long, for I had to escape, 
as well as the others. Some made for the woods, 
others for the water; we embarked upon the great 
lake, on which the Enemy was paddling; we passed 
and repassed each other [39] in these dangers, with- 


out being discovered. I prayed to God in silence 


with all my heart; it seemed to me that I felt within 


me an unknown power which sustained me, and 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


{cay quelle force qui me fouftenoit, & qui me 
donnoit l’efperance de mon falut. Voila comme fe 
termina noftre guerre difoit ce bon Neophyte. Mais 
touchons quelques actions particulieres des plus 
fermes Chreftiens. 

Vn ieune homme nous parlant d’[e]{poufer vne fille 
Chreftienne, nous luy confeillafmes de prendre aduis 
de fon frere aifné, homme de confideration parmy les 
Algonquins: Il n’eft pas Chreftien, refpondit il, il eft 
ennemy des prieres, ie ne le reconnois point pour 
mon frere, s'il croyoit en Dieu ie luy obeirois de tout 
mon coeur; quel bon aduis me pourroit donner vn 
homme, qui ne prend pas pour foy les bons aduis 
qu’on luy donne de fon falut? c’eft 4 vous de me con- 
feiller, vous m’aués donné la vie de l’ame, ie fuiuray 
auffi vo{tre direction pour le bien de mon corps. Sa 
mere s’eftant mife vn iour en cholere, luy dit, qu’elle 
vouloit fe retirer de Sainct Iofeph pour demeurer 
ailleurs out elle efperoit plus grand fecours: Son fils 
[40] luy repliqua; Ma mere, nous n’auons pas receu 
la foy pour les biens de la terre, quand tout le monde 
s’en iroit ie demeurerois toufiours aupres de ceux qui 
nous enfeignent le chemin du ciel; c’eft tout de bon 
que ie croy en Dieu, ie tiendray ferme iufques a la 
mort. Vn fien parent le voulant enleuer apres fon ma- 
riage, luy dit, qu’il s’embarqua{t au plutoft pour em- 
pefcher le defordre de fa femme, laquelle eftant allée 
voir fes parens aux trois Riuieres, s’y gouuernoit mal, 


au dire de cét impofteur: Ce bon ieune homme nous 


vint trouuer 1a-deffus, & nous dit; Ie viens d’ap- 


prendre des nouuelles qui affligent mon coeur, on m’a 


rapporté que ma femme n'obeiffoit pas 4 Dieu; mais 
il n’importe, qu’elle quitte Dieu fi elle veut, que tous 


' 


= 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 171 


which gave me hope for my safety. So this is the 
way our war ended,”’ said this good Neophyte. But 
let us touch upon some special actions of the most 
steadfast Christians. 

A young man spoke to us of marrying a Christian 
girl and we counseled him to take advice of his elder 
brother, a man of consideration among the Algon- 
quins: ‘‘ He is not a Christian,’’ he responded, ‘‘ he 
is an enemy of prayer; I do not acknowledge him 
for my brother. If he believed in God, I would obey 
him with all my heart: what good advice could a 
man give me who does not accept for himself the 
good counsels that are given him for his salvation? 
It belongs to you to counsel me; you have given me 
the life of my soul,—I will also follow your direc- 
tion for the good of my body.’”’ His mother, losing 
her temper one day, said to him that she wished to 
leave Saint Joseph, and dwell in some other place 
where she hoped for more assistance. Her son [40] 
replied to her: ‘‘ My mother, we have not received the 
faith for the sake of earthly riches; though every 
one should go away, I shall always remain with those 
who have taught us the way to heaven; I believe 
earnestly in God,—TI shall hold fast even to death.”’ 
One of his relatives, wishing to take him away after 
his marriage, told him that he should set out as soon 
as possible in order to prevent the ill conduct of his 
wife,— who, having gone to visit her parents at the 
three Rivers, was behaving badly, according to the 
report of thisimpostor. Thereupon this good young 
man came to us, and said: ‘‘I have just heard news 
that afflicts my heart,—I have been told that my wife 
has disobeyed God. But no matter,—let her forsake 
God if she will, let all my relatives leave and abandon 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


mes parens me quittent & m'abandonnent, ie ne quit- 
teray iamais la foy; ce qui m'attrifte dauantage, 
c’eft l’offenfe qu’elle commet, & le peu d’eftat qu’elle 
fait de fon ame. De bonne fortune nous venions de 
receuoir des lettres des Peres qui font aux trois Ri- 
uieres, qui rendoient vn grand témoignage de l’hon- 
nefteté, & de la conftance en la foy, de cette ieune 
femme; [41] fon mary entendant la lecture de ces 
lettres s’écria: Ah! ie voy bien maintenant le deffein 
de mes parens, ils ont forgé cette calomnie pour me 
perdre; ils s’imaginent que s’ils me tenoient parmy 
eux qu’ils me feroient quitter la foy, ils font bien 
loin de leur conte, ie ne la quitteray qu’auec la vie; 
La refolution de ce ieune homme me toucha le cceur. 

I’entendois certain iour vn Sauuage Chreftien pref- 
cher dans vne cabane, ott vn ieune homme baptifé 
mouroit, les raifons que l’Efprit de Dieu luy fugge- 
roit, m’e{tonnoient, il ne me voyoit pas, car i’eftois 
derriere la cabane ott ie m’arreftay pour l’efcouter: Il 
parloit du mefpris de la terre, & du bon-heur du Ciel, 
auec des paroles de feu; ce que nous croyons eft 
vray, difoit-il, c’eft porter entiie 4 ceux qui vont en 
Paradis, de s’attrifter de leur mort: Vne autre fois 
preffant vn infidele de fe rendre 4 Dieu; le n’ay pas 
affés d’efprit, luy dit cét homme, pour eftre baptifé, 
ie ne {caurois retenir tout ce qu'on m’enfeigne, ie 
{uis muet deuant Dieu, ie ne fgay que luy dire. Il 
n’eft pas befoin, luy fit ce Neophyte, de beaucoup 
parler [42] des lévres, fuffit que ton coeur foit A Dieu; 
quand i’eftois encor petit garcon, & que mon pere 
s’en allant ala chaffe ot en quelque autre endroit, me 
laiffoit en la cabane, ie ne faifois que penfer a luy, 
i’y penfois le foir en me couchant, & le matin en me 


—— 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 178 


me, I will never renounce the faith. What saddens 
‘me more, is the fault she commits, and the little 
regard that she has for her soul.’’ Fortunately, we 
had just received letters from the Fathers who are 
at the three Rivers, which bore full proof of the 
modesty, and the constancy in the faith, of this young 
woman; [41] her husband, hearing these letters read, 
exclaimed: ‘‘ Ah! now I see well the design of my 
relatives; they have forged this calumny to ruin 
me,—they imagine that, if they keep me among 
them, they will make me forsake the faith. They 
are far from their reckoning, I will give it up only 
with my life.’”’ The firmness of this young man 
touched me to the heart. 

One day I heard a Christian Savage preach ina 
cabin where a baptized young man was dying; the 
arguments that the Spirit of God suggested to him 
astonished me. Hedid not see me, for I was behind 
the cabin, where I had stopped to listen. He spoke 
of contempt for earth, and of the happiness of Heav- 
en, with words of fire: ‘‘ That which we believe is 
true,’’ said he; ‘‘ it is envying those who go to Para- 
dise, to be saddened by their death.’’ Another time 
he urged an unbeliever to give himself up to God, 
and the man said to him: ‘‘I have not mind enough 
to be baptized. I cannot retain all that they teach 
me, lam dumb before God, I do not know what to 
say to him.’”’ ‘‘ There is no need,”’ said the Neo- 
phyte to him, ‘‘ of much speaking [42] with the lips, 
it is enough that your heart belongs to God. When 
I was still a little boy, and my father, going to the 
chase or somewhere else, left me in the cabin, I did 
nothing but think of him; I thought of him at night 
on lying down, and in the morning on rising up; 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20° 


leuant, & ie difois en mon cceur, quand le verray-ie; 
ma bouche ne parloit point, tout ce paffoit dans ma. 
penfée; voila comme il te faut comporter, difoit-il, 
enuers Dieu; il importe peu que tu parles, fuffit que 
ton coeur penfe & luy, le foir deuant que prendre ton 
repos, le matin 4 ton réueil, penfe a luy, & luy dy 
feulement ces quatre paroles; fi ie fcauois ce qu’il te 
faut dire, ie te le dirois, cela fuffit, il n’en demande 
pas dauantage. La langue du cceur eft la plus intel- 
ligible en Paradis. Noél Negabamat voguant ce 
printemps dans vn canot auiec vn de nos Peres, luy 
raconta ce que ie vay dire: Il y a deux hyuers que ie 
penfay perdre la vie en ce lieu cy, le Pere demandant 
la raifon, il pourfuit, comme ie trauerfois le grand 
fleuue auec mes gens pour aller a la chaffe de l’autre 
bord, nous fufmes enuironnés d’vn grand bane de 
glaces, qui fe fracaffoient [43] d’vne telle impetuofité 
dans la rencontre de deux courans d’eaux, que nous 
penfions tous eftre perdus: Voyant le danger éui- 
dent, nous montafmes fur vne glace, fur laquelle 
nous tirafmes auffi nos canots, le malheur eft qu’elle 
eftoit fi petite, qu’A peine y pouuions nous eftre 
debout: Nous voila tous fur vn pont flottant, mais fi 
e{troit, & fi volage, qu’au moindre heurt nous atten- 
dions vne mort fans reffource; ie m’écriay, c’eft fait 
de nous, prions Dieu pour la derniere fois: Toy qui 
as tout fait, tu es tout-puiffant, fauue nous fi tu nous 
veux fauuer; fi tu veux que nous mourions, nous le 
voulons bien; puis que nous croyons en toy, nous 
irons au ciel, & nous te verrons, nous ne croyons pas 
en toy pour viure long-temps fur la terre: ayant fait 
ma priere tout haut, ie dis 4 mes gens; Ne craignons. 
point, mourons courageufement, nous fommes bapti- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 . 175 


and I said in my heart, ‘When shall I see him?’ 
My mouth did not speak, all this went on in my 
mind. It is thus,’’ said he, ‘‘ that you must conduct 


yourself towards God. It matters little what you 


say,—it is sufficient that your heart should speak to 
him: at night before taking rest, in the morning on 


awaking, think of him, and say to him only these few 


words: ‘If I knew what I ought to say to thee, I 
would say it;’ that is enough, he asks no more.’’ The 
language of the heart is the most audible in Para- 


dise. Noél Negabamat, while sailing in a canoe this 
spring with one of our Fathers, related to him what 


I am going to mention: ‘‘ Two winters ago I thought 
I should lose my life in this place.’’ The Father 


asking the reason, he continued: ‘‘ While I was 


crossing the great river with my people, going to 
hunt on the other shore, we were surrounded by a 
great bank of ice, which broke to pieces [43] with 
such impetuosity, from the meeting of two currents 
of water, that we thought we were all lost. Seeing 
danger imminent,we climbed upon a cake of ice, upon 
which we also drew our canoes; unfortunately, it 
was so small that we could scarcely stand thereon. 
There we all were on a floating bridge, but so narrow 
and wavering, that at the least shock, we expected 


-death without resource. I exclaimed: ‘ It is all over 


with us, let us pray to God for the last time.’ ‘ Thou 
who hast made all things, thou art all-powerful, save 
us if thou will to save us; if thou will that we 
should die, we are indeed willing; since we believe 
in thee, we shall go to heaven, and we shall see thee; 
we do not believe in thee in order to live a long time 


-on earth.’ Having offered my prayer aloud, I said to 
‘my people: ‘ Let us not fear, let us die courageous- 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


fés: Courage, nous irons au ciel: Au commencement 
du peril, i'eus grand peur, mais ayant fait ma priere 
ie ne craignois plus la mort: Ie n’auois pas acheué la 
parole qu'il fe fit vne grande éclaircie deuant nos 
yeux, les glaces s’écartans pour [44] nous faire paf- 
fage; auffi-to{t nous mettons noftre canot a l’eau, 
nous fautons dedans plus vifte que le vent, nous. 
voguons fans fgauoir ot nous allions, car les glaces 
nous déroboient la veué des bords de la riuieres, en 
fin cette éclaircie nous conduifit iufques aux riues ot 
nous defirions aller, nous fufmes fi ¢pouuantés de 
cette merueille, que fans nous dire mot les vns aux 
autres, chacun fe mit A genoux fur le bord du fleuue, 
pour remercier Dieu du peril que nous venions d’eui- 
ter par fafaueur. Ce bon homme ne nous auoit 
point encor raconté ce grand benefice de noftre Sei- 
gneur, les Sauuages parlent peu de ce qui fe paffe 
chés eux, fi les occafions ne s’en prefentent. 

Vne pauure femme eftant venue deux ou trois fois 
pour fe confeffer, & n’ayant peu le faire pour 1’ab- 
fence du Pere qui la pfit entendre, elle s’en retourna. 
fi trifte qu’elle paffa vne grande partie de la nuict, 
en larmes; le matin eftant retournée, elle dit au 
Pere, ie n’ay point eu de repos depuis mon offence, 
ie ne m’en retourneray plus que ie ne fois confeffée, 
i’ay defia remarqué que quelques vns ne fgauroient. 
[45] fouffrir fur leur coeur aucune offenfe qu’ils 
ayent commife volontairement, quoy que fort legere. 
Vn ieune Sauuage Chreftien s’eftant éueillé la nuict, 
& voyant vne femme indecemment couuerte dans fon 
fommeil, fut faifi de frayeur, tant l’occafion de pecher 
touche ces bonnes gens, ne fgachant comme aduertir 
cette femme, de peur de luy donner de la confufion, 


—- ° 


— 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 177 


ly. We are baptized; be of good cheer, we shall go 
to heaven.’ In the beginning of the danger, I was 
much afraid; but, having said my prayer, I no 
longer feared death. I had not finished the sentence, 
when a great opening was made before our eyes,— 
the ice scattering to [44] open a way for us; imme- 
diately we put our canoe in the water, and leaped 
into it more swiftly than the wind. We paddled 
without knowing whither we went, for the ice pre- 
vented our seeing the banks of the river; in short, 
this opening led us up to the shores which we desired 
to reach. We were so appalled by this wonder that, 
without speaking to one another, each one knelt 
on the bank of the stream to thank God that we had 
escaped from this peril by his favor.’’ This good 
man had not before related to us this great mercy of 
our Lord; the Savages speak little of what happens 
among them, if opportunities are not offered for it. 

A poor woman, having come two or three times to 
confess, and not having been able to do so, on account 
of the absence of the Father who could hear her, 
went away so sad, that she passed a great part of the 
night in tears. Having returned in the morning, 
she said to the Father: ‘‘I have had no rest since 
my transgression; I will not go back until I have 
confessed.’’ I have already observed that some of 
them cannot [45] bear upon their hearts any offense, 
however trifling, which they have voluntarily com- 
mitted. A young Christian Savage having awaked 
in the night, and seeing a woman immodestly cov- 
ered in her sleep, was seized with fright,—so much 
does the opportunity for sinning affect these good 
people. Not knowing how to warn this woman, for 
fear of putting her to confusion, he bethought him- 


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 20 


il s’aduifa de battre rudement vn chien, & de le faire 
crier bien haut, afin que cette femme s’éueillant fe 
remit dans la bienfeance. Si ie dy que des filles & 
des femmes & des ieunes hommes folicités au mal 
iufques aux menaces, ont imité le Sainct Iofeph & la 
chaite Sufanne, i’vferay de redites, ces actions eftant 
reiterées meritent d’ef{tre publiées, car en verité elles 
font heroiques. 

Vn ieune payen s’eftant gliffé la nuict dans vne 
cabane, s’adreffa 4 vne ieune fille Chreftienne, & luy 
dit ces quatre paroles: Crois-tu en Dieu; Ouy, dit- 
elle, iy croy: y crois-tu tout de bon? c’eft tout de 
bon, refpond la fille: adieu donc, dit ce frippon, ie 
n’ay rien a te dire. 

Vn bon Neophyte nous difoit vn iour, [46] qu ‘il 
s’ennuyoit de cette vie, qu’il fentoit bien maintenant 
qu'il eftoit prifonnier, & qu’il penfoit inceflamment 
a la vie qui ne meurt iamais; que fon cceur eftoit 
toufiours en Dieu. 

Vn de nos Peres ayant parlé de noftre Seigneur 
dans vne maifon de Sauuages, & recommandé 1’hon- 
nefteté, vne ieune femme mariée depuis peu, le fui- 
uit, & luy demanda en fecret, fi elle ne pouuoit pas 
bien fe feparer de fon mary, & coucher auec vne 
fienne parente: Le Pere luy demanda fi elle haiffoit 
fon mary, & s'il la traitoit mal: Non pas, fit-elle, 
mais ie voudrois bien me fauuer. 

La mefme eftant allée communier aux Vrfulines 
auec fes compagnes, les Meres leur firent vn petit 
fe{tin: celle-cy ne fit que pleurer pendant que les 
autres mangeoient: On la preffe d’en donner la rai- 
fon, mais iamais elle n’en voulut parler; Cela eftant 
venu a nos oreilles, nous luy demandafmes le fujet 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 179 


self of roughly beating a dog, and making it yelp 
aloud, so that the woman on awaking should again 
cover herself properly. If I told you how many 
girls and women and young men, entreated to evil 
even by menaces, have imitated Saint Joseph and 
the chaste Susanna, I should use repetitions; these 
acts, being reiterated, deserve to be published, for, 
in truth, they are heroic. 

A young pagan, having stolen by night into a cab- 
in, addressed a young Christian girl, and said these 
four words to her: ‘‘ Believest thouin God?” ‘‘ Yes,’’ 
said she, ‘‘ I dobelievein him.”’ ‘‘ Dost thou believe 
in him in earnest?’’ ‘‘ In earnest,’’ answered the 
girl. ‘‘ Good-bye, then,’’ said the rogue, ‘‘I have 
nothing to say to thee.” 

A good Neophyte said to us one day, [46] that he 
was weary of this life, and felt that now indeed he 
was a prisoner,—that he thought incessantly of the 
life that never ends; that his heart was always with 
God. 

One of our Fathers having spoken of our Lord in 
a household of Savages, and recommended modesty, 
a young woman, recently married, followed him and 
asked him in private, if she could rightly be sepa- 
tated from her husband and lodge with a female 
relative. The Father asked her if she hated her 
husband, and if he treated her ill: ‘‘ By no means,’’ 
said she, ‘‘ but I would gladly be saved.” 

The same person, having gone with her compan- 
ions to receive communion at the house of the Ursu- 
lines, the Mothers made them a little feast; this one 
only wept while the others ate. They urged her to 
give the reason for doing so, but she would in no 
wise speak of it. This having come to our ears, we 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20: 


de fes larmes; enfin apres vn long filence: I’eftois 
trifte, refpondit-elle, de ce que vous m’auiés mariée, 
ie voyois ces bonnes Religieufes auec lefquelles i’ay 
demeuré, & i’euffe bien voulu [47] viure comme elles, 
& ie ne fcaurois plus maintenant: Mais ne vous ay-je 
pas demandé, luy dit vn de nous, fi vous defiriés eftre 
Religieufe? ne m’aués vous pas refpondu que vous. 
vouliés eftre mariée? Vous m’aués bien demandé, 
fit-elle, fi ie voulois eftre Religieufe: Ie ne vous ay 
pas refpondu que ie voulois eftre mariée; mais bien 
que ie ne penfois pas pouuoir faire comme ces bonnes. 
Filles, & voila le fujet de ma douleur, de ce que ie 
n’ay pas affés d’efprit pour viure comme elles. 

Vne ieune femme Chreftienne penfant mourir en 
fes couches, & fa petite fille nouuellement née, eftat 
fi malade que les femmes Sauuages difoiét qu’elle 
s’en alloit expirer; le pere & la mere de 1’enfant 
promirent a Dieu qu’elle feroit toufiours vierge, c’eft 
4 dire, qu’ils la feroiét Religieufe quad elle feroit 
grande, fi elle le vouloit eftre: Dieu fauua la mere 
& la fille: Maintenant ces bonnes gens offrent fou- 
uent leur fruit A noftre Seigneur, & le fupplient de 
l’ageréer pour fa Maifon. Le fieur Giffard fauua la 
vie Ala mere; & noftre Seigneur refufcita, pour ainfi 
dire, le petit enfant. 

Vne bonne Chreftienne eftant accouchée [48] dans 
les bois, voyant fon enfant nouuellement né bien ma- 
lade, & ne fcachant que luy faire, confulta quelques — 
autres Chreftiennes; mais comme ces bonnes gens 
ne fcauoient pas la formule du Baptefme, ils s’aduife- 
rent de pendre leurs chappelets au col du petit en- 
fant, & peut-eftre que noftre Seigneur aggreant leur 
foy & leur fimplicité a conferué cette petite creature, 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 181 


asked her the cause of her tears; at length, after a 
long silence, ‘‘] was sad,’’ answered she, ‘‘ because 
you had married me; I saw those good Nuns, with 
whom I had lived, and I would indeed have wished 
[47] to live as they do, and now I no longer can.” 
‘* But did I not ask you,’’ said one of us to her, ‘‘ if 
you desired to be a Nun? did you not answer that 
you wished to be married?” ‘‘ You did indeed ask 
me,’’ said she, ‘‘if I wished to be a Nun; I did not 
reply that I wished to be married, but, really, that I 
did not think I was able to do as these good Sisters 
do; and this is the cause of my grief, that I had not 
enough spirit to live like them.” 

A young Christian woman thinking she would die 
in her confinement, and her little newborn girl being 
so sick that the Savage women said she was about to 
expire, the father and mother of the child promised 
God that she should always be a virgin,—that is, 
that they would make her a Nun when she was 
grown up, if she wished to be one. God saved the 
mother and the child. Now these good people often 
present their offspring to the Lord, and beg him to 
accept it for his House. The sieur Giffard® saved 
the life of the mother; and our Lord resuscitated, so 
to speak, the little child. 

A good Christian woman having been confined [48] 
in the woods, seeing her newly-born child very sick, 
and not knowing what to do for it, consulted some 
other Christian women; but as these good people did 
not know the formula of Baptism, they bethought 
themselves of hanging their rosaries on the neck of 
the little child; and perhaps our Lord, accepting 
favorably their faith and their simplicity, preserved. 
that little creature, who since has received holy Bap-- 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


qui depuis a receu le fainct Baptefme, & fe porte fort 
‘bien: I’aurois quantité d’autres actions femblables a 
dire de nos Neophytes, mais il faut éuiter la lon- 
gueur. En verité, Dieu eft bon, & fa Bonté n’a 
point de limites: Le Scythe & le Tartare font auffi 
bien a luy que les Grecs, ie voudrois que toutes les 


langues du ciel & de la terre le beniffent pour les” 


merueilles qu'il a operé, & qu’il opere tous les iours 
deuant nos yeux, au milieu de la Barbarie: qui n’ad- 
mire point ces Metamorphofes, ne les voit pas; ou qui 
‘es voit, & ne les admire pas, n’a point de coeur, ne 
‘concetiant pas ce qu’il a coufté a Iefus-Chrift pour 
changer des enfans de Sathan des enfans du grand 
Dieu. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 183: 


tism and is very well. I would have many other 
like acts to relate of our Neophytes, but I must avoid 
tediousness. Truly, God is good, and his Goodness 
has no bounds. The Scythians and the Tartars be- 
long to him as well as the Greeks; I would that all 
tongues in heaven and on earth might bless him for 
the wonders that he has worked and is working every 
day before our eyes, in the midst of Barbarism. He 
who does not wonder at these Metamorphoses does 
not see them; or he who sees them, and does not 
wonder at them, has no heart,—not apprehending 
what it cost Jesus Christ to change the children of 
Satan into children of the great God. 


—_—: 
ss 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


[49] CHAPITRE IIII. 


‘DE QUELQUES BAPTESMES PLUS SIGNALES EN LA RESI- 
DENCE DE SAINCT IOSEPH. 


E nombre de ceux qu’on a fait Chreftiens cette 
année, és Refidences de la Conception & de S. 
lofeph, n’eft pas moindre que celuy des années 

precedentes; nous auons maintenant cette confola- 
tion qu’on ne baptife pas feulement les enfans & les 
malades, mais encor les adultes qui font pleins de 
vie & de fanté; les graces que Dieu fait & quelques 
vns de ces bons Neophytes font fignalées; i’en touche- 
ray quelques-vnes en ce chapitre, que ie prefenteray 
comme vne riche recompenfe 4 tous ceux qui procu- 
rent deuant Dieu & deuant les hommes, la conuerfion 
de ces peuples. 

Nous baptifafmes & mefme iour trois chefs de 
familles qui fe retiroient ordinairement 4 Tadouffac, 
mais le defir de leur falut leur a fait prendre party 
auec le[s] [50] Chreftiens de la Refidence de Sainct 
Iofeph, le plus fignalé des trois fe nomme Charles 
Meiachkasgat. Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny, 
noftre Gouuerneur le voyant fi zelé pour noftre croy- 
Ace, voulut eftre fon parrain: Ie dirois volontiers de © 
luy ce que noftre Seigneur difoit de Nathanaél: Ecce 
vere Lfraélita in quo dolus non eft, ce bon homme eft vn 
vray Ifraélite, il n’eft compofé ny de fraude ny de 
{upercherie, c’eft la mefme candeur il a toufiours 
efté porté au bien, mais depuis enuiron deux ans 
Dieu l’a fortement touché; Il nous a raconté, qu’e- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 185 


[49] CHAPTER IIII. 


OF SOME VERY REMARKABLE BAPTISMS AT THE RESI- 
DENCE OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


HE number of those who have become Chris- 
“3 tians this year, at the Residences of la Con- 
_ ception and of St. Joseph, is not less than that 
of previous years; we have now this consolation that 
not only children and the sick are baptized, but even 
adults who are full of life and health.” The mercies 
that God shows to some of these simple Neophytes 
are striking; I shall touch upon some of them in this 
chapter, which I shall offer as a rich recompense to 
all those who procure, before God and before men, 
the conversion of these peoples. 

We baptized on one day three heads of families 
who generally have withdrawn to Tadoussac, but the 
desire for their salvation made them join the [50] 
Christians of the Residence of Saint Joseph. The 
most remarkable of the three is named Charles Mei- 
achkawat; Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, 
our Governor, seeing him so zealous for our belief, 
wished to be his godfather. I would willingly say 
of him what our Lord said of Nathanaél: Ecce vere 
Israélita in quo dolus non est; this good man is a true 
Israelite,— he is made up neither of fraud nor deceit, 
he has the same candor, he has always been inclined 
to good; but about two years ago God touched him 
mightily. He related to us that, being one day in 
tthe woods, he saw a man clothed like us, and he 


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


ftant certain’ iour dans les bois, il vit vn homme 
veftu comme nous, & qu'il entendoit vne voix qui 
luy difoit: Quitte tes anciennes fagons de faire, 
prefte loreille X ces gens la, & fais comme eux; & 
quand tu feras inftruit, enfeigne tes Compatriotes: 
Ie ne feay, difoit-il, fi c’eftoit la voix du grand Capi- 
taine du ciel, mais ie voyois & conceuois des chofes 
grandes; ie tins au commencement tout ce difcours 
pour vne réuerie de Sauuage, & i’ay paffé plus d’vn 
an fans y faire autre reflexion que celle que ie ferois 
fur vn fonge: Mais enfin [51] voyant que ce bon- 
homme s’efforcoit de nous imiter le plus prés qu'il 
luy eftoit pofiible, felon fa condition, voyant fa fer- 
ueur 4 embraffer & publier la foy, quoy qu’il en foit 
de cette vifion ou de ce fonge, i’ay creu que ces bons 
effets ne pouuoient prouenir que de la grace de Iefus 
Chrift: Si toft qu’il eut entendu cette voix, il quitta 
de foy-mefme fans nous parler, car il eftoit bien loin 
de nous, toutes les folies de fa Nation, les feftins a 
tout manger, les chants {uper{titieux; il quitta mefme 
les chofes indifferentes, comme de fe peindre le 
vifage, de s’oindre & de fe graiffer les cheueux & la 
face, 2 la facon des autres Sauuages, il quitta le. 
petun, dont les Sauuages font paffionnés au dela de 
ce quis’en peut dire: Il fe mit a prefcher fes gens, 
difant, qu’il falloit croire en Dieu, qu’il nous falloit 
prefter Voreille, qu'il falloit faire le figne de la 
Croix; c’eft, difoit-il, tout ce que ie fcay; il le fai- f 
foit A tous propos fans prononcer aucune parole, 
n’ayant pas encor efté inftruit: Il parla fi bién aux 
Sauuages de Tadouffac, & 4 quelques-vns du Sagné,. 
qu’ils le deleguerent 4 Kebec pour venir querir quel- 
que [52] Pere de noftre Compagnie, afin de leur” 


; ef 
iw 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 187 


heard a voice which said to him: ‘‘ Forsake thine old 
ways; lend an ear to these people, and do as they 
do; and, when thou shalt be instructed, teach thy 
Countrymen.” ‘‘I do not know,’’ said he, ‘‘if it 
were the voice of the great Captain of heaven, but I 
saw and conceived great things.’’ In the beginning, 
I took all this talk for the reverie of a Savage; and I 
passed more than a year without giving any other 
thought to it than that which I would have given to 
adream. But, at length,—[51] seeing that this art- 
less man exerted himself to imitate us, as nearly as 
was possible for him according to his nature, and 
seeing his ardor in espousing and proclaiming the 
faith, whatever it might be, of that vision or dream,— 
I believed that these good effects could only proceed 
from the grace of Jesus Christ. As soon as he had 
heard that voice, he abandoned of his own accord — 
without speaking to us, for he was far distant from 
us —all the follies of his Nation, the eat-all feasts, 
and the superstitious chants; he even gave up indif- 
ferent things, like painting his visage, anointing his 
body, hair, and face, after the manner of other Sav- 
ages; he left off tobacco, to which the Savages are 
devoted beyond all that can be said. He began to 
preach to his own people, saying that they must 
believe in God, that they must give ear to us, and 
must make the sign of the Cross,—‘‘ This,’’ said he, 
“is all that I know.”’ He did this at every turn, 
without pronouncing another word, not having yet 
been instructed. He spoke so well to the Savages 
of Tadoussac and to some of the Sagné region, that 
they commissioned him to come to Kebec for some 
[52] Father of our Society, ‘‘that he might teach 
them the prayers,’’—it is thus that they spoke. 


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Nou 20 


enfeigner les’prieres; c’eft ainfi qu’ils parloient: Ce 
bon-homme voyant que le Pere qu’il demandoit n’y 
pouuoit aller, fe tourmentoit: Ie penfe, faifoit il, 
qu’on s’imagine que ie {uis vn menteur; il s’adreffe 
au fieur Oliuier, & le coniure de faire en forte aupres 
de Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, qu’on enuoyaft ce 
Pere a Tadouffac, affurant que les Sauuages qui 
ef{toient 14, vouloient croire en Dieu; il n’y eut point 
moyen de luy fatisfaire pour lors: I] s’en retourne 
done porter refponfe, qu’on ne les pourroit aller 
vifiter; qu’au Printemps le Pere quils demandoient les 
iroit voir: Ayant fait fon meffage il s’en reuint en la 
Refidence de Sainct Iofeph, amenant auec foy deux 
familles: Nous prenions plaifir de voir la naifueté de 
ce bon Neophyte, il ne iettoit point les yeux fur les 
autres Francois, mais fur nous, tafchant de nous imi- 
ter felon fes forces; il nous vint demander vn papier, 
nous priant d’y marquer tous les iours: Marqués, 
difoit-il, les iours de fefte, les iours de trauail, les 
iours qu’on ne mange point de chair, les iours de 
ieufne, les iours que [53] vous ieufnés vous autres, & 
non pas les Compagnés, c’eft ainfi qu’ils nomment 
les hommes de trauail, car ie veux faire entierement 
comme vous: Luy ayant donné ce papier, il remar- 
quoit fort bien la difference des iours. Vn honnefte 
Fracois ayat fait quelque voyage auec luy, nous a 
rapporté, qu’il fe contentoit les iours de poiffon d’vn 
peu de galette boiiillie dedans de 1’eau pure; ils’eft 7 
comporté fi religieufement en ce point que le pauure © 
homme a quelquefois paffé deux iours fans manger, — 
n’ayant autre chofe que de la chair, ne voulant pas 
violer le Commandement de 1’Eglife, auquel il n’eft 
nullement obligé dans la neceffité de leurs viures: — 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 189 


This simple man, seeing that the Father for whom 
he asked could not go, was distressed. ‘‘I think,”’ 
said he, ‘‘ thatthey imagine I am a liar.’’ He made 
application to sieur Olivier, and conjured him so to 
arrange with Monsieur our Governor, that this Father 
should be sent to Tadoussac,— affirming that the 
Savages who were there wished to believe in God. 
There was no way of satisfying him at that time. 
Accordingly, he returned home, bearing the answer 
that we could not visit them, but that in the Spring 
the Father for whom they asked would go to see 
them. Having given his message, he came back to 
the Residence of Saint Joseph, bringing with him 
two families. We took pleasure in seeing the artless- 
ness of this good Neophyte; he did not cast his eyes 
upon the other Frenchmen, but upon us, trying to 
imitate us according to his power. He came to ask 
us for a paper, begging us to mark all the days upon 
it. ‘‘ Mark,’’ said he, ‘‘ the feast days, the working 
days, the days when meat is not eaten, the fast days; 
the days when [53] you yourselves fast, and not the 
Companions,’’—it is thus they call the workmen; 
“for I wish to do exactly as you do.”’ Having given 
him this paper, he observed very well the difference 
of the days. A worthy Frenchman having made a 
journey with him, told us that on fish days he was 
contented with a little sea biscuit boiled in clear 
water; he conducted himself so religiously in this 
respect that the poor man sometimes passed two days 
without food, having nothing but meat, and not wish- 
ing to violate the Command of the Church, to which 
he was by no means bound in the destitution of his 
provisions. Being invited to feasts on days when 
meat was not eaten, he kept his portion for his fam- 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Eftant inuité au feftin les iours qu’on ne mangeoit 
point de viande, il gardoit fon mets pour fa famille, 
fans y toucher; mais comme nous luy auions dit 
feulement gu’on ne mangeoit point de chair les iours 
marqués dans fon papier; Luy prenant cela au pied 
de la lettre, fans philofopher plus auant, ne mangeoit 
point de chair, mais ne laiffoit pas de boire du boiil- 
lon ott la viande auoit cuit: Nous en eftans apperceus, 
nous ne luy voulufmes [54] point defendre, ayans 
copaffion de fa pauureté; car il n’auoit le plus fou- 
uent ces iours 1A qu’vn morceau de galette, ou vn 
morceau de pain pour tout mets, & encor bien petit. 

Il atellement dans l’efprit d’imiter nos fagons de 
faire, qu'il nous demanda fi nous le voudrions bien 
receuoir parmy nous, qu’auffi bien il vouloit quitter 
fa femme, puis qu’elle ne preffoit point fon bap- 
tefme; la voix que i’ay entendiie difoit-il, m’exhorte 
A vous imiter, ie ne me foucie point d’eftre marié, ie 
donneray ma petite fille aux Vrfulines, & ie demeure- 
ray aulec vous; ce deffein nous fit rire: Comme il 
nous voit par fois retirer feuls 4 l’efcart, pour nous 
entretenir auec Dieu, il fait le mefme, fe promenant 
tout feul, contre la couftume de fa nation, recitant 
fon chappelet, ou ruminant quelque point de la 
doctrine qu’on luy a enfeignée. 


Vn Pere de noftre Compagnie, eftant defcendu ce 4 


Printemps 4 Tadouffac, comme il s’éloignoit tous les | 


iours des cabanes, pour fe recueillir quelque temps, } 
ce bon-homme le fuiuoit fans mot dire, fe promenant — 
A part fans l’interrompre: [55] Enfin le Pere s’eftant 
apperceu qu’il portoit vn piftolet fous fa robe, luy 
demanda ce qu’il venoit faire, & ce qu’il vouloit faire 
de ces armes: I’y viens, fit-il, pour faire mes prieres, 


| 


} 


$ 


A ‘tebe 
al 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 191 


ily, without touching it; but as we had simply said 
to him that meat was not eaten on the days indicated 
upon his paper, he—taking this literally without 
reflecting further— ate none, but did not fail to drink 
the broth in which the meat had been cooked. We, 
having perceived this, did not wish [54] to forbid it 
to him, having compassion on his poverty; for very 
often on those days his only food was but a bit of 
biscuit or bread, and even that very scanty. 

He had it so much in his heart to imitate our cus- 
toms, that he asked if we would really receive him 
among us; for he would like to leave his wife, since 
she did not urge her baptism. ‘‘ The voice that I 
heard,’’ said he, ‘‘ exhorted me to imitate you. I do 
not care to be married; I will give my little girl to 
the Ursulines, and I will stay with you.’’ This pro- 
posal made us laugh. As he saw us sometimes with- 
draw apart to commune with God, he did the same, — 
walking alone, contrary to the custom of his nation, 
reciting his rosary, or revolving in his mind some 
point of doctrine, that he had been taught. 

A Father of our Society having gone down to 
Tadoussac this Spring, as he withdrew every day 
from the cabins, in order to meditate a while, this 
artless man followed him without speaking, walking 
apart without interrupting him. [55] At length the 
Father, perceiving that he carried a pistol under his 
tobe, asked for what he came, and what he intended 
to do with those arms: ‘‘I am come,’’ said he, ‘‘ to 
say my prayers, and to watch over thee. This place 
to which thou retirest is dangerous,—some Etechi- 
min or other evil-minded Savage may come even 
here, and kill thee without our perceiving him; if 
that should happen thou wouldst sadden all the Sav- 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


& pour te garder, ce lieu ot tu te retires eft dange- 
reux, quelque Etechimin ou autre Sauuage mal 
affectionné peut venir iufques icy, & te tuer fans que 
nous nous en apperceuions; fi cela arriuoit tu attri- 
{terois tous les Sauuages, voila pourquoy ie viens 
armé pour te proteger, tu ne deurois pas t’éloigner 
des cabanes iufques 4 la venué des nauires, qui nous 
mettront en affurance. 

On l’entend affés fouuent exhorter les Sauuages a 
fuiure nos facons de faire: Iettés les yeux, leur fait- 
il, fur les principaux Francois, fur les Capitaines, 
fur les Peres, ce font ceux-la qu’il faut imiter, s'il y 
a quelque Compagnés qui ne marche pas droit, il n’y 
faut pas prendre garde, ils ne fcauent pas tous le 
Maffinahigan, c’eft a dire le Liure qui enfeigne 
comme il fe faut bien comporter: Si toft qu’il fut 
touché de Dieu, voyant des Sauuages du Sagné arri- 
uer a Tadouffac, il les alla vifiter, les exhorta 4 em- 
braffer la foy dont il [56] n’auoit quafi aucune co- 
gnoiffance, & pour ce que les prefents font les paroles 
de ce pais-cy, il leur offre vn grand collier de porce- 
laine, pour les engager 4 croire en noftre Seigneur, 
ie n’appris cela qu’vn an apres & encor par accident. 

Ces trois chefs de familles dont i’ay parlé, eftoient 
fi ardens a fe faire in{truire, qu’ils nous laffoient. 
Ayans efté certain iour long temps auec nous, on les 
vint inuiter au feftin, ils fe dirent 1’vn l’autre, n’y 
allons pas, nous voicy en repos aupres des Peres qui 
nous inftruifent, efcoutons les pendant que nous 
auons le temps. Qui a connoiffance du genie des 
Sauuages, iugera que cette action eft remarquable en 


eux, i’ay veu entr’autres Charles dont ie parle main- — 


tenant, fe bander fi fort pour retenir les prieres, qu’il 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 193 


ages. This is why I come armed to protect thee; 
thou oughtst not to go far from the cabins until the 
coming of the ships, which will give us confidence.”’ 
He was not unfrequently heard exhorting the Sav- 
ages to follow our customs: ‘‘ Cast your eyes,’’ he 
said to them, ‘‘ on the principal Frenchmen, on the 
Captains, on the Fathers,—they are the ones we 
must imitate. If there is any Companion who does 
not walk straight, we must beware of him; they do 
not all know the Massinahigan,’’ that is, the Book 
which teaches how one must conduct himself prop- 
erly. As soon as he was touched by God, seeing the 
Savages of the Sagné come to Tadoussac, he went to 
visit them, and exhorted them to embrace the faith, 
of which he [56] had scarcely any knowledge; and 
since presents are the language of this country, he 
offered them a great porcelain collar, that he might 
win them to believe in our Lord. I learned this 
only a year afterward, and even then by accident. 
These three heads of families of whom I have 
spoken, were so zealous to be instructed that they 
wearied us. Ona certain day when they had been a 
long time with us, they were invited to a feast; they 
said to one another: ‘‘Let us not go; here we are 
in quiet with the Fathers who instruct us, let us listen 
to them while we have the time.’’ He who has a 
knowledge of the nature of the Savages, will deem 
that this action was remarkable in them. I have 
seen, among others, Charles, of whom I am now 
speaking, struggle so hard to remember his prayers, 
that it caused him great drops of sweat, in rather 
cold weather. He had himself taught by children; 
he wrote, or rather he made marks upon bark, to 
impress upon his mind what he had been taught. 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


en fuoit a groffes gouttes en vn temps affés froid: Il 
fe faifoit in{truire par des enfans, efcriuoit, ou plutoft 
faifoit des marques fur de l’efcorce, pour s’imprimer 
dans l’efprit ce qu’on luy enfeignoit; ils ont tous 
trois paffé plufieurs nuicts, ou peu s’en falloit, pour 
fe faire dire & redire le Pater & 1’ Aue, & le Credo en 
leur langue, afin de pouuoir reciter [57] leur chap- 
pelet; ils eurent de grands fentimens en leur bap- 
tefme, ie m’eftonnay du courage de l’vn d’eux; car 
deuant qu’il fuft Chreftien il auoit de grandes craintes 
que fa femme ne le quittaft: eftant baptifé, non 
feulement il perdit cette crainte, mais voyant qu'elle 
ne preffoit pas fon baptefme affés fortement 4 fon 
gré, il luy dit nettement, que fi elle ne fe haftoit de 
croire en Dieu, qu'il la banniroit de fes coftés, & 
qu'il efpouferoit vne C[h]reftienne: Ces trois familles 
font pour le prefent regenerées dans le Sang de 
lAgneau, il n’y a que la femme de Charles qui fe fait 
maintenant inftruire, quoy qu’affés lentement; c’eft 
vn naturel brufque & agard, qui donne bien de 1’exer- 
cice 4ce pauure homme: II] nous vint trouuer certain 
iour tout affligé; Vous m’aués dit que ceux qui font 
du mal y font bien fouuent incités par les Demons, 
helas! faifoit-il, ie fuis donc toufiours auec quelque 
Demon, car ma femme e(ft inceflamment en cholere; 
i’ay peur que les Demons qu’elle retient en ma 
cabane ne faffent tort au bien que i’ay receu dans le 
fainct Baptefme; & 14 deffus mettant les bras fur fon 
coeur: Ie [58] vous affure, difoit-il, que c’eft tout de 
bon que ie croy en Dieu, & que ie luy veux obeir; & 
comme i’ay appris que le peché chaffoit Dieu de 
nof{tre ame, quand vn autre fait mal en ma prefence, 
ie crains que cela ne porte dommage 4 mon cceur. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 195 


All three have several times passed the night, or 
little short of it, in being told and retold the Pater, 
Ave, and the Credo in their own language, so that 
they could recite [57] their rosary. They had 
deep feeling at their baptism; I was amazed at the 
courage of one of them, for before he was a Christian 
he had great fears that his wife would leave him. 
When he was baptized, he not only lost this fear, 
but —seeing that she did not urge her own baptism 
quite strongly enough, in his opinion—he told her 
plainly, that if she did not hasten to believe in God, 
he would banish her from his side, and would marry 
a Christian. These three families are for the pres- 
ent regenerated in the Blood of the Lamb; the wife 
of Charles is the only one who is now being in- 
structed, although rather slowly; she is a rough and 
wild creature, who gives a great deal of trouble to 
the poor man. He came to us one day quite dis- 
tressed. ‘‘ You have told me that those who do evil 
are very often incited to it by Demons; alas!”’’ said 
he, ‘‘then I am always with some Demon, for my 
wife is always angry; I fear that the Demons she 
keeps in my cabin are perverting the good that I 
received in holy Baptism.” And thereupon, folding 
his arms over his heart, ‘‘ I [58] assure you,” said he, 
“that I earnestly believe in God and I wish to obey 
him; and, since I have learned that sin drove God 
from our hearts, when another does evil in my pres- 
ence, I fear that may bring loss to my soul.’’ 
Another time his wife aimed a knife at his thigh, 
and he, evading the blow, had only his robe injured, 
in which this Megera made a great slash. There- 
upon he came to us; meeting some Savages on the 
way, he began to laugh. ‘‘See,’’ said he, ‘‘ the 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


Vne autre fois fa femme luy portant vn coufteau 
dans la cuiffe, luy efquiuant le coup, il n’y euft que fa 
robe offenfée, A laquelle cette Megere fit vne grande 
eftafilade; 1a deffus il nous vint trouuer, rencontrant 
des Sauuages en chemin il fe mettoit a rire: Voila 
difoit-il, la cholere de celle qui me tient pour fon 
valet, elle penfoit me pouuoir fafcher, mais i’ay plus 
de pouuoir fur moy que d’entrer en fureur pour la 
cholere d’vne femme; & regardant fa robe toute 
defchirée: En verité, difoit-il, cette femme n’a point 
d’efprit, c’eft chofe eftrange comme les Sauuages font 
ennemis de la cholere, & comme ce peché les choque. 

Ie ne {cay ce que ce bon-homme n’a point fait pour 
la gaigner a Dieu: fi tu veux croire, luy difoit-il, ie 
t’aymeray vniquement, ie te feruiray A tous tes be- 
{oins, ie feray mefme les petits offices que [59] font 
les femmes, i’iray querir de l'eau & du bois, ie te 
cheriray plus que moy-mefme; il fe pingoit le bras, 
& luy difoit: Vois-tu cette chair, ie ne l’aime pas, 
c’eft Dieu que i’aime, & ceux qui croyent en luy; fi 
tu ne luy veux pas obeir, il te faut éloigner de moy, 
car ie ne puis aimer ceux qui n’aiment pas Dieu. 

Sa femme fe mocquoit de luy,; Ne vois-tu pas que 
nous mourons tous depuis qu’on nous a parlé de prier 
Dieu; ot font tes parens, ou font les miens, la 
plufpart font morts, il n’eft plus temps de croire. 

Tu n’as pas d’efprit, luy repartoit-il, celuy qui 
nous a donné la vie, & qui nous la conferue lors que 
nous ne croyons pas en luy, nous l’oftera-t’il mainte- 
nant que nous voulons luy obeir? & quand il nous. 
Vofteroit ie ne laifferois pas de l’aimer; car ie ne 
laime pas pour viure long-temps ¢a bas en terre, 
mais pour le voir au ciel: fi tu ne veux croire en luy, 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 197 


anger of her who considers me her servant; she 
thought she would be able to irritate me, but I have 
more power over myself than to fall into a passion at 
the anger of a woman.’’ And looking at his badly- 
torn garment, ‘‘ Truly,’’ said he, ‘‘ that woman has. 
no sense.’’ It is strange what enemies the Savages 
are of anger, and how this sin shocks them. 

I know not what this simple man has not done to 
win her over to God. ‘‘If thou wilt believe,’’ he 
said to her, ‘‘ I will love thee above all things; I will 
‘wait upon thee in all thy needs, I will even perform 
the little duties that [59] the women do,—I will go 
for water and wood; I will love thee more than my- 
self.’’ He pinched his arm and said to her: ‘‘ Dost 
thou see this flesh? I do not love it; it is God whom 
I love, and those who believe in him. If thou art 
not willing to obey him, thou must go away from 
me; for I cannot love those who do not love God.’’ 

His wife derided him: ‘‘ Dost thou not see that we 
are all dying since they told us to pray to God? 
Where are thy relatives, where are mine? the most 
of them are dead; it is no longer a time to believe.” 

‘“Thou hast no sense,” he replied; ‘‘ he who has 
given us life, and who preserves it when we do not 
believe in him, will he take it away now when we 
wish to obey him? And even should he take it away, 
I would not cease to love him; for I do not love him 
in order to live a long time here on earth, but to see 
him in heaven. If thou art not willing to believe in 
him, leave me; if my Father who has instructed me 
tells me to live alone, I shall obey him; if he allows 
me to be married again, to a Christian, I shall take 
her.’’ When he had been given a list of feast days, 
and when he [60] observed them in the woods, his 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


retire toy d’aupres de moy; fi mon Pere qui m’a 
inftruit, dit que ie viue feul, ie luy obeiray, s’il me 
fait remarier 4 vne Chreftienne, ie la prendray. 
Comme on luy auoit donné vn catalogue des iours de 
feftes, & qu’il [60] les gardoit dans les bois, fa femme 
luy reprochoit qu’il eftoit parefleux, qu'il ne chaffoit 
point, qu'il ne feroit qu’vn gueux, qu’il n’auroit pas 
dequoy viure, ny dequoy fe couurir. Tes paroles, 
luy difoit-il, ne m’eftonnent pas, quand tout ce que 
tu dis deuroit arriuer ie ne laifferois pas d’ obeir 4 Dieu, 
ie n’attens pas de luy des richeffes en terre, i’e{pere 
neantmoins qu’il m’affiftera, & quoy que l’on me die, 
ie luy obeiray: Quelques Sauuages voyans qu’il jet- 
toit aux chiens les os de caftor qu'il prenoit, l’'accu- 
foient de follie, difant qu’il n’en prendroit plus: C’eft 
l’vne de leurs fuperftitions anciennes de jetter dans 
la riuiere ou dans le feu les os de certains animaux, 
afin qu’ils ayent bonne chaffe. Luy leur reprochoit 
leur ignorance: Ces animaux font faits pour nous, 
difoit-il, c’eft vne trdperie du Diable de s’arrefter a 
ces fuperftitions, vous vous arre{tés a des menfonges, 
& vous fermés les yeux a la verité. 
Si on l’incitoit A embraffer quelque chofe ot il dou- 
taft qu’il y efit peché; ie ne [gay pas, faifoit-il, fi 
cela m’eft permis, ie le demanderay 4 mon Pere, & 
ie feray ce qu’il me dira fur ce fujet. | 
[61] Quand il s’en alla faire fa chaffe pendant l’hy- — a 
uer, nous luy donnafmes, comme i’ay remarqué cy- : 
deffus, vn petit calendrier, ot il marquoit tous les 
iours; nous 1’exhortafmes auffi de fe trouuer le iour 
du grand Vendredy 4 Kebec, s'il y auoit moyen, il 
n’y manqua pas, il s’y trouua parmy les Frangois, 
& fut plus de trois heures a V’Eglife, affiftant au 


Jb eel 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 199 


wife reproached him for being lazy, and for not 
hunting,—telling him he would be only a beggar, 
and that he would have neither food nor raiment. 
“Your words,’’ said he to her, ‘‘ do not shake me; 
though all you say should happen, I would not cease 
to obey God. I do not expect from him riches on 
earth; nevertheless, I hope that he will aid me, and, 
whatever may be said to me, I shall obey him.” 
Some Savages, seeing that he threw to the dogs the 
bones of a beaver that he had caught, accused him 


of folly, saying that he would catch no more; it is 


one of their ancient superstitions to throw into the 
river or into the fire the bones of certain animals, in 
order that they may have a successful hunt." He 
reproached them for their ignorance: ‘‘ These ani- 
mals are made for us,’’ he said; ‘‘ it is a deception 
of the Devil to remain in these superstitions; you 
are dwelling in falsehoods, and you shut your eyes 
to the truth.”’ 

If he were urged to undertake anything in which 
he suspected there might be sin, ‘‘ I do not know,” 
he would say, ‘‘if that be permitted me; I will ask 
my Father, and I will do what he tells me in the 
case.” 

[61] When he went to hunt during the winter, we 
gave him, as I stated above, a little calendar, on 
which he marked all the days; we exhorted him also 
to be in Kebec on good Friday, if it were possible. 
In this he did not fail; he was there with the French, 
and was more than three hours in the Church, being 
present at the Service and at the Passion, although 
he understood nothing of it. After dinner, he came 
to confess; and, after his confession, he was still an 
hour and a half in the chapel. He had eaten noth- 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Not. 20 


Seruice & Ala Paffion, quoy qu'il n’y entédit rien; 
apres le difner il fe vint confeffer, & apres fa con- 
feffion il fut encor vne heure & demie 4 la chappelle, 
il n’auoit magé pend&t le Carefme qu’vn peu de 
galette, & vn peu d’huile de loup-marin, qu'il auoit 
expreflement conferuée pour ce temps-la: s’eftant 
confeffé & communié, il s’en retourna a la chaffe; 
le temps luy eftant encor fauorable, il fit bonne 
prouifion de chair d’Eflan, mais ayant donné charge 
4 fes gens de l’aller requerir auec fa chalouppe, & 
les vents eftans contraires, il fut long-temps comme 
prifonnier dans ces grands bois, fans nous pouvoir 
venir voir; 4 fon retour il nous tira quafi les larmes 
des yeux, nous racontant comme il fe comportoit 
dans ce petit banniffement. 

[62] Ie difois A Dieu, faifoit-il, toy qui commandes 
aux vents, arrefte-les, afin que ie puiffe aller en ta 
Maifon, ie m’ennuie d’eftre fi long-temps fans me 
confeffer, & fans voir la Maifon de priere. Quand il 
faifoit quelque chofe qu’il penfoit eftre peché, aufii- 
tof{t il fe mettoit A genoux, en demandoit 4 Dieu par- 
don, & fe frappoit foy-mefme, pour tirer vengeance 
de ce qu’il penfoit eftre faute, & qui bien fouuent ne 
l’eftoit pas, prenant la crainte du peché pour le peché 
mefme. 

Sa petite fille eftant tombée malade, en forte qu'il 
penfoit qu’elle en deuft mourir; fa femme ne man- 
qua pas de luy reprocher que le baptefme la faifoit 
mourir; ce bon homme mettant fon efperance en 
Dieu, prend fon chappelet, luy pend au col, & la pre- 
fente & Dieu auec ces paroles; cét enfant eft a toy, 
tu me l’as donnée, & ie te l’ay rendué, determine 


de fa vie comme tu voudras, tu en es le maiftre; fi 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 201 


ing during Lent but a little biscuit, and a little seal 
oil, which he had kept specially for that season. 
Having confessed and received communion, he went 
away to hunt; the weather being still favorable to 
him, he laid in a good supply of Elk meat, but, hav- 
ing given his people orders to come back for him 
with his shallop, the winds being contrary, he was 
for a long time, as it were, a prisoner in those 
great forests, without being able to come to us; on 
his return, he almost drew tears from our eyes, relat- 
ing to us how he bore himself in that short banish- 
ment. 

[62] ‘‘ I said to God,” declared he, ‘‘ ‘ Thou who 
commandest the winds, stay them, that I may go to 
thy House; Iam weary of being so long without con- 
fessing, and without seeing the House of prayer.’”’ 
When he did anything he thought a sin, he immedi- 
ately fell upon his knees, asked pardon of God for it, 
and smote himself, in order to take vengeance upon 
what he thought a fault, and which very often was 
not,— taking the fear of sin for the sin itself. 

His little girl having fallen ill, so that he thought 
she must die, his wife reproached him, saying that 
baptism was making her die; this good man, put- 
ting his hope in God, took his rosary, hung it on her 
neck, and presented her to God with these words: 
“This child is thine, thou gavest her to me, and I 
have returned her to thee. Decide upon her life as 
thou wilt,—thou art the master of it; if thou will 
that she die, I will submit to it; if thou wilt give 
her to me again, I will thank thee,—and, as soon as 
she is grown, I will give her to the virgin Sisters, 
that she may be instructed. Do as thou [63] wilt; 
whatever may happen, I shall not cease to believe in 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


tu veux qu’elle meure, ie l’aggréeray, fi tu me la 
veux encor donner vne fois, ie t’en remercieray, & fi 
tof{t qu’elle fera grande, ie la donneray aux Filles 
vierges, pour la faire inftruire, fais-en comme tu [63] 
voudras, quoy qu'il arriue, ie ne laifferay pas de 
croire en toy, l’enfant guerit auec 1’eftonnement, & 
auec la confolation de fes parens. 

Ayant appris qu’vn certain homme parloit mal de 
luy, illuy vint quelque penfée de le payer en mefme 
monnoye, & de diuulguer quelque mal qu’on luy 
auoit appris de cette perfonne; faifant reflexion fur 
fa penfée, il deuint tout confus, & fe mit 4 genoux, 
demanda pardon 4 Dieu, difant en foy mefme: fi 
ceux qui ne font pas baptifés font du mal, il ne faut 
pas que ceux qui le font; les imitent, & 14 deffus il 
fe mit a prier pour celuy qui le calomnioit, la nature 
ne va pas fi auant, ces fruicts ne fe cueillent qu’au 
iardin de la grace, au milieu duquel eft planté l’arbre 
de la faincte Croix, fur lequel Iefus-Chrift prioit pour 
fes ennemis. 

Exhortant vn malade, & luy reprefentant les biens 
de l’autre vie; ne penfe pas, difoit-il, que les eaux 
du Baptefme fe verfent pour guerir ton corps, c’eft 
pour purifier ton ame, & te donner vne vie qui ne 
peut mourir, le Baptefme n’eft pas inftitué pour vne 
chofe fi baffe que noftre vie, [64] noftre Pere qui eft 
dans les cieux, ne nous tient pas au rang des chiens 
pour ne nous donner que la vie commune aux beftes. 

De verité, ie luy ay ouy dire tant de biens de la 
foy, & tenir des difcours fi deuots & fi tendres, que 
i’en eftois tout eftonné; ie me veux mal, d’auoir 
laiffé efchapper de ma memoire, les bons fentimens 
que Dieu luy donne, & 4 plufieurs autres, mais comme 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 2038 


thee.’’ To the astonishment and the consolation of 
her parents, the child recovered. 

Having heard that a certain man spake ill of him, 
the thought came to him of paying this person off in 
his own coin, and of divulging some evil that he had 
learned of him. Upon reflecting over this idea, he 
became quite confused, and kneeling down, he asked 
pardon of God, saying within himself: ‘‘If those 
who are not baptized do evil, those who are must not 
imitate them:’’ and thereupon he began to pray for 
the one who calumniated him. Human nature does 
not go so far as this; these fruits are gathered only 
in the garden of grace, in the midst of which is 
planted the tree of the holy Cross, upon which Jesus 
Christ prayed for his enemies. 

When he was exhorting a sick man, and pointing 
out to him the blessings of the other life, ‘‘ Do not 
think,’’ said he, ‘‘ that the water of Baptism is poured 
out to heal thy body: it is to purify thy soul, and to 
give thee a life which cannot die. Baptism was not 
instituted for a thing so low as our life; [64] our Fa- 
ther who is in heaven does not place us in the rank 
of dogs, that he should give us only the life common 
to the beasts.”’ 

Truly, I have heard him say so much about the 
blessings of faith, and speak in so devout and tender 
a manner, that I have been greatly astonished; I am 
vexed with myself, that I have let escape from my 
memory the good sentiments that God gives him, 
and many others; but as these good people expose 
the impulses of their hearts only when opportunities 
are offered, and as we then have neither pen nor ink 
to note them down, we let slip away many of the 
holy affections of these good Neophytes without 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


ces bonnes gens ne decouurent les mouuements de 
leur coeur, que dans les occafions qui fe prefentent, & 
que nous n’auons pour lors, ny plume, ny encre, pout 
les remarquer, nous laiffons écouler quantité de 
fainctes affections de ces bons Neophytes, fans les 
remarquer; Adiouftés que la reffemblance de fes 
actions, me fait craindre le dégouft, pour ce que cela 
femble des redites. 

L’vn de ces trois chefs de famille fut nommé 
Achilles par Monfieur le Cheualier de I'Ifle, lequel 
prend grand plaifir de voir ces bonnes gens fe ranger 
au bercail de l’Eglife: Tant que des hommes de ver- 
tu & de merite tiendront icy le timon, la foy y florira: 
Si ceux qui doiuent eftre [65] comme les yeux, s’a- 
ueuglent iamais dans les vices, le beau iour dont 
maintenant nous ioiiiffons, fera bien-toft changé en 
des tenebres. Mais pour parler de noftre Neophyte, 
ie ne fais pas moins de cas de celui-cy que de Charles; 
il eft vray qu’il n’a pas fi grande authorité, qu'il a 
moins de parole, mais ie croy que fon coeur n’eft pas 
moins touché; il eftoit fort orgueilleux deuant fon 
baptefme, nous en efperions peu de chofe, Dieu l’a 
conuerty en vn petit agneau; fon pere ef{toit Capi- 
taine, plus aimé des Frangois qu’il ne les aimoit, il a 
efté miferablement maffacré par les Hiroquois; fon 
fils a maintenant autant de bonnes qualités que fon 
pere en auoit de mauuaifes: Il fut baptifé en No- — 
uembre, & tomba malade au mois de Decembre; on 
le tenoit pour mort: La crainte que nous auions qu’il 
n’attribuaft fa maladie a fon baptefme céme font les 
infideles, nous portoit a le vifiter fouuent, nous en 
retournions toufiours tres-confolés: le ne m’attrifte 
point de ma maladie, ie ne crains point la mort; ie 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 205 


noticing them. Add to this, that the similarity of 
these acts makes me fear being tiresome, because 
they seem repetitions. 

One of these three heads of families was named 
Achilles by Monsieur the Chevalier de 1’Isle, who 
takes great pleasure in seeing these good people come 
into the fold of the Church. While men of virtue and 
merit shall hold the helm here, the faith will flourish: 
if those who should be [65] eyes, asit were, are ever 
blinded by vice, the glorious day we now enjoy will 
soon be changed into darkness. But, speaking of 
our Neophyte, I do not think less of him than of 
Charles. It is true, he has not so much influence, he 
has less eloquence, but I believe his heart to be no 
less touched; he was very haughty before his bap- 
tism, and we did not hope much from him, but God has 
changed him into a little lamb. His father was a 
Captain, more beloved by the French than they were 
by him, and was wretchedly massacred by the Hiro- 
quois; the son has now as many good qualities as 
the father had bad ones. He was baptized in Novem- 
ber, and fell sick in the month of December; they 
gave him up for dead. The fear we had that his 
malady would be attributed to baptism, as it is by 
the unbelievers, induced us to visit him often; we 
always came away much consoled. ‘‘I am not sad 
on account of my sickness; I do not fear death. I 
think continually of God,’’ said he; ‘‘I rejoice that 
my sins are blotted out; if I die, [66] I hope that I 
shall go to heaven; this is what consoles my heart.’’ 

He had only one little girl, whom God took from 
him some time after his baptism; this blow did not 
unsettle him, nevertheless he avowed to us that he 
had suffered from it. ‘‘ My sickness,’’ said he, 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


penfe inceflamment a Dieu, faifoit-il, ie me réjouys 
de ce que mes pechés font effacés; fi ie meurs, [66] 
i’efpere que iiray au ciel, voila ce qui confole mon 
coeur. 

Il n’auoit qu’vne petite fille, Dieu luy rauit quel- 
que temps apres fon baptefme; ce coup ne l’efbranla 
point; il nous aduoitia neantmoins qu’il l’auoit reffen- 
ty: Ma maladie, difoit-il, ne m’a caufé aucune trifteffe,. 
mais la mort de mon enfant m’a vn peu touché; Dieu 
luy a rendu depuis vn beau fils. 

Pendant la Meffe de minuict, comme il eftoit ma- 
lade, il demeura dans fa cabane, mais il ne voulut 
iamais dormir; il paffa tout ce temps-la en prieres, 
faifant fes plaintes A noftre Seigneur de ce qu'il ne 
pouuoit point aller 4 l’Eglife comme les autres. 

Vn Sauuage me menant de grand matin a Kebec, 
fon canot faifant eau, il defcend deuant 1’ Hofpital 
pour demander vn peu de feu afin de radouber fon 
petit vaiffeau; i’entray cependant 4 la Chappelle, i’y 
trouuay noftre nouueau Chreftien 4 deux genoux, les. 
mains iointes, & les yeux au ciel; mais fi attentif a 
fa priere qu'il ne m’apperceut point, quoy que ie 
demeuraffe 1A quelque temps, & que i’en [67] fortiffe 
auec affés de bruit; fon attention m’attendriffoit; en 
effet, fes deportemens font voir que fon coeur eft a. 
Dieu. 

Il nous a dit par rencontre, ce qui l’auoit porté a. 
embraffer la foy: vn Chreftien parlant hardiment de 
Dieu deuant les infidelles, & priant publiquement, 
quoy qu’on l’improuuaft, & qu’on fe mocquatft de luy, 
fut caufe qu'il conclud quelque chofe de grand de 
noftre creance, puis qu’vn homme la defendoit fi 
courageufement aux dépens de fon honneur. 


: 
j 


U 
it 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 207 


‘“‘caused me no sadness, but the death of my child 
somewhat affected me.’’ God has since given him 
a fine son. 

During the midnight Mass, as he was sick, he 
remained in his cabin, but was not at all willing to 
sleep; he passed all that time in prayer, making his 
laments to our Lord that he could not go to Church 
as the others did. 

A Savage was taking me to Kebec very early in 
the morning, and, his canoe springing a leak, he 
landed in front of the Hospital to ask for some fire, 
that he might repair his little vessel. Meantime, I 
entered the Chapel, and found there our new Chris- 
tian on his knees,—his hands joined, and his eyes 
taised to heaven, but so attentive to his prayer, that 
he did not perceive me, although I remained there 
some time, and [67] went out with considerable noise. 
His devotion moved me; truly, his conduct shows 
that his heart belongs to God. 

He told us, by chance, what had led him to em- 
brace the faith,—a Christian speaking boldly of God 
before unbelievers, and praying publicly, although 
disapproved and derided by them, was the cause of 
his inferring our belief to be a wonderful thing, since 
a man defended it so courageously at the expense of 
his honor. 

Another man,—his relative, not yet baptized,— 
being sick unto death, sent for his friends and said 
to them: ‘‘I have been to Kebec; I heard such a 
Father speak concerning the things of the other life, 
and all that he said seems to me true. I greatly 
tegret dying before being instructed; go, all of you, 
to this Father after my death; listen to him, believe 
what he will tell you, and be baptized: for what those 


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Vn autre homme fon parent, non encor baptifé, 
ef{tant malade & la mort, fit venir fes amis, & leur 
dit: I’ay efté A Kebec, i’ay entendu parler vn tel 
Pere, des chofes de l’autre vie; tout ce qu’il dit me 
femble veritable, i’ay vn grand regret de mourir 
deuant que d’eftre inftruit; vous autres, allés trouuer 
ce Pere apres ma mort, écoutés-le, croyés ce qu'il 
vous dira, & vous faites baptifer; car ce que ces 
gens-la enfeignent, eft bon: Ce pauure homme meurt 
1a-deffus; & noftre Neophyte defja tout difpofé dans 
l’ame, ayant fait rencontre de Charles fon Compatri- 
ote, qui l’inuitoit A croire en Dieu, fe ioint auec [68] 
luy pour venir faire fa refidence 4 Sainct lofeph, 
Dieu luy a rendu la fanté, mais il ne l’a pas forte, & 
s'il peine beaucoup, il n’eft pas pour viure long- 
temps. 

Charles l’emmenant ce Printemps 4 Tadouffac, il 
me difoit en fecret: O que i’ay eu de peine a me 
refoudre a ce voyage, il me fembloit quand ie quit- 
tay la Chappelle pour m’embarquer, qu’on m/arra- 
choit le coeur, & iamais ie ne m’euffe pti refoudre a 
partir, n’eftoit que i’efperois de te trouuer 4 Tadouflac, 
& que i’aurois le moyen de me confeffer & commu- 
nier. 

Il difoit vn iour apres auoir receu noftre Seigneur: 
Mon cceur eft plein de ioye, ie ne fgay ce qu'il dit, ie 
{cay bien qu'il parle, mais ie ne l’entens pas, il va 
plus vifte que ma penfée; il me femble que ce que 
Dieu me fait, eft admirable, ie tremble tant i’ay peur 
de fallir ce qui eft en moy, il m’eft auis qu’on me dit 
dans l’ame, qu’il faut que ie fois bon, puis que ie croy 
en luy, & que ie ne commette plus aucun mal: Si 
vous feauiés, difoit-il, combien i’aime mon baptefme, 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 209 


people teach is good.”” Then this poor man died; 
and our Neophyte, already quite willing in his 
heart,— having met Charles, his Countryman, who 
invited him to believe in God,—joined [68] him to 
come and dwell at Saint Joseph. God has restored 
his health, but it is not strong; and, if he becomes 
greatly fatigued, he has not long to live. 

After Charles brought him away this Spring to 
Tadoussac, he said to me privately: ‘‘ Oh, what diffi- 
culty I had in resolving upon this voyage! It seemed 
to me when I left the Chapel to go on board, that 
my heart was being torn out, and I never could have 
resolved upon starting, had it not been that I hoped 
to find you at Tadoussac, and that I should be able 
to confess and receive communion.’’ 

One day after having received our Lord, he said: 
““ My heart is full of joy; I do not know what it says, 
I know well that it speaks, but I do not understand 
it,—it goes faster than my thought. It seems to me 
that what God does for me is wonderful; I tremble, 
so greatly do I fear to soil what is within me. I 
think some one tells me within my heart that it must 
be that I am good, since I believe in him, and no 
longer commit any evil. If you knew,”’ said he, 
“how much I delight in my baptism, and what great 
joy I experience from it in my heart! it seems to me 
that I have no longer anything to fear.” As soon as 
he had a desire [69] to be converted, the Devil laid 
a great snare for him. The wretched Makheabichti- 
chiou” of whom I have often spoken in preceding 
Relations, ashamed to remain among the Christians, 
who put him out of countenance by their example, 
tesolved to go away with his two wives, whom he 
could not give up. He used every endeavor to take 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


& combien i’en reffens de ioye dans mon cceur, il me 
femble que ie n’ay plus rien Acraindre. Si toft quwil 
eut enuie [69] de fe conuertir, le Diable luy dreffa 
vne forte embufche, le miferable Mathembichtichid 
[sc. Makheabichtichiou], dont i’ay fouuent parlé és 
Relations precedentes, honteux de demeurer parmy 
les Chreftiens, quile confondoient par leurs exemples, 
prit refolution de s’éloigner auec fes deux femmes, 
qu'il ne pouuoit quitter; il fit fes efforts pour emme- 
ner ce bon-homme auec luy dans le pais des Abna- 
quiois, luy promettant monts & merueilles, comme 
on dit: mais ce braue Neophyte luy refpondit, qu’ay- 
At ouy parler d’vne autre vie, il vouloit aller voir 
ceux quien ouuroient le chemin, que la chofe eftoit 
de trop grande confequence pour la negliger: peut- 
ef{tre que ie n’auray pas affés d’efprit, difoit-il, pour 
comprendre ce qu’on me dira, mais toufjours eft-il 
bon d’oiiir parler de ces merueilles; I] s’en vint a 
Sainct Iofeph, & Mathembichtichid s’en alla au pais 
des Abnaquiois, ot il a efté miferablement tué cét 
hyuer, fes femmes font reuenués fort miferables, fon 
fils aifné mort comme vn chien, fans baptefme, fa 
famille renuerfée; voila la fin de ceux qui ferment 
l’oreille A la voix de Dieu qui les appelle. 

[70] Ie voy bien que ie diray la mefme chofe, fi ie 
veux rapporter les bons fentimens des autres que 
nous auons baptifés; car noftre Seigneur leur donne © 
les mefmes affections, & les mefmes volontés. le 
diray feulement en paffant, que deux ieunes hommes 
4 marier nous preffant fort pour leur baptefme; enfin 
comme nous les remettions apres leur mariage, a 
caufe que nous auons de la peine a marier les ieunes 
Chreftiens, dautant que le mariage des Sauuages ne 


A 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 211 


this artless man away with him, into the country of 
the Abnaquiois, promising him mountains and mar- 
vels, as they say; but this worthy Neophyte re- 
sponded to him that, having heard of another life, 
he intended going to see those who were opening the 
way to it,—that the thing was of too great conse- 
quence to be neglected. ‘‘ Perhaps I shall not have 
enough intelligence,’’ said he, ‘‘ to comprehend what 
they shall tell me; but, at least, it is good to hear of 
these wonders.’’ He came to Saint Joseph, and 
Makheabichtichiou went away to the country of the 
Abnaquiois, where he was wretchedly slain this win- 
ter; his wives have returned very poor, his eldest 
son died like a dog, without baptism,— his family is 
tuined. Behold the end of those who shut their ears 
to the voice of God who is calling them. 

[70] I see well that I shall say the same things, if 
I endeavor to report the good thoughts of others whom 
we have baptized; for our Lord gives them the same 
affections and the same inclinations. I will only say, 
by the way, that two marriageable young men urged 
us strongly to baptize them; finally when we put 
them off until after their marriage, because we have 
trouble in marrying the young Christians,— inas- 
much as the marriage of Savages generally becomes 
confirmed only by a similarity of dispositions, or by 
the children whom God gives them, or by a lapse of 
time and long-continued and reciprocal intercourse 
with each other,—so when we put off our young peo- 
ple, promising them baptism when they should be 
married, they often came to us and said: ‘‘ Either 
baptize us without marrying us, or else find maidens 
Suitable for us. Dost thou wish to cause our perdi- 
tion? If we should die in the woods, or if some acci- 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


s’affermit pour l’ordinaire que par vne reffemblance 
d’humeurs, ou par les enfans que Dieu leur donne, 
ou par vn long-temps, & par vne longue & mutuelle 
conuerfation par enfemble: Comme donc nous rejet- 
tions nos ieunes gens, leur promettant le baptefme 
quand ils feroient mariés; ils nous venoient fouuent. 
trouuer & nous difoient: Ou baptife nous fans nous 
marier, ou nous trouue des filles propres pour nous, 
veux-tu nous perdre, fi nous mourions dans les bois, 
s’il nous arriue quelque accident allans 4 la chaffe, 
que deuiendront nos ames, tu nous fais trembler par 
le recit des feux & des tourmens de 1’Enfer, & tu ne 
[71] veux pas nous déliurer de ce peril: Enfin, comme 
il falloit ce Printemps partir pour aller a la guerre, 
ils dirent tous deux 4 leurs Capitaines, qu’ils ne mar- 
cheroient point s’ils n’eftoiét baptifés, & qu’ils crai- 
gnoient de mourir deuant que de receuoir ce Sacre- 
ment, ils promirent de plutoft iamais ne fe marier, 
sils ne trouuoient des Chreftiennes: Ie me foucie 
bien de mariage, difoit 1’'vn d’eux, vous ne procedés 
pas bien, nous difoit-il, ie vous parle du ciel & du 
Baptefme, & vous me parlés de me marier; Vne 
femme effacera-t’elle mes pechés? I fe fafcha fi bié 
qu’il nous dit: Ie voy bien ce que c’eft, vous voulés 
que ie fois damné, vous me faites perdre coeur: mais 
vous refpondrés de mon ame. Enfin nonobftantles 
peines que nous apprehendons pour leurs mariages, a 
nous les baptifafmes A leur grand contentement: Le 
plus ieune a efté efleu Capitaine; & noftre Seigneur 
depuis qu’il eft Chreftien, luy a donné vne ieune 
femme Chreftienne, qui ne le pouuoit aimer deuant 
qu'il fuft enfant de Dieu; ils ont e{té mariés publique- 
ment 4 la venué des Vaiffeaux. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 213- 


dent should happen to us in hunting, what will be- 
come of our souls? Thou makest us tremble by thy 
account of the fires and torments of Hell, and thou 
[71] wilt not deliver us from this peril.’’ Finally, 
this Spring, when they were obliged to set out for 
the war, they both told their Captains they would 
not march unless they were baptized, and that they 
feared they might die before receiving this Sacra- 
ment; they declared they would not marry at all, 
unless they found Christian wives. ‘‘ Much doI care 
about marriage!’’ said one of them. ‘‘ You are not 
conducting yourselves well,’’ said he to us; ‘‘ I speak 
to you of heaven and of Baptism, and you talk to me 
of my marrying: will a wife blot out my sins?” He 
was so thoroughly irritated that he said to us: ‘“‘I 
see well how it is, you wish that I may be lost, you 
make me lose courage; but you shall answer for my 
soul.’’ At last, notwithstanding the troubles that 
we dread on account of their marriages, we baptized 
them, to their great joy. The younger one has been 
chosen Captain; and, since he has become a Chris- 
tian, our Lord has given him a young Christian wife, 
who could not love him before he became a child of 


God. They were married publicly, on the arrival of 
the Ships. 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


[72] CHAPITRE V. 


DU BAPTESME DVN HURON EN LA RESIDENCE DE 
SAINCT IOSEPH PROCHE DE KEBEC. 


E Pere Iean de Brebeuf eftant defcendu des Hu- 

L rons auec le Pere Frangois du Peron, fut con- 
duit iufques 4 Kebec par des Sauuages, en par- 

tie Chreftiens, en partie Catechumenes, il y en auoit 
vn de confideration, homme de bon fens, fils du Capi- 
taine de fa Bourgade; mais comme en ces quartiers 
14, les enfans ne fuccedent pas 4 leurs peres dans ces 
charges honorables, fi bien les neueux du cofté de la 
foeur: cét homme mene vne vie priuée en fon pais, 
neantmoins comme il eft adroit, & reconnu pour vn 
homme d’efprit, il eft écouté & bien voulu de fes 
Compatriotes. Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny 
ayant appris de la bouche du Pere de Brebeuf, les 
belles qualités de ce bon Catechumene, demanda fi 
on ne [73] le pouuoit pas bien baptifer deuant fon de- 
part, le Pere repartit que ce bon-homme n’auoit pas 
de plus ardens defirs, qu’on ne le retardoit que pour 
l’éprouuer dauantage: Iamais, difoit le Pere, il n’a 


combatu formellement la foy. Au plus fort de nos 


perfecutions, lors qu’on nous banniffoit de tous coltés, 
& que les portes des cabanes, & l’entrée des Bour- 
gades nous eftoient fermées, il nous receuoit chari- 
tablement, & nous permettoit de faire baptifer, non 
pas feulemét fes parés, mais encor fes propres enfans; 
ce Printemps dernier, il a ietté au feu les forts qu'il 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 215 


[72] CHAPTER V. 


OF THE BAPTISM OF A HURON AT THE RESIDENCE OF 
SAINT JOSEPH, NEAR KEBEC. 


ATHER Jean de Brebeuf having come down 
from the country of the Hurons with Father 
Francois du Peron, was conducted as far as 

Kebec by the Savages, partly Christians, partly 
Catechumens. There was among them a man of 
importance and of good sense, a son of the Cap- 
tain of his Village; but, since in those regions chil- 
dren do not succeed their fathers in these honorable 
posts as regularly as do nephews on the sister’s side, 
this man leads a private life in his own country. 
Nevertheless, as he is clever, and recognized as a 
man of ability, he is listened to and is much beloved 
by his Countrymen. Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny having learned from the lips of Father 
de Brebeuf the fine qualities of this good Catechu- 
men, asked if they [73] could not properly baptize 
him before his departure; the Father answered that 
this worthy man had not the most ardent desires for 
it, that they delayed it only to test him further. 
‘* He has never,” said the Father, ‘‘ positively opposed 
the faith. In our severest persecutions,— when on 
all sides they were banishing us, and the doors of the 
cabins and admission to the Villages were being 
closed to us, he received us charitably, and permitted 
us to baptize not only his relatives, but even his own 
children. This last Spring, he cast into the fire the 


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 20 


auoit pour la chaffe, declarant tout haut qu’il vouloit 
croire en Dieu, mais tout de bon, & fans feintife; 4 
renoncgant publiquement 4 toutes les anciennes cou- 
{tumes, & 4 toutes les fuperftitions de fes anceftres. 
Eftant allé en guerre, il s’accofta de deux Chreftiens, 

& les voyant retirer dans le bois, pour fuir les fuper- 
{titions de leurs Compatriotes, & faire 4 part leur 
petites prieres, il les fuiuoit & prioit comme eux. 
Dans tout le voyage depuis les Hurons iufques a 
Kebec, qui eft fort long, il n’a paffé iour qu’il n’ait 
inuoqué le fainct Nom de Dieu, [74] & iamais il ne 
sengageoit, dans aucun faut, & dans aucun danger, 
qu’il n’euft fait fa priere & qu’il ne fe fit armé du figne 

de la faincte Croix; Il difoit par fois au Pere, que s’il 
s’en retournoit en fon pais fans eftre baptifé, qu’il 
apprehendoit l’abord de fa femme: elle ne manquera 
pas, faifoit il, de me faire ce reproche, on voit bien 
qu’il y a quelque chofe qui manque en ta foy, fi les 
Peres auec lefquels tu as efté fi long temps, pendant 

vn fi grand voyage, t’auoient iugé digne du baptefme, 

ils ne te l’auroient pas refufé? Peut-eftre que l’a- 
mour de quelque autre femme, t’a empefché de pour- 
fuiure vn fi grand bien; Voila, difoit-il, le premier 
falut que i’attens de ma femme, 4 mon arriuée au ~ 
pais. Monfieur le Gouuerneur voyant vne ame fi bien 4 
difpofée, dit pour ce bon Neophyte, ce que 1’Eu- 
nuque de la Reine de Candace difoit a fainct Phi- 
lippe. £cce agua quid prohibet eum baptifari. Il ya 
tant d’eau fur le pais, qu’y a-t’il donc, qui puiffe 
retarder fon baptefme? Puis qu’il croit de tout fon ~ 
coeur en Iefus Chrift? Les Peres y condefcendent ~ 
aifement, Monfieur le Gouuerneur voulut eftre fon _ 
Parrain, le [75] iour eft pris au vingt-fixiefme de Iuin, ' 


IE Sn set 


i 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 217 


charms which he had for hunting,— declaring aloud 
that he would like to believe in God, but earnestly, 
and without pretense,—renouncing publicly all his 
old customs and all the superstitions of his ancestors. 
Having gone to the war, he became acquainted with 
two Christians; and, seeing them retire to the woods 
to flee the idolatrous rites of their Countrymen, and 
offer up apart their little prayers, he followed them 
and prayed as they did. In all the voyage from the 
country of the Hurons to Kebec, which is very long, 
he passed no day without invoking the holy Name 
of God; [74] and he never undertook any rapid, or 
any dangerous effort, without offering up a prayer 
and being armed with the sign of the holy Cross. 
He said sometimes to the Father, that if he returned 
to his own country without being baptized, he would 
dread meeting his wife. ‘‘ She will not fail,’’ said 
he, ‘‘to cast at me this reproach: ‘ It is easily seen 
that there is something lacking in thy faith; if the 
Fathers with whom thou hast been a great while, 
during so long a journey, had judged thee worthy of 
baptism, they would not have refused it to thee, 
Perhaps the love of some other woman has hindered 
thee from pursuing so great a good.’ This,’’ said he, 
‘‘is the first salutation that I expect from my wife 
on atriving at home.” Monsieur the Governor see- 
ing a soul so well disposed, said for this good Neo- 
phyte what the Eunuch of Queen Candace said to 
saint Philip: Lcce aqua: quid prohibet eum baptisari? 
“There is sufficient water in the country, what then 
should hinder his baptism since he believes with all 
his heart in Jesus Christ?’’ The Fathers readily 
acquiesced; Monsieur the Governor wished to be his 
Godfather, and the [75] day was fixed for the twen- 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


on en porte la nouuelle 4 ce bon Catechumene, on 
luy dit que le grand Capitaine des Frangois a inter- 
cedé pour fon baptefme, il eft tout raui, la ioye 
poffede fon cceur tout entier, la ceremonie fe paffa 
en l’Eglife de fainct Iofeph, ot fe retirent les Sau- 
uages, il y en auoit pour lors vn bon nombre, chacun 
accourt pour voir vn Sauuage de trois cens lieués, fe 
venir prefenter au baptefme en vne Eglife de nou- 
tueaux Chreftiens: Ces bons Neophytes prennent vn 
fouuerain plaifir 4 ce doux fpectacle, & pour marque 
de leur ioye ils font retentir l’air de leurs Cantiques 
Spirituels: de forte que ce bon Catechumene s’efcria: 
Si vous chantiés ces Airs en mon pais, vous enleue- 
riés tous les cceurs de mes Compatriotes. Enfin le 
Reuerend Pere Vimont commence les fainctes cere- 
monies, & le Pere de Brebeuf l’interroge fur fa cre- 
ance, & fur fes volontés: comme il eft homme de 
iugement, il ne fe troubla point, il repondit pofé- 
ment, & refolument 4 toutes les demandes, proteftant 
tout haut qu’il vouloit viure & mourir Chreftien, dans 
l’obferuance des volontés [76] & des Commandemens 
de Dieu, & de fon Eglife, Monfieur de Montmagny 
le nomme Charles, luy faifant porter fon nom il fe 
nommoit en fa langue Sondatfaa, du Bourg d’Ofo- 
fané, fi toft que les eaux facrées eurent touché fon 
corps, & purifié fon ame, fon parrain le careffe, & 
luy dit: Ie me refiouis de vous voir maintenant au 
nombre des enfans de Dieu; puis que vous eftes 
affranchy des liens des Demons, combattés genereufe- 
ment, tenés la parole que vous aués donnée a Dieu, 
le Baptefme vous a donné des armes & des forces 
contre vos ennemis inuifibles, ferués-vous-en cou- 
rageufement; Et pour ce que les peuples qui vous 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 219 


ty-sixth of June. The news was carried to this good 
Catechumen, and he was told that the great Captain 
of the French had interceded for his baptism; he 
was enraptured,—joy wholly possessed his heart. 
The ceremony took place in the Church of saint 
Joseph, to which the Savages go; there was, at the 
time, a goodly number of them. Each one ran in 
haste, to see a Savage from three hundred leagues 
away come to offer himself for baptism in a Church 
of the new Christians. These good Neophytes took 
supreme delight in this pleasing spectacle, and asa 
mark of their joy they made the air resound with 
their Spiritual Songs,—so that this good Catechumen 
exclaimed: ‘‘If you should sing these Airs in my 
country, you would captivate the hearts of all 
my Countrymen.’’ At length, Reverend Father 
Vimont began the holy ceremonies, and Father de 
Brebeuf questioned him upon his belief and upon his 
desires; as he is a man of judgment, he was not con- 
fused, but responded sedately and firmly to all ques- 
tions, avowing distinctly that he wished to live and 
die a Christian, in the observance of the will [76] 
and of the Commandments of God and of his Church. 
Monsieur de Montmagny named him Charles, mak- 
ing him bear his own name; he was called in his 
own language Sondatsaa, of the Village Ososane. As 
soon as the sacred waters had touched his body, and 
purified his soul, his godfather caressed him, and 
said to him: ‘‘I rejoice to see you now in the num- 
ber of God’s children; inasmuch as you are freed 
from the bonds of the Demons, fight valiantly, and 
keep the word that you have given to God. Baptism 
has given you arms and strength against your unseen 
enemies,—use them courageously; and since the 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


font la guerre defirent de vous détruire, ie vous veux 
armer contre eux: 14-deffus il luy fait prefent d’vne 
belle arquebufe, qui eftonna ce bon Neophyte, car 
ces armes leur font toutes nouuelles: Allés, luy dit- 
il, exhortés vos Compatriotes 4 embraffer la foy que 
vous aués receué, & les affurés de ma part, que ie les 
protegeray, s’ils fe rangent au giron de l’Eglife: Ce 
difcours finy, le Capitaine de nos Chreftiens de Sainct 
Iofeph fe leue, & [77] apoftrophant ce nouueau Chre- 
{tien, luy dit. 

Mon frere, tous les Sauuages que tu vois icy a l’en- 
tour de toy font Chreftiens, nous auons tous quitté 
nos vieilles couftumes, nous ations jetté bas les fot- 
tifes & les fuperftitions de noftre Nation, tu ne fgau- 
rois conceuoir la ioye de nos cceurs, voyans que tu 
embraffes noftre creance, & que tu as choifi cette pe- 
tite Eglife pour y eftre fait noftre frere: otiy, tu l’es 
maintenant, nous n’auons plus qu’vn Pere, qui eft 
Dieu, & qu’vne Mere commune, qui eft l’Eglife; voi- 
cy donc tes freres qui te declarent, que tes amis font 
leurs amis, & que tes ennemis font leurs ennemis; 
& pource que noftre Capitaine t’a fait prefent d’vne 
arme A feu, tes freres te prefentent par mes mains de 
la poudre pour t’en feruir dans les befoins, en ton 
retour. 

A ces harangues le bon Charles Sondatfaa refpon- 
dit: Onontio grande Montagne, (c’eft ainfi que les 
Hurons & les Hiroquois nomment Monfieur noftre 
Gouuerneur, a caufe qu'il s’'appelle de Montmagny) 
le nom que vous m’aués donné eft vn riche prefent, 
c’ef{t vne obligation [78] quim’eft particuliere, de la- 
quelle ie me reffentiray toute ma vie, ce canon que 
vous aués adjoufté, fera vn grand bruit dedans noftre 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 221 


people that make war upon you desire to destroy you, 
I will arm you against them.’’ Thereupon he pre- 
sented him witha handsome arquebus, which aston- 
ished this good Neophyte, for these arms are wholly 
new tothem. ‘“‘ Go,’’ said he to him, ‘‘ exhort your 
Countrymen to embrace the faith which you have 
received; and assure them, for me, that I will pro- 
tect them if they put themselves within the pale of 
the Church.’’ This speech being finished, the Cap- 
tain of our Christians of Saint Joseph stood up, and, 
[77] addressing this new Christian, said to him: 

** My brother, all the Savages whom thou seest 
around thee here are Christians; we have all forsak- 
en our old customs, we have thrown off the follies 
and the superstitions of our Nation. ‘Thou canst not 
imagine the joy of our hearts in seeing that thou hast 
adopted our belief, and hast chosen this little Church 
in which to be made our brother. Yes, thou art so 
now,— we have henceforth but one Father, who is 
God, and but one common Mother, which is the 
Church; behold, then, thy brothers who declare to 
thee, that thy friends are their friends, and that thy 
enemies are their enemies. And, since our Captain 
has made thee the gift of a firearm, thy brothers 
present thee by my hands with powder, that thou 
mayst use it in thy needs, on thy return.’’ 

_ To these harangues the good Charles Sondatsaa 

tesponded: ‘‘ Onontio, great Mountain’’ (it is thus 
that the Hurons and the Hiroquois call Monsieur our 
Governor, because his name is de Montmagny), “‘ the 
name you have given me is a rich present,— it is an 
obligation [78] that is peculiar to me, and which I 
shall feel all my life. This gun which you have 
added will make a great talk in our country,— it will 


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


pais, il fera voir l’e{time que vous faites des croyans; 
cét affaire eft important, voftre authorité en touchera 
plufieurs, & voftre prefent ne fera iamais mis en ou- 
bly: Puis fe tournant vers les Sauuages; Mes freres, 
fi voftre coeur a de la ioye me voyant fait enfant de 
Dieu, le mien en doit reffentir dauantage, vous voy- 
ant tous dans la poffeffion de ce bon-heur; vous m’a- 
ués deuancé & ie vous veux fuiure & imiter: fi vous 
defirés d’aller au ciel, i’ay les mefmes volontés; fi 
vous faites profeffion de garder les Commandemens 
de Dieu, c’eft ce qu’auiourd’huy i’ay publiquement 
promis & protefté, i’efpere que iamais ie ne me dé- 
mentiray de ma parole: Nous n’auons rien de fi 
precieux que nos colliers de porcelaine, fi i’en voyois 
briller vne vingtaine deuant mes yeux pour m’allecher 
au peché, ie détournerois ma veué, & mon cceur 
auroit du dégouft de ce qu’il a tant aimé. Nous 
faifons eftat dans nos Bourgades de quelques habits, 
& de quelques robes qui font en eftime parmy [79] 
nous; fice que nous appellons beauté me prefentoit 
vne de ces robes pour me corrompre, ie luy dirois: 
Si le Dieu que i’adore veut que ie me ferue de ces. 
habits, il m’en fera trouuer par d’autres voyes, le 
peché eft banny de mon cceur, il n’y doit iamais ren- 
trer; & fi par les mefmes attraits on m’offroit vn ba- 
ril de poudre, & des armes toutes de feu pour deftruire 


nos ennemis, ie refpondrois; celuy quia purifié mon 


ame ne veut pas que ie la falliffe de rechef, il a bien 
d’autres moyens de me proteger, i’aymerois mieux 
perdre la vie que de l’offenfer; Voila, mes freres, les. 
refolutions que ie prens dans mon baptefme, au refte 
ma famille eft defia toute baptifée, mes enfans & mes 
neueux font Chreftiens, il ne refte plus que ma 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 223 


show the regard that you have for believers; this affair 
is important, your power will touch many, and your 
present will never be forgotten.’’ Then turning 
around to the Savages: ‘‘ My brothers, if your heart 
has joy in seeing me made a child of God, mine ought 
to have more, seeing you all in possession of this 
happiness. You have preceded me, I wish to follow 
and imitate you; if you desire to go to heaven, I 
have the same desire; if you make profession of keep- 
ing the Commandments of God, that is what I have 
to-day publicly promised and vowed; I hope I shall 
never belie my word. We have nothing so precious 
as our porcelain collars; if I were to see a score of 
them glittering before me, to entice me into sin, I 
would turn away my eyes, and my heart would have 
loathing for that in which it has so much delighted. 
In our Villages, we value highly certain garments 
and certain robes, which are in favor among [79] us; 
if what we call beauty should present me with one 
of these robes, to corrupt me, I would say to her: ‘ If 
the God whom I adore wishes me to use these gar- 
ments, he will cause me to find them by other ways: 
sin is banished from my heart, it must never reénter 
there.’ And if with the same allurements one offered 
me a barrel of powder, and plenty of firearms, to 
destroy our enemies, I would reply: ‘ He who has 
purified my soul does not wish that I should sully it 
anew; he has surely other ways of protecting me; I 
would prefer losing life to offending him.’ These, 
my brothers, are the resolutions that I take in my 
baptism. Moreover, my whole family is already 
baptized, my children and my nephews are Chris- 
tians,—there remains but my wife. Not only will 
she follow my example, but, as I am of some impor- 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


femme, laquelle non feulement fuiura mon exemple, 
mais comme ie fuis en quelque cdfideration dans mon 
pais, iefpere que d’autres encor prendront enuie de 
m’imiter, notamment quand ie leur auray fait le recit 
de l’honneur que le grand Capitaine des Frang¢ois 
fait aux Croyans, & que ie leur parleray de la con- 
uerfion des peuples qui nous font femblables. 

[80] Apres ces harangues on fait feftin, chacun pre- 
nant part a cette ioye, beniffoit Dieu, de voir de fes 
yeux des changemens fi eftranges; que l’on en die ce 
qu’on voudra, mais ie croy que quelques Sauuages 
s’énoncent mieux en leur langue, que ie ne fais en la 
noftre, & leurs fentimens de Dieu, font par fois fi 
tendres que le coeur les goufte mieux, que le papier 
ne les exprime, le mal eft qu’il n’y a que ceux qui 
les entendent, qui connoiffent plus particulierement 
ces merueilles du grand Dieu. 

Quelque temps apres ce bon Neophyte parlant 
familierement au Pere de Brebeuf, luy difoit: Si ma 
femme retarde tant foit peu fon baptefme, ie luy 
feray le mefme reproche que i’attendois d’elle, ie la 
piqueray iufques au vif, i’aduoiie qu’elle eft plus 
fage, & plus iufte que moy, il y a long-temps que i'ay 
des preuues de la fidelité qu’elle m’a gardée: mais 
comme ie la defire voir au plutoft dans le bon-heur 
d’ont i’ay fait rencontre; Si elle ne preffe fon 
baptefme, ie luy diray que la veue des ieunes hOmes 
l’aueugle, & l’empefche de voir la beauté de la loy 
de Dieu: [81] ie ne croy pas que i’en vienne 1a, car 
elle eft plus portée au bien que moy. 

A peine eftoit-il baptifé qu’il fe mit dans l’exercice 
du Chriftianifme, & dans la frequentation des Sacre- 
mens, il fe confeffa trois fois deuant que de remonter 


4 
7 
7 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 225 


tance in my own country, I hope that others also 
will be seized with the desire of imitating me,— 
especially when I shall have related to them the 
honor that the great Captain of the French pays to 
Believers, and when I shall tell them of the conver- 
sion of peoples who are like us.”’ 

[80] After these harangues they made a feast; each 
one taking part in this joy blessed God for seeing 
with his own eyes transformations so strange. The 
world may say what it will of them, but I believe 
that some Savages express themselves better in their 
own language than I do in ours; and their thoughts 
of God are sometimes so tender that the heart enjoys 
them more than pen can express. The thing to be 
regretted is, that it is only those who hear them, 
who know most fully these wonders of the great 
God. 

Some time after, this good Neophyte, speaking 
familiarly to Father de Brebeuf, said to him: ‘‘ If 
my wife put off, ever so little, her baptism, I shall 
cast at her the same reproach that I expected from 
her; I shall sting her even to the quick. I confess 
that she is wiser and more correct than I; long ago 
I had proofs of her fidelity to me; but since I desire 
to see her as soon as possible in the happiness which 
I have encountered, if she do not urge her bap- 
tism, I shall say to her that the sight of the young 
men blinds her, and hinders her from seeing the 
beauty of the law of God; [81] I do not believe that 
I shall come to that, for she is more inclined to the 
right than I.’’ 

Hardly was he baptized when he began the prac- 
tice of Christian living, and the frequent receiving of 
the Sacraments; he confessed three times before 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 20 


en fon pais. Ayant fait vn tour aux trois Riuieres, 
comme i’eftois fur le point de mettre le pied dans le 
canot, pour defcendre 4 Sainct Iofeph, ce bon Neo- 
phyte s’adreffa au Pere de Brebeuf, & le pria de me 
dire ce qui fuit, ie prie le Pere de dire 4 Onontio 
grand Capitaine des Frangois, que ie n’ay point de 
paroles pour le remercier, mais que i’en trouueray 
pour publier dans mon pais, les riches obligations 
que ie luy ay, il eft vray que l’honneur qu'il m’a fait, 
& fes riches prefents me touchent au coeur, mais tout 
cela n’approche de la ioye, & du contentement que ie 
reffens d’eftre Chreftien, il m’a recommandé de pu- 
blier cette faueur, ie ne la fcaurois taire, ie reporte 
ma langue toute entiere, voire elle eft accreiie de 
beaucoup en ce voyage, ie l’employeray toute, & en 
tous lieux, & publier les verités de noftre creance. 
Ce difcours m’attendrit, [82] ie l’embraffay 14-deffus, 
& m’embarquay auec vn Nocher Chreftien, & vn 
autre Catechumene, bien édifiés de la foy de ce bon 
Neophyte. Il adjoufta au Pere, qu’il eftoit bien mar- 
ry, de ce qu’il ne pouuoit reconnoiftre par quelque 
prefent reciproque, les faueurs de Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur, l’amitié des Francois, & la charité des 
Sauuages Chreftiens: mais le Pere luy ayant reparty, 
que Monfieur le Gouuerneur n’attendoit autre chofe 
de luy qu’vne conftance en la foy, & vne fidele obe- 
iffance aux Commandemens de Dieu: I’efpere, repli- 
qua-t’il, que ie luy donneray toute fatisfaction en ce 
point; car il me femble, felon la difpofition de mon 
coeur, que rien ne me peut efbranler: neantmoins, 
comme ie fuis fragile, fi ie venois 4 chopper, le fou- 
uenir de la proteftation publique & folennelle que 
i’ay faite A mon baptefme, de vouloir viure & mourir 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 227 


going up to his owncountry. Having made a trip 
to the three Rivers, just as I was setting foot in the 
canoe, to go down to Saint Joseph, this good Neo- 
phyte spoke to Father de Brebeuf and begged him 
to tell me this which follows: ‘‘I pray the Father to 
tell Onontio, the great Captain of the French, that I 
have no words to thank him, but that I shall find 
some to declare in my own country the great obliga- 
tions under which I am to him. It is true that the 
honor he has done me, and his valuable presents, 
touch my heart; but all that does not approach the 
joy and contentment which I experience in being a 
Christian; he has charged me to make known this 
favor, and I would not know how to be silent. I 
take back my own language all entire, it has even 
improved much in this journey, I shall use it all, and 
in all places, to publish the truths of our belief.’’ 
These words touched me, [82] whereupon I embraced 
him, and set out with a Christian Pilot and another 
Catechumen; we were much edified by the faith of 
this good Neophyte. He added tothe Father, that 
he was truly grieved at not being able to acknowledge, 
by some present in return, the favors of Monsieur the 
Governor, the amity of the French, and the love of the 
Christian Savages. But the Father having replied 
to him that Monsieur the Governor expected from 
him nothing but constancy in the faith and steadfast 
obedience to the Commandments of God, ‘‘ I hope,”’ 
tesponded he, ‘‘ that I shall give him complete satis- 
faction on this point; for it seems to me, from the 
state of my heart, that nothing can shake me. Nev- 
ertheless, as I am frail, if I should happen to stumble, 
the remembrance of the public and solemn profes- 
sion which I made at my baptism, of wishing to live 


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 0 | 


dans l’obferuance des Commandemens de Dieu, me | 
rappelleroit 4 mon deuoir; & vous mon Pere, faifoit — 
ce bon Neophyte, fi iamais vous me voyés chanceler 
tant foit peu, remettés moy en memoire cette promeffe — 
faite A Dieu, & vous [83] me verrés bien-toft dans — 
mes premieres refolutions, comme i’efpere. 

Il difoit que trois chofes l’auoient fortement tou- I 
ché &4 Kebec: Premierement, la prompte obeiffance, 
& le grand refpect qu’on rendoit 4-Monfieur noftre t 
Gouuerneur: Cét éclat & cette bonté n’eft point chés E 
les Sauuages; les Capitaines ont beau commander, h 
les Sujets n’en font pas plus obeiffans, s’ils ne 
veulent. bd 

Secondement, la pieté & la charité des Religieufes t 
le rauiffoit; en effet c’eft l’vn des puiffans motifs que 7: 
nous ayons, pour faire paroiftre l’eftime que nous fai- 
fons de Dieu, & des actions qui luy font agreables, — 
de mon{ftrer comme de ieunes Filles, tendres & deli- — 
cates, ont quitté leurs parens & leurs amis, & leur — 
patrie fi douce & fi agreable, pour venir en vn pais — 
pauure & fafcheux, fous l’efpoir d’vne vie eternelle, 
& pour agréer Aceluy qui la leur doit donner; cela — 
leur fait croire qu’en effet cette autre vie doit e{tre, q | 
puis que fans attendre autre recompenfe, ces bonnes ~ 
Filles cheriffent, medicamentent, & nourriffent leurs 
malades, auec vne netteté & vne charité admirable, — ) 
inftruifent leurs [84] enfans auec des affections de 
vrayes Meres. Les Sauuages nous demandent affés 
fouuent, fi ces filles de Capitaines, car c’eft ainfi que 1 f 
par fois ils les appellent, ont encor leurs peres & 
leurs meres; & quand on leur en monftre quelques- 
vnes dont les parens font encor viuans, ils s’efton- 
nent comment elles ont pfi prendre la refolution de 


1640-41] RELATION OF 16g0-41 229° 


and die in the observance of the Commandments of 
God, will recall me to my duty; and you, my 
Father,” said this good Neophyte, ‘‘ if you ever see 
me wavering in the least, put me in mind of this 
promise made to God, and you [83] as I hope, shall 
soon see me with my former firmness.”’ 

He said that three things had deeply affected him 
at Kebec, first, the prompt obedience and the great 
respect that was paid to Monsieur our Governor. 
This splendor and this attention do not exist among 
the Savages; it is in vain that the Captains com- 
mand,—the Subjects are not for that more obedient, 
unless they choose to be. 

Secondly, the piety and the charity of the Nuns 
charmed him. In fact, one of the most powerful 
motives we have, in manifesting our esteem for God 
and for the acts which are pleasing to him, is to show 
how young Maidens, tender and delicate, have for- 
saken their parents, and their friends, and their coun- 
try so mild and pleasant, to come into a barren and 
tugged land, through the hope of an eternal life, 
and in order to please him who is to give it to them. 
This makes them believe that the other life must really 
exist; since, without expecting any other recom- 
pense, these good Sisters nurse their sick, give them 
remedies and food, with wonderful neatness and 
love, and instruct their [84] children with the affec- 
tion of true Mothers. The Savages not unfrequently 
ask us, if these daughters of Captains,—for it is thus 
they sometimes call them,—have still their fathers 
and mothers; and, when some of them are pointed 
out whose parents are yet living, they marvel how 
these could have resolved upon leaving them. There- 
upon they are made to see that Grace has more power 


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


les quitter: La-deffus on leur fait voir que la Grace a 
plus de force que la Nature; & que les feux d’vn 
ceeur qui aime Dieu, font plus ardens que leurs 
grandes glaces, & leurs profondes neiges, n’ont de 
froideur. 

La troifiéme chofe, qui a grandement edifié ce 
bon Neophyte & fes Compatriotes, c’eft la deuotion 
& la charité des nouueaux Chreftiens, les Sauuages 
ne s’eftonnent pas tant de voir des Frangois portés au 
bien, & croire fortemét en Dieu, ils penfent que cela 
nous eft acquis dés noftre naiffance: mais de voir des 
Sauuages qui leur font femblables, accouftumés a 
leurs fuperftitions, plongés dans les vices de leur 
Natié, fortir du Baptefme tous purs & tous nets, em- 
braffer la foy & la publier fans crainte, detefter ce 
qu’ils ont aimé, & fouler [85] aux pieds ce que les 
autres adorét; c’eft ce qui les eftonne, & qui leur fait 
dire: Si ceux-la qui nous reffemblent, fe paffent 
d'vne feule femme, s’ils font fermes & conftans dans 
leurs mariages, s’ils aiment ceux mefme qui ne font 
pas de leur Nation; s’ils prient Dieu, & fi les prieres 
ne leur font point de mal, pourquoy ne les imiterons 
nous pas: En effet, i’ay remarqué qu’vn bon Sau- — 
uage Chreftien, & zelé pour la foy, fait plus parmy — 
fes gens que trois lefuites. . 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 231 


than Nature, and that the fires of a heart which loves 
God are more ardent than their great fields of ice 
and their deep snows are frigid. 

The third thing which extremely edified this good 
Neophyte and his Countrymen was the devotion and 
the love of these new Christians. The Savages are 
not so much astonished to see the French inclined to 
virtue and to believe firmly in God,—they think 
that is secured to us even at our birth. But to see 
Savages who are like themselves,—accustomed to 
their own superstitions, and plunged into the vices 
of their own Nation,—come forth from Baptism 
every one pure and clean; embrace the faith, and 
publish it without fear; detest that which they have 
loved, and trample [85] under foot that which others 
adore,—that is what amazes them, and makes them 
say: ‘‘ If those who are like us are content with one 
wife only, if they are firm and constant in their mar- 
riages, if they love those even who are not of their 
own Nation, if they pray to God, and if prayers do 
them no harm, why should we not imitate them?”’ 
Indeed, I have observed that one truly Christian 
Savage, who is zealous for the faith, accomplishes 
more among his people than do three Jesuits. 


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


CHAPITRE VI. 
DE L’HOSPITAL. 


9AY creu que ce chapitre deuoit eftre placé en 

| fuitte de ce que nous auons dit de la Refidence 

de S. lofeph, non feulement pour ce que cette 
Maifon eft baftie auprés des Sauuages, mais auffi pour 
autant que la charité de ces bonnes Filles coopere 
puiffammét a l’arref{t de ceux qui fe retirent en cette 
Bourgade encommancée. [86] C’eft chofe eftrange, 
comme ces peuples font froids, & comme ils paroiffent 
exempts des admirations qui nous eftonnent, ils ne 
le font pas neantmoins, leur coeur eft touché auffi 
bien que le noftre, mais ilne fe produit pas tant: I’ay 
par fois ouy des Sauuages tenir ce langage; Nikanis 
nous nous e{tonnons comme ces bonnes Filles fi deli- 
cates ont quitté vn fi bon pais comme tu nous le 
depeins, comme elles ont abandonné leurs parens 
pour venir demeurer auprés de nous, & ce qui eft plus 
admirable, elles nous donnent 4 manger, & nous 
penfent dans nos maladies, Chekher, c’eft 4 dire fans 
attente d’aucune recompenfe. 

Noftre Seigneur qui a donné les penfées 4 Madame 
la Ducheffe d’Aiguillon, de fonder vne Maifon de 
Mifericorde en ce bout du Monde, luy auoit auffi 
infpiré le lieu ot elle deuoit eftre baf{tie: or comme 
elle s’eftoit prudemment r’apportée de cét affaire, a 
ceux qui font fur le pais: Ils prirent au commence- 
ment des penfées contraires 4 fes inclinations, mais 
apres auoir confideré meurement l’affaire deuant 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 233 


CHAPTER VI. 
OF THE HOSPITAL. 


HAVE thought that this chapter ought to be put 
| next to what we have said concerning the Resi- 
dence of St. Joseph, not only because this House 
is built in the neighborhood of the Savages, but also 
because the charity of these good Sisters codperates 
powerfully with the settling down of those who with- 
draw to this newly-begun Village. [86] It is a 
strange thing how cold these people are, and how 
exempt they appear from marveling at those things 
which astonish us; however they are not so, their 
heart is touched as well as ours, but does not betray 
itself somuch. I have sometimes heard Savages use 
this language: ‘‘ Nikanis, we are amazed that these 
good Sisters, so delicate, have left so goodly a coun- 
try as you have described to us; that they have aban- 
doned their parents to come and dwell among us; 
and, what is more wonderful, that they give us food, 
and take care of us in our sickness, Chekher,’’ that 
is to say, without expectation of any recompense. 
Our Lord, who has given to Madame the Duchess 
d’ Aiguillon the thought of founding a House of Mer- 
cy at this end of the World, also suggested to her the 
place where it ought to be built. Now, as she had 
wisely referred the matter to those who were in the 
country, they, in the beginning, conceived thoughts 
contrary to her inclinations; but, after having care- 
fully considered the affair before God, they judged 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


Dieu; ilsiugerent que les raifons, [87] que ces bonnes 
Filles alleguoient, pour auoir quelque demeure au- | 
pres des Sauuages, l’emportoient par deffus ces pen- 
fées contraires. En effet, fi elles euffent efté éloi- 
gnées des Sauuages, ces pauures gens ne fe fuffent 
iamais fait porter & 1’Hofpital, qu’A l’extremité de 
leur vie; & ainfi les Barbares auroient appellé cette 
Maifon, la Maifon de mort, & non la Maifon de fan- ‘ 
té, ou de Mifericorde, comme quelques-vns 1’appel- 
lent. Cette grande Dame écriuant fur ce fujet parle 
en ces termes: I’ay vne ioye bien grande de ce qu’on 
a refolu que la Maifon de ces bonnes Filles s’eftabli- 
roit & Sainct Iofeph, fans doute le fruict en fera plus — 
grand: car il me femble que les conuerfions qui fe 
font at. commencement des maladies, font plus affeu- 
rées que celles qui arriuent fi proches de la mort; & 
fi la fatisfation qu’en auront les pauures Sauuages, 
contribuera fans doute beaucoup & leur falut, cela eft 
tres-veritable. 

Ces bonnes gens furent tellement épris, quand ils — 
{ceurent le iour que les Religieufes deuoient venir — 
en leur nouuelle Maifon, que les principaux dentre © 
eux [88] monterent incontinent en leurs canots, pour | 
les aller querir eux-mefmes: ils prirent noftre Reue- : 
rend Pere Superieur, & quelques autres de nos Peres 4 
dans vn de leurs petits vaiffeaux, & ces bonnes Filles © 
dans vn autre, & les rendirent bien-to{t ot eftoient — 
defia leurs fouhaits: Si toft que les Sauuages qui 
eftoient reftés A S. lofeph apperceurent les canots, ils 4 
accourent au deuant, témoignent des ioyes tres-fenfi- 
bles, emportent en vn inftant tout leur petit bagage; — 
ceftoit A qui leur rendroit quelque petit feruice, Dieu — 
{cait quelles eftoient les penfées & les affections de | 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 235 


that the reasons [87] which these good Sisters ad- 
vanced for having some dwelling place near the Sav- 
ages, would outweigh those contrary opinions. In 
fact, if they had been sent away from the Savages, 
these poor people might never have had themselves 
carried to the Hospital, but in their last moments; 
and thus, the Barbarians would have called this 
House ‘‘ the House of death,” and not ‘‘ the House 
of health,’’ or ‘‘of Mercy,” as some call it. This 
great Lady, writing upon this subject, speaks in these 
words: ‘‘I am indeed very glad because they have 
decided that the House of these good Sisters shall 
be established at Saint Joseph. Without doubt, the 
fruit thereof will be greater, for it appears to me 
that conversions which take place in the beginning 
of sicknesses are more assured than those which take 
place so near death;’’ and as the comfort which the 
poor Savages have therein will doubtless contribute 
much to their recovery, that is very true. 

These good people were so overjoyed when they 
knew the day the Nuns were to come into their new 
House, that the chief men among them [88] leaped 
forthwith into their canoes, to go themselves and 
bring them. They took our Reverend Father Supe- 
tior, and some of our other Fathers, in one of their 
little boats, and these good Sisters in another, and 
soon brought them to the place where their desires 
already were. As soon as the Savages who had 
remained at St. Joseph perceived the canoes, they 
ran to meet them, expressed the most lively joy, and 
carried away in an instant all their little baggage; 
every one was eager to render them some slight serv- 
ice. God knows what were the thoughts and feel- 
ings of these good Mothers, when they saw that 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


ces bonnes Meres, voyans que des Barbares, dont le 
feul nom fait peur, & le regard épouuante, au com- 
mencement couroient deuant elles auec leurs robes 
faites A la Sainct Iean Baptifte, pour marque de leur 
bien-veillance, plus remplis d’affection & de candeur 
que de politeffe. 

Elles entrerent en cette nouuelle Maifon le pre- 
mier de Decembre del’an paffé; fi elles n’euffent efté 
fortement fecourués, cette Maifon, dans vn fi pauure 
pais, euft traifné bien plus long-temps, elle n’eft 
pas encor acheuée; qui commence 8 baftir [89] n’eft 
pas fi toft au bout; ona beau faire comme cét homme 
qui vouloit baftir vne tour: Sedens computabat /ump- 
tus fuos. Ona beau conter fon fonds & fes reuenus, 
on fe trouue toufiours court en ces entreprifes, notam- 
ment en vn pais ot tout eft cher au double de la 
France, ott les Ouuriers qui s’y rencontrent en petit 
nombre, ne fe lotient pas a prix d’argent, mais au 
poids d’or. 

Ie {cay bon gré A vne Dame de merite & de condi- 
tion, dont la vertu eft bien connué par fes effets, d’a- 
uoir donné la premiere aumofne a cét Hofpital apres 
{a fondation, elle feait bien que Madame la Ducheffe 
d’Aiguillon a vn grand coeur; mais elle n’ignore pas 
auffi que ce coeur aime & cherit l’vne & l'autre 
France; & que les miferes qui frappent fes yeux 
dans vn temps fi deplorable, luy font auffi fenfibles, 
que celles qui paffent 1’Ocean pour venir iufques a 
fes oreilles; elle a tant de modeftie & d’humilité: 
difons plutoft de charité, qu’elle tient a faueur que 
les ames d’eflite faffent des biens iufques au bout du 
Monde. Ie me fuis trompé en mon calcul, ce font 


Meffieurs de la Nouuelle France [90] ce qui ont les — 


; 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 237 


Barbarians, whose very name causes fear, and whose 
gaze, at first, appals, were running to meet them,— 
in raiment fashioned like that of Saint John the Bap- 
tist,—as a sign of their good will, more replete with 
affection and sincerity than with politeness. 

They entered into this new House on the first of 
December, last year. If they had not been vigor- 
ously assisted, this House, in so destitute a country, 
would have dragged on for a much longer time; it 
is not yet finished. He who begins to build [89] 
does not so soon cometotheend. It is useless to do 
as did that man who wished to build a tower: Sedens 
computabat sumptus suos; it is useless to count one’s 
principal and income; one always finds himself short 
in these undertakings,— especially in a country where 
everything is twice as dear as in France, and where 
the few Workmen who are to be found, do not hire 
themselves for a price in silver, but for loads of gold. 

I am grateful to a Lady of merit and rank, whose 
goodness is well known by its effects, for having 
given the first alms to this Hospital since its founda- 
tion. She knows well that Madame the Duchess 
d’Aiguillon has a large heart; but she is also not 
ignorant that this heart loves and cherishes both the 
new and the old France; and that the distress which 
in so deplorable a time meets her eye, is as grievous 
to her as that which crosses the Ocean to come to her 
ear. She hasso much modesty and humility —rath- 
er let us say charity —that she considers it a favor 
that the elect souls should accomplish good even at 
the ends of the World. I am mistaken in my reck- 
oning, it was the Gentlemen of New France [90] who 
first codperated in this great Work, notwithstanding 
the slight success of their temporal affairs. 


= are 


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


premiers cooperé a ce grand Ouurage, nonobftant le 
peu de fuccés de leurs affaires temporelles. 

l’apprens qu’ils ont encor aumofné cette année 
quelques toiles pour les pauures Sauuages de Sainct 
Iofeph, & pour les malades de 1’Hofpital, ie prie 
Dieu qu’il foit leur grande recompenfe. Vne per- 
fonne de vertu leur a enuoyé cette année vn beau 
Soleil & vn beau Ciboire d’argent doré pour leur 
Chappelle. Ie croy que tous ceux qui aiment les 
ceuures de Mifericorde, feront confolés, lifant ce que 
ie vais dire de cette petite Maifon. 

Premierement, ces bonnes Filles accouftumées 4 
exercer les ceuures de charité les plus repugnantes 
au fens & A la nature, recueillent tous les pauures. 
Sauuages abandonnés: Il y a peu de iours que le 
Pere de Quen efcriuoit en ces termes au R. P. Supe- 
rieur: I’enuoye 4 1’Hofpital Adam ce bon vieillard, 
le plus aagé des Sauuages, ie l’ay retiré de la mort, 
que ces Barbares luy vouloient caufer par vn cordeau, 
pour fe defaire d’vn fardeau qui les charge fort; l’ay 
prié nos Francois qui defcendoient 14-bas de le met- 
tre dans leur barque: [91] Ie ne doute pas que les 
Meres ne le recoiuent volontiers; elles l’ont defia 
nourry & fecouru tout l’hiuer paffé; ce bon-homme 
n’a point d’autre maladie que celle qu'il a commen- 
cée de contracter il y a plus de cent ans. 

Secondement, tous les malades Frangois & Sau- 
uages font bien venus en cette Maifon, & le feul 
regret des Meres en leurs fonctions, eft l'impuiflance 
qu’elles ont de les fecourir auec la mefme affiftace 
qu’elles auroient en France, le pais eftant encor tout 
neuf, & tout pauure, & deftitué de biens, dont regorge 
1’ Europe. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 239 


I learn that they have also contributed some linen 
for the poor Savages of Saint Joseph, and for the sick 
of the Hospital; I pray God that he may be their 
great reward. A worthy person sent them this year 
a beautiful Sun, and a beautiful Pyx, silver-gilt, for 
their Chapel. I believe that all those who love works 
of Mercy, will be consoled in reading what I am 


. going to say of this little House. 


First, these good Sisters, accustomed to practice 
deeds of charity most repugnant to their feelings and 


to nature, gather in all the abandoned Savages. Not 


many days ago, Father de Quen wrote in these terms 
to the Reverend Father Superior: ‘‘I sent to the 
Hospital that good old man, Adam, the most aged of 
the Savages. I rescued him from the death which 
these Barbarians intended to cause him by a rope, in 
order to rid themselves of a burden that greatly 
oppressed them. I begged our Frenchmen who were 
going down there to take him in their bark: [91] I 
do not doubt that the Mothers will receive him will- 
ingly; they have already fed and aided him, during 
the whole of last winter. This worthy man has no 
other malady than that which he began to contract 
more than a hundred years ago.”’ 

Secondly, all sick persons, both French and Sav- 
age, are welcome in this House, and the only regret 
of the Mothers in the discharge of their duties is 
their powerlessness to relieve them with the same 
ministrations that they would have in France,—the 
country being still wholly new, bare, and destitute 
of the wealth with which Europe overflows. 

In the third place, as soon as a Savage feels ill, he 
goes to the Hospital to be purged and bled; some of 
them go to ask for medicine, which they take in their 


+ Say maa 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


En troifiéme lieu, fi toft qu’vn Sauuage fe trouue 
mal, il fe va faire purger & faigner 4 1’ Hofpital; 
quelques-vns vont demander medecine, qu’ils pren- 
nent en leurs cabanes: l’apprens que les Meres en 
ont fait cette année plus de cent cinquante. 

En quatriefme lieu, cette Maifon n’eft pas feule- 
ment l’appuy des malades, mais encor des pauures 
neceffiteux: Quand ces bonnes Meres voient que la 
difette preffe ces pauures gens, elles font 4 manger 
aux plus pauures, & les font venir en la Sale des 
malades, ot le R. Pere Superieur, ou [92] quelqu’vn 
de nos Peres qui fcauent la Langue, fe trouue pour 
ioindre l’aumofne fpirituelle auec la corporelle. 

En cinquiéme lieu, comme Sainc Iofeph eft éloi- 
gné d’enuiron vne lieué & demie de Kebec, ot fe 
font retirées les Meres Vrfulines, pour mieux retenir 
& inftruire leurs petites Seminariftes, tant fedentaires 
que paffageres, qui feroient moins foupples & plus 
volages aupres de leurs parens: Les petites Sauuages 
qui ne {cauroient aller fi loin trouuer ces bonnes 
Meres, s’affemblent chés les Hofpitalieres pour y 
eftre inftruites; elles ont tant de zele pour apprendre, 
qu’elles paffent iufques 4 l’importunité: Voila les 
fruidts que cette faincte Maifon produit; & fi les 
forces viennent A croiftre, les fruicts croiftront 4 pro- 
portion: car les grandes actions de charité font les 
vrais Miracles qui touchent les coeurs des Grecs & 
des Barbares; bref, on peut dire des Sauuages, ce 
que difoit Iacob, parlant de Dieu: Si dederit mthi 
panem ad vefcendum, & veftimentum ad induendum, ertt 
mihi Dominus in Deum. Si vous fecourés les Sau- 
uages, vous les aurés tous. 

[93] Voicy ce que ie ly dans vn papier que m’a 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 241 


own cabins. I learn that the Mothers have treated 
more than one hundred and fifty of them this year. 

In the fourth place, this House is not only a refuge 
for the sick, but also for the needy poor. When 
these good Mothers see that dearth oppresses these 
poor people, they provide food for the poorest, and 
make them come into the sick Ward, where the 
Reverend Father Superior, or [92] some one of our 
Fathers who knows the Language, is found, to join 
the spiritual alms to the material. 

In the fifth place, as Saint Joseph is about a league 
and a half distant from Kebec,— where the Ursuline 
Mothers have made their retreat, the better to retain 
and instruct their little Seminarists, permanent as 
well as temporary, who would be less yielding and 
more inconstant if with their relatives,—the little 
Savages, who would not be able to go so far to those 
good Mothers, meet together at the house of the 
Hospital Sisters, to be instructed there; they have so 
much zeal for learning, that they even become im- 
portunate. Such are the fruits that this holy House 
produces, and, if their forces increase, fruits will 
increase in proportion,— for great acts of love are the 
true Miracles which touch the hearts of Greeks and 
of Barbarians. In short, one can say of the Savages, 
what Jacob did in speaking of God: Sz dederit mihi 
panem ad vescendum, et vestimentum ad induendum, ertt 
4 mihi Dominus in Deum. If you help the Savages, you 
4 will possess them all. 

[93] The following is what I readin a paper which 
the Mother Superior gave me: ‘‘ We have’ received 
and helped in our Hospital sixty-seven sick Savages, 
and one Frenchman; we have maintained, during 
the winter, the poor and the infirm who were not 


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 20 


déné la Mere Superieure, nous auons receu & affifté 
foixante fept malades Sauuages en noftre Hofpital, 
& vn Francois, nous auons nourry pendant l’hyuer 
les pauures, & les infirmes qui ne pouuoient fuiure 
leurs compatriotes 4 la chaffe, fept perfonnes ont efté 
baptifées en noftre Maifon, & quatre feulement de 
nos malades font paffés a l’autre vie, auec des mar- 
ques plus que probables de leur falut. Le Francois 
qui nous a quitté, pour entrer dans vn repos eternel, 
auoit vne patience de Iob; fes plaintes n’eftoient pas 
du pauure fecours que nous luy rendions dans nos 
difettes: mais de ce qu’il ne pouuoit s’acquitter de 
fes deuotions ordinaires; & cependant nous remar- 
quions qu'il recitoit tout les iours l’Office de Noftre 
Dame, & fon chappelet; ie ne doute nullement que 
Dieu ne l’ait fait paffer en ce bout du monde, pour 
le mettre au ciel: ce ieune homme a honoré & chery 
la vertu depuis fon arriuée a Kebec, & iamais il ne 
s’e{t dementy depuis qu’il s’ef{t fortement donné a 
Dieu. 

Iean Sakit¥negschit n’a iamais efté [94] abbatu, 
ny a la mort, ny dans fa maladie, les nouueaux Chre- 
{tiens ont ie ne fcay quelle force qui les anime, & 
qui les confole dans leurs afflictions; ce bon Neo- 
phyte voulant éuiter les occafions du peché parmy 
ceux de fa nation, s’eftoit retiré quelques mois auec 
les Peres de noftre Compagnie, qui font aux trois 
Riuieres, il a rendu des preuues d’vne foy viue, & 
con{tance. Au point qu’on le vouloit marier il eft 
tombé malade d’vne pleurefie baftarde, il s’eft formé 
vn abcés dans fon cofté, il ne pouuoit refpirer, la 
fievre le tourmentoit fort, tout ces maux ne l’ont 
iamais ietté dans l’impatience ny dans les plaintes; on 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 243 


able to follow their tribesmen to the hunt; seven 
persons have been baptized in our House, and only 
four of our sick ones have passed away to the other 
life,—and these, with more than probable signs of 
their salvation. The Frenchman who left us to 
enter into eternal rest, had the patience of Job: his 
complaints were not of the paltry help that we in 
our poverty gave him, but that he could not perform 
his usual devotions; and notwithstanding, we observed 
that he recited every day the Office of Our Lady, 
and his rosary. I do not in the least doubt that God 
inspired his coming to this end of the world, in order 
to lead him to heaven.” This young man honored 
and loved righteousness from his arrival at Kebec, 
and never did he belie his profession, after he gave 
himself wholly to God. 

Jean Sakitounegouchit was never [94] cast down, 
either at death, or in hissickness. The new Chris- 
tians have an inexpressible strength which animates 
them, and consoles them in their afflictions. This 
good Neophyte wishing to avoid temptations to sin 
among those of his nation, had gone to be for some 
months with the Fathers of our Society, who are at the 
three Rivers; he gave proofs of a lively faith and of 
constancy. Atthe time they intended to marry him, 
he fell sick with a sort of pleurisy,—an abscess 
formed in his side, he was unable to breathe, the 
fever greatly tormented him; but his troubles never 
drove him into impatience, or complaints. They 
often asked him if he were not sad; ‘‘ Not at all,” 
replied he. It isa great blessing of God, and a very 
great mercy, to see a young man in the prime of life 
go to the tomb with as much joy as he would go to 
marriage. The Mother Superior speaks thus of him: 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


luy demandoit fouuent s’il n’eftoit point trifte; point 
du tout, refpondoit-il, c’eft vne grande benediction de 
Dieu, & vne grace bié particuliere, de voir vn ieune 
homme 4 la fleur de fon A4ge aller au tombeau auec 
autant de ioye qu’il alloit au mariage: voicy comme en 
parle la Mere Superieure, c’eftoit la douceur mefme, il 
ne demandoit iamais rien, il prenoit auec vne tres- 
prompte obeiffance, tout ce qu’on luy donnoit, fans 
senquerir s’il eftoit amer ou doux; il prenoit vn 
tres-grand [95] plaifir d’entendre parler de Dieu, & 
fouuent on le voyoit prier auec grande attention, il 
fe confeffoit & communioit tous les huict iours, il 
affiftoit tous les iours a la faincte Meffe; bref il le 
falloit moderer quelque temps deuant fa mort, pour 
ce que fa ferueur augmentoit fon mal. Quand il fe 
vit hors d’efperance de recouurer fa fanté, il dit qu’il 
auoit laiffé quelques pelteries aux trois Riuieres, il 
pria les Meres de tenir la main qu’on en payait fes 
dettes, & que du furplus on fit vne aumofne aux 
pauures Sauuages de fon pais, il receut dans vne 
grande paix le S. Viatique, & l’Extreme Onction; 
bref ny en fa maladie, ny en fa mort, il ne fit pa- 
roif{tre aucune crainte, paffant de cette vie comme s'il 
eut efté affuré d’aller tout droit au ciel. 

La petite Anne spitabans’kK¥8e 4gée d’enuiron, 13. 
ou 14. ans nous a fort confolé dans fa maladie, elle 
auoit vn tres-grand defir d’eftre baptifée, fi-toft qu’on 
Vinftruifoit fur ce Sacrement, elle fe mon{troit atten- 
tiue, & fa maladie quoy que tres-fafcheufe ne la 
diuertiffoit point de prefter l’oreille, encor qu’és 
autres difcours [96] elle n’eut quafi point d’attention, 
eftant regenerée dans le Sang du Fils de Dieu, on 
luy parla de receuoir fon fainct Corps, cette doctrine 
luy fit redoubler fon affection comme elle auoit 1’ efprit. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 245 


‘He was meekness itself; he never asked for any- 
thing, he took with a most ready obedience all that 
was given him, without asking if it were bitter or 
sweet. He took very great [95] pleasure in hearing 
of God, and often he was seen praying with great 
devotion; he confessed and received communion 
every week; he was present every day at holy Mass. 
In brief, it was necessary to restrain him some time 
before his death, as his fervor augmented his suffer- 
ing.’’ When he saw himself without hope of recover- 
ing his health, he said he had left some pelts at the 
three Rivers; he begged the Mothers to see to it that 
his debts should be paid from these, and that with 
the surplus they should grant an alms to the poor 
Savages of his country. He received in great peace 
the Holy Viaticum and Extreme Unction; in a 
word, neither in his sickness, nor in his death, did 
he show any fear,—passing from this life as if he 
had been assured of going straight to heaven. 

‘““The little Anne Oupitabanoukwe, about 13 
or 14 years old, consoled us much in her illness; 
she had a great desire to be baptized. As soon 
as she had been instructed in regard to this Sacra- 
ment, she showed herself attentive, and her malady, 
although very distressing, did not hinder her from 
listening; yet to other conversation [96] she gave 
almost no attention. Having been regenerated by 
the Blood of the Son of God, we spoke to her of 
receiving his sacred Body; this doctrine caused her 
affection to be redoubled, and, as she had an excel- 
lent mind, she was soon capable of receiving this 
blessed food. Being in an agony she appeared neith- 
er to see nor hear; but, as soon as she was spoken to 
of God, she seemed to recover her senses,— showing 


; 
bi 
2 


246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


excellent, elle fut bien-toft capable de receuoir cette 
viande facrée; eftant a l’agonie, elle paroiffoit n’a- 
uoir plus d’yeux ny d’oreilles, mais fi toft qu’on luy 
parloit de Dieu, elle fembloit reuenir 4 foy, mon- 
{trant par figne qu’elle prenoit plaifir d’oiiir parler 
de celuy dont elle iotiit maintenant. 

Frangoife snatchiganikse apprehendoit grande- 
ment la mort au commencement de fa maladie, fi 
toft qu’elle fut baptifée; & qu’on luy eut enfeigné, 
qu’apres cette vie il y en auroit vn autre pleine de 
bon-heur, elle perdit cette crainte, quoy que fa ma- 
ladie fut fort langoureufe, & qu’elle n’eut point de 
forces, elle eftoit fi honnefte que iamais on n’a remar- 
qué en elle la moindre indecence. Toutes les filles 
Sauuages, dit la Mere, font tres-verecondes, & rem- 
plie de pudeur, iamais on ne les voit ioiier auec les 
petits garcons, & comme vn certain iour vn enfant 
affés [97] ieune fut entré en la fale des malades auec 
fa paréte, qui venoit pour fe faire inftruire; les autres 
filles demanderent 4 la Mere, permiffion de le faire 
fortir, alleguant que c’eftoit vn garcon; elles le 
traiterent fi rudement, qu’il n’y retourna pas vne 
autre fois. 

L’vne des ioyes que nous auons d’eftre logées a 
Sainct Iofeph, difent ces bonnes Meres, c’eft la con- 
folation de voir tous les iours des Sauuages, leur 
devotion nous rauit: Ce Printemps, comme ils reue- 
noient de la chaffe, tirant apres eux leurs grades 
traifnes, ils s’arrefterent deuant noftre Hofpital, & 
s’en vindrent faire leur petite priere en noftre Chap- 
pelle, puis ils pourfuiuirent leur chemin; ces actions 
font pleines de ioie. Il nes’eft paffé aucun iour de 
VE{té, que quelqu’vn d’eux n’ait entendu la faincte 
Meffe en noftre Eglife. I’ay veu, dit la Mere Supe- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 247 


by asign that she took pleasure in hearing of him 
whom she now enjoys.” 

Francoise Ounatchiganikwe feared death extreme- 
ly, at the beginning of her sickness; as soon as she 
was baptized, and was taught that after this life there 
would be another full of happiness, she lost this fear, 
although her malady was very tedious, and she had 
no strength. She was so modest that they never 
noticed in her the least impropriety. ‘‘ All the Sav- 
age maidens are very modest,’’ said the Mother, “‘ and 
filled with bashfulness. They are never seen play- 
ing with little boys; and when, one day, a quite 
young child [97] was brought into the sick ward with 
its parent, who came to be instructed, the girls asked 
the Mother for permission to make it go away, plead- 
ing that it was a boy; they treated him so rudely 
that he did not come back again. 

‘One of the delights that we have in dwelling at 
Saint Joseph,’’ say these good Mothers, ‘‘is the 
comfort of seeing the Savages every day; their 
devotion charms us. This Spring, when they re- 
turned from the hunt, dragging after them their 
great sleds, they stopped before our Hospital, and 
came to offer up their little prayers in our Chapel, 
then they went on their way; these acts are replete 
with joy for us. No day has passed, this Summer, 
without some one of them hearing holy Mass in our 
Church. I have seen,’’ said the Mother Superior, 
‘little girls so attentive in reciting their rosary, 
that—their companions coming for them to go and 
play, or to return home—they would not leave the 
Chapel until they had finished them. Often these 
little souls come to us [98] and say: ‘ My Mother, 
hear us repeat what the Fathers have taught us of 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


rieure, de petites filles fi attentiues 4 reciter leurs 
chappellets, que leurs compagnes les venans appeller 
pour aller ioiier, ou pour retourner 4 la maifon, 
elles ne partoient point de la Chappelle qu’elles ne 
les euff€t acheués. Souuent ces petites ames nous 
viennent [98] dire; Ma Mere, faites nous repeter ce 
que les Peres nous ont enfeigné au Catechifme, afin 
que nous fcachions bien noftre lecon. C’eft affés 
pour cét article, difons deux mots de la fimplicité & 
de la candeur de ces bonnes gens. Quand quelqu’vn 
d’eux s’e{t bien trouué d’vne medecine, tous les autres 
malades en demandent vne femblable, quoy que 
leur maladie foit bien differente: Vne bonne femme 
s’e{tant venué rendre a 1’Hofpital, auec deux de fes 
enfans, dont l’vn fe portoit mal; on ordonna deux 
medecines, l’vne pour l’enfant, & l'autre pour la 
mere; le matin on prefenta les deux gobelets 4a la 
mere: Or comme c’eft la couftume parmy eux, de fe 
faire part les vns aux autres de ce qu’ils boiuent, ou 
de ce qu’ils mangent; cette bonne creature prend en 
main la medecine de fa fille, elle y goufte la pre- 
miere, puis elle en donne 4 boire 4 fes deux enfans 
I’'vn apres l’autre; ayant vuidé le premier gobelet, 
elle prend le fecond, & le diftribué 4 la mefme facon, 
chacun y beuuant 4 fon tour; voila vne bonne fagon 
de prendre medecine. 

Madame la Ducheffe d’Aiguillon aiant [99] enuoyé 
en la Chappelle de fon Hofpital vn beau Crucifix, ot 
d’vn cofté eft la faincte Vierge, qui prefente 4 noftre 
Seigneur cette bonne Dame; & de 1l’autre Sainct Iean, 
qui prefente Monfeigneur le Cardinal, & de petits 
Sauuages peints tout a l’entour: Ces bonnes gens, 
notamment les femmes & les filles, accouroient pour 
voir ce Tableau viuant. Or comme les Meres leur 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 249 


the Catechism, so that we may know our lesson 
well.’’’ That is enough of this subject; let us say a 
few words about the simplicity and the candor of 
these good people. When any one of them has been 
cured by a remedy, all the other sick ask for a simi- 
lar one, although their disorders may be quite differ- 
ent. A poor woman having repaired to the Hospital, 
with two of her children, of whom one was sick, two 
medicines were ordered, one for the child, and the 
other for the mother; in the morning the two cups 
were offered to the mother. Now as it is the cus- 
tom among these people to share with each other 
what they eat, or what they drink, this good crea- 
ture took her daughter’s potion in her hand, first 
tasted it herself, then gave it to her two children to 
drink, one after the other; having emptied the first 
cup, she took the second, and distributed it in like 
manner, each one drinking in turn. A fine way, 
that, of taking medicine! 

Madame the Duchess d’ Aiguillon, having [99] sent 
to the Chapel of her Hospital a beautiful Crucifix,— 
on one side of which is the blessed Virgin, who 
points out to our Lord this good Lady, and on the 
other Saint John, who points out Monseigneur the 
Cardinal, and the little Savages painted all about 
him,— these good people, especially the women and 
young girls, ran to see this lifelike Picture. Now, 
as the Mothers had made known to them the obliga- 
tions under which they were to this great Lady, 
these good people were not content with simply look- 
ing at this beautiful Portrait,—they were obliged to 
express the actions that impressed their eyes. The 
little girls said to each other, speaking of Madame 
the Duchess, ‘‘ She is on her knees;’’ forthwith all 


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 20: 


declaroient les obligations qu’ils ont 4 cette grande 
Dame, ces bonnes gens ne fe contenterent pas de 
regarder fimplement ce beau Portrait, il fallut expri- 
mer les actions qui frappoient leurs yeux. Les filles 
fe difoient l’vne a l’autre, parlans de Madame la 
Ducheffe: Elle eft a genoux; 1a-deffus elles s’y 
mettoient toutes: Elle ioint les mains, toutes les 
ioignoient auffi-toft: elle regarde noftre Capitaine qui 
e{t mort en Croix pour nous, toutes leuoient les yeux, 
& regardoient attentiuement le Crucifix: elle prie 
Dieu, elles fe mettoient auffi-to{t A reciter les oraifons 
qu’elles fgauent: puis aiant fait leurs prieres, elles 
fe leuoient debout, & faifans vne grade reuerence a 
cette Dame, l’alloient baifer auec plus de fimplicité 
[100] & de candeur, que de grace; & puiss’en retour- 
noient bien contentes. Ce n’eft pas la couftume des 
Sauuages de fe faluer par vn baifer: mais comme 
Madame de la Pelterie embraffe affés fouuent, & 
baife ces pauures filles 4 la rencontre, ces bonnes 
creatures s' imaginét que cette action eft de prix & de 
valeur, comme ils parlent, & qu’il la faut imiter pour 
bien faire. 

Les Meres ne parlent en leur memoire que de ceux 
qui font trefpaffés en leur Maifon, elles ne voient 
pas le fruit qui prouient de leur Hofpital: car ceux 
qui recouurent leur fanté, s’en retournent dans leurs 
cabanes, fans leur donner ce bien fouuent a connoi{tre 
que la charité a operé dans leurs ames: Vne partie 
de ce que nous auons dit, au chapitre de la Refidence 
de Sainct Iofeph, fe doit rapporter 4 cette Maifon de 
Mifericorde; car les Sauuages y ayans receu du 
fecours dans leurs maladies, ont e{fté fortement gai- 
gnésa Dieu. I’en fcay vn entre autres, lequel fut 
porté en cette Maifon par 1’vn de nos Peres, qui l’alla 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 251 


fell upon their knees. ‘‘ Her hands are folded;"’ 
immediately all folded theirs. ‘‘ She is looking at 
our Captain, who died on the Cross for us;”’ all 
raised their eyes and looked attentively at the Cruci- 
fix. ‘‘She is praying to God;”’ at once they began 
to repeat the prayers they knew. Then, having 
made their petitions, they stood up, and making a 
low courtesy to this Lady, proceeded to kiss her, with 
more simplicity [100] and candor than grace; and 
then they went away quite content. It is not the 
custom of the Savages to salute each other with a 
kiss; but as Madame de la Pelterie quite often em- 
braces and kisses these poor girls on meeting them, 
these good creatures imagine that this act is of price 
and value, as they say, and that they must imitate 
her, in order to do right. 

The Mothers speak in their account only of those 
who have died in their House. They do not see the 
results that proceed from their Hospital: for those 
who recover their health, go back to their cabins, 
without often letting them know the good which this 
charity has wrought in their souls. A part of what 
we related in the chapter on the Residence of Saint 
Joseph ought to be attributed to this House of Mercy; 
for the Savages, having received therein help in their 
sicknesses have been firmly won to God. I know one, 
among others, who was taken to this House by one 
of our Fathers, who went for him to the woods, 
where his Countrymen had abandoned him: this good 
young man, [101] having recovered his health through 
the care of these good Mothers, was so deeply affected, 
that he not only urgently solicited his baptism, but 
resolved to remain all his life among us, in order to 
be more fully instructed therein; and his relatives 


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


querir dans les bois, ot fes Compatriotes l’auoient 
abandonné: ce bon ieune homme [101] aiant recouuert 
la fanté par les foins de ces bonnes Meres, fut fi puif- 
famment touché, que non feulement il pourfuiuit 
fortement fon baptefme; mais il prit refolution de 
demeurer toute fa vie aupres de nous, pour y eftre 
plus pleinement inftruit; & iamais fes parens ne luy 
ont pti faire quitter cette penfée; ils ont fait leur 
poffible pour 1’en diuertir, mais tous leurs efforts 
n’ont feruy qu’a faire paroiftre fa conftance: Ce n’eft 
pas tout; comme 5. Bernard gaigna fes freres, qui 
le vouloient diuertir d’entrer en Religion; de mefme, 
ce ieune homme appellera & attirera auec foy ceux 
qui le vouloient empefcher d’écouter Iefus-Chrift; car 
i’apprens, que l’vn des principaux d’entr’eux chan- 
cele defia, difant, qu’il veut croire en Dieu comme 
fon cadet- 

Ie conclueray ce chapitre par la mort d’vne petite 
colombe, c’eft la Mere de fainéte Marie que Dieu 
nous a rauy: Pretiofa in confpeciu Domini: Mors 
fSanttorum eius. O que la mort de cette Efpoufe de 
Iefus-Chrift eft precieufe deuant Dieu: elle fe trou- 
uoit vn peu mal dés la France, d’vn rheume ou d’vne 
defluxion qui la faifit au [102] temps de 1’embarque- 
ment, le mal creut fur mer, & encor plus fur terre; 
Depuis fon arriuée elle a prefché plus fortement les 
Sauuages, par fa patience, par fa refignation, par fa 
gaieté, dans vne maladie traifnante & douloureufe, 
que ne feauroient faire trois Predicateurs, auec toute 
leur eloquence; elle fe traifnoit fouuent dans la fale 
des malades pour auoir la confolation de les voir, 
nous prenions plaifir de nous y rencontrer, aec vne 
bande de ces pauures Barbares, pour leur apprendre 
la refignation par l’exemple de cette pauure malade, 


sabiasis 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 253 


were in no wise able to make him renounce this proj- 
ect. They did their best to dissuade him from it, 
but all their efforts only served to make his constancy 
apparent. This is not all; as St. Bernard won his 
brothers, who endeavored to prevent him from enter- 
ing the Religious life, even so, this young man will 
call and will bring with him those who wished to 
hinder him from listening to Jesus Christ: for I learn 
that one of the chief among them already wavers, 
saying that he is inclined to believe in God as does 
his younger brother. 

I shall conclude this chapter with the death of a 
dear dove,—this is Mother de sainte Marie, whom 
God has taken from us: Pretiosa in conspectu. Domini 
mors sanctorum ejus. Oh, how precious before God 
is the death of this Bride of Jesus Christ! She was 
somewhat ill after leaving France, from a cold or 
congestion which seized her at the [102] time of set- 
ting sail; the illness increased upon the sea, and still 
more upon land. Since her arrival here she has 
preached more forcibly to the Savages by her pa- 
tience, and by her resignation, and by her cheerful- 
ness in a lingering and painful sickness than three 
Preachers could have done with all their eloquence. 
She often dragged herself into the ward for the sick, 
to have the comfort of seeing them; we took pleas- 
ure in meeting her there, with a group of these poor 
Barbarians, in order to teach them resignation by 
the example of this poor sick woman. They could 
not comprehend how a young girl, so affectionate and 
delicate, was able to forget her country and her par- 
ents, with such cheerfulness as she showed in her 
face and in her words. 

Sieur Giffard, who treated her in her sickness, 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 20 


ils ne pouuoient comprendre comme vne ieune fille fi 
tendre & fi delicate, pfit oublier fon pais & fes parens, 
auec la gaieté qu’elle faifoit paroiftre en fon vifage, 
& en fes paroles. 

Le fieur Giffard la traittant dans fa maladie, luy 
dit: que c’eftoit fait de fa vie, qu’elle auoit trois ma- 
ladies mortelles: cette ame innocente, fe mit 4 rire, 
fe mon{trant auffi ioieufe de la nouuelle de la mort, 
qu’vn autre efit fait de la nouuelle de la vie; nous ne 
manquions pas de rapporter tout cela aux Sauuages, 
qui prenoient [103] vn fingulier plaifir de 1’aller voir, 
elle les careffoit en foufriant, ce qui les touchoit fort. 
La vertu a plus d’eloquence que 1’Ariftote ou le 
Ciceron. 

Quelqu’vn de nous luy demandant, certain iour, fi 
elle n’auoit point de regret d’auoir paffé la mer, d’a- 
uoir quitté vne maifon qui la pouuoit fecourir, & qui 
auroit trouué des remedes propres pour la remettre 
en fanté, fi la pauureté du pais, l’incommodité du 
logement, l’abfence de tant de bonnes filles, le de- 
faut de viures, propres pour vne perfonne malade, 
ne luy caufoient point quelque trifteffe; cette petite 
colombe le regardant d’vn ceil qui faifoit voir la fin- 
cerité de fon coeur, luy dit; Mon Pere fi i’eftois en 
France, & qu’on me prefentaft toutes les grandeurs, 
capables d’allecher vn coeur, ie les quitterois toutes, 
pour venir en Canada, quand mefme ie ferois affeurée 
d’y trouuer la maladie qui afflige mon corps; car il 
me femble que la refignation que ie refens dans mon 
coeur, & la patience que i’ay dans vne maladie bien 
longue & bien douloureufe, m’a efté donnée de Dieu, 
en confideration du Canada, pour m’eftre offerte 4 fa 
[104] Maiefté, fans referue, prenant plaifir de luy 
venir facrifier ma vie, au feruice des pauures Sau- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 255 


told her that there was no hope for her life,—that 
she had three mortal diseases; this innocent soul 
began to laugh, showing herself as joyous at the 
news of death, as another would have done at the 
news of life. Wedid not fail to report all this to 
the Savages, who took [103] rare pleasure in going 
to see her; she caressed them, smiling, which moved 
them exceedingly. Virtue has more eloquence than 
Aristotle or Cicero. 

One of us asked her, one day, if she had no 
Tegret at having crossed the sea, at having left a 
house that could relieve her, and that would have 
found the proper remedies to restore her health; if 
the poverty of this country, the inconvenience of the 
dwelling, the absence of so many good sisters, the 
lack of food suitable for a sick person, did not cause 
her some sadness. This dear dove, looking at him 
with an eye which revealed the sincerity of her heart, 
said to him: ‘‘ My Father, if I were in France, and I 
should be offered all the honors capable of enticing 
a heart, I would leave them all that I might come to 
Canada, even if I were sure of finding here the dis- 
ease that afflicts my body; for it seems to me that 
the resignation I experience in my heart, and the 
patience that I have in a very long and very painful 
sickness, have been given me by God, for the sake 
of Canada, to be offered by me to his [104] Majesty, 
without reserve, taking pleasure in coming to sacri- 
fice my life to him in the service of the poor Sav- 
ages.’’ If an Angel were capable of our desires, he 
would wish for ability to speak and to suffer like this 
maiden. 

At last this beautiful soul was released from its 
body, on the fifth of the month of March; she filled 


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 20 


uages: fi vn Ange eftoit capable de nos defirs, il fou- 
haitteroit de pouuoir parler, & fouffrir comme cette 
vierge. 

Enfin cette belle ame fe detacha de fon corps le 
cinquiefme du mois de Mars, elle remplit fes pau- 
ures foeurs de douleur, & noftre cceur de ioie; elle 
laiffa vne douce odeur de fes vertus aux Francois & 
aux Sauuages; eftant a l’agonie comme la fluxion la 
fuffoquoit de temps en temps, puis luy donnoit quel- 
que liberté de refpirer, elle eftoit fi prefente en elle 
mefme, qu’elle difoit par fois; ce dernier coup tarde 
bien 4 venir: on luy demandoit de fois 4 autre, fi le 
coeur e{toit en paix, mais il ne falloit que regarder 
fon vifage, pour voir la paix de fon ame: Enfin fen- 
tant la mort prochaine, elle s’écria; c’eft 4 ce coup. 
Adieu ma Mere, dit-elle, a fa Superieure, & le ref{pir 
ceffa auec fa vie. Quelques habitans nous dirent 
apres fa mort, qu’ils tenoient a faueur que cette 
faincte etit paffé la mer, pour venir laiffer vn fi facré 
depoft en leur pais, & qu’ils [105] croioient que par 
fes merites, & par fes prieres, noftre Seigneur beni- 


roit ces contrées: Si deux braues Filles auec leur 


dot, pour n’eftre point 4 charge, venoient prendre 
la place de cette colombe, elles trouueroient encor le 


parfum de fes vertus. Nous fommes en trop petit 


nombre, difent ces bonnes Meres, pour tous les tra- 
uaux qu'il faut fubir en ce bout du monde, deux 


ames genereufes pourroient icy cueillir des palmes. 


approchantes d’vn petit Martir; car les dangers de 
1’Ocean, la prifon flottante au gré des tempettes, la 
pauureté d’vn pais tout neuf, la rigueur des hiuers, 
font les tirans, qui n’oftent par la ioie des ames con- 
{tantes; mais qui étoffent leurs guirlandes de lis, de 
rofes, & de palmes. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 257 


her poor sisters with grief, and our hearts with joy; 
she left a sweet perfume of her virtues to the French 
and to the Savages. Being in an agony as the par- 
oxysm suffocated her from time to time, then gave 
her some freedom of breath, she was so composed 
that she said, at times, ‘‘ This last stroke is indeed 
long in coming.’’ She was asked now and then if 
her heart were at peace; but one needed only to look 
at her face to see the peace of her soul. At length, 
feeling death near, she exclaimed: ‘‘ This is the 
‘stroke! Adieu, my Mother,’’ said she to her Supe- 
rior, and with that breath her life ended. Some of 
the inhabitants told us, after her death, that they 
looked upon it as a favor that this saint had crossed 
the sea, to come and leave so sacred a deposit in their 
country; and they [105] believed that, by her merits 
and by her prayers, our Lord would bless these 
regions. If two brave Sisters— with their dowry, so 
as not to be a burden—would come to take the 
place of this dove, they would still find the perfume 
of her virtues. ‘‘ We are too few in number,” say 
these good Mothers, ‘‘ for all the burdens that must 
be borne at this end of the world.’’ Two generous 
souls could here gather palms that would approach 
toa minor Martyrdom: for the dangers of the Ocean, 
the prison floating at the will of the tempests, the 
poverty of a wholly new country, the rigor of the 
winters, are tyrants which do not take away the joy 
of steadfast souls; but which fill their garlands with 
lilies, roses, and palms. 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


[106] CHAPITRE VII. 


DE LA RESIDENCE DE LA CONCEPTION, AUX TROIS 
RIUIERES. 


E croy que la pauure Eglife des Trois Riuieres, a 

| e{té plus battué cette année de toutes fortes de 
vents, que les pilotes ou nautonniers n’en mar- 
quent dedans leurs rofes, ou dedans leurs cartes ma- 
rines: Il s’eft fait 1A de temps en temps, vn ramas de 
diuerfes Nations, qui a bien donné de l’exercice a 
nos Peres: On y aveu des Sauuages de 1’Ifle de la 
petite nation des Attikamegues, des Montagnais, des 
s’Kotoemis, des s8natchataronons, & plufieurs autres, 
dans la paix, dans la guerre, dans de petites jalou- 
fies les vns enuers les autres; fi bien que les mau- 
uais gaftoient les bons, & les Demons réueilloient 
les fuperititions, qu’on ne voit plus a Sainct Iofeph, 
& qui fembloient eftre éteintes aux Trois Riuieres: 
Mais écoutons ce qu’en efcriuent le Pere Iacques 
Buteux & [107] le Pere Iean de Quen, dedans les let- 
tres qu’ils ont enuoiées a noftre R. Pere Superieur, & 
dedans les memoires qu’ils m’ont communiqués: Les 
Chreftiens de Sainct Iofeph qui font montés icy, 
font tres-bien, le moins qu’il en pourra venir pour le 
prefent, ce fera le meilleur pour eux: car les Sau- 
uages venus nouuellement des terres de diuerfes con- 
trées, n’aiant encor eu aucune iniftruction, refufcitent 
les vieilles fuper{titions; ils font bruire les tambours, 
dont il n’eftoit quafi plus de memoire, ils réueillent 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 259 


[106] CHAPTER VII. 


“OF THE RESIDENCE OF LA CONCEPTION AT THE THREE 
RIVERS. 


BELIEVE that the poor Church of the Three 
Rivers has been beaten this year by more kinds 
of winds than pilots and mariners have marked 

on their wind roses or on their charts. There has 
occurred there, from time to time, a gathering of 
different Nations, who have indeed given exercise 
to our Fathers. They have seen there Savages from 
the Island, those of the petite nation, of the Attika- 
‘megues, of the Montagnais, of the Oukotoemis,'*® of 
the Ounatchataronons, and many others,—in peace, 
in war, and in little jealousies, one toward another; 
so that the bad harmed the good, and the Demons 
revived superstitions that are no longer seen at Saint 
Joseph, and which seemed to be extinguished at the 
Three Rivers. But let us listen to what Father 
Jacques Buteux and [107] Father Jean de Quen write 
of this in the letters which they have sent to our Rev- 
erend Father Superior, and in the accounts they have 
transmitted tome. ‘‘ The Christians of Saint Joseph 
who have come up here are doing very well. The 
fewer of them that can come, for the present, the 
better it will be for them; for the Savages recently 
arrived from lands of divers countries, not having 
yet had any instruction, resuscitate the old supersti- 
tions; they make the drums rattle, of which there was 
almost no longer remembrance; they revive the be- 


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


la creance aux fonges, que l’on ignoroit quafi du 
tout: Ceux qui font venus des endroits plus voifins 
des Hurons, ont apporté ie ne fceay quelle dance, ou 
fuper{tition diabolique, qui nous a donné bien de la 
peine. L’orgueil eft icy en fon regne, & la famine 
qui preffe ces pauures miferables, ne le fcauroit ab- 
batre; la crainte qu’ils ont de leurs ennemis, les 
empefche d’aller a la chaffe, pour conferuer leur vie: 
ils ont tous les iours & toutes les nuicts des vifions; 
ils voient, difent-ils, des Hiroquois derriere leurs 
bleds, ils en voient dans les bois, ils voient des canots 
vogans, ils en voient 4 l’ancre, ils en [108] voient 
qui les pourfuiuent; ils remarquent la pifte de leurs 


ennemis fur le fable, ils reconnoiffent le lieu ot ils. 


ont couché, les arbres ot ils ont cueilly des fruicts, 
ils les entendent mefme crier dans le profond des 
bois; ils donnent mille fauffes allarmes 4 nos Fran- 
cois: Et dans tout cela il n’y a qu’vne feule verité, 
{cauoir eft, qu’vne vaine crainte de la mort engendre 
tous ces phantofmes dans leur imagination, & les dé- 
tourne de la vraye peur qu’ils deuroient auoir, d’offen- 
fer Celuy qui feul peut affermir leur coeur. Fugit 
impius nemine perfequente. Les reproches qu’on nous 
faifoit jadis, recommencent icy; ces nouueaux hoftes 
nous difent que les prieres les font mourir, que 
d’eftre baptifé & voir biétoft la fin de fa vie, c’eft 
vne mefme chofe; fi vn Chreftien eft malade, ou s’il 
vient 4 mourir, c’ef{t le Baptefme qui luy ofte la vie: 
on a beau leur dire qu’il en meurt beaucoup plus d’In- 
fideles que de Croyans, le Diable prend fon temps, & 
leur bande les yeux contre la verité connué. Cét 


hiuer paffé, tous les Sauuages qui font icy s’eftans 


ioints enfemble, & renfermés comme dans vn fort, 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 261 


lief in dreams, that had been almost wholly forgotten. 
Those who have come from places nearer to the Hu- 
rons have brought I know not what dance or diabolic- 
al superstition, which has given us much trouble. 
Pride is reigning here, and the famine which is 
pinching these poor wretches will not succeed in 
bringing itdown. The fear that they have of their 
enemies, prevents their going to the hunt so that 
their lives may be sustained. Every day and every 
night they have visions; they see, so they say, the 
Hiroquois behind their corn, they see them in the 
woods; they see canoes floating, they see them lying 
still; they [108] see those that pursue them; they 
observe attentively the tracks of their enemies on the 
sand; they identify the place where they have slept, 
the trees from which they have gathered fruit, they 
even hear them yelling in the depth of the forest,— 
they give a thousand false alarms to our Frenchmen. 
And in all this there is but a single truth —to wit, 
that a vain fear of death engenders all these phan- 
toms in their imagination, and turns them from the 
true fear which they ought to have of offending Him 
who alone can strengthen their hearts. Fugit tmpius 
nemine persequente. ‘The reproaches that were former- 
ly made to us are being recommenced here: these 
new visitors tell us that prayers cause them to die, 
that to be baptized and to see very soon the end of 
life are the same thing. If a Christian be sick, or if 
he happen to die, it is Baptism which has deprived 
him of life; it is in vain to tell them that many more 
Unbelievers die than Believers,—the Devil takes his 
opportunity, and blinds their eyes to the known truth. 
This last winter, all the Savages who are here hav- 
ing met together, and being shut up as in a fort, the 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou20 


les pauures Chreftiens fouffroient [109] l’infolence & 
les mauuais exemples des Payens. Entre leurs 
fuper{titions ils en commencerent vne, tirée des pais 
plus hauts, qui deuoit durer trois nuicts, pendant lef- 
quelles les Sauuages vont courans par les cabanes, 
auec des cris & des hurlemens de Demons: le plus 
bel acte de cette tragicomedie confifte en ce point, les 
filles & les femmes vont dancant, & quelques hommes 
menent le Iongleur ou le Sorcier par deffous les bras, 
& le font marcher par deffus des charbons ardens 
fans qu’ilfe brufle. Le Pere Buteux ayant eu fecret- 
tement aduis par vn Chreftien, du temps que cette 
farce diabolique fe deuoit iotier pour la guerifon 
d’vne femme malade; porté d’vn zele de la gloire de 
nof{tre Seigneur, s’en alla dans les cabanes fur les dix 
heures du foir, accompagné du Pere Poncet, crie tant 
qu’il peut contre ces infolences, aborde le Capitaine 
des Sauuages de l'Ifle, qui feul pouuoit arrefter ces 
defordres, comme en eftant le premier autheur & 
promoteur: cét homme plus froid naturellement que 
la glace, s’échauffe, reproche au Pere que le Bap- 
tefme & les prieres faifoient mourir les [110] Sau- 
uages. Le Pere luy replique, que leurs pechés & 
leurs fortileges eftoient la caufe de leur mort: A ce 
bruit les Sauuages accourent de tous coftés, l’allarme 
fe met dans leur camp, les Chreftiens ne difent mot, 
eftant en petit nombre, les Paiens crient a pleine 
tefte, ie ferois trop long de raconter tout ce qui fe 
paffa pour lors: Bref, ce Capitaine tranfporté de cho- 
lere, jette des cendres bruflantes aux yeux du Pere, 
& prend vne corde, comme s’il euft voulu le garot- 
ter, le menagant de letuer: Le Pere tend le col tout 
froidement, mais ce Barbare ne paffa pas plus outre: 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 263 


poor Christians suffered [109] the insolence and the 
evil example of the Pagans. Among their supersti- 
tions they had begun one, brought from the upper 
countries, which was to last three nights, during 
which the Savages run through the cabins with the 
shrieks and yells of Demons. The finest act of this 
tragi-comedy consists in this point,—the girls and 
women begin to dance, and some men take the Jug- 
gler or Sorcerer under the arms, and make him walk 
over the glowing coals without being burned. Fa- 
ther Buteux,— having secretly had notice, from a 
Christian, of the time when this diabolical farce was 
to be played for the healing of a sick woman,— 
prompted by zeal for the glory of our Lord, went to 
the cabins about ten o’clock at night, accompanied by 
Father Poncet; and, inveighing as strongly as he 
could against these insolencies, accosted the Captain 
of the Savages from the Island, who alone could 
check these disorders, as being the chief author and 
promoter of them. This man, naturally colder than 
ice, became excited, and reproached the Father, say- 
ing to him that Baptism and prayers made the [110] 
Savages die; the Father replied to him that their 
sins and sorceries were the cause of their death. At 
‘this clamor, the Savages ran in haste from all sides, 
and alarm was manifest in their camp; the Christians 
said nothing, being few in number, but the Pagans 
yelled at the top of their voices; I would be too diffuse 
in relating all that took place then. In short, this 
Captain, carried away with anger, threw burning 
cinders at the eyes of the Father, and took a rope as 
if he intended to strangle him, threatening to kill 
him. The Father very coolly presented his neck, 
but this Barbarian proceeded no further. At last, 


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Enfin, quelques Sauuages prierent les Peres de fe 
retirer, ce quils firent, & cette fuperftition diabo- 
lique fut arreftée pour ce coup 1A. 

Les Frang¢ois ayans appris l’affront qu’on auoit fait 
au Pere 4 leur porte, s’alterent. Monfieur de Chan- 
flour commandant aux Trois Riuieres, fait venir ce 
Capitaine, pour tirer fatisfaction, contre la priere 
que le Pere luy faifoit, de ietter tout cela dans 1’ou- 
bly; comme ce Barbare eft fubtil & rufé, il trouua 
fa deffaite, il auoiia bien qu’il auoit ietté des cendres 
fur le [111] Pere, & qu’il eftoit tout preft d’en rece- 
uoir autant pour reparation de fa faute; mais pour le 
cordeau que i’ay pris en main, faifoit-il, ce n’a iamais 
efté ma penfée de lier le Pere, beaucoup moins de 
l’étrangler: mais comme il me reprochoit que ie fai- 
fois mourir les Sauuages par mes forts, & que ie luy 
reprochois dans ma cholere, qu’il les faifoit mourrir 
par les prieres: i’ay pris vn licol pour luy monftrer, 
que fi nous difions tous deux vray, que nous meri- 
tions tous deux la mort; d’auoir attenté fur fa vie, 
c’eft ce qui n’eft iamais entré dans ma penfée: la 
cata{trophe de cette tragedie fut, que ces beaux Me- 
decins ne purent iamais guerir leur malade; voila 
vne partie des bourafques & des tempeftes qui font 
arriuées cette année en diuers temps, aux Trois 
Riuieres: Ces €épines n’ont pas empefché la naiffance 
des rofes, prefentons en quelques vnes fur l’autel de 
noftre Seigneur. 

L’Eglife qui commence A naiftre en cette Refi- 
dence, eftoit compofée de quatre-vingt Neophytes, 
au mois de lanuier; ceux qui font capables d’in- 
{truction, viennent [112] tous les iours vne fois a la 
Chapelle, pour entendre la faincte Meffe; les medi- 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 265 


some Savages begged the Fathers to withdraw, which 
they did; and this diabolical superstition was stopped 
for that time.”’ 

The French, having learned of the affront that had 
been made to the Father at their very door, were much 
troubled. Monsieur de Chanflour, the commandant 
at the Three Rivers,“ sent for this Captain in order 
to obtain satisfaction, notwithstanding the entreaty 
the Father made him to cast all this into oblivion. 
As this Barbarian was subtle and crafty, he perceived 
his defeat; he admitted, indeed, that he had thrown 
cinders at the [111] Father, and that he was ready to 
receive the same, in reparation for his fault: ‘‘ But 
as for the rope which I took in my hand,”’ said he, 
‘‘it was never in my mind to bind the Father, much 
less to strangle him. But, when he reproached me 
with making the Savages die by my charms, and I, 
in my anger, reproached him with making them die 
by prayers, I took a noose, to show him that, if we 
both spoke truly, we both merited death; to have 
made an attempt upon his life, that is what never 
entered my head.’’ The catastrophe of this tragedy 
was, that these fine Physicians were not at all able 
to cure their patient. This is one specimen of the 
squalls and tempests which have occurred this year 
at divers times, at the Three Rivers. These thorns 
have not prevented the upspringing of roses: let us 
offer some of these upon the altar of our Lord. 

‘‘ The Church which is beginning to grow in this 
Residence was composed of eighty Neophytes, in the 
month of January. Those who are capable of instruc- 
tion come [112] once every day to the Chapel to 
hear holy Mass; the slanders of their unbelieving 
Countrymen have not been able thus far to hinder 


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 20 


fances de leurs Compatriotes infidelles, ne les en ont 
peu empefcher iufques a prefent, la rigueur du froid, 
les neiges & les glaces, & 1’éloignement de leurs 
cabanes ny l’heure de la Meffe, qui eft au point du 
iour, ne les retiennent point; ils frequentent fouuent 
les Sacremens, c’eft ce qui les nourrit & qui les entre- 
tient en la foy: bref ils fe comportent fort bien, & 
feroient encor mieux, fi leurs yeux n’e[{t]oient point 
bleffés par le mauuais exemple de leurs parens & de 
leurs Compatriotes infidelles: Tay fgeu que trente 
deux Neophytes s’eftoient communiés 4 la fefte de 
S. Pierre, & Sainct Paul, ce n’eft pas peu pour vne 
Eglife qui ne fait que de naiftre, & qui ne fe nourrit 
encor que de pain paiftri dans les larmes; mais def- 
cendons plus en particulier. 

Vn ieune Chreftien fe trouuant a plus de cent 
lieties des Trois Riuieres, dans vne cabane de pay- 
ens, introduifoit les prieres, & les pronongoit le pre- 
mier & tous les autres refpondoient fi quelqu’vn tuoit 
quelque caftor ou quelque autre animal, [113] il fe 
iettoit &4 genoux fur la place, & en rendoit graces a 
Dieu. 

Vne femme extremement fuperbe, 4 efté tellement 
changée par le baptefme, qu’elle eft deuenué docile 
comme vn petit agneau, elle a vne ardeur incroyable 
de fe faire inftruire, fi elle paffe quelque temps fans 
frequenter les Sacremens, elle reuient alterée de ces 
eaux viues, comme le cerf pourfuiuy des chaffeurs; 
vn ieune homme de fa famille eftant tombé malade, 
la pria de faire venir 1’vn de leurs longleurs, pour le 
faire chanter & fouffler 4 leur mode, cette bonne 
femme fe fafcha contre luy, iiaymerois mieux, luy 
fit elle, te voir mourir, que Dieu fut iamais offencé; 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 267 


them from it, neither does the severity of the cold, 
the snow, the ice, the distance of their cabins, or the 
hour of Mass, which is at daybreak, keep them away. 
They often receive the Sacraments; it is this which 
nurtures them and sustains them in the faith; ina 
word, they conduct themselves very well, and would 
do better still, if their eyes were not shocked by the 
evil example of their relatives and unbelieving Coun- 
trymen.’’ I have been informed that thirty-two 
Neophytes received communion on the feast of St. 
Peter and Saint Paul; that is not a few for a Church 
which has just been founded, and which is still nour- 
ished only by bread mingled with tears: but let us 
come down more to details. 

A young Christian, being more than a hundred 
leagues from the Three Rivers, and in a cabin of the 
pagans, introduced prayers; he pronounced them 
first, and all the others responded. If any one killed 
a beaver, or some other animal, [113] he knelt down 
on the spot, and returned thanks to God. 

An extremely proud woman was so changed by her 
baptism, that she has become as docile as a little 
lamb: she has an incredible eagerness to be instructed. 
If she goes some time without receiving the Sacra- 
ments, she comes back longing for these living 
waters, like a deer pursued by hunters. A young 
man of her family having fallen sick, begged her to 
send for one of their Jugglers, that he might chant 
and breathe upon him, after their fashion; this good 
woman was angry at him. ‘‘I would rather,” said 
she to him, ‘‘ see thee die, than that God be offended 
through my instrumentality; have recourse to him 
who made thee; these deceivers could not cure thee.”’ 

She exhorts the new Christians to give a good 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


par mon entremife aye recours 4 celuy qui t’a fait, 
ces trompeurs ne te fcauroient guerir. 

Elle exhorte les nouueaux Chreftiens, 4 donner 
bon exemple aux Fidelles, & Infidelles, afin que le 
fainct Nom de Dieu ne foit point blafphemé 

La crainte de Dieu & du peché, fe graue fenfible- 
ment dans les cceurs de ces bons Neophytes, les 
enfans mefme commencent A prendre le party de la 
vertu, [114] fileurs peres & meres par mefgarde, ou par 
vne vieille habitude, laiffent fortir de leurs bouches 
quelques paroles mefchantes, ces pauures petits leurs 
difent qu’ils s’en doiuent confeffer, & qu’ils offencent 
Dieu, qu’ils le chaffent de leurs cabanes, pour y faire 
entrer le mefchant Manits. 

Les Dimanches & les Feftes ils affiftent tous en- 
femble A vne Meffe, qui fe dit expreff€ment pour 
eux: car comme la Chappelle eft trop petite pour 
tenir les Francois & les Sauuages, on les appelle 
feparement au diuin Seruice: Au commencement on 
les fait prier tout haut, puis on leur fait vne petite 
inftruction en leur langue; en fuite on chante l’eau 
benifte: Pendant 1’éleuation on leur fait faire quel- 
ques actes de foy, d’efperance, & d’amour; & apres 
le facré Office on leur fait chanter quelque Cantique 
{pirituel, qui nourrit en leurs coeurs la deuotion. 

Vne bonne-femme nouuellement baptifée, eftant 
inuitée A vn feftin, voiant qu’on parloit de tout man- 
ger, fuiuat leur ancienne fuperftition, fe voulut reti- 
rer, difant, qu’il n’eftoit pas permis aux Chreftiens 
d’entrer aux banquets, ot Dieu eftoit offenfé: [115] 
Celle qui faifoit le feftin luy dit; Les Peres ne vous 
defendent pas d’affifter 4 ces feftins, mais bien d’en 
faire: Les Peres, re{pondit-elle, defendent nos excés ; 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 269 


example to Believers and Unbelievers, to the end that 
the holy Name of God may not be blasphemed. 

The fear of God and of sin is so perceptibly im- 
pressed upon the hearts of these good Neophytes that 
even the children begin to take the side of virtue; 
{114] if their fathers and mothers, through inadver- 
tence or through old habit, let any bad words escape 
from their lips, these poor little ones tell them that 
they ought to confess, and that they are offending 
God and chasing him from their cabins, so as to let 
‘in the wicked Manitou. 

On Sundays and Feast days they are all present 
together at a Mass, which is said expressly for them; 
for, as the Chapel is too small to hold the French 
and the Savages, they are called separately to divine 
Service. First, they are made to pray aloud, then 
they are given a little instruction in their own lan- 
guage; afterward, they chant the aspersion. During 
the elevation of the host they are made to perform 
some acts of faith, of hope, and of charity; and, after 
the holy Office, they are made to sing some spiritual 
Hymn, which fosters devotion in their hearts. 

A worthy woman, recently baptized, having been 
invited to a feast, and seeing that they talked of eat- 
ing everything, according to their old superstition, 
wished to decline, saying that Christians were not 
permitted to partake of feasts by which God was 
offended. [115] She who made the feast said to her: 
‘““The Fathers do not forbid you to be present at 
these feasts, but forbid you to make them.” ‘‘ The 
Fathers,’’ replied she, ‘‘ forbid us excess.”’ ‘‘ Very 
well then,’’ said she who had invited her; ‘*‘ commit 
no excess; eat only what you please;’’ the good 
creature agreed to this, protesting that she would 


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


Hé bien done, fit celle qui l’auoit conuiée, ne faites 
aucun excés, ne mangés que ce qu’il vous plaira; la 
bonne-femme s’y accorde, proteftant qu’eile ne vou- 
loit contreuenir 4 aucune des loix de fon baptefme. 

Vne ieune fille de la Nation d’Iroquet, ayant eu 
quelque inftruction ¢a bas pendant 1’Automne, a 
paffé l"hiuer aux Hurons, & voiant que dans la Bour- 
gade ott elle eftoit, on vomiffoit mille blafphemes 
contre Dieu, & contre nous; elle prit la caufe de 
Dieu en main & noftre deffence, iamais on ne la put 
empefcher de faire fes prieres, fes parens nous 
difoient, qu’ils auoient apris 4 prier Dieu par fon 
moyen. 

Malgré toutes les attaques du Diable, les Infidelles 
ne laiffent pas d’ouurir les yeux petit A petit; En 
forte qu’ils s’adouciffent & s’apriuoifent, nous don- 
nans de bonnes efperances de leur conuerfion. Vn 
certain qui paroiffoit autat opiniaftre, que [116] les 
autres, eftant pourfuiuy des Hiroquois, eut recours a 
la priere; & comme on luy demanda ce qu'il difoit, 
il recita le Pater & lV Aue, qu’il auoit apris en deux 
iours d’vne pauure femme aueugle, inftruite & 
baptifée a 1’ Hofpital. 

Ce que ie vais dire des Attikamegues, appartient 
a cette Refidence, pource que les Peres qui font 1a, 
les inftruifent; mais fort peu: car ils ne paroiffent 
que comme des éclairs: Les Sauuages de ce pais les 
nomment Attikamegues, du mot Attikamegs, qui 
fignifie vn certain poiffon blanc: Ie n’en ay point veu 
en France de femblables, il eft d’vn fort bon gouft; 
& peut-eftre, que s’en trouuant quantité au pais de 
ces bonnes gens, on leur a fait porter le nom de ce 
poiffon. Ils demeurent dans les terres, au Nord des 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 271 


never act contrary to the obligations of her baptism. 

A young girl of the Iroquet Nation having had 
some instruction down there during the Autumn, 
spent the winter among the Hurons; and, seeing 
that in the Village where she was, a thousand blas- 
phemies were spit forth against God, and against us, 
she took up personally the cause of God, and our de- 
fense. They were never able to prevent her saying 
her prayers; her parents told us, that through her 
means they had learned to pray to God. 

In spite of all the attacks of the Devil, the Unbe- 
lievers are, however, opening their eyes by degrees, — 
so that they are becoming softened and tamed, giv- 
ing us hopes of their conversion. A certain man 
who appeared as obstinate as [116] the others, being 
pursued by the Hiroquois, had recourse to prayer; 
and when he was asked what he said, he repeated 
the Pater and the Ave, which he had learned in a 
few days from a poor blind woman who had been 
instructed and baptized at the Hospital. 

What I am going to say of the Attikamegues, con- 
cerns this Residence, because the Fathers who are 
here instruct them,— but very seldom, for they make 
their appearance only like flashes of lightning. The 
Savages of this country call them Attikamegues, 
from the word ‘‘ Attikamegou,” which signifies a 
certain white fish. I have not seen in France any 
like this; it has a very good flavor; and perhaps it 
was through finding abundance of it in the country 
of these good people, that they were given the name 
of the fish. They dwell in the lands to the North of 
the Three Rivers; they have dealings with other 
Nations still more distant from our settlements; they 
come down by the river which we call in the Savage 


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


Trois Riuieres, ils ont commerce auec d’autres Na- 
tions, encor plus efloignées de nos habitations; ils 
defcendent par le fleuue que nous appellons en Sau- 
uage, Metaberstin, en Francois, les Trois Riuieres, 
pour venir traffiquer au magazin de Meffieurs de la 
Nouuelle France. Pendant le fejour qu’ils font 1a, 
nos Peres qui font en la Refidence [117] de la Concep- 
tion, aux Trois Riuieres, font vn autre trafic auec 
eux: Ils leur promettent, au nom de Iefus-Chritt, 
vne Eternité de grandeur, pour vne obeiffance paffa- 
gere. Ces bonnes gens auoient donné parole qu’ils 
s’approcheroient plus prés de nous, pour eftre in- 
{truits; mais la crainte des Hiroquois, ennemis com- 
muns de tous les Sauuages, qui ont commerce atuiec 
les Francois, leur a fait quitter cette penfée: Si bien 
qu’eftans defcendus au Printemps aux Trois Riuieres, 
voicy comme ils parlerent au Pere Iacques Buteux. 
Nous te promifmes l’an paffé, dit leur Capitaine, que 
nous viendrions demeurer A vne iournée de voftre 
Habitation, tant pour apprendre le chemin du ciel, 
que pour cultiuer la terre; nous nous fommes affem- 
blés fur ce fujet en noftre pais, tout le monde 
approuuoit ce deffein: mais l’orgueil des Hiroquois 
nous en fait fufpendre l’execution; nous ne fommes 
pas gens de guerre, nous manions mieux l’auiron 
que lefpée, nous aimons la paix, c’eft pourquoy 
nous nous éloignons le plus que nous pouuons, des 
occafions de combatre; fi on pouuoit dompter [118] 
ces peuples, qui nous veulent maffacrer, nous ferions 
bien-toft auprés de vous, car nous auons vn grand 
defir d’eftre in{truits: En effet, ces bonnes gens font 
plus fouuent chés nous, qu’au magazin ot ils vont 
acheter leurs denrées. 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 273 


tongue, “ Metaberoutin,’’ and in the French, “‘ the 
Three Rivers,” % to trade at the warehouse of the 
Gentlemen of New France. During the stay which 
they make there, our Fathers who are at the Resi- 
dence [117] of la Conception, at the Three Rivers, 
carry on a different traffic with them,— they promise 
them in the name of Jesus Christ an Eternity of 
glory for an obedience of short duration. These 
good people had promised that they would come 
nearer to us, in order to be instructed; but the fear 
of the Hiroquois, the common enemy of all the Sav- 
ages, who have relations with the French, has made 
them abandon this idea; so much so, that, having 
come down to the Three Rivers this Spring, this is 
what they said to Father Jacques Buteux: ‘*We 
promised thee last year,’’ said their Captain, ‘* that 
we would come and dwell a day’s journey from your 
Settlement, as much in order to learn the way to 
heaven as to cultivate the land. We had a meeting 
concerning this subject in our country, and every 
one approved of this design; but the boasts of the Hi- 
roquois made us suspend its execution. We are not 
men of war,—we handle the paddle better than the 
javelin; we love peace; that is why we keep as far 
as possible from occasions for fighting. If we could 
overcome [118] these people who wish to massacre 
us, we would very soon be near you, for we have a 
great desire to be instructed.’’ In fact, these good 
people are more often with us than at the warehouse 
where they buy their provisions. 

After the speech of this Captain, one of his people 
came to the Father in private, in order to be more 
fully instructed. The Father having explained to 
him at various times a good part of our belief, this 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 20 


Apres le difcours de ce Capitaine, 1l’vn de fes gens 
vint trouuer le Pere en particulier, pour fe faire plus 
pleinement inftruire: Le Pere luy ayant expliqué a 
diuerfes fois vne bonne partie de noftre creance: ce 
bon-homme le pria 4 fon depart, de luy donner vn 
chappellet, & vne Image, deuant laquelle il piit faire 
fes prieres: De plus, il luy demanda vn papier ot les 
prieres qu’il deuoit faire, fuffent efcrites: Le Pere 
voiant la naifueté de ce bon-homme, luy accorda 
tout ce qu’il demandoit; encor bien qu’il n’ignoraft 
pas, que ce pauure Sauuage ne fgauoit pas lire: 
mais affés fouuent ils prennent leurs papiers, & 
les prefentent 4 Dieu, & luy difent: I’ay enuie de 
te dire tout ce qui eft 14 dedans, fi ie le fcauois, ie 
te le dirois tout au long. A quelques mois de 1A, 
ce bon-homme eftant de retour, vint voir le Pere, 
luy prefente l'image qu’il luy auoit donnée: [1 19] 
Elle n’eft pas fi blanche, dit-il, que lors que ie la 
receu de ta main, c’e{t la fumée de la cabane, qui l’a 
noircie, ie la tirois tous les iours de mon fac, ie 1’at- 
tachois 4 ma cabane, & ma femme & moy, & toute 
ma famille, nous nous mettions & genoux pour faire 
nos prieres foir & matin. Ie difois fouuent A ma 
femme, Ie fuis bien faché de ce que ie ne feay pas 
tout ce qu’il faut dire, A noftre Pere qui a fait le ciel 
& la terre: Ie n’ay point d’efprit, tu me ferois grand 
plaifir, difoit-il au Pere Buteux, fi tu me donnois le 
moyen d’en auoir, & fitu m’enfeignois la facon de 
bien retenir toutes les prieres qu’il faut faire A Dieu, 
prens courage, enfeigne moy tous les iours pendant 
que ie feray auprés de vous; ne me parle point d’au- 
tre chofe que de mon falut; c’eft cela que ie veux 
{cauoir, ce feu qui eft 1a bas, eft bien A craindre, 


¥ 
4 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 275 


worthy man at departing begged that he would give 
him a chaplet and an Image, before which he could 
say his prayers; besides, he asked for a paper on 
which the prayers, that he ought to say, should be 
written. The Father, seeing the simplicity of this 
honest man, granted him all that he requested, 
although he knew well that this poor Savage could 
not read; but, not unfrequently, they take their 
papers, offer them to God, and say to him: ‘‘I have 
a desire to tell thee all that is here within; if I knew 
how, I would say it to thee at full length.’’ Some 
months afterward, this good man, having returned, 
came to see the Father and showed the image that 
had been given him. [119] ‘‘It is not as white,”’ 
said he, ‘‘as when I received it from thy hand, it is 
the smoke of the cabin that has blackened it. I took 
it out of my pouch every day, and hung it up in my 
cabin; and my wife, and I, and all my family, knelt 
down to say our prayers night and morning. I 
often said to my wife: ‘I am very sorry that I do 
not know all that ought to be said to our Father who 
has made heaven and earth.’ I have no understand- 
ing; thou wouldst do me a great favor,’’ said he to 
Father Buteux, ‘‘ if thou wouldst give me the means 
of having some, and if thou wouldst teach me the 
way to remember rightly all the prayers I must offer 
to God. Take courage! teach me every day while I 
am with you; do not speak to me about anything 
but my salvation,—that is what I wish to know. 
The fire that is below is much to be feared; I hope I 
shall not go there, for He who is good will help me 
to believe in him.’’ Having said this, he drew forth 
his paper: ‘‘ Now then, my Father,’’ said he, ‘‘ see 
if I have remembered well the prayers which thou 


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


i’efpere que ie n'iray pas, car Celuy qui eft bon, 
m’aidera A croireenluy. Ayant dit cela, il tire fon 
papier: Or ca mon Pere, fit-il, regarde fi i’ay bien 
retenu les prieres que tu m’as enfeignées, & que ie 
t'ay fait efcrire en ce papier; regarde-le, & m’ef- 
coute, pour voir fi ie n’ay rien oublié. Le Pere [120] 
fut bien en peine, car il n’auoit mis que les lettres 
initiales de plufieurs prieres, & de plufieurs actes de 
vertus, qu’il luy auoit enfeignés, dont il ne fe fouue- 
noit plus. Il s’auifa de cette defaite; Mais plutoft, 
commence toy le premier, luy dit-il, dy tout haut ce 
que ie t’ay enfeigné, pour voir fi tu n’as rien changé: 
Ce bon Sauuage fe mit 4 reciter, non feulement ce 
qui eftoit marqué en fon papier, mais tout ce qu’on 
luy auoit enfeigné, auec vne telle fidelité que le Pere 
en refta tout réjoiiy, & tout eftonné. Il faut que ie 
confeffe, adjoufte le Pere, que iamais Sauuage ne 
m’a plus touché que celui-cy, foit pour la candeur & 
la fimplicité auec laquelle il agiffoit, foit pour les 
fentimés de deuotion qu’il faifoit paroiftre foit pour 
l’attétion qu’il apportoit 4 ma parole, & pour l’auidité 
qu’il auoit de fcauoir la doctrine de falut: Si toft 
que ie luy parlay du Baptefme, il me le demanda auec 
vne tres-grande ardeur: Ne crains point, me faifoit- 
il, ie ne retourneray point en arriere, ie croy tout de 
bon, mon Pere m’aidera 4 luy obeir: Ie le voulus 
éprouuer deuant fes gens, dit le Pere; il fe monftra 
toufiours ferme & conftant; fi [121] bien que ie luy 
auois donné iour pour fon baptefme: mais arriuant 
1a-deffus vne alarme des Hiroquois, ces gens s’enfui- 
rent incontinent dans les terres, & luy auec eux, 
redoutant ces guerriers, plus que les Demons. 

Les Neophytes nouuellement baptifés, aident 


! 


r 
? 


1640-41] "RELATION OF 16qo-4r 277 


didst teach me, and which I had thee write on this 
paper: look at it, and listen to me, so as to see if I 
have forgotten anything.’’ The Father [120] was 
quite at a loss; for he had put only the initial letters 
of several prayers and of several acts of virtue which 
he had taught him, but which he no longer remem- 
bered. He bethought himself of this evasion: ‘‘ But 
rather,’’ said he to him, ‘‘ begin first thyself; say 
aloud what I have taught thee, that I may see if thou 
hast changed anything.’’ This good Savage began 
to recite not only what was marked on his paper, but 
all that he had been taught, with such fidelity, that 
the Father remained much delighted, and greatly 
astonished at him. ‘‘I must confess,’’ adds the 
Father, ‘‘ that no Savage has ever touched me more 
than this one, not only by the candor and simplicity 
with which he acted, and the feeling of devotion 
which he manifested, but by the attention that he 
gave to my words, and the eagerness that he had to 
know the doctrine of salvation. As soon as I spoke 
to him of Baptism, he asked for it with the greatest — 
ardor. ‘ Do not fear,’ said he to me, ‘I shall not 
turn back; I earnestly believe, and my Father will 
aid me to obey him.’ I wished to test him before 
his people,’’ says the Father; ‘‘ he always proved 
himself to be firm and steadfast,—so [121] that I had 
appointed a day for his baptism; but an alarm about 
the Hiroquois coming on that very day, these people 
fled immediately into the country, and he with them, 
fearing those warriors more than Demons.’’ 

The newly-baptized Neophytes greatly help their 
Countrymen; one of those who had retired to Sillery, 
being at the Three Rivers during the stay of these 
Attikamegues, who are of his kindred, said to one of 


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vot. 20 


grandement leurs Compatriotes, l’vn de ceux qui fe 
retirent A Sillery, eftant aux Trois Riuieres pendant 
le fejour de ces Attikamegues, qui luy font parens, 
difoit a quelqu’vn d’eux, qui fe faifoit inftruire: 
Nous ferons bientoft parens tout de bon, mes vrais 
parens font ceux qui croient en Dieu, & qui font bap- 
tifés; car ie feray eternellement auec eux. Nous 
n’auons qu’vn Pere, qui eft Dieu, puis que tu le veux 
connoiftre, tu feras bien-toft de mes parens. La 
parenté que nous auons felon la chair, n’eft pas 
grand’ chofe, il faut que tu fois baptifé, pour ef{tre 
mon vray parent. La chair ne connoift point ce lan- 
gage, il ne fe parle point en terre, il vient du ciel. 


F 
> 2 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 279 


them who was being instructed: ‘‘ We shall be very 
soon relatives indeed; my true relatives are those who 
believe in God, and who are baptized, for I shall be 
eternally with them. We have only one Father, 
who is God; since thou desirest to know him, thou 
wilt very soon be among my relations. The kin- 
ship that we have according to the flesh, is a trifling 
matter; thou must be baptized, to be my true rela- 
tive.’’ Flesh does not know this language; it is not 
spoken on earth, it comes from heaven. 


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


[122] CHAPITRE VIII. 


DE QUELQUES BAPTESMES EN LA RESIDENCE DE LA 
CONCEPTION AUX TROIS RIUIERES. 


cette Refidence, nommé des fiés s8mafatikseie, 

ceft a dire le crapaut, ce mefchant homme a 
plus de venin en fon coeur, & en fa langue, que 
cette vilaine befte n’en a en toutes les parties de fon 
corps; il a efté baptifé dans vne grande maladie, 
eftant guery il n’a pas imité ceux qui ont publique- 
ment confeffé dans leur fanté la foy, qu’ils auoient 
receué dans leur maladie, il s’eft declaré publique- 
ment ennemy de Dieu & du Chriftianifme, faifant 
tous fes efforts pour diuertir ceux qui le voudroient 
embraffer: Il a voulu empefcher qu’vn certain nom- 
mé Piefcars, dont ie veux parler, homme affés con- 
neu des fiens, ne recefit le fainct Baptefme; mais le 
Diable a efté vaincu dans l’vn de [123] fes plus grands 
{fuppots & Dieu a triomphé dans vne ame qui s’eft 
rendué fidele; ce bon Neophyte a efté nommé Simon 
par Monfieur de Chanflour commandant au fort des 
Trois Riuieres, comme il vit que les Infidelles, & 
notamment ce miferable Apoftat, le piquotoient fur 
le deffein qu’il auoit de fe faire baptifer; il voulut 
rendre fon baptefme le plus folemnel qu'il luy fut 
poffible, proteftant par cette action toute publique, 
qu'il ne vouloit point croire en cachette comme Nico- 
deme propter metum Iudgorum; mais qu'il vouloit fans 


hi fe trouue vn certain Apoftat dans le diftrict de 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 281 


[122] CHAPTER VIII. 


OF SOME BAPTISMS AT THE RESIDENCE OF LA CONCEP- 
TION AT THE THREE RIVERS. 


HERE is a certain Apostate in the district of 
T this Residence, called by his own people Ou- 
masatikweie, that is to say, ‘‘ the toad:’’ ® this 
wicked man has more venom in his heart and in his 
tongue than that unsightly creature has in its whole 
body. He was baptized during a severe sickness; 
having recovered, he did not imitate those who open- 
ly confessed in health the faith which they had 
received in their sickness,— he has publicly declared 
himself the enemy of God and of Christianity, using 
his utmost efforts to dissuade those who would be 
inclined to embrace it. He wished to prevent a cer- 
tain man named Piescars, of whom I shall speak, a 
man somewhat noted among his people, from receiv- 
ing holy Baptism; but the Devil has been overcome 
in one of [123] his most powerful instruments, and 
God has triumphed in a soul which has borne faith- 
ful witness; this good Neophyte was named Simon 
by Monsieur de Chanflour, the commandant of the 
fort at the Three Rivers. When he saw that the 
Unbelievers, and especially this wretched Apostate, 
tormented him about the plan he had for being bap- 
tized, he desired to make his baptism as solemn as 
was possible,— protesting by this very public act 
that he did not wish to believe in secret like Nicode- 
mus, propter metum Judgorum, but that he wished 


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 20 


crainte efleuer 1’étendart de la Croix, par tout ot il fe 
trouueroit: quelque temps deuant fon baptefme, il 
affembla les principaux Sauuages, & leur dit: I’ay 
pris refolution d’eftre Chreftien, ie ne fuis pas vn 
enfant, ie fcay bien ce que ie fay, ie ne doute pas 
que plufieurs n’improuuent mon deffein, mais la 
doctrine qu’on m’a enfeignée, me femble fi belle & 
fi veritable, que quand bien tout le monde 1’a rebute- 
roit, ie l’embrafferois de tout mon coeur, deuff’ay-ie 
eftre feul dans mes refolutions. Voiant que quel- 
ques-vns baiffoient la tefte, pour marque que ces 
[124] paroles auoient bleffé leurs oreilles, le lende- 
main il recharge de nouueau, il fort en public, s’en 
va faire vn grand cry 4 l’entour des cabanes felon la 
cou{tume du pais; les Capitaines & les principaux 
Sauuages, voulans annoncer quelque chofe publique- 
ment, n’ont point d’autres trompettes que leurs voix, 
qu’ils font retentir dans leurs Bourgades, ou dans les 
lieux oti ils raffemblent leurs cabanes. Celui-cy s’en 
alla crier 4 pleine tefte: hommes, écoutés ma parole; 
auffi-to{ft chacun fe taift dans les cabanes, & pour 
marque qu’on écoute, quelques vns répondent: ho 
ho! i’ay defia dit a quelques-vns, que ie croiois en 
Dieu, que ie voulois eftre baptifé, ie le dy publique- 
mét, ie ne fais rien en cachette, la chofe eftant de 
foy bonne & faincte, il ne la faut point cacher: 1’im- 
prouue qui voudra, la conclufion en eft prife, ie feray 
demain baptifé; ayant dit cela il rentre dans fa 
cabane, & 1’ Apoftat fort de la fienne vomiffant de fa 
bouche du poifon, dont il s’efforga d’empefter tous fes 
Compatriotes; ie voy bien, s’écria-t’il, que celuy qui 
viét de haranguer, fe veut laiffer tromper par les. 
Francois, [125] qu’il foit trompé, a la bonne heure, 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 283 


fearlessly to raise the standard of the Cross wherever 
he might happen to be. Some time before his bap- 
tism he called together the chief Savages, and said 
to them: ‘‘I have resolved to be a Christian; I am 
no child,—I know well what I am doing. I do not 
doubt that many will disapprove of my intention; 
but the doctrine which has been taught me seems to 
me so beautiful and so true, that, although the whole 
world should spurn it, 1 would embrace it with all 
my heart, even should I be alone in my resolve.’’ 
Seeing that some of them bent down their heads, as 
a sign that these [124] words had shocked their ears, 
the next day he made a second charge upon them; 
he went out in open view, and began shouting aloud 
among the cabins, according to the custom of the 
country. When the Captains and chief Savages wish 
to announce anything publicly, they have no other 
trumpets than their voices, which they make resound 
through their Villages, or in the places where they 
have gathered their cabins. This man went about, 
shouting at the top of his voice: ‘* Men, listen to my 
words!’’ Immediately every one was silent in the 
cabins, and, as a sign that they were listening, some 
responded ‘‘ Ho, ho!’’ ‘‘I have already told some 
of you that I believed in God, and that I wished to 
be baptized: I now say it publicly. I am doing noth- 
ing secretly,—the matter being of itself good and 
holy, it is not necessary to conceal it. Let whoever 
will disapprove, my decision is made, I shall be bap- 
tized to-morrow.’’ Having said this he reéntered 
his cabin; and the Apostate came out from his, vomit- 
ing from his mouth poison, with which he endeav- 
ored to infect all his Countrymen. ‘‘I see indeed,”’ 
he exclaimed, ‘‘that he who has just spoken is willing 


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


puis qu’il le veut eftre: mais il fera feul de fa bande, 
car perfonne n’a enuie de le fuiure: c’eft quelque 
vain efpoir qui le pouffe, dont nous ne faifons point 
d’eftat, on m’a baptifé lors que i’eftois malade a la 
mort, fi toft que l’efprit m’eft reuenu, i’ay defauoiié 
tout ce que i’auois dit pour lors. Noftre Catechu- 
mene entendant ce difcours, s’anime dauantage, il va 
trouuer le Pere Buteux, luy raconte tout ce qui 
s’eftoit paffé: Allons, luy dit-il, & la Chappelle, ie 
veux faire vn autre cry public contre l’impudence de 
cét Apoftat: mais deuant que l’entreprendre, ie veux 
recommander l’affaire 4 noftre Seigneur, ayant fait 
fa priere, il s’en va vers les cabanes, éleue fa voix, 
crie atiec vn zele de feu: Ie vous ay defia dit plu- 
fieu[r]s fois, que ie voulois eftre baptifé, ie perfeuere 
dans ma refolution; fi quelqu’vn a quelque chofe a 
dire contre moy, qu’il fe hafte; car c’eft demain que 
ie le dois eftre: Ie le deuois eftre auiourd’huy, mais 
pource que la ieuneffe eft abfente, i’attens fon re- 
tour, afin qu’elle apprenne par mon exemple, a ne 
point redouter les langues médifantes, [126] quand il 
s’agit d’vne fi faincte action. 

Le lendemain il fe vint prefenter au fainct Bap- 
tefme, deuant que de le receuoir il tint ce difcours a 
ceux qui eftoient prefens: Efcoutés ieuneffe, peut- 
eftre que quand vous me voiés 4 la porte de cette 
Eglife, vous dites dans vos cceurs; voila qui va bien, 
Piefxars va e{tre amy des Frangois, il nous fera fauo- 
rable, il ne manquera pas de belles robes, il aura des 
viures en abondance, voila peut-eftre vos penfées; 
mais vous vous abufés, feachés que Piefkars ne fe fait 
pas Chreftien pour aucune confideration humaine, 
c’eft pour éuiter les feux de l'autre vie, c’eft pour 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 285 


to let himself be deceived by the French. [125] 
Well and good; let him be deceived, since he wishes 
to be, but he will be the only one of his company, 
for no one desires to follow him; some vain hope 
urges him, for which we care nothing. They bap- 
tized me when I was sick unto death; as soon as my 
mind returned to me, I disavowed all that I had then 
said.’’ Our Catechumen hearing this speech, became 
the more aroused; he went to Father Buteux, and 
related to him all that had taken place. ‘‘ Let us go 
to the Chapel,’’ he said to him, ‘‘I mean to make 
another public denunciation of this Apostate’s inso- 
lence; but before undertaking it, I wish to commend 
the matterto our Lord.’’ Having offered his prayer, 
he went toward the cabins, raised his voice, and cried 
with fiery zeal: ‘‘ I have already told you many times 
that I intended to be baptized, I persevere in my 
resolution. Whoever has anything to say against 
me, let him hasten, for it is to-morrow that I shall 
be baptized; I was to be to-day, but, as the young 
men are absent, I am awaiting their return, so that 
they may learn by my example not to fear slander- 
ous tongues, [126] when so holy an act is in ques- 
tion.”’ 

The next day, he came to present himself for holy 
Baptism, before receiving which, he made this ad- 
dress to those who were present: “‘ Listen, young 
men! Perhaps, while you see me at the door of this 
Church, you are saying in your hearts, ‘ Here is one 
who is doing well; Pieskars is going to be a friend 
of the Frenchmen. He will be favorable to us, he 
will not lack beautiful robes, he will have provisions 
in abundance.’ These perhaps are your thoughts; 
but you are mistaken. Know that Pieskars does not 


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


eftre parent de Dieu, & pour aller vn iour au ciel; 
voila les deffeins de Piefkars: Ayant dit cela, il fe 
jette aux pieds du Pere, demandant le fainct Bap- 
tefme, qui luy fut accordé auec la ioye de tous ceux 
qui aiment le falut de ces peuples. Depuis fon Bap- 
tefme il a vefcu dans l’exercice du Chriftianifme, 
marchant la tefte leuée, confolant les Chreftiens, & 
confondant les Infideles par fon exemple: Cét homme 
eft de 1Ifle; En voicy vn autre de la petite Nation 
des Algonquins, moins contrarié [127] des hommes, 
mais peut-eftre plus fortement attaqué des Demons. 

Eftant encore Catechumene, le Pere Buteux luy 
dit, qu’il ne falloit iamais plus manier fon tambour: 
car il eftoit du meftier des Iongleurs, ou des Charla- 
tans du pais, que quelques-vns appellent Sorciers; ce 
bon-homme prit refolution d’obeir: mais il voulut 
faire vn traict de gentilleffe 4 la fepulture de fon tam- 
bour; il pria donc le Pere de le venir voir le iour {ui- 
uant, le Pere approchant de fa cabane, ce Charlatan 
prend fon tambour, & s’anime 4 la fagon des Ion- 
gleurs, il le fait fi fortement retentir, que le Pere 
l’ayant entendu de bien loin, s’arrefte tout court: Vn 
Sauuage apofté par noftre Catechumene, l’aborde 
fans faire femblant de rien, le Pere luy demande qui 
eftoit celuy qui faifoit iotier ce tambour: c’eft dit-il, 
vn nommé sgabirinisich qui fouffle & qui chante quel- 
que malade: Le Pere entendant nommer fon Cate- 
chumene, s’en va tout indigné, s’imaginant que cét 
homme luy auoit donné de belles paroles: Le Sau- 
uage l’inuite d’entrer, mais le Pere ne le voulut point 
écouter. Le pauure Catechumene voyant [128] cela, 
prend fon tambour, le met en pieces, & le jette a fes 
chiens: Ie voulois, dit-il, recréer le Pere, & le faire 


LP ay 


ae 


See 


a 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 287 


become a Christian for any human consideration,— 
it is to avoid the flames of the other life; it is to be 
the child of God, and to go some day to heaven: this 
is the purpose of Pieskars.’’ Having said this, he 
threw himself at the feet of the Father, asking for 
holy Baptism, which was granted him, to the joy of 
all those who delight in the salvation of these peo- 
ples. Since his Baptism, he has lived in the practice 
of Christianity,— going about boldly, consoling the 
Christians, and confounding the Unbelievers by his 
‘example. This man is from the Island. The other 
one of whom I shall speak is of the petite Nation of 
the Algonquins,—less thwarted [127] by men, but 
perhaps more violently attacked by Demons. 

While he was still a Catechumen, Father Buteux 
told him he must no longer beat his drum,—for his 
trade was that of the Jugglers, or Charlatans of the 
country, whom some call Sorcerers. This good man 
resolved to obey him, but he intended to play a wit- 
ty little trick at the burial of his drum, so he begged 
the Father to come and see him the following day. 
As the Father was approaching the cabin, this Char- 
latan took his drum, and exciting himself after the 
manner of the Jugglers, he made it resound so loudly 
that the Father, hearing it far away, stopped sud- 
denly. A Savage, set to watch by our Catechumen, 
accosted him, without seeming to notice anything 
unusual; the Father asked who was beating the 


drum. ‘‘ It is,’’ said he, ‘‘ one named Wabiriniwich, 
who is breathing upon some sick person, and sing- 
ing to him.’’ The Father, hearing him name his 


Catechumen, turned away thoroughly indignant, 
imagining that this man had deceived him. The 
Savage invited him to enter, but the Father would 


288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


{pectateur de l’eftat que ie fais de mon tambour, 
le donnant aux chiens en fa prefence: mais puis 
qu’il n’a pas voulu entrer, il ne laiffera pas d’eftre 
jetté dans vn oubly eternel. Le Pere ayant appris 
Vhiftoire, fut bien aife d’auoir efté fainctement trompé 
par ce bon Neophyte, qui fut nommé Paul en fon 
baptefme. 

Si toft qu’il fut Chreftien, il inuita les principaux 
Sauuages A vn banquet, pour leur rendre raifon de ce 
qui l’auoit meu A rechercher fi ardemment le bap- 
tef{me, la vie que nots menons ¢a bas, eft courte; on 
nous enfeigne qu’il y en a vne autre remplie de biens 
eternels, qu’on ne peut obtenir, qu’on ne foit laué 
dans les eaux du baptefme, il faut donc que ces eaux 
foient de grande importance; on nous dit que ceux 
qui les mefprifent, ne doiuent attendre qu’vn feu 
eternel, fi cela eft, comme ie croy qu’il eft, car nos 
ames ef{tans immortelles, doiuent eftre recompenfées 
felon leurs ceuures, il me femble que i’ay eu raifon, 
de rechercher les [129] moyens d’entrer dans ces 
biens, & d’euiter ces grands maux; ne penfés point 
que l’intere{t temporel me touche, ou que ie faffe 
eftat de la parenté & de l’alliance des Frangois, ma 
penfée va plus loing que tout cela. 

Au refte i’ay refolu de quitter pour iamais nos 
anciennes facons de faire; ie n’ay plus de voix pour 
les chants fuperftitieuxx, mon tambour n’a plus de 
fon, & ma bouche n’a plus de fouffle, pour tromper 
les malades: car toutes ces niaiferies ne leur fgau- 
roient rendre la fanté, ie veux obeir 4 Dieu, & tout ce 
qu’il defend, me fera interdit pour toufiours. 

Le Capitaine de l’Ifle, qui ne frappe que de tra- 
uers, & A coups fourrés, voulant raualer cette faincte 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 289 


not listen to him. The poor Catechumen, seeing 
[128] that, took his drum, broke it into pieces, and 
threw it to his dogs. ‘‘I wished,’’ said he, ‘‘ to 
entertain the Father, and make him an eyewitness 
of the value that I set upon my drum, by giving it 
to the dogs in his presence; but, although he would 
not enter, it shall nevertheless be cast into eternal 
oblivion.”” When the Father heard this story, he 
was really pleased at having been piously deceived 
by this good Neophyte, who was named Paul at his 
baptism. 

As soon as he became a Christian, he invited the 
chief Savages to a feast, in order to give them an 
account of the motives that had induced him to seek 
baptism so earnestly: ‘‘ The life that we lead here 
below is short; we are taught that there is another, 
filled with eternal blessings, which cannot be ob- 
tained unless we be washed in the water of baptism; 
this water then must be of great importance,— we 
are told that those who despise it must expect only 
an eternal fire. If this be true, as I believe it to 
be,—for our souls, being immortal, ought to be 
rewarded according to their works,—it seems to me 
that I have been right to search out the [129] way 
of entering into these blessings, and of avoiding 
those great evils. Do not think that temporal inter- 
est moves me, or that I value highly the connection - 
and the alliance with the French, my thought goes 
much farther than that. 

‘* Besides, I have resolved to abandon forever our 
old customs; I no longer have any voice for the 
superstitious chants, my drum no longer has any 
sound, and my mouth no longer has any breath to 
deceive the sick; for all these follies cannot restore 


290 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo1. 20 


action, & monftrer qu’il n’appartenoit qu’aux vieilles 
femmes & aux enfans, de fe faire baptifer, s’écria 
par les cabanes: Allés bonnes vieilles, allés, & vous 
petits enfans, qui n’aués pas le moyen de trouuer a 
manger, allés vous en trouuer les Robes noires, & 
vous faites baptifer, afin que vous ne mouriés pas de 
faim; que ceux qui vous reffemblent, vous imitent. 
Le Pere de [130] Quen voyant que ce cry fe faifoit 
au mefpris de la foy, & pour éloigner les Sauuages 
du Baptefme, rendit le change 4 ce miferable borgne; 
car allant le lendemain appeller les Chreftiens pour 
venir A la Meffe, adjoufta ces paroles d’vne voix 
haute: Hommes & femmes, qui n’eftes pas baptifés, 
allés trouuer Tefsehat, c’eft le nom de ce borgne, 
il vous donnera tous A manger c’eft luy qui tue 
les caftors & qui fcait bien attraper l’orignac; Cét 
homme fuperbe au dernier point fe croyant offenfé, 
s’en vint tout fumant de cholere, trouuer le fieur 
Nicolet & le Pere Buteux fe plaignant de l’affront 
qu’on luy auoit fait; mais on luy demanda fi quand 
il renuoyoit les vieilles femmes & les enfans aux 
Peres pour fe faire baptifer, afin d’auoir 4 manger, 
s'il pretendoit mefprifer les prieres & le Baptefme: 
Il dit, que non; On luy repart, que le Pere de Quen 
ne pretendoit pas auffi de l’offenfer, luy adreffant les 
hommes & les femmes pour les fecourir, veu mefme 
qu'il eftoit Capitaine: ce bon homme voyant bien 
qu’il perdroit fon procés s’il paffoit outre, alma mieux 
fe taire, que de plaider dauantage. 

[131] Pour reuenir 4 noftre Neophyte, il a fait bap- 
tifer toute fa famille; fa femme eftant bien in{ftruite, 
fe vint prefenter au Baptefme, trois iours apres fa 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 291 


their health. I intend to obey God, and all that he 
forbids shall be interdicted to me forever.” 

The Captain of the Island, who strikes only unfair- 
ly, and with underhand thrusts, wishing to disparage 
this holy action, and to show that it belonged only 
to old women and children to be baptized, cried out 
among the cabins: ‘‘ Go, good old women, go; and 
you, little children, who have no way of finding food, 
go to the black Robes and be baptized, so that you 
may not die from hunger; let those who resemble you, 
- imitate you.’’ Father de [130] Quen, seeing that 
this outcry was made in contempt of the faith, and 
to alienate the Savages from Baptism, paid off this 
wretched one-eyed man in his own coin; for, on 
going the next day to summon the Christians to Mass, 
he added these words in a loud voice: ‘‘ Men and 
women who are not baptized, go to Teswehat ’”’ — 
that is the name of the one-eyed man; —‘‘ he will 
give you all food; it is he who kills beavers, and 
knows well how to catch the moose.’’ This man, 
proud to the last degree, believing himself insulted, 
went raging with anger to sieur Nicolet and to 
Father Buteux, and complained of the affront that 
he had received; but he was asked if, when he had 
sent away the old women and children to the Fathers 
to be baptized in order that they might have food, 
he intended to set at naught prayers and Baptism; 
he said, ‘‘ No, indeed.”’ They replied to him that 
neither did Father de Quen purpose to offend him in 
sending the men and women to him to be helped, 
inasmuch as he was their Captain. This clever man, 
seeing well that he should lose his case if he went 
on, preferred silence to further argument. 

[131] To return to our Neophyte. He had his 


292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 20 


couche, fans que la longueur du chemin, ny que 
la rigueur du froid, l’en puft empefcher. Si toft 
que fon fils fut né, fon pere vint preffer pour fon 
baptefme; ce pauure petit eftant malade, tous les 
Chreftiens mirent leurs chappelets fur fon berceau, 
e{fperant que Dieu luy rendroit la fanté par cette 
deuotion; il fe porte bien 4 prefent, Dieu mercy. 

Tous les iours on prie Dieu dans fa famille, foir & 
matin, chacun fe mettant 4 genoux; ils frequentent 
les Sacremens auec vne candeur admirable; ils obe- 
iffent aux loix de Dieu & de fon Eglife auec fidelité. 
On preffoit certain iour, ce bon Neophyte, de faire 
acheuer fes raquetes vn iour de fefte, la neige eftant 
tres-propre pour la chaffe; il ne voulut iamais qu’on 
y trauaillaft: Ie ne fuis pas, dit-il, Chreftien 4 demy, 
il faut obeir 4 tout ce qu’on nous commande. 

S’en allant A la chaffe d’Eflan dans les bois, il 
demandoit auec inftance; fi quelqu’vn [132] de ceux 
qui le pourroient inftruire & entretenir en deuotion, 
ne le voudroit pas bien accompagner; & Simon Pief- 
Kars preffoit qu’on l’inftruifift pleinement de tout ce 
qu’il falloit faire, quand on eftoit éloigné de 1’ Eglife, 
fentant vn regret de s’en abfenter, quoy que pour vn 
peu de temps. 

Vn certain Paien difoit vn iour, qu'il fe feroit 
volontiers baptifer, fi apres eftre purifié dans les 
eaux du Baptefme, on l’affuroit, qu’il iroit au ciel: 
Mais vous me dites, faifoit-il, qu’on peut eftre dam- 
né, quoy qu’on foit baptifé; & que la recheute au 
peché nous precipite dans les Enfers: Qui doute que 
nous ne retombions dans nos offenfes par la violence 
de nos vieilles habitudes, qui nous entrainent: I eft 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 293 


whole family baptized; his wife, having been well 
instructed, came to present herself for Baptism three 
days after her confinement,—neither the length of 
the way, nor the severity of the cold could prevent 
her coming. Assoon as her son was born, his father 
came to urge his baptism; the poor little fellow being 
sick, all the Christians put their chaplets on his bed, 
hoping that God would restore his health for the 
sake of this devotion; he is very well at present, 
thank God. 

’ Prayer is offered to God in his family every day, 
night and morning, each one kneeling down; they 
frequent the Sacraments with an admirable sincer- 
ity; they obey with fidelity the laws of God and of 
his Church. One day this good Neophyte was urged 
to have his snowshoes finished on a feast day, the 
snow being in a good condition for hunting; he was 
never willing that any one should work on those 
days. ‘‘I am not a halfway Christian,’ said he, 
*“we must obey all that is commanded.”’ 

When going to an Elk hunt in the woods, he asked 
earnestly if some one [132] of those who could in- 
struct him and keep alive his devotion, would not be 
willing to accompany him; and Simon Pieskars urged 
that he should be fully instructed in all that was. 
necessary to be done when he was remote from the 
Church, as he felt regret at absenting himself, even 
for a short time. ‘ 

A certain Pagan said one day, that he would will- 
ingly be baptized if, after having been purified by 
the waters of Baptism, he could be assured that he 
would go to heaven. ‘‘ But you tell me,” said he, 
‘‘that one may be damned, although he have been 
baptized, and that a relapse into sin plunges us into: 


294 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 20 


vray que les habitudes ont vn poids épouuentable fur 
nos cceurs: mais il eft vray auffi que le Baptefme eft 
puiffant, & qu'il fait d’eftranges metamorphofes; ce 
qui n’empefche pas que qu[e]lques-vns ne retombent 
dans les occafions puiffantes, & dans les fortes tenta- 
tions: ce qui arriua A ce pauure Neophyte dont nous 
parlons: car eftant tombé malade, & fe trouuant dans 
des [133] douleurs tres-cruelles: Wn Charlatan fe 
prefentant pour le chanter, 4 la fagon du pais, il y 
condefcendit: Le bon Charles Sondatfaa Huron, en- 
cor Catechumene, voiant cette fuperftition, en vint 
donner aduis A nos Peres: Auffi-toft le Pere de Quen 
court aux cabanes, trouue le Charlatan en action, & 
plufieurs Infideles 4 l’entour du patient; il commence 
4 fulminer contre ces remedes, plus propres a tuer 
les malades qu’A les guerir: vn de la trouppe leue la 
main pour le frapper; mais il fe retint: Le Pere 
demande au malade, s’ilauoit quelque creance a ces 
badineries, qu’il auoit exercées luy-mefme, & dont il 
ne connoiffoit que trop l’impuiffance, le pauure 
homme repentant de fa faute, chaffe le Sorcier: A 
quelques iours de 1a, fe trouuant mieux, il s’en vint 
en 1’Eglife, & en la prefence des Frangois & des Sau- 
uages, il demanda publiquement pardon, du fcandale 
qu'il auoit donné, fuppliant a deux genoux tous 
les Chreftiens de prier Dieu pour luy, 4 ce qu'il 
luy pleuft oublier fon peché, promettant de iamais 
plus n’y retomber. I1 eft bon de tenir ferme au 
commencement, pour des fautes mefmes [134] affés 
legeres, on ne fe relafche que trop aifément: Ce bon 
Neophite eft maintenant dans l’exercice de la pa- 
tience, & de la refignation 4 la volonté de Dieu, aiant 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 295 


Hell. Who doubts that we may fall again into our 
transgressions, through the force of our old habits 
which overpower us?’’ It is true that habits have a 
frightful influence on our hearts; but it is also true 
that Baptism is powerful, and that it makes strange 
metamorphoses. But this does not prevent some 
from relapsing under stress of circumstances, and 
under strong temptations,— which thing happened 
to this poor Neophyte of whom we are speaking; 
for, having fallen sick, and being in [133] most severe 
_ pain, and a Charlatan offering to chant for him after 
the fashion of the country, he consented thereto. 
The good Charles Sondatsaa, a Huron, and at the 
time a Catechumen, seeing this superstition, came to 
inform our Fathers. Immediately Father de Quen 
hastened to the cabins and found the Charlatan per- 
forming, and many Unbelievers around the patient; 
he began to inveigh against these remedies better 
adapted to kill the sick than to heal them; one of 
the company raised his hand to strike him, but re- 
strained himself. The Father asked the sick man if 
he had any belief in this trifling, which he had him- 
self practiced, and of which he knew only too well 
the powerlessness: the poor man, repenting of his 
fault, dismissed the Sorcerer. Some days there- 
after, being better, he came to the Church, and in 
the presence of the French and of the Savages he 
publicly asked pardon for the scandal he had caused; 
and on his knees he implored all of the Christians to 
pray that God might be pleased to forgive his sin, 
and promised never to fall into itagain. It is well 
to resist firmly in the beginning, for, even [134] to 
very slight faults, one gives way only too easily. 
This good Neophyte is now in the practice of pa- 


296 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 20 


fait voir par plufieurs actions, qu’il auoit la foy forte- 
ment grauée au coeur. 

Celuy qui auoit leué la main fur le Pere pour le 
frapper, fut touché de Dieu a quelque temps de 1a; 
il demanda fouuent le Baptefm[e]: mais comme il s’eft 
moni{tré contraire 4 la foy, on veut tirer de luy de 
fortes €preuues; il en donna vne il n’ya pas log- 
temps, qui nous réjoiiit bien fort: Ayant fait affem- 
bler ceux qu'il croyoit les plus éloignés de la foy, il 
leur dit, qu’il auoit pris refolution de fe faire bap- 
tifer; & que la penfée d’vne recompenfe, ou d’vn 
cha{timent eternel, luy touchoit le coeur: L’Apoftat, 
dont i’ay parlé cy deffus, eftant prefent, ne put fup- 
porter ce difcours; il fe leua incontinen[t], & fortit, 
quittant la compagnie fans mot dire: Paul ¥abirin¥ich 
releua le courage de ce nouueau athlete: Si nous 
faifons de grandes feftes lors que nous refufcitons 
quelque trefpaffé, donnant fon nom a quelqu’vn des 
viuans, ilme femble qu’il y a bien plus [135] de fuiet 
de fe réjoiiir quand vn homme deuient enfant de 
Dieu, & qu’on luy fait porter le nom de l’vn des Bien- 
heureux qui font en Paradis. 

Ie ne fais pas profeffion de parler de tous ceux 
qu’on a baptifés, mais feulement de ceux qui font en 
e{time parmy leurs Compatriotes, & qui ont le plus 
d’empefchemens & plus d’obftacles, pour receuoir 
no{tre creance. 

Ie ne parleray point d’vn certain, nommé Arimsiti- 
gan, qui fut nommé Claude en fon baptefme; il 
e{toit excellent Iongleur; quelque temps apres s’eftre 
fait Chref{tien, vn malade luy enuoya vn prefent, le 
fuppliant de le venir penfer auec fes chants, & auec 
fon tambour; le bon Neophite refpond, qu’il a quitté 


1640-41] RELATION OF 1640-41 297 


tience, and of resignation to the will of God, having 
manifested by many acts that he has the faith strong- 
ly impressed upon his heart. 

He who had raised his hand against the Father to 
strike him, was touched by God some time after 
that; he often asked for Baptism, but, as he had 
shown himself averse to the faith, we wished to 
draw from him strong proofs; not long ago he gave 
one which rejoiced us very greatly. Having gath- 
ered together those whom he believed most averse 
to the faith, he said to them that he had resolved to 
be baptized, and that the thought of an eternal reward 
or punishment affected his heart. The Apostate of 
whom I spoke above, being present, could not endure 
this speech; he rose forthwith and went out, leaving 
the company without speaking a word. Paul Wa- 
birinwich revived the courage of this new athlete: 
‘Tf we make great feasts when we resuscitate a de- 
parted one by giving his name to some one of the 
living, it seems to me there is much greater [135] 
cause for rejoicing when a man becomes a child of 
God, and is made to bear the name of one of the 
Blessed who are in Paradise.”’ 

I do not profess to speak of all those who have 
been baptized, but only of those who are esteemed 
among their Countrymen, and who have the most 
hindrances and obstacles to receiving our belief. 

I shall not speak of a certain man called Arimous- 
tigwan, who was named Claude at his baptism. He 
was an excellent Juggler; some time after he had 
become a Christian, a sick man sent him a present, 
begging that he would come and treat him with his 
chants and with his drums. The good Neophyte 
answered that he had forsaken these follies, never 


ces Moniek pour tien les iamais reacts le 
laiffa le prefent en la cabane du Neophite, thaderbieat 


que ce medecin ne venoit point, il le renuoya querir, 
& laiffa en repos ce bon-homme, auquel ie prie noftre 


Seigneur de donner perfeuerance. Od See 
e oa | 
- Paz 
stare 
: fi S Teth 
metres bial rl eA: eae One row RE } ; 
(>) LETRA phe ae Bal es ak Ol (woe he ‘ea 


heresy oes) aie een Mae ba Sais) ORY at 
aie tive dake Jane Re cee fata Lae tee cial 
sirigost ‘ody saWa? tantepe ed tana bins. sheath 
Towa (,epehey aad, Ovhentie hee habaieamaat 
e As 5 if a hei 


a 
i or 
tay : 


vee 


er 


aie abet 


RELATION OF 164-4 


to take them up again. The messenger left the ae 


ent in the cabin of the Neophyte, but, seeing that atu 
the physician did not come, the sick person sent him aa 
back for it, and left this good man in peace. I pray ” 
our Lord to give him perseverance. : 


j 4 r 
i a 4) 
> ‘ Paya 5 4 
oY peRE® WARNES ~ 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XX 


XLI 
For particulars of this document, see Vol. XVIII. 
XLII 


This is a letter, in French, written by Charles Gar- 
nier to one of his brothers in France, and dated at 
Ste. Marie, in the Huron country, June 23, 1641. 
We follow a contemporary copy presumably by a 
member of the Garnier family in France, and now in 
the archives of St. Mary’s College, Montreal. The 
copy fails to intimate which of the brothers is ad- 
dressed; but evidently it is one of the two who were 
in holy orders — Henri, the Carmelite, or Joseph, the 
Capuchin (see vol. viii., mote 52). 


XLIII 


Jean de Brébeuf writes in Latin to the Father 
General (Vitelleschi), from Quebec, under date of 
August 20, 1641. The original is in the MSS. 
Soc. Jes., where Father Martin saw it in 1858, and 
copied therefrom such portions as he deemed of his- 
torical interest. A rather free French translation 
of these extracts was made by Father Martin, and 
appears as Letter XVII. in Carayon’s Premitre Mis- 
Ston, pp. 216, 217. We follow the Martin apograph 
in Latin, preserved in the archives of St. Mary’s 
College, Montreal; our translation is made directly 
therefrom. 


302 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


XLIV 


In reprinting the text of the Re/ation of 1640-41, 
we follow the original Cramoisy edition, from a copy 
in the possession of The Burrows Brothers Company, 
Cleveland. It is generally referred to by bibliog- 
raphers as ‘‘ H. 77,’’ because described in Harrisse’s 
Notes, no. 77. The volume purports to have been 
sent to the provincial in France by Barthelemy Vi- 
mont, the superior of the Society in New France. 
But his part in this volume seems to have been that 
only of nominal editor. Part I., undated, is by Paul 
Le Jeune; it was addressed to the Provincial, and 
carried by Le Jeune, personally, to France. Like- 
wise, Part II. (on the Huron mission) is addressed 
directly to the provincial by Jerome Lalemant, who 
dates his preface ‘‘ De la refidence fixe de 5S. Marie 
aux Hurons, ce 19. de May 1641.’’ There is no 
Privilege to this volume, but it contains a ‘* Permis- 
sion d’imprimer,”’ signed ‘‘ IACQVES DINET,’’ and 
dated at Paris, December 20, 1641. 

Collation: Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; “ Table 
des Chapitres’’ to Part I., pp. (3); “ Table des Cha- 
pitres’’ to Part II., pp. (2); ‘‘ Permission d’impri- 
mer,” p. (1); epistle from Le Jeune to the Provincial, 
pp. 1-4; text of Part L., by Le Jeune, pp. 5-216; 
special title to Part II., with verso blank, 1 leaf; 
epistle from H. Lalemant to the Provincial, pp. 3 and 
4; text of Part II. (Lalemant’s Huron Relation), pp. 
5-95; specimen prayer in Huron, with interlinear 
French translation, pp. 96-104. In Part I., page 
190 is misnumbered go, and in Part II., p. 76 is mis- 
paged 67; in some copies p. 77 is mispaged 68. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XX 303 


Chapter vi., on p. 46 of Part II., is misprinted viii., 
but it appears correctly in the table of contents. 

Copies of ‘‘H. 77’’ have been sold or priced as 
follows: O'Callaghan (1882), no. 1220, $20, it having 
cost him $30.50 in gold; Harrassowitz (1882), 100 
marks; Barlow (1890), no. 1282, $22.50; Dufossé, of 
Paris, priced (1891-1893) at 125 and 150 francs. 
Copies may be found in the following libraries: Len- 
ox, Harvard College, St. Mary’s College (Montreal), 
Laval University (Quebec), Brown (private), and Brit- 
ish Museum. 


he aS Hh " ay Ai Ay pAb 

Hf Cie Rts» OUT) TI one Oe, SO 
ay 

rihanna Be Catia 


ik? G ihe srt ea) 


PU sia akalohay Nan eS yi na 
eth ss clet we irae é 
a A 


nr i ‘} ae wy ait 
Wie 2 ) | 


NOTES TO VOL. XX 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 


I (p. 21).—St. Jean Baptiste was almost, if not quite, identical 
with the Cahiagué described by Champlain. Du Creux places it 
near a small lake,—evidently that now called Bass Lake, in the 
N. E. part of Oro township, the outlet of which is North River; inthe 
vicinity of this lake are many remains of Huron villages. Martin 
and Taché identify St. Jean Baptiste with Cahiagué, but mistake 
Bass Lake and North River (as indicated on Du Creux’s map) for 
Lake Couchiching and the Severn. But the latter are several miles 
farther east; the vicinity of those waters was less habitable, from a 
Huron point of view; and they do not correspond so well with the 
references in the text. Ragueneau (Huron Relation of 1648, chap. 
iv.) says that the Arendaenronnons, among whom this mission 
was located, were so harassed by the Iroquois (to whose attacks 
they were more exposed than the other Huron clans) that in 1647 
they abandoned their territory, and withdrew to other Huron vil- 
lages that were more populous and better able to resist the enemy. 
One of their villages in the vicinity of Bass Lake even shows indica- 
tions, in its remains, of having been attacked.— A. F. Hunter. 

Martin says of this site (in Géographie du Pays des Hurons, 
1855—a MS. in the archives of St. Mary’s College, Montreal): ‘‘I 
am inclined to place it to the south of the present village of Orillia, 
but nearer to the head of Lake Simcoe than is the latter.’’ Father 
Jones, of St. Mary’s College, (vol. xix., ote 9) places St. Jean Bap- 
tiste in Oro township, on Mill Creek, about a mile above Hawkstone. 

Champlain says of Cahiagué (Voyages, Laverdiére’s ed., p. 518) 
that in it were 200 large cabins, and that it was the principal village 
of the country. 


2 (p. 21).—St. Joachim is located by Du Creux on the east side of 
Sturgeon River, next to St. Jean. This is in a locality still wooded 
to a considerable extent, and where the sites have not yet been 
revealed by plowing. 

Although Ste. Elizabeth is included among the missions to the 
Arendaronons, other references to it in the Re/atéons show that it 
was a mission to Indians who spoke the Algonkin tongue. Du Creux 


306 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


places it on the west side of North River, erroneously interpreted 
by Martin and Taché (see o¢e 1, ante) as Severn River; the latter, 
however, have not attempted, so far as we know, to identify any 
one site as that of Ste. Elizabeth. The Huron Relatzon of 1644 
(chap. viii.) describes it as only a quarter of a league from St. Jean 
Baptiste; but Du Creux’s map indicates a greater distance between 
those points. So numerous are the sites west of North River, that 
no one of them can as yet be certainly identified as that of Ste. 
Elizabeth.— A. F. Hunter. 

The Relation of 1644, as above cited, states that many Algonkins 
had been driven by the Iroquois every winter, for several years past, 
from the neighborhood of the St. Lawrence, and that these Algon- 
kins had fled for safety to the Huron country. ‘‘ Having found an 
entire village of these poor wandering and fugitive Nations near the 
village of Saint Jean Baptiste, we [the Jesuits] felt constrained to 
give them some assistance,’ and thereupon Fathers Daniel and 
Ménard were placed in charge of this Algonkin mission, which was 
called Ste. Elizabeth. In all probability this was a different village 
from the Ste. Elizabeth of 1640; it is a fair inference, from the 
above-cited account, that the village of 1644 had been in large part 
formed between that date and 1640. Father Jones locates the mis- 
sion near the north end of Lake Couchiching, about % mile S. W. 
of Washago. 

3 (p. 23).— This tortoise-shell drum is described by Lalemant in 
vol. xvii., p. 157. Cf. Lafitau (leurs des Sauvages, t. 1, pare 
who says their drums are made from a gourd, or from ‘‘a Tortoise 
dried and neatly scooped out, without injuring the head, tail, and 
feet, or the skin which unites the animal’s two shells; so that it 
looks as if whole. They fill the cavity of the Gourd, or Tortoise, 
with some beads of their porcelain; then pierce it with a stick,”’ 
which serves at once to hold and to shake the drum. 

These drums—or more properly, tambourines—are character- 
istic of the ‘‘ medicine’ performances among all the North Ameri- 
can tribes, as indeed among many savage tribes in other parts of 
the world. Mallery quotes the following statement by an Ojibwa 
medicine man (Bur. Ethnol. Rep., 1888-89, p. 492): ‘‘ When Minabo’- 
sho, the first man, had been for some time upon the earth, two great 
spirits told him that, to be of service to his successors, they would 
give to him several gifts, which he was to employ in prolonging life 
and extending assistance to those who might apply for it. The first 
present consisted of a sacred drum, which was to be used at the 
side of the sick, and when invoking the presence and assistance of 
the spirits. The second was a sacred rattle, with which he was 
enabled to prolong the life of a patient. The third gift was tobacco, 


NOTES TO VOL. XX 307 


which was to be an emblem of peace; and, as a companion, he also 
received a dog.’’ Hoffman obtained a similar statement from the 
Menomonees (/d., 1892-93, p. 93): ‘‘ Then the good mysteries gave 
him the small flat rattle, that he might invoke the good ma/nidos 
when he required their assistance, or when he was fasting or dream- 
ing.’’ He also states of the medicine men and their practices 
(p. 63): ‘‘A tambourine drum is necessary as an accompaniment to 
the chant, as the personal manido is thus invoked for aid in the 
accomplishment of whatever task may have been assigned to the 
performer.’’ 


4 (p. 27).—Concerning Iouskeha, see vol. viii., mote 36; vol. x., 
note 12. 


5 (p. 35).— This transfer of name and authority, from the dead 
man to one living, accompanies the Indian ceremony of ‘‘ resuscita- 
tion’’ (vol. xvii., zoze 7). 


6 (p. 43).—St. Peter and St. Paul—the headquarters of the Mis- 
sion of the Apostles, to the Tobacco Nation—was located at the 
village of Ehwae, the most populous in that tribe. Its exact location 
has not yet been determined,—it may be any one of several adja- 
cent sites in Nottawasaga township; and there is no map to indicate 
the relative positions of the Tobacco missions, like Du Creux's of 
the Huron. Sanson’s map of 1656, however, shows this place at the 
south end of the Tobacco country, and St. Simon and St. Jude at the 
north end. From this circumstance, we conjecture that, at the time 
of the establishment of the Apostles’ Mission, the nine villages of 
the text were named, beginning at the southernmost village and 
ending at the northernmost, the order of the names in the text 
being preserved throughout. The only objection to this hypothesis 
might arise from Ragueneau’s mention of St. Jean (Relation of 
1650, chap. iii.) as then the most southerly or frontier village. But 
Sanson’s map gives the particulars as they existed about 1640; and 
it ought to be remembered also that during the next ten years the 
inhabitants of the frontier villages had to take refuge among those 
farther north, leaving St. Jean, the fifth village on the list of 1640, 
as Ragueneau’s frontier village in 1650. Coyne considers the S. 
Pierre of Sanson’s map as ‘‘near the south end of the county of 
Bruce;’’ also (though with some reserve of doubt), that it might 
have been intended for S. Pierre and S. Paul, of the Tobacco mis- 
sion (Country of Neutrals, pp. 9, 11, 44). The rudeness of Sanson’s 
map and the smallness of its scale make it difficult to say what part 
was Bruce County, and what part Simcoe County; but it is doubtful 
whether any of the nine villages were outside of Nottawasaga town- 
ship. And it may also be observed that the latter part of the name, 


308 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


‘“‘S. Paul,” is not wanting on the map, being spelled ‘‘ S. Pol.” 
St. Jean (called by the Indians Etarita) was located among the 
Wolf clan of the Tobacco Nation (Huron Relation of 1648, chap. 
ix.), and was in 1650 the most southerly or frontier town of this 
tribe (see preceding paragraph). It has not yet been identified. 

St. Mathias (Ekarenniondi) was among the Deer clan of the tribe; 
its location cannot be determined. Cf. the name Ecaregniondi, 
applied to a rock which departed souls must pass, in going to their 
abode (vol. x., p. 145); also Karegnondi, given to Lake Huron on 
Sanson’s map of 1656. 

St. Simon and St. Jude appear on Sanson’s map at the extreme 
north end of the Tobacco country.—A. F. Hunter. 

Harris (Miss. West. Canada, p. 26) locates the Tobacco tribe 
within the limits of Collingwood, Nottawasaga, and Sunnidale 
townships. 


7 (p. 61).— Ad¢szstaehronons : the Huron name of the Mascoutins 
(vol. v., zofe 20), an Algonkin tribe. Located, on Sanson’s map, in 
Eastern Michigan, between Saginaw Bay and the Maumee River; 
on Franquelin’s (1684), in Northern Illinois, from Lake Michigan to 
the Rock River,— having fled thence from their enemies. Allouez, 
who conducted missionary work among them, mentions them (7e/a- 
zzon of 1670, chap. xii.) as being a day’s journey from the Outaga- 
mies (Foxes); and,in the Re/aztzon of 1671, he describes his journey 
to the Mascoutins, up the Fox River from Green Bay, as lasting 
nine days. Cf. Butterfield’s Dzsc. of Northwest, p. 64, note 3. 


8 (p. 91).— Francois de Sales was born Aug. 21, 1567, near Anne- 
cy, France. His studies were pursued in that city, and in the Jesuit 
college at Paris (1580-86). He then took, at Padua, a course in 
civil law, his father intending that he should enter the legal profes- 
sion; but a clerical kinsman secured permission for Francois to 
become a preacher, Ordained in 1593, he spent three years in 
preaching, at Geneva, and in the province of Chablais, where he is 
said to have won, in that time, 800 converts; his reputation for 
eloquence and piety was great. In 1602, he became bishop of Gene- 
va; several other dignities were offered him, at various times, but. 
refused. He died at Lyons, Nov. 28, 1622, from an attack of apo- 
plexy; he was canonized Jan. 29, 1665. 

The most noted of De Sales’s works is L’/utroduction a la 
Vie dévote (1608), which, it is said, was translated into nearly all. 
the languages of Europe, and reached its fortieth edition in 1656. 
Another popular work was 7raité de l’ Amour de Dieu (1616). 


9 (p. 181).—It will be remembered that Giffard was a physician. 
(vol. vi., 20Ze 8). 


' mgt 


NOTES TO VOL. XX 309° 


Io (p. 185).— A letter from Buteux to Vitelleschi, dated Sept. 13, 
1641 (of which Father Martin’s apograph is in the archives of St. 
Mary’s College, Montreal), states that the residence of La Concep- 
tion at Three Rivers (of which he was superior) then maintained 
five missionaries—three priests and two brethren. He also states 
that about 100 Algonkins had been baptized during the year, and 
praises the piety and fidelity of the converts. 

Of great interest, in connection with the residence of St. Joseph, 
is its register of baptisms for the years 1638-40; this MS. (written 
in Latin) is preserved in the archives of the archiepiscopal palace 
at Quebec. It begins with the following introductory note: ‘‘The 
Commander de Sillery, a knight of Malta, and not long ago ordained 
a Priest, a man of notable piety, provided for the erection, at his 
own Expense, of the Reduction of Saint Joseph, a league and a half 
’ above Kebec, on the shore of the great river St. Lawrence. He 
then placed it in charge of the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, that 
they might call hither the barbarous Natives, and teach them the 
Law of Christ. The foundations of the house were laid on the [blank] 
day of July, 1637; and, on the 14th of April of the year 1638, two 
Fathers of the Society of Jesus came here to reside, and to instruct 
two families of the savages who had established here their perma- 
nent abode. Another family of the Savages also built their dwell- 
ings about it, asking assistance to change the wandering life they 
had hitherto led, for the Christian Religion and civilized life. From 
this time, those baptized are recorded below, unless they were bap- 
tized at Kebec, as were Noél Tekderimar and francois Xavier nenas- 
koumar, the first Dwellers in this reduction. These will be found 
recorded in the Register of those baptized at Kebec.”” 

During the entire period covered by this register, Le Jeune’s 
name appears frequently. Other priests officiating at these baptis- 
mal rites were: 1638, De Quen, Massé, Claude Quentin, Francois du 
Peron; 1639, Claude Pijart; 1640, Vimont and Ménard. Among 
those baptized, were ‘‘a girl of ten years, daughter of the late Capi- 
tenal;’’ Cecilia Natoukwabekwe, ‘‘ wife of the late La grenouille’’ 
(vol. ix., mote 18); Jerome Oukwe, ‘‘an orphan Lad about eleven 
years old;’’ Agatha Khisipikiwam, ‘‘ daughter of the late Makhate- 
webichtichi’’ (mote 12, fost). In many cases, the sponsors were 
Christian Indians; but this office was often performed by French- 
men. Among these, may be found the names of Montmagny, Le 
Gardeur de Repentigny, Pierre de Puiseaux, and Olivier le Tardif. 
Another is Achille de Lisle, doubtless Montmagny’s lieutenant of 
that name (vol. ix, zofe 7); others still were Francois Boullé and 
René Goupil (Jesuit donnés), and (Christmas eve, 1639) Madame de> 
la Peltrie and her maid Carola. This last was Charlotte Barré, 


310 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


whose name, as well as that of her mistress, may also be found in 
1640. The baptismal rite was often bestowed upon those “‘ in dan- 
ger of death;”’ and often is appended to the record, mortuus est, 
‘*he is dead.’’ 

The entries, though written in the first person, are not, as a rule, 
autographs of the Fathers officiating; most of them are written in 
the same hand—perhaps by a brother in charge of the church. In 
four places, however, the name of the priest has been cut or torn out 
of the MS.,— apparently to secure autograph signatures. 


II (p. 199).—Cf. Le Jeune’s statement of this superstition (vol. 
vi., p. 211, 213). Brinton (AZyths of New World, ist ed., 1868, pp. 
257-261) thus explains this belief: ‘‘ The opinion underlying all 
these [burial] customs was, that a part of the soul, or one of the 
souls, dwelt in the bones; that these were the seeds which, planted 
in the earth, or preserved unbroken in safe places, would, in time, 
put on once again a garb of flesh, and germinate into living human 
beings. The Iroquois word for bone is esken—for soul, atzsken, 
literally that which is within the bone. . . . Even the lower ani- 
mals were supposed to follow the same law. Hardly any of the 
hunting tribes, before their original manners were vitiated by for- 
eign influence, permitted the bones of game slain in the chase to be 
broken, or left carelessly about the encampment. They were col- 
lected in heaps, or thrown into the water.”” James, in Long's Exfe- 
dition to the Rocky Mountains (Phila., 1823), vol. i., p. 278, says: 
‘‘Many of the Minnetarees believe that the bones of those bisons 
which they have slain and divested of flesh, rise again clothed with 
renewed flesh, and quickened with life.’’ Brinton also says (pp. 144, 
145): ‘‘As the path to a ‘higher life hereafter, the burning of the 
dead was first instituted. . . . Those of Nicaragua seemed to 
think it the sole path to immortality, holding that only such as 
offered themselves on the pyre of their chieftain would escape anni- 
hilation at death; and the tribes of upper California were persuaded 
that such as were not burned to death were liable to be transformed 
into the lower orders of brutes.”’ 

12 (p. 209).—This Makheabichtichiou was an influential Algon- 
kin, whose partial conversion is detailed by Le Jeune in vol. xi., pp. 
149-183. 

13 (p. 259).—Oukotoem#s ; probably the Kotakouemis (vol. Xviii., 
note 14). Ounatchataronons : the Iroquet tribe (vol. v., mote 52). 

14 (p. 265).—Frangois de Champflour was governor at Three 
Rivers from December, 1639, to August, 1642, and again from the 
autumn of 1643, to October, 1645—the intervening year being spent 
‘as commandant of Fort Richelieu on the Sorel. He returned to 


NOTES TO VOL. XX 


France in October, 1645; and in the following year, at Paris, ob- 
tained a grant of a fief near Three Rivers, which, however, he sold 


to Le Neuf de la Poterie, three years later. He seems not to have 


returned to Canada. 


15 (p. 273).— Concerning the Metaberoutin River, see vol. ii., 
note 52. 


16 (p. 281).— This was probably the successor of the chief men-- 
tioned in vol. ix., zofe 18. Cf. vol. xii., mote 31. 


17 (p. 291).— Concerning Teswehat, see vol. viii., moze 30. 


Wiel Re 


is Nat! 


6y8y By Hud oP.” 
By yp 8, By Sy Bak 
Pm me 


bie 2 
Or 

28,2808 
a2 2.8 


é) a, By ty heheheh?" 
4, 0y840uSo8e 8. 83—° 
8, ER Se 


aya . 
Pot tat eh ad tal te ; 
Phot tot et aE YE TAL hd ay 
Prat br Wt OE ie 
Pa his 2 :.& = 
5,8) 8 


a> ’ at 


Bu se 
meme be 


eet 
setae Lae 
oat hr 

aiee i note 
ina itt 
im MGERLBESES, 


sy . Pett ee tht aeihe ut i 
sits ‘a. ay ease : its | a ta 
feutaibieatial 


ret cagagtgtitacaemssyecaca-ageces®, state rt 
nit ase ) Gu 8. 8. : | Per a | ie a6 
te 3 . sateen ttt 
eae e ne i | es 
: rasta 8, aticheacegseitas 


bo ua ae 
if bad 


488 


a 
ooh tet Pat 


& 
a ® 


