Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 25: Iroquois, Hurons, Quebec, 1642-1644
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits25jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits25jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits25jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 25 of 73.

---

er 
‘S 
acete nave 
ars? gets 
t ed 


lt 


YAAINN 


’ 
ve 


i ‘ 
Gy ust te 


. - a 


; i . Ae eth 
7 op &s -” +, +h rac "hd Oe 
U peat. ’ i . q » 
« «4 . - 
* —. 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 
AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


~ ar 


en univer and fifty et 
all numbered 


T rnPAnrS TY 1c 
mF AVPLA py 


win THE LAW SOCIE! 
——— # . 


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 


1610-1791 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL - 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


| EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XXV 


IROQUOIS, HURONS, QUEBEC 
1642-1644 


CLEVELAND: The Burrows Brothers 
Company, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XCVIII 


CopyRIGHT, 1898 
BY L 
Tue Burrows BrotTHers Co y: 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED : 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor : ? REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
f FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 


WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 


Translators . : 4 
CRAWFORD LINDSAY 
WILLIAM PRICE 
| HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor. EMMA HELEN BLAIR 


Bibliographical Adviser VicTOR HuGo PALTSITS 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXV 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXV ; ' as g 
DOCUMENTS :— 
LI. Relation de ce qvis’est passé en la Nov- 
velle France, en l’année 1642. & 1643. 
(Chaps. xiii.-xiv., concluding the docu- 
ment.] Barthelemy Vimont; undated . 17 
LII. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi, - 
Prepositum Generalem Societatis Jesu, 
Rome. Carolus Garnier; Sctze. Marie, 
apud Hurones, April 8, 1644 . Peers 
LIII. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la Nov- 
velle France, és années 1643. & 1644. 
[Chaps. i.—vili. of Part I., being the 
first installment of the document.] Bar- 
thelemy Vimont; Kebec, September 5, 
1644 ‘ : : ; . 89 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXV . 283 


NOTES ; : : j : - 207 


I. 


ILLUSTRATION TO VOL. XXV 


Photographic facsimile of title-page, Relation 
of 1643-44 , 


92. 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXV 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume: 


LI. The Relation of 1642-43, written wholly by 
Vimont, as superior of the Jesuit missions in New 
France, was commenced in Vol. XXIII. of our series, 
wherein the first three chapters were given; in Vol. 
XXIV. we presented Chapters iv. —xii.; and herewith 
publish Chapters xiii._xiv., thus concluding the 
document. 

After his survey of the missions in Lower Canada, 
and account of Father Jogues’s capture by the Iroquois 
(see preceding volume), Vimont turns his attention 
to the Huron mission, with its peculiar difficulties 
and dangers. He cites letters from the Fathers there, 
which have fortunately escaped from the clutches of 
the Iroquois: they note encouraging progress in their 
work, and, among the savages, more inclination to the 
faith; but the loss of Jogues, and of so many Huron 
converts who were captured with him, has dealt a 
severe blow to the infant church. The fierce Iro- 
quois are rendering the St. Lawrence so unsafe that 
the welfare of the Huron mission is greatly imperiled. 
Among the Huron converts are found a much larger 
number of warriors than formerly. ‘‘ The use of 
arquebuses, refused to the Infidels by Monsieur the 
Governor, and granted to the Christian Neophytes, 


10 PREFACE TO VOL. XXV 


is a powerful attraction to win them; it seems that 
our Lord intends t6 use this means in order to render 
Christianity acceptable in these regions.”’ 

The superior notes the deaths of three mission- 
aries, — Raymbault, D’Olbeau, and Davost,—also the 
murder of Goupil, the donné captured with Jogues; 
and he takes occasion to praise the devotion and cour- 
age of the donnés as a class. Goupil’s example has 
inspired another young surgeon, in Orleans, France, 
to give himself for the Canada mission; he has come 
hither for that purpose, and has gone to the Huron 
country. 

Vimont observes that the Canadian savages have 
good reason, from a purely human standpoint, for 
being averse to the faith; for, since it has been 
proclaimed among them, they have experienced ex- 
traordinary misfortunes— pestilence, famine, and 
war. Many of them bitterly complain: ‘‘ You tell us 
that God is full of goodness; and then, when we give 
ourselves up to him, he massacres us. The Iroquois 
do not believe in God, they are more wicked than 
Demons; and yet they prosper.”’ They are answered 
thus: ‘‘ God regards you as his children; he wishes 
to give you sense; he uses the Iroquois as a whip, in 
order to correct you.” ‘‘ Alas!” say some, “ why 
did he not begin with the Iroquois? why did not 
he try to give them sense first? we have so much 
already, and they have none at all.”” But the mis- 
sionaries console themselves with remembering that 
“these same scourges and these same reproaches 
were in olden time encountered in the primitive 
Church.” 

The superior announces a happy event,—the de- 
liverance of Jogues from the hands of the Iroquois, 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXV 11 


and his safe arrival in France; this is described by 
that Father’s own letters, written from the Dutch 
settlement of Rensselaerswyck (now Albany), and 
from Rennes, France. Taken by some Iroquois on 
a fishing expedition to the vicinity of the Dutch, he 
hears while there that he is to be burned on his 
return to the place of his captivity. The Dutch 
provide him a way of escape, which he accepts only 
when he is persuaded that his return to the Iroquois 
would be useless for aught save his death. The 
commandant at Rensselaerswyck hides him in his 
own house for some time, and finally ransoms Jogues 
from the savages, sending him to Manhattan, whence 
he voyages across the ocean, reaching France on 
Christmas, 1643, after much hardship and suffering. 
A letter, written by a Jesuit at Rennes, is added, 
giving various details of Jogues’s captivity which 
are not included in his own letters; the latter 
expects to return to the Canadian mission. 

To this Re/ation is appended a formal declaration 
by the directors and associates of the Company of 
New France, exonerating the Jesuits from the oft- 
preferred charge of having commercial interests in 
Canada, or any connection with the fur trade. 


LII. This is a letter (in Latin) from Garnier to 
the Father General (Vitelleschi), dated at Ste. Marie- 
of-the-Hurons, April 8, 1644. Garnier reports that 
the Huron mission is carried on with great devotion 
and excellent discipline. He especially praises the 
pious zeal and labors of the donnés, saying that with- 
out them the mission would soon collapse. He sug- 
gests that, if Lalemant be removed from his position 
as superior of this field, Ragueneau is best fitted to 
succeed him. He mentions the constancy of the 


12 PREFACE TO VOL. XXV 


native converts in the trials to which their country- 
men subject them. . 


LIII. The Relation of 1643-44 is in two parts— 
the first, the usual general survey by Vimont, dated 
at Quebec, September 5, 1644; the second is devoted 
to the Huron mission, and covers two years, 1642-44. 
It will be remembered that the Huron report for 
1642-43 was being carried down to Quebec in the 
summer of 1643, by the trading fleet of that tribe. 
These Hurons were captured upon the Ottawa River 
by the Iroquois; and, upon reaching the Iroquois 
country, this document, together with several letters 
which the Huron missionaries were sending to 
France, was given to Jogues, as he states in his 
letters appended to the Relation of 1642-43, in the 
present volume. Having no prospect of escape at 
the time when he went to visit the Dutch at Fort 
Orange, he left these papers in his cabin; and they 
were, of course, destroyed. September 21 follow- 
ing, Lalemant sent down to Vimont another copy of 
the Huron report,—it was the practice of the mis- 
sionaries to keep original drafts at the local house, 
and forward to their superiors a well-written copy 
thereof; this, as Vimont explains in a note prelimi- 
nary to Part II. in the present Relation, reached him 
too late to be sent to France for inclusion in the 
Relation of 1642-43. It is therefore given in this 
Relation, supplemented by a brief letter by 
Lalemant, dated ‘‘ the last of March,” 1644, bring- 
ing the account of the mission up to date. In the 
present volume, we give the first eight chapters of 
Part I. 

Vimont begins this Relation by a graphic account 
of the afflictions which have so scourged the infant 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXV : 13 


church in Canada,— disease, war, and famine,—and 
the suffering caused by these among the wretched 
savages. The Jesuits and the Hospital nuns at Sil- 
lery have supported throughout the winter over forty 
savages, most of whom were infirm or aged, and 
would have died without this aid. The Indian popu- 
lation has been so greatly reduced by these misfor- 
tunes that, ‘‘ where eight years ago one could see 
eighty or a hundred cabins, barely five or six can 
now be seen; a Captain, who then had eight hundred 
warriors under his command, now has not more than 
thirty or forty; instead of fleets of three or four 
hundred Canoes, we see now but twenty or thirty. 
And the pitiful part of it is, that these remnants of 
Nations consist almost entirely of women, widows or 
girls, who cannot all find lawful husbands, and who 
consequently are in danger of much suffering, or of 
committing great sins.” 

The savages are more submissive in their afflic- 
tions than could have been expected; but their usual 
pride has been humiliated by trouble, ‘‘ necessity 
has made them more dependent upon the French, 
and has made them experience the effects of Chris- 
tian Charity.” They admit that the new religion is 
true, even if they do not at once accept it; and ‘‘ the 
craft of the Jugglers and sorcerers is gradually losing 
credit.’”’ Many other encouraging facts are cited; but 
these ‘‘do not mean that all has been done. We have 
greater trouble in keeping our Christians than in 
acquiring them.’’ It is the old story, of their wan- 
dering life and their license in regard to marriage. 

Nearly a fourth of Vimont’s account is occupied by 
the conversions, religious experiences, and pious 
acts of the Christian Indians at Sillery. One is an 


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXV 


Abenaki chief, who promises to return thither to 
live, after settling’ up his affairs at home; but there 
is reason to believe that he was captured, on the way, 
by the Iroquois. Another convert—an old man, 
and ‘‘a notorious sorcerer of the Iroquets’’ —con- 
sents to all that is required, except to give up a hair 
that ‘‘ he has pulled from the moustache of the Mani- 
tou,” which has brought him good fortune for many 
years. ‘‘The Devil held him firmly by that hair; 
but, in the end, the Holy Ghost was victorious; ”’ 
the precious hair is sacrificed to God. 

The good example of the Sillery neophytes has 
greatly aided the mission cause, by recommending to 
the heathen the true religion. Especial praise is 
due to their ‘‘ Captains,’’ Noel Tekwerimat and Jean 
Baptiste Etinechkawat, ‘‘ whose zeal and prudence 
surpass everything that might be expected from a 
Savage,” of which various instances are related. 
The latter does not talk much; but Noel ‘‘ allows no 
opportunity to escape of making himself heard in 
favor of the Faith;’’ and he keenly pursues all evil- 
doers, not only with rebukes, but with the force of 
his authority as chief. Neither of these men will 
undertake anything of importance without the advice 
and consent of Montmagny and the Jesuits. As soon 
as he hears that the Iroquois have captured Father 
Bressani, Jean Baptiste volunteers to lead against 
them a band of his warriors, to punish their evil 
deed. 

The Sillery Christians go on their annual hunt,— 
but three months earlier than their usual time, in 
order to anticipate the raids of the Iroquois. Dur- 
ing their six months’ absence, they ‘‘ retain the inno- 
cence and grace of their Baptism, though without 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXV ' 15 


instruction or any Sacrament,’’ much better than do 
many Christians in Europe. Upon their return, they 
hasten to confess themselves,—one of them, two or 
three times a day; and the Fathers have to lose their 
sleep during several nights, in order to satisfy them. 

At the remarriage of Charles Meiachkawat, the 
husband compels his wife—who had been arrogant 
and ill-tempered— publicly to promise that she will 
conduct herself better in future. He adds that, if 
she do not keep her word, ‘‘ thou wilt cause me to 
be angry; and, if I get angry, I shall go to Hell, and 
so wilt thou.’’ The woman soon “‘ becomes truly a 
lamb;’’ her husband is ‘‘all afire in the affairs of 
God,” and of his own accord resolves to visit the 
Abenakis, to preach the Gospel to them. 

The writer relates several incidents showing the 
tenderness of conscience among the Sillery Chris- 
tians, and the sort of discipline maintained among 
them, not only by the Jesuits, but by themselves. 

The Iroquois continue more and more to harass 
the St. Lawrence valley. This year, ten of their 
bands have lurked along the shores of that river, and 
have done much harm. One of these captured (April 
28) Father Bressani and the Hurons of his party. 
Another penetrated to Montreal, killing several 
Frenchmen, and capturing two whom they afterward 
tortured to death. Many of the Sillery Indians take 
to flight, in consequence; and the Hospital nuns are 
obliged to remove to their house in Quebec, although 
only its walls and roof are yet built. They have 
cared for nearly forty sick persons, this year, besides 
many old men, women, and children who had no 
other refuge. Many of those who are attended by 
the nuns find the hospital salvation for their souls, 


16 PREFACE TO VOL. XXV 


as well as the cure of their bodily ailments; several 
instances of this sort are narrated in detail. The 
neighboring children are instructed, and are eager 
to learn. 

The Ursuline seminary has been reinforced by two 
more nuns. Their Indian pupils surprise them by 
their obedience, affection, and piety; andthe parents 
are now only too glad to place their girls in charge 
of the nuns. Many of these children come to the 
seminary in utter destitution, and must be clothed as 
well as taught. This is done by the nuns, as far as 
their means permit; they also feed many hungry 
savages. 

The unrestrained license in which the Indians 
have always lived leads to some scandals among 
those regarded as converts. One of these concerns 
the quondam “‘sorcerer,’’ Pigarouich, who is very 
zealous while at St. Joseph, but who is corrupted by 
his countrymen of the Island tribe, while with them 
at Three Rivers. He professes repentance and 
reformation, but soon relapses into dissolute ways. 
Driven by hunger, he and another apostate come 
down to Quebec and Sillery; but no one, at either 
settlement, will aid them. ‘The deserted wife of one 
of these men will not receive a visit from him, and 
threatens to kill him with a knife. Even the Pagan 
Indians do not dare receive them. This treatment 
subdues Pigarouich, and in public he makes confes- 
sion of his sin, and submits to penance. 

R. Ge @ 


Mapison, Wis., June, 1898. 


— i 


LI (concluded) | 


RELATION OF 1642-43 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1644 


Chaps. i.-iii. were given in Volume XXIII.; iv.—xii., in 
Volume XXIV.; and xiii.— xiv. herewith, thus concluding the 
document. 


18 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


[263] CHAPITRE XIII. 
DE QUELQUES REMARQUES, TOUCHANT LES HURONS. 


E Chapitre precedét nous donne la conclufion 
des chofes plus memorables, qui fe font paffee 
depuis Tadouffac, iufques 4 Mont-Real, il fal- 

loit maintenant parler des Nations plus hautes: mais 
les Iroquois nous ayans rauy la Relation & les lettres 
que nos Peres, qui font en ces [264] contrees plus 
eloignees, efcriuoient aux perfonnes qui les honorent 
de leur amitié, & de leur fecours, nous ayans dis-ie 
enleué ce petit trefor, nous ont cdtraint de garder le 
filence, neantmoins quelques Francois, & quelques 
Sauuages de nos alliez, marchants par apres fur les 
brifees de ces Barbares, nos ennemis ont recueilly 
quelques papiers qu’ils auoiét iettez dans les bois, ou 
qui leur eftoient efchappez des mains, & nous les 
ayans fait tenir en France, nous en auons recueilly 
ce qui fuit, pour confoler ceux qui s’intereffent auec 
tant d’amour en la conuerfion de ces pauures peuples, 
& pour leur donner vne petite cognoiffance de ce 
que noftre Seigneur va operant dans cette extremité 
du monde. 

Te ne feay (dit l’vn de ceux dont les lettres font 
venués iufques A nous) a@ guoy /eruiroit de m'estendre 
Jur la confideration de ce que Dieu a permis nous estre 
arriué: cela eft inconceuable a ceux qui ne font pas fur 
les lieux: car pour ne parler point du Pere Togues. Te 
vous diray que les deux Francois qui lf accompagnotent, 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 19 


[263] CHAPTER XIII. 
SOME OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING THE HURONS. 


HE preceding Chapter gives us the conclusion 
op of the more memorable things which have 
occurred from Tadoussac even to Mont-Real; 
it would be now in order to speak of the Nations 
higher up, but the Iroquois,— having robbed us of the 
Relation, and of the letters which our Fathers who 
are in those [264] more distant regions wrote to per- 
sons who honor them with their friendship and their 
help,— having, I say, taken from us that little treas- 
ure, have constrained us to keep silence. Neverthe- 
less, some Frenchmen, and some Savages of our 
allies,— marching afterward in the footsteps of those 
Barbarians, our enemies,—picked up some papers 
which they had thrown into the woods, or which had 
escaped from their hands; and, they having caused 
us to receive these in France, we have collected from 
them what follows, in order to console those who 
interest themselves with so much love in the conver- 
sion of those poor peoples, and to give them a little 
knowledge of what our Lord continues to effect in 
that extremity of the world. 

I know not (says one of those whose letters have 
reached us), what it would avail to expatiate upon the 
thought of what God has permitted to happen to us,— that 
zs inconceivable to those who are not on the spot. For, not 
to speak of Father Jogues, I will tell you that the two 
Frenchmen who accompanied him, named Guillaume 


20 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 25 


nomez Guillaume Coufture, & René Goupil, qui ont efié 
pris auec le Pere [265] par ‘les Troquots, eftoient deux 
zeunes hommes incomparables en leur genre, & tres-propres 
pour ces pays-cy. Et fi la flotte de Hurons Chreftiés, & 
des Catechumenes qu’ils accompagnoient, & qui a efte prife 
& defaite & mefme tips, fut arriuée faine & fauue, comme 
nous l'attendions, la conuerfion du pays Sembloit prefque 
infaillible, ce font des fecrets que nous ne verrons que dans 
l’eternité. Croyriez vous bien neantmoins, que tamats 
nous n’auons pris plus de courage, tant pour le /pirituel, 
gue pour le temporel. La Relation vous en fera voir les 
particularitez: Si on pouuoit remedier aux courfes des 
Iroquois, & les contraindre a vne bonne paix: nous verrions 
en peu de temps de notables progrez, en ces contrees, pour 
le Chriftiani/me: c’eft ou te ne voy goutte, fi cen eft par 
des voyes, qui approchent du miracle, fi bien qu'il nous 
faut ietter les yeux vers le Ciel, pour attendre les arrefis 
de la diuine prouidence, & ce qu'il en plaira a ceux de qui 
la chofe depend. 

Le Pere qui nous parle en ces termes, fgauoit bien 
le defaftre qui eftoit arriué l’annee precedente, a la 
flotte des pauures Hurons: mais il ne pouuoit pas 
preuoir que fes lettres pafferoifen]t [266] par les mains 
des Iroquois, que la Relation qu’il nous enuoyoit, 
feroit rauie, que tous les Hurons qui defcendoiét 
feroient les vns maffacrez, les autres menez prifon- 
niers dans le pays des Iroquois, & les autres pourfui- 
uis & defpoiiillez iufques Ala chair. Jamas (dit-il) 
nous n’auons pris plus de courage, tant pour le /pirituel 
que pour le temporel. Ie n’entends que la moitié de 
ces paroles: ie concois fort bien ce redoublement de 
coeur & d’efprit, qui fait trouuer la ioye au milieu 
des angoiffes, & la paix dans l’ardeur de la guerre: 


on im — ~ 
~~ r 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 21 


Cousture and René Goupil, who were taken with the 
Father [265] by the Iroquois, were two young men match- 
less of their kind, and excellently adapted to these countries. 
And if the fleet of Huron Christians and Catechumens 
which they accompanied, and which was taken and defeated 
at the same time, had arrived safe and sound, as we 
were expecting, the conversion of the country would have 
seemed almost infallible; these are secrets which we shall 
discover only in eternity. Could you well believe, neverthe- 
less, that never have we taken more courage, alike for the 
spiritual and for the temporal? The Relation will show you 
the particulars thereof. If one could remedy the incursions 
of the Iroquois, and constrain them to a favorable peace, we 
would see in a little time notable advances for Christianity 
in these regions. It 1s in this direction that I cannot see 
an atom, unless by ways which approach the miraculous; 
insomuch that we must cast our eyes toward Heaven, in 
order to awatt the decrees of divine providence, and what 
shall be pleasing, in the affair, to those on whom the matter 
depends. 

The Father who speaks to us in these terms, was 
well aware of the disaster which had happened, in 
the preceding year, to the fleet of the poor Hurons: 
but he could not foresee that his letters would pass 
[266] through the hands of the Iroquois; that the 
Relation which he was sending us, would be plun- 
dered; that all the Hurons who were coming down 
would be partly massacred, partly taken prisoners 
into the country of the Iroquois, and the rest pur- 
sued and stripped even to the flesh. Never (he says) 
have we taken more courage, alike for the spiritual and 
Sor the temporal. {understand only the half of these 
words: I apprehend very well this increase of heart 
and spirit, which causes joy to be found in the midst 


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Wot 2% 


ie fcay bien que Dieu ne fe laiffe pas vaincre, & que 
i’aymerois mieux eftre fecouru de luy tout feul, que 
de toutes les creatures enfemble: ce qui fe paffe dans 
V’abandon, fe peut bien fentir: mais la langue n’a 
pas de parole pour l’exprimer: les ioyes interieures 
font plutoft des ioyes de l’efprit que du corps. Ie 
n’entends pas comme ces pauures Peres preuuent 
prendre courage, pour le temporel, puis que tout ce 
que le Pere Iogues leur portoit, fut enleué auec luy, 
par les Iroquois, & que tout ce qu’on leur enuoyoit 
cette annee, a efté pris & pillé [267] par les mefmes. 
Quel courage peuuent-ils auoir dans le temporel qui 
leur manque? Ie feay bien que leur refolution eft 
de tenir ferme iufques au bout, & d’aller plutoft nuds, 
comme le Pere Iogues, que de lafcher pied: ils ont 
defia quelque rapport auec luy: car leur maifon pour 
la plufpart du temps n’eft baftie que d’efcorces, & 
leur viure n’eft pour 1l’ordinaire que de la boiiillie de 
farine de bled d’Inde, cuitte dans 1l’eau, fans fel, & 
{ans autre ragouft que l’appetit: certes ie ne voy pas 
quel plaifir temporel ils puiffent prendre dans ce 
traitement: mais ie vous confeffe & vous donne pa- 
role, que 1’accroiffement de l’efprit recompenfe bien 
les deffauts que fouffre le corps, & que Dieu opere 
plus parfaitement, & plus doucement par foy-mefme, 
que quand il fe fert de fes creatures, pourfuiuons nos 
lettres. 

Nos Catalogues vous feront voir nos befoins: ce que te 
demande plus particulierement eft qu’on nous enuoye de 
braues ouuriers, pour auancer [ ouurage que nous auons en 
main, & pour Jucceder auec le temps a ceux que l aage, 
& les accidents de cette vie peuuent rendre moins vttls. 

[268] Il faut que ie dife en paffant que le corps eft 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 ’ 23 


of anguish, and peace in the ardor of war; I know 
well that God does not allow himself to be van- 
quished, and that I would prefer to be helped by him 
all alone, than by all creatures together; what passes 
in desolation can indeed be felt, but the tongue has 
no word to express it; the joys within are rather 
joys of the mind than of the body. I do not under- 
stand how these poor Fathers can take courage for 
the temporal, since everything that Father Jogues 
was conveying to them was carried off with him by 
the Iroquois; and since everything which was sent 
to them this year was taken and plundered [267] by 
the latter. What courage can they have in the tem- 
poral, which failsthem? I well know that their reso- 
lution is to hold firm even to the end, and rather to 
go naked, like Father Jogues, than to give way. 
Their experiences are already somewhat like his, — for 
their house, most of the time, is built of nothing but 
bark; and their living is usually nothing but mush 
of Indian cornmeal, cooked in water without salt, 
and without other relish than that of appetite. Cer- 
tainly, I do not see what temporal pleasure they can 
take in this treatment; but I confess to you and give 
you my word that the increase of spirit well rewards 
the privations which the body suffers, and that God 
operates more perfectly and more gently by himself 
than when he employs his creatures. Let us continue 
our letters. 

Our Catalogues will show you our needs; what I ask 
more particularly is that they send us courageous laborers, 
tn order to advance the work which we have in hand, and 
to succeed, in course of time, those whom age and the acct- 
dents of this life may render less useful. 

[268] I must say, in passing, that the body is lim- 


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 25 


limité: mais que l’efprit ne l’eft pas: celuy qui a 
couché ces lignes fcait bien ce qu’on fouffre, pour le 
peu de fecours qu’on a dans ce bout du monde, & 
cependant il demande encore des compagnons de fon 
courage, & de fa ioye: car les trauaux pris pour 
Iefus-Chrift portent ces fruicts. Paffons outre. 

Tandis que la Riutere fera afsiegee de toutes parts par 
les Iroquois: t’auray bien de la peine a enuoyer de nos 
Peres & Kebec, de peur de les expofer aux prifes de Uen- 
nemy: perdre vn ouurter tout fait, & tout formé pour ces 
contrees: ceft perdre vn precieux trefor: & fi mefme 
encor no? pouuds nous dispéfer de faire defcendre quelques- 
uns de nos hommes la bas, nous le ferons, que s'il weft 
pas en noftre pouuotr, il les faudra facrifier auffi bien en 
defcédant qu'on fait en montant: car de pouuotr fubjifier 
icy fans fecours & hommes, tl ferott toft ou tard impoffible. 

Les Iroquois fe font tellement refpandus fur le 
grand fleuue de S. Laurent, & fur la Riuiere des prai- 
ries, qu'il n’y a point d’affurance depuis le lac de S. 
Pierre, qui eft vn peu au deffus des trois Riuieres 
[269] iufques bien loing au dela de Mont-Real: ces 
Barbares fe cachent, tantoft en vn endroict, tantoft 
en l’autre fe iettans a l’improuifte fur les Frangois, 
fur les Hurons, & fur les Algonquins, quand ils voy- 
ent leur auantage: fi bien qu’on n’oferoit quafi naui- 
ger tout l’E{té fur ces beaux fleuues, fi on ne fait des 
Carauanes, comme dans l’Arabie, ce que nous ne 
pouuons pas faire pour noftre petit nombre. 

Pour nos mifsions dans les Bourgades des [Hurons: 
nous les auons continuees a l’ordinatre: nous ne fufmes 
iamats fi heureux, ny tamais fi malheureux: la prife du 
Pere Iogues, de nos Francois, & de nos Hurons Chre/fitens, 
& de nos Catechumenes nous faire (sc. fait] reffentir nos 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 : 25 


ited: but the spirit is not. The one who has written 
those lines knows well what one suffers for the little 
help one has in that end of the world; and yet he 
still asks for companions in his courage and in his 
joy,—for the labors undertaken for Jesus Christ bear 
those fruits. Let us proceed. 

As long as the River shall be beset from every direction 
by the Iroquois, I shall have much anxiety about sending 
any of our Fathers to Kebec, for fear of exposing them to 
capture by the enemy. To lose one laborer, thoroughly 
accustomed and sutted to these regions, ts to lose a precious 
treasure,—and if, even yet, we can dispense with sending 
some of our men down thither, we willdoso. But, tf that 
be not in our power, tt will be necessary to sacrifice them no 
less going down than 1s done coming up; for the ability to 
subsist here without help of men would, sooner or later, be 
tmtposstble. 

The Iroquois have so spread themselves along the 
great stream of St. Lawrence, and along the River 
des prairies, that there is no security from the lake 
of St. Pierre, which is a little above the three Riv- 
ers, [269] even to very far beyond Mont-Real. Those 
Barbarians conceal themselves, now in one place, 
now in another,— falling suddenly upon the French, 
upon the Hurons, and upon the Algonquins, when 
they see their opportunity; insomuch that one would 
scarcely dare to navigate, in all the Summer, these 
noble streams, unless Caravans be made, as in Ara- 
bia, which we cannot do because of our small number. 

As for our missions in the Villages of the Hurons, we 
have continued them as usual. We were never so fortunate, 
nor ever so unfortunate — the capture of Father Jogues, of 
our Frenchmen, of our Christian Hurons, and of our 
Catechumens, makes us realize our troubles; and what has 


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


malheurs, & ce quis eft paffé cette annee, pour Lamplifi- 
cation de la foy, publie dans la Relation noftre felicité; 
Nous entrons de plus‘en plus dans la poffefsion des biens, | 
gue nous venons acheter en ce bout du monde, au prix de 
nofire fang & de nos vies: Le voy de plus grandes difpo- 
fitions que tamais, a la conuerfion totale de ces peuples, que 
nous attaqguons des premurs, & gue nous entreprenons 
a’ emporter, pour feruir de modele, & d’exemple (270]| a 
ceux qui fe conuertiront par apres. En vn mot nos petites 
Eglifes vont toufiours croiffant en nombre de perfonnes, 
& en vertu. Les affaires de noftre Seigneur s’auancent, 
a proportion des difgraces qu'il nous enuoye, & peine Se 
rencontroit-il cy-deuant parmy nos Chrefitens deux ou trots 
guerriers: mais deputrs la prife de ce braue Neophyte, 
nommé Euftache le plus vaillant de tous les Hurons, nous 
avos compté en une feule bande, iufques a vingt-deux 
Croyans, tous hommes de ceur, la pluspart Capitaines ou 
gens de confideration. L’vfage des arquebufes refuse aux 
Infideles, par Monfieur le Gouuerneur, & accordé aux 
Neophytes Chrefttens eft un puiffant attrait, pour les 
gaigner: wu femble que nofere Seigneur fe vueille ferutr de 
ce moyé, pour rédre le Chriftiani/me recommandable en ces 
contrees. 

Vne autre lettre parle en ces termes. 

Dieu nous confole fortement par 1 auancement du Spirt- 
tuel, qui eft le feul attrait, qui nous amene icy. La foy 
fait un progrez notable parmy les Hurons: on auroit de la 
peine de croire qu'il fe rencontre tant de folidité, tant 
a’ innocence, & tant de tendreffe en des ceurs Sauuages, fila 
verité ne nous enfeignoit que Dieu a des bontes, & des 
mifericordes, aufsi [271] bien pour les Sauuages, que pour 
les autres nations de la terre. Il a wetté les yeux cette 
annec, fur les Nipifiriniens par le Baptefme folemnel de 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 ; 27 


occurred this year for the enlargement of the faith publishes 
in the Relation our blessedness. We are entering more and 
more into the possession of the goods which we come to buy 
in this end of the world at the price of our blood and of our 
lives: I see stronger tendencies than ever toward the total 
conversion of these peoples, whom we are attacking among 
the first, and whom we are undertaking to carry away, 
in order to serve as models and as examples [270] to those 
who shall be subsequently converted. Ina word, our little 
Churches are continually increasing in number of persons, 
and in virtue; the affairs of our Lord advance in propor- 
tion to the adversities which he sends us. Hardly could 
one find, hitherto, among our Christians two or three 
warriors; but, since the capture of that worthy Neophyte, 
named Eustache, the most valiant of all the Hurons, we 
have counted in a single band as many as twenty-two Be- 
lievers,—all men of courage, and mostly Captains or people 
of importance. The use of arquebuses, refused to the In- 
fidels by Monsieur the Governor, and granted to the Chris- 
tian Neophytes, 1s a powerful attraction to win them: tt 
seems that our Lord intends to use this means in order to 
render Christianity acceptable in these regions. 

Another letter speaks in these terms: 

God mightily consoles us by the advancement of the 
spiritual, which is the only attraction that brings us hither. 
The faith makes a notable progress among the Hurons; 
one could hardly believe that he would encounter so much 
jirmness, so much innocence, and so much feeling in 
Savage hearts, if the truth did not teach us that God has 
bounties and mercies as [271] well for the Savages as for 
the other nations of the earth. He has cast his eyes this 
year upon the Nipisiriniens, through the solemn Baptism of 
certain persons more advanced in age,— besides some little 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2% 


guelques-uns plus auancez en aage, Outre quelques petits 
enfans, & qui ces eaux Jacrees ont ouuert les portes du Crel. 

Ne paffons pas s’il vous plaift legerement, les yeux 
fur ces fragments de lettres, tout n’eft pas ruiné, puis 
que nous ne perdons que l’acceffoire, & que le prin- 
cipal demeure en fon entier. Trois braues ouuriers 
font morts quafi 4A mefme annee. Le Pere Charles 
Raimbaut, qui auoit vn coeur plus grand que tout fon 
corps, quoy qu'il fut d’vne riche taille, il meditoit le 
chemin de la Chine, au trauers de noftre Barbarie, & 
Dieu 1’a mis dans le chemin du Ciel, le Pere lean 
Dolbeau, que la paralyfie auoit attaqué dans fes tra- 
uaux, le nauire qui le reportoit en France, ayant efté 
pris par trois fregates ennemies: cdme les vainqueurs 
le pilloient, on laiffa tomber du feu dedans les pou- 
dres, qui firent voler dans la mer nos amis, & nos 
ennemis. Le pauure Pere fut noyé dans la mer; 
bien-heureux d’auoir donné fa vie dans vn fi [272] 
genereux employ, & d’auoir paffé par le feu, & par 
l’eau, pour entrer dans vn repos, & dans vn rafrai- 
chiffement eternel: il menoit vne vie faincte dans 
les grandes forefts, & maintenant il iotiit de la gloire 
des Saincts, dans ces demeures eternelles. Le Pere 
Ambroife Dauoft repaffant pour fon aage, & pour la 
foibleffe de fon corps, eftant bien fouuent attaqué du 
feurbut, a e{té emporté fur la mer d’vne fiévre, qui 


ne la point quitté iufques A ce qu’il ait efté enfeuely — 


dans les ondes: il eftoit toufiours auec Dieu, pendant 
fa vie. Il auoit vne patience de fer, ou plutoft vne 
patience toute d’or, ou vne patience de Iob, & en fa 
vie, & en fa maladie, & en fa mort: la rigueur de la 
fiévre, les incommoditez du vaisseau, le deffaut de 
Chirurgien, de Medecin & de remedes, & des autres 


= 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 * 29 


children, to whom these sacred waters have opened the 
gates of Heaven. 

Let us not, if you please, pass lightly over these 
fragments of letters; everything is not ruined, since 
we lose only the accessory, and since the essential 
remains intact. Three worthy laborers have died, 
almost in the same year. Father Charles Raim- 
baut—who had a heart greater than all his body, 
though he was of generous stature — was meditating 
the way to China through our Barbarian land; and 
God has put him in the way to Heaven. Another was 
Father Jean Dolbeau,' whom paralysis had attacked 
amid his labors; the ship which was bearing him back 
to France having been seized by three hostile frig- 
ates, while the victors were plundering it, some one 
let fall fire into the magazine, which hurled into 
the sea both our friends and our enemies. The poor 
Father was drowned in the sea,—fortunate to have 
given his life in so [272] noble an occupation, and to 
have passed through fire and through water, to enter 
into an eternal rest and enjoyment. He led a holy 
life in the great forests, and now he enjoys the glory 
of the Saints, in those eternal dwellings. Father 
Ambroise Davost —crossing over because of his age 
and the weakness of his body, having been very often 
attacked by the scurvy —was carried off on the sea 
by a fever, which did not leave him until he was 
buried in the waves; he was always with God, dur- 
ing his life. He had a patience of iron,—or rather 
a patience all of gold, ora patience of Job,—in his 
life, in his sickness, and in his death. The severity 
of the fever; the discomforts of the vessel; the want 
of Surgeon, of Physician, of remedies, and of the 
other comforts which are found on land, and which 


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 25 


foulagemens qui fe trouuét en terre, & qu il n’a 
point rencontré dans fon nauire, les douleurs qu’on 
fouffre en ces extremitez, ne luy ont iamais ouuert 
la bouche, ny delié la langue pour fe plaindre, il 
eftoit accouftumé a fuiure plutoft les volontez & les. 
inclinations des autres que les [273] fiennes: il auoit 
vne fi grande habitude a prendre la conduite de Dieu, 
& A receuoir de fa main, tout ce qui luy arriuoit, que 
iamais il ne demanda rien en toute fa maladie, & 
iamais auffi ne refufa rien de tout ce qu’on luy vou- 
loit faire prendre, & iamais n’efcdduifit perfonne de 
ce qu’on defira qu’il fift: ces vertus ne font pas com- 
munes. Outre la mort de ces trois perfonnes d’elite, 
la prife & les mauuais traitemens qu’on a fait au Pere 
Ifaac Iogues, & 4 trois de nos Francois, dont l’vn a 
efté affommé par les Iroquois; la deffaite des Chre- 
{tiens & des Cathecumenes Hurons, le vol qu’on a 
fait de tout ce qu’on enuoyoit l’an paffé, & encore 
cette annee aux pauures ouuriers Euangeliques, qui 
font és nations plus hautes, les hazards, les perils, les 
embufches, ott ces braues Athletes fe iettent tous les 
iours; les morts continuelles ne font que l’acceffoire, 
le principal eft que Dieu foit cognu, qu’il foit aimé, 
que la foy fe plante, & s’amplifie: c’eft la parole, ou | 
la pierre precieufe, pour laquelle il faut vendre, don- 
ner, prodiguer fa vie & fong [sc. fon] fang: ceux-la 
font bien-heureux [274] qui font ce riche aqueft a fi 
bon prix! 

Puis que ie fuis en train, il faut que ie donne quel-. 
que liberté & mon cceur, & 4 ma plume: ie touche 
deux points en paffant deuant que de conclure ce 
chapitre: tous deux me femblent bien confiderables. 
Le premier eft que ce feu & cette ardeur de prodi-. 


eee 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 ' 31 


he did not find in his ship; the pains which one 
suffers in these extremities,—all these never opened 
his lips or loosed his tongue to complain. He was 
accustomed to follow rather the wishes and the in- 
clinations of others than [273] his own. He was so 
accustomed to take the guidance of God, and to 
receive from his hand all that befell him, that 
never did he ask for anything in all his sickness; 
also he never refused anything of all that they would 
have him take, and never denied any one what 
one desired that he should do; these virtues are not 
common. Besides the death of these three elect 
persons, the capture and the evil treatments suffered 
by Father Isaac Jogues, and three of our French- 
men,—one of whom was beaten to death by the 
Iroquois; the defeat of the Huron Christians and Cate- 
chumens; the robbery that occurred, of all that was 
sent last year, and again this year, to the poor 
Gospel laborers who are among the upper nations; the 
risks, the dangers, the ambushes into which these 
brave Athletes plunge every day; the continual 
deaths,—all these are only the accessory: the main 
thing is, that God may be known, that he may be 
loved, that the faith be planted and enlarged. This 
is the word, or the precious stone, for which it is 
necessary to sell, give, lavish, one’s life and one’s 
blood. Blessed are they [274] who make this rich 
acquisition on so good terms! 

Since Iam on the road, I must give some liberty to 
my heart and to my pen: I touch two points, in 
passing, before closing this chapter; both seem to 
me very important. The first is, that this fire and 
this ardor of lavishing one’s blood for Jesus Christ, 
is communicating itself to young men who might 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


guer fon fang pour Iefus-Chrift, fe communique 4 
de ieunes hommés qui auroient traifné leur mife- 
rable vie dedans les vices, s’‘ils eftoient reftez en 
France, & qui paffent pour des Saincts en ce nouueat 
monde, celuy qui a efté affommé des Iroquois, nom- 
mé Goupil, eftoit vn braue Chirurgien, qui auoit 
dedié fa vie, fon coeur, & fa main au feruice des 
pauures Sauuages: ila demeuré quelques annees 4 S. 
Iofeph, ou VYodeur de fes vertus, notammét de fon 
humilité, & de fa charité refiotiit encor les Francois, 
& les Sauuages qui l’ont cognu. Quand on luy parla 
d’aller aux Hurons, fon cceur s’efpanoiiift 4 la penfee 
des dangers qu'il alloit encourir pour fon maiftre: 
enfin il a donné fa vie pour fon amour: mais voicy 
qui accroit noftre eftonnement: vn autre ieune [275] 
Chirurgien bien verfé dans fon art, & bien cognu 
dans 1’Hofpital d’Orleans, ott il a donné des preuues 
de fa vertu, & de fa fuffifance, a voulu prendre la 
place de fon camarade, il eft paffé en la Nouuelle 
France, & moy qui efcri ce dernier chapitre, le voy- 
ant fur le poinct de monter aux Hurds, ie luy repre- 
sétay tous les perils ot il s’alloit ietter: ie preuois 
tout cela, me dift-il, fi mes deffeins ne tendoient 
qu’a la terre, vos paroles me donneroient de 1’efpou- 
uante: mais m6 cceur ne voulant que Dieu, ne craint 
plus rien: 14 deffus il s’embarque atec trois ieunes 
Hurons Chreftiens, refolus A tout ce qu'il plairoit a 
Noftre Seigneur leur enuoyer: nous croyons qu’ils 
ont paffé a la defrobee, au trauers des ennemis, nous 
n’en auons point encor d’affeurance. 

Au temps que les Hurons eftoient plus animez 
contre les Francois, & contre nos Peres, & quiils 
machinoient leur mort, on demanda 4 quelques ieunes 


as q ‘foes a 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 : 33 


have dragged their miserable lives into vices, if they 
had remained in France, and who, in this new world, 
pass for Saints. The one who was beaten to death 
by the Iroquois, named Goupil, was a gallant Sur- 
geon, who had dedicated his life, his heart, and his 
hand to the service of the poor Savages. He lived 
some years at St. Joseph, where the reputation of 
his virtues, especially of his humility and of his 
charity, still gladdens the French and the Savages 
who knew him. When we spoke to him of going to 
the Hurons, his heart expanded at the thought of 
the dangers that he was about to incur for his mas- 
ter; finally, he gave his life for the sake of his love. 
But here is what increases our astonishment: another 
young [275] Surgeon, well versed in his art, and 
well known in the Hospital at Orleans, where he 
has given proofs of his virtue and of his competence, 
has chosen to take the place of his comrade; he has 
crossed into New France; and I who write this last 
chapter, seeing him on the point of going up to the 
Hurons, represented to him all the perils into which 
he was about to plunge. ‘‘I foresee all that,’’ he said 
to me; ‘‘if my designs tended only to the earth, 
your words would give me terror: but my heart, 
desiring only God, fears nothing more.” There- 
upon, he embarks with three young Christian Hu- 
rons, resolved upon all that it might please Our Lord 
to send them. We believe that they have passed 
secretly through the enemy; we have as yet no 
assurance thereof. 

At the time when the Hurons were most irritated 
against the French and against our Fathers, and 
when they were plotting their death, it was asked of 
some young men who had come down from those 


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Not. 25: 


homes defcendus de ces Nations plus hautes, s’ils 
n’e{toient pas bien fatisfaits d’eftre deliurez de ces 
grands dangers, ot la malice des Barbares les auoit 
iettez, [276] [ils refpondirent que les Peres— mserted 
in Quebec edition] prodiguans fi liberalement leurs 
vies, pour la gloire de noftre Seigneur, qu’ils eftoient 
encor tous prefts de leur aller tenir cépagnie, & de 
mourrir auec eux: leur parole ne fut pas vn fimple- 
fon forme de leurs lévrees, ils remonterent la mef{me 
annee, & s’expoferent de nouueau dans les perils, 
qu’ils auoient euitez: ces fentimens & ces actions ne: 
font pas ducreudelanature. Ie veux dire en fecond 
lieu, que les Sauuages ont tous les fubiets, que le 
raifonnement purement humain leur peut fuggerer 
d’auoir de l’eloignement de la foy, ou plutoft de la 
rebuter: c’eft en ce point que Dieu fait voir que la 
conuerfion de ces peuples eft fon ouurage. Depuis 
que nous auons publié la loy de Iefus-Chrift dans ces 
contrees, les fleaux fe font iettez comme 4 la foule. 
Les maladies contagieufes, la guerre, la famine font 
les tyrans qui ont voulu rauir la foy aux fideles, & 
qui l’ont fait hair des infideles. Combien de fois 
nous a-on reproché, que par tout ou nous mettions 
le pied, la mort y entroit auec nous? combien de fois. 
nous a-on dit qu’on n’auoit [277] iamais veu de cala- 
mitez femblables 4 celles qui ont paru, depuis que 
nous parlons de Iefus-Chrift. Vous nous diftes (s’ef- 
crient quelques vns) que Dieu eft plein de bonté, & 
lors que nous nous rendons & luy, il nous maffacre. 
Les Iroquois nos ennemis mortels ne croyent point 
en Dieu, ils n’aymét point les prieres, ils font plus. 
mefchans que les Demons, & cependant ils profperent, 
& depuis que nous quittons les fagons de faire de nos. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 : 35 


upper Nations, whether they were not well satisfied 
to be delivered from those great dangers into which 
the malice of the Barbarians had thrown them; [276] 
[they answered that, since the Fathers were] so free- 
ly lavishing their lives for the glory of our Lord, 
they were again quite ready to go and keep them 
company, and to die with them. Their statement 
was not a mere sound formed by their lips; they 
went up again the same year, and exposed themselves 
anew to the perils which they had avoided. Such 
sentiments and such deeds are not of nature’s growth. 
I wish to say, in the second place, that the Savages 
have all the reasons which purely human argument 
can suggest to them, for having an aversion toward 
the faith, or rather, for rejecting it; it is in this 
point that God shows that the conversion of these 
peoples is his own work. Since we have published 
the law of Jesus Christ in these regions, plagues have 
rushed in asinathrong. Contagious diseases, war, 
famine,—these are the tyrants that have sought to 
wrest the faith from the faithful, and that have 
caused it to be hated by the infidels. How many 
times have we been reproached that, wherever we 
set foot, death came in with us! How many times 
have they told us that they had [277] never seen 
calamities like those which have appeared since we 
speak of Jesus Christ! ‘‘ You tell us’’ (exclaim 
some) ‘‘that God is full of goodness; and then, 
when we give ourselves up to him, he massacres us. 
The Iroquois, our mortal enemies, do not believe in 
God, they do not love the prayers, they are more 
wicked than the Demons,—and yet they prosper; 
and since we have forsaken the usages of our ances- 
tors, they kill us, they massacre us, they burn us,— 


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [NVou. 25 


anceftres, ils nous tuét, ils nous maffacrent, ils nous 
bruflent, ils nous ‘exterminent de fond en comble. 
Quel profit nous peut-il reuenir de prefter l’oreille a 
l’Euangile, puis que la mort & la foy marche quafi 
toufiours de compagnie? Il fe trouue des Chreftiens 
qui refpondent genereufement a ces plaintes. Quand 
la foy nous feroit perdre la vie, eft-cy vn grand mal- 
heur de quitter la terre, pour eftre bien-heureux au 
Ciel? fila mort & la guerre efgorgent les Chreftiens, 
elle n’efpargne non plus les infideles. Ouy, mais 
repartent les autres, les Iroquois ne meurent point, 
& cependant ils ont la priere en horreur. Avant 
[278] que les nouueautez paruffent en ces contrees, 
nous viuions auffi long-temps que les Iroquois: mais 
depuis que quelques-vns ont receu la priere, on ne 
void plus de teftes blanches, nous mourrons a demy 
aage. 

Dieu fe comporte en voftre endroit, leur dift, quel- 
qu’vn, comme vn Pere enuers fon enfant: fi fon 
enfant ne veut point auoir d’efprit, il le chaftie pour 
luy en donner, l’ayant corrigé il iette les verges au 
feu, vn Pere ne fe met pas tant en peine de fes valets, 
que de fes enfans. Dieu vous regarde comme fes 
enfans, il vous veut donner de l’efprit, il fe fert des 
Iroquois, comme d’vn foiiet, pour vous corriger, pour 
vous donner de la foy, pour vous faire auoir recours 
aluy. Quad vous ferez fages, il iettera les verges au 
feu, il chaftiera les Iroquois, s’ils ne s’amendét. 
Helas! difent quelques-vns, que n’a-il commencé par 
les Iroquois? que ne tafchoit-il de leur donner pre- 
mierement de l’efprit: nous en auons defia tat, & 
eux n’en ont point du tout. Il eft le Maiftre, leur 
dift-on, il fait tout ce qu’il [279] veut, il vous pre- 


ee 
-—. 
—— ‘ 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 37 


they exterminate us, root and branch. What profit 
can there come to us from lending ear to the Gospel, 
since death and the faith nearly always march in 
company?’’ There are Christians who generously 
answer these complaints: ‘‘ Though the faith should 
cause us to lose life, is it a great misfortune to leave 
the earth in order to be blest in Heaven? If death 
and war slaughter the Christians, no more do they 
spare the infidels.’’ ‘‘ Yes, but,’’ answer the others, 
‘‘the Iroquois do not die, and yet they hold prayer 
in abomination. Before [278] these innovations. 
appeared in these regions, we lived as long as the 
Iroquois; but, since some have accepted prayer, one 
sees no more white heads,— we die at half age.’’ 
‘““God behaves toward you,’’ was said to them, 
‘like a Father toward his child; if his child will not 
have sense, he punishes it, in order to give it some; 
having corrected it, he throws the rods into the fire. 
A Father does not put himself to so much trouble 
about his servants as about his children. God regards 
you as his children: he wishes to give you sense; he 
uses the Iroquois as a whip, in order to correct you, 
to give you faith, to make you have recourse to him. 
When you shall be wise, he will throw the rods into 
the fire; he will chastise the Iroquois, unless they 
reform.’”’ ‘‘ Alas!’’ say some, ‘‘ why did he not 
begin with the Iroquois? Why did not he try to give 
them sense first? we have so much already, and they: 
have none at all.’’ ‘‘ He is the Master,’ they are 
told; ‘‘he does whatever he [279] will; he prefers: 
you to the Iroquois, he loves you much more, since 
he gives a life all full of pleasures to those among 
you who die after Baptism, and since he casts all the 
Iroquois into the fires,—not one of them believing. 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Wor 25 


fere aux Iroquois, il vous aime bien dauantage, puis 
qu’il donne vne vie toute pleine de plaifirs 4 ceux 
d’entre-vous qui meurét aprés le Baptefme, & qu’il 
precipite tous les Iroquois dans les feux; pas-vn 
d’eux ne croyans en Dieu. Aprés tout on ne void 
quafi aucun Payen, pour opiniaftre qu'il ayt efté 
pendant fa vie, qui ne demande le Baptefme 4 la 
mort, & nonobftant toutes ces calamitez, ces pauures 
gens ne laiffent pas d’embraffer Tefus-Chrift. Ces 
mefmes fleaux & ces mefmes reproches fe rencon- 
troient iadis en la primitiue Eglife. Les humiliations 
font les fourriers qui marquét les logis du grand 
Dieu, & la tribulation nous attire plus fortement, & 
auec bien plus d’affeurace que la confolation: il faut 
abbatre l’orgueil, & la fuperbe de ces peuples, pour 
donner entree A la foy: mais reuenons a nos lettres. 

Nous voyons bien que fi on n’arrefte les Troquots, nous 
ne pouuons pas long-temps Jubfifier, nous ferons neant- 
moins, ie ne dis pas le poffible feulement: mais l imagina- 
ble, pour ne [280] point quitter prife, nous difpofants 
neatmoins a receuoir les ordres qu'il plaira a fa diutne 
Maiefté de nous prefcrire. 

Si les Iroquois ne retardoient point le progrez de 
l’Euangile, s’ils ne tenoient point les aueniies d’vne 
infinité de peuples, qui font dans les nations plus 
hautes, & qui n’ont iamais ouy parler de IEsvs- 
CuHRIsT, s’ils ne menagoient point la Colonie d’vne 
honteufe ruine, & l’Ancienne France d’vne efpece 
d’infamie de n’auoir peu donner de fecours 4 fa 
cadette contre vne poignee de Barbares: en vn mot 
s'ils ne tuoient que les corps, fans endommager le 
falut des ames, nos mal-heurs nous fembleroient 
tolerables: mais qui cognoift la valeur du fang de 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 7 “3 


in God.’’ Afterall, one sees hardly any Pagan, how- 
ever obstinate he may have been during his life, who 
does not ask for Baptism at death; and, notwithstand- 
ing all those calamities, these poor people neverthe- 
less embrace Jesus Christ. These same scourges 
and these same reproaches were, in olden time, 
encountered in the primitive Church. Humiliations 
are the harbingers that mark the dwellings of the 
great God; and tribulation attracts us more strongly 
and with much more certainty than does comfort. 
It is necessary to abase the pride and the haughtiness 
of these peoples, in order to give admission to the 
faith. But let us return to our letters. 

We see well that, if the Iroquois be not checked, we 
cannot long subsist; we will do, nevertheless, 1 do not only 
say our best, but whatever we can contrive, in order not 
[280] to let go our hold,— preparing ourselves, however, to 
receive the orders which it shall please his divine Majesty 
to prescribe for us. 

If the Iroquois did not retard the progress of the 
Gospel; if they did not hold the avenues of approach 
to a vast number of peoples, who are among the 
upper nations, and who have never heard JEsus 
CHRIST mentioned; if they did not threaten the Col- 
ony with a shameful ruin, and Old France with a 
kind of infamy for not having been able to give help 
to her junior against a handful of Barbarians,—in a 
word, if they killed only the bodies, without preju- 
dicing the salvation of the souls, our misfortunes 
would seem to us tolerable; but whoso knows the 
value of the blood of Jesus Curist, knows the price 
and the value of a soul. Let us finish this discourse. 
Here are a few words of a son, written to his father, 
which have but little sweetness as regards the senses, 


————_ =... 


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 25 


IEsvs-CHRIST, cognoift le pris & la valeur d’vne 
ame. Acheuons ce difcours, voicy quatre paroles 
d’vn enfant efcrites A fon pere, qui n’ont guere de 
douceur, pour les fens: mais beaucoup pour l’efprit: 
c’eft vn Religieux de noftre compagnie, qui parle a 
{es plus proches, & qui leur demande, s’2/s ne [281] 
luy portent point de copafsion ad’auoir efté priué du bon- 
heur qu’a receu le Pere Ifaac Togues, tombant entre les 
mains des Iroquois. Ce Pere, dit-il, n’a fait ce voyage 
qu'une feule fois, & tl a fait rencontre de ce bon-heur. Te 
Juis defcendu fix fois & Kebec, & fix fois remonté par les 
mefmes chemins, fans faire ce bon rencontre. le ne fcay 
ce que noftre bon Dieu me garde: mats te m’ eftimerots 
bien-heureux d’auoir trouué vn rencontre paretl, apres 
auoir paffé toute ma vie & fon fainét feruice. La rage de 
nos ennemis augmente noftre merite, & leurs feux noftre 
gloire, lors que nous entrerons dans les Cieux, par cette 
porte, nous aurons plus de force pour les attirer, te les y 
Souhaitte de bon ceur, ne les appellant nos ennemis, gu’ en- 
tant qu’ ils empefchent la propagation de la foy. 


oIcy pour conclufion le fentiment d’vn Sauuage 
Chreftien, auquel comme on reprochoit qu’il 
eftoit pauure, pource qu’il croyoit en Dieu: Quand 
bien [282] cela feroit refpondit-tl, ie ne m’en refouyrots, 
pource que mes richeffes font au Ciel: mats toy qui me 
fais ce reproche, & qui n’as point la foy, tu feras nonob- 
ftant tous tes biens, pauure & miferable, & bruflé dans 
les flammes toute une eternité, il faudroit, dift, celuy qui 
a couché ce bon fentiment dans fes lettres, venir paffer 
icy quelques annees, pour faire cas & efiime dela foy, 
dont nous ne cognotffons pas la valeur, pour lL’ auotr receué 
comme par heritage. 


1642 - 44] RELATION OF 1642-43 ° 41 


but much as regards the spirit: it is a Religious of 
our society, who speaks to his nearest friends, and 
asks them 7f they do not [281] feel compassion for him, to 
have been deprived of the good fortune which Father Isaac 
Jogues has received, by falling into the hands of the 
Iroquois. This Father, he says, has made that journey 
only once, and he has encountered that happiness. I have 
come down six times to Kebec, and six times gone up again 
by the same ways, without meeting that fortunate adven- 
ture. I know not what our good God has in reserve for 
me; but I would esteem myself very happy to find a 
similar encounter, after passing all my life in his holy 
service. The rage of our enemies augments our merit, and 
their fires, our glory; when we shall enter Heaven by that 
gate, we shall have a greater force by which to attract 
them. TI desire them there with good heart,—not calling 
them our enemies, except in so far as they hinder the 


propagation of the faith. 


ERE follows, in conclusion, the sentiment of a 
Christian Savage, who had been reproached 
that he was poor, because he believed in God: ven 
though [282] that were so,— he answered,— I would rejoice 
in tt, because my riches are in Heaven. But thou who 
castest at me this reproach, and who hast not the faith,— 
thou wilt be, notwithstanding all thy goods, poor and mtiser- 
able, and burned in the flames a whole eternity. It 
would be necessary, says he who has noted this good 
sentiment in his letters, to come and spend some years 
here, in order to make account and esteem of the faith,— 
the value of which we do not know, by reason of having 
received it, as it were, by inheritance. 


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 2 


[283] CHAPITRE XIV. 


DE LA DELIURANCE DU PERE ISAAC IOGUES & DE SON 
ARRIUEE EN FRANCE. 


ETTE nouuelle fera d’autant plus agreable 
‘Oe qu’elle eftoit moins attendué. On ne parloit 
plus de ce pauure Pere, qu’a la fagon qu’on 
parle des morts. Quelques-vns le croyoient bruflé 
& deuoré des Iroquois, d’autres le regardoient comme 
vne victime qui n’attendoit plus que le coufteau & la 
dent des Sacrificateurs de Moloc. En effect le Dieu 
des abandonnés l’a fauué par vne Prouidence toute 
particuliere, au moment qu’il eftoit deftiné au feu & 
4 ces autres cruautés qui passent la malice des hom- 
mes, il eft viuant; & fifes mains font racourcies, fon 
coeur eft aggrandy, les fouffrances de fon corps n’ont 
point diminué la force de fon efprit: nous 1’atten- 
dons de iour A autre [Si] l’Imprimeur [284] n’eftoit 
pas fi preffé, nous apprendrions de fa bouche les 
douces voyes que Dieu a tenués pour le deliurer, la 
lettre qu’il recrit de fa captiuité au Pere Charles 
Lalemant, nous en parle affez amplement: mais elle 
ne fatisfait pas & toutes les demandes que nous luy 
pourions faire. Suiuons la neantmoins, car elle 
merite bien fa place dans ce Chapitre. 
le party le propre tour de la Fefte de Noftre Bien heureux 
Pere faint Ignace de la Bourgade, ou i’ eftois captif pour 
Juiure & accompagner quelques Iroquois qut s’en alloient 
premierement en traitte, puts en pefcherie: ayans fait leur 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 43 


[283] CHAPTER XIV. 


OF THE DELIVERANCE OF FATHER ISAAC JOGUES, AND 
HIS ARRIVAL IN FRANCE. 


HIS news will be by so much more agreeable 
4. as it was less expected. This poor Father was 
no longer spoken of, save as one speaks of the 
dead. Some believed him burned and devoured by 
the Iroquois; others regarded him as a victim who 
awaited nothing more but the knife and the teeth of 
the Sacrificers of Moloch. In fact, the God of the for- 
saken saved him by a wholly special Providence, at 
the moment when he was destined to the fire, and 
to those other cruelties which pass the malice of men. 
He is living, and, if his hands are shortened, his 
heart is enlarged,—the sufferings of his body have 
not diminished the strength of his mind: we are 
expecting him from day to day. [If] the Printer 
[284] were not so hurried, we could learn from his 
own lips the pleasant ways which God has taken in 
order to deliver him. The letter which he writes 
again from his captivity to Father Charles Lalemant, 
speaks to us of these quite amply; but it does not 
satisfy all the questions that we might put to him. 
Let us follow it, nevertheless; for it well deserves 
its place in this Chapter. 

I started the very day of the Feast of Our Blessed Father 
saint Ignace, from the Village where I was captive,— 
in order to follow and accompany some Iroquois who were 
going away, first for trade, then for fishing. Having 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 2% 


petit trafic ils s’arrefterent Sept ou huic? lieues au deffous 
d’une habitation des Hollandots, placee fur vne riuiere ou 
nous faifions noftre pefche: comme nous adrefsions des 
embufches aux poiffons, arriue vn bruit qu'une efcotiade 
a’ Iroquois retournee de la chaffe des Hurons, en auoiwt tué 
cing ou fix fur la place, & amené quatre prifonniers, dont 
les deux eftoient defia bruflez dans nofire Bourgade, auec 
des cruautez extraordinatres: a cette nouuelle mon ceur 
fut transpercé [285] d’vne douleur tres-amere & tres- 
Jenfible, de ce que te n'auots point veu, ny confole, ny 
baptisé ces pauures victimes, fi bien qu’ apprehendant qu'il 
n arriuafe quelque autre chofe de femblable en mon abfence, 
te dy & une bonne vieille femme qui pour fon dge & pour 
le foin qu'elle auoit de moy, & pour la compafsion qu'elle 
me portoit, m’appelloit fon nepueu, & moy te l appellors 
ma tante, te luy dy donc, Ma tante te voudrots bien re- 
tourner en nostre Cabane, te m’ennuye beaucoup icy, ce 
n'eftoit pas que t’attendiffe plus de douceur & moins de 
peine en noftre Bourgade, ou ie Jouffrois un martyr contt- 
nuel, eftant contraint de voir de mes yeux les horribles 
cruautez qui s’y exercent: mais mon ceur ne pouuort 
fouffrir la mort d’ aucun homme fans que te luy procuraffe 
le fainét Baptefme, cette bonne femme me dit vas ten 
donc mon nepueu, puts que tu t’ennutes icy, prends dequoy 
manger en chemin: te m’embarquay dans le premier Canot 
gui remontoit a la Bourgade, toufiours conduit & toufiours 
accompagné des Iroquois, arriués que nous fufmes en 
l habitation des Hollandois, par oi tl nous falloit paffer, 
2’ apprends que toute nofire Bourgade eft animée [286] contre 
les Francois, & qu’on n’attendoit plus que mon retour pour 
nous brufler, voicy le fubie& de cette nouuelle. Entre 
plufieurs bandes a’ Iroquois, qui eftotent allez en guerre contre 
les Francois, contre les Algonquins, & contre les Hurons, 


—~jp oo 


1642 - 44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 45 


accomplished their little traffic, they stopped at a place seven 
or eight leagues below a settlement of the Dutch, which is 
located on a river where we carried on our fishing. While 
we were setting snares for the fish, there came a rumor 
that a squad of Iroquois, returned from pursutt of the 
Hurons, had killed five or six on the spot, and taken four 
prisoners, two of whom had been already burned in our 
Village, with cruelties extraordinary. At this news, my 
heart was pierced through [285] with a most bitter and 
sharp pain, because I had not seen, or consoled, or baptized 
those poor victims. Consequently, fearing lest some other 
like thing should happen in my absence, I said to a good old 
woman,— who, by reason of her age, and the care that she 
had for me, and the compassion that she felt toward me, 
called me her nephew, and I called her my aunt,—TI then 
said to her: ‘* My aunt, I would much like to return to 
our Cabin; I grow very weary here.’’ It was not that I 
expected more ease and less pain in our Village,—where I 
suffered a continual martyrdom, being constrained to see 
with my eyes the horrible cruelties which are practiced 
there; but my heart could not endure the death of any man 
without my procuring him holy Baptism. That good 
woman said tome: ‘‘Go then, my nephew, since thou art 
weary here; take something to cat on the way.’’ TI em- 
barked in the first Canoe that was going up to the Village,— 
always conducted and always accompanied by the Iroquois. 
Having arrived, as we did, in the settlement of the Dutch, 
through which it was necessary for us to pass, I learn that 
our whole Village is excited [286] against the French, 
and that only my return is awaited, for them to burn 
us. Now for the cause of such news. Among several 
bands of Iroquois, who had gone to war against the French, 
the Algonquins, and the Hurons, there was one which took 
the resolution to go round about Richelieu, in order to 


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2 


al s’en trouua vne gui prit la refolution d’aller a Ll entour 
de Richelieu, pour efpier les Francois & les Sauuages 
leurs allies, vn certain Huron de cette bande pris par les 
Hiroquois, & habitué parmy eux, me vint demander des 
lettres pour les porter aux Francois, efperant peut eftre en 
JSurprendre quelqu’vn par cette amorce: mats comme te ne 
doutots pas que nos Francois ne fuffent Jur leurs gardes, 
& que te voyots a’ ailleurs qu'il eftott important que te leur 
donnaffe quelques auis des deffeins & des armes & des 
defloyautez de nos ennemis, te trouuay moyen ad’auoir vn 
bout de papier pour leur efcrire, les Hollandots me fatfants 
cette charité. Te cognoiffois fort bien les dangers on te 
m’ expofois, te nignorots pas que s'il arriuoit quelque 
difgrace a ces guerriers, qu'on men ferot refponfable, & 
gu’on en accuferoit mes lettres, te preuoyots ma mort: 
mais elle me fembloit douce & agreable, employée pour le 
bien public, & pour [287] la confolation de nos Frangots, 
& des pauures Sauuages qui efcoutent la parole de Noftre 
Seigneur. Mon ceur ne fut faifi d’ aucune crainte, a la 
veue de tout ce qui en pourroit arriuer, puis qu'il y alloit 
de la gloire de Dieu: ie donnay donc ma lettre a ce teune 
guerrier qui ne retourna point. L’hiftoire que fes cama- 
rades ont rapportee, dit qu’illa porta au fort de Richelieu, 
& qu'aufsi toft que les Francots Veurent veue qu'tils tire- 
rent le Canon fur eux, ce qui les efpouuanta tellement que 
la plus part s’enfuyrent tous nuds, qu’ils abandonnerent 
l'un de leurs Canots, dans lequel il y auott trots arquebufes 
de la poudre & du plomb, & quelque autre bagage: ces 
nouuelles apportées dans la Bourgade, on crie tout haut 
gue mes lettres ont efté caufes qu'on les a traittez de la 
Sorte: le bruit s’en repand par tout, tl vient 1ufques a mes 
oreilles: on me reproche que tay fait ce mauuats coup; on 
ne parle que de me brufler, & fite me fuffe trouué dans 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 4a 


spy on the French and the Savages, their allies. A certain 
Huron of this band, taken by the Hiroquots, and settled 
among them, came to ask me for letters, in order to carry 
them to the French,— hoping, perhaps, to surprise some one 
of them by this bait; but, as I doubted not that our French 
would be on their guard, and as I saw, moreover, that tt 
was important that I should give them some warning of the 
designs, the arms, and the treachery of our enemies, I 
found means to secure a bit of paper tn order to write to 
them,—the Dutch according me this charity. I knew 
very well the dangers to which I was exposing myself; I 
was not ignorant that, if any misfortune happened to those 
warriors, they would make me responsible therefor, and 
would blame my letters for it. Ianticipated my death; 
but it seemed to me pleasant and agreeable, employed for 
the public good, and for [287] the consolation of our French 
and of the poor Savages who listen to the word of Our 
Lord. My heart was seized with no dread, at the sight of 
all that might happen therefrom, since tt was a matter of 
the glory of God; I accordingly gave my letter to that 
young warrior, who did not return. The story which his 
comrades have brought back, says that he carried tt to the 
fort of Richelieu, and that, as soon as the French had seen 
it, they fired the Cannon upon them. This frightened them 
so that the greater part fled, all naked,— abandoning one 
of their Canoes, in which there were three arquebuses, 
powder and lead, and some other baggage. These tidings 
being brought into the Village, they clamor aloud that my 
letters have caused them to be treated like that; the rumor 
of it spreads everywhere,—tt comes even to my ears. 
They reproach me that I have done this evil deed; they 
speak only of burning me; and, if I had chanced to be in 
the Village at the return of those warriors, fire, rage, 
and cruelty would have taken my life. For climax of 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nov. 2 


la Bourgade au retour de ces gens de guerre; le feu, la 
rage & la cruauté m'auroit ofté la vie. Pour redouble- 
ment de malheur, vne autre trouppe reuenant d’aupres de 
Mont-real, ou ils auoient dreffé des embufches aux Fran- 
cois, difoit qu'on auoit tué [288] l'un de leurs hommes, 
& qu'on en auoit bleffé deux autres: chacun me fatfott 
coulpable de fes mauuatfes rencontres, ils estotent comme 
forcenez de rage, m'attendans auec impatience. I efcoutors 
tous ces bruits, m’offrant fans referue a noftre Seigneur, 
& me remettant en tout & par tout a fa tres-faincte 
volonté. Le Capitaine de l'habitation des Hollandots ou 
nous eftions: n'ignorant pas le mauuais deffein de ces 
Barbares, & fcachant a’ ailleurs que Monfieur le Cheualter 
de Motmagny auoit empefché les Sauuages de la Nouuelle 
France, de venir tuér des Hollandois, m’ ouurtt les moyens 
de me fauuer, voila me, dit il, vn vaiffeau a Pancre, gut 
partira dans peu de tours, tettez vous dedans fecretement, 
tl s’en va premierement a la Virginie, & de la il vous 
portera & Bordeaux, ou & la Rochelle, ou il dott aborder, 
ayant remercié auec beaucoup de refpect de fa courtotfe, 
ie luy dis, que les Iroquois fe doutans bien qu'on aurott 
fauorifé ma retraitte, pourroient caufer quelques dimages 
a fes gés. Non, né, refpod-il, ne craignez rien, lL occafion 
est belle, embarquez-vous, tamais vous ne trouuerez de voye 
plus affeuree pour vous fauuer. Mon ceur demeura per- 
plex & ces paroles, doutant [289] s’tl n'eftotent point a 
propos pour la plus grande gloire de noftre Seigneur, que 
ie m'expofe au danger du feu, & & la furte de ces 
Barbares, pour aider au falut de quelque ame. Te luy dis 
donc, Monfieur laffaire me femble de telle tmporiance, 
que te ne vous puis respondre fur le champ: donnez-moy 
s'ilvous plaift, la nuitt pour y penfer, ie larecommanderay a 
noftre Seigneur, t examineray les ratfons de part & d autre, 


OO ————— lc ll 


” 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 49 


misfortune, another troop —coming back from Mont-real, 
where they had set ambushes for the French—said that 
[288] one of their men had been killed, and two others 
wounded. Each one held me guilty of these adverse en- 
counters; they were fairly mad with rage, awaiting me 
with impatience. I listened to all these rumors, offering 
myself without reserve to our Lord, and committing myself 
in all and through all to his most holy will. The 
Captain of the Dutch settlement where we were,—not being 
ugnorant of the evil design of those Barbarians, and know- 
ing, moreover, that Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny 
had prevented the Savages of New France from coming 
to kill some Dutch,— disclosed to me means for escape.” 
“‘Vonder,’’ said he to me, ‘‘is a vessel at anchor, which 
will sail in a few days; enter into tt secretly. It ts 
going first to Virginia, and thence it will carry you to 
Bordeaux or to la Rochelle, where it ts to land.’’ 
Having thanked him, with much regard for his courtesy, 
L tell him that the Iroquois, probably suspecting that 
some one had favored my retreat, might cause some 
damages to his people. ‘‘ No, no,’’ he answers, ‘‘ fear 
nothing; this opportunity ts favorable; embark; you will 
never find a more certain way to escape.’ My heart 
remained perplexed at these words, wondering [289] if 
wt were not expedient for the greater glory of our Lord, 
that I expose myself to the danger of the fire and to the 
Jury of those Barbarians, in order to aid in the salvation 
of some soul. I said to him then: ‘‘ Monsieur, the affair 
seems to me of such importance that I cannot answer you at 
once, give me, tf you please, the night to think of wt. TI 
will commend it to our Lord; I will examine the arguments 
on both sides; and to-morrow morning I will tell you my 
Jinal resolution.’’ He granted me my request with aston- 
ashment, I spent the night in prayers, greatly beseeching our 


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 25 


& demain matin ie vous diray ma derniere refolution; 
m' ayant accordé ma demande auec eftonnement, te paffay 
la nuiét en prieres, fuppliant beaucoup nofire Seigneur, 
qu'il ne me laiffaft point prendre de conclufion de moy- 
mefme, qu'il me donnaft lumiere pour cognotfire fa tres- 
Sainéte volonté, qu'en tout & par tout, te la voulows /uiure, 
iufques a eftre bruflé a petit feu. Les raifons qui me 
pouuoient retenir dans le pays eftoient la confideration des 
Francois, & des Sauuages: te fentois de l'amour pour eux, 
& un grand defir de les afsister, fi bien que v'auots refolu 
de paffer le refte de mes tours dans cette captiutté, pour 
leur falut: mais ie voyois la face des affaires toute changee. 

Premierement pour ce qui regardoit nos trois Francois 
amenez captifs dans le pays [290] aufst bien que moy: 
L’un deux appellé René Goupil, auott defia esté maffacré 
a mes pieds: ce teune homme auott la pureté dun Ange. 
Henry qu'on auott pris & Mont-Real, s’en estott enfuy dans 
les bois. Comme il regardott les cruautez qu'on exercott 
fur deux pauures Hurons roftis a petit feu: quelques 
Iroquois luy dirent, qu'on luy feroit le mefme traictement, 
& & moy aufsi, quand ie ferois de retour: ces menaces le 
firent refoudre de fe ietter plutoft dans le danger de mourir 
de faim dans les bois; ou d’eftre deuoré par quelque befte 
Sauuage que d’endurer les tourmens que ces demy-Demons 
faifoient fouffrir. Il y auoit defia Sept tours qu'il ne 
paroiffoit plus. Quant & Guillaume Coufture, te ne voyots 
guafi plus de moyen de l’aider: car on lauott mis en vne 
bourgade eloignee de celle oi v’ eftois, & les Sauuages Ll oc- 
cupotent tellement deca de la, que te ne le pouuors plus 
rencontrer.  Adiouftez que luy-mefme m’auoit tenu ce 
difcours: Mon Pere tafchez de vous fauuer, fi toft que te 
ne vous verray plus, ie trouueray les moyens ad euader. 


Vous /cauez bien que te ne demeure dans cette captiuité, 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 51 


Lord that he should not allow me to reach a conclusion by 
_ myself, that he should give me light, in order to know his 
most holy will; that in all and through all I wished to 
follow tt, even to the extent of being burned at a slow fire. 
The reasons which might keep me in the country were con- 
sideration for the French and for the Savages; I felt love 
for them, and a great desire to assist them,— insomuch that 
I had resolved to spend the remainder of my days tn that 
captivity, for their salvation, but I saw the face of affairs 
quite changed. 

In the first place, as regarded our three Frenchmen, led 
captive into the country [290] as well as I: one of them, 
named René Goupil, had already been murdered at my feet; 
this young man had the purity of an Angel. Henry, whom 
they had taken at Mont-Real, had fled into the woods. 
While he was looking at the cruelties which were practiced 
upon two poor Hurons, roasted at a slow fire, some Iroguots 
told him that he would receive the same treatment, and I, 
too, when I should return, these threats made him resolve 
rather to plunge into the danger of dying from hunger in 
the woods, or of being devoured by some wild beast, than to 
endure the torments which these half Demons inflicted. It 
was already seven days since he had disappeared. As 
for Guillaume Cousture, I saw scarcely any further way of 
aiding him,— for they had placed him in a village far 
rom the one where I was; and the Savages so occupted tt 
on the hither side of that place, that I could no longer meet 
him. Add that he himself had addressed me in these 
words: ‘‘ My Father, try to escape; as soon as I shall see 
you no more, I shall find the means to get away. You 
well know that I stay in this captivity only for the love of 
you; make, then, your efforts to escape, for I cannot think 
of my liberty and of my life unless [291| 1 see you im 
safety.’’ Furthermore, this good youth had been given to 


a 
“ 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 25 


gue pour l'amour de vous: fattes donc vos efforts de vous 
fauuer: car te ne puis penfer a ma liberté, & & ma vte 
gue [291] te me vous voye en affurance. De plus ce bon 
jeune homme auott efté donné avn vieillard, qui m’affura 
gu’il le laifferoit aller en paix, fr te pouuots obtenir ma 
deliurance, fi bien que ie ne voyois plus de ratfon gut 
m obligeaft de refter pour les Francois. 

Pour les Sauuages veftois dans Vimpofsibilité, & hors 
d’efperance de les pounotr inftruire: car tout le pays estott 
tellement anime contre moy, que ie ne trouuois plus aucune 
ouuerture pour leur parler, ou pour les gagner, & les 
Algoquins, & les Hurds eftotét contrains de s’eloigner de 
moy, comme d'une victime destinee au feu, de peur de par- 
ticiper & la haine & & la rage que me portotet les Troquots. 
Te voyois d’ ailleurs que i’ auois quelque cognotffance de leur 
langue, que te cognoiffois leur pays, & leur force, que 2é 
pouuois peut-eftre mieux procurer leur falut par d'autres 
voyes, qu'en refiant parmy eux. Il me venoit en Lefprit 
que toutes ces cognoiffances mourrotent auec moy, fi te ne me 
Sauuois; ces miferables auotent fi peu d’enute de nous de- 
liurer, qu’ ils commirent une perfidie contre le droit & la 
couftume de toutes ces nations: Vn Sauuage du pays des 
Sokokiots, alliez des Iroquois, ayant efté pris par les haults 
Algonquins, & [292] mené prifonnier aux trots Riuieres, 
ou & Kebec, fut deliuré & mis en liberté, par lentremife 
de Monfieur le Gouuerneur de la Nouuelle France, a la 
follicitation de nos Peres. Ce bon Sauuage voyant que les 
Francois luy auoient fauué la vie, enuoya au mois ad’ Auril, 
de beaux prefens, afin qu’on deliuraft pour le moins l'un 
des Francois: les Iroquois retinrent les prefens, fans en 


mettre pas un en liberté: deloyauté, qui eft peut-efire fans 


exéple parmy ces peuples: car ils gardent inutolablement 
cette loy, que quiconque touche ou accepte le prefent qu'on 


ee ee 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 53 


an old man, who assured me that he would allow him to go 
in peace, tf I could obtain my deliverance; consequently 
I saw no further reason which obliged me to remain on 
account of the French. 

As for the Savages, I was without power and beyond 
hope of being able to instruct them; for the whole country 
was so irritated against me that I found no more any open- 
ing to speak to them, or to win them; and the Algonquins 
and the Hurons were constrained to withdraw from me, 
as from a victim destined to the fire, for fear of sharing 
in the hatred and rage which the Iroguots felt against 
me. Il vrealized, moreover, that I had some acquaintance 
with their language; that I knew their country and their 
strength; that I could perhaps better procure thetr salvation 
by other ways than by remaining among them. It came 
tomy mind that all this knowledge would die with me, if I 
did not escape. These wretches had so little inclination to 
deliver us, that they committed a treachery against the law 
and the custom of all these nations. A Savage from the 
country of the Sokokiois, allies of the Iroquois, having 
been seized by the upper Algonguins and [292] taken a 
prisoner to the three Rivers, or to Kebec, was delivered and 
set at liberty by the mediation of Monsieur the Governor of 
New France, at the solicitation of our Fathers. This good 
Savage, seeing that the French had saved his life, sent, in 
the month of April, some fine presents, to the end that they 
should deliver at least one of the French. The Troquots 
retained the presents, without setting one of them at liberty, 
which treachery is perhaps unexampled among these peo- 
ples,— for they inviolably observe this law, that whoever 
touches or accepts the present which is made to him, ts 
bound to fulfill what is asked of him through that present. 
This is why, when they are unwilling to grant what ts 
desired, they send back the presents or make others in place 


— 


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 25 


luy fait, doit executer ce qu'on luy demande par ce prefent: 
c'est pourquoy quand tls ne veulent pas accorder ce qu'on 
defire, ils renuoyent les prefens ou en font d autres en la 
place: mais pour reuentr & mon propos, ayant balance 
deuant Dieu, auec tout le degagement qui m’'eftort 
poffible, les ratfons qui me portoient a refter parmy 
ces Barbares, ou & les quitter, Vay creu que nofire 
Seigneur auroit plus agreable, que te priffe Poccafion 
de me fauuer. Le tour eftant venu i allay faluér Monfeur 
le Gouuerneur Hollandots, & luy declaray les penfees que 
’auois pris deuant Dieu, il mande les principaux du 
nauire, leur fignifie fes intentions, & les exhorte [293] 4 
me receuoir, & & me tenir caché: en vn mot a me repaffer 
en Europe. Ils refpondent; que fire peux vne Sots mettre 
le pied dans leur vaiffeau, que te Juts en affurance, que te 
n'en fortiray point que te ne fois & Bourdeaux, ou a la 
Rochelle. Sus donc, me dit le Gouuerneur, retournez-vous 
en auec les Sauuages, & fur le foir, ou dans la nutct, 
derobez vous doucement, & tirez vers la riutere, vous y 
trouuerez un petit bateau, que ie feray tenir tout pref, 
pour vous porter fecrettement au Nauire. Apres mes tres- 
humbles aétions de graces, & tous ces Mefsieurs, te me- 
floignay des Hollandois, pour mieux cacher mon deffein: 
Jur le foir ie me retiray auec dix ou douze Troquots dans 
une grange, ou nous paffames la nurci, auparauant que de 
me coucher, te forty de ce lieu, pour voir par quel endrort 
ie pourrois plus facilement efchapper. Les chiens des 
Hollandois, eftans pour lors deftachez accourent & moy: 
l'un deux grand & puiffant fe tette fur ma tambe que 
i’auois nué & me Ll’ offenca notablement, ie rentre au plutofe 
dans la grange, les Iroquois la fermét fortement: & pour 
me mieux garder, fe viennent coucher aupres de moy: 
notamment vn certain qui auoit quelque charge de me veiller, 


er. 
a ] 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 ° 55 


of them. But to return to my subject,—having weighed 
before God, with all the impartiality in my power, the 
reasons which inclined me to remain among those Barba- 
rians or to leave them, I believed that our Lord would be 
better pleased if I should take the opportunity to escape. 
Daylight having come, I went to greet Monsieur the 
Dutch Governor, and declared to him the opinions that 
I had adopted before God. He summons the chief men 
of the ship, signifies to them his intentions, and exhorts 
them [293] to receive me, and to keep me concealed,— 
im a word, to convey me back to Europe. They 
answer that, tf I can once set foot in their vessel, I am in 
safety; that I shall not leave it until I reach Bourdeaux 
or la Rochelle. ‘‘Well, then,’’ the Governor said to me, 
“‘return with the Savages, and toward the evening, or in 
the night, steal away softly and move toward the river; 
you will find there a little boat which I will have kept all 
ready to carry you secretly to the Ship.” After very 
humbly returning thanks to all those Gentlemen, I with- 
drew from the Dutch, in order better to conceal my design. 
Toward evening, I retired with ten or twelve Iroquois into 
a barn, where we passed the night. Before lying down, 
I went out of that place, to see in what quarter I might 
most easily escape. The dogs of the Dutch, being then 
untied, run up tome; one of them, large and powerful, 
flings himself upon my leg, which ts bare, and seriously 
injures it. I return immediately to the barn; the 
Iroquois close it securely, and, the better to guard me, 
come ta lie down beside me,—especially a certain man 
who had been charged to watch me. Seeing myself 
[294] beset with those evil creatures, and the barn well 
closed, and surrounded with dogs, which would betray me 
if I essayed to go out, I almost believed that I could not 
escape. I complained quietly to my God, because, having 


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vo. 25 


me voyant [294] obfedé de ces mauuats corps, & la grange 
bien fermee, & entourree de chiens, qui m'accuferotent fr 
ie pretendois fortir, te creu quafi que te ne pourrots 
euader, ie me plaignots doucement a mon Dieu, de ce que 
m’ayat donné la penfee de me fauuer, Concluferat vias 
meas lapidibus quadris, & in loco {patiofo pedes meos: 
Il en bouchoit les voyes & les chemins. Ie paffay encore 
cette autre nuitt fans dormir, le tour approchant 
i’ entendy les cogs chanter: bien toft apres un valet du 
laboureur Hollandois qui nous auoit hebergé dans fa 
grange, y eftant entré par te ne fcay qu'elle porte, 
ie l’'aborday doucement, & luy fis figne (car te n’entendots 
pas fon Flamand) qui empefchaft les chiens de tapper, wl 
Sort incontinent, & moy apres, ayant pris au prealable 
tout mon meuble qui confiftoit en un petit office de la Verge, 
en un petit Gerfon, & une Croix de bois que te m’estots 
faite, pour conferuer la memoire des fouffrances de mon 
Sauueur, eftant hors de la grange, fans auotr fait aucun 
bruit, ny efueillé mes gardes, te paffe par deffus une bar- 
riere qui fermott T’ enclos de la matrfon, te cours droit a la 
riuiere on eftoit le Nauire: c’eft tout le Seruice que me pit 
rendre, ma iambe bien bleffee: car wl [295] ¥ auoit bien vn 
bon quart de lietie de chemin a faire: Ie trouuay le batteau 
comme on m’auoit dift: mais la mer seftant retiree, 
eftoit a Sec, ie le pouffe pour le mettre a l'eau, nen pouuant 
venir a bout, pour fa pefanteur, te crie au Nautre, qu'on 
amene l'efquif, pour me paffer, point de nouuelle: te ne 
Seay fi on m’entendott, quoy que cen foit, perfonne ne 
parust, le iour cependant commencoit & defcouurir aux 
Troquois le larcin que te faifors de moy mefme, te craignots 
gu’ils ne me furpriffent dans ce delit innocent, laffé de 
crier te retourne au batteau, te prie Dieu d' augmenter mes j 
forces: te fay fi bien, le tournant bout pour bout, & le 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . BT 


given me the tdea of escaping, Concluserat vias meas 
lapidibus quadris, et in loco spatioso pedes meos: 
He was stopping up the ways and paths of it. TI spent 
also that second night without sleeping; the day approach- 
ing, I heard the cocks crow. Soon afterward, a servant 
of the Dutch farmer who had lodged us in his barn, having 
entered it by some door or other,—TI accosted him softly, 
and made signs to him (for I did not understand his 
Flemish), that he should prevent the dogs from yelping. 
He goes out at once, and I after him, having previously 
taken all my belongings,— which consisted of a little office 
of the Virgin, of a little Gerson,*® and a wooden Cross that 
I had made for myself, in order to preserve the memory of 
the sufferings of my Savior. Being outside of the barn, 
without having made any noise, or awakened my guards, 
I cross over a fence which confined the enclosure about the 
house; I run straight to the river where the Ship was,— 
this 1s all the service that my leg, much wounded, could 
render me: for there [295] was surely a good quarter of a 
league of road to make. I found the boat as they had 
told me, but, the water having subsided, tt was aground. 
I push it, in order to set it afloat; not being able to effect 
this, on account of its weight, I call to the Ship, that they 
bring the skiff to ferry me,—but no news. TI know not 
whether they heard me; at all events, no one appeared. 
The daylight meanwhile was beginning to discover to the 
Lroquois the theft that I was making of myself; I feared 
that they might surprise me in this innocent misdemeanor. 
Weary of shouting, I return to the boat; I pray God to 
increase my strength; I do so well, turning it end for end, 
and push it so hard that I get it to the water. Having 
made it float, I jump into it, and go all alone to the Ship, 
where I go on board without being discovered by any 
Lroquois. They lodge me forthwith down in the hold; and, 


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


pouffe fi fortement que te le mets a l'eau, layant fattt 
flotter ie me wette dedans, & m’en vay tout feul au Naurre, 
ou t'aborday fans efire defcouuert ad’ aucun Iroquois: on 
me loge aufsi-toft a fond de cale, & pour me cacher, on 
met un grand coffre fur Vefcoutille. Ie fus deux tours & 
deux nuidts dans le ventre de ce vaiffeau, auec telle tncom- 
modité, que te penfay eftouffer & mourir de puanteur. Te 
me fouuins pour lors, du pauure Ionas, & te priay noftre 
Seigneur, Ne fugerem a facie Domini: gue ze ne [296] 
me cachaffe point deuant fa face, & que te ne m' efloignaffe 
point de fes volontez: ains au contraire, infatuaret omnia 
confilia quze non effe[n]t ad fuam gloriam: Je le priots 
de renuer fer tous les confeils qut ne tenderotent point a fa 
gloire, & de m'arrefter dans le pays de ces infideles, s'il 
n' approuuoit point ma retraite, & ma fuite. La feconde 
nuia de ma prifon volontatre, le Mintfire des Hollandots 
me vint dire que les Iroquois auowent bien fait du brutét, 
& que les Hollandotis habitans du pays auotent peur gu’ils 
ne miffent le feu dans leurs maifons, ou quils ne tiaffent 
leurs beftiaux: ils ont raifon de les craindre, puis qu’ts 
les ont armes de bonnes arquebufes. A cela te responds, fi 
propter me orta eft tempeftas, proijcite me in mare: 
Si la tempefte s’eft eleuee & mon occafon, te fuis prefe de 
l’ appaifer, en perdat la vie, te n’ auots tamais eu de volonté 
de me fauuer, au preiudice du moindre homme de leur 
habitation. Enjfin il me fallut fortir de ma cauerne: tous 
les Nautonniers s’en formalifoient, difans qu'on m’ auott 
donné parole d’affurance, au cas que te puffe mettre le pied 
dans le Nauire, & qu'on m’en retirowt au moment gu’ il 
my faudroit amener, fi te n'y estois pas, que te mettors 
[sc. m’eftots| mis en danger [297] de la vie en me fau- 
uant fur leur parole, qu’il la fallow tenir quoy qu'il 
en coutaft, ie priay qu'on me laifaft fortir, puis que le 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 } 59 


in order to conceal me, they put a great chest over the 
hatchway. I was two days and two nights in the belly of 
that vessel, with such discomfort that I thought I would 
suffocate and die with the stench. I remembered then poor 
Jonas, and I prayed our Lord, Ne fugerem & facie 
Domini,— that 1 [296] might not hide myself before his 
Jace, and that I might not withdraw far from his wishes; 
but on the contrary, infatuaret omnia consilia que non 
essent ad suam gloriam,—/J/ prayed him to overthrow 
all the counsels which should not tend to his glory, and to 
detain me in the country of those infidels, tf he did not 
approve my retreat and my flight. The second night of 
my voluntary prison, the Minister of the Dutch* came to 
tell me that the Iroquots had indeed made some disturbance, 
and that the Dutch inhabitants of the country were afraid 
that they would set fire to their houses, or kill their cattle; 
they have reason to fear them, since they have armed them 
with good arquebuses. To that I answer: Si propter me 
orta est tempestas, projicite me in mare: ‘‘// the storm 
has risen on my account, lam ready to appease wt by losing 
my life;’’ I had never the wish to escape to the prejudice 
of the least man of their settlement. Finally, it was 
necessary to leave my cavern; all the Mariners were 
offended at this, saying that the promise of security had 
been given me in case I could set foot in the Ship, and that 
I was being withdrawn at the moment when it would be 
requisite to bring me thither tf I were not there; that I 
had put myself in peril (297) of life by escaping upon their 
word; that it must needs be kept, whatever the cost. I 
begged that I be allowed to go forth, since the Captain 
who had disclosed to me the way of my flight was asking 
for me. I went to find him in his house, where he kept 
me concealed, these goings and these comings having oc- 
curred by night, I was not yet discovered. I might indeed 


~s 


—— 


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Nou. % 


Capitaine qui m’auott ouuert le chemin de ma futtte, me 
demandott, ie le fus trouuer en fa matfon, ou il me tint 
caché: ces allees & ces venues s'eftant faites la nutct, te 
n’eftois point encore defcouuert: z’aurots bien ph alleguer 
quelques ratfons en tous ces rencontres: mats cen eftoit pas 
a moy & parler en ma propre caufe, fi bien & fuiure les 
ordres d'autruy, que te fubiffois de bon ceur. Enfin le 
Capitaine me dit qu'il falloit doucement ceder & la tem- 
pefte, & attédre que les efprits des Sauuages fuffent ad- 
doucis, & que tout le monde eftoit de cét aduts: Me votla 
donc prifonnier volontaire en fa matfon a’ ou te vous refcry 
la prefente. Que fi vous me demandez mes penfees dans 
tous ces rencontres, te vous dtiray. 

Premierement que ce Nautire qui m’auoit voulu fauuer 
la vie, eft party fans moy. 

Secondement fi N. Seigneur ne me protege d'une fagon 
quafi miraculeufe, les Sauuages gui vont & viennent icy a 
tous moments, me defcouuriront, & fi tamats ils fe perfua- 
dent, que te ne fois point party, ul faudra de neceffité me 
remettre entre leurs mains: or s’ils [298] auotent une telle 
rage contre moy, auant ma futtte, quel traitement me 
feront-ils, me voyant retombé dans leur pouuotr, te ne 
mourray point d’vne mort commune: le feu, la rage & les 
cruautez qu’tls tnuentent, m arracheront la vie, Dieu fort 
beny pour iamais. Nous fommes inceffamment dans le 
Sein de fa diuine & toufiours adorable prouidence, Vettri 
capilli capitis numerati funt: nolite timere: multis. 
pafferibus meliores eftis vos quorum vnus non cadet 
{uper terram fine patre veftro. Celuy qui a foin des 
petits oifeaux de l’air ne nous met pas en oubly, il y a defia 
douze tours que te fuis caché, il eft bien difficile qu'un 
mauuats tour ne vienne tufques a moy. 

En trotfie/me lieu vous voyez les grands befoins que nous 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 61 


have alleged some reasons in all these encounters; but it 
was not for me to speak in my own cause, but rather to 
Sollow the orders of others, to which I submitted with good 
heart. Finally, the Captain told me that it was necessary 
to yteld quietly to the storm, and wait until the minds of 
the Savages should be pacified; and that every one was of 
this opinion. So there I was, a voluntary prisoner in his 
house, from which Iam writing back to you the present 
letter. And tf you ask my thoughts in all these adventures, 
I will tell you. 

First, that that Ship which had wished to save my life, 
satled without me. 

Secondly, tf Our Lord do not protect me in a manner 
wellnigh miraculous, the Savages, who go and come here 
at every moment, will discover me; and tf ever they con- 
vince themselves that I have not gone away, it will be 
necessary to return into their hands. Now, tf they [298] 
had such a rage against me before my flight, what 
treatment will they infltct on me, seeing me fallen back 
into their power? I shall not die a common death, the fire, 
their rage, and the cruelties which they invent, will tear 
away my life. God be blessed forever. We are incessantly 
tn the bosom of his divine and always adorable providence. 
Vestri capilli capitis numerati sunt: nolite timere: 
multis passeribus meliores estis vos quorum unus 
non cadet super terram sine patre vestro; he who has 
care for the little birds of the air does not cast us into 
oblivion. It is already twelve days that I have been 
concealed,— it is quite improbable that misfortune will 
reach me. 

In the third place, you see the great need that we have 
of your prayers and of the holy Sacrifices of all our 
Fathers; procure us this alms everywhere, Ut reddat me 
Dominus idoneum ad se amandum, fortem ad patien- 


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


auons de vos prieres, & des fainéts Sacrifices de tous nos 
Peres, procurez nous cette aumofne par tout. Vt reddat 
me Dominus idoneum ad fe amandum, fortem ad 
patiendum, conftantem ad perfeuerandum in fuo 
amore, & feruitio: afin que Dieu me rende propre, & 
bré difpofé pour l’aimer, qu'il me réde fort & courageux, 
pour fouffrir, & pour endurer, & qu'il me donne vne 
genereufe confiance, pour perfeuerer en [299] fon amour, 
& en fon feruice: c’eft ce quit te Souhaitterots uniquement 
auec vn petit Nouueau Teftament d’ Europe: Priez pour 
ces pauures nations, quit s’entrebruflent, & qui s entre- 
mangent, a ce gu'elles viennent enfin a la cognoiffance de 
leur Createur, pour luy rendre le tribut de leur amour, 
Memor fum veftri in vinculis meis: ze ne vous oublie 
pas, ma captiutté ne peut enchat/ner ma memotre. Te futs 
de ceur & a’affection, &c. 
De Renfelaerivich, ce 30. 
d’Aouit 1643. 


Dans vne autre lettre efcrite au mefme P. Charles 
Lalemat, du 6. lauier, de cette prefente annee, il 
parle en ces termes, 

Niic fcio veré quia mifit Dominus Angelum fuum, 
& eripuit me de manu Herodis, & de omni expecta- 
tione plebis Iudzorum. Exjin te /uis deliuré. WN. 
Seigneur a enuoyé l'un de Jes Anges, pour me tirer de la 
captiuité. Les Iroquots s eftans rendus & Tl habitation des 
Ffollandois, vers la my-Septébre, apres auoir fait beaucoup 
de brurét, ont enfin receu des prefens, que le Capitaine qui 
me tenott caché leur a fatt, iufques a la concurrence, 
d’enutron trois cent liures [300] que te m'efforceray de 
recognotfire: toutes chofes eftant pacifiees, te fus enuoyé a 
Manhaté, oi demeure le Gouuerneur de tout le pays, il me 


al 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 63 


dum, constantem ad perseverandum in suo amore, et 
servitio,—to the end that God may render me fit and 
well disposed to love him; that he may render me strong 
and courageous to suffer and to endure; and that he may 
give me a noble constancy to persevere in [299] his love and 
in his service,—this ts what I would desire above all, 
together with a little New Testament from Europe. Pray 
for these poor nations which burn and devour one another ,— 
that at last they may come to the knowledge of their 
Creator, in order to render to him the tribute of their love. 
Memor sum vestri in vinculis meis; J do not forget 
you; my captivity cannot fetter my memory. I am, 
heartily and with affection, etc. 
From Renselaerivich, this 30th 
of August, 1643. 


In another letter, written to the same Father 
Charles Lalemant, dated the 6th of January of this 
present year, he speaks in these terms: 

Nunc scio veré quia misit Dominus Angelum suum, 
et eripuit me de manu Herodis, et de omni expecta- 
tione plebis Judeorum. A¢last lam delivered; Our Lord 
has sent one of his Angels, to release me from captivity. 
The Iroquois having betaken themselves to the Dutch 
settlement toward the middle of September, after making 
much disturbance, finally accepted some presents which 
the Captain, who kept me concealed, made to them, to the 
amount of about three hundred livres, [300] which I will 
strive to repay. All matters being settled, I was sent to 
Manhaté, where dwells the Governor of all the country.” 
He received me very humanely; he gave me a coat, and 
then had me go on board a bark which crossed the Ocean 
in the middle of Winter. Having put back into England,— 
I boarded another bark, a Collier, which carried me 


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


receut fort humainement, tl me donna vn habit, & puis me 
fit monter dans vne barque, gui a trauerfé [’ Ocean au 
milieu de l’ Hyuer, ayant relafché en Angleterre, te me 
mis dans vne autre barque de Charbonnier, qui m’a porté 
en baffe Bretagne, auec vn bonnet de nurét en tefte, & dans 
Lindigence de toutes chofes, en la mefme facon que vous 
arriuafies & S. Sebaftien: mais non pas degouttant d'un 
Second naufrage. 


Voicy encore vne autre lettre, que le Pere a efcrite 
a vne perfonne qui luy portoit plus d’enuie que de 
compaffion, & qui auroit bien fouhaité d’eftre fon 
compagnon de fortune. 

En fin mes pechez m’ ont rendu indigne de mourtr parmy 
les Iroquots: Ie vis encore, & Dieu veille que ce foit pour 
m amander, pour le moins te recognoy comme vne grande 
faueur, de ce qu'il a voulu que t'aye enduré quelque chofe: 
te dis fouuent auec reffentiment, [301] Bonum mihi quia 
humiliafti me, vt difca iuftificationestuas. Je party le 
cinquie/me de Nouembre de [habitation des Hollandors, 
dans une barque de cinquante tonneaux, qui me rendit a 
Falmuth en Angleterre, la veille de Noél, & tarriuay 
en Baffe Bretagne, entre Breft & S. Paul de Leon, le 
propre tour de Noél, affez toft, pour auotr le bien a’ en- 
tendre la Meffe, & faire mes deuotions. Vn honnefte 
Marchand, m ayant rencontré ma amené, & defrayé 
tufques a Rennes, oi te futs arriué ce tourd’ huy vetlle des 
Rots. Quel bon-heur apres auotr demeuré fi long-temps 
parmy des Sauuages, apres auoir conuerfé des Caluinifies, 
des Lutheriens, des Anabaptiftes, & des Puritains, de Se 
voir parmy des feruiteurs de Dieu, dans l Eglife Catho- 
lique! de fe voir en la compagnie de Tefus\ c eft une petite 
dee des contentements que nous receurons quelque tour dans 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 : 65 


into lower Brittany, with a nightcap on my head, and in 
want of all things,—in the same way that you arrived at 
St. Sebastien, but not dripping with a second shipwreck.® 


Here is still another letter, which the Father has 
written to a person who felt toward him more envy 
than compassion, and who would have much desired 
to be the companion of his fortune: 

After all, my sins have rendered me unworthy to die 
among the Iroquois; I still live, and God grant that it be 
to amend myself; at least, I acknowledge it as a great 
Savor, that he has willed that I should endure something. 
I say often with gratitude, [301] Bonum mihi quia 
humiliasti me, ut discam justificationes tuas. J de- 
parted on the fifth of November from the Dutch settlement, 
in a bark of fifty tons, which conveyed me to Falmouth in 
England, the day before Christmas; and I arrived in 
Lower Brittany, between Brest and St. Paul de Leon, the 
very day of Christmas, in time to have the blessing of 
hearing Mass and offering my devotions. An honest Mer- 
chant, having met me, took me and paid my way to Rennes, 
where I have arrived this day, the eve of Epiphany. 
What happiness, after having dwelt so long among Sav- 
ages, after having conversed with Calvinists, with Lu- 
therans, with Anabaptists, and with Puritans, to see one- 
self among servants of God, in the Catholic Church! to 
see oneself in the society of Jesus! It ts a slight idea of 
the satisfactions that we shall receive some day in Paradise, 
if God please; when dispersiones Israélis congregabit. 
When will God withdraw his hand from over our poor 
French and our poor Savages? Vee mihi ut quid natus 
sum videre contritionem populi mei! My sinus and 
the unfaithfulness of my past life have made very heavy 
the [302] hand of the divine Majesty, justly provoked 


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou & 


le Paradis, sil plaift & Dieu, lors que difperfiones 
Ifraélis congregabit. Quand eft-ce que Dieu retirera 
fa main dedeffus nos pauures Francois, & nos pauures 
Sauuages. Vee mihi vt quid natus fum videre contri- 
tionem populi mei! Mes pechez & les infidelitez de ma 
vie paffee ont beaucoup appefanty la [302] main de la 
diuine Matefté, iuftement irritee contre nous. Te Supple 
V. R. de m’ obtenir de noftre Seigneur, vne parfaite con- 
uerfion, & que ce petit chafiiment qu'il m’a donné, me 
Serue felon fon deffein, & me rendre meilleur. Le Pere 
Raimbault, le Pere Dolbeau, & le P. Dauoft, font donc 
morts? tls eftotent meurs pour le Paradis, & la Nouuelle 
France a perdu en vne annee, trots perfonnes qut y auotent 
beaucoup trauaillé. Ie ne fcay fi on a receu cette annee 
une coppie de la Relation des Hurons. Le premier exem- 
plaire fut pris auec les Hurons, quit defcendotent aux 
Francois, au mois de Iuin, & me fut rendu au pays des 
Iroquois, auec vn gros paquet de lettres que nos Peres des 
Hurons enuoyotent en France, fi teuffe creu que Dieu 
m’euft voulu deliurer, te aurots portée auec moy, quand 
allay vifiter les Hollandots, tout eft demeure en la Cabane 
ou 2 eftois: une autrefois, te feray plus long, en voila affez 
pour le premier tour de mon arriuee. 
A Rennes ce 5. de 
Ianuier 1644. 


[303] i croyois que la fin de cette lettre feroit la 

conclufion de ce Chapitre: mais en voicy 
encor vne autre qui donnera quelque iour aux prece- 
dentes, ie les couche fuiuant l’ordre dutemps qu’elles 
nous font enuoyees, fans auoir efgard s’il n’y aura 
point quelques redites. L’Imprimeur ne permettant 
pas d’en tirer vne fuitte de difcours. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 ~~ 


against us. I beseech Your Reverence to obtain for me, 
from our Lord, a perfect conversion; and that this little 
chastisement that he has given me may avail, according to 
his purpose, to render me better. Father Raimbault, 
Father Dolbeau, and Father Davost are then dead? They 
were ripe for Paradise, and New France has lost in one 
year three persons who had greatly labored there. I know 
not whether a copy of the Relation of the Hurons has been 
received this year. The first copy was taken with the 
Hurons who were going down to the French, in the month 
of June, and was restored to me in the country of the 
Iroquois, with a large package of letters which our Fathers 
with the Hurons were sending to France. If I had sup- 
posed that God intended to deliver me, I would have carried 
wt with me when I went to visit the Dutch; everything 
remained in the Cabin where l was. Another time, I will 
write at greater length: this is enough for the first day of 
my arrival.’ 
At Rennes, this 5th of 
January, 1644. 


[303] | THOUGHT that the end of this letter would be 

the conclusion of this Chapter: but here is 
still another, which will shed some light upon the 
ones preceding. I arrange them according to the 
time when they are sent to us, without considering 
whether there may not be some repetitions,— the 
Printer not permitting me to draw from them a 
connected narrative. 

When I begged Father Isaac Jogues to relate to us the 
details of his capture and of his captivity, he answered me 
that he had written thereof quite amply; but because I 
perceive every day that he is so reserved in speaking of him- 
self that he may have omitted many interesting particulars, 


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 25 


Comme te priots le P. [faac Togues de nous racomter les 


particularites de fa prife, & de fa captiuité, il m'a refpodu 


gu'il en auoit efcrit affez amplement: mais pource que te 
m’ appercois tous les tours qu'il eft fi referué & parler de 
Soy quil peut auoir obmis plufieurs belles particularitez, 
voicy ce que ten ay tiré de fa bouche & diuerfes fois. 
Apres le combat des Hurons qui fut bien-tost fuiuy de 
leur deffaite, ce bon Pere fe trouua en lieu on uw n'eftort 
pas hors d’efperance de fe fauuer de leurs mains: mats 
al en perdit bien-tost la volonté: car s’eftant pris garde 
que les principaux Chreftiéts de 1 Efcouade, qui lacco- 
pagnott, eftoiét pris auec vn Fragots, il appella luy-mefme, 
& fit venir & Soy les Troquois, aufquels i fe donna 
genereufement, afin de pouuoir afsifter ces pauures [304] 
captif[s]. Aufsi-toft qu'il Se fut rendu, ils le defpoiiille- 
rent, ne luy laiffant que fa chemtfe, tls luy arracherent 
les ongles des doigts, excepté deux. Il fallut faire en 
Juitte vn voyage ad enuiron dix tours auec de grandes fa- 
tigues, & de notables incommoditez de la faim, ces Barbares 
manquans de viures. Aprochant du pays enuiron d'une 
tournee, tl fut cruellement baftonné, & tous fes concaptifs 
par une bade de deux cens Sauuages. On leur fit lemefme 
traitement a l’entree de trois Bourgades, fi bien que 
pendant trots tours qu’on les mena en triomphe, de Bour- 
gade en Bourgade: tls receurent vn nombre fans nombre de 
baftonnades, comme ces Barbares estotent fort animez contre 
les Francois, & qu’ils tenotent le Pere pour vn de leurs 
principaux Capitaines: la furie des coups tombotent plus 
particulierement deffus luy. On les faifoit monter pendant 
le jour fur des efchaffaux, pour eftre expofez a la rtfee, 


& a linfolence de ces Barbares. La nuit on les 


restiroit dans les Cabanes, ou les enfans les tourmen- 
totent auec des cendres bruflantes, & auec des charbons 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 ; 69 


here follows what I have drawn from his lips on sundry 
occasions. After the combat of the Hurons, which was 
soon followed by their defeat, this good Father found him- 
self ina place where he was not beyond hope of saving 
himself from their hands. But he soon lost the desire for 
this, for,—having noticed that the principal Christians 
of the Squad which accompanied him were taken, with a 
Frenchman,—he himself called and summoned to him the 
Iroquois, to whom he generously surrendered, that he 
might be able to assist these poor [304] captives. As soon 
as he had given himself up, they stripped him, leaving him 
only his shirt. They tore out his finger-natls, except two. 
It was necessary to make afterward a journey of about ten 
days, with great fatigues, and notable inconveniences from 
hunger, those Barbarians lacking provisions. Approach- 
ing within about a day’s journey of the country, he was 
cruelly beaten, and all his fellow captives, by a band of 
two hundred Savages. They received the same treatment 
at the entrance to three Villages insomuch that, during 
three days tn which they were led in triumph from Village 
to Village, they received a countless number of beatings. 
As those Barbarians were greatly enraged against the 
French, and as they regarded the Father as one of the 
principal French Captains, the fury of the blows fell more 
especially on him. They were made to mount, during the 
day, upon scaffolds, in order to be exposed to the ridicule 
and to the insolence of those Barbarians. At night, they 
were withdrawn into the Cabins, where the children tor- 
mented them with burning cinders and live coals. The 
fourth day of their arrival, they cut off the Father's left 
thumb, even to the root; they crushed and they burned the 
ends of the fingers [305] from which they had torn off the 
nails. The left index finger appears to have been partly 
burned with a hot tron; it has thus remained somewhat 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vo1. % 


ardens. Le quatrie/me tour de leur arriuee, on couppa le 
poulce gauche au Pere, tufques a la racine, on luy efcrafa, 
& brufla on le bout des doigts, [305] dont on auott arraché 
les ongles: Lindex gauche parotst auotr efté a demy bruflé, 
auec vn fer chaud, u en eft demeuré vn petit extropié, 
ayant le mouuement libre des autres qui luy font reftez. 
Le fixie/me tours tls l attacherent a deux pieux, cdme s'tls 
Leuffent voulu brufler: les cordes eftotent fi ferrees qu'tl 
sen alloit dans peu de temps tomber en deffatlance, lors 
qu'un teune Iroguots touché de compaffion, & de pitté, le 
delia. Cette charité fut recognué du Ciel: car quelques 
mois apres, le Pere Tayant comme par hazard rencontré 
bté malade, Tinfiruifit & le baptifa, & peu de temps apres 
zl mourut: on dit qu'vn bien fattt n’eft tamats perdu: 
mats celut-la a esté bien recompenfeé. 

Le Septie/me tour on les aduertit que c’efiott le dernier 
de leur vie, & qu'on commencerott a les brufler fur le fotr: 
als tinrent neantmoins vn grand confeil Sur cét affaire: 
pendant lequel le Pere rallie Jes gens, comme vn bon Pasteur 
Ses brebis, donne courage aux Chrestiens, les instruit des 
moyens de faire profit pour le Ciel de ces horribles cruautez: 
baptife quelques Hurons, encore Catechumenes, & lors qu’ils 
attendotent leur derniere Sentence, les Barbares fortans de 
Laffemblee[326i.e., 306] deur difent qu’ils n’ en mourrotent 
pas, tls furent neantmoins quatre mots entiers, traitez comme 
des victimes deftinees aux fupplices: enfin le Pere ayant 
donné aduts de fa prife aux Hollandots, qui font habituez fur 
la cofie prochaine des Iroquois: le Gouuerneur de tout le pays 
refcriuit au Capitaine qui commande en habitation plus 
votfine des Iroquois, qu il s'efforcaft de le retirer, & les 
autres Frangots fes concaptifs, wu fit quelques prefens a ces 
Barbares; ce que firent aufsi quelques Sauuages d’vne 


nation voifine, pour auoir efté obliges & Kebec par les 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 a 


crippled,—though he has the free movement of the others 
which are left to him. The sixth day, they bound him to 
two stakes, as of they intended to burn him; the cords were 
so tight that he was likely, in a little time, to fall into a 
swoon,— when a young Iroquois, touched with compassion 
and pity, unbound him. This charity was recognized by 
Heaven; for, some months later, the Father having, as if 
by chance, encountered him very sick, instructed and bap- 
tized him; and soon afterward he died. It is said that 
a good deed is never lost; but that one has indeed been 
rewarded. 

The seventh day, they were notified that tt was the last 
of their lives, and that toward evening, their captors would 
begin burning them, these held, nevertheless, a great council 
about that business. Meanwhile, the Father rallies his 
people, as a good Pastor his sheep; gives courage to the 
Christians, instructs them in the ways of deriving profit 
for Heaven out of these horrible cruelties; and baptizes 
some Hurons, still Catechumens. When they were expect- 
ing their final sentence, the Barbarians, leaving the assem- 
bly, [326i.e., 306] tell them that they should not die; they 
were, nevertheless, for four whole months, treated lke 
victims destined to tortures. Finally,—the Father having 
given notice of his capture to the Dutch, who are settled in 
the region near the Iroquois,—the Governor of all the 
country wrote to the Captain who commands in the settle- 
ment nearest the Iroquots, that he should strive to release 
him and the other French, his fellow captives. He made 
some presents to these Barbarians,—as did also some Sav- 
ages of a neighboring nation, for having been obliged at 
Kebec by the French; these presents somewhat softened the 
Iroquois, insomuch that they gave liberty to the Father to 
goand to come where he would. This gave him opportunity 
to baptize about seventy persons, both children and adults, 


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


Francois: ces prefens addoucirent un petit les Iroquois, fi 
bien qu'tls donnoient liberté au Pere, d'aller & de venir 
ou tl vouloit, ce qui luy donna occafion de baptifer enutron 
JSeptante per fonnes, tant enfans qu’ adultes dont la plufpart 
fSont au Ciel. Il entretenott auffi par ce moyen les Hurons 
captifs dans la pieté. Ces bonnes aétions qui l’auotent fatt 
refoudre a ne fe point fauuer, le pouuant fatre, addouct/- 
fSotent grandement la rigueur de fa captiuité. Les Iroquois 
cependant ne voulotent point otitr parler de fa deliurance, 
s'imaginans que pendant qu’ils retiendrotét le Pere, les 
Fracois de Kebec & a@autres lieux circonuotfins wn ofe- 
rotent leur faire aucun mal, [327 1.e., 307] guand ils 
viendroient a la chaffe des Hurons, & des Algoquins: 
mats le Pere mefprifant fa vie, refcriuit aux Frangots, 
gue fa confideration ne les empefchaft point de fatre tout 
ce qui feroit a la plus grade gloire de noftre Seigneur, ne 
voulant pas eftre Loccafion que quelques Francots, ou 
quelques pauures Sauuages fuffent furpris & maffacrez 
par ces Barbares. En fin ce pauure Pere eftant arriué en 
Angleterre: comme luy-mefme la mandé. Les Hollandots 
defcendirent a terre, pour s'aller un petit rafrat/chir de 
la mer, & d'un long voyage, quelques voleurs Anglois en- 
trans dans la Barque, & n'ayats trouué que le Pere tout 
Seul, la pillerent, & luy rautrent & emporterent le manteau 
& le chapeau, que les Hollandots luy auotent donné. Vous 
aures ph voir par les fiennes, en quel equipage tl arriua en 
France. Pour conclufion, i eft aufsi gay, comme su 
n’auoit rien fouffert, & auffi zelé pour retourner aux 
Hurons, parmy tous ces dangers, comme fi les perils luy 
eftotent des affeurdces, u s’attend bien de repaffer vne 


autrefots l’ Ocean, pour aller fecourir ces pauures peuples, 


& acheuer le facrifice encommancé. 
A Rennes ce 14. de Ianuier. 


——,. * 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 73 


most of whom are in Heaven; he also, by this means, 
maintained the captive Hurons in piety. These good 
deeds — which had made him resolve not to escape, even 
when able to do so— greatly mitigated the rigor of his cap- 
tivity. The Iroquois, however, would not hear mention of 
his deliverance,—imagining that, while they could retain 
the Father, the French of Kebec and other places round 
about would not dare to do them any harm, [327 i.e., 307] 
when they should come in pursuit of the Hurons and Algon- 
quins. But the Father, despising his life, wrote back to 
the French that consideration for him should not prevent 
them from doing all that might be to the greater glory of 
our Lord,—not unwilling to be the occasion for some 
Frenchmen, or some poor Savages, to be surprised and 
massacred by those Barbarians. At last, this poor Father 
having arrived in England, as he himself has sent word, 
the Dutch went ashore in order to go and refresh themselves 
alittle from the sea and from a long voyage; some English 
robbers, entering the Bark and having found only the 
Father, all alone, plundered it, and seized Jrom him and 
carried off the cloak and the hat which the Dutch had given 
him. You have been able to see, by his own letters, 
in what plight he arrived in France. In conclusion, he is 
as cheerful as if he had suffered nothing; and as zealous 
to return to the Hurons, amid all those dangers, as if perils 
were to him securities; he certainly expects to cross the 
Ocean once again, in order to go to succor those poor 
peoples, and to finish the sacrifice already begun. 
At Rennes, this 14th of January. 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 2% 


ce bout du monde, pour faire trafic de 

peaux de beftes mortes, les tiennent fort 
temeraires, & depourueus de fens, de s’aller expofer 
4 de fi horribles dangers, pour vn bien firauallé. I 
me femble qu’ils ont vn coeur plus genereux, & que 
Dieu feul, & le falut des ames eft capable de leur 
faire quitter leur patrie, & la douceur de la France, 
pour aller chercher des feux, & des tourmens au mi- 
lieu dela Barbarie. Pour-autant neantmoins que cét 
erreur de commerce fe pourroit gliffer dans l’efprit 
de ceux qui ne les cognoiffent pas: on a iugé a 
propos d’appofer icy vne atteftation authentique, qui 
fera voir combien ils font éloignez de ces penfees: fi 
ceux quien parlent auec liberté pour ne les cognoiftre 
pas, fe trouuoient auec eux en ce nouueat monde, 
ils changeroient bien de langage, & fe faifans com- 
pagnons de leurs fouffrances, & de leur zele, ils fe 
trouueroient vnis & liez, de mefmes affections, & ces 
chaifnes [309] pourroient eftre eternelles, puifque le 
vray amour, & la vraye charité, paffle au dela des 
temps: c’eft affez finiffons par vn tefmoignage veri- 
table, & desintereffé, qu’on peut tirer de la bouche 
de perfonnes honnorables, qui l’ont marqué de leurs 
noms, & confirmé de leur feing. 


[308] Cares qui croyent que les Iefuiftes vont en 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 75 


{308] HOSE who believe that the Jesuits go 
‘i into this end of the world in order to 
make traffic of skins of dead beasts, 
account them very rash, and destitute of sense, 
to go and expose themselves to such horrible 
dangers, for a benefit so sordid. It seems to 
me that they have more generous hearts; and 
that only God and the salvation of souls can 
make them leave their native land, and the comfort 
of France, in order to go in quest of fires and tor- 
ments in the midst of Barbarism. Forasmuch, never- 
theless, as this error about commerce might slip into 
the minds of those who are not acquainted with them, 
it has been judged proper to affix here an authentic 
attestation, which will show how far they are removed 
from such thoughts.’ If they who speak of them 
with freedom, for want of knowing them, chanced to 
be with them in that new world, they would certain- 
ly change their tone; and, becoming companions in 
their sufferings and their zeal, they would find them- 
selves united and bound by like affections; and 
these chains [309] might be eternal, since true love 
and true charity pass beyond time. Enough; let us 
conclude with a genuine and impartial testimonial, 
which may be drawn from the lips of honorable 
persons, who have stamped it with their names and 
confirmed it with their signatures. 


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 25 


Declaration de Meffieurs les Directeurs, & Af- 
fociez en la Compagnie de la 
Nouuelle France. 


ES Direéteurs, & Affociez en la Compagnie de la 
Nouuelle France, ditte de Canada: ayans fceu que 
quelques perfonnes fe perfuadent, & font courir le 

bruit, que la Compagnie des Peres Iefuifies a part aux 
embarquemens, retours & Commerces qui fe font audit 
pais, voulans par ce moyen raualer, & Suprimer leftime, 
& le prix des grands trauaux qu'ils entreprennent audit 
pais, auec des peines, & fatigues incroyables, & au peril 
de leur vie, pour le feruice & la gloire de Dieu, dans la 
Conuerfion des Sauuages & la foy du Chriftiant/me, & 
Religion Catholique, Apoftolique & Romaine: En quoy is 
ont faitt & font tous les ans de grads progrés, dot ladite 
Compagnie eft tres-particulierement informee, ont creu efire 
obligez par deuoir de la Charité Chreftienne, de defabufer 
ceux gui aurotent cette creance, par la declaration & 
certification qu’ils font par les prefentes, que lefdits 
PP. Tefuiftes ne font affociez en ladite Compagnie de la 
Nouuelle France, direétement, ny indirectement, & n'ont 
aucune part au trafic des marchandifes qui s'y faitt; En 
foy dequoy la prefente declaration a efté fignee defadits 
Direéteurs & Affociez, Et fcellee du fceau de ladite Com- 
pagnie. A Paris en l’ Affemblee ordinaire dicelle, le 


premier tour de Decembre mille fix cent quarante trots. — 


Ainfi figné. De la Ferté, Abbé de Jaintte Magdeleine. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1642-43 . 77 


Declaration of Messieurs the Directors and 
Associates in the Company of 
New France. 


HE Directors and Associates in the Company of New 
France, called Canada, having learned that some 
persons persuade themselves, and circulate the report, 

that the Soctety of the Jesuit Fathers has part in the ship- 
ments, returns, and Commercial Transactions which are 
made in the said country,— wishing by this device to dis- 
parage and destroy the reputation and value of the great 
labors which they undertake in the said country, with pains 
and fatigues incredible, and in peril of their lives, for the 
service and glory of God, in the Conversion of the Savages 
to the faith of Christianity and the Catholic, Apostolic, 
and Roman Religion, in which they have made and are 
making great progress every year, whereof the said Society 
1s very intimately informed,—have believed themselves 
obliged by the duty of Christian Charity, to undeceive those 
who might have this belief, through the declaration and 
certification which they make by these presents: that the 
said Jesuit Fathers are not associated in the said Company 
of New France, directly or indirectly, and have no part in 
the traffic of merchandise which is carried on by it. In 
witness whereof the present declaration has been signed by 
the said Directors and Associates, and sealed with the seal 
of the said Company, at Paris, in the regular Assembly of 
the same, the first day of December one thousand six 
hundred and forty-three. Thus signed: De la Ferté, Abbé 


Bordier, Margonne, Beruyer, Robineau, 
ruyer, Verdier, Fleuriau, Cafet, Boi 
& fcellé d'un Cachet. 


- Collationné a 1’Original par 
_-- moy Confeiller, Secretaire Pe 
du Roy, maifon & Cou- A ; 

ronne de France. 


; 


‘ 38) ‘et i § 
pihacy as ip . 
GN Oy - ‘ sob we 


66) SAVE 


f bal Abe a4 
‘ 


oa ney hauls “Saiaint Ag i 


e Binder. Prinses, Pw: « Robie 
labouret, Pac. Verdier, Fleuriau, Caset, Bour- 
t, and Clarentin; and sealed with a Seal. 

Collated with the Original by 
me, Counsellor, and Secretary 
of the King, house, and 
Crown of France. 


—— 


ln Ms Sey agen ¥5 vi Hy 


77 


LII 


; Epistola Patris Caroli Garnier, ad R. P. Mutium 
a" Vitelleschi, Przepositum Generalem 


| Sctz. Mariz, apud Hurones, 8 Aprilis, 1644 
Ad) 


{ _ SOURCE: The original is in the MSS. Soc. Jes.; we. 
follow an apograph thereof by Father Martin, in the archives 
of St. Mary’s College, Montreal. 


may. 


9 


Tahoe 
’ ¥ re 


j { Titieds ory 
oe bhi 
uy 2 


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vow 2% 


Epistola P. Caroli Garnier ad R. P. Mut. 
Vitellescum Przep. Gen. 
ef 


EVERENDE ADMODUM IN CHRISTO PATER, 

R Pax christi 

De nostris qui sunt in hac Huronum missi- 
one hoc tantum dicam Paternitati vestre eos esse 
admodum religiosz discipline observatores et stre- 
nuos in vinea Domini operarios. Superiorem quoque 
habemus virum virtute insignem, prudentem admo- 
dum, et suorum peramantem. Hoc tamen aliquan- 
tulum ei deest, quod non satis in suorum animos se 
insinuat. Nihil tamen est quod urgeat ut mutetur. 
Cum autem mutabitur, nullus mihi esse videtur qui 
in ejus locum suffici eque dignus sit ac P. Paulus 
Ragueneau, quippe qui singularibus et virtutis et 
ingenii et prudentiz doctrinzque ornamentis predi- 
tus est, quique multis partibus eum superat quem 
nunc habemus superiorem, R. P. Hyeron[ym]um 
Lallemant. 

De domesticis nostris qui se nobis ad vitam dede- 
runt, satis laudare divinum numen non possumus, 
quod eos nobis dederit, et procul dubio si rem oculis — 
spectaret P. V., ad laudandum Deum optimum, 
maximum ipsa nos excitaret, videret enim perdiffi- — 


1642-44] GARNIER TO FATHER GENERAL 83- 


Letter from Father Charles Garnier to the Rever- 
end Father Mutius Vitelleschi, General 
of the Society of Jesus. 


ERY REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST, 
V Pax Christi. 

Concerning ours who are in this mission of 
the Hurons, I will say only this to your Paternity,— 
that they are very strict observers of religious disci- 
pline, and earnest laborers in the Lord’s vineyard. 
For superior, too, we have a man distinguished in 
virtue, very discreet, and greatly attached to his 
people. However, he lacks this little,—that he does 
not sufficiently find his way into their hearts; yet 
there is nothing which urges his removal. But, 
when he shall be removed, no one seems to me equal- 
ly worthy to be substituted in his place, as Father 
Paul Ragueneau, inasmuch as he is endowed with 
unusual graces of virtue, talent, prudence, and learn- 
ing; and, in many respects, he excels him whom 
we now have for superior, Reverend Father Jerome 
Lallemant. 

As to our domestics who have given themselves 
to us for life, we cannot sufficiently praise the divine 
will for having given them to us; and no doubt, if 
Your Paternity saw the matter with your own eyes, 
you yourself would urge us to praise the best and 
greatest God, for you would see that it is most un- 


_ likely that domestics are attracted hither by the mere 


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Nou. % 


cillimum esse ut domestici huc advocentur sola spe 
lucri alicujus. Fore autem impossibile cerneret ut 
per multos annos multi hic prestent: tanta est itine- 
tum difficultas, tam horrenda pericula, tanta victus 
tenuitas, ut si se nobis Deo movente non dedissent 
qui se dederunt, cert? absque domesticis nunc esse- 
mus, hoc est brevi collapsura esset heec missio. Hi 
autem sunt domestici isti ut paucos tales inveniri sit 
qui stipend[iJarii sint, hoc est admodum pii, ad obedi- 
ent[iJam promptissimi, et singularis exempli Barbaris 
nostris, quod ultimum magni nos facere docuit diffi- 
cultas quam passi sumus 4 Barbaris per multos annos, 
qui legem evangelicam exponentibus nobis Gallorum, 
qui primi ad has oras appulerunt, corruptos mores 
opponebant, ita ut nos unos christianos existima- 
rent qui nigram vestem gerimus. Tanti momenti 
nobis visum est hoc negotium de domesticis nostris 
ut una voce clamare ad V. P. necessarium nobis 
visum sit. 

De Barbaris nostris ut aliquid dicam: crescit in 
dies Evangelice legis studium. Duo sunt in primis 
pagi in quibus bené multi sunt christiani, et inter 
eos non pauci singulari pietate preediti constantiaque 
qua neque adverse res, neque infidelium convitia et 


quis integre fidei semel dederit manus, spes est bené 


multos pagos in X"™ suo exemplo pertracturum. 
P. V*™, enixis precibus rogamus ut nos suis SS. 


i 
4 
a) 

i 


maledicta infringere possint. Sunt et in aliis pagis — 
aliqui Christiani et zdes sacre. Certé si pagus ali- 


—— 


f 
f 


1642-44] GARNIER TO FATHER GENERAL ; 85. | 


hope of any gain. You would moreover perceive 
the impossibility that many of these should serve here 
during many years. So great is the difficulty of the 
roads, so horrible are the dangers, so great is the 
scarcity of provisions, that, if these who have given 
themselves to us, impelled by God, had not given 
themselves, certainly we would now be without 
domestics,—that is, this mission would soon collapse. 
Such, too, are these domestics that few like them are 
to be found who are hired,—that is, very pious, most 
prompt in obedience, and an unusual example to our 
Barbarians. The difficulty which we have experi- 
enced with the Barbarians, during many years, has 
taught us to value highly this last qualification ; since 
to us who expound the law of the gospel they opposed 
the corrupt morals of the French who first landed on 
these shores,—so that they deemed us alone Chris- 
tians, who wear the black gown. Of so great moment 
this matter of our domestics has seemed to us, that 
with one voice it has seemed necessary to us to cry 
aloud to Your Paternity. 

To say somewhat of our Barbarians: the zeal for 
the Gospel law increases daily. There are especially 
two villages in which are very many Christians, and 
among them not a few endowed with singular piety, 
and with constancy which neither adversity nor the 
taunts and curses of the infidels can shake. There 
are some Christians and sacred buildings in other vil- 
lages. Certainly, if any entire village will once give 
support to the faith, there is hope that it will, by its 
example, bring over to Christ very many villages. 
We request Your Paternity with earnest entreaties 
that you aid us with your Holy Sacrifices and prayers. 


Sacrificiis et ofa ediven page i 
enixé opem imploro, qui sum 2 ere ‘ict emake 
Paternitatis Vestra .. °° "G os Bea a 

Ultimus in Christo filius 4 

CaRoLUs oon a 

In Residentia S‘* Mariz, apud sianastessoil er 
8 aprilis 1644. ' 


ga 
at 


é rH ¢ eee eee SP me 2 Yeaeegl i . 
siti alba Aced 2p ene Se weil Me y 
co Tas dane. cht slayer elaaas 


aul nani 4 diay aS heh | 


t the Residence of Ste. Marie of the Hurons, 
April 8, 1644. 


Most unworthy son in Christ, 
CHARLES GARNIER. 


Ae 
, =" 


AR 


LHI 


RELATION OF 1643-44 


Paris: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1645 


SOURCE: Our facsimile of the title-page is from the origi- ke 
nal Cramoisy edition of H. 83, in the library of the Wisconsin ty 

Historical Society; in reprinting the text, we follow the 
| Pmelenon copy in Lenox Library. 

_ The Re/atzon is in two parts ; we present herewith chaps. 
i ivi. of Part I. | wen 


Fovoyt au R. P, ae pote 
~ Prouincial dela Compagnie de Iesvs, 


a en la Fee de: EBACE, 
| 
£2 : ae. 
| _taure LE COE pie 
ee 
| 
| SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY,) 
pimp cur du Roy, & de 

2 Regente 


Pre van aac eee 
; at 


wer AT PON 


OF WHAT OCCURRED 


IN 
NEW FRANCE 


IN THE YEARS 1643 AND 1644. 


Sent to Rev. Father JEAN FILLEAU, 
Provincial of the Society of JEsus, 
in the Province of France. 


By REV. FATHER BARTHELEMY VIMONT, 
of the same Society, Superior of 
the whole Mission. 


Pi ae Loy 
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 3 
Printer to the King and to rue St. Jac- 
Print- h R t ques, atthe 
ed by the Queen Regent, Sign of the 
AN D Storks. 
GABRIEL CRAMOISY. 


me Ee EA. 
By Royal License. 


i LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vow % 


Av Reverend Pere lean Filleav, Provincial de 
la Compagnie de IESvs, en la Pro- 
uince de France. 


ON REVEREND PERE, 

M Ce nous eft une confolation bien fenfible de rece- 

uoir tous les ans des lettres de V. R. qui font autant 
de te/moignages authentiques de l affection qu'elle a pour la 
conuer fion de ces peuples, & des effets fignalez de fon amour 
en noftre endrott, elle ne feruent pas peu a nous encourager 
pour pourfuiure le deffein que nous auons a’attirer a la 
connoiffance & amour de Dieu toutes les Nations de ces 
contrées qui font plus grandes en nombre qu'on ne fe per- 
fuadoit au commencement, nous en defcouurons tous les 
ans de nouuelles qui ne font point errantes & vagabondes, 
& qui pourrotent feruir d'un iufte employ a&.ceux quit ont 
du zele pour leur falut: deux cents mille Algonquins les 
attendent, & fi leur zele n'efe point borné, wu pourra 
s eftendre & plufieurs autres Nations qui font au Midy de 
nofire grand fieuue, & s’ils ne font contens de cela, tls 
pourront sauancer tufques au Couchant, ou tls trouueront — 
affes d’exercice pour le refte de leur vie. Ils verront que q 
ces peuples ne font pas fi Barbares qu'ils n'ayent Vefprit q 
capable d’infiruction, & un ceur fufceptible des maxines — 
de l’Euangile, que fi quelqu'vn auott d'autres Sentimens, i 
la Relation que i’ enuoye a V. R. de ce qui s'eft paffé acy 
cette année, le pourra defabufer, elle y verra de bons & 4 
de mauuats fuccez, & remarquera que Dieu va toufiours F: 
exaucant de plus en plus les prieres qu'on fait en France ; 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 95 


To the Reverend Father Jean Filleau, Provincial 
of the Society of JESUS in the 
Province of France. 


Y REVEREND FATHER, 

M It ts a deeply-felt consolation for us to recetve 

every year Your Reverence’s letters, which are so 
many authentic proofs of the interest that you take in the 
conversion of these peoples, and signal marks of your af- 
fection for us. They serve not a little to encourage us in 
prosecuting our design to attract to the knowledge and love 
of God all the Nations of these countries, who are more 
numerous than we supposed at first. We discover new 
ones every year, who are neither wandering nor nomadic, 
and who could give ‘worthy employment to those who have 
seal for their salvation. Two hundred thousand Algon- 
guins await these; and tf their ardor be not limited, it 
can extend itself to many other Nations to the South of our 
great river. And tf they be not satisfied with this, they 
can go as far as the Setting Sun, where they will find 
Sufficient occupation for the remainder of their lives. 
They will see that these peoples are not so Barbarous that 
their minds are not capable of instruction, and their hearts 
not susceptible to the maxims of the Gospel. If any one 
should be of a different opinion, the Relation that I send 
Your Reverence, of what has occurred this year, will re- 
move that impression; for init you will find both good 
and ill success, and will observe that God hearkens more 
and more to the prayers that are said in France for our 
poor Savages, and that he continues to bless the assistance 


96 LES RELATIONS DES s JESUITES 


‘died nos pauures Sauuages, & qu'il va bentffant ne Secours 
gu’on leur donne. Elle connoiftra d’autre part que | les 
ennemts du falut de ces peuples veillent toufiours a inl 
ruine & s'efforcent de les perdre, ce qui nous oblige de re- 
courir plus particulierement a elle pour luy demander le 
fecours & afsifiance des prieres & Jaincts Sacrifices de nos r 
Peres & Freres, & fSpecialement celle de V. R. de qui a 
te futs. q 
A Kebec, ce 5. de a? 
Septembre, 1644. — 
Tres-humble & tres-obeyflant _ 

feruiteur, i 

BARTHELEMY VIMONT. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ° 97 


that is given to them. You will see on the other hand that 
the enemies of the salvation of these peoples ever seek to 
compass their ruin, and to destroy them; and this compels 
us to have more especial recourse to you, to ask the asstst- 
ance of the prayers and holy Sacrifices of our Fathers and 
Brethren, and, above all, that of Your Reverence, of whom 
I remain 
At Kebec, this 5th 
of September, 1644. 

~The most humble and most obe- 

dient servant, 
BARTHAZLEMY VIMONT. 


98 LES RELATIONS DES SésuITES [Vor. 95 q 


Table des Chapitres contenvs en ce Livre. 


Chapitre I. E leftat general des Chreftiés 
1) de la Nouuelle France, page. 

Chap. II. De quelques Baptefme en la 
refidence de S. lofeph, pag. 
Chap. III. Des bons fentimens & aétions des 
Chrefitens de Sainéi Iofeph, pag. 
Chap. IV. Continuation des bons fentimens & 
actions des Chreftiens de S. Iofeph, pag. 
Chap. V. Continuation des bons fentimens & 


actions des Chreftiens de Sainét Iofeph, pag. 56 
Chap. VI. De lf Ho/pital, pag. 70 
Chap. VII. Du Seminaire des Vrfulines, pag. 94 
Chap. VIII. De ce qui s'eft pafsé al occafion de 


quelques Apofiats, pag. 
Chap. IX. Du Seminaire des Hurons aux trots 
Riuteres, & de leur prife auec celle du Pere Io- 


Seph Breffany, par les Troquois, pag. 139. [i.e., 


i 


10 
23 


45 


113 


143] 


Chap. X. De la prife de trois Troquots, pag. I71 
Chap. XI. Des bons deportemens des Atikame- . 
gues, . pag. 137 
Chap. XII. De la Mifsion de Sitai Croix a 
Tadouffac, ; ; pag. 209 
Chap. XIII. Continuation de la Mifsion de Sainéte 
Croix & Tadouffac, pag. 229 — 


Chap. XIV. De la Creation d'un Gapiteins a Ta- 
douffac, ‘ ; pag. 


249 


1642 - 44] RELATION OF 1643-44 


99 


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book. 


Chapter I. F the general condition of the 
Christians of New France, page I 
Chap. II. Of some fine shat at the residence 
of St. Joseph, ; s ‘page to 
Chap. III. Of the good sentiments and actions of 
the Christians of Saint Joseph, 7 page. 4:33 
Chap. IV. Continuation of the good sentiments and 
actions of the Christians of St. Joseph, page 45 
Chap. V. Continuation of the good sentiments and 
actions of the Christians of Saint Joseph, page 56 
Chap. VI. Of the Hospital, ; . page 70 
Chap. VII. Of the Ursuline Seminary, . page 94 
Chap. VIII. Of what occurred in connection with 
some Apostates, ; . page I13 
Chap. IX. Of the Seminary of ‘the Hurons at 
the three Rivers, and of their capture, with 
that of Father Joseph Bressany, by the Iro- 
quots, page 139 [i.e., 143] 
Chap. X. Of the Fae py three Iroquois, page 17! 
Chap. XI. Of the good conduct of the Atikame- 
Zues, - page 187 
Chap. XII. Of the Dae of the holy Cross at 
Tadoussac, . . page 209 
Chap. XIII. abniadion of ae Mission of the 
Holy Cross at Tadoussac, ; « . page. ‘226 
Chap. XIV. Of the Creation of a Captain at Ta- 
doussac, ‘ : : . page 249 


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy. 


AR grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis & 
Sebaftien Cramoify, Marchand Libraire Iuré, 
Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy & de la Reyne 

Regente Mere de fa Majefté, Directeur de 1’Impri- 
merie Royalle au Chafteau du Louure, Ancien 
Efcheuin & Conful de cette Ville de Paris, d’impri- 
mer ou faire imprimer vn Liure, intitulé. La Rela- 
tion de ce qui seft paffé en la Nouuelle France, és années 
1643. & 1644. enuoyée au Reuerend Pere Iean Filleau, 
Prouincial de la [Compagnie de TESVS en la Prouince de 
France, par le R. P. Barthelemy Vimont de la| me/me 
Compagnie, Superieur de toute la Mifsion. Et ce pen- 
dant le temps & efpace de dix ans confecutifs, auec 
deffences 4 tous Libraires & Imprimeurs d’imprimer 
ou faire imprimer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de dé- 
guifement ou changemét qu’ils y pourroient faire, a — 
peine de confifcation & de l’amende portée par ledit 
Priuilege. Donné a Paris le 14. iour de Decembre, 4 
1644. Signé par le Roy en fon Confeil Cramoify, & — 
féellé du grand Séel en cire iaune. t 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 . 101 


Extract from the Royal License. 


Y the grace and Prerogative of the King, permis- 
sion is granted to Sebastien Cramoisy, Sworn 
Merchant Bookseller, Printer in ordinary to 

the King and to the Queen Regent, the Mother of 
his Majesty, Director of the Royal Printing House 
at the Castle of the Louvre, Formerly Alderman and 
Consul of this City of Paris, to print or to have 
printed a Book entitled: La Relation de ce qui s'est 
passé en la Nouvelle France, és années 1643. et 1644. 
envoyée au Reverend Pere Jean Filleau, Provincial de la 
[Compagnie de JESUS en la Province de France, par le R. 
P. Barthelemy Vimont de la\ mesme Compagnie, Superieur 
de toute la Mission. And this during the space and 
time of ten consecutive years, prohibiting all Book- 
sellers and Printers to print or have printed the said 
Book, under pretext of disguise or change that they 
might make therein, on pain of confiscation and of 
the fine provided by the said License. Given at Paris, 
on the 14th of December, 1644. Signed by the King 
in Council, Cramoisy; and sealed with the great Seal 
in yellow wax. 


, | x 


102 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou % 


Permifsion du R. Pere Prouincial. 


OUS Iean Filleau, Prouincial de la Compagnie 
de IESvs enla Prouince de France, auons ac- 
cordé, pour l’aduenir, au Sieur Sebaftien Cra- — 

moify, Marchand Libraire, Iuré Imprimeur ordinaire _ 
du Roy & de la Reyne Regente Mere de fa Majefté, © 
Directeur de 1’Imprimerie Royalle du Chafteau du — 
Louure, Ancien Efcheuin & Conful de la Ville [de] © 
Paris, l’'Impreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle — 
France. Fait a Paris le quinziefme Decembre, 1644. . 

Signé IzAN FILLEAY. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 m) 466. 


Permission of the Reverend Father Provincial. 


E, Jean Filleau, Provincial of the Society of 
\/ V Jesus in the Province of France, have 
granted for the future to Sieur Sebastien 
Cramoisy, Sworn Merchant Bookseller, Printer in 
ordinary to the King and to the Queen Regent, the 
Mother of his Majesty, Director of the Royal Printing 
House at the Castle of the Louvre, Formerly Alder- 
man and Consul of the City of Paris, the Printing of 
the Relations of New France. Done at Paris, the 
fifteenth of December, 1644. 
Signed, JEAN FILLEAU. 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. % 


{1] Relation de ce qvi s’eft paffé en la Nouuelle 
France, és années 1643. & 1644. 


CHAPITRE I. 


DE L’ESTAT GENERAL DES CHRESTIENS DE LA NOU- 
UELLE FRANCE. 


J %ESTAT ot fe void maintenant reduite cette 
L Eglife naiffante eft capable de tirer des yeux, 
de tous ceux qui l’ayment, des larmes de 
trifteffe & de ioye. Car d’vn cofté c’eft vne chofe 
pitoyable de voir perir deuant nos yeux ces pauures 
peuples 4 mefure qu’ils embraffent [2] la Foy: & de 
lautre nous auons fujet de nous confoler voyant que 
les miferes qui les accueillent de toutes parts, ne 
feruent qu’a faire fouhaitter la foy 4 ceux qui iufques ~ 
A prefent l’auoient mefprifée, & la fortifier & faire 
paroiftre auec plus de gloire dans les coeurs de ceux 
qui defia l’auoient receué. Nous voyons bien que © 
Dieu eft le Fondateur de cette Eglife, auffi bien que — 
de la primitiue; car il l’a fait naiftre comme celle-la _ 
dans les trauaux, & croiftre dans les fouttranceas if 
pour la couronner auec elle dans la gloire. , 
La maladie, la guerre, & la famine font les trois” q 
fleaux dont ila pleu a Dieu frapper nos Neophytes, ~ 
de puis qu’ils ont commencé a l’adorer, & fe foufmet- — 
tre 4 fes Loix. A peine eurent-ils oiiy parler de 
la Doctrine que nous leur prefchons, & commencé 
A receuoir cette diuine femence, qu’vne maladie 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 T $6 


[1] Relation of what occurred in New France, in 
the years 1643 and 1644. 


CHAPTER I. 


OF THE GENERAL CONDITION OF THE CHRISTIANS OF 
NEW FRANCE. 


HE condition to which this nascent Church is 
ar; now reduced is such as to bring to the eyes of 
all who love it tears both of sorrow and of joy. 
For, on the one hand, it is pitiful to see these poor 
peoples perish before our eyes as soon as they 
embrace [2] the Faith; and, on the other, we have 
reason to console ourselves when we see that the mis- 
fortunes which assail them on all sides serve but to 
arouse a desire for the faith in those who had hither- 
to despised it, and to strengthen it and make it shine 
with still greater glory in the hearts of those who 
had already received it. We see very well that God 
is the Founder of this Church, as well as of the prim- 
itive one; for he has caused the former to be born, 
like the latter, in travails, and to grow in sufferings, 
in order to be crowned with her in glory. 

Disease, war, and famine are the three scourges 
with which God has been pleased to smite our Neo- 
phytes since they have commenced to adore him, and 
to submit to his Laws. Hardly had they heard of 
the Doctrine that we preach to them, and commenced 
to receive this divine seed, when a contagious 


‘Pe 


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor % 


contagieufe s’efpandit dans toutes ces nations, & en 
moiffonna la plus faine partie: Cette maladie n’euit 
pas pluitoft ceffé, que la guerre, qui iufques alors 
leur auoit efté fi aduantageufe qu’ils [3] s’eftoient 
rendus Maiftres du pays de leurs ennemis, & les 
auoient battus par tout, commenga, & a continué 
depuis 4 leur eftre fi funefte, qu’ils y ont perdu tous 
leurs meilleurs guerriers, ont efté chaffez de leur 
propre pays, & ne font plus maintenant autre chofe 
que fuyr la cruauté des Iroquois, qui ne laiffent pas 
neantmoins de les attrapper bien fouuent & en faire 
d’horribles maffacres. 

En fuitte de ce malheur eftans contrains de quitter 
les bois les plus commodes 4 la chaffe, qui font au 
Midy du grand fleuue, & fujets aux courfes de leurs 
ennemis, ils font tombez entre les mains d’vn autre 
ennemy non moins cruel, qui eft la faim, laquelle en 
a ramené plufieurs du milieu des foref{ts 4 nos portes, 
pour nous demander l’aumofne en vn temps auquel 
ils auoient accouftumé d’eftre tous les iours dans les 
feftins. Nous en ations veu qui ont couru dans les 
bois dix, quinze, & vingt iours fans rien manger que 
quelque bout d’efcorce ou de peau: d'autres fe font 
refolus de paffer la grande riuiere [4] en vn temps 
auquel elle rouloit par tout des rochers & des monta- 
gnes de glace pour entrer dans les bois du Midy, 
nonob{tant l’apprehenfion de leurs ennemis, difant 
qu’ils aimoient autant mourir du feu des Iroquois — 
comme de faim; & comme fi le malheur les euft ac- 
compagné par tout, apres auoir couru parmy les ~ 
glaces & les neiges mille hazards de perdre la vie, ils _ 
font retournez fans auoir mangé autre chofe que les _ 
cordes de leurs raquetes. Ceux qui ont le moins 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ee 


disease spread throughout all these nations, carrying 
off the healthiest of them. No sooner had disease 
ceased its ravages, than war—which had previously 
been so much to their advantage that they [3] had 
become Masters of their enemies’ country, and had 
defeated them everywhere—commenced, and has 
since continued to be so disastrous to them that they 
have lost all their best warriors, have been driven 
from their own country, and at present do nothing 
but flee from the cruelty of the Iroquois, who never- 
theless very often overtake them, and massacre them 
horribly. 

Being compelled, in consequence of this misfor- 
tune, to abandon the woods best suited for hunting, 
which lie to the South of the great river, and being 
exposed to the inroads of their enemies, they have 
fallen into the hands of a no less cruel enemy, 
hunger,— which has brought many of them from the 
depths of the forest to our doors, to ask us for alms 
at a season when they were accustomed to hold a 
feast every day. We have seen some who have 
wandered in the woods for ten, fifteen, and twenty 
days, without other food than a piece of bark or of 
skin. Others resolved to cross the great river [4] at 
a time when everywhere its waters rolled down rocks 
and mountains of ice, in order to reach the woods to 
the South, notwithstanding their dread of their ene- 
mies,— saying that they would as soon die by the fire 
of the Iroquois as by hunger; and, as if misfortune 
accompanied them everywhere, after having been a 
thousand times in danger of losing their lives amid 
the ice and snow, they have come back without hav- 
ing eaten anything but the cords of their snowshoes. 
Those who have suffered the least are a portion of 


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — {Not. 2% 


{ouffert, font vne partie des Chreftiens de Sillery & 
de Tadouffac, qui pour n’eftre pas incommodez en 
leur chaffe par les Iroquois, font entrez dans les bois 
du Midy trois mois pluftoft qu’a l’ordinaire, & font 
allez fi auant que les Iroquois ne les ont peu rencon- 
trer, quoy qu’ils les ayent cherchez comme on a { 
a 


reconneu par leurs piftes. Cela a efté caufe que les 
Meres Hofpitalieres & nos Peres de Sillery ont eu fur 
les bras pendant tout l’Hyuer plus de quarante i 
Sauuages, la plus part infirmes, & vieillards, quila 
fallu nourrir auec de grands frais, & qui autrement 
[s] fuffent morts de faim & de mifere dans les bois 
fans aucune afiiftance corporelle ny fpirituelle. 

Tous ces accidens ont tellement efclaircy nos Sau- 
uages, que 1A ott l’on voyoit il y a huict ans, quatre- 
vingt & cent cabanes, 4 peine en voit-on maintenant 
cing ou fix: & tel Capitaine qui commandoit pour lors 
> huict cents guerriers, n’en compte plus 4 prefent 
que trente ou quarante, & au lieu des flottes de trois 
ou quatre cents Canots, nous n’en voyons plus que 
de vingt ou trente; & ce qui eft pitoyable, c’eft que 
ces reftes de Nations confiftent quafi toutes en des 
femmes veufues, ou filles qui ne fcgauroient toutes ~ 
trouuer vn mary legitime, & qui partant font en dan- 
ger de fouffrir beaucoup ou de faire de grandes fautes. 

Ce comble de miferes qui les accablent, deuroit fe 
me femble les fortifier dans la creance qu’ils auoient 
dés le commencement, que la priere les faifoit mou- a 
rir, que nous eftions des forciers, qui auions coniuré — 
contre leurs vies, que nous auions des intelligences 4 
[6] fecretes auec leurs ennemis. Mais celuy qui eft 4 
le Maiftre des cceurs leur donne d'autres penfées, & } 
leur fait reconnoiftre, & aduotier publiquement au — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 . 109 


the Christians of Sillery and of Tadoussac, who, in 
order to avoid being disturbed by the Iroquois in 
their hunting, went into the woods to the South 
three months earlier than usual, and penetrated so 
far that the Iroquois did not find them,—although 
they sought for them, as could be seen from their 
tracks. The result of this was that the Hospital 
Mothers and our Fathers at Sillery had on their 
hands throughout the Winter over forty Savages, 
most of whom were infirm or aged, who had to be 
fed at great expense, and who otherwise [5] would 
have perished in the woods, from hunger and hard- 
ships, without any bodily or spiritual aid. 

All these events have so greatly thinned the num- 
bers of our Savages that, where eight years ago one 
could see eighty or a hundred cabins, barely five or 
six can now be seen; a Captain, who then had eight 
hundred warriors under his command, now has not 
more than thirty or forty; instead of fleets of three 
or four hundred Canoes, we see now but twenty or 
thirty. And the pitiful part of it is, that these rem- 
nants of Nations consist almost entirely of women, 
widows or girls, who cannot all find lawful husbands, 
and who consequently are in danger of much suffer- 
ing, or of committing great sins. 

Such an accumulation of miseries as overwhelms 
them would, it seems to me, strengthen them in the 
belief which they had at the very beginning, that 
prayer caused them to die; that we were sorcerers, 
who had conspired against their lives; and that we 
had secret communication [6] with their enemies. 
But he who is the Master of all hearts inspires them 
with other thoughts, and causes them to acknowl- 

edge and admit publicly, in the midst of their afflic- 


a rE 


110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


milieu de leurs afflictions, que la main qui les frappe 
eft celle du vray Dieu, qu’ils n’auoient pas encore 
conneu, & dont les iugemens font auffi fecrets comme 
ils font equitables. Nous ations cependant grand 
{ujet de loiier Dieu de ce qu'il tire fa gloire de l’af- 
flition de ce pauure peuple & la fait feruir auanta- 
geufement a fa conuerfion. Quoy qu'il ne foit point 
dans le monde aucune nation plus pauure que celle- 
cy, iln’en eft pas neantmoins de plus orgueilleufe, 
lors quils eftoient dans la profperité, nous ne 
pouuions quafi les aborder, les Francois eftoient des 
chiens, & tout ce que nous leur prefchions eftoient 
des fables. Mais depuis que les afflictions les ont hu- 
miliez, & que la neceffité les a rendus plus dependans 
des Francois, & leur a fait e{prouuer les effects de la 
charité Chreftienne, ils ont ouuert les yeux, & voy- 
ent maintenant plus clair que iamais qu'il n’y a point 
d’autre Diuinité [7] que celle que nous leurs pref- 
chons. En effect de tous ceux qui ne font pas 
encore Chreftiens, il n’y ena prefque point qui ne 
tende pour le moins exterieurement vn te{moignage 


public de l’eftime & approbation qu’il fait de noftre i 
creance: Car fi on les interroge s’ils croyent ce que — 
nous leur difons, & s’ils ne veulent pas e{tre baptifez, ; 
ils refpondent quils croyent en effet, & quils — 
fouhaittent le Baptefme, que s’ils ne font pas encore . 


tous difpofez A receuoir la Foy, ou fi quelques-vnS 
mefme l’abandonnent, c’eft toufiours en aduoiiant a 
la gloire de Dieu, que ce que nous prefchons eft vray, — 
mais difficile. Ce n’eft plus maintenant vne chofe 
honteufe parmy eux de profeffer le Chriftianifme, de 
prier Dieu le foir & le matin en prefence des infideles 
mefmes. La grace va tous les iours adouciffant leur 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 111 


tions, that the hand that smites them is the hand of 
the true God whom they had not yet known, and 
whose judgments are as secret as they are equitable. 
We have, however, great reason to praise God be- 
cause he reaps his glory from the affliction of these 
poor peoples and makes it serve still more for their 
conversion. Although there is not in the world a 
nation poorer than this one, nevertheless there is 
none prouder than they. When they were prosper- 
ous, we could hardly approach them; the French 
were dogs, and all that we preached them were 
fables. But since affliction has humiliated them, and 
necessity has made them more dependent upon the 
French, and has made them experience the effects of 
Christian charity, their eyes are opened; and they 
see more clearly than ever that there is no other 
Divinity [7] than he whom we preach to them. In 
fact, there is hardly one of all those who are not yet 
Christians who does not, outwardly at least, bear wit- 
ness to his esteem and approval of our belief. For, 
if we ask them whether they believe what we tell - 
them, and if they do not wish to be baptized, they 
reply that indeed they do believe, and that they 
desire Baptism. And if they be not yet all disposed 
to receive the Faith, or even if some of them aban- 
don it, they always admit, to the glory of God, that 
what we preach is true, but difficult. Among them 
it is now no longer a thing to be ashamed of to pro- 
fess Christianity, to pray to God night and morning, 
even in the presence of infidels. Grace continues 
day by day to temper their former barbarism. The 
craft of the Jugglers and sorcerers is gradually losing 
credit. Remote nations, attracted by the reputation 
of our good Christians, approach us to enjoy the same 


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


ancienne barbarie. Le meftier des Iongleurs & des 
forciers perd fon credit peu 4 peu, les nations efloi- 
gnées attirées par l’odeur de nos bons Chreftiens 
s'approchent de nous pour iotiyr de la mefme faueur 
que recoiuent celles qui nous [8] font plus proches: 
ils commencent 4 s’appriuoifer 4 nos couftumes, les 
difficultez qu’ils ont a fe foufmettre aux loix Chre- 
{tiennes s’applaniffent de plus en plus, la vertu & 
l’honnefteté eft maintenant parmy eux en venera- 
tion, ceux mefme qui la pratiquent le moins, ne 
laiffent pas de l’honnorer exterieurement. Ils con- 
noiffent maintenant & deteftent plufieurs chofes fous 
le tiltre de vice, qu’ils eftimoient auparauant & loii- 
oient fauflement comme des vertus. Enfin la verité 
triomphe de l’erreur, & le Prince des tenebres eft 
contraint de ceder la place au Roy de gloire & de 
lumiere. 

Ce n’eft pas A dire que tout foit fait. Nous auons 
plus de peine A conferuer nos Chreftiens, qu’a les 
acquerir. Leur vie errante eft vn grand empefche- 
ment ala vertu, & neantmoins les difficultez qu'il y 
a pour les arrefter, font quafi infurmdtables. Les 
terres que nous leur défrichons, les maifons que nous 
leur baftiffons, & les autres fecours fpirituels & cor- 
porels que nous tafchons de leur rendre les arre{tent 
vn peu, mais [9] non pas tout a fait. La colonie des 
Francois qui eft & vray dire le fondement du Chrifti- 
anifme en ces contrées va toufiours croiffant, mais 
lentement, n’eftant pas affiftée de l’ancienne France 
affez puiffamment. Les Algonquins de 1’Ifle, & ceux 
de la Nation d’Hiroquet apres tant d’années d’in- 
{truction ne font pas a la verité fi infolens comme 
auparauant,; mais auffi ils ne font pas fi humbles 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 113 


advantages that are obtained by those [8] nearer to 
us. They are beginning to become accustomed to 
our habits; the difficulties that they have in submit- 
ting to Christian laws are disappearing more and 
more; virtue and modesty are now held in veneration 
by them, and even those who practice them the least 
nevertheless honor them outwardly. They now 
know and detest as vices many things that they 
formerly esteemed and falsely applauded as virtues. 
Finally, truth triumphs over error, and the Prince of 
darkness is compelled to give way to the King of 
glory and of light. 

This does not mean that all has been done. We 
have greater trouble in keeping our Christians than 
in acquiring them. ‘Their wandering life is a great 
obstacle to virtue; and still the difficulties that exist 
with respect to their becoming settled are almost 
insurmountable. ‘The land that we clear, the houses 
that we build for them, and the other aid, spiritual 
and material, that we endeavor to give them, keep 
them stationary for a while, but [9] not permanently. 
The French colony, which is in truth the foundation 
of Christianity in these countries, continues to in- 
crease; but it does so slowly, because it does not 
receive sufficient aid from old France. The Island 
Algonquins, and those of the Hiroquet Tribe, after 
so many years of instruction, are not, it is true, so 
insolent as they formerly were; but they are not yet 
so humble as they must be to become worthy of 
Baptism. The examples of some of them who have 
abandoned the Faith, or who have profaned it by 
shameful actions, prevent us from baptizing many 
whopresentthemselves. Marriagesstill give usmuch 
trouble. We are completely surrounded by Nations 


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 2% 


comme ils faudroit pour eftre capables du Baptefme. 
Les exemples de quelques-vns d’entr’eux qui ont 
quitté la Foy, ou l’ont profanée par des actions indi- 
gnes nous empefchent d’en baptifer plufieurs qui fe 
prefentent. Les mariages nous donnent encore bien 
de la peine. Nous fommes tous enuironnez de Na- 
tions qui ne nous ont encore iamais veu, fi le grand 
fleuue eft vne fois libre, il nous donnera 1’entrée dans 
des Nations innombrables, & grandement peuplées, 
dont quelques-vnes ont defia ouy parler de nous, & 
nous fouhaittent. En vn mot nous ne faifons que ; 
commencer; mais nous efperons que ces heureux 
commencemens auront d’heureux [10] progrez, & 
que Dieu confommera enfin l’ouurage qu’il a entre- 
pris, puis qu'il eft a fa gloire. 


1642-44] . RELATION OF 1643-44 115 


who have, as yet, never seen us. If the great river 
once be free, it will give us access to Nations beyond 
number, and very populous,—some of whom have 
already heard of us and wish for us. Ina word, we 
are only beginning; but we hope that these auspi- 
cious beginnings will have happy [10] results, and 
that God will finally accomplish the work that he has 
undertaken, since it is for his glory. 


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vor. 25 


CHAPITRE II. 


DE QUELQUES BAPTESMES EN LA RESIDENCE DE SAINCT 
IOSEPH. 


tion de fes efleus fes deffeins font fecrets, & 

fes penfées cachées, mais l’execution en eft 
merueilleufement efficace. Nous l’auons veu en la 
perfonne d’vn Capitaine Abnaquiois, que Dieu a tiré 
du milieu d’vne Nation toute infidele, & bien efloi- 
gnée de nous pour le mettre dans le fein de fon 
Eglife. Ily a trois ans qu’il eftoit venu A Sillery 
pour offrir 4 nos Sauuages des prefens en fatisfaction 
de la mort d’vn Algonquin que ceux de fa Nation 
auoient tué. Nos Chreftiens accepterét les prefens, 
les parens du defunct effuyerent [11] leurs larmes, & 
la Paix fuft renoiiée entre ces deux Nations. Vn de 
nos Principaux Neophytes haragua pour annoncer 
cette paix, & adioufta a la fin, parlant au Capitaine 
Abnaquiois qui eftoit entremetteur de la paix, que 
pour rendre leur amitié affeurée & immortelle, il 
falloit qu’il renongaft 4 fes fuperftitions, & qu’il em- 
braffaft la creance dont ils faifoient maintenant pro- 
feffion. Si tu veux, luy dit-il, lier nos deux Nations 
par vne parfaite amitié, ils faut que nous croyons _ 
tous le mefme: Fais-toy baptifer, & procure que tes ug 


i) IEU eft toufiours admirable dans la predeftina- 


gens faffent le mefme, ce lien fera plus fort que tous _ 


les prefens. Nous prions Dieu, & ne reconnoiffons 
point d’autres amis ny freres que ceux qui prient 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 a 9 


CHAPTER II. 


OF SOME BAPTISMS AT THE RESIDENCE OF SAINT 
JOSEPH. 


OD is ever admirable in the predestination of 
G his elect; his designs are secret, and his 
thoughts are hidden, but their accomplish- 

ment is marvelously effective. We have observed. 
this in the person of an Abnaquiois Captain, whom 
God took from the midst of an utterly infidel Nation, 
far distant from us, to place him in the bosom of his 
Church. Three years ago, he had come to Sillery to 
offer presents to our Savages, in satisfaction for the 
death of an Algonquin whom those of his Tribe had 
killed. Our Christians accepted the gifts; the rela- 
tives of the deceased dried [11] their tears, and Peace 
was renewed between these two Tribes. One of our 
Principal Neophytes delivered a harangue to an- 
nounce this peace; and at the end, speaking to the 
Abnaquiois Captain who was the agent of the peace, 
he added that, to make their friendship firm and 
everlasting, it was necessary that he should renounce 
his superstitions, and embrace the belief that they 
now professed. ‘“‘If,’’ said he, ‘‘thou wishest to 
bind our two Tribes by a perfect friendship, it is 
necessary that we should all believethesame. Have 
thyself baptized, and cause thy people to do likewise, 
and that bond will be stronger than any gifts. We 
pray to God, and know no other friends or brothers. 
than those who pray like us. How can we love those: 


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (ou. 


comme nous. Comment aimerions-nous ceux que 
Dieu hait? Or Dieu hait ceux qui ne prient pas: 
Si tu veux doncques nous auoir pour frere{s] & pour 
amis, aprends a prier comme l'on nous a enfeigné: 
Ces paroles firent vne telle impreffion dans 1’efprit 
du Capitaine Abnaquiois qu'il promit de retourner A 
Sillery ’ Efté prochain pour fe faire enfeigner. En 
effet [12] il s’acquitta de fa promeffe, & paruft icy au 
commencement de 1’Ef{té auec huic Canots, lors 
quon fe preparoit pour aller A la guerre contre les 
Iroquois, ot il fuft emmené, & eftant de retour, il 
commenga a preffer fortement fon Baptefme. Ses 
gens firent quelque infolence qui fuft caufe qu’on 
parla de les chaffer. I] prie Monfieur le Gouverneur 
qu’on luy permette de demeurer auec trois de fes 
gens, on le luy accorde. II fe fait inftruire, il affifte 
aux Prieres foir & matin, il entre fouuent dans 
l’Eglife pour vifiter le Sainct Sacrement & luy deman- 
der la grace d’eftre bien toft baptifé. Le Pere Dequen 
le rebute diuerfes fois pour 1’€prouuer, alleguant qu’il 
faut vaquer aux autres qui font plus preffez que luy 
& mieux difpofez, qu'il eft eftranger, & qu’on ne fe 
fie point 4 fa parole. Il refpond A tout cela, que 
s'agiffant du falut de fon ame, il eft autant preffé 
que les autres eftant autant en danger de fe perdre 
comme eftoient les autres qui pourfuiuoient leur Bap- 
tef{me, qu’il fgait defia les Prieres & le Catechifme, 
l’ayant apris de Charles Mejask¥at,[13] auec qui il auoit 
demeuré pendant 1’Hyuer, que pour eftre Eftranger, 
il ne doit pas eftre rebuté puis que le Paradis eft fait 
auffi bien pour ceux de fa Nation que pour les autres, 
qu’il n’eft pas vn enfant pour fe defdire, qu’il a quit- 
té fon pays & renoncé & fa charge de Capitaine pour 


ha 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 : 119 


whom God hates? Now God hates those who do not 
pray. If therefore thou wouldst have us for brothers 
and friends, learn to pray as we have been taught to 
do.’’ These words made such an impression on the 
mind of the Abnaquiois Captain that he promised to 
return to Sillery the following Summer to be in- 
structed. Indeed, [12] he fulfilled his promise, and 
came here at the beginning of Summer with eight 
Canoes, at the time when preparations were being 
made for war against the Iroquois, in which he 
accompanied them; and, on his return, he began to 
press urgently for his Baptism. His people were 
guilty of some offensive conduct which led to threats 
of their expulsion. He begged Monsieur the Govern- 
or to allow him to remain with three of his people, 
and this was granted to him. He had himself 
instructed, attended the Prayers night and morning, 
and frequently entered the Church to visit our Lord 
in the Blessed Sacrament, and to ask of him the grace 
to be soon baptized. Father Dequen refused him 
several times, in order to try him,—saying that he 
had to attend to others, who were more eager and 
better prepared than he; that he was a stranger, and 
that his word was not relied on. To all this he 
replied that, as the salvation of his soul was at stake, 
he was quite as eager as the others, for he was as 
much in danger of being lost as were the others who 
sought Baptism; that he already knew the Prayers 
and the Catechism, having learned them from Charles 
Meiaskwat, [13] with whom he had lived during the 
Winter; that he should not be refused on account of 
his being a Stranger, because Paradise is as much for 
those of his Nation as for the others; that he was 
not a child to break his word; that he had left his 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 25 


eftre inftruit, qu’il veut demeurer toufiours auec les 
Chreftiens de Syllery pour conferuer la Foy, apres 
qu'il aura fait vn voyage en fon pays, & pourueu a 
fes petites affaires. Le Pere voyant fon courage & 
fa perfeuerance apres vne longue efpreuue luy donna 
le contentement qu’il defiroit, & le mit au nombre 
des enfans de Dieu. Monfieur le Gouuerneur le 
nomma lean Baptifte. Apres fon Baptefme il vint 
trouuer le Pere Dequen & luy dit qu’il n’auoit iamais 
reffenty vne ioye pareille A celle de ce iour: Non, 
dit-il, ie ne ferois pas fi ioyeux quand on m’auroit 
retiré des mains des Iroquois. Helas! nous croyons 
qu'il y eft tombé. I1 s’en alloit 4 fon pays pour 
prendre cogé de fes parens, & dire 4 Dieu a fes gens, 
il nous auoit promis de parler hautement [14] & 
hardimét en faueur de la foy, & céme i’écris cecy vn 
Canot d’Abnaquiois viét d’arriuer par la mefme riui- 
ere par laquelle il s’en alloit, qui ne la point rencon- 
tré, mais bien plufieurs piftes d’Iroquois, & vn de 
leurs Canots qu’ils ont laiffé, apres s’eftre faifis, 
comme l’on croit, de celuy de ce pauure Chreftien, 
il e{toit en compagnie d’vn Catechumene de fa Na- 
tion qui auoit de grandes ardeurs & difpofitions A la 
Foy. Dieu foit beny de tout, nous ne deuons pas 
fotiiller dans fes confeils, mais les adorer tous auec 
trefpect. 

Vn vieillard de la Nation d’Hiroquet fameux Sor- 
cier, & grandement expert dans toutes les fupertfti- 
tions de fa Nation, qui en eft toute pleine, ne pouuat 
fuiure fes gens a la chaffe, fuft obligé de s’arrefter A 
Sillery, ot les Meres Hofpitalieres luy firent la 
charité de le nourrir dans leur Hofpital pendant tout 
l’Hyuer auec plufieurs autres infirmes & malades. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 : 121 


country and renounced his office of Captain, in order 
to be instructed; that he wished to remain always 
with the Christians of Syllery, in order to maintain 
his Faith, after he should have made a voyage to his 
own country and settled his little affairs. When the 
Father saw his courage and his perseverance, after a 
long trial he granted him the satisfaction that he 
desired, and placed him in the number of the chil- 
dren of God. Monsieur the Governor named him 
Jean Baptiste. After his Baptism, he came to Fa- 
ther Dequen, and told him that he had never expe- 
rienced joy such as he felt that day. ‘‘ No,”’ he said, 
““T could not be so joyful even if I had been saved 
from the hands of the Iroquois.” Alas! we fear that 
he has fallen into them. He was going back to his 
own country, to take leave of his relatives and to bid 
Adieu to his people. He had promised us that he 
would speak decidedly [14] and boldly in favor of 
the faith; and, as I write this, an Abnaquiois Canoe 
has just arrived which came by the very river on 
which he went. These people did not meet him, 
but saw many traces of the Iroquois, and one of their 
Canoes that they had left, after having seized, as we 
believe, that of this poor Christian. He was accom- 
panied by a Catechumen of his Tribe who had a great 
ardor and disposition for the Faith. God be blessed 
for all; we must not seek to pry into his counsels, 
but adore them all with respect. 

An old man of the Hiroquet Tribe—who was a 
notorious Sorcerer, and very well versed in all the 
superstitions of his Nation, which is saturated with 
them — could not follow his people to the chase, and 
was obliged to stop at Sillery, where the Hospital 
Mothers fed him out of charity in their Hospital, 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


La charité eft parfaitement éloquente dans fon 
filence, les ceuures font bien plus d’impreffion fur 
les efpris que toutes les plus exquifes paroles. [15] 
Auffi eft-ce le plus fort argument de credibilité que 
nous ayons pour toucher les cceurs des Sauuages. 
Ce pauure vieillard fe voyant feruy & affifté fi cha- 
ritablement par ces bonnes Meres, & confiderant le 
foing & les grands frais auec lefquels elles foignoient 
les autres malades & infirmes fans aucune efperance 
de recompenfe, & oyant dire qu’elles auoient quitté 
leurs parens & vn fi beau pays pour venir fecourir 
icy les pauures & les malades, congeut vne grande 
idée de la bonté & faincteté de noftre Religion, & fe 
fentit efmeu a l'embraffer. Ces bons mouuemés 
eftant affiftez des bonnes paroles qu’il oyoit dire, & 
de l’inftruction qu’on luy faifoit le firent refoudre a 
demander d’eftre inftruit & difpofé au Baptefme, 
fon aage ne luy permettoit pas d’auoir beaucoup 
d’efprit ny de memoire; neantmoins il s’appliqua 
auec tant de ferueur & de contention 4 apprendre 
les Prieres qu'il en vint 4 bout dans trois iours au 
grand eftonnement de tous les autres & de foy-mefme 
qui defefperoit auparauant de fgauoir rien appren- 
dre. Ilne [16] reftoit qu’éa luy faire rendre vn poil 
qu’il conferuoit cherement, & adoroit céme vne petite 
diuinité. C’eft vn poil, difoit-il, que i’ay arraché de 
la mouftache du Manitou, c’eft ce poil qui m’a con- 
ferué la vie dans mille hazards ott ie me fuis rencon- 
tré de la perdre. Ie me fuffe noyé cét fois fans ce 
poil: c’eft luy qui m’a fait tuer des orignaus, qui m’a 
preferué des maladies, & m’a fait viure fi long- 
temps: I’ai gueri auec ce poil des malades, iln’ya 
rien que ie ne faffe auec ce poil: me le demander, © 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 123 


during the whole Winter, together with many other 
infirm and sick persons. Charity is thoroughly elo- 
quent in its silence; works produce much more im- 
pression on the mind than the most exquisite oratory. 
[15] It is therefore the strongest argument for belief 
that we have, wherewith to touch the hearts of the 
Savages. When this poor old man saw himself so 
charitably waited upon and succored by the good 
Mothers; when he observed the attention and the 
great expense with which they cared for the other 
sick and infirm, without any hope of reward; and 
when he learned that they had left their relatives 
and so fine a country, in order to come here to suc- 
cor the indigent and the sick,— he conceived a high 
idea of the goodness and holiness of our Religion, 
and felt himself impelled to embrace it. This good 
impulse, aided by the pious words that he heard, and 
the instruction that was given to him, made him 
resolve to ask to be instructed and prepared for Bap- 
tism. Hisage did not allow him to have much mind 
or memory; nevertheless, he applied himself with 
so much fervor and perseverance to the task of learn- 
ing the Prayers that he succeeded in doing so in the 
space of three days, to the great astonishment of all 
the others and of himself, for he had before despaired 
of learning anything. It only [16] remained to 
induce him to give up a hair that he lovingly 
preserved, and worshiped asalittle divinity. ‘‘It is 
a hair,’’ he said, ‘‘ that I have pulled from the mous- 
tache” of the Manitou. That hair has saved my 
life a thousand times, when I have been in danger 
of losing it. I would have been drowned a hundred 
times had it not been for this hair. It is this which 
has enabled me to kill moose, has preserved me from 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 25 


c’eft me demander la vie. II] fallut bien du temps & 
de la patience pour defabufer ce pauure vieillard; 
le Diable le tenoit fortement par ce poil, & luy per- 
fuadoit viuement, qu'il eftoit mort s’il s’en défaifoit: 
Mais enfin le Sainct Efprit fuft le maiftre; Ie crois 
que ie mourray, dit-il, quand i’auray rendu mon poil, 
mais il n’importe, ie le donneray: i’ayme mieux 
mourir & aller en Paradis, que de viure plus long- 
temps & aller en Enfer. Quand la volonté eft gai- 
gnée, l’entendement ne fait pas de grandes refiftences. 
Apres cette genereufe refolution, il fut aifé [17] de 
luy perfuader, qu’il n’en mouroit pas, & que fa vie 
n’eftoit pas attachée ace poil, mais 4 la Prouidence 
d’vn Dieu plus fort que fon Manitou. Le Ieudy 
Sainct les Sauuages eftans tous affemblez pour affi- 
{ter 4 la ceremonie du lauement des pieds, & du 
feftin qu’on leur deuoit faire enfuite dans 1’ Hofpital, 
ce bon Catechumene fe refolut enfin de fe défaire de 
fon poil, & en faire vn facrifice 4 Dieu; il prend fon 
fac A petun, & en tire vn autre plus petit, & de cet- 
tuy-cy vn troifiefme gentiment ouuragé 4 leur mode, 
& bigarré de Porc-Epi, qu’il me met entre les mains. 
Ie l’ouure & le trouue remply de duuet au milieu 
duquel, ce poil eftoit enuelopé: brufle-le me dit-il, 
afin qu'il ne me brufle, ie hais & detefte le mefchant 
Manitou, ie ne le crains point, ie renonce & a luy, & 
4 tout ce qui luy appartient. Apres cela ie n’ay rien 
ate donner, ny a quiter, ce poil eftoit mon threfor, ? 
toute ma malice eftoit attachée-la: baptifez-moy. 
Nous luy accordafmes ce bon-heur le Samedy Sainct, Hy 
iour deputé particulierement a la ceremonie [18] du 
Sainct Baptefme: Monfieur de Sainct Sauueur le | 
nomma Bonauenture, il monta quelque temps apres 


a 


gt oe 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 » 125 


sickness, and has made me live so long. I have 
cured the sick with this hair; there is nothing that 
I cannot do with it. To ask me for it is to ask for 
my life.’”"™ It took a long time and much patience 
to undeceive this poor old man. ‘The Devil held 
him firmly by that hair, and strongly persuaded him 
that he would die if he parted with it; but, in the 
end, the Holy Ghost was victorious. ‘‘I think that 
I shall die,’’ he said, ‘‘ when I shall have given up 
my hair; but no matter, I will give it up. I would 
rather die and go to Paradise, than live longer and 
go to Hell.’’ When the will is gained, the intel- 
lect does not offer great resistance. After this 
brave resolution, it was easy [17] to convince him 
that he would not die, and that his life did not depend 
upon that hair, but upon the Providence of a God 
who was more powerful than his Manitou. On Holy 
Thursday,— when the Savages were all assembled to 
assist at the ceremony of washing the feet, and at 
the feast that was afterward to be given them in the 
Hospital,— this good Catechumen resolved at last to 
part with his hair, and to make a sacrifice of it to 
God. He therefore took his tobacco pouch, from 
which he drew a smaller one, and from the latter a 
third, neatly embroidered in their fashion with rows 
of Porcupine quills, which he placed in my hands. 
I opened it, and found it filled with down, in which 
the hair was wrapped. ‘‘ Burn it,’’ he said to me, 
““so that it may not burn me. I hate and detest the 
wicked Manitou; I do not fear him; I renounce 
both him and all that belongs to him. Besides that, 
I have nothing to give thee, or to abandon; that 
hair was my treasure; all my wickedness depended 
upon it. Baptize me.’’ We granted him that hap- 


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. % 


aux trois Riuieres, 1a ot ceux qui l’auoient conneu, 
le voyant prier Dieu, s’eftonnerent de ce grand 
changement, & comme ils luy demandoient, fi en 
effet il aymoit la Priere, il faut bien, dit-il, que ie 
l’ayme, puis que pour l’amour d’elle i’ay donné mon 
poil, & interrogé derechef qu'elle chofe l’auoit con- 
uerty, il refpondit que c’eftoit la Charité qu’il auoit 
efprouuée chez les Filles qui font habillées de blanc: 
il vouloit dire les Hofpitalieres. 

Nous baptifames bien-to{t apres vn ieune homme 
de la mefme Nation, auquel arriua vne chofe affez 
notable auant fon Baptefme: I] eftoit allé 4 la chaffe 
auec fes compagnons, & auoit couru plufieurs iours 
dans les bois fans rien trouuer, la faim les preffoit 
tous viuement, lors que cettuy-cy qui n’eftoit encore 
que Catechumene & n’auoit receu quafi aucune 
inftruction fe retira 4 l’efcart, fe mit 4 deux genoux 
dans la neige, & efleuant les yeux & [19] les mains 
au Ciel: Mon Dieu, dit-il, aye pitié de moy; i’ay bien 
faim: Tu le fgais bien; ie voudrois tuer vn orignac: 
ie n’en ay iamais tué; ie n’en vois point: fi tu veux 
pourtat, i’en tuerai bien-toft vn. C’eft toy qui les a 
faits, & tu les a faits pour nous: fitu ne le veux pas, 
n’importe: mais, ne me laiffe pas mourir, car ie ne 
{uis pas encore baptifé, & ie le veux bien eftre. Dieu 
aggrea cette priere faite auec tant d’ingenuité, de 
confiance & de refignation: il voit incdtinent la pifte 
d’vn orignac, il court apres, il l’attrape, le tué, fe 
remet a genoux dans la neige, remercie fon bien- — 
facteur & luy deftine la meilleure partie de fa prife — 
qu'il luy offrit & fon retour en la perfonne des — 
malades de 1’ Hofpital. 

Les autres Baptefmes que nous auons fait icy ne 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 197 


piness on Holy Saturday, the day especially set apart 
for the ceremony [18] of Holy Baptism. Monsieur 
de Saint Sauveur named him Bonaventure. Some 
time afterward, he went up to the three Rivers; and 
when those who lived there, and who had known 
him, saw him pray to God, they were surprised at 
the great change. When they asked him if he really 
loved Prayer, he said: ‘‘I must really love it, since 
Ihave given up my hair for love of it.’’ And, on 
being again asked what had converted him, he replied 
that it was the Charity that he had received from 
‘the Women clothed in white,’’ meaning the Hos- 
pital Nuns. 

Shortly afterward, we baptized a young man of 
the same Tribe, to whom a rather remarkable thing 
happened before his Baptism. He had gone out 
hunting with his companions, and had roamed 
through the woods for several days without finding 
anything. They were all much pressed by hunger, 
when he—who was only a Catechumen, and had 
received but little instruction— withdrew to one 
side, knelt in the snow, and, raising his eyes and 
[19] his hands to Heaven, said: ‘‘ My God, have pity 
onme. I am very hungry; Thou knowest it well. 
I would like to killa moose; I have never killed one, 
and I do not see any; and yet, if thou grant it, I 
could soon kill one. Thou hast made them, and 
thou hast made them for us. If thou dost not grant 
this, it matters not; but do not let me die, for I am 
not yet baptized, and I desire to be.’’ God granted 
this prayer, said with such ingenuousness, such 
confidence, andsuch resignation. He forthwith came 
upon the track of a moose, and pursued, caught, and 
killed it. Then he knelt again in the snow, thanked 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 25 


font remarquables par aucune circonftance extra- 
ordinaire, ie ne puis neantmoins m’empefcher de 
coucher icy quelques bons fentimens de ces nouueaux 
enfans de Dieu. Pierre Oumenabano s’eft difpofé a 
fon Baptefme auec vne ferueur extraordinaire, on ne 
pouuoit l’enfeigner affez, ny affez [20] faire prier 
Dieu: dés qu’il commenga 4 eftre Catechumene, il 
euft vne deuotion particuliere au Sainct Sacrement 
qu’il vifitoit plufieurs fois foir & matin: fa priere 
ef{toit, Iefus aye pitié de moy, qu’il repetoit cent 
fois, ne fcachant dire autre chofe. [1 regarda foi- 
gneufement toutes les fortes de reuerences qu’on fait 
au Sainct Sacrement, & autant de fois qu’il entroit & 
fortoit de la Chappelle, il les faifoit toutes l’vne 
apres l'autre, & celles des Preftres, & celles des 
hommes, & celles des femmes, & interrogé pourquoy 
il en faifoit tant: Ie voudrois, dit-il, honorer Dieu 
autant que font tous les autres enfemble, quelques- 
vns ne pouuoient s’abftenir de rire, il perfiftoit 
toufiours neantmoins dans fa deuotion, ie crois que 
Dieu aggreoit cette fimplicité. Apres fon Baptefme 
il continua dans fa deuotion au Sainct Sacrement le 
vifitant fouuent, & repetant continuellement ces 
paroles: Iefus ie te remercie, Iefus ie te remercie. Il 
dit vn iour au Pere qui l’in{truifoit, & le repeta par 
apres fort fouuent. Ie fuis bien mal, outre les 
efcroiielles qui me deffeichent, [21] i’ay beaucoup © 
d’autres incommoditez qui me trauaillent. Ile fuis — 
content de mourir fi Dieu le veut; mais neantmoins — 
ie ferois bien aife de viure long-temps fi Dieu le vou- 

loit. Eftant interrogé pourquoy il auoit ce defir; ce { 
n’e{t pas, dit-il, pour ioiiyr des plaifirs de cette vie, 
car ie n’en goufte point, ny ne les fouhaitte, mais — 


Tenens —gee T) 


1642-44] RELATION OF 164?-44 > “T20 


his benefactor, and set apart for him the best portion 
of his capture, which he offered to him on his return 
in the persons of the sick in the Hospital. 

The other Baptisms that we have administered 
here are not remarkable for any peculiar circum- 
stances. I cannot, however, refrain from mention- 
ing here some good sentiments of these new children 
of God. Pierre Oumenabano prepared himself for 
his Baptism with extraordinary fervor; he could not 
receive enough instruction, nor could he [20] pray to 
God sufficiently. As soon as he commenced to be a 
Catechumen, he had a special devotion for our Lord 
in the Blessed Sacrament, whom he visited several 
times, night and morning. His prayer was: “‘ Jesus, 
have pity on me,’’ which he repeated a hundred 
times, not knowing what else to say. He carefully 
remarked all the obeisances that are made before the 
Blessed Sacrament, and, whenever he entered or left 
the Chapel, he made all these, one after another — 
those of the Priests, those of the men, and those of 
the women: and, when he was asked why he made 
so many, he said: ‘‘I would like to honor God as 
much as all the others together honor him.’’ Some 
could not refrain from laughing; he nevertheless 
persevered in his devotion and I think that his sim- 
plicity was agreeable toGod. After his Baptism, he 
continued his devotion to our Lord in the Blessed 
Sacrament, visiting him often, and continually 
repeating these words: ‘‘ Jesus, I thank thee; Jesus, 
I thank thee.’’ He said one day to the Father who 
instructed him, and afterward repeated very often, 
‘‘T am very ill; besides the scrofula that withers me, 
[21] I have many other ailments that trouble me. I 
am content to die, if it be God’s will; but, never- 


130° LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 2% 


afin de pouuoir remercier Dieu long-temps, & le 
feruir. Ie ne commence qu’a le connoiftre: ie n’ay 
encore rien fait pour luy, ie voudrois bien faire 
quelque chofe pour fon amour, & auoir beaucoup de 
temps pour le feruir, & apprendre 4 le bien prier. 
Le Pere luy dit, qu’il feroit tout cela en Paradis 
mieux qu’en terre: Mais, dit-il, en Paradis on n’a 
point de peine a feruir Dieu, & il en a tant eu pour 
nous. Ce bon Neophyte difoit en fa langue ce que 
Sainc Auguftin difoit en vn autre. Sero te cognout 
bonttas antiqua, fero te amaut. 

Iofeph Memench ieune garcon de la Nation des 
Nipiffiriniens eftant encore Catechumene, & voyant 
qu’on differoit de le baptifer, nonobftant qu’il fuit 
fuffifamment [22] inftruict, en demanda la raifon. 
On luy refpondit, qu’on apprehendoit qu’il ne fuft 
pas affez conftant, & que remontant en fon pays, il 
n’abandonnaft la Foy: Cette parole l’affligea fenfible- 
ment, ils’addreffe au Pere quil’in{truifoit. Efcrits- 
luy, dit-il, au Pere Vimont: Voyla ce que tu luy 
efcriras. Pere Vimont, Memench eft trifte, de ce 
qu'on ne veut pas le baptifer, il femble qu’il perd 
courage, il te veut parler afin que tu le faffe baptifer, 
efcoute-le, Voicy comme il te parle. I’ay quitté 
mon pays & mes parens pour venir icy, & y eftre 
baptifé: car quelle autre chofe ferois-ie venu cher- 
cher icy ot ie n’ay aucun parent, ny aucune connoif- 
fance? Ie fgais toutes les Prieres, & tout le Cate- 
chifme, fi ie fuis vne fois baptifé, ie ne veux point 
remonter la-haut ot font les mefchans, ie demeure- 
tray icy auec les bons, ie fuis ieune, mais ie fcay 
pourtant ce que ie fais, ie conferueray la Priere toute 
ma vie: ie ne mens point, commande-donc qu’on me 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ial Fs 


theless, I would be well pleased to live a long time 
if God granted it.’’ On being asked why he had that 
desire, he said: ‘‘It is not to enjoy the pleasures of 
this life, for I taste of none, nor doI desire them; 
but in order to be able to thank God for a long time, 
and to serve him. I am only commencing to know 
him; I have as yet done nothing for him; I would 
like to do something for love of him, and to have 
plenty of time to serve him, and to learn to pray 
properlytohim.” The Father told him that he could 
do all that better in Paradise than on earth. ‘‘ But,”’ 
he replied, ‘‘in Paradise there is no trouble in serv- 
ing God, and he has had so much for us.”’ This 
good Neophyte said in his own language what Saint 
Augustine said in another: Servo te cognovi bonitas 
antiqua, sero te amavt. 

Joseph Memench,—a young boy of the Nipissiri- 
nien Tribe, who was yet a Catechumen,— seeing that 
we delayed baptizing him, although he was suff- 
ciently [22] instructed, asked the reason of it. He 
was told that we feared that he would not be con- 
stant enough, and that, when he returned to his own 
country, he would abandon the Faith. These words 
caused him great affliction. He said to the Father 
who instructed him: ‘‘ Write to Father Vimont, and 
this is what thou shalt write to him: ‘ Father Vi- 
mont, Memench is sad because they will not baptize 
him; he seems to lose courage; he wishes to speak 
to thee, that thou mayst have him baptized. Listen 
to him; this is what he says: ‘‘I have left my own 
country and my parents, to come here and be bap- 
tized; for what else would I have come to seek 
here, where I have no relatives or acquaintances? I 
know all the Prayers and the whole of the Catechism. 


vu rere 


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


baptife; fi tu ne le veux pas faire, ie feray trifte 
m’en retourneray en mon pays ot ie [23] mour 
peut eftre fans Baptefme, tu en feras la caufe: Voyla 
ce que te dit Memench; Ce n’eft pas mal dit pour vn 
Sauuage de quinze ans, il voulut eftre luy-mefme le 
porteur de la lettre, pour plaider fa caufe en propre | 
perfonne, & illa plaida fi bien qu'il la gaigna. Mon- 
fieur de Godefroy luy fit l’honneur de luy donner > 
le nom de Iofeph. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 133 


If Iam once baptized, I do not wish to go back up 
there where the wicked are; I will remain here with 
the good people. I am young, but still I know 
what Iam doing. I will keep up Prayer all my life; 
I do not lie. Command, therefore, that I be bap- 
tized. If thou wilt not do so, I shall be sad; I shall 
return to my own country, where I [23] shall per- 
haps die without Baptism. Thou wilt be the cause 
of it.’’ This is what Memench says to thee.’’’ It 
was not badly said, for a Savage fifteen years old. 
He wished to be himself the bearer of the letter, so 
that he might plead his cause in person; and he 
pleaded so well that he won it. Monsieur de Gode- 
froy did him the honor of giving him the name of 
Joseph. 


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


CHAPITRE III. 


DES BONS SENTIMENS & ACTIONS DES CHRESTIENS DE 
SAINCT IOSEPH. 


OUR donner vne idée generale des Chreftiens de 
Saint Iofeph, il fuffit de dire en peu de mots, 
que cette petite trouppe qui fait fon fejour dans 

cette refidence eft le leuain de cette nouuelle Eglife, 
& la plus belle perle de la Couronne que Iefus-Chrift 
s'ef{t acquife dans ce nouueau Royaume, ce font eux 
qui ont receu les premiers la Foy, [24] qui 1l’ont 
portée dans les autres Nations, & qui la fouftiennent 
maintenant par tout par leurs paroles, & bons ex- 
emples, quand on parle de reformer quelque mauuais 
Chreftien, on le met en la compagnie de ceux-cy, de 
laquelle ceux qui font les plus feruens, ne fgauroient 
fe feparer, fans reffentir quelque refroidiffement de 
leur ferueur. Si quelquesfois ils fe trouuent meflez 
auec les Algonquins & autres Nations plus hautes, 
on les diftingue affez par la profeffion publique qu’ils 
font de toutes les vertus Chreftiennes, & par 1l’auer- 
fion qu’ils tefmoignent auoir de tout ce qui reffent 
leur ancienne barbarie. Auffi leur reputation eft 
e{tendué dans toutes ces contrées, & fait vn merueil- 
leux efclat parmy toutes les Nations qui accourent 
icy pour voir ce qu’elles ont oiiy dire du changement 
admirable que la Foy opere dans des cceurs qui 


auparauant n’eftoient rien moins barbares que les 
leurs: Nous attribuons ce bon-heur apres Dieu, © 
aux deux Capitaines qui commandent 4 ces bons ~ 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 " 185 


CHAPTER III. 


OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS AND ACTIONS OF THE 
CHRISTIANS OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


O give a general idea of the Christians of Saint 
Joseph, it suffices to say, in a few words, that 
this little band who dwell in this residence are 

the leaven of this new Church, and the finest pearl 
in the Crown that Jesus Christ has acquired for 
himself in this new Kingdom. It is they who first 
received the Faith, [24] who have borne it to other 
Nations, and who now maintain it everywhere by 
their words and good examples. When we wish to 
reform a bad Christian, we put him in the company 
of these people, from which those who are most 
fervent cannot separate themselves without feeling 
some cooling of theirfervor. If sometimes they find 
themselves mingled with the Algonquins and other 
Nations further up, they are sufficiently distinguished 
by their public profession of all the Christian virtues, 
and by the aversion that they manifest for all that is 
the sign of their former barbarism. Consequently, 
their reputation has spread throughout all these 
countries, and has a wonderful luster among all the 
Nations. These flock hither to witness that of which 
they have heard, the marvelous change that Faith 
has worked in hearts which formerly were no less 
barbarous than theirs. We attribute this blessing, 
after God, to the two Captains in command of these 
good Neophytes, Noél Tekwerimatch and Jean Bap- 


i 
> , 
\ he 
iat y 
gt 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


Neophytes, Noél Tekserimatch & lean Baptifte qui 
[25] embraffent. & pouffent les affaires de la Foy auec 
yn zele & vne prudence qui furpaffent tout ce qu’on 
peut efperer d’vn Sauuage. lean Baptifte fe contente 
dagir, & ne parle pas beaucoup. Noél eft puiffant 
en fes paroles, auffi bien qu’en fes actions. le 
rapporteray icy quelques-vns de fes difcours, ot l’on 
verra les lumieres & les fentimens que Dieu luy 
donne. 

Vn iour le Pere Dequen faifant feftin a nos 
Neophytes a l’occafion du Baptefme d’vn Sauuage, a 
mefure qu’il leur rapportoit felon leur couftume les 
diuers mets dont eftoit affaifonnée la fagamité, ils 
refpondoient A vn chacun par autant de ho gui font 
des cris de ioye, qu’ils arrachent du. fonds de la 
poidrine. Mais a la fin quand il leur euft dit que le 
fujet du feftin eftoit le Baptefme d’vn de leurs gens, 
ils efleuerent la voix & ietterent non vn, mais trois 
cris, ho, ho, ho: cela donna occafion & Noél de 
parler en faueur de la Foy, & de dire a ces gens: 

A la bonne-heure, que vous vous faffiez tous 
baptifer, & que vous defiriez [26] tous de croire en 
Dieu. La Doctrine que les Peres nous prefchent, eft 
excellente. Tout ce qu’elle contient, eft parfaitement 
raifonnable; elle ne reffemble pas 4 nos anciennes 
fables qui font remplies de fotifes, & d’extrauagances. 
C’eft vrayement vn Dieu celuy qu’on nous prefche: 
Les promeffes qu’il nous fait, font rauiffantes, les 
{upplices dont il menace les mefchans, font efpou- 
uentables, mais iuftes & équitables; Pour moy ie 
vous affeure que i’eftimé & aymé cette doctrine dés 
qu’elle me fuft propofée; & quoy que i’aymaffe ma 


reputation & ma vie, neantmoins ie l’ay embrafiée — 
nonobftant la crainte que i’auois pour lors de perdre — 


eS a 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ° 137 


tiste, who [25] undertake and advance matters relat- 
ing to the Faith, with a zeal and prudence surpassing 
everything that might be expected from a Savage. 
Jean Baptiste is content with deeds, and speaks but 
little; Noél is energetic in his speech, as well as in 
his actions. I will here relate some of his speeches, 
which will show the enlightenment and the senti- 
ments that God gives him. 

One day, Father Dequen gave a feast to our Neo- 
phytes, on the occasion of the Baptism of a Savage. 
As he brought them, according to their custom, the 
various viands with which the sagamité was sea- 
soned, they received each of these with as many 
exclamations of ‘‘Ho!’’—an expression of joy which 
they draw from the depths of their chests. But at 
the end, when he told them that the occasion of the 
feast was the Baptism of one of their people, they 
raised their voices and called out, not once but three 
times, ‘‘ Ho! ho! ho!’’ This gave Noél an oppor- 
tunity of speaking in favor of the Faith, and of 
saying to his people: 

“It is a good thing that you should all be bap- 
tized, and that you should all wish [26] to believe in 
God. The Doctrine that the Fathers preach to us is 
excellent—all that it contains is entirely reason- 
able; it in no wise resembles our old fables, which 
are full of folly and extravagance. He whom they 
preach to us is truly a God. The promises that he 
makes us are delightful; the torments with which he 
threatens the wicked are fearful, but they are just 
and equitable. For my part, I assure you that I 
esteemed and loved that doctrine as soon as it was 
propounded to me; and, although I loved my repu- 
tation and my life, I nevertheless embraced it in 


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 2% 


l’vn & lautre: ie voyois que tous les iours nous 
allions mourant, & que la mort moiffonnoit pluftoft 
les Chreftiens que les infideles. Ceux qui croyoient 
pour lors paffoient pour des efprits foibles, n’importe, 
difois-ie en mon cceur, & la bonne-heure que ie fois 
mefprifé & que ie meure, ie veux croire, puis que 
c’ef{t la volonté de Dieu qui eft preferable 4 la repu- 
tation, & A la vie. C’eft Dieu qui [27] m’a fortifié 
contre ces vaines apprehenfions: haftez-vous de vous 
faire baptifer, vous qui ne l’efte[s] pas encore, ne 
craignez pas la mort, ny le mefpris, la Priere n’en 
eft pas la caufe, c’eft elle qui nous donne la vie, & 
qui nous met dans la poffeffion de la vraye gloire. 
Voicy vn autre de fes difcours 4 l’occafion d’vn 
mariage. Vn Capitaine de la Nation des Abnaquiois 
baptifé depuis peu recherchoit en mariage vne fille 
Chreftienne. Noél eftant confulté fur ce fujet, apres 
auoir demandé du temps pour y penfer, refpondit 
qu’il n’eftoit point d’aduis qu’on fe haftaft, dans 
l’apprehenfion qu’il auoit de l’inconftance de ce Capi- 
taine: mais cettuy-cy ayant perfifté long-temps dans 
fa recherche, & donné toutes les affeurances qu’on 
pouuoit efperer de fa fidelité, Noél & les autres Capi- 
taines & principaux Chreftiens confentirent a céte 
alliance, laquelle fe fit publiquement dans noftre 
Chappelle auec toutes les folemnitez de 1’Eglife, 
apres que le Pere euft fait vn petit difcours pour — 
exhorter 4 l’amour coniugal ceux quivenoient de[28]_ 
receuoir la Benediction Nuptiale, Noél Tekserimatch . 
print la parole, & fe tournant vers l’affemblée: g 
Ne vous eftonnez pas, leur dit-il, fi i'ay differéfi 
long-temps A confentir A ce mariage, c’eft vne chofe iq 
de grande importance que le mariage des Chreftiens, 
& qui eft extremément contraire 4 nos humeurs & 4 — 


ee 


ee OOOO lr lO a 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "189 


spite of the fear that I then had of losing both. I 
saw that we were dying off every day, and that death 
reaped his harvest more among the Christians than 
among the infidels. Those who then believed were 
considered weak-minded. ‘ No matter,’ I saidin my 
heart; ‘evenif I am to be despised and to die, I wish 
to believe, because God’s will is preferable to reputa- 
tion and to life.’ It was God who [27] strengthened 
me against those idle fears. Hasten to be baptized, 
ye who are not yet so. Fear neither death nor con- 
tempt. Prayer is not the cause thereof; it gives us 
life, and places us in possession of true glory.”’ 

Here is another of his discourses, on the occasion 
of amarriage. A Captain of the Abnaquiois Nation, 
who had recently been baptized, sought a Christian 
girl in marriage. Noél was consulted on the sub- 
ject, and after asking to be allowed some time to 
think over the matter, he replied that he was of 
opinion that there should be no haste, owing to the 
fear that he had of the Captain’s inconstancy. But, 
as the latter pressed his suit for a long time, and 
gave every assurance of his fidelity that could be 
expected, Noél and the other Captains and principal 
Christians consented to the marriage, which was 
publicly contracted in our Chapel, with all the rites 
of the Church. After the Father had delivered a 
short discourse, exhorting to conjugal love those 
who had just [28] received the Nuptial Benediction, 
Noél Tekwerimatch began to speak, and, turning 
toward the assembled people, he said: 

‘Be not surprised if I have so long deferred my 
consent to this marriage. The marriage of Chris- 
tians is a matter of great importance, and quite 
opposed to our inclinations and customs. We are 


ia 
; aa 
> a 
. —_ 


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Wot. 25 


nos couftumes: nous aymons auec paffion la liberté, 
nous nous plaifons a changer de femme, & quelques- 
fois nous en voudrions auoir plus d’vne; Tout cela 
eft contre les loix du mariage des Chreftiens, c’eft vn 
affaire auquel il ne faut pas fe precipiter, ie connois 
Vhumeur de nos filles, qui font volages, & ont de la 
peine & demeurer toufiours attachées 4 vn mary, ie 
{cay d’ailleurs que les Abnaquiois font fujets a quit- 
ter & changer leurs femmes, & 4 en retenir plufieurs 
enfemble: Pour toy tu n’as pas toufiours efté fort 
fage, ie fgay que tu as couru de nuict les Cabanes, il 
femble que tu as plus d’efprit depuis ton Baptefme,; 
mais il falloit t’efprouuer, i’apprehendois qu'il n'y 
euft pas affez de fincerité & de fermeté en [29] tes 
paroles, & ie ne fuis pas encore tout a fait hors de 
cette apprehenfion, fouuiens-toy de ce que tu as dit 
maintenant: nous l’auons ouy, fi tu nous trompe, 
nous t’en ferons de fanglans reproches deuant Dieu 
& deuant les hommes. Tu as eu loifir de penfer a 
ce que tu deuois faire, tu n’eft pas vn enfant pour 
t’en defdire, refpecte ton mariage qui n’ef{t pas pro- 
fane comme celuy des infideles, mais Sainct & Reli- 
gieux; fois fidel & Dieu & A ta femme, fi tu fais ce 
que ie te dis, Dieu t’aymera, & nous auffi: prends 
courage, ne te fie-pas 2 toy mefme, prie Dieu efpere 
en luy, il t’aydera. 

Cette harangue prononcée en bons termes & auec 
ardeur beaucoup plus cdfufément & efficacement 
qu'elle n’eft icy couchée fuft efcoutée auec attention 


de toute l’affemblée, & donna a tous les Sauuages — 


qui eftoient la prefens en bon nombre, du refpect & 


de la veneration enuers le Sacrement de Mariage, ~ 


principalement au nouueau Marié, qui refpondit a 
Noél en ces termes. 


f 
: 

i 

i 
Ls 
i 
q 


ae 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 141 


passionately fond of liberty; we like to change our 
wives, and sometimes we would wish to have more 
than one. All this is contrary to the laws of Chris- 
tian marriage. It is a matter in which one must 
not be hasty. I know the disposition of our girls, 
who are flighty, and find it difficult to remain always 
attached to one husband. I know also that the 
Abnaquiois are in the habit of leaving and changing 
their wives, and of having several at the same time. 
As for thee, thou hast not always been very discreet, 
and I know that thou hast gone about the Cabins at 
night. It seems that thou hast more sense since thy 
Baptism, but it was necessary to try thee. I feared 
that there was not sufficient sincerity and firmness in 
[29] thy words, and I am not yet quite free from that 
apprehension. Remember what thou hast just now 
said; we have heard it. If thou shouldst deceive us, 
we will reproach thee bitterly before God and before 
men. Thou hast had leisure to think of what thou 
shouldst do; thou art not a child, to break thy word. 
Respect thy marriage, which is not a profane one 
like that of the infidels, but Holy and Religious. Be 
faithful to God and to thy wife. If thou wilt do 
what I tell thee, God will love thee, and so shall we. 
Take courage; rely not upon thyself. Pray to God, 
hope in him, and he will help thee.”’ 

This harangue—delivered in good terms, and 
with ardor, much more fluently and effectively than 
is here set down —was listened to attentively by the 
whole assembly, and inspired all the Savages, who 
were present in good number, with respect and 
veneration for the Sacrament of Marriage, especially 
the Bridegroom, who replied to Noél as follows: 

[30] ‘* Thou sayest truly that the Marriage of Chris- 


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 25 


[30] Tu dis vray, le Mariage des Chreftiens eft vn 4 
affaire de grande importance, & auquel il ne faut pas 
fe precipiter: i'y ay penfé metrement, auant que — 
d’en parler, & ay prié Dieu fouuent fur ce fujet, ie — 
n’ay iamais trouué mauuais que vous efprouuafiiez a 
ma conftance, & quoy qu'il me fembloit que vous — 
n’agreaffiez pas ma recherche, ie ne me fuis pas | 
pourtant rebuté: Mais ie me fafche de ce que vous 
doutez encore de ma fidelité, il eft vray que ie fuis 
d’vne Nation volage & fujete 4 fes plaifirs; mais ne 
{cauiez-vous pas que ie fuis baptifé, & que i’apprends 
depuis long-temps par vos exemples comme ie dois 
viure, iiaduoué que deuant mon Baptefme ie n’eftois 
pas affez fage, mais depuis que ie fuis baptifé, ie ne 
crois pas auoir donné aucun fujet de fcandale, i’efpere 
que celuy qui m’a fait la grace comme 4 vous autres, 
d’eftre baptifé, me donnera auffi la mefme force qu'il 7 
vous donne pour luy garder la foy que ie luy ay © 
promife dans mon mariage: ie vous promets derechef — 
que ie garderay inuiolablement la parole que ie vous 
[31] ay donnée, & que ie refpecteray mon mariage 
comme vne chofe faincte, & ne le profaneray iamais 
par aucune action contraire au deuoir auquel il — 
m'oblige. A tant le tout, & en effet il a gardé fa : 
parole, en telle forte que c’eft vn des plus heureux & 4 
paifibles mariage que nous ayons fait parmy les Sau- q 
uages, mais continuons A ouir les difcours de noftre 
Noél. iz! 

Apres que les Sauuages de Sillery furent reuenus é 
de leur grande chaffe, les Capitaines & principaux 
Chreftiens furent faluér Monfieur le Gouuerneur, 
Noél fit le compliment au nom de tous les autres, 
auquel Monfieur le Gouuerneur refpondit (tefmoi- , 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 " ie 


tians is a matter of great importance, and one in 
which we should not be precipitate. I considered it 
maturely before speaking of it, and frequently prayed 
to God on the subject. I never objected to your 
trying my constancy, and, although it seemed to me 
that you did not approve of my suit, still I did not 
desist from it. But Iam grieved that you still doubt 
my fidelity. It is true that I belong to a Nation that 
is flighty, and addicted to its pleasures; but do you 
not know that I am baptized, and that I have been 
learning for a long time by your examples how I 
should live? I admit that before my Baptism I was 
rather imprudent; but, since I have been baptized, I 
do not think that I have given any cause for scandal. 
I hope that he who has given me, as he has given 
you, the grace of being baptized, will also give me 
the same strength that he gives you to keep the 
faith that I have pledged him in my marriage. I 
promise you once more that I will inviolably keep 
the word that I [31] have given you; and that I will 
respect my marriage as a holy thing, and will never 
profane it by any action contrary to the duty to 
which it binds me.’’ After this, he said no more; 
and, in fact, he kept his word, so that it is one of the 
happiest and most peaceful marriages that we have 
formed among the Savages. But let us continue to 
hear the discourses of our Noél. 

After the Savages of Sillery had returned from 
their great hunt, the Captains and principal Chris- 
tians went to salute Monsieur the Governor. Noél 
paid him a compliment in the name of all the others, 
to which Monsieur the Governor replied (expressing 
his satisfaction at seeing them, and at learning of 
their good conduct during their wintering); after 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


gnant le contentement qu'il auoit de les voir, & d’ap- 


prendre leurs bons deportemens pendant leur hyuer- — 


nement) apres quoy il adioufta, qu’il n’eftoit pas 
content de tous, & qu’il y en auoit quelques-vns qui 
donnoient du fcandale par leurs mauuaifes actions: 
Le Pere Dequen qui feruoit d’interprete en cette occa- 
fion, ayant expofé aux Sauuages le mefcontentement 
que receuoit Monfieur [32] le Gouuerneur de ces mau- 
uais Chreftiens, fans les nommer, Noél luy repartit, 
parle clair: Le Pere Dequen s’explique, fans nom- 
mer neantmoins ceux dont il eftoit queftion: Noél 
replique; Ie te dis derechef que tu parle clair, & que 
tu nomme ceux qui font mefchans: Le Pere les 
nomme, & leur dit que c’eft Eftienne Pigaroiiich, & 
Francois Kosk8eribagsgsch qui entretienne[nt] des 
concubines au lieu de leurs femmes legitimes qu’ils 
ont abandonnées: Noéi pour lors s’abandonnant a 
fon zele ordinaire. 

Ie voulois fgauoir, dit-il, fi ce n’eftoient point de 
mes gens fur qui i’euffe de l’authorité, i’y euffe pour- 
ueu: Pour ceux-cy, ie ne fuis point leur Capitaine, 
mais ie hais leur malice, & detefte leur compagnie, 
ie n’ay iamais approuué les actions qu’ils ont faites 
contre la Foy, & la fidelité de leur Mariage: ie les 
improuue, & les condamne, ils n’ont point d’efprit, 
les femmes le leur ont ofté, peut-eftre qu’ils le recou- 
ureront fi on les chaftie, ils retourneront bien-toft de 
la chaffe, ils [33] voudront cabaner 4 Sillery, ils au- 
ront befoin du fecours des Francois, mais il faut les 
chaffer bien loing de nous, ie ne fouffriray point 
qu'ils s’approchent de mes cabanes, ny eux, ny ceux 
qui les fupportent, ils nous corromproient par leurs 
mauuais exemples: pour toy, dit-il, parlant 4 Mon 


a 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 145 


which he added that he was not pleased with all of 
them, and that there were some who gave scandal by 
their evil deeds. Father Dequen, who acted as inter- 
preter on this occasion, explained to the Savages 
the displeasure felt by Monsieur [32] the Governor 
on account of those bad Christians, without naming 
them. Noél replied to him: ‘‘ Speak plainly.”’ Fa- 
ther Dequen explained himself, without however 
naming those who were referred to. Noél answered: 
*‘ Again I tell thee to speak plainly, and to name 
those who are wicked.’’ The Father mentioned 
their names, and said that they were Estienne Piga- 
rouich and Fran¢ois Koskweribagougouch, who kept 
concubines instead of their lawful wives, whom they 
had abandoned. ‘Thereupon Noél, giving way to his 
usual zeal, said: 

“I wished to know whether they were of my 
people over whom I have authority, for I would have 
seen toit. I am not the Captain of those men, but 
I hate their wickedness and detest their society. I 
have never approved the actions that they have 
committed, and which are contrary to the Faith and 
the fidelity of their Marriage. I blame and condemn 
them. They have no sense; women have taken it 
away from them. Perhaps they will recover some if 
we punish them. They will soon return from the 
hunt; they [33] will desire to have cabins at Sillery; 
they will need the help of the French; but we must 
drive them far away from us. I will not allow them 
to come near my cabins, neither them nor those who 
support them. They would corrupt us by their bad 
examples. As for thee,’’ he said to Monsieur the 
Governor, ‘‘ do not allow thyself to be moved by the 
prayers that they will address to thee; close thy 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


fieur le Gouverneur, ne te laiffe point flefchir par les 
prieres qu’ils te feront, ferme tes oreilles, & n’efcoute 
point leurs paroles, s’ils tefmoignent quelque repen- 
tance de leur faute, & s’ils s’offrent A en faire fatis- 
faction, ie fuis d’aduis, qu’on les efprouue pendant 
vn an, durant lequel temps ils demeureront bannis 
de Quebec & de Sillery, & efloignez de leurs concu- 
bines, & apres cela on pourra les admettre dans 
l’Eglife, & leur faire mifericorde. 

Ce difcours de Noél fuft fuiuy de celuy d’vn autre 
Capitaine de Tadouffac qui fe trouua en cette affem- 
blée, ie fuis bien aife, dit-il, de voir comme vous 
traittez les mefchans. Vous m’apprenez comme ie 
me dois comporter en femblables occafions, quand ie 
feray 4 mon pais, ie feray comme ie vous vois [34] 
faire, fi quelqu’vn de mes gens veut eftre mefchant, 
ie le chaftieray en telle forte qu’il feruira d’exemple 
aux autres, & moy-mefme fi ie veux eftre mefchant, 
ie defire qu’on me chatie plus feueremét que tout 
autre, ie veux qu’on me degrade de la qualité de 
Capitaine, qu’on me foiiette, qu’on me pende, ou 
qu’on me iette dans la riuiere. Quiconque offenfe 
Dieu, merite la mort: il faut croire tout de bon, ou 
ne s’en mefler pas, les mefchans gaftent les bons, ce 
meflange ne vaut rien, c’eft vne contagion qui 
s’efpand & fe dilate peu 4 peu, iufques a ce que tout 
eft infecté, dequoy nous fert d’eftre baptifez, fi nous 
n’obeyffons, on nous a dit fouuent que le Baptefme 
ne fert qu’a vne plus grande damnation, quand on le 
deshonore par des mauuaifes actions. Ie veux eftre 
obey quand ie commande, & ie me fafche fi mes gens 
fe reuoltent contre mes ordres. Et Dieu n’a-il pas i 


plus de fujet d’eftre irrité contre nous finousneluy 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 147 


ears, and listen not to their words. If they manifest 
any repentance for their sin, and if they offer to give 
satisfaction for it, 1am of opinion that they be tried 
for a year,— during which time they will be banished 
from Quebec and from Sillery, and be separated from 
their concubines. After that they may be admitted 
into the Church, and mercy may be shown to them.”’ 

This discourse of Noél’s was followed by that of 
another Captain, from Tadoussac, who was present at 
the meeting. ‘‘I am very glad,” he said, ‘‘ to see 
how you deal with the wicked. You teach me how 
I should act on similar occasions. When I shall have 
returned to my own country, I will act as I have seen 
you [34] do. If any one of my people choose to be 
wicked, I will punish him in such a way that he will 
serve as an example for the others. And, if I choose 
to be wicked, I myself desire that I be punished more 
severely than any other,—I wish that I may be 
degraded from my office of Captain; that I may be 
whipped, hanged, or cast into the river. Whosoever 
offends God deserves death. We must believe in 
earnest, or have nothing to do with the Faith. The 
wicked spoil the good; such a mingling is of no use; 
it is a contagion that spreads and extends gradually, 
until everything is infected. What does it avail us 
that we be baptized, if we do not obey? We are 
often told that Baptism serves but for greater con- 
demnation when we dishonor it by evildeeds. I wish 
to be obeyed when I command, and I am angry if 
my people rebel against my orders. Has not God 
still greater reason to be irritated against us if we 
obey him not? I will make my people behave prop- 
erly, else they or I will die.’’ 

If the zeal of these two Captains resemble, [35] to 


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


obeiffons pas, ie feray que mes gens feront fages, ou 
eux, ou moy y perdrons la vie. 

Si le zele de ces deux Capitaines tient [35] vn peu 
de celuy des enfans de tonnerre, il ne laiffe pas de 
proceder d’vn bon principe, & d’eftre lotiable en des 
cceurs barbares, qui n’auoient pas auparauant d’ar- i 
deur ny de fentiment que pour la chair & pour le 
fang. 

Ie ne puis obmettre vn autre difcours que fift Noél 
4 la nouuelle de la prife du Pere Breflany & des Hu- 
rons: Le Pere Dequen leur ayant fait vn difcours fur 
ce fujet, pour leur monftrer que cét accident & tant 
d’autres malheurs eftoient des effets de la cholere de 
Dieu, iuftement irritée par la mefchanceté des mau- 
uais Chreftiens, & des infideles qui ne vouloient pas 
obeir A fa parole; Noél vouluft parler 4 fon tour, il 
commande que perfonne ne forte de la Chappelle & 
qu’on ferme la porte. 

Tu dis vray, dit-il, ce font nos pechez qui ont mis 
le Pere Breffany & les Hurons entre les mains des 
Iroquois: ce font nos pechez qui peut eftre mainte- 
nant les chargent de coups de baftons, leurs arrachent 
les ongles, leurs coupent les doigts, leur mettent les 
tifons dans les flancs, & les bruflent a petit feu; qu’on 
[36] ne die pas que c’eft la priere qui eft caufe de ces 
malheurs. Ce feroit vn autre peché capable d’attirer 
de plus grandes maledictions de Dieu fur nos teftes,; 
c’e{t nous-mefme qui exterminons noftre Nation, & 
celle des Hurons, & des Francois: Comment eft-ce 
que Dieu ne nous chaftieroit pas? Il ya fi long- 
temps qu’on nous enfeigne, & qu’on nous prefche la 
crainte & l’amour de Dieu, & il s’en trouue encore — 
parmy nous quis’enyurent, qui font des feftins 4 tout 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 149 


some extent, that of the sons of thunder, it never- 
theless proceeds from a good principle, and is praise- 
worthy in the hearts of barbarians, who formerly 
had no ardor or affection for anything but flesh and 
blood. 

I cannot omit another discourse made by Noél, 
when the news arrived of the capture of Father Bres- 
sany and the Hurons. Father Dequen had preached 
a sermon to them on the subject, to show them that 
this accident and so many other misfortunes were the 
effects of God’s anger, who was justly irritated by 
the wickedness of bad Christians and of the infidels 
who would not obey his word. Noél wished to speak 
in his turn, and he gave orders that no one should 
leave the Chapel and that the door be closed. 

‘“ Thou sayest truly,’’ he said; ‘‘ it is our sins that 
have placed Father Bressany and the Hurons in the 
hands of the Iroquois. It is our sins that, perhaps 
at this moment, are loading them with the blows of 
clubs; are tearing out their nails, are cutting off their 
fingers; are applying firebrands to their sides, and 
burning them at a slow fire. Let [36] no one say 
that prayer is the cause of all these misfortunes. 
That would be another sin, capable of bringing down 
God’s greatest curses upon our heads. It is we our- 
selves who exterminate our Nation, and that of the 
Hurons, and of the French. Why should God not 
punish us? We have so long been taught and 
preached to about the fear and love of God, and still 
there are some among us who become intoxicated, 
who give eat-all feasts, who consult the Demons and 
offer Sacrifices to them, and renew their old supersti- 
tions. I myself,—who in my capacity of Captain 
should furnish good examples to others, especially 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 — 


manger, qui confultent les Demons, luy [sc. leur] — 
font des Sacrifices, & renouuellét leurs anciénes — 
fuperftitions: moy-mefme, qui dans la qualité que | 
ie porte de Capitaine, deurois donner de bons exem- © 
ples aux autres particulierement ayant efté tant © 
inftruit, ie ne laiffe pas pourtant d’eftre mefchant & 
peut eftre plus que tous les autres; apres cela faut-il 
s’e{tonner fi les Iroquois nous confument, il eft vray 
que nos ennemis font mefchans auffi bien que nous, 
mais neantmoins nous fommes plus coupables qu’eux, 
parce que nous fommes inftruits & eux ne le font — 
pas, fi on les [37] enfeignoit comme 1’on nous enfei- — 
gne, ils croiroient peut eftre plus fortement que nous } 
ne faifons. Nous ne croyons qu’é demy, & nos ~ 
actions defmentent nos paroles. C’eft ce qui irrite 
Dieu contre nous. I1 eft temps que nous l’apaifions 
fi nous voulons conferuer ce peu qui nous refte de — 
noftre Nation, & il n’eft pas difficile de l’apaifer. I { 
eft bon; il eft noftre Pere, c’eft a regret qu’il nous i 
chaftie: fi nous confpirons tous 4 l’aymer & aluy 
obeyr, il aura pitié de nous, prenez courage, ne laiffez ‘ 
pas d’aymer la priere, quand bien elle nous deuroit — 
caufer la mort, mais i’efpere, qu’au contraire, fi nous — 
l’aymons, elle nous donnera la vie, non feulement © 
l’eternelle, mais auffi la temporelle, Dieu nous cha- 
{tie pour nous rendre fages: il ceffera de nous cha- 
{tier quand nous cefferons d’eftre mefchans. Voyla — 
ce que i’auois a vous dire. gp 

Cette harangue prononcée par ce Capitaine auec — 
vne ferueur extraordinaire eftonna les mefchans, & © 
confola les bons qui fe trouuerent en cette affemblée, ~ 
& peut eftre fortifia quelque [38] coeur qui chanceloit, 4 
car comme il eft homme d’authorité parmy fes gens, 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ~ 151 


after having received so much instruction,—am 
nevertheless wicked, and perhaps more so than any of 
the others. After that, can it be wondered that the 
Iroquois destroy us? It is true that our enemies are 
wicked, as well as we; but nevertheless we are more 
guilty than they, because we are instructed, and they 
are not. If they were [37] taught as we are, they 
would perhaps believe more firmly than we do. We 
only half believe, and our deeds belie our words. 
That is what irritates God against us. It is time that 
we should appease him, if we wish to preserve the little 
that remains of our Nation; and it is not difficult to 
appease him. He is good; he is our Father; and it 
is with regret that he chastises us. If we all unite 
in loving and obeying him, he will have pity on us. 
Take courage; cease not to love prayer, even if it 
should cause our death; but I hope, on the contrary, 
that if we love it well, it will give us not only eter- 
nal but also temporal life. God chastises us to make 
us good; he will cease to chastise us when we cease 
_ tobe wicked. That is what I had to tell you.’’ 

This harangue, delivered by this Captain with 
extraordinary fervor, astonished the wicked and con- 
soled the good who were present at the meeting, 
and perhaps strengthened some [38] weakening heart; 
for, as he is a man of authority among his people, 
and has the reputation of being a prudent person, 
his discourses have a wonderful effect on the minds 
of all the Savages. 

I would never finish, were I to repeat all the 
other harangues that he has delivered in favor of the 
Faith; for he allows no opportunity to escape of 
making himself heard on the subject, and he always 
speaks of it with more energy and force than we 


a 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Wou% | 


& en reputation de perfonne prudente, fes difcours 
font vne merueilleufe impreffion fur les coeurs de 
tous les Sauuages. 

Ie n’aurois iamais fait fi ie voulois raporter toutes 
les autres harangues qu’il a fait en faueur de la Foy, 
car il ne laiffe paffer aucune occafion de parler fur ce 
fujet, & il en parle toufiours auec plus d’energie & 
de force que nous ne f[¢]laurions exprimer par nos 
paroles. Au refte fa vie eft conforme a fa parole: Il 
n’entreprend rien d’importance qu’il n’ait auparauat 
confulté Méfieur le Gouuerneur & nos Peres, fa ca- 
bane ne fouffre point que de bons Chreftiens, il tient 
fa famille dans la crainte & dans le refpect, il eft le 
premier aux prieres, & s’intereffe fingulierement en 
tout ce qui regarde le progrez du Chriftianifme 
en ces contrées. Difons vn mot de Iean Baptifte 
Etinechkavat qui eft le Capitaine des Montaignets & 
Attikamegues qui font leur feiour ordinaire 4 Sainc&t 
Iofeph. 

[39] La refponfe qu’il fit 4 ce Capitaine Abnaquiois, 
duquel nous auons parlé, tefmoigne l’eftat qu’il fait 
de la Foy. Ce Capitaine auant que d’eftre baptifé 
recherchoit vne de fes parentes en mariage, il luy 
enuoya pour ce fujet par vn autre Sauuage vn beau 
colier de Pourcelaine, Iean Baptifte refpondit froide- 4 
ment: Nous ne vendons pas nos filles, mais nous les 
donnons en mariage 4 des gens qui font profeffion de 
la Foy comme nous, & puis fit reporter le prefent 
fans y toucher. Ce Capitaine eftant par apres bap- 
tifé, & continuant dans fa recherche, Iean Baptifte 
apres auoir long-temps efprouué fa conftance & fa 
fidelité luy donna tout le contentement qu’il defiroit 
tefmoignant par cette action, que s’il n’auoit aupara- 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "158 


could express by our words. Moreover, his life is in 
accordance with his speech. He never undertakes 
anything of any moment without first consulting 
Monsieur the Governor and our Fathers. None but 
good Christians are allowed in his cabin. He keeps 
his family in fear and in respect. He is the first at 
the prayers, and takes a deep interest in everything 
relating to the progress of Christianity in these coun- 
tries. Let us say a word about Jean Baptiste 
Etinechkawat who is the Captain of those Montagnais 
and Attikamegues who usually dwell at Saint Joseph. 

[39] The answer that he gave to that Abnaquiois 
Captain whom we have mentioned, shows what 
esteem he has for the Faith. That Captain, before 
being baptized, sought one of his relatives in mar- 
riage. With that view he sent him a fine collar of 
_ Porcelain beads by another Savage. Jean Baptiste 
coldly replied: ‘‘ We do not sell our girls, but we 
give them in marriage to those who profess the Faith 
as we do;’’ and he sent back the present without 
touching it. Afterward, when this Captain had been 
baptized, he pressed his suit. Jean Baptiste, after 
having long tried his constancy and fidelity, gave him 
all the satisfaction that he desired, thereby showing 
that, if at first he had not consented to his alliance, 
it was only because he did not yet belong to the 
Faith. 

Another young Savage, a good Christian, named 
Alexis, of the Nipissirinien Tribe, sought one of his 
daughters in marriage. As, like Noél, he never un- 
dertakes anything without the consent of our Fathers, 
he came [40] to consult us on the subject. ‘‘I am 
pleased with the young man,’’ he said, ‘‘ on account 
of his goodness and virtue; but I am afraid of one 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 25 


uant agrée fon alliance, eftoit feulement par ce qu’il 
n’auoit pas encore la Foy. 

Vn autre ieune Sauuage, bon Chreftien, nommé ~ 
Alexis, de la Nation des Nipiffiriniens, recherchant 
vne de fes filles en mariage, comme il n’entreprend 
rien non plus que Noél fans le confentement de nos 
Peres, il nous vint [40] confulter fur ce fujet: ce 
ieune homme, dit-il m’agrée 4 caufe de fa bonté & 
vertu; mais i’apprehende vne chofe: c’eft qu'il eft 
parent du Capitaine des Nipiffiriniens, & doit fucce- 
der a fa charge, ie crains que cela ne le rende 
fuperbe, & que l’ambition de paroiftre Capitaine, ne 
loblige de monter la haut & retourner en fon pays 
apres la mort de l’autre, & qu’en fuite il perde l’affe- 
ction qu’ila maintenant pour la priere: carla fuperbe 
eft vn grand empefchement a la Foy, & i’eftime plus 
auoir vn gendre pauure & mefprifé, mais bon & 
vertueux, que glorieux, & fuperbe Capitaine. 

Voicy vne autre marque du mefpris qu’il fait de 
l’honneur, & de l’humilité qu’il porte dans le coeur, 
ie voudrois bien, difoit-il, vn iour au Pere Dequen, 
me pouuoir demettre de ma charge de Capitaine en — 
faueur de Philippe Sakapsam, elle luy appartient par 
droit de naiffance eftant fils de Capitaine, que fi ie 
l’ay receué & conferuée iufques a prefent, c’eft parce 
qu’il eftoit trop ieune pour la pouuoir exercer apres — 
la [41] mort de fon pere, mais puis qu’a prefent ila — 
l’aage, & les forces fuffifantes pour s’acquiter de cét 
office, & en faire tous les deuoirs, i’eftime quileft 
raifonnable qu’il en iouyffe: Ie ne veux pas retenir 
ce qui n’eft pas A moy, outre qu’il faut icy des Capi- 
taines qui foient vigoureux, qui puiffent difcourir en 
faueur de la Foy, & qui ayent de l’authorité enue ’ 


Sass} on" 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 155 


thing, and that is that he is related to the Captain of 
the Nipissiriniens and will succeed to his office. I 
fear that this will make him proud, and that the 
ambition to appear as a Captain will induce him to 
go up there and return to his own country, when the 
other dies, and that he will afterward lose the affec- 
tion that he now has for prayer; for pride is a great 
obstacle to Faith, and I would value more highly a 
son-in-law who, though poor and despised, was 
good and virtuous, than a proud and boastful 
Captain.” F 

Here is another indication of the contempt that he 
has for honors, and of the humility that lies in his 
heart. ‘‘I would like,’’ he said one day to Father 
Dequen, ‘‘ to lay aside my office of Captain, in favor 
of Philippe Sakapwam. It belongs to him by right 
of birth, because he is the son of a Captain. If I 
have accepted it, and retained it until now, it is because 
he was too young to exercise it after the [41] death 
of his father. But, now that he is old enough, and 
has sufficient energy to fill the office, and to perform 
all the duties connected with it, I consider it right 
that he should enjoy it. I do not wish to keep what 
does not belong to me. Besides, it is necessary that 
we should have Captains here who are energetic, and 
who can speak in favor of the Faith, and who have 
authority with the young men; and he possesses all 
these qualities to a greater degree than I, who have 
neither wit, nor words, nor anything to give me 
credit and authority. And I care not for such 
honors; I despise them in my heart. I also fear to be 
accountable for the actions and conduct of my people. 
I would far prefer that another should be responsible 
for them.’’ The Father did not give such an answer 


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 2% 


les ieunes gens, & toutes ces qualitez font beaucoup — 
plus aduantageufement en luy qu’en moy, qui n’ay — 
point d’efprit, ny de paroles, ny dequoy me donner — 
du credit & de l’authorité, & puis ie ne me pique 
point de ces honneurs, ie les mefprife dans mon coeur, 

ie crains encore de rendre compte des actions & 
deportemens de mes gens, ie ferois bien aife qu’vn 
autre que moy en refpondift. A quoy le Pere n’ay- 
ant pas refpondu conformeme[n]t 4 fa volonté, il s’en 
retourna fort affligé. La fuperbe eftant le plus grand 
vice de ces Sattuages, ce n’e{t pas peu que cettuy-cy 
foit arriué A ce degré d’humilité que de hayr ce qui 
eft de plus augufte & efclatant parmy eux. II nous 
fera voir [42] maintenant comme l’humilité Chretti- 
enne n’e{t point contraire 4 vn franc & genereux 
courage. 

Deflors qu’il euft ouy la nouuelle de la prife du 
Pere Breffany, des Hurons, & de plufieurs Algon- 
quins, il forma incontinent le deffein d’aller a la 
guerre pour tirer raifon des Iroquois de tous ces 
affrons & dommages. Voicy les raifons qu’il nous ~ 
en rendit dans le confeil qu'il tint auec nous fur ce H 
fujet. ‘ 

C’eft vne chofe honteufe, dit-il, que les Iroquois \ 
nous battent par tout, & que nous demeurions fans 
fentiment, & fans faire autre chofe que fuir, on dit — 
maintenant auec fujet que nous ne fommes plus des 
hommes, mais des femmes, & ce qui me pique da- 
uantage, c’eft que les infideles & quelques mauuais 
Chreftiens difent publiquement que c’eft la priere, — 
qui nous rend poltrons, & qui abbat nos courages, 
depuis qu’on fait eftat de prier Dieu, nous n’auons” 
plus de coeur, difent-ils, il faut leur monttrer qu’ils 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 157 


to this as he wished, so he went away much grieved. 
Pride is the greatest vice of these Savages, and it is 
no small matter that this one should have attained 
such a degree of humility as to despise what is 
considered most august and brilliant among them. 
He will show us [42] now that Christian humility is 
not inconsistent with frank and generous courage. 

As soon as he heard the news of the capture of Fa- 
ther Bressany, of the Hurons, and of several Algon- 
quins, he at once resolved to go to war, to call the 
Iroquois to account for all those insults and wrongs. 
Here are the reasons that he gave us therefor, in the 
consultation that he held with us on the subject. 

‘‘Itisashame,’’ he said, ‘‘ that the Iroquois should 
beat us everywhere, and that we should remain 
without feeling, and without accomplishing anything 
but flight. Itisnow asserted with reason that we are 
no longer men, but women; and what irritates me 
still more is, that the infidels and some bad Chris- 
tians publicly state that it is prayer that makes us 
cowards and depresses our courage. Since we rely 
on prayer to God, they say, we have no more cour- 
age. We must show them that they have lied, and 
that the Faith is far from making us timid,—[43] 
that, on the contrary, it animates our hearts in the 
midst of the most pressing dangers, and gives us 
courage in our greatest weakness. We must not 
allow Faith to be dishonored by the falsehoods and 
calumnies of the wicked. 

“What compels me once more to go to war is the 
capture of Father Bressany. He is one of those who 
have come from so far to teach us, and who love us 
somuch. He has exposed himself to this danger 
for our sake. His brothers are afflicted at his 


oe 
ri] 
‘ti 
. f 
7 7 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


ont menty, & que tant s’en faut que la Foy nous rende 
timides, [43] qu’au contraire c’eft elle qui anime nos 
coeurs au milieu des plus grands dangers & nous 
baille du courage dans noftre plus grande foibleffe. 
Il ne faut pas fouffrir que la Foy foit deshonorée par 
les menfonges & calomnies des mefchans. 

Ce qui m’oblige encor de faire la guerre, c’eft la 
prife du Pere Breffany, il eft vn de ceux qui viennent 
de filoing pour nous inftruire, & qui nous ayment 
tant, il s’eft expofé pour nous 4 ce danger, fes freres 
font affligez de fa prife, il faut les confoler & effuyer 
leurs larmes par la prife de quelque Iroquois. Peut 
eftre encore reprimerons-nous l’infolence de nos 
ennemis, fi nous remportons quelque aduantage fur 
eux, comme il nous fera facile dans la methode que 
ie veux tenir pour faire cette petite guerre, & parce 
que Dieu hayt les mefchans, & qu'il ne benift pas 
leurs deffeins, ie ne veux fouffriren ma compagnie 
que de bons & fideles Chreftiens; nous ferons peu, 
mais i’efpere que nous ferons plus forts, que fi noftre 
bande eftoit groffie d’vn grand nombre [44] de guer- 
riers, ou infideles, ou mauuais Chreftiens: Voila mon 


deffein, fi le Capitaine des Francois & vous autres 


lagrée[nt], ie fuis refolu de l’executer. 

En voila affez pour reconnoiftre la bonté & le zele 
de Iean Baptifte, que fi ces deux Capitaines, dont 
nous venons de parler, ont tant de vertu, de pru- 
dence, & de zele pour la Foy; il eft aifé de iuger 
quels font les deportemens de nos Chreftiens de Sil- 
lery, aufquels ils commandent & feruent, de regle & 


d’exemple. Nous verrons cecy plus en particulier — 


& en deftail dans le Chapitre fuiuant. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ~ 159 


capture. Wemust console them, and dry their tears, 
by the capture of some Iroquois. Perhaps also we 
may repress the insolence of our enemies, if we gain 
some advantage over them,— as it will be easy for us 
to do, according to the plan that I wish to follow in 
catrying on this little war, and because God hates 
the wicked and does not bless their projects. I do 
not wish to have any but good and faithful Christians 
in my company. We shall be but few in number, 
but I trust that we shall be stronger than if our band 
were increased by a great many [44] warriors who 
would be infidels or bad Christians. Such is my 
plan. If the Captain of the French and you approve 
it, I am resolved to carry it out.”’ 

This is sufficient to show the goodness and zeal of 
Jean Baptiste. And if these two Captains of whom 
we have just spoken manifest so much virtue and 
prudence, and zeal for the Faith, it is easy to judge 
what must be the conduct of our Christians of Sillery 
whom they command, and to whom they serve both 
astuleand example. We shall see this more particu- 
larly and in detail, in the following Chapter. 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 2 


[45] CHAPITRE IV. 


CONTINUATION DES BONS SENTIMENS & ACTIONS DES 
CHRESTIENS DE SAINCT IOSEPH. 


VSSI-TOST que les Nauires eurent leué 1’anchre 
de deuant Quebec pour retourner en France, 
la meilleure partie des Sauuages de cette refi- 

dence leuerent leurs efcorces pour aller a la chaffe 
de l’orignac anticipant de trois mois le temps ordi- 
naire de leur depart, de crainte des Iroquois qui les 
auoient menacez de les venir attaquer iufques dedans 
nos portes, & qui leur euffent ofté la liberté de chaffer 
bien auant dans les bois, s’ils n’euffent preuenu le 
temps auquel ils ont accouftumé de fe mettre en 
campagne & venir en guerre. Comme ils s’embar- 
quoient ils ne peurent s’empefcher de nous témoi- 
gner les reffentimens qu’ils auoient de fe [46] feparer 
de nous pour fi long-temps. Non fommes trifte, 
nous difoient-ils, de vous quitter: Qui nous enfei- 
gnera dans les bois? Si quelqu’vn de vous autres, 
nous poutioient accompagner, cela nous confoleroit: 
mais puifque cela ne fe peut, nous tafcherons de 
faire le mieux qui nous fera poffible: nous prierons 
Dieu fouuent: nous refpecterons les iours de Feftes: 
nous croirons toufjours fortement: nous fommes bien 
aife que nous ayons vn petit Fran¢gois en nof{tre compa- 
gnie pour eftre tefmoin de nos actions, il vous rap- 
portera A noftre retour l’eftat que nous faifons de la 
priere. Priez Dieu pour nous. 


ae 


— 


Oe 


= 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 161 


[45] CHAPTER IV. 


CONTINUATION OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS AND AC- 
TIONS OF THE CHRISTIANS OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


S soon as the Ships weighed anchor before Que- 
bec, to return to France, the majority of the 
Savages of this residence launched their bark 

canoes to go and hunt moose,—anticipating their 
usual time of departure by three months, through 
fear of the Iroquois. These had threatened to come 
and attack them at our very doors, and would have 
deprived them of the liberty of hunting far back in 
the forest, if they had not forestalled the time when 
they are accustomed to take the field and go to war. 
When they embarked, they could not refrain from 
showing us the regret that they felt at [46] separat- 
ing themselves from us for so longatime. ‘‘ We 
are sorry to leave you,” they said. ‘‘ Who will 
teach us in the woods? If one of you could accom- 
pany us, it would console us; but, since that cannot 
be, we will endeavor to do the best we possibly can. 
We will pray to God often; we will observe the 
Festival days; we will always believe firmly. We are 
very glad to have a little Frenchman with us, to be 
a witness of our actions. He will tell you on our 
return how we value prayer. Pray to God for us.’’ 

It isa marvelous effect of grace that men born in the 
most cruel barbarism that exists on earth,— brought 
up in the freedom of all kinds of vice, who have often 
fed upon human flesh and blood,— who have been 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou % 


C’eft vn effect merueilleux de la grace que des 
hommes nez dans la plus cruelle barbarie qui foit fur 
la terre, efleuez dans la liberté de toute forte de vice, 
qui fe font nourris fouuent du fang & de la chair des 
homes, baptifez depuis peu de iours, conferuent 
neantmoins l’innocence & la grace de leur Baptefme 
pendant fix mois fans inftruction & fans Sacrement, 
auec plus de facilité & de perfection que ne font 
beaucoup de [47] Chreftiens en France & ailleurs 
parmy tant d’aydes & inftrumens de falut. Ie crois 
que le Ciel prend plaifir de voir ces bonnes ames 
adorer Dieu au milieu des bois, ot fi fouuent le diable 
auoit efté adoré, & d’ouyr retentir ces vaftes defers 
des noms de Iefus & de Marie, qui auparauant ne 
refonnoient que des cris & hurlemens effroyables. 

Leur premiere & derniere action de la iournée, 
c’eft de flefchir les genoux deuant vn Crucifix ou vne 
Image qu’ils attachent 4 vne efcorce, & faire 14 leurs 
prieres: ils celebrent les Dimanches & les Feftes, 
s’abitenans de la chaffe, & faifant des prieres plus 
longues: il yen a qui parmy les grands trauaux & 
fatigues de leur chaffe obferuent les ieufnes comman- 
dez: Ils ont recours 4 Dieu dans leurs neceffitez & 
ne manquent pas de reconnoiftre fur le champ les 
graces qu’ils regoiuent de fa main liberale: Mais 
voyons des actions & fentimens plus particuliers. 

Il y auoit trois mois que ces bons Neophytes 
couroient chaffans dans les bois, & diuifez en diuerfes 
trouppes, lors que [48] plufieurs familles qui ne 
s'e{toient veués depuis 1’Automne, fe rencontrerent 


en vn mefme lieu ot la premiere chofe qu’ils firent | 


fuft de confronter les papiers que nous leur auions 
donné, pour reconnoiftre les iours de Feftes qu’ils 


5 
‘ 
¥ 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 " 368 


but recently baptized, should nevertheless retain 
the innocence and grace of their Baptism for six 
months, without instruction or any Sacrament, with 
greater facility and perfection than many [47] Chris- 
tians do in France and elsewhere, amid so many aids 
and instruments of salvation. I think that Heaven 
takes pleasure in seeing these good souls adore God 
in the midst of the woods, where the devil had so 
frequently been worshiped, and in hearing the 
names of Jesus and Mary reéchoed by those vast soli- 
tudes, which formerly repeated nothing but horrible 
yells and cries. 

Their first and last action every day is to kneel 
before a Crucifix or a Picture which they fasten to a 
piece of bark, and there say their prayers. They 
observe Sundays and Festival days by abstaining 
from hunting, and by saying longer prayers. Some 
of them, amid the great labors and fatigues of the 
hunt, observe the prescribed fasts. They have 
recourse to God in their necessities, and do not fail 
to acknowledge on the spot the graces that they 
receive from his liberal hand. But let us consider 
some actions and sentiments more in detail. 

These good Neophytes had been hunting in the 
woods for three months, and were divided into vari- 
ous bands, when [48] several families, who had not 
seen one another since the Autumn, met in the same 
place. The first thing that they did was to compare 
the papers that we had given them, to enable them 
to know the Festival days that they were to observe 
with respect. Their rejoicing was not slight when 
they saw that they agreed to the very day, and that 
no one had forgotten to recognize and honor Sun- 
day. Charles Meiaskwat, who is always true to his 


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


doiuent celebrer auec refpect: la re{jouyffance ne fut 
pas petite, voyant qu’ils fe rencontroient tous au 
mefme iour, & que pas vn n’auoit oublié 4 recon- 
noiftre & honorer le Dimanche. Charles Mejask- 
vat toufiours femblable a foy-mefme, c’eft a dire, 
toufiours zelé pour la Foy, prift la parole: mes freres, 
dit-il, il n’y a pas icy de Peres pour nous enfeigner, 
& faire prier Dieu; ne laiffons pas de prier tous 
enfemble puifque la commodité fe prefente, ie crois 
que vous ne manquez pas a4 vous acquiter foir & matin 
de vof{tre deuoir; mais puis que Dieu agrée & benift 
l’vnion des prieres, prions-le en commun, vn chacun 
s’y accorde, on dit les prieres, on chante vn Hymne. 
en leur langue. Apres cela ce braue Neophyte leur 
fait vn petit difcours de la prefence de Dieu. Mes 
freres, dit-il, ie n’ay [49] point d’efprit, ie ne retiens. 
point ce qu’on nous enfeigne: ie ne fuis pas Capi- 
taine pour entreprendre de haranguer, ie crois neant- 
moins que vous agréerez que ie vous die ce que Dieu 
m’infpire: Ne vous perfuadez pas qu’eftans efloignez. 
de l’Eglife, & errans parmy les bois, vous foyez efloi- 
gnez de Dieu: il eft par tout, il nous efcoute, & nous. 
void auffi bien icy comme 4 Sillery: c’eft vne grande: 
folie de croire qu’il ne nous void pas, c’eft encore 
vne plus grande folie de croire qu’il nous void & de 
mal faire; on peut bien fe cacher des hommes, mais 
non pas de Dieu, nous auons honte de faire de fales. 
actions deuant les hommes, n’auons-nous pas honte 
den faire deuant Dieu. Souuenez-vous done que 
Dieu eft par tout, & qu'il le faut honorer en tout lieu, 


comme nous croyons qu'il nous cherit, qu’il nous 


conferue, & nourrift en tout lieu. Ila foin de nous 
dans les bois, il nous baille des orignaus, il nous 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 165° 


character,—that is, ever zealous for the Faith, — spoke 
as follows: ‘‘ My brothers,’’ he said, ‘‘ there are no 
Fathers here to teach us, and to make us pray to 
God. Let us nevertheless not fail to pray all 
together, as the opportunity presents itself. I 
believe that you do not omit your duty, night and. 
morning; but, since God loves and blesses prayers 
recited in common, let us pray together.’’ All 
agreed to this; the prayers were said, and a Hymn 
was sung in their own language. Afterward, this 
worthy Neophyte delivered a short discourse on the 
presence of God. ‘‘ My brothers,’’ he said, ‘‘ I have 
[49] no wit; I do not remember what I am taught. 
I am not a Captain, to undertake to harangue you. 
Nevertheless, I believe that you will be pleased that 
_I should tell you what God inspires me tosay. Do 
not think that because you are far from the Church, 
and because you wander through the woods, that you 
are far from God. He is everywhere; he hears and 
sees us, here as well as at Sillery. It is a great folly 
to believe that he does not see us; it is still greater 
folly to think that he sees us, and todo wrong. We 
can hide ourselves from men, but not from God. We 
are ashamed to commit indecent actions before men; 
are we not ashamed to commit them before God? 
Remember that God is everywhere, and that we must 
honor him in all places, since we believe that he 
loves us, that he preserves and feeds us everywhere. 
He takes care of us in the forest; he gives us moose; 
he clothes and warms us; he lodges and feeds us. 
Let us therefore honor him in the woods, and do here 
what we [50] do in the Churches; for God deserves 
to be honored everywhere, since he is everywhere 
the same, and does good to us everywhere.’’ He 


1 


ve 
i 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


habille il nous chauffe, il nous loge, il nous nourrift: 
honorons-le done dans les bois, & faifons icy ce que 
nous [50] faifons dans les Eglifes, car Dieu merite 
d'eftre honoré par tout, puis qu'il eft par tout le 
mefme, & qu'il nous fait du bien par tout: il pour- 
fuiuit ce difcours fortement & efficacement: qui euft 
jamais attendu cela d’vn Barbare? Mais il n'y a 
point de Barbarie qui refifte a l’efprit de Dieu. 
Voicy vn effet de fa charité qui s’étend auffi bien 
fur les corps, quefurlesames. Dans ce rencontre de 
Sauuages, dont ie viens de parler, il fe trouua vne 
vieille femme, qui auoit bien de la peine 4 marcher, 
ce bon homme en euft pitié, & la chargeant fur fa 
traifne auec tout fon meuble, la traifna fur les neiges 


plufieurs iours, & puis fe deuant feparer, incita ceux | 


de cette bande ot eftoit la malade, de luy continuer 
la mefme charité qu’il auoit exercée enuers elle. 

Vn autre nous racontoit qu'il auoit efté grandement 
tenté dans les bois par le malin efprit: ie fentois, 
difoit-il fouuent quelqu’vn qui me parloit dans le 
coeur de la forte; il y a long-temps que tu ne t’es pas 
confeffé, ton ame eft maintenant [51] toute fale, tu 
ne la fcaurois fallir dauantage: fais ce que ie te dis, 
tu vois ta femme qui languift depuis tant de temps, 
elle t'empefche de vaquer a la chaffe, prends vn tam- 
bour, inuoque le Manitou, vfe de tes anciennes ion- 
gleries, peut eftre elle guerrira, tu auras le loifir de 
chaffer, & tuer des orignaus, & puis fi tu veux, tu te 
confefferas, & tu feras laué 4 mefme-temps de cette 
faute auffi-toft, & auffi facilement que des autres: 


quoy que tu faffe, tu ne laifferois pas d’aller en En-- } 
fer, fi tu mourrois maintenant: I’eus de la peine, dit- — 


il, A vaincre cette penfée, qui me venoit fouuent dans 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 el 


continued this discourse energetically and effective- 
ly. Who would ever have expected it from a Bar- 
barian? But no Barbarism can resist the spirit of 
God. 

Here is an effect of his charity which extends as 
much to the body as tothe soul. In this meeting of 
Savages of which I have just spoken, there was an 
old woman who walked with great difficulty. This 
good man took pity on her, and, putting her on his 
sled with all his effects, he dragged her over the 
snow for several days; and, when the time came for 
separating, he urged those of the band to which the 
sick woman belonged to continue the same charity 
that he had shown to her. 

Another told us that he had been grievously 
tempted in the woods by the evil spirit. ‘‘ I often,’ 
he said, ‘‘ felt as if some one were speaking to me in 
my heart like this: ‘It is a long while since thou 
hast been to confession; thy soul is now [51] quite 
unclean; thou canst not soil it more. Do what I tell 
thee. Thou seest thy wife, who has languished for 
so long; she prevents thee from attending to thy 
hunting. Take a drum, and invoke the Manitou; 
have recourse to thy former sorceries. Perhaps she 
will be cured; then thou wilt have time to hunt and 
to kill moose. And then, if thou desirest thou wilt 
confess, and this sin will be washed away at the same 
time and as easily as the others. Whatever thou 
doest, thou wilt certainly go to Hell if thou diest now.’ 
I had great difficulty,’’ he said, ‘‘in overcoming 
this thought, which frequently came into my mind. 
I prayed to God and then I said to him who spoke in 
my heart and wished me to be wicked: ‘ Thou liest; 
if my soul be unclean I must not soil it more. If I 


ee 
a 
' 
; Lich 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. % 


l’efprit, ie priay Dieu, & puis ie dis 4 celuy qui me | 
parloit dans le coeur, & me vouloit rendre mefchant. 
Tu mens: fi mon ame eft fale, ie ne la dois pas fallir 
dauantage, fi ie dois eftre damné, i’ayme mieux que 
ce foit pour vn feul peché, que pour deux, ie n’offen- 
ceray iamais Dieu pour guerir ma femme, ou pour 
auoir de la chair, ie n’auois qu’vn regret, difoit-il, 
c’eftoit de voir ma femme dans vn danger continuel 
de mourir fans confeffion. Ie diray [sc. difois] [52] 
fouuent &4 Dieu: Aye pitié de ma femme, ie ne 
demande pas que tu la gueriffe, ta volonté foit faite, 
mais ie te prie de luy conferuer la vie, iufques 4 ce 
qu’elle fe foit confeffée: Dieu m’a exaucé, me voicy 
de retour de la chaffe, & ma femme a affez de vie 
pour fe confeffer, il eft vray que ie n’ay rien, n’ayant 
peu faire autre chofe pendant 1’Hyuer que traifner 
ma femme apres les chaffeurs; mais n’importe, Dieu 
e{t bon, il me nourrira: Celuy qui gouuerne la con- 
{cience de ce bon Chreftien, le trouua quafi auffi inno- 
cent, apres fix mois paffez dans les bois, comme il 
eftoit quand il y entra. Dieu foit lotié qui fait triom- 
pher fi parfaitement fa grace de tous les efforts de © 
1’Enfer. | 
Vn autre rendant compte de fes deportemens pen- 
dant 1’ Hyuer, nous auons, difoit-il, obferuéexactement 
les DimAches & les Feftes, nommemét celles qu’on | 
refpecte particulierement, & mefme la nuict ot l’on © 
prie fi long-temps; (c’eft la veille de Noél) mais en- — 
core, que fiftes-vous, leur dit-on? perfonne ne dormit — 
cette nuict, on ne fit autre chofe [53] que prier Dieu: 
il y en euft tel qui recita fept ou huict fois fon 
Chapelet. F 
La prouidence de Dieu a tefmoigné fouuent dans 


> 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 169 


must be damned, I would rather be so for a single 
sin than for two. I will never offend God to cure 
my wife, or to obtain meat.’ I had but one regret,” 
he said, ‘‘ and that was to see my wife in continual 
danger of dying without confession. I often said [52] 
to God: ‘Have pity on my wife. I do not ask thee 
to cure her; thy will be done. But I pray thee to . 
preserve her life until she has confessed.’ God 
granted my prayer; I have returned from my hunt, 
and my wife is sufficiently alive to confess herself. 
It is true that I have nothing, because I was unable 
to do anything during the Winter but drag my wife 
after the hunters; but never mind. God is good; he 
will feed me.’’ He who directs the conscience of this 
good Christian found him almost as innocent after 
six months passed in the woods as he was when he 
entered them. Praise be to God, who causes his 
grace to triumph so completely over all the efforts 
of Hell. 

Another, who was accounting for his conduct 
during the Winter, said: ‘‘We strictly observed the 
Sundays and Festival days, especially those that are 
particularly respected, and even the night when we 
pray so long’’ (Christmas eve). ‘‘ But again, what 
did you do?” they were asked. ‘‘ No one slept that 
night; we did nothing else [53] but pray to God.” 
There was one of them who recited his Rosary seven 
or eight times. 

God’s providence has frequently manifested in the 
woods the care that it takes of these good people. 
All the provisions that they take with them, when 
they start for their hunt, consist of a bag of Indian 
corn and a few packages of smoked eels. This is 
very little for six months. They expect the remain- 


1" 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vot. 2 — 


les bois le foin qu’elle a de ces bonnes gens, toute la 
prouifion quils emportent auec eux quand il vont& — 
la chaffe, confifte en quelque fac de bled d’Inde, & 
quelques paquets d’anguiles boucanées, c’eft bien peu 
pour fix mois, ils attendent le refte de la main de © 
Dieu qui efprouue quelquesfois leur confiance & la — 
foy qu’ils ont en fa bonté. I] eft arriué fouuent 
qu'ils ont couru plufieurs iours fans rencontrer aucune 
bef{te: mais ils n’ont pas pluftoft flefchi le genoiil 
dans la neige pour inuoquer fon affiftance, qu’ils en 
ont reconneu les effets, & trouué dans 1l’extreme 
neceffité de quoy foulager leur faim tres-abondam- 
ment. 

Vne femme Chreftienne auoit vne de fes filles 
extremément malade, apres auoir languy long-temps, 
en fin elle tombe dans des fymptomes, & conuulfions 
de mort, la mere a recours 4 Dieu, luy recommande 
fa fille auec tant de [54] foy & de deuotion que Dieu 
l'exauca, & rendit Ala malade en l’efpace d’vne nuict 
vne tres-parfaite fanté. 

Voyla comme nos Sauuages fe comportent dans les 
bois, cela montre que fi les Demons n’en font pas — 
fortis, les bons Anges y font les plus forts, & que le { 
temps eft venu auquel Dieu veut fanctifier cette bar- 
barie, & verifier la parole de fon Prophete. Populus 5 
quem non cognout, feruiuit mihi. In auditu auris obedt- 4 
uit mht. a 

Dés que la riuiere commenga 4 eftre libre par le q 
depart des glaces, nos chaffeurs s’embarquerent pour — 
nous reuenir voir: vne tempefte furieufe s’eftant q 
efleuée cdme ils eftoient au mil[ijeu du grand fleuue, — 
nous les penfa rauir. Ce danger ne leur fuft pas fi 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ae 


der from the hand of God, who sometimes tries their 
confidence, and the faith that they have in his good- 
ness. It frequently happens that they wander for 
several days without finding any animal; but no 
sooner have they knelt down in the snow to invoke 
his assistance, than they have felt the effects [of their 
piety], and in their extreme necessity have found 
something with which abundantly to relieve their 
hunger. 

One of the daughters of a Christian woman was 
exceedingly ill. After languishing fora long time, at 
last she had the symptoms, and fell into the convul- 
sions, of death. The mother had recourse to God, and 
commended her daughter to him with so much [54] 
faith and devotion that God granted her prayer, and 
restored perfect health to the sick girl in the space 
of one night. 

Such is the manner in which our Savages behave 
while in the woods. It shows that, if the Demons 
have not gone out from them, the good Angels are 
stronger there, and that the time has come when 
God wishes to sanctify this barbarism and to verify 
the word of his Prophet: Populus quem non cognovt, 
servivit mihi. In auditu auris obedivit mtht. 

As soon as the river began to be free by the 
departure of the ice, our hunters embarked to come 
back and see us. A furious storm that arose when 
they were in the middle of the great river nearly 
snatched them from us. They did not feel this dan- 
ger so keenly as the loss of a shallop that we had 
lent them; for they were afraid of the displeasure we 


“Might feel at its loss. But Noél Tekwerimatch soon 
‘consoled them by assuring them that the Fathers 


were firm believers, and that whosoever believes 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 25 — 


que nous leurs auids preftée, apprehendat le defplai- 
fir que nous pourrions conceuoir de cette perte: mais 
Noél Tekgerimatch les confola bien-toft dans 1’affeu- 
rance qu’il leur donna que les Peres croyoient forte- 
ment, & que quiconque croit fortement, ne fe foucie 
point des biés de la [55] terre, & ne craint de perdre 
rien que Dieu. 

La premiere action qu’ils firent 4 leur abord, fuft de 
nous demander fice iour 14 n’eftoit pas la veille de 
celuy qu’on refpecte: c’eft ainfi qu'ils appellent le 
Dimanche) cela fuft trouué vray, en fuite de cela ils 
mettent pied A terre, entrent dans la Chapelle, font 
leur deuotion, nous mettent entre les mains les corps 
de cing ou fix petits enfans baptifez, & morts depuis 
dans les bois, empaquetez proprement dans des efcor- 
ces, pour eftre enterrez auec les ceremonies de l'E- 
glife, & autant d’autres nouuellement nés pour eftre 
baptifez, puis adiouftent parlant au Pere qui les gou- 
uerne, tiens-toy preft pour nous confeffer, il falluft 
veiller cette nuict, & les autres enfuiuantes, pour fatis- 
faire A leur deuotion: il y en auoit tel qui fe vouloit 
confeffer en vn iour deux & trois fois, difant que 
ceftoit pour reparer la faute qu’il auoit commife, 


ayant demeuré fi long-temps fans fe confeffer; ce 
nous eft vne confolation bien fenfible de voir d’vn © 
cofté le zele & l’ardeur [56] auec laquelle ils s'appro- — 
chent de ce Sacrement, & de l’autre l’innocence & la § 


pureté de leur vie. 


i 
{ 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 173 


firmly cares not for the goods of the [55] earth and 
fears only to lose God. 

The first thing that they did, on approaching the 
shore, was to ask us whether that day was not the 
eve of that which is respected (so they call Sunday). 
This was found to be the case. Afterward, they 
landed, entered the Chapel, performed their devo- 
tions, and handed us the bodies of four or five little 
children who had been baptized, and had since died 
in the woods, neatly wrapped up in bark, to be buried 
with the rites of the Church; and they brought as 
many newborn ones to be baptized. Then, speak- 
ing to their Father director, they added: ‘‘ Hold thy- 
self ready to confess us.” We had to remain awake 
that and the following nights, to satisfy their devo- 
tion. There was one man who wished to confess 
himself two or three times a day, saying that it was 
to atone for the fault he had committed in remaining 
so long without confession. It is a touching consola- 
tion for us to see, on the one hand, the zeal and ardor 
[56] with which they approach this Sacrament, and, 
on the other, the innocence and purity of their lives. 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [WoL 25 


CHAPITRE V. 


CONTINUATION DES BONS SENTIMENS & ACTIONS DES 
CHRESTIENS DE SAINCT JOSEPH. 


E zele de Charles MeiasKa¥at eft autant agreable, | 
L que feruent. Il auoit pris auant que d’eftre 
baptifé vne femme qui eftoit d’vn naturel 
extremément fuperbe, & violent, & n’auoit aucune 
difpofition 4 la Foy: cependant il fe rend digne ~ 
du Baptefme, & le regoit: & elle demeure toufiours — 
opiniaftre dans fon infidelité, il tafche de l’adoucir, 
& de la difpofer peu a peu a la Foy, auec vne- 
patience admirable: il en vint A bout, la voyla qui 
preffe fortement fon Baptefme, & l’obtient: on parle 
de les efpoufer en face de 1'Eglife, & donner a leur © 
mariage la qualité & la [57] grace du Sacrement, ils — 
s’y accordent tous deux, ils s’en vont 4 1’Eglife pour 
receuoir la Benediction du Preftre, qui demande 4 
premierement a Charles s’il agrée vne telle pour fa 
femme. Attends vn peu, refpond Charles, & fe tour-— 
nant vers fa femme; mais-toy, luy dit-il, feras-tu 
encore fuperbe, defobeyffante, cholerique, comme tu 
as efté par le paffé: refponds moy, car fi tu ne veux 
eftre plus fage, ie ne t’agrée point pour ma femme, 
i’en trouueray bien vne autre, elle luy répond toute 
confufe, qu’elle fera plus fage a l’aduenir: parle plus 
haut, replique Charles, on ne t’entend pas, quand 7 uw 
te fafche, tu crie comme vne folle, & tu fais mainte- 
nant la petite bouche, il falluft que cette pau a 


Rieti) 


she 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 1% 


CHAPTER V. 


CONTINUATION OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS AND AC- 
TIONS OF THE CHRISTIANS OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


HE zeal of Charles Meiaskawat is as agreeable 
44 as it is fervent. Before being baptized, he 
had taken a wife who was of a very arrogant 

and violent temper, and who had no inclination 
toward the Faith. Nevertheless, he made himself 
worthy of Baptism and received it, while she always 
stubbornly persisted in her unbelief. He tried to 
soothe her, and to incline her gradually to the Faith, 
with admirable patience. He succeeded; she urgent- 
ly asked for Baptism and obtained it. It was pro- 
posed that they be married according to the Church, 
so as to give to their marriage the character and the 
[57] grace of that Sacrament. They both agreed to 
this, and proceeded to the Church to receive the 
Blessing of the Priest, who first asked Charles if he 
took such a one for his wife. ‘‘ Wait a little,’’ 
answered Charles; and, turning to his wife, he said: 
“But thou, wilt thou continue to be proud, diso- 
bedient, and ill-tempered, as in the past? Answer 
me; for, if thou wilt not behave better, I will not 
take thee for my wife,—I shall easily find another.” 


She was quite abashed, and replied that she would 


conduct herself better in future. ‘‘ Speak louder,” 
said Charles; ‘‘ we do not hearthee. When thou art 
angry, thou screamest like a mad woman; and now 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vou. 5 


femme criaft bien haut & proteftaft publiquement © 
qu’elle feroit obeyffante & fon mary, & viuroit auec 
luy dans la douceur, & auec toute forte d’humilité: — 
Voyla qui eft bien dit Charles, pourueu que tu faffe ~ 
ce que tu dis, autrement tu me donneras occafion de 
me fafcher; & fi ie me fafche, i’iray en Enfer, & toy 4 
auffi: puis s’addreffant au [58] Pere, continué, dit-il, 
ie fuis content, ie l’aimeray toufiours comme ma 
femme vnique & legitime. Dieu a beny ce mariage 
vifiblement, & nous n’auons point veu de plus fen- 
fible changement qu’en cette femme, qui eft mainte- i 
nant deuenué vn vray aigneau, & a des fentimensde 
deuotion tres-folides & tres-affectueux. 

Voicy vn autre effet du zele de ce mefme Neo- 
phyte, qui eft tout feu dans les chofes de Dieu. Ila 
quelque connoiffance du pays des Abnaquiois, & de 
leur langue, depuis quelques voyages qu’il y a fait: 
Il a apris la refolution d’y retourner cette année, non 
pour autre fin que pour leur prefcher Iefus-Chrift, il 
nous vient communiquer fon deffein. Iln’ya point | 
de Peres chez les Abnaquiois, nous dit-il, perfonne ~ 
ne les enfeigne, vous autres n’y pouuez pasaller, i’ay 
pitié de ces pauures gens qui fe damnent: ie m’en 
vais les voir, ie leur apprendray ce que vous m’auez q 
appris. Onluy demanda qu’eft-ce qu’il leur enfeigne- — 
roit? La-deffus il fit vn Sermon tres-iudicieux qui 
comprenoit les principaux [59]myifteres de noftre Foy, | 
& les maximes les plus cdfiderables de 1’Euangile: — 
Voyla, dit-il, ce que ie leur prefcheray. Ie n’ay — 
point d’efprit, mais fi Dieu fe veut feruir de moy, il, 
m’en donnera, & nous ferons tous deux des merueil- 
les. Apres cela il s’embarque dans vne pauureté 
vrayement Apoftolique: apres deux iournées de 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 -) 97 


thou wilt not open thy mouth.’”’ The poor woman 
had to shout aloud, and protest publicly that she 
would be obedient to her husband, and live with 
him in gentleness and in the utmost humility. 
‘‘ That is right,’’ said Charles, ‘‘ provided thou doest 
as thou sayest; otherwise, thou wilt cause me to be 
angry; and, if I get angry, I shall go to Hell, and 
so wilt thou.’”’ Then speaking to the [58] Father, 
**Go on,” he said, ‘‘I am satisfied. I will always 
love her as my only and my lawful wife.” God has 
visibly blessed this marriage, and we have never 
seen a greater change than in this woman, who has 
now become truly a lamb, and has very deep and 
affectionate feelings of devotion. 

Here is another instance of the zeal of this same 
Neophyte, who is all afire in the affairs of God. He 
has some knowledge of the country of the Abnaquiois 
and of their language, since he has made some jour- 
neys thither. He resolved to return to those people 
this year, for no other purpose than to preach Jesus 
Christ to them. He came to tell us of his design. 
*““There are no Fathers with the Abnaquiois,’’ he 
said ; “‘ no one teaches them, and you cannot go there. 
I feel pity for those poor people who are exposing 
themselves to damnation. I am going to see them; 
I will teach them what you have taught me.’’ He 
was asked what he would teach them. Thereupon 
he gave a most judicious Sermon which included the 
principal [59] mysteries of our Faith and the most 
important maxims of the Gospel. ‘‘ That,’’ said he, 
“is what I shall preach tothem. I have no sense; 
but, if God wishes to make use of me, he will give 
me some, and together we shall do wonders.” After- 
ward, he embarked in a state of truly Apostolic pov- 


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vor. 25 — 


chemin fon compagnon l’abandéne & il fe trouue feul — 


dans fon canot, il s’en retourne froidement a Sillery 
en chercher vn autre: il s’embarque derechef, & 
nage fortement pendant deux iours, apres lefquels 
fon canot fe rompit, il s’en reuient a Sillery en pren- 
dre vn autre. Cependant quelques Abnaquiois arri- 
uent de leur pays & racontent qu’ils ont veu en che- 
min quantité de pifte d’Iroquois: cela n’eftonne point 
no{tre Apoftre, on luy veut diffuader fon voyage, en 
luy propofant le danger ot il s’expofe, ils’en moque, 
ie ne crains pas les Iroquois: ie ne crains que Dieu, 


s'il veut, il me conferuera: s’il ne le veut pas, il 


{cait bien pourquoy, ie ne me foucie pas d’eftre pris, 
bruflé, & mangé pour vne telle occafion. En fuite 
de [60] cela il fe confeffe, demande vn Crucifix, le 
baife, & fe iette dans fon efcorce, il auoit defia efté 
en toutes les maifons Religieufes pour fe recomman- 
der 4 leurs prieres: Dieu le conferue, & beniffe fon 
deffein, mais le voifinage des Anglois met de grands 
obf{tacles 4 la conuerfion de cette Nation, pour 
laquelle ce bon Neophyte a tant de zele. Dieu trou- 
uera des voyes que nous ne fcauons pas pour faire 
entrer la Foy dans cette Nation, & en tant d’autres 
ott l’entrée nous a ef{té fermée iufques a prefent. 

Ie crois qu’on pourroit faire vn iufte Liure des 
bons fentiment[s] & actions de cét homme: il eft 
admirable quand on le met a difcourir fur les chofes 
de Dieu, il a la confcience extremément tendre, les 
feules penfées qu'il a de faire du mal, quoy qu’il les 
chaffe incontinent auec horreur, luy font criminelles, 


il penfe fouuent s’accufer d’vn grand peché, quand 


il dit vn acte heroique de vertu qu’il a pratiqué: il 
s’accufera par exemple comme d’vn grand peché, 


| 


4 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * fae 


erty. After two days’ journey, his comrade abandons 
him, and he is left alone in his canoe. He quietly 
returns to Sillery, to seek for another companion. 
He again embarks and paddles steadily for two days, 
when his canoe breaks; he returns to Sillery to get 
another one. Meanwhile, some Abnaquiois arrive 
from their country, and relate that they have seen 
on the way many tracks of Iroquois; but this does 
not frighten our Apostle. We try to dissuade him 
from undertaking the journey; when we tell him of 
the danger to which he exposes himself, he laughs 
atit. ‘‘I do not fear the Iroquois; I fear God alone. 
If he choose, he will preserve me; if not, he knows 
why. I do not mind being captured, burned, and 
eaten for such a cause.’’ Afterward, [60] he con- 
fessed himself, asked for a Crucifix which he kissed, 
and stepped into his bark canoe. He had previously 
gone to all the Religious houses to recommend him- 
self to their prayers. God preserved him, and blessed 
his undertaking; but the vicinity of the English isa 
great obstacle to the conversion of that Nation, for 
which the good Neophyte is so zealous. God will 
find means that we know not of, to bring into the 
Faith this Nation and so many others that have, up 
to the present, been closed to us. 

I think that a whole Volume might be written about 
the good sentiments and actions of this man. He is 
admirable, when one engages him in discourse on 
matters relating to God. His conscience is exceed- 
ingly tender; the very thought of committing evil 
he considers criminal, even though he repel it at once 
with horror. He often thinks that he accuses him- 


_ self of a grievous sin, when he relates a heroic deed 
_ of virtue that he has performed. For instance, he 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2% 4 
d’auoir eu la penfée de manger de la chair vn [61] _ 
Vendredry, n’ayant aucune autre chofe quoy, qu'il — 
aye detefté cette penfée, & pafsé tout ce iour fans 
rien manger. Ce luy eft indiferent des’accuferen — 
Confeflion ou hors de confeffion. Il fuft inuité vn 
Samedy au foir 4 vn feftin ot il y auoit de la chair: 

il euft quelque defir d’en goufter: mais il fe mortifia 
bien-toft: il coucha toute la nuit auec fa chair fans y 
mordre, & le lendemain il ne manqua pas de s’accu- 
fer de cette faute innocente c’eft vn plaifir de 1’oiiyr 
crier quelques fois parmy les cabanes quand il a- 
pelle les autres aux prieres. car il fe glorifie du tiltre 
de Capitaine des prieres, & s’acquite excellemment 
de cette office; c’eft affés de ceftuy-cy: nous n’au- 
rions iamais fait, & il eft affez connu par tout. 

Il y ena qui pratiquent de bonne graces les ceuures 
de mifericorde vifitant les malades, les confolant, & 
leur donnant 4 manger. Vn certain ayant oiiy dire — 
l’eftat que Dieu fait de cefte forte de bonnes ceuures, — 
entre foudain das 1’Hofpital, & y trowuant des ma- 
lades fans efperance de guerifon, ne perdez pas cou- q 
rage mes freres, dit-il, ne foyez pas triftes de ce [62] 
que vous deuez bien-toft mourir, cefte vie eft pleine © 
de miferes. Apres celle-cy vous en aurez vn autre — 
pleine de contentemens qui fera eternelle nous mou- — 
rons tous les iours, & quand nous acheuons de mou- , 
rir, nous ne mourons pas totalement. II n’y A que 
la moitié de nous mefme qui meure, & la plus baffle — 
& chetifue: L’ame ne meurt point: ce n’eft que le — 
corps, lequel encore doit refufciter vn iour: penfés a 
cela, & vous ne ferés pas triftes. j 

Vn autre leur difoit, Pourquoy vous affligés vous, — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 > yet 


will confess, as a great sin, that he has thought of 
eating meat on a [61] Friday because he has had 
nothing else, although he has hated the thought, and 
has passed the entire day without eating anything. 
It is quite immaterial to him whether he accuse him- 
self in Confession or out of confession. He was 
invited on a Saturday night to a feast whereat meat 
was served. He felt a desire to eat some, but soon 
mortified himself. He slept all night with his meat, 
without eating it; and on the following day he did 
not fail to accuse himself of this harmless offense. 
It is a pleasure to hear him shout sometimes among 
the cabins, when he calls the others to prayers; for 
he glories in the title of ‘‘ Captain of the prayers,”’ 
and performs the duties of that office in an excellent 
manner. This is enough for him; we would never 
have done, and he is sufficiently known to all. 

There are some who with good grace practice works. 
of mercy, such as visiting and consoling the sick, 
and giving them food. A certain man, who had 
learned how highly God esteems such good works, 
at once entered the Hospital; and, finding therein 
sick persons who despaired of being cured, he said to 
them: “‘ Do not lose courage, my brothers; be not 
sad because [62] you are about to die. This life is 
full of misery. After it you will have another, full 
of satisfactions that will be everlasting. Wearedying 
every day, and, when we finish dying, we do not die 
altogether,—only one half of us dies, and that the 
lower and baser half. The soul does not die; it is 
only the body, and that will rise again some day. 
Think of this, and you will not be sad.”’ 

Another said to them: ‘‘ Why do you afflict your- 
selves because you are dying? Your body does not 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 


il eft A Dieu qui vous l’a donné: vous n’eftes pas 1 
maiftre de vos vies; c’eft Dieu feul qui en eft le 
maiftre, il eft raifonnable qu’il en difpofe comme bon ~ 
luy femble. Confeffez vous feulemét, mettez voftre 
ame en bon état, & puis n’aprehendez rien. a 

Vne bonne vieille ayant otiy dire dans vne ex[h]or- / 
tation que Dieu aggreoit grandemét qu’on donnaft a 
manger aux pauures, s’en va incontinent dans fa © 
cabane prend le meilleur morceau de chair qu'elle — 
euft, & le porte aux malades de [63] 1’Hofpital. — 
C’eft vn acte genereux 4 vn Sauuage de donner ainfi ] 
fa chair gratuitement, & pour l’amour de Dieu. 

Les Sauuages aiment leurs enfans auec des paffions ; 
eftranges, & la perte qu’ils en font eft l’vnique dont i 
ils témoignent du reffentiment. I1 s’eft trouué — 
neantmoins vne femme courageufe, qui apres en auoir 
perdu trois, & voyant le quatriéme languiffant, ne~ 
s’e{tonnoit point: voila l’vnique enfant qui me refte, 
difoit-elle vn iour & vn de nos Peres, i’en ay perdu , 
trois, ceftuy-cy mourra bien-toft. Ie fuis agée, & 
fans mary, n’importe, Dieu le veut ainfi, il eft le 
maiftre: ie ne laifferay pas de l’aymer & feruir. 


les ramaffer toutes, & les enfermer pendant la nuid& 
fous la clef, ou dans les maifons que nous leur auon ; 
bafti A la francoife, ot dans les greniers ot ils fer- 
rent leurs prouifions. Vn foir comme nous faifions 
les prieres dans noftre chapelle, elle entre brufque: 
ment, & nous hafte de fortir, [64] nous trouuafmes 


qu’elle nous apelloit au fecours contre quelque: 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 183 


belong to you,—it belongs to God, who gave it to 
you. You are not the masters of your lives; God 
alone is master of them. It is reasonable that he 
should dispose of them as he thinks proper. Only 
confess yourselves, put your souls in a proper state, 
and apprehend nothing.” 

A good old woman, who heard it said in an exhor- 
tation that God was greatly pleased at food being 
given to the poor, went at once to her cabin, took 
the best piece of meat that she possessed, and carried 
it to the sick in [63] the Hospital. It is a generous 
action for a Savage, thus to give meat gratuitously 
and for the love of God. 

The Savages have an extraordinary love for their 
children, and their loss is the only thing for which 
they manifest any deep feeling. Nevertheless, there 
was a brave woman who after having lost three, saw 
the fourth dying, and was not disturbed. ‘‘ This is 
the only child that is left to me,’’ she said one day 
to one of our Fathers; ‘‘I have lost three, and this 
one will soon die. I am old, and have no husband. 
Never mind; God so wills it. He isthe master; I 
will not cease to love and serve him.’’ 

This same woman of whom we speak manifests 
admirable zeal for the purity of the girls. When 
the young men come back from war, she carefully 
assembles all the girls and locks them in at night, or 
shuts them up in the houses that we have built for 
them in the manner of the French, or in the grana- 
ties where they keep their provisions. One night, 
while we were reciting the prayers in our chapel, 
she suddenly entered and hurried us out. [64] We 
found that she called us to help her against some 
young men, who were walking about near a house in 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


quelques filles eftoient enfermées: ce fuft affez pour — 
les chaffer de Sillery, o4 les moindres foupgons en 
cette matiere font criminels. 

Vn de nos Peres ayant tefmoigné & vne fille fort 
innocente enfuite de quelques difcours & raports, 
qu'il craignoit quelque chofe touchant fon honneur, 
& l’aduertiffant d’y prendre garde, elle fe mit A pleu- 
rer, & fe retira dans fa cabane, la ott ayant raconté 
afes parens le fujet de fes pleurs, tous fe mirent & 
pleurer auec elle, & pafferent toute la nuict en larmes, 
iufques a ce que le lendemain, le Pere ayant fceu ce 
qui s’eftoit paffé, les confola en les affeurant qu’il ne 
doutoit point de l’innocence de cefte fille, mais ce 
qu'il luy auoit dit, n’eftoit que pour luy faire appre- 
hender d’auantage ce qui pouuoit nuire A fa pureté. 

Il y ena plufieurs qui s’accufent comme d’vn grand 
peché de ce que quelques ieunes hommes leur a parlé 
de fe marier, quoy qu’elles ayent refpondu froide- 
ment [65] a cela que cét affaire ne dépend pas d’elles, 
mais de leurs parens. Vne bonne femme eftant 
grandement malade, demanda inftamment qu’on ne 
la defpoiiillaft aucunement apres fa mort, mais qu’on 
la laiffe enuelopée dans fa robe de caftor, comme elle 
eftoit alors: vn foir vne troupe de ieunes filles vin- 
drent crier 4 no{tre porte mon Pere aye pitié de nous, 
on leur demande qu’eft-ce que c’eft? nous auons 
peur, difent-elles, de quelques ieunes gens qui ne 
font pas fages, nous ne fommes pas en affeurance 
dans nos cabanes, ferme-nous a la clef dans quel- 
qu'vne de ces petites maifons, il y en a qui rendent 
compte de leur confcience s’accufent comme d’vn 
grand peché de hayr grandement vn homme qui leur ~ 
a dit quelque parole trop libre, ces {crupules font 


hi 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "185 


which some girls were shut up. This was enough 
to drive them from Sillery, where the slightest 
suspicion on this head is criminal. 

One of our Fathers told a very innocent girl, in 
consequence of some remarks and reports, that he 
feared something affecting her honor, and advised 
her to be on her guard. She began to cry and with- 
drew to her cabin, where she related to her parents 
the cause of her tears. All began to weep with her, 
and passed the whole night in tears, until, on the 
following day, the Father, who had heard what had 
happened, consoled them and assured them that he 
did not doubt the girl’s innocence; but what he had 
said was merely for the purpose of making her dread 
still more whatever might harm her purity. 

There are many who accuse themselves, as of a 
grievous sin, that some young men have spoken to 
them of marriage,—although they have coldly an- 
swered [65] to this that the matter did not depend 
upon them, but upon their parents. A good woman, 
who was very ill, urgently requested that she be not 
stripped after her death, but that she be left wrapped 
up in her dress of beaver skins, as she then was. One 
night a band of young girls came to our door and 
called out: ‘‘My Father, have pity on us.’’ We 
asked what was the matter. ‘‘ We are afraid,” they 
said, ‘‘ of some young men who are not well behaved. 
We are not safe in our cabins; lock us up in one of 
those small houses.” There are some who, in giving 
an account of their consciences, accuse themselves, 
as of a grievous sin, of greatly hating a man who 
has spoken too freely to them. Such scruples are 
pardonable in girls, and show in what esteem purity 
is held here, where formerly its name was hardly 


——— 


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 25 


icy de la pureté, 12 ot auparauant A peine en con. 
noiffoit-on le nom. C’eft affez de ce fujet; voicy © 
comme nous traitons ceux qui font quelque faute 
publique. . 

Vn Chreftien, d’ailleurs innocent, [62 i.e., 66] & 
fort homme de bien, s’eftoit enyuré non tant par fa — 
faute, que par celle d’vn Francois qui l’auoit inuité 4 
boire, il falluft qu’il fatisfit A Dieu qu’il auoit offenfé, — 
& aux hommes qu'il auoit fcandalifé. Le Pere 
Dequen luy fit vne bonne reprimende & la fin de la 
Meffe, en prefence de tous les Sauuages, luy enioi- ~ 
gnit de baifer trois fois la terre, & de ieufner trois a 
iours confecutifs, ce qu’il accomplit auec humilité, & 
édification de tous les affiftans: outre cela il fuft — 
obligé de payer l’amende qu’on a taxé par le confen- — 
tement mefmes des Sauuages A ceux qui s’enyurent, — 
il fuft au fort pour cét effet, ott apres auoir efté dere- 
chef repris par Monfieur le Gouverneur de fa faute, il 
ietta trois Caftors A terre: Voyla, dit-il, que ie iette q 
ma mefchanceté, ie ne fuis pas mary de bailler mes © 
Caftors, mais ie fuis marry de les bailler pour ce 
fujet, i’ay fafché Dieu, & perdu fon amitié, c’eft ce 
qui m’afflige & non pas la perte de mes Caftors, c’eft 
la premiere fois que ie me fuis enyuré, ce fera la 
derniere: celuy qui m’a fait boire n’a point d’efprit: 
mais ie ne deuois pas luy obeir. [67] Ie te deuois 
aduertir: Voila ce que ie feray vne autre fois, quand 
cela m’arriuera, ces rigueurs font douces A nos Chre- 
{tiens, & ne laiffent pas neantmoins d’eftre efficaces. 

Ie mettray icy vn ou deux traits pour faire voir le 
refpect qu’ils portent aux chofes fainctes. Vn Chre- 
{tien auoit perdu dans les bois vn Crucifix qu’on luy 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "187 


known. This is enough on the subject; see how we 
treat those who commit some public sin. 

A Christian who was innocent in other respects, 
[62 i.e., 66] and a very good man, had become intox- 
icated,— not so much through his own fault as 
through that of a Frenchman, who had invited him 
to drink. He had to give satisfaction to God, whom 
he had offended; and to men, whom he had scandal- 
ized. Father Dequen administered a severe repri- 
mand to him, after Mass, in the presence of all the 
Savages, and ordered him to kiss the ground three 
times, and to fast for three consecutive days. This 
he performed with humility, and to the edification 
of all present. Moreover, he was obliged to pay the 
fine that has been imposed, with the consent of the 
Savages themselves, on those who become intoxicated. 
He went to the fort for that purpose, where, after 
having been again reproved by Monsieur the Govern- 
or for his offense, he threw down three Beaver skins. 
“ There,’’ said he, ‘‘I throw away my wickedness. 
Iam not sorry to give my Beaver skins, but I am 
sorry to give them for this purpose. I have offended 
God, and have lost his friendship; that is what afflicts 
me, and not the loss of my Beaver skins. It is the 
first time that I have been intoxicated; it shall be 
the last. He who made me drink has no sense; but 
I should not have obeyed him—[67] I should have 
notified thee. That is what I will do another time, 
if the same thing happens to me.’’ Such strong 
measures seem lenient to our Christians, but are 
none the less effective. 

I shall here relate one or two instances to show 
the respect that they have for holy things. A Chris- 
tian had lost in the woods a Crucifix that had been 


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Wot. 2% 5 


auoit donné, il creuft auoir offenfé Dieu griefuement, i 
quoy qu’il fuft innocent dans cette perte, il part fou- 4 
dain pour venir a Sillery, il rencontre vn de nos Peres, 4 
ie fuis trifte, luy dit-il, vay fafché Dieu, hafte-toy, 
ie me veux confeffer. Ce crime pretendu le preffoit — 
fi fort, qu’il en fit vne Confeffion publique fur le 
champ, n’ayant pas la patience d’attendre qu’il fuft 
aux pieds du Confeffeur, i’ay perdu, dit-il, mon Cru- 
cifix, depuis cette perte, ie fuis exactement affligé, 
que feray-ie pour appaifer Dieu? 

Vne bonne vieille ayant trouué fon Chappelet 
qu'elle auoit perdu, 6 que ie fuis aife, difoit-elle, 
d’auoir trouué mon Chappelet, il y a deux iours que ~ 
ie l’auois perdu: pendant tout ce temps, il m’a [68] 
femblé que i’auois mal au cceur, non feulement 2 
caufe de la perte que i’auois faite, mais auffli parce 
que ie ne fentois plus la croix me battre fur le coeur, 
comme elle faifoit d’ordinaire lors que ie portois mon 
Chapelet pendu au col. Ces fentimens monftrent 
qu’il n’y a plus de barbarie dans ces coeurs, puis que © 
l’amour de la Croix y eft. 

Ie finiray ce Chapitre par l’édification publique ~ 
qu’ont donné les Chreftiens de Sillery allant a la — 
guerre contre les Iroquois, le rendez-vous eftoit aux — 
trois Riuieres ot il fe trouua fix-vingts Guerriers par- 
my lefquels il y auoit quelques mauuais Chreftiens, © a 
& plufieurs infideles: Les noftres voulurent toufiours 
cabaner 4 part pour n’auoir aucune communication © 
atiec les mefchans. Quelques-vns de ceux-cy firent 
vn feftin de guerre, ot ils introduifirent (felon leur 


qui s’en doutoient ny allerent ier les autres qui 
y allerent innocemment, detefterent céte impieté, & 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ' 189 


given to him. He thought that he had grievously 
offended God, although he was not to blame for the 
loss. He at once started to return to Sillery, where 
he met one of our Fathers, and said to him: ‘‘] am 
sad; I have offended God; hasten, I wish to make 
my confession.’’ This sin that he thought he had 
committed caused him such remorse that he made a 
public Confession of it on the spot, being too impa- 
tient to wait until he was at his Confessor’s feet. 
“*T have lost my Crucifix,’’ he said: ‘‘ Ever since 
my loss, I have been truly contrite. What can I do 
to appease God?”’ 

A good old woman, who had found her Rosary 
that she had lost, said: ‘‘ Oh, how glad I am that I 
have found my Rosary! I lost it two days ago. 
During the whole of that time, it [68] seemed to me 
that I was sick at heart,—not only on account of my 
loss, but also because I no longer felt the cross strik- 
ing against my heart as it used to do, when I carried 
my Rosary hung around my neck.’’ Such sentiments 
show that there is no longer any barbarism in these 
hearts, since love for the Cross dwells in them. 

I shall conclude this Chapter by the public edifica- 
tion given by the Christians of Sillery, when about 
to go to war against the Iroquois. The rendezvous 
was at the three Rivers, where there were one hun- 
dred and twenty Warriors, among whom were some 
bad Christians and several infidels. Ours always 
wished to have separate cabins, so as to have no 
communication with the wicked ones. Some of the 
latter held a war feast, in which they introduced (in 
accordance with their old custom) naked girls. 

_ Those of ours who suspected this did not go. The 
others, who went there unwittingly, detested such 


i 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (ow. 25 


en témoignerent de vifs reffentimens. Monfieur de — 
Chamflour Gouuerneur [69] des trois Riuieres chaftia — 
tous ceux qui auoient trempé dans cette faute par vne — 
peine corporelle en les chaffant de fon Fort, &le 
Pere Brebeuf d’vne peine fpirituelle en les chaffant : 
de l’Eglife. La veille de leur depart, ceux-cy paffe- | 
rent toute la nuict en des feftins fuperftitieux, en i 

des danfes, & en des cris & hurlemens effroyables, — a's 
les noftres la pafferent dans la Chappelle en priant © 
Dieu & fe confeffant; fi leur pieté a paru en fe dif- | 
pofant a la guerre, leur courage n’a pas moins paru 4 
en y allant: Voicy le tefmoignage qu’en rend le Pere 
Buteux qui les a veus A Montreal, & eft defcendu a 
auec eux aux trois Riuieres. Ils eftoient, dit-il, les a 
premiers 4 s’embarquer pour aller A la defcouuerte — 
de l’ennemy, & entrer bien auant dans les bois aux 
lieux les plus dangereux, ils alloient par tout la tefte 
leuée fans aucune demonftration de crainte; mais i’ay 
admiré encore dauantage la bonté de leur courage a 
les voyant prier Dieu parmy les infideles fans aucun — 
refpect humain. Lors que ie prenois mon Breuiaire q 
pour prier Dieu, celuy qui commandoit dans cette — 
chaloupe, & les [70] autres Chreftiens a fon exemple — 
prenoient leur Chapelet, qu’ils recitoient deuotement — 
lors que le vent les exemptoit de fe feruir de l’auiron. 
Ceux qui les voyoient dans cette pofture, quoy qu’in- A 
fideles faifoient autant d’eftat de leur vertu, comme | 
ils conceuoient de mefpris des autres qui ayant efté — 
baptifez ne viuoient pas conformément A leur pro-— 
feffion, tant il eft vray que la vertu a de grands at- 
traits pour fe faire aimer, mef{me parmy les barbares. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 191 


impiety, and expressed strong resentment at it. 
Monsieur de Chamflour, the Governor [69] of the 
three Rivers, inflicted a corporal punishment on all 
who had participated in this offense, by driving them 
out of his Fort; and Father Brebeuf inflicted spirit- 
ual punishment by expelling them from the Church. 
On the eve of their departure, they passed the whole 
night in superstitious feasts, in dances, and in utter- 
ing horrible yells and cries. Ours passed it in the 
Chapel, praying to God and confessing themselves. 
If their piety made itself apparent in their prepara- 
tion for war, their courage manifested itself no less 
by their going thither. This is what Father Buteux 
says of it, who saw them at Montreal, and who came 
with them down tothe three Rivers. ‘‘ They were,’’ 
he says, ‘‘ the first to embark, to go and discover the 
enemy, and to penetrate into the woods at the most 
dangerous points. They went everywhere with 
heads erect and without any manifestation of fear. 
But I admired still more the greatness of their cour- 
age when I saw them praying to God in the midst 
of the infidels, without fear of what might be said of 
them. When I took my Breviary to pray to God, he 
who commanded in that shallop, and the [70] other 
Christians in imitation of him, took their Rosaries, 
which they recited devoutly when the wind dispensed 
them from the necessity of using their paddles. 
Those who saw them doing so, infidels though they 
were, had as high an opinion of their virtue as they 
felt contempt for the others who had been baptized, 
but did not live in accordance with their belief; so 
true it is that virtue possesses great attractions, that 
cause it to be admired, even among barbarians.”’ 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % { 


CHAPITRE VI. 
DE L’ HOSPITAL 


ES Iroquois qui font les vrais tiras & les perfecu- 
ki teurs de cette nouuelle Eglife, ont ietté la ter- 
reur cette année dans le pais, ils eftoient diui- 

fez ce Prin-temps dernier en dix bandes efparfes ca 
& 14 fur la grande Riuiere pour efcumer tout ce qu’ils 
rencontreroient, 1’vne de ces bandes [71] prift le Pere 
Breffany & les Hurons, qui le conduifoient en leur 
pais le 28. iour d’Auril 4 quatre lieués au deffus des 
trois Riuieres: vne autre efcoiiade ayant maffacré trois 
Francois 4 Mont-Real, en emmena deux autres cap- 
tifs, qu’ils ont depuis bruflez dans leur pais au raport 
d’vn Huron qui s’eft efchappé de leurs mains, plu- 
fieurs Sauuages de la refidence de Sainct lofeph 
efpouuantez, eurent fujet de craindre que ces enne- 
mis ne defcendiffent plus bas, & pour cela fe retire- 
rent, qui deca, qui dela, ce qui obligea les Religieufes 
Hofpitalieres auec l’aduis de Méfieur le Gouuerneur, 
des Peres, & des habitans de ceder au temps, & de 
fe tranfporter en leur maifon de Kebec, non fans vne 
grande incommodité, pour ce que cette maifon n’a- 
uoit encor que les quatre murailles & la couuerture, 
mais auffi elles emporterent cette confolation auec 
elles que les Sauuages fains & malades auoient acquis 
l’habitude, & familiarité de cette faincte maifon, & 
perdu la difficulté de les venir trouuer a Kebec 
en leur neceffitez & maladies. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "198 


CHAPTER VI. 


OF THE HOSPITAL. 


cutors of this new Church, have spread terror 

this year throughout the country. They were 
divided last Spring into ten bands, scattered here and 
there along the great River, to take all whom they 
came across. One of these bands [71] captured Fa- 
ther Bressany, and the Hurons who were conducting 
him to their country, on the 28th day of April, four 
leagues above the three Rivers. Another party 
massacred three Frenchmen at Mont-Real and took 
two others captive, whom they have since burned in 
their country, according to the report of a Huron 
who escaped from their hands. Many Savages of 
the residence of Saint Joseph were terrified, and had 
cause to believe that the enemies would come further 
down. For that reason they took flight, hither and 
thither, which compelled the Hospital Nuns, by the 
advice of Monsieur the Governor, of the Fathers, and 
of the inhabitants, to yield to circumstances, and to 
remove to their house in Kebec,—not without great 
inconvenience, because the building had as yet but 
the four walls and the roof. But they also took with 
them this consolation, that the Savages, both healthy 
and sick, had become accustomed to and familiar with 
that holy house and had lost their unwillingness 
to come to them at Kebec in their necessities and 
sickness. 


a . Iroquois, who are the true tyrants and perse- 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou 2% 


——Ser 


[72] Noél Tek¥erimath Capitaine de Sillery, s’eftant 
retiré aux trois Riuieres pendans ces bruits, pria le 
Pere Brebeuf qui y eftoit pour lors d’efcrire aux q 
Religieufes Hofpitalieres que fi toft que les femences 
feroient faites elles fe retiraffent 4 Kebec & y me- © 
naffent auffi auec elles toutes les femmes, enfans & 7 
vieillards iufques & fon retour, cela ne pefit pas s’ex- 
ecuter entierement, mais quand les Religieufes quit- — 
terent Sillery, toutes les femmes Sauuages vinrenta 
Kebec dreffer deux cabanes prés de la maifon des 
Religieufes, 1’vne pour les hommes qui trauailloient — 
‘au baftiment, l’autre pour les malades, attendant 
qu’il y euft vne fale faite pour ce fujet & ne manque- 
rent pas d’enuoyer incontinent deux ou trois de leur iq 
gens qui eftoient malades, & qui ont encor efté fui- i 
uis de quelques autres. Les Sauuages les vifitent 4 
tous propos, & les preffent de paracheuer quelque | 
lieu commode pour paffer 1’Hyuer, & fe garantirdes 
neiges, & des glaces. | 

Leur charité a fecouru cette année plus de 35. 
malades, dont le Ciel en a pris [73] dix, & outre ces 
malades, plufieurs Sauuages ont paffé les deux ou — 
trois iours en cette maifon de mifericorde pour s’y — 
faire purger & medicamenter voulans preuenir quel-— ; 
que maladie dont ils fe fentoient menacez. Ce n’eft | 
pas 1a encor tout l’exercice de charité de ces bonnes 
meres, la maifon de Dieu fait du bien aux pauures — 
auffi bien qu’aux malades, plufieurs vieillards, plu- — 
fieurs femmes & plufieurs enfans leur font demeurez — 
deux ou trois mois fur les bras pendant l’Hyuer, & 
fuffent morts de miferes fans ce fecours, c’eft vne 


y, 


neceflité, mais auffi vn contentement de s’efpuifer 


. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "195 


[72] Noél Tekwerimath, Captain of Sillery, who 
had gone to the three Rivers during these rumors, 
begged Father Brebeuf, who was then there, to write 
to the Hospital Nuns that, as soon as the crops were 
sown, they were to withdraw to Kebec, and to take 
with them all the women, children, and old men 
until his return. This could not be fully carried out; 
but, when the Nuns left Sillery, all the Savage 
women came to Kebec, and erected two cabins near 
the Nuns’ house,— one for the men who were work- 
ing at the building, and the other for the sick, until 
a ward could be prepared for them; and they did 
not fail at once to send thither two or three of their 
people who were sick, and who were afterward fol- 
lowed by some others. The Savages visited them at 
every opportunity, and urged them to complete the 
building of a suitable house to enable them to pass 
the Winter and to be protected against the snow and 
ice. 

Their charity has this year succored over 35 sick, 
of whom Heaven has taken [73] ten; and, in addi- 
tion to these sick persons, many Savages have passed 
two or three days in this house of mercy for the pur- 
pose of undergoing purgation, and of taking medi- 
cines for the prevention of some disease with which 
they felt themselves threatened. Even this is not 
all the charity exercised by these good mothers. 
The house of God does good to the poor as well as to 
the sick. Several old men, several women, and sev- 
eral children have remained on their hands for two 
or three months during the Winter, and would have 
died of hardship without such assistance. It isa 
necessity, but also a satisfaction, to spend oneself in 
such circumstances. As the majority of these poor 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


gens eftoient Chreftiens, ils ont donné vne grande 
édification aux Religieufes, en voicy quelques actions 
particulieres. | 
Ona fouuent parlé dans les relations precedentes 
d’vne bonne femme aueugle nommée Helene, fa mort 
a donné vne fainte approbation aux actions de la vie © 
qu’elle a menée depuis fon Baptefme, vn excez peu — 
blafmable la iettée dans le tombeau, fe fentant atta- — 
quée [74] d’vne forte fiéure, elle dift aux Meres Hof- — 
pitalieres la trifteffe que ie reffents voyant la dureté 
des Algonquins de 1’Ifle mes compatriotes & le fcan- 
dale qu’ils donnent aux autres Sauuages par le mef- 
pris qu’ils font de la Foy me fera mourir, fi i’entre — 
dans leur cabane pour raconter quelque Hiftoire i} 
Saincte, ou pour les imiter [sc. inuiter] 4 prier Dieu, © 
ils fe mocquent de tous les aduis qu’on leur donne, 
ils mefprifent la priere comme s’ils eftoient indepen- 
dans, de Dieu leur malheur me touche fi viuement le _ 
coeur, que i’en fuis trifte iufques au mourir, voila, ' 
difoit-elle, la caufe de ma maladie. Vn grand Sainct 
dit que toute chofe doit auoir fa mefure & fa reigle _ 
excepté l’amour qu’on porte a Dieu, cette bonne ame 
auoit trop de zele et fa ferueur eftoit trop preffante, © 
i’auois [sc. i’ai], dit-elle vne grande confolation quand — 
ie vay vifiter les Sauuages d’icy bas, ils prennent — 
plaifir d’entendre parler de Dieu, ie leur raconte — 
1’ Hiftoire d’ Abraham, de Moyfe & les autres que vay 
retenués dans 1’inftruction qu’on m’a donnée (en effet. 
elle eftoit auffi fcauante [75] dans les myfteres du 
vieil Teftament, que plufieurs femmes des plus capa- 
bles de no{tre France) ils prennent tous plaifir d’ottyr 
parler de chofes fi rauiffantes, ils fe mettent A genoux 
tous les foirs, & ils prononce[nt] les prieres tout haut 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 “197 


people were Christians, they gave great edification to 
the Nuns. Here are some especial actions. 

Mention has frequently been made in previous rela- 
tions of a good blind woman named Helene. Her 
death has given holy approbation to the deeds of the 
life that she had led since her Baptism. An impru- 
dence, hardly blamable, brought her to her grave- 
Feeling herself attacked [74] by a violent fever, she 
said to the Hospital Mothers: ‘‘ The sorrow that I 
feel at seeing the hard-heartedness of the Algonquins 
of the Island, my countrymen, and the scandal that 
they give to the other Savages by their contempt for 
the Faith, will cause my death. If I enter their cab- 
ins, to relate some narrative from Sacred History, or 
to invite them to pray to God, they laugh at all the 
advice that is given to them; they despise prayer, as: 
if they were independent of God. Their misfor- 
tune touches my heart to such an extent, that I am 
sorrowful unto death. That,’’ said she, ‘‘ is the cause 
of my illness.” A great Saint says that everything 
must have its measure and its rule, except the love 
we bear to God. This good soul’s fervor was too 
zealous, and she was too eager. ‘‘I feel much con- 
solation,’’ she said, ‘‘ when I go to visit the Savages 
downhere. They take pleasure in hearing one speak 
of God. I relate to them the Story of Abraham, of 
Moses, and of others, which I have retained in my 
memory from the instruction given to me”’ (in fact, 
she was as learned [75] in the mysteries of the old 
Testament as many of the most clever women of our 
France). ‘‘ They all take pleasure in hearing of such 
delightful things. They kneel down every night, 
and repeat their prayers aloud,—each one following 
me with much modesty. But there is still another 


a 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


chacun me fuit auec beaucoup de modeftie, mais ils ; 
mdquent encor en vn point pour la plufpart, c’eft 
que ie voudrois qu’apres leur priere ils gardaffent le 
filence, qu’ils ruminaffent ce qu'ils ont dit A Dieu, & — 
qu’il s’endormiffent en péfant A luy, or vne bonne ~ 
quatité ne laiffe pas de parler & de s’entretenir apres — 
qu’ils ont prié Dieu, cela m’afflige vn petit, car ie i 
voudrois quils fiffent encor mieux qu’ils ne font. 

Elle adiofitoit que depuis qu’elle étoit deuenué — 
aueugle & qu'elle s’eftoit ragée Ala foy, elle auoit & 
toufiours efté trauaillée de quelque maladie, le diable 
prenoit de la occafion de luy fuggerer cette penfée, i 
mais d’ott viét que depuis que ie cénoy Dieu & que ie 
Taime fi particulierement, ie fuis toufiours dans les E 
fouffrances, & voyla des femmes qui fe portent, fi 
bien & qui le m’efprifent? auffi-toft, il [76] luy venoit 
vne autre penfée c’eft l’amour de mon Dieu qui fait 4 
cela pour m’efprouuer & pour me faire paier mes — 
debtes icy bas, afin que ie ne fois point tourmentée 
en l’autre vie, voyla comme il traite fes amis, cela 
luy donnoit des defirs de fouffrir, en forte que ne 
pouuans ieufner le Carefme, & croyant que les fouf- 
frances eftoient agreables 4 Dieu, elle luy difoit fi ie @ 
ne puis ieufner ie peux endurer, ie vous offre les _ 
douleurs de ma maladie. t 

Ie n’aurois iamais fait fi ie voulois rapporterle nom- 
bre des prieres que faifoit cette bonne ame, elle auoit — 
vne devotion amoureufe enuers Noftre Seigneur, elle 
aimoit cordialement la faincte Vierge, elle s’addref- 
foit fouuent a fon bon Ange & A faincte Helene 
dont elle portoit le nom, faifant des colloques auer 
vn langage qui eft bien venu au Ciel, fur tout fie 
voyant charitablement affiftée non feulement elle 


i) 


wy 
v 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 199 


point, on which most of them fail. I could wish that 
after their prayer they should keep silent, ponder 
over what they have said to God, and go to sleep 
while thinking of him. Now a good many speak 
and converse together, after having prayed to God. 
This afflicts me a little, for I would like them to do 
still better than they do.” 

She added that since she had become blind, and 
since she had belonged to the faith, she had always 
been afflicted with some disease. The devil took the 
opportunity to suggest this thought to her: ‘‘ But 
how is it that since I know God, and love him so. 
thoroughly, I am always suffering, while there are 
women who are in good health and who think noth- 
ing of him?’’ [76] Another thought came at once to 
her mind: ‘‘ It is the love of my God which does this, 
to try me and to make me pay my debts here below, 
so that I may not be tormented in the other life; it 
is thus that he treats his friends.’’ This inspired. 
her with a desire to suffer; therefore, as she could 
not fast through Lent, and as she believed that suf- 
fering was agreeable to God, she said to him: ‘If I 
cannot fast, I can suffer; I offer you the pains of my 
sickness.’’ 

I would never have done, were I to repeat the 
number of prayers that this good soul said. She had 
an affectionate devotion for Our Lord; she heartily 
loved the blessed Virgin; she often addressed her- 
self to her good Angel, and to saint Helena, whose 
name she bore, holding this communion in a lan- 
guage which surely reached Heaven. Above all, 
when she saw herself so charitably succored, she not 
only thanked the Mothers who attended her, but she 
_ hever failed frequently to repeat these words: ‘‘ My 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 5 


remercioit les Meres qui la feruoient, mais elle ne 
manquoit point de dire fouuent ces paroles: mon Dieu 
determinez de ma vie vous eftes le maiftre; ayez 
pitié de ceux qui ont pitié de moy, fecourez tous ceux 
qui [77] nous fecourent, & fur tout éleuez au Ciel la 
perfonne qui a fait baftir cette maifon ot on recoit 
les pauures malades, éleuez y auffi tous fes amis 
Minskiteh ainfi foit-il. 
Elle auoit vne grande deuotion d’Entendre la © 
faincte Meffe, enuoyant aduertir certain iours les 
bonnes Meres qu'elle fe trouuoit fi mal qu’elle ne 
pouuoit aller feule & la Chappelle, on luy refpondit 
qu'elle n’eftoit point obligée d’affifter & la Meffe dans — 
vne fi grande maladie, mais deuant que la refponce — 
luy fuft rendiie deux femmes Sauuages l’eftant veniie 
voir, elle fi fift traifner & l’entendit 4 deux genoux, ~ 
& pour marque que fa ferueur la fouftenoit, fes deuo- 
tions finies elle n’en pouuoit plus, tombans en deffail- — 
lance, fi bien qu’A peine la pefit-on reporter fur fon - 
lict d’ott elle difoit 4 Dieu les iours qu’on ne luy per- 
mettoit pas d’aller 4 la Chappele, tu fgais bien que ie 
fuis malade, & que ie fuis trifte de ne pouuoir entrer 
dans la maifon des prieres, & elle prenoit pour lors 
fon chappelet, & fe tournant vers 1’Eglife le recitoit 
auec toute l’attention [78] qu’elle pouuoit auoir. | 
Elle demanda qu’elle opinion auoit le Medecin de 
fa maladie, on luy dit, qu’il auoit bonne efperance 
de fa fanté, c’eft a Dieu fift-elle d’en determiner, 
qu’il face ce qu’il voudra ie ne feray pas marrie de 
le voir, comme elle vit que les remedes la tourmen- 
toient fans effect elle en efit auerfion, neantmoins 
elle fe [sc. les] prenoit difant qu’il falloit obeyr. 
Elle eftoit dans vne ardeur bruflante la colique la 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 201 


God, decide as to my life; you are the master. Have 
pity on those who have pity on me. Assist all those 
who [77] assist us, and especially take up to Heaven 
the person who has caused this house to be built, in 
which the poor sick are received. Take there, like- 
wise, all her friends. Minoukiteh,—Amen.’’ 

She had a great devotion for Hearing holy Mass. 
When, on a certain day, she sent word to the good 
Mothers that she felt too ill to go alone to the Chap- 
el, she was told that she was not obliged to attend 
Mass while she was so sick. But, before the answer 
teached her, she induced two Savage women, who 
had come to see her, to drag her there, and she heard 
it kneeling. And, as it was only her fervor which 
sustained her, when her devotions were ended she was 
exhausted, and in a fainting condition, so that they 
could hardly carry her back to her bed, where she 
said to God, every day when she was not allowed 
to go to the Chapel: ‘‘ Thou knowest well that I am 
sick, and that I am sad because I cannot enter the 
house of prayer.’’ Then she would take her rosary, 
and, turning toward the Church, she would recite it 
with all the attention [78] in her power. 

She asked what opinion the Physician had of her 
illness, and was told that he had good hope for her 
tecovery. ‘‘ That is for God to decide,’’ she said. 
“Let him do as he will; I shall not be sorry to see 
him.’’ When she saw that the medicines tormented 
her without effect, she felt an aversion to them; 
nevertheless, she took them, saying that she must 
obey. 

She was ina burning fever; she sometimes suffered 
greatly from colic; and, if in her agony any fretful 
words escaped her, she at once begged pardon, 


7 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 25. 


preffoit quelquefois viuemét, & fi dans fes angoiffes. 
il luy efchapoit quelques paroles de chagrin auffi- 
to{t elle demandoit pardon, c’eft le mal difoit-elle 
qui parle, ie veux obeyr 4 Dieu priez-le qu’il aye 
pitié de moy, c’eft chofe bien remarquable que iamais 
fa maladie ne l’empefcha d’inftruire, & de parler de — 
Dieu a ceux ott celles qui la venoient vifiter, & mefme — 
encor par fois elle enfeignoit quelque chofe de fa 
langue aux meres qui l’affiftoient. Elle auoit de — 
grandes affections de mourir Religieufe comme on ~ 
ne iugeoit pas 4 propos de luy accorder fa demande, ~ 
on luy promit pour fa confolation qu’on l’enterreroit ~ 
[79] aupres de la Mere de faincte Marie, qui eft paffé ~ 
de ce monde dans Il’eftime d’vne haute vertu, on luy ~ 
dift auffi qu’on 1’enfeueliroit 4 la Frangoife, cela luy © 
donna vne ioye fi fenfible qu’elle ne fe pouuoit © 
contenir, elle auoit neantmoins encor vn regret c’eftoit 
de mourir deuat que les Sauuages fuffent retournez 
de leur grade chaffe defirat leur témoigner le conten- — 
tement, qu’elle reffentoit d’auoir embraffé la foy de — 
Iefus-Chrift, elle demanda cette faueur 4 Dieu, qui © 
luy fait accordée: car ayant [arriués] deux iours de- — 
uat fa mort, l’eftant venué vifiter elle déploya fon ] 
zele et fa rhetorique, elle fe met fur fon feant, & les. a 
fentant 4 1’entour de fon lict elle leur dit d’vne voix — 
ferme, 4 la bonne-heur que ie vous parle encor vne — 
fois deuant ma mort, iauois defiré cela tres-ardem- 
ment, ne croyez pas que ie fois trifte, quoy que vous” 
me voyez malade & toute mourante, mon coeur eft 
plein de ioye de ce que ie m’en vay au Ciel; 6 que 
ie remercie Dieu de bon coeur de ce que ie fuis 
baptifée & de ce qu’il m’a fait la grace de croire 
toufiours en luy depuis que ie fuis Chreftienne, i s 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 203 


saying: ‘‘ Itisthe disease that isspeaking. I wish to 
obey God. Pray him to have pity onme.” Itisa 
very remarkable thing that her illness never pre- 
vented her from instructing, and telling of God, those 
who came to visit her; and even occasionally she 
taught something of her own language to the moth- 
ers who attended her. She had a great desire to die 
a Nun. As it was not deemed advisable to grant her 
request, she was promised, for her consolation, that 
she should be buried [79] near Mother de sainte 
Marie who had passed away from this world with the 
reputation of lofty virtue. She was also told that she 
would be enshrouded in the French manner. This 
gave her such joy that she could not contain herself. 
She had, nevertheless, still one sorrow, which was 
that she might die before the Savages returned from 
their great hunt. As she wished to manifest to them 
the content that she felt at having embraced the faith 
of Jesus Christ, she asked that favor of God, which 
was granted to her,— for they arrived two days before 
her death; when they came to visit her, she dis- 
played her zeal and her rhetoric. She raised herself 
to a sitting posture, and, feeling them around her 
bed, she said to them in a firm voice: ‘‘ It is well that 
I should speak to you once more before I die; I have 
desired it very ardently. Do not think that I am 
sad. Although you see me ill and dying, my heart 
is full of joy because I am going to Heaven. Oh, 
how heartily I thank God that I have been baptized, 
and that he has granted me the grace of always be- 
lieving in him since I have been a Christian! I [80] 
die with that satisfaction. Be firm in the faith. I 
will pray to God for you when I shall be in Paradise, 
so that you may persevere in his Church. Pray to 


D 
q 
’ 
' 


‘ 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2% 


[80] meurs dans ce contentement 14, foyez fermes en 
la foy, ie prieray Dieu pour vous quand ie feray en 
Paradis, afin que vous perfeueriez en fon Eglife, priez- 
le auffi qu’il m’ayde 4 bien mourir. lay vne confo- 
lation toute particuliere de ce que mes bonnes Meres 
m’ont promis que ie ferois enterrée aupres de la Reli- 
gieufe qui mourut ily a 3. ans. Ace difcours les 
Sauuages refpondirent 4 leur ordinaire ho, 6, 6, pour 
marque qu'ils approuuoiét tout ce qu’elle auoit dit, 
plufieurs lui parlerent en particulier, & tous luy 
donnant le dernier adieu, s’en retournerent fort fatis- 
faits; Nous fommes grandement fafchez difoient-ils, 
de la mort de cette bonne femme, elle fcauoit toutes 
les prieres, elle nous in{ftruifoit & nous parloit fou- 
uent de Dieu dans nos cabanes, nous l’aymions tous. 

Le Pere Superieur la voyant baiffer notablement 
luy donna le fainct viatique & en {fuitte 1’Extreme 
Onction, & luy recommanda de s’occuper tant qu’elle 
pourroit dans l’amour de celuy qu'elle alloit voir, fe 
fentant affoiblir c’eft A ce coup dit-elle, ie me meurs, 
& ioignant [81] les mains & leuant les yeux au Ciel, 
elle perdit la parole, mais non pas l’oiiye, fi bien que 
comme on luy fuggeroit quelques actes d'Amour & 
de confiance elle mon{troit en ferrant la main des 
Meres qui l’approchoient, qu’elle prenoit plaifir en 
ces fainctes actions, elle paffa au Ciel dans cette 
douceur, nous laiffant vn riche exemple des bontez 
de l’efprit diuin. Les Religieufes Hofpitalieres qui 
aimoient vniquement cette bonne femme pour fa 


vertu luy firent vn feruice le plus folemnel qu’elle(s] 
peurent, auquel affifterent les Sauuages qui fe trou- 


uerent pour lors 4 fainct lofeph. 


Le 12. d’Octobre vne autre femme nommée Marie 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 205 


him also that he may aid me to die a good death. I 
have a very special consolation in the promise that 
my good Mothers have made to me, that I shall be 
buried near the Nun who died 3 years ago.”” To this 
discourse the Savages replied, as usual, ‘‘ Ho, 6, 6,” 
to show that they approved all that she had said. 
Several spoke to her, individually; and, after they 
had all bidden her a last adieu, they returned very 
well satisfied. ‘‘ Weare very sorry,’’ they said, ‘‘ for 
the death of that good woman; she knew all the 
prayers; she instructed us, and often spoke to us of 
God in our cabins. We all loved her.” 

The Father Superior, seeing that she was visibly 
sinking, administered to her the holy viaticum, 
and afterward Extreme Unction, and recommended 
her to occupy her mind as much as possible with love 
for him whom she was about to see. As she felt 
herself growing weaker, she said, ‘‘ Now I am dy- 
ing;’’ and, clasping [81] her hands, and raising her 
eyes to Heaven, she was deprived of speech, but not 
of hearing; so much so, that when some acts of Love 
and of faith were suggested to her, she showed, by 
pressing the hands of the Mothers who were near 
her, that she took pleasure in those holy actions. 
She thus gently passed away to Heaven, giving us a 
striking example of the goodness of the divine spirit. 
The Hospital Nuns, who greatly loved this good 
woman for her virtue, honored her with the most 
solemn funeral service in their power, at which the 
Savages who were then at saint Joseph were present. 

On the 12th of October, another woman, named 
Marie Oukiwichunoukwe, gave up her soul to Our 
Lord in the same Hospital after an illness of three 
months, caused partly by the loss of her Christian 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 2% 


vkivichungkse rendit lame 4 Noftre Seigneur dans 
le mefme Hofpital apres vne maladie de trois mois, 
caufée en partie pour la perte de fon mary Chreftien 
tué par les Iroquois, fa patience fut infigne, elle | 
brufloit d’vn feu qui luy confommoit la langue & le 
-gofier & toute la poitrine, elle deffecha comme vn 
{quelet, iamais neantmoins elle ne manqu’a de rendre 
{es petits deuoirs 4 Dieu foir & matin, elle n’euft pas 
[82] crf eftre Chreftienne fi elle n’euit fait fes prieres, 
le Pere Superieur 14 confolant fur fes Angoiffes elle 
s’efcria d’vne voix fort dolente, ie n’apprehende 
point la mort, ie ne me fafche point de ce que Dieu 
ordonnera de moy, mais i’ay des regrets bien fenfi- 
bles de laiffer cette pauure petite orfeline, (monftrant 
yne feule enfant qui luy reftoit) fans aucun fecours, 
le Pere luy promit qu'il l’aideroit & les Hofpitalieres 
luy firent faire vne petite robe au pluftoft ce qui con- 
fola tellement cette bonne Mere qu'elle embraffa fon 
enfant, auec des tendreffes admirables, puis la don- 
nant a vne femme Sauuage luy dit, préd 14 pour ta 
fille & ne l’apporte plus, de peur que cela ne refueille 
mes douleurs. Quelque temps deuant fa mort, elle 
demanda 2 fe confeffer, ie me fuis fafchée difoit-elle, 
ie defire qu’on me face venir vn Pere, ce fut la 
derniere Confeffion de fa vie, car bien-toft apres elle q 
perdit la parole, ne laiffant pas par vn figne de fes 
yeux de tef{moigner qu'elle entendoit ce qu’on luy — 
difoit & qu'elle exergoit les actes qu’on luy fuggeroit, — 
eftant encor [83] aux trois Riuieres deuant qu'elle | 
defcendift 4 1’Hofpital, elle dift a vn Pere qui la con- 
{oloit ie m’en vay 2 faint lofeph, ie me logeray ate 
pres de 1’Hofpital, & ie demeureray le refte de mes ; 
jours auec les croyans, ie m’approcheray d’ Helene 
; 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 207 


husband, who had been killed by the Iroquois. Her 
patience was remarkable. She burned with a fire 
that devoured her tongue, her throat, and all her 
chest; she became emaciated like a skeleton; never- 
theless, she never failed to perform her minor duties 
toward God, night and morning. She would not 
have [82] considered herself a Christian if she had 
not said her prayers. When the Father Superior 
consoled her in her Sufferings, she exclaimed ina 
very sad voice: ‘‘ I fear not death, I do not grieve at 
what God may order for me; but I feel deep regret 
at leaving this poor little orphan’’ (pointing to the 
only child that was left to her) ‘‘ without any assist- 
ance.’ The Father promised that he would help 
her, and the Hospital Nuns made her a little dress 
as soon as possible, which so consoled the good 
Mother that she embraced her child with admirable 
tenderness. Then, giving her to a Savage woman, 
she said to her: ‘‘ Take her for thy daughter, and 
bring her here no more, for fear of reviving my 
grief.”’ Some time before her death, she asked to 
be confessed, and said: ‘‘ I have been angry, and I 
wish a Father to be brought here.” It was the last 
Confession of her life, for shortly afterward she was 
deprived of speech; but she failed not to show by a 
movement of her eyes that she heard what was said 
to her, and that she performed the acts suggested to 
her. While she was still [83] at the three Rivers, 
before coming down to the Hospital, she said toa 
Father who was consoling her: ‘‘ lam going to saint 
Joseph. I will lodge near the Hospital, and will 
spend the remainder of my days with believers. I 
will get near Helene, who knows all the prayers”’ 
(this was the good woman of whom we have just 


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


qui feait toutes les prieres (c’eft cette bonne femme 
dont nous venons de parler) elle m’inftruict profondé- 
ment, en effect cette bonne femme Aueugle a aidé 
beaucoup de perfonnes 4 voir & embraffer la vertu & 
les verités de noftre creance. 

Vne ieune fille d’vne Nation qui tire plus vers le 
Nord que Tadouffac, eftant venué voir les Sauuages 
de ce quartier 14, tomba malade, on la fift apporter 
de 4o. lieués loin en cét Hofpital, ot elle a demeuré 
4. ot. 5. mois malade, c’eft chofe eftrange que cette 
ame qui auoit toufiours efté dans la barbarie eftoit 
neantmoins doiiée d’vne douceur fi aimable qu’on la 
gouuernoit auffi facilement qu’vn petit enfant, quoy 
qu'elle euft des douleurs tres-fenfibles & tres-ennuy- 
antes, iamais elle ne fe plaignoit iamais elle ne 
demandoit rien, elle aggreoit auec vn vifage gay & 
ferain tout [84] ce qu’on luy donnoit fes delices 
eftoient de prier Dieu & quoy qu’elle fut debile, elle 
ne vouloit rien prendre qu’elle n’euft entendu la 
Meffe, ayant defir de communier elle fouffrit beau- — 
coup pour ioiiir de cette faueur, car eftant bruflée — 
d’vne foif qui la confommoit elle endura toute la — 
nuict cette peine fans iamais vouloir prendre vne © 
goutte d’eau, elle en ffit fi foible que cette commu- 
nion luy feruit de viatique. Le Pere Dequen la con- 
folant apres la Meffe les Meres s’apperceurent qu’elle , 
defailloit, le Pere luy déne au pluftoft 1’Extreme- — 
Onction, & ce petit Agaeet laué depuis-peu dans le 
fang de Iefus-Chrift, s’en alla auec fon vray oa 
dans le Ciel. . 

Vn ieune Attikamegue, c’eft vne nation qui eft au 
Nord des trois Riuieres, auoit trois grandes playes — 
mortelles & vne violente fievre qui l’oppreffoit de 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 209 


spoken); ‘‘she teaches me thoroughly.’’ Indeed, 
that good Blind woman has assisted many to see and 
embrace the virtue and the truths of our belief. 

A young girl, belonging to a Tribe that dwells 
farther toward the North than Tadoussac, came to 
see the Savages in that quarter, and fell ill. She 
was brought from a distance of 40 leagues to this 
Hospital, where she remained sick for 4 or 5 months. 
It is a strange thing that this soul, which has always 
lived in barbarism, should nevertheless have been 
endowed with a gentleness so lovable that she was 
managed as easily as a little child. Although her 
sufferings were very keen and wearisome, she never 
complained, and never asked for anything. She 
accepted with a cheerful and serene countenance all 
[84] that was given to her. Her delight was to 
pray to God; and although she was very weak she 
refused to take anything before she had heard Mass, 
because she wished to receive communion. She 
suffered much to enjoy that favor, for she burned 
with a consuming thirst; and she endured the suffer- 
ing throughout the night, without ever taking a drop 
of water. She was so weak that this communion 
served as a viaticum to her. When Father Dequen 
consoled her after Mass, the Mothers noticed that 
she was swooning away. The Father administered 
Extreme Unction to her, as soon as possible; and 
this little Lamb, lately washed in the blood of Jesus 
Christ, went to join her true pastor in Heaven. 

A young Attikamegue—this is a tribe to the 
North of the three Rivers—had three deep mortal 
wounds, and a violent fever that oppressed him from 
time to time. His severe illness did not rob his soul 
of peace, nor his countenance of its serenity. For 


7 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 — 


temps en temps, fes grandes maladies ne luy déro- 
boient point la paix de fon ame n’y la ferenité de fon 
vifage, aux moindres petits feruices qu’on luy ren- 
doit, il tefmoignoit des actions de graces plaines de 
coeur, comme il n’auoit [85] pas efté profondément 
inftruict, fa maladie nous ayant obligé de le baptifer 
promptemét, il ne fcauoit que quelques prieres qu’il 
recitoit fi fouuent auec fon Chappelet, qu’on euft-dit 
qu’il n’auoit rien au monde de plus cher, en effect fi 
dans fon fommeil, fon Chappelet luy efchapoit, il 
n’auoit point de repos, qu’on ne l’efit cherché & 
qu’on ne luy euft rendu, comme on vit que fa mala- 
die luy donnoit le temps d’eftre inftruict de la Com- 
munion, d’ont il n’auoit point encor eu de connoif- 
fance, on luy en parla: mais on n’euft pas fi-toft 
entamé ce difcours que le voyla en ferueur, il preffe a 
toute-heure ces bonnes Meres de l’inf{t[r]uire, fi quel- 
que Sauuage le vient voir, il luy demande s'il eft 
admis 4 la Communion s’il refpond, que ouy, tu f¢ais 
donc bien ce que c’eit, fied toy 14 & m’inftruy; car 
ie veux Communier deuant que de mourir, en effect 
il mourut le lendemain qu’il etit receu fon Sauueur. 

Vn nommé Charles kserafing fils d’vne bonne 
veufue nommée Charitée eftoit feul chaffeur de fa 
famille compofée de dix perfonnes, il a efté trois ans 
[86] malade, enfin s’eftant retiré 4 l’Hofpital; iamais 
on ne l’entendit pleindre, iamais il ne tefmoigna au- 
cune trifteffe n’y ennuy de fon mal, il eftoit tres-bien 
in{truict, c’eft pourquoy il n’eftoit pas befoin de luy 
remettre en memoire fon petit deuoir, il perdit la 


veué 8. ou g. mois deuant fon trefpas, fes douleurs 


augmenterent, mais fa patience ne diminua iamais: 
enfin elles en vindrent a tel point, qu’on ne penfoit 


ai 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 911 


the smallest service rendered to him, he returned 
the most heartfelt thanks. He had [85] not been 
fully instructed, because his illness compelled us to 
baptize him promptly; and he knew only a few pray- 
ers, which he recited so often, with his Rosary, that 
one would think that nothing in the world was dearer 
to him. Indeed, if during his sleep his Rosary 
slipped from him, he had no rest until it was searched 
for and restored to him. As we saw that his sick- 
ness allowed him time to be instructed for Commun- 
ion, of which he had as yet no knowledge, we spoke 
to him of it. But we had no sooner begun this dis- 
course than he became eager; he pressed the good 
Mothers at all hours to instruct him. If any Savage 
came to see him, he would ask him if he were 
admitted to Communion, and, if he answered in the 
affirmative, he would say: ‘‘ Thou knowest well, 
then, what itis. Sit down and teach me, for I wish 
to receive Communion before I die.’’ In fact, he 
died the day after he had received his Savior. 

One Charles kwerasing, the son of a good widow 
named Charitée, was the sole hunter of his family, 
consisting of ten persons. He was ill for three _ 
years, [86] and finally went to the Hospital. He was 
never heard to complain; he never manifested any 
sorrow or weariness on account of his illness. He 
was very well instructed, consequently it was not 
necessary to remind him of his minor duties. He 
lost his sight 8 or 9 months before his death. His 
sufferings increased, but his patience never dimin- 
ished. Finally, they became so great that it was 
thought that he could not endure them for two days 
without dying; and still he endured them for three 
full weeks and more. He sometimes pronounced 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 25 — 


pas qu’il les peuft fupporter deux iours fans mourir, 
& illes endura encor trois femaines entieres & dauan- 
tage, il pronongoit par fois le S. Nom de IESvs, 
comme en criant & en fe plaignant dans fes plus 
grandes preffes: mais auffi-toft qu’on luy parloit de 
Dieu il s’arreftoit tout court, prenant vn fingulier 
plaifir dans les difcours de pieté, & quelquefois il 
difoit aux affiftans, encor que vous m’entendiez crier, 
ie ne fuis pas neantmoins fafché, ie ne fuis point las 
de fouffrir, c’eft la douleur qui a fes faillies ie veux 
ce que Dieu veut, c’eft a luy d’ordonner de ma vie, 
il paffa de ce monde muny de tous les Sacremens de 
l’Eglife. 

[87] Le 5. d’Auril, vn nommé Alexis Pimina- 
ksauich Algonquin, quitta cette vie pour entrer dans 
vne autre meilleure, & de plus grande durée, ce pauure 
garcon eftoit d’vn naturel affez vif, mais la grace 
temperoit bien fon ardeur, vn an ou enuiron deuant 
fon trefpas s’eftant rencontré aux trois Riuieres auec 
fes camarades qui traittoient auec leur rage ordinaire 
vn pauure prifonnier, il fe retira doucement d’auec 
eux, ils fe gaufferent de luy, ils luy ofterent fon 
Chappelet le mirent en piece[s], en vn mot ils firent 
ce quils peurent pour l’induire 4 tourmenter auec 


eux ce pauure miferable, ce ieune homme s’enfuit & — 


fe retira dans noftre maifon, fuppliant le Pere qui 
eftoit-l4 de luy donner le couuert, & de l’aider a 
trouuer vne commodité pour retourner auec les 
croyans de faint lofeph, le Pere s’y employa, ce bon 
garcon ne fe contentant pas de viure 4 la fagon des 
Neophytes, qui gagnent le coeur de ceux qui les con- — 
noiffent te{moigna vn defir de paffer en France, pour 
apprendre la langue & employer le refte de fes iours — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 O18 


the Holy Name of JESUS as if crying and complain- 
ing to him, in his greatest paroxysms; but, as soon 
as they spoke to him of God, he would stop quite 
short, taking a remarkable pleasure in pious dis- 
courses; and sometimes he would say to the attend- 
ants: ‘‘Even if you hear me cry out, I am not 
grieving,—I am not weary of suffering; it is the 
pain that breaks out. I wish what God wishes; it 
is for him to dispose of my life.’’ He passed away 
from this life fortified with all the Sacraments of the 
Church. 

[87] On the 5th of April, one Alexis Piminakwa- 
uich, an Algonquin, departed this life to enter into a 
better and a more lasting one. This poor youth was 
of a rather passionate nature, but grace tempered 
much his ardor. A year or so before his death, he 
encountered at the three Rivers his comrades, who 
treated a poor prisoner with their usual cruelty; he 
quietly withdrew fromthem. They laughed at him, 
took away his Rosary from him, and broke it to 
pieces; in a word, they did what they could to in- 
duce him to torture the poor wretch with them. 
The young man fled, and took refuge in our house, 
begging the Father who was there to give him shel- 
ter, and to help him find means to return among the 
believers at saint Joseph; this the Father undertook 
todo. This good youth was not content to live in 
the manner of the Neophytes, who win the hearts of 
those who know them; he expressed a desire to go 
to France, to learn the language and to devote the 
remainder of his days to the service of Our Lord, 
[88] without marrying. Death overtook him while 
in that desire, and in the practice of Christian vir- 
tues. He was very careful to cleanse his soul in the 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou % 


au feruice de Noftre Seigneur [88] fans fe marier, la 
mort le prit dans ce defir & dans l’exercice des — 
vertus Chriftiennes, il auoit vn grand foin de purifier — 
fon ame dans le Sacrement de Penitence, & de s’ap- © 
procher de fon Sauueur autant de fois qu’on luy per- — 
mettoit, peut-eftre que cét amour luy obtint la grace 
de ioiiyr deuant fon trefpas de tous les Sacremens 
que Dieu a laiffez en fon Eglife pour le foulagement, 
& pour la fanctification de fes enfans, & qu’il puifa 
dans ces diuines fontaines les eaux de grace qui luy 
donnerent vne mort auffi douce que celle d'vn petit 
enfant. 

Vn autre ieune garcgon aagé d’enuiron 16. ans, nous 
a laiffé des exemples d’vne patience de fer, vn abcez — 
s’ef{tant formé dans fa tefte, & en fuitte eftant deue- 
nu paralitique fon pauure corps commenga A fe pour- — 
rir deuant que d’eftre en terre, les vers luy fortoient — 
par les oreilles, fa peau eftoit toute déchirée & fes _ 
membres s’en alloient quafi en lambeaux, ie vous — 
laiffe A penfer de combien de douleurs eftoit enuiron- — 
né ce pauure garcon? on ne le pouuoit remuer [89] _ 


ui 
Os 'c 


ny tourner, ny toucher qu’il ne fouffrift dans l’ex- 


kschfin vous me faites mal, & il le difoit fi doucement _ 
qu’on eut dit qu’il parloit pour vn autre, il n’auoit de © 
Vefprit qu’autant qu’il en falloit pour fouffrir patiem- 
ment & pour prier Dieu, la viuacité qu'il faifoit 
paroiftre en fanté, & qui auroit donné vn indice d’vne _ 
ame colere & impatiente ne parut plus dans fa mala-— 
die, finon pour demander qu’on luy fift dire les prieres 
que nous enfeignons aux nouueaux Chreftiens, ayant 
e{té muny de tout le fecours qu’on donne aux enfans 
de Dieu, il nous quitta chargé des merites d’vne 
riche patience. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ” 915 


Sacrament of Penance, and to approach his Savior 
whenever he was allowed to do so. Perhaps that 
love obtained for him the grace of enjoying before 
his death all the Sacraments that God has bestowed 
upon his Church, for the relief and sanctification of 
his children; and he drew from those divine foun- 
tains the waters of grace, that gave him a death as 
peaceful as that of a little child. 

Another young boy, about 16 years of age, gave us 
examples of a patience of iron. An abscess formed 
in his head, and he afterward became paralyzed; his 
poor body began to rot before being in the ground ; 
worms came out of his ears; his skin was all torn, 
and his limbs were falling away almost piecemeal. 
I leave you to imagine how the poor boy must have 
suffered. He could not be moved, [89] or turned, 
or touched without suffering extremely; still, he 
uttered only two words,— Kitakouchsin, ‘“‘ You hurt 
me;”’’ and he said it so gently that one would think 
he was speaking for some one else. He had only 
enough sense to suffer patiently, and to pray to God. 
The vehemence that he had manifested while in good 
health and which would have indicated a passionate 
and impatient soul, no longer appeared during his 
illness, except to ask us to make him say the prayers 
that we teach to the new Christians. Having been 
provided with all the help that is given to the chil- 
dren of God, he left us, laden with the merits of a 
lofty patience. 

A woman already aged was carried to the Hospi- 
tal, there to find her eternal salvation; for, accord- 


ing to all human appearances, she ran the risk of 
almost certain reprobation if she had not found that 


refuge. It must be confessed that God exercises a 


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


Vne femme defia aagée fut portée a 1’Hofpital pour 
y trouuer fon falut eternel, car felon les apparences 
humaines elle couroit des rifques d’vne reprobation 
quafi certaine, fi elle n’euft trouué ce refuge, il faut 
confeffer que Dieu exerce vne eftrange prouidence, 
& qu’il tient des voyes tres-cachées fur ce pauure 
peuple, les Peres qui font venus icy des premiers ont 
veu cette femme mariée [90] a vn Capitaine de- 
grande authorité parmy ceux de fa Nation, elle auoit 
vne famille groffe & floriffante, vne parenté nom- 
breufe, quantité d’alliances, elle a veu de fes yeux 
toute cette {fplendeur reduite au neant ne laiffant 
apres foy [de] quantité d’enfans qui luy font morts 
qu’vne fille aueugle, laquelle ne luy donnoit pas trop 
de contentement, ces grads coups dechargez du Ciel 
fur la tefte d’vne pauure femme qui demeuroit parmy 
des impies, lefquels attribuent 4 noftre creance tous 
les fleaux, & toutes les calamitez qui accablent les 
Sauuages depuis qu’ils ont receu la Foy, eftoient 
capables non feulement de luy donner de grandes 
fecouffes, mais auffi de la terraffer & de la perdre de 
fond en combie fi elle n’euft efté fecourué, mais 
comme elle auoit grandement bien fecouru & fortifié 
fes enfans & fes alliez 4 l’heure de la mort, ayant vn 
foin qu’ils mouruffent en vrais Chreftiens, noftre 
Seigneur la voulu prendre en vn lieu ot elle fuft 
grandement affiftée. Le diable luy liura plufieurs 
attaques, mais elle auoit cela de bon qu’elle ouuroit 
aifement fon cceur [91] & nonobftant fes tentations 
elle prioit Dieu fort volontiers, fa bonté luy a accor- 
dé 4 la mort ce qu'elle auoit procuré aux autres, nous 
laiffans dans la croyance qu'elle auoit trouué grace 
deuant fes yeux. 


~ 


d 
j 
io 
» 
vi 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 217 


wonderful providence and that he has mysterious 
ways for these poor people. The Fathers who first 
came here saw this woman married [90] to a Captain 
high in authority among those of his Tribe. She 
had a large and flourishing family, many relatives, 
and numerous connections. She saw with her own 
eyes all this splendor reduced to nothing,—leaving 
her, out of her many children who are dead, but 
one blind daughter who did not give her much satis- 
faction. These heavy blows, falling from Heaven 
on the head of a poor woman living among the un- 
godly,— who attribute to our belief all the scourges 
and calamities that overwhelm the Savages since 
they have received the Faith,—were sufficient not 
only to give her great shocks but also to overthrow 
and destroy her utterly, had she not received succor. 
But, as she had greatly assisted and fortified her chil- 
dren and relatives at the hour of death, being careful 
that they should die as true Christians, our Lord 
chose to take her to a place where she would be 
greatly assisted. The devil made several attacks 
upon her, but she had this good trait, that she easily 
opened her heart; [91] and, in spite of her tempta- 
tions, she prayed very willingly to God. His good- 
ness granted her at her death what she had procured 
for others, leaving usin the belief that she had found 
grace in his eyes. 

This house of Charity has not only taken care of 
grown persons, but has also aided the smallest chil- 
dren,— with this additional burden in New France, 
that the mothers must be fed and lodged while their 
children are being attended to, for they do not leave 
them out of their sight. These poor women, while 
watching the sufferings of those who are dearest to 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2% 


Cette maifon de Charité n’a pas eu foin des grandes 
perfonnes feulement, mais elle a foulagé les plus pe- 
tits enfans auec cette charge qui eft de furcroift en la 
Nouuelle France qu'il faut nourrir & heberger les 
meres pendant qu’on fecourt leur enfans, car elles ne 
les quittent point de veués, ces pauures femmes voy- 
ant fouffrir ce qu’elles ont de plus cher pafferont les 
iournées entieres fans dire vn feul mot fi on ne leur 
parle, les enuifageant auec des tendreffes affligeantes, 
elles mefmes les enfeueliffent & les portent en la 
Chappelle en attendant qu’on les mettent en terre, fe 
tenant par force vn long-temps deuant l’Autel 4 prier ~ 
Dieu. Vne Religieufe fe perfuadant vn iour que ces 
bonnes meres prioient pour leur enfans leur ditt, 
vous n’auez que faire de prefenter vos prieres 4 Dieu 
pour ces petits innocens, ce font [92] des Anges . 


deuant fa face, nous le fgauons bien, refpondent-elles, 
ceft noftre ioie que nos enfans ne fentent point le 
feu deuant que d’aller au Ciel nous penfons aux con- 
tentemens qu’ils ont, & nous les fupplions en noftre 
coeur de fe fouuenir de nous aupres de Dieu. 

Comme on faifoit tous les foirs les prieres 4 1’ Hof- 
pital, ott les Sauuages voifins fe trouuoient quatre ou — 
cing femmes e({tat reftées apres les autres dirent ala — 
Mere qui vouloit efteindre les cierges de la Chap- 
pelle, attend vn petit, ma Mere, nous n’auons pas ~ 
acheué nos prieres, auiourd’huy on a enterré vne | 
femme Chreftienne, nous voulons prier Dieu pour — 
elle, leur deuotion dura vne bonne heure, ces actions _ 
confolent bien fort ces bonnes ames qui recueillent 
dés cette vie le fruict de leur charité, ayat veu de 
leurs yeux quantité de fainctes actions qui fe font 
faites dans leur Hofpital. 


+ 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 219 


them, will pass entire days without saying a word if 
they be not spoken to, looking at them with distress- 
ful tenderness. They themselves enshroud them, 
and carry them to the Chapel until such time as they 
can be buried, forcing themselves to remain for a 
long time before the Altar, praying to God. A Nun 
thought one day that these good mothers were pray- 
ing for their children and said to them: ‘‘ You need 
not offer your prayers to God for these little inno- 
cents; they are [92] Angels before his face.’’ ‘‘ We 
know it well,’ they replied; ‘‘it is a joy to us that 
our children do not feel the fire before going to 
Heaven. Wethink of their happiness, and beg them 
in our hearts to remember us before God.”’ 

The prayers were said every night at the Hospi- 
tal, and the Savages of the neighborhood were pres- 
ent. Four or five women, who remained after the 
others, said to the Mother who wished to extinguish 
the tapers of the Chapel: ‘‘ Wait a little, my Mother; 
we have not finished our prayers. To-day they have 
buried a Christian woman; we wish to pray to God 
for her.’’ Their devotions lasted a good hour. 
Such actions comfort these good souls, who reap the 
fruits of their charity in this life; for they have seen 
with their own eyes very many holy actions that 
have been performed in their Hospital. 

Several persons have been baptized,— among oth- 
ers, an Old Man who passed the Winter there, and 
who displayed an extraordinary fervor in learning 
the mysteries of our belief, and in committing to 
memory the prayers [93] and exercises of a true 
Christian. He was never tired of saying and re- 
peating them continually. Finally, his assiduity and 


| 
e > 
ie 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Not 25 


On a baptifé plufieurs perfonnes, entre autre[s] vn 
Vieillard y ayant paffé 1’Hyuer montftra vne ferueur 
extraordinaire 4 apprendre les my{fteres de noftre 
creance & a faire entrer dans fa memoire les prieres 
[93] & l’exercice d’vn vray Chreftien, il ne fe laffoit 
point de les dire & redire inceflamment, enfin fon 
affiduité & fa diligence luy obtindrent vne faueur 
dont il n’en cognoiftra la beauté qu’au Ciel. 

D’autres ayant appris que Dieu aggreoit qu’on luy 
prefenta{t les premices de toutes chofes, prirent les 
plus beaux faiffeaux d’efpics de leur Bled-d’Inde, que 
nous leur aidons a cultiuer, & les allerent prefenter 
fur l’Autel auec plus de coeur que de compliments. 

Les petites filles Sauuages voifines de 1’ Hofpital 
vont vifiter fouuent les Religieufes, les fuppliant de 
les in{truire, on leur faict reciter le Catechifme, on 
les interroge, on les fait prier Dieu, & il y ena def 
con{tantes qu’il les faut pluftoft reprendre d’eftre 
importunes que de manquer de diligence, comme les 
Religieufes donnoient certain iour quelque petite 
recompenfe 4 celles qui auoient bien retenu ce qu’on ~ 
leur auoit enfeigné, & qu’on voulfit aufii prefenter 
quelque chofe a leur compagnes, elles repartirent, 4 
fort bien, interrogez-nous & nous demandez comme i 
aux autres, & [94] fi nous difons bien nous prendrons © 
vos prefens. ; 

Voila en quoy ces bones Religieufes fe font occu-— 
pées cette année voyla leur exercices outre leur fon- 
ctions ordinaires dont elles s’acquittent fainctement, 
{i le deffaut des petits foulagemens qu’on Aen France, © 
fila pauureté & la difette, fi les incommoditez d’vn 
nouueau pays aide A faire des faincts, elles y auront — 
bonne part. iP 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 . St 


diligence obtained for him a favor whose value he 
will recognize only in Heaven. 

Others, having learned that God was pleased that 
the first fruits of all things should be offered him, 
took the finest sheaves of ears of their Indian Corn, 
which we help them to cultivate, and offered these 
on the Altar, with more heart than compliments. 

The little Savage girls who live in the neighborhood 
of the Hospital frequently visit the Nuns, and beg 
them to instruct them. They are made to recite the 
Catechism, they are questioned, and are taught to 
pray to God; and some of them are so persevering in 
this that they have to be reproved more for being 
importunate than for want of diligence. The Nuns 
one day gave a slight reward to those who had well 
remembered what they had been taught, and also 
wished to present something to their companions; 
the latter replied: ‘‘ Very well. Question us and 
ask us, as you have done the others; and, [94] if we 
answer well, we will take your presents.” 

Thus have these good Nuns occupied themselves 
this year; such has been their practice, in addition 
to their ordinary duties, which they perform in a 
Saintly manner. If the absence of the petty com- 
forts that one has in France, if poverty and priva- 
tions, if the inconveniences inseparable from a new 
country, contribute to the making of saints, they will 
have a goodly share thereof. 


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


CHAPITRE VII. 
DU SEMINAIRE DES VRSULINES. 


ARRIUEE des vaiffeaux A augmenté la ioye de 
I. ce petit feminaire luy rendant faines & fauues 
deux braues Vrfulines qui fe font moquées auffi 

bien que les autres des dangers de la mer, & qui 
pour toutes les fatigues d’vn long voyage n’ont ia- 
mais tourné la tefte en arriere, le choix de ces deux 
bons fubiects a efté [95] fait par Monfeigneur 1’Ar- — 
cheuefque de Tours, lequel eftant fupplié par la Su- 
perieure du petit Conuent de Kebec, de leur enuoier 
du renfort douta quelque temps s’il confiroit aux 
longs dangers de 1’Ocean des filles qui viuoient icy 
dans l’affeurance, mais voyans que le chemin eftoit 
defia frayé & qu’il ne pouuoit fans quelque reproche 
de fa bonté refufer vne demande fi raifonnable & 
fi fainte, n’eftant pas bien feant de laiffer vn tel 
ouurage imparfait, il y voulut luy mefme contribuer _ 
fes foins & fes affections. I] fe tranfporte en la maifon 
des Vrfulines de Tours il écoute celles qui auoient plus — 
de feu & plus de zele pour cette miffion, & apres les — 
auoir diligemment & fainctement examinées, il donne 
fa Benedi@[iJon a foeur Anne de faincte Cecile & A ~ 
foeur Anne de Noftre Dame, & pour tefmoignages 
des defirs qu’il 4 de fouftenir ce petit feminaire, il 
fait conduire ces deux bonnes filles dans fon propre 
Caroffe iufques 4 Poitiers, fes affections ne fe renfer-_ 
ment pas dans l’enceinte de fon Diocefe, fon coeur eft 


i 
ie 


—— tt — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 223 


CHAPTER VII. 
OF THE URSULINE SEMINARY. 


HE arrival of the ships increased the joy in this 
oh: little seminary, for they brought to it safe and 
sound two brave Ursulines, who, like the 
others, scorned the dangers of the sea, and, in spite of 
all the fatigues of a long journey, never looked back. 
The choice of these two worthy persons was [95] made 
by Monseigneur the Archbishop of Tours, who on 
being requested by the Superioress of the little Con- 
vent of Kebec to send them a reinforcement, doubted 
for some time whether he should expose, to the con- 
tinued dangers of the Ocean, girls who lived there in 
security. But, seeing that the road was already 
opened, and that he could not, without reproach to 
his own goodness, refuse so reasonable and so holy 
a request,—for it would not have been fitting to 
leave such a work unfinished,—he himself wished 
to contribute thereto his care and his affections. He 
went to the house of the Ursulines of Tours, listened 
to those who had the most ardor and zeal for that 
mission, and, after having diligently and holily ques- 
tioned them, he gave his Blessing to sister Anne de 
sainte Cecile and sister Anne de Nostre Dame. 
And, as evidence of his desire to support this little 
seminary, he caused these two good maidens to be 
conveyed in his own Carriage to Poitiers. His affec- 
tions are not bounded by the limits of his Diocese,— 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


plus grand que le Iardin de la France, il fait efperer 
aux pauures [96] Sauuages vne partie de fes bontez, 
mais difons deux mots de l’employ de ces bonnes 
Ames. 

Les Vrfulines ont de petites écolieres Francoifes 
elles en ont auffi de penfionnaires & le pais fe peu- 
plant dauantage augmentera leur employ, elles ont 
des feminariftes fedentaires, elles en ont de paffa- 
geres tirées des cabanes des Sauuages, leurs grilles 
font par fois vifitées des nouueaux Chreftiens & des. 
bons Neophytes qui les vont voir pour entendre par- 
ler des chofes du Ciel, il y a des filles en cette maifon 
qui parlét Algonquin, d’autres qui parlent Huron, elles 
honorent Noftre Seigneur en plufieures langues, & fa 
bonté leur donne occafion de debiter la fcience qu’il 
leur A départies leur enuoyant des perfonnes quiap- 
prennent par leur moyen & le connoiftre & a l’aimer. 

Cette année vne feminarifte qui auoit defiré ardem- 
ment d’eftre Religieufe eft paffée de cette viedans 
vne meilleure elle fe nommoit Agnes Chabsekse- 
chich fes parens l’ayant retirée du feminaire pour fe | 
feruir de fon petit trauail comme [97] elle eftoit defia i 
grade, il arriua qu’en nauigeant dans leurs petits — 
canots elle trouua [sc. tomba] dans la grande riuiere i" 
fon beau frere; l’ayat apperceué fe iette a l’eau & la 
retire de la mort car elle couloit defia 4 fonds, il 
fauua auffi fes compagnes qui eftoient dans le mefme 
nauffrage, or comme on ne rechauffe point cette 
pauure fille que le froid d’vne pales defia bien rude; | - 


traifner iufques enuiron les feftes de Noél qu ‘elle j 
prit vne nouuelle naiffance en Paradis, elle donna — 
beaucoup dedification aux Sauuages dans le peu de — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 225 


his heart extends beyond the Garden of France; he 
leads the poor [96] Savages to hope for a share of his 
benevolence. But let us say a few words as to the 
manner in which these good Souls employ them- 
selves. 

The Ursulines have little French girls as pupils; 
they also have some as boarders; and, as the country 
becomes more settled, they will have more occupa- 
tion. They have resident and transient seminarists, 
taken from the cabins of the Savages. Their grated 
parlors are sometimes visited by the new Christians 
and by the good Neophytes, who go to visit them, 
to hear about matters relating to Heaven. There 
are sisters in this house who speak Algonquin, and 
others who speak Huron. ‘They honor Our Lord in 
several tongues, and his goodness gives them an op- 
portunity of spreading the knowledge that God has 
bestowed on them by sending them persons who learn 
by their means to know and love him. 

This year, a seminarist who had ardently desired 
to become a Nun passed from this life to a better 
one. Her name was Agnes Chabwekwechich. Her 
parents had withdrawn her from the seminary to 
make use of her for light work, as [97] she was 
already grownup. It happened that, while paddling 
in one of their little canoes, she fell into the great 
river. Her brother-in-law, who saw her, jumped 
into the water and saved her from death as she was 
about to sink tothe bottom. He also saved her com- 
panions, who were wrecked at the same time. Now 
as they did not warm this poor girl, whom the cold 
of an already severe season had brought within two 
finger-lengths of death, she lingered only until about 
Christmastide, when she was born to a new life in 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


temps qu’elle ffit auec eux, comme elle auoit vne 
belle voix, elle leur chantoit des Cantiques f{pirituels 
qu’on luy auoit appris au feminaire, elle fe rendoit 
obeiffante & fa deuotion agreoit extremément A ces 
bons Neophytes, quand ceux qui l’affiftoient luy 
eurent annoncé la nouuelle de fa mort voyans la 
rigueur de fa maladie, elle rentra dans foy-mefme 
puis tirans vn profond foupir, helas ie voudrois bien 
dit-elle me pouuoir Confeffer, ie ne fens rien qui me 
preffe la confcience, [98] mais ie fouhaitterois bien 
fort neantmoins d’eftre affiftée par quelque Pere, il 
n’y auoit pas de moyen pour lors, car fes parens 
l’auoient menée auec eux dans leurs grandes chaffes, 
vn ieune Francois qui accompagnoit cette efcoiiade 
de Sauuages Chreftiens, pour apprendre leur lague 
s’en reuint fi édifié & fi eftonné de tous tant qu’ils 
e{toient, & notamment de la belle mort de cette 
ieune feminarifte qu’il en confola bien fort tous fes 
parés qui nous l’ont raconté, elle produifoit des actes 
de douleur d’auoir faché Dieu, mais auec des ten- 
dreffes fi grandes, que les Sauuages en eftoiét tou- 
chez, elle auoit toufiours en main & deuant fes yeux 
fon liure de prieres: car elle lifoit fort bien & quand 
fa veué vint a s’affoiblir elle fe feruoit de fon Chap- 
pelet pour entretenir fes petites deuotions, fes parens 
enterrerent auec elle fon liure & fon Chappelet pour 
marque de fa pieté & de l’amour qu'elle auoit enuers 
Dieu, & enuers la faincte Vierge. Comme on leur 
demandoit s’ils n’auoient point de regret de fa mort 


non dirent-ils, elle eft trop bien morte nous la croy- — 
ons bien-heureufe, [99] il ne faut pas s’attrifter de ~ 
fon bon-heur, c’eftoit vn excellent efprit, Dieu luy a 
accordé de mourir vierge comme elle l’auoit defiré, 


| 
4 
) 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 927 


Paradise. She greatly edified the Savages, during 
the short time that she was with them. She had 
a fine voice, and would sing to them Hymns that 
she had learned at the seminary. She was always 
obedient, and her devotion gave great pleasure to 
those good Neophytes. When those who attended 
her saw how severe was her illness, and informed 
her that her death was near, she communed with 
herself, and, heaving a deep sigh, said: ‘‘ Alas! I 
would be very happy if I could make my Confession. 
I feel nothing that troubles my conscience, [98] but 
I would like very much to be assisted by a Father.’’ 
This was impossible, at the time, for her parents had 
taken her with them on their great hunt. A young 
Frenchman, who accompanied this band of Christian 
Savages for the purpose of learning their language, 
came back so edified and so astonished by what he 
saw of all of them, and especially by the beautiful 
death of this young seminarist, that he gave great 
consolation to all her relatives, who told us of it. 
She uttered acts of sorrow for having offended God, 
but with such affection that the Savages were touched 
by it. She always kept her prayer book in her 
hands, and before her eyes, for she could read very 
well; and, when her sight grew weak, she made use 
of her Rosary to perform her minor devotions. Her 
parents buried her book and her Rosary with her, as 
a mark of her piety, and of the love that she had for 
God and for the blessed Virgin. When they were 
asked whether they did not feel regret for her loss, 
they replied: ‘‘ No, she died too good a death; we 
think her happy, [99] and we should not regret her 
happiness.”” She had an excellent mind. God 
allowed her to die a virgin, as she had desired, 


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 


nonobftant qu'elle euft efté recherchée de quelque — 
Francois & de quelques Sauuages. 

Vne bonne femme Chreftienne ayant eu deux filles — 
d’vne ventrée demandoit il n’y 4 pas long-temps 4 
vn des Peres de nof{tre Compagnie fi les Meres Vrfu- 
lines ne voudroient pas bien prendre l’vn de fes en- 
fans, n’ayant pas le moyen de les nourrir tous deux, } 
le Pere luy repartit qu’il eftoit trop petit n’eftant — 
encore qu’au maillot, il eft vray refpondit-elle que J 
les Religieufes n’ont point de laid, mais elles ont 
tant de charité & tant d’efprit qu’elles trouueront 
bien le moyen de luy fauuer la vie, elles difoit cela ~ 
&mon aduis a raifon que les Vrfulines ont eu auec 
elles trois petites orphelines aufquelles il falloit quafi 
faire l’office de nourrices; Il y en & vne autre qui ~ 
n’a que trois ans & qui a efté trois mois de l’année : 
perclufe de tous fes petits membres, fi bien qu'elle 
n’auoit que la langue libre, vous diriez que la raifon — 
[100] 4 notablement preuenu le temps qu’elle fe dé- — 
couure és autres enfans, & que les benedictions du 
Ciel luy ont efté données en abondance, elle a efté 7 
votiée & Dieu par fon Pere, & par fa Mere dés fa © 
premiere naiffance, il n’y a rien de fi obeyflant rien 
de fi complaifant c’eft vne humeur compofée de fuccre — 
& de miel tant elle eft douce, ce quin’a pas peu feruy — 
pour foulager les peines de fes maitreffes, car il fal- ~ 
loit qu’ils la tinffent quafi iour & nuit fur leurs bras, © 
lors que fes douleurs plus pregnantes luy tiroient les — 
larmes des yeux, fi on luy difoit c’eft affez pleuré, — 
priez Dieu, elle fe mettoit A chanter /’Aue Maria, ot 
quelque autre priere, il arriua que l’vne de fes mai- © 
{treffes fut contrainte de la leuer quatre fois pour 
vne nuict, le lédemain matin on luy dit Charité, c’eft 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 229* 


although she had been sought in marriage by a 
Frenchman and by some Savages. 

A good Christian woman, who had two girls at a. 
birth, asked one of the Fathers of our Society not 
long ago whether the Ursuline Mothers would not 
take one of her children, as she had not the means of 
supporting both. The Father replied that it was too 
young, being still but in swaddling clothes. ‘‘ It is 
true,” she said, ‘‘ that the Nuns have no milk; but 
they have so much charity and wisdom that they will 
be sure to find some way of saving its life.’”’ She 
said this, I believe, because the Ursulines have had 
with them three little orphans for whom they have 
had almost to perform the duty of nurses. There is 
another, who is only three years old, and who was 
for three months of the year crippled in her little 
limbs, so that only her tongue was free. You would 
think that in her reason [100] had greatly anticipated 
the time when it manifests itself in other children, 
and that Heaven’s blessings have been showered on 
her in abundance. She was dedicated to God by her 
Father and Mother, from the moment of her birth. 
No one can be more obedient or more obliging. 
Her disposition is one of sugar and honey, so sweet 
isshe. This has served not a little to lighten the 
trouble of her mistresses, for they had to keep her in 
their arms night and day. When her more violent 
pains brought tears to her eyes, if they said to her, 
“You have cried enough; pray to God,’’ she would 
begin to sing the Ave Maria, or some other prayer. 
It happened that one of her mistresses was compelled 
to raise her four times in one night. On the follow-- 
ing day they said to her: ‘‘ Charité’’—that is her 
hame,—‘‘ you have given much trouble to your 


230 i LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 


ainfi qu'elle fe nomme, vous auez bien donné de la 
peine a voftre mere, il eft vray dit-elle mais m’a 
mere eft bien patiente, elle ma fait comme elle feroit 
4 Tefus, cette enfant qui n’a que trois ans fait plu- 
fieurs actions qui la font admirer, les Meres ne chan- 
tent quafi rien au Choeur que cette petite innocente 
[1o1] ne retienne quelque verfet, variant les champs 
[sc. chants] & les entonnans auffi gentiment qu’vne 
grande perfonne, cela confole bien fort ces bonnes 
Religieufes de voir de fi gentilles inclinations en des 
Sauuageons fi peu cultiuez depuis tant de fiecles. 
Comme les Seminariftes fedentaires font veftués a 
la Francgoife, demeurant auec les Penfionnaires 
Frangoifes, on tafche par fois de leur donner de 
l’émulation, on en a fait communier cette année vne 
petite bande d’vnes & d’autres, vne Maiftreffe a pris — 
foin des Frangoifes, & vne autre a pris le foin des 
filles Sauuages, elles ont employé fix femaines 4 les 
inftruire & 4 les difpofer plus particulierement & cette 
premiere Communion, ces enfans firent paroiftre tant 
d’affection & tant de ferueur que ces bonnes meres 
en eftoient dans l’eftonnement, les voyant conceuoir 
& goufter les chofes de Dieu d’vne facon toute par- 
ticuliere, i’aduoué, difoit la Mere Superieure que les 
interrogeant pour reconnoiftre fi elles eftoient capa- 
bles de receuoir ce pain celefte, qu’elles [102] ont fur- 
paffé mon attente, les voyant inftruites & touchées 
au dela de mes efperances, le temps de leur Commu- 
nion approchant, leur Maiftreffe voyant que leur defir 
augmentoit, leur dit qu’il leur manquoit encor quel- 
que chofe pour plaire 4 celuy qu’elles vouloient rece- 
uoir, ces pauures petites creatures fe croyans q 
tebutées demandoient en pleurant ce qu’il fall 


at 


« s 


J 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "231 


mother.’ ‘‘ It is true,’’ she said; ‘‘ but my mother 
is very patient; she did for me what she would do 
for Jesus.’’ This child, who is only three years old, 
does many things which cause her to be admired. 
The Mothers hardly sing anything in the Choir, 
of which this little innocent [101] does not remember 
some verse, varying the airs, and intoning them 
as pleasingly as a grown person would. Itisa great 
consolation for these good Nuns to see such sweet 
dispositions in Wildings, that, for so many centuries, 
have received so little cultivation. 

As the resident Seminarists are clothed like the 
French, and reside with the French Boarders, at- 
tempts are sometimes made to excite emulation 
among them. A small party of both were prepared 
for communion this year. One Mistress had charge 
of the French girls, and another of the Savage girls. 
They took six weeks to instruct them, and to give 
them special preparation for this first Communion. 
These children manifested such affection and such 
fervor, that the good mothers were astonished when 
they saw them understand and relish the things 
which relate to God in a very special manner. “ I 
admit,” said the Mother Superior, ‘‘ that, when I 
questioned them to see whether they were fit to 
receive that celestial bread, they [102] surpassed my 
expectations; I found them instructed and impressed, 
beyond my hopes.”” As the time for their Commun- 
ion drew near, their Mistress, observing that their 
desire increased, told them that they still lacked 
something in order to please him whom they wished 


to receive. The poor little creatures considered 


° 


o 


themselves almost refused, and asked with tears 


what they had to do. They were told of a general 


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 2 
donc faire, on leur parle d’vne Confeffion generalle © 
qui ne pouuoit pas eftre de beaucoup d’années, non 
feulement pour ce qu’elles font encor ieunes, mais — 
par ce qu'il n’y a pas long-temps qu’elles font bapti- 
{ées, on les inftruit 14 deffus, elles s’y comportent en . 
perfonnes meures & touchées de Dieu, fe confeffans 
auec beaucoup de tendreffe, & auec beaucoup de 
reffentiment de leurs pechez, s’eftant ainfi difpofées 
elles vont trouuer leur Maiftrefle & luy difent il, n’y a 
plus rien dans noftre coeur, tout le mal en eft dehors, 
c’e{t A ce coup que Iefus y viendra, on leur accorde 
ce qu’elles auoient tant demandé & tant attendu; de 
verité Noitre Seigneur ne fait point de diftinction 
[103] du Barbare ou du Grec, il agit en ce Sacrement, 
felon la difpofition de noftre coeur, ces petites ames 
en firent paroiftre les effects: pleuft 4 Dieu, difoit 
l’vne que celuy qui m’eit venu voir demeuratt 
toufiours auec moy, 6 que i’ay reffenty vn grand defir 
de iamais ne l’offenfer, difoit l’autre, fut-il ainfi, ad- 
iouftoit fa compagne, que iamais plus ie ne retour- 
naffe aux cabanes des Sauuages, i’ay trop peur de 
fafcher Dieu. 

A peine auroit-on creu que les filles Sauuages fe 
d’euffent iamais affujettir 4 tous les exercices d’vne 
Claffe comme font les Frangoifes, on n’efit iamais 
penfé dans les premiers commencemens qu’il euit fallu 
parler de correction 4 des enfans qui iamais n’en 
recoiuent de leurs parens, cela fe fait neantmoins & j 
auec fruict, & maintenant elles s’y accouftument foit — 
par l’exemple des Frangoifes, foit que leur efprit fe — 
rende petit A petit plus fouple. La Mere Superieure — 
en ayant veu quelqu’vne commettre vne faute, recom- — 
manda a fa Maiftreffe d’en tirer le chaftiment, la ~ 


ee eee ee 


EN 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 233 


Confession which could not cover many years,—not 
only because they were still young, but also because 
they had not long been baptized. They received 
instruction on this point, and behaved as persons of 
mature age and moved by God,—confessing their 
sins with much feeling, and with a great detestation 
of their errors. Having done this, they went to their 
Mistress and said to her: ‘‘ There is nothing left in 
our hearts; all evil has gone out of them. Now 
Jesus will come to them.’”” They were granted what 
they so earnestly desired and awaited. In truth, 
Our Lord makes no distinction [103] between the 
Barbarian and the Greek; he acts in this Sacrament 
according to the dispositions of our hearts. These 
little souls manifested the effects thereof. ‘‘ Would 
to God,”’ said one, ‘‘ that he who has come to visit 


me would always remain with me.’’ ‘‘ Oh, whata 
great desire I felt never to offend him!’’ said 
another. ‘‘ Would that I might never return to the 


cabins of the Savages,’’ said her companion; ‘‘ I am 
too afraid of offending God.’’ 

One would hardly have believed that Savage girls 
could ever subject themselves to all the restraints of 
a Class, as the French girls do. One would never 
have thought that, at the beginning, it would be 
necessary to speak of correction to children who 
never receive any from their parents. It is done, 
- nevertheless, and with good effect; and now they 
are becoming accustomed to it, either through the 
example of the French girls, or because their minds 
are gradually becoming more pliant. ‘The Mother 
Superior saw one commit a fault, and advised her 
Mistress to chastise her for it. The poor child 
showed that she was more contrite and more afflicted 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


pauure enfant fe monftra plus contrite & plus affligée 
[104] de fa faute que de la peine, elle fe vint ietter 
aux pieds de la Superieure apres la correction auec 
des regrets fi fenfibles qu’il la fallu[t] confoler. 

Comme on difoit certain iour aux Seminariftes que 
les corps des bien-heureux auroient d’autant plus de 
gloire qu’ils auroient fouffert ca bas auec plus de 
patience & que la grandeur des fouffrances feroit la 
mefure de leur beauté: Voyla qui va bien, refpondi- 
rent-elles, les Sauuages feront donc bien releuez au 
Ciel, car ils fouffrent beaucoup notamment pendant — 
l’Hyuer, cela nous donne enuie d’eftre malade, afin 
d’endurer dauantage pour auoir plus de gloire, elles — 
offrent 4 Noftre Seigneur leurs petits trauaux & leurs 
petites peines, elles dreffent leurs penfées & leurs 
intentions auant que de commencer leurs petits 
ouurages, que fi la chofe eft penible, elles s’arreftent 
par fois vn peu de temps pour faire vne petite priere, 
& vne petite eleuation de coeur au Ciel, elles paffent 
encore plus auant, car pour entretenir cette ferueur, } 
il y ena toufjours quelqu’vne qui reueille les autres 
[105] s’efcriant tout haut, faifons tout pour l’amour ~ 
de Noftre Seigneur, mes foeurs, faifons tout pour fon 
amour, cette deuotion les tire petit 4 petit de la 
pareffe & de la liberté qui n’eft que trop naturelle 
aux Sauuages. 

Deux Seminariftes ayant efté enuoyées en quelque 
endroit, & s’eftant arreftées plus de temps qu’il n’en 
falloit pour la commiffion qu’on leur auoit donnée, ne 
refpondoient rien a leur Maiftreffe qui les tancoit, © 
iufques ace qu’elle leur vint 4 demander 4 quoy elles” 
auoient employé leur temps, nous nous fommes arre- 
{tées, dirent-elles, 4 penfer & a parler des fouffrances 


ee ws 


. 


oA 
, 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 235 


[104] on account of the fault than of the punishment. 
After being punished, she threw herself at the feet 
of the Superioress with such manifest regret that she 
had to be consoled. 

The Seminarists were told one day that the bodies 
of the blessed will be all the more glorious, the more 
patiently they have suffered here below; and that 
the extent of their sufferings will be the measure of 
their beauty. ‘‘ That isa good thing,’’ they replied. 
“Then the Savages will occupy a high place in 
Heaven, for they suffer greatly, especially in Winter. 
This makes us wish to be ill, so as to endure more 
and have greater glory.’’ They offer their petty 
tasks and troubles to Our Lord; they arrange their 
thoughts and their intentions before beginning their 
little tasks. If these be difficult they sometimes stop 
a moment to saya short prayer, and to uplift their 
hearts to Heaven for a little while. They even go 
further; for, to maintain this fervor, there is always 
one of them who arouses the others [105] by calling 
aloud: ‘‘ Let us do everything for the love of Our 
Lord, my sisters; let us do everything for his love.”’ 
This devotion gradually cures them of the sloth and 
freedom that are only too natural among Savages. 

Two Seminarists who had been sent somewhere, 
and who had remained away longer than was neces- 
sary for executing the commission that had been 
given them, replied not a word to their Mistress 
who reprimanded them, until she asked them how 
they had employed theirtime. ‘‘ We stopped,’’ they 
‘said, ‘‘to think and speak of the sufferings of the 
Son of God; for it is very wonderful that he should 

have made himself man, in order to suffer and to 
Tepay his Father. He has great love for mankind, 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou 25 


du Fils de Dieu, car cela eft bien eftrange qu’il fe — 
foit fait homme pour endurer, & pour payer fon Pere; — | 
il aime bien les hommes, puis qu’il a tant paty pour 
leurs pechez, ie penfe fouuent a cela pendant la 
Meffe, difoit l’vne des deux: & moy, difoit l'autre, 
i’y penfe auffi, & ie me donne A luy, & ie le prie qu'il 
difpofe de moy comme il voudra. 
Ie n’aurois pas penfé que les Sauuages fuffent fi 
conf{tans a prier pour quelques [106] perfonnes quand 
ils l’ont entrepris, vne ieune fille aagée, peut-eftre de 
douze ans difoit au Pere qui eft retourné cette année 
de France, il ne s’eft paffé iour que ie n’aye prié pour 
toy, le Pere ne la croyant pas, luy demande ce qu’elle 
difoit & Dieu, auffi-toft fans broncher, elle luy dift 
promptement, voicy comme ie luy parle: Mon Dieu 7 
ayez pitié de noftre Pere, conferuez-le, empefchez j 
qu’il ne faffe naufrage par vn trop grand vent, ou par — 
de trop grandes vagues, menez-le en fon pays, & le | 
ramenez, vous pouuez-tout: Voyla toute fa Retho- 
rique qui vaut mieux que celle de Ciceron. | 
Il y a vne ieune Seminarifte qui n’a point manqué 
depuis trois ans de prier Dieu a la faincte Commu- — 
nion pour Madame de la Peltrie Fondatrice du Semi- — 
naire, les autres font le mefme pour les perfonnes qui 
leur font du bien en particulier dont ont leur donne ~ 
aduis; mais & propos de Madame de la Peltrie, quand 
ces petites plantes la virent de retour au Seminaire, — 
apres quelque fejour qu’elle a fait 4 Montreal, elles: 
ne pouuoient contenir leur ioye, c’ef{t bien pour [107] 
lors qu’elles la regardoient pour leur vraye Mere qui 
les a toufiours bien cheries & bien-aimées: Or ce n’e it 
pas feulement a l’endroit de ces ieunes enfans que 


4 


ces bonnes meres employent leur zele, des femmes 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 237 


since he suffered so much for their sins.” ‘‘I often 
think of it during Mass,’’ said one of them. ‘‘And 
I,” said the other, ‘‘ think of it also, and give my- 
self to him, and beg him to do with me as he wills.’’ 

I would not have thought that the Savages could 
be so constant in praying for [106] persons, when 
they have undertaken todo so. A young girl, about 
twelve years of age, said to the Father who returned 
this year from France: ‘‘ Not a day passed that I did 
not pray for thee.’’ The Father, who did not be- 
lieve her, asked her what she said to God. At once, 
without hesitation, she promptly replied: ‘‘ I speak 
to him in this way: ‘ My God, have pity on our Fa- 
ther; preserve him, and save him from being wrecked 
by too stormy winds, or too heavy waves. Take 
him to his own country, and bring him back to us. 
You can do all things.’”’ That is all her Rhetoric, 
which is better than that of Cicero. 

There is a young Seminarist who has not failed for 
three years to pray to God, at holy Communion, for 
Madame.de la Peltrie, the Foundress of the Seminary. 
The others do likewise for the persons who are espe- 
cially kind to them, of whom they aretold. But, with 
Tespect to Madame de la Peltrie, when these young 
plants saw her return to the Seminary after a short 
stay in Montreal, they could not contain their joy. 
Then, indeed, [107] they looked upon her as their 
true Mother, who had always cherished and loved 
them. Now it is not only in the direction of these 
young children that the good mothers display their 
_ zeal. Grown women, and even other persons, visit 

them in their grated parlor, and beg them for 
instruction. Others leave their daughters there as if 
on deposit, for several months, while they are away 


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 25 4 


toutes faites, & mefme encor d’autres perfonnes les _ 
vont vifiter 4 leurs grilles, & les fupplient de leur 
donner quelque inftruction: d’autres laiffent leurs 
filles comme en depoft pendant quelques mois qu’ils 
vont faire leurs grandes chaffes, ce qui les accom- 
mode entierement, car ils n’ont point la peine de les 
traifner apres eux dans les bois, ils font bien affeurez 
que leurs enfans ne fouffriront ny la faim, ny le froid 
pendant qu’elles feront auec ces bonnes meres, & ce 
qui vaut mieux que tout le refte, ils fe refiotiyffent de 
ce qu’on leur apprend le chemin du Ciel, vne pauure 
femme voulant A ce propos laiffer fa fille auec les 
autres, cét enfant ne peuft demeurer fi long-temps 
efloignée de fa mere, elle pleure, elle s’afflige, bref 
on la renuoye a fes parens; La mere s’en attriftant, 
difoit, ma fille n’a point d’efprit, i’efperois qu’elle 
m’éfeigneroit ce qu’elle [108] auroit apris aupres de 
ces bonnes Meres pendant cét Hyuer, & me voila 
fru{ftrée de mon attente: Vne autre fienne parente 
difoit A l’enfant; pleuft A Dieu que ie fuffe en aage ~ 
d’eftre auec les Religieufes, i’aurois plus d’efprit que a 
toy, car ie ne les quitterois pas que ie ne fuffe 
inftruite: pour conclufion ces deux bonnes femmes fe — 
rendirent affidués cinq ou fix femaines pour venir — 
entendre parler de la doctrine de Iefus-Chrift, & puis 
il fallut fuiure ceux qu’elle[s] ne pouuoient quitter. — 

Vne autre femme baptifée depuis quelques années 
s’en alla exprez chez les Meres & demanda qu’on 2 
l'inftruifit du myftere du tres-fain@ Sacrement, i’ay — 
efté long-temps abfente de fainct lofeph, difoit-elle, — 
ie ne me fuis point trouuée aux inftructions, i’a 
perdu la memoire de ce que ie dois fgauoir, A chaque — 
article que luy expliquoit la bonne Mere qui luy fut — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 239 


on their great hunts. This suits them admirably, 
for they have not the trouble of dragging them after 
them in the woods. They are very sure that their 
children will suffer from neither hunger nor cold 
while with those good mothers; and, what is better 
than all the rest, they rejoice because they are taught 
the road to Heaven. A poor woman wished, on that 
account, to leave her daughter with the others; the 
child could not remain so long away from her moth- 
er,—she cried, she grieved, until finally she was sent 
back to her parents. The mother was sorry for it, 
and said: ‘‘ My daughter has no sense. I hoped 
that she would teach me what she [108] would have 
learned from the good Mothers during the Winter, 
and now I am disappointed in my expectations.’’ 
Another, a relative of hers, said to the child: ‘‘ Would 
to God that I were of an age to remain with the 
Nuns. I would have more sense than thou, for I 
would not leave them until I had been taught.’’ To 
conclude, these two good women went assiduously, 
for five or six weeks, to hear the doctrine of Jesus 
Christ explained to them, and then they had to 
follow those whom they could not leave. 

Another woman who had been baptized for some 
years went to the Mothers on purpose to ask for 
instruction in the mystery of the most holy Sacra- 
ment. ‘‘I have been away from saint Joseph a long 
time,’’ she said; ‘‘I have not been present at the 
instructions, and have forgotten what I should 
know.”’ As each article was explained to her by the 
good Mother who was appointed to be her mistress, 
she would say: ‘‘ That is exactly what was taught 
me. I have no sense; I cannot remember what I 
am told. Truly thou givest me pleasure; I thank 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 5 _ 


donnée pour maitreffe, voila iuftement ce qu’on m’a- 
uoit enfeigné, ie n’ay point d’efprit, ie ne fcaurois re- 
tenir ce qu’on me dit, en verité tu me fais plaifir, ie — 
te remercie, ah [109] que i’eftois affligée autre fois, 
adioutoit-elle quand quelqu’vn de mes enfans venoit 
a mourir; ie ne pouuois me confoler en facon du 
monde, mais depuis que ie fuis baptifée ie n’ay plus 
ces ennuis, car ie d’y en mon cceur, Dieu 4a de l’ef- 
prit, il eft bien fage, il eft bon, il fgait tout ce qu’il 
fait, peut-eftre qu'il voit de loin que fi mon enfant 
viuoit plus long-temps il ne croiroit plus en luy & 
qu'il feroit bruflé, voila pourquoy il le prend de bonne 
heure, laiffons le done faire: car mon enfant n’eft 
pas mal d’eftre auec luy, quand i’en voy mourir quel- 
qu’vn, ie d’y 6 Dieu, détermine de moy auffi fi tu 
veux, fais tout ce que tu voudras de mes enfans, tu 
me veux peut-eftre efprouuer tu veux voir fi ie croy 
en toy quand tu m’affligerois cent fois d’auantage i’y 
croyray toufiours, ie t'aymeray & t’obeiray toufiours, 
ie veux tout ce que tu veux, & puis m’addreffant a 
mon enfant, ie luy d’y prens courage vas-t’en voir 
Dieu, & quand tu le verras, dis luy, ayez pitié de ma 
mere, prie-le pour moy afin que i’aille au Ciel auec 
toy, ie priray pour ton ame afin que tu ne fois pas 
[110] long-temps en Purgatoire. 

Sa maitreffe luy parlant 4 ce propos des Indulgences 
qu’on pouuoit gagner auec vne médaille, elle s’efcria _ 
auec autant de ioye comme fi elle euft trouué vn thre- — 
for, voyla pour la premiere fois que i’entends parler — 
de cette doctrine, en verité m’a mere, difoit-elle, tu — 
me fais plaifir ie te remercie 6 ce que tu dis eft bon 
ie m’en fouuiendray tous les iours de ma vie, notam- — 
ment quand ie Communiray, elle prit la médaille — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "241 


thee. Ah! [109] how grieved I used formerly to 
be,’’ she added, ‘‘ when one of my children died; I 
could not console myself in any possible way. But 
since I have been baptized I no longer feel such 
grief, for I say in my heart: ‘God has wisdom; he is 
very wise; he is good; he knows all that he does. 
Perhaps he sees long beforehand that, if my child 
lived longer, he would no longer believe in him, and 
would be burned,—that is why he takes him so 
early. Let him do so, for my child is fortunate in 
being with him.’ WhenIsee any one die, I say: ‘O 
God, dispose of me also, if thou wilt. Do all thou 
choosest with my children. Perhaps thou desirest 
to try me; thou wishest to see whether I believe in 
thee. Even if thou wert to afflict me a hundred times 
more, I would still believe. I will always love and 
obey thee; I desire everything that thou desirest.’ 
And, addressing my child, I say to him: ‘ Take cour- 
age; go and see God, and when thou seest him, say 
to him: ‘‘ Have pity on my mother.’’ Pray to him 
forme, so that I may go to Heaven with thee. I 
will pray for thy soul so that thou mayst not remain 
[110] long in Purgatory.’’”’ 

When her mistress spoke to her, in this connec- 
tion, of the Indulgences that could be gained with a 
medal, she exclaimed, as joyfully as if she had found 
a treasure: ‘‘ This is the first time that I hear of 
that doctrine. Truly, my mother,”’ she said, ‘‘ thou 
givest me pleasure; I thank thee. Oh, what a good 
thing thou tellest me! I will remember it every day 
of my life, especially when I shall receive Commun- 
ion.” She took the medal that was given her, with 
feelings of deep gratitude, and said: ‘‘ Not a day 


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES © [Vou 2% 


qu’on luy donna auec vn fentiment tout plein de © 
reconnoiffance’ il ne fe paffera iour que ie ne prie — 
Dieu qu'il te récompence de la peine que tu as prife — 
de m’enfeigner. 

Quelques Hurons eftat defcendus cét Hyuer a fainct 
Iofeph, ne manquoient iamais de deux iours l’vn d’al- 
ler vifiter celles qui parlent leur langue pour eftre 
inftruit en noftre creance notamment fur 1’ Adorable 
myt{tere du fainct Sacrement, ils auoient plus d’vne 
lieué de chemin a faire pour aller a cette efcole, ny 
le vent ny la neige ny le froid ny le mauuais temps 
ne les en ont iamais empefchez, & par fois ils demeu- 
roient les deux & trois [111] heures dans le parloir, 
nonob{tant la rigueur du temps, fans iamais par- 
ler d’autre chofe que de leur Catechifme quoy qu’on 
leur offrit A manger & qu’on les inuitaft de s’aller 
chauffer dans la maifon voifine, rien ne leur fembloit 
plus preffé n’y de plus grande importance que de fe 
faire in{truire, la ferueur du difciple aide par fois a 
rechauffer le coeur de fon maiftre. 

Te ne finiray point ce Chapitre que ie n’aye encor ~ 
touché vne autre occupation des Vrfulines de Canada, i 
c’eft l’exercice des ceuures de mifericorde corporelle, 
il faut aider les corps qui veut gagner les efprits, fi © 
tof{t que les vaiffeaux furent partis plufieurs Semina- — 
riftes paffageres fe prefenterent fi pauures & fi mal — 
veftués qu'il fallut leur donner dequoy fe couurir, & — 
ce qu’on leur donna auroit ferui 4 plus de vingt Semi- 4 
nari{tes fedentaires, elles déroberent aux vnes ce que — 
la charité vouloit qu’on donnaft aux autres, cette — 
année on lesa bien empefchées de commettre vn fem- q 
blable larcin: car on ne leur a point ot fort peu | 
apporté d’etoffes le deffaut [112] du temporel retarde 
beaucoup le fpirituel. } 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ” 248 


shall pass without my praying God to reward thee 
for the trouble thou hast taken in teaching me.” 

Some Hurons who came down to saint Joseph last 
Winter never failed to go every other day to visit 
those who spoke their language, in order to be 
instructed in our belief, especially on the Adorable 
mystery of the holy Sacrament. They had to make 
a journey of over a league to reach this school; and 
yet neither wind, nor snow, nor cold, nor bad weath- 
er ever prevented them from doing so. Sometimes 
they remained two or three [111] hours in the parlor, 
in spite of the severity of the weather, speaking of 
nothing else but their Catechism. Although they 
were offered food, and were invited to go and warm 
themselves in the next house, nothing seemed to 
them more urgent or more important than to be 
instructed. The disciple’s fervor sometimes assists 
in warming the heart of his master. 

I cannot conclude this Chapter without saying a 
word of another occupation of the Ursulines of 
Canada,—that is, the practice of works of corporal 
mercy. He who would win the mind must succor 
the body. As soon as the ships had left, some of 
the transient Seminarists presented themselves, so 
wretched and so poorly clad that they had to be pro- 
vided with something to cover themselves; and what 
was given to them would have served for more than 
twenty of the resident Seminarists. They robbed 
these of what charity required to be given to the 
former. This year they were prevented from com- 
mitting such a theft, for no materials, or only very 
little, were brought to them. The want [112] of 
temporal things greatly delays spiritual matters. 

That is not all. Many Savages from the Island, 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


la Nation d’Iroquet, & d’autres endroits s’eftans cam- 
pez affez proche de Kebec, alloient tous les iours en 
la Chappelle des Vrfulines, ott le Pere Dequen leur 
faifoit l’aumofne fpirituelle, on en a baptifé quel-— 
ques-vns en cette petite Eglife apres les auoir fuffi- 
famment in{truits: Or comme la mifere accabloit ce 
peuple, l’aumofne fpirituelle eftant faite fuiuoit la — 
corporelle, les Meres au fortir du Sermon donnoient — 
a manger A quatre-vingt perfonnes, charité qu’elle ont y 
continuée enuiron fix femaines durant: Voicy la 
reconnoiffance de ce bien fait, les femmes venoient — 
encor en d’autres temps vifiter les Meres, elles en- 
troient dans la Claffe des filles Sauuages, ott 1’on ne — 
ceffoit de leur apprendre A prier Dieu, les hommes — 
entroient aux parloirs pour le mefme fujet, leur 
ferueur payoit & recompenfoit la bonté des Meres, & 
comme vn bien-fait difpofe vn bon cceur A en faire 
vn autre, ils ne pouuoient renuoyer ces bonnes [113] 
gens fans vne feconde aumofne, le moyen de voir de 
grands corps affamez fans les fecourir, qui donne af 
Dieu doit ouurir fon coeur & fes mains pour receuoir, — 
il veut eftre le Maiftre & auoir le deffus en tout, qu ‘iL . 
foit beny au dela des temps & de 1’éternité. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 245 


from the Iroquet Tribe, and from other quarters, 
who had encamped somewhat close to Kebec, went 
every day to the Chapel of the Ursulines, where 
Father Dequen dispensed spiritual alms to them. 
Some of them were baptized in this little Church, 
after having been sufficiently instructed. Now as 
distress overwhelmed these people, the spiritual gifts 
were followed by material ones. When the Sermon 
was over, the Mothers gave food to eighty persons, — 
an act of charity that they continued during about six 
weeks. Oh, what gratitude they showed for this 
kindness! The women also came at other times to 
visit the Mothers. They entered the Classroom of 
the Savage girls, where they were always taught to: 
pray to God; the men went into the parlors for the 
same purpose. Their fervor repaid and rewarded 
the kindness of the Mothers; and, as one benefit im- 
pels a kind heart to bestow another, they could not 
send away these good [113] people without a second 
alms. How could they see great crowds of people 
starved, without succoring them? He who gives to 
God must open his heart and his hands to receive. 
He chooses to be the Master, and to have the suprem- 
acy in everything. May he be blessed beyond time, 
and for eternity. 


246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo § 


CHAPITRE VIII. ; 


DE CE QUI S’EST PASSE A L’OCCASION DE QUE 4 
QUES APOSTATS. 


ueur de fes commencemens, elle ne laiffe pas’ 

pourtant de fouffrir des feandales de quelques 
mauuais Chreftiens; Satan faifant tous fes efforts 
pour reprendre les places que Iefus-Chrift a con- 
queftées fur luy, & fe maintenir dans la poffefiior 1 
d’vn pays ot ila regné paifiblement pendant tant de 
fiecles. Nous auons neantmoins fujet de nous confo- 
ler dans ce malheur, fur ce [114] que ces fcandales ne 
font pas foufferts, & que bien fouuent ils reiiffi[ffjent 
4 la gloire de Dieu qui les a permis, & A la confufion 
du Demon qui les a fufcitez. La fource de tous ces 
fcandales n’eft autre que la liberté qu’ont toufiours 
eu nos Sauuages, & qu’ils voudroient bien retenir, 
d’auoir autant de femmes que bon leur femble, & de 
les quitter felon leur fantaifie: D’ot viét que de 
toutes les loix Chreftiennes que nous leur propofons, 
il n’en eft point qui leur femble fi rude, comme celle 
qui defend la polygamie, & qui ne permet pas qu’on 
rompe les liens d’vn iufte mariage. Comme ils 
haiffent extremément tout ce qui choque tant foit 
peu la liberté, ils ont de la peine 4 plier le col fou: 
vn ioug qu'il n’eft pas licite de changer ny de qui. 
ter, & ne regardent plus le mariage des Chreftien; 
comme vn ayde & vn foulagement de la vie humaine 


Oe que cette nouuelle Eglife foit dans la fer. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 247 


CHAPTER VIII. 


OF WHAT OCCURRED IN CONNECTION WITH SOME 
APOSTATES. 


LTHOUGH this new Church is in the fervor of 

A its beginning, it cannot avoid, nevertheless, 
suffering scandal through the acts of some 

bad Christians. Satan spares no effort to recapture 
the posts that Jesus Christ has taken from him, and 
to maintain himself in possession of a country where 
he has reigned undisturbed for so many centuries.. 
We have reason, however, to console ourselves in 
this misfortune with the fact [114] that these scan- 
dals are not tolerated, and that often they result in 
the glory of God, who has permitted them, and the 
confusion of the Demon, who has given rise to them. 
The source of all these scandals is none other than 
the liberty that our Savages have always had, and 
that they would like to retain, of having as many 
wives as they please, and of leaving them according 
to their fancy. Hence it results that, of all the 
Christian laws which we propound to them, there is 
not one that seems so hard to them as that which 
forbids polygamy, and does not allow them to break 
the bonds of lawful marriage. As they hate to the 
utmost anything which in the least restricts their 
liberty, they find it very difficult to bend their necks 
to a yoke which they cannot lawfully change or set 
aside; and they no longer look upon Christian 


‘248 _ LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


mais comme vne feruitude pleine de defplaifir, & d’a- 
mertume: C’eft ce qui empefche la plufpart des infi- 
deles d’accepter la Foy, & l’a fait perdre & quelques- 
vns qui l’auoient defia embrafiée. Il y ena plufieurs, 
[115] graces 4 Dieu, qui nous donnent toute forte de © 
contentement fur ce fujet, gardant exactement toutes _ 
les loix du Mariage, fans peine & auec la benediction ; 
du Ciel. Il s’en eft trouué neantmoins deux cét 
année, qui ont caufé du fcandale en cette matiere, & 
ont beaucoup troublé la Paix de cette petite Eglife. — 
Le premier s’appelle Eftienne Pigarsich, le fecond, 
Francois Kokseribagsgsch: celuy-la auant fon Bap- 
tefme eftoit vn des plus fameux Sorciers de fa 
Nation, & qui donnoit plus de peine a ceux qui trauail- 
loient 4 fa conuerfion: Mais enfin, apres auoir recon- © 
neu & embraffé apres plufieurs combats la verité de 
no{tre creance, il l’a profeffa auec autant d’ardeur, 
comme il l’auoit auparauant combattué. C’ettoit luy 
qui appelloit & amenoit les autres aux prieres, qui 
cha{tioit les mefchans, & qui prefchoit noftre doctrine 
dans les Eglifes & dans les cabanes auec vne ferueur 
& éloquence qui n’auoit rien de barbare: il cdtinua 
dans ce zele tandis qu’il fuft en la compagnie des 
Chreftiens de fainct Iofeph, [116] mais s’eftant fepa- — 
ré de ceux-cy, pour monter aux trois Riuieres ot fe q 
trouuoient pour lors les Algonquins de 1’Ifle fes com- 
patriotes & ceux d’Hiroquet, qui font deux Nations i 
extremément infolentes, orgueilleufes, pleines de © 
fuperititions, & de libertinage, il fe laiffa bien-toft — 
corrompre auec fon compagnon par ces mauuaifes 
compagnies; en forte que tous deux quitterent leurs” 
femmes legitimes auec l’exercice de la Foy, & prin- 
drent chacun vne cocubine. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 249 


marriage as an aid and comfort of human life, but as 
a servitude full of vexation and bitterness. Itisthis 
that prevents most of the infidels from accepting the 
Faith, and has caused some to lose it who had already 
embraced it. There are many, [115] thanks be to 
God, who give us every satisfaction on this point, 
faithfully observing all the laws of Marriage, with- 
out any trouble, and with Heaven’s blessing. How- 
ever, this year there have been two who have given 
scandal in this matter, and have greatly disturbed 
the Peace of this little Church. 

The name of the first is Estienne Pigarouich; that 
of the second Francois Kokweribagougouch. The 
former was, before his Baptism, one of the most 
famous Sorcerers of his Tribe, and one who gave the 
most trouble to those who labored for his conversion. 
But at last, after several contests, he acknowledged 
and embraced the truths of our belief and professed 
it with as much ardor as he had formerly contended 
against it. He it was who called and brought the 
others to the prayers, who chastised the wicked, and 
who preached our doctrine in the Churches and in the 
cabins with a fervor and eloquence that savored in 
no wise of barbarism. This zeal continued while he 
was in the company of the Christians of saint Joseph; 
{116] but after he left them to go upto the three 
Rivers, at which place were the Algonquins of the 
Island, his countrymen, and those of Hiroquet,— 
who are two Tribes extremely insolent, arrogant, 
full of superstitions, and very profligate,—he soon 
allowed himself, with his comrade, to be corrupted 
by such bad company, so that both abandoned their 
lawful wives with the practice of the Faith, and took 
each a concubine. 


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou % 


Le 25. de Decembre, iour de la Natiuité de Noftre 
Seigneur, le Pere Iean de Brebeuf qui iufques & lors — 
n’auoit rien peu gagner fur les efprits de ces deux i 
Apottats, enuoye querir Eftienne pour 1l’aduertir que 
c’ef{toit le lendemain qu’on folemnifoit la fefte du 
Sainct dont il porte le nom, & qu’en ce iour il deuoit _ 
mettre fin a fes defbauches, & fe remettre dans le 
deuoir d’vn bon Chreftien. Il vient & apres auoir ‘a 
ouy le fujet pour lequel on 1l’auoit appellé, fe retire, . 
fans dire autre chofe, finon que c’eftoit perdre du q 
temps que de luy parler de cette matiere. Ce fuft 
neantmoins vn coup [117] de flefche qui luy entama 4 
le coeur, & y fit vne playe dont il reuint bien- toft 
chercher le remede. I 

Ce fuft le lendemain, iour de Sainct Eftienne fon q 
Patron qu’il reuint fans eftre appellé, & dit au Pere: _ 
Ie parle tout de bon, ie ne ments point, i refolu — 
de mettre fin 4 mes defbauches, depuis que i’ ay quit- 7 
té Dieu, ie n’ay pas eu vne bonne heure. Ie fuis . 
piqué nuict & iour des remords de ma confcience, les — | 
flammes que vous nous prefchez, font toufiours pre- 
fentes 4 mon efprit, ie ne vois iamais de feu, que ie 
ne me fouuienne de celuy d’Enfer, & ie me figure © 
qu'il n’eft allumé que pour moy, mille Beasts me 
troublent l’efprit; & me percent le coeur, i’ay efte | 
inftruit auec tant de agin, dis-i le en moy- -mef{me, 1’ ayy 


que d’abandonner la priere, i ‘enfeignois les autroal P 
i’affeurois ceux qui branfloient, i’encourageois ceux 
qui craignoient, ie chaftiois les mefchans, & me 
voyla décheu maintenant, & deuenu le plus abomi- | 
nable de tous. Dieu me hait, le malin [118] efprit — 
me poffede, & ie ne puis attendre autre chofe que de 


| 


‘ 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 251 


On the 25th of December, the anniversary of the 
Nativity of Our Lord, Father Jean de Brebeuf — who, 
up to that time, had been unable to exert any influ- 
ence on the minds of these two Apostates— sent for 
Estienne, to notify him that on the following day 
would be celebrated the festival of the Saint whose 
name he bore; and that on that day he must put an 
end to his debauchery, and return to the duty ofa 
good Christian. He came, and after having heard 
what he had been summoned to hear, he left with- 
out saying a word, except that it was a loss of time 
to speak to him on that matter. It was, neverthe- 
less, an [117] arrow shot that reached his heart, and 
inflicted a wound for which he soon came to seek a 
remedy. 

On the following day, the feast of Saint Stephen, 
his Patron, he came back without having been sent 
for, and said to the Father: ‘‘I speak the truth; I 
do not lie: I have resolved to put an end to my 
debauchery. Ever since I have abandoned God, I 
have not had an hour’s peace; I am goaded night 
and day by remorse of conscience. The flames of 
which you preach to us are ever present to my mind. 
I never see a fire without thinking of that of Hell; 
and I imagine that it is lighted only for me. A thou- 
sand thoughts disturb my mind, and pierce my heart. 
‘I have been so carefully taught,’ I say to myself; 
‘I have protested a thousand times that I would 
tather lose my life than abandon prayer. I taught 
the others; I steadied those who wavered; I encour- 
aged those who were afraid; I chastised the wicked; 
and now I am fallen and have become the most 

abominable of all. God hates me; the evil [118] 
spirit has possession of me; and I can expect noth- 


ne 


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 
brufler eternellement: dans ces penfées qui ne me ~ 
quittent iamais, ie m’eftime indigne de viure; Il y — 
a trois iours que ie ne mange rien, ie ne fcaurois — 
fubfifter dans cét eftat, il faut que demain ie me 
confeffe, & puis ie demeureray auec toy, fi tu l’agrée, 
pour m’efcarter des occafions qui me perdent, tu 
m’obligeras encore de me prefter vn habit Fran¢ois, 
qui me fera fouuenir que ie ne dois plus viure en 
Infidele, mais en Chreftien. Ie defcendray bien toft 4 7 
Sainct Iofeph, efcrits au Pere Vimont, qu’il me re- — 
coiue dans fa maifon, afin que ie ne fois pas contraint 
de retourner dans les cabanes de nos gens, ow les 
mauuaifes compagnies auec la foibleffe de ma nature, 
acheueroient 4 me perdre. 

Le Pere Brebeuf efmeu de ce difcours, luy accorde 
ce qu'il demande, & le retire dans noftre maifon, ot ~ 
eftant vifité par vn des principaux nommé Salomon, _ 
il luy déclare la refolution qu’il auoit prife, le fup- 
pliant de luy pardonner la faute qu'il auoit commife, — 
& le fcandale qu'il [119] auoit donné, & le loiiant de © 
ce qu’il croyoit fermement nonobftant les contra- — 
dictions, & mauuais exemples des Infideles, parmy — 
lefquels il conuerfoit; &4 quoy Salomon refpondit fort — 
a propos, loiiant le deffein d’Eftienne, & l’exhortant — 
a la perfeuerance. j 

Le 28. de Decembre iour de fainct Iean apres auoir 
paffé toute la nuict fans dormir dans la recherche, & 
douleur de fes pechez il fe confeffa auec toutes les 
marques exterieures d’vne vraye penitéce, & ayat 
demeuré en priere hors de la Chappelle iufques apres — 
la Predication, enfin il entre veftu d’vn habit Fran- 
cois, fe met A genoux deuant 1’ Autel, baife la ia 
puis fe leue, & fe tournant vers les Frangois, & 
Sauuages il harangua en cette forte. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 253 


ing else than to burn eternally.’ With such thoughts, 
that never leave me, I consider myself unworthy to 
live. For three days, I have eaten nothing. I can- 
not live in this condition. To-morrow, I must 
confess my sins, and then I will remain with thee if 
thou art willing, so as to keep myself aloof from the 
temptations that are causing my ruin. Thou wilt 
also oblige me by lending me French garments, which 
will remind me that I must no longer live as an Infi- 
del, but as a Christian. I shall soon go down to Saint 
Joseph; write to Father Vimont to receive me in his 
house, so that I may not be compelled to return to 
the cabins of my people, where evil companionship, 
with the weakness of my nature, would complete 
my ruin.’’ 

Father Brebeuf, moved by these words, granted 
him what he asked, and took him into our house,— 
where, on being visited by one of the leaders named 
Salomon, he told him of the resolution that he had 
taken. He begged the latter to pardon the sin that 
he had committed, and the scandal that he [119] had 
given, and praised him because he firmly believed 
in spite of the contradictions and bad examples of 
the Infidels with whom he lived. To this Salomon 
replied in appropriate terms, praising Estienne’s 
resolution and exhorting him to persevere. 

On the 28th of December, the feast of saint John, 
after having passed the entire night without sleep, 
thinking over and sorrowing for his sins, he made 
his confession, with all the outward marks of sincere 
repentance; and, after having remained in prayer 
outside the Chapel until the Sermon was over, he 
came in at last, clad in French garments, knelt be- 
fore the Altar, and kissed the ground; then he arose 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 25 


Ie fuis celuy qu’on appele Eftienne Pigaroitiich, — " 
celuy qui iadis auoit tant d’affection pour la priere, : 
qui a efté inf{truit auec tant de foin, qui a efté bapti- 
fé des premiers de notre Natid, qui prefchoit la Foy 
aux autres, qui chaftioit les méchans & qui par apres 
eft deuenu le plus mefchat de tous, & s’eft changé 
en vn miferable [120] Apoftat, ie n’ay pas honte de 
confeffer, ce que vous fcaués defia; mon peché a efté 
public, ie veux auffi que ma penitence foit publiqte, 
& que tous ceux qui croyent, fgachent que ie detefte 
mon impieté, & que i’ay vn extréme regret du 
fcandale que i’ay donné. Aprenez cela de moy, que 
c’eft vne chofe efpouuentable d’eftre ennemy de 
Dieu, & coupable de damnation éternelle, depuis que 
ie fuis en cét eftat, ie n’ay iamais dormy en repos, & 
ie n’ay iamais veu de feu, que ie n’aye efté troublé 
de cette penfée. Pourras-tu fouffrir le feu d’Enfer, 
dont celuy-cy n’eft qu’vn ombre, & tu ne le fgaurois 
éuiter mourant dans l’eftat ot tu es? Si l’appre- 
henfion de ce feu donne tant de peine, que feras-ce 
de le reffentir en effet, & d’eftre entouré & penetré 
de ces flammes. Ie ne merite pas que vous me par- 
donniez le mauuais exemple, & le fcandale que ie vous 
ay donné: i’efpere neantmoins que vous aurez pitié ; 
de moy, & que vous m’accorderez le pardon que ‘ A 
ie vous demande. Ie me foufmets entierementala 
difcretion des Peres qui nous gouuernent, pour eftre 
[121] chaftié felon qu’il ordonneront, ie ne refuferay 
aucune penitence. Vous tels & tels, qui croyez s 
fermement & qui refpectez la priere, i’eftime voftre — 
courage, & loiie la fidelité que vous gardez a Dieu: — 
ne fuiuez pas le mauuais exemple que ie vous ay — 
donné, mais continuez 4 bien faire. Et vous ieunes” ‘ 


ay. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 O55 


and, turning toward the French and the Savages, 
he harangued them as follows: 

‘‘T am he who is called Estienne Pigarouich,— he 
who formerly had so much love for prayer, who was 
so carefully taught, who was one of the first of our 
Tribe to be baptized, who preached the Faith to 
others, who chastised the wicked, and who afterward 
became the most wicked of all, and changed into a 
miserable [120] Apostate. I am not ashamed to con- 
fess what you already know. My sin has been pub- 
lic, I wish my repentance to be public also, and that 
all who believe may know that I detest my impiety 
and that I deeply regret the scandal that I have 
given. Learn this from me, that it is a dreadful 
thing to be an enemy of God, and to be deserving of 
eternal damnation. Ever since I have been in that 
state, I have had no quiet sleep; I have never seen a 
fire without being disturbed by this thought: ‘ Wilt 
thou be able to bear the fire of Hell, of which this is 
but a shadow ? and thou canst not avoid it if thou 
shouldst die in thy present condition. If the fear of 
this fire disturb thee so, what wilt thou do when thou 
shalt really feel it, and shalt be surrounded and 
penetrated by those fires?’ I do not deserve that you 
should pardon the bad example and the scandal that 
I have given you. I hope, however, that you will 
have pity on me and that you will grant me the 
pardon that I ask of you. I submit entirely to the 
discretion of the Fathers who direct us, to be [121] 
punished as they may order. I will not refuse any 
penance. You, and you, who firmly believe and 
respect prayer, I esteem your courage, and praise 
your faithfulness to God. Do not follow the bad 
example that I have given you, but continue to do 


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 26 a 


gens, qui n’eftes pas encore baptifez, ou qui desho- _ 
norez vo{tre Baptefme par vos libertinages, fi vous 
auez fuiuy mon exemple, & imité mon peché, imitez 
auffi ma penitence, craignez Dieu & apprehendez 
1’Enfer que vous auez merité, & que vous ne pouuez 
éuiter fi vous ne changez de mceurs & de vie, ne 
defefperez pas de la bonté de Dieu, fi quelqu’vn en 
deuoit defefperer, ce feroit moy qui ay tant abufé de 
fes graces: mais neantmoins i’efpere en fa miferi- 
corde. Priez Dieu pour moy, afin que ie puiffe 
appaifer fa colere, que i’ay tant irritée par mes pechez. 

Voyla le Sommaire de la harangue de ce Sauuage, 
dit le Pere Brebeuf, qui nous a donné ces memoires, 
ie fuis extremément marry, adioufte-il, que ie [122] 
ne puiffe repeter mot & mot tout ce qu’il dit, mais ny 
ie n’ay peu le bien comprendre, ny ne l’ay peu bien 
{cauoir des interpretes, lefquels apres auoir repeté ce 
que deffus, dirent qu’il n’eftoit pas poffible de redire 
ce qu’il auoit dit, & qu’eux & tous ceux qui fe 
mefle[nt] de parler la langue des Sauuages ne font 
que begayer en comparaifon de cét homme, & qu'il 
auoit auffi bien dit, comme le Pere de Breffany ve- 
noit de bien prefcher. Ce que ie puis dire, c’eft que 
fa facon, fa deuotion, & toute fon action toucha extre- 
mément tous les Francois & tous les Sauuages, & tira 
mefmes les larmes des yeux de plufieurs qui l’efcou- 
toient. 

Apres que cettuy-cy euft harangué, vn des princi- 
paux Chreftiens prift la parole. Mon frere, dit-il, 
nous fommes grandement confolez de voir que tu as — 
recouuert l’efprit, que les femmes t’auoient ofté: Ie — 
haiffois ta malice, & ne pouuois fouffrir le fcandale 
que tu nous donnois, maintenant i’eftime & loiie ton 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ® 257 


well. And you, young men, who are not yet bap- 
tized or who dishonor your Baptism by your profli- 
gacy, if you have followed my example and imitated 
my sin, imitate also my repentance. Fear God, and 
dread the Hell that you have deserved, and that you 
cannot avoid unless you change your habits and your 
lives. Do not despair of God’s goodness. If any 
one should despair, it should be myself, who have so 
greatly abused his graces. But, nevertheless, I trust 
to his mercy. Pray God for me, so that I may ap- 
pease his wrath which I have so excited by my sins.”’ 

‘Such is the Summary of the harangue of this 
Savage,’’ says Father Brebeuf, who has given us 
these notes. ‘‘I am extremely sorry,’’ he adds, 
‘*that I [122] cannot repeat word for word all that he 
said. But either I did not hear him well, or I could 
not learn it properly from the interpreters, who, 
after having repeated what I have related above, 
stated that it was impossible to report all that he 
had said; that they, and all who undertake to speak 
the language of the Savages, can only stammer in 
comparison with this man; and that he had spoken 
as well as Father de Bressany, who had just preached 
afinesermon. What I can assert is that his manner, 
his devotion, and all his actions greatly impressed 
all the French and all the Savages, and even brought 
tears to the eyes of many who heard him.’’ 

After this man had delivered his harangue, one of 
the principal Christians spoke. ‘‘ My brother,” he 
said, ‘‘ we are greatly consoled at seeing that thou 
hast recovered thy sense, which the women had 
taken from thee. I detested thy wickedness, and 
could not bear the scandal that thou gavest us; now, 
I esteem and praise thy courage. Do not lose heart; 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (ou. 5 


courage. Ne perds point coeur, repare ta faute, fou- — 
uiés-toy de ce que tu viens [123] de dire, ne ments _ 
point, ie tourne maintenant toute mon indignation — 
contre quelques ieunes gens qui perfiftent dans leurs 
defbauches: Mes nepueux, iufques a quand n’aurez a 
vous point d’efprit? Serez-vous toufiours fols? Vous q 
mentez quad vous dites que vous croyez en Dieu, 
ceux qui croyent fermement, ne font pas libertins 
comme vous eftes; imitez celuy qui vient de parler, 
il vous a gafté peut-eitre par fon mauuais exemple, . 
maintenant que fa penitence vous remette dans voftre 
deuoir, ce font ceux de la Nation d’Iroquet qui nous 
rendent mefchans, rapportant icy leurs anciennes 
fuper{ftitions & mauuaifes couftumes: fuffent-ils bien 
loin de nous. Prenons courage tous tant que nous 
fommes, appaifons Dieu, afin qu’il nous faffe part de 
fes mifericordes. 
Paul Teffsehats Capitaine des Algonquins de 1’Ifle 
approuua ce que ceftuy-cy venoit de dire, & adioufta 
qu’il falloit parler plus amplement de ces affaires. 
Apres cela Eftienne difoit que tandis qu’il eftoit dans 
fa mauuaife vie, illuy fembloit qu’il eftoit 1ié comme Y 
vn prifonnier [124] de quantité de cordes, mais qu’A 
prefent il luy fembloit eftre en liberté. Il continué 
dans ces bons fentimens, & parle fouuent hautement — 
tant a l’encontre de foy-mefme, & de fes desbauches 
paffée, qu’en faueur de la vertu, & de la priere, 
iufques a ce qu’il partit des trois Riuieres auec tous — 
fes compagnons pour defcendre A Sillery. a 


promis, & abufant des lumieres, & fentimens que le © 
fainct Efprit luy auoit donné, il recheut dans fon 
peché foit qu’il fuft follicité A cela par les difcours, — 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 ~ Ge 


repair thy fault; remember what thou hast just [123] 
said, and do not lie. I now turn all my indignation 
against some young men who persist in their de- 
bauchery. My nephews, how long will you remain 
without sense? Will you always be foolish? You 
lie, when you say that you believe in God. Those 
who believe firmly are not libertines as you are. I 
imitate him who has just spoken. He has perhaps 
injured you by his bad example; now let his repent- 
ance induce you to return to duty. It is those who 
belong to the Iroquet Tribe who make us wicked, 
by bringing here their old superstitions and evil 
customs. Would that they were far from us! Let 
us all take courage; let us appease God, so that he 
may grant us a share of his mercies.’’ 

Paul Tesswehats, Captain of the Island Algon- 
quins, approved what the last speaker had said, and 
added that it was necessary to speak more fully of 
these matters. After that, Estienne said that, while 
he was leading his evil life, it seemed to him that he 
was bound, like a prisoner, [124] with many ropes; 
but that, at that moment, he felt at liberty. He 
continued in these good sentiments and often spoke 
aloud both with reference to himself and his past 
debauchery, and in favor of virtue and of prayer, 
until he left the three Rivers with all his compan- 
ions, to come down to Sillery. 

It was during this voyage that, forgetting what he 
had promised, and abusing the enlightenment and 
sentiments with which the holy Ghost had inspired 
him, he relapsed into his sin,— either because he 
was solicited thereto by the words and bad examples 
not only of the Infidels, but also of some bad Chris- 
tians who accompanied him; or because he is ofa 


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. % 


& mauuais exemples non feulement des Infideles, 
mais mefmes de quelques mauuais Chreftiens qui 
l’accompagnoient, foit parce que c’eft vn efprit vio- 
lent, & en qui la mauuaife couftume auoit ietté de 
profondes racines, tant y 4 que le Pere Breffany qui 
eftoit party deux iours apres ceux-cy pour defcendre 
a Kebec, les ayant rencontré en chemin, & s’eftant 
informé d’Eftienne, trouua qu’il auoit repris fa con- 
cubine, & ne fuft pas fatisfait des refponces qu'il 
luy fit. 

[125] La malice de cét homme, & celle de quelques 
autres mauuais Chreftiens, infideles, & forciers qui 
fe trouuoient en cette trouppe, & s’eftoient compor- 
tés infolemment aux trois Riuieres, nous fit refoudre 
auec Monfieur le Gouuerneur de leur faire vn mau- 
uais accueil pour leur tefmoigner l’horreur que nous 
auons des mefchans, & leur faire apprehender 
d’auantage leur faute. 

La crainte des Iroquois, & la famine les contrai- 
gnoit de defcendre 4 Kebec, ot il efperoient d’eftre 
protegés par le voifinage des Francois, & receuoir de 
leur charité qu’ils auoient touflours experimentée en 
femblables occafions quelque foulagement Ala faim 
qui les preffoit. Mais il furent bien eftonnés a leur — 
abord, de voir que ceux 14 qui auparauant leur 
mon{ftroient vn vifage ferain, & les receuoient a bras. 
ouuers, & ne leur refufoient rien, ne leurs paroiffoient 
alors qu’auec des vifages courroucés, ne leur par- — 
loient qu’auec des iniures, & leur fermoient la porte — 
comme a des excommuniés. Ils fe prefentent pre- 
mierement 4 noftre maifon de Sillery, [126] & on les — 
chaffe apres vne verte reprimende, il vont chez les — 
Meres Hofpitalieres, & on les renuoye. Ils prefen- j 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 26% 


passionate nature, and evil habits had become deep- 
ly rooted in him. At all events, Father Bressany, 
who started two days after them to go down to 
Kebec, overtook them on the way, and, on inquiring 
about Estienne, found that he had taken back his 
concubine; nor was the Father satisfied with the 
answers that he gave him. 

[125] The wickedness of that man and of some 
other bad Christians, infidels, and sorcerers, who 
were in this band, and who had behaved in an inso- 
lent manner at the three Rivers, made us resolve 
with Monsieur the Governor to give them a harsh 
reception, to show them the horror that we have for 
the wicked, and to make them comprehend their fault 
still more. 

Fear of the Iroquois and famine compelled them 
to come down to Kebec, where they hoped to be 
protected by the neighborhood of the French, and to 
receive from their charity, which they had always 
experienced on similar occasions, some relief from 
the hunger that pressed them. But they were great- 
ly surprised, on their arrival, to see that those who: 
had formerly received them with a serene counte- 
nance and open arms, and had refused them noth- 
ing, appeared now with angry faces, spoke to them 
only with insults, and closed their doors to them as 
to excommunicated persons. They first came to our 
house at Sillery [126] and were driven off with a 
sharp reprimand. They went to the Hospital Moth- 
ers, and were sent away. They brought some sick 
persons, and were not admitted. They went to the 
houses of the inhabitants, who all closed their doors. 
to them. They wished to enter the Church, and 
were forbidden to do so. They went to the Gentle- 


‘ 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. % 


tent des malades, & on ne les accepte pas: ils sen 
vont par les maifons des habitans, & on leur ferme 
par tout la porte. Ils veulent entrer dans l'Eglife, — 
& on leur en deffend l’entrée: ils ont recours aa 
Meffieurs du Magazin, & on les rebute: ils crient © 
qu’ils meurent de faim, & perfonne ne leur donneA _ 
manger, ils iettent des caftors, des coliers de Pource- — 
laine, & tout ce qu’ils auoient de plus precieux pour 
auoir vn morceau de pain, & on reiette leurs prefens. 
Ils fe mettent en eftat de cabaner proche des Fran- — 
gois, & Monfieur le Gouuerneur leur fait faire deffence 
de s’approcher, & d’auoir aucune cOmunication auec 4 
les Frangois, iufques ace qu’ils ayent chaffé les deux © ‘4 
Apoftats, & fatisfait pour les fautes commifes aux a 
trois Riuieres. P 
Les Sauuages mefmes qui fe trouuerent pour lors & 
4 Sillery, ne leur firent pas meilleur accueil que les — 
Frangois. Ils ne les voulurent point admettre dans — 
leur cabanes, quelques-vns fe retirerent dans [127] ~ 
nos maifons pour n’eftre pas obligez de conuerfer — | 
auec eux, les autres s’efcarterent parmy les bois 
pour ef{tre plus efloignez de leur compagnie, pas vn 
ne leur offrit 4 manger, ils ne daignoient pas mefme | q 
leur parler, finon pour leur faire des reproches de — 
leur mefchanceté, ils voulurent entrer en des cabanes — 
ott il n’y auoit que des femmes, qui n’eftans pas affez — 
fortes pour chaffer ces mauuais hoftes, courent a 
no{tre maifon pour auoir main forte, d’autres fe 
barricaderent dans vne petite maifon que nous leur 
ations batty a la Francoife, vne femme Chreftionsiag 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 263: 


men at the Storehouse, and were turned away. They 
cried out that they were dying of hunger, and that 
no one gave them anything to eat. They threw 
down beaver skins, collars of Porcelain beads, and 
all the most valuable things that they had, for a 
piece of bread; and their presents were rejected. 
They prepared to erect their cabins near the French, 
and Monsieur the Governor gave orders to forbid 
them to approach, or to hold any communication with, 
the French, until they had driven away the two 
Apostates, and had atoned for the faults committed 
at the three Rivers. 

Even the Savages who were then at Sillery did 
not give them a better welcome than the French. 
They would not admit them into their cabins; some 
of them withdrew into [127] our houses, so as not 
to be obliged to converse with them. The others 
scattered themselves in the woods, so as to be far 
removed from their company. No one offered them 
food; they would not even speak to them, except to 
teproach them with their wickedness. They tried 
to enter cabins in which there were only women, 
who, not being strong enough to expel these evil 
guests, fled to our house for assistance; others bar- 
ricaded themselves in a small house, which we had 
built for them in the French style. A Christian 
woman, who had been abandoned by one of these 
Apostates after lawful marriage, heard that her hus- 
band wished to come and see her. She took refuge 
in a corner of her cabin and armed herself with a 
knife, being resolved to kill him if he approached 
her. Another, to whom wisdom and age gave much 
authority, was visited by some of these newcomers, 
who were her countrymen and near relatives. She 


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


cabane, & s’arme d’vn couteau, refolué de le tuer s’il — 
s’approche, vne autre a qui l’efprit & l’aage donnoit — 
beaucoup d’authorité ayant efté vifitée par quelques- _ 
vns de ces nouueaux venus qui eftoient fes compa- — 
triotes, & fes proches parens, leur dit librement; 
vous n’eftes point mes parens, depuis que vous auez 
quitté la priere, ie ne connois [128] point d’autres 
parens que les vrais Chreftiens, ie hais voftre malice, 
ne craignez-vous pas l’Enfer, il y a fi long-temps 
qu’on vous enfeigne, & vous n’eftes pas encore fages, 
c’eft la fuperbe & les femmes qui vous empefchent 
d’auoir de l’efprit, ne vous eftonnez-pas fi les Fran- 
cois vous traittent mal, ils haiffent voftre mefchan- 
ceté, quoy qu’ils ne haiffent pas vos perfonnes; foyez 
gens de bien, & ils vous aimeront & affifteront, mais 
ce qui eft le principal, Dieu vous aymera. 

Cette rigueur euft vn excellent effet, & fit que — 
les deux Apoftats qui attiroient toute cette haine fur 
eux & fur leurs compagnons, furent abandonnez de © 
tous les Sauuages, lefquels firent tous vne protefta- — 
tion publique qu’ils haiffoient la mefchanceté de ces © 
deux Apoftats, qu’ils n’approuuoient point leurs — 
actions, & qu'ils ne les fouffriroient point en leur — 
compagnie, ceux mefme de la Nation d’Iroquet qui 
font encore quafi tous infideles fe fequeftrerent des — 
mauuais Chreftiens, & vindrent trouuer Monfieur le © 
Gouuerneur, [129] auquel le Capitaine de cette bande > 
fit vne affez iudicieufe remonftrance. 

Nous nous fommes grandement eftonnez, dit-il, def j 
la fagon auec laquelle on nous a traitéA noftre arri- 7 
uée, la plufpart de mes gens qui font icy, n’auoient — 
jamais veu les Francois, & n’eftoient venus que dans | 
l’affeurance que ie leur donnois, de 1’affection que 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "965 


boldly said to them: ‘‘ You are no relatives of mine, 
since you have abandoned prayer; I know [128] no 
other relatives than true Christians. I detest your 
wickedness. Do you not fear Hell? You have been 
taught for so long a time, and you are not yet good. 
It is pride and women that prevent you from having 
sense. Be not surprised that the French treat you 
badly; they detest your wickedness, although they 
do not hate you personally. Be good men, and they 
will love and assist you; but, above all, God will 
love you.”’ 

Such severity had an excellent effect, and caused 
the two Apostates who had brought all this anger on 
them and on their companions to be abandoned by 
all the Savages. These publicly protested that they 
abhorred the wickedness of the two Apostates; that 
they did not approve their conduct, and would not 
suffer them in their company. Even those of the 
Iroquet Tribe, who are nearly all infidels, kept aloof 
from the bad Christians, and went to Monsieur the 
Governor [129] to whom the Captain of the band 
made a very sensible remonstrance. 

‘“'We were greatly astonished,’’ he said, ‘‘ at the 
manner in which we were treated on our arrival. 
Most of my people who are here had never seen the 
French, and came here solely on the assurance that 
I had given them of the affection that the French 
had forus. ‘ The French,’ I said to them, ‘ are our 
brothers; they love us even better than our relatives 
do. It is for us that they have left all the riches and 
pleasures of their country. They are a very kind 
Nation; their Captain loves us. Let us go and see 
them, my nephews. They will protect and preserve 
the wretched remnants of our Tribe who have escaped 


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 25 


les Frangois nous portoient. Les Francois, leur — 
difois-ie, font nos freres, ils nous cheriffent plus que 
ne font nos parens mefmes, c’e{t pour nous qu’ils ont 
quitté les richeffes & les plaifirs de leur pais, c’eft 
vne Nation toute bien-faifante, leur Capitaine nous 
ayme, allons les voir, mes neueux, ce font eux qui 
nous protegeront & qui conferueront ces miferables 
reftes de noftre Nation qui font efchappées de la 
rage, de la faim, & de la cruauté des Iroquois; il y 
a parmy eux des hommes qui enfeignent des 
merueilles de l’autre vie. Nous apprendrons leur 
doctrine, nous croirons comme eux, & nous ne ferons 
plus qu’vn peuple: c’eft ce que ie leur difois, me 
perfuadant de trouuer maintenant les [130] Francois 
dans la mefme affection qu’ils auoient toufiours eu 
pour nous. Mais maintenant qu’ils ne voyent que 
des vifages courroucez, & n’entendent que des pa- 
roles d’outrages, & que toutes les portes leur font fer- 
mées, & qu'ils meurent de faim, fans que perfonne 
leur porte compaffion; ils difent que ie fuis vn men- 
teur, que ce ne font pas ces Francois bien-faifans, 
defquels ie leur auois parlé: ou bien, difent-ils, fi ce 
font les mefmes, ils ne nous connoiffent pas, & comme 
ils voyent de nouueaux vifages peut-eftre nous pren- 
nent-ils pour des Iroquois. Falloit-il, que nous 
vinffions de fi loin pour mourir de faim, que leur 
auons-nous fait pour eftre traittez de la forte? 

En effet, ie ne {gay & quoy attribuer la rigueur qu’on 
exerce enters nous; eft-ce parce que nous eftions 
auec quelques Algonquins qui ont quitté la priere? 
Mais nous n’en fommes pas la caufe. Nous deteftons 
leur malice, & fi nous eftids baptifez cOme eux, nous — 
nous garderions bien de tomber dans ces fautes: Eft- — 


‘ 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 * 967 


from the fury, the appetite, and the cruelty of the 
Iroquois. There are men among them who teach 
the wonders of the other life. We will learn their 
doctrine, we will believe as they do, and we will be 
but one people with them.’ That is what I told 
them, being convinced that I would still find the [130] 
French animated with the same affection that they 
havealwayshadforus. But,—now that they see only 
angry faces, and hear only insulting words; that all 
doors are closed against them; that they die of hun- 
ger, without any one having compassion on them,— 
they say that I am a liar, that these are not the kind 
Frenchmen of whom I had toldthem. ‘Or,’ they say, 
‘if they be the same, they do not know us; and, as 
they see new faces, perhaps they take us for Iroquois. 
Was it necessary that we should come from so far, 
to die of hunger? What have we done to them to 
be treated in that manner?’ 

‘“Indeed, I know not to what we must attribute 
the severity displayed against us. Is it because we 
were with some Algonquins who abandoned prayer? 
But we are not to blame for that. We detest their 
wickedness; and, if we were baptized as they are, 
we would be very careful not to commit such faults. 
Is it, then, because we do not yet pray, [131] and be- 
cause we retain the ancient customs of our country? 
But that is not our fault. For my part, I have asked 
for Baptism for over three years, and the Fathers have 
never granted it to me. As for my people, most of 
them have never seen the French up to this time. 
Order now what thou wishest us to do, and we will 
obey thee. Look at ourarms; there is no more flesh 
on them—they are but bones covered with skin. 
These few men, whom thou seest around me, are the 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


ce donc parce que nous ne prions [131] pas encore? 
& que nous conferuons les anciennes couftumes de 
no{tre pais? mais ce n’eft pas noftre faute; pour moy, 
il y a plus de trois ans que ie demande le Baptefme, 
& les Peres ne me l’ont voulu iamais accorder; pour 
ce qui eft de mes gens, la plufpart d’eux n’auoit 
encore veu les Francois iufques & prefent. Ordonne 
maintenant ce que tu veux que nous faffions, & nous 
t’obeyrons: regarde nos bras, ils n’ont plus de chair, 
ce ne font que des os reulef{tus de peau, ce peu d’hom- 
mes que tu vois icy 4 l’entour de moy, font les reftes 
d’vne des plus fleuriffantes Nations qui fuffent dans 
ces contrées: Si tu n’as pitié de nous, nous ferons 
bien-toft reduits au neant, & les autres Nations qui 
font voyfines, & chez lefquelles ta bonté & valeur font 
dans vne haute eftime fcauront que nous fommes 
morts parce que tu n’as pas eu pitié de nous. 

En difant cela, il iette vn paquet de vingt Caftors. 
par ce que ces peuples ne parlent iamais fans prefens, 
ce n’eft pas 1a, dit-il, vn prefent que ie t’offre, voyla 
bien de quoy pour appaifer vn tel Capitaine, [132] — 
mais tu verras par 1a noftre pauureté, & peut-eftre — 
auras-tu compaffion de nous. 

Monfieur le Gouuerneur luy refpondit qu'il auoit 
toufiours eu beaucoup d’affection pour luy & pour fa 
Nation, dans la croyance qu’il auoit qu’il fe feroit — 
Chreftien auec fes gens: mais que maintenant il 
hayffoit fa malice, & non pas fa perfonne, parce qu'il — 
le voyoit efloigné des difpofitions de la Foy, & recon- — 
noiffoit qu’il ne demandoit le Baptefme que par cere- — 
monie, qu'il y auoit long-temps qu’on Vinftruifoit, & — 
qu’on atoit de l'inclination 4 le baptifer, mais qu'il — 
s’en eftoit toufiours monftré indigne continuant dans” 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "269 


remnant of one of the most flourishing Tribes that 
ever dwelt in this country. If thou hast not pity on 
us, we shall soon be reduced to nothing; and the 
other neighboring Nations, by whom thy kindness 
and valor are held in high esteem, will know that we 
died because thou hadst not pity on us.” 

As he said this, he threw down a package of twen- 
ty Beaver skins, because these people never speak 
without making presents. ‘‘It is not a gift,’’ he 
said, ‘‘thatlofferthee. This is not much to appease 
so great a Captain; [132] but thou wilt see by it how 
poor we are, and perhaps thou wilt have compassion 
on us.’’ 

Monsieur the Governor replied that he had always 
had a great affection for him and for his Tribe, be- 
lieving that he would become a Christian with his 
people, but that now he detested his wickedness, 
though not him personally, because he saw that he 
was far from having inclinations for the Faith, and 
that he asked for Baptism merely for the sake of 
ceremony. He reminded this Captain that he had 
been instructed for a long time, and that they had 
been inclined to baptize him, but that he had always 
shown himself to be unworthy of it, for he had con- 
tinued his incantations and superstitions, and had 
within a few days seduced a Christian woman whom 
he had taken for his wife, not being content with 
the two others whom he kept; that, if he wished to 
be a friend of the French, he would have to give up 
the Christian woman whom he had seduced, and keep 
but one of the two others, with whom he must always 
live. He told him that he must separate himself 
from the Apostates; that after [133] that he would 
be well received by the French, and have every kind 


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou % 


fes iongleries, & fuperftitions, & ayant encore depuis — 
peu de iours defbauché vne femme Chreftienne qu’il 
auoit pris pour femme, ne fe contentant pas de deux ~ 
autres qu'il retenoit que s’il defiroit eftre amy des © 
Fracois, il falloit qu’il quittaft cette femme Chrefti- 
enne qu’il auoit defbauchée, qu’il n’en retint qu’vne 
des deux autres, auec laquelle il demeureroit toufiours, 
& qu’il fe feparait des Apoftats; qu’apres [133] cela 
il feroit bien venu parmy les Francois, & y receuroit 
toute forte decontentement. Luy & fes gens tefmoi- 
gnerent qu’ils s’accordoient 4 tout cela par leurs ho, 
ho, qu’ils redoublerent 4 la veué des prefens que leur 
fit M.le Gouuerneur. Paul Teffsehas, Capitaine des 
Algonquins de 1’Ifle vouluft pareillement faire fa paix 
auec Monfieur le Gouuerneur, mais parce qu’il auoit 
fupporté & fauorifé les deux Apoftats contre le de- 
uoir auquel l’obligeoit la qualité de Capitaine & de 
Chreftien, il fouffrit la confufion d’eftre renuoyé © 
honteufement de la porte du Fort en fatisfaction — 
de fa lafcheté, ce qui l’obligea 4 fe declarer ennemy 
des Apoftats & faire des foumiffions affez fafcheufes — 
& vn homme de fon humeur. 

Cependant les deux Apoftats demeurerent errans — 
& vagabons fans maifon & fans compagnie, mais — 
non pas fans de grands remords de confcience, parti- — 
culierement Eftienne Pigaroiiich comme il tefmoigna — 
vn iour au Pere Dequen, duquel ayant efté accueilly — 
vn iour affez froidement: Hé quoy, dit-il, il n’y a 
[134] point done de mifericorde pour moy: Voulez- — 
vous que ie courre dans les bois comme vn Loup- 
garou abandonné de Dieu & des hommes. I’ay man-_ 
qué, ie l’aduoiie, mais pour cela faut-il me ietter dans 
le defefpoir: Suis ie vn Ange pour ne pas pecher, 


a . 
mare: 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "ey 


of satisfaction. He and his people showed that they 
agreed in all this by their exclamations of ‘‘ Ho, ho,”’ 
which they redoubled when they saw the presents 
given to them by Monsieur the Governor. Paul 
Tesswehas, Captain of the Island Algonquins, also 
wished to make his peace with Monsieur the Govern- 
or. But as he had supported and favored the two 
Apostates, contrary to his duty as a Captain and a 
Christian, he had the confusion of being sent away 
in disgrace from the gate of the Fort, as a penalty 
for his cowardice. This compelled him to declare 
himself an enemy of the Apostates, and to make 
submission in a manner very galling to a man of his 
temper. 

Meanwhile, the two Apostates were wanderers and 
vagrants without house or company, and not without 
great remorse of conscience,—especially Estienne 
Pigarouich, as he stated on one occasion to Father 
Dequen. Having met one day with a rather cold 
reception from the latter, he said: ‘‘ What! is there 
[134] no mercy for me? Do you wish me to roam 
the woods like a Werewolf, abandoned by God and 
men? I have sinned, I admit; but must I for that 
be cast into despair? Am I an Angel, that I should 
not sin? Do not the French sin sometimes? You 
often preach to us that God has mercy on those who 
repent, and who confess their offenses. Here I am, 
quite ready to confess mine and to expiate them by 
whatever penance you may be pleased to impose. 
Why should you refuse me what you grant to others? 
It is not the punishments with which you threaten 
me that give me fear,—I fear neither hunger, nor 
the prison, nor the whip; I am satisfied to remain in 
prison during the whole Winter. Make me die of 


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 5 


les Francois ne faillent-il pas quelquesfois: vous nous 
prefchez fouuent que Dieu fait mifericorde 4 ceux 
qui fe repentent & confeffent leur fautes, me voila 
tout pre{t a confeffer les miennes & 4 les expier par 
quelque penitence qu’il vous plaira. Pourquoy me 
refuferez-vous ce que vous accordez aux autres? Ce 
ne font pas les chaftimens dont vous me menacez, qui 
m’effrayent, ce n’eft ny la faim, ny la prifon, ny le 
foiiet que ie crains, ie fuis content de demeurer en 
prifon pendant tout l’Hyuer, faites-moy mourir de 
faim fi vous voulez. Ie ne crains que 1’Enfer ot le 
defefpoir me precipite, fi vous ne me faites miferi- 
corde. 

Le Pere luy refpond que s’ila bonne volonté de 
confeffer fon peché, & s’en corriger, il entendra vo- 
lontiers fa confeffion, mais qu’il ne peut l’admettre fi 
[135] toft dans l’Eglife auec les autres Chreftiens, 
caufe du fcandale qu’il a donné, & qu'il faut qu'il en 
faffe plu{toft vne penitence publique, & qu’il donne 
des preuues de fa conftance, & fidelité pendant les 
trois mois qu’il doit paffer a la chaffe de l’orignac 
dans les bois, que fi au printemps fes compagnons 
rendent bon tefmoignage de fes déportemens, il fera 
remis dans 1’Eglife, & iouyra de toutes les autres fa- 
ueurs communes a tous les Chreftiens, il s’y accorde, — 
& prend iour du Pere pour fe confeffer, mais la mau- 
uaife habitude euft plus de force fur fon efprit que 
la grace: il fe prefente au iour determiné, & aduoiie 
ingenument que fon cceur n’eftoit pas bien refolu de 
quiter fon peché, qu’il preuoyoit bien qu’il y retom- 
beroit pendant 1’Hyuer, & que dans cet eftat, il ne 
vouloit pas fe confeffer pour ne fe rendre pas plus 
coupable, le Pere ne pouuant gagner autre chofe fur 
fon efprit le renuoye. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 " . ae 


hunger, if you will. I fear only Hell, into which 
despair will cast me, if you have not mercy on me.”’ 

The Father replied that, if he were really willing 
to confess his sin, and to correct himself for it, he 
would willingly hear his confession; but that he 
could not at once admit him [135] into the Church 
with the other Christians, on account of the scandal 
that he had given; that he would have to perform a 
public penance, and give proofs of his constancy and 
fidelity during the three months that he was to pass 
hunting moose in the woods; that if, in the spring, 
his companions gave a good report of his conduct, he 
would be restored to the Church, and would enjoy 
all the other favors common to all Christians. He 
consented to this, and agreed with the Father upon a 
day for confessing himself. But evil habits had more 
influence over his mind than grace. He presented 
himself on the day appointed and frankly admitted 
that his heart was not firmly resolved to abandon his 
sin; that he foresaw very well that he would relapse 
into it during the Winter; and that, in the circum- 
stances, he would not go to confession, that he might 
not render himself still more guilty. As the Father 
could not gain anything more in his mind, he dis- 
missed him. 

In short, he continued in his debauchery for the 
remainder of the Winter, in consequence of which he 
was no better received on his return than on the 
previous occasion and [136] was again compelled to 
live apart from the French and the Savages, like an 
excommunicated person, without daring to show him- 
self except at night,— ever feeling the same remorse 
of conscience, and never losing the recollection of 
Hell, which goaded him sharply. The shame that 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 


En effect il continua dans fes desbauches pendant 
le refte de 1’Hyuer, ce qui fuft caufe qu’a fon retour 
il ne fuft pas mieux accueilly qu’a l’autre fois, & [136] 
fuft contraint derechef de demeurer feparé des 
Francois & des Sauuages comme vn excommunié 
fans ofer paroiftre que la nuict, reffentant toufiours 
les mefmes remords de confcience, & ne perdant 
iamais la memoire de l’Enfer qui le piquoit viue- 
ment, la honte qu’il auoit d’auoir fi fouuent violé 
les promeffes qu'il auoit faites fi folemnellement, 
l’empefcha a ce coup de fe prefenter 4 aucun de 
nos Peres, il refolut neantmoins de quiter fa concu- 
bine, & reprendre fa femme legitime, apres quoy 
il remonta aux trois Riuieres auec le refte des 
Sauuages pour aller en guerre, & ce fuft la ot l’appre- 
henfion du danger qu'il alloit encourir, ioincte a la 
crainte continuelle de l’Enfer qui le fuiuoit par tout, 
fit vn dernier effort fur fon efprit, & l’obligea d’aller 
voir le Pere Brebeuf, auquel il reprefenta, apres 
auoir auoiié, & detefté fon inconftance & infidelité, 
le danger ot: il s’alloit expofer, l’apprehenfion qu’il 
auoit du feu éternel, le defir qu’il auoit de bien faire, 
comme il auoit defia abandonné fa concubine, & 
repris fa femme legitime,.qu’il proteftoit de [137] 
n’abandonner iamais plus, & le coniura apres tout cela 
de ne luy refufer point l’abfolution de fes fautes, & 
de mettre fon ame en repos s’offrant 4 toute forte de 
penitence. 

Le Pere Brebeuf n’ofant pas fe fier a vn efprit fi 
inconitant, & d’ailleurs defirant luy faire apprehen- 
der d’auantage fa faute le renuoye fans le vouloir ex- 
aucer. Eftienne employe la faueur des Fracois pour ce 
mefme effect, mais le Pere tient bon: il fupplie que 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 "96 


he felt at having so often violated the promises that 
he had so solemnly made, prevented him this time 
from presenting himself to any of our Fathers. He 
resolved, however, to leave his concubine, and to 
take back his lawful wife; after which he went up 
to the three Rivers with the remainder of the Sav- 
ages, to go to war. There the apprehension of the 
danger that he was about to incur, added to the con- 
tinual dread of Hell that followed him everywhere, 
produced a final effect upon his mind, and compelled 
him to goand see Father Brebeuf. To him, after 
admitting and expressing detestation of his incon- 
stancy and infidelity, he represented the danger to 
which he was about to expose himself, the fear that 
he had of the eternal fire, his desire to do right, and 
the fact that he had already left his concubine, and 
taken back his lawful wife, whom, he protested, 
{137] he would never again abandon; and he begged 
him, after all that, not to refuse to give him absolu- 
tion for his sins, and to put his soul at peace, offer- 
ing to do any kind of penance. 

Father Brebeuf, fearing to place any reliance on 
so inconstant a mind, and desiring, moreover, to 
make him realize still better his offense, dismissed 
him without granting his request. Estienne em- 
ployed the influence of the French for this same 
purpose, but the Father remained firm. He begged 
that, as he would not be listened to, he might at least 
be given a letter of recommendation to enable him to 
make his confession at Richelieu or at Montreal; 
this, Father Brebeuf granted to him. Finally he 
arrived in Montreal, where he met Father Buteux, 
who writes to us as follows: 

‘* Estienne Pigarouich, who arrived here with the 


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Nou. 5 


puis qu’on ne le veut pas efcouter, on luy baille pour 


le moins vne lettre de faueur pour pouuoir fe con- 
feffer 4 Richelieu ot A Montreal, le Pere Brebeuf la 
luy accorde: il arriue enfin A Montreal ot il rencontra 
le Pere Buteux qui nous efcrit de la forte. 

Eftienne Pigaroiiich eftant arriué icy auec le refte 
de nos guerriers, me vint trouuer incontinent, & me 
preffa long-temps, & fortement d’auoir pitié de fon 
ame: ie luy dis que s’il vouloit fe confeffer, & remet- 
tre en fon premier eftat, il falloit qu’il fe foufmit a 
tout ce que ie luy dirois, ie le feray, dit-il, & fallft-il 
[138] me percer de ce coufteau que ie porte, ce n’eft 
pas, luy refponds-ie, ce que ie defire de toy, ie me 
contente de cecy. Premierement que tu crie tout 
haut hors des cabanes, felon la couftume, que tu as 
tres-mal fait, & que tu defapprouue tout ce que tu as 
dit, & fait au fcandale de la priere, & des Chreftiens, 
fecondement que tu die hautement, & publiquement 
que tu quitte la compagnie de ceux qui ne prient pas, 
& qu’en effect tu les quitte, & te range auec ceux de 
Sillery qui font eftat de prier Dieu. Troifiefmement 
que dans la Chappelle tu demande pardon A deux 
genoux A tous ceux qui font baptizez, & que tu les 
{upplie de prier Dieu pour toy, & te pardonner. Auant 
que faire ce dernier, il faut que tu te difpofe a la con- 
feffion, & apres l’auoir faite, & demandé pardon aux 
Chreftiens, tu feras en quatriefme lieu la difcipline 
publiquement en fatisfaction de tes fautes, pour affli- 
ger ta chair, & monftrer par effect le reffentiment 
que tu as de ton peché, voila ce que ie defire de toy 
s'il n’y a que ce cela, me dit-il, affeure toy [139] que 
ie l’accompliray de point en point: il le fit en effect 
au dela de ce que i’euffe peu fouhaiter. Il harangua 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 QT 


remainder of our warriors, came at once to see me, 
and urged me long and earnestly to have pity on his. 
soul. Itold him that, if he wished to confess, and 
to restore himself to his former condition, he must 
submit to everything that I should tell him. ‘I will 
do so,’ he said, ‘ and even if I have [138] to stab my- 
self with this knife.’ ‘ That,’ I replied, ‘is not what 
I require of thee; I am satisfied with this: In the 
first place, thou shalt announce aloud, outside of the 
cabins, according to the custom, that thou hast be- 
haved very badly, and that thou dost condemn all 
that thou hast said and done to the scandal of prayer 
and of the Christians. Secondly, thou shalt state, 
aloud and publicly, that thou abandonest the com- 
pany of those who do not pray, and, in fact, that 
thou dost abandon them, and dost range thyself with 
those of Sillery who make a practice of praying to: 
God. Thirdly, thou shalt in the Chapel and on thy 
knees ask pardon of all those who are baptized, and 
beg them to pray to God for thee, and to pardon 
thee. Before doing the latter, thou must prepare 
thyself for confession; and, after having made it, 
and having asked pardon of the Christians, thow 
shalt, in the fourth place, take the discipline publicly 
as an atonement for thy faults, to punish thy flesh, 
and thereby to show the hatred that thou hast for 
thy sin. That is what I desireof thee.’ ‘If that be 
all,’ he said, ‘rest assured [139] that I will accomplish 
it in every respect.’ He did so, in fact, beyond 
what I could have wished. He delivered a harangue 
near the cabins,— he acknowledged his sin, protested 
that he was sorry for it, renounced the company of 
the wicked, and promised to confine himself to that. 
of the good; after which, he confessed himself with 


4 


‘278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 25 ql 


proche des cabanes, auoiia fon peché, protefta qu'il 
en eftoit mar[r]y, renonga & la compagnie des mef- 
chans, promit de n’adherer qu’a celle des bons, apres 
cela il fe confeffa auec toutes les marques d’vne vraye | 
penitence, ie n’ay iamais ouy Sauuage mieux parler, 
ny plus hardiment qu’il fit en 1’Eglife l’efpace d’vn 
quart d’heure. La fubftance de fon difcours fuit A 
remon{t[rjer l’enormité de fa faute, & l’importance 
de tenir ferme en la Foy, que cela eftoit preferable a 
toutes les chofes du monde, qu’on ne prit pas exem- 
ple fur luy, fi on ne fe vouloit perdre, qu’on ne fe fia 
pas trop en foy-mefme, & qu’on tint pour tout affeu- 
ré, que fi on quitte Dieu, on fera quité de luy, & 
qu’6 ne pourra retourner 4 luy fi ce n’eft par vne 
particuliere faueur de fa bonté, qu’au refte on ne 
creu{t pas que ce qu’il en faifoit, eftoit pour fe remet- 
‘tre aux bonnes graces des Francois, [140] ou pour 
crainte de la mort téporelle: que ce n’eftoit que 
l’éternelle qu’il craignoit, c’eft pourquoy il fupplioit, 
& les Peres & les Sauuages de la bas, méme les Al- 
gonquins d’en haut (s’il y en auoit quelqu’vn qui euft 
la Foy dans fon coeur) de prier Dieu pour luy, que 
Dieu eftoit bon, & qu’il efperoit en fa mifericorde, 
que defia il s’eftoit confeffé, mais que pour tefmoi- 
gner qu’il quitoit tout de bon fa mefchanceté, & la 
confiance qu'il auoit en foy-mefme, il en donnoit vne 
marque en iettant fon couteau par la feneftre, qu’il 
pouuoit dire neantmoins en verité qu’il n’en auoit 
iamais fait de mefme de la priere, quelque mine qu'il 
eu({t faite 4 l’exterieur, qu'il [1’ Jauoit toufiours aymée, 
-& conferuée en fon coeur, & que de fois a autre en 
cachette il eftoit demeuré long-temps en priere. 
Apres cette harangue il s’aproche de moy, met fon 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 " (999 


all the marks of true penitence. I have never heard 
any Savage speak better or more boldly than he did 
in the Church, for the space of a quarter of an hour. 
The substance of his discourse consisted in showing 
the enormity of his sin, and the necessity of remain- 
ing firm in the Faith; that this was preferable to 
anything else in the world; that they must not follow 
his example, unless they wished to be damned; that 
they should not be over-confident of themselves; and 
that they might rest assured that, if they abandoned 
God, he would abandon them, and that they could 
not return to him except by special favor of his good- 
ness. He said that they must not think that what 
he was then doing was for the purpose of regaining 
the good graces of the French, [140] or through fear 
of temporal death,—that he dreaded only eternal 
death; for that reason, he begged the Fathers, and 
the Savages who dwelt below, and the Algonquins 
who dwelt above (if there were one of these who had 
Faith in his heart), to pray to Godfor him. He said 
that God was good and that he trusted in his mercy; 
that he had already confessed, but, to show that he 
abandoned his wickedness for good, and what confi- 
dence he had in himself, he gave a proof of it by 
throwing his knife out of the window. He added 
that he could nevertheless say truly that he had 
never done the same with prayer; but that, what- 
ever his outward actions might have been, he had 
always loved it and preserved it in his heart, and at 
various times had prayed a long time in secret. 

‘* After this harangue he drew near to me, removed 
his hat and shirt, and, holding the whip of discipline, 
that had been given him before he entered, said: 
‘ This will not do to tear my flesh; bring me a more 


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 25 


chapeau, & fa chemife bas, & tenant la difcipline 
qu’on luy auoit baillée auant que d’entrer. Ce n’eft 
pas la, dit-il, dequoy defchirer m’a chair, qu’on ap- 
porte quelque initrument plus [141] rude: iene me ~ 
feray pas grand mal auec ceituy-cy, ou qu’vn autre 
prenne la difcipline, & qu’il me flate moins que ie ne 
feray. Ie luy dis la deffus que Dieu defiroit plus la 
contrition de coeur, que l’effufion de fang, qu’il fe 
donnaft feulement cing coups, ce qu’il fit deuant les 
Sauuages, & Frangois, voila ce qu’A fait Eftienne 
Pigaroiiich. De fgauoir ce qu’il fera, il n’apartient 
qu’a Dieu, comme il ny a que luy qui fcache s’il eft 
vrayement contrit, ce qu’il a fait 4 1’exterieur, femble 
ef{tre vn tefmoignage affez grand d’vne entiere con- 
uerfion, & particulierement en fa confeffion, ou du 
commencement il fuit fi long-temps 4 pleurer, que ne 
pouuant parler il falluft luy dire qu’il tafchat de 
reprimer fes larmes, auec tout cela peut-eftre qu il 
retombera, il le craint, & m’a prié de faire en forte 
qu'il ne fuft pas ot eft cette miferable femme qui luya 
ferui de pierre de fcandale: ie luy ay dit que i’en 
efcrirois A voftre Reuerence, & que s’il retomboit la 
bas, on le mettroit en prifon, il s’eft accordé a cela 
tres-volontiers, & & demandé [142] encore pardon a 
ceux qui font la bas, en vn mot a faire tout ce qu’on 
luy dira. A fon exemple le grand forcier, & quel- 
ques autres fe font conuertis, & confeffez auec beau- 
coup de fatisfaction de leur cofté, & du mien. Dieu 
leur donne a tous la perfeuerance, a tant le Pere Bu- 
teux: ie prie tous ceux qui liront cecy de recomman- 
der A Dieu particulierement ce pauure homme duquel 
nous venons de parler, car il peut feruir, & nuire 
beaucoup a l’auancement de la Foy en ces contrées. 


1642-44] RELATION OF 1643-44 281 


severe instrument; [141] I shall not hurt myself 
much with this one. Or, let another take the whip 
and let him treat me less gently than I would my- 
self.’ Thereupon I told him that God desired con- 
trition of heart more than the effusion of blood, and 
that he should give himself five blows only, which 
he did in the presence of the Savages and of the 
French. That is what Estienne Pigarouich did. 
What he will do is known to God alone, as he alone 
knows whether he is truly contrite. The outward 
actions that he has done seem sufficiently strong 
proofs of his complete conversion, and more espe- 
cially his confession,—at which, from the begin- 
ning, he wept so long that he was unable to speak, 
and it was necessary to tell him that he must strive 
to suppress his tears. Even after all this, he may 
relapse. He fears this, and has begged me to 
manage so that he may not be where that wretched 
woman is who has been his rock of scandal. I told 
him that I would write to your Reverence about it; 
and that, if he again fell into evil ways down there, 
he would be put in prison. He willingly agreed to 
this, and also to ask [142] pardon from those who 
are down there,—in a word, to do all that he should 
be told to do. Following his example, the great 
sorcerer and some others became converted, and 
confessed themselves, with much satisfaction on their 
part and on mine. May God grant them all per- 
severance.’’ So much from Father Buteux. I beg 
all those who shall read this to commend specially 
to God this poor man of whom we have just spoken; 
for he can greatly aid or injure the progress of the 
Faith in these countries. 


stay: Sola er ° 
My behay ae ae 
we is A hey dt: 
my 


mM ce ot i‘ ot j 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXV 


LI 


The particulars of this document were given in 
Vol. XXIII. 


LII 


This is a letter of Garnier to the Father General 
(Vitelleschi), dated from Ste. Marie-of-the-Hurons, 
April 8, 1644. The original is in the W7SS. Soc. Jes.; 
Father Felix Martin made a copy thereof in 1858, 
when in Europe, and this apograph, which we fol- 
low, rests in the archives of St. Mary’s College, 
Montreal. 


LIII 


In reprinting the text of the Relation of 1643-44 
(Paris, 1645), we follow a copy of the original edi- 
tion in the Lenox Library, known there as the La- 
moignon copy; our facsimile of the title-page is from 
a like copy in the library of the Wisconsin Historical 
Society. This Relation consists of Part I., by Vimont, 
who dates his ‘‘epistre’’ or*prefatory letter ‘‘ A 
Kebec, ce 5. de Septembre, 1644;’’ and Part II., by 
Jerome Lalemant, whose introductory epistle is 
dated ‘‘ Des Hurons ce 21. de Septembre 1643.” The 
Huron report covers the period from June, 1642, to 
June, 1643. Preceding it is a letter from Vimont to 


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


his Provincial, dated ‘‘ De Kebec, ce 1. de Septem- 
bre, 1644,’’ in which he tells him that the first copy, 
which the Huron Fathers had forwarded to him, fell 
into the hands of the Iroquois. A second copy 
reached him too late for transmission to France in 
1643, and, consequently, was delayed until 1644, 
when it went over with a supplementary report for 
that year. 

The 1643-44 Relation is usually designated as 
‘““H. 83,’ because described in Harrisse’s Notes, 
no. 83. 

Collation: ‘Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; Vimont’s 
prefatory letter to Filleau, pp. (3); ‘‘ Table des Cha- 
pitres”’ to Part I., pp. (2); ‘‘ Priuilege’’ and ‘‘ Per- 
mifsion,’’ p. (1); text to Part I., pp. 1-256. Part 
II. consists of: Half-title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; 
Vimont’s special letter to Filleau, p. (1); ‘‘ Table des 
Chapitres’’ to Part II., p. (1); Lalemant’s text, pp. 
1-147 (the last mispaged 174). The supplementary 
‘“* Lettre de M.DC.XLIV ”’ covers pp. 139, ff., and is 
dated ‘‘ Des Hurons, ce dernier de Mars, 1644.’’ In 
Part I., the paging of p. 37 is almost obliterated, and 
pp. 66 and 143 are misnumbered 62 and 139, respec- 
tively. The only mispagination in Part II. is that of 
174 for 147. 

Besides the Lamoignon copy in the Lenox Library, 
there is another, formerly owned by George Bancroft. 
Both of these seem to agree to the greatest degree of 
typographical exactness, excepting in signatures D 
and E. These particular signatures are of different 
composition. This is not only discernible from the 
spacing, line-endings, etc., but also from the follow- 
ing peculiarities: 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXV * 285 


LAMOIGNON. 


P. 52, 1. 20: ‘‘auons’’ 

P. 55,1. 6: ‘‘refpecte: c’eft’’ 

P. 55, 1. 9: ‘*la Chapelle, 
font leur deuo-’’ 

P. 55, 1. 17: ‘‘adiouftent’’ 

P. 56 has the initial L en- 
circled by leaves, and small. 


P. 58, last line: ‘‘compre- 
noit’’ 

P. 61, 1. 2: ‘“*penfée”’ 

P. 61, 1.18: ‘‘connu par tout’”’ 


P. 63, 1.6: ‘‘dont ils témoi- 
gnent’”’ 

P, 67, 1. 22: ‘‘appaifer”’ 

P. 67, 1. 24: ‘‘ Chappelet”’ 


BANCROFT. 


P. 52, 1. 20: ‘‘auds’”’ 

P. 55,1. 6: ‘‘refpecte: (c’eft’’ 

P. 55, 1. 9: ‘‘la Chappelle, 
font leur de-’’ 

P. 55, 1. 17: ‘‘adjouftent”’ 

P. 56 has the initial L with a 
figure, apparently the angel 
Gabriel, blowing a horn, and 


larger than in the other copy. 


P. 58, last line: ‘‘cdprenoit’’ 


P. 61, 1. 2: ‘*pensée’”’ 


P. 61, 1. 18: ‘‘conneu par 
tout ’’ 

P. 63, 1. 6: ‘*ddt ils tefmoi- 
gnent’’ ' 


P. 67, 1. 22: ‘‘apaifer’’ 
P. 67, 1. 24: ‘‘Chapelet’’ 


Copies of H. 83 may be found in the following 
libraries: Lenox (two variations), Harvard, Laval 
University (Quebec), Public Library (Toronto), Li- 
brary of Parliament (Ottawa), Wisconsin State His- 
torical Society, Brown (private), and the British 
Museum. Copies have been sold or priced as fol- 
lows: O'Callaghan (1882), no. 1223, sold to Library 
of Parliament, Ottawa, for $17.50, had cost him 
$32.50 in gold; Barlow (1890), no. 1288, sold for $21; 
Dufossé (1891-95), priced at 175 to 225 francs; 
Lenox duplicate, sold by Bangs & Co., New York, 
April 29, 1895, for $32; and Dodd, Mead & Co., no. 
42 in list of April, 1896, priced at $47.50. 

Note: —The Public Library of Toronto has also 
originals of our nos. XXX. and XLI. Subsequent 
ones will be duly recorded. 


Pore 


NOTES TO VOL. XXV 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 


I (p. 29).— For sketch of Raymbault, see vol. xi., mote 16; of 
Davost, vol. v., zofe 54; of D’Olbeau, vol. xxiv., xofe 12. 


2 (p. 49).— This ‘‘captain’’ was Arendt Van Curler (Corlaer). 
He was a cousin of the patroon Van Rensselaer, and came to New 
Netherlands with the colony sent hither in 1630 (vol. xxiv., mofe 22). 
Van Curler was commissary-general or superintendent of Rensse- 
laerswyck, his jurisdiction extending from Beeren Island, near 
Coeymans’s Landing, to the mouth of the Mohawk; he was also 
colonial secretary until 1642. He ruled the colony with firmness, 
justice, and honesty, and from the outset cultivated friendly rela- 
tions with the Indians. Making numerous visits to the savages, in 
their own villages, and learning their language, he acquired their 
confidence, and a strong influence with them. In 1646, he retired 
to private life, but was often consulted by officials, both civil and 
military, in regard to Indian affairs. Two of his visits to the 
Indians, above referred to, are of especial interest,— one, in 1634-35, 
of which he preserved a record in his Journal (vol. viii., p. 299); and 
another, in September, 1642, to intervene in behalf of Father Jogues 
and other French prisoners among the Mohawks. Although he 
offered them a ransom of 600 guilders (then equal to $250 of our 
money), the savages refused to release the captives; but they finally 
promised Van Curler that they would not kill Jogues, or torture him 
further. Later, Van Curler aided the priest to escape to his own 
country. 

After a long and useful life, Van Curler met his death by acci- 
dent, in the summer of 1667,— being drowned while crossing Lake 
Champlain, on his way to Quebec, going thither in response to an 
invitation sent him by the viceroy, De Tracy. So honored was Van 
Curler by the Iroquois that, until this century, they applied his 
name to the successive governors of New Amsterdam and New 
York; and, at this day, the Mohawks of Canada address the 
governor-general of that country as ‘‘Kora,’’ a corruption of 
Corlaer. For more detailed information regarding this noted 


288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


pioneer, see O’Callaghan’s Hzst. New Netherlands, vol. i., and 
Griffis’s Arendt Van Curler, a paper read before Albany (N. Y.) 
Institute, Nov. 18, 1884 [Albany, 1885?]. 


3 (p. 57).— The book here mentioned was doubtless one of those 
written by Jean Charlier, better known by his scholastic name of 
Gerson (adopted, in accordance with the custom of the time, from 
that of his native village). He was born Dec. 14, 1363, and died at 
Lyons, July 12, 1429. From 1395 to 1418, he was chancellor of the 
university of Paris. During that period, he was actively engaged 
in the theological controversies so bitterly waged, striving earnestly 
for the extinction of schism, and the reformation of the church. 
This course aroused many enmities against him, which drove him 
for a time into exile. Returning to France in 1419, he retired to 
the Celestine convent at Lyons, of which his brother Jean was prior. 
The remaining ten years of his life were there spent in works of 
piety and instruction; he also wrote many religious books,—com- 
mentaries, didactic and ecclesiastical treatises, and devotional and 
mystical meditations. He has divided with Thomas 4 Kempis, in 
the minds of many, the honor of having written the /mztatzon of 
Christ—a controversy probably not yet settled. Aubé gives a 
summary of this discussion in Hoefer’s Bog. Générale (art. 
Gerson). Gerson was surnamed ‘‘ the most Christian doctor.’’ 

Jogues’s mention of the ‘‘little Gerson,’’ and his possession of 
it in such circumstances, suggest the probability that the book he 
refers to was Thierry’s duodecimo edition (Paris, 1621) of JV dzvres 
de limitation de Jésus-Christ,—a French translation from the 
Latin,— most of the early editions, whether French or Latin, having 
varied in size from folio to octavo. 


4 (p. 59).— This Dutch minister was Domine Johannes (or Jan) 
Megapolensis (vol. xxiv., zo0fe 22). He was called to Rensselaers- 
wyck for a term of six years, at a salary of 1,000 guilders yearly. 
In 1649, having been dismissed from this post, he became minister 
of the church at New Amsterdam (New York), at an annual salary 
of 1,200 guilders. He was the fourth pastor of this church, which 
still exists as the Collegiate Reformed church of New York City; 
next after Trinity, it is the wealthiest religious corporation in the 
city. Jan Megapolensis died in 1669; his son Samuel was also a 
minister, officiating in the above-named church from 1664 till his 
death in 1668. 


5 (p. 63).— Manhate: afterward Manhattan; the island on which 
the city of New York was built. O’Callaghan (7st. New Nether- 
lands, vol. i., p. 47, #0¢fe 2) says that this name is that of the Indian 
tribe living thereon at the time of the first Dutch settlement. 


NOTES TO VOL. XXV 289 


Beauchamp (Jud. Names, p. 45) regards it as a form of the Dela- 
ware word Man-a-tey, ‘‘an island.” 

6 (p. 65).— Concerning this shipwreck of Lalemant’s, see vol. iv., 
P- 235-245. 

7 (p. 67).— Another letter by Jogues, describing his captivity, is 
given by Bressani in his Breve Relatione, it is dated from Rensse- 
laerswyck, Aug. 5, 1643. This, however, is but an Italian version 
of the original Latin, which is found in the MS. Mémozre tou- 
chant la mort et les vertus des Péres Isaac Jogues, De Noué, et al. 
(1652 — archives of St. Mary's College, Montreal; see vol. ix., of this 
series, zo¢e 40), and is given by Alegambe (with some additions) in 
his Mortes zllustres (Rome, 1657). 

8 (p. 75).— Concerning the relations of the Jesuits to the fur trade, 
see vol. i., zofe 31; vol. iii., zo¢e 33; and Le Jeune’s elaborate dis- 
cussion of the subject, vol. ix., pp. 171-181. 

9 (p. 79).— This was Jacques de la Ferté, abbé of Ste. Madeleine 
at Chateaudun; one of the Hundred Associates (as enumerated by 
Creuxius). He gave to the Jesuits two seigniories,—in 1639, that 
of Batiscan; and, in 1646, that of Cap de la Madeleine. In 1647, 
he gave funds to Richard and De Lyonne for the erection of a 
chapel at the Nipisiguit mission on the Bay des Chaleurs. 


10 (p. 123).— Concerning the olden use of the word ‘‘ moustache,”’ 
see vol. v., moze 14. 

II (p. 125).— Regarding these fetiches (‘‘medicines’’), see vol.- 
xxii., more 6. 


ig a 
7 

wt j 

rety 

ry CGR?) 


-w 


a3 8 
eas 
“ ern 


i fain 
Pat mT e* | a6 8 y : KAS 
q : Pit : Ay af a3. 
; Ter hg 8 @0° 
fais, $f arece 
s , #,'5'8 
ge 8 


stpietafetttylgientetstbtetecttatrcegttsateeeititgasect teaangretten’atertetatteg 
BP Pu Pur i ft, feist <" bt e 
fe'e Tete 

anf 


H ates 
; ig #8. 
Pot i eed be Pas er at 
cf ten AOA 
fats tote te tater tats 


+ 
bd ’ 
Pt ba “, 


if 
BS, 


i 
A 


stat 
ats . 
a e i 


i 
a 


I At 
inte 


. slitstae 


tata 


iterates tattle 
Teleeteletestetety ie 


7 


