Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 31: Iroquois, Lower Canada, Abenakis, 1647
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits31jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits31jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits31jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 31 of 73.

---

é-e58 


158-8 


* ed td ed 


apS.3 5858 
a 18.8 


@ a. 3,358 
2) 8:2,% ¥ 
8.88 8.8 & Sayers 
Og 8 8 86808 08 19 8 eRe) epee ea os ee 

Bb 0,8, O50 On Oye B Bek yd tla ets 

ed Bags Re SoWysoe ke F 

SB BHF 8 Scs-e Fer 

‘ 


El 
it i 7 i , i 


ff 


- es 2 
rin te 


6785 0)8,6.8.6)8 
' * c 
4.556) 5/8) it ae Lee d 58 €.8.8 5.5.2 8 
bol be tal ‘ 6 aye 8/8 858. 
¢.3: et 
i et at 


ll! | | | 
35357109 S$. TAVHOIW ‘1S JO ALISHSAINN 


cae 


‘ we Fa al - 
ae eae 9, eet 


et 


scsi 


- 


—= 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


The edition conststs of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. wee. 


Lo Becanrcetheasle 


i, 3991 THE | 


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 


1610-1791 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XXXI 
IROQUOIS, LOWER CANADA, ABENAKIS 
1647 


CLEVELAND: Tbe Burrows Brotbers 
Company, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XCVIII 


‘ sth re 


‘ bass ait °) 


i 


“lero lll 


. e > 
Zs lL . 
. | H 
CopyRIGHT, 18098 
BY 
{ Tux Burrows BrotHers Co ; 
5 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor : ; REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
{ FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERcY Favor BICKNELL 
Translators . ; 4 CRAWFORD LINDSAY 


WILLIAM PRICE 


| HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor . EMMA HELEN BLAIR 


Bibliographical Adviser VicToR HuGo PALTSITS 


pa 


a 5 ha 


ry 7 ay TH a) ate 


y 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXXI 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXXI_. ; i ae 
DOCUMENT :— 


LXIII. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé . . ..en 
la Novvelle France, svr le Grand 
Flevve de S. Lavrens en l’année 1647. 
[Chaps. iv.—xiii., second installment 
of document.] Hierosme Lalemant; 
Quebek, October 20, 1647 ; Meas 
NOTES ‘ ; , , ‘ . 289 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXI 


The Relation of 1647, by Jerome Lalemant (Doc. 
LXIII. of our series), was commenced in Vol. XXX. 
by the publication of the first three chapters; we 
herewith present Chaps. iv.—xiii., leaving the last 
two chapters to Vol. XXXII. Continuing his nar- 
tative, Father Lalemant devotes much space to the 
labors, captivity, sufferings, and finally the death of 
Father Isaac Jogues, who was killed by the Iroquois 
in the preceding year. Much of this account is taken 
from Jogues’s own narrative, written at the command 
of his superior. He describes his capture by the Iro- 
quois in August, 1642; the cruelties inflicted on him 
and his fellow-prisoners; and the painful journey to 
the Iroquois villages. On the way, they encounter a 
large troop of warriors proceeding to attack the 
French, and these also vent their fury on the wretched 
prisoners, even more fiercely than their captors have 
done; Jogues and his companions — Goupil, Cofiture, 
and over twenty Hurons—barely escape from this 
ordeal with their lives. They meet similar treatment 
upon entering the first Mohawk village, and thence 
are taken to the other two, at each one experiencing 
a repetition of these hideous cruelties,— Jogues him- 
self being, in every case, the especial object of his 
captors’ rage. The Frenchmen are sentenced to 
death, but are reprieved, and kept as prisoners in the 


10 PREFACE TO VOL. XXX1 


Indian villages. Having seen Goupil teaching a child 
to make the sign of the cross, the superstitious natives 
slay him, in Jogues’s presence; and they threaten to 
kill him also,—making several unsuccessful attempts 
upon his life. In the midst of his sufferings and 
anxieties, he has a dream, sent by God for his instruc- 
tion and consolation, which he recounts at length; he 
also describes reveries, meditations, and visions, that 
came to him in his desolate captivity. He is sent 
into the woods, as servant to a hunting party, where 
he suffers the utmost privations and hardships; 
returning thence, he saves the life of a poor Indian 
woman, at the risk of his own. Similar perils he 
repeatedly incurs throughout the winter, visiting the 
Huron captives who are kept in the Mohawk villages, 
and consoling and encouraging them in their suffer- 
ings. His patience and unselfishness win the hearts 
of the family to whom he has been given, and they 
treat him with some kindness. The Father is in 
continual danger and expectation of death; but his 
life is, for the time, spared. 

In April, 1643, an envoy from the Sokoki tribe 
brings presents for the ransom of Jogues, because 
one of their tribesmen had, some time before, been 
redeemed by Montmagny from the Algonkins. The 
Mohawks accept these presents, but nevertheless 
violate both tribal and international law, by detain- 
ing their prisoner. He is comforted, however, by 
receiving through this envoy letters from Montma- 
gny. These he answers, and one of them reaches 
its destination. Not long afterward, he is taken by 
his keepers on a fishing expedition, to a place below 
the Dutch settlement at the present Albany. This 
affords opportunity for his deliverance, which is 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXI : 11 


effected by the aid of the Dutch; they send him to 
Manate (New York), and, later, to Europe. After 
many hardships endured upon this voyage, he finally 
reaches the Jesuit college at Rennes, France, Janu- 
ary 5, 1644. But he returns to Canada by the fleet of 
that year, and is sent to Montreal. Jogues and Bour- 
don depart on another voyage to the Iroquois coun- 
try, May 16, 1646, as envoys of Montmagny; they 
return to Three Rivers about six weeks later. Jogues 
is not content to remain long among his brethren; he 
sets out on his last and fatal voyage on September 24 
following, accompanied by a young French donné and 
some Hurons. News of his death is received at 
Quebec, some months later, through a letter sent by 
Kieft, the Dutch governor, to Montmagny. 
Lalemant explains Jogues’s death as caused by the 
hatred felt by the savages toward the Christian 
doctrine,— imagining that it causes their illnesses 
and other misfortunes. He proceeds to eulogize the 
virtues of the martyr —notably his extreme humility 
and purity. His confessor asserts that Jogues’s 
““ greatest offenses were some feelings of compla- 
cency which he had felt at the sight of death.’’ 
Lalemant recounts the pious and devout actions of 
the converted Indians at Sillery, where a church has 
been built for them, dedicated to St. Michael. The 
hospital still continues its noble work; it has, during 
the past year, cared for more than eighty patients, 
both French and Indian, and ‘‘ not one Savage has 
died there without baptism.’’ The superior, Marie 
de St. Ignace, has died; she has lived a most devoted 
and unselfish life in Canada, and accomplished great 
good for both races. Her death occurs at the very 
time‘ when the new hospital at Quebec is ready 


12 "PREFACE TO VOL. XXXI 


to receive the nuns; her unwearied charity and 
devotion are highly praised. 

The Ursuline nuns have also been most useful; 
they have aided and instructed more than eighty 
girls, one of whom has married a Christian Indian. 
One of the nuns is well acquainted with the native 
languages, and in consequence several of the converts 
regard her as a confessor and teacher. 

Father Druillettes has begun a mission among the 
Abenakis, who send to Quebec for him and gladly 
welcome his coming. He travels among them, voy- 
aging even to the mouth of the Kennebec. He meets 
great success, both in learning the Abenaki language 
and in winning the hearts of the people. He visits 
the English settlements along the coast, where he 
is received with great kindness. At Pentagouet 
(Castine) he finds a residence of the Capuchins, who 
are in charge of the Acadian missions. Druillettes is 
soon able to instruct the natives, and induces them 
to promise that they will abandon the use of intoxi- 
cating drinks, stop their intertribal and neighbor- 
hood quarrels, and forsake their manitous, or demons. 
This arouses the jealousy of the medicine-men, who 
attempt to frighten the savages away from such teach- 
ings; but these refuse to listen to them, and on their 
hunting expedition are accompanied by the Father. 
Even one of these ‘‘sorcerers”’ is converted, and 
abandons his craft; as a result, he is miraculously 
cured of an illness. Thirty persons are baptized, 
most of them when in danger of death; and several 
sick persons are healed. The savages take Druil- 
lettes with them to the nearest settlement of English ; 
the latter approve his work among the Indians, and 
grant him permission to establish a mission on the 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXI ‘ 13 


Kennebec. When the Father returns to Quebec, his 
people send with him an escort of thirty of their 
number. 

A band of Attikamégues come down to Three Riv- 
ers to perform their religious duties, and astonish the 
Fathers by their goodness and devoutness. At a 
great gathering of various tribes, these Attikamégue 
Christians confound the Pagans by celebrating divine 
worship with all the display in their power, and 
allowing no unbeliever to enter their little church. 
Numerous instances of their faith and zeal are related. 

The mission at Tadoussac is flourishing, being still 
served by De Quen. Many of the neophytes show 
great piety and constancy in their Christian practice. 
The tribes north of Tadoussac, which last year 
showed an inclination to receive the faith, are now 
somewhat cold; for they have been ravaged by 
epidemics, which are ignorantly ascribed to the new 
doctrine. A bell has been hung in the Tadoussac 
chapel, which excites the admiration of the Christian 
savages, but terrifies the Pagans. De Quen makes a 
journey into the country of the Porcupine tribe; a 
description of that region, and of the voyage up 
the Saguenay, is given from his letters. The Porcu- 
pines receive him very gladly, and promise to build 
a chapel for him on his return, the next year. 

At the Three Rivers mission, several events have 
occurred which display the justice of God toward 
sinners and backsliders—among these, is the death 
of an apostate by lightning, which terrifies the others. 
“Simon Pieskaret, who was a Christian only in 
appearance, and through policy, became so in earnest; 
he confessed three times in twenty-four hours, so 
much was the fear of God’s judgments urging him.”’ 


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXXI 


The Iroquet tribe come down to Three Rivers, and 
several of them are evidently converted. This year, 
the quarrels usual between the numerous tribes are 
very few; and Pieskaret is appointed by themselves 
as an agent to keep the peace between them; another 
man is deputed to see that all attend prayers. 


Rie. FY 
Mapison, Wis., September, 1898. 


LXIII (continued) 


RELATION OF 1647 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1648 


The first three chapters were given in Volume XXX.; we 
herewith present chaps. iv.—xiii.; the remaining two will 
appear in Volume XXXII. 


16 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


[56] CHAPITRE IV. 


COMME LE PERE ISAAC IOGUES FUT PRIS DES HIRO- 
QUOIS, & DE CE QU’IL SOUFFRIT EN SA 
PREMIERE ENTREE EN LEUR PAYS. 


E Pere Ifaac Iogues eftoit iffu d’vne honnefte 
L famille de la Ville d’Orleans. Apres auoir 
rendu quelques preuues de fa vertu en noftre 
Compagnie, il fut enuoyé en la Nouuelle France l’an 
1636. il monta aux Hurons la mefme année ot il 
demeura jufques au treiziéme de Iuin de l’an 1642. 
qu'il fut enuoyé a Kebec pour [57] les affaires de 
cette grande & laborieufe Miffion. 

Depuis ce temps-la iufques 4 fa mort, il s’eft paffé 
quantité de chofes fort remarquables qu’on ne peut 
fans crime defrober au public, puis qu’elles font 
honorables 4 Dieu & pleines de confolation pour les 
ames qui ayment 4 fouffrir pour Iefus-Chrift. Ce 
qu’on a dit de fes trauaux dans les Relations prece- 
dentes prouenoit pour la plufpart de quelques 
Satutuages, compagnons de fes peines. Mais ce que 
ie vais coucher eft forty de fa plume & de fa propre 
bouche, il a fallu vfer d’authorité de Superieur, & 
d’vne douce induftrie dans les conuerfations plus 
particulieres pour defcouurir ce que l’eftime tres- 
baffe qu’il faifoit de foy-mefme tenoit caché dans vn 
profond filence. 

Quelque temps auant fon defpart des Hurons 
pour venir 4 Kebec, fe trouuant feul deuant le Saint 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 17 


[56] CHAPTER IV. 


HOW FATHER ISAAC JOGUES WAS TAKEN BY THE HIRO- 
QUOIS, AND WHAT HE SUFFERED ON HIS FIRST 
ENTRANCE INTO THEIR COUNTRY. 


family of the City of Orleans. After having 
given some evidences of his virtue in our 
Society, he was sent to New France, in the year 
1636. Inthe same year, he went up to the Hurons, 
where he sojourned until the thirteenth of June in 
the year 1642, when he was sent to Kebec upon [57] 
the affairs of that important and arduous Mission. 
From that time until his death, there occurred 
many very remarkable things,— of which one cannot, 
without guilt, deprive the public, since they are 
honorable to God and full of consolation for souls who 
love to suffer for Jesus Christ. What has been said 
of his labors in the preceding Relations, came, for 
the most part, from some Savages, companions in his 
sufferings. But what I am about to set down has 
issued from his own pen and his own lips: it was 
necessary to use a Superior’s authority and a gentle 
dexterity in the more intimate conversations, in 
order to discover that which the very low esteem in 
which he held himself kept concealed in a profound 
silence.} 
Some time before his departure from the Hurons 
in order to come to Kebec, finding himself alone 
before the Blessed Sacrament, he prostrated himself 


penn Isaac Jogues had sprung from a worthy 


18 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


Sacrement, il fe profterna par terre, fuppliant Noftre 
Seigneur de luy accorder la faueur & la grace de 
fouffrir pour fa gloire. Cette refponce luy fut grauée 
au fond de l’ame auec vne certitude femblable a celle 
que nous donne la Foy, Exaudita eft oratio tua, fiet tibt 
ficut [58] & me petiftt, confortare & efto robuftus. Ta 
priere eft exaucée, ce que tu m’as demandé t’eft accor- 
dé, fois courageux & conftant. Les effets qui fe font 
enfuiuis ont fait voir que ces paroles qui luy ont tot- 
jours ef{té tres-prefantes dans toutes fes fouffrances 
eftoient veritablement fub{ftantielles, paroles forties 
de la bouche de celuy a qui le dire & le faire ne font 
qu’vne mef{me chofe. 

Le R. P. Hierofme L’alemant, pour lors Superieur 
de la Miffion des Hurons, ne fcachant rien de ce qui 
s’eftoit paffé, le fit venir: & luy propofa le voyage 
de Kebec affreux pour la difficulté des chemins, tres- 
dangereux pour les embufches des Hiroquois, qui 
maffacroient tous les ans vn bon nombre de Sauuages 
alliez des Francois. Efcoutons le parler fur ce fujet, 
& fur la fuitte de fon voyage. L’obeiffance m’ayant 
fait vne fimple propofition, & non pas vn commande- 
ment de defcendre 4 Kebec ie m/’offry de tout mon 
coeur, & ce d’autant plus volontiers que la neceffité 
de l’entreprendre eut ietté quelque autre de nos Peres 
bien meilleur que moy dans les perils & dans les 
hazards que nous preuoyons tous. Nous voila donc 
dans le [59] chemin & dans les dangers tout enfem- 
ble. Il nous fallut defembarquer quarante fois & 
quarante fois porter nos batteaux & tout noftre ba- 
gage dans les courans & dans les cheutes d’eau qu’on 
rencontre en ce voyage d’enuiron trois cent lieués, 
& quoy que les Sauuages qui nous conduifoient 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ' 19 


to the ground, beseeching Our Lord to grant him the 
favor and grace of suffering for his glory. This 
answer was engraved in the depth of his soul, with a 
certainty similar to that which Faith gives us: Exau- 
dita est oratio tua; fiet tibi sicut [58] a me petisti. Con- 


fortare et esto robustus,—‘‘ Thy prayer is heard; what 
thou hast asked of me is granted thee. Be coura- 
geous and steadfast.’’ The results which followed 


have shown that these words, which were always 
very present with him in all his sufferings, were 
verily substantial,— words issuing from the lips of 
him with whom saying and doing are only one and 
the same thing. 

The Reverend Father Hierosme L’alemant, at that 
time Superior of the Mission among the Hurons, 
knowing nothing of what had occurred, sent for him, 
and proposed to him the journey to Kebec,—a fright- 
ful one, on account of the difficulty of the roads, and 
very dangerous because of the ambuscades of the 
Hiroquois, who massacred, every year, a considerable 
number of the Savages allied to the French. Let us 
hear him speak upon this subject, and upon the result 
of his journey. ‘‘ Authority having made me a 
simple proposition, and not a command, to go down 
to Kebec, I offered myself with all my heart,—and 
that the more willingly, because the necessity of 
undertaking this, might have cast some one else of 
our Fathers, much better than I, into the perils and 
hazards that we all anticipate. So there we were, 
on the [59] way and in the dangers all at once. We 
were obliged to disembark forty times, and forty 
times to carry our boats and all our baggage amid 
the currents and waterfalls that one encounters on 
this journey of about three hundred leagues. And, 


20 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 31 


fuffent fort adroits, nous ne laiffafmes pas de faire 
quelques naufrages auec vn grand danger de nos 
vies, & quelque perte de noftre petit bagage. Enfin 
trente-cing iours apres noftre defpart des Hurons, 
nous arriuafmes bien fatiguez aux Trois Riuieres, 
de 1A nous defcendifmes 4 Kebec. Nous benifmes 
Dieu par tout, de ce que fa bonté nous auoit confer- 
uez. Nos affaires eftans terminées en quinze iours, 
nous folemnifames la fefte de faint Ignace, & le 
lendemain premier iour du mois d’Aouft de la mefme 
année 1642. nous partifmes des Trois Riuieres, pour 
remonter au pays d’ott nous venions: le premier 
iour nous fut fauorable, le fecond nous fit tomber 
entre les mains des Hiroquois, nous eftions quarante 
perfonnes diuifez en diuers canots, celuy qui tenoit 
l’auant-garde, ayant defcouuert fur les bords du 
grand fleuue, quelques piftes [60] d’>hommes nouuelle- 
ment imprimées fur le fable & fur l’argille, nous en 
donna aduis. On mit pied 4 terre, les vns difent que 
ce font des veftiges de 1’ennemy, les autres affeurent 
que ce font des pas d’Algonquins nos alliez: dans 
cette contention Euftache Ahatfiftari auquel tous les 
autres defferoient pour fes faits d’armes & pour 
fa vertu, s’efcria qu’ils foient amis ou ennemis, il 
n’importe, ie remarque a leurs traces qu’ils ne font pas 
en plus grand nombre que nous; auancons & ne 
craignons rien. Nous n’auions pas encore fait vne 
demie lieué, que l’ennemy caché dans des herbiers 
& dans des broffailles, s’efleue auec vne grande huée, 
defchargeant fur nos canots vne grefle de balles. Le 
bruit de leur arquebuze effara fi fort vne partie de nos 
Hurons, qu’ils abandonnerent leurs canots & leurs 
armes, & tout leur equipage, pour fe fauuer & la fuitte 


1647]: RELATION OF 1647 21 


although the Savages who were guiding us were very 
adroit, we nevertheless incurred some disasters, to 
the great peril of our lives, and with some loss of our 
small baggage. At last, thirty-five days after our 
departure from the Hurons, we arrived, much fatigued, 
at Three Rivers; thence we went down to Kebec. 
We blessed God everywhere, in that his goodness 
had preserved us. Our affairs being finished in 
fifteen days, we solemnly observed the feast of saint 
Ignace; and the next day, the first day of August in 
the same year 1642, we left Three Rivers, in order 
to go up again to the country whence we came. The 
first day was favorable to us; the second caused us 
to fall into the hands of the Hiroquois. We were 
forty persons, distributed in several canoes; the one 
which kept the vanguard, having discovered on the 
banks of the great river some tracks [60] of men, 
recently imprinted on the sand and clay, gave us 
warning. A landing was made; some say that these 
are footprints of the enemy, others are sure that they 
are those of Algonquins, our allies. In this dispute, 
Eustache Ahatsistari, to whom all the others deferred 
on account of his exploits in arms and his virtue, 
exclaimed: ‘ Be they friends or enemies, it matters 
not; I notice by their tracks that they are not in 
greater number than we; let us advance, and fear 
nothing.’ We had not yet made a half-league, when 
the enemy, concealed among the grass and brush- 
wood, rises with a great outcry, discharging at our 
canoes a volley of balls. The noise of their arque- 
buses so greatly frightened a part of our Hurons that 
they abandoned their canoes and weapons, and all 
their supplies, in order to escape by flight into the 
depth of the woods. This discharge did us no great 


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  {Vot. 81 


dans le fond des bois. Cefte defcharge ne nous fit 
pas grand mal, perfonne ne perdit la vie, vn Huron 
feulement eut la main tranfpercée, & nos canots 
furent brifez en plufieurs endroits. Nous eftions 
quatre Francois, l’vn defquels eftant en l’arriere- 
garde, fe fauua auec les Hurons qui l’abandonnerent 
deuant [61] que d’approcher l’ennemy, huit ou dix 
tant Chreftiens que Catechumenes fe ioignirent auec 
nous, leur ayant fait faire vne petite priere, ils font 
tefte courageufement a l’ennemy, & encore qu’ils 
fuffent trente hommes contre douze ou quatorze, nos 
gens fouftenoient vaillamment leur effort: mais 
s’e{tant apperceus, qu’vne autre bande de quarante 
Hiroquois, qui eftoient en embufcade a l’autre bord 
du fleuue, venoit fondre fur eux, ils perdirent cou- 
rage: fi bien que ceux qui eftoient moins engagez 
senfuirent; abandonnans leurs camarades dans la 
meflée. Vn Francois nommé René Goupil, dont la 
mort eft pretieufe deuant Dieu, n’eftant plus fouftenu 
de ceux qui le fuiuoient, fut entouré & pris auec 
quelques Hurons des plus courageux. Ie contem- 
plois ce defaftre, dit le Pere, d’vn lieu fort aduan- 
tageux pour me defrober de la veué de l’ennemy, me 
pouuant cacher dans des haliers & dans des rofeaux 
fort grands & fort efpais; mais cefte penfée ne pit 
jamais entrer dans mon efprit. Pourrois-ie bien, 
difois-ie 4 par moy, abandonner nos Francois, & quit- 
ter ces bons Neophytes, & ces pauures Catechumenes, 
fans leur donner [62] le fecours que l’Eglife de mon 
Dieu m’a confié. La fuite me fembloit horrible, il 
faut difois-ie en mon cceur, que mon corps fouffre le 
feu de la terre, pour deliurer ces pauures ames des 
flammes de ]’Enfer, il faut qu’il meure d’vne mort 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 : 23 


hurt, and no one lost his life; one Huron alone had 
his hand pierced through, and our canoes were broken 
in several places. We were four French,—one of 
whom, being in the rear, escaped with the Hurons, 
who abandoned him before [61] approaching the 
enemy. Eight or ten, both Christians and Catechu- 
mens, joined us; having been made to say a brief 
prayer, they oppose a courageous front to the enemy; 
and although the latter were thirty men against twelve 
or fourteen, our people valiantly sustained their 
effort. But, having perceived that another band — 
of forty Hiroquois, who were in ambush on the other 
shore of the river — was coming to attack them, they 
lost courage; insomuch that those who were least 
entangled fled, abandoning their comrades in the 
fight. A Frenchman named René Goupil, whose 
death is precious before God, being no longer sus- 
tained by those who followed him, was surrounded 
and captured, along with some of the most courageous 
Hurons. I was watching this disaster,’’ says the 
Father, “‘ from a place very favorable for concealing 
me from the sight of the enemy, being able to hide 
myself in thickets and among very tall and dense 
reeds; but this thought could never enter my mind. 
‘Could I, indeed,’ I said to myself, ‘abandon our 
French and leave those good Neophytes and those 
poor Catechumens, without giving them [62] the help 
which the Church of my God has entrusted to me?’ 
Flight seemed horrible to me; ‘ It must be,’ I said 
in my heart, ‘that my body suffer the fire of earth, 
in order to deliver these poor souls from the flames 
of Hell; it must die a transient death, in order to 
procure for them an eternal life.’ My conclusion 
being reached without great opposition from my 


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


paffagere, pour leur procurer vne vie eternelle, ma 
conclufion prife fans grandes oppofitions de mon 
efprit, i’appelle I'vn des Hiroquois qui eftoient reftez 
4 la garde des prifonniers. Celuy-cy m’ayant apper- 
ceu, n’ofa m’aborder craignant quelque embufche: 
approche, luy dis-ie, ne crains point, conduits moy 
aupres du Frangois & des Hurons que vous tenez 
captifs. Il s’aduance, & m’ayant faifi il me mit au 
nombre de ceux que la terre appelle miferables. 
I’embraffay tendrement le Francois & luy dis, mon 
cher frere, Dieu nous traite d’vne fagon eftrange, 
mais il eft le maiftre & il a fait ce que fes yeux ont 
iugé le meilleur, il a fuiuy fon bon plaifir, que fon 
faint Nom foit beny pour iamais. Ce bon ieune 
homme fe confeffa fur l’heure, luy ayant donné l’ab- 
folution, i’aborde les Hurons, ie les inftruy & les 
baptife, & comme A tous momens ceux qui pourfui- 
uoiét les fuyards en ramenoient quelques-vns, ie les 
confefflois [63] faifant Chreftiens ceux qui ne l’eftoient 
pas. Enfin on amena ce braue Capitaine Chreftien, 
némé Euftache, lequel m’ayant apperceu, s’efcria: 
ah! mon Pere, ie vous auois iuré & protefté que ie 
viurois ou mourrois auec vous. Sa veué me tran{per- 
cant le coeur, ie ne me fouuiens pas des paroles que 
ie luy dis. Vn autre Francois nommé Guillaume 
Couture, voyant que les Hurons lafchoient pied, fe 
fauua comme eux dans ces grandes forefts, & comme 
il eftoit agile il fut bien-toft hors des prifes de l’en- 
nemy: mais vn remord l’ayant faifi de ce qu'il auoit 
abandonné fon Pere & fon camarade, il s’arrefte tout 
court deliberant 4 part foy s'il pafferoit outre, ou s’il 
retourneroit fur fes brifées; la crainte d’eftre tenu 
pour vn perfide luy fait tourner vifage, il eut cinq 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 7 ae 


feelings, I call the one of the Hiroquois who had 
remained to guard the prisoners. This man, having 
perceived me, dared not approach me, fearing some 
ambush. ‘Come on,’ I say to him; ‘ be not afraid; 
lead me to the presence of the Frenchman and the 
Hurons whom you hold captive.’ He advances and, 
having seized me, puts mein the number of those 
whom the world calls miserable. I tenderly em- 
braced the Frenchman, and said to him: ‘ My dear 
brother, God treats us in a strange manner, but he is 
the master, and he has done what has seemed best 
in his sight; he has followed his good pleasure. May 
his holy Name be blessed forever.’ This good 
young man at once made his confession; having 
given him absolution, I approach the Hurons, and 
instruct and baptize them; and, as at every moment 
those who were pursuing the fugitives brought back 
some of them, I heard these in confession, [63] mak- 
ing Christians those who were not so. Finally, they 
brought that worthy Christian Captain named Eus- 
tache, who, having perceived me, exclaimed: ‘ Ah! 
my Father, I had sworn and protested to you that I 
would live or die with you.’ The sight of him 
piercing my heart, I do not remember the words 
that I said to him. Another Frenchman, named 
Guillaume Couture, seeing that the Hurons were 
giving way, escaped like them into those great for- 
ests; and, as he was agile, he was soon out of the 
enemy’s grasp. But, remorse having seized him 
because he had forsaken his Father and his comrade, 
he stops quite short, deliberating aside with himself 
whether he should go on or retrace his steps. The 
dread of being regarded as perfidious makes him face 
about; he encounters five stout Hiroquois. One of 


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


grands Hiroquois 4 la rencontre, l’vn defquels le 
couche en ioué, mais fon arquebuze ayant fait vne 
fauffe amorce, le Francois ne le manqua pas, il le 
ietta roide mort fur la place, fon coup tiré les quatre 
autres Hiroquois fe ietterent fur luy, auec vne rage 
de Lyons, ou pluftoft de Demons; 1l’ayant defpoiiillé 
nud comme la main, ils le meurtriffent 4 grands 
coups de baftons, ils luy arracherent [64] les ongles 
des doigts auec leurs dents, écrafans les extremitez 
fanglantes pour luy caufer plus de douleur. Bref 
ils luy percerent vne main auec vne efpée, ils l’ame- 
nerent lié & garotté en ce trifte equipage au lieu ot 
nous eftions, l’ayant reconnu, ie m’efchappe de mes 
gardes, ie me iette 4 fon col: courage, luy dif-ie, 
mon cher frere & m6 cher amy, offrez vos douleurs 
& vos angoiffes A Dieu pour ceux mefme qui vous 
tourmentét, ne reculds point, fouffrons courageufe- 
ment pour fon faint nom, nous n’auons pretendu que 
{a gloire en ce voyage. Les Hiroquois nous voyant 
dans ces tendreffes, demeurerent au commencement 
fort eftonnez, nous regardans fans mot dire, puis 
tout A coup, fe figurans peut-eftre, que i’applaudiffois 
Ace ieune homme de ce qu’il auoit tué l’vn de leurs 
Capitaines, ils fe ietterent fur moy d’vne furie enra- 
gée, ils me chargerent de coups de points, de coups 
de baftons, & de coups de maffes d’armes, me ruans 
par terre & demy mort. Comme ie commeng¢ois a 
refpirer, ceux qui ne m’auoient point frappé s’appro- 
chans, m’arracherent A belles dents les ongles des 
doigts, & puis me mordans les vns apres les autres, 
l’extremité des [65] deux index defpoiiillez de leurs 
ongles me caufoient vne douleur tres-fenfible, les 
broyans & les écrafans comme entre deux pierres, 


es 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 27 


these aims at him, but, his arquebus having missed 
fire, the Frenchman did not miss him,—he laid him, 
stone-dead, on the spot; his shot being fired, the 
four other Hiroquois fell upon him with a rage of 
Lions, or rather of Demons. Having stripped him 
bare as the hand, they bruised him with heavy blows 
of clubs, and tore out [64] his finger-nails with their 
teeth,— crushing the bleeding ends, in order to cause 
him more pain. In short, they pierced one of his 
hands with a javelin, and led him, tied and bound in 
this sad plight, to the place where we were. Hav- 
ing recognized him, I escape from my guards, and fall 
upon his neck. ‘Courage,’ I say to him, ‘ my dear 
brother and friend; offer your pains and anguish to 
God, in behalf of those very persons who torment 
you. Let us not draw back; let us suffer coura- 
geously for his holy name; we have intended only his 
glory in this journey.’ The Hiroquois, seeing us in 
these endearments, at first remained quite bewil- 
dered, looking at us without saying a word; then, all 
at once,— imagining, perhaps, that I was applauding 
that young man because he had killed one of their 
Captains,—they fell upon me with a mad fury, they 
belabored me with thrusts, and with blows from 
sticks and war-clubs, flinging me to the ground, 
half dead. When I began to breathe again, those who 
had not struck me, approaching, violently tore out 
my finger-nails; and then biting, one after another, 
the ends of my [65] two forefingers, destitute of 
their nails, caused me the sharpest pain,— grinding 
and crushing them as if between two stones, even 
to the extent of causing splinters or little bones to 
protrude. They treated the good René Goupil in the 
same way, without doing, at that time, any harm to 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


iufques A en faire fortir des efquilles ou de petits os. 
Ils traiterent le bon René Goupil de mefme fagon, 
fans faire pour lors aucun mal aux Hurons, auffi 
eftoient-ils enragez contre les Frangois de ce qu’ils 
n’auoient point voulu accepter la paix l’année prece- 
dente auec les conditions qu’ils leur vouloient donner. 

Tout le monde eftant raffemblé, & les coureurs 
reuenus de leur chaffe aux hommes, ces barbares 
diuiferent entr’eux leur butin, fe refiotiyffans de leur 
proye auec de grands cris d’allegreffes: comme ie les 
vis fort attentifs A regarder & A defpartir nos defpoiiil- 
Jes, ie recherchay auffi mon partage, ie vifite tous les 
captifs, ie baptize ceux qui ne 1’eftoient pas encore, 
i’encourage ces pauures miferables 4 fouffrir conftam- 
ment, les affeurant que leur recompenfe pafferoit de 
beaucoup la grandeur de leurs tourments; ie recon- 
neus en cette vifite que nous eftions vingt-deux 
captifs, fans conter trois Hurons tuez fur la place. 
Vn vieillard aagé de quatre-vingts ans venant de 
receuoir le faint Baptefme dit aux [66] Hiroquois qui 
luy commandoiét de s’embarquer, ce n’eft plus 4 vn 
vieillard comme moy d’aller vifiter les pays eftran- 
gers, ie peux trouuer icy la mort, fi vous me refufez 
la vie. A peine eut-il prononcé ces paroles qu'ils 
l’affommerent. 

Nous voila donc en chemin pour eftre conduits 
dans vn pays veritablemét eftranger, Noftre Seigneur 
nous fauorifa de fa Croix. Il eft vray que treize 
iours durant que nous employafmes en ce voyage ie 
fouffry au corps des tourmens quafi infupportables, 
& dans l’ame des angoiffes mortelles; la faim, la 
chaleur tres-ardente, les menaces & la haine de ces 
Leopards, la douleur de nos playes, qui pour n’eftre 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 * 99 


the Hurons: they were thus enraged against the 
French because the latter had not been willing to 
accept the peace, the preceding year, on the condi- 
tions which they wished to give them. 

‘* All their men being assembled, and the runners 
having come back from their hunt for men, those 
barbarians divided among themselves their booty, 
rejoicing in their prey with great shouts of mirth. 
As I saw them engrossed in examining and distrib- 
uting our spoils, I sought also for my share. I visit 
all the captives; I baptize those who were not yet 
baptized; I encourage those poor wretches to suffer 
with constancy, assuring them that their reward 
would far exceed the severity of their torments. I 
ascertained, on this round of visits, that we were 
twenty-two captives, without counting three Hurons 
killed on the spot. An old man, aged eighty years, 
having just received holy Baptism, said to the [66] 
Hiroquois who were commanding him to embark: 
‘It is no more for an old man like me to go and visit 
foreign countries; I can find death here, if you refuse 
me life.’ Hardly had he pronounced these words 
when they beat him to death. 

‘“So there we were, on the way to be led intoa 
country truly foreign. Our Lord favored us with 
his Cross. It is true that, during thirteen days that 
we spent on that journey, I suffered in the body tor- 
ments almost unendurable, and, in the soul, mortal 
anguish; hunger, the fiercely burning heat, the 
threats and hatred of those Leopards, the pain of our 
wounds,— which, for not being dressed, became 
putrid even to the extent of breeding worms,— 
caused us, in truth, much distress. But all these 
things seemed light to me in comparison with an 


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


point penfées fe pourriffoient iufques 4 produire des 
vers, nous caufoient A la verité beaucoup de douleur, 
mais toutes ces chofes me fembloient legeres 4 com- 
paraifon d’vne trifteffe interieure que ie reffentois a 
la veué de nos premiers & plus ardens Chreftiens des 
Hurons. Ie les croyois deuoir eftre les colomnes de 
cette Eglife naiffante, & ie les voyois deuenus les 
victimes de la mort. Les chemins fermez pour vn 
long-temps au falut de tant de peuples, qui periffent 
tous les iours faute d’eftre fecourus [67] me faifoient 
mourir a toute heure au fond de moname. C’eift 
vne chofe bien rude, ou pluftoft bien cruelle, de voir 
le triomphe des Demons fur des nations entieres 
rachetées auec tant d’amour & payées en monoye 
d’vn fang fi adorable. 

Huit iours apres noftre defpart des riues du grand 
fleuue de faint Laurent, nous rencontrafmes deux 
cent Hiroquois, qui venoient a4 la chaffe des Frang¢ois 
& des Sauuages nos alliez. Il nous fallut dans ce 
rencontre fouftenir vn nouueau choc. C’eft vne 
creance parmy ces Barbares que ceux qui vont en 
guerre font d’autant plus heureux qu’ils font cruels 
enuers leurs ennemis, ie vous affeure qu’ils nous 
firent bien reffentir l’effort de cette mal-heureufe 
creance. 

Nous ayans done apperceus, ils remercierent pre- 
mierement le Soleil de nous auoir fait tomber entre 
les mains de leurs Compatriotes, ils firent en fuitte 
vne falue d’arquebuzade pour congratulation de leur 
victoire. Cela fait ils drefferent vn theatre fur vne 
colline, puis entrans dans les bois ils cherchent des 
baftons ou des efpines, felon leur fantaifie; eftans 
ainfi armez ils fe mettent en haye, cent d’vn cofté, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 » 381 


inward sadness which I felt at the sight of our earliest 
and most ardent Christians of the Hurons. I had 
thought that they were to be the pillars of that rising 
Church, and I saw them become the victims of death. 
The ways closed for a long time to the salvation of so 
many peoples, who perish every day for want of 
being succored, [67] made me die every hour, in the 
depth of my soul. It is a very hard thing, or rather 
very cruel, to see the triumph of the Demons over 
whole nations redeemed with so much love, and paid 
for in the money of a blood so adorable. 

‘* Eight days after our departure from the shores 
of the great river of saint Lawrence, we met two hun- 
dred Hiroquois, who were coming in pursuit of the 
French and of the Savages, our allies. At this en- 
counter we were obliged to sustain a new shock. It 
is a belief among those Barbarians that those who go 
to war are the more fortunate in proportion as they 
are cruel toward their enemies; I assure you that 
they made us thoroughly feel the force of that 
wretched belief. 

‘“ Accordingly, having perceived us, they first 
thanked the Sun for having caused us to fall into the 
hands of their Fellow-countrymen; they next fired a 
salute with a volley of arquebus shots, by way of con- 
gratulation for their victory. That done, they set upa 
stage on a hill; then, entering the woods, they seek 
sticks or thorns, according to their fancy. Being 
thus armed, they form in line,—a hundred on one 
side, [68] and a hundred on the other,— and make us 
pass, all naked, along that way of fury and anguish; 
there is rivalry among them to discharge upon us 
the most and the heaviest blows; they made me 
march last, that I might be more exposed to their 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 31 


[68] & cent de l’autre, & nous font paffer tous nuds 
dans ce chemin de fureur & d’angoiffes, c’eft a qui 
defchargera fur nous plus de coups & plus fortement, 
ils me firent marcher le dernier, pour eftre plus 
expofé A leur rage. Ie n’auois pas fait la moitié de 
cette route que ie tombay par terre fous le faiz de 
cette grefle, & de ces coups redoublez, ie ne m’effor- 
cay point de me releuer partie pour ma foibleffe, 
partie pour ce que i’acceptois ce lieu pour mon 
fepulcre. Quam diu multuimque in me feuitum eft, ile 
fcit pro cutus amore & gloria hec pati & tucundum & 
gloriofum eft tandem crudeli mifericordia cémoti volentes 
me viuum in fuam terram deducere a verberando ceffa- 
runt. Ce font les propres paroles du Pere qui a cou- 
ché en Latin vne partie de fes trauaux. Me voyans 
terraffé ils fe iettent fur moy, Dieu feul connoift & 
la longueur du temps & le nombre des coups qui 
furent defchargez fur mon corps, mais les fouffrances 
prifes pour fon amour & pour fa gloire, font remplie 
de ioye & d’honneur, voyans donc que i’eftois tombé 
non par accident, & que ie ne me releuois point pour 
e{tre trop voifin de la mort, ils entrerent dans vne 
cruelle compaffion, leur rage n’eftoit pas [69] encore 
affouuie, ils me vouloient mener tout vif en leur 
pays, ils m’embraffent donc, & me portent tout fan- 
glant fur ce theatre preparé; eftant reuenu a4 moy, ils 
me font defcendre, ils me donnent mille & mille 
iniures, ils me font le joiiet & le but de leurs oppro- 
bres, ils recommencent leur batterie, defchargeans 
fur ma tefte & fur mon col & fur tout mon corps vne 
autre grefle de coups de baftons: ie ferois trop long 
fi ie voulois coucher par efcrit toute la rigueur de 
mes fouffrances, ils me bruflerent vn doigt, ils m’ef- 


OO , — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 os 


rage. I had not accomplished the half of this course 
when I fell to the earth under the weight of that hail 
and of those redoubled blows. I did not strive to 
rise again,— partly because of my weakness, partly 
because I was accepting that place for my sepulchre. 
Quam diu multuimque in me sevitum est, tlle scit pro cujus 
amore et gloria hec pati, et jucundum et gloriosum est; 
tandem crudeli misericordia commoti, volentes me vivum 
in suam terram deducere, a verberando cessarunt.’’ 'These 
are the very words of the Father, who has described 
in Latin a part of his labors. ‘‘ Seeing me prostrate, 
they rush upon me; God alone knows for how long 
a time and how many were the blows that were dealt 
on my body; but the sufferings undertaken for his 
love and his glory are filled with joy and honor. 
Seeing, then, that I had not fallen by accident, and 
that I did not rise again for being too near death, 
they entered upon a cruel compassion; their rage 
was not [69] yet glutted, and they wished. to conduct 
me alive into their own country; accordingly, they 
embrace me, and carry me all bleeding upon that 
stage they have prepared. When I am restored to 
my senses, they make me come down, and offer me a 
thousand and one insults, making me the sport and 
object of their reviling; they begin their assaults 
over again, dealing upon my head and neck, and all 
my body, another hailstorm of blows. I would be 
too tedious if I should set down in writing all the 
rigor of my sufferings. They burned one of my fin- 
gers, and crushed another with their teeth, and those 
which were already torn, they squeezed and twisted 
with a rage of Demons; they scratched my wounds 
with their nails; and, when strength failed me, they 
applied fire to my arm and thighs. My companions 


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


craferent l’autre auec leurs dens, & ceux qui eftoient 
defia defchirez ils les preffoient & les tordoient auec 
vne rage de Demons, ils efgratignoient mes playes 
auec les ongles, & quand les forces me manquoient 
ils m’appliquoient du feu au bras & aux cuiffes, mes 
compagnons furent 4 peu prez traitez comme moy. 
L’vn de ces Barbares s’eftant aduancé auec vn grand 
coufteau en la main droite me prit le nez de la main 
gauche me le voulant couper, mais il demeura court, 
& comme eftonné, fe retirant fans me rien faire, il 
retourne A vn quart d’heure de 14 comme indigné 
contre foy de fa lafcheté, il me prend vne autre fois 
au [70] mefme endroit, vous fgauez mon Dieu ce que 
ie vous difois pour lors au fond de mon coeur. Enfin 
ie ne fcay quelle force inuifible le repouffa pour la 
feconde fois. C’eftoit fait de ma vie s’il euft paffé 
outre, car ils n’ont pas couftume de laiffer long-temps 
fur la terre ceux qui font notablement mutilez. 
Entre les Hurons le plus mal traité fut ce braue & 
vaillant Chreftien Euftache. L’ayant fait fouffrir 
comme les autres, ils luy couperent les deux pouces 
des mains, & luy fourerent par les ouuertures vn 
bafton pointu iufqu’au coude. Le Pere voyant cét 
excez de tourment ne peuft tenir fes larmes, Euftache 
s’en eftant apperceu & craignant que les Hiroquois 
ne le tinffent pour vn effeminé leur dit; ne croyez pas 
que ces larmes prouiennent de foibleffe, c’eft l'amour 
& l’affection qu’il me porte, & non le manquement 
de coeur qui les fait fortir de fes yeux, il n’a iamais 
pleuré dans fes tourmens; fa face a toufiours paru 
feiche, & toufiours gaye, voftre rage, & mes douleurs 
& fon amour font le fujet & la caufe de fes larmes: 
Il eft vray, luy repart le Pere, que tes douleurs me 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 35: 


were treated very nearly as I was. One of those 
Barbarians, having advanced with a large knife in 
his right hand, took my nose in his left hand, wish- 
ing to cut it off; but he stopped suddenly, and as if 
astonished, withdrawing without doing aught to me. 
He returns a quarter of an hour later, as if indignant 
with himself for his cowardice; he again seizes me 
at the [70] same place; you know, my God, what I 
said to you at that moment, in the depth of my heart. 
In fine, I know not what invisible force repulsed him 
for the second time. It was over with my life if he 
had proceeded; for they are not accustomed to leave 
long on the earth those who are notably mutilated.’’ 
Among the Hurons, the worst treated was that 
worthy and valiant Christian, Eustache. Having 
made him suffer like the others, they cut off both 
thumbs from his hands, and thrust through the inci- 
sions a pointed stick even tothe elbow. The Father, 
seeing this excess of torment, could not contain his 
tears. Eustache, having perceived this, and fearing 
lest the Hiroquois should regard him as effeminate, 
said to them: ‘‘ Do not suppose that those tears pro- 
ceed from weakness; it is the love and affection that 
he feels for me, and not the want of courage, that 
forces them from his eyes. He has never wept in 
his own torments; his face has always appeared dry, 
and always cheerful. Your rage, and my pains, and 
his own love are the theme and the cause of his 
tears.”’ ‘‘Itistrue,’’ the Father answers him, ‘‘ that 
thy pains are more keenly felt by me than are my 
own; it is true that Iam covered with [71] blood 
and wounds; my body, nevertheless, does not feel 
its torments as keenly as my heart is afflicted for 
thy sufferings. But courage, my dear brother; 


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (VoL. 31 


{ont plus fenfibles que les miennes, il eft vray que ie 
fuis couuert de [71] fang & de playes, mon corps 
neantmoins ne reffent pas tant fes tourmens, que mon 
coeur eft affligé pour tes fouffrances: mais courage 
mon cher frere, fouuiens-toy qu’il y a vne autre vie 
que celle-cy, fouuiens-toy qu'il y a vn Dieu, qui void 
tout & qui fgaura bien recompenfer les angoiffes que 
nous fouffrons & fon occafion. Je m’en fouuiens 
tres-bien, luy dit ce bon Neophyte, ie tiendray ferme 
iufques 41a mort, en effet fa conftance parut toufiours 
admirable & toufiours Chreftienne. 

Ces guerriers ayans fait vn facrifice de noftre fang 
pourfuiuirent leur route, & nous la noftre. Le 
dixiefme iour depuis noftre prife nous arriuafmes au 
lieu ot il fallut quitter la nauigation & marcher par 
terre, ce chemin qui fut d’enuiron quatre iours nous 
fut extremément penible, celuy 4 qui i’eftois donné 
en garde, ne pouuant porter tout fon butin, en mit 
vne partie fur mon dos tout defchiré; nous ne man- 
geafmes en trois iours qu'vn peu de fruits fauuages, 
que nous ramaffafmes en paffant. L’ardeur du Soleil 
au plus chaut de 1’Efté, & nos playes nous affoiblif- 
foient fort, & nous faifoient marcher derriere les 
autres, nous voyans fort efcartez & fur la [72] nuit, 
ie dis au pauure René qu’il fe fauuaft; en effet nous 
le pouuions faire, mais pour moy i’aurois pluftoft 
fouffert toutes fortes de tourmens que d’abandonner 
ala mort ceux que ie pouuois vn petit confoler, & 
aufquels ie pouuois conferer le fang de mon Sauueur 
par les Sacremens de fon Eglife. Ce bon ieune 
homme voyant que ie voulois fuiure mon petit trou- 
peat ne me voulut iamais quitter: ie mourray, dit-il, 
auec vous, ie ne vous fcaurois abandonner. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ABE 


remember that there is another life than this; remem- 
ber that there is a God who sees everything, and who 
will well know how to reward the anguish that we 
suffer on his account.’’ ‘‘I remember very well,’’ 
that good Neophyte said to him; ‘‘ I will remain firm 
even till death;’’ and, indeed, his constancy appeared 
ever admirable and ever Christian. 

‘‘’Those warriors, having made a sacrifice of our 
blood, pursued their course, and we ours. The tenth 
day after our capture, we arrived at the place where 
it was necessary to cease navigation and to proceed 
by land; that road, which was about four days long, 
was extremely painful for us. The man to whose 
guard I was given, unable to carry all his booty, 
put a part of it on my back, which was all torn; we 
ate, in three days, only a few wild fruits, which we 
gathered by the way. The heat of the Sun, at the 
warmest season of the Summer, and our wounds, 
greatly weakened us, and caused us to walk behind 
the others. Seeing ourselves considerably separated 
from them, and near the [72] night, I told poor René 
that he should escape,—indeed, we were able to do 
so; but, for myself, I would rather have suffered all 
sorts of torments than abandon to death those whom 
I could somewhat console, and upon whom I could 
confer the blood of my Savior through the Sacra- 
ments of his Church. This good young man, seeing 
that I wished to follow my little flock, would never 
leave me: ‘I will die,’ he said, ‘ with you; I cannot 
forsake you.’ 

‘‘T had always thought, indeed, that the day on 
which the whole Church rejoices in the glory of 
the blessed Virgin—her glorious and triumphant 
Assumption — would be for usa day of pain. This 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 31 


l’auois toufiours bien penfé que le iour auquel toute 
lEglife fe refioiiyt de la gloire de la fainte Vierge fa 
glorieufe & triomphante Affomption nous feroit vn 
iour de douleur. C’eft ce qui me fit rendre graces a 
m6 Sauueur Iefus-Chrift, de ce qu’en ce iour de lieffe 
& de ioye il nous faifoit part de fes fouffrances, nous 
admettant a la participation de fes croix. Nous 
atriuafmes la veille de ce iour facré 4 vne petite 
riuiere efloignée du premier bourg des Hiroquois 
d’enuiron vn quart de lieué, nous trouuafmes fur fes 
riues de part & d’autre quantité d’hommes & de 
ieunes gens armez de baftons quwils defchargerent 
fur nous auec leur rage accouftumée: il ne me reftoit 
plus [73] que deux ongles, ces Barbares me les arra- 
cherent auec les dents defchirans la chair de deffous 
& la defcoupans iufques aux os auec leurs ongles 
qu’ils nourriffent fort longs. Vn Huron a qui on 
auoit donné la liberté en ce pays-la, nous ayant apper- 
ceu s’efcria vous eftes morts Francois, vous eftes 
morts, il n’y a point de liberté pour vous, ne penfez 
plus a la vie, vous ferez bruflez, difpofez vous ala 
mort: ce bel accueil ne nous affligeoit pas au point 
que nos ennemis croyoient, mon garde neantmoins 
me voyant tout couuert de fang, touché de quelque 
compaflion, me dit que i’eftois en vn pitoyable eftat, 
& pour me rendre plus connoiffable 4 la veué de fon 
peuple il m’effuya la face. 

Apres quils eurent affouuis leur cruauté, ils nous 
menerent en triomphe dans cette premiere bourgade, 
toute la ieuneffe eftoit hors les portes rangée en haye 
armez de baftons & quelques-vns de baguettes de fer, 
qu'ils ont aifément par le voifinage des Holandois, 
iettant les yeux fur ces armes de la paffion, nous nous 


We 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ee 


made me render thanks to my Savior Jesus Christ, 
because, on that day of gladness and joy, he was 
making us share his sufferings, and admitting us to 
participation in his crosses. We arrived on the eve 
of that sacred day at a little river, distant from the 
first village of the Hiroquois about a quarter ofa 
league; we found on its banks, on both sides, many 
men and youths, armed with sticks which they let 
loose upon us with their accustomed rage. There 
remained to me now [73] only two nails,—those 
Barbarians tore them from me with their teeth, 
rending the flesh from beneath, and cutting it clean 
to the bone with their nails, which they allow to 
grow very long. A Huron, to whom they had 
given his liberty in that country, having perceived 
us, exclaimed: ‘ You are dead, Frenchmen, you are 
dead; there is no liberty for you. Think no more of 
life; you will be burned; prepare yourselves for 
death.’ This fine reception did not afflict us to the 
degree that our enemies believed it would; my guard, 
nevertheless, seeing me all covered with blood, 
touched with some compassion, told me that I was in 
a pitiable state; and, in order to render me more 
distinguishable to the sight of his people, he wiped 
my face. 

‘“* After they had glutted their cruelty, they led us 
in triumph into that first village; allthe youth were 
outside the gates, arranged in line,—armed with 
sticks, and some with iron rods, which they easily 
secure on account of their vicinity to the Dutch. 
Casting our eyes upon these weapons of passion, we 
remembered what saint Augustin says, that those 
who turn aside from the scourges of God, turn aside 
from the number of his children; on that account, 


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Nou 31 


fouuinfmes de ce que dit faint Auguftin, que ceux qui 
s’efcartent des fleaux de Dieu, s’efcartent du nom- 
bre de fes enfans, c’eft pourquoy [74] nous nous offrif- 
mes d’vn grand coeur, 4 fa bonté paternelle pour eftre 
des victimes immolées 4 fon bon plaifir & 4 fa colere 
amoureufe pour le falut de ces peuples, voicy l’ordre 
qui fut gardé en cette entrée funebre & pompeufe. 
On fit marcher vn Francois en tefte, & vn autre au 
milieu des Hurons, & moy tout le dernier; nous nous 
fuiuions les vns apres les autres par vne efgale 
diftance, & afin que nos bourreaux euffent plus de 
loifir de nous battre a leur aife, quelques Hiroquois 
fe ietterent dans nos rangs pour nous empefcher de 
courir & d’éuiter quelques coups, la proceffion com- 
mencant d’entrer dans ce chemin eftroit du Paradis, 
on entendoit vn chamaillis de tous coftez, c’eft bien 
pour lors que ie pouuois dire auec mon Seigneur & 
mon maiftre, /upra dorfum meum fabricauerunt pecca- 
tores, les pecheurs ont bafty & laiffé des monumens 
& des marques de leur rage fur mon dos. I’eftois 
nud en chemife comme vn pauure criminel, les autres 
eftoient tous nuds, excepté le pauure René Goupil, 
auquel ils firent la mefme faueur qu’A moy, plus la 
proceffion marchoit lentement dans vn chemin bien 
long, & plus nous receuions de coups. [1 m’en fut 
[75] defchargé vn au deffus des reins d’vn pommeau 
d’efpée ou d’vne boule de fer groffe comme le poing, 
qui m’efbranla tout le corps & me fit perdre haleine. 
Voila quelle fut noftre entrée dans cette Babylone. 
A peine peufmes nous arriuer iufques 4 l’efchaffaut 
qui nous eftoit preparé au milieu de cette bourgade 
tant nous eftions abbatus, nos corps eftoient tous 
liuides & nos faces toutes enfanglantées. Mais par 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 fs 


[74] we offered ourselves with great courage to his 
fatherly goodness, in order to be victims sacrificed to 
his good pleasure and to his anger, lovingly zealous 
for the salvation of these peoples. Here follows the 
order which was observed at that funereal and pomp- 
ous entry. They made one Frenchman march at 
the head, and another in the middle of the Hurons, 
and me the very last. We were following one an- 
other at an equal distance; and, that our executioners 
might have more leisure to beat us at their ease, 
some Hiroquois thrust themselves into our ranks in 
order to prevent us from running and from avoiding 
any blows. ‘The procession beginning to enter this 
narrow way of Paradise, a scuffing was heard on all 
sides; it was indeed then that I could say with my 
Lord and master, Supra dorsum meum fabricaverunt pec- 
catores,—‘ Sinners have built and left monuments and 
marks of their rage upon my back.’ I was naked to 
my shirt, like a poor criminal; the others were 
wholly naked, except poor René Goupil, to whom 
they did the same favor as tome. The more slowly 
the procession marched in a very long road, the more 
blows we received. One was [75] dealt above my 
loins, with the pommel of a javelin, or with an iron 
knob the size of one’s fist, which shook my whole 
body and took away my breath. Such was our en- 
trance into that Babylon. Hardly could we arrive as 
far as the scaffold which was prepared for us in the 
midst of that village, so exhausted were we; our 
bodies were all livid, and our faces all stained with 
blood. But more disfigured than all was René Gou- 
pil, so that nothing white appeared in his face except 
his eyes. I found him all the more beautiful as he 
had more in common with him who, bearing a face 


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot.31 


deffus tous, René Goupil eftoit fi deffiguré que rien 
de blanc ne paroiffoit fur fa face que les yeux. Ie le 
trouuay d’autant plus beau qu'il auoit plus de rap- 
port aceluy qui portant vne face tres-digne des regards 
& des plaifirs des Anges nous a paru comme vn 
lepreux au milieu de fes angoiffes. Eftant monté fur 
cét efchaffaut ie m’efcriay dans mon coeur. Spectacu- 
lum fatti fumus mundo & Angelis & hominibus propter 
Chriftum: Nous auons efté faits vn fpectacle aux 
yeux du monde & des Anges & des homes pour Iefus- 
Chrift. Nous trouuafmes quelque repos fur ce lieu 
de triomphe & de gloire. Les Hiroquois ne nous 
perfecutoient plus que de leur langues, rempliffant 
l’air & nos oreilles de leurs iniures qui ne nous fai- 
foient pas grand mal, [76] mais cette bonace ne dura 
pas long-temps. Vn Capitaine s’efcrie qu'il falloit 
carefier les Francois: Pluftoft fait qu'il n’eft dit, vn 
mal-heureux fe iettant fur le theatre, defchargea 
trois grands coups de baftons fur chaque Francois, 
fans toucher les Hurons. D’autres cependant tirans 
leurs coufteaux & nous ayant abordez ils me trait- 
terent en Capitaine, c’eft & dire auec plus de fureur 
que les autres. La deference des Francois, & le 
refpect que me portoient les Hurons me cauferent 
cétaduantage. Vn vieillard me prend la main gauche 
& commande a vne femme Algonquine captiue de 
me couper vn doigt, elle fe deftourna trois ou quatre 
fois ne fe pouuant refoudre a cette cruauté: enfin il 
fallut obeyr, elle me couppe le poulce de la main 
gauche, on fit les mefmes careffes aux autres prifon- 
niers. Cette pauure femme ayant ietté mon poulce 
{ur le theatre, ie le ramaflay & vous le prefentay, 6 
mon Dieu! me refouuenant des facrifices, que ie 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 1 a 


most worthy of the regards and delight of the An- 
gels, appeared to us, in the midst of his anguish, like 
aleper. Having ascended that scaffold, I exclaimed 
in my heart: Spectaculum factt sumus mundo et Angelis 
et hominibus propter Christum,—‘ We have been madea 
gazing-stock in the sight of the world, of Angels, and 
of men, for Jesus Christ.. We found some rest in 
that place of triumph and of glory. The Hiroquois 
no longer persecuted us except with their tongues, — 
filling the air and our ears with their insults, which 
did us no great hurt; [76] but this calm did not last 
long. A Captain exclaims that the Frenchmen ought 
to be caressed. Sooner done than it is said,—one 
wretch, jumping on the stage, dealt three heavy 
blows with sticks, on each Frenchman, without touch- 
ing the Hurons. Others, meanwhile drawing their 
knives and approaching us, treated me as a Cap- 
tain,—that is to say, with more fury than the rest. 
The deference of the French, and the respect which 
the Hurons showed me, caused me this advantage. 
And old man takes my left hand and commands a 
captive Algonquin woman to cut one of my fingers; 
she turns away three or four times, unable to resolve 
upon this cruelty; finally, she has to obey, and cuts 
the thumb from my left hand; the same caresses are 
extended to the other prisoners. This poor woman 
having thrown my thumb on the stage, I picked it 
up and offered it to you, O my God! Remembering 
the sacrifices that I had presented to you for seven 
years past, upon the Altars of your Church, I accepted 
this torture as a loving vengeance for the want of 
love and respect that I had shown, concerning your 
Holy Body; you heard [77] the cries of my soul. One 
of my two French companions, having perceived me, 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo.. 31 


vous auois prefenté depuis fept ans fur les Autels 
de voftre Eglife, i’acceptois ce fupplice comme vne 
amoureufe vengeance du manquement d’amour, & 
de refpect que i’auois eu touchant voftre Saint Corps, 
vous efcoutiez [77] les crisde moname. L’vn de mes 
deux compagnons Frangois, m’ayant apperceu me 
dit que fi les Barbares me voyoient tenir mon poulce, 
ils me le feroient manger & aualler tout cru, & 
partant que ie le iettaffe en quelque endroit. Ie luy 
obeys, a l’heure mefme. Ils fe feruirent d’vne 
coquille ou d’vne efcalle d huitre pour coupper le 
poulce droit de l’autre Frangois, afin de luy caufer 
plus dedouleur. Le fang coulant de nos playes en 
fi grande abondance que nous allions tomber en 
fyncope, vn Hiroquois defchirant vn petit bout de ma 
chemife, qui feule m’eftoit reftée nous les enueloppa 
& ce fut tout l'appareil & tous les medicamens qu’on 
y mit. 

Le foir venu on nous fit defcendre pour eftre 
conduis dans les cabanes, & pour eftre le joiiet des 
enfans. On nous donna pour nourriture vn bien peu 
de bled d’Inde boiiilly dans 1’eau toute pure, puis on 
nous fit coucher fur vne efcorce, nous lians par les 
bras & par les pieds a quatre pieux fichez en terre 
en forme de Croix de faint André. Les enfans pour 
apprendre la cruauté de leurs parens, nous iettoient 
des charbons & des cendres ardentes fur 1’eftomach, 
prenant plaifir de nous voir griller [78] & roftir: 6 
mon Dieu! quelles nuits, demeurer toufiours dans 
vne pofture extremément contrainte, ne fe pouuoir 
remuer ny tourner, dans l’attaque d’vne infinité de 
vermine, qui nous affailloient de tous coftez, eftre 
chargez de playes recentes & d’autres toutes pourries, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ae 


told me that, if those Barbarians saw me keep my 
thumb, they would make me eat it and swallow it all 
raw; and that, therefore, I should throw it away 
somewhere. I obey him instantly. They used a 
scallop or an oyster-shell for cutting off the right 
thumb of the other Frenchman, so as to cause him 
more pain. The blood flowing from our wounds in 
so great abundance that we were likely to fall ina 
swoon, a Hiroquois—tearing off a little end of my 
shirt, which alone had been left to me— bound them 
up for us; and that was all the dressing and all the 
medical treatment applied to them. 

‘‘ Evening having come, they made us descend, in 
order to be taken into the cabins as the sport of the 
children. They gave us for food a very little Indian 
corn, simply boiled in water; then they made us lie 
down on pieces of bark, binding us by the arms and 
the feet to four stakes fastened in the ground in the 
shape of saint Andrew’s Cross. The children, in 
order to learn the cruelty of their parents, threw 
coals and burning cinders on our stomachs,—taking 
pleasure in seeing us broil [78] and roast. Oh, my 
God, what nights! To remain always in an extremely 
constrained position; to be unable to stir or to 
turn, under the attack of countless vermin which 
assailed us on all sides; to be burdened with wounds, 
some recent and others all putrid; not to have 
sustenance for the half of one’s life: in truth, these 
torments are great, but God is infinite. At Sunrise, 
they led us back upon our scaffold, where we spent 
three days and three nights in the sufferings that I 
have just described. 

‘“The three days having expired, they parade us 
into two other villages, where we make our entrance 


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


n’auoir pas dequoy fuftenter la moitié de fa vie, de 
verité ces tourmens font grands, mais Dieu eft 
immenfe. Au leuer du Soleil, on nous ramene fur 
noftre efchaffaut, ot: nous paffafmes trois iours & 
trois nuits dans les angoiffes que ie viens de defcrire. 

Ces trois iours expirez, on nous pourmene dans 
deux autres bourgades, ot nous fifmes noftre entrée 
comme dans la premiere; on nous fait les mefmes 
falues de baftonnades, & pour encherir fur la cruauté 
des premiers, on nous donne de grands coups fur les 
os ou fur le gré ou l’arrefte des iambes lieu tres-fen- 
fible Ala douleur: comme nous fortions de la premiere 
bourgade, vn mal-heureux m’ofta ma chemife, & me 
ietta vn vieil haillon pour couurir ce qui doit eftre 
caché, cette nudité me fut tres-fenfible. le ne peu 
me tenir de faire vn reproche 4 1’vn de ceux qui auoit 
eu la plus groffe part de nos defpoiiilles. [79] 
N’es-tu point honteux de me voir dans cette nudité, 
toy qui a eu tant de part 4 mon bagage; ces paroles 
luy firent quelque honte, il tire vn morceau de groffe 
toile, dont vn paquet eftoit enueloppé & me le iette. 
Ie la mis fur mon dos pour me deffendre de l’ardeur 
du Soleil, qui efchauffoit & pourriffoit mes bleffures, 
mais cette toille s’eftant collée & comme incorporée 
auec mes playes, ie fus contraint de l’arracher auec 
douleur & de m’abandonner a la mercy de l’air: ma 
peau fe deftachoit de mon corps en plufieurs endroits, 
& afin que ie peuffe dire que i’auois paflé per ignem 
& aquam, par le froid & le chaud pour l’amour de 
mon Dieu, eftant fur l’efchaffaut trois iours durant 
comme en la premiere bourgade, il tomba vne pluye 
froide qui renouuella grandement les douleurs de mes 
playes. L’vn de ces Barbares s’eftant apperceu que 


f 
; 
| 
, 


—S 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ga 


as into the first; they give us the same salutes of 
beatings, and, in order to enhance the cruelty of the 
earlier ones, they deal us severe blows on the bones,— 
either at random or on the shin of the legs, a place 
very sensitive to pain. As we were leaving the first 
village, a wretch took away my shirt and gave me an 
old rag to cover what ought to be concealed; this 
nakedness was very painful to me. I could not ab- 
stain from reproaching one of those who had had the 
bulk of our spoils, saying: [79] ‘ Art thou not ashamed 
to see me in this nakedness,—thou who hast had so 
great a share of my baggage?’ These words some- 
what abashed him: he took a piece of coarse cloth, 
with which a bundle was enveloped, and threw it to 
me. I put it on my back in order to defend myself 
from the heat of the Sun, which heated and corrupted 
my wounds; but—this cloth having glued itself fast, 
and, as it were, incorporated itself with my sores—I 
was constrained to tear it off with pain, and to aban- 
don myself to the mercy of the air. My skin was 
detaching itself from my body in several places; 
and,—that I might say that I had passed per zgnem et 
aguam, through cold and heat, for the love of my 
God,— while on the scaffold during three days, as in 
the first village, there fell a cold rain, which greatly 
renewed the pains of my sores. One of those Bar- 
barians having perceived that Guillaume Cousture, 
although he had his hands all torn, had not yet lost 
any of his fingers, seized his hand, striving to cut off 
his forefinger with a poor knife. But, as he could 
not succeed therein, he twisted it, and in tearing it 
he pulled a sinew out of the arm, the length of a [80] 
span. At the same time his poor arm swelled, and 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vo. 31 


Guillaume Coufture, quoy qu’il euft les mains toutes 
defchirées n’auoit encore perdu aucun de fes doigts, 
luy faifit la main s’efforgant de luy coupper 1’index 
auec vn mefchant coufteau, & comme il n’en pouuoit 
venir 4 bout il luy tordit, & en l’arrachant il luy tira 
vn nerf hors du bras de la logeur d’vne [80] palme, 
a mefme temps fon pauure bras s’enfla & la douleur 
en reialit iufques au fond de mon coeur. 

Au fortir de cette feconde bourgade on nous traifne 
en la troifiefme, ces bourgs font efloignés de quel- 
ques lieués les vns des autres, outre le falut & les 
careffes, & la reception qui nous fut faite, aux deux 
precedentes, voicy ce qui fut adjouté 4 noftre fup- 
plice. Les ieunes gens fourroient des efpines ou des 
baftons pointus dans nos playes, efgratignant le bout 
de nos doig[t]s, defpoiiillés de leurs ongles, & les 
defchirant iufques a la chair viue, & pour m’honorer 
par deffus les autres, ils m’attacherent 4 des bois 
attachez en croix, en forte que mes pieds n’eftant 
point fouftenus, le poids de mon corps me donnoit 
vne gehenne & vne torture fi fenfible, qu’apres auoir 
fouffert ce tourment enuiron vn quart-d’heure, ie 
fenty bien que ie m’en allois tomber en pafmoifon, 
ce qui me fit fupplier ces Barbares d’allonger vn 
petit mes liens, ils accourrent A ma voix, & au lieu 
de les allonger, ils les eftraignent dauantage, pour 
me caufer plus de douleur. Vn Sauuage d’vn pays 
plus efloigné touché de compaffion fendit la preffe & 
tirant [81] vn couteau, coupa hardiment toutes les 
cordes dont i’eftois garroté. Cette charité fut depuis 
recompenfée au centuple, comme nous verrons en 
fon lieu. 

Ce coup ne fut pas fans prouidence: car 4 mefme 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ay 


the pain was reflected from it even to the depth of 
my heart. 

‘* On departing from that second village, they drag 
us into the third; these villages are several leagues 
distant from one another. Besides the salute and 
the caresses, and the reception which was given us 
at the two preceding ones, note what was added to 
our torture. The young men thrust thorns or pointed 
sticks into our sores, scratching the ends of our fin- 
gers, deprived of their nails, and tearing them even 
to the quick flesh; and, in order to honor me above 
the others, they bound me to pieces of wood fastened 
crosswise. Consequently, my feet not being sup- 
ported, the weight of my body inflicted upon mea 
-gehenna, and a torture so keen that, after having 
suffered this torment about a quarter of an hour, 
I plainly felt that I was about to fall in a swoon 
from it, which made me beseech those Barbarians to 
lengthen my bonds a little. They ran up, at my call; 
and, instead of lengthening them, they strain them 
more tightly, in order to cause me more pain. A 
Savage from a more distant country, touched with 
compassion, broke through the press, and, drawing 
[81] a knife, boldly cut all the cords with which I was 
bound. This charity was afterward rewarded a 
hundredfold, as we shall see in its place. 

‘* That act was not without providence: for, at the 
same time when I was unbound, word was brought 
that some warriors, or hunters of men, were conduct- 
ing thither some Hurons, recently taken. I betook 
me to the place as best I could; I consoled those poor 
captives, and, having sufficiently instructed them, I 
conferred upon them holy Baptism; in recompense I 
am told that I must die with them. The sentence 


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 31 


temps que ie fus delié, on apporta nouuelle que des 
guerriers ou des chaffeurs aux hommes, amenoient 
quelques Hurons pris de nouueau. le m’y tranf- 
portay comme ie pii, ie confolay ces pauures captifs, 
& les ayans fuffifamment in{ftruits, ie leur conferay 
le fainct Baptefme, pour recompenfe on me dit qu’il 
falloit mourir auec eux. La fentence arreftée dans 
le Confeil m’eft intimée, la nuit fuiuante doit eftre 
(A ce quils difent) la fin de mes tourmens & de ma 
vie. Mon ame a ces paroles tres-contente: mais mon 
Dieu ne l’eftoit pas encore, il voulut prolonger mon 
martyre. Ces Barbares fe rauiferent, s’efcrians qu’il 
falloit donner la vie aux Frangois, ou pluftoft diffe- 
rer leur mort. Ils penfoient trouuer plus de retenué 
aupres de nos forts en noftre confideration. On 
enuoye donc dans la plus grande bourgade Guil- 
laume Coufture, & René Goupil & moy fufmes logez 
enfemble dans vne autre. La vie nous eftant accor- 
dée on ne [82] nous fit plus aucun mal. Mais helas! 
c’ef{t pour lors que nous reffentifmes a loifir les tour- 
mens qu’on nous auoit fait. On nous coucha fur des 
efcorces d’arbres A platte terre, & pour reftaurant, on 
nous donna vn peu de farine d’Inde, & par fois vn 
peu de citroiiille 4 demy crué. Nos mains & nos 
doigts eftans tout en pieces, il nous falloit appafter 
comme des enfans. La patience fut noftre Medecin. 
Quelques femmes plus pitoyables nous voyoient auec 
beaucoup de charité, ne pouuans regarder nos playes 
fans compaffion. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 51 


decreed in the Council is intimated to me; the fol- 
lowing night is to be (as they say) the end of my 
torments and of my life. My soul is well pleased 
with these words, but not yet was my God,—he 
willed to prolong my martyrdom. ‘Those Barbarians 
reconsidered the matter, exclaiming that life ought 
to be spared to the Frenchmen, or rather, their death 
postponed. They thought to find more moderation 
at our forts, on account of us. They accordingly 
sent Guillaume Cousture into the largest village, and 
René Goupil and I were lodged together in another. 
Life being granted us, they [82] did us no more 
harm. But alas! it was then that we felt at leisure 
the torments which had been inflicted on us. They 
gave us for beds the bark of trees, flat on the ground; 
and for refreshment they gave us a little Indian 
meal, and sometimes a bit of squash, half raw. Our 
hands and fingers being all in pieces, they had to feed 
us like children. Patience was our Physician. Some 
women, more merciful, regarded us with much char- 
ity and were unable to look at our sores without 
compassion.”’ 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo.. 31 


CHAPITRE V. 


DIEU CONSERUE LE PERE ISAAC IOGUES APRES LE MAS- 
SACRE DE SON COMPAGNON. IL L’INSTRUIT 
D’VNE FACON BIEN REMARQUABLE. 


ORS que ces pauures captifs eurent repris quel- 
: que peu de leurs forces, les principaux du pays 
parlerent de les ramener aux Trois Riuieres 
pour les rendre aux Frangois, l’affaire alla fi auant 
qu’on la tenoit [83] pour affeurée. Mais ne s’eftans 
pti accorder, le Pere & fes compagnons rentrerent 
plus que iamais dans les affres de la mort. Ces Bar- 
bares ont couftume de donner les prifonniers qu’on 
ne veut pas executer & mort, aux familles qui ont 
perdu quelques-vns de leurs parens 4 la guerre. Ces 
prifonniers prennent la place des deffunts & font 
incorporez dans cette famille quifeule a droit de les 
tuer, ou de les laiffer viure. Les autres ne les 
oferoient offenfer, mais quand ils retiennent quelque 
prifonnier public, comme le Pere, fans le donner a 
aucun particulier, ce pauure homme eft tous les 
iours A deux doigts de la mort. Si quelque faquin 
l’affomme perfonne ne s’en remuera, s'il traine fa 
pauure vie c’eft a la faueur de quelques particuliers 
qui ont de l’amour pour luy. Voila la condition en 
laquelle eftoit le Pere & 1’vn des Francois: Car 
l'autre auoit e{té donné pour tenir la place d’vn Hiro- 
quois tué en guerre. 
' Le ieune Francois compagnon du Pere, auoit cou- 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 " §% 


CHAPTER V. 


GOD PRESERVES FATHER ISAAC JOGUES AFTER THE 
MURDER OF HIS COMPANION. HE INSTRUCTS 
HIM IN A VERY REMARKABLE MANNER. 


HEN those poor captives had recovered a little 
W of their strength, the principal men of the 
country talked of conducting them back to 
Three Rivers, in order to restore them to the French; 
the affair made so much progress that it was con- 
sidered [83] as settled. But, as their captors could 
not. agree, the Father and his companions endured, 
more than ever, the pangs of death. Those Barba- 
rians are accustomed to give prisoners, whom they do 
not choose to put to death, to the families who have 
lost some of their relatives in war. These prisoners 
take the place of the deceased, and are incorporated 
into that family, which alone has the right to kill 
them, or to let them live. The others would not 
dare to offend them; but when they retain some 
public prisoner, like the Father, without giving him 
to any individual, this poor man is every day within 
two finger-lengths of death. If some rascal beat him 
to death, no one will trouble himself about it; if he 
drag out his poor life, it is by favor of some individ- 
uals who have love for him. In such condition was 
the Father, and one of the Frenchmen; for the other 
had been given to take the place of a Hiroquois 
killed in war. 
The young Frenchman who was the Father’s com- 


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vo. 31 


{tume de careffer les petits enfans, & de leur enfei- 
gner A faire le figne de la Croix. Vn vieillard s’eftant 
apperceu qu'il auoit formé ce figne facré fur le front 
[84] de fon petit fils, & qu’il luy prenoit la main pour 
luy apprendre 4 le former, dit 4 vn fien nepueu, va 
t’en tuer ce chien, les Holandois nous difent que ce 
qu'il fait ne vaut rien, cela caufera quelque mal a 
mon petit fils. Ce nepueu obeyt au pluftoft, comme 
donc il cherchoit l’occafion de commettre ce meurtre 
hors de la bourgade, elle fe prefenta en cette forte. 
Le Pere Iogues ayant eu connoiffance que le deffein 
de deliurer les Francois eftoit rompu, & qu’en fuitte 
quelques ieunes gens l’ef{toient venu chercher iufques 
en fa cabane pour le tourmenter & pour le traiter 
comme vne victime deftinée 4 la mort, voulut preue- 
nir & fortifier fon pauure compagnon, il le conduit 
dans vn bocage proche de la bourgade, luy declare 
les dangers ot ils eftoient, ils font tous deux oraifon, 
ils recitent puis apres le chappelet de la Sainte 
Vierge, en vn mot ils fe difpofent gayement 4 
la mort, encouragez par la vertu de celuy qui ne 
manque iamais 4 ceux qui le cherchent & qui l’ay- 
ment, comme ils retournoient vers leur bourgade 
parlans des biens de l’autre vie, le nepueu de ce vieil- 
lard & vn autre Sauuage armez de haches épians 
l’occafion leur vont 4 la rencontre, [85] les ayans 
abordez l’vn d’eux dit au Pere, marche deuant, & a 
mefme temps il caffe la tefte au pauure René Goupil, 
lequel en tombant & en expirant prononga le Saint 
Nom de Iefus. Le Pere le voyant terraffé fe iette 
fur luy & l’embraffe, ces Barbares le retirent & don- 
nent encore deux coups de hache A ce faint corps. 
Donnez-moy vn moment de temps, leur dit le Pere, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ne) 


panion was accustomed to caress the little children, 
and to teach them to make the sign of the Cross. An 
old man, having seen him make this sacred sign upon 
the forehead [84] of his grandson, and that he took 
the child’s hand in order to teach him to form it, 
said to a nephew of his: ‘‘ Go and kill that dog: the 
Dutch tell us that what he does is of no account; that 
act will cause some harm to my grandson.’’ The 
nephew obeyed, as soon as possible; when he, ac- 
cordingly, sought the opportunity to commit this 
murder outside the village, it presented itself thus: 
Father Jogues—having learned that their purpose 
to release the French was set aside, and that, in con- 
sequence, some young men had come to seek him 
even in his cabin, in order to torment him and to 
treat him as a victim destined to death — wished to 
forewarn and strengthen his poor companion. He 
leads him to a grove near the village, and explains 
to him the dangers in which they stood. They both 
offer prayers, and then recite the rosary of the 
Blessed Virgin; in a word, they cheerfully prepare 
themselves for death, encouraged by strength from 
him who never fails those who seek and love him. 
While they were returning toward their village, 
talking of the blessings of the other life, the nephew 
of that old man, and another Savage, armed with 
hatchets and watching for an opportunity, go to meet 
‘them. [85] Having approached them, one of these 
men says to the Father, ‘‘ March forward;’’ and at 
the same time he breaks the head of poor René 
Goupil, who, on falling and expiring, pronounced the 
Holy Name of Jesus. The Father, seeing him pros- 
trate, falls upon him and embraces him; those Bar- 
barians draw him away, and deal two more blows 


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 31 


croyant qu’ils luy feroient la mefme faueur qu’aé fon 
compagnon; il fe met donc a genoux, il s’offre en 
holocaufte a la diuinité, puis fe tournans vers ces 
Barbares, faites, leur dit-il, ce qu’il vous plaira, ie ne 
crains point la mort. lLeue toy, repliquent-ils, tu 
n’en mouras pas pour ce coup, ils trainent le mort 
par les rués de la bourgade & puis le vont ietter en 
vn lieu fort efcarté. Le Pere luy voulant rendre les 
derniers deuoirs le cherche par tout, quelques enfans 
luy ayant enfeigné il le trouue dans vn ruiffeau, le 
couure de groffes pierres pour le deffendre des griffes 
& du bec des oyfeaux en attendant qu’il le vint enter- 
rer, mais il pleut toute la nuit fuiuante & ce torrent 
fe rendit fi violent & fi profond qu’il ne peuft trouuer 
ce faint corps. Cette mort arriua le [86] vingt- 
neufiefme de Septembre de l’an 1642. 

Le Printemps fuiuant quelques enfans rapportans 
qu’ils auoient veu le Francois dans vn ruiffeau, le 
Pere {’y tranfporte fans dire mot, retire ces facrez — 
defpoiiilles, les baife auec refpect, les cache dansle 
creuz d’vn arbre pour les tranfporter auec foy, fi tant 
e{t qu’on le mift en liberté. I1 ne fcauoit pas encore 
le fujet de la mort de fon compagnon, mais le vieil- 
lard qui l’auoit fait maffacrer l’ayant inuité quelques 
iours apres en fa cabane & luy donnant 4 manger, 
comme le Pere vint 4 donner la benediction & expri- 
mer le figne de la Croix. Ce Barbare luy dit, ne 
fais point cela, les Holandois nous difent que cette 
action ne vaut rien. Scache que i’ay fait tuer ton 
compagnon pour l’auoir fait fur mon petit fils, on 
t’en fera autant fi tu continué. Le Pere luy repartit 
que ce figne eftoit adorable, qu’il ne pouuoit faire 
que du bien a ceux qui s’en feruoient, qu’il n’auoit 


ae ee ee 


1647} RELATION OF 1647 57 


with the hatchet on that blessed body. ‘‘ Give mea 
moment’s time,’’ the Father said to them, supposing 
that they would accord him the same favor as to his 
companion. He then falls on his knees, he offers 
himself in sacrifice to the divinity; then, turning 
toward those Barbarians, ‘‘ Do,’’ he said to them, 
‘‘ what you please; I fear not death.’’ ‘‘ Get up,” 
they reply; “‘thou wilt not die this time.’’ They 
drag the dead man through the streets of the village, 
and then go and throw him into a very sequestered 
place. The Father, wishing to render him the last 
duties, seeks him everywhere; some children having 
informed him, he finds the corpse in a brook, and 
covers it with great stones in order to protect it from 
the claws and beaks of the birds, until he might come 
to bury it. But it rained all the following night, 
and this torrent became so violent and so deep that 
he could not find that blessed body. This death 
occurred on the [86] twenty-ninth of September, in 
the year 1642.” 

The following Spring, some children reporting 
that they had seen the Frenchman in a brook, the 
Father betakes himself thither without saying a 
word, withdraws those sacred remains, kisses them 
with respect, and hides them in the hollow of a tree, 
in order to remove them with himself, if it so hap- 
pen that they would set him at liberty. He did not 
yet know the cause of his companion’s death; but 
the old man who had caused him to be slain having 
invited him, some days later, to his cabin, and giv- 
ing him food, when the Father came to offer the 
blessing and express the sign of the Cross, that Bar- 
barian said to him: ‘‘ Do not do that; the Dutch tell 
us that that act is of no account. Know that I have 


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


garde de le quitter. Cét homme diffimula pour lors 
& le Pere n’via point de referue en cette deuotion, 
ne demandant pas mieux que de mourir pour auoir 
exprimé la marque & le figne du Chreftien, [87] mais 
reprenons la fuite de noftre difcours. 

Ce ieune homme ou ce faint martyr, eftant ainfi 
maffacré, le Pere s’en retourne en fa cabane, fes gens 
luy portent la main fur la poitrine pour fentir fi la 
peur n’agitoit point fon coeur, layant trouué conftant, 
ils luy dirét, ne forts plus de la bourgade que tu ne 
{ois accompagné de quelqu’vn de nous autres, on a 
deffein de t’aflommer, prends gardeatoy. Il connut 
fort bien qu’on le cherchoit a mort, vn Huron qui 
luy auoit donné des fouliers par compafiion les luy 
vint redemander, pource, luy dit-il, que bien-toft tu 
n’en auras plus que faire, & qu’vn autre s’en ferui- 
roit. Le Pere luy rendit, entendant fort bien ce qu'il 
luy vouloit dire. 

Quelque temps apres vn ieune Hiroquois le vou- 
lant tuer, le vint trouuer en fa cabane, & luy dit, 
viens-t’en auec moy en la bourgade prochaine. Le 
Pere connoiffant A fon maintien qu’il auoit quelque 
mauuais deffein en tefte, luy dit ie, ne fuis pas 4 moy 
fi ceux A qui i’appartiens ou qui me gardent m’en- 
uoyent, ie t'accompagneray. Ce mal-heureux n’euft 
que repartir, il fort & s’en va communiquer fa penfée 
AX vn bon vieillard qui luy deffendit [88] cette mal- 
heureufe entreprife auertiffant le Pere, & les gardes 
du Pere de iamais ne le laiffer fortir fans bonne 
compagnie. 

Comme le froid de 1’ Hyuer commengoit a fe faire 
fentir, vn autre Barbare demanda au Pere la plus 
grande partie d’vn bout de caftelogne qui luy feruoit 


1647) RELATION OF 1647 59 


had thy companion killed for having made it upon 
my grandson; the like will be done to thee, if thou 
continue.’’ The Father answered him that this sign 
was adorable; that it could not do anything but good 
to those who should use it; that he had no intention 
of giving it up. That man dissimulated, for the 
time, and the Father employed no reserve in this 
devotion,— asking nothing better than to die for 
having expressed the mark and sign of the Christian; 
[87] but let us resume the sequence of our discourse. 

That young man, or that blessed martyr, being 
thus slain, the Father returns to his cabin; his 
people apply their hands to his breast, in order to feel 
whether fear did not agitate his heart. Having found 
it steady, they said to him: ‘‘ Do not again leave the 
village, unless thou art accompanied by some one of 
us; they intend to beat thee to death; look out for 
thyself.’’ He knew very well that they were seeking 
his life; a Huron, who had given him some shoes 
out of compassion, came to ask them of him again, — 
“* Because,’’ he said to him, ‘‘ soon thou wilt have no 
more use for them, and another would use them.” 
The Father gave them back to him, understanding 
very well what he meant to tell him. 

Some time after, a young Hiroquois, wishing to 
kill him, came to find him in his cabin, and said to 
him: ‘‘Come with me to the next village.’’ The 
Father, knowing by his bearing that he had some evil 
design in mind, said to him: ‘“‘I am not my own 
master; if those to whom I belong, or who keep me, 
send me, I will accompany thee.’ That wretch had 
nothing to answer; he went out and proceeded to 
communicate his intention to a good old man, who 
forbade him [88] that base enterprise,— warning the 


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 31 


de robe, de matelats & de couuerture. Ie te la 
donnerois volontiers, luy repart le Pere, mais elle eft 
defia fi courte qu’elle n’abrie que la moitié de mon 
corps, fi tu en couppe tant foit peu tu me ietteras 
dans vne nudité mefceante aux yeux de tout le 
monde. Ce mefchant homme qui tenoit 4 grand 
mefpris d’eftre efconduit en quoy que ce fut par vn 
chien, c’eft le rang qu’il donnoit au Pere: prit refo- 
lution de le mettre 4 mort. Il enuoye fon frere pour 
l’attirer hors de fa cabane & de la bourgade; mais 
n’en ayant pii venir a bout, il entre luy-mefme, parle 
fecrettement au garde du Pere & s’en va. Le lende- 
main matin ce garde peut-eftre efpouuanté par cét 
infolent, enuoye le Pere aux champs auec deux fem- 
mes, a peine font-ils fortis de la bourgade, que ces 
deux femmes s’enfuyent, laiffant le Pere tout feul 
a la mercy [89] des loups qui le deuoient deuorer, le 
meurtrier du bon René parut auffi toft la hache 4 la 
main. Le Pere qui voyoit tout ce jeu & qu’eftoit 
forty de la cabane par obeyffance, fe doutant bien 
qu’il s’en alloit 4 la mort, regarde cét homme auec 
affeurance, & 4 mefme temps porte fon coeur a Dieu. 
Chofe eftrange! ce furieux s’adoucit, les forces & les 
armes luy tombent des mains; il s’en retourne comme 
eftonné & comme efpouuanté fans dire aucune parole 
au Pere. Envn mot ce bon Pere eftoit tous les iours 
comme l’oyfeau fur la branche, fa vie ne tenoit qu’a 
vn filet, il luy fembloit 4 tous momens qu’on I’alloit 
couper, mais celuy qui en tenoit le bout ne le 
vouloit pas lafcher fi toft. 

Quelque temps apres la mort de fon compagnon, 
Dieu luy communiqua dans fon fommeil comme il 
faifoit jadis 4 ces anciens Patriarches, ce que ie vais 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 , 61 


Father and the Father’s guards never to let him go 
out without good company. 

As the Winter cold was beginning to make itself 
felt, another Barbarian asked the Father for the 
greater part of a piece of castelogne,? which served 
him as gown, mattress, and blanket. ‘‘ I would glad- 
ly give it to thee,’’ the Father answers him, ‘‘ but it 
is already so short that it shelters only the half of my 
body; if thou cut off even a little, thou wilt reduce 
me to a nakedness unseemly in the sight of every 
one.”’ That wicked man, who considered it a great 
slight to be denied, in anything whatsoever, by a 
dog,—this rank he assigned to the Father,— took the 
resolution to put him to death. He sends his broth- 
er to entice him out of his cabin and of the village; 
but not having been able to accomplish this, he him- 
self goes in, speaks secretly to the Father’s guard, 
and goes away. The next morning, this guard, 
being perhaps frightened by that insolent man, sends 
the Father to the fields with two women. Hardly 
have they left the village, when these two women 
flee, leaving the Father all alone at the mercy [89] of 
the wolves who were to devour him; and the mur- 
derer of the good René immediately appeared, hatch- 
et in hand. The Father,—who saw all this game, 
and who had left the cabin through obedience,— 
strongly suspecting that he was on his way to death, 
looks at this man with assurance, and at the same 
time inclines his heart to God. Strange thing! that 
furious one becomes quiet; his strength and his 
weapons fall from his hands; he returns, as if aston- 
ished and terrified, without saying any word to the 
Father. In brief, this good Father was every day 
like the bird on the branch; his life held only by a 


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 31 


raconter, c’ef{t luy-mefme qui l’a couché par efcrit de 
fa propre main: voicy comme il parle en langue 
Latine, rendué en noftre Francois. 

Apres la mort de mon tres-cher compagnon d’heu- 
reufe memoire, lors qu’on me cherchoit tous les iours 
& la mort, & [90] que mon ame eftoit remplie d’an- 
goiffes ce que ie vay dire m’arriua dans mon fommeil. 

Egreffus eram & pago noftro folito meo more vt tibi Deo 
meo liberius gemerem, ce sot fes premieres paroles. 
l’eftois forty de noftre bourgade 4 m6 accouftumée 
pour gemir plus librement deuant vous 6 mon Dieu, 
pour vous prefenter mon oraifon, & pour leuer la 
bonde en voftre prefence 4 mes angofilffes & 4 mes 
plaintes. A mon retour i’ay trouué toutes chofes 
nouuelles, ces grands pieux qui entouroiét noftre 
bourgade me parurent chagez en des tours, en des 
bouleuars, & en des murailles, d’vne infigne beauté, 
en forte neantmoins que ie ne voyois rien qui fut 
nouuellement bafty, mais bien vne ville toute vene- 
rable pour fon antiquité. Doutant fi c’eftoit noftre 
bourgade, ie vis fortir quelques Hiroquois que ie 
connoiffois fort bien qui me fembloient affeurer qu’en 
effet c’eftoit noftre bourgade. I’approche de cette 
Ville tout plein d’eftonnement, ayant paffé la pre- 
miere porte, ie vis ces deux lettres L. N. grauées en 
gros characteres fur la colomne droite de la feconde 
porte, & en fuitte vn petit agneau maffacré. Ie fus 
furpris [91] ne pouuant conceuoir comme des Bar- 
bares qui n’ont aucune connoiffance de nos lettres 
auroient pti grauer ces characteres. Et comme i’en 
cherchois l’explication dans mon efprit, ie vis au 
deffus dans vn rouleau ces trois paroles efcrites /au- 
dent nomen eius. Et & mefme temps ie receus vne 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 63 


thread, and it seemed to him at every moment that 
some one was about to cut it; but he who held the 
end of it was not willing to let it go so soon. 

Some time after the death of his companion, God 
communicated to him in his sleep, as he did of old to 
those old Patriarchs, what I am about to relate. He 
himself has set it down in writing, with his own 
hand: hetells it thus in the Latin tongue, translated 
into our French. 

‘‘ After the death of my dearest companion, of 
happy memory, when they were seeking me every 
day for my death, and [90] when my soul was filled 
with anguish, what I am about to tell happened to 
me in my sleep.’’ 

Egressus eram & pago nostro solito meo more ut tibt Deo 
meo liberius gemerem, these are his first words,—“‘ I 
had gone forth from our village in my usual manner, 
in order to groan more freely before you, O my God; 
in order to offer to you my prayer, and to lift the 
sluice, in your presence, of my distresses and my 
complaints. At my return, I found all things new: 
those great stakes which surrounded our village 
appeared to me changed into towers, bulwarks, and 
walls of an illustrious beauty; so that, however, I 
saw nothing which was newly built, but indeed a city 
highly venerable for its antiquity. Doubting if it 
were our village, I saw some Hiroquois come out, 
with whom I was very well acquainted, who seemed 
to assure me that in truth it was our village. Filled 
with astonishment, I approached that City; having 
passed the first gate, I saw these two letters, L. N., 
engraved in large characters upon the right column of 
the second gate, and next a little lamb, slaughtered. 
I was surprised, [91] being unable to conceive 


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Von. 31 


grande lumiere dans le fond de mon ame, qui me fit 
voir que ceux-la proprement loiioiét le nom de 1’a- 
gneau, qui dans leurs preffes & dans leurs tribulations 
s’efforgoient d’imiter la douceur de celuy qui comme 
vn agneau n’auoit dit mot 4 ceux qui l’ayant dépoiiillé 
de fa toifon, le conduifoient 4 la mort. 

Cette veué m’ayant donné courage, i’entre dans la 
feconde porte baftie de grades pierres quarrées de 
toutes facons, qui faifoient vn grand portique ou vne 
entrée enrichie d’vne voute admirable; continuant 
mon chemin i’apperceu enuiron le milieu de ce 
portique, vn corps-de-garde tout réply d’armes & de 
toutes facons, fans voir aucun foldat, ie leur fis vne 
grande reuerence, me fouuenant qu’on leur deuoit 
ce re{fpect: comme ie les faliiois, vne fentinelle pofée 
vers l’endroit ott ie marchois s’écrie demeurez 1a: 
[92] or foit que i’euffe la face tournée d’vn autre 
co{té, ou que la beauté des chofes que ie voyois occu- 
paffent fortemét m6 efprit, ie ne vy & n’entédy rien. 
Cette fentinelle redouble vne autre fois criant plus 
fort, demeurés 14. Ie m’arrefte tout court. Cdment, 
me fit ce foldat, eft-ce ainfi que vous obeiffez a la 
voix de celuy qui eft en garde deuant le Palais royal? 
il a donc fallu vous crier deux fois demeurés 14? allons 
vifte paroiffez deuant noftre Iuge, & deuant noftre 
Capitaine, ientendy ces deux mots de Iuge, & de 
Capitaine, entrés, me dit-il, dans cette porte, pour 
receuoir le chaftiment de voftre temerité. Ie vous 
affeure 6 mon cher amy, luy repartif-je, que ie ne 
vous auois ny veu, ny entendu, il m’entraifne fans 
receuoir mes excufes. La porte de ce Palais deuant 
lequel il eftoit en faction, eftoit vn petit au deffous 
de ce corps-de-garde, dont ie viens de parler. Ce 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 65 


how Barbarians who have no knowledge of our let- 
ters could have engraved those characters; and, while 
I was seeking the explanation of it in my own mind, 
I saw overhead, in a roll, these three words written, 
Laudent nomen ejus. At the same time, I received a 
great light in the depth of my soul, which caused me 
to see that rightly were they praising the name of 
the lamb, who in their distresses and tribulations 
were striving to imitate the gentleness of him who, 
like a lamb, had said no word to those who, having 
robbed him of his fleece, were leading him to death. 

‘‘ This sight having given me courage, I enter the 
second gate, built of great stones, hewn in every fash- 
ion, which made a great portico or entrance, enriched 
with an admirable vault. Continuing my way, I 
perceived about the middle of this portico a guard- 
house, well filled with arms of every pattern, with- 
out seeing any soldier; I made them a deep obei- 
sance, remembering that one owed them this respect. 
While I was saluting them, a sentinel, stationed 
toward the place whither I was proceeding, ex- 
claimed, ‘ Halt there.’ [92] Now—vwhether I had 
my face turned in another direction, or whether the 
beauty of the things which I beheld strongly occupied 
my mind—I neither saw nor heard anything. The 
sentinel repeats, the second time, crying more loudly, 
‘Halt there;’ and I stop quite short. ‘ How?’ said 
this soldier to me, ‘ is that the way you obey the voice 
of him who is on guard before the royal Palace? 
Was it then necessary to call to you twice, ‘‘ Halt 
there?’’ Come, be quick; appear before our Judge 
and our Captain.’ I heard these two words, ‘ Judge’ 
and ‘Captain.’ ‘Enter,’ he said to me, ‘through 
this gate, in order to receive the punishment of your 


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vox. 31 


lieu me parut d’abord cOme ces chambres dorées, 
dans lefquelles on rend la Iuftice en Europe, ou 
comme ces beaux endroits qu’on voit encore dans 
quelques anciens Monafteres ott jadis les Religieux 
tenoient leur Chapitre. Dans cette Salle ou dans ce 
Palais tout rauiffant, ie [93] vis vn vieillard tout plein 
de majefté femblable 4 1’Ancien des iours, il eftoit 
couuert d’vne grande robe d’écarlate d’vne extreme 
beauté, il n’eftoit point affis dans fon Trofne mais il 
fe pourmenoit doucement, rendant la Iuftice 4 fon 
peuple duquel il eftoit feparé par de riches baluftres. 
Ie vis a la porte de ce Palais quantité de persénes 
de toutes fortes de cdditions. Le foldat qui m’auoit 
coduit ayant parlé, mon luge fans m’entendre tire 
vne baguette ou vne verge, d’vn faifceau femblable 
a ceux qu’on portoit jadis deuant les Confuls Romains, 
il me frappa long-temps & rudement de cette baguette 
fur les épaules, fur le col & fur la tefte, & encore 
qu’vne feule main me frappaft ie fentois autant de 
douleur que ie reffenty 4 mon entrée dans la 
premiere bourgade des Hiroquois, lors que toute la 
ieuneffe du pays eftant armée de baftons, nous traita 
auec vne cruauté ndpareille. lamais ie ne pouflay 
aucune plainte, iamais ie ne iettay aucun gemiffe- 
ment deffous ces coups, ie fouffrois auec douleur tout 
ce qui m’eftoit appliqué, trouuant de la patience dans 
la veué de ma baffeffe. Enfin, comme fi mon luge 
eut admiré [94] ma patiéce, il quitte la verge, & fe 
iettant A mon col, il m’enbraffa & en banniffant mes 
ennuys, il me remplit d’vne confolation toute diuine 
& entierement inexplicable. Regorgeant de cette 


—S - 


joye celefte ie baifois la main qui m’auoit frappé, & — 


me fentat tomber comme dans vn extafe ie m’écriay, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 * 67 


temerity.’ ‘I assure you, O my dear friend,’ I an- 
swered him, ‘ that I neither saw nor heard you;’ but 
he hurried me away without receiving my excuses. 
The gate of the Palace before which he was on duty 
was a little below the guard-house of which I have 
just spoken. This place appeared to me at first like 
those gilded chambers in which Justice is dispensed 
in Europe; or like those beautiful places which one 
still sees in some old Monasteries, where formerly 
the Ecclesiastics held their Chapter. In this most 
delightful Hall or Palace, I [93] saw an old man, full 
of majesty, like to the Ancient of days; he was 
covered with a magnificent scarlet robe, of extreme 
beauty; he was not seated on his Throne, but was 
quietly walking about, rendering Justice to his peo- 
ple, from whom he was separated by high railings. 
I saw at the gate of this Palace many persons, of all 
sorts of conditions. The soldier who had conducted 
me having spoken, my Judge, without hearing me, 
draws a switch or rod from a bundle like those which 
were formerly borne before the Roman Consuls; he 
struck me long and severely with that switch, on the 
shoulders, neck, and head,—and, although only a 
single hand struck me, I felt as much pain as I 
experienced at my entrance into the first village of 
the Hiroquois, when all the youth of the country, 
being armed with sticks, treated us with unequaled 
cruelty. Never did I utter any complaint, never did 
I utter any groan under those blows; I suffered with 
pain all that was applied to me, finding patience in 
view of my own baseness. Finally, as if my Judge 
had admired [94] my patience, he laid down the rod, 
and, falling on my neck, embraced me; and, in ban- 
ishing my griefs, he filled me with a consolation 
wholly divine and entirely inexplicable. Overflow- 


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 31_ 


virga tua domine mi rex & baculus tuus ipfa me confolata 
Sunt, voftre verge 6 mon Seigneur & mon Roy & 
vottre bafton m’ont confolé, cela fait il me recon- 
duit & me laiffe fur le feiiil de la porte. 

Eftant reuenu 4 moy ie ne pti douter que Dieu n’eut 
operé des merueilles dans mon ame, non feulement 
pour le rapport que ces chofes auoient par entre 
elles, mais particulierement pour le grand feu d’a- 
mour que mon luge auoit allumé au fond de mon 
coeur dont le feul fouuenir plufieurs mois apres 
me tiroit des l’armes [sc. larmes] d’vne tres-douce 
confolation. 

La creance auffi que ma mort eftoit retardée me 
fut plufieu[r]s fois imprimée dans mon fommeil 
m’e{tat aduis que ie fuiuois m6 tres-cher cOpagnon 
receu das la beatitude, ie courrois apres luy par des 
voyes & par des detours qui me déroboiét fa veué, 
dautre fois en le pourfuiuat, ie rencdtrois [95] des 
temples fuperbes dans lefquels ie me iettois attiré 
par leur beauté, & pendant que ie faifois orais6 & que 
la douceur des voix que i’entendois en ces grands 
edifices me charmoit, ie me confolois dans fon 
abfence, mais fi-toft que ie fortois de ces douceurs, 
ie r’entrois dans les defirs de le fuiure. Tout cecy 
eft tiré quafi de mot 4 mot du memoire de ce bon 
Pere qui ne comprenoit pas pour lors que ces coups 
qui luy furent déchargez fur la tefte par fon luge 
denotoient fon retour dans ce pays ot il deuoit trou- 
uer l’entrée de la Saincte Sion, par vn coup de hache 
qui la logé auec fon cher compagnon. 


7 


¥ 


1647) RELATION OF 1647 * 69 


ing with that celestial joy, I kissed the hand which 
had struck me; and, feeling myself fall as it were 
into an ecstasy, I exclaimed: Virga tua, domine mi 
rex, et baculus tuus, tpsa me consolata sunt,—‘ Your rod, 
O my Lord and my King, and your staff have com- 
forted me.’ That done, he conducts me back, and 
leaves me at the threshold of the door. 

‘““ Having returned to myself, I could not doubt that 
God had wrought wonders in my soul,—not only 
because of the connection which these things had 
among themselves, but especially because of the 
great fire of love which my Judge had kindled in the 
depth of my heart, the remembrance of which alone, 
several months later, drew from me tears of the 
sweetest consolation. 

“The belief also that my death was delayed, was 
several times impressed upon me in my sleep,—it 
seeming to me that I was following my dearest com- 
panion, received into blessedness, and was running 
after him in ways and byways which deprived me 
from seeing him. At other times, in pursuing him, 
I came across [95] superb temples, into which I 
entered, attracted by ‘their beauty; and, while I was 
offering prayers, and the sweetness of the voices 
which I heard in those great buildings was charming 
me, I would console myself in his absence; but, as 
soon as I left those delights, I returned to the desire 
of following him.” All this is taken, almost word 
for word, from the memoir of that good Father,— 
who, at the time, did not understand that those blows 
which were dealt on his head by his Judge denoted 
his return into that country, where he was to find the 


entrance to the Holy Sion by a blow from a hatchet, 
_ which has lodged him with his dear companion. 


u 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


a 
- 
\. 
* 


CHAPITRE VI. 


. 


LE PERE EST DONNE POUR VALET A DES CHASSEURS. 
IL SOUFFRE IL EST CONSOLE, IL EXERCE 
SON ZELE EN SES VOYAGES. 


N donna ce pauure Pere 4 quelques familles 
pour leur feruir de valet dans leurs chaffes, 

il les fuit dans l’entrée de 1’ Hyuer, il fait 

trente lieués auec eux les feruant deux moys durant 
comme vn [96] efclaue. Tous fes habits ne 1’ab- 
Tioient pas plus que feroit vne chemife & vn mechat 
callegon, fes bas de chauffes & fes fouliers faicts 
comme des chauffons de tripot & d’vn cuir auffi mince 
qui nauoient point de femeles, en vn mot il eftoit 
tout delabré, les rofeaux & les glajeux tranchans, 
les pierres & les cailloux, les halliers par ot il luy 
falloit paffer luy decoupoient les iabes & luy dechi- 
roient les pieds. Come on ne le tenoit pas capable de 
chaffer, on luy déna vn meftier de femme. C’eft a 
dire d’aller coupper & d’apporter le bois pour entre- 
tenir le feu de la cabane. La chaffe commengcant a 
donner il pouuoit vn petit reparer fes forces, la viande 
ne luy eftant pas efpargnée: mais comme il vit qu’ils 
offroient au Demon de la chaffe tout ce qu’ils pre- __ 
noient, il leur dit nettement qu’il ne mageroit iamais 
d’vne chair immolée au diable fi bien qu’il fe conten- 
toit d’vn peu de fagamite bien claire, c’eft A dire 
d’vn peu de farine d’inde boiiillie dans de 1’eau, 
&*encore n’en auoit-il que rarement, pource que 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ou 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE FATHER IS GIVEN AS SERVANT TO SOME HUNTERS. 
HE SUFFERS, HE IS CONSOLED; HE EXER- 
CISES HIS ZEAL IN HIS JOURNEYS. 


serve them as a menial in their hunts; he fol- 
lows them at the approach of Winter and makes 
thirty leagues with them, serving them through two 
months, as a [96] slave. All his clothes sheltered 
him no more than would a shirt and a sorry pair of 
drawers; his stockings and his shoes made like ten- 
nis slippers, and of a leather just as thin, without 
any soles,—ina word, he was allinrags. ‘The sharp 
reeds and briars, the stones and pebbles, the thickets 
through which he had to pass, cut his legs and tore 
his feet. As they did not account him fit for hunt- 
ing, they gave him a woman’s occupation,—that is, 
to cut and bring the wood to keep up the cabin fire. 
The chase beginning to furnish supplies, he could to 
some extent repair his strength,— meat not being 
stinted to him; but when he saw that they were offer- 
ing to the Demon of the chase all that they took, he 
told them plainly that he would never eat of flesh 
_ sacrificed to the devil. He therefore contented him- 
_ self with a little very thin sagamité—that is to say, 
_ with a little indian meal boiled in water; and even 
_ then he had it but seldom, because, gorged with 
_ meat, they despised their dry cornmeal. 
He secretly confessed to one of our Fathers that 


—_ gave this poor Father to some families, to 


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


regorgeans de viande ils méprifoient leur farine 
feiche. . 

Il a confeffé fecrettement A quelqu’vn de nos Peres 
que Dieu l’efprouua fortement [97] dans ce voyage, 
qu’il fe vit vn long-temps fans autre appuy que la 
Foy feule, fon abandon eftoit fi grand, & la veué de 
fes miferes luy paroiffoit fi affreufe qu’il ne fgauoit 
de quel cofté fe tourner. I] euft recours a l’oraifon, 
il s’en alloit dés le matin aux bois, en apportant 
autant & plus qu’il n’en falloit pour l’entretien du 
feu qui brufle iour & nuit dans leurs cabanes. Sa 
tafche faite il fe retiroit feul fur vne colline couuerte 
de fapins, & 14 il paffoit les huit & dix heures en 
oraifon fans autre entretien qu’auec Dieu, demeurant 
pour la plufpart du temps 4 genoux fur la neige, 
deuant vne Croix qu'il auoit luy-mefme dreffée, il 
continua ces exercices quarante iours durant, fans 
maifon, fans feu, fans autre abry que le Ciel & les 
bois, & vn mefchant bout de ie ne fgay quoy, quafi 
auffi tranfparant que l’air. Ceux de fa cabane 
s’eftans apperceus de fa retraite l’efpierét, & croyans 
qu’il faifoit 18 quelques forts pour faire mourir les 
hommes, le tourmentoient de temps en temps, luy 
faifans mille niches, l’vn luy prefentoit fon arc fai- 
fant femblant qu’il alloit décocher fes fleches deffus 
luy, l’autre l’abordoit la hache 4 la main, luy difant 
qu’il l’affommeroit s'il ne [98] quittoit fes charmes, 
ils rompirent la Croix qui luy feruoit d’oratoire; mais 
il en graua vne autre fur du bois, ils abbatirent quel- 
quesfois des arbres aupres de luy pour l’épouuanter. 
Retournant le foir en la cabane il portoit encor vn 
gros faiz de bois, & pour toute recdpenfe ils luy 
reprochoient qu'il eftoit forcier, que fes prieres 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 73 


God tried him exceedingly [97] in that journey, and 
that he saw himself a long time without other sup- 
port than Faith alone; his desolation was so great, 
and the sight of his miseries appeared to him so 
frightful that he knew not in what direction to turn. 
He had recourse to prayer; he would go to the 
woods as soon as it was morning, bringing back even 
more wood than was needed to keep up the fire which 
burns day and night in their cabins. His task done, 
he withdrew alone upon a hill covered with spruce 
trees; and there he spent eight or ten hours in prayer, 
without other conversation than that with God,— 
remaining most of the time upon his knees on the 
snow, before a Cross which he had himself set up. 
He continued these exercises during forty days, 
without house, without fire, without other shelter 
than the Sky and the woods, and a miserable scrap 
of I know not what, almost as transparent as the air. 
Those of his cabin, having perceived his retreat, 
espied him; and, supposing that he was there pre- 
paring some spells in order to make men die, they 
tormented him from time to time, playing upon him 
a thousand tricks. One would present his bow, pre- 
tending that he was about to let fly his arrows upon 
him; another would approach him, hatchet in hand, 
telling him that he would strike him dead if he did 
not [98] desist from his charms. They broke up the 
Cross which served him as oratory, but he engraved 
another on wood; they sometimes felled trees near 
him, in order to frighten him. Returning at evening 
to the cabin, he carried another great burden of 
wood; but, for all recompense, they cast reproaches at 
him that he was a wizard; that his prayers were sor- 


} ceries, which prevented the success of their hunting. 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


e{toient des fortileges qui empefchoient le bon-heur 
de leur chaffe: enfin on le tenoit comme vne abomi- 
nation, iufques-la que tout ce qu’il touchoit eftoit 
comme pollu & contaminé parmy eux, fi bien qu’il 
ne pouuoit fe feruir d’aucune des chofes de la cabane, 
il eut les cuiffes & les jambes creuaffées & fendués 
par la rigueur du froid, n’ayant pas dequoy fe 
couurir. 

Il eut dans cette retraite quelques communications 
auec Dieu, que ie traduiray fidelement du Latin de 
fon memoire. 

Il me fembla, dit-il, vn certain iour que ie me 
rencontrois en 1’affemblée de plufieurs de nos Peres, 
dont i’auois honoré la vertu pendant qu’ils eftoient 
au monde, ie n’en connu que trois diftinctement, le 
P. Iaques Bertric, le P. Eftienne Binet, & le P. Pierre 
Coton, ie les connu plus clairement les vns que les 
autres felon que ie les [99] auois plus ou moins com- 
muniquez en Europe, ie les priois de toutes les forces 
de mon coeur, de me recommander 4 la Croix afin 
qu'elle me receut comme difciple de celuy qui auoit 
e{té attaché entre fes bras, i’apportois vne raifon qui 
iamais ne m’eftoit venué en l’efprit, lors mefme que 
ie faifois des oraifons, ou des meditations de la Croix, 
i’alleguois que i’eftois concitoyen de la Croix, puis 
que i’eftois né dans vne Ville dont 1’ Eglife principale 
& Metropolitaine eftoit dediée 4 la Sainte Croix. 

Eftant encore dans cette mefme retraite, ie me 
trouuay tout a coup en la boutique d’vn Libraire placé 
dans le Cloiftre de Sainte Croix, en la ville ot i’ay 
pris naiffance, ie luy demanday s’il n’auoit point quel- — 
que Liure de pieté & d’edification, il me repart qu’il 
en auoit vn, dont il faifoit grand eftat, Amefme temps 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 75 


In fine, they regarded him as an abomination,—even 
to the degree that whatever he touched was, as it 
were, polluted and contaminated among them, so that 
he might not use any of the articles in the cabin. He 
had his thighs and legs cracked and split by the rigor 
of the cold, not having wherewith to cover himself. 

He had, in this retreat, some communications with 
God which I will faithfully translate from the Latin 
of his memoir. 

‘“ It seemed to me,”’ he says, ‘‘ on acertain day, that 
I happened to be in the assembly of several of our 
Fathers, whose virtue I had honored while they were 
in the world. I recognized only three of them dis- 
tinctly,— Father Jacques Bertric, Father Estienne 
Binet, and Father Pierre Coton. I knew some more 
clearly than others, according as I [99] had more or 
less intercourse with them in Europe. I begged 
them, with all the strength of my heart, to commend 
me to the Cross, to the end that it might receive me 
as disciple of him who had been fastened between its 
arms. I adduced an argument which had never come 
into my mind, even while I was offering prayers or 
meditations at the Cross,—I alleged that I was a 
fellow-citizen of the Cross, since I had been born in a 
City whose principal and Metropolitan Church was 
dedicated to the Holy Cross. 

** While still in that same retreat, I found myself 
all at once in the shop of a Bookseller, stationed in 
the Holy Cross Cloister, in the city where I had my 
birth. I asked him if he had not some Book of piety 
and edification; he answered me that he had one, on 
which he placed great value. At the same time when 
it was put in my hands, I heard this voice: ‘ This 
Book contains //lustres pietate viros et fortia bello pecto- 


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


qu’on me l’euft mis entre les mains, i’entendis cette 
voix. Ce Liure contient ///u/tres pietate viros & fortia 
bello pectora, les faits & les ge{tes des hommes I]luftres 
en pieté & des cceurs genereux dans la guerre, ce 
font les propres paroles que i’entendis, lefquelles 
imprimerent cette verité dans mon ame, qu’il nous 
[100] faut entrer dans le Royaume des Cieux, par 
beaucoup de tribulations: Or comme ie fortois de 
cette boutique, ie la vis toute couuerte de Croix. Si 
bien que ie dis au maiftre du logis que ie retourne- 
rois pour en achepter, que i’en voulois auoir, i’en vis 
de toutes fagons & en grand nombre. Ce bon Pere 
ne viuoit que de Croix, il ne meditoit que la Croix, 
il ne refuoit que de la Croix, fes lumieres eftoient 
fur la Croix, il en fit des Litanies amoureufes qu’on 
a trouuées apres fa mort dans des bouts de papiers, 
ot. il auoit auffi couché quelques mots en langage 
Hiroquois. 

Dans cette mefme folitude ot ces Barbares le tour- 
mentoient 4 outrance, Noftre Seigneur, comme i’ay 
defia remarqué, le ietta dans vn grandiflime abandon, 
& puis le confola en cette forte, efcoutons-le parler. 

Les neiges eftans defia profondes ie me trouuay 
demy mort dans la faim, dans le froid, dans la nudité, 
i’ef{tois la boué & la fange de ces Barbares, l’opprobre 
et le jotiet des hommes, ie fouffrois des angoiffes 
mortelles dans mon ame a la veué des negligences 
& des pechez de ma vie paffée, les douleurs de 
la mort que ie deuois [101] attendre dans peu de 
temps de la main de ces Barbares, 4 ce qu’ils me 
difoient, & les perils de 1l’Enfer m’enuironnans 
de tous coftez. I’entendis diftinttement vne voix 
qui condamnoit la pufillanimité de mon coeur, & qui 


) © ay (wey CONe-teoNHCeRRAAS 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ° 717 


ra,’— ‘the acts and deeds of men Illustrious in piety 
and of hearts brave in war.’ ‘These are the very 
words which I heard, which stamped this truth upon 
my soul, that we [100] must enter into the Kingdom 
of Heaven through many tribulations. Now, as I 
was leaving that shop, I saw it all covered with 
Crosses,—insomuch that I told the master of the 
house that I would return to buy some, and that I 
wished to have some; I saw them of all patterns and 
in great number.’’ This good Father lived only by 
the Cross, he meditated only on the Cross, he dreamed 
of nothing but the Cross, his mind was enlightened 
by the Cross; he made loving Litanies upon it, which 
were found, after his death, on scraps of paper, where- 
on he had also written some words in the Hiroquois 
language. 

In that same solitude, where those Barbarians were 
tormenting him beyond measure, Our Lord, as I have 
already remarked, cast him into the utmost desola- 
tion, and then consoled him in this way. Let us hear 
him speak. 

“The snows being already deep, I found myself 
half dead in hunger, in cold, and in nakedness; I 
was the mud and the mire of those Barbarians, the 
shame and the sport of men. I suffered mortal 
angtish in my soul at the sight of the omissions and 
sins of my past life; the pains of the death which I 
was to [101] expect, in a little while, at the hands of 
those Barbarians, as they told me; and the perils of 
Hell that surrounded me on all sides. I distinctly 
heard a voice which condemned the pusillanimity of 
my heart, and which gave me warning, senxtirem de 
Deo in bonitate, that I should fix my thoughts upon 
the goodness of my God, and cast myself entirely 


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


me donnoit aduis /entirem de Deo in bonitate, que i'ar- 
ref{taffe ma penfée fur la bonté de mon Dieu, & que 
ie me iettaffe entierement dans fon fein, i’entendis 
ces autres paroles que i’ay creu eftre de faint Ber- 
nard, Seruite Domino in illa charitate que foras mitttt 
timorem, meritum non intuetur. Seruez Dieu dans la 
charité & dans l’amour qui bannit la crainte, il ne 
iette pas les yeux fur nos merites, mais fur fa bonté. 
Ces aduis m’eftoient donnez fort 4 propos, car ie 
fentois bien que ie n’eftois pas dams vne crainte 
amoureufe & filiale, mais dans vn abbattement feruil; 
ie n’auois pas affez de confiance, & au lieu de gemir 
pour mes offenfes commifes contre Dieu, ie m’attri- 
{tois de me voir enleué du milieu de la vie & entraif- 
né au Iugement, fans auoir enuoyé deuant moy au- 
cunes bonnes ceuures. Or ces paroles me changerent 
en vn moment, elles bannirent mes ennuis, & me 
ietterent dans vn feu d’amour fi vehement que deuant 
que d’eftre [102] retourné 4 moy, ie pronongay ces 
mots de faint Bernard auec vne grande impetuofité. 
Non immerito vitam ille fibi vindicat nofiram quit pro nobis 
dedit & fuam, ce n’eft pas fans raifon que celuy-la 
demande noftre vie, qui a liuré la fienne pour nous. 
Enfin Dieu eflargit fi fort l’ame de fon pauure ferui- 
teur que ie m’en retournay plein de ioye dans noftre 
bourgade A l’entrée de laquelle ie croyois qu’on me 
deuft affommer. 

Ayant appris que quelques vieillards vouloient 
retourner en leur bourgade, ce pauure Pere demanda 
permiffion de les accompagner, on l’enuoye fans fufil, 
fans fouliers & parmy les neiges du mois de Decem- 
bre, & apres tout, on luy commande de porter dans 
ce chemin de 30. lieués vn paquet de chair boucanée, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 . 79 


upon his bosom. I heard these other words, which 
I believed were from saint Bernard,® Servite Domino 
in tlla charitate que foras mittit timorem; meritum non 
intuetur,—‘ Serve God in the charity and love which 
expels fear; he does not turn his eyes upon our 
merits, but upon his own goodness.’ These admoni- 
tions were given to me very opportunely, for I felt 
that truly I was not in a loving and filial fear, but in 
a servile dejection. I had not sufficient constancy; 
and, instead of groaning for my offenses, committed 
against God, I was grieved to see myself removed 
from the midst of life and led away to Judgment, 
without having sent before me any good works. Now 
these words changed me in a moment; they ban- 
ished my vexations, and threw me into a fire of love 
so vehement that, before having [102] returned to 
myself, I pronounced with great impetuosity these 
words of saint Bernard: Non immerito vitam tlle sibi 
vindicat nostram, qui pro nobis dedit et suam,—‘ Not 
without reason does he ask our life, who has given 
up his own for us.’ Finally, God so greatly enlarged 
the soul of his poor servant, that I returned full of joy 
to our village,— at the entrance to which, as I believed, 
they were to beat me to death.’’ 

Having learned that some old men wished to return 
to their village, this poor Father asked permission to 
accompany them; they send him without tinder, 
without shoes, and amid the snows of the month of 
December; and, after all that, they command him 
to carry on this march of 30 leagues a bundle of 
smoked meat, which would have served as burden to 
a stout porter. He had no answer to make; ail the 
Savages are like carriers or packhorses. Steadfast 
charity and patience beget strength where there is 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


qui auroit feruy de charge a vn puiffant porte-fais. 
Il n’euft point de replique, tous les Sauuages reffem- 
blét 4 des maletiers ou a des cheuaux de bagage. La 
charité & la patience folide fait trouuer des forces ot 
iln’y en a point. Il fe trouua dans ce voyage vne 
femme enceinte qui portoit auffi vn puiffant fardeau 
& vn petit enfant. Comme on vint a paffer vn 
ruiffeau fort profond & fort rapide, [103] & qu’il n’y 
auoit autre pont qu’vn arbre couché en trauers, cette 
femme ébranlée par fa charge, tomba dans ce torrent. 
Le Pere qui la fuiuoit voyant que la corde de fon 
paquet s’eftoit gliffée A fon col & que ce fais l’entrai- 
noit a fond, fe iette a l’eau, l’attrappe a la nage, la 
defgage de fon fardeau, la mene A bord, luy fauuant 
la vie & A fon petit enfant qu’il baptiza fur l’heure, 
le voyant fort mal, en effet il s’enuola deux iours 
apres en Paradis. Ie vous laiffe 4 penfer fi le froid 
fe fit fentir 4ce pauure corps extenué. Le feu qu’on 
fit pour cette femme refufcitée leur conferua la vie; 
ils l’auroient perdué fans ce fecours. 

Ef{tant arriué 4 la bourgade il n’euft pas le loifir de 
fe rafraifchir & de fe repofer, on luy commande de 
porter vn grand fac plein de bled Aces chaffeurs. 
Ce fardeau l’eftonne, on luy iette fur les efpaules, 
mais il n’alla pas loing, fa foibleffe & le verglas qui 
le faifoient tomber 4 chaque pas, luy font rebrouffer 
chemin, ceux qui l’auoient enuoyé le voyans de retour 
le chargerent d’iniures l’appellant vn chien, vn mal 
baity, qui ne fcauoit que manger, & pour penitence 
ils le mettent dans la cabane d’vn homme tout pour- 
ry, par vne puante & [104] mefchante maladie, d’vn 
homme cruel qui luy auoit arraché les ongles en fon 
entrée au pays, & qui au refte dans fes ordures 


— ——— 


ee ed ee 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 * 81 


none. There happened to be on this journey a preg- 
nant woman, who also carried a heavy burden and a 
little child. As they came to cross a small stream, 
very deep and very swift, [103] and which had no 
other bridge than a tree thrown across, this woman, 
swayed by her burden, fell into the torrent. The 
Father, who was following her,—seeing that the 
rope about her bundle had slipped to her neck, and 
that this burden was dragging her to the bottom,— 
plunges into the water, overtakes her by swimming, 
disengages her from her burden, and takes her 
to the shore, saving her life and that of her little 
child, which he baptized at once, seeing it very ill; 
in fact, it took its flight, two days later, to Paradise. 
I leave you to think whether the cold made itself felt 
by that poor worn-out body. The fire which was 
made for that revived woman preserved their lives, 
which they would have lost without this help. 
Having arrived at the village, he had no leisure 
to refresh and rest himself,—they command him to 
carry a great sack full of corn to those hunters. This 
burden astounds him; they throw it on his shoulders, 
but he does not go far,—his weakness and the sleet, 
which caused him to fall at each step, make him turn 
back. Those who had sent him, seeing him return, 
overwhelmed him with insults,—calling him a dog, 
amisshapen fellow, who knew nothing but to eat. 
Then, by way of punishment, they put him in the 
cabin of a man who is all putrid through a loathsome 
and [104] vile disease,—a cruel man, who had torn 
out his nails at his entrance into the country; and 
who, moreover, in his filthiness, had no other com- 
fort than a little corn boiled in water. The Father 
serves him as a menial during fifteen days, with an 


Le 


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


n’auoit autre foulagement qu’vn peu de bled cuit a 
l’eau, le Pere luy fert de valet quinze iours durant 
auec vne patience de fer & vne charité toute d’or. 
Enfin ceux de fa cabane eftans retournez de la chaffe — 
le rappellerent, vne ieune femme, & vne ieune fille 
s’offrirent 4 luy pour le feruir a la fagon du pays, 
luy tefmoignans beaucoup de compaffion; comme il 
les vit feules, les hommes eftans encore abfens il les 
remercia, ou pluitoft les rebuta d’autant plus rude- © 
ment qu'il s’apperceut qu’vn ieune Hiroquois les 
frequentoit trop librement. Ce defordre auquel il 
ne pouuoit remedier luy fut plus fenfible que fes 
douleurs paffées: il n’eft pas croyable combien Dieu 
eft prefent a ceux qui fouffrent pour fon nom. 

Il vifita pendant tout l’Hyuer auec danger de fa vie 
les trois bourgades des Hiroquois, nommez Agnero- 
nons, pour confoler les Hurons captifs, pour les animer 
& pour les encourager de tenir ferme en la Foy, leur 
adminiftrant de fois 4 autre le Sacrement de peni- 
tence. La mere de fon [105] garde ou de fon hofte 
qu’il appelloit fa tante commenga d’admirer & de 
refpecter fes vertus, elle luy donna vne peau de cerf 
pour fe coucher & vne autre pour fe couurir; ils 
auoient vn voifin tout couuert de playes. Cét homme 
eftoit du nombre de ceux qui auoient traité le Pere 
auec plus de rage & plus de cruauté; comme il le vit 
dans cette extremité il le vifita fouuant, le confolant 
dans fa maladie, il luy alloit chercher de petits fruits 
pour le regaler. Cette charité luy gaigna le coeur & 
augmenta le refpect que fes gens luy portoient. 

Sa tante le mena ala pefche enuiron le mois de — 
Mars, fon exercice fut le mefme qu’A la chaffe, il 
fourniffoit le bois de chauffage pour fa cabane, mais ; 


| 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 *83 


iron patience and a charity wholly of gold. Finally, 
those of his cabin, having returned from the hunt, 
called him back; a young woman and a young girl 
offered themselves to him to serve him in the man- 
ner of the country, showing him much compassion. 
When he saw them alone, the men being still absent, 
he thanked them,—or, rather, he rebuked them, all 
the more severely because he perceived that a young 
Hiroquois was associating with them too wantonly. 
This licentiousness, which he could not remedy, was 
more painful to him than his own past sufferings; it 
is not credible how present God is to those who 
suffer for his name. 

He visited during all the Winter, at the peril of 
his life, the three villages of the Hiroquois named 
Agneronons, in order to console the captive Hurons, 
and to animate and encourage them to remain firm 
in the Faith,—administering to them, from time to 
time, the Sacrament of penance. The mother of his 
[105] guard, or host,— whom he called ‘‘ his aunt,’’— 
began to admire and respect his virtues; she gave 
him a deerskin to lie down on, and another with 
which to cover himself. They had a neighbor, all 
covered with wounds: this man was among the num- 
ber of those who had treated the Father with most 
tage and cruelty. When he saw this man in such 
extremity, he visited him often, consoling him in his 
disease, and went to gather small fruits with which 
to refresh him. This charity won for him affection, 
and increased the respect which his people enter- 
tained for him. 

His aunt took him to the fishing, about the month 
of March; his occupation was the same as while hunt- 
ing,—he furnished the firewood for his cabin; but 


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 31 


on le traitoit auec plus de douceur. Cette retraite — 
hors des bourgades & du tumulte des Hiroquois luy © 
fut tres-agreable: il fit vne petite cabane de branches 
de fapin, en forme de chappelle; ot il dreffa vne © 
Croix. Cette Eglife eftoit toute fa confolation, il y 
paffoit la plus grande partie de la iournée en prieres, 
fans eftre mole{té de perfonne; mais ce repos ne fut 
pas de longue durée. Vn vieillard voyant que fon 
parent [106] ne retournoit point de la guerre creut 
qu'il auoit efté tué, & pour foulager ou pour honorer 
fon ame, il luy voulut facrifier celle du Pere. Sga- 
chant donc qu’il eftoit efloigné du bourg de quelques 
iournées, il enuoye vn ieune homme pour aduertir 
ces pefcheurs qu’on auoit veu l’ennemy roder en ce 
quartier-ld. Il n’en fallut pas dauantage pour leur 
donner la peur & pour les faire retourner bien vifte 
en leur bourgade, de bon-heur pour le Pere, 4 mefme 
temps qu'il entroit dans les portes vn meffager arriua, 
qui apporta nouuelle que ce guerrier & fes camarades 
dont on eftoit en peine retournoient victorieux, ame- 
nans vingt prifonniers Abnaquiois, fix mois apres 
leur defpart du pays. Voila tout le monde dans la — 
ioye, on laiffe le pauure Pere, on brufle, on efcorche, 

on roftit, on mange ces pauures victimes, auec des © 
refioiiyflances publiques: ie croy que les Demons : 
font quelque chofe de femblable dans les Enfers, a | 
la venué des ames condamnées 4 leurs brafiers. | 

Depuis le mois d’Aouft iufques a la fin de Mars, le 

Pere fut tous les iours dans les tranchées & dans les — 
efpouuantes de la [107] mort. Vn moindre courage © 
fut mort cent fois d’apprehenfion. [1 eft plus ayfé— 
de mourir tout d’vn coup que de mourir cent fois. - 
Sur la fin d’Auril vn Capitaine Sauuage du pays des 


—— el 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 * 35 


they treated him with more mildness. This retreat 
outside the villages and tumult of the Hiroquois was 
very acceptable to him; he made a little cabin of fir 
branches, in the form of a chapel, where he erected 
a Cross. This Church was all his consolation,—he 
spent in it the greater part of the day in prayers, 
without being molested by any one; but this repose 
was not of long duration. An old man, seeing that 
his kinsman [106] did not return from the war, sup- 
posed that he had been killed; and, in order to com- 
fort or honor that man’s soul, he wished to sacrifice 
to it the Father’s. Accordingly, knowing that he 
was at several days’ distance from the village, he 
sends a young man to warn those fishermen that the 
enemy had been seen prowling about in that quarter. 
It required nothing more to inspire fear in them, and 
to make them return very quickly to their village. 
Happily for the Father, at the very time when he 
was entering the gates, a messenger arrived, who 
brought news that that warrior and his comrades 
about whom they were anxious were returning vic- 
torious, bringing twenty Abnaquiois prisoners, six 
months after their departure from the country. Be- 
hold them all joyful; they leave the poor Father; 
they burn, they flay, they roast, they eat those poor 
victims, with public rejoicings. I suppose that the 
Demons do something similar in Hell, at the sight of 
souls condemned to their braziers. 

From the month of August till the end of March, 
the Father was every day in the pains and terrors of 
[107] death. A lesser courage had died a hundred 
times, from apprehension. It is easier to die all at 
once than to die a hundred times. Toward the end 
of April, a Savage Captain from the country of the 


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 — 


Sokokiois parut dans le pays des Hiroquois, chargé — 
de prefens, qu'il venoit offrir pour la rangon & pour 
la deliurance d’vn Francois nommé Ondeffon, c’eft — 


ainfi que les Hurons & les Hiroquois nommoient le 
Pere Iogues. Cét homme racontoit que l’vn de fes 
compatriotes homme de confideration, eftant tombé 
entre les mains des Algonquins, auoit efté fort mal 
traité, mais qu’Onontio, & les Francois auoient fait 
de grands prefens pour le rachepter, qu’ils luy auoiét 
fauué la vie, & 1a-deffus il tira des lettres du Capi- 
taine des Francois, pour eftre rendués 4 Ondeffon. 
Cét ambaffade donna du credit au Pere, & le fit regar- 
der pour vn peu de temps d’vn ceil plus pitoyable, 
mais ces Barbares ayans accepté les prefens ne le 
mirent pas pourtant en liberté, violans le droit des 
gens & la loy receué parmy tous ces peuples. 

Cette nouuelle bien-veillance n’empefcha pas qu’vn 
fou n’affommatft quafi ce “pauure Pere, il entra de 
furie dans fa cabane, [108] & luy donna deux grands 
coups d’vne maffe d’armes, par la tefte le renuerfant 
& demy mort, & fi quelque perfonnes ne 1’euffent 
empefché, il luy auroit ofté la vie. I] n’en fut autre 
chofe, finon que fa pauure tante fe mit a pleurer, & 
depuis ce temps-1a elle l’auertiffoit en fecret des mau- 
uais deffeins qu’on braffoit contre luy, l’incitant a fe 
fauuer & a fe tirer de cette rude captiuité. Ie diray 
en paffant que ces fous dont il y a grand nombre en 
ce pays-la, & en plufieurs autres endroits de 1’Ame- 
rique, font pluftoft agitez & comme poffedez de quel- 
que Demon, qui leur caufe cette fureur de temps en 


temps, que bleffez du cerueau par quelque maladie — 


naturelle. 


Au moys de may & de Iuin le Pere écriuit diuerfes 1 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 * 87 


Sokokiois appeared in the land of the Hiroquois, 
laden with presents, which he came to offer for the 
ransom and deliverance of a Frenchman named 
Ondesson,—thus the Hurons and Hiroquois named 
Father Jogues. This man related that one of his 
fellow-countrymen, a man of note, having fallen into 
the hands of the Algonquins, had been very badly 
treated; but that Onontio and the French had made 
great gifts to redeem him, and had saved his life; 
and thereupon he drew forth some letters from the 
Captain of the French, to be delivered to Ondesson. 
This embassy gave some credit to the Father, and 
caused him to be regarded for a short time with more 
compassionate eyes; but those Barbarians, having 
accepted the gifts, nevertheless did not set him at 
liberty,—- violating the law of nations, and the law 
accepted among all these tribes. 

This new benevolence did not prevent a madman 
from almost beating to death this poor Father; this 
man entered with fury into his cabin, [108] and gave 
him two heavy blows with a war-club on the head, 
prostrating him half dead; and if some persons had 
not hindered him, he would have taken the Father’s 
life. Nothing else happened, except that his poor 
aunt began to weep; and, from that time, she warned 
him secretly of the evil designs which were brewed 
against him, urging him to escape and to extricate 
himself from that harsh captivity. I will say, in 
passing, that these madmen—of whom there is a 
great number in that country, and in many other 
regions of America—are rather agitated, and, as it 
were, possessed, by some Demon, who causes in them 
this fury from time to time, than injured in the brain 
by any natural disease. 


_ 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Nou. 81 


lettres par des guerriers qui venoient a la chaffe des © 
hommes fur le grand fleuue de Sain@ Laurent, il 
leur difoit qu’ils attachaffent ces lettres Ades perches — 
fur les riues de cette grande riuiere, quoy que c’en © 
foit ilen fut rendué vne 4 Monfieur noftre Gouuer- — 
neur A l’occafion que nous auons deduit au chap. 12, © 
de la relation de l’an 1642. ou la coppie de cette lettre _ 
eft couchée tout au long. 1 

[109] Enuiron ce temps-la quelques Capitaines q 
Hiroquois, allant vifiter de petites nations qui leur a 
font comme tributaires, pour tirer des prefens. Celuy — 
qui auoit le Pere en garde eftant de la partie le mena 
afa fuitte, fon deffein eftoit de faire paroiftre les 
triomphes des Hiroquois fur les nations mefme qui 
font dans 1’Europe, & Dieu prétendoit fauuer quel- 
que ame, par le moyen de fon feruiteur, lequel ne 
manquoit pas fi toft qu'il eftoit entré dans quelque ~ 
bourgade, de vifiter toutes les cabanes & de baptizer 
les enfans moribonds, & mefme encore les plus 
grandes perfonnes, quand il auoit le moyen de les 
in{truire, allant donc de cabane en cabane il apper- 
ceut vn ieune homme tout languiffant, celuy-cy 
s’addreffant au Pere luy dit, Ondeffon, l’appellant du 
nom Sauuage qu’il portoit en ces contrées, ne me a 
connois-tu pas? te fouuiens-tu bien du plaifir que ie 
te fis en ton entrée, dans le pays des Hiroquois. le — 
ne me fouuiens pas de t’auoir iamais veu, luy dit le © 
Pere, mais encore quel plaifir m’as tu fait? te — 
fouuiens-tu bien repart-il, d’vn homme qui couppa les 
liens en la troifiefme bourgade des Hiroquois Agnero- — 
nons, lors que tu n’en pouuois [110] plus? ie m’en © 
fouuiens fort bien, cét homme m’obligea grandement, 
ie ne l’ay iamais pti reconnoiftre, donne m’en ie te ; 


<n 
: 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 » 89 


In the months of May and June, the Father wrote 
several letters, by warriors who were coming to hunt 
men upon the great stream of Saint Lawrence; he 
told them that they should fasten these letters to 
some poles on the banks of that great river. Be this 
as it may, one of them was delivered to Monsieur 
our Governor, on the occasion which we have de- 
scribed in chapter 12 of the relation for the year 1642, 
where the copy of that letter is written at full length. 

[109] About that time,—some Hiroquois Captains 
going to visit some small nations which are, as it 
were, tributary to them, in order to get some pres- 
ents,—that man who had the Father in custody, being 
of the party, led him in his train; his design was to 
display the triumphs of the Hiroquois over even the 
nations which are in Europe. God was intending to 
save some soul by the means of his servant, who did 
not fail, as soon as he had entered into any village, 
to visit all the cabins and to baptize the dying chil- 
dren,—and, even further, fully adult persons, when 
he had the means to instruct them. Going, then, 


from cabin to cabin, he perceived a young man who 


was very ill; the latter, turning to the Father, said 
to him, ‘‘ Ondesson,’’—calling him by the Savage 
name which he bore in those regions,—‘‘ dost thou 
not know me? Dost thou remember well the favor 
that I did thee at thy entrance into the country of 


the Hiroquois?”’ ‘‘I do not remember having ever 
seen thee,” said the Father to him; ‘‘ but, then, what 
favor didst thou do me?” ‘‘ Dost thou indeed 


remember,’’ he replies, ‘‘a man who cut the bonds, 
in the third village of the Agneronon Hiroquois, 
when thou wert at the end of thy strength?’’ [110] 
“‘T remember it very well; that man greatly obliged 


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vou.81 


prie des nouuelles fi tu en as connoiffance? c’eft moy 
mefme repart ce pauure languiffant. A ces paroles 
le Pere fe iette fur luy lembraffe luy tefmoignant de 
coeur des yeux & de la voix les reffentiments qu’il 
auoit d’vn tel bien fait. Ah! que ie fuis trifte, luy 
fit-il, de te voir en ce pitoyable eftat? que i’ay de 
regrets de ne te pouuoir fecourir dans ta maladie, 
i’ay fouuent fans te connoiftre prié pour toy le grand 
mai{tre de nos vies, tu me vois dans vne grande pau- 
ureté, mais neantmoins ie te veux faire vn plaifir 
plus grand que celuy que tu m’as fait, le malade 
écoute, le Pere luy éuangelize Iefus Chrift, il luy fait 
entendre qu’il peut entrer dans vne vie de plaifir & 
de gloire, en vn mot il l’inftruit, il croit, il donne 
des te{moignages de fa creance, le Pere le baptiffe & 
peu de temps apres il s’enuola au Ciel recompenfé 
plufqu’au cétuple de la compaffion qu’il auoit portée 
au feruiteur de Iefus-Chrift. 

Les fatigues du Pere dans ce voyage de plus de 
quatre-vings lieués furent pleinement adoucies & 
recompenfées par le [111] falut de fon Bien-faicteur, 
il n’y eut iamais d’Anachorete plus abftinent que ce 
pauure captif dans ce voyage, fa vie n’eftoit que d’vn 
peu de pourpier fauuage, qu'il alloit cueillir dans les 
chaps dont il faifoit vn potage fans autre affaifonne- 
ment que de l’eau claire. Onluy donnoit bien a 
manger de certaines graines, mais fi infipides & fi 
dagereufes qu’elles feruoiét de poifon tres-prefent 4 
ceux qui ne les fgauoient pas accommoder il n’y 
voulut point toucher. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ° 91 


me. I have never been able to thank him; give me, 
I beg thee, some news of him, if thou art acquainted 
with him.’’ ‘‘It was I myself,’’ answers this poor 
invalid. At these words the Father falls upon him 
and embraces him,—showing him with heart, eyes, 
and voice the grateful emotions which he felt for such 
a benefit. ‘‘ Ah! how sad I am,’’ he said to him, 
**to see thee in this pitiful state; what regrets I feel, 
to be unable to help thee in thy sickness! I have 
often, without being acquainted with thee, prayed 
for thee to the great master of our lives. Thou seest 
me in great poverty; but, nevertheless, I will do 
thee a favor greater than that which thou didst to 
me.’’ The sick man listens; the Father announces 
to him the gospel of Jesus Christ; he makes him 
understand that he can enter a life of pleasure and 
glory; in a word, he instructs him. The sick man 
believes, and gives indications of his belief; the 
Father baptizes him; and shortly after, he took his 
flight to Heaven, rewarded more than a hundredfold 
for the compassion which he had extended to the 
servant of Jesus Christ. 

The Father’s fatigues in that journey of more than 
eighty leagues were fully soothed and rewarded by 
the [111] salvation of his Benefactor. There was 
never Anchorite more abstemious than this poor cap- 
tive on that journey; his living was only a little wild 
purslane which he went to gather in the fields, with 
which he made a soup without other seasoning than 
clear water. They gave him, indeed, certain seeds 
to eat,—but so insipid and so dangerous that they 
served as a very quick poison to those who knew not 
how to prepare them; and he would not touch them. 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 31 


CHAPITRE VII. 


LE PERE SE SAUUE DES HIROQUOIS & PASSE EN FRANCE 
PAR L’ENTREMISE DES HOLLANDOIS, IL RE- 
PASSE EN CANADAS OU ESTANT AR- 

RIUE, IL FAIT VN VOYAGE AU 
PAYS DES HIROQUOIS. 


V retour de ce voyage on commande au Pere 
d’aller accompagner quelques pefcheurs qui 
le menerent 7. ou 8. lieués au deffous d’vne 

habitation Hollandoife, comme il eftoit occupé en 
cét exercice il aprend de la bouche de quelques [112] 
Hiroquois qui vindrent en ce quartier-l4 qu’on 1’at- 
tendoit en la bourgade pour le brufler, cette nouuelle 
fut l’occafion de fa deliurance de laquelle ayant fuffi- 
famment parlé en la Relation l’an 1642. & 1643. au 
chap. 14. ie ne rapporteray icy que quelques particu- 
laritez dont on n’a fait que peu ou point de mention. 
Les Hollandois luy ayant donné la commodité d’en- 
trer dans vn nauire, les Hiroquois s’en plaignirent 
on l’en retire & on le mene en la maifon du Capi- 
taine, quile donna en garde a vn vieillard, en atté- 
dant qu’on eut appaifé ces Barbares, en vn mot s’ils 
euffent perfeueré dans leur demande & rebuté quel- 
ques prefens qu’on leur fit, on eut remis le Pere entre 
leurs mains pour eftre l’objet de leur fureur, & 1’ali- 
ment de leurs feux. Or comme on attendoit l’occa- 
fion de le faire repaffer en Europe il fut fix femaines 
fous la garde de ce vieillard fort auaricieux, qui le 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 7 = 


CHAPTER VII. 


THE FATHER ESCAPES FROM THE HIROQUOIS AND PRO- 
CEEDS TO FRANCE, THROUGH THE INTERVENTION OF 
THE DUTCH. HE RETURNS TO CANADAS; HAV- 
ING ARRIVED THERE, HE MAKES A JOURNEY 
TO THE COUNTRY OF THE HIROQUOIS. 


PON the return from this journey, they com- 
mand the Father to go and accompany some 
fishermen, who conducted him 7 or 8 leagues 

below a Dutch settlement. While he was engaged 
in that exercise, he learned from the lips of some 
[112] Hiroquois who came to that quarter that they 
were awaiting him in the village to burn him. This 
news was the occasion of his deliverance, of which,— 
having sufficiently mentioned it in the Relation for 
the year 1642 and 1643, chapter 14,—I will relate here 
only some particulars of which there has been but 
little if any mention. The Dutch having given him 
the opportunity to enter a ship, the Hiroquois 
complained of it;—-he was withdrawn thence and 
conducted to the house of the Captain, who gave him 
in custody to an old man, until they should have ap- 
peased those Barbarians. In a word, if they had per- 
severed in their demand, and rejected some presents 
that were made to them, the Father would have been 
given up into their hands, to be the object of their 
fury and food for their fires. Now, while they were. 
awaiting the opportunity to send him back to Europe, 
he remained six weeks under the guard of that old 


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 81 


logea dans vn vieux galetas, ou la faim, & la foif, & 
la chaleur, & la crainte de retomber 4 tous momens 
entre les mains des Hiroquois luy donnoient de 
grandes occafions de fe ietter & de s’abyfmer dans la 
prouidence de celuy qui luy auoit fi fouuent fait fentir 
fa prefence. [113] Cét homme étoit le viuandier de 
cette habitation, il faifoit la leffiue tous les quinze 
iours, puis reportoit fon cuuier au grenier, dans 
lequel il mettoit de l’eau qui feruoit de boiffon au 
Pere, iufques 4 la premiere leffiue. Cette eau qui fe 
gattoit bien to{t dans les ardeurs de 1’ E{té luy caufa 
vne grande douleur d’eftomach. On luy donnoit a 
manger autant qu’il en falloit, non pas pour viure, 
mais pour ne pas mourir, Dieu feul & fes Saincts 
ef{toient facompagnie. Le Miniftre le vifita quelque- 
fois, & s’aduifant vn iour de luy demander comme 
on le traitoit, car iamais ce bon Pere n’en eut fait 
mention, fi on ne luy en eut parlé, il refpondit qu’on 
luy apportoit affez peu de chofes, ie m’en doute bien, 
repart le Miniftre, car ce vieillard eft vn grand auari- 
cieux, qui fans doute retient la plufpart des viures 
qu’on vous enuoye, le Pere luy témoigna qu'il étoit 
content, & que les fouffrances luy étoient agreables 
depuis vn long-temps. Dans ce grenier ou étoit le 
Pere, il y auoit vn retranchement ou fon Garde 
menoit inceflammét des Sauuages Hiroquois, pour 
vendre quelques denrées qu’il y referroit, ce retran- 
chement étoit fait de planches fi [114] peu jointes 
qu’on eut ayfement paffé les doigts dans les ouuer- 
tures, ie m’étonne dit le Pere comme ces Barbares 
ne m’ont cent & cent fois découuert, ie les voyois 
fans difficulté, & fi Dieu n’euft détourné leurs yeux 
ils m’auroient mille fois apperceu, ie me cachois 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 * 95 


man, who was very miserly, and lodged him in an 
old garret,— where hunger, and thirst, and heat, and 
the fear at every moment of falling back into the 
hands of the Hiroquois, gave him excellent reason 
to cast and submerge himself within the providence 
of him who had so often caused him to realize his 
presence. [113] This man was the sutler of that 
settlement; he made lye every fortnight, then carried 
back his tub to the garret, in which he put water 
which served the Father for drink until the next 
lye-making. ‘This water, which soon spoiled in the 
Summer heat, caused him a severe pain in the stom- 
ach. They gave him to eat as much as was neces- 
sary, not to live, but not to die. God alone, and his 
Saints, were his company. The Minister visited him 
sometimes, and bethinking himself one day to ask 
him how they treated him,—for never would this 
good Father have mentioned it, if he had not been 
spoken to about the matter,— he answered that they 
brought him very few things. ‘‘ I suspect as much,”’ 
the Minister answers, ‘‘for that old man isa great 
miser, who no doubt retains most of the provisions 
that are sent to you.”” The Father assured him that 
he was content, and that his sufferings had long since 
been acceptable to him. In this garret where the 
Father was, there was a recess to which his Guard 
continually led Hiroquois Savages, in order to sell 
some produce which he locked up there: this recess 
was made of planks so [114] slightly joined that one 
might easily have passed his fingers into the open- 
ings. ‘‘I am astonished,’’ says the Father, ‘‘ that 
those Barbarians did not hundreds of times discover 
me; I saw them without difficulty; and unless 
God had turned away their eyes, they would have 


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


deriere des futailles me repliat dans vne pofture 
violente, qui me donnoit la gehenne, & torture les 
deux & trois & quatre heures de fuitte & cela fort 
fouuent. De defcendre a la cour du logis, ou d’aller 
en d’autres endroits, c’eftoit me precipiter, pour ce 
que tout étoit remply de ceux qui me cherchoiét a 
mort & pour augmétation de mes biés, cét 4 dire de 
mes croix, la bleffure qu’vn chien m’auoit faite, la 
nuict que ie me fauuay d’entre les Hiroquois, me 
caufoit vne fi grande douleur que fi le Chirurgien de 
cette habitation n’y eut mis la main, i’aurois non 
feulement perdu la jambe: mais encore la vie, car la 
gangrene s’y mettoit def-ja. 

Le Capitaine de la principale habitation appellée 
Manate, éloignée de celle ou i’eftois de foixante 
lieu€és, ayans appris que ie n’eftois pas trop 4 mon 
ayfe dans ce voifinage d’Hiroquois, ot de Maquois, 
comme les Hollandois les nomment, commanda [115] 
qu’on me conduifit dans fon fort, de bonne fortune en 
mefme temps qu’on receut fes lettres, vn vaiffeau 
deuoit defcendre, dans lequel on me fit embarquer 
en la compagnie d’vn Miniftre qui me Stémoigna 
beaucoup de bien-veillance. I1 eftoit garny de qua- 
tité de bouteilles, dont il fit largeffe, notamment a 
la rencontre d’vne Ifle, 4 laquelle il voulut qu’on 
donna{ft mon nom au bruit du canon, & des bouteilles, 
chacun témoigne fon amour 4 fafacon. Ce bon Pere 
fut receu dans Manate, auec de grands témoignages 
d’affection, le Capitaine luy fit faire vn habit noir 
affez leger, & luy donna auffi vne bonne cafaque & 
vn chapeau 4 leur mode. Les habitans le venoiét 


voir, monftrans par leurs regards, & par leurs paroles, ~ f 


quils luy portoient grande compaffion. Quelques- 


; 
4 
. 


; 
a 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 - 97 


perceived me a thousand times. I concealed myself 
behind casks, bending myself into a constrained pos- 
ture which gave me gehenna and torture two, three, 
or four hours in succession, and that very often. To 
go down to the court of the dwelling, or to go to 
other places, was casting myself headlong; for every 
place was filled with those who were seeking me to 
death. Besides, to increase my blessings,—that is 
to say, my crosses,—the wound which a dog had 
inflicted upon me, the night that I escaped from the 
Hiroquois, caused me so great a pain that, if the 
Surgeon of that settlement had not put his hand to it, 
I would have lost not only the leg, but life; for 
gangrene was already setting in. 

‘“The Captain of the principal settlement, called 
Manate, distant sixty leagues from the one where I 
was, having learned that I was not overmuch at my 
ease in that vicinity of the Hiroquois,—or Maquois, 
as the Dutch name them,—commanded [115] that I 
be taken to his fort. By good fortune, at the same 
time when they received his letters a vessel was to 
go down, in which they made me embark in company 
with a Minister, who showed me much kindness. He 
was supplied with a number of bottles, which he dealt 
out lavishly,—especially on coming to an Island, to 
which he wished that my name should be given with 
the noise of the cannon and of the bottles; each one 
manifests his love in his own fashion.’’ This good 
Father was received in Manate with great tokens 
of affection; the Captain had a black coat made for 
him, sufficiently light, and gave him also a good cloak 
and a hat in their own style. The inhabitants came 
to see him, showing, by their looks and their words, 


that they felt great sympathy for him. Some asked 


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


vns luy demandoient qu’elle recompence luy donne- 
roient Meffieurs de la Nouuelle France, s’imaginants 
qu’il auoit fouffert ces indignitez a l’ocafion de leur 
commerce, mais il leur fit entendre, que les penfées 
de la terre ne luy auoit point fait quitter fon pays, & 
que la publication de 1l’Euangile, étoit 1’vnique bien 
qu’il auoit pretendu, fe jettant dans les dangers [116] 
ou il étoit tombé. Vn bon garcon l’ayant rencontré 
a lécart fe ietta a fes pieds, luy prenat les mains pour 
les baifer, en s’écriant Martyr, Martyr de Iefus- 
Chrift, il l’interrogea & conneut que c’eftoit vn Lute- 
rien qu’il ne pfit ayder pour n’auoir pas connoiffance 
de fa langue c’eftoit vn Polonois. 

Entrant dans vne maifon affez proche du fort, il 
vit deux images au manteau de la cheminée l’vne 
de la fainte Vierge, l’autre de noftre B. Louys de 
Gonzage, comme il en tefmoigna quelque fatisfaction. 
Le maiftre du logis luy dit que fa femme eftoit catho- 
lique. C’eftoit vne Portugaife menée en ce pays-la, 
par ie ne fcay quel rencontre, elle paroiffoit fort 
modeite & fort vereconde, la fuperbe de Babel a 
bien fait du tort A tous les hommes, la confufion des 
langues les a priuez de grands biens. 

Vn Catholique Irlandois, arriuant de la Virginie a 
Manate, fe confeffa au Pere, & luy dit, qu’il y auoit 
de nos Peres dans ces contrées-la, & que depuis peu 
l’vn deux fuiuant les Sauuages dans les bois pour 
les conuertir, auoit efté tué par d’autres Sauuages 
ennemis de ceux que le Pere accompagnoit. Enfin 
le Gouuerneur du pays enuoyant [117] vne barque de 
cent tonneaux en Holande, renuoya le Pere au 
commencement du mois de Nouembre. I] fouffrit 
affez dans cette nauigation, fon lit eftoit le tillac ou 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 wht 


him what recompense the Gentlemen of New France 
would give him,—imagining that he had suffered 
those indignities on account of their trade. But he 
gave them to understand that worldly thoughts had 
not caused him to leave his own country; and that 
the publication of the Gospel was the sole good that 
he had had in view when casting himself into the 
dangers [116] into which he had fallen. A good lad, 
having met him in a retired place, fell at his feet,— 
taking his hands to kiss them, and exclaiming, ‘* Mar- 
tyr, Martyr of Jesus Christ!”” He questioned him, 
and ascertained that he was a Lutheran, whom he 
could not aid for want of acquaintance with his lan- 
guage; he was a Pole. 

Entering a house quite near the fort, he saw two 
images on the mantelpiece,—one, of the blessed 
Virgin; the other, of our Blessed Louys de Gonzage. 
When he betokened some satisfaction at this, the 
master of the house told him that his wife was a cath- 
olic. She was a Portuguese, brought into that coun- 
try by I know not what chance; she appeared very 
modest and bashful. The arrogance of Babel has 
done much harm to all men; the confusion of tongues 
has deprived them of great benefits. 

An Irish Catholic, arriving at Manate from Vir- 
ginia, confessed to the Father and told him that 
there were some of our Fathers in those regions; and 
that latterly one of them—following the Savages 
into the woods in order to convert them—had been 
killed by other Savages, enemies of those whom the 
Father accompanied. Finally, the Governor of the 
country, sending [117] a bark of one hundred tons to 
Holland, sent the Father back, at the beginning of the 
month of November. He suffered much in that 


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


quelques cordages arroufez bien fouuent des vagues 
delamer. Le peu de viures & le grand froit, n’accom- 
modoient pas vn homme affez legerement couuert, & 
qui auoit tant ieufné parmy des Barbares. . 

Ils moiiillerent l’ancre en vn port d’Angleterre fur 
la fin de Decembre, les Nautonniers fe voulant vn 
petit rafraifchir s’en allerent tous dans vne bour- 
gade, laiffant le Pere auec vn matelot pour garder la 
bargue. Sur le foir arriuent des voleurs dans vn 
bafteau, ils entrent dans cette barque, qu’ils croyent 
chargée de grandes richeffes pour venir d’vn voyage 
de long cours. Ils prefentent le piftolet au Pere, 
mais ayans reconnu qu’il eftoit Frangois, ils ne luy 
firent autre mal que de luy defrober tout ce qu’il 
auoit, c’eft aA dire fa cafaque & fon chapeau, auec 
tout le bagage de ces pauures Holandois. Celuy qui 
commandoit cette barque eftant aduerty de ce vol, 
fut bien eftonné, pendant qu’il va & vient cherchant 
par tout les autheurs de [118] ce forfait, le Pere 
rencontra vn vaiffeau Francois; quiluy donna dequoy 
viure iufqu’A ce qu’il eut trouué le moyen de 
repaffer en France. 

La veille de Noél il s’embarqua, comme vn pau- 
ure, dans ie ne {cay quel bateau ot vne petite barque 
chargée de charbon de terre, qui le mit le lendemain 
en la cofte de la baffe Bretaigne. Le pauure Pere 
ayant apperceu vne petite maifon toute feule s’en va 
demander a ceux qui l’habitoient ou eftoit 1’ Eglife. 
Ces bonnes gens luy enfeignerent le chemin, & croy- 
ans 4 fa modeftie que ce fut quelque pauure Irlan- 
dois catholique, ils l’inuiterent & venir prendre fa 
refection en leur logis, quand il auroit fait fes deuo- 
tions. Ce qu’il accepta fort volontiers, pour la grande 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 * 101 


voyage; his bed was the deck, or a pile of cordage, 
very often washed by the waves of the sea. The 
scanty provisions and the severe cold did not agree 
with a man rather lightly covered, and who had so 
long fasted among Barbarians. 

They anchored in a port of England, toward the end 
of December; the Mariners wishing to refresh them- 
selves a little, all went away to a village, leaving the 
Father with a sailor to guard the bark. Toward even- 
ing, some robbers arrive in a boat: they enter this 
bark, which they believe to be laden with great riches 
because of just coming from a long voyage. They 
present a pistol at the Father; but, having recognized 
that he was French, they did him no other harm than 
to rob him of everything that he had,—that is to say, 
his cloak and his hat, with all the baggage of those 
poor Hollanders. The man who commanded that 
bark, being notified of this robbery, was indeed 
astounded; while he came and went, seeking every- 
where the authors of [118] this crime, the Father met 
a French vessel, which gave him the means to live | 
until he had found the means to cross over to France. 

On Christmas eve he embarked, like a poor man, 
in I know not what boat or little bark laden with min- 
eral coal, which landed him the next day on the coast 
of lower Brittany. The poor Father, having per- 
ceived a little house all by itself, went to ask those 
who inhabited it, where the Church was. These 
good people showed him the way; and, supposing 
by his modesty that he was some poor Irish catholic, 
they invited him to come and take his repast in their 
dwelling, when he should have accomplished his 
devotions, which he accepted very willingly, on 
account of the great necessity to which he was 


102 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


neceffité ot il eftoit reduit. Il s’en va donc en la 
maifon de Noftre Seigneur, le iour de fa naiffance en 
terre. Mais helas! qui pourroit exprimer les douces 
confolations de fon ame. Lors qu’apres auoir efté fi 
long-temps auec des Barbares & conuerfé parmy des 
Heretiques, il fe vit auec les enfans de la vraye 
Eglife, il me fembloit, difoit-il, par apres que ie 
commencois de reuiure, c’eft lors que ie goutay la 
douceur de [119] ma deliurance. S’eftant confeffé 
& communié & affiftéau S. Sacrifice de la Meffe, il va 
vifiter ceux qui l’auoient fi charitablement inuité, c’e- 
{toit de pauures gens mais doiiez d’vne charité vraye- 
ment chreftienne, ayant veu fes mains toutes defchi- 
rées, & apprenant comme il auoit fouffert ce martyre, 
ils ne fcauoient qu’elle chere luy faire. Ce bon hofte 
auoit deux ieunes filles qui prefenterent au Pere leurs 
aumofnes auec tant d’humilité, & tant de modefttie, 
que le Pere en eftoit tout édifié. Ie crois qu’elles 
luy donnerent chacun deux ou trois fols, c’eftoit 
poffible tout leur threfor, iln’eut pas befoin de leurs 
richeffes. Vn honnefte Marchand de Rennes, s’e- 
{tant rencontré en cette maifon, non par hazard, 
mais par vne prouidence qui conduit chaque chofe a 
fon point, ayant appris l’hiftoire du Pere luy offrit 
vn cheual, l’affeurant qu’il tiendroit 4 faueur de le 
conduire iufqu’a la premiere de nos maifons, cette 
offre fi courtoife fut acceptée auec de grands fenti- 


mens de la bonté de Dieu, & auec vne douce recon- — 


noiffance de fon bien-faicteur. 

Enfin le cinquiefme de Ianuier de l’an 1643. [se. 
1644] Il fut frapper le matin a la porte de [120] 
noftre College de Rennes. Le portier le voyant en 
équipage d’vn homme affez bigarré en ces habits, ne — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 » 103 


reduced. He therefore proceeded to the house of Our 
Lord, the day of his nativity on the earth. But, alas! 
who could express the sweet consolations of his soul, 
when, after having been so long with Barbarians, and 
consorted with Heretics, he saw himself with the 
children of the true Church? ‘‘ It seemed to me,’’ 
he said, ‘‘ that from that time I was beginning to live 
again; it was then that I tasted the sweetness of [119] 
my deliverance.’’ Having confessed and received 
communion, and been present at the Blessed Sacri- 
fice of the Mass, he went to visit those who had so 
charitably invited him; they were poor people, but 
endowed with a charity truly Christian. Having 
seen his hands all torn, and learning how he had 
suffered that martyrdom, they knew not what wel- 
come to give him. This good host had two young 
daughters who presented to the Father their alms 
with so much humility and modesty, that the Father 
was greatly edified thereby. I suppose that they 
gave him each two or three sols,—it was possibly 
their entire treasure; but he had no need of their 
riches. An honest Merchant of Rennes, happening 
to be in that house,—not by chance, but by a provi- 
dence which leads everything to its issue,— having 
learned the Father’s history, offered him a horse, 
assuring him that he would account it a favor to 
escort him as far as the first of our houses. This 
offer, so courteous, was accepted with deep emotion 
at the goodness of God, and a sweet gratitude toward 
his benefactor. 

Finally, on the fifth of January in the year 1644, in 
the morning, he was knocking at the door of [120] our 
College at Rennes. The porter seeing him in such 
plight, clad in garments so incongruous, did not 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 31 


le reconnut pas, le Pere le fupplia de faire venir le 
Pere Recteur pour luy communiquer, difoit-il, des 
nouuelles de Canada. Le Pere Recteur prenoit les 
habits Sacerdotaux pour aller celebrer la fainte Meffe, 
mais le portier luy ayant dit qu’vn pauure homme 
venu de Canada le demandoit, ce mot de pauure le 
toucha, peut-eftre, difoit-il, A part foy qu’il eft preffé, 
& qu'il eft dans quelque difette. Il quitte donc les 
habits facrez dont il eftoit en partie reueftu pour 
faire vne action de charité. I] le va trouuer, le Pere 
fans fe defcouurir luy prefente des patentes fignées 
du Gouuerneur des Holandois, deuant que de les © 
lire, il fait diuerfes queftions au Pere fans lecon- 
noiftre, & puis enfin il luy demande s’il connoiffoit 
bien le Pere Ifaac Iogues. Ie le connois fort bien, 
re{pond-il, on nous 4 mandé qu’il eftoit pris des Hiro- 
quois, eft-il, mort? eft-il, encore captif? ces Barbares 
ne l’ont-ils point maffacré. I] eft en liberté& c’eft — 
luy mon R. P. qui vous parle, & 1a-deffus il fe iette 
& genoux pour receuoir fa benediction. Le Pere i 
Recteur, furpris [121] d’vne ioye toute extraordinaire i 
l’embraffe, le fait entrer dans la maifon, tout le i 
monde accourt, la ioye & la confolation d’vne deli- 
urance, fi peu attendué, entre-couppe les paroles. 
Enfin on le regarde comme vn Lazare refufcité, qui 
doit aller mourir pour la derniere fois au pays ou il 
a defia fouffert tant de mo[r]ts. 

De Rennes il s’en vient 4 Paris, la Reyne ayant 
ouy parler de fes fouffrances dit tout haut on feint 
des Romans, en voila vn veritable entremeflé de 
grandes auantures, elle le voulut voir fes yeux furent 
touchez de compaffion 4 la veué de la cruauté des 
Hiroquois. Il ne fit pas long fejour en France, le © 


im 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 105 


recognize him. The Father besought him to bring 
the Father Rector, that he might impart to him, he 
said, some news from Canada. The Father Rector 
was putting on the Sacerdotal vestments, in order to 
go and celebrate holy Mass; but the porter having 
told him that a poor man, come from Canada, was 
asking for him, that word ‘‘ poor” touched him. 
‘* Perhaps,’’ he said to himself, ‘‘ he is in haste; and 
he may be in need.’’ He then lays aside the sacred 
vestments with which he was partly robed, in order 
to perform an act of charity. He goes to find him; 
the Father, without revealing his identity, offers him 
letters signed by the Governor of the Dutch; before 
reading these, he puts various questions to the 
Father, without recognizing him; and then, at last, he 
asks him if he were indeed acquainted with Father 
Isaac Jogues. ‘‘ I know him very well,’’ he answers. 
“We have had word that he was taken by the Hiro- 
quois; is he dead? is he still captive? Have not those 
Barbarians slain him?’’ ‘‘ He is at liberty, and it is 
he, my Reverend Father, who speaks to you;’’ and 
thereupon he falls upon his knees to receive his bless- 
ing. The Father Rector, overcome [121] with an 
unaccustomed joy, embraces him, and has him enter 
the house; every one hastens thither; the joy and 
consolation of a deliverance so little expected inter- 
rupt their words. In fine, they regard him as a 
Lazarus raised from the dead,—who is destined to 
go and die for the last time in the country where he 
has already suffered so many deaths. 

From Rennes he comes to Paris; the Queen 
having heard mention of his sufferings, says aloud: 
*“Romances are feigned; but here is a genuine 
combination of great adventures.’’ She wished to see 


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 81 


Printemps venu de l’an 1644. il fe rendit a la Ro- 
chelle pour repaffer au pays de fon martyre, ot eftant 
arriué on l’enuoya a Montreal, fa memoire y eft 
encore viuante, l’odeur de fes vertus recrée & con- 
forte encore tous ceux qui ont eu le bon-heur de le 
connoiftre, & de conuerfer auec luy. La paix eftant . 
faite auec les Hiroquois comme on a veu dans les 
Relations, on tira le Pere de Montreal, pour aller 
ietter les fondemens d’vne Miffion, dans leur pays, 
laquelle on nomma la Miffion des martyrs. Le R. P. 
Ierofme Lalemant [122] Superieur de nos Miffions, q 
luy en ayant refcrit, voicy comme il luy refpondit. 

Celle qu'il a pleua V. R. de me refcrire, ma trouué 
dans la retraitte & dans les exercices que i’auois com- 
mencé au defpart du canot qui porte nos lettres. Tay ‘ 
pris ce temps, pource que les Sauuages eftans a la 
chaffe nous laiffent joiiir d’vn plus grand filence, 
croiriez-vous bien qu’a l’ouuerture des lettres de 
vo{tre R. mon coeur a ef{té comme faifi de crainte au 4 
commencement apprehendant que ce que ie fouhaite _ 
& que mon efprit doit extremément prifer n’arriuaft. ‘ 
La pauure nature qui s’eft fouuenué du paffé A trem- 
blé, mais noftre Seigneur par fa bonté y a mis & 
mettra le calme encore dauantage. Ouy mon Pere, 
ie veux tout ce que noftre Seigneur veut au peril de 
mille vies, 6 que i’aurois de regret de manquer A vne 
fi belle occafion, pourrois-ie, fouffrir qu’il tint 4 moy 
que quelque ame ne fut fauuée, i’efpere que fa bonté 
qui ne m’a pas abandonné dans les rencontres m’affi- 
{tera encore, luy & moy fommes capables de paffer 
fur le ventre de toutes les difficultez qui fe pourroiét 
oppofer. C’eft beaucoup d’eftre zm medio nationis 
[123] praue, d’eftre tout feul au milieu d’vne nation 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 107 


him; her eyes were touched with compassion at the 
sight of the cruelty of the Hiroquois. He made no 
long sojourn in France; the Spring of the year 1644 
having come, he betook himself to la Rochelle in 
order to cross back to the country of his martyr- 
dom,— where, having arrived, he was sent to Mont- 
real. His memory is still living there; the odor of 
his virtues still refreshes and comforts all those who 
have had the happiness to know him and converse 
with him. Peace being made with the Hiroquois, as 
has been seen in the Relations, the Father was taken 
from Montreal, in order to go and lay the founda- 
tions of a Mission in their country, which was named 
*‘the Mission of the martyrs.” The Reverend 
Father Jerosme Lalemant, [122] Superior of our 
Missions, having written to him again, notice how 
he answered him. 

“The letter which it has pleased Your Reverence 
to write me, has found me in the retreat and the 
exercises which I had begun at the departure of the 
canoe which carries our letters. I have taken this 
time because the Savages, being at the chase, allow 
us to enjoy a greater silence. Would you believe 
that, on opening the letters from your Reverence, 
my heart was, as it were, seized with dread at the 
beginning? apprehending lest what I desire, and 
what my spirit should most prize, might happen. Poor 
nature, which remembered the past, trembled; but 
our Lord, through his goodness, has calmed it and 


will calm it still further. Yes, my Father, I desire 


all that our Lord desires, at the peril of a thousand 
lives. Oh, what sorrow I would have, to fail at so 
excellent an opportunity! Could I endure that it 
should depend on me that some soul were not saved? 


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


deprauée fans Meffe, fans Sacrifice, fans Confeffion, 
fans Sacremens: mais fa faincte volonté, & fa douce 
difpofition vaut bien cela, celuy qui nous a conferuez 
fans ces fecours par fa faincte grace, l’efpace de dix- 
huict ott vingt mois, ne nous refufera pas la mefme 
faueur A nous, qui ne nous ingerons pas, & qui n’en- 
treprenons ce voyage que pour luy plaire vnique- 
ment, contre toutes les inclinations de la nature. Il 
faudroit que celuy qui viendra auec moy fut bon, 
vertueux, capable de conduitte, courageux & quil 
youlut endurer quelque chofe pour Dieu, il feroit a 
propos qu'il pfit faire des canots, afin que nous puif- 
fions aller & venir independemment des Sauuages. 
Le feifiefme de May 1646. ce bon Pere partit des 
trois riuieres, en la compagnie du Sieur Bourdon, 
ingenieur de Monfieur le Gouuerneur; fon voyage 
ayant efté d’écrit en la Relation precedente, ie n’en 
parleray pas d’auantage, le Sieur Bourdon m’a dit 
que ce bon Pere eftoit infatigable, qu’ils fouffrirent 
extremementencechemindefer. Bref, ils arriuerent 
[124] aux trois riuieres ayant accomply leur legation, 
le iour de Sainct Pierre & Sainct Paul le 29. du mois 
de Iuin. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 109 


I hope that his goodness, which has not forsaken me 
on [past] occasions, will assist me still; he and I are 
able to trample down all the difficulties which might 
oppose themselves. It is much to be zx” medio nationis 
[123] prave, to be all alone in the midst of a depraved 
nation without Mass, without Sacrifice, without Con- 
fession, without Sacraments; but his holy will and 
his sweet command are well worth that. He who has 
preserved us without these helps, by his holy grace, 
the space of eighteen or twenty months, will not 
refuse us the same favor,—us who do not intrude 
ourselves, and who undertake this journey only to 
please him alone, against all the inclinations of 
nature. He who shall go with me must be good, 
virtuous, qualified for leadership, courageous, and 
willing to endure something for God. It would be 
expedient that he should be able to make canoes, 
so that we may go and come independently of the 
Savages.”’ 

On the sixteenth of May, 1646, this good Father 
left three rivers, in company with Sieur Bourdon, 
the engineer of Monsieur the Governor. His jour- 
ney having been described in the preceding Relation, 
I will not speak of it further: Sieur Bourdon has told 
me that this good Father was indefatigable; that 
they suffered extremely on that road of iron. In 
short, they arrived [124] at three rivers,— having 
accomplished their embassy,—on the day of Saint 
Peter and Saint Paul, the 29th of the month of June. 


110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


CHAPITRE VIII. 


LE PERE ISAAC IOGUES RETOURNE POUR LA TROISI- 
ESME FOIS AU PAYS DES HIROQUOIS, 


. 


OU IL EST MIS A MORT. 


nous, deux ou trois mois qu'il recommenga 
fes courfes le vingt-quatriefme de [Septembre, 
en] la mefme année 1646. il s’embarque auec vn ieune 
Francois dans vn canot, conduit par quelques Hurons 
pour retourner au pays de fes croix. Il eut de grands 
prefentiments de fa mort ce qu'il communiqua a 
quelques perfonnes confidentes: Nous auons recou- 
uré vne lettre qu’il efcriuit A vn de nos Peres en 
France, vn peu auparauant qu’il nous quittaf{t pour 
la derniere fois, ott il en parle de la forte. 
Helas! mon tres-cher Pere, quand commenceray-ie 
a feruir, & aymer celuy qui n’a iamais commencé a 
nous aymer; & [125] quand commenceray-ie, 4 me 
donner totalement a celuy qui s’ef{t donné 4 moy fans 
referue. Quoy que ie fois extremément miferable, 
& que i’aye fait vn mauuais vfage des graces que 
nof{tre Seigneur m’a fait en ce pays, ie ne perds pas 
courage, puis qu’il prend le foing de me rendre meil- 
leur, me fourniffant encore de nouuelles occafions de 
mourir 4 moy mefme, & de m’vnir infeparablement 4 
luy. Les Hiroquois font venus faire quelque prefent 
a noftre Gouuerneur, pour retirer quelques prifon- 
niers qu'il auoit, & traiter de paix auec luy au nom 


A PEINE le pauure Pere fut-il rafraifchy parmy 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 111 


CHAPTER VIII. 


FATHER ISAAC JOGUES RETURNS FOR THE THIRD 
TIME TO THE COUNTRY OF THE HIROQUOIS, 
WHERE HE IS PUT TO DEATH. 


ARDLY had the poor Father been refreshed 
H among us two or three months, when he recom- 
menced his expeditions; on the twenty-fourth 
of September in the same year, 1646, he embarks 
with a young Frenchman, in a canoe conducted by 
some Hurons, in order to return to the land of his 
crosses. He had strong premonitions of his death, 
which he communicated to some persons in confi- 
dence. We have recovered a letter which he wrote 
to one of our Fathers in France, a little before he left 
us for the last time; wherein he speaks as follows. 
““Alas! my very dear Father, when shall I begin 
to serve and love him who has never begun to love 
us; and [125] when shall I begin to give myself ut- 
terly to him who has given himself to me without 
reserve? Although I am worthless in the extreme, 
and though I have made a bad use of the graces which 
our Lord has shown me in this country, I do not lose 
courage, since he takes care to render me better,— 
still furnishing me with new opportunities for dying 
to myself and uniting myself inseparably to him. 
The Hiroquois have come to make some present to 
our Governor, in order to redeem certain prisoners 
whom he had, and to treat for peace with him in the 


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


de tout le pays; elle a efté conclué, au grand con- 
tentement des Francois, elle durera tant qu’il plaira 
a noftre Seigneur. On iuge neceffaire icy pour l’en- 
tretenir, & voir doucement ce que l’on peut faire pour 
l’inftruction de ces peuples, d’y enuoyer quelque 
Pere. I’ay fujet de croire que i’y feray employé, 
ayant quelque connoiffance de la langue du pays, 
vous voyez bien comme i’ay befoing d’vn puiffant 
fecours de prieres eftant au milieu de ces Barbares, 
il faudra demeurer parmy eux fans auoir prefque 
liberté de prier, fans Meffe, fans Sacrements. Il 
faudra eftre refponfable de [126] tous les accidents 
entre les Hiroquois, & Francois, Algonquins, & Hu- 
rons, Mais quoy, mon efperance eft en Dieu, qui n’a 
que faire de nous pour 1l’execution de fes deffeins. 
C’eft a nous a tafcher de luy eftre fidelles, & ne pas 
gafter fon ouurage par nos lafchetez: I’efpere que 
vous m’obtiendrez cette faueur de noftre Seigneur, 
& qu’apres auoir mené vne vie fi lafche iufques a 
maintenant, ie commenceray 4 le mieux feruir; le 
coeur me dit que fi i’ay le bien d’eftre employéen 
cette Miffion. Jbo & non redibo, mais ie ferois heu- — 
reux fi no{tre Seigneur vouloit acheuer le Sacrifice, — 
ot il la commencé, & que ce peu de fang, quei’ay 


refpandu en cette terre fut comme les arres de celuy _ 


que ie luy donnerois de toutes les veines de mon a 
corps, & de mon cceur; Enfin ce peuple-lA /pon/us — 
mihi fanguinum eft, hunc mihi defpondi /anguine meo, > 
no{tre bon maiftre qui fe l’eft acquis par fon fang, 
luy ouure s’il luy plaift la porte de fon Euangile, — 
comme auffi A quatre autres nations fes alliez quifont — 
proches de luy. A Dieu mon cher Pere, priez le — 
qu’il m’vniffe infeparablement a luy. z 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 113 


name of the whole country. It has been concluded, 
to the great satisfaction of the French; it will last as 
long as our Lord shall please. It is judged neces- 
sary here, in order to maintain it, and to ascertain 
quietly what can be done for the instruction of those 
tribes, to send thither some Father. I have reason 
to believe that I shall be employed therein, as I have 
some knowledge of the language of the country; you 
see well how I have need of efficient aid from prayers 
while in the midst of those Barbarians. It will 
be necessary to dwell among them almost without 
having liberty to pray,— without Mass, and without 
Sacraments. I must be responsible for [126] all the 
accidents between the Hiroquois, French, Algon- 
quins, and Hurons. But what of that? my hope is 
in God, who has no need of us for the execution of 
his designs. It is for us to try to be faithful to him, 
and not to spoil his work by our own baseness, I 
hope that you will obtain for me this favor from our 
Lord; and that, after having led so slothful a life 
hitherto, I shall begin to serve him better. My heart 
tells me that, if I have the blessing of being 
employed in this Mission, /éo et non redibo; but I 
would be happy if our Lord were willing to finish 
the Sacrifice where he has begun it, and if the little 
blood which I have shed in that land were as the 
pledge of that which I would give him from all the 
veins of my body and my heart. In fine, that people 
Sponsus mihi sanguinum est; hunc mthi despondi sanguine 
meo. Our good master who has acquired it by his 
blood, opens to it, if he pleases, the door of his 
Gospel,— as also to four other nations, its allies, who 
are near to it. Adieu, my dear Father; entreat him 
that he unite me inseparably to himself.” 


114 LES RELATIONS DES JES UITES [Vox. 31 — 
a 


Mais il eftoit trop humble pour écouter [127] fes 
fentimens, & trop courageux pour reculer dans vne © 
bonne affaire, & pour s’effrayer a la penfée ot Ala © 
veué de la mort: Nous auons appris qu’il auoit efté — 
maffacré dés fon entrée en ce pays plein de meurtre, — 
& de fang, voicy ce qu’en mande le Gouuerneur des — 
Hollandois 4 Monfieur le Cheualier de Mont-Magny. — 
Celle-cy fera pour remercier voftre Seigneurie, du 
fouuenir qu’elle a eu de moy, faueur dont ie tafche- b | 
ray Ame reuancher s’il plaift 4 Dieu m’en conceder a 
l’opportunité (ce font /es termes) Au refte i’enuoy q 
celle-cy, par les quartiers du nort, foit par le moyen i 
des Anglois, ott de Monfieur d’Aunay aux fin de vous ~ 
auertir du maffacre que les Barbares, & inhumains q 
Maquois ot Hiroquois, ont fait du Pere Ifaac logues, M 
& de fon compagnon, enfemble de leur deffein qu’ils _ 
ont de vous furprendre fous coleur de vifite comme ~ 
vous verrez par la lettre cy enclofe, qui encore qu’elle — 
foit mal dictée & ortographiée vous apprend a noftre 
grand regret, les particularitezdutout. Iefuismarry — 
que le fujet de celle cy n’eft plus agreable: mais la a 
confequence de l’affaire, ne m’a pas permis de me ~ 
taire. Noftre [128] Miniftre d’enhaut (cef a dire 
d’une habitation fituée au haut de la riuiere) s'eft enquis — 
foigneufement aux principaux de cette canaille, de — 
la caufe de ce mal’heureux ace: mais il n’a peu auoir — 
autre refponce d’eux, finon que le Pere auoit laiffé le ql 
Diable parmy quelques hardes qu’il leur auoit laiffé 
en garde, qui auoit fait mager leur bled d’inde. — 
Voila ce que ie puis écrire pour le prefent a voftre a 
Seigneurie. L’inclufe mentionnée dans la prece- 
dente efcrite par vn Hollandois au Sieur Bourdon eft — 
couchée dans les termes fuiuans. ; 


il 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 115 


— 


But he was too humble to listen to [127] his feel- 
ings; and too courageous to recede in a good under- 
taking, or be alarmed at the thought or the sight of 
death. We have learned that he was slain directly 
upon his entrance into that country full of murder 
and blood: here follows a letter announcing this, 
from the Governor of the Dutch, to Monsieur the 
Chevalier de Mont-Magny. ‘‘ The present letter is 
sent to thank your Lordship for the remembrance 
that you have had of me,—a favor which I will try 
to reciprocate, if God please to grant me the oppor- 
tunity” (these are his terms). ‘‘ Moreover, I send this 
by way of the northern regions,— by means of either 
the English or Monsieur d’Aunay,—in order to 
inform you of the murder which the Barbarous and 
inhuman Maquois, or Hiroquois, have committed upon 
Father Isaac Jogues and his companion. I would also 
inform you of the design which they have, to surprise 
you under pretext of a visit, as you will see by the 
letter enclosed herewith; which, although it is poorly 
worded and spelled, acquaints you, to our great regret, 
with the details of it all. Iam grieved that the sub- 
ject of this is not more agreeable; but the importance 
of the matter has not allowed me to be silent. Our 
[128] Minister up yonder” (that is to say, at a settle- 
ment situated on the upper part of the river) ‘‘ has care- 
fully inquired, from the principal men of that canaille, 
concerning the reason of this wretched deed; but he 
could not obtain other answer from them, except that 
the Father had left the Devil among some clothes 
which he had left in their custody, who had caused 
their indian corn to be devoured. This is all I can 
write, for the present, to your Lordship.” The 
enclosure mentioned in the preceding, written by 


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vow 81 


& de vos enfans. Au refte ie n’ay pas beaucoup de 
chofe A vous dire, finon comme les Frangois ont efté 
arriuez le 17. de ce prefent mois d’Octobre 1647. at 
fort des Maquois, c’eft pour vous faire entendre 
comme ces Barbares ingrats n’ont pas attendu qu’ils” 
fuffent bien arriuez dans leurs cabanes, ot ils ont 
efté dépoiiillez tous nuds fans chemifes, refte qu’ils 
leur ont donné chacun vn brayet pour cacher leur 
pauureté, le mefme iour de leur venué [129] ils ont 
commencé de les menacer, & incontinent a grands _ 


quand nous prendrons vos freres ils vous voyen 1 
encore. I1 faut que vous fcachiez que font efté feule- 
ment la nation de l’ours qui les ont fait mourir, la 
nation du loup & de la tortué ont fait tout ce qu’ils 
ont pfi pour leur fauuer la vie, & on dit a la nation 
de l’ours tuez-nous premierement: mais helas! ils” 
ne font pas pourtant en vie, fgachez donc que le 18. 
au foir qu’ils vindrent appeller Ifaac pour fouper, 1 i 
fe leua & s’en alla auec ce Barbare au logis de l’ours. 


i) 


Il y auoit vn traiftre auec fa hache derriere la porte, 


luy couppa, & la mit fur les palliffades, le lendemain 
de grand matin il fit de l’autre de mefme & ont ietté 
leurs corps dans la riuiere. Monfieur, ie n’ay pas 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 117 


a Dutchman to Sieur Bourdon, is expressed in the 
following terms.*® 

**T would not miss this opportunity of acquainting 
you with my welfare. I am in good health, thank 
God; and pray God that it may be so with you and 
your children. For the rest, I have not much to tell 
you, except how the French arrived, on the 17th of 
this present month of October, 1647, at the fort of 
the Maquois. This is to inform you how those 
ungrateful Barbarians did not wait after they had 
actually arrived in their cabins,—where they were 
stripped all naked, without shirts, save that they 
gave them each a breech-clout to hide their wretched 
plight. The very day of their coming, [129] they 
began to threaten them,— and that immediately, with 
heavy blows of fists and clubs, saying: ‘ You will die 
to-morrow; be notastonished. But we will not burn 
you; have courage; we will strike you with the hatch- 
et and will set your heads on the palings’ (that is 
to say, on the fence about their village), ‘so that 
when we shall capture your brothers they may still 
see you.’ You must know that it was only the nation 
of the bear which put them to death; the nations of 
the wolf and the turtle did all that they could to save 
their lives, and said to the nation of the bear: ‘ Kill 
us first.’7 But alas! they are not in life for all that. 
Know, then, that on the 18th, in the evening, when 
they came to call Isaac to supper, he got up and went 
away with that Barbarian to the lodge of the bear. 
There was a traitor with his hatchet behind the door, 
who, on entering, split open his head; then immedi- 
ately he cut it off, and set it on the palings. The 


next day, very early, he did the same to the other 


man, and their bodies were thrown into the river. 


7 
| 
im | 


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 81 


ils les ont tuez. Au refte leur enuie & entreprife eft | 
[130] de s’en aller trois au quatre cents hommes pour 
tafcher de furprendre les Francois, pour en faire de 
mefme comme ils ont fait des autres: Mais Dieu 
veuille qu’ils n’acheuent pas leur deffein. 

Voila mot pour mot ce que les Holandois ont 
efcrit, touchant la mort du Pere Ifaac Iogues. L’vne | 
de ces deux lettres eft dattée du trentiefme d’Octo- 
bre, l’autre du quatorziefme de Nouembre de 1’an 
paffé 1646. elles n’ont efté rendués 4 Monfieur noftre — 
Gouuerneur qu’au mois de Iuin de cette année 1647. 
Vn peu deuant que de les auoir receués, quelques 
femmes Algonquines & vn Huron s’eftant fauuez de 
la captiuité de ces Barbares, nous auoient bien parlé 
de ce maffacre, mais ils n’en defcriuoient pas les par- 
ticularitez, nous les ffaurons encore plus amplement 
quelque iour. 

Nous auons re{pecté cette mort comme la mort d’vyn 
Martyr, & quoy que nous fuffions en diuers endroits, 
plufieurs de nos Peres fans fgauoir rien les vns des 
autres, pour la diftance des lieux ne fe font pfi refou- 
dre de celebrer pour luy la Meffe des trefpaffez, fi 
bien de prefenter cét adorable facrifice en action de 
graces des [131] biens que Dieu luy auoit eflargis, les 
feculiers qui l’ont connu particulierement, & les mai- 
fons Religieufes ont refpecté cette mort fe fentant — 
plufto{t portez d’inuoquer le Pere que de prier pour — 
fon ame. | 

C’eft la penfée de plufieurs hommes doctes, & cette — 
penfée eft plus que raifonnable que celuy-1a eft vraye- _ 
ment martyr deuant Dieu, qui rend tefmoignage au — 
Ciel & 4 la terre, qu’il fait plus d’eftat de la Foy & 
de la publication de 1’Euangile que de fa propre vie, y 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 119 


_ Monsieur, I have not been able to know or to learn 
from any Savage why they have killed them. For 
the rest, their desire and undertaking is [1 30] to go 
away, three or four hundred men, that they may try 
to surprise the French, so as to do the same with 
them as they have done with these others. But God 
grant that they may not accomplish their design.” 

Such is, word for word, what the Dutch have writ- 
ten concerning the death of Father Isaac Jogues. 
One of these two letters is dated the thirtieth of 
October; the other, the fourteenth of November, of 
last year, 1646. They were not delivered to Mon- 
sieur our Governor until the month of June in this 
year, 1647. A little before having received them, 
some Algonquin women and a Huron, having escaped 
from captivity among those Barbarians, had indeed 
told us of this murder; but they did not describe the 
particulars of it,we shall know them still more 
fully some day. 

We have honored this death as the death of a Mar- 
tyr; and, although we were in various places, several 
of our Fathers,— without knowing aught from one 
another, because of the distance between those 
places, although they could not resolve to celebrate 
for him the Mass of the dead, have indeed offered 
this adorable sacrifice by way of thanksgiving for the 
[131] blessings that God had extended to him. The 
laymen who knew him intimately, and the Religious 
houses, have honored this death,— feeling inclined 
tather to invoke the Father than to pray for his soul. 

It is the thought of several learned men, and this 

_ idea is more than reasonable, that he is truly a martyr 
before God, who renders witness to Heaven and earth 

lat he values the Faith and the publication of the 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vow 31 __ 


la perdant dans les dangers ot il fe jette pour lefus- : 


Chrift, auec connoiffance, proteftant deuant fa face, 


qu’il veuft mourir pour le faire connoiftre, cette mort — 


eft la mort d’vn martyr deuant les Anges. Cveft 
dans cette veué que le Pere 4 rendu fon ame & lefus- 
Chrift, & pour Iefus-Chrift, Ie dis bien dauantage, 
non feulement il a embraffé les moyens de publier 
l’Euangile qui l’ont fait mourir: mais on peut encore 
affeurer qu’il a ef{té tué en haine de la doctrine de 
Iefus-Chrift, voicy comment. 

Les Algonquins & les Hurons & en fuite les Hiro- 
quois, 2 la follicitation de leurs captifs ont eu, & 
quelques-vns ont encore [132] vne haine & vne hor- 
reur extréme de noftre doctrine difant qu’elle les fait 
mourir, & qu’elle contient des forts & des charmes 
qui caufent la deftruction de leurs bleds, & qui engen- 
drent des maladies contagieufes & populaires, dont 
maintenant les Hiroquois commencent d’eftre affli- 
gez, & c’eft pour ce fujet que nous ations penfé eftre 
maffacrez en tous les endroits ot nous auons efté, & 
encore ne fommes nous pas de prefent hors d’efpe- 
rance de poffeder vn iour ce bon-heur. Or tout ainfi 
qu’on reprochoit jadis en la primitiue Eglife aux 
enfans de Iefus-Chrift, qu’ils caufoient des mal-heurs 
par tout, & qu’on en maffacroit quelques-vns pour ce. 
{ujet, de mefme fommes nous perfecutez de ce que 


par noftre doctrine qui n’eft autre que celle de Iefus- 
Chrift, nous dépeuplons Ace qu’ils difent leurs con- — 
trées, & c’eft pour cette doctrine qu’ils ont tué le — 


Pere, & par confequent on le peut tenir pour martyeg| i 


deuant Dieu. ae 
Au refte il eft vray que parlant humainement, er | i 


Barbares ont des fujets apparens de nous faire ¢ 


2 
= 
\ 


a 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 121 


Gospel more highly than his own life,—losing it in 
the dangers into which, with full consciousness, he 
casts himself for Jesus Christ, and protesting before 
his face that he wishes to die in order to make him 
known. This death is the death of a martyr before 
the Angels. It was with this in view that the Father 
yielded up his soul to Jesus Christ and for Jesus 
Christ. I say much more than this,—not only did 
he embrace the means for publishing the Gospel 
which have caused his death, but one may besides 
affirm that he was killed through hatred for the 
doctrine of Jesus Christ, as here follows. 

The Algonquins and Hurons—and next the Hiro- 
quois, at the solicitation of their captives— have had, 
and some have still, [132] a hatred and an extreme 
horror of our doctrine. They say that it causes them 
to die, and that it contains spells and charms which 
effect the destruction of their corn, and engender the 
contagious and general diseases wherewith the Hiro- 
quois now begin to be afflicted. It is on this account 
that we have expected to be murdered, in all the 
places where we have been; and even now we are not 
without hope of one day possessing this happiness. 
Now, just as of old, in the primitive Church, the 
reproach was cast against the children of Jesus 
Christ, that they caused misfortunes everywhere, 
and as some of them were slain on that account, like- 
wise are we persecuted because by our doctrine, 
which is no other than that of Jesus Christ, we de- 
populate —as they say —their countries; and it is for 
this doctrine that they have killed the Father, and 
consequently we may regard him as a martyr before 
God. 


Moreover, it is true that, speaking humanly, these 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


reproches, d’autant que les fleaux qui humilient les 
fuperbes, nous deuancent ott nous accompagnent [133] 
par tout ot nous allons, comme ils ont deuancé & 
accompagné ceux qui nous ont precedez en la publi- 
cation de l’Euangile; & pour marque de la folidité 
des veritez adorables qu’il contient, c’eft qu’enfin 
ces peuples ne laiffent pas de fe rendre a Iefus-Chrift, 
quoy qu’il ne vienne 4 eux qu’auec les fleaux en la 
main. 

Il ne faut pas mettre en oubly le ieune Frangois 
quia efté maffacré auec le Pere. Ce bon garcon 
appellé lean de la Lande, natif de la Ville de Dieppe, 
comme a ef{té dit cy-deffus, voyant les dangers ot il 
s'engageoit dans vn fi perilleux voyage, protefta a 
fon defpart, que le defir de feruir Dieu, le portoit en 
vn pays, ot il s’attendoit bien d’y rencontrer la mort. 
Cette difpofition la fait paffer dans vne vie qui ne 
craint plus, ny la rage de ces Barbares, ny la fureur 
des Demons, ny les affres de la mort. 

On nous a dit que les Hiroquois voulans brufler 
quelque prifonnier, luy demandent s’il prie, c’eft a 
dire s’il eft baptifé, s’il refpond qu’il a receu ce diuin 
Sacrement, ils perdent efperance de le faire gemir 
dans fes tourmens, fe perfuadans [134] que la Foy 
donne de la conf{tance A vne ame. On dit encore 
qu'ils ont veu fortir de la bouche d’vn Chreftien qu’ils 
brufloient, ie ne fgcay quoy d’éclatant qui les a épou- 
uantez, fi bien qu’ils ont connoiffance de noftre 
doctrine, mais ils la regardent auec horreur, comme 
faifoient jadis les Payens dans le premier aage 
du Chriftianifme. Difons deux mots des vertus de 
noftre Martyr. 

Il eftoit dotié d’vne humilité toute rare, il ne 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 123 


Barbarians have apparent reasons for thus reproach- 
ing us,—inasmuch as the scourges which humble 
the proud precede us or accompany us [133] wherever 
we go, as they have preceded and accompanied those 
who have gone before us in the publication of the 
Gospel; but, in token of the soundness of the adorable 
truths which it contains, the result is that finally 
these peoples will not fail to yield themselves to Jesus 
Christ; although he comes to them only with scourges 
in his hands. 

One must not forget the young Frenchman who 
was slain with the Father. That good youth, called 
Jean de la Lande,—a native of the City of Dieppe, 
as has been said above,— seeing the dangers in which 
he was involving himself in so perilous a journey, 
protested at his departure that the desire of serving 
God was leading him into a country where he surely 
expected to meet death. This frame of mind has 
enabled him to pass into a life which no longer fears 
either the rage of those Barbarians, or the fury of 
the Demons, or the pangs of death. 

We have been told that the Hiroquois, intending 
to burn any prisoner, ask him if he prays,—that is 
to say, whether he is baptized. If he answer that he 
has received this divine Sacrament, they lose hope 
of making him groan in his torments,— persuading 
themselves [134] that the Faith gives constancy to a 
soul. It is further said that they have seen issuing 
from the lips of a Christian, whom they were burning, 
astrange brightness which has terrified them; so, 
indeed, they have knowledge of our doctrine, but 
they regard it with horror, as of old did the Pagans 
in the early age of Christianity. Let us say a few 
words about the virtues of our Martyr. 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


connoiffoit pasfeulement fa baffeffe, il defiroit d’eftre 
traité felon fon neant. I1 approuuoit des fa ieuneffe 
ceux qui le chaftioient baifant en cachete les verges 
& les ferules dont on fe feruoit pour le corriger, 
e{tant au pays des Hiroquois, il ne pouuoit regarder 
fans ioye les poteaux qui fouftenoient 1’échaffaut ot 
il auoit tant fouffert, il les alloit baifer & embraffer 
non feulement, par vn amour des fouffrances: mais 
pour ce qu’ils eftoient, difoit-il, les inftrumens de la 
iuftice diuine pour fes crimes. Jamais la Compagnie 
(a fon dire) n’auoit receu perfonne fi lafche que luy, 
ny fi indigne de l’habit qu’il portoit. I] a fallu vfer 
d’induftrie & de commandement fur luy pour luy 
faire declarer ce que nous [135] auons rapporté, non 
qu'il fut retif a l’obeyflance; mais pour ce qu’en 
verité il auoit vn fi bas fentiment de foy-mefme, 
qu’il n’en pouuoit parler qu’auec mefpris. C’eftoit 
l’affliger que de luy tefmoigner tant foit peu d’eftime 
de ce qu’il auoit enduré pour Iefus-Chrift. La Reyne 
ayant defiré de le voir, il ne pouuoit fe perfuader 
qu’elle en euft veritablement enuie, il fallut que cette 
bonne Princeffe redoublaft fon commandement, pour 
le faire venir. C’eftoit le tourmenter que de luy 
demander a voir fes mains toutes déchirées. Le Pere 
qui eftoit auec luy la derniere année de fa vie 4 Mont- — 
real, reconnut bien que Dieu le difpofoit pour le Ciel, _ 
luy donnant des fentimens d’vn enfant, il recherchoit 

tous les plis & replis de fa confcience, depuis le pre- 
mier vfage de fa raifon, iufques a lors, les declarant = 
auec vne humilité & vne candeur d’vn petit enfant. 
Cela fit croire au Pere, que le Royaume des Cieux luy 
appartenoit, & qu’il n’en eftoit pas éloigné. Il 
demandoit la facgon de bien faire oraifon, la fagon de _ 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ") 4a 


He was endowed with a humility altogether rare; 
he not only recognized his own lowliness, but he 
desired to be treated according to his nothingness. 
He approved from his youth those who chastised 
him, secretly kissing the rods and whips which were 
used for correcting him. Being in the country of 


the Hiroquois, he could not behold without joy the 


posts which supported the scaffold whereon he had 
suffered so much; he would go to kiss them and em- 
brace them,—not only through a love for sufferings, 
but because they were, he said, the instruments of 
divine justice for his crimes. Never had the Society 
(according to his saying) received any one so base as 
he, or so unworthy of the garb which he wore. It 
was necessary to use skill and command upon him, in 
order to make him tell what we [135] have related, — 
not that he was restive against obedience, but because 
he really had so low an opinion of himself that he 
could not speak thereof but with contempt. To 
show him however little esteem for that which he 
had endured for Jesus Christ, was to afflicthim. The 
Queen having desired to see him, he could not per- 
suade himself that she really had that desire; it was 
necessary for this good Princess to repeat her com- 
mand, in order to make him go. It was tormenting 
him, to ask him to see his hands all torn. The 
Father who was with him during the last year of his 


life at Montreal, plainly recognized that God was 


preparing him for Heaven, giving him the feelings 
of achild. He examined all the folds and recesses 
of his conscience, from the first use of his reason 
until then,— revealing them with the humility and 
candor of a little child. That made the Father 
believe that the Kingdom of Heaven belonged to 


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


bien faire fon action de graces apres la fainte Meffe, 
non feulement pour couurir les hautes lumieres, & 
les grands fentimens qu’il auoit [136] de Dieu, mais 
par vne creance que tout ce qui partoit des autres 
e{toit toufiours le meilleur. [1 eftoit vne grande 
partie du iour deuant le faint Sacrement, il entendoit 
autant de Meffes qu’il pouuoit, & apres tout il n’auoit 
a fon dire aucune deuotion, mais il vouloit recom- 
penfer le temps qu’il n’auoit pi offrir ce diuin 
Sacrifice, & preuenir celuy au quel il feroit priué de 
ce bon-heur. 

Le Pere le voulant foulager dans fes petits befoins 
le preffoit quelquefois de prendre les chofes plus pro- 
pres pour fouftenir fes forces. Ce n’eft pas dequoy 
ie manque, difoit-il, ie ne veux pas, lors que ie me 
trouueray encore parmy ces Barbares, que ma mife- 
rable nature tourne la te{te vers les maifons ot elle 
auroit trouué fes aifes. Ie n’ay befoin que des chofes 
qui me font purement neceffaires. Eftant de retour 
des Hiroquois, il écriuit A vn Pere de fa connoiffance, 
qu'il eut bien defiré de paffer encore vn Hyuer auec 
luy, pour s’exercer plus folidement qu’il n’auoit fait 
en la vertu: mais i’aymerois mieux encor adioutoit-il, 
retourner pour la troifiéme fois au pays des Hiroquois. 

Iamais il n’euft au milieu de fes fouffrances, [137] 
n’y dans les plus grandes cruautez de ces perfides, 
aucune auerfion contre eux, il les regardoit d’vn ceil 
de compaffion comme vne mere regarde vn fien enfant 
frappé d’vne maladie phrenetique, d’autrefois il les. 
contemploit comme des verges dont noftre Seigneur 
fe feruoit pour chaftier fes crimes, & comme il auoit 
totijours aymé ceux qui le corrigeoient, il adoroit la 
Iuftice de fon Dieu, & honoroit les verges dont il le 


. - a Se 


ae 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 127 


him, and that he was not distant from it. He asked 
in what manner he should offer prayer aright, and in 
what manner he should suitably perform his act of 
thanks after holy Mass,—not only to cover the lofty 
illumination and the deep emotions that he had [136] 
concerning God, but through a belief that whatever 
proceeded from others was always the best. He 
remained a great part of the day before the blessed 
Sacrament; he heard as many Masses as he could,— 
and, after all, he had not, by his own saying, any 
devotion; but he wished to make amends for the time 
when he had not been able to offer that divine Sacri- 
fice, and to anticipate that in which he should be 
deprived of this happiness. 

The Father, wishing to relieve him in his little 
needs, would sometimes urge him to take things 
more suitable for sustaining his strength. ‘‘ That is 
not what I lack,’’ he said; ‘‘I do not wish, when I 
shall again find myself among those Barbarians, that 
my miserable nature shall turn its head toward the 
houses in which it had found its ease. I need only 
the things which are absolutely necessary for me.”’ 
Having returned from the Hiroquois, he wrote toa 
Father of his acquaintance that he had indeed desired 
to spend another Winter with him, in order to train 
himself, more thoroughly than he had done, in 
virtue; ‘‘ but I would like still better,’’ he added, 
*“to return for the third time to the country of the 
Hiroquois.”’ 

Never did he feel, in the midst of his sufferings, 
[137] or in the greatest cruelties of those treacherous 
people, any aversion against them. He looked at 
them with an eye of compassion, as a mother looks 
at a child of hers, stricken with a raging disease; at 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES ‘{Vou. 31 


puniffoit. Ayant demandé les fouffrances 4 Dieu, & 
s'entant fa priere exaucée, il n’ef{t pas croyable quels 
ardeurs il reffentoit de fouffrir la rage des Hiroquois 
pour les Hiroquois mefme. Ie ne puis me perfuader 
que Dieu en fa confideration ne leur donne quelque 
lumiere s’ils ne s’oppofent a l’effort de fes bontez. 
Te croy qu’eftant au Ciel il a demandé A Dieu le falut 
de celuy qui l’a mis 4 mort, & qu’il luy a efté accor- 
dé: car ce pauure miferable ayant efté pris des Fran- 
gois, a e{té baptizé & mis a mort, comme nous ver- 
rons au chapitre fuiuant, il donna dans fes tourmens 
des indices d’vne ame predeftinée. 

On ne fgauroit exprimer le foin qu’il auoit de 
conferuer fon coeur dans la pureté, [138] celuy auquel 
il s’e{t communiqué particulieremét depuis fon départ 
des Hurons, jufqu’a fon retour en la Nouuelle France 
apres fa captiuité, & fon voyage en Europe, affeure 
ala gloire de noftre Seigneur, que fes plus grandes 
offenfes eftoient quelques complaifances qu’il auoit 
eu ala veué de la mort, fe croyant par ce moyen 
deliuré des angoiffes de cette vie. 

Ii eftoit d’vn naturel affez apprehenfif, c’eft ce qui 
releue hautement fon courage, & qui fait voir que fa 
con{tance venoit d’en haut, il voyoit en vn moment 
toutes les difficultez qui fe pouuoient rencontrer dans 
vn affaire, & il en reffentoit les atteintes naturelles, 
ce contre poids le tenoit dans vne profonde humilité, 
& luy faifoit dire qu’il n’eftoit qu’vn poltron, & cepen- 
dant les Superieurs qui le connoiffoient, s'appuyoient 
deffus luy auffi fermement que fur vn Rocher. Il ne 
fcauoit que c’eftoit de reculer dans les difficultez, ce 
mot luy fuffifoit (allez) il n’y a monftre, il n’y a 
Demon qu’il n’euft affronté auec cette parole, chofe 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 129 


other times he regarded them as rods which our Lord 
employed for punishing his crimes; and, as he had 
always loved those who corrected him, he adored the 
Justice of his God, and honored the rods with which 
he punished him. Having asked sufferings from 
God, and feeling that his prayer was heard, it is 
incredible what ardor he felt for enduring the rage 
of the Hiroquois for the sake of the Hiroquois them- 
selves. I cannot persuade myself that God may not, 
in consideration for him, give them some light,— 
unless they oppose themselves to the effort of his 
goodness. I believe that, being in Heaven, he has 
asked God for the salvation of the man who put him 
to death, and that it has been granted him; for that 
poor wretch, having been taken by the French, has 
been baptized and put to death, as we shall see in 
the chapter following.. He gave, during his torments, 
indications of a predestinated soul. 

One cannot express the care that he took to preserve 
his heart in purity; [138] the one to whom he inti- 
mately communicated his thoughts — from his depar- 
ture from the Hurons until his return to New France, 
after his captivity and his voyage to Europe — asserts, 
to the glory of our Lord, that his greatest offenses 
had been some feelings of complacency which he had 
felt at the sight of death, believing himself by this 
means delivered from the sufferings of this life. 

He was of a rather timorous temperament, which 
highly exalts his courage, and shows that his con- 
stancy came from above. He saw in a moment all 
the difficulties which might occur in a matter, and he 
felt the hurt naturally caused by these; this counter- 
poise kept him in a profound humility, and made him 
Say that he was only a coward; and yet the Superiors 


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


eftrange, il eftoit circonfpect au dernier point és 
affaires qui dépendoient de fes conclufions examinant 
les plus petites difficultez auec des [139] confidera- 
tions bien pefées & bien balancées. Mais fi le Supe- 
rieur le determinoit, il n’auoit plus de raifonnement. 
Dieu feul pour l’amour du quel il fe fut expofé a 
mille dangers luy venoit en la penfée & occupoit 
toute fon ame. 

I’ay defia remarqué qu’il ayma mieux fe paffer d’vn 
peu d eau & de farine d’Inde, pour fouftenir la moitié 
de fa vie (car il n’en auoit pas 4 demy fuffifance) que 
de manger de la viande qu’il fgauoit eftre immolée 
au Demon, ce n’eft pas qu’il n’euft pf garder le 
confeil de faint Paul, & prendre les chofes qu’on luy 
donnoit fans s’enquefter d’ot elles venoient, mais il 
vouloit auec vn courage qui luy coufta bon, faire 
entendre A ces Barbares qu'il y auoit vn autre Dieu 
que ces Genies ou ces Demons qu’ils honoroient, pour 
leur pur intereft temporel. 

Allant vifiter les Hollandois dans le temps de fa 
captiuité, ils l’inuitoient & le preffoient quelquefois 
de boire vn petit coup de ces eaux de feu, ou de ces 
vins bruflez dont ils fe feruent, luy les remercioit 
pour monf{trer aux Hiroquois qui s’enyurent fouuent 


de ces boiffons, qu’il ne falloit pas toucher 4 ce qui — 


caufoit vn [140] fi grand mal. Vn Hiroquois eftant 
tombé malade, fongea qu’il falloit faire ie ne fcay 


quelle dance ou quelque autre ceremonie pour fa © 
fanté, & qu'il falloit qu’Ondeffon fut de la partie i 


tenant fon liure en main, & fe comportant comme 
font les Francois quand ils prient Dieu. Les Sau- 
uages ne fgauent que c’eft de refufer ce qu’vn autre | 
a fongé deuoir eftre fait pour fa fanté. Cette loy eft 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 131 


who knew him depended on him as firmly as ona 
Rock. He knew not what it was to recoil in difficul- 
ties; this word, ‘‘ go,’’ was enough for him,—there 
is no monster, there is no Demon that he would not 
have confronted with that word. Strange to say, he 
was to the last degree circumspect in affairs which 
depended on his conclusions,— examining the least 
difficulties with [139] considerations well weighed 
and balanced. But, if the Superior persuaded him, 
he had no more argument. God alone, for love of 
whom he had exposed himself to a thousand dangers, 
came to his thoughts and occupied his whole soul. 

I have already remarked that he would rather con- 
tent himself with a little water and Indian meal, for 
sustaining half his life (for he had not a sufficiency 
thereof by half), than eat meat which he knew to be 
sacrificed to the Demon. It was not that he might 
not have observed the counsel of saint Paul, and 
taken the things which were given him, without 
inquiring where they came from; but he wished, 
with a courage which cost him dear, to have those 
Barbarians understand that there was another God 
than those Genii or Demons whom they honored 
solely for their temporal interest. 

Going to visit the Dutch in the time of his captiv- 
ity, they invited him and sometimes urged him to 
drink a little dash of those waters of fire, or burnt 
wines, which they use; he declined with thanks, in 
order to show the Hiroquois, who often become 
intoxicated with those drinks, that one must not 
touch that which caused [140] so great anevil. A 
Hiroquois, having fallen sick, fancied that it was 
necessary to perform I know not what dance, or some 
other ceremony, for his health; and that Ondesson 


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


commune dans l’eftendué des pays de 1l’Amerique, © 
dont nous auons connoiffance. Ons’en va donc trou- 
uer le Pere, on luy reprefente que la fanté d’vn tel — 
e{t entre fes mains, on ne croit pas qu’il face aucune 
difficulté d’accorder ce que tout vn monde trouue © 
tref-raifonnable. On luy donne courage, veu mefme — 
que cette guerifon qu’ils tenoient certaine luy deuoit 
e{tre tres-honorable, le Pere en fe fouriant rebutte 
la vanité de leurs fonges; On le preffe, il refufe, 
d’autres meffagers font enuoyez, reprefentant que a 
c’eft cruauté de laiffer fouffrir & mourir vn pauure 
malade. Enfin comme on vit qu’il ne vouloit point 
venir on prend refolution de l’amener par force. On 
enuoye de ieunes gens pour le faifir: Mais comme il © 
eftoit agile & fort adroit & bien [141] peu chargé de © 
greffe, il efquiue de leurs mains gaigna au pied, ils _ 
le pourfuiuent 4 toute force, ils trouuerent qu’il auoit — 
des jambes de Cerf, & que s’il fe fut voulu fauuer 
qu’il l’eut fait puis qu’il deuangoit les meilleurs cou- 
reurs du pays. En effet la feule charité le retint — 
parmy les Hiroquois preferant le falut des captifs a } 
fa vie & Afaliberté. Pour conclufion il retourna 4 , 
la bourgade auec refolution de mourir pluftoft que — i 
de conniuer tant foit pew dans leurs fuperftitions, _ 
nof{tre Seigneur voulut qu’on ne luy en parlaft plus. 

Quoy qu'il fut d’vn naturel prompt & fec, il {cauoit © 
neantmoins fi bien fe foumettre lors que 1’ humilité i 
Chreftienne & la charité le demandoient & prendre a 
l’afcendant lors qu’il voyoit la gloire de fon Dieu it 
engagée, que ces Barbares luy difoient quelquefois 4 
en riant. Ondeffon c’euft efté mal fait de te faire — 
mourir, car tu fais bien le maiftre quand tu veux, & j q 
l’enfant quand on te commande quelque chofe. 


oa i ae ee ee a eee, a ee ee 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 “133 


must be of the company, holding his book in his 
hand and behaving as the French do when they pray 
to God. The Savages know not what it is to refuse 
what another has dreamed ought to be done for his 
health. This law is common throughout the coun- 
tries of America of which we have knowledge. They 
go then to find the Father; they represent to him 
that such a one’s health is in his hands; they do not 
suppose that he will make any difficulty about grant- 
ing that which a whole world finds very reasonable. 
They encouraged him, urging, moreover, that this 
cure, which they accounted certain, would be very 
honorable for him. The Father, smiling, rebukes 
the vanity of their dreams. They urge him, but he 
refuses: other messengers are sent, representing that 
it is cruelty to allow a poor sick man to suffer and 
die. Finally, when they saw that he would not 
come, they take the resolution to conduct him thither 
by force, and send young men to seize him; but as 
he was agile, and very adroit, and very [141] little 
burdened with flesh, he eludes their hands, and 
takes to his heels. They pursued him at full speed; 
they found that he had the legs of a Deer, and that, 
if he had wished to escape, he could have done so, 
since he outstripped the best runners of the country. 
In fact, charity alone kept him among the Hiroquois; 
for he preferred the salvation of the captives to his 
own life and liberty. In conclusion, he returned to 
the village resolved to die rather than connive, how- 
ever little, at their superstitions. Our Lord willed 
that they spoke to him no more of these. 

Although he was of a hasty and quick temper, he 
nevertheless knew so well how to submit when Chris- 
tian humility and charity required it, and to assume 


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 81 


Plus de cent fois ils luy ont dit tu te feras tuer, tu 
parle trop hardiment, & fi dans noftre pays ou tu es 
prifonnier & tout feul de ton party, tu nous tiens 
tefte, que ferois-tu, [142] fi tu eftois en liberté parmy 
tes gens? iamais tu ne parleras en faueur des Hiro- 
quois. Tout cela ne l’eftonnoit point, comme il 
obeyffoit aux plus petits dans les chofes licites pour 
baffes qu’elles fuffent, auffi refiftoit-il aux plus 
grands, lors qu’il s’agiffoit de la gloire de fon maiftre. 
Vn homme qui ne tient ny a la vie ny a la fanté ny a 
la terre, qui fe contente de Dieu feul & tout pur eft 
bien hardy, il s’eftonnoit par apres de fa liberté, 
mais comme il n’attendoit ny vie ny deliurance, en 
vn mot comme il n’auoit rien 4 perdre; auffi n’auoit- 
il rien 4 craindre ny A redouter. Ce courage le fai- 
foit honorer de ceux qui auoient plus d’efprit, & luy 
caufoit la haine de tout le gros qui ne iuge que par 
les fens A la facon des beftes. | 

Il enuoya au Ciel plus de foixante perfonnes de 
cette miferable nation, leurs baptefmes eftoient le 
lien de fa captiuité; il fe fut cent fois fauué fi la pro- 
uidence ne l’euft arre{té, en luy prefentant de fois 
a autre par des rencontres admirables le moyen 
d’ouurir les portes du Paradis 4 quelque pauure ame. 
Il fut inuité certain iour, d’aller voir des jeux & des 
dances, qui fe deuoient faire en vne autre bourgade; 
[143] il s’y tranfporta en bonne compagnie, il ne fut 
pas pluftoft arriué, qu’il fe dérobe du tumulte & de 
la foule pour fe gliffer dans les cabanes, afin de con- 
foler les malades & les mourans, fi tant eft qu’il en 


rencontraft. Il femble que Dieu le conduifoit par la | 


main en ce voyage. I] trouua dans vne cabane cing 
petits enfans qui tendoient tous A la mort, il les 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 "135 


superiority when he saw the glory of his God 
involved, that those Barbarians sometimes said to 
him, laughing: ‘‘ Ondesson, it would have been ill 
done to put thee to death; for thou actest the master 
well, when thou choosest, and the child when any- 
thing is commanded thee.”’ 

More than a hundred times, they said to him: 
“Thou wilt cause thine own death; thou speakest 
too boldly. And if in our country—where thou art 
a prisoner, and all alone in thy cause—thou op- 
posest us, what wouldst thou do [142] if thou wert at 
liberty among thy own people? Never wilt thou 
speak in favor of the Hiroquois.’’ All that did not 
confound him; as he obeyed the least in things law- 
ful, however humble they were, he also resisted the 
greatest, when it was a question of the glory of his 
master. A man who clings to neither life, nor 
health, nor the world—who is satisfied with God 
alone and only—is very bold. Afterward, he was 
astonished at his own freedom; but, as he was 
expecting neither life nor deliverance,—in a word, 
as he had nothing to lose,—he had also nothing to 
fear or to dread. This courage caused him to be 
honored by those who had more sense, and procured 
him the hatred of all the common crowd who judge 
only by their senses, after the manner of beasts. 

He sent to Heaven more than sixty persons of that 
wretched nation: their baptisms were the bond of 
his captivity. He would have escaped a hundred 
times if providence had not checked him, by offering 
him from time to time, through wonderful coinci- 
dences, the means of opening the gates of Paradise 
to some poor soul. He was invited on a certain day 
to go to see some sports and dances, which were to 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 31 — 


baptize a fon aife & fans bruit, tout le monde eftant 
forty pour voir ces refiotiyffances publiques. I] apprit 


a trois iours de 14 que ces petits innocens n’eftoient 7 


plus en la terre des mourans. O mon Dieu! qu'elle 
fauorable rencontre? Quel coup admirable de la 
predeftination pour ces petits Anges qui lotient main- 
tenant & qui beniffent Dieu auec leur bon Pere? 6 
quels remerciemens luy font-ils dans la fainte Sion? 
ces rencontres comme i’ay remarqué retenoient le 
Pere dans fon exil. 

Il fut dans d’eftranges gehennes quand il fallut 
prendre la refolution de fe fauuer par l’entremife des 
Hollandois, s’il n’euft veu que c’eftoit fait de fa vie, 
& qu’il ne pourroit plus fecourir ces pauures Barbares 
s'il ne fe fauuoit pour les venir retrouuer vne autre 
fois, iamais il ne les auroit [144] pi abandonner: 
mais noftre Seigneur luy prolongea la vie pour luy 
venir prefenter vne autre fois en holocaufte au lieu 
ot il auoit defia commencé fon facrifice. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 187 


take place in another village: [143] he betook him- 
self thither in good company. He had no sooner 
arrived than he stole away from the tumult and the 
crowd, in order to slip into the cabins,—that he 
might console the sick and dying, in case he should 
encounter any. It seems that God led him by the 
hand on that journey. He found in a cabin five 
little children who were allin danger of death; he 
baptized them at his ease, and without noise,— every 
one having gone out to see those public rejoicings. 
He learned, three days later, that those little inno- 
cents were no longer in the land of the dying. O my 
God! what a propitious encounter! What an admi- 
rable stroke of predestination for those little Angels 
who now praise and bless God with their good 
Father! Oh, what thanks they give him in the holy 
Sion! These opportunities, as I have remarked, 
retained the Father in his exile. 

He was in unusual misery when he was con- 
strained to take the resolution that he would escape 
through the intervention of the Dutch; if he had not 
seen that it was all over with his life, and that he 
could no longer help those poor Barbarians unless he 
escaped, so that he might come and find them at 
another time, never could he have [144] abandoned 
them; but our Lord prolonged his life, that he might 
come and present it to him another time, as a burnt- 
offering, at the place where he had already begun 
his sacrifice. 


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (VoL. 31 


CHAPITRE IX. 
DES CHRESTIENS DE SAINCT IOSEPH A SILLERY. 


NE perfonne de merite & de pieté, ayant fait 
V vne aumofne pour dreffer en ces nouuelles 
contrées vne petite Chapelle, fous le nom de 
Sainct Michel, nous nous fommes efforcez de fup- 
pleer 4 ce qui manquoit, pour en baftir vne petite 
Eglife dediée 4 Dieu, fous le tiltre de ce glorieux 
Archange. La croifée fait deux Chappelles, ou la 
Saincte Vierge & fon cher Epoux Sainct Iofeph font 
honnorez. Ce petit baftiment fait tout expres pour 
les Sauuages, n’a pas a la verité la magnificence de 
ces grands miracles de 1’ Europe; mais il a quelques 
Parroiffiens, dont la candeur & la bonté eft autant & 
plus agreable 4 Dieu que l’or & l’azur de ces grads 
édifices. Ces bons Neophytes en font rauis, nota- 
ment [145] la famille dont le chef porte le nom de ce 
glorieux Archange, felon les defirs de ceux qui l’ont 
particulierement fecourue. 


Leur pieté s’augmente tous les iours, la Foy prend 


de fortes racines dans touts ces bons Neophytes: & 
fi leurs corps fubfiftoient vn petit plus long-temps, 


ils compoferoient vne Eglife plus riche des biens du | 


Paradis, que des grandeurs du monde. Mais vous — 
diriez que le Ciel eft jaloux de leur demeure furla — | 
terre, tant il les preffe d’entrer dedans fa gloire. 

Ie fcay bien qu’on attend touts les ans vn tribut de 
leurs actions, de leurs bons fentimens. Ce tribut eft 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 139 


CHAPTER IX. 


OF THE CHRISTIANS OF SAINT JOSEPH AT SILLERY. 


alms for erecting in these new regions a little 

Chapel under the name of Saint Michael, we 
have exerted ourselves to supply what was lacking, 
in order to build a little Church dedicated to God, 
under the title of that glorious Archangel. The 
transept forms two Chapels, where the Blessed Vir- 
gin and her dear Spouse Saint Joseph are honored. 
This little building, made expressly for the Savages, 
has not, in truth, the magnificence of those great 
wonders of Europe; but it has some Parishioners 
whose candor and goodness is even more agreeable 
to God than the gold and azure of those great edifices. 
These good Neophytes are delighted with it, espe- 
cially [145] the family whose head bears, according to 
the desires of those who have especially assisted it, 
the name of that glorious Archangel. 

Their piety increases every day; the Faith takes 
strong roots in all these good Neophytes: and, if 
their bodies existed a little longer, they would com- 
pose a Church richer in the blessings of Paradise 
than in the grandeurs of the world. But you might 
say that Heaven is jealous of their dwelling upon the 
earth,—so much does it hasten them to enter into 
its glory. 

I know well that there is expected every year a 
tribute of their actions, of their good sentiments. 


A PERSON of merit and piety, having founded 


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vo1. 81 


d’autant plus dificile & payer, qu’on demande tou- 
jours vne monnoye nouuelle. Certes il faudroit 
auoir vn grand fond, pour fatisfaire 4 tant de defirs. 
Le Sainct Efprit touche les coeurs comme il luy plaift: 
les fentimens qu’il leur a defia donnez, & qui ont veu a 
le iour fur le papier, continuent par fa faueur, & par 
fa grace: ie n’en rapporteray que bien peu cette 
année, afin que de ne point tomber dans de longues 
redites. 

Le Pere qui a eu le foing de les inftruire, leur 
ayant parlé le iour de la fefte de Saincte Catherine, 
de la Foy & de la conftance [146] de cette Amazone 
Chreftienne ; vn Capitaine s’écria deuant toute l’affem- 
blée: voila ce que c’eft, d’eftre Chreftien; c’eft faire 
eftat de la Foy & non pas de fa vie: faut-il qu’vne 
fille nous couure le vifage de confufion? on n’en voit 
que trop parmy nous qui deuiennent fourds & aueu- 
gles: ils ferment leurs oreilles aux inftructions qu’on 
leur donne: ils mettent vn voile deuant leurs yeuxde 
peur de voir ce que la priere & la Foy leur comman- a 
dent: prenons courages, demeurons fermes & con- . 
{tans, que la faim, que la foif, que les maladies, & 
que la mort mefme n’ébranflent point la refolution, 
que nous auons prife de croire en Dieu, & de luy & | 
obeyr iufques au dernier foupir de noftre vie. Ces 
petites harangues inopinées dedans l’Eglife mefme, 
ont bien fouuent de plus grands effets que les plus 
longs difcours. Le Predicateur en ces rencontres fe | 
tient bien honnoré de deuenir auditeur d’vn Sauuage. 

Le iour de la Purification de la Saincte Vierge, le 
Pere leur ayant diftribué des flambeaux, & donné 4 4 
l’explication de cette faincte ceremonie: le mefme 
Capitaine ne fe peut tenir de faire fa petite Predica- ‘ 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 141 


This tribute is the more difficult to pay because new 
coin is always required. Certainly it would be neces- 
sary to have a great fund, to satisfy so many desires. 
The Holy Ghost touches hearts as he pleases: the 
feelings which he has already inspired in them, and 
which have seen light on paper, continue, through 
his favor and through his grace. I will report, this 
year, but very little concerning these, so as not to 
lapse into long repetitions. 

The Father who has had the care of their instruc- 
tion, having spoken to them, on the day of the feast 
of Saint Catherine, about the Faith and constancy 
[146] of that Christian Amazon, a Captain exclaimed 
before the whole assembly: ‘‘ That is what it is to be 
a Christian,—it is to set value on the Faith, and not 
on one’s life. Must a girl cover our faces with con- 
fusion? There appear only too many among us who 
grow deaf and blind; they close their ears to the 
instructions which are given them; they put a veil 
before their eyes for fear of seeing what prayer and 
the Faith command them. Let us take courage; let 
us remain firm and constant; let not hunger, thirst, 
diseases, or death itself, shake the resolution that we 
have taken to believe in God and to obey him, even 
to the last sigh of our life.’’ These unexpected little 
harangues in the Church itself have very often 
greater effect than the longest discourses. The 
Preacher, on these occasions, esteems himself much 
honored to become hearer to a Savage. 

The day of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, 
the Father having distributed torches to them, and 
given the explanation of that sacred ceremony, the 
same Captain cannot abstain from delivering his 
little Sermon. [147] There is no wish to deprive 


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 31 


tion; [147] on ne veut point leur ofter cette liberté; 
pource qu’elle eft grandement profitable, & tant s’en 
faut qu’ils en abufent, qu’ils ne deuiennent tous les 
iours que trop retenus en ces affemblées. Ah! mes 
freres, difoit-il, que nous auons d’obligation 4 noftre 
Pere de nous enfeigner de fi belles veritez? conceuez 
vous bien ce que veut dire ce feu que vous portez en 
vos mains? il nous apprend que Iefus eft noftre iour 
& noftre lumiere; que c’eft luy qui nous a donné la 
Foy & la connoiffance, que c’eft luy qui nous découure 
le chemin des Cieux: ces flambeaux nous enfeignent 
que tout ainfi que Iefus s’eft confommé ¢a bas pour 
noftre falut, employant toute fa vie pour nous fauuer, 
que nous luy deuons rendre le reciproque, bruflans 
touts les iours de fon feu & de fon amour: nous con- 
fommans comme ces cierges pour fon feruice & pour 
fa gloire. Il y a parmy nous de ieunes gens, il y en | 
a de vieux, mais touts tendent 4 la mort en viuant, | 
tout fe confomme, toutes chofes tendent a leur fin. q 
O que nous ferids heureux fi apres nous eftre tous 
confommez pour Iefus, nous nous voyons auec luy 
dedans fa gloire! 

La grande Chaffe de L’élan fe rencontrant [148] 
pour l’ordinaire enuiron le mois de Mars, les Sau- 
uages ne fe trouuent pas fouuent aux Ceremonies de 
la femaine faincte fi la fefte de Pafques n’eft bien 
auant dans le mois d’Auril, comme il eft arriué cette 
année. I1n’eft pas croyable combien ces bons Neo- 
phytes ont efté affidus aux longues prieres qui fe font 
en l’Eglife dans ces iours de deiiil & de trifteffe. 
Encore qu’ils ne fe produifent pas beaucoup, leur 
deuotion neantmoins & leurs fentimens ne laiffent 
pas de toucher & de rauir ceux qui les confideroient 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 " 148 


them of this liberty, because it is greatly profitable, 
and they are so far from abusing it, that they become 
every day only too reserved in these gatherings. 
‘‘ Ah! my brothers,’’ he said; ‘‘ under what obliga- 
tion are we to our Father for teaching us such beau- 
tiful truths! Do you indeed realize what that fire 
signifies, which you carry in your hands? It teaches 
us that Jesus is our day and our light; that it is he 
who has given us the Faith and knowledge; that it 
is he who discovers for us the way to Heaven. These 
torches instruct us that—just as Jesus has been con- 
sumed here below for our salvation, employing his 
whole life to save us— we are bound to render him 
the equivalent, burning every day with his fire and 
his love; consuming ourselves, like these tapers, for 
his service and his glory. There are among us young 
men, and there are some old ones, but all are tending 
to death while living; all is consumed,—all things 
move toward their end. Oh, how happy shall we be 
if, after we all have consumed ourselves for Jesus, 
we see ourselves with him in his glory!”’ 

The great Chase of the Elk occurring [148] usually 
about the month of March, the Savages are not often 
present at the Ceremonies of holy week, unless the 
feast of Easter is very late in the month of April, as 
happened this year. It is incredible how assiduous 
these good Neophytes have been at the long prayers 
which are held in the Church during those days of 
mourning and sadness. Although they do not often 
appear, their devotion and feeling, nevertheless, 
do not fail to touch and delight those who most thor- 
oughly observed them. They listened to the dis- 
course about the passion of the Son of God witha 
bearing which sufficiently discovered the grief and 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


plus particulierement: ils preftoient l’oreille au dif- 
cours de la paffion du Fils de Dieu auec vn maintien 
qui découuroit affez la douleur & l’amour & la com- 
paffion de leur coeur: ils 1’adorerent fur le bois de la 
croix fans empreffement, fans confufié, ioignant vne 
modeftie exterieure, non eftudiée auec des fentimens 
interieurs, qu’ils ne peuuent exprimer, les meres 
détachoient leurs petits enfans de leurs mamelles, 
pour les profterner, & pour leur faire baifer limage 
de leur Sauueur, en vn mot, la candeur la fimplicité, 
la bonté, qui rend ces gens vn peu trop groffiers aux 
yeux du monde, les conduit auec grande affurance 
au port [149] de leur falut. 

Les Sauuages fe voulans cabaner dans le bois pour 
la rigueur du froid, vne pauure femme malade voy- 
ant qu'elle feroit éloignée de 1’Eglife, s’y tranfporta 
le mieux qu’elle put, & ayant demandé vn Pere luy 
dit ie me viens confeffer pour la derniere fois. La 
montagne eft trop roide, ie ne pourray defcendre, & 
vous aurez trop de peine de monter, c’eft pourquoy 
ie vous viens remercier & prendre congé de vous, 
priez pour moy mon Pere ie ne vous verray plus en 
ce monde. Et moy ie vous verray luy repart le 
Pere; ie vous iray vifiter en voftre cabane, il n’y 
manqua pas. La pauure malade en eftoit confolée 
en vn point qui ne fe peut dire: elle luy dit vn iour, 
mon Pere ne me faites vous point communier encore 
vne fois deuant que ie meure; I’en fuis content, 
refpondit-il, mais il faudroit vn petit embellir vos 
cabanes 4 la venué d’vn fi grand Capitaine? helas! 
quel ornement pourroit-on donner 4 vn lieu fi mife- 
rable? il vaut bien mieux qu’on me traifne en fa 


maifon, auffi-to{t dit, auffi-toft fait, deux Neophytes : 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 “145 


love and compassion of their hearts; they adored him 
on the wood of the cross without haste, without 
confusion,— uniting an outward modesty, not studied, 
to inward feelings which they cannot express. The 
mothers detached their little children from their 
breasts, in order to prostrate them and have them 
kiss the image of their Savior. In a word, the can- 
dor, the simplicity, the goodness, which render these 
people somewhat too rude in the sight of the world, 
guide them with great certainty to the port [149] of 
their salvation. 

The Savages wishing to lodge in cabins in the 
forest, on account of the rigor of the cold, a poor sick 
woman, seeing that she would be distant from the 
Church, betook herself thither as best she could, and, 
having asked for a father, said to him: ‘‘ I come to 
confess for the last time. The mountain is too 
steep,—TI shall not be able to go down, and you will 
have too much trouble in going up; therefore I come 
to thank you, and to take leave of you. Pray for me, 
my Father, I shall see you no more in this world.”’ 
“But I shall see you,’’ the Father answers her; 
“I will go to visit you in your cabin,’’ in which he 
failed not. The poor sick woman was consoled by 
him in a matter which cannot be told; she said to 
him one day, ‘‘ My Father, will you not have me 
Teceive communion once again before I die?’’ ‘‘I am 
willing,’’ he answered; ‘‘ but it would be necessary 
to embellish your cabins a little at the coming of so 
great a Captain.” ‘‘ Alas! what ornament could one 
bestow on a place so wretched? It is much better 
that I be drawn to his house.’’ No sooner said than 
done; two Neophytes offer themselves, wrap her in 
her blanket, bind her upon a sledge, and draw her 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 y 


y 


fe prefentent, ils l’enueloppent dans fa couuerture, — 
la lient fur vn traineau & la tirent [150] fur la neige © 
droit 4 l’Eglife; le Pere 4 fon entrée luy prefentant — 
le Crucifix, elle le prend, l’embraffe, le baife auec — 
vne tendreffe admirable, & quoy que la parole luy 
manquatt, elle ne laiffa pas de l’apoftropher comme 
elle peut; Kinaksmir Kinaks’mir Ief%s, ie vous 
remercie, ie vous remercie 6 Iefus de ce que ie fuis 
baptifée; ie ferois precipitée dans les feux qui font 
fous la terre, fi ie fuffe morte deuant le baptefme: Ie 
vous demande pardon, ayez pitié de moy, vous eftes 
bon, vous me pardonnerez, ie le feay bien. Apres — 
s’e{tre confeffée & apres auoir entendu lafainte Meffe 
auec bien de la peine, on luy donna fon Sauueur 
qu'elle fouhaittoit de tout fon amour. L’ayant receu 
le Pere luy fit faire fon action de graces mentalement — 
pour la difficulté qu’elle auoit de refpirer, elle fuiuoit _ 
de la penfée & de l’affection ce qu’il luy difoit, mais 
enfin elle ne put s’empefcher de prononcer ce peu de 
paroles qu’elle pouffa de fon ame comme des flam- __ 
mes de fon amour, 6 que vous eftes bon de m’eftre 
venu vifiter, ie ne vous vois pas maintenant, vous 
vous cachez, mais ie vous verray bien toft: vousauez 
promis le Paradis 4 ceux qui font baptifez & qui i 
gardent [151] la Foy & qui vous obeiffent, iefuis bap- 
tifée, iay gardé la Foy depuis mon baptefme, ie la 
garderay iufques a la mort, i’ay tafché de vous obeyr, © 
ie vous demande pardon de mes offences, vous l’auez 
promis 4 ceux qui fe confefferoient, ie me fuis con- — 
feffée auec douleur. Ie fouffre volontiers les grandes 
douleurs de ma maladie, i’attend la mort ioyeufement _ 
quand il vous plaira, ie vous ayme, ie vous verray, — 
jiray auec vous & 1’a ie vous prieray notamment 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 147 


[150] over the snow, straight to the Church. The 
Father, at her entrance, offering her the Crucifix, 
she takes it, and embraces and kisses it with an 
admirable tenderness; and, though speech failed her, 
she nevertheless addressed it as she could: Kinakou- 
mir, Kinakoumir, /Jesous,—‘‘1 thank you, I thank 
you, O Jesus, that I am baptized; I would be cast 
into the fires which are under the earth, if I had 
died before baptism. I ask your pardon: have pity 
on me; you are good,— you will pardon me, I know 
it well.’’ After having confessed, and having heard 
holy Mass with much difficulty, she was given her 
Savior, whom she desired with all herlove. Having 
received him, the Father had her offer her act of 
thanks mentally, on account of the difficulty that she 
had in breathing. She followed with intelligence 
and affection what he said to her; but at last she 
could not help pronouncing these few words, which 
she sent forth from her soul, like flames of her love: 
**Oh, how good you are to have come to visit me! I 
do not see you now,—you conceal yourself; but I 
shall see you very soon, for you have promised Para- 
dise to those who are baptized, and who keep [151] 
the Faith and obey you. I am baptized; I have kept 
the Faith since my baptism; I will keep it even till 
death. I have tried to obey you; I ask your pardon 
for my offenses; you have promised it to those who 
should confess, and I have confessed, with pain. I 
willingly endure the great sufferings of my sickness; 
I await death joyfully when you shall please. I 
love you; I shall see you, and I will go with you; 
and there I will pray to you especially for those who. 
have instructed me and who are the cause of my 
being baptized.’’ The Father, seeing her beyond 


™ 


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 _ 


ie fuis baptifée. Le Pere la voyant hors de toute — 
efperance de recouurer fa fanté, luy parle de l’Ex- 
treme-Onction, elle la demande, on luy donne; elle q 
la regoit auec vne confolation toute particuliere, luy _ 
eftant auis que le Ciel ne luy pouuoit plus échapper. 
Il faut confeffer que la fimplicité engendre dans les 
ames de ces bons Neophytes, vne conftance toute 
extraordinaire. Ils agiffent tout rondement auec 
Dieu, il leur 4 promis le Ciel s’ils perfeuerent en la 
Foy, quand ils fentent dans leur ame le témoignage 
de leur creance, & le regret de leurs offences, ilsfe 
tiennent affeurez du contract qu’ils ont paffé auec vn 
fi bon Pere. [152] Pour conclufion on remit cette @ | 
pauure femme fur fa traifne, & on la ramena en fa 
cabane bien joyeufe d’auoir encor vne fois vifitéla 
maifon de fon Dieu deuant fa mort, qui arriua bien- © j 
toit apres. i 

Vne autre femme defia affez aagée malade depuis 
fix mois, n’auoit pas vne patience fi forte que celle y 
dont ie viens de parler; mais elle auoit rencontré vn 
gendre qui la fouftenoit faintement dans fesangoiffes: _ 
cette pauure languiffante dit vn iour au Pere qui la 4q 
vifitoit, ie m’ennuye de viure, la peine que ie donne y 
A ceux de ma cabane me fait fouhaiter la mort. Son 
gendre l’ayant entendué, fe leua & luy repartit, vos 
paroles ne font pas bonnes, vous auez tort de fouhait-_ 
ter la fin de voftre vie, pour la peine que vous nous ~ 
donnez: Sgachez que nous vous foulagerons de bon 4 
coeur iufques A vof{tre dernier foupir, prenez garde 
que vous ne cherchiez pluftoft voftre deliurance que — 
la noftre, ne chocquez point les ordres de Dieu. Ila 
determiné du premier moment de voftre vie, c’eft a 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 “149 


all hope of recovering her health, speaks to her of 
Extreme Unction; she asks for it, and they give it 
to her; she receives it with a very special consola- 
tion,—feeling sure that Heaven could no longer 
escape her. It must be confessed that simplicity 
begets, in the souls of these good Neophytes, a con- 
stancy quite extraordinary. They deal very frankly 
with God; he has promised them Heaven if they 
persevere in the Faith. When they feel in their 
souls the witness of their belief, and sorrow for their 
offenses, they hold themselves assured of the con- 
tract which they have made with so good a Father. 
[152] In conclusion, they put this poor woman back 
on her sledge, and led her back to her cabin, very 
joyful to have once again visited the house of her 
God before her death, which occurred soon after- 
ward. 

Another woman, already somewhat aged, sick for 
six months, had not so great patience as the one of 
whom I have just spoken; but she had found a son- 
in-law who piously supported her in her sufferings. 
This poor languishing creature said one day to the 
Father who was visiting her: ‘‘I am weary of liv- 
ing; the trouble that I give those of my cabin makes 
me desire death.” Her son-in-law having heard her, 
arose and answered her: ‘‘ Your words are not good; 
you do wrong to desire the end of your life on account 
of the trouble which you give us. Know that we 
will relieve you with good heart until your last sigh; 
take care, lest you seek rather your own deliverance 
than ours. Do not offend the orders of God; he has 
ordained the first moment of your life; it is for him 
to determine the last. You have obeyed him from 
your baptism until now,— continue steadfastly in the 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 31 


luy de determiner du dernier, vous luy auez obey 
depuis voftre baptefme iufques a maintenant, pour- 
fuiuez con{tamment dans le chemin encommencé, le _ 
[153] terme n’eft pas long, ce qui refte eft court, le 
Ciel eft tout preft de vous. Comme elle fe couuroit 
la face dans fes douleurs; il luy dit, oftez ce voile qui 
vous empefche de voir le lieu ou vous deuez afpirer. 
Portez vos yeux & voftre coeur au pays ou vous deuez 
aller, dites en vous mefme regardant les Cieux, voila 
ma maifon, voila le lieu de ma demeure eternelle! 6 
que ce lieu eft beau? qu'il eft rauiffant? qu’il y fait 
bon? Le Ciel adioutoit-il, c’eft le premier objet que ie 
tegarde 4 mon réueil, ie ne le voy iamais que ie ne 

le defire, c’e{t toute ma ioye, la terre ne me fcauroit 
plus confoler. 

Vne femme encore Payenne eftoit en trauail d’en- 
fant depuis trois iours, celles qui l’affiftoient vindrent 
querir le Pere pour la baptifer deuant fa mort. Le — 
Pere l’ayant veué & la difpofant doucement Ala Foy 
luy fit promettre que fi elle fe deliuroit de fon fruit, 
elle procureroit fortement fon baptefme & celuy de it 
fon enfant, & 1a-deffus l’exhorte Aimplorer le fecours _ 
d’vn grand amy de Dieu faint Ignace, qui auoit deli- 
uré plufieurs perfonnes de femblables dangers, il 
luy fit pendre au col vne petite relique de ce grand 
faint. A peine [154] fon cceur euft-il receu ces 
faincts aduis qu’on luy donnoit, & fon corps touché 
le Reliquaire, qu’elle accoucha fans peine & fans 
douleur, auec 1’étonnement de tous les Sauuages qui 
l’auoient def-ja mifes au nombre des morts. Ce 
miracle fauua le corps & l’ame de la Mere, & de 
1’ Enfant. a 

Vn Sauuage Chreftien fit paroiftre fa pieté dans vn — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 151 


way begun. The [153] term is not long; what 
remains is short; Heavenis very near you.’’ As she 
was covering her face in her grief, he said to her: 
“Take away that veil, which prevents you from 
seeing the place whither you ought to aspire. In- 
cline your eyes and your heart to the country whither 
you are to go; say to yourself, beholding the Skies, — 
‘There is my house; there is the place of my eter- 
nal dwelling! Oh, how beautiful is that place! how 
ravishing it is! how pleasant itis there!’ The Sky,”’ 
he added, ‘‘ is the first object which I behold on my 
awaking; I never see it without desiring it; it is all 
my joy,—the earth can no longer console me.”’ 

A woman, still a Pagan, had been in child-labor 
for three days; those who were assisting her came 
to fetch the Father to baptize her before her death. 
The Father, having seen her, and preparing her 
quietly for the Faith, made her promise that, if she 
were delivered of her offspring, she would earnestly 
seek her baptism and that of her child; and there- 
upon he exhorts her to implore the help of a notable 
friend of God, saint Ignace, who had delivered sev- 
eral persons from like dangers. He had them sus- 
pend from her neck a little relic of that great saint. 
Hardly [154] had her heart received those holy admo- 
hitions that were given her, and her body touched 
the Reliquary, when she was delivered without diffi- 
culty and without pain,—to the astonishment of all 
the Savages, who had already reckoned her in the 
number of the dead. This miracle saved the body 
and the soul of both the Mother and the Child. 

A Christian Savage manifested his piety in a 
danger wherein he thought to lose his life, in walking 
along the shores of the great frozen river. This 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 81 


danger ou il penfa perdre la vie: marchant fur les 
bors du grand fleuue glacé. Ce pont fi fort & fi 
épays pour l’ordinaire, qu’il porteroit quantité de 
Canons fans s’efbranler, fe rompit iuftement deffous 
fes pieds. Ce pauure homme fe vit en vn moment 4 
l’eau iufques au col fans trouuer fond, de bonne for- 
tune comme il tiroit fon bagage apres foy fur vne 
longue traifne, le traict ou la corde attachée au cha- 
riot d’Hyuer trauerfant fur fon eftomach, l’empefcha 
d’eftre emporté par le courrant, deffous ces grands 
corps de glaces, & luy donna moyen de fe retirer de 
cét aby{me, il parut au fortir de la, comme vn héme 
bafty de glaces; fes compagnons accourrent pour le 
fecourir, mais deuant qu’ils le touchaffent, il fe mit 
& deux genoux 4 demy mort, fur le bord de fon preci- 
pice [155] pouffant ce peu de paroles de fon coeur, 
toy qui as tout fait, tu m’as fauué la vie, tu m’as deli- 
uré du naufrage, en verité ie t’en remercie. Cela 
dit, fes camarades luy donnent vne couuerture, le 
menent dans le bois, font du feu promptement & le 
mettent en eftat de pourfuiure fon chemin beniffants 
Dieu de ce qu'il l’auoit retiré des portes de la mort. 

Vn autre Chreftien ne fut pas fi doucement traité 
dans vn danger qui paroiffoit moindre, la Iuftice & 
la mifericorde luy ofterent la vie par vne prouidence 
doucement rigoureufe. I1 s’eftoit tellement accou- 
{ftumé aux boiffons Frangoifes, qu’il n’épargnoit rien 
pour en trouuer; or comme il ne les pouuoit porter, 
il donnoit du fcandale &4fes compatriotes. II] eft vray 


qu’il s’eftoit fait de grandes violences pour fe corri- & 
ger, on l’auoit puny quelquesfois publiquemans ig qi | 


prenoit en gré toutes les peines qu’on luy impofoit, © 


fe voulant mal 4 foy-mefme, quand il auoit excedé: 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 153 


bridge —so strong and thick, as a rule, that it would 
bear a number of Cannon without shaking — broke 
just beneath his feet; and this poor man saw 
himself, in a moment, in the water up to his neck, 
without finding bottom. By good fortune, as he was 
drawing his baggage after him on a long sledge, the 
line or rope attached to this: Winter chariot, passing 
over his breast, prevented him from being carried 
away by the current underneath those great masses 
of ice, and gave him the means of releasing himself 
from that abyss. He appeared, on emerging thence, 
like a man formed of ice. His companions ran 
thither to help him; but, before they could touch 
him, he fell on both knees, half dead, over the edge 
of his chasm, [155] uttering these few words from 
his heart: ‘‘ Thou who hast made all, thou hast saved 
my life; thou hast delivered me from shipwreck; in 
truth, I thank thee.’’ That said, his comrades give 
him a blanket, lead him into the wood, make a fire 
promptly, and enable him to continue his way,— 
blessing God because he had withdrawn him from 
the gates of death. 

Another Christian was not so gently treated ina 
danger which appeared smaller; Justice and mercy 
took away his life through a gently rigorous provi- 
dence. He had so accustomed himself to the French 
liquors, that he spared nothing in order to get some; 
now, as he could not endure them, he gave scandal 
to his fellow-countrymen. It is true that he had 
done himself great violence, in order to correct him- 
self, and had sometimes been punished in public. 
He willingly accepted all the penalties which were 
imposed upon him,—wishing ill to himself, when 
he had exceeded bounds; but frailty and evil habit 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


mais la fragilité & la mauuaife habitude, 1’empor- 
toiét de fois A autre dans l’excez, s’e{tat donc embar- | 
qué dans vn canot d’écorce, auec vn Frang¢ois, pour 
exercer vn acte de charité, le vent trop violent ren- | 7 
uerfa [156] leur gondole. Or comme on entroit dans © ; 
l’Hiuer le froid les faifit incontinent, enfin ils fe 
debattent fi bien qu’ils arriuent 4 bord quoy qu’en — 
diuers endroits. Le Francois mieux couuert fit tant 
qu’il attrapa vne maifon Frangoife, on luy fait vn 
bon feu, mais il falluit déchirer fes habits pour le 
rechauffer promptement, d’autant que le froid 1’at- 
taquoit iufques au coeur; Le pauure Sauuage quoy — i 
que fort & allegre, gaigna bien la terre, mais comme ~ 
il eftoit nud & tout gelé, il n’eut pas la force de cher- 
‘cher vn lieu de retraite, la marée venant 4 monter * 
V’emporta, & luy ofta le peu de vie qui luy reftoit, 
les Chreftiens de faint Iofeph ayans appris ce nau- 4 
frage, le vont chercher, ils trouuent fon corps tout Hi 
glacé, l’enfeueliffent auec charité, & l’apportent pour a 
le faire inhumer dedans leur cimetiere. Ils dirent 
tous que c’eftoit vn chaftiment, mais bien amoureux, q 
pource que la veille il s’eftoit confeffé auec de grands 
regrets & auec de grands tefmoignages d’yn ame — 
veritablement contrite. if 

Ie ne puis m’empefcher de redire ce qui a efté fi o 
fouuent couché dans les Relations precedentes, cette 
deuotion merite d’eftre publiée cent & cent fois. Hl 
ny [157] a ny fread, ny glace, ny gelée, ny neige, Be ; 


qui puiffe empefcher les Ganmiot de venir entendre 
la fainte Meffe, quand ils ne font efloignez que d’vn 
quart de lieué de la chappelle. ¥ 

Vn Neophyte vrayement Chreftien, difoit 4 ce pro- 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 155 


led him away, from time to time, into excess. Hav- 
ing then set out in a bark canoe, along with a French- 
man, in order to perform an act of charity,—the too 
violent wind upset [156] their gondola. Now, as it 
was the beginning of Winter, the cold immediately 
seized them ;—at last they struggle so bravely that 
they arrive on shore, although in different places. 
The Frenchman, better covered, managed to reach 
a French house, where they made for him a good 
fire; but it was necessary to tear off his clothes, in 
order to warm him quickly,—the more because the 
cold was striking him even to the heart. The poor 
Savage, although strong and sprightly, indeed gained 
the land; but, as he was naked and covered with ice, 
he had not the strength to seek a place of shelter. 
The tide, beginning to rise, carried him off, and 
took from him the little life that remained to him. 
The Christians of saint Joseph, having learned this 
shipwreck, come to seek him: they find his body all 
frozen, enshroud it with charity, and carry it to be 
buried in their cemetery. They all said that it was 
a punishment,— but very lovingly, because, the day 
before, he had confessed with great sorrow and with 


strong indications of a truly contrite soul. 


I cannot help repeating what has so often been 
described in the preceding Relations; this devotion 
deserves to be published hundreds of times. There 
[157] is neither cold, nor ice, nor frost, nor snow, 
nor rain, nor nakedness, nor mountain, nor bad road, 
which can prevent the Savages from coming to hear 
holy Mass, when they are not distant more than a 
quarter of a league from the chapel. 

A truly Christian Neophyte said, in this connec- 
tion: ‘‘ When I hear the bell ring which calls us to 


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 _ 


pos, quand i’entends fonner la cloche qui nous appelle © 
a la fainte Meffe, mon cceur bondit de ioye, ilme 
femble qu’on m’appelle & quelque grand feftin. Cét — 
homme de bien va fouuent vifiter & confoler les ma- 
lades, les entretenant de difcours faints & de l’efpe- — 
rance d’vne meilleure vie. Il luy arriua certain iour 

qu’ayant entamé vn difcours fpirituel, il demeura 

tout court perdant comme on dit fon étoile. [I] eut 

quelque penfée que le Demon le vouloit troubler, il 

fort de la cabane, fe retire a part, fait fa priere a 

Dieu, & en vn moment fon efprit fe vid tout libre & 

fa memoire auffi heureufe qu’auparauant, il retourna 

vers fon malade, continuant fon difcours auec vne 

plus grande facilité qu’il ne l’auoit commencé. 

Vn Sauuage baptifé depuis quelque temps arriua 
l’vn des iours de cét Hyuer [158] paffé, le Pere qui 
venoit de celebrer la S‘** Meffe ayant paru, il luy dit, 
mon Pere il faut que ie vous raconte ce quis’eft paffé 
cette nuit en ma cabane, comme i’eftois endormy, il 
m’a femblé qu’vn Demon s’eft approché de moy, ie 
le voyois, ie 1’entendois, il fe mocquoit de ma fagon 
de reciter le chappelet, il me contrefaifoit auec des 
geftes ridicules, il tafchoit de me dégoufter de la © | 
priere, me voulant perfuader qu'elle eftoit rude & © 
fafcheufe, fi toft que ie l’ay veu, i’ay fait le figne de 
la Croix, mais il ne s’en eft point fuy: au contraire, 
plus ie le faifois, plus il me contrefaifoit; enfin . 
voyant fon opiniaftreté, i’ay fait vn effort qui m’a i 
réueillé, ie me fuis mis A luy dire des iniures, va t’en 4! 
miferable efprit, mal-heureux & mefchant, c’eft toy > 
qui trompe les hommes & qui les precipite dans les _ 
feux ou tu brufle toy-mefme fans efpoir d’en iamais 
fortir; tu me voudrois bien tromper & me rendre — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 157 


holy Mass, my heart leaps for joy; it seems to me 
that I am called to some great feast.’’ This worthy 
man often goes to visit and console the sick,— enter- 
taining them with holy discourses, and with the hope 
of a better life. It happened to him on a certain 
day that, having broached a spiritual topic, he 
stopped quite short,—losing, as they say, his star. 
He had some idea that the Demon was trying to 
disturb him; he leaves the cabin, withdraws in 
private, offers his prayer to God, and in a moment 
his spirit saw itself quite free, and his memory as 
fortunate as before. He returned to his patient, 
continuing his discourse with a greater facility than 
that with which he had begun it. 

A Savage, baptized for some time, arrived on one 
of the days of this past Winter; [158] the Father who 
had just celebrated Holy Mass having appeared, he 
said to him: ‘‘ My Father, I must tell you what 
happened last night in my cabin. When I had fallen 
asleep, it seemed to me that a Demon approached me; 
I saw and heard him,— he was mocking at my man- 
ner of reciting the rosary, and aping me with ridicu- 
lous gestures. He was trying to disgust me with 
prayer: trying to persuade me that it was severe and 
vexatious. As soon as I saw him, I made the sign of 
the Cross, but he did not flee; on the contrary, the 
more I made it, the more he imitated me. Finally, 
seeing his obstinacy, I made an effort which awoke 
me. I began to say insulting things to him. ‘ Be- 
gone, miserable spirit, wretched and wicked; it is 
_thou who deceivest men, and dashest them into the 
fires wherein thou thyself burnest without hope of 
ever getting out of them. Thou wouldst deceive 
me and render me a companion of thy treachery and 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 


compagnon de ta perfidie & de tes fupplices: retire 
toy maudit & mal-heureux, i’obeiray & Dieu toute ma 
vie, il t'a chaffé de fa maifon pour ton orgueil, va t'en. 
& t’efloigne de ceux quicroient en luy. Il ma femblé 
difparoiftre en vn [159] moment. Ie fuis demeuré— 
tout plein de confolation, ie doutois neantmoins fi ie 
m'eftois bien comporté: car que f¢ais-je, ce quil 
faut faire en ces rencontres? Le Pere l’affeura qu'il — 
auoit fort bien combattu, & le renuoya tout remply — 
d'allegreffe en fa cabane. 1 

Vn Sauuage de la nation des Berfiamites, eftant en 
danger de mort & porté & 1’Hofpital, on luy parla du © 
baptefme, mais comme il auoit peu conuerfé les” } 
Chreftiens, il refpondit qu'il ne vouloit point encore | 
mourir, s'imaginant que ce Sacrement de vie lay } 
donneroit la mort; Ces bonnes filles le preffent, elles — 
font venir vn Pere de noftre Compagnie, mais en — 
vain; cét homme obftiné dit toufiours qu’on le veuft — 
precipiter A la mort. Enfin on a recours A noftre © 
Seigneur, & en vn moment cét opiniaftre deuient 
doux, il prie qu’on ne le laiffe point partir de cette — 
vie fans ef{tre laué dans ces eaux falutaires; vn Pere © 
accourt, l’examine, l'in{truit, & le trouuant capable 
d'eftre fait enfant de Iefus-Chrift, fait venir de l'eau 
benifte: ce pauure malade voyant qu’on le vouloit - 
baptifer dans fon lit, laiffez moy leuer leur dit-il, — 
cette eau n’e{t pas commune, [160] c’eft vne eau du — 
Ciel qui me rendra parent de celuy qui a tout fait. 
Eftant baptifé, il embraffe le Pere, & tous les Pra 
cois prefens auec vne ioye toute extraordinaire, & 
deux heures apres, il paffe du pays des Sauuage 
dans le pays des Anges. i 

Ce fuft vn contentement bien fenfible A ces bonnes 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 159 


thy torments. Withdraw, accursed and unhappy 
one; I will obey God all my life. He has driven 
thee from his house because of thy pride; begone, 
and go far from those who believe in him.’ He 
seemed to me to disappear in a [159] moment. I 
remained full of consolation; I nevertheless doubted 
whether I had behaved well, for how do I know what 
must be done in these encounters?’’ ‘The Father 
assured him that he had fought very well, and sent 
him back, filled with gladness, into his cabin. 

A Savage of the nation of the Bersiamites, being 
in danger of death and carried to the Hospital, was 
spoken to concerning baptism; but as he had asso- 
ciated little with the Christians, he answered that 
he did not yet wish to die,—imagining that that 
Sacrament of life would cause his death. Those 
good sisters urge him; they send for a Father of our 
Society, but in vain,—this obstinate man always 
says that they wish to hurry him to his death. 
Finally, they have recourse to our Lord, and ina 
moment that headstrong man becomes gentle; he 
begs that they will not suffer him to leave this life 
without being washed in those salutary waters. A 
Father hastens thither, examines and instructs him, 
and, finding him capable of becoming a child of Jesus 
Christ, sends for some holy water. ‘That poor sick 
man, seeing that they wished to baptize him in his 
bed, said to them: ‘‘ Allow me to rise; this water is 
not common; [160] it is a water from Heaven, which 
will render me a kinsman to him who has made all.”’ 
Upon being baptized, he embraces the Father, and 
all the French present, with extraordinary joy; and, 
two hours later, he passes from the country of the 
Savages into the country of the Angels. 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


Meres, de voir leurs prieres exaucées, veu que depuis 
qu’elles font en la Nouuelle France, pas vn Sauuage 
n’eft mort en leur Hofpital fans baptefme. La Mere 
de faint Ignace, qui eft paffée faintement de cette vie 
en l’autre, en auoit vn foing fi particulier, qu’elle ne 
pouuoit dormir d’vn bon fommeil, fi les ames de ces 
malades n’eftoient en affeurance, autant que la cha- 
rité les y peut mettre, ces bonnes Sceurs fuiuent 
courageufement ces traces, elles ont efté chargées de 
plus de quatre-vingts malades Francois & Sauuages, 
pendant le cours de l’année, c’eft vn grand fecours 4 
tout le pays que cette maifon de Dieu, & n’y a per- 
fonne dans le pays qui ne donne mille benedictions 
a leur Fondatrice. 

Mais puis que nous fommes tombez fur la mort de 
la Mere Marie de faint Ignace, [161] ie crois eftre 
obligé d’en dire icy quelque chofe. Cette bonne 
Mere apres auoir conduit fes filles en Canada, & les 
y auoir gouuernées fix ans, fut frappée d’vn afme ou 
plufto{t d’vne augmentation d’afme (car elle s’en 
fentoit dés la France) auec vn mal continuel d’efto- 
mach qui luy caufa de violentes douleurs l’efpace de 
quinze mois, fans que iamais pour cela elle quitaft le 
foin & le feruice des malades. Quand il y en auoit 
quelques-vns en danger elle faifoit porter fon lit en 
la fale ot ils font receus, afin de les veiller auec vne 
de fes Sceurs & les confoler, que fi elle n’y pouuoit | 
aller, elle s’enqueftoit plufieurs fois la nuit deleur __ 
difpofition, fur tout en ce qui regarde le dernier 
paffage de l’ame & fon Createur. Quand onluydon- 
noit quelque viande fraifche a raifon de fa ma[la]die, 
elle n’en mangeoit point qu’elle n’en euft fait porter 
aux plus malades, elle n’a vefcu que fix ans & demi 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ~ 161 


It was a profound satisfaction to these good 
Mothers to see that their prayers were heard,—con- 
sidering that, since they have been in New France, 
not one Savage has died in their Hospital without 
baptism. Mother de saint Ignace, who has blessedly 
passed from this life into the other, had so especial 
acare for this, that she could not sleep soundly, if 
the souls of these patients were not in safety, so far 
as charity can place them therein. These good 
Sisters courageously follow in this path; they have 
been burdened with more than eighty French and 
Savage patients during the course of the year. This 
house of God is a great help to the entire country; 
and there is no one in the country who does not 
bestow a thousand blessings upon their Foundress. 

But since we have alluded to the death of Mother 
Marie de saint Ignace, [161] I think that I am obliged 
to say something about it here. This good Mother, 
after having conducted her daughters to Canada, 
and having governed them there for six years, was 
stricken with an asthma,—or, rather, with an aggra- 
vation of asthma (for she had felt it since leaving 
France),— together with a continually disordered 
stomach, which caused her violent pains for the space 
of fifteen months; and yet never did she forego on 
that account the care and service of the sick. When 
any of them were in danger, she had her bed carried 
into the ward where they are received, that she might 
watch over them with one of her Sisters, and console 
them; but, if she were unable to go thither, she 
inquired several times at night concerning their situ- 
ation,— especially in what regards the last passage 
of the soul to its Creator. When some fresh meat 
was given her on account of her sickness, she ate 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 81 


en la Nouuelle France, mais en ce peu de temps elle 
y agrandement fouffert & trauaillé pour le bien de 
la Colonie Francoife & des Sauuages, demy an apres 
fon arriuée voyant que l’eftabliffement de 1’ Hofpital 
contribueroit 4 l’arre{t & A la conuerfion des Sau- 
uages [162] de Sillery, elle eut affez de courage quoy 
que ce lieu fuit efloigné & priué de toutes les commo- 
ditez de la Colonie Francoife, pour s’y baftir 4 grands 
frais & grandes peines, & fi lors qu’elle en fuft venué 
a bout & que Dieu euft conuerty les Sauuages qui y 
refidoient, les Hiroquois commencerent leurs courfes 
& l’obligerent d’abandonner cette maifon, & en com- 
mencerent vne autre 4 Kebec auec nouueaux frais & 
nouuelles peines qui euffent fait perdre coeur a toute 
autre, & fi to{t que cette feconde fut prefte Noftre 
Seigneur qui luy en referuoit la recompenfe au Ciel, 
l’appella a foy le mefme iour que le coeur de leur 
petite Chapelle fut acheuée & prefte a y receuoir les 
Religieufes, en forte qu’elle y fut portée morte toute 
la premiere, & les premiers Cantiques que les Reli- 
gieufes y ont entdnez ont efté autour du corps de 
leur chere Mere. Quinze iours auant fon decez, elle 
pria inftamment qu’on ne luy parlaft plus du tout 
d’aucune autre chofe que de Dieu & du Ciel, & elle. 
confomma tout ce temps-la en des colloques tres- 
affectueux auec Noftre Seigneur Iefus-Chrift & la 
tres-faincte Vierge, & finit fa vie en ce faint exercice 
[163] aagée feulement de trente-fix ans, quoy qu’elle 
fuft d’vne forte complexion fes veilles & fes mortifi- 
cations luy abregerent fes années pour luy donner vne 
plus heureufe eternité, elle mourut le cinquiefme de 
Nouembre 1’an paffé fix iours apres le depart des 
nauires, elle fentoit vne fatisfaction incroyable de 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 163 


none of it until she had sent some of it to those most 
sick. She lived only six years and a half in New 
France; but in that short time she greatly suffered 
and toiled here for the good of the French Colony 
and of the Savages. Half a year after her arrival, 
seeing that the establishment of the Hospital would 
contribute to the settlement and conversion of the 
Savages [162] of Sillery, she had courage enough — 
although that place was distant, and deprived of all 
the conveniences of the French Colony —to build 
there, at great expense and with great difficulties; 
and, even then, when she had succeeded, and when 
God had converted the Savages who lived there, the 
Hiroquois began their incursions and obliged her to 
abandon that house. Then they began another at 
Kebec, with new expenses and new toils, which 
would have caused any one else to lose heart; and as 
_ soon as this second one was ready Our Lord, who 
was reserving her reward in Heaven, called her to 
himself, on the very day when the choir of their 
little Chapel was finished and ready to receive the 
Nuns,—so that she was the very first to be borne 
thither dead; and the first Hymns which the Nuns 
intoned there were around the body of their dear 
Mother. Fifteen days before her decease, she 
urgently begged that they should no longer speak to 
her at all of any other thing than of God and Heav- 
en; and she spent all that time in most affectionate 
colloquies with Our Lord Jesus Christ and the most 
blessed Virgin, and ended her life in that holy ex- 
ercise,— [163] aged only thirty-six years. Although 
she was of a strong constitution, her vigils and 
mortifications shortened her years, in order to give 
her a happier eternity. She died on the fifth of 


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


mourir en Canada au feruice de ces pauures Barbares. 
Elle a efté également regrettée des Francois & des 
Sauuages, fa charité ayant gagné tous les coeurs, — 
elle laiffa ces Religieufes prefque inconfolables tant 
pour la perte qu’elles faifoient, que pour le petit 
nombre qu’elles reftoient, n’eftant plus en tout que 
cing Religieufes tant pour le feruice des malades que 
pour les fonctions de la Religion, les grands frais 
d’vn pays nouueau & barbare auec le nombre des 
pauures & malades qui s’y rencontrent obligent a fe 
retrancher, nous efperons pourtant que fa place ne 
demeurera pas longs-temps vuide, & qu'elle nous 
marquera du Ciel celle qui doiuent remplir cette 
année pour laremplir. Retournons a nos Sauuages. 

Ie diray cy-apres comme les Algonquins qui ont 
e{té maffacrez cét Hyuer auoient ie ne fgcay quel pre- 
fentiment de [164] leur deffaite les Montagnets qui 
chaffoient és enuirons de Kebec & de faint Iofeph 
furent quafi en mefme temps faifis dvne crainte qui 
les fit fortir des bois; ils compofoient trois bandes, & 
toutes ces bandes, quoy que feparées les vnes des 
autres, furent touchées d’vne mefme frayeur quafi a 
mefme temps, comme ils eftoient en chemin pour 
gagner Kebec, arriua vn meffager des Trois Riuieres © ' 
qui leur dit fauuez-vous, tout eft mort au quartier 
d’ott ie viens, l’effroy fe iettent incontinent dedans 
leurs ames, chacun vouloit gagner le deuant, tout 
beau, leur fit vn Chreftien, quia de l’authorité parmy 
eux, ne nous precipitons point, gardons le faint 
Dimanche, & demain nous partirons au petit iour, ne 
craignez point, Dieu nous conferuera fi nous luy ‘l 
obeyffons, en effet ils ne décamperent que le iour — 
fuiuant. bi 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 165. 


November, last year, six days after the departure of 
the ships. She felt an incredible satisfaction to die in 
Canada, in the service of these poor Barbarians. She 
has been equally regretted by the French and by the 
Savages, her charity having won all hearts. She 
left those Nuns almost inconsolable, both for the loss 
which they incurred and for the small number that 
remained of them,—for there were no more than 
five Nuns in all, not only for the service of the sick 
but for the offices of Religion. The great expenses 
of a new and barbarous country, with the number of 
the poor and sick whom we encounter therein, oblige 
us to retrench; we hope, nevertheless, that her place 
will not long remain empty, and that she will indi- 
cate to us from Heaven those who are to complete 
this year in order to fill her place. Let us return to 
our Savages. 

I will relate, farther on, how the Algonquins who 
were massacred this Winter, had I know not what 
premonition of [164] their defeat. The Montagnais 
who were hunting in the environs of Kebec and 
saint Joseph were almost at the same time seized 
with a fear which caused them to leave the woods; 
they composed three bands, and all these bands, 
though separated from one another, were affected 
with a like terror, almost at the same time. While 
they were on the way to reach Kebec, there arrived 
a messenger from Three Rivers, who said to them: 
*“Escape! everything is dead in the quarter whence I 
come.’’ Terror straightway entered their souls; each 
one wished to get the start. ‘‘ Softly!” said to them 
a Christian who has authority among them; “‘ let us 
not be headlong,—let us observe the blessed Lord’s 
day; and to-morrow we will depart at daybreak. Do 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vou. 31 


A peine eftoient-ils arriuez, que trois Hurons de 
leur efcotiade parurent tout effarez: deux de nos 
compagnons font pris difoient-ils, ie m’eftonne que 
nous n’auons tous efté maffacrez, il eft croyable que 
lennemy ayant eu connoiffance par fes prifonniers 
du lieu ou nous eftions, nous aura pourfuiuy, mais 
Dieu luy a bandé les [165] yeux, car il n’eftoit rien 
plus facile que de nous rencontrer, hé bien ne fait-il 
pas bon fe confier en Dieu, difoit ce braue Neophyte, 
qui ne voulut iamais partir le Dimanche. C’eft luy 
qui nous a conferué, beniffons-le, & fouffrons ioy- 
eufement les fleaux qu’il nous enuoye. Pour moy ie 
ne fuis point les fouffrances, ie dis 4 noftre Souuerain 
Capitaine, i’ay commis tant de pechez, ie merite bien 
que tu me puniffe, ie veux fouffrir, fais tout ce que 
tu voudras, ie ne diray mot & tant que ie feray en 
vie ie croiray en toy. 

On a marié cette année vne ieune fille fortie depuis 
quelque temps du Seminaire des Vrfulines: ces 
bonnes Meres qui ont fecouru & in{truit dans le cours 
de cette année plus de quatre-vingt filles en diuers 
temps ont veritablement reuffi. Leur Seminaire eft 
vne grande benediction pour les Francoifes & pour 
les Sauuages, mais comme toute les fleurs ne font 
pas des rofes n’y des lys, comme tous les Aftres ne 
font pas également brillans, auffi les filles qui fortent 
de deffous leur conduitte ne font pas toutes égales 
en vertu. Celle-cy qui fut la premiere donnée a 
Madame de la Pelterie, leur fondatrice eft d’vn 
naturel [166] doux, elle eft bien eftablie en la Foy, 


le ieune homme qui l’a époufée, n’eft pas moins | 


Chreftien que fon époufe, il l’a recherchée enuiron 
deux ans: comme il vit qu’on luy monftroit bon 


] 
rn 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 167 


not fear, God will preserve us if we obey him.’’ In 
fact, they did not break up camp till the following 
day. 


Hardly had they arrived, when three Hurons of 
their squad appeared, thoroughly frightened. ‘‘ Two 
of our companions are taken,’’ they said. ‘‘I am 
astonished that we have not all been massacred. It 
is possible that the enemy, having had knowledge 
through his prisoners of the place where we were, 
has pursued us; but God has blindfolded his [165] 
eyes; for there was nothing easier than to meet us. 
Ah, well! is it not a good thing to trust in God?’’ 
said that worthy Neophyte, who would never set out 
on Sunday. ‘‘ It is he who has preserved us: let us 
bless him, and let us suffer joyfully the scourges 
which he sends us. As for me, I do not flee suffer- 
ings; I say to our Sovereign Captain, ‘I have com- 
mitted so many sins that I well deserve that thou 
shouldst punish me; I wish to suffer. Do all that 
thou wilt,—I will not say a word; and, as long as I 
remain in life, I will believe in thee.’ ’’ 

We have married this year a young girl, who some 
time ago went forth from the Seminary of the Ursu- 
lines; these good Mothers, who have assisted and 
instructed, at various times in the course of this year, 
more than eighty girls, have been truly successful. 
Their Seminary is a great blessing to both the French 
girls and the Savages; but, as not all flowers are 
Toses nor lilies, as not all the Stars are equally bril- 
liant, so the girls who go forth from under their 
guidance are not all equal in virtue. This one, who 
was the first to be given to Madame de la Pelterie, 
their foundress, is of a gentle nature, [166] and is 
well established in the Faith; the young man who 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 31 


vifage, il s’alla loger dans la cabane de fa future 
époufe felon l’ancienne couftume des Sauuages, nos 
Peres luy dirent que cela n’eftoit pas bien feant, 
auffi-toft il fe retira proteftant qu’il vouloit obeyr en 
tout. Ie vous auoué que cette obeyffance contre les 
facgons de faire des Sauuages dans de ieunes gens qui 
s’entr’ayment, tient du miracle en l’efprit de ceux qui 
connoiffent le genie de ces peuples. 

Vn Pere de noftre Compagnie eftant arriué nou- 
uellement 4 faint Iofeph, alla vifiter vn malade fort 
pauure. Celuy-cy luy dit, tu me fais vn grand plai- 
fir, ie te fupplie viens moy fouuent confoler dans ma 
maladie: ouy mais dit le Pere ie n’ay pas dequoy te 
foulager. Ie ne te demande rien finon que tu m’in- 
{truife, que tu inftruife ma femme & mes enfans. Ie 
ne penfe plus A la terre, mon coeur eft au Ciel, le 
Pere fut furpris; car cét homme eftoit l’vn des plus 
méchans qui fut parmy les Sauuages, c’eft pourquoy 
il luy ditmon cher amy. Le [167] Demon te voudra 
peut-eftre perfuader que la Foy te fait mourir, c’eft 
l’vne des tentations dont il tourmente les Sauuages, 
mais fcache que tes excez ont reduit ton corps au 
point ot il eft, il eft vray repart-il, mais laiffons-la 
le corps, & penfons a l’ame. Ie fouffre volontiers 
pour mes offenfes, i’efpere que Dieu me fera miferi- 
corde. Certes l’efprit de Dieu fouffle ou bon luy 
femble, il n’a égard ny aux Grecs, ny aux Scythes, 
ny aux Francois, ny aux Sauuages, ceux qui luy font 
plus obeyffans font fes plus grands amis. | 

Deux Sauuages Chreftiens s’eftans laiffé furpren- 
dre de boiffon, le Pere en fa predication reprenant — 
l’yurognerie qui feroit aufficommune en ces contrées _ 
qu'elle eft dans le fond de la Suiffe, s’il y auoit des 


1647) RELATION OF 1647 "169 


married her is not less Christian than his spouse. 
He sought her hand for about two years; when he saw 
that he was well received, he went to lodge in the 
cabin of his future spouse, according to the former 
custom of the Savages. Our Fathers told him that 
that was not very seemly; forthwith he withdrew, 
protesting that he would obey in everything. I avow 
to you that this obedience, contrary to the Savages’ 
customs among young people who are mutually in 
love, resembles a miracle in the minds of those who 
know the character of these tribes. 

A Father of our Society, having recently arrived at 
saint Joseph, went to visit a very poor patient. The 
latter said to him: ‘‘ Thou doest me a great favor; 
I beg thee, come to console me often in my sick- 
ness.’’ ‘‘ Yes, but,’’ said the Father, ‘‘I have not 
wherewith to relieve thee.’’ ‘‘I ask thee nothing 
except that thou instruct me, and instruct my wife 
and children. I think no more of the earth, my 
heart is in Heaven.’’ The Father was surprised, for 
this man was one of the worst among the Savages; 
therefore he said to him: ‘‘ My dear friend, the [167] 
Demon will perhaps try to persuade thee that the 
Faith causes thee to die;’’ this is one of the tempta- 
tions with which he torments the Savages. ‘‘ But 
know that thine own excesses have reduced thy body 
to the state in which it is.’’ ‘‘ That is true,’’ he 
answers, ‘‘ but let us leave the body there, and let us 
think of the soul. I suffer willingly for my offenses; 
IT hope that God will show me mercy.’’ Certainly 
the spirit of God breathes where he pleases,— he has 
tegard for neither Greeks, nor Scythians, for neither 
Frenchmen, nor Savages: those who are most obedi- 

ent to him are his greatest friends. 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 if 


boiffons. L’vn de ces Sauuages arrefta le Pere au 
milieu de fon difcours, ce que tu dis eft vray mon 
Pere, ie me fuis enyuré, ie n’ay point d’efprit, prie 
Dieu qu’il me face mifericorde. Ie ne parleray qu’a 
ceux qui font de mon pays, ce n’eft point 4 moy a 
haranguer en cette bourgade, i’adreffe mon difcours 
4 la ieuneffe qui m’écoute, fus done prenez exemple 
non fur mon peché mais fur ma douleur, & fouuenez- 
vous [168] que fi moy qui fuis aagé ie reconnois mon 
crime, que vous ne deuez point diffimuler les voftres. 
Ie condamne l’action que i’ay faite, c’eft vn precipice 
ou ie me fuis ietté, ny tombez pas. Son complice 
entendant ce difcours prit la parole, c’eft moy qui 
fuis vn méchant, c’eft moy qui n’ay point d’efprit, 
i’ay faché celuy qui a tout fait, ieuneffe foyez plus 
fage, ne fuiuez point le chemin ot ie me {uis égaré, 
marchez tout droit & priez auec le Pere, afin que 
celuy qui a tout fait prenne de bonnes penfées pour 
moy. 

Le Pere cependant gardoit le filence bien édifié de 
la ferueur de ces bons Neophytes. Toutes chofes ont 
leur temps; ce feu ne ceffera de briller & d’échauffer 
que trop toft, il ne le faut pas eftouffer, mais qui le 
voudroit allumer par violence efchaufferoit fa bile & 
non l’amour de fon Dieu. | 

Le Printemps dernier les Chreftiens de faint lofeph 
armerent trois chalouppes & quelques canots, pour | 
aller battre non la campagne, mais la grande riuiere, ~ 
& donner la chaffe a l’ennemy qui paroiffoit de temps _ | 
en temps en diuers endroits. Ils eftoient efcortées _ 
de quelques Frangois [169] que Monfieur noftre Gou- _ 
uerneur leur auoit donné. Eftans arriuez iufques a 
Montreal on les feftina tous auec beaucoup de bien- — 
4 
4 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 ee il 


Two Christian Savages having allowed themselves 
to be beguiled by drink, the Father in his sermon 
reproved drunkenness,— which would be as common 
in these countries as it is in the depth of Switzer- 
land, if there were liquors. One of those Savages 
stopped the Father in the midst of his discourse. 
‘““What thou sayest is true, my Father; I became 
drunk. I have no sense; ask God that he show me 
mercy. I will speak only to those who are of my 
own country,—it is not for me to harangue in this 
village; I address my discourse to the youth who 
listen tome. Come, then; take example not by my 
sin, but by my grief; and remember [168] that, if I 
who am old acknowledge my crime, you ought not 
to dissimulate yours. I condemn the deed that I 
have done; it is a precipice upon which I have cast 
myself: do not fall on it.” His partner, hearing this 
discourse, began to speak: ‘‘It is I who am a 
wicked fellow,—it is I who have no sense; I have 
offended him who made all. Young men, be wiser; 
do not follow the road in which I have gone astray. 
Walk straight ahead, and pray with the Father, that 
he who made all may think kindly of me.”’ 

The Father meanwhile kept silence, being much 
edified by the fervor of these good Neophytes. All 
things have their time; this fire will only too soon 
cease to shine and warm. It must not be stifled; 
but he who should attempt to kindle it by violence 
would stir up his own gall, and not the love of God. 

Last Spring, the Christians of saint Joseph armed 
three shallops and some canoes, in order to go and 
scour, not the country, but the great river; and to 
give chase to the enemy, who appeared from time to 
time in various places. They were escorted by some 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


veillance: Vn Capitaine Chreftié dit ces belles paroles 
pour action de graces apres le banquet. Autrefois 
quand on nous auoit bien traitez, nous difions Aa nos 
hoftes, ce feftin va porter voftre nom par toute la 
terre, toutes les nations vous regarderont d’orefna- 
uant comme des gens liberaux qui fcauez conferuer 
la vie aux hommes: mais i’ay quitté ces couftumes, 
c’e{t maintenant A Dieu a qui ie m’adreffe quand on 
me fait du bien, ie luy dis ces paroles: Tu es bon 
fecoure ceux qui nous affiftent, fais qu’ils t’aiment 
toufiours, empefche le Demon de les aborder, & nous 
donne place aupres deux en Paradis. Voila vn faint 
compliment. 

Deux iours apres leur arriuée ils fe rembarquerent 
pour defcendre 4 Kebec. Or comme ils n’auoient 
point rencontré d’ennemis, ils s’imaginoient que le 
grand fleuue en eftoit libre, c’eft pourquoy ils ne fe 
tenoient point fur leurs gardes. Vn canot conduit 
par deux Hurons deuancant les chaloupes fut attaqué 
& pris dans le lac faint Pierre par vne efcoiiade d’ Hi- 
roquois. [170] Les canots qui fuiuoient s’en eftant 
apperceus remontent incontinent vers les chaloupes, 
plufieurs ieunes gens s’eftoient efcartez ca & 1a dans 
les Ifles pour chaffer aux rats mufquez, enfin s’eftant 


raffemblez ils tirent vers l’ennemy, lequel ne croyant — 


pas pouuoir refifter 4 ces chaloupes fe iette auec fa 
proye dans la foreft en vn lieu inondé des eaux du 


Printemps, ils fe fortifient comme ils peuuent. Vn > 


Capitaine Chreftien fe difpofant au combat fit vne 


forte harangue a fes gens tenant en main vn Crucifix 
& vn Chapelet enrichy d’vne grande medaille. Vn 
autre l’efpée A la main le feconda. Les Frangois 


cependant fe confefferent & vn Pere qui fe oa 


j - 
f 

+ 

5 - 


; 


) 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 173 


Frenchmen, [169] whom Monsieur our Governor had 
given them. Having reached Montreal, they were 
all feasted with much benevolence. A Christian 
Captain said these beautiful words by way of thanks- 
giving after the banquet: ‘‘ Formerly, when we had 
been well treated, we said to our hosts, ‘ This feast 
is going to carry your name throughout the earth; 
all nations will henceforth regard you as liberal 
people, who know how to preserve lifeto men.’ ButI 
have given up those customs; it is now to God that 
I address myself when any one does good tome. I 
say to him these words: ‘ Thou art good; help those 
who assist us, cause that they may love thee always, 
prevent the Demon from approaching them, and 
give us room near them in Paradise.’’’ That wasa 
holy compliment. 

Two days after their arrival, they embarked again 
in order to go down to Kebec. Now, as they had 
not encountered enemies, they imagined that the 
great river was free therefrom; for that reason, they 
were not on their guard. A canoe conducted by two 
Hurons, preceding the shallops, was attacked and 
taken in lake saint Pierre by a squad of Hiroquois. 
[170] The canoes which followed, having perceived 
this, straightway go up again toward the shallops; 
several young men had gone aside here and there 
among the Islands, in order to hunt muskrats. 
Finally, having come together again, they proceed 
toward the enemy,— who, not thinking that he can 
resist those shallops, casts himself, along with his 
prey, into the forest; in a place flooded by the Spring 
tains, they fortify themselves as best they can. A 
Christian Captain, preparing himself for combat, 
made a vigorous harangue to his people, holding in 


ee 
j a 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


dans ce rencontre. Vn bon Neophyte voyant qu'il 
n’eftoit pas entendu en fa langue demanda de fe con- 
feffer par interprete. Il faudroit, difoit par apres le 
Pere, venir du bout du monde pour voir des Sauuages. 
peints de diuerfes couleurs, parler de Dieu fi ardem- 
ment & penfer fi foigneufement a leur falut. Or 
comme la nuit aprochoit, on trouua bon que le Pere 
montaft dans vn canot pour aller faire vn tour aux 
Trois Riuieres, & donner aduis 4 Monfieur nof{tre Gou- 
uerneur de ce qui fe paffoit. [171] Il aprit les nou- 
uelles fur les dix heures du foir, & le lendemain il fe 
trouua auec deux bonnes chaloupes, & dix canots de 
renfort au lieu ou s’eftoient retranché ces Barbares. 
Vn Huron les voulant reconnoiftre fut tué d’vn coup 
d’arquebuze & mangé de ces Antropophages. Ils 
auoient liez leurs canots par enfemble pour n’auoir 
point le pied a l’eau d’autant que leur fort eftoit 
inondé. Monfieur le Gouverneur eftant arriué vou- 
lut reconnoiftre la place. La pluye tomba en fi 
grande abondance toute la nuit qu’on ne put mettre 
la main aux armes. Le lendemain au point du iour, 
ces oyfeaux s’en eftoient enuolez. 

La Relation des Hurons, faifoit mention l’année 
pafiée d’vn ieune homme appellé Michel, de la nation © 
du feu, il amena 4 Kebec vne petite fille Huronne, . 
pour eftre mife au Seminaire des Vrfulines: or \ 
comme il ne pfit remonter en fon pays, il eft demeu- 
ré depuis ce temps-la dans la petite maifon du Chap- 
pelain de ces bonnes Meres. Ceux qui le connoiffent - 
n’ont point de peine de croire qu’vn miracle le guerit 
d’vne maladie, & qu’vne grace extraordinaire la A 
appellé & la Foy de [172] Iefus-Chrift, il n’y a rien — 
de fi innocent, rien de fi candide, rien de plus | 


1647) RELATION OF 1647 175 


his hand a Crucifix and a Rosary enriched with a 
great medal. Another, javelin in hand, seconded 
him. The French meanwhile confessed to a Father 
who happened to be present on that occasion. A 
good Neophyte, seeing that he was not understood 
in his own language, asked to confess through an 
interpreter. ‘‘One would need,’’ said the Father 
afterward, ‘‘to come from the end of the world, in 
order to see Savages painted in various colors, speak 
so ardently of God, and think so diligently upon their 
salvation.’”” Now as night was approaching, it was 
deemed best that the Father should get into a canoe 
and take a trip to Three Rivers, to warn Monsieur 
our Governor of what was occurring. [171] He 
learned the news toward ten o’clock in the evening; 
and on the next day he was present with a reinforce- 
ment of two good shallops and ten canoes, at the 
place where those Barbarians had intrenched them- 
selves. A Huron, desiring to reconnoitre them, was 
killed by an arquebus shot, and eaten by those 
Cannibals. They had tied their canoes together, in 
order not to have their feet in the water, because 
their fort was flooded. Monsieur the Governor, hav- 
ing arrived, wished to reconnoitre the place; but the 
rain fell in so great abundance, all night, that the 
weapons could not be handled. The next day, at 
dawn, those birds had flown away. 

The Relation of the Hurons made mention, last 
year, of a young man called Michel, of the nation of 
fire; he brought to Kebec a little Huron girl, to be 
placed in the Seminary of the Ursulines. As he 
could not go up again to his country, he remained 
from that time in the little house of those good 
_ Mothers’ Chaplain. Those who are acquainted with 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


modefte, que ce bon Neophyte. Les Meres Vrfulines 
qui l’ont fouuent veu & communiqué, affurent qu "ils if 
n’ont iamais eu aucune prife fur fes actions, tant il 
eft moderé, iamais il n’a refufé aucun employ, pour 
bas & pour vil & pour éloigné qu’il pfit eftre des 
fagons de faire des hommes Sauuages. Si on luy 
recommandoit quelque action qui fe refflentit parmy © 
eux de l’occupation d’vne femme, apres vne fimple 
propofition fort modefte, il beuuoit cette confufion, 
non auec le gouft d’vn Barbare, mais auec vn efprit © si 
tout Chreftien. q q . 

La Mere Vrfuline qui entend leur langue, connoif- __ 
fant l’innocence de fa vie, luy demanda certain iour a 
s'il ne s’approchoit pas fouuent de la faincte Table. 
Ie n’oferois pas, re{pondit-il, m’y prefenter de moy- q 
mefme, i’en ey. prou de defirs, mais ie d’y au fond © 
de mon coeur, i’en fuis indigne fi Marie (c’eft le nom + | : 
de la Mere) m’en iugeoit capable, elle me diroit, a 
Michel communie; puis qu'elle ne m’en dit mot, 
c’e{t figne que ie ne le dois pas faire, cette foumiffion — 
e{t bien aymable. 

Quelques-vns de fes camarades le preffans [173] 
d’aller ce Printemps 4 la guerre, il leur refpondiiiiae } 
qu'il n’y pouuoit aller fans l’ordre de celuy qui le 
dirigeoit, nous voyons bien, repartent-ils, que tu es 
vne femme & non pas vn homme, il baiffa la veué, — 
& retint fes paroles, mais fon coeur fut piqué: ils’e D 
alla quelque temps apres le decharger aupres de fa 
bonne Mere, luy racontant fes ennuis, & les penfé eS 
qu'il auoit touchant la guerre, la Mere l’ayant 
confolé, l’exhorte 4 porter cette iniure en Chreftien ; 
Ah! Marie, refpond-il, que c’eft vne chofe difficile 


& vn homme d’eftre tenu pour vne femme! pe if 
“a 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 177 


him have no difficulty in believing that a miracle 
cured him of a disease, and that an extraordinary 
grace has called him to the Faith of [172] Jesus 
Christ; there is nothing so innocent, nothing so 
candid, nothing more modest than this good Neo- 
phyte. The Ursuline Mothers, who have often seen 
him and conversed with him, affirm that they have 
never had any complaint to make of his actions, so 
scrupulous is he; never has he refused any employ- 
ment, no matter how low or how vile, or how foreign 
it might be to the usages among Savage men. If 
any act were assigned to him which savored among 
them of the occupation of a woman, after simply 
making a very modest statement, he swallowed that 
embarrassment,— not after the manner of a Barba- 
rian, but with an altogether Christian spirit. 

The Ursuline Mother who understands their lan- 
guage, knowing the innocence of his life, asked him 
on a certain day whether he often approached the 
holy Table. ‘‘ I would not dare,’’ he answered, ‘‘ to 
present myself there of my own accord; I have 
many desires to, but I say in the depth of my heart, 
‘lam unworthy of it.’ If Marie’’ (this is the Mother's 
name) ‘‘ judged me fit for it, she would say to me: 
‘Michel, receive communion;’ since she says nota 
word to me of this, it is a sign that I ought not to 
do so.’’ This meekness is very lovable. 

Some of his comrades urging him [173] to go to 
war this Spring, he answered them that he could not 
go thither without the order of him who directed 
him. ‘‘ We see plainly,’’ they reply, ‘‘ that thou art 
a woman, and not a man.’’ He lowered his eyes and 
restrained his words, but his heart was piqued; he 
went, some time afterward, to unburden it in the 


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


conclufion il alla 4 la guerre & en reuint, & celuy 
qui entre les‘autres, luy auoit donné cette iniure, fut 
pris des Hiroquois. 

Vn autre Huron nommé Iean Baptifte voulant 
aller a la chaffe, & voyant qu’vn Francois ne luy 
donnoit pas quelques viures qu’il auoit achepté, fe 
fentit emeu laiffant aller quelques paroles d’impa- 
tience ott de colere, s’en ef{tant pris garde, il va cher- 
cher fon Confeffeur, ne voulant point embarquer fon 
peché auec foy, ne l’ayant point rencontré, il s’en 
court aux Vrfulines demdde la Mere qui entend leur 
langue, la voyant 4a la grille, il luy dit ces [174] qua- 
tre paroles. Marie tu diras 4 mon Confeffeur quand 
il fera de retour, lean Baptifte 4 peché, il s’eft mis en 
colere, ilen eft grandement marry, il fe tiendra fur fes 
gardes pour ne plus retomber; cela dit il s’en va fans 
autre ceremonie. Eftant a Sainct Iofeph, il apprend 
que le R. P. Hierome Lalemant fon confeffeur eftoit 
de retour A Kebec, il le va trouuer fans delay, il fe 
confeffe il fait fa penitence, il fe rembarque & s’en 
va a la chaffe: Dieu vueille que ces bons Neophytes 
conferuent long-temps ce grand foin de tenir leurs 
confciences pures & nettes. 

Vn autre Huron non encor baptifé, allant voir de 
temps en temps cette bonne Mere dont ie viens de 
parler, luy dit certain iour. Marie mes camarades 
me veulle mener a la chaffe, donnez-moy confeil que 
dois-je faire? la Mere luy reparty, fi tu defire d’eftre 
bien tof{t baptifé, demeure, pour eftre plus parfaite- 
ment inftruit: fi tu n’es pas preffé de joiiir de ce 
bon-heur, tu peux aller a la chaffe, s’en eft fait, 
repond-il, la conclufion eft prife, ie n’iray pointala 
chaffe. Ie ne fuis point refté parmy les Francois, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 “179 


presence of his good Mother,— telling her his trials, 
and his ideas concerning the war. The Mother 
having consoled him, exhorts him to bear this wrong 
like a Christian. ‘‘ Ah! Marie,’’ he answers, ‘‘ how 
hard a thing it is for a man to be accounted a 
woman!’’ In conclusion, he went to the war and 
came back thence; and he who, among others, had 
given him that insult, was taken by the Hiroquois. 
Another Huron, named Jean Baptiste, wishing to 
go to the hunt, and seeing that a Frenchman did not 
give him some provisions which he had bought, felt 


_ disturbed, and let some words of impatience or anger 


escape him. Having reflected on this, he goes to 
seek his Confessor, not wishing to embark his sin 
with him; as he does not find him, he hastens away 
to the Ursulines’, and asks for the Mother who under- 
stands their language. Seeing her at the grating, 
he says to her these [174] few words: ‘‘ Marie, thou 
shalt say to my Confessor, when he returns, ‘ Jean 
Baptiste has sinned, he has been angry; he is very 
sorry for it, and will be on his guard not to fall back 
any more.’’’ That said, he goes away without other 
ceremony. While at Saint Joseph, he learns that 
the Reverend Father Hierome Lalemant, his con- 
fessor, has returned to Kebec. He goes to find him 
without delay; he confesses and performs his pen- 
ance, embarks again, and goes away to the chase. 
God grant that these good Neophytes may long 
preserve this great care to keep their consciences 
pure and clean. 

Another Huron, not yet baptized, going from time 
to time to see that good Mother of whom I have just 
spoken, said to her on a certain day: ‘‘ Marie, my 


_ comrades wish to take me to the chase; give me 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Nou. 31__ 


pour amaffer d’autres richeffes que celles de la Foy, — | 
n'y d’autres [175] biens qu’vne in{ftruction plus par- — 


ticulieres des affaires de Dieu, & de mon falut, voila 
l’vnique threfor, que ie veux remporter en mon pays, 


il fit bien connoiftre que la grace auoit formé ces © 


paroles: car il ne manqua pas vn feul iour quatre 
mois durans, de venir vifiter la Mere Ouarie, c’eft 
ainfi qu’ils prononce le nom de Marie, pour n’auoir 
point de M en leur langue n’y autre lettre labiale: & 
pour autant que les empefchemens de la Mere ne luy 
permettois pas tofijours de venir au parloir au moment 
qu'elle eftoit demandée il attendoit les heures entieres 
qu'elle fut libre fans iamais fe rebuter, tant il auoit 
d’ardeur pour des veritez qui luy auoient e{té incon- 
nués iufques alors. Il n’y a point de cceurs a 
l’épreuue de la grace, quand Dieu les veut auoir. 
La Barbarie perd fon nom, fi toft qu'elle eft entrée 
dans l’école de Iefus-Chrift, mais le commencement 
d'vne bonne action & d’vne bonne vie, n’en eft pas 
la fin & le commencement, ie prie noftre Seigneur 
que ceux qui recoiuent fes benedictions les confer- 
uent, iufques au dernier moment de leur vie. 


tg a EE: I 


iin 


— 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 "181 


> 


counsel what I am to do.’’ The Mother answered 
him, ‘‘ If thou desire to be soon baptized, remain, in 
order to be more thoroughly instructed; if thou art 
not in haste to enjoy that happiness, thou mayest go 
to the chase.’’ ‘‘ Itissettled,’’ he answers, ‘‘and my 
conclusion is taken; I will not go to the chase. I 
have not stayed with the French to amass other 
riches than those of the Faith, or other [175] benefits 
than a more special instruction in the affairs of God 
and of my salvation: that is the sole treasure that I 
wish to carry back to my own country.’’ He made it 
well understood that grace had shaped these utter- 
ances; for he did not fail a single day, during four 
months, to come and visit Mother Ouarie,— thus they 
pronounce the name of Marie, for want of having an 
M or other labial letter in their language. And, 
since the hindrances of the Mother did not always 
allow her to come to the parlor at the moment when 
she was asked for, he would wait whole hours until 
she were free, without ever becoming discouraged,— 
so much ardor had he for truths which until then had 
been unknown to him. There are no hearts proof 
against grace, when God wills to possess them. Bar- 
barism loses its name as soon as it has entered the 
school of Jesus Christ; but the beginning of a good 
action and of a good life is not the end of it as well. 
I pray our Lord that those who receive his blessings 
may preserve them, even to the last moment of their 
lives. 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 81 


[176] CHAPITRE IX. [i-e., x.] 


DE LA MISSION DE L’ASSOMPTION AU PAYS DES 
ABNAQUIOIS. 


J ES Abnaquiois eftans venus demander vn Pere 
Jp de noftre Compagnie pour le mener en leur 

pays, & pour aprendre de luy le chemin du 
Ciel, le Pere Gabriel Dreuilletes leur fut accordé, 
comme il a e{té remarqué dans la Relation de l’année 
precedente. Il partit de faint lofeph ou de la refi- 
dence de Sillery le vingt-neufiéme d’Aouft, conduit 
par vne efcouade de Sauuages. Ie ne dis rien des 
difficultez qu’il faut effuyer dans vn voyage de neuf 
4 dix mois, ot on rencontre des riuieres ferrées de 
rochers, & les vaiffeaux qui vous portent ne font que 
d’écorce, ott les dangers de la vie retournent plus _ 
fouuent que les iours & que les nuits, ott les froids © 
de 1l’Hyuer changent tout vn pays en neiges & en . 
glaces, ot il faut porter fa maifon, fon viure, & fa — 
prouifion, ot vous n’auez autre compagnie que celle — 
des Barbares, auffi éloignez de nos fagons de faire que 
la terre [177] eft éloignée des Cieux; ot les forces — 
du corps, dont ils font pourueus abondamment — 
l’emportent par deffus toutes les beautez de l’efprit, _ 
ott il ne fe trouue ny pain, ny vin, ny aucune nourri- + 
ture de celles dont on fe fert communément en 


en Enfer tant ils font affreux, & cependant ils menent ~ . 
en Paradis ceux qui ayment les Croix dont ils font 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 "183 


[176] CHAPTER IX. [i.e., x.] 


OF THE MISSION OF THE ASSUMPTION IN THE COUNTRY 
OF THE ABNAQUIOIS. 


HE Abnaquiois having come to ask for a Father 
rT. of our Society, to take him into their country, 
and to learn from him the way to Heaven, Fa- 

ther Gabriel Dreuilletes was granted to them, as has 
been remarked in the Relation of the preceding year. 
He started from saint Joseph, or the residence of 
Sillery, on the twenty-ninth of August, conducted by 
asquad of Savages. I say nothing of the difficulties 
which must be experienced in a journey of nine or 
ten months,—in which one encounters rivers iron- 
bound with rocks, and the vessels which carry you 
are only of bark; wherein the perils of life recur 
oftener than the days and the nights; wherein the 
cold of Winter changes a whole country into snow 
and ice; where it is necessary to carry one’s house, 
one’s living, and one’s provisions; where you have 
no other company than that of the Barbarians, as far 
removed from our usages as the earth [177] is removed 
from the Heavens; where bodily strength, with 
which they are abundantly provided, triumphs over 
all the beauties of the spirit; where there is found 
neither bread nor wine, nor any food of the kinds 
which are commonly used in Europe; where one 
might say that all the roads lead to Hell, so frightful 
are they, and yet they lead to Paradise those who 
love the Crosses with which they are strewn. It 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


parfemez, c’eft dans fes fatigues que le Pere a trouué 
du repos, rencontrant plus fouuent des montaignes 
femblables 4 celles du Tabor, & des Oliues, qu’a celle | 
du Caluaire. Si toft qu’il fut arriué au paysdefon | 
hofte, qui eft allié des Chreftiens de faint Iofeph: 
les Sauuages circonuoifins le vindrent faluer auec plus 

de coeur & de fimplicité que de complimens, quel- 
ques malades fe traifnerent plus d’vne lieué & demie 
pour le voir, tous luy témoignoient de la bien-veil- 
lance & leur mode. I] leur rendoit le reciproque 
faifant paroiftre en fes paroles & en fes actions, la 
ioye qu’il refentoit en fon coeur, & les defirs qu'il 
auoit dans fon ame de les fecourir de toute l’eftendué 

de fon pouuoir. 

Apres ce premier abord & cette premiere [178] 
communication qui fe fit par interprete, le Pere s’ap- 
plica fortement 4 1’étude de leur langue, qui a peu de 
rapport auec l’Algonquine dont il auoit defia con- 
noiffance, & a mefme temps qu’il eft écholier, il fait 
l’office de maiftre, inftruifant les malades qu’il va 
chercher de cd de 14 en diuers cantons ou fe reti- 
roient les Sauuages. 

Il defcend tout le long du fleuue nommé Kinibeki, 
conduit par vn Sauuage qui auoit connoiffance des 
endroits ou demeuroient fes compatriotes: il arriue 
enfin en vne habitation Angloife baftie fur cette 
riuiere, ot il fut tres-bien receu, de 14 il remonte fur 
ce beau fleuue pour reuoir les malades qu'il auoit 
vifitez, pour les inftruire de plus en plus, & pour 
baptizer ceux qu'il verroiten danger de mort. Eftant 
de retour au pays de fon hofte, il y demeura quelque q 
temps fe comportant toufiours en maiftre quand il © 
falloit parler des veritez Chreftiennes, & en écholier ; 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 "185 


was in his fatigues that the Father found rest, more 
often encountering mountains similar to those of 
Tabor and Olivet than to that of Calvary. As soon 
as he had arrived in the country of his host, who is 
allied to the Christians of saint Joseph, the surround- 
ing Savages came to greet him, with more heart and 
simplicity than compliments; some sick people 
dragged themselves more than a league and a half, 
in order to see him; all evinced good-will to him, in 
their own way. He returned the like to them,— 
manifesting in his words and his actions the joy which 
he felt in his heart, and the desires which his soul 
had to aid them to the utmost of his power. 

After this first approach and this first [178] com- 
munication, which took place through an interpreter, 
the Father applied himself assiduously to the study 
of their language, which has little in common with 
the Algonquin, with which he was already acquainted ; 
and, at the same time while he is a scholar, he does 
the office of teacher,—instructing the sick people, 
whom he goes to seek hither and thither in various 
districts where the Savages had retired. 

He goes down the whole length of the stream 
called Kinibeki,* conducted by a Savage who was 
acquainted with the places where his fellow-country- 
men lived. He finally arrives at an English settle- 
ment built upon that river, where he was very well 
received; thence he returns up that beautiful stream 
to see again the sick people whom he had visited, in 
order to instruct them more and more, and to baptize 
those whom he should see in danger of death. Hav- 
ing returned to the country of his host, he remained 
there some time,— always behaving as master when 


it was necessary to speak of the Christian truths, and 


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou.31_ 


quand il falloit apprendre les rudimens d’vne langue | 
qui luy eftoit inconnué. Le recours & la confiance — 
qu'il eut en Dieu, luy obtiendrent vne benediction 
quafi miraculeufe, les Abnaquiois mefme & depuis les 
Algonquins & les Frangois fe font [179] eftonnez 
comme en fi peu de temps il s’eftoit rendu cette 
langue fi familiere. 

Sur la my-Octobre il retourne vers fes malades, 
qui foupiroient apres luy: car il les feruoit des deux 
mains, il gagnoit leurs ames, par les foins qu’il auoit 
de leurs corps, il les veilloit, il les feruoit, il leur 
portoit 4 manger, & fion luy donnoit quelque bon 
morceau, ils eftoient affurez que c’eftoit pour eux. 
Dieu beniffoit fa charité, par plufieurs guerifons 
affez notables & bien peu efperées, ce qui le faifoit 
rechercher, des petits & des grands. Le Sauuage 
qui le conduifoit, le menant vne autrefois en cette 
habitation Angloife nommé Kinibeki, le fit defcendre 
iufques en la mer de l’Acadie, ot fur fes coftes il 
vifite fept ou huict habitations d’Anglois, qui le 
receurent tous, auc vne affection d’autant plus extra- 
ordinaire, qu'elle eftoit moins attendué. Le Sauuage 
fon guide fe voyant fur les riues de la mer de 1’ Aca- 
die, dans fon petit canot d’écorce, conduifit le Pere 
iufques & Pentag¥et, ot il trouua vn petit hofpicede 
Peres Capucins qui l’embrafferent auec l’amour & la” 
charité qu’on peut attendre de leur bonté. Le R.P. 
Ignace de Paris leur Superieur, [180] luy fit ‘oul | 
l’aqueiiil poffible. Apres s’eftre rafraifchy quelque 
temps atic ces bons Peres, il remonte dans fon bateau — 
décorce, repaffe dans les habitations Angloifes, qu'il 4 
auoit veués en chemin. Le Sieur Chafte luy donne — 
des viures abondamment pour fon voyage, & des 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 187 


as scholar when it was necessary to learn the rudi- 
ments of a language which was unknown to him. 
His recourse to God, and confidence in him, obtained 
for him a blessing almost miraculous: even the Abna- 
quiois, and later the Algonquins and the French, 
were [179] astonished that, in so little time, he had 
become so familiar with that language. 

Toward the middle of October, he returns to his 
patients, who were sighing after him,—for he served 
them with both hands; he was winning their souls 
through the care that he gave their bodies; he 
watched them, served them, and carried food to 
them; and if some good morsel were given to him, 
they were sure that it was for them. God blessed 
his charity through several very notable and little 
hoped-for cures, which caused him to be sought by 
small and great. The Savage who conducted him, 
taking him another time to that English settlement, 
named Kinibeki, had him go down as far as the sea 
of Acadia; where, on its coasts, he visits seven or 
eight English settlements, at all of which he was 
received with a cordiality all the more extraordinary 
since it was little expected. The Savage, his guide, 
seeing himself on the shores of the sea of Acadia in 
his little bark canoe, conducted the Father even to 
Pentagouet, where he found a little home of Capu- 
chin Fathers, who embraced him with the love and 
charity which may be expected of their goodness.® 
The Reverend Father Ignace of Paris, their Supe- 
rior, [180] gave him all possible welcome. After 
having refreshed himself some time with these good 
Fathers, he reénters his bark boat, and returns to the 
English settlements which he had visited on the way. 
Sieur Chaste gives him provisions in abundance 


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 


lettres pour l’Anglois, qui commendoit 4 Kinibeki, — 
dans lefquelles il proteftois, qu’il n’auoit rien remar- 
qué au Pere qui ne fut tres loiiable, qu'il n’étoit 
nullement porté au commerce, que les Sauuages lay 
rendoient ce témoignage, qu’il ne penfoit qu’a leur 
inftruction, qu’il venoit procurer leur falut au dépens— 
de fa vie, en vn mot, qu’il admiroit fon courage. 

Ce Capitaine ayant receu ces lettres, & pris vne 
copie des patentes du Pere, luy fit toutes les careffes, 
dont il fe pit aduifer, & quelque temps apres, s’en 
alla A Pleimot, de la A Bofton ce font deux villes de 
la nouuelle Angleterre. Le Pere remonta vne lieué 
plus haut que Kinibeki ot les Sauuages fe raffem- 
blerent au nombre de quinze grandes cabanes, ils luy 
baftirent vne petite Chapelle de planches, faites a 
leur mode, c’eft icy ot le Pere poffedant fuffifam- 
ment leur langue, les [181] in{truit fortement, il leur 
fait entendre le fujet qui le retenoit auec eux, & 
l’importance de reconnoiftre celuy qui les a creez, & — 
qui les chaftiera, ou qui les benira felon leurs ceuures. | 
Voyant qu’vne grande partie témoignoit aymer les — 
bonnes nouuelles de l’Euangile il leur demande trois | 
chofes pour marque de la bonne volonté, & du defir | 
qu’ils auoient de receuoir la Foy de Iefus-Chrift. 

La premiere fut de quitter les boiffons de 1’Eu-_ 
rope, d’ot. s’enfuiuent de grandes yurongneries, — 
parmy les Sauuages, les Abnaquiois promirent d’éui- 
ter ces excez. Ils ont affez bien tenu leurs parole 

Le Pere leur demanda en fecond lieu, de viure 
paifiblement les vns auec les autres, & d’arrefter les 
jaloufies, & les querelles qui fe rencontrent entre ces” 
petites nations. Il n’eft pas croyable combien les Sau- — 


tj 


uages d’vn mefme quartier font vnis par enfemble: 


EE 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 189 


for his voyage, and letters for the Englishman 
who commanded at Kinibeki; in which he declared 
that he had observed nothing in the Father which 
was not most praiseworthy; that he was not at all 
inclined to trade; that the Savages rendered him this 
testimony; that he thought only of their instruction, 
and came to procure their salvation at the expense 
of his own life,—in a word, that he admired his 
courage. 

That Captain, having received these letters, and 
taken a copy of the Father’s credentials, showed him 
all the courtesies that he could think of; and, some 
time after, went away to Pleimot [Plymouth], and 
thence to Boston,—these are two towns of new 
England. The Father went a league higher up than 
Kinibeki, where the Savages assembled to the num- 
ber of fifteen great cabins: they built him a little 
Chapel of boards, made in their manner. It was 
here that the Father, having sufficient command of 
their language, [181] efficiently instructed them; he 
enabled them to understand the object which kept 
him with them, and the importance of acknowledg- 
ing him who created them and who will punish 
them or bless them, according to their works. See- 
ing that a great part of them showed a liking for the 
good news of the Gospel, he asks them three things 
in token of their good-will, and their desire to receive 
the Faith of Jesus Christ. 

The first was, to give up the liquors of Europe, 
whence ensues great intoxication among the Savages. 
The Abnaquiois promised to avoid these excesses; 
and have fairly well kept their word. 

The Father asked them, in the second place, to 
live peaceably with one another, and to stop the 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 31. 


mais comme on voit en France, entre deux villes, — 
oti entre deux hameaux, ie ne feay qu’elle pointilles, 
auffi remarque-on en cette partie de noftre Ame[ri]- 
que, de petites enuies, entre les diuers cantons des 
Sauuages, les hommes font hommes, par tout auffi 
bien au bout du [182] monde comme au milieu. I] y 
auoit aupres du Pere, des Sauuages de diuers endroits, 
c’e{t pourquoy il s’éleuoit de temps a autres des dif- 
putes, d’autant plus faciles 4 terminer, qu’ils auoient 
promis de s’entr’aymer. Si bien que quand leurs i 
bouches auoient efté trop ouuertes, pour parler A 
leur mode, & que leur langue n’auoit pas marché 
droit, ils fe venoient demander pardon l’vn a l’autre 
dans la Chapelle; voire mefme il y en eut vn, qui 
pouffé de fureur [sc. ferueur], fe batit foy-mefme en 
la prefence de fon compagnon, priant celuy quia tout 
fait, de leur pardonner a tous deux leurs offences. 

Le troifiefme témoignage que le Pere erigea, fut 
qu’ils jettaffent leur Manits ou plufto{t leurs Demons, _ 
ot! pluftoft leurs forts phantaftiques. Il yapeude 
ieunes gens parmy les Sauuages, qui n’ait quelque 
pierre, ou quelque autre chofe, qu’il tient comme 
par dependance du Demon, pour eftre heureux a la 
chaffe, ou au jeu, ou Ala guerre; cela leur eft donné, 
ou par quelque forcier, ou ils fongent qu’ils le trou- 
ueront en quelque endroit, ou leur imagination leur 
fait croire, que le Manits leur prefente ce qu'il ren- 
contrent. [183] Ie ne doute pas que le Demon ne 
fe gliffe dans fes badineries, mais i’ay de la peine a 
croire, qu'il fe communique a eux fenfiblement, 
comme il fait aux forciers & aux magiciens de l’Eu- 
rope, & A quelques peuples de cette Amerique: Quoy — 
qu’il en foit, ceux qui auoient de ces forts ou de ces 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 191 


jealousies and the quarrels which occur among those 
little nations. It is incredible how much the Sav- 
ages of the same region are united together; but, as 
one sees in France, between two cities or hamlets, I 
know not what cavilings, there may be seen also in 
this part of our America small envies between the 
various districts of the Savages. Men are men every- 
where, just as much so at the end of the [182] world 
as at the middle of it. There were with the Father 
some Savages from various places: on this account 
there arose, from time to time, disputes, which were 
much easier to end when they had promised to love 
one another. So, when their lips had been too widely 
opened,—to speak in their fashion,— and when their 
tongues had not walked straight, they came to ask 
pardon of one another in the Chapel; indeed, there 
was one of them who, impelled by his fervor, 
beat himself in the presence of his companion, ask- 
ing him who has made all to pardon them both their 
offenses. 

The third evidence that the Father secured was, 
that they should throw away their Manitou,—or, 
rather, their Demons, or fantastic charms. There 
are few young men among the Savages, who have 
not some stone, or other thing, which they keep as a 
token of dependence upon the Demon, in order to be 
happy in the hunt, or in play, or in war; it is either 
given them by some sorcerer, or they dream that 
they will find it in some place, or their imagination 
makes them believe that the Manitou presents to 
them what they encounter. [183] I doubt not that 
the Demon slips into these follies; but I can hardly 
believe that he communicates with them perceptibly, 
as he does with the sorcerers and magicians of 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 31 


Manits, les tirerent de leur fac, les vns les ietterent, 
les autres les apporterent au Pere. Il y eut mefme 
quelques forciers, ou quelques Iongleurs qui brufle- 
rent leurs tambours, & les autres in{ftrumens de leurs 
mettiers; fi bien qu’on n’entendoit plus dans leurs 
cabanes, ces heurlemens ces cris, ces tintamarres qu’ils 
faifoient 4 l’entour de leurs malades. Pource que la 
plufpart proteftoient hautement qu’ils vouloient auoir 
recours 4 Dieu; ie dis la plufpart, & non pas tous; 
quelques-vns ne gouftoient point ce changement, fi 
bien qu’ils procurerent qu’vn malade fut foufflé, & 
chanté par ces affronteurs: mais ce pauure homme 
eftant bien difpofé pour le Ciel, ne voulut iamais 
confentir 4 leurs fuperftitions, difant nettement, que 
s'il recouuroit la fanté, qu’il la tiendroit comme vn 
don venu de la part de celuy qui feul la peut donner 
& ofter quand il luy plaitft. 

[184] Le Pere demeura iufqu’au mois de Ianuier, 
au milieu de ces quinze cabanes, inftruifant en public 
& en particulier, faifant prier les Sauuages, vifitant 
& confolant, & fecourant les malades, auec des peines 
grandes a la verité, mais detrempée d’vne rofée, & 
d’vne liqueur du Ciel, qui adoucit les plus grandes 
amertumes. Dieu ne fe laiffe pas vaincre, il refpand 
fes douceurs, auffi bien fur les croix de fer, que fur 
les croix d’or & d’argent. Ce n’eft pas vne petite 
joye, de baptizer vne trentaine de perfonnes, difpo- 
{ées ala mort & au Paradis. Le Pere n’a pas encore 
voulu confier ces eaux facrées, A ceux qui eftoient 
pleins de vie, il ne les a répandués que fur des mori- 
bons, dont quelques-vns font rechapez, auec 1’étonne- 
ment de leurs compatriotes. 


Au commencement de l’année, comme ces bonnes 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 193 


Europe, and with some peoples of this America. Be 
this as it may, those who had some of these charms, 
or Manitous, drew them from their pouches; some 
cast them away, others brought them to the Father. 
There were even some sorcerers or Jugglers who 
burned their drums and other instruments of their 
trades; so that one no longer heard in their cabins 
those howlings, those cries, those commotions which 
they raised about their sick, because most of the peo- 
ple loudly protested that they would have recourse 
to God. I say the most part, and not all; some did 
not relish this change, and brought it about that a 
sick man was blown upon and sung over by those 
insulters. But this poor man, being well prepared 
for Heaven, would never consent to their supersti- 
tions,— saying plainly that, if he recovered health, 
he would regard it as a gift proceeding from him who 
alone can give and take it away when he pleases. 

[184] The Father remained until the month of 
January in the midst of those fifteen cabins,—in- 
structing in public and private; having the Savages 
pray; visiting and consoling and helping the sick,— 
with great hardships, in truth, but diluted with a 
dew and cordial from Heaven, which sweetens the 
greatest bitterness. God does not allow himself to 
be conquered; he pours forth his gifts just as well 
upon crosses of iron as upon those of gold and silver. 
It is not a small joy to baptize thirty persons pre- 
pared for death and for Paradise. The Father has 
not yet chosen to entrust those sacred waters to those 
who were full of life; he has shed them only upon 
_ the dying,—some of whom have escaped, to the 
astonishment of their fellow-countrymen. 

At the beginning of the year, when these good 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 31 


gens fe preparoient pour leur grande chaffe, les 
forciers ou les Iongleurs prenants 1’occafion au poil, 
firent les deuins; ils publierent par les cabanes, que 
tous ceux qui prioient & qui crioient a ce qu’on leur 
auoit prefché, feroient mal-heureux, & qu’ils mour- 
roient bien toft, que le Patriarche, c’eft ainfi qu’ils 
nommoiét le Pere, & tous ceux qui tiendroient [185] 
fa route feroient pris des Hiroquois, lefquels moleftent 
auffi bien cette nation que les autres. Les Sauuages 
qui auoient commencé de goufter les paroles de la 
vie eternelle ne s’épouuanterent point de ces mena- 
ces, ils continuerent leurs prieres 4 l’ordinaire, & la 
plus grande partie fe ietta du cofté du Pere, pour 
auoir la confolation de fe loger aupres de fa cabane, 
afin de l’entendre & de fe confirmer de plus en plus 
dans les veritez qu’ilsadmirent. Les voila donc tous 
en campagne, ils montent huit ou dix iournées fur le 
fleuue de Kinibeki. Ils entrent dans vn grand lac, 
ou ils fe donnent le rendez-vous apres leur chaffe. 
S’eftans diuifez en plufieurs bandes ils declarerent 
la guerre aux Cerfs, & aux Eflans, aux Caftors, & 
aux autres beftes fauuages. 

Le Pere inftruifit toufiours fon efcoiiade, la fuiuant 
dans toutes fes courfes, auec des trauaux trop grands 
pour acheter des Royaumes de la terre, mais bien 
petits pour procurer le Royaume des Cieux, a des 
ames dont le prix & la valeur doit eftre confideré 
dans le fang de Iefus-Chritt. 

Leur chaffe acheuée, ils fe trouuerent tous fur les 
riues de ce grand lac au lieu [186] qu’ils auoient 
arrefté. C’eft icy ou les forciers perdirent leur 


credit, car non feulement ceux qui prioient Dieu, P 
n’encoururent aucun defaftre, non feulement le Pere 


t 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 195 


people were preparing themselves for their great 
hunt, the sorcerers or Jugglers, taking occasion by 
the hair, acted as soothsayers: they published through 
the cabins that all those who prayed, and who 
denounced what these had preached to them would 
be wretched and would soon die; that the Patri- 
arch,—thus they named the Father,—and all those 
who should keep [185] his path, would be taken by 
the Hiroquois, who molest this nation as well as the 
others. The Savages, who had begun to relish the 
words of eternal life, were not awed by these threats; 
they continued their prayers as usual, and the ma- 
jority placed themselves upon the side of the Father, 
in order to have the consolation of lodging near his 
cabin, that they might hear him, and confirm them- 
selves more and more in the truths which they 
admire. So there they all were in the field; they 
ascend eight or ten days’ journey along the river of 
Kinibeki. They enter a great lake, where they 
appoint their rendezvous after their hunt. Having 
separated into several bands, they declared war on 
the Deer, the Elks, the Beavers, and other wild 
beasts. 

The Father constantly instructed his band, follow- 
ing it in all its expeditions, with labors too great to 
buy Kingdoms of the earth, but very small for secur- 
ing the Kingdom of Heaven to souls whose price 
and value must be estimated in the blood of Jesus 
Christ. 

Their hunt finished, they all met on the shores of 
that great lake, at the place [186] which they had 
appointed. It was here that the sorcerers lost their 
credit, for not only did those who prayed to God 
incur no disaster, not only did the Father and his 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 : 


& fes gens ne tomberent point dans les embufches 
des Hiroquois, mais Dieu les fauorifa encore d’vne 
heureufe chaffe, & quelques malades éloignez du Pere, 
ayans eu recours 4 Dieu dans leurs angoiffes, auoient 
receu la benediction d’vne fanté fort inopinée. 

Vn forcier eftant fort malade fe voyant abandonné 
de tous fes gens, fit venir le Pere, le fupplie de 1’in- 
{truire, l’affeurant qu’il vouloit croire & prier tout de 
bon. Le Pere luy declare les veritez plus neceffaires 
pour eftre baptifé, le fait renoncer 4 fon Demon, & 
le voyant dans vne difpofition fufffante pour vn 
homme qu'il croyoit 4 deux doits de la mort, l’anime, 
l’encourage & le baptife, s’eftant retiré d’aupres de 
luy, il fe fouuient qu’il ne luy auoit point demandé 
les outils de fon meftier de Iongleur, il retourne, il 
rentre dans la cabane de ce nouueau Chreftien, il luy 
demande fon tambour & fes forts en prefence de 
quelques Capitaines qui 1’étoient venu vifiter, il les 
donne fans contredit, [187] priant le Pere de les 
ietter au feu: fitoft qu’il euft fait cette action, il fen- 
tit vn fi grand foulagement qu’il creut eftre guery, 
en effet il ne luy refta qu’vne foibleffe de laquelle il 
fe fit bien toft quitte. 

Vn autre ayant efté guary par la vertu de l’eau 
benifte que le Pere répandit fur fon mal, publia hau- 
tement qu’il tenoit la fanté de Dieu par l’entremife 
de l’eau qui donnoit la vie. Mais ce pauure homme 
s’e{tant enyuré en allant vifiter les Anglois, retomba 
dans fa premiere maladie, il en attribua la caufe a 
fon peché, celuy qui 4 tout fait, difoit-il, 4 fes gens, 
m’auoit guery par fa bonté & par fa puiffance, mais 
l’'yurongnerie ma reietté dans mon mal-heur. 


Quelques femmes voyans leurs enfans malades, — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 197 


people not fall into the ambushes of the Hiroquois, 
but God further favored them with a successful 
hunt; and some sick people, at a distance from the 
Father, having had recourse to God in their suffer- 
ings, had received the blessing of very unexpected 
health. 

A sorcerer being very sick, seeing himself aban- 
doned by all his people, sends for the Father, and 
begs him to instruct him,—assuring him that he 
wished to believe and to pray in good earnest. The 
Father declares to him the truths most necessary for 
baptism, and has him renounce his Demon; and, 
seeing him in a state of mind sufficient for a man 
whom he believed within two fingers of death, ani- 
mates, encourages, and baptizes him. Having gone 
from him, he remembers that he had not asked him 
for the tools of his Juggler’s trade; he turns back, 
goes back to this new Christian’s cabin, and asks 
him for his drum and his charms, in the presence of 
some Captains who had come to visit him. He gives 
them without opposition, [187] begging the Father 
to cast them into the fire; as soon as he had per- 
formed this act, he felt so great a relief that he 
believed he was cured. Indeed, there remained with 
him only a weakness, from which he soon became 
free. 

Another, having been cured by the virtue of the 
holy water which the Father poured over his sore, 
published aloud that he obtained his health from 
God, through the intervention of the water which 
gave life. But this poor man, having intoxicated 
himself while going to visit the English, relapsed 
into his prior sickness: he attributed the cause of 
this to his sin. ‘‘ He who has made all,” he said to 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 31 — 


prioient fur eux en l’abfence du Pere, & noftre Sei- 
gneur ayant égard a leur confiance les exauffoit bien 
fouuent, leurs rendant leurs petits non fans action de 
graces, car elles publioient par tout que la priere 
eftoit bonne, & qu'elle auoit guery leurs enfans. 
Deux ou trois perfonnes ayans eu recours aux fuper- 
{titions des Iongleurs moururent quafi entre leurs 
mains: & tous ceux qui fe font adreffez a Dieu, [188] 
ont efté ou gueris ou foulagez en leurs maladies. 
L’hofte du Pere eftant tombé malade, les forciers 
dirent qu’il en mouroit, & quand il gueriroit qu'il 
ne verroit pas le Printemps, qu’vn fort ou vn Hiro- 
quois luy ofteroit la vie en punition de ce qu’il auoit 
amené vne robe noire en leur pays. Ces faux Pro- 
phetes qui parloient fans eftre enuoyez, furent trou- 
uez menteurs, ce bon homme plein de confiance en 
Dieu a e{té trois fois malade, & trois fois guery, non 
fans l’admiration de ceux qui l’auoient defia con- 
damné a la mort. Il eft vray qu’il luy arriua vne 
chofe bien fafcheufe, il n’auoit qu’vn fils qu’il aymoit 
comme foy-mefme, cét enfant mourut mais la crainte 
qu'il eut qu’on n’attribuat cette mort a fa creance luy 
fit prononcer cette harangue en public. Son fils 
venant d’expirer, il fort de fa cabane, il fe promene 
a l’entour de celles qui l’auoifinoient, criant 4 pleine 
voix preftez l’oreille 4 mes paroles, ie n’auois qu’vn 
fils que i'aymois plus tendrement que ma vie, il eft 
mort. Dieu me l’a ofté, il a bien fait; car ie l’ay | 
merité, il l’auoit guery de fes maladies, ayant peut- | 
ef{tre égard 4 mes prieres, & a [189] l’obeyflance que 
ie rendois 4fes commandemens: mais l’ayant offencé | 
griefuement depuis quelque temps, il m’aiuftement 
cha{tié par la mort de mon fils, ie ne {uis pas trifte, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 199 


his people, ‘‘ had cured me by his goodness and by 
his power; but drunkenness has cast me bdck into 
my illness.’’ 

Some women, seeing their children sick, prayed 
over them in the Father’s absence; and our Lord, 
having regard to their confidence, very often heard 
them, restoring to them their little ones, not with- 
out thanksgiving,—for they published everywhere 
that prayer was good, and that it had cured their 
children. T'woorthree persons, having had recourse 
to the superstitions of the Jugglers, died almost in 
their hands; and all those who addressed themselves 
to God [188] were either cured or relieved in their 
diseases. 

The Father’s host having fallen sick, the sorcerers 
said that he was dying, and that, even if he should 
be cured, he would not see the Spring: that a spell 
or a Hiroquois would take away his life, in punish- 
ment for having brought a black robe into their coun- 
try. Those false Prophets, who spoke without being 
sent, were found liars; this good man, full of confi- 
dence in God, has thrice been sick, and thrice 
cured,— not without the wonder of those who had 
already condemned him to death. It is true that 
there happened to him a very grievous thing. He 
had only one son, whom he loved as himself; this 
child died; but the fear that he had lest they should 
attribute this death to his belief, made him pronounce 
this harangue in public. His son expiring, he leaves 
his cabin, and walks around those which were near 
it, shouting in a loud voice: ‘‘ Listen to my words! 
I had only one son, whom I loved more tenderly 
than my life; he is dead. God has taken him from 
me, but he has done well; for I have deserved it. 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 31 


n’y marry de fa mort; car il eft au Ciel, mais ie fuis” 


dolent d’auoir offencé celuy qui a tout fait, fi toft que 
ce petit enfant fut enterré, ce bon Neophyte appela 


ceux qui auoient affifté 4 fa mort & a fon enterre- — 


ment, leur fit vn magnifique feftin A leur mode, &en 


fuite leur diftribua les plus belles chofes & les meil- 
leures qu’il eut en fa cabane, auec ces paroles, l’hon- 
neur que vous auez fait 4 vn enfant bien-heureux, & 
les pechez qui l’ont fait mourir me donnent de la ioye 
& de latrifteffe. Voila ce que ma ioye donne 4 voftre 
amour, & ce que la douleur de mes offences me rauit 
pour vous en faire vne action de graces. La creance 
que les ames de leurs enfans font au Ciel les confole 
infiniment dans la douleur qu’ils reffentent de leur 
mort: Vne mere éplorée & comme au defefpoir ar- 
re{tera foudainement fes larmes, fi le Pere en la 


tancant amoureufement luy reproche qu’elle pleure — 


le bon-heur & la gloire de fon enfant. 

Pour conclufion ces peuples ont témoigné [190] vne 
grande affection au Pere, auffi difoient-ils que fa vie 
eftoit bien differente de la vie de leurs forciers, & 
que le Dieu qu’il adoroit auoit bien vn autre pouuoir 
que leur Manits. Il faut bien difoient-ils, que le 
Dieu que nous annonce ce Pere foit puiffant, puis 


qu'il guerit fi parfaitement les maladies les plus — 
grandes, & les plus contagieufes, ce que ne erry io | 
faire le Manit¥ ou les Genies que nos forciers inuo-— 


quent. Il faut bien que ce Dieu foit grand, & qu'il y | 


ait vn grand efprit, puis qu’il fait que cét homme 7 
eftranger entende & parle noftre langue en deux ou 

trois mois, & les Algonquins apres auoir demeuré vn a 
an entier parmy nous, ne la fgauroient parler; nl 


j 


| 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 201 


He had cured him of his diseases,— having, perhaps, 
consideration for my prayers, and for [189] the obe- 
dience that I rendered to his commandments: but, 
because I grievously offended him some time ago, 
he has justly chastised me through the death of my 
son. Iam not sad or grieved at his death, for he is 
in Heaven; but I am grieved to have offended him 
who has made all.’’ As soon as this little child was 
buried, that good Neophyte called those who had 
been present at his death, and at his burial; made 
them a magnificent feast, after their fashion; and 
subsequently distributed to them the most beautiful 
things and the best that he had in his cabin, with 
these words: ‘‘ The honor that you have done toa 
blessed child, and the sins which have caused his 
death, give me joy and sadness. Behold what my 
joy gives to your love, and what the sorrow for my 
offenses robs me of in order to perform you an act of 
thanks.’’ The belief that the souls of their children 
are in Heaven infinitely comforts them in the distress 
which they feel at their death. A mother weeping 
and, as it were, in despair, will suddenly stop her 
tears, if the Father, affectionately chiding her, 
reproaches her for mourning at the happiness and 
glory of her child. 

In conclusion, these peoples have manifested [190] 
a great affection for the Father: they also said that 
his life was very different from the lives of their sor- 
cerers, and that the God whom he adored had indeed 
another power than their Manitou. ‘‘ It must surely 
be,’’ they said, ‘‘that the God whom this Father 
announces to us, is powerful, since he so perfectly 
cures the greatest and the most contagious diseases, — 
which the Manitou or Genii, whom our sorcerers 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 31. 


faut bien que ce Dieu foit bon & bien puiffant, puis | 
qu'il ofte A ce Patriarche la crainte des maladies les _ 
plus contagieufes, & qu’il l’affeure contre les mena- 
ces de nos forciers, & contre la malice de leurs char- 
mes dont il fe moque. Cét homme eft bien diffem- 
blable denosIongleurs. Ceux-cy demandent toufiours 
celuy-l4 ne demande iamais rien: ceux-cy ne font 
quafi point auec nos malades, ce[l]uy-la y paffe les 
iours & les nuits. Ceux-cy ne cherchent que des 
robes de [191] Loutres de Caftor & d’autres animaux, 
celuy-l& ne les regarde pas feulement du coing de 
l’ceil. Nos forciers font bonne chere tant qu’ils 
peuuent, le Pere ieufne fouuent, il a paffé cinquante 
iours auec vn peu de blé d’Inde fans vouloir goufter 
de la chair, fi on luy prefente quelque chofe tant foit 
peu delicat, il le porte incontinent 4 nos malades, 
certes il faut que fon Dieu le fouftienne bien fort, 
nous voyons bien qu'il eft d’vne complexion affez 
delicate, il n’eft point accouftumé 4 nos courfes & a 
nos fatigues, il a mené vne vie toute fedentaire, il 
e{t confiderable parmy les fiens, & cependant il fouffre 
autant & plus que nous. I1 eft ioyeux dans les dan- 
gers & dans les peines d’vn long voyage & d’vn che- 
min de fer. I1 eft toufiours en action aupres de nous 
& aupres de nos enfans & aupres de nos malades, il 
eft bien venu par tout. Les Francois de Pentagouet, 
l’ont careffé & ce qui eft bien plus eftonnant, les 
Anglois qui ne font n’y de mefme pays n’y de mefme 
langue l’ont refpecté. Tout cela fait voir que fon ' | 
Dieu eft bon & bien puiffant. ; H | . 
Apres quelque temps de fejour fur les bords de ce ¢ | 
lac ces bonnes gens defcendirent [192] 4 Kinibeki, | . 


~~ 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 203 


invoke, cannot do. It must surely be that this God 
is great, and that he has a great spirit, since he causes 
this stranger to understand and speak our language 
in two or three months; and the Algonquins, after 
having remained a whole year with us, cannot speak 
it. It must certainly be that this God is good and 
very powerful, since he has taken from this Patriarch 
the fear of the most contagious diseases, and has 
given him safety against the threats of our sorcerers 
and the malice of their charms, at which he mocks. 
This man is very different from our Jugglers. The 
latter are always asking, and the former never asks 
anything; the latter are almost entirely absent 
from our sick, but the former spends days and nights 
with them. The latter seek nothing but robes of 
[191] Otter, of Beaver, and other animals; the 
former does not so much as look at them from the 
corner of his eye. Our sorcerers live as well as 
means allow; the Father fasts often, and has spent 
fifty days with a little Indian corn, without desiring 
to taste meat; if one offer him anything that is at 
all delicate, he straightway carries it to our sick. 
Certainly it must be that his God very greatly 
sustains him. We see plainly that he is of a rather 
delicate constitution; he is not accustomed to our 
expeditions and to our fatigues; he has led a wholly 
sedentary life; he is influential among his people, 
and yet he endures even more than we. He is joy- 
ful in the dangers and the hardships of a long jour- 
ney and an iron road. He is always active about us 
and our children and our sick; he is welcome every- 
where. The French of Pentagouet have cherished 
him; and, what is much more astonishing, the 
English, who have neither the same country nor the 


~ 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


ils y menerent leur Patriarche qu’ils aymoient ten-— 
drement. Le Capitaine de cette habitation Angloife © 
le receut vne autre fois auec la mefme bien-veillance _ 
qu’il luy auoit defia témoignée, luy racontant comme 
il auoit paffé l’Hyuer A Pleymot & a Bofton, qu'il 
auoit communiqué fes patentes & la lettre du fleur 
Chate 4 vingt-quatre perfonnes des plus confiderables 
de la nouuelle Angleterre, entre lefquels s’eftoient 
rencontrez quatre de leurs plus fameux Miniftres, & 
que tous vniuerfelement auoient approuué fon deffein 
difant hautement que c’eftoit vne bonne & loiiable & 
genereufe action d’inftruire les Sauuages & qu'il en 
falloit benir Dieu. 

Meffieurs de la Compagnie de Kinibeki m’ont 
donné charge, difoit ce Capitaine nommé le fieur 
Hoinfland de vous porter parole, que fi vous voulez 
amener des Francois, & baftir vne maifon fur la 
riuiere de Kinibeki, qu’il vous le permettront de 
tres-bon coeur, & que vous ne feriez nullement mo- 
le{tez dans vos fonctions. Si vous eftiez icy, adjou- 
toit-il, plufieurs Anglois vous viendroient vifiter, 
donnant 4 penfer qu’il y auoit des Catholiques parmy 
[193] les Anglois de ces contrées. Le Pere n’ayant 
point d’ordre fur cette propofition répondit 4 ce Capi- 
taine qu’il luy récriroit en fon temps fi la chofe eftoit | 
iugée faifable, il partit de cette habitation enuiron 
le vingtiefme de May, il alla vifiter tous les endroits © 
ou fe retiroient les Sauuages, les malades baptizez & — 
gueris contre toute efperance, fe confefferent, iln’y 
eut petit n’y grand qui ne témoignaft du regret du 
départ de leur Pere. Tu afflige nos penfées, difoient j 
quelques-vns, quand tu nous parles de ton départ, & 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 205 


same language, have respected him. All that shows 
that his God is good and very powerful.” 

After some length of sojourn on the shores of this 
lake, these good people came down [192] to Kinibeki; 
they brought thither their Patriarch, whom they 
tenderly loved. ‘The Captain of that English settle- 
ment received him the second time with the same 
good-will which he had already shown him; relating 
to him how he had spent the Winter at Pleymot and 
at Boston; that he had communicated his credentials 
and the letter from sieur Chate to twenty-four of 
the foremost persons in new England, among whom 
had happened to be four of their most famous Minis- 
ters: and that all had unanimously approved his 
design, frankly saying that it was a good, laudable, 
and generous action to instruct the Savages, and that 
God should be blessed for it. 

‘“Messieurs of the Company of Kinibeki have 
given me commission,’’ said that Captain, named 
sieur Hoinsland, ‘‘to convey word to you that, if 
you wish to bring hither some French and build a 
house on the river of Kinibeki, they will permit you 
to, very gladly; and that you would not be in any 
way molested in your functions. If you were here,”’ 
he added, ‘‘ several Englishmen would come to visit 
you,’’—intimating that there were some Catholics 
among [193] the English of those regions. The 
Father having no order with reference to this propo- 
sition, answered that Captain that he would write to 
him again in due season, if the matter were judged 
feasible. He left that settlement about the twentieth 
of May, and went to visit all the places whither the 
Savages retired; the sick—baptized, and cured 
against all hope —confessed; there was neither small 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


de l’incertitude de ton retour, nous dirons, difoien 
les autres, Le Pere Gabriel ne nous ayme pas il ne 
fe foucie pas que nous mourions puis qu’il nous aban- 
donne. Vne trenteine l’accompagnerent iufques & 
Kebec, ot il arriua le quinziéme de Iuin tout plein 
de fanté contre 1’attente de ceux qui ne fgauoient que 
iuger de fon retardement. ; 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 207 


nor great who did not betoken regret at their Father’s 
departure. ‘‘ Thou afflictest our minds,’ said some, 
‘‘ when thou speakest to us of thy departure and of 
the uncertainty of thy return.’’ ‘‘ We will say,” 
said others, ‘‘ that Father Gabriel does not love us 
and does not care that we die, since he abandons 
us.’’ About thirty accompanied him even to Kebec, 
where he arrived on the fifteenth of June, full of 
health,—contrary to the expectation of those who 
knew not what to think of his delay. 


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou 31 


[194] CHAPITRE XI. 
LA VENUE DES ATTICAMEGUES. 


OUS auons def-ja dit és Relations precedentes, 

N qu'il y a quantité de petites nations dans les 
terres, fituées au Nord des trois Riuieres, dont 

l’vne eft appellée en Sauuage Attikamegsek, & des 
Fran¢ois les Attikamegues, ou les poiffons blancs pour 
ce que le mot Attikamegue fignifie vn poiffo[n] qui 
fe rencontre en ce nouueat. monde, auquel les Fran- 
¢ois ont fait porter le nom de poiffon blac a caufe de 
fa couleur. Tous ces peuples ne font la guerre 
qu’aux animaux, leur vie n’eft qu’vne chaffe conti- 
nuelle; la paix eft profonde dans leurs grandes 
foreits, ils fe raffemblent tous, chaqu’vn en fon car- 
tier, certains iours de l’année; & encore qu’ils ayent 
leurs limites, fi quelqu’vn s’auance fur les terres, ou 
plutoft dans les bois de fes voifins, cela fe fait fans 
querelle, fans difpute, fans jaloufie. Ils ont com- 
merce auec les Hurons, & quelques-vns auec les Fran- 
cois, leur rendez-vous fe fait certain mois de 1’année 
en vn lieu dontils [195] ont conuenu, & la les Hurons 


leurs apportent du bled, & de la farine de leur pays, _ 


des Rets, & d’autres petites marchandifes, qu’ils 
efchangent contre des peaux de cerf, d’élan, de 


caftors, & d’autres animaux, ceux qui communiquent 
les Francois, les abordent vne ou deux fois l’année, i 
par le fleuue appellé les Trois Riuieres, ou mefme 
encor par le Sagné qui fe dégorge 4 Tadoufac dans © | 


a 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 209 


[194] CHAPTER XI. 
THE COMING OF THE ATTICAMEGUES. 


E have already said, in the preceding Rela- 
\W tions, that there are many small nations 
back in the country, situated North of three 

Rivers. One of these is called, in the Savage tongue, 
Attikamegouck, and by the French, the Attikamegues, 
or ‘‘ the white fish,’’— because the word Attzkamegue 
means a fish, which is found in this new world, to 
which the French have assigned the name of ‘‘ white 
fish”’ on account of its color. All these tribes make 
war only on animals; their life is nothing but a 
continual hunt; the peace is profound in their great 
forests. They all assemble, each one in its own 
district, on certain days of the year; and, although 
they have their own limits, if any one advances upon 
the lands, or rather into the woods, of his neighbors, 
that occurs without quarrel, without dispute, without 
jealousy. They have trade with the Hurons, and 
some of them with the French. Their rendezvous 
takes place in certain months of the year, at a spot . 
which they [195] have agreed upon; and there 
the Hurons bring them corn and meal from their 
country, Nets, and other small wares, which they 
exchange for skins of deer, elks, beavers, and other 
animals. Those who communicate with the French 
approach them once or twice in the year, by the 
stream called the Three Rivers,—or even also by 
the Sagné, which discharges itself at Tadousac into 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 _ 


la grande riuiere de faint Laurens: mais ce chemin 
leur eft fort difficile. 

Ces peuples font fimples, bons, candides, pacifi- 
ques, ils ont les mefmes fuperftitions que les autres 
Sauuages, & les mefmes Prophetes ou Deuins, que 
nous appellons forciers & magiciens, pource qu'il y 
a bien de l’apparence que quelques-vns d’entre eux 
ont du commerce auec les Demons. Ils fe feruent 
de tambours, de foufflemens, de chanfons, de fueries, 
de feftins & tout manger, de Tabernacles pour con- 
fulter les genies de l’air, de pyromantie, & d’autres 
telles fuperftitions pour guerir les malades, pour 
trouuer des anim{a]ux dans les bois, pour découurir 
fi quelque ennemy n’eft point entré dans leurs terres, 
& pour d’autres fujets femblables. 

[196] Or les Attikamegues font pour la plufpart 
defabufez & détrompez de toutes ces fourbes du 
Demon, vne partie s’eft fait baptizer, leur innocence 
eft rauiffante, ces pauures gens ayans appris que les 
Hiroquois, apres auoir maffacré quantité de Sauuages, 
auoient deffein d’exterminer les Francois, n’ofoient 
approcher de nos habitations; mais enfin vne efcoii- 
ade prit refolutid de fcauoir en quel point eftoient 
nos affaires, ils quittent leurs femmes & leurs enfans 
& deux iournées au deffus du fleuue des Trois Riui- 
eres, & s’en viennent reconnoiftre 4 la dérobée, fi 
nos habitations n’auoient point changé de maiftres: 
ayans trouué les Francois dans la ioye & dans la 
fanté, ils fautent d’allegreffe, il les abordent, & les 
quittent 4 mefme temps: nos femmes & nos enfans, 
difoient-ils, nous ont engagez de les aller querir au 
pluftof{t pour fe confeffer, en cas que les Peres fuffent 
encore en vie, elles feront en peine iufqu’a noftre " 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 21t 


the great river of saint Lawrence; but this route is 
very difficult for them. 

These peoples are simple, kind, candid, peaceful; 
they have the same superstitions as the other Sav- 
ages, and the same Prophets or Soothsayers,— whom 
we call ‘‘ sorcerers’’ and ‘‘ magicians,’’ because there 
is indeed some probability that certain among them 
have commerce with the Demons. They use drums, 
breathings, song's, sweats, eat-all feasts, Tabernacles 
for consulting the spirits of the air, pyromancy, 
and other such superstitions to cure the sick, to find 
animals in the woods, to discover if some enemy 
has not entered their lands, and for other similar 
purposes. 

[196] Now the Attikamegues are for the most part 
disabused and undeceived regarding all these cheats 
of the Demon; part of them have become baptized, 
and their innocence is delightful. These poor peo- 
ple having learned that the Hiroquois, after having 
massacred a number of Savages, had designs of exter- 
minating the French, dared not approach our settle- 
ments; but finally a squad took the resolution to 
ascertain in what condition our affairs were. They 
leave their wives and their children, two days’ jour- 
ney above the stream of the Three Rivers, and come 
secretly to reconnoitre, to see whether our settle- 
ments had not changed masters: having found the 
French in cheerfulness and health, they leap for 
gladness; they accost them and leave them at the 
same time. ‘‘ Our wives and our children,’’ they said, 
“have engaged us to go and bring them as soon as. 
possible to confess, in case the Fathers were still 
alive: they will be anxious until our return.’’ They 
embark again, and in a little while they bring their 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


contentement de voir en vie ceux que le bruit auoit — 
logé entre les morts. Ce n’eft plus le feul traficdela 
terre qui les ameine: [197] Ils viennent pour receuoir 
les Sacremens, pour prefenter au baptefme leurs _ 
enfans nouueaux nez, les Cathecumenes pour eftre , 
baptifez, en vn mot: ils viennent pour rendre compte 
de leur confcience, & de ce qu’ils ont fait depuis 
qu’ils n’ont veu leurs Peres. Tout cela fe fait auec 
vne candeur qui n’ef{t pas quafi conceuable, qu’A ceux 
qui l’experimentent: les petits & les grands, les 
baptifez & les non baptifez fcauoient toutes leurs 
prieres, & le petit deuoir d’vn bon Chreftien, ceux- 
la mef{me qui iamais n’auoient veu d’Europeans, 
e{toient inftruis en forte qu’il ne leur manquoit plus 
que le baptefme. 

Le Pere qui les receut ne s’eftant peu trouuer le | 
foir en leurs cabanes pour les faire prier Dieu, d’au- 
tant qu’ils eftoient dans le fort, & que le pont eftoit 
leué, apprit le lendemain de quelques Francois, que 
ces bonnes gens les auoient rauis, ils m’ont touché 
& cofondu difoit 1’vn deux; ils ont employé vn gros 
quart d’heure en leurs prieres qu’ils faifoient pofé- 
ment doucement & fans bruit. Le Pere voulut 
éprouuer fi ce que difoit ce Frangois eftoit veritable, 
il fe trouua le lendemain dans leurs cabanes, & leur 
dit, faites vos prieres [198] [c]omme vous les faites | 
dans les bois, ie ne fuis pas venu pour les faire: mais 
pour y répondre auec vous. Leur Capitaine nommé _ 
Paul setamsrat s’addreffant auffi-toft a l’vn de fes — 
gens luy dit, Michel puis que le Pere ne veut pas 
parler, fais nous les prieres comme tu les fais tous 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 213 


families,—all filled with joy and satisfaction to see 
alive those whom rumor had placed among the dead. 
It is no longer only the trade of the world that brings 
them; [197] they come to receive the Sacraments, to 
offer for baptism their newly-born children, and the 
Catechumens,—in a word, they come to give account 
of their conscience, and of what they have done since 
they have seen their Fathers. All that takes place 
with a candor which is hardly conceivable, save to 
those who test it. The small and the great, the bap- 
tized and the unbaptized, knew all their prayers and 
the minor duty of a good Christian; even those who 
had never seen Europeans, were so well instructed 
that they lacked nothing more but baptism. 

The Father who received them,—having been 
unable to be present at evening in their cabins to 
have them pray to God, inasmuch as they were in 
the fort, and as the bridge was drawn,—learned the 
next day from some Frenchmen that these good 
people had delighted them. ‘‘ They have touched 
and confounded me,’’ said one of them; ‘“‘ they spent 
fully a quarter of an hour in their prayers, which 
they said composedly, softly, and without noise.’’ 
The Father wished to prove whether what this French- 
man said was true; he was present the next day in 
their cabins, and said to them: ‘‘ Say your prayers, 
[198] as you say them in the woods: I have not come 
to offer them, but to respond to them with you.’’ 
Their Captain, named Paul Wetamourat, immediately 
addressing himself to one of his people, said to him: 
“Michel, since the Father does not wish to speak, 
offer the prayers for us, as thou dost every evening.”’ 
Upon this, the young man kneels in the middle of 
the cabin, and takes his Crucifix in his hand, all the 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vow 31 


les foirs. A mefme temps ce ieune homme fe met 
a genoux au milieu de la cabane, prend fon Crucifix 
en main, tous les autres prennent leurs Chapelets, & 4 
les mains jointes, & les genoux en terre fuiuent mot 
pour mot tout ce que difoit celuy qui recitoit les 
prieres, cela fe faifoit pofément d’vn ton fans fard, 
fans mignardife, fans affeterie d’vn accent tout fimple, 
tout naif, & tout remply de deuotion. Le Pere fut 
furpris, il ne reconnoiffoit plus les prieres qu’il leur 
auoit enfeignées, elles eftoient dans le ftile, & dans 

la pureté de leur langue, elles eftoient accreues de 
quantité d’oraifons a Iefus-Chrift, 4 la fainte Vierge, 
afon glorieux Efpoux faint Iofeph, 4 l’Ange Gar- 
dien, aux faints dont ils portent les noms, en yn 
mot, ils faifoient paroiftre que ces prieres proue- 
noient d’vn efprit plus haut & plus fublime que celuy 

des hommes. 

[199] Apres les prieres, celuy qui auoit charge 
dentonner leurs Cantiques fpirituels, éleuant fa 
voix, chacun le fuiuit, & tous d’vn commun accord 
chanterent les loiianges de Dieu, fans ietter la veué 
ny deca ny dela, leur modeftie donnoit des marques 
tres-douces de l’attention de leur coeur. Ie me don- 
nay bien de garde, dit le Pere, de leur faire reciter 
leurs prieres les iours fuiuans, ie n’euffe pas appro- | 
ché de tout ce qu’ils difoient, ie me contentay de | 
leur faire vn petit mot d’in{truction, que ces bonnes 
gens écoutoient auec vne auidité nompareille, ils 
reflemblent A ceux qui n’ayans point mangé depuis — 
vn long-temps, deuorent tout ce qui leur eft prefenté, 
on ne peut faouler ces bons Neophytes tant ils font 
affamez du pain des enfans de Dieu. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 215 


others take their Rosaries, and, with hands joined 
and knees on the ground, follow word for word 
everything that he who recited the prayers was say- 
ing; that was done composedly, in a tone without 
artifice, without airs, without affectation; in accents 
entirely simple and artless, and replete with devo- 
tion. The Father was surprised,—he no longer 
recognized the prayers which he had taught them; 
they were in the style and in the purity of their own 
language; they were increased by many orisons to 
Jesus Christ, to the blessed Virgin, to her glorious 
Spouse saint Joseph, to the Guardian Angel, to the 
saints whose names they bear; in a word, they made 
it appear that these prayers proceeded from a spirit 
higher and more sublime than that of men. 

[199] After the prayers, he who had charge of 
intoning their spiritual Hymns raised his voice, and 
each one followed him; and all with common accord 
sang the praises of God without turning their gaze 
to one side or the other; their modesty supplied the 
most delightful tokens of the attentiveness of their 
hearts. ‘‘I took good care,’’ said the Father, ‘‘ to 
have them recite their prayers on the days follow- 
ing; I could not have approached all that they were 
saying. Icontented myself with giving them a little 
word of instruction, which those good people heeded 
with matchless eagerness; they resemble those who, 
not having eaten for a long time, devour everything 
which is offered them; but one cannot surfeit these 
good Neophytes, so famished they are for the bread 
of the children of God.’’ 

After they had all, individually, satisfied their 
consciences, and had derived new strength from the 
Sacraments of Jesus Christ, the Father inquired 


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 31 — 


pour leur confcience, & qu’ils eurent tiré de nou- 


uelles forces dans les Sacremens de Iefus-Chrift, 


le Pere s’enquefte quels exercices ils faifoient en 


commun, ils refpondirent qu’ils faifoient leurs prieres 
tous les foirs, & tous les matins, en la facon qu’il 
auoit veu & entendu: mais que les iours de feftes 
dont ils ont bonne [200] connoiffance par les petits 
calandriers qu’on leur donne, ils redoubloient leurs 
deuotions en cette forte. 

Le Dimanche au matin au point du iour, le plus 
ancien d’entre nous, ou le Capitaine s’il eft prefent, 
nous auertit que le iour eft du nombre de ceux que 
nous honords, & partant qu’il ne faut point trauail- 
ler, il permet neantmoins 4 ceux qui ont tendu des 
rets d’aller voir s’ils ont pris du poiffon, puis qu’ils 
n’ont point d’autre nourriture, mais ne mangez 
point leur, dit-il, ne beuuez point, ne petunez point, 
que nous n’ayons fait nos prieres, cela fait on difpofe 
la cabane qui doit feruir d’Eglife, on la tapiffe de 
branches de fapin, & puis chacun prend fes plus 
beaux habits pour honorer la fefte, le fignal donné 
on entre modeftement & fans bruit, les Payens ont 
permiffion de s’y trouuer au commencement, tout le 
monde eftant 4 genoux on expofe vne image au 
milieu de cette Eglife d’écorce, chacun joint les mains 


& tous refpondent aux prieres communes qui fe font __ 


tous les iours, apres lefquelles le Capitaine s’efcrie 


vous qui n’eftes point baptizez fortez: les prieres — 


que nous allons faire ne font que pour les Chreftiens. 


La [201] deffus ils entonnent des Cantiques ou du * 
fainct Sacrement, ou des autres veritez Chreftiennes: 4 
& en fuite ils recitent leur chapelet en forte qu’ils © 


chantent tofijours le dernier Aue Maria de chaque 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 217 


what exercises they practiced in common. They 
answered that they said their prayers every evening 
and every morning, in the way that he had seen and 
heard; but that on the days of feasts, with which 
they are well [200] acquainted through the little 
calendars which are given them, they redoubled 
their devotions, as follows: 

‘““On Sunday morning at daybreak, the eldest 
among us—or the Captain, if he be present — noti- 
fies us that the day is numbered among those that 
we honor; and that, consequently, we must not work. 
He nevertheless allows those who have set nets, to 
go and see whether they have taken any fish, since 
they have no other food. ‘ But do not eat,’ he says 
to them, ‘ do not drink, do not smoke, until we have 
said our prayers.’’’ That done, they prepare the 
cabin which is to serve as Church; they carpet it 
with branches of spruce, and then each one puts on 
his finest garments to honor the feast. The signal 
being given, they enter, modestly and without noise; 
the Pagans have permission to be present at the 
beginning. Every one kneeling, they display an 
image in the midst of this Church of bark; each one 
joins his hands, and all respond to the usual prayers 
which are said every day. After that, the Captain 
exclaims, ‘“ You who are not baptized, go out; the 
prayers which we are about to say are only for the 
Christians.’’ Thereupon [201] they intone Hymns,— 
either those of the blessed Sacrament, or of other 
Christian truths; and next they recite their rosaries 
in such a way that they always sing the last Ave 
Maria of each decade. In conclusion, those present 
are warned to be very careful on that day, to do no 
unseemly deed, or any servile work. They who 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 _ 


dizaine. Pour conclufion on auertit les affiftans — 
d’ef{tre fort retenus ce iour-la, de ne faire aucune 
action meffeante, ny aucune ceuure feruile, ceux a 
qui fe veulent entretenir auec Dieu plus long-temps, ~ 
il leur eft permis. Les femmes, qui pour l’ordinaire 
ont de belles voix, prenent plaifir de les fanctifier — 
par le chant de quelques Cantiques fort deuots, ils © 
s'affemblent ainfi deux fois le iour, employant deux 
bonnes heures notamment le matin en ce fainc 
exercice. 

I’ay remarqué cy-deffus qu’il fe fait vne certaine 
affemblée entre les Hurons & ces nations du Nord, 
les Attikamegues s’y font trouuez cette année au 
nombre de plus de trente canots, nous leur auions 
donné des lettres pour les faire porter par 50. Hurons 
qui fe trouueroient en cette affemblée a nos Peres . 
qui font en leur pais, & nos Peres de ces contrées-la - 
en auoient auffi donné 4 leurs Hurons pour nous les 
faire rendre par les Attikamegues, ces bonnes gens 
ont efté fideles, ils ont donné nos [202] lettres aux 
Hurons, & nous ont rendu celles qui venoient de nos 
Peres qui font en ce pays-la. Les Hiroquois nous 
contraignent de chercher ces voyes merueilleufement 
écartées, mais pourfuiuons s’il vous plaift noftre 
difcours. Nos Chreftiens Attikamegues fe trouuans 
dans cette grande affemblée, ne voulurent iamais rien 
relafcher de leurs deuotions, ils eurent quelque ( 
apprehenfion qu’ils feroient gauffez des Payens, mais — 
ils deuorerent cette difficulté par vne deuotion plus — 
feruente & plus fplendide qu’a l’ordinaire. | 

Le Dimanche approchant le Capitaine commande 4 — 
fes gens de fgire vne belle & grande cabane, qui ne ~ 


ra 


feruit qu’A la priere: les ieunes hommes vont aux 


1647} RELATION OF 1647 219 


wish to converse with God longer, are permitted to 
do so. The women, who, as a rule, have beautiful 
voices, take pleasure in sanctifying them through the 
singing of some very devout Hymns. They assemble 
thus twice a day, employing two good hours, espe- 
cially in the morning, in that holy exercise. 

I have remarked above that a certain assembly is 
held between the Hurons and these nations of the 
North; the Attikamegues were present there, this 
year, to the number of more than thirty canoes. 
We had given them letters, to be conveyed by 50 
Hurons who happened to be at that assembly, to our 
Fathers who are in their country; and our Fathers 
in those regions had also given some to their Hurons, 
in order to be delivered to us by the Attikamegues. 
These good people have been faithful; they have 
given our [202] letters to the Hurons, and have 
delivered to us those which came from our Fathers 
who are in that country. The Hiroquois constrained 
us to seek these wonderfully devious ways. But let 
us continue, if you please, our discourse. Our Atti- 
kamegue Christians, being present at that great 
assembly, would never relax aught of their devo- 
tions; they had some apprehension that they might 
be jeered at by the Pagans, but they surmounted this 
difficulty by a devotion more fervent and splendid 
than usual. 

Sunday approaching, the Captain commands his 
people to make a fine and large cabin, which should be 
used only for prayer; the young men go after bark, 
and the women and the girls after branches of spruce, 
which are very beautiful and always green. The 
old men, having built the Church, order all their 
people to clothe themselves as richly as possible, 


DS 
* 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 81 


écorces, & les femmes & les filles aux branches de 
fapin, qui font fort belles & toufiours vertes, les 
vieillards ayans bafty l’'Eglife ordonnent a tous leurs 
gens de fe couurir le plus richement qu’ils pourront — 
pour honorer la priere. Avuffi-toft dit, auffi-toft fait, — 
ils fe figurent & fe peignent le vifage 4 leur fagon 4 . 
de diuerfes couleurs, ils prennent leurs grandes robes — 
de Caftors de L’outres de Loups ceruiers, d’Ecurieux | 
noirs & d’autres animaux, leurs enjoliuemens de [203] | 
brins de porte épic, teins en écarlatte n’y manquent ~ 
pas. Les femmes prennent leurs grands bracelets, — 
& les hommes leurs coliers, & leurs couronnes de 
porcelaine, les Hurons & les autres peuples voyans 
cét appareil eftoient bien eftonnez ne fgachans ot , 
cette pompe aboutiffoit. Comme nos gens eftoient — 
fur le point d’entrer dans leur Eglife, le Capitaine 
Paul ¥etamsrat s’écrie A tous ces peuples, ne vous 
eftonnez point de ce que nous faifons, nous allons © f 
prier & honorer celuy qui a tout fait, telle eft main- — 
tenant noftre couftume, que pas vn de tous ceux qui — 
ne font point baptifez ne mette le pied dans noftre 
affemblée s’il ne veut encourir l’indignation de celuy A . 
qui eft tout puiffant, chacun demeura dans le filence, — 
quelques Hurons Chreftiens fe trouuans dans cette q j 
grande compagnie, & voyans qu’il s’agiffoit de la 
priere, produifent leurs Croix, & leurs chapelets, 
proteftans tout haut qu’ils eftoiét Chreftiens. Le 
Capitaine tout remply de joye, les embraffe, & les 
fait entrer dans 1’Eglife: 14 chacun chanta & pria en © 
{a langue les loiianges du grand Dieu, & Iefus-Chrift 
fut adoré dans le fin fond de la Barbarie, au milieu des 
forefts qui n’eftoient [204] connués, il n’y a pas long- 
temps, que des faunes & des fatyres, ou pluftoft 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 221 


ra 


in order to honor prayer. No sooner said than done: 
they figure and paint their faces, after their fashion, 
with various colors; they take their great robes of 
Beavers, of Otters, of Lynxes, of black Squirrels, 
and of other animals, and their embellishments 
of [203] porcupine quills, dyed in scarlet, are not 
wanting. The women put on their great bracelets, 
and the men their collars and crowns, of porcelain. 
The Hurons and the other tribes, seeing this dis- 
play, were much astonished, not knowing the object 
of this pomp. When our people were on the point 
of entering their Church, Captain Paul Wetamourat 
exclaimed to all those tribes: ‘‘ Be not astonished at 
what we do,—we are about to pray and honor him 
who has made everything. Our custom now is 
such, that not one of all those who are not baptized 
shall set foot in our assembly, if he do not wish to 
incur the indignation of him who is all-powerful.”’ 
Every one remained silent; some Christian Hurons, 
chancing to be in that great company, and seeing 
that it was a question of prayer, produce their Crosses 
and their rosaries, protesting aloud that they were 
Christians. The Captain, filled with joy, embraces 
them and has them enter the Church; there, each 
one sang and prayed in his own language the praises 
of the great God, and Jesus Christ was adored in the 
very depth of Barbarism,—in the midst of the 
forests which were [204] known, not long ago, only 
by fauns and satyrs, or, rather, by Demons and their 
imps. The Pagans, who had never seen anything 
similar, approaching that holy assembly and looking 
at their postures, remained utterly astonished, with- 
out saying a word; but their speech and their 
prayers impelled these to far greater admiration; 


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 31 


des Demons & de leurs fuppots. Les Payens qui 
n’auoient iamais rien veu de femblable, s’approchans _ 
de cette fainte affemblée, & regardans leurs poftures 
demeuroient tout eftonnez fans mot dire, mais leurs 
paroles & leurs prieres les iettoient bien plus auant 
dedans l’admiration, ils ne pouuoient conceuoir ow 
ces gens faits & baftis comme eux, auoient puifé de 
fi hautes & de fi nouvelles connoiffances. 

Au fortir des prieres les Hurons Chreftiens & les 
Attikamegues s’entre faliierent, fe donnans courage 
les vns aux autres de perfeuerer conftamment en la 
Foy, ils fe firent de petis prefens, s’inuiterent au 
feftin les vns les autres, tant il eft vray, ce que difoit —__ 
n’y a pas long-temps vne femme Chreftienne, que la | 
Foy auoit cefte puiffance, de ne faire qu’vn peuple 
de plufieurs nations. Ce bon Michel qui fait ordi- 
nairement les prieres, s’eftant pris garde qu’vn Huron v | 
Chreftien n’auoit point de chapelet, luy dit, mon Gh 
frere, peut eftre que tu n’approcheras pas cette année 
des Francois, & que tu ne pourras recouurer de [205] 
chapelet, ie te fais prefent du mien, ie verray bien 7 
toft les Peres, i’efpere qu’ils m’en donneront vn 
autre, en effet il en a demandé vn au Pere, lequel 
voyant qu'il en tenoit vn autre en fes mains, luy he. 
voulut refufer, mais il repartit, il m’en faut deux; car ith 
fi le mien fe defile ot fe romp, oi fi ie le perds, 1’au- 
ray recours 4 l’autre, c’eft l’vne de leurs prouifions _ 
innocentes. 

Cét homme vrayement Chreftien 4 prefenté cette 
année fa femme, fa fille, & fa belle mere au bap- 
tefme, mais fi bien inftruites, & fi defireufe de rece- 
uoir cette grace, qu’A peine le Pere pouuoit il croire | 
ce qu’il voyoit de fes yeux, fa belle mere autre fois 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 223 


they could not conceive where those people, fashioned 
and built like them, had acquired such high and 
new knowledge. 

At the close of prayers, the Christian Hurons and 
the Attikamegues greeted one another, encouraging 
one another to persevere steadfastly in the Faith; 
they made one another little presents, invited one 
another to the feast. How true it is, as a Christian 
woman said not long ago, that the Faith had this 
power to make but one people of many nations. 
That good Michel, who usually says the prayers, 
having noticed that a Christian Huron had no rosary, 
said to him: ‘‘ My brother, perhaps thou wilt not go 
near the French this year, and wilt not be able to 
get another [205] rosary. I make thee a present of 
mine; I shall soon see the Fathers, and I hope that 
they will give me another.’’ Indeed, he asked one 
from the Father, who, seeing that he had another in 
his hands, would have refused him. But he an- 
swered, ‘‘I must have two; for if mine becomes 
unstrung or broken, orif I lose it, I will have recourse 
to the other;’’ this is one of their innocent hoards. 

That man, truly a Christian, has this year pre- 
sented his wife, his daughter, and his mother-in-law 
for baptism,— but so well instructed and so desirous 
of receiving this grace, that the Father could hardly 
believe what he saw with his own eyes. The 
mother-in-law, formerly so far from our belief, was 
so deeply moved, and so zealous for the Faith, that 
no other than God can have rendered so pliable a 
woman so haughty. 

It is true that these good people, concealed in the 
depth of the forests, have not great opportunities for 
sin. Luxury, ambition, avarice, or delights, do not 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


fi éloignée de noftre creance, eftoit fi fortement 
touchée & fi zelée pour la Foy, qu’autre que Dieu 
n’a pti rendre fi foupple vne femme fi hautaine. 

Ii eft vray que ces bonnes gens cachez dans le — 
fonds des forefts, n’ont pas de grandes occafions de 
peché, le luxe, 1’ambition, l’auarice, les delices, n’ap- 
prochent pas de leur pays, la pauureté, les fouffrances 
le froid, la faim en baniffent ces monftres. Ils ne 
laiffent pas pourtant d’auoir leurs tentations, & 
leurs efpreuues; les maladies, & les forciers, ot les 
deuins, ne [206] laiffent pas de les affliger. Le 
petit fils d’vn Chreftien, eftant tébé malade, 1’vn 
de ces beaux medecins voyant qu’il ne gueriffoit 
point, fe prefente a fon pere, pour le fouffler, & 
pour le medeciner a leur mode. Le Pere 1’éconduit: 
mais comme la maladie fe régregoit, le Iongleur 
pouffe fa pointe, il fait paroiftre vn grand amour — 
enuers le pere, & enuers l’enfant, fi bien que cét 
homme s’addreffant 4 fa femme luy dit, y auroit- 
il grand mal de laiffer fouffler noftre enfant A cét 
homme, qui me promet de le guerir? comment, luy 
replique fa femme, demande tu s’il ya du malen 
vne chofe que les Peres nous ont deffendué? cét 
homme n’approchera point de mon fils, fa bouche eft 
pleine de diable, i’ayme mieux que mon enfant 
meure, que d’eftre guery par vn demon; s’il meurt 
il ira au Ciel, s’il eft foufflé & chanté, il ira dans les 
feux, ie ne fouffriray iamais qu’il aborde mon fils. 
Cette bonne femme étoit plus zelée en ce point que 
fcauante, car fon fils eftoit vn petit innocent, A qui 
tous les demons, n’y tous les forciers du monde, ne 
pouuoient ofter la grace. 

Au refte fon zele faifoit des merueilles, elles enfei- 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 225 


come near their country; poverty, sufferings, cold, 
and hunger, banish from it those monsters. They 
nevertheless have their temptations and their trials; 
diseases, and sorcerers, or soothsayers, do not [206] 
fail to afflict them. The grandson of a Christian 
having fallen sick, one of those fine physicians, see- 
ing that he did not get well, offers himself to his 
father in order to breathe upon him and treat him in 
their manner. The Father dismisses him; but, as 
the sickness became aggravated, the Juggler urges 
his point, and manifests a great love toward the 
father and the child,—so that the man, turning to 
his wife, says to her: ‘‘ Would there be great harm 
in allowing our child to be breathed upon by this 
man, who promises me to cure him?” ‘‘ How?” 
his wife replies to him, ‘‘ dost thou ask whether 
there is harm inathing which the Fathers have 
forbidden us? This man shall not approach my 
son; his lips are full of the devil. I would rather 
that my child die, than be cured by a demon; if he 
die, he will go to Heaven; if he is breathed and sung 
over, he will go to the fires. I will never suffer him 
to approach my son.’”’ This good woman was more 
zealous than intelligent upon this point; for her son 
was a little innocent, from whom all the demons and 
all the sorcerers in the world could not take away 
grace. 

For the rest, her zeal worked wonders; she taught 
the prayers to those who [207] did not know them. 
The Father was listening to her one day, in secret, 
to hear how she was instructing an old man of sev- 
enty years, teaching him to make a good confession. 

This old man listened to her as attentively as one 
_ might lend ear to a great Prelate: he retained so well 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31_ 


gnoit les prieres 4 ceux qui ne [207] les fgauoient 
pas, le Pere 1’écoutoit vn iour 4 la dérobée, comme ~ 
elle in{truifoit vn vieillard de feptante-ans, luy appre 
nant A fe bien confeffer, ce vieillard 1’écoutoit auffi 
attentiuement, qu’on prefteroit l’oreille 4 vn grand 
Prelat, il retint fi bien tout ce qui luy fut enfeigné, © i 
qu'il fe confeffa auffi nettement comme s’il eut efté 
Chreftien des fon enfance, cette femme fe confefla 
apres luy & donna vn grand étonnement 4 fon Con- 
feffeur, le Dieu du Ciel eft le Dieu de tout le monde, ~ 
fes yeux regardent auffi bien les cabanes d’écorces, 
que les Palais ou les Louures de marbre. Ces 
pauure gens demandoient des inftruments de pieté — 
pour déchirer leurs corps, tant ils auoient de haine © 
& d’horreur de leurs pechez. 
Vn braue Neophyte qui n’eft point defcendu ce 
Prin-temps, a efté fortement affligé & confolé en la ~ 
maladie d’vn enfant qu'il aymoit comme fon petit — 
Benjamin, auffi luy eft il né dans fa vieilleffe, ce 
pauure petit languiffoit depuis quatre ou cing mois 
approchant tous les iours de la mort, & tous les iours ; { 
fon pere en faifoit vn facrifice 4 Dieu, tu me las a 
donné, luy difoit-il, fitu le veux reprendre il efta toy _ 
j’en [208] fuis bien aife puis que tu le veux ainfi, ma A 
douleur eft qu'il fouffre beaucoup, c’eft a toy de — 
determiner de fa vie ott de fa mort. Vn Iongleur — 
voyant les douleurs de l’enfant promit au pere, que | 
s’il luy vouloit permettre de batre fon tambour & de a 
fouffler fon fils qu’il le gueriroit en pew de ae MH | 
j 


a 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 227 


all that was taught him, that he confessed as clearly 
as if he had been a Christian from his infancy. That 
woman confessed after him, and greatly astonished 
her Confessor. The God of Heaven is the God of 
every one; his eyes regard as kindly the cabins of 
bark as the Palaces or Louvres of marble. These 
poor people requested instruments of piety, with 
which to lacerate their bodies,—such hatred and 
horror had they for their sins. 

A worthy Neophyte, who did not come down this 
Spring, has been greatly afflicted and consoled in 
the sickness of a child whom he loved as his little 
Benjamin, who, likewise, was born to him in his old 
age. This poor little one had languished for four 
or five months, drawing daily near to death; and 
every day his father made a sacrifice of him to God. 
“Thou hast given him to me,’’ he said to him; “‘ if 
thou wilt take him again, he is thine. I [208] am 
very glad of it, since thou wilt have itso. My grief 
is, that he suffers much,— it is for thee to determine 
his life or his death.’’ A Juggler, seeing the child’s 
distress, promised the father that, if he would allow 
him to beat his drum and breathe upon his son, he 
would cure him ina little while. ‘‘ Thou promisest 
this,’’ answered him that good old man, “‘ but thou 
wilt not do it,—both because I know thine impo- 
tence, and because thou shalt never approach my 
son. It is from him who has given life that we must 
ask health, and not from the Demon, who seeks only 
our misfortune.’’ When he then manifested regret 
at having lost an image before which he said his 
prayers, the sorcerer urged that he might show it to 
him. ‘‘I had,’’ he said, ‘‘ enclosed it in this pouch; 
I have looked for it several times with diligence, and 


" 


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


—== 


qui il faut demander la fanté, & non pas au Demon 
qui ne cherche que noftre mal-heur, & la deffus tef- 
moignant les regrets d’auoir perdu vne image deuant a 
laquelle il faifoit fes prieres, le forcier le preffla de 
luy monitrer, ie l’auois dit-il, enferméé dans ce fac, © 
ie l’ay cherchée plufieurs fois auec diligence, & iamais — 
ie ne l’ay peu retrouuer. Ceux qui racontoient cette — 
hiftoire affeuroient qu’en effet elle ny eftoit pas, & — 
neantmoins cét homme fourrant fa main dans fon fac 
plutoft par contenance que par efpoir de la trouuer, 
la rencontra dedans fes doits, il fe leue auffi toft, 
appelle fes gens, les fait tous mettre 4 genoux, pofe 
l’image en lieu decent, demandons dit-il a [209] 
celuy qui a tout fait, la fanté pour mon fils, c’eft a 
luy de la donner ot de la refufer comme il luy plaift. 
Ils font leur oraifon en la prefence du forcier, & a | 
lenfant guerit auec l’eftonnement des Chreftiens & 
des infideles. _ 
Il femble que Dieu ait pris plaifir de benir cette 
pauure petite Eglife & d’en conferuer les colomnes, 
les Hiroquois ayant connoiffance de l’entrée de leur 
riuiere, leur auoient dreffé des embufches a leur 
retour, & s’ils fuffent partis le iour qu’ils auoient 
determiné, ils eftoient pris de ces Barbares: carles 
Frangois qui les efcorterent quelque temps, nous 
rapporterent qu’ils auoient veu les piftes de l’enne- 
my, toutes nouuelles & toutes frefches. Si Dieu 
nous frappe d’vne main il nous fouftient de l’autre, — 
s’il nous afflige il nous confole, fi nous fommes per- — 
fecutez de quelque Sauuages du midy, nous fommes © 
recherchez de ceux du Nord. } 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 229 


never been able to find it again.’’ Those who were 
relating this story asserted that indeed it was not 
there; and nevertheless this man, thrusting his hand 
into his pouch rather for appearance’s sake than in 
the thought of finding it, came across it in his fin- 
gers. He rises immediately, calls his people, makes 
them all kneel, and puts the image in a fitting place. 
“Let us ask,’’ he says, ‘‘ from [209] him who has 
made all, health for my son: it is for him to give or 
to refuse it, as he pleases.”’ They offer their prayer 
in the presence of the sorcerer; and the child recov- 
ers, to the astonishment of both Christians and 
infidels. 

It seems that God has taken pleasure in blessing 
this poor little Church, and in preserving its pillars. 
The Hiroquois, being acquainted with the entrance of 
their river, had laid ambushes for them on their 
return; and, if they had started on the day which 
they had appointed, they would have been taken by 
those Barbarians,—for the French, who escorted 
them for some time, reported to us that they had 
‘seen the tracks of the enemy, quite new and fresh. 
If God strikes us with one hand, he sustains us with 
the other; if he afflicts us, he consoles us; if we are 
persecuted by some Savages at the south, we are 
sought after by those of the North. 


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou 31 i 


[212 i.e., 210] CHAPITRE XII. 
DE LA MISSION DE SAINCTE CROIX, A TADOUSSAC. 


y L eft certain que tous les hommes font créez pour 
| connoiftre pour aymer & pour ioiiir de leur 

Dieu, tous en ont les moyens: mais bien diuer- 
fement. Les vns font dans l’abondance & n’en font 
pas plus riches; les autres font opulens dans leur 
difette, vne femmelette fe peut confeffer A cent 
Prei{tres dans Paris, & entendre tous les iours cent 
Meffes fi elle auoit le temps, & cent Sauuages 
n’auront bien fouuent qu’vn Preftre, & encore pour 
vn bien peu de temps: cela prouient de la facon de 
viure des vns & des autres, & de la prouidence du 
grand Dieu qui difpofe de fes creatures comme il luy 
plaift, fans toutesfois manquer 4 pas vne. Les Sau- 
uages errans fe difperfent qui deca qui de 1a dans 
l’Autonne, & fur le Prin-temps ils fe raffemblent, les 
vns 4 Tadouffac, les autres aux endroits qu’ils prenent 
pour leurpays. [213 i.e., 211] les Peres qui ont foin 
de ces Miffions les vont trouuer, pour leur faire ren- 
dre conte du paffé, pour les conferuer dans le prefent 
& pour les animer a4 tenir ferme pour le futur. Le 
Pere Iean de Quen qui a eu foin depuis quelques 
années de la Miffion de Tadouffac y eft defcédu ce 
Prin-temps. I] a efté receu 4 cceur ouuert de tous 
les Chreftiens: mais les peuples du Nord qui luy 
auoient tant donné d’efperances l’an paffé fe font 
monitrez plus froids. Nous en diront bien toft la 
raifon. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 231 


[212 i.e., 210] CHAPTER XII. 
OF THE HOLY CROSS MISSION AT TADOUSSAC. 


T is certain that all men are created in order to 
know, to love, and to enjoy their God; all have 
the means to do this, but very diversely. Some 

are in plenty, and are none the richer for it; others 
are wealthy in their want. A silly woman can con- 
fess to a hundred Priests in Paris, and hear a hun- 
dred Masses daily, if she had the time; and a hun- 
dred Savages will very often have only one Priest, 
and even then for a very little while. That results 
from their respective methods of living, and from 
the providence of the great God who disposes of his 
creatures as he pleases,— without, however, failing 
asingle one. The roving Savages become dispersed 
hither and thither in the Autumn, and toward the 
Spring they reassemble,— some at Tadoussac, others 
in the places which they regard as their country. 
[213 i.e., 211] The Fathers who have charge of these 
Missions go to find them, in order to have them 
give account of the past, to maintain them during 
the present, and to animate them to hold firm for 
the future. Father Jean de Quen, who has had 
charge, for some years, of the Mission at Tadoussac, 
went down toit this Spring. He was received with 
open heart by all the Christians; but the peoples of 
the North, who had given him so many hopes last 
year, have shown themselves colder. We will soon 
tell the reason of this. 


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 31 


Les Chreftiens voyans venir leur Pere fe refioiiirent, 
chacun rendit compte de ce qui s’eftoit paffé pendant 
l’Hyuer. Ceux a qui on auoit donné des Liures 
de bois, cét [sc. c’eft] a dire des marques, qui deuoient 
feruir de memoires locale aux Principaux, afin d’in- 
{truire les autres fur certains points plus importans, 
les reprefentoient fidelement & fans diffimuler 
difoient tout naiuement ce qui auoit efté commis con- 
tre chaque Chapitre, ot chaque partie de ces Liures. 

Les autres qui auoient leurs calandriers pour faire 
obferuer les Feftes, & pour faire garder les ordon- 
nances de l’Eglife, les apportoient au Pere pour voir 
s'ils ne s’eftoient [212] point trompez. En vn mot 
le Pere fut confolé voyant la cadeur, & l’innocence 
de fes oiiailles. I] arriua yn debat agreable entre 
ceux qui gardoient ces Almanacs ot ces calandriers. 
S’eftans raffemblez 4 Tadouffac deuant la venué du 
Pere, ils confererent leurs papiers les vns aux autres, 
& voyans qu’ils ne s’accordoient pas: pource que les 
vns celebroient le Dimanche, vn iour deuant les 
autres, ils fe reprocherent leur manquement, chacun 
difoit qu’il auoit fidelement marqué tous les iours 
figurez dans fon papier, & cependant ils voyent du 
méconte. Le procez fut renuoyé au Pere; il ne fut 
pas fi toft arriué qu’on luy demande quel iour il étoit, 
ceux qui fe trouuerent conformes a ce qu’il répondit, 
fe gaufferent amiablement des autres comme des 
gens qui s’eftoient égarez: celuy qui auoit gouuerné 
le Calandrier foutient fa caufe, il fait voir la fuitte 
des iours qu’il a effacé fans y manquer, le Pere l’ay- 
ant examiné reconnut que les vns & les autres 
auoient bien compté, mais que l’erreur prouenoit du 
Calandrier qui eftoit fautif; ils fe mirent tous & rire, q 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 233 


The Christians, seeing their Father come, rejoiced ; 
each one gave account of what had happened during 
the Winter. Those to whom Books of wood had 
been given,—that is to say, tokens which were to 
serve as topical memorandums for the Principal per- 
sons, that they might instruct the others upon certain 
of the more important points,—faithfully brought 
these forward, and, without dissimulating, told quite 
ingenuously what had been committed contrary to 
each Chapter or each part of those Books. 

Others, who had their calendars for securing the 
observance of the Feasts and for keeping the ordi- 
nances of the Church, brought these to the Father, 
to see whether they had [212] made any errors. In 
a word, the Father was consoled on seeing the candor 
and innocence of his sheep. There occurred an 
amusing debate between those who kept these Al- 
manacs or calendars. Having reassembled at Tadous- 
sac before the Father’s coming, they compared their 
papers with one another; and, seeing that they did 
not agree,— because some were celebrating Sunday 
a day before the others,—they reproached one an- 
other with their errors,—each one said that he had 
faithfully marked all the days figured on his paper, 
and yet they saw a misreckoning. The case was 
teferred to the Father, who had no sooner arrived 
than they asked him what day it was; those who 
found themselves in keeping with what he answered, 
amiably derided the others, as people who had gone 
astray. He who had regulated the Calendar main- 
tains his cause, and shows the sequence of the days 
which he had marked off, without missing one; the 
Father, having examined it, acknowledged that both 
parties had counted well, but that the error proceeded 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou.31 


accufans auec amour la main de leur Pere, qui auoit, 
difoient-ils, perdu fon chemin [213] en écriuant. [1 
eft bien ayfé en tant de iours & tant de papiers qu’il 
leur faut donner de manquer d’vne lettre, ot d’vn 
trait de plume. 

Le Pere ayant receu fes comptes, rentre dans fes 
exercices ordinaires, il prefche, il catechife, il ex- 
horte en public & en particulier, il vifite les cabanes, 
il prend garde comme fe font les prieres, il les affem- 
ble tous les iours A l’Eglife, il fe difpofent a la 
Saincte Communion, fe confeffans auec vne candeur 
tout a fait aymable, en vn mot, fi le Pafteur a de la 
peine auec vn peuple fi pauure, fi denué de viures, fi 
miferablement logé; il a de la confolation voyant la 
bonté de fon bercail. : 

Entre les chofes qui s’eftoient paffées pendant | 
l’Hyuer, la mort de quelques Neophytes, a efté fort 
remarquable; ils ont perfeueré dans la Foy iufqu’au : 
dernier foupir; ils ont abhorré les fuper{titids dans 
lefquelles ils auoient efté nourris: en vn mot, ils font 
morts en vrais Chreftiens, vn notamment qui eftoit 
l’appuy de cette pauure petite Eglife. Ce bon Neo- i 
phyte fe trouuant mal, fit appeller tous les Chreftiés , 
de fon quartier, il leur dit que fon plus grand regret 
e{toit de mourir fans confeffion; [216 i.e., 214] mais 
qu’il efperoit en la mifericorde de fon Dieu; qu’au 
re{te il ne luy vouloit point cacher fes offences, & la 
deffus il les dit toutes publiquement, demandant — 
pardon & toute 1’ Affiftance auec de grands fentiments — 
de douleur. Ne marchez pas dedans la voye de mes ~ . 
offences, difoit-il, fuiuez le chemin de la Foy, per- — 
feuerez iufqu’A la mort dans la priere, & dans la 
creance: 6 que c’eft vne chofe douce d’aller au Ciel; 


| 
, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 235 


from the Calendar, which was defective. They all 
began to laugh, accusing, with love, their Father’s 
hand, which had, they said, lost its way [213] in writ- 
ing. Itis very easy, in so many days and so many 
papers which must be given them, to miss a letter 
or a stroke of the pen. 

The Father, having received his accounts, returns 
to his usual exercises: he preaches, catechizes, and 
exhorts, in public and in private; he visits the 
cabins, and notices how the prayers are conducted. 
He assembles them every day at the Church; they 
prepare themselves for Holy Communion, confessing 
with a candor altogether amiable; in a word, if the 
Pastor has trouble with a people so poor, so destitute 
of provisions, so wretchedly lodged, he has consola- 
tion in seeing the goodness of his fold. 

Among the things which had occurred during the 
Winter, the deaths of some Neophytes have been 
very remarkable. They persevered in the Faith 
until the last sigh; they abhorred the superstitions 
in which they had been reared; in a word, they died 
like true Christians,—especially one, who was the 
support of that poor little Church. This good Neo- 
phyte falling sick, sent for all the Christians of his 
quarter; he tells them that his greatest regret was 
to die without confession, [216 i.e., 214] but that he 
hoped in the mercy of his God. Hesaid, moreover, he 
did not wish to hide from him his offenses; and there- 
upon he told them all openly, asking pardon of all 
the Audience, with deep feelings of grief. ‘‘ Walk 
not in the way of my sins,’’ he said; “‘ follow the 
way of the Faith: persevere even till death, in 
prayer and in belief. Oh, how sweet a thing it is to 
go to Heaven!’’ He made his little will; there was 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


il fit fon petit teftament, il ne fallut ny Tabellion, ny 
Notaire; Il prend fon Crucifix le donne a fa femme, 
prié pour moy, luy dit-il, celuy qui a tant fouffert 
pour nous, afin que ie ne fois point long-temps en 
Purgatoire, hays le peché, & fur tout ne te laiffe 
point furprendre au demon. Quand noftre fille fera 
grande, ne la marie iamais qu’A vn Chreftien fou- 
uiens-toy de cette parole. Il tire fon chapelet, le 
prefente A vne femme Chreftienne de la Reduction 
de S. Iofeph, ie te fupplie, luy dit-il, de donner de 
ma part ce chapelet 4 Iean Baptifte Etinechkayat, 
c’e{t vn Capitaine Chreftien, qu'il touche & qu'il 
manie ces grains pour moy, i’ay confiance en fes 
prieres; & en celles de tous fes gens, & de tous les 
Chreftiés de [217 i.e., 215] cette Refidence. Pour 
le refte de fon bagage qui confiftoit en quelques 
petits meubles de Sauuage, il en fit prefent au Capi- 
taine de Tadouffac. Voila tous fes biens departis 
fans querelle & fans procez. Ayant apperceu vn de 
leurs forciers, qui s’eftoit gliffé dans fa cabane, il luy 
dit mon cher amy, ie fuis affez mefchant pour eftre 
condamné aux flammes d’Enfer; c’e{t pourquoy ie 
ne deurois pas ouurir la bouche pour vous parler: 
mais fcachez, que vous faites mal, de refifter 4 la 
Foy, & A la priere, la Foy eft bonne embraffez-la, 
faites vous baptifer au plutoft, autrement il vous en 
prendra mal, ce font les dernieres paroles que ie 
vous donneray en cette vie. Cét homme bien efton- 
né, baiffe la tefte fans rien repartir. a 

Le Pere ayant baptizé quelques filles & quelques 
femmes auec les ceremonies ordinaires de l’Eglife, 
vne bonne matrone croyant qu’on ne leur faifoit pas — ‘ 
affez comprendre l’importance de cette action 4 fa q 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 237 


no need of Scrivener or Notary. He takes his Cruci- 
fix, and gives it to his wife. ‘‘ Pray for me,’’ he 
says to her, ‘‘to him who has suffered so much for 
us, that I may not be long in Purgatory. Hate sin, 
and especially do not allow thyself to be beguiled by 
the demon. When our daughter shall be grown up, 
never marry her except to a Christian; remember 
this request.’’ He takes his rosary, and presents it 
to a Christian woman of the Settlement of St. 
Joseph. ‘‘I beg thee,’’ he said to her, “‘to give, 
on my behalf, this rosary to Jean Baptiste Etinechka- 
wat,—he is a Christian Captain; let him touch and 
handle these beads for me. I have confidence in his 
prayers, and in those of all his people, and of all the 
Christians of [217 i.e., 215] that Residence.’’ As 
for the rest of his property, which consisted of a few 
little pieces of Savage furniture, he made a present 
of them to the Captain of Tadoussac. Thus were 
all his goods distributed without quarrel and with- 
out lawsuit. Having perceived one of their sorcer- 
ers, who had slipped into his cabin, he said to him: 
** My dear friend, I am wicked enough to be con- 
demned to the flames of Hell, therefore I ought not 
to open my lips to speak to you; but know that you 
do wrong to resist the Faith and prayer. The Faith 
is good; embrace it, and have yourself baptized as 
soon as possible,— otherwise, it will be a bad thing 
for you. These are the last words that I shall bestow 
on you in this life.’’ That man, much astonished, 
lowers his head without making any answer. 

The Father having baptized some girls and some 
women with the usual ceremonies of the Church, a 
good matron, believing that they were not sufficient- 
ly made to understand the importance of this act, — 


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vor. 31 


fantaifie, leur tient ce difcours. Mes niepces vous 
venez de donner vne grande parole 4 Dieu, vous 
venez de renoncer au Demon, vous venez de renon- 
cer au peché, vous auez promis de garder la Foy 
[216] ce n’eft pas pour deux Hyuers, c’eft pour toute 
vottre vie, tenez ferme, fi quelqu’vn de vos gens vous 
preffe de quitter la priere, foyez fourdes: s’ils vous 
querelent, foyez muettes, ne leur dites mot; mais 
parlez a Dieu & luy dites, ie croiray en toy toute m’a 
vie. 

Vn Truchement nous a raconté, qu’vne femme 
Chreftienne luy auoit parlé de fes afflictions, en ces 
termes. Dieu m’auoit donné des enfans, il me lesa 
o{tez: i’en ay perdu trois cét Hyuer, quafi en mefme 
temps, fi ie n’auois la Foy profondement dedans 
l’ame, ie croirois comme quelques-vns, que la 
nouuelle creance que nous auons embraffée, nous fait 
mourir; mais ie ne puis fouffrir cette penfée dans 
mon cceur. Voicy ce que ie me dis 4 moy-mefme, 
ces enfans font au Ciel, ces petits innocens n’ont 
point fafché Dieu, ils font en Paradis, tu efpere d’y 
aller, ne te fafche donc pas: car la vie n’eft pas 
longue, voila ce qui me confole. Il me refte encore 
vne fille qui eftoit la plus grande de tous mes enfans, 
elle eft malade 4 la mort, ie n’attends que l’heure 
de fon trépas, c’ef{t Dieu qui le veut ainfi, il me lesa 
d6énez, il me les ofte, ie ne m’en veux ny fafcher, ny 
plaindre; [217] le Truchement qui entendoit ce dif- 
cours fut d’autant plus touché que cette fille eftoit 
fort gentille & bien éleuée a la facgon de ces peuples. 
Enfin Dieu la prit auffi bien que les autres, & 


cette bonne femme au lieu de ietter les hauts cris if 
d’vne mere fi fenfiblement affligée, fe vint confeffer — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 239 


to her fancy,—speaks to them as follows: ‘‘ My 
nieces, you have just given an important promise to 
God; you have just renounced the Demon and 
renounced sin; you have promised to keep the Faith, 
[216] not for two Winters, but for all your life. 
Hold firm; if any one of your people urge you to 
give up prayer, be deaf; if they quarrel with you, 
be mute, say not a word to them: but speak to God, 
and say to him, ‘I will believe in thee all my life.’”’ 

An Interpreter has related to us, that a Christian 
woman had spoken to him of her afflictions in these 
terms: ‘‘ God gave me children, and has taken them 
from me; I have lost three of them this Winter, 
almost at the same time. If I had not the Faith 
deeply in my soul, I would believe, like some, that 
the new creed which we have embraced causes us to 
die; but I cannot suffer this thought in my heart. 
This is what I say to myself: ‘ Those children are in 
Heaven; those little innocents have not offended 
God, and they are in Paradise. Thou hopest to go 
there; then be not troubled, for life is not long.’ 
That is what consoles me. There is still left to me 
a daughter, who was the tallest of all my children; 
she is sick to death, and I await only the hour of her 
departure. It is God who thus wills; he has given 
them to me, and he takes them from me. I will 
neither vex myself nor complain.”’ [217] The Inter- 
preter who heard this discourse was the more affected, 
because that daughter was very comely, and well 
trained in the manner of these peoples. Finally, 
God took her as well as the others; and this good 
woman, instead of raising the loud cries of a mother 
so keenly afflicted, came to confess,— humbly asking 
permission to receive communion, which was granted 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 __ 


demandant humblement permiffion de communier, ce 
qui luy fut accordé. Cét enfant aagé peut-eftre de 
douze ans, fe fit apporter deux fois A la Chappelle, 
pendant le fort de fa maladie, pour fe confeffer, ce 
qu'elle fit auec tant de connoiffance, de iugement & 
de candeur, que le Pere en fut tout rauy, admirant 
les effets de la grace dans ces nouuelles plantes. On 
luy fit des obfeques les plus honorables qu'on peut, 
fa mere l’enfeuelit auec fon Crucifix qu'elle pofa fur 
fon coeur, pour marque de 1’amour qu'elle auoit porté 
a Iefus-Chrift fon Sauueur. i 

Tl eft vray que la Foy de ces nouuelles Eglifes, 

n’eft pas encore fortement éprouuée par le feu, & par 
le glaiue elle a neammoins fes Tyrans, ce font les 
Epidimies, ce font les morts frequentes, les guerres, 
les maffacres, & en fuitte les calomnies des Payens, 
& des forciers, ott des Medecins [220 i.e., 218] Sau- 
uages, fi bien qu’on diroit quafi parmy ces peuples, — 
que vouloir eftre Chreftien, & vouloir abreger fa vie, 
c’eft la mefme chofe. Les peuples du Nord qui 
faifoient paroiftre l’'an paffé tant de feu pour la 
Foy, ont efté acceiiillis de ces Tyrans, le Demon les a 
ébranlez par cette tentation. 

A peine furent-ils retirez de Tadouffac, ot ils 
auoient prefté l’oreille auec amour aux veritez Chre- 
{tiennes, & prefenté leurs enfans au Baptefme, que 
la mort fe ietta fur ces petits innocens, & la maladie 
fur vne grande partie de leurs parens, ce procedé de 4 
Dieu nous eftonne, & nous fait voir que les Croix 
font pour ainfi dire, l’vnique entrée du Paradis. Il 
ny a point d’éloquence humaine, qui puiffe perfuader 
a vn peuple, d’embraffer vne Religion, qui femble . 
n’auoir pour compagnes que la pefte, que la guerre, a ? 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 241 


her. That child, aged perhaps twelve years, had 
herself twice carried to the Chapel during the height 
of her sickness, in order to confess,— which she did 
with so much intelligence, judgment, and candor, 
that the Father was quite charmed therewith, admir- 
ing the effects of grace in these new plants. They 
gave her the most honorable obsequies they could; 
her mother laid her out with her Crucifix, which she 
placed on her heart in token of the love that she had 
borne for Jesus Christ her Savior. 

It is true that the Faith of these new Churches is 
not yet severely tried by fire and sword; it has 
nevertheless its Tyrants,—these are the Epidemics, 
the frequent deaths, the wars, the massacres; and 
then the calumnies of the Pagans and of the sorcer- 
ers, or Savage Physicians. [220 i.e., 218] Indeed, 
one might almost say among these peoples, that to 
wish to be a Christian, and to wish to shorten one’s 
life, are the same thing. The tribes of the North, 
which last year manifested so much fire for the 
Faith, have been assailed by those Tyrants; the 
Demon has shaken them through that temptation. 

Hardly had they left Tadoussac,— where they had 
listened with love to the Christian truths, and pre- 
sented their children for Baptism,— when death fell 
upon those little innocents, and disease upon a great 
part of their parents; this dealing of God astonishes 
us and makes us see that Crosses are, so to say, the 
only entrance to Paradise. There is no human 
eloquence which can persuade a people to embrace a 
Religion which seems to have for companions only 
pestilence, war, and famine. It is God alone who 
causes the Faith to germinate, who preserves it, and 
_ who vivifies. Men, in truth, are the instruments of 


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 81 


& que la famine. C’eft Dieu feul, qui fait germer — 
la Foy, qui la conferue, & qui viuifie, les hommes a — 
la verité font les inftruments de ce grand ouurage, ~ 
ils fement, ils plantent, ils arroufent: mais Dieu feul © 
fait pouffer les feiiilles, les fleurs, & les fruits. 

Vn forcier voyant que la maladie & la[22I i.e., 219] 
mort, s’attachoient plus particulierement aux enfans 
& aux autres baptifez, confulte le Demon pour en 
{fcauoir la caufe, or foit qu’en effet le Demon luy 
parlaift, ott que fa malice controuuaft des menfonges, 
il dit tout haut du milieu de fon tabernacle, que le 
Manits affuroit que la Foy & la priere caufoient la 
_ mort a la plus grand’part de ceux qui l’embraffoient, 
que les Peres qui prefchoiét les Sauuages, €toient 
trompez, & qu'il ne failloit pas s’etonner, s’ils 
abufoient ceux qui leur preftoient l’oreille. Que ce 
n’ef{toit point le Dieu des croyans qui gouuernoit la 
Terre, notamment leur pais, que c’eftoit luy qui 
regiffoit les Sauuages, & qu’ils mourroient bié plus 
fouuent qu’a l’ordinaire, pource qu’ils 1’auoient 
quitté. Quafi A mefme temps que ce Demon tenoit 
ce difcours, vne forciere éloignée de plus de cent 
lieués de Tadouffac, affura que le Manits luy auoit 
dit, que les Sauuages qui ont efté tuez cét Hyuer 
aupres des trois Riuieres, feroient maffacrez, pour — 
ce qu’ils l’auoient quitté. Sainct Paul a raifon de — 
dire, que nous n’en vends pas feulemét aux prifes — 
auec les puiffances vifibles, mais qu'il faut encore — 
combatre des mon{tres qui ne paroiffent point. 

[220] Ces pauures gens épouuentez & par leurs ma- — 
ladies, & par les menaces de ces forciers ne regar- _ 
doient quafi la Chapelle que de loin, ils ne vouloient 
pas que leurs enfans en approchaffent, ils venoient — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 243 


this great work,—they sow, they plant, they water: 
but God alone brings forth the leaves, the flowers, 
and the fruits. 

A sorcerer, seeing that disease and [221 i.e., 219] 
death attached themselves more especially to the 
children and to others who were baptized, consults 
the Demon in order to know the cause of it. Now,— 
whether the Demon indeed spoke to him, or whether 
his malice invented lies,— he said aloud in the midst 
of his tabernacle, that the Manitou declared that the 
Faith and prayer brought death to most of those who 
embraced it; that the Fathers who preached to the 
Savages were deceived, and that one must not be 
astonished if they deceived those who listened to ~ 
them. He said that it was not the God of the believ- 
ers who governed the Earth, especially their coun- 
tries,—that it was he who ruled the Savages; and 
that they would die much oftener than usual, because 
they had left him. Almost at the same time when 
that Demon was delivering this speech, a witch, dis- 
tant more than one hundred leagues from Tadoussac, 
asserted that the Manitou had told her that the Sav- 
ages who were killed this Winter near three Rivers 
would be massacred, because they had left him. 
Saint Paul is right in saying that we come to wrestle 
not only with visible powers, but that we must also 
combat monsters who do not appear. 

[220] These poor people, terrified both by their 
diseases and by the threats of those sorcerers, hardly 
looked at the Chapel except from afar; they were 
not willing that their children should approach it. 
They sometimes came to prayers when they were 
called, but with a bearing which indicated fear and 
terror; but, after all, there is not one who wishes to 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 _ 


auec vn maintien qui faifoit paroiftre de la crainte & — 
de la frayeur, apres tout il ny en a pas vn qui veuille © 
mourir fans baptefme. Vn autre magicien leur tint © 
vn iour ce difcours. Ne voyez vous pas que nous — 
deuenons tous malades, depuis que nous auons quité © 
nos anciennes facons de faire? les prieres que nous ~ 
faifons ne feruent qu’a nous faire mourir: plus nous ~ 
croyons & plus nous manquons de chaffe, plus nous © 
fommes accueillis de la famine; quitez ces chapelets, © 
& les autres marques de Chreftien que vous ont 
donné ces robes noires, jettez tout au feu, fi vous 4 7 
voulez euader la mort. Ceux qui auoient la Foy en _ 
l’ame, cacherent leurs petites deuotions, de peur que 
les Payens ne leur oftaffent: mais ils n’eurent pas la 
hardieffe de refifter 4 ce blafphemateur: il ny eut 4 
qu’vn ieune enfant de douze ans ot enuiron qui prit 
la parole. Cét enfant eftoit tout couuert de playes 
depuis la plante des [221] pieds jufqu’a la tefte; 
fon pere eftoit malade a la mort, fa mere & fes freres — 
e{toient trefpaffez depuis peu, & toutes ces afflittions — 
leur eftoient arriuées incontinent apresleur baptefme, 
il ne laiffa pas de rendre vn glorieux tefmoignage de 
la Foy. Ie fuis baptizé, dit-il, ie ne quitteray iamais q 
la priere; ny la maladie, ny la faim ny la mort dont — 
ie fuis menacé, ne me feront iamais quitter la creance © 
que i’ay embraffée, quand vous ne croiriez pas en — 
Dieu, tous tant que vous eftes, ie ne laifferois pas d’y © 
croire, faites en ce que vous voudrez, la vie n’eft pas — 
de valeur, la Foy eft vne chofe pretieufe ce font fes 
paroles. Toutes les natids de la terre font dénées a — 
Iefus-Chrift, toutes luy feruiront, il ny aura ny peu- 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 245. 


die without baptism. Another magician spoke to them 
one day, as follows: ‘‘ Do you not see that we are 
all becoming sick, since we have given up our former 
customs? The prayers that we offer serve only to 
make us die; the more we believe, the more we fail 
in hunting, and the more we are attacked by famine. 
Give up those rosaries and the other marks of a 
Christian which these black robes have given you; 
cast everything into the fire, if you would escape 
death.’” Those who had Faith in their souls con- 
cealed their little devotions, for fear lest the Pagans. 
should take these from them: but they had not the 
boldness to resist that blasphemer; there was only 
a young child of twelve or thereabout, who ventured 
to speak. This child was all covered with sores, 
from the soles of his [221] feet to his head; his 
father was sick to death, his mother and his brothers 
had recently died,—and all these afflictions had hap- 
pened to them immediately after their baptism; he 
nevertheless rendered a glorious testimony for the 
Faith. ‘‘ I am baptized,” he said, ‘‘ and I will never 
give up prayer,—neither sickness, nor hunger, nor 
the death with which I am threatened, will ever 
make me give up the belief which I have embraced. 
Though not one of you all should believe in God, I 
would none the less believe in him. Do what you 
will about it; life is not of value, but the Faith isa 
precious thing.’’ Such were his words. All the 
nations of the earth are given to Jesus Christ; all 
shall serve him, and there will be neither people, 
nor Tribe, nor language, of whom some will not sing 
his Justice and others his mercy. This child will 
signalize his goodness. He said to the Father who 
baptized him, ‘‘I have been stubborn, and angry,. 


246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


fa Iuftice & les autres fa mifericorde. Cét enfat fera — 
éclater fes bétez, il difoit au Pere qui la baptizé, i’ay — 
e{té opiniaftre, i’ay ef{té cholere, i’ay efté defobeiffant — 
depuis mon baptefme, c’eft la raifon que ie fois — 
malade & que ie fouffre. Ie ne demande point la vie 
a celuy qui a tout fait, finon pour le mieux feruir 
que ie n’ay pas fait. 

On a apporté céte année vne petite tapifferie de 
droguette, pour embellir la Chapelle [224 i.e., 222] 
de Tadouffac; on a auffi apporté vne cloche pour 
appeller les Sauuages au feruice de noftre Seigneur. 
Cét ornement a raui de ioye les Chreftiens, & donné 
de la terreur aux Payens. L’vn deux ayant remar- 
qué que cette tapifferie eftoit faite en ondes, s’encou- 
rut dire a fes gés, tenez vous fur vos gardes, ils ont 
expofé des ames ou des figures de ferpens & de 
couleuures das leur maifon de prieres, ny entrez pas: 
car elle eft toute enuironnée des robes & des habits 
des Demons, ces pauures gens qui n’ont jamais veu 
que des forefts, des fleuues & des montaignes, qui 
n'ont conuerfé qu’auec les Caribous, les Elans & les 
Caitors, ne concoiuent les chofes qu’a leur mode; les 
Sauuages de Tadouffac, qui voyent ordinairement les 
vaiffeaux Francois, admiroient ces eftofes, ils pre- 
noient vn plaifir nompareil d’entendre le fon de la 


cloche, ils la pendirent eux mefmes auffi adroitement q 
que pourroit faire vn artifan Francois, chacun la 
vouloit fonner 4 fon tour, pour voir fi elle parleroit 
auffi bien entre leurs mains, qu’entre les mains du 
Pere. 


Au refte nous ne nous eftonnons pas de latentation — 
de ces pauures peuples, ils [225 i.e., 223] viendrét — 
auffi bien que les autres, la Croix eft la marque de 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 247 


and disobedient since my baptism; this is why I 
am sick and why I suffer. I do not ask life of him 
who has made all, except in order to serve him better 
than I have done.’’ 

We have furnished this year a little tapestry of 
drugget, to embellish the Chapel [224 i.e., 222] of 
Tadoussac; we have also furnished a bell, to call the 
Savages to the service of our Lord. This ornament 
has overcome the Christians with joy, and given 
terror tothe Pagans. One of them having remarked 
that this tapestry was made in a watered pattern, ran 
to tell his people: ‘‘ Be on your guard,—they have 
exposed the souls or figures of serpents and snakes 
in their house of prayers. Do not enter it, for it is 
all surrounded with the robes and garments of 
Demons.’’ These poor people—who have never 
seen anything but forests, rivers, and mountains; 
who have conversed only with Caribous, Elks, and 
Beavers—conceive things only in their own man- 
ner. The Savages of Tadoussac, who are accus- 
tomed to see the French vessels, admired those 
things; they took unrivaled pleasure in hearing the 
sound of the bell, and suspended it themselves, as 
cleverly as a French artisan could. Every one 
wished to ring it in his turn, in order to see whether 
it would talk as well in their hands as in the hands 
of the Father. 

For the rest, we are not astonished at the tempta- 
tion of these poor peoples. They [225 i.e., 223] 
will come, as well as the others; the Cross is the 
token of their salvation, and affliction is the nearest 
preparation for the Faith and for grace. Before 
closing this Chapter, I will say a few words about 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


leur falut, & l’affliction eft la plus prochaine difpofi- 
tion A la Foy, Ala grace. Deudt que de conclurre ce 
Chapitre. ie diray deux mots d’vn voyage que fitle _ 
P. de Quen dans le pays de la nation du Porc-efpic. __ 
Ayant apris que quelques Chreftiens eftoient ma- 
lades en ce quartier-1a, il s’y fit conduire par deux 
Sauuages auec des peines épouuentables, voicy ce 
qu'il nous en a récrit, ie m’embarquay le 11. de Iuil- 
let, dans vn petit canot d’écorce nous trauaillames ; 
cing iours durant, depuis le point du iour jufqu’a 
foleil couché, ramans tofijours contre des courants, 
ou contre des torrens, qui nous faifoient bander tous 
les nerfs du corps pour les furmonter; nous auons 
rencontré en ce voyage dix fauts ou dix portages, 
c’e{t A dire que nous nous fommes defembarquez dix 
fois pour paffer d’vne riuiere A vne autre, ou d’vn ~ 
courant trop rapide a vne autre partie du fleuue plus 
nauigable. Dans ces portages, dont quelques-vns 
font d’vne lieué & demie, les autres d’vne demy- 
lieué, les autres d’vn quart de lieué, il faut porter 
fur fon dos, ot fur fa tefte, & le batteau & tout [224] 
fon équipage par des chemins qui n’ont efté faits que 
pour des beftes Sauuages tat ils font affreux: ilfaut 
trancher des montaignes, paffer des precipices cachez 
dans l’abyfme des forefts. Nous changeafmes trois 
fois de riuieres, la premiere ott nous nous embarquaf- — 
mes fe nome le Sagné, c’eft vn fleuue profondiln’y 
a nauire qu’il ne porta{t, il a quatrevingt braflesen 
plufieurs endroits, & pour l’ordinaire, il hauffe ot ~ 
baiffe de dix a vingt braffes, il eft affez large, ces 
riues font efcarpées de montaignes affreufes, lef<9 
quelles fe vont abaiffans 4 15. ot vingt lieu¢ defon 
emboucheure ot il regoit dans fon fein vn autre — : 


twat th Le bd Oe Oo bee Aro 


i fae a eT Per. ek cee, oe ce 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 249 


a journey which Father de Quen took, into the 
country of the Porcupine nation. 

Having learned that some Christians were sick in 
that quarter, he had himself conducted thither by 
two Savages, with frightful hardships; here follows 
what he has written back to us. ‘‘ I embarked on 
the 11th of July, in a little bark canoe; we toiled 
during five days, from daybreak till sunset, constant- 
ly paddling against the current, or against torrents, 
which made us strain all the sinews of the body in 
order to surmount them. We encountered on this 
journey ten falls or portages,—that is to say, we 
disembarked ten times, in order to pass from one 
river to another, or from a too rapid current to 
another part of the stream that was more navigable. 
In these portages,—some of which are a league 
and a half in extent; others, half a league; others, 
a quarter of a league,—it is necessary to carry, on 
one’s back or head, both the boat and all [224] 
one’s outfit, over roads which have been made only 
for Wild beasts, so frightful are they. It is neces- 
sary to cut through mountains, and to cross chasms 
hidden in the depth of the forests. We thrice 
changed rivers; the first on which we embarked 
is called the Sagné. It is a deep stream, and there 
is no ship which it might not carry; it is eighty 
brasses deep in several places, and usually it rises or 
falls from ten to twenty brasses. It is quite wide; 
its banks are scarped with frightful mountains, which 
gradually decrease in height until as far as 15 or 
twenty leagues from its mouth, where it receives in 
its bosom another stream, larger than itself, which 
seems to come from the West. We sailed another ten 
_ leagues beyond that meeting of waters, which forms, 


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 — 


ia 
“ia 


fleuue plus grand que luy, qui femble venir de i 
L’oueft. Nous vogafmes encor dix-lieués au dela — 
de ce rencontre d’eaux, qui fait comme vn beau lac, q 
les vents qui fe pourmenent fur cette riuiere, font — 
tres-froids au milieu de 1’E{té mefme, parce qu’elle 
e{t bordée de montaignes, & qu’elle eft expofée au 
Nor-oueft & fouuét au Nord. 

De cette riuiere nous paffames 4 vne autre appellée 
Kinsgamis, laquelle fe décharge dans le Sagné par 
des courants & par des precipices affreux, nous fifmes 
vne lieué & demie trauerfants vne montaigne [225] 
& vne vallée pour l’aller trouuer en vn lieu nauigable, 
elle eft bien moins rapide que le Sagné, ferpentant a 
l’Oueft, au Sud, & au Nor-oueft, elle fait vn lac qui 
a plus de quinze lieués de long, & quafi demy-lieué 
de large. 

Quittans ce fleuue nous allafmes chercher au 
trauers des bois, la riuiere appellée des Sauuages 
Kinsgamichich; elle a fon lit dans vne terre, ou vne — 
vallée toute plate qui regarde le Nord; fes eaux 
font profondes fort larges & toutes calmes, elles fe — 4 
repandent en quelques endroits par des aulnes & par : 
des broffailles qui nous importunoient au dernier 
point, nous auions nauigé contre le courant de l’eau © 
dans les deux precedentes riuieres, nous commancaf- — 
mes icy 2 defcendre dans le lac Piouagamik, fur les — 
riues duquel habitela nation du Porc-Epic que nous q 
cherchions. Ce lac eft fi grand qu’aé peine en voit- — 
on les riues, il femble eftre d’vne figure ronde, il eft : 
chets, des perches, des faumons, des truittes, des — 
poiffons dorés, des poiffons blancs, des carpes & 
quantité d’autres efpeces. iia 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 251 


as it were, a beautiful lake; the winds which pass 
over this river are very cold, even in the midst of 
Summer, because it is lined with mountains and is 
open to the Northwest and frequently to the North. 

‘‘From this river we passed to another, called 
Kinougamiou, which flows into the Sagné with 
frightful currents and over frightful precipices: we 
made a league and a half, crossing a mountain [225] 
and a valley, in order to overtake it in a navigable 
place. It is much less rapid than the Sagné, wind- 
ing to the West, to the South, and to the Northwest; 
it forms a lake which is more than fifteen leagues 
long, and almost half a league wide.” 

‘* Leaving this stream, we went through the woods, 
to seek the river called by the Savages Kinouga- 
michich; it hasits bed in a land or flat valley, which 
looks to the North. Its waters are deep, very wide, 
and quite calm; they spread out in some places 
through alders and brushwood, which annoyed us to 
the last degree. We had navigated against the 
current of the water in the two preceding rivers; we 
began here to go down into the lake Piouagamik, on 
the banks of which dwells the Porcupine nation, 
which we were seeking. This lake is so large that 
one hardly sees its banks; it seems to be round in 
shape. It is deep and very full of fish; they fish 
here for pike, perch, salmon, trout, dories, white- 
fish, carp, and many other kinds. 

““It is surrounded by a flat country, terminating 
[226] in high mountains, distant 3, four, or five 
leagues from its shores. It is fed by the waters of 
fifteen rivers, or thereabout, which serve as high- 
ways for the small nations which are back in the 
country, to come to fish in this lake, and to maintain 


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 31 _ 


Il eft enuironné d’vn plat pays, terminé [226] par 
de hautes montaignes éloignées de 3. ou quatre ou 
cing lieués de fes riues, il fe nourrit des eaux d’vne 
quinzaine de riuieres ou enuiron, qui feruent de 
chemin aux petites nations, qui font dans les terres 
pour venir pefcher dans ce lac, & pour entretenir le 
commerce & l’amitié qu’elles ont par entr’elles. Nous 
voga{mes quelque temps fur ce lac, & enfin nous arri- 
uafmes au lieu ott eftoient les Sauuages de la nation 
du Porc-Epic. Ces bonnes gens nots ayans apper- 
ceus, fortirent de leurs cabanes, pour voir le premier 
Francois qui ait iamais mis le pied deffus leurs terres. 
Ils s’eftonnoient de mon entreprife, ne croyans pas 
que iamais i’aurois eu le courage de franchir tant de 
difficultez, pour leur amour. Ils me receurent dans 
leurs cabanes comme vn homme venu du Ciel, l’vn 
me donnoit vn petit morceau de poiffon feché a la 
fumée, l’autre vn peu de chair boucanée, le Capitaine 
me fit prefent d’vn Caftipitagan de Caftor, c’eft a 
dire d’vne peau de cét animal, ouuerte feulement 
par le col, en forte qu’on diroit que le Caftor eft tout 
entier; voila me dit-il mon Pere pour adoucir les fati- 
gues de ton chemin, nous ne te fcaurions exprimer 
[227] la joye que nous auons de ta venué vne chofe 
nous atrifte, tu viens en vne mauuaife faifon, nous 
n’auons point de rets pour pefcher du poiffon, & les 
eaux font trop grandes pour prendre le Caftor. Il 
ne faut point parler en ce pays-la, ny de pain, ny de 
vin, ny de lit, ny de maifon. 

Le Pere fut trois iours auec eux, confeffant les 
Chreftiens, confolant les malades, difpofant les vieil- _ 
lards au baptefme pour 1’Efté prochain, les affurant 
que fi on ne les amenoit & Tadouffac, qu’il les 1 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 253 


the intercourse and friendship which they have 
among themselves. We paddled for some time on 
this lake, and finally we arrived at the place where 
were the Savages of the Porcupine nation. These 
good people, having perceived us, left their cabins, 
in order to see the first Frenchman who has ever set 
foot in their land. They were astonished at my un- 
dertaking, not believing that I would ever have had 
the courage to surmount so many difficulties for love 
of them. They received me in their cabins as a man 
who had come from Heaven; one gave me a little 
piece of fish dried in the smoke; another, a little 
smoked meat. The Captain made me a gift of a 
Castipitagan of Beaver,—that is to say, a skin of 
that animal, open only at the neck, so that one might 
say that the Beaver is quite entire. ‘ That,’ he said 
to me, ‘my Father, is to soothe the fatigues of thy 
journey; we cannot express to thee [227] the joy 
that we have at thy coming. One thing saddens 
us,—thou comest ata poor season; we have no nets 
for catching fish, and the waters are too deep for 
taking the Beaver.’ There must be no mention, in 
that country, of bread or wine, or of a bed or a 
house.”’ 

The Father remained three days with them, receiv- 
ing the confessions of the Christians, consoling the 
sick, and preparing the old men for baptism for the 
next Summer,—assuring them that, if they were not 
brought to Tadoussac, he would come to find them 
even in their cabins, which gladdened them to the 
last degree. ‘‘ We will make for you,’’ they said to 
him, “‘ a little Church or house of prayers, in which 
to celebrate Mass, and to administer to us the Sacra- 
ments.’’ This Church will be built in two hours; 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 31 __ 


viendroit trouuer iufques dans leurs cabanes, ce qui 


les refioiiit au dernier point. Nous te ferons, luy 
difoient-ils vne petite Eglife ou vne maifon de — 
prieres pour y celebrer la Meffe, & pour nous y 
adminiftrer les Sacremés, cette Eglife fera baftie en 
deux heures, dix ou douze perches & quatre ou 
cing rouleaux d’écorces compoferont tout 1’édifice. 

Vne chofe refioiiit le Pere auec eftonnement, il 
trouua vne grande Croix a l’entrée du lac que les 
Chreftiens y auoient arborée, pour y aller faire leurs 
petites deuotions, & pour fe fouuenir de la mort de 
no{tre Sauueur. Enfin apres auoir donné toute la 
confolation qu’il peut a ce petit [228] troupeau. II 
fe rembarqua auec fes deux Nochers, & en trois iours 
ils firent ce qu’ils auoient fait en cinq, mais ce furent 
des iours pleins: car ils voguoient depuis trois heures 
du matin jufqu’a neuf ou dix heures du foir, leur 
viure eftoit vn peu de boucan, ou vn peu de bled 
d’inde fans autre reconfort que de l’eau toute pure, 
fi les torrens font difficiles A franchir en montant, ils 
font bien dangereux en defcendant, car il ne faut 
manquer que d’vn coup d’auiron pour perdre la vie. 
Noftre Seigneur les conferua dans les dangers qu’ils 
rencontrerent, & les rendit A Tadouffac bien las 
& bien fatiguez, mais bien ioyeux d’auoir donné 
quelque fecours 4 ces pauures abandonnez. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 255 


ten or twelve poles, and four or five rolls of bark, 
will compose the whole building. 

One thing rejoiced and astonished the Father,— he 
found a great Cross at the entrance to the lake, 
which the Christians had erected there, in order to 
go and offer their little devotions before it, and to 
remind them of the death of our Savior. Finally, 
after having given all the consolation that he could to 
that little [228] flock, he embarked again with his 
two Pilots, and in three days they did what they had 
done in five: but these were full days, for they 
voyaged from three o’clock in the morning till nine 
or ten o’clock in the evening. ‘Their provision was 
a little smoked meat, or a little indian corn, without 
other cheer than pure water. If the torrents are 
difficult to surmount, going up, they are very danger- 
ous in going down: for it needs only to miss the 
stroke of a paddle, to lose life. Our Lord preserved 
them in the dangers which they encountered, and 
restored them to Tadoussac,— very weary and great- 
ly fatigued, but very joyful to have given some help 
to those poor forsaken people. 


—_—." 
oo _ 
nl 


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 _ 


CHAPITRE XIII. 


DE LA RESIDENCE DE LA CONCEPTION, AUX TROIS 
RIUIERES. 


E lieu a & fes joyes & fa defolation, fes douceurs 
e & fes amertumes, il a veu des coups de la Iu- 
{tice diuine, & des effets de fes mifericordes, 
commeng¢ons par la feuerité que Dieu a fait paroiftre 
au [229] chaftiment de quelques refractaires. Trois 
hommes de confideration, parmi les Sauuages, met- 
toient quelques ob{tacles a4 l’amplification de la Foy 
par leur polygamie, retenant publiquement deux 
femmes, vn carreau de foudre lancé du Ciel ie veux 
dire vn chaftiment extraordinaire a tué leurs corps & 
peut eftre perdu mal’heureufement leurs ames. 

Le premier eftoit vn ieune homme bien-fait nommé 
Kapimichats, il auoit efpoufé vne fille Chreftienne; 
mais s’ef{tant laiffé furprendre d’vn fol amour, il en 
receut vne autre pour feconde femme. On luy parle, 
il efcoute, fon efprit femble eftre touché; mais la 
chair l’emporte, il perfifte dans fes plaifirs, Dieu qui 
attend le pecheur autant qu’il luy plaift donna quel- 
ques mois a celui-cy pour fe reconnoiftre & puis tout 
a coup luy ofta la vie par les mains d’vn fien ami. 
Tous deux eftoient allez Ala chaffe en diuers endroits, 
ce jeune frippon retournant fur le foir & paffant 
proche de l’ifle nommée de faint Ignace fituée vis a 
vis de Richelieu, fon ami qui eftoit 14 aux embufches 
prit dans les tenebres de la nuit, le canot de ce jeune 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 257 


CHAPTER XIII. 


OF THE RESIDENCE OF LA CONCEPTION, AT THREE 
RIVERS. 


HIS place has both its joys and its desolation, its 
5h sweetness and its bitterness; it has had strokes 
of the divine Justice, and effects of its mer- 
cies. Let us begin with the severity which God has 
displayed in the [229] punishment of some refractory 
ones. Three men of influence among the Savages 
were placing some obstacles against the expansion 
of the Faith, by their polygamy,—openly retaining 
two wives. A thunderbolt hurled from Heaven,—I 
mean to say, an extraordinary punishment,— has 
killed their bodies, and, perhaps, wretchedly de- 
stroyed their souls. 

The first was a young man, well fashioned, named 
Kapimichats. He had espoused a Christian girl; 
but, having allowed himself to be beguiled by a mad 
love, he took another as his second wife. He is 
spoken to, he listens, his spirit seems to be touched; 
but the flesh gets the mastery, and he persists in his 
pleasures. God, who waits for the sinner as long as 
he pleases, gave this one several months to come to 
his senses; and then, all at once, took away his life 
by the hands of his own friend. Both had gone to 
the chase in various places; that young rascal return- 
ing toward evening, and passing near the island 
named saint Ignace, situated opposite Richelieu,— 
his friend, who was there in ambush, mistook, in the 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 


homme pour quelque Ours ot pour quelque Eflan qui 
fembloit [230] trauerfer la riuiere, il defcharge fur 4 
luy fon arquebufe & le tranfperce de deux bales, ce 
pauure blecé s’efcrie ie fuis mort, fon meurtrier inno- 
cent l’ayant reconnu 4 fa voix, s’écrie, ah! mon cher 
amy c’eft moy qui t’ay tué? il s’embarque il court 
apres luy, l’amene a terre luy demande pardon, pro- 
teftant qu’il croyoit auoir tiré fur quelque animal, il 
Vexhorte 4 bien mourir, mais il eftoit bien tard, le 
fang qui fortoit A gros boiiillons de fes playes, fit 
fortir fon ame de fon corps deuant qu’elle euft efté 
lauée du fang du fils de Dieu. 

Celuy qui le fecondoit dans ce canot, & vn autre 
fien parent furent fi épouuentez de ce coup de Iuttice, 
que iamais ils ne purent prendre aucun repos toute 
nuit: ils en pafferent vne partie 4 genoux demandans 
pardon 4 Dieu de leurs offences, auec de grandes refo- 
lutions de mener vne vie toute autre qu’ils n’auoient 
fait, iufques a4 ce moment. 

Le fecond s’appelloit Chichontibik efprit prompt 
& hardy, mais profondement enfeueli dans la chair, 
& dans le fang. La connoiffance qu’il auoit de noftre — 
creance le tourmentoit, il auoit dit fouuent parlant 
d’vn Pere qui 1l’éxaminoit fur les [231] iugemens de 
Dieu; cét homme me fait trembler, en fin il m’oftera 
la vie, la Foy vouloit entrer dedans fon ame, mais 
l’attache a fes voluptez, le fit refoudre de fe bander 
contre la Doctrine qui troubloit la douceur de fes 
plaifirs, il s’efforce donc d’éloigner fes gens de la 
priere de l’inftruction & des Francois, mefme difant 
pis que pendre de la Loy de Iefus-Chrift, & de ceux — 
qui la publient & qui la profeffent. A peines’eftoit- 
il fortement declaré, qu’il fe vit affailly d’vne — 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 259 


darkness of the night, that young man’s canoe for 
some Bear or Elk, which seemed [230] to be crossing 
the river. He discharges his arquebus at him, and 
pierces him with two balls; and the poor wounded 
man exclaims, ‘‘I am dead!’’ His innocent mur- 
derer, having recognized him by his voice, exclaims: 
‘‘ Ah! my dear friend, it is I who have killed thee! ’”’ 
He embarks, hastens to him, and brings him to land; 
he asks his pardon, protesting that he supposed that 
he had fired upon some animal. He exhorts him to 
die well, but it was very late: the blood which issued 
in great spurts from his wounds drove his soul from 
his body before it had been washed in the blood of 
the son of God. 

The man who was aiding him in that canoe, and 
another, a kinsman of his, were so frightened by this 
stroke of Justice that they could take no rest, all the 
night; they spent a part of it on their knees, asking 
pardon of God for their sins, with firm resolutions to 
lead a life very different from that which they had 
lived up to that moment. 

The second was called Chichontibik,—a spirit 
quick and bold, but deeply buried in flesh and blood. 
The knowledge that he had of our belief was tor- 
menting him; he had often said, speaking of a Father 
who examined him upon the [231] judgments of 
God: ‘‘ That man makes me tremble; in the end, he 
will take away my life.” The Faith would have 
entered his soul, but attachment to his sensualities 
made him resolve to harden himself against the 
Doctrine which disturbed the enjoyment of his pleas- 
ures. He then strives to alienate his people from 
prayer, from instruction, and from the French,— 
even saying worse than hanging, of the Law of Jesus 


maladie fi prompte, & fi foudaine, que iamais il ne ‘ 


put douter qu’elle ne fut vn fleau enuoyé de la part 


de celuy qui veut eftre obey, mais 6 mal’heur! Au — 


lieu de fe recdnoiftre, il fe reuolte plus que iamais, 
contre le bras qui ne le frappoit que pour le guerir; 
il vofmit des millions de blafphemes contre Dieu, on 
luy confeille de l’appaifer, on luy promet que tous 
fes crimes feront effacez dans les eaux du baptefme, 
s'il le veut receuoir, on luy fait entendre les mal’heurs 
ot il fe va precipiter s’il n’ouure les yeux. A cela 
point d’autre réponce finon que cette Loy eftoit abo- 
minable qui faifoit mourir les hommes: la rage fut 
la Cataftrophe de fa vie; fes deux femmes efpou- 
uantées de cette [232] mort fi étrange & fi foudaine 
fe conuertirent. Quelques Sauuages en furent tou- 
chez, mais comme les oreilles ne font pas fi proches 
de l’ame pour ainfi dire que les yeux, il falloit que 
quelques Apoftats, & quelques Payens endurcis viffent 
vn autre coup pour eftre ébranlez. 

Ce coup arriua en la perfonne d’vn Apoftat nommé 
Iofeph smofotifcschie vulgairement appellé la Gre- 
noiille, ce nom qui auoit efté porté par plufieurs 
Capitaines de fon pays, & qu’on luy auoit donné pour 
les faire reuiure le rendoit fuperbe & infolent. Son 
naturel fougueux le faifoit quelquefois efchapper en 
des excez qui le jettoient bien auant dans le mefpris, 
or comme la Foy ne s’accorde pas bien auec l’orgueil, 
il en prit vne telle horreur qu’il ne pouuoit de temps 
en temps contenir fes blafphemes. L’ Automne pafiée 
les Sauuages tomberent dans vne maladie, qui les 
conduifoit iufques aux portes de la mort, mais il 
femble qu’ayant recours 4 Dieu, ils en reuenoient 
quafi par miracle: cela cdfoloit fortement les bons, 


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vow 81 


A 
ts 
Pht 


; 


} 
iW 
Yi 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 261 


Christ, and of those who publish and who profess it. 
Hardly had he stoutly declared himself, when he 
saw himself assailed by a disease, so prompt and so 
sudden that he could never doubt that it was a 
scourge sent from him who wills to be obeyed. But 
oh, woe! instead of coming to his senses, he revolts 
more than ever against the arm which struck him 
only to cure him; he vomits millions of blasphemies 
against God. He is counseled to quiet himself, he 
is promised that all his crimes shall be effaced in the 
waters of baptism, if he will receive it; he is made 
to understand the misfortunes into which he will 
dash himself unless he open his eyes. To that, he 
made no other response than this, that a Law which 
made men die was abominable. His rage was the 
Catastrophe of his life; his two wives, terrified by 
this [232] death so strange and sudden, became con- 
verted. Some Savages were touched by it; but as 
the ears are not as near to the soul, so to speak, as 
the eyes, it was necessary that some Apostates and 
some hardened Pagans should see another blow, in 
order to be shaken. 

This blow happened to the person of an Apostate 
named Joseph Oumosotiscouchie,—in vulgar par- 
lance, la Grenouille[‘‘ the Frog’’]. Thatname, which 
had been borne by several Captains of his country, 
and which had been given to him in order to make 
them live again, rendered him proud and insolent.” 
His vehement nature sometimes caused him to break 
forth into excesses which carried him far into 
contempt; and, as the Faith does not well agree 
with pride, he conceived such a horror for it that he 
could not, at times, contain his blasphemies. Last 
Autumn, the Savages fell into a disease which was 


va 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 31_ 


& touchoit faintement les mefchans & les infideles. — 
Ce miferable Apoftat, ne pouuoit fupporter cette d 
maladie [233] n’y fa guerifon, il attribuoit le mala 
nof{tre creance, & la fanté au Demon. II fut enfin — 
attaqué auffi bien que les autres, cela luy fut bien — 
fenfible, il creut que la Foy luy caufoit ce mal’heur: 
c’e{t pourquoy cOme vn de nos Peres alloit faire 
prier Dieu fur le foir dans les cabanes il l’attaqua, 
que fais tu icy? ne {cait-on pas bien par toute la terre 
que vous faites mourir les hommes par vos prieres? 
ne voit-on pas que tous ceux qui vous écoutent per- 
dent bien-tof{t la vie? bref, il vfa de menaces, & fe 
tournant vers fes gens il fait fon poffible pour leur 
perfuader qu’ils deuoient quitter la Foy, & boucher 
entierement les oreilles A nos paroles. Le Pere luy 
voulut repartir, mais il vit bien qu'il n’y auoit rien 
a gagner fur vn efprit & demi poffedé, il fe retire 
doucemét apres auoir confolé les croyans. 

Sur la nuict ce fanfaron s’imaginant qu’il alloit 
triompher de noftre creance fit vn grand feftin, il 
y inuita quantité de monde & notamment ceux qu'il 
croyoit auoir peruertis par fes difcours, il tefmoigne 
acette affemblée qu'il n’attend pas fa guerifon par 
les prieres; mais bien par fes fonges & par fes veués 
& par les autres fuper{ftitions dont s’eft tofijoursferui — 
fa nation, [234] fgachez donc dit-il, que ie gueriray 
fion m’accorde trois chofes. La premiere eft qu’on 
me donne vn chien auquel on fera porter le nom de 
quelque perfonne de confideration. La feconde, fi 
on me donne yn fils adoptif qui s’appelle sifanté, il 
vouloit dire (voftre fanté) ayant apris ce mot des — 
Frangois qu’il ne pouuoit prononcer a raifon qu’ils 
n’ont point de (v) confonante. La troifiefme, fi on , 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 263 


leading them even to the gates of death; but it 
seems that, having recourse to God, they recovered 
from it almost by a miracle. That greatly consoled 
the good, and devoutly touched the wicked and the 
infidels. This miserable Apostate could not endure 
either that disease [233] or its cure; he attributed 
the sickness to our belief, and health to the Demon. 
He was finally attacked, as well as the others: that 
was very significant to him,—he believed that the 
Faith was causing him this misfortune. Therefore, 
when one of our Fathers was going, toward evening, 
to offer prayer to God in the cabins, he attacked 
him: ‘‘ What art thou doing here? Is it not well 
known throughout the earth that you cause men to 
die by your prayers? Do we not see that all those 
who listen to you soon lose life?’’ In short, he 
used threats; and, turning toward his people, he did 
his utmost to persuade them that they ought to give 
up the Faith, and altogether stop their ears to our 
words. The Father wished to reply to him; but he 
plainly saw that there was nothing to gain over a 
mind half possessed: he withdraws quietly, after 
having consoled the believers. 

Toward night, this braggart, imagining that he 
was about to triumph over our belief, made a great 
feast; he invited to it many people, and especially 
those whom he thought he had perverted by his 
speeches. He declares to this assembly that he does 
not expect his cure through the prayers, but only 
through his dreams and visions, and through the 
other superstitions which his nation has always em- 
ployed. [234] ‘‘ Know then,” he said, ‘‘ that I shall 
get well if three things are granted me. The firstis, 
that I be given a dog which shall be made to bear the 


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 81 


fait vn feftin A tout manger fi on m’accorde ces trois 
chofes, ie fuis gueri difoit-il. 

Les Chreftiens qui fe trouuerent Aa ce banquet 
baifferent la tefte tefmoignant que ces fonges qu’ils 
adoroient autresfois n’eftoient plus de faifon, les 
Payens n’oferent refifter aux defirs de cét homme, ils 
les accomplirent de point en point dés la mefme nuit, 
& auec vn fi fauorable fuccez 4 ce qu’il difoit qu’il fe 
publioit tout guery au leuer du Soleil, il paroift en 
public il triomphe il dit par tout que l’accompliffe- 
ment de fes fonges a efté la fin de fa maladie & le 
re{tabliffement de fa fanté, vne fievre violente le faifit 
au milieu de fon triomphe, le renuerfe par terre le 
jette dans vn debris & dans des tourmens fi étranges, 
qu'il écumoit comme vn poffedé [235] ceux de fa 
cabane €pouuantez, craignans qu’il n’affommaft quel- 
qu’vn, l’ayant lié jetterent deffus luy vne couuerte, 
afin de cacher fa fureur & fa rage, voila mon thrafon 
bien humilié. Vne bdne veufue Chreftienne voyant 
toute cette tragedie, accourt en noftre maifon, pour 
nous auertir de ce qui fe paffoit, on en donne aduis 
au Chirurgien, il y court nous le fuiuons, mais le 
Chirurgien leuant la couuerte, le trouua roide mort, 
iettant la baue & l’écume des deux coftez de la 
bouche comme vn homme qu’on auoit eftouffé ot 
ef{tranglé. Tout le monde accourt, l’étonnement fe 
iette dans l’efprit des Francois & des Sauuages, a la 
veué d’vn {pectacle fi épouuantable. 

Iamais nous ne vifmes tant d’effroy, difent les Peres 
qui coururent dans cette cabane. Ce miferable pref- 
choit hautement la Iuftice de Dieu qu’il auoit mépri- 
fée; fa bonté l’auoit efbranlé quelques années aupar- 
auant, par vne menace bien remarquable: ce fut a 


- 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 265 


name of some person of consideration. The second, 
that I be given an adopted son, who shall be called 
Wisanté:’’ he meant to say ‘‘vostre santé’’ — having 
learned this word from the French, which he could 
not pronounce because they have no ‘‘ v’’ consonant. 
‘‘ The third, that an eat-all feast be made. If these 
three things be granted me, I am cured,’’ he said. 

The Christians who were present at that banquet, 
lowered their heads,—indicating that those dreams 
which they formerly adored were no longer in sea- 
son. The Pagans dared not resist that man’s desires; 
they fulfilled them in every point, that very night,— 
and with such favorable success, as he said, that he 
at Sunrise proclaimed himself wholly cured. He 
appears in public; he triumphs; he says everywhere 
that the fulfilment of his dreams has been the end 
of his malady, and the restoration of his health. A 
violent fever seizes him in the midst of his triumph, 
prostrates him to the earth, throws him into a wreck 
and into torments so unusual that he foamed like one 
possessed. [235] Those of his cabin — frightened, 
and fearing lest he might beat some one to death — 
having tied him, threw over him a blanket, so as to 
conceal his fury and his rage; behold my blusterer 
much humbled. <A good Christian widow, seeing all 
this tragedy, hastens to our house in order to warn 
us of what was going on. Notice is given to a Sur- 
geon; he runs thither, and we follow him; but the 
Surgeon, lifting the blanket, found him stone-dead,— 
the drivel and foam issuing from both sides of his 
mouth, as with a man who had been stifled or 
strangled. Every one hastens thither; astonish- 
ment seizes the minds of both French and Savages, 
at the sight of so awful a spectacle. 


aiigel — 


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 81 


Richelieu ott ce perfide ayant promis qu’il protefte- 
roit en vn feftin public, qu’il fe vouloit conuertir 
d’éclama fortement contre la Foy, il fut 4 mefme 
temps furpris d’vne maladie enragée, fi bien qu'il fit 
venir vn Pere de noftre compagnie [236] non pour fe 
rédre 4 Dieu, mais pour luy faire entendre que s'il 
mouroit de cefte rage, qu’il ne mourroit pas tout 
feul, fe croyant terraffé par les prieres ot par les 
forts du Pere. Ce pauure efprit s’adoucit peu a peu 
par les paroles de celuy qui ne luy auoit iamais 
procuré que la vie. Enfin s’eftant reconnu il fit fon 
oraifon a noftre Seigneur auec le Pere, promettant 
de fe faire inftruire, chofe étrange, fa maladie qui 
e{toit venué en vn moment, difparut en vn inftant, 
il prefta Voreille quelque temps a la Doctrine de 
Iefus-Chrift, mais enfin l’ayant méprifée auec paffion 
il a efté puny auec vne grande I[uttice. 

Ce careau de foudre en tuant vn homme en refufcita 
plufieurs, les bons Chreftiens donnerent mille bene- 
dictions a Dieu, les tiedes fe rechaufferent, les 
Apoftats fe reconcilierent 4 1’Eglife, & les Payens 
honorant Iefus-Chrift, demanderent fon fainct Bap- 
tefme, perfonne n’ofoit plus ouurir la bouche contre 
la Foy, on n’en parloit plus qu’auec vne crainte, & 
vn refpect tout aymable. 

Simon Pieskaret qui n’eftoit Chreftien qu’en appa- 


rence & par police, le deuint tout de bon, il fe 


confeffe trois fois en [237] vingt-quatre heures, tant la 
crainte des iugemens de Dieu le preffoit, quoy qu’il fut 
malade, il fe tenoit fort long temps 4 genoux, pofture 


fort incommode aux Sauuages: il haranguoit incef- 


famment en faueur de la Foy, témoignant par fes 
paroles qu’il eftoit touché iufques au fond du coeur. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 267 


‘“ We never saw so much terror,’’ say the Fathers 
who ran to that cabin. ‘‘ That wretch was loudly 
preaching the Justice of God, which he had despised ; 
his goodness had disquieted this man some years 
before, through avery remarkable threat. It was 
at Richelieu, where this treacherous fellow — having 
promised that he would declare, at a public feast, 
that he wished to become converted—loudly de- 
nounced the Faith. At that very time, he was sud- 
denly seized by a malignant disease, insomuch that 
he sent for a Father of our society,— [236] not to 
give himself up to God, but to have him understand 
that, if he died of that madness, he would not die all 
alone, for he believed that he had been prostrated 
by the prayers or spells of the Father. This poor 
soul became softened, little by little, through the 
words of him who had never procured for him any- 
thing but life. Finally, having come to his senses, 
he offered his prayer to our Lord with the Father, 
promising to have himself instructed. Strange to 
say, his malady, which had come in a moment, dis- 
appeared in an instant. He listened for some time 
to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; but finally, having 
despised it with passion, he has been punished with 
a great Justice.”’ 

This thunderbolt, while killing one man, raised 
several to life; the good Christians gave a thousand 
blessings to God, the lukewarm ones became warm, 
the Apostates became reconciled to the Church; and 
the Pagans, honoring Jesus Christ, asked his holy 
Baptism. No one dared longer open his lips against 
the Faith; it was now spoken of only with a dread 
and respect that altogether pleased us. 

Simon Pieskaret, who was a Christian only in 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 31 


I] demandoit pardon aux Francois & aux Sauuages, 
de la vie trop libertine qu’il auoit menée. I] ne 
ceffoit de publier les mifericordes de fon Dieu, ce 
coup de Iuftice luy fut vn coup de grace & de mife- 
ricorde, car il a perfeueré dans fa ferueur iufques a 
la mort. 

Vn autre fut auffi touché mais non pas jufques au 
point neceffaire, pour ne plus retourner 4 fon aueu- 
glement, il auoit deux femmes fi toft qu’il eut apris 
la mort funefte & toute efpouuentable de cét Apoftat, 
il en congedia vne & promit au Pere qui auoit foin 
de ces nouuelles plantes de fe reconcilier entierement 
al’Eglife. Les liens du fens & de la chair font 
efpouuentables, cette concubine de laquelle il a des 
enfans le charma de rechef, fi bien qu’eftant guery 
car il eftoit malade, il retomba dedans fes pieges, 
dequoy les autres Sauuages furent fi indignez qu’ils 
s’affemblerent [238] pour auifer fi on ne le banniroit 
point des trois Riuieres, la conclufion fut qu’on luy 
prefcriroit quelque temps pour fe reconnoiftre, & 
que fi dans ces limites il ne fe changeoit on le 
contraindroit de s’efloigner, il n’alla pas jufques au 
terme prefix il delogea fans trompette de peur qu’on 
ne le chaffaft auec bruit. 

La femme legitime de ce miferable Apoftat, dont 
la mort a e{té abominable deuant Dieu & deuant les 
hommes, fe voyant mal traitée de fon mary le quitta 
pour remonter auec fon beau Pere en fon pais, en 
chemin les Hiroquois s’eftant iettez fur leur efcotiade 
emmenerent cette pauure miferable auec vne autre 
qui eftoit de fa compagnie, ces nouuelles eftant appor- 
tées aux trois Riuieres affligerent toute fa parenté; 
mais notamment vne femme Chreftienne, ie ne pleure 


—— 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 269 


appearance and through policy, became so in ear- 
nest; he confessed three times in [237] twenty-four 
hours,—so much was the fear of God’s judgments 
urging him. Although he was sick, he remained a 
very long time on his knees,—a posture very incon- 
venient for the Savages; he harangued incessantly 
in favor of the Faith, showing by his words that he 
was moved even to the depth of his heart. He 
asked pardon from both French and Savages for the 
too dissolute life that he had lived; and he did not 
cease to publish the mercies of his God. This act 
of Justice was a stroke of grace and mercy to him, 
for he persevered in his fervor even till death. 

Another was affected, but not to the degree neces- 
sary for not again returning to his blindness. He 
had two wives; as soon as he had learned the melan- 
choly and altogether frightful death of that Apostate, 
he dismissed one of these, and promised the Father 
who had charge of those new plants that he would 
become entirely reconciled to the Church. The 
bonds of the senses and the flesh are terrible; that 
concubine, by whom he has children, charmed him 
again, insomuch that, being cured,—for he was 
sick,—he fell back into her snares. At this, the 
other Savages were so indignant that they met 
together, [238] in order to consult whether they 
should not expel him from three Rivers. The con- 
clusion was that they should assign to him a certain 
period for coming to his senses; and that if, within 
these limits, he did not change, they would constrain 
him to remove. He did not go as far as the 
appointed time, but quietly decamped, for fear that 
they would drive him out with turmoil. 

The lawful wife of that miserable Apostate, whose 


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 31 


point fa captiuité difoit-elle, ie ne regrette point fon 
abfence, mais ie ne me puis confoler fur la perte de 
fon ame; le Pere a qui elle racomtoit fes ennuis, luy 
dit que c’eftoit vne iufte punition, qu’elle auoit negli- 
gée les occafions de fon falut, il eft vray re{pond-elle, 
mais helas! fes parens & notamment fon mary, la 
iettoient dans ce mal’heur, au refte, difoit-elle, [239] 
i’ay vne ferme creance que Dieu luy fera mifericorde, 
ie m’en vay luy demander pardon pour fes pechez & 
afin que ma priere luy foit plus agreable, ie defire de 
me confeffer & de me communier, ne mas-tu pas 
enfeigné que Dieu eftoit tout-puiffant? quel mal y 
auroit-il de le prier qu’il la tiraft des mains de fes 
ennemis? pour moy ie prefenteray tous les iours le 
chapelet de la Saincte Vierge 4 fon Fils, ie le prie- 
tay 4 la faincte Meffe d’exaucer mes prieres. Pour 
vous autres qui eftes bien plus puiffans aupres de 
Dieu demandez luy cette deliurance & affurément 
vous l’aurez, fes prieres ne furent pas faites en vain, 
quelque téps apres on vit paroiftre aux trois Riuieres 
ces deux pauures captiues, Dieu f¢ait auec quelle 
ioye cette béne Chreftienne les receut, vne bande de 
Hurons allans en guerre, récontrerent les ennemis 
qui tenoient ces deux pauures victimes dans leurs 
feps & dans leurs liens, ils les pourfuiuent fi chaude- 
ment, qu’ils n’eurent pas le loifir de tuer leurs pri- 
fonnieres, deuant que de prendre la fuitte: les voila 
donc en liberté pour le corps, & bien toft apres pour 
l’ame, pour ce que la plus 4agée des deux fe fit bien 
toft inf{truire [240] & baptizer, la plus ieune qui eftoit 
femme de cét Apoftat ayant apris l’horrible mort de 
fon mary, & fe voyant hors de 1’Enfer par les prieres 
de fa parente, fut fi fenfiblement touchée, qu’elle 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 271 


death was abominable before God and before men, 
seeing herself ill-treated by her husband, left him in 
order to go up with her Father-in-law to her own 
country. On the way, the Hiroquois, having fallen 
upon their squad, took away that poor wretched 
woman with another who was of her company; this 
news being brought to three Rivers, afflicted her 
whole kindred, but especially a Christian woman. 
“‘T do not mourn her captivity,’’ she said, ‘‘ I do not 
regret her absence; but I cannot console myself 
about the loss of her soul.’’ The Father to whom 
she was relating her troubles told her that it was a 
just punishment, that she had neglected the oppor- 
tunities of her salvation. ‘‘ It is true,’’ she answers, 
** put alas! her relatives, and especially her husband, 
drove her into that misfortune. However,’’ she 
said, [239] ‘‘ I have a firm belief that God will show 
her mercy. I am going to ask his pardon for her 
sins; and, that my prayer may be more acceptable 
to him, I desire to confess and receive communion. 
Hast thou not taught me that God was all-powerful? 
What harm would there be in asking him to deliver 
her from the hands of her enemies? As for me, I 
will offer every day the rosary of the Blessed Virgin 
to her Son; I will entreat him at holy Mass to hear 
my prayers. As for you others, who are much more 
powerful with God,—ask him for this deliverance, 
and surely you will secure it.’’ Her prayers were 
not offered in vain; some time after, those two poor 
captives were seen to appear at three Rivers, and 
God knows with what joy that good Christian received 
them. A band of Hurons, going to war, encoun- 
tered the enemies who held those two poor victims 
in their fetters and bonds: they pursue the latter so | 


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 _ 


mene vne vie fort faincte, & fort exemplaire; les 
Hiroquois luy auoient écrafé les doigts entre deux 
pierres, & l’auoient fi rudement traitée, qu’elle ne la 
fit pas longue apres fon retour, mais elle donna des 
fignes d’vne ame fort auancée A la vertu & fi nota- 
bles, qu’on l’eut prife pour vne perfonne consémée 
dans la pieté & das la deuotion. La plus-part des 
Sauuages Chreftiés & Cathecumes, pafferét vne grade 
partie de la nuict quelle mourut, aupres de fon corps 
faifans oraifon, reiteras leurs chappelets, & les autres 
prieres qu’on leur enfeigne, les Francois auffi bien 
que les Sauuages honorerét auec affection fa fepul- 
ture. Ah! Dieu que fa mort & fa fepulture furent 
differentes, de la mort & de la fepulture de fon 
mary! Le mary mourut d’vne mort enragée, & la 
femme mourut dans vne profonde paix. Le mary 
fut furpris, & fa femme fe prepara de longue-main, 
celuy-l4 n’eut iamais de connoiffance, celle-cy ne 
perdit la parole n’y la raifon, qu’au dernier fofipir. 
Celuy-14 [241] mourut en reprouué, celle-cy en fille 
tres-obeiffante a l’Eglife, apres auoir receu tous fes 
Sacrements. Bref elle fut enterrée auec toutes les 
prieres & toutes les ceremonies & tout l’honneur que 
le temps & le lieu & la commodité le pouuoient per- 
mettre, & fon mary n’eut que la fepulture d’vn afne, 
on le iette en cachette dans vn trou comme vne 
voirie, de peur qu’il n’empeftaft l’air de fon corps, 
comme il l’auoit faly par fes vices, & par fon apoftafie. 
Ie ne puis douter dit le Pere qui nous a donné ces 
remarques que l’ame de cette femme ne foit au Ciel, 
en voicy vne grande & forte coniecture, comme ie 
luy demandois fi elle ne craignoit point la mort, eg 
point du tout me refpond elle mon coeur me rend _ 


1647} RELATION OF 1647 273 


hotly that they had not the leisure to kill their pris- 
oners before taking flight. Behold them, then, at 
liberty for the body, and soon afterward for the soul, 
because the elder of the two soon had herself in- 
structed [240] and baptized; the younger, who was 
the wife of that Apostate, having learned the hor- 
rible death of her husband, and seeing herself out of 
Hell through her kinswoman’s prayers, was so deeply 
moved that she leads a very devout and exemplary 
life. The Hiroquois had crushed her fingers between 
two stones, and had treated her so harshly that she 
did not live long after her return; but she gave signs 
of a soul far advanced in virtue,—signs so notable 
that one might have taken her for a person accom- 
plished in piety and devotion. Most of the Christian 
Savages and Catechumens spent a great part of the 
night when she died, near her body, offering prayers, 
repeating their rosaries and the other prayers 
which are taught them; the French, as well as the 
Savages, affectionately honored her burial. Ah, 
God! how different were her death and burial from 
the death and burial of her husband! The husband 
passed away in a terrible death, and the wife died 
in profound peace. The husband was taken by 
surprise, and his wife prepared herself long before- 
hand; the former never had consciousness, the latter 
lost neither speech nor reason until the last sigh. 
The former [241] died like a reprobate, the latter 
like a daughter most obedient to the Church, after 
having received all her Sacraments. In short, she 
was buried with all the prayers, and all the cere- 
monies, and all the honor which the time and the 
place and convenience could permit; but her hus- 
band had only the burial of an ass,— he was secretly 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 31 


témoignage que ie croy en Dieu, c’eft ce qui me 
cofole & qui me fait efperer d’étrer bien toft dedas 
les cieux. Si cela eft luy dif-je fouuiés-toy dans 
cette maifon de gloire & de plaifir, apres que tu 
auras remercié ton Seigneur & ton Dieu de t’auoir fi 
amoureufement conuertie & de t’auoir logée dedans 
fon Paradis, fouuiens toy de luy demander la con- 
uerfion de ta mere, prie le qu’il luy donne de 1’efprit 
& de l'amour pour la Foy, ie ny manqueray pas [242]. 
repart elle, chofe 4 la verité bien remarquable, peu 
de temps apres fon trefpas, fa mere eft fortement 
touchée ie puis dire en verité, que fa conuerfion fi 
fubite a efté 1’vn de mes plus grands étonnemens, 
cette femme deuint non feulement bonne Chreftienne; 
mais fouple docile & tref-feruente, auant qu’elle fe 
_ fut rendué a fon Dieu elle fe gauffoit inceffamment 
des prieres, c’eftoit par apres tout fon plaifir, elle 
nous regardoit d’vn ceil autant fauorable qu’elle auoit 
eu d’horreur & de nous & de nos paroles, fa famille a 
fon exemple adore Iefus-Chrift, on luy prefenta vn 
parti affez auantageux pour vne fienne fille; elle ne 
le voulut iamais accepter quoy qu’elle fut dans vne 
grande neceffité, difant que Dieu ne feroit pas feruy 
dans ce mariage, puis que ce jeune homme n’auoit 
pas la fermeté d’vn Chreftien. 
Vn nommé Bernard d’Agmangsy, eftat tombé 
malade fut fortement follicité par ce miferable Apoftat 
nommé la Grenoiiille d’abandonner la Foy comme 
eftant la caufe de fa maladie & le plus puiffant 
obf{tacle 4 fa guerifon, ta parole ne vaut rien luy 
replica-il, celuy qui ma donné premierement la vie 
me la peut rendre quand il luy plaira il en eft le 
maiftre, qu’il me face [243] felon fon bon plaifir, ny 


1647} RELATION OF 1647 275 


flung into a hole like a common sewer, for fear that 
he might infect the air with his body, as he had 
polluted it with his vices and his apostasy. 

‘‘T cannot doubt,” says the Father who has given 
us these remarks, ‘‘ that the soul of that woman is 
in Heaven, of which I will offer this well-founded 
conjecture. When I was asking her whether she 
did not fear death, she answered me, ‘ Not at all; 
my heart yields me evidence that I believe in God; 
this is what consoles me and makes me hope soon 
to enter the heavens.’ ‘If that be the case,’ I 
say to her, ‘remember in that abode of glory and 
pleasure,—after thou shalt have thanked thy Lord 
and thy God for having so lovingly converted thee, 
and for having placed thee in his Paradise, remem- 
ber to ask him for the conversion of thy mother; 
entreat him to give her intelligence, and love for the 
Faith.’ ‘I will not fail in this,’ [242] she answers; 
and,— what, in truth, is very remarkable,— shortly 
after her decease, her mother is deeply moved. I 
may say, in truth, that her so sudden conversion has 
been one of my greatest astonishments; this woman 
became not only a good Christian, but pliable, docile, 
and very fervent. Before she had surrendered her- 
self to her God, she jeered incessantly at prayers,— 
they were afterward her whole pleasure; she regarded 
us with as much favor as she had had horror, both 
of us and of our words. Her family, following her 
example, adores Jesus Christ. She was offered a 
fairly advantageous match for a daughter of hers; 
she would never accept it although she was in great 
need,— saying that God would not be served in this 
marriage, since that young man had not the firmness 
of a Christian.’’ 


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 31 _ 


la vie ny la mort ne feront pas que ie ’abandonne. _ 

Vn autre appelé Pierre Nanch¥ak¢fity, preffé par 
vne fienne tante de chanter vne chanfon fuperftitieufe 
pour recouurer fa fanté par l’entremife du Demon, 
luy répondit genereufement qu’il n’en feroit rien, 
ouy mais repart-elle, tu ne gueriras iamais, c’eft pour 
la troifiefme fois que tu es retombé dans ta maladie, 
ta creance ne te fcauroit guerir. Ta bouche, luy 
dit-il, eft trop grande, les paroles en fortent trop 
facilement? fgachez que i’ayme mieux eftre malade, 
que de fafcher Dieu pour recouurer ma fanté. Cette 
miferable femme eftant prife des Hiroquois s’eft 
defefperée, & ce ieune homme eit mort bien toft 
apres en vray Chreftien & en homme plain de 
courage. 

Vn Francois eftant entré dans le bois, apperceut 
vne femme Sauuage 4 genoux fur la neige, voyant 
qu'il n’eftoit point découuert, il s’arrefte pour efpier 
ce qu’elle faifoit, il la vit le chapelet en main, les 
yeux au Ciel, dans vne pofture extrememét modette, 
fans tourner la tefte, n’y d’vn cofté ny d’autre, fai- 
fant fa priere auec attétion toute extraordinaire, elle 
s’e{toit retirée [244] du bois des cabanes pour agir & 
pour traiter auec fon Dieu plus librement, ce pauure 
héme en fut fi touché, que s’en allant trouuer vn de 
nos Peres il luy dit auec vn fentiment plain de ten- 
dreffe, ne sémes nous point honteux nous autres qui 
auons plus de connoiffance que ces peuples, de mener — 
vne vie fi lafche, & de nous comporter fi froidement 
dans nos prieres, cette bonne Chreftienne m’a fait — 
vne grande lecon fans me voir & fans me parler, vne 
bonne veufue Chreftienne eftant proche de la mort, — 
laiffa fon fils 4 vne famille Frangoife, quelques-vns y 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 277 


A man named Bernard d’Agmangwy, having fallen 
sick, was urgently solicited, by that wretched Apos- 
tate named la Grenouille, to abandon the Faith as 
being the cause of his sickness, and the most pow- 
erful obstacle to his cure. ‘‘ Thy speech avails 
nothing,’ he replied to him. ‘‘ He who first gave 
me life can restore it to me when he pleases; he is. 
the master of it,— let him deal with me [243] accord- 
ing to his good pleasure; neither life nor death shall 
cause me to abandon him.” 

Another, called Pierre Nanchouakousity, urged 
by an aunt of his to sing a superstitious song in order 
to recover his health through the intervention of the 
Demon, bravely answered her that he would do noth- 
ing of the sort. ‘‘ Yes, but,’’ she replies, ‘‘ thou 
wilt never get well. This is the third time that 
thou hast relapsed into thy disease: thy belief cannot 
cure thee.’’ ‘‘ Thy mouth,’’ he says to her, ‘‘ is too 
large; the words come from it too easily. Know 
that I would rather be sick, than offend God in order 
to recover my health.’’ That wretched woman, being 
taken by the Hiroquois, became desperate; and this 
young man died soon afterward as a true Christian, 
and a man full of courage. 

A Frenchman, having entered the wood, perceived 
a Savage woman on her knees upon the snow; see- 
ing that he was not discovered, he stopped to spy 
what she was doing. He saw her, with rosary in 
hand, her eyes toward Heaven,—in an extremely 
modest posture, without turning her head either to 
one side or to the other,—saying her prayer with 
extraordinary attention. She had retired [244] to 
the woods from the cabins, in order more freely to 
deal and treat with her God. That poor man was so 


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Nou 31 


luy demandant la raifon pourquoy elle ne le donnoit 
point 4 ceux de fa nation. Ie fuis affurée dit-elle 
que mon fils fera Chreftien demeurant auec les Fran- 
cois, c’eft tout le bien que ie luy fouhaitte. Le Pere 
qui l’alloit vifiter en fa maladie, la voyant confolée 
dans les fouffrances dont elle eftoit remplie fut 
fenfiblement touché, etendat ces paroles fortir de fa 
bouche, non non ie ne m’atrifte pas de mes fouffran- 
ces, mais bien de ce que i’ay fafché Dieu, il me 
regarde il voit ce que i’endure, ie ne luy d’y point 
qu’il prenne de bonnes penfées pour mon corps, mais 
bien qu’il ait pitié de mon ame, [245] quand le ver- 
tay-ie? quand fortiray-je de cette vie? elle demada. 
plufieurs fois qu’on luy montrai{t fon cercueil tant elle 
auoit peu d’aprehenfion de la mort, chofe fi rare 
parmy les Sauuages, qu'il n’eft pas permis de nom- 
mer vn mort dans leurs cabanes, la Foy & la grace 
ont de puiffans effets dans vn coeur fidele. 

Les Onontchataronons vulgairement appelez des 
Francois ceux de la nation d’Iroquet, qui furent 
inftruits l’'an paffé 4 Montreal, font defcendus cette 
année aux trois Riuieres, ie feray mention de deux 
ou trois qui en verité ont donné de grandes marques 
de leur falut & de leur predeftination. lean Baptifte 
Manitsnagsy baptifé l’année precedente & Montreal, 
A continué fa ferueur dans les trois Riuieres, il n’en- 
troit iamais dans nos maifons & iamais nous ne vifi- 
tions fa cabane, qu’on ne vit la joye s’épanoiiir deffus 
fon vifage. Vous eftes veritablement nos Peres, 
nous difoit-il, vyne mere n’ayme pas fes enfans, c’eft 
vous autres qui nous aymez: mais ie vous affure que 
ie vous ayme auffi fort tendrement, fgachez que par 
tout ot vous eftes c’eft-l4 mon pays & m’a bourgade, 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 279 


touched thereby that, going to find one of our Fa- 
thers, he said to him with emotion full of tenderness: 
‘* Are we not ashamed—we, who have more knowl- 
edge than these peoples —to lead a life so base, and 
to behave so coldly in our prayers? This good Chris- 
tian woman has given me a valuable lesson, without 
seeing me or speaking to me.’’ <A good Christian 
widow, being near death, left her son to a French 
family; some persons asking her the reason why she 
did not give him to those of her own nation, she 
said: ‘‘Il am sure that my son will be a Christian, 
living with the French; this is all the good that I 
desire for him.’’ The Father who went tovisit her 
in her sickness, seeing her consoled in her abundant 
sufferings, was deeply moved at hearing these words 
issue from her lips: ‘‘ No, no, I am not grieved at 
my sufferings, but rather because I have offended 
God. He looks at me, and sees what I endure; I 
do not tell him to take kind thought for my body, 
but rather to have pity on my soul. [245] When 
shallI see him? When shallI leave this life?’’ She 
asked several times that they would show her her 
coffin, so little apprehension did she have of death, — 
something so rare among the Savages that it is not 
permitted to name a dead person in their cabins; the 
Faith and grace have powerful effects in a faithful 
heart. | 

The Onontchataronons,—commonly called by the 
French, ‘‘ those of the Iroquet nation,’’— who were 
instructed last year at Montreal, came down this 
year to three Rivers; I will mention two or three 
who, in truth, have given excellent tokens of their 
salvation and predestination. Jean Baptiste Manitou- 
nagwy, baptized last year at Montreal, has continued 


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 31 


& qu’auffi toft que ie fuis absét de vous autres [246] 
il me femble que ie fuis dans vn pays étranger. 
Quand ie fuis dans les bois & que vous ne paroiffez 
point, ie d’y, ie fuis égaré, il faut que ie cherche mon 
chemin, & mon cceur regarde tofijours du cofté de la 
maifon de priere, il proferoit ces paroles auec vne 
naifueté & vne candeur, qui ne reffentoit rien du Bar- 
bare, d’ot vient, difoit-il, que vous me permettez bien 
de vous propofer mes petits befoins, & que iamais vous 
ne me demandez rien? ie vous veux prier de deux 
chofes, nous voila prefts de partir pour noftre grande 
chaffe, donnez-moy vn catalogue des iours de Feftes, 
afin que nous les gardions dans les bois & vn peu de 
fel, pour vous conferuer des langues d’Orignac, garde 
les pour toy & pour ta famille luy difmes nous, hé 
qui meritera mieux de les manger, repondit-il, que 
ceux qui cdnoiffe[nt] Dieu? Au refte fi ie fgauois le 
maffinahigan, c’ef{t a dire fi ie fgcauois écrire ie rem- 
plirois vn grad papier des fautes que ie feray, i’écri- 
rois auffi tous les deffauts de mes gens, pour vous en 
rendre compte, ie ne crains rien, ie reprédray publique- 
ment tous ceux qui feront quelque chofe contre Dieu. 
Ce bon Neophyte auoit vne femme & vne belle mere, 
qui correfpondoient [247] fainctement 4 fa deuotion. 

Tatchkaron l’vn des Capitaines de cette nation 
d’Iroquet, ne manqua pas d’inftruction 4 Montreal, 
mais fon orgueil l’empefcha de fe rendre aux veritez 
qu'il cénoiffoit & qu'il approuuoit. Eftant tombé 
malade aux trois Riuieres, il fut fortement touché, il 
demanda le baptefme qui luy fut accordé, ce Sacrement 
receu non & la legere mais apres vne folide inftruction, 
le changea de telle fagon qu’on ne le connoiffoit 
plus, on ne vit iamais Sauuage plus defintereffé, il 


a ae 


a 


a 
~~» &” 
= - 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 281 


his fervor at three Rivers; he never entered our 
houses, and never did we visit his cabin, when joy 
was not seen spreading over his face. ‘‘ You are 
truly our Fathers,’’ he said to us; ‘‘a mother does 
not love her children, it is you who love us; but I 
assure you that I also love you very tenderly. Know 
that wherever you are, that is my country and my 
village; and that, as soon as I am absent from you, 
[246] it seems to me that I am in a strange country. 
When I am in the woods and you do not appear, I 
say, ‘I have gone astray, and must seek my road;’ 
and my heart always looks in the direction of the 


house of prayer.’’ He uttered these words with an 
ingenuousness and candor which savored naught of 
the Barbarian. ‘‘ Whence comes it,’’ he said, ‘‘ that 


you indeed allow me to set forth to you my little 
needs, and that you never ask anything of me? I 
wish to ask you for two things. Here we are, ready 
to start for our great hunt; give mea catalogue of 
the Feast-days, that we may keep them in the woods; 
and a little salt, in order to preserve for you some 
Moose tongues.’ ‘‘ Keep them for thyself and thy 
family,’’ we said to him. ‘‘ Why, who will better 
deserve to eat them,’’ he answered, ‘‘ than those who 
know God? For the rest, if I knew the massinahi- 
gan, —that is to say, ‘‘ if I knew how to write,’’— ‘‘ I 
would fill a large piece of paper with the faults that 
I shall commit; I would also write the errors of my 
people, in order to give you account of them. I fear 
nothing; I will openly reprove all those who shall 
do anything contrary to God’s will.’’ This good 
Neophyte had a wife and a mother-in-law, who 
responded [247] piously to his devotion. 
Taouchkaron, one of the Captains of that Iroquet 


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 81 


deuint foupple & humble & maniable céme vn enfant. 
Eitant allé das les bois pour chercher leur grade 
prouifion de viande, il fut accompagné d’vn homme 
qui a fa confideration auoit quitté l’vne de fes deux 
femmes, 4 peine auoient ils commancé leur chaffe, 
que cette feconde femme reuint trouuer fon mary 
Tean Tasc[h]karon (c’eft le nom qui luy fut donné au 
baptefme) ne 1l’eut pas fi tof{t apperceu, qu’il plie fon 
bagage, fe leue & s’en vient trouuer le Pere qui 
l’auoit baptifé, pour luy donner auis de ce qui fe 
paffoit. lene veux point dit-il, demeurer auec vn 
homme qui fafche Dieu, oiiy mais dit le Pere, ne 
pourrois tu pas bien les feparer, peut-eftre [248] que 
la pauureté contraint cette femme de rechercher fon 
mary, ie tafcheray refpond-il, d’en venir a bout, & 
ie la nourriray pluto{t moy-mefme, pour 1’éloigner 
de l’occafion d’offenfer Dieu, c’eft ce qu’il fit auec 
vne charité vrayement Chreftienne. Il conferua fon 
zele pour la Foy, iufques au dernier foupir comme 
nous remarquerons en fon lieu. 

Vn fien parent nommé Ouechinkinaganich 1’vn des 
plus mauuais naturels que i’aye point veu, s’eftant 
bandé contre la Foy, fe fit peu apres inftruire, mais 
fon inconftance le ietta dans la reuolte, la Foy qui 
auoit ietté quelques racines dans fon ame, commenga 
petit a petit a s’eftendre & ce d’autant plus facile- 
ment que la maladie l’ayant terraffé, l’approchoit des 
feux dont il auoit peur, vn iour le Pere qui ne cher- 
choit que 1’occafion de le fauuer, 1’étant allé voir auec 
vn Chirurgien, celuy-cy touchant le poux du malade, 
luy dit, tu n’as plus de vie, tu mourras bien-toft, a 
ces paroles (6 changement de la droite du tres-haut) 
cét homme commance a pleurer & fe l’amenter? quoy 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 283 


nation, did not miss instruction at Montreal; but his 
pride hindered him from giving himself up to the 
truths which he knew and approved. Having fallen 
sick at three Rivers, he was deeply affected; he 
asked baptism, which was granted him. This Sacra- 
ment—received not lightly, but after thorough 
instruction — changed him in such a way that one no 
longer knew him. A more disinterested Savage was 
never seen; he became pliable and humble, and tract- 
able as a child. Having gone into the woods, in 
order to seek their main provision of meat, he was 
accompanied by a man who, out of regard for him, 
had left one of his two wives. Hardly had they 
begun their hunt when that second wife came back 
to find her husband. Jean Taouchkaron (this name 
was given him in baptism) has no sooner perceived 
her than he folds up his baggage, rises, and comes to 
find the Father who had baptized him, in order to 


give him warning of what was going on. ‘I will 
not,’’ he said, ‘‘remain with a man who offends 
God.’’ ‘‘ Yes, but,’’ said the Father, ‘‘ couldst not 


thou separate them? It may be [248] that poverty 
constrains that woman to seek her husband again.’’ 
‘‘T will try,’’ he answers, ‘‘ to accomplish it; and I 
will sooner support her myself, in order to remove 
her from the temptation to offend God.’’ This is 
what he did, with a charity truly Christian; and he 
preserved his zeal for the Faith, even to the last 
sigh, as we shall remark in its place. 

A kinsman of his, named Ouechinkinaganich,— 
one of the worst characters that I have seen,— having 
ranged himself against the Faith, soon afterward 
became instructed, but his inconstancy threw him 
into revolt. The Faith, which had cast some roots 


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 31 


difoit-il, ie mourray bien toft, & ie ne fuis pas bap- 
tifé, helas! ott ira ma pauure ame, ie croy mon Pere, 
[249] ie croy c’ef{t tout de bon pourquoy ne me 
baptife-tu pas? que veux-tu de moy, ie fuis marry 
du paffé, ie detefte mes offences, ne me laiffe point 
fortir de cette vie fans baptefme. II dit cela d’vn 
tel accent que le Pere ne le piit éconduire, il-luy con- 
fere ce Sacrement de lumiere, qui luy donna tant de 
joye qu'elle rejailliffoit deffus fa face, il demeura en 
repos joiiiffant d’vne profonde paix, il paffa la nuict 
dans les loiianges de Dieu, & le matin fon ame puri- 
fiée dans le fang de l’agneau, les alla entonner auec 
les Choeurs des Anges & des bien-heureux. 

La diuerfité des nations qui fe r’affemble aux trois 
Riuieres, caufoit toutes les années ie ne {cay qu’elle 
confufion qui donnoit d’eftranges peines A ceux qui 
inftruifent les Sauuages, il n’eft pas croyable com- 
bien ces peuples fi differens fe font bien accordez fur 
la fin de l’Autonne, & vne grande partie de 1’Hyuer, 
cela ietta tous nos Francois dans vn profond eftonne- 
ment, Dieu qui preuoyoit leur maffacre les auoit mis 
dans ces difpofitions toutes extraordinaires, pour ne 
les appeller miraculeufes, deuant qu’ils fe fuffent 
iettez dedans les bois pour faire leur grande chaffe, 
[250] voicy l’ordre qu’ils auoient mis 4 leurs petites 
affaires. 

Ils auoient nommé Simon Piefcaret pour maintenir 
la paix entre les Francois & les Sauuages, entre les 
Hurons & les Algonquins qui fe rencontroient auec 
eux, ils luy donnerent charge de punir les delin- 
quans & nommément ceux qui commetteroient quel- 
que deffaut contre la Religion, c’e{t merueille comme 
il s’aquittoit fidelement de fon office. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 285 


into his soul, began little by little to spread; and 
that the more easily because disease, having pros- 
trated him, was bringing him near the fires of which 
he was afraid. One day, the Father, who sought 
only the opportunity to save him, having gone to see 
him with a Surgeon, the latter, feeling the patient’s 
pulse, said to him: ‘‘ Thou hast no life left; thou 
wilt soon die.’”’ At these words (Oh, change from 
the right hand of the most high!), that man begins 
to weep and to lament. ‘‘ What?’’ he said, ‘‘ I shall 
soon die? and I am not baptized. Alas! where will 
my poor soul go? I believe, my Father,—([249] I 
believe in good earnest: why dost thou not baptize 
me? What dost thou wish of me? I am grieved for 
the past; I detest my sins. Let me not leave this 
life without baptism.’’ He said that in such a tone 
that the Father could not deny him; he conferred 
on him that Sacrament of light, which gave him so 
much joy that it was reflected upon his face; he 
remained at rest, enjoying a profound peace. He 
spent the night in the praises of God; and in the 
morning his soul, purified in the blood of the lamb, 
went to sound them with the Choirs of the Angels 
and the blessed. 

The diversity of the nations which assemble at 
three Rivers occasioned, all these years, an inde- 
scribable confusion, which caused unusual difficulties 
to those who instruct the Savages. It,is incredible 
how well these tribes, so different, agreed toward 
the end of the Autumn, and a great part of the Win- 
ter; that caused profound astonishment to all our 
French. God, who foresaw the massacre of these 
people, had brought them into these altogether 
extraordinary states of mind,—not to call them 


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou.31 _ 


Bernard d’Agmang’y eftoit con{titué pour prendre 
garde fi tout le monde fe trouuoit aux prieres 
publiques, foit dans 1’Eglife foit dans leurs cabanes, 
& pour veiller fur ceux qui commetteroient quelque 
indecence en ce temps facré. Quoy qu’il ne fut pas 
du ‘nombre des anciens, fa ‘Foy & fa vaillance luy 
donnoient la hardieffe de tenir les plus huppez dans 
leur deuoir, ils drefferent vne cabane tout expres 
pour initruire 4 diuerfes bandes les hommes Chre- 
{tiens, & puis les femmes & en fuitte ceux qui 
n’ef{toient pas encor baptifez. Le commencement de 
leur chaffe d’Hyuer fut plaine de benediction, & du 
coité du Ciel & du cofté de la terre, les iugemens de 
Dieu font des abifmes, nous [251] auons veu par cy- 
deuant les fruits de ces grandes difpofitions cueillis 
par celuy a qui cette vigne appartenoit, mais par des 
mains perfides & defloyales: ainfi qu'il a plu 4 Dieu 
ainfi eft il arriué, fon fainct nom foit 4 iamais beni. 


1647] RELATION OF 1647 287 


miraculous,— before they had plunged into the 
woods in order to carry on their great hunt. [250] 
Now see what arrangement they had made in their 
little affairs. 

They had appointed Simon Piescaret to maintain 
the peace between the French and the Savages, and 
between the Hurons and the Algonquins who hap- 
pened to be with them; they gave him commission 
to punish the delinquents, and especially those who 
committed any fault against Religion. It is wonder- 
ful how faithfully he discharged his office. 

Bernard d’Agmangwy was appointed to notice 
whether every one were present at the public 
prayers, either in the Church or in their cabins; and 
to watch over those who committed any indecency at 
that sacred time. Although he was not of the num- 
ber of the elders, his Faith and his valor gave him 
the boldness to keep the most haughty to their duty; 
they erected a cabin expressly for instructing in 
various bands the Christian men, then the women, 
and, next, those who were not yet baptized. The 
beginning of their Winter hunt was full of blessing, 
both from Heaven and from the earth. The judg- 
ments of God are great deeps; we [251] have seen 
on previous occasions the fruits of those great 
preparations, gathered [not] by him to whom this vine 
belonged, but by treacherous and disloyal hands. As 
it has pleased God, so it has come about; may his 
holy name be forever blessed. 


bial Le a Sean, ae 
firee: inet r WT isis BA 0 7 aratat oat aL 
7 | res ‘ § i+} t} “eit ee ’ Wet “4 

. f A ii Tae te a ye) eet ce ps aR 
ay ras 1 he 


sah 
: i; ‘ 
*@. &Y 
’ ' Ae 
i 
' ‘: i 
: 
: 


trie’ 10) RATS) owe ORTON ay 


ba : aii : i Are A } iva oS Nba AOS 
ae toed orb Aieeticomdocey? ve dod be oui 


th dst) ore 1A ‘py a4 i), Dow, ; eats 
¢ 
Sekai 2 tayo tne a7 


NOTES TO VOL. XXXI 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 


1 (p. 17).— The narrative of Jogues’s capture which is given in 
our text is part of that written by him at the command of Father 
Buteux, his superior during his second sojourn in Canada (1645-46). 
It is mainly but another version of the account given by Jogues in 
a letter to his provincial, written from Rensselaerswyck, Aug. 5, 
1643. This letter was translated into Italian by Bressani, and given 
in his Breve Relatione, which we shall reproduce in the present 
series. 


2 (p. 57).—See Jogues’s own account of Goupil’s life and death, 
vol. xxviii., pp. 116-135. 
"3 (p. 61).— Castelogne: see vol. vi., mote 18. 


4 (p- 75).-— Jacques Bertrix, a Jesuit from 1580 until his death in 
1639, was, in 1626, soczus of Pierre Coton, provincial of France (vol. 
ii., mote 68); and, later, rector of the colleges at Bourges and Rouen. 

Estienne Binet was Jesuit provincial of France in 1636-38. 


5 (p- 79)-—St. Bernard of Clairvaux, as he is known, was born in 
togi, of a noble family in France, near Dijon. In 1113, he entered 
the convent of Citeaux, taking with him his five brothers and some 
twenty-five companions; and in the following year was sent with a 
colony of monks to found the convent of Clairvaux, of which he was 
the first abbot. Even at this early age, he was distinguished for his 
piety, devotion, and learning, and soon became a leader in the 
church; disputes, also, were often referred to him for arbitration. 
He is especially noted for his opposition to the doctrine of the Vir- 
gin’s Immaculate Conception, and his persecution of Abelard; he 
also inveighed against the errors and corruption which had crept 
into the Roman Church. Bernard died Aug. 20, 1153, leaving 160 
monasteries of his order, founded through his personal labors. He 
was canonized, twenty years later. He was the author of several 
religious works, the most widely-known being his Medztatzons, read 
alike by Catholics and Protestants. 


6 (p. 117).— This letter of Kieft, the Dutch governor, is printed 
by Martin in his Jogues (Shea’s trans.), p. 203, as copied from the 


290 LES RELATIONS DES J/ESUITES 


Ragueneau MS. of 1652 (vol. ix., zofe 40). The letter enclosed by 
Kieft was written by Jan Labatie, a Dutch interpreter at Fort 
Orange. Our text states that it was addressed to Bourdon, who had 
accompanied Jogues in his first embassy to the Mohawks; but 
Martin says that this is incorrect; ‘‘the address bears the name of 
M. Lamontagne, and the context shows that Labatie saw no way of 
communicating with the French colony.’”’ Reference is here made 
to Johannes la Montagne, one of the most prominent councilors of 
New Amsterdam. 

The allusion in the first sentence of Kieft’s letter is to the com- 
munication addressed to him by Montmagny, dated May 15, 1646, of 
which Jogues was the bearer as far as Fort Orange,—a statement 
made in the original, but omitted in Lalemant’s version. 

7 (p. 117).— These ‘‘nations’’ are simply the clans within the 
tribe (vol. xxix., zofe 6). The gift made by Jogues to the Wolf clan 
was probably because of his adoption therein, after the decision of 
his captors to spare his life. 

8 (p. 185).— For sketch of Druillettes, see vol. xxiii., zofe 11; for 
information regarding Kinibeki, vol. ii., mo¢es 2, 5. 

9 (p- 187).— Concerning the Capuchin missions, see vol. xxx., 
note 22. 

Io (p. 251).— Kinougamiou River is now known as Chicoutimi; 
Kinougamichich is now Lake Kenogamishish, or Little Lake, 
emptying into Lake St. John (the Piougamik Lake of De Quen), 
by Belle Riviére. 

Regarding the Porcupine tribe, see vol. xiv., mote 13; for sketch 
of De Quen, the discoverer of Lake St. John, vol. viii., moze 15. 

Ir (p. 261).— This chief—a nephew of Tesswehat, of the Island 
tribe — was the first savage to be baptized and married with church 
rites at Montreal; this occurred in the spring of 1643 (vol. xxiv., pp. 
231-233). His Indian name was that of his predecessors in office 
(vol. ix., zo¢e 18; vol. xii., mote 31),— given to him that they might 
be made to live again (vol. xvii., mofe 7). 


j . 
“ 
. 
: 
A 4 
; 
~ i 
' 


od te — on oot ee oe 
Bo, 8 8 8 Oe 84 BB. Bes Ue Os go 8 Ry 
65. 8)8 2.88, 8.8.4, 8.3.9, 8.8 i - 
&,8.6,8.9,8.5 2.8 


8.8 
5S. 8, 2.8 
re 
8.9.8 


1} 
tah : 4 34 
tee erate mnt ot cise : aoe: 
let sd hed ‘ = 7 Se ap ‘eo Y xT Te a8. Fy 
Saracacas aaa ye va ara ce Acai area 
: P ‘ Te ae ns 


a. 


nyizts 


‘ 


By 


* 


3 


Bs 


Pi 
mm 
us 


; Petit) meee ah 
Piet | Tm #jag8 88 tie ey ee 28.88 f(a 8i88 
ie 5, ree en : Be et ie : int ter at 


2. o, 5 


geanmue i a 
ee ia ot 
9 33y* rim i 
seseatite 


a 


ee 


e Boom: 


me 


; bt pre 
meat 


aoa - t ri ; 
5 ‘ 


