Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 12: Quebec, 1637
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits12jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits12jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits12jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 12 of 73.

---

tn — 


a 


















1 


^ 


^^ 
















re 

. 3 Hi 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS. 


VOL. XII 


idl 


r1 

f LIBRARY j 


^ 


m' 


The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No...^.. 


V/ 



. ]i^/ THE LAW SOCIETY 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XII 

QUEBEC: 1637 


CLEVELAND; ZbC J3urtOW0 J3tOtbCt0 

Company, publishers, mdcccxcviii 


Copyright, 1898 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators 


Assistant Editor 


Reuben Gold Thwaites 
f FiNLON Alexander 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
Hiram Allen Sober 
Emma Helen Blair 


Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XIl 

Preface to Volume XII . . . i 

Document: — 

XXIX. Relation de ce qui s'est passe en la 
Novvelle France, en I'annee 1637. 
[Conclusion of Part I. of the docu- 
ment.] Paul le Jeune; Cap Rouge, 
August 31, 1637, and Kebec, Sep- 
tember 1 1, 1637 . . .5 

Notes ...... 269 


PREFACE TO VOL. XII 


Following is a synopsis of the concluding portion 
of Part I. of Le Jeune's Relation of 1637, — the first 
installment thereof having been published in Vol. 
XI. of our series : 

XXIX. Le Jeune commences chap. x. of his Re- 
lation of 1637, by describing the character and prac- 
tices of the medicine men (whom the missionaries 
call " sorcerers "), and discusses the question whether 
these persons really have intercourse with the devil ; 
he inclines to the opinion that such is the case. He 
goes on to recount certain superstitious beliefs, cur- 
rent among the natives, regarding various matters — 
the genesis of thunder, eclipses, and other natural 
phenomena ; the condition of departed souls ; and the 
destiny of the human race. The curious legend of 
Tchakabech — a wonderful dwarf, who climbed to 
the sky, and caught the sun in a net — is also nar- 
rated. 

The writer then describes the foundation at Quebec 
of a seminary for Huron boys. After many difficul- 
ties, it was opened with three pupils, a number after- 
wards doubled. The seminary soon meets a great 
loss in the death of its two most promising lads, 
Tsiko and Satouta, as the result of over-eating. 
They, however, passed away in a pious frame of 
mind, and were baptized just before that event. The 


PREFACE TO VOL. XII 


remaining seminarists are doing well in both secular 
and religious studies, and prove surprisingly apt 
therein, as well as docile in behavior; they wish to 
remain always with the missionaries, who hope that 
these heretofore wild youths may be induced to be- 
come tillers of the soil, thus affording a needed ex- 
ample to their fellow-savages. 

Le Jeune recounts the hindrances to their work 
from the credulity of the natives, influenced by vari- 
ous false reports spread among them concerning the 
smallpox epidemic which, that year, had ravaged all 
Canada. This and other misfortunes were attributed 
to the French, and especially to the preachers of the 
new faith ; these are considered by the Indians as sor- 
cerers, who have bewitched them, and the tribesmen 
have sometimes threatened the lives of the Jesuits. 
The seminary is for a time in danger of ruin ; but a 
turn in affairs, with a novena of masses in honor of 
St. Ignace, restores it to safety ; and new pupils are 
sent down from the Huron country. 

Brebeuf has sent a letter of * ' instructions for the 
Fathers of our Society who shall be sent to the Hu- 
rons," which is here given in full. Among these, 
are injunctions to "never make the savages wait for 
you in embarking; take, at first, everything they 
offer, although you may not be able to eat it all, — 
for when one gets somewhat accustomed to it, there 
is not too much ; do not be at all annoying to even 
one of these barbarians ; do not ask too many ques- 
tions; try always to be cheerful;" etc. 

Le Jeune concludes his relation by the usual ' ' Jour- 
nal" of the year's events. In September he had 
gone with Montmagny to Three Rivers and the Ri- 
chelieu River; and in October he had visited Beau- 


PREFACE TO VOL. XII 


pre. Later, the Indian women come to him for 
instruction ; but he soon has to dismiss these visitors 
on account of the noise made by the babies that ac- 
company them. In April, a party of Algonkins and 
Montagnais go to attack the Iroquois, but are defeated, 
losing both their chiefs in battle. Makheabichti- 
chiou, the Montagnais chief, applies to Montmagny for 
aid, and is told that it will be given them, if they 
consent to settle at Three Rivers and give up their 
nomadic life. 

May day is celebrated by the light-hearted French, 
and a Maypole erected before the Quebec church — 
' ' the first May day on which New France has honored 
the Church," 

In June, a battle occurs between the Iroquets and 
Iroquois. The latter are defeated, losing thirteen 
prisoners, whom the Algonkins put to death with 
fearful tortures. 

In July, a party of Abenakis come to Quebec, to 
visit the Montagnais. In defiance of prohibitions 
from the latter and from the French, they go to Three 
Rivers, to barter for beaver skins ; but Montmagny 
compels them to return to their own country without 
any pelts, that they may not injure the trade of the 
Hundred Associates. The ships from France bring 
Fathers Claude Pijart and Claude Quentin. 

Le Jeune and Ragueneau attend Montmagny to 
Three Rivers, to meet the annual Huron fleet. Pierre 
Pijart meets them there, having come with the Hu- 
ron chief Aenons (mentioned by Brebeuf , in his Rela- 
tion of the preceding year, as a warm friend of the 
mission). This man, becoming sick on the journey, 
dies at Three Rivers, — meeting his end piously, 
after having been baptized. As the Huron canoes 


PREFACE TO VOL. XII 


Start to return, they are attacked by an ambushed 
band of Iroquois, numbering some 500 warriors. 
Some of the Hurons are captured ; but the others es- 
cape for their homeward journey, — Ragueneau being, 
fortunately, with this band. The Iroquois even 
threaten the French at Three Rivers; but Mont- 
magny keeps them at bay, and sends to Quebec for 
reinforcements, whereupon the Iroquois retire. Soon 
after, the French return to Quebec, arriving there in 
time for Le Jeune to send his letters to France by 
the returning ships. He finishes writing the Rela- 
tion, " on board the Sainte Marie," the ship that car- 
ried them back from Three Rivers. 

Arrived at Quebec, he writes a derniere lettre, as a 
postscript to the former; this letter closes Part I. of 
the present document. In this epistle he relates that 
he was obliged, four days after reaching Quebec, to 
return to Three Rivers, to meet another Huron fleet 
that had just arrived at that settlement. The Hurons 
bring with them new pupils for the seminary, — even 
more than the Fathers can accept. Letters from the 
Huron mission relate the calumnies current there re- 
garding the French, who are accused of being the 
cause of all the natives' misfortunes; but the mis- 
sionaries heed not their persecutions, and continue 
their work full of faith and ardor. Montmagny's 
lieutenant, De I'lsle, and Le Jeune hold a council 
with the savages at Three Rivers, making many 
speeches and presents ; the savages are thus pacified, 
and their friendship won. Le Jeune concludes by 
relating the particulars of the illness and death of 
Charles Turgis, the missionary at Miscou. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., December, 1897. 


XXIX (continued) 

Le Jeune's Relation, 1637 

ROUEN: JEAN LE BOULLENGER, 1638 


Chaps, x.-xv. of the Relation proper, of 1637, and Le 
Jeune's Derniere Lettre, completing Part \. of the document, 
are given in the present volume. The greater portion of 
Part IL ( Le Mercier's Huron Relation ) will occupy Vol- 
ume XIII. 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 12 


[154] CHAPITRE X. 

DES SORCIERS, ET S'lLS ONT COMMUNICATION AUEC 
LE DIABLE. 

LES Sauuages Montagnets donnent le nom de Ma- 
nitou k toute Nature fuperieure k rhomme, 
bonne ou mauuaife. C'efl pourquoy quand 
nous parlous de Dieu, ils le nomment par fois le bon 
Manitou, & quand nous parlons du Diable ils I'appel- 
lent le mef chant Manitou. Or tous ceux qui ont quel- 
que cognoiffance particuliere auec le Manitou bon ou 
mauuais fe nomment parmy eux Man[i]touifioueKlii. 
Et pour autant que ces gens-lk ne cognoillent que le 
mef chant Manitou, c'eft a dire le Diable, nous les ap- 
pellons Sorciers. Ce n'eft pas que le Diable fe com- 
munique k eux fi fenhblement qu'il fait aux Sorciers 
& aux Magiciens [155] d'Europe: mais nous n'auons 
point d' autre nom pour leur donner, veu mefmes 
qu' ils font quelques actions de vrays f orders: comme 
de fe faire mourir les vns les autres par forts ou de- 
firs, & imprecations, par prouocations du Manitou, 
par des poifons qu'ils compofent: Et cela efl fi ordi- 
naire parmy eux, du moins dans leur eftime, que ie 
n'en voy quafi mourir aucun, qui ne penfe eftre en- 
f orcein. C'efl pourquoy ils n'ont point d' autres Me- 
decins que ces Sorciers dont ils fe feruent pour rompre 
les forts defquels ils penfent eftre liez : en effet ils 
meurent quafi tous etiques, deffeichans en forte qu'ils 
n'ont plus que la peau & les os quand on les porte en 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 


[154] CHAPTER X. 

OF THE SORCERERS, AND WHETHER THEY HAVE COM- 
MUNICATION WITH THE DEVIL. 

THE Montagnet Savages give the name Manitou to 
all Nature superior to man, good or bad. This 
is why, when we speak of God, they sometimes 
call him the good Manitou; and, when we speak 
of the Devil, they call him the bad Manitou. Now 
all those who have any special acquaintance with 
the Manitou, be he good or bad, are called among 
them ' ' Man[i]touisiouekhi. ' ' And inasmuch as these 
persons know only the bad Manitou, that is, the Devil, 
we call them Sorcerers. Not that the Devil communi- 
cates with them as obviously as he does with the Sor- 
cerers and Magicians [155] of Europe; but we have 
no other name to give them, since they even do some 
of the acts of genuine sorcerers, — as, to kill one an- 
other by charms, or wishes, and imprecations, by the 
abetment of the Manitou, by poisons which they con- 
coct. And this is so common among them, at least 
in their own opinion, that I hardly ever see any of 
them die who does not think he has been bewitched. 
This is why they have no other Physicians than the 
Sorcerers, whom they employ to break the spells by 
which they think they are held. In fact, they nearly 
all die of consumption, becoming so thin that they 
are nothing but skin and bone when they are borne 
to the grave. Hence it arises that these sorcerers 
are greatly feared, and that one would not dare offend 


8 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

terre. D'icy prouient que ces f orders font extr^me- 
ment redoutez, & qu'on ne les oferoit fafcher poiirce 
qu'ils peuuent, "k ce qu'ils croyent, tuer les hommes 
par leur art. lis font auffi grandement recherchez, 
pour autant qu'ils ont pouuoir, "k ce qu'ils difent, 
d'ofter la maladie qu'on leur "k donnee. C'eft chofe 
pitoyable de voir comme le Diable fe ioue de ces 
peuples, lef quels s'efhonnent voyans que nous pro- 
uoquons & defions fi aifement leurs Sorciers. lis attri- 
buent cela a vne plus grande cognoiffance du Mani- 
tou. lis croyent qu'il yadeformais \sc. des hommes] 
parmy [156] eux, qui n'ont aucune communication 
auec le Diable. Ce font des longleurs qui font les 
mefmes fmgeries que les Sorciers pour tirer des autres 
quelques prefens. Comme nous crions certain iour 
contre la malice de's Sorciers, I'vn des Sauuages qui 
eftoyent prefens & qu'on tenoit pour tel, dit tout 
haut, pour moy ie ne f9ay point ces malices : mon 
pere battoit fon tambour aupres des malades, ie I'ay 
veu faire, ie fay comme luy: Voyla toute la finefle 
que i'y fgay. Ces pauures Barbares mourans tous les 
iours, difent qu'il n'y a plus de vray Man[i]touifiou 
parmy eux, c'eft a dire de vray Sorcier. 

C'eft r office du Sorcier d' interpreter les fonges, 
d'expliquer le chant, ou le rencontre des oifeaux. 
Les Romains auoyent les Augures qui faifoyent la 
mefme chofe. lis difent que quand on fonge qu'on 
a veu beaucoup de chair d'Orignac, que c'eft figne de 
vie: mais fi on a des fonges d'Ours, c'eft figne de 
mort. I'ay defia dit plufieurs fois que ces Charlatans 
chantent & battent leurs tambours pour guerir les 
malades, pour tuer des ennemis en guerre & prendre 
des animaux k la chafl^e. Pigarouich, c'eft le Sor- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 


them, because they can, the people believe, kill men 
by their arts. They are also greatly sought after, 
inasmuch as they can, it is said, remove disease which 
has been inflicted by them. It is a pitiable sight to 
see how the Devil makes sport of these people, who 
are astonished when they see how easily we challenge 
and defy their Sorcerers. They attribute it to a bet- 
ter acquaintance with the Manitou. They believe 
that there are men among [156] them who have no 
communication with the Devil. These are Jugglers 
who perform the same apish tricks as the Sorcerers, 
in order to get a few presents from others. One day, 
when we were inveighing against the malice of the 
Sorcerers, one of the Savages present, who was re- 
garded as such, exclaimed, "As for me, I know 
nothing about these tricks ; my father beat his drum 
near the sick; I have seen him do it, and I do as he 
did; this is all the artifice I understand." These 
poor Barbarians, perishing every day, say that there 
is no longer any real Man[i]touisiou among them, that 
is to say, no genuine Sorcerer. 

It is the office of the Sorcerer to interpret dreams, 
to explain the singing of birds, or encounters with 
them. The Romans had their Augurs, who did the 
same thing. They say that when one dreams he has 
seen a great deal of Moose meat, it is a sign of life ; 
but if one dreams of a Bear, it is a sign of death. I 
have already said several times that these Charlatans 
sing and beat their drums to cure the sick, to kill 
their enemies in war, and to capture animals in the 
hunt. Pigarouich, the Sorcerer of whom I have 
spoken above, sang to us [157] once the song he uses 
when he intends to go hunting. He uttered only 
these words, lagoua mou itoutaoui ne e-d, which he re- 


10 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

cier dont i'ay parle cy-deffus, nous chanta [157] vne 
fois la clianfon qu'il dit voulant aller a la chaffe. II 
ne prof era que ces paroles, lagoua mou itoutaouj ne e-^, 
qu'il rei'tera plufieurs fois auec diuers tons f ombres 
& pefans, quoy qu'affez doux h. I'oreille. Nous luy 
demandafmes pourquoy il chantoit cela pour prendre 
des animaux. I'ay veu, dit-il, en fonge cefte chan- 
fon, c'eft pourquoy ie I'ay retenue & m'en fuis feruy 
depuis. II nous pria fort de luy enfeigner ce qu'il 
falloit chanter pour guerir les malades, & pour avoir 
bonne chaffe, nous promettans de I'obferuer de poinct 
en poinct. 

Voicy I'vne des fa9ons dont fe feruent les mefchans 
pour tuer leurs compatriotes. Quelqu'vn m'a dit 
qii'ils s'eftoyent autresfois voulu feruir de ces diable- 
ries contre les Fran9ois, mais qu'ils n'auoyent peu 
les faire malades. Si le Chreftien fgauoit fa dignite, 
il en feroit grande eflime. Vn Sorcier voulant tuer 
quelqu'vn entre dans fon Tabernacle, fait venir les 
Genies du iour, ou ceux qui font le iour : ils les nom- 
ment ainfi, & nous les appellons des Diables. Eftans 
entrez il leur enuoye querir I'ame de celuy, ou de 
ceux qu'ils veulent tuer. Si ces perfonnes font d'au- 
tre Nation, ils changent leur nom, de peur que leurs 
parens en ayans le vent, [158] prennent vengeance 
du forcier. Ces Genies apportent ces pauures ames 
en forme de pierres, ou d'vne autre fagon. Alors le 
forcier les frappe a coups d'efpees, ou de haches: en 
forte que le fang en decoule fi fort, que I'efpee, ou 
la hache en demeure toute teinte & toute rouge. Cela 
fait, celuy dont on a frappe I'ame tombe malade & 
languit iufques a la mort. Voila comme ces pauures 
gens font abufez des Demons. Quand vn Sauuage 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 11 

peated several times in different tones, grave and 
heavy, although pleasant enough to the ear. We 
asked him why he sang this to capture animals. " I 
learned," said he, "this song in a dream; and that 
is why I have preserved and used it since." He re- 
quested us earnestly to teach him what must be sung 
to cure the sick, and to have a good chase, promising 
us to observe it exactly. 

Here is one of the methods employed by the wicked 
ones to kill their countrymen. Some one has told 
me that they had formerly tried to use these devil- 
tries against the French, but that they could not make 
them sick. If the Christian realized his own dignity 
he would hold it in high esteem. A Sorcerer, wish- 
ing to kill some one, enters his Tent and summons 
the Genii of the light, or those who make the light ; 
they call them thus, and we call them Devils. When 
they arrive, he sends them after the soul of him, or 
of those, whom they wish to kill. If these persons 
belong to another Nation, they change their name, 
lest their relatives, getting wind of the affair, [158] 
take vengeance on the sorcerer. The Genii bring 
these poor souls in the form of stones, or in some 
other shape. Then the sorcerer strikes them with 
blows of javelins or hatchets, so hard that the blood 
runs down from them, so copiously that the javelin 
or the hatchet remains all stained and red with it. 
When this is done, the one whose soul had been struck 
falls sick, and languishes unto death. See how these 
poor people are deluded by the Demons. When one 
Savage hates another, he employs a sorcerer to kill 
him in this way ; but they say that if the sick man 
happens to dream who it is that has bewitched him, 
he will get well and the sorcerer will die. These 


12 LES RELATIONS DES [^SUITES [Vol. 12 

en hayt quelqu'autre, il fe fert d'vn forcier pour le 
tiier en cefte maniere : mais ils difent que li le ma- 
lade vient "k fonger qui eft celuy qui I'a enf orcein, 
qu'il guerira & que le forcier mourra. Ces Genies 
ou faifeurs de lour leur font accroire qu'ils ayment 
beaucoup leur Nation, mais que le mef chant Manitou 
les empefche de leur procurer les biens qu'ils leur 
deCrent. 

lis s'imaginent que celuy qui fouhaitte ou defire 
la mort a vn autre, notamment s'il eft forcier, obtient 
fouuent r effect de fon delir: mais auffi le forcier qui 
a eu ce fouhait, meurt apres les autres. C'eft chofe 
eftrange de voir comme ces peuples s'accordent fi 
bien a I'exterieur, & comme ils fe hayffent ^ I'inte- 
rieur. lis ne fe faf client pas & [159] ne s'entrebat- 
tent pas fouuent : mais au f onds du coeur ils f e veu- 
lent bien du mal. le ne f9ay comme cela fe pent 
accorder auec le bien & le fecours qu'ils fe preflent 
les vns les autres. 

Vn de ces Sorciers ou longleurs m'a dit, que par- 
fois le diable parle ^ quelque Sauuage, on entend 
feulement fa voix fans rien voir. II luy dira par ex- 
emple : tu trouueras vne pierre fur la neige, ou en 
tel endroit, ou dans le coeur, ou dans I'efpaule ou 
autre partie d'vn Elan, ou d'vn autre animal: prends 
cefte pierre & tu feras heureux \ la chaffe : Celuy-cy 
m'alfeuroit qu'il auoit trouue vne de ces pierres dans 
le coeur d'vn Elan, & qu'il 1' auoit donne a vn Fran- 
9ois: C'eft pourquoy, difoit-il, ie ne tueray plus rien. 

II difoit encores que le Diable f e communiquoit par 
fonges. Vn Orignac fe prefentera ^ quelqu'vn en 
dormant, & luy dira, viens a moy : Le Sauuage ef ueil- 
le va chercher 1' Orignac qu'il a veu; I'ayant trouue, 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 13 

Genii, or makers of Light, induce them to believe 
that they greatly love their Nation, but that the wicked 
Manitou prevents them from procuring for it the 
blessings they would desire. 

They imagine that he who longs for, or desires the 
death of another, especially if he be a sorcerer, will 
often have his wish gratified ; but also the sorcerer 
who has had this wish dies after the others. It is 
strange to see how these people agree so well out- 
wardly, and how they hate each other within. They 
do not often get angry and [159] fight with one an- 
other, but in the depths of their hearts they intend a 
great deal of harm. I do not understand how this 
can be consistent with the kindness and assistance 
that they offer one another. 

One of these Sorcerers or Jugglers told me that oc- 
casionally the devil speaks to some Savage, who 
hears only his voice, without seeing any one. He 
will say to him, for example, "Thou wilt find a 
stone upon the snow, or in such a place, or in the 
heart, or the shoulder, or some other part of an Elk, 
or of another animal ; take this stone, and thou wilt 
be lucky in the chase. ' ' He assured me that he-had 
found one of these stones in the heart of an Elk, and 
that he had given it to a Frenchman. " Hence I 
shall kill nothing more," said he. 

He also said that the Devil made himself known 
through dreams. A Moose will present itself to a 
man in his sleep, and will say to him, " Come to me." 
The Savage, upon awaking, goes in search of the 
Moose he has seen. Having found it, if he hurls or 
launches his javelin upon it, the beast falls stone- 
dead. Opening it, he occasionally finds some hair 
or a stone in its body, which he takes and keeps with 


14 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.12 

s'il lance on darde fur luy fon efpee, la befte tombe 
roide mort: rouurant il trouue par fois du poll ou 
quelque pierre dans fon corps, il le prend & le gar- 
dent foigneufement pour eflre heureux a rencontrer 
& tuer force animaux. 

[i6o] De plus il adiouftoit que les Demons leur en- 
feignoyent ^ faire des vnguens de crapaux & de fer- 
pens pour faire mourir ceux qu'ils ont en hayne. S'il 
dit vray, il n'y a point de doute qu'ils n'ayent com- 
munication auec le Diable. le croy que de celle fu- 
perflition ou refuerie eft prouenue vne coullume 
qu'ont les Sauuages d'auoir vn fac fi particulier pour 
eux, que pas vn autre n'oferoit regarder dedans, ils 
s'en offenferoyent peut-eftre iufques ^ s'entretuer. 
lis ne veulent pas qu'on voye cefte pierre ou chofe 
femblable s'ils en ont: & I'vn d'eux me dit vn iour, 
en ce poinct tu cognoiftras fi vn Sauuage veut croire 
veritablement en Dieu, s'il te donne cefte pierre s'il 
en a quelqu'vne. 

MaKheabichtichiou m'a raconte qu'eftant encor 
jeune gargon & chaffant tout feul dans les bois, il vit 
venir k f oy vn Genie du iour : il eftoit veftu «& pare 
comme vn Hiroquois, il eftoit porte par I'air: le 
m'arreflay, difoit-il, tout remply de peur: il s'arrefta 
auffi vn pen loing de moy, toute la terre a I'entour de 
luy fembloit trembler : il me dit que ie ne craigniff e 
point, que ie ne mourrois pas fi toft, mais qu'il n'en 
feroit pas de mefme de mes gens. En fin, ie le vy 
enleuer [i6i] en I'air difparoifCant de deuant mes 
yeux. Ie retourne en la Cabanne tout efpouuante, 
ie raconte ce que i'auois veu "k mes compatriotes : ils 
prirent cela k manuals augure, & dirent que quelqu'vn 
d'eux feroit tue par leurs ennemis. Incontinent apres 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s7 15 

great care, that he may be fortunate in finding and 
killing many animals. 

[i6o] Moreover, he added that the Demons taught 
them to make ointments from toads and snakes, to 
cause the death of those whom they hate. If he tells 
the truth, there is no doubt they have communica- 
tion with the Devil. I believe that from this super- 
stition or notion has sprung a custom the Savages 
observe, of having a little bag so especially for their 
own use, that no one else would dare look inside of 
it; they would be greatly offended thereat, perhaps 
even so much as to kill the other. They are unwill- 
ing that any one should see this stone, or similar 
object, if they have one ; and one of them said to me 
one day, " In this way thou wilt know whether a 
Savage really desires to believe in God, if, having 
one of these stones, he gives it to thee." 

Makheabichtichiou has related to me that once, 
when he was still a young lad, and was hunting all 
alone in the woods, he saw coming toward him a 
Genie of light ; he was dressed and adorned like an 
Hiroquois, and was borne through the air. " I 
halted," said he, " filled with fear. He stopped 
also, at a little distance from me, and all the earth 
around him seemed to tremble. He told me that I 
should not fear; that I would not die so soon, but 
that it would not be the same with my people. At 
last I saw him rise [i6i] into the air, and disappear 
before my eyes. I returned to the Cabin, thorough- 
ly frightened, and related to my countrymen what I 
had seen ; they took it as a bad sign, and said that 
some one of them would be killed by their enemies. 
Immediately after this, some one came to tell them 
that one of their f asters, being separated from the 


16 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

on leur vint dire que I'vn de leurs jeufneurs fepar6 
des atitres auoit eft6 furpris & niaffacre des Hiroquois : 
Si la crainte qui fait voir a Timagination ce qui n'efl 
pas, ne troubloit point la fantafie de cet homme, fans 
doute le Diable luy eftoit apparu, quoy qu'il n'efloit 
point Sorcier. 

le me fuis laiffe dire par vn Sauuage que ils croient 
que les Genies du lour ont les yeux de trauers, I'vn 
haut & r autre bas. Come i'ay parl6 d'eux aux autres 
Relatios, ie n'en dirai point dauantage en ce lieu. 
Refpondons a la queftion propofee en tefte de ce 
Chapitre, f9auoir, fi ces Sorciers ont vraiement com- 
munication auec le Diable? Si ce que ie viens de 
dire eft veritable, il ne faut point douter que les De- 
mons ne fe manifeftent par fois h. eux : mais i'ay creu 
iufques a maintenant qu'en effect le diable les abu- 
foit, rempliffant leur entendement d'erreurs, & leur 
volonte de malice. Mais ie me perfuadois qu'il ne 
fe [162] defcouuroit point fenfiblement, & que tout 
ce que faifoyent leiirs Sorciers n'eftoient que des lon- 
gleries qu'ils inuentoient, pour en tirer quelque prof- 
fit. Ie commance maintenant a douter, voire a pan- 
cher de I'autre cofte, pour les raifons fuiuantes. 

Fay dit autresfois que voulans confulter les Genies 
du lour, ils dreffoient des Tabernacles, fichans des 
pieux en terre, les lians & arreftans auec vn cercle, 
puis les entourans de robes ou de couuertures : quad 
le forcier eft entre la dedans & qu'il a chante 8c inuo- 
que ces Genies ou Demons, le Tabernacle commance 
h. branfler: Or ie me figurois que le Sorcier I'efbran- 
floit, mais Makheabichtichiou me parlant a cceur ou- 
uert, & le Sorcier Pigarouich me defcouurant auec 
grande fmcerit^ toutes fes malices, m'a protefte que 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 17 

others, had been surprised and murdered by the Hi- 
roquois." If fear, which makes the imagination see 
what is not there, did not trouble this man's fancy, 
then doubtless the Devil appeared to him, although 
he is not a Sorcerer. 

I have been told by a Savage that they think the 
eyes of the Genii of Light are in an oblique line, one 
above and the other below. As I have spoken of 
them in other Relations, I will say no more about 
them here. Let us answer the question proposed in 
the heading of this Chapter, namely, whether these 
Sorcerers really have communication with the Devil. 
If what I am about to tell is true, there is no doubt 
that the Demons sometimes manifest themselves to 
them ; but I have believed until now that in reality 
the devil deluded them, filling their understandings 
with error and their wills with malice, though I per- 
suaded myself that he did not [162] reveal himself 
visibly, and that all the things their Sorcerers did 
were only Deceptions they contrived, in order to de- 
rive therefrom some profit. I am now beginning to 
doubt, even to incline to the other side, for the fol- 
lowing reasons : 

I have said before that, when they intended to con- 
sult the Genii of Light, they prepared Tents by 
driving stakes into the ground, binding and fastening 
them with a hoop, then covering them with robes or 
blankets. When the sorcerer has entered therein, 
and has sung and invoked these Genii or Demons, 
the Tent begins to shake. Now I imagined that the 
Sorcerer shook it ; but Makheabichtichiou, speaking 
tome frankly, and the Sorcerer Pigarouich, revealing 
to me with great sincerity all his knaveries, protested 
to me that it was not the Sorcerer who moved this 


18 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

ce n'efloit point le Sorcier qui moiiuoit cet edifice, 
mais vn vent qui entroit fort promptement & rude- 
ment : & pour preuue de cecy, ils me dif oient que le 
Tabernacle eft par fois fi fort, qu'k peine vn homme 
le peut-il faire remuer, & cependant tu le verras, fi 
tu y veux aflifter, s'agiter & fe courber de part & 
d' autre, auec vne telle impetuofit6 & par vn fi long 
temps, que tu feras contraint de confefl^er [163] qu'il 
n'y a force d'homme qui puiffe faire ce mouuement. 
Hyuernant auec les Sauuages ie vy faire cefte diable- 
rie, ie vy fuer de grands ieunes hommes drefl!ans ce 
Tabernacle ; ie le vy branfler, non pas auec la vio- 
lence qu'ils me difent, mais affez fort, & fi long temps, 
que ie m'eflonnois qu'vn homme eufl eu tant de force 
pour refifter a ce trauail. Neantmoins comme ie 
n'efprouuai point fi cefte tour ronde eftoit fortement 
plantee, ie me figurai que c' eftoit le longleur qui 
Tefbranfloit. 

De plus, ceux que ie viens de nommer, & d'autres, 
m'ont fortement affeure que le haut de ce Taber- 
nacle, efleue de fept pieds ou enuiron, eft par fois 
port6 iufques h. terre, tant il eft puifl!amment agite. 
Item, qu'on voioit quelquesfois les bras & les jambes 
du Sorcier couche fur terre, fortir par le bas du Ta- 
bernacle, pendant que le haut fe mouuoit tres-forte- 
ment. Que le Demon ou le vent qui entre dans cefte 
maifonnette, s'y iette auec vne telle impetuofite, & 
trouble tellement le forcier, luy reprefentant qu'il va 
tomber dans vne abyfme, la terre luy paroifl^ant comme 
s'entr'ouurir, qu'il fort tout efpouuante de fon Taber- 
nacle, qui ne laiffe pas de branfler par quelque temps 
en fon [164] abfence. AnifKaouasKoufit, c'eft le nom 
d'vn ieune Sauuage, nous a afleure qu'Etouet, c'eft 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 19 

edifice, but a strong wind which suddenly and vio- 
lently rushed in. And, as proof of this, they told 
me that the Tent is sometimes so firm that a man can 
hardly move it, * ' Yet thou wilt see it, if thou pleas- 
est to be present there, shake and bend from one side 
to the other, with such violence and for so long a 
time, that thou wilt be compelled to confess [163] 
that there is no human strength that could cause this 
movement. ' ' While passing the winter with the Sav- 
ages, I saw them perform this deviltry ; I saw strong 
young men sweat in erecting this Tent; I saw it 
shake, not with the violence they say it does, but 
forcibly enough, and for so long a time that I was 
surprised that a man had strength enough to endure 
such exertion. Nevertheless, as I did not try this 
round tower to see if it was firmly fixed, I imagined 
that it was the Juggler who shook it. 

Furthermore, those whom I have just named, and 
others, have stoutly asserted to me that the top of 
this Tent, seven feet high or thereabout, is some- 
times bent even to the ground, so powerfully is it 
agitated. Also, that the arms and legs of the Sor- 
cerer, who was stretched upon the ground, were 
sometimes seen to emerge at the bottom of the Tent, 
while the top was shaking violently. They say that 
the Demon or the wind which enters this little house 
rushes in with such force, and so disturbs the sorcer- 
er, making him think he is going to fall into an 
abyss, the earth appearing to open under him, that 
he emerges in terror from his Tent, which goes on 
shaking for some time after he [164] has left it. 
Aniskaouaskousit, a young Savage, has assured us 
that Etouet, the Captain at Tadoussac, having gone 
last Autumn into his Apitouagan, — this is the name 


20 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

le Capitaine de Tadouffac, eflat entre rAutomne 
paffe dans fon Apitouagan, c'efl ainfi qu'ils nomment 
ce Tabernacle, fon brai6 fut iette hors du Tabernacle 
par le haut & fon corps enleti6, en forte que ceux qui 
regarderent dedans ne le virent plus: qu'en fin on 
I'entendit retomber, faifant vn cri plaintif, comme 
d'vn homme qui relfent le coup de fa cheute: Eflant 
forti de cefte diablerie, il dit qu'il ne f9auoit ou il 
auoit efte, ny ce qui s'eftoit paffe. 

Le mefme m'a dit fort familierement, car il eftoit 
noftre domeftique, & nous I'inftruifions a la Foy, 
qu' eflant fur vn Lac glace pendant I'hyuer auec vn 
autre ieune homme, ils virent vn forcier entrer en 
fureur, lequel fut enleue fans fgauoir comment, car 
il difparut tout a coup de deuant leurs yeux, fur le 
foir on trouua fa robe fans fon corps: k quelques 
iours de la il reuint tout haraffe, fans pouuoir dire ou 
il auoit eft6, ny ce qu'il auoit fait. I'ay dit cy-deffus 
que par fois dans leurs grandes famines quelqu'vn 
d'eux difparoiffoit fans iamais plus retourner: ils 
m'ont affeure que cela fe faifoit & que c' eftoit vn 
tres-mauuais augure pour eux, que [165] alors le Ma- 
nitou les confommoit. 

De plus ce mefme ieune Sauuage dit auoir veu de 
fes yeux le Sorcier Karigouan, auec lequel i'ay hy- 
uern6, tirer vne pierre de fon fac, la mettre fur vn 
bouclier & le brufler: il m'affeuroit qu'on n' auoit 
point chauffe cefte pierre. 

En fin, MaKheabichtichiou m'a rapporte que les 
Algonquins, qui font plus haut fur le grand fleuue, 
deuinent par Pyromantie : mais pource qu'elle n'eft 
point differente de celle des Hiroquois, dont le Pere 
Breboeuf a parle en fes Relations, ie ne I'expliquerai 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 21 

they give the Tent, — his clout was thrown out of it 
at the top, and his body was lifted up, so that those 
who looked inside no longer saw him ; finally, he 
was heard to fall down, uttering a plaintive cry like 
a man who feels the shock of a fall. Having emerged 
from these enchantments, he said that he did not 
know where he had been or what had taken place. 

The same one related to me, very freely, for he 
was our domestic and we were instructing him in the 
Faith, that once during the winter, when he and an- 
other young man were on a frozen Lake, they saw a 
sorcerer enter into a state of frenzy. He was lifted 
up, and without any one knowing how, for he sud- 
denly disappeared from before their eyes. Towards 
evening, his robe was found, but not his body ; a few 
days later, he returned utterly worn out, and could 
not tell where he had been, or what he had done. I 
have said before that sometimes, during their great 
famines, some of them disappear never to return; 
they have assured me that this did happen, and that 
it was a very bad sign for them, for [165] then the 
Manitou finished them. 

Furthermore, this same young Savage said that he 
had seen with his own eyes the Sorcerer Karigouan, 
with whom I passed a winter, draw a stone from his 
bag, put it upon a shield and burn it ; he assured me 
that the stone had not been heated. 

Finally, Makheabichtichiou has informed me that 
the Algonquins, who are higher up on the great 
river, divine by Pyromancy. But, as it is not differ- 
ent from that of the Hiroquois, of which Father Bre- 
boeuf has spoken in his Relations, I will not explain 
it further. All these arguments show that it is prob- 
able that the Devil sometimes has visible communi- 


22 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.12 

pas dauantage. Toutes ces raifons font voir qu'il eft 
probable que le Diable fe communiqiie par fois fenfi- 
blement ^ ces pauures Barbares ; lef quels ont bef oin 
d'vn grand fecours, & temporel & fpirituel, pour les 
tirer de I'efclauage qui les oppreffe. Depuis la con- 
clufion de ce Chapitre le Pere Pijart nouuellement 
arriue des Hurons, m'a apporte vne pierre, que le P. 
Breboeuf m'enuoie, laquelle a ferui k vn Sorcier en 
cefte forte : cet homme voulant penf er vn malade, 
mit cefte pierre au feu, I'y laifTa fi long temps qu'elle 
eftoit toute rouge, & toute enflammee. II entre ce- 
pendant en fureur, retire du feu cefte pierre ardante, 
la [i66] prend auec les dents, court comme vn enrag6 
par la Cabane, rejette la pierre encore toute eftince- 
lante fans en auoir receu aucun dommage. Le Pere 
Pijart fut tefmoin oculaire de cefte action, & comme 
la pierre eft affez groffe, il voulut voir fi elle luy au- 
roit point brufl6 les 16vres ou la langue, il trouua que 
non, ce qui luy fit croire que cela ne fe pou[u]oit faire 
fans r operation de quelque Demon. I'enuoie la 
mefme pierre ^ V. R. laquelle eft encore marquee des 
dents du Sorcier: comme elle eftoit en feu, elle eftoit 
comme calcinee, & plus tendre : c'eft pourquoy la f er- 
rant auec les dents il y a fait les deux brefches qui 
paroillent. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 28 

cation with these poor Barbarians, who have need of 
great assistance, both temporal and spiritual, to draw 
them out of the slavery which oppresses them. Since 
the conclusion of this Chapter, Father Pijart, who 
recently arrived from the Hurons, has brought me a 
stone that Father Breboeuf sent me, which was used 
by a Sorcerer in this way. This man, wishing to 
cure a sick person, placed the stone in the fire, and 
left it there a long time, until it was red-hot. Mean- 
while, he entered in a frenzy, drew this burning 
stone out of the fire, [i66] took it between his teeth, 
ran like a madman through the Cabin, and cast the 
still glowing stone away without having received 
any injury therefrom. Father Pijart was an eye- 
witness of this act; and, as the stone is quite large, 
he wished to see if it had not burned his lips or 
tongue; he found it had not. This made him be- 
lieve that it could not have been done without the 
agency of some Demon. I send to Your Reverence 
this same stone, which is still marked with the Sor- 
cerer's teeth. As it had been in the fire, it was, as 
it were, calcined and made softer ; hence, in pressing 
it with the teeth, he made the two notches which 
appear. 


24 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 


[167] CHAPITRE XL 

DE LEVRS COVSTVMES, & DE LEUR CROYANCE. 

IE ne pretends pas rei'terer ce que i'ay dit autres- 
fois fur ce fujet: mais i'ay deffein d'adioufter 
feulement ce que i'en ay appris de nouueau. Si 
i'vfe de redite, c'efl pour auoir oublie ce que i'ay 
defia dit, ou pour I'expliquer plus amplement. Entre 
les fuperftitions dont fe feruent les malades pour 
guerir, ils font quelquesfois demeurer aupres d'eux 
quelque homme, ou femme, ou enfant, s'imaginans 
que cela les aide k recouurer leur fante. lis font li 
condefcendans en ce poinct, que £1 vn malade demande 
quelque perfonne pour demeurer en cefte forte au- 
pres de luy, il eft tellement obei, qu'on croiroit ce- 
luy-la bien ingrat qui luy refuferoit cefte courtoifie, 
quoy que bien ennuieufe : car il faut demeurer Ik fai- 
neant [168] fans autre exercice que d'eftre alTis aupres 
du patient. 

lis font prendre des vomitoires a leurs malades, ils 
font boiiillir des feuilles ou branches de Cedre, dont 
ils boiuent le jus contre la diffenterie. Le P. Buteux 
dit auoir veu guerir vn enfant en fort peu de temps, 
ayant prins cefte medecine. 

Ils iettent le fiel de I'Ours dans le feu, pour voir 
s'il petillera, conjecturans par ce bruit s'ils en pren- 
dront d'autres. 

Le P. Buteux demandant k vn Sauuage pourquoy 
ils plantoient leurs ef pees la pointe en haut : II repar- 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 25 


[167] CHAPTER XL 

OF THEIR CUSTOMS AND THEIR BELIEF. 

I DO not propose to repeat what I have previously- 
said upon this subject, but intend to add only 
what new things I have learned about it. If I 
use repetitions, it is because I have forgotten what I 
have already told, or that I may explain it more ful- 
ly. Among the superstitions used to cure the sick, 
they sometimes induce a man, a woman, or a child 
to remain near them, imagining that this helps them 
to recover their health. They are so compliant in 
this respect that, if a sick person asks some one to 
stay near him in this way, he is so readily obeyed 
that one who should refuse him this kind office would 
be considered very ungrateful, although it is a very 
tiresome duty; for he must remain there idle, [168] 
without other occupation than to sit beside the patient. 

They have their patients take emetics ; dysentery 
is cured by drinking the juice of leaves or branches 
of the Cedar, which have been boiled.^ Father Bu- 
teux said he saw a child recover very soon, after 
having taken this medicine. 

They throw the Bear's gall into the fire to see if it 
will crackle, conjecturing from this noise whether 
they will capture others. 

Father Buteux asked a Savage why they fixed their 
javelins point upward. He replied that, as the thun- 
der had intelligence, it would, upon seeing these 
naked javelins, turn aside, and would be very careful 


26 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

tit que le tonnerre ayant de I'efprit, & voyant ces 
efpees nues fe detourneroit, & fe donneroit bien de 
garde d'approcher de leurs cabanes. Le P. deman- 
dant ^ vn autre d'oii venoit ce grand bruit du ton- 
nerre, c'eft, dit il, le Manitou qui veut vomir vne 
grofle couleuure qu'il a auallee, & a cbaque effort de 
fon eftomach il fait ce grand tintamarre que nous en- 
tendons. En effect, ils m'ont fouuent dit que la foudre 
n'eftoit autre chofe que des couleuures qui tomboient 
fur la terre : ce qu'ils recognoiffent aux arbres frap- 
pez de la foudre: car, difent-ils, on y remarque la 
figure de ces animaux comme imprimee par replis & 
[169] tortuemens k I'entour de I'arbre. On a trouu6 
mefme de grandes couleuures fous ces arbres, difent- 
ils: Voilk vne Philofophie bien nouuelle. 

Les Sauuages ayant eu du pire en guerre, enuoient 
deuant quelqu'vn de leurs gens comme vn Heraut, 
qui crie k pleine tefte fi toft qu'il apper9oit les Ca- 
banes, pronon9ant les noms de ceux qui font prins ou 
tuez : les filles & les femmes entendans nommer leurs 
parens, refpandent leurs cheueux fur leur vifage, & 
fondent toutes en larmes, fe peignant de noir. 

Quand ils retournent de la guerre, ils pendent a vn 
arbre, d'ou ils commencent k toumer vifage pour fe 
retirer en leur pays, autant de petits baflons qu'ils 
eftoyent de foldats, peut-eftre pour donner a co- 
gnoiflre k leurs ennemis, s'ils paffent en ces lieux-1^, 
combien d'hommes ils eftoient, & iufques ou ils font 
venus, afin de les intimider. le n'en f9ay point 
d' autre raifon. 

Dans le conflict de leurs guerres, ils crient a chaque 
fois que quelqu'vn de leurs ennemis eft frapp6, s'ils 
s'en appercoiuent : le me doute que c'eft pour fe re- 
fiouyr & fe donner courage. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r637 27 

not to come near their cabins. When the Father 
asked another one whence came that great clap of 
thunder, " Itis," he said, " the Manitou who wishes 
to vomit up a great serpent he has swallowed ; and 
at every effort of his stomach he makes this great 
uproar that we hear. ' ' In fact, they have often told 
me that flashes of lightning were nothing but serpents 
falling upon the ground, which they discover from 
the trees struck by lightning. ' ' For, ' ' say they, 
' ' here is seen the shape of those creatures, stamped, 
as it were, in sinuous and [169] crooked lines around 
the tree. Large serpents have even been found un- 
der these trees," they say.^ A new kind of Philos- 
ophy, truly! 

When the Savages have been defeated in war, 
some one of their number is sent on ahead as a Her- 
ald, who cries out in a loud voice as soon as he per- 
ceives the Cabins, uttering the names of those who 
have been captured or killed. The daughters and 
wives, hearing their relatives named, spread their 
hair over their faces, burst into tears, and paint them- 
selves black. 

When they return from war, they hang to a tree, 
at the spot where they begin to turn back to retire 
into their own country, as many little sticks as there 
were soldiers, perhaps to let their enemies know, if 
they pass by those places, how many men there 
were, and how far they went, in order to intimidate 
them. I know no other reason for it. 

In their wars, while fighting, they shout every 
time one of their enemies is struck, if they perceive 
it. I am inclined to think this is to cheer themselves 
and increase their own courage. 

[170] They believe the earth is entirely flat, and 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

[170] lis croient quelaterre eft toute platte, qu'elle 
a fes extr^mitez coiippees perpendiculairement, & 
que les ames s'en vont "k 1' extremity qui eft au Soleil 
couchant : Qu'elles drellent leurs Cabannes fur le bord 
du grand precipice que fait la terre, au fond duquel il 
n'y a que des eaux. Ces ames paffent le temps k 
danfer, mais quelquesfois badinant fur la riue de ce 
precipice, quelqu'vne tombe dedans cet abyfme, & 
auffi toft elle eft changee en poiffon. II eft vrai qu'il 
y a des arbres fur ces bords, mais ils font fi polls que 
les ames ne s'y peuuent que tres-difficilement ag- 
graflfer. Fay defia dit qu'ils s'imaginent que les 
ames boiuent & mangent. I'adioufte encor que ils 
s'imaginent qu'elles fe marient, & que les enfans qui 
meurent icy, font enfans en ce bout du monde, & de- 
uiennent grands, comme ils auroient fait au pays oil 
ils font nez. Or cefte creance toute pleine de badi- 
nerie, nous donne beau moien de les couaincre d'er- 
reur. Premierement, nous leur difons que fi la terre 
eftoit toute platte, elle feroit bien toft inondee du 
flux de r Ocean. De plus, nous leur faifons entendre 
qu'il feroit iour en mefme temps par tout le mode. 
Or eft-il qu'eftant icy Midy, il eft nuict [171] en 
France pendant I'Hyuer. Nous les affeurons que nos 
vaiffeaux voguent au Soleil leuant & couchant, & 
qu'on ne rencontre point les pays des ames. lis 
s'eftonnet quand on leur parle des Antipodes, & s'en 
rient, aulTi bien que d'autres de plus bel efprit qu'eux 
s'en font autresfois mocquez. 

Nous leur difons fouuent que fi les ames man- 
geoient, qu'elles vieilliroient & mourroient: or eft-il 
qu'ils les croient immortelles. En outre, fi elles fe 
marioient & engendroient, comme elles ne meurent 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 29 

that its ends are cut off perpendicularly ; that souls 
go away to the end which is at the setting Sun, 
and that they build their Cabins upon the edge of 
the great precipice which the earth forms, at the base 
of which there is nothing but water. These souls 
pass the time in dancing ; but sometimes, when they 
are sporting on the edge of this precipice, some one 
falls into the abyss, and is immediately changed into 
a fish. To be sure, there are trees along these shores, 
but they are so slippery that souls can grasp them 
only with great difficulty. I have already said that 
they imagine that the souls eat and drink, I may 
also add that they fancy that they marry, and that 
the children who die here are children in that end of 
the world, and grow up just as they would have done 
in the country where they were born. Now this be- 
lief, so full of nonsense, gives us good opportunities 
to convince them of error. First, we tell them that, 
if the earth were entirely flat, it would soon be 
flooded by the tide of the Ocean. Moreover, we show 
them that it would be day at the same time all over 
the world. But as it is now, when it is Noon here it 
is night [171] in France, during the Winter. We as- 
sure them that our ships sail to the rising and the 
setting Sun, and that the land of souls has never 
been encountered. They are astonished when one 
speaks to them of the Antipodes, and laugh at the 
idea, just as others, of better understanding than 
these, scoffed at it in former times. 

We often tell them that, if souls ate, they would 
grow old and die ; how is it that they believe them 
to be immortal? Besides, if they married and had 
children, as they do not die, the whole earth would 
soon be filled with souls ; we would run across them 


80 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.12 

point, toute la terre feroit bien toft remplie d'ames, 
on les rencontreroit par tout: car depuis le temps 
qu'elles vont en ces pais du Couchant, elles fe fe- 
roient infiniement multipliees. lis congoiuent bien 
ces raifons & autres que nous leur alleguos. 

Voicy vne admirable raifon de I'Eclypfe du Soleil, 
ils difent qu'il y a vn certain, foit homme, foit autre 
creature, qui ayme fort les hommes; il eft fafcli6 
contre vne tres-mefchante femme, & par fois mefme 
il luy prend enuie de la tuer: mais il en eft retenu 
pource qu'il tueroit le iour, & introduiroit fur la terre 
vne nuit eternelle : cefte mefchate eft la femme du 
Manitou, c'eft elle qui fait mourir les Sauuages. Le 
Soleil eft fon coeur [172] & par confequent qui la tue- 
roit feroit mourir le Soleil pour vn iamais. Par fois 
c6t homme fe faf chant contr'elle, & la mena9ant de 
mort, fon coeur tremble, & paflit: & c'eft de 1^, 
difent-ils, qu'on void quand le Soleil s'efclypfe. 
Quand le Soleil de luftice ne luit pas dans vne ame, 
elle ne cognoift pas mefme le Soleil qui efclaire fes 
yeux. Ils varient fi fort en leur creance que on ne 
pent rien auoir de certain de ce qu'ils croient: helas! 
le moien de trouuer de la certitude dedans I'erreur. 

lis croient, ^ ce que m'a rapporte Makheabichti- 
chiou, que tout le monde mourra, except^ deux perfon- 
nes, vn homme & vne femme : que tons les animaux 
mourront auffi, horfmis deux de chaque efpece: & 
que le monde fe repeuplera de nouueau, de ce peu 
qui doit refter. 

le leur ay ouy raconter quantity de fables, du moins 
ie me figure que les plus fenfez d'extr'eux tiennent 
ces comptes pour des fables. I 'en toucherai vne 
feule, qui me femble fort ridicule: lis content qu'vn 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 81 

everywhere ; for, since the time they came into this 
land of the Setting Sun, they would have multiplied 
infinitely. They comprehend these arguments well, 
and others that we urge upon them. 

Here is an admirable reason for the Eclipse of the 
Sun. They say there is a certain being, either a 
man or some other creature, who has a great love for 
men. He is angry at a very wicked woman, and at 
times even conceives the desire to kill her. But he 
is withheld, for in doing so he would kill the day and 
would bring upon the earth an eternal night. This 
wicked creature is the wife of the Manitou, she who 
makes the Savages die. The Sun is her heart, [172] 
and hence he who should slay her would kill the Sun 
forever. Sometimes this man, getting angry at her, 
threatens her with death ; her heart trembles and 
grows feeble ; and it is at such a time, they say, that 
we see the Sun eclipsed. When the Sun of Justice 
does not illuminate a soul, it knows not even the Sun 
which lightens its eyes. They vary so greatly in 
their belief that one can have no certainty about it. 
Alas, how can we find truth in the midst of error? 

They believe, according to what Makheabichti- 
chiou told me, that all the people in the world will 
die, except two, a man and a woman ; that all the 
animals will die also, except two of each kind ; and 
that the world will be peopled anew from the few 
that are to remain. 

I have heard them tell a number of fables, at least 
I imagine the most intelligent among them regard 
these tales as fables. I will consider only one, which 
seems to me very ridiculous. They relate that, a 
man and a woman being in the woods, a Bear came, 
which threw itself upon the man, and strangled and 


32 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

homme & vne femme eftans dans les bois, vn Ours 
vint qui fe ietta fur 1 'homme, I'eftrangla & le man- 
gea: Vn lievre d'efpouuantable grandeur fe jetta fur 
la [173] femme & la deuora: II ne toucha point neant- 
moins k fon enfant qu'elle portoit encor dans fon 
ventre, dont elle eftoit prefle d'accoucher: Vne fem- 
me palTant en cet endroict vn peu apres ce carnage, 
fut fort eftonnee voyant cet enfant viuant, elle le 
prend, I'efleue comme fon fils, I'appellant neantmoins 
fon petit frere : auquel elle donna le nom de Tchaka- 
bech, c^t enfant ne creut point en grandeur, demeu- 
rant toufiours comme vn enfant au maillot: mais il 
paruint k vne force fi efpouuantable, que les arbres 
feruoient de flefcbes a fon arc. le ferois trop long de 
raconter toutes les auantures de c6t homme-enfant : il 
tua rOurs qui auoit deuore fon pere, & luy trouua 
encore dans Teftomacli fa mouftache toute entiere: il 
fit auffi mourir le grand Lievre qui auoit mange fa 
mere, ce qu'il recogneut a la troulTe de cheueux qu'il 
luy trouua dans le ventre. Ce grand Lievre eftoit 
quelque Genie du lour, car ils nomment I'vn de ces 
Genies, qu'ils difent efkre grand caufer, du nom de 
Michtabouchiou, c'eft a dire grand Lievre. Pour 
abreger, ce Tchakabech voulant aller au Ciel, monte 
fur vn arbre, eftant quafi a la cime il fouffle contre cet 
arbre, lequel [174] s'efleua & grandit au fouffle de ce 
petit Nain, plus il montoit, plus il fouffloit & plus 
I'arbre s'efleuoit & grandiffoit, en forte qu'il paruint 
iufques au Ciel : oil il trouua le plus beau pays du 
monde ; tout y eftoit rauiffant, la terre excellente, & 
les arbres tres-beaux: ayant bien tout confider6, il 
vint rapporter la nouuelle de tout cecy k fa foeur pour 
I'induire h. monter au Ciel & y demeurer ^ iamais. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 83 

ate him. A hare of formidable size threw itself upon 
the [173] woman and devoured her. However, it did 
not touch the child that she still bore in her womb, 
of which she was about to be delivered, A woman, 
going past that place shortly after this carnage, was 
greatly astonished to see this child living. She took 
him, raised him as her son, but called him her little 
brother, giving him the name Tchakabech. This 
child did not grow in stature, always remaining like 
a child in swaddling clothes ; but he attained a 
strength so formidable, that he used the trees as ar- 
rows for his bow. It would take too long to recount 
all the adventures of this man-child. He killed the 
Bear which had devoured his father, and found in 
its stomach, his hair still preserved. He also killed 
the great Hare which had eaten his mother, whom 
he recognized from the bunch of hair that he found 
in its belly. This great Hare was some Genie of 
Light, for they call one of these Genii, who they say 
is a great talker, by the name of Michtabouchiou, 
meaning " great Hare."^ To be brief, this Tchaka- 
bech, wishing to go to the Sky, climbed a tree. 
When he had almost reached the top, he blew against 
this tree, which [174] grew tall and large at the 
breath of this little Dwarf; the more he climbed, 
the more he blew, and the taller and larger became 
the tree, so that he reached the Sky, where he found 
the loveliest country in the world; everything was 
delightful there, the land excellent, and the trees 
very beautiful. After having thoroughly viewed 
everything, he came to bring the news of all this to 
his sister, that he might induce her to mount to the 
Sky and remain there forever. Then he came down 
this tree, building Cabins at intervals in its branches. 



34 LES RELA TIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 12 

II defcend done par c6t arbre, dreffant dans fes bran- 
ches des Cabanes d'efpaces en efpaces, ou il logeroit 
fa foeur en remontant. Sa foeur au commencement 
faifoit la retiue, mais il luy reprefenta fi fortement 
la beauts de ce pays-Ik, qn'elle prit refolution de fur- 
monter la difficulte du chemin. Elle mene auec foy 
vn fien petit nepueu, & monte fur c6t arbre, TchaKa- 
bech allant apres k deffein de les retenir s'ils tom- 
boient, a chaqne gifte ils tronuoient totifiours leur 
Cabane faite, ce qui les foulageoit fort. En fin, ils 
arriuerent an Ciel, & afin que perfonne ne les fuiuift, 
c6t enfant rompit le bout de I'arbre iufques alTez bas, 
en fort qu'on ne peuft atteindre de Ik au Ciel. Apres 
auoir tout admire le pays, TchaKabech s'en va pour 
tendre des lacets, ou comme les [175] autres les nom- 
ment des colets, efperant, peut-eftre, de prendre quel- 
que animal : la nuict f e leuant pour aller voir a fes 
lacets, il les vit tout en feu, & n'en ofa approcher: 
II retourne a fa foeur, & luy dit, ma foeur, ie ne fgay 
qu'il y a dans mes lacets, ie ne voy qu'vn grand feu, 
duquel ie n'ay of^ approcher: Sa foeur fe doutant de 
ce que c'eftoit, luy dit, ah! mon frere, quel mal- 
heur, affeur^ment que vous aurez prins le Soleil au 
lacet: allez vifle le defgager, peut-eflre que marchant 
la nuict, il s'eft jette Ik dedans fans y penfer : Tchaka- 
bech bien eflonn6, s'en retourne, & ayant bien confi- 
der6, trouue qu'en verit6 il auoit prins le Soleil au 
colet: il s'efforce de le deliurer, mais il n'en ofe ap- 
procher. II rencontre par cas fortuit vne petite fou- 
ris, la prend, la fouffle & la faict deuenir fi grande 
qu'il s'en feruit pour d'etendre fes colets, & defga- 
ger le Soleil: lequel fe trouuant libre, continua fa 
courfe k I'ordinaire. Pendant qu'il fut arrefte dans 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j637 35 

where he would have his sister lodge while ascend- 
ing. His sister at first would not consent; but he 
represented to her so strongly the beauty of that 
land, that she decided to overcome the difficulties of 
the way. She took with her one of her little neph- 
ews, and went up this tree, Tchakabech going behind 
to catch them if they should fall. At every halt they 
found their Cabin ready, which was a great comfort 
to them. Finally, they reached the Sky ; and, that 
no one might follow them, this child broke off the 
end of the tree just low enough so that no one could 
reach the Sky from thence. After they had thorough- 
ly admired the country, Tchakabech went to spread 
the nets, or as [175] others call them, the snares, 
hoping, perhaps, to trap some animal. In the night, 
when he arose to go and look at his nets, he saw them 
all on fire, and did not dare go near them. He re- 
turns to his sister and says to her, ' ' My sister, I do 
not know what there is in my nets ; I saw only a 
great fire, which I did not dare approach," His sis- 
ter, suspecting what it was, said to him, "Ah! my 
brother, what a misfortune ! you have surely taken 
the Sun in the net ; go quickly and unloose it ; per- 
haps, walking in the night, it fell in there unwitting- 
ly. " Tchakabech, greatly astonished, goes back ; and, 
after having looked carefully, finds that he has in- 
deed captured the Sun in his net ; he tries to free it, 
but he dares not go near. By chance he encounters 
a little mouse ; he takes it, blows upon it, and makes 
it become so large that he uses it to extend his nets, 
and to let out the Sun, which, finding itself free, 
continues its usual course. While it was caught in 
these toils, there was no day here below on the earth ; 
how long this lasted, or what became of the child. 


36 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.12 


ces lacets, le iour manqua 9k bas en terre : de dire 
combien de temps, ny qu'eft deuenu cet enfant, c'efl 
ce qu'ils ne fgauent pas & qu'ils ne f9auroient f9auoir. 
le me fuis laiffe dire que les [176] Mahometans croient 
que la Lune tomba jadis du Ciel & fe rompit. Ma- 
homet voulant remedier k ce defordre la prit, la fit 
paffer par fa manche, & par ce mouuement la refit & 
la renuoia en fa place. Ce conte de la Lune efl au- 
tant croiable que celuy que ie viens de rapporter du 
Soleil. Pour conclufion, Beati oculi qui vident qu(B nos 
videmus. Bien heureux ceux que la bont6 de Dieu a 
appell6 k I'efchole de la verity. Que rendront-ils k fa 
Majefte pour ce bien faict? Vne conftance en la Foy, 
& vne refolution ferme de viure conform6ment aux 
maximes qu'elle nous enf eigne, puis que ceux qui ne 
fuiuent pas les fentiers que ce flambeau leur defcou- 
ure, meritent de cheminer dans les tenebres. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 37 

they do not and cannot say.^ I may mention that 
the [176] Mahometans believe that the Moon once 
fell from the Sky and was broken. Mahomet, wish- 
ing to remedy this disturbance, took it, passed it 
through his sleeve, and by this action repaired it, 
and sent it back to its place. This story of the Moon 
is as credible as the one I have just related about the 
Sun. In conclusion, Bcati oculi qui vident gtice nos vi- 
demus. Blessed indeed are those whom the goodness 
of God has called to the school of truth. What shall 
they render to his Majesty for this blessing? A con- 
stancy in the Faith, and a firm resolution to live 
conformably to the maxims that it teaches us, since 
those who do not follow the paths that this torch re- 
veals to them deserve to walk in darkness. 


38 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 


[177] CHAPITRE XII. 

DV SEMINAIRE DES HURONS. 

NOSTRE glorieux Pere & fondateur S. Ignace 
eftant inform^ de diuers endroits que fes en- 
fans trouuoyent de grandes contrarietez dans 
leurs fainctes entreprifes s'en refioiiiffoit fort, difant, 
que les affaires de Dieu c6nien9oient par les difficul- 
tez & par les baffeffes, & en fin aboutifloient k la 
gloire : iufques-lk qu'il eut mauuaife opinion de I'efla- 
bliffement de noftre Compagnie en quelque Prouince, 
apprenant qu'on I'auoit receue auec tant d'honneur 
& auec vne fi generale approbation de leurs fonctions, 
qu'ils n'auoyent trouue aucune refiftance : Si les Croix 
& les peines font les fondemens les plus folides de 
r edifice, qui doit porter fon faifte iufques au Ciel, le 
Seminaire des Hurons eft tres-bien eflabli : fa naif- 
fance eft pleine de trauaux, fon premier progrez de 
trifteffe, ie prie Dieu que fa fin f oit accompagnee [178] 
de ioye & de repos. Voflre R. nous ayat refcri que 
nous nous efforgaffions de commencer vn Seminaire, 
Dieu femblant difpofer quelques bonnes ames a le 
fonder, i'en efcriuis au R. Pere de Brebceuf, afin qu'il 
nous enuoiaft de petits Hurons: aulfi toft nos Peres 
qui font en ce pays-la fe mettent en deuoir d'en trou- 
uer, ils en choififfent entre vn grand nombre vne 
douzaine de fort gentils : deftinent le P. Antoine Da- 
niel pour auoir foing de ces jeunes plantes: Les con- 
clufions eftoient prifes fur le pays, le P. s'embarque 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 39 


[177] CHAPTER XII. 

OF THE SEMINARY FOR THE HURONS. 

OUR glorious Father and founder, St. Ignace, 
upon being informed from various places that 
his children were meeting with great opposi- 
tion in their holy enterprises, rejoiced greatly there- 
at, saying that the affairs of God were wont to begin 
in trials and humiliations, and finally would end in 
glory, — even going so far as to have a poor opinion 
of the establishment of our Society in any Province, 
if he learned that it had been received with so much 
honor, and with so general an approbation of its 
functions, that it had met with no resistance. If 
Crosses and trials are the most solid foundations of 
the edifice which is to raise its pinnacle to Heaven, 
the Seminary for the Hurons is very well established. 
Its birth is full of labor, its first steps full of sadness ; 
I pray God that its end may be accompanied [178] 
by joy and peace. Your Reverence having written 
to us that we should try to begin a Seminary, as God 
seemed to be disposing some good souls to endow it, 
I wrote to Reverend Father de Breboeuf to send us 
some little Hurons. Our Fathers who are in that 
country immediately set about finding some ; from a 
great number of children, they chose twelve very 
fine lads, and appointed Father Antoine Daniel to 
care for these young plants. The final arrangements 
were made throughout the country ; the Father em- 
barked to come down here, hoping his Pupils would 


40 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.12 

pour defcendre qk bas, efperant que fes Efcholiers ne 
manqueroient pas de predre place chacun dans les Ca- 
nots de fes parens ou de fes amis. Car de venir tous 
enfemble das vn mefme vaiffeau, ils ne fgauroient, 
n'aians point d'autres nauires ni chalouppes que leurs 
canots d'efcorce qui font fort petits; Mais quad il 
fut queftio de feparer les enfans de leur mere, la ten- 
dreffe extraordinaire que les femmes Sauuages ont 
pour leurs enfans arrefla tout & penfa eflouffer noflre 
deffein en fa naifCance. Vn braue ieune homme, 
nomm6 Satouta, s'efloit ioint au Pere, auec parole de 
demeurer auec lui & mefme de palTer en France fi on 
le defiroit. Celui-ci fut feul conftant, perfeuerat au 
milieu des plus grandes difficultez, dans la refolution 
qu'il auoit prife de fe faire inflruire & de demeurer 
[179] auec nous. Quand le Pere fut arriue aux trois 
Riuieres, ou de long temps nous I'attendions auec les 
douze petits Hurons, comme on nous I'auoit mande, 
nous fufmes bien eftonnez lors que nous le vifmes 
auec vn feul ieune home, defia affez age. Nous ne 
perdifmes pas courage pour cefte premiere difficulte, 
nous auons recours k Dieu & aux hommes. Tout 
concourt du cofte des Fran9ois a auoir quelques ieunes 
Hurons qui eftoient defcendus auec leurs parens. 
Monfieur le General s'y emploie auec affection, comme 
ie I'efcriuis en ma derniere Relation. Le lieur Ni- 
colet & les autres Truchemens font ce qu'ils peuuent, 
on parle tantoft a vn Sauuage, tatofl a 1' autre, on 
fait des prefens, le P. Daniel prie, coniure les enfans 
de demeurer, & leurs parens de leur donner cefle li- 
berty; Cela en esbranla quelques- vns : mais s'ils re- 
floiet au matin auec nous, le foir ils s'en alloiet. En 
fin, comme c'eft la couftume de ces peuples de tenir 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 41 

not fail to take their places, each in the Canoe of his 
parents or friends. For to come all together in one 
vessel would have been impossible, as they have no 
other boats or shallops than their bark canoes, which 
are very small. But when it came to separating the 
children from their mothers, the extraordinary ten- 
derness which the Savage women have for their chil- 
dren stopped all proceedings, and nearly smothered 
our project in its birth. One worthy youth, named 
Satouta, clung to the Father, promising to remain 
with him and even to go to France, if it were desired. 
This youth alone was faithful, persevering in the 
midst of the greatest trials in his determination to 
be instructed and to remain [179] with us. When 
the Father reached the three Rivers, where we had 
long been expecting him with the twelve little Hu- 
rons, who they had sent us word were coming, we 
were much surprised when we saw him with a single 
lad, already nearly grown. We did not lose courage 
on account of this first difficulty ; we had recourse to 
God and to men. All the French, on their side, en- 
deavor to get some young Hurons who had come 
down with their relatives. Monsieur the Comman- 
dant kindly uses his influence to this end, as I wrote 
in my last Relation. Sieur Nicolet and the other 
Interpreters do what they can ; they address now one 
Savage, now another; presents are made. Father 
Daniel begs and conjures the children to remain, and 
their parents to give them permission to do so. Some 
were influenced in this way ; but if they were with 
us in the morning, in the evening they were gone. 
Finally, as these tribes are accustomed to hold an as- 
sembly or council with our French before returning 
to their own country, Monsieur the Commandant had 


42 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

vne affemblee ou confeil auec nos Frangois deuant 
que de s'en retoumer en leur pays, Mofieur le Gene- 
ral fit affeoir aupres de foi Satonta, c'eftoit le feul 
conftant & perfeuerat dans fon delTein, I'honora de- 
uant tous les Principaux de fa Nation, luy attribiia 
le feftin qu'il leur fit, & enuoia quelques prefens ^ 
fes amis. Tout cela fit dire aux Hurons que [i8o] 
nous aimions leur Nation : mais ne les fit point re- 
foudre fur I'heure k nous lailTerleurs enfans. L' Af- 
femblee partie nous perdions quafi Tefperance de pou- 
uoir commencer le Seminaire cefte annee-1^: quad 
tout h. coup noflre Seigneur follicit^ par les prieres 
de I'ancienne & de la nouuelle France toucbe I'vn de 
ces Barbares, lui fait tenir vne affemblee auec les 
principaux Hurons, en laquelle il harangua fi forte- 
ment en faueur du Seminaire & du bien qu'ils pou- 
uoient efperer de I'alliance des Frangois, que les Ca- 
pitaines enjoignirent h. deux ieunes bommes de tenir 
Compagnie a Satouta, & demeurer auec nous. Vous 
pouuez penfer fi cefte nouuelle nous releua le cou- 
rage, & fi elle anima noftre efperance qui commen- 
9oit bien fort h. chaceler. On peut dire auec grande 
verity que Deus deducit ad inferos & reduci[t,'] at to Hit & 
deprimit, exaltat & Jiumiliat\ Nous voila done auec 
trois ieunes hommes au lieu de douze petits Semina- 
riftes que nous attendions. Comme le temps prefl!oit, 
Monfieur le General nous embarque auec ces trois 
ieunes hommes pour defcendre a Kebec. A peine 
eftions nous partis, qu 'vne autre bande d'Hurons arri- 
uant aux trois Riuieres & apprenant ce qui s'eftoit 
paffe, en dona encore trois autres que le fieur Nicolet 
amena k Kebec. Quelque temps apres d'autres [i8i] 
Hurons furuenans au mefme lieu des trois Riuieres, 


1637] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 « 

Satouta sit near him, — lie being the only one who had 
been faithful and persevering in his purpose, — hon- 
ored him before all the Chief Men of his Nation, as- 
cribed to him the feast he made for them, and sent 
some presents to his friends. All this showed the 
Hurons that [i8o] we loved their Nation, but it did 
not make them immediately decide to let us have 
their children. The Assembly over, we were almost 
losing hope of being able to begin the Seminary that 
year ; when all at once our Lord, solicited by the 
prayers of old and of new France, moved one of 
these Barbarians, and caused him to hold a council 
with the chief Hurons, in which he spoke so eloquent- 
ly in favor of the Seminary, and of the benefit they 
might expect from the alliance with the French, that 
the Captains enjoined two young men to bear Satouta 
Company, and remain with us. You can imagine 
how this news raised our courage and animated our 
hopes, which, indeed, were now faltering. We can 
most truly say that Deus deducit ad inferos et reduci\t,'\ 
attollit et deprimit, exaltat et hiimiliat. Here we are 
now with three young men instead of twelve little 
Seminarists, as we expected. As time was pressing 
us, Monsieur the Commandant gave us passage with 
these three lads to go down to Kebec. Scarcely had 
we departed, when another band of Hurons, arriving 
at the three Rivers, and learning what had happened, 
gave us three more, whom sieur Nicolet brought to 
Kebec. A little while afterwards, other [i8i] Hu- 
rons, arriving unexpectedly at this same place, the 
three Rivers, offered some of their children also, say- 
ing that nothing else was talked about along the 
great river but the decision the Hurons had made to 
stay with the French, — that it would be discussed a 


44 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

offrirent encor de leurs enfans, difans, qu'on ne par- 
loit d' autre chofe fur le grand fleuue que de la refo- 
lution qu'auoient prife les Hurons de demeurer auec 
les Frangois, qu'il en feroit fort parle dans le pays & 
qu'on s'en refioiiiroit grandement; Or comme il n'y 
auoit perfonne qui peuft tenir Confeil auec eux, les 
Truchemens eftans defcendus a Kebeo. on ne paffa 
pas outre. Ce fut vne prouidence de Dieu qu'on n'en 
enuoya pas dauantage, car nous euffions manque de 
viures & d'autres chofes neceffaires pour les entre- 
tenir. 

Voila done le Seminaire commence auec de tres- 
grandes difficultez, on carefTe ces ieunes gens, on les 
fait habiller k la Frangoife, on les fournit de linge & 
d'autres chofes neceffaires. On les loge en vn lieu 
deftine pour ce fuiet auec le Pere qui doit auoir foing 
d'eux. II seble que tout eft en paix: Nos Fra9ois 
prennet plaifir de voir de ieunes Sauuages jaloux de 
viure ^ la Fran9oife, chacun fembloit fort content. 
Qui loge fon contentement ailleurs qu'en la Croix ne 
fera pas long temps fans trifteffe; I'vn de ces ieunes 
homes eftant d'vne humeur melancholique, demande 
bien toft apres fon arriuee de s'en retourner en fon 
pays, ne pouuant, difoit-il s'accorder auec les autres. 
Sur ces entrefaites [128 i.e., 182] vn Capitaine Hu- 
ron ayant appris aux trois Riuieres les nouuelles du 
Seminaire, defcendit k Kebec pour voir ces ieunes 
gens & les encourager de bien faire, notamment Tvn 
de fes neueux qui eftoit de la bande. Ce bon vieil- 
lard (car il eft bien aage de foixante ans) aiant veu 
I'ordre qu'on gardoit au Seminaire, & le traitement 
qu'on faifoit ^ ceux de fa Nation, s'efcria. 6! qu'il 
fera parle de tout ceci en noftre pais : mes enfans que 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 46 

great deal in the country, and would be the subject 
of great rejoicing. Now since there was no one who 
could hold a Council with them, the Interpreters 
having gone down to Kebec, nothing more was done. 
It was a providence of God that no more of them 
were sent, for we would have lacked food and other 
necessaries to maintain them. 

Behold, then, our Seminary begun under very 
great difficulties. These young men are petted, are 
dressed in the French way, are furnished with linen 
and other necessary articles. They are lodged in a 
place selected for this purpose, with the Father who 
is to have the care of them. All seems to be going 
along peacefully. Our French people are pleased at 
seeing these young Savages anxious to live after the 
French fashion ; all seemed very contented. He who 
places his contentment elsewhere than in the Cross 
will not long be without sadness. One of these young 
men, being of a melancholy disposition, asks, soon 
after his arrival, to return to his own country, saying 
he could not agree with the others. In the mean- 
while, [128 i.e., 182] a Huron Captain, having heard 
at the three Rivers about the Seminary, came down 
to Kebec to see these young men, and encourage them 
to do well, especially one of his nephews who was 
among them. This good old man (for he is fully 
sixty years old) having seen what order was observed 
at the Seminary, and the treatment received by those 
of his Nation, exclaimed, "Oh, how they will talk 
about all this in our country ! My children, how for- 
tunate you are to be made so comfortable ! Among 
us we do not know what it is to have food so well 
prepared as this that they give you ; come, have cour- 
age, be peaceable and very obedient; observe care- 


46 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 12 

voTis efles heureux d'eftre li bien accommodez : nous 
ne f9ations que c'eft parmi nous de ces viandes li bien 
appreftees qu'on vous donne, prennez courage, foiez 
paifibles & bien obeiffans, remarquez bien tout ce 
que vous verrez de bon parmi les Francois, pour vous 
en feruir par apres en noflre pays, vous pouuez afpi- 
rer aux plus grandes charges, car d'orefnauant on 
fera eftat de vous. Le pauure ieune homme qui s'en 
vouloit aller, voiant qu'on loiioit fi fort ceux qui de- 
meuroient, chageoit de volont6 ; mais comme on I'eut 
recogneu plus inconftant & moins accort que les 
autres, on fut bien aife qu'il s'en retournafl. Le 
Pere Daniel luy demanda en la prefence de fes Com- 
patriotes, s'il fe plaignoit de nous autres: Non pas, 
dit-il, car vous m'auez bien aime, mais i'ai de la peine 
k m'accorder auec mes Compagnons: II eftoit venu 
fans habits & fans [183] robe, on le renuoia bien cou- 
uert. On fait de grands frais pour gaigner ces Na- 
tions. Quand les Sauuages vous donnent leurs en- 
fans, il les donnent tons nuds comme la main, c'eft "k 
dire qu'auffi toft que vous les auez il les faut faire 
habiller & rendre leurs robbes ^ leurs parens. II les 
faut bien loger & bien nourrir, & encore ces Barbares 
fe perfuadent-ils que vous leur eftes beaucoup obli- 
gez. I'adioufte bien dauantage, il faut ordinaire- 
ment faire des prefens k leurs parens, & s'ils font 
pres de vous il les faut aider a viure vne partie du 
temps. C'eft la couftume qu'ils ont entr'eux, fi quel- 
qu'vn voiant fon ami fans enfans, lui en donne des 
Hens pour le confoler: I'autre ne maque pas de faire 
quelque prefent aux parens ou amis de 1 'enfant. 
Cefle couftume nous fera faire de grades defpences, 
mais Dieu y pouruoira s'il lui plaift. Pour retour- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 47 

fully all you shall see that is good among the French, 
to make use of it afterwards in our country ; you can 
aspire to the highest positions there, for from now on 
you will be held in great esteem." The poor young 
man who desired to go away, seeing how greatly 
those who remained were praised, changed his mind ; 
but, as he was seen to be more unstable and less 
compliant than the others, we were glad to have him 
return. Father Daniel asked him in the presence of 
his Countrymen if he had any fault to find with us. 
" No," said he, " for you have shown great affection 
for me ; but it is hard for me to agree with my Com- 
panions." He had come without clothes, and with- 
out [183] a robe; he was sent away well dressed. 
Great expenses are incurred, in order to win these 
Nations. When the Savages give you their children, 
they give them as naked as the hand, — that is, as 
soon as you get them you must have them dressed, 
and give their robes back to their parents. They 
must be well lodged and well fed ; and yet these Bar- 
barians imagine that you are under great obligations 
to them. I add still more; generally, presents must 
be made to their parents, and, if they dwell near you, 
you must help them to live, part of the time. It is 
a custom among them that, if a man sees one of his 
friends without children, he gives him one of his 
own, to console him ; the latter does not fail to make 
a present to the parents or friends of the child. This 
custom will entail great expenses upon us ; but God 
will provide therefor, if it please him. To return to 
our subject; after this young man departed, the 
others acted so well, and lived so peaceably among 
themselves, that we were all consoled. They were 
contented, cheerful, obedient; in short, it seemed to 


48 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

ner ^ noftre propos, ce ieune homme eftant parti, 
les autres qui refterent faifoient fi bien & viuoient fi 
paifiblement par entr'eux, que nous en eflions tous 
confolez. lis eftoient contens, ioyeux, obeiffans, 
bref il nous fembloit quafi que toutes les tempeftes 
ejfloiet paffees, & qu'apres les pluies venoit le beau 
temps fur noftre horifon. Mais voila que I'vn des 
principaux d'entr'eux eft faifi tout a coup d'vne forte 
fievre continue, on le fait penfer, on le traitte auec 
vn [184] tres-grand foing, on le veille iour & nuict, 
on prie Dieu pour lui auec ardeur : apres tout cela ce 
pauure ieune homme aiant long teps fouffert tobe en 
I'agonie, le Pere I'Allemant le baptifa, & peu apres 
il rend I'efprit h. Dieu. Helas ! que cefte mort nous 
fut fenfible, notamment au Pere Daniel qui a foing 
d'eux: il eftoit iour & nuict aupres de fon malade, 
luy rendoit tous les offices de charite polTible, mais fi 
fallut il le voir mourir deuant fes yeux. 

A peine celuy-cy eftoit-il enterre que Satouta tombe 
dans vne mefme maladie; le pauure ieune homme 
eftoit vn exemple d'humilit^ & de patience en fon 
mal, d'vn naturel graue & ferieux : on le fait purger 
& feigner auffi bie que fon compagnon, on apporte 
toute forte de diligence pour luy fauuer la vie : mais 
noftre Seigneur le voulant auoir, on luy confera le 
fainct Baptefme, qui luy donna bien toft I'entree 
dedans le Ciel. Voila les deux yeux de noftre Semi- 
naire efteins en peu de temps, les deux colones ren- 
uerfees. Car fans contrafte ils eftoient doiiez de tres- 
belles qualitez pour des Sauuages. Adorans les 
confeils de Dieu dans lef quels nous ne voions goutte, 
le Pere Daniel entr'autres les fecouroit & veilloit fi 
affiduellement qu'il en tomba malade dans vne fi 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 49 

US that nearly all the tempests had passed over, and 
that, after the rains, fine weather was appearing upon 
our horizon. But lo, one of the most prominent of 
them is suddenly taken with a severe and protracted 
fever. He is nursed and treated with the [184] 
greatest care ; he is watched day and night ; fervent 
prayers are offered for him to God ; but after all that, 
the poor young man, having suffered a long time, 
sinks into the last agony, is baptized by Father I'Al- 
lemant, and shortly after renders up his soul to God. 
Alas ! how keenly we felt this death ! especially Fa- 
ther Daniel, who has charge of these boys; he stayed 
near his patient day and night, rendered him all pos- 
sible offices of charity, but had to see him die before 
his eyes. 

Scarcely was this one buried, when Satouta was 
stricken with the same disease. The poor young 
man was a model of humility and patience in his 
sickness, being naturally grave and serious. He was 
purged and bled, as his companion had been, and the 
most assiduous care was employed to save his life ; 
but, as our Lord wished to have him, holy Baptism 
was conferred upon him, which soon gave him ad- 
mission to Heaven. Behold the two eyes of our 
Seminary extinguished within a brief period, the two 
columns overthrown. For they were unmistakably 
endowed with very excellent qualities, for Savages. 
Adoring the counsels of God, though to us they were 
dark. Father Daniel, among others, nursed and 
watched over them so assiduously that he became 
very ill, so ill that we almost thought the Master 
would die [185] with his Disciples. Our Lord re- 
stored him to us to take care of the others, who have 


50 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.12 

grande maladie, qu'on croioit quafi que le Mai fire 
tnourroit [185] auec fes Efcholiers. Noftre Seigneur 
nous le rendit, pour gouuerner les autres qui ont eu 
quelques legeres maladies : mais Dieu merci ils font 
en bonne fant6. 

II eft vrai que la mort de ces deux ieunes homes 
nous affligeoit, voians qu'ils donnoient de tres-grandes 
efperances de fecourir vn iour puifTamment leur Na- 
tion : mais vne circonflance arriuee vn peu auant leur 
trefpas nous iettoit tous dans de grandes aprehen- 
fions : TfiKo (c'efloit le nom du premier mort) fe riant 
auec vn de nos Fra9ois fort eftourdi, celuy-cy fe faf- 
cha & commenga a quereller le Huron, ils en vindrent 
iufques 'k fe donner quelques coups de poing, non 
pas dommageables comme il eft aife k penf er : neant- 
moins le Huron tombant malade vn peu apres, accu- 
foit le Fran9ois, fe plaignat des coups qu'il auoit 
receu k la tefte, on le vifita & ne trouua-on aucune ve- 
flige ni marque dangereufe : En eff et il eft mort non 
pas de cefte batterie fort legere, mais de trop grande 
repletion, comme ie diray maintenant. Neantmoins 
comme il auoit raconte a fes camarades ce qui lui 
efloit arriue auec ce Fran9ois nous eftios das de 
grandes apprehenfions du f uccez de cefte affaire : car 
fi vne fois les Hurons fe fuflent perfuadez que leurs 
enfans eftoient morts par quelque violence, ils au- 
roient tue autat de Fran9ois que [186] on en auroit 
peu enuoier en leur pays. La mefme chofe arriua "k 
la mort de Satouta. Ce pauure ieune gargon carrefTant 
vn Frangois & lui pafTant la main fur le vifage, 1' au- 
tre prenant cela k affrot, comme s'il lui euft voulu re- 
leuer le nez le repoulla auec cholere : quelques- vns 
mefme ont dit qu'il le frappa; c'efl pourquoi le Hu- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 61 

had some slight attacks of illness, but are now, thank 
God, in good health. 

Truly, the death of these two young men was a 
great affliction to us, since they had occasioned very 
strong hopes that some day they would effectively 
succor their Nation; but a circumstance which oc- 
curred just before their death caused in us all serious 
apprehension. Tsiko (the first one who died) jesting 
with one of our hot-headed Frenchmen, the latter 
became angry and began to quarrel with the Huron ; 
they went so far in this as to strike each other sev- 
eral times with their fists, — not dangerous blows, as 
can easily be imagined. Nevertheless, the Huron, 
falling ill soon after, accused the Frenchman, com- 
plaining of the blows he had received on his head. 
He was examined, and no traces of them, or danger- 
ous indications, were found. In fact, he died not 
from this very slight boxing-bout, but from over- 
eating, as I shall now relate. Nevertheless, as he 
had told his comrades what had happened with the 
Frenchman, we were in great dread as to the outcome 
of this affair ; for if once the Hurons had gotten the 
idea that their children died through some act of vio- 
lence, they would have killed as many Frenchmen 
as [i86] might have been sent to their country. The 
same thing occurred at the death of Satouta. This 
poor boy caressing a Frenchman, and passing his 
hand over his face, the other took it as an affront, 
thinking he was trying to pull his nose; he pushed 
him angrily away, and some say he struck him ; so 
the Huron picked up some stones to defend himself, 
and the Frenchman seized his sword, as it was re- 
ported to me. I declare that he did not give him 
any blow capable of hurting him much ; yet, as this 


52 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.12 

ron print des pierres pour le deffendre, & le Fran9ois 
mit la main ^ I'efpee, k ce qu'on m'a rapport^. I'ad- 
uoue qu'il ne lui donna aucun coup capable de I'offen- 
f er notablement : toutesf ois comme ce pauure Huron 
tomba malade & mourut incontinent apres : nous nous 
vifmes faills d'vne nouuelle crainte, d'autant qu'vn 
Algonquin, qui cognoift les parens de Satouta, fe 
trouua prefent a toute cefle tragedie bien mal ioiiee. 
Ces deux actions eftoient capables de tout perdre. 
Noftre Seigneur y a remedie par fa bonte. Qu'il foit 
benit a iamais des Anges & des homes & de toutes 
les creatures. I'eftois aux trois Riuieres auec Mon- 
fieur le Gouuerneur quand ie receus ces funeftes nou- 
uelles, on iugea d, propos de les afifoupir, de peur de 
fortifier les Sauuages dans vne mauuaife penfee. La 
vraye caufe de leur mort prouient du changement 
d'air & d'exercice & notamment de nourriture: la fa- 
gafmite ou broiiet de farine d'Inde que mangent ces 
peuples, n'eft pas ferme ni folide [187] comme le pain 
& la viande des Fran9ois. Ces ieunes gens fauorans 
auec plaifir ce qu'on leur donnoit en table, mangeoient 
inceflamment, fi bien que la trop grande repletion 
les a tuez : pour obuier a cela nous donnons "k manger 
aux autres, partie a la Huronne, partie k la Fran- 
goife, cela fait qu'ils fe portent mieux. Adiouftez 
que les Sauuages eftans malades ne f9auent que c'eft 
de fe conferuer, s'ils ont chaud ils fe mettent en lieu 
frais, fe font ietter de I'eau froide fur le corps, fans 
confiderer qu'vne crife ou vne bonne fueur les pour- 
roit guerir. 

Mais difons deux mots de ces pauures ieunes hom- 
mes. Satouta qui fut nomm6 Robert en fon baptefme, 
eftoit petit fils de Tfondechaoiianouan, qui eft comme 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 53 

poor Huron fell sick and died soon after, we were 
seized by a new fear, inasmuch as an Algonquin, 
who knew Satouta's parents, was present during all 
this ill-played tragedy. These two events were cap- 
able of completely ruining us, but our Lord provided 
a remedy therefor through his goodness. May he be 
forever blessed by Angels and by men, and by all 
creatures ! I was at the three Rivers, with Monsieur 
the Governor, when I received this fatal news; it 
was thought best to suppress it, for fear of strength- 
ening the Savages in a mischievous notion. The 
true cause of their death lay in the change of air and 
of occupation, and especially of diet. The sagamite, 
or thin Cornmeal broth, that these people eat is not 
solid or substantial, [187] like the bread and meat of 
the French. These young men, enjoying greatly 
the food which was given to them, were always eat- 
ing, so that too great indulgence killed them. To 
obviate this danger, we fed the others partly in the 
Huron way and partly in the French, and this kept 
them in good health. Besides, when the Savages 
are sick, they do not know what it is to take care of 
themselves; if they are warm, they go into a cool 
place, or have cold water thrown on them, without 
considering that the symptoms of a crisis or a good 
sweat might cure them. 

But let us say a few words about these poor young 
men. Satouta, who was named Robert in his bap- 
tism, was the grandson of Tsondechaouanouan, who 
is, as it were, Admiral of the country. To him are 
reported all matters pertaining to navigation, and all 
the news of the nations to which these Hurons go by 
water on their fresh- water sea. His name is so well 
known that, if it is desired to communicate some- 


54 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 


TAdmiral du pays. C'efl k lui auquel fe raportent 
tons les affaires de la nauigation, & toutes les nou- 
uelles des nations ou ces Hurons vont par eau fur 
lenr mer douce : fon nom eft tellemet cogneu, que fi 
Ton veut dire quelque chofe des Hurons aux peuples 
plus efloignez, on le dit ordinairement au nom de 
Tfondechaouanouan. II prend encor cognoiffance de 
tous les affaires du cofl6 des Hiroquois & de la Natio 
neutre, fans parler des differends qu'il vuide iournel- 
lement entre fes Compatriotes. Ce Capitaine auoit 
promis k fon petit fils noftre Seminarifte de luy don- 
ner [i88] fon nom, & en fuite de le faire entrer dans 
toutes les charges qu'il auoit en fon pays: Noftre 
Seigneur en a difpofe autrement. Ce pauure gargon 
fe voiant malade k la mort, remercioit auec grand 
refpect ceux qui le veilloient, & qui lui rendoient 
quelque office de charite. Le Pere de None m'a tef- 
moign6 qu'il fe monftroit fi recognoiffant dans ces 
petits fecours qu'il en reftoit tout attendri & efl6n6. 
Le P. Daniel qui m'a donn6 les memoires de ce qui 
touche le Seminaire, marque que ce pauure malade 
fe tournant par fois vers noftre Seigneur, luy difoit: 
Mon Dieu, vous mauez fait vojlre fils & ie vous ay pris 
pour mon Pere, garde z-moy done s'il vous plaiji, ayez piti^ 
de inoy, effacez mes offences, ie les hai, iamais plus ie ne 
les veux commettre. D'autres fois il difoit, lefus mon 
Capitaine, puis que vous auez tant endure pour m' ouurir 
le del, faites que ie ne tombe point la bas dans le feu : 
ains au contraire faites que ie vous voye au plufiofl dans 

les Cieux. 

II fe fentit afflig6 de ie ne f9ay quel fonge ou re- 
prefentation mauuaife; Qu'eft-ce que ie vois difoit-il, 
qui font ces gens-lk? Qu'efl-ce qu'ils me confeillent? 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 55 

thing from the Hurons to more distant nations, it is 
usually uttered in the name of Tsondechaouanouan. 
He takes cognizance also of all the affairs relating to 
the Hiroquois and the neutral Nation, to say nothing 
of the differences which he daily settles among 
his Compatriots, This Captain had promised his 
grandson, our Seminarist, to give him [i88] his own 
name, and afterwards to admit him into all the re- 
sponsible positions that he had in his country ; Our 
Lord has disposed otherwise. This poor boy, seeing 
himself sick unto death, very respectfully thanked 
those who watched over him, and who rendered him 
some kindly service. Father de Noue declared to 
me that he showed so much gratitude for these little 
services that he was greatly touched and surprised 
thereat. Father Daniel, who has given me the mem- 
oranda of what relates to the Seminary, notes that 
this poor sick boy, turning sometimes towards our 
Lord, would say to him. My God, you have made me 
your son and I have taken you for my Father; now please 
watch over me, have pity on me; blot out my sms, I hate 
them, I will never commit them again. At other times 
he would say, Jesus, my Captain, since you have suffered 
so much to open Heaven to me, do not let me fall down 
into the fire; but, on the contrary, grant that I may see 
you as soon as possible in Heaven. 

He was afflicted by I know not what dream or evil 
vision. " What do I see," said he, " who are those 
people there? What are they counselling me?" 
* ' Dost thou not recognize them ? ' ' asked the Father. 
"No," said he, " I do not know who they are." 
Then the Father cheered him, and explained to him 
that the devils, enraged because he had been made 
[189] a child of God by Baptism, were tr\ ing to make 


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 12 

Ne les cognois-tu point, luy dit le Pere ? No, repart- 
il, ie ne fgais qui ils font. Alors le Pere I'enconra- 
gea & lui fit entendre, que les diables enragez de ce 
qu'il auoit efle fait [189] enfant de Dieu par le Bap- 
tefme, s'efforceroient de le faire renoncer a la cre- 
ance qu'il auoit embraffee, & partant qu'il tint bon, 
que Dieu ne I'abandonneroit pas. Addreffant Ik 
deffus fa parole aux Demons, Allez mefchans, leur di- 
foit-il, retirez-vouz de moy, ie vous ay en horreur. Ie ne 
recognoy point d' autre Maijire que celuy qui a faict le ciel 
& la terre, & qui ma pris pour /on enfant. Ah ! mon 
Dieu, ne me quittez pas, ie ne vous quitterai iamais; Mon 
Capitaine vous auez pay ^ pour moy, ie fiiis a vous: vous 
m'auez achept^ le ciel, donnez-le moy. Les douleurs 
de fa maladie le preffant, il foufpiroit par fois douce- 
ment & poulloit ces mots entrecoupez de fanglots: 
Mon Capitaine, prenez en grd ce que i endure, prenez-le pour 
mes offences : ce que ie fouffre ejl bien peu a comparaifon 
de vos tour mens: mais permettez que Vvn fe mejle auec 
V autre, & il y en aura affez pour payer tons mes pechez & 
pour auoir encor le ciel par deffus m.on pardon. 

II prenoit vn fmgulier plaifir quand ie lui difois, 
rapporte le Pere, qu'on le regardoit fouffrir du plus 
haut du Ciel, & que plus on enduroit conftamment, 
plus on reffembloit a noftre Seigneur, plus on lui 
aggreoit, & par confequet plus grande en eftoit la 
recompenfe. En fin, apres auoir paff6 deux nuicts & 
vn iour apres fon Baptefme, exergant des actes de 
Foy & [190] d'efperance, voire encore de Charity 
enuers Dieu, il rendit fon ame k fon Createur, toute 
rouge & toute • teinte du fang de fon fils bien-aim6 
lefus Chrift noftre Sauueur. 

Son Compagnon nomme Tfiko, qui mourut le pre- 


1637] LE JE UN E'S RELATION, i6s7 67 

him renounce the faith that he had embraced, and 
therefore he should hold fast, and God would not 
abandon him. Thereupon, addressing his words to 
the Demons, Go, evil ones, he said to them, go away 
from me, I hold you in horror. I do not know any other 
Master than he who has made heaven and earth, and who 
has taken me for his child. Oh my God, do not leave me, 
I will never leave you. My Captain, you have paid for 
me, I am yours; you have bought heaven for me, give it 
to me. Racked by the pangs of his malady, he some- 
times sighed softly, and uttered these words, broken 
by sobs: My Captain, take what I suffer in good part, 
take it for my offenses; my sufferings are slight indeed, 
in comparison with your tortures; but permit that the one 
be mingled with the other, and there will be enough to atone 
for all my sins, and to have heaven also, in addition to 
m.y pardon. 

" He took a singular pleasure in hearing me tell 
him," reports the Father, " that his sufferings were 
looked upon from the highest Heaven ; and that the 
more we endure with steadfastness, and the more we 
are like our Lord, the more we please him, and con- 
sequently the greater will be our reward. Finally, 
after having passed two nights and a day after his 
Baptism, practicing acts of Faith and [190] of hope, 
yes, even of Charity, towards God, he rendered up 
his soul to his Creator, all red and stained with the 
blood of his well-beloved son, Jesus Christ, our 
Savior." 

His Companion, Tsiko, who died first and was 
named Paul, was the son of Ouanda Koca, a Captain, 
and one of the best speakers of his country, and con- 
sequently held in high esteem. His son promised to 
surpass him, for he possessed a very rare natural 


58 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 


mier, & fut appelle Paul, eftoit fils de Ouanda Koca, 
c'eft vn Capitaine des mieux difans de fon pays, & 
par confequent fort eftime: Son fils eftoit pour le 
furpaffer, car il auoit vne tres-rare eloquence natu- 
relle. Le foir comme ie le faifois quelquesfois dif- 
courir, dit le P. Daniel, il coloroit fon difcours de 
figures, de Profopopees, fans auoir autre eftude ni 
aduantage qu'vne belle naifl^ance, il formoit des Dia- 
logues fort naturels: Bref il s'animoit en difcourant 
auec vne telle grace & naifuet6 en fon langage, qu'il 
rauifloit fes compagnons & moi auec eux. II n'eftoit 
pas tant inftruict que Robert Satouta, d'autant que 
celui-ci conuerfoit ordinairement auec nos Peres en 
fon pays, & Paul Tfiko n 'auoit iamais ouy parler de 
la Foy qu'au Seminaire : II eftoit d'vne humeur gaye, 
fe faifant aimer de tons ceux qui le cognoifloient. 
L'affection qu'il auoit monftre a noflre Creance, pen- 
dant qu'on I'inftruifoit, fut caufe qu'on le baptifa 
dans fa maladie, quoy qu'il perdift bien tofl le fens 
de I'aureille. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 59 

eloquence. "Sometimes in the evening, when I 
made him talk," says Father Daniel, " he would color 
his speech with figurative expressions and Personifi- 
cations, without having other study or advantage 
than good birth, and he composed very natural Dia- 
logues ; in short, his discourse was enlivened by such 
grace and artlessness in his language that he charmed 
his companions, and me with them. He was not so 
thoroughly instructed as Robert Satouta, inasmuch 
as the latter had been in the habit of associating with 
our Fathers in his own country, and Paul Tsiko had 
never heard of the Faith, except at the Seminary. 
He was of a happy disposition, making himself be- 
loved by all who knew him. The interest he had 
shown in our Belief, while he was being instructed, 
caused them to baptize him in his sickness, although 
he very soon lost the sense of hearing." 


60 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 


[191] CHAPITRE XIII. 

DE L'ORDRE QV'ON GARDE AV SEMINAIRE, & DE 

QUELQUES PARTICULARITEZ DES 

SEMINARISTES. 

1L n'y a rie de fi difficile que de regler les peuples 
de TAtnerique. Tons ces Barbares ont le droict 
des afnes fauuages, il naiffent, viuent & meurent 
dans vne libert6 fans retenue, ils ne f9atient que c'efl 
de bride ni de caue9on: c'eft vne grande rifee parmi 
eux de dompter fes paffions, & vne haute Philofophie 
d'accorder k fes fens tout ce qu'ils defirent. La Loy 
de noflre Seigneur eft bien eloign^e de ces diffolu- 
tions, elle nous done des bornes & nous prefcript des 
limites hors defquelles on ne pent fortir fans choquer 
Dieu & la raifon ; Or eft-il tres-difficile de mettre ce 
joug, quoi que tres-doux & bien leger, fur le col de 
perfonnes qui font profeffion de ne s'affuiettir ^ au- 
cune chofe qui foit au ciel ou en la terre: ie dis qu'il 
eft tres-difficile, mais non pas impoffible : En effect ie 
me perfuade que cela eft au delk de la puiffance & de 
I'induftrie des hommes, mais qu'il eft tres- facile ^ 
Dieu. [192] Nous nous fommes eftonnez comme de 
jeunes gens libertins, acouftumez a fuiure leurs vo- 
lontez, fe font captiuez auec tant de douceur, qu'on 
ne voit rien fi fouple qu'vn Seminarifte Huron. Ce 
n'eft pas qu'il ne faille vne grande dexterite "k les 
conduire, vne douceur & vne patience tres-infigne ; 
car de fe feruir d'aigreur parmi ces Nations, c'eft les 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, Jb37 61 


[191] CHAPTER XIII. 

OF THE ORDER OBSERVED IN THE SEMINARY, AND 

SOME PARTICULARS RELATING TO 

THE SEMINARISTS. 

THERE is nothing so difficult as to control the 
tribes of America. All these Barbarians have 
the law of wild asses, — they are born, live, 
and die in a liberty without restraint; they do not 
know what is meant by bridle or bit. With them, 
to conquer one's passions is considered a great joke, 
while to give free rein to the senses is a lofty Philos- 
ophy. The Law of our Lord is far removed from 
this dissoluteness; it gives us boundaries and pre- 
scribes limits, outside of which we cannot step with- 
out offending God and reason. Now it is very hard 
to place this yoke, although it is very mild and easy, 
upon the necks of people who make a profession of 
not submitting to anything, either in heaven or upon 
earth; I say it is very hard, but not impossible. In 
fact, I am convinced that it is beyond the power and 
skill of men, but that it is very easy to God. [192] 
We are astonished to see how wild young men, ac- 
customed to follow their own caprices, place them- 
selves under subjection, with so much meekness, that 
there seems to be nothing so pliant as a Huron Semi- 
narist. Not that it does not require great skill, gen- 
tleness, and remarkable patience to manage them, — 
for to employ harshness towards these Nations is to 
throw them into rebellion. I believe, indeed, that 


62 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

jetter das la reuolte. le crois bien que ces ieunes 
gens fe voyans trois cens lieues efloignez de leur 
pays f e rendent plus fouples ; mais il faut conf effer 
que leur docilite & obeiffance a eft6 vn grand prefent 
de la part de noflre Seigneur. Comme ils fe pic- 
quoient au commencement de viure ^ la Frangoife, le 
Pere leur fit entendre que nous reglios toutes nos 
actions, que nous ne faifions pas ce qui nous venoit 
en la fantafie, mais ce qui eftoit raifonnable, & ce que 
nous anions projett^: qu'il feroit bon qu'ils nous imi- 
taffent en ce poinct; s'en eftans monflrez tres-con- 
tens, on leur dreffa ce petit ordre qu'ils gardent tons 
les iours auec beauooup d' obeiffance & de fubmifllon. 

Le matin eftans leuez on les fait prier Dieu, ils le 
remerciet de ce qu'il les a creez, & de ce qu'il les a 
coferuez, & de ce qu'il lui plaifl les apeller h. fa co- 
gnoiffance : ils lui demadent f on fecours & fa grace 
pour ne le point offenfer pendant [197 i.e., 193] la 
iourn6e, & puis luy offrent toutes les actions, les 
confacrant k la tres faincte Trinity, en I'lionneur de 
laquelle ils recitent trois fois I'oraifon de noftre Sei- 
gneur, & trois fois la falutation Angelique, pour bo- 
norer la faincte Vierge. lis recitent aulTi le fymbole 
des Apoftres, & quelques autres prieres. Apres leur 
priere ils vont k la Chappelle, oil ils affiftent k la 
faincte Meffe, iufques a I'offertoire feulement, ils 
font fi ponctuels, que la Meffe qu'on leur a aflign6 
eftant fonnee, ils s'y trouuent ordinairement tons les 
premiers, iufques Ik qu'on les a fouuet propofez pour 
exeple k quelques vns de nos Fran9ois bien plus ne- 
gligens qu'eux en cet endroit. 

Apres la Meffe on les fait defieuner, puis on leur 
monflre k lire & k efcrire, apres quoy aians pris quel- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 83 

the consciousness of being three hundred leagues 
distant from their own country makes these young 
men more tractable ; but it must be confessed that 
their docility and obedience has been a great gift to 
us from our Lord. As they took pride, at the start, 
in living after the French manner, the Father gave 
them to understand that we regulate all our actions, — 
that we do not act according to mere whims, but do 
what is reasonable and what we have planned before- 
hand; that it would be well for them to imitate us 
in this regard. Upon showing themselves very will- 
ing to do this, the following little program was 
arranged for them, which they observe daily, with 
much obedience and submission. 

When they arise in the morning, we have them 
pray to God; they thank him for having created 
them, for having kept them, and that he is pleased 
to call them to a knowledge of himself; they ask 
him for his help and grace, that they may not offend 
him during [197 i.e., 193] the day; then they offer 
him all their actions, consecrating them to the most 
holy Trinity, in honor of which they thrice repeat 
our Lord's prayer, and thrice the Angelical saluta- 
tion, in honor of the holy Virgin. They also repeat 
the Apostles' creed, and some other prayers. After 
their prayers they go to the Chapel, where they 
attend the holy Mass, as far as the offertory only. 
They are so punctual that, as soon as the Mass 
assigned to them is rung, they are usually the first 
ones there, so that they have been often held up as 
an example to some of our French who are much 
more careless than they are in this respect. 

After Mass they breakfast, then are taught read- 
ing and writing; after which, having taken an inter- 


64 LES RELATIONS D£S JESUITES [Vol.12 

que relafche, le P. leur fait le Catechifme, leur expli- 
quant les myfteres de noflre creance, auf quels ils fe 
rendent fort attentifs. 

L'heure du difner eftant venue, eux mefmes dreflent 
leur table auec vn ou deux ieunes Fran9ois, qui ont 
demeure auec eux, & quelque temps apres auoir pris 
leur refection, ils ne manquent pas d'aller faluer & 
adorer noflre Seigneur en la Chappelle, luy prefen- 
tant cette petite oraifon; Mon [198 i.e., 194] Dieu ie 
vous remercie de m' auoir conferu^ depuis le matin 
iufques k maintenant, conferuez moy le refte du iour, 
oubliez mes fautes, & m'aidez k n'y plus retomber, 
ie vous prefente toutes mes actions, donnez moy 
voftre grace pour les bien faire. 

Apres cela on leur enfeigne encore vn peu a lire, 
puis on leur donne la liberty de s'aller promener, ou 
de s'addonner a quelque exercice, ils s'en vont ordi- 
nairement k la chaffe, ou k la pefche, ou font des 
arcs & des flefches, ou defrichent quelque terre a leur 
fa9on, ou font quelqu' autre action qui leur aggr6e. 

Sur le foir aiant fouppe, ils font I'examen de leur 
confcience, comme auffi leurs prieres ^ genoux, puis 
s'en vont prendre leur repos. Eftre ne Sauuage & 
viure dans cette retenue c'efl vn miracle ; eftre Hu- 
ron & n'eftre point larron (comme en effect ils ne le 
font point) c'eft vn autre miracle ; auoir vefcu dans vne 
liberte, qui les difpenfe d'obei'r mefme a leurs pa- 
rens, & ne rien entreprendre fans conge, c'efl vn 
troifiefme miracle. Mais defcendons k quelques par- 
ticularitez que leur maiflre & inflructeur a remarqu^. 

L'vn d'eux aiant offenf^ quelqu'vn de nos Fran- 
9ois luy alia demander pardon apres [199 i.e., 195] 
auoir fait fon examen immediatement deuant que de 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 65 

mission, the Father teaches them the Catechism, ex- 
plaining to them the mysteries of our faith, to which 
they give strict attention. 

When the dinner hour comes, they themselves, 
with one or two young Frenchmen who have re- 
mained with them, set the table ; and some time after 
this meal they do not fail to go to the Chapel to sa- 
lute and adore our Lord, offering him this little 
prayer: " My [198 i.e., 194] God, I thank you for 
having kept me from morning until now; keep me 
the rest of the day ; forget my faults, and aid me not 
to relapse into them again ; I present to you all my 
acts, give me your grace to perform them well." 

After that, they are given a little more instruction 
in reading ; and then are free to go and walk, or to 
devote their attention to some occupation. They 
generally go hunting or fishing, or make bows and 
arrows, or clear some land in their own way, or do 
anything else that is agreeable to them. 

In the evening, after supper, they make their ex- 
amination of conscience, saying their prayers on their 
knees, and then retire to rest. To be born a Sav- 
age and to live in this restraint, is a miracle. To 
be a Huron and not to be a thief (as in truth they 
are not), is another miracle. To have lived in a 
freedom which dispenses them even from obeying 
their parents, and then to undertake nothing without 
leave, is a third miracle. But let us come down to 
some peculiarities that their master and instructor 
has observed. 

One of them having offended one of our French- 
men, went to ask his pardon after [199 i.e., 195] 
having made his examination [of conscience], imme- 


66 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

fe mettre au lict, ne voulant pas s'endormir fur la 
faute qu'il auoit faite. 

Vn autre n'aiant pas efl6 efueill6 affez toll pour 
aflifler ^ la faincte Meffe, en receuttel regret qu'il en 
ietta des larmes, le P. luy difant qu'il n'eftoit pas en- 
core oblig6 d'y afllfter, cela ne le confoloit point, en 
fin on I'enuoia faire fes prieres a la Chappelle, ce qui 
le contenta. 

C'efl chofe incroiable comme ils s'accordent en- 
tr'eux, & comme les plus ieunes deferet aux plus 
aagez, mais aufli les plus grads ne commandent point 
aux autres auec empire, ou auec orgueil, ains d'vne 
fa9on aimable & deferente, comme en exhortant & 
tefmoignant de 1' amour. Ils font fi vnis, que fi on 
oflfenfe le moindre d'entr'eux, ils fe tiennent tons 
efgalement offenfez. 

C'eft vne douce confolation de les entedre chanter 
publiquement dans noflre Chappelle le fymbole des 
Apoflres en leur lague. Or afin de les animer d'a- 
uantage nos Fran9ois en chantent vne Strophe en 
noflre lague, puis les Seminarifles vne autre en Hu- 
ron, & puis tous enfemble en chantent vne troifiefme, 
chacun en fa langue auec vn bel accord : Cela leur 
aggr6e tant qu'ils font [200 i.e., 196] retentir par tout 
cette chanfon faincte & facree, on les fait aufli pu- 
bliquement refpondre aux interrogations du Cate- 
chifme, afin de les bien fonder & eflablir en la foy. 
I 'ay ouy chanter les Fran5ois, les Montagnez & les 
Hurons tous enfemble, les articles de noflre creance, 
& iagoit qu'ils parlafl!ent en trois langues, ils s'accor- 
doient fi gentiment qu'on prenoit grand plaifir \ les 
ouir. 

lis m'ont fort prefix (dit le P.) de les baptifer, & 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 67 

diately before going to bed, not willing to goto sleep 
upon the fault he had committed. 

Another one, not having been wakened soon 
enough to attend the holy Mass, regretted it so keen- 
ly that he shed tears. He was not consoled when the 
Father told him that he was not yet obliged to be 
present there, and finally they sent him to the Chapel 
to say his prayers; this satisfied him. 

It is wonderful how well they agree among them- 
selves, and how the younger defer to the elder ; but 
then the larger ones do not command the others in 
an imperious or dictatorial manner, but amiably and 
deferentially, as if exhorting them, and testifying 
their love. They are so united that, if one offends 
the least among them, they consider themselves all 
equally offended. 

It is a sweet consolation to hear them sing public- 
ly, in our Chapel, the Apostles' creed in their own 
language. Now, as a greater incentive to them, our 
French sing a Strophe of it in our language, then the 
Seminarists another in Huron, and then all together 
sing a third, each using his own language, in excel- 
lent harmony. They like this so well that they make 
[200 i.e., 196] this holy and sacred song resound 
everywhere. They are also made to answer in pub- 
lic the questions of the Catechism, in order to ground 
them and establish them in the faith. I have heard 
the French, the Montagnez, and the Hurons all sing 
together the articles of our belief; and, although 
they used three languages, they harmonized so nice- 
ly that it was a great pleasure to hear them. 

" They strongly urged me " (says the Father) " to 
baptize them ; and as an inducement they represented 
to me, among other reasons, that I could not doubt 


68 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 12 

pour m'induire a cela, ils me reprefentoient entre 
autre raifons, que ie ne pouuois douter de leur bonne 
volonte, puis qu'ils auoient pris refolution de iamais 
ne nous quitter. L'vn d'eux difoit qu'il feroit fort 
bien ce que font les Chreftiens, ie ieufnerai bien, di- 
foit-il, ie refifterai bien aux mauuaifes penf^es que 
Ie diable iette dans noftre efprit, ie n'ai defia plus de 
mauuais fonges, fi bien que ie ne demande plus a 
Dieu qu'il me garde de mon mauuais fonge, mais 
qu'il efloigne de moy toute mauuaife penfee. Vn 
autre difoit que fi on les baptifoit, ils auroient plus 
d'efprit, & apprendroient mieux ce qu'on leur en- 
f eigne. 

Le P. leur expliquat certain iour les Comman- 
demens de Dieu, leur faifoit voir la deffenfe \sc. 
difference] qu'il y a, de ces belles ordonnances, fi 
[201 i.e., 197] coformes k la raifon, auec ce que leur 
enjoignent leurs Charlatas. lis vous commandet (di- 
foit-il) des feftins de beftes, ils afl^emblet par fois 
quantity de perfonnes de plufieurs bourgades, font 
faire des ceremonies ridicules ou abominables, & tout 
cela au defpends du malade, qui ne regoit autre fou- 
lagement de ces demoniacles que d'eftre tourmente 
par leurs cris & par leur tintamarre, & mange iufques 
aux OS par leur gourmandife, fans compter les pre- 
fens qu'il leur faut faire. Quand nous defirons ob- 
tenir quelque chofe, nous ne fommes point fubiets k 
tant de Demons, a des pierres & a des rochers, a des 
courants d'eaux, k des ceremonies badines comme 
vous faites ; nous auons recours a vn feul Dieu qui 
pent tout, qui f9ait tout, qui eft la bonte mefme. 

Lk deffus l'vn d'eux prenant la parole, dit nous 
faifons encore d' autre chofe plus fafcheufes que tu 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 69 


their good will since they had made a resolution 
never to leave us. One of them said that he would 
do very well those things the Christians do ; 'I will 
fast well,' said he, ' I will strongly resist the bad 
thoughts the devil puts into our minds ; I now have 
no more bad dreams, so that I no longer ask God to 
keep me from my bad dreams, but to take away from 
me all evil thoughts. ' Another one said that, if they 
were baptized, they would have more intelligence, 
and learn better what was taught them." 

One day, when the Father was explaining the Com- 
mandments of God, he showed them the difference 
there was between these beautiful ordinances, so 
[201 i.e., 197] in harmony with reason, and what 
their Charlatans enjoin upon them. "They com- 
mand you" (said he) "to make feasts of animals, 
they sometimes gather a multitude of people from 
several villages, and have ridiculous or abominable 
ceremonies performed, and all that at the expense of 
the patient, who receives no other benefit from these 
demoniacs than to be tormented by their cries and 
their uproar, and to be devoured to the bones by their 
gluttony, without counting the presents that must be 
made to them. When we desire to obtain some- 
thing, we are not subject to so many Demons, to 
stones and to rocks, to streams of water, to the fool- 
ish ceremonies you perform. We have recourse to 
one God only, who is all-powerful, who is omnis- 
cient, and who is goodness itself. ' ' 

Thereupon one of them, beginning to speak, said, 
" We do still another thing, more grievous than any 
thou hast mentioned. When we wish to have suc- 
cess in hunting, we fast sometimes for a week, drink- 
ing or eating nothing ; we cut and slash our bodies, 


70 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 12 

ne dis pas. Quand nous voulons faire bonne challe, 
notis ieufnons par fois iufques k huict iours, fans 
boire, ny manger, nous nous decoupons & tailladons 
le corps, en forte que le fang en decoule abondam- 
ment, nous voions bien que cela n'efb pas bon. 

Ces bons enf ans voulans entreprendre [202 i.e., 198] 
quelque action, ou retournans de quelque exercice 
s'en vont k la Chappelle pour demander fecours a 
Dieu, ou le benir & remercier de fon afliflance. 
Noftre Seigneur leur a fait voir qu'il demandoit d'eux 
cette recognoiffance ; car affez fouuent il leur eft ar- 
riue quelque petit malheur ou affliction, quand ils 
manquoient a ce deuoir. 

Certain iour ils s'en allerent k la chaffe fans cong6, 
& fans auoir efle demander fecours a Dieu en fa mai- 
fon, ils fe perdirent dans les bois, en forte qu'ils ne 
retournerent k la maifon qu'apres auoir bien fouffert 
& endure parmi les neges ; ils recogneurent que ce 
malheur leur eftoit arriu6 pour auoir entrepris cette 
action ^ la fagon des vSauuages. 

Vne autre fois eftans fortis fans auoir eft6 k la 
Chappelle, & voulant abbatre quelque arbre, I'vn 
d'eux penfa tuer fon compagnon, fa hache aiant man- 
que le coup. Ils s'en reuindrent honteux & pleins 
de confufion, fi bien que le P. leur demandat s'ils 
auoiet efte prier Dieu en la Chappelle deuant que de 
partir, eux fans faire autre refponse fortent tout fur 
I'heure, & s'y en vont demander pardon de la faute 
qu'ils auoient faite. 

L'vn d'eux eftant retourne de dehors auec [203 
i.e., 199] precipitation, & fans aller faire fa pe- 
tite priere, fift tomber vn aix deffus fa tefte qui I'of- 
fenfa fort. La premiere parole que luy dit l'vn de 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 71 

SO that the blood runs down abundantly ; we readily 
see that that is not right." 

When these good children intend to undertake 
[202 i.e., 198] some enterprise, or when they return 
from any occupation, they go to the Chapel to ask 
help from God, or to bless him and thank him for 
his assistance. Our Lord has shown them that he 
required from them this acknowledgment ; for often 
some little trouble or affliction has happened to them 
when they failed in this duty. 

One day they went away to the chase without 
leave, and without having asked help from God at 
his house. They became lost in the woods, and did 
not return to the house until after they had endured 
and suffered great hardships among the snows. They 
recognized that this misfortune had happened to them 
for having undertaken this expedition in the Savage 
way. 

Another time, they departed without having been 
at the Chapel ; and, in trying to cut down a tree, one 
of them nearly killed his companion, his hatchet 
missing its aim. They returned, ashamed and full 
of confusion ; so much so that when the Father asked 
them if they had been to pray to God in the Chapel 
before setting out, without making any other answer, 
they immediately went out and betook themselves 
thither, to ask pardon for the fault they had com- 
mitted. 

One of them having come in from outdoors [203 
i.e., 199] hurriedly and without going to say his little 
prayer, had a board fall on his head, which hurt him 
severely. The first words which one of his comrades 
said to him were, " Hast thou been at the Chapel, 
before returning to the house ? ' ' Upon the wounded 


72 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

fes camarades f ut ; as-tu efte k la Chappelle quand tu 
es rentre k la maifon ? le blelTe conf effant que non ; 
voila, Iny fit-il, la caufe de ton mal ; & comme il fai- 
foit paroiftre quelques indices de la douleur qu'il fen- 
toit lors qu'on le penfoit, I'vn d'eux dit ^ I'aureille ^ 
fon compagnon, tout noftre malheur ne vient, linon 
de ce que nous ne prions pas Dieu. 

Le P. leur expliquant quelques circonftances de la 
paflion de noftre Seigneur, & leur parlant de I'eclypfe 
du Soleil, & du tremblement de terre que fe fit fen- 
tir en ce temps-la, ils repartirent, qu'on parloit en 
leur pais d'vn grand tremble-terre, arriue autrefois; 
mais qu'ils ne f^auoient, ny le temps, ny la raifon 
de c6t efbranlement. On parle encor (difoient-ils) 
d'vn fort notable obfcurciffement du Soleil, lequel 
on croit eftre arriue, pource que la grande tortue qui 
fouflient la terre, changeant de poflure ou fituation, 
oppofa fon efcaille au Soleil, & en defroba la veue 
au monde. Tons ceux qui n'ont point la cognoifTance 
[204 i.e., 200] de Dieu, ont plus de tenebres dans 
I'efprit, que la terre n'en regoit par I'abfence du So- 
leil. lis admirent nos veritez k comparaifon de leur 
fables. 

Le P. de Noue eflant alle aux cabanes des Sau- 
uages, efloign6es de ^ebec d'enuiron fept ou huict 
lieues; d'eux \sc. deux] Seminarifles Hurons le vou- 
lurent accompagner. Les Montagnez les voians, 
leur prefenterent de la chair d'Eflan; or comme 
c'eftoit vn Samedi, ils n'en voulurent iamais man- 
ger. Le P. leur dit, que n'eftans pas encore bapti- 
fez, ils n'eftoient point obligez k ce Commandement 
de I'Eglife. II n'importe (dirent-ils) nous ne defi- 
rons pas d'en manger, puis que vous n'en mangez 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 73 

boy replying that he had not, " That, then," said he 
to him, " is the cause of thy misfortune." And, as he 
showed some signs of the pain he was suffering while 
his wound was being cared for, one of them said in 
the ear of his companion, " All our ill-luck comes to 
us because we do not pray to God." 

When the Father was explaining to them some 
circumstance of the passion of our Lord, and speak- 
ing to them of the eclipse of the Sun, and of the 
trembling of the earth which was felt at that time, 
they replied that there was talk in their own country 
of a great earthquake which had happened in former 
times ; but they did not know either the time or the 
cause of that disturbance. " There is still talk " (said 
they) " of a very remarkable darkening of the Sun, 
which was supposed to have happened because the 
great turtle which upholds the earth, in changing its 
position or place, brought its shell before the Sun, 
and thus deprived the world of sight." ^ All those 
who have not the knowledge [204 i.e., 200] of God 
have more darkness in their minds than the earth 
has through the absence of the Sun. They admire 
our truths when compared with their own fables. 

Once when Father de None went to the cabins of 
the Savages, distant from Kebec about seven or eight 
leagues, two Huron Seminarists chose to accompany 
him. The Montagnez, seeing them, offered them 
some Elk meat ; now, as it was Saturday, they would 
not consent to eat it. The Father told them that, 
as they were not yet baptized, they were not bound 
by this Commandment of the Church. " It does not 
matter" (said they), "we do not wish to eat meat, 
since you do not eat it." The same Father related 
to me that these good boys knelt and said their pray- 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.12 

point. Le mefme P. me racompta, que ces bons gar- 
cons faifoient li bien leurs prieres ^ deux genoiiils, 
& leur examen de confcience, qu'il en eftoit interieure- 
ment louche. 

II eft vrai, Dieu nous a afflige par la mort de leurs 
compagnons, mais auffi nous a-il confol6 par la doci- 
lity & deference de ceux qui reftent en vie. lis fe 
picquent de viure k la Frangoife, & li quelqu'vn corn- 
met quelque inciuilite, ils I'appellent Huron, & de- 
mandet depuis quel temps il eft arriu6 de ce pais Ik. 
Ils font gentiment la reuerence [205 i.e., 201] & fa- 
luent humblement nos Fran9ois, mettans la main au 
chappeau aux rencontres. Tons nos Peres & nos freres 
m'ont rendu de grands tefmoignages de leur docility. 
Ce n'eft pas que quelqu'vn n'ait fait paroiftre par 
fois quelque petit defpit & mouuement de cholere, 
mais cela ne dure point, auffi les gouuerne on auec 
vne grande douceur. Le plus aage aiant fait vn 
coup de fa tefle, demeura quelque temps dans fon 
opiniaftret^. Le P. Daniel eftat venu k Kebec me 
racompta ce qui s' eftoit palle, ie fis venir ce ieune 
homme, ie luy demandai fi aiant toufiours bien fait, il 
fe vouloit tout d'vn coup & par cholere efloigner du 
bon chemin, qu'aiant veu tant de preuues de noftre 
amour en fon endroit, ce feroit vne marque de peu 
d'efprit, de n'y pas corref pondre ; qu'au refte Dieu 
fe fafcheroit fortement contre luy s'il le quittoit, que 
pour nous autres, nous n'y perderions rien, que tout 
le malheur tomberoit fur fa tefte, qu'on m'auoit dit 
qu'il auoit defifte de le prier. II me refpondit qu'en 
effect, il s'eftoit mis en grande cholere, fe figurant 
qu'on le vouloit induire a croire en Dieu par menaces 
& par force, & pour monftrer que fon coeur ne fe laif- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 76 

ers, and. made their examination of conscience, so 
admirably, that his heart was touched. 

It is true God has afflicted us in the death of their 
companions, but he has also consoled us by the docil- 
ity and deference of those who remain. They pride 
themselves on living in the French way ; and, if one 
of them commits some act of rudeness, they call him 
" Huron," and ask him how long it is since he came 
from that country. They make neat courtesies 
[205 i.e., 201] and humbly salute our Frenchmen, 
touching their hats when they meet them. All our 
Fathers and our brethren have borne excellent testi- 
mony to me of their docility. Not that some one of 
them does not sometimes show a little temper or out- 
burst of anger, but it does not last long; they are 
also governed with great gentleness. The oldest one, 
having committed a wilful act, remained obstinate 
about it for some time. When Father Daniel came 
to Kebec, he told me what had happened ; I sent for 
this young man ; I asked him if, having always done 
well, he wished all at once and out of anger to aban- 
don the right way ; that, having seen so many proofs 
of our love for him, it would be an indication of a 
narrow mind not to respond to it. That, besides, 
God would be very angry with him if he left him ; 
as for us, we would lose nothing, that all the misfor- 
tune would fall upon his own head ; that I had been 
told he had ceased to pray. He replied that he had 
indeed become very angry, imagining that they 
wanted to make him believe in God by threats and 
by force; and, to show that his heart would not 
let itself be affected by fear, he had committed a 
[206 i.e. , 202] wilful act ; that, moreover, he had ceased 
to pray to God in public, but that he prayed to him, 


76 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 12 


foit pas faifir de crainte, il auoit fait vn [206 i.e., 202] 
coup de tefte, qu'au refte il auoit bien cefle de prier 
Dieu en public, mais qu'il le prioit toutesfois en fon 
particulier. II ne faut, adioufta il, s'eftonner des 
petites fafcheries qui furuiennent, nous auons bien 
quelques differens en noftre pais, entre nos plus pro- 
ches parens, nous ne les hailTons, ny ne les quittons 
pas pour cela, nous tenons icy le P. Daniel comme 
noftre Pere, nous n 'auons garde de le quitter pour 
de petites fafcheries. Sa refponfe m'aggrea fort, & 
me confirma dans la penfee que i'ay, qu'il faut gou- 
uerner ces peuples auec vne grande prudence, puis 
que la feule menace des feux & des peines eternelles, 
les rebute par fois. Si faut il bien leur inculquer 
cette verity, c'eft par cette bride qu'on les retiendra 
dans la creance, fi vne fois ils la peuuent tenir en 
bouche fans fe cabrer. 

Voicy vne chofe pleine de confolation, la veille de 
la Conception de la faincte Vierge, que nous hono- 
rons fort en la nouuelle France, ils prirent refolution 
par enfemble de deferter de la terre, & de I'enfemen- 
cer, & en fuite, de faire vne maifon ou cabane a la 
fa§on de leur pais ; nous prenions cela au commence- 
ment, comme vne penfee ou refolution [207 i.e., 203] 
de ieunes gens qui changent d'aduis k tout propos, 
mais I'effect furpaffa noftre attente; ils fe mirent pe- 
tit k petit a efbracher des arbres, & le Printemps 
venu ils preparent vne telle efpace de terre, qu'ils 
nous eftonnerent fe rendant fort alTidus a ce trauail, 
Vn malheur en ce poinct leur eft arriue, le bled 
d'Inde qu'ils auoient plante, eftant trop vieil & trop 
fee, ou I'aiant pouffe trop auant das terre n'a pas 
reiilTi. Leur maifon k eu vn meilleur fuccez, ils I'ont 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 77 

nevertheless, when alone. " One should not be sur- 
prised," he added, " at the little vexations that occur; 
we have indeed some disagreements in our own 
country, among our nearest relations, but we do not 
hate them nor leave them on that account ; we look 
upon Father Daniel here as our Father; we have no 
inclination to leave him on account of little annoy- 
ances." His answer pleased me greatly, and con- 
firmed me in the idea I have, that it is necessary to 
govern these people with great prudence, since the 
mere threat of fires and eternal torments sometimes 
repels them. Yet it is very necessary to inculcate 
this truth in their minds ; it is by this bridle that 
they will be retained in the faith, if they can once 
hold it in their mouths without chafing. 

Here is a circumstance full of consolation. On the 
eve of the Conception of the holy Virgin, whom we 
greatly honor in new France, they all resolved to 
clear some land and sow it, and afterwards to make 
a house or cabin like those in their own country. 
At first, we regarded this as an idea or resolution 
[207 i.e. , 203] of young men, who change their opinions 
at every turn. But the results surpassed our expecta- 
tions; they began, little by little, to strip the trees of 
their branches, and, when Spring came, they had 
cleared so large a plot of ground that they astonished 
us by their great diligence in this work. A misfor- 
tune happened to them in one particular; the Indian 
corn they had planted, being too old and dry, or 
having been planted too deep, did not grow well. 
Their house proved a greater success ; they finished 
it neatly, although it is not used for anything, for 
they had put it up as a storehouse for their grain, 
none, or very little of which, came up. Now al- 


78 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

acheuee gentiment, quoy qu'elle ne feme de rien, 
car ils Tauoient dreffee pour aller garder & recueillir 
leurs grains, qui n'ont point ou fort peu leuez. Or 
ja9oit que ce trauail n'ait pas eu grand effect tempo- 
rel, pent eftre en aura-il vn tres-grand felon I'efprit; 
fe voiant fecourus de viures d'outils & d' habits, & en 
outre bien cheris des Frangois, ils auoient refolu de 
faire aupres de leurs parens tout leur poffible pour 
demeurer, non feulement Tan prochain auec nous: 
mais encore pour s'y habituer le refte de leurs iours, 
auec defir d'attirer de leurs compatriotes, & de plus 
faire defcedre quelques filles de leurs pais pour les 
faire inftruire & les [208 i.e., 204] efpoufer en la 
religion Chreftienne & Chatholique, fi ce deffein re- 
iiffiff oit ce feroit vn grand coup & tres-important pour 
la gloire de noftre Seigneur, & mefme pour le bien 
de Meffieurs les Directeurs «& Alfocies qui font Sei- 
gneurs de ces contrees. Premierement dans peu 
d'annees il fe feroit icy vne bourgade de Hurons 
Chreftiens, qui ne feruiroient pas peu pour reduire 
leurs copatriotes a la foy, par le comerce des vns 
auec les autres, & nos Motagnez erras s'arrefteroient 
petit a petit a leur exemple, & par leur alliance. 
Secondemet Meffieurs les Directeurs «& Alfocies au- 
roient icy des hoflages pour alTeurer la vie de nos 
Fran9ois au pais des Hurons, & pour conferuer le 
commerce qu'ils ont auec tons ces peuples & nations 
plus efloignees. le dis bien d'auantage que fi. les 
peuples errans voioient des Hurons fedentaires au- 
pres de nous, qu'ils feroient diuertis de nous faire la 
guerre s'ils en auoient la volonte, pource qu'ils fgauent 
que ces Sauuages ellans pres de nous & fous noftre 
protection ne nous quitteroient point, & d'ailleurs 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 79 

though this work did not have great temporal results, 
perhaps it will be of very considerable benefit spirit- 
ually. Seeing themselves provided with food, tools, 
and clothes, and besides greatly cherished by the 
French, they had resolved to do their utmost to get 
their parents' permission to remain not only the next 
year with us, but even to live here all the rest of 
their days — with the desire of attracting some of 
their compatriots, and also of getting some girls of 
their country to come down, that they might have 
them instructed, and [208 i.e., 204] marry them ac- 
cording to the Christian and Catholic religion. If this 
plan were to succeed, it would be a great and very 
important event for the glory of our Lord, and even 
for the good of Messieurs the Directors and Associ- 
ates who are Lords of these countries. First, in a 
few years there would be here a village of Christian 
Hurons, who would help in no slight degree to bring 
their compatriots to the faith, through commerce 
with each other ; and our wandering Montagnez would, 
little by little, become stationary through their exam- 
ple and through alliance with them. Secondly, Mes- 
sieurs the Directors and Associates would have hos- 
tages here to assure the lives of our French in the 
country of the Hurons, and to maintain the com- 
merce they have with all the more distant peoples 
and nations. I say still more, that if the wandering 
tribes saw some sedentary Hurons in our neighbor- 
hood, they would be diverted from making war upon 
us, if they had such a purpose ; because they know 
that these Savages, being near us and under our 
protection, would not leave us, and having, more- 
over, a knowledge of the woods, and running as well 
as the rest of the Savages, they would dread these 


80 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

aiant cognoilTance des bois, & courans auffi bien que 
le reste des Sauuages, ils les redouteroiet pP que les 
Frangois mefmes, & ainli nous garderions auec nos 
armes la bourgade des Hurons & eux par leurs courfes 
donneroient lachaffe [2091.6., 205] ou du moins d'ef- 
couuriroient les ennemis. 

Quiconque pefera folidement ces raifons concluera 
qu'il faut entierement s'efforcer & n'efpa[r]gner au- 
cune defpenfe pour dreff er pres de nous vne bourgade 
de Hurons. Ceux que nous auons y font delia bien 
difpof6s par la grace de noftre Seigneur. Voicy vn 
autre traict de leur affection. 

Comme les vaiffeaux font arriues fort tard, la tra- 
uerfe aiant efte longue & fafcheufe cefte annee, les 
viures nous manquans, nous eflions bien en peine ce 
que nous ferions de ces pauures enfans. le deman- 
dai fur ce poinct I'aduis de Monfieur de Montma- 
gni noftre Gouuerneur. I'honore fon courage, il me 
repartit qu'aiat eu tat de peine d'auoir ces ieunes 
gens qu'il ne croioit pas que nous eulTions le coeur de 
les renuoier, puis qu'ils fe coportoiet fi bie. C'eft k 
faire a fouffrir, difoit-il, & a efpargner quelque chofe 
de vos viures & des noftres. II cognoit bie I'inipor- 
tans de ce Seminaire pour la gloire de noftre Sei- 
gneur, & pour le commerce de ces Meffieurs. Aiant 
rapports cefte refponfe fi fage a nos Seminariftes, le 
plus aage dit Ik deffus; voilk qui va bien, c'euft efte 
vn grand mal de nous renuoier en noftre pais, car 
jagoit que nous euffions pris refolution de demeurer 
[210 i.e., 206] auec Echon c'eft le P. Brebeuf, & auec 
Antoine, c'eft le Pere Daniel, s'il remotoit la haut; 
fi eft-ce qu'il vaut bien mieux vn peu fouffrir 9 'a [sc. 
§a] bas que de retourner dans de fl grands dangers. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 81 

more than the French themselves. Thus we would 
guard the village of the Hurons with our arms, and 
they in their hunting expeditions would give chase 
to [209 i.e., 205] or at least would discover their 
enemies. 

Whoever will carefully weigh these reasons will 
conclude that it is quite necessary to exert ourselves, 
and to spare no expense, to form near us a settle- 
ment of Hurons. Those whom we have here are al- 
ready well disposed through the grace of our Lord. 
Here is another example of their affection. 

As the ships arrived very late, the passage having 
been long and troublesome this year, our food gave 
out, and we were in great straits as to what we should 
do with these poor children. I asked the advice of 
Monsieur de Montmagni, our Governor, in this mat- 
ter. I honor his courage; he replied that, as we 
had had so much trouble in getting these young men, 
he did not think we would have the heart to send 
them back, since they were behaving so well. " It 
is a matter of suffering," he said, "and of saving 
something from your food and from ours." He fully 
appreciates the importance of this Seminary for the 
glory of our Lord and for the commercial interests 
of these Gentlemen. Having reported this so wise 
reply to our Seminarists, the oldest one said there- 
upon, "That suits us well; it would have been a 
great pity to send us back to our country, for although 
we had made up our minds to stay [210 i.e., 206] 
with Echon'' (Father Brebeuf) " and with Antoine," 
(Father Daniel) " if he had gone up there again, yet 
it will avail a great deal more to suffer a little down 
here than to return into so great dangers." Alas! 


82 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

Helas! c'eft ce pauure gar9on qui a penf6 tout per- 
dre. Nous en verrons roccafion au chapitre fuiuant. 
Dieu I'a ramene par d'eftranges auantures. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 83 

it was this poor boy who was nearly undone, the 
occasion whereof we shall see in the next chapter. 
God brought him back through strange adventures. 


84 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 


CHAPITRE XIIII. 

DE L'ESTAT DU SEMINAIRE A LA VENUE DES HURONS 
LEURS COMPATRIOTES. 

SI la Miffion & le Seminaire des Hurons, n'euffent 
efl6 eftablis fur cefte pierre de laquelle il eft 
dit Petra autem erat Chrijius, s'en [sc. e'en] 
eftoit fait cefte annee, 1' edifice eftoit abss [sc. k bas], 
les troubles, les guerres, les maladies, les calomnies, 
en vn mot toutes les machines qui peuuent fortir de 
I'Arfenal des Demons ont efte pointees cotre cefte 
Sainte entreprife, en forte que nous pouuons dire 
morimur & ecce viuimus, Nous voions tout renuerf^ & 
[211 i.e., 207] tout affermi quafi en mefme temps. 
Tous les mal-heurs, toutes les pefles, les guerres, & 
les famines qui afiiigeoient le monde au premier aage 
de I'Eglife naiflante, s'attribuoient jadis a la foy de 
lefus Chrift, & k ceux qui TembralToient, ou qui la 
prefchoient. Ce qui s'eft paff6 touchant ce poinct en 
la primitiue Eglife fe voit tous les iours en la nou- 
uelle France, notamment au pais des Hurons. II ni 
k [sc. n'y a] malice noire dont nous ne foions chargez. 
En voici les occafions. 

Comme la contagion S. fait mourir grand nombre 
de Hurons, ces peuples ne recognoiffant point la 
iuftice de Dieu, qui prend vengeance de leurs crimes, 
fe font imaginez que les Frangois eftoient caufe de 
leur mort. Vn certain Algonquin fort mef chant 
homme leur raporta I'an palT^, que deffunct Monfieur 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 85 


CHAPTER XIIII. 

OF THE CONDITION OF THE SEMINARY AT THE COM- 
ING OF THE HURONS, THEIR COUNTRYMEN. 

IF the Mission and Seminary of the Hurons had 
not been established on that rock of which it is 
said, Petra auteni crat Christus, it would have 
come to an end this year, the edifice would have been 
overthrown. Troubles, wars, sicknesses, slanders, — 
in a word, all the machinations that can issue from 
the Arsenal of the Demons, have been directed 
against this Holy enterprise, so that we could say, 
morimur et ecce vivimus. We see it entirely over- 
thrown and [21 1 i.e., 207] entirely established almost 
at the same time. All the misfortunes, all the pests, 
wars, and famines which in the early ages of the in- 
fant Church afflicted the world, were formerly attrib- 
uted to the faith of Jesus Christ, and to those who 
embraced or preached it. What occurred in this re- 
gard in the primitive Church can be seen every day 
in new France, especially in the Huron country. 
There is no black malice of which we are not accused. 
Here are the causes of it. 

As the contagion caused a great many Hurons to 
die, these people, not recognizing therein the justice 
of God, who takes vengeance for their crimes, imag- 
ined that the French were the cause of their death. 
A certain Algonquin, a very wicked man, reported 
to them last year that the late Monsieur de Cham- 
plain, of blessed memory, had said to a Montagnez 


86 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

de Champlain d'heureufe memoire, auoit dit k vn 
Capitaine Montagnez, vn peu deuant que de rendre 
rame, qu'il emporteroit auec foy tout le pais des 
Hurons. C'eft la couftume des Capitaines Barbares, 
de fouhaitter que d'autres leur tienent copagnie ^ 
leur trefpas, iufque Ik qu'ils enuoirot par fois tuSr 
quelqu'autre Capitaine, pour aller enfemble en I'autre 
monde. Ces ignorans pleins de malice fe figurent 
[212 i.e., 2o8] aif6met que nous participons a leurs 
deteftables fentimens, c'eft pourquoy ils foup9on- 
noient Monfieur de Champlain d'auoir procure leur 
mort k fon trefpas. 

Quelques autres attribuoient la caufe de leur con- 
tagion k noflre vengeance, difans que nous n'eflions 
months en leur pais que pour facrifier tons leurs corps 
k I'ame d'vn nomm6 Eftienne Brufl^ qu'ils ont mife- 
rablement affaffine. Tout paroift jaune aux icte- 
riques qui ont les yeux jaunes, les peuples que I'ar- 
deur d'vne vengeance enrag^e contre ceux qui leur 
font mal, va confommant, nous croient tous efchauffes 
& bruflez d'vn mefme feu. 

Bref ils philofophoiet encore de leur maladie d'vne 
autre fa9on, ils difoient que nos Fran§ois auoient en- 
f orcein vn capot, ou vne robe, & 1' auoient enterre aux 
trois Riuieres, mais en tel lieu qu'ils fe doutoient bien 
que les Hurons tres-grands larrons I'enleueroiet: ce 
qu'ils firent, I'aiant done trafporte en leur pais ils y 
ont quand & quand porte la pefte & la contagion. 

Ces nations fe perfuadent qu'ils ne meurent quafi 
que par des forts, c'eft pourquoy nous mefuras k 
mefme aulne ils nous penfent & croient plus grads 
forciers qu'eux mefmes, [213 i.e., 209] fur ces bruicts 
autant efloign^s de la verity, qu'ils font opportion- 


1637J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 87 

Captain, shortly before rendering up his soul, that 
he would take away with him the whole country of 
the Hurons. It is customary for Barbarian Captains 
to wish that others may bear them company at their 
departure, going so far that sometimes they send one 
to kill another Captain to go with them into the 
other world. These ignorant people, full of malice, 
readily imagine [212 i.e., 208] that we share their 
detestable ideas, hence they suspect Monsieur de 
Champlain of procuring their death at his own 
departure. 

Some others attributed the cause of their epidemic 
to our vengeance, saying that we only went up to 
their country in order to sacrifice every one of their 
bodies to the soul of a certain Estienne Brusle, whom 
they had wickedly assassinated. All things appear 
yellow to the yellow eyes of the jaundiced; people 
who are being consumed by the fierce flame of a ven- 
geance aroused against those who have done them 
harm, believe that all of us are heated and burned 
by the same fire. 

In short, they reasoned upon their sickness in still 
another way. They said that our French had be- 
witched a cloak or a robe, and had buried it at the 
three Rivers, but in such a place that they suspected, 
and rightly, that the Hurons, as they were very great 
thieves, would take it away, which they did. Hav- 
ing then carried it to their own country, they bore 
thither at the same time the pestilence and contagion. 

These nations persuade themselves that they die 
almost entirely through charms ; and hence, measur- 
ing us by the same standard, they think and be- 
lieve we are greater sorcerers than they themselves. 
[213 i.e., 209] Upon the strength of these reports, as 


88 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

n^s \sc. proportionn6s] a I'efprit des Sauuages, & 
conformes a leurs couftumes, ces barbares ont atten- 
t6 fur la vie de nos Peres, iufques Ik qu'ils ont parl6 
en plein confeil de les maffacrer, mais Dieu efl plus 
puiffant que les hommes & que tous les Demons. Sa 
bont6 nous fufcita pour protecteur, vn Barbare contre 
les Barbares, mefme vn Capitaine nomme Taratouan 
dont nous auons le neueu au Seminaire, entendant ce 
difcours tire vn grand colier, de pourcelaine le iette 
au milieu de Taffemblee, difant voila pour fermer 
vosbouches, & arreftervos paroles: c'eft la couflume 
du pais de n'agir ordinairemet que par des prefens, 
ce coup fuft arrefte, ie ne fgais fi nos Peres des Hurons 
I'ont fceu, mais le neueu de ce braue Capitaine nous 
la racompt6 auxtrois Riuieres. leparleray bien toft 
de fa prife deplorable, vne autre fois dans la propre 
bourofade ou eftoient nos PP. on traitta de les r'en- 
uoier 9'k \_sc. renuoier 9k] bas, ou de les faire mourir: 
leur Capitaine nomme Aenon prit la parole, & haran- 
gua de telle forte qu'on vint prier les PP. qu'ils ne 
nous efcriuiffent rien de ces mauuaifes penfees, de 
peur qu'ils ne fuffent mal traittez aux lieux oil font 
nos Fran§ois. Ce Capitaine eft I'vn de [2 14 i.e., 210] 
ceux qu'6 croit qui ont tu6 ce miferable Brufl6, dont 
les plaies font encores toutes fanglates, mais il a tel- 
lement repar^ cefte faute par I'affection qu'il a de- 
puis port6 aux Fran9ois, que noftre Seigneur luy k 
fait la grace de venir mourir Chreftien entre nos bras. 
Or iugez maintenant fi ces difpofitions eftoient bien 
grandes pour peupler vn Seminaire, car fi en public 
on parloit de nous perdre, ie vous laiffe k penfer 
quelles calomnies vomilloiet contre nous les plus in- 
folens. On n'entedoit qu'iniures, que menaces, en 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 89 

far removed from the truth as they are adapted to the 
minds of the Savages and in harmony with their cus- 
toms, these barbarians have made attempts upon the 
lives of our Fathers, even going so far as to talk in 
open council of slaying them ; but God is more pow- 
erful than men and all the Demons. His goodness 
raised up for us as a protector a Barbarian against 
Barbarians, even a Captain named Taratouan, whose 
nephew we have in the Seminary. On hearing this 
talk he drew out a long string of porcelain, and threw 
it down in the midst of the assembly, saying, " There 
is something to close your mouths and stop your talk- 
ing." It is a custom of the country to act ordinarily 
only through presents, so this blow was averted. I 
do not know whether this was known to our Fathers 
among the Hurons, but the nephew of this brave 
Captain related it to us at the three Rivers. I will 
soon speak of his deplorable capture. Another time, 
in the very village where our Fathers lived, they 
talked about sending them back down here, or of kill- 
ing them. Their Captain, named Aenon, began to 
speak, and harangued in such a way that they came 
and begged the Fathers not to write any of these evil 
thoughts to us, lest they should be badly treated in 
the places where our French are. This Captain is 
one of [214 i.e., 210] those who are supposed to have 
killed the wretched Brusl^, whose wounds are still 
bleeding. But he so entirely atoned for this fault by 
the affection which he afterwards displayed towards 
the French, that our Lord graciously allowed him to 
come and die as a Christian in our arms. Now judge 
whether these circumstances were favorable to the 
peopling of a Seminary ; for, if they spoke in public 
of ruining us, I leave you to imagine what calumnies 


90 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

forte que les plus gens de bien d'entr'eux, craignoient 
qu'on n'en mallacrafl quelques-vns de nous autres, 
& par confequent ils fe pouuoient perfuader qu'on 
efgorgeroit 9'a [sc. 9a] bas leurs enfans s'ils nous les 
enuoioient, fuiuant la couftume tres-mefchate de tous 
ces peuples lef quels fe vengent fur le premier venu, 
des torts qu'ils ont re9eu de quelque particulier d' au- 
tre natio. Or nonobftat la rage des demons, le Semi- 
naire fubfifle. le I'ay veu h. deux doigts de fa ruine, 
puis tout k coup celuy qui le febloit renuerfer Ik ap- 
puie, & fi la maladie & la guerre, n'euflent afflige les 
Hurons en chemin, nous euffions peut-eftre eft6 con- 
traints de renuoier des enfans: car nous n'auons pas 
les reins affez forts pour nourrir & entretenir tous ceux 
que nous pourrions auoir, mais [215 i.e., 211] voions 
les accidens affez eftranges qui font arriuez a ce pau- 
ure Seminaire. 

De i^ix. ieunes Hurons qui le compofoient, I'vn d'eux 
d' affez mauuaife humeur, quitta fes compagnos & 
s'en retourna en fon pais, (comme i'ay dit cy deffus) 
mais il nous fift plus de bien que nous n'efperions: 
car il dit merueille du bon traittement qu'il auoit re- 
ceu de nous, ce qui confola fort les Hurons. La mort 
nous fift bien plus de mal : car elle nous enleua les 
deux meilleurs efprits du Seminaire. Comme ces 
barbares font remplis de foup9ons nous anions belle 
peur qu'ils ne s'imaginaffent, que ces pauures 
ieunes hommes n'euffent perdu la vie par noftre 
faute, veu les circonftances que i'ay dites eftre 
arriuees a leur mort, & par confequent nous craignios 
qu'ils n'en prinffent quelque vengeance fur nos 
Peres, ou pluftoft ce qui nous fembloit plus probable, 
nous apprehedions qu'ils ne fe perfuadaffent que 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637. 91 

the more insolent would spit forth against us. 
Nothing was heard but insults, but threats, so that 
most of the good people among them feared that 
some of us would be massacred; and consequently 
they might have persuaded themselves that we would 
kill their children down here, if they sent them to 
us, according to the wicked custom of all these peo- 
ples, who avenge themselves upon the first comer 
for wrongs they have received from some individual 
of another nation. Now, notwithstanding the rage 
of the demons, the Seminary survives. I have seen 
it within two finger-lengths of ruin; then, all at 
once, what seemed to overthrow it, propped it up; 
and, if sickness and war had not afflicted the Hurons 
on the way, we would have been perhaps obliged to 
send back their children, for our backs are not strong 
enough to feed and maintain all those whom we could 
have. But [215 i.e., 211] let us consider the rather 
strange accidents that have happened to this poor 
Seminary. 

Of the six young Hurons who composed it, one of 
them, of a somewhat peevish disposition, left his 
companions and returned to his country (as I have 
said above) ; but he did us more good than we had 
hoped, for he told wonderful things about the good 
treatment he had received from us, which greatly 
comforted the Hurons. Death did us a great deal 
more harm, for it took from us the two best minds 
of the Seminary. As these barbarians are full of 
suspicion, we were very much afraid that they would 
imagine that these poor young men had lost their 
lives through our fault, considering the circumstances 
which I have said attended their deaths ; and hence 
we feared that they would take some vengeance on 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Voi.. 12 

nos maifons leur fuffent fatales: & par ainfi qu'ils 
ne vouluffent plus nous doner de leurs enfans. 
Dieu par fa prouidece k remedi^ k ces craintes; 
auffi n' anions nous efperace qu'en fa pure bonte. 
Le bruit de ces deux morts eftat porte aux Hurons 
par quelques Algonquins, le Pere de Tfiko, I'vn de 
ces deux braues ieunes hommes trefpaffez, entendant 
ces nouuelles, [216 i.e., 212] non feulement n'entra 
poinct dans la cholere d'vn barbare, mais parla en 
homme bien prudent & bien fage, I16 bien, dit-il, k 
nos PP. qui font \k haut, on dit que mon fils eft mort, 
fi le cadet eft mort ie vous donneray fon aifn6, ie ne 
m'attrifterois point quand tous mes enfans feroient 
morts entre vos mains, car ie f9ais bien que vous en 
auez grand foing, lors qu'on me rapporta ces paroles, 
mes yeux en furent auffi toft frappez que mes oreilles. 

Les parens de Sat out a, voiant que la contagion 
efgorgeoit les Hurons en leur pais, ne s'eftonnerent 
point d' entendre le bruit de la mort de leur fils. C'eft 
ainfi. que Dieu abbaiffe & releue qu'il attrifte & c6- 
fole ceux qui trauaille pour fa gloire, qu'il foit benit 
k iamais, voi-lk doncques I'vne des caufes que nous 
penfions deuoir miner le Seminaire, demeure fans 
effect, voions les autres. 

II reftoit trois Seminariftes Ton nomme Teouatir- 
hon, I'autre Ariethoua, & la troifiefme A'iacidace, di- 
fons deux mots de leurs auanture. Nous les anions 
enuoiez aux trois Riuieres fur le commencement de 
I'Efte, pour y voir leurs parens, qu'on attendoit k 
Tarriu^e des Hurons. Comme vne bande arriua le 
P. Buteux m'euoia querir "k Aebec par I'vn d'eux 
nomm6 Andehoua fur ces entrefaites arriue vn oncle 
de Teouatirhon Capitaine de Guerre [217 i.e., 213] 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 93 

our Fathers — or rather, what seemed to us more 
probable, we feared they would persuade themselves 
that our houses were fatal to them, and that there- 
fore they would no longer consent to give us their 
children. God in his providence has dispelled these 
fears; therefore we base our hopes upon his pure 
goodness only. The report of these two deaths was 
brought to the Hurons by some Algonquins; and 
when the Father of Tsiko, one of the two fine young 
men that died, heard this news, [216 i.e., 212] he 
not only did not indulge in the anger of a barbarian, 
but spoke like a man of great prudence and wisdom. 
" Ah, well," said he to our Fathers who are up there, 
" they say my son is dead; if the younger is dead, I 
will give you his elder brother. I would not be cast 
down if all my children were to die in your hands, 
for I know well that you are very careful of them. ' ' 
When these words were reported to me, my eyes 
were affected by them as soon as my ears. 

The parents of Sat out a, seeing that the epidemic 
was slaughtering the Hurons in their own country, 
were not surprised to hear the report of the death of 
their son. It is thus that God abases and raises up, 
that he saddens and consoles those who work for his 
glory. May he be forever blessed ! See, then, how 
one of the causes that we thought would ruin the 
Seminary had no effect. Let us consider the others. 

There remained three Seminarists — one called 
Teouatirhon, another Ariethoua, and the third Aiaci- 
dace. Let us say a few words about their adventure. 
We had sent them to the three Rivers, at the begin- 
ning of Summer, to see their relatives, who were ex- 
pected at the coming of the Hurons. When a band 
of them arrived, Father Buteux sent one of them, 


94 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

homme affez leger, celuy-cy dit k fon neueu qu'eflat 
k rifle, vn Algonquin Iny auoit rapporte que les Hu- 
rons auoient tue deux Francois. A cette nouuelle 
ce pauure ieune homme, & fon compagnon fe difpo- 
fent a la fuitte. Car ce Capitaine leur faifoit affez 
entendre qu'on leur feroit paier la mort des Fran- 
9ois. Au commencement ils vouloient partir auec 
conge, mais comme ils auoient efl6 donez publique- 
met, on ne les vouloit pas receuoir k la fourdine, du 
moins le plus ieune nome Aiandace dent les parens 
n'efloiet pas encore defcendus, pour Teouatirhon, 
puifque fon parent le demandoit, on le laiffoit aller. 
le ferois trop log fi ie voulois expliquer toutes ces 
particularitez de cette affaire. Comme les fecrets des 
Sauuages font des voix publiques, on vint a fgauoir 
le bruit qui couroit de la mort de deux Fran9ois, on 
arrefte ce Capitaine Huron, qui promet de refter 
quelques iours, mais la nuict venue il veut prendre 
la fuite auec fon neueu, & auec 1' autre Seminarifte, 
qui fe ietta k bas d'vn baftion du fort pour fe fauuer, 
nos Fran9ois accourent les armes au poing, retiennent 
ce Capitaine come prifonnier, voiant qu'il contreue- 
noit k fa parole, & qu'il nous vouloit enleuer nos 
Hurons, la deffus Monfieur le Gouuerneur arriue 
[218 i.e., 214] aux trois Riuieres, i'eftois auec luy, 
ramenant noftre troifiefme Seminarifte. A peine 
eftions nous en terre que quelques canots Hurons pa- 
rurent, lefquels diffiperent ces faux bruits & nous 
affeurerent que les Fran§ois fe portoient tous bien 
en leur pais, & qu'on en verroit bien-toft defcendre 
quelques-vns. Voilk la face des affaires toute chan- 
g6e, le Seminaire que nous penfions diffout eft efta- 
bli, le Capitaine eft tout confus, chacun eft bien aife 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 95 

named Andehoua, to bring me from Kebec. In the 
meanwhile there arrived an uncle of Teouatirhon, a 
War Captain, [217 i.e., 213] and a rather inconsider- 
ate man. The latter told his nephew that, when he 
was at the Island, an Algonquin had told him that 
the Hurons had killed two Frenchmen. At this 
news this poor young man and his companion pre- 
pared for flight ; for they were given to understand 
by this Captain that they would be made to atone for 
the death of the Frenchmen. At first they tried to 
get permission to depart ; but, as they had been given 
publicly, it was not desirable to receive them secret- 
ly — at least this was the case with the younger one 
named Aiandace, whose parents had not yet come 
down. As for Teouatirhon, since his relative asked 
for him, he was allowed to go. It would take too 
long if I should try to explain all the details of this 
affair. Since the secrets of the Savages are public 
talk, the report which was being circulated about the 
death of two Frenchmen became known, and this 
Huron Captain was detained ; he promised to remain 
a few days, but when night came he wanted to take 
flight with his nephew and with the other Seminarist, 
who threw himself down from a bastion of the fort, 
in order to escape. Our French people, their weap- 
ons in their hands, rushed forward and took this 
Captain prisoner, seeing he had violated his parole, 
and was trying to take away our Hurons. At this 
point Monsieur the Governor arrived [218 i.e., 214] 
at the three Rivers. I was with him, bringing our 
third Seminarist. Scarcely had we landed when 
some Huron canoes appeared, which dispelled these 
false rumors and assured us that the French were all 
well in their country, and that we would soon see 


96 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

d'auoir appris la verite: Neantmoins noflre Semina- 
rifle Teouatirhon perfeuerant dans la volont6 de re- 
tourner voir fes pares, notamment fa mere qui eft 
fort aagee, pour la foulager en ce qu'il pourroit dans 
leur maladie commune, nous luy donnafmes conge ; 
d'autant plus volontiers qu'il nous promit d'aller voir 
le P. de Brebeuf, pour continuer dans la bonne in- 
flruction qu'on k commence de luy donner au Semi- 
naire. Et afin de I'obliger d'auantage "k garder ce 
bon propos, le P. Paul Ragueneau que i'enuoiois aux 
Hurons s'embarqua auec luy dans vn mefme canot. 
Comme ils s'en alloient tous deux bien contens, I'vn 
de ce qu'il s'alloit facrifier a la croix de lefus Chrift 
pour fa gloire, 1' autre de ce qu'il s'en retournoit en 
fon pais, voilk qu'ils rencontrent en chemin Taratouan, 
braue Capitaine qui defcendoit aux [219 i.e., 215] 
Francois. Celuy cy voiant noflre Teouatirhon fon 
nepueu, le tance, commet, luy fit-il, mon nepueu, 
quittez vous ainfi les Fran§ois, qui vous ont fi 
bien traitt6? Ce pauure ieune gargon n'euft plus 
de parole, fmon pour tefmoigner qu'il efloit preft de 
retourner d'ou il venoit. Allons done, luy fit fon 
oncle, embarquez vous dans I'vn des canots qui me 
fuiuet car ie vous veux moy-mefme remener. II 
obeit fans replique, prend conge du P. Ragueneau 
qui tire outre pour fuiure fon chemin, auec les autres 
Hurons qui le coduifoient, fe mift en la compagnie de 
Taratouan, pour nous venir reuoir. Comme ils s'en 
venoient doucemet dans le grad lac de S. Pierre, qui 
n'eft pas beaucoup efloigne de noftre habitation, ils 
tombet dans vne embufcade d'Hiroquois leurs enne- 
mis, & les noflres. Taratouan, marchant le premier, 
eft le premier entoure. Ces demi demons fortent 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 97 

some of them coming down. Now affairs assume 
quite another aspect, — the Seminary that we thought 
dissolved, is established, the Captain is covered with 
confusion, each is glad to have learned the truth. 
Nevertheless, as our Seminarist, Teouaiirhon, per- 
severed in his desire to return and visit his parents, 
especially his mother, who is quite old, to do what 
he could to make her comfortable in the general mal- 
ady ; we gave him leave to do so — and so much the 
more willingly as he promised us to go and see Father 
de Brebeuf , in order to continue the good instruction 
he had begun to receive in the Seminary. And the 
more to constrain him to keep this good resolution, 
Father Paul Ragueneau,^ whom I was sending to the 
Hurons, went with him in the same canoe. As they 
departed, — both very happy, the one because he was 
going to sacrifice himself to the cross of Jesus Christ 
for his glory, the other because he was returning to 
his own land, — lo, they encountered on the way Ta- 
ratouan, a brave Captain who was going down to the 
[219 i.e., 215] French. He, upon seeing our Teoua- 
iirhon, his nephew, chided him, saying, " How now, 
my nephew, are you thus leaving the French, who 
have treated you so well?" This poor boy had 
nothing to say, except to assert that he was ready to 
return whence he had come. "Come, then," re- 
sponded his uncle, "embark in one of the canoes 
which are following me, for I wish myself to take 
you back." He obeyed, without a word; took leave 
of Father Ragueneau, who continued on his way 
with the other Hurons who were conducting him, and 
placed himself in company with Taratouan, to return 
to us. As they were coming slowly into the great 
lake of St. Pierre, which is not far from our settle- 


98 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.12 

comme de leur enfer, & fe iettet auec de grandes 
huees fur ce braue homme, qui fe vit plufhoft pris 
qu'il n'euft defcouuert rennemi. Auffi tofl la nou- 
uelle nous eft apport^e que Taratoilan & Teoiiatirkon 
noftre Seminarifte, eftoient prifonniers. Nous pen- 
fions tous que le Pere Ragueneau eftoit de la bande, 
mais quelques Hurons efchappez de ce danger, nous 
raconterent comme vn peu de temps auparauant 
[220 i.e. , 2 16] Teouatirhon I'auoit quitte pour defcendre 
5k bas auec fon oncle, ie m'oubliois de dire que nos 
PP. qui eftoient en la refidence de la Conception aux 
trois Riuieres, entendant les bruicts dont i'ai fait men- 
tion cy delTus, du maffacre des deux Fran9ois aux 
Hurons, & voians que Teouatirhon s'en voulant aller, 
renuerfoit le Seminaire, s'addrelTerent a Dieu, par 
I'entremife de noftre Pere S. Ignace, donans vne 
neufuaine de facrifices en fon honneur, k ce qu'il luy 
pleuft conduire c6t affaire k la gloire de noftre fouue- 
rain Maiflre. lis prierent k I'Autel, & ce grand 
Patriarche opera dans les cieux, quafi contre noftre 
attente. Car nous penfions tous que ce Seminarifte ne 
retourneroit iamais, au commencement nous iugions 
qu'il s'alloit perdre en fon pais, nonobftant toutes fes 
bonnes refolutions, car les occafions y font trop pref- 
f antes, puis aians entendu qu'il eftoit tombe entre 
les maing des Hiroquois, nous croions aifement qu'il 
f eroit brufle & mange de ces loups deuorans ; comme 
les penfdes affligeoient noftre coeur, & que I'alarme 
des ennemis, faifans vn gros de cinq cens hommes 
battoit nos aureilles, voila qu'on vift paroiftre vn ca- 
not d' Hiroquois fur la riuiere, dans lequel on ne voioit 
qu'vn bomme [221 i.e., 217] feul arm6 d'vne grande 
perche feulement, on ne fjauoit qu'en iuger. Le 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 99 

ment, they fell into an ambuscade of the Hiroquois, 
their enemies and ours. Taratouan, as he was in the 
lead, was the first one surrounded. These half-de- 
mons emerge, as it were from their hell, and fall 
with loud cries upon this brave man, who finds him- 
self captured before he is aware of the enemy. As 
soon as the news was brought to us that Taratouan 
and Teouatirhon, our Seminarist, were prisoners, we 
all thought that Father Ragueneau was of the band ; 
but a few Hurons, who had escaped this danger, told 
us how, a little while before, [220 i.e., 216] Teouati- 
rhon had left him to come down here with his uncle. 
I forgot to say that our Fathers who were in the resi- 
dence of the Conception, at the three Rivers, hearing 
the reports which I have mentioned above of the mas- 
sacre of two Frenchmen among the Hurons, and 
aware that Teouatirho7i s efforts to get away would 
ruin the Seminary, addressed themselves to God 
through the mediation of our Father, St. Ignace, 
offering a novena of sacrifices in his honor, that he 
might be pleased to direct this affair to the glory of 
our sovereign Master. They prayed at the Altar, 
and this grand Patriarch operated in heaven, but al- 
most against our expectations, for we all thought this 
Seminarist would never return. At first we sup- 
posed he would go to ruin in his country, notwith- 
standing all his good resolutions, for the temptations 
there are too importunate. Then, having heard that 
he had fallen into the hands of the Hiroquois, we 
thought of course he would be burned and eaten by 
those devouring wolves. While these thoughts were 
afflicting our hearts, and an alarming report was 
smiting our ears, that the enemy formed a body of 
five hundred men, lo, there appears upon the river 


100 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.12 

lour precedent on en auoit apperceu vn autre volti- 
geant deuant nos yeux, & comme nous brauant, fga- 
chant bien que nous n'eftions que peu de perfonnes 
dans noftre reduict. Comme done on voioit approcher 
ce canot, conduit par vn feul homme, les vns difoient, 
que c'eftoit quelque prifonnier qui fe fauuoit, les 
autres s'imaginoient que c'efloit vn Hiroquois qui 
nous venoit amufer, pendant que le gros nous vien- 
droit f urprendre par dedans les bois ; quelques Sau- 
uages vont au deuant pour le recognoiflre, lefquels 
aians apperceu que c'eftoit vn canot, non de Huron, 
ny de Montagnez, mais d* Hiroquois, prirent la fuite 
tant qu'ils peurent, s'efcriant Hiroquois, Hiroquois, 
Hiroquois, c'eft I'ennemi, c'eft I'ennemi, le canonier 
voiant c6t homme "k la port6e du canon le voulut tirer, 
mais Monfieur le Gouuerneur I'arrefla. Nous eitions 
tous fur vne platte forme, regardans ce pauure gar- 
9on, lequel aiant mis pied a terre, prit fa route vers 
nous, alors nous vifmes bien que c'efloit quelque 
pauure Huro, forti des griffes de ces tygres, pleuft a 
noftre Seigneur (difmes nous) que ce fuft noftre pau- 
ure Seminarifle Teouatirhoriy k peine auios [222 i. e. , 2 1 8] 
nous lafche la parole que Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur 
s'efcria, c'eft luy mefme, ie le cognois a fon port & 
a fa fa§on. C'eftoit luy en effect, lequel fe venoit 
reietter entre nos bras, comme en vn port de falut ; il 
eftoit nud comme la main, excepte vn mefchant braier 
qui luy couuroit ce que les yeux ne fgauroient regar- 
der fans pudeur. Eftant arriue il nous racompta, 
qu' aiant veu fon oncle Taratoiian, puiffamment affailli, 
il s' eftoit efforce auec les camarades a grandes tires 
de rames de fe fauuer. Nous fufmes, difoit-il, pour- 
fuiuis par plufieurs canots d' Hiroquois, mais aians 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 101 

an Hiroquois canoe, in which is seen a single man, 
[221 i.e., 217] armed only with a long pole. No one 
knew what to think of it. The day before, another 
one had been seen, hovering before our eyes as if to 
brave ns, knowing well that we were only a few per- 
sons in our fort. So when this canoe was seen ap- 
proaching, guided by a single man, certain ones said 
it was some fugitive prisoner ; others imagined that 
it was an Hiroquois who came to divert our attention, 
while the main body of their men would come and 
surprise us from within the woods. Some of the 
Savages went forward to reconnoitre; having per- 
ceived that it was a canoe, neither of the Hurons nor 
of the Montagnez, but of the Hiroquois, they fled as 
rapidly as they could, crying, " Hiroquois, Hiro- 
quois, Hiroquois! the enemy, the enemy!" The 
cannoneer, seeing this man within cannon-range, 
wished to fire, but Monsieur the Governor stopped 
him. We were all upon a platform, watching this 
poor boy, who, having landed, turned toward us. 
Then we saw plainly that it was some poor Huron 
escaped from the claws of those tigers. ' ' Would to 
our Lord, ' ' (we said) ' ' that this were our poor Semi- 
narist Teouatirhon." Scarcely had [222 i.e., 218] we 
uttered the words when Monsieur our Governor ex- 
claimed, "It is he indeed ; I know him by his walk 
and his figure." It was really he, coming to throw 
himself again into our arms as into a port of safety. 
He was as naked as one's hand, except for a ragged 
clout which covered what the eyes cannot behold 
without shame. When he reached us, he related 
how, having seen his uncle Taratouan attacked by a 
strong force, he and his companions had striven to 
escape by strong thrusts of the paddles. * ' We were 


102 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

quelque auace nous abordafmes les premiers la terre 
du cofl6 du Slid, & abadonnant noflre canot, & tout 
noftre efquipage, nos robes mefmes, pour eftre plus 
legers, nous nous iettafmes dans les bois, qui d'vn 
coft^, qui de I'autre. L'ennemi nous fuiuoit k la 
courfe: la nuict nous cacha, & nous rendit la vie. 
Car ces voleurs nous perdans de veue, perdirent aufli 
I'efperance de nous attraper. Aiant demeure vn iour 
cache ie trauerfai "k la defrobee vers le grad fleuue, 
tirat vers les trois Riuieres. Comme i'approchois de 
ces riues i'apperceus vn canot d'Hiroquois; ie de- 
meure \k tout efpouuante, m'imaginant que i'eftois re- 
tombe entre les pattes de ces beftes farouches, i'efcou- 
tai fi ie n'etendrois [223 i.e., 219] aucun bruict. En 
fin voiant que tout eftoit dans le filence, ie m'approche 
doucement, ie regarde de tous coftez, & ne voiant 
perfonne, ie prens vne perche & me iette das ce ca- 
not, pour me venir fauuer au lieu que i'auois aban- 
donn6. Nous le receufmes de bo coeur, comme vne 
pauure oiiaille errante. Le P. Daniel luy demanda 
s'il ne s'eftoit point recommand^ ^ Dieu dans ce de- 
faftre. Ah! dit-il, que ie le priois de bon coeur. 
L'auanture de ce pauure ieune Huron, fut iug^e fi 
grade que quelques vns le voiat efchappe creurent 
qu'il eftoit deuenu efpion, & que les Hiroquois luy 
auoient fauu6 la vie, pour nous venir trahir, ou plu- 
ftoft ceux de fa nation. Mais helas ! le pauure gar9o 
fit bien paroiftre le contraire, defirant de s'en aller 
en diligence "k Kebec, pour prendre quelque repos, 
& fe faire pefer d'vne bleflure qu'il s'eftoit fait en 
fuiant, les orties & les halliers luy auoient defchire 
la peau courant dedans le bois. 

Le P. Daniel luy aiant tefmoign6 de la trifteffe 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 103 

pursued," said he, "by several Hiroquois canoes; 
but, having a little start of them, we were the first 
to land on the Southern shore ; and, abandoning our 
canoe and all our baggage, even our robes, so as to be 
less encumbered, we rushed into the woods, each tak- 
ing a different direction. The enemy followed us on 
the run ; night concealed us and gave us our lives ; 
for when these robbers lost sight of us, they also lost 
hope of capturing us. Having remained in hiding 
one day, I stealthily crossed over towards the great 
river in the direction of the three Rivers. As I ap- 
proached its banks I perceived an Hiroquois canoe ; I 
stood there horrified, imagining that I had again fall- 
en into the clutches of those ferocious beasts. I 
listened, to hear [223 i.e., 219] some noise. At last, 
perceiving that all was silent, I approached noiseless- 
ly ; I looked all around, and, seeing no one, I took a 
pole and sprang into the canoe, to escape to the place 
I had abandoned." We received him gladly, as a 
poor wandering sheep. Father Daniel asked him if 
he had not commended himself to God in his calam- 
ity. ' ' Ah, ' ' said he, ' ' how heartily I prayed to him. ' ' 
This adventure of this poor young Huron was consid- 
ered so remarkable that some, seeing that he had 
escaped, believed that he had become a spy, and that 
the Hiroquois had saved his life that he might come 
and betray us, or rather the people of his nation. 
But ah, the poor boy made the contrary very appar- 
ent by wishing to go posthaste to Kebec, to get 
there some rest and to have a wound attended to that 
he had received in his flight, for the nettles and 
thickets had lacerated his flesh while running through 
the woods. 

When Father Daniel expressed to him his regret 


104 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.12 

pour la perte de fon oncle Taratoiian, lequel n'eftoit 
pas encore inftruit, il repartit qu'il luy auoit declare 
les principaux articles de noftre creance, felon qu'on 
luy auoit enfeign6 au Seminaire. Au refte quelques 
iours apres vn Huron fe fauuant [224 i.e., 220] ra- 
compta qu'il s'eftoit cach^ dedans des joncs fans 
branfler, d'ou il entendoit ces bourreaux tourmentans 
fes pauures camarades prifonniers, i'entendois, difoit- 
il, Taratoiian chanter auffi fortement & auffi gaiement, 
que s'il euft eft6 parmi fes amis. Comme i'eftois 
couch^ nud dans la vafe, cacb^ feulement par des 
joncs, & que cette pofture me contraignoit fort, ce 
pauure Capitaine me donnoit tant de courage, par fa 
conftance, & par la fermete de fa voix, que ie me 
penfai leuer plus de trois fois, pour m'aller rendre 
compagnons de fes tourmens. Voila vne eftrange 
auanture, le ieune Seminarifle fera bien chaflie, s'il 
ne recognoifb la main de Dieu en fa conduite. Ce 
n'eft pas la premiere fois que fa bonte la deliure 
des mains & de la dent de fes ennemis ; comme il eft 
defia grand & courageux, il voulut fuiure quelque 
Montagnez qui s'en alloient "k la guerre ce Printemps, 
nous Tempefchafmes, luy reprefentant qu'il deuoit 
obei'r, puis qu'en fon pais mefme on ne faifoit pas 
d'eftat d'vn ieune homme d'efobeilTant \sc. defobe- 
iffant] k fon Capitaine, s'il y fuft all6 il eftoit pour y 
perdre la vie, auffi bien que les autres, qui furent fur- 
pris & mis en partie "k mort. C'eft alfez parlons des 
deux autres fes compagnons. 

[225 i.e., 221] I'ay dit que le fecond de nos Semi- 
narifles fe nommoit Andehoua, celuy cy eft d'vn bon 
naturel, comme ie I'eus remene aux trois Riuieres, 
il fut bien eflonn6, voiant que Trouatichon, I'vn de 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s7 105 

for the loss of his uncle Taratouan, who had not yet 
been instructed, he replied that he had imparted to 
him the chief articles of our belief as it had been 
taught to him at the Seminary. Besides, some days 
later, a fugitive Huron [224 i.e., 220] related that he 
had lain concealed in the rushes, motionless, whence 
he heard these butchers tormenting his poor captive 
comrades, " I heard," said he, '* Taratouari singing 
as loudly and as gayly as if he were among his 
friends. As I was lying naked in the mud, hidden 
only by the rushes, and in a very cramped position, 
this poor Captain gave me so much courage, by his 
steadfastness and by the firmness of his voice, that 
more than thrice I was tempted to rise and become 
his companion in his torments." This is truly a 
strange adventure; the young Seminarist will be 
severely chastised if he does not recognize the hand 
of God in this guidance. It is not the first time that 
his goodness has delivered him from the hands and 
teeth of his enemies. As he is already tall and dar- 
ing, he desired to follow some Montagnez who were 
going to war this Spring; we forbade him, repre- 
senting to him that he ought to be obedient, since 
even in his own country they did not think much of 
a young man who did not obey his Captain. If he 
had gone with them, it would have been to lose his 
life, as did the others, who were surprised, and part 
of whom were killed. Enough; let us speak of the 
two others, his companions. 

[225 i.e., 221] I have said that the second of our 
Seminarists was called Andehoua. This one has a 
good disposition. When I took him up to the three 
Rivers, he was much surprised to see that Trouatichon 
[Teouatirhon ?] , one of his comrades, wished to go 


106 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 12 

fes caniarad.es s'en vouloit aller, il fe perdra, difoit- 
il, li toft qu'il fera arriu^ au pais, comme il le vit fur 
fon depart il luy dit: Tu fgais bien, mon cher com- 
pagnon, comme nous auons toufiours vefcu en bonne 
intelligence, continuous dans cette amiti6, fouuienne 
toy qu'aupa[ra]uant que nous cogneuflions Dieu, 
nous viuions comme des befles, ne retournons point 
h. noftre premiere ignorance, prends garde k toy, 
n'oublie point ce qu'on nous a enfeign6. II difoit 
cela auec vne grande douceur, & pour conclufion 
il luy fit vn petit prefent que nous leur [sc. lui] 
donnafmes, en figne de I'amour qu'il luy portoit. 
II a fait d'autres actions pleines d'edification. 
Quelques canots eftans arriuez de fon pais, voiant 
qu'ils apportoient des malades, il les alloit vifiter, 
& k peine eftant cathecumene, il faifoit du Predi- 
cateur. Ce n'eft pas merueille, leur difoit-il, fi 
nous gueriffons fi rarement & fi nous mourons fi 
fouuent, nous ne cognoillons point le Maiftre de la 
vie, nous ne le prions point, au contraire nous le 
fafchons fans ceffe. Ces compatriotes [226 i.e., 222] 
luy demandans, en quoy ils le pouuoient fafcher, 
il leur expliquoit les Commandemens de Dieu, & 
puis leur difoit, nous menons vne vie toute con- 
traire k ces paroles ; mais encor (luy repliquoient-ils) 
les Francois ne defrobent-ils iamais, iamais ne 
font-ils impudiques? Les bons, refp6doit-il, ne com- 
mettent iamais ces malices, les autres y eftans 
tombez s'en repentent, en demandent pardon h. Dieu, 
qui leur fait mif ericorde ; mais nous autres nous nous 
plongeos dans nos offences, fans iamais les reuoquer : 
les pauures gens fe regardoient les vns les autres, 
auec eftonnement voiant vn ieune Barbare de leur 


1637] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 107 

away. " He will be ruined," said he, " as soon as 
he reaches his country;" and, when he saw him 
about to depart, he said, "Thou knowest well, my 
dear comrade, how we have always lived on good 
terms ; let us continue in this friendship ; remember 
that, before we knew God, we lived like beasts; let 
us not return to our early ignorance ; be careful of 
thyself, do not forget what has been taught us. ' ' He 
said this with great gentleness, and finally offered 
him a little present that we had given him, in token 
of the love he bore him. He did other things 
that were greatly to our edification. Some canoes 
having arrived from his country, seeing that they 
carried some sick people, he went to visit them, and, 
though hardly a catechumen, he acted as Preacher. 
" It is no wonder," said he to them, " that we are so 
seldom healed, and so often die ; we do not know the 
Master of life, we do not pray to him ; on the con- 
trary, we are continually displeasing him." His 
countrymen [226 i.e., 222] asking him in what they 
could have offended him, he explained to them the 
Commandments of God, and then said to them, " We 
lead a life exactly contrary to these words." " But, 
after all ' ' (they replied to him) ' ' do the French 
never steal, are they never unchaste ? " " The good 
ones," he answered, "never commit these sins; the 
others, who are guilty of them, repent and ask God's 
pardon for them, and he is merciful to them ; but, 
as for us, we plunge into our offenses without ever 
correcting them." These poor folk looked at each 
other with astonishment, at seeing a young Barba- 
rian of their nation become a Preacher of the law of 
the great God. As they often came into our house and 
cast their eyes upon some paper pictures, this young 


108 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

nation deuenu Predicateur de la loy du grand Dieu. 
Comme ils entroient affez fouuent en noftre maifon, 
& qu'ils iettoient les yeux fur quelques images de 
papier, ce ietine Cathecumene leur expliquoit ce 
qu'elles vouloient dire. II leur prefchoit lefus Christ 
crucifix k la vene de fa croix, noubliant pas fes gran- 
deurs, apres auoir parl6 de fes balleffes ; en vn mot 
ce nous eftoit vne grande ioie de voir de nos yeux la 
verity de ces paroles, Pauperes Eudgelizantur . Or 
iagoit que ce bon ieune homme nous donne de grades 
efperances neatmoins il eft n6 das la barbaric, c'eft 
'k dire, dans Tincoftance, c'eft pourquoy il a bon be- 
foin d'eftre fecouru des [227 i.e., 223] prieres de V. 
R. & de tous ceux qui cherifset cette Million, afin que 
celuy qui donne du poids au vents, raffermilTc dans 
le bien que luy mefme a commence. 

Noftre troifiefme Seminarifle fe nomoit A'iandac^^ 
c'eftoit le plus ieune de fes compagnons, nous le re- 
gardions au commencemet come vn petit Benjamin, 
en effet il s'efl fort bien comporte. II s'efl rendu 
fort obeilTant; mais come il eftoit le moins efloigne 
de la mamelle (pour ainfi dire) de tous les autres, 
auffi a-il delire plus ardamment de retourner voir fa 
mere & fa nourrice. II s'eft embarque auec le P. 
Pierre Pijart, promettant de Taller voir fouuet fur 
le pais, voire mefme demeurer vne annee auec Echon, 
s'il I'a pour agreable, & en fin de nous reuenir voir 
I'a prochain auec quelques vns de fes camarades, qu'il 
ameneroit, dit-il, au Seminaire. le m'en rapporte, 
Dieu le vueille conferuer, & luy donner bon confeil. 
Voila comme fe font coportez nos Seminariftes a la 
venue de leur copatriotes, s'ils nous confoloiet d'vn 
cofte. La cotagion qui affligeoit ces peuples, nous 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 109 

Catechumen explained to them what these meant. 
He preached to them Jesus Christ crucified, at the 
sight of his cross, not forgetting his glory, after hav- 
ing spoken of his humiliation. In a word, it caused 
us great joy to see with our own eyes, the truth of 
those words, Pauperes Evangelizantur . Now although 
this good young man seems to us very promising, 
yet he was born in barbarism, that is to say, in in- 
constancy ; therefore he has great need of being suc- 
cored by the [227 i.e., 223] prayers of Your Rever- 
ence and of all those who cherish this Mission, to 
the end that he who gives force to the winds may 
establish him in the good which he himself has 
begun. 

The name of our third Seminarist, who was the 
youngest of them all, was AiandacL At first, we 
regarded him as a little Benjamin; and in fact he 
behaved very well, showing himself remarkably 
obedient. But as he was less removed than all the 
others from the breast (so to speak), so he desired 
the more ardently to go back and see his mother and 
nurse. He embarked with Father Pierre Pijart, 
promising to go and see him often while at home, — 
indeed, even to stay a year with Echon, if agreeable 
to him, — and finally to return to us the following 
year with some of his comrades, whom he would 
bring, he said, to the Seminary. Whether he will 
do so, I cannot say ; may God preserve him, and 
give him good counsel. Such, then, was the behav- 
ior of our Seminarists at the coming of their country- 
men. If they consoled us on the one hand, the epi- 
demic which afflicted these peoples saddened us on 
the other, for it snatched from us the young people 
who were intended for us. Teouatirhon, seeing one 


no LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

attrifloit de I'autre. Car elle nous rauiffoit les ieunes 
ges qui no^ eftoiet deftinez. Teouatirhd voiant arri- 
uer apres foy vn fie camarade fauue du feu auffi bien 
que luy, remmena auec [228 i.e., 224] foy au Semi- 
naire, pour luy eftre compagnos dans vn grand bon- 
heur, comme ils I'auoient efte dans le malheur. lis 
partirent trois de compagnie auec le P. Daniel, qui 
les recoduifoit a Kebec, oil nous auos drelTe le Semi- 
naire. Comme ils s'embarquoient dans vn canot, 
Monfieur de Chafteau-fort imitant volontiers I'affe- 
ction de Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, qui eftoit alle 
donner la chaffe aux Hiroquois, les fit faluer a coups 
de canon, pour tefmoigner a ces ieunes Sauuages, & 
a tous leurs compatriotes que nos Capitaines cheriffent 
& honorent tous ceux qui fe veulent ranger fous 
I'eftandart de noflre creance. 

Ceux-cy efhans partis, quelque iours apres vne 
efcouade de Hurons leuerent leurs tentes & leurs 
pauillons, d'aupres de noftre habitation, pour s'en 
retourner en leur pais, remenant auec eux (comme 
i'ay dit) le P. Pijart. Or ils n'efloient pas encore a 
demie-lieue de nous, que voicy paroiftre vn ieune gar- 
gon, lequel auoit quitte \k fes compatriotes pour s'en 
venir, difoit-il, demeurer en noftre Seminaire, vne 
heure apres il en vint encor vn autre, nous demander 
la mefme faueur. le ne f9ai fi I'honneur que Monfieur 
noftre Gouuerneur venoit de faire au P. qui [229 i.e., 
225] fortes [sc. fortoit] d'auec nous, le conduifant iuf- 
ques a so canot, carefCant les Sauuages par quelques 
pref ens, pour marque del' eftime qu'il faifoit de nous, 
les auoit incite h. cela ; ou s'ils auoiet appris de nos 
Seminariftes le bon traittemet que nous leur faifions, 
ou pluftoft fi Dieu ne les auoit point fortement tou- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 111 

of his comrades — who, like himself, had escaped 
from the fire — arrive after him, brought him with 
[228 i.e., 224] him to the Seminary, to be his com- 
panion in great blessings, as he had been in misfor- 
tunes. These three departed in company with Fa- 
ther Daniel, who took them back to Kebec, where 
we have established the Seminary. As they were 
embarking in a canoe, Monsieur de Chasteau-fort, 
cheerfully imitating the friendliness of Monsieur our 
Governor, who had gone in pursuit of the Hiroquois, 
had a cannon salute fired for them, to prove to these 
young Savages and to all their countrymen that our 
Captains cherish and honor all those who are willing 
to range themselves under the standard of our faith. 
A few days after their departure, a band of Hurons 
took up their tents and pavilions from the neighbor- 
hood of our settlement, to return to their own coun- 
try, taking with them, as I have said. Father Pijart. 
Now they were not yet half a league away from us 
when lo, a boy appeared who had left his country- 
men there, to come, he said, to live in our Semi- 
nary. An hour later, still another came to ask from 
us the same favor. I do not know whether the honor 
that Monsieur our Governor had just shown to the 
Father who [229 i.e., 225] was leaving us — escort- 
ing him as far as his canoe, and propitiating the Sav- 
ages by presents, as a token of the esteem he had for 
us — had incited them to this act, whether they had 
learned from our Seminarists the good usage we had 
bestowed upon them, or, rather, whether it was be- 
cause God had deeply touched them; be this as it 
may, they came to throw themselves into our arms 
without asking us whether we would receive them. 
I thanked God from the bottom of my heart when I 


112 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

chez, quoy que s'en foit, ils fe vindrent letter entre 
nos bras, fans nous demander fi nous les voulions ac- 
cepter, le remerciai Dieu de bon coeur, apprenant 
de quelques-vns de nos hommes qui auoient eft6 aux 
Hurons, que I'vn d'eux pour le moins, eftoit d'vn 
excellet naturel, & qu'il frequentoit fouuent Ik haut 
en fon pais, en noftre maifon ou cabane. Car en- 
core que nous foions bien aifes d'auoir des Semina- 
riftes, fi eft-ce que comme nous n'en pouuos pas tenir 
li grand nombre, il eft a propos de n'en prendre au- 
cun de mauuaife humeur, c'eft ce qui nous en k fait 
refufer vn, qui fe prefentoit de bon coeur, mais Teou- 
atirhofi nous aduertit en fecret qu'il eftoit polTede 
par fois de quelque demon, ou de quelque noire me- 
lancholie, c'eft pourquoy nous le congediafmes, de 
peur qu'il n'offengaft les autres. 

Outre ces ieunes plantes, il en venoit deux autres 
de la bourgade de Teanojieae, mais helas ! les pauures 
enfans ont efte pris en chemin [230 i.e., 226] auec 
leurs parens par les Hiroquois, leur cruels ennemis. 
Quand ie les vis depeints dans le nombre des captifs, 
comme ie dirai au journal, cela me fift feigner le 
coeur. 

De I'heure que i'efcris cecy, nous en attendos en- 
cor trois de Offofandue [OffofTane] & cinq ou fix 
de diuers autres endroits : ils ont tous don6 leur pa- 
role a nos Peres, voire mefme le Capitaine de Khion- 
daefahan, voiant que la ieunelfe de diuers endroits fe 
difpofoit pour venir demeurer auec les Fran9ois, dit 
au P. Pierre Pi j art qu'il vouloit eftre de la partie, & 
qu'il nous en enuoiroit de fa bourgade. On dit par 
vn vieux prouerbe qu'k quelque chofe mal'heur eft 
bon; I'Epidimie & la mort mefme, «& pent eftre en- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 113 

learned, from some of our men who had been among 
the Hurons, that at least one of these lads had an 
excellent disposition, and that, up yonder in his own 
country, he was a frequent visitor at our house or 
cabin. For although we are very glad to get Semi- 
narists, yet, as we cannot keep a great many of them, 
it is expedient not to take any of bad temper. This 
is what caused us to refuse one who presented him- 
self very willingly; but, as Teouatirhon warned us 
secretly that he was at times possessed by some de- 
mon, or a sort of black melancholy, we dismissed 
him, lest he might have a bad influence on the 
others. 

Besides these young plants, came two others from 
the village of Teanostea^. But alas ! the poor children 
were captured on the way, [230 i.e., 226] with their 
parents, by their cruel enemies, the Hiroquois. 
When I saw them pictured among the number of 
captives, as I shall relate in the journal, it made my 
heart bleed. 

At the time when I write this we are expecting 
three others from Ossosandu6 [Ossossane], and five 
or six from various other places, all of whom have 
given their word to our Fathers. Indeed, even 
the Chief of Khionda'esahan,"' seeing that the boys 
from various places were preparing to come and live 
with the French, told Father Pierre Pi j art that he 
wished to participate in this movement, and that he 
would send us boys from his village. An old prov- 
erb says that ' ' misfortune is good for something ; ' ' 
the Epidemic and the mortality itself — and perhaps 
even the report of war, which will, perchance, pre- 
vent these people from coming down and from bring- 
ing their children to the Seminary — will be a bene- 


114 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

core la nouuelle de la guerre, qui empefchera para- 
uanture ces peuples de defcendre, & d'apporter leurs 
enfaUvS au Seminaire, nous foulagera. Car vn plus 
grand nombre nous opprelTeroit, les defpences qu'il 
faut faire pour habiller & nourrir ces ieunes gens, 
font plus grandes qu'on ne f9auroit penfer: ils vien- 
nent nuds comme vn ver, ils s'en retournent bien 
veftus, il leur faut entretenir maifon, vn bon emmeu- 
blement, des matelats & des couuertures, de bons 
habits, quantity d'eftoffes & de linge, vne grande 
nourriture, [231 i.e., 227] des perfonnes pour les in- 
flruire, & feruir, quand ce ne feroit que pour les aider 
I'Hiuer k tirer du bois de chauffage. 

Ce n'efl pas tout, il faut des prefens pour leurs parens 
& pour leurs amis, voil^ comme on gaigne au com- 
mencement des hommes Barbares. Deuant que tons 
ces grands befoings aiet fait milles lieues, pour nous 
venir trouuer, il y a bien de faux frais & bien du de- 
chet. Tout cela ne nous eftonne point, les coffres 
de Dieu font grands, fi fa Maiefte veut entrer par fes 
voies dans I'ame de ces pauures Sauuages, elle en 
trouuera bien I'ouuerture. Que tous les Anges luy 
rendent honneur & loUange dedans les cieux. 

Ce nous eft affez de confolation apres tant de bou- 
rafques, de voir ces ieunes gens en bonne intelligence, 
bien deliberez de prefter I'aureille k noftre creance, 
& de viure no plus en barbares, & en Sauuages, mais 
en bons Chreftiens. 

Difons encore deux mots deuant que de conclure 
ce chapitre, le Pere Brebeuf ma enuoi6 vne inftru- 
ction, que ie fais lire k tous nos Peres que i'enuoie 
aux Hurons. I'ay creu qu'il feroit a propos de la 
mettre icy afin que ceux qui feroient deftinez pour 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 116 

fit to US. For a greater number would inconvenience 
us ; the expenses that must be incurred in clothing 
and feeding these boys are greater than one would 
imagine. They come as naked as worms, they re- 
turn well clothed; they must be provided with a 
house, good furniture, mattresses and blankets, good 
clothes, quantities of cloth and linen, a great deal of 
food, [231 i.e., 227] and persons to instruct and wait 
on them, even if it be only to help them get firewood 
during the Winter. 

This is not all, for presents must be made to their 
parents and friends. Thus it is that Barbarous peo- 
ple are won, at the start. Before all these costly 
comforts have traveled thousands of miles to find us, 
there are many useless expenses and a great deal of 
waste. But all this does not confound us, for God's 
coffers are large ; if his Majesty wishes to enter, in 
his own way, the souls of these poor Savages, he will 
find means to do so. May all the Angels in heaven 
render him honor and praise. 

It is consolation enough for us, after so many vex- 
ations, to see these lads living in harmony, fully 
determined to give ear to our belief, and to live no 
longer as barbarians and Savages, but as good Chris- 
tians. 

Let us say a few words more before concluding 
this chapter. Father Brebeuf sent me some instruc- 
tions, which I have all our Fathers read whom I 
send to the Hurons. I thought it would be wise to 
place them here, so that those who should be ap- 
pointed to this mission [232 i.e., 228] might see from 
France the trials with which they will have to con- 
tend. I know very well that the greater these trials 
are made, the more ardor we see in our Fathers, who 


116 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

cefle miflio, [232 i.e., 228] viffent des la France les 
difficultez qu'ils ont k combattre: le fgais bien que 
plus on les fait grandes plus nous voions d'ardeur de- 
dans nos Peres iufques h. les delirer trop auidement. 
C'eft mieux fait k mon aduis, quand on eft encore en 
France, de ne point penfer n'y aux Hurons, ny aux 
Algonquins, ny au Motagnez, ny k Kebec, ny a Mif- 
kou, ni mefme a conuertir les Sauuages, mais a pren- 
dre la Croix par oil lefus Chrift nous la prefentera, 
venons au poinct. 

INSTRVCTION POVR LES PERES DE NOSTRE COMPAGNIES 
QUI SERONT ENUOIEZ AUX HURONS. 

LES Peres & Freres que Dieu appellera k la Sainte 
Million des Hurons, doiuent diligemmet pre- 
uoir tons les trauaux, les peines, & les perils qu'il 
faut encourir en faifant ce voiage afin de fe refou- 
dre de bonne heure k tous les accidens qui peuuent 
arriuer. 

Faut aimer de coeur les Sauuages, les regardans 
comme rachetez du fang du fils de Dieu, & comme 
nos freres, auec lefquels nous deuons paller le refte 
de noftre vie. 

Pour agreer aux Sauuages faut predre garde de ne 
fe faire iamais attedre pour s'ebarquer. 

II faut faire prouifion d'vn fufil ou d'vn [233 i.e., 229] 
miroir ardant, ou de tous les deux, afin de leur faire 
du feu pendant le iour pour petuner, & le foir, quand 
il faudra cabaner, ces petits feruices leur gagnent le 
coeur. 

II faut s'efforcer de manger de leurs fagamitez ou 
falmigondits, en la fajon qu'il les appreftent, encor 
qu'elles foient fales «& demi cuites, & tres-infipides. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 117 

even go so far as to wish for them too eagerly. It 
is better, in my opinion, while one is still in France, 
not to think either of the Hurons, or of the Algon- 
quins, or of the Montagnez, or of Kebec, or of Mis- 
kou, or even of converting the Savages, but to take 
up the Cross wherever Jesus Christ shall offer it to 
us. Let us come to the point. 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE FATHERS OF OUR SOCIETY 
WHO SHALL BE SENT TO THE HURONS. 

THE Fathers and Brethren whom God shall call 
to the Holy Mission of the Hurons ought to 
exercise careful foresight in regard to all the hard- 
ships, annoyances, and perils that must be encoun- 
tered in making this journey, in order to be prepared 
betimes for all emergencies that may arise. 

You must have sincere affection for the Savages, — 
looking upon them as ransomed by the blood of the 
son of God, and as our brethren, with whom we are 
to pass the rest of our lives. 

To conciliate the Savages, you must be careful 
never to make them wait for you in embarking. 

You must provide yourself with a tinder box^ or 
with a [233 i.e., 229] burning mirror, or with both, 
to furnish them fire in the daytime to light their 
pipes, and in the evening when they have to encamp ; 
these little services win their hearts. 

You should try to eat their sagamite or salmagundi 
in the way they prepare it, although it may be dirty, 
half-cooked, and very tasteless. As to the other 
numerous things which may be unpleasant, they 
must be endured for the love of God, without saying 
anything or appearing to notice them. 


118 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.12 

Pour les autres chofes qui font en grand nombre, qui 
peuuent defplaire, il les faut fupporter pour Tamour 
de Dieu, fans en dire mot, ou fans en faire femblant. 

II eft bon au commencement, de prendre tout ce 
qu'ils baillent, encore que vous ne le puiffiez tout ma- 
ger: car quand on eft vn peu accouftume on n'en a 
pas trop. 

II faut s'efforcer de manger des le poinct du iour, 
n'eftoit que vous puiffiez embarquer voftre plat: car 
la iournee eft bie logue, pour la palTer fans manger. 
Les Barbares ne mangent qu'au refueil, & au coucher 
du Soleil quand ils font en chemin. 

II faut eftre prompt &, s' embarquer, & k f e def em- 
barquer, & retrouller tellement fes habits, qu'on ne 
fe moiiille point, & qu'on ne porte ny eau ny fable 
dans le canot. II faut aller nuds pieds & nues iambes, 
afin d' eftre mieux appareille ; paffant les fauts on 
peut [234 i.e., 230] prendre fes fouliers, & aux longs 
portages on peut mefme prendre fes bas de chauffes. 

/I fe faut comporter en forte, qu'on ne foit point 
du tout importun k pas vn de ces Barbares. 

71 n' eft pas k propos de faire tant d' interrogations, 
il ne faut pas fuiure le defir qu'on a d'apprendre la 
langue, & de faire quelques remarques fur le chemin, 
on peut exceder en ce poinct, il faut deliurer de cet 
ennui, ceux de voftre canot, veu mefme qu'on ne 
f§auroit profiter beaucoup dans ces trauaux, le filence 
eft vn bon meuble en ce temps la. 

I\ faut fupporter leurs imperfections fans mot dire, 
voire mefme fans en faire femblat, que s'il eft befoin 
de repredre quelque chofe il le faut faire modefte- 
ment, & auec des paroles & des fignes qui tefmoignent 
de I'amour, & non de I'auerfion, bref il faut tafcher 
de fe tenir & monftrer toufiours ioieux. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6j7 119 

It is well at first to take everything they offer, al- 
though you may not be able to eat it all ; for, when 
one becomes somewhat accustomed to it, there is not 
too much. 

You must try and eat at daybreak unless you can 
take your meal with you in the canoe ; for the day 
is very long, if you have to pass it without eating. 
The Barbarians eat only at Sunrise and Sunset, when 
they are on their journeys. 

You must be prompt in embarking and disembark- 
ing ; and tuck up your gowns so that they will not 
get wet, and so that you will not carry either water 
or sand into the canoe. To be properly dressed, you 
must have your feet and legs bare ; while crossing 
the rapids, you can [234 i.e., 230] wear your shoes, 
and, in the long portages, even your leggings. 

You must so conduct yourself as not to be at all 
troublesome to even one of these Barbarians. 

It is not well to ask many questions, nor should 
you yield to your desire to learn the language and 
to make observations on the way ; this may be car- 
ried too far. You must relieve those in your canoe 
of this annoyance, especially as you cannot profit 
much by it during the work. Silence is a good 
equipment at such a time. 

You must bear with their imperfections without 
saying a word, yes, even without seeming to notice 
them. Even if it be necessary to criticise anything, 
it must be done modestly, and with words and signs 
which evince love and not aversion. In short, you 
must try to be, and to appear, always cheerful. 

Each one should be provided with half a gross of 
awls, two or three dozen little knives called jambettes 
[pocket-knives], a hundred fishhooks, with some beads 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

Vn chacun doit eftre pourueu d'vne demi-groffe 
d'alefnes, de deux ou trois douzaines de petits cou- 
fteaux qu'on appelle jambettes, d'vne centaine d'hains, 
auec quelques canons & rallades, afin d'achepter du 
poiflon, ou antres commoditez an rencontre des na- 
tions, pour f eftoier f es Sauuages, &feroit [235 i.e., 231] 
bon de leur dire des le commencement, voila pour 
achepter du poiffon. Vn chacun es portages s'effor- 
cera de porter quelque petite chofe felon fes forces, fi 
peu qu'on porte aggree fort aux Sauuages, ne fuffe 
qu'vne chaudiere. 

II ne faut point eftre ceremonieux auec les Sau- 
uages, ains accepter les biens qu'ils vous prefentent, 
comme feroit quelque bonne place dans la cabane. 
Les plus grandes commoditez, font pleines d'affez 
grandes incommoditez, & ces ceremonies les off encent. 

Qu'on prenne garde de ne nuire ^ perfonne dans 
le canot auec fon chappeau, il faut pluflofl prendre 
fon bonnet de nuict. II n'y a point d'indecence par- 
mi les Sauuages. 

Ne donnez pied k rien, fi vous n'auez enuie de 
continuer: par exemple, ne commencez point a ra- 
mer, fi vous n'auez enuie de ramer toufiours. Pre- 
nez d6s le commencemet la place dans le canot que 
vous defirez conferuer, ne leur preflez point vos ha- 
bits, fi vous n'auez enuie de leur laifTer tout le voiage. 
II efl plus aif6 de refufer du commencement, que 
de redemander, de changer ou defifter par apres. 

En fin perfuadez vous que les Sauuages [236 i.e., 232] 
retiedront la mefme penf6e de vous dans le pais, 
qu'ils auront eu par le chemin, & quiconque auroit 
paffe pour vne perfonne fafcheufe & difficile, auroit 
par apres bien de la peine d'ofter cette opinion. 
Vous auez affaire non feulement "k ceux de voftre ca- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 121 

of plain and colored glass, with which to buy fish or 
other articles when the tribes meet each other, so as 
to feast the Savages; and it would be [235 i.e., 231] 
well to say to them in the beginning, " Here is 
something with which to buy fish." Each one will 
try, at the portages, to carry some little thing, ac- 
cording to his strength ; however little one carries, 
it greatly pleases the Savages, if it be only a kettle. 

You must not be ceremonious with the Savages, 
but accept the comforts they offer you, such as a good 
place in the cabin. The greatest conveniences are 
attended with very great inconvenience, and these 
ceremonies offend them. 

Be careful not to annoy any one in the canoe with 
your hat ; it would be better to take your nightcap. 
There is no impropriety among the Savages. 

Do not undertake anything unless you desire to 
continue it; for example, do not begin to paddle un- 
less you are inclined to continue paddling. Take 
from the start the place in the canoe that you wish 
to keep; do not lend them your garments, unless 
you are willing to surrender them during the whole 
journey. It is easier to refuse at first than to ask 
them back, to change, or to desist afterwards. 

Finally, understand that the Savages [236 i.e., 232] 
will retain the same opinion of you in their own 
country that they will have formed on the way ; and 
one who has passed for an irritable and troublesome 
person will have considerable difficulty afterwards 
in removing this opinion. You have to do not only 
with those of your own canoe, but also (if it must be 
so stated) with all those of the country; you meet 
some to-day and others to-morrow, who do not fail to 
inquire, from those who brought you, what sort of 


122 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

not, mais encore (s'il faut ainli dire) k tons ceux du 
pais, vous en rencontrez aniourd'huy les vns, & de- 
main les autres, qui ne manquent pas de s'enquerir 
de ceux qui vous ont amenez, quel homme vous eftes. 
C'eft vne chofe quafi incroiable, comme ils remar- 
quent & retiennent iuf ques au moindre defaut. Quand 
vous rencontrez en chemin quelque Sauuage, comme 
vous ne pouuez encore leur donner de belles paroles, 
au moins faites leur bon vifage, & monftrez que vous 
fupportez ioieufement les fatiguez du voiage. C'efl 
auoir bien emploie les trauaux du chemin, & auoir 
defia bien auance, que d' auoir gagne 1' affection des 
Sauuages. 

Voila vne le§on bien aif^e "k apprendre, mais bien 
difficile k pratiquer; car fortans d'vn lieu bien poli, 
vous tombez entre les mains de gens barbares, qui ne 
fe foucient gueres de voflre Philofophie, ny de voftre 
Theologie, toutes les belles parties qui vous pour- 
roient faire aimer & refpecter en Frace, [237 i.e., 233] 
font come de perles foulees aux pieds par des pour- 
ceaux, ou pluftoft par des mulcts qui vous mefprifent 
au dernier point voias que vous n' eftes pas bon mal- 
lier comme eux : fi vous pouuiez aller nuds, & porter 
des charges de cheual fur voflre dos comme ils font, 
alors vous feriez fgauant en leur doctrine, & recogneu 
pour vn grand homme, autrement non. lefus-Chrift 
eft noftre vraie grandeur, c'eft luy feul & fa croix 
qu'on doit chercher, courant apres ces peuples, car 
fi vous pretendez autre chofe, vous ne trouuerez rien 
qu'vne affliction de corps & d'efprit. Mais aiant trou- 
u6 lefus Chrifl en fa croix, vous auez trouu6 les rofes 
dans les efpines, & la douceur dans I'amertume, le 
tout dans le neant. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 123 

man you are. It is almost incredible, how they ob- 
serve and remember even to the slightest fault. 
When you meet Savages on the way, as you cannot 
yet greet them with kind words, at least show them a 
cheerful face, and thus prove that you endure gayly 
the fatigues of the voyage. You will thus have put 
to good use the hardships of the way, and have al- 
ready advanced considerably in gaining the affection 
of the Savages. 

This is a lesson which is easy enough to learn, but 
very difficult to put into practice ; for, leaving a high- 
ly civilized community, you fall into the hands of 
barbarous people who care but little for your Philos- 
ophy or your Theology. All the fine qualities which 
might make you loved and respected in France 
[237 i.e., 233] are like pearls trampled under the feet of 
swine, or rather of mules, which utterly despise you 
when they see that you are not as good pack animals 
as they are. If you could go naked, and carry the 
load of a horse upon your back, as they do, then you 
would be wise according to their doctrine, and would 
be recognized as a great man, otherwise not. Jesus 
Christ is our true greatness; it is he alone and his 
cross that should be sought in running after these 
people, for, if you strive for anything else, you will 
find naught but bodily and spiritual affliction. But 
having found Jesus Christ in his cross, you have 
found the roses in the thorns, sweetness in bitter- 
ness, all in nothing. 


124 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.12 


CHAPITRE XV. 

lOURNAL CONTENANT DIUERSES CHOSES, QUI N'ONT 
PEU ESTRE MISES SOUS LES CHAPITRES PRECEDENS. 

IL refte touliours quelque chofe ^ dire, que le teps 
ou le fuiet ne permettet pas d'eftre infere dedans 
les chapitres de la Relation. C'eft pourquoy ie 
dreffe ce iournal k la fin, qui fe groffit ordinairemet 
iufques au depart des vaiffeaux, nous le commance- 
rons par le 29. d'Aoufl de I'an paff^. Ce iour Mon- 
fieur le [238 i.e., 234] General leua I'ancre du port 
de Kebec. /'ay efcrit qu'il emmenoit auec foy trois 
petites filles Sauuages. Comme i'auois peur qu'elles 
fiffent difficult^ de s'embarquer, ie me voulois feruir 
de ftratagefme pour les engager k monter dans la 
barque, mais il ne fut befoin d'aucune inuention. 
Elles eftoient plus portees k voir la France, qu'^ refler 
en leur pais, iufques Ik que deux feulement y deuant 
aller, la troifiefme qui eft baptifee, fe mit tellement k 
pleurer, voians que fes compagnes la quittoient, qu'il 
la fallut embarquer auec les autres. 

Le 4. de Septembre, le P. Buteux nous fit entendre 
que le P. Dauoft eftoit arriue des Hurons. Depuis 
peu de iours qu'il eftoit encor defcendu quelques 
efcoiiades de Sauuages de ce pais la, lefquels en vn 
confeil ou aflembl^e qu'ils tindrent k la Conception 
aux trois Riuieres, dirent que Monfieur de Champlain 
leur auoit promis I'ann^e precedente, que les Fran- 
9ois & les Hurons ne feroient plus qu'vn peuple. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 125 


CHAPTER XV. 

A JOURNAL CONTAINING DIVERS THINGS WHICH COULD 
NOT BE PLACED IN THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS. 

THERE always remains something to be said, 
which leisure or the subject does not permit to 
be inserted in the chapters of the Relation. 
Hence I place at the end this journal, which usually 
continues to increase up to the departure of the ships. 
We will begin it with the 29th of August of last year. 
On that day Monsieur the [238 i.e., 234] Comman- 
dant weighed anchor in the port of Kebec. I have 
written that he took with him three little Savage 
girls. As I was afraid that they might object to 
going on board, I intended to resort to stratagem to 
induce them to enter the bark ; but no such device 
was needed. They were more inclined to see France 
than to remain in their own country, — so much so 
that, as only two of them were to go, the third, who 
is baptized, began to weep so hard when she saw her 
companions leaving her, that she had to be sent with 
them. 

On the 4th of September Father Buteux sent us 
word that Father Davost had arrived from the Hu- 
rons a few days before, and that there had also come 
down from that country some bands of Savages, who, 
in a council or assembly that they held at the Con- 
ception, at the three Rivers, said that Monsieur de 
Champlain had promised them the year before that 
the French and Hurons would no longer be other 


126 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

C'eft potirquoy ils demandoient de nos Peres, & de 
nos Francois, pour emmener en leur pais. Nous 
auos difoient-ils, parl6 de cet affaire auec Echon, 
c'eft ainli qu'ils nomment le P. Brebeuf. Nos com- 
patriotes trouuet bonne cette comunication. Nous 
vous donerons des Hurons, & [239 i.e., 235] vous 
nous donerez des Frangois. A tout cela on ne peuft 
repartir autre chofe, fmon qu'ils eftoient arriuez bien 
tard, que les Francois eftoient partis pour retourner 
en France, & que le truchement mefme eftoit defcen- 
du ^ Aebec. 

le receus en mefme temps deux lettres, I'vne du 
P. Garnier, I'autre du P. Chaftelain, qui font montez 
en ces pais plus haut : voicy comme parle le P. Cha- 
ftelain. Dieu foit etemellement benit, qui par vne 
prouidece particuliere, nous a procure vne ren- 
contre fi fauorable, pour vn voiage extremement 
difficile, ie puis dire en verite. Propter verba labiorum 
tuorum ego cujlodiui vias duras. Ouy, mon R. P. qui 
me tenez la place de Dieu en cette million, vos pa- 
roles m'ont engage dans des chemins bien durs. Ne- 
antmoins il eft tres-vrai, que ie ne me fuis iamais 
mieux porte, que ie fai maintenant. Dans le grand 
nombre d'incommoditez que Dieu nous a voulu faire 
goufter, ie n'ay pas reffenti la moindre indifpofition. 
Ie luy auoue franchement que ie n'euffe peu cy de- 
uant demeurer vne heure affis fur la terre, fans eftre 
endommag^ de ma fante, i'y ay paff6 les nuicts les 
plus froides fans autre matelas qu'vn petit bout de 
branches d'arbres, auec vn repos nompareil. Ie ne 
dis rien du [240 i.e., 236] Soleil & du viure. Quand 
k I'eftat de I'ame, dans les plus grads abandonemes 
exterieurs & mefme en partie interieurs; Dieu m'a 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 127 


than one people. Hence they asked for some of our 
Fathers and of our Frenchmen, to take them back to 
their country. "We have," said they, "spoken of 
this matter with Echon ' ' (the name they have given 
Father Brebeuf). " Our countrymen approve this 
communication. We will give you some Hurons and 
[239 i.e., 235] you shall give us some Frenchmen." 
To all this nothing else could be said in reply except 
that they had arrived very late, that the French had 
left to return to France, and that even the interpreter 
had departed for Kebec. 

At the same time I received two letters, one from 
Father Garnier, the other from Father Chastelain, 
who went farther up into these countries.^ This is 
the way Father Chastelain speaks : ' * God be eter- 
nally blessed, who, through a special providence, 
procured for us so favorable an opportunity to make 
a most difficult journey. I can say truly. Propter verba 
labiorum tuorum ego custodivi vias duras. Yes, my 
Reverend Father, you who take the place of God to 
me in this mission, your words have involved me in 
very rough ways. Yet it is quite true that I have 
never been better than I am now. In the many dis- 
comforts that it was God's will for us to experience, 
I have not felt the least indisposition. I confess to 
you frankly that heretofore I had never remained one 
hour seated upon the ground without injuring my 
health. Here I have passed the coldest nights with- 
out other mattress than a little heap of the branches 
of trees, in a matchless repose. I say nothing of the 
[240 i.e., 236] Sun and of the food. As to the state 
of the soul, — in the greatest lack of bodily comforts, 
and even of some spiritual ones, God has always 
showed me the grace to make known to me that he 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.12 

touliours fait la grace de me faire cognoiflre qu'il me 
faifoit vne faueur que ie ne recognoiftrai iamais bien 
que dans le ciel, & que mille vies ne pourroiet affez 
paier. Que i'en eftois tout k fait indigne, qu'il fe 
plaifoit toutesfois ^ m'accabler fous le poids de fes 
bien-faits, plus i'en eftois incapable. Les cofola- 
tions qu'il m'a donne, ont eft6 plus diuines que fen- 
fibles, & telles que ie me fuffe encor mille fois plus 
abandonne pour vn fi grand Dieu d' amour & de bont6 
en mon endroit. Ie prie V. R. de le remercier pour 
moy, & le fupplier de ne fe point rebutter de mes 
froidures & ingratitudes. 

Le P. Gamier efcrit en ces termes. Dieu foit be- 
nit k iamais, nous voicy aux Nipiffiriniens depuis 
bier, fi ioieux & en fi bonne fante, que i'en fuis tout 
honteux. Car fi i'eulfe eu aflez de coeur & de cou- 
rage, ie ne doute point que noftre Seigneur ne m'eut 
donne vn bout de fa croix k porter, comme il a fait k 
nos Peres, qui font paffez deuant nous. S'il m'euft 
fait cette faueur ie ferois vn peu plus abbatu que ie 
ne fuis, qu'il foit benit de tons les Anges. II a trait- 
t6 I'enfant, comme vn enfant; ie n'ay point ram6, ie 
n'ai porte [241 i.e., 237] que mon fac, fmo que depuis 
trois iours que i'ai pris aux portages vn petit paquet 
qu'on m'a prefent6, k raifon qu'vn de nos Sauuages 
eft tombe malade. Eft-ce pas la eftre traitt6 en en- 
fant ? Le mal eft que celuy qui f e plaint de ne pas 
fouffrir beaucoup, rejoit auec beaucoup de lafchete, 
les fouffrances que noftre Seigneur luy prefente, 
mais que faire k cela? fmon de letter mon pauure, 
foible & chetif coeur entre les bras de mon bon 
maiftre, & de vous prier de benir ce Seigneur de 
toute I'eftendue de vos forces, de ce que Humilia de 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 129 

was doing me a favor, which I shall never fully ac- 
knowledge except in heaven, and which a thousand 
lives could not fully repay. How utterly unworthy 
I was; yet how he delighted in loading me down 
under the weight of his benefactions, the more unfit 
I was for them ! The consolations he has given me 
have been more divine than material, and such that 
I might have still given up a thousand times more 
than I did for a God so great in love and goodness 
toward me. I pray Your Reverence to thank him 
for me, and to beg him not to be displeased by my 
coldness and ingratitude." 

Father Garnier wrote in these terms. " God be 
forever blessed. We have been, since yesterday, 
here among the Nipissiriniens, — so happy and in so 
good health that I am quite ashamed of it. For, if 
I had had enough heart and courage, I do not doubt 
that our Lord would have given me one end of his 
cross to bear, as he did to our Fathers who journeyed 
before us. If he had done me this favor, I would be 
a little more cast down than I am ; may he be blessed 
by all the Angels. He has treated the child as a 
child; I did not paddle, I only carried [241 i.e., 237] 
my own baggage, except that during three days I 
have carried, at the portages, a little package that 
some one offered me, because one of our Savages fell 
ill. Is not that being treated like a child? The 
trouble is that he who complains of not suffering 
much receives with a great deal of cowardice the 
suflFerings that our Lord presents to him ; but what 
is there for me to do in this, except to cast my poor, 
weak, wretched heart into the arms of my good mas- 
ter, and to pray you to bless this Lord with all your 
strength, because Humilia de coelo respicit and because 


130 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

ccelo re/picit, & de ce qu'il me donne I'efperace d'eflre 
vn iour tout a luy. Nous arriuafmes a I'lfle la veille 
de S. Ignace, nous acheptafmes du bled d'Inde, nos 
pois nous manquas. Ce bled nous a conduit iufques 
icy, nos Sauuages n'en aians ferrez en aucun lieu, 
au moins ils n'en ont pris qu'vne cache. Nous n'a- 
uos guere trouue de poiffon iufques k prefent, nous 
attendons icy auiourd'huy le P. Dauofl. A Dieu 
mon R. P. faite[s] moy tel par vos faincts Sacrifices, 
qu'il faut que ie fois au lieu oil vous m'enuoiez de la 
part de Dieu. du lac des Nipifiriniens ce 8. d'Aoufh. 

Si les trauaux qu'on fouffre dans ces chemins af- 
freux, ou on n'a que le ciel & laterre pour hoftellerie 
font grands, Dieu I'eft encor plus; on cognoift par 
ces lettres que fa [242 i.e., 238] bonte ne fe laiffe pas 
vaincre. Qu'honneur & gloire luy foient rendues h 
iamais, dans les temps, & dans I'eternite. 

Le 13. du mefme mois, Monfieur noftre Gouuer- 
neur defirant voir la refidence de la Conception aux 
trois Riuieres, & le pais plus haut, me prit auec foy. 
Nous arriuafmes le 16. aux trois Riuieres, & le 18. 
nous trauerfafmes le lac S. Pierre. Le grand fleuue 
fainct Laurens fe relferrant deuant Kebec, s'eflargit 
derechef montant plus haut, mais vne lieue ou deux 
au deffus des trois Riuieres, il s'eflargit en forte 
qu'il fait vn eflang ou lac, fi fpacieux, qu'vn bon oeil 
pof6 au milieu, n'en voit qu'k peine les extremitez, 
Au haut de ce grand lac poifTonneux, on rencontre 
quantity de belles Ifles fort agreables. Nous prifmes 
en allant, le coft6 du Sud, & au retour le cofte du 
Nord. Nous vifitafmes le fleuue des Hiroquois (ainfi 
nomm6, pource qu'il vient de leur pais) Monfieur de 
Montmagny nomma la grande Ifle qui correfpond h 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 131 

he gives me hope of one day being entirely his. We 
arrived at the Island on the eve of St. Ignace ; our 
peas having given out, we bought some Indian corn. 
This corn lasted us until we reached here, our Sav- 
ages having none stored in any place, — at least they 
found only one cache of it. Up to the present, we 
have found but little fish. We are expecting Father 
Davost here to-day. Adieu, my Reverend Father; 
make me, through your holy Sacrifices, such as I 
ought to be in the place where you send me in the 
name of God. From the lake of the Nipisiriniens, 
this 8th of August. ' ' 

If the hardships that one suffers in these frightful 
journeys, in which the only hostelries are the sky 
and the earth, are great, God is still greater. It can 
be seen through these letters that his [242 i.e., 238] 
goodness does not suffer itself to be vanquished. 
May honor and glory be rendered to him forever, in 
time and in eternity. 

On the 1 3th of the same month Monsieur our Gov- 
ernor, wishing to see the residence of the Conception 
at the three Rivers, and the country above there, 
took me with him. We reached the three Rivers on 
the 1 6th, and on the iSth we crossed lake St. Pierre. 
The great river saint Lawrence grows narrower op- 
posite Kebec, broadening again farther up ; but a 
league or two above the three Rivers it enlarges so 
much that it forms a pond or lake, so wide that a 
good eye looking from the middle can scarcely see 
the farther shores. In the upper part of this great 
lake, which abounds in fish, a number of very pleas- 
ant Islands are found. In going, we followed the 
Southern shore, and in returning, the Northern. We 
visited the river of the Hiroquois (so called, because 


132 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

ce fleuue, du nom de fainct Ignace. Lelac fainct Pi- 
erre commance a fe fermer en cet endroit. Le fleuue 
s'eftreffilTant, non pas en forte qu'il n'ait encor bien 
vn quart de lieue ou enuiron de large, iufques au 
fault fainct Louys, ou iufques a la riuiere des Prairies, 
la il fe fait comme vn autre lac, par le [243 i.e., 239] 
rencontre de trois fleuues, qui ioignans leurs eaux tous 
enfemble, font vne autre petite mer parfemee d'Ifles. 
Les autres \sc. terres] en cet endroit font hautes ; c'eft 
pourquoy ces trois fleuues font trois faults d'eau, 
comme nous les appellons icy, c'eft ^ dire, que ren- 
contrans vn fond, ou vn lict penchant & inegal, ils 
vont d'vne grande roideur & rapidite. Les Barques 
peuuent approcher de ces cheutes d'eau, mais elles 
ne fgauroient paffer plus auant, non pas mefme les 
chaloupes. Dans toutes les Ifles que nous vifmes Ik, 
il n'y en a que deux ou trois remarquables, le refle 
efl petit, & a mon aduis, eft noie au Printemps. Voi- 
cy comme les Ifles font couppees: Le grand fleuue 
S. Laurens baigne la terre d'vn de nos MelTieurs, du 
cofte du Sud ; trauerfant au Nord il fait deux Ifles, 
I'vne qui a, peut-eftre, vne lieue & demie de long, 
mais elle eft fort eftroite; 1' autre c'eft la grande Ifle, 
nommee de Mont-Real. Cette Ifle paroift couppee 
par le milieu d'vne double montagne, qui femble la 
trauerfer. A I'endroit de ces montagnes eft le fault 
fainct Louys qui fe trouue dans le fleuue fainct Lau- 
rens. I'apprends que les Sauuages de I'lfle ont autre- 
fois defriche & tenu vne bourgade vers cette mon- 
tagne, [244 i.e., 240] mais ils I'ont quittee, eftat trop 
moleftez de leurs ennemis ; ils nomment encor ce lieu, 
rifle, ou il y auoit vne bourgade. Au cofte du Nord 
de rifle de Mont Real, paffe la Riuiere des Prairies, 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 133 

it comes from their country) ; ^" Monsieur de Mont- 
magny gave the large Island which lies at the mouth 
of this river the name " saint Ignace." Lake saint 
Pierre begins to close at this place, as the river grows 
narrower — not that it is not still fully a quarter of a 
league or thereabout in width, as far as sault saint 
Louys, " or as the river des Prairies ; here it forms, 
as it were, another lake by the [243 i.e., 239] meet- 
ing of three rivers, whose waters being united form 
another little sea dotted with Islands. The land in 
this region is high ; hence these three rivers make 
three rapids, as we call them here, — that is to say, 
encountering a sloping and uneven bottom or bed, 
they flow with great force and rapidity. Barks can 
approach these rapids, but they cannot pass over 
them, — not even shallops. Of all the Islands we saw 
there, there were only two or three worthy of notice, 
the rest being small, — and, in my opinion, are flooded 
in the Spring. This is the way these Islands are 
divided: the great river St. Lawrence bathes the 
lands of one of our Gentlemen on the South ; '^ pass- 
ing to the North, it makes two Islands, — one, per- 
haps, a league and a half long, but very narrow ; the 
other the great Island called Mont- Real. This Is- 
land appears to be divided in the midst by a double 
mountain which seems to cross it. In the vicinity of 
these mountains is the sault saint Louys, in the saint 
Lawrence river. I learn that the Savages of the Is- 
land in earlier times cleared the land, and had a set- 
tlement near this mountain; [244 i.e., 240] but they 
abandoned it, as they were too often molested by 
their enemies. They still call this place " the Island 
where there was a village. ' ' ''^ On the Northern shore 
of the Island of Mont Real flows the River des Prai- 


134 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 


qui eft born6e par vne autre Ifle, belle & grande, 
nommee I'lfle de Montmagny. Au delk de cette Ifle 
eft la Riuiere S. lean, qui touche aux terres fermes 
du cofte du Nord, au milieu ou enuiron de cette Ifle, 
il y a deux fauts, ou cheutes d'eau, correfpodans au 
fault S. Louys. L'vn eft das la Riuiere des Prairies, 
I'autre dans la Riuiere S. lean. le dirai en paflant 
d'ou font tirez les noms de ces fleuues. La Riuiere 
S. lean tire fa denomination du fieur lean Nicolet, 
truchement & commis au magazin des trois Riuieres. 
II a fouuent paffe par tons ces endroits. La Riuiere 
des Prairies fut ainfi appellee, pource qu'vn certain 
nomme des Prairies conduifant vne Barque, & ve- 
nant k cet affour ou rencontre de ces trois fleuues, 
s'egara dans les Ifles qu'on y rencontre, tirant ^ cette 
riuiere, qu'on nomma puis apres de fon nom, au lieu 
de monter dans le fleuue de S. Laures oti on I'atten- 
doit. Pour le grand fleuue, ie ne fgay k quelle occa- 
fion on luy a fait porter le nom de S. Laurens, pent 
eftre pour auoir eft6 trouue en ce iour la. 

[245 i.e., 241] Nous defcendifmes k terre en ces 
trois ifles que nous trouuafmes toutes fort bonnes & 
bien aggreables, ie celebray le premier Sacrifice de 
la Mefl^e, qui ait iamais efte dit, a ce qu'on me rap- 
portoit en I'ifle de Montmagny qui eft au Nort de 
rifle de Montreal. Apres auoir confidere la beaute 
du pays nous fifmes voile aux trois Riuieres. 

Le 4. d'octobre nous quittafmes les trois Riuieres, 
a- peine en eftions nous efloignez de 4. ou 5. lieues 
que nous apperceufmes vn Elan fe pourmener fur le 
bord des bois, nous voguions doucement au milieu 
du grand fleuue das la beaute d'vn iour tout dore. 
Mofieur le Gouuerneur aiant veu ce grand animal fit 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 136 

ries, which is bordered by another Island, large and 
beautiful, called the Island of Montmagny.^* Be- 
yond this Island is the River St. Jean, which touches 
the mainland on its North side. At or near the 
middle of this Island, there are two rapids or water- 
falls, corresponding to the sault St. Louys, — one be- 
ing in the River des Prairies, the other in the River 
St. Jean. By the way, I will mention the origin of 
the names of these rivers. The River St. Jean takes 
its name from sieur Jean Nicolet, interpreter and 
clerk of the store at the three Rivers, who often 
passed through all these regions. ^^ The River des 
Prairies was so called because a certain man named 
des Prairies, steering a Bark, and arriving at this 
junction or meeting-place of these three rivers, lost 
his way among the Islands which are found there, 
and entered this river which has ever since borne his 
name, instead of ascending the St. Lawrence river, 
where he was expected. As for the great river, I 
do not know for what reason the name "St. Law- 
rence" was given to it, — perhaps because it was dis- 
covered on that day. 

[245 i.e., 241] We disembarked at these three is- 
lands and found them very fine and agreeable. I 
celebrated the first Sacrifice of the Mass which had 
ever been offered, as I was told, on the island of 
Montmagny, which is to the North of the Island of 
Montreal. After having viewed the beauties of the 
country, we set sail for the three Rivers. 

On the 4th of October we left the three Rivers. 
We were hardly 4 or 5 leagues distant thence, when 
we perceived an Elk moving along the edge of the 
woods. We were sailing gently down the middle of 
the great river, in the beauty of a golden day. When 


136 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol. 12 

auffi toft mettre has les voiles & tenir tout le monde 
en filence, pendant que deux ou trois de nos Fran9ois 
s'en allerent doucement dans vn petit canot, pour 
faire ietter a I'eau cette grande befte, ou la tiier k 
coups d'harquebufe, fi elle tiroit dans les bois; en- 
tendant le bruit elle fe iette a I'eau. Incontinent 
Monfieur fit equipper vne chalouppe qui tire delTus a 
force de rames; la pauure befle ne fgauoit de quel 
cofl6 fe ietter, elle voyoit des harquebufes h. terre, & 
vers I'eau vne cbalouppe qui luy courroit fus, en [fin on 
la] mit k mort & I'apporta on fur noftre [246 i.e., 242] 
tillac, fi tous les voiages qui fe font en la nouuelle 
France fe pafToient auffi doucement que celuy-ci, il 
y auroit trop d'attrait, & pent eftre que le corps y 
gagneroit plus que I'efprit. Le gibier, la chair d'E- 
lan, & parfois de Caftor & le poifl!on ne nous man- 
querent point en fon temps. Dieu foit loiie par tous 
fes Anges des biens qu'il fait aux hommes. Pour 
conclufion nous nous rendifmes a Kebec le 7. iour 
d'octobre. 

Le 17. du mefme Monfieur le Gouuerneur voulant 
aller ^ Beau-pre, autrement le cap de tourmente 
pour auoir cognoifTance du pais, me dit que puis 
qu'vn des Peres de noftre compagnie y deuoit aller 
pour adminiftrer les Sacremens de I'Eglife k nos 
Francois qui demeurent en ce quartier la, qu'il trou- 
ueroit a propos que i'y allaffe. le luy obeis volon- 
tiers. A mefme temps le Pere Maffe & le Pere du 
Marcbe s'embarquerent pour aller aux trois Riuieres. 
Mais le temps fut fi rude & fi fafcheux que leur bar- 
que relafcha & les vens nous retindrent 13. iours au 
lieu oil nous ne penfions eftre que trois ou quatre 
pour le plus. A la verite c'eft auec bonne raifon 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 187 

Monsieur the Governor saw this large animal, he im- 
mediately had the sails lowered, and all the men 
keep silence; while two or three of our Frenchmen 
went away quietly in a little canoe to force the great 
beast towards the water, or to kill it with shots from 
the arquebus if it turned into the woods. Hearing 
the noise, it leaped into the water. Immediately 
Monsieur had a shallop manned, which was vigorous- 
ly rowed thither. The poor beast knew not which 
way to turn ; it saw the arquebuses on land, and on 
the water a shallop hastening towards it. It was 
finally killed and brought upon our [246 i.e. , 242] deck. 
If all journeys which are made in new France were 
to pass off as pleasantly as this one, they would prove 
too attractive, and perhaps the body would gain more 
than the soul. Small game, the flesh of Elk, and at 
times of Beaver, and fish, did not fail us in their 
turn. God be praised by all his Angels for the bless- 
ings he confers upon men. In conclusion, we re- 
turned to Kebec on the 7th day of October. 

On the 17th of the same month, Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor, wishing to go to Beau-pre, otherwise cap de 
tourmente,^^ to get some knowledge of the country, 
said to me that as one of the Fathers of our society 
ought to go there to administer the Sacraments of 
the Church to our French people who live in that 
quarter, he considered it fitting that I should go. I 
obeyed him willingly. At the same time. Father 
Masse and Father du March6 embarked to go to the 
three Rivers. The weather, however, was so rough 
and stormy that their bark put into port ; and the 
winds kept us for 1 3 days in a place where we had 
expected to remain only three or four at the most. 
Truly, it is with good reason that the country around 


138 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

qu'on ^ nortime les lieux voifms du Cap de tour- 
mente, Beau-pre; Car les prairies y font belles & 
grandes & bien vnies, c'eft vn lieu [247 i.e., 243] tres 
comode pour nourrir quatite de beflial. 

Le 26. de Novembre nous commen9afnies de faire 
le catechifme aux petits Sauuages. Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur en aiant oiiy la nouuelle nous dit qu'il les 
vouloit traiter, & recompenfer, ceux qui retiendroient 
bien ce qu'on leur auroit enfeigne, ce qu'il ne manqua 
pas de faire. Nous cotinuafmes c6t exercice vn allez 
long-temps. 

Le 5. de Decembre le froid aiant de-ja comanc^ de 
nous vifiter la Riuiere de S. Charles fur laquelle eft 
fife la maifon de noflre Dame des Anges, fe gela & 
fit vn pont qui fe ruina feulement fur la my Auril. 

Le 2 1 . du mefme mois qui eftoit iour de Dimanche 
vne efcouade de petits Sauuages gar9ons & filles s'en 
vindrent f rapper ^ noftre porte difans qu'ils venoient 
a la Melfe. lis entendent bien maintenant quand on 
la fonne, voir mefme ils fe feruent du propre mot 
I'apprenant de nos Fran9ois. Nous leur difmes qu'il 
ne pouuoient affifter ^ la Meffe qu'ils ne fuffent bap- 
tifez, baptifez nous done difoient-ils, car nous y vou- 
lons affifter. on les admit feulement pendant la 
predication afin qu'ils viflent comme les Francois fe 
rendent attentifs a I'inftruction, qu'on leur donne, & 
en les congediant on [248 i.e., 244] leur dit qu'ils re- 
tournaffent apres midy, & qu'ils prieroient Dieu. lis 
ne manquerent pas de fe trouuer a vefpres. 

le marqueray en ce lieu que les Sauuages fgauent 
de-jk fi bien que nous cheriffons les malades & que 
nous en auons foing, qu'ils croient que c'eft alTez 
d'alleguer quelqu'vns de leurs maux pour obtenir 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 13» 

Cap de tourmente has been named Beau-pr6 ; for the 
meadows there are beautiful and large, and very- 
level. It is a locality [247 i.e., 243] well suited for 
maintaining herds of cattle. 

On the 26th of November we began to teach the 
catechism to the little Savages. When Monsieur the 
Governor heard of this, he told us that he wished to 
entertain them, and to reward those who should re- 
member well what had been taught them, which he 
did not fail to do. We continued this exercise for a 
long time. 

On the 5th of December, the weather having al- 
ready become very cold, the River St. Charles, upon 
which is situated the house of nostre Dame des Anges, 
froze over, and made a bridge which did not break 
until the middle of April. 

On the 2 1 St of the same month, which was Sunday, 
a band of little Savages, boys and girls, came and 
rapped at our door, saying that they had come to 
Mass. They understand very well now when the 
bell is rung for it, — indeed, they even use the right 
word, having learned it from our French. We told 
them they could not attend Mass, because they were 
not baptized; " Baptize us then," said they, " for we 
wish to be present there. " They were admitted only 
during the preaching, that they might see how atten- 
tive the French are to the instruction given them ; 
and when they were dismissed they [248 i.e., 244] 
were told to return in the afternoon, when they 
should pray to God. They did not fail to come to 
vespers. 

I will observe in this place that the Savages al- 
ready know so well that we cherish and care for the 
sick, that they believe all they have to do to allevi- 


140 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 12 

qtielque chofe de nous, vous en verrez qui viendrot 
demander des pruneaux, pource qu'ils ont mal au 
pied oil a la main. 

Le iour de Noel comme le Pere de Quen & moy 
reconduiffions fur le foir nos Peres de noflre Dame 
des Anges qui nous efloient venus aider a entendre 
les confeffions de nos Francois, paffans ou efloient 
les Sauuages, nous trouuafmes Makheabichtichiou qui 
faifoit vn cry public par les cabanes. II crioit d'vne 
voix fi forte & auec vn accent fi violent, que ie pen- 
fois au commencement qu'il fut yure. II efloit indi- 
gne de ce que quelques ieunes Sauuages eftans entrez 
en vne maifon de Frangois, auoient pris du pain & 
quelques efpics de ble d'Inde qu'ils auoient rencon- 
tre. II s'efcrioit done a pleine tefte, vous ieuneile 
qui vous allez faire inftruire tons les iours, vous de- 
robez & cependant on vous enfeigne que celuy qui k 
tout fait vous le [249 i.e., 245] deffend, efl-ce ainfi 
que vous obeilTez, vous n'auez point d'efprit, ne crai- 
gnez vous point que les Fran9ois ne vous pendent? 
ce ne font pas les vieillards qui font ces coups Ik, ce 
font les ieunes gens qui n'ont point d'efprit. II par- 
loit auec telle ardeur que ie m'en eftonnay. 

Le 26. du mefme vne femme Sauuage me demanda 
fi les femmes ne pouuoient pas bien aller au Ciel, 
auffi bien que les hommes & les enfans; luy aiant 
refpondu que oiiy, pourquoy done replique elle, n'in- 
ftruis tu point les femmes, n 'appellant que les hommes 
& les enfans. Ie luy refpondis qu'elle auoit raifon, 
& que nous les ferions venir a leur tour, ce que nous 
fifmes, mais il les fallut bien-toft congedier, pource 
qu'elles apportoient les petits enfans qui faifoient vn 
tres-grand bruit. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 141 

ate any of their ills is to obtain something from us. 
You will see them coming to ask us for prunes, 
because they have a sore foot or hand. 

On Christmas, towards evening, — as Father de 
Quen and I were accompanying home our Fathers 
of nostre Dame des Anges, who had come to help us 
hear the confessions of our French people, — passing 
along where the Savages were, we found Makhea- 
bichtichiou making a public announcement among the 
cabins. He shouted with so loud a voice and in so 
violent a tone, that at first I thought he was intoxi- 
cated. He was indignant because some young Sav- 
ages had entered one of the houses of the French, 
and had taken some bread and a few ears of Indian 
corn which they had happened to find there. So he 
cried in loud tones, " You children who go to be in- 
structed every day, you steal ; and yet you are taught 
that he who has made all [249 i.e., 245] forbids 
this, — is it thus you obey ? You have no sense ; are 
you not afraid the French will hang you? It is not 
the old people who commit these acts; it is the 
young people who have no sense." He spoke with 
so much warmth that I was astonished. 

On the 26th of the same, a Savage woman asked 
me if women could not go to Heaven as well as men 
and children. When I told her they could, "Why 
then," she replied, " dost thou not instruct the wom- 
en, instead of calling together only the men and 
children ? " I told her that she was right, and that 
we would have them come in their turn, which we 
did; but we soon had to dismiss them, for they 
brought their little children, who made a great deal 
of noise. 

On the loth of January Makheabichtichiou asked me 


142 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

Le lo. de lanuier Makheabichtichiou me faifoit plu- 
fieurs queftions des chofes naturelles; comme d'ou 
prouenoit I'Eclipfe de la lune, luy aiant refpondu 
qu'elle prouenoit de I'interpofition de la terre entre 
elle & le Soleil, il me repliqua qu'il auoit de la peine 
h croire cela, pource difoit-il, que fi cette noirceur de 
la lune eftoit caufee par ce rencontre de la terre entre 
elle & le Soleil, comme [250 i.e., 246] ce rencontre ar- 
riue fouuent, on verroit la lune Eclipfee, ce qui ne 
fe fait pas. le luy fis voir que le Ciel eftant fi grand 
comme il eft, & la terre fi petite, cette interpofition 
n'arriuoit pas fi fouuent qu'il s'imaginoit; voiant la 
figure auec vn flambeau ^ I'entour d'vne boule, il fut 
fort fatisfait. II me demandoit d'oti prouenoit que 
le Ciel paroilToit tantoft rouge, tantoft d' autre cou- 
leur. le luy repliquay que la lumiere rendue das des 
vapeurs, ou dans des nues, faifoit cette diuerfite de 
couleurs felon la diuerfite de la nue ou elle fe trou- 
uoit, & fur rheure ie luy monftray vn verre trigonal. 
Tu ne vois, luy dis-je, aucune couleur en ce verre, 
mets le fur tes yeux & tu le verras plain de belles 
couleurs qui prouiendront de la lumiere, I'aiant ap- 
plique k fa veue, & voiant vne grande variete de cou- 
leurs. II fecria vous eftes des Manitous vous autres 
Fran9ois, qui cognoiffes le Ciel & la terre. 

Le 26. de Feburier les Sauuages qui n'eftoient ca- 
banez qu'li vn quart de lieue de nous, s'approcherent 
entierement de Kebec. Vn de leurs forciers auoit veu 
fept feux en dormant, c'eftoit autant de cabanes d'Hi- 
roquois, ils efloient de-ja en de9a les trois Riuieres 
a fon dire. La terreur les faifit fi puifCamment [2 5 i i.e. , 
247] qu'ils fe logerent ^ vn jet de pierre de noftre mai- 
fon, me demandans pourquoy nous ne tenions point 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 143 

many questions about the phenomena of nature, such 
as, * ' whence arose the Eclipse of the moon ? ' ' When 
I told him that it was caused by the interposition of 
the earth between it and the Sun, he replied that he 
could hardly believe that, "Because," said he, "if 
this darkening of the moon were caused by the pas- 
sage of the earth between it and the Sun, since 
[250 i.e., 246] this passage often occurs, one would see 
the moon [often] Eclipsed, which does not happen." 
I represented to him that, the Sky being so large as 
it is, and the earth being so small, this interposition 
did not happen as frequently as he imagined ; upon 
seeing it represented by moving a candle around a 
ball, he was very well satisfied. He asked me how 
it was that the Sky appeared to be sometimes red, 
sometimes another color. I replied that the light, 
passing into the vapors or clouds, caused this diver- 
sity of color according to the different qualities of 
the clouds in which it happened to be, and there- 
upon I showed him a prism. " Thou dost not see," 
I said to him, " any color in this glass; place it be- 
fore thine eyes, and thou wilt see it full of beautiful 
colors which will come from the light." Having 
held it up to his eyes and seeing a great variety of 
colors, he exclaimed, ' ' You are Manitous, you French- 
men; you know the Sky and the earth." 

On the 26th of February the Savages, who were 
encamped only a quarter of a league from us, drew 
very near Kebec. One of their sorcerers had seen seven 
fires in his sleep, which were so many Hiroquois cab- 
ins ; they were already this side of the three Rivers, 
in his opinion. Fear had taken so powerful a hold 
upon them [251 i.e., 247] that they encamped within 
a stone's throw of our house, asking me why we did 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

d'armes chez nous pour reiifter au cas que leurs en- 
nemis paruffent. lis voient des Fran9ois cabanez de 
tous coftez, & vne terreur panique ne laiffe pas de les 
terraffer. Fugit impius nemine perfequente . Ce font 
effets du diable qui les troubles par la reprefentation 
des horribles tourmens que leurs ennemis leurs font 
fouffrir quand ils les tiennent. 

Le premier iour de Mars, le Pere de Noue me ra- 
comptoit qu'eflant alle aux cabanes de quelques Sau- 
uages qui s'eftoient retirez fept ou huit lieues dedans 
les bois ; il fut fort edifie de deux Hurons du femi- 
naire qui le fuiuoient. Ces bons enfans comme i'ay 
de-ja dit cy-dellus faifoient leur examen de confcience 
k deux genoux auec autant de modeftie, comme s'ils 
euffent efl^ inftruits des leur ieunelTe. Le Pere 
eftant arriu6 aux cabanes fut tres-bien receu des Sau- 
uages. Come il allumoit vn peu de bougie pour re- 
citer f es heures ; vn Sauuage luy dit ie voy bien que 
tu veux prier Dieu, retire toy en ce petit coin Ik, tu 
feras plus commodement, moy-mefme ie le veux 
prier, & la dellus fe mit a faire fes prieres fort pofe- 
ment. Son frere le reprenoit [252 i.e., 248] quand il 
ne difoit pas bien. Ie ne fuis pas encor bien inflruit 
difoit-il, mais ie le feray auec le temps. Le Pere re- 
tourna fort confole & nous dit entre autre chofe qu'il 
y auoit vne petite fille du catechifme qui prenoit vn 
fmgulier plaifir k feruir & apporter aux Fran9ois ce 
dont ils auoient befoin, faifant cela auec vne telle fer- 
ueur & gaiete qu'ils en eftoient eflonnez. 

Le mefme iour fur le foir vne trouppe de petits 
Sauuages gargons & filles fe vindrent letter dans 
noftre maifon pour y paffer la nuit, ces pauures en- 
fans trembloient de la crainte qu'ils auoient de leurs 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 145 

not keep arms with us, to resist in case their enemies 
should appear. They saw Frenchmen encamped on 
all sides, and yet continued panic-stricken and terri- 
fied. Fugit impius nemine perseqiiente. These are the 
devil's doings, who disquiets them by bringing be- 
fore their minds the horrible torments which their 
enemies make them suffer when they capture them. 

On the first day of March, Father de Noue told me 
that, when he went to the cabins of some Savages 
who had withdrawn seven or eight leagues into the 
woods, he was very highly edified by two Hurons 
from the seminary who followed him. These good 
children, as I have already said above, made their 
examination of conscience on their knees, as mod- 
estly as if they had been instructed from their 
youth. The Father, having arrived at the cabins, 
was very well received by the Savages. As he 
lighted a little piece of candle to recite his hours, a 
Savage said to him, " I see that thou art going to 
pray to God ; withdraw into yonder little corner, it 
will be more convenient for thee, I also will pray to 
him," and thereupon he began to say his prayers very 
seriously. His brother corrected him [252 i.e., 248] 
when he did not say them aright. " I am not very 
well instructed yet," he said, "but I shall be, in 
time." The Father returned very much consoled, 
and told us, among other things, that he had a little 
girl at catechism who took a peculiar pleasure in 
waiting upon and carrying to the Frenchmen what 
they needed, — doing this so earnestly and cheerfully 
that they were surprised. 

The same day, toward evening, a troop of little 
Savages, boys and girls, came rushing into our house 
to spend the night there ; these poor children trembled 


146 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 


ennemis les Hiroquois, nous leur difmes que nous 
receurions les gargons, mais que les filles ne cou- 
choient point en nos maifons, ces pauures petites 
Sauuages ne vouloient point fortir, enfin nous nous 
auifafmes de prier Monfieur Gand de les receuoir, ce 
qu'il fit fort volontiers les faisat dormir aupres d'vn 
bon feu. lis firent le mefme quelque autre fois, & 
touf jours nous prenions les gar9ons & les filles fe 
retiroient en la chambre de Monfieur Gand, les 
matins nous les faifions prier Dieu, & les renuoions 
fort contens. 

Le 2. iour de Mars. Monfieur le Gouuerneur alia 
vifiter vn lac efloigne enuiron quatre [253 i.e., 249] 
lieues de kebec. II ne trouua point la d'autre hoflel- 
lerie que la neige. Monfieur Gand & autres I'accom- 
pagnerent. Comme le froid eftoit fort vehement, nous 
anions peur que la nuit n'endommageaft leur fante, 
car il la fallut paflier entre le feu & la neige foubs le 
grand toict ou la grande voute du Ciel, mais ils reuin- 
drent fans autre mal qu'vne grande laffitude. C'eft 
vn grand trauail que de cheminer fur la neige, no- 
tamment quand on ny eft pas accouftume. Si ce lac 
fit du mal en le cherchant, il fit du bien eftant trou- 
ua, & en fera encor. Monfieur le Gouuerneur y fit 
pefcher foubs la glace pendant le carefme, on y prit 
quelques carpes & des truites faumonees dont il fit 
plufieurs prefens aux vns & aux autres, car il n'a rien 

k foy. 

Le 9. du mois d'Auril, vn Sauuage admir6 de fes 
gens pour eftre grand mangeur, nous rencontrant le 
Pere de Quen & moy das les cabanes f e voulut vanter 
de fes proiieffe de gueule. I'ay nous difoit-il, man- 
ge en vn feftin la longueur de deux brafl:es de grefl:e 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 147 

from fear of their enemies, the Hiroquois. We told 
them that we would receive the boys, but that girls 
did not sleep in our houses; these poor little Savage 
girls were loth to depart, so we finally decided to ask 
Monsieur Gand to receive them, which he did will- 
ingly, having them sleep near a good fire. They 
did the same thing at other times; and we always 
took the boys, and the girls withdrew to Monsieur 
Gand's room. In the morning we had them offer 
prayers to God, and sent them away well satisfied. 

On the 2nd day of March, Monsieur the Governor 
went to visit a lake about four [253 i.e., 249] leagues 
from kebec. He found no other hotel there than 
the snow. Monsieur Gand and others accompanied 
him. As the cold was intense, we were afraid they 
might injure their health during the night, for they 
were compelled to pass it between the fire and the 
snow, under the great roof or mighty vault of Heav- 
en ; but they returned without other ill than excess- 
ive fatigue. It is hard work to make one's way over 
the snow, especially if one is not accustomed to it. 
If this lake gave us trouble in seeking it, it was a 
blessing when found, and will be a still greater one. 
Monsieur the Governor had some fishing done there 
under the ice during lent, when some carp and sal- 
mon trout were caught, of which he made presents 
to various persons, for he cares for nothing for him- 
self. 

On the 9th of the month of April a Savage, ad- 
mired by his people as a great eater, meeting Father 
de Quen and me among the cabins, tried to boast of 
the prowess of his jaws. " At one feast," he said 
to us, "I have eaten a quantity of Bear's grease two 
brasses long and more than four finger-lengths wide. ' ' 


148 


LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 12 


d'Ours, large de plus de quatre doigts. II s'imagi- 
noit que nous radmirerios, mais il fut bien eflonn6 
quand nous luy repartifmes qu'il fe glorifioit d'eflre 
deuenu loup, c'efl la [254 i-e., 250] gloire d'vn loup, 
& non d'vn homme, luy difmes nous, de manger 
beaucoup. Si tu difois que tu as fait artiftement vn 
canot, vn loup ne te difputeroit pas cette loiiange; 
mais fi tu te glorifie de manger, tu es moins qu'vn 
loup, & qu'vn chien. Tons les autres fe mirent a 
rire & mon pauure homme demeura tout confus. 

Le 16. du mefme mois d'Auril, plufieurs Sauuages 

eftans retournez des terres, fe raffemblerent felon 

leur couflume fur le bord du grand fleuue, Makhea- 

bichtichiou nous en amena fix ou fept des principaux 

pour entendre parler de noftre doctrine ; eftans affis 

& aiains \sc. aians] petun6, car c'eft par Ik qu'ils com- 

mancent & finiffent la plus part de leurs actions. le 

leur toucbay trois points. L'vn de leur vaine creance 

refutant leur refueries, I'autre de la verit6 d'vn Dieu, 

& le troifiefme de fa iuftice, que ie tafchois de prou- 

uer par raifons naturelles. Le plus apparent d'entre 

eux m'aiant efcoute fort attentiuement, me repartit 

que pour leur doctrine. lis n'en auoient pas fi grande 

certitude & ny eftoient pas beaucoup attachez; en 

effet quad on leur apporte quelque raifon qui ren- 

uerfe leur creance, ils font les premiers k fe rire de 

la fimplicite de leurs aieuls d'auoir creu des badine- 

ries & des puerilitez. 

[255 i.e., 251] Quand aux autres points de l'vnit6 
d'vn Dieu & de fa iuftice. II repartit que leurs 
efprits ne pouuoiet pas atteindre iuf ques k ces cognoif- 
fances, qu'ils n'auoient pas allez de iugemet pour 
difcerner ce qui arriuoit apres la mort. La deffus 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 149 

He imagined that we would admire him ; but he was 
much astonished when we answered that he was boast- 
ing of having become a wolf, — it is the [2 54 i.e., 250] 
boast of a wolf, and not of a man, we told him, 
to eat a great deal. " If thou hadst said that thou 
hadst skillfully fashioned a canoe, a wolf would not 
dispute with thee this praise ; but, if thou gloriest in 
eating, thou art less than a wolf or a dog." All the 
others began to laugh, and my poor man was much 
embarrassed. 

On the 1 6th of the same month of April, many 
Savages, having returned from the interior, as- 
sembled, according to their custom, upon the banks 
of the great river. Makheabichtichiou brought six or 
seven of their principal men to us, to hear our doc- 
trine explained. After being seated and having 
smoked their pipes, for it is thus they begin and end 
the greater part of their operations, I spoke to them 
regarding three points : One, their chimerical belief, 
refuting their vague notions ; another, the reality of 
a God; and the third, his justice, which I tried to 
prove by natural reasons. The most prominent one 
among them, having heard me very attentively, re- 
plied that, as to their doctrine, they did not have so 
much certainty about it, nor were they greatly at- 
tached to it. In fact, when one propounds to them 
some argument that overthrows their belief, they 
are the first to laugh at the simplicity of their fore- 
fathers for having believed such absurdities and 
childish notions. 

[255 i.e., 251] As to the other points, the unity of 
a God, and his justice, he replied that their minds 
could not attain to such knowledge, that they had 
not enough judgment to discern what happened after 


150 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.12 

Makeabichtichiou fe mit k difcourir fur ce que nous 
auios enfeigne aux Sauuages qui auoient pafs^ I'hiuer 
aupres de nous. 

II expliqua la creation de rhomme, I'inondation du 
monde arriu6e pour les pechez des hommes, comme 
I'vniuers s'eftoit repeuple par Noe & par fes enfans, 
comme tous les hommes mourroient & reffufcite- 
roient. Que le Ciel gardoit de tres grands biens pour 
les bos, & qu'il y auoit d' horribles fupplices preparee 
pour les mefchans. Que Dieu defendoit la poliga- 
mie, que fi on quittoit fa femme, on n'en pouuoit re- 
predre vne autre, qu'il ne falloit ny tiier, ny defirer 
la mort k persone, qu'il ne falloit faire aucun cas des 
fonges, qu'il falloit quitter ces tambours & autres tin- 
tamarres qui ne feruoiet de rien, qu'il ne falloit point 
faire de feftins a tout manger, que ceux qui croient 
en Dieu font protegez contre les forciers. lis 
approuuerent la plufpart de tous ces articles. Mais 
pour le regard des femmes ils refpondirent que les 
ieunes gens [256 i.e., 252] ne s'accorderoient pas 
ais^ment ^ cette doctrine. En fin ils concluret comme 
les Atheniens nous t'entendrons encor vne autrefois 
difcourir fur ce fujet. 

Le 17. du mefme mois deux Sauuages eftans de 
r autre cofte du grand fleuue & voulans palfer k 
kebec furent fi bien enuironnez de glaces, que les 
marees font monter & defcendre quelquefois en tres 
grand quantite que leur canot eftant brise ils coule- 
rent a fond, & furent noiez. L'vn deux eftoit homme 
fort paifible, & qui aimoit beaucoup les Fran9ois, fur 
la fin du mois du may on retrouua l'vn de ces deux 
corps qui flottoit fur la riuiere. Le mefme iour que ces 
pauures miferables fe perdirent, le fieur Nicolet & 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 151 

death. Thereupon Makeabichtichiou began to talk 
about what we had taught the Savages who had 
passed the winter near us. 

He explained the creation of man, the inundation 
of the world caused by men's sins, how the universe 
was repeopled by Noah and his children, how all 
men would die and be again brought to life. He 
said that Heaven kept very great blessings for the 
good, and that there were horrible punishments pre- 
pared for the wicked; that God forbade polygamy, 
that if a man left his wife he could not take another; 
that we must neither kill nor desire any one's death ; 
that no importance should be attached to dreams ; that 
those drums and all the other uproar, which amounted 
to nothing, must be given up, that eat-all feasts must 
not be given, that those who believe in God are pro- 
tected against sorcerers. They approved the greater 
part of all these points; but, in regard to women, 
they replied that the young men [256 i.e., 252] would 
not readily agree to this doctrine. Finally they con- 
cluded, as did the Athenians, "We will hear thee 
again, another time, discourse upon this subject." 

On the 17th of the same month, two Savages being 
on the other side of the great river, and wishing to 
cross over to kebec, were so entirely surrounded by 
blocks of ice, which the tides cause to drift up and down 
sometimes in great masses, that their canoe was shat- 
tered, and they sank to the bottom and were drowned. 
One of them was a very peaceable man, and was great- 
ly attached to the French, Towards the end of the 
month of May, one of these two bodies was found 
floating upon the river. The same day that these 
poor wretches perished, sieur Nicolet and some of 
our Frenchmen, who were coming down from the 


152 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 12 

quelques vns de nos Francois defcendans des trois 
Riuieres penferent tomber dans le mefme defaftre. 
lis trouuerent le grand fleuue en cor glace ou embar- 
raff6 de glaces deuant eux & par derriere il en venoit 
vne {1 grande quantite qu'ils furent contrains de for- 
tir de leur canot, & de fe letter fur des glaces. Dieu 
voulut qu'ils en trouuaffent d'ailez fermes pour fe 
fauuer mais auec beaucoup de peine & de trauail. 

Le 24. vn Capitaine de Tadouffac paffant par Ke- 
bec pour aller ^ la guerre alia faliier [257 i.e., 253] 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur qui luy fit quelques prefens, 
puis nous I'enuoia pour entendre quelque chofe de 
noftre faincte foy. Ce bon homme de-ja age trou- 
uoit nos maximes fort raifonnables, il nous promit 
qu'il nous reuiendroit voir. Deux iours apres il nous 
vint dire qu'il eftoit fur fon depart, nous fuppliant 
de le mener au fort, pour prendre conge de fon amy, 
c'efl ainfi qu'il nommoit Monfieur le Gouuerneur. Le 
Pere de Quen & moy, le conduifismes; eftant entre 
il fe ietta incontinent fur fes propres loiianges, difant 
qu'en fa prefence tout eftoit paifible a Tadouffac. il 
fit vne grande enumeration des peuples de ce pais 
cy, & pour conclufion protefta qu'il ny en auoit point 
de fi pofez & de fi raifis qui luy & fes gens. Prenant 
vn craion en main le nous depeignit le pays des Hi- 
roquois oil il alloit. Voila, difoit-il, le fleuue qui 
nous doit mener dans vn grand lac, de ce lac nous 
paffons dans les terres de nos ennemis, en cet endroit 
font leurs bourgardes. Quand ce Capitaine fut forty 
du fort ie luy dis Nikanis, ie n'ay pas bonne opinion 
de voftre guerre, ie crains quelque mal-heur contra 
vous autres. pourquoy cela me dit-il. vous menez 
auec vous vn mefchant homme, c'eft vn forcier qui 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 153 

three Rivers, came near experiencing the same disas- 
ter. They found the great river still frozen or 
clogged by ice in front of them, and behind them it 
appeared in so great quantities that they were com- 
pelled to leave their canoe and leap upon the ice. 
God willed that they should find some of it firm 
enough to save themselves upon, but with a great 
deal of hardship and effort. 

On the 24th, as a Captain from Tadoussac was pass- 
ing through Kebec on his way to war, he went to 
salute [257 i.e., 253] Monsieur the Governor, who 
gave him a few presents, and then sent him to us to 
learn something about our holy faith. This good 
man, already old, found our maxims very reasonable, 
and promised that he would come back and see us. 
Two days later, he came to tell us that he was about 
to depart, and begged us to take him to the fort to 
take leave of his friend, — thus he called Monsieur 
the Governor. Father de Quen and I accompanied 
him ; having entered, he began immediately to sound 
his own praises, saying that when he was present all 
was peaceful at Tadoussac. He enumerated at length 
the peoples in that country, and in conclusion pro- 
tested that there were none of them so quiet and 
steady as he and his tribe. Taking a pencil in his 
hand, he sketched the country of the Hiroquois where 
he was going, " Here," said he, '' is the river which 
is to take us into a great lake ; from this lake we pass 
into the land of our enemies ; in this place are their 
villages." When this Captain had left the fort, I 
said to him, " Nikanis, I have not a good opinion of 
your war; I fear some misfortune will happen to 
you." ''Why so?" he asked. "You are taking 
with you a wicked man, a sorcerer, who has mocked 


154 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

s'eft mocque de celuy qui k tout fait. [258 i.e., 254] 
Hier eftant toinb6 en difcours auec luy, il blafphema 
difant que Dieu ne fgauroit empefcher le fuccez de 
voftre guerre, voila pour vous perdre. Si vous eftes 
tuez il s'en faudra prendre k luy, fi tu me croisois tu 
le renuoirois k Tadouffac. Ce pauure home qui n'ap- 
prehende pas les iugemens de Dieu me refpondit, il 
n'a point d'efprit, ie luy diray qu'il fait mal. Ce 
n'eft pas affez luy fis-je, s'il eftoit Fran9ois onle met- 
troit k mort, car fi nous protegions les ennemis de 
Dieu, il fe fafcheroit contre nous. Cela ne fit pas 
beaucoup d'lmprelTion fur fon efprit, ils s'en allerent 
done auec quelques Algonquins pour clierclier quel- 
que pauure miferable a I'efcart, mais Dieu les chaftia. 
Comme ils virent vn Hiroquois ils le pourfuiuirent fi 
bien qu'ils s'engagerent fans ordre das leur pais. 
La terre eftoit tout en feu & la f um^e deroboit la veue 
de ceux qui brufloient oti fumoient leurs chaps felon 
leur couftume ; au bruit de cet homme qui fuioit les 
autres accoururent, & voians leurs ennemis mettent 
la main aux armes, enuironnent vne partie de ces 
pauures miferables, les tiient a coups de flefches, en 
prennent quelques vns, aufquels ils feront fouffrir 
d'eftranges cruautez, les autres fe fauuent k la courfe. 
L'vn deux eftant de re tour [259 i.e., 255] me dit 
qu'en fe fauuant il auoit efle cinq iours fans manger 
& fans dormir, qu'il eftoit nud come vn ver & qu'il 
ramoit nuict & iour. Vn autre ne pouuant retourner 
fur fes pas, les Hiroquois luy fermant le paffage tire 
plus auant dans leur pais ; la nuict venant il repaffe 
k la derobee pres de leur bourgade, les entend crier 
& hurler de ioye bruflans fes compagnons, ce qui 
augmenta tellement fa peur qu'il fe ietta dans vn 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, t6s7 155 

at him who made all. [258 i.e., 254] I fell into con- 
versation with him yesterday, and he blasphemed, 
saying that God could not prevent the success of your 
war; this is enough to ruin you. If you are killed, 
the blame must be laid at his door; if thou dost 
believe me, thou wilt send him back to Tadoussac." 
This poor man, who does not understand the judg- 
ments of God, answered, " He has no sense, I shall 
tell him that he is doing wrong." "That is not 
enough," I replied; "if he were French, he would 
be put to death ; for, if we protected the enemies of 
God, he would get angry at us." This did not make 
much Impression upon his mind, and he went off 
with some Algonquins to find some poor wretch 
alone ; but God chastised them. Seeing an Hiroquois, 
they pursued him so far that, in disorder, they pene- 
trated into the enemy's country. That region was 
all on fire, and the smoke hid from view those who 
were, according to their custom, setting the fires with 
which the fields were smoking. At the noise made 
by this man who fled, the others rushed forward and, 
seeing their enemies, seized their weapons, sur- 
rounded part of these poor wretches, and killed them 
with their arrows; they captured some, who will be 
made to suffer extraordinary cruelties. The others 
saved themselves by flight. One of them, having 
returned, [259 i.e., 255] told me that in escaping he 
had been five days without eating or sleeping, that he 
was as naked as a worm, and that he was paddling 
night and day. Another, not being able to retrace 
his steps, as the Hiroquois closed the way, advanced 
farther into their country; night coming on, he stole 
quietly back past their village, where he heard their 
cries and shouts of joy while they were burning his 


156 LES RELATIONS DES J ASUITES [Vol.12 

fleuue, le trauerfa k la nage, fuit tat qu'il pent. II 
auoit iett^ fa robe pour eftre plus leger, fi bien qu'il 
eftoit tout nud. Au bout de neuf iours il arriue aux 
trois Riuieres, raconte a fes gens qu'il n'a point man- 
g6 pendant tout ce temps-la, que la nuit il ne prenoit 
qu'vn peu de fommeil ramaffant des feuilles feiches 
de I'an pafs6, dans lefquelles il s'enfeuelilToit na- 
iant point d'autres habits. II prit vn bout d'efcorce 
qu'il accommoda en forme de canot voguant la deffus, 
auec plus de peur de fes ennemis que du nauf rage ; 
fe trouuant dans le grand lac de Champlain, & le vent 
Tempefchant d'auancer, il fe mit a terre, continuant 
fon chemin dans les halliers & dans les ronces des 
bois, fi bien qu'il auoit les jambes toutes en sag, & d6- 
coupees come fi on luy eut tailladees auec [260 i.e., 256] 
des coufteaux. le le vis moy mefme par apres k Kt,- 
bec oil il me racompta tout cela. A mefme temps 
que ces pauures fuiarts furent retournez a iTebec ie 
rencontray dans les cabanes, le f orcier blaspbemateur 
qui ne s'eftoit pas iette bien auant dans la meflee, 
aiant tourne vifage des premiers, ie luy dis publique- 
ment deuant tous fes gens qu'il eftoit caufe de leur 
deroute, qu'il auoit fait mourir fes compatriotes, que 
ie I'auois excite ^ demander pardon a Dieu de fon 
blafpheme & qu'il ne m' auoit pas voulu croire. Ton 
Capitaine ne t'aiant pas voulu chaffer de fa compagnie 
eft mort en ta place, c'eft toy qui I'as malTacr^, don- 
ne toy bien de garde de plus parler comme tu as fait, 
I'amour que ie te porte me faifoit donner vn bon auis, 
mais tu ne las pas voulu fuiure. Ce pauure mife- 
rable ne dit pas vn feul mot, mais vn autre prenat la 
parole I'excufa difant, il ne fera plus cela, il ne co- 
gnoilToit point celuy qui ^ tout fait. Le P. du marche 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 157 

companions ; this so greatly increased his terror that 
he leaped into a river, swam across it, and fled as fast 
as he could. To be lighter, he had thrown away his 
robe, so he was entirely naked. At the end of nine 
days he reached the three Rivers, where he told his 
people that he had eaten nothing during all that time, 
and that at night he only took a little sleep upon a 
pile of last year's dry leaves, with which he covered 
himself, having no other clothes. He took a piece 
of bark which he shaped in the form of a canoe, and 
floated upon it, with more fear of his enemies than 
of shipwreck. Finding himself in the great lake of 
Champlain,^^ and the wind preventing his progress, 
he landed and continued his way through the thick- 
ets and brambles of the woods, so that his legs were 
covered with blood, and lacerated as if they had been 
gashed with [260 i.e., 256] knives. I myself saw 
him afterwards at Kebec, where he related all this to 
me. At the same time that these poor stragglers 
were returning to Kebec, I encountered among the 
cabins the blasphemous sorcerer, who had not taken 
the foremost place in the fight, but had been one of 
the first to retreat. I told him publicly before all 
his people that he had been the cause of their defeat, 
that he had caused the death of his countrymen ; that 
I had urged him to ask God's pardon for his blas- 
phemy, and he had not been willing to believe me. 
"Thy Captain, not having wished to banish thee 
from his company, has died in thy place, it is thou 
who hast slain him ; be very careful to talk no more 
as thou hast done ; the love I bear thee caused me to 
give thee good advice, but thou hast not been willing 
to follow it." This poor wretch did not say a word; 
but some one else, beginning to speak, excused him. 


158 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

efcriuit en ce teps la au Pere Lallemant, des trois 
Riuieres, que c'eftoit chofe lugubre de voir arriuer 
ces pauures guerriers. Voicy comme il parle. lis 
retournerent hier de leur guerre, non point chantans 
comme ils firent I'an paffe, mais tellement abbatus 
de due[il & de trjifteffe, [261 i.e., 257] qu'ils n'auoient 
pas le courage de tirer leurs canots hors de I'eau, 
non plus que leurs femes qui faifoient retentir le 
riuage de leurs trifle & lugubres lametations. Les 
deux Capitaines qui les conduifoient, ont eft6 tuez 
dans le combat. Tous deux font k regretter, mais 
particulierement celuy de la nation Algonquine, qui 
nous aimoit, & qui fembloit fe vouloir faire inftruire. 
II auoit hyuerne pres de nous, & nous auoit permis 
de baptifer fa femme, & de I'inhumer apres fa mort 
en noflre cimetiere auec les ceremonies de I'Eglife, 
elle eft bien-heureufe comme nous croions, & luy bien 
miferable, Voilk ce qu'en efcriuit le Pere. 

I'ay appris que le Capitaine de TadoufTac fe com- 
porta fort vaillamment, car fe voiant inegal en nom- 
bre, & en force ^ fes ennemis. II dit k fes gens, 
retirez-vous, & fauuez vos vies, pendant que ie fou- 
fliendrai I'effort du combat mourant pour vous. II 
fut bien-toft obei des plus coiiards aiant re9eu vn coup 
de fleche dans la cuilTe il tomba par terre, mais fe 
mettant fur fes genoux il fe defendit long temps auec 
fon efpee; fi fallut-il a la fin perdre la vie. 

Le Pere Buteux adioufte quelques particularitez. 
Ie ne vous mande rien, dit-il, de la [262 i.e., 258] 
mort des guerriers, ceux qui vous vont voir vous ra- 
conteront comme la chofe s'efl pallee. C'eft chofe 
pitoiable de les voir dans leurs cabanes, ils ne retour- 
nerent pas en trouppe comme Tan palI6, les canots 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 159 

saying, ' ' He will never do that again ; he does not 
know him who made all." Father du marche wrote 
at this time to Father Lallemant, from the three 
Rivers, that the return of those poor warriors was a 
very mournful sight. This is the way he speaks: 
" They returned yesterday from their war, not sing- 
ing as they did last year, but so cast down with 
mourning and sadness [261 i.e., 257] that they had 
not the spirit to draw their canoes out of the water, 
nor did their wives, who made the shores resound 
with their sad and mournful lamentations. The two 
Captains who led them were both killed in the battle. 
Both are to be regretted, but especially he of the 
Algonquin nation, who loved us, and who seemed 
inclined to receive instruction. He had passed the 
winter near us, and had permitted us to baptize his 
wife, and to bury her after her death, in our ceme- 
tery, with the ceremonies of the Church. She is 
blest, as we believe, and he is very miserable." This 
is what the Father wrote about them. 

I have learned that the Captain of Tadoussac bore 
himself very bravely ; for, when he saw that they 
were unequal in number and strength to the enemy, 
he said to his people, " Retreat and save your lives, 
while I bear the brunt of the fight, dying for you." 
He was immediately obeyed by the most cowardly ; 
having received an arrow in his thigh, he fell to the 
ground; but getting upon his knees, he defended 
himself a long time with his javelin ; yet at last he 
had to lose his life. 

Father Buteux adds some particulars : " I send you 
no account," he says, "of the [262 i.e., 258] death 
of the warriors; those who are coming to see you 
will describe how the affair took place. It is pitiful 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

defcedoient les vns apres les autres tous debandez. 
II y en eut vn qui vint deuant les autres donner aduis 
de ce defaftre, il crioit d'vne voix lugubre, k peu 
pres comme ceux qui recommandent les trefpalTez en 
France, il nomma par leur propre nom, tous ceux qui 
efloiet morts ou pris des ennemis. lis auoient tuez 
quelques animaux en chemin, leurs canots efloient 
remplis de chair, mais ils efloient fi abbatus, que 
cette viande demeuroit 1^ fans que perfonne I'empor- 
tafl. Eflans entrez dans leur cabanes, ils furent quel- 
que temps dans vn morne fdence, puis I'vn d'eux 
prenant la parolle racompta toute la Cataflrophe. Ils 
dirent que les Hiroquois n'eftoiet qu'a quatre iournees 
des trois Riuieres, & qu'il en efloit venu cet Hyuer 
vne trouppe de cent cinquante, qui s'approcherent 
pres de Thabitation des Francois, enuiron de deux 
iournees, ce qu'ils recogneurent aux petits baflons, 
qu'ils attachent "k vn arbre, pour faire cognoiflre ^ 
ceux qui pafferont par Ik combien ils efloient en 
nombre. 

Le 27. Vn Capitaine des Montagnez me [263 i.e., 
259] vint trouuer auec Makeabichtichiou, me priant d'al- 
ler auec eux, trouuer Monfieur le Gouuerneur pour 
parler de leurs affaires, ie les accompagnai, ce dernier 
print la parole & dit. Qu'ils auoient appris de leur 
Capitaine deffunt, qu'en vne affemblee qui fe fit de 
leur nation auec les Francois, il y a quelques annees, 
que Monfieur de Champlain leur promit de les aider a 
fermer vne bourgade aux trois Riuieres, k defricher 
la terre, a baflir quelques maifons; qu'ils auoient 
fouuent penf6 h. cela, «& qu'ils efloient refolus, du 
moins vne partie d'entre-eux, de s'arrefter la, & de 
viure paifiblement auec les Fran9ois. Nous auons. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 161 

to see them in their cabins ; they did not return in a 
body, as they did last year, but the canoes came 
down one after the other, all in confusion. One of 
them came ahead of the others to announce the dis- 
aster, who cried out in a mournful voice, very much 
like those who commend the departed in France, 
mentioning by name all those who were dead, or 
captured by the enemy. They had killed some ani- 
mals on the way, and their canoes were filled with 
meat; but they were so dejected that this food 
remained there without being removed by any one. 
Having entered their cabins, they remained for some 
time in a mournful silence; then one of them, begin- 
ning to speak, described the whole Catastrophe. 
They said that the Hiroquois were only four days' 
journey from the three Rivers, and that a troop of 
one hundred and fifty of them had come this Winter 
to within about two days' journey of the French set- 
tlement ; they had learned this from the little sticks 
which they fasten to a tree to make known to those 
who shall pass that way how many of them there were. 
On the 27th, a Captain of the Montagnez [263 i.e., 
259] came with Makeabichtichiou to see me, request- 
ing that I go with them to see Monsieur the Govern- 
or, to speak with him about their affairs ; I accom- 
panied them. The latter opened the conversation, 
saying that they had learned from their dead Captain 
that, in an assembly which had been held by their 
nation with the French some years before. Monsieur 
de Champlain had promised to help them enclose a 
village at the three Rivers, to clear the land, and to 
build some houses ; that they had often thought about 
it, and that they had resolved, at least a part of 
them, to locate there, and to live in peace with the 


162 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

difoit-il, deux puiffans ennemis qui nous perdent, 
I'vn eft rignorance de Dieu qui tue nos ames, I'autre 
font les Hiroquois ; qui maff acrent nos corps, ils nous 
contraignent d'eftre vagabonds, nous fommes comme 
vne graine qui fe feme en diuers endroits, ou pluftoft 
comme la pouffiere emport6e du vent, les vns font 
enterrez d'vn cofte, les autres de I'autre, le pais nous 
va manquer, il n'y "k quaii plus de chaffe proche des 
Fran9ois, fi nous ne recueillons quelque chofe de la 
terre, nous nous allons perdre. Voiez vous autres, 
difoit-il, fi vous nous defirez fecourir, felon la 
[264 i.e., 260] promeffe qu'en k fait deffunct Mon- 
fieur de Champlain. 

Monfieur le Gouuerneur demanda Ik deffus au fieur 
Oliuier, & au fieur Nicolet, qui eftoient prefens, s'il 
eftoit vray que Monfieur de Champlain leur eut fait 
cette promeffe. lis refpondirent qu'en effet, Mon- 
fieur de Champlain leur auoit dit, qu'auffi toft que 
I'habitation des trois Riuieres feroit baftie, qu'on les 
fecoureroit. Or come ie m'eftois trouu6 en cette 
affemblee, ie priai Monfieur le Gouuerneur de me 
laiffer refpondre aux Sauuages, ce que m'aiant accor- 
ds, ie leur dy qu'ils oublioient vne partie de ce qui 
fut conclud en cette affemblee. lis repartirent qu'ils 
n'auoient pas la plume en main comme nous, pour 
conferuer fur le papier, la memoire de ce qui f e trait- 
toit parmi eux. Ie leur dy done qu'on leur auoit 
promis le fecours qu'ils difoient, pourueu qu'ils fe 
rendiffent fedentaires & qu'ils donnaffent leurs enfans 
pour eftre inftruits, & efleuez en la foy Chreftienne. 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur aiant ouy cela, leur fit 
tefmoigner qu'ils eftoit preft de garder les conditions 
de fon coft^, pourueu qu'ils vouluffent executer celles 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 163 

French. " We have," said he, " two powerful ene- 
mies who are destroying us, — one is ignorance of 
God, which is killing our souls ; the other is the Hi- 
roquois, who are slaughtering our bodies ; they force 
us to be wanderers. We are like seeds which are 
sown in divers places, or rather like grains of dust 
scattered by the wind, — some are buried in one 
place, some in another. The country is failing us ; 
there is now scarcely any more game in the neigh- 
borhood of the French. Unless we reap something 
from the earth, we are going to ruin. Consider, you 
people," said he, "whether you wish to help us, 
according to the [264 i.e., 260] promise made to us 
by the late Monsieur de Champlain." 

Thereupon Monsieur the Governor asked sieur 
Olivier and sieur Nicolet, who were present, if it 
were true that Monsieur de Champlain had made this 
promise. They answered that, in fact, Monsieur de 
Champlain had told them that, as soon as the settle- 
ment at the three Rivers was founded, they would 
be assisted. Now, as I was present at that assembly, 
I begged Monsieur the Governor to let me answer 
the Savages ; this being granted to me, I told them 
that they were forgetting part of what had been de- 
cided at that meeting. They replied that they had 
not the use of the pen, as we had, to preserve upon 
paper the remembrance of what was discussed among 
them. Then I told them that the help which they 
mentioned had been promised to them, provided they 
would become sedentary, and would give their chil- 
dren to be instructed and reared in the Christian 
faith. When Monsieur the Governor heard this, he 
assured them that he was ready to abide by these 
conditions on his side, provided they would carry out 


164 LES RELA TJONS DES /£SUITES [Vol. 12 

qui les concernoient. lis donnerent ^ cognoiftre 
qu'ils en eftoient contens, [265 i.e., 261] mais qu'ils 
euffent efte bien aifes qu'on eut inftruits leurs en- 
fans aux trois Riuieres. On leur repliqna, qu'on y 
baftiroit, qu'en attendant il les laiffaflent k Kebec, 
& qu'auffi toft que le Seminaire feroit dreffe aux trois 
Riuieres, qu'on les y meneroit. Makheabietichiou, dit 
que pour luy, il s'accorderoit aifement a ce que nous 
defirions, mais qu'il falloit f9auoir quel eftoit le fenti- 
ment des autres fur ce poinct, & qu'ils en parleroient 
par entre eux. Pour moy, difoit-il, ie tefmoigne 
encor publiquement que ie veux croire en Dieu, plu- 
fieurs de mes compatriotes me difent allez que le 
Pere le leune nous veut perdre, qu'il commece de 
commander parmi nous, qu'il ordonne defia du nobre 
de femmes que nous deuons tenir. A tons cela ie 
refpons, que ie trouue bon tout ce qu'il enfeigne, que 
nous nous perdons nous mefmes, & qu'il ne nous 
fgauroit arriuer plus de mal qu'il nous arriue tons les 
iours, puifque nous mourons a tons momens. De- 
puis que i'ay prefche parmy eux, qu'vn home ne de- 
uoit tenir qu'vne femme. Ie n'ay pas efte bien venu 
des femmes, lefquelles eftant en plus grand nombre 
que les hommes, fi vn homme n'en pent efpoufer 
qu'vne, les autres font pour fouffrir; c'eft pourquoy 
cette doctrine n'eft pas conforme [266 i.e., 262] a 
leur affection. O que la chair & le fang ont de peine 
a goufter Dieu ! 

Pour reuenir a mon difcours quand ce Capitaine & 
Makheabihtichiou, furent de retour aux cabanes, ils 
declarerent tout ce qui s' eftoit paffe deuant Monfieur 
le Gouuerneur. Les viellards c[on]clurent tous qu'il 
fe falloit mettre k defricher, & fe feruir du fecours 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, j6s7 166 

those which concerned them. They expressed their 
satisfaction with this, [265 i.e., 261] but said they 
would have been very glad to have had their chil- 
dren instructed at the three Rivers. They were told 
that a house would be built there ; but that, in the 
meantime, they should leave the children at Kebec, 
and that as soon as the Seminary was ready at the 
three Rivers, they would be sent there. Makheabie- 
tichiou said that, as for him, he would readily grant 
what we desired, but they must find out the feeling 
of the others upon this subject, and that they would 
speak of it among them. " As for me," he said, ** I 
again declare publicly that I wish to believe in God ; 
some of my countrymen often tell me that Father le 
Jeune is trying to ruin us, that he is beginning to 
command among us, that he already dictates the 
number of wives we are to have. To all this I re- 
ply that I am very well pleased with his informa- 
tion, — that we ourselves are being ruined, that no 
more harm could happen to us than is happening 
every day, for we are dying every moment. Since I 
have been preaching among them that a man should 
have only one wife I have not been well received by 
the women ; for, since they are more numerous than 
the men, if a man can only marry one of them, the 
others will have to suffer. Therefore this doctrine 
is not according [266 i.e., 262] to their liking." Oh 
how hard it is for flesh and blood to enjoy God! 

To return to my subject. When this Captain and 
Makheabihtichiou returned to their cabins, they ex- 
plained all that had taken place in the presence of 
Monsieur the Governor. The old men all decided 
that they ought to begin to clear the land and avail 
themselves of the help of the French, yet they must 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.12 

des Francois, neantmoins qu'il falloit attendre que 
Tckimiouiriniou, I'vn de leurs Capitaines fut arriue. 
Quand ils declarerent qu'il falloit mettre leurs enfans 
parmy nous, ils eurent diuers fentimens, les vns en 
efboiet contens, les autres non. Quelques Algonquins 
dirent que ceux qui fe ioignoient auec nous mouroient. 
Vn vieillard Montagnez parla la deff us en ces termes : 
Deuat que les robbes noires vinflent en ce pais cy, 
les Fran9ois mouroient fort fouuent, depuis qu'ils 
font arriuez, ils ne meurent plus, & nous au contraire 
nous mourons, il faut qu'ils fgachent quelque chofe 
qui conferue leur nation. Vn autre tira de \k vne 
bonne conclufion, fi depuis qu'ils font auec les Fran- 
9ois, les Frangois ne meurent plus, il eft croiable 
que s'ils auoient nos enfans, qu'ils les empefcheroient 
auffi de mourir, car nous voions qu'ils aiment la ieu- 
neffe. Bref I'vn [267 i.e., 263] d'eux prit refolution 
de nous amener deux de fes gar9ons. Si en ce temps 
\k nous euffions eu des hommes pour les fecourir, & 
des viures pour nourrir leurs enfans, nous les euffions, 
peut-eftre, fait refoudre a nos volotez. Mais comme 
nous eftions foibles de viures & d' hommes, le pais 
n'eflant pas encor en eftat (comme i'ay defia dit) de 
faire cette depenfe a leur occafion, nous ne preffios 
point : bien marris neatmoins de laifler perdre vne fi 
belle occafion. C'efl chofe pitoiable, ie ne le fjau- 
rois dire affez fouuent, que le bien fpirituel de ces 
pauures barbares, foit retarde par le deffaut du tem- 
porel. 

Le I. iour de May, Monfieur le Gouuerneur fit 
drefl!er deuant I'Eglife vn grand arbre enrichi d'vne 
triple courone, au bas de laquelle il y auoit trois 
grands cercles I'vn fur I'autre, enrichis de feflons. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 167 

wait until Tchimiouiriniou, one of their Chiefs, arrived. 
When they declared that they must place their chil- 
dren among us, there were different opinions about 
it, — some were satisfied to do so, others were not. 
Some of the Algonquins said that those who united 
with us died. Thereupon an old Montagnez spoke 
in these terms : ' ' Before the black robes came to this 
country, many of the French died; but since these 
came they do not die, and, on the contrary, we die; 
it must be that they know something which preserves 
their nation." Another drew therefrom a good con- 
clusion; " If, since they have been with the French, 
the French die no more, it is to be supposed that, if 
they had our children, they would prevent them also 
from dying, for we see that they love children." In 
short, one [267 i.e., 263] of them decided to bring us 
two of his boys. If at that time we could have fur- 
nished them with men to help them, and had had 
food to nourish their children, we might, perhaps, 
have made them pliant to our wishes. But as we 
were short of food and men, the country not yet be- 
ing in a condition (as I have already said) to incur 
this expense for their sakes, we did not urge them, — 
very sorry, nevertheless, to let go so fine an oppor- 
tunity. It is a pitiable thing, I cannot repeat it too 
often, that the spiritual welfare of these poor barba- 
rians should be retarded by the lack of temporal 
resources. 

On the I St of May, Monsieur the Governor had a 
long pole erected in front of the Church, ornamented 
with a triple crown, below which there were three 
large circles, one above another, adorned with fes- 
toons, and bearing these three beautiful names writ- 
ten as upon an Escutcheon, Jesus, Maria, Joseph. It 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUri'ES [Vol.12 

qui portoient ces trois beaux noms efcrits, comme 
dans vn Ecuffon, lefus Maria lofeph. C'eft le pre- 
mier May dont la nouuelle France ait honors TEglife, 
II fut falue d'vne efcoiiade d'harquebufiers qui le 
vindrent entourer. Les foldats en planterent vn 
autre deuant le fort, portant vne couronne, fous la- 
quelle on appliqua les armes du Roy, de Monlieur 
le Cardinal, [268 i.e., 264] & de Monfieur noflre 
Gouuerneur. 

Le 3. du mefme mois, quelques Sauuages nous ve- 
nans voir, dirent qu'on leur auoit raconte qu'vn Euro- 
pean de I'Acadie, auoit tefmoigne qu'on manderoit 
aux Franfois qui font en ce pais cy, qu'il enforcel- 
laffent tous les fleuues, & toutes les eaux de ces quar- 
tiers, afin de faire mourir tous les Sauuages origi- 
naires. En effet, difoient-ils, nous fentons defia que 
les eaux font ameres. lis me prierent fort, que fi les 
vaiffeaux apportoient ces nouuelles, que i'empefchaffe 
ce coup, & que ie leur en donnaffe aduis. Ces pau- 
ures gens ne f gauent a quoy attribuer la cauf e de leur 
mort. Le diable les trouble, & les efpouuante, fai- 
fant tous les ans courir de mefchans bruits parmi 
eux. Ie leur dis que fi vn Frangois fe feruoit de for- 
tilege qu'on le mettroit k mort, qu'ils en deuroient 
faire de mefme de leurs forciers. L'vn d'eux me 
repliqua fort a propos: Vous autres, vous obeiffez k 
vn chef, s'il faifoit mourir quelque mefchant homme, 
les autres Frangois fes parens, n'oferoient en parler; 
mais fi nous tuions vn homme de noftre nation tant 
mefchant fut il, & fes parens, & fes amis nous tue- 
roient, & ainfi nous nous perdrions tous. Helas ! qui 
auroit pouuoir d'arrefter les Sauuages, & en [269 i.e., 
265] authorifer l'vn d'eux, pour commander aux au- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 169 

is the first May day on which new France has hon- 
ored the Church. It was saluted by a squad of 
arquebusiers, who came and surrounded it. The 
soldiers erected another in front of the fort, bearing 
a crown, under which they placed the arms of the 
King, of Monsieur the Cardinal, [268 i.e., 264] and 
of Monsieur our Governor. 

On the 3rd of the same month, some Savages who 
came to see us said they had been told that a 
European of Acadia had asserted that word would be 
sent to the French who are in this country, that they 
should bewitch all the rivers and the waters of these 
regions, in order to kill off all the original Savages. 
" In fact," said they, " we already perceive that the 
waters taste bitter. " They entreated me earnestly, 
if the ships brought such a message, to prevent this 
misfortune, and to warn them of it. These poor 
people do not know to what cause to attribute the 
mortality among them. The devil worries and fright- 
ens them, every year causing evil reports to be circu- 
lated among them. I told them that, if a Frenchman 
used sorcery, he would be put to death; and that 
they ought to do the same with their sorcerers. One 
of them replied very aptly, " You Frenchmen, you 
obey one chief; if he had some wicked man killed, 
the rest of the French, his relatives, would not dare 
to talk about it ; but if we killed a man of our nation, 
however wicked he were, both his parents and his 
friends would kill us, and thus we would all be de- 
stroyed. ' ' Alas ! if some one could stop the wander- 
ings of the Savages, and [269 i.e., 265] give author- 
ity to one of them to rule the others, we would see 
them converted and civilized in a short time. 

On the 1 8th of the same month, I received a letter 


170 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

tres, on les verroit conuertis & policez en pen de temps. 

Le 1 8. du mefme mois, ie receus vne lettre des 
trois Riuieres dattee du i6. qui parloit des Sauuages 
en ces termes. Vne terreur panique fe ietta leudy 
dernier parmi nos Sauuages, fur I'apprehenfion qu'ils 
eurent de la venue de Hiroquois. lis prierent qu'on 
fift entrer leurs femmes & leurs enfans dans le fort, 
pour eftre en lieu d'affeurance. On leur repliqua 
qu'on leur prefteroit le lendemain matin des pieux 
pour fermer vne efpece de bourgade, a I'abri du fort. 
A peine le Soleil eftoit-il leu6, qu'ils vindrent tons 
petits & grands pour enleuer ces pieux, ils trauail- 
loient d'vne fi grande ardeur, les vns portans ces bois 
affez pefans, les autres difpofans le lieu ou on les de- 
uoit planter, les autres les dreflant, qu'en moins de 
quatre heures, ils fe virent barricadez. Pleuft k Dieu 
que la refolution qu'ils ont de s'arrefter fuft ftable, 
il y auroit bien moien de les inftruire. 

Le 27. du mefme, le P. Buteux me manda ce qui 
fuit. Les Sauuages fe raffemblans icy, nous iu- 
geafmes k propos de leur faire feflin, pour gagner 
touliours d'auantage leur affection; nous en inui- 
tafmes enuiron vne vingtaine, [270 i.e., 266] dont la 
moiti6 eftoit de la nation Aqs, Attikatnegues; les vol- 
ant tons affis ie leur dis, que puis que les Fran9ois 
les traittoiet, il falloit auffi qu'il priaffent Dieu de- 
uant que de manger, comme faifoient les Fran9ois. 
Alors Makheabichtichiou, qui eftoit I'vn des conuiez, 
print la parole, & dit a fes compatriotes : Vous autres 
qui n'auez point encor efte inftruits, vous ne fgauez 
pas encor la couftume des Frangois, ie vous I'enfei- 
gnerai : la delfus il leur expliqua que vouloit dire le 
benedicite, & me demanda permiffion de le dire, de- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 171 

from the three Rivers, dated the i6th, which spoke 
of the Savages in these words : ' * Last Thursday a 
panic spread among our Savages, caused by their 
apprehension of the coming of the Hiroquois. They 
begged that their wives and children might be taken 
into the fort, to be in a place of safety. They were 
told that the next morning some stakes would be 
loaned them, with which to enclose a sort of village 
under the shelter of the fort. The Sun had scarcely 
risen when they came, small and great, to carry off 
these stakes ; they worked with so much ardor, some 
carrying these heavy pieces of wood, others making 
ready the place where they were to be set in, and 
others putting them up, that in less than four hours 
they found themselves barricaded. Would to God 
that they might adhere to their resolution to settle 
down; there would be excellent opportunity to 
instruct them." 

On the 27th of the same. Father Buteux sent me 
the following information : "As the Savages were 
gathering here, we judged it fitting to give them a 
feast, to gain still more their affection. We invited 
about twenty of them, [270 i.e., 266] half of whom 
were of the nation of the Attikamegues}^ Seeing 
them all seated, I said to them that as the French 
were entertaining them, they must, therefore, pray to 
God before eating, as the French did. Then Makhe- 
abicktickiou, who was one of the guests, began to 
speak, and said to his countrymen, ' You who have not 
yet been instructed, you do not yet know the French 
custom; I will teach it to you.' Thereupon he ex- 
plained to them the meaning of the 'benedicite,' and 
asked my permission to say it before any one should 
eat. I said it in Latin, and he in the Savage tongue. 


172 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

uant que perfonne mangeafl. le le dis en Latin, & 
luy en fa langne Sauuage. Pendant qu'ils man- 
geoient, comme ie leur voulus expliquer quelque 
poincts de noftre creance, laiffe moy parler, dit le 
Sauuage. La deffus il leur deduifit auec telle em- 
phafe la creation du monde, & de deluge, & plufieurs 
autres articles de noftre foy, que i'en demeurai tout 
raui, & enuieux d'en pouuoir dire autant. O quelle 
difference entre vn homme qui parle, & vn enfant 
qui begaie, non ie ne croi pas que fi on auoit la per- 
fection de la langue, qu'on n'obtint beaucoup fur ces 
peuples. Au refte ie ne f9aurois iuger de 1' intention 
de cet homme, mais ie puis alTeurer qu'il difoit bien, 
& qu'il conceuoit ce qu'il difoit, ie ne fgai pas s'il le 
gouftoit. [271 i.e., 267] Ces barbares ont redouble 
leur pallilTade, en plantant vne feconde, efloignee d'vn 
pied & demy ou enuiro de la premiere, auec deffein 
de remplir ce vuide de fafcines & de terre. II femble 
qu'ils fe veulent fortifier tout de bon. lis ont fait 
vne ordonnance, que perfonne ne iettafl aucune or- 
dure dedans leur fort. Ce matin toutes les femmes 
font allees k la Riuiere lauer leur chauderons, & leurs 
plats ou efcuelles defcorces. II n'y a que deux fa- 
milies qui fe foient mifes a defricher, celle de Etinech- 
kaeuat, & de Nenaskoumat . Celuy-cy a defia plus de 
demi arpent d'enfemec6, il affeure qu'il fera vn grand 
champ I'an prochain, fi on le pent aider, il a plufieurs 
enfans, & de bonne fagon; s'ils prennet la mefme 
volonte, ils reiifliront. Ie luy ay promis toute forte 
d'affiftance, felon noftre petit pouuoir, & par auance 
ie leur ay fait prefent k tons deux de la graine de 
bled d'Inde, qu'ils ont feme, Dieu leur vueille don- 
ner la conftance. Puis que vos occupatios ne vous 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 173 

While they were eating, as I was trying to expound 
to them some of the points of our belief, ' Let me 
speak, * said the Savage. Thereupon he told about 
the creation of the world, and the deluge, and sev- 
eral other articles of our faith, with so much fluency 
that I was completely carried away, and envious of 
his ability to say so much. Oh, what a difference 
between a man who talks and a child who only stut- 
ters ! I do not doubt that, if we knew the language 
perfectly, we might obtain much from these people. 
While I cannot judge the intentions of this man, yet 
I can assert that he spoke well, and that he under- 
stood what he said; I do not know whether he ap- 
proved of it. [271 i.e., 267] These barbarians have 
doubled their palisade, by erecting a second one, 
distant a foot and a half or thereabout from the first, 
intending to fill in this space with branches and mud. 
It looks as if they were trying to fortify themselves 
in earnest. They have made a regulation that no 
one shall throw any filth within their fort. This 
morning all the women went to the River to wash 
their kettles, and their plates or dishes of bark. Only 
two families have begun to clear the land, those of 
Etinechka'euat and Nenaskoumat . The latter has al- 
ready more than half an arpent planted ; he declares 
that he will make a great field next year, if he can 
get some help; he has several children, and fine- 
looking ones; if they have the same determination 
[as good appearance], they will succeed. I have 
promised him every assistance, in proportion to our 
limited means; and I have given them both in ad- 
vance a present of some shelled Indian corn, which 
they have planted. May God give them steadfast- 
ness. Since your occupations do not permit you to 


174 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

permettent pas de venir li toft, il faut me refoudre ^ 
faire le Catechifme, mais i'ay peur que mes efcholiers 
ne m'entendent pas, la difcotinuation des eftudes, & 
de la frequentation des Sauuages ma grandemet nuit, 
& ma fait cognoiftre que ma memoire oublie auflTi 
aifement qu'elle apprend facilement. 

[272 i.e., 268] Le 6. iour de luin, les Sauuages m'en- 
uoierent querir, pour affifter a la mort du petit Ignace 
qui agonifoit. Comme nous eufmes eft6 la vne 
efpace de temps, le P. de Quen & moy, apres auoir 
fait quelque prieres, nous nous retirafmes, donnas 
parole aux Sauuages que nous retournerions dans 
quelque temps. A peine fufmes nous partis que 
ce pauure petit trefpalla. Vne pauure femme Sau- 
uage voiant cela, dit au fieur Oliuier, que ie me de- 
uois trouuer a fa mort, pour autant que i'eufle fait en 
priant Dieu, que I'ame ne fe fuft point deftournee 
du chemin du ciel, oti nous difions qu'elle deuoit al- 
ler, peut eftre adiouftoift cette femme, que cette pau- 
ure ame s'egarera de fon chemin, faute d' auoir eft6 
bien dirigee en partant. Cette {implicit^ monftre 
quelque forte de creance. Le fieur Oliuier me ra- 
compta vne autre pareille fimplicit6. Vn Sauuage 
eftant auec luy, & auec quelques autres de nos Fran- 
9ois, dans vne Chappelle, les glaces les aians mis en 
danger de mort : le fieur Oliuier luy demanda par apres, 
quelles penfees il auoit dans ce danger. Ie me fou- 
uenois refpondit-il, que i'ai ouy dire que les Frangois 
vont en vn lieu plein de plaifir apres leur mort. 
C'eft pourquoy ie difois k part moy: Voila qui va 
[273 i.e., 269] bien, que ie meurs auec eux, car ie ne 
les quitterai pas, i'y prendrai bien garde, ie tiendrai 
le mefme chemin qu'eux, apres ma mort. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 175 

come soon, I must make up my mind to teach the 
Catechism, but I am afraid my pupils will not under- 
stand me ; the discontinuance of my studies and of the 
visits of the Savages are a great detriment to me, 
and have taught me that my memory forgets as read- 
ily as it learns easily." 

[272 i.e., 268] On the 6th day of June, the Sav- 
ages sent for me to visit little Ignace, who was dy- 
ing. After we had stayed there a short time. Father 
de Quen and I, and had offered some prayers, we 
withdrew, leaving word with the Savages that we 
would return soon. Scarcely had we departed when 
this poor little one passed away. A poor Savage 
woman, when she saw this, said to sieur Olivier that 
I should have been present at his death, inasmuch 
as, through my prayers to God, I might have pre- 
vented the soul from being turned aside on its way 
to heaven, where we said it was to go. " Perhaps," 
added the woman, " this poor soul will wander from 
its path for lack of having been rightly directed at 
its departure." This simplicity shows some sort of 
belief. Sieur Olivier related to me another instance 
of like simplicity. A Savage being with him and 
some of our other Frenchmen in a Chapel, ^^ the 
masses of ice placing them in danger of death, sieur 
Olivier asked him afterwards what his thoughts were 
in this time of danger. " I remembered having 
heard," answered he, " that the French go after death 
to a place full of joy. Hence I said to myself, ' It is 
[273 i.e., 269] well that I die with them; for I will 
not leave them, I shall be very careful to take the 
same route that they do, after my death.' " 

On the 1 2th, some bands of Savages having re- 
turned from the interior, they asked me if I would 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JJiSUITES [Vol.12 

Le 12. quelques efcoiiades de Sauuages eftans re- 
tournez des terres, me demanderent, li ie ne recom- 
mancerois pas k les inftruire. Ie repliquai que ie n'a- 
uois pas dequoi leur faire feftin. lis repartirent que 
cela n'importoit pas, qu'ils ne laifferoient pas de ve- 
nir efcouter, quoy que nous ne leur donnaffions point 
k manger. Ten voulus faire 1' experience, nous les 
allafmes inuiter en leurs cabanes ; ils ne manquerent 
pas de venir. Si bien qu'vn certain iour, ie remar- 
quai des Sauuages de fept & huict nations qui m'ef- 
coutoient. La Chappelle eftoit toute pleine, depuis 
le haut iufques en bas, mais le venue des vaiffeaux 
me fait quitter cet exercice. 

Le 1 8. du mefme mois, Monfieur de fainct lean 
defcendant des trois Riuieres, nous racompta vne 
hifloire gentille, qui fait voir la crainte qu'ont les 
Sauuages de leurs ennemis. II difoit done qu'eflant 
dans vne barque en la Riuiere des Prairies ; ils ap- 
perceurent vn canot, qui rodoit doucement k I'entour 
des Ifles, pour voir s'il ne decouuriroit point quelque 
Hiroquois, auffi toft on tira [274 i.e., 270] quelques 
coups d'harquebufes pour le faire venir. Le Sauuage 
qui efloit dedans voiant la barque, la vint aborder. 
Apres qu'on I'eut interroge fur diuerfes chofes, on 
luy demanda s'il ne voudroit point defcendre aux 
trois Riuieres, pource que Monfieur de S. lean, & le 
fieur Hertel defiroient y aller, il refpondit qu'en effet 
il voudroit bie y eftre, mais quinfailliblement les Hi- 
roquois le tueroient en chemin. Le fieur Nicolet luy 
repart, qu'il ne deuoit rien craindre auec ces deux 
ieunes hommes, tons deux vaillans & enfans de bra- 
ues Capitaines; qu'ils eftoient armez de bonnes har- 
quebufes, & qu'aucun mal ne luy pouuoit arriuer en 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 177 

not begin to instruct them again, I replied that I had 
nothing with which to make them a feast. They 
answered that that did not matter, — they would come 
and listen to me, even if we did not give them any- 
thing to eat. Wishing to put them to the proof, we 
went to their cabins and invited them ; they did not 
fail to come, so many of them that one day I noticed 
Savages from seven or eight nations listening to me, 
the Chapel being full from one end to the other ; but 
the coming of the ships caused me to give up this 
exercise. 

On the 1 8th of the same month Monsieur de sainct 
Jean came down from the three Rivers. He related 
to us a pretty story, showing the fear the Savages 
have of their enemies. He said that when he was 
in a bark on the River des Prairies, they perceived 
a canoe prowling around the Islands on the look- 
out for some Hiroquois; they immediately fired [274 
i.e., 270] several shots from the arquebuses, to sum- 
mon it to them. The Savage who was in it, see- 
ing the bark, brought his canoe alongside. After he 
had been questioned about various things, he was 
asked if he would not like to go down to the three Riv- 
ers, as Monsieur de St. Jean and sieur Hertel ^ desired 
to go there. He replied that, indeed, he greatly 
wished to go there, but that the Hiroquois would be 
sure to kill him on the way. Sieur Nicolet rejoined 
that he ought to fear nothing when these two young 
men, both of them courageous and children of 
brave Captains, were with him; that they were 
armed with good arquebuses, and that no misfortune 
could befall him in their company. He insisted that 
his death would be inevitable if he went on this 
journey; but at last, being strongly urged, he agreed 


178 


LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.12 


leur compagnie. II dit totifiours que la mort luy eft 
infaillible, s'il fe met en cliemin. Mais en fin comme 
on le preffoit viuemet, il affeure bien qn'il embar- 
quera ces deux ieunes gens, mais k condition, que le 
premier canot d'Hiroquois qu'il verra fur la riuiere, 
qu'il les plantera fur le bord du fleuue, & s'enfuira 
dans les bois, n'aiant pas enuie de mourir fi toft. lis 
accepterent cette condition, & firent paroiftre qu'a- 
iant le pied ferme fur la terre, ils ne craignoiet pas 
I'abord des Hiroquois. Mon Sauuage penfant inti- 
mider nos Fran9ois par cette menace, de les quitter, 
fut bien eflonne, [275 i.e., 271] les voians fi refolus. 
Cela luy mit le cceur au ventre (comme on dit) & luy 
fit proferer ces paroles. Allons ie vous menerai, & 
qui plus eft ie ne vous abandonnerai point, ie mour- 
rai auec vous ; puis fe tournant vers le fieur Nicolet, 
luy dit: Quand tu auras appris la nouuelle de ma 
mort, dis ie te prie k ceux de ma nation, que ie fuis 
mort courageufement, en la compagnie de deux bra- 
ues Capitaines Fran§ois. Encor ce pauure barbare 
vouloit-il auoir de la gloire, & de la vanite k fa mort. 
II embarqua done nos Fran9ois, & les amena aux trois 
Riuieres, fans rencontrer autre cbofe que des eaux & 
des bois. 

Le 20. ie receus lettres, qui portoient qu'vn Sau- 
uage aiant voulu tuer vn Francois, aux trois Riui- 
eres: Makheabichtichiou ne s'efloit pas comporte 
comme il falloit en cette action. C6t homme (efcrit 
le Pere Buteux) a vn grand pouuoir fur fes gens, mais 
fort peu fur f oy ; il fait des fautes & puis il les re- 
cognoift, il voit que ce que nous enfeignons eft le 
meilleur, le dit "k tout le monde, mais cependat il ne 
quitte point fes trois femmes. A la Proceffion du 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 179 

to embark these two young men, — but on condition 
that at the first sight of an Hiroquois canoe on the 
river he would set them down upon the bank and 
flee into the woods, having no desire to die so soon. 
They accepted this condition, explaining that if they 
had a firm foothold upon the land they did not fear 
the approach of the Hiroquois. My Savage, think- 
ing to intimidate our Frenchmen by this threat of 
leaving them, was quite taken aback [275 i.e., 271] 
when he saw them so determined. This put his 
heart in his stomach (as the saying is), and led him 
to utter these words : ' ' Let us go ; I will take you 
and, what is more, I will not leave you; I will die 
with you;" then, turning to sieur Nicolet, he said to 
him, " If thou hearest news of my death, tell those 
of my nation, I pray thee, that I died bravely, in the 
company of two valiant French Captains." Even 
this poor barbarian desired to have glory, and an oc- 
casion for vanity, in his death. Accordingly, he em- 
barked our two Frenchmen, and took them to the 
three Rivers, encountering nothing else than water 
and woods. 

On the 20th, I received letters bearing the news 
that, a Savage having tried to kill a Frenchman at 
the three Rivers, Makheabichtichiou did not conduct 
himself in the matter as he should have done. " This 
man" (writes Father Buteux) " has great power over 
his people, but very little over himself; he makes 
mistakes, and then he acknowledges them; he sees 
that what we teach is best, — he says so to every one, 
yet meanwhile he does not give up his three wives. 
At the Procession of the holy Sacrament, he had all 
his people turn out to adore our [276 i.e., 272] Lord. 
He was present at the Procession, then at Vespers, 


180 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

fainct Sacrement, il fit fortir tons fes gens pour ve- 
nir adorer noftre [276 i.e., 272] Seigneur. I\ affifta 
k la Proceflion, & puis h. Vefpres, & an Sermon, auec 
Ekhinechkaoiiat , c'eft le nom d'vn Capitaine Monta- 
gnez. 

Le 25. comme nous inftruifions quelques Sauuages 
malades, I'vn d'entr'eux nous dit, que nous faifions 
mal d'improuuer leurs couftumes ; & Ik deffus nous 
racompta que I'Hyuer palTe, vn petit enfant s'eftant 
trouue fort mal, I'vn de leurs /ongleurs entrant dans 
fon tabernacle, fit venir I'ame de ce pauure petit, il 
eut de la peine k I'attrapper, mais en fin il la prit auec 
la main, la remit fur la tefte de 1' enfant, & a force 
de fouffier, la fit rentrer dans fon corps, & ainfi I'en- 
fant commen9a a reuiure. /e luy dis que ce /ongleur 
deuroit appeller dans fon tabernacle, les ames de tant 
de malades qu'on voit parmy eux, & les remettre 
dans leurs corps, afin qu'ils gueriffet, mais il me re- 
partit, qu'6 n'attrappoit pas les ames comme on vou- 
loit : Voila d'eftranges erreurs. Cela nous paroifl fi 
ridicule en France, qu'il femble qu'a la premiere pa- 
role on les doit diffiper. Mais la malice des diables, 
la fubtilite des charlatans, colore fi bien ces im- 
poftures, qu'elles pafl!ent pour des veritez, aufquelles 
ces Barbares font attachez, par vne habitude tres- 
difficiles k defraciner. 

[277 i.e., 273] Le 27. ie fus informe d'vn combat 
des Sauuages de la nation d'Iroquet contre les Hiro- 
quois. Les vns & les autres s'eftans rencontrez dans 
des canots, ils fe battirent fort & ferme fur I'eau. 
Comme les canots des Algonquins font plus legers 
que ceux des Hiroquois, & que d'ailleurs ils eftoient 
en plus grand nombre, ils remporterent la victoire 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 181 

and at the Sermon, with Ekhinechkaouat , a Monta- 
gnez Captain." 

On the 25th, as we were instructing some sick Sav- 
ages, one of them told us that we did wrong to find 
fault with their customs. Thereupon he related to 
us that last Winter, a little child being very sick, 
one of their Jugglers entered his tent and summoned 
the soul of this poor little one ; he had some trouble 
in catching it, but at last he took it in his hand, 
placed it upon the child's head, and by dint of blow- 
ing made it reenter the body, and thus the child be- 
gan to revive. I told him this Juggler ought to call 
into his tent the souls of the many sick people seen 
among them, and put them back in their bodies so 
that they might recover; but he replied that souls 
could not be caught at will. These are very strange 
errors. Such ideas appear so ridiculous to us in 
France that it seems as if the first word ought to 
dispel them. But the malice of devils and the cun- 
ning of charlatans color these impostures so skillfully, 
that they pass for truths, to which these Barbarians 
are attached by habits very difficult to eradicate. 

[277 i.e., 273] On the 27th, I was informed of a 
battle between the Savages of the Iroquet nation ^^ 
and the Hiroquois. Meeting each other in their ca- 
noes, they fought a fierce and stubborn battle upon 
the water. As the Algonquin canoes are lighter than 
those of the Hiroquois, and as besides they exceeded 
them in numbers, they carried off the victory, bring- 
ing back with them thirteen prisoners alive, whom 
they caused to suffer horrible tortures. They sent 
one of these prisoners to the three Rivers. Oh God ! 
what cruelty was not exercised upon this poor wretch, 
by the wives of those who a little while before 


182 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 


ramenans auec eux treize prifonniers en vie, aufquels 
ils ont fait fouffrir d'horribles tourmens. lis enuoie- 
rent aux trois Riuieres I'vn de ces prifonniers! 6 
Dieu quelle cruaute n'exercerent point fur ce pauure 
miferable, les femmes de ceux qui depuis peu auoient 
efte tues au pais des Hiroquois. Le Pere Buteux 
ma efcrit toute cette hiftoire tragique, me defcriuant 
la barbarie de ces tygres, leur fureur ma femble fl 
horrible que ie ne lay peu coucher fur le papier ; ce 
qui m'attrifte c'eft que cette manie s'exerce en la pre- 
fence & a la veue de nos Fran9ois. Fefpere neant- 
moins que d'orefnauant ils s'efloigneront de nos habi- 
tations s'ils veulent exercer cette rage. Monfieur 
noflre Gouuerneur auoit mande aux trois Riuieres 
qu'on les empefchaft ou qu'on les fit retirer d'aupres 
les Fran9ois : mais les lettres arriueret trop tard, Le 
dernier iour de luin arriua vne chalouppe [278 i.e. , 274] 
dans laquelle eftoit le Pere Paul Ragueneau, qui nous 
apporta la nouuelle des vaiffeaux qu'on attedoit il y 
auoit de-ja quelque iours. (Tomme ils arriuent parfois 
en May k Tadouffac, fi toft qu'on vient fur le declin 
du mois de luin fans en apprendre des nouuelles, on 
commance a entrer en doubte de leur venue. Or ja- 
9oit que cette annee on ait bien trauaille au defriche- 
ment, & que les bleds f oient fort beaux : neantmoins 
comme le pays n'eft pas encor alfes riche pour nour- 
rir le monde qui palle tous les ans, fi les vaiffeaux 
manquoient on fouffriroit. 

Le premier iour de luillet vn Capitaine de la petite 
natio des Algonquins m'apporta des lettres, qui por- 
toient que ce Capitaine defcendoit k Kebec pour voir 
le Capitaine des Fran§ois. On le tient, difoit ce Sau- 
uage, pour grand perfonnage en noftre pays on dit 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 183 

had been killed in the country of the Hiroquois. 
Father Buteux has written me the whole tragic 
story, describing the barbarity of these tigers. Their 
fury seemed to me so horrible that I have not been 
able to set it down on paper ; what saddens me is that 
they give vent to this madness in the presence and 
in the sight of our French people. I hope, however, 
that in the future they will keep away from our set- 
tlements, if they wish to indulge in this mania. 
Monsieur our Governor had sent word to the three 
Rivers that they should be prevented from it, or that 
they should be sent away from the neighborhood of 
the French, but the letters arrived too late. On the 
last day of June, a shallop arrived [278 i.e., 274] in 
which was Father Paul Ragueneau, who brought us 
news of the ships, which we had already expected 
for several days. As they sometimes reach Tadous- 
sac in May, we begin to doubt their coming, if no 
news is heard of them by the end of June. Now al- 
though we have worked hard this year at clearing 
the land, and although the crops are very fine, still, 
as the country is not yet rich enough to furnish food 
for all the people who come over every year, the fail- 
ure of the ships would cause suffering. 

On the first day of July, a Captain of the petite 
nation of the Algonquins brought me letters stating 
that this Captain was coming down to Kebec to see 
the Captain of the French. " He is considered," 
said this Savage, ' ' a grand personage in our coun- 
try; they say he is a great friend of the Sun, and 
that he gives letters which prevent one from dying, 
at least soon. I am going to ask him for some of 
them," said he. I made Monsieur de Montmagny, 
our Governor, laugh heartily when I communicated 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.12 

qu'il eft grand amy du Soleil, & qu'il donne des 
lettres qui empefchent de mourir, du moins {i toft, 
le m'en vay faifoit-il luy en demander. le fis bien 
rire Monfieur de Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur 
quand ie luy communiquay cette lettre. En effet ce 
pauure Barbare le vint voir & luy demanda pourquoy 
ils fe d^peuploient ^ veue d'oeil, & nous autres au con- 
traire nous viuions fi long-temps, il faut [279 i.e., 275] 
bien difoit-il que tu f9ache quelque fecret pour con- 
feruer tes gens, & que tu aye grande cognoilTance au 
Manitou. Monfieur le Gouuerneur I'aiant entretenu 
quelque temps & donne quelque refponfe conforme k 
fa port6e, nous I'enuoia auec quelques vns de fes gens 
qui Taccompagnoient, luy difant que s'ils faifoient 
ce que ie leur enfeignerois, ils auroient trouue le fe- 
cret de conferuer leur nation, & ne pas mourir fi fou- 
uent. Le fieur Oliuier me les aiant amene m'expli- 
qua le fujet de leur venue. La deffus ie leur fis vn 
petit difcours de la grandeur de Dieu, de fa puiffance 
& de fa bonte, que c'eftoit luy qui nous conferuoit, 
qu'il vouloit conferuer toutes les nations de la terre, 
& que s'ils vouloient croire en luy, & luy obeir, il 
les aimeroit comme il nous aime. Qu'il defendoit de 
tuer, de defrober, de paillarder, bref qu'il haiffoit 
tout ce qui eft manuals, & aimoit tout ce qui eft bon. 
L'vn deux prit la parole & dit en Algonquin, tout ce 
que i'auois dit en Montagnez. II adjoufta mefme 
quelques autres chofes de noftre creance qu'il auoit 
oiiy de ceux que nous auons inftruits. Pour conclu- 
fion il dit "k fes compatriotes ces gens cy ne font point 
en deux parolles, ils n'ont qu'vne mefme doctrine: 
[280 i.e., 276] lis font conftans en ce qu'ils nous en- 
feignet Ie me perfuade qu'il eft quelque chofe de ce 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 185 

the contents of this letter to him. In fact, this poor 
Barbarian did come to see him, and asked him why 
they were becoming visibly depopulated, and we, on 
the contrary, lived so long, " It must [279 i.e., 275] 
be," said he, "that thou knowest some secret for 
preserving thy people, and that thou hast an intimate 
acquaintance with the Manitou." Monsieur the 
Governor, having conversed with him for some time, 
and having given him answers suitable to his under- 
standing, sent him to us with some of his own people 
as an escort, telling him that if they did what I 
should teach them, they would learn the secret of 
preserving their nation, and of diminishing the num- 
ber of deaths. Sieur Olivier brought them to me, 
and explained the object of their visit. Thereupon 
I made them a little speech on the greatness of God, 
on his power and goodness, — saying that it was he 
who maintained us, that he wished to preserve all 
the nations of the earth ; and that, if they were will- 
ing to believe in him and obey him, he would love 
them as he loves us; that he forbade murder, theft, 
and lewdness, — in short, that he hated all that is 
bad, and loved all that is good. One of them began 
to speak, and said in Algonquin all that I had said in 
Montagnez. He even added some other points about 
our belief which he had heard from those whom 
we have instructed. "These people here," said he 
to his countrymen, in conclusion, "have not two 
ways of talking, they have but one single doctrine ; 
[280 i.e., 276] they are consistent in what they teach 
us. I am convinced that there is something in what 
they say. They forbid us to kill ; if the Europeans 
who are with the Hiroquois taught them as these men 
teach us, we should live in safety." In short, they 


186 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

qu'ils difent. lis nous defendet de tuer, fi les Euro- 
peans qui font auec les Hiroquois les enfeignoient 
come ceux cy nous enfeignent nous ferions en affeu- 
rance. Bref ils approuuerent la parole de lefus C. & 
refpondirent qu'ils voudroient bien eftre aupres de 
nous pour le pouuoir entendre plus fouuent. 

Le 5. du mefme mois la barque qu'on auoit enuoi6 
a TadoulTac au deuant des vaifleaux apporta quelques 
habitans. 

Le 9. vn Capitaine Montagnez me vint trouuer & 
me dit que nous allaffios voir Monfieur le Gouuer- 
neur, qu'il luy vouloit parler. Le Pere Lallemant 
s'y trouua. Le fujet de fa harangue fut que les Abe- 
naquiois eftans venus a isTebec, il leur auoit deffendu 
de monter aux trois Riuieres & qu'ils n'auoient tenu 
compte de fon commandement ; fi Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur difoit-il, me veut prefler fecours, I'iray fer- 
mer tous les fleuues par oti ils peuuent retourner en 
leur pais. Comme nos Sauuages vont parfois aux 
pais des Abenaquiois, ceux-ci les veulent auffi venir 
vifiter ^ kebec & plus haut. Mais ce n'eft pas le bien 
de Meffieurs les Alfociez, car ces barbares vienent 
enleuer les Caftors de ces contrees [281 i.e., 277] 
pour les porter alieurs [sc. ailleurs], c'eft pourquoy 
Mr. le Gouuerneur coliderant ce defordre fit venir le 
Capitaine des Montagnais «fe des Abenaquiois pour 
leur faire entendre qu'il n'efloit pas content que ces 
marchans vinffent trafiquer fur les brifees de nos 
Fran§ois, fi bien qu'il menaga les Montagnez de faire 
defence au magazin de leur traitter aucuns viures 
iufques h. ce que les Abenaquiois fuffent partis. Ce 
Capitaine Montagnez tefmoigna qu'il n'efloit point 
content que ces eftrangers montafl!ent aux trois Ri- 


1637] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 187 

approved the word of Jesus Christ, and answered that 
they would gladly be near us, to be able to hear it 
more frequently. 

On the 5th of the same month, the bark that had 
been sent to Tadoussac, to meet the ships, brought 
us some new settlers. 

On the 9th, a Montagnez Captain came to see me, 
and asked me to go with him to see Monsieur the 
Governor, as he wished to speak to him. Father 
Lallemant was there. The subject of his speech was 
that, the Abenaquiois ^^ having come to Kebec, he had 
forbidden them to go up to the three Rivers, and 
they had paid no attention to his command. " If 
Monsieur the Governor," said he, " will lend me aid, 
I will close all the rivers through which they can re- 
turn to their country. ' ' As our Savages occasionally 
go to the land of the Abenaquiois, those also wish to 
come and visit them at kebec and further up. But 
it is not for the good of Messieurs the Associates; 
for those barbarians come to carry off the Beavers of 
these countries, [281 i.e., 277] to take them else- 
where. Hence Monsieur the Governor, in view of 
this disorder, summoned the Captain of the Monta- 
gnez and the Abenaquiois to notify them that he was 
displeased that these peddlers should come traffick- 
ing in the footsteps of the French, — even threaten- 
ing the Montagnez that he would prohibit the store 
from selling them any provisions until the Abena- 
quiois should go away. This Montagnez Captain 
declared that he did not wish these strangers to go 
up to the three Rivers, but preferred to have them 
return to their own country. Those worthy people 
thereupon reembarked, pretending to turn home- 
wards ; but in fact they went straight to the three 


188 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol, 12 

Tiieres, ains plufloft qu'ils s'en retournaffent en leur 
pays. Ces bonnes gens 1^ deffus fe rembarquerent 
feignans leur retour, mais en effet ils tirerent droit 
aux trois Riuieres pour changer leur porcelaine auec 
les Caftors des Algonquins & autres nations qui abor- 
dent en ces quartiers la. Monfieur le Gouuerneur 
I'aiant appris depefche au plufloft vn meffager 
aux trois Riuieres pour rompre ce coup. II en efcri- 
uit k Monfieur de Chafteau-fort, lequel fit affembler 
les chefs des Montagnez & les Abnaquiois qui 
eftoient douze en nombre. II demanda pourquoy ils 
auoiet outrepafl^e le commandement de Monfieur le 
Gouuerneur, ils refpondirent qu'ils n'eftoient pas 
venus pour aucune traitte de pelleteries, [282 i.e., 278] 
mais pour fecourir leurs alliez dans leurs guerres. 
Comme ils virent neantmoins qu'on les prelToit, ils 
prirent ref olution de f e retirer ; Monfieur de Chafteau- 
fort fit vifiter leur cabane & tout leur equipage, il ne 
trouua point de Caftors mais bien trois harquebufes 
qu'il fit enleuer, enfin ils troufferent bagage & s'en 
allerent. Vn Capitaine Montagnez s'eftoit prefente 
pour leur aller boucher le paffage fuiuat la fa9on de 
faire de ces nations. Ces Barbares ont vne couftume 
affez remarquable quand quelques autres nations arri- 
uent en leur pays, elles n'oferoient pafl^er outre fans 
la permiffion du Capitaine du lieu, autrement on bri- 
feroit leurs canots. (Tette permiffio de pafi!er fe de- 
made les prefens en la main : fi le Capitaine n'agree 
pas leurs prefens, n'aiant pas enuie de les laifi!er 
pafi^er, il leur dit qu'il a bouche les chemins, & qu'ils 
ne fgauroient pafl^er. A ces parolles il faut rebroufi^er 
chemin ou fe mettre en danger de guerre. 

Ce mefme Capitaine Montagnez qui s'eftoit pre- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 189 

Rivers, to exchange their porcelain for the Beavers 
of the Algonquins and other nations, who go ashore 
in that neighborhood. Monsieur the Governor, upon 
hearing this, sent a messenger to the three Rivers 
as soon as possible, to break up this arrangement. 
He wrote to Monsieur de Chasteau-fort, who brought 
together the leaders of the Montagnez and the Ab- 
naquiois, who were twelve in number. He asked 
why they had disobeyed the command of Monsieur 
the Governor. They replied that they had not come 
for any trade in peltries, [282 i.e., 278] but to help 
their allies in their wars. However, as they found 
themselves hard pressed, they decided to withdraw. 
Monsieur de Chasteau-fort had their cabins and all 
their outfit examined; he found no Beavers, but 
three arquebuses, which he took away from them; 
they finally tied up their baggage and went away. 
A Montagnez Captain had presented himself to go 
and block their passage, according to the way of 
these nations. These Barbarians have a very re- 
markable custom. When other nations arrive in 
their country, they would not dare pass beyond with- 
out permission from the Captain of the place ; if they 
did, their canoes would be broken to pieces. This 
permission to pass on is asked for with presents in 
hand ; if these presents are not accepted by the Chief, 
not being minded to let them pass, he tells them he 
has stopped the way, and that they can go no further. 
At these words they have to turn back, or run the 
risks of war. 

This same Montagnez Captain, who had offered to 
go and block the way, told me to tell Monsieur the 
Governor to send a good supply of food and provi- 
sions to the settlement of the three Rivers, " Be- 


190 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

fent6 pour aller boucher le paffage, me fit dire a Mon- 
fieur le Gotitierneur qu'il enuoiaft force viures, & pro- 
uifions en I'habitation des trois Riuieres; pour ce 
dif oit il que nous nous affemblerons la en grand nom- 
bre [283 i.e., 279] cet Hiuer. II m'inuita auffi de my 
trouuer & dy fejourner pendat ce temps la pour les 
inftruire ; tu retourneras li tu veux me difoit-il k ke- 
bec fur le prin-temps, pour nous le bruit eft que nous 
pafferons la 1' Hiuer, I'Efte venu nous defcendrons ^ 
kebec. 

Le 10. du mefme mois aiant fait demander en la 
maifon de noftre Dame des Anges. Si quelqu'vn 
n'auroit point fait quelque remarque pour la Rela- 
tion, le P. Adam m'efcriuit en cestermes. le n'auois 
pas enuie de rien contribuer de ce qui me touche, 
pour groffir la Relation que V. R. enuoie en Frace, 
neantmoins depuis quelque teps il m'eft venu vne 
penfee que i'amoindrirois la gloire de la mere de 
Dieu, fi ie cachois vne faueur que i'ay receu par fes 
mains. C'eft qu'eftat malade depuis trois mois, & 
receuat tous les iours la Ste. Comunion au lit, d'oii 
ie tafcbois d'entendre toutes les Meffes qui fe difoient 
en noftre Chappelle, ny aiant qu'vn aix entre I'Autel 
& moy. II pleut ^ Dieu m'infpirer vne neufueine de 
Communions en I'honneur des neuf mois que fa faincte 
Mere auoit loge dans le ventre de fainte Anne, afin 
de pouuoir dire la Meffe le iour de la natiuite de noftre 
Dame. Aiant obey k I'infpiration, & ledit iour eftant 
[284 i.e., 280] venu, ie me refolu de preffer V. R. 
quelle me laiffaft dire la faincte Meffe. Elle eut de 
la peine k me I'accorder voiant ma foibleffe, neant- 
moins elle fe laiffa gagner & confentit ^ mon defir, k 
condition que le Pere de Noue m'alTifteroit comme fi 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 191 

cause," said he, "we shall assemble there in great 
numbers [283 i.e., 279] this Winter." He invited 
me to be there also, and to remain during that pe- 
riod, to instruct them; " If thou wishest," he said to 
me, * ' thou shalt return to kebec toward spring ; as 
for us, the report is we shall pass the Winter there, 
and, when Summer comes, go down to kebec." 

On the loth of the same month, as I had sent a 
request to the house of nostre Dame des Anges to 
know if some one had not made some remarks for 
the Relation, Father Adam wrote me in these words : 
" I had not the desire to contribute anything con- 
cerning myself to swell the Relation that Your Rev- 
erence is sending to France ; yet some time ago the 
thought occurred to me that I would diminish the 
glory of the mother of God if I concealed a favor 
which I received from her hands. It is that having 
been ill three months, and daily receiving the Holy 
Communion in bed, — whence I tried to hear all the 
Masses which were said in our Chapel, there being 
only a board between the Altar and me, — it pleased 
God to inspire me to a novena of Communions in 
honor of the nine months in which the holy Mother 
lay in the womb of saint Anne, to the end that I 
might be able to say Mass on the day of the nativity 
of our Lady. Having yielded to the inspiration, and 
the said day having [2841. e., 280] come, I resolved 
to urge Your Reverence to allow me to say the holy 
Mass. Seeing how weak I was, you hesitated about 
granting me this ; yet you allowed yourself to be per- 
suaded, and consented to my wish, on condition that 
Father de None would assist me as if I had been say- 
ing my first Mass. The next day Father Daniel ren- 
dered me the same kind service. Since that time I 


192 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

ieulle dit ma premiere MefTe. Le lendemain le Pere 
Daniel me rendit le mefme office de charity. Depuis 
ce temps-Ik ie n'ay manqu6 vn feul iour h. dire la 
Meffe quoy que ie fuffe bien foible. 

lauois aulTi dit vne neufueine de Melles a I'lion- 
neur des neuf coeurs des Anges, pour obtenir la grace 
de pouuoir faire les genuflexions deuant le Roy des 
Anges, a I'Autel: mais noltre Seigneur a voulu en- 
cor que ie fulTe redeuable k fa faincte Mere de cette 
faueur ne me I'aiant octroie que vers le temps de 
I'Annonciation, afin de pouuoir rendre cet honneur 
exterieur au myflere de I'lncarnatio faincte. Si V. 
R. iuge que cecy doiue feruir a refueiller la deuotion 
k I'endroit de noftre Dame I'inferant dans la Rela- 
tion, elle en fera ce qu'il luy plaira. 

Le 14. arriua k ATebec vne chalouppe laquelle nous 
apporta le Pere Claude Quentin & le Pere Claude Pi- 
iart. Les vens contraires retardans leurs vaiffeaux 
animoit noftre affection, & leur pre fence combla 
noftre ioye. 

[285 i.e., 281] Le 16. parut enfin vn vaiffeau qui 
vint moiiiller deuant Kebec. II eftoit commande par 
Monfieur Fournier. 

Le 19. vne barque montant aux trois Riuieres, i'en- 
uoiay le Pere Paul Ragueneau pour s'embarquer dans 
quelque canot de Huron; s'il s'en prefentoit. 

Le 22. nos Peres des trois Riuieres m'enuoierent 
vn canot a kebec, afin que ie m'embarquaffe au plu- 
ftofl pour venir au deuant de ces peuples, que Ton 
difoit deuoir arriuer dans peu de iours. Aiant porte 
cette nouuelle k Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, il me 
dit que dans deux iours luy mefme partiroit, pour fe 
trouuer auffi k la defcente de ces nations, & que nous 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1637 193 

have not failed a single day to say Mass, although 
I was very weak. 

" I had also said a novena of Masses in honor of 
the nine choirs of Angels, that I might obtain the 
grace to be able to make the genuflections before the 
King of Angels at the Altar. But our Lord still 
wished that I should be indebted to his holy Mother 
for this favor, and he did not grant it to me until 
near the time of the Annunciation, in order that I 
should be able to render this external honor to the 
mystery of the holy Incarnation. If Your Reverence 
judges that this might serve to awaken devotion to 
our Lady by inserting it in the Relation, you will do 
with it what you please." 

On the 14th, a shallop arrived at Kebec which 
brought Father Claude Quentin and Father Claude 
Pijart.^ The delay of their ships, caused by adverse 
winds, stimulated our affection, and their presence 
crowned our joy. 

[285 i.e., 281] Finally, on the i6th, a ship appeared 
and cast anchor opposite Kebec. It was commanded 
by Monsieur Fournier. 

On the 19th, as a bark was going up to the three 
Rivers, I sent Father Paul Ragueneau to embark in 
some Huron canoe, if one should appear. 

On the 22nd, our Fathers at the three Rivers sent 
a canoe to kebec in which I was to embark as soon 
as possible, in order to meet those tribes, who, it was 
said, were to arrive in a few days. Going to Mon- 
sieur our Governor with this news, he told me that 
he himself would depart in two days, in order to be 
there at the coming of those nations, and that we 
should go together. So we started up the river in 
his bark, and, favored by a gentle Northeast wind, 


194 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

irions de compagnie. Nous montafmes done dans 
fa barque & a la faueur d'vn petit Nordeft, nous 
vinfmes fur le foir moiiiller deuant la riuiere de 
faincte Croix, Les iours fuiuans le vet s'eftant cha- 
g6 nous aua9afmes peu, come nous n'eftios encor 
qu'au trauers du Cap k I'arbre, vn canot de Sauuage 
nous vint aborder, lequel aportoit des lettres en dili- 
gence pour informer Monfieur le Gouuerneur de ce 
qui s'eftoit paffe le iour precedent aux trois Riuieres. 
Vn Capitaine de guerre defcendant des Hurons, aiant 
appris par vn Algonquin, que [286 i.e., 282] depuis 
fon depart deux Fran9ois auoient eft6 tuez par les 
Hurons, ne laiffa point de defcendre iufques a noftre 
habitation a deffein de remener nos Seminariftes, 
c'eft ce qui a eft^ dit aux chapitre du Seminaire des 
Hurons. 

Le 2. Monfieur le 6^ouuerneur tint confeil auec 
quelques autres Hurons pour les induire k amener 9a 
bas quelques families Huronnes, lefquelles demeure- 
roient paifiblement aupres de nos Fran9ois. On leur 
represeta les biens qui pourroient prouenir de cette 
communication: ils promirent d'en parler en leur 
pays. Cq mefme iour ie fis venir quelques petits en- 
fans Sauuages que i'auois inftruit pendant I'Hiuer, ie 
les interrogeay publiquement apres les vefpres en la 
(Thappelle de la conception aux trois Riuieres. lis 
refpondirent fort gentiment me moftrant qu'ils n'a- 
uoient pas oublie ce qu'on leur auoit enf eigne, ie leur 
fis chanter le Symbole des Apoftres, en leur langue, 
le Pere Daniel le fit chanter en Huron S, fes Semina- 
riftes, quelques ieunes enfans le chanterent en Fran- 
cois, fi bien qu'il fut chante en trois langues. A 
mefme temps comme nous fortions de ce fainct exer- 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 195 

towards evening we came to anchor opposite the river 
sainte Croix. During the following days we made 
very little progress, the wind having changed; so 
that when we were still only opposite Cap h. I'arbre^ 
a canoe of Savages came alongside of us, which bore 
urgent letters informing Monsieur the Governor of 
what had taken place the day before at the three 
Rivers. A war Captain, who was coming down from 
the Hurons, having heard through an Algonquin that 
[286 i.e., 282] since his departure two Frenchmen 
had been killed by the Hurons, continued his jour- 
ney down as far as our settlement with the view 
of taking back our Seminarists. This is what was 
related in the chapter on the Huron Seminary. 

On the 2nd, Monsieur the Governor held a council 
with some of the other Hurons to induce them to bring 
a few families down here who would live peaceably 
near our French. The benefits that would arise 
from this connection were represented to them ; they 
promised to discuss the matter when they reached 
home. This same day I gathered some little Sav- 
age children, whom I had instructed during the Win- 
ter ; I questioned them publicly after vespers, in the 
Chapel of the conception at the three Rivers. They 
answered very prettily, showing me that they had 
not forgotten what had been taught them. I had 
them sing the Apostles' Creed in their language. Fa- 
ther Daniel had it sung in Huron by his Seminarists, 
and some little children sang it in French ; so it was 
sung in three languages. At the very time we went 
out from this holy exercise, a canoe appeared, bring- 
ing us Father Pierre Pi j art from the Hurons. Mon- 
sieur [287 i.e., 283] the Governor, having heard of 
his arrival, came down to the shore ; we all hastened 


196 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

cice, parut vn canot qui nous amenoit le Pere Pierre 
Pijart des Hurons. Monfieur [287 i.e., 283] le Gou- 
uerneur en aiant eu le vent defcend au bord de I'eau, 
nous accourufmes tous, quantity de nos Fran9ois, & 
de nos Sauuages s'y trouuerent. Le pauure pere 
eftoit tout defait aiant efte fort fatigue & bien ma- 
lade en cbemin. II eftoit pieds nuds portant fur fa 
tefte & fur fon corps vn chappeau & vne foutane qui 
ne valloient pas deux doubles & cependant il ne s'en 
trouua pas vne en la maifon pour le faire changer. 
Monfieur le G^ouuerneur I'accueillit auec vne fingu- 
liere bien-veillance & le mena au fort, nous allons 
tous ^ la ^'happelle pour benir Dieu de ce qu'il auoit 
conferu6 le Pere de mille dangers. 

Le Pere eflant entre en noftre petite chambrette 
nous racompta en peu de mots I'eftat de la nouuelle 
Eglife des Hurons, nous donnant efperance, de la 
voir vn iour fleurir, mais non pas fans peine & fans 
trauaux. Puis difcourant de fon voiage, il nous dit 
que la contagion eflant fur tous les chemins, il auoit 
pense mourir, la maladie 1' aiant faili auffi bien que 
les autres. Qu'aiant rencontre vn Frangois ^ I'lfle 
il auoit receu de luy vn grand foulagement! 6 qu'il 
me fit grand plailir, difoit-il, nous penfions tous que 
ce Francois eut porte auec foy [288 i.e., 284] quelque 
raffraichillement. Nous luy demandafmes en quoy 
ce bon ieune homme 1' auoit tant oblige, il auoit ref- 
pond-il vne clef fur foy, qu'il fit rougir & la trempa 
dans de I'eau pour en ofter la erudite, & me la fit 
boire: cela me fit vn grand bien, car ie n'en pouuois 
plus, eft-ce 1^ difmes nous tout le grand fecours qu'il 
vous rendit? qu'eut-il peu faire autre chofe repliqua 
il ? nous nous mifmes k rire & k benir Dieu tout en- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 197 

thither, many of our French people and of our Sav- 
ages being there. The poor father was all wasted 
away, having suffered greatly from fatigue and sick- 
ness on the journey. He was barefooted, and wore 
upon his head a hat and upon his body a cassock not 
worth two doubles ; ^ yet the house could not fur- 
nish him a change of clothing. Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor received him with singular kindness, and took 
him to the fort ; we all proceeded to the Chapel to 
bless God for having preserved the Father from a 
thousand dangers. 

The Father, having entered our little room, de- 
scribed to us in a few words the condition of the new 
Church of the Hurons, giving us hope of some day 
seeing it flourish, but not without suffering and 
hardships. Then, speaking of his voyage, he told 
us that the epidemic prevailed in every direction, 
and that he had almost died, since the disease attacked 
him as well as the others. Having met a French- 
man at the Island, he had received from him some- 
thing which relieved him greatly. " Oh, how much 
good he did me ! " he exclaimed. We all thought 
that this Frenchman must have had with him 
[288 i.e., 284] some refreshing beverage. We asked 
him in what way this good young man had so greatly 
obliged him. " He had with him a key," said he, 
" which he made red-hot, and dipped in some water 
to remove the crudity therefrom, and then gave it 
to me to drink ; this did me a great deal of good, for 
I was exhausted." "Is that," we demanded, ''all 
the great help he gave you?" " What else could he 
have done?" he asked. We began to laugh and to 
bless God at the same time, seeing that the great re- 
lief that a person can give to a poor sick man in these 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.12 

femble, voians que le grand fecours qu'on pent don- 
ner k vn pauure malade dans ces rencontres, confifle 
en vn pen d'eau ferree. II s'eftoit embarque dans 
le canot du Capitaine de leur bonrgade nomme Ae- 
nons, ce pauure homme tombant malade par les che- 
mins arriua tout languiffant aux trois Riuieres, nous 
le fecourefmes le mieux qu'il nous fut poffible. Le 
Pere Daniel & le Pere Pierre Piiart Tinftruifirent, ou 
pluftoft luy remirent en memoire rinflruction qu'on 
luy auoit de-jk donn^e. Comme 11 fe fentit proche 
de la mort. II fit venir les interpretes, offrit vn pre- 
fent ^ Monfieur le Gouuerneur, le fuppliant de grati- 
fier les Hurons. Les Peres le volant senfiblement 
bailTer, luy demandent s'il ne vouloit pas mourir 
chreftien. Or fus dit-il, on m'a follicit6 de venir 
aux Frangois, i'y fuis venu, [289 i.e., 285] cela va 
bien que deuant mourir, ie meure aupres deux. Bref 
il fut baptist comme i'ay de-j^ remarque cy delTus, & 
mourant quelques heures apres fon baptefme nous 
I'enterrafme en noftre cimetiere. 

Le 6. du mefme mois d'Aouft deux canots de Hu- 
rons eftans partis, I'vn deux retourna fur les dix 
heures du foir criant de loing, oiiai! oiiai! oiiai! 
Les Sauuages preftent I'oreille "k ce cry, que les Hu- 
rons font ordinairement quand ils rapportent de mau- 
uaifes nouuelles. Cliacun eflans dans le filence ces 
bonnes gens s'efcrient qu'ils ont rencontre les Hiro- 
quois, que le canot auec lequel ils eftoient allez de 
compagnie eftoit pris. Voila tous les Sauuages en al- 
larme, toutes les femmes vouloient venir fondre dans 
le fort; on delegue quelques auanturiers pour aller 
defcouurir I'ennemy, ceux-ci retournent fur le point 
du iour, remplillent toutes les cabanes de terreur, ra- 


1637J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 199 

chance encounters consists of a little water impreg- 
nated with iron. He had come down in the canoe of 
the Captain of their village, whose name was Aenons. 
This poor man, falling sick upon the way, arrived 
at the three Rivers in a very weak condition ; we did 
all we could to succor him. Father Daniel and Fa- 
ther Pierre Pijart instructed him, or rather recalled 
to his memory the instruction that had already been 
given him. As he felt that he was nearing death, 
he summoned the interpreters, offered a present to 
Monsieur the Governor, and begged him to favor the 
Hurons. As the Fathers saw him perceptibly weak- 
ening, they asked him if he did not wish to die a 
christian. " Well," said he, " I have been requested 
to come to the French, lam here; [289 i.e., 285] it 
is well that, since I must die, I die near them." In 
short, he was baptized, as I have remarked above; 
and, dying a few hours after his baptism, we buried 
him in our cemetery. 

On the 6th of the same month of August, two 
canoes of Hurons took their departure; about ten 
o'clock in the evening one of them returned crying 
from afar, ' ' ouai ! ouai ! ouai ! ' ' The Savages lent 
ear to this cry, which the Hurons generally utter 
when they are bringing bad news. In the midst of 
this silence these good people cry out that they have 
encountered the Hiroquois, and that the canoe which 
had accompanied them had been captured. Now all 
the Savages are in a state of alarm, and all the wom- 
en try to crowd into the fort. Some of the bolder 
men are commissioned to go and discover the enemy ; 
they return at break of day and fill all the cabins with 
terror. They report that they heard a great many 
voices, like those of thieves rejoicing over booty; 


200 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 


content qu'ils ont ony grand nombre de voix comme 
de larrons qui fe reioiiiffoient de leur proie, qu'ils ont 
mefme entendu quelques coups d'harquebufes, & 
qu'ils s'imaginent qu'ils font bien deux cent hommes 
en embufcade k 1' entree du lac de S. Pierre; chacun 
eft en haleine, les femmes montent dans leurs canots 
des quatre heures [290 i.e., 286] du matin s'enfuient 
auec leurs enfans, qui a kebec, qui dans les trois Ri- 
uieres, qui en d'autres endroits, les hommes fe vien- 
nent pref enter pour entrer dans le fort. Nos Fran- 
9ois ne fgauoient que dire de cette efpouuante. Car ces 
barbares font fouuent alarm^s fans fujet. lis nous 
affuroient que les Hiroquois nous viendroiet aflie- 
ger dans noftre reduit, tout cela ne faifoit aucune im- 
preffion fur nos efprits ; la plus part des Francois n'ad- 
jouftant point de foy au raport des Sauuages. En fin 
on vit paroiftre vn canot d' Hiroquois au milieu du 
grand fleuue, prefentant tantoft la pointe, tantoft le 
flanc, toufiours fe promenant comme s'il nous euft 
voulu brauer auffi bien que les Sauuages ; on cognut 
par la qu'ils eftoiet en nombre. On laiffe entrer les 
Montagnez & les Hurons dans le fort ou pluftoft dans 
noftre reduict pour les alTurer. Ces pauures gens s'a- 
niment, chafcun prend qui vne efpee, qui vn bou- 
clier, qui vne hache, qui vn coufteau, qui vne perche. 
lis fe raffemblent tons crians comme des enrages, 
les (Tapitaines hurlent pluftoft qu'ils ne haranguent, 
eftans arm^s k leur mode, & quel[qu']vns par^s de 
plumes, ils fe mettent a dancer pouffans de leur efto- 
mach des chanfons de [291 i.e., 287] guerre. Comme 
ces barbares ne fe conduifent que par boutades, & 
que la paffion les porte pluftoft que la raifon, ils s'ex- 
citent les vns les autres au combat par des chants & 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 201 

that they even heard some gunshots, and that they 
imagine there are fully two hundred men in ambush 
at the entrance to lake St. Pierre. All are in a state 
of suspense ; the women get into their canoes at four 
o'clock [290 i.e., 286] in the morning, and flee with 
their children, — some to kebec, some to the three 
Rivers, some to other places ; the men present them- 
selves at the fort to be admitted therein. Our French 
knew not what to think of this panic, for these bar- 
barians are often alarmed without cause. They as- 
sured us that the Hiroquois would come and lay siege 
to us in our redout ; but all this made no impression 
upon our minds, and the greater part of the French 
gave no credit to the report of the Savages. Finally 
an Hiroquois canoe appears in the middle of the great 
river, now turning its bow, now its side, and continu- 
ing to hover around, as if wishing to brave us as well 
as the Savages; we knew by this that there were 
many of them. The Montagnez and the Hurons are 
admitted into the fort, or rather into our redout, in 
order to reassure them. These poor people take 
courage; each one seizes some weapon, — this one a 
sword, that one a shield, another a hatchet, a fourth 
a knife, a fifth a pole. They crowd together, all 
howling like madmen, the Captains yelling rather 
than haranguing. Armed in their fashion, and some 
of them decked with feathers, they begin to dance, 
shouting from their chests songs of [291 i.e., 287] 
war. As these barbarians do things only by whims, 
and as they are governed by passion rather than rea- 
son, one side excites the other to combat by songs 
and violent demonstrations; in which they greatly 
err, for they are half worn-out and fatigued when 
they must come to blows. Monsieur our Governor 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

des mouuemens allez violens ; en quoy ils manquent 
beaucoup, car ils font a demy recreus & laffez quand 
il faut venir aux mains. Monfienr noftre G^ouuer- 
neur procedoit tout d'vne autre fa^on, car fans bruit 
il faifoit difpofer fes gens, les faifoit armer par efcoii- 
ades, pluftofl pour tenir les Sauuages entrez en 
echec, quoy qu'il les eut mis en vn retranchement 
ou ils ne pouuoient nous nuire, que pour fe deffendre 
centre les Hiroquois. Or comme ce canot brauache 
paroiffoit de temps en temps pour attirer quelques 
Fran9ois ou quelques Sauuages dans leurs embuf- 
cades, ainfi que nous coniecturions. Monfieur le 
6^ouuerneur voiant qu'il s'eleuoit vn petit vent, com- 
mande ^ vne barque de leuer lancre & deploier fes 
voiles pour les aller recognoiftre, la chofe fuft quafi 
auffi toft executee que commandee: la barque tire 
vers le lieu oil eftoient les Hiroquois, le canot difpa- 
roift, la barque s'aduance & defcouure I'ennemy le- 
quel fe promenoit partie fur la riuiere partie fur le 
bord du bois. Le Sieur Nicolet [292 i.e., 288] qui 
la conduifoit, rapporta qu'ils eftoient enuiron cinq 
cens hommes bien armez, il voulut les approcher, 
mais craignant dechouer, il ne les peut ioindre a la 
port6e du moufquet. Comme il en vit quelques vns 
fe traifner dans des ioncs, il fit tirer deffus vn coup 
defpoir de fonte fi dextrement, qu'on vit les autres 
Sauuages releuer les corps blefCez ou tuez, autant 
qu'ils en pouuoient iuger, ils apperceurent auffi dans 
vn canot quelques hommes dont les teftes feulement 
paroilfoient. lis creurent que c' eftoient les pauures 
Hurons pris le iour precedent, qu'ils retenoient 
prifonniers. 

Vous pouuez bien penfer que nous faifions bon 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, t6s7 203 

proceeded in quite another fashion, for he put his 
people in order noiselessly and had them armed by 
squads, — rather to keep in check the Savages inside, 
although he had placed them in an enclosure where 
they could not harm us, than to protect himself 
against the Hiroquois. Now as this swaggering 
canoe appeared from time to time, — to attract some 
French or Savages into their ambuscades, as we con- 
jectured, — Monsieur the Governor, seeing that a lit- 
tle wind was rising, orders a bark to weigh anchor 
and spread its sails, to go and reconnoitre. This 
command was executed almost as soon as given ; the 
bark turns toward the place where the Hiroquois 
were, the canoe disappears ; the bark advances and 
discovers the enemy, who were moving about, part 
upon the river, part upon the edge of the woods. 
Sieur Nicolet, [292 i.e., 288] who was guiding the 
bark, reported that there were about five hundred men 
well armed; he wished to approach them, but, fear- 
ing he would run aground, he could not get within 
musket-range of them. As he saw some crawling 
into the reeds, he fired a shot from the brass cannon, 
so skillfully, that the other Savages were seen to pick 
up the bodies of the wounded or dying, as far as they 
could judge. They perceived also in a canoe some 
men, whose heads only were visible. They thought 
that these were the poor Hurons captured the day 
before, whom they were holding as prisoners. 

You may imagine that we kept up a careful watch ; 
in truth, we blessed God with all our hearts for hav- 
ing led Monsieur the Governor to the three Rivers 
at this time. He put everything in so good order, 
among both the French and the Savages, that there 
was cause to praise our Lord for the method and reso- 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

guet, de verite nous beniflions Dieu de bon coeur de 
ce qu'il auoit anient en ce temps-Ik Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur aux trois Riuieres. II mit tout en fi bon 
ordre & Fran9ois & Sauuages, qu'il y auoit fujet de 
loiier noflre Seigneur, voiant la difpolition & la refo- 
lution des vns & des autres. Les Sauuages attendans 
le choc faifoient de grandes hu^es ou de grands hur- 
lemens, pour faire entendre k I'ennemy qu'ils eftoient 
fur leur garde, & qu'ils ne les craignoient pas. Mais 
Mofieur le Gouuerneur leur enuoia dire [293 i.e., 289] 
qu'ils gardaffent le filence, & fit auertir leur Capi- 
taine qu'ils fe tinffent tous k I'endroit oti on les auoit 
placez, & qu'en cas qu'on luy vint demander trois, ou 
quatre ou cinq, de fes gens, pour les placer ailleurs, 
qu'il les enuoiaft, les nommant par leur nom, de peur 
de confufio. Nous eftions fix Religieux de noftre 
Compagnie dedans noftre reduit. I'enuoiay le P. 
Pierre Pijart venu des Hurons, dans la barque pour 
alfifter nos Frangois, au cas qu'on I'attaquafl, comme 
ils ont fait autrefois vne barque Flamande qu'ils 
coulerent k fon, a ce qu'on ma dit. le deftinai 
le P. Buteux pour prendre garde aux Montagnez & 
les fecourir s'il y en auoit de blefl^ez, & le P. Daniel 
aux Hurons, le Pere Claude Pijart fe deuoit mettre 
auec le Chirurgien pour alfifler nos Fran9ois, le P. du 
Marche a la Chappelle, pour la garder & entendre les 
conf effions de ceux qui f e pref enteroient ; pour moy 
ie m'eftois refolu de me trouuer en tous ces endroits 
afin de voir comme tout fi pafferoit, & de fecourir 
ceux qui feroient tellement blefl!ez aux approches, 
qu'on ne les peuft aifement porter au Chirurgien. Or 
foit que ces barbares redoutaffent nos armes "k feu ; 
notamment fe voians defcouuerts, foit qu'ils s'en vou- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 205 

luteness existing on all sides. The Savages, await- 
ing the attack, uttered loud yells or shouts, to notify 
the enemy that they were on their guard, and that 
they did not fear them. But Monsieur the Governor 
sent word to them [293 i.e., 289] to keep still; and 
had their Captain warned that they should all remain 
where they had been placed, and in case three, four, 
or five of his people should be called for, that they 
might be stationed elsewhere, he should send them, — 
designating them by name, for fear of confusion. 
There were six Religious of our Society in our re- 
dout. I sent Father Pierre Pijart, who had come 
from the Hurons, in a bark to assist our French in 
case they were attacked, as I was told they [the Sav- 
ages] had once attacked a Flemish bark, and had 
sunk it to the bottom. I appointed Father Buteux 
to guard the Montagnez, and take charge of any who 
were wounded, and Father Daniel to the Hurons. 
Father Claude Pijart was to be with the Surgeon to 
assist our French people ; Father du Marche at the 
Chapel, to guard it, and to hear the confessions of 
those who might present themselves. As for me, I 
had decided to be in all these places, to see how 
things were going on, and to help those who were so 
badly wounded on the outposts that they could not 
be easily brought to the Surgeon. Now either be- 
cause these barbarians were afraid of our firearms, 
especially as they saw that they were discovered, or 
because they chose to go on and meet [294 i.e., 290] 
some Hurons, in which move there would be less 
danger for them and greater hopes of booty, — they 
were satisfied to look at us from a distance without 
coming to blows. Meanwhile, a Huron, who was in 
the canoe which I have said was captured, having es- 


206 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.12 

lullent aller au deuat [294 i.e., 290] des Huros, ou 
il y auoit moins de danger pour eux, & plus grade 
efperace de proie, «& ils fe cotenterent de nous regar- 
der de loing, fans en venir aux mains. Sur ces en- 
tre-faites, vn Huron du canot que i'ay dit auoir eft6 
pris, s'eftant efchappe, nous vint affeurer que ces 
barbares efloient aux aguets k 1' entree du grand lac 
de Saint Pierre, ou ils prendroient infailliblement, 
tous ceux des nations plus bautes, qui defcenderoient 
aux Fragois. Ce pauure home difoit que luy & fes 
camarades, fe voians inueftis de tous coftez, abandon- 
nerent leur canot, fe jetterent dans les bois, mais ils 
furent bien-toft fuiuis k la courfe. Ses copagnons 
furent bien-toft pris ; pour luy comme il eft alaigre, 
il lailTa bien loing derriere foy, cinq grands Hiero- 
quois qui le pourfuiuoient. En fin les orties & les 
halliers, luy defcoupant les jambes, & les cuifles, car 
il eftoit tout nud, il fe ietta dans vn arbre creux qu'il 
rencontra par bonne fortune ; fes ennemis approche- 
rent iufques au pres de cet arbre, cherchans & fure- 
tans tout k I'entour, iufques Ik, qu'abbatans quelques 
orties ils le toucherent au pied, luy cepedant pointoit 
fon efp6e vers eux, afin d'en tuer pour le moins vn, 
s'il efloit defcouuert, [295 i.e., 291] noftre Seigneur 
luy voulut fauuer la vie. Si toft qu'il fut arriu6, 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur defpeche vn canot a Kebec, 
pour faire venir du fecours, afin de pouuoir donner la 
chafle a ces barbares, de fauuer la vie aux Hurons & 
autres peuples, que nous attendions tous les iours. 
Sur I'entr^e de la nuict parut vn canot de Hurons, 
lequel nous apporta de trifles nouuelles, nous eftions, 
fit-il, dix canots de compagnie, comme nous fufmes 
aux Ifles du grand Fleuue. Taratouan braue Capi- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 'iSSl 

caped, came to assure us that these barbarians were on 
the watch at the entrance to the great lake Saint 
Pierre, where they would surely capture all those of 
the upper nations who should come down to the 
French. This poor man said that he and his compan- 
ions, seeing themselves surrounded on all sides, 
abandoned their canoe and rushed into the woods, 
but they were soon closely pursued. His companions 
were soon captured; he, being fleet-footed, left far 
behind five stout Hieroquois who were pursuing him. 
Finally, as the thorns and nettles lacerated his legs 
and thighs, for he was entirely naked, he took ref- 
uge in a hollow tree which he fortunately encoun- 
tered. His enemies came close to this tree, search- 
ing and ferreting all around it, — so close that in 
trampling down some thistles they touched his foot ; 
he meanwhile pointed his javelin at them, to kill at 
least one if he were discovered; [295 i.e., 291] our 
Lord willed that his life should be saved. As soon 
as he had arrived, Monsieur the Governor despatched 
a canoe to Kebec for reinforcements, in order to be 
able to pursue these barbarians and to save the lives 
of the Hurons and other tribes whom we were daily 
expecting. Toward nightfall, a canoe of Hurons 
appeared, who brought us sad news. " There were 
ten of our canoes in company," said they; "when 
we were at the Islands of the great River, Taratouan, 
a brave Captain of the Hurons, followed the North- 
ern shore, taking with him nine canoes; the rest of 
us kept along the Southern shore. When we reached 
the opening of the lake, near the French, we were 
swiftly pursued by the enemy, which makes us think 
that Taratouan and his band are captured, for the 
body of the Hiroquois are encamped on the North 


208 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

taine entre les Hurons, prit le cofle du Nord, emme- 
nant auec foy neuf canots, nous autres tirafmes an 
Slid, arriuans a remboucheure du lac voifm des Fran- 
9ois, nous auons efte pourfuiuis viuement par I'enne- 
my, ce qui nous fait croire que Taratouan eft pris auec 
fa bande, car le gros des Hiroquois s'efh camp6 au 
Nord, par oh. il k palT^. I\ nous dit encore que Teou- 
atirhon noftre Seminarifte, efloit tombe dans le mefme 
defaftre, comme ie I'ay explique, cy deffus. Sur la 
minuict arriua vn autre canot, conduit par cinq Hu- 
rons, lefquels nous alTeurerent que le lac efloit rem- 
pli d'ennemis, & qu'ils tenoient toutes les auenues 
aux Francois, [296 i.e., 292] nous eftions, difoient- 
ils, deux canots enfemble eftans paruenus ^ 1' entree 
du lac, vers les Ifles, nous vifmes deux autres canots. 
Le canot qui nous accompagnoit les voulut aller re- 
cognoiftre, eux diffimulans leur malice, faifoient tou- 
fiours femblant de tenir leur route, iufques k ce qu'a- 
iant apperceu nos compagnons, bien efloignez de nous, 
ils fe ietterent deffus ; comme ils les prenoient nous 
euadafmes fur la nuict, approchant de I'autre embou- 
cheure nous entendifmes vn bruit horrible, on nous 
crie qui va Ik, de quelle nation efles vous. Auffi toft 
prenans la fuitte d'vn autre cofle, nous nous vinfmes 
ietter dans vn autre peril: car eflans defia dans la 
riuiere, bien pres de la demeure des Frangois, nous 
nous voulufmes cabaner pour prendre quelque repos, 
apres auoir excefliuement trauaill6 pour nous fauuer. 
Abordans done la terre, nous defcouurifmes vne em- 
bufcade, voulans tourner vifage, "k mefme temps deux 
canots fe iettent apres nous, auec telle ardeur qu'ils 
nous ont pourfuiuis quafi iufques k voflre habitation. 
Voila ce que nous racontoient ces pauures barbares, 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 209 

shore, by which he passed." They told lis also that 
Teouatirhon, our Seminarist had shared the same fate, 
as I have explained above. Towards midnight an- 
other canoe arrived, bringing five Hurons, who as- 
sured us that the lake was swarming with the enemy, 
and that they held all the avenues to the French. 
[296 i.e., 292] "There were two of our canoes to- 
gether," said they; " having reached the entrance of 
the lake, towards the Islands, we saw two other ca- 
noes. The canoe that accompanied us wished to go 
and reconnoitre them ; and they, covering their evil 
design, pretended to be continuing on their way, un- 
til, seeing our companions far distant from us, they 
rushed upon them. As they captured them, we 
escaped in the darkness. Approaching the other 
entrance, we heard a horrible noise; some one cries, 
" Who goes there ? Of what nation are you?" Im- 
mediately taking flight in another direction, we were 
about to rush into another danger. For, as we were 
already on the river, quite near the French settle- 
ment, we intended to pitch our camp and obtain some 
rest after our toilsome efforts to escape. Approach- 
ing the shore, we discovered an ambuscade; and, 
trying to turn back, two canoes at once dashed after 
us so eagerly that they pursued us almost to your 
settlement." Such are the stories related to us 
by these poor barbarians. Monsieur the Governor 
took it greatly to heart, as did all our Frenchmen, 
that he could not drive these rovers away from us,. 
[297 i.e., 293] as we had so few men, and as it was not 
right to leave our redout or palisade without defense. 
These poor people brought me a brief letter from Fa- 
ther Paul Ragueneau, who writes thus: " This canoe 
which I found behind the others, bringing up the 


210 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

c'efloit vn grand creue-cceur 'k Monfieur le Gouuer- 
neur, & a tous nos Fran9ois, de ne pouuoir efloigner 
de nous ces conrenrs a [297 i.e., 293] raifon du petit 
nombre d'hommes que nous eftions, n'eftant pas a 
propos de lailTer noftre reduit ou palliffade fans de- 
fence. Ces pauures gens m'apporterent vn petit mot 
de lettre du Pere Paul Ragueneau, qui parle ainfi : 
Ce canot que i'ay trouu6 derriere les autres comme 
tenant I'arriere-garde d'vn, petit gros de Hurons, m'a 
donne le moien de vous affeurer que ma fante va 
tres-bien Dieu mercy, ie fuis auffi robufte qu'au pre- 
mier iour, me voila def-ja fait aux viures des Sauuages. 
/e trouue pluftoft le fomeil en leur lict, qui eft la 
belle terre, que fur la plume, mefme la pluie ne me 
refueille point, quoy que def-ja par deux fois elle 
nous ait bien moiiille. /e n'en ay point eu de co- 
gnoiffance, fmon quand il s'eft fallu leuer. /e vous ay 
efcrit en hafte par Teouatirhon, lequel &, remporte 
auec foy, le paquet de nos petites hardes qu'on luy 
auoit confi6. Ie ne m'en fuis pas auif6 qu'apres fon 
depart, il vous dira come noftre canot a efte brife 
d'vne roche, & comme hier nous fufmes furpris d'vne 
furieufe tempefte, ie me recommande &c. 

Le 9. du mefme mois d'Aouft Teouatirhon noftre 
Seminarifte, s'eftant fauue du danger dont i'ay par- 
le, cy-dellus arriua aux [298 i.e., 294] trois Riuieres, 
il nous dit que fon oncle voiat le paquet des hardes, 
ou petits befoins que no^ enuoions h. nos Peres, le 
mit & I'embarqua dans fon canot, difant qu'il fe vou- 
loit charger luy mefme de le rendre fidellement: 
mais comme ce Capitaine k eft6 pris, le paquet ^ efte 
perdu, nos pauures Peres qui font Ik haut, en pati- 
ront, mais Dieu fgaura bien les confoler d'ailleurs. 


1637] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 211 


rear guard as it were, of a small band of Hurons, has 
afforded me the means of assuring you that my health 
is very good. Thank God, I am as strong as on the 
first day, and behold me already inured to the food 
of the Savages. Sleep comes to me on their bed, 
which is the beautiful earth, sooner than upon feath- 
ers ; even the rain does not waken me, although it 
has already twice well soaked us, of which I was not 
aware until I had to arise. I have written you has- 
tily, through Teouatirhon, who has taken back with 
him the little package of our clothing that was en- 
trusted to him. I did not think of it until after his 
departure. He will tell you how our canoe was split 
by a rock, and how we were yesterday surprised by 
a furious tempest. I commend myself, etc." 

On the 9th of the same month of August Teouatir- 
hon, our Seminarist, having escaped from the danger 
of which I have spoken above, arrived at the 
[298 i.e., 294] three Rivers. He told us that his 
uncle, seeing the package of clothes or little necessi- 
ties that we were sending to our Fathers, took it and 
placed it in his own canoe, saying that he would take 
it upon himself to deliver it faithfully. But, as this 
Captain was made a prisoner, the package was lost, 
and our poor Fathers who are up yonder will suffer 
for want of it ; but God will know well how to con- 
sole them with something else. 

Towards nightfall of the same day, a great fire ap- 
peared on the other bank of the River. Some Hu- 
rons and Montagnez went to find out what it meant. 
They found the two companions of Teouatirhon, who 
had escaped with him, and were asking by the light 
of this fire that we should send for them. It is indeed 
remarkable how these Savages, entirely naked and 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.12 

Le mefme iour fur la nuict parut vn grand feu de 
I'autre cofle de la Riuiere, quelques Hurons & 
Montagnez, allerent recognoiftre ce que c'eftoit, ils 
trouuerent les deux compagnons de TeouatirJioyi qui 
s'efloient efchapez auec luy, & demandoiet par la 
lumiere de ce feu qu'on les vint querir. C'eft vne 
chofe bien remarquable que ces Sauuages ellans tout 
nuds n'aias ny fufil, ny coufteau, ny hache, trouue 
le moien de faire du feu. 

L'vnziefme du mefme arriuerent de Kebec, deux 
cbalouppes bien efquippees en guerre. Monfieur de 
rifle aiant regeu les lettres de Mofieur noftre Gou- 
uerneur, arma auffi toft ces deux chalouppes en grande 
diligece, fit venir du monde des vaiffeaux, en prit des 
families, & nous enuoia encor quatre autres chaloup- 
pes bien equippees, & en fuitte [299 i.e., 295] vne 
bonne barque, que le Capitaine Raymbaut comman- 
doit. Les vents contrarians nos delTeins: Monfieur 
le Gouuerneur n'attendit pas tout ce fecours. Aiant 
veu les deux premieres chalouppes bien deliberees ; 
dont I'vne efloit commandee par le Capitaine Four- 
nier: I'autre par le fieur Des-Dames, il monte dans 
fa barque, & moy auec luy, felon fa volonte. Nous 
faifons voile le plus promptement qu'il nous eft 
pofTible ; la nuict nous f auorifa d'vn bon vent, pour 
trauerfer le lac de fainct Pierre, oil nous n'entendifmes 
aucun bruict, ces barbares s'eftans retirez a la riuiere 
qui porte leur nom. Le Suroueft s'efleuant, nous ar- 
refta dans les Ifles du lac. La nuict le temps fe trou- 
uant aflez calme, nous montafmes iufques au fleuue, 
ou nous penfions trouuer ces barbares. II eftoit defia 
grand iour, quand nous I'aprochafmes. A I'embou- 
cheure nous apperceufmes vne groffe fumee, qui nous 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 213 


having neither tinder box, knife, nor hatchet, find 
the means of making fire.** 

On the eleventh of the same month, two shallops, 
well equipped for war, arrived from Kebec. Mon- 
sieur de risle, having received the letters of Mon- 
sieur our Governor, immediately armed these two 
shallops in great haste, sent to the ships for men, 
selected some from families, and sent us four other 
well equipped shallops, and afterwards [299 i.e., 295] 
a good bark, commanded by Captain Raymbaut. 
The winds interfering with our plans. Monsieur the 
Governor did not wait for all this help. Having 
seen the first two shallops in good order, one com- 
manded by Captain Fournier, the other by sieur 
Des-Dames,^ he entered his bark, and I with him, ac- 
cording to his desire. We set sail as promptly as pos- 
sible ; the night favored us with a good wind to cross 
lake saint Pierre, where we heard no noise, as these 
barbarians had withdrawn to the river that bears 
their name.^° A South wester which arose stopped 
us among the Islands of the lake ; but during the night 
the weather became quite calm, and we ascended to 
the river, where we expected to find these barba- 
rians. It was already broad daylight when we ap- 
proached it. At the mouth we perceived a quantity 
of smoke, which led us to think that the enemy was 
not far off. Then every one exerted himself to row 
with energy, and prepared to rush upon them. But, 
when we reached the place whence this smoke came, 
we found the birds had flown thence. One day 
sooner, and we would have had a battle, [300 i.e., 296] 
for we all thought they had departed only the day 
before. We could not make any further efforts; to 
follow them would have been labor lost, for their 


214 LES RELATIONS DES jitSUITES [Vol.12 

fit croire que rennemi n'eftoit pasloing. Alors cha- 
cun s'efforce de ramer auec violence, on fe difpofe k 
donner deffus : mais comme nous fuf mes arriuez au 
lieu d'ou prouenoit cette fumee, nous trouuafmes que 
les oifeaux s'en eftoient enuolez, vn iour deuant nous 
euft fait combattre, [300 i.e., 296] car nous creufmes 
tons qu'ils n'eftoiet partis que du iour precedent : nous 
n' anions pas peu diligenter d'auantage, de les fuiure, 
c'eft peine perdue: car leurs canots font bien plus 
legers que nos chalouppes, & que nos barques. Nous 
voians done dans le repos, au moment que nous pen- 
fions combattre, & dans la paix au point de la guerre, 
nous defcendifmes a terre. Vifitans les lieux que ces 
voleurs venoient de quitter, nous trouuafmes fur les 
riues du fieuue vne planche, qui auoit ferui de trauers 
a vne croix, que Monfieur le General du Pleffis auoit 
drelTee I'annee precedente. Ces barbares I'auoient 
arrachee, & fur cette planche ils auoient peint les 
tefles de trente Hurons, qu'ils ont pris. Nous les 
confiderafmes attentiuement, auffi auoient-ils attache 
cette peinture a vn arbre efbranche, en forte que les 
palTans la pouuoient aif ement def couurir ; les diuers 
traicts faifoient paroiftre la qualite & I'aage des pri- 
fonniers, comme quelques Sauuages qui fe trouuerent 
Ik, nous I'expliquoient. lis auoient figure deux tefles 
bien plus groffes que les autres, pour reprefenter 
deux Capitaines qu'ils tiennent entre leurs mains, 
dot I'vn eft ce braue Taratouan, duquel i'ay parl6 cy 
deffus; on y voioit aufli la tefte de deux [301 i.e., 297] 
enfans, & de deux autres ieunes gargons, qu'on ame- 
noit au Seminaire. lis auoient fait des raies en forme 
de panaches, fur les teftes des plus vaillans. Toutes 
ces teftes eftoient grifl!onnees \sc. griffonn^es] en 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1637 216 

canoes are much lighter than our shallops and barks. 
Now finding ourselves resting at the moment when 
we expected to fight, and in peace when on the verge 
of war, we went ashore. Looking over the places 
these robbers had just left, we found upon the banks 
of the river a plank which had served as the cross- 
bar of a cross, which Monsieur the Commandant du 
Plessis had erected the year before. These barba- 
rians had torn it down and upon this plank had 
painted the heads of thirty Hurons, whom they had 
captured. We studied it carefully. They had also 
fastened this picture to a branchless tree, so that 
passers-by could readily see it; the different lines 
indicated the quality and age of the prisoners, as 
some Savages who were there explained to us. They 
had pictured two heads much larger than the others, 
to represent two Captains whom they had in their 
clutches, one of whom is the brave Taratouan, of 
whom I have spoken above. We saw also the heads 
of two [301 i.e., 297] children, and of two other 
young lads who were being taken to the Seminary. 
They had made stripes in the form of plumes on the 
heads of the bravest ones. All these heads were 
scrawled in red, except one, which was painted in 
black, — a sign that this last one had been killed, and 
that all the others were victims destined, as it were, 
for the fire. Some Savages found the body of the 
one who had been slain, floating in the lake. We 
knew by these grotesque figures (for the Savages are 
not acquainted with the art of painting) the havoc 
wrought by these infidels, who were going away 
triumphant, bearing a quantity of skins that those 
poor Hurons were bringing to the storehouse of these 
Gentlemen. What still more added to our sorrow 


216 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.12 

rouge, excepte vne qui eftoit peinte en noir, pour 
marque que celuy-lk auoit efl6 tue, & que tous les 
autres eftoient comme des victimes deftin^es au feu. 
Quelques Sauuages trouuerent le corps de celuy qui 
auoit efte maffacre, flottant das le lac. Nous cogneuf- 
mes par ces marmoufets (car les Sauuages ne fga- 
uent point I'art de peinture) le degaft qu'auoient fait 
ces infideles, lefquels s'en alloient triomphans, char- 
gez de quantite de pelleteries, que ces pauures Hu- 
rons apportoient au magazin de ces Meffieurs. Ce 
qui augmentoit encor noflre triftefTe, c'eft que ces 
coureurs ne nous auoient point veu. le me perfuade 
aifement que s'ils euflent efprouue la cholere de ceux 
qui les fuiuoient, qu'ils ne feroient pas pour retour- 
ner fi toft ; en fin il falloit repaffer fur nos brifees. 
Defcendans vers les trois Riuieres, nous rencontraf- 
mes dans le lac quatre chalouppes qui nous venoient 
au fecours. Le fieur Coiiillart eftoit de la partie, 
comme auffi le fieur Giffart, & le fieur Pinguet, & quel- 
ques autres qui meritent d'eftre loiiez [302 i.e., 298] 
de s'eftre embarquez fi promptement, pour venir faire 
tefte a I'ennemi, & defendre au peril de leur vie, les 
biens & le pais de Meflieurs les Affociez. Eftans ar- 
riuez en la refidence de la Conception aux trois Ri- 
uieres, nous trouuafmes encor quelques Hurons, qui 
eftoient efchappez des mains & de la dent de leurs 
ennemis; ils arriuoient tantoft I'vn, tantoft I'autre, 
tous deffaits, plus affamez que des cliafl;eurs, & cou- 
uerts de leur peau tant feulement. 

Le 16. du mefme mois d'Aouft, le P. Pierre Pijart 
qui nous eftoit venu voir du pais des Hurons, pour 
prendre foin du Seminaire de cette nation, en cas de 
mort du P. Daniel, lequel a efte fort malade, fe rem- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 217 

was that these rovers had not seen us. I feel very- 
certain that if they had experienced the anger of 
those who followed them, they would not be likely 
to return soon. In short, we had to go back the way 
we came. As we were going down towards the three 
Rivers, we met in the lake the four shallops which 
were coming to reinforce us. Sieur Couillart was of 
the party, as also sieur Giffart and sieur Pinguet,^ 
and others who deserve to be praised [302 i.e., 298] 
for having embarked so promptly to come and cope 
with the enemy, and to defend, at the peril of their 
lives, the goods and lands of Messieurs the Asso- 
ciates. When we reached the residence of the Con- 
ception at the three Rivers, we found other Hurons 
who had escaped from the hands and teeth of their 
enemies. They arrived, one after the other, all 
worn out, hungrier than hunters, and with no other 
covering than their own skins. 

On the 1 6th of the same month of August, Father 
Pierre Pijart, who had come from the Huron country 
to visit us, to take charge of the Seminary of that 
nation in the event of the death of Father Daniel, 
who was very sick, reembarked in a canoe of the 
Savages to return to those lands. Crosses are ren- 
dered sweet by the love of the cross. The way from 
Kebec to the Hurons, all strewn with horrors, is trav- 
eled more cheerfully by souls parched with a thirst 
for Jesus Christ, than people roll along those streets, 
where horses draw the carriage, and vanity actuates 
those who are within it. Monsieur our Governor did 
not fail to show the Savages in what esteem he holds 
the preachers of the Gospel. He accompanied the 
Father to the banks of the great river, commending 
him, [303 i.e., 299] with presents, to the Hurons who 


218 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

barqua dans vn canot de Sauuages, pour retourner 
en ces contr6es. L'amour de la croix, rend les croix 
douces. Le chemin de Kebec aux Hurons, tout par- 
fern^ d'horreurs, fe fait plus gayement, par des ames 
alterees de la foif de lefus-Christ, qu'on ne roule en 
ces cours, ou les cheuaux traifnent vn carrolTe, & la 
vanite, ceux qui font dedans. Monfieur noftre Gou- 
uerneur ne fe laffe point de tefmoigner deuant les 
Sauuages reftime qu'il fait des predicateurs de I'E- 
uangile, il conduifit le Pere iufques fur le riuage du 
grand fleuue, le recomanda [303 i.e., 299] auec des 
prefens, aux Hurons qui le conduifoient. Cet amour 
efclattant en public, donne dans la veue de ces peu- 
ples, qui nous efcoutent plus volontiers, nous voians 
cheris de perfonnes de tel merite, & de telle authorite. 
Le 23. du mefme, ie receus lettre du P. de Quen, 
lequel me mandoit la mort d'vn ieune enfant Monta- 
gnez, qu'on nous auoit donn6, fon pere nous eftant 
venu trouuer, me dit : le n'ai plus que deux enfans, 
I'vn eft malade, & I'autre efl encor en fante, ie te les 
donne tons deux, car tu les conferueras mieux que 
moy. Ie luy repliquai, que pour le malade, ie ne 
fgauois oil le loger, qu'il le tint en fa cabane, & que 
nous I'irions f ouuent vifiter, ce que nous auons fait ; 
le pauure enfant a efte inftruit & baptif6, & mort en- 
fant de Dieu. Pour I'autre, nous le prifmes auec 
nous. Monfieur le Gouuerneur luy fit faire vn bel 
habit k la Frangoife, & luy donna tout fon petit equi- 
page, comme on fait a vn Seminarifte. Or comme 
il efloit volage, & que nous eftions fouuet diuertis a 
la venue des vaiffeaux ; cet enfant s'ennuiant fe re- 
tira auec fon pere, lequel auoit delTein de le ramener 
auec vn fien parent, fi toft que nous [304 i.e., 300] 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 219 

were to take him. Such marks of affection, displayed 
in public, catch the eyes of these people ; and they 
listen to us more willingly when they see us cherished 
by persons of so much merit and influence. 

On the 23rd of the same, I received a letter from 
Father de Quen, informing me of the death of a 
young Montagnez child that had been given to us. 
His father had come to me and said : "I have only 
two children left ; one is sick, the other is still in 
health. I give thee both of them, for thou wilt keep 
them better than I can. ' ' I replied to him that, as for 
the sick one, I did not know where to put it, — that 
he should keep it in his cabin, and that we would go 
often and visit it, which we did ; the poor child was 
instructed and baptized, and died a child of God. 
The other one we took with us. Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor had some good clothes made for him in the 
French way, and gave him all his little outfit, as we 
do to a Seminarist. Now as he was restless, and as 
we were often occupied by the coming of the ships, 
this child found it rather dull and went back with 
his father, who intended to send him to us again with 
one of his relatives, as soon as we [304 i.e., 300] 
should be free. But alas! he could not do it, for a 
sudden illness seized and carried off this poor little 
one in a short time, without baptism. It is quite a 
serious misfortune. The judgments of God are mys- 
terious; he has taken one of them, and rejected the 
other. 

On the same day I received the fragment of a let- 
ter containing these words : ' ' There is reason for 
great edification in all that has been inserted in the 
Relation which has been sent. We would ask, how- 
ever, for some enlightenment as to what we may 


220 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

ferions libres. Mais helas! il ne la peu faire, vne 
maladie foudaine a faifi & emporte en peu de temps 
ce pauure petit fans baptefme. C'efl vn malheur 
bien fenfible, les iugemens de Dieu font"'des fecrets. 
II en a pris vn, & rebuts I'autre. 

Le mefme ionr ie receu le fragment d'vne lettre le- 
qiiel portoit ces paroles ; II y a fubiet de grande edifi- 
cation, en tout ce qui eft infere dans la Relation qu'on 
a enuoie : on demanderoit neantmoins quelque efclair- 
ciffement, en ce qu'on pent efperer d'eflabliffement 
de la Religion Chreftienne, & en fuitte de communi- 
cation auec les pais attenans aux Sauuages, leurs 
frontieres & aboutiffemens. Ie refponds a cela, que 
fi celuy qui a efcrit cette lettre, a leu la Relation de 
ce qui fe paffe au Paraquais, qu'il a veu ce qui fe 
fera vn iour en la nouuelle France. 

La Religion Chreftienne (moiennant la grace de 
Dieu) florira en ce pais cy, comme elle fait en celuy- 
1^, notamment aux Hurons. Ces peuples oil nous 
fommes, font tout femblables k ces aiitres iVmeri- 
quains, nommez Paraquais, lefquels fe mangeoient, 
il n'y a pas long-temps, les vns les autres. La grace 
abonde neantmoins, oil le peche a regne fort long- 
temps; la cruaute s'efl changee en [305 i.e., 301] dou- 
ceur, & les loups en des agneaux. Nous deuons 
efperer icy la mefme faueur du ciel. Mais au nom 
de Dieu, prenons tons patience, c'eft iuftement I'hu- 
meur du Frangois, de vouloir aclieuer quand il com- 
mence. On voit de petites eflincelles, on voudroit 
defia fe chauffer a vn grand brafier. Contez combien 
il y a d'annees que les Portugais tiennent ces endroits 
de I'Amerique, d'oii nous apprenons ces belles con- 
uerfions ; il y a plus de quarante ans que nos Peres 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 221 

hope for the establishment of the Christian Religion, 
and then communication with the countries contig- 
uous to the Savages, their frontiers and boundaries." 
I respond to this that if he who wrote this letter has 
read the Relation of what is occurring in Paraquais 
[Paraguay],^ he has seen that which shall some day- 
be accomplished in new France. 

The Christian Religion (through the grace of God) 
will flourish in this country as it does in that, espe- 
cially among the Hurons. These peoples where we 
are, are exactly like those other Americans, called 
Paraquais, who not long ago were eating each other. 
Yet grace abounds where sin has so long held sway. 
Cruelty has changed to [305 i.e., 301] gentleness, and 
wolves to lambs. We may expect here the same 
favor from heaven. But, in the name of God, let us 
have patience. It is just the temper of a Frenchman 
to desire to finish as soon as he has begun. He sees 
some little sparks, and already he wishes to warm 
himself at a great fireplace. Count how many years 
the Portuguese have held those regions in America, 
whence we hear of so splendid conversions, — our Fa- 
thers worked more than forty years to subdue them, 
and it is more than eighty years since those nations 
began to hear about our faith. They did not surren- 
der very soon, yet our haste would require that ice 
take fire like gunpowder. I have often said, and I 
say it again, that I am surprised at the advancement 
that God is granting to this infant Church, consider- 
ing the short time employed, up to the present, in 
instructing these barbarians. I believe that those 
who are urging us, urge God still more. It is he who 
must be earnestly solicited, — it is his cause, it is he 
who will make it succeed. 


222 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 


12 


trauaillent pour les reduire. II y en a plus de quatre- 
vingt que ces peuples ont ouy parler de noftre cre- 
ance. lis ne fe font pas rendus li toft, & noftre 
promptitude voudroit que la glace prit feu, comme 
la poudre a canon; i'ay fouuent dit, & ie le dis en- 
cor, que ie m'eftonne de Tauancement que Dieu 
donne a cette Eglife nailTante, veu le peu de temps 
qu'on a emploie iufques k prefent, a I'inftruction de 
ces barbares. Ie croy que ceux qui nous prelTent, 
preffent encor Dieu d'auantage. C'eft celuy la qu'il 
faut puiffamment foliciter, c'efl fon affaire, c'eil luy 
qui I'a fera reiiffir. 

Pour la communication auec les pais voifms, on a 
pleinement fatisfait dans les autres Relations, les 
liures qui traittent de ces [306 i.e., 302] contrees. II 
y a quantity de nations fedentaires, voifmes des Hu- 
rons, I'Euangile doit porter la fon flambeau; il y en 
a plufieurs d'errantes, celles cy font moins peuplees, 
elles ne fe rangeront pas fi toft, mais elles viendront 
auffi bien que les autres, lefus Chrift fera leur Roy ; 
c'eft fon heritage, Dabo tibi gentes hcereditatcm tuam. 
Les errans du Midy s'eftans reduits, il n'elt pas 
impoffible de conuertir les Septentrionaux. C'eft 
affez pour cette question. 

Le mefme iour, le pere de cette fille tant aimee, 
qui fut baptifee I'an pafle, le 8. de lanuier, me vint 
trouuer, & me dit, Nikanis entrons dans ta chambre, 
car ie te veux parler. Eftans done tous deux affis, il 
me demanda pourquoy ie I'auois fait fortir le matin 
de la Chappelle, puis qu'il y eftoit entre a deffein de 
prier Dieu, defirant croire en luy. Ie luy repliquai, 
qu'il ne pouuoit point affifter a certaines prieres que 
nous faifons le matin (c'eft au S. Sacrifice de la Meffe, 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j637 223 

As to communication with the neighboring coun- 
tries, this has been fully answered in the other 
Relations, and in the books which treat of these 
[306 i.e., 302] lands. There are numerous sedentary- 
nations who are neighbors of the Hurons ; the Gospel 
should carry its light to them. There are many wan- 
dering nations which are less populous ; they will not 
fall into line so soon, but they will come as well as the 
others ; Jesus Christ will be their King, they are his 
heritage, Dabo tibi gentes hcEreditatem tuam. The 
wanderers of the South being subdued, it is not im- 
possible to convert those of the North. Enough upon 
this point. 

The same day, the father of that dearly beloved 
girl who was baptized last year on the 8th of Janu- 
ary, came to me and said, * ' Nikanis, let us go into 
thy room, for I wish to speak to thee." Then, when 
we were both seated, he asked me why I had made 
him leave the Chapel that morning, since he had 
gone in there to pray to God, desiring to believe in 
him. I answered him that he could not be present 
at certain prayers we offered in the morning (it was 
the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass that I was about to 
offer), but that, if he were baptized, he should be 
present there, as the French were. Thereupon he 
made me a long speech. "Hast thou not heard," 
said he, " of my daughter, whom thy brothers bap- 
tized in the Winter, who died in your faith, and was 
buried in the place where they bury [307 i.e., 303] 
the French ? Hast thou not been told how my wife 
also believed in God before her death, and how the 
same favor was granted to her as to my daughter? 
It is I who induced them to embrace what you teach. 
I wish to take for myself the advice I gave them ; I 


224 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

que i'allois offrir) mais que s'il efloit baptife, qu'il 
s'y trouueroit comme les Frangois. lA deflus il me 
fit vn long dif cours : Nas-tu point, difoit il, ouy par- 
ler de ma fille, que tres [sc. tes] freres ont baptife c6t 
Hiuer, laquelle eft morte en voflre creance, & enterr^e 
au lieu ou on enterre [307 i.e., 303] les Frangois. Ne 
t'a t'on point racompte comme ma femme a auffi creu 
en Dieu deuant fa mort, & comme on luy a fait la 
mefme faueur qu'a m'a fille. C'eft moy qui les ay 
induit h. embraffer ce que vous enfeignez. le veux 
prendre pour moy le confeil, que ie leur ay donne. 
le veux mourir Chreftien, & eftre enfeueli auec vous 
autres. Crois moy Nikanis, mon coeur k toufiours dit 
que voftre doctrine eftoit bonne, ie me plais a I'en- 
tendre ; pendant que tu es icy enf eigne moy, tu es 
toufiours fi empefche, qu'on ne fgauroit te parler. Ie 
te viendrai voir, ie t'efcouterai attentiuement, ie fuis 
vieux, il efl temps que ie penfe a moy. Ce bon 
homme me difoit cela auec vn tel accent, qu'il m'at- 
tendrit le coeur. De verite ie bois quelquefois vn 
calice alTez amer, paffant par les cabanes en ce temps 
icy, de la venue des vaiffeaux. Car les petits & les 
grands me demandent fort bien, pourquoy ie ne les 
enfeigne plus, pourquoy ie ne les vais plus voir, pour- 
quoy ie ne les affemble plus? Ie les remets de iour 
en iour, & cependant trois grands mois f e paffent que 
ie ne fuis point libre. Pour ce bon vieillard comme ie 
rincitois a parler, en faueur de noftre Religion, dans 
les cabanes; il me refpondit, qu'il craignoit que la 
ieuneffe ne prit vn mot pour I'autre [308 i.e., 304] 
S'il I'inftruifoit qu'il auoit peur que la langue, ou la 
parole ne leur variaft, & qu'il n'en arriuaft quelque 
malheur. Pour moy, difoit il, qui f9ais bien parler, 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 225 

wish to die a Christian, and to be buried with your 
people. Believe me, Nikanis, my heart has always 
said that your doctrine was good, I like to hear it. 
While thou art here, teach me. Thou art always so 
busy that one cannot talk to thee ; I will come to see 
thee, I will listen to thee attentively; I am old, it 
is time I was thinking of myself." The simple man 
said this to me in a voice that touched my heart. In 
truth, I sometimes drink a very bitter cup, as I pass 
among the cabins at the time when the ships are an- 
chored here ; for small and great ask me, with rea- 
son, " why I do not teach them any more? why I do 
not come to see them? why I do not call them to- 
gether?" I put them off from day to day, and mean- 
while three long months pass before I am free. As 
to this good old man, when I was urging him to talk 
in favor of our Religion in the cabins, he answered 
me that he was afraid the young people would mis- 
construe his meaning, — [308 i.e., 304] that he feared 
lest, if he instructed them, his use of the language or 
of certain words might convey a different meaning to 
them, and that some misfortune might thence hap- 
pen. As for me who could speak well, he said, 
nothing would pass my lips that was not entirely 
proper. It is one of the fears of these barbarians 
that they will not speak or pronounce well what has 
been taught them, placing the whole force of the 
doctrine in the words. But I explained to him that 
God looked at the heart and not at the lips ; and if 
the mouth should make a mistake, nothing serious 
could happen from it, provided the heart was right. 
He was satisfied with this answer. I told him I had 
written to a great Captain in France (it is thus we 
call people of influence), for they have no other title 


226 LES RELATIONS DBS jASUITES [Vol.12 

il ne fortira rien de ma bouche que bien \ propos. 
C'eft vne des craintes de ces barbares, de ne pas bien 
dire, ou prononcer ce qu'on leur enf eigne, mettant 
toute la force de la doctrine dans les paroles. Mais 
ie Iny fis entendre que Dieu regardoit le coeur, & non 
les 16vres, & que la bouche fe trompant, il n'en pou- 
uoit arriuer aucun inconuenient, pourueu que le coeur 
fuft bon. II fe contenta de cette refponfe, ie luy de- 
clarai que i'auois efcrit "k vn grand Capitaine de France 
(c'efl ainli que nous appellons les perfonnes de condi- 
tion) car ils n'ont point d' autre tiltre de grandeur 
que celuy de Capitaine. Fay done mande (luy difois- 
ie) "k vn grand Capitaine, que tout voftre malheur 
vient de ce que vous eftes errans & vagabons, que 
vous vous arrefteriez fi on vous aidoit "k defricher, & 
a vous loger. Comme ce Capitaine eft bon, il don- 
nera les ges qu'il a icy pour vous fecourir ; alors vous 
ne ferez plus enterrez, qui de?^, qui delk, vous ne 
mourrez plus fi fouuent comme vous faites: car vous 
ne fouffrirez pas tant. O que voila qui va bien (di- 
foit-il) veux-tu que [309 i.e., 305] ie parle de cecy 
dans nos cabanes; car ie fuis age, on mefcoutte, & 
tous les Capitaines font mes ieunes gens. Ie luy re- 
partis que i'en eflois content. 

Le 27. arriuerent quatre canots de Hurons, I'vn 
deux me rendoit vn petit mot de lettre du P. Pierre 
Pijart, lequel m'efcriuoit du long fault, & me man- 
doit que la maladie continuoit fon maffacre dans les 
Hurons, qu'elle auoit fait rebroulTer chemin ^ plu- 
fieurs, qui venoient en traitte aux Frangois, qu'il s'en 
retournoit fort ioieux au pais des f ouffrances ; puis il 
m'adiouftoit qu'vn petit Seminarifle, qu'il remeine 
auec foy, nomm6 Aiandac^, I'edifioit grandemet. II 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 227 

of rank except that of ' ' Captain. ' ' "I have written ' ' 
(said I to him) " to a great Captain that all your mis- 
fortunes come from your being an unsettled and 
wandering people ; that you would become stationary 
if you could be aided in clearing the land and making 
dwellings. As this Captain is good, he will give you 
the workmen whom he has here, to help you ; then 
your people will not be buried, some here, some 
there, nor will so many of you die as now, for 
you will not have to suffer so much." " Oh how 
good that will be ! " (said he) ' ' dost thou wish me 
[309 i.e., 305] to speak of this in our cabins? For I 
am old, they listen to me, and all the Captains are my 
young men." I told him I would be glad to have 
him do so. 

On the 27th, four Huron canoes arrived; one of 
them delivered me a brief letter from Father Pierre 
Pijart, who wrote me from the long sault,^^ and in- 
formed me that the epidemic continued its ravages 
among the Hurons, and had caused several, who 
were coming to trade with the French, to turn back ; 
and that he himself was returning very joyfully to 
the land of suffering. Then he added that a little 
Seminarist, called Aiandac^, whom he was taking back 
with him, edified him greatly. " He prays to God 
on his knees," said he, "morning and evening; he 
always asks a blessing before eating, without being 
ashamed of it before his companions; I pray our 
Lord to give him perseverance; Amen." 

I will note here an incident, which would have 
been better placed in chapter tenth. As we were on 
the point of returning to Kebec, hopeless of seeing 
any more Hurons this year, a Montagnez Savage said 
to Sieur Olivier, " Do not hasten to go away; the 


228 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

prie Dieu, dit-il, &, genoux le matin & le foir, il fait 
toufiours la benediction anant que de manger, fans 
honte de fes compagnons, ie prie noftre Seigneur qu'il 
luy donne la perfeuerance, Ainfi foit-il. 

Ie remarquerai en cet endroit, vn poinct qui feroit 
mieux plac6 au chapitre dixiefme. Comme nous 
eftions fur le poinct de retourner h. A'ebec, perdans 
I'efperance de plus voir des Hurons, pour cette annee, 
vn Sauuage Montagnez dit au Sieur Oliuier, ne 
vous haflez point de partir, la mamelle "k fremi k 
[310 i.e., 306] quelqu'vn de nos deuins. Vous aurez 
demain des nouuelles, alleurement il viendra des Hu- 
rons. Le fieur Oliuier vint rapporter cette Prophetic 
a Monfieur le Gouuerneur, auec lequel i'eflois pour 
lors, nous la receufmes en riant, cependant nous ne 
lailTafmes pas le lendemain d'eftre eftonnez, voians 
arriuer ces quatre canots qu'on n'attendoit pas. Cela 
m'afaitrelTouuenir qu'eftant &. kebec deux Sauuages, 
voians que nous doutions de la venue des vaifTeaux, 
nous dirent ne doutez point qu'ils ne viennent, de- 
main fans faillir vous en aurez nouuelles, car la ma- 
melle h. fremi bien fort a nos gens, cela fe trouua ve- 
ritable. Le lendemain, vne chalouppe en apporta 
nouuelle. Tout cecy me fait coniecturer que le dia- 
ble fe fourre la dedans, & leur caufe ce fremiffement, 
pour les lier k foy d'auantage, les amufans par ces 
belles propheties, qui fe trouuent fauffes affez fou- 
uent, Dieu le difpofant ainfi pour faire paroiftre 
quelles prouiennent de I'autheur de menfonge. 

Le 28. paffant dans les cabanes, & voiat quelque 
enfat malade, ie demadai ^ fa mere fi mo frere ne I'a- 
uoit point baptif6, cette bone femme me fit rire par 
fa refponfe: ouy, dit-elle, il la baptif6, mais fi pen 


1637] LE JFMNE'S RELATION, i637 229 

breast of [310 i.e., 306] one of our soothsayers has 
throbbed. Tomorrow you will have news; some 
Hurons will surely come." Sieur Olivier came to 
report this Prophecy to Monsieur the Governor, with 
whom I was at the time. We heard it with amuse- 
ment, and yet we were certainly astonished the next 
day, at seeing these four canoes, which had not been 
expected, arrive. This reminds me that, when we 
were at kebec, two Savages, seeing that we ques- 
tioned the coming of the ships, told us not to doubt 
that they would come ; ' ' You will have news of them 
tomorrow without fail, for our people's breasts have 
been throbbing very strongly." This proved to be 
true, for the next day a shallop brought us news of 
them. All this makes me conjecture that the devil 
enters into them and causes this throbbing, to more 
firmly bind them to himself, diverting them with 
these fine prophecies, which often enough prove 
false, — God thus disposing in order to show that 
they originate with the author of lies. 

On the 28th, as I was visiting the cabins, I saw a 
sick child. I asked its mother if my brother had not 
yet baptized it ; I had to laugh at the answer this 
simple woman gave, — "Yes," said she, "he bap- 
tized her, but hardly any; baptize her more." In 
instructing these simple [311 i.e., 307] people on the 
virtue of the sacred waters of baptism, some imagine 
that the more there is poured out, the more efiica- 
cious is this Sacrament ; they are being disabused of 
this error. 

On the 29th, Monsieur the Governor concluded to 
return to Kebec to dismiss the fleet, inasmuch as 
these last four canoes assured us that the French 
whom we were awaiting in the rear guard of the Hu- 


230 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

que lien, baptife le d'auantage. Comme on inftruit 
ces bonnes [311 i.e., 307] gens de la vertu des eaux, 
faeries du baptefme, quelqiies-vns s'imaginent que 
plus on en verfe & plus de force ^ ce Sacrement, on 
les defabufe de cet erreur. 

Le 29. Monfieur le Gouuerneur volant que ces qua- 
tre derniers canots nous affeuroient, que les Frangois 
que nous attendions en I'arriere-garde des Hurons 
eftans arriuez k la petite nation des Algonquins, 
auoient efte contraints de rebroulTer chemin ^ raifon 
que les malades affligeoiet leur efcoiiade, fe delibera 
de retourner k Aebec, pour congedier la flotte. II 
me fit naoter auec foy dans fa barque, i'eftois vn peu 
trifle voiant qu'k faute des Hurons, qui peuffent por- 
ter le petit bagage que nous enuoions ^ nos Peres, la 
plus grande partie reftoit aux trois Riuieres. Et ce 
qui augmentoit ce mal'lieur c'eft que nous auios en- 
uoie la haut de nouueaux hommes, les vieux qui ont 
acbeue leur terme n'ont peu defcendre, & ainfi nos 
Peres fe trouueront chargez d'vn plus grad nobre de 
perfones, & n'aurot pas la moitie de leur neceffitez, 
foit pour leurs habits, foit pour achepter des viures 
du pais, ie crains fort qu'ils ne foient cotrains de fe 
feruir de la premiere robe que Dieu fit k Ada & a fa 
femme, fecit quoque Dominus Adcs & vxorj eius tunicas 
pelliceas. [312 i.e., 308] Pour leur nourriture, celuy 
qui repaift les oifeaux du ciel ne les oubliera pas, il 
touchera le coeur de ces barbares, pour les fecourir ; 
puis que nous n'auons peu leur enuoier les denrees 
qui leur feruent de monnoie. 

A la verite il eftoit affez defcendu de canots, mais 
comme ils eftoient remplis de malades, ils ne fe vou- 
loient pas charger des hardes, ou des paquets d'au- 


1637], LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 231 

rons, having arrived at the petite nation of the Al- 
gonquins, had been obliged to turn back on account 
of the prevalence of sickness in their band. He had 
me enter his bark with him ; I was rather depressed, 
seeing that, through the non-arrival of the Hurons, 
who could have carried the little baggage we were 
sending to our Fathers, the greater part of it re- 
mained at the three Rivers. And what made the 
trouble worse was that we had sent new men up 
there, and, as the old ones who had completed their 
term could not come down, our Fathers will find 
themselves burdened with a greater number of per- 
sons, and will not have means for their support, either 
for clothes, or to buy the food of the country. I am 
much afraid they will have to use the first robe God 
made for Adam and his wife, fecit quoque Dominus Ad(Z 
et uxori ejus tunicas pelliceas. [312 i.e., 308] As to 
their food, he who feeds the birds of the air will 
not forget them, he will touch the hearts of these 
barbarians to succor them, since we have not been 
able to send the commodities that serve them as 
money. 

In truth, enough canoes came down; but, as they 
were full of sick people, they did not wish to burden 
themselves with the clothes or packages of other 
people; and those who did take any, made us pay 
double and triple freight. This is enough for this 
year ; besides, we are about to land at Kebec. I am 
writing from the Sainte Marie, a bark which is now 
conveying us upon the great river. I will not im- 
plore the help of those who shall read this Relation, 
as well as that which has been sent me from the Hu- 
rons, both of which go together to be presented to 
your Reverence. I know well that God is speaking 


232 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

truy, & ceux qui s'en chargeoiet, nous faifoient paier 
le port au double & au triple. C'eft affez pour cette 
ann^e, auffi bien allons nous aborder k iTebec. I'ef- 
cris de la Sainte Marie, c'efl vne barque qui nous 
porte maintenant fur le grand fleuue. le n'implore- 
ray point les fecours de ceux qui liront tant cette Re- 
lation, que celle qu'on m'a enuoiee des Hurons, 
laquelle fe va de compagnie pref enter "k voftre Reue- 
rence, ie f9ay bien que Dieu parle a leur coeur, & que 
leur coeur parle k Dieu, pour nous, fans que nous le 
follicitions nous leur en fommes plus eflroitement 
obligez, comme auffi ^ la douce charite de tons nos 
Peres, & de tons nos Freres de fa Prouince, voire de 
toute la France, & notamment a 1' amour & au fouue- 
nir qu'a voftre Reuerence de tous fes enfans a I'Au- 
tel & a rOratoire. [3 1 3 i.e. , 309] Nous la faluons tous 
de toute I'eftendue de noftre affection, moy tres-parti- 
culierement qui me dirai auec fa permiffion, ce que 
ie fuis de coeur. 

Mon R. P. 

Vojire tres-humble & obeiffant 

feruiteur en nojlre Seigneur. 

PAVL LE IE VNE. 

Du bord de la fainte Marie, 
au trauers du Cap Rouge, 
en la Nouuelle France, 
ce dernier d'Aouft, 1637. 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 233 

to their hearts, and that their hearts are speaking to 
God. As for us, without having solicited them, we 
are under the greatest obligations to them, as well as 
to the sweet charity of all our Fathers, and of all our 
Brethren of your Province, yea, even of all France, 
and especially to the love and remembrance your 
Reverence has for all your children at the Altar and 
in the Oratory. [313 i.e., 309] We all greet you with 
the utmost affection, — I very particularly, who will 
sign myself, with your permission, what I am from 
my heart, 

My Reverend Father, 

Your very humble and obedient 
servant in our Lord, 

PAUL LE JEUNE. 
On board the sainte Marie, 
opposite Cap Rouge, in 
New France, this last 
of August, 1637. 


234 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 


[314 i.e., 310] Derniere Lettre dv P. Paul le 
leune, au R. P. Prouincial. 

MON R. P. 
Depuis que i'ay fertn^ la Relation, plufieurs 
chofes fe font prefentees, que i'ay iug^ deuoir 
eflre efcrites fommairement k V. R. mais fans autre 
ordre que celuy qui me viendra en la penfee, car Tem- 
prellement des affaires ne me per met pas de digerer 
ce que i'ay a dire. 

/'ay remarque dans la Relation, que Monfieur le 
Gouuerneur eftoit mont6 au deuant des Hurons, pour 
communiquer auec ces peuples, qui viennent voir 
tous les ans nos Frangois. Comme le retour de la 
Flotte le preffoit, apres auoir long temps feiourn6 
aux trois Riuieres, en fin il defcendit h. Kebec le 29. 
d'Aouft, aiant perdu toute efperance de voir plus de 
Hurons, pour cefte annee. le I'accompagnai toufiours 
dedans fa barque par fon commandement, nous arri- 
uafmes la nuict, du 31, du mefme mois. Le iour d'a- 
pres noftre arriuee, parut vn canot [315 i.e., 311] qui 
vint nous apporter nouuelle, qu'enuiron cent cin- 
quante Hurons eftoient defcendus, & qu'il feroit k 
propos, que Mofieur le Gouuerneur remontaft pour 
les voir; ces peuples fouhaittans luy parler. Nos 
Peres m'efcriuoient qu'il eftoit entierement neceffaire 
que i'y retournaffe auffi, pour les affaires de noftre 
Miffion des Hurons, & pour le Seminaire. Monfieur 
le Gouuerneur occupe a expedier les depefches de la 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 235 


[314 i.e., 310] Last Letter of Father Paul le Jeune, 
to the Reverend Father Provincial. 

MY REVEREND FATHER, 
Since I closed the Relation, several things 
have presented themselves which I have 
judged ought to be written briefly to Your Rever- 
ence, but without other order than that in which 
they may occur to me, for the urgency of affairs does 
not permit me to digest what I have to say. 

I have noted in the Relation that Monsieur the 
Governor had gone up to meet the Hurons, to com- 
municate with those tribes who every year come to 
visit our French. As the return of the Fleet was 
urging his departure, after having sojourned a long 
time at the three Rivers, he finally, on the 29th of 
August, went down to Kebec, having lost all hope of 
seeing any more Hurons this year. I was with him 
in his bark all the time, by his orders; we arrived 
at night, on the 31st of the same month. The day 
after our arrival, a canoe appeared [315 i.e., 311] 
which came to bring us the news that about one hun- 
dred and fifty Hurons had come down, and that it 
would be well for Monsieur the Governor to go up 
and see them, as these tribes wished to speak with 
him. Our Fathers wrote me that it was absolutely 
necessary that I also should return, for the affairs of 
our Huron Mission, and for the Seminary. Mon- 
sieur the Governor, being busy in finishing his de- 
vSpatches for the fleet, and in sending it away, could 


236 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

flotte, & ^ la cogedier, ne peut quitter Kebec ; il en- 
uoia en fa place Monfieur le Cheualier de I'lfle fon 
Lieutenant, fort honnefle Gentil-homme. le voulois 
m'embarquer dans vn canot de Sauuages, mais il me 
fit prendre place aupres foy, dans fa chalouppe. Nous 
vogafmes autant la nuict que le iour, combattant 
centre la contrariete des vents, iufques a la nuict du 
cinquiefme de Septembre, que nous mifmes pied a 
terre aux trois Riuieres. Les Hurons accoururent 
incontinent au bruit des rames de deux chalouppes, 
qui nous portoient. Le tonnerre du canon venant k 
efclatter du fort, ^ noftre defembarquement, i'en vis 
quelques vns qui fe ietterent par terre d'eftonnement. 
AUant vifiter Monfieur de Cbafteau-fort, nous le 
trouuafmes bien malade, en forte que le [316 i.e., 312] 
iour fuiuant, ie luy portai la faincte communion, apres 
cela ouurant les lettres de nos Peres, qui font aux 
Hurons, i'appris que la contagion continuoit en ce 
pais la, que les calonies redoubloient, que les demons 
nous faifoient ouuertemet la guerre. Ces peuples 
croient que nous les empoifonnons & enforcelons, iuf- 
ques la, que quelques vns ne fe feruent plus de chau- 
diere des Fran9ois, ils difent que nous auons empeft6 
les eaux, & que les vapeurs qui en fortent les tuent; 
que nos maifons leur font fatales, que nous auos chez 
nous vn corps mort, qui nous fert pour vne magie 
noire. Que pour faire mourir leurs enfans, quelques 
Francois font entrez dans I'horreur des bois, portant 
auec eux le portraict d'vn petit enfant, que nous auons 
piquotte de pointes d'alefnes, & que voila iuftement 
la caufe de leur mort. Ils pafl!ent bien plus auant, 
ils attaquent noftre Sauueur lefus Chrift, car ils pu- 
blient, qu'il y a ie ne f9ai quoy dedans le petit Ta- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 237 

not leave Kebec. He sent in his place Monsieur the 
Chevalier de I'lsle, his Lieutenant, a very honorable 
Gentleman. I wished to embark in one of the ca- 
noes of the Savages, but he made me take a place 
near him in his shallop. We sailed during the night 
as well as the day, fighting against contrary winds, 
until the night of the fifth of September, when we 
landed at the three Rivers. The Hurons immedi- 
ately ran to us at the sound of the oars of the two 
shallops which conveyed us. The thunder of the 
cannon resounding from the fort at our disembark- 
ment, I saw some throw themselves upon the ground 
in amazement. When we went to see Monsieur 
de Chasteau-fort we found him very ill, so that 
on the [316 i.e., 312] following day I carried him the 
holy communion. After this, I opened the letters of 
our Fathers who are with the Hurons, and learned 
therefrom that the contagion continued in that coun- 
try, that calumnies were multiplying, that the demons 
were making open war against us. These tribes be- 
lieve that we poison and bewitch them, carrying this 
so far that some of them no longer use the kettles of 
the French. They say that we have infected the 
waters, and that the mists which issue thence kill 
them; that our houses are fatal to them; that we 
have with us a dead body, which serves us as black 
magic; that, to kill their children, some Frenchmen 
penetrated the horrid depths of the woods, taking 
with them the picture of a little child which we had 
pricked with the points of awls, and that therein lay 
the exact cause of their death. They go even far- 
ther, — they attack our Savior, Jesus Christ ; for they 
publish that there is something, I know not what, in 
the little Tabernacle of our Chapel, which causes 


238 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

bernacle de noftre Chappelle, qui les fait mourir mal- 
heureufement, les diables ne gaigneront rien de fe 
prendre ^ leur maiflre. lis tiennent qu'il y a vn fa- 
meux forcier parmi nous, qu'ils gueriroient fi on le 
faifoit mourir. Toutes ces perfecutions nous confo- 
lent en quelque fagon, [317 i.e., 313] car c'eft fur ce 
fondement que la foy & la Religion s'eft eftablie. 
C'eft vn contentemet bien doux, de voir auec quelle 
ioie tons nos Peres refpirent la vie au pais de la mort, 
& ce qui m'eftonne d'auantage, c'eft que quelques 
ieunes hommes Francois qu'ils ont auec eux, fe voi- 
ance [sc. voians] enueloppez dans les mefmes dan- 
gers, n'en veulent pas fortir, voulans courir les mef- 
mes rifques que nos Peres. Si ie n'eftois preff6, ie 
coucherois icy les fentimens pleins d'amour & de 
feu qui brufle leurcoeur. Vous diriez qu'ils fouhait- 
tent comme k I'enuie, d'eftre tenus pour ce fameux 
forcier, qu'on deftine ^ la mort, comme vne miferable 
victime. Remarquez cependant qu'ils ne laiffent pas 
de baptifer toufiours quelques pauures malades, 11 
bien que ie puis dire, que nous auons bien baptif6 
trois cens Sauuages cette annee. Voicy qui palTe 
mon eftonnement, nonobftant tous ces bruicts, & 
toutes ces impoftures, on nous a prefente plus de Se- 
minariftes que nous n'en auons peu accepter, en effet 
nous en auons ef conduit plufieurs, faute d'auoir de- 
quoy les nourrir & entretenir, nous nous contentons 
de fix en ces premiers commancemens, cette derniere 
bande de Hurons, nous en amenoit en bon nombre, 
cela me fait leuer les yeux [318 i.e., 314] au ciel & 
dire, Digit^ Dei ejl hie, c'eft Dieu qui coduit c6t af- 
faire, qu'il foit benit k iamais des Anges & des hom- 
mes, dans les temps & dans I'eternit^. Ces barbares 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 239 

them to die miserably. The devils will gain noth- 
ing by attacking their master. They hold that there 
is a famous sorcerer among us, and that, if he were 
killed, they would recover health. All these perse- 
cutions console us in some respects, [317 i.e., 313] 
for it is upon this foundation that the faith and Re- 
ligion are established. It is a source of sweet con- 
tent to see with what joy all our Fathers breathe the 
breath of life in the country of the dead ; and what 
astonishes me still more is that some young French- 
men, whom they have with them, seeing themselves 
involved in the same dangers, will not leave, wish- 
ing to run the same risks as our Fathers. If I were 
not in haste, I would here set down the sentiments 
full of love and zeal which inflame their hearts. You 
would say that they desire to emulate each other in 
being taken for this famous sorcerer, who has been 
destined to death as a miserable victim. Observe, 
however, that they do not fail to go on baptizing poor 
sick people, — so many, that I can say we have bap- 
tized fully three hundred Savages this year. And 
here is what astonishes me beyond measure, — not- 
withstanding all these reports, and all these misrep- 
resentations, we have been offered more Seminarists 
than we could accept ; in fact, we have refused sev- 
eral, not having anything with which to feed and 
maintain them. We are satisfied with six in these 
early stages. This last band of Hurons brought 
us a goodly number; it makes me raise my eyes 
[318 i.e., 3 14] to heaven and say. Digitus Dei est hie; it 
is God who is guiding this affair ; may he be blessed 
forever by Angels and by men, in time and in eternity. 
These barbarians who had just come down had in 
their company the first Christian baptized in their 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.12 

nouuellement defcendus, auoiet en leur compagnie le 
premier Chreflien baptife en leur pais, en pleine fan- 
t^, apres vne longue inflruction, cet homme nous a 
raui le coeur. 

Le P. Pierre Pijart remontant aux Hurons I'a ren- 
contre en chemin, voici comme il m'e efcrit: le vous 
prie done (mais i'ay tort de vous prier d'vne chofe 
qui n'eft autre que le defir de voflre coeur) de tefmoi- 
gner bon vifage k noftre premier Chreflien, ie vous 
aduoue que d'abord que ie I'ay rencontr^, auat mefme 
qu'il m'eufl dit qu'il auoit des lettres "k me donner, 
lefquelles ie vous enuoie ; ie fus touchy de fa dou- 
ceur & modeftie, il me vint en penfee ce qu' autrefois 
i'ay appris des anciens Chrefliens, conuertis de I'ido- 
latrie, & ce que i'ay leu depuis peu des lapponnois : 
f9auoir eft que le baptefme receu dignemet, outre les 
graces qui luy font infailliblement attachees, confere 
vne douceur exterieure aux nouueaux Chreflies, de- 
das leurs moeurs & dedans leurs paroles. Le peu de 
temps que ie I'ay veu en pafTant, il m'a tellemet tou- 
che, que fi i'eufle peu, ie me fuffe iette k fes pieds 
pour les baifer Ce sot les paroles du P. Celuy 
[319 i.e., 315] qui pent changer les loups en des 
agneaux, a change vn barbare en enfant de Dieu. 
Comme les Huros tomboiet malades &n chemin, ce 
bon Neophyte les inftruifoit pour les redre capables 
du baptefme. Son nepueu eflat frappe de la conta- 
gion, Mathurin (c'eft ainfi qu'on appelle I'vn de nos 
hommes) luy dit, Pierre (c'eft le nom qu'il a receu 
au S. Baptefme) aie foin de ton nepueu. Ie prie 
Dieu, refpond-il, tons les iours & toutes les nuicts pour 
luy, prie le aufTi pour le mefme fubiect : mais prends 
garde (luy repliqua il) qu'il ne meure fans inftru- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 241 

country in good health, after a long instruction ; this 
man filled our hearts with joy. 

Father Pierre Pijart, in going up to the Hurons, 
met him on the way ; see how he writes me about 
him : ' ' Now I beg you (but I am wrong to beg a 
thing which is nothing more than the desire of your 
heart) to show a pleasant face to our first Christian ; 
I confess to you that when I first met him, even 
before he said that he had letters to give me, which 
I send to you, I was touched by his gentleness and 
modesty. There came into my mind what I had once 
heard of the ancient Christians, converted from Idol- 
atry, and what I read a little while ago about the 
Japanese ; ^ it is, that baptism worthily received, out- 
side the grace which is infallibly attached to it, con- 
fers upon the new Christians an external gentleness, 
in their manners and in their speech. The little that 
I saw of him in passing made such an impression upon 
me, that, if I could, I would have thrown myself at 
his feet to kiss them." These are the Father's words. 
He [319 i.e., 315] who can change wolves into lambs, 
has changed a barbarian into a child of God. As 
the Hurons fell sick on the way, this good Neophyte 
instructed them, to get them ready for baptism. His 
nephew being attacked by the contagion, Mathurin 
(the name of one of our men) said to him, " Pierre " 
(the name he received at Holy Baptism), " take care 
of thy nephew." '' I am praying God day and night 
for him," he answered; " do thou also pray to him 
for the same object." '' But be careful" (he replied 
to him) " that he does not die without instruction." 
" I have already instructed him," answered the good 
man ; " he knows all that it is necessary to believe in 
order to be a Christian, and he believes it; if he 


242 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol. 12 

ction; ie I'ay delia inflruit, refpondit le bon homme, 
il f9ait tout ce qu'il faut croire pour eftre Chreftien, 
il le croit; s'il baiffe, ie t'appellerai pour le baptifer, 
ou tu me diras les paroles qu'il faut dire, s'il fe porte 
bien, ie le menerai au Seminaire, en la maifon des 
Peres. Eftant arriue aux trois Riuieres, le P. Claude 
Pijart allant par les cabanes, porter des pruneaux aux 
malades, il le prenoit auec foy, & luy faifoit figne 
qu'il inftruifit fes compatriotes, il le faifoit auec affe- 
ction, comme auffi I'vn de nos hommes nomm6 Petit- 
pre, ce qui fut caufe que le P. en baptifa quelques 
vns. Mais nous en parlerons I'an prochain. C'eft 
la couftume quand ces peuples defcendent pour 
venir voir les Fran9ois, de tenir quelques confeils 
[320 i.e., 316] ou alTemblees; au commencement ce 
font eux qui parlent, & qui traittent de leurs affaires, 
fur la fin ce font les Frangois qui les affemblent, 
& qui leur recommandent ce qu'ils ont a leur dire. 
Aians done a leur arriuee demand^ de parler au Capi- 
taine des Fran9ois; Monfieur le Cheualier de I'lfle 
s'y trouua en I'abfence de Monfieur le Gouuerneur. 
Pour tefmoigner I'eftime qu'il faifoit de ceux qui 
embralToient noftre faincte foy, il fit affeoir noiire 
Neophite aupres de foy : lequel fut bien eftonne f e 
voiant tant honore des Francois. Nous eflios affis 
fur des bancs, & les Hurons eftoient afTis en terre, 
felon leur couftume, chaqu'vn aiant pris place, & tout 
le monde gardant le filence, deux Capitaines Hurons, 
expoferet leurs prefens. L'vn d'eux voulant haran- 
guer, demanda premierement comme fe nommoit 
Monfieur le Cheualier de I'lfle, puis il I'apoftropha, 
& luy dit: L'Ifle (c'eft ainfi que ces peuples nomment 
chaque chofe par fon nom, fans autre ceremonie) vous 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 243 

sinks, I will call thee to baptize him, or thou shalt 
tell me the words that must be said; if he gets well, 
I will take him to the Seminary, to the house of the 
Fathers." When they reached the three Rivers, Fa- 
ther Claude Pijart went through the cabins, to carry 
some prunes to the sick, and took him with him ; he 
made him a sigh to instruct his countrymen, which 
he did affectionately, as did also one of our men, 
named Petit- Pr6, which caused the Father to baptize 
some of them. But we will speak of them next year. 
When these tribes come down to see the French, they 
are accustomed to hold councils [320 i.e., 316] or as- 
semblies. At first, it is they who speak and treat of 
their own affairs ; towards the end, the French call 
them together, and recommend to them the subjects 
they wish to be discussed. Now having at their ar- 
rival asked to speak to the Captain of the French, 
Monsieur the Chevalier de I'lsle, in the absence of 
Monsieur the Governor, acted for him. In order to 
show the esteem in which he held those who em- 
braced our holy faith, he had our Neophyte sit near 
him, who was greatly astonished at seeing himself so 
highly honored by the French. We were seated on 
the benches, and the Hurons on the ground, as is 
their wont. Each one having taken his place, and 
all being in silence, two Huron Captains showed their 
presents. One of them, wishing to make a speech, 
asked first what Monsieur the Chevalier de 1' Isle's 
name was; then he addressed him, saying: *' L'Isle " 
(it is thus these people call everything, by its name, 
without other ceremony), " you and your people are 
Okhi,'' — that is to say, " you are Demons, or extraor- 
dinary beings, and more than common men." " Al- 
though our country is ruined, although pestilence 


244 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

eftes des Okhi, c'eft ^ dire, vous eftes des Demons, 
ou des creatures extraordinaires, & hors le commtin 
des hommes. Quoy que noflre pais foit perdu, que 
la contagion & la guerre rauagent tout, vous nous 
attirez vers vous, faifans que nous furmontions 
[321 i.e., 317] toutes fortes de difficultez pour vous 
venir voir. Puis nous monftrant leurs prefens ; voila 
qui parle peu, auffi fommes nous en petit nombre, 
tout le mode fe mourant dans nos bourgades, & par 
les chemins, cela n'empefche pas que nous ne foions 
venus confirmer la paix & I'amitie qui eft entre nous. 
Monfieur le Cheualier de I'lfle fit repartir qu'il eftoit 
fort aife de les voir, que noftre grand Capitaine Mon- 
fieur le Gouuerneur, eftoit monte la haut pour leur 
parler, qu'il les auoit long-temps attendu, qu'il auoit 
enuoi6 vne barque au deuat d'eux, pour les proteger 
centre les Hiroquois, que les viures manquans, la 
barque eftoit defcendue, puis remontee pour la fe- 
conde fois, mais en fin voiant que la faifon fe pafl!oit, 
elle auoit efte contrainte de retourner. Que ce grand 
Capitaine aiant appris que cinq cens Hiroquois te- 
noient le lac S. Pierre, prenans les Hurons au paffage, 
auoit enuoie querir du fecours "k Kebec, qu'on luy 
auoit enuoi^ vne barque, & quatre chalouppes, pleines 
de braues guerriers, & que luy mefme auoit voulu 
pourfuiure leurs ennemis; qu'au refte il eftoit fort 
marry de n'auoir peu remonter iufques aux trois 
Riuieres, qu'il y auoit quantity de nauires, & vn tres- 
grand nombre de [322 i.e., 318] Frangois, tant "k ke- 
bec, qu'a TadoufTac, qu'il eftoit empefche a les con- 
gedier, mais qu'il 1' auoit delegue en fa place, qu'il 
les verroit tres-volontiers I'an prochain; pour moy, 
leur fit il, ie fuis bien refioui de vous voir, mais tres- 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 245 

and war are laying all waste, you attract us to you, 
making us surmount [321 i.e., 317] all sorts of diffi- 
culties to come and see you." Then, showing us 
their presents, "These tell but little; but then we 
are in small numbers, for they are all dying in our 
villages, and along the way ; this does not prevent us 
from coming to confirm the peace and friendship 
which exists between us." Monsieur the Chevalier 
de risle made reply that he was very glad to see 
them; that our great Captain, Monsieur the Govern- 
or, had come up there to speak with them, that he 
had waited a long time ; that he had sent a bark to 
meet them, to protect them against the Hiroquois; 
that, for lack of supplies, the bark had come back, 
then had gone up a second time, — but finally, seeing 
that the season was passing, it had been obliged to 
return. He said that this great Captain, having 
learned that five hundred Hiroquois held lake St. 
Pierre, capturing the Hurons as they passed through, 
had sent to Kebec for aid ; that he had been sent a 
bark and four shallops, full of brave warriors, and 
that he himself had tried to pursue their enemies ; 
that, furthermore, he was very sorry he could not 
come up to the three Rivers again, — that there were a 
large number of ships and a great many [322 i.e., 318] 
Frenchmen, both at kebec and at Tadoussac; these 
he was occupied in dismissing, but that he had dele- 
gated him in his place, and that he would gladly 
come and see them next year. ' ' As for myself, ' ' he 
continued, " I am very glad to see you, but very sor- 
ry about your sickness. I will thank you for your 
presents, which are very acceptable to me ; but I have 
one suggestion which I wish to urge upon you strong- 
ly. It is, not to believe these false rumors, like the 


246 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

marri de voftre maladie. le vous remercierai de vos 
prefens, qui me font fort agreables: mais i'ai vn 
poinct k vous recommander puiffamment. C'eft que 
vous ne croiez iamais les faux bruicts, comme celuy 
qui portoit, que Monfieur de Champlain auoit voulu 
perdre tout le pais h. fa mort. lis dirent que les Al- 
gonquins de I'lfle auoient feme ces faux rapports. Lk 
dellus Monfieur le Cheualier fit venir vn nomm6 
Oumajiikoueian, lequel eft alli6 de ces infulaires, & luy 
fit demander pourquoy les Algonquins femoient des 
dif cordes entre les Franjois & les Hurons : dif ans que 
Monfieur de Champlain auoit voulu perdre le pais, & 
I'entraifner k la mort auec foy, qu'vn Capitaine mef- 
me des Sauuages Montagnez, efloit tefmoin de cette 
mefchante volont6. Ou eft ce Capitaine, luy dit-on? 
parle maintenant, fais le venir, qu'il nous dife, fi 
Monfieur de Champlain a iamais tenu tel difcours. 
Ce pauure homme fe mit k crier contre les Hurons, 
dif ant que c'eftoit eux qui faifoient courir vn 
[323 i.e., 319] bruict, que les Fran9ois auoient enfor- 
cele vn capot, pour les faire mourir. Nous deman- 
dafmes aux Hurons, s'ils inuentoient ces mefonges. 
Ceux d'vne bourgade reprocherent aux habitans d'vne 
autre, que ces bruits venoient de leur coft6, & qu'ils 
s'en purgeafl^ent. Bref chaqu'vn defnioit ces calom- 
nies, difans qu'il ne falloit plus parler de cela, & 
qu'on reiettoit la caufe de leur mort, fur certains co- 
liers de porcelaine, que les Montagnez ramafl^oient, 
pour les inuiter "k la guerre. On les prelTa fort de ne 
plus prefter I'oreille a ces impoftures. Demandez ^ 
voftre compatriote que voila, leur dit Monfieur de 
rifle, fi ce que nous croions eft mauuais, fi nous en- 
feignons "k tuer les hommes, nous vous aimons tons. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 ^47 

one that appeared, that Monsieur de Champlain had 
wished to ruin the whole country by his death." 
They said that the Algonquins of the Island had 
circulated these false rumors. Thereupon Monsieur 
the Chevalier summoned one named Oumastikojieian,^^ 
who is allied to those islanders, and had him asked 
why the Algonquins sowed discord between the 
French and the Hurons, saying that Monsieur de 
Champlain had wished to ruin the country and drag 
it down to death with him, and that a Captain of the 
Montagnez Savages himself had borne witness to this 
ill-will. "Where is this Captain?" he was asked. 
" Speak, now; make him come in, let him tell us if 
Monsieur de Champlain ever made such a speech." 
This poor man began to exclaim against the Hurons, 
saying that it was they who spread a [323 i.e., 3 19] re- 
port that the French had bewitched a cloak, to cause 
their death. We asked the Hurons if they had in- 
vented these lies ; those of one village accused the in- 
habitants of another of originating these reports, tell- 
ing them to clear themselves thereof. In short, each 
denied these calumnies, saying there was no need to 
speak of it further, and that the cause of their death 
was being attributed to certain porcelain collars which 
the Montagnez had collected in order to invite them 
to go to war.^~ They were earnestly urged not to 
listen to these impostures. " Ask your countryman 
here," Monsieur de I'lsle said to them, " if what we 
believe is bad, if we teach that men should be killed ; 
we love you all ; he knows well that what we have 
taught him is very good." He spoke to our Neo- 
phyte, who very modestly expressed his approval of 
our belief. This council or assembly having ended, 
these barbarians went to the store to exchange their 


248 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

il f9ait bien que ce qu'on luy a enf eigne eft fort bon. 
II parloit a noftre Neophite, qui approuua noftre cre- 
ance, auec vne grande modeftie. Ce confeil ou allem- 
bl6e eftant termine, ces barbares s'en allerent au ma- 
gazin pour changer leurs pelleteries contre des baches, 
des coufteaux, dCvS couuertures, & autres denrees, que 
Meffieurs les Directeurs & AlTociez leurs enuoient. 
Aiant fait leurs traites (pour me feruir du mot qui 
court icy) on tient le dernier cofeil. La faincte 
Vierge y prefida, car cette affeblee [324 i.e., 320] 
fe fit le iour de fa naiffance. Monfieur le Cheualier 
de rifle me fit afleoir aupres de foy, & en fuitte noftre 
nouueau Chreftien Huron. Les prefens des Fran- 
cois eftoient expofez au milieu de la place, & les chefs 
& principaux de cette nation, eftoient alTis en rond 
deuant nous. Monfieur le Cheualier me dit, mon pere, 
comman9ons par les affaires du Chriftianifme, car ce 
poinct eft le plus important. En effect, c'eft par ou 
il faut toufiours commencer le confeil des Francois, 
car quand on entre en difcours par la declaratio des 
prefens, ceux qui n'ont point d'affection pour la foy, 
fe leuent & s'en vont fans ceremonies, fi toft qu'on 
commance a parler de noftre creance; mais tandis 
que les prefens frappent leurs yeux, leur efprit, ny 
leur corps ne s'efloigne pas beaucoup des difcours 
qu'on leur tient. C'eft la couftume de ces peuples 
de parler par des prefens, & par des f eftins ; pendant 
que la marmitte bout, vous aurez les Sauuages atten- 
tifs, tant que vous voudrez; le feftin eft-il diftribu^, 
les Sauuages ferment leurs oreilles, «& ouurent leurs 
bouches, ils ne donnent point tant d'occupation h. 
leurs fens tout ^ la fois. Mais entrons en confeil. 
Monfieur le Cheualier de I'lfle prenant la parole 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 249 

peltries for hatchets, knives, blankets, and other 
wares that Messieurs the Directors and Associates 
send them. Having finished their trades (to use the 
word which is current here) the last council takes 
place. The holy Virgin presided at it, for this as- 
sembly [324 i.e., 320] was held upon the day of her 
birth. Monsieur the Chevalier de I'lsle had me sit 
near him, and next our new Huron Christian. The 
presents of the French were exposed in the middle 
of the place, and the leaders and principal men of 
this nation were seated in a circle before us. Mon- 
sieur the Chevalier said to me, " My father, let us 
begin with the concerns of Christianity, for that is 
the most important question." In fact, it is always 
necessary to begin with this subject a council with 
the French ; for when the speech is begun by the an- 
nouncement of the presents, those who have no in- 
terest in the faith rise and go away unceremoniously, 
as soon as one begins to speak of our belief. But as 
long as the presents attract their attention, neither 
their minds nor their bodies are withdrawn very far 
from the speeches which are made to them. It is the 
custom of these people to speak through presents, 
and through feasts; while the pot is boiling, you 
will find the Savages as attentive as you wish. The 
feast distributed, the Savages close their ears and 
open their mouths. They do not keep so many 
senses occupied all at once. But let us enter the 
council. 

Monsieur the Chevalier de I'lsle began to speak, 
and told them that he was greatly pleased with the 
presents [325 i.e., 321] they had made him; that he 
honored the steadfastness of their friendship, since 
neither the capture of their countrymen by their en- 


250 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.12 

leur dit, qu'il agreoit fort les prefens [325 i.e., 321] 
qu'ils luy auoient fait, qu'il honoroit la conftace de 
leur amitie, puis que la prife de leurs copatriotes 
par leurs ennemis, ny la maladie qui les affligeoit de 
tous coftez, ne les auoit empefchez de nous venir vi- 
fiter. Que cette comunicatio eftoit le nceud de la 
paix, & de la bone intelligece, qui eft depuis log 
temps entre les deux nations, Fran9oife & Huronne. 
Qu'au refte nous eftions quelquefois affligez dans 
noftre pais des mefmes fleaux de la pefte, dont ils 
font battus, qu'alors nous demandions a nos Peres 
qui f9auent bien prier Dieu, ce qu'il falloit faire pour 
appaifer les maladies, que s'ilsvouloient faire le mef- 
me qu'ils s'en trouueroient bien; & fi tout prefente- 
ment ils vouloient m'efcouter, que ie leurs dirois, 
comme ils fe deuoient comporter. lis refpondirent 
qu'ils en efloiet fort contens. La delTus, ie tire vn 
beau tableau de noftre Sauueur lefus (thrift, ie le 
defcouure, & le place deuant leurs yeux, puis prenant 
la parole, ie leur dis que nous n'eftions point les 
maiftres de la vie & de la mort, que celuy dont ils 
voioient I'image eftoit Fils du Tout-puiffant, qu'il 
eft bon, qu'il aimoit les hommes, que les demons, qui 
font tant de mal, n'eftoient que fes efclaues. 
[326 i.e., 322] Que quad nous offenfios ce grad Capi- 
taine, fils de Dieu, foit en d6robat, ou en refufant de 
croire en luy, & de luy obei'r, qu'il permettoit aux 
diables de nous affliger : mais que lors que nous anions 
recours k luy, demandant pardon de nos offenfes, 
promettans de luy eftre fideles, qu'il nous gueriffoit 
de nos maux, & lioit les mains aux malins efprits, 
lefquels ne nous pouuoiet plus nuire. Que s'ils defi- 
roient faire le mefme, ie donnerois ce beau portraict 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r637 251 

emies, nor the malady which afflicted them on all 
sides, had prevented them from coming to visit us ; 
that this intercourse was the bond of the peace and 
good understanding which for a long time had ex- 
isted between the two nations, French and Huron. 
He said, moreover, that we were sometimes afflicted 
in our country with the same scourges of pestilence 
by which they are assailed ; that then we asked our 
Fathers, who understand how to pray to God, what 
must be done to check these maladies ; that, if they 
wished to do the same, they would find it to their 
advantage ; and if at that very moment they would 
listen to me, I would tell them what they ought to 
do. They answered that they would be very glad 
to hear me. Thereupon, I drew forth a beautiful 
picture of our Savior, Jesus Christ; I uncovered it, 
and placed it before their eyes. Then beginning to 
speak, I told them that we were not the masters of 
life and death ; that he whose image they saw was 
Son of the Almighty, — that he is good, that he loved 
men, that the demons who do so much harm were 
only his slaves. [326 i.e., 322] I said that when we 
offended this great Captain, son of God, either by 
stealing, or refusing to believe in and obey him, that 
he permitted the devils to afflict us ; but that, when 
we had recourse to him, asking pardon for our offenses 
and promising to be faithful to him, he cured us of 
our ills and bound the hands of the evil spirits, so 
that they could no longer injure us. That, if they 
wished to do the same, I would give this beautiful 
picture to Pierre Tsiouendaentaha, our Neophyte, to 
take it into their country, so they could pray this 
great Captain to have pity on them. They replied 
that Echon — their name for Father Brebeuf — told 


252 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

^ Pierre TJioiiedaetaha, noftre Neophyte, pour le por- 
ter en leur pais, afin de prier ce grand Capitaine, 
d'anoir pitie d'eux. lis refpondirent que Echon, c'eft 
le nom du Pere Brebeuf , leur difoit la mefme chofe 
que ie leur venois d'enfeigner, qu'ils parleroiet de 
cet affaire k leurs vieillars, & que tous enfeble fe- 
roient ce que nous leur anions recommande. La deffus 
noftre nouueau (Threflien, prit le Tableau, & fe mit 
k prefcher. II y a long-temps qu'aucune predication 
ne ma tant touche, encor que ie ne I'entendiffe que 
par la bouche du Sieur Nicolet, qui fait volontiers 
feruir fa langue ^ la Religion de lefus Chrift. Pour- 
quoy difoit ce bon Neophyte, ne voulez-vous pas 
croire ce qu'on vous enf eigne, efl il manuals? faites 
en r experience, efprouuez la verite des paroles 
[327 i.e., 323] qu'on vous dit, aiez recours "k celuy qui 
pent tout, cela efl de valeur. Pour moy, ie ne f9ay 
pas encor grande chofe, ie m'efforce & preds peine 
d'efcouter, & d'apprendre; puis en les tangant, il les 
reprenoit doucement de ce qu'es affemblees, oii fe 
trouuoient nos Peres, la plus part s'en alloient, fi toft 
qu'on commacoit ^ parler de la foy. Ne vous I'ay-ie 
pas dit quelques-fois Ik hault, pourquoy fortez-vous 
quand on vous veut inftruire. Cela eft veritable dit 
le Sieur Nicolet, i'ay veu quelquefois que tout le 
monde eftant attentif a efcouter Echon, fi quelqu'vn 
venoit inuiter I'affemblee au feftin, elle le quittoit Ik, 
au milieu de fon difcours. Les Hurons entendans 
cela, fe parlerent les vns aux autres, quelque temps, 
difans qu'il falloit prendre garde a ce qu'on leur 
difoit, pour en faire leur profit en leur pais. En fin 
noftre bon Chreftien defploiant le petit Tableau ou 
Saluator, que ie luy auois donne, s'efcria, fi nous 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 253 

them the same thing that I had just said ; that they 
would talk over this matter with their old men, and 
that they would all together do what we had recom- 
mended. Thereupon our new Christian took the 
Picture and began to preach. It is a long time since 
any preaching has touched me so deeply, although I 
only heard it through the mouth of Sieur Nicolet, 
who cheerfully lends his tongue to the Religion of 
Jesus Christ. "Why," said this good Neophyte, 
' * will you not believe what is taught you ; is it bad ? 
Try it, test the truth of the words [327 i.e., 323] 
that have been said to you ; have recourse to him who 
can do all ; that is worth something. As for me, I 
do not yet know much ; I strive hard to listen and 
learn something." Then chiding them, he reproved 
them gently because in the assemblies, at which our 
Fathers were present, the greater part of them went 
away as soon as we began to speak of the faith. 
" Have I not asked you sometimes, up yonder, why 
you leave when they wish to instruct you ? " " That 
is true," said Sieur Nicolet, " I have sometimes seen 
them all listening very attentively to Echon; but, if 
some one came to invite the assembly to a feast, 
they left him there, in the middle of his discourse." 
When the Hurons heard this, they talked among 
themselves for some time, saying they must heed 
what was said to them, to profit by it in their own 
country. Finally our good Christian, displaying the 
little Picture or Salvator that I had given him, ex- 
claimed, " If we have to encounter any enemies on 
our return, let us raise this standard high and all 
cast our eyes upon it, and we shall be helped." The 
eyes can hardly refrain from tears when the ears hear 
these words coming from the mouth of a barbarian. 


254 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.12 

auons les ennemis k la rencontre en noflre retoiir, 
efleuons cet eftendart hault, iettons tons les yeux 
deffus, & nous ferons fecourus. Les yeux ont de la 
peine k fe tenir, quad les oreilles entendent ces pa- 
roles fortir de la bouche d'vn barbare, qui pent eftre 
k mange plus [328 i.e., 324] de vingt fois de la chair 
humaine, & maintenant prefche les loiianges du grand 
Dieu. Cela, dit, il me prefente le Tableau, me pri- 
ant de le bien enuelopper afin qu'il ne fe gaftaft point. 
Ce poinct eflant conclud, Monfieur de I'lfle en en- 
tame vn autre, exhortant ces peuples d'amener quel- 
ques families Huronnes, pour demeurer aupres des 
Frangois : les affeurant qu'on les fecoureroit, que nous 
leur donnerios des habits, & les aiderions k defricher, 
& faire baftir vne bonne maifon. II leur expliqua 
les raifons qui les pouuoient induire "k embrafler cet 
affaire, qu'ils n'executerot point fi toft: car les fem- 
mes ne fe ietteront pas aifement dans vn chemin, 
d'euiron deux a trois cens lieues, pour venir demeu- 
rer auec des eftrangers. II ne faut pas laiffer de 
battre & rebattre le mefme poinct, la perfeuerance 
I'emportera: & fi iamais on I'obtient, ce fera vn bien 
qui ne fe pent dire, pour le Chriftianifme. C'eft pour 
lors que fi on dreffe des Seminaires, ils feront remplis 
de petites Huronnes. Mais ^ propos, nous ne fifmes 
point mention du Seminaire de gar9ons, pource que 
nous anions peur qu'ils ne nous preffaffent d'en 
prendre plus que nous n'en pouuons entretenir. Seu- 
lement Monfieur de [329 i.e., 325] Tide print auecques 
foy vn ioli gar9on, qu'ils nous auoient donn6, le ca- 
reffant deuant eux, pour marque que les Capitaines 
cheriffoient ceux qu'on nous confioit. Voila vne 
efkrange prouidence du grand Dieu. Nous importu- 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 255 

who perhaps has eaten more [328 i.e., 324] than twen- 
ty times, of human flesh, and is now sounding the 
praises of the great God. Having said this, he handed 
me the Picture, with the request that I should wrap 
it well, lest it might be injured. 

This subject concluded, Monsieur del 'Isle broached 
another, exhorting these people to bring down some 
Huron families to live near the French, — assuring 
them that they would be assisted, that we would give 
them clothing, and would help them to clear the land 
and to build a good house. He pointed out to them 
the reasons which might influence them to embrace 
this scheme, which they will not carry out very soon ; 
for the women will not readily undertake a journey 
of from two to three hundred leagues, to come and 
live with foreigners. One must not cease to strike 
and strike again upon the same spot; perseverance 
will prevail ; and if ever this is accomplished, it will 
be an inestimable benefit to Christianity. It is then 
that, if Seminaries are erected, they will be filled 
with little Huron girls. But, by the way, we made 
no mention of the Seminary for boys, because we 
were afraid they would urge us to take more of them 
than we could accommodate. Only Monsieur de 
[329 i.e., 325] risle took with him a pretty little boy, 
whom they had given us, caressing him in their pres- 
ence, as an evidence that the Captains cherished those 
who were confided to us. Behold a strange provi- 
dence of the great God. We importuned heaven and 
earth to get these children; everything seemed to 
point to the overthrow of the Seminary, we were 
momentarily expecting nothing less than its ruin; 
and yet we are obliged to be silent for fear of being 
urged to take some of them. The business relating 


266 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

nions le ciel & la terre, pour auoir ces enfans, tout 
fembloit tendre a la deftruction du Seminaire, nous 
n'en attendions que la ruine a tous momens, & nous 
fommes contrains de nous taire, de peur d'eftre preffez 
d'en prendre. Les affaires du Chriftianifme eftans 
conclues on en vint aux prefens. 

Monfieur le Cheualier fit dire k ces peuples, qu'il 
leur prefentoit vn baril de haches, & de fers de flef- 
ches. Partie pour repouffer doucement leurs canots 
en leur pais; partie pour les attirer vers nous I'an- 
n^e prochaine. C'eft la couftume des Sauuages de 
fe feruir de femblables metaphores. II fit venir en 
fuitte vn autre prefent d'vne belle chaudiere, de 
quelques haches, & de quelques fers de flefches, qu'il 
offrit aux habitans d'OJfofan^, pource qu'ils auoient 
receu nos Peres, & nos Franyois en leur bourgade, 
leur aiant fait vne belle cabane. C'eft vne riche 
prudence de ces Meflieurs, d'appliquer pour la Reli- 
gion, cequine s'eft donn6 quafi iufquesa [330 i.e., 326] 
prefent, que par police. II ne coufte rien d'offrir 
auec vne faincte intention, ce qui d'ailleurs doit eftre 
donn6, pour entretenir Tamitie de ces peuples. C'eft 
I'vne des belles induftries, de Monfieur le Cheuallier 
de Montmagni, & de Monfieur de I'lfle, fon Lieute- 
nant. Les prefens faits, Monfieur de I'lfle fe tourne 
vers noftre Neophyte, & luy dit : Mon frere ie ne t'ay 
rien donn6, cependant nous ne fommes plus qu'vne 
mefme chofe, car tu es Chreftien, & enfant de Dieu, 
aufli bien que moy. Viens moy voir en particulier, 
ie te veux parler ; il ne manqua pas de luy f aire vne 
belle gracieufet6, & nous aufli de noftre coft^, en tef- 
moignage de 1' amour que nous portons "k ceux qui 
regoiuent noftre creance. La conclufion du confeil, 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 257 

to Christianity being concluded, we came to the 
presents. 

Monsieur the Chevalier had these people told that 
he presented them a barrel of hatchets and of iron 
arrow-heads. Part of this was to waft their canoes 
gently homewards, part to draw them to us next 
year. The Savages are wont to use such metaphors. 
Then he had them bring another present consisting 
of a fine kettle, some hatchets, and some iron arrow- 
heads, which he offered to the inhabitants of Osso- 
san^, because they had received our Fathers and our 
French in their village, having built them a fine 
cabin. It is rare prudence in these Gentlemen to 
ascribe to Religion what has been given, up to 
[330 i.e., 326] the present, almost entirely through pol- 
icy. It costs nothing to offer with a holy intention that 
which must be given for another reason, in order to 
retain the friendship of these peoples. It is one of 
the fine expedients of Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagni and of Monsieur de I'lsle, his Lieutenant. 
The presents disposed of. Monsieur de I'lsle turned 
to our Neophyte and said to him, " My brother, I 
have given thee nothing; nevertheless, we are but 
one and the same thing, for thou art a Christian and 
a child of God, and so am I. Come and see me pri- 
vately, for I wish to speak with thee." He did not 
fail to make him a fine present, nor did we on our 
side, as an evidence of the love that we bear to those 
who accept our belief. The conclusion of the coun- 
cil was that, as we had caused these good people to 
wait, and as they were short of food, Monsieur de 
risle had them given several barrels of peas to sup- 
ply them on the way, — one being given in considera- 
tion of the new Christian. The Captains, one after 


258 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

f ut que comme on auoit fait retarder ces bonnes gens, 
lesquels manquoient de viures. Monfieur de I'lfle 
leur fit donner quelques barils de pois, pour leur pro- 
uifio en chemin, en appliquant vn en confideration 
du nouueau Chreflien. Les Capitaines les vns apres 
les autres, firent de grands remerciemens. L'vn di- 
foit : L'llle, tu fais comme il faut faire ; c'eft ainfi que 
les freres fe fecourent dans leurs befoins. L'autre 
affeuroit que tout leur pais alloit eftre rempli de la 
renomm^e du [331 i.e., 327] Capitaines des Frangois, 
& de fa liberalite. II y en eut vn qui s'efcria : L'Ifle, 
ie te remercie, ie remercie les veftus de noir, ie 
remercie Ie Truchement qui nous parle, ie remercie 
toute la ieunefCe qui efl ^ tes cofkez : tout noflre pais 
vous remercie. Et Ik deffus tons les autres firent 
refonner, en figne d' approbation, leur ho, ho, ho, ho, 
& puis chacun fe defpartit. Remarquez la prompti- 
tude de ces nations en leurs affaires. Nous arri- 
uafmes Ie Samedi k la nuict, & Ie Mardi d'apres, tout 
cecy fut conclud & termine. 

Ie me fuis oublie de dire, que Monfieur de I'lfle re- 
commanda, dans ces confeils, tres-efficacement, tons 
nos Fran9ois, & nos Peres qui font en ces contrees 
fort efloignees, aduertiffant ces peuples de bien predre 
garde a eux, de ne point perdre leur pais, que tous 
les Capitaines Fran§ois, nous tenoient fort chers, que 
c'eftoit nous qui inflruifions les plus grands, qu'ils 
fgauoient bien que nous n'allions point en leur pais 
par interefl temporel, ce qu'ils aduouerent publique- 
ment. Bref ie ne fgaurois fouhaitter d'auantage, que 
fit ce braue Gentil-homme, pour Ie bien de cette 
Eglife naiffante, & pour tefmoigner de I'amour au 
nouueau Chreftien, qui fe trouua parmi ces barbares. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 259 

the other, expressed their thanks profusely. One 
said, " L'Isle, thou doest what ought to be done; it 
is thus brothers succor each other in their needs. " 
The other asserted that all their country would be 
filled with the renown of the [331 i.e., 327] Captain 
of the French, and of his liberality. There was one 
of them who exclaimed, " L'Isle, I thank thee, I 
thank the black robes, I thank the Interpreter who 
speaks to us, I thank all the young men who are thy 
retinue; all our country thanks you." And there- 
upon all the others, as a sign of their approval, 
shouted their " ho, ho, ho, ho," and then each one 
departed. Observe the promptness of these nations 
in their business. We arrived Saturday night, and, 
the Tuesday after, all this was decided and finished, 
I forgot to say that Monsieur de I'lsle very effect- 
ively commended, in these councils, all our French 
and our Fathers who are in those far distant lands, 
warning these people to heed them well, and not to 
undo their own country. He said that all the French 
Captains esteemed us highly, that it was we who 
instructed people of the highest rank; and that they 
themselves knew well we did not go into their coun- 
try for worldly interests, which they had publicly 
admitted. In short, I could not have wished more 
than this gallant Gentleman did for the welfare of 
this infant Church, and to prove his love for the new 
Christian who was present among these barbarians. 
[332 i.e., 328] No one can say that this good Neo- 
phyte has enrolled himself under the standard of 
Jesus Christ out of worldly considerations. Although 
the Savages are pertinacious beggars, even to the 
last degree, yet he has never asked, nor showed any 
inclination to get, anything from us. He came to 


260 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 12 

[332 i.e., 328] Perfonne ne fgauroit dire, que ce bon 
Neophyte, fe foit range fous les eftendards de lefus- 
Chrift, pour quelque confideration humaine. Quoy 
que les Sauuages foient importuns k demander, iuf- 
ques au dernier poinct, iamais il ne nous a demande, 
ny monftr6 inclination d'auoir de nous aucune chofe, 
il venoit h. la Meffe, & a Vefpre, il frequentoit noftre 
Chappelle pour prier Dieu, & n'euft pas mis le pied 
dans noftre maifon, fi on ne I'eufl inuite, contre la 
couflume de fes compatriotes, qui s'ingeroient ^ tous 
momens, & demandoient, qui vne chofe, qui I'autre. 
Nous I'auons laiffe long-temps, fans luy doner mefme 
k manger, ny fans le beaucoup careller, il ne s'efl 
point venu prefenter, demeurant en paix, dans vne 
grande modeftie, qui a raui noftre cceur ; auffi a-il dit 
fouuent au P. Brebeuf, ie me fuis fait Chreftien, non 
pour le corps, mais pour I'ame. II s'eft confeffe & 
communie, deuant que de partir de fon pais auec vne 
fmguliere confolation de nos Peres, il faut que ie con- 
feffe ingenuement a V. R. que ie ne m'attendois pas 
de voir en toute ma vie, en vn Sauuage, ce que ie 
penfe auoir veu & reffenti en celuy-cy. II y a vne 
certaine modeftie, qui prouient de I'efprit interieur, 
il me femble que ie la sentois [333 i.e., 329] en cet 
homme quand il s'approchoit de moy. I'ay actuelle- 
ment confidere les autres Sauuages, pour voir fi ie 
pouuois remarquer vne mefme fimplicit6 colobine que 
ie voiois en celui-ci, ie n'en ay point veu; Ie m'efton- 
nois de ce qu'on I'auoit admis h la (Communion apres 
fon baptefme, mon eftonnement s'eft change en vn 
autre quand ie I'ai veu & pratique. Dix perfonnes 
come celuy la mettroient le feu dans toutes les bour- 
gades des Hurons, aufquels ont peu defia dire par 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 261 

Mass and to Vespers, and frequented our Chapel to 
pray to God, and would not have set his foot in our 
house had he not been invited, — quite contrary to 
the custom of his countrymen, who were always 
meddling, and asking, now for one thing, now for 
another. We had neglected him for a long time, 
not even giving him anything to eat, or paying him 
much attention ; he did not come to see us, remain- 
ing quietly and modestly away, in a manner that de- 
lighted our hearts. Indeed, he often said to Father 
Brebeuf, " I became a Christian, not for the body, 
but for the soul." He confessed and took commun- 
ion before departing for his own country, giving our 
Fathers a singular consolation. I must frankly con- 
fess to Your Reverence that I did not expect to see, 
in all my life, in a Savage, what I think I have seen 
and experienced in this one. He possesses a certain 
modesty which emanates from the spirit within ; it 
seems to me that I felt it [333 i.e., 329] in this man 
when he approached me. I have now studied the 
other Savages, to see if I could observe the same 
dove-like simplicity in them that I saw in this one ; I 
have not found it. I was surprised that he had been 
admitted to the Communion after his baptism ; my 
astonishment changed to another kind when I had 
seen and conversed with him. Ten persons such as 
he would set on fire all the villages of the Hurons, 
to whom can already be said in advance, levate capita 
vestra, appropinquavit enini redemptio vestra. Amen. 

Meanwhile, I have observed that this contagion or 
Epidemic, which slaughters so many Hurons, has 
not been communicated to the French at the 3 Riv- 
ers, although they have had negotiations and inter- 
course with these people. I will relate in passing a 


262 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.12 

auance, leuate capita vejlra appropinquauit enim redevt- 
ptio vejira, Amen. 

Cependant i'ay remarque que cette contagion on 
Epidimie qui egorge tant de Hurons, ne s'eft point 
comuniquee aux Fran9ois aux 3. Riuieres quoy qu'ils 
aiet agi & couerfe auec ces peuples. le racompteray 
en paCfant vne chofe aflez gaie que le Pere Paul Ra- 
gueneau ma efcrit de fon voiage. Cbmme il gardoit 
vn perpetuel filence auec ces pauures barbares n'en- 
tendant pas leur langue, fa conuerfation eftoit ordi- 
nairement au Ciel parlant done quelquefois au Dieu 
du Ciel & pouffans de fon coeur quelques oraifons ja- 
culatoires, ces bonnes gens eftoient bien en peine de 
f§auoir ^ qui il adreffoit fa voix, ils fe mettoient aux 
aguets, les vns d'vn coft^, [334 i.e., 330] les autres 
de I'autre pour le defcouurir: & come ils n'apperce- 
uoient rie, ils redoubloiet leur diligence, changeans 
de place regardans qui d'vn cofte qui d'vn autre auec 
eflonemet. Le depart des vaiffeaux me prefle, mais 
deuant que de finir ie dirai ce que i'ai appris fraifche- 
ment de la mort du Pere Charles Turgis. 

II y a enuiron trois ans qu'il fuft enuoie auec le 
Pere du Marche aux ifles de Mishcou, pour affifter 
principalement les Frangois, qui y alloient eftablir 
vne demeure, & par occafion faire ce qui fe pourroit 
auec les Sauuages qui fi rencontreroient, lis y ont 
demeur6 enfemble enuiron vn an en affez bonne fan- 
te, au bout duquel les affaires de cette refidence aians 
oblige le Pere du March6 de prendre 1' occafion de 
quelque vailTeau qui alloit a Kebec, pour me commu- 
niquer quelque point d'importance, le Pere Turgis 
demeura feul. Depuis aiant efte inuite a I'occafion 
d'autres vaiffeaux de fe retirer, n'i [sc. n'y] aiant guere 


1637] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, t6s7 263 

rather amusing thing that Father Paul Ragueneau 
wrote me on his voyage. As he had to observe a 
perpetual silence with these poor barbarians, not 
understanding their language, his conversation was 
usually addressed to Heaven. Now as he was some- 
times speaking to the God of Heaven, and uttering 
from his heart some ejaculatory prayers, these simple 
people were very anxious to know to whom he was 
addressing his speech ; they set themselves to watch, 
some on one side, [3341.^,330] some on another, 
to discover who it was, and when they perceived 
nothing, they redoubled their watchfulness, changing 
their positions, and looking now here, now there, 
in amazement. The departure of the ships hurries 
me, but before finishing I will tell what I have 
learned recently of the death of Father Charles 
Turgis.^ 

It is about three years since he was sent with Fa- 
ther du Marche to the islands of Miskcou, chiefly to 
minister to the French who were going there to es- 
tablish a residence, and incidentally to do what they 
could with the Savages they happened to meet. They 
lived there together about a year in fairly good health, 
at the end of which — the affairs of this residence 
having obliged Father du Marche to avail himself of 
a ship that was going to Kebec, to communicate to 
me some matters of importance, — Father Turgis re- 
mained alone. Afterwards, having been invited, an 
opportunity being given by other ships, to withdraw 
thence, as there was little probability of the return 
of his companion, or the coming of some one in his 
place, — I had in fact sent one from Kebec, but he 
could not land at Miskcou on account of the contrary 
winds which prevailed at that time, — and as, be- 


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.12 

d'apparence du retour de fon compagnon, ou de quel- 
que autre en fa place; lequel en effect, i'enuoiai de 
Kebec mais il ne pent aborder ^ Mishcou ^ raifon des 
vents contraires qui regnoient en ce temps; & que 
d'ailleurs il y auoit beaucoupde fujet de [335 i.e., 331] 
craindre la quelque difgrace de maladie ou mifere, 
ou quelque irruption de Sauuages; il refpondit cou- 
rageufement qu'il ne pouuoit mourir en lieu plus 
auantageus, qu'en celuy ou I'obei'ffance 1' auoit mis, 
& en la Croix que la paternelle bonte & prouidence 
de Dieu luy auoit choilie; outre que la charite I'obli- 
geoit de ne point quitter ceux, qui par fon depart 
demeureroient abandonnes de tout fecours fpirituel. 
II femble que cette action ait mis le Ciel en ialoufie 
contre la terre de polleder vn fi bon courage, car la 
maladie du fcorbut, ordinaire en ces nouuelles habi- 
tations, s'eflant mife parmy ces nouueaux habitans, le 
Pere en fut atteint, & en fin abbatu le deuxiefme de 
Mars, & en mourut apres plulieurs autres le quatri- 
efme de May ; aiant eu parmy vne fi grade defolatio 
cette cofolation, que d'auoir prefque aflifte tous ceux 
qui moururent, fe faifant parler \sc. porter] au lict des 
malades felon le befoin qu'ils auoient de luy, & d'a- 
uoir difpose les autres fains & malades k fouffrir pa- 
tiemment tout ce que Dieu ordonneroit d'eux; il n'y 
en eut qu'vn qui mourut apres luy. Ce bon Pere en 
outre k eu cette confolation que de fe voir au moins 
en mourant, en quelque fajon femblable au grand 
Apostres des Indes [336 i.e., 332] du fiecle paffe fainct 
Fran9ois Xauier, ne pouuant en ce paffage eftre fe- 
couru & aflifte de perfonne pour le fpirituel, & fort 
peu pour le temporel. Cefl le premier de noftre 
{Jompagnie qui foit mort de maladies en ces terres. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 265 

sides, there was good reason to [335 i.e., 331] dread 
some misfortune from sickness or poverty, or some 
inroad of the Savages, he yet answered courageously 
that he could not die in a more favorable place than 
in that where obedience had placed him, and on the 
Cross which the paternal goodness and providence 
of God had chosen for him; besides, charity com- 
pelled him not to leave those who, through his de- 
parture, would be bereft of all spiritual aid. 

It seems that this act made Heaven jealous of earth 
to possess so courageous a soul, for the disease known 
as scurvy, common in these new settlements, spread 
among these new residents ; the Father was attacked 
by it, and was finally stricken down on the second 
day of March, — dying, after many others, on the 
fourth of May. He had, in the midst of so great a 
desolation, this comfort, that he had ministered to 
almost all those who died, having himself carried to 
the bedsides of the sick, according to the need they 
had of him ; and that he had prepared the others, sick 
or well, to suffer patiently all that God should ordain 
for them. There was only one of them who died 
after him. This good Father had, besides, the 
consolation of seeing himself, at least in dying, in 
some respects like the great Apostle of the Indies 
[336 i.e., 332] in the last century, saint Frangois 
Xavier, — since he was not able in this emergency to 
obtain relief and help from any one in spiritual mat- 
ters, and very little in temporal. He is the first one 
of our Society to die from disease in these lands. 
He was equally regretted by the French and by the 
Savages, who honored him and loved him tenderly. 

Although, in the two years or thereabout that this 
good Father was in this place, he had baptized only 


266 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.12 

II a eft6 efgalement regrete des Fran9ois & des Saii- 
uages, qui rhonoroient & aimoient tendrement. 

Quoy qu'en deux ans ou enuiron que ce bon Pere 
k eft6 en ce lieu, il n'ait baptist qu'vn ou deux petits 
enfans Sauuages, qui moururent incontinent apres le 
baptefme, toutesfois ce feul bien eftoit capable def- 
fuier tous fes traiiaux, & luy apportera eternellement 
vne recompence & vne confolation pour laquelle il ex- 
poferoit encore mille vies s'il eftoit en eftat de les 
donner. Dieu foit a iamais loiie de la fidelite & du 
courage qu'il a donne a ce fien feruiteur. le prie V. 
R. & tous nos Peres de fe fouuenir de luy deuant Dieu 
& ne point oublier nos pauures Sauuages. C'eft la 
requefte que luy en fait le moindre de fes enfans qui 
fe dira encor ce qu'il eft. 
Mon R. PERE. 

Voftre tres-humble & tres-obeiffant 
feruiteur en N. S. lefus Chrift. 

PAVL LE lEVNE. 

De Kebec ce ii. de Septembre. 1637. 


1637] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 267 

one or two little Savage children, who died immedi- 
ately after baptism, yet this good deed alone was 
capable of mitigating all his trials, and will bring 
him an eternal recompense and consolation for which 
he would expose a thousand more lives, if he had them 
to give. God be forever praised for the fidelity and 
courage that he granted this his servant. I pray 
Your Reverence and all our Fathers to remember 
him before God and not to forget our poor Savages. 
This is the request made to you by the least of your 
children, who will again sign himself, what he is, 
My REVEREND FATHER, 

Your very humble and very obedient 
servant in Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
PAUL LE JEUNE. 
From Kebec, this nth of September, 1637. 


NOTES TO VOL. XII 


(Figures in parentheses, folloiving number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 

1 (p. 25). — This remedy for dysentery is apparently the same as 
that prescribed to Cartier by the ruler of Hochelaga, for the plague 
of scurvy, — see Brief R^cit (Tross ed., 1863), fol. 38: "Then Dom 
Agaya sent two women in search of it ; they brought nine or ten 
boughs thereof, and made us understand that we must strip off the 
bark and leaves of this tree, and boil the whole in water ; that then 
we must drink of this water for two days, and put the pulp upon the 
swollen and inflamed limbs ; and that this tree would cure all disease. 
They call this tree, in their language, Ameda. " 

Laverdiere, Ferland, and others regard this tree as probably 
epinette blanche, or hemlock spruce {Abies canadensis, Mich.), 
indigenous to Northeastern America. 

Josselyn also mentions {N. Eng. Rarities, p. 64) the medicinal 
properties of spruce: "The tops of green spruce-boughs, boiled 
in bear, and drunk, is assuredly one of the best remedies for the 
scurvy, restoring the infected party in a short time. They also 
make a lotion of some of the decoction; adding honey and al- 
lum. . . . The Indians break and heal their swellings and sores 
with it ; boyling the inner bark of young hemlock very well ; then 
knocking of it betwixt two stones to a playster ; and, annointing or 
soaking it in soyls' oil, they apply it to the sore. It will break a 
sore swelling speedily. ' * 

2 (p. 27). — The symbolization of lightning by the serpent, occa- 
sioned by obvious resemblances, — in sinuous motion, celerity of 
action, and fatal stroke, — is as old and as extensive as the human 
race ; to it is due, in the opinion of many writers, the genesis of the 
Old-World legends of Osiris, Indras, Perseus, and Beowulf. Huit- 
zipochtli, the war god of the Aztecs, was called "the Hurler," as 
hurling the lightning serpent against his enemies ; and other Central 
American tribes worshiped Mixcoatl, the "cloud serpent," a per- 
sonification of the tornado; while the Ojibwas, the Illinois, and 
many other Northern tribes relate legends of the serpents (light- 
nmgs) that are the food of the "thunder-birds" — this last perhaps 
the most general of our aboriginal myths concerning the phenomena 


270 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES 

of the thunderstorm (vol. x., note 3). See Jones's Ojebway Indians 
(London, n.d.), pp. 85-87; and Dorman's Origin of Primitive 
Superstitions (Phila., 1881), pp. 271-276. In all these myths, the 
serpent is symbolical, in its turn, of the waters, and of the unceasing 
conflict of the elements. 

3 (P' 33). — Michtabouchiou: the same as Michabou or Manabozho 
(vol. v., note 41). Cf. Squier's " Manabozho and the Great Ser- 
pent," in Amer. Review, vol. ii. (N. Y., 1845), pp. 392-398; chapter 
on "Manabozho" in Emerson's Indian Myths (Boston, 1884), pp. 
336-371 ; and Hoffman's collection of Menomonee myths relating to 
this personage, in Bur. Ethnol. Rep., 1892-93, pp. 161-209. 

4 (p. 37)- — Other versions of this legend appear in the myths of 
various tribes. The Ojibwas relate that a boy, enraged because 
the heat of the sun had singed his birdskin coat, contrived a snare 
with which he caught the sun ' ' at the moment of its rising above the 
earth's disk;" the dormouse — "then the largest animal in the 
world" — set the sun free by cutting the snare with its teeth; but 
the sun's intense heat so burned the dormouse's body that it was 
reduced to its present small size. — Schoolcraft's Hiawatha (Phila., 
1856), pp. 239-242. 

The Menomonees have a similar tale, in which the cord is cut by 
a mouse {Bur. Ethnol. Rep., 1892-93, pp. 181, 182). 

An Omaha legend, secured by Dorsey, relates that the rabbit, 
vexed that his morning hunt was always anticipated by the Sun, 
resolved to catch the latter in a snare. Having done this, but 
obliged himself to cut the cord, the rabbit's hair between the shoul- 
ders was scorched yellow by the sun's heat, which mark is still 
visible. — Contributions to N. Amer. Ethnology (U. S. Geog. and 
Geol. Survey), vol. vi., pp. 14, 15. 

The story of Tchakabech's ascent to the sky suggests the nursery 
tale of "Jack and the Beanstalk." It is also akin to a tradition 
among the Minnetarees that in former times all the tribes of their 
stock lived underground, but that two boys among them climbed 
upward, by the roots of a great vine, to the surface of the earth ; 
finding there a rich and beautiful country, they returned below, and 
persuaded their people to migrate to this new land. — Jones's Tra- 
ditions of N. Amer. Indians (London, 1830), vol. i., pp. xix., 
201 - 209. 

Ojibwa and Menomonee legends of Manabush say that he caused 
the pine tree to grow to several times the original size, that he 
might rise above the earth {/our. Amer. Folk-Lore, vol. iv., pp. 
202, 212). 

5 (P- 73). — The notion of a turtle upholding the earth is promi- 
nent in the Huron story of creation as given by Br6beuf in Relation 


NOTES TO VOL. XII 271 

of 1636 (vol. X. of this series, p. 129). Hale relates a similar tale as 
given by an old Huron — "perhaps the most complete account of the 
Huron cosmogonic myth which has yet been obtained" {Jour. 
Amer. Folk- Lor e,vo\. i., pp. 178-183). Cf. Cusick's Ancient His- 
tory of the Six Nations (Lockport, N. Y., 1848), p. 13. 

The Delawares also fancied that ' ' an enormous tortoise carried 
the world on its back ; " see Loskiel's Mission among Indians of N. 
America (Latrobe's trans., London, 1794), part i, p. 30. Cf. Hecke- 
welder's "Indian Nations," in Amer. Philos. Soc. Trans. (Hist, 
and Lit. Com.), vol. i. (Phila., 1819), p. 246: "The Tortoise, or as 
it is commonly called, the Turtle tribe, among the Lenape, claims 
a superiority and ascendency over the others, because their relation, 
the great Tortoise, a fabled monster, the Atlas of their mythology, 
bears according to their traditions this great island on his back, 
and also because he is amphibious, and can live both on land and 
in the water, which neither of the heads of the other tribe[s] can 
do." Cf. also the "Walam Olum " of the Lenape, as given in 
Brinton's Lenape and their Legends (Phila., 1885), p. 179; he re- 
marks (p. 133), " The turtle or tortoise is everywhere in Algonkin 
pictography the symbol of the earth." Schoolcraft makes a similar 
statement. 

In some instances, the tortoise was also regarded as a creative 
agent. Bankers and Sluyter record — in their "Journal of a Voyage 
to New York, 1679-80" (translated by Murphy), in Long Island 
Histor. Soc. Memoirs, vol. i. (Brooklyn, 1867), p. 268 — the state- 
ments of Indians whom they met near the present Newark, N. J., 
ascribing such power to the turtle: " The true name by which they 
call this Supreme Being, the first and great beginning of all things, 
was Kickeron or Kickerom, who is the origin of all, who has not 
only once produced or made all things, but produces every 
day. ... I told him I had conversed with Jasper or Tantaqud, 
another old Indian, on the subject, from whence all things had 
come, and he had told me they came from a tortoise ; that this tor- 
toise had brought forth the world, or that all things had come from 
it ; that from the middle of the tortoise there had sprung up a tree, 
upon whose branches men had grown. That was true, he replied, 
but Kicheron \^sic'\ made the tortoise, and the tortoise had a power 
and a nature to produce all things, such as earth, trees, and the like, 
which God wished through it to produce, or have produced. ' ' 

Peter Jones (Ojebway Indians, p. 255) states that in 1837 he saw, 
near the N. E. shore of Lake Huron, an island on which there was 
a large rock shaped like a turtle, to which "the heathen Indians 
frequently offered their devotions and sacrifices;" and he found 
beneath its head several pieces of tobacco, evidently left there by 
the Indians as such offerings. 


272 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

6 (p. 97). — See sketch of Ragueneau in vol. ix., note 40. 

7 (p. 113). — Khiondaesahan (also spelled Ekhiondatsaan) : A 
large village on the trail to Teanaustaye (St. Joseph). As this name 
occurs in the Relations only in 1637, the village was probably 
removed elsewhere soon after that year. — A. F. Hunter. 

8 (p. 117). — See Le Jeune's description of the aboriginal process 
of fire-making (vol. vi., p. 217). The " metallic stones" were pieces 
of iron pyrites, used from the earliest times (and even now em- 
ployed by some Eskimo tribes) for this purpose — sometimes alone, 
but more often with flint. This primitive method was succeeded in 
the Iron Age by the flint and steel, which is still used in many parts 
of the world, and has but recently been superseded in civilized 
countries by the lucifer match (invented about 1830). The outfit of 
flint, steel, and tinder used by Europeans was early supplemented 
by matches (Fr. allumettes), — slightly-twisted hempen cords, or 
splinters of wood, tipped with sulphur. Such as these. Le Jeune 
refers to in the text. The tinder box of the Europeans was readily 
adopted by the American Indians, as they came into association 
with white men, and, among many tribes, soon superseded their 
own primitive methods. For detailed account of aboriginal appli- 
ances for fire-making, with many illustrations, see Hough's " Fire- 
Making Apparatus," in U. S. Nat. Mus. Rep.. 1887-88, pp. 531-587. 

9 (p. 127). — For sketches of Chastellain and Garnier, see vol. viii., 
notes 51, 52. 

10 (p. 133). — River of the Hiroquois: thus named by the French 
because it was the route used by their Iroquois enemies for hostile 
incursions; later, known as Richelieu River. Sauthier's map (en- 
graved by Faden, 1777) gives the name Richelieu only to that part 
of the river above Chambly; thence to St. Antome, he names the 
river Chambly ; and the rest of the stream, to its mouth, the Sorel. 
These latter names are those of officers under Marquis de Tracy, 
who by his orders erected forts on this river (August, 1664), — Pierre 
de Saurel (or Sorel), who built the fort of that name, at the mouth 
of the river, on the site of old Fort Richelieu; and Jacques de 
Chambly, who erected a fortification at the foot of the rapids, at the 
present village of Chambly. 

11 (p. 133). — This rapid was at first called simply " Grand Sault," 
the great rapid; but after 1611 it received the name Sault St. 
Louis — apparently in memory of a young Frenchman named Louis, 
who in that year was drowned while attempting to descend the 
rapids in a canoe. The name St. Louis is also applied to the lake 
above, formed by an expansion of the St. Lawrence; and, again, 
designates the seigniory lying on the southern shore, opposite the 
rapids, in which the old mission town, Caughnawaga, is situated. 


NOTES TO VOL. XII 278 


This estate was granted to the Jesuits, May 29, 1680, with two 
leagues frontage on the river ; it is now the property of the Caugh- 
nawaga Indians. 

The rapids are commonly known as the Lachine Rapids, and 
form a prominent feature in the scenery of that region. Navigation 
past them is rendered possible by the Lachine Canal, 8>^ miles 
long, extending from the town of Lachine (opposite Caughnawaga) 
to Montreal. The seigniory of that name was granted to La Salle 
(in the winter of 1667-68) by the Seminary of St. Sulpice, in honor 
of which he named it; but in 1669 the seigniory became known as 
Lachine, in derisive allusion to the expedition projected by La Salle 
to discover a route to China via the river (Faillon's Col. Fran., 
vol. iii., pp. 297, 298). The settlement founded by La Salle at 
Lachine was destroyed (Aug. 5, 1689) by the Iroquois, and 200 
persons cruelly massacred ; while many others were made captives, 
and either enslaved or tortured to death. 

12 (p. 133).— Reference is here made to the lands granted to Pierre 
Le Gardeur (vol. viii., note 57). 

13 (p. 133).— Montreal Island — the site of ancient Hochelaga, and 
of the modern city of Montreal — is 32 miles long by \oyi miles wide, 
and forms the counties of Hochelaga and Jacques Cartier. The 
island was granted, soon after the restitution of New France by the 
English, to Jean de Lauson (vol. vi., note 2); but in 1640 he trans- 
ferred the greater part of it to Dauversiere and his associates of the 
Society of Notre Dame de Montreal. This association afterwards 
became so reduced in membership and in funds that in 1663 it sur- 
rendered the Montreal colony, with all its possessions and rights, to 
the Seminary of St. Sulpice (conducted by the Society of that name 
established in 1641 in France), which for six years had maintained 
an ecclesiastical establishment in Montreal, and had done much to 
aid the colony. The Sulpitians thus became the seigniorial proprie- 
tors of the island, which they held until the abolition of feudal ten- 
ure in 1854,— retaining, however, up to the present time a consid- 
erable part of their valuable domain. A full account of the Montreal 
colony is given by Faillon in his Col. Fran. For mention of the 
early aboriginal inhabitants of Montreal, see vol. v., note 52. 

14 (p. 135).— Concerning Isle J^sus, see vol. ix., note 42. 

15 (P- 135).— This river was named Pontgrave by Champlain 
(1609), in honor of his friend; the name St. Jean was given to it in 
memory of Nicolet (vol. viii., note 29). 

16 (p. 137). — Concerning Beaupr6, see vol. xi., note 13. 

17 (p. 157). — Regarding Lake Champlain, see vol. i., note 67. 

18 (p. 171).— See sketch of the Attikamegues in vol. ix., note 20. 

19 (p. 175). — In a Chapel: a nautical phrase, thus defined in 


274 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


Supplement au Dictionnaire de I' Acadhnie (Paris, 1825): "A 
vessel enters chapel when a wrong manoeuvre or other cause brings 
it into danger." Littre describes it as "putting about, head to 
wind, despite oneself, and through the force of winds or of currents. ' ' 

20 (p. 177).— For sketch of Jacques Hertel, see vol. ix., note 3. 

21 (p. 181).— Concerning the Iroquet tribe, see vol. v., note 52. 

22 (p. \%-])-— Abenaquiois (Abnaki, Wapanachki, or Wabena- 
kies): a group of Algonkin tribes in New Brunswick and Maine. 
Ferland says {Cours d'Hzstotre, vol. i., p. 66): " Later, the Souri- 
quois, the Abenaquis, and the Malecites became allies, in order to 
furnish mutual aid to one another in their wars against the English 
colonies. They have sometimes been confounded, by English and 
French writers, under the collective name of Abenaqui tribes." 
Laverdiere {Champlam, p. 73) mentions "the Etchemins, after- 
ward called Malecites;" and says that " the name Ouabenakiouek 
was given by the Montagnais to the Etchemins, especially to the 
savages of the Kennebec." Champlain, in his earlier voyages, 
visited the last-named tribe; and he relates {ut supra, pp. 1180, 
1 1 82, 12 16) that in 1629 they sought his assistance against the Iro- 
quois, whereupon he sent one of his men to visit their country. This 
envoy brought back a favorable report of the Kennebec region, and 
of the friendly disposition of its people. 

For sketch of the Jesuit mission among these tribes, see Introduc- 
tion to this series, vol. i., pp, 13-15; for details of their history and 
present condition, see Vetromile's Abnakis and their History (New 
York, 1866), and Maurault's Hist, des Abenakis. 

The Abenakis of Maine are now principally represented by two 
small tribes in that State, the Penobscot and Passamaquoddy (vol. 
ii., note 6). living on the rivers of those names; and by a small 
remnant in Canada, at Becancour, and at St. Fran§ois-du-Lac 
(Yamaska county). 

23 (p. 193).— Claude Pijart, brother of Pierre (vol. viii., note 8), 
was born in Paris, Sept. 10, 1600, and became a Jesuit novice Aug. 
7, 1 62 1. His studies were pursued in his native city; and he was 
an instructor in the colleges at Orleans (1624-28), Caen (1632-34), 
and Rouen (1634-36). In July, 1637, he came to Canada, where he 
labored three years at Quebec and Three Rivers, in that time be- 
coming proficient in the Algonkin dialect. Thus prepared, he be- 
gan, with Raymbault (vol. xi., note i6), the mission (1640) to the 
Nipissings and other Northern Algonkin tribes, to whom he minis- 
tered during the greater part of the following nine years, — jointly 
with Raymbault until the latter's death, then with Menard. Some 
intervals in this period were spent in the Huron mission,— upon 
the destruction of which, Pijart escaped, with others of the mission- 


NOTES TO VOL. XII 275 


aries, and later returned to Quebec. Soon after, he was assigned to 
the Jesuit residence at Montreal, and remained there (as superior, 
from 1653) until the arrival of the Sulpitians (August, 1657); lie was 
then placed in charge of the parish church at Quebec, in which 
capacity he is frequently mentioned in the>«r. des Jdsuites up to 
the close of that record (1668.) According to Sommervogel, Pijart 
died at Quebec, Nov. 16, 1680. 

24 (p. i95)._Cap a I'Arbre (the Pointe Sainte-Croix of Cham- 
plain) is now known as Point Platon (vol. ii., note 66). 

25 (p. ^^-^Y— Double: "A small copper coin, bearing on one side 
the image of the king, and on the other three fleurs-de-lis, which 
was worth the sixth part of a sou, or two deniers" (Littre). 

26 (p. 213).— Thierry Desdaraes, a naval captain, was one of De 
Caen's employees, as early as 1622 ; and it was his ship that brought 
to Canada, the following year, the Recollets Viel and Sagard (vol. 
iv., notes 25. 48). In 1628, he brought to Quebec news of the ap- 
proach of De Roquemont's squadron, and narrowly escaped cap- 
ture by Kirk. Desdames left Canada upon its conquest by the Eng- 
lish, but doubtless returned thither soon after its restitution to 
France, although the first mention we have seen of his name after 
that event is at this place in our text. From 1639 to 1646, Desdames 
was commandant at Miscou, and a warm friend of the Jesuit mission 
there; the Relation of 1643 mentions the generous aid given by 
him to the priest D'Olbeau in the latter's long and dangerous ill- 
ness. No further information regarding Desdames's. career is availa- 
ble. Dionne ("Miscou," in Can.-Frangats, vol. ii., p. 447) conjec- 
tures that "he may have remained as commandant in the Bay of 
Chaleurs until the arrival of Denys [1656-57?]-" 

27 (p 217).— For sketch of Giffard, see vol. vi., note 8. 

Guillaume Couillard came to Quebec in 1613, and was an em- 
ployee of the successive mercantile companies (vol. iv., note 21) 
until 1628 — sometimes as a carpenter, sometimes as a sailor; Cham- 
plain praises his energy and excellent disposition. He married (1621) 
Guillemette. the second daughter of Louis Hebert (vol. ii., note 80); 
and, upon the latter's death, his title of Sieur de I'Espinay and the 
cultivation of his land devolved upon Couillard (vol. vii., note 5). 
who remained at Quebec during the 'English occupancy. He had 
ten children; of these, Louise married Oliver le Tardif (vol. v., note 
49), and Marguerite, Jean Nicolet (vol. viii., note 29). Couillard 
died in March. 1663 ; his wife, in October, 1684. 

Louis Henri Pinguet (born in 1588), a native of Perche, France, 
came to Canada probably before 1637; he died in December, 1670. 
He had three children ; the daughter, Frangoise, married Pierre de 
Launay (vol. viii., fiote 69). 


276 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES 


28 (p. 221).— The Jesuit missions in Paraguay were an offshoot 
(1588) from those of Brazil — the latter founded in 1549, by Emma- 
nuel Nobrega and other priests, at San Salvador. Early in the 17th 
century, the Indian neophytes of the Paraguay missions were gath- 
ered by their Jesuit directors into villages (or "reductions "), form- 
ing what has frequently been styled, by historians of that order, 
"the Republic of Paraguay. " There the converts were instructed.' 
not only in religion, but in agriculture and various trades — spinning 
and weaving, building, carving, and the manufacture of firearms. 
Each village was governed by two of the priests; and the people 
owned, as common property, the products of their industry. These 
"reductions" attained great prosperity, until 1631-32, when they 
were so ravaged by heathen tribes of Brazil that they were aban- 
doned by the Christian natives, who descended the Parana and 
founded new colonies at the Grand Rapids of that river. Daurignac 
states that "in 1656 there were in Paraguay more than twenty 
towns wholly civilized, each reduction having a population of 5,000 
to 6,000; and numerous other towns were partly civilized." Their 
great increase in numbers was partly due to the fact that Fathers 
Valdivia and Anchieta had obtained from the king of Spain decrees 
that the baptized Indians should be exempt from slavery. In 1759, 
the Jesuits were expelled from Brazil and other Portuguese colonies'; 
and the communities they had founded soon lapsed into decay. Full 
accounts of these missions have been written by Charlevoix and 
Muratori. 

29 (p. 227).— The Long Sault of the Ottawa River, about 45 miles 
above Montreal, is over six miles in length. Navigation past these 
rapids is now secured by the Grenville Canal, excavated, in most of 
its length, from the solid rock. At the Pass of the Long Sault, on 
the western shore, occurred (1660) the heroic defense of an intrench- 
ment by Daulac des Ormeaux (more commonly known as " Dollard") 
and eighteen comrades, against 500 Iroquois,— the Frenchmen, by 
the sacrifice of their lives, saving Montreal from destruction' by 
these savages. See Parkman's vivid description of this episode, in 
Old Regime in Canada (Boston, 1875), pp. 72-82. 

30 (p. 241).— The Society of Jesus won renown as a missionary 
order, from its very foundation (1534). Only seven years later, 
Francis Xavier was sent to India, devoting the rest of his life to 
missionary labors there and in Japan, and before his death (1552) 
converting thousands to the Christian faith. The Japan missions 
were prosperously continued by Xavier's successors, despite frequent 
and cruel persecutions; they baptized thousands of natives, includ- 
ing many princes and nobles, and erected numerous churches. In 
1587, an imperial edict was issued, banishing the Jesuits (who then 


NOTES TO VOL. XII 277 

numbered 125), and condemning their converts to exile or death; 
but this was afterward mitigated to the extent of forbidding them 
only public worship and teaching. Persecutions and martyrdoms 
soon followed ; and in 161 3 most of the missionaries, with many of 
their converts, were expelled from the empire. Those remaining 
met a martyr's fate, until, in 1634, no Jesuits were left in Japan. 
Nevertheless, priests of this and other orders again made various 
attempts to renew missions in Japan, but in vain ; they were put to 
death with cruel tortures, and at the capture of Ximabara (1638), 
after a six months' siege, the native Christians were massacred by 
thousands. By 1643, the Japanese mission was utterly destroyed, 
and definitely abandoned both by Jesuits and Franciscans (the lat- 
ter order having also maintained missions in that country since 
about 1590). 

31 (p. 247). — Oumastikoueian (named by the French, Le Crapaud, 
"the Toad"): an Algonkin chief of the same name as the one 
mentioned by Le Jeune in 1635-36 as spreading mischievous re- 
ports among the tribes, and finally meeting a violent death (vol. 
viii., p. 59; vol. ix., p. 95). The savage here mentioned was, later, 
baptized, but afterward returned to heathenism {Relation of 1641). 

32 (p. 247). — Porcelain, or wampum (vol. viii., note 70), had an 
extensive use among the Indians in ceremonial intercourse, either 
inter-tribal or with the Europeans. " When ambassadors set out 
for another nation, they bore before them the calumet, or pipe of 
peace, in evidence of their pacific purpose and to secure protection 
for their journey, and also belts of wampum to be submitted in con- 
firmation of their proposals, or, if their people had been worsted in 
battle, to atone for injuries and purchase peace." — Woodward's 

Wampum (Albany, 1S78), p. 25. See Brebeuf's mention of his 
present of wampum to the Huron council, ' ' to smooth the difficulties 
of the road to Paradise," and of a similar gift made by the Island 
tribe to the Hurons, to incite the latter to war (vol. x., pp. 29, 75). 

33 (p. 263). — See sketch of Turgis in vol. viii., note 18. 


h 




%jm 



V ^ v~ - 




