     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Lives of the Eastern Saints
      Creator(s): John of Ephesus (c. 507-588 CE)
                  Brooks, E. W. (Editor/Translator)
     Print Basis: Patrologia Orientalis, vols. 17-19 (Paris: Firmin-Didot,
                  1923-1926). Syriac text with facing English translation;
                  this OCR carries the English and apparatus, run together
                  across all three parts as issued in one download.
          Rights: Public Domain
    Rights Basis: Published 1923-1926; long out of US copyright (>95 years,
                  rolling; 1930 as of 2026). Robert Bedrosian's compiled
                  Internet Archive upload; the underlying Brooks/PO edition
                  itself is the public-domain work, independent of the
                  compiler.
Source Collection: Internet Archive (archive.org), identifier john-of-ephesus-lives-eastern-saints
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE ON THIS TRANSCRIPTION: the source is a raw OCR (djvu) text layer from
a scanned physical volume, not a clean digital edition. Runs of 2+ spaces
between words (a systematic OCR-layout artifact of the scan, not a feature
of the printed text) have been collapsed to single spaces throughout; no
word, spelling, or punctuation has been altered. OCR misreads may remain
uncorrected elsewhere in the file; any passage this build quotes verbatim
has been checked by eye against this file directly, not assumed correct
from the OCR alone.

R. GRAFFIN — F. NAU 


PATROLOGIA ORIENTALIS 


TOMUS DECIMUS SEPTIMUS 


Ie See W. BROOKS. 
Joux or Erursus, Lives of the Eastern Saints (V). 
ihe =e. Ee. (PETTY: 
DOCUMENTS RELATIFS AU CONCILE DE FLORENCE. Documents 
vir-xxiv : OEueres anticonettiatres de Mare d'Éphése. 
HI. — RENE BASSET. 
LE SYNANAIRE ARABE JACOBITE, V. Les mots de Buounah, 
Abb, Mésoré et jours complémentaires. 
IV. — S. GRÉBAUT. 


Les MIRACLES DE Jésus. Miracles xxi-NNX. 





PARIS 
FIRMIN-DIDOT ET Cc, IMPRIMEURS-EDITEURS 
LIBRAIRIE DE PARIS, 56, RUE JACOB 


11:23 


JOHN OF EPHESUS 
LIVES OF THE EASTERN SAINTS 
BY 


E. W. BROOKS 


PATR. OR. T. XM. - bed. 


Nihil obstat. 
Parisiis, die 4° maii 1923. 


R. GRAFFIN. 


PERMIS DIMPRIMER 


Paris, le 4°% mai 1923. 


J. LAPALME, 


v. gén. 


INTRODUCTION 


Until £853 the name of John of Ephesus was hardly known exeept from 
scattered references in extracts from the so-called. Dionysius and other 
authors published by Assemani; but in that year the 3" part of his Eccle- 
siastieal History was published at Oxford by W. Cureton, and this was soon 
followed by J. P. N. Land's pamphlet Johannes Bischof v. Ephesos der (°° syr- 
ischer. Kirchenhistoriker (Leiden, 1856). In 1860 an English translation of 
Cureton's text was published at Oxford by R. Payne Smith, and in 1862 a 
German translation by J. M. Schónfelder at Munich. Finally the Commentarii 
de Beatis Orientalibus and fragments of the 2™ part of the Ecclesiastical 
History appeared in tom. 11 of Land's Anecdota Syriaca at Leiden in 1868, 
and a Latin translation of the same by van Douwen and Land was published 
at Amsterdam in 1889. Since that time however two works have appeared 
which are invaluable for the purpose of enabling us to supplement John's 
published works and correct his text, M. Nau's analysis of the 2"? part of 
the history from the so-called Dionysius in R. O.C., I, p. 495, (1897), and 
the first two volumes of M. Chabot's edition of Michael the Syrian (Paris, 
1899, 1901, '. Other studies of our author’ lave been published by Land’, 
II. G. Kleyn?, and L. Duchesne ‘; but all these have now been thrown iuto 
the shade by the great work of A. Dvakonov, loann Efesskiy (Petrograd, 1908), 
in which 402 pages are occupied by a critical account of Jolin's life and 
works, and full use is made of the new information derived from * Dionysius’ 
and Miehael. In consequence of John's careless methods of writing the 
chronology of his life and of the facts which he records appeared to be 
an almost insoluble puzzle; and it is not the least of Dyakonov's many merits 


1. Some fragments are also preserved by Elijah of Nisibis (€. S. C. 0, 
tom. VII, VII). — 2. De gedenkschriften v. een Monoph. uit de 6° ecuw K. Ak. v. 
Wetenschappen, Verslagen en Mededeelingen; Afd. Letterkunde, 3% Reeks, Dl. v, 
p. 237. Amsterdam, 1888). — 3. Een blik of het godsdienstig teven in de oostersche Kerk 
d. 6** eeuw (Theol, Studien, VM, p. 229. Utrecht, 1889); Bijdrage tot de Kerkgeschie- 
deniss e. het Oosten gedurende d. 8" ceuw (Festbundel aan W. J. De Goeje. 
Leiden, 1891). — 4. Jean d'Asie. Mémoire tu devant les 5 Académies te 25 oct. L802 
(Journ. Officiel, n° 299, p. 5200). L take this ref. from Dyakonov, but cannot tind the 
work. 


INTRODUCTION. [iv] 


IV 
ation of the whole subject he has sueceeded in 
In a few places I am obliged to differ from 


that bv a laborious investig 


bringing order out of chaos. 
but in general my chronology is hased upon his work (] have not 


his name every time), 


him: 
thought it necessary to occupy space by mentioning 
and Fam thankful indeed to have bren spared the necessity of attempting 


what seemed to be an impossible task. 

John of Ephesus (so called from his titular bishoprie) was born about 507 
in the territory of Iugila in the territory afterwards known as Armenia lV‘, 
which for ecclesiastical purposes was united with the pu al Mesopo- 
tamia of which the capital was Amida, and at the age of 3 or 4 was placed 
in the neighhouring monastery of the stvlite Maro at Ara habtha?. At the 
after Maro's death, he moved to the monastery founded by John 
Amida®, the monks of which, having been expelled during the 
were then residing in the deserted monastery of Mama 


age of I5, 
Urtaya at 
perser ulion of 521, 
at Hazim, where they remained à years, i.e. till 3264 The archimandrite 
at this time was Sergius*, who from the dates given in ch. 58 seems to have 
Wied in 2235, so that the author's. migration may he placed im 522/37. 
After other wanderings the monks were at the end of 530 allowed by Jus- 
tinian to retuen to Amida. Iu the preceding vear John had been ordained 
deacon by the exiled bishop Jolm of Thella (Constantinas*. The quiet lile 
in the monastery seems however not to have suited him, and he frequently 
travelled about to visit other monasteries and celebrated hermits; in 432 
he accompanied. his friends Thomas and Stephen to Antioeh '^, and in 534 
undertook a journey to Egypt, and in 535 visited. Constantinople "t. At the 
end of 536 or beginning of 537 the patriareh Ephraim of Antioch followed up 
the final condemnation of the Monophysites at the synod of 536 by a * descent 
lo the East’, when the monks were again expelled ©. They then removed 
to hella d Thuthe in the region lying W. of Amida, and on being expelled 
thence eame to the monastery of the Paplars at the extreme limit. of the 
Amidene territory t. But there also they were not Tet alone, and this time 
they were dispersed: but in 43) the bulk of them, headed by the arcliman- 
drite Abba aud ineluding our author, came to the territory of Claudias on 


This was inhabitesd by a mixel Syrian and Armenian population: but Ingilene 
seems to have been predominantly Syrian, — 2. P. 6%. 3. PL 8%; see also eh. 5t. 
Reedy ae c xe CES aS n. Dyakonov, p. 38, n. 51. - 7. See p. 83, n. - & Ch. 35; 
Jacl. Hl, vin Do They were in exile 9 yes. and returned in Ind. IN Dyakonov, 
HISE che 255. xd Po 207, -- 01. P. 200. seen. 0,211. Dyakonov p. 47) 


pats the Eeyptian journey in 235, but himself notes that, since there is no mention of 
the ecelestastieal revolution that followed: the patriarch Timothy's death 7 Feb. 935; 


see Pyza Zeitschr, NAT. p. ^9, it must have been D that tine. - 12. Ch. 35, 58; 


, 


Land, p. 25; Zach Hi, x, 45 Yt Monoph, C. S. C. O., toin. NAN du, p. 65. 


ivo Ter Bon obo cob Sse tiene its 


Iv] INTRODUCTION. v 


the Euphrates‘. Thence in 540 John, perhaps following Abba, who led 
to Constantinople about this time, removed to the capital, and never per- 
manently returued. Jn 54l he made a seeond journey to Egypt, and in 
the autumn of the year he went to Palestine, where the plague was just 
beginning?, and thence to Mesopotamia, and returned through Svria to 
Constantinople. The date is fixed by the fact that he met Jolin of Hephaes- 
topolis performing ordinations im Asia Minor’, for in 542 James and Theo- 
dore were appointed for that purpose *. 

In 542 Johu was selected by the emperor for the task of converting the 
pagans in Asia on condition that he should convert them to the Chalee- 
donian faith*. Probably however he did not wholly neglect the oppor- 
tunity for propagating Monophysitism, for, when dames Burd‘ana passed 
through Asia Minor, he consecrated seven bishops. Among these was Jolin 
himself, who was made bishop of Ephesus, the metropolis of Asia ^, whenee 
he is often called ‘John of Asia’. The date of his consecration may be 
gathered from the fact that he was consecrated at almost the same time as 
Kashish of Chios, who, having begun travelling with John, continued to 
travel for 13 years, and then lived 5 years in Chios before being made 
bishop*. Now the travelling must apparently have begun between 540, 
when John left his monastery, and 542, when he undertook the mission to 
the pagans ^, and this brings the eonseeration to 558-60, and it should pro- 


9 


bably be fixed to 558 le was still a deacon in 541, for he ollictated as 
such at the ordinations performed by John of Hephaestopolis, and the date 
of his presbyterate is unknown. There is nothing to show that he ever 
resided at Ephesus; and after the death of the patriarch Theodosius in 566 
he became the acknowledged head of the Monophysites in Constantinople, 
where manuy Syrians had taken refuge under the protection of the empress 
Theodora and after her death (548) continued to enjoy the favour of dus- 
tinian, who encouraged them to come to the capital in order that he might 
bring pressure to bear upon them for the purpose of etfectiug a union‘ and 
leave the Monoplysites in Syria without leaders, In this object he failed; 
and, though his successor by using more violent measures effected a tem- 


porary union (571)'', it was repudiated by the eastern Monophysites, and 


1. Ch. 58; see n. ad loc. — 2. Land, p. Sto. - 3. Ch. 25. ^. Cli, 50 Dyakonov, 
p. 62). — 5. Mieh., p. 287; At. O. C., M, p. ^82. ashe Clie ota S. Dya- 


konov íp. 81, supposes it to have begun between 537 and 540 and fixes the consecra- 
tion to 555-8; but he does not note that J. states that the travelling was in the West. 
There is no evidence that he was in the West between 535 aud 540. - 9. See 
n. on ch. 56. It may be added that 540, when J. (and probably Kashish alse) left the 
monastery and went to CP., is the most likely time for the travelling to have begun. 
— 10. See eh. 25. — 11. H. E., M, 24. 


VI INFRODUCTION. [vi] 


-= 


the division between East and West eventually led to a sehism (575)' in 
which John is found on the opposite side to his hero James’. The union 
however did not last even in Constantinople, and the Monophysites suffered 
frequent perseeutions as long as John lived. — His history ends in 585, and 
he probably died in 586 after a year spent in prison at Chaleedon?; but with 
the last 18. years of his life, which fall after the completion of the Lives of 
the Eastern Saints, we have little concern. For the first two years of his 
residence in Constantinople (540-2) he lived in the house of the patrician 
Probus‘, nephew of the emperor Anastasius, and after this, when he was in 
the capital, his quarters were perhaps for a time in the palace of Hormisda, 
where many of the refugees were settled under the protection of Theodora”; 
but at some time between 542 and 546° the chamberlain Callinicus, who in 
565 held the ollice of praep. sacré cubiculi", gave him a villa at Sycae* (pro- 
bably that previously oecupied by Mare the solitary, who died in 542/3) 
which he turned into a monastery known as * the monastery of the Syrians’, 
of whieh he was areliimandrite '*, aml this was his head-quarters until in 
578 it was confiscated by the patriarch Eutyehius ''. 

His earliest work was a history of the perseeution, which was probably 
written in 537 5, and does not now exist. He also wrote, probably in 544, 
an account of the plague of 541/2 °; but it is not certam that this was ever 
published as an independent work. Both of these were doubtlessly incor- 


D 


porated in the Ecclesiastical. History, which extended from the tine of Julius 
Caesar to 595, and was divided into three parts '*, of which the first probably 
came down to the time of Theodosius H^, and the second to 571. Of part 1 
we have only citations in Michael; but of part 2 large fragments exist, and 
with the help of ‘Dionysius’ and Michael it may be possible to restore it 
almost entirely, Part 3 exists almost complete. Another work, now lost, 
was a defence addressed to the Eastern Synod in the matter of the union 


of 571 and written. not later than 375'°, There remains the most eharac- 


teristic of all his works, the Histories concerning the ways of life of the blessed 
Easterns, or, as it is more conveniently ealled, Lives of the Easteru Saints", 


Ic AI Lees Aa re his LM 3. Mich., p. 364 Dyakonov, p. 165 . — 4. P. 157. — 
5. Ch. ^7. 6. Fhe date is fixed by the fact that Leontius, who died before the Lives 
were written 260, lived 20 years in the monastery ieh. 39. Dyakonov p. 86 , appy. 
confusing him with Aaron feb. 38), makes him die in 560, and therefore throws haek 
tke origin of the monastery to Mare's lifetime, See n. at end of eli. 36. 7. Corippns, 
Laus dusting, i, 75 |f, — 8. Hf. FE. n, ^t. Vor the site see p. 208, n. d: = 9. Ch. 36 
see tit. , and, forthe name, p. 187. n. l. Io. P. 298, eh. 36. init, 328, 39, 40, 44, 51- 

We F1 0. 12. Sec eh. 35, 2 note; — 13. Land. p. 325. Dyakonov, p. 168). 

Vi. FH. Isa, 3i Mich, p. 377. - 15. It is most likely that he would end part 1 at 
the point where Socrates and Theodoret end, but the evidence adduced by Dyakonov 
p. 129 as to me unconvincing. Ws EC scu o5 DV T 19s = 17. Lives is 
the easiest designation: but many are only detached anecdotes. 





[v] INTRODUCTION. vi 


58 short lives or stories of hermits and others with whom the author was 
contemporary, after the style of Palladius and Theodoret, but containing 
more of the personal element, and including lives not only of obseure asceties 
but also of men who played a part in history! besides a few more general 
chapters on life in Monopliysite circles in his time?. This seems to have 
been written in 566%, and amplified in 567 *, and again in 568". We have 
one nis. only which contained the whole work : (1) Brit. Mns. Add. 14647 (A), 
written in 688 in a good estrangelo hand. This ms. consists of 20 quires 
of (normally) 10 leaves each, the I leaf being marked with the number of 
the quire in estrangelo, and the next four with the letters NCEE and ot; 
the last five leaves, being the other halves of the folded sheets, needed no 
numeration, There are lacunae alter f. 2, f, 3, and f. 5; and, since f. 3 has 
no numeral, and the 2" quire begins at f. 6, it follows that 3 leaves are lost 
after f. 2, and one each after f. 3 and f. 5. There is another lacuna after 
f. 13, and, the 3" quire beginning at f. [4, 2 leaves are lost. The 4^ quire 
begins at f. 22; and the 3" quire therefore contained 9 leaves only. Appa- 
rently the scribe, perhaps by inadvertence, left a leaf unused. The 5 quire 
begins at f. 33, the 3", 4", and 5" leaves are numbered v5, Y’ y", and the 
6^ quire begins at f. 44. The 5" quire therefore contained 11 leaves; and 
we may perhaps suppose that the scribe found the blank leaf in quire 3, 
and tacked it on here. The 10" quire is wholly missing, and the next leaf 
(f. 83) is the 2" leaf of the 11, so that Lt leaves are here lost. After f. 89 
is another lacuna; and, as the 12" quire begins at f. 90, 2 leaves are lost. In 
the [5" quire, which begins at f. 120, there is a lacuna after f. 121, f. 122 has 
no numeral, and there is another lacuna after f. 123, while f. 124 is the 2"! 
leaf of the 17" quire. lence in these two lacunae 7 leaves are lost, and the 
earlier must include at least 3. Part of the text here lost can however be 
supplied from D; and from this we know that it cannot have covered less 
than 5 leaves, so that 5 or 6 are lost after f. 121, and I or 2 after f. 123. 
The rest is complete, but our text ends at f. 136 r° a. The ms. is carefully 
written, and it is not often necessary to depart from its text. Ch. 37 has 
been omitted by the scribe; and, since the Simeon mentioned in the heading 
of ch. 41 does not appear in the narrative, the end of that chapter has perhaps 
also been omitted?. The missing portions are parts of ch. 1, the beginning 
of ch. 2, the end of ch. 3 and beginning of ch. 4, all ch. 26 except ; of a leaf 
at the beginning, all chs. 27-29, all ch. 30 except about + of a leaf at the 


1. Ch. 2, 10, 24, 25, 26, 48, 49, 50. — 2. Ch. 35, 47, 58, and the latter hall of eh. 20. 
— 3. Cl. 35, 47, 48, 49, 53-1035 v* a). — 4. Ch. 31 fin., 35 fin., 48, 5t init. (cf. ch. 
39), 58 tit. — 5. Ch. 58 fin. — 6. Probabty the 6' was numbered o, but the mark is 


illegible. — 7. Dyakonov, p. 363. 


vit INTRODUCTION. [vin] 


end, the end of ch. 33 and. beginning of ch. 35, all ch. 52 except part of 
the title, the beginning of eh. 53, and part of eh. 54. 

Several other mss. contain some of the lives or extracts from them. 
These are: (2) Brit. Mas. Add. 14650 (B), written in 875, whieh at f. 161 (T. 
comune: ehs. 3, 7. 13. Maloy 1S. 19, 36, and 40; whieh are also in A, in 
that order, the lives of Susan and Mary (chs. 27, 28 below), which are 
there missing, these being placed. after ch. 19, and ch. 11 and an extract 
from ch. 2, whieh stand between ehs. 36 and 40, the last three having 
probably been added as an after-thought. The writing is semicursive, and, 
probably beeanse it was fading, a later seribe wrote it over; but, since he 
did not ink over the letters, but spaced them afresh, he often made mistakes, 
as the remains of the original writing show, and in many places it is 
impossible to say whether the errors of the text are the fault of the original 
scribe or not. The text is of a paraphrastic charaeter, the order of words 
being changed, one word substituted for another, and words inserted 
to make the sense elearer. Almost any other ims. should therefore be 
preferred. to this; but for the life of Mary (ch. 28 below) it is the only 
authority. (3) Add. 12174 (Ci, written in 1197, a huge ms. in a large clear 
hand, whieh contains ch. 3 (£F 276 i. 64) Add. 7190 (D), of the 12" cent, 
whieh contains ch. 52 (for which it is the only authority) and extracts from 
chs. HE and 27 2333 rf). lu the heading of the extract from eh. 11 John’s 
name is not given. (5) Add. 14651 (E); a palimpsest written in 850, which 
contains ehs. 12 and 27 if 70 v^, 94 v*j in a text which, as we see [rom 
ch. 12, fers Tittle feom that of A. (6) Add. 14730 (F), ol the 12" cent., 
contains ch. 52 and the same extracts from chs. 11 and 27 which are pre- 
served in D, of whieh it seems to be a copy ad. as Wea ea 1 have not 
thonght it necessary to give its variants. (7) Add. 18814 (G), of the 9 eent., 
contains the life of Malkha (eh. 29 below), and, as this is missing in A, is 
Ihe only aathority Tor itd. Qa 348 Add. 14735 (11, ol the 12 cent., 
contains chs. 18 and 33 (6 071 v^; 157 v" and for the conclusion of ch. 33, 
where Ads defective, is the ouly authority. Hs text resembles that of B, 
as may be seen Irom a comparison of the two in ch. 18, aud the peculiarities 
of B may perhaps be derived from the original of B and 10; but for brevity s 
sake P refer in notes to ‘the seribe of B^ without meaning to assert that 
the reading is not older thau B. (0) Paris Syr. 234 (P), of the 183% cent., 
contained chs, 3 ul ^F 443 v" a, but the latter prt of ch. 4 is defec- 
tive. The text has been written over again by a 2°" hand, but is very 


ditlicult to read and seems fo have been most carelessly written. lt is 


FAL the end ofel 52 the word gas is added under the line in D £336 v and inserted 
in FÉ 21r, inthe wrong place as if it belonged to the line below. 


ix] INTRODUCTION. Ix 


in too bad a state to photograph, and I owe the text to a copy taken long 
ago by M. Nau which he kindly sent to me, and of which M* Gralliu and 
M. Nau obtained a new collation for me. For the beginning of ch. 4 P is 
the only authority. 

Land’s text does not claim to be a critical edition; but it was collated 
with the mss. by Wright, and is fairly accurate, though many errors (some 
no doubt misprints) remain. Hardly any suggestions lor emendation are 
made; but in v. Doawen and Land’s translation are 22 pages of emendations, 
many of which come from Professor Néldeke', A large number of these 
are actually in the ms., and of the others many are of great value for the 
restoration of the text. The parts defective in A Land supplied from other 
mss. in which they are found, but did not give variants where A exists, and, 
gave the text of one ms. without recording the 
variants of others, except ihat in the life of Susan (ch. 27 helow), which he 


where A does not exist, 
published from B, he gave a few of the variants of E. The existence of P 
was unknown to him?. Tence the beginning of ch. 4, whieh is in P only, 
is absent from his edition; and the life of Susan is given in the paraphrastie 
text of B instead of that of the more faithful E°. V. Douwen and Land's 
translation generally reproduces the original accurately ; but in some places 
they have misunderstood the meaning, aud, when there is a dilliculty, they 
give what they believe to be the sense intended without comment or emen- 
dation. Notes on the subject-matter are rare, and there is no attempt to 
elucidate the chronology. 

Michael (p. 377) mentions this work of John, and gives a list of the lives, 
stating the number as 54‘. This list, which is very corrupt, has been 
emended by M. Chabot, in whose traastation the number appears as ol, but 
Dyakonov (p. 369, n. 75) notes that no. 42 in the list is our eh. 52, and that 
le) is a corruption of waas, and is the title of the next life (our 
ch. 53), whieh brings the total to 52; and, if we suppose that the seribe 
omitted Elijah (ch. 30) because Elijah and Theodore (ch. 31) followed, and 
James and Theodore (ch. 50) because James (ch. 49) preceded, we have 54, 
the missing lives being chs. 10%, 42, and 43, and the life of Malkha (eh. 29 
below). Among the lives mentioned by Michael is one of Cosmo. which 
cannot be identified with any existing life*, and this life together with the 


1. I believe these are taken from a review, but ł have not the ref. to it, and give 
them from v. D. and L. with mention of Noldeke’s name. — 2. Land, p. 1x. 3. In this 
he departs from his principle of transcribing the oldest ms. (/d., p. &'. — ^. He implies 
that J. wrote more, but says that he himself transcribed or cpitomated these 54 in 
another work. — 5. Dyakonov notes that in Mich.’s no. 7, where only poeg is legible, we 
should not with M. Chabot supply ‘Simeon’ ch 10, since he is not ealled poog in the 
heading, but ‘Addai’ (ch. 8). — 6. M. Chabot identified it with ch. 52, because a C. is 
mentioned there; but see above. 


x INTRODUCTION. [x] 


lives of Susan, Mary, and Malkha must have occupied ehs. 27-29, which were 
in the lost [0™ quire of A, and ch. 37, which has been omitted by the scribe. 
Now in B, where the lives follow the order of A, the lives of Susan and Mary 
come in that order betwen our chs. 19 and 36, and, though for a reason 
stated below, this does not prove that Mary's life was not the omitted life, 
it does prove that Susan's was one of the missing chapters 27-29, and that it 
preceded Mary's. Further the life of Mary begins with the words « Neither 
then was the history of this holy Mary unworthy of admiration », from which 
it seems a fair inference that another woman's life preceded; and, if this is 
accepted, since there is no other woman's life till ch. 54, these two lives ' 
are either chs. 27, 28 or chs. 28, 29. Van Douwen and Land, knowing 
nothing of Michael, and therefore knowiug nothing of Cosmo, treated the 
omission of ch, 37 as merely an error of numeration, and made the lives of 
Susan, Mary, and Malkha chs. 27-29, without binding themselves to the 
correctness of the order. Tt is however more likely, as Dyakonov (p. 371) 
remarks, that the three women’s lives came together; and this is borne out 
by the following consideration, The great lacuna in A covered, as I have 
shown, Hf leaves; and an easy calculation will show that Susan's life would 
cover about 42 leaves, Mary's about 2 of a leaf, and Malkha’s about 3 leaves, 
or 81 leaves in all, so that for the whole of the life of Thomas of Damascus 


(ch, 26) except the first 2 ofa leaf, and the whole of the life of Elijah of Dara 


(ch, 30) except the last + of a leaf there remain 24 leaves, 1. e. for these two 
lives we have 34 leaves. Now Thomas was a distinguished bishop, and is 
inserted here after John of Thella and John of Hephaestopolis as having 
heen concerned with them in the work of ordaining Monophysile clergy ?, 
and their lives occupy 3+ and 4 leaves respectively. It seems unlikely then 
that the life of Thomas covered less than 3 leaves, and, even if we cut it 
down to 24, we have only = of a leaf for that of Elijah, at the end of which 
Jolu says « Out of his practices E have briefly set down these », which seems 
to imply a longer space than this ?. I eonelude therefore that a shorter life 
than Malkha’s stood in this place, and that can only have been Cosmo's *. 
Accordingly if is most probable that the life. omitted. by the serbe was 
Malkha’s, and that the lives of Susan, Mary, and Cosmo oecupied chs. 27-29. 
As to the order, we have already seen that Susan's preceded Mary's, and 
the order in Michael is a slight presumption that the three lives came in 


t. Se. Mary's and that whieh preceded, be it Susan's or Cosmo's. — 2. This is 
imphed by the opening words ofthe life. — 3. There are siinilar expressions at p. 35, 


p. 71. eh. 25 fin, eh. 36 fing, eh. 49 fin, all in lives of considerable length. — 
^. Dyakonov fp. 370) would identify the heroine of the life with the C. of ch. 13 and 
the C. of eh, 52: but itis strange that in that case John should in neither place have 
stated that he was writiag or had written her life. 


[xi] INTRODUCTION. xl 


the order given above’. If however we make Malkha's life ch. 37, two 
difficulties arise : (1) The work naturally divides itself into two portions, of 
which the earlier (chs. 1-35) deals with persons whom the author knew 
(most of them in the East) before 542, and the later with those whom he 
knew (mostly in Constantinople) after that tme’, whereas Maltkha died 
while he was at Amida’. (2) The life of Maret (ch, 36) deseribes the 
sepulchre built by Mare, and the title of ch. 38 runs « of ... Aaron the pres- 
byter and the rest of the presbyters and deacons who were afterwards laid 
in the sepulchre that was built by .. Mare », from whieh it clearly appears 
to be the immediate sequel of Mare's life. Hence we must suppose that 
the omission of a chapter has caused an error in the numeration through the 
serike numbering the chapters consecutively without looking at the ms. that 
he was copying. Dyakonov (p. 371) would make Malkha’s life ch. 36 and 
Mare's 37; but another «difficulty then arises, since the history of the Ami- 
dene convents during the persecution in ch. 35 seems to wind up the first 
part, just as the history of the monastery of Jolin Urtaya in ch. 58 winds 
up the second part. It is possible therefore that the error occurred earlier; 
but on the other hand the opening words of Malkha's life « Onee, when 
we were in our convent ...., before it was driven into banishment » seem 
to refer back to ch. 35, and look as if Matkha’s lile were added as an after- 
thought?; and it may be conjectured that the two parts were in two volumes, 
and that the leaves containing this life, being at the end of a volume, were 
lost^. Since however the order is uncerlain and of no importance, and 
Cosmo's life does not exist, I have preferred not to cause confusion by 
altering the numeration of v. Douwen and Land’, and have left Matkha’s 
life as ch. 20, 

Of the whole 58 lives then that of Cosmo is altogether lost, of the lives 
of Thomas of Damascus (26) and Elijah (30) we have only insignificant 


a 


1. Mich. by calling ch. 47 a life of Theodora reckons 7 women’s lives, which he puts 
together at the end as follows : (46) Theodora ‘ch. 47), (47) Susan, (48) Mary, (49) 
Cosmo, (50) Caesaria (ch. 54), (Si) Sosiana ‘ch. 55), (52) Mary and Euphemia (ch. 12). 
Possibly lie put Th. first as being empress, and meant to specify the others in order, 
but accidentally omitted the two sisters, and added them at the end. — 2. If my 
understanding of the difticult chronology of ch. 52 is right ‘see notes there), that chapter 
might appear to be an exception; but his informant, the cleric Jolin, lived with him in 
CP. for 8 years. We might also have expected to find ch. 25 in the 2" part, but it 


is the natural sequel of ch. 24. — 3. Dyakonov, p. 380. — 4. See p. 187, n. 1. — 5. A 
similar phrase occurs however in ch. 17 (p. 149) in a life which much resembles 
Malkha's. — 6. lt may be that tlie, ms. used by Mich. was lerived from A or its 


original, and therefore did not contain Malkha’s life, in which case the lives omitted 
by Mich. are reduced to 3. — 7. NXNNXVH' in the title of Mare's life in v. D. and L. isa 
misprint, as is clear from the list of contents and the note on p. 141. 


NT INTRODUCTION. [xi] 


fragments, and the lives of Habib (11. Z'ura (2), Simeon the seribe (34), 
Priscus (53), and Caesaria (54) are defective. The rest, excepi in so far 
as omissions may have been made by the seribe', and a few illegible words 
in ch. 47. is complete. 

besides Michael the work was also used by the so-called Dionysius, who 
transcribes p. 141, L. 22125. and under A. S. 836 gives the following list of 
men celebrated at the lime: « Abraham bishop of .Anzetene and Maro the 
stylite from the convent of fanem, Simeon the recluse and Sergius his 
disciple, Mare, Paul of Surtha on the Tigris, Addai Jiaxco (visitor) from 
the convent of. Fardaisa, John of Zuknin » *, i. e. our elis. 3-9 in a different 
order aud with ch. 7 omitted (unless it eame in the lacuna alter Mare); where 
it is to be noticed that he has apparently confounded Abraham the S&lite 
(eh. 4) with Abraham bishop of Beth Urtaye mentioned in eh, 58 (E 131 v? a), 
and thal he gives the name Hsikha (abstinent) to the monastery over which 
Abraham aud Maro presided, the name being perhaps derived from a gloss 
in an early ms.*.— Agam under A, S. 862 he gives the following names 
« Theodosius, Anthimus, Paul, James, John of Amida from the monastery 
of Karthamin, Theodore of Hirtha »*. all of which come from our chs. 48-50 
except John, who is added to the list of bishops consecrated by James in the 
interpolated life of James? (see below), aud may also be derived from a 
marginal addition in an early ms.*, 

John is not a literary writer. He puts down what he wants to sav as it 
comes into his head, stringing sentences together by the use of 45 and y Lat, 
whieb are often equivalent to vaud’, and frequently rambles on, forgetting 
how he had begun; indeed in many places irregularities that T have charitably 
allribuled to the seribe may well be the author's. 1n the translation I have 
reprodneed these peculiarities so [ar as can be done without making the 
sentences mnintelligible, placing the words * sie syr.’ in the notes when the 
sentence is ungrammatical or inconsequent, Prom the cireumstanees of his life 
he must have had an extensive knowledge of colloquial Greek, aud many Greek 


words are interspersed in his Syriac”. He certainly used Jolin Malala t; but 


I. See above, p. su. There are also two accidental omissions in ch. 46. — 2. P. 59. 
vios SC Wap b ^. Kleyn. Bijdrage, p. 69: c£. B. O., M, Diss., s. v. Anizeta 
Dyakonov, p.34. 5. lt is just possible that it oecurred in the lacunae on p. 59. — 

E. Kleyn. op. eit; p. 22. 7. Me is there however called bp. of Dara; see n. ad loe. — 


S. Phat the extract under A. S. 836 at all events eomes from the Lives, not from the 
Leelesiastieal History, seems clear, for 4. would not have inserted a list of obscure 


ascetics as 0i men distinguished at the time. 9. In two places in eh. 36 he even 
traushiterates zovi into Syriac. though jesse is an exact equivalent. 10. Land, p. 300. 
Pert. we should say ca source of John Malake Haase in Or. Christ., Neue Ser., Vl, 


b. Sb, 


[xm] INTRODUCTION. xut 


the only evidence of acquaintance with any other Greek writer is an erroueous 
citation from Ignatius in ch. 24, and that may come froma Syriac translation. 
Though he was a fervent Monophysite, he shows little interest in theology, 
and in contrast to his contemperary, the so-called Zacharias, includes no 
theological document in his works except the Henotieon, Even in the 
account of the Tritheite controversy in H. E., v. 1-12, where some theology 
seems to be imperatively required, his theology is confined to a few stilted 
formulae, except that in ch. 8 he gives two short citations from the arguments 
at the conference. The only other theological argument in his works is 
the report of the debate with the Nestorians in the life of Simeon of Beth 
Arsham (p. 148), and that is put into Simeou’s mouth, and is probably derived 
either.[rom his own lips or from the books which Jolin inherited from himt. 
llis chronological statements are aften loose or even wild, of which many 
instances are given in the notes’. 

As an appendix to the genuine lives Land published a longer life of 
James, whieh is attributed to John aud was taken by Land to be his; but its 
spuriousness was clearly proved by Kleyn” and was admitted by v. Douwen 
and Land in their translation; and its eharacter is so olivions that | need not 
occupy space by repeating the arguments here. For the sake of completeness 
however, and because Land's text is taken Irom an inferior ms., I have 
re-edited it with the genuine lives. It is contained in three mss.: (T) Ber- 
Jin Sachau 321 (S), of the end of the 8" cent. * (€. [66 i" b). This is perhaps 
the best of all Syriac hagiographical mss.; and, where we have it, we rarely 
need to emend or follow another ms.; but the last leaf of this life is unfor- 
tunately lost. For the text of this ms. 1 am indebted to a photograph which 
the kind assistance of Professor Allgeier enabled me to procure. (2). Paris 
Syr. 235 (N), of the 13" cent. (f. 315 v"), which I have consulted in a photo- 
graph which Monseignenr Graflin with his usual kindness supplied. This 
seems to be a not very good copy of S, and I have therefore not as a rule 
recorded its variants, but bave supplied the lost final leafof S fromit. (3) Brit. 
Mus. Add. 12174/(€). See above, p. vii. The textofthis ms. (f. 285 v?a) is alater 
paraphrastie version of the lie, in which some stories are omitted because the 
seribe did not think them edilying. Jt was from this ms. only that the life was 
published by Land, and the fall text is therefore now published forthe first Gime. 

This life is followed in S and C by a short narrative of the theft of the 
relicsof James by the monks of Fsiltha, which has been most carefully edited 


| with illuminating introdnetion and commentary by M. Kugener in M. Clugnet’s 


Bibl. Hagiogr. Orientale, MI, p. 5. As the document is closely connected 
with the life preceding I have added it here; but, though 1 have collated both 


1. P. 158, — 2. P. 83, 85, 94, 95, 157, 193, 210, 201, 206, besides many in part 2. — 


|! 3. Jac. Baradaeus, p. 105, — 4. See p. xiv, n. 1. 


XIV INTRODUCTION. [xiv] 


mss., | lave seldom indeed found it necessary to depart from M. Kugener's 
text!. ln both mss. the narrative is followed hy the words : « The history 
of Mar James, bishop of Edessa, is ended », and in S there follows a colophon 
stating that the history was composed by Theodosius the stvlite of Fsiltha 
in 7412. as if he were the author of both. The narrative is however stated 
in the title to be the work of Cyriae bishop of Amida (€ * Mardin’), and we 
must therefore apparently suppose that Theodosius after writing the life 
copied the narrative of Cyriae as a pendant to it. Three dillieulties remain. 
(1) Theodosius is said in the colophon to have written when Stephen was 
arehimandrite of Fsiltha; but the arehimandrite when the relies were stolen 
in 622 was also Stephen, so that we must postulate two areliimandrites of 
that name, (2) The so-called Dionysius places the death of Cyriae of Amida in 
623°, whereas the narrative mentions events of 628, so that we must either 
postulate two bishops of Amida named Cyriae or adopt with M. Kugener the 
reading * Mardin’ from C *. Of a Cyriac of Mardin nothing is known. (3) The 
author of the life calls himself « Me the sinful John the Syrian, the converter 
of the pagans and anthor of the Ecclesiastical History, who am from the 
house of Mar John at Amida», and this is apparently not simply eopied from 
the original, for the text there is « a man whose name was John »*. If then 
the author passed himself olf as John of Ephesus, why is he in the subserip- 
tion called Theodosius? To this it may be answered that the document is 
an amplification of the original lives, and that the use of the [* person was a 
mere literary. deviee not intended to deceive, and Theodosius was known to 
everyone as the author. 1 must say however that it seems very strange that 
a writer who is amplifying an older work should put an expression of humility 
into the mouth of the original writer which he did not find in the text; and, 
as John nowhere else in the Lives speaks of himself in the 3" person, I have 
a suspicion that he really wrote LAN OX here and the seribe of A inad- 
vertently substituted Joo opaa, ao] because the expression was used of the 
other bishops above; but, as he is not in the habit of making mistakes, I have 
nob presumed to alter the text% In any case the narrative must have been 


I. My S and € are M. Kagener’s B and L. | had already used B for another ms., and 


had denoted Add. 1217^ by C, and therefore could not adopt his notation. — 2. See 
Kugener, p. 23, where it is shown that 74t should he taken as the date of this 
document rather than that of the ms., as D^ Sachau took it. — 3. Ed. Chabot, A. S. 
O34. Ile was the successor of the John who died in 578 à Dion." ap. Kleyn, hijdrage, 
p. 73. See above, p. xu, and the interpolated life ad fin, — ^. Baumstark Gesch. d. syr 
Lit, p. (St ascribes the narrative to a Cyriac of Thella. 5. Ch. 50, — 6. lle often 
does so in IJ. E. — 7. There is a elear instance in which the text of A may be corrected 


from the interpolated life, i. e, the account of the consecration of the bp. of Seleucta in 


Syria, where A has *Tsaüria 3 see n. on ch. 50. Cf. also f. 117 v" b, where the reading 
po: Should almost certainly be adopted from the interpolated life. 


[xv] INTRODUCTION. xv 


written between 628 and 741, and the life was probably composed in 741°. 

In the text I have recorded all variants exeept the common orthographical 
variations in the spelling of Xs, Aso, hasl, Lasp, and such words as 

+>]. Words and letters inserted to fill lacunae are inclosed in square 
brackets in the text, and, as far as possible, in the translation, and words 
which have been omitted by the seribe are inelosed in round brackets in 
the text. A half-braeket denotes the beginning of the part of the text to 
which a note refers. The biblieal references are to the Peshito. 


1. Baumstark (/. c.) thinks that the life may have been written before 600; but the 
title ‘king of the Romans’ shows that the author wrote under the Arabs. 





n REST ee 


MSS. USED IN THE PRESENT FASCICULE 


A = Brit. Mus. Add. 14647 (688). 


Be = -=- = 448004875) 

C= = = Meer. 

Du = — 7190 (12"' cent.). 

E= - - 14651 (850). 

I - -- —- 14735 (12'" cent.). 

P = Paris Bibliotheque Nationale Syr. 23^ 13'^ cent. ). 


ABBREVIATIONS 


D. 0. Assemani, Brbliotheca Orientalis. 

CS. C. 0O. Corpus Seriptorum Christianorum Orientalium, ser. syr., ser. 3%. 
Hook. John of Ephesus, Ecclesiastical History, part 3 

Land Land, Anecdota Syriaca, tom. Il. 

P. 0. Patrologia Oriental’s. 


R.O. €. Revue de (Orient Chrétien. 

V.D. and L. Joannis Episc. Ephesi Commentarii de Beatis Orientalibus et Historiae 
Ecclesiasticae Fragmenta latine. verterunt. W. J. v. Douwen et 
J. P. N. Land. 


m o T IST ar E 


evan rains aapa measan Jan mduarda rada X 
| ua. 5i uaa TĒ awa .TEaxta n ré eo. ahaa po 
ered |r ras iba Eyddi a 


worse La op sms, ssa ROBO Luo) oUN S S 49 

Opa} j| eis ypo saioa joy yas lao iw TAONE 
Lanao Jh > NMopell J -haaa casasfl amaa hg Sapin 
Las. ote, 0h Ioco: NOO iO sper) Joins :Jyor ous p 
Jæ; oa Oly lax ro JjNaoo Qa seo uns Joos fasiss 
aK soiase; jaso oise, Jluus ha DA waa Laopo aan M 
asai, Jiu», asda uaaa a aopa fe D lo cis sS 1 
„opoh Lag SLA A» ? [£203o Jo SEa sie sE- Say JN 


|. Suppl. L. — 2. Point e follows in ms. 


A BOOK OF HISTORIES CONCERNING THE WAYS OF LIFE OL THE BLESSRID Is rERNS. 
COMPILED AND WRITTEN DE JOUN THE PILGRIM AND AT ONE TIME A SOLITA 


OF THE House oF Man Jous] OL AMIDA IN THE PERVOER OF DEVINE ZENI 


When we considered the words of our Saviour and Redeemer Jesus in 
his preaching to his saints which he said, « Let vour light so shine before 
men, that they may see your good deeds, and glorify your Father who ts in 
heaven »', it seemed to us that this is not disagreeable to his will, that 
the light of the deeds and of the triumphis of his holy disciples shonld at all 
times arise and be made known and appear among men, its indeed the 
sense of his holy saying declares; and for this reason, although we may 
seen to be presuming to set foot in things that are too great for us, by the 
power of his saying and the hope of his gilt we have been encouraged lo 
approach the task of compiling histories concerning their ways of life and 
their brave triumphs and the characters of their good deeds, that, we 


may draw, though obscurely, by means the vile and common pigments ol 


1. Mattli. v, 16. 
PAIR. OB. — 1. AMIL — b. d 


Aft. 
vh. 


2 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [2] 


Jlasoy -.JKuncose NS, Lanino [Axa Laasi re KoJi 41 ols 


ANN ECSC waas o : ean oM «o «JJ X 9o 002 


Joa pac - Jorasdh soomi Li LOHAN Odo AAEM e»t fun] 
oo ap SX opens e» wt Jae xe ee who Soo: «2 SN 
ot. e: “0h alio - aso: Do ysl xen vaal o sano JS? 
Lada, oases dyp do Js) Sa oio JN sal, ^ [Bees 
xS Aio Soo La p Jioras m> Vous» Jlaards Laio ba 
Lohas, Lin] . om rcaias voak äs, amado «os apa 
aña oh x fan fldoy Jlo oo Qooce Qa39320 LOAD AS 
JNda [INS sos. [3:328 ~ ol? p NS 201 a) DA ual, oot ups 
Jl sias od par’ flo JNag Seat Luj [axe JAM fos hye? 


v sJhlenzselo JNoso JARQMM ded] Losso pal Jl Rexel 


bl Woo .Nujpsou MaNLo M» o Rup L&D o ON Lasfos 
„uao Mame Maé. ha £D Je jo Exo Jy Nojima 100220. 


our poor words, the pattern of their likenesses for posterity, and? leave it 
inthe memorial of our writings: so that, when they read aud see their good 
deeds and marvellous ways of life, by this means we opine that two bene- 
lieial results will be produced, one that when they see their good deeds 
they may also glorify their Father whois in heaven as if is written, and the 
second again, that. when the Hight of the narratives of their wavs of life 
shines upon souls entangled in the vamties of this world and darkened by 
error, they may be enlightened by the light of their triumphs and be eager 
to mitate them, and to receive their patieris in themselves, in order that 
they may attain to Chet crowns, and hear with them the life-Iraught eall that 
says « Come enter, ve blessed of my Fathers! For these reasons therefore, 
sinee T. dreaded even to hear the apostole saving that condemns the man 
Whe knows whit is good and does it not by the sentence of sin?, | deter- 
mined not to coneeal and cover with silence the great and marvellous virtues 
that T have seen and Known and elearly earned in heroic and divine persons, 
and | am confident of bearing true witness withont fear and without hesi- 


tation: lasing first formed this resolution in my mind, that. though F hear 


1 Matth. XA n ^ dames p y= 


[3 AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 


oom Ll] Saias SI Jloshhs jsa Slo Wo JNa ere o 


cute as Seius I el Seas desse. Jas AT Ss 
Daan Loopy l Jyo JL Jusps romuja M p pd Mo'a 


wis Qoo» ha ol 25) ex ol: meme OSL Jl =l Ka Nias 
ov» ANo} Loppa Had CAI Laly ooh, qoot NA] Jioc eT 
hadan f» Mor floiary q3e aooo pe pa b» oa] 
«9011360 Jis) bo aoo «cane Lisy Pro Ld, Nod «oos 
ee JRa a JLSLly Jloiarce Xr; «250 at Noort th Pee ~~ 
mses JNsdiasc fda haal oUN o y SAO pane pane Sods 2 
JM Jena b JLL? Jh £55e5 Jyaos oo flan Lod saoo 
Jlontonslo Jlaopaso fw JNSSL lxo hapo khan hipa Jlaroro 
CALO pa p D Lad Jaaa, .: JN soiisos LS dor Joya yar a 
fase Svo josh Jxgas Daa vo Joo it Mlapa orario 
+ 2305 Lao hnos fxoaa HA pa JNa! NASA. faso, uta] Mio 


1. Ms. om. o. 


that a few days ago and now also there have been and indeed are in the 
districts round us heroie and brave men, for my part except those of whom 
l have been an eye-witness in every one oftheir actions [or a long time and | 
a witness of the trath of them I will in no case commit any the of to the 
memorial of my handwriting’, actions to the truth of which besides myself 
all the other men of our time are also witnesses, actions that were wrought 
in those men heroic in their ways of life, with every one of whom f was in 
intercourse from my childhood down to their own end; of whom some fell 
asleep some time ago, aud some during this time, and some are still illus- 
trious in the body, men who have power to perform apostolic signs, since 
to each one of them according to the blessed apostles saving gifts are dis- 
tributed and given?, to this miracles, to that great ways of life without 
signs, to another beauty of heart and purity, to another ready sorrow and 
copious tears, to another self-denial and perfect pilerin life, in addition 
to the other distributions of gifts, consisting in the beauties that each 


one of them severally used to depict upon his person. These marvel- 


1. Ms. om. — 2, This statement cannot be taken literally, He gives an account of Abraham of 


Kalesh (ch, 4) who died before he was born. — 3. I Cor., xin, t6. 


^ JOHN OF EPITIES ES. 4 


92) wa Qoo» had racy Jlo |N lanam, JL. p50 "m 
s eon Jlojanxo roto xS Jos Jl SN»; bso y OA «AA 3830 
NES De E EN Ks, Ix [32050 hd saso Koo, Jl» -sooo ee 
TAN LoDo Joel 2o Jes Q6 £3» » JXRLasads Janno 
Je hoas Da «^59 Jano Ge A> lu Jen hepato 
gotas Saa. I3o'o, oo JJ 9] s bla lao! - xao Ji e SELO > 
yioo wikarro ical) E E A> enn J ely Nw 
xot Logon OOHO pas pee Nu arsed) Lion Raa faanoi ookan 
So; Qoodás 2: Li .olo ood)» |a m> Daa olNa xal wol p> 
waw, [so yl A! QO hha «Soda aAa, pawo eto! 
ha JNa faspo po Jas > flaw pro aspo'Kaads Jiary ad 
a Ss : ere. 
Lasai, flass o. Llo «d fas] ska be baas aano JNN 


- sa Re faaan uaok.] pa DNN EL 5 laa? m [12302 Lx» 


Ma. siue. m 2. Ms, beds carry. D, aud L. 


lons and divine beauties therefore E have set myself to bring to the 
record of narratives, while the spiritual beauties and great triumphs them- 
selves, without the interposition of elegant language, are related by their 
natural simplicity of heart with whieh as is written thev giorified God', 
and we record the active manifestation of the ways of life of every one ab 
them without ornate dietion and artilieial combinations af words, rejecting 
and dismissing all worldly elegance outside the circle of these admirable 
aud divine beauties, lest by it we soil their holy images: which have no 
need whatever of beauty and adornment Wing outside their etrele, as neither 
has the Giver ol their beauties himself, «ince indeed they are not lackiug 
ii anything, whieh also enrich and enlighten others by their beauties, We 
begin therefore: Trom this point to draw the pieture. of each one. of these 
salats by relating his history through the help. of their prayers imd. conti- 
dence dn their petitions on our behalf, and hope in the wilt of him who 
strengthened them, tbat is, as Far as our small strength is capable of attai- 
uing, throngh the strength that arises from grace; and at the head of this 
divine company we sel this great old ian whom a high place at table in the 


heavenly le, where each ts ti Christ desus, well betits. 


5) LIRE OP HABIB. 5 


+a’ alra Tea rawi w dun eiusd 


Luo Wy aal LAr Henna hada bor fags aial, bid 
peA HDA QO Wad joli gts Ne fans] es NM opohs 
» fisioio JosL JLlIo jJiy3e4 ? patos oos] PONI ody Va 3 
+ wot reed Jans, pad’) cà Joa pao oou]: JN zw ao [NS JLo 
eae Jo -jpa S oo jaa Sly Soro Nas [aco <% Jos 
Pn ot JN biao NSxas voada coiohs/; Lin Lau? [säs 


ipa ye spe lu Loo [55 La bad sul c Nel aao Nofro 
Jy2as) | | [2 x3. Jaana Lod .JMirarda aliso sie fly Vor => 
spika, xo Jlorisolo J Naso qN «2l exer seh oy faso; 
Nj fba aa Jo ~o1opshoy I (449 2X5 Ma 
ois jl <H «296 valas; p «Ml assasot No ds «090 
«A96 CO gaioi WS gaa “Oo; wel: s Jo oo pepas o3e 


I. 5 word seetiis lo have been here erased. — 2. Point follows in tus. > OMe o 8.— Point. 


follows in ties. 


l. — Tug rinst MISTORY, OF THE GREAT AND DBIVINE OLD MAS ESHI 


The relation of the history of this apostolic man Habib it is not easy 
lor any man to approach without fear to narrate it, inasmuch as on both 
sides a canse of alarm springs from the relating of it; lirst, the fact that the 
man who sets himself to enumerate the marvellous and great miracles and 
acts of power, and fearful and apostolic signs, which he who performs the will 
of those who fear him wrought through hin will fall short of the sum; since 
a tongue of flesh is indeed too small, and human mouths are nob sufficient, 
to speak of him as he is: and here there is danger lest a man wish to deptet 
this great and divine sea in an ill-ordered and faulty manner. and‘, dimi- 
nishing his heavenly features because he is not snflicient for them, finally 
incur the eoudemnation of a corrupter of spiritual beantios; secondly, even 
if the great and marvellous deeds that can be ecsily wrought through 
apostles only which God wrought through him be narrated, lest they be as 
it were hard to believe: but, commiting the greatness of these lo. the 


knowledge of him who is true and does not lie, whe said, « Whoever belie- 


1. Ms. om 


*G dos 


M? 


a. 


Ü JOHN OF EPHESCS. [06] 
ard Qoo CMS J, Jo o halo] a L? raa fish] 
[yor Lod «we Ce Wado JNosas) go Pros anal a loss 
34] <% eo La sic fro uae Jow, Jas) DSA 
CON Lasoo l>; oo Sly ha o t past! Lasp Joa saod? 
Pro -ha La Saa oa acus Joa aaa; -Joa coto] Jigal 
oa d p) oaao Asana Joo eno <% pelo -Joa — Lo 
JLoizsoh Xx qM ooo xe Jl Lino omad lə; bo Law 
JL poner | E PETI wd «Dopo fro y „Joa pray JKsio5 
baos ANa Jioc Sesso «food qt] Matas Lou J ix 
opas: foot PaL] Lan Ladd sol oa Sl; L? eel J od 
aiy e» Le Say yards; nexo] Codon Bex quer jn 2e Jos 
Sly via pas 'LioMse, [Nono <> foa sotokul Sco bor Ji NS o0 
Laag be ypo dt Jes way JD ogo Joa oot Na] aao oa; 


L Poin follows 1n m~- 


veth on me shall do greater than these signs which I do »', we leave this 
also to him and to those to whom it has not been hard to believe his word, 
bringing these few things (a small proportion) to record for the glory of God. 
This holy old. man therefore came from the district of Sophanene, and was 
trained by a man who was himself also great and holy and a worker of 
miracles, whose name was Bar Nbyl. "This divine man therefore was 
before our times; and, imasmach as his end preceded our days, though this 
great old man bis disciple and many others used to tellus about the great 
marvels which he used to perform, inasmuch as we declared before that we 
shall omit men in whose case the sight of our eves has not borne witness 
to our handwriting 7, for this reason we have not touched the history of that 
samt; who himself also again was trained by a divine blessed man whose 
name was Mar Dada; which things we have omitted to relate, im order to 
tell only the things that concern this man who was our contemporary, This 
mau therefore came from a village ealled EF v try from which his master 
also eunez and he first planted that monastery, and then this blessed Habib 


- 


1. edit 1 DEM ES 


[7] LIFE OF HABIB. 7 


.opa» joa paso oWal00 .L2n* xo pel 2 Sey olas aanas 
Jlaass Jyalyo sodes NS Loss ro [22205 Jio o Joa aj ao 
oà [az of aD o p alasan q% Joo Lio Jlamadso Jule 
naw kisak, eal SX apao sad [asas opoo] Lad xia v 
oUaixsoMssoo uoopo, Jj. £p Lasao wia haa oia Ls > ane 
Joa yao ty Jas aN oaao olM5jas: flol clio! -olaarasco 
Haw Jh furs] -olaarms | Joa saoi] firsoiasxco Gran jised 
hie E eer Mo ance peu Di Eten te sedia csse di 


€. $^ OSG UE or Tee o Uer cl As Jes 95 (uo 9 iei Up (e ie c9 79 DS ces 0 D Te ies ck, 9. 79. cece Je 09. 09 49 9. o o c c9 tee 


Jana] feu] Ais «995 Ws hah oi NS a, Ns x2? wo E Juga ` 
jtasas Op ad oothoifus ator -og Loot p04 re JRL, «2o JE ao: 
xe Kooy «sl Sx a.00s yo Na Lazo! Jzn .hasag NS aso wma 
Ws JaN Joa iuo Jax aNd yas P Joa tSc aan ooo 


1, A leaf or more is here lust. 


went to him, wheu he was about ten years old, and he received him, and 
he continued to dwell with him, and he exercised him in spiritual ways of 
life, marking his tender age, and what devoutness and what orderliness he 
possessed from his youth. But, when that old mau bad completed. ninety 
years, he departed to his mansion in heaveu, and left his monastery in the 
hands of the blessed Habib, after he had lived with him twenty years; and 
$0, having seen his ways of life and his obedience aud his humility, he made 
him heir of the inheritance of his blessings, aud left him to succeed him. For 
the blessed Habib was so humble and obedient even iu his old age that | do 
not think it was strange to lim‘. 

And from that time the fear of the blessed man fell upon all men, so that 
many from fear, before he himself spoke to them, of their own free will 
made a remission; aud then afterwards the blessed man used to perforin 
frequent mighty works in every place against those who contended against 
him, aud when he spoke God would perform in action everything that he 


L. A leaf or two missing. 


N JOHN OF EPHESUS. 8] 


ua laasna aako Haig Jh. DA joa pal, yoo No Juciol. 
Oel Q» tas Jed Jie votastas waa V,» jen d x24 o8 
Ladas Sos yaco panam fapoy oM je, Adan vad S] yn 
{ass} J x! vol .o' waas, ounas]o o VI Sxsolo 2o s 
~ J NaN Jlararolhso os Joa Maly - Jabs Joo Na] Jhal [eas 
fusa db oM opel ello JE Joa ska ba slo Je Joos 
<% y peo hl Gran Joy wes I oes wj], «suo - od NS so 
Jide cor sk hagad coi! Coase INES Joo anges Jh 
ade Loo) eMe) © polo snc Jised wa poo whao o9 fo 
„eonia Jo EX J hais que Lod J Ns s 2] Joa 
JN Duo oà han Kasco LNS oce Je» Aoo pa J ol 
poan Lasas, pi»ezm Niujsiod Lisad Damo annaa, oo ~D 
< aliu) Loa L^ laa aalo -Joa Joa fhada [rojas p Joa 


L Ms ISsaaslo, conss PD. and I 


said without delay, because he saw his zeal and readiness and the keenness 
of his purpose. But, when the owner of the ass heard it, his knees knocked 
together in fear, lest the power of the saints curse should light upon him 
also: and he arose and took all his parelhinents yzszrz, and brought them 
to him, and entreated him to forgive him. Again there was another rich 
man dn another village, who bad an ancient debt, many vears old: aud he 
also used to plinder many people; and they came and told the blessed man 
about him, and he set out to go to him. Aud, when he beard * Lo! Habib 
Is eoming i, Inasmuch as he was not prepared to do good, he arose and took 
the parehinents: 4222725 1. e. the deeds; and left him and Hed, And when 
the blessed inan heard it le was distressed and said : « Beeause his will was 
thus prepared to do evil toward these poor men, WW God wills their deliverance, 
let them ever see htm again oo. Aud the same might that man died, and 
Fear fell on all who heard at. Aud the blessed man went on continuing 
to busy himself greatly in matters of debt-remission, becoming a delive- 


vanee for the poor amd hist fame inereasing. Bat the wife of the man 


9] LIFE OF HABIB. 9 
sad ad cellule ad 02 ooann Qoo» -voidiso Kiso, oón 
Joa y „Joa Mal Ll hay sol saas) anus Koopa [iso 
00.230. Jos saas] ollo Lais Da fhais <>} Laso Jida 
sa alanswhaso alanas olaanmso alaanid q) DA0 sy lo 
5-5» Lams of JKiamse of JX S05]; fuss] Soa y ei a wat Sl) 
JA han pel J ooa Lael] Lies Sas ose» Wb, od Joa 
Wy Joa Sy] erac soa) pel Je fl] Syl Wr Joa S JN eso 
hay: oad Jae Jla È y » Syl oo Je las Wool ra -feot'ol 
Jao ! as; for :JEso ofa SR be sy] Jy 3l pw Cw oa 
M p Oops yea . naX LH] vot Laag wes yo «Jato Sas] 
JINalo Sacs] Spoor NG] wear ooo] Soy iDa, spy Lor ele 
ye I Al volo Jess Lo o waas 5e Juss Kalas 
Laz ja 2o) fan Naau BaxXN hojas "edo pros Sgro; 


Il. Appy. eorr. from S9. 


who had died aud his children took all. their parchments — 42272; , and 
brought them to the blessed man, and thus returned them to their owners. 

Again there was another man, and he kept ancient deeds some years old 
against poor men, and they came and told the saint, and they brought hini, 
and le went; and that because from his bosliood and down ta his old age 
he retained bis Inumility and obedience which itself also distinguished him, 
so that a widow or à poor woman or poor man who begeed him to go with 
him on any business wliatever, he! did not as being a man of high reputation 
refuse to go. but, in order to satisfy him. would go with him at. once 
without delay. When therefore he had gone to that man, inasmuch as 
Satan had filled that man’s heart, he was roused to fury against hiu, saving, 
« Will not this fellow go and sit in his monastery and be quiet? for see! 
he comes ont and wanders about to eat and drink ». And when the blessed 
man heard these things he wis distressed, and he returned to his monastery, 
having prayed and said : « Lord who knowest what is in the hearts of all, 
if thou knowest that 1 eame eut in this business in order to eat and drink, 
forgive this man. And. again, if thy grace knoweth thal it ts for the sake 
of thy name aud for the sake of the deliverance of the wronged that | have 


come ont, in order that this same thing may be made known to this mau eund 


]l. Sie sve 


10 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [10] 
Jac Vra OHA FARO ie I» vt Laas? -opt au] Da; haao 
sao uoaa -oà [5002-5 oto Je jan sao Xo Law, abrol 
Joao eC Jo wa o50 -Aas po oad I T aao 
IDa Ds Sask «20r 001 I: ENG Solio! p20 Jia b Soks 
else] Ho J ey oaas Jin Lago asa $a e 
ret or be .Jiary Joa oaas, ipa oal oeNxa Q2 Pl o0 
oad.) J JKsoase Q6 - sas apad L2. ised Lasops 
p dpe Sao Los. meeps ano ph. ol ots, fuss] oaa joa pms 


Ley ja mer bia 9 Ji NCONCe EE ERST el ` 
‘9 Sy] po gde cant JI yaso, hao Lin q% hisis uaaa as 
Joa Lad po jjo Masco o9 qo ctas) Nass otra po 20] 


JN.) geo Joa Ne xou P6] we oon sx Lass javas 


Lomo Joa aias Laia lannelli aM joo Maly au] D ha 


io everyone else, do with him as thy grace knoweth how ». Then Grace 
exacted forthwith from the man requital for the old man; and that same day 
the Lord smote him, and ball of him became withered, one of his eves aud 
one of his arms, and the whole of his side, and one of his feet, and he 
fell into grievous afliction. Aud, when he understood that it was a sen- 
tence emanating from justice, whieh had overtaken him of on account of his 
blasphemy, le sent intercessors to the saint to ash bhim to pray for him; and 
he on lis side did not withhold his kindness from him, but immediately sent 
his disciple whose name was Z ura: on whom from that time he poured part 
of the gift of the power of his prayer like the blessed. Elijah upon his 
disciple Elisha, so that after him he. became even more distinguished than 
himself. Phis man therefore he sent, saving : « Go, my son; we for our 
part will not close the door, aud pray for him. But the rest of the sentence 
has gone forth against him, that he shall depart from life; ind this we cannot 
reverse >. Amd, when he had gone and prayed over him, immediately his 
soul departed from his body, aud he died, and without his consent a remission 
was brought about for these iajueed persons whom te himself was prepared 
to subject to atticttons. Aad in consequence of this fear everyone who had 
debtors of ancient standing would remit the debt; and some of then: brought 


their deeds to the blessed man himself; and entreated him to bless them; 


[114] LIFE OF HABIB: vi 


s «jl ye AX ooo «4242300 .,o00 oS Jura ds o» Loose gs | 
9932 oo ely Spo log Laco. jh] Sas absojso o NS Lu, Scraso p 


y o some Laado fads; a polo Jor à Liaw, Jlosl] 
loot Lasia hino; er [ia jio yaza oD ) Jooto 9c» Gyal] 
yilo OM y002 Sa haao haao Las ad saad wil yao Jh fur. 
Propane |Mi. ras Jor Kal JNa Be] col fray. cok o; 
Jara s Jo vangrropg ad Jon Malo JM Ame) Joa works!) 
Wry avo Laa X819] Las} ollo ass flo Mlapa Joa solo 

PET Soc E Pao oe tar NS A e 


. 
4. 7 9 We O4 c 9 . . . E de. ke ae RR 4:901. des 29. Wek 19 NAT Di Seni c^ a E E E 


who'll + plas KNapo sto ja po ies QS Jpn soon bias 

pool watts ly peo pelo nial hoa Lam ogo py ajo 
NEM Ll -.JI <! Jo Joas wads Noo aD walana O0 
p JoJ Joa has ada p Jis Wda ha Jliasoyh Loll [1200 


L Ms. om.; e Pesb. suppl. - 2. A leaf or more i~ here lost. 


while the fear and the terror of him wenl out thenceforth in every place 
because he himself also travelled in all the districts of Syria. And, as it is 
written in the blessed Job, « Who hath contended with him and hath had 
peace? »', so was it fullfilled in this spiritual old man, so that no one resisted 
him in this matter, and transgressed his orders, and raised his head again. 

There was again another rich man in the city of Maiferkat?, who was a 
banker (rsameZiens) and had many bonds (yzayy2tetor, several vears old, and 
used to exact cruelly and mercilessly. And certain persons came and 
informed the old man; and he rose forthwith and directed his steps to the 
Cie 


five years I have not seen the NS and, when l came near you with everyone, 
my eves were opened » ; though indeed even the old man was astonished at 
this, and as il by way of precaution. agatust being deceived said to her, 
« Your own faith has given you light; and, if not, E For amy part am a sin- 


ner». And so this miracle was proclaimed all over the cilv, while everyone 


V. Job, 18. ^. sS Marbyropaliss 3. A deaf or iwo missing. 


Io JOHN OF EPHESUS. [12] 
Lem: Jil? qx qx] aspas JNa ò> clojaxmas q? work. | 
me J25N3e; Je abil fir oles a4 Malo Se NS. Joo ai; Sd 
loa aha] o. ~~ JE ese. p Je <% Jaa, Jule -Jila 
m oo ono» II dy eU» oot La 2.360 Jars a ooo qsa flo 
+> Gro aso Jila oo oncle Me eM vor ài. uo Eo 
ajos lo Udy Solo. éieN uo >j nua Ins, g os JeaeJAle ox 
feo wmm Bul Jor - Mee? JMis asp ee cape D senanus 
Nis; óMasoo Jie Lano Jado MX aco AS jlo sar JEG] Mase.soto 
Laaa be o Nasao . 9054550 apaa lo Op Lasag lad llle o 
JKàsuo . fai oS Joa Mul bsopoo -Joa Nal rs Je "sol. Joos 
4e Jyo Joa Nas Sane sis RAL Liao Joo aas voids Eo 
Sylb aas xil; wore od ha [doo 120 Najla od foopads o joo 
poe] Lao q oo roids W ys ad joo marx haw lad foo p 


Lo Nn erasure ptullows. 2 Ms boo corm y. D, and D. 


gave thanks to God. While he was exerting his activity in the same city, 
certain persons from the eountiv of the Persians heard of tt because he was 
near there, and they bronght him two women, one who was persecuted by a 
demon. and another who was barren of offspring. haying heen many years 
with her husband and not having had children; and they coutinned entrea- 
ting him to pray for them. Put he on his side came up and made the sign 
over the possessed woman, and prayed. and laid an inlibition upon that 
demon, and he immediately came ont of her, and she was healed. But in the 
ease ol the one whe was barren he prayed and made the sign over her and 
said, « Go and keep enard over yourself) thal vou sin nob: and at this time 
next year lo! you shall have a son». And thal woman believed, and went 
away sand she received conception and bare a son: and, after a vear had 
passed, she took hin in her arms, and came to the Blessed man imo his 
monastery sand he baptized and blessed him: and she retumed rejoicing and 
praising God, 

Again there was a verlain man, and he had a large vineyard, and had 
spent mach money upon it; and for three years running hail came down 
and made terrible havoe of that vineyard: and, when thal time came dn 


the fourth vear, he set forth and went weeping tothe old man. and continued 


[ts| LIKE OF HABIB. 13 


Jul we JE wide ael ee Jj» oàd qas 2p» jo» eMe) e 
Jos of Nano of J&sp 2e Mee pepe bad dae ad el 
syst wre yid DA Re a D pd] LE o al J| Dao] 
Wybo JLi5:2o ra Sy JE] sso. Nols Apo ed Jl «^» 
ple os raS, y om hay v Sy! pass jong] Kalo odd 
aaas asio ad.oa +20 laias gal ioo Sylo khas a.o JLo 
Kdsoo Njaa Mote sa jus udrs 30 -ootsiao jo JNosas 
rare fas, alaso oaaao alos JD sya) pel pd hoo olds 
Aao foo <% L-a jes a Nus Jya bolts qia p20 Lindy o 
Wo py) ppd 30 ` haaa Sass QR paolo Lasand woos] 
E E E E E NAS ot ES 
panalo 2$ pra LA soriofs oo dix fn yon Pig? 


L Ms. wilh port. — 2. «erased, 5, Ms, 9922386. 


entreating him to pray for lim. But the old man said to him : « Wherefore, 
my son, is havoc made of that vineyard? ». And he said : « Sir, E know not ». 
The old man says to him : « Has that plantation done any sim or crime, or 
ollended God? » Ile says to him, « No». He says to him : « Know aud see 
that it is consequently on account of your own sins that things which 
have not sinned are being chastised, that vou may repent. But go make an 
oblation, and let us go there; and do you keep guard over vourself ». That 
man went as he ordered him, and made a particle of bread. Aid. the old 
man set out and went, and offered the oblation there. And, when thev had 
partaken and sat down to receive the blessing alter their oblation, suddenly 
that cloud ascended in terrilying fashion, and came to the place; and this 
perhaps so that God might make it known that he had. accepted the old 
man’s oblation and his prayer, and had done bis will. And, when the 
hailstones began to Tall, the old man rose from the table and siretehed ont 
his hands to heaven, and said, « Our Lord Jesus Christ, whose signal and 
word of command. governs everything that is in heaven and that is on earth, 
because, my Lord, this vineyard has been deemed worthy to have thy living 
and life-giving body and blood offered in it, accept the person of the sinner 


thy bondman, my Lord, and cause this cloud to pass away from him ». And 


EN IE 


th JOHN OF EPHESUS. [1^] 


a> Nol llo ..2à Lus leo Js. das Lido wx5o Jsa Lus ono 
met spe. Ja used: dd y Pan par o& bep aoo Jo) c. JI el 
QNM vaoa ooo xi NS so HOS pn So e Jyo as Ma J P 
Oise aso oclo „hla à Joa Maly alas asho? J poe JIN? col 


oto 37S] asooo laxus puble Jac oo ont] frre Ks Wo 
e|. eso] Sao jin bae) 5 ot »ocsaco] fray woan] 
ads ool pao JN}! cas ope -o5 Jes yoo aAa .o Joa 
Js Lasas oot pol «Moor ol 29 haad Kaal hah 
sa yo! oll yoo JM ->l hl yko + ad Joa mal, pa 
ad aNd Lupas pes y fis Uo pdr od aa asad 
|a às Jor Nuly ook bee! sor] Joos Ass flaws sol [ise ” 
JNa flare pol Jb» loa Jaca «Je Jo Ja Kul hao 
„las leds àa] 120 . Loot Jas ese Jaco so - coors {so lea Lo,casd0 


the Lord heard the old man’s voice; and that cloud passed away, and did not 
harm even one leaf in it: and lo! from that time, through the power of the 
blessed man's prayers, that vinevard. remained. without hail falling in it, 
while havoc was made of every thing ronnd it, and it alone escaped, | 

Again they brought a certain woman to him who had a demon m her, 
and he laid an inhibition upon him, and he eame ont of her. And alter 
some years the old man fell sick. and was constrained to die: aud his 
disciples came near and besought hin to remove his inhibitions; and the 
blessed man removed all his inlibitions that he had made. And immediately 
that fiend returned, and appeared in that woman. And, when they said to 
him, « How have vou presnmed, when vou were laid under an inhibition by 
the blessed Habib?», he said to them, « Last evening he removed every inhi- 
bition laid by hin, while Twas standing there, and FL eame ». And when they 
eame and told the blessed man he sent him a message, « As for von, vou 
are not al liberty to dwell in a human being for ever und ever». And so 
he was again expelled hy the power of God's word, There was again another 
woman in a eertain village who had a mad demon in her, a woman who 
barked at people. like a noxions beast, and tore their clothes; and violently 


assaulted many, and, when they brought her to the old man. she eontinued 


h. ^, where a similar story ts told 


[15 LIFE OF HABIB. 15 


apolo .oi3eN so ops | Las Paso woal, hanao ous Joa Jl 
Suse was fxs aao MS. eo Là) cass No] RJ Pele 
Jad jaso Joa paN auc» p ud MN? Ne Nalo Mico |ilo 
Jlatrco! loa jando -joa Kul JNams JN] Jh2 coh JN 
Jhal c! loa fod .d :o40sams Jaio loa Lido goo Shor’ 
p gayo +. qos NMSoex, JLexm Lej ihe qo éd) x vallo 
e| S los]; Soy Spdoo de] Od Ws flo $uodS jo cess 
LOCUS Ico lad [M Leon Lad; yl joa yadphso D J 
Jil Bio aas] aaam Dao -LL otlad ha sor - Joo gò 
Pe dlatroofs wa, MB on Jy -JMoas ao aliad DoD 
eso Jo Jaros voasiAao d x? v9 Ov saxa Jnl ALY $I 9 
piel Od rohan co, Lia thy Deas oao CdS cristo ods 
y Joo Bere Oi Jul zone sel JH xu) aLi oad Hn rt 


1. * erased. 


howling at him and seeking to run away. And the old man stretched out 
his haud, and made the sign over her; and he laid an inhibition npon him 
and said, « In the name of the Lord vou are barred from his ereation » 
And the same hour he went out of her, and she was healed; and that woman 
became quiet, while everyone wondered and gave thanks to God. 

There was again another poor widow woman, and she had been tanght 
the art of drawing, and used to practise it aud labour at it for her necessities, 
and she used to teach pupils. And two of her pupils, after a long time 
during which she had spent labonr upon them, went away when they had 
learned and defranded her. and did not give her her fee. Aud, because 
everyone who was defranded whether of little or of much had recourse to the 
holy Habib as to a deliverer of those who were wronged, this woman came 
to him, and informed him of her affair. And he wrote a letter to these 
pupils of hers the same hour, telling them not to make use of her art till they 
paid her the fee for her labour. Bunt they acted presumptuousty and treated 
the old man with contempt, and did not comply with his order, and they 
began to praetise the art. And the same day the sentence for their pre- 
sumption overtook them: for the tongue of one was seized with au impediment 
so that she could not speak at all, and the arm of the other withered and 


A f. ^ 


* 


Ad 


16 AON OF EPHESUS. 16] 
NI x^ 
goce Nyfly |o | cma maco «gars FEN |n | 
9330» o» oo o «42242300 +, LOAD IK Sul wt boos |n. |9,L0 
DA xo $00.36 p |J Saco! xS Na lo xl * | aK) W0 “So braces 
Nu Naaa Joa NS t~ han eol Lja; [Ne Sa gian on 
y Haeo fase ~~ Lon do: JE Lams vaa ooo! «e» Joa 


aas -fusagd soa pao Woo foa wal Col gado Qo 9o foo 


JA e2 dex | edes áNxauso |.Jo ot poor Jo . Loano 


* 


eoo - oda sopadasy pS - 8508 OA $20 MAD alaa Syl 
lano ods 3.2360 fish Sx fac lo joao Sans Jl) sordsfs hsil 
AUN Laso rete cw Set palo Peas pO ua STET onse loop c Esos ond | 


Losupphov. D, and L. eva coss Suppl. vs Ps and J. ot tines lost. 


became libe wood, and would not turu. And immediately certain persons 
ran carrying thal poor woman's fee to her, weeping, and entreating her to 
go with them and entreat the old manz and she went with them, and they 
continued entreating him to forgive them. but. he in order uot to requite 
the evil-doer according to his. evil-doing set forth tecuse and praved and 
made the sign over them, and the bonds were loosened, while he cautioned 
Ihem nol do act presumpltuously agatast the word of God. 

Veain there was a certain rich inan in the city against whom many poor 
men used to complain that he had retained. parclinents (yxgzzo against then 
Tor many Mears, and, when they bad been paid, he used to demand them again. 
And. when the blessed man heard d, he set out and went to him do entreat 
him. Mad when that man heard of it. he ordered them to stop him at his 
door, and the door to be shut iu his face sa that he should nol come in; 
amd the old man continued standing al the door and. sending him an 
entreaty the whole day. And hic. J was distressed... s s . aud 


he wey 


17 LIFE OF HIAB. I 
oY aS aa MA oin Lote cote arse ut Eps cee SOO ets aM UNE 
oN be SJ ood vo] AES E. liso s ins 
Jl: e [AM ux js Jas Valas op] a Ton 
SR ean oe JD... QO asangl.....y vane QM 
ien etn tate een Leen cis || 


(xao pANDOY Jas NS, y yes JN as E Veni 

hel ba Lara Qo seal] eel Jus uo reba ope qx Q5 
y - Koj pou «ouo J J~ Dao RES HO ho tH g 
Bel) Exe cos; Layos xe aoro; soopaa. fisady Lope 
Sepe baso; [o | Sl Lol Jiary Lia Lisas neoni] us] 
^ e» ANUN JjuxM [a Pe aha À x» oa> pe wee ey 
Poss tao) Jlallo 'Jhysoyhio fisse legas s Jy ot, Lal»: HQ IMs 


l. 2% lines lost. - z. suppl. frome the end ot ch, 


Sa eae UE e m noudppl. v. D. and Lo — i. Ms. 
ILvsek jo, 


distressed, CEN URL TN in confidence in the divine 
power that was in him, he said to them. « Go: and, when vou have seen 


these beasts, sav to them. in a lond voiee , 7 Habib the sinner savs that vou 


ine qotspiebmittede & vous soos s e Data tell oec e bee nin. SH 
she: tò the company oF 2: 8 scs they 

said. 

day ; 


U exe Figen deo S m . we comprise 11 the few 
acts that have been De in TM to glorify him who performed. them. 
neglecting the rest. while all of us who are at this time in the body testify to 
the truth of the things that have been written, and have seen and know clearky 
each one of them, together with the blessed men the disciples of the saint as 
well, among whom the first and the most eminent are Zura and Hawu va! 

Which blessed Z'ura, of whom we will also compose à special record, 
began vigorously to walk wholly in the footsteps of che saint. But, after 
the old Habib had marvellously run in this path of heroism. and of acts 


of power and miracles and signs and mighty deeds. and deliverance of 


L See end of ch. 2. 


PAIK. OR. EO AMIE — F. L. 


OUN OF EPHESUS. [18 


IA 
DG A LY ENT JR 203 [30 Lans) 10, [5o 210 ! Esa! Sn J1.03a9o 
xl Jel: :| vaasa «2 Lila | Loo] Les «got J oa] Nolo sel 
So! 31] pM Laas SAX Ohr £2 Jen >| asc 
9o as Nolan aNs, j aa RY IL] oa Sty La „otpa d jias > 
apa Oa ha has foco aras lazas hlas 9| Lal uaina 
ogai aiso 1 woIaassor yoo eas Jhopatins Llo soidrca. yawa 
5] Y Jokas alos >} Ora. aso 


Cr 7 57 2$; $5 95 i$; 4 € 


sonans Lose foi ham, [Kanal Micha 
srian sap roce riata oes rdusx dh aah 


e. oe . eo . . . e a tas hia, A 0 (ey Ce oder CAI aE PE 7 8 © © 6 


E ji c Soto ere od SS JA [2245 . Na] sses mato J»a23o slo i 


E s Uo and Poo 2 leal er more as here tot 


those who are wronged and of orphans aud of poor men and of widows, 
he was enrried to the mansion that is a release from the troubles of the 
body, ind fell asleep in peace, having contitenthy committed his monastery 
and his labour and the eare of the distressed to Zura his disciple, who 
himself also trafieked zealously with the talent of his gilts all his days, 
insomuch as to amass double profits. And so the great old man Habib 
begia and ended his days im the course of heroism in all his relations, 
and ended his course and received his crown’: by whose prayers may we 


merit? 


Ehe history o] the great and dirine old man Habib is ended. 


|l. NINEL ODM SECOND HISTORY, OL 1HE DIVINI BLESSED MAN ANRA 


and a spring broke forth and eame owt in abundance. many times more so than | 


nes ` ON deab or bwo tissine 


[19] LIFE OF ZUBRA 0o 


Lions, ocv fO Jo. S JJ “olo da - foray J ore r20 aD T% foa 
vanta fion ye ota» od full Does laS cal. [OMM oe Apa0 
Nass Kashal sur p Larl aD oo J oly Laal Jy I Jasad 
.OLLSO aM) yh yl hn <0 jho p> waste -Lasoo [so 339. Loak 
s] WHEL LO seo ss] «xo » pablo SAS) [328 2-322 xo 
Aawa] às Jis 32.20 QA JeaamasJ] froto JAM. adoro 
asolo ojal oj. +20 ey) ox» JKs.,300 J, par foaomas/ «3oNSo 
who ora a3o - 054 [s 34. saoao sor S ups. Jaa; pony JoJ acaso 
sero JL ba faoc Joe Slo JpoWso fisoe [iac [s Jiasy 


Jla aay woh? xt vol Nas oS, Juss MS LNA boat Lais alad, 


LaNa] po .ooo won] [amus lasal ; «aio. + fasody farctol 
JL oe» DN eS Jen «au lang: yl lisa} opa -opaa 


L Ms one point, s. pps. core tron Dss. 


that which existed before. And, when the blessed man saw it, le rejoiced 
and thanked God who had done his will: and at once the same night he 
departed to his master, having charged the brother who was with him wot 
to reveal this to men during his life, as lie also did nol inform his master. 
But, when the news was received that the blessed man had gone down to 
the spring in the evening, in the morning many persons gathered together 
in order to go and be blessed. by him; and they see the spring Howing in 
a copious and rich stream, and their lands. and gardens Innnodated with 
waiter, and they ran to the city; and they miformed the bishop of this. And 
the news was received throughout the city: aud the bishop with the judge 
and the whole city directed their steps to the place; and when they saw il 
they marvelled and gave thanks, and praised God who does the will of them 
that fear him. And they called that fountain *Mar Z uris spring to this 
day; and it is even actually so ealed to the present timet, This was the 
lirst act of power which the prayer of this divine master produced in his awn 
disciple. 

Again once the mighty hosts of the Huns came for bi^, and those blessed 


men were in a fortress; and, when it wes thought that they had passed by, 


I. This clause is perhaps. i serbes addition, zs v. D. ied lo sdggest.--2. Probably in 215 (Marcell, 
sub anno: Theoph., A. M. 60089, 


*A 


20 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 20 


S900 pw go 9369 „aaao sio wa c E Jobs Leao8n 
ape! ea [Sho JaN soins} pel eil [lo -42a Aao 


coole Lpa odts ops | Nalo dais]. I - ool. h oA elo op saad 


Ja ao kar boa «fuser LAL oplo onam paad po Mas J 
| Jo, [dx sobs haao aal J| aooo pe p ogi olo SyJo vidtalo 
lado waht p -haag baw: Late d) qo? «MS ce SO sy, oq 
o Ns No dE Joa Jie») Pix oò :Jjiaay haak og ANST, [o do 
Djaja 42 HDS LO A,£00 So pad Lia Ao? JN e. 5o 
:Ladol ad. Hy Ilse .ooo miedo atop sho ois Jalo fli. 
ro Lands Daai pass eter a Ss ow joo 4*9 "Waco Jlo 
ooa KAO} Jas] sso -joa ppasdo o» ooo 9e L © - Jol. pas 
pae, hes) Lado! Sx o MP Rm, PP Joa puoliso JI haaa 


1. Ms. Osa nil. 


the blessed man sent him to go down amd inspeet the monastery. And. as 
he was going down, the host of the Huius came upon him on the way, while 
he was carrying his eross and walking, and repeating the service. And 
at onee one of them ran and drew his sword, and raised his hand Tor the 
purpose of smiling the PÞlessed man: and he on his side raised his hand 
aginst kim and sand to him: « Ho! move itno Tarther >o. And the hand of 
that barbarian was impeded and moved no farther, while he retained lis 
vel and his band was thus raised, until the whole of the host had 
passed; and he was released and he also as well went away, while none of 
them had hort him, and so, trusting iu God, he also went to his monastery. 

After the Term of years thal the blessed man lied when he had taken 
his rest amd gone to his Lord, the blessed. Z ura. who was in truth a small 
mangon in his stature and im his mind was higher than the bigh. made a 
column for himself, and went np uul stood npon if. while thence forth the 
deeds of power and healings of his master were performed through bhim. 
For, after he had gone up on lo the colmun. and il was accordingly no 
tonger ii bis power to grasp paraly sed persons with his hands and bend them 
anl enre the siek, they nsed to give him waler and he used to pronounce 
a blessing, and Sherever 16 fell a enre was nol long in following. Bul. 


when he had completed) ai tern of years upon the column, the syuodite 


|21 LIFE OF ZURA. Ti 
aoc Jil?) amaa) ji £29 Quee ala LM. oda va des 
sal NS £e woo] Lao! Se Capone |5!la&se Mopars: 
DNE (lean ax ce Ren as JET ss) EIS 


Soro oles Adas, Jlasos Ss faa Ade QR ees HD soolo 
cl Laag Lard qr bore nil] Daas, Lapor Qeenjale womsiag 
Nuad IDo -wA vao jum Hay aoo Lo Looks ole 
J| JNsed aaa, wor cor [Nashs S] pa sue Djs Jane 
o2 obese anos Aix vod mass shoe HANNO cuia) 
ND saaana OA pI aK | Se E sl veils SIE 
aas NS eee El Laas Lasix je foot $39 L5: LA [aids o Mo 
JS “huamo huma Jos ipaa) cuir gol alas Sa s.s 


jax aloja Loo -joa wan [i] No Jede Lows Jl; jaah haad i 


l. Gurr. trea eee etas. s MS dee ous Ter allows wes creer. 


persecutors eame to him: and. sinee they did not tind in his disposition a 
ehanee of making him communicate with them, they brought him down 
from the column: and, when be had come down, he was moved with zeal 
saving, « [will not rest till 1 20 up to him wlio holds tlie roval authority. 
and testify to him before our Lord Jesus Christ concerning the persecution 
of the whole church. and concerning the distresses and the mockery of the 
saints in every place 

With this zeal the blessed man armed himself and with trust in his Lord 
also, and he arose and took ten of his disciples. and jonrneyed to the royal 
city itself and arrived there, letters from the adversaries having also preceded 
the blessed man by no small number of days, whieh gave information a~ to 
his going up. by dispensation of providence, in the same manner in whieh 
things were also effected through Ahbab withont his knowledge. for, while 
he himself was turning over his plans for killing the zeatons Elijah the great 
man, sending as of his own motion his envoys and his letters among foreign 
peoples with regard to his death. lio was being made to celebrate and display 
the fact that he was able actually to bind the heaven so that uo rain fell 


upon the earth. and was by his envoys proclaiming his mighty aet to the 





a ne ~2 ee -— oe - -— l^ — 00 
» mays - - i > > E = l 
ue Ame. at 1 x a . -> e - m at a — m mm o aiT 
n E EN E a ae —À 





Fr: s um + i ome: mox e Aca "he 
eee Pc or - = - —— 
3 a e LS -~ - à 
-- p ^ hh [2S PIENE OE EOM eim m —À— To, ae pey e Em BR 





- RAT -- —— 2 oo oe eet ae) 





-— a x 
a s tr ted rA aa = CST Re: mar. oe p EN PEDES, DI C dn 


. 
--— A ——- -——— ee — = oe -æ -a —— ELM 
a =.= A a —— ——92 ^7 — — ae ——À at —À 











- ~ : Lr LAN E ~ = 
_ -- - - -—— —— — Áo — —— eee? ee 
3 - ——— — eh -e m -—— — — - o + 
"€ E Ai 

i 


33] LIFE OF ZURA. 


Mokha 80 xa x le Sod Na LAS on doo fac CR c £2 
Laoi- otpse; Lawa Mesi wot 7o) sol q~- al ovo] 


y p Soo hoaia Qu Cs Su Lasag Jase yar a Na No 


> Jo sasol Jos yar Jh le. oil -aNs va L-a; vor 
Joi pax Jl Joa pad ado Luo; Law ., eje]; 3339. 5e J H fias 
Ko hil pel Joor pod Toor Lad JI aao agit Jas) je» Jlo 
Kufscaro saana -jiwasa 0 Lai; Jlarmas òa po day ard; 
o» Sa sJei9w, beds 6149055. oXa5 Dad ahi o Joa JN 
Wao JA- jja «0)0002.20 INSanna So e aN saza, [se 
[33 beo y was, Jor. reds «oa» «on 9l p JI Ro 
ot au) c6 ] 3.36 po yo Sar) Lado oia- ado JA L> 


«o wus Ja Jos. JNN 4205-9 DA hoad ' jl ET 


1. Ms, 0% 


But, when the old man and all his company came in, and, the doctrines that 
were condemned had been gently ' expressed, those that were right were 
again heroically expressed in sound language on behalf of the believers by 
the blessed man with the frankness mabini of his Lord and the confidence 
that contends with death, while the spiritual old man carried out. his pro- 
cedure according to what it is written that the king of Edom. commanded 
and said, « Ye shall not contend with greal nor with small save with the 
king of Israel »?: for he did not direct his contest with great nor with smalls 
but against him who roared as a lion, and looked whom he should devour”, 
in that he sternly brought the whole mensureless reproof against hini per- 
sonally, on account of all the persecution of God's ehureh, concerning all 


the blood that was shed in his days, concerning Ihe introduction of this 
accursed synod, and concerning many things, saving. « ATL these things God 
will require al your hands in the great day when he shall come, afl the 
distress of the Christians every were ». When the king by reason ofthe 
fear of bim feared to lay a hand on the blessed man on acconnt of the divine 


nsn whieh he possessed, he was excited by his rage, and 


D 


frankness (x22 


l. There is perhaps some error here, Hit is right, the intention must he to charge the Chalo de 


nians wilh lubewarniness. — 2. 1 jungs, AMI. aM shee teles 


TINGET 


2^ JOHN OF EPHESUS, [2^] 
SX Bato «JA JNa «pell | bas Jokes Mec SJ] ese 
moose -LD Jyog «aas MA] cohsly slo essa oo m 
Jos ao 4. aac aec] SE ool L? Saar lo Jue 
.moyouacnS jeux» odo Jl] «eacus Jew 2M jos Jamad «o.oo 
AL, foi Lao kloa Jassin à» jja £20 ax Mose oom xa ad 
A30) D Da Jla» TON) J Jenne D Lag v? oo eais «oo 8s. 


amaaa 2o (ao, bro pel aag? oad ewe Lade my Kal osoan 
qe KDa 4d «50)04240; .430]o ois 3o. US j lo fias lel 


Ll DSA erus frsass Lals <% el fil. a aa od 
a J pir pad my Ju) earshiye J Sh] Lsa Nod bts 
I eM Of p Jla [JNa was Lao „paa y> Jil -La y 
oU NS so y Ne fas uà JE] dona < No ooa xul so Laag So 
Laas nro ooo wo Malo oiu Sx Nos po UU] as farsa), 


denehed his fist has tightly as he could in violent rage, and struck himself 
upon the breast and said, « You are apostates and corruplers, and the synod 
is true, and | will not consent to hear these things against it from you any 
more, and. if vou were true men, God would show me a sign hy your hands. 
And he who anathematizes the synod contends with his life ». On all this 
commotion taking place great terror overwhelmed all the magnates; but the 
blessed man, when he saw that he had decreed death against anyone who 
anathematized the synod, was kindled with zed and his heart became hot 
within him as il is written. and fire seized his body‘, and immediately he 
went straight against him, and said : « The synod whieh divided Christ our 
Lord is anathematized not only by us, but also by the angels of heaven, 
And. since you seek a sign, by believers signs are nol required: but the 
Lord will uot show vou a sign outside vou, but in vour own self. And so 


” 


he? went out in. violent rage, while threats were also being forged against 
the Messed man. But after a day the sien lor whieh he asked appeared in 
him aecording to the blessed mains saying. in that he was smitten upon his 
head. and his understanding was taken away: and a fearful swe Hing covered 
him. ant] human shape was not recognisedin him *, insomuchi that his wife. 


Les gt 8s os Se, dJastinian, — t Miel who repeats Chis passage Irom our feb c his fare‘, 
This nent Poe etae oddest dares xit wand je the story whieh there follows the monk is perhaps 


35] LIKE OF ZURA. 25 
ad: Jya? alha? ol; Jars] Jia JI axo AD Kal] Js Los cubes 
o Naso ES Se Js sous’ Loo] NS Nhana» - Loot l5 
oda Sass wil Naaa Ji oh Je-NXoaaco wih Jlac] al Hlo o qd 
LEM Šip S00 +, PADI, oo Ss Wes Ps + farad Lod Lanas Jiao po 
Polo .e Koao conso SY] ops Mean] JN. Jrot poo lpr Laas 
„uaaa ooo fis Js. oco Shas; Laag paro Nas: JA] Jor oiled 
AX Joo wawo hoa dpa pra; Koo; Spo fac ocs 3o Malo 
Jio «o Fo] aod oo p) palsy So paro SM oot Ns W psy 
JL Nanao -haao Jl yl $98 Jaya cosy Xr Ne 
sas oM Joo: Saar JN aso oo» Nou lasag otxoy i axoo 
N99 SG. OOF à Qs yè | Sap Dad Jes: T ol Qus ee cr 


vib 


po Jas xt «oo Jlopops wedi <>% J? anol J -.L5axols 
JNa aa, fisado oana hamana haos oda v JL Naso 


l. Mich. p. 282 ins, was. — », y over an erasure, — $. Mx, «wo 


who was very cumming, hid him secretly in the chamber, that it might not 
be known to the city that he was already dead, and except two physicians 
and two chiamberlains she did not allow anyone to come in to him, while 
she sent intereessors to the blessed mau to ask him to come aud pray Tor 
him that he might recover, and he would at onee make peace in the church. 
And, this message having roused him, he went and saw him, and he was 
sorry; and he said to him : « Lo! the sign which vou senght». Aud the 
blessed man made a prayer, and the same hour his understanding returned 
to him, and he recognised the old man ind knew that it it had so happened to 
him because he had set him at naught; and he went on emtreating him to 
pray for him that he might be healed. and he might do all that he ordered; 
while the blessed manu said to him : « This happened to vou, because. vou 
tempted the Lord your God like an unbeliever, and sought a sign ». And 
thenceforth the dread of the blessed mau fell upon hin, and in fear he used 
to assent to his requests in everything; only the state o£ the chareh he did 
not set right, because the delinquencies of the Amorites were perhaps nol 
yet full; but he ceased that violence and these threats, while the power of 
the old man’s prayer. thencelorward wave freedom of action izz8225:z) to all 


26 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [26] 
[anad ud oo qpa KLS Jasaiso - loa face 3| Sasso 
pxsass rae) Joa Grosses <— Sx «| foot EN oil ]so yopo Jae 
JA flo Daso fish] p LAs fsooo bos .J5asj lisa» oído 
Mais, Jroartoo loa bAa alos oso JN >00 Joa £o soopsh> 
aas MS asco far. las JL doo Laso; Lysa e Joo rad os) L5, Las 
ada haoo- o> 22 do p9 0001 cians OLLdo RACE 
. Jlas e Kies Lasag Joos hasy e No «e Joa aote Na] Jlassasor 
ota: joa paar bre Loap haay odas Jais Laaa hiia; od og 
Long S Jla Napad Joa Naso oio JNS + ea has! joo 
stars LoMeásssa jaos Naos Jody ooa ga Aq? Las? fs 
HATA D mano y JI ` hazas «or Laas ih ASN 051 oar aal 
Das “(yaa30) JN Laio JN arsa dpaay aai Joot Aa }1,009 Lo 


Leanaig requies Hie indblilion ob W, Dut The sentbeuee gs congdelesd in another wis. 8 Mw 
c a MS bm eore v. be aud E. 1 Ms. #9. — n. Me nee Sus l — 6. Ms. our 


the believers ti every city and in every. place, and they openly held. assem- 
bhes, which! before his coming the threat ol death was decreed, against 
anyone who was discovered holding an assembly, And the fame of the 
blessed Z nra reached as far as Rome, while God continued to work signs 
and deeds af power Through him, and the whole city resorted to him, and 
he was made protector of the poor as in his country, while many greal alfairs 
were resolved by him before the King and all the senators: evpxxrzixo! i, while 
every day he was engaged in tlie same contest on behalf of the faith. Alter 
Hie blessed man had. been some time in the royal ety, the man deserving 
of evil memory whe lal at that time been made patriarehi in Rome, whose 
nane was Agapelus, was sumimnoued by some cause, and went down to the 
roval etly V aman who was a grievons blaspliemer, in comparison of whose 
blasphemtes those of the Followers of Paul of Samosala were very small: 
who. dP sentence From. heaven hal not overlaken drm and suppressed his 
Dlasphenies. was about do issue this order. that dhe name of the Blessed 


Ma thet tod-bearer should nol be eommemorated in the ehliureh at all, 


Peb os dH cune enia peltiical masson hot hino Theedahal Lib. Pont — 


[27] LIFE OF ZURA. m 
NL Doe e woos Sady J ol JUS woos JJ odo 
Jor w'y, Lia. Loads vomas J gada for wim ro vaasi 
JL llup Joa Wal] [3$3 me Mhio; p Nader [ror oso 
vaasa «36 pel SD a5 osi] loans oars Joor a5 Hy qd yl 
xol p Sa] [2x39 aAA, Jlaspras -joa (ek lias Laag 
Ja. yoorse pS ras haa Maly fasiaso od Landi [iso CS dese 
pol Jam, oars urs foot aa, < yl <? Las aland 
wS a Nia Jh haao ooo] jay ORS LM as Kal [aseo obs 
p woIars into : poe ott, Jaws besado; <> yl x? o0 Juil 
ANE JosL) «ooo user o] ess Nas yo] ooo ess] ooa Xe 
yos NI J oes: oo Ah 48] v» oa> p osote var LD 
oca be < hool Hy alasosa bot ca jan 39x Mes 
«522: jan fisaQ [53 wy ao Ges oso): ode .J 39 330 


1. Corr. [eoi eso. — 2, Michi, (p. 255) 982722. — 4; Ms. 020 


nor her likeness be found depicted. anywhere, while he presumptuously 


promulgated his blasphemies, whieh did not retard for him the reward that 


his labour deserved. This mau therefore, having been magnilicently received 


by the king with much display, inasmuch as he was not aware of all the 
evil of his mind, when he had come in, inasmuch as he was annoyed by the 
reports of the Messed Zura, brought a complaint about him before the 
king, saying, « Wherefore is the Syriau deceiver who is here allowed by vou 
to turn the world "to his deeeption* »?.— But the king, inasmuch as he knew 
well the old man's power, said to him, « And what ean Tdo to him? For he 
is a stubborn man who does not [ear meu ». But bhe, in order to show his 
zeal in the ease of the blessed man lirst, accused him saving. « Let me do to 
him so that he will submit, or be expelled from all the countries ». And 
the king gave him his will, saying, « If you are stronger than be, do as you 
wish ». 

But this man in lis arrogance without delay sent sone of his own leading 
men aud the king's to the blessed man himself (a large villa at Syeae on 


the other side? had been given him by the queen, and he was staying there 


1. Mich. * by his sorceeries', — 2. $e. of the Golden Horn. 


tede os 


[Dd n 


28 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [28] 
JNa. joa ONL soopaa SL, Joya je» lo ..Joot ool? JKads0 <> 
2 Lasag WW oaM LoL39 295 yao 2 foo Loro ooot «oot | ow 
Ll ol oio JUL Nil ols ora bomidi Dix») oa o2 we 
eX» Pl apr RX ue BL] bos sacl, colo I >” fl Ju 
Laal Jaco «o < ex AG] eso daze Jar 1,009 Kl 
Qo > arm fares Dy oD Sepe: pel > ooa Goi! sns 
flo - suff Lapio JRrxda+ Aer Saas Hy on Jes) Jac be 
Lana flo Je Jo Dawo > was foil ols frou] 222222] LAM 
ecg csse pus ene sers NO Gok 
Js Kins V» oo Joy Joi. sy Perse cà M» Io Js d 


aoao, oa] oes Nj Mo mag J Ed te card ete td JI ce 
Sh pops JNa Wdd0b] od Lor SS. edo or v2 sos] j c wohl 
eot: i20 Jjooo woad amy, Moo Maro pa20 
JL JAX nip oho Jjjj Daas pasl., y Od ver p? „haa Ns 


1. Ms. Opo. 


with all his disciples; for it was the first days of the fast, while the presump- 
tuous man set himself against the blessed man by sending him a message 
in these terms : « The king and the patriarch! have ordered that either you 
come here, or | come there at onee: and it is quite impossible lor vou to 
remain longer ju this eonntry. inless von do the king's order and ours, and 
make accord with us». When the blessed old man heard these things, he 
jeered at his arrogance, telling them to say to him, « We have alaw viva 
ud down for ns by our tene King, that we are nol fo receive anyone im these 
holy days, nor make answers zz222:52:5: tnsomuch that our door ts closed, 
and accordingly we are not free to answer either you or the king. But 
wall for us Gl the fifth day of the week when we shall open the door, and 
after we have opened it what God knows tobe right he will himself perform 
between us. But for the present we will not. voluntarily answer you: for if 
veu seek do aet will violence sou know ». When that wretebed man 
learned these things, he was led. with violent rage, and ordered the 
magistey to dake exeubibors ard irons ind bring (the blessed man across. 

MW ben dhalt nin as he was ordered had taken Che irons amd embarked in a 


p Mena 


29" LIRE OF ZURA. 29 


[20$ Jae, » Sods Jpa rs was, foo p „haa MM JN. adylo 
wands lasl «o Niao, jana loot .,ó6 Nan 3 qaselo Agi eas 
' aaa, (oco mrs) Jor po aaoo ars lily JN «olo 
«Mau, fas! ora Jis» Joao «ces oS gard fas] p> pel :floms 
000 n~oa basma ado] flo ade Jh fasboy 2à ysl vol 
p30 „adar amilo 9139 aa o pel Jao Da Moat 
Lapo Joa pas La, ool Lao; od yl „aao aoo qio 
ECAN, v» Ma <% òo Lonas J aso s au Sopa 
Jn» fjRIL he» SS aMo Jyxo LAA Bad vxo [9 ouo Nes lo 
ahoo [isa addy JaN; oof flung oi Jud; Wh] pdt 
e| doo alo Ja ap drt] Aas » Ajlo 


1. Ms. amay. 


entter (suey) with the military foree and they had. gone that he might 
leteh the blessed man, when he was on the point of landing on the other 
side, something like a wind took the cutter (Scope) and turned it back, and 
it was on the cily side whence he had started. And again a second time 
they returned, and approached; and. when they were! just about! to fix the 
ladder (52222), it was as if a man grasped the boat (xzez5:»), and with mighty 
force placed it where it started. 

Again according to that which is written « They knew not nor understood 
that they. were walking in darkness »*, he was enraged against the entter-men 
Scouovzeg as if it was they who were lazy, and they proceeded to go on 
board. And, as they were struggling and advanced little nearer, like what 
Is written. again, « The Lord was making war for Israel »?, there came 
forth something like a flash of lightning amd suddenly smote their boat 
(hos e, and the bench was torn oul of it from end to end, and it sprang 
away and mounted upwards as far as the eye can sees and then that 
wretched man nuderstood that it was God's power which was contending 
on behalf of the blessed man. And quickly with cries of lamentation they 
eseaped to shore; and they went and told. these things to those who sent 


them, and everyone was seized with wonder, 


1. Ms. uini, — 2, Ps. LAXI 5. — 3, dosh s. 42. 


N 


"VTS pode ube od jag] po wep hd at drad Vou] Jaslo LOOT RIO 
b. s Tode: .* . 


20 IOUN OF EPHESUS, [50] 


k 


cre! anaaga fsaro :fadsxd wits alps palo JM EIL 
on. dl <> woo su] su] aao LOADS 9 bcos seio] waa], 
KS; <5 pel soo Sau’ QU) Sas, laai Say hinad iae 
xD): dt odas [Oa RO «eo uaaa Daa Jos, ol NS foa 
KMS jM co So; aN low JysofKso kioll olasionaa Lod 
brad Daa fao Sapiens ls Iro Sx J? six Niolo prea 
"Shape Ne Muto awas «OO DS TAO ydo ou Lyre Oran dO 
hias p tis A> easy vtl, hias? ka; i392 JNS uus | overs 
Jarsase Lansa! Joao joa ral 2o... ND Alpas <> Jad SN 
pa, lass fasam ot [302 ops Joor Pay! ASA) LA Ett Jw? 
Nes oà Loan obo pda Joi TES Lasa jasad; - 20/0 Jeo Jasad 


* 


coma Lors je» JNS2ao aano ae Xiao - Joo awd frsal 


l Muh qu series. Weds 


Bat, when thet man had Degun 1o promulgate his blasphemies openly. 
awl poured his gall into the ears of the kine and the people of the hereties 
Who rejaiced that an tastrament iasavev) had been Found. for the spirit. af 
Iheir hlasphemies; and thev had hevun one aud another to become drunk 
on lis fond dress; and le was loreng Threats avainst the believers everywhere, 
masmi inashine a Ehee SPRUCH e his eves, then suddenly that 
happened in his erse whieh wasoma sail in the ease of the arrogance of 
(he Assyrian e Against whom hast thon opened thy tiouth and lenethened 
His ponere, save against the Etape ceil Israet a 6 So ms bra the Lord 
smole this man din his tongue, and it wrew long and. protended beyond his 
month and came downto his breast. makinga fearful sight with wreat swell, 
so that he was Dudes Pini ito while terrar thd trepidation seized all 
Whosaw ita at the siela hope eMe bdotseboreitosond manilest sentence 
of requital for his blasphemy be insere 0H the fifth day of the week? 
hielo the dilesssod man yed as the term and said, « On the tifth day of the 


week Ged will jrschayripay dal dus knows. cmd oho same day he whe 


Mier ibd ed Mecano pum s con A anil diro 


Ista He freta ol Tan 


but (his does not agree 


[31] Liki OP Z UB. a1 
Kaz? y? Daa [sasdiso So Jorio Ael oà [Los EN UE 
Hd Que ha Jas Jas Lal, .fasady obdsas Joa ja stro o 
Jas» pallas «30 oà hon ray wid anaal Jh 59 fo awot] 
bmd Jiady ma, jsa oda; ye» DA, x9 (v5) ool: 
„ooa «AL ors «^o Jasco Naa cài [30942 oppo co pad bape - uso 
Joa ja» haag oof Slo ooa <n Jago - foot SN so Jods 
©) A Joa >; Lang SX ous) ja wil toaa Joad waa, 
se Joa Hass NS Ness Best sels SAO 38. 3 jaooo wo 
26.2 SS RUN hano .oniAas oig han pelo Lardy pel Lao paak? 
J JLal lo woal flo ypa Jla, CEN ejm fae Koad 
AD 3s So Less asasi] lario He Koo pansies Jo. Sad 


]l. Ms. onn 


had threatened. the blessed man received his burial and perished!) and Pear 
accompanied by shame seized all the partisans of that wretehed man, and 
joy reigned over the believers everywhere, while everyone was amazed at 
the blessed man’s words, how God wrought this miracle in bim, When the 
partisans of that wretched man could not by reason oftheir shame tind what 
to say, they devised a plan, saving. «© Whereas on the day whieh Z ura 
decreed for the patriarch he died, he used enchantments against him, and he 
died on that same day >». Amil so these inen were ashamed and God was 
glorilied, and the believers rejoiced; and even the blessed mau himself would 
confess that God had beard his voiec, and had awoken with his. sentenee 
against the blasphemer. For, when he heard the openness zz of his 
blasphemies, he prayed and said, as he used to pray and say al all seasons, 
« The Lord awaked like a sleeper and dike à ian who hath shaken olf hi> 
wine, and smote his enemies behind him ^. Lord behold the blasphentues 
of presumption against thee, aud * Be nol quiel nor silent, O God; sinee lo! 


thine enemies make tumult. and they who hate thee have lifted ap the heal 


122 Apr. aen lo Lib. Pont.. but (his was Euesdas, and nol in Lent. Vs lasba sc 2: Mars, and 
A. addressed a detter to dustinian on 18 Mar. Jale. sabl anno, at he died et Vhurs. m Lent, il 
musl have been 20 Marg bul sec p. 30,1. 2, Very probably Ihe whole story basel und dhe date sien 


in Lib, Pont, right. © Zach. Ri. ax. 19; vives a similar uceonnl ob hi dealb bul without mention ot 


AZ. or indication of dale; — 2. Ps. cys ri, 6D. 66, 


\ 


ite) 


RO Se ET) 


33 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (33] 
p Jp < Jhasloo Joo LL saaswpao “sso ola p> hae fora 
ces oaas liso oò Jaseqgas ala flew Jeu oe cliens 
| Ajao Jord Jaso Joo soil’ su] wo alad; rM MUS Laso 
e s basasbso Jom AAR "e NS o ola A20 vaarna 
Doe J, ois a aen) Wy em Ire NS ouo pant Jh 
Nuo Laa SOS aail Xoo hasio je» N&.saxoo Joa CMU 
> hado <r Saard, vost aTa bos <x +. boot Je fojl 
workilo JN od ao ‘ado Barc Je] wid re Jha Joa b; 
hace Joa yko saasa Nes osso Joa lag voids] D> eed 
alaa T Tjan Noa pe uhso} Nolo . Nb NAA Joa by 
pind Lada ao Ste Jor plang Jamadar ul o Sos MANS + [wage 
el bees Sexo o JI JNisy Wed; Ji» "bh hal JN 


a Here hesins anc Mraclin BE 0S8 ra. headed ha upo leads [a x oa, vol [j lo. - 2B 
ie bor — a2 [i [Mate ods oo. — 1. p bearea(so. — à. [D ean (oie Sara Ul aiy 
Laces, 3 xen NSS wore tal pu ege uoo japo — n EE fates wie — dns di ois. 


— l. li voto 23 pe 


against tiy people! »; besides the other things which the blessed man used 
to repeat in his prayer and over his ineense. And justice did. indeed not 
delay to show the power of his prayer in thal blasphemer, And so everyone 
was amazed al all the things that were done throngh the saint and at the 
deeds of power wrong through his prayer, and gave thanks to God. and 
vapeeially at his labours and his petitions and lis erving and his tears 
night and day, so that not one hour ever passed from lint without his 
huocking at God's door, Even when hie was sitting and speaking with men, 
because his mind was dwelling above im heaven among the angels, his tears 
would suddeuly gush forth perforee; while he did not wish to do this before 
mien, iud sobs would spring up iu. him, and he would beat his two hands 
npon his face, and rest his heul upon his huees, and thus lie wonld ery 
loudly. And sometimes, when he was displaying the cheerful appearance of 
arbiter with his lips; tn the middle of his Speech at which he displayed the 
appeiranee of auehing sobs overpowered him, insomuch that while speaking 


with ous Be often did so; until by virtue of the freedom aziiceez) whieh d 
: 


133] LIFE OF ZURA. 35 
—~ ]1.20t es] airy h ajo alaa JM Joo Maly hawao yrs Mosel 
Je j ad; NM Isaa EN hoa fuas >» aois Nul pony p exa is ni 
ANM Iss OM. «o kas syani for S Nal oso: 0,30 ow ol 
Daw Q2) Noon Is Hs saps we Joal - uN Joo p? v? o0 (M 
" 22900 ulus) Sax vM eM. PE ote uo Jana] Ha L? 
ex; of Kuoot maaa oo Utes JL eo JM is «non JNa hops 
S wa OFX Aoi fas Jardfs ol p Molan sooto LSS 
^L] J paN e del eis yas £21 Joa lo fats p vol Joa Jana 
Js cs ee SS ie) eaa NN CN aa 3o o S 
oe Ne 
je NS J Si CON gando ei IN ca E «oe ea aS "hasJ 
«2e ed ONSET Jupa Loa od ohwaral <% ta) Dado foals 
iret hss! wisy [iix3o ee, frasas Od.) BINN Ea 


Nooa 341 [ioo ` uA TIINA MSas qe fade lax JSNagalo Jie tas 


1. B arw clas Als 123519 ea: o» Lnoxlo. Tp reas m utt NS ata m opo cx gs 


5. B ees: — 6. B «530939 qae .— 2. ins, S» os. [ruis bl duse con p oe dap e be R? 
(sir ge ba. — Iu, [1 IDeasaL. HH. Mags. — 12. B bL Rae — qu A Mise pn sine DD enam. 
ulasam — 15, B 454 foo. — 16, B Aoc. 


enjoyed with him E went so far as to presume to say : « Why is it, our 
father, that in the midst of laughing vou are thas suddenly saddened by 
weeping? This tells us thal your mind is nol occupied. with us or in. that 
which you ure saying to us, that sorrow thus suddenly seizes you ». Bul 
he would say to me, « Know, my son, that I did not want to do this while 
speaking, and my sius suddenly occur to my mind, and turn my joy to 
distress ». When I olten entreated him between ourselves to tell me privily 
his manner of life, even adjuring him by God. to inform me, he would 
again while weeping vield to constraint and say : < When, my son, I am 
constrained to speak among men, my mind looks at those above in heaven, 
how their mouths cease not even for a short season from praises. and sobs 
rise within me on account of mysell, how | am neglecting to praise Ural 
Creator who created me, and have ceased to make petitions for the forgive- 
ness of my olfences, and am sitting in intercourse with men: and this and 


other things urges! me to cease speaking ». And so f was amazed at this 


l. Sie syr. 
PATH. OR, — T. NYIL — F. d. 


SON ng 


34 JON OF EPHESUS. a^ 
Law, laio Lascia] !Nxanio aaan Slo «fut Lupo aaa No 
Jur crsos "coil a-eo Sax, Jun -Noi o ENE aaau Loo 
mht ola oe. frsas Xoo -, yor So er) fusions lo JN eese 
Aad LAM. cai s Jhan Jropro slo «Loo! Joke, hoops 0001 
qos x3]: Je. jemo yar Naso Jo Damo ooo «ol 
paad Jyo Stee Loses „Jage y> oT ogo haana A 
ya "Sas jlöllo flat :Joot - E Lasag hao q+) D Joa 
«2325 lea ood par eu haoh 30) ao ooo gaias Uotop fs 


9» yar -koa bAa alad op Er ad Napo Use «ol ui 
v-a, Jlasmaso -fJXa3 Lamao ooo «Ent Ioda . wa AN aano 
odo Nsoo JND aD Na haio Jlasdy [idea vl? 
a.a dot ert .jeot exul oe sal So JNa; JAaxsesorso ooo xr o 
Jasardis [3336 "Wo -ooo ghae Khaso flipao jlx; Qoo 


1, no5x2;50. | B boo Mere the extract ends — 3. Ms. wills inih à Ms. Qo. 


saints disposition, as well as at his humility and the kindness to strangers 
and poor men of whieh lis soul was fall with great zeal, so that in. conse- 
quenee a multitude of the poor of the city and strangers from every place 
Hoeked to him on account of the report of his. charity, until eighty and 
ninely and as many as a hundred tables were on some days prepared in 
lis monastery. Mid. thereupon be made greal cauldrons and. appointed 
men who were continually cooking and making bread: and in company 
With many he would with his own hands make himself into an attendant 
with. eheerfuliess amd jove While the blessed man was thas illustrious in 
all things. and deeds of power and signs were every day wrought through 
him. do aarme each one of which we have omitted siiee we are not sulli- 
cient, the whole city used already to flock to him, with the whole senate 
ayaza and! they who saw the greal freedom of speech (mzima. and 
Hie rebuke of thease who had the power of death and life aller God, were 
kept in great fear and decal of him, and everyone pal greal faih in 
hini. 

Then all the hereties ti the churelies aud monasteries were sorely dejected, 
and they cried against the King every daw dn great assemblies: « Hf the 


|OMeS om, 


T3252 LIFE OF ZU Ul S. 35 


bop JNa «2o L^5ac way JI ly ooa v y. Saas hojo; 
ax JNa JKenso «nam Me Joal Jl DAS opa Pow! [22.38 
fused ads Neol JMoo. Jaco £) JNaspdoy J-0 «2o ey Ohio 
was [iot ‘eho Jas We» macs, amaa, Lois h~ Jp doo. 
Joa yanal] «2l Lima, bido «nao hag 9l p eos 
Joss oa jida po +0001 apart Noa hägg ol aseo 
wants jos danoms Wee Jh. JNsops aol hlas sso loa basi 
e LL lo y. ejes jas) Loak 2à JNoop> à [aia js x00 
wats ea» oa Sl; Ln] wos, hanso Lans apaa DL J&»o; aaa 
Jac Sx gao goa eari] oouthy Jesop> aan oa; fsa 
qa eoa Vots p Jaa Jaan x ydio 49 „Jas Laso 
sanaaa pada Ss das «M 90 jar UH ee» APADO Gp 
visssi etse Mess] ea od cat qued 


1. Ms. Peas , eorr. s. D. und L. 


Syrian does not leave the erty, it will be ruined », and the king and queen 
when they saw it. in order that there might not be a sedition i6z25:2 and evil 
in the city, begged him to depart. from the city limits, while the queen 
prepared a place for the blessed. man in a certain camp (zz5222: iu Thrace 
the name of which was Derens thirty miles ol; and so he set ont thither, 
while the blessed Theodosius also the patmareh of Alexandria had. been 
established there; and thereafter the blessed men dwelt there together, 
while that camp /zzezzx. thundered praise. And after some time again ou 
aecount of the inclemeney of this place they withdrew to another; and after 
some years the blessed Z ura finished his course and Tell asleep iu the same 
place, his disciple Hananya the presbyter who "was next to him! having 
left the place, who himself also had been trained with him during the Hetime 
ol his blessed master Habib im the manner of life of both of them. lu 
these lines we have comprised the story of the holy old man Z ura, dreading 
condemnation for the omissions of all. his trimmplis whieh we have omitted 
and passed over for the reason that our time i» not long enough for these to 
relate them. 


The history of the divine man the blessed Z ira is ended. 


l. Ov Ssneeeeded him’. — 2. See p 07. 


t Adab. 


LU 
rob. 

* p tag 
DE 

DA dave. 


a0 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (36 


$a S uu usa aapa Alda méuirà !aeh 


aso Sn eas! E " Lor Laso * ous p 

‘Nas Aly vot pro : e Jo asd. las, M9 M ..’yaap sho 
we based, COMIC Qn pee pel Sy Moanaso "Jall Sx ang 
Sau S NI U Jain Mdso JH JN Nos Ja goo Lease » ON} 


Jos, Je 33 NS copay qaam, aah! ha Neo P aeuo 
ASOLO per per pori aen: ku Tas INT Uo saxi s, 
«o +2 Jlasajao Jl. «oon x 2x8. Da Jlaasy: Mons MEN Ole 
o wellh Base e ee par seme p oe pe eel) ol vot caes Jie 


D aNo Sly frou] oaa oot Loo VLAD Jl Ww was Mo So 


x 99 . : 
Jama [8x) “Lod spell) ores Jilo 2X5 we : Iis ls oi Ns d 
L This el, is contained in Fd. 161 v b where Ihe heading ids * [Saal „hals cles faa, 


IPSE FAIT à. PP ety where the heading ds lem gawas eie has ps [Meal col, aml CS f 276 
ES S : S ET 
ioa, where Hie heading is Pci» guas Ics zal mo get ma lero dea, hioaps (Meals pu this ch. 


| duse not the pagination of pP, — 2, dea NS iL 03s den bons à P Say E96 E 
EOS Slo. 6. Bosing Dam. — 7. A O8 —— 8. P ins. du - 4. P ins. Do. — Jat) corr. to 
evel. — il. Hh iunda. qs; D wanda Se 77 06 deleted. — 15, 1]* emanan. — it AN 
So c om. — D Born, 16, pam bado p angl alo c eil ele. — 17 60 30» -- 
Is NC pells 19. Haus, oo — fe, Th ine. o9 — gl, Pod o9. P on, 

MI. -— NENE rie qun HISTORY, or The BLESSED dons TOE PERLECT NAZIBITE. 


When we set ourselves 1o approach and record the history of this holy 
John, we exposed ourselves to a multilude of conflicting: Uhouehts, in 
consequence of the fet that, iP we lake upon ourselves to narrate severally 
Ihe signs thal were wrought through each of these same saints, we shall 
wander and extend into a great muuber of unending writings: and for this 
resson we considered at the Urimmphs only that belong to the labours 
ol each of them are enongh to exeite the praise of God that is in those 
Whe hear them. and how they bore themselves manfully in the course of 
justiee all the dass of there Hie without shrinking, while by reason of this 
fict ind the Fact farther that even one onb of the tinmphs of each of the 
sails that has been related is suflicient lo indicate Che divine power hidden 


imi Bin whe wrought tl just as it ds in the power of expert tasters to know 


37 LIFE OF JOUN THE NAZIRITE. 37 
yaad p> iaaa yas Nass ' JLL) Jago qr ha S dese 
5s saa: Ii5ota* Lad "Halls sus oto LOHMANN ra} lig ECT 
"Jesse De Sisan or Savor pe haag Wu x49 JR 
Jamaa fs} Jpscars * otpsadol Joas fasio lot Ben LNS, Jaia 
aaa Aso -ofsadol uias) oo Q5 oda d) <0 Joa «4199: fco Ne: oà 
fex b] La je WIN Nob bilas fase, plo waar Joa 
Jlads0 |? fase DA aea MUSH Jepo laxe Jouw* deer Bei 
aah sas] eo Jefe lease pes Maelo "Meses fole ans 
pax» [Niak p95] pa oND Los joe) Most ool waaa po 
"e el olo SQA CHIR Gy Joi sU JKaxasbses Laoso 
Cham., fasts copes Diol, » xh «2S0 Jas Noui se: 
„JNa, 30282289 y Lad? VALo “voNasst lo Is] Sr yas 


* 


|. d M zoo ILett o Met Lol. — 2, P ge e — i A 99e oo P aec comes Mata 
Mas 5 Boe a singe 7. C om. — 8S. B Iis P desee oot Bons, «eto ds Boon = HL BP 
bis. — 12) Pom, — 13, P be — 105. AC sine, — 15. P orn, h - 16. Edari o9. — 17,13 oho. 


— 1s. € Sfory — 10. Gom. P ius, Miel: — 20, € P epe 


the whole taste of a tree from one fruit only, on this account we abstiin from 
recording many signs in order, only presenting the triumphs gained by their 
labours and the manner of the signs to the memory of expert hearers. This 
perfect blessed mau therefore, who is m truth one worthy to be third in this 
series of saints, received his training from his boyhood in the great and 
renowned monastery called that of Zuknin'. while from the very beginning 
of his training he would consider in himself and say, « What profit have | 
from the fact that 1 feed this body the end of whieh was doomed to be 
loathsome and disgusting decay? and wherefore do | by a quantity of food 
amass and lay up store m H for a multitude of creeping things aud of 
worms? »; since he heard further what the blessed apostle writes saving, 
« Food belongeth to the belly and the belly to Food bat God shall make an 
end of both »2, and further that also which is written reprosehfully to those 
who concern themselves with the sustenance of their bodies; « Ye took your 
pleasure upon the earth and were wanton, and ve fed your bodies as for a 


day of slaughter »*. 


L Near Amida, see eh, 28s (fol lib ir bu — 2.0 Gor, Vr, ER iis GbR Yo dk 


tqq 


7A Taye, 


eps 


38 JOHN OF EPIHESUS. 35] 
D> Ung saah] ERE TETES qo Laxa p> asad waver Q2 
L3e& 4) e: Jolwa dar .Jeeu fupsaso Lac ae a Ns rw) 
asa quar ee OS bly 538! o aee NS Lungs 
ody ass `o Topo J| yasal col «o Jal] Maas 
xot Jarani Ns pano pod Wy qa IRs gail Jah] Jose 
faxsas [3&4 Qo. Ll win wo Ll soi cse. Moa «Ju aw Naso 
sNsoa I bile she JB haas plo oaas fiscal S wol 
US Adan o JANN dr Lee aM J lhasa fads Soo 
Jslo A oS ce I spado enis aM w'y Qoo s; voe 
exe) dex es vx ve QUON GM JR aubse ^ goths 
ya LBD Sx ims lapu hudo hag S.aseo Poasa, y 
Loss" of PLN seo hiso hanna [nM QJ JH lT yopo) JNsasla> 
Lah, Lo basn a Joor A edo Je» spawns J bela 


1 BP ins, dean — 2, Doa ea go Coonn — V BE big Doom. o h V dre |o Sese. — 
& P onn — 7. B. e go C ay — 5, A Dams — 1. (1 wado Jade p ouese]9. — to, DP danza - 
Hoc Sepa Blo ps BIDA word uiie (C o9 dins in later hand. — 13. C encsaaSs zel 
Br — gu Cpo Pins, atu We — qus B ph 


When then the blessed man through hearing these things turned his 
thoughts upon himself, he in zeal decided for hinuself that he would be a nian 
aloof from and a stranger to all pleasure that comes through the bodily tastes 
which spring up in food, saving, « F for my part did not depart [roii the 
Ihings of the world in order to turn hack to them: but it is enough that 
l have sel myself to be a slranger to tbese transitory things, in order to 
run aller the things that pass not away: and through holding: aloof from 
corruplible things E remembered and desired the heavenly blessings which 
the blessed Paul indicated and said. ^ Eve hath not seen, ner ear heard, 
nor bath it risen inte the heart of man. what God prepared for them that 
love hinr t. Vhese D omast run after awl pursue. with all omy strength, 
vasling all eorraptible things behind me, except the ordinary nourislhineul 
of ms body in order to sustain Ho». And theneeforth the blessed man in 
fervent zeal deeided for himself that he would eat no food ar all of any 
hind except ondinary bread, and water and salt or ordinary lentils. while 


In place of berbs he used do mix with these the leaves of a certain large 


RETE NL 


[39] LIFE OF JOHN THE NAZIBITE. 9] 


oux WD Jews Jesse) © Jes Mul ver Jen Jh Stags bei re 
Sol "do -Joa gtd ono col JoKimso -Joa sol’ o5 TAR 
La b Sol «2o 432) o» ooo <p ofa» Wid "ooo p «Joo 
JlaixsoNMaso yan Jes Joa waa flo + Ot Joo DU 
wot par "Lana NS S] o Joo Nel) JNasgaul Fors: Jaanisoo LA 2o 
AND; [ao sil Aal aSs; aao] Linshi fazas ag «Ml 
5N&.saseo agma NS of o» Joo sfiro sese TJoa WL fl.“ omaxs 
JL of sfras s yasa H fio ENT ^» eu, "oM vx Xo Loos 
SXMb «Sh 9 yl Jen Joules Mol Jl. nas Ns Jl Ly Doro 
H ss Joa A Jis p Jl Sas “jaar! ol Sfrad P yasa] caals 
J ois, otra (dnm yl fo | INS fano] haao 


(onn. — 2, 0 0: — 4, 1e? odd) = s d ihoa om. -a A nares (same band [So 
6. C lae umanta mal. — 5. P ins. oo — 8, (€ Neo wad KAD. Ti ans, uel c ei». 
ze bdsm. poe. Tn aston eS 315855 Us P dne ew» e do. G ins, leo 


16, Li 010,2» > (1 HS (ors p ho eoo 


tree that was inside the court of that monastery called shigra!, eatiug Tren 
it all the summer, and in the winter again drving the produce of it and 
eating what was left, while all the members of his couvent would ree 
bim to desist [rom this distressing practice that was distressing lis body. 
and in this only he did not obey: but the obedience and silence and 
bumility in all his other relations of life went even beyond the Binits, qualities 
that befit the humble and obedient; so that, if anyone stretched out liis 
finger and sluek it in his eve, he would not raise his face (2:6 02599) and 
look at him, er open his mouth and speak with hun, and, if he said lo 
him, « Take an ax and come turn this roch over », or « Come dig out this 
boulder that is not dug out », he would again not delay for the purpose 
of al least inquiring? « How fam Eto? (nen the mountain? over» orice dig 


out the rock? », but silently take the iron and begins se that thes. often 


L Ace. to Psmith canchusa linetena^z but Hiis seems to he a bust nol a targe free’. Perh 
the ‘syagrus’ of Pliny. N- df. xin, ds meant: Imi, as Une tree has eyed gb name to the fawn 
Singara oShreras, Hie name must be presumed to be myrbaes 2 As, hke novixvng 2t is ellen uscd 
this sense, Though unknown lo the lexieotis ef. eh, do Dol, do y fican d: ayo deor des RAI 


the should’, — ^. B shoulder’. 


“Adit 


tA b, 


40 JOHN OF EPITESUS. [^0] 


oon Le o Joa ras, Ao, P ow "Joa ja Lol Jl Le 
eM» 'JMss Gol joa Jia gepa was, o "joa pel oof, q 
Jian joo ward ol. SS, "ol Jsa oso os "loot Jaan Jen 
Jum es hell euer aer ans! Lda ly WES Iaa Jh 
ST Sad Basle S SS TIS oet INGE E fey fc 
s'o oo saasa «3o ois jawo fans «3 iN soin J2 St 
error aeo os "ooo qal po Jlaxas JaN po o Joa was Laas 
ro Serdang, Jeeps eas 0M ooo caro "Jit gwo uoa ooa 
faoa -haa bon Joa «NS No "NA JE: jM Jaco NS aso 
Kal Ad nl | SI Ns S60 xD «35 JsoN5N 5. aso Joa 3.0 aso ols 
Neo Jla po o NA] Jas P esum . os TJoa Jewo ^ aso: < Joa 
xoi iiss Kio J4NS&so |! pass] je» Jamas Jacks. oso, Nolan 


1, B evene p lae — 2, Pam, o4 Cem. — Cs Bins. Tee — h. Bleo e — 6. pe SL 7 
*» fur e: — 5s. Bans eec c o, ]' eo — du. C dns, ee — dE di ins, loo — d2. P ao qe o0 
— 13. B ins, voada — 14, (€ wol]. — 15, B petao. 


made a kind of trial of hin, and he would at once without delay begin 
what was ordered him. until that inan whoever lie were said to him * Stop’, 
aud then he would cease, 

Again a place bad been mide by hin in the monasterv-enclosure, and he 
World spend the rest of the day or of the night there, in vigil without 
measure and prayers without ceasing, so thal in consequence of these things 
there was generaled for bim first sorrow of heart, and floods of tears of 
vreat weeping by might aud by day, insomuch that his eyelids shed their 
lashes from weeping, and the bair of his head fell ofl in Iront, from the 
namber of times that he used to knock it! before God in supplieation, while 
all who saw him were amazed and wondered at him, and ou this acconnt they 
used to call bim, Jobn the perfect Naziite^, while he was thereby openly 
preparing for the contest with the demons even to blood, insomuel that some- 
Himes his mind received blows in the contest and was silenced, so that if there 
Wits anyone wire was present and saw him, be thoneht that he bad a demon. 
in thal he heed become silent and had seeretty in his spirit entered upon a 


secret contest with powers zzz amd. authorities, su during the intervals 


Dode te dn de obon the vroand cf eh, bs lol, aaa bh. 


|41] LIKE Ol JOHN THEE NAZIBITE. ful 
LOPS AO ojo. Suo Lee] eos Laaa [op -Laoly "Eas Joa 
15 Jho Joa anois bo laso vm ders ` aso .o Mao) 
lasis flaw eM boots -ottattmsaucsos "oom, drool Jods e 
JNarno epu "Kao Malo coor soul] mere 00 + WHADSPNNS NSS 
wis g> coo «o9, ot sJleizselo Jno; awasi wok.s lo 
Les, ege So rw II] Joo ases ff fos; hoa o e Jat 
SLasäaso fos JNa; Jlopor Jor paa ota ‘Maotulfo oor ipo JINazol 
Jase so sao Q3 4380. J ol d£] ais ooa xao Js fas! 
Podo haao | form dim] of yo aMail laarsardo Na 
e SON 3o x33 383 oad ooo qà Wasa VES ES H apn 2.804 
LADD cobs! giao Joi” aano aaao cos |” vol 
eos Nol asso £t Ml JKs555. JAàzo| ro Jn food wes 
JE lad ^as Ji “etry! SSK Qe oly fl ixl 


L B eorr. from Weta i) Wea P MSazS 0 s, P ogs biaa. — 3. P ins oaao. 4 Poprefo o 
5. For e Slo P 90 — 6. B owela C P wbi — 7. BE Ballo P Sl fore — 8. B 
JaaFadso. — 9, (; vexed. — ]0, P Laa — 11, Hi lapamato p jogadora] — o 0 gls 
— is, P com gias. — 14, P pl. — 00. € «9L. — 16.6 ins loo 


of the contest he was so hard smitten that others would approach him and 
speak with him and think that he was dead. And so for ten years this saint 
contended: and at last, when God saw his conlidenee in tom and his 
steadfastness, he gave him strength and vietovy over tis enemies, and from 
that time his mind was enlightened and his spiritual sight cleared, and he 


attained to high and marvellous conceptions Mesias! at whieh men marvelled, 


though he had not faboured at reading the Seriptures, but instead of 


everything he would witer a series of constant pravers; and through this 
there was given to him great perspieacity in the Scriptures and the commen- 
taries, so that men were unable even to comprehend and take in the height 
of his words and the depth of bis intellect, even the scholastics amd the other 
men who were learned in the Holy Seriptores running to hiw to hear his 
words, while they were amazed and praised and gloritied God. And 
afterwards he attained to authority over unclean spirits, and over great works 
of healing; but, if we record these severally, as we have also stated above, 


many sheets of parchment 4227459. will not snllice us. When the blessed 


* d dur 


TN e] INC Sab 


* p las 
p d. 
ONE Esc 


^3 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 


= 
le 


MSS eas [Lisa flora) bot Jasoa soewo ae Lis qo 
9.5: «ooo ` haao cana oia» Xs Ianga 5jj& 94M 
eo ey Lasag S.asco Mm c "Lalo JM ops | 
x Pise] — 2049) ol So wing JE ads sue] p aand ll QM 
sa Laaa uo] re L? o} os sano! fas] ats Pro wo jaan, 
qo Jo. ] 5 xao * phased: oss “ano ol t2 1:30 sol aaa 
a T are OP gl PD RR ONSE pel Jeses; reps 
Ns lady lo! aau ji WC» ean) Djal o» fra x» ph 
IT oot Joo. maa [a2 [eM Ji o/ r3 Jens A4 a jaw 
oo Jona, Pas] A DN v5 alo Laag o Joa a9 po 
KOSTN Je Jis amas] hoo Jaska Dad ash], Bg): Laak 
NS. casco jen sxa] o5 ji T Jasagy oag ol CECO 


L haah bec — 2 B e 0a o cing c- 5 i bopo CP Lagi? — 5. € sanjao. — 
b G Hael O Pere s He 9, Roum — le Com g — 1L G goa — d. B gtl — 
A ame — Py CI! esie - p. Bains bow 


Jolm had completed. twenly-hyve years in this [ife of perfection, heretical 
machinations assailed bis convent’, aud all the leading meu in it submitted 
under compulsion and great constraint (Zezyzz); amd accordingly the blessed 
man prepared to witlilraw from among them, saving, « Por my part I have not 
forgotten the words of our Saviour whe says; * Whose shall deny me before 
men, Falso will deny him before my Father whe is in heaven? ». Then he 
left theng and departed, while about thirty men among the chiefs of the bro- 
therhool and the leading men of the convent also went out after the blessed 
matt, saying to him, « Death with vou, out father, ts more desired by us than 
life with others». Mid so they set forth and went to another district; hoping 
in God, not even bread Tor the day being found upon them, while the blessed 
baa eucenraged them and said, « Would, my brethren, that we eould attain 
lo the blessing of those who have been persecuted for riiliteoustiess! sake? ». 
Vid se they found a certain monastery amd took up their abode in it, while 


the Fame of the blessed Jobn was beard also over the whole distriet, and 


EON Ie auendo ed Stora were expelled iet seo Palro, owe ged tn as Hee date ot Tre begumnme 
ub his toe Bon ver oM anti. Seem, dote Nuts 


[43] LIFE OF JOUN THE NAZIBITE. ^43 
[203 «oo. vod Najo lañsas Loans ooo eed} «Ml LORD 
uflrol Joa Lols poothaas as; Lots Lawo alaa ados [Kars 
aloso ^ Mas JL < əl, hal Jol “jaso Joa sab sul So 
LAAN cis. 5 D0 reddy] odes os Liam we} US EET 
asa.a | LoDo Ago Nn ss Otay! A Fea pa !N.Las lasan [às 
AOD E Lasag we? o0 esd t2 ads ollo T ISNS Pook 
No * eo ary] Lasoo ICON Ns Sb Jio uw A99 paso 
JI, — I^ Ny le 0,01 ogy «uN, au] SoS y/o we ate! 
os reo AMO xao AD ho) amda lo re Qoo 3o 
san «3er Ne ors UT Goth eol Laor Coles flaws fied 
e» Jlolo Joa Kul 29 Jer try JEU Jes [sooo fuse JJ 9| so 
„oà iSo. onasenl que P asoilo JI PONO Joa Nye oma 
à.» joo pee Hd acado o> Jlle Jose "Las No; JN soo 


1, Com. — z, D waste. — 3. Pj. — 3 BP om, - 5. B umoles c vole p umookso. 
— 6, BP Mads C Nar — 7, BP aree. — s Pe — 1. CP Se. — 00. 6 exile — I. LE 
selo eb — quocp — Dh E Baas — di A gob — 15 GP elo — 16. Poom — 17. B 


hasal, Jap oue. — Is. Dom. — Iu, P hæt. 


accordingly all who were sick with various diseases and who had evil spirits 
ran to him, and the divine power that was in him would confidently heal 
them all, while evervone was amazed and thanked God; so that we also went 
to him in the district of the saints martyrdom, 1. e. tu his exile (220%, and, 
when we had sal down to take food, five demoniacs together with their hands 
tied behind them and howling beat down the door and came and entered 


go to the 


cC 


foaming; but the blessed. mau rebuked them, awl ordered them to 
martyrs’ chapel and He down: and so they went: and, after we had had 
supper and everyone had gone away to rest, he himself went out and went 
and made a prayer, and expelled them ' all; and they were found in the morn- 
ing at peace and in their right minds. And we saw it, and were seized with 
amazement at the power of the saint's prayer. We were further specially 
amazed at him, because after severe labour he was even so no! remiss; for 
there was an enclosure jn that monastery, and one fiz-tree inside 1t, and. he 
went and bronght sand and laid it on the south side of that tree, and he filled 


I. Se. the demons. 


SA d Sed 


tq pna 
wh. 


A^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. Aj 
«20 0006 «4.0030 JM case lo] AM poa Wa D> Be: otbopops 
ooo .adssh] «ol <} E „ooa La DNA «wol «on .J 30a 
ol yo Sokal Taanga qx Qoo ial fof; Jaang ror jene 
Hinge fee etre ado!) e| pa Loot asus ca haad Jie 
lie Ls oHa hapa S ad aD; © Lo Toy iN» 


Sy, lo london jM Ljan ao Jie 5L pute " Jag. JL osot2o: i 
ql alaa “p foo o22was, klasy xr ere Jn ! Eres] laS 


ES uota 1m a9] + 01,2089 «2e 001 cody Ja» Jlso Assan - ROI 


Lopa ese JASN ye into 5} o Jis Jesor Dd) cd Hobs 
<% J Pro 231 joe leg? ol Lied «4a o9 JLoiN aas Jaos 
J Jaa Ho «oo s oA cuu N39; Cua Naan; Jasas 
d "HesNaso, fino LOND gaano ouo eu lo Na? 


Teale Ry te a Phe 4, d ameter Cp esto — 4 V beet a Pom. sini, 61 
Lsac|s wa mh os ode. 7. Vous. P Fob — si Phas. e5 — Pons — dus C om, I do «qo — 
1. In Babe numerals arean marse. P! — 12, P ans, wal. 


a large. jar with cold water and lung it on it: and he continued kneeling 
over against ib on that sand all through the extreme noonday heat, while 
we were parched even by the shade m consequence of the heat, Again, 
When they had passed a short time, they were again driven from that place 
also, and that whieh had been sent te them by the grace of God was 
laken by the hereties, while this also gave much pleasure to the blessed 
num. who said, « They have relieved us of a bodily burden that we may run 
after spiritual things »..— But, after twelve vears had been completed by the 
holy Joho in the comet (zyos! of the martyrdom of persecution, he ended his 
eonrse in the same exile (25260, ad went to the mansions of rest'. Before 
the time of the saints end, when we were with him. when E Bad heard the 
words of grace that used to come ont of his month. we entreated him to 
tellus what line of virtue seemed to him to be greater and more execllent than 
the other lines tn God's steht. "Phe blessed man sad s dE. Among all the 
courses of justice nothing is greater in God's sight than submission that is 


pocfect tn performing its obligations. im whieh are comprised all the Iv pes of 


[45] LIFE Ob OHN THE NAZERUTE ^ 
dos] qux Jae NS od ily “Pas col sia Jes das 
xi xn i hop hal - asl "hae: yl Da qe oot e$ haa 
haäds ya) colo Jeanas Qe Joa ND, Da Liga eo ena 
ve Jasas ad qda Joc P Laso fluo oao Jhal oly 2o 
cow! ve. ! aae: avaa a] Saad Loo LS ootloi Kisco -ooo 

vu nas dns cuoc flaw, laws Tän gao JN SS Jis 
ea jm roa. JL hse aul Soy ee eel Pada Laaa 
eased Jio wot PIND pal) oso Quads colo od MEN 
JaN, vaai Wes paso) gania haan colo Jo. vaok 
balai qao aN E Seo. eal NE Makes, 
SST os HNL eae US [uai bos Sets cis lou n oS cool 
wore dKsiay vit uel jls Jlöllao amps Jes heh pels 


. 


l. CP am. — 2, P Role. — 3, P oon. init. — 5. P ins, el. — a. Bi 54 Ws sl wy ero 60€ 
Dd Weta [Datos Ie Ls. D deas EIS, oves — & |} «29230 ore. 9 Tt oweasaS. 
— io. B. pl. — th. Pom. — 12. B gets. Is. BP ins Baw Do por wag ve — Do P $— 
16, A DX% — IT, N din erasure Dons oo 


virtue that bring near to God». H. Again a second question wis presented 
to the same blessed man by us. « If, as vou have said, our falher. sub- 
mission is thus greater than everything, how is it that we see triumphs won 
by solitaries and he mits who had not submission, and by the other blessed 
men moreover who also wrought mir acles and great acts of power, and lo! 
these did not live in submission, and their virtue was manifest to everyone? » 
The saints explanation. « Consider, our brother, the divine words, and 
they will themselves show an example of the p that is hidden m 
them. We hear the holy apostle saving, very mans work shall be iade 
manifest; lor that day shall make it manifest’'. And we have learned again 
from him in that he says, “There is great fear of falling into God's hands 
And again we hear the prophet AA o God's. judgments, * They are 
like a great deep that is nel fathomed at all Whence is it nowt tell me 
that on the dreadful day of judgment fo many imong those who as vou said 
were distinguished by acts of power and by signs and by miracles the words 


of our Lord will be spoken in answer, which in his parables he saul to those 


l. 1 Cor, mt D$, — 2. Nebr, x. at -— 4 Ps NNNM, 78 This phrase. which oecurs asan below 


(p. ^6, 16). perb, means Mas il not be” ^M hiat is the dithe ull’. 


TEES 


"Th des 


poe disse tg 


ad Pod 
h, 
VEL T te 
ve. 


^h JOHN OF EPHESUS. ^46] 
wench! x5 JI “aS owe so ooo xol: vo] des ! exe] 
Hy a> bl pel <>l: yoo poly FAS ogo REO v Isa poasco 
Spiro: je X994 JAS ax SL, wel We» Lolo wars Jal See 
* ca prasso : oor] yo SOLD) «capo T oaan po Ja 
wol jal cso -loina Japano qr ^el veneno Ja] eux 
seul] Janis Ls&4s Jes oot So} haag o'r soos] Qoo M 
bans pAX? ee oo gy 090 Laar ol; dun wore 5 ‘Jsamsddro 
xuuáxe jas] we Jia Je "Waray otia aiaa ads v 
asi voee dao No "aset Udo .'"fhasfasy opcasiage 7 AD5_ DAD ` 
J Joes LN gol: TRS. pel acs] wy, jasana Qoo 
sao] palo JNSL, Was Gol fad Jas ge ots ante JI] ca) 


I^ 25) Na ws fun] pedro Fas] ' el y oi lio Lo Jasas 


1opGÉ»bo — s pP oom. — 3. (€ dus. Iago 5s V om. * B ootetahio — 5, B ins. vol — 8H 
wl P om. 2. 1} wtataaadSo p jamisoso -s HN e. c06725. ES Vs A IEEE (m 15.2205 s. 
eo. U onm — do. PH oiseau s watao addres fy dete — l [553 [OSs p ERU) MEE 
ERE LN lel: 1s. P Moola. — r. db prtann unod] aal i hasaa bo for bo {ee 
CP oon. el Vea hins. zl hee (in red. 


who said to him, ¢My Lord, have we not in thy name prophesied, and in thy 
name done aels of power", and he on his side will say lo them, 7 Verily | say 


unlo vert 1 Know von nol! 


And again ta the ease of those who finished 
their courses in submission for God's sake, setliug their will aside and doing 
thatof their masters and of their brethren, and despisimg men and shnuning 
even The appearanee of virtue, whenee is ib tell me if that blessing is theirs 
whieh was given by the Lord of blessings to the lowly, and to the poor 1n 
Spir, as die also states in Ihe prophet, ^ Bettler is one whe doeth the will 
than a thonsandg OS M henee eun we understand the secrets of God's dreadful 
Hoal pudeement. and his provision made du rehteousness? And my opinion 
is this. that those who have spent the days of their life in due submission, 
according to Hie gospel izaci Saving. come not do judgment, but have 
passed from death te fife, ; 
Verda the third question. And what is the submission which ts so great 


in vour eves, O our father’, and how should the man conduct himsel who 


Mall ] pe eat PAD We. S tops VAS VE Y vm Ups adl ye. 


[47] LIKE OF FOUN THE NAZIBITE. A7 
BaMa e ha, Joio Ja | NN io njaaa HADI AD, Las? 
taD QNS o € Hes qœ lo vakssol nnd Was x 
JE go oon] e» dau ime oU Sas frat» wad „pasia, 
Joon e JE pax l.20a 24 ‘Jasas PAD p jasan S Kilo 


1 


je-2.x259 Quee) "ody aa “tanao Lï jloyopaao Jlar Maca 
1) me? Jaros ped flo re MIS H bos JNaszals Oly aso 
„yN Jooss w'sy hay Jusjaas Moly oa la oro] Jor. Mes 
Wad CN» Joou ipaa t Jslo 42 39S ade, oàn 
OG Vl Ji eo Maldron prado Nu Sek of ras bso; Sas 
Qe tay baw (fed pas Rules hop arsi cod pas 
2A) waLa Clas Dom mE re Nos I" Jof. AS 
e» o TOD) oe Nw poor! "el Sle Jy oo paal JAà&sl ais 
A> soaa] Do oan PN] yai AD yapaa! T RS 


| B upesklo — oz. p Lnd: — a P BNO — 4. P ins. ha. 5. Boom, (bees for haags. — 
6. B. S — 7. BP om laaa >. -8. B om. C HL oso el. — 9. B eo — lo. € ins. ael. p. p bee 
— iz. € beg — 15 Hs P ls — dis B ap euo C ap loo P a0 lees 1s, P himos. 
Las. Cine, þe: — 7. È om. — I8. B aa. — 19. B ins, Ot ow — 20 B oom — 2H B oa 
s). GP om. — 23, 38288 — 23. ji o'o — | oor jeu. — 25 R ins, oM 


has set himself to practise submission. and how should he attain to this virtue 
which vou have mentioned, which you have magnified beyond all classes of 
virtue, and what models are suited for the man who is submissive to 
observe?» ‘The answer of the same blessed man. « There are many models: 
and there is a submission which while appearing submission begets loss for 
many by being accompanied by pride and by contumacy, and by the personal 
wishes ol the man who seems submissive andl by all the other things; and 
this leads to hell and not to life. But the submission which properly belongs 
to religion is this avhich should also vary according to differenee of in- 
clination), that he whois ready to snateh spiritual fruits should be ready 
to listen to every order that is given him simply, and to carry it ooul 
diligently, not judging the man who gave bim the order, and aule 
‘This man has ordered me wrongly’, unless he orders some act of sin 
that is ab variance with religion, carrying in himself the model of the 
patriarch Abraham, who made i0 question or objection against lim who 


ordered him « Take thy son thine only son hint whom thon lovest, Iac; and 


* 


> 
D 


n 


AN OLN OF EPHESUS. [As 
y = Marana De js,oa9 Jas ! Dot r9 .J5e4) xe y= NS JS 2 
y Hd Joouo .frxsy > Jo amaha o» ^w] SaD EY 
coD vodao Dy o po! p20 Lhasas, [2282 y-le basiss JL. 
J- sanna ANLA ANSE 2C bo os yl vt Iad, 
hai ofS jpo N oa o "Xe. ooo .' flraias Jasna, oasis 
y 2 one anaji A Ips > oot PHD < Laio JM LA 
sel Lsao isiy > oN bos aS 430] [002 rn} polo aul] 
o Hga: wahh fro bssy os jois Laszlo suonna Sy; 


Danae BE pool haak, T E paana oSo cosas ob «2501 


vt Moo Mays ios janas, ods rao wtpods wil «^98 o'o So 


«le wae Of y oodo JI] .'" rM re ME d «c hse} ooo 


waagillo Salo UDan £23 oXQ4Mo Sa oA, ooo vho Ws 


L Mes deos o x CP opes — 3, 1 be lh — 8. Soe sies — 5. 6C bo Poom. — 6. P Ske. 

7oprdbaraBDa so Haws os, C polls Oo C ee cs do G on -1L B ins, e R N 
bis. bul 2e' apps. deleled. — 1s. [5 oas boss woo erata. 1^ BR werd Qo es anes C es 
425560 P essaie wllsacans mg N Itan. 


go olfer him upto meas a whole burnt-olfering upon one of the mountains »' 


And, when this man received the order concerning his only son, he did not 


judge the saving that preceeded it whieh he said to him « In Isaac shall thy 


seed be ealled, and Ihis seed shall be as the sand of the seas and as the 
stirs dn heaven ^; and, when lie said to bim to whom this son was promised 
for these purposes *Go kill him; he accepted th simply, and only. determined 
to show perfect obedience, and to carry to slaughter bim in whom he pro- 
mised him that his seed should be called; and, what is greater than all. 
wilh his own hands to sacrifice his only som. without thinking and. saving, 
Yesterday he said to ine; s In this son shall thy seed be called », and 
now he Sud. 9 Go saerliee him», and how will seed be called in him aller 
he has been saerifieed 27 Vid vet more facets than these were to be found 
in the affair of the Blessed. Abraham, f£ he bad sought to raise objection 
against him who ordered bini to carry out these two orders whieh thus 
seemed outwardly to he opposite to and inconsistent with one another, but he 


even nidoubtingly believed and trastet him whe promised, and to him who 


Lani: o2. go salle Een aA 


UNE -ika 


E. 1 


AQ LIFE OF LOHN THE NAZIBITE. ^A 
? fLa. ase aot. qeu 5 Lo Loss] rao} Ss Sas ly | iens 
wy Daa Jio Lasa, Jlaadsas bass Jootsy soia] À JlarssoNaso 
2er AANA GAAS Joos oot eus Ne No fao; oo o» 
4e! [aS Nose J "Sar ooo . paS c'os hs Jh - oS -a.91], 
recep’ so OLLd0s ae ee] Ss boast Ke SN, ms oo Nola 
LLa pa | ! pais I" pa. abso LLO, De o ol ow as oo AG] 
frase Jasas re Jom I NS ass oO ae ec! do > saaa 
Jooss .! oases bilas wv Lyra «9925 Jlasoo os NU] Joal, 
EN hä S aaa, v) wA Alaco oo T% oa QosM aio 
gor] 3o NS as "Soto Nas va! ASSEN : za], Ly 
Sas soul Lass Sy: ERAN jaxa, SE so l danus 
M Da Jods re wl No JI p30 $9430 pad ^ leon, A» as 


l. C oin, — 3, |! l3896a8. —— 4, p aps, lab edt axel bul A eorr an Paler horl, went 
haee. — aoa flatsedascdso 7 pn S39 por 89. — si prom. — 9. CE! eo lo, P p9, 
H. App corr, froin les in ACP bests 2o p p BSede — OERAL om, P isodass © p), pp pisos 
— Ee B ggo — 16, B with o inil — 17, [1 Dupas Pos 


instigated him to kill the son of promise lie assented, aud he made ready to 
do it without Inqniry ; so qhatin virtue sed tie: walk that was sabmissive to 
laith and of obedience he attained the position of chief in the kingdom 
of heaven. So therefore he who is made subinissive for Gols sake 
should himself De ready to perform what has been ordered him without 
judging the man who gave the orders; and the man who gave the 
orders, whether he gave them wrongly or rightly, shall himself give ac- 
count for the ee given by him; fore the man himself also Teom whom 
he receives them has one who will reprimand bhin if he give a wrong 
order. Besides these things it is the duty of the man who professes 
religion by means of submission to have in hin diseretion iu all mallers Elia 
condnee to spiritual benefits, that whoever he is he may earey Thear oul 
discreetly ; oe. to wail upon the satuls, to wash the feet of strangers, 
to relieve them in all that they need, to clean their clothes. To mend 
lit balaren decns: “lie Spake ha eaten based abont the relief 
of his brethren in all ways. to keep waleh and vigil and pray and siwh 
before God at all seasons, and keep his tongue Prom evil. and his lip- 


PALR. Oli, FONS. — 4: 0| ' 


tO Eg 


Pod 


ce as la mode D. alasse Jans oe 003 C$ 
lasas cooks, "Lees ave doers Gots Laws SUA SE ass | Naas 
saana sux [be JOS qu ao cA ek anaa Laaa 
Leese NUN JaAMÜU aaa vM [ee "~ Lou aaa = 
—À Ries Nas cea oss ER c DEA Ses * alot Noses 
Do Bas, YE Ne bx Lob Grin Ss. Ls 
oo a tee Ue La Seca 


on ume om Y, DAMS o AM LO M ` 


f) 


A ec. a ee e NECS reuse. 


d 


(o9 QM ve 5 
: ` 


NS 
SENS Du WESS Iaa RM AAS. 


NN Lus Mule Eu em cL. Lao Xo ELS, losa 
‘ Lica ‘ ee UP CES 


P d . 


pat 


SONA Nooo wc» Nance: Reais 2G 
^ 1 
— k m] set wed os RM wee e 


CES 
LILAGIMM es Ces 25 Gs aK. Shoe: 22 lx dizx La 


TZ > = — A. 
SoS a DT aa C eS IU. Se EO) us ADS de reps — Er EL ES MS 
SO SS viia a m ee eas EGIT I2 cem 


d LIFE OE JOHN. EHE NAZIBITE vt 


dana] gs ok oe "eijesso oa Jil. JN taX Laos Edo 
oe sal eo I iuo las ie xs; SO Qon] ba eoe Lh 
LNA so x "leue cjua: Class aus Jeux) uxo) “L's 
JN [Nas "e laamsio JMXahso ‘hope poe Jose jma 
“Ss MM. JIMazsas «xl Jloo JNa, [5o d CE Xo 
taba] aD ha exul I oau oer | oy Jiono basio Mus 
wot [hie has fro “frase Ul lige A “Jager LOMA bases 
sS Messe deos coe ES Lxsdone JES Naas tay 
eee xe fg caf disup Node Miliae ijsele 
axade Mo cue sce oro eh Lamas Jeep Js Cann. 
Heo Loraaiso -heroas 1 Se sa Jano oh haad asadsado 


L Poses LU — s A ppp corr, fran, olaaa Toppy, oaiaao MIT A vod ans 
hz. qj o co deleted dm \ 7B Lon.a2e P bois ae. os (4 po xs Lanes o 
l. PS EP em — tL A leali here n ens dud is Pisae str" Toe ht Aan 
-R Cine ve. — 14. | tale — Jn, p aapa S ade — 15 VES Ae en t oo sil 


statmer and darkener of the soul. and will ery in illliction to God te come 
to his aid. and rescue him from his fraud and from his tilthiness "0 bu the 
vase therefore of this passion. our brother, he who wishes to escape from 
it and keep true purity. and be puritied from all pollution ef the Hesham of 
the spirit, needs tears amd pravers and many sobs, and pareity of food, ind 
abstinence from dishes of varying tastes; beeanse the desire of dishes thal 
please the taste are' a deep cavern in whieh is no standing-ground. — But 
think not that precaution against fornication is this only. precaution against 
that which consists in the open contact of body with body. but that alse 
Which is many times greater than this. the secret. [ornieation of the heart 
and of the thoughts, is that against which we ought to take special preean- 
tions and be diligently on our guard: because many are the wiles by which 
the rebellious fiends endeavour in secret fashion rather than in that whieh ts 
open to cheat and submerge and detile the soul thal promises purity to tts 


Lord. and strive by their deceits rather than that which rs open to stain 


and submerge with many kinds of tilthinesses, from the mention of which 


L 5€ 


an reel 
NU 
* B65 
vg 


52 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 52: 
< SLM. anada “ashasdds RAR OHM — Jae] 
Teotlotance Da Jb] paliso "Jai Joas ai] DaS: edo Ld: 
JS Jlassj < Je? DA sul LNs JLo co JA JI x? 
[s iw "od «edo JLo, NON ras Mjaa JNoog A9] 
JAzu]lo kla; Las S: v» JN aseo Jloaas sad [Paes Jing? je 
JL Les o ise oon) ba J> lp “Tanto eA ALO Ia 
oM zmas: py Las? ï aoiu x^2loN sso (ors; el Ss; fansa, 
Ios |Loiaxcoyo "JLolse d: Jjà 9 [esse flo ioa Moo o S eno 
Klaas, SA «2o ps KLS? wot waa RN yi T: ol fanan ol 
o'a g% Hio si»Nase luo oo haana M ESI £a» Spo - poy 
ol frmas iga GO prod Il S3Kisso Joop «ell A30 9 30 Lo? 
Hea JA rags Sx Jis: saaa ad w'y haa Jlo? EM 
ow Las cola, La v4 p BE yaon Nl P! obses EDAEN 


LH». = zo From this point two leaves are missing in A. — 3. G eo aagi Slo — 4b 
emblem. 20s a ang s 6. oun o 7 € Bads — s. Cins, Sa. — 9. ( latg» Ioana. — 
lo, € wal. — 11. (0 ajya — 12, C Mastds 


Pam prechided by great shame, But by. reason of the workings of these 
filthinesses Fin filled with many sighs, because there are many whe, while 
taking precaution against open Tornteation, are in other matters secretly by 
means of feshly desire grievously deliling the soul as well as the body 
through the entieements of shame, men who need great weeping and sighs 
of atllietionz awl how shall they apply a plaster to this wound that thus they 
mas escape Trom the dreadful judgment of torture. that is decreed against 
these who take part in these things? He who takes equal preeaution in his 
secret and in his open aets also does net yield to the blindishments ol 
fontness and ol shameful action, either secretly or openly; but more than his 
open guard tikes precaution against that which ts done in secret, because 


hi Wound secretly inflicted that is wrought upon the sprit penetrates 


lor than that whieh ts administered openly. put, af he be avereome 
How apse, secretly or openly, even se he should not despair. of 

hin | deliver bimsell to the service of fontness. but turn straightway., 
bearing alllietion of his disease, to the gracions Physician, who will 


Laz LIFE OF JOUN THE NAZIRITE. 53 
«3l olo . edes aad plas oaasi, Bsp MaJldy suo Las] 
Pes Scar Je] Jans. «ob “sibs wo hs; lu] Sata Jano? 
«2l cbe IRS og lasak 2à «ae s^[xoo. hoa flo] o y 
s'a sl aland, Lap SS andy so odo flas of Sa Co eis 
ex! [5 oy aD Cd! Pans np Lag Jojo el, 
a0, 9 Nos, RO yA dood J ECT qo CI «el E hA Loos 
lo ey hoa D ao galano] uta! Ww» Jadan odas 
p pam wy ijo JM Saase, JNsias is Š <% Tga, 
Jla oS Vator caso S00 ebRA qe) jJ. amas voe ooo p 
pepe Nsan A o TaN fas] Lod ^e RAD oot a ag Son 
Joi rand . "JM AL, [Nassar floor Lads Koen «99 g oralis 
Sudo Lama l aoa Nias pa p raia Jago Jauo 
Jaiswe pas sl again ooksilas; Laan led; via od. seade dll 


13: 


HD coorasy casoy ALa, Feaanul] pas] anal: qdo JLo, 


1. C e. — 2, (6 eios. — 3, 0 beo — 5$, ph — 5. G TY ee. olas — 6, B pl. — 7. € 
+ — 8. Com. — u, Here P begins again. — 10. P ins. SE - q. B 85, oy». Points precede, nol 
follow, in BU (reading of P unknown. — 12. € ins. NS ese. 15, P om. 
easily apply the plaster of his merey fo his infirmity. And further, even if 


the man who has been smitten receive healing, and after it be again 
smitten with another stroke, he should not even so neglect to run a second 
time to the Physieian's door, even if he be smitten many times, or refrain 
from entrealing for a plaster for his stroke, a thing which we see happen 
in visible battles also to those who are smitten, that, as lone as their life is 
preserved in them, even if they be struck many times, They do not neglect 
to take measures for their bodily healing with all carefulness. So those also 
who have lapsed after the lapse of a spirttaal fall must act, not falling into 
despair of life, and delivering themselves into the hand of their enemies. 
When these things are brought about in the case of any persons. thal, alter 
they have been involved in any lapses. they thrust themselves tito the deep 
cavern of sin, they are worthy objects for great weeping and many siglis, 
in that, having fallen throngh a lapse, and bavine been a httle besmirehed 
with mire, instead of running to have their stains washed. away, through 


he shameful teaching of those who caused them to lapse they resolved to 


* p 16G 


54 


DA JOHN OF EPHESUS. [54 
ho NZD «ooo. coy sas SE 9o s 20 plassgs Joa 
Jeol Lado sh Loo Jlasy ^às NM. Jlex [594 Lad; 
Lacs]. JL ]i2)o Jas lo Nas ^ Paes Jlslo M o MM, 
JM aar0y Jas pw «oo eS MS y [Laaa A NN 
iN "Jeslie Jl J poo aso aS 5h Je Jawa o> 
Jaso ` «DO! LOO Loiaso ood ies, JKs&4o Sx adash] J E 
“Opa gl «oodosL.. 2: oà LLAD, otia cosas axle JNA 
eo Las yodod; forte rosary "ooa, “Lop oò sores ss 
ll ota Lo <% . alaz, I" aloi aseo Op») OD Dwo pads fly 
fia oso haa oly lal urs hass CaN "esso coors Liaz 
Laa oóà Lad; vaasil] ous oas Plana oós AAD yl 


BETET naasia osos l QN ala ND og .a2caJll No ote Xe] 


|, | haara Qe s Pome. aD one — 4. 6 995 — 5, C dns «e TETTE NO 
EE Vago IS eeloil.lss.. s. GP. 3239. 9 (i oe D eoe lo. €, omlasdtarco 
Lih C 09. ban — D Paw bee |^. C ous 


throw themselves completely into. the pit ob filthiness, and. voluntarily 
remain in the very submersion of their pulrescence, which leads them to the 
submersion of econdenmation in which there is ue absolution, and to the 
wound for which there is no remedy, and bitter lamentation for whieh there 
is no consolalion, and the dreadful judgment of torment which has uo end 
for ever and ever. In the ease of those who alter the lapse of a fall are 


smitten with tlie same pleasure of sin, and remain in the same den of eorruption 


ud perdition, without having eoneerned themselves for the resurrection of 


their souls ind the saving of their lives Trom the putrescence of sin, and 
have delivercd themselves to the serviee of Satan, to whose will they have 
been made captive? by there free chotee, the requiter of their serviee with 
hun will repay them with eternal torment that passes not away, and in 
return for their affection with him and their remaining in bis company will 
male them to inherit part of bis possessions, whieh are outer darkness, 
Vherem is weeping amd guashing of teeth, according to the saying ob the 
Lib-Giserc. stuee thes have themselves seceded) from him who have joined 


them] to the destroyer of their lives. with whom if they remain, they 


ASEM 


[537 LIFE OF JOHN THE NAZIBUITE. a 
«et SS h=, ls zos OQ 30 ug 2 woyokay x oa) qoo «0o 
yl. dah! Le Lào Sor |» Ns JLa is) AN so NT "del 
SS) wo "NE s] N A oio Jesi IN Saca Ss ye «oe ee 
+ Jhopnrags ja y Je C oD] Mbasa JNa J Maar 
Lads Qr gen} DA ooo Karsh KNS a “läsa ol, bso y! 
Jhoy Lads ha; << iN eee) $e. “eta Jh. J Sasso 
"NsfBs socwo frase «M wy hooters hajo Losas So NC 
! Lass fino JN JL ins Lusohs fige ofds [58941 -.dddsasadso 
ERN eines Jasrsh. JNa HAN; foot eso Jlar, 
Je JA; woos Danad Jio; va JAND, xl) wanas Lo 

«| Laogay Laad VAM uc ells oie 


ePLAN mou ana aapa mund d od 


1. € om. — z P el. — x BP onn s — 4 Open — 5.6 Natl. 6. 0 Stool). 
TOC det P dap Ss. 5 Doat a De ole. — u, € Shba Slo. — 40, € pl. IT. B dea. — 
j2, C pils ume ol3. — 13. C om, P ata facie — Di P we BD xw» uua. oix aeos Ladjo e 
15. Bom. G «el. kads Qeon 5a lwan Mao Das 2 ife Hea Lane dee gua bo» [Sas 


P Ve wey FAQS lene ein Gag ISoal, ] follow the bending im V. 


will also be tormented with him; from whom and from all whose doings 
may we all be preserved, by the abundant merey of the Lord of all. 

These, our brother, are the words which at the insiigation of vour request 
have been spoken on this subjects but they will he blamed by your sound 
and vreat and spiritual knowledge on account of the fact that they were 
spoken of fall aud resurrection alike, and not according to the character of 
perfection, as your questions also strongly demanded: because we see Ihat 
the disposition of all of us is inclined to and onr will bent on a fall rather 
than on hastening to perlection; and therefore we must inquire and ask ind 
speak about the forms of our illness and the remedies for it, lest the whale 
body be struck with the uleers of sin, and grow putrid with) the tumour ol 
negligence, and we be thereby thrust into the abyss of torment: for we 
learn from the divine Paul who said :¢ Phere is great fear of falling into the 
hands of the living God? '.. Whal has been spoken ts -ullicient fo stir up 


the memory of the disereet ». 
The history of the blessed John the perfect Neasirite is ended. 


]. Hebr. , x, 3l. 


t 
^ 


in 
b. 


MEL 


DE 
t 


n JOHN OF EPHESUS. at; 


oc mum Qaia yea reui aaia nduanh 


Jax. a24 o amy Led zo] Ss KIDS 0620 gt > |r| «Mei 

xà alad ol Nhl oly qe Sial oao, ras Jlasj, 
x, fro [Eu paaa froo ag foo ip Lasao oo “Jlprrsopos 
oaolo paaso oo ad "fio E: <1 "ees SN Kufuas Jya] 
La fin] eX caso pa iasa aho, [mo] Jeol gaia 
el Judas Xo Lpo JMupo «3o 0001 «oos NS] wo Lane 
Je. mese Nylo papal jos oes; cacao) oò roar hug Jose 
«às bes Jobo, f Lado! TESK] Jaddass JNa; bs] Less, 
AAA a p A Juas h ayy iNo «O00 dt J> Joo Ku] hoaa ooa 


l. Mo. Ware japano loal Was eieo woal hsatp pel athe ILN p follow fhe subseriplion 


aU V. — 2. Ms. sing, ont slop a Ms, [bvaelos. y. Ms. oise — 5, Ms, Bods. — 6, X stop 
follows in ms. =- T. 2a. SN. Corr, 25 aut do Eel LAs. 
IV. NENT THE FOURTH HISTORY. OL THE. SAINTS IN HRAHAM 


Op Mane FHR BROTOLRS. 


These before our tine and in onr time itself gained distinction upon 
a column and seized the crown of victory through their marvellous ways of 
ites ini whose ease also the words found in the Psalmus of the Holy Spirit 
may also aptly be sung : 5 How good and how beautifal it is for brethren 
when they dwell together sti for to these Iwo holy brethren alike it is 
good and heautifül and marvellous that they dwell together, as is written in 
the Psalmist. These two holy brothers were by birth vissa from a village 
ealted Ialesh?. im the territory of Amida: and the elder whose mane was 
ANbraliau was first moved by zeal and he went and dwelt ina monastery called 
Va Rabtha 5n the territory of Tngila. New there was a high stone colin 


Io v lin hi men used to eorne dmn order to stnu upon tt tu that monastery ; and 


orb distance Woot Tagilla atul set the tigis e wap an Eynekh’s 
D E Veneer | dy theta. p dcr sors al 


ox LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO. 57 


Ml oes o3: ooa] joo jj. poo «aX. oot Jadoo! Ls: flsaxs 


p Ajan 7|vsaS. cise Lasoo 8 Iso | J23o]] qaas "oo ol 
Lopa Jeieh Jlasairy ooa Jlsdxs Seat «x Lass coor Saxo 
ol EAM Joa was pore! hag p2 ois JKSoiaxo ol daa 
«ao «oo RE Laag ce vaan] "wx oo r2 J& xo Jlaso] 
qatar Laso 4 | 5oc3a s: «ot waaa] epe ae] p Jon | 
“(oot Joco noma Mao ves Jfigme pal — UTE) 
pano .Jso aal Joa ral anoji oo x Joor sls xt va x? 
Joa Boy ota so fo} "Joa. LSe Ese] «e hias, once OD Joa 
Kal Pa Joa keo Jiga: “aag Jy le FXO pI AAA 
Joa kay shs? joa ass ouis joa [5 aaas 490 Spas, posh < Joor 


Jhs Laoso Joo Joo H> fanol Ie Jo 2o had a hoa FAY je» 


I. Ms, .e3ax. — 2. Ms. oc — 5 28 manu. oe 4. Ms. ots $7 5. Ms, 2" mann) jeu, DU Sin MES 
2^ ay eb ] correct according to what appears to be the sense, — 7. Ms. om, =- 8. Ms, mage 


— 9. Ms. om. slop. 


alter. he had broken bimself for a space of ten vears by great labours he 
himself ascended the column. And, when his brother whose nine was Maro 
had seen it, he also came and entered upon the road from the first mile and 
began to walk sonndly, while those two brothers were theuceforward ilus- 
trious for mighty labours of abstinence, until they received gilts of the Spirit 
also. the blessed Abraham receiving even the power of working healings 
and driving out demons, he being above, white his brother the blessed 
Maro shanned these things, saying: « Sir, E will have nothing to do with 
things that! gain very vain glory tor someone but deceive eertain persons », 
And many would seek assistance? with these; but he when be saw these 
persons coming to be healed would shut his door and remain silent For 
Irom the very begining also he had made a great segment [rom a hollow 
tree and set himsel? up inside it, having taken it inside the enclosure ina 
certain corner (yovéz ; and he used to stand in it. And there was a little 
door, and he would stoop and come out by it when he wanted for this 
monastery is situated on the top of à mountain, and there usel to be heavy 


snow there and violent winds; and so he would go out aid remove the snow 


L Ms. oti, — 2. Text eortapls this ts the sense required. 


" 


DE 


te 


D TOPA GF EPHESUS. ^58 


oes Joa “JLo p | Joo plo wrassoo hl lanpa joa au jisoto 


hw yaa MG] Wo aa Lise Say aa Joa paolo Sad oe voa] 
2i» vM uo aolo Jon Jais gar Togt pd Ml aka aso Jioc pS [de 
Lams! od of [35 Suro: LM Lo j4 wo [ue 2.56 "oen2oaas 
Har oà je Joy Jp Ln “Lash hras où ol joas Jy S9 
Lo SA0 A sas JNa jor od) onesas (526 haass «a2 
JA» Jo MS Meuse bosses M Le) fogo be aua [siot 
eo 222. 30 aau jos! lise Joo was "do dof lo flop alo 
saada joa wj DA sp das aad> Jas; Lus Hy Lal, 
Dawu, ods foa pil JM oor p «oe Lica: OHO Joa aSa Na, 
ud) O7 boot "Lass SxS <> hag toa Sly DA aaa 
joo por voanl, Leoao yanu: yl n 
eM 20) 2/0 sooo] Sx co Jai e Joa WIS" Dlo .J1axs-3e Naso 


<> oo Laos «odo 


l. Ms, “lig unas! Sd So ganno = 2 Ms. We. 2 a. Mss ge, om. prev, slop ole — Ls 
zognunu. 1 VMs. oo 5 Ms. with slop following, — 6. 2) mani, — 7, Ms. Wel 2r ananus — 
8, M^. bis, — 9. Ms laos. — Tu, Ms. «ae 


and recite the service and stand, while his brother from above used to chide 
him and say to bin: « Wherefore are von thus killing vourself?^ What good 
is this to vou? Why do vou aullliet vourself?» But he would weep and say : 
© Woe de me, sir, forgive me, sir. Wieh. pray. is the keener. this snow 
that allfiets fora little time, or the eternal torture that does not end, or the 
smoky burning of bitter thirst? Lo! how bitter is the intensity of the stress 
dyzyæn I~ made known by the torment of that wreteled rieb mant. Mmd 
for this reason let this wretehed body whieh has an end be tortured here. 
and. be there sorrows or joys, they will soon come to an end, and it will uet 
last. When the blessed Abraham. heard in his soul and in his thoughts 
how God's judgment was always depieted in his heart, and, because. hie 
pitied hin in that bis colour was changing nature from the intensity of the 
snow. used to nege him to we into his tree-seoment, beesuse the blessed 
man alse above found it ditlieult to repel the violence of the winds, he in order 
pearry ont his brothers order would comply, and would go inside weeping, 


and pon his faece aud ssvo: s Woe ds me woe is me the sinner: 


a a ae M € — a 


aaa Pens eye 


ee ss SS, PERENNE 


130) LIVES OF ABRAIAM AND MARO. ET 
Jou] hooo .Jazisl oà v3 J oh! wad. «naso a130) [AALS od oo 
foe 10 Joa Dy? Leere. Ai bees vols p2 s0001 Jortsol oo 
Lee pagar] Nes Lalo CSL Lira pode... eos] Jasolo UNS). 
beso yoy Mas kso; Joa p. ee. ARÄ ..... . OQO JN ses a 
[vào] pops! Laad ..... aa 0 opasok] Jure | Less) Ls 
yes loa JJ] Loa LOX JE wp ao hoak, laja loa franco, 
[2s oaa] JND, oao jos yao po «a May] JNa 49 
aS cono aasia Kars oo Le wall Oiso «asas 42 fao s 
ous Ras .....wtoll adole fats yo mele cux) lusu foods 
[NA] W? eso M CHADS uo jas sse Io ose wa 
OAD) St 0 A NE [Joa] ads. waka! fauo [aso | ota, | 
Jo asl Jaang cad pads galo Kado Vo. Hl Laso laag, 
Jazas aw Jesolo | <> Jha ppaddo [lan | y^ bem jeu oo 
p20 T eros D Nl Na J do otr ha> x1 So 


1. Ms. ow- 


who will entreat for me that Panay escape from that torment? » And so 
these brothers were objeets of marvel, their fame going as far as the country 
of the Persians. And, when Abraham... thirty-eight years... completed 
thirty eight! vears on the column... deep and he... in his days,... When 
a great. clamour everywhere arose and a great number of people in the 
villages and of the cities gathered together, they went up... the blessed 
Abraham. And what was purposed in the heart of the blessed Maro was 
not known to anyone: but when a ladder had been set up he first went up; 
and, when he stood at the top of the ladder. he found the holy old man 
bending down and sitting with his face to the east with his head between 
his knees, and he bade him a farewell: and so he took him up and carried 
him out weeping, and handed him towards... helow him?... the east and for 
himself and praved. And he entered. and went too his brothers place . 
And the multitude (25252) was seized with sorrow and adllietion on his 
account that was more than that in memory of the holy blessed man Abraham, 
while they eried and said, « Do us a kindness. our father: and, il 20 be vou 
are thus purposed, come down, and first comfort us and go up at once in 
peace, beeause we shall all be made glad by this. And. if vou do not come 


L We should perb, read +28? and complete the senlenee as when V had practised aseetiel mn: 


38 sears (aud, compleled 287, — 2.1 ean mahe nothing uf dhe 2 words whieh tallow in the cops. 


ap 


pus We 
iab l 


60 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [60] 


eos X99 fo} oars SSoasy mas! JI filigco JMujle baw q 
„oala paolo aaa flao Sudo ofa, [393 ASN 920 OFS CRO . QM As 
xX ? X ME. SOR uM. 


3 Jl oa exo Aoi Quay § "Joop aS A Jul aS 822330 WO à e» [sl 


woal, yoo) lad zo Ju] paas - [apo enl? osos soil Jy Ww so 
foods aan aao Wl fal Nas H doi ga Snc oet Nau, Jal 
Lodo jas, cocos] vul aMi qo Eu dh Oo Se ajo 
paal Lasoo leo Jya poo AM eMe INi * Laas Daas asco 


qaaa o cool cJ ooops adds Sylo pass vis! 9x] 


Jax Lad foa ow Lasako LAD [55 fers Laag v? og JocSJl 
J` ji? fossa 'dNM ese hers SX Joos ]| o£ 3e uc i 
weotshase boy a2 daret "od Jan Jess 4 Los a ES. 


Joa “Jooss h> Sco .oo oL word! ooo coos! oD jen SE 


L Phoa La -- 2, P aw a |o eg haee — oa Pins, 99e — 6 Posing. o7 DP 9» 


- 8, P leos 


down, we will all go up there », And, being Irom alfliction and many sighs 
unable to speak to the people, he beckoned to them with his hand to be 
silent and wait lor him. And, when he had suppressed his own tears for 
a short time and restrained his weeping, he then said to them : « Brethren, 
pray for me, and leave me alone. Ffor my part did not desire this and my 
Lord knows, but, in order that my holy brother's place may not be vacant, 
| hope by his pravers that, until you bring me down as le eame down, | shall 
heneeforih not come down henee. But take the saint and wrap him up 
for burial, and wo: and pray for me, that Pinay not be deprived of my brother 
Abrahams portion with all the saints. Now take away the bidder, and pray 
for me 5s. When this bad been done and the holy Abrabam had been 
wrapped np. the assembly dispersed, and each man went to his place in 
peace, being amazed aud. glorifying God! Bal the blessed. man would in 
ereat alllietion ery night and day to God. saving, « My Lord, let not this 
lone be do mne a eonduector to torment. but a conductor to life ». 

Vhetirstinstanee in whieh the power of the prayers of the saint was seen 


happened in the case of me the wretched one the writer of these things. 


A] 1 


——— 


(617 LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO. 6l 
<>A coos ful £129 Joo lle xL el CRANE Jis PCIE oo 
wit Jlase: Jana uil, [soe ods “orso M lo LL] Jyo Fs 
z obrape uD ooo qiia eos], Ls y Nai] OS ; Sees sand. 
my 2 i Nin faso lan JN erase DS "ooot M 
Joi. «xs "asl ADS 09) lo Qu Jos Jie WM Jl: ode 
ed Jor conss JI "Jos! year J: Dad .ooaso pad; 
Js fro p -hak oo ere Jis ha 9r «Qo eot a |» CV 
J «ore Pe pay eR SRI ees oot e]! sora], Xeon, 
fleas «elo Jhasadss pel rola! aN oo <+], y mere hse 
~pa] Laag “yes eot Jo NS aso LOD Kuso 0 Lise lo DSS Ls; 
M iwas JAN? cel Jl aalo JANo | ads nr) Lopa aod 
Ao NE ER “let yl - Jiopsany flana «0 HOY p3 JE Per rene 
JN.» zoo Na] oo à caos CIEL eie Jes fly olas 


aada 2 


1 P do Iz 2, Mss. %3. — 3. P om. — 4. P exe: a P 55 u | 855802 .c 


manu) — 7. P e9 -- 8. P e Bg IM 


My parents were acquainted with him, and every son who was born to them 
used to die at the end of a year aud a ball or two years : and, when I myself 
was born and came into this perturbed life; and! on the same day as my 
brothers the stroke that had slain them attacked me, as my parents used to 
tell me, they immediately repaived to the holy Maro, carrying me and weeping 
with sobs, crying to him, « Have merey upon us, and pray to God for this 
one who has remained tous. Perhaps God will hear yout prayers, and save 
him; since, if your prayers do not persuade God, this child, to judge from 
the example (sxuetov) of his brothers, is already housed in the grave ». 
Then the blessed man, seeking to silence my parents) sobs, said to theme: 
« Be quiet, be quiet. John shall not die before Maro». Then, as they used 
to say to me, | was struck with silence as it were to death; and my mother 
wailed with a loud voice, and said: « Sir, he is dead ». Thereupon wheal 
happened? The blessed man (they said) in answer to the woman's vehe- 
ment wailing jested and said : « Do not wail, woman Jobu -hall not die 
before me ». Aad, guarding against the suspicion of. pride like a wise 


merehant who keeps his riches that they may not be seen and plundered, and 


L Mss. om. 


MA nat 


62 IOUN OF EPHESUS. 6a: 
ness udsarx uw dyo MEX CMO - Peg 1 e] GX pro] Joins; 
Ar phooe Late Jaso od alo LNSay io eo L^)" wroo fds 
Sot ru wee wi) yl óc 
woes lio saang" updo” Saases «Jide! y» boot JUS aso. NJ 
bao o i36] yang JP Naw ‘aot Jojo frog” ow ha jaa 
Izxs [5] «oj Lam" Da qe) oho] aaao MIETEN. 
A> IJ. sel mere Jols "eee cooled y Liisaa rA» “lee sal 
oà hoaa Je Laas L.S JNG| Sar . fa] DaN), "v 
o> eX ha vaai- Js jmaas ups od Ju] o : » $3] oh. 922.5 
TID pel DA Nyy oí Loi Jub "ya colo rare odd Ms 
pony VJ] 044,008 oot Daaa yaar Jl DAS có v hel 
nce s whl] Sao Joss)" WO [huss xo a> enol ele 


122301 haw pel SAO 90H30 a'lo 


]. Pose Sam bes. zoom. Uu EUM Sol Wee ng uan — OP seed 


to make these persons think that it was not he who was the cause of the 
deliverance, he said to my mother laughing : « Believe in our Lord and go, 
lake vourself into the refectory (55, and ask for some lentils from the servi- 
tors’? cauldron. and bring them to him, and he will at onee live and recover, 
and eat of them oo. And she, as thinking that he was jesting with her in 
order to silence her, herself went on wailing more than before, saving, 
e Heneeforth, sir, this child's lentils are ripening in the grave. ‘Plas ehild 
will now never again laste lentils here», The holy Maro savs to her: « See, 
von do not believe that from these lentils of these brothers vou. will gain a 
son, throngh the help of the prayers of the same brothers o. Then he said 
Hey gold mies do a certain brother who was present : « Brother, go in aud 


feteh some dentils iu a enp. and drop them into that baby s month». That 


brother also cthes told mei says : « Sie, for the baby, pray for him. This 
baby has already passed to that world». And again ithey said: he repeated 


to dhat brother, «© Go do as P have toll vono. “Phat brother, in. order nat 
oppose the intent of his command, went laughing and saving : « | am 
ne to raise your son from the dead by the eating of lentils ». And he 


et weeks sentors etliee 2 perk. kiehen. — 2. Metdomeadarit, the bateli of 
bite s of Che Bibelien etes wer ed for the week. 


[63] LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO, G3 


y» pre Lady” Jor vido Jie we oaa) SSS yao - yas Llo 
aaa paalo props um fas ad vx Pees Sd Nes [bs fase 
or Jor >} p mwaa i "Me cà Lu! A Daso aiy NS 
Masóo ias" Mute NS Jis) pad vao qgaxm “Jor en. vo 
Ji qoe vide lose Ns exo caeso dias lo Musso Mies do Ere 
Laag my oa LA o Pratl! Jen n yla jo heise c xa» 
Nyy fy hba of Meas eo ngar pe ail a DA soo Joot fiL. JI 
E woot <i e lo fis o Nao wd gaa" Nsl, flo 
oped waar LSx fll Joa Jp JLN ls Lao 9 oe oa fl slo 
fajo 'aoa ao xis) [3 Sol’ Lady" oad "ose nro! po! 
wpe Lo, Wee Jojo 2 ota. lo nenia] via hsl ~ aaoi 


I uaaa [15010 woes] pa obsoy Laona Liso Loias Mods Mido sooda], 


1. A with slop:, reading of P unknown. — 2. P. oo. 3. Poom. — 4. P Dgs. — 5. P yeno 
— 6. Mss, om. s» lin. — 7. P. eoaeo. — s, P sowa — o, P elo — In. Erased in A and. looks 
more Tike W — 11. P odo 


went iu and. fetehed the lentils and came (they saidi and stood above me, 
and said to the blessed man: « Sir, here are the lentils. You wilt see one 
who is dead eating lentils » The saint says to him : « Take some with 
your finger, and insert them into his mouth three times ». And that brother 
(they said) took them and inserted them into my mouth, saving : « See! 
These things have been done to no purpose». And at the third tine (they 
said) E opened my eves, and moved my tongue round, and tasted and turned 
round and roused mysel. And then they cried to the blessed man. « Str. 
sir, pray; and perhaps our Lord will effect a deliverance by vour pravers, 
for the ehild has roused himself». But the blessed man did not see them: 
because women used to stand and speak to him Trom one gate of the enclosure 
as lar behind him as a woman's voice will carry, and they were not allowed 
to set foot inside, and he also never saw the Pace z2250z5v| of a woman, 
but her speech © only. Then he said to my mother : : Give him lentils to 
eat as much as he wants, and take hin and go, rear him for two more vears, 
and bring him to me here; because this is my son, aud. there i$ no possi- 


bility of his dying until his father is buried ». And so they took me and 


l. Sie syr 


Sa Pond 


TOU Ne dis 


ev aste de 


Puede: 


6^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. [G^] 


oad E») nues wo] pasa Qs waso catia uli) sse .ady,lo 
NSAN Muga fats oS po otXsjas; fluo .Jlase <>% Nool? 
„Joa ph JM20 Sas soopsh> JN Joo xia Jorrsolo La; my L> 
fasl shao WW» aai, wado] pia !15iot «oo oA Pp xl 
a Jb. glo aos loo [La oh ^ 2à . pa] ooa Ss JL | 
erat Joor ze] > Fad o Jen d ] ez JI] aas of Jor» alaa Justo | 
Joi e uo JN; oras. camaaly Ching Dao «fod, fas] uis ol 
COLD OPA uox uio er Neo ael: uae Lss Jes) o 
prado [jo Laaa avo yes Jil Jos) Lp eo fay vlad Loh! ello 
Jaca «2:93lo ulas oL), A Joa o. JI » Nuon sia] Joi, Ad) 
- adoKaol’o aryl) yard Jhula J Lil pr0420200 ful MSS 29 "cane 
Addo ado + au] So y frames Ne Jar]. booms Kanio vadi Sese: 
han [15916 obl whl Jis Jat 20 fara oda; vlad laos, 


[OP ges tome — Y, P ins. + ges pods 3, P apana. 


wentaway sand. alter two years. they gave me to the blessed man my spiritual 
Father, by whose pravers I was saved [rom death: and the power of his 
blessing was dissolved and nullified throngh my evil deeds: for God used 
to work aets of great and marvellous power through him in all the words 
that le spoke even when laughing. Aad From that time the multitude (27262 
hegan to eather together to the saint ir numbers many times as great as 
eame to his brother Abraham: whieh! was also very hateful to bhim that 
anyone should come and bring hii a siek person or one possessed with a 
demon, but he wonld at once drive him out, saving these words: € O wreteh- 
ed men, what has misled vou into leaving God's altar and his great power 
whieli took up its dwelling in the saints who were slain for his name. and 
loved him and dul his will. and coming to me the wretehed man and provoker 
ol God? Pudeed zz2 I1 were one scho pleased and loved God and did his 
will. vou ought not to have come to me and neglected the saints, let alone 
when E provoke awl ieritite: God. And there is another thing that vou 

ould know aud understand. that it was beewuse of iiv sins that Teame up 


ln cask mere libe every tian. not beeanse of my righteousness. To 


[65] LIVES OF ABRAIIAM AND MARO. 6^ 
four las T% wopo Jictsas onse ONT < yl Jhal, bo 
I y Sos Joa V DW Laaa L—! ad ro : fasai, 
c =e Joa sg 3J Noan AJ ons oia ooo! hl fassyo 
$e PJ Laado Lana), pel CAM -Joot asso Ad ssl sul lads 
"n E anll Jf yas uus ea dor Njan Mhel Joo 
NES vr ET Jody edac so alas; mn LAN? „aa Ll 
Ja ula oll Jh No : basio Jopas läs, os «a aal P 
JNa? rm el JLo INNA h x22 Jfa ol pando 
seo qos, of saos fo rae ol bias ob pas of’ . finda pas ol 
worasts asKis | "easy pools al y Redon wre Jl +2 VL wero 
ee Jer “Ja; > oO y bios “ood ward) Spandoy COR! 
«Jd op wu Jaha we} xS Js NIS «Solo INS 
xus Sexo, fano] s ood as oaao aao LS fo od 


LP Da ba. — 2 poom, — 4. P lbopmao. — s PH 5, P hlade — e P r 7, p hees 
ex ON gds — 8 POD fore The rest is illegible in P. 


myself the madman and man of evil life why do you come?» And so this 
wonderful man as if to drive arrogance from him and avoid the vain praise 
of men, even though he was gentle and kind, would violently and with anger 
drive away those who came to him to gaze at him asa great and righteous 
man. Yet again, if he were vexed with any particular persons, he would 
at last as if to entreat and console say reproachfully and kindly these words : 
« My sons, be not vexed at what I am saying to vou. You do not know 
the evil one's wiliness and deceitfulness. If I vive way to these matters 
of sick and possessed persous, and allow them an opportunity of coming to 
me, lo! fiends will at once go and seize women and girls and many persons. 
be it by means of a fever, or of uleers, or of affection. of the eyes, or of 
affection of the head, or so as to foam in them, and will work in them without 
their knowledge, as if one were to savy t Go jeer in the "aee of Maro’, for, as 
soon as they bring them here, as if our own prayers were indeed powerful 
aad mighty and drove out fiends, the fiends who have brought about these 
diseases will abandon them, and in their deccitfulness depart and withdraw, 
in order to carry out the wiles of their deceitfuluess, aud cheat us into having 
PATH. OR, d XV. — pu ÉD. i 


E S Look vb 


"pene 


TENE A ae 


ache Bicone es A SA 


66 JOPN OF EPIHESUS. [66, 


wal cae os Jor pols «0 SO pany “E> aratto colada; 
siaiu ahs dM cadet pu lisk wxmlsdo Jass odo Là 
Le 3o Naas flair Ss Jaus amas fish Ss Jes). Janu] 
Jory 59 08 pol haao ” «3224 Jo lad; Gods sro) Jaxa, Lal 
Laos Les ee jai eala dno, Jarn A20 ON elena) 
Le l-> ad Pago sans) Wohi. Soy Jal. Lose], 


LOOL AO ECET JAo a. 3-25 ORAL Mn «M» jesse sss 
Jans N90 Mjaa auseillo Mae JL iS Oly 2à s Kulsoteare 
AXaso Jiha, oDi pao cootlad t» so) ooi Jipa oao jasy 
qaa jad for JNasjoo Jlar aims pas o Nina [ases ord lo 
had aso CONS bass JN sss oiam Je . Lakis qlo Gay 
coasts laisse ep Jeu Jose aiao coga Ls Jos 
P? LA gaano jd Jory Jäs coors qao CM Jo ANZ. holas 


some such thought of ourselves as that we ourselves are indeed righteous 
and expellers of demons and healers of diseases, so that by this means 
we may be pulled up and be arrogant, so as to add disaster to disaster, 
and receive blows upon blows, and cease and remit these constant petitions 
to God for our sins, as if we were indeed righteous, and through the guile- 
fulness of the demons? deecitfulness cease the rapid running on the road of 
repentance for our sins, and utterly sink in the stormy sea of sins, and there 
be fulfilled against us the saying ^ Their days were consumed iu vanity, 
and ther years rapidly? t, which also happened to many, and they childishly 
yielded to the deceitfülness of the demons, and thought that what was done 
to them through the deeeits of the fiends was true, and fell and were eanglt 
in (he depths of evils, through the vain suppositions that they were indeed 
casting ont demons and healing diseases, and do not understand that they 
are sitting in a dark house, and them heart is feeding on ashes, and they 
are making their souls a dwelling-place for demons, and filling parts of 
Themselves with the stain of sins, and the demons are mocking at them 


because they are indeed casting them ont without considering our Lord's 


1677 LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO. 


poo) Lbs Jes. wot S9» yes eso le, «$36 ocNS sas NC Ji 
hs yo9--2o ssa] yox» J| 2x oí) pas «oe p> Cocky 
“oD exero UNa Las rad essor sce JQ flan prose cas] 
M9 utr caad aai] Kaas Pri Spe J^ vans bl exl wl 
y x ils Jao .20125]L532o J aro) [22M 2à Ber ady - las 
«ooo s d: Jas uS. aawit], «250 Lads .Jpaco aas, flo oà dO SOM 
Ll en Ws fade Jerse oà x0 SoA! Vo spon «A3 ovi. c o), 
x vM amu s jail Qon) Mois], yobeexs9 Le pany hb eS 
LN Fare) vo Jaap 8. A fal ses «Sul sod!’ NoN uss 
wen Kinsey FON SE S «2o Liddraso JL oco eto 
Lae Jos alasan osa» p! «ue wars - oprah Jl, «^2.» 0005 
Jiss ry) Sx pac expo es Jo «oo3Jo0 «copa. ofXd0 t aaa 
web po Asoo n) aas xA ver Sola] JL C0 eter! 


l. Mz, ins. stop «and om, afler we -2 Sje urs unerannnasliesths. 


saving whieh he uttered beforehand to these men. which shall be spoken ta 
them, when they shall say * My Lord, my Lord, did we not in thy name 
prophesy, and in thy name cast oul feuds, and in thy name do many deeds 
of power?’, then shall the bridegroom answer and say to them, ‘Verily | say 
unto you T know vou not, depart ve from me workers of iniquitv, go lo the 
fire prepared for the devil and for his angels t. Now, my sons. whe will 
not tremble at the pronouncement of despair addressed to those who vielded 
to the deceitfülness of the fends’ enilefulness, who thought that they were 
casting them out, when he hears from the good Lord ^E know thee not’! 
As for mv wretched and sinful self, as 41 have probed the deecits of the 
demons, it is enough for me to drive them out of my stained. self only; for 
tome it seems that the saints who truly possessed power and authority from 
God over these used to shrink from and shun being made spoil of, let alone 
us who, while all the wickedness of the demons ts ambushed within as, 
and all their envy and their deceit and their desires, think of ourselves that 
we are driving fiends out of one another. Would that 1 were driving my 
own out!» 

By saving these things every day to many the blessed Maro did not per- 


L Matth., vir, 22, 23: xxv. 4b A similar notion appears in eh. 15. 


\ 


sy 


716 r^ a. 


GS JOHN OF EPHESUS. [68] 


Jos] wid joa wanas JD o haag Joo £35] JL le^ pado 
voas] awai, Udo :o DM yo .-OtQ M ooo «Lh «2o ypa Da 
yl Snare - jaxcauy o Joa «so JJ Joa aso qa foa Ji m 


elo Nac eso Jesi - Jlopmasy Japans odo prpy oo 
fares Lod cos] coh! ase Ji] sexe] 49 Joor saco Shao Lad bps 
yl Jos þa Ss fo} mal Ss use Coupe “pray fas] wo fase 
wowo Dovey Jy JM eas lors fads Lemeh yl of fers pos 
pel ihia qae els OS Jen ass DS) velo] Gade JE Jaen 
„Lato US Joa Ku] JANaG]o u Moa pad JNa aa m p D 
whol aiam 362390 vA Sa i] h oN] qN J ol 
aD ooa gadr r da ooa pool, Jan) yo] kolo haa JaN 
“pao lr ooo qaa Da a ooo! wind] -lasak atop 0 ETEEN 
PANY Ol pol of lads polo nL Looks laz; yl che el 
Jr t eer Jue] Nas vez] 99 Qoo ao au] oof Syl Jie RS 


1. Ms. 99. -— 2. Ms. ^S»; corr. v. D. and L. 


suade men not to come to him every day ; and, being distressed, and it not 
being open to him to act as he did in his brother's days by withdrawing when 
he saw these, aecordingly, in order to extinguish out of him the reputation of 
gravity, he would speak to many with simple and ridiculous words, and like a 
fool, saying. « Why then (gx) come you toa madman? Have vou, pray, seen 
anyone fouler’ than I am? Sinee I am bound to this stone like a malefaetor, 
or as a vicious dog is bound by a chain that he may not eseape and do hurt 
to many, know you not that, if it were open to me to escape hence, I should 
like each one of you have both made a house for myself and had a wife and 
children? or understand you not that in my ease also it is on aecount of my 
sins and my spots and my crimes that God bound me to this stone, like a 
judge who puts a criminal in bonds? » But those who knew the blessed 
man’s character aud way of life used to say when they heard these things : 
« Yes, sir, we also are come as to a eriminal, and as to one who is bound; 
for a man goes and sees even murderers when they are bound in prison ». 


But those who were not thoroughly aequainted with him, who saw the 


[69 LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO. 69 


* 


poke Loa, Jie M a ooo PP JNN ops coo enano 
sje Lady Jair cso ad co KRY ad; ‘pico bes, asia 
altul, oda asada pe Jeng JA] ooh ee «5 ag oco ghaoi 
edax Joo fico Ohad) Joor S'po fasts GS ooo ôa flo - Loot Jas 
ia DA woiopa Daa YP „amaa Sr Lacans «Limos 
euo dy p0 Loos CI xe) of [roy Prop + word iy Jig 280 
Kady - fasts WD coo; yel Nes HY wero M 70] Saas ciao 
x» Jil aD "ple paolo ees pe mr oo wns; fram JI WS 
AG] SSsarve Je] arts LoD} fuss Lad, Jlsas N? qiia J Lal 
aly p81) fade [oad Maaa pa HNI al ala gada Lal 
Jas, ode nando [224] spade Rei aus) aa] fl ons. Jus 
Je «26 dapa flias leen Hes was! J| acs Sa; vx» lois pad 
aaan lu Ss Lal - boos J em ales, PAD dtprdo JA. 


]. Ms. with stops, — 2. Ms. xd: eorr. L. without note. 


blessed man thus distressed by the multitude of people and crying that they 
hindered him from holding intercourse with God, wondered greatly. Once a 
certain layman came to him whose wife was barren and hore no children; 
and he knew his disposition, and had gained the privilege of free speech 
(axiineix, with him, and by chance he came in and found him removing liis 
nails, because his toe-nails were of vigorous growth, so that they were a 
finger or two fingers long. And, having prayed and sat down and begun 
to speak, he savs to him : « Sir, pray for your hondmaid that she may have 
children, since I have no heir and hope of my house.» But he looked at him 
and wondered, and’ he savs to him : « Then (492), so-and-so, how is it 
that you do not consider the words that you are speaking to the most wretehed 
of all men? How is it that vou sav these things to me? Have you not 
heard the blessed apostle saying, ‘ff a man hath not been able to rule his 
own house aright, how will he be able to rule God's church 22) How will 
one who bas not been able to pray for his soul, which has become by its 
disposition barren of the progeny of good deeds, and through his praver 
made it fruitful in spiritual progeny, be able to pray for women that tliev 


L Ms. om. — 2. I Timm., 111. ^. 


+ib 


* fayou 


70 JOHN OF EPHESUS, [70] 


ja yar wa Jord! aan JI vido Jena. oot D 420] farts iir Wty 
watdo ` [soo Ji JA? 08 Jos doo No] janice Mo! ET clo Jil 
S Joa hoy Ws J ye eels so S2) M] Jobo oaol, ey soos p 
wJo JaN, bes soos Jlpvlo -o poly oro J 593 yas oaa Sd) 
ao ad) re dro Jobs waso) Loo Je oor paolo wna 
da] WAS cus JI p y fal Sores jeg waco ease nado Ja.o0 oot 
as) Jl ta QR ones No] joe Jeo y> Jodo NI Sx BX Wo 
y Ipan Jj, WMseo od cono RMoo ENT. Je Daso TN 
Jl . ba T woos] fase flo cot frome ad; opus oM p30] haad, 
e What Jae Sjo fo aul Weta og al iter wore! Jems 
hay were - Ni] Jae Je hasn ee «Nal vM) yH el 
hA Braco Jo 60 on Jpandoo AN; | Ss» filo sy fo Daa 0d 
BIAS loa hopua Joanna Jhiasosh as «Loo fo r20 Je luo 


may bear children? » The man says to him : « Sir, there is no diffieulty 
with God iu making the former fruitful as well as the latter. Aud if vou 
wish vou will have mercy upon me. By God who chose yon do not neglect 
me ». When lie heard that he adjured him by God, he was moved by two con- 
siderations, one that he did not wish to state of himself at all that he could 
do any such thing, and another that he heard God's name and his heart 
trembled; and he said to that man : « Why did vou adjure me by God 
about a matter that is not my concern and is too hard for me? Accordingly 
take what Twill give von without men being aware it of, and go hang it on 
your wife; and you shall have a son, and you shall call his name Maro, no 
man being aware of it», And he took one of his toe-nails and wrapt it 
up, ind gave it him; and, in order that he might not honour n as a martyr, 
he said to him: « Observe that it is not a martyr, nor is this bundle Ahnana!; 
Iul itis a herb that | give von. See that no one undo and see it; and nest 
year vou shall carry your son also and bring this herb with lim to me ». 


Then that man took it and went: and he hung it on his wife; aud at onee 


God gave to her and she received conception. and she bare a son, When 
this happened, it seemed to everyone no ordinary wonder that so-and-so the 
5 ` so nmiutsr s dus! mixed with off and water: see Zach. Rh. vut. Gand PeSmith. ~ v. 


lus 


(7h, LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO. n 


loo franco Lords Kos Jya; Lal Jude Nao Jhar Kaos 
woth 120 JJ Js ou Ns: Lee "fads Nye Jes Maie, 2à 
Je JE Jeseo s Meo. «^2 0M 0 dha ooo ee) Jage 
Pr wor Lot fear DaD Jes Mao] wolad o oa Ja dh] 
y *JL5e-seslo odes y Laa Do :fitinpoy oso v6 JL 
Ad 5p haag Odo, sul Sad Noe Jesi H JN, Naaa: 
wail So werent Je» JBN AX ceno aote] [sey Ll I» flo "ege 
SRM JAN 3S ol, xl «xl Ya sco JoJ ooo qaa Hal e 
<? qa JaN pro Leo wil «^ Ix T EVER CN 
vM» Nono) op Kay QOH RAM Lion «es oue 2] «, oos] Jano 
ype Jl laas clits o onan!’ Mosen 2o obusrabo eni esl: 
Mamo, oh Julo seoir — 30 Jya. atresia pads od 
ex» JL pany «M fus Jil ups] Meas haw Joal Hy e 


1. Transposilon marks are tipps. in error; placed over Lese words, — 2. Ms. ILiaswLlso. 
pp? i 


barren woman had received conception; so that to many it presented itself as 
a matter of doubt that so-and-so the barren woman had reeeived conception, 
until her conception came to delivery, Aud, many being amazed, they used 
to assemble before her and in great wonder eagerly inquire, « What is the 
cause from whieh this has been brought about in you after so long a time? » 
But she, fearing the saint's injunction, aud in order that the power of his 
prayer and the miracle wrought for God's glory might not be concealed, 
announced to everyone : « So-and-so the blessed man sent me something, 
and Lalo not know what it is, and God gave me a son ». Then all men in 
amazement glorified God. And many are the things that God wrought 
through these two holy brothers, things that even surpass written records 
and the capacity of the ears: but the acts of the holy Abraham even [ar 
surpass those of this man’. But this is enongh that 1 have undertaken to 
shorten his history and run. through it in simple feshion, observing two 
things, one that miracles are from their character dillieult to believe, and 
another that I have determined in my mind not to be a witness with my 


1. Hr the teat is right. the meaning must bedhat Mo petbrmned fewer naraeles heeause he shi o 
from performing Hem VoD. and Do in translation fate the opposite willpont emen lins thed 


*quopew 


72 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [72] 
Sly del WI yards Kaia, cobs!’ oh Jo Giese Jaws yas 
me st hot leo: Sly bras] ue ful 19e Noc elo Masa 
De [om Las Sudo d Veep? «o ch? So Nops 
«2o os, flor wsdl eso a sb] Jaro Jago Jagdeo JAa1sesot J 
» Jord; Ja 33S, y EN 2 Ls] fe JANsseso 
o Kadai} <>] ld», JN; san -[driso hanid Od sphuyo 
soto SNS Jad. Co hawao [95:0 exe cash vo1astoa.2 wi dio 
oq à.» joa yoko, Jas w> t~ IAM coh wy leo Nal 2036.2 
hay joa vaol, Loa Moa aao agd dal oly hasl -hoa Laso 
jaxiso .,J/NSses]lo LSNA Jarsdo haas, frorrco .franio Lanas 
Iga haro g FX Jos Nu] Jhpoyo [ex Jlasads; gas as; 
qaaa Js cà Jeary Joa wio Kisco Jlaa5]o Je33o » fos JNaso 
a> Loany vrlo „haaa hanso JNN poh. oao ooo eM 


handwriting except ouly of things confirmed by the sight of my eves as well 
as the written record, and not to repeat in writing what | have only heard’, 
but the things that E have both heard and also seen to these I bear witness; 
as m the ease of this saint alse | bring to record the same deeds that I 
have seen and know, those that are small and a little inferior, because of 
the unbelief and doubt of many, abstaining from mentioning marvels that 
are greater than the ears ean bear. Even the actual things that we have 
repealed we have repeated for the glory of God, and that God's love towards 
those who Iove him and keep his commandments may be known to us ordinary 
diens and simple men, and how great freedom (zxizzstx? God vives to his 
bondmen before him. There was again a certain magistrate in the same 
village in which this saint lid his stand (with whom IL also was well aequain- 
led) who was an abominable and impious mon, an oppressor of the poor. 
and one who caused orphans and widows to groan, and a perpetrator of 
all wieked deeds of covetousness and of injustice and of rapine: and he had 
much property and a great house, and bondmen and bondwomen. And 
that man bore himself proudly in the world; and the orphans and. widows 


and other poor persons used always to flee from him and. take refuge 


potis pesto refers to miracles only bnt see op. an L 


[73] LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO. T 


à 


oM Joo ' anca-2.300 oad Joo JN aso jpa La eo ogi qa Laado - 


yA Coy pee Jeo +, paas soy | wer palo o. Jla a Naso 
haas casos Mil arse Lise Nakse IG] wate tes, JI Jord 
ES Load pash? [soans bras eon m? aaa AAs fos opes). 
seang lo «ax. JE sole gara o Nasso LNS, 
jha SAn A volo JNN ah hio fN fol Niol bl ele 
Lojas paalo -hao pal jea-o[' Daa. fate’) JNaslo hana, 
Tae aa a tees ues NS tT Nee 
elo + wolo Jars eph So Rb Wy hoas K gati ex £e 
SQQOA36.D cono hai aD Lal] shaspa vadon flan Loa J 
og paso Nul rahe n y pasts fra) woe. fons, va) 
sol’ votes) Ed pa Ribisopae aaas paal [20$ où hay < 


wwa], Ohad} horoa Qux gel) và yl hand} Joa pany odt Jo 


* 
RE 


Lag -+l jp agro Jo, JA wpa Lot oo [user oul ^ S 


with the blessed man. Then the saint would send and feteh him and 
gently entreat him, admonishing him and saving : « My son, beware, and 
keep what God has given you. for vou are not in need. Wherefore do 
you oppress these broken-hearted poor, not. one of whom has daily bread 
in his house? Remember the scripture. that says, ‘The orphans and the 
widows and them that turn to me ve shall not overreach nor defraud '!: 
and again *] am the father of the orphans and the judge of the widows? 
and again, ‘By reason of the plundering of the poor and the groaning 
of the needy, therefore will | awise, saith the Lord, and E will make delive- 
rance openly ?. Buat for my part ! pity you, my sons since, however much 
God's justice turns away, il is impossible that il will not some time be 
roused against evil-doers » : and again, « Neither vet think that this power of 
the saints before whom these poor people come and groan is a void hinge: best 
it beroused against vou, and vou aid your house perish. > Bil thats retched 
man stirred himself up arrogantly at the instigation of lis father the devil, 
whose will he did according to what our Lord said to the Jews, « Phe will 
of your father ye do »*, so? this man derided and seerned the man of God. 


j 


1. Zech.. vit, 10. -= 2. Ps bavi 6 Sa Ps. ML fm dohin 


th Wd. les 


TN 


b. 


7^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. ELT 


x |l Se} «MI bem: pay bl PRD vho „yol Sx ol 
b] capo lo WX Nal es flo c6 Re ol Jl Las» J M 


—— ^ «oi eed oaa, (lo ooo d -— alo wil Das Pp 
Soana ibas of fal p> pol qdo po mods aaas J| hoad 


Jao au» fsoat q? og Jasad, clos <> aana p fans 


è 


aans Jor “> >> »o.o polo esL Joo ns p [35 jla» sopo 
unas NS hA bly peak pag JE bras ceo pads iai bags 
op bh sao + Jods; alala pods Jul aaam x Llo tool Jl] od 
Do. hoac . LA: pense Jilala pant xe 91] NA. vo oo 
Dol v N] . pads so fs] wpa wee bl le S236, 36 Lasag 
Jusad oo £a Jue WAT bday Kasil <% has LAS: v! OL AS 
£5 haao Junto loa fae faif Lasas qo Jrracols Jlaso,.o Ota 
coo as Nawo optata oN as vi JA soa KADM] oboe 


I. Points a above the line follow. 


saving, « Blessed man, sit on your stone, and mind yourown business. 1] will 
not neglect matters which LH huow to he proper lor me., Sitin your monastery 
and be quiet, and you have no coneern with me, and 1 none with vow. Every 
man's sins or righteousness as the case may he falls to his tot. Those who 
are going np to heaven will not entreat for me». When that captive man 
whom the evil oue had taken captive had said these things, he turned his 
ace to go out from the blessed man’s presence; but the blessed. man was 
distressed and wept, and, carried away by his feelings, called him witha loud 
voice and said to times « Woe for vou, my son! a pronouncement ol wrath 
has gone out against you from heaven for think not that ] the sinner have 
eursed vou; far be Ho from mer Bat repent and | with you will entreat 
God's justiee for vou, and. perhaps vou will be delivered »..— Dut he beeame 
more hardened, and said : « Let justice do what it Hikes»; andso he departed 
while the blessed man shed tears and said : « 1, my sou. am innocent ol your 
sin. You knew oo. But at midnight fire broke out from the Tour corners 
cei of his house, while the blessed man saw it deseending and coming 
down from heaven to earth like a ball ieg523:: aud so that Name immediately 


made itself master of his house and bis property, and seized all his furniture : 


[73] LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO. Fa 


salana SX ofS sass Joi >} Neo Je» oo x 2300 soni] 
Lise lias anr «oec eo Mel] Made aes wits yas 
Jars 45 -J p fara x! 90 sean oe» jija hane; bapao [Las 
cà Judy Lads “Lhe yil M Polo exero elo; as hannad Jyo 
wt og Joo, ope Sa neo banc» o Wed Q2 FX Bye [do spo 
(ey Spee andi es (IR e recess oS E 
Jes Jax feb Quid [see aadis Jail 998 Koto 
ee JN] ipao Jias ago Fess von» Jedado goH JN sodas 
JNa; JEG] eio] Maco Naso. Jahas [sroaiso “piel oà frags Loc» 
900 «LA 20A 20» JNs3le [sejso op OP 29) Laros [yao .Jlopraasoo 


ADR wis so> AOC pane oog qo 1.004451 2.50 votes 
soL ON eso aooo Jo .J Loxse < ohall Japao oils : oN 


JINI va ol Maa A? Lasa p hao Nansio] JLN] soto o 


and the man with his domestie slaves hardly escaped naked because God 
wished to make his presumption known to hin, while all the precious 
belongings and valuable furniture and the rest of the property contained in the 
buildings (2) were all burnt. But the blessed man, when le saw il, weeping 
called his own presbyter who stood before him, and said to bin : « Go as 
son to that wretehed man and see what has happened to him »; telling him 
with great sorrow what had occurred. And the presbyter with bwo brothers 
went to the village by night. and they found all the buildings O) of the house 
levelled with the ground, and blazing so much that the stones themselves 
looked like coals of flame, and were all dissolved into chalk within the fire. 
And fever and dysentery at once attacked that inan, and in ten days he died ; 
and his wife survived, a great and distinguished woman: and the rest of the 
property that remained to him was ruined; and of the vineyards and the fields 
that were thick with their trees and their fruits; and were regarded with awe o 
in the neighbourhood, some sank to the ground in two years, aad the rest 
were plundered from the owners)"; and of the slaves some died. and some 
ran away; and the woman herself became blind: and so receiving the com: 
mand (is) the woman also died, and she became a subject of gossip and 


1. This can hardly be right. we require rather «by tablet", 


^ IN 7° 


a. 


ME 


h. 


A JOHN OF EPHESUS. [76 
Joa JL] «9ouio-s: vse] Sao uag oo p JAN Mole buchos looo 
qaa qal “Ais opar acd Joa pl Nolga JLo JNa Nia -oA 
Laaa, Nofio wel J haas La We Lal JD; od Snags Jofta 
< JKsod. hal «e our Là ele eso] [sop frum o5 
x2) poo S fI Jn AAO vola CAO r2 Je 
«2e! JIax.lyses Jla Hio Jasons + JNasasl loo pronto ward yoy 
Jelo Ce D Jas] wats ya ok) x49 cd Joa 136] LS fakes 
JN Jl, Js J|» + 822215 ool Abe x A22080 ett Jlas3 
Ix ano «Ml R2 £2 JLo JI Joa] coi re xia Joou 
201020 ,.0) «302.2. et Joos Jala jaz, NE jassa Nolan 
Dir J| Q)M2aaih D> anw J| con SP eiN ua as! tal] foods i 
my Goh Sapo soleo pes "eo — — n laag 
o» [»xepso :Joo jal [ors od hag (12 15) Sas xs ej! we! 
NS p Jlasslyso rA shab o» Joa Lusso Qe sol -joa 10 so 


1 Me apps. ga. — 2. MS om 


of lamentation; while the blessed man, whenever the memory of them came 
into his mind, would say to us mournfully with many sighs : « See, my sons, 
how the hende destroy God's creation. low can we avoid shedding bitter 
tears for this poor man, when we think how far the evil one puffed him up 
until he destroyed him. and even blotted out his memory from the earth? » 
ig before him at the end of the 
service, because sometimes the service was performed in his presence, he 


Bat for many days, while we were kuecln 


would wilh many bears speak fo us these words of admonition from the divine 
Serptures : Sees my sons, how we stand, and what majesty we take upon 
our tongues. Tahke eare, lest we stand before that awful and mighty Being 
as corpses without sense, while onr hidden man has been secretly made 
captive by our decettfal adversary, lest we make à moekery of God when 
we sand. before him, lest we iusalt the honour of his glory, who does not 
hinselluced onr praise, but because of his gracious merev called forth by the 
pease of him deis ns to himself os At another time again, that is always 
when he was thinking with wonder of that magistrate and remembering him 


with tears, be would again turn the warning toward us by way of admonition, 


vi" LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MABO, pi 


&NSe2so) LL jp Saas Kuno fac’ haaa oh wits yod ofp 
Now jiso fads Jaa, vod! x sao P 4430 oot lo. Jasi, 
© o] wads ad pO oon oD po Lye bN Lu] Jasco 
prawn fasad as vol l fisas oo S] has) Kamo es Iss} Laa 
elec; [dirs cà Lio Oly Læ | ana odes] Sad 
Loss ena Sto opto Sot ed, solo Lan Kors alaras Aao 
Sy lanl, e ba D> oasi, Jo j> A39 wa LASS 
Slo J| amd es ad; Aao oot) wo Doa fous So 
Ko] fase scum) Sado Jasilo Lucado LIS Laoso sod dod 
Lads [raatwe ae [Kato [Iani quas, [all po psofsedo cass 
» lad ooa xp D «nans, os vo jo Joa 5,235 Nano; 
Jan Jc aal loo Slo ..J I4 lasio qoodNssos) ladana Ss 
KABSALIO LOOPS (2300-07 J NS aso BoLMAmA siao parsoo Joo 
Jiao Lad. JK.sease <% Budo Gol fads ular ooann Ai 


I. Ms. with stop followin. 


saying, « See, my sons, again how severe and awful and rapid is the sentence 
of the fall of pride, and beware of it, observing how many high and powerful 
men it has overthrown. And why repeat many instances, when it cast down 
from heaven to earth and overthrew him who himself causes it among men ; 
even as he also to-day is again in the same fashion eager to overthrow 
everyone as he was overthrown, just as that wretched magistrate also was 
suddenly consumed and destroyed by his pride and haughtiness? Let us fear, 
and tremble, and entreat Christ our God to repel it from us by the prayers 
of his saints ». Concerning the rest of the admonition which treated of every 
form of life in his discourse, and concerning his warning and his exhortation 
addressed not to us only, but to laymen also as well, and even to women and 
children and fathers and all classes, what is there to write and say? To the 
brothers who were with him he would offer spiritual education and wires 
and exhortation to spiritual things, and to his own priests and. those of the 
villages and all who resorted to him he would give expositions of the solem- 
nity of their serviee and the magnitude ef the penalty, aud the greatness 
also of the glory, and would incite and warn them to stand earnestly and 


with fear in their stations amd serve in their classes: buen again and women 


^ dS 


a. 


ua 


78 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [78] 


SN coos 2] p Joa Maus JN SSro „Joa HÄ JXgisy [oso 
Jad; alanas lasanan, fora yas „joa waas Jlasfoy Js Lis 
Laño] Wo» 5&2) reais encod; yl La t SK» 95) wil Sas 
wà Li. hiw, Jlec€M Ss d oC ap «Lor kaspo og 
| None JXRaas q rol fri] Sx hania JhosoeM € 1088 v! 
[22s <% Nwo -joa paai LA, d Na] L; Jas 
Joon Lise D La fha Jaw Lad alo 0029] Sx Sh p ee 
yino VE ES yes NSo ye pa dl updo Lise. yo ye 
Joas ` h . yla- ado on vada cao vc eo .lagxe 
Joi] ate] Ss Ibs, y Loot ia «NO r Lisaa fsrario pod 
JLo J> a o> poo «Josse | Jo asas; Lec gx, Mido 
be ro? Dado «peat! Da p> ED x69 qia RWA qe 


he would restrain from oaths and blasphemies and adultery and the other 
evil things, and exhort to good things. declaring to them also the awful 
sentence of justice, besides the other things whieh in the gentleness of his 
mereilulness toward all men he! disseminates. Bat after a space of about 
twenty years during which this saint stood apou the column a revelation was 
shown to him concerning the terrible hosts of barbarians, i. e. Tins?) who 
should come forth to chastise men upon earth. 

Then with mournful weeping he continued with a loud voice vehemently 
giving vent to his sorrow in the middle of the night and wailing out of a 
mournful heart, beating on his Piee and speaking to God thus : « What, 
Lord, will happen to thy churches and thy monasteries? What, my Lord, 
wilt thou do to thine altars and thy service and thy sacred vessels, Lond? 
Woe ta us whose sins have brought these things to pass, and not thy gentle- 
ness. What will happen to thy priests and the people of the believers, 
whose corpses are cast out as dung upon the lace. of the earth wilh none 
to bury them? li merev chastise me and not in anger, Lord? ». And, when 
all of ns heard the voice from above in the monastery within, having all 


been awoken we were ugitated: and, because tt was a short time before ser- 


"s 2.515 ^. eq F0 n. 2 The better known mvasion of 531 2 Zach. Rie. IN, 6; 
Proc, Bel var 2s Che Edessa A, SSU was afler Mis. death, — 3. Ter. Ne 2i 


eS wn, ee 


79] LIVES OF ABRAHAM AND MARO 75i 


Ja o sO aa J oN en ns Say qin „Joa JKarsaaly Suto 


ET KDL ope $E eS £5 oC polo Ss oa c 
n plasso JNaas fasma upao jio Janso o paolo aigi og aa 
E T E ERES Lape cy N Mijas I 
Lace huh) hl MJ EME Le sasao Jla wano 
„uoät ead agM Ko s p20 59 Diao ULE ope osea 
oo haso ope M foe ialo ADS Joa Jaco - Joa Jlrs oa ol po hanao 
Pe eo lano was, Soo ey ayy p> oM pol «reet M pol 
xil: Sse sao Jl" Ne elo fusasdsas [ope Bde «bse 


* 


eM sh b] «23e Nil ras NI Lasso vele Jos bol e 
«o haa “pd pd Fad od paelo dy] Lose ro Nes haao 
Sy . Ji we alo wassas ady sok] v J JV] Laaa ad napa 
PLAS odo Jas p30 JNasaaks araco qo) «22-24 Jia «ao fact y 


1. Ms. Pose. — 2, In erasure, 


vice, we did not ourselves dare to go into his enclosure; but the presbyter 
who was next alter him went in, and cried out and said to him, « Sir, give 
your blessing », three times. And then he ceased his sobbing, and the pres- 
byter said to him, « Why, sir, is. your holiness distressed with weeping, 
and so above all when speaking?» But the saint said to him : « My son, go, 
and wake the brethren, and stand ap to prayer; and grieve for my ! latter end, 
for what times I have beeu preserved, and what in my days my eyes see and 
my ears hear», And, when his sobs eame up more than ever, the presbyter, 
having been himself also seized with trembling, continued crying te hin aud 
saving : « What is the matter with vou, sir? Tell me what d is». Then 
he said to him : « My son, go and pray; because a sword has gone forth 
from the presence of the Lord, and slanghter has prevailed among the belte- 
vers, and also over the churches and monasteries, because menu have provoked 
God». And the presbyter said, «If you please ^, E entreat you to inform me 
what you have seen». Then the blessed man was angry and said to hnn : 
« Remove yourself now, my son, from my presence, Have vou not come 
to pry? Please go and recite the service; or, if not, begone now from here ». 


And they went out and stood up in service and in prayer all the night until 


l. Ms. om. — 9. This seenis to be the meaning of wl 8 J bere and below p. so, HL 3). 
The expression occurs several times in this work, but is unknown to the lezieons. 


Tg 


ug. 


SO OHN OF EPHESUS. [80] 
942250 2.0.94 fasodty Jania «cogens J' 36a. xe? iNe er Jp Le, 
pooksose JJ ol gaano, vakas] Lrscootts Laila acp AL Wy oues. sili 
wos alo wey US Jada J Jl ho soan anise] Laoón Ns e Na] 
Moo o a] pa aAa wproods Na Jaaa -haag yar; 
NE Je: ol po ye poo Js nyA qH N? pas 
y J solo Sors wl ege; Loio x) OA ARR) 020 y ol 
ASSJ Jo uho ulamo uano +f] NS fads sits bl sors Nico 
LOOLLIO (RS cause Qoia. + Of Cad pO SAM» apo naaman Liseo 
Jano aoa, [opio ans, wags fl p> hasad, eds LS Ss 


Ness LA? Jl 20! D otolo ' val Jpwo alaa Lads assy < ve 


J base alo Ja «le "as! y» <=> nS’ Joos «el ERU ENTM 
fos? watts - J «ell dass Jl JN dus: wits eM Apo vx wa? ood 


jo Sis; adas Lst Mas [tata poo ae eiat as Do er dng See tate un translation. 


the morning. Dut after twenty days the hosts of the Huns came forth, and 
they covered the land of the East, and none so nunierims as they had appeared 
in the land of the Romans, nor had it ever becu heard that any luns except 
these presumed to crass the Euphrates; | indeed even among the blessed man's 
companions also arose haste to tlee to the fortress, while they sail to him, 
« Sir, if vou please we will carry vou down, lest we leave vou alone aud 
you suffer distress, or they burn the monastery or anything happen lo you 
yourself «2 But he in confidence in bis Lord said to them, and again not 
by way of boasting : « l, my sons, am ready for suffering, and my life and 
death are in God's hands. Go, aud the Lord be with you, aud pray for me ». 
When they saw it, three of them, trusting in the blessed man’s prayers. 
bravely remained. while he was unaware that they had remained, and the 


rest dled to the fortress. But those who remained went in to him, and he 


Saw them and was astonished. saving : 6 Have vou nel cone away, my 
Sons Po», amd they say to him soc Either life or death is better for ns with 
veu, onr Either. Bathe said to thems Pray. my sens. that we may nol 
At thes) thisss happe net the gerzu af Justinan gn lus SU ve ur: but this is 3i 5, 
vdd the n l Hu I lud id do ail. M leatlis amil, eyen i we read 
' : he vean nod thealty tetinur Prebably thierefere the words are a seribe’s 


Sb LIVES OF ABRAAM AND VARGO. 81 


wear ones qo sex sad! hagor lee po JJ S @XQor 
H aN aD, oà qin ol Hss, nea hal JI yao Se e 
Pea suae Ain Jas ds DAS Noa xoc Ll ol aA Joa acus 
woes ak 2 oa LOL) at Lass Ja] ea Lope c» «tei Naso 
adamsi jo oco aaa EEN Dado Joa wj La +4 ooo 
.ososhlo wog ads jo Jen Nes AM Iso, JE Jao "eho LOO LA T 
hoe 2x JNa Kasam, SAdso Sy 6 elo Jie lar ejoso 
Los 36] £p Jor S427 ooo] So < Laaa} T eure Jor MSAN 
oana, CAT xo x was fag’ liso qx») WN LG] cats 
p L3» < Ja SORS «eo Max <% vda) Noo :Jaot r 
pas aïo) ENC, faszi sasis] eaan fhad faos -y9 Da 
STOUNA 13e, aad oot Ns aami] .ootad) JNOS MA s0 | - fasags 
fos! yl saoo sasjohia! Ags NOHAD-D 0000 ADEM we ote Jem: 


|. Ms, wo — 2) Ms. with stops.. 


die ii sin; but, if not, men eannot. kill ns, beenuse they who are with ns 
are more than they who are with then ';.— But these things /T did ? nol sav 
lo you before, in order that we ourselves also may Tullil every man's fot: for 
Pit were open to me Falso would have led, in order that we may nol seem 
to be inany thing better than the rest of meno. Bat the heart oftliose whe 
had remained with him was agitated, though they were eucoursged by him, 
and they continued peering ont on all sides, and they lifted up their eves 
and see, and lo! a host of horsemen appeared before thi monastery: and 
they themselves trembled and were disturbed: and they ran do the blessed 
man and say : e Sir, pray, heeause the evil bas come. Sir. what shall we 
Ho?) Lo! they surronnd us», But the blessed man continued beating on his 
lace, saving, « What. my sons. ean Esav? What?) Vin F imysell betler than 
all those who are now being eul in pieecs and east ont; and are being eaten 
hy beasts and by birds?» But the host of the barbarians, when they had 
reached a distance of half a mile from. the monastery overtook men who 
were fleeing toward the blessed man's monastery; anc with cries uttered 
in their language they pursued them, and they advanced as far as the monas 


tery lenee; and those who were Beeing before thei escaped inside. And 


I. UE Kings. NI. 46, — 2 Or did FS Ede nob felles tfe arotau nt. 


Joy les Oh =the MEE rds A 


toda 


PAE pus 


82 JOHN OF EPHESUS. S2 
x jo «oo» Das aM of nooi Sasho ol mirgisoy 
x95: dor Jas odt pelo opa Ji Sipas LA Son 20 Jas LOANS 
rd lasos haso frog, obsit We» oped gahi Woornsep© Qoo ooa 
OR Vahase jao aoa DAD gaa gaip Jon gana 
Lisa „odao 9001 —— EE a Joo Mad au] e Loot 
ha Maso jio Sd J| Stang Qoouse pro + [sags oot sina Nox 
an Way De ee coord Mayol! lazpuNse Jl ols sas] Sad 
Ko ee JA veio xara] cootaian Jl Slo - open “Sartlo ond! 
lisa: eias col ooo [jo JL o Laso slo a2 2 E 
xo flo Naal?) Je flo 0487s bisaa [Lao . asols Jr Ns. Sor 
PO) Lapa + Oh panes Lusas «ooa el p sha pe of às wohals 
y lasa} oo odo Jis yoo Xa» roa, cox JNa a> Slo Joa ' 
pels 


Hoffer Jo oot Las Sax JN aM Gs Jes Jeau Nao Lasas 


Lo Ms. Pese. sore Nold. - zs Ms, este LM- eant. 


these, Tike men who are driven along or whose eyes are blinded or whom a 
deceiver carries along se that thev do nol see, passed round the monastery 
half on ene side and halfou the other, aud. just as af those whom they were 
pursuing were running before them, they passed by the wate of the monastery 
on this side amd on that; thinking thal they were just overtaking ind eutehing 
the Pusitives;— And this their shouting indieated: sinee; while there was no 
one in front of them, they themselves continued erying ad running, and so 
thoy passed round the blessed man's monastery, and not one of them entered 
within W: and so tt ts believed by everyone that ih was nol even seen Dy 
them at afk because they passed by the side of its walls ind gates, aud did 
not even HE up their eyes and look upon the site of one of its sides, although 
His seen even al a greal distance, and the blessed man's station moreover 
is seen above, bere Black. Nud so by the help of his prayers neither was 
ie monastery harmed, nor anyone who was iu it or round it, though in 
Hl the sallaees round d complete destruction was carried out, and even in 
th Vase self they were for a whole day. and. while the whole monaslery 
and the blessed min were seen by the village dike a sun, their eves were 


blonde Liho del not see bhim, Many sueh things God used to perform 


[83] LIVES OF XDRAILVM AND MAO, S3 


Jasja, S] ak hag, ole, ras JaN Joa pric Jhb goo dor 
+ 09 Paso Joa won Jl oos 15:a.o rm JN Ms [NS m> 
J Jya AONas aN lads foe D ol :000 qa, Jasy Ss of 
«ae Nd © edo D? Rood Ai Kase JL JN]. [Ns «sol 
< La Ss cote Lon S d Ns s Jos JN a sal LAN, Rado Ugo 
[Naso - alo res Lars es | ec beo] Sx odode 006282: 
oM feme ans pes vaa] Urcais foia Haai 
Jlo 8o AANA v! fora ws MS eis saai, hay: LA 
ajho < saoi} woKasads ul ras JL pa -uao Jlarsco awas, 
„hadol Ss paas JI oon Lco Laaj; o0, „oaar H oa [so 
CEN əl Joa Jys Nasa S o Kal path oad IHD} oí cy hay 
L? yl LOX ooo x95 Jes? cai X9 o5 * Joa Joco "oo FER 


L Ms. with stop following. — 2. Corr, by Eder hand to lea — 3. Corr frar haag. 


through the blessed man’s prayers; though, il £ had undertaken to tell all 
the things that were performed in sick men through the outward word ouly 
without his applying his touch to these. either in the case of demons who 
came out, or in that of the other acts of healing, one by one. 1 should have 
wandered into a greatly protracted series ol stories; but these few out of 
many are enough to stir up praise to God in those who are convinced by them. 
As do the time of his standing he completed ou the column in this trial of 
endurance (zyóv) twenty-nine years and fifteen days. and in the trec-xegemenut 
in his brothers days he passed eleven years, so that for the time of the trial 


ur 


of endurance yévi in whieh he laboured there are made up forty. years | 
But as to the rest of his labours and the paiufulness of his standing and the 
austerity of his habits I reckon it superlluons to write. But his. successor 
is his own presbyter, his kinsiuan, a man who from the very earliest. time, 
when he himself was nol standing ou the column, himself abso walked rightly 
and soundly in his very footsteps. — For, even while the salnt was alive, 


all men used to congratulate him, because suelh a man was standing belore 


1. If the Hun invasion was iu Sts. Hiis would bring M's death fo 52:56 bul, as J. seems fo dive 
Jeff the monastery not later than 222 24 (see Enlrod. , we ins peel place Mos death ain 322 aud tahe 2 
(p. 78) as a round number. This throws back Abraham 9 death bootie. (os. and the beginning of h 


ascetic life [o cire; 15. 


oy 


8^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. SV 


Jl; ois das jawas Slo ooo. o0 Joao Joor yoko hay 
Lag yo: Naas r2 Joa — Rufus No. kaaso; flo Li 
lazo: Lains Mani prs joo Sxookkso ofa) 2] uao alamaan, 
yoy Naas ogy da a5], Jaai sonda] Lady loawe *Joor 
[xaoso Lujan JS 2 o> -lasak Ob ad co} Tw «20 -0004 v 
y Seo at Laño Joot Jaars otlasairo oftsad aco :, oc. Joo rad 
foots Jaco SX No xol sao a Mooot Mass" EN Ju] Joa ao 
raanda I Liamoals> ST Fd ANS Lh L.s&i5 ro rego 


Pm ^um latina poiar sms duard hir 


anr balra eor aun mduird aah 
erup muld ruas oah asl isa mas 


* 


Urb ooo qoot Ne] badal, «^» fasio l Sao, wor JNa wol as 


Lo Mure. in bator hand: aao Nader lio, goes worasal hawl le-s Jans bo 


bim z und after hrn be bore all his burden and that also of the whole convent 
with stainless purity withont marninr and without complain: white the fame 
of bis kindness and of his own habits also was everywhere spoken, through 
the charity to the poor which le possessed, and the love towards his bre- 
thren, and the reception oF strangers, who used to carry las fame every- 
Where. But, after the blessed nans decease, le made himself a hut and a 
Station dm the enelosure itself, and therein carried ont his labour aud his 
(hstinence: but he did not as vet monuit the column, Put ] removed myself 
thenee becanse of the neighbourhood of bodily hin viv. aud joined 
my sell to the communities of the Minidenes. while they themselves were in 


ie exile suy deereed by the hereties, 


Phe history of the vetus, Nbeaham and Muro the brothers, is finished, 


es ENSE C SPEI itd set His hour, ol VHO HOLY AND DIVINE MEN SIMEON TUE 


ERESI AND O NERGITS MSO PHE RECEUSE WHS ZESEOUS. DISCIPLE. 


lu une viage moreover froii which the saints ofthe column derived 


= —M— 


[85 LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. m 


eol Jor ac -joa Jrokso anwas, Be] Loo Jos Jam Fama 
ois Oly Lol - fou!) sero sons] faapo QoonceMol sias, fisyy oue 
eaa opoatas oo Sly Lo Nhao a> joisas oi sa T loa J! 
Ngaio wads}s Lod. yar assy «oomen: [poly oda; JNS 
oos joo Mo so Loot [ney Ln eo Laui] Mie; Dad bor 
JNasash Joa Joass Js] 2.5 eos] Laso lasa otov]. So ALILD 
J oly DAs Jes x Lass ouf Buh bes | ad bene 
coo My Jools JXasaal Joo pad wot v6 ohh yel Jes pans 
sb] tS Qoo Lads foot lot oe» [3$ yool, RAS W0 odo 
Js JN Joni o Jaoo:so .. o. Joa ra JSary has Jot Soo 
os rade me el re Jed je» Jot saan LOMA fusoo .bssh 


* 


xA Lams] Ll DA wJKeols Nawo [rams rae Naona 


sào Jlassany udio awana» joa sas gtl Dan [ioo .olad ooo 


their origin (yivozi' a great and holy old man who was called Simeon had 
also been living as a recluse ever siuce the time when the saints Abrahani 
and Maro the brothers began their diseipleship ^, a man whose own story 
also was not unworthy ol gwat admiration; who also in his own person 
carried out the words of the apostle which sav, « They crucilied their Hesh 


with all its affections and its lusts » ' 


This man because of the ereat hospi- 
tality that existed in him (and he was eager to carry oul the ministration lo 
the saints personally with his own hands like the holy Abraham the patriarch! 
used not to shut himself up iu a lint Hhe all the others, because indeed as 
Ihave said he would not endure to do so, since he used to perform. the 
ministration to the brothers who resorted to him. For the love ol the greal 
Abraham had been implanted in bim toward all men, amd on this account 
he made himself some small huts, and a little enclosed conri aud garden 
without a gate; and thus he was shut up within then with one disciple or 
two: and at one place he made for himself a way of ise nines and descending 
the wall, on account of the strange brothers who reso teal to him; and thus 


therefore he fulfilled in himself two purposes, bolh that of seclusion iud 


L Kalesh: see p. 36. 2. M. besun do sesre alter AS op. S7 2 but, even d owe pakon pret the 


be ol the beginn of omit 


tine when M. ascended the columan (qe a, we gel A54 as Hie dit 
seclusion, whieh as imeousistent witht Jaler shalediends see quote gn l Cab. i 


E eas 


Sb JOHN OF EPHESUS. 86] 
ANS solas Joa Jilly baam! pa Lans] pay, Sao Jam» LI 
Joa Ko sees <% Joa «axo «Jao! < Ness, [GL oo OFS Joa 
SX Ja Nauso voos] aao OS joo arsso o Joa ye alaz 
bxL00 qh p „saaa No Id FS aso NJ Mo ye was 
oeaisfo s[ANMZ of de fusca, Jll ex epe b] hex plo 
gà; noaoo Ja, COM «cA» Sp -nd00 Jo VHP S.S uoto) 
RAM) we hapo Joa Jh o Joa moia a> Ji Ll Las Joo 


OA CS Ody om MAS OHO aos] XX "Wale «pe jano o joo 


wardsyo + farms] yar) X od Joà Jio ^ [210 off «a^a, Joe Neo re 
awo [5&2 paa oD so. J) M4] sp dso; od pl QJ od 
parse [rods cad Joa Yai oo -joa Was où po Nujso-o ba 
aN aw ol, : |a) cà + M210 pats ]263o Loro aad «Jiro 
waa ADD JH po Jaga lo Joot pw KL Lod Joot ea sro Lasoo 


). Xu erasure follows. -— 2. M>. pl. 


that ofthe entertainment of strangers. Whenever any stranger wearing the 
habit sexe) came to him. he would himself open the gate at the top of the 
wall for him, and he wonld come up outside and come down to limi: and he 
vould take hold af him and embrace him and kiss his hands: and he would 
fall upon his face and forcibly take bold of him, and would kiss his feet and 
his heels, leaping and crying and saving, « J thank my Lord Jesns that he 
has come to-day and visited the sioner, and has thought me worthy to see 
him in bis holy bondmen oo. And, as soon as they had made the prayer 
amd were sitting down, he would run to a vessel containing wine, and wonld 
Alla eertain gourd-cup that had been mide by him and a roll zoso", 
and before anything else would fall ou his face before the man’s feet whoever 
he might be, that be migbt take that cup; and the hospitable man would 
invite him to eat that roll izoz722x: also, saying to bim, « You are weary; but 
for Gods sake be Ried and take this first». und, while that mau was 
receiving Th he bimselfy ould rand prepare a footpan Xzzzvziand bring water, 
aud would prepare a towel and put it round bis loins, in the manner whieh 


out Lord afso taught; and thus he would wash them whether they were one 


i97 LIVES Of SIMEON AND SERGIUS. n» 


Sa Mla «coord joo T sio «200 SS) Kissy fo oor Joo 
Jas oà »- xS ] AX oA joa asso Gorarss Dao of»? vaio] 
asaos Joa 02 ..Joot pady yop vao au] Jho Joa Na gan! 
nei NSL oom foo JNao -L` ey «Aoi p Hi <% rM 
9o joo 222390 Jusdoo Jaan Joa La Dlo .. cof Joa ain gado 
xl ARM y Lx. rane loo Leody Joos wad joo Qo Ote S00 
foul Io JN Noja JNoop> HD les [ioo lora yl pado 
par‘o pdo Joa JNa aa Joot wijs PS v3 w>) Joa aaas, 
Nao Dolo Joa vs 9 Aco Ot} g OS joo xe mero - flsas 
Nas; + [spo oao Dam Joa waas Jl» od i255 final Ael 
uso «ad foot v5] qe Joor Mp 49 qe? 091 Joot yams hoa yas 
Joa Joos, pany jx Wo» fusca. ful Jao fa] Sin] ex. $36 je» 
^) pando nanus Jl» Nekorin Joa JNiso ta] haaa ala Laaa] 


L Mz. palo: 


or many, not allowing them to speak nor to refuse. And, alter he had 
washed them, he would hastily raise this water to his own face and his 
arms, just as if he were desirous of washing: and, tiat no one might nder- 
stand what he was doing, he would withdraw to one side wlüle these men 
were occupied in conversation; and he would drink of it three tines, and thea 
leave them; and he would go and pour ont wine and oiband anoint thea. And 
immediately he would run to that garden, which measured about ten eubits 
one way, and about twenty the other rand the heavenly blessing rested upon 
the place to such an extent that what was sown in if was enough for forty 
men), and he would bring something from it and eook a dish, and then he 
would entertain whoever might be there, and he would make merry ond 
joyfully eat and drink, so that anyone who was not wequainted with the 


saint's love and his manner of life would think that ae enjoyed himsel in 


this wav every day. But fe would say in eheerful esultition, «© Blessed 
am E that Pan to-day eating and drinking with my Lord Jesus For, shen- 


ever there was a stranger with him, he would thus joyfully eat and rin! 


without reserve: and, as soou as there was no es eum cde would go a 


role 


ety 


b. 


55 JONN OF EPHESUS. [88] 


po «x30, hand Ioco [xao JNalo Joa foo. hasas] Joa Na: 
[i P| Nasly road Lunae Jas pda bly soil pa Joo yang’ D 
em) wet ER Jiono Ss ol] oper oor 2c anos] «JU bl 
JL annas DA olopnae DA ALAN aN, pO ooo 
«ao Ro +0001 caia slas) Ww Mo: wt faeces] ok SOAM 0: 
Dads oog < J othes La Ae Joo JN” ol has o 
Ht IAM exa gbl g cut mho Jhrg aħasaalo L>; ojos 
ao foot L-5; £65 ad IM» foa yoko p2 Wl Loa Joa K-A 
bes Jo Kalo apy Jo doa dass èh fos Janey Lael s. feo, idem 
ja DS or ol oao cmi ire "(v2) LJ Joa wats - fhe 
yan Joa Ssy'l were NT Io fats e Luojan» foa #0026 
Jed 42.0 haas Loawo Laso jlsas dons hanao Jap JNa NS. Looks 
wade xd. Sas p » Jhiaroshy boa frac “oewis pervs Jo 


joas Loano wana) Jas] wid amas Js fans? Joor PAN 


1. Au erasure follows, — 2. Ms. oni. 


muchas six and seven and even ten days, and taste nothing, saving, « For 
my part without King Christ 1 eannot eat bread, unless he has thought me 
worthy to sil at table with him in lis hondmen ». Many were deterred by 
hin trom going in to him onaeeount of his reverend character and on account 
ol Eis great humility in their presence: others again who were a little lazy like 
iie eon not pass more thau two nights or three at most with him, on account 
of his great watching and protracted recitation of service: Tor there was no 
possibility of his sleeping more than two hours of the aight; but he would 
stand up in the night and H up the heil of David. and, until the day broke, 
Where be began there te would end'; iud, if it happened that he had some 
Hine over, he would leave the brothers resting, and would himsel! go and 


recite he gospel tòzyyihey in Che hut; weeping, until daybreak. and then he 


would go and rouse them to perform mations. And so this wonderful man 
ended his days in this severe labour and abundant love and great carnestiess, 
bowing fortitude all the days ol his life; so that ien were not able to support 
and eudure the burden of lis great labours more than a short time, eseept 


abest the wh 


de pealter. 


ENT. eS RO, 


(39; LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. S9 


AO akaona, Aan J INSS ho «x BA Laso; saarin, 
oem» [ALN pa Boa yo Sas Joot jais a Sly Lot opadl 
y! Massy huoi où Joao Naaaseo Joo Msax ope» Jloi Mises 
Ley Lams Joco Gast (Ghai aor uote eso] bl Liao ead v3 
sooo opa; Jasco] Kas pads ol, Ba] Joa JN Jan oaao 
Jo fu alo xA ASS ooo gaat 70,30 Naas Jlas <> «elo 
hsl pars à dros vor coh .ofk Joa «o3: pel aD sse 
J| col fluids L3: iJlas, coo loa farsa J a.C) jeje 
Li58) awo] - gor] L «200 LAL CO wikis Loooto ECT 
.9900 «calo Jas <% Ja voto ! CENT xS L000» «oot. Paane 
E Jod «Ll bee -Joa oso Jlas <% ag Lawas ? 
Í3/NZ20 JJasopse yew Jlanco] cass; fseo Laopo Je2p> q wo .0001 
jasy aas: Jll Mx» -coot gepaar foo corasy E QORDON oF 04) 


JNa DA oo Kas «le 9001 vano NL wl «NS 


1, Ms. om. — 2. Ms. ag — 3. Text w9e3 oe: corr, marg, in same hand. - Y. Ms. 0:9. 


Sergius lis disciple an earnest man like himself, who also imitated him in 
everything, for for the space of twenty years he laboured with him in the 
excellent life, and accordingly the saying of the Spirit thal! was uttered in the 
prophet as from the mouth of the Lord, € This is my rest with which | will 
rest Ihe weary »? was fulfilled in the splendid obl man and his diligent son, 
insomuch that they made a gaest-house outside, and (here used to entertain 
all who came with everything out of the window, whether they were women 
or laymen, each as was proper for him. Again also, sinee the tash of 
performing anything in the way of manual work was not open fo them, and 
that they might not continue to eal the bread of idleness, and be despised 
by themselves and by their couserence, the blessed men formed a plan and 
chose for themselves to teach boys, and this they did ont of the window, 
since a seat was placed inside the window, and hours were appointed [oc 
the boys to cone, that is in the morning and qm tlie event iz: and, when they 
had taught one class isyoni) 10 read the psalms and the Seriplures, and ' 
they had withdrawn aller being strengthened, another came nof ule infants. 


thirty or forty of them, and they would learn and yo to their homes, because 


1. Ms. oin, — 2. Is., Xx vit, 12. 


SES 


au JOHN OF EPHESUS. 90] 
Jaw Joa EAM Lasoo òo Joa a4 JL Laso -loa Aal Joel 
Ago is -000l cea xot LAS, Dawo adaa, EETA Joo, 
Lsaapnds oLa fe cate vom lary wy SNRs q> ooo — 
xxi oo 2! .. Jaco: ahad Joa Maly J JN sopa „paal, aH 
wily upa WX Ll, aS pool ad ras Sxas lon Naay 296a r20 
wash, yard yA bl Jeà P ^ y Nooa ward JI £x 1 
md «eee Wy Jl Jlaasyy bol: hga «xe Mul Jp baa Ss 
ad aaa saw We as we ha Jlastcnaso O vÒ (M 
ja.rsyo asao Jis NJ eS Jaa Lujaa» J? caai lainh c9 


o ore Joa ow oom M34». hapa alo ` qlo „ahas <% olo 


Lawana :Joo Mul ud JNa JE o foyodtuy S ado ipa Jot 
pa Dao ECEN laxe] haoNol o Joot ooo 435066 IN; 
aro Moama wil uS Joo ahon Qoo a oat. JA Ado ya) yl 
Leba «aas Nas J| fois; Jes) LBD, een plo soris Joa «02.200 


L Ms. & € ebes — 2, Peat eo corr. mare, in same hand. 


it was a populons village, and many people used to come out from it. And 
so the old man continued doing until the time of his end; and accordingly 
the boy-pupils supplied their needs, Altera space of twenty years Sergius 
his disciple asked. the saint that he also might shut himself up ata certain 
place. close hy the villae Aud, seeing that he was eager for every good 
deed, he said to him: « EF, my son, should not. be at all satisfied al vour 
leaving me. However, | will not as it were stand in your way so as lo 
prevent you from making progress in running on the road of righteousness 
as far as vou are able; but go and may our Lord. prosper you. ». Then, 
having received this permission, he went out and went and shut himself up. 
not after his masters method, but straitly in a lonely hul the size of Ins 
stature, ves and eyen smaller than his stature: and there henceforth he 
performed the rest of bis labours, But, before doing this. because there 
reonany dews di that village. and they went about with greal freedom 
Che carried on a continuous contest against them, and every day he 

| tend against them as with shavers of God, being fervent in the 


| of his Lord. aed gnashing his teeth. and saving :« These crucifiers of the 


191] LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. ul 


Naaa famosas soar coo vf49loMaso) [i.i Joa DL RP 
a.so "goto <> vcra y SSS 455 xs XO pedo 
SORSAS Obs ALO je» goa Jas Rasy [si Js +20] Wylo Jia 
«9o rl J „aadj Sass up ydo prec p oossaal oao 
bens pro OD wash] o» LAD ojos Q9 vof «eet sess. boss 
JasleM5; Sadsoo Mufpiso cadd.] -coottasasl ano qoot 
+ Php wLES ooo snam» Jo «na M Niso :ooot cook. ph Je 
vH [3,30 Jm LOAD «oo ooo - corso. Lopes Mawi pao 
«e! o0 AE Hei Heres E pos ele MA RD BD Esa DS 
Jias Sad 2 Sean JNieeo: Jm edad cat p La 
«oot lu [£o oe» 5, “oopa iD L «9o. A5 Qoo scs Naa 
AND jaan Qoo à Jiards qaas adylo L% adaaso Joco 
SQ wo Jo, Jia»; hào Mas x99. JN. euo sholi asso 


son of God should not be allowed to live at all. »; and he used to upbraid 
Christians who had dealings with them in the way of taking and giving. nd 
one day he led about twenty of their diseiples by night, and took fire, and went 
and burnt their great synagogue-house, with their hooks amd their trumpets 
and all their furniture, saving, « As Jor those who erncified my Lord Jesus, 
| will never make peace with them ». But these men, when they saw that 
all their hope had been cut off through the burning of their books and of all 
their furniture, lamented bitterly; and, because they were settled in the terri- 
tory ‘ of the ehurch of Amida, and used to pay many contributions (ev72etzz 
to the members of the chureh, out of desire for the abundance of their wold 
all the members of the church became their supporters, threatening the 
blessed Sergius and saving :« This man wishes to destroy the property of 
the chureh »..— But the zealous man, when these inen had gone into the 
church of the city to prefer an acensation, while the fire was still in their 
synagogue, collected all his master’s disciples with him and all the others 
from the village, and they took water, amd went and put ont thet fire: and 
they cleared all the soil: and they collected stones. and within three 
days built a small martyrs chapel in that place. in the name of the Blessed 


I. Mastol js a literal rendering of zxeocxix ail means ecelesiastinal purrsdietion, nof. property 


Hence the gurs were not rent, but c kind of blackhtnul pant bo Ire qeeteelion uns att 


of this kind. 


231 


92 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 02 
Na»: pope So Jes J, Jsarxascso Jos lj JNa, dpars 
J p SUE Bos xE-o ooo x5 Naso Löt e ANa] joue 
-— wero AAN 0d Jaa Mis hös Kis 290 Opa Lo ee 
Jha gaa £5 ob] Qo aha,a4; oos vM» Liron 
IaoN5l ao Joa aus fas oo ly woo [edt «ooo as SN. oS 
Ok £20 Joa Syo J x4 aa o joo [ss fl o oY p) Aea, 
Swxo Jb dy pasos Dao eale Kaa hao > LA aaa), 
<% yl tas xol] J| oe aois Sarco JNa, col Jorroa'so 
wa 9| ad.a2 alaska oc cesar Son Laws 0001 gahd 


(Opusc) aoas yoyo [ii voir jars anai] adylo CMM Ba 


„hanol J, J1a d ~~ Koba, ja alo yè e os o-oolo + OLS 
pale a) Afro .voasiars Kato falas Laada Joas, Jun] 
„Joa soioks] Ldrowo Laa DAS mage cof gp oO Joa 
LaLa) 0006 aspis «o yoo Ahol qoi] Lino yo Jio, JMscans 


God-sbearer; itid; at the end af one week the whole of the martyrs eliapel 
was completed, while the Jews assembled and looked on and lamented, not 
knowing what to do; and that synagogue remained a martyrs chapel for 
ever, Then the Jews who had gone in to prefer accusation against them 
look conrage and came to fight with the blessed men; since the old man 
also did not hold. aloof from the tight with them *, though he did not take it 
to heart, that is, he was not moved with indignation, When they saw that 
al ope for their place of worship was lost, aud it had now received. the 
form of à ebhurch, and the name too of the Blessed one; and they were no 
longer able to approach 1, inasmuchi as they had been reinforced by those 
in whose territory they were settled, they also took fire by night and went 
and set fire to the old man’s buts, before his diseiple separated. [rom him, 
amd barot them: though perhaps even this also was brought abont provi- 
ential) by the grace of God, in order that the blessed man might have a 
little Preathing-space tu his hats, beeanse he was much straiteued in them. 


Then Sergius, beeanse he was an agile and energetic man, rebuilt them 


firmly noa few dayss Mid, when these men began to buld a synagogue, 
l Sheet Heat heddet dure cell but onb thal he enecuraged his dtserples to go. 


Pl 


(8 LIVES OF SIMEON AND SEIUGIUS. ny 


DS pando ASI. ooo «^iv: ES Koad joo rer „JNa Kos 
re Hes, Daai, Joa faoksl Lors [15oto -o Joo ipad lələ kəf» 
amaa] Ji say Lasot wl KOM} oou Wroais; Jin] wows, 
wes Nofaol Lrops Asoo o0 ast! Opa om aul] ope wt e 
Jitsoto „woop poo LSAS Mer X30] špa SOON Mao amnia pao .0001 
Do vaoo [Yori D> x Law .oU M 3oá, Loa Jass, > saa. 
olo, bep „Joa Amar pas «a ya haria) Lado Jo Lads asa. 
xl Jis flsaro [2saa22o voe [Lusan ads pow Haso 
adasi Joa Te [soo oaasis JJ]. yolo Joa asso flo a) Jl 
Joo Mo 40105 | «Jasons! Joa Jj Šip 300 Jaso LAS amio 
Loana yl Jaio foa uL NS ~ Rola Joa Paso oa; me Da 
We» Q6 ay Da » brooy aaao aha) JL Noi Set Ne Moo 
ACCIUS WEN <% J oly Las} Nosas Daol, Moa gà v» 


he waited for them till they were ou the point of finishing, and he oecupied 


eed in this 


^ 


one night in pulling it to pieces slone by stone. and thus he enga 
contest against the erueiliers before shutting hiniself np; so that anring the 
days of his lle the Jews could. not raise their head there. But, wlien thes 
saw that he had shat himsell up, they thonght that they were rid of him: 
and for this reason they went on building coulfidently: aud, when they had 
completed and finished ', he sent his disciples by night, and they burnt it: 
and so they desisted from building all the days of his fife. Bat the old mau 
went on adding to the course of his habitual practices amd to his love 
toward God and toward strangers every day; until he grew old and became 
very infirm, alter completing forty vears in these hats and in seclusion and 
labours: and at last he beeame emaciated and was nol able to stiuid unless 
they supported him; and so he was laid upou his rog aud recited the service 
night and day; and, as soon as he saw a stranger, he would twine his hands 
together above his head, and weep with sighs, sobbing and weeping like a 
baby. And, beeanse E knew the power of the old manis prayers and of his 
blessings, l always used. fo repair. to hit from all quarters to reeeive his 


blessings, so that onee E did not shrink from making the effort and coming 


L foes the synagosue, the obiect has perh, filled out 


0^ JOHN. OF EPHESUS. 94 


«oor waas yopo, hial -Misado adana Mood Nas] < Sew 
o NS ole sey hs, Jr hanao Joo .ooiaa Jo Na't Je 
Lanan Noa bl <2! „aakay «2e Naso whliols bep MS 
Je Je. fofas fred) o Joa Ku] nae JN) co otN as] oao, 
OMENS som v6 Joa «AX, haoa Jas! [sek Jay wula Qoo yo 
Roy wea poo Laan haana, gs] [68.9 a5 ooo Joo aaas 
io sse, NS Jo Jaso M waar E Joa Jya JNx.a asha odas 
o5 Gao haas Daso rss «dile e» Daso -jaw or ashulo 
oes Nu hoa < Jaso(’s -palo o roto x oaio p 


tob yao ecard Jp eo oles Lais? ol] -alan Las Jas; JNa ` < 
Nes) oD Nooà hal Llo Joa baiso oaa So yL. woop] Joa 
aM iso eu SO xr sanis Nea No a> Tc “asl Nu? [ias L 


1. Ms «2r Dl with marks ef transposition, 


down even from Constantinople *. iu order to gain his blessing before his 
departure from the body ; and the inereiful Gad, who saw the desire of my 
feebleness, preserved him in the body till he had made me heir to a small 
portion of his goods, thongh 1 for my pat turned out à -quaunderer of his 
property. d found. that for one year he had been kud up wilh disease uf 
the fiver and of the spleen and ol all the internal organs. insomuch that the 
breath which came up from inside him used to canse his tongue to dry np, 
and cracks appeared on il, as on a barefooted man’s heel. When he heard 
that Thad come in to him and saw me, he went on for an hour embracing 
me and weeping, and unable to speak: and he beckoned aud they brought 
him water. and he took some on his finger and wetted his longue: and he 
took otf ind smeared d£ on gt while we both wept: and then he spoke and 
said, v Now that (have seen iny son. Pet mne die s; After Thad spent a few 
days with hin. some strangers eame to him and, when he saw them, he 
placed bath his hands on his head, and went on weeping. And l said to 
hin: e Wherefore do von weep. our father? », iud he looked at me: and his 
fears went on flowin more than before: and im the midst of his sighs he said 

une de alia than e m duties sd Haeretete ap we re hon 0 years from W83 qu Sa, 


pese Thea S. Hed 17 vua im d he aberepil state desernibisd apoye, Moreover 


i tull mine poe Tiley kaeh therefore del mob besi betere 


95 LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. 95 
Lanao JL cJ NL, weeds Hans! Jl urs A> haf, ADO US Joa +œ] 
«a bl JNalo «Ml we yash L? J ps lo C99 a ES oa ukla 
e eer b> r Las! has ull J oN Noa «xl Maas, pel 
"on Ne yi prs lo Joa: Had; Lasoo. ZU Laas ov Kos! 
28M Mo ads I uid oos LUN uel At ot Jas! YS sS flo 
pel oases ray AS cod b] OXY 10 od sa S so broad ANT ray Ll 
NA» JH] Haasan’) se Noa mS CEN Joa aaa - Jor oy. 
ad P Lasao ao ja NA aaoi, JI assa NS Kaaso Ll: 
CN qlas ooo KABA Q5 .Joot coo] mere Naso Op edo 
Saso eha P Apne! Majo oa. o i seias Jls Lojas Joa NA i, 
x en. OXON» Sasso * ease bard), INg: hL go> 


. 


vM. Lopa, wosoa nd, «Ml x h20; Joo Joa SOX Loy 


KM sesat — 2. M. om Mae o. Ms. amio. 


to me these words : « How, mv son, ean T do aught but weep formy wretched 
sell, sinee Christ omes to quie on his own feel. and | cannot. rise and 
Wash them and drink». But 1. in order thid he migbt be comforted. Wis 
saving to him : « Be not distressed at this, our father, When Christ wished, 
you washed him as much as he wished. And now bis will be done. And 
your own will also he knows, and will not do von wrong, weep nolo». But 
he said fo ime : « Ite, my son, lias not done wrong and does not do Wrong; 
but | am a doer of wrong and one who lave done him Wrong, and wlio am 
doing him Wrong, ff E bad served him as I ought to have done, he would 
have allowed me to serve him all my file: bit. because | provoked him aud 
neglected the servier of his hondtien doithis- reason Ie east me down, 
And so, though he was already a dead man in the body, men Supportline 
him 2nd setting him np. he insisted on their coming up before him and on 
stretching out his hand. Weeping, and dipping il in the water in whieh the 
strangers had been washed, and taking it and smearing it on his bod. 

A short time before a persecution had been set on foot ov those who served 


the synod of Chaleedon', and meu who possessed the name only of ehurelinen 


1 


l. As Maro was still living (que 98 This must be the persecution of 521. unl tbe + short Mite guns 
he ut least 10 Murs, 


BID JOHN OF EPHESUS, 067 
(aus x Oo O08 meted Lis Jia dae p> JLo eoo 
> Jha gen ro -o0 qao 900 ered JERE 9006 qato S wid) 
wh? fraud Jhe Rajan vol. J LA ue ooo ver Jhasas Jars Jejo~ 
Sor [Nao jos) Look wal p20 + 00% | ep anand Kujo Jaza}lo .coot 
. 000l qos Loon road Je foro Sos “ha cols „Jiao Je 
Laag dor J|Maras AD «et eoe 900 ve Loon SSS AOALDIA.LO 
«o pl m Lapa Jha ats Loot coords? ol, ha od -aha 
olo cot car) Jam, 1° Loo ote d Td lise] Los 
PT NEC SS Lana, z! aad Co joa SX r^ fay oro 
oq > ooo MM Aene) yeh air oe p oou Jas 
Jot doe .o1430 900 xo boa Sr oos Joo rare KUL ny Fey 


shes, arene adyl v Ni Jasas opel i apa. laa 


coo sans upd Ooo —€— e rods coo La 30 Nai D 


pow erased. — 2. M-. Jopue ls. a Poms... above the line follow. 


expelled many by the nse of harbarian troops. and many they arrested and 
imprison ala and many thev drave epa brad Stripes iullieted with rods, nnd 
MANY again they erecdily and meretlessly plundered: and others thev reduced 
fo submission bs foree, and, when men had eaten aud drmmk wine and meat. 
they world open their mouths with ash! hides (9655; and rods, and sinif 
their oblation into their mouths. When these things were being done in the 
vers village in which these blessed men Vived inasmuch as it owas in fact 
rahabe bie rea} ehnrehmenn ad first they went straight to the blessed 
Sergius the obl mans disciples For of the saint himsel they were afraid: for 
yudert some time þefore also they had used bhandistients with him under the 
cloak of persuasion anl afection. and they saw the vigour of his dis position. 
when they on their part thought Ihat they were deceiving him as a simple 
Hine ter de owls side went on openly amuhematizing them. Therefore they 
dnm from him: and for this reason thes beul the whole mass of their plans 
ip dhe direction of his disciple. Viale e bienes ANTE and began te speak 
sell. to himn with coaxing wais aiie ilies praised the head ol their 


XX E that is their bishop. and wished to deeeive itid save & There 


gap inant Sins NSS po Wey ida Bhoxoz. Miel p le 


ia LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. 97 


iac) pro Jad Na oko vox da vp eaaa wy ad 
Jed: vor DN Seo Mlan casas xo Qoae yos pl 
ooo «ol JN SES | caydte fursso «2o X991 35 xau jasp 
-cootta ouy Jlas «o Lao oA aN Joor Aspas v6 pel om 
Li Nes Lio as > vAN?! € fats "jns [aso aoas asao; 
Ja NE 2d. rato] Jhansi, V Qohu] aD sebo] Qype; 
LOM ANTAL Q5 vef xaO nny Laajaan Ka NU] ài o! sf Neo 
ed Jh, «odas wer pol Ne Ager ol JNS Jh beast 
jul NS xl + SED Aa D Lag x ood JM ash Lojas faio oas 
LI AD soe. apr ow cof Uw eaaa coh] <! Jbl a JI 
sago CTER «fens INi o5 e Lp ET eB 2*9 oo 
v! ods ahaa auo aD gaze. «aas, lo fasola co | 
soaS cas MEM. «ot ORT. Janw yl fresno loo Jasper [Lider 


1, Ms. wero. 


is nothing wrong, but agree and accept », while they on their side said these 
things to him softly and gently. as is said in the psalmist, « Their words are 
softer than oil, and they are arrow-points »', inasmuch as he was vigorous 
in his speech and in his zeal, he cried from his own window to them. « Stand 
up and go away from here, evil wicked men, You are cursed with the 
deeeitinl doctrine that you proclaim, since you advise me to accept a 
quaternity instead of the Holy Trinity, in whieh 1 was sealed for my life's 
salvation ». But these meu, when they heard the anathema upon them 
spoken boldly? without fear, on their part also began their own methods, 
saving to him, « Come, come out; since there is no possibility of your staying 
here ». But the blessed Sergius said. to them : « E will nol come out 
of myself. But, if vou turn me oul, as our Lord Jesus. lives, ‘whose Tam 
and whom FE serve", in the middle of the chureh, while the whole city is 
assembled, before them and jn the middle of them E will go up to the chancel 
CER, and will curse vou to your faces, vou and Che head of your congre- 
gation ». And his speech was thas heen and entling, The a sword. But 


these men were yet more agitated by his words, and. they pulled down his 


Ll: PSS oem 2. Wath n»ponsta. dr Wels AACE SEES 


PAIR. Oh, — "V, XVID ps b 


us JOHN OF EPHESUS. 98] 


yay e <>] J Lase wy og .29.a.9]o oda» oka so a E] 
Ladal, od «oro Lio las Dlo wad [2S5 a5 Jj] aN am Loops 
Lais oo Sls Lal Joa nae Knap .£ „ha Loo asai, Dads 
— ag oue I] Joa a NS NS anngior Daad, bay Lor as 
J JI pap > Dario wx a] ol eoira, loaamis] «AMA ooo 
oa» p2 oot sodaw soot. «2o sil Joo Sax Lasan, pel JM 
lasa joo frase Moe» p20 Janah TURN asas Joo L 
au] flo jpa iNo olNaseo opad [|-2a.a.ca.29] c» Lasao .cootlatsasot | 
CE TET yl ajoaan JND, r oct ao Las Oud 
dea i360 BIS y» ro J15e4: atlas Sylo walo Aha? NET 
boada, JN «noua, fare haad Jparaso oil so 
hisas, ba oot «buat Joa watchs] Jorasséo Loi Jay dee 
oJ ope Lx ds; hal JM el ELIT fassly Joa «o9 Mo 
o] loa Kary jira A; 2à Na A omadel o Jas psolso 


window, and dragged him onte But the blessed man did not neglect to carry 
out his oaths upon them: but the same nigbi he set out and went to the holy 
Maro the sty lite; because this happened iu bis days, while he was still alive, 
eyen as he also contended for bweuty vears tn this struggle (yov) against the 
herelies': bat the bishops? were mach ashamed before him and feared to 
send, or anyone to presume’ to enter his monastery: unless perhaps oue ol 
the clergy (aras) ese in to hin as il were by chance, who had voluntarily 
munbered himscll in the ranks of the heretes, and being ashamed acknow- 
ledged the falsity of their! faith. And thus two bishops passed away and 
died one after the other, and none molested the holy Marot. But the third, 
in order to gratify those who appointed him, was lifted up in his pride and 
prestimed to go 0o the blessed man, advising and ilinouishing aud cajoling 
him, im order to bring hin into subjection to the evil tmpiety of the aeceursed 
anod of Chaleedon. Amd, because this was a great and celebrated inan, 
Hiis man erally sought meis to caleli him i only in speech, in order by him 


fe dee ive nans Vcl say e Lot Maro of fiis eolimim agrees with us »; and, 


umbot osl Ie what Chis atude > ae sese A Wisin) age yee ably = E E 


od und | mostan eb bishops ab Iusta tmt have been rapid, 


(99) LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. nu 


pel Laa- q co „haass Hy has] nis had oao ooa qah 
saani J olo - Uses hl eoa. uam JI Joc ES ouo LB NS 
„hano soto Na] Joss paia - cba yopso was iS yl JI SS 
JU TES Ve My uà Jape Jia NAE iuo oan} ais X995 Ad 
Dow Nos Jlaruss | Lassi + JXaupo Jh hania js ole 
Jisai frards aas, Jaspo ] oco y ECCOCI LoD qnia 
J £e .uO(2.2.8à.. MN ajaaa 1330 V5 ala qo wiial [i2oto 
ha aza, Jlo Oly haas) Lez <% Ao ol POO Lad) RAM 
seas S] ctw | a J Nis: od Salo a oaas jasa30o 
ot.» oad £2 Can ED Daaa Lasag Jjlas, ' Sasso Hamada Se eso 
Loaiad Res Aiao “25:0 ool adalh- ro :JA| cope delle 
past” asd doy Lasko vooiiaaseo :Jiaas oolasoLuo |13a.206138$ 
pasanan «6 Kass, ac jux "ops ed» oA wl Jars Sadr, 


|. Ms. po. 


if this had really happened, numberless persons would indeed have been 
deceived and brought to this'. But the blessed man, as one thal was a 
valiant man and wise in God, did not vield to his blandishments, nor vel 
fear his threats; but as a valiant man he imn "everything showed him to be a 
denier of God and a deceiver, with all of his opinion, aud Chat instead of the 
Holy Trinity, which was delineated in the prophets and proclaimed in the 
holy church in the apostles, those men were secretly introducing a quaternity, 
diluting their blasphemies like a drug with boney to give them to the 
people of the believers to drink. And so he was dismissed from his presence, 
humbled in lis pride and with his plaus frustrated, since Che had not effected 
his intention, and even recoiling? from his presumption, as he also soon 
received a castigalion on this account and a humiliation of his pride, which 
we decline even to deseribe because of its fearful nature and the greatness 
‘of the subject. When therefore the blessed Sergius came to the very same 
holy Maro, and he was startled at his coming and shed bitter tears. on 
aecount of the distresses of the believers and the cruelty of the renegades, 
and the ejection of the saints from their places of close seelusion chosen for 


God's sake, he said to him, « What is it, my sen? what has happened that 


V Be, the synod. 2-2. Or Ste (Maro) bad nol done his will ind even recoiled '. 


100 JOUN OF EPHESUS. 100] 


OPS BI oa Slo yoy ooa Laso | yo} Lasoo casio .fosom UNS ase 
Joors erd0 So o ax Ma] a 2] fas p ARD la oe ve 
» JKsedsas sas SX du wo) ogo alaz ay! Jo ,e or»; o 
P aa L JI age JNa Ado ero wl] yer Saas SJ as 


e| SS, ie qx (eie CE pD D elo qaaa AD vc D 
Laso oS Sx Joa od <! <->] TN Lasan oboaso Sx whee 
ARN Lay «Jh class ol so3ao sls ososll wd po] $2 Not | 


aaia Juls <% polis i30 aaau aaa “updo yb LAS 


wwa Jenas prope Nato 20 pla ctlaasyio .* parsasdtdos |5:ado 


Js «Qe Ru panD Naso - yt Mio: wd ye allo "Lex 


y? qa O a Nay) JNa o „ha JN aao dad me 
JINsonss o in Sad -Joa pò] Jiga JI iso Iz. Loro EI 


|. Corr. Irom B4 ud 


you have come out of your seclusion? Why have you come hither? And 
What has befalleu our holy Father yonr master? Has even he also come ont? » 
Then the zealous Sergius, himself also weeping, related to him everything 
thal had been done, and that they had been afraid of his master, and had not 
goue to him: and that he himself moreover had bound himself by oaths to wo 
and go dn. and. curse them before the whole city inside the church if they 
turned him out. When we all too being assembled heard these things also, 
we too desired to teari about the ejectiou of Sergias the recluse: but our 
father coutinued beating on his breast aud weeping with sobs, saving, « Alas 
for ny hdtler end and for my evil days. to what times | have been preserved. 
His in thy power, Lord, to lake my soul from me, rather than that 1 should 
see the bulTetings and the distress of thy believers, and the persecution of thy 
ehureh whieh thon purchasedst with thy preetous blood '. Have merev. Lord, 
and remember thy church. whieh thou pureliasedet wath thy passion and 
sovedst with Why eross Behotd from heaven’, my Lord, tand sees aud 
gae vines aud the vine which thy right hand planted’? 5». While our 
Fdher wies saving Chese hings with feeling and with bitter sobs, at the 


i pitiful sobs we all wept with tim. But, when he had been 


T Ws 


[101] LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. lol 
LN £A? ASgSMM3eo Woo GM ca p) HARD goo cens «a5 
re bea. poo Joh Joa JE Jas ga 39 pel eX haag 
x29): qo seu] AQ pI soado; - sare jesus + Joo «le 
er») olo o Joa Ms hasad 120 Joa Aawa Joi, Naso alpa 
a2, Mj] rhs [x3 Jyo Leno fas] PASO x24 No] b hia. fo 
o vo] ME ID Laag oo = RAD ous | paiol, y» Kol hanao 
finas yaso «Jul cadre Jad Luly Ngso ajo Noo do I, cael 
Jes lo Jia Jl 2. ed Jo ful NS Ne Jlar Loop » Jets Ji xp 
-rasagio olas NS Jpn p lied «2 oo ek W, sana JI] Lopa Jo 
APD EH? Laag 1329.8. Sy "oss y NI Rey p? ipso Lpd 
Jes Aeon Jio "ET i a Laso Lan JS osos wx aa 
haas od Slo 000 ML hay Js) iNo Naap Aan pao Qu 


1. Ms. om. stop. 


silent for a little time and longer (uzXovi, he gave orders that the blessed 


Sergius should retire to rest, Inasmuch as he was weary from the effort. of 


the walk. After à day and two days had passed, le was desirous of carrying 
out his oaths and hurling anatliemas at them, the men who were persecuting 
God's holy church. And, when the blessed man tried to restrain hin and 
said, « My son, vou are throwing wourself into a struggle (aye). and vou 
are about to fall into the hand of erucl and inereiless men, and you have a 
trial to endure. Beware », the blessed Sergius suld to bim : « Our father, 
pray for me for our Lord's sake; because L for my part am prepared for 
sulfering, and Eo will contend until death with the renegades who malign 
God, and fire will not frighten me, nor sword, nor scourgings, nor rakes '. 
But only pray forme». But the blessed man, when he saw his lirmness and 
readiness, blessed him and sent him away, saying, « Our Lord strengtheu 
you, my son. Go in peace ». But the blessed Sergius set ont and reached 
the city on the holy first day of the week at daybreak. Then he went straight 
to the church; and, while the whole city were sitting” after the morning 


lauds, among them he also who enjoyed the name of the bishoprie?, and 


1. Tnstroments o£ tortue., — 9, This seems do show thal ad that tite Eastern congregalions sat 


(uu doubt on the floor. during the sermon, — 3. Abraham of Anada. 


= 


iW JOHN OF EPHESUS. . [102] 


lao]: Ae Sly Dad :Jiasefl cesso Joa Lie laa ooo], 
«433430 oco uai Jiase]so E3330. Jasaaly [amasa coo oal 


JNa Jha Jha bide Dry or vmo o 2loN a> Jl p TONS 
S99, e. franco] opa p raol ao] so p20 Nopal? ere IN | 


Handy «Me : Laco ~ Peg IN axo S, kaa] hay 700 
Sms Jl Jha éd» psa Ijas J, NJ pil Sk to o9 N59 Sa 


xa Jal r3 o Jha plo Joa yolo jas? 2 „Lo Las Besse ol. 


Spd scat fused Jlas, Soha] fare sopas OOF espn oss] So Soa 
wiho eas NE mo waco doi /o ONE So ou ios wx hoha, 


laamas) ol Jess ol eer RAUS aD nasa P MMC up | 


Jiarols fa] JMS; Laie Nw Bere) t? Ko? od + ADU) ol eol: AM 


Læ WeaqMe -Ju ero JN io Jo hasis hrao cas Ws eas 


listening to the preacher because those who were orthodox UL TECH also 
used to be present in the congrezation daring the hearing of the service and 
the lessons and the preachers only without communicating . then suddenly 
there was seen at the deor of the chureh a strange and outlandish sight; and 
evervone was startled when they saw a form i277». that was not their own, 
en anchorite comme in, clad ina patchwork of rags made of sackelotli, and 
carrying his cross on his shoulder, aud be came straight in without asking 
a question straight to the middle ofthe chureh, without speaking or turning 
this was and that. and, while the preacher was standing and speaking, 
he paused. while everyone was struck with astonishment, and they looked 
te see wlid the matter was. But the blessed man. as soon he reached the 
chancel sraza planted his cross on the step and uale to mount, And, when 
be had begun to mount one and two steps in silence. and evervone supposed 
that he was volne to TUN something either to the cy or to the bishop or to 
make a request of then he on ceaching the third step, where the preacher 
was shading. Hune out his haud and seized him by the neck and grasped 
m Heddy, sad satd to him : e Evil wieked man, our Lord commands ‘Give 
loeb ds sered to thre dows, lor pearls! leone the <wine 7, where- 


speaktog The words of God before men who deny him?» And 


ee bans haai oa polo epu eno» aaa do eta] Jes - Joo yko 


E E 


LA 


4 


(103 LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. 103 
Oso Ape yalo JM] pal es qm Ml Jer? Jos, ls Kul 
eoo, je oo jaso AS aol os apao aaao .opoass Aiao [as o 
wogan Lpa h90, ojd Jans qa dopando axle profs, ens 
laias vaniro Jas, faou So Laopo LOD Da a D0 Doraz; 
saa L] Joos flas haag ero ydo p20 Jah J? Laa pS banio 
T> Lido po 2.0), l [32a aS [30 fraryo 00, A0: Jrsacso kə; Lo; 
Lasd Lor egal (0044300 d AD) Odo Len oo 
[soto .lesejo ups] voids joe LIBER JaN oor 
1,000 edo ohso Jlsaad, do p Joa JNa o5 Jamol flo pw 
+ asad Ms medi «S361; haaa «30 (aor Soo ane q? Jaseot3o0 


Led naas, SE T | fea GNiso beh Jesu p Joo — ols 0% Jao t rau 


Heh] mee whe fro tad 20200 SAO eas Kass jasal Sano 
MAD) > yu wero E fsas «DO oo ad waa] Loo des] 


1. Ms. pl. — 2. Ms. œ% 


he swung his hand round and gave him a buffet, and distorted his mouth; 
and he seized him and shook him down. And he himself sprang up and 
slood in his place at the top of the eliaucel-steps (pipz), and said :« Cursed 
are the renegades; cursed are the persecutors; eursed is the synod of 
Chaleedon, and whosoever assents to it. Cursed is every. soul that receives 
the oblation from you mid assents to your opinion unless he repents ». 
When the blessed man had eried these words in a loud voice, great turmoil 
and contusion prevailed nmong the clergy (zs%e23) and the people and the 
bishop, sume threatening, some expressing indignation, some crying, « This 
man is a teacher of error, let him be arrested », and some crying, « Let no 
man lay hands npon him and die ». And so the whole city became one 
intense volume of sound, the adversaries expressing indignation, aud the 
believers joy. Since they feared on aecount of the people to lay their hands 
upon the blessed man, the man who was practised in pernicious wiles rose and 
quieted the people by saving, « Be so good! as to let the blessed man come 
into the vestry?, aud we will speak, and see whal his business is »; and thus 
he sueeeeded by a trick in withdrawing him from the people, and then 


accomplishing his will upon him. When the crowd (47222) had dispersed, 


L See p. 28. 2. House of the évavevixey. 


104 JOHN OF EPIHESUM. 1404 
TE hie» ~aio, JNa flaws y q rol Llao] os Na] poo 
Jaret oao fas odo; uxo OLO Jae Sxdo Te gr EN «Xo 
han] .oram Mfrs wagiw [sed We» TAQ Se Oo Wods 
WHO} EIS LAD) lampa «2 las]: eei paw Sad o2 Jio jlo}, 
hao | alassa, Jas Dan vaa opal p Jao alana 
* oo ooo coo | Jl] Jens banawa DA Qe othopetsy 
vaoia + JE ODS axo - MFO o> aasi lo La anmas Lasag slo 
AX joa lass 2à ja] Lapon aoil Maal Jew J> 
pay hel àa Jo seem] Maas LL baaga tony hadia 
Dad -Joa yu POO) has mar Scare s foot i Naso cod; 


neaka Joa 3yKiasoy odf\ ooo a «Mane whroowh Js JEL lanso 


dx Jlaassy pelo | l umaamin JNa oco qè “ya? DA 


CAN Jod zo y asco fusasdise jj Soria: và «oos loo 


I. Ms. pl 2 Ms, om — 3. Ms om. s 


then like ravening beasts who find a sheep in a feld and all attack it, each 
of them tearing his own portion siz rom at, so they all savagely attacked 
the blessed Sergius from all sides, so that even his body could not supply 
each of them with a place where he could exercise his cruel disposition aud 
canse pati by striking him. Mast, when they tad vented all the venom 
of their malice npon him. they went on to shave off the hair that marked his 
ascetic profession! ismee he as well as the blessed Simeon his master wore 
the honoured babil 54522531 of the auchoritie tife), and put irons upon him, and 
assigned men to him, and sent hin to a eertain bouse of. anchorites in 
Armenia that ds called “fey zo and d would be better for a Christian to be 
confined in the lowest dungeon in a prison than iu that monastery: for anyone 
wbo was sent (hither was theneeforth reduced to utter despair, on aceount 
of the boundless severity of sallertnes shieh? they nsed tfo iulliet on the man 
Whe was sent to them: since they were very zealous for the tenets of the 
lo cess and (hey used to reckon if as an art of justies to torture believers; 


almah they wonld stand over them like executioners not one or two 


m Ths Eds chased et dhe ban halo timed adba dae arnonastie teste, leas ime 


[105] LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. 105 
“AOL par por ad Jil -ooa Padang f s fLs el wih ol re as 
y dex 999b od OD yr Noo o moose ooo «o9 Haw eO 
soho, ooa «5h NS ooo ipado fuor Saasco Js 
INN. «o D Jis JA» paa o anjo franc wc! 900 9943; 
ADSL Qeeuse JAI, [roars Jo Lie paa joo Baan akapo 
qs oad Joa Na] L, p~ Joao slo ..4NS-9 uaap ©! r2 
Jap INL «2o SAS odas uoo opaha o s oii) lassi 
pad ems Sr yao Minto «nar Jljrso opka osi Joao ol p3 jaso 
vaï] Da SKLaso |L Laso 933 Lado -ASL LOO1LD0 Lisowo . Jiss «ao 
Juss y wao JD Y jani. Moy. 2px [son paolo vo1aso,o 
So 20 Jil vM Joa KX AD yl NR J qi ferns adr; 
«US cou, KX oS Mads; Lapse Jor! oro] os Ns] ere 
| JNapoy Jiagdy je Noopa JR fuss Sy by (OM ounas] os 


or a hundred only, but each one of them would pull him" from his side and 
torture. him (for they were about three hundred); and aceordingly those 
who used to send to that place were confident that their purpose would be 
accomplished. But the holy Sergius, being confined in the middle of the 
monastery on the third floor, by God's help escaped from them on the third 
day, having even slipped out of his irons, and a certain piteher for water, 
which was the only thing that he had with him, lie alsoin the keenness of his 
ardour grasped in his hand, and he climbed up to his window on the third 
fluor, and he leaped with that piteher also in his hand and the irons with 
it?, and he came down and stood on his feet outside the monastery. And 
so he escaped from them, and came to his boly master; and he fell npon 
his face before him, and said : « Now, sir, | bave learned that God loves 
you, aud in truth hears you; since, unless the mediation of your pravers helps, 
it would have been quite impossible for me to see your face ». When he 
had related everything to him, he gave thanks to the merciful God, who cares 
for his own. But afterwards he asked. his master’s permission to go and 


build à monastery in à certain mountainous district belonging fo a village 


]l. Bie syn — 2, What was the use of the irons? ff it is meant that Chey were still on him, the 
statement is inconsistent with whal precedes, 


te 


e 


106 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [106] 
„faapo, aajao aad) Daso aaao o» «n5]o.JM.sà ce Lho, 
JANN Vae, JS. Jl ses pro 830.800 aad) col waco Slo 
wea poo ola olle -JNa caryolo fos! sao fans v+ piolo Joexeolo 
y jute ANAS Goth ooi par pas M20 eps oae) Sx a] 
cà Jilla jasy JANseRA s Nhan ol £p Lasag, alaa A Sloss Das 
Kaha] pao [eol rob ooo Ku] Lise p JMAxexoh] Jes Je bw 
MS No, Lao haupa sad oón Jlsaad, dot Q33.4 +, 0430 Daa Jey 
see» «Jeep dds duonan cana, exa carancoll! Jpusoo Jul Jes 
dela CENT wh] ces com 2] x o ol p eco] NID 
saasha flo sona oaas «Jil, Lay aagi oNu] er Jo Ww 
£25 ar jon ! or acolo A89] | asopo p anes vuol re) eA 
23233 obo) hesa NS samaa] ol] 490 ADAM. «DO WHO NS 


raol] Je Muse Loa qe ads Neq» | oP cope! wate! en p20 


1. Ms. em. © fin. 


called Olwfvte: and he gave him permission and blessed him. And he 
took his eross and the saints blessing, and went and erected his cross there, 
and reeites the serviee. And he kneels down and prays for three days, 
night and day: and then some people saw him and wave information in the 
village, and they eame to him. And on his informing them of his purpose 
they were pleased; and each one of them rau to his house to lind something 
to bestow npon the blessed man's praver in proportion to his ability, while 
by the common effort also a monastery was erected in that desolate 
mountainous regton in a few days, there being abundance of water there, 
When the monastery was completely fiuished, the adversaries heard the 
news, « That audacious stubborn man is building a monastery in such-and- 
sneh a place »: aud men were at once appointed to go out and pull the 
monastery down fo its foundations, « and signily to him also besides that vou 
desire to arrest awl bring him to is! : and if vou see that he is ready and 
willing to come, leave him alone, and do not bring him upon us ».. Then 
these ien seb out, having first. declared and professed « Why! perhaps he 

lb be afraid. and run away from ns». And, when they came, they found 
fe blesse P man stateling and reetiing the serviee; ind, when they saw liim, 


li to him c Since veu have built à monastery without an order, we 


wt 


107] LIVES OF SIMEON AND SEDBRGIUS. 107 
auh laas haad we? 04 9.52) j2.22.2] lad ye : yen apay 
sA] «M30 copa rly qoa] «ras Jiao ly JMvedsas Qoo exl 
od laS SNO care al WOAH. C300 .àj; ful L»; L? Lpo TA 
OM ap o ono Amy CF aA AISI ojus po Jal E. «eoe 
J2&.2.42] lad < Dash, aa A0 Ad ymaa N O -T 
JNola Nolo + [adoy.o AH Kos doi Lisad erst y^ xe J 
paa (999 JL oo Ne dro we? QUO ABS Las Jor oh oor. polo 
yards ca £2 goa» Joa JL ogo . NUN. so, Jpop Hopar Laas 
oS pO] + pads Orao lolio Lazo Ving? Joa Naino ooto Nd 
waaa J5a25 wor ads; saan ful p29] Bess face “brad [sot ansaa 
pe boson Ar «oNS 325, ese s A Mucor Daas Mois .JJa cud 
ot Juann aasoils CET JA (olea [ases «eal Adan J 
ants) laajana ust > LANSAS wards huoa uasa) ulpepe 


o g] oir fu] fais fies: Js Lao aans Gras Ll paaa haoo 


have been ordered to pull your monastery down, and conduct vou to the 
bishop ». But the blessed man in the fervour of his zeal said to them with 
oaths : « If you are in truth ordered to pull down and desire to do so, T myself 
will lay the first ax to it; and, if it is your desire, | will go in before you 
to him who sent vou ».. When those men saw that he was ready, they were 
afraid of him; and they say to him : « We are traly ordered to pull it down 
and are prepared to do so: but we do not desire vou to come in to the 
bishop ». Then the blessed man was the first to run and take his ax, 
and he fixed it im the wall and said to them : « Come, here is glory to our 
Lord ». And they, because they were many, pulled the monastery down 
lo the ground in one day; and he himself was assisting them to do the work 
of demolition, But, when they had finished their task, aud he was himself 
urging them to drag away the wood and stones and throw them outside, he 
said to them : « Listen now, evil wicked men. Iu trath E say to vou that, if 
renegades against grace deserved it, | would thank vou greatly for labouring 
with me here. God without your being aware of what von have done 
constrained you to subvert these huts, as fo which T was truly exercised in 
my mind in consequence of the fact that they were built in haste; aud now | 


trust in our Lord Jesus that I shall now build a monastery indeed here ». 


ia a 


a. 


Town | 


li. 


108 LOUN OF EPUESUS. 108) 


weh Joe» So ogi cooky £x] M xi sea vol + fash cok ly 
om Als y *5 eolle o5 Lo LX»; ous [icy <> aad ful 
-JNa <% Od fy] wo anoa - dopant x3 ASRS Laora; 
«aol «36 anda opadl Ho, OL Q| whe oaa od Ll ipa o5pasdo 
A~ Li <! og Joan? oa) NS uso olas. «eor No p 
JNoy S, po JND Je. ipao haso uluopse fds ao ano 
SUl Sado ha iias ad INQ Jo pare [uu yalo 
„>l alaz yaNiao - b4y,009 os Ns Jllo œ; kaspo Llaw «2o yN 
a> Da 49 -Loi saaa? «20 axle wohkislo Jad’ JIoyorzn.2 
Mole ansaan 240 x Jara po + axsaa Laopo «^ og .Joot 
X908» ad oad fo) of haaa oa 9] : anaso oda, jade uu 
< Ue» ha paias haii xo Lös Cte Joins senis hane 


L Ms. woj, cori; Liezenbers ap. v. D; and L. -2 Ms. Sp. 


They say to him: « IH you rebuild, we will pull it down again ». He on his 
side savs tothem : e Take what Tsay to vou. By him who built tlie house 
of all this world and was called the carpenters son, if so be you pull it down 
as many as thirty tines, 1 will make it more spacious and L will make it 
stronger than belore all my Bfe, if ven pull it down». Then they departed 
henec, wondering at the fervour and the vigeur ol the mat Bat the blessed 
mau dug and delved deep and kad the foundations on a spacious basis: and 
he built a substantial monastery aud made it strong; and he planted a 
plantation, and made an enclosure round, and made a very desirable place‘. 
ANasl, after a shori tine, fe wert to be blessed hy the holy old man his master; 
and the summons followed him. and he ended his life with hin there. bearing 
good testimony oand he was lud out? and buried by his spiritual father, who 
was stil] in good health. But the holy Simeon after divine hiilliantly in his 
seclusion forty even years ended his days. and hünsetf also fell asleep in 
peace: Ty whose pravers. with Ghose of all the saints his companions, mav all 
vw rebelud men gain mere in the day of judgment. 


te ofthe bealings and deeds of power and enres thal God wrought 


hould he ndlentiliesd wihi Ss. whe has nos rebinlt (Seve (Zach. Bha, yin 


grails 


> Ip ined an dus sense, i Ve eril oa] 


[109 LIVES OF SIMEON AND SERGIUS. 109 


2m dapo for Llaw oho o. esa NS. JD; fixo flare Jal 
Js). Jhansi! <> Ja SXdsoo as Nass fasy GS oot jasy - Joo 
JN aby Jilala q% hp. ag? n „Naai (eus vuol elo 


NUT Spa So yl » Noodi edo Jyon.c0 Ju L? ads «2o bet jan? 
Joot pay chawao hops fpo Lasoo Lipa? La; = hay ol, lal 
JNa, Jyot Jias ere fas] 4d; Lamo cor. ao La jaap Lasas No 
2o oaio asiano DSA aAa Lo oa [xao D aaa 


gas] wis Jal x ao] Dha om0 aal lo soiofprseo ay? 
wis q q% futcag a +l Cjl Jasin Mer evel x! Que 
Le. ee dell Lady uar weds ane Nooo Jal wee al ol 
TENE Jsils policy od Jio; hasa Lad I faso “so ECCO roll 


D 


uota dca is Jo 562305 ot. Na] >] vis Jor Lass od OAT 


1. Ms. om, slop. 


for his glory by the hand of this holy old man the time is loo short for me 
to relate; and for this reason, wishing to avoid a lengthy narrative, | have 
recorded these things only, thereby falling far short of the splendid glories 
of this man; to whieh it is not only E who was a witness, bnt all who knew 
him; so that another great and holy man and ‘seer of spiritual visions also 
who lived in the south in the inner desert bore testimony about the old 
man, since, when some men from the territory. (69%) of the eity of Amida 
were going down for the harvest (because men are in. the habit of going 
down to the southern country for the harvest), they heard of thal saint, and 
were eager to go and be blessed by him: and, when they had gone and had 
come to him and been blessed by him, he asked them, « Whenee are you, 
my sous? »; and they said, « From the north of Amida ». The blessed man 
said to them: « But what, my sous, do | for my part really. Know? and 
Wherefore did. vou come to un wretched self? Tf yon are. from the north 
of Amida, wherefore did you not go lo the pillar of fight which stands in 
the northern country, who to-day has been serving God in his saints [or 


forty years, and has nol grown tired or weary, nor is vel satiated with so 


PAASA 


a. 


EL 


i 
ib, 


110 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [110] 


Lise Soo unam 6.25 Laa J ol om Nado] of o£ Ni fso flo 
SAM food Oly dose Jor snotty be oN Jl ba la cis 
= lada apes ‘Ilaaroo kag CLAD 70 VOIP 309) J^ MS La 
ranana Laza] D aau. Aa laopo c SO AMI pI nDo La 
fraag my cf oom M le] Do bor updo a, «le e. oco 
Nos, Jape jj haaa » Jy „alpan aN Gro Oly 2à yl 
apin pel jas] eis ypo saaa sorts Lason oho «fase Jiag 
BENE «e Lor ge dor Isa) oot $3] «2395: casas) a 2 aso Lag 
ad feo -olas oJ J| JNa ao: ADL saps 44 Lanau «ons 
mud Jpopas Chu, [ade Jl ds wily of ialo ALO aAA 
„Ja Lads pores ] NS Was Na] wh; y Ll Sp "wn uy 
coors pna: [is] fos] «^6 ee} Ka wah Je» Mogao Jaan faia 
exl: hal aD oprolo aswaa hapan edo Qc assolo oll -kasak 


LoM woa Thus inel the lowing words to e» | 3 are weitlen iu an erasure, 


doing? Wherefore, my sons, did you not go to this man, who has refreshed 
God. in the persons of the weary, who has also caused the savour of his 
practices and of his purpose that is good and acceptable! at all times 
to reach to the heavens of heavens? » But these men an hearing these 
things fram the saint fell on their faces and continued entreating him and 
saving : e Who. sir is he of whom vou have said these things to us? » 
But the blessed man, in accordance with what our Lord also taught in his 
preaching. « A city built upon a mountain cannot be hid », and again « So 
bet vour light shine before men, that they may see vonr good works and 
elority vonr Father that is in the heavens »?, says to these men : « Plus 
is Simeon the reeluse who is living in seclusion on the top ol a hill in the 
Village of INalesh;.— But go to biw, and greet him from me and say to him, 
Nn idle sinful man settled in the desert eutreats you, « As | know von 
Eo he always fervent in vonr love towards God, perform an aet of love, and 
wy for ane 77». Bat these men, as the blessed man enjoined them, 
ed informed: the holy Simeon of these things; and they said to 


MI e add to them. seven Neues before his departure from the body, 


Nba. x MAS da 


[111] LIE OP PACL THE ANGHOBLETE. tIl 


ease AD? e =~ Dc Sige «2er Haase, Sas Lais yoo ac oot 
oot jas JoJ ssl Sso .oóà faso poly ooo 


Euan Lan UR ránaba réduandh dois 
+l ru ĮmuNnidh ruas wN ioa 


eiua walas rena ai Axa wWhsasrh aah 
ora. 


Joa Kal Jes Japo [342300 flasaro for; Lann col c Jrsad 

Laia p Sag Lot faso JLI x Joa uotohuly fas! Jaa} wanas 
w3ea -joa parhao JNa; Jlasainc Jlopspsy faio JR Jis» Jago 
Na, D> jai = Janas, oo Maol Jy Jas c «3h Hal > 
xpo oll c Lampo + fas uxo Lan eal M Lease) [Noop 


1. Ms. pL, with stop preceding. 


repeating all these words whieh that saint said. And all continved gi mg 


thanks to God. 


The history of the holy and divine men Simeon dhe recluse and Sergius 


the recluse his zealous diserple is ended, 


VE T Next VE SINTIL HISTORY, OF THE GREAT WAN or Gop Pur 


THE HUMBLE. NNCHOMRITE. 


There was again a blessed inan beloved of God and laborious and humble 
and a perfeet Nazirite, Paul the anchorite, whe was from the district of 
Sophanene. This man therefore, when he had been for many yeirs practi- 
sing heavy and severe labours of asceticism and great abstinence, heard some 
men saving that there was i eertain large cave in the side of a certain high 
rock on the banks of the Tigris ata place ealled. suitha, which is some 
distance from the caltivated land, but near the road, and malignant fiends 


lived in it, so that men passed along that road with trembling, though it 


Lose. ‘the image’, 


112 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 112) 


(e| poo «A» Vt [osos has) usd JMxokp» furs! eere Jie ec 


doy Jois Die, Sad OD see harari loo JW MG 
Neo) aar] ssas nu! JEn wag v Jur fisa qa) og loo DES 
|. 3-5 9 ola cus Golo fwi] 292 VAM vM wien, 
wards Sybas oJ Jas] utd Nas, fpsarsoo Jasas «2o CEN 
Sade LRA y Kujlaol per fsa.) monet Lanoy das wo» 
lixM5eM3o Jana MDI iay +, OFA aso hrs <>}! Jousgso JL. 
yl anado « flpraad ad fdrsoo Sylo Jo 2s Od $e JaN, 
Jlsary las, Kary faasao; emo Joli opoo han J we Jyo Jao 
Jla., Load aa LNS ao Jose a> Kao JI ea «o! yr 20 
+ Joot qaan oot? Jsaco uM dos JR za, laso « farope floatus 

Soj fash Jory oà yl dx LaR2e Je Je ooa vw [1-501 


L Ms. aD. earr. Nold, — 2. M~. sing. 


was very necessary that men should pass along it, because it led into the 
fortress called Zivat'. But this blessed man, when be heard the report of 
that cave, reflected, « Beeiuse those who pass along that road are frightened, 
and again in order that the powers of the enemy may be expelled by the 
name of human beings and the presence of a human habitation, itis a duty 
to gro, and to erect the emblem of the cross there ». 

Then this blessed man, like a mighty man who mocks at the feeble and 
siek men who wish to light with him, confidently: armed himself with the 
power of God aud contilenee in him, and directed his steps to the place. 
Vid he went and arrived at the cave, and near it at about half a furrow's 
aeri? he erected the eross: and he fetched stones, and traced the plan of a 
amall oratory and knelt there in prayer, and passed the night in the place. 
And during the night shapes of basilisks and fearful shapes of every kind 
weve gn heres] together against hin: and, the more eoustaney he on his 


Ade showed. the more the oral voiees and grievous exhalations increased, 


jnst as al great serpents had arrived aud were coming, and just as if their 


Nadie Te NIA A Lool Dion pe Nau am hers di LOr Cher, TW esp nt. Th -ecms do 
en the Parens ated the 7 Pya onos qh SGo n Tle zS Care. a yards = 45 inelres, 
Dyakoney p U^ 0n Mo bol Wereslins parallel from ‘Taylor's Travels 


Bo Geogr. SOC NNNN Of Eal it so abs have happened atter he 


[113] LIFE OF PAUL THE ANCHOLRITE, 113 
joa Jag Laag wotdsfrsas ooann Jory od pelo 00% wo ads 
Jaamas] ofdd0 +08 LAS of odas p> vx Loa x) 90 LAD T b. 
amw Sd aL Moo; N-o, Jlo ja coho J| LNS ol volo 
afro ollo .. 32s <% Ses <% Aayo asa Al? slo 1:324: 
wed € y p had s y og f£ ooa oe Lao cola 
Jasas fla xo J Moods «ea Sot y jaok iaN-> fso or «89 
Lora vot jas, Jugo Jlatsdoly [eas po pad wt JNo0,> 
pNMN yl OA AOADA Ol OSOE ol uctatarspy ala 
T D 280 yani Jlo ..Joo xLis H osos Jesu lias 012-30) 
y o6 Sax Dalo [INS LS Laopo io qd Jil . Hasse oala 
Daso -Jloangs Jion «2o JM y frown [rsa ops AQ tO? Ico 
óc Sunde Lao oha [aco [2o <0 SESS y? odes 
NS oj, aio akopa er as anos. LRN hon JNonk&so: 


J.se3lo - so od Jlprd0s Ahapa j aad; hazl, [roars Lasao + 5 a. 


breath were striking against the blessed man's clothes in order to drive hin 
away. But he was thus constant in prayer all that night, and all the day, 
and again another night also. And nextlota sound of boulders being uproot- 
ed just above the blessed man, and they were indeed uprooted and eame 
down from the rock above, and they came, and reached him, and thus they 
would pass by while he was knechng at his prayer, not having power to 
touch him. And so he passed seven days and nights in that place in such 
eonflicts. And, when these demons practised many different: kinds of con- 
trivances against him in order to shake him or frighten him or drive him 
away, he like a mighty man girt in the true breastplate of his Lord was nol 
shaken, nor reckoned their wiles and their fonl shapes as anything, but also 
after he had, like a mighty man who trusts in his Lord, after the pattern of 
the holy David, chosen for himself the sound pebbles of prayers from the 
river of grace, and had taken the stalf of the cross, and. lifted the sting of 
heavenly trust, then he next looked upon the camp of the Philistine tyrants, 


to pull down their prowess aud to scatter their camp. id so on the eighth 


PATR. OR. — r. XVIL = r. l " 


114 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [114] 


fasol JLo HRS p20 Ji gn yh 42 Jha o JL Saad AD Jasos 
J, hasl anaha] Jaaa ae haa vx Jlpspro JNa; JAAS, 
Laj Lepa bid eoa £o aAa fas] ci IEN Lax co pos 
uoa Moa poaa seis] JD jew qx: bisaa e. .fasag Joa pls 
aa TM EE EU USE IU 
JLo rots 02M Noad 2322.30 od Jasco .oà Jio» oops 
. Ji <! Jo > Daas lamo; kasol p], Lo Mss fob <% 2M 
was J| XO Aso; 2 Nolo Nooa N EAS JNawas Jic Nil 
wo FAS Qoo Qna 4) aS Napia D pol rs NS Sh Mulo ~ Noa 
he Nasl) Ll olo Napas MA 0000 gao SN «co Jaan aao 
amaa B] aoho adus Aana ado lanos es ful 5l .oolads 
hass [popa r Jisa ao Now oN ret eco naa B] so 
oM coat qoas Janis JU | rsidato Eas Igo Jaago 


LA, wwo 


day he planted his cross in the midst of that cave, and hung up a bag ol 
stints at (he east emf of at, and knelt in it io pray a prayer. And, 
while he was kneeling, frequent sounds of loud and violent howling were 
suddenty heard in the cave itself, sueh that many thousands of men if 
they joined together would not be able to howl so loud, so much so thal 
the blessed mau used to say, « HF help from God had not reached me, 1 
should have gone out of my mind; so that 1 was indeed already dazed, 
and my head became dizzy, and my ears rang from the violeuce of 
that sound. And thus 1 rensined. constant in trust on God: and at last I 
heard a voter outside the door, saving. «Alack! the cross has laid us 
low: otherwise vou with the dirty hood would not have laughed at us; 
and ids not vou who would have ejected us from our place, and come in 
and settled in it yourself Then, when E saw thal they had gone outside 
the mouth of the cave and were erving to me from ontside, I rejoiced; 
and P also was strengthened. aud E said to them : 54 also am contending 
bacu and expelling vou by the eross itself, not by my own strength’. 
And from that Gine E remained settled in the cave, white they used to dis- 


play before ane foul visions and many fearful shapes strange to the sight 


to, oned tf 


[115] LIFE OF PAUL THE ANCHORITE. 115 


91 «olo Wd ooo ga NNa [su] aio y JN eue SK .asco 
loà yl wd ooo «42.2.5 Aoo «llo “Jarl wis, 000 qaa Jä- 
Osa jas eol A> v> y Comps SS COEN Wyo was'ls A> 
Moe fasa Jor ooa ood, razia COO whl JL fn eco JK i5) «olo 
qaaa pI JNN Áo Kanio JLa-35,> Jara AN ale dsl 
Naja sanio Y» LANS ad Jao aaao aO «02630 Lass 
La jao uy o Mucor pa] alas blo >% AgollNioo cea ao 
Ope dO hranate 0 oubllrad lo, > xS wh.s030 «works! 
4e w-— [aes J| AX wine, wor Jer s.j A230 Kas <>? JI so. Xo 
L| Stuy J SQareds QNM Mas Jad Sano cohul Lis Ji-as 
Raped o] «iMac Qoi] xe naioo sok] Jaks lo .Jhare <% 


Joor Ji + odes T ves iae] SOLA SOpM Jor -fhaa <> wihaaarsadso 


whasas Jl ol Jl nuts sachs ado. Loser o ^S ado . Jie so Qaa + 


rade O01 «3-0 Lot; «oos.» fla xus s Naoot vx] M ceo £29 
hoy La ADM oil, jano of jd» S..2d0; Lesa fords coe DOS 


l. Ms. oo. 


of men, and thereupon they would hold speech with me as men, and further 
they would even take the shapes of men, and would come and pretend. to 
eutreat me to come out and go with them to their houses, for the pur- 
pose (as they said) of visiting their sick. iid again they would often come 
and cry ‘Flee, flee. Lo! the land is fall of Huns’ And. fans appeared 
to me in various fearful shapes, riding on horses and with swords drawn 
and flashing. And lo! they came up to the gate crying in barbarie language, 
and in au excited state, and with arrows fitted to their bows. And fon my 
part would say to them, ‘This is my grave, and my place for ever, Until 
the coming of Christ in his glory, aud the resurrection [rom the abode of 
the dead this is my place. Edo uot care; and, if vou are in truth barbarians 
and vou have received power to kill, I do not fear death: and, if vou are 
fiends and can kill me oc take me away and eject me from this place, lo! Pam 
before vou; but my own will shall not be your assistant and eject me hence; 
and not only in ny life but not even iu iny death’. While Twas saving these 
words, all the hosts of the Huns would ery and go up upon these rocks thus : 


‘Henceforth the cross has protected this man against us. This man has con- 


116 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [116] 


Jis) oS Moa xw], DSA aM Joa hiis wanas Laso og qoo 
xo Najo JsoN3l leu fis? hal ralada Moa Dls JH soo 
SAO Son y «^ og Jya [Kido 0006 «Lai sje JAlaM 
Jl lano ASS e298 c) Ho qp JJ une x aM Joa £39] -Jio 
Jas) JKso) je Qe youd ads aNG odias L haslo Las 
adsoNialo asl] lanoj> o> gaio Xd «60 Jl -ha yh JL p30 
fancy Lad «oon:ed eo . ens COO LAO 9d chA alaa 
<% elo Lio AS sag LAILO Jroodiino sine 99014-30820 ouis] 
St in wo ash] Nanoha qoot Laos l2 MDa [oso 
agd Oe Jha a Joa Lu’Kso oa So ya-da .oiN a sa NOS 


Jens. pol i haD. olo .oco ay ode Jho Jas) uta s sola] 


AD ooo xz Nido hopia ooo eee? Sao el p ol oM ooo 
Pra- sachs, lo LOOM} J alad ooa well qoo J Koop 
„oa fas! Jlo aal ol re Ohl, og NL >] D ors «2260 Joa 


1. 6 init. erased, — 2. l ins. in laler hand, — 3. Ms, œ~. 


quered oo, Phese things the holy Paul used to repeat to me, because many 
times when L went to him I used to iuquire of him, « How, father, did vou 
carry on the eonlliet with the strange powers who haunted. this place and 
overcome them?» But he, in order to expel and repress pride, would say to 
me ze We, my son; should not have overcome nor should we be vietorious, 
unless the cross had overcome. And, as we see, W we have understanding, 
that the hosts of Satan have been expelled and hurled down by the same 
eross not only. from one smalt and insignificant place like this, but also 
from all quarters; in that it has deprived them of the worship paid to them, 
and caused their worshippers to turn to the eross, and closed their mouths, 
and whelmed them in the lowest abysses, so also from this place too these 
malignant spirits have been expelled by the power of the cross, and it has 
strengthened me for its glory o. These few words he himself would repeat 
me. But at bast. when his Pone had been spread abont, many men used 
rete him, aud he also gated about ten disciples there, while even 

hits that were seen qi the place were fearful, and, when men came 

lo hin ther to reside or to stay for a time. he would arm them before- 


haud, vd so be ven see anything or hear any sonnd whatsoever, 


117 LIFE OF PAUL THE XNCHORBRIUTE. 117 
jo 4l J olo aN 20 saaana esl Lanz laso JJ]. «8. I 
eaa e a a JE del of bl oad Li] 
äl p2 eer ..9436 «oda, oot a] Jl Colo aol farsi 
WSs «2e ogo Ow «Qo 000 «LA Jas Xs £2 30350 Joa $35] 
xS Je coor «oto *otladop> Jofiia. ooo wi whs, dro Lfd 
oot fuscia Joa Mul [sj Lasas -Jinan MURS qao) So po os 
oh, lo og wt Jip ad p «Qo + aAa Jo Na M foo par [road 
laxe oí Ja] Sao Jase! Nas pao cse > W200 
Lasaia Qoo dd [iso papa HO Joop oos Lh Jo Nofaol loo 
asoan - «oaa [13245 obsias Lada) i 
JNa; Jloncoly JKaotase ow 2] oreo lasanms ssassado -Abp 


ooo we hts od Jilla 


yu as} -ctlanrasco Uoiadrxdro oon © >> la Joi» Cots 


Lul Vs Joa TK p ES » Saslo foot “paar [Loot Jpe J oM aso 


1. Ms, wo — 2, Appy. corr. from ooo. — 3. Ms, leBwexSo; eorr, Noll. — ^, Ms, cv. 


be uot agitated, but make the sign of the cross upon you and be silent; 
and, even if | myself call you or anyone else, do nol come out » (because 
the fiends often deeeived men there). And again to those who came to him 
to receive instenetion from him he would say the same words and he would 
caution them, simee at night they slept inside, and he outside hy the gate; 
because fiends used to appear in his likeness, aud used to terrify the brother, 
and entice him out; because under the eave there was a great hole. And so 
the blessed man used to he awake to guard the place in which he lived, from 
the time when he directed lis steps to that cave, and he made an altar and 
set it up in it, and he made it a chapel. And thenceforth the brotherhood 
used to sleep confidently in it; and his monastery extended to twenty meu. 
And so all the men of that distriet used to run to receive the blessed Paul's 


blessing, and to gain the privilege of seeing him, and to hear his gentle 


g 
words; for God gave also into his hand a great gilt of healing. But his 


asceticism and his labours and his humility no man ein succeed in deseri- 
bing'; since he was so humble and retiring that, il a man were to sib with 


him and converse for three days, he would not raise his face (zzásemov) nor 


L Or comprehend and describe. 


tuns vd 


we 


118 JOUN OF EPHESUS, 1118] 
oux |s1z15 yopo -201-9 jca yana fl NNa cared. JI. alaz 
p20 dasa Joot Wale KAMAN apan Aaa «DU PP o0 Hl ons 
Ja..lo Nanah? Jio :Jeoc wd JL cs, ES Lis y Jasy 
WO. Jn? <0 pada odes lisah oo - Addo v3 ess Le, 
„alaaa Jo Lad; oan deseo .yanco M] orcas pul JKoopo órso 
Naas vod >am Lasgo saak PAD Jlysoyh alas jKs <% el 
:J peo Joass fal sso Joska x ^2e3300 . eK aoro —À CEST 
Joi Nea» sono ol asadas Loot Jljlo hamas, Lala of Laaa of Jia ol 
wi hA das So Jae qoor*5; jas odis par Joa paz [15:29 

aes aca Ie sna [oan D 4,9000 


ormnapa renal, rZ Lar walada hard Am 
ieuas masks piar ran ania rouand aaa 


Lapazo, us! sees] fac, aasal o] haaa JNa col <r 


Ro This eh. as in Bu dz deer bh, B Odes 2 oras. euni 


would men see the inside of his eve, bat he would. this eouverse with 
emotion with his head bent and his looks fixed downwards, When he had 
been in that eave Tora space of about twentv-live years, and a monastery had 
been built; and the brotherhood had reached the number of thirty men, the 
blessed mau finished his course‘, and departed Irom the body; and he was 
buried on the spot in accordance with. his promise, And, on account of 
his love toward God and his humility, even after his death miracles were 
everywhere wrought through his holy hones, men taking his skull and 
going round the districts, aud, wheresoever loensts came, or hail or a seor- 
ching wind or bubonie plague, and his right band or bis head went, God 
would straightway make deliverance, By his pravers, with those of all the 


saints, may all we sinners have merey in tlie day of judgment. 
The history of Paul the blessed and holy anchorite is ended, 
AGE NENT THE SEVENTH HISTORY, OL THE OLD WAN 
ARRAIAM PHE LAYMAN. THE RECLUSE, 


Nec dehet to place on record the history of the old man Abraham also, 


il 


[119] LIFE Ol ABRAHAM THE RECLUSE. 119 
Ke pes Lot SERATA wee! +> y J!a.3.—.m.5 Joe Joa fpohso 
Aa m.) È Soy peo "$xels wx Sere] Jeolso 42 qari. 
wee pe Scar ulan Neo a NS Nae kopao [ALS o] JI] 
Solo essa [Ew Bl psy banao sar paaa Jiao case 
Jaco woe gado pao aD Jala fl is Elo aaao toa Jy So 
fuse WeqNser lo oramus awklo coburih Sx fa Sa - bot 
lo bl DAM J Jot, Lad; J vbl Jesse “hanao ob] a T? 
LAs aois OPA?! [so «2l haro HN? waaals Jor St Loci 
NEN, ere oÀ ful css JE asc sonas] Lea, Woy haa iiy 
so» [M v% ol JAN] «2o ol Laio T% ol No ow fuse Jot. 
M 


ol Jia loas «ol. wia aas pao, asd Kadsd Joo Nilus 


Nasol arsodio DUNS with holo .]Aoanscns wale as KA 


NA A22? I^ L aora Lo «2l NS aso Ji wo Ohe HUE ES eoo also 


LD Di ura 2205 Rx -— s. D saas — 4, B ins. be px». — 5. B on, — 6, D 9s - 
7, Bie Dexo. — s, D bAi — 9. Dh (2* nianu ww caza e; t db is doubtful if ene 
was in the ws. as originally written). — 10, B.» oma, bl — 1H. B, o sici Peete ges — 12, p Ditos 


(sie), — D, B ins, Da — 15. Bins. P haze — do, A Pia 


who was called ‘the conseerated’, and had reached old age being about 
sixty years old. This man one day, when the gospel (ej»yyshev) was 
being read, heard that our Lord said, « Whoever shall leave wife or 
children ete. for my sake and for the sake of my preaching shall receive 
thirtyfoldl and sixtyfold and an hundredtold in this age, aud in the future age 
shall inherit eternal life »'; aud again « Whoever doth not take up his cross 
and follow me is uot worthy ofime »?..— When this old man heard these words, 
sorrow entered tuto his mind, and he thought within hiaself, and said : 
« Wherefore am I for my part alive and called a Christian, if | do not do 
God's will? If it is pleasing to God that I should leave wife and children, even 
now that my days lave been completed and the sentence has reached me that 
l shall leave them against my will, why do I not that whieh God wishes? 
What have P gained either. from children or from wile, or from the whole 
world, except that | have consumed my life in it im vanity, and idly wasted 
my moments, and passed my lays evilly?, and lo! E lave come to the gate 


of the grave. Who will shelter me there in that judgment! or who will resene 


1. Mark. x, 29, 20 (4 Joose citation). — 2. Malih | x, 38, 


EUN mm. 


"BIG 


POE th 


120 JOHN OF EPHESUS, [120] 
haw XNA] yo sol Else emote seu Ws Gol!” Ng] uM | yg 
Qus Jno Juo Lee. pe 4d SE IN seh Uxo JNa cà 
lo hoa Jarno yar Jd $2) aso Ms] -olls «20 boot [so 
Wwa slaad aïo aaay fissh Jods rol Js ful “pate ful 
ul 259 J| ward's] J Sold QA Jis» Law Joa aau'Kse 
Dae gol Spool = slu, ba [ao vM JA] xl odio 
se aswan fas p dood ple Jes feds Silo + popdo ‘fam 
oll Jul pe use sanda, [exco «9-2.200 «10,9000 Ja A 
oaa «ax badd ey cua fu] o a oe NL XX Kudo 
“peasy ODS o worden JJ] oaas arsas Jaak [adj p -votofloo 
Sa.ar%0 oo [iei Xoo JAN ha Na] JE J NI ran “as! 


ü T 4 : 
! oala, VAD opan IN es EE RS HE geo p20 “p> oo 
1, li ains. — 2, J; i3eatw bl elo oao. — oP fas DELE ED bs. — 4. D ose vt Jaw. 5. Hh 
.m»aDs 4, R ulaxu Ss. [pac uso 7 Jie — 8, E paa 5 N Pe — du D ins. e init. — 11. B 


Sol Iso om. 


me from my sins? But now even for this little remainder of my hfe that 
remains to me E will go and. repent of my sins, and then I. will die, having 
hope in that parable of the Inbonrers whieh our Lord spake, that, even after 
the day had declined: and one hour ouly was left for those who eame, 
they were thonght worthy to receive the pay with the first’. So E too also 
hope that God wilh not. shut the door of his merev im the Tee of my 
repentance», And thereafter the old man would think, « What shall I do? 
If E go do a monastery, DL eannot work; and they will sav, * This old man 
has come upon us th order to gel a present out of ns" ». Then the old 
man teft everything, amd went to a eertain monastery amd said to them, 
weeping soe Rise make the praver for me, and give me the tonsure, and 
take the haar olimy secular fife from me, since | desire to repent for a short 
Hime Tor ons sins before To die oo. But the blessed men did. not frustrate 
hts wish and stand in his wada When they heard the announcement of repen- 
tance Trom him. bat they encouraged him and they say to him :« You 
are doing vehit, our father. if vou are turning in repentance toward God ; 

e cde as gaereiful and will receive Nou >». After they haf held much 


couversaltom with him, because thes supposed that he iutended to Hye with 


[121] LIFE OF ABRAHAM THE RECLUSE. 121 


Ru] Me last «Natl l amd, No —? o NIE Joons x No 
JoaSx) lalo «oe «2.000 NE aman, oo «el AU o Jools 
ol .3Koby N? lə; Jaa J h; qia OUS «el Jl Jos ‘hey 
Mo oM suma vus Ni] jaro Jas J «ce»9to MM y? 
<? o0 JN] Jooty fino] v% pads Kul paias Hua xl y? 
sla KUL] aoao ussaszobo Jha, AS Qoparty oos exo]. [2c 
Dp Juda) c! HH OK aay Jlo solu] <~r NI SAM «aa, ads 
«Qo «A2. aoo MERTENS Ja, Opad +, LAD 0 Lam ods) Lasah of. 
às Joao ! (ys +2.00 eol] Neo à "eal foa Jodo ILANA 
OO Sco fase pd [ass p qu Jas) alpana auj mus! po 
AAD G5 pel 5o) po haio Jlasrr.l> J peo aaao Joa yoko [iso 


jeon-5] <% yo Nyhus oly sooo | | hansa <>% au] aslo 


1, B BAmss bo» o> ojal — 2, D «sosia. — 3. Bi ins, qel. — à. Di inse ey = A will oa [i 
will, — 6, B ottollo. — 7, B wail. 


them, they said to him : « After you are tonsured, where do vou intend to 
live?» But he said to them : « Rise give me the blessing and take my hair, 
and where God wishes Twill hye ». They say to him : « We seek to learn 
whether you intend to remain with us or elsewhere: and then, tf you remain 
with us, we will ourselves give you the tonsure, and, af elsewhere, why will 
you be tonsured away Irom the place where you are going to live? » The 
old man said to them : « | eame to you that you might make the prayer for 
me and give me the blessing and the tonsure, not that vou might argue with 
me, [f you are willing, well; and, if not, pray for me. » The blessed menu, 
when they saw the old man’s own intention and purpose, made the prayer 
and gave him the tousure, and he rose and left the place, and he directed his 
steps to a certain oratory at the boundary of his village, whieh had been 
formerly built and roofed and in which a man had lived: and he went in and 
repaired it and closed its doors, and took up his abode in it, after requesting 
a mau to bring him his little food every first day of the week. And so hie 
would stand and recite a service and pray eonstantly and weep, while 


everyone was struck with astonishment at him, and some mockers would 


Silone, 


KAID 


VIS a 


122 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [122] 
TAa [ans 5 er ADA pa 0001 cae] Mialo farne Iani. 
So das v2) og Joa pan paa Foal olds saw a aN; -ooa 
! saoo- d Wow (2014 pD ano Iz p^ aao (MAIS wots 
Jka «3 Joa Wa J po Joa Sta uma haol qr la pe Ja... 
hasas fisa loo "Gi NA] gop or Nana Laasala flo oro JI .Jaraale 
“oops eM» «o9 Lua volo Lazda "Lasao, [20x28 o. Jo fol 
Jlaxso las, je» haas Los "isst ua Sot «elo ol js 
aklas oaa edo asl p2 -Jasas 2934 Isoaosag Joa ward JN solo 
weasel JH Joo Daso JI aufi Lansy faoa opoo jada Jh Nps 
«aao -hasada fas] ooo Sy] | pasoo soe Ls wo Laso Joo 
Jas fate alaaa [aao qao o2 ooo P heko „aigi Do 
ve Liaas jus Joa Jor aada mao 49 li»ehy q JNa 


Lo heba —os, & earr, from haoso. - 4, Roles wtNl. i wdy lagts. — s. [HH ou. — 
6. Geo — 7, i heao 9» qe os. iiis ey = 9 po soat. in B bis — IL B $ee — 
pz]: gioko. 


sav, 0 Come Jet us go and he blessed by Abrahian the consecrated recluse », 
and. others, uttering words that came from the evil one, would say, « If he 
had sbat np his wife with him, he would he doing rightly». But the old 
man despised everything and set one object ouly before his eyes, sinee fie 
wonld ash repenbanee for his stus and healing from the mereiful Physician, 
nol eeasing from prayer and recitation of service, either by night or by day. 
And his service was as follows: « Glory tothe Father and to the Son aud to 
the Holy Spirit Hallelivali! »; and again as follows : « and from eternity to 
elernily Amen aud Ament Halleluvali! » And thus he spent the hours of the 
might and of the day in these words af praise with prayer and supplication 
and thanksgiving, while he gave orders thal none of his kin cyives) should 
appear in his preseneez and before the first day of the week lie did not speak 
if ney bat wept eontiniously [or his sins; and so men used to go by 
nnl Listen to the sound of his sobs, and they were astonished at him. 
Vid boe ob] man persevered in his repeutance for eight years, Aud in the 


eighth tohen he was near bis end, there nsed to be hail iu these villages 


[123] LIFE OF ABRAHAM THE RECLUSE, 123 
po wotsif90 vod Daini pao -uoi giai Ao ‘Jus Sas 
E et [san : Nan a> y JN? uà [iio fussy LAS : 
loo laun DAs haaa apal -alad gadaa- foul ula Yr 


+ 


ient pc 


Kasa.coo Lilo frodtso Sea Jias pel Jf je Aso ~ag "9 Jasoko Jii» Bis7 wh. 


Jaco v2 of Nope Jio: bas pay Voa Q2 edt Joker issu] Oo 
| thas Ns Mas, J ape ele dex pro gue Jla-> v% aas] 
Qo a ja Lus Sat J -Syal Jh ye M» ad. LAN 
?*f a2; Jlasops) yal A MS as cà aas caet Ja Jupoy or 308.1 
phish’! Lado LaS ado Q2» Jor à.» Jlafarar ui age Sls 
Ius) [soy «Lio iias Gor JE] ui Neo, ósea Kis yore liso 
RAe Saoka] "oii fiue s. Lar als i fla pao hasar dea od 
Qo ad Mas! Long pe Dool po -Jlo Joss od IM —% 


|, B ha a2 155 edo biasa. — 2 D PAM Emi com Datadwo, — 3. R Jat 00, B owa 
Jos ka ..— 5. Hines [oe — 6. Popel tates hiano — 7, 1) words ale pas — XS usb — 
9. p 1L a3e,2 (Lads — ju, Bas — 11. B boon Io po 


every vear and they were smitten, and their crops also were utterly ruined. 
And, when the time arrived and that terrible cloud had come up according to 
its custom, on the first day of the week, when some persons were present al 
lis lodging, thev began to weep, because the cloud was terrible and. very 
thick, aud something like fire was blazing and roaring within it, and ih came 
and settled over the boundaries of that village, after the fice had burut ap 
all those round it. But the old man looked out [rom the widow aud saw it; 
and he turned his eves toward heaven, and said : « My Lord, if thou hast 
been pleased with the sinner’s repeutanee, aud thy merey has decliwed of ime 
that | shall not perish, let nol this cloud come within the bouudiries of this 
village ». Thenu that cloud took in the middle of it as it were the likeness 
ol serene air (z£z) muside all thal darkness; aud, while it all divided this was 
and that, and passed by the boundaries of that village, the signol of light 
remained until that cloud had passed. Aud so through the power of the 
old man’s prayers that village was delivered and eseaped from that terrible 
rod of chastisement, which injured not one leal within its boundaries; aud, 


1 Sie syr, 


124 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [124] 
Llon I 9l "aS Jl m pO Hawa! oofhs «oo pado ósea 
COM «2/4330 AIA PD +d JNa arsoatul ooo x95 Kons JS 

Jl haso Joa “poal au] So wo pal Lasag, ola 9 LANS 
[Laaa .otasst Wale) od vas Nos jaso - oe Lao oo Slo. 


shanty fag badass dx OO. » Lasoly Naas 


“wasp rav. yea rawi cduand hiis 


orSpoudrjas sar aapa enh ehad aah 


DA apaa fano o vor ad ha Lex» —8 si] Sad 

195 Jo, 2830 as Mule!) Qno oN] JNopsa30 ALAAS wor 
Het vor of Laso IDa wo ad Saarso .oaas Bolsas JI! 
Juror Jlasas Jun] Joan, pope oro «eS x ico L Lax 
— yoo ads Jogos Sor 10d.) Josse. ]laxes s. JNz]o Je o e: 


nop Natal! eveeam2e[ go acl o2, D oaa | s dee D eceeat2l. 303, sol. — 4, Blom. — 
5. 1; [Ota aano . eani Goo 6 Boom. 


outside all its bonndaries all round, uot even the leaves remained upon the 


trees!) Pheu the boundaries of that village exulted, while they themselves 


made proclamation concerning the power of the prayers of the blessed 
Abrahan, everyone being astonished and giving thanks to God. And the 
old inan also rejoiced, and he gives thanks to God who nad shown him that 
he accepted tis repentance. And, atthe end of the eighth vear, he departed 


from the world im the good ending of repentance, 


The history of the old man Abraham the layman, the recluse, is ended. 


VAR NENE THE EIQUE HISTONHY, OF THE BLESSED ADDAE THE 


Chore piscapts. 


Has patent to everyone Hid salt does not itself need a condiment, because 
hs Us own nature ds a condiment, and, to put u differently, nob a coudiment 
only. hut salted by ils nature: and accordingly it does not need. itself or 

le arse of self, but all other insipid foods need to use it üs a condiment. But 

bur shetelies whieh show the udinirahble fori of the likenesses of the 


nol aapke for repetition to them, uer do they themselves need 


1125] LIFE OF ADDAL THE CHOREPISCOPUS. 1) 
wn wel: Ke! => pl ALD «So D> Wet ol teas N, 
way] ha Daa [sad Jaco: Soo SpA? Laas [2 7Mse JI <> 
fadoras jams Jesse) [Naos Te Jaamaol jas Jon soos] 
Jlaaamaojian q JadSas Aa Jp Jihly ` hasadi], froauhs 
haina p> gaaj Jl» JD NX 935 Nae Joa Pap b hj 
pry frantado .Joor uasjparse JINSesJlo ..Joot De pe JroKs10 -Joa £o 
adas Krad suae japao Joo v5 Mio p .Joot Ja Igor Jpscarxdo 
oU NS so <>) Sas jo Jory re Laag Jl» Nolo: aMis ss] as] 
owes oo [33 ody vod ro gass J| is) S5] So Lad Joa jo 
«aeo Jan oa haj Uta hlo x» aa Jsadascs pels ado DONS 
QM IN Lasia «oe eal oot [rays < «So aao M ha 
vM. Jis oothpens colo "Ww Jos 679 MM, 0.36] cole QAM 
Nas gta Ao worse cto «^on. fou] yl ba Sagrsoo JM 


these, but for us ourselves who are more insipid than food ! the condiment 
of the stories of the saints is required. This blessed) Addai then was 
chorepiscopus in a monastery in a village called Farduisa^, at the approach to 
the Armenian frontier in the district called Anzetene*; and he had fittingly 
wielded the authority of the chorepiscopate lor a considerable time with all 
religious conduet without blame, visiting the poor, aud caring for the orphans, 
and providing for the widows, and admonishing the clerical stall in the 
churches and the monastie convents, going about and warning and teaching 
eael man to devote himself sincerely to his ministry without stain in the 
sight of men, while his words to every man were always these : « My sons, 
let us not despise the expressions of the great and divine Paul. Let us 
hear from him that he cries to us as with a trumpet and says, ^ My children, 
itis the last time. Amd from this we understand that itis the last time, from 
the false Christs who have come in among us"; and again he says, ‘The 
end of all things hath come near ^, and again, “The end of the times hath 
come near upon ns ^^. And for this reason, as men who read these things 
and meditate upon them always, let us eouduct ourselves in. the time of our 


L Or tinsipid of laste’. — 2. Se. paradise. a Sor Hanzi) — 7. Sie sye. — >. T Jolin. m. ds 


(loose citation). Gale Ne Fe emm ue, dO NR ule cots 


bee 


h. 


Twi NoOe EPI SKS: "136 


pel be awa: Wee clastoly ba Lraps aay hy JN 03 
Lisias Lxa (males Jeol; Lwa aA JU] hoa LSS Ln 
Jo K.lao: aasa onum] Le DA OPES y! wi] Sad wie 
ohaalllo .adsgiee: Jer aohsareo ^o Xmas: Jla ong X] 
areas alaan Ao arsios (are; X26 om aax adul lo 
ed .xhull3as [Lb Qaa. Sgro raaa (caranolo shes 
.29a3&.* laa: Lies: ash Jil NS JN.ceasal Sx arto oos Wee | 
dpa Load: asas boys Snort v Nasal SN SS ahwaasl po) 
Lara qe joa aas stds lad ha pols |Loss nao vM y ESE 
pele LA alaa joa Qs’ ods byvols: Lease Leos: cà bul 
Loca» ora cos [sso feos. Js. <A aea Leo feos 
x LidSas: cà Las NTs ve +> ogil alas » 00% v 
aloiaaas: flaslas Wala ok jecMago s oa) adad, joa 


-ob annm eth Pao beeatee the clay te the Lond ~> eometli a- a thief in 
the ito] is vnd helix: abou Nase, donee. ariel blue dav n requital 
tot regaites every dort de eakad caeca: Deere awk TOF tliis 
peat he urselves righteously. | sn noto. Keep the purity of 
sone otl sonla. nsa siho ir bodies: and wake and 

il Selene s m now lie lovon nial by hi~ grace 
] E i~ lapy | | se him, because he 
L~ - B d I~ himself neels our praise. 

i- -ouraelutis 1 ul praise of him to give 

: Ww ther IT - ~ blessed mau. days he’ had 
=| x X - va - { web every nbi. -uddenly 
the s ME ; 1 | chabal over the whole 
| | 1 tbourer~ for the 

( J - ped nouas archief and 

l l L n l = » Ute Thou who held 


h II. aml arwept 


Ss | RO PEN E ER 


[127] LIFE OF ADDAI THE CHOREPISCOPUS. 127 


USO ope SAB vao t? faapo «2 o0 Laal Jis flo cy clo 
eh} yl wads Daan fly us Jil aix: SNL 45 Jo No Koon 
t^ jg» Ware hana pads Liama] .-fioa as Nols <> 85 vos! 


+ 


Jo Kos opsars e SAG <> ele ol «Ji No as hjam Launa, 
TAa wga Da a Ji Ns) aw .fiaas Joos saaman £o Jo naam 
«oon Neo L>; Jo MNolaio; -arcas vot oso :oj) NS] odas, 
Soo Saco]. yas yt peu CPU "ele NES S20 QM» ooo! 
Leon? y Mal Saaw Ml ANa ji d wal pas JE dos! cols 
waha] «5 ary palo (904m pg 1 NAAR QA PD EH? OF far) 
-Ioa Dado Qu dp SS Iso hira, y ew Joo rod} [25.56 
"eMe malo root [33i Ww. lor manag: AS oh.oot vans aso 
Road haeo -,of300-% MAES ao oD joa) 5&9 on 
+] p» aao otioass Daso aLa jogp aD -R p Jo 
Janaa edo ud joa 3 Mucor [io a3. oi» [dX s, aad «orco! JI 


l. Iu erasure, — 2. Ms. wilh potuts:.. 


driven into exile (žogi). Bul the samt on hearing these things rejoiced; and 
he answered them, saving : « Who then (xx) is there, pray, who will nol 
take upon himself as you suppose (everyone who has sense in him) exile 
(209) with Christ? Now that Christ is being. driven into exile opta by 
you, would that we also may be banished by vou rather than by becoming 
renegades with vou be banished by him ».. When therefore the men who 
had been sent to him heard these things from. him, they went on uttering 
great menaces against him in great wrath, threatening and saving, « Prepare 
yourself to meet a fate that is in accord with vour assertion: sinee you shall 
not live here longer, unless. you make concord and siguily acceptauce 
according to the king’s order». But he, when he heard these words, laughed 
at them, and said : « M, pray, there had happened to be a king who ordered 
me to sacrifice Jike the holy martyrs, would you on account of his ander have 
urged me to obey him because he was hing, and suerilice to idols?» “Phen 
the blessed man arose before them and gathered the inmates of his convent 
together, and spoke many words with Chem, saying, «© Let every man 
heware ». And be took his stal and went oul, saying: « Think nol fo 


yourselves that, if E possessed the whole world, t. would be more to me 


DUX 


128 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (128, 


«o sb] sje 2 RdXtos [e bac H ol for d; fJ. 
EN aM cof clas Nisia Aaso Ago la S d «oo Hos o» La 


* 


jane opens haao Sade Goad) vioroas wily Jo asd] Ksares 


latins ot los Jabls HDD} s]azolo fads Jia ds. amo ute 
Be has) «el Joao .oothatasin Naso 4s aiaa JM JX s303 
la; prof) Joasso J pe "peo No dasa AEso Jpax passe p 
So oo Jiaats Loops L3ls vhs -AST hasl, chanana JKsa.rol, 
aolas oy eis Slo.orrag shalo Jj [ej phl er haj 
op «01 Noro Joa fasey noaa Guo Sot» asace Je sS 


. 


S942 J| corey We» Cadac eue AX + Ata oor 0000 adis «^o 


SS ede Say So Joa paar. as. vo mo AAAI Spell fsa. otio 
Dad <? od “LOOKS a., Lopa où end JNa Lando hanis 


Lo Erased e follows. 


than the true faith in Christ. Lo! E have not taken even bread for the day 
now that bam expelled froni all this course of life in which | have run and 
laboured and gathered! from my youth. Tt ds. better for me to die than 
that anyone should make my boast in our Lord Jesus Christ vain? » And so 
he depirted and went up to the rugged towering mountains that are in 
the ess Eof that distriet; in whieh nothing exeept greal beasts is to be found 
ou account of their inaccessibility: and he was there for a considerable tine 
supporting bimsell on roots, and passing the nights in caves; and gorug about 
and praying, and weeping for the sheep of Christ's innocent Hock, how they 
had fallen inte the heols of malignant apostate wolves. And, after a 
considerable tine, the blessed man was seen by certain men, and news of him 
was beard: and tbe inmates of his monastery also sought for him carefully, 
amd they discovered: him; and he learned. from tbem what bad happened: 
because, afler those who were conducting the persecution had seen that he 
himself hid departed. they did not. trouble themselves much about his 
monastery, but took all the plunder that they eould [rom it, and left tt. And, 
When he lenurned these things, he continued. enjoining them to provide foe 

Spoor iid the orphans ind the widows oul of the remnant that had been 


[or do them. But he, on aceount of the rmigeedness of the mountains and 


pront LOU Agerihe Mayet 


[129] LIFE OF ADDAI THE CHOREPISCOPUS. 120 


-— Lose) Jerod sale Jh cai La Jhoba cope Jal; Jas. 
lo » fuias ms Joa prado Joa Maw Joa OK edo Jad ots; 
Laos) D0 po ro Joa Je: bor) cx [are cy IRs Qo Joa JNa 
Rudo hyp oh! T yaad > v2) OO ayy Spe £20 Oft lemen Laios 
fssag Joa peso (Ar qd} pel Lars, flasa Sraro ao Joa 
volo Sans Na la» Qe Joa No, Laxseo fads Dad waco 
eM MM Wauase oss] n .JIoyacma.s 0001 mys psy «i20 
exse fasdg vella JH nuil, hasa Cad. x0 pe x26 Lees 
was JD jha voto Jasino hasas Qoo Jodo - fiag o bop 
[| alo ha JNa Qoo Laso soo pol alas oL] p y 
9| la»eo X93» opm y Jesolo JNaa col axle + ohano 
ND Jin yo Da hy aao flags Lys aolo MSL tSls 
Hy Jaam Joot Nas ol 3 JNa ags Sar Je Jiag Nx» 


the unbounded amount of snow that covered them, went down to the 
neighbourliood of a certain hamlet that was situated among these same 
mountains, and made a cell for himself, and there he used to pass the winter. 
But after live years during which he had lived in this manner, busying himself 
about providing for the poor, his monastery was brought to indigence; and, 
when he knew that it had been plundered more than ten times, and no longer 
contained provision for the needy as before, and the blessed man was 
grieved and distressed on aceount of the starving and distressed persons 
for whom there was no method of providing, and further the inmates of his 
monastery also were pressed by want, then he considered « There is no 
longer any quarter from whieh it is possible for me to provide for my brethren, 
except that the blessed men should come and make a vineyard in these 
mountains, and it will be a provision for them and for the needy ». And this 
he did not delay to carry out; but when they came to him he spoke to 
them, and this suggestion pleased them. And they brought men and dug: 
and there in the first year they put in about twenty thousand S and a like 
number also in the second, and the third; and the vineyard reached a great 
size on the mountains. And the news went out everywhere « Such-and-such 
a monastery has covered the mountains with vineyards »; and hence within 
live or six years so much wine was produced thal they could not find vessels 


]. Se. vines. 
PATR., OR. — T. XVII. — F. |. . 10 


Sieh. 


130 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [130] 
odao eS [aso Loo, 2-01 JNa DBA uoan, are] 
Lapos JKoop> à oa) Jeu garajo ooo! van) Laco. so, 
Laado d eus oS wann ee] xe x00 ENS Loo 


a foot Mads war Bdrm ros ooo! mpl: : wl Ioco vaasan Suawo 


«ol «2o Joa ipad p3 wag ooo qoi No „haid waa sooi 

jal- o -Jig où L5 eee) Joa SLs; haa Sco AO 
MIS Mye Je Laso [da ol Jasoe farimds ydo 
Joa jpasd fly Joa ata JI exo y sero: oaan, oc Jad 
Ops eee Mau caen. [zia Lor hadaa hooo Jya “) Sx oS 
wis Ll yel flo Jes Leas ha Jlasp> Je - Jor Sfx Jamas Jf yo 
Kas yo o5 Jroas eMoais Joo garg Jl] ofS ooa Kopin Iss] 
as] yn eSI € .]-23226 Ji pee ‘Jor e SEE] Maso JLue flags 
pm Noo Joa Sh odas) Judo Lasao woes yano ofa pas 


1. Ms. om. 


to contain it. And, since the region of Cappadocia was elose at hand, and 
these men! used to go out as lar as Syria and. buy wine, they became aware 
of the place that was elose to them, and from that time it became their habit 
to go out thither in companies and buy; and thencelorth the anxieties of the 
holy Addai that had been troubling Iam because he had nothing in his 
possession wherewith to provide for the poor were mueh relieved, since he 
would send from forty and tilty denarii, und as many as came iu from? that 
vineyard, and bay clothes and distribute them to the needy, and similurly 
also corm aud oil, and many articles: so that, exeept what was needed for 
the cultivation of the vineyard itself. he left nothing whatever that he did 
not Liberally bestow npon the distressed. persons. Aud thns he completed 
twenty-five years in this occupation, while be did not. go into the enlti- 
vated territory or neglect this business, nor did men see hin casually, 
hut he would earey his stalf the whole day, and go about among the gullies 
e] ravines and among the trees, aud would. kneel aud pray andl weep, 

care that no one should pass behind him and surprise him; aud so at 

ume he would betake himself to a certain place that he had secretly 


davies. — 2. Ms. om. 


[131] LIFE OF ADDAI THE CHOREPISCOPUS. 131 


paddo - clad Joa oso ofS Joor aaas, odo Jamas oA loa Jas; 
La] -joa par feiaaso ASN e| seo adaa asy su] yon o 
wat WoueNa JE Sor ad Joa ma Jl) Jansa Jed Jh 
opaa oda aa Kor co : while Jes Jis; lh hal hbo 
VE Kod wu) Xoo v! ox Jpn SNR Ji aes p50 Jn NS 
+ ot JA sos <>} Jaa; Lo eaa fl coe e Liss "20; 
ON sary Left bod] - cok Joot Mul feo hl, FM eS deseo 
OES xo eli pools fani saasom e lc Nos e 
ENT flo JL) toa Jat x99 se 3S ue yoo oisi sc quo Karo 
meng hiro NN. Lao «DO eOhndofinn pO Jag <> ML. othsooisyo 
laD Bay pul poo JMae lr $9 oD pasotio Gs jos yor) qeoot 
vi) cà y „alaa MN Ne Ho M Wag rio x jy; 
Jo «xo I o X JL Lp kb £0 aoo o0 mol -joo ofc 


1. Ms. 90,0 


made, and the man who attended him would meet bim, and inform him in 
case anyone had come out to look for him. And thus he would do even in 
snow and frost, in order that he might not be seen by men; but he had given 
orders that everyone who came should be received and refreshed and go; 
so that in fact on one and two occasions | went up to these mountains to see 
the blessed man, and | did not see lim with his consent. But on one occasion, 
because | knew the hour of his arrival, T took one of the brethren with me, 
and at eventide we betook ourselves to that place: and, as there was a thicket 
of many trees there, 1 said to the brother who was with me : « Let us sit 
down among these trees, and lie in wait for the old man; since perhaps he 
will come and we shall catch him, and obtain his blessing ». And, while we 
on our part were sitting down, lo! there comes the sound of bis feet and 
of his breath as he was coming down from the mountain; and, when we saw 
him in the distance, we kept ourselves hidden all the more, lest he should see 
us and turn back; as in fact happened. When he had approached to about 
half a furrow’s length’ from us, though neither the sight of us nor the 
perception of our presence reached him, as if he scented the smell of 
us, he cheeked himself and halted, waiting a long time, while we on our 


side did not stand up and were not seen by him; aud, as if he had become 


1. See p. 112, n. 2. 


* 


3 s 


132 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [139] 
ja lew. y Ne 26 ex NI! Ouod) OŠ pelo o root oi 
jao ga NM pe Lore hags aag Wh, mo oA Joa Loo 
5 J exo Homes Jo A We Lal e waas, Musto 


a rl <? vol, Joe: oU. 2. «io Aa] Jo wire : S Lao .o6 Kis 


. 


Jed fh 3a WocexceMo Yopsar uo Sas Qo ais Joa L5, <% 
fasy ¿Noo II hoa flo Moa hoas fl -Law otiosa: Jha JNag 
Jol d ceto GIRS boa aia] Rade yo cdot fias hi wel 
AD v JD Jes eo prolly yo oa Jiag eo Jas 1E - foior 
—— . [soa lo Da J3od: bee Ja [Xactase asas, L] «nuce 
DA Jiad Jiag > Kao Laso; <% RAM) J JNS laas 
DA woo SS Jj yon aa Ao JNa paa Joa Ku] Lams, 
sorori] 290 Joo 000 «p> volo Mp Je „Joa soo] Laso Jiords 
atoj) ber JL aeo be Joao Lady laxe,» joo wiso, ANo p Laaa 


1. Corr. from (Sag odo 


aware of us in his spirit, he thereupon like a wild beast turned aside, and 
set his lace to go down the mountain-side at a run. When I saw that the 
old man was running, T cried out : « Forgive us, father, and pray for us ». 
And, in order not to vex and annoy him, we did not pursue after him; and so 
we went in and passed the night. and we did not obtain a sight of the saint. 
But owain, inasmuch as my mind was ardently bent on running and tabon- 
ring alter the good and precious merchandise of the old man’s blessing at all 
costs, even so | was nof remiss in the matter, but also after a time again | 
directed my steps to these mountains, having determined, « If I am here 
asanuch as two months, | will not depart from these mountains until | am 
blessed by the bondman of God », entreating our Lord to grant me this gift. 
And at noontide in the middle of the day we saw the old man passing over a 
certain clear space some distance off, aud coming down from peak to peak, 
because there was a gap between: and we kept ourselves close lest lie should 
see us aud run away. And, because intense noonday leat prevailed, he 
Aood and prayed, and next he knelt down, aud he stood itp and stretehed out 

hands to heaven, expanding himself in the form of a cross; and he 


val for a long time until about the ninth hour', and then he sat down 


ohapps. be 38 PM bat in olber places tlie hours seer do be reckoned IDgrom imitdnigh| 


133] LIFE OF ADDAL THE CHOREPISCOPUS. 133 
b usua prs ro ee? ete M meaty o OIL coped cce sal 
opdrsaad; fro Alo „hanas po Ja es hes smn Nas wus 
> iw? wontaado ead Jade «3 [soo ce e Jasads 
Re) do ts] aN [ada exor cepe Lily Jl o yl oco 
Dha jeso Jie Pade XO. aoo yoo ANS eS NM Jio bso fas 
vua 339 vor ts Jia Lore fisad biod oh! Jao] «3er e] 99 
Joos Ku Jl» wo yl wos, eai] Ji v? o0 Suae ON, 2o cot 
sanie Jed EN ad Joo p] fll fail wis yasr ham dani) 
|y ha og Ness uia Wee poo ese lol JET Jor le sel 
QNS) nd yada, calo M ou y Je Ns las AM Joa 
N] wid ua oD al oaa Moho: v pel an El ox 
Lag L3 Sojo AAA JN p> e JLo "We of “as! «6 
oo hanao Jl; Jiaso opt] Jsoady e! XII ^ esl BS» 


1. Ma, vomp — 2, Ms. Va. — 3. Ms, SL. 


to rest fora short time. But we, when we saw that he had sat down to rest, 
came down by a certain deep gully, and went on until we arrived opposite 
the blessed man; and thus we suddenly came up and caught him. But when 
he saw us he was thunderstruck, as aman is frightened by the sudden sight 
of some lion; and, after he had looked this way and that and seen that there 
was no escape, he stood up and received us, and made a prayer. And he 
stood and asked, saying, « Whence have you come hither, blessed men, on 
this mountain? » We continued entreating him to sil down for a little time; 
but he did not consent to sit down, in order that he might not be involved 
in a long eonversation with human beings; bnt he eontinued saving to us, 
« Go to the monastery and rest there, and lo! 1 will myself come at once ». 
And, after we had begun many sentences, le continued urging this upon 
us, lo go to the monastery, iu order (as he professed) to rest, which was 
only that he might escape from us. But [, inasmuch as I divined his pur- 
pose, said to him : « Why, our father, do vou run away from us? Sit down 
and speak, and console us with your affectionate words ', and sow good seed 
in our ears, even if? our own soil is ungrateful, amd barren and unculti- 


1, Or take 222-2 as a lille, and render ‘the words of your affection’. — 2. Ms. oni. 


aed roues 


134 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 134] 


wor Sou; xul bol se «ao o wo ads Jal paolo mo pu c! 
J Kx "2o wil 4 Lan? ni~ qanana f ox lo ns JL of 
Jl file annthhlo cosas aay ec ha ord manan Sxsaso yoaas 
a ha DA, | Mosul] oady hoon Sry ee y - Ll „oHa 
syaw aau aoo oad Jen ww sags A Jun! a Jado. 
m ha Power ood JNa oles > Lodo UXOR pe SaL lO 
[5:236 salada “A we} vam boas wrod ad; oh}; M +>] 
sea; ANo aa Ap OAD; Yorn JN; aaan Ro Ss 
Nasco weha Jl Haad ool P oa to Lao uona as LAD} 


JA ho ha sga Shas auo Jos, Nodo hank xa 
Las, Jas) «or SMe Los er Jan ode [ailes exe CIP tl Jh 
Ia» Lorak, xe | SS < oe Lido Juco o VAM 
AD BLES Lacie: hansis, 2à Joo» Ned p ahh O30) 


vated ». But he looked at ine, and said : « Do we then (Zgz), pray, seek 
another greater than Jesus to speak with us or to admonish us? and, if we 
do not obey him, if a man rise from the dead and speak, how shall we 
obey him?! Now go and rest, and T will come, and we will talk ». But | 
inasmuch as I knew his purpose reflected that on account of the blessed 
man’s pleasure we had been afraid of annoying him; and so we fell down 
before him and entreated him to bless us and to endow us with Ins holy 
prayers. But he when he dismissed us said to us : « Do vou pray for 
me the nugratefal. As for yourselves vour earnestness signifies the direc- 
tion of your will, that God may mingle his will with vour will, and make 
your will his will, Pray for me ».. And thus we parted, and we did not 
see the blessed inan again; but suflicieut for our consolation and for thanks- 
giving to God to be ever rendered by us was this one occasion on which 
we were not deprived of the benefit of the sight of this divine man. After a 
period of twenty-five years, while spending his time in this way, he ended this 
lite of troubles, and departed to the rest of his Lord, having committed the 


place of provision for the needy to the inmates of lis convent, and enjoined 


[135 LIFE OF MARE OF BETII UBTAYE. 135 
f Lanas SN DS Joop 9x s) fuss] ene TET) vo] O90 
*'CS9anmuSsr ^aa sar ráiela wduanrh Asx 


ora ar duas cin aapa anda hajh aah 


Fils: JNa; Jes JNa, Jiro Lasso Joa looo] Jys hoa haag 
. Joa vaoo] woa e Naso uot floor JRupo [eMe Apos 
«23.350 OS a seo T? Joot paN Joa “jKiuse [Nuan <% ao mya 


* 


OAS S Katy Jlaang veis) g ped p00 020 Nas euo sono 
joa Ml; pops Sco wc Mee foot Gas o flare Jer ds oo 
y Ju po «2o Lamis Jie: )- J soy o W'80 waipa fosims o 
„Lhaaa flo fes flo bann JI PIA “Sing HEY do ais JN fase 
J| Lo Lene Les | Ul pag pope flo er flo Jay Ho 
asas Ey oà ol Jadoo «rot wNubrso Joa Ssax [i500 ey 


l. Ms, unodl. — 2, Ms, appy, SAs. 


them to make provision from it for the needy, as during his life, for ever 


The history of the blessed Addai the chorepiscopus is ended. 


IX. — NEXT tne NINTH INSTORY, Or THE BLESSED Maur! or Bern Unrave?, 


This blessed Mare was a clergyman (2i2.26:) in the chureh of a certain 
large village in the district of Anzetene* called the village of Huki (2x2). 
This man then, when he was a member of the clergy (42242), used to behave 
with great and measureless arrogance, and he was haughty and a good 
speaker and teacher, and very well-informed on every subject. And, grace 
having at a certain time arisen in his mind, suddenly he began to form the 
plan of taking upon him the yoke of monasticism; and he disposed of and 
distributed all that he had among the needy; and he withdrew to a certain 
mountainous spot about three miles from the village; and he bound himsel! 
never to taste bread or wine or oil, or cheese or fish, or anything whatever 
except pulse and herbs and water; aud thus he exereised himself 
severely. 

1. See p. 187, n. 1. — 2. Gf. ch 31 and 38. Deth Urtaye seems it be almost, if not quite, idenlical 


wilh Anzetene; cf. eh. 38. f. 131, vea — 3. Syr,‘ Manzil’. 


32 


136 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [136] 


Lisoto Laso, Lamas lisad; 2095» pay x6 wal J -J «a» 
Ie aad lo plo spes. Lapo vaada 23620 Jo INi 
o ooo «ra La fro do soto JNas ,5 omaro ipe es] lo 
Joa Sols ers Ù “oot Jloly waaa «22.90 JL. 2e 28s eo s LA 
Joupa «ajo haao oot 23225 wars], Le» sj pags 
NE OXY Krad soda 0001 eio? bep +O 0000 yaaa | No: ; 
nas oS Joa worms hoa LRH o: oot eS La hot eh 
AD 0006 «42)930 lose pa nu J| J5e25: q% ere Joadvasds bep 
Joi jis p30 Jota: odo pane Ans MX 000 wpe J yo “OSX 0001 € SÀ 
JUzssoo Jlotasol fray Lis -Jrso95 wolo Joa sooie] ha yin Jo 
saaa] Da JAail pose [aeo] olh, Wwe JE JNioNo ..JNə;0 
pels Ff sis Jess 5h fore ad «So “advise Lao Joo work. | 
re wore! J p noe JMxjj JLororans Je XO xu) SO or 


L Ms. 157-03 9053. — 2, Ms. o0 — 3. Ms. with points — 4, Ms. sing, 


Then Satan again, who wishes to restrain men from good actions, did 
not neglect to stir up against the blessed man the trial of persecution; and so 
the assaults of persceutions often attacked. lim, and he was arrested and 
imprisoned and ill-treated, and he did not give way and allow his rule (zzv6v) 
to be relaxed, while the adversaries kept him in prison a week and two 
weeks and as much as a month; and he determined tn his mind that even 
the very food that he was in the habit of eating he would not taste at all 
as long as he was under their power. And so they by Satan's machination 
would leave him until his life was approaching dissolution, Saving, « This 
man defeats ns». But the valiant man was so determined in his soul that 
downto the end he tasted nothing that eame from the renegades. And thus 
they were continually defeated in him and left him, not being able to weaken 
his fortitude in God. While he was ocenpicd with such severe asceticism, 
and moreover with persecultou, he built an admirable, substantial, large 


monastery, With many exeellent details of construction; sinee he was also a 


eraftsinan with jutelleetual skill in all crafts. And he built and finished it, 
and twelve years were completed by him in such labours. Then he departed 


from ody, bearing good testimony, nothing whatever having been found 


[137 LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISTIOP. 137 


Jo "esas I ya Lies qxer caso] ous Spa: ol ruaan Pad 
th ASI; fore flo [5055 


Aren rusas ehaťaxrdh dlr 


rdhassues Alya re paly mdhsinpa iasi eduard aah 
draoi Lain regana LANL win rehin 


as bl ooN loaamis/ 4S9. fso Laos odas aJ, Lapad [p 

Ji-2a-* pend fM ad: Addo ful pro ha JMOL, Yo Nossa 
fsa; jop pads poly sl wp sas, uoopo gaad lanys 
Jis. [o soleo fy foi fio cer Jaga Jonas JI oboi Nad 
JE») Mo) xe) sjhRe2aaso ero pad) Jlaasaras lo Jaa, 
Danad, ruaa Qoo Menos) [kac Clo huaa ad, has Jo 
loce col [o flared fron; waada Mis, Jis]; J sid! 


L. Ms, oca. 


to weaken lim. or to make him remit what he bad originally undertaken, 
not sicknesses nor persecutions, nor any other distresses. 


The history of the blessed Mare is ended. 


NA = NEXT THE TENTH HISTORY, OF THE BRAVE WARRIOR ON BEHALF OF THE 


TRUE FAITII, Man SIMEON THE BISHOP, THE PERSIAN DEBATER. 


When } approach the task of relating the history of this lioly Simeon the 
bishop, Ido not do this in simplicity and without fear; because his character 
does uot shine out in one beauty of righteousness only, that oue might pre- 
sume to depict his virtue as one portrait, but in many beanties, the objects 
of great and inexpressible amazement, be they labours of righteousness, or 
humility exceeding the standard of those who live in these tines, or zeal on 
Christ's behalf, or the war which all his life until death he carried on agralusl 
tlie fraudulent disciples of the school of Nestorius, or again his labour in all 


T9 a ps 


Lis JOHN OF EPHESUS [138] 
Lias Lh] paleo Jh boa Lanas alano Qoo Kardon coil] Saas; 
Ss «2o QN xo Wexu hawaa uaaa bro lawpa; ad loa 
«e assa JI hope jeSasel xo jan 5 qM, oft 9] vo) paolo Mop 
a> JI MC Leao alaw os Kado cosh] Sasyo Ji] 
Ju edo ol Wh Meo joa udo m à Lroootdy Jlosh? 
J Lasso Nipa + ENKI koli, a90 „aaao oaarmoc alopas JOD 
hy Pe ose ol nana Loa Da bro nS as Au Amao 
L3 Jla Jharna Daus [abo Jou. [ei p» alaaa], i 
Bs Slo Joa cooks] Mulsios LaNäis aipa „oA Joa Mely Jlasas 
ex adirsm ea s ae a a e 
lxh est Jha, wt | Jory aNs 5a», "Woo Lio JLäi> 
Joa podiso Jumps Maso joo svao] Lawo ol WM» oM Loot 
ui asd Aggie „waja Nao woll Misys Liao uf. od filho 
bo yaso «6| Loomis ddso Laasi faaan s) cas] Jiaryy Jas] 
Hig Jie JS Qo “A pet FO saoao aso Mis, Laas o} - ool 


eountries in which the preaching of Christ had travelled; for whom, T think, 
if would not have been improper to speak with boldness (zx2iqsiz) like the 
holy Paul and say : « E have toiled more than all »', and to say further this 
also, that he had travelled not only from Jerusalem and as far as Hlyricum ?, 
but also in all countries in which the preaching of Christ had travelled, except 
only the territories of Rome; and thither also he was ready and had started 
to vo, When God saw his venerable character and his old age and his labour, 

and ordered bim to finish his course in tlie royal erty of Constantinople. 
This holy Simeon then even before the period of his episcopacy, besides 
the fervent zeal and enthusiasm. for the true Bath unto death which he 
possessed, was deeply versed in the Scriptures, and he was also ardent in 
practising debate; beyond (in my opinioni any other man, even the ancient 
fathers: beeause besides the gift of God this other faet too summoned him to 
IL becanse he was also a Persian, and he lived in Persti, and it is in that 
ountey especially that the teaching of the school of Theodore and Nestorius 
ry witle-spread, so that believing bishops and their dioceses are 


wid farther besides this teaching that of the school of Mani and 


doBene. ss Tee 


[139] LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. t39 


vaad o] volo . poih] X Jilla e qb wey ooh sdk 25d] 
Ml Jlanco/ x23 Ne do NS 0 0o =? Sart p> oh Kisco awe Pr 
Fos be SUNS axe Janee: y haoo wao haoa, waiols foot 
nga "anao LAA0}-d090 Ker lo N SIN S aas + ooh / 
wt Jlancoff ards nau JN ha Jes oå Js!ls as Mo oM. le 
Jhs eise xo c3) Joon oà Jo [Laa + foot <> Lose 
aaa e| JU see woasiadcas ps] yards ad Loy Svo voto!) 
Iro 4939] + hoor Las Naso JN woofs Ji ho Ies p20 Jasoa 
«el oral, Col was flo orope «Q6 Aano Joaamss! heo 


ROS et ce ha woo aay Pre x pel s DO-T ^Jaazol 
ol, Las? Ns jip- Jd. ord. od Jib] oaao Aoao] JN 


Da cao Daa conde au] au] eng J--3eco6) eeu ba hi5 
Joa N3N So [Ss Iho «Joo xh NS Nas Nl sos aaas haag 


1. Ms. sing. — 2. Ms. sage. — 3. Ms. pl. 


Marcion and Bar Daisan also had from this cause been much dissemi- 
nated there, and Mani travelled much there in the same country, and there 
also they flaved him alive, and he died there; and Bar Daisan and Mar- 
cion', because there was once a school (ayer) of Persians at Edessa, and 
the Persians are in general keen inquirers, they were trained in the tenets 
of Bar Daisan and of Marcion and became immersed in them, and they 
carried this evil plant down and planted it in that country; even as Hiba 
the blasphemer who was once ruler there (of the church of Edessa) made 
himself a promoter of that same school (s7024); because this man not only 
blasphemed like Nestorius, but even surpassed him in wickedness. When 
this bitter plant was spreading in the city of Edessa, the holy bishop 
Cyrus discovered it, and tore it out from its roots, and did not allow the 
school (sys) of the Persians to be mentioned there again, as had been 
the case before?; and this school was Irom that time established in the 
city of Nisibis, from which all that country drink dregs of wall, so that 


even in this our country, the country of the Romans, some men taste of 


it*, Against these therefore the blessed Simeon was always strongly armed 


1. The sentence is left unfinished, and (he sense completed iu another way, — 2. 489 Chron, Edess., 
A. 8. foo’. — 3. Cf. Simeon's own account in Assem., B. O.. 1, p. 350-354, from which John probably 
took this. 


140 JOIN OF EPHESUS. [140] 


[xas pad oS Loo Jaro. Joa xa Jas] So Jods oo Jlasjo 
o] seoa ooot Cada} la bees „Joa mo haoa poo dad 
sot. ls oad ases: Jills addsX0<oarddo copa whiasad .* corns 006 
ausa een eco Joa paalis ops; haass Wes Lais 53445: DAS Joa 
Joot NS JN; o9 pol joa cá i J qoan jas ol Lx 
„aN Joor Was l Xero A Loo Lay Dily oà polo o 
pen Jills «Noo foa fis JJ Lad} laas oui lolo «oo 
haaa uaaa gada p] wy p lalo oll WS wy Jy esl 
aad M Hy o chaso Lope [4s], Kurs «n 
Le, .JLloslh. anaso Joa Mas ha DA as] 823. 528 So 
Lal aD Joa Lx» Lex AiD, odor acy M Lo [Bes 
opel], histo pars Ladina Jao cS e INS ez: Ig brary 
Jlassse, oss [55 NS ao, s Minto Joa brass Colo 45 «aao oU NS Sas. 


and ceaselessly contending; aud wherever he came vietory was given him 
by God, and he was made aeloser of the mouth to all hereties (atceswmsa), 
until their chiefs or doctors dreaded to open their mouth and speak in a 
district in whieh his presence had been reported; because in a district in 
Which a debate was being originated by the Nestorians against the belie- 
vers Who were in it, if he were five or ten days’ journey (uavstey) away, 
as if God bad made him ready and as if the earth had vomited him up, 
he would suddenly spring up and be present there', since from the 
ereatness of his zeal and the fervour of his will he did not rest and sit still 
in one district; saving, « I must not sit still and rest, when l know that 
Christ's sheep are being scattered among ravening and destructive wolves, 
who will uot spare to destroy them and tear them in pieces? ». And tor this 
reason he was sedulous in going out among the countries, as far as the 
camp? of the Saracens of the tribe of Nu man, which he often visited; so 
that he gained a large number of Saracens in it, and he induced the magnates 

ho were converted by his words to build a Christian church in it. And 


he would depart and go down to the very gate of the kingdom’, and 


Acts AN. 29, — B Sy, Hirllia^ d. Nutman, = Arab, AL Hira’: see p.d — 5. Se. 


[E417 LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. HAL 


Joa Las JaN Lad Lra’ o D -Hawa o 19 od Jago 
Jaan e oa pat JAN buo Loio bul cope Sl; ha] 
Jue ooao Jas a so «2o 02,901) polais assas yo wal paalo 
«i255 flo aasa Jija lr opens anaia noana aD axo] 
Ope e pL Jarrad oaa ADA c2) or 'Q.elaexu Jlompoopas 
Lys -haag of Ol p apy flo ado: I -aNs lanmo panad 
Janmo [poas Daaa araco -a cJ PSO: L2 Ds Jlo, 
sbsle Loes EM Jan Jes jaanu, D nu ele eon WAI) 
jana, oda olaands OOK pO} oÀ shaan sans [ups aao 
IKa SK qa Là wero „uaaa Da aia yagmo Col oí» 
Jase p> ate J&s4 Joam JaN lad huwo; Laado, jas 
japo joo ancy La fly JAoslEs -Laak Lio v og Jano JLo 
anaa ado joa aa oad [5] adras aseo . 12-90 Dex Neo Joa 


1, A stop follows. — 2. Ms. base. 


would turn many to God not only among the heretics (aizesvoz2:), but also 
among the Magians; so that he once even converted three great and dis- 
tinguished men among the Magians and baptized them. And, when their 
companions heard that they had turned away from Magism and become 
Christians, they informed the king about them; and they received an order 
that, if they had really turned away and would not deny Christianity, they 
should die, 

But these men, who showed themselves worthy of a crown of life, when 
they saw the threat and the kiug’s sword, were not afraid nor dismaved, 
while the blessed man also armed them with the enthusiasm of martyrdom 
for the sake of eternal life, and they resisted the order and the sword that 
had gone out against them; and they say, « Far be it from us to deny the 
living God who made heaven and earth, and his Son the Lord Jesus Christ, 
who called us and brought us near to him by his grace, that we should deny 
him again and worship instead of him the things that he created ». Then 
ten days after their spiritual birth these blessed men departed ta God by the 
quick death of the sword, bearing good testimony. But this blessed man 
continued to go out amoug the countries without ceasing, and to warn and 
make disciples and convert. And accordingly his fane went out over the 
whole land, and not only that of the Persians but that of the Romans also: 


3r 


142 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [142] 
J-3eoo3. Jaano Mods alos xe Joa c Ne Laois JI] Oe- REN 
foaom +9! assi] «x» eha poly JMO Qo JNa Jj 
xol jurasdiso Ws Lawa, [dd oods asolo JN JNa, arja Nas 
Viamao Lau] a5laaS so; hasana vA] A qoa; l - 


"xn o9 Apos Ku] C Jeseoot; Je» wyj alamaa Sy aD), 
Lalaan Aa amorki] D> Lao paso Qa] qao Jag 
SOM) ams odo dy wool] -oad laap aaa ©: hag 
Jl.» Lad janes J.e3a hen - frsoooiss [3235 wda] Loana 
NaN x» oy "f p30» aaao, +50] po Props, Jilla, [Lsasorsos 
Lasa food's oaa Shas Laaa od ladsdo sb] £z ji «e Ql 
«Sto -LA wn Nes] Jadoo law BGJLOwo were Jen NM. Jills, 

aio Joa hoaa Wee ijo. ans [or [also oct vom xo 
Joa Kul fais; DA jprmood pro's JI ohio "o Ns. seo 


l. In erasure. — 2. Ms, ets, 


and he extended his travels to the roval city of the Romans for the first time 
fora reason hike this. 

On one occasion. the Nestorian bishops of the chief cities met together 
and gave information to the king of the Persians about. the hence in 
that country, saving, « These men are traitors to your majesty, as it Is 
in your power to learn, since their faith also and their rites agree with 
those of the Romans »; and the Magian believed them, and he ordered a 
persceution against the orthodox (asho3e%ou) in. the whole of his kingdom. 

But the blessed Simeon in the Fervour of his zeal formed the plan of going 
up and informing the bette ving Anastasius, king of the Romans, of (hese 
things, that he might do this favour to the chureh of the believers in the 
vountey OF the Persians, saying, « Who will be able to intercede with the king 
For us i£ Edo not do these things? and that believing king will ask of him 
vace for the believers in the country of Persia ». Then he quickly arrived 

e King Anastasius, and informed him of these things. And this God- 

ibessahise hears a believer anl a Dorena- ol the believers, did 
() carry ont his request whieh he asked of him: and, because 


th aer between. them, and they were sending embassies to one 


[1437 LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. 1^: 


^ 


„LD, JKsdiasco Jzesle :ooo vipao m las Lome EE ous 
Lese] r face of los qe Mla o> eon denas] Lan Cop ds 
wand joo pone yh» uel Sx fares sanal, y^ VY 
Lama Jh yroa yooka, Laion hai p SN Je o > Nol 
- Jlasap roy J SOS A> oi eM wa Jl » A] LAS, LOAD HM 
J 33.36; e boy Nu. A20 vo JL uams «oos. as] yv «o Jl 
XS lo „Joa Ns]: <H] ci aaa fasa D es INS Sol p 
Lansa foa opo Jewel Joa Ko xao OLX Jor Cots Aor 
«e oaa jo sl Jh -pa20 Salo „wada, jio: odas 
Jasoos Laye .ooot — aaah qoot; às K.2d00 JN ego 
Joa a NSNso NJN anaa [ised oo ooo Mas [2008-9 
AOLO QooLAiRa Nor Ian Luda p Aado aas son KOHALA 


l. Mich., who repeals lhis from John, uses (p. 262) Lhe word Jas sgg) This he must be sup- 
posed to have found in lhe original, but I do nol know where to insert il. 


another ', and roval presents and gifts, king Anastasius then wrote earnestly 
to the Persian, saving : « You will do well if you order that peace shall reign 
in your empire in your days; and in this matter you will gratify and please 
us, if your order keeps the Christian peoples in your empire uninolested, 
when you order that they shall not harm one another by reason of occasions 
of enmity, nor any of your people molest them ». These words then that 
are in the king’s letter together with others we have found that the holy 
Simeon himself asked from him, and he gave him a copy (zv! of thei ?. 
And, when the envoy came down, he presented the request of the belie- 
ving Anastasius to the king; and he consented and gave orders that none 
of the Christians should hurt his neighbour; and thenceforth the machina- 
tions of the heretics were rendered of no effeet, and the party of the believers 
enjoyed freedom (zzi£asíz). | And the blessed Simeon was more Ineited agains! 
the hereties, and was warmed with zeal for debating against their leaders 
1. Hypatius was sent on an embassy lo Persia in 517 (P. Os vtt, p. 661), hub an earlier occasion 
seems to be here meant, for the 7 years’ imprisontuent ^p. 153) must have begun some sears kiler, 
and S. afterwards travelled: for 7 years and returned in 30 (p. Dto, and he was certainly al liberty 
in 52% (Assem... BLO, 1, p. 86%) “Zach. Rho, vit, 3. Moreover, if the narrative 1s in chronological order, 
this mission to Constantinople preceded the dispute with the Nestorian: which was bebween %99 and 


305 /p.147). — 2. This was perh. anong the documents which came into the authors possession (p. 058 
and, if so, he no doubt quotes from it. 


POM 


144 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 1447 


Agora Joa 3 [asi yopo » Lady ots coa v [34] So oly La 
wo Joa a5. Lisote ECT xA OOOH) Joa sla» Lad pode 
Jie» SoLo wos | c» joo <% J ol, Janu] oos Joa Lopasdso 
p» Lai Ras coord: Joanmis) Ve pe Joo Layo LEN al Sx..200 
x26 22-22 Joo soos] Jas]; pead Joor aNs -hazas > sl 
ow v Joa SXsar0 | roto -,Saolimr; © vx ol fuio} es 
ooo «no Laois aaa Luas I LAN al) où Aro opo a2 S, 
ooa Dha vaa L90 79S o cs) Jya Lias} oaoa? faul) oA 
LALR Joor x90 Loy po “od Joa pad JL ons poy Sas; Sgro 
woo + Ji geo JAMES Apo Arges [ears Sh «oo Jon [AM 
Jlassasoy Lope . [uy pel LOAD -O fasoto Li, Joo wlase Jaa rds 
(9000 Ae A» No «0001 x01 Jlasy os AAAI Joa +36] 
Noo NS voptse LOM Juss] oi ase. ooot vs Ju Ne noo 
«onc Nao soo M. ood casio lols e oco s Jl wo xt 


and doctors, insomuch that, wherever they asked him to debate, he would 
debate with them before an audience and would set up umpires to hear the 
discussion between them, and so he would debate and would refute them 
and pat them to shame, so that on no single occasion was he defeated by them 
in debate. And therefore, if it happened that one of their bishops wished 
to originate a debate with any of the believers, he would first inquire ! from 
Lravellers, or from anyone who came in his way where Simeon was, and then 
would speak, saving. « Inquire! and see as to the man whom they used also 
to call the invineible Satan Simeon the debater where he is »; so that once 
They were asking Thim himself? about him’, beeause everywhere he was 
inllictingz shame upon them, defeating and refuting them, and causing even 
Ihe Magians to langh at them, since he would often set up the Magis 
themselves as judges, and thus before them as judges plead the cause of the 
faith, and they themselves would adjudge the victory to him, and langh at 
these men, And therefore many were threatening to kill him, in order to rid 

mselves of him and above all those who did not know him by sight and 


ceusteined to hear about him used to threaten him; and for this reason 


anpas is ellen used m Uns sinse: see p. ta m 2 2 Lil chus own person 


pole. The same story is told of James eh. 49, 


[145] LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. 1^5 


o) Slo o joo as Lac», yl ora fja DA ofS ooa 
aaao aha par haas -hiad oon os hawa, Jilla DA 
P! Dé Jl ua] Low» ad; oM joa we sil J Jioc deseo 
JN «2o Je Sony od Joa Ju soy pel Sy! p20 o> Joa waas 
. Lavo; œ JA Luaj, polo JS So meh ET AW A2] 
e voe] KU] farm] seo ixl cur oo Ns] fae] eoe) oos Ls 
LOD Re y» AM ood faoss aaa 0d works! P$ woes [nl 
LOAD wia Q5 Fado oohhsy ord laol Loa Xo]. -aoo Me jso 
Sapo M Lo p cà AMX xao oo o «2e ory holy 
Jo 900 Sao oo» o £P Alo par haoo use oo] hl fioa 
woh was ansiada y? sas ods oog vM) Jasco | .2ota* 40 s] 
fos LaS oio ipa po a) Js) [serdar aanas Dlo JE 


]. Ms. waa; soe below. 


he had left his hair and also his beard like that of a layman; because in the 
country of the Persians they allow the beards of laymen to grow and increase 
as much as they can; and for this reason no one knew that he was not a 
layman, unless it were someone who was very well acquainted with him. 
And, when he was, as he used to tell us, on the point of entering a certam 
city, he found some clergymen (2dngixot) sitting at the gate; and they asked 
him as a stranger coming from a distance, « Whence do vou come? » And 
he said to them, « I am a stranger ». They say to lim: « Where have you 
heard that that Simeon the dehateris?» And he turned. round and looked 
at them; and, that they might not know that he was the man, he on his part 
said : « Woe for those same men », and passed on, hearing them say, « This 
man is one of ours, and he has heard him crying out against us, and lor this 
reason he cries * Woe for him’ »; and thus he passed on and went away, 
while they asked him about himself, and they did not recognise him; and so 
the Nestorians dreaded him everywhere. Once again he set out and went 
to visit the believers in Hirthad Nu man; and the great eatholicus of Arzun', 
having sent and learned that he had gone to Hirtha, sent to the believing 


1. Arzanene. From p. 147, f... 16, il is clear thal the only Nestorian eathoticns, the bishop of 
Seleucia, is meant. 


PATH. OH. — T. XVII. — F. l. l1 


T4 d 


1^6 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [146] 


os pelo Lasoo [922.202] Las js sese cse Sh ao voih 
qio asail] Janome] arsaa yoo Jhasses Sr aoip olo vassal! 
Nf hao aoip qe qaas. [used ser Spe cet Oot dD ml & 
No Golo .-Jibo of aaao P Nee JM, Ji p Aor Jor Wy 
Seo woe. 490 os Ns OF pHO dee EN aos me? Sao Sra, e 
<P oothads LA AJ. so. NAA JA.3a55 whl Nas MN s 
joa dda, oà Lad ayl amaso Jods asolo Nufaios aspe - oto] pas 
Moos, JH] Je) bib carson 23: j.22 o joo No P oor 
ocol ©4041} fisas foaomisf! Lasag vammaa ood pS] ooo] h 
lise q> Jh Doo aoi) ausis esed M wH jpo jos Lasan 
L2eS -ho oO Sous; xal Jl: Noel «M Jya “copoly 
Slo» Ssaty ot] v Pood l «9o oo] < oa] Sob] 


L Corr. from 92. 


bishops, and said to them : « Assemble together, and come let us debate 
about the faith ». And the bishops on hearing it were alarmed; and they 
write to him saying, « Wait for us »; but he knew that they desired to send 
abont the blessed Simeon, and he continued pressing them more, thinking, 
« Lest they send and inform him and he come, and again we shall not be able 
lo speak a word». But they on their part wrote a letter and horsemen ', and 
sent after him. And, when he heard it, he rose promptly aud took two Arab 
mares’, and quickly arrived among them. And, when they saw him, they 
rejoiced greatly, and gave thanks to God; and they rose and went to the 
man who had written to them, while he had no notion that Simeon was in the 
land of the Persians, but supposed that he was in Saracen territory. The 
blessed Simeon says to the believing bishops, who were five : « Lo!, as soon 
as the Nestorians see me, they will be amazed; and, beeanse they will not 
knoow what to say, they will end by saving this, * We will not permit this 

ito join in the discussion with us, sinee he is a disturber’. But do you 


1 


em HE vou are not willing that all of us should join in the diseuss- 


íocardinasanimals', perhaps dromedaries P.-zinitb, s. v. 12253 


F147] LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. 1^7 
coto]. qna exo Laak, olpus «or pax» ay vun. JI 
Im. Je: 2e saan «oro ha, asp jlo eel Slo amar Llo 
oa Jijas -uamo woh aNu hai oal Catary DAS LoD oot 
nN! ei qe «2333 d Aga Laag vol v! Looms 5%? Apo 
Hl Janam las Sos Jh ; oaao Aaa faäsaao Laja Sa 
EN «el Ss J p. [sasia re ssi arco Gay fod. hs Ow) 
+>} Ms bja Maly [2S9 [13:50 Mic. wb cane Jvdsas NI 
Molano ooo cel Jaap oni) 6 MADE cia Jlo oa Loot 
Jlasapa ha ly has? - Jlassasc: Ss S&O cool «el soo las 
Whpeih Jhatrasoty Ja jjj spo fain vps Oly chaol JNN 
fs; Look o roa pol Q9, asso frp. Saoads ash. 430 
oan apo NO <% joa «53. ogs < y! nuaa foot Aaa, 
ooh] faas Laaa Las? cabo alado (aap road 
ARAM Laxoa Nas J Aa 3e: JyJio on NS] hasas, pax oakao 


ion, then neither will we ourselves hold discussion with yon’ ». Then at 
the sight of the blessed Simeon these men were astounded and disturbed; aud 
they were also caught and did not know what to do. To decline the debate 
would bring ridicule upon them, since if was they who had originated the 
debate ; and again to speak aud be defeated would bring disgrace upon them. 
The blessed Simeon again says to them: « If you desire to debate with us, 
we need umpires and an audience to hear the discussion between us, lest we 
fall into empty talk. But let us in the presence of an upright audience 
speak a few words that will refute and be refuted », They say to him : « If 
you want an audience, we on our side will ask the king’s marshan who is 
here ». He on his side says to them : « Neither will we refuse to accept 
the marzban's decision ». Then all together were going to a Magian to 
argue about the faith; even as this too was brought about by divine dispen- 
sation, that even through the heathen the true mystery of the right faith 
might be proclaimed. And, when they had taken their seats opposite one 
another and begun to discuss, the great catholicus, whose name was Babai ', 
inasmuch as he took precedence over all, first said : « My lord, we inform 
your high excelleney that these men are the kings enemies, and their faith 


L. 499-504, 


+ 


da xD 


[AN JOHN OF EPHESUS. [148] 


Jlassasoty kapas asas whio di wear DA :fo dobro Da L'os ey oo 
Jl; DS-A JaN ad loas’, Spe | - uy Lea Laa laas 
Jaang «3? pol oò Laos ca oc 498 hH Lod «pans Hoe, >p 
Jlasopxxs < pay A? rean XA e set «ll Lason Jipa 
saus goa or ete A vos] <+>] qa Ji le .a3* M], 
Lasao «26 haya Ja. .4, Dao; JNa TA dta qay J 
cl bados esos exl lu patho ASA) «lo el e Napol] 
aas oM paol opl naslaan D> nool «a2 Na? wie! re 
fos] po sa] SAS - pohly > Nay Janaa Dad -u .Lacdoho 
Ja -alanssjo oko pail S-A wo deco JIN? «oe pell „lasl, 
JRXens Jio po was fadso ys) Lalo JN; a d.so ooi s 


- 


sore dhing ds tere deleted and © written in marg. 


agrees With that of the Romans, and they convey the secrets of the kingdom 
to the Roman dominions ».. Dut this wretehed catholicus, because he kuew 
that ib he opened his month on the subject of the faith he would be put to 
"inanes began to make accusation, not knowing that God would put him to 
shares and, because he did not know what to do, had recourse to accusation. 
Bul that governor as i inspired by the grace of God answered liim, saving: 
These are our alfairs, not yours. Hi we learn thal as a matter of faet these 


things are so, we will attend to them, You on aecount of the enmity that 


u have toward one another say these things to uns; but we for 
ur part will nol receive these statements from von», Then an expression 
olthar as ollered to the Magian by the believers, who said, « Your judg- 
went ds just and upright». The governor says to the catholieus : « W you 


have anything else to say, aboul your faith, say on »..— Babat the catholicus 
avs do hn i: My ford, as to our faith we have to speak about a certain 
nike us, who was born From a woman as we were, and upon whom the 
FofGod came down on aweount of his uprightness and his righteousness; 

tas the King of Kings might dnd a beggars son in a dungheap 

doam, e arseament here adyancel must þe gseribed te Simron: bul Chal 


els pataonto there months eredat dudaens '. 2. As the verb is 


149] Lik OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. 149 
Od ao Nao «36 voa waaa yaaae :fX0o} x5 
ssl Soy [3339 aaao jla waid soana <~) Ixo; 
JDS aao jx hamna of aal DA aao Ee LoD 
La; soda Miao Dons Mly hasa Le ho oa [Role osealo 
+] Niso Jua sao] Jl [o Jie Ms § offs vanai Jos 
J| salasan, wie Ana pO oh! «9l la ou] Jas 
pow doko xl mead «o xe Cds uso «5 Jes Nso 
Neg M! fos Jods Noll» «oro Lalo as Me» xn Bao 
tplass ere Ladoo poly DA o. pa wel M Pol cod PS] 
lha plasonan oso froth JUN] eo Poll qe» Bess Lul ke 
poly od Ww» onse as JAN] <% iHa lo han? Lsj D ey 
laul > of daal Frags foot Bis o sell l eae asl; S 


1. Ms. om. stop. But perh. something has fallen out. 


girt with rags, and give orders about him that they should. raise him from 
the duugheap, and strip the rags with which he was wirt olf him and clothe 
him in royal rannent, and the king might issne an order « Let evervone 
name this man my son », and, because that poor man found grace in the 
king's eyes, he also conferred upon him the honour of being called his sou, 
so God was pleased to name this man to whom the contention between us 


relates his Son by grace, when he is nol so by nature». And he came to 
an end, The governor says: « What do you say?» — Simeon says : « We 


know that your wisdom will not go astray. Therefore we entreat you by the 
great God (may he prolong your days) oul of all the statements whieh the 
catholicus has made to investigate two, and examine and judge fairly». He 
says to him: « Tell me which ». He says to him : « Since the eatholicus 
slated in the presence of vour highness that an ordinary man hke us was 
born of a woman, let your wisdom put this question to hiu. Whereas we 
are born ofa woman from the seed ofa man, inquire! Trom him as to the 


man who he told vou was born of a woman like us, was he frome the seed of 


lesee pi 39. ne 9s 


foU ae 


150 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [150] 
bI») «26 JM] po] ar QA SO ass} Lado o 436] Joa 
ET. Joa fas] «e ol 2o» a Je] lul £5 où Jt Joo 
noD po] Joa 153). «o ad o wx al PP s) «0 polso Jes 
Jor ods pol haao Looi «2 ahoa oM pl cottage oa faul «aeo 
xe Jot tools banns saoto] hu] £5: broly y> MSc wee 
xus J ne he ce SoS JH] +. Op X00 aA vols! as] e» 
Mal sos Nu) widiore Nol) ba to pull Lxi Hy Lasa, »ool aoo 
Jao tas] [sanna oot Lsa aS el 133). yo hyo Dy hawo ool 
nando aAa tjipa «el «Soto SA Mull y phorum q 
xe] +0001 ganiad Lixezo sr] fay Lauds Lonia col cor y 


jao + sanus ono 0x04 Jian) JAND Jae sue haa carcas 
Ladoo Sadso .arsas o el Jeol o 26] fl sees Mo 
o aaao Lais jo Was JS we ]2S.36 y : phases ol 


1. 2+ erased follows. 


a man like us, or whence was he ».. The governor says to the catholicus : 
« What say vou about these things? Was the man of whom you spoke to 
me from the seed of a man, or whence was he?» But he was struck with 
shame, and he cond not say that he eame Trom seed, He says to him : « lle 
did not come from seed ». He says to him, « And whence is his conception? » 
Ile says to him : « Ht is written that it is from the Holy Spirit». He says 
lo them : « Lo! therefore vou lied when you said that he is an ordinary man 
like us. Lot therefore his conception and birth are not like us, but above 
us; lor we lor our part never heard that a man was born without seed. And, 
if in the case of this man whom you accuse you have yourself on the other 
hand testified that he was born without copalation and without seed, he ts 
not an ordinary man like ns: and by your own testimony you have been 
condemned, and these men speak truth rather than you ». While the party 
ol the helievers were proceeding to extol the governor with praises, Simeon 
says do the marzban : « My lord, let them confess one more point iu the 
presence P your wisdom, and let us dispense with lengthy speech ». He 
sa Sa. What?» Simeon says to him : « Since the catholicus said to 


n S that the hing of kings takes a poor man’s son from a dung- 


151] LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. 151 


£o aul So [laxa hodo Jes) o2: eae aD Usdad 
oà oo) oto": yl Laot ax» os ecco D o fio [2e 
eoo. Jl p oj o» aaao hana oi Stas a v5 iade jo 
use ade ell fool’ eno of sir Lol oS Nl ioo oae ye] 
Jans JI qos clo + fatas L? e Kal paddy Lul ps oóno oo] autre 
oet «ot [aseo qr o£ nuaa) alo pl! la «a6 9.2 
Wo acd] ods, jaana, Laer) o5 yar wrath] Lap% 
Molach Qo fra hs Ns Ne acusa] Jo. NL NS oaa 99 A9ol&2.2o 
Wyo ell JaN «ner earl l oò votes] oan Dos sh 
alo o> 2] oa JASN .2es| Joa Joi. |] xr eausa) 436]. Lyooy 
pol ooo joo Lass „asl Loos bij «o was! Joo Lors wol 
SMALL ups NNS Qo yix» Nol Jo J eura ce hal, 
«xh pelo JND [pepe ND Qaae Qoad30 iad; oe 


heap and clothes him in royal raiment, and orders him to be called his son, 
and therefore by grace everyone calls him the king’s son while he is not his 
sou by nature, let your highness put the question to him : ‘Has that poor 
man's son (though the king takes him and names him his son while he is 
not so according to his own f very statement!) a natural father? Or whence 
was he born?’ Inquire? from him who is the father of the man also of whom 
he speaks. Has he a natural father? and if not let him show in your 
presence whence he was born and who his father is». When the catholicus 
received the questions put by the marzban, with the whole assembly of his 
bishops, they closed their lips and hung their heads, and could not utter a 
word; and when the judge sharply insisted on their declaring the father of 
him of whom they were speak, they confessed thal he was born from God and 
without copulation, 

The governor says : « Therefore if God was his father his son also is 
God. And, if again a man was his father and he eame from the seed of 
copulation like us, he himself also was a mau as you said before. But by the 
words that you have spoken you have refuted and condemned yourself; and 
men who are fewer than you hold the true and sound logieal position, and 


the thing is as they say by your own testimony. ». Then the believing 


1. Or * proper character’. — 2, See p, 39, n. 2 


*a6 vob. 


TES MCA. 


153 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 152] 
woasas . liaa [2.0.2] Vro anda; aoso «6 hu] fase 
arto pilo lasanan J yas Jo fore soa] p2 9000 Mo 


show © SY LAM Qensaluuo Jos yas amas Jlasy Jo J 3L. 


alanaan] M» e| loa c ha tapos pesos pa avis! 
Jeol ence’ Salas, od oot <p JI 00 JKitsyy dso Da Ico: 
saaana, -jla 0.24, ey qx Joa «nag Nse lo Jlaaamaol, 
Jwoase sas] Mas Lose, Joop. Jsanma2] -o042»o JM 
JloilLs lioe Joa ope'Kasc yasi) Kas, mardAraspdiuco looomas/ 
Jlaass >œ Haso oS Ao Joa 2x0 l-m*9 v S L& 
nis NJ eM J38K5N.5 vooo „Joa bas Jil o colo JI so oo 
ve waaa, vol, Jie so Jor s] wasiadoosy frund ones 


«ooo jp CENE 08D) E cm c! uol oog add 
4,009 a9] «rp ooo opa Nhao Jm [2336 re . Laa 
Je Jas 35 ooa -, Lasa.rdpse Joo.nmss] Loa -.aaad yy 


bishops continued giving vent to exclamations (gov%:), saying, « God preserve 
your wisdom and your uprightness many years. God multiply your great- 
ness many times, and grant you a good life ». And so they separated, the 
Nestorians having been put to shame., This was also the occasion of this 
saints episcopate; beeanse they often pressed him to accept ordination to 
the episcopate, and he would not consent; but, after he had come out victo- 
rious, they seized him by foree and made him bishop for a place called Beth 
Arsham', and thereforward he bore the title of metropolitan bishop of Beth 
Arsham. And so he wonld go about in the interior countries beyond the 
Persians and make disciples, and convert men from paganism and Magisin, 
and return again to the same country, and strennously meet those who held 
the impious doctrine of Nestorius in the same contests; and these were again 
inflamed with hatred against him. And some moreover of the most eminent 
among them made ernel aceusatious against him and all the believers. as 
vell before the Persian king, Then he issued an order that all the belie- 


\ bishops. should be arrested, and all the chief arehimandrites, and 


Karba H. Bed. Abbeloos ind Lin. H1. p. don 


[153 LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. 153 


+ Jeo [sacos ascohle aaas.) Lice xA» Loss Qeon No 
vA ous saa basi Jh gaian, basis Jes Moly yl 
Ks où b Sol Say [as cot jasy hoan Lanjo Ls; b Sols ' 
qa VoD Jlasoy hN aseo ED hea asso]; «9 «née 
woke lh] was, [3529 do v8 nJeng «e Slo b Sol «2o 10005 
S Ji JS Js eoe II > „Joa aote e| oa o} hisas, Sadoc 
joa -ha eu Se oà [po] eo w] alo Nfs buses haD 
Ja re ansa Nas [95.2222] «26 LOAD Lol. Jo ENS E 
owa Lo; Qooaas Janaa el Ker CAD cae] v5 
JN hazas, bubs NCC hag coor C con „Jla 
AO o£» xt bag’ Joa aio Nso NJ > Jya Je t Jlasooarsaso 
Ago es. oido op Lasi, coor ve J p2 $0004 «22^ Naso Lood 
waw, LaNa oM Guo. „eaa lu A <> hasa Lese a.a.o] 


1. Ms. om. 9. 


committed to prison at Nisibis; wid thus they were arrested and imprisoned 
in bitter confinement (as is the custom of the Persians who imprison withont 
mercy) for seven years, being subjected to great distress and severe tral 
(6v), so that the mouth is too small for us to describe that distress. And 
then, after their own lives had wasted away, and they were all already 
knocking at the gate of death, from the distress and also from the length of 
time, an account of these things was written to the king of Aethiopia; and, 
since he also was a believer, he made this request though his ambassadors 
of the Persian king, and he released them from that distress. But after a 
time much accusation was again made against them before the king by the 
Nestorian bishops, who said : « Our people hold the faith among all Christians 
and in all kingdoms ». When the blessed Simeon learned these things, he 
came to the king’s court, and strenuously contended in the refutation of this 
falsehood. But the Magians, being mueh worried by them, since they did 
not know how to judge and decide between them, issued an order in these 


terms : « Whoever of you wishes it, permission is given to him to go out 


15^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. 154] 
-frssto [x24] foanmis! ro Ji. Mero hais Jaro So ya Nio 
Nod pal ` 92130 kay Inl Spy roo» Xo cothasra.o1 > Jo 
Jlo ERE jha JN 3s P Ls Lot xt Laag ae o 
aD esl] Ji -fupram Sx soie] aw fhasas onnsd) LB T JNa; 
JED Jlaadso <x je (wh) Jasad haia qdo Je poo 0,30 
aao Nino Jj Jlo - 004 Jogo ado asso Neo, Jer» yl Ul 
wound. JI ~ Jla 30 hasin, Loil woos, - oni NS. Joel Jl pando 
Jad Jo JNa pass La; Lo N>, h: y Joe Le onze ol 
ouo JI Juvoly JINasese Ho ..JLosous Jy lo Jan D JLoshls 
loi Lokio Jes, Lise s. Laa JI] alaan, Jproas flo (eoo edo 
X995 Mada Jlesl| vada jii suo (20 0&e5 Ss fas og 


J Ms. ins, € inil. over tuarg., uppy. in same hand, — 2. Ms. om. 


and go round among the kings of the Christian peoples, and among the 
chief bishops and authorities, and bring us their faith and their seals, that 
we may know which party among you speaks well and shows great cor- 
rectness ». Bat this earnest blessed man, when he heard these words, 
rejotecd with great jov; and from the ardour of his zeal, since he had thus set 
lis Face to the task, the labour of going! from peoples to peoples, and [rom 
kingdoms to kingdoms was not reckoned by him as anything at all, but he 
undertook this with joy as something Hight and easy and of no moment ?. 
And he set out at once. withont delay in his zeal, in order to traverse the 
frontiers of the peoples aud the kingdoms, not being hindered or frightened 
by fear of anything, not of the great length of the intervening space, nor 
the dangerous character of the countries on Recount of robbers, nor the 
erossines of the rivers; nor the long distances to be covered, and, what is 
greater than all, not even the burden of his old age; but thus, in coufideuce 


ou God and the ardour of his burning zeal, he made light of everything, and 


L Ms om, x The renon for the journey ean hardly have been as here slated, sinee the Por- 
i would have no object in inking the inquiry and kuew well that the Nestorians differed from the 
Hie empire aad therefore favoured then Moreover it was to the interest of the Nesto- 
ss apen the difference, nol to deny doef poli. 07. Bark. doc. says Chats. obtained 
hing to onmeenraze the Menophlissiles te hobl their services freely and to defend them 
" wdding lii he reecived certilieales tram Greeks, Armenians, aud Syrians, 

Fare tle Nestotians, 


(155] LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHO 155 


Lasis Mh, fsas no hiako Lge ‘Lupia J—53 akyan 
.Jasealo LENS Lose goles Sol: JI 32. KAL], JLà3S soo 
NI ojos jS so JN Jans Ringed Joys Q8 M5 < [5152 
Lag Snot Jor ddl; Qe; Jlasijes - ado, DI; JSN 
jay? 92 Jj p roas DA hh aD y oò hasana 
< 0 ipa P «xus Ji fils LaZ2ws: flofl, od <% ipo Jio onago 
war dacs JL. LENS pay SAN on] Loss, od ol soraso ‘oo fl ol 
ado ois -Joa Jooty JRL, brea. ode o. foot SL; ^ La Sc 
lsh sy Ie jo) Slo Lio manao, Jord jas p? OLSON Joa NS. sso 
> plo Joa jas Jya p50 Joa pa Joa Syl's oaa haas, Jes 
Jo-S« | caseo NLSN Nooa Kayo Lao »^ bors; NaS p 
ch xe Joa xu aa uotaranio olaand flo lo «od Lo 


1. Ms. 0% 


set out and travelled in all countries im which the preaching of Christ had 
set foot, eastern and northern and southern, wherever there were peoples 
and kingdoms to whom the preaching of the gospel (:b2y-2..0v) had penetrated, 
in the east and the north and the south; but toward the west he came only 
as far as the royal city, and he ended his course there, the third time that he 
came up', while we were present there. The good and merciful God there- 
fore, who does not fail to reward zeal for his name, on seeing the man's 
purpose of mind and his zeal, and that he underwent weariness no less than 
that of the apostles without shrinking, himself also bestowed upon him in 


no less degree than upon them his gift that was given to the apostles, of 


speaking with new tongues. For, whatever people's country he entered, 
on the third day that came he would speak with them in their own tongue, 
thanking God who had visited him. And xo also he even delivered an expo- 
sition in the chancel (zua) in the churches of all the peoples to whom he 
went; and on this aecount he would declare and say to us with tears, « In 
this matter T recognised clearly that God had visited me and strengthened 
me, and that he had not withheld his grace and his mercy from me ». But 


1. The second veeasion is not mentioned, unless two visits are here iitended, the third. being 
that recorded below (p. 157, 1. 6). 


156 JOURN OR EPHESUS. [1561 | 


Jh3o|: ada Lo lana ac Ala yaaa L% M lo foo dio 
wi Woo. -.Jyo1 S seo S sen s Ns lo JA1eslL.3: JLS JS ass 
Laso; L28gzo as Nas Lod unas, aspan JI; JS No, Jipa 
jd randy SU Js, Ni aac Janel «asl * yateoJo LN, 
Waa No ood ` J? oD, y |J cogo: EET ]isezorsocs 
Jà4e Joo ols saasaa io] a <% Joana [sa doy Janaa 
uaa oA laani od haan aD JLassasot <% Sod. x! 


f} 
) 


«22058» Saas Loa r Joa ipaa Soto xot bords Joa wad’ pablo 
Falamansa aao ye y» joo £x fisada Cat cM Dano 
JL suo Jasia, Jlatrasor [10019 NOAS tasg valaa S sos ] 5-5 4o 
Xeso ye Kas fads poao Joor au» qo ‘Lloyds Lego Lids 
ooo, wot [1.5363o -Joa Sy] awai, oà han- Mire Pedy 


]. e ans, in marg. m another bid. — 2. Fins; above line, — 3. Corr. from bei: — 4. Ms. sing, 


he reflected, « What parchments (yars) and what rolls are capable of going 
through all this wear of long and protracted journeys through the countries 
without being torn to pieces? » And for this reason, and in order that the 
certainty of the writing might remain without suspicion of alteration, he made 
ereat linen. cloths and medicated them, so that they might take writing, 
whieh also will, 1 think, be preserved by ihe believers in the land of the 
Persians Tor ever; and on them he would accordingly write the belief of every 
people in their own language from their archbishops, and above the belief he 
allixved the seals of the hing of that people and of the bishops of the same 
and of their chief men in lead upon these eloths, and thus confirmed it, acling 
thus among all peoples and all tongues among the believers‘, going about 
and taking their belief and the seals of their soverans and of their. high- 
priests. Amd thus be collected the belief of many peoples and of many 
tongues on these cloths. Awl he turned back alter seven years and went 
) 


away iP sand, while he was ou lis way back, the king in whose days he had 


farted died, amd the magnates who had been umpires. and his son succeeded 


Motinphissiles:— Fherefore he went onb lo those who agreed with hiu. What kings 
of Abyssinia amelan Atab shatkho or Iwo are meant is not easy lo see. — 2 This 
tau from below. — a. Kawal who dk sept, 331, 


(157 LIFE OF SIMEON THE BISHOP. NA 
„Lama; jlesll.s joa par! lano Dawo ois ons zaoo expo 
Lwa; Jills; xe Qoo Ji Ldsoss ro, + do Ja [re 
pP, "xao <>! «oa ja xus haa of haas sana, Nsell 
Loy Le Las - coeds col Mjo 4i os Mo «92380» No ono 
Joot amy, JI Ss. Loo loli o .. Lot Jar. ts Sus os Joa paso 
Lao JND, La; Loads JNa aso Dha Lasoo, JND Jods 
joa aans joas Jlosl -loa I2 [e haaa z-seco S so i 
loa haao foy ro Sly DSA SS NN ao uas ws 
Jos J -a— L5 p Je JNa; [sj wl “ot. dso uso ola Ns 
ag paso a Joa clo -faapo Adar Jo Juo LoD Loot Jya 
oa Sly [ra] orano, fare! me} Jlaapas "xao! llo ose: [2.30 
WIAA AAD haard JN} Od „waas foa oaa, . JiKrrsoo laas 


jroo fam, aX dX o0020-5 NS Da p + Joot 30 «5 fasts was;,s 


I. Ms, oio. — 2, Ms, eee. 


him; and he proceeded to stir up war in the territories of the Romans‘, and 
his appearance before the authorities was not carried out. But it became 
known lo all men living in the country of the Persians that the evil doctrine of 
Nestorius flourished there only, while all peoples and tongues abhorred it; 
and this glorious old inan was yet more emboldened against them, In this 
same zeal then some occasion called him to go up to the queen of the Romans, 
to ask her for a letter to the chief queen of the Persians about the affairs of 
the believers, aud, if it were possible, to go up in the same zeal to the terri- 
tories of Rome. And she gladly consented, because she had in fact been 
well acquainted with his earnestness and his zeal for some time: and she 
detained him there for the space of one vear, holding him in great honour. 
And God saw the saint's labour, and that he had grown old and very feeble. 
and his signal gave command and he fell asleep there, in our presence; so 
that his presbyter who himself also was devout and. virions, whose name 
was Paul, lived with us in the domicile of the glorious. patrician Probus for 
two vears?, while at all seasons we meditated together upon the eloquence 
L Not till 538. His first act was lo make peace (833; Chr. Edess;, A. 7.833, Zach Rh 1, 7 


2. Probably 540-542; see Introd. and Dyakonov, p. 50. ziüneon's stay ii Constantinople will. then 
have been 539-540. 


* 


38r b 


ie JOHN OF EPHESUS. t158] 
chaika ariaa . Haosa Naad, vooskläso worasacmso «93304 
Jlasradso oh wise „200l vole Ribas LjmunasajSle Lago 
Jluas Jo Jie Joa pad Adagio «ooi oa Naon [3799 
vores] leas poni <œ] Joa oio yo acy Jh haai led 
Loss Slo aaa vs Ji Wl eiN5;a) hiraad, pul frond, o 

slats Jeson florenos s. Na seus las of 


rain dance pase sina mur Anl 
erwi 


rfSangmuaSrea j,91u» "niei ana rfóuxzó “aah. 
dues road a 


£o Jiao “foto Exon fate H Jes voi. Lue e» haag 
So Jilaso o» Jas wohl - ohio woos | Od AMAR) AM 


1. Ms, #9 — 2, This ch. is in P, f 186 r° b. Bos — 3. B om. — 1. Ber — 5. B Ipo bi 


ol the holy old man Simeon and on his treatises and his proceedings against 
the heretics (aiz:stzzu, Nestorians and Manichees, and followers of Bar Daisan 
amd Eutychianists; since he also eomposed a work of instruction and books 
of objections against the hereties, and he write many letters on the faith to 
many believers everywhere, some of which in the saint's own handwriting 
we inherited in order to supplement his blessing. But at last that presbyter 
also as well fell asleep in the same city, bearing the testimony of a devout 


manuer of lfe. 
The history of Mar Simeon the bishop the Persian debater is ended. 


XD Nrxr TH ELEVENTH misTORY, or Hanrvr tie chorepiseopns 


TROM FAL COUN ERY OF ANZETENE '. 


This blessed man belonged to a distinguished, great, and rieh family 
and, when all the members of his family yivog), his parents iuelnded, 


Lial the whole household and the wealth were left in this man’s hands, 


[159 LIFE OF HARFAT. 159 


* 


oà oo — joo 4x0) Linn! mig po vps] Sr slo Loon 401043 
ad loo Lannoo Sass haso,> aao aM, y> taro Joo NY exo = 
3 aao Aao Joo fais op fico ey Loc iade: prams col 
oo ed SD JLor eso p „Kolana! ! aas laso JN ex 
aaas, Liojasyo hawo -sotoptf> loa Laam, yo ogo oan H 
floss yo Iän Hyams S Aso -oaa loo banna e| p jon Sa pe 
nats joo asw isoo Jess MO pA} Lasso .: Jf az 240 Je lo 
Taza voll £e wparskse “oes jja Jes. a e Jie DA lo 
Jaanas, frsad o of ypa So qoli “jedeo JNa qaa 
J N-03, “feo mos! o Sudo hasy v! iNo joa au Ne won 
asd foaomad! lose 7s voona, oblo -Nao Mess] Loio 
Lion ok c o£ jha ae OES vcr oo JI aor aoo JJa-9la.s-5 wo 


1. B om. — 2, B sing. — 3. B ins low. — ^. D ins. bs. — 5. b owo — o. D dd c web 
eol xz. — s. B gelo: — 9. D pm 1922225]. 


and also in the hands of another kinsman older than he; and he practised 
deceit and was a man of artful tricks and a dog like Nabal’; aud he was 
moreover engaged in the affairs of the praetoriani?. Bwt this virtuous Harfat 
lived in pure and simple fashion and spent a guileless life within the house like 


Jacob?, having committed the whole management of it to that kinsman of 


his; and he himself as far as he vould gave his attentiou to the needy aud 
to the salvation of his soul, while his soul was indeed vexed aud he was 
distressed at the multitude of male and female slaves, and hired servants 
and outsiders, and the other luxuries of the household; and he would think 
in himself, and say : « Wherefore do I need all this parade, while debtors go 
on bringing interest and bonds continue to be exacted every day? »; but 
the blessed man was oecupied with thoughts that were adverse to these 
things, After a little time the bishop of a place called Arsamosata died, 
and they came to make the blessed man bishop, that is in the Clalcedonian 
communion‘; but he shrank from this, When they saw that this man had 


absolutely refused, under the inducement of riches aud high position they 


1.1 Sam., xxv, 3. — 2. Se. the civil servants in (he governors office Jen GUTES NX eae 
^. This would be nol eartier than 519, and we tind in fact a Monopliss te bp. of Arsantosata at thal 
lime (Zach. Rh.’, vni, 5). 


TD SS A 


fasse Dye 


sh dise" h. 


PEN, SUM aly 


160 JOUN OF EPUESUS. [160] 


OM P» 005 aad -Jlasio files DA SN] Mofo 
Taopik Laaa} Joa wl -Joa yo | [oae] "oto 330 » pasar 
J| odo .La iz obo: 3 corso og OIL Sus y JNa saan Diu, 
met Lw ' "ooo —1 Age Naso J aata set = Lane] 
Xj] eà po e» JM jo «o Ao -Siten Dose tos") pal 
Sag! Joe m "oes Maaso jene Laag 7, ots 205a 8s 
"YP el, ol vào six eoe Nu] wv No] Lex e£ o£ wg 


JN «x2» «niue [apse Jae <% Aa Ip 


whois Jj Lupo lao 
Judas ol CN wos rsa ent ey rel yc Lolaa Dz 
Pado .jlaspans], Paa aiso is; haia oÀ “Ylasancns) jas 
Jijse lhaa Syl BEEN Laxas alo -2 MO Tg Joa Lardy 


MOANA FO0 wAopsfso od p25 x) uà Pasa axle fastoo [5530 


|. p Basah oS. 2, ope. — 3. B owiha — 4. D ohh] fH bas. — 5. B loo uats. — 
6, p RSS. — 7. Kins eo — 8, D «3: eooynisy. — 9, B SSIs — Io. B epe. — IH. Here 
begius an extract in D, f. 537 v^, headed : Hier IS sal oo — 12. D thaMom.9! p [LadomS]. — 11, D 
ii» or p pl. — 14. DB ins. o init, — 15. D orat sso Ss. 


seized his kinsman, a layman, and made him bishop; and, when he had 
became bishop. the blessed man continually required of him to divide the 
estate; in order that he himself might distribute his share (2203) among the 
needy, and he would not agree, saying, v While F live, ad shall not be 
divided ». Now they had abont five thousand denarii, besides all the rest of 
the estate, and, when that man had gone to his see, the blessed man 
distributed as much as he could among the needy, and committed the rest 
lo our Lord, saying, « Lord, thon hnowest the readiness of my mind, and 
the facto moreover: that neither hast. thou commanded me to continue in 
contention and shife. Henceforth, Lord, dispose thou my wretched soul 
to Jive before thee according to thy will». 
Then the blessed man left the house and the otliee of the chorepisecopate 
hich he had held for some years, and withdrew to à convent of the solitary 
l And, beeause be was very simple, and thought that this was the 
unmalion of perfection, he went and made great heavy irons and pnt 


Ihem upon himself, that is on bis neek and on his hands and on his Teet, 


[161] LIFE OF HARFAT. 161 


el o Js 36 cM o INM Say pa Jado Chy Sy lo wes. Qh 
„Joa DK oa Jia ds hoa JI] jac of Law pag o) Ce Joe J 
lose op ado’ aaa, xo haia fon Sr sonas [ano Da 9 
hola co! Xoo AO Bad Joa Jone Laj et E CNJ 
Jla LN Seo Mlio; Lisa JH » Jlopo Lao ro They 
ose” Jo lex» pe hujas -.JMrsaso4s0 SESS oe "Je JN]. oem nem. 
.,O ooot RII JL oo ol e S[sxJ[35o LASS fao jos Chu 
fas, pod Led pe flo gro JD boon sha pas Dee vot fro, 
pens 30 Loa liso "Nul Jes o oo Kal uooti Aae Mu) [ius 
pe ^ NN. [rsa v? ooo Naa [oai y goa polarce * A 391^ b. 
Ja Nw faisse lja as £o 5o wan oS cates xot Joa rds 
Vand yd fas J wits l andes se] 49 Jes Dre aD Joo Oly È omes. 


1. B eio oue. — 2, B Migs — 3. B om. — i. PB hel Lole. — 5. D ins. 1555 (from IT 
Kings, tv, 8, — 6 D om. A L in erasure, — 7. B pe hatad oS Lea. — s. p P320 basal. — 
9. B ins. «ev: — 10. B ins, peo. — 11. D. kyle Has ,» ute eoo ote. 


two on each. Aud lie went and settled ou a certain mountain about three 
miles from the cultivated land, and he did not take or recetve any part 
whatever of his property, hut he would. sit thus on that mountain, mourning 
and weeping and groaning for the rest of life whieh had been spent aud had 
passed from him in vain. But, when he had stayed a eousiderable time in 
these mountains, ir consequence of the quantity of snow and the severity of 
the cold the blessed man suffered great distress and was brought to the 
point of death. Then a certain believing lady made a hut for him. and in it 
he would sit and weep night and day, though many said to him, « What is the 
cause of this weeping of yours that is thus incessant and not for a limited 
season? — The mau who weeps out of sorrow for his sins has seasons. 
Why do vou thus weep like a baby over your eatiug and your silting down 
and your rising up? » But, when he heard these words, the blessed man’s 
sols would rose all the more, aud his very speech to the man who was 
addressing him was mingled with weeping, while. die expressed himself 
saying, « Who, my sons, will not weep. when he sees a decayed and putrid 


PATI. OR. — T. NVII. — F. 1. Jo 


"SISSE Ii 


A ERS S 


162 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (1627 
hasan ds ui Ss von fly asso owas eso flanseo Lie) jj $a 
“ 90010 -!oatto, Jlaso Wal Ea) JNa euo Jope vines 
Sar oulo JI d: Pape fioe oò sS Ihpsis [Slo Joo Lao 
wo 993 Ras foflsd; Jaspar JNuoy ams Cw scansione Nets 
JN Jdinso jon SIN Jeune NS] JI Ese faa] «toot Lior 
hasin do "oiio fired: eS Janiso "Yarns Loo 
Rifas Addo Opn? WIP Jas] !J hand ANSEL lex» Jive Lim 
"Nas S pe» cas! Maddy rods D poil JE aail Nay flo 
oà «Lars Joug Jas i 7 Mo MMs Jor Laco Koy Jio 
Joor wy fats} aa ad be Wojexe "Jos 2Q2» od raia 
Sx Jiop hs pel Jla Lolo sfion y Do poi'lo [|| depo 
eds) QS aoi eis WA Marisol) caps CR Nope) zs 


|. B sine. 2. Erasure follows du A. — 32 D Niye — D Ini. — 5. D «sing. — 6. B lee 
wees con p EL — s B om, — t. D BEES. — 10. B ins. Mpy — 1E. B ius. ew — 12. Ins. in 
mars. du AB fin A da another hand — 13. B ins. Ioja — 15. ts ius, Ghee tly — 15. B see 


corpse Thrown down in his house? Who will. not mourn for the sons of 
youth Mir to behold) and of attractive age, when he sees that death has 
corrupted their features, and they bave become mire and putrescence and 
loathsome worms in place of the attractive beauty of elildliood? And, if 
men weep for these with sobs, how shall E not now wail bitterly for my 
wretched sont thal was fashioned in the likeness of angels with all beauties, 
and lo! is dead m sim aud decayed through evii deeds aud cast down inthe 
house ol the body, ind in which corrupt and abominable thoughts ereep about 
like worms? How shall £ iot weep for my moments that have been speut 
by me in vain without my. perceiving ih? How shall 1: not monrn for my 
days that E have uselessly wasicd one by one without knowing it? And now 
lo! the terrible sentence of torment is prepared for ime, which the workers of 
iniquity deserve! For His reason | ought not only to weep, but also to 
mourn and wall dike a jackal aml increase mourning as of a jickal's whelp 
for my fife that has been spent. for my moments that have been consumed, 


formy years that have been lost; for my Cine that bhas been wasted, for my 


[163] LIFE OF TARPAT, 163 


LL Beower SS ca Ney Ju. DA Mets DN use as Gout 
om ed OAs bes oà Wes -Jla Ios Ls Tay oà So SRL 
[5a 2. wago ora S jo saos] NIST sJleKsso. hli o Maddy 
20 «30 Jasa aa] wis of us ee wohl «3S3 «vl Sx so L2 
oi isc hasu coor kas Da EN [ase AD Nas [aq ouo 
p20 Joa MN y? Sad. Taago adol fads bos -taNo Joos! 
ha p20 Joa Lasag obprd Joliosy «el ao dad CH dor 
? Joy r OA Lans] HD Q2 xo Lao cola do ! «Ml “apo 
we Slo - Jhoppto Jie» q> Jo Ja se» ootNalo «Noo 
ww Y OMA dO oA «lo |». 420 x95 Jljz-9: Jaano 
Lo Joas Jio DA o8 «290 "slo zalan J INS so, "NY pone "Diva 


| D. Sso. — 2, Bins, [hutaso. — 3, B Hass. — 1. Bom. — 5. B hags — 6. 1: loo iodo- — 


7. D edasse: — s, B jas loj. - 00. Ho bhaail D basa. — 10, D gil 


soul that is dead in sin, for my body that has been made à grave during my 
life, for my son} that is dead in evil deeds, tor the judgment that has arrived, 
for the end of lile that has overtaken me, for the terrible sentence of justice, 
for the moment when the command will go forth, * He who hath not wedding- 
garments, let his hands and his feet be bound and let him be cast into outer 
darkness’'. And Tor what reasons, pray, O men, do vou advise me to cease 
crying woe upon my lfe at all moments? » And thus this man used to cause 
all men to marvel and be amazed, nntil the report of his mortification and of 
his atliction penetrated to every place, And, when we heard these things, 
we made it our object to obtain a sight of this blessed man. And, having 
done this, we went and entered his presence; and so we found him in the 
sume state, silting in dejection, and in great infirmity on account of the 
labour and the abstinence, as well as from the weight of these irons. And, 
when we had enjoyed his society for a day and two days, and had gained 
freedom (2255552) of speech in his presence, and continued saving to hun 
« Wherefore, O our father, have vou burdened your body with the weight 


ol all this iron? », he said to us, « On aeeount of my sins», And, when. * 


l. Matth, , xxi 31, 


*ARayeh. 


SRS: 


10^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. [164] 


poo oor INS Wee XS “pol i asl of Mandl ye ado Py 
der Laag hol) eA Weed sob -oa Pho «209 ecol! ol 
pss Jaan, [Psd 5 RD Aur ie ho Joal Hyza Jyo 
LA DSS jiga po od aaao T y Jh i sj 
>} jio oe facto AD +>] Jha uko Joa fas Soa 
v? eM lus] eias Ila] wpa D v5 vc hl ada oN 
Jii», Joa le honam froas oon Ne] TFS oce yaik, qin 
Laak Gy oof JADI MG] aire haao Janka cody oor Ss 
Pausa auis ON oot cales exo] e» mco oat! Jror J NS s 
oed sas «or oo Srl Xho; Nasa] waads Llo Hyo qo Jle 
Sese cr sudes Jan] cac JLas SQsoo vote © Spoor eel 
wo Wy y e001 vp z Apr a nude SX Root Cama 


pando Jis» fuprasoy - asl Ee eje jon of «el «pase 


L B bor B9, — 2 
pomnts. stand above l 7. Bins; #3 -— 8. B ins. wv s De — la, B Syo — IL D sing. — 
D Tims, ov o d3 Bee wce3.. pae a |i does wall! uge — 14, D ins, loo followed by e 
cancelled. In, [oS Lpsotlo. gdo HS. — go TS wid. — 17 D Da HDS oro D oto Dor lsd. 
— In. B ins, el. 


Bb oa I gao gial s Ti ita pa — 5. Th pl — 6. 1n AD 


we were on another oceasion conversing with, him, we again said to him : 
« What regulation commands this matter of the irons to be carried out? », 
and, « H we seek fo humble our body to the earth by labours of asceticism, 
cannot we humble it without irons? »..— Afler we had addressed many words 
to the blessed man, he continued to weep and sigh : and at last he said to us : 

And now, sir, what do you wish done 2». And L joking a little with him, 
said to him: « We wish you to throw off these irons which are a useless 
burden, and Jade yourself instead of them with the burden of labours 
performed with knowledges and thus vou will please God». But ihe blessed 
man was much annoyed at these words, saving, « H were better for me that 
ms head were removed and not these irons». And ] turned upon him with 


the words :« For what reason? » Buthe in his simplicity said, « On aecount 
lu ins, and on account of the stumbling-block put in men's way ».. Bul 
vo pitied the infirmity of his body, and wished to remove these 


iron kim, said to him : « Lo! therclore see, our father, that the matter 


[165] LIFE OF HARFAT. 165 
Joas coors ML | ere wy Joi. Led uao] teases: las ` faoa 
SS JN, Koso fa Go aan aa body, Ll Neo Jii 
Qj Jor; oot, od 3o poy, cns Noka EST £22 JJ Je 
wd ua L] axo bl o uso aad) s.l. war use a8 
eó pas sec joi ty wot yopoardo .pas Sa 40 Jind, c 
t. pdagire umi. vx» vol 2óp! Rma y yo eu. "ool 
Is, Less. I pe paso alana A aN Lido, dor Joya pas 
< Tijjpas Aul auw wotlasls [212-20 E JE asl Mal 
y H hoa Loo cost Jus tarseo JU] asl J P Jos 
xoxo -jpo MAD, pS cnn top] Tol «uuo MG] fade l 
No] JL pcan ge Nel “Last 1 IIo. pao Jayoo No] Lair nd 
wt aot qty pelo aix wy cosas Kodo edo p ca hoak SNH 


1. B 5:9» lows c% NS. — 2B exl 2 — 3 Bom — 6. D om. B on. bol. 25, Here the 
extract in D ends, — 6. B ins. «es — 7. B p for >. — 8. B Ol pels pl ev os Bo ln B boo 


of the irons is addressed only to men, but there is nothing in them that brings 
near to God: but | even fear lest they lead away from life; since God gave 
no commandment about irons. But, if we seek to conduct ourselves according 
to knowledge and fulfil God's commandments, we shall hear from him what 
he said, * Learn of me for I am mild and lowly in my heart’, and, « Whoever 
smiteth thee upon thy cheek »; and first ‘Thon shalt love the Lord thy 
God'; and again * Thou shalt tove thy neighbour as thyself’; and again 
‘Whoever will take thy cloak’ ', besides the other things which the Lord 
taught and commanded us in his preaching. If, our father, you wish to 
please the Lord, it is by these things and by the others that are like them 
that you will please; but by irons God will never be pleased; but they even 
become sources of detriment to the soul... For now, as von said, vou are a 
sinner; and we or others who see you with irons hanging on vou think to 
ourselves that von are a great and holy man, and a worker of miracles. 
If you are so, you do well in hanging irons on yourself », When the blessed 


man heard all these things, his heart trembled and he said : « IH itis so, and 


T. Weg SA, 202 VE BU RATT BT, SUE V. 40. 


UT gaa 


*TAIsSt yb. 


Ne Tis 


*PUsseca. 


nan 


oe aa es 


166 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [166] 


auol hl Qoob bile. Hag Ll peated Jul bro I 2e [pcan dso 
jyan rA Ae Jljc2o. Se APRES oaa) paral Loa poas ado 
ass ^ oor SS, “Sxade [aas JI so cra S] oue Jum La. 
Jp2op> hsoa + othe «1390 935 Lais fasy iNo <% ol, haas? INE 

ela; Lh qu ee fioo . 20A 1a ns] [id 


iro pod jaa Larus rduascdh Aon 


edi rehni redes reae hóa eduard ľad 
Lara malas mua ral “his sam pindi 
hha relha hina ram madur? 


Jlo ja NMA sass Lao: 1.00!) SML Loi wanas <P 
Ja : + 09 wet. JK Sas 11433 «ooh ol, UXOR Mul] E Www" 


Lier 2 Bom. — 3 This eh. is in E, foo v5 — i. K IDeal dame, guas jan. 
(sic) [Xero [late abel Say 5 A Mae — 6. A corr. fron eas 


they tend Co cause loss, | do not desire to sulfer loss; for as for me it is my 
earnest endeavour to amass gain, and not loss ». And so he committed 
himself to our Lord, and to us; and by the aid of many strong men we took 
these irons olf him: and thenceforth he subjugated himself by double labours 
in their place, insomuch that aller seven years we returned to him, and we 
found him thus living a hard life; and thns he ended his days with great 


glory, 


The history of Harjat the chorepiscopus ts ended. 


NII. — NEkNT THE TWELPEIE HISTORY, OF TWO. HOLD SISTERS, WIO WERE 
CALLED DNUGHTElRS. OF THE GIELE BEST AND ONE PERIOUMED. HER TASK IN 


AMIDA, AND THE ATER EN THELEA DMAUZLATHU, 


Inasmuch as we learn from the divine Paul who says that in Christ Jesus 
is no male nor female’, it bas seemed wood 1o us to introdnee the history of 


persous also who were by nature females; for the subject of their lives does 


Toa Nels IN, ah (See p.e 175 5 bul, as the word as in fhe absolute gaby. nol the 
u domisli nol be rendered as a proper tame, — 2. Couslantiia. — 3. Gal, HI 28. 


[167] LIVES OF MARY AND EUPIIEMIA. 167 
Ne poo Jae: JN s zal, jipan «odes jipa ma JI ENS NS 
Qo re ne Dy Joo} Lio] on cS UL so. cop oot gous J ols 
JNa aac Jr of - fotos opao JI] -o "às TA 
v Jay | d Jingo wot coth] Jal JNa v9 Sao 
JNZso s. co OI EESTI Jao shoa hoho zaspao hanso 
Laino Jlaopaso fade ala c9 oU» Nae hoor òda] JNa, 
ol Jla- M5 HN oso JNa? Jha yo JE eo Jiono [30043 Laso; 
Lasto oà Jilbso Azai aoh, aaa Aao Daa ha Jlasraska 
OL dans pasotlo ja co) os ., Naxos] Soy Lojas ayy Jasa, 
Koha lo JS Sey JN a0, re Meo » Kars o Kano aot £p 
Jol eH pog JNSJo ena! INL sel Lano loo ‘Jiao 
JKaco JN, ops £20 MODS ede) «2o ep AS Eo 
«rob co Amas Joa Jaano Ja eo Solo ` loo oL NA] INS so 


|. E pl... - 2. Bengo (sic), -= 3. E oes. — 1, Mas. 1oso; eorr. v, D. uud L. — 4. X ins. eo 
6. A with 9 inil, erased, 


not fall short of the standard of the series of the histories of the saints: since 
neither is the course of life of these persons lower than that of* the high 
path in which each oue of these walked, but their habits of hfe also are 
great, and surpass written narratives. These virtuous blessed women then 
were sisters in the body, of whoin one, the elder, was called Mary, and one 
Euphenia. But this Mary was a pure. virgin, aud ehose for herself 
from her clildhood quietude and renuntiation and great labours of fasting 
and nich watching, iid constant prayers, and exertion in the way of charity 
or of pilgrimage. This woman therefore formed the phu of gomg up to 
Jerusalem, aud in the holy country in whieh the dispensation for the sake ol 
the salvation of all was carried out there to worship and retiru to her 
employment?. When then she had gone up and prayed, she stood before 
the place called Golgotha, and was lifted np with eestasy, and she remained 
standing there three days aud three nights, while men came and saw her; 
aud the custodians wished to drive her away; and on seeing that she was a 


feeble old woman, and further that she was standing in prayer they let her 


|. Rie syr. — 2. Se. aseclic exercises. 


* 


nq 


Ns 


EA bah. 


168 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [168] 
JAM Jy ox NS Jad po Jaai olo . sol Jasa fos Loo 
JA Jus «RAI Joi loa Daw Jaszas yar flo sul, Loa Is 
Jais Mas 'Loa laho JU] tloa Laxia xixri£& yopa ol Jo +, Loot 
“cone ssl ~] Llo Ae clo «oo: Lac] so hes aala JNa 
aS adl] lo .JLaso Sipel Loa [Aras -Loo JLaoNas fas] -. "e —À 
ven» So whe do rel e» loa Laas J| wol mer gias 
loa hj oia qe cadres vo Loot [sàn ns oo wool 
Lisa JN S-> Lrastyo «cits Laopo eat paises frauds 
au] Joa JE? flo Joa a ee? J toot Ji Naso CwoNumse, sdo? 
beo Pendeds frxsilo JINNIo «fuse Loo ES NS -Loa Laorans, foul 
JI.onen.> pol Jasaan dhussh haso -LaNa e loa Jou [Nai 
Jo ORAS «Mo Joh t2 Joa 2ote Nu] Js au re aolas ~? 


I dtu. 2. Point above in. E. 35. Erasure follows in A (E 0005 


alone. And from that time she used to sit there in the temple, and again 
she continued going round and praying Por three years, without. entering 
anyone's honse or speaking with human beings. And she did not sleep 
outside the church, or yet ash uything from human beings; but she would sit 
among the poor and pass the night with them, m the church and wherever 
Homeht bet. And, if it chanced that anyone came and gave charity in the 
place where she happened to be, she would stretch out her hand and receive 
iy and, af the sum received by her reached twenty minae, she would nol 
afterwards accept anything more: and, if she received. more than twenty 
minae, she wonld give them to someone else; but with these twenty she 
would buy bread for Aileen minae, and herbs for two, and pulse for three; and 
so whenever it happened to be she would take her food. But, if ib elianeed 
that no one came to the place where she happened to be, she would sit in 
the same way, and for three aid four days, and as much as a week she 

Est sent, with her mind wrapt np in heaven. Usually her seat was 


in ol Golgotha, while she sat with her eyes raised, and looking 


l Dis will the stateimenlbabose Thal sbe never passed a nieht eutside the church. 


169] LIVES OP MARY AND EUPHEMIA. 169 


eb koo [anas saa 49 haa Josie Jory od pal «frase foko rn o 
of Jna pol coking seht rael Jasoa Loot ‘fas. yeas so pa Lon 
E «o» Ka jio t A> 0001 qi NS [da x ~ y "AM rta, 
x 003300 HX ooo Kady! fos! oh oll wos CO nts KSI 
Jo Habid ead" Lo - Jaq pre fous danaslo -iao Loora 
wor AKAD alaso .. o. Op KARAT + do] far 490 Jaano Jalo -ò 
hul sasa wero aol Lass Sue loot Jus, Hy Sese INS] «a 
Sed cx JNarsagy dro, loy. Ss “Jha eor ngado 
pels cot Naaa o Jage Suc 0004 qeaasoho „alaaa Laopo 
Lau Jaang DA o3 polo oeAieXx Loot hansa NaN Jaco 
ERAN qad aspa !J sae J 329 y e Malin? Laj Ls ol loo * E ov 


Nor <> pel ks pa Ja] <! =o AO Dh oN qaaa 
2 l <> Kor aisa oa» poolo paul fos) was <% fradss 


EDS. — 2, E (sie) aei an, fart eo 3s ES ISa. 4 Over erasure in A; € ins 
above line. 


in eestalie wonder and weeping, just as if she were looking at God fastened 
to the cross amd standing there, with the result that, white she sat there 
in admiration every day, those who saw her looked upon her as a mad 
woman, or as some oll person who had become silly; and thus she 
eompleted three vears there in her praying. And afterwards some persons 
who knew her and were well acquainted with her adinirable modes of lite 
eame thither and found her sitting before Golgotha with her eyes raised and 
looking at it, and weeping with eestatie wonder. And on seeing her they 
fell down and made obeisance to her, and saluted her; but she was troubled, 
because she did not wish that men should know her there. Then. these 
persous told many about the perfect modes of [ife of the blessed. woman 
from her childhood down to her old age, and many marvelled at her. And 
thenceforth those in whose eyes she had been reckoned as a foolish old 
woman, and as if she sat there for the sake of charity in order to live the 
bodily life, began to honour her as a great and holy woman, entreating her 
to pray for them. But the blessed woman when she saw it, inasmuch as she 
was struck with fear lest she should be honoured by me1 and lose her labour, 


fled thence immediately, being distressed at her expulsion from the holy 


120 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (1703 
aias [sy o5; Lou] Jaro sd Joo, G30; daase Sx Lorre 
INg Lose scolo Nas haoo Joal J.5o03 0612: Loot kand <. 
eaae n JNa Jla limao Joal Je JKasy «Jaa dy aaas Nawo 


Jamol [ssam Lara p - boot jao facts oaia oaa JEN, okas 
yD eared. eis J~ ul +, ord hoot I flo ut Loeb» Loot Ls 
AD Joa pr jady pe jen DJ Jes arg J ex jene 
Jas Was -jla bot er aS Kea, loot Lasi Jasoto | es frasio! aaia 
-Jawo Jlasäso Jla j> Jaxe]IK3eoo. loa hasa +2 oiu AMOR. No 
cry. baso aAa fadr4o loot Jasa oa col [12000 ot. weds No 
9e «o Do àles.Lo Qo JL JL ol, Lee» +, Shape hao Ap 
Jlo Joa loa eo Moo y T% KH} VA 0001 «ano GN S soo 
Joa b>, wal clo od Joa pols g2 y Jer s GX Joa wu 
iaaa qo fior Jos "Loot Jyo E vd LOS Joa Jp J ol, Sep 


LA be (eorr, from paste) boio — 2, E om. 


place, inasmuchas she had intended to remain there in that occupation all her 
lifetime. And so she departed, and went down again to the East ; and she 
determined that all her life she would once every vear offer worship in the 
place where God suffered. And thus she did, travelling along that road iu 
the season ol extreme heat, and she did not taste anything except every other 
day, while she carried nothing whatever except one small basket (auo), 
which she fastened to her arm, and one salver: and thus she travelled. And 
she imposed this labour upon herself every vear all the days of her life, 
returning and applying herself to constant pravers and supplications and tears, 
all the days of her quiet life; and so she would when her time came again 
return and go up to Jerusalem, and accomplish her vow and come back to 
her usual habits, insomuch that great deeds of power were wrought by her 
presence, not by her will and her words. But she herself shrank greatly 
fom such things, aud it was not pleasing to her that anyone should say 
aus thine of the kind to herz and, if anyone wished to press her, he did not see 


her ag Por this devout woman guarded herself carefully against pride 


(t71 LIVES OF MARY AND EUPTIEMIA. 154 
baska du ddsar pool Dads [Masso JI uasa NS. Loot Lasasco 
“OS loot Loot j JI.3o -Loa Naos ja ala- S Ms aua loa LS, 
met eia a Loot Laipa Jad Kao siloiasy vae lue oly us 
hal Loot haas Jhay dilpso wnan Leo] ` M » Rise fios SQ Vy 
à... opo So UJ] aaas lad p) Daw "La sess Jona) <% ol, 
flaaks Jaan, Laado Ao loo Jesse Jo Jigar > Jon 
pany ia AN dilpado Mac, fiama ol pa hoot Lo. JD NSn 
«eo Apon Jaano [3Ma3o Jiascpsa>0 doa hk: pee Mail] olt Env. 
p Iso] so LXS, loa Moas fla q JKasasty [58 Ne so Lies Aro 
iy be Lex Poot sow laasia Alo òpar fopaso jlazaíx 
Lee «Jing sào . loa Jarsasse Qoonsl | 49 Loot JaN- aao 
[updos Laad «dass ‘Mame flor wet fro LopA Los 
of va + Joo SLs alo Sass J| ANa "ensi QAM! «Qo woo has 


1A eo — 2. Eins «* — 3, E Hox — 1, E bxeazolso. - 5. E pl. — 6, E Kaoso theta 
(Irpa dans looi» ew» Bal oS bo wo .|llobp. [os — 7. A corr. Irom Seda. — sp 
aads baa. 


and repressed vain glory, lest she should lose her labour. But her sister 
;uphemia, who was younger than she, bad in her childhood been united to 
a husband, and had had one daughter, who hersell also had been trained 
from a tender age in religion. But afterwards, since this woman's husband 
had died, Euphemia herself and her little daughter formed the kouselold, 
insomuch that she thenecforward came to herself! from the secular order 
of life, and turned to the practices of her sister which she had been practising 
for a Jong time, and lived in the order of devoutness and in the religious 
habit (772), while she also learned the psalms by heart, and taught them 
to her daughter; for her daughter also had while she was a child. been 
splendidly trained in the psalms and in the Scriptures and in haudwritinz. 
And from that time she appointed fixed hours for reciting service and for 
the prayers, those of the night and those of the day: and, while observing 
her sister's asceticism and the rest of her practices, she herself. practised 
another high and sublime order of life, while she in fact carried out both, 
the observance of abstinence and the practice of relief of the distressed. But 
this admirable woman decided in her mind not to introduce into her house 
other men's bread that was not wained by the work ol her hands; aid, if id 


ar 
o 


I. Duke; xv; I 


ia eer Tess 


172 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [172] 
+ 801 M Nol aaso NJ as ve AK Noo cof dot org J Pad akya 
<% Lo je et UM Jose Jj Jess. Ns, vM Jaaa 5 
Jasj x oot ao Jatsyo haD loa flats JM. JM3:65 Js Kus 
4350 Je: ham: L.aM loa Jon lo. NS odo Sos 1 


<> "Nó Lal Saad feno hando Jlaos je Wo “yo asan 


à 


solo ^ oot JL.3a.so x y" el cja) Maas aa of koh 


Joss “Loot furaasey fas] Saco - Loot Ío13N so JN ispo, Laa loïs 
OMD pu ee Da Lad -aas Jaso Dy fac ol haw ol hango ol 
DM yds col Nal m5. E el [zy oM haso Loo Lais 
frauds “freddy ol JM EN fuer odo wil Jee > ol gana ba opo 
aN ioar «3$ oà Joa v3] Jee o3 x gol Wl y^ Ly J eoo 
Joa MUS alo QU» Loot Laas J| aNs] fy onis [Komal Loo [so eo 
"eoa ca] vo m Loot JLaiso à Ns loa Là aia Io o 


Lodue bel Pe ocn dom. + i. E ins. ec 


came in, netllier she her daughter tasted any of it. But, because they were 
fine and excellent workwomen, they would weave two pounds only of goat's 
wool vari for a denariis, which she received from great ladies of the city and 
worked up, buying their small supply of provisions with half. of it, 
and assigning the other half to the relie of the poor and the siek and 
the prisoners, while every day she would take cooked food and bread and 
wine fo every place where there was anyone in bouds or shit np in prison or 
anywhere else, and again she would go round all the streets of the city, aud 
wherever she found a stek inan or a cripple, or a blind man or an old. man 
who could not stand, she would sit by the side of each one of them and ask 
him, « What, my brother, do vou wish? Would you like me to buy vou 
some bread. and herbs only? Or do you perhaps wish for something else 
instead of this? or do vou perlitps wish me to go and buy von some line 
vheaten bread? »/— Aud. whatever the man, whoever he might he, said, il 
iewd-eovering was in its place, she did not leave him till she had satisfied 
Vid, if she had uo coppers at hand, she would run to her house aud 

oe artiele of their furniture and go and pawn ib, and. thas she would 


[173] LIVES OF MARY AND RUPHEMIA fee 


Lpo y e Loot hania Lacie oo [iso -hiasi of loa franc y/o 
Jl» o Noo. Loc ' EIE voa «o Joo from so Jooss Loor 
o» goail, Loo Joas, yl Jaana JNa h~ ol xl ol .2ota c rool 
el Jodi [so lia Nl fsa yyy -Lasso J> x2 loo Lapai haoa 
sotmi “Loot funssoy Daa hooo ` „Jana JN] Sa JNa 
Jprano Lalo Jo, hana aD Loot fasy os Joa aaas ere yl 
foa Kuo Jr alo ors hawo Joa hapaNsoo .Jlós Joot Ie so 
Joa KA AO «20 SL - Jie pel oot x OO AOI aaa ls spsk 
Neo) flh, wopads «2 cha ol bà ol haee: of J5ej2 ol; Loia 
y ^ axo; -ona Malo sopla soranaadlo ole "loa ollo raD 
Kuso oA wpe: yaad adol Je J; jalo Ll p ups 
obe oo yaad ee vM Wy 1384 f% anag jas yaad 
qai, Dad aD iaw naa WM ly Sd] Da aD 


L E lov: — 2. Erasure followsin A. 2, E om. — t A oja ize ins, in later land); a. E sol. 
- 6, E ec» eoadallo. ols... 7, E, Goll. 


satisfy that indigent man; and there could not be any sick poor man among 
those lying in the streets who escaped her so that ske did not visit him either 
twice or once in the day, inasmnch as she was capable of ramming about all 


day. But she would go round the courts of the houses and ask, « Is there 
e fen) 


lere a needy orphan, or a poor old sick widow? ». And so in tlie ease of 
: | 


everyone whom she found sick, according to the extent of ler possessions she 
would buy for him, fine wheaten bread and. frnit, and wine for anyone Tor 
whom she knew it to be proper, and would go round and distribute it to 
them. And, iit happened that she had uot by her wherewithal to salis 
any: inan whoever he might be as was proper, nothing whatever would prevent 
her from at least bringing him apples or pomegranates or fish or bread, and 
sitting by him and taking him by the hand, and ashing him « What has 
alllieted you, my sou ? », adinonishing and saying, « Be not dejected because 
you are iu distress and have no consolation. Blessed are vou for the number 
of unending blessings that are prepared for vou in that world. in return for 
these distresses which are passing by npon vou. Look at Lazarus, how 


because he endured and was patient and did not murmur hie inherited the 
| 


SERENS 


tex drm 


LTA JOHN OF EPHESUS. [174] 
coot wo Liane asad hoo faasa, Janm Li. EL Jle oos mle 
Da- iS Jis) ` Laas feos Sods Napapa orcad haas as 
Jos gano .-JNaropo JI ad ‘Udy gada laso .disiasc danny 
Qo shoot Lio INu Da JNa -Jrot vor Snareo No Jpn 
hA: A: Jie JBha Jsl LoD omiko dilo pee ooot x 
od Joo Nl, as Jp sax NLs o Joo ROS) loo 
|». 303620 AJh à Joot enano uoan les Scu [aad 
shoot Loi tise We .aso [sete janoko «cL lopd Lc ods [s 3 Mao, 
Jopa wul, loot Jas Jy h~ ag Loot JS xao NS, DSA 
paz o» loo Jass, Ladas ody JAle -fias «20.30. <> facto 
Ges vor Sxaasco AS Golly Loot LasNas J| M5 J J? esl 
£e as] I loa Jed] pa fags Wyo Mufsassol loa flsax basalo LAS 


Jlsa-ris odes fra, ware] wad Lacs) lpn! of e <% AS Joa 


1E wo Ne ES 


kingdom of heaven. » And so the poor used to call her ‘our comfort and our 
visitor Blessed truly is that soul for the number of souls that are laden 
with gratitude to her and with her bounties, like those of the original Tabitha, 
and display them to God the all-seeing: and accordingly this woman was 
called Tabitha all over the ety. And, when all the high-placed men and 
women of the eity saw her strennonsness and her zeal, and saw that she was 
distressed: because she could not visit the distressed in a liberal fashion, 
vervoue Who was earnest im seeking what was for the good of his life used 
to entreat her to go and take everything that she knew to be required by her 
for the relief of the allfieted and visit them: and thus she was henceforth 
free Prom anatety, beeatse on both points she was much distressed, 
one that she was nnable to releve the siek and aeedy out of. their 
small smount of labour, aud another that she had uot leisure. to devote 
herself te the employment which she had taken upon herself, the work of 
hands, except at night. And therefore her daughter laboured) simple- 
mledh ond withont murmuring night and das, and she would say if any 


of | npenens or anyone else said to her,» Your mother leaves you to 


[175] LIVES OF MARY AND EUPIIEMEN, 175 


Jis Loot ho «29 ow e) adal ees, - Loot Je] Too painaa 


Luins Sudo ha Jiag wawo ^ o D JD Shad js eo: 


LX» fatima asd zlo à coa) haan flax aliaa po deo 
Jo tao hh JKasash Loot [2.50.50 EN JNa, Js sao -loa 
loo Lanas yoana ANa o] Wuase p eX» [seas loro 
Daol, o ooo! Amado Jo aaoo crono woo Lord [1365 
«Qo v noa «Jere P Loot Lan. d so flo alao óc: Laram JRun 
Jer 9d Eh Phe) ving? paslo ferns) Lau Sas], Lise 
Joot DW as} vyl „eoad JKoolds awo Daslo . Ward 
ha e AA wo jal a GN Jos aklan -saad pel aa 
awis a gaian yA Janco wa aj i hoy sy» 
aaan ax» Kal; JKaamso udiso Jl us ods Jo» cM 


1. Eins. ev 


work alone all day », she on her part would say', « My mother's labour ts 
greater than all labours; and l receive strength from God through her 
prayers. » And therefore this blessed woman had a little freedom from 
anxiety, since her daughter laboured for their own necessities, and as far as 
they were able she supplied the needy, and she herself without much 
solicitude carried out the ministration to the distressed and needy and 
alllicted all the day, and afterwards she would further gather them together 
at her house every day and relieve them ont of there labour, And in conse- 
quence many would entreat her to accept what was required for her own 
necessities aud those of her daughter, and she would not consent, saying, 
« May the Lord save me from cating the strength of human. beings, 
aud gratifying my body out of the toil of others while Ht is strong enough to 
work, and reeeiving in my spirit the stains of their sins ». But, if anyone 
pressed her on the other side, she was displeased and would sav, « A truce 
to this charity of yours, since you wish to pollute me with the mire of vour 
sins; my own blots are sullicient for me. God puts strength in me and in 


that poor girl who is with me, both to work for our necessities, and to 


I. Sic syi 


Sey 


^ 


Tor. 


176 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [176} 


Jj] sod ex) J pag hio AMA y v—J M63010 datacom 
raol, oH J Na Me EN VIDI xoa v6 J 
roo p= "ele woot tars] Jis» ` bas La Jil ppd <I Jy [2a 
fio cto, JA pads vhs] Saco JN ss Nao Jha p50 ool, 
Jas we fly] v5 - hoor LAm oaro foass ” - "Loot faux Jae]! 
Ji pe L> ->o fasopse ag alps slo wol oo Lyn! le bor 
Jira bot doo kasoj Me Jae" rot ,2 Nufsas gasaio 
L>; Lilas Jl ol 9 2 J. Loot [Joti à das Jioc JNa} 
Brow exo od Lad; Jae: aD Jaial, hasl eb HE qe 
Jexase :Joot |-9o8 v5 Jl] ad "Sono. o Nol oò pel) voogas 
LaS jaaaz, qao : oor eso, «o» a31] JN eec) X995 
We» Q2 fo MS") Nase) Lab. leo,» JNa} wa Daan rl 


p ElMSe a po ox EdBasap eco bis — $2 n, © — 5. A erae. 


minister to our brethren according to our power. » Aud so they never ate 
except from the proceeds of their labonr in their house, unless perhaps one of 
them might be constrained on some oceasion to perform au act of friendship! 
somewhere. But in this way they were continnally occupied in this labonr, and 
moreover in fasting also and prayer, and the recital of service ; and, whenever 
the blessed woman was engaged outside in ministering to the needy, she wonld 
perform her offiee zzv». in the street while going from one to another, aud 
likewise also did her daughter too at home as well, and at vespers, nocturns, 
and utatins they recited service together, — A hile then this blessed woman 
was with all her power running in the line of these great practices and in this 
perfect course of life, neither did she miss the great benefit derived from 
another labour, in order that the saving of the Lord to the man whe had the 
five talents who said. « He that hath to him shall be given » 7, might be 
mlfilled: bat, when the perseention took place, and all dhe convents round 

reeity were expelled: from their places, and the adversaries occupied them, 


l at blessed woman. ke a barbour Fesai which reecives ships from all 


ni e cs sweat Ee eode e meth 


177) LIVES OF MARY AND Et'PHEMIA. 177 


So «6: Lors [9.55 2e ol fiw - ors cette E EN 
Samad Jpsoans «9o Joa Kas Jills Neo JL Ai300 Loot Laas y? 
goa waaa -leao loaas9o Jana JING] LoS: ysl -l aagi co 
M ma p hos JAS oS NS Nool] et va olas) las, ; 
Lamaaso JLo ro la ` Jydtco Miss Jlasope 1.2 vio ao Joa 
alo a» foo a2 Jas ere Soro [abso Lajas o} P+ ope aso 
Joe. s Neol alhan ado JMuatalo Jsuiuo ang? JA JS reo 
Hea loot oo. Ayam ds Sas Arian yl vor eo we 
loo Jers Joma -loa fry: DAS oL so Jag jo» Jena NS. 
al «o fashh of aJ] ys Lol broads, SO SUN Se | ER UA ES eu 
ol Ji RO Rep» +061 jio Aus wert spe hao Jija vo 
«otl Jas of Was P Joa ths Ji pea fs0,d0 cns M sso 


1, E aupra — 2, A «erm (sic), — 3. B «aeo. — 4, E Dao. — 5, A [Laddzs- 


sides that they may lie to and be at peace in it, so herself also received and 
relieved the persecuted and alllicted from every place; and, because there was 
no place for the convents to enter away from the hereties, they were 
constrained to find quarters with her as with a devout woman renowned for 
her manner of life. Butshe found means, and hired spacious rooms; and one 
which was suited and adapted for the purpose and of great size she turned 
into an imitation of a martyrs’ chapel, with likenesses and pictures, and 
chests', aud everything, while the oblation also and the Scriptures and 
everything that is proper to a monastery were in it; and she prepared great 
mats also, and curtains and rugs. And for herself and her daughter she 
made provision in a certain inner. chamber; and being a very wise woman 
she alone devoted herself to ministration with the blessed men, and her 
daughter, because she was a child, she would keep in security within hy 
day and? by night, lest by the sight of her she should harm anyone, or be 
herself harmed by anyone through the sight. And so from that time that 
martyrs’ chapel harboured not fewer than ten or fifteen, and as many as 


twenty, while with the labour of their hands which they disposed of outside 


1, Bither for relies or tor the sacred vessels; — 2. Y om. 
PATR. Oh. — T. XVII, — F. l. 13 


178 JOHN OF EPHESUS [178] 


fsa loa fraso -Lomo Ladys HN la> loa fatsy ia vod E, 
aoi loo hanao Lasoo -Lopo J29X" Laa has — loo Jlsasoo 
Joa hasio diasaabs o5 [30m vat pd .0004 xv [3.5 xo 


(Nae pO LAX 000 vira Lx fly dec : fused aor “elo «olo 


eyo JaN Lads Goan AAS dled ooo x» Daas calis So 
NESA coul. “SQrooy door J AJMse scorsa cofdsad of 
air loa basg Ji T Leona PA p» s \ooasa.co Noo) «Sod eso 
[Issa cooper ool, od ooo! <p) Jens fos] Lamao Sing alo 
+ Ohad Loot [2e 200 dius ord "xs JN oio s Loot LN So 
Ijo aan Ese Lamia] ooa solle tee cet N oar JE] Laser 
coord leat faalo Jf wats fas] Lard Jljlo loa bass -JNa coer 
Rä, oà shaa Lads Qoa] xD hao sus ex] t? NJ Ao 


don — m BoB So Lexo -a RS ema — E weal. — 6. E sing. 


she would therefore buy wheat and lentils and herbs, and make bread and 
cook lentils and herbs from evening to evening, and thus she would relieve 
them, as many as eame, while she hersell was ocenpied in her ministration 
the whole duy, and moreover also. the blessed men too were ceaselessly 
remitting?) matters to hert. When accordingly they came to her from all 
quarters on account of her love toward God, and the produce of their labour 
was foo small to provide Tor them, she was compelled, iu order to relieve their 
distresses, for their sake to accept what was necessary lor them. while she 
never joined them in tasting of it And, il if happened that there were some 
reverend men among them who constrained her to receive the blessing with 
them, she would bring a triple portion? of her bread and all that she 
requited and set ib before her, and so eai. But, if it happened that strangers 
whom she knew do be in need and not known in the city came, she would 
eo oul dub eo do some persons of high position, and make instant demands 
of them, saying : «€ A mighiy matter it is thal you do toward Christ, 


lose properly all your good things are. nd now lo! von are smearing olf 


oust s ob eliarilv ^ Or render *were sendin things do her. 2. Three loaves? Or 


[179 LIVES OF MARY AND EUPHEMIA. 179 


«exo .arstlol os oh! wit Ja [soo oe. | day odd 
bos], Sx anso asso} ds Laas vo .aslaany vor hais solu] 
Ju ha [ioc Snack Ls] yl Lassy baos od polo Aga wh! 
my Oly rope loa Laas [lols “amare Jy sul Sad Jldooks sve, 
ooa eardaso Joano) Loot fly"! yaso ; Joco: Mhea fs Sse coat € 7 
A decal) JA) quM Uly Ad vo ooo vous] Laco. [aso] 
o] :-a— iy xS D; Loot hasy ees MoJa ase [fiot 
Jess lo assoc “frokso flouzs JNS) of haai] Jase ds 
fans roa. BE SNE flo Joa Jy wl <r! Jive Joa Jas 
so, poi pd pace hasas -.Jpso] p aD pas o5 los amr 
:Jagxecoso | JAN JKning yd qeMaluo $? prassass JpSs Qajenauo 
[3239 -&5 Meno Loaro adm Jodo.. Oho FDO JA &sLo I ]5o 2o 
UM N] saasa fasu'lo oms No] Wl flo iomas «2o Sarto 


| E boos — : a35. — 3. o wrillen over marg. in A, E 5> ol — 4, E [lez Me, — 5. E 


2d 
ins. » init, — 6. A Mag». 


your superfluities ou him, and you think that vour clarity is great. * Woe 
to you, rich men; wail and weep Tor the calamities that are. coming upon 
you’! ». And in accordance with the text « The righteous is bold as a 
lion »*, so this zealous woman would boldly rebuke evervone without fear of 
persons, insomuch that the Ingh-placed men and women of the city were 
afraid of her, and, as soon as she was going up to the threshold and they heard 
that Euphemia was coming up, they would say, « Woe to ns; Tabitha hax 
come upon us to smite us ». And so therefore she would boldly take all 
that she wanted to give to anyone Who was in need, to the blessed guests or 
to sick widows and orphans and needy persons, or perhaps siek men, and 
go down. Bat, if anyone was recalcitrant and did not vive cheerfully, she 
would make him rue the day by her words, saying, « Is it well that you 
thus sit yourself! while slaves stand and wait upon you, and enjoy a variety 
of tastes in dainty foods and in wines, aud ol? pure bread and splendid rues, 
while God is knocked down iu the street and swarms with liec and faints from 
his hunger, and you do not fear him? and how will you call upon him and 
he answer you, when vou treat him with such contempt. Or how will you 


L dames, v, |. — 2. Prova XAM, L — 3. Sie syr 


DANS dS 
So pr 


180 JOHN OF EPHESUS [180] 
o Jacl iaa] of rasan oo Dhal hanl "e| .2emadesl Lsa lpo 
SS ot L3 nD loop fala [asao » Loy M? at ae 
xS yond JI flac, Jraroly wt pol (95 coord loot aol! Siro 
Hel !JNaal . scoops Was; too [Avan Jio «ero o» «nai 
th Jalo wh woo ya Le] jlaas vo :J No Nseo 
Slo Jl ahan JA loa aawl SDa JNasps0 J oly fant] "xot LA jap 
Lamo as] [Xe -Jpracco Loot hapaa Jippo JNusolo foldas pas 
Joa [2230 Jiao Sly Juss! [soio opa Loom m> “Laal of 
Jlsaso "aopa TL loa Las dass aooo oo [treo 
900 —— NM Ne Maji N.o noo rr loot ] 2.3300 Joa 
Laso exo el jo JNa, Jas Mo fassops mn hoot boe x» peo 
[ww p JJ NS oo J. pane aada q% + dbp Joa woas ard 
pea hladas kisa yopo Lebe Jh Jede Me hda Jooo 


1 E je. — 2 E on, — 3. Mss, ehrn — 4 E sing. — 5. E [Das]. — 6, A adoro eacoll 
E waww. 


ask forgiveness from hin? Or how ean you expect him to deliver you from 
hell? » And thus she would pass judgment upon them, so thal those who 
were secular (2) were a little offended against her iir accordance with the 
saying « The fool loveth not one who reproveth him »'.. But she herself was 
so earnestly heut on relieving at all costs distressed and alllieted souls who 
lacked luman comfort and satisfying. their needs that even the whole city 
did not sutlice for her business, but she would even go round the inus and 
roads aud habitations outside also and search, lest there should be any needy 
inan or stranger laid up sick iu one of them, so that she in fact found many 
and relieved them, And some she took into her house, and some she earried 
to siperintendents of hospitals; and gave charge concerning them, and it was 
chielly on her account thal they were received aud tended: for she was 
Known fo great aud small in the city, awl everyone recognised her on seeing 
her even ab a distance by her quick and rapid walk, siuce she would walk in 
this way summer and winter in mud and snow and frost without auything 


wh er on her feet, with her toes bruised and her nails toru out and the 


i81 LIVES OF MARY AND EUPHEMIA. 151 
Jo manaia, firey Jyo npa) “pa rr00 ET | Sel No 
o» Joa walle su] So P 49 asl a> psa J| ol loa frsapiss 
o ^ qo val Ju Nia pg Cie Slo oS co qos coul; 
wo fina} Nolae fico nass <e fh "ORSON pao v 
vam fuse Stoo soe] [dole Has Tod, jeg: Loa Jose] < 
D> LN, [as oot jasy haas] - tears loa [Aros Loo oA cin 
Jes» Jr IN ex ohio eh pag ful si ado 
pel» he | Le» Jos furs Jlaojpmsoyo hads flasoiny Jinoiy 
Joa NS ao No Leo $a suce Jlaruls Had) La? JN 
J; jao p reese Jes So hah aul Sard joe Q2] Jiao 
Laia, La Dwa p flaosy Saroul, loo [dios Noj ja cjue 
M pol) J-5o,—5 HS jada [house dM ads Ghost pm Ph. 
reads Sao v0 fans, JN Sas Joa yas frasarfoo LSS dihiso 


1, A QZoBxe. — 2, E odo. — 3. A sing. — 4, E tobings 


blood flowing froin her wounds, and she would not consent even to treat them, 
while everyone was very sorry for her on account of the state in which they 
saw her; for indeed we onrselves too would often jest with her and say to her, 
« Do not kill yourself in so cruel a way, Tabitha »; but she would say : 
« When the end of a thing is corruption and the worm, wherefore do we 
preserve it? »' And she was so energetic in her task that the mouth is too 
small to tell the story of her great labour; for, just as her sister Mary in the 
city of Thella was celebrated for her perfect practices of asceticism and 
quietude and renuutiatiou, so was this woman also in the city of Amida; so 
that the fame of these sisters was spoken all over the East. everyone being 
wrapt in wonder to think how each of them in one peerless mode of life was 
strennously applying herself to store up righteousuess, When then the 
blessed woman had completed a period of thirty years more or less in such 
practices, and her house thundered night and day with the praises of the 


1. This must bave been while John was living in Amida, i. en between 530 and 537 (see Introd.) 
and the story is with his usual carelessness misplaced. for the monks were not in exile at that time, 


and the persecution mentioned must appy. be thal of 537. 


ONE 


* 428v 


d. 


ope 


TA P b. 


182 LOHN OF EPIHESUS. [182] 


voe c paca) Co uxo] JI s Jess coy Sas jammy oà Jadoo 
Ja; PINE Liila- <% <>! Jaze ama, Jan] hasas 
ooot xr «^ot "Leasjjot bean. xoa ssl «rot Proto | 
cy don ssl e» rant Jo Molapo Malas «hers Liddas | 
JNa WLS goudo vacat "|saazais| eso piso -Joa [Nasa of 
sass o. Jada dss Jha «olas rad} ed Koo S oen 36o 
Jead gaul aolo quu] arad oipo Jao-xjee vo Aaso 
bansa pase "Lf eo p20 90.203) Jlaslas Mis «xl Se yl 
loa JINsarxo Kufisco fl] iaol} Jle «2922s Qus. eo | Jods paso 
T% u oe aces -jl £a Jla» yaa shod, fadooks JNaag 
Au Janno; ujao Jua aiD SloNal, chanan var fujro 
oJjs 1| oD ooo guaia, «aor anaa ja JNS 420 JNaspo Jla NS. 


LE gabiani — 2. E. beso — 3. & lasm]. 4, | Saolo.— 5. E ins. eoo com e»t. 


E 


saints from all quarters, Satan who is always envious of good things did not 
neglect to stir up a trial against them, in order to make them lose the benelit 
of their great and spiritual business and deprive them of it. Then he stirred 
up against them the heretical envy of those who held power in the church, 
cruelly and savagely aud mercilessly, in that they said, « These women are 
disturbing this city, and the citizens fear and honour them more than the 
bishops: sinee their house has been made a cave of robbers‘, and they 
receive and shelter the deceivers ». Aud they sent and arrested them and 
brought them into the chnreh, in order to make them communicants 10 their 
inpiety. When they had brought many inducements to bear upon them 
both in the way of threats and in the way of blandishments aud they did not 
vield, but the blessed woman in confidence thitt fights with death even used 
bement language. saying, « As for me, may the Lord Jesus Christ deliver 
hom communicating with those who divide him, aud with those who 


E 


a quaternity in place of tlie Holy Trinity »?, and, when those who 


Nonunnulat stery ts fold bs debris id E u 39 


(183) LIVES OF MARY AND EtPEEMISN. 183 


ac Jess] Mas, LINZ Joa opao -Molao Khaso KUN 
AL Jäs Mash! haoo jja yad Jla a `. ere es 


Sd anaa. opus KOAIHO „oaol, Janan ado JNa Y Joa 


INA S06 po o = «coh J| hias Gol «ooh Laora; aooaa 


08) oaa aD Jan panao) OX SKY qx» Jeséle wears Loot oso | 
Liaaa» Lard] flo - bard] foray œ> pry Das Jano utd. aa 
loa fra nina #9 JKasp300 feojas Mids op p20 LANDo ajs 
wN [ager Ol; 29 SJN ada Co ogo dans! - dh oOo 
soto Na] * JN so: Sx» flasamsas foi Jlo Aare falo Joal, Joa 
«M le ENEN wet ya Joa hans ado "Jeila ols Lal Joa 
wao . yaio) «24 vod vp +, O83 QN. Jurca le^ 
axo. [ais cao SNaisag Joss, cor Li Es haoo asso djo 
Maas] yd) 999 FEL Q2 “edie Ji e x3 yo OS oNA] 


L.A bis — 2. E w3 IS pes. — 4. Epl. — &. E sing, — 5. E ins. «et 


deserved these words had heard them, they were seized with furious, 
vehement, passionale indignation, and they ordered the blessed woman to 
be confined in the lowest dungeon of the prison as a punishment for ‘this 
audacity’. And so she was confined for thirty days in the dungeon, while 
the whole city entreated. that she might be released; and they bound 
themselves under a curse that she should not come up thence till she received 
the oblation there. And, when she heard it, she would mock at them, and 
sav : « Would that 1 might undergo sufferings in return for the sullering of 
him who suffered for my sake on the cross. | am glad to die here rather 
than to die in denial of my Lord and my God. ». And, when they saw 
that it was impossible, and the whole city was grieved on her account, 
they released her and expeHed her from the whole city; which also 
Satan had been contriving to bring about, And then all the poor of the 
city were oppressed with sorrow and great allliction, Finsomneh that! all the 
people of high position were distressed, But they left, and went to her 
blessed sister Mary, and it was their wish to go up to Jerusalem : and they 
went up and prayed, and returned. And so these blessed women were 
bulleted by the trials (zyóv). of persecution for. five years: and, having 


received one anothers blessing, afterwards, thinking hat the fury against 


1. Or * as also’. 


SON MUN e 


* apes I. 


au S Ad D 


184 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [184] 


laS od . paso . Mosa» ei doo pa qn2961 “teraz Joan Loot 
vo x ood S eso va Xs; apao Jio Nass yo Bhe pa al 
q~i, wl amadlo oala vod (pad, Ca dot lasotl! . Jlsaad, 
No JKaaxbb] JNarsag en wat ooias spay yas brady, - roms 
Wan wo Kado uu Mxusel]'y pasond cade vite Phalo Jods Lads 
NS La y-l hpa JKNrtoads wo ial LAN a0 uA wale ool 
xm to AADA ooo pes xt pe .Lojars NS oo Sad y 
"ases «e «e ful Lao) x5 S a Na) Jl» oo Jalo Ael lo 
Laas Lisha cAn adio] JD 2 vor Molua] JNas jjo 
wash] alus aD Plago Loa Lose Lifsoy "Jeu! dix Liao Liao] 
Jo ord Jyacelli od 2x30 [Lyra Hacc» s eas; nono houaa 
cao jb] ! Je Il a Nu S accent L? Laais Jis ween abl 


|l K ins, e9 900 — 2, E qnoa cose — 3, E Lie: — 4. A [be — 5, E odes. — G, E 


als — 7E bae 


them had perhaps abated, they returned to Amida and eame in secretly, and 
they resided in a eertain gentleinan's. house. And, when it began to 
become known, and the adversaries began to speak about them, those 
in whose house they were rezidiug were alarmed, and they besought them 
to depart, lest (as they said) their house should be plundered. But the 
blessed woman was distressed; and she eried to God, and said : « My Lord, 
thy merey knoweth that T have grown feeble, and there is no more strength 
in ome. ftis sullieient for me». And the same night a summons was sent 
forth for the blessed woman according to the request of her prayer, and she 
Fell into a sickness; and, while these people were troubled on her aecount 
and in fear, she called them, and savs to them : « Be not dismayed, my 
children: for | shall go ont from lamong vou! this week assuredly ». But 
they did not understand her words, to what departure she referred. And she 
called her daughter, who was called Marta, and said to her: « My daughter, 
he comforted in Christ, and keep yourself in purity for the Lord your Lord to 
Whom you were betrothed; and be uot distressed, for Lam not deserting you 


far beit from me, my beloved); bat bam committing you to the Child of my 
: / B. J 


) house 


[185] LIVES OF MARY AND EUPHEMIA 135 
eh alanga Jian iSo s Lifso lp Jarsady oS 
Manso Ohad Ie po JN; baaa Looi; Liama Jao ooko 
JNa ț JAa s NS. &iNS S A lo ase Los ON bl Il hls halo oS 
Jaan sans Liao omaro dM o Sine | KAn «sare D i 
Nas dacs -Load alja flros ” po haass Lio dans Kdaso 
uJ sese ài, 5 Nace otaa Xr pe] Jal au] Daad p 
fasbuc Le: p ro], aaa JAI, [308436 .duyan> Jeder aoo 
Prt oe IAT sal Jer ie oe aa vor 9] Lasoo NSLS 
po JD Ja [sS pro Mate -Jaaa Ja. yopo yaa Naag? 
D rp Ji <> O93 wislo abe Jos ssaak fly ars Jal CT: 
ójsop So aJl JNa add Lad; -Joot oot a] La Sesso Sao 
<% allo wraah Laan ar. La Sooo Aaaa Lop S10 NJ. 
xot dos QJ[NS39825 [sol ay . [1-50 vo NS .50t JN -ajo Jla 


1. E %5- Li — 2, A obad 35 E e furs — 3. E om, — 4. E Loo WSs Do. — 5. E ins, loo. 


blessed Lady Maria, and to the holy one herself, that by her prayers you 
may be preserved, and may become a temple for the indwelling of the Holy 
Spirit of God ». And after laying many charges upon her, and saying 
positively, « | for my part am. going to Christ », and committing her to the 
divine graee, while speaking, she stretched ont lier hand, and made the sign 
over her in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ: and she extended hersell and 
looked toward heaven, and, while her eves were raised toward heaven, her 
soul passed away, while everyone was seized with amazementat her departure: 
and her daughter remained alone solitary and bereaved. And on the next 
day but one alter her mother’s departure, while she was iu misery and was 
sitting in her grief, and she also was near passing away. from life. lo! a man 
came bearing a letter from the blessed Mary, who had passed from the world 
to God ten days before. And certain persons on it coming lo their knowledge 
prevented her niece [rom hearing it aud her soul fitting from sorrow, since 
her whole hope was now this, to go to her blessed aunt, and share her manner 
of life until her end. And Tor this reason they prevented it, lest she should 
hear the news and be overwhelmed with anguish. These satis therefore in 


t bos Ne. 


"Ara. 


Eu) etn Ned Dae 


A EH MI 


186 JOHN OF EPHESUS. f 186] 
JNa; Jlsaso Mono J~ Da D tls Na ae qa Jor} 
«o» lasos hoa ja JNarsag ca MM JL ahia JI. 
sores sols L^ £5 IN Las “ALAA fropdo óleo S] 
+ Jhopadags Llo; Loa oo ol - fasado! qo JRursag JaN Lad Jaano ` 
aawo + [asptoy Jasas Ns eed aano ANM hua $8 aas i 
Naso Lanan Ima Jlor quay aa Slaai, ' Lan t>o Lota his 
va ol -> dad to iKojasy flue Lame £P «Ads col Jiu sa) 
he sre sga Noso Naa vo JNa Ja RO gait 

Heep S09) 


"erede "ossa Ensari róusrh hv» 


RE pl — 2. E om, 


this way both finished their marvellous courses together within eight days, 
each of them carrying the great load of her merchandise. The blessed Mary 
completed sixty years in the course of sanctity from her birth down to her 
departure, walking in the read of perfection, and labouring toward God; 
while, as for the blessed Euphemia, she too accomplished thirty-five years in 
this course of perfection, thirty in ministering to the saints, and five in the 
alllictions and the coniliet (¢yév) of persecution', that is of martyrdom for 
Christ's sake. And her blessed daughter vet remained, strengthened by the 
power of her blessing and of her prayer, while she too followed closely in 
the footsteps of these saints, and began after them to take up the strict course 
of their practices. 


The history of Euphemia and Mary the sisters is ended, 


I. HE tminislering do the sands! is lo be taken literally, the so years mms be dated from the 
rseeutien, and, thal of 237 is meant (p. 81, n. V her death would fall taler Chan The composition of 


k, so that we have probably only another iistanec of careless wriling. 


[187] LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 187 


rida map mxama (reas Ada edad aah 

rita: meo a li era vrácnenmó suede 

rea aut sladibion rin eorn ‘minianma 
“re és 


t adaon] haaa [a Io Kindy oón origo s ja co j 
Jo s odas Loro Lors Lias .. yao Jlaadiso “So "eon LA eoo, 
Sav bot «260 foo NES liora») JKx.25 «nojooua or. JN po 
Aaw JLaio casos <% So hoe Laza; ejas Hoa pad 
Base «nosacn5Jlo Joo Jou Jrsiego Joss + Joor pads J ° coop 1220 
Jot dod m1 bios Toot «arae Jha vito “fost [NS Suae 
sul So - Sars Laia «aeo 5000} 1-00 S y whale Jhul Miso 
.00% vha KLS sone 2g jiao ad, JNeofkso o> Js 
1. This ch. and the next two are in B, f. 167 r° b, The heading is : Iso aaro? leas day sol 
poly lg3Soigao lix wise eao llaziaso lipa Horo hapalo Loll wie boss. — 2. A Lagesoo — 


3. Mss. woottpooas. — 4, D þonad3, [amas «wosazo». — 5. B Damai ueogams. — 0, Bom — 7. B 
DES ILa wits jal oom we bal. 


NID. — Next TOE THIRTEENTH HISTORY, OF CERTAIN SAINTS AND SERVANTS OF 
Gop, Tuomas ax» SrEPuEN aso Zw T' the NoTAnIES [voszgios) aso syncelli 


or THE HOLY Mane! METROPOLITAN or THE CITY or AMIDA. 


After the decease of the believing king Anastasius who is among the saints, 


when Justin? was set over the kingdom, he was making a beginning of 


divisions and contentions in the church of God by introducing the impious 
synod of Chaleedon; and from that time forward by order of the same 
schismatic king everyone who did not assent to the reception and introduction 
of the synod lived under persecution and expulsion, and certain members 


of the ehureh were accordingly banished to various places of exile (2Zostxs). 


Y 


Do 


The beginning of these things occurred in the year eight hundred and thirty 


; 
of Alexander; and from this time forward were clearly seen in every 


man’s ease the love that was in him and the foundation of his heart and the 


l. This name is frequently (hus pointed in msg.. aud I therefore write it so rather than ^ Mara’, — 
2. Mss, ‘Justinian’. — 3. 519. 


*nidzv'a 


OCT NUS 


RSTU N Ei: 


af des R a al ie 


188 IOUN OF EPHESUS. [188] 


"eae Pads; Tok Ma) Cd ulo Je, JN Gu! 
Kass Aseo cdo Sus yd “Jans body hard co. Ja S das 
waars atco eel J3a.az45| "jso Joona Toyo aö A sons 
Jasas Lusso d wau pa flo + Joos Lol yar Jeoba Lasis 
MO RP ad -þa baso ANEN oot Joos Las asl, frcoiasyo Jauo 
[Nonio Jao Liama) ds flasdoo Jiga “Lrooflo hielo 
x Li L Sols l cogie .adylo aaao aniano ooa "gi Naa "Jodfos 
DA pad AOO ' angana ooo v0) [s ao ae «o 
sJlaacwso Nassar ipaa) Jiao [apo foot opas yor Lup doly Jes 
— zè MIT Ds Jedeso f[issas30 ime] Lujo Jiusad 
eo dt JMoo «oo Sully ^ foSN Pot Daans «X» Lalo 


Low. — zi eue so — i E lod tes baas — 4. u erased in A. —25. B Blase: — 6, Be jada. 
— 7. Heros 8. B beele. s, A BIS — qo, tare — il B Lysol bos Sado [Ss — 12. B 
ha. — 15.1) ee Sa daoa.ros. 


lirmness of his will, those who had! the love of God, and those again who 
had? the love of the world and desire for positions of power and inclination 
toward the renegades, These things therefore quickly reached Mesopotamia, 
nud overtook the holy. Mare bishop of Amida; and he took upon himself to 
suffer persecution and expulsion with Christ, rather than to depart from Christ 
and occupy the temple and the throne of temporal honour?, This) saint 
therefore, with Sergius. aud Stephen and Thomas his notaries (verastes! and 
syneell, were sent toa hand and distant place of exile (get) al Petra: and 
they accepted tt and departed and went; and they were there in great distress 
exceeding their power of endurance, until their lives were near disappearing. 
By reason of this distress therefore the holy Mare was constrained to send 
the virtuous zealous Stephen his deacon and uolary (verás) to the royal 


ell, in the hope that he might perhaps by the thtercession of anyone whom 


Sverbos nel an Hie svt y and the sentenee is uueraunualieal, 2. Ta 219. ‘Thomas was bp. of 
lied aller dhe order for dis palson, amal hiis stieeessar, Nonnus, lived only 3 meuths, 
| "ppeintid Zach, Bl, vro Assen HO, nu 84, His expulsion was pro- 

poss Prone (le sequel it as clear Hed M. only was banished, und the others 


Innbaily. Seruius is not duo mentioned, and Crom the return to Amida 


[1897 LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 189 
Sy] haD hada oly haly od sha joC$ aco Do 
«pe l eee «2e abs! aj, «ass Ji; Paso x» OA —dAs0103 
«er vd "Joof Las Laio? Jidiusadds od esl » Quen d N Sas wohl 
JN. ol A Ja Laado Lia cobs loo Hh], cà Aia 
pl » Nad. of L Sol So p Soon Jor Joa [3S 6. Jin deas yar 
"Reo nslo sou Ad +061 haupo eu Pel Jes JNO Jlosparsasy 
Tomana As slo madd fol Joo vadh raD Icio NM eoa. 
el r J aor falas yanaso AUN esas, „ID ois poo 
fate Sx os Sudo: od "Je sd m0 “loa hanas Jyo sa hä 
Jus dco] Daso JL ans JI QIE Leon? «9978 aayo Loot js 
Isl | 22242] 2003 pon.» | fasano aeoo Alo Jot esas Ol sae 
La; falas Wei» joa yami ooa- ' woh oo Sl; eio 


L B baal eub. — 2, Bi opel. — 3. B ins fo — 1B be ae is» — 5 B Bb. — us B eSenSlo. — 
7. B woo oae. — s, B ins, po. — 0. Ti ins, Ivo. — qu, 1) peaa L1]. D oos 


jana] Fores! las o 


God might put in his way be able to have that place altered for them. But, 
when he went up, the good God, who, as the divine apostle also says, 
‘is faithful and just, who will not permit vou to be tried more than ye are 
able to be tried'* directed the virtuous Stephen to Theodora who came 
froin the brothel (mosvetov), Who was at that time a patrician, but eventually 
beeame queen also with King Justimian?. She therefore, when she learned of 
that distress, as if by divine instigation, because she saw that saint's distress, 
made her merey manifest, and made entreaty to Justinian her hushand, who 
was master of the soldiers (sz9x7422z75 and also a patrician and the King's 
nephew?, that he would inform his uncle, and he might order relief to be 
given to these distressed men, making this entreaty even with tears. And, 
through the grace which cares for every man’s life; it was doue and an order 
went out to them to come to Alexandria. And Stephen the deacon took this 
order, and brought it down, both to them and to the holy Isidore another 


bishop, of Keuneshrin *, who also was exited there with them; and aecording- 
I 8 


1} Cor. X. Ut, — 2. See Proe, Hist. Are, 1x. Justintan’s marriage followed upon Cod, Just, V, 
Iv, 23, which, being addressed * Deinostheni pp. minst be dated 2202521, — 3. Sr. cet s son’, 
^. Chaleis. Por I. sve Severus, Select Letlers, p. 38, 66, 153, 166, 369, 


BIGGS ra, 


unc rs 


n. 


190 JOIN OF EPHESUS. 1190) 
busy oda ha INep ^ Sao JlisRQ Go» Qoo Joa Lioiase 
spor No or Jed: JNntdraaroo - cats Da a; lans SD Loot Jia 
c No .ooot vM Japon "Se fades .J84 CA were «aoo 
wot ve Joano] xx awia Qoo lo JMXa Do eey 
Jas Jlamses, polo Ikeas n pol eh don] a 
aaz, fk pe japas Joo "iis, dl] oIa ‘par fou cusa] 
flasd «feito <0 Tas Las Jel Paapa JaoMs, JNáko, 
od "jane Na qao latens «fit Lam og oly Lol Jrsife cans 
JN so ool JNasïa} olo gal lard je» a Sado La jard 
JM Mv p~ fensiaas ooa iHa LNA wt JNo0,> EX) 
farsa | aoo] o iex] joa wool Jia» q% hoa oot Root 42 Ja 


eoo: P uota] KOOL $20 004 Pools :j5aazc9] Jk Lao. Je» 


1. B òo brzsagó. — s.p wo. = 3. HBowsBa] p jas «dem. HLan2ge pelo Votes Ieseo. — 1. 
QE. 5 Jio MHS. 6, B adn bjOd29 he — 7. B oin, — 8. B uea. — 9, D bis. — 10. D 
ins. leo. — 1I. B ins, eoo 


ly a great relief and deliverance was effected for these blessed men, because 
at that time this city became a habitation of men driven by persecution 
from all quarters, and a place of reception for men expelled from every place ; 
and from that time the blessed men were quietly settled in the same city. 
But, after a short time, some cause called them to be in need of. a utensil 
usages) such as they make out of the leaves of the date-palin for household 
use; and as it were by the dispensation of God, an old man was found selling 
them who lived ina certain desert in the region of Libya belonging to a 
village called. Mendis', which Hes twenty-four miles above Alexandria, and 
this old man had also come into this desert [rom Palestine under 
persecution, with other blessed men as well as virtuous blessed women also 
who were living in quietude in that place. in a certain tower whieh had been 
set up for defence against barbarians ?. Since therefore this man came from 
the territory. (yéox) of Amida, and the blessed. men who accompanied the 


holy bishop Mare saw that be was an educated man and spoke their language, 


x € 4] 


te Nile now Mendishe iYahul. Geogr. W'orterb,, ed. WN' üstenfeld, Iv, p. 661). — 2. Gf. 


[191] LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN, 191 
ias. hals “lo Qao on» Lad Xo eas «435 lL Danao 
frooflo Lado] fase.) TOUV l l OaD AD "oos ý wol +20 
vos Ojo .Oi-3a.* ?aa2Jo gl $0 oes 42-222; ! assa sso 
SJN, ops Sl NONI JAN S84 «oso Paas lass aod) 
[No0 iaa Dy L5; fro. DSA "s xe Loo ooo 2-045 
AS o2 sil "ois Joa woe», ejoa Kul MS wih Ss "Japa 
BINA, Jos. hooh Le La-52a4) P erret «200 oto] paso Hajlo 
Fay o> oF pau lay otia» pao „loa AADA- AM0 
al, hul Joa L5:Nso LNS p> yl oe d <>? see LOAN hay 
nwan Ao joo vaod], of aa pO vans]: Joa sooda] Lao 
wol fico] slo Lupaa ooa So «2e JN wio Joa Golh. of 
Joor AEN Jasco Joa Lao Lo9]!. Lag oo Jo Ji1axo - Jlopsdlo JrAdo 


L Bo emaSoao. — 2, Oly — 3, p al -1 B Kaplo beoll hz5a-b ese 5. D ade. — 
6. DB ins fey — 7. B ins, Seon — s, B col. — » B Ios sie) tasol — m B leo dals 
loo patas, hsa e. — LL. B dul e: — 12. D ins. o — 13. Bins. ho — 1i. A oo D unodl. 


they brought him, and received his mzy qn! from him, and conversed with 
him; and they inquired also further where he lived. And, when he had told 
them all his affairs, the blessed Stephen and Thomas the deacons conceived 
the desire of going out to that place; and he conducted them, and they went 
out with him: and they saw the blessed men driven out by persecution who 
were with him and the blessed women, and the quietude of the place also 
attracted them. And they also told them about a certain large pit that lay 
near the place in the deser! at a distance of two miles, in which someone 
had once lived?^: and they went and saw it. And from that time the blessed 
Thomas, with whom the chief part of the story and the course of the 
narrative are concerned, formed the plan of going down and living in that 
pit; a luxurious and dainty man, who from his ehildhood had been brought 
up like a king’s son, who was also a descendant (yévos) of Ishakunt Bar bar ee: 
who was a patrician; who was mighty and great and eminent above all who 
were in the East: and the blessed Thomas moreover possessed an estate 
(òsta) and male and female slaves, and great riches; and he was so luxurious 

1. This must be the name of the utensil whieh they required. Tt probably represents: soie Greek 
word, — 2. The same is stated in Susan's case (eli, 27 0 and it as perh. the same cave. Tomek ane 


would have expected Susan to be mentioned as the bast occupant, — 3. CH. tach. Rho. vtr, w. Naldeke: 
conjecture * Arsacids’ (Arshakuni), hesilalingd adopted by v. D. and L., is quite vat of place. 


BIs Dy 
TE hb. 


"NA AG NI a. 


* D I68N a 


102 ION OF EPHESUS. [192] 


WEBMD aote lol soda) sande jaana JMMis; pas ad; Jans] Nanao 
Jaaa, -Joa asii N, Lsa La Doa oa Jaai Joo 
aa Joa well ve? Joa lias, gaas eco Jlasass nga, uxo. 
oM.» Joa ^ y oa van Dao aaan ho, xot "orsa 
ol po aal hrao [51 japas, |o Je... o Je 9X5 ye dry 
Nau Koo foot Mul ody hadaa JINasi) sor fad] haa NS 
ha Jed Dur Os ool Joa Lasoo ADS iot à okaso Joo 
Jaap haao gaa, E wel Il exeo Uad.use Ne Jie as 
p> othasag D cse) 8 “Sas Lya anuo eco iaoa 
pepe Da aAa, bres wipo froof) Lhi2e4 JN usos Sanco < 
| aop0y OLLSO yllo ? Joanno]; wahia ADD woo Nj 
IS Aso je .oà Joa pee Joop omy 290 aao S Jl > J NS 


1 ea. 9, p ba — s. Bins, saas — 4, B das, woo flags — 5. pins ew — A B 
dada SOx peas. — 7, D eee. — s, D gos 2990. — tu. D Janaus]. — 10. B om. 


and dainty that he nsed to clean his face and his hands with water more than 
ten times a day, This saint then, who lived under these conditions, now in 
opposition to these things formed the resolution of acquiring ascetic habits. 
But, when bis object became known, that he wished to do these things, then 
everyone who heard it would as it were laugh at his purpose, saving, « Alt 
that delicacy and luxury wants to dwell in the waste uninhabited desert ». 
And, though the blessed Stephen had the intention of doing spiritual serviee, 
vet, because he was feeble and siekly of body, he refrained from doing 
these things, saying, « For ourselves this is (oo great a thing to live m the 
desert on account of our fecbleness; but, my brother, let ns look after our 
soul, and gain a desert by our manner of life and our heart, and always 
entreat the Lord to cause his grace to shine upon us ». When they had 
relurned to the city, the blessed. Thomas provided for the concerns of his 
ell, doing every thing in secret, and he gave his key Tda) to the bishop's 
vellarer zakasni, and for some reason was blessed by the saint without his 


knowing of itt; and he departed and returned to the place, and went straight 


houl Mare huowinz his purpose”. 


(193; LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 193 


c oc Joa Maa Joa paso Je JXasaalo jsotso Jlasarr "Ws 
o andu Je «Do OD >k J, SA Joa a uoo o& Joa 
JR oS ooo «or [45d4 ooo Da Ass [rasa pa Loro 
Jem ouo) Nw [3530)0 hio [bax oà laag Lasao ` rods WAI * A iv b. 
Joa <>l foa J, ` uade D "alao hanao hanao «oot risen. 
ooa ve d ve el xo lae UX coo Aiao ^ 
Nes Rd o „Jao Laa MM ‘eds voas ose] So; ELLO p> 
looms seco KA al GS oos aalo oA wet aaO sonata] 
basm, Jän win ex9ol; WS vo "Maras Za aay; aM 26 
saasaa lanas. woo Joo rol Nass we org 3! JU SN ues sd 
sJAaxa Ms haana Jos array, unl] Oo a>; Jy bot I9» 

3. [4 a MSN, dos aS; salant vxo ooo pow Ho 


L Mss. her — 2 B eho. — o3. Hoocnaso niar 000. Boma Ss loo olo ». B isle 
6. B Pe. — 7. Bom. — S. B ius. eo». - u, p lasas. — lo. Bins. waso bee — dp B das 
Q% satan. 


to that pit, bravely applying himself thenceforward to asceticism and vigil 
and protracted recitation of services. But he used to go down into that pit 
and come up again, that he might not put force upon his body all at once and 
faint and be overcome, while the blessed men who were the occasion. of his 
going out to that place supplied his necessary requirements, And so in 
that pit he laid great and grievious labours upon himself, aud was without 
ceasing continuously occupied in weeping and sorrow anl mourning for 
his sins, and these blessed men (since these also were very perfect in their 
mauner of life) used to relate to me', « Whenever we see the blessed Thomas, 
we find him beating his face, aud saying, ‘Woe to me, my brethren, since | 
have consumed my days in vanity, Woe to me, since my moments have 
melted away iu evil deeds. Woe to me since my life has been squandered 
in works of darkness. The world has deceived me. The demons have 
mocked me. My mind has been lost in the vanity of the affairs of this lying 
world. Pray for me, my brethren, that the merciful God may receive me in 
repentance, and not turn his face away from my hatefuluess. Pray for me 
that the door of merey at which I am knocking may be opened to me, and | 

1. This must have been in 53% (p. 209,; but the words though giver in the present, appear as spoken 


al the beginning of his ascetic life. 
PAIR. OH. — Y. XVIR — F. l. lá 


ine JOHN OF EPHESUS. [104] 


pay 9X2 999 st Jio, Asay Gate case o5 Lh] sal 
es bias be Jig? Laatia eso So bl) pBas—M 
and pas] awe aer pinlo Jae Histo «Jase creo hol. ek Jor 
foot Lus fy [omine uoa us foot zoo] Ja] asc ads vo OS uo 
A 000 wr! A Joo Ji SAS shoo] Sd haa bopa xe 
Dor Ne] aau Say | aalo “omase eeu lad Sag ce 
"bera Tuer Ses. Joa ae “Addo Ms ans o9 Jonas Joo p50 Joa fa ase 
jeu) Jax lanso Shoo wall 0 bagasse Jet Jas sos. Lanas 
.Jasel fasting haay SNo «260 4430 saan] Jm lup 20449). Ss 
oda] 9| p feiprenadfs 2 "eins fex eae Jide Jeunes" Jano 
Jla; pad Jua» “Pato Mas cash Oly Cadel reel JNa 


hoe: Aspa «MS «0o hinaa -> woo >L r. Amao 


L blag’ bl. -—-cn hee mdr o Bomm — 4. B |LadsBuso. — >, | qe uia 5 [Saom9/ 
Hg-K Bins emo — 7. HB gowo Lass. 


may find the life of my wretehed soul whieh was lost. AH the earefulness of 
life | for my part expended on these corruptible concerns of this body of 
dust; and life has passed away and death has come near, aud corruption ts 
at hand, amd judgment has overtaken me. Aud what shall } do, my brethren? 
Woe to me woe to me, the erring ene. Where, pray, was my darkened 
mind, that it did not think of these things Ull to-day". As often as he saw us» 
these blessed men used to say to me), « by reason of the sound of his sobs 
aud his weeping and mourning for his soul he would make us also weep ». 
When he had been in that pit six years, because attacks of bodily infirmity 
and the influence of damp vozi had greatly. alfected him, and he had become 
infirm by reason of the severity of the labours which he had laid upon 
himself, they with great bree lifted him out of it. After a space of eight 
years the holy bishop Mare departed from the body iu Alexandria', while 
his two sisters? also who were deaconesses were there in Alexandria, women 
lio are themselves also iu truth among the saints by reason of the greatness 
ir mode of life. And. after the decease of the blessed bishop Mare’, 

Fo depiivalion is unznb, the date as probably 229. Indus ease. as Th, was ia the 


alto bas - nob later Chan st owe sve Ies vile ae 3. Un B the 
(Py FEST Los a 


[95 LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN, 105 


"eus oaa Lese) [xa yar alai] iij -Jis laomas! 
wey od fiol LaS fassaase Laio] lisa dd vrao oh MHA 
ely ‘Yel v Lias] <>? «9er aio Da fla S Ms ‘Joo lex 5. 
Joa Ja Joas Koo sor Dawo ha w aX loo JNa 
Č yami} La fsada o» ooo xA Dax becas JL t20 “Lusak 
"Nass 9&2; Woo -aaan kasno, eda xA. Soau - foian 
SJ Naso ran ha q% “haag we? Oot l saaw ad Laan 
NST PIL Lasa vaan amao] Ne .Jootl he ps0 Js ` A. 
J NI b>, heh o8 «el n>» pasar MES clo :Jana; a-a 
Plasts I} Nhs paltda.ao9 yel warns y dd CTS Loot 
wot ERCON poo JJL colo $ -yo $ Ms Nl boy) pel «n9 lo 
Ja2.: Ody tha wor ll n> oaio, oor Jersey o Noui] fret 


Ja e -ooann DNs Daio jme. Py saayana Aaaa 2o 


]. B geet ble Tso, 21) oats goy bonas [ES wor ISa slk am, — s BSb 


aLi haag. — s. i toa eds bool — 7 1) oai SOT NT Bes Bete eNe aa n ana. 


psl > — ILL B œ boe — 12 B Jae ho — 13. A Shans — qi [tds ias ka; YW fo Dihs 
— D. D Paa — In DS — 17, B o. Biad ,a9olo. — is, p tlle. 


his sisters with the rest of the company 2530 that was with them prepared 
io carry his bones down to his own country: and they sent the blessed 
Stephen the deacon to Theodora, who had before interested) herself in 
procuring their release from exile ifesan who also at the time had become 
queen‘: and she thereupon issued an order that the blessed man should be 
carried down. „And. when the order came. they therenpon continued 
constraining this blessed miu who loved the wilderness to show his gratitude 
to his holy bishop, and consent to vo down with them with his bones to his 
country. But the blessed man utterly refused 10 do this. saving, « [Ht cannot 
be » And, when they had made many attempts to induce him to conse: 

to vo down, and if he wished, return. saying to him. « Ifyou wish this, 
it would not be right for vou to leave vour estate eset, and vour alfurs to 
chance, but vou ought to vo down and arrange matters as vou wish between 
vourself and vour sister, and come back ». and. when thes had urged him, 
he considered this to he the right course, sinee he eame to this conclusion, 


that it was not in accordance with right that his albur- should remain 


| rem Apr., a3. 


tlourth 


PATE 


V 


106 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 196] 


eels a | ooo! mike po sexe, Loot La c0 onu) aaO 
sa x) JNxe Bo qe Soari ele arto JON “Laas 
Naso Lot p vo Sol Jy Lasol5 ‘elo tr wands, md 0.3, 
y^ Taas, oN User Pol gaad vd pal og p . Lasa wol, oppad 
walled -karo Phang laas cer og PA] Jas Nolae] Jason "al 
pel er a E I dul fats E Soy foot oil 


M pea Pa] Sado oad "Tne psy XM pol učo Css, 


oóp «D el ey AN oa Laas cade! Laso oppor [TOS Hy 
[S Tuo. “wd so oU caddy pec oou] romps Molana < 
y [35a3eo frase IM ona Jor P 400% qano Lao lais 
HS ano oka q p 20015840 op) Ja-3—! AN «ono ba 


0a JKuu do MCN Jassos as] aD aaao PING ES 


LA wom — 2. p Bs. 4o Mss. wim — 1, D o wom. 5. Boom, — 6, A wor -- 7. Bae. 
s pæl — spams Maso — ds Boo — D. B eBoy — 2. DJ el — 3. P bee — 14. SS. 
— Y. A eorr. from 9> gs Beet — 16, BD O0 — 17, B com — 18, B eoe aoo olf. — 


10, B goue: 


without provision; and he accepted and went down with them in silence, 
and with his head covered, and his tears always flowing. Aud. when they 
saw that he was constantly weeping night and day, then. these holy women 
also who saw that his tears ran down upon his food, and on the road also 
while he was travelling again the same, and similarly also at his lodging- 
place, being much astonished ai his sorrow, would say to him : « What is 
the matter with vou, father, that von thus constantly weep? » But the 
devout and holy man would say to them : « I weep because I am sick; 
but pray for me ».. But they, as they used to relate, « as if to jest a little 
with him said to him : ‘And what of it? Does a man who is siek thus 
constantly weep? But he said to us : « A man who is seriously ill, if he 
feels that his complaints are giving him pain, weeps even if he does not 
wish it^ oœ. And so we would praise God, who had thought him. worthy 
uch sorrow and weeping and humility, and had given him repentance 
might know his blemishes. But, when they had gone down and 

| city. and the magnates and their kinsmen and the whole city 


l ul lo receive them. and the bones of the blessed. bishop had 


[197 LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 197 


Joa keas o£ Jöt IAS [saco Laag, saa aana o 
lasag <: og JI ss SS» «Ml |. Pas Nas, feosey o Bivi 
Mas) hoN JNa EN «aet em Ji seas p. « soo, 
Jae nol cope Lapos passe, ba q% ful Sly Jeol crear vido 
Joi. Woo SNS oaaao oaoa Moo uu] as Jasal Lie pel 
JA Q20 LoD Sollo hpa Kus Dhao oM 6N -a0 JL] boa fap! 
Ihe stay faso :a3ojao joa ‘aas, ou. Hspdop> liha oo el 


Joo So sag] J| oa uaau] Naso odo s Say :0 ooo <p 


ee 


Om c» iex Low : fiam T% COR Jae Say + Joo a] — Apo a WENO h. 
Jes as i a sns P haeo Ioa Jp ye aD xe y Lea t^ 


oO 


oog «9 JAosN sos farts olo Je oog xA "adr Naso 


1. B Nas ln». — 2. B dns. yao — 3. Boom. — 4. B lees. — d. Bins. ec — 6. poda 1L 
o W»o por — 7, B (sic) exa» ,; os 135a iaon uo Sl. — s, R en SULLO V us. — 9, B oS». 
- 10. B h36zsl- 


heen laid in his martyrs’ chapel which he had built, called that of Beth 
Sharla‘, they proceeded to enter the city; but the blessed Thomas directed 
his steps to a monastic convent on the north of the city which is called 
that of the house of Mar John, of which I also was an inmate for about 
19 years from the time of the departure of the holy Maro. my spiritual 
father?, both when it was sullering persecution and when it was at peace’. 
To this monastery then this saint came ; and he went in and prayed, and 
he asked for a lodging, and it was given him. And, when his sister, whose 
name was Cosmo, who also was a woman of virtuous habits of life, and 
the other persons of high position urged him to go into his house and thal 
of his people, he did not yield to them, saying, « Learn, my brethren, 
from the divine psalmist who says, ‘One day in thine habitation is belter 
than a thousand’* ». And, when the blessed Stephen the deacon saw 
that he had taken up his lodging outside, because they loved one another, 
and also imitated one another in the matter of virtuous practices, he also 


L Hc. Shouse of eye-fitm (4°. Le wrongly reads ‘Beth Shneta’ (honse of rain). "the reading of 
both mss. is clear, -- 2. 522-540 (2). Julin's figures are not always quite aecarate ; see Tutrod . — 3. As 


the monks were in exile till the end of 530 (see Tutrod.), the arrival in Aridi cannot be earlier than 
that lime. — 5. . s. LXXXIV. IL The word for ‘habitation is Hie same as that for * monastery". 


198 JOUN OF EPTIESUS. 198!) 
x asso CENE La soto foa T olas pads oo ol Ns eR 
oooo Japa 9013929 Kufuas oaio] amaw, "We potus) 
SOain 009 cook! JI Njaa D el EC «3 A22 No 
» faosdl wer UO gor «93224 PASO) “OS loa Noms «Jot las 
ooa] Jpdo faso ods; cot Oly Lol [123930 [fos jax aso Nos 
"ndesh.aczwo Jlasas jes je» nau oa el je JU 3 madsen Joo 
Jorco Jl PAD £2 Shean dy saoga, rae HAS PAD jall oa Oly Lel 
je oo Nus > oà 'Jlasas JNa; daas, ausi Sx log 
lisah, olja Yr .JLo3N sos lina, pene "oou NS. Daw ooo Joa 
"saa JLL hasas fas) Jlasi fal <0 Jaky )--l <>} : fsoofl 


AGSK i efe 


«420.20 ooo —— er Sad as J Lex ]a5oto desee Loot Jiao 
aD Kas Naas dard pa «oS. Joot quits xol, Sa loe Lh 


1. E. feo far eos s. — 2, Lb o Leo leam 3. B deae. — 4, T1035 doas. — 5. B IDL — 
b Bin. PR — 7. D be Nene 


asked to lodge outside in the monastery. And thus they did, while both 
of them were detained. because they intended to return. to the desert 
together. And they were delayed for two years: though, if their thoughts 
had not been completely set upon God, it would have heen decided that they 
should remain for good. The blessed men thenceforward together with ZwU 
the deacon, who also was a clerevinan (4.21293) of the chureli under the same 
boh Maret, himself also devoted himself to death or life with the blessed 
men, who himself also astonished those who knew him by the manner of life 
Which he finally adopted, while it would never have entered any one's mind 
that that man woukbever place upon his neck the great yoke of monasticism, 
And the three of them thenceforth lived with one virtuous purpose, while to 
ee to what humiliation the blessed Thomas had come from what splendour 
mid greatness astonished and saddened everyone ; aud so many used to spurn 
l despise everything in hin, 
bis space ol iwo years then he occupied in making an equal division 


hnself and his sister, saving, « She is in the world, and needs her 


noa dierent wars, 


[199 LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPUEN. 199 
wali JH aa frokso exero aa] baaa Jo -aal e Ano 
zean Nawo ards Jogo D 490 aa aus ied Dt pt 
od uo Ns pose Pu s soo Joo? ous peas as p Jess Joa Pron 
hawl onis Adao flasuzpo ud loot: <> yl Ll sod JL? œ 
y o Nooo pl «Male oda "Laos olo uoopo Map: peo 


. 


pal J Jor JE Tod fol Nl ana wo lise oaa Tu] gaad 
So waxlo pyh ol Pk ypo Jor -ynl an pay Laz 
Japa y^ Joo Na] Je Ni] pM fase SA Nul boys t fas Rican a. 
L? 2 hasad x4 oo a] boys y Ses e» JN bia el Jao 
wed Joa so o Loot haao awa So tpa | noa Moa $35] olads 
cope GINS Juni oaa "Bh £e 2a] Jiao eL .5 
„haï Joos Jos; Laa, dans lasso vol ol ^ esa 1.118 rb, 


tl. Bom, — 2. B yos »Xa.o o0. | oec sawo — 4 B Vg. 5. Bo 25 Mao’oro solos. — 
6, B hæla. — 7, B hadr = 8. p BU — t. D oso 455 N eco. 


share. | am not required to dispose of anything except my own ». When 
they had completed everything, and lie was thenceforth desirous of returning 
to the desert, being every day vexed and annoyed and distressed at his deten- 
tioun from that country, L inasmuch as | was close at hand and had been in 
constant intercourse with him because | had seen his manner of life, and had 
itecia) before him, would say to him as if 


vei 


also gained freedom of speech (zz 
jesting with linn, « Why, pray, are vou vexed, father? Lo! are vou not n 
a monastery? (for are you in the world?), lo! it lies before you to fast and to 
pray, and practise asceticism as much as you wish. Wherefore are vou 
distressed? You had a cell in the desert, and To? here too is a cell. Do in 
it as vou wish ». But the blessed man, while | on my part was saying these 
things to him, kept his hand restiug upon his eheek, and looked at mein 
astonishment; and at last he sighed and said to me: « Cana slave then (a4) 


serve two masters'? or again ean a man be in imterecnrse with God aud 
e 


I, Luke. SI d3 


Bieb 


a, N&AANO «oS s Je So «No oco 


200 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 200] 


ooo Linge ` Lae eom leo vc asl pay sul | Laassoo 
foods <0 Jla) UX Luo — e "apo wiadrato «JN sog 
obe <% [updo J' x woo INi Nj] spo JI e of .—M Jamu JL- x 
Lid Td qon Lh yl Kofas Sero vM Ed 
OAD} gS J q x hue T Shs dos cates ha) ec v» 
«9 RAO) Ui duds ~ Ixa Sx So Joss I Ls! » fant] 
Nor Jootss0 ^ solo sjo 2360 Nus, Iso <> J 2 JL AS 
Na] sp ee, JE Joc pepo eK <0 7 DRA bo s0 Jad 0 lass o> 
es) Layas Joe, ees] Wwa voaao Lua aNass 


ol JNa of JNa ssl a iSc: OWN S20 [sono Woo No 
I?I saso :froas of as vo [3353 Ga Js. Moot Jas, ol JA anal 
el en I. oos Dad zuad] xo See Jo £20 J P 


* 


1oO0t0£ 20, <% Na 


|. | wena ude 2. Tt lenia s of — 3, Bins wœ — V. D ins OD — 3B S» el- — 6. B om. 
— 7. A ALlitao: — s, I voat — 9, Bins, œ gowl. — In B idee el. — TL. Bins es -- 12. B 
ins. ee 0 qus ee, 


with men? and can one see any of one’s relatives and bodily kin (voz! aud 
approach spiritual things? aceept my statement, sir, that for me a foreign 
land is much better, and it preserves me from many impediments. Or know 
vou not That hour after hour and moment after moment privily steal and 
spateh away part of our life like wolves and flee from us, so that, sinee, if 
all our lifetime we run after one moment of our life, we shall not overtake 
it, how, father, shall we not weep and lament for one day only that passes 
idly from us, without bearing the fits of our praises and presenting them 
to God. and again ‘that also our petitions and prayers and requests may 
on it be ! depicted and ile visible before God? Know vou not that man’s 
days and his years are themselyes like volumes full of letters, and every day 
and hour on which i man does good or evil, ov performs praise or prayer, that 
hour or day records them upon itself, and presents them before God, and, since 

Lis omniscient, in order that the inan may be judged or applauded accor- 


line to his conduct in life, and that everything that has been done by him 


tus. a negative. and render ton whieh our... requests are not. 


[201 LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPTEEN. 201 


~ xs v 2 Jo ere rr xao No Jipa wordy ator 


„an clo ag, clo Las où o> rows) P o "oOo v 
Las oot] INS «ooo Nag «e Lids; col Clo Jah Jasco 
ex» od oou Nar JL disc Jorassle Lasse fuse cate oo px 
. Jao, X9ousle cà es cac) e aa LUH ewo bance -o> oos 
Laou Nioo «LS poor Jado- Laas, Jaano - has, Jpolo 
| aa au] D a GH DP Jo Jaunsoo - fodas, Lrosaso 
JNa wos soe Ni] hoa So - Juss] L>] of haao a A9 
dle sols Jie Lo» J 2 s N Laus «Do pansy som flo h~ 
Dada alanad pliu cae! Lise! ial, Jio aa gaioi 
lao òa gidai [Noe Jyor or asc Soka flo ohay bot 
eS lee Bo Ba sete eal eee ee NOS 
Pander OSS daim Dole jlo wise ^ Less Jor Nelo. Sosa, ts 


1, A aor. 2, A pies — 3. Bom. — 4. B Alaia qe "esas — 5, TD. dh. aS col mudiveo. 


may be known to hun, therefore his own moments approach in order and pass 
before God, each one of them carrying that which that man did in it. whether 
it be what is good or what is evil, and showing it to God. And, if again 
a day which has passed of our life is one of abstention from good deeds and 
from evil, the place in the life of the man whoever he be is in it similarly 
void and torpid and useless, and it stands up and aceuses him, sinee that day 
carries the fruits of the saints, and the confession of the conlfessors, and the 
praises of those who give praise, and the prayers of those who pray, and 
the alms of the givers, and the forgiveness of those who forgive, and shows 
them to God, every man's own actions which he performed in it being depic- 
ted on it. And now, O father, when these things are so, how shall we 
neglect one hour and not tremble to let it pass from us void without carrying 
the fruits of our. repentance, and without the words of our praises heing 
written upon it? How, our brother, shall we be caught by the deceit of 
this lying. world, and not understand and consider that from this hour in 
which we now stand we were equally distant from the time of our birth 
down to the present day, and, since we began to speak. it has been quickly 
fleeing from us and departing, and. if we run after it lor a thousand vears, 


*Blz0v*a. 


fA uS Y*B. 


202 COHN OF EPHESUS. [2027 
Dado. root cane JD asda ADD daar of soe cula as 
"uacu OSS MoS os el Sy] h~ bags a` Las € «Jio 
loparo aar sous Soo Glas Jy nda so [aspe oap ro 
odo Sedo uS ue hapo flo [odes Jy Jas] Lanao Laso wise 
eu» flo “hasy flo dazas Jo proud JD» wos "hn ja bes 
«Do “Rusa sade vxor uo» e vor bl pepe o» er Jis 
Aunoéo LoIaataan yard "ow» Los “Xx Sau La; Jorsol -a Laso 
Js h^ «2l MORAL. vxo Le aD ux flo Jars lars ooa 
Jays «o Lasao .-Jlasslo lado Jas) Jl, bes Isl [Nasa 
oml po ahd L? erst Do Sjo joa HAJ Jamad Jen Js, 
S» «ais Aci] JMaxee jio wo Gul) Maco aaa p] 
«c! US Up» LU sac vases daly [ous Sao saco Ss 
forse J| fee JN yards ado as! Mas Landes use qose 


(OD ee — 2. B ins, bod. — 4. A oim. — 4, B asio aaps whee — 5. D dns bh. — 6. B 
~ - * 
La — 7, Fi ins. e po. — s, T; seta. und? eo th B be 935. $34 doel Bs Sa — do, B 
ins. e — IL B ota. lz. D a2» xo. 


we should not be able to overtake it again or do see it for ever and. ever? 
And for this reason it is much better Tor me to go and sit in some corner 
ventos aud weep for my life and for my empty moments and Tor my profitless 
years, und for my hours that have melted and passed from ine. empty 
and void, where neither acquaintances nor relatives will harass me: because 
in the moment when the sentence goes forth upon me no friends, or loved 
ones, or kin vin, or members of the familv, will give me any pleasure ». 
\s for me. while Ewas listening to all these things from this saint, great 
marvel fell apon me that he so effectually controlled his thoughts and eol- 
lected his mind, directing it toward God, and did not allow even f it were 
meddle hour or moment of his life to be lost without praise and praver and 
portance, and thas shunned and dreaded and feared the waste of one hour 

hy. Phen 1 marveling in my mind thought, «© Pray, what sounds and 

T Ponentations will suffice to make tament for my own self, and for 

j] 


those who are The me? sinee 4 ave wasted some of my moments, 


that Che whole of my life, in wantonness 5z:zvix : and not only has 


[203] LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 203 
<% Mas) Jul otal +29 JXsdasy óc» Nas JI olo fll ad 
Led: c jao; Moa L'N Joys Ll «oio qao Lisak lads 
JNaes[seo Lasn fared Qo Joe Joa oe] Loa Joa Jes + 
yel aD Moa pal alad ad booty Lawaan e] ,» JAD 
pel 2 eM Joa hass wa, 9e JS] oe had bb pai jx» 
arh uM Hò JE ol aos bop Jena pal erg Nails LIK aso; 
Jes od Wd JS a Wee PbASSh:o JAN, uoo] JNa, 
holo Naa JR Mofs0 45 QD Jingo nM) laD yilo 
ye Lassus “Lasso ya No HD: LN lal Jias + eon 
haass oot JLN, GX» roto LAD, «30 oot auo eps J, poarco 
Onc «30 acs oo vo > LL Lo Se) necs ea es Ho Lous 
Moon: Lemiol, Ade gat eem, eae! dil X00 “Shans lolaio 


]. B la. H9. — 2, R haalia. — 3. Bins, mg — s Bel — 5. Boom. s — G B Das 007. B 
oad. 95 Hag oe. — s. B corr, from as and ins, das. 


one hour not been treated by me as of any account, but not even a whole 
year of days also ». And marvelling | went out from the presence of the 
blessed man, and used to repeat all these things to my brethren with trem- 
bling. Now the blessed man’s manner of life while he was in the monastery 
was as follows, fasting from one evening to the next, and seanty food: and 
indeed with the freedom of speech (rabinats) that I had acquired with Inm 
| used to say to him, « In truth | wonder how you live »: but he wonld an- 
swer me, saying : « What have | gained by feeding my body as if for 
sacrifiee down to the present time? Or ought | not to know that food 
belongs to the creeping thing and the worms? Wherefore must | take fire 
and seorch my eyelids? When the body receives foods and is nourished 
and grows fat, the fire of passions and lusts is kindled in it, and it seorches 
aud burns the eves of the soul so that they do not see and restrain it from 
sinning. And now, instead of it hanging to the soul so that it is brought 
down and, wallows in the mire of the body’s tusts, let the soul hang upon 
it, that the body may rise out of its mire and share in the souls purity 
and lightness. Those who concern themselves with the nourishment of their 
bodies, thinking that it is a good thing, are weaving a cope of pigskin and 


oO" Cae de. 


PONE 


SE 


oii has a S 


204 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [204] 


mio qao vaso Je flee’ - ooh] Js coos xem rP 
t Jlsas Lansa NS val MOSS IMS x95 asio QoS AS 


joa eas Ajj | Joe oóà oo -joa yanas > [2 d pels 


ror LAN- “JRasopo Joe xx) see oftasasl Joo Sese 
*Lojas GS -Jna Nas yo loot duke] "Ice Jh Jeeps 
jas PLADS JI, haoa + Joor J) «aoo JS dor JN ipo 
sa JE e» Jago Jim zs Nous Ll ‘g-a Jiow J'Kaxeal yar Joor 
aN jms JK b] ‘alo Nes peel) Soo Kuo Lo uo 
Kad O 20% EAD 19 Sjoa Ka] a ws Kas Joo] pando 
jos vnu Yoyo "aa doo] Jsa per Jie Les IN saa) 
IN oot wads flo Lao Japs «s p3 gool qA IND 
Io gai JAL DA d J la a D wklad 


L V oaDsalo gs haoo — 2 A om — 3. 1i 0 ES - 4B Le 5. BoweasaTOse — 6. B ins. 
eA — 7. Ton, e — 8. o uS Xe loo Dol sands ISelo. — 9. B pl. (sic). — 10, B Wo Saee ox 
11, 4 usima dss 6 aalap tres. 


throwing it round their own neeks. and giving the end of it to Satan to 
deag them to tormento. But, while he was delighting us with such words, 
he would abstain even Trom the seanty quantity of food that he was in 
the habit of taking. But his recitation of service was one which lasted 
without ceasing from the first hour in the night! until morning. while during 
every marmitha? he would make thirty Egyptian. gennflexions whieh are 
called prayers. until he accomplished five hundred during the night with 
the service of matins; and these | myself on many nights secretly. coimted 
without his dixeoverinz me: because T too also occupied a cell. behind 
his eell, and there was only a partition between me and him, while we were 
some distance Trom the common chapel of the brotherhood, together with 
the virtuous men Stephen and Zw). and we alone lived in cells. The first 


Hine that bheard the sound of his s:izzvotzc © behind my cell, sinee he used to 


aoee to be reekoned from midntett. He eould hardly begin at 7 P. M. and, if he 


(bone Ses poat allo Gt po 21. do m oa A divislon of the Psaltis (ur. atasil. OF 
h that we shoutd probably ntederstand Hal le made 50 zenullevions. during 


of penitence 


205) LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 205 


jul yas JIL nce) aee Say b) yb ioa sos MJLA Ji 
jn Nos JLo Knox's yo vlad Jo foot JL] Lisa saam) [Sosik 
xao Ns saasa -peaa sooi] woh qai v2 Ja lee 
oe ca Moa xu» bees njo Meus aa qo [1200 JLpus ono 
„Moba pelo was Nooo you 2! p» flo Stoo anw use AAAS 
ato uaau pol © flo pa C» xe su Jeg lado yd: 
p ogo .. wol Kuo We [xo Moa saan Jlo Togo LADS pad Aoa 


„aœ joa Kul ba lag Daso Jas Jas ps Laak oos DA oA 
abut or bids Bo] po oh jy i3 p wi dads SN 


Spe (| ad poe Hage Lens pad Dey Jas See cio Bees 
pubsoo : poy] Joojas NA vol Ll pan hal, ho sul pers; bi! 
laS "Je ooi sul JD [uer Lya Gy Soo oc LOO L 
x ool als z! oe] haos ooa oao Dana) Jl, ode 


L B S — 3, p «casas ido — 3, D oni, — à, X eee — 3. B ins bs — 6, Elem wha 
eie 7.] €weOspaar — 8 D -wodl 


make three knocks in quick succession, the sound would come to me just as 
if three men were striking together upon a smith's anvil with hammers, the 
sounds following one another till morning, since his hands first. struck 
the ground, and after them his knees, and lastly bis head: and so he would 
suddenly sink down. until I thought. that the sound was coming up from 
beneath me, while I even erossed myself aud said, « Perhaps Satan is 
mocking me, and is making me hear this sound in order to deceive me »: 
aud I would go outside by night, and would hear the sound: and | would 
come in again, and there was the same sound. And, because the blessed 
man showed great care and earnestness in charging and entreating evervone. 
« Let not a man approach the door of my cell till the morning. because 
fama very bad <leeper, and, if Į am aware that any one is passing r und 
the place where f am sleeping, it is quite impossible for me to sleep 
again, and | am tormented the whole night. on account of this charge 
therefore no one approached his cell, lest he should annoy him, since 
we thought that it was as he said; but he wishel to aet by stealth 
and not be di-covered bv stealth. 


ECTS E 


"Uo WOLE B. 


: EL AM ou A (Meee Fe 
cd. Ve lle Mc nh cM |e à Jus a DA Cea [I JL £2 N. 
- = eo. ee 
tp pods Veet tS et ee o3 ode etas S o Lows ex 
| D dio decals Ae cac [d ds mu I^ = 
pi “Pae pa o] te oS —— ee] eSI, T xc at 


i Pier ere : X 
oot nte ut Loa bud s LN asis oisi L Mules Bisse 


tetanic Sigg Se lub. Les "6. dag dew uei PEN Jaa Lo mue 
» 


staal qu cuu ha DS Basis: aaa La E 





aN aas hons as a OA Lu V a le 
Salhi jw pi fk 
hones Jta —— eA Jem y sumen s Jas Jex Jan > EL 
| x Dom po ps y bl Je wes. Liasis 
—— fir o a Lasis Hess Leio! [nce DSa 


bc aE | | EEA AA 5 k2bsiei Laua e's cases cow 


Fi 


‘se aas haii Juas Ja Jia 


^4 - fet ee er EE E eme Bea Mee L.fTa.e 

y RULES ELI L2 E 
| S8VYeien runpa a -ce and being for mant mest- andired by 
t eed ped, Tee Y arar Thes xe E more n oere Ereat]y 
hutes da nat pesine -ulllelent re-clution co er dure that sound which 
Isis cred en date aed fake no notice. D went outside aod stood ttl, 
fe oto, d 25 4nd LI softie approached the door. and found that it 
) pi ed dona 4 ull this labour. panting a- if he were 
TERRE hore edoa- vreatlv amazed at this man- labour. 
laut du De 1 Hatthilll Scan ee alb. and ral-c:d bich hy the number of its 
pur and hi idosgapt himeelf iu a little piece of hair-mattinz fitted to 
lu tabure n under hi- Jeet ^2 and on it he rested so far a- he -lept at 
Al huile don he presented the appearance of really -Ieepiuz on hi~ bed. 


| 


from that fune Pike an idle msu would often keep count of the Iudus- 
mo prasers both those of the night and those of the day. And 

ard the sinuou- men Stephen sud Zw the deacons made it their 

mate him qm everything. aud they them-elves also underwent 


hen then thes had thereafter made preparations to set 


307: LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 207 


Joel INSS + yanpo x0! ydo EE CENE ixi pe JoL wares 
IRs peo pools pepo ol hex “Lado Laak, oaan, el 
aD Lio yo da YNashso aih Lida «leo “loo Madal: 
Sad oad as Shad Joos y HOSS mua No GSC, 
Ly Neo NJ pou Sly WM volo SelNsaxuo o NS eo alodo 
fell q% aaa Koper Nul Aeg Jaars Sa sob hoa vao foa 
Na olo sandy! bop aooaa paaa b] slo bae: 
«Qo opa rss I met D SLINA eM jos maw Lado] 
NoL.a-s aas OAN? hor ama, je Py SQso HEC Irs 
sms «or low diaaa Nona bana laws Laaso -Jans Misses 
as) frcofly unl 2M Wes xe | Joa NJ ase fion <> poo “Joa 
aso JI JN nwo haas Laxo Ra) J brian flan so Jy e 


L eters gel c. V hae Som, s bee eee - Eos €» — r piene 


adatas (OS [Ase 7, B hasap Sane wt we — o Aom — phas Nh pu. E Esel; 
— 11, Bho ge loo Sida. 


forth to the land of Egypt. and to live there as before. queen Theodora, who 
had been in intercourse with the blessed Stephen the deacon both before she 
became queen and after she had become queen. sent magistrian- ' after him 
and a letter. earnestly inviting him to come up to the capital in order to he 
with her in the palace /—xzzzvw . because of hi~ eloquence and his conversation 
and his wisdom, and moreover because he also lived a pure life and after the 
manner ofa solitary: and this further hastened them in making their depar- 
ture. Then thev left the district of the East. and Lal-o with them in inter- 
course with them, a~ far as Antioch. And there Stephen thenceforth con- 
tinued to entreat Thomas. -aving. « My brethren. let us on no account part 
from one another: but. in order that this woman's will may not be disap- 
pointed, let us vo up together to the roval cily. and return and zo down 
together by sea to the desert ». But he. declining to do this. continued 
entreating him and saving: Pray for me. my brother. since Thomas will 
not see auvone from this kingdom here ». And so with weeping and many 


1. Officials of the staff of Tue meister off 


* 


Lao D 


208 JOUN OF EPHESUS. (208) 


Neo €] Je ale | fade] Lej ad snas > Jip ete 
pees Mbas Ll [PS EET les la. lo JN vÒ c6 Jee] 
-— key o ol Node Taag t - bsoofk bo wed OO DA 
Jad) «iol perso Josie, opr jason, «3e fraso «peasy Spy 
aai, c» «oec y^ yo ord yo eM SN Jas Ks 
Jh pr AZ Sado J>, Dad» JDI N? Ji pe» Jarn N? 
Napas yada baa Mlo daas ool Je Jei Jolo jl 
Pl e has eaa) eMe eX yy zax JM] pdx JlexMe 
La :qtoms au aco cote wid QA] exe Jas] -Aal Laag 
Jena aM Nul s Jer Jaco wel onte quads Jena. Asians 


Ns no Radon QD» nol yoo JM ble NI Jesse, oo 
ois SOLDO pee So /as;o aso Lasoo T o9 «e eee 


|. V BAe duck of spare - 2. Bae. — 3. Bins, e a ~ 5. B ins, coo — 3, B bhis — 6. B 
Akg esos — 7. B ator 22:2, from which A corr. 


-obs they parted from one another, while the blessed Stephen was entrea- 
ting him and saying : « Pray for me, my brother, that I may soon be dismissed 
from that city and come down to you, and we may end our lives together 
in the feonvent of solitaries' ». But ihe holy Thomas, shedding tears and 
sobbing, said to him : « Beware, my brother, and take care of your soul; 
and day by day, as far as in vou Hes, entreat God in penitence for your sins. 
Let not your thoughts mock you and say to you, * You shall go out to the 
desert and pray to God’; because you shall never see the desert again: but 
neither indeed shall we meet one another in the body any more: and you will 
live in the royal city till the end of your life. Accordingly pray for me ». 
And they prayed, aud they set out at the same time, while the blessed 
Thomas said, « As, when we left our country, we enjoined upon our kinsmen 
vig and everyone to suppose that they were thus following us to the 
rave, so, my brother, in this hour also do vou think that you are following 

to the grave and | you». And, while we were all Hstening to these 


the fears of us all burst forth with sobs. And thus they for their 


“209 LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN. 209 
SNL pues b] aadso po Jprcans UX Koco Aaoi vol Lilo 
Rood xL fasta Mads’ po cux] "Isot haag Lad No 
S „ulas 38M Joo Maly [35 baas SQroo » > oen aso 
dod eren Nipan Ies veros SwjlsM s2aass Aufams 
Je oo Mo .2otr205 Jloorrol soo fao) Lisa: soar. Mo 
wide bapor aNs Qo auc JLS pasii ends Jesse) aay 
JA. p» oso] Saa -haa NS othupioc “eas wt e bbe 
NP TE "oo ora» —€— . aso! p 200 a», fl we 25. roo ao hl 
— NW MSS Jya aaao oaa Jino yelo pracardo 
poo uaa] Da Sato aol 234 p20 os Loco Lazy 
Lopa 5 2d aoo bl Wo» Ji.» Jie | 12050 Pado 


wasiy liod o0 lamad alaz 4920 woo 720* Loose. — 7, B Mxtoo pe. lassol pho “is. — 
S. B igma + pooll. — 9. B oD akd — 10. pde aaa — d]. B Ipa [ne we balas — a R 
waso OL x20 ,5o. 


1, B j9 mos — 2. p beol agn. — 3. B bl sears. — 4. B ins œ — 3. |Boqm 2o. — o6. 


part separated, each of them to his own quarter; and 1 returned agai to tlie 
convent, intending by making petition to obtain leave, and betake myself 
soon to the blessed Thomas. And after my return 1 was a petitioner for two 
years; aud, on account of the great love that the blessed men bore towards 
me, scarcely with difliculty did they allow me to go'. On reaching the city 
of Alexandria we learned about the life of the blessed Thomas, und about his 
marvellous habits; and we went out to him to the desert called that of Men- 
dis, twelve miles above the habitation of the holy Mar Menas?. But, when 
we arrived aud | saw the blessed man, I scarcely recognised him, while I 
looked at him and was in doubt if it was really he, since his whole body was 
black and burnt by the sun, and all his hair was scorched and standing on 
end, and he was elad in one old garment of rags, and one ugly little hood was 
bound round his face. And, when he saw me, he was astounded, and fell 
on his face; and he came up and gripped us; and we greeted one another, 
while T was still not sure that it was he, until at last [fixed my gaze on him; 

|. Since Th. stayed at least 2 years in Amida, we may probably place Liis visit in 235: see Introd. 


and Dyakonov, p. 47. — 2. The ce ebrated monastery: see Journ Asa ser. v. lom. NTE 1858), p. als 
PATIO IS S NIB SEL Hs {a 


A Sea, 


*Blize b. 


*; ca D 


210 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (210 


£26 spo fuse oo Jaky 29 Da Jorsol palo o> Mins! JM, 
las yl -— Jl y Kasey rd Ss Latsoo Joa Seat ta Hors loa 
[sory y Joa Jae» aD b] vl p JNooà on oc» ful -.” LAS 
palo wx» NaN oe <] ot iNo Wo o9 a>] Pree nma 
aas lo joa pro. Lis eM Jet oM x coals ulaz 
Loj oA ne oe Jao Laora vla <% haD, ‘Ness 3e aso 
Lao hiaan spacey wooly “ee? = leo [Men JOL Lo y NS ao 
Jar% Da, "Laapio ERA T Jona “yar i -faapo aksjas «uA 
p> gaso Qm] aaao Thasa hgoy Laag: yar ses Joor pas) 
TH ete acrass Loto oala pason oly +. coord iroh 
o C! 6 Kao «RAS | VEM p20 haso «90112982. NS » Jaco 
< y losa» JLos5e5 xt y [5365 Jl3à3x5 -Lafl I eas 


1 Bom. — 2. li sing, — 3. B Bao — 5. B loputa betas cios. — 5. B ius. e hoi haags — 


6, B sel heat. — 7, Boom. — 8. A woo. 


aud 1 was seized with astonishment to think to what all that luxury had come. 
And, while he was exuberant with jov and was asking me, « What have 
you to sav, father? what has brought vou to the sinners? », | was looking 
at him in astonishment, saying to him, «© What has happened to you that 
vour body is thus burnt, our father? » But he after these things bent his 
looks downward aud shed tears; and he said to me; « Would, our brother, 
that my outward body might be burnt, and not my soul that is stained with 
the evil deeds that E have done from my childhood and down to the present 
lime.» After we had remained a short tine, about three months, occasion 
called us on our side to return again to Syria; and so we received the blessing 
of the saint, together with all the rest of the saints in the whole of the desert 
in whieh he was living, together with that of the blessed Zwt' the deacon; 
and we left them, and returned, promising them that we would return again 
to them. And thus we parted, we to our vain occupation, and they to their 
üirtual employment. And, when twenty six years! had been completed 
te ele life lesan ad least} sears betore Mares death qe 0195, aud therefore probably between 

which fringes His death to 248-520 add Ws visit lo 551-5254. 4. however was in. Alexandria 


Introd and Dyakonov, p. 63s and there is no evidence thal Te was Here later: and 
foots an error tor *16 atel place Thos death in 537-8. 


[211] LIVES OF THOMAS AND STEPHEN 211 


La yb wma aluan p^) wea CIE be d SING Sol, 
JN; flnaro xy D Dulo ad Liag eumd mio s oso] 
oo, s «nx Jj Jex22: o LN voha? Jl solo eoa uy Jlpnoso 
Lao; flsares Jer a> oo Sly fas! Jissasso He) Laa AS . o6 Ns 
Nai Ny [Maas uasa Lord ioo Drops or [sd qe frre Jin piso 
soy oaan 50,0 SOOM taS v6 jisoo .Lroo]! hsa} oaas 
VOA ay : 560 œ ya joa Nl fisco xo Too H COML E r= 
Less JNa jM3M [sop eS c jS Lasoo eala 
Na Liana, NS WO me Le A030 0, IEN Js y Loomis 
hado? JN Ao Laa NS. '" ele aajo “had Jlasdso Koss sol 
Jhopopsyo Jlasassy [5303 Jlsàs ES fays «oo pH oo JJ ly ba 
wis No o [5:9 LOMA soul Es; LLA foo vaoa], Colo 


l. Bom. — 2. Bom. e. — 3. B SPA - 4 B yooesh ean. npn Wo. Lag pne 


hy the holy Thomas in such great labours, in order that the conflict (xev) 
against his distresses which lie displayed by me: 


ans of his endurance miglit 
be further increased, he fell for about eight months under the chastisement 


of an illness; and then the blessed man finished his contlict (xyav)3 and he 
departed carrying the great and honoured burden of his triumphs; and we 
were not again granted the privilege of seeing bis face in the body. But he 
lelt in his place after him the blessed Zwt? the dea 


con; who also passed out 
of this disturbing aud 


deceiving world in the same «desert with greal labours 
aud noble triumphs in the. third vear after the passing of the blessed 
Thomas. And so, after we parted from them and down to the 


passing of 
each one of them, both they and we were day by d 


ay In lope that we should 
he coming back to them; and so our sins brought it about for us that we did 
not come to the place where they lived till a year after the death of both. 
But we, after we lad gone down lo Syria, went up again to the royal cilv; 
and we also found the blessed virtuous Stephen too'; who also did not fail 
to obtain the glory that is gained by great labours of asecticism and of 
abstinence; and who was moreover a great harbour (uzy) of rest for all the 


1. J. probably here returns to the narrative on p. 


210 and refers to his. first visit to CP. qn 535 
(see Inlrod.). 


- 


sna Oe ae 


SEop be 


z AN al dq b. 


212 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [212] 


93M jinas Jiaro | Lasse coos; basado .olad ooo qao 
otro Jlopro.s «3o ooa Ad) Jad 26 caso el Ll fests 
Liu Mas obi cro Suaro iso cof qo nacó apoa yopo aso 
:Joot yaw ojohad jram ARA] pe oa Jaaa 1275]; 
gary le Laa JN] Ja*3 Je» uot Xo}: LA] < oM 
J? lana ado alad coo oe! Jowsddso Laai), JNaods Joa 
< bo Joa vaoa] lasamo [si “Lanan anndan condo ' 
in Po eddies xot Ne. JNa oras Joa oet Na] Naso: 
o2 Droas m> og Slo aau Dex» Sx je © Julasoy od khs 
cà pel Je PAS alaw js oabitros oA woke! Ji +3 pll i 
e a LL Jeanne Taso qao iade "oS Joot Bali Jon tanum 
eae] <% eX oMslo o Joa Noly Larus ooo qio po OE So 


|. Hoe jatos .- u, po fet] wat. — i B eae. 4. Pans, Paz sien 5, h Ihos. 
6 A em. — 7. A haas prdbeeste — s, B Eus ne. 


alllicted who used to repair to him from all quarters, and a comforter of all 
the distressed, and a noble example to all men: so that even the king and 
queen themselves stood in awe of his venerable mode of life, and they exeeu- 
ted his orders in everything: and thus his cell had in eonsequence become 
a house of rest for strangers. And, while hall a denarius (iutceov) a day 
was allotted to his table, besides the eost (zvzópaxza) of his bondservants in 
addition to other matters, so this was not large enough Tor the expenditure 
on the strangers and the needy who used to come lo him; and not only so, 
but to the senatorsizoyoorzuuso themselves he was a great comfort and support; 
and he was very well-known all over the city, but especially m the palace 
meas). Amd, when the seutenee of pestilenee went forth upon the world 
from God ', he also too was carried off in it by the command; aud in his 
eclbas the property of a man who might be supposed to have more than five 
red pounds! weight (zevravdevi of gold? nothing whatever was found 

is death except a denariis and a half. And, while men supposed that 

oney and the coins had been taken by others, there was found a 


idee ob ei Src Pho a AIR OS. 


313] LIFE OF ABBI. 213 


s» paws ss] basy Laa 2oezibs o» esM» Mads o wos! 
bl eM JoJ, asks Lb] NS Pda. popes ie! sil oes ol 
Jw L? Lro bsiaas flo Lazors Hy Lun beans Lasan padly 
raped sida Joel usao! Lamain Joou Loo Deo fits Lal J 
SaDo QO aod «DS hoo Jioc o JE La the t9), bee 


rad orca Enard rab resins rvéusró d» 
en lala9iluo rin rna ree rl pico Ores 
Sm Auam va 


Taare aapa nes rdusnd [sad 
“rua plns 


Jla aaa jiwan qo pus joa worl -aal ba < lasak 
wasan DA, hao; Joo £p ito “flsdxo JNa; © Je to’ asivea. 


1. B lo89. — 2, Bladi ods. — 3. B ins, bor — i. B g9 bop aia pal Joel be. — 5, Bom. 
6, Boos. — 7. B with vowel points for aand i, — 8. B ins. bSvolo. 


tablet (27220) inseribed in his haud as follows : « Lest anyone suspect me 
or aceuse anyone else in any matter, Í wrile these things with my hand, that 
Į am prepared to give account to God on the day of judgment that neither 
at a distance nor close at hand do I possess anything in the world except 
this denarius aud a half; and let this go to the poor ». And thus everyone 
was seized with astonishment, insomuch that some time afterwards every- 
one used to speak of these things with wonder. 


The history of the saints Thomas and Stephen and Ze C, the syncelli and notaries 


(vordoros) of the holy Mare metropolitan of the city of Amida, is ended. 


NIV. = NEXT THE FOURTEENTH HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED ADBBL THE MAN 


OF ABNEGATION AND NAZIRITE. 


This blessed Abbi lived in a certain convent in great abnegation and 
abstinence, and severe labours. And, when the persecution on account of 
the synod of Chaleedon arose, the inmates of his convent were under the 


of ban We ce 


214 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [214] 


oa opl] colastasds ois wis jme Jede oo s Dena: 
Laaa Lad; f$ eua CEET, eas] of E Ico Law < 
Nl ee Jia Sadso SM] paaa I aa Uy 9c Tano] 
D has d Ev wre Aol by Llap ha ~ > Iis JE 
la] ohl doy Laaa JA] acy - aul asd pals Joss d P oss 
Lusa» Joo vooda], Joo ad eye einer JNa fil! fasce des; 
“J sas» jusa} Lo ‘oot Joa waas DA anano Jhoarxros kay 
A Je. ae haoo ads Jhlo yt „ha cds oe Moa Jods 
Jess So Aana, Jes Minaso Jes odes ofS Joo Kul pa oaas 
joa manag JE Joss: ons] popes ym 49 .asruol; fios) Lao 
me ad fae] + flaw] yas Jes Lag my Lang carro! ode Il 


|. B Vomdd25 Ina woonam Nooo. — 2. B opwlll, — 3, B bis. ^. A corr. from eaS]. — 
a B bees. — 6. Bins, wo — 7. B om, — 8, B ixa cos. — 9. B fe ouo Qo. 


compulsion of the persecutors united to their communion; but in the case of 
the holy old man, as they were unable to bring down his high purpose that 
was set on Christ, they gave him a charge, saving, « If you will not yield, 
since vou have been made an example to many, withdraw yourself hence 
whither you please ». Then the old man, weeping for the time of error that 
lad got possession of men, set forth and came to the community of us the 
men of Amida, whieh was living in the district of Ty sf’, in a village called 
llzvn':whieh was in number seven hundred and fifty men. Aud, because 
this blessed man was aequainted with the convent in which Twas at that 
time”, he came direct to us; and thus he attached himself to the same monas- 
tery, having one tunic and one cape made of pieces of rag fastened together, 
and a small text of the gospel teóoyaov: and he would not consent to read 

any other book except that gospel (evayyedev). Aud he chose for himself 


in corner yeux) among the brotherhood, where not much light pene- 


nd h 2. The monastery of Jolin Vitaya ch. osi The date must be 2522-526 (see 


[215] LIFE OF ABBI. 215 
JNa” slo Jia fet p JXasaaly "hadas ioa ases 
oh. RN Jos JNasaal Nass “oo -hoo Less JLexao JS 
fobs oa ‘olo MERE p saasa So 5o. 3 N20 eas Loss foo 
JIL I Sorts jene jue Jiotasy Jladssds Sado Jil Ms Ql Ilo 
vod >l J pad00 a Joa so I? LND o Joa ANS aaao Joa 
NN Lopes TET ce Joa SNL fioc Ones Ss P Nds HARM 3 
H Joa whe Jl ams, ys! 3I Loy pod I [aso MC 9D aden 
» JdoKasoy off of -P jas, of of JS SN, [so oà ol -Laë «o ol 
J alo Naxo Luso [ees Bes Maly fas] So of fds of 
cm e Blania i20 soani joo repo opas sul joo NSraro J 
aaas Joo aao, foo, O20 so fas] unis coo x o YP fabs on 
me “Mags ds Mol Hig Paat slo asm JD slo Ji] 


1. Bins, ee — 2. B ins. 9 — 3. B. 0, — h B 8109. — 5, B uut D. — 6, D wads TI 


— 3. BSL — 8. B pe ouo wpe — 9, BL — to. Bins. oto — 11. B eo. — 12. B ins. waas. 
— 13. B lo. — 14. B ins, WL — 15. B a> Dos. — 16. B leds oos. — 17. B om, — I8. B o2 loe. 
— 19. A om. — 20, B ins, lom fo wo. 


trated; and at the end of the service, when the brotherhood was scattered 
over a large number of chambers for the purpose of reading as well as for 
ilie purpose of repeating the service, he would sit iu the great common (zoov) 
chapel and cover his head with his book on his knees, while even the book 
also was eovered, and except a small surface only for the purpose of admit- 
ting light no part whatever of it was exposed. And thereupon he wonld 
open the book and gaze at it, and at once his tears would hurst forth, falling 
down upon his breast; and thus he would sit from morning till the sixth 
hour ', with his face eovered, aud weeping: and he would not turn over a 
leaf, but generally had the book open at the beatitudes, or the parable of the 
virgins, or that of the talents, or that of the banquet, or that of the rieh 
man, or any place where the subject was that of threats and judgment; and 
thenceforth not even if a man was actually speaking to him would he raise 
his eyes and look upon men outside that book: hut men did not see his faee 
(rotcwnev) until the bellman sounded the bell?, nav not even then also; for 

1. Perhaps 6 P.M.; see p. 291, n. B and eb H El, vi, 9, where it is said that after the 6^ hour 


fighting-time is past, Probably however he is referring to the services and means * from malins ull 
sexl'. — 2. Probably for sext. 


Sao TVs 


"T AUI 


AA Tus 


oa) Ga bra bh n. 


216 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 216] 
«o Jes eat, frais Sas p Jean yho lise Jal 2x0 on 
J ^as noo [sas Joa Iso Joo dts Jos ota Lasas ^ oaas 
J Špo gas au] foot sse! I Pole so] wis ja» Joor naso 
«el p ' Joa SSsaso [a e Nu; loo jol soy Jl JN cer 
as] fase DA, oD doa polio alaa Joa opas [Soo | 
oa «ado pass Nu] haao Ni] Da flo aga Ns] Sao! 
paa ooops "Kasco, Jess Nu] fx fase Joa Las furor 
MB Dd voi] Jena od Nl p ba pon L| Sexey of as 
eaae Lio JR duc omaes esso Jue Jpaos foe Joa poll 
JN» uer US ey S] Nase gana oot Jis]. Jo Ss 
Aus JE as loo Jiono Noy asang “elo god Joo ps! Hue 


L Bom, -2. B e wda — 3, Boma loo Da wl. — i, 1: $3lo eas ao jaw my hasl. 
-5. Hoe ee Cue; Autas [Na Aas ad! el Ex yy does co 9 eo o pel. — 6. D un bl .deseo- 
— 7. B idus, Ios. — s. B INg e OO (sic) eo. Mso baSe. — o, Bo. 


even during service too he would again stand in this way in the sanie corner 
(ova with his head bowed and covered, and after every sentence that came 
out ol his mouth he would utter an expression of praise with ecstasy. 
Vid he used to keep silence the whole dav, not speaking to men at all, no 
not even if anyone spoke to him. But, if any kind of occasion called him 
to speak, he would weep while speaking; and, even if one of the seniors 
eame up to him and said to him, « Wherefore, our father, are you exceed- 
ingly mournful, and do not speak and enjoy yourself a little? », he on 
his side would thus answer : « Why do vou desire a dead man who is dead 
in his sins and buried in his body to speak? For me whom you see my body 
a grave; for, like a rotting corpse in a grave, thus my soul is rotting 
thor dt dn sin; and henceforth over the dead man there is mourning only 
illl 


And even these words he would. sav with many sobs. 


\ aue way tis food also which he took at table did not go down 


(217 LIFE OF ABBE 7 


Laag liso Soa p wa oh LSD jos Nol J| eei llaa, o> 
Sao Ss jac Jn» JINI) pol Jas H; Juss joa saan bo 
„LLS ^ Sosy Ly Joa Joà et D mw [rd po J soa dla? 
iaai Jie ess uà Du Jia] cooks of con asso 
JMSNS of GIRS [sop Jena Loni ve Joa Jpshs a JI] foot 
acu, joo Naar face Litas aS Joop aaa So «sod. 
iN Jiasy JNa Jaandi «Joo JaN p Lajao «2o colo Jiya] 
Jas esl; Jo: Lo haao o Joa Laso Lanas ordo! Joo Lash 
[aai uaa Loot a od a Jas SA oa aSa [csi 
Moa aaas J wo Llo i oot yb re o Nooot Jj "oes 
who alaa AX Joa i; be ror eet Jasza, fosa. folds 
wpe waa Ji pd] p - Joa Jha on. Jxxo so S E5N5 oo oi. Joa 
fads wa Do Jii So "exc Sess eds fuyodso Jods has 


. 1. Bins, «wata, — 3. D ins loo jaa. — 3. D jo. — 42 B sash loge — 5. X 80. 26. B 
Loo lage eb un oo lmata sic) loo Ids Saxo. — 7. B omad unre So, — 8, D eh. 0. B Lesh. 


into his belly unless mixed with tears; and at night again the same. And 
so this blessed man used in truth to sorrow disconsolatelv, like a woman 
girt in sackeloth for the husband of her tender age in the first days of her 
mourning. When the time came round when he received clothes, all 
the blessed men would entreat him to change that old garment of his, and 
he would not agree; but, when he was forced by the quantity of vermin, 
for two or three days, while he was seething it in hot water and it was 
drying, he would consent to put on another; and again, when he was 
forced by the cold, he would for a few days cover himsell with a cloak 
supplied out of kindness, and would return it to its owner with an apology. 
And thus he spent his life in this practice of great mourning. And, be- 
eause he used to sec in my case that my soul loved and clave to anyone 
in whom I saw anything of this kind, aud I for my part had not yet subdued 
the wild impulse of youth, then he would each time take me apart, and 
open that book, and with tears warn me out of it, saying, « Come, hear, my 
son, how many secret blessings and promises are guarantved to the pure and 
the virgins and the pure in heart, aud to boys like vou who draw near to the 


NOS be 


BISS VoD 


TARRA Sih 


fo WSs Was el ba s 


218 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [218] 


“Pladoks Jo -plarsps iando fre LoS qoh plas], PSX bso 
JL» wol ujao ^ .ÓAALAON Ko p40 Kisio! jeux exe hay o! 
J Jiaso Jilan J| Ls-wole his wiaro fans, he. ipo jM 
Sr Jade uiado Loo [az grad eso Taso Kear 
p> PA Ja N&&aso! Jsl 9s " sol, Meo cas jalo 
Trax, M NS] pd] oe ae) od dele Js] cards x30 vs 
xe, Hi». cot] Jot - yoo ex ll RQ Jha, bia 
Dea Som. LAY B5] Jee x9» Uy nol 99e x WU! 
hampo "ow qe M gel pansy OM MG] Saare [sco “odd. es ac 
alarsa, Lily - ups TOES we > Noot Joas paddo wo H aa e 


"Beso y Ja d» «9 vol. Jroto 231 1? Soh woe Joo J 27 J 
el ho - odo Ha, Jos «Qo. ege Ooty frag Jas Jas 


1. B balle. 2 2 A Sods, corr. later, — 3. B ins. $94 bul Fin estrangeto and erased, — 4. Bins. 
bite, — 5. H edoa -Nido celo p% uwo — 6. B loo Das a — 7. D avlo —R. B MRA, 
— uw. Bes OO — lo, B osp oS — IE Bins of — 12. Bom, - H3. B eio. — I. p ge Ros 
[hop 


Lord'; and gnard your purity, and keep virginity, which beyond all things 
has magnilied and glorified its possessors: and see moreover what a threat 
and sentence of weeping and gnashing of teeth, and an immortal worm and 
unsleeping fire and darkness are threatened against the wicked and the 
presumptuous and the doers of sin; and Tear, and be wary ». And these 
words again he would speak to me with a flood of tears. But one day I 
presumed to say to him : « Why, sir, do you tell me to perform acts of 
righteousness! (ff go to do anything, lo! vou seniors laugh at us, and say : 
dM you sec a boy going up to heaven, catch hold of his foot’. And what 
therefore ein we do?» But the saint, looking at me and shaking his head, 
said to me : « Know, my son, that a lion who does not tear the prey in his 
‘coud vear will not afterwards quickly tear it. And know this further, that 
hood, like tender wax whieh receives the impress of that which falls 


me upon it, so itself also from the beginning receives the impress 


bhy be Promi 15 ta 18 at dle Ime cd A's arrival: see Introd. 


[219] LIFE OF ABBI. 219 


JNA? Uo re NS jeg od Joy I4 Jas pias pro 2e 
warty C» NM £a mol d o al qa iso JN Wo 
c» wl hja LPO san up» Jos ` fam M pol Od Je» fase 
ENS Le xu, Jrsop00 La; Lipoas voi! Lol: pds Jamo 
uuu, of Ln sho pias o Goo s Sus oco Geo pad oso 
yraa Jasas LA wow gwana oo Col for ES yl ge 
«e “Lode; ops pas iw] ol o [as] pas Sa A Ia 42d} 
JL Ja5eto . No] Leo hg = pads i» JaN oon VON DS Je» ol 
lads ‘joa 3 Phas prolly 2à ble aS Joa Jus ya "Njaa 
Laps “glo ula aa Mog re Rujasa Jasia aa wal’) Kars 
fats Led Jih exe ba fans yoda esa my ooi Neo! aia JI 
Jia], fans] MS Kacy wad Jlor ^ | Yflsaras jisoo val 


1. B o mwana A vas. — 2. A om. slop. — 3. B odas bard Dory via. — 4, B howe lew. — 
5. BSS, — 6, D leal Haxopsas s. — 7. Bins, pels. — 8. B pelr — 9. B ins. Biasos — 10. B ins, bow — 
11. B ins, 1823. — 12. B 35. 


and the picture of that which is impressed upon it, be it of good things or 
of evil ». And after these words I said to him: « What, my father, do you 
command me to do^ What will be for my good?» The old man says to 
me: « Lo!, my son, Jesus your Lord tells vou here and shows you what is 
the great and first commandment : ‘Thou sbalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thine heart, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind’; and the 
second which is like it, ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thysell^*. Ie has 
again in his own person shown you humility, and commanded vou : * W hoe- 
ver shall smite thee on thy cheek, turn to him the other also’ ^. together with 
the other commandments. These things, O my son, which God himself your 
Creator taught you, keep and you shall live? ». Aud thus he would warn 
me with many words every day; and 1, when 1 should have used the saving 
ol the psalmist against evil, here on the contrary drew it to me, and fas a 
deaf man heard not’. The blessed man from the time when he came to us 
completed nine years in this employment; and so he will receive his Lord 


l. Matth., xxi. 37-39. — 2. lda v. 309. — 3. Ida, XIN, 17, — 4, Ps. ANWON l^ 


ux axe 


" pi7^r b. 


220 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 220] 


woo Lea] sO Hors JN PUT «eh feuds, à 
J: “Joa J| oraaa fee pe Lyx -homas Jor jam ful obs» 
fess JNa a 3j 


“replies vara ehar dale 


bx ie eni e urs "Aes xSaaa eduard Coad ' 
ersari ria ena ^r xoiaa malba 


ode M n) vxo al: IS Laai aL Jo Suse J Lopory 

«t "exeat RJD JN oS [dd x0 «36 Soy role wsyokias [as 
Wy ja yaos od) Jalo AM Jiao D JS ees ol Joc xn) 
sJAssNZ Se, Ja Lujols OPE «on Jhopsoy Saa Sado Sx a5 
aaka eie pgs Uy bel ipsam of aas JA) Mass] 


|. B marg. es. — 2. B ins. oS. — 3. Bom. — 4. Boss. — 5. Bins s 


with a load of joy, in order that the text may be fulfilled, « They who sow 
in tears shall reap in joy’'; so that from the time when { myself came to 
know this old man of abnegation down to his passing away not one moment 


passed in whieh he was not sowing the tears of sorrow. 
The history of Abbi the man of abnegation is ended. 


NV. — NEXT THE FIFTEENTH HISTORY, OF TWO BROTHERS PROM TUE SELF- 


SAME COMMUNITY, AT THE SAME TIME OF PERSECUTION. 


Greal caution therefore is required of us, my brethren, to provide that 
we may escape from the eraftiness of the evil one, and again, that we may 
fear the divine words (especially men who are highly reputed for modes of 
life or for knowledge), when they cantion us and say : « Let him that standeth 
take heed lest he fall »?. For the sake then of cautioning those who are 

tue on the road of virtue, F have determined to commit to record an 


hat ds well worthy to be an object of great commiseration whieh the 


(221 LIVES OF TWO MONKS. 231 


«095 Jiyao, zl: >a ose fl Lad Jfa oj. e Mufsios sods 
ly hal Jrda Qeon» exo fao loian Looi oaa cos 
- [ised oo Nw UI Soa fase yl re bgah flo jaro 
fosos Jao La Joa hons caan hel Nfi re Ot mY ain 
wo Ajoa frsatas os JE Lao JLopapsyo l j5oia so fsan 
haao ea, Sad Lool, eese: Jisan ede aca jos wool Joo 
Lotan Jasas gado Hae! aso paasoo t pe fad Joa sos 
oad LI oly hal 425 tol coraddxdx5 ooo «eor qoos 
alasan Jiga «26 ph. “Mio onaolo Duoi SAI] JNass 
Kio] «Sanco Lot Laamaso LSS, oma Jlasnops ‘solo topazo 
OA «A200 AN COM CABADY AOE ORI} 5 poly due coo 
tl [äss Tana] Sp JASN oot «Ml Joa acto] Loa yo ala 


L B pl — 2. B Mlowel loon u9, — 3, B amarg. (in bad haud without ref. in text odd Oo 
orb gars b.e So od lo hipo ex! wines bins. — n B Slo eS» gial ooo. — 5. B ins, 
Qi. — 6, Bins; eis — 7. B. o. — 8, B pal. — s. A uana. 


fiends did to two brothers who were in truth running with all their strength 
in the way of virtue, and whom the fiends made such a laughing-stock that 
the like was never heard among men of older or of recent times. These bles- 
sed men therefore, that is one of them especially, who was called James ', 
— this man employed himself! in a marvellous way in the same community 
in great practices of standing and of watching and of abstinence and great 
quietude; and he came from the convent called that of the Edessenes adjoining 
Amida itself?. And this brother was so laborious and humble and meek 
that these seven hundred men? were all amazed at his labours, and at his 
asceticism; so that I also was with him on the weekly duties *, and particu- 
larly marvelled at his gentleness and his quietude, and further at the way 
in which he crucified his body by night and by day. This man then had 
many who for the purpose of imitating his modes of life used to attach 


themselves to him and keep themselves close to him. And, while he was of 


1. The sentence is bere broken off, — 2. B marg. « All these are son- of Mar Eugenius the Egyp- 
tian. Lel him who reads pray for ihe sinner who restored. it». — 3. See p 218. — 4, Phe duties of the 
hebdomadarii; see p. 62, n. 2, and ch. 35. 


nip Si Wa ns 


SOA GO Tk 


"NOS Wea, 


*hiU i veb. 


22 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [222] 


D logo m Hy cem „oilo a0 qdo NU «2o CX 
M jäs SX ooo SN JL goo ooo 208) po do! A 

yoj [Seo et oao vM UN Juss qa laiad opo ele 
wor): Jä Jess ooo v9! < y Capra <>! ooa Mols 
J| wars 2D MX Jens: jy hass giaa flo Jaio > whualo 
xe yl Justa Od - LOLs «ele AS wore (ye {COO v 
Dee» ba ^ vaot] has lo oaas yh. «^ og MM xS lasia 


We 


oooi <p fides < Tass os fl wa Í J 5. e] coh] eh 
frojaa Jas «Sos Joo ee pa : asl eoo 5 way + A 
Jo ODS ooo <p Kalk AW oao foot SJ Kase ha «Dé oo p20 
naa Jo hop 90 has Loot vans DA JO 3) . jas. eni 


L p. o sasu $ sib. — 2. B lle coo aca. o3. Bly — i Do — 5. B om. — 6, B 
wo ios. — 7. E dor [Dnu [195080 jaja od oom lo — s. D Oo 35a)». — 9. B o. 


this character, as God himself knows, possessed persons were [ound to come 
outside the vate, and wail before him, and say : « James drives us out, and 
itis he who expels us ».. When he and many besides heard these things, 
they continued laughing at these demons, and saying : «See these evil beings, 
how they deceive and mock ». Then the great seniors who were there, 
inasmuch as they knew the craftiness of the demons. commanded that they 
should be driven from the place. But they contended the more and said, 
« James bound us and brought us here; and we eannot depart before he 
releases us », while they had not seen James at all. Then they came in, 
and say to him : « Release these fiend-possessed persons that they may go 
hence, sinee they are pestering us ». But he erossed himself, and said : 
What is it that vou sav, my brethren, since Ido not understand it? » But 
they continued in the same way to press him to go out and make the sign 
(hem. saving :« Perhaps these souls will receive deliverance ». While 

lu his side continued declining and repudiating tliis proposal, they on the 
otl continued to press him the more to do this, * that they may only 


[223] LIVES OF TWO MONKS. 323 


obra p20 EV yeso ES «o0 ohare lasa cosh oo 
ahs |. DIS aniso "JNxs od <% oo fas] exl 
<0 «2ad30 Jao 3 INS farce -Luo Ray ooo v» Vh, 
jasy pm Jio Nas q! og Sees), o boot Loo Laul wero 
yar LOS no Noo 1 Jlis soo cod Joot JLxóo -Joa Patas fail CEAS, 
OET ooo eens xor Ix Leono ooo! xo J olo t 
lo Do 0000 aaas O pad ooo chile Joa s) “haao Jy Jarre 
«Syl: ess? Qoo Joo. M» aana o foot mad Yo o 


"ese 2 ' eoo wil Jasco Laa, bop hä Kus ode ajo Ns 


t^ Joa e I ..JKsoa. wil Vjosa Jos clo ool ooo loi esos 
Ow xor or Jes af; [e ol vx asus ol Qdashs, onse 
Xx aca 2: JA a. 2) JN so eon I ERE ods whl KOOP 


|. B apia Sor enol o. — 2. Bom. — 3. B sv PODS oasis dameo Wags cami namo, 
Expo -com — 1. B loo: — 5. B ins, eel g. — 6. B dx — 7, \ Nelazxeo. — 8, B eame. — OT 
ins. eoo — 10, A om. 


depart hence’. And, when under great pressure he went out, these persons 
saw him, and begau to foam ; and he eame up and made the sign over them, 
and immediately these persous were liealed from that hour, and they departed. 
And thenceforth a multitude used to repair thither foaming, men and women, 
and boys and girls, and all ages; and from that time he was under the neces- 
sity (Zvzy«v) ol going out. But he on his side would go out to a certain small 
martyrs’ chapel outside the gate, and would fill it; aud he would put them 
to silence and drive them out one by one; aud the persons from whom they 
eame out no longer suffered from them. And thus he would drive them out 
in countless numbers; and they would come outside and cause annoyance, 
and cry out. And, if it was not in liis power to come out, lie would send 
them an order to go and lie down in that martyrs’ chapel till he came out. 


And thus they would go away foaming, aud would lie down there; and, if 


he waited two days, none of them dared to streteli himself out or to remove 
from the place till he came out. But, when the numbers of those who used 
to come there aud cause annoyance increased, there were avitations there 


against this blessed mau, both on the part of the mimates of Lis monastery 


er Asai hs 


ENE? ae 


*tAXME C ah. 


224 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 224] 


SJ Nay Joa L>; wawo Brea! «2o ! elo Oa) wis <0 Jor rsa 


fours «9 ooo vM Joco "Sasso Joa J Jo fuyraco Le v 


loas Lasao "fuses <= o [i o loa Lan] ` ot pls 
ev Joa ancy, bol Voor yar Jas) oor ful pate, pul Japana 
Jfonmass Kas Jie Jes JN aM INS ute! adylo aaao 
xol. al «ol fisoto “a> oon xA x». Joo hauls Jy Jas AXdaloo 
waar, jusa} oof KAADS pol 2] wolo Lais oaza gaai asja 
oà Lia» epot [intro fly Jas} ooo x35 osa paso «Joo pa 
Ja haass Su „Lassan anarpodds olad aay Jou, p> «0,9 N 3o, 
Nl xao celo Judy r2 JDS T% pedo Aa liM» veo 
Jo Sopa loa Lax» Oly -a ^e JN» ol qa Joor 


L Be. — 2 Be — 3, B ins bo. — 3. B. ins, gal. — 5. B ins; bl — 6. Bom. — 7. B May 
losma .- s, B ooo epal 0/20. 


and also on the part of others; and accordingly he wished to give up this 
business, and could not, on aecount of the multitude who used to come. 
And in consequence of such annoyances it became necessary (NX) for 
him to withdraw from the community; and so he withdrew nnder the insti- 
vation (I believe) of the demons themselves, in company with the other who 
was attached to him, and they set out, and went in the direction of Ha- 
mimtha ', to a certain village called Beth Musika ^; and they had a certain 
monastery that was there given to them, and they resided init. Andina 
similar way again there also multitudes began to flock together to them; 
and then also the blessed James would again command them authoritatively, 
and by means of his word demous without umuüber were expelled. Then the 
evil one, who by means of his crafty tricks finds methods of deceiving men, 
contrived a method of making a mockery of these blessed meu. One 
night, when the possessed. persons were assembled there, there was also a 
certain young woman there of whom he had taken possession, who was also 


of worldly appearance”. Her accordingly the demons took, and they elothed 


fot spring? or had bath’. see * Zach. Bl. xit, 6. - 2. House of mosai’ 2), cf. Theoph. Coul., 
poli where povewes lias Ihis meaning. — 3. This seans do mean ‘smartly dressed ^: ef. ch. t. 


ae 


[225] LIVES OF TWO MONKS. 22053 


Amos Mie, Pedy, JNSGLa floss; aaao «Jas, ddaa Sis 
pal, J> Mal; oà [ac zs] wasil SX alol "aazlo 
NAM ron Je lso Ann Wes m Jloàà Naas ol fips 
Jos. bls pars Jet pel mmu Miei col Jh&xey soolo oio las 
«Quot OOF a20), Jos] JXarsaah Kass ado aio 9911360 Aeon] 
fso fasts, 2» pel -Jioiasy Jase ol Tolo Nags lo ia 
oie’ Kiso "Nol sso e Jid qeu] asailo coo axsylo Jinas foflsas 
J Niro Joy höra NS. cafotio «acc [spas [epo nehalo qoos j 
D lipa Jor Joffe; foi Man yaa -astad Liha] Jo L Xo ya.}s0 
aoii} JI e Jer «830541 lisa TECE ENGS ol aoai No 
ONN afaio Laio hopo Mifsopmrs Anaao fers, olana 
Jla yl anadi, fldsoy flsoy ot» JNa opu odo po Jiro 


1. B sing. — 2. Bins, © oom. — 3, B Baamt.S], «mol. — 1, B ins, ero er o. B bis, — 6. A 


gile — 7. Bom. — 8. B. e — 9. p owja fo Ede. — 10, p ate. 


her in awe-striking forms of phantasmal! rays; and they led her up and 
seated her on the bishops’ throne (6:2w:), which is usually placed in the 
churches or in the chief martyrs’ chapels on the dais (4x2x570072) of the altar. 
Then they filled the whole martyrs’ chapel again with phantasmal’ forms, 
as if forsooth they were angels of Gol; and some of them flew away, and 
entered the chapel? where the blessed meu were sleeping; and there also as 
well they emitted rays with the appearance of light, according to the text 
‘maketh himself like an angel of light ?..— And they roused the blessed men 
aud urged them to haste, hastily alarming them and saying, « Take incense, 
incense, and haste to the martyrs’ chapel; for the holy Mary the God-bearer 
has been sent to vou, with a great host of angels; and she has sent us for 
you, come straightway». But the blessed men were terrified by the sight, 
not perceiving the craftiness of the evil one; and they hurriedly took Incense 
and spices, and ran to the martyrs’ chapel; and on entering they found the 


whole house full of phantasmal! forms, in the semblance forsooth of angels 


l. Of gavtegias. -- 2. Lit. ^ house of serviee'. i.e. the private chapel of the monastery, diferent 
from the martyrs’ chapel (house of martyrs. At pi 205 also we find meiks sleeping in the chapel. 


— 3. H Cor., N1, 15. 
PATR. OR. — T, XVII. — F. L 16 


YD reb 


NOT a 


n FUE" oes Ji jon ox < y T 


226 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [236] 


KA -wasoih Sx Jody Gol JHhujlo sep fias Ll, yo 
Ss aA auo EN «30 eooo Dada] Mz o fiasy Jlasoy òa 
as] Qe39-230 asp; lea loo "|3'N4. oot A> xr NECI 
aad Las, «2362.0? oo vilo Aotea 9r lo aso fils we} SUO 
ayo JS SS oaas p anao g) wA ors NONE MEN E 
JaN Jis onamo 03 pol oats] Kd op geo aspoo JL. ooon 
NSD Seng: epee HS oo J Sl po 2» JMxc» 2) 20 aoo 
Jo ulas "asopo jM oly 4oo llo tae ijs oa AC) WO ooa 
Js so» olas. vis eso Jannas oio] yao il 1p] AS 
aN pao anod vo] SENG odas, "easano aan 
Jl naoi DAS Jasa 150 4a. 2.olo oaa Jo je] 


NE Jada asopo of 


1, 1h oes pits, [pata Far 2. |i bus. — n, B ins, OMB 7. — 0s TE pref. s — 5, R aoia» 
od. — 6, DP ins. 123. — 7, D. adane. 


of brilliant Hight, and the woman moreover sitting on the throne (4évss), 
and a semblance of light flashing from her; and their wits were yet more 
taken from them by reason of their agitation, and they fell ou their faces, 
Then it is said) she that was sitting commanded them! to approach and raise 
them up; and the fends approached and took hold of their hands, and they 
sav to them : « Rise, for she lias commanded vou; and approach, and make 
obeisance to her». And they on their part rose smitten with fear and robbed 
of their wits by the sight: and they approached and made obeisance on their 
laces, as if they supposed liat they saw a genuine sight. But that voung 
Woman, being unaware even herself of what had happened, spoke with them 
dhat is, the fiend spoke in her), and said to them : « Come, approach ine, 
and fear not, T myself imi Mary the Mother of Christ; and my Son sent me 
to vou, because he saw your righteousness and your Jove Toward him, and 
that vou are perfect in vonr modes of fife; and he commanded me to ordain 
you, and that vou shonld receive the priesthood from me because of your 

luousness, Bal eome approach and receive it». But they, inasmuch as 


tI posed that they had in truth been granted some heavenly privilege 


1227] LIVES OF TWO MONKS, 


7 
UE 


Strel Kawo Aaso . Laas aisle aio „oaa au] So ce eh. 
want 3 | aduacaXus cease obras Jon 0d lialo “Coots hy “faus So 
Do. feta | NOSE joa pe. salasar «23523. hasanio Nl ge MM Jor 
Jor ss 000% cond: won «fans wil, ws Na] jha Joi haway 
ce vo JAAD JMxas àco Layo; opao, ye! fassas Loo ooo 
Tanal Jes 2à JNa Aoao ORIN Rs! once. Nis 
«ot Opas "e Jesu qe boty xii tes] Goro .moasosh Xs "Io, 
ele cota! XX oco eS a ” ooo las olle oof Seat ord 
J aN lao [asia jsa Jas y loa Jl MM M Jase e 20 
WOR Loot Joann + coasoil SES ohal car JNa zs v! tae 
ECCE ue xA [iso ands Joa kasos jalo Jes» alapana 
aaao „aAa awh Jaxl, Jano Aea . Saul] — YARI. 
RENN ies “COOKS Meng? 926 Ns xL soo MS e MeL q t ASH veh, 


1, B ins, o9. — 2. pi sing, — 3. B IL aiio. mi Ollie es a Jarsys sla wre dal. 
6. B ins, boo. — 7, B Iiwas woa mudal. — s, i <7 elise — 9, [| gend. — 10, B ins oo 
— b. A om. 


beyond other men, approached, and bowed their heads; and she rose, and laid 
her hand upon the heads of both of them, and said to them : « You have beth 
received [rom me the preshyterate. You have been made presbyters, perform 
the funetions of your priesthood ». When the fiends had done this, a sound 
of great laughter was heard in the air (#42), since the demons were saying, 
« Those who used to drive us out have to- day become as thev supposed 
great». And at the same ery that girl was stripped of the phantasms (gzvzz- 
ae „and it was found that it was a girl who was a Greek who was sitting 
ou m throne (8:5vo;), and it was she who had done these things. When 
these men saw what had happened to them and eame to their senses , they 
continued beating on their faces and saving : « Woe to us! what has Ii med 
lo us? Anything like this deceit never happened to men before. What to 
do, we know not». But, when they brought that young woman down from 
the throne (hevos), she continued laughing at them at the instigation of the 
demon and saying : « What has come to you? Why are vou troubled?» Bat 
they on their side resolved to find means of subjecting their ease to the eure 
| of penitence; and they left that place, weeping and sobbing at what had 


JOHN OF EPHESUS. [228] 


238 
jx Gc Jhasosiy bid hey oğ Ws laamas] xd Laso Lads 
Jlaisoofs ~ha} oo Slo ox BULLET os | aol po eA, jaa 
Jlasul CEN Loo t wl La Jos “Laia JlaXrasyo J'asas 
Nlo woh capt 00 cooks ?JaslasN «eoo NS Las 
[soo coors) do. . 000 xe) bao Ta sds0 haao NSAGNSO 
jamaa Qo ad 5 xa No KANT aos] Lawan > JlaslasSo .-ol] 
JS sao xao] worn haapao one VA n xl Quo 
xl bios foasod Lad JKuraly LuNa Dado «oco Neo 
Laana ofdas oo halos eee JNsotasadd Jolssos fas] "Lao Jeouy 

Onroad wa p uë] Sos, 

Jaxon ocala cuim Gh Eira méuirà Ali 
“wagania mau wea 


Le SO: nop os mass Lada IL Lane els 3. V dne WSs — 42 Bo biso. — 
^S oet eo Jis» 6£Ma9La£s aodalo Lepo omar ps elis. zt BH eec ete — 
S. D otn, 


happened to them, and they went down to Marde to the holy John bishop of 
Thella t, who ended his life in the conflicts (zyov) of perseeution for Christ's 


sake. And, when they informed him of the alfair, even the blessed man 
also marvelled at the wily. crafty artfnliess of the rebellious evil beings. 
But he received them, and laid upon them three years’ penance, and then 
they were to be admitted to communion, And [rom that time again they 
led even more severe lives than before, with sorrow and tears, until they 
attained to their. former standing, and were admitted to the communion 
that is obtained by absolution. These things which we have written we have 
not received throngh hearsay, but they are all matters which were enacted 
in our knowledge and in our presence and before our eyes?, and we have 
brought comparatively few of them to the reeord. of writing on account of 
the length of the narrative, that à man who is granted any gilt may he 
especially cautious against the eraft of the adversary, who uses all artifices 
Tm plotting to decrive, 


The history of tive brothers: from the selfsume community at the same time 
of persecution is ended. 


ua dolin’s life d ven below edi 292 See severus Select Letters; s. Vi, 15. from 
t m V Marle after S27 (see qe se ad dins and Prams. p. 458, notei — 
| Wh the fact Ihat the eenteal event happened in a distant monastery 


M. M WLS) amnedieates Chat the author is not speaking al tied hand. 


[229, LIVE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 229 


was aapa rinishda hard aah © 
srLar rjal 


Jad Joa pros hates Jas Jia ds annaa ha Sco [ised 

yH, A Lupos awi «ool s, Läsasnso aoao Uaiolo ] àcn s. <? 
D Da p JaN yary oà e Joa KG] Laas pad oo rao EN 
J, Jil iA» jañs foa soo hasn sorts joa yaa 
<l Valaa” [ada Ko Jos re qao xao 22s 


P» [use sos Joo 6l ago waia dopo «201 2 Sto Jiary Jia’ 
woul! jaso Ux «xl x» JJ exo, Jas NS od; Lös q 
shaman hopa ody owaash q% giu casos sJan haso D 
Lah, Pay vt Jos da Noo Ly: La Lhaa, ol ascen. Ha soo 


NVI. — NENT THE SIXTEENTH HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED SIMEON 


THE MOUNTAINEER THE ANCRORTE, 


This blessed Simeon then used to go about on the mountains Hke the 
wild beasts, and these the rugged mountains of towertng height with valleys 
between them which are called the inner Karlie! ; and he had no intercourse 
except that with God, while at every moment he would raise his eyes to 
heaven, and be lost in eestatie wonder at the hosts above, how they stand 
continuously before God without impediment, and that there is no cessation 
in their song of praise even for a short space. And he would often in my 
presence say these things : «© Wherefore do we wretched men, who were 
created for the same expression of praise in like manner as these, and to 
whom a month has been given and a tougne and power of speech, cease 


from the praise of the merciful Creator, aud busy ourselves with the vain 


Losec whirlvinds': or. perh, voealize as * Nralie! bald . 1 do nol know whence v, D. and E; get the 
retulerinz * vertebrae, CE Anecd, Syr, 1, 208, L3, aud A E. vi; 9. Tot Iles passages we ave 
thal they were near Melitene, but E, of Ihe Euphrates. 


r” 


230 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [230] 


sale UR Jury oò oM SMS «Lo so Jo p ano o wak 
cay bso i DUIS ECCO jas we hasl, iege Ji e Loos > 


Joe ha bot Jl) loam Lag Lops où e he hasl, „vlo : x 


Jla&z5» senso floc JAD «aus iol qe sci Jano] aasan Jo des 
Lawo Los Joos «ads Jiotas und lasl, fou aaao frsdo 
iss Jie E E coo Ds Bea al liac fedes OSS 
Juopro Sly soho 4» Logs», Jor Jas PUHAL LT pad MOBIC pl} 
fears slo «olo aN «6L Je axaas .j[sX.as Sas woh 
volo .o Cots óleo yl haiu fiw - dad oro Laropso 109 y 
Lard cx Moy Js fiado laxo, ola cd vot » 
Leas JLsRace gwo Baza qo Od JejMoes foyassso De -rararfso 
haana goa boa qx» (xum Jäng «2025 co po JN 


things of this false and deceitful world? A great thing it is how our heart 
is sunk and our mind blinded, and we do not consider the bounties of him 
who created us, and brought us into existence out of nothing, how we, feeble 
dust of the earth, ‘live and move and exist, how the good Creator gave us 
the breath of this pure air (zzz) to sustain our life without anxiety, how he 
put together for us an organ (eyavev) for speech, and a voice and a mouth 
aud lips and a tongue and a palate, how he infused light into the pupils of 
our eyes, that it might be an informant and a director to the whole body, 
how again be bestowed hearing in the ears and breath in the nostrils, and 
understanding im the heart, that by means of ils perceptions it might know 
and discern creation which declares him: and, again, that he always gives 
aliment also in all varieties for the susteuance of the body, and again to the 
soul also besides, in accordance with its nature and after the pattern of its 
airiness, be gave spiritual life according to its spirituality, and again besides 
these things his grace like a wateliful euardian stands carefully over our life 
by night and by day and delivers and guards us from mishaps and from all 


ent that evil things may chance todo, and while this our merciful 


[231 LIEFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 231 
waag bo, ed Od Cote JN 2o Nanos JI sdtase «29095 KHdoIO 
Mafija pay H T aSa JRasol <> advo JNA osos 
ex fex 99$ wrasse ha Goo Crane j825 s fold yl Joa JI 
C—— 4M» ele MS O17 Las] doa Ss Jage fos 9] Ji 
Wl oe»): Mo vu epee col Lasoo fupwso qoos) Ss Jo [7s 
qail Sadr Jaso .forrsolo hai aono woe ws Nji io Ms 
XU No wh] ese b hasaa <> Joi oot maido Wado 
JNses]3a$ Q Cots 00 Ago EAD laoa wa dy HADIO aja 
Se ses Gs pro fay hod Pooh fodfo shoe fi. frase 
Jà&j 9X JRsol Xd xA dallas me eS ou ad fans‘lo 
Da 99 [reuse QoiSMo fag? oia qe» pio) Cx o y JI35e5 
jose soiardsaa Qoo oM «Joo #26] fies Le Laag wots Me 
Naaah, Jie oasis Soe e RADA qao joss Ho el r2 Joa 
Jos] c5 Kaa DSSA ț ja y alno cu Js Joa p) lass 


Creator performs all these gracious acts in relation to us, and gave us all 
these spiritual and bodily gifts, our wretched heart is sunk in the mire of 
sin, and neglects to give thanks for these things. For we truly ought nol 
only to thank and praise lim who ereated us as the angels do, but even many 
times more than these, even as his care for us too is mauifestly many times 
greater than his care for them. And why again do we look at things that 
are small? But let us regard with greater astonishment the thing that is 
greatef and more marvellous than all, and passes all bounds and all measures, 
that God himself in his love descended from heaven to earth for our salvation, 
and sacrificed himself on the cross for our sake, and gave us his living and life- 
giving body and blood to eat and to drink, and further promised us in his 
kindness invisible blessings. And how do we not mach more than the angels 
owe thanks for great. kindnesses such as these, which our good Creator and 
mereifal God performed in relation to us? » While this blessed man was 
saying all these things with eestatie wonder, he was filling all bis hearers 
with similar wonder, while, his mind being uplifted by ecstatic contemplation 
of the glories of the heaveuly beings, he said many th ves beside that are 
greater than these. And the occasion whieh called him to enter the limits 


232 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [232] 


Jina Joor pas hasol Jue Jad Leto L5 eoD Poly yda0 


Jhon Jya KO pad hio Lorio Lo Ll qa dot » .]- 2-0. $20 


otlans.co Jobers alaani DBA foot Na ob dams casu) Sela) ful 
Xe sco Mao] - Jia ps Jiag c ye poA) «Q9 xor JM 
Jo Say JNa posl «oos ls fio Jam ucc: Juto Jiad> 
ag £1 xot Badd Joa Jue JL aeo yas ' Lose franco) Je 
xA v5 Apo A : spad Laios JLS s0 INS xS alo qo n» 
lcs fssy Mle css Role io Josse hel S Jio s 
boss hanol va Slo wd JN creak uso! Liso, DA Jando 
Joot N E «op EE dune Sadodads N 
vho Jurtoo INS T colo :j2ixis Ad Jsa}, Jaamas Jl, 


1. Conj. Snouch ap. v. D. and L. hagS36, Nold. bago (bul >x is not constructed with 9a). — 
2. Conj v. D. ung L. $530 ; ch p. 233,1. 0. 


of men's habitation and say these things to them was as follows. In 
earlier limes he used to spend eight months on the mountains among caves 
and rocks, and for the four severe. winter months he would come down to à 
monastic convent which he knew to be convenient for his occupation, on 
accouul of the hardness of the winter and the severity of the snow. But 
once, while going round from mountain to mountain, he chaneed to be on 
rough mountains near the river Euphrates, belonging to the village of 
'bdhyr'on the Euphrates, a village which lies and makes a boundary (2) with 
the territory of Clandias?; and he saw that, though these mountains were 
rugged and towering, houses and fdomestie brood-animals (2)* were scattered 
over them all, while they were some five miles and some seven, and some 
as muelh as eight and ten from tbe village: because the boundary of that 
village is so extended (and it is itself also populous) that other hamlets are 

settled from it within its boundaries. 
The blessed Simeon was amazed to see in what a rugged mountainous 
distriet human beings were living, and moreover that they possessed houses 
5 


"i hs pe 63 054. zs Chandias day W. of the Euphrates, whieli must have. been the 


l Hie tet ds right, Hue meaning must be thal the village territory lay on the river, and 
ther d sbeie init of lie provinee, — 2. Or, willis. D. and L's emendalion, ! calile-sheds'. 


T 


Mt 


[233] LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 233 


Klo Lax Mlo topan «2e q> INL SS co Kat NJL. 
.oo9 «M haa Jiag «oo» Joa ord colo : fhasas yl wily 
goo auo Joa SEO JNS ese joa Jj Laos Jas p q vò 
fas] qe pol ads New uot fou, fis bo cada JRA 
«auo oh «oon Ne] Junin Jpn haso JAS JI] ana fasion Jlis 
J5ed o xoi cu meas! Laos «o ooa «Neo Jasi qo 
oho cnp 9965 cha ol for mS coors 26 pele 19001 qa OD 
sd exo] pdr dot ades e ere ial) coors foot S Lao 
sexe Joh =o; ose wrassdo s jo) oos. Qaa oh] 
J'à Jlaso,> RAD Ke? ECT .Ob30)0 mye? Jes aslana of 
exe y jus oslo anu sed Sax cdo prs JN Jerre 
«a on laias ool ^ hao way hias sill or» ilas hag 


1. Ms. @o. 


and cattle and were settled there in confidence (one being three miles distant 
from his neighbour, and another five and another two according to chance), 
and he was also astonished that all the mountains were so full of people ; 
and then, seeing some shepherds at a distanee lrom the houses, he eame near 
and inquired' from them the causes of this scattered character of this place 
of habitation, because there are there not only cattle-sheds such as some 
men make, but great houses and substantial dwellings. But the shepherds 
would state to him, « We found our fathers living in this way on these 
mountains; and, inasmuch as we were born on them, lo! we also live on 
them. » And again he would ask them, « How then, as you live on these 
mountains, are you able to assemble in God's house, and to hear his word 
from the holy Scriptures, or to communicate in the mysteries of his body 

and blood? ». But fee men, like some wild beasts, upou these E 
laughed at the blessed man, aud they say : « How, blessed sir, does the 
oblation that a man receives profit him? For w hat is the oblation? ». When 
the blessed man heard these words, his bones shook from his fright and his 


l. See p. 39, n. 2. 


^ 


+ 


BITTER Ah 


h. 


23^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. [234] 


plo uaan; waso Aao Qo vaadi on. aaa aA 49 haag 
copol| EI. Lro of coh] Dnm eis c» osx] oo 
Joosts e jol JJ in lier hiag eel ele Jha JN 
^xolexleo Jol «oM Es ob] Jon deos lo Jisej «oor $36] 
QNS, [roiase xA onio] od o Lasoo Jun oe) gè So 
Joins xot vohsy J Laas] ood.) Pay Lw, ol <= slasd fuses 
wash! oN] wes!) y Lo Mero p anni rs casrcal LaoSnso 
ele ! aor el Qa » Sxsar0 Ko | ey) ak ise oj ad T la 
[SN cis Aaaa flo gos $5] AM Spo ad; op e Warns 
m whe JI [SR «^! Ua > Joo se «ol «2o o «el 
OLX oog «S930 ho «NS Jove L5 y x’? oog oda? 
22 5 wis hs! wok, Looky +s! mM Joa 1s. Naso, yl fsa ds 
LOR x] cnet Jado TH, qa oA ol . Loa Sada] 


L M», @o. — 2. Ms. wilh points... 


tears gushed out, and he said to them: « Tell me, my sons, are you Christians 
or Jews? »..— But they were indignant at these words, aud they say : « O! 
indeed, blessed man, we are Christians, do not call us Jews. » The blessed 
man says to them: « And, if you are Christians, how is it that vou have 
mocked at God and said of his living and holy body and blood in which our 
Hie and our souls? salvation consists, * What does it profit us?" or ‘For what is 
82772 How isit that von were not frightened to perform with your tongues 
the acts of pagans and Jews, when vou are as vou say Christians? ». They, 
when they saw the awe with which he expressed himself, became afraid 
themselves also, and they say ze Forgive us. sir, for we have no knowledge. » 
He says to them : « And have you not heard the Scriptures, my sons? ». 
They say to him : « From our fathers we have heard: but the Scriptures 
thetiselyes we have not seen. » Now those who were speaking to the 
blessed man were as lie used to state to us about thirty years old. He says 
to them again 2 « Are vous my sons, only in this state, or are all who are 


living bese mountains the same? ». They say to him: « Str, it is not 


[235] LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 235 


Nl Ja Jak 95 bol KO] Wl woh! aD gle A coo + opxo 
Juuso we y voto" os o Ja.» ao sols voiodr>/ «ao (owns AL 
oos food ha wot hi> Qoo «2006 «et boa oly và Ji Sol 
prod Wo Wo: Vo carl copparto JA. ans «9o ss s 
vt "oot eee nS Jiad vo Jas y Jl Joo «oo JS «ite 
lew flan. pls QE wis paaa Qoo polo Laso o Laag 
vio Lops «xl Je: y Aon Safco qaando hw ah HY 
obeyed J io Asoo T eumd Sos a of wood” o] usdstuNis! JI t3 
ong yaad oso rothadoy20 oie p> JASN Las} Pee? wohl m Jl 
ASS, [xo Gre conse ol OY Jor: asi ioo, Loiano [M oio) 
«93» Kul Jos. fase Daso Jän xo RAM. eae xe x9 sooo 


VOIALAD . uo aid. S dd Po iso a] ne saal bilo comes 


. 


l. Ms, ee. — 2. Ms, Sls. 


only we who are so, but there are men on these mountains which you see 
who, unless they have heard from their fathers, who carried them to church 
and had them baptized, do not know what a church is. And this same thing 
happens now also to those who have children born to them; on their account 
they go into a church and have them baptized; otherwise none of us has 
entered a chureh since he was born; but we live on these mountains like 
animals. » The blessed man marvelled and wept, and said to them : « Well 
have you said ‘like animals’, my sons. For animals are much better than 
you; since these have remained as the Creator created them, without changing 
or being ungrateful to or blaspheming against their Creator; and for this 
reason they do not come to judgment. But, as for you, God created you in 
his image and in his likeness, and gave you his body and blood for the life 
and salvation of your souls, and you have deprived yourselves of eternal life, 
and have become very wild, surpassing the animals, And now what hope 
have you toward God? for lo! you are unaware even of what Christianity 
is. » And, having spoken with them and warned them, he left them and 
departed. And, being troubled in his thoughts, he would say to himself, 


4 


ab V 


a. 


^ 


on 


v 


1° 


h. 


a. 


236 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [236] 


pol dot bu] ^ uis Qeon] Laly joa pal wes oar pel oa 
d: Jos er | o5 «lo Soko cro era jado fie. 
Joon, <% y booty Jiag ors JASN, Jaang wsha o} ha so 
p Jase Dds aj eM Joao Jh 59 J&&so «o» hojas 
J Jar gwo way Qo BK JN Lo qda hoaa ho" 2236] 
xml Jando Dad Jom ga amsol) J] joie er Jis] 
JIGS oeque: loss o] fae FAQ ate] Jedes oor] Jl? o9 pelo 
AD ag Kay Nore flo code) Jens] Sos feos oa» hor 
aN Los deor» y JoJ flo A ceret Jos o. uas) 0-30 
OM EET Ja So Meo aano fot yl cl po Jlo 
aalo Laaa ores, où [se MS oi Jes [Nuno pal asl -. pioltso 
J à Jr (x9 pO 4 o] bie Ado - pos ha Lads 
JA] oot Mal kla Jor ” ole epee JNa Sods. <> Janan Jhiary 


as he himself deelared, « How is it that these men are like animals on these 
mountains? ». Then he considered, and he said in his heartas if from God, 
« Perhaps it was indeed for this reason that God's. grace led me to the 
mountains here, in order that there may be salvation for these souls thal are in 
the darkness of error. » And the blessed man became enthusiastic, saying, 
« God wishes for the salvation of all these people more than mine. Hence- 
forth E will not withdraw from this place, unless these have been gained for 
Gods since they are bound in error, and are as if they were not Christians. 
What pagan is there; or what other worshippers of creation, who for so 
long a period of time wonld neglect to pay honour to the object of his 
worship, and would not always worship that which is reckoned) by him 
as God? These men neither. worship God like Christians, nor honour 
something else like pagans; and they are apostates against the one and 
against the other. » As he was going about, he found a kind of village on 
he same frontier the name of whieh was Merbn’: and he resolved to 
approwch this village, and learn what ils condition also was. And on 
approaching he saw in it a Httle chureh overshadowed with vines, and he 


rejo! wid said: € Lo! here there is à sign of the presence of Christians. » 


[237] LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 237 


Laso igo kofio Lao £30: dyno Sox dled oue p20 frond aoro 
Say Maal haw jan [Repo x6 lul ope x) o£ Aiao Laag 
aly „Laag oo lao .oftd0 ye JS Mor alaa Lo JJe 
Jia has kis qaw o joo Hy o vl my og hia boas Ml 
AX Blo Golo bia N; oi. halo .oot <> et ut «ele „ool aA .ao 
"o ma bez Joà ly o 426] fasiao oA] wvMas jaj, SLs 
awh KA biah co Jo Stas [Liao cor oe Jans Ne sco Nolo 
l odio Laas ALS [ase Sagtsoo oA al asian, Jla duds ha 
[a Nego Ja E chaudo SA Nl «le oi. pd Je e Kady of 
oho aanus Jl cof 5] ngada yl aaa DD qos 99 saD MM 
aXe anD «^! Vaso JNa Sudo as el hl lv jo He 
uot feria. Ls Kal, ` Jas WARD FAN UK aui PX polo .arol/o 


And, when he had come up to it, he went in and saw that it was full of 
wood and stones and dust; and the blessed man wept bitterly. But, some 
meu from the village having seen an old anchorite enter the church, one 
of the oll men came up to him, and received his blessing; and the 
blessed man asked him, « Is there a priest here? ». Tle said to him : 
« There has not been a priest here during these times. » And. he asked 
him again : « And not even a brother! or anyone whatever? ». Ie said 
to him, « There is none here. » Again he went on to ask him also, 
« Where do von receive the oblation? ». He says to him : « If one of us 
has business and has happened to be present in one of these villages, he 
receives; if not, no one here has this concern for the oblation. » He savs 
to him : « And wherefore have you no priests? ». He says to him, « It is 
not our custom. » He says to him : « And how are you Christians, when 
you do not follow the custom of Christians? ». After conversing with 
him iu this fashion he says to him : « Come let us sweep ont and tidy up 
this church, for 1 wish to take up my abode in it for a few days. » And 
they swept and seoured(?)? and tidied. And he said to him : « Gather 
together for me to-morrow all the souls that are in this hamlet, men and 


1 Se, a lay monk. — 2. No such meaning of Sq is known to the lexicons. 


238 JOIIN OF EPHESUS. [238] 


Jed» Jj Ww» arses v! 6 Lajos yar J5esjo Xo Boo Jian 
JN. Looper Woo oda er opel po loa Le Jh JNa 
NCC coh] emis Ja] «i5 of hoe SPs ood polo Shashi 
Joc ,5 fuse Wee aaia, hojas Oo Jas. M5 cass Kado 
ee H Lul wis, haag ly gjara Mobilan gle Da ond ps 
Jä eh Nl ee JI sexo eMe Vols] hul ais: Wohl 
J Slo uo phs panan Jh «er us Laag «o Kul «aad pho 
edes JD; alaska, Lo n Nl a I D Josko, Los 
erased aaa phs Jo; JNS uu) Lele 29 50cm oh] cue lo 
«ola» [o Karas vol] x Jado, JA. Knot hL SA 
Lamas «2e SN] ax o.» ell mos Naso laxe sias Jl 
(Of to LL Jlaslas oa q% vos] c volo ` Jo; JN, 
ise, yoa poly mor p> r vars haan JI Jao Jo; Jen. 43030 
Dul'ly aaa Ssare uly JA Js re JLa y -Joa Lr. cooled 


women and children, and small as well as great. » And on hearing about 
some strange sight that they had never seen they assembled together before 
him in the morning; aud he conversed with them in words of admonition, 
and said to them : « Wherefore, O men, do you hold your lives in contempt 
and take no thought for the salvation of your souls? Wherefore, when God 
formed us in his image, do we on our part live animal lives outside the 
orderliness of men? — Kuew vou not thal you are men, and not animals? 
know vou not that even the animals have a greater blessing than you, they 
who are not destined to rise, nor yet to enter the judgment of justice? 
Know you not that the dread judgment of God's justice is at hand? and know 
vou nob that you are destined to stand before the dread tribunal (87px) of 
God? Wherefore then do von make yourselves like the animals ou the 
mountains? and wherefore are you like them delivered indiscriminately to 
death, iu that vou. hold aloof Trom hearing God's word, and are moreover 
deprived of the communion of the venerated body and blood of God, and this 
is nel reckoned by you as amy thing? ». While the blessed man was repeating 


such ls do them, Hke some irrational animal, whieh when a man speaks 


[2307 LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER, 239 


CWRiese; yoo 0000 gana (QJ ol ho o5 JL haas 2M 
e| 9L wa oon “coo lae coors Mido sdl PHD xcu 
wide a hos lad oo] me? wa wok! Da J eala 
re joo DLS ds ass el e» e wh xl JM geb: SS No? 
J «oot. +s] Ae S J3&5 ad; Save Os sapos Wold odds 
Quir RS 4o iaa v Moa Lanao Sate QR aol cce 
„hul po yl Jos) wis yar poole ietoias Dado JN v6 
qaia 5 el NET |]3z oS «el Ji ol A» oh] tay) 
vol wos! v B jua pa pando coh] qia oos wel vot 
hi wolle Jans «Je JD a. xS wohl ve p 
ss] aixM hawas hao Laos one oo Nana 9, Ras Llo ; 
en» pel 99. JAAD eoo nass aro alaso Naso 


Ag O pa JN Jo e saluo Lol 3 D ope» => ole 


1. Ms. with points. — 2. Gorr. from. te 


to it in order that it may be instructed only hears and looks at him, so they 
also heard what he was speaking, and looked at him 1n astonishment, and 
they had nothing to say. But he again said to them : « Do you not speak? ». 
They said to him : « What, sir, ean we say to you! There is no one to say 
anything to us or teaeh us; and this which you say has never reached our 
ears; sinee we do not know the Seriptures. » He says to them : « Know 
you not that our Lord Jesus Christ came down from heaven, and clothed 
himself in our body from a Virgin for our salvation, and consorted with men 
as a man? are you aware of these things, or not? ». The old men among 
them say to him : « Yes, sir, we hear these things ». He says to them : 
« Do you hear only without knowing the truth? Know you not moreover 
that God suffered for our sake, and was suspended on the cross, and was 
fastened with nails aud his side was plerced by a lanee, and blood and water 
flowed from him as a propitiation for men, and that be died and by his death 
slew our death, and rose after three days as it is written and raised us with 
him, having trodden the road and shown us the resurrection that shall be ours, 


and before he suffered broke his body and blood! in an upper room and 


l. Sie svr.. 


qub. 


2^0 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [240] 
asà palo uou ARTS go yo JA po X) Yop 00 
roy colo Jade, hasaan J | pose [sw coda ee] Sosy P 
Llo sora ble jeax wa oo s Jao or Nes] LS Sey ose] 
ACERS ena oor qda p waaa laal Lhal Loan voiarraro] 
Jado cohy] qm x4 ^NI «el: yl «ons vol] Mo 
ec, laste dais uns JD ques celu] qui JE asia 
D “Yo ENS oani JASN, w00 g! Jlaslaa «290 ei 
pene Sae) [rasa ad p s.» sng ja 30 opo fwan ol 
[aseo aa «opel may ator asc Na je be) H asd vook. | 


+ 


a Eso es = gor eas aco Ja. yl me} oA pe} e Ael G0 


naslaan prs ., as Miu Gaso aspe y Mer oor Jaro 
Sader Eo qr ody Panel -igo L3a» à» ads bay «ae Jika: Dil yl 
KONI ol hoa aai; Li vmo poao war [odo oo roa 
asi»lle ud ohslo Lass pds JL po Opodo iM Js ha asco, ayy 


1. Ms. with points... — 2. An erased letler precedes, 


hlessed it and gave it to his disciples and said, ‘This is my body that is 
broken on behalf of the life of the world for the forgiveness of sins’', and 
again that he said before. ‘Everyone who eateth my body and drinketh my 
blood. he abideth in me and { in him, and } will raise him at the last das? 
How then, when you have heard all these things and know them, as you say, 
do vou treat them with contempt and pay no regard to your souls’ life, and 
remain deprived of the word of life in the holy Seriptures, and hold aloof 
from the eommunion of Christ's body and blood, and do not consider that any 
loss falls upon you from this, whereas vou suffer not loss of some small thing, 
but utter destruction of your souls? ». They said to him : « And what, sir, 
ean we do? >. But he laid a kind of penance upon them all, admonishing 
them and explaining to them, * Because your souls are waste and barren by 
reason of your neglect, like soil that is barren on account of the length of 
time during which thorns and briars have heen springing up in it, so that a 
man who wishes to till it first plucks up these thorns and burns them, and 


th ts in his seed, so do vou also go and fast this week and pray, and 


eS ok Os EU E 2. John. vi. o4, a6, 


(241; LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 24L 
e ayy lo ..o NS. so. aS aco wm? Ma naspol! olo Jiaryo [3593 «as. 
waco wis Qaíaxi3 yaad ooo wear JD [ase Saxo oot 736] ollo 
JaN: JR d0 cand ooa Caddaas00 Shp Jos odo ooo wao 
«eon (096 2o Jpn” «eas; qasin J| sk M «el 
$leso frsiao par - fil; colar rsoorasc valaa [ind ohal 
AH Q5 9o apa Jord]! «1236 aiso «oopsoas ano wao Ans] 
«Do LOOK HM E nat’ Ase Esse Ve» ooo, Jen Loot 
Joa s JI r^ J poo poly DA "JL dro cro JL «aeo loran 
wet om al, Mado Juss; ol eo ol fas] par br Qeouse pad 
D + Lupdaco fur vaan a, D maa v0 Da Jao Laag 


log x! 99 ooo cS Lao835o fass y-le JN ladon c» 
JNa Joo ipaa 99 Jaah ec JaN Sudo JRA, LORD 


wy pol dood Joo parks aui) veo «Js des x9 Qoo». JA sS. 


break bread on the first day of the week, and bring it me; and all of you, 
great and small, meet together, aud come and present yourselves ». Aud 
they consented to his proposal, and went and fasted, and came. He says to 
them : « Wherefore have vour sous not been made sons of the covenant', 
and been instructed and placed in this church, and been making you hear 
God's word? ». They say tohim : « Sir, they have not time to leave the goats 
and learn anything». The blessed man, marvelliug at the people's simpleness 
and carelessness, made the oblation, and communicated them; and then they 
opened their mouth, and began to give thanks to God who seut him to them; 
while he laid an injunction upon them that they should meet together every 
first day of the week, keeping themselves from blasphemy and from forni- 
cation, and from murder; because none of them reckoned the blood of a man, 
either of his neighbour or of a stranger, as worth one locust, and there was 
none to require it; but the blessed man made an inquiry into these things, 
and everyone in whose case he learned that this thing had taken place he 
deprived of Christian fellowship, and they were set apart as pagans and Jews. 
And then they began to feel a tittle fear, both of God and of the blessed man 
himself, while he continued sending and fetching all who were on the 


Ll e. received the first tonsure for orders or monastieisni. 
PATR. On. — T. XVII. — F. l. 


TN e 


b. 


o8 v^ 


2 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [2^2] 
<! hs No Jya Jaz s yl Joa 1236 Vada fuscte . fas. 
Nas fasflo Jpop Lely oono ~ pay Las Sa Oda p Sao 
exu) aA jus) aana qatay S J P UNS] «oou rM haso 
sees cose Jl; huua asaos J| opas bel Jasad, rad 
yl elle aa c £ nanii Jiary f[ee&s ol, 35] ~ Ba 

Je ooo jian of» «x -.of4d0 ooo mee oh Dad aNd 


npa] aiao vodo | duas p20 NES aw Joa Sy hb ee t 


LOD LL, 2:300 » INojas was fusca, Nn Loads 90235 oos 
Daas w'y Las <% ody pro xL le KOTO Che «38300 
aJo cen Las omoa 0001 fason aa JaN, IN5% a] LoD 
fooados OA, n „ady le. auo T eo Jaso wl So N? 
„asas aaan e 90 JN55a5 yas oN] — X asaos, Jyo 
Shao -hasl plo Jae Jio qaal yel soofdad qas ret ards 


mountains to the house, and converting them afresh, as if from paganism; 
and thus he used to gather them all together like wild animals. After a short 
time, when lie had gained information about the children of cach one of them, 
who had male children and who female, and how many each of them had, 
while they were unaware of his purpose, what he intended to do, he gave the 
order « Next first day of the week see that no persons stay away from the 
congregation » ; and he sent to the mountains, saving, « Let the little children 
also he present in the congregation ». When they assembled and came 
according to his iustructions (since they were indeed afraid of him), he | 
provided himself with a razor, both himselfand a certain man who was in the 
secret who knew them well, and, when all had received the oblation, he said 
to them: « Allow all the little ones to receive a present! to-day, and we will 
bless them and speak with them, and they shall come: since to these from 
to-day someone must always speak the word of God, that thus they may 
remember it as long as they live; and do you go everyone in peace ». And 
they believed it, and went away, having induced the little ones to remain by 
these words, « You will receive presents, and we will mix them for you’. 
"u all of vou ». Then they all remained, about ninety, males and 


The ambiguity is perh, intenlional; — 2 Mos assumed. Ihat the presents will 


tor drink, 


243) LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER, 243 


JRL eo vs joa a'o ENS joa ws oà par «adl molo 2o 
y xv» «2o h~ a ET pao J\Sos welsh clo Jus ssol JR auo 
anole ALDO ODO pw hoa -ol wih alo Jv» Slo Jie Joa 
qdo JON" Jaski Jug" ports conse eS) fa pod 
eos y vacpay «ab Jh pe] JA-x3 cas! al Wesel boys 


oU Vaso Lise Lag © poh vele «Jape pepo v aul LO 
RAMS LOOMS LAIGIO ool. Cate nro p? 9069225 «oons) asao » Jlas 3 
JeLes JND. LAAN «jl Oe Lasoo wa omo ooo 
AOO pan Qoo Saal, p o9 Na] Jlo asyohls Leo «2o Jis careo 
oro eama aero colo «Joo ypo omol apa) 
saai D> USor p L00 MOM ON haoo Joo [soy L.»ol 


females. And he shut the doors, and came up and separated and arranged 
them with the help of the man who knew them, separating one in three, and 
the females moreover on the same system’; and, if there were two females 
and one male, he would take one of the former; and so also with the males 
too, and if again there were two’, he would in the same way take one of 
them; and he separated thirty of them and set them on one side, eighteen 
boys, and twelve girls ; and the rest he led away and shut up in another room, 
lest they should go and report what had happened. And he brought them 
up before the altar, and shut the inner and outer doors, and made a prayer 
over them, and the two began to tonsure them, soothing them with 
blandishments ; and of them some wept, and some were silent; and thus they 
shaved them boys and girls alike. And then he released the first lot who had 
been separated and not tonsured, having shown them their companions, that 
they might report to their parents what had happened, and they might 
eome, and he might speak with them, and might appease those who were 
troublesome, When the news arrived, the women assembled with lamenta- 
tions, crying, « Alas! what has taken plaee and what has befallen us? ». 
And some were binding themselves under a curse, saving, « My son shall not 


1. The meaning clearly is that he took the threes from boys and girls indiscriminalely. — 2. se. 
males. 


SS, PINE 


2A JOUN OF EPHESUS. 24h] 


qomo Js £3: bas 2o Jesse col Jo - ups Spo vo] Jl, 
Jew o] haao .209 236) L] haak, aD el + POSS) JAae Se «2e 
re ADRK AOD 990 O3 wn l ro EN Joa fio ©?! og 
ol veros XM S Ay vo Joou Key A> xnl p opad 
cool S polo le «aul wand] -oo o Maso 991130 


a aul vom; YP ceno Naso Lanan Los í Jl bell as "uus yon 


lad oon — r Jl xnl p Naso esl MNT. 
Lanan ans hoa Jens] fal cl p o9 foem v oo Josse 
Jedes «ao ful 21230 bl «Nil vA Juuso oj, Aia; oa ss NS 


So» [sse od [32128 . 5 yew, 2350 laas Ono 9) od 


Ja Ju] saat t] opsaoco wot op» Nea Mao sace JI J: Jus 
opyo shol and] ao ERCE obl ve wohl agas hu 
Jo “Wt aaa Sx aman haag coos +] PM £e awl] aos! 


1. Ms. om. slop. 


again be shaven, and the name ‘son of the covenant’ shall not again be 
called over him ». And some of them from the rage of their souls even 
betook themselves to abuse of the blessed man; and so also the men. But 
he held his tongue, and he continues laughing till their wrath is pacified; and 
some of them acquiesced in what they had done, saying, « Our Lord's will 
be done », and, « We would it were soo. But, when two of them stubbornly 
stood out, he exhorted and admonished them, and said to them : « They are 
yours, my sons; they are not going to destruction; they are being presented 
io Christ, while they are yours ». But they showed violent. indignation, 
saving, « We will not present one of them to Christ». But he testified to 
them, saving, « | for my part have marked out this plot in Christ's name to 
his glory. Beware what you are doing. E am free from sin. THe who 
separates a sonf from it and takes it ont that he may bring it back to the 
world, Christ! will not resign that soul in this bodily life, because it is his 
and has been marked in his name. | for my part have testified to you; you 
rayon. But they came up, and laid their bands upon them and dragged 
i away and removed them, blaspheming. The blessed man says to them 


rey npon your souls, my sons, and do not be obstinate and deprive 
SU EIUS l 


245. LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 245 
Lao; <>} eel med AHO „aapa L'o nS v6 LAES sano, LL 
CENE e aa UE i ibe BY 
ue haas red LHD pes ol 301235. Colo hoo Jor bl -. coors 
p ases as dda! arses 9 eot vsus zie JI Jeger Es sois 
eae pI LORUS oj) «290 wolasato Japa eras we hls [80 
oc zoj «foo oops T UNE Ni eL INS Aero .aNj lo 
Luk» alas wo aAa, AD upal] p slo wal Ss Sa jase): 
"xe ADD e 0030.0 adas alo ECC | guo lo Set 
sl mere Hee godt > ol Laz; — waar “ups enol) 
“atl e» Joi “Ol ud uns KAS vos J| ol X5 bl noala 
Joana d$, SQrvo .oNS ao Sa; Qaslenuse Gd. jns qax) ad: 
aol ady facto nal Jes; odNS eso Jom; oft.) oaan pl xe 


L Ms, wo - 2, Pin. in erasure. 


yourselves of your children, and incur blame ». They said : « Let us he 
deprived this evening and we will not make our children shavelings ». 
He says to them : « Beware, for, if you take them away, I for my part have 
testified, and T testily again, that neither of them will reach next first day of 
the week in this bodily life». They, when they heard it, Jeered at the 
blessed man, saving : « H you think that your curses are so well heard, 
go and curse these Huns who are coming and making havoc of creation’, 
and let them die. » And so they took their children away in good health, 
and went off; and within three days both of them were smitten and died. 
Then the terror of the blessed man fell upon everyone, when the power of his 
word and of his prayer upon those men was seen: and they also repented, 
and they went and fell down before him, weeping and saying, « We have 
been presumptuons, sir, forgive us; lest you eurse us also and we die ». 
Then he said to them : « 1, my sons, did not curse these either (far be 
itt); but God took them away, that he might chastise you yourselves for 
your presumption against his word; since it was not in our name, but in 
the name of God himself and in his word that [ marked them. And now 

l. Probably therefore these things happened in 515 seep. 19. n. 2. The invasion 01531, 2p. 78, n. 2 


is too late, for il would bring his death to 257, 17 years after J. left the East: see below, and p. 246. 
n. 2. 


Me 599p: 


all 


a ped +, 0,2Kc0]5 ve! xo JN» Jis wo ' Joo y oM joa paias <> 


?ui JONN OF EPHESUS. [246] 
met iao oh! Slo jn sax» sasa Jo ad ad p 
ad Loo Laso; «oo» we} wo oo Qn Od qaa ee 
So Sasso Saas; Wade, — 9 Joa N sema Jaco oa Joa b 


Na eo Lao) lhases Wai Lasao cooks Oso hN [ley Woo. 
Dulas JANSA. LAAS aoo joo 9o - Jas] 5: y Joo SN. 
vad. - asd o] ws] Las ago Je s «S345, oons whl, Sro 
e| X 89 ard JKasasks Jy Snare fuscio .L3M25o Jasopso 
T R3» Lop op dO? ooo «Mo +0004 asscl! «ooa vo Js 

of bol wia, Jae vx cas] aoao Jaco scans Li» Ja 
el ngl saol, Kao ADHAS y Lesa WAA Joao as g, 
>a aksias <3 Dar p Joo «oto, ] cao lcs Sas 
asad Siro od bass Loaloa Nao s00 most Lars lo sgool 


go repent and pray to God that he will forgive you, lest vou also perish 
as well ». And they in fear and entreating him departed. And from that 
time among all of them great and low, if the old man wished to tonsure 
auyone, there was none who presumed to speak; and thenceforth whoever 
pleased him he would mark and take away without impediment. But for 
those who had been tousnred he made tablets for writing, and wrote for 
them; and thus he would thenceforth frequently sit with patience as ma 
school (67551, and would teach them, bovs and girls together. Aud down 
to the time when they reached an age at which they might receive harm 
from one another, within four or five years, they learned the psalms and the 
Scriptures ; and thus thencelorward loud choirs were to be heard at the 
service, and all these mountains also had been brought into subjection, and 
they trembled to commit any breach of order, test the old man should hear it 
and separate them from the fellowship of men, or that' he should curse 
them. And accordingly twenty-six years passed while he was there, and 
ie was still in this life, and we were always receiving his blessing, and were 


also in intercourse with him?; and we used to learn from him about the 


— 2. This seeuis to mean thet he died 26 sears after lhe beginning of his missionary 
! Dee his death must be placed cire; 21. 


[247] LIFE OF SIMEON THE MOUNTAINEER. 247 


pano joo joo Daw pow cody ALO A> ronal; Sx. Wo 
Kiso Waase Lopeco ooo Nuan Jeane Loo + AOI woop sd sh lo 
Laad oes SKaaroo bi Slo xa s qD Q5 10001 godi fsanot so v b. 
Saso Joa wotokul Jilly hiso Loasa y-le „Joa anas ofa» od Jills 
oM]; Nadso Dwaas Joa Jl] old J sok Kx Joa wate, yop do 
Joa Lis Otpad y Jia QS a Joa n vo. Jl ..JIa.a.2o |ladX sus. 
hu] wa le Joa sass oce» ohiios «Jills as ol yl 
danny «o ol p Joa woiok..J «ooo. fusos Lol pelo Joa hio ot 

tas] use] haoso Ligge Jaa Lai AS -ookoo 


siap Larg anr rsaba round join 


uncivilized character of that people and about their subjugation aud about 
all the torments that they had inflieted on him, when he was now old and 
deerepit, and these disciples of his also had beeome grown women and men, 
and they were now becoming readers and daughters of the eovenant, and they 
were themselves teaching others also as well. And accordingly the blessed 
man’s name had gone out over all that country, and he was a law (végoc) and 
a judge of the country; and every matter that was in need of reform was 
referred to him. And now, beeause feebleness and old age had overtaken 
him, he was no louger able to retire to the mountains outside according to 
his custom, but he used to carry out his labour there in the same country in 
his cell, and he had also gained possession of these men; and he was as a 
spiritual father to all of them, having also converted them from the error of 
their apostasy to proper rules of life both bodily and spiritual. 


The history of the blessed Simeon the anchorite the mountaineer is ended. 


248 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [248] 


SEÉLaAB e carta baudurd’a rear wduandh aah 
a T rele oup Ar n anan eamm dan rio 
Samy aola 


ak | Lax Ae Rsodsy Jroopro cards) Jiasi esso p 
wey aua Iaa JD aa D ada JH and) sh] odh 
t9 25K. No Lassy rol je Jon Joel we) lad Mfuasi, sjN2oU0S 
p» ha Lasao Jis x39 ou Neo Lia. jaye Jano D JNS, 
fotos Jyosds CEAT Jaaa yas € Lo Ns op fash 
alano «oom 9 prs jM jjj Jad; Deci afer. ASO 
c9 hais he «2o aniso asa] Jor ooa cM NS Sas) 
Valaa winks Ja ds Jasons Jontoh Jlsdro [35305 Jiao, vol, doo 
j= y Buns «o archalo NUT Ja -asancoll) Fs Jo] Kas 
o] 3» adas JSA ha DA aian Naso sassy 


1. Ms. oxabuls. 


ANXIE NÉE YHE SEVENTEENTH HISTORY WHICH IS THAT OF ONE OF 
THE SAINTS WHO WOULD NOT CONSENT TO STATE HIS NAME, EXCEPT ONLY 


* POOR MAN’. 


When therefore | consider the degeneracy of our times and the confu- 
sion of our days, 1 marvel greatly to think how it is that the prophetic, that 
is divine, saving does not rise into our mind, which says in a voice of 
thunder to our error, « Lo! the righteous hath perished and there is none 
that taketh it to his heart, and saintly men are gathered and no heed is 


given »', 


If we truly consider this, it has received accomplishment in our 
limes, since all the great pillars whom we have seen, who by means of their 
continual supplication and petition bore up the tottering house of the world, 
have heen gathered and passed from the confusions of this life, aud those 
again whose great modes of life and mighty labours had been laid like huge 

slones at the foundations of the world have been collected and removed 
fi mong us as it is written ‘and there is none that hneedeth' '. For this 


249] OF A POOR STILANGER., 249 


JNa Kasaco Op «a0 olas. y-le Suns asilo Noo Ns] 
JA-se Cada jd al, Juni] oc s Ss JRirsgo an pé) MX co ocso 
J Jm chul wats we Lens qa% usd] ey ohial, Mbas Lao 
Kido raD Nolo Jal adi adao Jos [jxo Mea, M] 
c soot janl Jroa2; JLo 5 PQ Dre J ol Kx my 
waasio yas » Kujioas «2h «zl home Nos] ule) oos): 
La; Jose NS. Lou Na] Naia hasa oc od l Jags hires 
lasos anal! patio Jonah qdor oor fas] eaaa bl yes 
adore Jats mgo Lau JR)jNS [eMe exo shes Las Jis. 
HOS WO unes che» J 
jio pal eua Noy cot qe] Jape sears Kr pa P 
«i Jaial gro Jere oly hasl sfpo dso gias opo hoor eet osi 
«o Jia» Vator So qno PL ooo gada Hd Daath Jor © 


1.9 added in marg., appy. in later hand. 


reason the whole habitable world of men has been shaken and tottered and 
its structure has been loosened; and it las so to speak already begun to 
fall: and there is none who takes note of these things and lays them to his 
heart, in order that the passage of sacred song may be fullilled upon us 
which says, « The Lord looked out from heaven upon men, to see if there 
were any man that was understanding and sought God, and all had together 
gone astray and beeome reprobate, and there was not even one who was 


'.— For, having taken upon ourselves to trace, even if 


doing what is good » 
obseurely, a picture of the marvellous beauties of the saints whom | met in 
the times of my boyhood and leave it for the general benefit, if only to this 
remnant who have been left in our days, I am reduced to marvelling greatly 
in my thoughts how it is that all these marvellous and viant-like men have 
been collected like elear pure wine, and the world has been reduced to 
disgusting dregs turbid with evil matter, and we lay not these things to 
our heart. 

Onee, when we were in the holy convent adjoming the eity of Amida, 
that is that which is called the convent of the holy Mar John, as has heen 
recorded by us in one of the foregoing histortes?, since all these convents 


|. Ps. xiv, 2, 3. — 2. Ch. 13 (p. 197). As the monastery was then at ..tmida aud John was in it, 
the date is 530-536 (see Introd.). 


* 00 re b. 


* 60 vy 


250 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [250] 
Dad » oor] Lad; Loans co ccs io :Jle iens] Moana NC 
jwa Loos ooa wroh wis So «3 coole sacs LA ha 
omits Joo — jao Jo Kaia DA JNa E «^o 
R5? alad ooo Vv! | xe or So coo oaas Jl» fas! 


Vinge pas Jee joo JN oo JH] -Joot woos] yous emos jaa] 


eta finarso aaa, yl Juscio .cooilads joo Jp bso Laansoo [Aus 
eres loss as] Shas; .opanto Ader ndo voto uo Lae ooo 
$9 J poe yl Jiasyo fotos kusao .o0t < ody osjass pir? 
Joa Joos 4| -em x usar aso Hao pano vulilo JNis, ooo 
wano gwa wha, <> Joa Ka ngada jyxas We > L5] 
Jiseo Joa vaoia] Lasis Jíasex xr où yl ad, sg alaz 
oos Ja] òa eo Là yeas haua, [Sar oao jaa cM. 
paa ydo Da ro haad Lopa 21 sash a) xo foot 
ov -4 haa] hans [az w? nowi EO p> 0001 v 


surpassed evervone in devotion to hospitality, and were fervent in love 
toward their brothers, therefore on account of the report of their open- 
handedness men nsed to repair trom all quarters to the convents round the 
city, because their zeal was in truth kindled by the love of God, so that 
they did not in the ease of any one of their brothers who came to them hold 
him to be merely aman of flesh, but throngh a mean and poor body he ap- 
peared in their eves as God himself who became flesh, and so they were eager 
to serve and refresh and wash and honour as it were Jesus Christ, that everyone 
might share in anything that might result through the blessing of the man 
whoever he were: and wreat and mall were alike so devoted that, if à 
stranger were in one of these convents a year and two years and ten years 
and twenty and all the davs of his hfe. there was no one who would open 
his mouth and in any way give him to understand that he was not as one 
of the old inmates: and so in the matter of clothing and in the whole supply 


" 


necessities he was brought forward with the priests and before the whole 
be brotherhood; things which are objects of great admiration even down 
ent tine. While they were showing fervour in these things every 


d: 1 eertain old man, poor and a stranger, came to the couvent 


[251] OF A POOR STRANGER. 251 
aao laxe asf Sx soll! po Luca Shu] bl ota, Jio 
Nl Loasa y 2o x3) ..JNssas). yazaa ]a3605$ bo Nao : Loo; 
ha P 1 ogo Jepa; Naas wey, aà shad, joro Sa oly taco Joa 
AA uaia] VM aoaaa, elo aaao p was code] Ws sns 
«Joo octo Na] «a oo Jul Jats J Jrodo Ku] hans se Ju to 
Sex) Japa opa» Jago asco [ise oos pacrdo oiu joo Sounds 
Sora Joa asso Josh voids] cats; r2 oo ..-otAJa.3.a4 oà J5olko 
wp al] Joke, Lors we orn Say uM aoaaa ups Jaang wo 
ens] Loo of hado uh jaxms Qoa 34) ol Je h-— oua, 
Kod Na fo] Jokes «Jot; Jaang «0: pelo Joi] «3e joan; 
wok. Jioke Ll Mae sJNS pas Jor ooa] sag v20 ph, wads 
sancoll./ yoo us Kuo ML oà haa = 200 Da «13-00 «400 
Jor wanes Gol ooo . pros Jioko a; o Joa waas jaaa JNO 


olas ol wrotlo Salo Ji ess DAN po wd acars) 


in which I myself was; and, when he had been questioned with regard to 
the faith and made a defence, and had come in at the hour of vespers at the 
end of the service, they required him according to the custom (voyoz) which 
they followed to sit at the seniors’ table, that is the archimandrite’s; 
and he on hearing this fell on his face in entreaty, saying : « Excuse 
me, my fathers, for Christ's sake; because I am a poor man, and of this I am 
not worthy ». But he was a man with sparse hair and long beard; and so 
many with the archimandrite himself among them rose to seat him at that 
table; and he with his face cleaving to the ground entreated : « Do me a 
favour, sir, and allow me to sit at one of the other tables ». And the archi- 
mandrite, seeing his wish, said : « Let him do what he likes »; and so he 
consented to rise from the ground. And, as if by the grace. of God, he 
direeted his steps to the table at which I was sitting; and that though it was 
in the middle, and we were sitting with other tables on both sides of us. 
And we all rose and received that old man gladly and sat down. When a 
dish of cooked food had been set on the table, the head of the table was 
requesting him to pronounce the blessing; and he again continued making 
request saying, « Excuse me »; and he strongly urged him, and he would not 
agree; and we were astonished at the resistance whieh that old man made by 


* oo v 


b. 


Et anis 


tolr 


2523 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [252] 


L 


a Khang -joa Qaaroy Joh So fused o og aaas DA Lam, 


Ja yo] S09 a5 alaado koa Lai IKa Sod oar Sado Suto 
JNol. Jw; awaa loa Jis. Jie Sas Mifasso! [iso Jiary 
pach) e p oma Jpsoio alaa, [eli prs aad «36 joa a eo 
wits INI) fepasas foot Kul Loo Sse JN So wash, JL 245 «2o 
p~ Jam Danao JA JL yo JI De wash, L3 pas JM 
piss KLN -joa q jo N30. Jota si Dada -.su] So as fimo 
La» yamo Malo y qr adds Sraisoo (0 Ms jan» py vs Joos 
a] J pe Jo Joa wily où yzl JNoiaw Jya Jya Laag «2 og ooo s 
Ji à je f~ J&siac, «aal Ji + Joa JNa fuser JK, 
odS amy o paia fran ard oi baD ars hoa Jl Mapas | 
‘AS JXe%am Jha, — wh. „Joa oot Na] Jian ag p20 JN a 3a) 
DA sf IN foot caso hania [aao pas.pso] Jioke wij Jp. à we? n 


reason of his humility. And, every time that the blessed man reached out 
a spoon, his eye was furtively and gradually raised upward, and his lips 
moved, as if he were making a little sign; and thus regularly, whenever a 
morsel of food entered his mouth, a sign of thanksgiving eame up from his 
heart by the muttering of lis lips and the motion of lis eyes. And, when 
the order was given by the archimandrite that the wine and water should 
go round (since this was the custom (véuo3) that the wine and water should 
go round three times a week Thesides the first day of the week '), and, 
when the steward came and the old man received one cup like everyone 
else, since it was diluted with cold water, and one cup each only would 
be rapidly carried round aud colleeted, and everyone pronounced a blessing 
and drank, and deposited the cup in its place, yet the blessed man would 
drink a sip at a time as if it were hot and one could not drink, and he could 
not be induced to drink one sip together with the next, but this ts how he 
divided. that cup, into as many sips as the times that it pleased. lim to 
olfer praise over it; and, though it was a small cup, he divided it into 
than a hundred. sips. When the lead of the table saw it, he 
Perhaps the old man would like to drink it with hot water, and 


talay af the week ineluded '. 


[253° OF A POOR STRANGER. 353 


BS z> Jas sas! Nl E» os plo Jie 064 «2o Ns loy ha 
Wa; J> wd al hoa hana lo Jiaco aly ds aoaaa JH aal 
Soe] ois Jas] eer Jams Cae casts vor po Mal No 
DRS oped oi] fis p - Jos haan Joy pol «2: oo - phason 
«8.02.34; Jot anid Js q redio TI No xb volo .JLso Was 
Jaak, ous x oae] wy wo mx b] nso Ju] «23 2! 5] S 
p Klann SXd o RUD SEU hawo xn SS PIO Hat Orso 
vaar, «Kul Laa? «2o! sopa NA Lao road xu MWo wile JNa 
Wes words] Las aa] flo Dna) AL Jes po Oe foro «2e 
Lasao OK cine X20 ao DM qaan foto oaa ao 005323 
So ee wa) p JNa pes yhoo wans fan P .J5oko «2o «ao 
e Nicol fMasaal Mas JKsoal .[uaxu yo! fam qaslllo ^ fioo 
Jp Jo Jul o bee fu] Suae) eser e| po Joa anaso Jp 420 


1. Ms. with points... 


for this reason he was afraid of the cold »; and he said to him : « Do 
you wish us to bring you hot water, our father? ». de says, « No, 
excuse me. Whether it is cold or hot, this is my habit, to drink a little at a 
time ». When we were sitting, we asked the old man, « Whence, sir, does 
your holiness come? ». But he, as if he were now occupied in eating, 
silently bent his head down toward us, and was silent; and again a second 
and a third time; and then at last he made this answer : « Excuse me. mny 
fathers, ] am hungry and need to eat ». And then we understood the blessed 
man’s intention, and left him alone. And, when we had eaten and the 
old man was looking down and privily signalling upward, when we had 
spoken with him once and twice and thrice, and had asked him « Whence 
are you? », his tears suddenly gushed out; and when he had put force upon 
himself to refrain and could not, he bowed his face down upon his knees, 
and covered his head; and so he with difficulty constrained himself, and 
stayed his sobs. And so we rose Irom the table, the old mau standing in 
the midst with his head covered; and, when we had offered praise over the 
tables, and the old man had been washed according to custom (véu02), a rug 
was prepared lor him in the cbapel. And when he saw it he continued 
making request and saving, « Because | am feeble and weary, aml cannot 


n beet 


"n. 


* 1 S 


] 


254 JOUN OF EPHESUS. 1254] 
eum hua Jess d cal pad Joi DA -Saas peas, hil 
DA Jo: y o eas -Naasi pes Jes bhan Wee 
ooo «NS ot yel) Canary coor qadam fisad Joa Mil; 
aaah ao Jory oct pel olia ey oof haa So arans: Jom 
adash oeu haag oor aS, Ho ss] Sas; flo s yoo NEY 
LX, haad bere Laso; «o» Ja opo QUA (X99 wad] Sx 
Mo bh JNa axago all ol 2D HS: sul Mols aw I 5 
coo qaaa fuso ooo gaoh pao o ooo «RM x50 giy 
jg pol aaau aan Jeans wos vo) p faaats Je 05 Boxe 
JD L> Jaa og ol, x) #510 JXasaaby Lanan Lopa eae 


, O00 «LA 30.30 INSECTS) ET YP J? esos «o! y “aS [à 


waan x2! sp J5exejse ooa qaas qa 0 JN a) js 
Jason vas! awh], xl p he aus pone. flo Sybo JiNas Joos 


rise for service, for God's sake lay the bed for me outside in some corner 
(yoviz}», Then, lest he should really be troubled by the serviee, they laid 
it for him as he asked. And, as there were some blessed men who were 
eager to investigate such things, they observed the old man in order to 
discover hisintention. But he immediately fell upon his rug as if he had fallen 
asleep; and, when everyone's voice had ceased and they had been gathered 
to their beds, the blessed man turned upon his face on his rug, and he knelt 
and began to weep, from the evening right on till the nocturns bell, not being 
aware that anyone was aware of what he was doing, though those who were 
observing him had become weary and heen sunk iu sleep two and three 
times, and they were astounded to find that saint thus engaged down to 
the bell: but, when the bellman sounded the bell, he covered himself. like 
an infirm man and lay down, until the end of the service; and then the 
same again until the morning, though not as he had done in the evening, 
but with precautions. against those who were looking after the land (?) 
i} 


after serviee ' and against those who were learning the Psalms. But in the 


ruiug he continued requesting to be dismissed and go: and the areli- 


ius fo be something wrong here. since they could not took afler Ibe land at night and 
Y pe rloiia! nol ‘look after’. 


(255. OF A POOR STRANGER. 255 


JN o oss NET MT 
no CO LE Ml evo Kes odo b? p20 Ne NT 
lel Jas o9» pas]? Mapa v5 ey bl Mlle uso oie Katsu 
Kal hel oo poh Lex) qux Kamo cas! Bae Wee) .od 
Wy oS Bol mos fu] flac saans, sda ol, Jie va ooo J aas 
wiayo! Hy paal, hanao opado Mu] je l pd bl e 
fear fy Ael for Kaas Dec fas Xa fao Lass Lise Sos 
yel Wes elo ha Da pawol o No] o£») cdo; - Jos; Ml 
pone arth! -haag xr og nee] acy l1ioja9 Naso 
e sihh, Nasol, Led! Lalo Loot Fl J ha y JNa "ws 4x6] 
GON popor ^ "nadia JINsoasks fac og eer S) Na] poe JE Sal 
liens 2.5 uly lo 22 wb perso «3022 «30 was J «NSL La 
Jes uS. Cy JE sacs qaSerso S KG] Gata GAS fot i 


l. Ms. base. — 2, w in erasure. 


mandrite would not let him, saying, « Rest, our father, for five days and 
bless us, and then vou shall go». And tlie old man, having been detained, 
went out into the garden to walk: and I, having learned these things about 
him from those who had been watching him, went out after him: and he 
saw me, and stopped. And I, beginning to enter into conversation with 
him, said to him : « Wherefore, our father, did vou conceal from us what 
kind of man you are, and from what convent vou come? ». But on lis side 
his tears at once gushed forth again, and he was silent. But I said to him : 
« If you are a Christian and Christ's bondman, I will not let you depart, 
unless you have informed me wherefore last evening and now you wept at 
this question. ] have presumed, if vou are God’s bondman, to adjure you 
by him whom you serve, inform me about this and also about your modes 
of life for the sake of my soul’s salvation ». But the blessed man was 
annoyed and indignant, saying : « For such an adjuration there was no 
need ». And lon my side said : « I made an adjuration that I might profit, 
while you do not lose ». Then the old man laid an injunction npon me with 
an oath that, until three years had passed, no word should come out of my 
mouth of what he would say to me »; and he said : « I, my son, have to- 


day spent thirty years in this discipline; and during these years God will 


dou 


b. 


256 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [256] 
wards Kao Jl; Jo; otsotase Qo; Jl, onco oa. wrwoas Miho, 
MMee) coasa js] ex pl Nase fl odes) adn, Jraaskds 
wie Mee uw obi pissy JNa So yar Jo 99» “pel 
Aso a wa ua fas wu, JMiasilo Jrasabds 
Ww kaim, hart, Laose 09 v fal !seoNaso | vleossme < Ilo 
valan ja» fre Joia KeKs'lo sprees of bards rod obse slaad 
coo soto: Jlaclas US vadsols vo Suy Jando ón0r3: Rob fly 
was) y Lsias SPol’y wd Chroot <p Lasa qa joo 
J| ol fast] hananaw — Umama - KS pad JNugoly Jia) A. 
eol Jor pin arn roa SEE Jax, vor Jaang Nl c 
euo SS Jos RS I vie halle > Jo huia, 
Lrs JNuyoly Laias axo Dab alamad fonscaly Litora 
J&son «e Bul wats wel Sa, les, wok Suo of Loupe 


|. Corr. from dæ». — 2, Ms. ins. ol cancelled. 


not judge me for having opened my mouth over food which is derived 
from God's gilt without stretching my thoughts to give praise for his bounty. 
| hope in his name that I shall not be condemned for having stretched forth 
my hand to my mouth without every time that J stretehed it forth similarly 
stretching forth my tongue to praise and my mind to prayer on behalf of 
those who labour and sweat and toil to supply my need. I shall not be 
despised by the Giver of our good things for having put a vessel to. my 
lips to drink water or wine, and drunk two consecutive sips without giving 
thanks to the Creator of it and intereeding for those who have ext ended to me 
a share in their gift. Aud after these things last evening you were urging 
me to neglect such rendering of thanks to my Benelactor as my little strength 
is able to perform, and engage in vain talk. Or know you not that it was 
God's bounty that we were eating, with the sins of men’ moreover that 
stain us! And how ean it be, my son, that God will not be angry with 
vs and deliver us to the judgment of lorments when we eat his bounty 

instead of rendering thanks engage in frivolous talk, and further, 

ul of prayers for the men the sweat of whose labonr we are eating, 


ec 


. 


"n 


[257] OF A POOR STRANGER. 257 
Deo LA MDa NEN od oe TI LOAD) 
p eRe Wadd [soo [axis cdot Dada Jor JoJo lauha], 
Jed «aeo a a S faced or e Sa S 
Jas jo JNosols o> sje) dax INS JSN oad ly JD sbeimij 
wHo gapado oo qe Q9) Dar Lyotado hauo Sd.) 
Josip Js a). oD agio SNS Iho Las Iy hao S Na oot enano 
aA boot haD yas va ui “Roads oó bam g «o px L? 
soko ul pro Jhiaroyhy ba frags a Li] omat pa Maso faila vel 
wahl) 142-5 JKosac wo J ol joio Nes [esso «Ml olo 
wo unes Mau] Japs Qu; has Soa ho polo Je y ? aas 
x Kudo oa ot&24 ja | wolo., oa Le han bos «hl ko 2 
Ko vagi; JLaas ys hasas., J;£*oco flo] «olo om anaa oA eA 
iaaio Laa? att che eth Jio» haso Bos axe Jy Dado 


1. Ms, JSeeol. — 2, Ms. ten 


that! we should sit and enjoy ourselves in idle talk? And, because vou 
adjured ime by God, lo! these are the reasons for which last evening and now 
my sobs caine up, since I said : * How then (zz) can the heart of a man 
who is fed by God's bounty and mens’ sin not tremble to emit words in 


any other kind of conversation beyond that of thanks and prayer on behalf 


of the needy and remembrance of those who are working and sulfering 
hardship and distress and want and need, while he is sitting thus without 
care and without fear, and concerning himself with frivolous stories? ». Lon 
hearing these things from that old man tid the only thing that was proper 
for me to do, | bowed my face to the ground, marvelling at this extraordinary 
man and fixing my gaze on him, and further also too how ' in the evening at 
table he would not consent to take even two sips only together. And such 
is our presumptuous impudence that | thought to myself while [ was stand- 
ing, « This man is a solitary, and further also he is his own master, and 
there is none to command him, and it is easy for him; and moreover neither 
ix he pressed by matters of the obligation of domestic business; and there- 
fore he can observe this amazing canon (zzvóv). But how are we able to 


1. Sie sy. 


PATR. OR. — T. XVII. — F. 1. I8 


* BN 


h. 


253 IOHACOR EPHESUS: (258) 


KASN luoi oà han -rweasdus Mog ily Mem» ful edo vo) 
Ne: a p Dp 3302 oss od y eas AX «xl +>] 
oe at i» Milas Qo Dead: yl yN fans ani] fase 
Kayo] sx» Wn Jide JP, Dans el p «eoo exsul. bro yl 
wee yda Sade Jon ex] e ULL] NAJA NS Gy of Renal!” favor 
SM pay Y a dadol] fod DXA, Lodge Nyah] Jas Aoa 
S20» [uan] -haoss Naaa «2e Kal jams’ soo jion Ws A] 
of aoaaa Sx Jor; odes Nu] o9 e hiec JST Ni] 
ret be Il suce saapa vaania fra. ys sue U Jil 
wey wade Jil gS Lai Ni] Snol od "hasse sacs Lisa 
fax fly al solo pram Je Lagesoo H.N? fxh yb Lam 
Wwe) Lal Nul J OU so Hod LSN yx o6 o» Hoo! 
poe J| Rifles JNa Y ebal’ eco Lm oh 2); 


TA preceding letter erased, — 220 apps, carr, from lex;35se*. — 3, Ms, S252: eorr, Nold. 


dosoJ». But, while l on my part was secretly tracing these things in my 
thoughts. that spiritual man openly told me them all as if he had. written 
out my thonght and come to know it, saving : « I have come to know what 
the evil one has caused to creep into vour mind, in order to deprive you of 
profit». while he repeated everything to me as E had thought it. And then, 
when not only fear but astonishment also as well fell upon me, | confessed 
that that was what | had thought. But he sighed the more, saying : « On 
account of These things, my son, Christianity has been corrupted, and tlie 
ordinances of religion have been thrown inte confusion, ff vou are sitting 
at table; and enjovinz the gifts of the Giver, how ean vou bring in affairs 
of business and cheat God's kindness of its dne for the sake of his gifts? 
Oris not then .se2 the day sullicient for yon for your business with its hours 
and its moments, but at the moment at whieh one business only is required, 
hanksgiving, ate von on your part giving attention to stories? (and would 
vere matters of business as vou say: but they are actually detrimenta, 
atters of business) and all the more sinee it is Indeed no trouble 

©. While the outer man is feeding on his own food, it is easy, if 


\ the hidden man to nourish himself with his, unless conversa- 


1259 OF A POOR STRANGER. 250 
[o£ We» [Ange Soo Laso Jam gw gda po oon S duo 
Pe es doo; exl p> AD and -— Jo: amas] Jeson 
LI ly ato JNa uus Kina whisolo pro NEY 
Jn, Qe D ^ ima So bad Nod! JH oes] bards dS 
Ne 5 >o PETS Jie „yoan We ‘yaa ole sy Il Jha 
Res olan Jams Dw, bcos Jim Lanny JAM exer 
neoa eth iS Sylo ute hoo SX wars; oaa slo saae 
nhao boa Q9 Naso aa managh Len! Jiao Sx Jo area Ip 

HJD, frags bl pol Qe Soars 


aan ex dan rab en ari orduandh don 


oud) hre "c 


tion be unfairly brought in and cheat him of his due ». When the holy old 
man had spoken all these words, 1 began to request him to explain his other 
modes of life to me. Then he cut me short, saving : « On one point on 
which you begged and pressed and adjured me you have heard me speak. 
Take a short answer. If you repeat another word to me, I will not eat 
bread within twenty miles of this city. But go and beware, and observe 
your promise, and pray for me ». — And, understanding these things, that 
it was on account of the fear of robbers that the spiritual merchant feared 
to show his riches, 1 fell down before him and besought him to forgive me. 
And thus he departed and went away after two days, without having con- 
sented to tell us his name or anything about the other modes of life. And 
I have remained down to the present time lost in admiration of the man of 
God at all seasons. 


The history of one of the saints who would not consent to stale his name 


is ended. 


260 JOHN OF EPHESUS 260) 


CA ad ay rures iauna duard aad 
biua os) Japa foal rin W^ aa Anas 


I at Qe n lad; Apis Joy JN Loss JEN NOE z 
ncn a ba e sae Bl Sh hl pate JU foal fades hae] fads 
WR» yoy Daa Beo), Laan Cape Rex P GR Jab roy Xj 
ear h Lese] “fades, anuos Laan o? oot | 
EE 9000 qatal lasa M»: [No "pes |530$ v» Jesoars 
poy So qe fusdo Tehrani «o Sx [Na < J> Vol, has? 
Lag «auo :lleoo aS uo! Nao Jlasol vata; ooo gai iao 
RSS {asa} Daia] ooa — aD Ji] ees Jon rl JI 
Nass | bor wee Joor oie] Jlrs] Pasola, “eS JL 


pe JLaxse50(. 79] 


1. This eh. and the next ace in B. f E> v? bi and this eh. in H, f. 171 ve b. B 0*2». IE ins. «2250. — 

32d hl H bed Ws — 3, BH onem — i, Ins Henan [D Silo eC baie. — >. Hi ;5 +, uatan, 

-6 A pAg] Hou See — 7. M ain, — 8. BH bedas — 9. Does o do By — 4H. TE ooo 
es — qs DH bib qe — 13. R paseja, ]] be.he]as — 14, BI om. 


XVIII. — NENT THE EIGHTEENTH HISTORY, OF A CERTAIN. BROTHER WHO LEFT 


X CONVENT WITHOLT BEING RELEASED ', AND BETOOK HIMSELE TO ANOTHER. 


If therefore T cover with silence a sentence that was pronounced in a 
terrible story which I saw, which was enacted in the case of one of the 
blessed brothers. Tdo not think that I also shall be freed Irom the sentence 
of blame that proceeds from justice. When formerly the eommunily of Those 
who had beeu everywhere expelled on account of the faith were celebrated, 
and the spiritual community of the diocese of Amida, that of these great 
convents, were gathered together in great numbers in the village of Hzyn in 
Tyst. aswe have indeed recorded these matters in one of the listories?, 

ul blessed men from everywhere desired to join that spiritual unity, and 
lessed men did not keep their door shut, but received. evervone, it 


that à certain / blessed man’ came thither, who by his habil isyžua) 


having been relaxe. — 2, sie sr. — 3 Ch. A. ef. ch. 25. The dale is 


alek tothe 


26] OF A MONK WHO LERT A CONVENT. 201 
Susak «oe m> La Lans yoo 3 Naso Jess !jzseas x on 
Pest d Jsadyo -apao Nw» opa» Galr ex jo; o5 
Lasas, akoka p à Lasag «2! o0 wars Kul Lx» of ruaa] 
Je Joa aris “ust ae Nas ben Je Wy Jeary Ser Ee 08 
ray pel Soot Jes JI uo siot eo oot Jen eel Jio EN soo . Sacks 
ojo Jona «Laos of ja ber diy | “Loot [pay JD; Jaang <> 
Jasaan haad Sro Daol] hoo Saos Je SA Js alad 
«ae ael fee ^ deanar |? pelo joa yil, cà liara La; "or blas 
Jya, Leono EN [ras lo whl, Jin .com xao oà "seio 
vem» JXsda. Ka geo .|farancollo ohare! qol s ans] Qe io 
woldalo XS da queo Jor Nasik]; od Psa ooo! Jno 


1. BI ins, o — 2. 11 hasaa Awo. 3. DII om. — 4. BIH faces eol seo Ibe 2 (Hom. em el 
om — 5, H pe oor go A foods. — 6, H S6% — 7. D ins, ew — 8. B oo [Lado ies ora 
H Maa? We oras — 8 Dom. loi pals oor (sic), — LL. B eager — 02. TI la, corr. Lo ba. 
2- 13. H (sic) aea» ooi. — 15. H com oe. — 15. B LÀ Sese HE hels Se 


was an anchorite, and this man desired to be received in one of the convents 
iu obedience, and remain. And on his tendering this request to one of the 
blessed archimandrites he examined him as to his monastic training, aud if he 
were in any other obedience, or barred by any impediment. But that 
Thlessed man? on seeing the thoroughness of that examination was alraid to 
confess that he had not been released, lest he should fail to obtain what he 
desired and not be received; and therefore he said that he had bren released 
from his monastery, when he had not been released; but as if by the grace of 
God, which knew the sentence that threatened that wretehed man, it? caused 
him to state the name of his monastery without falsehood‘. Aud thus he 
was received, and entered the convent in obedience. At that time a great 
pestilence broke out®; and, as commonly happened, many died there from 
that community, insomuch that eighty-four men from the convents themselves, 
besides guests, died there, and were laid in the grave. And after twenty 


days the lot reached the blessed man? who had been received; and he was 

L Le. as an inmale, not as a guest. — 2. BIL ‘brother’. — 3. Sie sw. — 4. The rule had been 
lightened since severus time, when a monk was free lo leave his monastery al any lime Nel. Letters, 
p. 15J). — 5. This clearly cannol he the great plague of 542, bnt must be an earlier epidemie nol 
olherwise known. 


* A603 v*u. 


EBITH 


"Wistar b. 


* A630 b. 291 


Ay 


ry 


262 JOUN OF EPHESUS. (262) 


PAo au) Jyo Joo piper Joo) DA woth! Es sao o JNa 
Loo aranenso feme o] haan vanish, Jea Joor Mn e Joa 
Lao :Joot TR wol Jo sflapanKse, bpa So ops MCN 
ol Joa JiKaso Tore pro sucks AAO ooo whe ael 
NETT Sally x29 y „hans wa Dad .JAexc of LM 
J dap da ja» s feum Noo Jody JAD vor fa iban, 
IL hoso .-fladjo Jans opano Phäag exis] po Lia SJoo 
lajas flo Lia Kudo fee) Lorg hex. ems JLI Wolo Jrmaiuo 
«les Jhor Jana Jeans JS. [eps frireo Jauo Lano fobs od no 


he 


xe Jo | aasam qo Daso ole juo asas ladu 40 


MA „ohako ganio +0001 gehe D Lise 40105 paw Nast 
ILa Jas Js oà Saxo 7 seu way! Ha, Ss ~ao 


1. 1 M Sle, RI jeto liso farce CI] sinu, bev9 oom gamos luia pel com I] um. o) a500 


cans — 3, I lo angol- ^. TD] Iona 5. 11 sing, — 6. H bis, — 7. D las. — s. 1I ins. 
o. — «pins re — 10. BH o — 11. 1L» lazio sic. — 12. BI e30; — 13, 11 wo ls. — 15. HI 
[EIS 


suddenly smitten, and was struck. dumb, while his soul was convulsed and 
snorts proceeded from his throat, and he was bereft of his senses and was in 
torture, not being amoug the dead or among the living. And, whereas it was 
the custom, when the end was overtaking a man and he was in great pun, 
for live or ten to meet together, and set down incense and make propitiation 
[or him for the other transgressions, and, if he were still in pain, they would 
bring the holy gospel iozyy2«ov and lay it upon him, and immediately he 
would be released either to life or to death, this poor man, in order that the 
teat, «© The word of God is living and doeth all things, ete. »', might be 
understood by actual facts, gained no release when the blessed men met 
lovether and made petition and prayer and much incense and many forms of 
propitiation. And the Lord of the world? even came and relies of the saints, 
and there was no release, nor relaxation from that intense, terrible. painful 
nvulsion for ten days. insomuch that à hundred and twenty men were thus 
231 


round. him, and were standing and marvelling, and weeping and 


2 The serbes of HH (or dhe seribe of Ihe archetype of B angli apps understood 
he espe] see pe 2645 n. i but the consecrated elements must surely be intended. 


1263] OF A MONK WHO LEFF A CONVENT. 205 
» JKsoas IN lo “ilo ' leon à: SOOT s fsa Jasco Jas «aeo 
Jl I voor say ud dd roe Ho xl Ho w20 qao] Led 
Joias Mesas Garand pol Jiang xg, hann fopa Joa ve! oe 
coor lasi5 -jas “od [502.5 £p JNA ou haass Las FERT 
JASSSSE [5.3030 JLasso [LES v feds ao A> 905.4 aaoo ] 5 
RAS el^ Je) «eel Le "ooa i valo)! LOOKS ay P 
SaD 7 Cores S patos poms Js bo boe Lasak or 
ouo Sod Aa, fasi foot yoko Posy po S oS au Sa “ors Sedes, 
Jaros [Ad uo loo banio 2X. Jlasoy o] 49 Se Joa 10.38] . fats 
JJ Jad Ms a je Ld; Ottis eel: Is csacao ane o& 
Lau >» pono Leia) MIU NES xs <% Ral PSl Nil Nase! 


L Bins, eo. — 2. HE ins e» — 3. H oe. — 4. Bl] 82:2. — 5. BH Mol: — 6. Hom — 
7. B eme uaaa — s, ]H bez. — 9, DH p for e — 10. JE ile: — 1. 11 lavo» — 12, H eec 
B ins. oS. — 13. BH of H om.) 9M pS m» hws A4 eas) deta pools — 14, Mss. 


om, — 
15. B. Silo Oo] Pose lor HH. Silo Of Boo. — 16, IH om, œ 


distressing themselves at the agitation of that soul, and at that terrible and 
violent driving; and from distress and grief they sat thus round lim two and 
three days, marvelling and weeping, and not eating or drinking, and despising 
all human life. But, when it had lasted ten days, Grace in accordance with its 
mercy effected deliverance, that is, the release of that agitated sonl, when on 
the tenth day all the seniors had met together and had stationed themselves 
round him with the Lord of the world ', and prayers and petitions and copions 
tears, while all who were standing there cried with affliction and said : 
« Lord, great is thy mercy. Suflicieut. is this torture for this man. Let thy 
merey persuade thee on his behalf, God who carest for thy creation ». The 
chief of the seniors, while standing over him and weeping, was saving these 
words, while my wretchedness also was standing and forming part of that 
sorrowful gathering and hearing him say in the midst of his sobs : « What to 
do to you, alllicted man, we know not, in order to ask you ‘Is it because? you 
are conscious in your soul of grievous delinquencies that you are dying and 
departing from life, and only torture remains for you in the bodily life?’, and 


I. BH ‘gospel’. — 2. Ms. om, 


"Bli6s"a 


*a EPUM. 


*IL 172v? h. 


IBIG h. 


"N80 h, 


SET dais 


20^ IOIEN OF EPHESUS. 7264] 
wpa aire . pass fram] eae PS NG] fads brody, pobre Loro 
eer gel Sol op pokey Prete boni Sas das II! Ji S 
amwa Lue] Lag o5 jeher ^ bye] aae cà p59] -Sno Japano 
I>a sere] aaa haas ho taiag Loy! ne Ll xxu dh 
JNa 300 ioa "La “a ey sul pel del e po Joi 
Jv "ears proio da ore Tanshhlo oof obuhse Mhao JKonsar 
pd Kol hai» beady qas ful sol si] So “orc Q5 3j 
SOLL Q3 EY je ots Ja JL a5 lel solo -Lo A 
"aaaxall] carus woh e odl, JP le ngoa vod ai 
YRS sos, Ss Mayo] JIN Jaang I] 0-9 goa Naa et al, äg 
Pod, odf D Gor Naoi aN paw Loo osas LX» JaN, 
Jay ISa Snare ok Ji] go JNS aaa Ja hia paa te 


sy E m ^ * 

"ja ojo) sod Lod spmsy Jaz L>, NE op ` A> yano 
Lop hans uc pekso Long? Bo — 2, II josh dbom. = i. BH be Bias — 5. H Daey 

6, B kae — 7. BIL Sligo. s, ID me i3. 9. Tom, IF. fo er Es. — 10, B Sob — I B «amm 


sie. 12 BH om, © — 14 BH I>» mas- 


to say tls there an linpediment upon you and is vour soul bound by it?’. 
Who will inform us of this, unless the abundant mercy of vour Creator have 
pity on you? ». Then again, as if by divine instigation, the other senior 
who was standing at the other side of his bed said : « Il, sir, think that 
this agitation of this soul is an impediment proceeding from the word of 
God ». And, when he had said this, like one who is suddenly struck by his 
neighbour and roughly dragged out of deep sleep, he was smitten with 
stupefaction and snddeuly quivered and nodded his head once. And, everyone 
being astounded, the senior again repeated : « Is there an impediment 
upon you, agitated oue? », and Grace caused him again to nod his head once, 
while his eyes dried up, and there was nothing to show even that they existed. 
Then the blessed men deliberated : « Even if this man is already a dead 
man. vet the divine grace has let us know that his soul is impeded by the 
“lof Gods and what shall we do? If we were accepted as ourselves 
the release in place of the man who laid the bond, we have done so 

~. Bat come now let us feteh à man. and let us all stand sureties 


God willing. we will send a petition to his arechtmandrite to release 


[265] OF A MONK WHO LEFT A CONVENT, 265 
po Lor basaa co oS Jiao Linaw fois S Daan pas] od Jon 
ype ye Je nul “Joo oie»; Lasas Jian) yao acad] cuo 
Naess fh] Wl] Le EX Wa Jes "hoy Tr pele oues 
Tadaa " jaro vaia] «eos Jlesix5 Jya hass, aro waar Od 
haass "éuasseo “Sure Slo Joa -oà Laag; aad oe JN, 
aas p «Naso "SND go Joi JS Loge iga qe lud 
1sg0A.KO TUNE WI Jos Jeep Nobsenznse! [iso JoJ Puctaso E 
Hamal au] Neo! yo uas I] Pus) [sonas Poi Lodo Ses 

ol uon wre pobre Joa 


rcl aa "mua cn dia ay rur rduarnd Al 
eU hime md dana! ol cin 


1. B i22 H :25lo with o erased. — 2. B laxe. ow ljan H e laxa — 3. II om. — ^. UL ins. 900 — 
5. B By — 6. BIT onore Qe oial. — 7, HL paas. — s. I ge — 9. DIE HI bia, osia loo loo — 
10, Heo erasure follows), — 11, I ISa90 B ins. b» 12 ] S5 We Ba; om. T. do los. — 
13. B ama'ao wok. — 14, B esl 15$ Sefaorzense H usl Laag (sic) 1530s Borms, — 15. H bias — 16, BI 
(B pul) pul losk aia. — 17, H ins, ol 3509 bie aros qmi; — ds, DD NUS ode p 
on, ff, — 19. I] eas. — 20. TP ee — 21. I] ores. — 22, Hp 252, Lgs Se ady : paro 


him. Perhaps the merciful God will accept us, and release him from this 
torture ». And, when they had determined upon these things, a certain 
deacon whose name was Addai rose, and eame and knelt before his bed, and 
said : « If God be willing to grant me life till 1 go and make the release, 1 will 
under the security of all ny fathers take this soul's impediment upon myself ». 
And, as the words that came [rom the mouth of that blessed man ended, 
then the release and the departure of that soul from its body also took place; 
and there was a great and terrible and mighty ery, while everyone was amazed 
and praised God. And so the blessed man exerted himself and travelled 
rapidly, and fulfilled his promise; and on the tenth day that agitated man was 
buried, while all marvelled and wondered at the things that had happened. 


The history of a certain brother who left a monastery without being 


released and betook himself to another is ended, 


BATE as 


PADE v*u. 


PGs by 


266 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 1260] 


sy ami 'r Asa nda hard aad 
ATUS ram cara 


Jine Mis Joa oe] Lese) Jisan ge paa be] ber "jaro 

poke oi Iro Lil, [23e Jyaos JloiN so Dad :0à Jie23 ois. 
loa jha ‘oot p Aoa oul ba Law, ond ceo hs Mood 
oot .Joo Lio Ladd panda ea oct 00] lsixis) jar» do} "eMe, 
Liles Jian JL o qas] PLE Jf rods Mood anano po bor NETT 
PONES wat al iaa Jil Sy Todt, abhor Ngdso pS goo} 
Jal Lod os Nb ee 01x39. -joa Woda qa YP Iro v! og 
a'lo wolo .Joo JM weed bo -Jais ops Joo pg o» JNa 
je» ed NS cast; oi Kucot ana aio Ll «elo .Jlso “a 49 *Jea 


usas ol SS op uS Noa Soo | au] yaar of Jor MAS e 


1, Bos — 2 Bom, o3. D baap — 1. Bom. — 5, R olat — 6. B jaw Wo om. lo wa. 


— 7. Bom. *- — 8. Jb ins, low 


NIN. — Near THE NINETEENTIE HISTORY, OF A CERTAIN OLD MAN WHOSE 


NAME WAS ZACHARIAS. 


This holy Zacharias was im one of the great convents; to which same 
convent I used often to repair on account of the pre-eminently great modes 
of life of certain saints in it, and } had much intercourse with this old man, 
while he on his part made this lis concern to shun intercourse with men, 
being a man who bad one intercourse only. This man therefore, when ] used 
to entreat him, « Our father, let me not be deprived of the profit and gain 
that is acquired through vou, because it is written tHe who soweth reeeiveth 
wages, even if the earth disappoint’ '; but, as for the saint, when he heard 
these things, his tears would gush forth with sobs, so that for a whole hour 
he would be putting constraint upon himsel! to be silent, and was scarcely 
able to do so; and again he would cease and bow his head tu silence, And 

in Fon my side would entreat him to give me the favour of his conversation 


| [oos not his habit to converse on the spur ofthe moment with anyone). 


The sentenee here breaks olf. and the sense is completed differently. 


267] LIFE OF ZACHAREAS. Tl 
Jj jou S; NS, WX MG] wok upo es fuser aulo 2 ud pol 


Jaaa Mall Jo scare sj] eo MX Qs Madad Nu] 
ad aa Do haan, JH] Sou, e Ku] fao wawo Mana? flano 
o Naw sanno Ludo fhar Mh < oh) DNA LA 
vem Jando Laag ods p lor [as ce iino 
hanl, Lysol solo aoa Jie A So jas]; atroaas Suro a0 
whos oà Ja - Mal Jes LL EY. a] x oo asl Palas eps 
Mo fies Na] woae JP od IO ups eX sees oly y 
A ful Shard, Jha g p doar; Joo Na] Jflso [sas 
<% Lols wolo -omaa oel daolo os Nass ‘psal -k Ss 
10 hano usar "aso Waaso ujno dps osos So "N.Leco loas 
ha Ao aN loa Las qama eue» «er o ous, Jas Jis 
US pas ed Loot franc [isd leas Wwe of Jaano Ma So 


L Bom. — 2. B om. v — 3. B ins, 9> — 4, B Mangas. — 5. B kegs — 6. B Js — 
7, B. wmat8l , 9o. — s, B ins, w. — 9, B Wee, but 9 appy. later addition, — 10, BL fous. 


Buton my pressing the blessed man, he said to me with sighs : « Why, my son, 
do you require ine to speak ? Lo you see that Christianity has vanished from 
the earth, and religion has been forgotten, and vanity and error have prevailed. 
And now what have we to speak, except to weep for the decadence of our 
generation (yévos), since even we, who are im name Christians, enjoy the 
shelter only of this name, while all the ordinances of Christiamty are far from 
us? And now suffer me to weep for my life, and pray for me». Aud again 
I said : « How can welive!, our father? ». But he said : « If you seek to live, 
lo! he into whose hands you will fall teaches vou. 1f. you do not listen to 
him, why do you weary the piece of dust your fellow-slave by superiluous 
talking? » But, after I had pressed him with many questions whieh I was 
asking him, he turned round and put his hand to his mouth, and. stealthily 
took a stone out of his mouth and dropped it into his bosom; and he began 
thenceforth to speak easily with me without any impediment in his tongue; 
while previously his words had been uttered with difficulty, and ] ou my 
part had been putting this to the account of old age or ascribing it to a 


]. Sc, be ‘saved *. 


SA Gayot, 


TIERA VOA 


s Aq. 


268 OHN OF EPHESUS. 268) 


Jajans Mlanao dis xo leur p Joo paoho Lam, ous dor 
e» Jui, Moa aasi caus lasl -uaa PD DEN * Esos 
Spiro La ona wheal, men Nw Jis) Jory fac ^ 2oí2oo 
Jolalss Sxooo onis. Jecol 2H Jno Joo .Joot aero Na] JS s 
ias Luso ob Jl ro :Jieejo Jlar lire Ss JiLx ag yo 
wis aha] C ha wa; Joa rl à Aje oa suse Joor Sxraro 
P-e «Qoi Js So, faces pb] ax» Me 2 es] Sx MD ay 
wrt JIL fede: fran dmm ool JU] p9 ado "Lava: Ji ^ Lrotgo 


baag p Rape eue etsy -ï Jaw, Opal JNa Ww» Ji Moo so 
alos JAM os Moa Dlia uso! "Woo Jio > Laso "els 
Jj Moo Jo Lano par 2 Wwe slo lll uM Joa 4] 
el z P uaxeoolo BT Lio v! ooo Lod Muod wish Jonas, 


] B om, — 2. B Ses. og Bb eta. n, D AAso — 5. Bo — d, Alamo. - 7, B oaos, 
- x, Blogo laws sie evel: Huard Dao. o2. eio u Bowe. — 10. Bins. oo — Il. B ESTEE 


19. X om. we Hin, 


stammer, by one. of which causes the old man's tongue was restrained, 
But, when he suddenly conversed easily with me with many plain words, 
Linarvelled in myself and was thinking, « What has happened to the old inan? 
forlo! dming the space of three vears! that L have been in intercourse witli 
him he was astammerer and slow of speech, and in this hour the fastening 
of his tongue has been loosened and he lias spoken easily? And, thongh he 
spoke many words with me in. the way of admonition and caution, and 
further on the subject of the end and the future judgment, which was the 
matter on whieh my mind was above all things intent, 1 fell on my face 
entreating the old man not to hide from me the reason of his previous and his 
present demeanour; while ] had moreover often seen an emblem of a thick 
thread (zzzi with three knots tied on it and tied to the palm of his left hand, 
whieh had sunk into his hand and was level with the flesh, and, whenever 
ished him, he used to tell me that it was a ease of disease: and abont that 

| continued inquiring of him with much entreaty and violent adjuratious. 


aint took hold of me aud raised me up, while he alse repeated lo me 


[269] LIFE OF ZACHARIAS. 269 


winds wrods edo Jos; Jad, Uo vlad Lih rare! qs; Pues 
wo OR ceu Lido - froyhoo Jada Dao frod0 Lpa 
Laus Da ops ys! dro TEX pol oa Mood anas Lol 
2X . D LIAS E eD, N) ess haass Tiao :JLosN so, 
y JSL plads Law, be oca» ` Loc, wla vo -Laias «o 
JN, JXsods ooi aS ass] 'ooulo ' Jlasoad d les m My rs 
pa v» Das JNa Taa AD ^aNao J oas "jy 
«Mah Jes Jh ual Ladies bli Sese dons a a 
-Jos JLN bre alo oaan op] ao! ceo Saaio 3029 
de milas Sry Nay vps sor exe] pow wwe POO jas 
bile, [iso ,"hs5] x L| S&s M joa JUs) saN? ba Jor - Kul 
Leona HW Joho Hy Hass A, py cf nas! miel Lolo Jie oo 


1. B ins, 6,0 — 2, D 50 Ee» uja — 3, [eaa Soo. — AW elo. — à. A ins. 4d. — 6, D ode. 
— 7, A eS at S. — 8, B epo: — 9. B ins. 9 — 10, Mss. with points. - 


this saving from the gospel (exyyduov) : « The kingdom of God hath been 
sulfering violence from the days of John the Baptist and down to the present 
time, and violent men seize it »'. But, when I again continued to entreat 
bim, he said to ine: « Since | have seen that you are eager to learn about the 
character of virtue and ihe life of the soul, I will not deprive you of what you 
wish; and this very consideration it is which from the beginning constrained 
me to devote so much time to conversing with you, in order that I might not 
be condemned on the charge of churlishness; and, if, our brother, you count 
all the days of this vear, my conversation that | have held with men during 
the whole year has not reached the total of to-day's eouversation; since I 
myself am a sinner, who am not worthy that my mouth should be opened and 
speak ». Then he put his hand into his bosom, and brought out a round 
river-pebble, white and shining, and showed it me, saving, « Since I have 
seen, my son, that you are eager to benelit yourself, lo! this is what 
prevented me from speaking ». But I said : « Aud tell me, our father, what 
benefit is derived from this stone. 1f we wish to be silent, are we not silent 


1. Matth.. x1. 12. 


*BI77 vb. 


"NO Ve as 


-9 IOHN-OF EPHESUS. 270] 


Jew wastes ad laa hee wok. sora: X was wel. wet og 
ANS Wis [NS See Ili aoa. Ross ie Numi cor Sd 
Qe e Jan NA A goo sanas au] top bas qol 
De el anoe ated aal Ur o» paw C] dejas awas fro 
Laxans je delis Nol asas Laie basen ce je yo ness 
^hseas Les NM. Fas Al Jl sh] wis ~~ wil a> V Js 
jewel. M GAs Jas pepo s MENS Jo Milo ene lacs ‘Lor oon 
pawl ox» Je Ce bl uis SNS eis sxais (| opr 
la. has “Lar KO] ves? "asiaan sb] y nM bl ho 
es EDGE QNIN Jo "Lass qas Ni .ooardas fel? eue) 
wae] wo] Ses: vir JL) NSedseo alas] sies Moa oal ca 
KEON Jens we JL] Jioc soo JM Ns. T wee Wa od 
Se 2e] Soo aia [gms los Lpd: Der Nase cd Loot 


|o otaw oo 2 E or weis SQQ UH. X*----—— 42 A wem o Rom — RB 
vaxa — T — do ho o Pons La — de A eee — 10 Boom. 9 — 
Ld Sees Au are v qose. cw. cgo Sos 
Without a sone. c dle said to me : One who is alone and whom Satan 


ves to himself can do so; but in the case of one who is among many 


sions must necessarily eall and speech come. however much guard a man 
over hime If, because our will is bound to the voke of forgetfulness. 

And for this reason P dave closed my mouth with this stone. lest my tongue 
Sse my wil use me to slip: while God knows that to-day this 

= - i rs in my meuth without any person being aware of 
\ L this convent who have adopted this plan. And. for 

| shall stand with vou before God, if meu learn this 

E > us . And. that vou may not think that 1 alone have 
ipic" te are now fifteen persons siroaa in this monastery 

sicdes] l reir mouths, that they may he trained to silence, 

- ~p While marvelling at this. 1 made request to him 


< hand also: . Ho-said tu me ca Now that 1 have Taid 
son. listen. This emblem l had formerly tied to 
| many. | undid it. and tied it to my 


271 LEE OF ZACHARIAS 3E 


U Nol. opalo cos waar. “yas Lscals Jhasops KONNE 
as JE] ha Kao Loa cM saas) I oo blo seba Vinge CONS et 


as] Lamis qrorsarsaicss: So Joes fla s Mus soc 


„pa [seal bear eil Sor ass Sa Ramis ijo Mo Lido 
eel! Jl ads qe haali Uo ups qo Rail. JI wosal I 


Je No QM «oe wash xa Jat ol flo wad ba [sx "pasl 
jiad = Jado INS x dot Oly AX pane eo ado oua» Jil 
eM NES JNa oas caass ls sss Loo om UN up 
pasar sol] Xa do Lacus adis asus Louse rst Ss aog 
U «xol "ese eor elis eS: Dream! eile Gol odio Jas la hoo 
want eel ves coner»: Lys qae "au woo JP ols acis 
LN. we fens foods nest e nuo uota adole larg, JNa 


7 


B - . * 
1 Bow. SO] ams oo 3. Peat gant i li bows 0 ste Lawa Yo dao ost Son game u 
, 5 t d 
9430 QU pato 62 Boms. ee Kool gale Ao vs er uo esas Prox que e apps 


wded Later’. — 8. R D. 


mand instead of my neek, bike the frontier which lacob and Laban set up 
ind said, * "Thou shalt not pass this heap against me, and E again will not pass 


"oso Eset this emblem on my neck, between falsehood: and 


t against thee 
wrath, the ministers of whieh are ministers of Satan, and not of God; aud 1 
unde a decree Tor my soul that, whenever tl saw this lrontier, ut should not 
How wrath to enter Trom without, aud, iit should be stirred up from within, 
hat it should again not pass this frontier to go outside, and falsehood ngain 
should never go ont from within. But these knots of the emblem Ihave put 
here for private observation ; and, of these three huols, one, the first, Chave 
mit there as a guardian of my thoughts, lest they dissipate themselves in 
vain things, and that, il error gaii dominion over my mind, aud it be 
suddenly captured and dissipated by the sight ofan object, Fanas remember 
uy soul and tiri to God; and the second again is guardian of the veineinbrance 
God, that, as it does not depart. thence, neither may my imlelleet: also 
lepart from the remembrance of its Creator; and, W again the evil of error 


nun dominion over and take possession of un intellect, when | see this 


V. Gens, NAAT, D? 


RIS 


tb. 


Jo JOHN OF EPHESUS. 273] 


Laus jJ NS, eur od manag qe laoa Joos tod facie fiel] 
A 66h uupa uM ^ qol eran Ah n l, oò saapas Lojadyy Lions 


Jaa; oà |a o eo xen JlanA a, Li] S JL “> «Ato Oeo 


cse, jpo US «ots. lo xv a Ae Ad oos vhi haa 


Dl mal p ran bl JD yop pa hoor wpe MALE se sul 


^ qoo . aL od xA) Jho3 Muse: Liens L»ea"lo Lam, coiaasdus 


DER Jigal ol po Naia [sol Jada -ontaasad bep qa; Lol 
e^ eds MAO Kaano 39 talkaz; m> 


siia madara ay awi rush Amis 


LA Os D «0; oos —2 Dev —3. Pe i DB pl. —5. A «5c. — 6. B om. 


object, | may suddenly turn myself and ery to God to deliver me from error; 
and the third is a symbol of remembrance to keep the commandments of 
him who said, ‘If ye love me, keep my commandments '.. I] know, my son, 
that these things are to many folly, and lead them to deplorable laughter ; 
but to me they are very useful, and they are to me the irons of my service, 
but they are not manifest to anyone. Mark that ] have testified against vou 
before God ». But I, being astounded at the old man's thoughts, and the 
seeret ordinances of virtue that he had stamped upon his soul, refrained also 
from repeating these things until his departure, for eight vears, while many 
miracles were also wrought through his prayer and through the repository 


of his bones, 


The history of a certain old man whose name was Zacharias is ended. 


|] Jobe, iy, bs. 


OF A MONK FROM THE SAME CONVENT. 


t 

~l 

o 
te 
~i 


read man AN Euri seias isard aah 
dsa ram ina ma Lia Eou im awi reure 
oranda anlada riian 


fant DAA yilo Nod x«l ROP BS oà jand Scot YP 

wt flan] «oo : JL (O53 Lasto «99a»: Lonas ol :facoy aloi iso; 
cl “eo! er? a ooo peer (oo) yl jaaseM Asis 
reo spo» hasin Sa qaza o aLaaa So q 0001 
oo JLias hao .Joo Lio N-so KOHL pow rM Ja d <> Joa 05 N30: 
che} Jie «mo 000 yep Ja5oto. Joa fro No JL JN 


9. mm? ee A29 Jl;.a5 Apos ads <% AM pel ~~ 
Kms orsa» bes oó [iso :Joor [zo og 9] foi fusiasy Lol e Ll 
[A JRA dw o jMasnal, be Jae low Lis B) So AG 


l. Ms. seit 


XX. — NEXT THE TWENTIETH HISTORY, OF A CERTAIN BROTHER FROM THE SAME 
CONVENT IN WHICH THIS HOLY OLD MAN ZACHARIAS WAS LIVING, AND ABOLI 


THE BEGINNING OF SOY ND. TRAINING. 


Since therefore I was always coustautly going to that convent, on account 
of the character of the old man's virtue, and that of all the other saints in it, 
many of that Christ-loving brotherhood, as if they supposed of us that we 
were something, used to come and make revelations about their thoughts, 
and tell of the thoughts with which they had to contend (); and sneh answer 
would be made to each one of them as Grace supplied, And thus consolation 
derived from conversation was gained by many; and thus they would rejoice 
and cause one another to think that we, as a person raised above passions, 
were giving them consolation. One day a certain brother!, who himself also 
possessed such great pre-eminenee of character that the period during which 
the whole of the sole of his foot was lying and resting ou the ground during 
the hour of serviee was reckoned by hin as sin (« | have removed myself from 


l. The sentence is lelt unfinished, and the sense resumed in the next. 
PATR. OW, — T. NVII, — F. kJ. lu 


* 66 v^ 


a. 


Faby 


h, 


27^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. [274° 


os 


Joa Je Jl: !Jaso] JN Lady Jabs eso VS Nai] rad Jon o. loo 
xo JI 2 be Nos Jl] dpa «oor as J.o]s ud eet als 
Daz doo las Ni Sod ogo ja» ons Loa ol p JxseaM ofc 
“yp as oon As v p oce) [ais su] joa Laia, [ias 
be p30 SSS oau Joop UM fusos cod Joa Jpn | Kuso cas bo 
esl beso o «ami Jory oà y „Joa yoko aka, Body D 
ID-a» aao Joa JL wolo "oom de foot (2230 AKAs, woe ei; 
JL HO Lod BQH JI ooins “Lists d» aS; fano] Jae 
» | Xasaabes A200 foa co Naso p bl, bso yl Joas «DO vaai, 
aada ANa 01043 | el p JN o pansy ule Moo soil 
NSM ode Od oF doo 208 — Là os NET » Nuficos 
JNosol of JN asal jh orsoas «2o a, Joos yo y Joa ash 
ol 2L y^ Lasas Jesse rA or da Kurs Loijas Joo NAM 


L Hore follows an erased. word of about 3 letters, the fast being 0 - 2. Corr. v. D. and 1. Wo. 


— 3. Conj. v. D. and L, bie. — ^. Ms. ee. 


fervour toward God »); so that it was impossible for anyone 10 see him (and 
neither did this man so act in common with all, bnt specially 9 without his 
eves extended towards heaven, his soul also being in this way drawn upward 
with liis body, so that, whenever anyone observed the soles of his feet, he 
would see him with his heels always raised, and moving up and down, so 
that m this way his soul was extended upwards, and at one moment he would 
stand upon the very tips of his toes, as if he were in the act of ascending, and 
at another moment, when his toes were tired, he would let his soles drop, 
and again raise them, aud so all the service; so that, if barbarians” came in 
among them, be would be unaware of them and would not lower the gaze of 
his eyes from heaven; insomuch that 1, when he happened to be in front 
of me at the service, was amazed at the fervour of his soul before God, since 
his hands also under his robe, that is the palms themselves, were secretly 
extended, and every part of him was being drawn upwards, while not a 

fenee was allowed to pass out from his mouth without an expression of 


r thanksgiving between each several sentence, « Praise to thee, Lord »; 


© eot that I ean make of this semence, whieh is probably corrupt, — 2, V. D. and L. 


OF A MONK FROM THE SAME CONVENT. 275 


275 
yai [sas cops NM] a ool biba qx yd No 
„Joa ar WE TYE b oca» wads -Jslo vet Loto xo 
po i daaw e Woo oot Jor ipaa Lode Jy Malena so t Laado 
PN Lily XS polo war Woo 5 wads! Sx Sas Asfi fais 
Jas ud re yasil, b] Las Sarco .JorSs Pe eo ed ho'l wal 
D bl Je Suas, e Ace Me yaro Mais od; Sei p5 
aio bel 9l Dow +] Jas, Stoo] Lazo aalo loc -Nanaia 
bl masw Jo Midis fai Je ud ix] moalo anao ooo 
epe llam, hanas food, NA pe bl Joa] aS ypo o Jie] 
jN ce) oo pode WX pO] o [Ul al eai Kalo yon? HD Bag? 
Jesi Soo py hil rol Ll Jase Uy aal uso Jl fats yo Joo 
Lanas hady od halo LM rM e. ouo . Los JL- xo c» pals 
ehya Kamy LN Sly DNAd oal flo pæ? nP SÈ Ja aj 


l. Ms, Fuge. 


again, « Thanks to thee, our Hope » : at another again, « Blessed art thou, our 


Creator. Praise to thy mercy, our Saviour » ; and thus his tongne would give 
birth to these fruits all the time of his service, aud would send them to hea- 
ven iu rapid succession without ceasing. This earnest! man therefore fell 
on his face before me weeping bitterly, and spoke with me, and said to 
me: «l, my father, am lost from before God; and from this time forth Tam 
ashamed to stand before that majesty inasmuch as I have provoked it; since | 
have deserted it and have served with Satan, doing his will». But I, when I 
heard it, was astounded, and said : « Tell me what the thing is », while 
others also were standing aud listening and marvelling. He says to me :z « | 
have committed a great sin, and cannot confess it before men ». 1, thinking 
that perhaps some temptation of fornication had somewhere come in his way 
and he had fallen, say to him : « Tell me your sin ». But he objected, weeping, 
« Be not vexed, sir, that | cannot confess. » But I, because | thought that per- 
haps he would be ashamed in the preseuee of many persons, took him apart, 
and said to him : « In case the temptation of fornication has come in your 
way, say, and be not ashamed; because this happened to mighty men also, 


1. The ms. reading might perh. be rendered ‘rapt’ iv. D. and L. c eestatieus? ; but, as Page is 
uot known in this sense, E prefer the easy emendation. 


FOS. 


r 


eae 


a. 


276 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [276] 
©: og ya bl SIL blo pal facto noad Melo ast Jpandoo 
AO PW HA a] po dale las] g + vPro dey Jorge exl 
JM 9 Lame: oaio Chinn qa lad tant Mass] 
asa od lex] cdo So Kas po Mos Lied ic ous 
J fap Pm: JA&x «o NI frase Lasanya ocu] Jag’ ars 
o Daa o> Jn Jl oS D J| saamasi «Ms aayo fils, oo 
Lies», [Malis yardo ad -arsaa day JAD as) 0d) ope 
Wohl Woks sate food, Q0 fropayo JA3eR3e) 9] I] Say fron 
Ku'flso LaS I my cle pace jL Mul E» al haoo alana ofS 
JN yo b] yko p b] has $e Dan od fe! cer of S 
blo mo 5o nau JLo CN aanw [Ll «o ped + arash 
Nano Asiiialo Rae. Koao Joi JAasaal Maca «Kop r3 
z ha doy Jes oet Ne] ba Joao .od L^] Sa |Kasasbs bl yko re 


L Ms. with stop following. 


and they repented at once, and were forgiven. And now savy, and T myself 
will repent with vou ». But he said, « My sin, sir, is more grievous and 
more lamentable than fornieation ». But | again, being greatly distressed, 
raised my thoughts to terrible and grievous things, in which Satan by the 
same desire plunges and sulfocates men; and, being afflicted at the thought of 
these things, | said to him : « Blessed man, our God is good and merciful; 
and, however greal are the wiekednesses that a man commits, if so be he 
turns and knoeks at the door of his merev, he does not reject lim; but he 
rejoices over him and receives him. See how his own chief disciple Simon 
fell not only into the simple wickedness of denial, but also into that of oaths 
and curses; and, when he poured out tears toward him, he did not remember 
his offence. Aud now, if vou are willing to tell vour case —, and, if not, 
why do vou trouble me?», He said to me: « Now, sir, | will confess. While 
L was standing before God at the service, Satan threw one of the brothers 
vn, and he came and fell before my feet: and I on seeing il deserted the 
PGod, and performed that of Satan, aud I fell, and laughed over that 

ile Twas standing at the service. And to! this is my disaster ». 


M iy part heard this, | also was smitten with the same sin as he, 


[2377] OF A MONK FROM THE SAME CONVENT. 229 
ooo wat So Sad KaL Oo as L? o9) Ks. Nos Ll 
woos! ba N > Joa pass hsa bos JaN ojo Laseàs 
Jans] dae eM Jiasy Jia Loj Ilse asa: alarmo Lidl yoo 
A99. ase Jaco: fseos [ups Iac Sd Qua M ee jija J ols 
| apn -paan Nepal] JLo «Qe p D re foodsy wo Lpsd/ 
hasain e5 y wornsadlo LA JM. xls ANo LM y? Je 
Lal, po ads b] [e.c upro as -430/ «2! o0 Jha 
RN NS Jl Je alaao,o, farts JL Doc! bl JoL acta ass] 
Jj oo Jod. ad” bets sos. halo xe) lapaa Lad odas iS 
oM Jam I Jl ie Jlomoj, «2h „Jad oot No] DSA 
aM . Lo ford ws Joi Jas Je rook van] wj: Ll el p Lisa ds 
LOD eae iN plaropos bya Do0 J] yards y. oà Sa 
v» rn sihal c! dias «260 Oii300 «sory! Nl )pe: bas Nolo 
D Lindl sxM £e jh: amas dade phos Jh sory] Jed 
vA joo s s y Joo Jorg Luas Sad IE] No] Sso'hoo 


and |] laughed over all the depths and heights of sins which np to now we 
had thinking that this might be. And, being amazed at the blessed man's 
spirituality, to think what a height of wickedness the saints reckon such a 
little shorteoming as is neglected by us so that we ourselves do not even rec- 
kon it as a shortcoming, | said to him : « In ease you have been constrained 
hy shame to say one thing in place of another, beware lest Satan deceive 
you, and vou be involved in two wickednesses aud double your sin by the 
use of falsehood ». But he professed, « This, sir, is my sin; and 1 seek to 
learn from you how to meet God ». Bat F, looking at the nature of the 
man’s pre-eminent character, did not bring his thoughts down to the level of 
our coutemptibility and say to him, « This is wot asin », in the first. place 
because it is a sin, and in the second since excessive caution would do no 
harm to the blessed man, saying : « Go, our brother, again, and pray to God 
on account of this sin; not for your own only, but also for the rest who slip 
and fall into it like you. And do you, as far as you can, beware both of it 
and of any other. But, if you fall into any sin, beware Jest Satan lead vou 
into despair and say to you, * You have provoked, you will not be accepted’; 
but, whenever you have any nleer of sin, lay the poultice of repentauce' 


1, Cf, p. 52. 


Os rt 


a. 


278 OHN OF EPHESUS. [278] 
Joal Sarco Sy Jo Sato jisot Jao wamol, ado « Jlassl, lp 
Joo rd cà Jo. ute] Sa A56 basafs JN 
«M Jad :oà jano eee: Noua EE Jes D> cs) Lol. 
Qu bos d el Jos Diy) haao) aac, prods <% ell 
Mss exo a] vov di ely hope pel eS RQ er oes Mas! 
Aoc» x of eU Na] 5 Jho po <> ol Shops <% ol s hujamw 
aai «6 hiano sd Joo JD Wylo Jaa fratvado Jaia 
La 3», alansa, Lgo Lpramc Luu oHa Q2 AO aO 
Jispero blaan aA Me yasilhls oaao Jea yar slo solas) ea 
ha Dado .Jlasgo Joay [acc aa ©] nad ofa) any 
LOHAN RAM [R02 ooo JLo hais Q5 ol) MG] Jha 9l 
Opad, Jie [3&5 ano] JI has q0) So sodass», Jado 
franco], ] pao L2» lai Sos voo Plarrsd&r.x2) Liao Les Lis 


upon itimmediately, and do not despair ». Aud so he aecepted the advice, 
and went away: and [rom that time forward he used to perform remorseful 
repentance for that sin by day and by night. 

Next it has been my desire to record something on the subject of the 
training which | have seen them applying in that convent to those who come 
from the world to receive the religious habit (cy7u), which pleased me 
greatly. For these are not like all the others who', if a man runs away by 
reason of an offence committed, or from slavery, or from a quarrel with his 
wife; or by reason of thefts and the menace of the law, then he goes to 
à monastery, and at once has his hair shaven from his head, and has passed 
in and been admitted, while the sensual methods and acts of the worldliness 
of this world are thronging within his mind, and also, as soon as he has seen 
that his hair has been removed and he has been elothed in the loose garment, 
he will think that he has now also passed the limit. of perfection and of 
monastieism. And for this reason there are many also from whom the leaven 
of their worldliness does not pass away even when they are in a convent 

v years, because the thorns and briers of their. loose and dissolute and 


mstoms din the wordly estate were not from the beginning cleansed, 


eis left untinished and the sense completed in another way. 


[279] OF A MONK FROM THE SAME CONVENE. 270 
|] ^—320,-0 Lo 5 Jo LOAD Mus Jad MS jao fou 
oot slo Jlaxo Jesus SM, - of weal] Jadoo ja wo wa 
Jo 10 po So KaD sy ey Lado Jes pe facto Jes. 
Ws qoa bäs . jKaso eso, Ja .seS ss Jia ali XK po JE ‘ 
ea ouso fais Lano Lops Mse.jo Jlasmso Jlasjpsrso JL aca. Aso 
coos! Li Jipa ouo oly dh] Lao Joa JI «uot Soo Jon 
aasa «fobs, J Aso yl Su [pened pal oo coi [ow yl lo 
Saw; oy Laos Illy pay Jando than cmixes cas] «x5: Lio Ss 
Jans fro limo „oaao ahl Ss opar fM pea JanS” 
«2e I Ladin oix xo a sua Lasan o> Ies] Js Je lio 
«ao eda D Jroo Jas) ha Sx ple! Js JASOS S 
Lice Jas oh | TOAD 9 JAo NA NL MS yl 000 q 0% AMS 
bias oc No] Lo; be» Jon ama 42-235 Ses NS had ad 


and then tlie pure unalloyed seed of the devout and venerable habit (syžux) of 
religion falls outwardly upon them, and they have put it on atonee on the first 
day, and from this time it has heen in Satan's power easily to drag and entrap 
and lead many into sensuality and prideas well as into actual dishonourable and 
odious customs and passions of various kinds: beeanse, if the root of 
worldliness remains in its place, the thorns of disorderliness and sensuality and 
greediness and the love of money and evil passions spring from it. In this 
convent therefore it is not so, since from it there come monks indeed 
and not like that rabble who themselves according to the words of Seripture 
seduced Israel fo turn against the Lord who delivered them to try him'. 
As soon as a layman comes who wishes to enter upon a course of training, at 
first they ask him questions about his country and his family (yév2s), and 
what he possesses in the world, and what cause gave rise to this resolution 
in him, inquiring of him « Has any worldly cause turned your thoughts to this 
purpose? »: and, after the man whoever he be has settled all these points, 
so that they may know the genuineness of his desire, if again he in truth 


possesses this iu his mind, they inquire of him, « Lo! how long have you 


Io Suni, She 


* 685 1 


CN E NE: 


*o68 yv b 


280 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [280] 
qA Jn od qaaa SSL oon» òa poo (eM Lasan 
- yasal, ere Wee pasae x» Js Jar ON x9] Dow. 
woh Laia yore Junto Sgro o] sJANG| Soo o] fear D ol 
Baa «not exo. Lal, Ku] snare X] i30, NS y Laso 
Joo JNa hasl ah Jror ol pa ue yan hah Dl SLX grdo 
o| Da o] J> Dax J| Jaa vcowd slo aN «26 canas], 
Lesa has, «o ere os Mj NI >p ol bia of ass No wu» 
«2e Jogo o KAS ol aaan, Pro o QJ sje Lad passe) oà 
Slo Jl -Jisas Joot onse pady qo je 55 ad; finu] odo bD, 
xe) wo ep v9) ooo 2» aids; xe QI Jn. bis oM oq 
tt col suus» o au d ended MSL cop iN S vxo opohss 
Lu N»es or. gcd. pag SE verto so wis! JI eo ead p 
‘JKaay 12220 Jian! yan Jiono JMasoaks Ny «o. garda olo 
glaas qau p erupt IN’ y Jr Je ado Lamao 


had this resolution in you? »; and on learning all these things they allow him 
to stand at the gate for thirty days, saying, « Beware lest your thoughts urge 
you lo return for any reason, for the sake of kindred (yévs3), or for the sake of 
wife, or for the sake of any property. Sit here, and try your thoughts for 
thirty days, if vou can die to the things of the world, and then you shall come 
in lo live with Christ, knowing this also, that, as a dead man, after they 
have carried him out of his house and laid him in the grave, is no longer able 
either in small or iu great degree to consider or think or know if he has any 
worldly property, so he who is buried with God, if he seeks to serve him, 
las no more any kind of worldly property, so that not only does he become 
a stranger to things outside him, but be also seeks even to forget himself, that 
is to abandon his former habits, and then he approaches ». But after thirty 
days, if they see that he is kindled with enthusiasm (?), they again say the 
same things to him and many words, and then he comes inside, while they 
ve him free admission and also require him to be regular in attending service 

tehing with the brotherhood, and the weekly ministration’, and all the 


| l Libour of the monastery for about three months, making trial of 


hibdomedarit, see p. 62, n. 2. 


Y 


[281] OF A MONK FROM THE SAME CONVENT. 281 
AX ! de frases Sao, Quan, od v 4o oda co o 
jS Jen of Ao Jago Joao oo) «4? 290 JNa opao 
Kuroslo frasos AX tans foo JI vM le food; Map Joo Mamá 
vo laxo [oto feo «i Jam paso Col sJleis NS NoN 
re oy «a3 Jyo Nas «9a» p30 M xo y^ x Jl» 
» Jlsasy JOM KY oto, fool eh qao Jad; os rado Laa 
«je ad vele Naa Jha Ladd’ lo Jaz Roly yl 
waana «naso yo aan pD aL] py ado Dul Joa Lank fao 
Adas qe hahlo nal e Jopo yon D Colo «fords re 
ero „hanan Lads Naaman, oo Jl T: RAL” Jase flop vas 
yho sop pele «cman! lans flum] y* caradsoo yas 
— JAAKA Lee» eol az «^aa Lao voas 2009 4 losa das 


1, Ms. RII 


his earnestness and observing his alacrity. ud, if they see him to be eager 
to receive the mark, and if lie is vigilaut and presents a petition, then indeed 
he is again called, and many things are said to him : « You have tried, and 
you have seen. Is 1 too hard for vou? after vou have received the mark and 
laid a foundation for repentance, let not Satan return again ; for from this time 
struggles aud temptations such as you have never seen will assail you ». 
And, when he professes every thing, they present him before the altar and 
make a prayer for hin, and they take a small round piece from the erown of 
his head, as the custom is (and they take it even from many laymen'); and 
they say to him : « From this time onward you become a penitent, not a monk. 
Remember everything that has been done by you, and make entreaty on 
account of it before God. and repent of your former habits, and forget them: 
and cleanse yourself from all worldly foulness for three years. ff so be you 
have eloven firmly to Christ, then he will command, and they will clothe vou 
in the venerable robe (sz22z) of his habit (s7z92), and he will place on your 
hand also the ring of observance of his commandments ». And so they leave 
him again for three more months; and again he presents a petition to be 


l. Se. those who are not inmates of a monastery: ef. cli. 7. 


* 69. y* 1t. 


sour b. 


282 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [282] 
ah] AD ha ol p aohia jl. opan volo xS 
pasan aee moropeh> >l cole Jimaa og ben someday 
lo spamo, Mu] wrasse had, „yasal pd wasso Iso y^ fats 
ghand -Aaa EC yapaa lasyo hjel hani cool, 
LOLA AD, JL- aao JNS ha «e fans] pando otii, Lore 
mere alanas, Juss [392250 polus JE NM] Jip d 
Sec Jor Jlo aA, Qe iN Jl D qaas ojs'ac jas aso 
J| uses JL of JRsad 20 Lulas lo .JM ees flo furor fo 
xe] 9 „JL vol. Ja 2.50 She Lulas We os «ol Jas 
oL No p wil p^ waaina qaaa Lao les Ms Ael, 
xeu MSI ado O59 haao) of) Joao AN), -panso jamso 
xs 5e badyo oi Laso; Jiao olo „hapo pea JL) q 296 
Je eol No ze . Lanao] o was Lao y> aaao hao yasal, AG] 


I. Me. Daio. 


tonsured, while this also is their part, to urge him himself to seek 
intercessors', And. again they require at his hands, « Look to vonr 
thoughts. H is expedient for vou now to turn back and it is open to you 
to do so. Can vou endure, even after yet other days’ journeys (uzvstev) have 
presented themselves before you? ». Aud, if again they see that he is in 
earnest, they shave half his lead only, so that for this reason one may see 
many among them whose tonsures differ among themselves. And, at the end 
of a year of his penitence, then his tonsure only is completed, while he is 
net allowed to clothe himself in the coat, nor to bind on the girdle, nor the 
cloak, nor the cowl, nor a regular tunie or a regular eoat?, but they bind 
a cord on him over a tunic of straw, and a hood moreover of straw, saving, 
« Be in earnest in. your repentance »; and thus they humble his thoughts 
during his repentanee. while he longs and expects and hopes until he be 
thought worthy to approach the habit 272723) also. And he completes three 
years", and then he eomes before the altar; and again great cautions are 
pronounced, and, « Iu ease you seek do turi back now, it is open to von ». 


l so they array him in the habit phun. the first foundation whieh he laid 


eosors, d John hse pers forgollen thal he had mentioned the Wa above, — 3. The 
rechoned from the firsl tonsure see p. 281. ]. 13. 


283] LIFE OF THOMAS THE ARMENIAN. 293 


ago Lial ah doao „aaa sop mre ls JN eso, JNcofa car os 
Jan Mis easpolse Jia» pay ao AM paa 


Lani eines. Cn an ura ehar Anis 
erod anlada man daa ra 


nach reai aapa Ese pimsi róusrh aah 
anih ribo iha San ac rai San 
mhdur'a an melde does ae rc hoa ta73l 


woma 


Noel fl -froofh ba Layos wotopses Loool, Jas, Daa Luol. 

«dt «6 alako Lass y ad «el [repo boa hipan spaa A 
alomo .JNLoS oad, hulio “ais «Q6? «otro Jlass SA 
+ oae jhe po eS! haa. fas] de BAS, Ape? Jlaaacyjo 


1. Ms, Vat. 


having been laid hy him unto his end. At these things | was greatly 
astonished, and they pleased me much; for these men are in truth brought to 


religion. 


The history of a certain brother from the couvent of the holy Zacharias, 
and about the beginning of sound training is ended 


XXL. — Next THe TWENTY-FIRST HISTORY, OF THE GREAT BLESSED MAN Tno- 
MAS FROM ARMENIA, WHO FROM GREAT RICHES WAS TRAINED TO POVERTY Ol 


SPIRIT, HE AND HIS WIFE AND HIS CHILDREN. 


A relation therefore of the history of the admirable modes of life of this 
holy Thomas did not seem to me to be alien to this holy series, even if it 
be not related by us iu accordance with its magnificence, ou account of the 
greatness of his later modes of life, and the fervour of his zeal in divine 
things, and his mortification and the crucifixion of his body to this world; a 


toye a 


* 6 v? b. 


284 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (284 


ure «Qe be xe; Was eoe s] teoa nno [xo obtains 
. Joa oot Na |. 15.38 re seo Jasas Loa; han one Joa oaas LL] 
p JLL frre Hawl Liaw JLosl]s Jas No: od Joa Ku] Los aso 
SRN Sly ha ood. fay Soro ‘fdas Sa - Joos Daa waa 
p JL JrSdo JN xs Lsac0 “bolmso ‘Leon A) c owe EENI 
las de basse (lo - fas clo Liao «lo Joa ol fd. yopso So 
Joa 5. Ns Lee ooo JJ acco o pK. Sl; ha] noala inae fro’ 
Sl; 08 .o Joa Na] bis] voanl e» Jeans he Jes Suse Lod kso 
Jo Jas. NS ooi Joa pAXo „oaao Joa Sor J33.39 yoo oie 
Ld wada £» pe fran Ww» Juudsy JNa Jsi dos 
2% Loads Jo Jeu o} p o Joo Cas | PKs] JN so So 


man with whom we were in pleasant and spiritual intereourse for thirty 
years after his training '. 

This saint's father therefore, whose name was Sng, was formerly a great, 
renowned, aud distinguished man before the kings*, and he held the ollice of 
the satrapy in the districts of Syria and Armenia * for many vears, while the 
kings? and all the leading men listened to him and weleomed hin, inso- 
much that the man became exceedingly rich and great, in gold and silver, 
and extensive lands, and many slaves; while everything that he possessed 
was on a great seale, were it fields or woods, or parks (nagadevsos) or high 
buildings of vast size; insomuch that in riches and dignity he held a very 
hich place among those who were in the East. This man therefore had 
this devout son hesides another brother; and he also as well as himself was 
distinguished and renowned before the kings?: and be bestowed great care 
upon him that he might receive the best possible education in the wisdom 
of the Greeks, placing him at Berytus and at Antioch and at other places, 


While he also spent large. sums of money on him in accordance. with the 


L Sw gp. W o .— 2. Or thing and. queen’. 3. This seems lo be an exaggeraled statement. 
only salrapies were those of the 5 Armenian lerritaries which dustinian in 536 combined inlo 
Norella 31, aud thal Snq's post was one of these is confirmed by the fact that his son 
Jain lo the succession, The distiiel was apps. Balabilene, since the hereditary 
e other sulrapies was ibelished by Zeno (Proc. ded., m, De The 2 salrapies might he 

d ! veia or Aami, aud perh, this is what T. means. Cf. p. 225. 


(285. LIFE OF THOMAS THE ARMENIAN. 285 
wash! Kilaswo „Joa aist? Nojo Suse ba Jlasi, Laag y » Joo 
Jas Jea: y o joa fio ods; Lina Nae JAM co Juss 
Js [i NS ess. of aos | Sasso Nifi aalo so hay Joa +20 
vot p20 OS aa Joa xs No JNa hal, hahida 9l p3 LOS Joa 
od a go werd nol ahos y Jroas oàt50 .04955/ yo » Joot a N 
elo Maso uaan] ol p ou NSes Wo ol. s Ss ops Lot oo 290 
eo Bol o5 iot od esl: le eo ooa s au hoo oils Mr oo 
sys Jos cl Il oie Sy] flo ers lanas Joa iso fico 
as’! J Jsa Dwa Llo Aano *ouaioo alaso ous oa» ~ 
es bl Lja Secus) DS alaso eas] saal, onto So 2000/0 
ods epee „Joi Kujo hupa Lada s Ae Jog-ls Jeoe ola] 
Nude ex» Lonwrslo boc. MIL oma LAs fuse ao Molana 


]. Ms. wasa. — 2. Ms. with slop following. 


scale demanded by the high position. He therefore was brilliantly instrue- 
ted, and sagaciously educated, for many years; because by his own nature 
he possessed in general the quality of sagacity. And, when the time came 
aud he had been taught and had received a first-rate education, his father 
began to occupy himself in introducing him into the office itself, since he 
was indeed destined to receive the charge (szexsi2) of the great gover- 
norship (2;/52)'; and, while he was making these plans, the end over- 
took him; and ‘on that day’, as it is written, «all his plans perished »?, 
And this his son remained over his house and over his office, his brother 
also having died; and he too began to deliberate with himself and to say : 
« My father, who acquired all this dignity and greatness and property and 
riches, has left everything, and out of all his house and his riches and his 
property and his office nothing has gone with him except sins only: and I 
therefore now, if 1 stay and add to my father's property to the same extent 
as he did, and to the same extent a thousand times over, shall presently die 
as he did, and it will become the property of others, and perhaps it will 
hecome the property of men who are prodigal and vicious and of fornicators, 
and they will squander it in evil fashion; and to me what will come from it 


1. I. e., to succeed lo lhe satrapy. — 2. Ps. CXLVI, 4 


iam Ua bea 


Foe 


386 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [286 


!Lla-so JA «2o plaas Jay «e ol Jlasfo «2o J | ex» ben 
flan Neo Jhan Jlatasio laddsas S» Boc Laa Ww.asoo Laias, 
JNa Js N Jl > xs Koo} <> Laas Ji vl reo 
yalo . LAD “pial las p> waco] ha DAs portato [io 
eas), O&2 viaaa M m lle òo? Koay? Jlassu5 Looms 
Do soco J Jo Ji») 413 7wo JM lac Joouo Jor Ji ease oll 
Jot. oe „JNa JUNG] oe xus Sas of Joa Sos D als re 
Lax sols poly ow oos] wor; «Son st forsansoo ha; 
Lisa dds edo yl Daa [Esa ooo «oot al caso 9] JAas 30 J 365 
Jl peas Ji Dow SS Jay óloia.cn.o ooa ada roads ba 
„Joa Nes. Lad «2o ha VINS Lao aow Jlardsoo Nispa J pando 
JLsasy ofS Joa Jes Ja dso wy oof rtp Sas; lasso. aaa sons 
carlas sey ja> aaa] fy -Joor 436] aas No p? ogo saaal, [Kooy 


1. Ms. lleno, corr. to Blasco. — 2, Ms. ILE, 


except hell and eternal torment, since neither has all this been amassed 
by justice or by righteousness, but by plundering and cheating the poor? 
And now why do I need othee and governorship that passes away and decays, 
and gains nothing else for those who enjoy it except a bad end and judg- 
ment and torment? And therefore | will go up to the rulers, and surrender 
to them the governorship which is theirs, and for me it is sullicient to sit in 
my house in the silence of my soul and praise God; and what we have is 
snflicient for me and my children if they live many times over(?) ». He had 
taken therefore during his life‘ a great wife from the great and renowned 
family (évoz) of those who are called Arsacids, who, as they say, were them- 
selves also an exalted royal race. Sueh thoughts then first sprang up in 
this blessed man; and he forthwith began to carry the thing out, not delaying, 
but gomg up at once to the royal city, and making this request of the king, 
Ibat he would order them to receive an account of his office. But the king 
continued to press him to fill his father's place; and he made supplication 
and said : «Hf your majesty’s slave has found merey in your eves, order me 


joe's life must be meant. Perh. *9a25l* has fallen out. 


(287 LIFE OF THOMAS THE ARMENIAN. 287 


Judas uNa caridSaas ges; GM aoaaa QQaixnzx5 boi 


sani lo [NT [use Sea Jaap Ly] aae JI oly Sese oll 
p29 J eh J| eA Q3] [2939 po Jade Dao glo 
has p Shops Ag oco sisal [soto Jikiaso otro CAT, 
Syl SjMAxo INurso Jla g JN woa, aN Dwaas lo JAS 
Ee «olo Jad Nurs «xl ee. enaaeS|0 “Kiso aao 
arso sax Le [S allaapa dos: oà voll L? ron. Jodi 
bl spay hoas Ado, awopro US Joon, Sooo o as edo Ld 
mans Sado col; JMoy wasa otro b] Xl Jil ears Sarl; 
“ehh «0 vou) ojana Knol Qo Vd veo «fey? roams fron’ 
Rufims Joo y ul sexo Joa Sa. ws] wo yl Nose ad p 
Aso huo haio ~ Joos. HAD, wd! Xx joo Dajo Dais, oof 
xpos 859] Y saal | Lao LAD} Daia JDI wanas cond 


only to sit in silence in my house in your dominions: since | am indeed not 
equal to the position of ruler; and why must I overwhelm myself and others 
and incur sin? ». And the king, admiring his words, did not press him, but 
ordered them to receive it' from him and let hin be released. And thus he 
was released, and went down to his house with joy, giving thanks to God 
and saying : « Now that God has delivered me from robbery and cares and 
anxieties, I will attend to myself and my house and my properties (adsizs), 
and will administer them in a religious spirit; and further I will remember 
my father who ran his course in the vanity of this deceitful world, and amassed 
all these things for me. And, in order that | and his own spirit itself may 
receive deliverance, since I know that he did great injustice, | on my side 
will give alins out of the very sum that he amassed, that le may find at 
least a little mercy on the judgment-day ». And from that time therefore he 
began to carry out these same things, and he did not give and act in the 
ordinary way like other men, but he would in private grasp the receiver, and 
in private fall on his face before him weeping aud beseeching him to entreat 
God to accept his purpose, and absolve his father also, saying, « Since you, 


I. Se. the account. 


* 


70 V? a 


* 


Wwe bi 


388 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [288] 


AES sowan] -fasodroo Jla Jord hp I st ols 
oa Oly Jaj scans S iNo m ISN Nez Jao NM, 


LN syo hasia läm, uoo] JNa, Laos qe 2142064 ere bha 
ae Joa pal ws] So -Joot p JI o la «0 coy p JN) | 


| 


[asanjzseo Loode bho J£» Luj c Ido xo fal Lol Jods! sexo | 


ye» 950 foa paio ' Laso «9o 5 Lad, Heo Kooy xo “pool 
JNooJay [sas] ooa «Mas vodaso. | Jl.ss JNisih do 
re Des Saas; Ja 0 Loo je Iia.» . props oes floss Jadu, 
J Al joa £2 no JI haios sotdsvolo vaag XS Qoo vao Snare 
LaLa voIaasda oj uo vor Sas JLS 92s. Jn 
pio Gro Sly Jas] Lassa Woo Lo, Wes OP choa olls |o, 
lues wax JH] 2c noa J| Jroddro os Sy bo oa, cao 
wot oo, sian aso ply v aly syolo iu opoant wis Jilly 
pots] we Lr; po qax) Ia mr clo goaa, 


my brothers, have not provoked God by robbery and injustice, entreat him 
on our behalf, of whose wiekednesses there is no end, that he may be recon- 
ciled to us, aud have merev upon us in the great day; since even this which 
weare giving comes from the blood of the souls of the poor and of the indi- 
gent, and of orphans and of widows ». When he had been doing these 
things for a long time, everyone was astonished at him and praised God, 
thinking what a cruel and rapacious father had begotten what a just and 
generous and merciful son. But, while he was making many distributions 
of alms to all the needy and giving them, during these things his thoughts 
also were receiving a praiseworthy advance, su that he began to lay a sound 
fonndation for penitence, with alfliction and fasting and prayers at all times; 
and henceforth out of all his great dainties and delicacies he fed on nothing 
except bread only and salt; and gradually his thoughts progressed until they 
reached this point, to sell all that he possessed and give to the needy as 
our Lord also commanded, and take his cross and follow him'. And this he 
did not delay to carry out, but he thereupon sent a message to the magnates of 
the distriet his neighbours, and stated that, if they were willing to buy his 


nds which bordered upon them —, and, if not, they were not to be annoyed 


or SRN ass 


[289] LIFE OF THOMAS THE ARMENIAN, 289 
-———3) j&X Jem gro] Aaa Lido us gol -Rasokal hoa coy 
wl So khoa ud JMG, oS ojo Lo's sao <o JNa JNa 
woe Jo “Ads Joo Nols ore 3 "Hy hba Draw od Joa MU); 
joo uot} sido p Loao Joa «2H * JNasolo Jlomsdl ve Liao iie a. 
|o! Ja») Lapa «foo x Cum oa J| ol, Colo PEDO yopa 
L5223; Ja No, Jlaarol Jlo Maza, Joas JI. uona JJ EET JNa; 
wadai Lanska JL Hi». Jamra flo . uso pero v» 
Las N fjas, fopr0 Laoso Lu jo haa Miss Je Jo eon Ss 
Jg “forts, palo JI] ooo xr [Sslo [sepe [age Ss Auforoly 


€ 


X99» vorartso Jijo -JecM[Ls aaas Moos [isa -jo sg] Joa We 
Lx qao loa Laasi -ousil, [ias Naso D o9 Ls 
wade Q9 aa oc oio] JH aas «b ha soo. Lui Mane 
“fod ujao coo Na], CATI B Lac. Kufsios JMa3o3a3 


1. Ms. sing. — 2. Ms. 1355; corr. v. D. and L. — 3. Ms. xo. 


at strangers buying them. And, when this news was received, like that 
whieh our Lord says in the parable, « A man who finds treasure in a field 
hath sold all that he possessed and bought that field »', so everyone 
who had anything was cager to sell all that he had, and buy one of these 
admirable and extensive fields. And so, since everyone hastened to be the 
first to buy, and further since he himself also did not do much valuing, in a 
short time he sold the great estate (95/2, not being deterred by the beauty 
of the buildings, nor the extensiveness of the courts that were scattered 
over these lands, nor the thickness of the many woods and of the parks 
(xxoxevoz) with various kinds of fruit, nor the attraetiveness of the irrigation 
and of the gardens and of the vines, and the circuit of long walls which 
formed a strong fence round the meadows and vines and fruit; but, just as 
a man becomes often drunk from wines, so his soul beeame drunk on God, 
and he scattered all his possessions in the fervour of his love: since the eye 
of his mind was henceforth set on the possessions that remain, and the 
scattering of temporal ones therefore did not trouble him, while henecforth 
he devoted himself to making gilts on a large scale to the needy and the 
distressed, and to those who had creditors, and to churelies and monasteries, 


l. Id.. xii, Mi. 
PATR. OH. — T. XVII. Ed 20 


290 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [290] 
Jl» sotarcso palaan as Sa MS, pelo Joa man Jhesa Jo 


Joa Lis -qam ad Lan odol, T jen 9] p Joa Jis «oo 
ssai alulo Jjasjo haso; o} [p XD od sso i Ady sad 


caches bas aaa + OOS VLLA NECS + Os cocog gaon Js NT Hp olo 


wey aad) toa Oy 2à e» ooo garoa Joss: Jm Jens 
Js] Bado aN Julo «o9» Kago e Jae Wn) JAN, 
Jos. oro ollo Jede Jasäaso ise Hào] Ja. Joa wo v2 9603, 
sJo88. Nos Jio: «oos. Joca «25360 franco] «oo 2.500 Je 
lacs «e 9 MA hes „alia? Slo «coh [asco Jlasjuy, Le Rdo 
HX Slo mod gx “asaro -JKssjoo Jiao VUL Jas Lrodas 
Dawo vod Q2 MS Jo Mau Jlogps0 + Starx axo J à. 2o 
ss Jla4xas «oo» Lise lops jio, Jla.ais, [Naso Jlsdso 
Jueces od lass aaay, Jana] noaoo ooa cade poa 


lL Ms. 8.3. — 2, Ms. œ for co. 


and he dissipated his possessions without stint in a manner that cannot he 
understood and told; while he also built a certain monastery (which is a well- 
fortified stronghold) for his own personal use and that of his whole house- 
hold, since both great and small and his wife and his children, and his 
slaves also aud many free men who were attached to him would promise 
him to yoke themselves with him under the gentle yoke of monasticism, 
which they iu Tact did. 

And he prepared two places, one for himself and the men who were 
with him, and another for lis wile and the other women who were with her, 
while he collected certain renowned and distinguished blessed men, and 
they came and made vigil and prayer, aud gave them the habit (7252); and 
they used to teach them the methods of the religious hfe and the ordinances 
of monasticism; and so again his wife also as well sent and Fetched [or 
herself two great and holy women front the laud of the Cappadocians, and 
they Hived with her, and tanght both her and her one daughter aud everyone 


was with ber the discipline of religion. And henceforth all the blessed 


T ed severely to bind upon themselves great burdens of ascetieism and 
ol line and of abstinenee and bear them, in order to subdue the worldly 


[201] LIFE OF THOMAS THE ARMENIAN. 201 


oo ade Jos Apo Jlearaswe flaw Lop dase OMS 
Joa sroKare yor Sas ootlasatsyo Wo S o3», Jad poU 
nA popes aot] t2 + fon’ ]í3303 aiso Jo Juste Sasso 
100% yaaa olas ana frais Do ooa xw) 9 Ha Lasag 
JLosL ol oomo aasa 9] haao) amaa ooa whl alaa Leono 
Dax Jlpvo Jb em op» e|) 2à ooa men Go [rape fixae fiya] 
wm ol YP fos] ats Qe Joo pA La haag J/i42ao JNa; 
ol shpen Da ons pases of vou Ji Bae poy crags So 
y JU Lass? J “bpe [3.5 So Lusso ol CORO So Juss ada 
OH — | LE Läd? y HANGS [dope > er Jr wo Spo 
wars Jo Jos £m fis SMS «2e Joo. exe xXx 9 
Joo E>, flo "ETT Lies ward], ! ro 09 oS ay az, oí polo + 00 
JMisy p Lo p> Dao roð Slots ed e Sos «el Je S Ms yam} 


animal instincts of their bodies, and beget mildness and humility and 
religion instead of the things that are in the world, while the report of their 
labours and of their asceticism was heard everywhere; and theuceforth many 
magnates and sons of distinguished magnates, marvelling at what this 
blessed man had done, would imitate him, and like him despise the whole 
world; and some would come to him that they also might receive the habit 
(cy$px), and some again would hasten to other districts and well-known 
convents, which many in fact did. And accordingly this blessed man had 
been made a great and beautiful sight for all men, while he had also deter- 
mined for himself that he would never throw himself upon his side or rest 
his head upon a pillow, or let water fall upon his body, or oil, as far as was 
possible, exeept under the pressure of great necessity (Zvxz), which he in 
fact carried out, until his feet were like charred columns, being thick and 
black, until. after ten years they used to discharge a large quantity of 
matter, and were as if they were not his, since he was smitten with severe 
ulcers, and would not concern himself even to wash off that discharge, and 
to apply a poultice, while we used often to say to him', « While thinking 


|. This would probably be aller Th. had removed to Claudias see below). The stuement at the 
beginning that J. knew him 30 years from his entering upon the monastie life ein hardly be recon- 
ciled with the statement that Th. lived 30 years after his banishment (p. 296), and probably the period 
should be reekoned. from his banishment. 


ese aan, 


ves dg 


292 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [292] 
INST bya Dal panddso Kol £2.36 p Fo gool <+] IE 
jl 6l t joa al a oof Mu] Daso Jisas dso Nl 3p y 
varoo JL «e SIS Lasin Jas woot la p fred 
Las curd aat jon 4261 aa] Joo FAL fad; shay aX. pas 
Loar . oj 82 eoe bot bass ORUE Jaky vÒ CMS waaa 
jaon qe? Jopa D> aoo ca 300130 adail Lasand gol wr P 
Laso J| sommes Ww» yards as arom, farol flsdso [iso 
Jersey asoMas o] LN xn J| ..2e 8120 oly lo oto X39 s]. 
ias oda; - [aio Jeo aim) woh vio 000b cup ba Loan NS 
a> gadaa, Lin! of © NOUO pa pas Da Lapo [oas aspis 


a Jaaa ^ flo Lesaas Ji p» asil) of soll J P ots as 


loo Jiro Loans oaaroks Jo «Joao, Jiao; flopyro Jlo pe) 


]. Ms, eatooleorr v. D. and L. 


yourself to be showing prowess, vou will be defeated, if you do not attend 
to these uleers, and you will fall». But he would look in astonishment at 
us, saving : « Then (zo), when these feet are anointed with drugs, and are 
rubbed by many persous aud cleaned with great care, someone would perhaps 
come and sav, ^ They have enough, now let them pay for the outward slow 
with which they have been magnified, lest they be requited for it tn hell” ». 
And so, being amazed at the soundness of his intellect, we would allow the 
matter to drop. Of the rest of the severe practices and heavy labours which 
they laid not only on themselves, but also the rest of their disciples and his 
wife and children !, we are not capable of composing a relation or description, 
so far did they transeend the limits of corporal creatures. And this again 
isa pout (hatis very admirable and great, that at the beginning when they 
began, the first day, cach one of them found the last day also, that of his 
end (57, without wearying of the life or slackening and falling olf, through 
sicknesses, or through the infirmity of liis body, or through the intensity of 


the winter cold, or through the extremity of the summer heat. But the 


same? 20 The Saris awkward. — 2. Ido net understand this. V. D. and L.'s 
t qualia die p facere eocperanl, eliu postremo die talia agentes vidi’ imay express 


| nol in the test. 


[293] LIFE OF THOMAS THE ARMENIAN. 293 
[Sho has, Lupaa ba Daia ugar Xoo aa ING r os 
<% JIL par aN JK5; Lean JI Ja ING proo Jas]: 
Lao NS wc) lao fodamas! Jigs Laser: [nas pe ope} 
Jlatsasrso Joa EUN KJ Joo ooa gasaio ql Jusy ood 
waa], [a5 So. Jlds] sooo: JJAgmo [3305 [3&5 f cJ .JLsossso 
sajo] qo Jl» Jii. [e 2 lasao foto} [ax sux) y wpotle 
je halso [AS Snare haao Jloiiiscy cu ss Q5 4200 
Läsas, eda [ok hupa .JKmism JKasdslo JKusso/ äs, 
pol - snare oai hasal Joo care] Maal, Loc Bo ero Jlankyaoo 
Lapa pa laag Loa Jrootsl frie wa iNo q% Joa Sou No. Lasas 
PAD Laual, Jilla as Lauder Jasosi bash -Joo wys | oN aas, 
„faao wadad, alaso -Joa Joà ga Jiaxcoo Laas po Joo 
aaas joa paw! hay o> Jasio des Loss»: fas] od 


blessed man, hecause he used to bestow much labour on reading, conceived 
the desire of obtaining some books of the fathers; and in consequence of 
this desire he directed his journey to Alexandria the great with three of his 
followers; and he entered into communication with the many holy bishops 
and the others who on account of the persecution were at that time colleeted 
there '; and he was strengthened vet more both in the faith and in labours. 
And he bought many great books of all the fathers, the [nll amount that he 
could and was able to obtain, about five large loads?, and similarly also some 
spices Tor a hundred denarii from Edessa; aud he returned having collected 
examples of virtue. Aud so he thenceforth oceupied himself constantly 
night and day, besides constant prayers and frequent repetitions of service, 
in reading books of the fathers containing commentaries and exhortations 
and dogmaties (Sejyat2), so that thenceforward his mind was enlightened 
like the sun. After twelve years during which the blessed man with all the 
rest of his convent was thus distinguishing himself, the smoke of heretical 
persecution was being exhaled in the same district of Armenia, the Instigator 
and perpetrator of these things being the likeness of the original Antichrist, 
the man who held the authority of the patriarehate in Antioch at that time, 


1, 519-536, — 2. Horses’ burdens (?.. 


~a 


te 


EE 


204 JOHN OF EPHESUS, [294] 


pha; who; AND gwaa OG oó foro] Jars] £5 yasol Joo 
Daa uou] Joi; odo war yero Se» Jy Jaco oro Js 
Adu Adaa Joa paul Liame Lusil, Jilla Joor sadol Lon 
Loasa Sx Lao; Mhao Loto .Jlas Aos Jre «e cà froofl jasal, 
hmas «sso |loaamasfias Suarco Joa pd! Lassil, Jills, Qoo» 
Jyaa'se haipo Lai Lad; pol -doofh isa) Led maine: Lidia, Lao 
Soy ede! p Joa Joou Jaanson Jka: foi hasas La] us i 
froofh Jio; oom» Lao bama Da ga e cL A aS, 
ba Jil: oa Jiawo Lasi secl] oon : xA] Duda Case 
» JEsoacse NS bees 2] osas Joor ao ol PD oxeàÀ REDD ONY) 
ol oaas «oL cx TE . 000 «oso Londo, weds Sax» 
x? o JLI aaam, of +. borsa wosan, haao aaa 


|. Ms, I9aoz,9| 3a5. — 2, Mx, bods 


whose name was Ephraim 'the son of Appian! of Amida; who in his own 
person displayed beforehand in the ehureh of God all the things that are to 
be done in the world at the end by the false Christ. This man’s brother 
therefore was in the district of Armenia and Syria, holding the ollice of the 
satrapy previously hell by the blessed Thomas himself?^; and this man 
stirred up a ernel persecution against all the believers in the district of Arme- 
nia; and thereupon the chorepiseop? and the heads of eonvents and the rest of 
the priests of the villages assemble before the blessed Thomas as before a 
teacher and a learned man and a leader of men, so that a great assembly of 
five hundred men was formed, saying, « Everything that he commands we 
will do ». Then these things stirred up violent odium against the virtuous 
Thomas himsell, since they said, « He is a head and an example to all who 
are in this district to rebel against us». Then, when the numbers of their 
assembly had further mounted even to eight hundred, they thereafter received 
summonses to the praetorium ol the satrap, that they might do one of two 
things, either assent to the impiety of the synod of Chalcedon, or leave the 
~a family name, ‘Bar Afsana'. — 2. Cf. Land, rn, 295. Tenee ib appears that lhese 

ned at the lime of Ephraiurs descent lo the E. whieh was at the end of 536 or beginning 


The satripies were abolished by the edict of 18 Mar, 536. (p. 285, n. 3), but 
ld take setae time to varny out. The beginning of Th.’s monastic career must 


295] LIFE OF THOMAS THE ARMENIAN., 295 


Ass) fuss] oofds -anat qa «oo [uy yopo aaoo ell v» 
Jos NS. eu Janno a J| Jurasas qua .ex haaha oon 
web,» alou, Qs wow Jaaa cias ol edo JI JIro 
Laro koor waylh] - 40d xoxo L>; od [sa odo er foci JLa 
pels Laso flo mm? Jas. col <> LOMAS Js Dao -haï Sco 
J hanan jasols yopoas Q] Il; bes jh £e Joa ac» foi je 
oà fran M. cotasohtaly Ji, o3, wool] -oujaso aan wrasse 
Nl Ae ` DAS Da oA a] p Jasal, oom cotantas . o5 
J3»39 par Snare oso yel «o Ago» Edo» dd Jo o 
lasag Labot aad aad of spade fil! qao oa of spo yd Mel 
pars e „Jaos [385 ol < Jal ax 49 DN aol y <? 
Jlassesoy hajas LDA JI ol A ana JI istae -Ll she J 
y pach wer Jh ba [525 us, WM flo JM Jo bl stn haaa, 


district. But they, when they came and stood before the judge and were 
required to do these things, all as they had been taught by the blessed man 
cried: « We for our part will not deny Christ; and we will not confess or 
introduce a quaternity in place of the holy Trinity. Far be it froin us to com- 
munieate with the renegades », Upon these words being uttered in a loud 
voice by all that great company the persecutor and judge and all the hearers 
were alarmed, and trembling fell upon all of them, from the intensity of the 
one stern ery that resounded like a great thunderclap ; and, when the per- 
secutor saw that, unless he first bound the strong man, he could not reduce 
his camp‘, he formed the plan of turning the whole force of his efforts in the 
struggle against the blessed man himself in place of all that company, saying 
to him : « All these things are your doing; aud, if all these men die, they will 
die at your hands; and henceforth you must contend with the king. Either 
depart from this district at onee, or prepare yourself for the struggle ». 
But the blessed man as one possessed of coufidence and streugth said to him : 
« For my part, O man now exalted, I am uot frightened of your words, and 
your threats are of no account to me; nor in the matter of the faith of Clirist 
do | take account of the kine 


a? 


nor of you, nor of anyone who lives in this 


I. Matth., xir, 29. 


~a 
E 


STE RR, 


296 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [296] 


e» pl -Al pis Jill qao ainaski] peo! Jio of Jills bil 
J| Nopol) amaaa, oà vo wea d Jl Sy Joal, LÌ aas Las; 
Jo pass paky Ns] Ls, adr aD pol cat o9 A yppa bl pao] 
Ne Joe) c om JHL «2o was SN Se ado fills bop. Joal 
ois 4S] So, “LQ US SING u$ «8! v5 0222; eor» Siac 
Jlesad Ji bl Jes of Nas pag I ol arh] ex Lax, foi 
„Jy OKs oix» oà hasar, opio oa») Cw» ja» sass oil] «3o hoo 
Lima, Los Loo hadiso frao Jia dS noonoo pn] Jost soosoo 
]15o4) «2! OA OOF hand yo} Dar coo ds Mhuman Laroo 
«5 Joss JSary L25a2o x) «o»! J&5oo par Lago Jro Nor Joli 
Lo cre Sy -ootlpas aolo foi Jiad, 29 JKoopa Jean yo [Les 
9001 «43230. ANS nn V oonison Jlsax Snare «olo. Joa yano iors 
od.) oad pis gw Q5 ree Jii haj Jlas2s2 o dos yo 


world. But, lest you think that I for my part am bound hy district or place, 
if yon seek to expel me from the district, | on my part will leave this evening, 
that you may know that l am not bound by anything else except by Jesus 
my God by whose name I was saved ». He said to him: « If you wish 
to respect voursell, and uot let there be slaughter in the whole district 
on your account, depart from the district ». But the blessed man gladly 
undertook to depart, saving, « Would that I the sinner night be persecuted 
on behalf of the great name of Christ my God; for l neither have merited nor 
do merit this privilege ». And so he departed from his district with all who 
were with him; and the rest of all that assembly journeyed after hin, and 
some to other districts, and some to the stern and rngged mountaius; and 
so all of them everywhere bravely endured the violent and eruel persecution. 
But the blessed man crossed into the district called Claudias, and there he 
bought a site; and on that site on the high mountains of towering size above 
the river Euphrates he erected some small huts forming two monasteries 
for women and for men; and there for the future they valiantly carried out 
he Jabours whieh they habitually practised. When he had completed the 


period of thirty years in banishment‘. when afterwards we used to resort to 


fo S667, hut probably the sentence is faultily expressed, and J. does not mean 


[297] LIFE OF THOMAS TIIE ARMENIAN. 207 


oo +, oa hasa; Woot xq oà polo ioo «rose hag: 
M5 od fly ial p alaaa Joa Jal uNa Mj 
HL LI aA lasl, Lon Gd. aD flaro pe ol ihh 
Nwaase fhao Lans J Gd hao. lul pe basa J, p30 aS ylas asio 
Lao; bany AaS ee ge: Jlaomso ` Jed: ud Jlo 
e „anah Joa J Rufsios aa] oà fda mY P Joa Gas 
à hai vaoo ha; flsaro -aD ra [235 Jas) JR © Senso 
29MM Ju flo frou Jy PA ona) Sx m2 p Joa Jl5a.2.56 
25 Joa Loil N o5 Jo] «eo. ie 5j [sete suotan pdt J Joss? «| 
A2. JSR ANS capac aso) hasa pado JNa Jas eno 
ooa «40ó wots Slo haao Jonas JNa Liofly [Ksotarxcd; Las] 
hol altul JKarsagy Jano gad Joa aia Lai bor Jiao - JAM 
si loa Jlsax huso oaas Muyo Jo coors sol + toot Loo Laihos 


the presence of the same blessed man himself, and wished as it were to olfer 
him consolation, be would show his fortitude aud his courage vet more by 
saying, « For my part I am ready not only to be expelled or to die one death 
only for Christ’s sake, but also, if it were possible for a man to die ten thou- 
sand deaths, even this will not distress me ». And so thenecforward tlie 
severe life of the mountains and the multifarious hardships existing upon 
them were counted by those persons as a spacious garden; for, when he had 
found that quiet retreat, he lad great joy and pleasure, and he therenpou 
made himself a small hut of planks, and used to carry out the great labour 
of his secret practices in it, having laid down an absolute rule for himself 
not to taste bread or wine unless constrained by necessily (avez); and thus 
he would feed on pulse and some fruit only, sometimes from one week to the 
next and again on the first day of the week, and sometimes every two or 
three days, so that he was granted the gift of secret vision (Ssestz). And so 
also his sous too who were three he used to train in this great method of 
life, in the same way as his blessed wife who was called Maria also yoked 
herself to the same mode of life, and she also laboured in the same way, 


that it was after the 30 years that he visited him, At p. 285 the 30 years are rechoned from the beginning 
of his monastic life (524), which brings us to 554, bul see p. z91. note, Since J. wrote in 566 see 
Introd.), 30 years should probably not be taken as an exact reckoning. 


208 JOHN OF EPHESUS, [298] 


Do Jl Joa Lap oN saña Jlslo pra hae: opis yd - vot 
Je Joa do Njamo Mjanma harao on e$ condo pe 


i oon Nl [EET y Jad so Opd «0r j ors od foo prot sudo 


«219360 aso) ho y Jlo 1o Jhsdinyo Janas, aao fasfls OOM 
Jlo + Jo D my 20 Jop «24300 oan eso ooo 
ol p -Jlaad so Musas oes yoda [oed vs oe Jool Jison 
JA sad x alha? .fsaso 2,26 beo jaz A Jpsoars yancoll| 

eas. BIS orto Naai j£ o 


rani na mCnemà mela hard dole 


wma mhduria 


while she never came within sight of the blessed man nor yet of his sons, 
but each of them performed his? spiritual service alone and solitary. And so 
everyone was amazed at them, to think to what extremity of humility and of 
labours and of hardship like this persons who were already in the world's 
eyes kings had heen brought, and they gave thanks beeause of them and 
praised God. And they departed from the world with a reputation for mar- 
vellous modes of life; and the blessed man finished his course in the royal 
city, being also interred in our convent at the holy Mar Mama beyond the 
water?, and his blessed wife ended her course at the same time in the 
district. of Armenia. 


The history of the blessed Thomas from Armenia, and of his wife and of his sons 


is ended, 


] 5e, his or her, — 2. The convent was in. Syeae (eh. 37), i. e. the suburb beyond the Golden 
Hora. Pargoire Usrestiga Russkage Arkhrologieheskago [stitata v Konstanfinopole, Ix, p. 251, (190%)) 
has shown thal the palace of S. Mama was on the Thraeian. eoast opposite Chrysopolis, and. the 
monastery of S. Mama al Belgrad Kapn in the SW. of the city; and ‘beyond the water’ shows the 
palace lo be here meant, even if we did not kuew the sile lo be in Syeae. V. D. and L.s rendering 


y= 


Deeelesiat in eb, 37 is erroneous, the Sys having ^ house" only. 


[299] LIVES OF ADDAL AND ABRAHAM. 299 


ñap eh rura eode pinsi rdéusnd sah 
srub omiaa oar reLar 


000 «oor Ne] Lal wis Lal -. yoopslo uy] «7 Suro Jus 

Lasan Qoo Joa pais qao oon fais Jisas seoran reado 
LaNa Lasan Joot -ooa anao Laa haria p20 Jla anos; 
Jas quanno flo ANEA qh hoa La DA eI ^ 
sao P Loa .oi Na as NS Jos, «430i s. NN) 
opadao aLa y «2o anaso Jis o» Jooks JE» sanaa] J JXs05 
Op 490 Jiro Naas J Koo, wep apao Jljs9. «oo akao JS doo 
Jas qad r2 yor <> +, coothas aadh] arsaso fil) a5 
S390 uà Joo,> fran Jpsoarn [Nia Jando Au) pops Soo Lasoo 
ce ood D RASA facts „olo Qpa Oje $90 oS ooo Jei DL olo 
:j$axejse yas] asso fas] opal 0 Aufl ds »Ne Jes 2à 
y «oe! vo LOO} eas Q 30.20 Jla X990 asamo 


XXN. 


NEXT THE TWENTY=SECOND HISTORY, OF TILE TWO BLESSED ANCHORITE 





BROTHERS ADDAI AND ABRAIFAM THE ZEALOUS MEN. 


These blessed men Addai and Abraham therefore were brothers on the 
mother's side, and at first they remained under training in a convent for 
several years; and afterwards they formed the resolution of voing out on 
pilgrimage. And, when they had been thus going about for several years, 
they began to deliberate between themselves, saying, « Wherefore do we 
thus go aimlessly about, and not show labour for our Lord, and erect places 
for his praise? » And so, as they were going about, they found a certain 
place that was a convenient site for a monastery, and they planted their cross 
there, and made a cabin; and they asked for iron tools, and began to dig out 
a site for a martyrs’ chapel. And, when the people of the district saw and 
heard it, they repaired to them from all quarters, providing money and wood 
and everything that was useful. And in one year they erected an extensive 
convent in that place, and they also gained disciples: and when they saw it 
they rejoiced, and they say : « Now it is better for us than roving and 
going about aimlessly ». And, when they had trained some men and taught 
them the psalms, and showu them how to conduct alfai^s, they conceived the 
plan of leaving them there as it were to govern themselves and depar- 


300 JONN OF EPIIESUS. (300] 
Lacs aM 0004 Lasoo JI] Joo, Laamaso - eso voor Saas, 
Ll d xol eet A9 Jem Jh. Qe p SA3Oa'O E 
Loos pl el Rapin J| 2989 (dad) poo bso Jills a2 axle, 
e Kao Lajo Mg 4x0; 06 uy! haag aa aa woes JL 
> Joo «3o ceo euo] Jaski Jyo Jas: xl p> OLLAND 
pa So e Naak], ber oue Jpn Sas 0001 v2 fasoro Loa Lad 
«rào Jer o> ADAH OO “AX 000 RAH ADO +0001 copo Laas 

ejpasksh 0.5 pera ye ws 11324 s JI ,Oo00l ane 


ordut rr eiae sara réusxh ho 


ora. Qox car aapa dAlda Liman eiusd sah 


JN £2] EN Say q» Jeo 93264 La Daaa rsa} 
Jlaosnwawo hans No p30 £p Joa saod] Jolo Lajos J20 
„fasts Jaen]. Nol N.so .fusoos Looms Jäs Noaujo .-Jhasrsolasoo 


ling, and erecting another place. And thus they continued doing for twenty- 
five veurs, during which they erected twelve monasteries; most of which 
| know, which they erected in the distriet, and the rest, because they were 
some way off, | have net seen; but the men } saw at last in that in whieh 
the blessed Addai who was the elder died, and I was for some time in inter- 
course with them, and they said, « This is the twelfth monastery that we 
have erected, since we devoted ourselves to this object ». And in each of 
them this is what they used to do. As soon as it was built, they would 
obtain everything that they could for it, and appoint an archimandrite in it, 
aud then departe But at last the blessed Addai fell asleep in the twelfth. 


The history of Addai and Abraham the zealous brothers is ended, 


NNU. — NENT THE TWENTY-THIRD HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED SIMEON 


THE SOLITARY. 


This blessed Simeon therefore used to occupy himself with great and 
marvellous practices in a convent adjoining the city of Amida, being distin- 
guished for quietude and humility and obedience, and love of all spiritual 


[301] LIFE OF SIMEON THE SOLITARY. 301 


vH fuss <P pasoo“alo finis Qoo» lady [rao l>; bsano 
aao lasan HYE Jem haia qrdor Jiao a 00 
Je Jo -5 Mao JNa xo xA IL Ny s Jia dX wulo 
wool ogy [jas col [iso vino cel Los o aao Ud) 
Jais Snare QooiS.5o wos ors Joa $3, so JLz eo exo p2 ooo 
Krauio oso. lanaa c2; Dado Joa flsaasd Jinas ooter3on Jopas 
LSL of Jh; paas waahh] H aa Loot Sjanna hanso 12275] 
seleM JE]. he apa Box»: forse Joal Lion -53l p + Ota. $a. 
aas [soy paaa Jio Mf dias HSS pad LARO Aoc Sau 
[2a4.5o JD Naawa joa X5 bor Lao Lao .oa a4: JKoiaads 
Joor rl J| uaaa «36 waa o Loot Jol JMS e»: Lal saast, 
Jasoko fiasco hair e] Jf] aNd k qd yom Joo Aaso fil 
Vo froa clo raspy OS Joot Joos p3 foot prc anaana MUL. 
re "Ness, foot 2p J| ;& 45 ad; va colo vxo JN lo wih 


1, Ms, aas. — 2, Ms, Wais. 


labours, and especially the service of the saints, and great and abounding 
love towards all poor men and strangers. But, when he had completed 
twenty years in these heavenly practices, he desired to adopt the life of a 
solitary; and he set out and went to a certain mountain two miles from the 
city; and he passed the night at a certain spot. And there he prayed and 
traced the plan of some cabins for himself, and he began and built some tints 
there that were very marvellous, being supplied by many persons with all 
that he needed; and thereafter he used to carry out all the marvellous labours 
of his honoured course of life. But on account of the abundanee of his 
charity and the Jove of strangers and poor men that burned in him he would 
not consent to make a court or gates for his huts, saying, « Thus it will he 
open to Christ my Lord when he comes to me to enter my dwelling in the 
person of his bondmen simply and without impediment; that so he may grant 
me the blessing of his favour». And so much was this saint smitten with 
the love of God, and with the love of his brethren, that, when occasion called 
him to leave his huts, he did not close the door and conceal any one of the 
articles of furniture in his cell, but also he used to do a thing that is parti- 
cularly great and splendid and marvellous to hear, wien it happened that 
he was absent were it one day or two or three from his cell. Not only did 


UN S pe Ds 


5s 


302 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [302] 


rare -aAa «2e Joa aau, Jeans o} Jil olo. wild NE «2o 


a l Jaan Spo LX wp ..Jioks Joa i « 2. N00 JLses Joa Daas Joa 


~ Sly 2à Jie ose DA hano Laia Luado Joa yla 
oro Sos <>! peas cool! ADDO Oba Ja Maly Ono igo 
dy Sooo adsl Ho an whhlo Na js! 9262 Kaa anas Jaco: 
Laza JNeos;a.s for Nean JNa Ny who N LA. 
Ja opranw DA han Ai [D AM ae) oi N Sota so <% hasam, 
coord ipao vp do Lasse coords Gadde; JL go clo work. | m clo 
ECOLE ófa» anxo Aaaa CER «ob Jl Oe NS 
Jal moe sal Jl) ps Rt ope Mo ol e Ree bl «sl 
e oaasjJo ooh. yo LN Q0) otf so1ase woe . Ji wt clo 
Jor - sas Nas [pn] Jegeo vyplo Js. Wh Lao nalas y JNoja> 
oso as NA], So v» T s010p3].50 Jis ao hanao E JX © aD 
Feet vl L-35- [sot < Kaos ado J, Jisu oprosaco 


L Corr. from Peis. — 2, Ms. with stop following. 


he not trouble bimself to bring in any one article of furniture in his cell, but 
also on the day on which he teft his cell he would first cook food, and would 
lay atable, and moisten bread and temper wine, and put it out, and a tablet 
Inseribed and laid on the top of it as follows (whieh we have also often read), 
ou which were these words : « Welcome, our brothers, Christ's bondmen; 
come into. your bondman’s house confidently and refresh yourselves, and 
hesitale not. Sinee oveasion has called me the sinner to go on necessary 
service, here is a present of what is required to satisfy need from the gift of 
our Benefactor set ready. For the sake of his true love, whether it is one or 
many whom Christ my Lord is preparing and sending to his boudman’s house, 
shrink not Irom coming in and. satisfying all vour need, though | myself 
am absent in the body. Hf it be possible for him to wait till I come, I beg 
him to do so: if not, let bim refresh himself out of onr Lord's gift and bless 
the Giver, and leave us the blessing of his prayers, and thus go in peace; 
and. f he need anything else. besides, lo! the whole cell is committed. to 
Christ's hands, and at his hands fet him satisfy all his need without restraint 
From everything that is im it But let him leave this writing of ours in ils 


(he rest of our brethren whe shall arrive in order to inform them 


[303] LIFE OF SIMEON THE SOLITARY. 303 


Iro: Jos prams fag haoo casas Koos; S] Doaa, : yl iso, : 


wih Laia oll we? OMS Joa N35 No. od fillo INte a -ha 
Joa JN JJ odt fisan o aS wulo xv Me) husan amaa lo nohan, 
„ah eas 0 ango noosa anm] Lao. aalo acaso ddro 
v P aza arco esol CANY aala - [xh <% pad aos ye 
[oops Lalis cohiisy jlo pell wasn Jlo T pasos Joop 
aan] «2300 iac ooa] -Lovos xao wl p) p20 Jae4) J.A 
wt 99 pe AAs PX cadet dX juil] opo nelo La; Jas 
BANAN woa [43e alo wp Lass vaaia [SI ocNs sss haag 
Js Lio 32S. Leo NS. "so Jpn odas su, jio, so Okai 0 
oon | We» adao asi Kal Jas aro asl A vot Ww 051 
rads inoa vac Sad fly cdot poo pool cer ool „aaao 
„hag N JI Joc m00 sha JN © OS Loot ARN exo NOTENN, 
Jue wia Nar haaa Jio ona; fas] Da oh] e JI ol 


1. Ms. om. stop. 


also». And so the fame of this saint's great charity was spoken of over 
the whole of the eity and that district. But once two young men who were 
passing eame, and they found the huts open, and no one was to be seen all 
round; and they went in and ate and drank, and the rest they put into their 
packs; and they loaded themselves, aud started to so. And, when they had 
passed out of the door, their feet stuck there, and they stood still bearing 
their loads till the evening and standing erect; and they became incapable 
of moving, or of laying down their loads until the blessed man came. And 
on seeing them from a distance he understood what had happened; and they 
themselves cried with a loud voice and say, « Sir, have merey on us for we 
have sinned against you, and forgive us »..— But the blessed man unmediately 
raised his eves to heaven, and prayed, and said : « Lord, deliver thy crea- 
tures, and free them from the deceitful teaching of the enemy; and remove 
from them the teacher of evil who ineited them to these things ». And 
the same hour they were released, and fell ou their faces before him. And 
he on his side said these words to them : « Knew you not, my sons, that | 
had committed this cell to Christ my Lord, and him nothing escapes? or 


know you not that, wherever Christ's name is called, everyone who presumes 


eG LEE 


304 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [3047 


oio] ay uc baoo o Bo] We» JL. Je yas see So opel 
Nai yo; Saas Iso: eos pr Lago «gl Jia hooo naasa 
o» jopa je asad D> vaada Jlaass3) Desa» o] EM wis Joo 
Jyr0ad X Joa a Nose EN NJ pas 5 beso ao] Jha 
SEL asyl} e» Ji] oo » [a905 we andy lo exa, Loo 
[.4-9o5$ olope- > | Nimaa ao wash] Kojas EX Lasoo 
ero ha 9] £e Esaiae LNSCN pO 200 Lao - Joo 295 
ja às Jil Sars JP ox. vaos] Jie ~ ALI ye) + ome 
„joa Daas hasad hamai], fopaso -ofdsy oaan Kaw sooi 
Niso ahol] Laia Jisas fuors Lao oo joo Cd iso oaa wo 
JN-3a.9 Ko] Ss Jla L3 É JIocx 3 Jn pi Jio Jlo 
ejoa No Naso 


WW a astaxn aapa m'éuird Aou 


1. In erasure with erased word following. 


to streteh out his hand and lay it upon anything has to deal with God the 
Judge ofall? And now, my sons, go and beware ». And so he dismissed 
them'. And the fame ol the saint's triumphs was spoken of everywhere. 
But afterwards the storm (yaw) of persecution was stirred up against the 
same blessed iman also together with all the rest of the church; and he 
bravely and heroically contended in. the conthets (zy6v), while all the con- 
vents were overeome and defeated by the perseeution, and driven from the 
whole district *, And he himself held firm; and thus he persevered and 
maintained a hereie contest: and he used to go about the city itself at 
the very height. of the persecution, and give absolution and baptize 
night and day, while he lad previously determined this also, that nothing 
should enter his belly except from the labour of his hands; but he used 
to labour with his hands in proportion to his own needs, and those of 
the other strangers whom he was in the habit of receiving in secret. and 
relieving out of his labour. And thus he contended several years while 
oceupied in this labour; and he ended his life with this reputation. in the 
triumphi of heroism, while contending until death on behalf of the truth. 


The history of the blessed Simeon the solitary is ended. 


lar story is told in Palins, Hisl. Mow. 6 Dyakonov, p. 38i) 2. This seems lo mean 


1 nd others went tube exile, 


Kg gr 


TUT | 


ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA 


. xm, n. 4 For 1’ read 2. 
. 1, transl., l. ult. After ‘means’ ins. ‘of’. 
. 3, text. 1.5. After oio] ins. ref. *!'. 


D 


— transl., 1. 4. Om. ‘the of’. For js read qz. 


. 6, text. n. After * Point’ ins... 
. 7, notes. Read ‘ Three leaves missing’. See Introd., p. vii 
. 10, text, l. penult. For ss read ss. 


— transl., 1.6. Om. ‘of’. 


. 11, text, n. 2, and transl., n. 3. Read ‘A leaf missing’. See Introd., p. vu. So 


wt 


| 


eee a p E RM 


vovv] 


" 


also at p. 18, text, and transl., n. 2. 
18, transl., 1. 3. For *confitently ' read ‘ confidently’. 


. 21, text, l. ult. For pas read pss. 
. 23, text, l. 1. For esso read swo. 


31, transl., n. 1. Add. ' but at x, 1, he places his death at the end of March’. 


32, text, 1. 10. Por Ie 2e read jamso. 
— — n3. For ik read jy. 
— transl., 1. 13. After ‘was’ ins. ‘speaking and’. 


— — 1.15. After ‘sobs’ ins. ‘suddenly’. 


. 93, text, n. 3. For ss, read ss... 


— — n.12. For psso read pao. 


35, transl., 1. 3. Add note ‘Ile was banished by deeree of 6 Aug., 536 


xin, 3); cf. Mansi, VIII, 886, et passim’. 


. 44, text, n. 3. For o ssi. read aad. 
. 45, text, 1. 3. For *3' read ‘4’. 


— — 41.8. For ‘13’ read *3*. 
— — n.16. For ops read or». 


. 48, text, n. 14,1. 1. For wae read cya. 

. 49, text, n. 14. For ‘ACP’ read‘ A, CP’. 

. 53, transl., 1. ult. For ‘he’ read ‘the’. 

. 56, text, l. penult. Om. 1“ hall-bracket. 

. 57, text, L. 7. For ‘3’ read ‘5’, and for :5' ‘3°. 
. 70, transl., n. For ‘vin, 6’ read * vir, 4’. 

. 72, transl., n. For*1' read ‘2’, 

. 74, transl., 1. 7. For ‘aee’ read ‘face’. 

. 79, transl., n. 2, 1. 2. Read ** Tliis expression and the imper. paas == please! oceur 
several... . . .. but are unknown to the lexicons " 
. 85, transl., n. 2. For ‘1°’ read +10’, and for ‘columan’ read ‘column’. 
. 103, transl., n. 1. Add. ‘n. 2. 


PATR. OR. — T. XVII. — F. 1. 


Just., Vor. 


306 ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. [306] 


P. 132, transl., n. 1. Om. 'p. 

P. 139, transl., n. 2. For ‘foo’ read *800'. 

P. 155. text, 1. 9. For oie read oes. 

P. 165, text, 1. 11. For ji read isi. 

P. 163, transl.,]. 4. For ‘nything’ read ‘anything’. 

P. 172, text, 1. 5. For usas read pos. 

P. 181, text, 1. 3. For os read es. 

P. 186, n. In ch, 23, init., and ch. 33 all Christian recipients of charity are appy. 
called saints ef. Rom. xv, 25; Hebr. vi, 10). If this is the mean- 
ing here, the chronological ditficulty disappears. 

P. 190, text, 1.6. For joo read joo. 

— — transl,1.6. Add note ‘Cf. ch. 51 (f. 121 r° b)’. 

. 191, transl., n. 1. Add ** Nóldeke (ap. Brockelmann) renders ‘ pera’, but I do not 

know on what evidence ". 

P. 49^, text, 1. 3. For «xit read “as !. 

P. 195, text, n. 5. For xjp read wp». 

P. 109, text, n. 9. For sss read Vin. 

P. 207, text, 1. 5. For ‘4’ read ‘6’. 

— — — ]L8,411. For os: read "L4 *. 

— — — 1,9 For*S8'read ‘9’, 

— — transl.,1. 10. For ‘brethren’ read ‘brother’, 

P. 208, text, l. 1... For xt read "Lu. 

P. 212, transl., n. 2. Read ‘Cire. £ 22500 = fr. 5623500’. 

P. 214, text, 1. 4, 5. For pop ws read js; so). 

P. 218, text, l. penult. For s read a aus. 

D. 225, text, 1. 6. For exte read esto. 

— — — l penult, marg. Read ‘A 54 meb’. 


-= 


— — transl, 1.3. For xxržstowux read x%otpwux. 
P. 228, text, n. I... Read ‘Bom. 2. 
234, text, 1.3. For piseg read "sa, *. 
— — — 1.9. For. read .;!. 
P. 241, transl., 1. 2. After ‘yourselves’ ins, ref. to note ‘Sc. for the communion’. 
P. 243, text, 1. 8. For jugo read jugo. 
P. 24^, transl., 1. 144. For ‘resign’ read ‘leave’. 
P. 254, transl., l. 15. For ‘land’ read ‘lands’. 
P. 264, text, n. 4. For ii read yp. 
— — iransl, n.4. For ‘lightened?’ read ‘tightened’. 
P. 263, transl., n. 2. For ‘Ms.’ read * Mss. '. 
P. 264, text, n. 12. Read ‘BM om. ,.". 
P. 265, text, n. 4. For roo read ; oo. 
P. 260, text, n. 3. For sus read ex. 
P. 271, text, n. 7. Om. bracketed words. 
P. 283, transl., 1 8. After ‘spirit’ add ‘for God's sake’. 
P. 301, text, n. 1... Read * Ms. saamas’. 


1, 2 points are often placed at the emt of a word (in the mss. sometimes above the line, some- 
ine s on it) do denote the vocative. See p. 7%, L6; p. 75,145 p. 76, LI. 2; p. 79, L 01; p. SO, L 125 
p.235, 126, 13; p. 265, L to. This usage is not noted in the grammars, 


«c 0go-1c0c cc wwe 


=œ > BRA» 
w ve o 


14 
15 


17 
18 


20 
21 
22 


Introduction. 
Author's preface. 


Life 
Life 
Life 


Life 
Life 
Life 
Life 
Life 


Lives of Mary and Euphemia. 
Lives of Thomas and Stephen 


Life 


Lives of two monks. . . . 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


OL Hablb. c xD Seed 
of Z ura. 


of John the Nazirite. ... ...... 
Lives of Abraham and Maro 
Lives of Simeon and Sergius. 
Life of Paul the anchorite 


of Abraham the recluse. 


of Addai the chorepiscopus. . . . . 


of Mare of Beth Urtaye. 


of Simeon the bishop. ........ 


of Ilarfat. . . 


of Abbi. . . 


CR a er ee (9. ceo Sa 


Of a monk from the same convent as Zacharias. and about sound training. .. . 


Life of Thomas the Armenian 
Lives of Addai and Abraham. 
23 Life of Simeon the solitary. . 
Addenda and Corrigenda 


Pages. 


6 GRAFFEN FE. NM 


PATROLOGIA ORIENTALIS 


ONS AIT Ga MAGI VICIT S 


l. pi PANAN. 

Saw Re ATANES N DU TER Assi Ae ets vean 
Il. PONG la 

he ISKRE pi Jon. Versron copte boharrique, 
Hl. (POESIE. 

lx PLES ANCIPAS MONI ME NER DE CMS ANISM EC KERIS SUR 


PXYRLS Ib 


IV. EAV. BROOKS. 
Jony Or lbursvs. Lives of tlie Eastern Saints | dy. 
M To NDDCEITISUASS IS M er A. VASILIEV. 


LST me Ve WILY Vli A CCE ONT IST EPL de Td 


Sa ID-IBN- DIMO. 





va. 
a? o 
A i 
je ees 
se) 
a0 
DNUS 
Epp Ep E ud q est SEI CAL Pee Sv DE JC EE 


LIBRAIRIE DE PARIS, 56. RUE JACOB 


]'!25 





JOHN 
LIVES OF 


OF EPHESUS 
THE EASTERN SAINTS 


WAUEIACO TEXT EDITED AND TRANSLATED 


Dx 


E. W. BROOKS 


Il 





ee. r^23ela asira pimsi mrodusnad aah 
Sr duas reidi r2Sancaar 


[5a.a.2n..5] T: Lie Joes Jrcoas IL oos ANS uoo v5 
<el: e «polso o + coran alan", I Lias Wes Ros 
LSN 2otoz92aa: Joy basn sU NS No Lisasi ras NK.]:oor2 
<% Pl -oaa d0, p30 L5. rA «o Q5 ad; e aso [s 
-a> Las] Ll.» Jno Jass SMX rajaa LAWS) — CAS xed 
Lem. Je Nao vaania au) wanas Joos oU NS so yl Pa J 
aho Sx pansy cad TENTE Jo Jano a bà» Ma Ne Jis 
Jarg] p> m - LA: Ly Jac NIS clo -yan 


x? ha oia. 136.400 Jipa aD jos Joao -Jas [3.20.2 ool lo 


NEXT THE TWENTY-UOURTH HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED Jour 


BISHOP OF TRE CIT or Tnerra ' 


When therefore we approach the history of this holy bishop John thal 
abounds in beauties, we need the help that is brought through his pravers, 


and then we shall be able, even if obscurely, through the vile pigments ol 


our words, to liv down aud trace out a detmeation of the features of his 
divine beauties?; and indeed his beauty does not shine from one side only, 
but from all sides the ravs of his high! Wash upon the soul that wishes to 
gaze at him: for, if in aceordauce with the holy Paul's saving? one seek him 
among solitaries, he is a perfect solitary, and, if among priests, a high-priest, 
and, if among persecuted men, one who bears his cross on his shoulder every 
day, and. if among the public contests of combatants (zyowiozáz), a brave 
combatant (zyevisz42) and a hero, and, if again the series of martyrs, n true 


martvr for the truth ol " his Rath: and tlos is the consummation of all his 


|. Goustaulina, See the Jonser dite by Elijah in €. 8S. €. 0, lom NNNV. bu ond ett Zieh Be, 
VHS. dfe was commonly called Bar Q wr s ws €. N C. O, av, qe Ma. clo Dion. ap. hlevin 
Bijdrage. p. 20 , ndis antlior of 2 sels of canons published by Lamy fess. de Syrorum: fide. Wouvain, 
Isso) and Kuberezyh Berlin, Eo]. aud translated by P. Nau dae. Lil. Gan. Nyra Vase. 2, 190b). — 
ho Serf La I ono ee 3 


M^ EREIN TREE OS UT A" 


Wool E4525 We o! iio was Leo „uao 9a «ooa»: [sola ou! 
wandu] Lo cát alaso hastu Jo asse ful aar el o 
ees Losses J| pas Clo 26a] boa baa: jjo [52a aslo Jio. 
Iso MSN 5 galls ba Jprdse od x0 Saar Slo amana Jio TE SE 
wohl KLA optus dors me} QUÀ fazas ESS ado. Ds 
s Joa ~y Jac enar Loo laaan Jo + asp «do aso Lo 
hoa Gs col Lais poo JN Phy Upooll! [saacsz-s]le Jom; Jia 
[Ni eodd us ecc on aa aoi NA 
INi oars ser Dado Joa NS popras Jul Lasa s [ropas 
t fasarsro ooo SISTI Joi) uano jad -joa 3&x6 JD Nob 
> forge bay os Lor Jlaspas JN; ops aadoy ijeexoly l òis 
og Lopa «30 ADO joy) INEAN, yl? L»5o LA% ba Laag Lads 
aw alas q% hangja Lh se qs QD paiso Joa wprohso Na NK 


1. Ms, wo 


beauties. This saint, for whom also, E think, the appellation * God-clad' 
is not inappropriate, alter the pattern of the ancient Ignatius, the samt and 
bishop and martyr, who earned this name (and. i£. perhaps it is not auda- 
cious to sav it and to presume so far, this man seems to have shown vet 
even more valour than he in the contest on beball of the whole church of 
the believers, that is; he distinguished himself to perfection. in his. aets), 
this man therefore at lirst distingnished himself in the laborions and divine 
practice of the solitary lile: and by God's grace he was also advanced to Lo 
bishop of the ety of Phella, And. when agam he had [or some years ' 
led a severe Hfe in this same city, the severe persecution set on foot by the 
partisans of the schismatic synod of Chaleedon was wafted like sinoke every- 
where, and it blinded everyone whose spiritual. eyesight was not fonnded 
upon a sound basis, and concealed the light of their truth, and they became 
aceomplishers of the saving, « They changed God's truth into a he»? 
When therefore this troublous time came to this blessed man, and sought’ 
to unsettle him like many and turn him away Irom his steadfastness, he on 


his side was more resplendent and beautiful: and. having repelled the 


I. Readly 2 years (FIL, po 6. As dis episcopate began aller. Justin's accession tida p. o0, his 
Npulsion was probably in 521. — 2. Genn, I, 25. — 3. Sie. 





[313° LIEE OF JOHN OF THELLA. 515 


«oot panail zl laamso] Ll lasos [aa yard oaan «ao . Joo 
Lasoo . Wwaase Joos, farol Jesajo Lato Jlàso .'as5!] OOS pane 
faaoo HOF add chao fort T Lisak .coo — yoy sas) 
itso LOX Joa ean’ fas) re Sty 2à Joa Yori Jy +2 Jež ap>20 
JlarasNass JKxsbyo hisss JN n° „Jasso once. Lops L. r goo 
wna! SKcasco .JL5 soo. Joa as Ne «ofS NL J NS Dn J asso: 
soto. ls oà Laopo Of. Soa SN road TEN Joa aA uo SNS 
Sado Laa p .Joot Jrobso ug upan hesi o SNo mwanana foa 
col osan ja» lamulo Lea, où GAS ^ elo eec -Joo jus] 
Jes 22s Dawo. fuga] J2:àe 9]: olo Jescany fora yan. heag Joo orks 
„a-h [2s yao») oaa) s.J030 Kopi pD +0004 qA a la 
rl Ret PD 00% gripa loo» fias Mus fosters], bs ol r2 


]. Sic ms, 


heretical communion from bim, he was driven from his see with all the 
other holy bishops, about twelve from dus neignbourhool: and thenceforth 
they endured the severe labours and grievous hardships of banishment, and 
wanderings in every place. But this blessed Jolin joyfully resorted to his 
former anchoritie habits, wineh be had previously desired to do: and often 
he wished to leave his see and depart, and he was hindered aud stayed by 
the fear of judgment and requital for deserting the rational Hock that bad 
heen entrusted to hin; and new be found an opportunity, and returned to 


that for which he was ready, first to his former convent, which was in the 


„city of Callinicus, which was called that of Mar Zakkhai': and when he had 


been a short time in this convent, the adversary came thither also as well, 
and a second time the blessed) man was again in banishment with his 
convent, with the rest of the convents, and with all the other bishops also: 
and thenceforth they were driven to the outer deserts, rejoteme aud exult- 
ing that they. had been thought worthy to suller persecution with Christ, 
since the other bishops also were seattered over all the convents. Dut, 


when the period of persecution had lasted about teu years’, the rest of the 


I. This sojourn is not. mentionel by Elijah, — 2. Matth., v, Hl; 12. — 3. The line must be exag- 
ceyated even il the perseention is dated from 519, sinee the autlior waserdained by Jolin in 229 (p.519 
and he had Iheu been performing ordinations for some time. 


+ 


yt gee 
PA es Paty 


So EARS OPER Eom Ala 


wwa D L poaa, Jasasdisor Lapa . poor Lose yl faoss fury 
jatsad x! wae Jisa fa amas] Las dot 50S asha .009 xz PS No 
[Lagos Lol} LOMAS Day Nofi [9X ooa esis <> y-l 
e [Lann <2! -> Sw ooo cas Karo jso <> 
asad Sx fLrasotsos y?! Nw «oo lo2555 las upao ooo xam Prd 
ashy, DAS «oor aS. xao «| po ost “yI r^ (OX No 
la asish? xar JS CORB C EN TCR Hess Lor: fral 
Jel (XN; d Opa Lise ooo waar !sco ESSE |5.à.cn 9] he 
LSU RU ES. "Esos goaa y? xo <% Jit sasorsos [$15 i x 
lio» Was &5 vass owo Dajo, ouo) hapo (Ax is No fiai] 


sed loo [sal LI el Liso .. Laesos ois kasado yaaa :L>; 
cools apres E NEN praasado aaa iw ae) Ota) Lao padls 


I. Corr, from Vex Jomo) — v. Letter appe erased before this word. 
believers everywhere were in dillieulties about ordinations (yegotovies): and 
they began to have recourse to the believing bishops. But. the blessed 


meu. Inasmueh as they were troubled by fear of lighting the furnace. ol 
persecution "more hotly against them, refused. to practise this ! openly, 
though they did a few things in secret sand à murmuring on thezparl of those 
among the believers who hid been banished from every quarter began to 
be stirred up against the blessed men, since they had been reduced to greal 
dillienlties, while they spoke and sent messages to them at all times, asking 
them to eive a haud of ordination (yesorovz) to the church of the believers, 
"beeause ibis in great difliculties’. Then all the bishops assembled toge- 
ther, and considered what to do. Uf they should give the hawl ‘erawds of 
believers will come from every quarter, and the persecutors will hear it, and 
he more milane with rage: aud on this ground they, finally out of fear 
refused the thing. Then, as it ts written that * The. Lord. stirred up. tlie 
spirit of Zurbabel and the spirit of Joshua tlie son of Jozadak the high-priest 
to stand up and build the Lors house ^?, so also here it were Titing to say 


that the Lord stirred up the spirit of John to stand upland visit the Lord's 


COS Sem er A su Hee cop onde 


wil 
— 
-] 


[315] LIFR OF JONN OF MELAS. 


J92&am.5| vaoa Mx poatlo opo spol] xw) SOL. poy Nass Joes’ 
JNS% yl: DA uada J JN, Loana Daam op Jon p] jo 
Dolo NA [3a 5 JN) Colo loans Naan JD Story v3 + fobs) 
Damo te «Mel MM) he [oto JR Xap AN Jya a « foans 
eo lads wo cos! < >) AM Lops kans [aeo cad Jou) 
lad, Ld ods Se Joc. ^w bl xml eR) OLS cas Pan, 
jJiaacieo | b Sols Joi; ol So ASS a alalo Aoa anA aaa 
QI» Ao o] Das D? Lao Pre x» GN una aaa) aaa flo 
r^ xo Neu soho coi, Lacon Laza ia Ie S dol: 
Jlarmasoo lioas A Q23o LN] giao y «ello SORA NO EADS 


DSS laal, Slo - fs] S5. Nso blo «223223 eoo*9o S SXSaro uen spoE M9 
Ioa aco 5l TECE LI anA he ps0 A Lasaucrse lha MA meaty 
Jans. haa anD QA p 20 Luas, opalo Jd a 


ehureh, which is the persecuted n] every quarter. Then he was moved 
with indignation in his spirit and argued against his fellow-bishops, saving : 
« Lo! see that henceforth we are not perfect in the love of God, since 
according to the saying of Seripture, ‘Te who feareth is not perfeet in 
love’; and again ‘There is no fear in love’; and again * Love casteth out 
i 


leur And now we our own selves have stated it; and henceforth whither 


^ "Do xou 


shall the perseented and distressed helievers who are with us go. 
wish, pray, that we should send them to those that are every day killing 
them? for God knows that I for my part was ready for a lile of quietude 
by myself, and that | should leave God's people and church in distress and 
need, and serve my own sell, far be it from me in the Lord's name. Dul 
now either consent to stretch. out a hand to the believers in the boldness 


txoia) of our God, and let us contend valiantly cach of us doing his part, 
A e 


(TZ 
and, if not and vou are afraid, give me a mandate and a Heence from the 
patriarchs and from yourselves, and save yourselves; and I for my part will 
be persecuted, and Lam ready even to die also a thousand times, iat were 
possible, for the sake of the believing people ». The bishops rejoiced at 


this, and said : « His better that one of us only shonld be known by this in 


1. E Jolm., 1v, 18. 


ds TEN erp S bal ed 3168] 
vas! Lomo Cuanto Der «26 Jlaimaroo Lusraa slo z flo 
Jl Daaa Ma Joon - bad CMM Ll. 2a3o Joa Gor eee IMS 
DE DER vt haag sylod x^, «A9 CR vx jer) Qe 


M 


Nka 00 Nell genas jeg] Haas Jyot wor Nase «sia 
xo vaio aa | ee a) wera tA» Jisa Jods | fhso Laso,> q> Jl 
„Naxo Joo maia Ad AD CHO je Masasi H fused. tax 
Joa Wan so o Jiwan SY m o i 2+0 Japa x goo 
lan oJ «o5 Slo Lano Jiao Jfsoyo gaada aaan fais Jiao 
ao iao yaw Mado Joa ya iNi 12 fsan JNN LL SIS. 
DWD [.oa2Wo boi [jaa jo JH geo Jlo fs} huaa pa'o 
Sha, wet [òo + JSadojsey halo [3NI. Lro joa Da a? 
amaa ax Jh Joot aiaa H PO al p Okapi] wri lo sonoras 


Jor S's vaada ogano Mb. oM Joa ows - Jor we JI NI 


Lo Corr. from Hag be 


the affair. and not. all of us: and take also authority and [lieenee from 
ourselves: and we will refer this bv letter to our saintly father the 
patriareh ‘f, and he will issue a mandate to us, that i shall be permitted lo 
give a hand to all expelled men who come to you from all parts ». And 
the blessed man elad liimsell in this zealousuess, and thenceforth this heeame 
known to the expelled multitudes everywhere: and from that time they 
rushed in crowds to eome to the blessed man freely without impediment like 
a Hood that is prodneed in a river by thiek clouds, while he was sometimes 
to be found in his same monastery and received them there, and sometimes 
in the desert, and sometimes in some eouyvent, receiving and dismissing 
companies of fifty and of a hundred in a day, and even now and again as 
many as two and three hundred a day, wiviug expositions and injunctions 
and caution and instruction, aud performing the ordinations after careful 
Investigation and many testimonies given, subjecting everv man to a careful 
examination and test in reading the Scriptures and repeating the psalms, 
and ability to write their names and signatures, not admitting anyone 
whomsoever who did not sign his name, and, if anvone was incapable of 


doing so, he wonld bid him learn, and his companion would write for him ?, 


hosevernus ob Anlioch, — 2. | cannel tecorcile (his with (he statement Chat he ordained ne one 


who could not write; V. D. and L.'s interpretation of the writing and signing as a repudiation of 


SI LIFE OF JOHN OF TUELLA. au 
M sAN xam 9] cr) Kasco 200 «MA ro Dax Lrosio 
Joo aao aco Joor JKardo 342.590 .' «osa xoa Jes fos] «el 
Luana aso .ofds9 «Qa3x42o0 opas; frag «oo joo coto oo 
Nd ie < . N N 
Jl» a geiao MS oooto +, [HD ooo, o's >! xa Ooo 
haasi flo fasan ND [rod JNa Was Dawo hts yl ean Joos 


x20 £00 Ot ooo! Ne fos] NU» sS. o Lroraao Kado „gji po E 


JsA] owa je oc «0 Head Jl, aulo RN clo o ipa hasaan, 
Ji. | foot JN) oes joa ads Nkana foot JL] oso sete]: 
JJ JNa MAL sands q> J Dh hasl Joa Dae N mero 
„Lipan joo farms Nao june Lasas loanmral ooo qaas 
JN Rs fasas Jedes ero N36 paja, pel oro I3] Scoot e 
Da aaajson flaslas wis q% oly hal: yoy Saaso Lsaao Jae 


|l. Ms, woosad. 


sind thus therefore they were received and dismissed; while he also inquired 
and learned who were the men of knowledge in all the districts iz62z2. and 
he would send and fetch them, and vive them 1ustrüetions, and haud them 
the impress of his name and his monogram (snusiovi, themselves to see by 
investigation who were fil to become priests, and to write and send them to 
him, thal le might not. perform ordinations at random. Accordingly in 
every eny as far as the frontier, aud as far as Armenia and Arzun', and the 
land of the Cappadocians and the sea-coasts*, men were ehosen and 
appointed to send candidates to hun after investigation; aud, if it happened 
that anyone came to him without a letter from the man that had deen 
appointed in the region from which he came, he would return. empty, until 
he brought a letter, and then he would be received: as no believing bishops 
were to be found except at these three places only, at Marde and in the land of 
the Persians, and at Alexandria. When the whole earth, so to speak. had 
been filled with the ordination tgezozovia) of believers, iu the cities aud the 


monasteries and the villages and everywhere, insomuch that some of those 


the synod ithoush it has some contirmation from p. 328 seems fo ine ab varies bolt with the 7r. 
and with the contexts ef also p. 319. 

|. Arazaueng. This was in Persian ferritory ; ee p. Pio aad po ste, 2. Tins nsnally tuens Che 
proviuee of Phoenice Maritimir Thal doo was al Marde the auth legis ns in ocho D p. 229, but 


he does not plainly state it here, nor is ib mentioned by bljah. Sec also Sev., Select Letters. v, Ui. 


r 


AH JOLIN OC RPHESTS, SIS! 


radar Jte L das +r in) Redo ee ‘LS Sh «llo vM e 
||a3w se. li NSaa Joa elt ot oh abo] Js La? Lod Ko prado 
Lusa o» Wo . Lasa.d40 ooi 5 Xa yea naoi co T 
‘fl sso fsacolo L39 eros PD. Ady 000 were po Lak, 
als ooo M ow [Laz*a» ooot rmt v^ O]aXs. [MX sa5 


Jo. ~~ JK.so1aso UN TO Koo eX ooo lasas fasadojn pad 
Dan eae «ooo. Jio + Li] S&S le bl Pato òo laas 
y (cA deos ods drools Jo os “Lasoteo | SET S Lotes AN. [sas 
an P hasia LNS M coy Naast <% „hLasi} hxw Jo LA? 


LOOM ——— BEN. 6p Jeans odas. 2o aak <1 e Rok 
he> core I] Joa Jj No SN JNa L.co&9 cos ad Saar 


|, Ma, Bygsa8e corr, Nod. — 2. Ms, Poo 


that were in communion with the hereties would every day arrivetand come 
to repentance, then these things exasperated those that held authority both in 
the churehes and in the world. so that. they did not shrink from writing a 
report of these things even to the wielder of the royal authority, first eoneer- 
ning allthe believers, and concerning all the freedom (z2255iz) that they had 
shown, and then concerning him who had been made the cause of these 
things. Theneeforward they hunted after the blessed man's life to take il 
away. while the occupiers of the sees al first sent him threats and orders 
and mandates issued by the hing that. if he performed ordination (yegotovta), 
he should die: and he on his side sent them this message: « | lor my part 
have received a gift from God, and with it bam trading and am not negligent”; 
and know this, that, as longas ] am in the bodily life, and a hand is given 
meto extend to anyone that is in need, not you nor an earthly king shall 
hinder me from performing the service that the heavenly king has given 
me »^,.— When they saw tho man's readiness and conrage. they threatened 
the more: and thenceforth he did not show himself openly with the former 


freedom owa3iecian but al the time when believers arrived he on his side 


l. I Wines. AIX. l0. — 2. Matll., sav, Meno, — 3. Nee. to Elijah 'p. 35, 50) John and 7 olher 
bishops went to Constantinople bs the emperors orders. It is strange that our author omits this. 





7319] LIFE OF OHN OF FHELLA. 521 
JL s JL ons Damo joa sas gl oot 000 M] [136.204.303 
oot NAP Joa s wis wl Lopa 2 Jer pa S Laas? „Joa Jute. 
ENS D Me Jhar! Mass . Jlasssassos ENS wa. | Pea 
ALASX >Op “So ~~ ws ol p2 JAN» alpa woos lo alas he ` 
„joa wams wis ops “sao pes aN p2 IS sath] o 3oac0o 
Neaase oaa flo Lasao joa aas A20 „joa sass dO [15012 
o0 Afio aawo Ja Jj p20 Nanan flo Joot wi Kass 


Jian yl «299 ody Da pad cos Joor H jhe g Uas, fpes 
AJL ga Nao yta hO : hal, bae «209 lisas WO Heads 
„anal Joay To L? pa? Jao ^is 22 Naash Ll, Joa ps0! vmi 
aAa flo fisa.drad Jel xx li] qoem dus) JA Jet 
arr chlo alanas Mosa sam ol Q2 X900 ou 550.5 exl EENE 


Joo NE ho hay joas e so Jo frie, d] awoke! flo 


L Ms. Quy. — 2. Marg. Woe. — 4, See p. 306, nole, — 1, Ms. Bias. 


wonld spring up there, and therefore he would dismiss many at night, as 
he was the first to admit our meanness also with the rest ol our brothers, 
the members of our convent. to the order of the diaconate, m. the year eight 
hundre and fortv!, when we came down to hin and received the privilege 
of seeing him by night, when we were also astonished above all things bv his 
attire and the austerity of bis garb, since an unsightly cloak had been cnt 
in two, and so he clothed himself with half olit and covered himsell with 
half of 3t?, and thus therefore he had no superlluity either of clothing or of 
covering. When he saw our company and our habit (5/752), and especially 
the fact that he had seen? that he had not much trouble. with us, because 
all of us, who were about seventy men, caine Irom well-known Amidene 
convents, and we read and wrote with contidence, then he said, « Iam 
satisfied with vou, my sons; and lo! | say to you pay ae eeense Moln 
for a time is coming when men to give a hand to believers shall be wanting 
and shall not. be found». And so we received his blessing, and returned, 


and his propheey also was in tenth fnlfilled, and they were sought and nol 


|. 529. — 2. This probably means that he divided it into an inner and an outer garments ef. eh, 
du dodge com. p De bh as E 89. ae s X sinar story ie ole of Janies rel, adeo 9e eo ENE: 


— 4. I Thess., v, 17. 


ya ORN DE FPHESUS. A30] 


Jis Le EN Joo pio mandas Ji MN saa woh qa6o Jose nias JI 
Nis ENAS La? .ocw sas «Qo epo joa Lease JI 1 - Jody 
mt p> wot Liprmadls Golo -Laa Nupa Moo faspso Nany? 
ooo v Lawo Misr Gol [se&1o hasada Joo Nal L Sol "pe 
xe lasy iNo <% Jet oda saw Kuo t5 No «M20 Jo m> 
e ootlasas Na AND AD ano Las Xx} Joho Laag oo Nas 
Jaia i Oaks cada laagi ;Ms ol noala ooo hoi 
SI Qon Qao] i Nim Jor vo .jlajo aX alo otiso: dot .* LLsasd4d09 
aao Jis qal aasin «4e aao, | Lasan laa. 
wa! Laan dp qe? wa hiag q% huaga diac; Jg 
uana laasia Jia Nano je Jo ~ su) aa Jl pros où “pilo 
Jio JN [andano fino Jetso ios Lyre] jaa] Joa vool, 


l. SAn 


found. so that for many vears a man would go mlo Alexandria to become 
a priest ^ and thenee to Constantinople. and return perhaps afler a vear of 
davs without. gaining any salislaclion from his labour, as E saw happen to 
many; and at the time when | was in the roval city (and the same Ihing 
happened in Alexandria also: the believers were in this aillieulty; and the 
lrontier of the Persian territory moreover was closed by war, and ] always 
remembered the saint's propleey. But. after a time the blessed man fell 
into the enemies” band?) and they satislied. all their malice upon him, and 
in their craftiness they also hunted for the documents iyzores) that contained 
the anathemas against them and the names of the believers who reeeived 


n 


the priesthood from bim. and God hid them from them, the number of whom, 
as was posted up i?) by those who counted them. amounted toa hundred 
aud evenly thousand, who received ordination (yitsuTovia) from the blessed 
man, Bot they ou their side carried tim up to Antioch, and he fell into 
the hands of the man that one would perhaps not go wrong if one were to 
name (he executioner (zoz:5zwvz2wz Of the believers, who was Ephraim of 


Amida: and he inflicted on him severe tortures ?. and close paimlul impri- 


L Aes. fo Elijah «p. sd, 62 ho ordnined bps. adso, though no names or sees ave given. Prom 
5r one wanbl suppose thal James and Theodore were the first Monoplissite bps. ordained after 
eceldsins— E. mentions i other bps. as associated with Jolin. — 2. He wie arrested in Persis aud 
\ivadibed Taf. po 68 WL — 3. No fortares are tienlioned by Lijah, and the worl is probably not 


tu be understood: literally. 


—— Se — — —- 
ee 





321) LIFE OF JOHN OF THELLA. 523 


zie: fasy No 36 l Lapik Namo yor! fusoio waana Lx] 
Pan beMEsee jüa. Janas ceal, Jlorormy bänk Joo D9 
<> i y ooo apaa LOK pan soot M coor xS SS Naso eas edo 
laulo aAa foo ysl samo Lasan Jansy, Lupaa Joot wpnrdy 
Jäs Looms a+ pol] J}. Jhaso yan aN, fasad, Lim hj Joos 
aha [sc [hs Op? ol OLN, uao; fun und, 91 x2) a'o 
wot vcn odia dds ard SO QO Loto pn JL" facto JA s ol r3 
od Lias qae Sly oà ihaw laamas] coon dice! Luro ol, “od pel 
+ and D «e SN. Sh hal. wardi! Low Psoas 
A He Ne hul Ss ofits] lady eda b> Joa oio [iso 
— pad els o) rone frooo ds zoo eno CES oS "5e Ma 


1. Ma. E 2, Ms. uo. 42 8 woadeded in erasure. — i We. baasi: coms diu pater hand. — 
a Na aXe s. 


sonments, aud thus he sulfered martyrdom and. died at their hands there, 
alter a period of such-and-such a number of! vears during whieh he had 
been undergoing the conlliets (zyév) of martyrdom inflicted upon him there, 
and the successions of tortures and torturers that were tmposed upon him in 
daily variety in the hope that he might be weakened in his constancy. And, 
inasmuch as be on liis side was girded with the breastplate of righteousness 
ou the right hand and on the left as it is wrilten, and? beld the strong 
weapon of readiness that contends with death, the burning, that is heretical, 
darts? of his persecutors were not able to pierce and penetrate the sound 
breastplate of his constancy, though many beasts were set round him on all 
sides to guard him, like that which the holy Ignatius also. the bishop and 
martyr, to whom at the beginning also we compared this second Ignatius, 
as he is indeed exceedingly like, thus wrote in his epistle to the Ephesians’ 
about certain soldiers (e72270072:) to whom he was committed thal they 
might conduct and convey him to Rome to be martyred there : « Pen ernel 


savage beasts were committed” to me, between whom I was bound for my 


Lo We was arrested L Peb., 237 (106, p. 69), reached Nistbis 2 days later dd.. p. 69, 20 V reunaiued 
there 0 dass ced po. ocenpied a0 dass m the journey to Antioch qii, p. 86, aud died 6 Feb., 558 
GL. p. 1s Wis imprisonment ab Antioch therefore Tasted l0 m. 2 d. — 2. Ms. om. PERO E 
I^-1n. ^. Corr, from ‘strangers’. ‘The rel (b is nol a qnotation must be fo hom.. y wegen "l'eiaz 


rio X7O.... EYDAU, QUAM PENTAGONI — 0. Sie 
xe l f 


EPI EAE 


52^ TN OP EPHESUS. (3293 
kol alie duds vainos qa IN [Sop tas lain Sak 
19425 Vas ad. ad Mal oos Jhaso,> 9&5 Da fsa .. Lrooo ds y] 
Spots LaaSo CI PAG au] Joor pelas Jh has] Jl "bigcoo JH] 
AX ooo Vna wil lesão - Joo sian i Kofann D oo 49 ala 
ba! Les lio ooo «oon Na] PEE ast ol, «MI Rafa 
wi aA -aloan IMS «2o Yaaro JNa; flosams | 2o paws 
wil DD sloo Jas Laaa cts joo Sans Laso Looss Lo e ol, 
laï was [inin hason coy awi JHD Ja NS aa japao Joot 012236 
asecolll ol, jia) Lio Döl japa yan - flarsy Jopa fasas, 
L5 ț ay QJÀ dw, LLO Oo, [ajon2» XOX . ‘eta xaos «o 
JLoSLJ] ooo „Eo ooo cere Jaslo JN Na 0001 qias 
[NY CLO .0004 eA IANO Soo Xa «olo (9000 CA OR J xo 
JNa, hasis vu Jia Qoouxeo ooo oaa JL <% J retro 
hern Le - too JL, rd be [Sa SX e] 2à ooo cras 


custody that 1: might go to Rome ». So therefore in the sume way there 
were committed! to this man not ten only, but rather many, so that no one 
Whosoever among the believers was able to approach bun, he being contined 
alone, and two? blessed men that were attached to him alone, who also were 
combatants iZyoviszz0: and thus he ended his life in this conflict yov) in a 
great martyrdom, Aud thereupon alter his martyrdom his words, of whieh 
he had also gained intimation by the vevelation of the Holy Spirit, received 
accomplishment, for he would testify to every man and warn him concerning 
what was about to come, viz. violent persecutions, lacerations of the believers, 
seareity. of pastors, with the rest of the sore distresses, even as they were 
from all sides laid upon those of his ordination (gs; . Some, that is 
many, they seized in every city and re-ordained ; and some fled to distant 
regions. and there ended their lives; some departed from life under Impri- 
sonments aid stripes; and some were burnt. with fire in the sight or the 
peoples of the cities*. A thine whieh perhaps even the ancient pagans 


would have been afraid to do. Christians were here thrown into the fire and 


|. mie. — 2. Ace to Elijali p. 58, se, 92. there were al tiret ^, one was removed aud afterwards 
brouzh! back, caul two were persuaded to leave, — ii This refers lo Cyrns, a quesbyter of Amida. who 
is sud to have been burnt in the fefrapylon by bp. Abraham (Zach, Bl. si 3: BOO. 0n p.a; Miel. 


|i 





[323] LIFE OF-JOHN OF THELLA. 325 


9001 M Jiars MURS aD LN eor | Qol ols vet x 
NK eee fas! Kiss foam slo Jo. cosas; lass Je do à epee 
Quas] coMs fro yl h-ag Jue pel b--— Lao Joa e Aud 
Jno [as wasana, of hao Ml amdssol3/) Lispa Sarco 
wou Aoa of :Ljaasc JI a5) vol. Ml ol occ «oot | 
lle: «X? +0001 onu] JKvso Jlopamrurso ka; las ooa me dere 
J paws ow Jory AM Las) haa Joa Mal J qoo? lonas Loi» 
Jhoshhs <2! od Ss. ooa Sou yl Dwa falans < «eo J „bol 
jäi! oa oo ol jia oð FEO, ewa vol 22b NS NS Je So 
JN xa NS SnN S Js esses xxl Jaen Jis) odo, os 
otlasaitdyo soasä Jio bot Joos »os$ad: Joye co 2] p JE fosoll 
pas? «300 J| 9 NA] hlaw fos «D pel zakopao ol oda. 2,3010 
X Nu wee v» S RAS Nal onse xo Ms. ye anal 


Is Ms. sun. 


burnt in the sight of those who also were reckoned and called. Christians : 
and the steam of the savour of their Uesh was woefully wafted to heaven and 
also into the air breathed by men: and so few were left * like doves upon 
ledges’! as it is written. And theneeforward the remnant of the orthodox 
(4063-201), great multitudes who were in banishment or in places of exile 
(2ostas), or those again who had hidden themselves in the cities and in the 
villages, or in villas, were in greal sorrow and sore need, since for a space 
of so many vears there was none to sive them the communion of the life- 
viving mysteries. But God, who saw the distress, did uot neglect in accord- 
ance with his merev to give a little refreshing to his church, though in 
distant regions, by means again of another John, who also was in tath 
John, of whom also we determined to compose a history separately *, that 
we may not protract the history to a greal length; while we have also not 
sought to comprise any of the rest of the alllictions of this siint and of his 
conflicts (ayo) and of his asceticism, and of his conduct moreover and of 
his abstinence in our history, inasmuch as it is endless, but we have rapidly 


run through these points, which are patent to him who knows alt. By the 


l. Ezek., vit, l0, — 2. Ch. 25. 


26 IOUN CH EPHESUS. B24 | 
cana lisse slos wa alas), Layo CAT CITERE alas p>, 
Luyseysase Liao tool, KUNAN S aai e Laan al iasa -jo 
saol Nna dts Sas ENN Lo: Io Agnus Nus do dM r> 


rdan sIr una ÉL ehnarLdh Av 
rehun reidi 


usa minaba anaia eian Tius aah 

se] Sa Xon aa ehet atm ars T Sapo 

am pia Exin semwa mah sada 
“Sman c 


| Lose t Jeo Sox Neal JNuspsco Lox; reer Nea foo 
ase Kus ols Fes La Dad -pasmo jas Aan Deae: 
was J, alaa; ooiloiarco Xo Slo se <i] Jaras 


1. Ms. AA» po: 


praver of him who presents them! and. of all saints like him. who present 
propiatory fruits to God, may be visit his elinreh in merey, and be gracious 
to us her children, who throneh our sins have made ourselves sons who 
provoke, and may they be expireted hy the blood of the only God over all 


for ever and ever, 


The hisiory of the holy John bishop of the city of Thella is ended, 


NEXT THE TWENTY-<FIETH HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED JOHN BISHOP Ol TILE CITY OF 
ieee ere = rs EGYPT, AS ETE CES: TRAE CONFLICTS (ye) OF THE HOLY Jon 


WHO PRECEDES NIM. 


Since the purpose of our work and the course of our history aims at 
showing and describing the circumstances ofthe perfect lives which the saints 
lived, therefore we sav that in the order of our history we will nisert spiritual 


pastors”. and will also in our work state the circumstances of their activity 


poe. the atlietions. Zoe. (Maite, noi — 3. me. bishops. 











323 LIPE PIE AOHN OF MEPHAR SOP OLS: na 


aL 0000 VL. Amam Jr.sas qoos MS aso oh Sd N35 
qias J qita JNAxsNS Jaat <: «2. «2l jha wa Nxo cons 
Lua SX «0t xoc] Je. 430 Sx oh ofloihuses saad Lisas 
lise ^o» Nao yas} Jo; [Ka 33S, yel hoot LaNa} 
wok | «Dé AMIE > ..[.9a.a.ca..9l cine. Lado [ss Gol Loi Dana 
Joo -4-30 JN -a30 DR < ‘pata Aano q! IH Liaw foo 
JR a3o3 JLSL? pi oà fal «eq» foals Jrob.coy Las haan 
ENT JL No «pope yas ba jas og < os] JN so 
x^) aH haal, sasoi sadil Laoi, [Naona Joa paia qho 
apwan Da Ad Leo oo Liho lo [53e J->0-> Kolas «aolo JL 
woancoos|) fusato osea s hyd Nase» oo Jans 420 Joa d 
imao - otlara cM so "Reo woop- “Qa woes „joa SNL oacias nox 


" 9? Lois SANANI b JN asp so ; Jess [52.2.2249 lot 3o OF As Nr, 


in God's chureh, since they also were complete anil perfect in both forms of 
beanty'; and Toe this reason, though we seem to be passing from one sibjecl 
to another, we did not think it alien to the excellent purpose to describe and 
band down to remembrance for the glory of God the life thal was practised 
by these divine men also. 

This blessed man again, the greal and divine John the bishop, was by 
his birth yoa a Syrian, Chat is a Palestinian, front the eity of Gaza, and he 
lived in a greal convent called that of father Peter the Iberian, the doer of 
greal and apostolic signs’. This convent was expelled. with the rest, and 
enue into the territory of Alexandria; and there it lived m at place called 
Eunaton which means ‘ninth’, viz. miles*; and there the saint dwelt with the 
rest ol his convent. livingadevont life and following grcal and divine practices. 
While the chareh was still at peace in Alexandria, and the blessed Theodosius 
was sealed on his throne *, he heard of bis manner of life iud of lis teaching, 
and sent and seized him and made him bishop in one of the cities of Egvpl 


which is called Hephaestu. After a period of such-and-sueh a number’ o£ 


Hose, the pastoral ond the aseli. = Z2 Usually Called the uonuslers of PE heedore oo arhe ble 
vit, ber see PF. Pelr dh. p. F5. — i Sje swi, 5, Dae t, 3. Nof auore Jhan bl, for Ch. returned 
lo Mesaudetii nol cartier than daly. a, and was expelled nol haer Than Deca 536 Byz. Zelschr.. 
SIL pee a. 


BACT. Ol}. — P. AMIL — r. CJ 3 


Xs JOHN OF EPHESUS. 326] 


|a S S2: o foa ~ laag olarryo: D Ili his Ns «aoo 
Nes Los N&aaso Jdàs 6008 cpoh] Jos ox JD oo e | Noo 
Lain [spes ope] SA Topaas Joao JNN Jason vxo pay uà 
lasado co goi 42 JN: od JN uses Je Maly v Lose 
cocilamias yd ou NS aa: been Joya ja» woarmoyofh [9a aca zo]. Lasi 
xo bee lo] pro «eoo apol] Jlaadso Miis Slo aawl] 
EN e| hasans foods: -flsaady; dso oem po Jlaa sos 
os e exl lo as N51] Moli £20 asl «oe oaa, Jlaslass 
eer hasa D ad |Kisco JN Dav Liams] -ooaasdy Jona, 
Oop So [nop j^ "[aadaisf soto honaw dado jeaamzis] 
| poo Mog} i Jasas Sx Loss ag ‘coords Jo NS. l y-l 
las ol E Lala fag cui] Oly 2à mwao; Lpo, pm 
Jh] wx) où joa basta Jia) foro Liz [aio rrr. Haak 


1, Manai c 2, Mes dS og Me sing. ear Vu ER one [.. 


vears during which the blessed man had. distinguished himself in his pasto- 
rate, to which be had been called by the providence of God against his own 
will; preparations for persecutions were then stirred up against her whom 
one of the doctors names tthe Ezvptiau. virgin’ '. and severe fighting and 
much slaughter took place in il as is common iu that great city; and the blessed 
archbishop Theodosins with the rest of the eminent men of his jurisdiction 
were? driven from their sees; ind they were also invited to the royal city and 
went ap thither through certain eminent men attached to the court, the 
adversaries thinking that by threats or blandishinents they might perhaps 
bring them to communicate with them’. And, when they resisted strenuously 
and they were unable to overcome the constancy that was in their souls; a 
well-kuown and cruel place of exile (zz). was then given to the holy 
archbishop himself and the whole of his company (auvaa), the bishops with 
the most eminent clergy (227202), abont three hundred of them, in the interior 
of Thrace a day's journey cszzvciev) off a certain. Tortress (zz579z). called 
Dereuz; to which albo we often used to go to vixit the same saints, as well as 
the blessed man the perfect and ereat obl. inan Zura the celebrated Syrian 
l. I do nol know the source of this quotation, — 2. sig 2r. — 3. see Introd, p. s. — i. Or 


‘delle. 


we 
to 
`~] 


EIFE OF JOHN OF HEPHAESTOPOLIS. an 


moh Soo Xe NS. Woot mo | ahh] ewm oo Sl: Loa ‘fats yy 
faracos a3), flarso aoo fod x0 y) 99 ol p ooo vM oo 
J 35 Ja Ns dA Naani J3e:9]J. : JK adso Kaol]? | 2255 
[dso leo haoo .-Loot frase yor Soars; fous Lope je «ood. as. 
vio Wal hoas yoy “sad lo xo! dor S50 55 » Jasco 
«co J ,OQOO way TE xs v> Jlasdso Naapa Ooms + OOO xa phys 
beg pda; furs! haag Wed» «heo «kid "ac, basos 
ped joo Kad fro] Qeasy au] -Lasoo Mas oftas Lawa, [roa 


L000 wl JL o pro RS [soo Valaa Dawo Lasoo <% 
aot. J o? looa mata ho x JI 9or-S]5 enn DOO ADD us 
p> 000 awhio fJusadpao «oo! Joal, loot | p50 J Js oly fans? 


„Joa soda «e Doi. La Laso «2! 99 Kansans flsaod, abot 
Sly Bad Lana eds oH do Wes» os Do joo Sp Nafiye 


Lo And erasure follows. 


from the country of Sophanene', who also was confined with them; and 
thenceforth they were kept in custody there. though the Christ-Ioving 
Fheodora, who was perhaps appointed queen by God to be à support for the 
persecuted against the eruelty of the times, showed great attention to them 
as well as the other perseented wen everywhere, supplying them- with 
provisions aud liberal allowances IEEE SUI 

While these inen were suffering distress there, and. every where also the 
believers in all quarters were similarly suffering, they used to betake them- 
selves from all quarters to the royal city. itself, firstly on account of the 
persecutions in all quarters, and secondly for the sake of ordination (yersutovial. 
as There was absolutely no man to extend a hemd of ordination to any believer 
in the whole Roman territory as far as the Persian frontier; aud accordingly 
many used to go to the same saluts in Thrace, lamenting and representing 
their trouble: but even there they gained no hearing, as it was indeed: tu 
truth imnipossible for them to live if an ordination yeoten were performed 
there, af the adversaries beard of it. But this holy John, when he beard 


these things. would shed bitter tears every day for the distress of Christ's 


Ll. -ve eh. z. 


oh GAN 


530 OHUN SOME EPHESUS, AUAM 


Jos. odes JLaxt Mhlas pad cass foot pal RALENS deg catiay 
= while -samamishs "p «oo | pat _do JI tos} oio a] 
^ ed Ls Jad NON aol Ss lass —— Jlo Tany La 
Ljano whs BY qa JJ ol Jas JaN, edes Nw [aoi € wile. 
doo S20 Ut ol Looky wha} lads «Le «^el soo 944 Koo 
SOL ovas J < Jo Jd] N [es oat Loa «e „Joa $36]. Las p2 
Jab) Nooi aa. J | Ntar, JNa; JLex>s Karol Jy haaa ad 


eet J&tzis Qo») Mo ca JN «aas of .-fasadpno par 


IE lo foot ssa att Y» easdto Jlag ooo «eh yas Sas 
was] «oh Li» C30 c coy polo eoe Fartllo uns wyth] 
X «3l Jaaa 42045 Linas ha chuan ol Nas sos Lola «2o | sooi]o 
wand! Ssylo ..JNS MZ G's xr M oof Jioq2a& aus] Sx Las] 
Jess Daw, (0000 hAur odoo Loses JN» pop dods 


[NES mayo 05 WM. ene: 


church, insomuch he that would often say in our presence : « We for our 
part have been named pastors of God's chareh to no purpose, since we have 
suffered her lambs to be torn by wolves, and have come and sat down by 
ourselves, and have not consented to die for the sake of religion. What ts 
the benefit that we ourselves are now doing to God's church? for 10! we are 
unwilling fo eure or heal even Chose that come to us bulleted and bruised 
from a journey of sixty days ». And these things he would sav weepme, « | 
stand ju awe of him who ts the head'; otherwise, as Christ lives, nothing 
would have prevented me from performing ordination (z:2570viz. in the greal 
church of the ety i£ E had found opportunity, or in au open space (2) (yozozi iN 
Hheetty in the Sight oFall men »?.. When many were coming every day, and 
lie continmally heard the same things aud could not contain himself. he was 
moved with zeal and his spirit was ronsed, and he said : « Far be it [rom 
me in the Lord's name to hold aloof longer and pay no heed to the allliction 
of Christs Hock whieh was bought by his precious blood *; for, even il I die 
on its behalf. it te a boast to me ».. Phen he coneocted pretexts, and under 
pretexts of illneszes he went and begeed tlie patriareli and the enstodizus for 
permission lo go into the city to see physicians; and, because they heard 

1. se. Theodosius; — 2. sinee om oantbor was notin CP. belween 235» and 240. Inteod.. p. 1s. v. and 


ippy. did nol weet Jobn [Hil oti p. 556, n. L} fliese words seem to be recorded out ot ploce. — 


took Sa NAG oS E duse: op 5 


M I = —— 


t 


r320 LIFE OF OHN OF HEPIEXESTOPOLIS. a: 


ha l p wes) vaol H Lajas, [xis DA: yelo Jla] law 
war S]. JNA lasap ANSA, JA Mx Loot Ksel] JAND 
JuyoWsoy JNa; es l>; ed do ol, L,.2.90 JAN or ol NS Lo 
o jaw cols cl Adri Me o focads] Slo of Cops asa 
JN seo me} Vt OO . Joa Jods Jasags oti NS o Ohad p» Laas Xsaroo 
2nd Kove wid Koo x Jasy «oo Kalo tooa pe: wo, [Iz 
«33000 joa Js «oo 30 .000 xv loas ons woos Kido 
O09 CAMA I e: <? JL Ro La -2.3o Si ro Jioc aeos JLos LU 
Aw hee 2-30 oa 2 2 Joa ward Josh ca lo carro, y 
„Joa JLo aNs Na Jlase as Jis So 3o Jasin Jar. dro JNa; frsooido 
Jlo ÄN Jaya «lo Naas [an.n INI Spek lo 29 T“? e 
L5l» 13025 sas xen] p2 9990 apa od. a. *Jhgase Joa wispa Lx 
„Joa xol v? od Jato gas Nó Js Jea Oss ops Lano ba i 


I. © erased lollows. — 2. Ms. LO i080; eorr, Nold. 


menhon of illness. therefore they did not prevent him from going, and this 


matter alse about the eause of his coming was mide known to the queen; and 
hy divine dispensation she also received him with greal jov, and she gave 
orders that spacious quarters (ézxz27) also should be given him iu the great 
uniisien called Antliemiu ' and an allowance (zvz*ouz) also for him and his 
slave should be assigned to btm there. And thenceforth the will aud the 
zeal ol the blessed man found expression: and. from that time companies of 
those who were in distress, and had been for a long time beaten and bulleted 
and had none to relieve them, betook themselves to him, iud he would dismiss 
them alf? and they would return to their own countries with jov. while he also 
anointed many altars that had been set up lor a tong time fo be anoinled and 
vo to the countries, and himself also fixed an altar, and he was filled with 
ereat boldness (w23icciz showing keen enthusiasm and conlideree that contends 
with death. When he had stood up and become openly known, envy like 
Cain's was sown in the hearts of many who were inzide and iot outside: and 
they used to address mandates to him. saving, « We are standing in a lion's 


mouth, and vou are causing him to rend us all aud cast us away in one hour ». 


|. fe. c& Avueutoy. — 2. We are Hell to understand that be ordained Ihem; see below. 


ner a c 


b. 


ne Ti NC OF pP SS Es 330) 
pol Lily 9922 saad way A 030-0 joan sol DOJEL Lsls 
L3e&.9 m woe» cx har pel Jaro -alhs sob] gl, 
sts J aug «e oo Lasoo Uo Naso Nx >? Lj. 2a9 rad Joss [s 
«^f 90 HAMAS) FNay Mad Lad s/o | a3 xw qos Joa 
base. falaso Lroiaas oa Slo Joo ope Jo roped Pha faso 
l pe nasil] Lia) soars; Jl Mass T" RAM Mss 
hao ab. Xiao [Naso olo sooi] Jh eso 20 mlas quo as Syl Jor 
we pol haao . Sot pels rat) oc a7 pas Jl wd Lp ol 
«Ai» No qx Qoo» vas haao coy oof Joe baoa wy JI yl 
coos. | hasni «4 p20 Jasrase) Jloyoams we} QUÀ Joa Daa 
x! okar Qe Jasxaleo jj fly joa 5e I Sgro Jel + 000 
ooo Soc NS] T asl ras |-5 5-9 x5 ole RENTE WU vo 
a»olo ayj} .-sanamats! le «oouseo so dey Juscuaco oi» [iaioa 


L Ms, 8.89. — 2, Something seems here to have fallen out. 


But he said, « As for the hon that is coming let no man stand before him: 
let him send him against me myself only ; sinee it ts Tas vou say that have 
provoked him, and God will do as he wishes. The mouths of lions are wont 
to be closed by command from on high' » And so he did not cease from his 
zealousness. Bat afterwards they wrote to his patriarch also as well to 
inhibit lim. But the saint, who saw Ins zeal. and on his own side also was 
nol displeased by the saving and refreshing of the believers, passed over 
the savings that were concocted against the same blessed man without notice, 
saving, «© dde has gone away from my presenee, and is in the city, and the 
queen also has received him; and she farther knows that | have not ordered 
him to do such things. » And so he took no account of the matter as one 
that knew it and did not know it. Bat the holy Jolm would accept all who 
came from all quarters, that is on the testimony of those who preseuted them; 
and, though? they were strangers, he did not immediately apply a hand of 
ordination without witnesses and persons to present. Dat, when those whose 
envy...) saw if, and he also made them hostile to him, who were believers, 


members of his company (ya, and some of them also even bishops, they 


L Dan, Vp 221 Wehbe. xt. da - 8 Wee sherk expeet + because? but the meaning perh. is [hal : 
uele there was dn de eireametanees a difficulty in selling proper Tesiinony, he wontd. uel 


> 


di ense with t. — 23. mene words have fallen out. 


LIFE OF AJOHUN OF HEPHAESTOPOLIS. A 


pov 
` 
T 


assy XX of» aal, feos ous ps] aad} Q5 «Ja dso sos 
hye N ye: loo Jy L y-l woo hisa Sado JN <% omy 
xe me wa oad; ists 7 slo had oni, pol sazic 
esas p> liaa dds voaa As Jao allo Joas a a.s 
Nsa Jall rar fy JNS $9 laopo Q3» | e$ ialo ady/ ea 
piel lu,-oa-s jao Na] Eha JE lo xo] Jrk of JNa foots fly nef 
me} oon arols a920 Niol? Jase Lad; Nea laal Jl, pees 
alo Jul a Qh anh] «Jor Gadsd Siaa Jasi, <> yl Loa 
và fr] aias JE fipa aslo OMS Sarl, ro “facts lo Jaa 
naa] «2.20 Bajo wads, wp Lho o5] Jon cao pao] -— 
JNN S re Noll) xo hot aay? J +2 LA [Mo Naso 
CANS, LN Aano Gary sl p2 Jíi2sé&s JaN o; Licoopas 
alaaa KxajJA| -bpa JNS p20 Lisa oia» haos; us! DS 
me? Ol ey oa ise ba oote Nul fase . urse ya airy Jesolo 


went and told the queen about him. having eoncoeted a petition purporting 
to come from him that she wonld gtve him in order to leave. the city lor a 
short tie. Aud she, masmuch as she thought that he was perhaps in need 
of recreation, in order to gratify him, gave the order, and she also wrote, 
«Go». But these men took the order, and formed a plan to vateh the blessed 
man by terror by means of the order, in that they went and they sav to lim as 
if speaking inthe person (zeisozov) wf the queen, « Do not Hinger another hour 
im this eity or see my face: otherwise you will die. And the order has 
reached yourself (2), lest vou die an evil death: since you have been accused 
io the king, and he ordered your death.» Butthe intelligent man, inasmuch 
as he was in truth ready for death, determined « If T depart, be it to death 
or to life, I will not depart before I go into the palace (zzv) and know 
the truth ». Then he made these meu think that he had been fightened 
aml was packing his things to depart; and he went out and teft them, and 
went down and came to the palace (z2*220v)i without these men being aware 
of it; and he went im confidently before the queen with the great boldness 
(maccnotz) of the heavenly King. manifesting wrath also and threats against 
the king and queen on account of all the persecution of the believers, And, 


when the queen saw him, she was alarmed at his wrath. and BAYS i u Who 


NU OY 


“shai 


JEU M 


D TORE CES PEERS 58: PE 


Look met VA ES eiat i WL JaN, od, sS of L0 crac, 
alash M Vlad OM pa (30830 y^ 0] ene Jis XX halo 
wa] Lasts col ooo J aano «2o Na] son enso wash, 3.029 2X Jo 
ado Ban JN Az NS OLLSO QN as oll, loot ALS ads Kado x? - cO SS, 
- Jesel rae) dor Ls xs oll NK aL son.ca soo J€2.9 -NaN panad 9 pel 
Leo Loo uso joko NI yl oe yaad. loo. Bes] bya? x» 
hoo OOH AD y-l vas so Po - Jlaro <% «al w JNo; Jlaxras 
jiso be Ns GM cM Rec! hut OU. Pho] accade < 
JNa jaa börs park flo yu y Mo o) francs pads. Jib 
Jae Lo oM AL] JING ayy cz byo Ll SMS Js od poo] RI. 
aAa, FAN EE aaa saw ands Kod wap. AS “Jor 


has injured vou, sir? What is this allure? oo. And he said : « Who las 
injured and disturbed me or God's chureh except vou and vour husband? » 
And she was astonished, and said : « For what reason? Who has said 
anvthing to von?» He savs to her: « You! ordered my death, and vonr” 
order came to me to leave the city hastily; and what more do you want to 
learn? » When she learned that it was not at his tustigation that they had 
come and received the document [rom her, and that? she herself had written 
in order to gratify him, she issued an order, and these enemies quickly eame, 
While she said. « Whom else was it your purpose to deceive exeept God and 
iie and this samt?» Then, when she threatened them with such things as 
their tricks deserved, the blessed man with great entreaty delivered them 
from death, and did not requite them according to their deeds. But on the 
matter of ordinations (yegersvizz) she said to him : « See that von remain within 
the palace (zzz). lest trial in trath come upon vons Remain still and 
keep quiet Tike your companions and do not make priests in this city ». 
Ile said to her, « E will not do it; and. that von may know thal I have no 
desire for this business, | was just abont to request vonr majesty to order me 
to wo out toa villa oustide for a secret retreat of thirty or forty days, as | now 


|l. Pl 2. sing. — 3. sae sw. — s Se. the palace of Anthemius. 


ii a a e S eee 


BSD LIPE OFP JOUN OF HEPHAESTOPOLIS. BON 


Jar oly Ga Nau.» [46M Joal wao? eA Os ET ON 
alpa olo Oh pd Kots ic =J Ls] Oba er Sse T Be OO. A S SO 
ESIS Jr Joa cM aj f29 ORAS ja Daa Ja ol Dad 
UY «2o acu Nias NE ot Loot fsan „lasag «^ 9d o ooo! xb] 
|J oo «ol jaxms waas Sew Liso.z0t3o2. Jeol Asas fly oot p> 
aa Amjad Jot oð zl yi pws y ol, SÄ OL d: kolis ECCA 
Sly 23 haol l qd00 Ja DS „reaz waso fadfo ok. ..aas 
oth] Naas jaro pr faaoo i Joar Ku] [rsasorso; J.A Jzsoeas 
Jl Joa pain JI [Nooa ods [35092 45 roduc, cone NS [sop Kaso 
Hag 3300 TERN wads (ofS) loot ha; [oo - frasassso LASN 
INL eso, ol ETE 12.2.22. .5 JI Joa LA wag poo soa] "o fas] CENE 
loot. Daxis PIE DNAS ouw Fado OM Joa 1.2, xe: jose MO eot 
aS Pro «s INSI el «53. poo » fusewdise Wes foo D hl 


1. Ms. om. 


also request, since ] iun indeed itl». Amd she on her side gave him his will, 
and also dismissed him, since he was indeed really weak in bodily. health, 
and, his body being greatly afllieted, he constantly suffered from diseases. 
But the blessed man was determtped that, if anyone interfered with liim in 
Ihe way of preventing him from extending a hand of ordination to the believers 
within, he would go out aud. visit them himself in the district where they 
were, in the fervour of his enthusiasm; whieh also hie did not delay to do, 
but under the appearance of having gone out to the vill he went on board a 
ship, and went out first to Lydia, aud thenee ta Asia, tii whieli there were 
in fact many convents of believers: and thas be visited in all distrrets and 
pissed through them; and he came down as far as Tarsus in Cilicia, while 
he never spent a whole day in a place, but meht and day devoted himself to 
travelling in all directions. And thereupon tlie report of hin was heard over 
all that land: and. while the report of him was reaching Cre bishop of the 
district or of the city, he himself did what le required and passed from tt: 
sinee before he entered à distetel he would learn about the believers, and he 


would send a message two or three days beforehand that the men of every 


|. Sc. the province. The tuetropolitin ts therefore meant, 


PES NS 00: 


pin 


A36 ENS o PAS 


wo 


xe32A3) oon jn qe Lanns par ee SO X,» [Kooy won Joa 
Lias `a Joa (Nx o a waw A Lso, ]5oto cor N00 
ADNa Lge JKsiso [5 Lasag t Jooto aA S so a SM, «olo laa 
Jo sans [sams pelo dol. saah- was Lao co Addo Joco 
LA&sco JAX Loa Ji eM assu - lost] as Mal J pine p20 pant! 
can NES guo xm NS li Liso ud posal’ fad sad basa 
oliso Sa drsor «eol t2 JXRadsas fasia spao foo, Syl ds où pel 
oM» fuu] Nas] Los) er» ha Nass] Jl J]laS uso DO vc bly 
«99.20 aol o Lips’ ji-a] Slo Kd soto «3*0 Qa oM wake 
[aac ze] «oo»: boo handuk bii qo JN jM. 
WAAD a0 ass vac, laanza] ex ner dad) [25.398 odo 
Iso JlaaX 0 Nase <> -facoawo ‘aslo cono huaga DADO jha 
[Npa saos MS Lads eol JE eo J Kx». Loo p20 Liana S 


LM 


th 


Od. 


place shontd assemble and be ready along his ronte! (2) at one day's Journey 
yaris) Tram one another: and thus he visited as fir as Tarsus, intending to 
zo down over the whole of Syria. And there they Jearned. about him; and 
there was great commotion. and much searching throngl: the whole city on 
his account: and so he left his things there, and took his departure like a 
poor man, and was nol caneht. When he saw that the eonntries had been 
thrown into commotion, he thought « Before search is made and the 
commotion reaches the king, | will return »: and so he came baek after Iwo 
months, and he went straight to the villa, as if he had not gone anywhere, 
And he sent a letter to the queen, saying, « Since 1, my lady, have on account 
of ill health not heen able to come in and make obeisance to vou. all this 
time. send me by letter what you wish to say ». Aud she on her side 
consented, and sent him a present also there, And during the same days a 
letter from the putriareh of Xutioch? and all the rest of the bishops was 
brought in to che king which stated. « One of the bishops who are there has 
come out. aud has thrown the whole church into confusion, and has performed 
ordination (yezszovtx) and given penances 429025 and absolution’, from the 
roval cily as far as Syria ».— Aud, when a great search lad been made, he 


LL his 18 apps. the enn. We should perk. read was hesola, or we nell render every place 
in ils territory’. V. D. and L. pass over the word, — 2. Ephraim. — 3, Sc. fo eonveri- from biplivsilisti. 


D» LIRE OI AJOUN OFE HEPHAESTOPOLIS. TOT 

JN; Jaang pas haag Ds Jlor q od l Jas) fiot oio 
Ota CMS Sud Ne on Jd] jo ANS JNS 2o I? faasa cid 
JN sea wo re B ORS 2.94 eM JR ras HAY Slo Jao 


woe 
--7 


Lasao Jlas p> anma] - acto] EET- oi 2o, aD p20 alas Te 


als nN oo. mds] d ,OQOoOl wh. tse JJ oom 9 ae ‘No Kgl pops d t2 


J a? x Laja «2o -oo Lad Lan 2002225237» coke] xA so 
o» Coby, Was Load .Ji ao laas hja e Jal Nis; 9. nosy 
Coas pape ware ialo s uomo SA ansad fos Nb 
[dopo JasesA eM vxo oaa Iso + HA 10 Jes opm: DON 
aw «na Sly od hoa So co ok we ssl Jl E kasao . Latona. 
oS. aao]. polo - oro don Nao PRO + wotateas! Jloiarmeo 


wo No «2o paN Laok, Joa a A farashs -asak <= wol poe 


I. Ms. Wilh pointe. — 2, Ms. saN]; corr, Nóld. 


said : « Perhaps H is so-and-so who has not been in the city all this time ». 
Then by the grace of God no ordinary person, but the queen herself, came in 
to vive evidence on belialf of the blessed man, saving : «© That man is sick 
and laid up in such-and-saeh a villa; for indeed it was by my order also 
that he went out thither: and only a lew days ago he sent to me »,.— And, 
when everyone testified that he was im his place, they dropped the matter. 
And so, while these men wrote forcibly, they gained no hearing, and a 
message was sent fo them to sav, « IE you can, arrest him, for perhaps he 
is an impostor. No one has left this place », Again on another occasion, 
when this lad been forgotten and had blown over, he succeeded in vetting 
an order given him to go as lar as the hot spring! on account of his diseases. 
aud he was sent away; and he went oul and passed over all the islands 
of the sea-eoast? and those within the sea as far as Cyprus and visited the 
believers, and as far as Caesarea; and so he returned withoul anyone dis- 
covering 1 Again after. this (ou which same visilition we ourselves 
eneonntered him. he ma le a visitation and went down as far as Rhodes, 
and there we were privileged to see him. And, when he old us his infentiow, 


that he intended to pass throngh Asin a second time about six vears aller the 


Ll. cs co Vamintha’. Probably some bol spring near Constantinople is meani, ted he wetlblhnown 
llaminitha ia Mesopotamia p. 224: eli, oo, — 2. Phoenice Marina. 


TN OHN op E PIESCS 


-- 


Nupa Liman M9 xut Dad s gatia Na y-l Je socio JNa 
Jn? „hasas ooa ooa hasoo ADAM 200 «200 —— Jla 
qaaa, «o9 OCC . Jlas Naas «o9 «n [Janas p Joo 3,236 
QAM Lose ias Was x le RDO ARIA IN: <% LOD x 23360 
ele say INi aAa al frjaaso JM sas Kufuas 
«o3 | Ns aao: WM s. bào adn d0 waa Ls unocA ND yaaa 
EE NOONE Fe OD) <> oL] QN joa Kul Paez Jef Gado JN 
Laza lasan INNE IAN xol. kasao Jhs LENS aaan Ao ; 
oA aao eee dro Esa LOSS TN «A942 .5 «000 ero 
woe Joa yra og yko .lasaso fasiao b] Nooi «M E seed a00 
olas ao Moi odlo LIDS oer KAD «423223300 4322390 [i5iao 


ale "= S ~o Sol «a5: visa- p0 N Jean? alas KA Lao 


]. Ms. um. 9. — 2. Ms. warn — a, Vs. anuo. — 4, VWs. ee 


liest, stnee we were ourselves come up from Alexandria to the royal wiy 
be returned. with ous. And. so, when we had travelled à day's journey 
saato. at every lodging-plice, he would send envoys taken from the 
believers Dr wo amone en and? at every piet we used to find from a 
handred and fifty and from two hundred assembled waiting for him. And 
thus we passed through the cities and vilktwes togethers so that in the city 
of Tralles mistdle the ehureh, while the clergy were performing the service. 
he made more than lifty priests. Since we were a large party, and there were 
distinguished gentlemen among us, we were given permission to occupy an 
upper spree, In the upper eatechumenia* of the church; and so they would come 
up there three and live ata time, while men stood atthe doors and kept wateh, 
apd men who arranged these and sent them on, and this while T mysel! was 
carrving the eblation and the sacrament! and he was standing and blessing 
and administering the oblation and dismissing them, and those below were 
performing the service: and Twas amazed at the maus courage and fortitude, 


Inthe house of Mar Joho al Ephesus again the same, more than seventy men 


Thos nins haye been dn bdo see Pontre poo. whieh Throws baek tlie 1* journey bo 333. but. a> 
Linsufosins del ned teave Mexandrie belore the end of S56. the 6 years most be one eb the gather ~ 
naeccuraeies See abso p. gust. 2. — 2. Ms. om. — 3. Wonen ~ gallery; see Ducaure, >. v. xacnyoupeva, 


M~. qtukwrolsywu. — 4. Viz. a~ a deuran. 





"337| LILE OF JOUN OF HEPHAESTOPOLIS. 539 


It JNa LASS. o» ——Ó 2o OOH gasa 1o x03 NAM T% 
ra «o - (assay) qisas i30 Kass ou. haan JI slo Je 
«20! «200 AWA oot Ache» o] x) Edo Jasco Ju Xda sos 


<H «301 Ao TE J|a3*.3o Musas vno [o Me cR Mo [itor JI 


f 


^L. -o sjaxazokse| 6. Jlojasa fas] po boi ollis JN, J'as IMS 


li Sol “par Joa Jody haas oD pa KN) Mason Col JL e SU SaL aai 
|soóno fag’ jaa, pelo Joa Mal ooo X Nias gaS 
JL walo -Llo yg S Od ..0o09 qamna ON ! oor Nay 
Dial jage JNa o> od £1) Wee o Cramrco ooo! «pm 
«Soto rar. C36 pO DM etel Asas fau] po Joa NAM Joa I| 
Loc QS CN Jes oie» Jot, oaa" la.sio ot) lol ens 
Dr oe wA) oar d0 Jas) 49 Nas Js, o5 haio? 
Nes. railed drsasady 0 ool JL sco Sly 25 Qo pa alojan, JLasy sexo 
|a.) [aad «2e pad Laan taAa oilaasarozo alo een Lapa 


L. Ms. m= 2, Ms. oom. — 3. Phe supplement et vo D aud L, aloes nol ageer with dle ois.. at 


disjoined letler precedes e — 4 Vs. oolstas s. Ms. wo. 


were assembled; and', they having been instructed to assemble! by night in 
the open spaee in the western court of the paed preenmt cy deret alli 
same louse of Mar Jobn, be there ordained them by aighi Ando so from 
that place we again separated, he to Chios and thence to Alexandria and to 
Palestine, and we to the roval city. Wondering al Une arave of God which 
had stirred np this man to visit the believers, and had given bini moreover 

lo 7 the whole chureh, while all the Gime that he had been away 
those who came to the eity had been in distress and had been wiling for 
him as a good hope and a granter of (heim requests. nd be also retired 
and came. and fonnd many in distress and waiting Tor him: sinee. Though 
there were many others in the eitv itself; there was no man Whosoever to 
stretch out his hand to ordain by reason of his Tear. These things, on aceon 
of the abundanee ob his zeal and the greatness of the goodness of God with 
the man, impelled ns to stray into such a length of narrative, while we have 
repeated few of liis actions, sueh as relate to the method in whieh he carried 
oul his visitation, while ou that whieli is indeed too great to tell; the subject 


ol the rest of his brave character and his hunility, we have kept silence, lest 


Ie ALi a, MSS 


MAO ORANA O EPHESUS. [338 


Ss bats nN Lia de Lac o «9f Laas N wa „oaa 
JNaxal. Lors daas] wol vivas fuco fao o oA gina, Ja NS, 
|osot eee A a aoi «30 Lasla Joass 2 à DA Je~ unes] 
ods soda ca lA) Xr sia [essere SESS «Solos Sua soto akasa, 
wih dor ou Sols Lə be of Lal, Jem one oil Ss. ET 
«o vary JA To alas p33 XLasc às yor! liaas Jasin 
Lani ,ooop No: Lad ro xb Jh Lh: duae bopo Ha. 

enrol ooa i> 


alma eanas usa runapa rdusana dalL 
toafa ran eda 


ranch reoni dca pinsi rdhasarh aah 
2c apfaD3aa Moped amma maar 


|J NS o Jos > Nus, Jaxal Rufioorso Nolo: AL ols w? Sgro 


we exceed the fixed linit These things which tend to preserve the memory 
of these holy and ze: alous men mighty m conflicts (z76v! on behalf of religion. 
the first Jobn and Inrther this second John. we have conimitted to the record 
of historv, in the first place in order that the world may reap benelit, from 
the deseription of... their aseetie and virtuous life; and in the second 
in order to make known the graciousness of hint who saved his church by his 
precious blood. how in this Gme of its distress also he set np these two 
pillars of light in ak te comfort it: by whose holy prayers may schispis and 
-Arifes be done away from within it until the end, Amen! And may merey 


light upon the sinner who wrote it through their pravers. Amen!” 


The history of the blessed John bishop of the city of Hephaesti in Egypt is ended, 


NEXT THE TWENTY-SIN EIE. HISTORY, OL THE HOLY THOMSS TIE 


PERSECUTED MAN AND WanTYm, AS 01. DANAE ES 
Whereas we lave though enigmatically and obscurely set down a nar- 


Lo Mes tory: = 2. iss almost cerlainly a serbe addilion, but t= writlen as part of the chapter. 


[339° LIFE OF SUSAN. d 
ALAA aO iwas wih dor Spaga Jlaxso | poe Judspo re hos 
Læ) JIE, bor Joos 2! COOLED Jes. JN ]1a.so, 2 Ha: wy 
on sos HD alasya 0, Jlojasxwo omad, Jlag.;L. oly La [222249] 
WE WEE CT EC JL kaspo ^ [15.1 AD MOH 7D 200 vor JN, 


* * * e » L] * * * * * LI * * » * * * * . * 


ráduisols aara pimsi) Thord “aah 
LaL NLI Én rdhlaha 


pado JN] Jas soy oO Jos Lanns [Laan Nr Gin cs 

iN sso lio Of + WHAM, 20.2 Da jaahas Jis Jans! :JauKsdo MS 
UNO o nel OOpa Lia Je rA yOu oM LL JL se: 
JNx&ao JNa fais ol Ji alasan jama pa \ooilaaroksa 


KM elo fsop cons PAHO v2n2.36 IP Lise əl, Bax Risso 


1. The rest of this eli, Hie s following ebs.. and parl of eli 0 ne. fost dn A. buf ebs. 27-29 pray 
be recovered from olber mss.; see Litred., p. X. — 2. B ins, es praec. cli; 18, a Mes. om, B 
ins. lom. — à. E ins. >b alors; lai» genas — ds B a — 7. bebe — sS Bag — c2 E ine, 
Pus — jou. D om. 


eh these (wo brave warriors 


rative concerning the divine dispensation throug 


and true pastors John and John, we anust after the same pattern Introdnee 
into the series that ts connected with them thts third saint also, Thomas 
the bishop, the whole of whose keen enthusiasm and active administration 


in God's eliurch is the same as theirs. For, as the holy '. 


NENE TILE TWENTY-SEVENTH 7 HISTORY, Ob A BLESSED. VIRGIN 


or Cinusr WHOSE NAME WAS SUSAN. 


The strong power of Christ who is God therefore, which is want to be 
elorified and displayed in human weakness tin order that no flesh may boast 
before him ?. this strengthener of the weak is wont to display its operation 
not only through men of great size or mighty strength, Imt also in weak, 
feeble, powerless women, insomuch that it gives them such force iiid conrage 


that they show mighiv valour in fight not only ‘with flesh and blood’ (or 


l. The rest of the chapter is lust. — 2. Mss. oui; see Introd., pox. — 3. I Cor; L 245 


Ur) JC a Top sive UM 
os eo li. san ol daso Jims yar 2*5 ad UMA. I3oN 5.5 
J LadSdac uas] Savas JU] aao SKa JN) [No 
dhasaa Nan. JNa Luo Danado hars Los Des uria] Danado 
E yl S a300 SINN Krag hso et KV Danas 
oNu volle cesa NsSr Lil uno hans 7na ENS 
wd “Nepal! wadas Cas yaaan oh vac hot aul e] sonas 
AS p> Ho J Jo JNaas flo ha MAN sas, Lanan EET 
Alpes aho] 92 Lasso EERE Naso ha sa Daa liso 
Jeans sy Lasso GM Nan] Jb Jola aba y..s50 ódNx 323 
Sy Dask, Lay J e Isis a> voaa, carr -hasko 'JNaxal, 
+ uas]: lan hoa n PMN SMS o, «20 Sly ha. 
Lawas cos <% “Loa Na? wag EE Mn E 
aa | fss Lasy KO xr À - Jasoh qaia les Jot 95 Nu] VRSI r20 


l ft: L&Atac. Sod gun fe al ape i u 8i uy ro roon aadd. — n J} waas {as 
MP >L] 6, [i lessees >na ELE 7. 4, [5,039 [Aes Za l4, S, Jt leo. DEC Loo madal. 
1D. [|i oan i$ Db Law AST [sapa laa eo 9 Kel PRI Kisak Lys re Lom. 


With insidious passions and the entieements of tleshly Insts and so om, * but 
actus principalities EE and authorities, and awatnst the rulers of the 


work] of this darkness. and against evil spirits under heaven’ ', so that 
against these they show ‘mighty prowess amd mock at them as a mighty 
man miocks at a party of babes and suckhings sho make Ihemselves ready 
and come to fight with bim. 

For this also was declared tous through the most wise Paul in that he 
saves cn dn Christ Jesus is no male nor female, nor bond nor Wee, So 
therefore this holy woman valiant in Christ. in that she astonished me by 
her appearance and speech and streneth in God, did not seem to me to be 
ini way oul af pluee in the sertes of histories of the saints; with whom 
she also is pressing do enter by the sine narrow gate #, as she has indeed 
already entered. 

This blessed woman. as by inquiry we sieceeded in learning accuratelv 
from her, was by her darth o6; from Arzun* of the Persians, Vaid, 
when this woman was a girl of eight, that is of high Fanily céva from her 


Lo ile wie de mme Gril ots SC MSS SNe — e Zn 


[341° LIFE OF SUSAN. dd 
ferris oso worsolso; “foo, ALAS “Jor wats OX !5otas ujas, 
y HH] i joa sooi? x) oaa .àáleaaiso dlaastaso ÒaaD 
jha va JX ao JNa JMojos Mors: oa .JNoias Jo 22: 
fojas, Jaso JNa qeu) "loo Dyl Lasan ad Joo,’ JLi Nao 
ooo CAD ana “Lasoo òS Loot [asas - soe» wrote] exa) 
ET Asolo “Kose JI Taal, D> i ele Alors D> 
MM, squat Aia Moose Ss Lido Rds var uec NS bas 
ade prio! AX poih -Naor waas llus Ns] Esp AD Lise Lalo 
d Jor hanss haw tlas faza} c3 2d l oops .J Noa aM 
issu | Nsaco E I Dd "loo Lal! oos foo pol "jyan 
JNa Nasal jaso frog) "ol JL yal boas po depo Lise oes 


1. B dne bas. — m. B ine, ov HL ins. P — 4. PP evlatanoaso ovbadaisng — h, 1 SS ao 
Joo 15220 as won Naa 6, Dioni LOB eme ema aal hasa9. cdo os |i Qoa] os 
wee no. too Ss. — 9, Bias 15s. -= do; L 9e I]. As — 19. basa vaas pal 29985" ceo 


Se» dA ty d det3ele: Loop nas Nl Is? oo — I5, L> coido Io fevols DET 


PASE aH eno s Mans. Ls» bos Qua liso. moms IN. p 9» Draco i, lowa aa 


very beginning the light of her hfe rose in her mind, until men marvelled 


at her sorrow and modesty and devoutness; and her name given her by her 


parents, as by way of propheey, was ‘blessing’ '. who truly received a 
heavenly blessing. — This virtuens woman formed the plan of gore and 


worshipping in the holy places in whiel the salvation of our life was effected, 


and she continued asking her parents! leave, and they would laugh at her 


childhood and sav : « You have not vel learned to interpret ?^, aud do you 
wish to vo to Jerusalem ? », hut she on her part was silent and kept it in her 
heart. Aud‘ in the same days she prayed ind said: « Lord, if thou wisliest 
lor the life of my wretched soul, ^ make thy way straight before me * aud 
provide au escort for me, and save my soul [rom the stam of the hateful 
mire of this world ». Then the elild, as she herself would repeat to us, 
when [| pressed her much, placed. her sonf in the Lord's hands and Hed. 


And after traversing “three or four miles she found a large party of women 


IL. Se. Eulosiu.— 2. De. wrdltne, ioe. Plo reusl ?. To wake the meine eleurer die seribe ot 2) dies 
inserted ID ~peeeh i -= 2. lac T6 dq. 4. The seribe of Ho has dneerbed ícabonb 7 years 
allerwards', probably becanse Hie notion ot a child of 8 setting off sone fot derusaleuir staggered bin 
though he thereby makes the words tin the june dass! üecningless. Thal she was reus only $ is 
-eareely eredible, amb is probably one of the authors loose statements, da NUR 
V. gps und Jo wrousfy cquaudzrenulta 


PATR. UB. — T. XVIII. — F. 4. 


EAST 


* 


I: 


We As 


21 TON CUP EPIS SS EU RD 


Mao gads Maas pao yaah Leiola qos: Jante buy JMi 
Leo Ls. aag Loa Jaslo Jo Luaro loo J reto Nopa » Kado 
[sane Ns asbl Nus GS cence, CoS cc's: “GIN a pelo 15:25 
‘ooo .b] Wy) Wise od las Ji] Laslo Jas] Xs ol Joie Xs o] 
Kaul] aN aiot lioe haas Loops Hras Jisoo Lulo! fal UX Joà 
AX 9001 eral raaa axa dthuad uiso eto «ol. 10 Jhopanc 


DASE) Uos aa. oaas J^ xol p JL bes yl "Lol S904 


GO Qux. Jh aal, Maaxo olp JJ «olo "Naps LoLo | ve) o0 
cob d<o Vig Lewac]| Ni es JM | pa. je) NM Kado 
Lysol] «dt Jess loo Jarol, Ww Noo JO Lad, xs INS AD Js 
LANs SQdro Sas sS MUNG] Jo ps0 I haia alis shul, cdr [Kano ods 
Nas UN əl «olo AM Jisàso 'Yeoa. ħu? ja po Wo was] 


Lone — cop Neh 4 oec bo emamesm wise, 032 B Tico hango Elo ble 
latasa. — 5. 1s baSLL. — qs p ogous 5479. 7. B Na s. phas — s Bins fae = dp E 
86e. — 1]. Fi ste. 


M 


and men travelling along the road to Jerasalem; and, having joined them 


and made mquiries and learnt ii, she rejoiced and would exult and praise 
God, and would say : « Blessed am 1, for the Lord has wished for my salva- 
Lion, and has answered me aecordine to my petition. Aud far be it from ine 
heneeforth to return for the world or Tor kin (yevesi, or for parents, and die, 
But lam going to him that led me, aud he himself will he to me father! and 
brother, and Lord and Saviour in both worlds ». And thus she reached 
Jerusalem with joy sand, when she had worshipped there, and her companions 
desired to go baek, they continued requesting her to return with them as 
being a countrywoman, saving, « We will not leave vou in this country ». 
Bul she separated from them, and they did not see her again. Anil she 
made inquies to find a monastery in whieh to live: and she learned. that 
there was a large women's monastery betwen Ascalon and Gaza; and thither 
she directed her steps: and she made her wish know to the portress. And, 
stnce Ihat monastery was severe (2)7, that old woman said to her : « You, 


my daughter, cannot five here, since vou are a girl, and you cannot hear 


LB due cand mather. — c This is appx. the meaning of 13205 here, us v. D. amd L. sunl 


P. siuith take it: bat the word expaesses size or mtensity, and, though ib is nol infreqnenthy applied to 


uscelie practices iu the sense ol severe’. ibis a greal stretch of fongnage lo nse il of a monasteryan 


; pa 


Which severe as etieien ts practised. Im eh. os go by b it de applied foo monsters du Hie sense d 


"esbensiye ^. buf [his seems oul of place here. 


343] LIFE OF SUSAN. des 


Li» Jilla lua JMaims] We faa me? wt Je JE Jos 
5 c [xaa ‘fraso [sib Ss doo [shso! loa Mass] "enl 
uS. ao Alana) Ws ey” cee opt. D Lasse JI “go o Od d 
A bug Joh? pud ey SS po Ade S) Xn .fmaro ES "RNS 
Joo Sy] -h> Da fare Soy 6 Sta x 230) ! oà y ON 280 rx] 
"pus M ado aoo JK du, Lois MOETET wale qaal, wad 
Joe JIKASd fy rama Rufus aadslo MIMSY) son aad Joa 
x) o0 Aag || Cascais Js Joa EX J «el chào usados oM 
Jere] Pad wa. Lias, 2801 «A opos J&isad do Lo pel 
ous: oA ees cà» Lb] jans, Xs vM, «So ses Loa 
war. Jory eel ‘yas lise .M wala flo | Sait] arora ^ fly 


flaaasyo Jhasasryo Jäs, fpras fupracso kaio ]eso s RHA qn pt 


L Bis B ins. Lom, — 3. B ins. (A4 ^] Bl Ss fao Lom fad. 5. 5. B bo 
vrenn E CE NSS aS Ls hao c s M a ee eot ts eo opm us Tum dara 
Ll. |) wdOscat.s. — p] Hh dues e md. Sas Ny Dail is. LEE hamo -Asjal IDa bso, 

15, B Wad «^? ^0 EHD. - | Danso; corr. Fiber. 


Irurdens and labours; and moreover also your own delivacy is unsuited [or 
a monastery »..— Dul the devont woman because she was a stranger and in 
à strange country was distressed: and she remained sitting before the gate 
nud weeping Tor seven days, while they tmed to drive her away and. she 
did not move. Then, after they had learned. that she was a stranger, they 
received herz and she came m, while they looked down upon her tender 
years. And, when they learned. from what country to what country she 
had come, they would say to her as il distressed over her, « What profit 
was H to you, my daughter. to come out and rum your soul in the mire 
of sin in. this way? Who is there whom, tf he were to see that vou ire xo 
young, and especially thal vou. are alone, Satan would not set upon von 
even aginst liis will, to ruin you before your day? » But she, as the 
blessed women who were with ber would relate that they had originally 
learned from her, wonld say : « For our Lord's sake pray for me: since | 


hope in hon to whom | have committed myself that he has net suffered me 


to be ruined, and with not suffer me». And so (she saidi they gave thanks 
to God. But she from that time began to follow great modes of life; aud 


austere practices olf labours mil abstinence and devoutness, though they 
| : 


D 


sca Oeo 


"Auge. 


DIE oy Goes a p isses 34^] 
poll ly -dibopas Xi Qoo od 2800 gaio as Udo wads ol t2 des 
qth La] loa [acaso Mjn voto lar] words vo ae cots 
los Lass wade Liag vane dom Les cad JASE JNSlo vus 
Jl Lees eX Ae INi „loa Lano Le LAS oMa, Jsorso 
Je LLS és] p dex bass J “hariad doas qx EEEN, 
bawaye pe Jj od aa KSS qe i ad a oo o| aljan q 
oP äi Laas JKutsags opao Ce po aa J| aaa v 
Jonas jo «llo JNa Loot famas sa shoo 2d: «6 yl LAX 
| eae y Aare ARN Udo ves Ioas “Say pals o» Xnare 
"Q6 asl Jibs [59e Je Dask, Pe ot aaa o] pe Sé 2899 Nm 
| ncs xo ois aaas lotxaso . INS Gado panto «x axo L 


Taas ols (909-9. An Xx [29093 » loa L2. PEST core yas “pel 


G 


E 9% E ou. apse Bald eine oe laa. od ans, p% — à. i ins. Waves. 


— «6, hans, (Cu waa. — 7. ]bodne. lama. s. Hi ins. el otos: — u D ins. boe»so55.4 sci 


tried to prevent her and useil to smite lier on account of her childish ave, 
that she might not apply herself to these things more than all the sisters : 
and she on her side would. increase them the more: so that) she would go 
[or two and three days ata tine, and then eal lentils only, and she would 
keep a whole mehta vigil st uding in a corner (yous): aud no single word 
from her mouth would be ultered to human beings all day. unless it Was 
demanded, while none of her companions saw her face openty or the whole 
of the inside of her eve. from the time that she entered that monastery, and 
no laughter eame out of her mouth. When they saw the blessed WOURULS 
Way oiire, that in proportion as they strove to prevent her on the ground 
ol her tender vears she on her side went on adding to Ihis serious demeanour 
lor a vear and two vears, then her that they had despised as a child they 

now regarded as a vener able woman: and she herself had also changed ne 
name before entering the monastery, lest any of her kin Crévs; ) should come 
and make inquiries and discover her:and she took the name of Susan. When 
she had been practising these habits for about ten vears, a persec ulion Was 


sel on foot awainst their monastery to make them either submit! or quiis 


Edid fe Hae inire onl iiuen ara estat ates ki odo otc D pro t EIE in Palestine 


probably began, sooner Han in Mesopotamia, where Munophysiles were in a large majority. 











[345] HIER QUE SUSAN. DA 


vrak oo “Joa aote Nol Iro (js fjeeoss xr Koro Er el 
SPD «t =? JNasag „pokl Jao [2 v RALO eta dno «1 


+ 


sol. J Lassasot las 23 Mule » wash Jess T> as a fom o0 “SA D 


Joorl oho Lena <% e EE aslo asl. Nas] root 
afro] o. pahal gla of foi Lone joa p Masa jü2xo 
Wy JNS pa edo 30 aes cin lo Mass caas, “Siar 
arly boot JNa omand sor p d aces “ods, cosa 
AES x we} HOI RN asso apalu, Laias oD o8ot Kol «oto 
Lis J N azma Lh «i J a j? ro Las xor NS 
JNS addr Slo g arco Jul Jhl Jesus uxor pol MOS Mp 
Lori dM ESSI Jl, «200 Jaras <5 waad qiw ol, 
Awd} ee» J pas Jso1y Lad INA sad ET YY Joi eren as JI giao 


I. Hs ins, Serbo les — 02, B ins., go. — n Ko gs PSasags lado [aa groll sono -wdtao 
el^ QE oLïL oon SER ace he Set ily eum Se de a As 6. Bo ims. Be» p n 
vadas al jos [0,20 SÍ. — s. Hh NS. tse s. — 9. H woods oras, $us sa e ee sel Me s 
H. B our $ d2. B we, — Ln Mss. «eoe — p D SES. — Tn, db eae. 


Since it was a large and celebrated convent, the majority of them were 
detained and conformed, and some were scattered this way and that. But 
the blessed woman was pressed by two alleruatives, one of removing from 
the monastery, and the other of falling into the evil faith. Then she re- 
solved to leave, and go into the desert bevond Alexandria, and live there. 
And she left at once, while a great division arose even among those who 
had submitted in that they said, « Now that Susan has left, neither will we 
stay oo. But of the leading women who had not conformed five of them ' 
attached themselves to her, while she was prepared to go alone; and these 
would say to her : « Ht is impossible for us to be separated from von». But 
she, after she had been compelled, revealed hier intention to Ihen, saying : 
« Do not come with me; since for my part, to pul it shortly, if the Lord 
prosper me as he is wont to do, lam going to the desert ».. But they also 


as well stated their determination, « We too will go with vou to the desert». 
And, when they refused to give way, they embarked on a ship and crossed 
to Alexandria. And the blessed woman heard a report of a place in the 


desert beyond the house of Mar Menas?; and she directed her steps thither, 


1. Sie svt. — 2. See p. 209, m2. 


F 


NN 


DAS IOUN OF EPHESUS. 31067 
me gi Gi D l aN Lilo aasan Kas qc 
<! asias loa Lasao kisal, Jaa 2à Í saat oaas ro Io 
Jlia AGS "ya — lao: ` l ct Joo Kal koa "JN sod: 
x repare JNa lids INu] a qo ol 290 — Lise» 
Luas wud [Noo = Jara «oon» N*.a.so vodo I NM»o 945 
Joa Su loo I au axo ETE «oes SSA TDi 
joa Mol Je quay Jia uaaa gaDl onak Jp O81 robs} 
Jon Joa «2 26 ANS NE d agy? Jaaa "ese oà lmo:a9 q XM 
loq |Past -has Luso, fod. E E „Laag sil as o 
wot Jaw So Aas Ny? Ls p20 LAS peo Je I Lapa No0 
Jo ope] sal flo Halpa xw JP voiles daga waa IS xe p50 
jets] wo Wacoas,] DS 2ói yl Ne aseo lys jo NS-a.* JI co 


„ha Lad ol i 9 hana [Kao Joa 23 Noo je Joo Na, bao No 


1. b ble mom tee lam EE læna yw — 4. |. 1329 coe [s ceed i p baSs 
«9u20m — 7, B ui, Om. 8 Thins. d$ — uw [i arse w3. — lo, Hos h5a8 pr sag all. 
Vip Em cq poins beo. — Is Troes Sue — i D efl ovlyas. — 15. bone. cial. 


it being about Iwo miles from a village named Mendis: whieh finally became 
the abode of the blessed Syrians‘, but took its begining from the blessed 
woman. — Aud there was there a tower that had been erected [or protection 
against barbarians; and the other five also went in with. virtuous zeal. and 
they took up their abode iu it. And one of them went in ayd obtained 
material for work for them from that village: and thus they laboured with 
their lands for their necessities and supported themselves: mul God took 
care of them, who saw their zeal and their trast iu him. Now there was a 
cave outside that tower in the desert that had been dug in the earth under- 
neath: and once there had been a certain blessed man in it. And, having 
passed beyond human habitation. she was proceding further and going to 
and froin the desert and praying: and on her walk she went and discov- 
ered that cave; and immediately she threw herself inside it without her 
companions or anyone else being aware of it: and she took no food or 
anything. And theneeforth hike that whieh is written of Ishmael the son 
of Abraham, that he lived in the desert of Paran and was there instructed 


Poser pe 19 At p. 209 the deserl of Mendis i> said to dee 12 miles feom Mar. Menase — 2 li 


‘Women, 








[347 LIFE OE SUSAN. 540 


Laoi ! oS IN soo Jaraa Janaa loa fads .psofsard loa haina 
Valasa, | Jja» Je Nea Nus dot Jepi Jas, Dasan, JJ o5. o "Bas at, 
JKNaaso Jpszro b Sols LLL “Jo Loot whe Loa. ro? Oba. xao 
+ tol | HLan ón.2.co SS Se pol yo fhasd LAS God = 
xo fos! aa. -looa Jeon JN sä. yl vol p20 N aLao => Nos] 
xo 3| Opas PIO Apr Oro SS, «ol [Naiad Lado oud [Muyo 
ns MICA NER yP> po + 000 "eeu JI Asa, EIS 
"Js adylo ooo ‘0001 v x» y aa.sJo JN. i Jis ese: 
O0 ADM LW Jo aol Ws Lonas JNarza NS Hof puso aao Ter 
aa JAgassoo JN JLi, q> K Jofias haws x6 y oto 


Loot ans Js open D ox! wor JI y Joy <% Jo JI ce od 
Yds dr Juss woo Jao = . Ug AM alo. aMjlo | .àeaas usw. 


D 


1. D Lom 1935 ,5.. — 2, Tus. in mars. in E, — 3. Boom. — ^4, E wot. — 5. [i eal. — 6 7 


ua [liaa inse cS ES 9 D 959. 


in the bow ', soit would be fitting to sav of this woman also that she lived 
in a cave in the desert, and was instructed in struggles and acts of valour 
avainst powerful demons, who show the power of their wickedness more 
especially in the desert. But her companions, when a day aud two days 
passed and she did. not come, sat night and day in bitter distress. and 
weeping, while they said, « She in reliance upon whom we came hither 
has deserted us and departed »..— And, when agam about ten days had 
passed, some persons from that village learned about it; and they came to 
the blessed women to learn the facts. And, when they saw the sorrow and 
the weeping of the blessed women, they thought, « Has she perhaps gone 
down into the cave in the desert?» And, inasmuch as they knew the place, 
they set out and went to that eave: and they looked in and saw the blessed 
woman lying on her face and crying aloud; and they spoke to her. And 
she, inasmuch as she supposed that they were the fiends, who lad dis- 
played fearful and horrible shapes before her there, was not irightened out 
of erying in prayer. But they, when they saw that she did not answer theni, 
left her: and they went and informed her companions; and so they all ran 
to that cave: and they found the blessed woman iu the same position, 


(rene NNT 20, 2]: 


DL Hopp Sec p p ETE S US. Hb 


DE je aaao LS geo [525 r2 Jena 5 os JRarsa dS naala 
asa Len xr “ols XX dso ete. | “ep dty Naso |. opad ead RDO 


‘ads Ln x? cet aol «o Waai, yl óÓla ollo alas, Jass 


«KS nwopaw Soar oo UNG] byes wel ^X ON ao89 x20 S30 ja oo 
NND JNaisy cer aos Cogo as ese [acts OO lot ES Keo 
hears J nae Vat ea es} I» Jlo xoa SN YQ 2.50 
diss! vala KNS «Dio l"àsao fons yo JNA NS x! 0 „Joons 
[322.4 d: xL wv Ae Wal, aM aao Mojs Jha J Kno, Pre. 


oe a L1 7 


ox poh lo asam Gd edo . UJ HAD} XK ro v! St 


«ol <0 Slo Lads: QI a JN So Sts, y>} veo sKs x vol. 
li 


Jaaa aN oa aai c ol ao Mole «xl wol Jo Jia] 


1 dus 2: 2 Mos genos odo Raas. ee — 0 D tr, Tee — on G bo ropes pad 
15015 BMP P3 app. erased:, S NE. ce dp es 525. -- p poo — TI D eoi Lil 
E [enm gola. — 12 d qase de bbb — qus p bl dne of bl bee. — qa Mss, e — qs. KE 
emo. — qo, pidas. — 17, p olo. 


kneeling and praying: and with dillteulty, when they had spoken manv 
words to her, was she broneht to believe that it was thev, sinee the day 
before also demons had clothed themselves in their shapes and come to her 
to dislodge ber from that place. ud they, while weeping. continued 
making this entreaty to her, saving : «© You hnow that it was in reliance 
upon vou after our Lord that we came out to this desert: and now wherefore 
do you seek to destroy all our souls, and be yourself alone saved? and know 
vou not that we without yon cannot exist? » But. the valiant woman ad- 
dressed them weeping with her head bowed downwards : « Leave me, niv 
sisters: and now | am with you always; but, since the Lord bas prepared 
this place for me in which | have had the opportunity of being at peace, go 
and keep quiet: and every first day of the week one of you shall come and 
see me whether | am alive or dead ». But they, m order that she might 
come with them, set upon her to lift her up aud were unable to do so. 
Again after these things they demanded from her a sure promise, lest she 
should depart even from that place also and not let them know: and she 


gave them the promise. And again they continued begging her that they 


Ba Heec SESAN: Al 


vex OX jeu) JI jeux JNxeR. Jis Jon v9 yu! Lix94 Jjasj 
vex Nb jal p2 waal, jlo? loa Jaa, Wo c vor o8 T 
JRxoyo rks] We ‘borne L|, ds; fNsesas QeAMSh 2h] 
"Loao us wale + nD? osazaas JI cx caw Dl oaol, 
Luso .[324.5 Le proamas pu pao hasap M gih haay 
yoa [AMéised: eb qs ie x vds NSL ad oda Qe 
Joi pcan v% qalan ooo whl Jn eco sapaa col Laslo niusa] 
yar ea ‘Oly deb pe baw ike "Gs ool Pla, Liao xo 
Prades Joa vooal goy Laso ioo Jeans ps! ooo, 2394. 
JNa So MENS e ong l laus !'INso, oo lassi] Aw o 
ple BI oğ ja>, alokuar alada Da olo "35, hasl vo» 
xo Lasis ou Joo «oto. Sane] LOLO pany uD. yar hd 


|. B Bmw p Deaton, — c Db juin, ed Sao. 5. Loins, ee — 4. B pone vedal [Sasatbs L}. 
aps Izas wars. dne. wo pene 2 — 6, BIN œ- aS se eat lAa. —- 
lo Boom. & — Ih Bins Sol- — 12, b ofS. AE LL medal. 


might make a ditde dish of lentils and bring it her, inasmuch as 1 was now 
ten days that she liad not tasted anything. Bat she on her side refused 
even to lear of it, saving : «© You seek to concern vourselves about my food, 
while { am dving fat on my face, and to make me eat the sweat of vour 
faces, far be it from met But for the support of my body it is enough 
that you bring me a jar of water on ihe first day of the week, and one cake 
(aa aua of bread à day ». And thus they did for her Tor three years, 
But, after the fame of the blessed women had been beard everywhere, and 
moreover where they lived. many persons would come to them from Alexan- 


dria, and from the villages of Libya, and further afterwards a great old man. 


who also with his. disciples, about ten of them. was a neighbour of their 


monastery (i Palestine, and, when Chey had been wuch persecuted, and 
driven from one place to another, when he learned where these blessed 
women were, aud also about the quietude and pleasantuess of that desert, 
set forth and directed his steps thither with his disciples; one of whom wits 


brother of her who had been made head of the same blessed wonten, who 


1. Bread twiee eooked like eur bisevit. and therefore hard anil capable of feanz kept i consi- 


derable time, The meaning perh. is Hial Les were lo bring 7 cakes every Sunday, 


PISO 


"about: 


a 


gre JOUN OF CPHESUS. 3507 
joa waas „maoka joa parol oot Sls | loo TEES JN ise ds 
Lex Qe Lac ML >} P0 Joot ama fam v! ads cfasas 
xt 9? „saol wipe dO aK. yan Damasa “apaa lo Joa 2otoe Na] 
mere woh qase + vd daN (oats Juag “Lusso lol] Good 
JND Sasso J >05 Nao x 22042. 5 so "Lise «219360 .000, 
CHo, cool adi obs “ook Lzle :oà fama Sx Krtasas apa 
sà | Kooro JI asoro "IN aL x Ieee omoran, dna) GX rar 


Pe PROG Snes “aa Nx] Saar c A9 Nuus Jiusad ol v5 NaN? 


doo Je JINA fall ashy J; DNNN JNa aso Noos word 
A> wt ere Bohl gv „AD, qoos Joo pra. hae JKR deg 
La Mo Jo : ie [Noo sain JD Gals I Sw sos shoo fuses Lasan 
Yad: fans: ox ILa, zl TES LAA fia, Qu! METTE 


I. D TSattaag Qed Loo luos $ Benu. * noB omo. bael leo umadsal, — 4. H œA of | 
— 5 Were Ble k ara i Pans. 92 — 70 B pl NL Stee, 9 Esing, — Io. [; aal] 
SN. er coo -al dba — pa duas — I3. ins, bao — 1%. E ema s 


also was a man of marvellous modes of life; whose name was Samuel: and 
the name ol the old man himself was Maro: and the old man Maro was hy 
bieth sz) an Nmidene, while his disciple Samuel with his sister. came 
from the ueighbonrhood of Edessa. And. when they arrived, the blessed 
women on them side received. comfort. from their presenee, and the men too 
rejorced, and they gave thanks to the Lord that they were eratified with 
the quiet of the desert. And thereupon they began to plant a eell in that 
desert, and olliers moreover came thither, of some of whom a record has 
been set down by us in one of the preceding histories '. And that place 
wits colonized, while the blessed women also were among them. Acem- 
dingly they formed a plan of preparing a separate place for them, in order 
uet to give oceasion for evil speaking among persons outside; and on 
account of the blessed Susan they did not like to speak Jest she should be 
offended ^. But she was oecupied witli the same thought, « Now that God 
has brought his bondmen to this place, neither is it possible for those of our 


female sex (fév; to pass their lives among them isince the evil one’s attack 


puse dod 22 She had therefore Pet the eave afler He zi wears. and if seems likely that if was 


the same cave which Thomas of Amida allerwards oveupicd p. fol, though st is Chere called a pil. 


[35]? LIFE OF SUSAN. Z 


foal «el pleases NS. 201 Laas pas need ! 50 wack. | [3.12 jaspo 
Y Jj.» Chis; Siar fi] sebagai [Nasas 3M» Kufpsoy cols 
ede “o -JNa orsa. «x0 0001 geko Lisa} aya vos Lo «2o 
"atasy «con» anano JoJ asso] arsaa 420 INNS oothas 
"Ja xls wool, a eo v wt JN co: Jaa J 2o: Koo vanadio 
ro JMoses [| oM 3] <5 ài] o axxo Lago «boot Li.» 
AS ay NC, vo» taaa ^ aS Gd Jo HS «M 
«390 rues Jl oo Js Je werd O20 gor "Nan xr 
Jofta Sse Jie <>? La ees RN Naaa et "SS O 
Ml oN sao Lasaia, I [Lasag ii yl | d[5ases]so LANS CONS 5 ONTO 
pel oto Peces as x25 ooo! wohl ON fuspso .ooot le Lovo 


in» GE ao, L eolas — u H ee ha ul. ches Danos hne 452 bulao caol = 
op me Se ela» es — 5 | eras — E lana be au cel astu. Im yl in 
ALLL Qe Csata gay 2 [Meats Mano. — s. Mere begins an extract in D, fase v^. headed c 
laele qm aa JaQds Q1 Aaa ISl ee prec cie oss — qu. doe, - pn Bains «R68 — 12, B ma. — 


Eno Ho — [y p daaa. — li. B ooon will "Sz. Sy Lele wdro coo cupo 


upon saints is generally made through women even when ihiey are 
absent, how nmeh more therefore in their presence ti, even ak so be we! 
eontinne to rnn with caution after spiritual things. | But now let as with- 
draw into the desert beyond this o. While the blessed men were ashamed 
on account of the saints serious character, she herself. addressed them in 
these words: and when they heard it they gave thanks to God: and they 
mudertook to build and prepare for them a place m the vicinity of that village, 
while she hersell intended to move farther up country: and they stood up 
and opposed her, saving : « For you, mother, in a city. if von dwell iu it, 
itis a desert to vou *; but look at these souls who are hanging fupon you? ». 
Then she gave way to them: and they built an enclosed monastery Tor them 
and a tower inside it; and they took up their abode in it. But the blessed 
woman through strength proceeding from Grace received mighty power 
over fiends, since they would thenceforth set. themselves in array against 
her night and day in the form (z2zoz, of human beings, and they wenld come 


against her with all varieties of weapons : and she like a strong mian who 


|. B c they! fem. — 2. Sic sye — 5. Do like creepers on walls . 


MI SEU s 


Sb ST Eus 


ee JOHN OF EPHESUS, 352] 
par ethos EN EN E34 S əl, bias] Joa ssobaso yo 
Lom od [E A>) “Jeo Saas ia iNo <> «aol: kaspo «9h 
isso "Bal doces] Jul OSS Camur cen LOU oa ear 8 
<> Say, JK.soa. rae) HAD «9 90 « A941 EAS JKsancs0 Jos 
ANni woalals bl filo bl wl t2 fako ot lad ‘Kado m 
œ J ol DNS pih ai hn] Naaa? “Plo Lanna “osano 
jL, Naso Lancs Loo [sans [iso Shans oad yards Ji] -490 eS 
fein moh lane flarsnXt> el [i4 Le JM Soa Jaa 


l 


Lic [&25o fjas a> | adoro eani wawi, LOE DD 


aapa garg dors Kod whey So ors ors I hd. Ng? 


Je of haia oad So was J| col fraslo JE la Lans, 

l. 1i ins > æ |S cia | ens a Sas «t. 353 xo sels eo lazo. gts, i} cle al ERK) or ua, 

Ec bi disease e, th solo qm — 7, E om. s [iesnaxcaS[s = os WSS epos De — 
ETE BL o Ne tascs if Wi mE 


despises the sickly men who threaten him would mock at tbem’. And the 
fame of her strength was heard everywhere, so that the fame of her perfec- 
Hon instigated us also to see her as well as the holy men who were there, 
fifteen years after she had settled in the same desert?^..— And, when we had 
heen privileged to ser her that } «lo not like to name a woman, | was amazed 
at the words of solemn feeling aud of the wisdom of God that proceeded From 
her mouth during the space of more than twenty days that E was with these 
saints, going and coming, in order to hear her speech and her delight 
conversation: and | was unable to see her head held erect, or a Teatuve of 
her face mise) except the tip of her nose only; so sorrowful was she and 
tearful. And she took upon herself to speak to us about this world how it 
is in the grasp of error, and how men see their Tellows rotting and decaying 
and putrefying within graves. and the loathsome worm creeping * about in 
the midst of their putrelying remains, and they who see these things are 
led astray by the vanities of this false world, and how again the thought 


af the rapidlv-approachinz terrible hour of the dissolution ol this world does 


Lf p ato, — 2, 1,7 s visit lo Egypt was in Aji see Inlrod, p. 1v i hence we mag plove Susan's 
stay an Palestine from Sao £0 510: see qh 34% and p 356. J. XS musl comme from cool «Sy se 
must aie 3 nülliigsseeds Neos only X; Poel are penee i PSr to ite passage 


under hax = insipidus. but this mithes nu sense. 


[aa LIFE OF SUSAN, 555 
fsofs 3 Pre pans i lemingo [Lo [Lanas Chop ds Je Lasa: 
Jas PINa THa, “Lə; oa farming 3 Jere] J; JI, 
wee NGS — Jo :Laxıal, Loro l sasso INA soa, Lrcodibo 
SEIS Joa Ado <~ "lasls uA <> Mol Ss fans wdfn 
J-s00p 0 Joa hasl Se JNN foot JEG] JA Ro ot — ool 
» Jlancols JN setaso ol ‘os MsoLul] xA) 90b Rs CAD EA ON se “sx fs; 


wh! «aol. e ." Leo] LS val OLX “Nasol, Ja. ol ləb dss: 


„Janaa |"JRoops Joa isan JoAN, | fratuio Los fasad ws] «I 2001 


J piso oN Js oca EU aaao ooa Loot Joss ag? ads 
LINS aa aon wu Ne Mo Ops oto Norse} P Loa o ANS Joa 
Lasap o» loot :Jylts qr poo loa fly flo Loot [PX amo oao loot 


v las hE2 Qe Oly Lal st case: ilo oescsoc 


"waso, | 


cabo Jio ha «0o Loo < o loa wor JAN? hes ot : ooo 


L B Bok «oio hada boe. — 2 Bins d Fee eo Male. — 3. EK ph — 3. Bins bias. 
— 5 B” sheo’ [satan aac wr WS Odell. s Peels, — 9, p laotLby. — in. p 
eL wom eM. H.E pl. — Iz p. PLA. L B ans. de D ins. — i D g — qo. B 
leo [ie 10cisa as eoa eS So. Ni, |. asosl. — 17. k Dijo. — 18. D ins, ad. 


not rise in men's hearts, and that they are about to stand before the terrible 
judgment-seal (2242) of God, saving, « Itis a great absurdity that we hear 
of the pit of fire, ind the abysses of flame, and the darkness, and the rest 
of the torments, and we do not lav it to heart aud ask mercy while we have 
the opportunity as a means of escaping from these things. » This divine 
woman Would repeat in our presence many things yet more terrible than 
these, and we were brought into a state of great wonder at her speech. 
Then there was given to her also the gift of healing, so that every inlirmitv 
or disease upon which she stretched ont her haud was healed. While we 
were there, a eertaiu. great and God-loving blessed man was living in a 
place in the desert that was not far from them; and ihe fiends used openly 
to set themselves m array against him; and he used to see their struggle 
with the blessed woman. and she his. Dut, since she was stronger than 
he, she both prevailed and had no fear whatever of the liends, and she had 
heeome firm and immoveable hke adamant, insomuch that the demons 
Iheinselves used to cry to her, « This ts a woman, but sle has become stone, 


aud [rom flesh iron». These things the demons used to say to her. And, 


Tp Spp] 


550 POUN OE EPHESUS. M 
oà lisa] ™ Loot Jae lason o ele alan ooo cade! Jar vage 
Joa JEL àdeS RaQ Lady yl -Lö voids ooo aok, o No] 
,NN3SN a] ol. PO 10300 OHOO wio Ans e bt RI «ol. p20 
aNaso fihia ‘army Jor esl x! Oot sha] Nil «aus pases aba 
D basaslo LAS bao [aoo NS uai NUN, Jas ors Ja t9 tensor 


odloslle woo WoNs]o wad wuylhlo - AX a.a Jla soos Lias Spa 


dup Joy < AKASA Sane LI 6Naxo Nion NS «a0 
Toes lau] e Naaa po vor va uà Jas ofS fu] alas Daaa 
Jjexso WL Uja aed flo Jian hoN bu] ope ob Je] 99 
Jua. uou Naa a op oll sse) Jän flo obo] Lanao, 
Jancis flo jamol ous Ss pry Olaus um Nusawo Jla ex 
SAL ur «Qo 99 pop Jac) dan ofXac Nae Jeso o) 05 


1 Ti Do pelvo | Vo: --—» itis, Sl eo oa eae D bos LE om 
a D GS. — 7, Tf wàless*s |) artes s.d emo po S20 ES I CS lo di 
Ides eos — 11, ove — qu) onm. — En E bees. — lw D por — Fs G> 16, p Teta 


inasmuch as she was xo firm, that blessed man, whenever the visions pressed 
hard upon him. used to come to her as to a strong person; and while | was 
there, he eame; stricken and smitten in his mind and perturbed. Aud 
when she saw him she understood; and she asked him « Why are vou 
distressed. father? » But he continued saying : « The fiends have been 
mighty and have taken away my wits. sinee the whole week we have been 
more than ordinarily involved in a struggle: and this night and day they 
showed me terrible sights of fear, and my heart was shaken and my wils 
were taken away and I was confounded; and [rom fear D Hed: and Tam 
afraid to enter my cell on account of the sights thal 1 saw. And now I will 
leave that place». She on hearing it shook her head, saving : « Come see 
persons that are called men, and not only men but. also Christ's bondmoer. 
Is it right that vou should be called Christs bondmen? You have in this 
way reckoned Christ vour Lord to be feeble, and by vour own Trailty have 
made the mighty and invincible power of Christ, which cast down and 
overthrew and brought to naught all the power of Satan, appear less than 


haol the tai. so that Clivisionow Scenis tobe a rüniwax ain one that 


[355] LIFE OR SUSAN. 307 
ECT QaasNaago Jasy g0, [rads pr00 Moos Lanan fac paias fini 
aaoh, pl, odis oal pel fans] "Joi, ot. usoyo Lind. 
JLS Nors Nas [s nas] SM wars Laser. >; dau dads 
wx. sana LAS "boa JN SA al JEL Lasse MESS "ISIN b. 
Llo ^N.oo ono dX eoa Jass Loora Nol, ‘JLo Jlasos “Nooo aga 
bipul Lano feos fias Larose ulanan bene ILa oer fe] I». 
"E JAn JLN? TORS qa "n - JM fdsaad oaa, 
ered Yoo Lans H mtd ma vo RD OOl haa jipa „loa J>? 
ya-2a yao Laan sass Lha oaa Sx fusadds Nol T 
O0 A300 fancy oi us LOS | so Mia] Das ooo . ye 
Apan —30 Joa sanw ey + :JANG [9 ANS o -— MT e ^i sad x! 


L lins. >. - 2. D aad de soo D or Aawa. — 5 Line. TENERE an ee od 
om. 6., G Mote boaa, — 7, Dosing. — 8, D soto loisolo. — 9. B. ins. om. — 10, B Loo bebe N 
a) ee e dee for bre — dL E Lin — 12. p qix cx» Sa haag asl. — dag d pl o. 


14. E ew. i». E baw. Ie. EK 5l. 


ean be overcome by the demons. and they are found to be strong and 
vanquishers of the power of God. Tow are you a disciple of him who said : 
1»? 


‘Ye shall trample on all the power of the enemy ` Forgive me, our father. 


You have distressed me by causing the fiends to rejoice. TIF necessary, 


were it not for other reasons ^, you should only last night have been hearing 


the shapes * and voices of the struggles of the demons which they showed 


me, and have been marvelling‘ at them. Aud for my part l know that the 
Lord's power surrounds my weakness like a wall of bronze. and there is 
no other power that can resist it». While the weak woman was boldly 
saying these words in our presence, we looked at one another, while she 
did not see either of us. Then she said confidently to the blessed man 

« In the name of the Lord Jesus Clirist rise and return to your cell: and 
he as his custom is will make all the power of the evil one weak before 
vou >. But. the blessed mau, being struck with shame at the woman's 


words and trembling greatly from his shame, consented to go. And. when 


L Lake, x. do. — 2; B. ome. probably Decisis the seribe did nob amderstamd these very obscure 


words. ber oye dollowimg B has EP. — a. Sie ayr —5. Or would have anuvelled . 


IGN TOUN OE SIL ies [356 
SDN giallo qo [EN Xaar.s AdaN Ge qao 75s “Nyy Dao 
Jsa ‘JNissags oio 1-9 JaN JE hals Pes kolaa ha 
AA lal QE doar £D ga x26 ad > "eM Joor vl «^? 90 
M nae: on Jes] e XC NSAZS we) wi Du SS vaso Soa x3 
vom "ja lsa ots RX roy Qo; Sd ve alaan Ms ota 
«| feeds a Nal css phere NS st ran [a09 Jaia aano 
eK] Jh uduh Jia ON aal Goo DA LD al la lo 
wet Vt kpaa pans J| og "Esse of Ja: Jlj «30 cowl J, 
Ja... o: O-O al e La-5e Loon] Sudsos rem 
3 l qo tats tan Jurado oi doKs; lila 1120 304.3050 


Joris Jl — 


urni ilada rduisaba hard) Ain 
SEQ: code 


|l. Li lee Sato Ww al oo loo 130223 Qo. 2. Here the extract in Doends, — 3. P ins. ew 
6o |o sawo 2. Tone. om n Bin. beas — ee Te ISvs,os. S.B sS — Sh Pon, — 
lu. B een lo. — 11. B eet o 02s Loil added in Bn — 18, B bas — qa K Ll — gà 
ol anwso, — I6, Mss unii 


we had risen up from before her and were speaking aud expressing astonish- 
ment at her spiritual. strength and her courage, | said to hin : « How is 
it that this blessed woman's face (z225zov) is not visible?» He on his side 
sail to me: « One day while we were speaking I said to her : * Vor what 
reason do vou hide your face from us? And she made oath to ine, saving : 
Me whe by his grace laid his voke upon me kuows, our brother, that since 
| took his veke upon me, which is to day twenty-five vears ago. E have uot 
seen a man's face (zz55e9z], and do you desire me to sve yours now)’, and 
| on my side said to her : *For eur Lord's sake tell ine the truth, Are 
vou for your part afraid lest vou should voursell sulfer harm from the sight 
of a man, or lest he should suffer harm from the sight of you ^ And she 
suid ^ For both reasons’. » And thus in astonishment at the saints habits 
of life and the endurance of Susan the virgin of Christ we departed. from 


that place. praising God. 


Phe history of a blessed virgin of Ghrist whose name was Susan’ is ended, 


|. Me. tu 


[357] LIFE OF MARY. 559 


rhusaba (nha pias) rf dua aah 
srchblar’ vou 


n am- hja Joco: Jab flo] s. Jod. oo T Naso loo Ji 

haao cy Jio JARAS Loot flros lass “yous haa» hi 
nos DNSIaso feat Jian Hl de Jigs 9 ad - [ras,0 
foot. Il la] ha ha was JNa} 566062422 oo lo "loot 
Je Joa JA; [si Jamo a JA vo ol loa eá NS] paras [si 
Ivo lao JE [1s <>? Lass. + Jor saan cooiksyoy [sea Ns 
|a. Lis QD LOHAN uot e JN sed) eil «M ooo mt |» |l ba 
fan o JNa loa jane hawo otloprartds p0 oo wM) pan 
p loa jaia aa Xo je» aa brads do fea Sh Alas Ks 


L Ms. 069 — 2. Ms, om. — 3, l'oint. follows in ms 


NEXT THE TWENTY-EIGUTU HISTORY, OP THE BLESSED MARY THE ANCHORITE. 


Therefore neither was the history of this holy Mary unworthy of almi- 


"5 ISSansá 


ration, a woman who by nature only bore the form of females, but herself 


also too bore in herself the character and soul and will not ouly of ordinary 
men, but of mighty and valiant men. 

This blessed woman therefore also was the daughter of distinguished 
persons and a high family (yévoz) in. the world. Now there was a great old 
man of God who was living as a recluse in a village bordering ou their village, 
a man far advanced in years; and to this saint the blessed. womau's people 
used frequently. to come, she being with them, when she was ten years 
old. And, when the damsel saw the serions character of the old man, 
solemn feeling was stirred in her mind, and she despised all the world with 
all that is in it, meditating in herself aud saying : « Lo! they are rich who 


I. Me. onn, see Dutrod., pe ix. 
PATR. UR — P. AVH — P, T. 37 


neo TOTES EUIS IS 358 | 


cro fy dogs garor JERS Gouda] cea Jon Jalo Haars hasni 
Jahal of NA e as] tay bo Ld) qi ad ues» aa pad 
asauifo salas oto las JA ody; Jilass j> aoon pa.colo 
Na oo auas JR puss INS odas }sopd0 oda S), o1 alol Lil 
ba Lasas voe jad “iar ja gels eue joao ..o JAM 
AS crass J HY li» DA Jlaouicoo a voia] Jhowrg 
Yoo MM Kul oras sos HEX y <2! Do ANa «30* ORDO oo» Sd 
Suse uM unus ot oot hapa a schoo J Law ha yl y [ise 
ret C309 Jor Law, 2ootor2on [os «oo waslo «fr ts us JM 
Kase xo jaa, JNa qo amas Namo -JNa ons uus 
drat] Jlosiusoy Luiols Lotro Jlad eso jroo p> Kuyiao Mafra Jens 
JR asfsas c1). o! ooo sape LHD ooo who ado Oja HD eo} 
DAMA iN as lex a loot Lanai J| soo .Jprawy Lasoo [FEY 


1 Me. ont. € init. 20 A vonstructio 2:à gauze, bos, the object ot tlie Web. being understecd 


from Hol. — 3. Ms. wih pomt s. 


possess the world that passes not away for ever and ever, not we wretched 
persons among whom, as soon as a man has become rich and! proud and 
boastful, and believed himself to be lord of his own riches, death has come and 
east him down into sheol, and others have taken away his toi in which he 
toiled from his childhood even to his death, and which has perhaps been 
ainassed by sin. and the sin has remained with him, and the riches have 
become the property of others. Lo? then the things that are in this world 
are all deceit and vanity. For what reason do we not voluntarily leave a 
thing which we mus! in any ease leave even if we do not desire 112 and for 
what reason do we nol become as this old man?) Tis not this? a human heng: 
Far be it from me henceforth to let the world deceive me, and refrain from 
following the course of life of this old man ». And from that. time the 
dameel’s mind became inflamed. and she cut herself off completely from eating 
flesh and from drinking wine; and she began to fast and pray, and to run 
in the road of excellence. Bat her people, when they saw these things, 
used to reprove her, und to press her to continue eating lesh and drinking 
wine: and she would not obey, having east her body. and? all the enticements 


of youth, and the adornment of childhood behind her, and begun to walk 


Ll Msc iiir his man is not’. — 3. Ms. om, 





[359]! LIFE OF MARY. 56] 


JN; Los Niao lacs Lawo | jasadna, JXulaw eN 
Load Loot jaza, x DA Jl Nae -Jaano fanl, 
azs >a noaio xa Ao [529 n5 pel asa ANS ca i 
pA yaw, 1250 voti] Jos fico od) lo Jl ssa LOO ay 
eM oo poaso Sep gyJlo oM syal [sas Jlo od pass 
Nay .JLoN-s>0; Lasag wthivreo ANM apia LAI pO eee 
oò b] Jamas Ll) eR do Mlapa “olf Jl Jose] ooo JKussag 
JN Hy o9 Ao aloa fasams :]lo. So Jaco [atopy JE 
Janis cuau, Jlaz» jo] Janma lo Meo Jlaclas GX Loa Jl, 
yl Loa J ANS case Njoo «Sos joa <2 Passo hany Lupas 
NS.a.ao das) JL9.20 J Jera Nyy lo asl Naas OOP a8} Lanta; 
doro oà Laa P Lasa} ad Adas es haana} 
Las Jaco jaws hulas o] T LNN: Nao flaSso Jlopypsso Lad 


I. Ms. om. o inil. — 2. Ms. ms. wadi. — 3. Ms. L. 


soundly in the lofty road of anchoritism and asceticism. Since she had been 
betrothed by them toa certain rieh man, they began as people of the world 
to be distressed and to think thoughts which were not theirs only but those 
of the hater of good things also as well, « Let us rise and make a wedding- 
feast for her, lest she run away and go fo a monastery, and we lose the man 
who was to fake her to wife ». And. when they on their side had beguu to 
prepare and make ready the thines required for the wedding, the blessed 
woman beeame aware of it and said to them : « Do not tail! to no purpose 
and lose your money ; for my part l hope in him who invited the pure and holy 
and virgin to recline at his eternal wedding-feast that ceases not that E shall 
make no bodily partnership, nor corrupt the purity of my sont by fleshly 
conjunetion with a mortal man ». But, when this incited these people all 
the more, so that they met together (7 in order to constrain her, she left 
them and went fo a monastery: and she shaved her head and took the habi 
optus). Aud from that time she took that holy old inan as her model i252 
in all things, in standing and abstinence and vigils and cating once in three 


days. while she also made for herself a hair-sliirt and sandals (22292222). and 


1. Ms. chament’. — 2. This ts perh. corrupt. 


SE 


562 JOUN OFP EPHESUS. 300] 


akaw JD Gol hasi Nolo) Loo [soo Qo DLO ol pə Of 
juro acs so eae OU NUS IO ee SC <~) wath d m : Liss Jie 
JLa-a e bales alo . (Joar) JNa; flonan na » |] PENES fans] .:Joot 
SpA28e JH] - Loot Lao Daw Jlds ac p Now ssh] jasan fate 

NJ aae NLD ce Dd loa |» erento Seed. ] -20:o 
JM. MXAaose aon “Kosovo als Jan): Losol5 NS | UU MY 
shaada Kasulllo ..ony20n 


Sm Aa join hanap durd) An 


apinn rals (axha pimsi) dus 
v rumaa 


;J Naa eol AN Ne» go ce! — j -xax land T’? «2 


Lasan] i] Vlas Joot 4 Supe] eal haas rannd.sor o ons re 


|l Ms om, * Me. with s ting @ ch Ws. om. — i. Ms. tadi% eps — h Ms. with slop. — 
b. Ms. itis. hals qw a uja jadaiws. 


moreover from the first day on whieh she received the mark never again cul 
her hair. so that it became loug and abundant, until it was wound. ronud 


great 


her four times up and down, so thal at last (it is said) Dt became! ae 
weight. And she also distinguished herself in the conflict (ayer) of persecution 
for fifteen years, no longer passing mievlit-vieils, bat vigils lasting even it 
week. and ten divs, and then she would taste something. And, when she 
had walked strongly and heroically in the roal of righteousness for 
thirty vears, she linished her course and received the crown? earned by her 


life, and fell asleep in peace. 
The history of the blessed Mary the anchorile! is ended, 


The TwENTY-NINTUCS! miS Ton, O° Marinas TOE MENDICANT AND STRANGER, 


Once when we were in our convent adjacent to the eity of Amida’, before 
ih was driven into banishment by the heretics, at the lime of the second 
he AIs om cm E Ditties oe eet ADS oom TE incerti: See Introd... qp» XE. 1. Ms. 


soc Mar’. The name Malkha dees nol oceur gti the chapten = M~. rns. wrilten hy Mar Jobn of 


Asia’. — 6. UL p. 22V. 


[361] LIFE OF MALKIA. 563 


ADI pant} ws lllo aol] poo xd raio Hp LL joa 5 
JKasaaks ES joa yao . S. S Ns Jad Joa Mauls y fusy o>; ud 
+> haao hasas Nolar Jes Jp Ene wasdso fle Q5 Joao Lais 
~~ Joa wake sachs orsa S eset fo T Nail] Jasinas) Kaano 
op pa aa Nas 36 ar gaai] SoN aas Jla .. Js sno 
ooa opolo e sib asya] o0), Jprsoio alasi | opan] 
od oo ahoo ipaa uao] JN, LN Laua] Lo han hiad 
<? o0 i15] yeso SUNL Lau <>? „plo o Joa Sfasdo pæl, 
wha] Los Laras] apao UN waaa of pS] alio joo ikia Ke 
ul fas] er D usi HI] foldle a Ludo! Jal Qo oA l 
Sp Nul Ips pen] io de Lacan So JAN pag, bide 8 cet on 


J Ms, Sewwblo, — s; Me. om. c — i o fins seems do have been erased and written again in marg. 


— ^, See p. 306, note, 


Theshri* a certain stranger arrived among us, clad m dirty and much-worn 
raiment; aud, when he had been received and been required to anathematize 
the heresy that prevailed at that time, as it was the custom to require, he 
stood with us al vespers and at table in silence and without speaking, now 
and again looking furtively to heaven. And so, when he had been hospitably 
received and his soul had been refreshed, he simply refrained from couver- 
sation and tilled his month with? thanksgiving. But some of the honse- 
workers (2)", when they saw his habit (oy%y2) and his dowuward 
looks and the indication provided by Ins practices, recognised his character 
and said to the rest, « This stranger is in truth a servant of God ». And 
the man who said it himself eame up and continmed asking him and saving : 
« Whence comes your holiness, father? ». But he continued looking down- 
ward and sighing. Ue says to him : « Forgive me, sir. 1 an a miserable 
stranger ». Tle says to him : « All of us, father, are strangers, and so: 


journers*. Bat we wish to learn whence vou come ». But he on his side 


]lL. Nov. This must he the 27 expulsion, since 2. did nol enter the monastery before the first. The 
date ds therefore 540-6; see Intro, p. tv. — 2. Ms. om. — 3. Lit. those of my lord's bouse’. V. D. 
and L. render | domestici: bnt were there domestici in a iionaslery ? From p. 565 they seen to have 
heen an inferior class of menu, vet ab p. 853 they are associated with the arebimandrite, Ehe ba. give 
ne help. Thes were perh. novices or lay monks who were required to perform certain menial ollices; 
ef. p. 280. The faet diat they recited. serviee p. 3645 is hardly decisive: against this. since we find 
the laymen Abraham p. 4121. and Tribunus (eli. 55 reciting sovice. They perle derived their name 
Irom being specially «attached to the archimandrile. — 4. Gen.. ANUL 4; Lev., xxv, 23. Ps. XXAIX, 


I TIebrs XI 


VW. aper . 
Pale Ae tg 


tis JOHN OF EPHESUS., 21 


oq CRT e Me 20 aal} jas e! oed hasop> Ks! Jens, 
Laai Less? mY JNaos Mas, DSN bd shu] oue Jor pao fools 
mol wlll e eX haag bars cor er dor M Joab, q+ Dy PPA he 
aD yl yore Loo] [S yl „JNa of Nao LL? frscie uao 
Jel o Jlaskl> ooo va 2 Noo polis ! sol js joa Kul < fos) ` 
Lo eo oao ooa gaano hasto iNo Aufsopoy 
v5 Ja dà 5e ]Le:& s Lasoo -pa een Sol Loaptsee .ooo! eS 
Joa otolo Jando ye buio], Jol! 3e» La Laad owo nA poo „O00 
aaao Jo :, Na. Nans JJ ases Shwo oaa filo Naa, AQdas 
oaas Jars Jl. Dahl) ss] Da Jpn Q0 So I ALAD 
yl Kijarss haao .eNoasN S vaio] Sx Saito o> yt -| yko; 
e haao Laraos Xo joo was; boe Jats T Joa xvas ssl Jh 


1,M. om — v2 Us JLawls. — 3, Stop follows in ins, 


sad : «€ Why?) What need is there to inquire? When you see that (am a 
son of Adam, know that Tam dust like Adam who was taken [rom dust, and 
upon whom through his sin sentence was given whither be should return. 
Lo! E come from him if vou wish te learn; for E have no other place here : 
but pray that F may have one ». These things that blessed man said with 
emotion when he was questioned, and ceased speaking. And so a place was 
prepared for him according to the custom in the case of strangers, and he 
fell asleep like. evervone else, gut there were some whose sleep was 
wakeful, and whe used to watch the brotherhood, who* after the house was 
at rest would stand in different places, while some bowed themselves down. 
and some knelt, and some again went outside, and so knelt in corners (ovt) 
and in corridors (52227, and praved; and they saw that this blessed man fron 
the weariness caused by his journey Tell asleep at once: and again it happened 
that in the middle of his sleep he raised his head and saw that the servitors” 
were not vet gathered in and all had not fallen asleep, and he waited a 
short time: and. when he saw that everyone was gathered in, that he might 
nol show himself to be up. he wrapped himself in his coat, and fell upon 
his faee on his rug: and this while he was weeping gently that no one 


might hear, until he heard the sound of the first bell while the blessed men 


1, se. the brotherhood, a~ Ure eratumar shows: ef. eli; 35. — 2. See p. 62, t. 2 


[3637 LIFE OF MALKHA. 565 


A-o [saa Ceo waa yoo LNA owes ‘jlo Jaca? o2 Aan 
jp Joa »Le asao wa Me MÁira. Jos od pelo SUN aA NS ors) 
Jes [sep sor Q2 wor Cok .asraso px Mus; aaao poo wail So 
oia SI Janso yanas Jl: uo p> uaia] Da jys, jo Joo fats [asoc 
aa Jpn Dos he fared Laan allo Adrsih! soais, boop 
oo Las] y Joo joe; o cod] waaa o£ Mus, [ops Jk 

s) ha Woo -fajofs rans 2x) ily aoo kx] 2 
«2.02.34; 000 wi o5 LA. 22cm, Jes ok! c «^ot ees. 
Lea ae: Jpn Laos aso Jia JEANS Joo may we? hasas asa ds ond 
Jw oras ofS M» e» A (Esos) OD) Jeans oes o) «Se lo Joa 
"La? a aas oA «2l Jaso TORE, ota. 24] TEN ETEN 
l "ISl Nog Las) Jos sud o prolo JE] cor oot Je aa pd |» 


1. Ms. wilh point. — 2. Mz. om. slop. — 3. See p. 306, nole, — ^. Ms. om. — 5. Ms, with pointe. 


See p. 506, note. 


were marking him the whole night. And, when he heard the sound of the 
bell, he stretehed himself on his rug. and was rising with everyone else just as 
iL he had been heavily sunk in his sleep. And, when the houseworkers had 
risen and recited the service’, the same agam went on Ull morning, and thus 
he would weep lying on his face, in order that he might not rise and show 
his labour to auvone, until his eves became swollen and greatly inflamed. 
And in the morning, when the archimandrite? and the “houseworkers also” 
saw his eves, they say to him : « What has happened to your eves, our 
father? », But he on his side said to them : « The air (243) of vesterday 
alfected me on the road, and therefore my eves swelled’ ». But. those 
who had seen the manner in which he had been emploved all the night 
continued saving « Leave the blessed inan alone ». During the day he went 
out into the precinct of the monastery, and found a concealed spot, and 
there he bowed himself till the midday hell’, while they were seeking him 
all over the monastery: and then as they were going round they found him 
bowed downand weeping. They say to him: « Be so good ® as to go in, father: 


for the arehimandrite is asking for vou ». Ille came; and the archimandrite 


said to him : « Where have you been, father? ». He says to him 
I. Se. noclurns. He was no doubt sleeping in the chapels see p. 201, 225, 253, — 2 Abba; see 


ch. 58. — 3. Lit. ‘rest of the houseworkers'. — 4. Ms. om, — 5. Se. for sext. — ^. See p. 79, n. 2. 


and Addenda lo part i. 


"t 


TEG JOHN OE EPHESUS. an^ 


oV pel ds] Mood Jiwo Aca yha, Do JN PRE uM Ware LO 
eon Js) Bt ups Igy SGT fells AE See EP eigenen 
Kaas dace bes yoo antsy .flsax cde wander © al £29 
Naps plo Jost wanao voids! Xx MOI vof oot Je yl Joan 
Kasil’ n lass Mas kaag T% pado ANAL] Mod aua Agito} 
mall, updo Mac, ja» Rad) AS wane AD Ce J] awado 
-vanagl! lo ot SS vw 150 "genes all] [ioo JNa uhSaalso 
Jura QNS JXasasl r3 JusaJ wr og Js yl jana, Hare 
Lay Lasag Laad woes! canis pa aseo Ny.) pane gor vd 
JL spond Jadu aS malay updo ars lo [Kaas foot IX 
Joe p00 eo ful broad) CSS Annas ot “Jh yai 
lle updo aaoo aapaldi piso anaa asja Jl asao 


-1 wot SS Laa sadis JL «DO wA 0,9 Nl JI colo bl Ssy'l Jl = 


v 


l5 erased. — 2. Ms. oi. stop. 


« Forgive me, sir. D was going round the garden and seeing the trees. ». 
The archimandrite says to him: « I also know that vou desire to see the 
trees of the warden, father » Then with the usual kindness he bade him, 
inasmueh as he was worn out with labour, go to rest before the vesper hour, 
But he [ell on his face aud continued. entreating and saving : « Because | 
was greatly worn out. yesterday, I both ate inordinately last night and 
caused a pain di my stomach oranges: but Jor God's sake allow me to 
wait with the honseworkers, iu. order. ihat my previous. food may 
divest itself, and so go to rest with them ». And. when he had pressed 
him strongly and he would not give way, he allowed him. to do as he 
wished. And the blessed man. when the service was over, went to the 
eorner yoviz) Where he bad been hefore: and so with lis hands stretched 
out to heaven in the form (z2xo2) of a cross he continued erying with tears 
and saving : « Who is there, my Lord, who is sullicient to entreat thee 
for me the sinner, except thy great. mercy that is poured ont npon our 
race (yévog)? Tam ungrateful. my Lord, and a provoker. Come, 1 pray, to 
my aid. Abandon me not, | pray thee, inv Lord. Save me, niv Lord. 
and let me be at peace, before | go and am no more. Save my life from 
the corruption ofmy sins, Lord my God. 7 Be pleased, Lord, to deliver me’! 


I: zs XD. ds 


[3657 LIFE OF MALKHA. 267 
«0o „ha fra dry oda nas soo JL es. A. to wAd}o} «x0 ila, aD | prev 
DA -pasantse Qoo, [op pad ao) jonas XX yawio oi: wo 
MA [ar> KNS aa Lasa 129 T x0? SZ! fro ons 
ol o € ol ARD Jasmis Mo, Joa paramo :0à Lasag Joo Jr 


9 


No ooa 4.39740 JN e| Na cin! (969 «ax AD cA Ss 
i398. JNSE ur NS Jo yop) woan ctas. qzioilo ot eL 
vM KAAS ox Mas) o] Jiwan vooo 2oomopsac fpa e 
Joico pansy o jas .JlosN aso, Jiso, iho ooi, Maa "onse. 
laz. NC Joa has fia MM ood JNa, dpaado Jisan ons 
JN So Hine?) Ja. se DA esso V bl aD velo Jen 
eR Ro y? Neo Jen: Mod 2M» [ao NM . [ajaoso Joho, 
La Joo L? Nja so yas wire Qd Jobo ba Joal sal, 
Las L-—- «9"J bl fire s2 HO EX lil "oo le „alas 


|. Ms. with points. — 2. [n marg. — 3. i lekter added later. — t. Stop follows in ms. — 5. * om 


erased. 


from the confusions and falseness and the decettfulness of this world, and 
from all that is in it; and have merey upon me in the day of thy judgment, 
with all the rest of thy servants, for the sake of thy hoty Name, my trust 
from my boyhood ». While that blessed mau was thus mightily erving 
with many tears, and thought that there were no persons near or seeing 
or hearing him, some men were stauding behind the wall; and listeunig 
to the sound of his sighs, and marvelling at his sorrow and tears before God. 
After three days, when he had seen the doings and practices of the convent, 
that even the very houseworkers also were eager to run with all thetr might 
alter practices of excellenee, he made up his mind to pass the winter in the 
sume convent, aud at the coming of the milder season to return to the same 
mountains. And he came to the archimandrite and said to him : « For my 
part, sir, f intended on account of my bodily weakness and fear of the winter 
and the cold to go down to the south; and, since perhaps our Lord sent me 
to be with you this winter, if itis convenient to vou [will stay with vou tliis 


winter; and, if so be | am alive and our Lord is willing, in Nisan! E will 


l. April. 


S IONN OF EPHESUS, 366] 
Joa Kul loas ba sh DAS ‘as laxas oa haa lolo < [Fer 
Joasi Laua) Joo bo’, J pazo while JRGtea NS Lop, ALAS 
`a Je a yl ere Wa AA Xena so P? œ> ooo! xr 
Ar S Ls'lo IRIS) Jooly yas] q| aaan "eM «le 
Neaase Lose Mas Harps JO. rt KOO JNA5laso pd d.20.20 
Noro ya ty E ol [aso assi aama fla .5 .Joor Daia Maas 
IE a aa y Line alaaa e 
Awa «3e J No wes > Laaro .falso NAAN oni Vo Joo pend 
Joo mar e Di Py JN Jl .|Muyolo las, J Bl log Faso Ji 


«^? 90 J vos-so Jiss LAA Danad, fsokuols Ja alo £505 


aoaaa, ".,35] c Joa assiso Joo Dau coda] Sax Jo; Jlaarasas 


]. e added Later, — 2 We. ius. 039) — 3. Ms. om, — 4. Stop follows in ms. — 4. Ms. om. slop. 


return toward the north». And the arehimaudrite and all the other members 
of the convent also rejoleed, stice this was indeed there custom (252), that, 
if a stranger wished to stay as long as a year and two years and ten, they 
rejoiced over. him, honouring him iu. every respect like the archimandrite, 
And they consented and they say to him : « We beg you, our father, to he 
with us! aud edify us by the sight of you, and by vour helpful conversa- 
tion». And from that thine he determined to remain; and so he thenceforth 
doubled his labour. keeping silence and hiding his head and weeping. 
Even when cating and sitting at table, even so also his tears could not be 
restrained, but he would eat and how his head down and weep; and so no 
words came rapidly out of his mouth except prayer and thanksgiving, and 
unceasing sighs. When some time had passed, those who cared about 
methods of life, and judged and repelled their thoughis, used to go and beg 
him one by one to tell them a rule of life and an illustration of the method of 
contending against the thoughts of the rebellious fends. But he in great 


humility would fall upon his face and make entreaty, saying : « Forgive me, 


l. Ms. oin. 


————— —— 


[367 LIFE OF MALKHA. 569 


yl HAS, MS uka aal Io adr» D'o SE a ee 
was! ! aaas JN. NL Oly Leana klisak = ana 24] ADO 
lex.» L| facto papa waco Jor; alpa fuss] 4m wx sd] 
Jpn gto INe +20 AM» ajo aaan SA Pl fal SK. TAE: 
! Ja yo Jans fo] Js oa fd axo] c Sos Jens aœ Joo S 
„ooul, ad [Avo haa ow Jul .ofSs prod) fapa yar sods Jie Jaz 
«3| ooul l aA, ga £3 eed aA Jul e—.2 flo 
Dopad «3230 wil flo oa Joo Ay Sno "esl adl oM 
asl Wy SLE Jor Wy Joao JEU Suse JI Slo Jad p (oo »3 Las 
säl Dawo Mass Jilele wpa jlo roku] cisely pel asso 
racy -.actlad Jas PA Mira pad works! ba OX as aos ld 
Naaa? flo coz wasi] ow Ja .od [wan <H! „alaaa, Lions 
Rado wusi] ow J po Ja sia) < J pohly + wa Ow eM Arabe gin FINIS es 


l. Final leller. prob. = erased, — 2. Mz. om. slop. == 3. See p. 306, note, — ^4. stop follows in rus. 


brethren, lor tam sick, and pray for me; and, seek not such things at the 


hamls of me a simmer. xe persuaded by the blessed apostle who sacs T 


aman hath not been able to rule lis own house aright, how is he eapable 
of ruling God's cliureh ? '..— And now 1 for my part am sitting in the darkness 
of sin: but show vour love and pray for me », And, when the arclimandrite 
often pressed him to speak. he himself said to him at last : « Father. show 
vour love to God and pray for me, with all the rest of vonr convent. For as 
lor me the day has come for me to set out on my journey, and f am not 
sufficient for it ». They, thinking that he meant « | am setting out for the 
mountains », say to him : « Rest vourself, our father. HM ts still winter and 
no man eii set out on a jouruey to-day ». He sars to them weeping : 
« Nay indeed, the winter has not vet come, but it is just coming; in which as 
vou say no man can either set out on a journey nor vet work?. And now, my 
fathers and my brothers, pray for me. This is my convent; for God sent me 
to vou, that through the remembrance of your petition 1 may tind merey in 
that dav. My sins have overtaken me and I could not see it. My brethren. 
prav on inv behalf, that 1 may escape from the torment. The end has 
overtaken me, and the day after to-morrow [| shall depart from this life to 


|. I Tin, i11, 5. — 2. John, ta. 4. 


So Ul 


570 AON OFE EPHESUS. [308] 


es Sad D] salas Da Ax lac B] hace Go del v0 pur 


«MSN t. SEI PASO «oil Slo EES OO, Ce MALA DJs ! anise M 


AS perge, Nae hanaan De anainn “fur Laas asado Kokal 
os] oa Sas eN] Gee Xo “hass 2o Jw coh! 
KS pol le vad] ba seo coulis Le) S qeu] aaao 
Laa NDN; Joot Wal Uusso aanas wot "yor JNa ere oe ols 
QAM Li] ee Jor fag’ KOALAD 119 aaa Jaca Joal Hy No 
CANIN QHD! «Ml J| sons fu] S336 asso ad je OSSA) eot 
x) Was Ji Aa Jl Ji Prd} 9 oo Reo Ne Sas colt! 
cok] A x» ^ bso Joss. ero oe Ns * Lao} a0 elaz; 
ANS eR Spay Lao «Do M oy JSSNS o8 KAS, ass + eNO bo 
«eM ha al Colo que] oò eMe JLo so RAG IE 5 NS. Iso: 
«M Colo Jato Jord yy vaol Daad Jo; 2e JDO ig hai, 


I, stop follows iu nis; — 2. Ms. wilh ponle. — 4 Ms. «eot — ^. Me. oti slope — D. Ò erased. 


our Lord, Accordingly L entreat you one aud all to make entreaty on my 
behalf: and vou vourselves also, my brethren, be strong. You are running 
well’. Perform this your life-service unto the end; for in every matter about 
Which vou concern vourselves there is one object that is sought. You know 
ally vou are perfect in all; and vou are able to admonish others also. And 
therefore, my fathers and brothers, inasmuch as a few days ago also your 
afection required of me to speak these words, now in order not to be 
ugraleful for your alfeetion and vour good will, lo! | put you in mind of 
these your principles, not teaching vou, but? things on which you are 
meditating at all times, ‘Onr Lord is at band. Be anxious for nothing, 
but always let your pravers and requests be made known before God *. 
For, "when ve see all these things, know that it has reached the door’ *. 
For from this time we must truly know that it has reached the door; for 
the word of him who said it is not falsified. And again we know that this 
also is written, “There is great fear of falling into the hands of the living 


God ^: and again ‘We shall alf stand before that dread jadgment-seat (577) 


|. Gal, v, 7. — 2. Se. ‘pul you in mind of’. The syr. is confused. — 3. I'hilipp., 1. 5, 6. — 
4. Matth.. xxiv, 33. — 5. Hebr.. x. 31. 


[369] LIFE OF MALKIHA. al 


* 


na ADHD eel ET Rady clo xd: d TAN LAM) dors pos 
y^M Les oğ nd NO pS JNa, J NS cy "INS Wr" nd CERES UNDE 
— ese JLo sooi] os valo oss ss Lasan u rae — So 
rp rokso ol pO Pa JRxe oà _ JLasklo ro oS oL "oot 
wad Nal way: poly ans Lag Ni, asso clad cd 2.05; SengMso aL 
Nod ea Ns M Mi ea V pel win! Was Jo Qin qo Nac»). lo 
lal SS cure AP Na VEM ypo SP Sö aaa 
was So "fond Noe Jaang od ype aasa pa Jason c3 
Phan [A-2056 buys 0045 ede Caco Ji v re J ol x 
oà ‘AND: Lanal oà Qo da cjolaugo 47 [allo ais «ors! 
JR ues Jl 2o RADNER LOOK JN sas palo Nl sess > wy Jh 
eden» 06 Laag To dor Sacer pa JNa JAMxsop»o [No 


I. Ms. sing, — 2. Stop dollows in ms, =-=.. Ms. 0% — '. M> IB oa Ma. 2B. — og Willi point. 


— 7. Ms. ins. ee 


of righteousness, that each one of us may be requited For that which has been 
wrought by hin, be it good or be it evil. Let us think upon these things, 
niv brethren. Let us, my beloved, fear the dread final hour. Let us dread 
the moment when each one of us shall receive an account upon his fingers, 
and his hands shall be hung up and his neck shall be Fid bare and he shall 
be made an accnser against himself in the presence of justice. For who shall 
contrive a means of shunning or escaping that hour, since who is there who 
shall be hidden by his eloquence? * Who shall say « Thou art innocent, my 
heart, and thou hast been purified from sins » 2’? Accordingly, my brethren, 
inasmuch as we are all abundantly persuaded of these things, let them he 
depicted before our eyes at all times, and written on the tablets of our heart *, 


that so, while we rest before the grace that is lull of merev all the days of 


our life, even if we are not capable of doing aught else, al that moment of 


trepidation aud fear it may spread its wings and cover us, and we may by 
it be delivered from the eternal torment, of which we ought not to hear with 
indifference as if it were a tale, but with great fear and mighty trembling ». 


While then that blessed man was saying all these things in the presence 


1. II Cor., v, l0. — 2. Prov., 4 N, V. — 3. II Cor., tur, 3. 


TEST [ez 


E FONS OF EPHESUS. 370 


INN ba bars sfoor pe] AD 5e. Paa [55,50 JU 
Seder «dou: 09602 oA AL ag 4-2 aaa Od əl ra JH eo 
aA. Cased. INL INS Lol msc haio fl lois Jes. Loon: 
Pe Jla Mo qth [soar soos Casas bso ur 9 Jing? «e 
swans! col JAAN od = Lox Xs os Joa polo SN. "ol jo 
eu No, plo fas Doo LaL Japao yano JH of Jools 
roo easy Rs Rollo. QS w'yy JJ ha DSA wy No prsopo boy Jh 
Xa : aLL] Jsopnd0 Kol] an >pd0 £20 : Loot Jos vo DES D 
Jlo laio Jes jebe AN; aa So. oa el Jas au] 
AQAA d04.0 DIDE 2N SATA nu ad uM» aay wie! Joa jo Q5 las 
-M vaaan Jo; Lh] Il Laa oo oà oaa maad od pay ad 
Jal J lo robso aa Lass] Sans haaa ado ajs} Las; Je 
L| E» Po. sings (Sax SelA- Jos ex vaslady Sgro JH 


L M», e. — 2, Ms. wo. 


al us all amidst his many sighs, and amidst copious tears, with great emotion 
and with many sobs, be eaused us also to listen to hint i great astoutslimeut 
at him. since we saw that no sigu ol bodily infirmity was to be seen on him, 
and he contidently. pronounced that after three days be would depart. from 
the body. While we were thus gathered together, for two days and nights 
he sat and said the same things to us all; but on the thied night he again 
requested that prayer might be made for him and incense set, and he might 
receive absolution while he wept and said : «€ It is written * None that liveth 
shall be innocent before thee’'. Therefore we must not trust in ourselves. 
And. when we had all knelt, and praver had been made, and when the altar 
had been opened. aud incense set, and everyone was overpowered with 
sorrow on account of the words spoken, he was standing and weeping, and 
at last he continued erving to all of us : « My brethren, pray lor ine; for ] 
am not repeating niv. praises before vou: the who praiseth himself is not 
he who is approved. but he whom God praiseth’*. Upon me has come the 
eid of death: and human praise is no longer needed by me, nor yet honour: 


but, since God sent my sinfulness to vou to bury my body. 1 will not prevent 


xx te 2 TE Gor, X. 15. 


[371] LIFE OF MALKITA. 57: 


-1 


lise, .urods coohias 3a» pro alaaa vol SAO Lando 
Moo Je x sas0 Jed > Jaco] Los “Nol fasta wilo qA Ja 


Naas J ` yog Laaa Od Kao JI. Nian [acl £2 «9 [saui 
Loot Ji aul Nesey of dae hid DSS ji vlad co Jad 
ol haa a eel al WW Mo el mel ape Rell pel WI NS 
Jio shard WX you Karts fl pape oo Ol Js Pb col plo »woaok. ! 
Lisy Lor ud $06 ogo - Pese asado vos Sx Mas I 4pm 
adas J OS Sx wads "Migs JH Laual, Casado aS Mi! 
adaa lO vna: Of —d0 ahh bane od AX spo JU als 
Napa) Dado Doh LM jaf, fre yl de DNUS qoo 
Qo Jil ash way eoo ado aaa dot lau wa e el 
Njppa oos Wee a Ns cao eHL AN 0h LAN ausa 


L. Ms. om, t — 2. Ms; Neds corm Nol. 


any of you from knowing the things that he worked with me by his help all 
my days. Jt 1s to-day thirty-nine years that | have worn this habit (eju). 


ou monntains and in eaves and among men; aud, since T received the habit 


isyiuz), | have not possessed aught beside Christ. No lie has come out of 


my lips; I have not spoken evil words to men or reviled any man, My 
speech has been naught but as onr Lord sanl * Veamswea amba, nag " 
| have not said ‘Yea’ unless if was in truth * Yea’, nor vet ‘Nay’ without T 
also being true. 1 have not sought anything that would benefit me and harm 
another. Ihave not murmured against my God during my troubles and dis- 
tresses and he himself is my witness. This is the time during which amid 
the troubles of pilgrimage (evi) | have not murmured in my heart against any 
man who did not receive me and entertain me. The man whe reviled me 
and drove me away was not treated by me with less respect than the man 
who honoured and entertained me. And these things, my brethren, ] have 
repeated before you even as they are manifest before God, because | saw that 
these objects lie before vou too, and not in order that you may imitate me. 
but let us all imitate Christ our God the teacher of these things, because he 
himself truly taught this humility in his person, and showed it to ns. My 


L. Matth., v, 37. 


ET IOTA OT EPHESUS: (3721 
Laaa asade wOXS ad, d I (aluo QAM opealas ba hasas 
dase Wey yl hawai Max fad ws Ss ans diu Jos 
sot eo jus Ber wo wads, o foams BND .5 „>L wang lo ORO 
Sx 20 ma] [Naal ws saas [5] o polo Lasas Ss mW; 
su] Wo Was Jio JND «boot ho 20 Jaf yas! HRD - OFSAd 
Sada l> Luo «2»lle Laada 2022s] |N Jasco . N94 
Jasio, A w0, Sias -Latas TE aM. jos JN, Lizaso 
gea a N d Joi. L JNa oaa, opaa 


“ <o <] 
rama Wpimn ‘realni wdusrdh Ax 


Lo Step tellows 1H ms. 2. M-. JaXdtse o, 398 > M-~. ins. lels cin Qe uiad |552»x.. 


brethren, pray for me and abide in peace. God keep vonr community ». 
And the blessed man went into the vestry! in order to pray and stretched 
himself out awl day down there, while evervoue was looking for him lo come 
out. And the arehimandrite went in. amd saw him lying on a paving-stone 
and said to him: « Father, be so good? as to He upon a rug ». And, when 
he bad spoken to him, he gave np hiis soul to God. And on this happening 
erral fear fell upon everyone; and so in fear they brought the blessed man 
out; and he was buried with a great procession ol all the believers of the 
aityv. May God whom be served fora long terni of vears magnify his memory 
with that of the sainte who did bis will, and that of the holy God-bearer Mary, 


and mav we for our part be helped through their prayer, Amen and Amen! 


The history of? Maliha the mendicant and stranger’ ts ended. 


i House afi The cazensa Ch ae Ti eR p sns sand Addenda lo. parl ] — 3. Me. ats. 
Mar’. — 5. Me. ine. o writlen by Mar Jolin ol Asie. 


[3734 LICE OF BELIAH OF DARA. TUM 


ram enia mena riala sedih re dus sah | 
2s tl dua Aaa ram snadura + alr 


* * * * * * * + * * * * * * * * * * L] 4 + + a 4 * * * * * 


xao) p3 ool Jego ad athvas JK.sda.r. 001 seh! 

Le [easi] Jy00 yopud00 Le p3 Span? o1) las2í5 
Jun] Jic l2o95o0 Jja92o lx-s25 - copia} lioSw sos fa dsas pine : 
Noo odio alando «as; [LiazsJlo -aia sods [aso əl, 


Land 
~ 


Jul Ixi san uprads ow Jul x5 eanan, pl .5 was [toy 
Maui 3 qp Pwo 22e [sos jemM*392 haiio sags jisot sands 


QM £2 sok] S| RM lo; TE Ma Lasao Laansoo Larata] 


I. Supplied from the snbscription. 2. ines in later hand afler ©. 


NEXT THE THIRTIETH HISTORY, OF A MAN OF GOD WHOSE NAME WAS 


ERI wHo was IN Tue ermm EIE] ^ 


we arrived, in whose house we were with many others for some days, being 
amazed at the keenness of the man’s enthusiasm, as he stood and uttered 
anathemas and called the bishops as well as those who wielded the authority 
of the crown to their faeces impious men, renegades, and new Jews, insomuch 
that they wrote to the king about him. and he was driven into exile (202). 
And he left bis employment and his mansion? and all that he possessed, 
saving, « Let the impious men (ake? them; for my puti seek my Lord 
Jesus only »: and so he departed. And he completed) fifteen years in 
banishment, without diminishing the kindness to strangers aud poor men: 
and thus he ended his life in^ great distinction which surpasses description, 


his distinction not being one only. And out of liis praetives I have brirelly 


l. The beginning is missing. — 2. He was therefore nob a monk or hermit, hut a rieh man living iu 
his own house and employing himself in asceticism and charity hhe he heroes efeli i, = Aer fo 
fle correction in (he ims. c be sated with’. 


? 


BATH. OH. -— T. XVIII. — FP. 4. 38 


an JOHN GE EPHESUS [37^] 


<> bud Sess rd S salad Loop 30: x No] d on-so doo Suae O9 poe 
whi por uon Layla 


„id ram maxri roles reiala nbus d dale 
srčan maa mam smadura 


SUAM A Gad mama sm se pidhi rádusnáh aah 

dumade Sra omui. ehiad Yoana ule 

ra lw s.amner can Qaenduma aan ex hé 
“mranacha 


<= ES Jas NN es |o] 0999 Los] Ne». "aot Nea foo 

J lua Noe.» sos KOH D091 Jaa” ns Ss Joal, [3150 ANis 
[53MM wui 4 OHA AIH | >} dor J5 Naso, L^ Sx JI o? M15 
x?! Sora | 0A x] L-a- xt Jz3o “OOO Mee Jo 
LOHDA-D AADJO Je je eel «ooa 2 [12130 Zub L2 coo 


asa. .oo ssh lese. JLosl]l «c? aà „Naa oono p~ xo 


set down these, while fearing to be aceused an account. of those which I 


have omitted. 


The history of aman of God whose name was Elijah, who was in the 


city of Dara, is finished. 


NEAT FHE THIRTY-LIRSE HISTORY, OF TWO BROTHERS WHO WERE TRADERS, WHO 
BESIDE WORLDY TRADE ENGAGED MOREOVER IN. DIVINE ALSO, WHOSE NAMES 


ARE Erwan asp THEODORE. 


Since therefore 1t is our purpose to tell the stories of men who walked in 


the path of religion, and in the course of our history to make the glories of 


their practices known, accordingly neither have we kept the glories of these 
excellent men hidden, who in their garb (zyzgyx) were reckoned laymen aud 
traders, but were constantly occupied in the practices of angels. These are 
two brothers, and in the time of their boyhood they served for pay with 
traders. and travelled with them, each of them in his own direction, that ts, 


tothe regions of the Persians both of them. Aud they formed in their mid 


375, LIVES OF ELBA AND THEODORE. Dus 
JaN qoo c sos jeg aask lo JD NS ji (cones 
Calas] huas) vaol, cor Soy fopaso oor: pM x. ood 
| VE V. ERN qao „COO ened} L000 os Nna [soo forte 
ooo «4393 ere xo Looe sho wipe oou) Jos JI p20 Jaras jo 

„ekila Jox yea, re Wa loa Lya [Msias ^ Lao Srl ots 

xS Mufars [sss JR cae) ASH C50} cones 250.00 49 
«300 Joe «eo DAS J N32 ao x6 xr WH ADO Koons 
'laujas yoo So .|laso Jlas xo JLolsoo Johs xe Jose 
< J fi Wy ocn <H] oN x2) ol soona «LJ: có» JLo Nae 
ooo <H] JRormas io :.J 2.92.2220 JXscardis joa jpa oct 3d cà 
duree Lawang Jo Jasad Jl» T EENT MJ: uih Waco Lol .fasot of 
Kore Qax Yoo .—>) ol sory >» pad Sl JKsedsco Jimsam Jo 
Max ly pdr pane JI Jede c cl Lider yds sijo s[INsedso 


]. stop follows in ms. 


the purpose of following n religious life: and they determined that whatever 
God provided Tor them should go to their own use, and that of everyone else 
whom they saw to be a stranger like them and in need. Aud thus they 
thenceforth did: for they carried on their business, and distributed to the 
poor and to the strangers. And. when God saw their zeal, he caused everv- 
thing to which they put their hand to imerease abundantly in their hands. 
And thus a blessing rested on everything that passed through their hands. 
they having resolved to abstain entirely from the evil practices which traders 
of the world are wont to follow. i. e. from oaths of all kinds, and from lying, 
and from extortion, and from diverse weights and diverse measures'. They 
told everything te the man who was buying from them or selling to them 
fairly aud honestly withoul contention: bnt, if that man whoever he might 
be began oaths and bargaining, they on their side would say to him shortly 
as follows : « Brother, accept what f have told vou honestly, without extortion 
and without fraud and contention, and without bargaining and oaths. Tf it 


suits vou buy» ior « sell op « Wherefore are von making havoc of (2) oaths 


and allowing Satan to thrast vou iuto sin, when vou are under no necessity 


| POUND 


WIS POUN OF EPHESUS. [370] 
Ji -r clo wa yd rod al JRscaso Js hao «t el. «2 Max Jl ol 
. 605 MS KOPN | Joy NS Js No eo fas] Lisac teas D 
Joa me Jo ery Nor (0003063 qdo, qa o) p30 .Joot 


SNS-A-RAO. A>) Justa iNo Golo fron has OOD Op a> So] 


V 


lass) x20 JN5:a5 Ou r2 ea} JI» JNa Je VraS LoD opa 
ESR Opa Jis Jin: NM whl Loo Lois No e E 
Nba ones Cd NN Agen NA, Was po oNu Coola yards; 
d Jo Jlosbhso wags JNoïos Lass] x «9o |J oo 
TAN ed Las Vr» Ix e Js so «^o E x? QUO ooa 
QUE > Vala asas] « Jlasls; Koh 3a <% Ja cas! Kujo 
ha q% shaa 6 x20 Eiddaas warau Sy fu «dr > 096 109} 
C re Om «291 SA A90 = Pere Joos XM Nen. Ja: 
rol) Me! ase ailj Lio . Lol «oor lAo js oe WN Jas > 


to buy » ior « sell ») « whether you want or nol?) Now, if il suits you, lake 
iH without oaths; and if nol, pray for us ». 

Aud thus these exeellent men followed their employment in the fear ol God, 
each of them serving for two and three years at the salary of five or six 
denarii. And, when those under whom they were employed saw that God 
caused everything that they did to prosper in their hands, they appointed 
them ten denarii; ind again, after some vears during which they had been 
willing to travel, they appointed them twenty denarii a vear; and at last, 
when they saw the blessing that grace brought about through them, they 
appointed them thirty denarii a year, that they might remain with them only, 
having committed to their hands all that was in their houses; and they had 
very large storehouses (zzoüzz), and they used to do business in many regions. 
Bul these excellent brothers, when they had completed twenty years at this 
salary. and Grace fed them out of ein honest labour, deliberated with one 
another, saving, « ftis better for us for the future to go and carry on business 
ourselves on our own account out of that which Grace has provided for us: 
thal it may in be our power and choice to give to God out of that which he 


wives us without fear of others.» And so after twenty vears they returned to 


2 
-] 
~il 


LIVES OF ELUA AH AND THEODORE. ou 


wet Sl; gSa xe Jud «t «oo Joor Nl vem Lis aaoo 
[so 2081 a paN xoa) o KupfoKes ] Loo 0*0 Jlasarrs eser 
Less} «9t LOAD 730 00 w | NS Na Je" io Jldxso [aso 
msds yos J? etd CO Kahu Jl e» ba ha> 29 NY 
vo Mal JI ob] £20 poca] Lawo Nao aae) v?) «o voi 
ol JNoiasy xe! Su] xo aop AIO SS Je Xoo a! 
adylo anas [isoto Qon, Ud, So RUN JN uos xoa 
NS aso «olo eo 2o Nuso Ln Adaa ooa] Mbasa ask. 
gor ' Joa Xs; ere So. Aor ADS Moliso; flsars aspas 
LOHSIAS 290 Janas Lasit, Lsa o NOD Mofas oog qan 
JK53«.59 Jla2.À) Davo :Joor asli Va JN ol va DA 
JLas Js MyuNas volo .:ooet xai pa Sas |a-2£x23o Lans, 
Lw 4 pd Sas So w'p Lad spams; Ids y JlaX o Jlasadts‘o 
was of was fly oà saamani, Jilas y liso :Joo aM fads, 


15 Ms: 1144329 5. 


their country toe. to Amida. Now they had two sisters who also had been 
engaged in practices of asceticism and sanetity in virgin fashion Irom their 
childhood, and at all times constantly devoted themselves to sorrow and tears 
and petitions and prayers, and that while they were mourning over these same 
brothers during so Jong a time ni which they had not seen them, but had 
only heard from time to time that they were alive and m the land of the 
Persians; and when they came they did not recognise them on account of the 
lapse of time, muti they themselves informed them. And they determined to 
make a gain of their sisters’ spiritual. blessing also all the days of their 
life; and so they removed and went and settled the four of them together at 
Melitene a city of Cappadocia, and there they thenceforth began to labour 
in spiritual fashion at their business, and all the income that they received 
they used to divide equally between themselves and the strangers and poor. 
Aud from the time when they began, because God also was pleased with them, 
they both received the gratitude and the blessings of the poor and needy every 
day, and further the business carried on without deceit and extortion and lying 
ascended like the vapour of meense at all times from the devout men them- 


selves to him who knows all, and so aceording to the riehes of his merey he 


^ S^ r 


b. 


aNU JOUN OP EPHESUS [S75] 


Sas akiona Ja LSY alaan saD” q>, NRD 
Vaal C ol -2 oll Las filas fiary Lasa haoo Loa Lis re 
-coothas Jos Loo Janu] .soM iaa KP xa + veo) Ksoo oom 
<x Lazio . Joo AAS yO} xa «oo oo «90i 5a s La} Nuo 
aah wl a) LODO .coLAi2jJàzoo 00O <~] LaLa xis Sx 
yor Naas c lans Jhojaxca \ Vasa Colo ooa «A330 O09) 
Lado Apos so rA 000 oleo roai 000 E 
MLA Mjao JNa corso ooa anaal prado; Je J 
eot e wor jaa «Sea. JI Oly Lal ooo See at JNa; Jlo 
3]: es ooo wda Loan «o J Nsdiaso TAM Je JI Sx 
Jog J>? y as] xo Lao DOES yea D093 Joya Sx ja cor ee 
Mb AY «3h fans) Joa J 20 Koheke ol - Joo wo. aA 
Ie» JNa «a3 yaw], whoo [Se Nino. Lpsofh] haaa và -Jpads 
has] boot kar Jods lad so «ot fas" DSa hoa O12 copoly 


Jo MSS Dn 9 Ms. ylas. — 3. Ms. tm. 


Who has not deserted and does not desert any who trust in him showed his 
favour openly, and his blessing rested on all that they did. And this in a 
short time they attained to great wealth, while even they themselves marvelled 
and wondered how it was that. while they were always seattering it, it in- 
ereased with them. Aud thenceforth the fame of their kindness and of their 
almseiving went ont everywhere, and needy persons trom all quarters used to 
come to them, and supply their needs from them for each man l'aceordtng to! 
his duc: and moreover the visitation of the persecuted whom they heard to be 
in need everywhere they would console? through their gifts. And accord- 
imelv they disregarded the worldly trade, ind. streunously and earnestly 
followed the spiritual one with great watelfilness, insomuch that they would 
press the same npon them blessed sisters with regard to the trade carried 
on through the eifts derived from their labour, that they also might add this 
to the rest of their practices. And thas each would ou his part give as he 
was able, and still it^ increased the more, so that in that place was manifestly 
fulfilled that which was said in the prophet, « I will pour blessings upon vou 


üll ve shall say ^ Enough » .. Thus therefore it happened to these men from 


I. Ms. om. There is perh, further corruption in the sentenec. — 2. sie syr — 3. Mal, mm, du. 


[379] LIVES OF ELIAME AND THEODORE. ASI 
Joo LA «oos somaa] T DANa aaan aaan J ols 
room Na] oà Jas Je waal Sxanseo lazio, [ope dso khara: 
«133 Joi. DSA, huas Jazi, Laso ..JLaslo Jo Jä 
Janais ol, Lal Jony m0 aimo .JKSa0 JND elo .ooe 
JLasasso Jlopepso [>o r2 noer aaa, basse: Losana EV 
JXayaso JNN ioo .ooít yanao ROAD 2086 KOSI Jet y [šao 
- ps0 [oot joa Loot- par Kos lads) [2.25 Jl Mo Jos oS. 
LN, faxo hawo) £o) aD LOX Wold o 30 S.2d0 
rA ore [N-a] Loot [5o 82: bees . vol Je2 p50 fso Joa se N aso 
x) oo aj maaana] pano poo 24) joa Da% J| aoo 
JIN? aa JNa L2 8| SA, - of 000 <p LSS opens Bass 
Kaxa] [55 N39 alas ol jo JLN) Soe 201098 423.2 ogo e 
JINS? Pan vo Lao «oo Son fra ohh JIK34 JN; ehl, wor 


God, insomuch that they were unequal to the task of bringing forth and 
giving, while their house was turned into a hospice (Zevodoystov) for strangers 
and other persons in need And aceordingly there were a multitude (473.02) 
of many persons in that house, of slaves and hired men and bondmatds, and 
travellers besides and strangers who were gathered together for God's sake, 
and virls also, and old women, and blind and maimed men, insomuch that 
they practised the ordinances of monasticism in all the departments of there 
house, fasting and abstinence and asceticism: and they had weeks! as in it 
monastery and did menial work, and separate eells for prayers and for secret 
labours by night, since each of them used to watch and pray. And accord- 
ingly all the night there was heard [rom their cells spiritual singing and 
the reading of the Scriptures; and so in the morning also as well, until each 
one’s repetition of the service was finished, he would not consent to go oul 
at all and make an answer (zzxzg:o:c) to anyone's cal. But the elder whose 
name was Elijah they would urge, for the sake of the security (2592): ? of the 
house, to lake a wile; and he yielded to the pressure, and he alone took a 


wile, while with him also the Seripture-sayine was fulfilled which says, « A 


1. See, p. 62, n, 2. — 2, If ‘permanence’ is meant, the end of the ch. shows thal the object. was 


nol obtained, 


tcs | 


T 


d FOHUN OP NDS SE SG RSO 
NN oleo Nos .Jlaassjs friols dotes eaten lo NUS r2 jso 
[as o? t? JI" yo jioso bs00,0 [So Lano DURERE VoD ao Lo 
ees T HN ooo wash: loa Jj NS'IKso fers pad of Jia Golo Kana 
voe ur TAT Lao .J NS. Loot d.a Jo Jr Jl. je 
wman oah «auo EIN wel .000 095 JNa SMS JN so 
Joo Laks pasos «DO LHD pa COPAY JAN» LAA Joo Kul 
Lonas Toar <% Llana jeca Sia r -cÒ Jla>, ran) jo al. soo 
vA sje. JMa2aiíh. yards 2à Gn obra soaa aana, 
Joi TCI aS e» LIND uso GX con boas éd S so: 
wot las, li») .b] £1, MES Nhana Jadu ws ahh hes 
Kaspar JS, al Nse| - Qoothoi uses Jiao boda parry fans] Joa 45 


à ols i AES RON VIA <= 2 Leao vootlas UXOR 901 xD Ja 29. so 


l. Ms. via 


good woman shall be given to a man who feareth the Lord st. For this 
woman, when she came in and saw that they were bent on running mi the 
path of righteousness, began and quickened the running, and passed them all, 
in sorrow and tears and fasting and watehing and prayers, while she also 
learned the psalins by heart: and she was further prepared to wo out to 
a monastery or to the desert. And she had sons born to her beside one 
daughter; and she at once made her a nun. And so all these excellent 
persons ran after spiritual things. But, af at happened. that cases of 
necessity (xvzyzzs) arase for them to make an answer (2zóxgweu) to a call 
during the night, one of them would. be chosen and appointed the evening 
before to perform that office, white he would make entreaty and request all 
the others to entreat the Lord for him * because ] im neglecting the praise of 
God, Tor the sake of which he gave me a mouth and a tongue”. Pray for ime 
that God may preserve me, lest a stun of sin be seeretly formed? im me 
through the things that 1 am doiuge’?; and thus be would carry out that oflice ; 
so that on account of the fame of their excellent mode of He, when occasions 
called ns to the roval city‘, we used to make our lodging with them, and it 


might happen that we even passed several days m their house both on the 


AA 


` ] . b. S 
K GM NNNTUS PS Gp. 2255 — s. weise is not elsewhere known in [irs sense, bul means "was 
` I 


Samed with rel lo the object stained, — ^. 5 5» audito; sce pIulrod.. p. 1y, v. 


[381 LIVES OF BEIJA AND THEODOBE 585 
ENET cere LE, [a-a JNa- Lamao I2 JNda- 
Lasar, lese 9004 Op (9936.30) IKs x9 ed hän Mas Ssaro 
Ago» Joo paasa Cope? wulo ooa paoho Grol Naaa, Qoo 
[x ui») jaana ga [sss p Damo oD ooo Naas owl. 
Jsaxjo kaiosy igoa qhi Daai oaa Aio oon ho, No 
JNsolo firsaso Jiaasi» il :Jhorsslo ] jo Je le |a. Sa Lo, 
«o CICER Daa J! p? ]3eo 20 :000 x AA200 so Joi, 
LA sandra haa coor Cam M3 vou foo po oA voran 
Ply og wea Ao lan Rer aby 2 ol 49 ADAM Je hax J 
«201 So) Jasa kusao hasaa, Jadna cass —.%,0 JKsuyo Laïs, 
NOOD 19 (OFS la sot iol we? a) ASA EPO CHS Lala 
Ja pe: fron Mfano] Lio -Jiaryo [3303 Gd oco opas 9} Jos. Lads 
e| Gh] fips, qx wal y WL tar q% cot pains fi 
«n liason Joys do wotastaan SX CMO co) pee pee dedero 


way up and on the way back. since they bad now made a martyrs’ chapel in 
oue of the chambers of their dwelling, and at the hour of their own assembly 
lor service they used to meet there, and anyone who was known and 
honoured by them they would. receive there. Accordingly, when we 
looked a! these persons who were called by the name of laymen, and at 
their regulations and customs (v.93), how great and small down to little 
children and hired servants and slaves male and female passed their time 
in devout practices and rendering of praise and thanks to God, wd in 
lasting and prayers at all times, we inwardly despised ourselves, erying woe 
upon our life, since the Christian name only without deeds was called over us, 
while we also remembered with sorrow the words of our Lord who says, « The 
tax-gatlierers and the harlots go into the kingdom of heaven before vou »' 


And so we marvelled at these things while we were with them: and we were 
eo 


especially astonished at the greatness of their kindness and the direction of 


their will toward God, so that, whenever they saw us great and small, they 
would thus with as little intermission as possible refuse to leave us, but, 


thinking of us thaf we were in truth actually Christians, each of them would 


|. Matth., XXi, 31. 


rhe Sch NM 


2n IMIN O EPHESUS. 382] 
y» lelo Hose Da XS aM oy Lolo «sassy Joa Ns Ls 
Me cunag pel Me lasrs otto pe Nas wd rax) ja fad Jlsos 
eum: Luise fram Qe] Geo sh à yox Jie clo Pn 
eoo dee Wolo qr oul ilaiaiss fio Sa Jua feaa je veh] 
ON AHO ed ete} qo Loa go CN qe hss, 
Njeno qoo capo coo. Jla”) JAN So Jlaasyy, farts 
MEC. E RE EUN LOOENI FAX LOANS ooo val oou Sas 


dor fs: J sed JH, biles Qoo Joo marco Jy < yl SN So 


AN: P Mum) La aa acala ooo wy joo ay 
WROD LOD Lopo lass roa: x20 J.oslJ] wasss -Jo oor Joo 
IS E ra Kufcs ooi AI |o ag. KOOL eae + . 000 
Lao .3h] Was —— Haad ooo VLA Sa): Joa La ol DSA 
Jado mananao. oaa [sop ao „Lias oa> ya Noo Joo wisu 
mals JN Lsoso Mm J p Laaa EN Jaano LA" wh yar 


ask to hear Trom us about his thoughts and about the other modes of life, and 
«llow must PEdeal with such-and-such a thonglit? » and « What labour will 
bring me near to God? », each of them separately according to his station, 
whether women or ment. And we like what our Lord said also to the scribes 
and Pharisees, « Ye bind heavy burdens upon men's uecks, but ve yourselves 
do not touch them not even with one of your fingers »*, similarly would urge 
them to things to whieh we were ourselves strangers by describing a model 
of righteousness amd by stories of the Tathers. And they all vied with one 
another the more inthe ardour with which they carried out their observances, 
But, inasmuch as the profit of the spiritual trade in those who RHoeked to 
them every day was not enough for them, they resolved that one of these 
excellent brothers should take what God had provided for them, and go out 
to the distriets in whieh the persecuted and ill-used convents were dwelling, 
and distribute his bodily things among them, and himself make spiritual 
vain through their prayers; since. the time had in fact come when the 
believers. were persecuted and maltreated in every district. And so he 
would go out and go round the whole of Syria, aud as Tar as * Arab? and 


Callinieus and the desert, accompanied hy two bondmen, and he did so in 


1 Gf. p. 274. — 2. Luke, xr, 46. — 3. The plain of Mesopolamia and Osrhoene. 


383 LIVES OF ELUA AND THEODORE, 585 
valia Jhy JaN Naana JNoso; flsasd .. Hase) «aot Las} hoas Joa 
ols qa ]esee2 Ohaiu WSC .000 ipad jon, wao [23M 
SS Laaa, JAa3S o; Je Lai Koan + quid Nasal, Laso 
Slo x Jya attired canoe «Soi uo sa], Jasi q% ere J o? e 
€ J ROS laa", ÍIox2o «oo s, antsy coeds Joa hols SS 
LN fused jo Joa: o000 o0 [soto bapapro [1222382 CL .. 600 
Lais, Je al ao qe} aliu? hadia’ «2o aa franco] «ms re 
Stools - fact e Slo x s ooa uu] roai qaae 7. aad} Laddascs 


Jos qasado | A Jagiols Jill Npa - Jaselo x20 Jlisassol Mas 
*J Lopes. t Liso -Nanan Jaana Hr mul JAG os 


aia rosario re eM rra ehad ho 


|. Corr, from «etes 


the dress (oy%ux) of a secular trader without being known, and he was 
making spiritual gains. And so by the love of God which they showed in 
their trade these admirable men would every day send great loads to heaven, 
and eompleted the days of their [ife in practices whieh it surpasses even 
the power of words to describe. in love of the new life of the kingdom of 
heaven, while we have not been competent to deseribe any part of the 
greatness of their glory. But at last they even sold all that they had 
also, their mansions and the rest of the worldly goods that they possessed, 
and distributed it among the poor and the monks; and so they all became 
e the 


a 


monks. The blessed Elijah had departed from the world before takin 
habit | eux); but his wife and daughter ended their. lives in a women’s 
monastery in the territory of Mabbug'; and their sisters are even down to 
the present tine. also, which is the year eight hundred and seventy-erght’. 
living in Anzelene* the country of the Urtaye', and they preside over i 
monastery in the village of Nons, and they are in extreme old age, aud 


occupied in. labours of perfection. 
The history of two brothers Elijah and Theodore the traders is ended. 


L Hierapolis. — 2. 267. — 3. Svr. t Tanzi’. — ^. See p. 135, n. 2. 


RIDE 


d. 


DSG TOUN oP EPHESES. [38^ 


aANHgCA ay mma so hida edlid dard aah 
shana redre Busca taala saan rA jaa 


Soto SNL VIL par „Linman, TS Nl Jas re Lag 

Qe ‘hls alas mo ris mds we ee? 9? eae hj Vo Joa SML 
D m m Lol aaa otlad xot x68. JAL MS ENTE 
Jans] ala poasus [l3 of\ pa. pel JL) ala xao 5-2: [FN 
yr! alad paso So po o> Noa was apaa of LJ bL? ol; 
Lana 0813 aNd wifsd aa hdo aw awi] Je JN s.s 
„jaxa Jis Goraradus «ello: P Sad woo KAN pO op VO 
Kul boK*%s0 laco: IL 9) s Aa] 2 jog» aio LOX > yao 
Dulo «owe Joi Jang cal "naso jan JH od Laad o Joa 
Sao Lao Jys, food xo A} Jesus xS Js waa] 


NEAT CHIE THIRTY<SECOND HISTORY, OF A CERTAIN BROTHER WHO was CAUGHT 
BY THE ENTICEMENT OF TEMPTATION TO THEFT AND AFTERWARRS CAME TO 


REPENTANCE. 


A eertain blessed man had heen settled for à considerable time as a solitary 
in a eell in the Ennaton of Alexandria’ with two disciples; and, when we 
ourselves arrived at that place ? and went iu to him and received his blessing, 
three days after we had departed from his. presence a brother from one of 
the well-known convents ef the place came to him under the plea of desiring 
to live with him, even as E had myself made the acquaintance of that brother 

his convent; and, when he had come iu aud passed about one week with 
him, Satau put it into lis heart to take the conteuts of that solitary’s cell 
and flee. And, having looked and learned. everything, aud devised in his 
mind a plan of action. le rose by night aud collected everything that he 
could (sinee that blessed man had indeed no sinall number of saints” and 
hooks), and he took them, a great load. and fled. And he went and found 
caniel-drivers geing into the desert above. Libya that is called Cellia*; and 


he gave them a fee, leading them to think that he was carrying lis own 


|. See p. 325 and ch. at. 2, ln 3% or drli see Introd.. p. INS yve -Ob Se. relies: ch p. 1i — 
4. Buf. Hist. Mons, NNI: Soz., NI 31, Aee. lo Rutinus 10 was 70 slades [rom Nilria. 


[385 OF A MONK WHO STOLE. 587 


«ol. jos Dyb, Sama oe) LLS sQoo8$ 2.230 yl Jed CN 
JR. o Joa [3-50 -.sul laS mods So Qoa» Wexo aooo 
„SOÑA OS COO vaio? Je Jas qol. pad po d Jootso paz, 
Hal Jats p3 oon y AMAL sotatas plo AAS oM Joa — rao 
Joe Joods Kas); Judy fas] $5 of sad hal ADD BX OS Joos 
jaa» fraa; Nao LA, xa ow Jo . Jade of us sm 
JN.royo Jhoflo .Ksj5| Jos lass LENT Jasso .NoSexkso Jira. 
mateo etd Sas aM Jos 0,00 Mops! Ir oà fads oia», 
p2 Joa PSl o v 29 hinas Jin; jan od Na] haslo frigo 
asau Ss» ful] Joase r2 Je JNaa Lan » fatso polo Muoa JolKse 
“pas [i9 2 ox P. IN Jae Jul slo wot Ll Ns 
Mana Hlo. haas Jans aig opas Hd 2o mais Jas] fis] 
Jy» wy M rhs Jan Las p2 wide Joos [aso 5e» facial GM 
aod ful haas b] pad 420 or faso aX. NE M Ma] Lada] 


l. Ms. œ. 


belongings in order to go thither. And they took him, and he went mlo 
the desert with them; and he went in to a certain man there, and made 
search for a cell for himself in whieh to live and be a solitary. And, when 
he had passed one week there, his thoughts began to pass judgment upon 
him, and his heart to smite him, and he would say to himself, as he himself 
would inform us about everything, weeping : « ^In what way, O wretched 
man, did vou wish to become a solitary? To Christ, pray, or to Satan? 
Lo! vou have performed the service of Satan, and executed and fulfilled the 
will of a demon, and afllieted a soul fashioned in the divine likeness, and 
carried olf the toil and sweat of that. holy old man’s labour; and he is 
sobbing and crying before God on your account at all times. nd. low 
have 1 hope of life and salvation?’ Then » (he would say) « l passed one 
week in penitence and horror and tears, weeping for myseif, aad meditating 
upon these things and saving. * What has befallen ine? Who led me astray? 
What shall I do? How shall l weep Tor myself? Alas for me! since my 
companions are secretly stealing a kingdom, and 1 stole eternal torment for 
myself, What will happen to me when I iin about to go to God? What 


)? 


defence (xzoxvyix) have I to give for this wickedness.” And, while 1 0n my 


* 86 


ass ye SAR TOP HESS UCS: [386] 


Lass Jll JM abro +0091 hA A ooa ania dor 


OAS lialo oasolo Qoo ANL A yri ooo gada ds; 
Sais [v aS LAD Man, DA TEE - weh qan Laso, 
Je Laia Xx wan o 42 QI sor Jae vo melo waas 
P IESUS JL. sa poals SAM 0001 erry oo laco AS «uoto 
Ku] Nho Nu] pawis ho] 420300 GX Movin Ns AX 000 ge] 
qaia fas] iso pedro janis Joe -Jrot yladXam asl Ss fra.) 
Do -prdda Edis Slo X Laco pars aan cauot ele. 
Nooi panio -Noost m Ho e] Jhhoaas fst uS con wu M 
Sls OAM] Jroty WIS] QN 9 Loos Jul £l p2 Saxo Jon «oo 
jaune Jae gr Cuvee eges doles mer) eo 


a. ya was Lisos sag CE ~ UM ooot ET ECCE WESS 


D JL? y Nol Sx Llo vollo :Jhiaas JI.ot3o Jhan panal Lajos 
NL aS, Lassa! oò ol xxl halo Rael, Jar woul col 


1. SS js here inserted. apps. im another hand. - 2. ba erasure. 


side was weeping for mysell, my hearers were wondering, and were desirous 
of learning the eause of the lamentation and weeping on my part. Then 
| revealed it to them, and they marvelled. And I said to them : * What do 
you advise me to do? because my meditation is inciting me to strangle 
myself and perish out of this life, which deceived me and incited me to this 
crime’. Aud these saints advised me to return the stolen. goods to their 
owners, saving to me, ‘Tf vou listen to us and make restitution and. humble 
yourself and ask merey for this your offence, God will be merciful to vou 
aud men also will forgive you: and even they themselves will be mereiful 
to vou and forgive you, and will also make petition for you’. And, while 
they pressed me, | oi my part was restrained by my shamefacedness and 
hindered from doing this. saving to them : *My lace ts ashamed to do this. 
With what face, or with what colour (yona), or with what brazen front ean 
this be carried out?) But the blessed men went on saying to me, * Which 
is better for you, to endare reproach and transitory shame here, and repent 
and live while vou have opportunity, while you further relieve the souls to 


whieh vou have given sorrow and bitterness, or to be consumed in. the 


3387 OF A MONK WHO STOLE. oso 


— eA Jo xA JI xao» je» Laortalo Je zn. Joss kas? 
foto fufso Natasa Mado e] cM Ne <œ a> VE ca! 
„hia ful Gude Jor L? No £o Malle caen, e LoD [19.290 
«aeo oà Jul ee rads Sr vao» voto .Jimnuiio Qn» xao uS 
JN sors 13 pro Joa L'h 0-0 Jhal [asao JL eo [asaza -a9 
Liel hol, Lio Jeu Jipa Naal - prot! Laio a Moo yia, Nao 
loo aN Q0 hapaa Jaap JesMx) quce uao foo, Jaano 
«DR 000 Ae! — Nos «mms JI 2 oda ALa .o. 2e. 
pido OAS qw Mo oa] o Nscas ox s] So £20 Joso £430 + Joot 
Miah Noia p20 Naisi, o So Jo SS ouan No 
Jiothyo elm 3; o0» L] e ahaa do Jean? oia 1.0 Ns 
yo Maio sJHorcs es kha] yaa, jaso] D has sooi? 


eternal torment, where shame and reproach and torment are not finished 
and brought to an end for ever and ever? When these words had been 
spoken to me by many men, l rose and left all the utensils and the books 
and the martyrs under seal, and I came in shame; and lo! I am settled 
here till intercessors are found for me». All these things about himself 
that brother was relating by word of mouth in my presence with great 
humility and eopious tears; since, while | was going round the districts to 
be blessed by the saints, I found him in a monastery called that of lather 
Andrew’, on the farther side? where the holy Mar Menas” is, which is 
called the desert of Mendia'; and, when ] saw him, | was astonished in 
his presence, and | greeted hin, having no knowledge of what had happened: 
and heon his side was bowed down, and was melaneholy and wretched. And 
on my inquiring of him about his sorrow he sat down and aceused himself 
and told the story of his crime at a length many times greater than what 
| have put in writing. And, when! heard it, | admired the man’s penitence ; 
and I coniforted hun by saving to him: « You have done a great deed and 
one that deserves admiration, in that for the sake of your souls healing 


vou have despised shame’. and have taken upon yourself that, be it i1: no- 


1, Andrew the soldier is commemorated with Menas en 12 July vib. and L.: see Aela Samet XXN, 
p. 2899, — 2 Se of the Nile. The meaning of * Vas in our author is as here given, polt evadyersium 
as v. D. and |. See p. 2985, n. 2, and KONON p. st. «oett teas 9. cat vam s cr 


oc deb NIE c 


jr TRUE 


a0 JOHN QE EPHESUS. 388] 


jaa al "aol fora LL Saco Ire clo Je alo Laps als 
VN S SON Loc! Jo Lais Iny o! — XO ANS. EETA “ook. | 
ALA> o LAs, Apa Kur sata jy Le maa Sal J| [soto JO M 


bs 


Nona a TESES ya ma Jal: yl JNs5a5 J OI IS. Ld04> 
HCAs Joly apo laS pasou ocn» S joa anaso aal] 
lila) oa Jin: quam t pa JNsjaa waasso Mlada ou Diass 
Oxo CÓ lioas «Dot to volo SS Ka! ERCON. bs od 
Lao e arr Sy eas — yor! S s y^ R23 ees 


. 


vonteaslo Lawo «ras os yo Laag cà lo Dao oad L290 
EE Sen Pr juo SA ho hanao Jna Jaia ex 
aD >` Las A30 NIE sd Qon hapit £50 dia eS 
IN auo ‘> paddy L0 «Ma "INS. wd «are „aan aio otl 


1. Corr. [roti qaaa. — 2. M^ M. 


miny or reproach, or chastisemeuts and everything that comes here, vou will 
submit to them. they being things that are tr ansitory, in order to escape 
from the severe and terrible ehastisement in hell which lasts lor ever. And 
now fear not. You dil svell a5 that vou «hd mof carry out the work of 
Satta and tis will ta the uttermost, though he caused you a fall inas- 
much as vou are a man. Ile on hearing these things was comforted; and 
he went on entreating us to return with him to the owner of the stolen 
property, in order to entreat him to receive his own in full and forgive the 
transgression. When we saw that it was a labour of profit to gain our 
brother *, we did not refuse; and further also we were required to fulfil the 
precept given in the command, « If thy brother shall force thee to go one 
mile, go with him two » 2 And so we returned with him. and went in to 
that blessed man, having left him some distance away. And we found him 
agitated with great grief and much distress on account of the martyrs and on 
account ol the hooks especially; and, when we Dewan to speak before hun, 

« Indeed we can find your property or vou », he was astonished, and began 
to make inquiries Then we on our part asked him to perform a request 


for us, and all his belongings would be found comple te: and be on his side 


irati Avi ties 2e 1d 3 


[3891 OF A MONK WHO STOLE. 501 


bl oà Jio oh] werd) joo wo, WUD ooo A [I 3easo o5 of ad 
OS So dena rd » Jlarioh ois we «DES ened xl bl pds 
aDJ ado rgd sia] fail ais pel [ol ades: XQsoy alo 
Joal, hal eos Jy Niao [iiec waaso yd.» Xo «plas. ado 
— Lasag we? o0 A923 aa Aao aoaas, ts 0d lioas, Lisanna 
ZONI wrA20 yopo wd has J æl, l jo AAaMbHe 2e» xa. 
pda J p A9 pN Jal Daas jaso; Jy aiu 23682 Do 
Jaarso Laso vols CER Laul 141 hao fya las, o L| o» 
<> hoo fooi J p36 Wy hasl ufaso oaas Hesio [ils rods] 
NI Nas Do rothassolhso oà [isa Jp 490 iA akw 
Nao samuo Joly [sos ousil Moe. Jlaaad= alo ag 
we JAN aa jlaang saad hioo o oprosblo oo) ansaa, 
myle OS wano Jlassl o usoilo Laag Aao .2o Ms] ws] Sao 


I. Corr. front apa wo (7, 


answered « Everything thal vou command I for my part am ready lo carry 
out even without that ».. Then we offered him repeatance, having taken it 
upon ourself, and we said : « Since Satan, father, caused us to fall like men, 
and we sinned against God and your holiness, receive vour own, and forgive 
the crime, and remain withont ill-feelme, in order that vou may be a fulliller 
of the command which said * Forgive and it shall be forgiven unto you"! », 
But the blessed man was much grieved over him and was distressed, saving : 
« Even if he does not restore me anything and you command, all the divs 
of my life | will consent that he shall live with me without ill-feeling, and 
Iwill never remind him of this matter ». And so that brother came, repent- 
ing and weeping and with his face bowed down to the ground, and bitterly 
accusing himself, in such a way as he could not have been acensed by one 
who hated him. When that blessed man saw his penitence, and al] of us? 
alike greatly wondered and marvelled at the grace which had opened his 
heart aud caused lim thus to repent and to act in this way (aud all who 
heard the story wondered aud inarvelled at it, then he in this way received 


thanks From everyone in place of punishment. And the blessed man received 


l. Lethe, vi, 37. — 2. The other persons present were perh, Che hermits disciples, 
PANE Ole Tie NNT ay ou 


* NS 


hup OHNA disp sb. 340 


Lrg I po edad la qoos Nyy] hoo oa ul ere Jina ofS 
Joo Mame -otadams Joo soso Loop yl ,X2ad00 (ouo ! ol 
eed Vo ob Lacs ce vus Oly Lal AM Jle: Ms 
JoJ oao oio. 

rA Aaa ddr ay rura nux Aale 

fr Aen rar’ aidaa ewalaa haasi 


ram maxa uapa ,àélhe oódàa round aad 
fUr emhana Aind rua Co rub nd 


I Jes Sl. cà Laa Joa Joia La .. Ji Naso. ba oot Laag 
Sasso Laisso Lax hug "Bass. ba fury’ fL aa Jos G3» 
„hia Loak oo «t Joa ooo Ne] Jan NS oos) Jyo «o0 52 | LUN saas00 


* 


te dotscchz deo fub. 052 X 5 S2 pl hamza] bdnaiceo Ngana lates Gtr abbr. © Wa oL 


, v» . B 
aia yacan e 3 dla abbr. eNs. ERE V ETT NE: i. dM at. e. 


him, and laid a penance upon him, and absolved him. And he hired. an ass 
for him: and that brother set out, and so he went and brought all the articles, 
net having forgotten anything. And thenceforth he continued to repent 
of his olfenee like a guilty man, and he was diligent in showing repentance 
for it, insomuch that we on onr part left bine in this condition, admiring 


what he had done and thanking God. 


The history of a certain brother who was caught by the enticement of temptation 


lo theft and afterwards came to repentance is ended, 


NENT THE THINTY-THIHRIP HISTORY, Ol]. A BLESSED. MAN WHOSE NAME WAS flana 


THE ZEALOLS PROM THE MONASTERY CALLED THAT OF TILE ene SSENES. 


This exeellent blessed man therefore was thus called hv a name whieh was 
also eonmipletely fultilled tn him, Hala! the zealous, a man who was in truth 
zealous and humble and aseetic ind a teacher, and perfect in all the practices 


af religion. Now this blessed man lived in one of the convents of the \imideues 


Lida a sweel: butappy. (he propriety of the mame applies only lo the nickname tthe zealous’. 


aly LIFE OF HALA. 503 


aas ” faias Laaj Of) Lal Lool, Jrofkyos hael, Jisan «coo rae 
Lala, ulamo uważa Nooo Toh LNs as) ddas j Nood 
Daa, "alojan JAn] Pala Nanao 5j DU ojos» fas. onis 
Hasarwo -jaN lad; erac Ls -poki Jens t woo Jud QA 
Lio uotop 59 NS onse) X. opasaras; L; cón odas, 2: ' ouddo 
lec Qoo» warasy o» La paol, Lias, ouso [ii] Daa 
MNES; haras] fps Jy aaa 562 hoa yado otpsoady Js Ja 
Lja; rors enses olod, "lanas JKasaahs sloss fly -fiaa 


Jlä->; SN als j Jhaso,>! uoto N, | p2 . Joot «2» ow» sca. 
waha, JNa Joal ER „alia Ih DA f o CIE Je x JL 
apwan, LSD Sly hams Joa lpas Hy paa 51e. JOM sh] 


Laas fours Js coh lo Jiasi Je «el H glansi loNss Js 


|. H [Sua po pols. zed HOO bth. =e TAMEO Pe Co Se eh orbe e Sy, alll be — 6. TL om, 8. — 
7. M. bag Fs. — s. dE des [23 ooms mlas, oug Sl — s.d] oss [neas cio — lo, H deo Sh 

LI. Hobos ns. — 42. UE igh lag barge. — 15. EE [biel worbsagts. — 1%. I ifa abbr, weds 
olacaos. — 15, A V. — I6. H ins. el. 


which is ealled that of the Edessenes!; and |] was also in titercourse with him 
for a space of some years, and during the days of my association with him | 
was with my whole sonl thoroughly amazed at his keen zeal and his stre- 
uuous conrse of He, and his. constant energy and his vigilance in every 
good work, and (that we may use an expression whieh sums up all) in. the 
fervour of his love toward God, and his humility and his zeal that imitated 
that high one who by his humility taught the pattern (tums) of it to his 
diseiples. This zealous man therefore from the very beginning of his 
training chose for hunself to perform all the menial tasks required for the 
needs of his convent, and besides this he resolved not to see a stranger enter 
the convent without associating himself in careful attention to his wants; 
and thenceforth he was constantly engaged in this pursuit all the day, 
being like a trader with many classes of merchandise, so that, although his 
trade fail in one, he can spend money on another, that an opportunity may 
be found for profit to come in. in that he never saw a poor man come to ilie 
gate of his convent without imparting to his necessity if only some small 


thing, or vet seeing a f poor sick? man without associating himself in careful 


]. Hee p. 221 amd eb. s af. 0136 1! b. — 2. dE sieh or poor’, 


FASS 1? b. 


*Ili5s1"2. 


"ASSN 


Hsi b 


LY IOUS CEL SP EES: 1392 


La Laad Dwa dis uoaa | Jas: JarcaXs! sloKas Jh 
exo Jor Sis JE hilan JNA Go pau Jas Joo: CIN] 
of Luso? —~ of «Joa pow Jb yoas Sas JN aos Jod JH, Jas 
ÄLL es e JL.a5o. : 3S wert! dot forsy «2o ol .:fartc <% 
Seo fin aada go “ss Jor gaal Da aao woo “MLS 
CE SOT les Joas [seo Lodo SL SaDo Js auo food. 
mss Jas Mis "aas Joa Wy Lo anso “Plsass spo LNäa 
Jes; LA Los [Naso os ha roo Joa OK. aol, Lao wpa 
Jor Khao aD Joa quao lane os Joa Na] sacs Jno, poly 
asaso colo TSAN Jon ylw Jyo OM ooo «22950 -LNSS ina asoo 
A fa ''Xwaasoo sse Sao o Joo Podno . Jal) Joos 
oà "eai Ad yous au] Jes quei Ni Jana] ©. INS 
N fran “Joor Wha "XRye louse "unxsuo Milas “Kags 


1 IL a. ss sie. 2. HU NS — 3. H WS bass SS. 1 JD oo. — > H ins. dec TES 
wide. =o Pl BaSxtie SW. 9. [| bis laas amm, wo. - Jo. TP INO 0s Age 5. ppo. 
11. ILL 12. ET ess Li [p eoo HP» ojo. 14 [|] Saar Qoo. — 1h, IP aseo oues. 


16, TE Mase o, 0 


altention to his needs. So therefore one might see that this saini never 
ceased. bringing iu profi, and every day the business of the spiritual trade 
was never daeking to him, were it. from strangers or Trom needy persons, 
or from sick persons Wing outside and without consolation from any quarter. 
And besides these things he was constant in sweeping and washing the 
latrines (5230027). of the monastery every day, and sweeping the whole 
monastery ind brushing away the ashes. And, when the Gime came when 
he knew that the servitors had put a cankldron on the fire to cook the dish 
and tad cleansed the herbs, he would go and sweep out the scullery, 
and fake at? outside; and aller taking d outside he would) sit down and 
collect the scouring, down to a tittle leaf only about a finger long that had 
an annnal in it, and he would wash it, and he would go tn and bee of 
the servitors. Gud they would sive him a pot, and he would set it on the fire: 
arul further he would make entreaty of the steward, and he would give him 
a little oil, and he would cook that rejected portion in such a way (hiat at 
main would he attracted by the mere smell of it; and that he would leave the 


isliedisdss] porlion, and eat obit: aad he would go and ask fora little bread, 


See pets Mada ch ses de reluse, 


[393] LIRE OF HALA. 30» 
l asias o J5 Jo Jasa joa ward Lao -joa ahano | Jaano 
J, SA oo. SS. Lon Joor Mud; froanso [rik Da coot caet! 
oà "jus: Loo -joa WLS INA of a Jos aas LIS wows 
ware frat fo flsas paso Joe Joa Aaw - Joop sn Ji yrs) 
espace] od) Joo (Aa ioio Ns jos Chi, Gol [aoo aisd 
oi Joot kaoi ool oS Joa Ly yopar Pel aoo wold “yancoe Loaso 
“aoaaa omaa wA Slo o5 sdu bye! INS ‘Jou ol jo 
Pasco Moles Mse Joo Soto ."ooot wh Ops Aco] alasso 
«2o OFX ooo «45.2300 JE eco J&Kis4w Joa LOTES. kasao -hassas 
‘Prarasic Joor gaa] hloas Lors [iet waana yD poo Jean LS IN 
Sx wsio] l oA Joa KAS has] uis yar Lean E TEE 
J poo gwa — Jsasopso » SS po aa : ~ Jl ei Ns sa. JAN 


|. Hp Jantaosce ÓeartasMo enin asco. — — 2. Bb ins. Mus — 3, Der — 52 Hone Nal. —- 
>. Lins. toon: 6. LT Ilaec c. — 7, H leo, — s, H ins, «es — 0. Don — 10. HH ins. c0 lon. — 


IL. li w. — 12, ]] e. 


and wine if any was to be had, and so he would take it out to the sick and 
afflicted and needy persons lying by the gate. Aud on a day when the 
servitors had no herbs he himself, in order not to trouble the gardeners, 
would go outside or go into the garden, and he would pick a wild herb that was 
of no use and bring if and make a dish and lentils and take it out to the 
poor people. And again, when he was sitting at table, he had made a basket 
(omuctdx) and a jar, and it was placed by him: and the greater part of what 
came to hin he would put there, while he was also the canse of others 
imitating him and themselves also putting their cups into his jar and their 


NI 


portious into his basket (525293) : and he would take them seeretly and carry 
them ont to the needy persons, and thus he would relieve many souls, and 
they would bless him out of the whole of a perfect heart, and pray [or him. 


wht, holding uo 


« 


And so he was constant in following this course day and ni 
conversation with men, except if it was needed for the purposes of his service; 


but, when he was going ont and when he was coming in, a psalm never 


departed from his mouth; and, even if he was speaking lo someone, belween 


|. Mic syr. 


Š x \ NS b. 


*AissvUa. 


EE 


NESE ie lie 
“RSSa; 


a LOIN CE EET s e EIV 
Joor J rakblad [MXso Kis au) yas joo WSsaro «ole Joo pts 
kaspo JNasaat Cre Joor why Lyx od Jog “Jou lo apd olla S ans. 
WP opa ooo aD Ld] basalo LAS; bul Joa dos “MES 
Lispa khoa AD Fay Joa peos . Loo <>? alaram aaa 
por» LAS, [Kasaale Lasar .of\ coa M) No JR Mo Laas, 
Jn gS Bees dise oos Lal of ax] Mix Wl "Oped! joo 
2 Joh on Wwas We Joo erase J-2 p>0 ARDALION 0000 she 
ero Noo - AI; yop do ad Joa KX «le hago ey Joo was 
lise o "acNao fliasoo -ooo va I5 55 aol funcorsads hex 
loa Jasco yards ‘soy harijo Lanio Das Alpa coo qaan 
joa ` yko „Jiono XX ^ ooa NM. NN J> Jia 3 “Loot 


Kol «2e . E Jlsas optosaco Jaa dD Jus] oot Joa y zlo 


LH JJe 2H om. — s HE sing, — 4. pl — > H pref.) — 6. 1p So biaso 7. tl 49955 
uos loutwo finm. s. tL o fom bo w pase lors mon zel 13009 ao loo »Eos fpo A pref. » 
|i! LO) ao. 


one word and the next the man would see his lips move. And, if he ever 
had a moment during which he was resting from the service of the saints, 
he hid recourse to the Sertptures, so that, ia meht and a day was devoted 
to his reading without interruption, tt was nol enough to satisfy him with 
reading; for he was very erudite in the Seriptures and in doctrinal 2)" rea- 
ding. And he had a band of disciples: and at the conclusion of nocturns 
he would take his disctples, and would goto the refectory, or wherever it might 
be, and so they would read and recite the service GU daybreak: and at 
daybreak he would eagerly betake himself to his ministration, going ont 
several times although hie. had nothing to take out, and visiting the poor 
people Iving at the gate before the tine, and consoling and comforting 
them: and so all the needy and strangers used 10 look ont for the sight of 
him, beeanse that alone was enough to console them. But. as soon as they 
were seated at the tables, he would rise and pretend to laugh Tas to how 


he alone was to satisfy his need (2)7 saving, « Who has anything to. give 


|. Orc special. — 2. This is vers obscure : and, as HH. omits the words, the scribe. would seem lo 
have been puzzled by il see paaa n. 2. and In(rod., p. viu. V. D. and L.'s trauslation tac ~i 
desiderium snam datar explevisset!? cannol be got from the lest. The meaning appy. is thal he could 


not wel what Was wanted without the help ot olhers, 


395] LIKE OF HALA, 597 


va haer [rod o Nol wul Rad aao ex SKY) a a 
OUS. aio Qon) Nos Aso "el Jha Joa | QAMMo -Saa 
M hin O E! M Ga ae 
aX ee aes [i NG]. s Mbas "ad*-»» o. 59230 pw [siks 
waas, «35 t2 oo ‘= cà! JAX par ol ..JL.so “Joa saa NE. 
Nass] Matas EN ojo Ww. GL, Naas sj, oet] do cupo US 
ow da 36 Re JM Joa Daa Lao TN i PECES. 
fans] ejoa ute Jroanl <r ao my? c JN eu bs Nola 

Jaaa Jio. Jess. fenes flo pand Js eel od oc eia Is 
qa; Dawo .Jiokss he Joo pire aA’ Misses J, PSS 
JJ o coa Do ll otand.o ooa Sm LOX ooo WP poo ' > ood 
us LS Laos oplo aal ol aolo of y Joa P Jl. octo 


IRSN vo] LM. & eM loo landio, aka Malo Ji Wl akl? 
L Jao m 2 1E ls 3. Hol dahs. -4 E haama — 5. ety s, A dus — 7. TL ener eee 
S. IL Npeo — 9, IL ins. Saas oes — 10. H Hb. — 1. HE on. — 12. HE 935. — 13, IE «89. 
I1. Il ins, leo — 15. H s leo Ba 10 9 Sig bon > 


to my Lord Jesus? Is there anyone who has a morsel for the lledgliugs of 
my Lord Jesus? », and he would make many even secretly take and give 
him something, so much so that some of those in authority were filled with 
resentment against lim, sayiug, « We have oue gate set up, that we may 
together look aller everyone. Why do vou go outside? » But he would 
listen and kept silence, or laughed with the mau whoever he might 
be, saving, « Forgive me, sir... | went out and saw these brothers of Lazarus. 
| went out and looked at the fledglings, and they are in want of a morsel 
of food ». And so he was at last assailed by reproaches from all sides, but 
especially frou the steward, since he used to trouble him greatly and beyond 
measure, go that, if they assisted him, the steward had no bread or wine, 
and the servitors no cooked food thal reached mealtime without: having 
zone out to the gate. And accordingly they leaped indignation and abuse 
upon him, and threw lis eups and his plates to the ground. And he on his 
side would be in no way angry or wrathtul or annoved and would say, 
« Why is it necessary that ] should be abused? » But sometimes too one 


of the servitors or the steward would be vexed, and they would show indig- 


SUN SCNT 


"Howie 


AES DD 


pl 


a1 


DS POUN OEF EPHESUS. [396] 


JL oA CoO vaa wos Joo JNa Lisa oo LOX ooo aoo 
aLasac ~œ jl] peo o0: Q6 oo loo Jaa oos sa cnso oos Jin] 
oad Kado qa»: oM ! L5 was updo Dado, o6]. 2 -Joor Tasso J ouo 
Joa Was Lio JM Koon rese Jo d) «elo TaN basa! <>?! 
LN Tess . Jhassfro ro [aas Js Loa “Jory 30 Lansio Joa [sso wereAo 
Noa so S + 008 c «ot Nec Laas) Jea ane Na So 
Mor. be PES "Noelia! Jasso 2300 yao 1300 Joa 
O9 kaas od Shs LAS ados Jod lo Sy | cote AMOS 
Joo wXtsse0 .[ aS Loot E eos Lao "Nw. Qao 350.3300 Lua 
JN Jsa Qos LOAD joo Cots “Lasoo oos Awo 9o d 
|Nasaa} "ots hara”, heas «e ths "aeo Ju e aw OM ooo M 


ljas aaaso | «foo yl 909 AN aS 064 [49095 . haaa Joa EE rS 


pod om. 02 Hoe» ja ge om H losado h, Ope — A. 1 Daal. — 6. IL ins, loo. 
7. EH Bese anexo god. — SH Soo n. I. ee ned Wa — qo. \ don 


nation against him; aud he on his side would thus drink in everything and 
put up with it, and lugh, so that his very patience would shame the man 
whoever he might be: and he would by no means depart till he had supplied 
his need from lim, saving, « T iun grieved for my Lord Jesus, because he is 
hungry and has no quarter whenee to get food: otherwise I shonld not be 
troubling vou». And so he would receive it, and then depart. And thus 
he would intently aud eagerly look after the poor and the sick without 
remission and withont lassitude. And strangers who came in he would 
recetye inside and would refresh and wash and auomt them and would lay 
their res besides all the other attentious, and they would he down. And 
he himself would after a short rest for his body go and stand alt night Ina 
corner vows: and recite the service and take their elothes and give them 
changes, and would sed and wash and darn and repair theni, and so he 
would give them to theni; and for this reason they used to call him * Mar 
so-and-so the zealous’. But alter a period of some vears during which the 
blessed man tad been devoting himself to this great ministration, there 


eame the persecution whieh disturbed everyone ‘, and the convents removed 


lL. Since J. seems to have known bim before the expulsion, the 27" expulsion (536 7) musl be meant. 


[397] LIFE OF WALA. D99 
Dax flo JN Joa je Jaso aooo yopdo “Nas Doha? p2 
has 11524, ‘ome ne Seas comasan, Jinan coos Too Jus Koso 
JNS& al flo -Joa hio farms) [sec Jh pro joo pro € 
Nwaasoo foa aaribse Lara) Soo xS Kasay od Joo aso 
WAI Aaaa Qoo Joo rs do akak Sao LAS E joa wopalkso 
f.r.oos Lrscte -Liao m NEC Laan Wa» aawo [NAM Joo 
KONS ! lodos PADS yao +, Wensd00 Joa jN « JrGxo joa sian 
Lasoo wmeroo of Jassoo Joa Js farms) Joor Ji] [sos -yolo Joo 
J Eel be Les Ke o wens! e, henaa LoaM [e Lojas 
haj NS i Liamal> "Jo JNa flo La2os> Jo Joa alo Li 
Joa mua J| ogo wanoh Ws gy far A Joa peo ul o Joa Nl 
Laz qe; Spwo Ssjho 924 oi] mae! GIAXX 5&2 20 


|l. I] oma. — 2, II mys. -— 3. H laa lsateo jomas: — 4. A Ilomata. 5. The rest of this 
ch. and the beginning of eh. 34 are missing in A, 2 leaves being losh — 6, Ms. ins, þa erosseid 
oul, — 7. Ms. with points. 


after all their property had been taken Trom them, and the rest! stored. in 
certain places: and they no longer had an abundance of the things which 
their needs required in everything. And. the blessed man was much dis- 
tressed at this. because he possessed no changes of clothes for the strangers 
nor rugs; and he would disregard the fact that they were themselves n 
distress, and vex himsell over the strangers; and aceordingly he would 
contrive to obtain some worn-out old eoats, aud wash and darn them; and 
he would zo out to the dungheaps and pay no attention to The jeers both of 
those inside and of those outside, and thus he would collect rags and Docks 
of wool, and would bring them and washt liem, and cut them up, and make 
cushions and fasten them together and lay them out; and when a stranger 
came he wonld dismiss him? and lay a rug for him and make him he down. 
And so he found this method of carrying out his own employment, not giving 
up this strenuous pursuit lu peace or in persecution, in the eity or in exile 
(2osta). After a time he had a brother’, nnd he eontinned pressing him to 
eo and pray at Ephesus; and he lor his part was unwilling to do so. and Dis 


brother by urging him induced him to set out and go, And, since he was 


f. fic ave. — 2. Se. do resb: see p. 402, L 8, — 3. ic -Mr. 


en VEXEL EM le |o ET SEA |398) 


Laias ooh] - Jlaarcoy Jlasspo “Gs olo Joa woos] --. 'Jlasarss 

w «3 [o8 Bo] Joa Ns <> yl Jo Ao JE lia; laas 
laas somobusy Laul N aD flasdso Napao “cots 
«» Caos. dus) ow Joa aas JND, fie] haaa Da Loo 
veo aA cos coss LN lanpo leo laras yor do 
wre Babs Sox Ih ioo Lail hanso TEN oly Jsprosootr Jrobsos 
ad >] | Moore o] is dod j Lag v! og Lasako LXS ooo 
„Laios Gorarrio x? m Ad} Lans lao. Day scalas Nasal 
Jeo et Noo Loup Oda «ao „aaia col fly arose ac suo 
Jea swords foa of “J Nxsoy0 mada Snare p asad boo La 
S Lar Jupan, froopas wise Los wofjasaso wis 2o! JsloNK.s 
CM vido ele a> xe 9L soo AD ooo PE ss ag «2o Joo 


ed + No] sae Joo flsaso Laso, Jana) Doa Jia N s Lao ES 


L M», [arse op Hanes, After (his a word seems to have falen out, -= 2, Mes. QOH — 3. M», Omens, 
— v Mom s — 3. Ms. Ini SIC 6. Ms, sing. — 7. Ms. EE 


weak from the feebleness caused by asceticism and moreover. from the 
approach of old age, he fell into a serious illness lor a long time. and 
therefore, Inasmuch as some blessed men among the members of their monas- 
tery were iu the roval city, they? went up thither in order to take the old 
man, and so he entered the community gathered. together at that time by 
the queen who? had been gathering together perseented men from all quarters 
and looking after them. im that they had been placed by her in the palace 
zarama called Hormisda. where many distressed and poor persons. and 
strangers lay by the gate night and dax . Gut =the blessed man, when le 
saw these, and. an opening had been found for him also to give, thenceforth 
like a poor man who loses one of his great. possessions, and deeides in his 
mind that it will never be found again, and suddenly sees il and is astonished 
and glad. so was H with this blessed man also *, while he thenceforth doubled 
the earlier work. first by the leavings that he got from everyone and by his 
own portions (ustzo, and afterwards by the persistent elfrontery. (ypòna) 
with which he would ask everyone after they had been showing resentment 
and indignation against him and saying : « Mar so-and-so the zealous », 
and so he would perfectly carry out all the ininistralion to the needy with 


= 


1. Me. om, — 2, Hala and his bhrotlier 2). 3. Ms. ain. — 4. mee eh. 47. — 5. mie ssp. 


[399 LIFE OF SIMEON THE SCRIBE. 601 


bine ey) D Jase Los Rai [anata odf D, lads, Mio 

| je Joa Noo ol peer «Qe yl p20 Joa woos] Jlasrsoy 
(xw Hy cà y! Jaa oo pa [214.15 DA vao] faao fusas 

| JAD asolo str. o> iod. Dee Jen wus foot Sp Jae dts 
Dass La Lane Lucho fesso. Ll Jas faclo buses od) of 
slo «el xax ero 

c rent, chy ram moans aapa mdash Avr 

ramara nnda rus 


raada ram .as7313 aarda ulha edad aad | 
[$ re ore 





| oie, o oS aoa Jia JMsodsy faoa - of Joot aase oom s ME T T 


I. A had. perh. wadat (ged) far?) as al p. 202, 1. 2. — 2, Ms, «eel ee (his mlad, Ma ops. I follow 


the heading in A. 


superlluity, washing away the excrement of all that coninunity and bringing 
them water, though he held the rank of a presbyter. And, while il was 
said there as it had. been said before that he was a lover of vain glory and 
acted on account of men, he alone as if unaware of if sought that one object, 
to relieve persons in trouble, till everyone was astonished at him and they 
gave thanks to God, to whom be glory and honour and worship to the 
Father and to the Sou and to the Holy Spirit now and always and for ever 


aud ever Amen and Amen! 
The history of Fa blessed man whose name was Hala the zealous from the 


monastery called that of the Edessenes' is ended. 


[NEXT THE THIRTY-FOURTH HISTORY, Or SIMEON TOE OLD, 


THE SCRIBE oF Amipal?, 


* 


he used to expend upon them. until for many cays nothing succeeded: in 


I. Ms. "Mar Hala his prier be with us Ament)’. -— 2. The beginning is lost. 


GO? FOUN OF EPHESUS | 400] 


lasanan WM Joo ~~! ssl Sart bə Jaxl p JLL, Joa raa J perso 
i padlsoo Joa wo Nso of ofS Loot fuse fl Lals. SaN, bot ow CLAD, 
hago wis) ad e 290 NS Loot ize]: Jarrin, Jo o ota» GHD 


Jas eae JN o e Hlo e Nukso alos]: hab Juyuuflo > o] 
VE Lals -200l «e tO -ATO olas. cAol IN 
was flo .-basops bso,do ror xe? parv o» Lo Au] panado 
sok] M opl, Joa vel < o0 xl 990 9ot2! be «oor Nl 
sul o AG) Xs, flo Jor) oos Ks aaas bes > ols] 
Sok bis] leac lao aNs ihalo GS oss ol <> palios aris 
aaan goy vis J aail by |S Nas qo loot | suo for fl” 
ucianasale SX BSNS oo JL WS coh] xS e Jine -o> 
word pA Lasso: «aal J| .ocs yl be of roaa] lo aaas of 
alas a5 wh" ow lees bly HU Ph c BEDS 


ow «M | pe odi cn S wol: wt > Laaa JP ol Jea 


reaching his own particular table and those with him, while everyone was 
overpowered with greal astonishment at the abounding willingness of this 
inan of Cod, how he was not wearied or annoyed and vexed by all that great 
number of poor who were constantly with him, though often both we and 
other tazy persons hike me felt) weariness, and we were annoyed by the 
clamour and turmoil of many persons when we were present with him, and 
we said, « How is it, our father. that vou endure all this turmoil from morning 
even to evening, and do nol tell them fixed times at which they may come? » 
But he on his side would sav : « Do you tell me, my brethren, have we a 
lime al whieli we knock at God's door and are not received? has he someone 
al his door who is vexed with us or makes announcement to us and says. 7 Go 
now and come at another time’? Lo! isnot his door open before us at every 
time if we on our side wish to kuoek at it? and how then do vou advise me 
that, when he himself comes to my door, | should turn him away, or, when 
he knoeks. | should not answer him, or that 1 should fix a time Tor him? Is 
it not enough that Christ comes on his feet tomy door, but that’ f£, a vile 
piece of dust of his formation, should open my mouth to him in insult? or do 


we not believe what he told us in his preaching, saying, ‘To me ve du} IE =. 


LoS syr, — 2. Mallb.. XXV, 20, 





401] LIFE. OF SIMEON. THE SCRIBE. 603 


aM Yl aao RAAT& [eo] LSA) poo! flo srry clo md: do ole 
je Joa psd] [9 [&3 «fords; pepe be fran ee olaa 
Joa INS, DA Joa pro Wee Slo „hro ^ ]i3j2 JL guo 
Lago Laia o rel e x | eee HAD} Jassass Las. JI od 
ipao sam Jpg Jorn o] Joa Sxohso JNa Aar vooo, 
aay wA >| laso Law oo Sal aol ' eRe EA ouLajaco oA Joo 
sau [36 Joor usu oa od Jla) 25; omad pe ws yards A; 
„aai pio Jad aAa Joa wopdd oD do ga So Wl -Niao 
Jl ..oàe otlaso,> Joa Lilo farms! Maoswio Jlawawc [322 je» ha} 
oO aM joa ot sns “otopi hao ars oo Joas JI olo Joo iN 


:foa Luo [158.8300 E [sas od oD -2 Ja] a5, anle .JNazas)l 
haa goan LJ rao JI aX alo] oso Laias] pels ead J pose n 
ado Joos og JKoiasy Joco? Jos oan oo PI JE [Nass 


whether it be what is good or what is evil? And he said nott To vile and feeble 
men’, but ‘To me ve didit’. » 

And these things thts true bondman of God would say with sorrow aud 
tears besides many others. Bat at first he was indeed actually in great 
straits, because he had not supplies suflicient for his abounding Willingness ; 
but at last, when he had continued for several years, and the fame of his 
practices had been reported all over the eity, God also who had seen his love 
used to send him what he needed in abundance, and thenceforth the holy 
old man would contrive not merely to plant his foot in one footprint (25x02) 
of the patriarch whom he was desirous of imitating and remain there, but 
would! enlarge his steps? to run and reach many of his footprints; so that, 
besides the love and alacrity and hospitality which he possessed like him, in 
this also as well he did not fall behind him, that he personally and with his 
own hands performed all the service; and, as the patriarch, when he pos- 
sessed all that host of bondmeu and servants, when he saw the meu whe 
were received by him as guests, did not order someone else to run to the 
herd to. feteh the calf) but ran himself in his old age that he might be the 


receiver of the blessing and nol another, so this man with all that advaneed 


Iz spe du eet ds AIT 


HON EIS 


TRIP JOUN OEF EPHESUS. 402 


JKN anas Jaano si oia [reas oir JRasaal là! rot Laser ops] 
Yo oog res JMU Ns opas XLarso JL. sco ol É Joa ^ JLsà.so oot 
(oot asas s Load oo E JI ol o ol assas aS «99 Joa aas 
Jiokis Ke oo too She Juss, a>) a-a TAN tiy je 
Ilsa Lisl ere Sle -Jia Ns JL d So L>iso + flsassoo Joot yoko 
oM Joo ere Q5 J»jeo Jj Saarsdo foa bo oo JN sas La 
ame Joa jaa ooa SADa LXS; JNasaal, J305 „Lisa Loass 
Joa jas oao Joa pi €: Kiss ooo "Soter Dt LM orsass 
Nwoaalo. LOIS ES M y 990 ards) Lais DA Saardo 
Jia JNa NS oaao “LOAN Fardrd00 Joor aa [15000 xS. NS00 Joo 
yl mw? ol pado ado J'oks ooo eR -JXasaaby Lanas aro 
dod; wi Wo Gh] ls IN us: alja J} la>; Da Joa aod; 
ohudoas TI ; Je-o prod] haw ot UNS] fl) arson «^2 le IE 
Lawaan yolicoo eh} J Jl ose Joa MAN SSuasoo .otiolNo Ss 


1, Ms. odas — 2, Ms, bas ou Carr. from esse, 


old age nsed himself to perform all the service of the whole day, though 
many were then tiving with him in the eell, and he did not allow them to 
wait either upon him or upon anyone, but he himself would wait upon them, 
and often; whenever any necessary service was required, he would himsell 
rise from table. and fulfil it; and (a great thing which astonishes many) that! 
he would actually himself stand before the cooking-stand every day and 
cook without tiring, having laid down the following law (voxoz) for himself, 
that. as soon as they had finished nocturns, he would dismiss his companions 
to their bodily rest. and would himself direct his steps to the kitehen, and 
himself begin and cook until morning on account of the poor people who were 
in the habit f coming early, and would put the food together, and make it ready : 
and so he would go ont and wake them, and they” would rise to matins: and 
as soon as the service was finislied they would place tables both within aud 
Withont. Moreover, as if greedy for his great spiritual trade, he did not 
stop at? watting on those who came and went, but. he brought four blind 
men, and placed them in his cell at his table; and thenceforth he was not 


to be seen exeept distributing the food and placing it in the mouth of each 


hosie ro 2. Se, Ihe moths. — $. lis must be the meaning of Sx dall. The lexicons do not 


ive lhe phras 


[A03 LIFE OF SIMEON THE SCRIBE. 605 
Sxvad has lo Ordo Laon clo JA clo DARD LOOO par pw Soy 
J pe LOOK MAAS . COMO MALD Jo e h> Joo pare SOOLO pas 
AX sararoo ..Joot y «901430 pr par Nady Jo ol £2 EC ST) 
loo | p J|... Jac). of bas oon v% ala Joa IL} as volo JN 
DÅ, hrs lo Lasoo JL Da, La? NE <a oiNSas[so aopa, 
ooo s rola ooo < saoao JLoonsolo alaaa., J oas 
oo oo Joa olas Lio qa Kao ha loa fpas 43am we 
«43303 oos ud» v6 Qao - [asdco xx Jl] Joa pros Ji Me 
aAa | Spobly faoiase Joo asana loots [sso sos, pelo „ooo 
Liel Lains, bs A of «conie alas Joo oly <>) ol od uy ol 
fare JKusdo Ao Joa 52.2.36 oot watradro Leo o PL Joa RUS 
Sloot jas Jian ojo aac dso ha stds Ss pm Joa hd ooo 
xe (OO pad WHA SN aus ‘Loy ol sJoo [io ala Jer wil lo 
Al M lea dA) Jo. lo phe J «lo» fly Joa £l alas 


1. Ms. pref. s — 2. Ms, sing. — 3. Ms. loo jos. 


one of them by his name'; and, if 1l. were a portion of bread (?)*, or some herbs, 
or à cup, he would grasp each of them with his hand, calling them hy their 
names, and cntrealing and pressing them to eat, while he also grasped the 
hand of each one of them and made it feel the dish; and again that‘, ifanyone 
soever great or small eame to him, there was no possibility of lis separating 
his food [rom theirs, so that many great and distinguished men who used to 
visit lüm on account of his extreme old age and his extraordinary practices 
and were possessed by friendship for him did not like this that he used to 
make them sit among these blind. men; and he on his side paid no heed to 
these men, but these blind men were greater in his eyes than anyone, and 
he used to wait on them as if they were Jesus Christ, and there was no 
means of distinguishing either his own proper food or that of anyone who 
visited him from them? or from all the other guests, but he himself would 
walt both on them and on everyone, and would pour out wine and bring 
hot water, and himself mix it, everyone disliking this on account of his 
venerable old age: and, if anyone made any answer to him or wished to do 


anything instead of him, this is what he would say to him : «J, my brother, 


lo Sie syn — 2. Ms. portion’ ouly. Perk. à word has fallen out. bul ef; p. 395, 1l. ro. — i Sie sve 


Sheedy 


GOD OTEN eT Acs, [^0^! 


| ens ec» La. be Laco SCC je AN ONT e» px loo SDA 
jans o aal: T pol Daw p MOS. a SO pa yl Ja 3.30. 
Jes WM JD yoy Stas CX daa cob ases, vq pelo rabia JS 
haski, ee we y^ x hao Laxo Nasa àa iNiass ad Joot hay 
Lask, ba han Lao tO a> wook.! cedar Jeaer> p Onus 
van! jada Mode Ls: qo JL.58-5 ~ fo (woreda) VE ST 
Hoof) on. ser Jo. z Esp + Jor poe D or Jans] moasa oon 3. 
Se! oaksro <> JK5:a5 aman Saad coL HL: MS lo : seas, 
we 5e» oh we sles de; [Nasaaly boys aD loot haaay Joo 
Laid -NoLa às Joor Pose Jropseo iod o Loot Sahl Jl» Slo 
Lao Laasi Son Nío of Ka], So 21H? 0.90 Joa wits alas Ls; 

JaN; oU,0a9 yl be dH «2o [aayo kog 


erant aada rav anr rhand darle 


. MS, om. 


have nol insulted vou or qone youany harm, Wherefore do vou insult me? ». 
When then this saint had completed about ten years in the royal city itself, 
since, Inasmuch as he did found material for his trade in t, and inasmuch 
moreover as the persecution whieh was always everywhere did not cease, lie 
had now chosen to continue to remain in the city oeenpied in this labour, we 
onrselves. having been in intercourse with him Tor about twelve years while 
he was following these practices. so then this extraordinary man ended Chis 
fife! having strenuously completed all his daysin these great labours, so that, 
When he had become very infirm, and God wished to take him to lis abode im 
heaven, and he felt. that be was dying, he gave each of liis companions a 
present out of lis cell as he kuray to be suited to him, as well as the furniture 
of the altar, since indeed besides these things his cell was aetnally a church 
also, and an altar was contiunonsly set ready in it, ind a large congregation 
used to assemble before it. Amd he ordered all that be had to be sold and 
wiven to the poor: and so it was done. And he departed Irom this world 


according to the commandment of God, 


The history of Nimeon the old, the scribe af Amida. is ended. 


LoM onn stave die dived lovens in CP, and was in intercourse with d. for 12 years, be probably 


come tod P., able same time as d. ie and died in aan, 


[405] OF THE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 607 


andha rat Arana anwa phlda róusxóó aah 

róa réa olm Prahara rab einan emna 

vida ereen duran os eade ehala rc3^3eA 
saga oA 


* 


Nes Li] Las vis wd); Lsj Pe «e ol Wose p 
ol Los) A oa yanai 30,30 Op faso Da hasan So ol :Loo; 
Las] . yoasys omaan baspa Js. ba hipa ol; od Nopal} jso 
Laan Da . fates Lial E Ne oa» Je JL Loot J pay 
Lv e ols Pha kans Jadu Lato uuaa La Sx; Jolo [si 
LoNGe jag» Py LaNa, Lapa, [az xo jaN +, easy woe dd; 
J¥anyo Lsto3 ]z3ea T% aill Lo ba Daa hasan xA wikas 
«vel Sd xo yt “Da T Jiao Aage JNa pl “ipad? 


1. Ms. om. 9: — 2. Ms. ho 


NEXT THE TIHRTY-FIFTIL HISTORY, OF THE GREAT, ADMIRABLE, AND RENOWNED 
COMMUNITY OF TUE HOLY CONVENTS OF THE AMIDENES, WHO DISTINGUISHED 
THEMSELVES IN GREAT CONFLICTS (xyov) OF PERSECUTION, WHO WERE EX- 


PELLED IN THE YEAR EIGUT HUNDRED AND THIRTY-TWO |. 


Sinee then thirty years ago also in another book about the persecution” 
we put in writing a certain amount about this holy community also, we now 
too thought it right in the series of histories of the saints also to. put a 
memorial of it in writing: for how could it be anything but a reprehensible 
aet, while relating the stories of persons (z255670v) living a solitary life, to 
cover with silenee the story of a great and admirable community ol saints a 
thousand in? number? as to which too, if we wish to put an account. of il 
in writing, we shall fall no small distance inside the boundary of the subject 
of its history. This divine community then was composed of a combination 
of the convents great and small round the city of Amida and those inside it, 


and those of its territory (yé2z), and, as we stated above, contained not less 


1. 521, — 2. This lost werk is mentioned in the Eecl. Mist. (Land, p. 249, 208), and, since it related 
the descent of Ephraim to the East /p. 29%, cannol have been written earlier Uii 237, whieh is about 
30 years before 266 (see Tutrod., | VI. — 3. M-. om. 


PATR. UR, — T. XVIII. — F. 4. Ww 


* 01 v? b. 


GOS JOIN SE TPHIESUS: [^06] 


Jlassasony Lads pr haa Jes ps Po uix ads; frre DO qe 
oprollo Mhada aom l) Jipas Lupo :[5365 yar jasy Coops at 
exa homad JS sis" woan aD vocor Sansa Laot 
Jj flags dot Sarto ol, Lal : Noo N Jo Isla Saas 
fusars Nojot sel a ais lo a yl op doko SAMI oo p3a-» 30 
Jor ro ENSIS JH Jel? x20 Is c L0, <! La? haoo [3: 
Lalo Lions ïo Jo 203 qai JJ D ol :adyihl opsar DEN 
Lag, SoN hasadi Nio pa haano foi Jasad ariool/ 
lašo; Jlà&s| u5 qr Joa saos? Liuoio hai 4 -: La Jaam 2i 
és AJD o Abasi Lei poa haar og -hisa ag po JI] cool: 
Sl pd Sur Jompo el fran] asan haia ha bee o Joo 
Lasan, aaa «oot es] a, Jas Joao, JRvassas Sues 


D3 Je Soc o „tbo í I-A Kiss Js] vo JE Poss ba 


|. Ms. ges 


iu number than a thousand meu'; so that, having all, small as well as great, 
been fired by zeal for the faith, and having been duly girded with the armour 
of truth, they also entered valiantly and heroically and courageously into the 
strugele against the defenders of the eorrupt synod of Chaleedon, insomuch 
that by reason of these things they were by a violent persecution expelled from 
their convents, and met together and were marvellously combined in a great and 
spiritual cominunity, so that they were driven from place to place and from 
region to region, and after settling in many places were driven oul, or because 
they were not convenient and not large enough for their uumbers arrived? at 
the great and extensive convent in the village oftilzv n in Ty sf? which 
is ealled that of the blessed Mar Mama; but, though it was large and spacious 
from the times of the great fathers who built it, vet, even though this is the 
ease, this great community was cramped and straitened for room while living 
in it for the space of five vears*: so that our meanness also, though we had 
still only attained to the tender age of boyhood, were? with many others 
attracted by the renown of this community to come from the district of 


l. At p. 214 Lhe number is given as 750. 2. This sentence is confused and incorrect, but the 


Incatiinz is clear. 3. See p. 215, 260. — 4. 521-6. — 5. die sve. 


[407 | OF TIHE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 600) 
qwl el H eds updo Lisaks Jasas [i325 M? vy ioa 
Lə; oà bas, Lao fotos Laso jț>0+> eda dibo xor soo «200 
«b La asses flo! GN oom» o3 y Buds oà sL2aoio 
Lojas Joa NAM oaa «ordo ad Paro ooo asy au] a> Joo Mol 
lol Lado ANS JNacse Nis I polo ooo oie sunt Ih 
Juuod flsix lado sw [Meanie Dhyo shes hoo: Lawo . fips feos 
J'aacceo fpr p «Jot poss JNa; Lusols J paw Hoio Las hs lacus, 
SN SS T ha.» Leno Ji» Jen»; sje Malsso Jh wd 
No hloa hastu, Jamada, Juas) JAesse olo [Nsoo ‘hand ps0 
«oa ee Jl Ja" o ]3eo ie ` Jsotso JLassoo .Jlasasso Jlopsjs 
Nol 42 .ooot —— Jo re Jdasarsofc, .JKrsaras{o JN fxs 


. 


Iro 90.300 ) paso „Jal yooddo, has; ssossad kə; fial Joa 
No fao,so Kofann s bot ol J? taWa ot JQ dD a Loo 


1. Ms. Laer pe. 


Ingilene, and received the privilege of living in it, i. e., in the renowned 
convent of the blessed Mar John! while we also marvelled and wondered and 
were amazed at the great and divine spiritual practices of that great and 
spiritual people, whom it is impossible fittingly to write about or describe. 
Even if there were in that community a man of deal intellect and blind heart 
and hardened soul, it would be impossible that he should not be affected and 
bowed down aud repent, and be roused as from deep sleep, and come to 
compunction, and gain afllietion. of mind, and pour out piteous tears, and 
betake himself to spiritual works of righteousness, and embrace the strenuous 
running in the lofty road on seeing revered old age with honourable white 
hairs bound to the yoke of spiritual labours and duly dragging it, and * middle 
age and the tender years of youth also being drawn along in the pursuit of 
abstinence and asceticism, and holiness and watehing and fasting and prayers 
that never cease at all hours of the night and day, who? used to stand 
constantly before God; while it was a great marvel to hear the thunder ol 
their admirable voice, and to listen to their holy and divine singing, not only 


those? of the canon *, bnt those also which took place privately and separately 


l. See p. Se — 2. Ms. om. — 3. Sie SMS — 4. Be. the canonical hours. 


Swe 


to JIDHN OF EPHESUS. (408 | 


cri xo 300 [es Ss oo CMS So xao » Jobo > Joo Kul 
she xe! DÀ Jos oa jeas ocv», Jho Jag olo “Ud. Sa» 00 
ado Leioa NGA, fos Jed 6x9 Mo Jua Joo N? ot 
foto Le be BJ. ba Jasas Issam vodan . flax dy 
ol Ex» ol Cae Axnalo0 yaoni joo B] xo qth ouo Loop» [sens 
D ort NJ we! Jagan] o seeeQ2AMle fei of NS ol Pp 


eJ Naa JNSOSE sess JANN Jo e xo ven, oo 29] 


Lx: wao, JKasasl iNo me «Jor sso Karo arty, SS De Wootko 
yl ooa o 0; waaa o5 haoa M liso aao, 
wy Wo “bey JN] las" o J Nasas Noo LaNa, Lupas ahos |» 
SS Laow LA MDa ots T :Jilaiwo fasoiyo valso Kayo Als 
-haway ol Laa of chiul Los. qoo» jax aN e ] eso Joa 


during the winter season, from all the rooms and from all the cells and from 
all the doorways and from all the corners (ywviz), and the corridors (¢70%) and 
halls of all that great convent. But in the summer-season these were the things 
that one might see and hear with great astonishment, especially during the 
whole extent of the nights, tn ail the surroundings of this convent, especially 
in the broad and spacious stony ground, up to some distance from which 
there were men standing and reciting the service two and two, or four or less 
or more, or a master and his disciples, and others were lying alone upon their 
faces, and some way apart from one another, whose voice was heard from all 
sides with mighty erving of rushing tears of weeping, from after the canonical 
nocturns till the matins bell, and so they would again meet together for the 
holy canonical singing. and so afterwards they would the whole day meditate 
on the law (vsus;) of the Lord as it is written ', while reading the Scriptures 
and reciting the service and the regular prayers of the hours, terce, that is, 
and sext and nones and vespers aud compline?, while all idle and vain speech 
had fled and been cast out from among them with all human conversations, or 


1. Ps. 1, 2. — 2. V. D. and. L. wrongly ‘nocturna’, Nocturns and malins have been mentioned 
above. Only matins, sext, vespers, and nocturns seem lo have been common services. From ch. 17 
(p. 254) and ch. 29 it seems clear that there was no common service between vespers and nocturns, 
and from ch. 29 /p. 363) it seems unlikely that there was any between matins and sext. 


[409] OF THE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 611 


Jiu Jo e quer de JH ani eene ul ol 
eoe Jana] pe Jos je») dnas pads po Jxser jam) dolo Jano 
Laan por Wiese j Phar nore Jes Janaa j Jlasol Jy Jaaa] 
Jea Joor Kul wa Daa haio Lanao; Mawo «Lisi fiaro 


me? ol oa gano aa co Cras a po 
Lasag jw «e haoo o coe jija po Snare aAa 
000 anon sd Jhatousys E 9001 c9 Jlaaaso «coo was 
qiio Luo Sot J5 «goo Say aot ]e3oes Lao} a] eI Las? 
Jsarossso LSAS bebo jh woasalo eonan [o LOOO 10001 
(ei) Joa haou -.oothims yas codes ves use :Jor Laias 
«o2» [xa; valea ol Po Lss] yar Joa Jo Snare hoe pars 
o ET roots -LNS Jh [a flsaro "aos INN 

el JN soo Ja. ~ ans] aoo oco d J o Less 


1. Ms. om. — 2. Ms, H99. 


jestiug or laughter, or suchlike things, but instead of these things was to be 
seen thanksgiving aecording to the apostolic saying', and sorrow and 
compunction, and tears, one conversation only, that with God, one order, 
and one habit (y%u«), one union, one coneord, one serenity, one quietude, one 
love, and downcast looks, and gentle and sorrowful speech at all hours; 
and, though there were to be found some who were young and some who 
were of light disposition or who were loose in their speech, when we 
looked at one another and wondered, they would thenceforth take example 
(túna) from one another, and learn devoutness, and be rivals in works of 
righteousness; so that, if any discerning man observed the practices that 
were common to all these spiritual ranks, and their sorrowfulness and thet 
habit (sy%ux) and their praises that ceased uot night aud day, auc took note 
of their open as well as their sceret aets, he would think that he was already 
dwelling among heavenly, not among earthly beings, while all these spiritual 
and brave combatants (zyoww4:;) used to pass most of all the protraeted 
hours in tears and labours with unceasing sorrow; so that from the first 


lh Eph; v, 4 


* 
tgp 


a. 


HE JOUIN OE. EPHESUS. [^10 


SSS Js J w of :ahuaskKs baw -— VT DMSO; lily P 
"ird Qaa watts Waaso Q2 Joo sodas fl fs JL. jo boianas wads] 


«ol Daas sao] Jado anma» fram. of £e He Joo as 
frdsass Savor lly oot Lams, oa Joo Jj Nso Lolo Lago Jinan pram. 
Aano pads Joa Jp ofa sido hay Joa bag joo bamus 
‘Loasasto LOM Todds; heas hasn jane hiano [law calo 
LSS ewag ancy Loo) bilo -frodas qrarco qira bio 
0001 «A399 [Nady JL UNS boop, SNDL flats isle :bo& Jl? ods 
esi voolans Kaos z i qAdanine oooi y LAA opts LOAD LOLO 
eu yj Pag LOBOS ooo eM |31&3o Say ve Es 9o» ooo 
Sus; foo Nl «lh Lasas -aaao NS Lo jxeXxo fds :0001 
oio, Nuo palio -Nosy «o Jl JA ‘ela «4300000 oL xol'o 
oca aiaa gda fioro eve Nan Wax Jian Nis qe) yl 


1. * ins. laler, perh, in fater hand. — 2. Ms. Jocwlo: eorr. v. D. and. L. — 3. Ms. Wyo- 


hour of the night or at latest the second! no man in full health was to be 
found on his rug, or not lying on his faee with genuflexion and tearful 
praver, everyone thenceforth emulating and rivalling his neighbour; and, 
though emulation is in its nature a deadly aud destructive thing, there an emu- 
lation was seen that is beautiful and good and sound, a thing that it is 
difficult for hearers to believe, that emulation ever was a good thing; for, 
when everyone saw his neighbour active and eager and constant for prayer 
and genuflexion and tearful sorrow for the apace of a whole night and day, 
and others ranged in rows and standing on standing-posts, and others who 
had fastened their bodies to the walls all the night without standing-posts, 
and others who were tied to the eeiling of the room by ropes aud. vine- 
branches, and were suspending themselves by them in a standing posture 
all night, having put them under their armpits, and others who were sitting 
on seats and never falling on their side, old and young and strong and weak,” 
and that to so great an extent that, even if there were a man who was idle 
and stolid and careless and lazy, he would be incited by the sight of these 
labours. aud awake with astonishment as from deep sleep, and would thener- 
forth labour, and emulate these heavenly praetiees, while Falso the wretched 


]. See p. 20%. n. 1. As they had supper after vespers p. 2511, 7 and 8 P. M. can hardly be mean. 
— 2. Our aulhor forgets how he began this lung sentence and completes the sense in another way. 


——— = ~ 
————— ——— ———— 


[411] OF TRE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 615 


£x laD JKooaas, Lis Koo rep «2l Lamao L6) b] ol yo 
Kuda Jj Jana Noa was 9] > x pe cj oe 
(s cà) Spr va sJorxrsolo [530i «et Jo rats «oo 
um» qne Jes fl of an JI hadaa of JRopor yel cue Sa 
lp al Ico «Set jJ» Ww ECS aapa me pe «OUR; \asdo 
faas Lol sro faao] od Jaw So ia [aco cro [3$ ago s jns px 

3330 . [2s Jf. JRcuflo hoot Lise fjas baso [a5] Soy [Qo Jh 
sj] Nase .:Joo Jj eso» sul Ww» JA-ES JM gino Jo Jul 
Los qM» M3eo faos Nooo pamo sismo Do Joa LY oaia 
AAN Jol) Sx eom, JLo Lae] opad = Jlacusys 
JN). jipa ols y .'oo0t wt || eoo vM C Jija 00090 3 ve p, 
hol" Jo Jago Mino seaga fare qo aay eoa wi] So 
Lisas, froasd, fagrss Sly Las? Jo Jrmas voä wets oues 


1. Ms. om. ; v. D. and L. ins. per coni, +‘ afler V5. — 2. Ms. © 


and poor, though deficient in years which were in the age of boyhood, 
thought to emulate such things, and | would also go out by night and see 
them in these great and marvellous conflicts (zyóv) and labours, and Fhe 
who knows! all knows that our description of them contains no embellishment 
or flattery, nor are we able to record a tenth part of the truth of them, 
and ', if anyone wish to write a record of these holy labours, he will leave off 
far short of the end, with regard to that constant allliction, and with regard 
to the unremitting contrition spread over men great and small, and the 
unceasing sighs, and the copious tears, and the crying and severe sobs 
because everyone was looking at his fellow, and everyone was emulating his 
neighbour and Jearning and acting, and was practising and nnitating and 
was eager to pass Ins fellow in the race of righteousness; so that many 
among them had the power of performing signs, and used by faith to drive 
out fiends before our eyes, even as in the series of the histories we have 
recorded the story of some of them who were tricked by the evil one?, and 
many acts of power and signs took place among them secretly and openly, 
insomuch that paralyties who used to come on the report of the benefits 


1. Ms, oni. — 2. Ch. 15, 


GL‘ JOUN OF EPHESUS, (A12 
Jlaspsey franco! o aoao .arcfllo adal] |, 0004 «ll «90.50 


sido, Ja] oog Qeon: IL — bia LLI% o} +2 ooo <L 
fesciss fats Lanus Jhosh/ «209 „joa pros JLo do [5394.2 
JNoiaado Jlas Sy yl Ceo soo coo! x6 faso Lo hass Lad 


999€ Cawoihsd ooo qaw Jano] Sr; JLeueo do Boro qx 
<l fons Lo Ns; xA». eA JP Je) Jaso Joa 130: N39. su] aso 
Sud] Jlasory uà ho Laras ops Jods paor |liso [cm eso Jes 
Jamaa Bex); bard cro Jig — fad"Ls ooa ere Jooty oà franco; 
DU sire 061 Jo «Loot Loo Laco: Mosis JLoi en xD)» ROO 
Jai y jr Jur haan oujpasos Lor Jib - oma, «Do Spoo 
vot JNa JANS” Nosaaa, [an aaa uaa uoaa Laa 
gan o deese: |i] o€*» ha Hs o5 L5 hawo oa Joal 
Jlontons!s JL Las ‘eared. vxo p>? Jin] Jiaas moped Joa 
hasian] Moama coords; Jhi Nao Joa suas od Jhan, oi NS. 


conferred by them were straightened and healed, and would immediately come 
to receive the habit (6775) of monasticism, itself, and chosen vessels! were even 
made out of many of them, so that everyone marvelled ai the report of these 
wonderful things, and crowds of men from distant countries would hurry to 
this holy community and arrive among it in order to receive prayer and 
blessing from these saints, and many who needed healing were relieved, and 
everyone marvelled aud gave thanks to God. But we do not wish to cover 
with silence one at least of the many miracles whieh God wrought in this 
same community, one that resembles the abundance brought about by our 
Saviour among the many thousands out of the little bread in the desert. 
Once, when a dearth had occured in the districts of the East, God who knows 
his own and is known by his own blessed the district in whieh this holy 
community was settled, in order that he might show his loving care for it, so 
that the produce of that vear came forth in 1t plentifully, and there was a great 
and rich abundance in it, so that the whole district of the East had recourse 
lo it to buy corn; so that one day a great crowd of strangers was assembled 
at the door of that convent, and extraordinary expense was incurred upon 


them in the way of liospitalitv. so much so that the bread which had according 
j Į i È 


lE NACLS INX IS. 


[^15 OF THE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 615 


afro je yl: oò rads arsardd Topo Oly fal soy «Loot Joal 
Jas JNS asso [3s uss oly ha] flaw!) bee LN joo 
Lasag o42axX co Jos JM. Lej xl p2 COO PALO sto} Liao 
Nol wolo cof «ds Jh breads Jpn yb Jisaso hancs 
vootasaco Jisas fos] oe x» No S oa: Jo - Janan] 
e Kofi ala anus «Los edo Lats w! aa Jaca lse «208 
J X25] o Jones Lams «&aslo «aSJ Ai» Aq | BNET YS ed 
annaa ira, flas qaas J «vele Diss `~, <> IK, lo 
serum cue PSM o -Asi Laimo farmilyo häm, hasan 
Jiasy eres hoops „Joa eases er? Jas ORA [4,002 y wert 
[.12:a420 eco <> Nea oy Mele joo fass, Laros Los yo 
Laco qo Jaca œ Jaa. johyo Jai esos JAN. So pKa] JN 
Janasa Las] ru! a dso, ce] p "Joa flaw! ei» Lod 


I. Ms, &5:5. — ?, Ms, loo. 


lo custom been prepared by the servitors' for the food of the brotherhood was 
actually on the point of being exhausted, insomuch that the chief servitors 
and the stewards were coming to the great seniors and saying ruefully : 
« The provision of bread and cooked food which had been according to custom 
prepared for the food of the brotherhood has reached the point of exhaustion; 
and there are still many strangers lying at the door, and we have no means 
of supplying the need of these and of the brotherhood ». But these divine 
seniors answered them quietly, saying, » Glory to our Lord! Go, our sons, 
and bring forth and relieve the poor and the strangers; and, if anything 
remains over for us ourselves, well, and if not, we will keep fasting vigil to- 
day, and let the needs of the strangers and the poor and the needy only be 
supplied, and let them not be eut short by us ». Then these men expended 
what was prepared according to the order, until a small quantity was 
left. And, when the canonical service of vespers was finished, and it was 
known that a small proportion of what was needed remained over for supper, 
some words of admonition and of exposition were addressed by these holy 
seniors to all the brotherhood, in which they said : « Since our brothers the 


strangers came to satisfy the necessities of their life, that which was prepared 


l|. See p. 62, n. 2. 


65 ph p. 


* ^s 


b. 


616 JOHN Ie EPIUESUS. [A14] 


ews NA sey Je yl = Joa S No: ere EN EE 


“Laser GN Lads Jo Sata JSN JNsias Sudo ido TUE 


Jas] «3e; Jao Nas su] So facie cod Jos Jos n Lja 

Lal Jio SX all], Jiary froard ashuo ecole Laok] 
poo saadu voL of JN Jew oscars yko, ypo «papas au] 
SN SIS eg" [sas VM» p jono amsha] uu] Sas anamo anal 
ol he giia hash) da oa bas ol po ypa D c» PK 


* 


SQL] SM «e o ha Jliarsosly ano] x Jos rm x9 ep !y 
Jla} à» Naso Jasajllle ootolo ooo) sido xx» a> ws] Soo 
aAa «Moo -haas wai [lazo ors PS JsoKko, LOAD 
vo [am s Lal Jhe poops .fago wily Joi Jiu 
E» ope Joy pro] 25 Bo Jant) lads Qa» Jibexm dato 
«Das o9 S) > Sars; Jor. Lads LLasoad do Yasana locns 


AAA woo v1 Ade eddy edes Ms Jano i pO saaana 


1. Ms. Uy. — 2. Ms. om. 9 fin. — 3. In erasure. 


for us according to custom was bronght out, and little remained over. Let 
each of us receive a little present! with thanksgiving and continue without 
murmuring, for thus he will have a recompense from God». And so everyone 
aecepted the words that were spoken by the fathers; and they gave thanks, 
and sat down to the little food that was set upon the table, so that everyone 
thought that something to put into liis mouth would reach bin once or twice. 
And, when all had eaten and been satisfied, the tables were found to be (nl 
of bread in abundance, more than every day, though that great number of 
men. which as we have often said, was not less than one thousand, had been 
satistied; so that, when this miracle was suddenly seen, and all had observed 
it, all marvelled and were astonished, and were excited. And the whole 
brotherhood stood on the tables themselves together with all the old heads 
of the convents. and they ery * Kyrie eleeson’. with great awe many times, 
with many tears ; insomuch that these holy old men addressed many words 
to the brotherhood with emotion, saying; « Lo! see, onr sons, our lack 
of faith and our churlishness toward God at all times, that, while he in his 
mercy is always visiting us. and showing his care for us, we wished to 


o 


|. Lit. ^ blessing’, 


[415] OF THE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 617 
Kine ha JE] aNd ol; «9 INN a» Lainan? JI 
v HM SX aus Joss joe! Ylarmasas ol Ma] 
JR nyo N] [ac qo foo Heo Juil yas eM Hot 
wA Bel Qer cà foi Laaio JA] Lee Noth] au] Sas JKiyolo 
Ss. Joa yanal? w> JI el p20 nakl, fe Joor aghso aaa 
-Maell fo od fess oio, fram ise Qo "oio dot filol go - Joke 
wool] p2 Pl JoMo «6 aroha, Jilo Joo m~l flo - waltalo 
JaN, JRuyoho JA; JN foo fas ouse joo Won -Sya chlo 
ceo ` Jlosh] Lomas + Jrot Jliaroyhy oia. ol p «hoot Loa wu] Sas 
JEiasoghy Sot filol «0$. Joa pee BA ada joa Sxsohsd [55 Jasio 
Hohe! «3o! wu! Lops p> x J55 basso Jisan No «Joo on 
S4] So yar xao «Ml Sl; jia sotos yl JN sas as Loot 
Sw] eM boos p> as poe yoo Jóuse JNojas ato 


1, Ms, IbatnooraS. — 2, Ms, 349. — 3. Ms, 0x, 


be churlish to our brethren the strangers who eame to us, for whose sake 


also this sign has appeared among us as well as for our reproof, since we 


wished to take thought only for ourselves », besides many other things of 


this Kind which were spoken by the seniors; and awe and thanksgiving 
were excited in everyone. And soa great basket (xzjx) was brought in that 
four men could scarcely carry after it had been filled; and, though not half 
of it had been placed upon the tables, out of the remnants whieh remained 
after all that great multitude had been satisfied it was filled to overflowing, 
and would not hold the remnants that were taken from the fables, but, 
when it was filled and packed(?), itt was falling from it this side and 
that; and great fear and thanks to God were called forth im everyone, 
while the story of this miracle was also spoken of in all these countries 
with great wonder (for everyone pressed to take some of these miraculous 
remnants, and keep them as a blessing and a great help) and our own 
meauness was there at the supper as the truth witnesses that we also ate 
and were satisfied with everyone, and we took a blessing from it; and 


we have recorded these things not as having been conveyed to us by report, 


1, Sie yr. 


PO papers 


GIS JOUN OF EPHESUS. [^16] 


CIENT ACA vana SO Oly La? 1200 Jaros Ksoo LL Jil 
bias, Pads o joa 32 Sel y Jloarsolo JiSl] JN. r^ 
Was s ol r2 kaspo oà fasar, ADO Lasto, oA ote 
+ OOM voor. Nao; Jlaz]: Jlasolo Jlasars T J.50 rao J zoas 
JNXMSo [Nass Jeo .J] 253a: ~o Laso; qo Lajo jyan «oo. as. 
«xm» ,5 7 aoo loa jl] Sas Jlosos Jo JKasaah Juo Jiono puo 


1 amao ooa qaa J yl THN Re nw C0) Cian 
day Jlasls và pro ow Jh Jpsoaxn We» Slas hes yard 


Nba LASA «2925 e) AUSOO Of» aso aläs;o hoot Dop 
xot bao, Pru] laaa, o$ Jas «oo» yas . 260 «aes so 
JNa giaa; Mba WM v0) 
IE ash] où jaan > arcs wis soa Loa Scot > 
„Laso; Ro <x oj p» cU JN] Lo, Laaa, Jlaasoo 


hut because we were eye-witnesses and partakers, so that we have also 
recorded the truth of them and borne witness toit. But he who performs the 
will of those who fear him worked other such marvellous signs among these 
same saints of that holy community, and all these great holy convents had 
also henceforth one convent and one rule in one concord and unity of the 
spiritual brotherhood, and one administration, and one expenditure and 
revenue, aud one table, and one service, and they had one coalition 
throughout, twenty servitors out of each body of fifty men being combined 
together io perform the dutics', the separate character of each convent being 
preserved in this only, the fact that its own brotherhood was separate, and its 
belongings and its archimandrite and its priests, while all the alfairs of them 
all were administered in common, together with all the spiritual labours of 
brotherly concord of the types which we have imperfectly recorded above in 
few words. 

When then they had completed a space of five years? m that convent, 
they determined to take up their abode in the neighbourhood and vicinity 
of their province (92227:z) * of Amida, though by reason of the persecution it 


I. We should perhaps understand that there were usually 50 hebdomadarii in each monastery, and 
lhat in the combined convent 20 oul of each 20 were laken. — 2. 521-6. — 3. Often used by the Syrians 
in place of émasyia. 


[417] OF THE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 619 


Jikhs opazo ol] Re aaia coo yaaa faao 5 bows 
eel fap Sos; deed JNa feos fryer dy) Jroksoy 
L2 JM; Q9 2o: Of poy fir! dash JAx3e) Daoa, Jills 
xe ` Jazo loa fusary a vapaana v v Jer oo oot 
eoo$ru Jess Lda] Ne Jes pads Hie) o» Lor, oN! 
L5N. 2350. haios ]5e225 JS M39» .Weo casas hais of Jie» 
OOO qaa Jornrol Looma fai jas hisce LOHPIARNION axa a 
Saio vais od Je JoKcoy Jpsansad haso JMS, o el p 
el p :Joot JKo0,-> ann AD WIL Lois) La Da Q9 . ood 
alaan ujass oopan Noo "op aol] ool «Nl Lonas 
horo oà faaora aD Addo wal ia ol po Ludina LAs 
voy] amasijo apol] .9 adro arsa ooma, JKaaro vx 


I. Ms, þaapos; corr, v. D. and L, — 2. Ms, ro 9Ll. 


was only under difficulties (avzyza) that they could appear in the same pro- 
vince ()zaoyíz). Then they eame and took up their abode in the district 
called that of the East ', in a monastery called that of the Poplars, on the 


border of the territory of Amida, in the district opposite the hot spring? of 


Abarne*; so that, when they saw that the place suited them, but that 
monastery was very small and confined for the purposes of their habitation, 
then they were compelled all the summer-time to set up tents for themselves 
outside on the mountains and under the wild trees surrounding that convent, 
and erect huts in extended and varted lines for themselves to dwell in; and 
so they aecomplished the great labour of their marvellous practices, being 
also compelled to build and prepare for themselves great houses for winter 


habitation m that monastery. When then they had completed a space of 


two years and a half’ in this place, while we were also with them. they 
were ordered to enter their convents at the beginning of the reign of king 
Justinian’. Aud, when they had also completed niue. years and a half in 
the first persecution dated from the expulsion of their convents, they 


1. Ms. ‘Altar’, for which I adopt v. D. and L.'s emendalion; cf. ch. 58 (f. 18% v? b. Clearly the 
dioecesis Orientis is not meant, nor the eastern part of it, bul a district lving E. of Amida. — 2. Syr. 
'Mamimlha'. Cf. p. 221. — 3. Amin. Mare AVID ix, ti ‘Josh. Styl’, xx xiv; Geo. Cypr, 331. — 
^. It is clear from the term of 9 12 years given below that this should be 4 1 2; see Dyakonov, 
p. 29, n. 160, — 5. End of 530. See Introd., p. tv. 


9s VS 


d. 


020 TUA EN CHE EPHESUS, MS 


Sh st ss x39 xS IN xo Aamo waa oto} Koo eoa sS. 
ASA Lado ‘Lato » [aasal LASN aawo LORA aD QO ‘`N 
ol. yl oM» ] Nira ə] r2 „eoa x20 [Fe EN va ole 
Adrcuam Lads osu Jass La] loa Jis «coros, Jasdioy frsdis 
root lyon, No > Ag 90 waa fils jian LOD vasa p ool La? 
lily Kade adllo - frsosss Lol! LOAD Sal Dol v wot 
‘Lo oğ xo rp <’ asà .as15]] La; hasas Lisa ol € reas) 
wol] Laios Lacio «2o! Las <>> og ol, j xas> opazo oll ol jo 
„asi Ll ba «o Slo wol +20 JNa! Nopo holy JNa, solo 
j>; Jax jo Snare poo JMsiany Col Jeu oS Loos anaoa 
ali loo werd ee NS). LA hops + 0001 xao LSN wot 


returned. and came in on the invitation, and they found their convents 
destroyed and demolished and knocked to pieees and turned to earth, m- 
somuch that they were obliged to set themselves to labour night and day, 
and build, and set up and restore all these convents, while the whole city 
also, so to sav, used to hold sacramental assemblies with them, so that 
few remained with the Synodites; so that again, when they had completed 
seven years and a half! m the convents after their restoration, then the 
furnace of persecution again blazed up against them, and they were expelled 
and departed a second time; and in this way also a great community was 
assembled, though smaller than the previous one, when they also came 
and dwelt m a convent which itself too had once been a great one whieh 
was built and erected by great saints, in the village of "Phella d Phuthe ? 
in Gumtha*; and, having again been expelled from this also as well, 
they came back again to the monastery of the Poplars. And, when they 
had thereafter been completing the labours of these divine practices in this 
monastery for the space of three years’, then occurred the desceut of 


1. This nust be wrong. The descent of Ephraim was in 536/7:see Introd., p. tv), and therefore 
i , 


the expulsion cannot have been later, The summ 2 1,2 + 7 1 2 however is about right, and the error 
perh. arose from placing the return at the beginning of Justinian’s reign, which began in Aug. 527. 


— 9, se. chill of the sscamore-'. — 3. Se. tthe ench g ef. Aim, Mare., NVITIL, ix, 2 Cauma- 
thena’. It lay on the E. bank of the Euphrates. — 4. Clearly wrouz, perh. an error for *3 months’; see 


p. HU, nl 01. and. Dyakonov. p. 30, n. 166. 


[419] OF TIE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 621 


ex exe i5) LaL: pao Laupa £o beu Loos jl 
xn LoD amagi) J| p :elaslas wis cas] pansy yel oala 
aao Liara, Laan | Lato Bado Lys Jlad ne Qoo» jpa 
JL Jn co Lsa oà Ls Ss oly La? Joilla vas] 2.3Jo 03,30 ordo 
JRiraly onu N so Sapso JJ aS Nas] Joo Mu] Jot ss. J Lone]. 
Sas Lao; DAS ad [ao Ms) Ge, va SOBs ol colo 
001 2 aake fala Laios J20 Jlo Da JI] sas D 
m So -anello oie Naw [s Ahly en05 Nos <x 
Joo! A Jal Nlo onsas | auasly JNa Jisas - 
Jloshl: [oko LuNa Lilo LiAsisasy;o Lese —LqN9ex2 
Laso Jujo Eo sas TES bees le aooo ABMS 
razao Jho JA» pao Qopxexso cares laani Lan] xe JLoslly 


Ephraim the persecutor, the patriarch of Antioch, to the East'. And, 
when he had several times sent them a persuasive doeument in order to 
make them members of his communion, when they did not yield to him, 
then he sent armed and armoured hosts of fighting men against them as 
if to fight against barbarians, and they expelled and ejected and seattered 
and dispersed them over the countries; so that in respect of this time also 


one might now deseribe many marvellous things which God wrought, if 


it were not for the fength of the history, and further also because the 
standard of our work is not now raised to relate the story of the perse- 
eution °, but it aims at deseribing the exeellenee of the practices of the saints. 
When then by reason of the persecution of the impious Ephraim they were 
thenceforth scattered and divided, each one of the convents went to any 
quarter that they found and settled there, and in some places two; so that 
they were divided over the territory of the Edessenes and the Samosatenes 
and the Perrhenes and the men of Melitene and the other districts, and 
some of them from the stress (xvxy74) of the persecution even withdrew as 
far as the southern desert also, and ‘Arab? and tzla* and the other districts 
and dwelt theret. And, when they had set up many places, and built many 


l. 536 7. The perseculion began with the descent of Ephraim, and we should probably understand 
i 


lhe extension to this district to be here meant. — 2. These events are also relaled in the Eccl. Hist. 
(Laud, p. 29%). — 3. See p. 382, n. 3. ^. *Izalü muns^; see Aman. Mare. NVIIT, ep 125 NTXS 1x. 4: 
Theoph. Sim., |. xtu, 4, et passim. If was tlie range lying N. of Dara. — 5. J. o Idly omits Clandias, 


where he settled himself. See ch 28 of 130 r° a. 135 1° bi, 


ko Quo pis 
y spass 


"ung b 


^ot v 


Jd. 


622 JOHN OF. EPHESUS. [^20] 
Kean Jsanui so ach blo Jil! N ars! ais Jib go Jio 
Jens. Loos Gol aS So exl] ool aasoio ..Lanuo$ «oon! s] ber 
ool roo cl JN; Slo aD; Ela No wendy Jasy iK» vo 
vars col, £20 xe xen 300 I ari Kooy vas anne | pe olo 
ol G»3a4'oo Aaido :ooXxuao, jado fly JNaaso JL o ] 3. Ns 
X9ou3e asik] Col aasoto ao ood haoo, Lex» woh cops 
Nawo coms cadsasy aaia? col veis Shh pol p QNS JN 
Wish JN Ji Spee oo cijo Ee. Jaa, JN soul JNa 
COA qapad Loa o} e FETU J Hesse Joe 5 ipho Aso 
CAs Luurdma. vaaia, bazad Lees tanao Se so 
Jsasseh Nas ^ on. MEAM ha JRurxaly Godan os far ol; Lo 
jaz, valaas; hy RD Joos Jl fun.) Juez vaso gaa 


Io M SOT o 


monasteries, they found a little opportunity and were drawn by love of the 
coflins of their spiritual fathers, and they eame back again and arrived, and 
again entered the same convents after a space of twenty-three years! that 
they completed, and Tor the second time also. And, when they had vet 
again fonnd them quite completely knoeked to pieces and demolished and 
destroved, and when they had again been involved in much Jabour and 
no small expense in setting them up, and had built. them and set them 
up, then again a storm (yewev) of perseention rose up against them, and 
they were again expelled from them a third time, when they had not been 
allowed to complete even two more vears in them’, and thereafter return? 
to the southern region of the desert and of * Arab and of Izla, and of all the 
eountry round the city of Dara and go down and be scattered. over the 
places and the monasteries for the purpose of habitation, while even so 
they habitually showed strength and prowess. down to the end of the life of 
Justinian the king, at which also we have now made the end of this history, 
whieh is the vear eight hundred and seventy-seven * according to the era 


of the Greeks, so that the time of the persecution of these convents besides 


t. This brings us Io 559; bul aecordtiig ta ‘Zach. Bh," xir, 6, the monks were in Amida in 553. — 
— 3. This would be 561; but see n. 1. — 3. Sie sw. — ^. 5656. 





[421] “OF THE AMIDENE CONVENTS. 623 


qaa cat Dyal nia ceno ET cba oa», jad wot 
et che 2 Jlasos.5 cas! à» cres canon Lao > oly Jil 
«2o cope» Lardo pa pansy haa os «38S» jla Moe 
J ex woot TN Da gydo hel jsa > elo + «oo Lanan L5as 
NCCWETY Qe Ja tos Jhopatin 26 wand Sot lols 15365 Laosko 
Jhsaasol Mas ou Nol haon Lopa + weliho whddho JJsassol Nis ao Joa 


+ j]iselo qao 


rinas raanda wah Lani hard Anli 
halL aiai malar elm sr Dea rna 
“aN eade 


L Ms. ajans. 


all the East is no less than forty-five years, and others' even more; so that 
even to the present time at which we are committing these things to writing 
they are under the same persecution, we for our part having completed these 
things in the royal eity at the stated time, having been under persecution 
together with them from beginning to end, and being so even to the present 
time. And these things we have set down concerning these brave conflicts 
(zyóv) and great combats, which themselves also do not dl far short of 
spiritual heroism, the beginning of wlich dated from the vear eight. hundred 
and thirty-two ?, down to the present day which is the year eight hundred 


and seventy-eight®. 
The history of the great and admirable community of the holy convents of the 
Amideues, who distinguished themselves in the great conflicts (zyx) of 


persecution, ix euded, 


|. Sie syr = 2. ath 3. 267. See Introd., p vit. 


PAR. OR. — r. XVII. — PFP, à. al 


hams Wee ie 


h 


"T IOUN OF EPHESUS. A22 

u nam mm^ hina Uhlan rdusnd aad 

inaona mas wom raap a gah roaina 

Asin wapami ina maaan eiun Sri 
Cm o st dua cm 


"Mabens]. oaan “io Jlara dards, “Karr Sese 

Jho¥ar coy [sar op ary Lese o fas) JIa o AN. hoor Mufdrano 
Sly Lal Nue] answa LAL Oe) JS Dao Jlas,"s 
Sotul, rea Qsdds Lod Quy esed e] Dao Bees u5, Jeans 
eet pepo deae ~hi Miaa ganai “Ou! codes 
Ne Sor]: aN, alojan aljo AD) Dad 
Lor spl. a Maaa NOS "weh. wul Da - cot soa iso 
«3 «e hiyo flo Boh secs laos, base byo1a0s 
writs aer LT) sel NS, cones LI erano Jom) orsa) adah] 


1. This ch. is in B. f. 182 V^ b. B. oes (praec. ch. 25. sS B onm -— 8. D wilh poiuls denoting 
ác and oe — 3. B es — Ó. X sius. — 6. ON Ntan. 7, H oum. — 8. A sing — 9. D olotamo — 


lo. B well GNA: yace] e? WO. ASO. - [1:5 Qo». 


NEXT THE THIRTY-SIXTH ' HISTORY, OF FATHER MARE? TOE SOLITARY, ANT THE 
REST MOREOVER OF THE BLESSED MEN WHO ARE LAID WITH IIM IN THE 
SEPULCHRE OF THE STRANGEBS BELONGING TO THE MONASTERY OF YHE Syrians 


sp NSACAE BEYOND THE WATER ABOVE TIE HOUSE oF Man. Mama Uc 


Whereas therefore we find im ancient traditions that men of ancient times 
sel themselves earnestly and diligently to make memorials of the performance 
of various things thal were performed before their times and in their days, 
insomuch that in the course of the times down lo the present time they 
lave now reached us even in our own days, which are all that are recorded 
severally in. the Holy Seriptures, firstly, in. order. that the power and 
miracles and actions of God wrought. through them and in their days 
might be known to everyone. for his own glory, secondly, for a memorial 
and remembrance of the righteousness of the same just and righteous men, 
who at different times endeavoured to please God and do his will, thirdly 


ain, that those who should. afterwards res] and receive it through) the 


av 
o 


]. Perk. really 37th. see nire ]5 A 9; ee pe 182431. Lotes, ns 3 above and p. A26, n. 3, I1 


ces. 298.1. 2. pe 95856 Med, and p. 5351. à. 3. 


————————— M 


[423 LIFE OF MARE THE SOLITARY. 625 


Limo Qoonrsen ooo fuspraso «Jacks f m> «xax vao 
ene to! aero Juans] Susot 9 „ealas Jo MOINS [otis 
SOLA] Jods Naso | JN Sos ax exueas)] vao ga 
«ol Joc NON Jas Jix9o shiol [and LAM krasos faa ols 
Laoi fay AAD oE Ow, HJ Joms [2285 lasos; Jolo 
Lor Jie]: Joe «S3 co] ao vassoks [ag banana, aoha lo 
hiad pa spese wide Joyo Kas cro SS; hoaa er beo 
LOO Rass wookials . yao] [2o Lop Lope p> e jaN; Jac 
Joa asian sul So - Le oà ha Jo. [si M o0 
Nania Axim Lroody jeg Pro Jesse) xe be! qe 
a ado Joot Pua ds. aaao o0 42.32 «20H30 chanso Jp Xo, 
eese] Joa woos! Jib] co ports sor faso Da Q5 Alana 
ol, ud Los Nao Likes jupo ~ LA Ns «OO wc? I 


L Mss, INS ose — 2, B baa bas epo — 3, B (be. — 4. B oras. — 5. B osing — 6. B ins, 
loo — 7. E: las) Nas, marg, Lane 


writings might be imitators of their practices, and eager to run the course 
of reivion like them, since then, as we said before, we ourselves observed 
all these things. we considered it to be a matter of right and religion 
now also to make a record of the upright men and. strenuous workers 
of religion, our fathers and brothers, who like bright stars shone by their 
practices all the time of their lives, and earned the privilege of being 
gathered together by a good ending and laid in this place. in this holy 
convent of us Syrians above the house of the holy Mar Mama, which by the 


help of the erice ol God was at this time erected through the instrumen- 


tality of our meanness ': the head and. first of whom is the great man of 
. = 


God Mare who was named by evervone ‘the solitary -anids Dy others dis 
of his patches’, on account. of the pieces of unsightly and illamatelied rags 
of hair and of wool out of which he had put together his clothing and 
covering? and sewn them together in il-matched fashion. This saint then 
was by birth (vo) from the country of the Amidenes’, that is from fieilene 


from a vilage called Beth Marka’. whieh is indeed in our neighbourhood, 


ke Secche fing aimi A Ee Le Siew, — mee po ag. th os ondes ode eiA a 


the province of Mesopotamia, of which Awida was capital, — > Do Zbirni cary, " Mebana; — bousht. 


FR USS rea. 


NX al tae OF 


“hts hb 


026 TOUN OP EPHESUS. [42%] 


Joo xX Jd] aS soe swi a po :oL Nl D Ja3325 - 
JL ->> [soo r> el E ud joa ` BIN «20 kae ETC aA sana 
ooN NOS JL ols La? ioe xs pel AN 30 ye Apos 
sagi] flosas haa AS 90 :jox JLL Jlasle-s c. cotoorsilo os 
e yl „aaa frat oog vei aas [soas aA So ooa amare 
LN o3 [Na s s NS fray "T hf ans lp. Jess 
JS uo Jlaslas Shor asl lo obussl SSG oix» Kiss Joas 
KS ‘dons . Jlasos Hop hd "oN saa Aao UEN JLəäas oM ways 
ST NM ox, Jl doo [xm on eU pe JNa; Jlaslas 
ms LAA; Aras basco wos Ny']o oeSN5 Ss Had ” yoko 


Le peed} vanao "weno Wb, [Loo] oad qM esas. aSo 


vaod, Lol .-flas? «eas JN, [35 hay laS otuso] jho H2 
«oo Sao Jsa Pro? Js NIS of, Lel o Jio flan Cx» ol Joo 


I. Riean woot! bads. — 2, 1 loom aS — 3. Mes ins o ooo% Boom, — 5. eo c 6B ins. 
iss p pos =s. Reap — u l uwo — n, diaria 3d: aa HS B ins. bia 


and, while this man was a layman. and was powerful of stature and of 
more Ihan ordinary strength, he became also a son of the covenant! in the 
ehureh of his village. And, when he had completed about thirty years, 
even as many were advising him and his parents that he ought to form an 
alliance, and when his parents were making preparations for the wedding 
function, and the day arrived on whieh they were to celebrate the wedding, 
suddenly Grace, which had seeretly seen that he was to he ta chosen vessel? 
for the glory of his Lord, dawned in. his heart and on his mind, aud. he 
resolved instead of bodily communion, to which many accidents are attached 
and against which is set the dissolution of death, to pursue spiritual com- 
munion, bearing his Lords gentle and light yoke? upon his neek, and 
placing his cross upon his shoulder and going after him. And so he rose 
in the middle of the night and prayed to the Lord to direct. his way that 
he might go after him, and erant. him the privilege of doing his will: and 
he directed his way to the ereat man of God, Paul the anchorite, who was 


also a performer of mighty works and miracles, a record of whose history 


H 


l. I. e. took minor urder~. Cf. yo 2*1. 2. els, ox. Ih. — 3. Multb., Xr. 30. 


— Sa 


[425] LIFE OF MARE THE SOLITARY. 627 


wx fro la Sirs z ee «M oi s a). Ner Daas o 
,ou3e, Jj3eXoNSo oia fpransad saasaa, lass oh coo ji Lisa 
Loads Jaya oh] £2 «Jory lady Jaah ot Joas po ono 
mra frase yo sans fais old ihe "lise dies feine 
TY Kssastyo Jha ds 30 Leo» Laio Jlià» oean DS SNC hoard SQ" BIss va. 
PONS fat elit of JN fae paaa Jase] aao Jiono IN Lese 
° lajao JNa A o5 Liao Laa JNM SQoo oa 
. Jlaspamwo Jlaxssammro Ja S xot ero ANalsol Jes,» jor zn 
. Joi Nue joa Jy; pass 205 -oto Js9:o | ! Eso Jlaanaso 5e 
uel Jha el hal SJlaas Nao [ans panao joa aan othy2o 
pad} ooopso: lanao jju po :[aspo loi haw c! oa 9] ..o S xS 
Jesse ero pad Ji o Jio Ji Qas as Jóa JLo - JNvaase qr 


L Bom — 2. Boe — 3. B. tho — 4. P ins; o Hes. — $5. D dao SN. 6, HH pl. — 7. D. 9 


lew — 8. Hh |haaebs, 2 above: — 9. D EID La. 


we have also introduced at small proportion and in defective fashion into 
the histories which precede this'. When then the blessed Mare reached 
this man, and presented to hima request to grant him the privilege of living 
with him and receiving training from him, he received hint on his promising 
him repentance toward God, having given hin mueh instruction in the 
ordinanees and labours of monasticism. And so he remained with him five 
years, imitating his divine practices, and decreeing for himself severe labours 
of fasting und praver and protracted recitation of service, and constant vigil, 
so that he gave himself rest for one hour or two only for the sake of the 
demands of nature, and through the whole extent of the night he performed 
a constant series of inelinations and genullextons with prayer, and besides 
these things barefootedness and austerity and abstinence, and humility 
and sorrow, aud tears. And by all these things he used to train himself 
in religion, and subdue his body and bring it into subjection with sorrow 
and repentance, insomuch that many were surprised at his labours, and even 
that holy old man himself, when le saw the immoderate severity of his 


practices, would strongly reprove him, and admonish him not to exceed the 


l. Ch. ü. 


SON RENE 


BISI b. 


G2S OHUN OF EPHESUS. [426] 
Lac. oda «Sell e y i vlads olh oo ‘Ape Od raise NM 
asa QS ol semi alas, Welalo ous Na pal Laso 
JK_vasso <0 wads: aaoo larno Sr > Joa fuse .. "fase 
Joo yanco Lost je Jo Noo. alon Ses əl, ha? Og ~ bcati Sar 
p Su Nab darso Jia dS Joor wass ‘Sra Aao Ue ites RN 
Joo: aa fusde Joa LUX SAA «oo DL NN xo er Se ES y 


NES eee a Joa o “Lao Naso; JNuarxg Joa paxo Loio 


HN HDA aD < Læs Joa ]i$s Lap Lo, SMS 


scs <% < yoo .JlaS 3 woa Joa pax hoa Jl alo Naso 


AD goa qaan alojan Coy X36 yl eha pelny Basso So 
oaa A waaki LoD oa velie JI a 1 Jeso Lasak, OLD 0 
eS aoaaa, -plo fats ~ woes] Sx Sau wr o0 dispo saal, 
Mado Roo jas) Soy Ji Daaa, floros Laias youl e. "ool 


LB eb s kph O R Bowth points denoting à and e) tise heaps Slo. 4. Bins, loo — 
5». du marg. 5.] dus vet - 7.7 Hap fom Wad: Bafa saxo. S.B o — 9o, ins. %9. -— In, B. dus. 
waa. — 1]. D witli poire a and e. — 12, B bees eoasls lan — 13. B dux. yl 


bounds of moderation in his dealing with his body: à thing which he also 
repeated to us ourselves, when we once came to the holy old man in order 
to he blessed by him and receive. his prayer, and to visit the blessed Mare 
also, concerning the severity of his practices how he exeeeded the bounds 
of moderation in his dealing with his body, insomuch that in the hardness 
of winter, when snow was lying about a man’s stature high, he would go 
out to the mountains without an outer garment, having nothing on his feet 
below or above, and thus he would ent wood and make great loads, and 
thus he would carry them, cleaving the snow and sinking into it, so much 
so that blood would flow and drop from the whole of the flesh of his feet, 
and even so he would not pay attention to them. And, when we learned 
from the holy man about suelt severity, inasmuch as we were aequainted 
with him from his childhood! and with the family (yévo)). of the blessed 
Mare, we nsed to admonish him earnestly to accomodate himself to the will 
of his spiritual lather. But he fell on his face weeping and saying, « Forgive 
me, my fathers: the body has not received. what the contumacy of ils arro- 


ganl behaviour against the soul deserves, and ] have not vet done to it 


4 


L Perhaps we -honld read botas tour childhood i: see p. 128. n. L 





[427] LIFE OF MARE TOR SOLITARY. 620 


alaa lol ES Je x20) ARAL: luian oo M jas, e 
«2o 4224 Jsa oly faa] -ottasaasaddo otfopararcads ful wsh Ji] 
Jaz La eso Ja 4o yh Pawo yar x93, darraro 
fais) LAD} Jadan NE sO CAMOAR v3) li Joa Me 


* 


«2o NS aso Doo cox | of e je» eM we} DOLD) 
paso ha JQ ~~ „Joa «au Naso "Jlarrrsols OL 200 waco. 
fans PAD saw Lo LOAD KO Lao Joos] xor ones 
JLosh] coors «2o aso ]55 cones [asad «2o? Liso Ja Dha E əl, 
hapo, j>a IN wmusflyo R Jkosl J wuwo -Liams 
Dlia AS eala po Joa poAo horail o Laso; ` Las? Lado -Joa yo 
AXIS ee Jo Joa Lasis Muf pron Agotapso"2o ? Joa 
Lo NS bes Je5e$ Lad ssare Daa haoa foo 2A] osc jap 


t. B lo for e: — 92, B om. — 3. Room. 8- — 4. B M SSK [Lapana enest d — A. jj asja: 
— 6. EH «v? D^ vaan Qoo je; Qo HEALY oO lez5| go wuss HX. — cu wapa ls 
o. us all sc. Lu recor loo nc may ot S45 03903220. 


anything adequate to my sins and the vices in my soul which arise from 
the body: but Tam contriving means to bring it into subjection and subdne 
it, that even now it may cease injuring my soul », with many similar things 
which he would repeat to us with afllietion and with tears; so that, when 
we were hearing them, we were surprised at the earnestness of his will and 
the allliction of his mind. But, when he had completed five years with 
that blessed man, since he was still being constantly pestered by his parents 
and by his kin (yévoz). for this reason he determined to remove eompletely 
from parents and kin (yéves) and from all acquaintances, insomuch that, 
having asked for prayer and release from the blessed man his master, he 
seb out on his journey and departed from all the countries of Syria, and 
eame to the countries of Egypt and Thebais; and thenceforth he nsed to go 
to and fro in the desert of the saints, and he would betake himself to certain 
great men and solitaries, and ask for. their prayers. and eagerly observe 
their praetiees, and set himself to imitate their labours with all his soul. 
insomuch that after these things he gave himsell to the life of a recluse in 


EN us re b. 


AWS rea 


one of the deserts: and thus he theneelorth went on distinguishing himself 


AEN 4 


“hsv bh. 


an HOUN O EPHESUS. [A25 


Lua yl boa bab ad “LX po oa gu Sego hiar 
poo Inu Linah Jlasrsaso K> <r JLo haag s.) S 
y. — spo sS. Qe wor )bo «aho ) Jo Oly ha Jen 
Iso «or andl] JRsoprad. lasla aada ooo cena a dao 
Laosa -coottaslass ca] Ho oro 3s JL ns 120 Jio haak, oles 
Laa; Lola -fha “pelos JS. s. eo olo Qe ad ol 20.29] 
JN so "Jlarmasads Lal Joa y «aas [aad Nea aS, J Nan so. 
wt SS Jlaa so Kissa ‘si r0o wadi.mo sas con “ado; 
LOD} AXED “Joss rd0 :fXadrsoo Lans lads; Loads ‘oabdsooo 
Nope] I fior eode Ss; col olafaaso "oda. 300 :ooilads E 
Nad jada ad coats; "JN Axa S EMI J&3zMo, eso e 


l| beats Fluss — 2. pos 03. B poli — 4. B fhg aA. — 5. B om. — 6. B pS 
|Laicatw S o .umdad human ossa. — 7, ] wd eS ase. — 8. D Wee for e: — 9. R ins. Iyer. 


by laborious practices for a long period of time. And, when he had con- 
pleted ahout 15 vears in this conflict (£6), a great disturbance arose in the 
city of Alexandria on account of the faith’, insomuch that many were 
expelled and driven from their places, men who would not consent ta conform 
to the Clialeedonian communion, And they came even to the blessed Mare 
himself; and, when they had pressed him greatly and he did not acquiesce 
in their communion, they drove him also out and expelled him from his 
cell. And from such a reason as this he was seized by a vehement desire 
to go up to Constantinople, so that he apphed* himself to dealing a severe 
reproof to the king and queen; and he went up and reached the royal city. 
But with regard to the blessed man's entry into the presence of the king 
and queen, and the rough character of his mecting with them, and the 
insulting words which he addressed to them, and his audacity and his con- 
temptuous conduct moreover to them of this we have not thought it well 


to make a written record? in the history of his life not only on account 


1. This must refer 1o the events of 536, which gales his stay in Egypt cire, 521-36, his life wilh Paul 
eire, 516-21, and his birth cire. 436: bul T eannot reconcile this wilh T. having known him from his 
childhood. 12 years must be foo much, for in 521 J. was a boy of 15 in the convent of Maro séc lutrod.; 

2, We require ralher ‘might apply : but tlie lest cannot be olhicrwize rendered. — 3. The syr. 
i- hardly zrauimalical. but the sense is clear. 


[420] LIFE OF MARE THE SOLUCARY. 631 


Sapo ! elo Jil Laza “il Las om koas Ja so jeg - pola sco 
lad aixuoNsdS ocd Gams” jarys “Yo ag ao N34] aslo xr 
erm] [3339 Lad yous od © prof, 289 CRN dot, rasan h 
Pp Jeeps Weta but lex ole Jil bir Lode Lise 
as] :o Joa bro ola dg <r eh 2à hoa y Jhannoo ^L. zoo 2.5 
JaN; Joc «0 yb vor „las LSA aee: y Mhao 
Lalo lə; han <>? yl .,o9u3o aS aco. [NS as ||a..so fly Njama 
Soro JA. Ilo No s cod NS aso, 1o opas Nol NA Je 
Jia jon l p soaa; | lies] Jio ory] Ly J p 3o aslo 
Sd «2o? yl Joa oot Na |. oia 2 p Sn: Loana cooks! 
Qo HDs Ja usisco Jia roots hados rae opus paaa + qotdrss 
ol, Lal Jpraryo Jio) Jie Juda pas, oaio Jio e 


I. Bom, = 2 BU apo: dall d A om v — 3. om © [E hai]. — 4, pP bene 


lmi} oles — 5, B feos. — 6, |: loo wisp IAs [Auta hoos. 
: z ? : 


of their violence’, and the insults aud the conteniptuous conduct which he 
used toward the rulers of the world, but further also because perhaps, even 
if they had been written, the difficulty of believing among the hearers would 
be very great and not small, that these things could easily be said not only 
to kings, the holders of the power of this world, but even also to contemptuble 
and mean persons. But, when he sternly rebuked the royal pair asx we 
have said with? such freedom (zad£zsta) and sternness, which he had indeed 
possessed from his boyhood, they as hy the grace of God accepted it from 
him humbly and with fear without violent action, as from a great man and a 
perfect: solitary, especially because they saw the freedom (wagsqacia) of his 
speech, that he spoke and rebuked and reproved courageously and without 
fear, not being frightened by the crown or alarmed by the purple, snd they 
said, « This man is in truth a spiritual philosopher »; his dress being as we 
deseribed it above, hideous through the patching together of unsightly and 
ill-matelied. rags differing from one another, and fastenings whereby they 


were joined together by unsightly cords of hair and of wool, insomuch that 


l. The sense shows that the violence of the insults is meant, but ace, to the evaunuar ilb would be 


easier to refer il to llie hing and queen. — 2. Mss, em. 


Veta 


Aun rb. 


ase TEEN OF EPHESUS. ABD) 


a 
naaks Js. Jado Was Joo yds ET NX ol VLL y 
e| pad max “barre Ji p> Laiwo qr n teh! Holy ail 
oS wohkal J| ads “| «9l OMS a 242238 joo maafhso d 
i os Sp) [a Seo sens di Mec» RAMS PD Dja an.maxsa A jeg» 
Njoo pans ofS Lal) epo: L4o2* ofS on JA o or'h] 
oS loo haasi «ope! hanso Lei fread: yl -aao || Naso 
Qe hilan JD Sha sare Joons day Da “sled ian 
NoLaononoe “janas, of oS boot hanas dor ons] Sa vor 
Noms bos os wana gitso Jl) Lp p20 .Joor Las “dla MobL.s.oo 
haad, Loot Jaco t? Joe "Jdu ^o! Jig, NLD ony; 
Napao eMe 29 aD aNs oo JL} p20 panako kakal has = oh 
ADS pe NC ^ .OuaJjac wo hiina Saio Dalas oA fhanas 
Sd oot “oto oes] Jens Ij Aun foamed oi «Naso 


1, ads t Donn — 8, 1 oleae, — i grins e 1809. m a Bains ov» = n Fi «9| 2n 
ela Waandes "ere. — x, 0S wT liege fo 1 with points a and e, — dE d Pe — 12. Hi 


every aperture (?)! made by a fastening of his garments covered more than 
two or three fingers’ lengths, insomuch that no mean poor man in. the world 
was anywhere to be seen who was clothed in them or perhaps would 
ever consent to be clothed in them, nol even if lie had nothing lo cover 
his nakedness. But, when the victorious king observed these things, he 
ereatly wondered at him and gave him a promise that he would do for hun 
whatever he commanded; and vet more the believing queen held him as a 
great and righteous man, and continued entreating bim to remain with her 
in her palace (z2Xzzw»). that he might speak to her words of profit. And, 
while she on her side was making ‘this request of him upon her face?, he on 
the other hand answered her with stern reproofs. Aud, when she saw 
that he would not comply with her wislies, she quietly ordered her own 
treasurer (ozze77.4:102) to bring her* a hundredweight (xevravzciy) of gold, 
thinking that by this she would soften the blessed Mare and make him yield. 
And. when it came and she offered it him bound up, and began entreating 
him to aecept it and divide it between the poor and his needs, then after 
gazing sternly al it he grasped the bag (w2gedmy) containing the hundred- 


1 $O8So should mean cfork^ or tongs’. The meaning perb. is Hif the rags parted from one 


ioter in the shape of a forks — 2. B c request of him for these things. — 3. A "hin". 


[431 LIFE OF MARE THE SOLITARY. 632 
Dado jidan poor kad Joa snb foi Joel Lal jasy H Jiag 
«Mel Lojas Kot pel OMS Suo Joor Mu. for saepe 
owes Joa ‘oly Lise -. Jl Sso ras. JLses Joa Joos “ls l pel poo 
aal Jars, Lo TAM XS dso Lo} Wh 239» 2322595. . 00 al e 
cw eus caes fa a (Uo eso ee as pesas lai 
wa falo Lauso Lass p> Aaso aao Grac -àla nus wha 
Joas Laly sjised: “haga Da Sr Daan ooa, faso 
Vhal uoaa bo poly LNS o aak] JE hao corde "Jo: 
Jo vex Jp3eo, 5o Nassa] jho JNa Dao A was ol; 
saio} JN; Ni cass foo pals ja Lasag mw og hoot LSN 
] aa pag Ll ais, Fol, omana aims Q5 208 Gee bibs © 
Laana; fado jar 5 waa, hand hooo use aoso pas 
joa SIN. qaolo oond] fase Mas ol) fas] auo l'ónse Laido 


l.l; soute Dado Kassas — 2 p s le rlo 3. Mss. la222; corr. v. D, and L. — 4. B tots ns, 
b Boom. — 6. Bo wklad. — 7, | mevSa3a0. — s, p bhig =o. Ts with: points Aand à. — 
In D 69. — [II D pl. — 12. Mss. ado om. prec. stop, — 15. D wao Qao 5 Had hoo Ill, — Li. D ww. 


weight (z:v752x2:5») in one hand, and hurled it and threw it no small distance, 
so that all the chamberlains and everyone who saw it were seized with 
great astonishment, to think that he was so powerful and of such well-knit 
frame, as we stated at the beginning, and since he had tung! it to a distance 
just as If it were something full of light apples, saving to her, « *'Thy money 
vo to perdition with thee’’, because through this vou wish to tempt me 
and moek me ». And after answering her with many other stern words 
which we refrain from recording he left her and went out; and she remained 
in distress and fear, and she and all ber chamberlains as well were won- 
dering al the blessed man’s bodily strength, how he thought nothing of 
throwing a weight of a hundred pounds (zz) of gold to such a distance, 
insomuch that the story was heard over the whole palace (zzzv) aud over 
the whole of This city, and was spoken of with astonishment by many 
persons. When the blessed man was passing along a street af the cily, 
his eves were fixed on the ground, since he had determined in his mind never 
to see the fave of men in it. And he lefl it; and so lie went over to Svea 
bevond the water’, and climbed the mountain to the north-west of it, where 


I. 59 is not otherwise known, but the meaning is clear, ee tts. MT 20 — 3. This passage 


shows the meamng of 12-9 to be as above; see p. 387, n. 2 ef; also ps 832, bos. 


* dst 


RASA OE p 


NOMEN 


h 


03^ JOUN OF EPHESUS., [432] 
wa Joa aas ones Jess been «2o m wooo flax Jasso 
INS araa], "Lapo loo ooh] JNa Dado JND c! 
DJ No wo or was; Kad voe Ruf ds voids Nas, pra do: 
ona A.N up Noasos bl <> Lipa "eap Jia d> i Jparoyo 
r20 obey perso cà sarasaw, Jus. Oni acm); Ónasano o 
Las Joos Noos cme S uso uaaa asco v0.30 do aXdsas Kuo 
“paw coorm nay £22 -opa SLf, L> y-l JL frond oM eoo - foo 
XAR; yO Ug] RES rool JI? oor Ls oD wd e sol! Ji 
Wd essesog. Seres INST V Jo. Bey UW Jor; oto A gr EN 
ba Lipso Aso) Kasa uoo] Jn]; Kado oi Ns | or aaoo 
use JNA Liias, pMle liaa dd o ooo prawns yas Sar 
s alas Jigs has SKxnaroo .of\ ooo cau dado coor Wad Lolo 
meres Nf, esas Jesi, coy Jha oiled, aal D 


SA dis ser p33, 1 6). — 2. B mwas loo Waas. — 3, p Apo — 1, D Lb — 5. Fins, 9295. 
—&6. ph alad (6 wriflen under e) we doasans. LB ay wasy es: eger] by oo. — 9. D 
Fes pad afi SEIN ees] Ee eon omo s bs LAN [Lt eo eoo eboo. — 15. D pl. 


there are also graves; aud there he resided and performed the labour of 
his practices, satisfving lis needs with wild herbs. But the queen, becanse 
she was a believer and knew that she had distressed him in the matter of 
the lundredweight of gold (72v), made careful search for him; and 
ou learning that he had left the city and was dwelling ou the other side 
among the mountains sent some of her most distinguished chamberlains to 
entreat him to forgive ler, and as a favour to herself to receive from her 
something that his needs required, whatever he wished. And, having 
taken much trouble and with dillicully diseovered him, because he used to 
move [rom place to place, they delivered an earnest request to him as they 
had heen ordered, and, absolutely refusing to grant their request, he sent 
her a message through them, « Think not that you possess auything which 
God's bondmen need, except religion if it exists in vou». Aud, when those 
who were sent came back again and she learned where he was, she sent 
vet again: and thenceforth they used to pester the blessed man every day: 
and he was compelled to remove to other places; and again they would find 
it out and discover him. And thenceforth many persons used to repair to 


him to reeetye his prayer: aud they were speci ially astonished at sceing his 


[433] LIFE OF MARE THE SOLITARY. 635 
wHysfs Me £2 EL, | Jll, lov) o ole x Dla ooo 
aaa "Nu, soropil, Jos <>% “pads POS p2 Joa flsase oppasaco 
isoo], Laas qx Joa INAN [o Joa nagi JI ere 
Kalo eed, Malo yil Joa Joor -aLa ey lo eoa «eL | E 
best Q J? [e ` Joa p ” ao Qoo Jiaa ol oA? 
Llazo Re Joa £22. Numx huo acis pe «250 Jen 
[zos Qe pad A Insaan J NS ses gM -JoN eo: e! "hai guMib 


ve ado L2 foa p20 Joico, aloes «o0 i aao Da 
yol Jib Jenas fly poaso uwal I Jigana Lio HLA -joa o 
H Larzan, [5.20 J£ 02.30. ops 999 Je a LASN ooi. s 


oi AN sas yhoo Daa l>a oa., Laak, odas «le «Mh L53o; 
 aasduy Opi] opao „P saasa lo aor s anas LSAS OOD Lao 


L B E20, — 2, B33 — 3, B Nav, —- 1 BOSS — o L OD — 6. i So — 7 om. — 
S. B pl. — 9. B ax — lo | beat WA — ll. D foaBSquateos laine lh esao. — |», |; o5; 
«Qa 8: S46. — 13. B waras 


unsightly clothing. And he asked and palm-leaves were brought to him, 
out of which lie supplied his needs hy the work of his hands, since he abso- 
lutely refused to allow anything to enter his mouth except from the labour 
of his hands. And, if he was prevented from working with his hands on 
account of those who came to and fro to him, he would vo two and three 
days, and sometimes even a whole week, and then taste bread. except wild 
herbs'; and sometimes he would feed on the berries of the bushes, and 
sometimes on the nuts of the trees. But in the winter-time he was com- 
pelled to put up a hut for himself on one of these heights, and shelter himself 
in it from the severity of the winter. And, while he was thus dwelling 
peacefully on these mountains, Satan the hater of good things did not 
overlook it and leave him untried, but he set up robbers 22574z) against him, 
ten men, who, having seen the ehamberlains and the other great senators 
(suyzantizes) coming to and Tro to the blessed man, thought that he was 
receiving gold and storing it in his hut; and so in the middle of the night 


they fell upon him and surrounded him, and they flung out their hands to 


1. Sie syr The meaning apps. is that during the week he ate herbs only. 


"]ivurl 


tX dogs 


X leer b, 


Liisi 


n" 


G36 LOHUN OMS EPHEST S. [434] 
pel ALSO Woe | MS t. AOOO QOL yl “v oN Roro anri tE, 
anaes corm J| "2x3 Ps 439] £25 «9o Joo manaso -Lasao oto 
oà Al «eu. Jl als LOH 0430 / me} KAO Lansa US oil vM» [so 
ool v! WLS MN x MV J e JN 3o > Jiyao, fsory 
JNN» g% ‘fas I [son Ady - tts SaDa 438] e oala 
yoo Mood OMG Pl bian Nosa [xis bso, avo joel beg) xo flo 
ad acoA wHADDO A Sa) HA ir OA A00 jgan Lamp yo S So 


fo 


Lanao :oX Masc “ood ara; JL. p30 Padas qoot ne lo]? 
laa oa BZA re où Naa pe a asi Jl Sas fas 
+ tye | J> waaa wow Lo oa] «Qo onda o Nsaso aS. lo 
"oo uomaa [aac vaan) fire! dose uaaa] Sx voa o 
Nooo once <% Ra “Okap BO HASXYLO HAA Dao Of S0 Jed 2 


COO NS Aloe. eats edi Deu] OA ojo p20 aoil ooo JMS, 
x : 


|] ges zel Sense umol. — 2. l 3D, 3. Dose? ans. coos sel «e» eo. — 4. p om. 
— S |l biel wl =a ase TA 0m. cs IB mele 0. HE oba ouo loo. — lo, p Bemas 
OM O60 uisa. - Pie eo. 


seize him and bind him. yut he, being stronger than they, threw their 
CY e» v ud 


‘men, and he went on 


hands olf him as if they were sick and tortured (?) 
entreating them, saving, « Nav. my sons, do not lose your soul. Why do 
vou seek me the poor man? » But they on their side said to him : « Unless 
vou give us the gold which the queen is sending vou, we will kill vou al 
once.» But he returned them answer, saying: « Take it, my sons, that to 


me no gold has ever (maré) been sent by the queen, or by others. And, if 


g 
| desired gold, I should not be residing here ».. When he had said these 
words, one came back with a club and wave him a severe blow. and they 
all surrounded him, having also drawn their swords. And, when he saw 
that they had set themselves to kill him, and he did not mollify them by 
entreating them with gentle words, he looked straight at the one who was 
holding the club, and seized and dragged the club out of his hand; and he 
seized his hair with one hand, and threw him on his face. And. another 
ran up to smite him with the sword, and he on his side smote him with the 
club. and stopped him: and his sword fell and he took hold of him, and 


threw him on the top ol his companion, and the third, and the fourth. When 


l. This scetus to þe corrupl bul both urs. hav» it. 


Y 


[435] LIFE OF MARE THE SOLITARY. 7 
Lasoo pear jagan 206.430, Sarto .co41d0 Mog IRE ye 
cal je-m2 «ooa s Ss vas! 42.90 PDH 4.25 oou [.. 222 
who Jr y kay eA yeso OME JAW LOAD NU. oJ 
lizo IN aoaaa, 415 ^ Lankans; x9] £o cota Sono 9 
w5 facto ianao oM o J; NanNalo hansa of wohl vM 
eehuorso qao EAD} pO Jeep L-53 Jaaa ooo SS] 
Am y Jho Nos Iu Nano cas] jos oM ooo «20230 
J sols "assa: ood joo palo oolopates joa Dw ey oo 
„awalo cail J ‘has laas wi] Do nahoa Da aol 
| aja "asyo, Mo Jes Io, “oot Joa fps p20 
ja Jl m9 JI eet 0,04 . [5.900 cas! «as; so. 0004 x32 428 390 
LALL MD «t OH Jae . Jo gon Loot Jlo yrs p3 asl paso aal 


saal Ojas 


L Bom. — 2. B A œi arto. |an. — $. Mss. om. — ^. B «25 0» apane, CEN ote id 


om. s — 6. [1 aad. ors iei 02. — 7. OSS. — s, B ins, 8299. g, p axs. — ]0, h ins, Haab. 


the others saw it they began to run away, and he ran alter them; and he 
overtook three more ol them; and of every man whom he smote with the elub 
he made himself master; and thus he mastered seven of them. And. he 
returned and bound the seven of them, aud set. them in a row, and he 
colleeted their swords and their clubs, and placed them together ou one side; 
and he sat down aud jeered at them saying : « | begged vou, my sons, saying, 
‘Leave me alone’, and *Why do vou seek the poor man!’ And I was dis- 
tressed that you did not comply with my request. And now, my sons, rest and 
be quiet till the morning ». And, lying as they were bound and disgraced, 
they went on adjuring him to release them and to be mereilul to them, and 
not to deliver them up. But he on his side went on jeeriug at their valour. 
and saving to them : « Learn never again to trust to your valour, and do 
not al auv [ime (zoz£) despise and look down upon a poor man». Amk, 
when he had been admonishine them Ull the morning, those also who came 
to him saw them. and they went on threatening to deliver them up to the 
preleet (wrxcyesi. Dui he on his side would not consent, but released them 
and sent them away with much advice and admonition: but their elnbs and 


their swords be look from them. But three of them ran away and escaped 


ON: ON ay. 


ll 


» 
, 


155 v9b. 


bos JUAN: OP EPHESUS. [ARG | 
Se io edi «2e a YS'Llo aspa LaL «ot JRL :OOLL SO yo 
JNSGI| uar Asac. bado aaoo aNd Saxa] hoa 
ttem b. cas jl JUL ao i TeSa SAANS ——À "uota ooo oe 
dork] bia Sx aro Hano dels Jpn 0 5 froaao Slo "col 
Ope £0 .fparséSo Jadoo! Gan Salo -Jado farms < Daas 
Laia Jie poo o3] "sse "Mauo Ja t Eus je laias .'eyxol 
Joo SS » Jlos Kinsey [E - o Joot pepo Jiag € JL eoo 
Laas fix] Ms Mo eda oto, | ro) MH PAD + OPED? JK ss 
ad JKxoyo Jin «30: tarps o Joo anao olo Joa aawo JI 
ve had yio n D uso Nai yo bhial, ade oo c 
posl LAS wale, be 1 ae Nes Jj -ILa Nooo ION aso 


Lio 02, B outas] — 3. Ppl =% 1 Loo Sell wapdsorams, — 5. Bonm. — 6, B WSesan 
cel... 7. I aed ote o6. ÉaNMxe Jam. — sQq: Blo for o. 0. A pA. .- do. [D cc. 
|]. | .229226;35. 


from his hands. When these things had thus fallen out, and it had become 
known to the king and the prefect (9z45759;2) and the rest of the senators 
goyani), these wondered at him and spoke much about him. Moreover 
there came a chamberlain also as well: and on seeing the swords and the 
clubs and learning about the rest he was surprised; and he took the swords 
and the clubs, and brought them ni and showed them to the queen and the 
king: and on seeing them they said : « Here besides power of prayer power 


' been 


of arm was also required ». nd, when he had for many vears 
dwelling on these mountains in this way and distinguishing himself by 
excellent practices. he was hard pressed by his bodily requirements through 
the fact that the work of his hands was not sullicient for his requirements 
and for hospitality to poor brothers, and further that he had determined 
in his mind never to support himself ou the labour and sweat, that is on 
the sins, of others?. And, while he was going about on these mountains 
and among the villas (ss%stev), he saw a villa? suited for a life of retreat, 


and he considered that, if he performed spiritual employment in it, it would 


IAs be died in 442 3p. 837, 528. aud eame te Constantinople nol earlier Than 236. p. ^28, n. |. if he 
really dived 2 years iu the villa p 6357). he cannol have been more than one year on the mountains, — 
ac ST e o. S2 VS De aml Le render thane villam", aud infer thal J. was writing in lhe villa; but 
bo i- only the weak anlecedent. 





=e 


^b, LIFE OF MARE THE SOLPPARY. 630 
Les © Jes je eM oa ox - flsasso Joos as frtuwo} Lee 
o3Jo -|AN caro «26 ssf œl [fioc .optasany Juss haao 
Mee "os joo wy Damo aos axo | JSocaao bl ae 
Lais p30 "Laana alaz "xA | 5-230 lois.» omaa Joa Laas 
joa -alas ee Lapao [i53o* JL co Laas TES uA (as 
Jaxol Lxx p30 NS lLo Ad daw0 Jhsassol Mass - fies oà Llas Lian 
WD OD MAAD, Js [s f[n2X€eamse :Joot poy Bso Loto 
ocot qay Sars LA fois, Juss} Jlasansaso panao Joor 
Joa x4 Mio [3939 “Lad Jlarmarsaso :ad.d0 flao Joa vaas odo 
laal N aoo :J NS. ad) Je co IN| coo. TJ Nas EAN 
Apne 2} JAX RDS I Jo na 22 : oq X 36.20 oto S Iso oaan Joa 


DD a pel HA» qe) hlas, beala x0: 99 +. woiaasde Jaro 


1. B lassa piel asl go ousio :Waesao o ard pelo o- 2 R oins Joo — i p ooa — 4. Boom, 
— 5. B ooo gas ul. — 6. B 31e for o. — 7. 1 ooo «224 lajro — 8. Tr ins, oœ 9. By o— 
10. ]Hohaes[820. — 11. Dois. — 12. p ML oiaeo sio). 


suit him for manual labour also as well and for the employment of providing 
for his necessary requirements. And so he spoke to one of the cham- 
berlains', and he bought it from another chamberlain for five pounds (A722) 
of gold?, and thenceforth be used to sow and reap in it, and supply Ins 
own private needs and those of those of the other people who used to visit 
him, and of the poor, And, when he had completed five vears in it, while 
many persons among the magnates and others used to visit him, there hap- 
pened the beginning of the great plague in the year eight hundred and fifty- 
three*; and, while he was practising mighty spiritual labours, and subduing 
his body aud bringing it into subjection * by tilling the ground for lis neces- 
sary bodily requirements, and was reproving and admonishing and teaching 
all who visited him by the spiritual teaching of the divine seriplures, and 


ri 
, 


stoutly always reproving the king and queen with ereat freedom (zx3525tx| 
. n Iu ‘ ‘ va 


witliont fear, and everyone marvelled at his teaching and at his deeds anid at 
his words, and at the stoutness of his soul in addition to that of his body and 
in addition to his thought: *, then by the sudden destruction ot the plague, as 


Lo From AO BL MH. 50. it seems probable ded this was Callimeus., allerwards praep. sacri cubiculi, 
see p. iN 05 2 Dyakonov, p. Sò. — 2. Gire. g 225 (r. 56525, — koe. — 5. 1 Cor. IN, 227, — 08. Se sve. 


PATER. OR. — TO AMET, — F. 1 d 


aa a 


NTU sae 


650 JOHN OHE EPHESUS., Aun] 
oa Sls ha aA foa prokros joo 'ovNso. ado -pL 
Jlaxaso JN] | JlaS p30 „joa oot NA JE Jlsfso hana -Laag 
aaax No oh QN hlo Jos Go SL v5 Joa xu Nse Joi Lars 
oxeNSSI Boss] dd duas Niles, por Sudo js eso osa 9! 
e Na pao oos Slo Lad» Jo EAM JKasso jas] od CT, 
Las J¥axy JNsän Jess NM r Lulo ..JNasso "Lises]| o 
Laso Aho cas] Sono „huil, "fee fotos JNS wil x Sons Joo 
"uo Na] oc où.. has Jo ol ‘aro auus Jiu Mas "elo 
Sc. Sof ds l3» LA, So TRANS OLX 32.8 EE o eol Nas 
Hoy oU aly od Las [Ns Q5 vano oda So [uS s 
froans +! o] Usd) o5 boda co] So Jl p30 aec» p» cel 


Lo h sds. — 2, | Jom udso. — 3. Poou, nenial =i simge = nal Sl a Mes: 
emo — oa Bots. — 08 Mss ph — do. P ins, foo — 11, B sable oos — 12, R sorata Soe 
ho auarus cilia mann: Il23 haa. la. Ts ins, wearSl Sa, 15. | lan 


lias been stated above, everyone was in perturbation and doubl and eounfusion, 
insomuch that the blessed man passed his time im alllietion and great sorrow, 
and occupied himself with constant prayer and petition to God, while he asked 
of God, and a revelation was made to him about his own personal departure 
also after a short ime, Then he sent a pressing message to the chief men 
ol the palace (zzrzzwv ashing them to send him eraftsmeu and supplies 
that he might make a tomb for strangers and also for himself. And, when 
the craftsmen and the supplies had been sent to him, and men to saperinteud 
the work. in a few days he built these two great houses, the strangers ` 
tombs, and completed porticoes, amd built a martyrs’ chapel also as well 
between them. and he also made a eoflin (2)! for himself, in which he was 
privileged to be taid”. Bunt, when he had completed the work, and knew 
that the day was at hand that had been told him in the revelation about his 
end. then, the collin (2) being open which he had prepared. for himself 
to be laid in it, while he was kneeling and praying on behalf of the whole 


world of men, on the third day be vielded up his spirit. Aud, this having 


L The word þes i~ here mase. but below fein; — 2. Sinee nothing is said aboul obtaining (he 
hand dor the cemetery, we quay defer that il was io (he grounds of the villa; aud, since the cene- 
tery is described as belonging to the monastery of the Syrians p. 422), the monastery wits probatis 


on the site of the silla: bnt that M. hiwselt made it a monastery (Dyakonov, p. 8t 1 see Title exi- 


denee (sce Introd.. p XI. 


[430] LIFE OF AARON. el 


Anco J ad 2.5 | Nseall ha [3S 92e po ouo jl JRL, 
La 5 £na.c0o IN oaao TAP dS; Lasrv0 i Isl fos! <% ore 
waned [oi huoa hee llago Lino Jasco 'oanmas"]o 
Jlarsoarads Lyotard; e| ug qo Sado voie haag: off cad 


9 7 * [T . r! 
wASH-309 90 PU M -a ‘Yh ^ <> - iaa, ala à 30 aojasy: 


J 
oJRaxaly LuNa Sse sa] 


Enua’ ea vara wduand dal 


aint lid euala nha vada duash aah 
sda Com STÉaxtaxtoa fYhxixpa aixa rrp 
sash nv ruajt = riaan duns anwdhdar’ 


Joa ooto Nu] Jih? «Qo AML > . eer vial Næ ha Da haag 
', uo S i ar o ORG wp'h! Slo ahl Joa ome xr othoiady q asses! 


i; passes bo BeQat[- — 2 B o oime — X4 p odee5a6- 4. [i Tas ws. 
6 B œ ela so aAa. — 7, Fins. e* — 8. Bom., 


5. L sing. 


been made known to the king and queen, with great zeal they sent some 
of the leading and eminent men of the palace (zxxzzwv), chamberlains and 
senators (coyzknTuo;) and bishops and clergymen and inany monks, and 
thus they buried the blessed man’s body with a great procession. We have 
recorded these few things ont of many for the sake of a memorial and tn 
order to gain his blessing and liis prayers, having passed over many of his 


labours and of his practices on account of the length of the lustory. 
The history of father Mare the solitary is ended’. 


NEXT THE THIRTY-EIGILTH HISTORY, OF THE EXCELLENT BLESSED MAN THE HOLY 


AARON THE PRESBYTER, [AND THE REST OF THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS 
WHO WERE AFTERWARDS LAID IN. THE SEPULCIRE THAT WAS. BUILT BY THE 


BLESSED MARE”. 


This exeellent blessed man therefore Aaron the presbyter was by his 


birth (-évoz) from the country of Armenia; but from his childhood he had lett 


1. Ch. 37 is missing: see Introd.. p. vin IX ih — 2. his clearly refers to the following chapters. 


"Alolva 


bis ION Ob EPHESUS, (AAG 


[Nsa as] pass jJo$& Drao Laa Jlasnp fias: od hae 
baa ws HAAS S]: 2à yano alasan Da, Jas) |J Naso «DO s ooa 
o ban Jo Rms ms | aso je ..JAaaaxoo Jladsas os Loo 
Laas hoo .JleiseM aseo Jian wau aN lo JhoiKusor Joal jjo, 
goo Us JNa] laSo [soo 1o Jian . sary Jrat> D oor 45 a s Jos 
wokal Lad m noia] oca po; orate opas Joa pains |, Lalo 
| ego Is 33, 3o Jes Jlanaso Jlasoy a Saas Mfrs La - flasotos 
~ [Nasal < Joa D JN so Heo Loj pea | o Joa 52.2.36 
«e o JD, hpo haarad exl b] Jaa Hy ialo Joor Jia Nao 
JNS Jars -joa wal Jluas, JKasosh Mfd Lil «200 
Ane ol e Joa flsaasd ^ fro +, Jhasrsobasoy Lsanu pans [ly NS No 
flsatoo JN fropas dvd qaas, Lurge Je aaao loo wats 
S Lasse» [exe Lasp Bees «je. acy Qoo» Jp 52’) [oko farms”); 


lis conntry and iad also made himself alien to his kin (eves) aud hiis aequatn- 
tances. and he chose for himself to pass the days of his lile iu a monastic 
eonvent in retreat and religion, from the early age of his vouth., And besides 
the fact that stmplieity and humility were also implanted to him by his nature, 
stnee he had devoted himself to religion, he chose for himself marvellous 
practices of excellence, aud taught himself. ineekness and obedience. and 
acquired true love, having bound. himself under the yoke of labours, vigils 
and fasts and constant pravers without wearving: and, even as he resembled 
his namesake Aaron m name and in character, so; when hie had attained to 
the order of the priesthood, le would recite the serviee. yet more with all 
integrity and devontuess with fear and many tears, after he had at first for a 
lone time refused to perform the service, contending and saving. « | aun nol 
worthy to approach God's holy altar »; and, when we and others had been 
insistently demanding of him to perform the service of the priesthood, in 
order that he might not transgress against the rule of obedience, he would 
vo throngh this with sorrow and fear, while he also used to subdue his body 
and bring it into. subjection! by the bodily labours of agriculture, in the 
vineyard and the garden. and the reception of strangers, and all the other 


flasks inside the monastery. so much so that late in the evening when he 


[A^ LIFE OF AARON. 0^3 
COS pots joo mass «m3 «Joa JL frrpro <> Ore} Jans Led 
bo JLaS NS [502.22 ray NDA JNasaal, Laos jesas slo hoff <> 
Haag J.aslo Læs < has? Joa GAL wansi >20 . Joo 
fsop> LEN NSN A: pel Opa Laas Wa. of -Joot SJ Maso 
Sos Me} Joos «n x? sào » Jac sas Jaanam fatto hasan 
woi] Laos Jl. Jos JN «e Loa J of yo «fos ws JNaaal 
JLoshhs POLO] ep he je» fasia «NS fas) ofdaso I: Joa 


Solo flans ` € PEREST «otl oo v? Qa qoo : Lasp 


Laana 03 daas jpa Lo flro «el! Noel H JE Lrsorz> 
D J| ol .2ee-39&, Ladas, LD ho Aani Lias TER «2e? 
Ie «2e «ix J JLI basas, IN S2»So Mo Jaana 
loa loas J&Xa.5| [im fofas Joo ras an HO Loads” | 
L0, „od ha Ls Sof Jya Jlacats haao soani 
ah DES cyano sonas le.» udolo amshlo sornas DL, 


came of necessity to rest his body, he vould searcely turn his body round, 
from weariness and also from the labour of standing at the serviee. But some- 
Limes he would stand on a standing-post' at night, and sometimes he would 
sit oma ehair (Yaoves), so that he completely refrained Irom bed and poco Ut 
give rest to his body so as to fie upon his side, until he was smitten by sore 
diseases and advaneed old age, and then le was forced to lie upon a rug laid 
on à plank, while even so he in no way gave up the great pnrpose of spiritual 
labours. And during all the period of thirty years that we dwelt together, 
some in the eastern countries, and some, viz. most of ilem, in the 
western in the royal city. and further in many perseculious, if was never 
seen that this strennons worker showed negligence in the tilling of Christ's 
vinevard from the morning of the beginntug of his life down to the evening 
of the end of his davs, nor, when he fell into extreme old age aud a combt- 
nation of diseases, did he shrink from divine labours. Onee he fell under 
the severe pain of a gangrene that was formed in his lotus; and in this way 
he bore this distress with great devoutness, until his loin was eaten up. and 


was eut away and vanished down to the root of it, and his trouble Dewan to 


1, CT, p. 310, — Bic sve, 


1o02 


ti 


TA JOUN OF APES ETS, MOM E 
X X M M I M c a ae 
woo] duse pals woas od «90 cox! 5 oL NO: adios Nuits 
fla < sol e . Joor «2020... 30 Mhao alano Kiss; faor ooo 
Li ` hana we Pe! Lus Jods, Ja aalo JN} oioas Jlo 
al De csl» we JL mon afl! pasos - Sl wo Nicol oux 
fash gas E ees? cusato No ess Neos 
aiao Jzaxo I5", ©] De Hardy lia aso, yl o» aano aN 


| 


Lusso: bras iNo hasal Lv ol 49 wacofh] Janaa oo [io o 

Laas, fuss Jes. bud Jal | e JeMH Hex £2 d be 
he pel Jos; bises pas Jis ha JNa; p2 Jioto Loa franco soas, 
yon . Jlasols Jal haas sola! url wl Od «dixo 
lle rose “Jhsonsol Nas, ò> vilo ADHAMO +. pO vx SO 
yl oaa; qao Joa ja> Lag «2o! lua Jsano Nas yancolllo 


1. Corr, tron aal woa v Ms. Masab, eorr, Land = 035 Vn erasure follows, 


pass Inside hin. And we, seeing him distressed by a sore disease and 
grievously lacerated in secret, woukl ask of him to tell us what his tronble 
was: and he, until his alllietion beeame intense, stouthy endured, being 
constant in prayer and filling his mouth with thanksgiving and the praise of 
God. But at last when the passing of water from him was stopped he was 
foreed. and so he consented to reveal and make known his trouble, when the 
whole of his loin was found to have been eaten away and consumed, so that 
ihe physicians contrived to make a tube of lead and place il to pass his 
water, while they also applied plasters and drugs to him. And so the ulcer 
was healed; and alter the testing of this trial he lived vet eighteen. vears, 
giving thanks to God: and the leaden tube was also in position for the purpose 
of passing his water. And so, after we had together through God's help in 
association with some of our other brethren set np this monastic place, he 
altained to an adinirable and righteous ending, on a day in the month of the 

Theshrin. on the twenty-seeond of it, in the vear eight! hundred and 
seventy-two; and he was laid in the sepulehre that was built by the blessed 


Mare. And these things we have recorded in few words for a remembrance 


1 Ms. ‘uine’, The date ix 22 Oct, Set. 


(443) LIFE OF LEONTIUS, 645 
Mh I NS .J'NSSaS fama dd0$ Jaaa d Jx, ApJAHQXO | VEND ee qaae Ty, 
^ ootor.s0) laulo, Jiao ie 


erua yahoo Madu masala rduard doni 


uta aaf dsa anda edildi méuirnà aah 
“renin oia eadun am Ora sme xb 


Lise dcs joa yous — xo uuo ba Laad Scoor orsus 

Dai oof doe [iso .000( «2.3830 "aso hex Oly Lax „ojo 
Niso Jhanwasas }Sops"y0 Larus Jän passo + Jpop ops Joa 

M.Je No ooa Qocon Jo NS Jine oMa Jlaisobssas 
woos] «a Auo Laas Lia NL. was] xo lado Ji~ lads Laama er) 

paso Nisaas [pos JMupo qo LA Kis «306 onmia joo 
Nupa cape; JN leo po Sujana ujao Rose aseo Jisas Joot sr a. 


i. Appy. in another hand. — 2. Ms. ins, aș. 


and memorial of the strenuous worker of Christ. about the matters connected 
with his beautiful mode of life of which we are witnesses. 


The history of the excellent blessed man Aaron the presbyter is ended. 


NEXT THE TIERTY-NINTU HISTORY, ABOUT TUE BLESSED LEONTIUS THE PRESBYTER, 


WIFO ALSO WAS AN EXCELLENT AND GREAT MAN OL Gon. 


The character therefore of this blessed Leontius the presbyter was very 
like that of the blessed Aaron; insomuch that they accordingly vied with one 
another; and thus also one would be eager to excel the other in modes of lile, 
and to surpass him in spiritual labours, and to imitate him in humility and 
to resemble him in obedience, and that in all matters they should be imitators 
of religious practices, and especially in love toward one another and toward 
everyone. But this devout Leontius was by birth (voz) from luzilene from 
a village called hw bint and he lived in the holy monastery of the blessed 


Mar Samuel’. And, occasion having once called him to go up himself to the 


PEL em «58 (£132: V9 bj, 


DAD JOUN OF EPHESUS. [4^^1 


«oo»: Jixxxx9 Joos CS V jaaa, onse 15584 yar oot woos J Laad.so 
jaa Pas sas Nae e Ale iNo -harao Qo [asad aro 
„Joa fate floras ‘Poy Jl3 2. Ja SX Ji NASo wu] So «DS e 
Joa Jo Nso baal Laag ya» rans Lora ae oo Oly dna) od joe 
ens fuscia deis) q Kasil poo mm! x Seas, pa 5s 
Jiro ol e Bloc corte eM . ooa aaa Jlasimo/, bo LM 
lio] «e aN carrey Ji war Sedo QOS And ooh Mufsads 
Nw» Lonezle Lusso Lss Jlosl]3 Lva Jaga Laia +20 Jogos yl 
. hanis [oly Tan Ae o 10001 raaa Ao SAAN SOLDO pw 
20 „Ào Loak oo roa «2? ao „ordaol] ad hais, hA 
Ji + Joo Daia Jas <>? frcians Jos; JKasaak>s ol q> hioj 
uua o oor Banc haag Sly hasl Joa Los] banso, Jpal o m 
Jaano Lai Jens Jeu! yaaa oof Slo oa! -hanso sooda], onde 


iz Ms. siny 


roval city with some blessed men trom the same convent, he coneeived a 
desire to live withus and with the blessed Aaron aud the rest, and he remained 
with us, living a whole-hearted and laborious life, so that once on learning 
about a certain excellent man who was passing his life in great labours 
of pilgrimage he was moved with zeal himself also to labour in the same 
course with the other blessed man who was called Washish! and was a 
member of our own convent and had been brought up with us [rom our 
childhood. And so both of them went forth in this zeal for pilgrimage, each of 
them separately, while both also let their hair grow Joug in secular fashion, 
in order that they might not be reeoguised and honoured by men as monks. 
When they had been thus travelling in the regions of the cast and the west 
and the south each of them separately lor many years, and when the brunt 
of trials had failen heavily upon them, after some years they came to us, 
that is first the blessed Leontins. When lie had for some time been labouring 
with us in the service of God in saving persons from paganism also, he at 
last attained to ordiuation as a presbyter, even as the blessed Kashish also 
who named himself John, who was a presbyter, himself also too altained to 
ordination to the greal and honourable voke of the episcopacy *s that Is. 


l. Wis life is siven in ch. 51. — z. See ch. oe fh odie ove b. The date 


was probably 558. pee 
lutrod., I] 


[4451 LIFE OF ABRATIAM THE PRESBYTER, 6^7 


Jas x^ y e Jo Je JA a> Sotes. oe}, DIS .JJaS.a.cn S]: 
vem» haia Qo] Led x: e JI Lao J'axsosLs ..ooo0( op ash] Lior 
RifAsrso oae] Lal Larrdas «oo Jaen i.a. RN 
Je» oo el je) lo ZEE «Qo aao Of son Lots iao . axe 
ooo] Je S5 ases + sano Oly 0d tetas v sad cia! hag 


JNa Jasa | Jot M3, Jio wore - hol! dor za Joor 


tabard) rael rousse hoi 


rao paia uap dsa eaaa eihar oah 
Sirona 5m UMS mia rss aah mew «xx 
“ands aa rx 


L198) Jil —~ Joa saoi] ORL > „Las ois! joo Daa usa 
Joo JL] Jlaadse ES «212 6 La Nano .fupoksoy Jupo «2o 


both of then: were with compulsion and by great elfort brought to this against 
their will bv the use of many artifices. When tlie blessed Leontius. had 
completed twenty years more or less in the convent that is with us in divine 
employments with coustaney and carnestuess, then he finished the course 
of his practices and departed from the world, and he too was laid with the 
blessed Aaron. But the blessed John, who ts also Kashish, was still in the 
body when these things were wrilten, engaged in the same divine practices 


and living in advanced old age. 


The history of the blessed Leontius is ended. 


NENT THE EORTEETIL HISTORY CONCERNING ‘THE BLESSED ABRAHAM TIE OLD VAN 
THL PRESBYTER, AND JEN T MOREOVER THE PRESBYTER HIS BODILY SON, AND 


DANIEL THE DEACON IMIS SISTERS Sox”. 


This blessed Abraham therefore, the old man, was by birth iyevoz: from 


the district of Sophaneue, from a village called such-and-sneh?. This man, 


I. Below he i called brother's son. — 2. Or PILI ‘Phe reading i- doubtful. 


TOEPUSMES 


GAS IOHA OF EPHESUS. |^] 


moths eas. Joo. Sah} Rxiss] han zl «0 p20 .Joot poll Ja 
[2e Jlar Jolla bra. NSo -Nac'h <b>} A» Noo fats p? RADY Jya 
Js. Jo JN Mon haw - ela so. To g ^asNs joan ue 
JR axe ] Y <=> NSST SOM xot «^M tJ gin so „aixi on M] 
NM e oo OMAN FNM, Ete vc 6? ere xu p Jlo oa 
fr flsars fram C» Mads a T fsa. + fatso Joa Jea aoo] 
axa) oc: lass bano) L? Jo Naa «| o arr DS ool]. Jd Jl 
DER vo ws LN £20 M yario A Jis furs lois «aa lo 
En xa No ie ol p> SU Law oo sotaa -OAS Sool] 
JL as p50 Lco p-> «2l e? A ee als] aso Jus poo oai cn Sosa.» 
Nwas asiw ol Qai Meo Jlaarasco Janda, [dnce] Jiono 


having at a certam time eome to the royal city, betook himsell to us; and, 
having been received by ns as a stranger, on the second day he east himsell 
down weeping and entreating to he received. by us, and admitted to the 
monastie order (szyu2). And we on our side, observing the burden of his 
oM age, thought that his request was a pretext and not gennine, and! we 
continued closely examining him. that he might let us know the true reason 
{his coming to the royal city, and if he had any fact to tell us about his 
intention, and we would not fail in anything that we could do to help hin. 
And he. having east himself upon his face and weeping, continued swearmny 
to us « I have no concern in this world, "SUE to repent for my sins, and if 
| may be admitted to the monastic habit (27742). that in it 1 may serve and 
please God during this remnant of fife. which n has appointed for me ». 


o these 


And. after mueh conversation had been held with him concernin 
t 


things, we allowed him to m: ake trial of his own self, while we also on our 
part observed his perseverance. And, when he had thus completed. two 
years, being constant in fasting and prayer and constant vigil by night. and 
humility and obedience, while he was also always entreating to be admitted to 


t. Ms. om. 


[447] LIFE OF ABRAHAM THE PRESBYTER. 6^0 
Joyonzo par Lasoo -Jlag bamu; foanmlo laad Jeden o>) 
Ja d So Jm [39.2 po uo Na] Jlasisys banao) JLL Jlasbysco 
WL 490 Joa Jaan ypas Nas uoio}ro; Jlsar Jo Jlonvarco 
Nx Jlas.sos Jy» yo. 22:2. „apaa ok Ko qaa” adan? LN 
hay <? UMS JE ja Aao fae pr Joo uvo Nal] cotoysos Loorwsol 
«ae Dafa oes, soul poo e) Joa aaas Leo o> el. So 
£20 Jlac Lanmo 2o Na [10 -uoopo Mx (aa pa wohl ala lazo 
Slo coors Jo$& who - Jos Deny jao Was Laso soto) pus 
Powys Jas frarcof! ator Slo «coss; qanana asia o "Agora 
Land +A X.%0 aao : oof Joe J snare oo Jigme p20 
ex Doo! hoa ons Sadso o/ 120 Ago uy Joa Spars cond 
Nofaol whe pa flaps Jaas Deal ECE Slo o^ «^23 A 
ol hasis fasy Maso JaN No ladaan adas NS los so soo 


l. Ms. I, 


the order and the beloved habit (72:2) of monasticism, so also upon many 
testimonies and admonitions he was admitted to the monastic habit (27204). 
And, while he was accomplishing the labour of his practices every day with 
many tears and much carnestness and humility, and when he had reached the 
period of five years after his training, he was on account of his marvellous 
modes of life by constraint and much compulsion admitted to ordination to 
the presbyterate. But after a short time his bodily son also whose name was 
Z wi’, and his brother's son whose name was Daniel Irom Syria came to 
him, having learned about his modes of hfe, and that he had been admitted 
to the monastic habit (s7%u2). Aud, when they saw him thus labouring in 
the practices of religion, God opened their own heart also as well, and they 
began to request that they also as well might be admitted to the honoured 
monastic habitisy7ux). And while he himself from that time continued giving 
them much admonition and correction and teaching, he was presenting a 
petition on their behalf that they might be received. And, this having also 
been done in order to gratify him, they also as well were taught! the devout 
monastic habit (77:3), living a whole-hearted and obedient life, with all 
earnestness and religion, After a period of some years they also were 


l, Sic syr. 


ior og 


ihn JOHN OF EPHESUS. 'A^8] 
falls «s JNasasls J.A Saar. .jlaissasso: azoN a] Le NS 
LSU BU PECES Jo Lisj5 flan, ien -— lean hol 
t ceo yeas so EE ease Moo Aufassoissoo Kulrolo 
pal La yar oo abo alas ps0 vootlarole oolagi.s. 
Lil eel ferns Lupe] Uxo, fora yaa -haio udsoflo Qoid haao 
LD pa pee aay ei Riso Des Qoo Slo iMs io: So 
me UH JN joe: awpa Jlanjso Hy Nfa Ssaro uo ass 
gc Dec" Jarmo hire Jot; Jaang q) b asians 
wh! a> Wo e JaN NS flops, Jadu’ hls NS <>} 
JNa ao [ixsasso Dakas ojos Nia -jho Jhosbfs JNasas No 
v2 H[ eoo hawas, Jill pa N or aglo Sasok, boie J e 
JLo Janse padul aig Sa Bonus bpobso: Jh. pascoll! 
Jor on 2 paws laa rd Naapa S «X990 FD o. pal l < Lasako 


admitted to the rank of the diaconate; and thenceforth for many years they 
earnestly and whole-heartedly and obediently oceupted themselves with 
us in the work of the ministry in the distriet of Asia in converting men from 
the deceithiIness of paganism, gralifving our soul every dav by their 
earnestness and whole-hearteduess aud diligeuce, with the old man Abraham 
and the devout Aaron and Leontins the presbyters, with all the other 
strenuous workers their other brothers, of whom also too we shall one after 
another make record, each one of whom worked and laboured strennonsly 
in his time without weariness in the householders vinevard !, that is in the 
great salvation which God's grace wrought in onr times, consisting in tlie 
conversion of many thousands from the worship of fiends and the ceremonies 
of idolatry to the fear of God. While then we were engaged in the same 
ministry in the districts of Caria, Daniel the deacon ended his course in the 
same ministry, seeing wonderful visions, and it having been revealed to 
him that he would be carried away to the blissful countey ; and, having fallen 
asleep, he was laid in the monastery called that of Gordiana hard hy the 
city of Antioch in Caria. And, when we returned to the royal eity, the 
blessed Abraham himself also ended the course of his life-practices in a 


L Matth., AN. bbe It is nol slated in ch. oS that Aaron took part iu the conversion of the pagaus. 


[ 449! LIFE OF ABRAHAM THE PRESBYTER. 651 


oial Janos aou] Li5&j Lad je col. e JNag Jaana aoyo, 
pado Jeunes, jah [oy Laag «5M x9 qr 99 ME ullo 
J 222] JE JlasoKiso JN Jal s ala5, mer ade jaan o5 
SN o Soars hoa Joss ba höra Naar ons» Lrodlo Jas ols 
Jas so1rpsisc soo» caw!) ba je» sos e PD UJ 
Jess Jloshhis voo [Naso jaxa eo c Nae «5.90 eol vau p 
oo S S8. Ss ja> h~o STA >20 j~ Naas hias sKa po 
J Jazas Ns DSA los TECA tole , oll - LAD. iato 
vok.s lo see: J 0 las oa Slo pask] haa cy of UL «vel 
shaspa Llas vaals Loop DS ye sol Nas 


“doals 


I. Ms, as. — 2. Ms. wilh points 


good old age; and he was laid with his blessed spiritual brothers Aaron 
and Leontius. And the blessed Z w 1° was afterwards admitted to the honour 
of the presbyterate, and he took over the charge of the whole convent anl 
all its belongings with great diligence and much single-mindedness, insomuch 
that he laboured at the completion and restoration of the building of the 
martyrs’ chapel of this monastery’ and wearied himself excessively bevond 
his streneth, together with all the rest of our brothers, aud by their means 
it was completed, when we ourselves had gone back again, and were engaged 
in the work of the ministry in the same districts of Asia. And, when after 
the space of a year and à half we came back, and saw the product of 
his labours and his industry, we were astonished and gave thanks 10 God, 
though for fear of pride we did not tell him openly ()?. At the same time he 
also too was brought to the consummation of death, aud gained the privilege 


of being lad by the bones of his father the holy old man. 


It is ended. 


Fo Probably that built by Mare ceps. — 2. Whe ts. is unintelligible, but i chanse of one betler 


eives Lhe above sense, 


TISSA 


à JOHN OE. EPHESUS. Aat] 

asm rmnaba sre acm rhosardh 'aah 

Wan Witsasa iawa ""Yuxxp mimata «| maw 

danas ma osa UA LNL A eter 
srun ules noo "o. mians 


Ll o Lb SS S l.4.»o L5 ba c: "1324; 

Ja NS cona lle vH J^ MI Ls Nass japan, Lasoao "Ja .a1so 
eue oka] fias Lo Jo; foi lose: onam v Wl cds NU 
Laso Joa Nas] yo -alarma vaan [iso ANo ofsars 
Ks oe Das T sje sce ei N.assoo alasso So ~ opaa 
JRsGsh saaan fan Xo — ikso bel bel: Ja. go Jiro 
JN. > Nje - cvot eraadxds opa Jos] JR ko JI o 


ohi eh de an Pe £dss p b. where the heading is wises das Dae [ead haag Soo [Asal 
Lat daa, 2 Ms. pho wath port c following so dboen s — 435 7 NS — oo. B ins 1895. 


TE o6 7. B om, 8. S Ub ius. es — 9. i o> 


NEE THE FORYTY-FERST PHisToRY, OF THE BLESSED BASSIN THE SOLITARY, ASD 
VOMANLS THE PRESBYTER & ND VISITOR OL THE GREAT CONVENT OI Viren j AES 
NI OF SIMEON THE Viti IIMAND RITE >. WHO ARE LAID IN THE SEPULCHRE WETH 


ies maryam MEN”. 


To describe the rest of the practices and asceticism and manner ol life 
in the desert of this blessed Bassian the presbyter and solitary, things whieh 
we have not seen nor heard, seemed to is superthious; but, when fora short 
lime we had received the privilege of intercourse with the great blessed man af 
God, in his labour aud his speech and the aflliction of his tears and his 
teaching, while he mourned and wept first for his disturbance and his ejection 
from the desert. which ilie sadi was brought about through the violence and 
contentions conduct of other solitaries, then afterwards also, when we were 
making inquiries of him with regard to the alllietion shown by his many 


floods of tears ind. constant sighs, lie showed greater distress by grievous 


1. Near Antioch Wright, CBM.. p. 198. — 2. There i> Holling about mimeo in tbe eh. nor is de 
mentioned in the subseriplion, see lulrod., p. vin 5-3. In B the tie is e A history concerning the 
le-*2d B. the solitary bs the same Mat Jobn of Astin. 


[451] LIYES OF BASSIAN AND ROMANUS. 653 


Lie | fads Joou «el asns m vx Sel e joa paa JN xo 
fas] assy footw opalo So aso eoa A Ss Iss °y fobs 
> Rasa wirdrso Jos Mx oo AS I Noa; aXseas sds Jos 
Plane palo L JN Wy as] palo JNN fly oun odtas Jaros 
Joao X39 pho; Jl Lus JSG Jho wass fly [Kap 
Kiss Jp! o» beso yof D ALDI Lad ea ado esl: fhwase 
oà yeh eeu neri Jihad Jlopwo jade. Le e Jor ed 
canard Ja facto .w poh] othasadg yo JN xo oan Lanas 
“laana! JNa JL ees. PAST xr + fusca Jian ous als 
Sa qÈ ened y <> faas | <% x&»( vaa wo") Sao pote]: 
fof. Kany sions he»: pul Jaooo "hiona pol Hol pans H or 
qapo Jory; ELT ET "kasd axes. halo Jos 
falcon EE do Sg eee 9 ouo X coi +30 I aaao 


L aissy mcs Ws hoo 915s. — 8. i abano. — V Ji sco. — 5, A BD rin erasure), 6. B 
So S» je. — 7. eha los. — 8. Rins. BS. — t. N ins. Bali. — 10. Hom. 9. B db. 
l-—d02H HAD 9 baus — 33x Qo qo. 


sobs, saving, « Who ion (ges pros, as there even vil he svere a mam 
possessing a heart of stone who would not weep over the delusion and 
captivity and destruction of the race (yivog) of meu? for lo! everyone is running 
against himself contrary to religion, and everyone is with all his strength 
intent upon evil things with naught to hinder, and we all behave ourselves 
like men without God, and like deaf animals without law (vous) and without 
fear of the dreadful) judgment to come, and everyone is of his own will 
casting himself into the pit of destruction unto destruction, and by all this 
destruction of Adaurs race a festival has been created for Satan and joy lor 
the fiends who are carrying away the race (yévoz) of Adam that was fashioned 
in love and after its deviation was rescued: and now lo! the hosts of darkness 
are mocking at its destruction, and rejoice to be carrying many to par- 
ticipate in. the torment of their destruction. lu. regard of these things, 
our father, who would not weep, who would not be afllicted, who would uot 
wail, who would not make mourning like a jackal, aud lamentation like a 
jackal’s whelp, since the force of error and destruction has borne away men 
who are bought by the blood of God and reseued by his cross? ». While 


the blessed man was repeating these tinis and more than them in his 


toT EE ES ub 


*pissvb. 
OX KY ad 


055 IOUN OFE EPHESUS. TU 


SaNa owa Gime po oD aia Al oa ooo | oola 
p a Isso LLNS «QJ ot Slo ooo meres Koo -'fyoors Pcs co 
vM po bisags "adaisxoo oaaao ofdsara Joo awli ss] Xo 
[Nsa iN oaao amadas Sa od GRY] SN Joa pain fasa 
. [Nai Tia JsaSass: o fadtico Lo: Sr ol a» .. «xl E Jayy 
tre? [DX Reo Jlo l “wol 9 ia eo b] a2 
LdNsec + e209 Dan penr ‘dot £26 FP Jv LA ba 
Naa je JE Ss cono -Laias ooo “>o 2 wh Jay ~ hoas 
su vom. fano ool) L&XXso LOHMAN Ad a0 7, oo el 
Kass one wortdas opsas pal qe: Joys Jess Leoa aso 
eus odas kas tlass STER yolk lo asc] obs-0a9 yl -haas 
MAA fag $0 LA~ aa frases Joao «Jos; voaa Laco TCA, 
vooda], haolo Lai Law oot ol, Laoi my Laag Malo l oa 


Lob ebol œ 2 Bans. 9090 — s: [o bees — 035 bs Quetta htsedo las laud. — 5 [p 
IN AA aS mladad wae pots ulop ad. MCN (ered ESSE S 1:e a2». Sog obolis sero m po s ass las. 
Ie ie PIE — ly e$ 0589 pl lllo MS «Sul. — quor dhe rest HH has Sad only, 


aliction. all who heard btm were marvelling: and, despising all this confused 
life, they also as well were being brought to atllietions and tears with him, 
evervone marvelling at the blessed man's labour aud afllietion and teaching. 
White he was doing and teaching these things, a revelation was made to hini 
concerning: bis end and his departure after a few days, while he said, 

Pray also for The miserable sinner, for at the end of twenty days f£ shall 
depart from the body », having also adjured my meanness, « Bury this my 
siufnl body in vour monastery, and pray for me o. When we had been saying 
these many things. and that sabbath-day {was at hand, he rose and prayed 
and offered the oblation, and gave it to many, having received H also himself, 
inl bade farewell to all. And during the night he became ill, and on the 
twentieth day he fell asleep: and so we carried. liim in a procession over the 
water to our monastery? according to his injunction: and his holy body was 
buried and laid. in the same tomb according 10 his injunction; by whose 
pravers together with those of all the saints who please God may all we 
sinners who provoke our Creator be admitted to merey. Yea and Amen! 


And the blessed Romanus who also was a great and Whole-learted old man, 


|. Toe the das on whieh die was lo so te his pest — 2. See pe fbi a. 


[453] LIVES OF MARE. SERGIUS, AND DANIEL. 6255 
sls Js A> oot alo Joot A Y) Jess L3 Jpsoary jasoa] Joa 
l) cot ol wise Jis [isa ol Fal] ota haamo [35 


Joye yar jaa as oa | yz le Je | E <>? Juoaso lad 


anaia urt mums uapa rfóusrdh dox 
SEE «(i46 4. 


Ehia ant aapa edida oimWES rZóusxh aah 
ara pawn Lra QGuX ica sen srl 


Sr dla mai a 
et 


* 


Jaa Xs Nispa faia oon gor - oo hs). dot “scot fsa.” 

partl'le „Aoa c6 Joa saN] uilo Lo fused o Lon aso! 
wot OX Jpopso ‘Jasan wise Joa ots o el; Joi, bi fie 
Jie Laspan oo T? eaS .Joot wook.] Lia sdo joMas do C 


1. Ms. with point - following. — 2. Ms. pl; «f. heading. 


who was apocrisiarius of the great convent of Thel ‘Adda, who himsell also 
as well lived in the same house of a certain. great and believing man in 
which the blessed Bassian also fell asleep, was also afterwards himself too 
Drought to the departure from the bodily life, and himself also was laid m 
the same grave with the rest of the blessed men. 


The history of the blessed Bassian the solitary and Romanus the presbyter i ended. 


NEXT THE FORTY-SECOND HISTORY, OF THE TIREE BLESSED AHRCIHMANDRITES, Mant, 
Sernaicvs, AND DANIEL, WHO THEMSELVES ALSO AS WELL ARE LAID IN THE 


SAME HOUSE. 


These three blessed men therefore ended their courses here m the royal 
city. This blessed Mari was by birth (yéves) from Anzetene', and received 
training froma blessed great man of God, who himself also was named Mari, 
a man of labours aud a Nazirite, besides being also versed in the Seriptures 
and a doctor, and was at first a clergyman of the cehurel also, but at last, 


| Syr.c kiika 


PATER. On, E NIS =. 75 3 


“105 v? b. 


t ten pe 


620 JOUN OF EPHESUS, [^^^ 
ec» was brads; vai, Loco edes M» dL v v: hs 
əh La} Joa Joa esas akuro x6 pad Jos o Laa woo oao 
J|la a1 :fartol Isin oaa y liso Joa Jons Loo sijo oo 
Jas] seotus hal JlaX"jo hop Jha ioo :Jlanpsse0 
Joo Daw falso wor Jlesos: JL bay] oly hal HOF 0, 5 
Noro be [asad WW 2o JN soto Nasao DNA Noho 


a. NLY aN l saans Jal < [sot xL 300430 ADOT AO C30 


JlaixsoNasaM ddao Ahaaa fut oj ba Laag vaod Lon 
Jay Jiono hasl [seek Jos 2-79 à» JNamoks slo o, 
3e £ hasl jJilesns laio [iol ford}, fora yas Jha Jioao 
uu Moo ge Joa aata flsas Lasso ~ Jess Las aAa La N39. 
Joa par Laaa bapao JL. La oa Slo qe» jasana po 
La? Joa ~y EPPA Jal je» Snare 0,01 LO, amaaa jio 220 


t Corr. fram ,eoccelt, lul. — s. In erieure. 3. Corr. from Beato. 


seeing his error and the course of the world's times, left all his property, 
and went out and sought for himself a monastery outside his village, the 
name of which was Hula (042); so that he himself also was called. Marr of 
Hula; and thus he mortitied himself by mighty labours, asceticism and self- 
abuegation, and much watching, and fasting and prayers, so that inen 
marvelled at his practices, even as he stubbornly endured many conflicts 
(26v) of persecution arising from the heretics, And, whereas in the previous 
histories we have recorded a small proportion of faets about this same 
blessed man', we now forbear to relate his history. This blessed Mari 
therefore is this man’s disciple, who took upon himself his master's obedience 
to the full, and in practising it even went beyond him, in constant fasting 
and perfect abstinence. and much watehing, with the rest of the excellent 
and devout rules of monasticism, so that, when he had dived to a long period 
of years, his body was dried up and enleebled from the severity of the 
labours: and he also lived a considerable time iu the convent with us both in 
the east and in the west. And after his master’s decease he himself with 


other disciples was thenceforth vaining distinction, so that he also endured 


I ch. There however he is called Mare, 


[^55 LIVES OF MARI, SERGIUS, AND DANIEL. 657 
ww Jla Kus sas a> ol; où Joa Saco Lang J.a2.55 oa 2l, 
bsa <? Ida + as Jans Nupa poser aka; wikso Joa 
mo epo Mas) Jesse. Joa, Joa soodat Je + Lay EO 
Joa ^ oet NA] Jaca «Sufi, haag ol colo JN IL badass 
Jrosaco Neo dM so hes pel Las Ly J A198, DIET [ansis Juyolrsoy jen 
Slo ooo qha m 00 amaaa |laad>o Napaan Jao ooa, 
Lass] [$e D £20 lesus) flsdro JLosKAse. fads ] eo, La 
J , So oð aM. Cope pir] «0001 Eapalmse (oop wards 

d uic SSN y” < x ? 
jas “ea WES pas hmas, j0 v? QI Soe [oa ~ 9004 op aco] 
Joys yar fur psoas, Jiaao Kus; Joo, Sos axal lo Ax, 
Cx pl, JL eo Jase fs] [ze Lr W200 bgal Hase 
+ [ropa «oor oy PES valas, ~> Jo, OME aS sull J Kooy O2» 
Js Wale Le jando Jou: Lasan Jans Loona eo 


L. Ms. wo — 2, Ms. wilh slop following. — 3. Ms. %3. 


much persecution; who also in the perseeution eame to the same royal 
city, and afterwards ended his course here in the royal city. 

This blessed Sergius was archimandrite of the convent called that of the 
house of Mar Gy In, in the territory of the eity of Amida; and moreover the 
blessed Daniel also was avehimandrite of the monastery ealled that of the 


| eee at i 


in the distriet of Sophanene ; both of whom together came up hither 
to the roval city for the sake of the needs of their convents, thev also too 
being famous for devout practices of exeellence and monastic labours. And, 
while they were trusting to human assistance for their convents, something 
whieh they had perhaps not expected so quiekly suddenly overtook them 
both, that is the consummation of death, one alter the other, in twenty days: 
and they were laid in the place ol sepulture of this convent, together with 
all the other many blessed men, monks and layinen, many exeellent men 
who are not recorded, whose bodies were interred in the same place; through 


whose prayers with those of all the samts mav God erant us all forgiveness 


L VOL and Le render * Fabernacnlorun, and world therefore apps, read Wt aases. 


* lo6 r? b, 


E FO Ir V 


GIS WARA Oe EET US o9 456: 
ec» eia sa NS jaa) laco jyan oo»: Joye yas I LOADORAY 
sl esas 


sind Sud ehia an^ aapa rharh Ad) 
(durae aul ima 


divas padia rridu Alda aoira eduard aah 


mopwiapa eia Cram eunin alre 
“dul tsa maxsaayiaa 


LNMARS Litdroo :Jpras Je Lrssatiso QoonNs 55] va S001 Joss 

Jaa qd hojas Sd. lox Lael) Jleshh»: : NaN fXasosly 
Muy bara Ahana oisotl eso ais ey oor Jeu: losin 
hora Klina Joa Daia Vad LOM pw Da T -aot = Jes 
oun Iona! Jas Sa caret oly Final igo saos Lia Doa 
co «oo NS] Liaw we Qoo» v haa. p Je Maas as 


1. Ms. om. — 2. Ms. pl. 


of sins with them, and stablish this convent which received their collins with 


all the other holy convents to his glory for ever and ever. Amen! 


The history of the three blessed archimandrites. Mari, Sergius, and 


Daniel, is ended. ' 


NEXT THE FORTY-THIRD HISTORY, OF THE LOUR EXCELLENT DEACONS, EARNEST 


IN RELIGION, ARRAHAM, Coniac, BARHADBSHALBA, AND SERGIUS. 


As for these four devout deacons therefore, strenuous workers and earnest 
performers of the divine ministry whieh was earried out in the distriets of 
Asia for the sake of delivering from the error of paganism souls which from 
the beginning from the foundations of the world had. been sitting in the 
darkness of idolatry, when each of them laboured earnestly with us down to 
the end of the life that is derived from the body, so that these devoul men also 


were laid together in the sepulchre, while all of them were by birth (yévss) 


I. M- our. 


pio qda js Cua Jie = as] So ro x La Lasiao 
lisad coy yol JNa Aoa a amigs foo ooa] -Loo 
DEP Lag n Nahas Jiyao Janiso Jes Joa J , 
J Lox ji e qaladan veo eoe M EROS, > Roo Lawa Joa oot a] 
qao Jlairsoi'ssos jlannasoo Liidso Jlacpmsaso ..Joot Nope ` 
hus KO AML Joo oct Na]. ba -fass e y wol .JIN Luo 
Ja Quon Joa Ko p30 cof 9] Lior Joi foi] poise, Jae go JI 
Lag xe? ol SN Leo JKXsseaks Joa d - Jlasrsassas ys S60 
ooo [530; an] A el, be Las Aag Joa uoo? aH 
bna yar «eon Ns S3] cay aroha] forSs Nas, JXsraaly Loa Jj o 
Jsede .JAesll; foiago huoi Juans o) Lnag haad - bps!) 
$96 omaa Loom re p So Mo NS o Nou sal; Lasso [rds 
Jaano Jlo, fauartmo .-flaaisy LAS So Han Koco joa 
Jo» Mr lam Lads hsl borge Leàs Lese Jao" 


[^57] LIVES OF FOUR DE XCONS. 659 


from Syria‘, Cyriac, who laboured with us for some years before everyone 
alter these first old men?, was by his birth (yévos) from the city of Maiferkat?, 
and the blessed Abraham, who was powerful in word and in deed, and 
above all in body, was by birth (yéves) from the country of the Persians, and 
eratilied our spirit more than others by his earnestness, being adorned wth 
abstinence and with self-abnegation and with zeal and humility and obe- 
dienee, and with all spiritual qualities, and as to Barhadbshabba too he was 
hv his birth (yév9;) from. Ingilene, from a village called Arta Babtha*, who 
also was adorned with earnestness and ready to show obedience, and very 
zealous in reciting service, and the blessed Sergius moreover was by his 
birth (yévoz) an Armenian, who also underwent great conflicts (zyóv) in the 
work of the ministry of the house of God; and the four of them with all the 
rest gained a blessed ending, since amid the same spiritual employment and 
the tiring nature of the countries and the high rugged mountains of Asia 
each one of them ran zealously and mightily in his time, and was streng- 
thened to abolish paganism, and overthrow idolatry, and uproot altars and 
destroy shrines (voz) and eut down trees in ardent religious zeal; and ? each 


1. I cannot reconcile this with the stalements following. — 2. Leontins and Kashish (?;; see ch. 39. 


3. Marlyropolis. — 4. see p. 56. Ht was perhaps the author's native place p. 61).— 5. Mz. om, 


* 106 y^ b 


onn IOHN OF EPHESUS, ADS 
LOA ADO OS Laco — Lis je LL PS OHD e on Id 
Joana wot] ens Jioc Mao coal ES Lui» Slo Joa ANS No 
Jla So Jos o» aao Tar ooa <} sh» Jl m> woot 
pel Hesse: bios. lao: lo, "Je O bos Sly ha Jhb goo 
Spo oJ Jo wot less Can SOINS <>? Jad’ hao, 
eMe neons [stage sis amo ch sJles]o qo ran N J, 2à 
hasia guii gie galio e Mfo oomp ta 
e» Jas) Lap Lal shaax"UMxe Jo Llo saarso jaN, 20325) 
Lads onir Luando Joio Aa hiy Pananda pe js 
ee e Tre asiag «O6 +>) LOHRAN JAXX) | er IN s een] hs 
EDS Lute harmo sre 44323 voe Main Suse 

eloos foiago JLseno Joos ` ve Lo 


mass wisa rÉnmàana "eiiam iard dale 
HELDIN cal uec 


1. Ms. ©. SS An erasure follows. 


one of them in his time together with the holy old men who were before 
them worked earnestly, and all of them also toiled and laboured with us with 
joy and great earnestness in. building ninety-two churches and ten monas- 
teries in four provinces (zx). whieh were erected by the help of the 
heavenly power: a thing which justice also requires us to bring Info the 
record of memorials of blessed character for the sake of a future good remem- 
brance for all these strennous workers, in order that we may not be reproached 
bv righteousness for having seen and known their labours and troubles 
and done injustice to their memories, especially since we marvel and wonder 
atthe dispensation of God's mercy, and his just and inscratable judgments, how 
in à short time he led them all one after another to the end of this tumultuous 
life and to the gathering together of their. bodies, which he caused to lie 
by one another, and all of them to his eternal rest from the vexation of the 
hody, while we on our part are still bound in the ropes of our sins and 
involved in bodily temptations in this life of turmoil, and of vanity and vexa- 
tion of spirit. 
The. history of Abraham and Cyriac and Barhadbshabba and Sergats 
the deacons is ended. 


I. see p, 416, n. 4. — 2. Ecel, 1; Dv: dn 10, 07, 26; Tv, 4, 16. 


[459] LIFE OF TRIBUNUS. 661 


TC agora Maaiba asia aimes dush aah 
rand haiduni wt mania anasa nls 


?'€ uM a 


farus ]ü3e; Janana, Lama: bass he Jikiso Sco [isa 

Jh q% „Lassy BL ae Joo worok.] < onmi „Joa Jla 
Asia Jn Das a Jhiasy JIKsoao <>? bet JNa; Kas Loos 
JNa Laso; fusad Lad Jugo JL exa Jlasssolo lad. 0 Jsoo p50 Joo 
[aa ]i2.9 ol; fal ha Noo j$asejse azo wao foo <x] 
Joa S Lec ol joe. yar coo woad, woos] adan L 
NS aso jo peo ^ [sex Lapo awama «ao y Lao Nsoo 
eoo | pao Joo —— NMoL5aso Noe. fot, fujpaso JKasaaks 
OOF «3-300 + UOHAIAI_ JN], Jae Jlaslas>, coo RP 
oM ooo pe LOS foot rM |; Dad noo Joos Ja ol, 


1, Ms, e 32. 


NEXT THE FORTY-FOURTH HISTORY, OF TRIBUNUS WHO IN HABIT (s7%u.n) WAS 
A LAYMAN AND A COUNT, BUT IN THE PERFORMANCE OF PRACTICES OF EXCEL- 


LENCE COMPLETE AND PERFECT. 


This excellent blessed man Tribunus therefore, who tn a lay station 
carried out spiritual practices, was by his birth (yévoz) from the district of 
Sophanene, from a village called Beth R sv m n t''; aman who from an early 
age had been taught religion, and was constantly oceupied in fasting and 
prayer and constant attendance in churches and monasteries with the great 
and excellent blessed men, and used to hear and learn the psalms aud the 
Scriptures, even as his parents also set themselves to teach him to read aud 
write Greek, and he besides Greek learned Syriac also’, and meditated, as 
it is written, ‘on the law of the Lord day and night ^. While then he was 
constantly occupied in reciting service and reading the Scriptures in Greek 
and Syriac, aud while his parents desired to yoke him in worldly intercourse 
with a wife, and expected that he would also be their heir, because he was 


indeed their only child, and‘ advised him to take a wife, as she had been 


l. Perh. read * Rumane’ pomegranates). 2. Appy. his own language was Armenian. — 3. Ps. 


1, 2. — 4. Ms. om. 


t ove 


a. 


uni FOHUN O SES: AGO] 


Joa Laso Joo Jasaan, oa Naglio hasl, faa] JANI ani 
sba bats: OAYOO-D Sno] GN SY] Lisa pas AS DO! e wood] 
s» slo anD al] a) rr Jlasaddo JAM XL! JJadsoo 
“coco Jlax Ss fasa du ol Lis: ave po sasl] Jago Joio 
JL" La co [Nas Joa LNS mp0} LL. sco [anao 51] «oos SL Colo 
o cool whe Lasers Oda JL o Jas. Lal Joa Las sooo), 
„Jilan oh DNA aa So No aM» SQA aan, [aco had 
OU} 0000 ejo oo aaO JLoi.35]o J exo |.JNsle L522o Kis 
S gao S anado oA Jha saoi? «2500 Jus Ae 
Joa «el Lawo; liz 2waso Joos Axe J? Joa muaaphso JJ sacs 
„Joa gos JloslN sos veo SAT bel Ia Zo Jas} Lado 
jiwana Qoo as Snare [xnl Jes poly fans] aN Nao Wes) ANo 
uns [ssojo lais fase) s+ 5; haas Jawara NoJi Neo od ooo vl 
ADO pS Jaan, Lardy y ot Jal, Liassy, doi ^ J5asJo 


betrothed and provided, he on his side opposed, and he wonld answer his 
parents, saving, « As for me why should | go and fall into the turmoil of 
this world, and give material to sin and death? IPT indeed obey von, then 
| shall also be bound by the world and many sins, and, if it happens that I 


beget children, they will be spoil for death, and I shall again stt mourning 


lor them »; and the many other things which, as lie often repeated in our 
presence, he would answer to his parents, so that they were rednecd to great 
distress, because they saw that the devout young man so despised the 
world and all that is im it; since indeed they relied upon riches, houses and 
estates and lands, and male and female slaves, and saw that he who they 
thought was heir of these things spurned and despised them, and wonld not 
consent to look at them at all, but was constantly occupied with religion 
and spiritual employment, and used to have recourse to saints who were 
stvlites and recluses and laboured iu the excellent hfe, and attached himself 
to them, and was taught, so that thenceforth they held hin as a beloved son 


iu allthe convents, and especially in the devout convent of F v t v the devout 


and great blessed men Habib and Zora, who shine at the beginning of 


these histories! lke rays of light: so that after the decease of Ilabth the 


[AGL] LIFE OF TRIBUNUS 603 


TN ama} poA Lanes flaw (xis osse is >) Jus. 
Jlsasso Joa ams Lada! slo - os «30 mas; sola] Jas Jian 
ase ds [si] Mis frasas we his, fas; po ooto Lod 209 
acc Pass} Jingo saod] p2 Jias) ha ` haag JOr2200 fiir oas 
Do OHAMd ina C0 oo [49093 - Jlaifoy Laaa, oped -Joa 
"oua Neo] «2e Laad vonoi, fo Joop ..Joot Sax [Nie are 
waa. JH ..Joo Sac xt D met OOF 5302» adas ja» quo 
Seas; Jano] joa dota «aor s] Kay Jlarmasad Jad Kupas, 
O36» q Maa > paus xoi ao) Say JNaxl& NS ugo x6 
lis. fhasas yl .JAacsacw ry hanoh cota] ro Dess) 1921 
Jaam ,5 opao s Je 3784. ja» PAado .opa» «aM. hooo Lua. 
Laa) lolh Senso Joo m Sly La) JRusrod 9o Lipa 
pro wot Lalas, ou] p votaaas JJ Jrsdigo Joa Joes Jasin haas 


1, Appy. in erasure. 


mighty in spiritual strength, when his perfect disciple Zura at last earned 
the privilege of succeeding him in the administration, and also of ascending 
the pillar aud. accomplishing the course of his practices on it, and, when 
this blessed Ztura had for a period of some years while in an earthly body 
heen engaged in heavenly and sublime employments on a column between 
earth aud heaven, by the envy of the enemy of righteousness a persecution 
was stirred up against him by those who honoured the synod of Chaleedon, 
and that so violent that they brought the blessed man down from his pillar, 
and he was expelled with all his convent: and he. when these things were 
inflicted upon him, without delay hastened to the royal city to utter a reproof 
on aceount of these things, as have! been recorded by ns at short length 
in the histories relating to these things; and he took the devout Tribunus 
with him in lay attire (syžuz) as an interpreter of the Greek tongue. And 
so he went up with him, and lived with his disciples and with him, imitating 
their practices and occupied m spiritual employment; insomuch that he was 
consequently desirous of being admitted to the devout monastic habit 


isy7ux) also, and the blessed men would not allow him, saving « It is 


]. Sie sy. 


* bos 7° 


GGA TOUN AORTIC. 4^2. 


QM esee cud See Iu pead waslo Nort Lads juli so 
e» JNa poill N] aad bano] Q5 Jo -muimpoas/ i 
vaaia Nia Coots aano Laws |Nasaal Joor Jlsasse |15ote Laaa] 
mwan [Lac slo -Lawas JND os Kul Joal Kofi ol, Las? 
y re y jso si] H ADAD pad SINNA opa [Ma 
M Jd Men ex ors esa y oo waned Nj] lv “Aolo jax 
Lando Jo c» |a 5006 RAMS Nw ato Aet wanman] DAA 
q] Los psn äa> arcade ooo Ma oo ,5 "X. alo JN aas] 
~ Lisa} oo wos :fisa ds oaa, Lxl& sis Ye lo Joo 
e JN ras o6» joo pad à Jas haag Jihiirso 2o: 
Luas) Kasis |Namol lo] e JN’; [Naso acior5o) flsax fisas 


Maeiazsas | p huso vaain We avo] | Lans, haao 


er? Joa Noo Seng Als fens] core Jo ya soo Joo Loi Naa 


] Added m marg. in smaller letlers. — 2. Coir. from [batcadees. 


better both for vou and for us that you should go in and out of the city and 
the palace (x59) as a lavman, and carry communications (arozgisers) for 
us, and not go about the city clad in the habit (ezzyx) aud cause the habit 
(07x) to be made an object of mockery ». And so he performed the service 
of the old man and of his convent all the days of his life, insomuch that he 
gained easier entry and more freedom (zzz25552), and they even thrust the office 
of a count on him under constraint by his‘ command, saying, « This willbe no 
impediment to your practices: aud, when you wish, it is casy for you to give 
up the office. But for the sake of our communications (Zzozz/ss) take it upon 
youn. And so under constraint he accepted an earthly employment, while 
the whole of his own mind and energy was constantly occupied in heavenly 
employments and bound up in thein. When after some years during which 
he had served the blessed man the blessed man departed from the world, 
then the exeellent blessed inan remained in the cell iu whieh he dwelt in the 
city, accomplishing the labour of his practices on a great scale, having also 
added to his spiritual labours the extra labour of hospitality and the relief 
of the poor, living and delighting also in voluntary poverty, and rejoicing 


iu it, so that, if it happened also that there was a superlluity of anything 


l. 7c. Z' ura '*. 


[463] LIFE OF TRIBUNUS. 665 
pro haio Sx di aS loa Joal Jace pe ahanda loa Joal 
haal ob ir «oo ICTU Au dXosass Jaaa «200 JSXcano <% JAN 
OX ooo! qm eotr2o) lopas col WNMseo ta ooo qanad 
Jiao Jootss al 9l of neonas, Jis sns vat] Jass ofS cool yanao 
ox haao «| Ksotase joe «gouso Saad Jootsyo OL pu Xo je 
MN «^ 220) ENI p2 JNa; Jloian.o «oe pel » SJ Kaseo Joa 
pO yes) bol; JRropsy of hpa Jos sloWalyo oad. 
ol p :Joor «| Ja-a.25)3 Jute Dzaa Less [ise fy] Naas Ji 
r> Jon Jb francofly Joa pans Nee ja „Joa ward Jaanas 
rad el «5 foa ward oU so, I-A Jiary haagkso My Lo Jysxcaxns 
Joo aa “Jlasakts volo Jlor! joe Jor A9 waaa [Lal 
Koklass wu Jr ot aS 2d wih y» Joa «aspohsoo 240 haäo, 
Slo .,ooot AAAI oon fou) of Hue !? fro .o XX oot yanin 


1. added (in same ltand ?;. — 2. Corr. from ILasaizo. 


in his cell, he would set himself to scatter it among the needy. Since many 
of the ehamberlains and of the distinguished members of the senate (en c) 
were acquainted with liim because of the blessed man ', and moreover loved 
hin on account of liis venerable manner of life, and used to beg him to do 
them the favour of dwelling with them, or even only to stay with cach of 
them, and to receive some gift [rom them, so also he would flee and shrink 
as from the perpetration of an evil act, saving, « My sins are enough for 
me; and to share in other men’s sins”, or to refresh myself by the sweat 
of others 1 will never consent». And so he was constant in maintaining a 
life of retirement and the performanee of righteous acts, though be had 
reached old age, still hoping to attain the habit (sya), passing most of 
his days in this our convent and that of the blessed Zura, while he also 
practised handiwork for liis needs, some carpentering: and moreover he made 
partridge-cages (420503) and sold them, and gained lis living, with his two 
slaves, who also served hin devoutly: for, when they went out to monaste- 
ries or anywhere, then they also continually practised vigils and fasting and 


1. Se. Z' ura. — 2. Cf. p. 175. 


* 108 4 


b. 


T" JOHN OF EPHESUS. ET 


[Sea as qoos sS S la ro J| Na salo Leo o [Sone 
|2NNG Janis of S AD 908 v~o] JN Xas [soo ooa q~] 
Nh Late Jeses Jal 42 Joa cese] aso haag oa Indo 
Ae 4 Lex Jos c JLa ai eo Joa -—— Jlasamsasy us 
Joor 3L po Joa ado Noo — ha> -© Jood. <> J Lank a0 
JS ol yas UE Las] .e£ Joor iN. ouo oof paso + 61d ey 
de oua o ako Ss Xo | oan Say Soo [jl EX Joa asso 
[has Xa: oi Joo ope bos Suns Jason JNa] Loo, yoasily 


(59 WOR SANSON, casey INS s. [esos [155 yo Ns ! (v5) WARIO .Of. 30.303 


aa JM | D” DMa Jee JE Pris sraco ass; bolas caa] 
«oet yl YP) i» I Jpadrco/ «9 901 £20 JM oM vaan 
Loa [Aso 40 :JINsoco s boo oi NA od No] Nace] Lào, flsaooo 
we J Xv >> Ll Lams ble usar Jh ad lexol -dopa D 


1 Ms. can 


recitation: of service and: constant pravers in company with all the members 
of the convent; and. when they were remaining eontiniously in the cell, 
the blessed Tribunus was constantly occupied in the same way night and 
day. and what is especially deserving of admiration is that he rejoiced in 
poverty and took pleasure in scarceness; so that, i it happened that at any 
time he actually had a superfluity, he was mueh displeased at this, and set 
himself to scatter and to spend his superlluity : so that he took pleasure in 
-eareenezs, giving thanks. E wish therefore to set down and place on record 
something abont a temptation of his and about the maws courage and the 
eonlliet izy6v) whieh he sustained. This man then had once thought of 
changing his place of residence; and he went ont and was going round the 
mansions, looking for a tenement convenient for him to live in: and, having 


i 


found tinn ^! written and lixed up on the door of a certain mansion. he asked 


for tlie porter. saaan to vo up aud show him the tenement. And, sinee 
the porter (zziz; himself was not there, but as Wf hy the opposition. of 
Satan his wife was present, who was a voung woman and was very worldly 


CN 


in her appearauee?, she sail to hint « Come with me and twill myself show 


|l. This was perh. used. of ans house where rooms were te he lel; but in Bar Ali (quoted in 
Porth es vs SN gol ostiarius is rendered bolas "Uunkeeperi; — 2, See p. 225 n. 3. 


———— eee 


[465 LIFE OF TRIBUNUS. 667 
po oma) (27M CUN Naso Nat eoo Jo MN a.a £20 n~a, 
Losu 6.5 pall] a loa Lanm JNA furs cor T E ya, N 
y Kapao aAa ol £p o aaa loot EN Nujpaso JN NL: 
OD PRAY £20 rary J[MSaarad AAs pa bo was auf JS Nus JXoadisy 
Wes) otha nos vxo) pel Mojo. wor oao Op 5| arso aaao 
Lasa. Jo 2..430 JM 410.290 9 furs m> Joa Naanu od Jo 
Jaa d vaasa), Mujpasy ore Soil] Nfa - cotasse’Kaso soopaa 
|) Rear Y is S] p woa Saas frat Jlacss) hina D | 49 
J Noa" sas (Lasso) t2 Tea J jos Nso os TRES JJ aS.14» kiss 
x JJ haama. Jas) ol JINsse eso Jha dso oan JI ols va 
Ao Hano «fu x flrs xh wey 001 ea | JNa franc so’ =o 
las "aas FON) Slo Nise ae pro JE je HL wis 'Llo 


Lol Laas] | Jlarrnio Jasson ha Do waaa, od Iylaso JIN? 


1. Ms, wats (sic, The eonfusion in this sentence is perh. the authors. ss Ms. [Da oae. 


3. Cors from e Preceding word in erasure, 


you the rooms that are advertised ». And, when she had taken the key 
(153a) and sone up and opened them, they both went in. And, as he was 
golug round to look, while she on her side was displaying a snare of sin 
e o . D 

pelore him, a siuful passion was aroused in her, and she went on madly 
bel him, ful | | her, I sl t I] 
laughing in his face, while she also seized him, and began as if by the 
kisses of sin to grasp him and enttee him to fall with her. And, as he was 
ki f sin to grasp | id enttee | to fall with ] And, as | 1 
rebukinz her and flinging and casting her hands off hin, she on her side all 

c & qs L 

the more as il by the machination of the devil, who was desirons of eatehing 
the brave man by a snare, and setting a blemish on lis beaultes aud staining 


' yet more entered into her, making her madly grasp the blessed 


him, he 
man, while she also threw herself in front of him to tempt him to lasci- 
viousness, litertwining herself with himn with all the lasciviousness and 
violence of impurity and adultery, using? foul words which we do not wish 
even la write dowu and pollute the ears or amad of the hearer aud record. 
But the man armed with the divine power flung aud threw her olf and 
withdrew himself from her, reproving and rebuking her sternly aud saying, 


« The Lord rebuke you, woman, and the fiend who clothed vou in so much 


shamelessuess and wickedness that you should dare to detile the path of 


1, Se. The devil, Sie syn — 2. Ms. owm. The text ds here very eorenpl 


* 
* yoy re p, 


GGS JAEN OBR Te HIS SUN, ^il 


eastoKal Loasa paro brio ara.wad yolk WA! JLaslas, 
| oa soe» la e -[i»oto asa NS 2:30 «e: ANA axo 
Noor vit jlas.32 ads «ao? ..oà JNa q% DIO QM Llo amass 
la Alo foro "Ww sje LNS bL Jagas ol MM «on Janel Jbl eo 
| S TG Danai joo pi, fairs: oda car Soo sos joos 
NN » Joo we «o jyan JloiKiusas ro Lasao aljan JL adda 
jas, jano N35 oo alo yallo JNag Joano soas yes 


duos 
^Qu53an rana r£ éhauxrh hi 


rum masala “(cana aim) méuiràé aah 
“poor ram mnri iduna 


„ha Jiag Sry JNa fadsods haso fly aia Da aa 
Jas No, ]losN so. adds REN fas") JloiKasoy Jg3os$. ota) o} hisa 


1. Vs, assag Dan — 7. Me, oim. 3. Mo. Wael, 


intercourse with your husband, and hold intercourse with another in violation 
of the law ivouoz . aml think to stain me the stuner with vou». Ant so 
this brave man like Joseph the just fled and Teft that house aud all. thal 
neighbourhood in great trepidation, so that he would relate these things to 
us and to many others, about the battle and conflict Gepevi which he had, and 
about the machination of the evil one who was bitter against the wise 
merchant in order to make spoil of his merchandise, Aud so, being illus- 
trions for the excellence of this manner of living, he ended*his life heroteally, 
bearing good testimony, and he too as well was laid in the sepulchre of our 


convent. 
The history of Tribunus the count is ended, 
NEXT THE FORTY- TH ISTOR, OF A PERFECT AND ENCELLENT. BLESSED 
MAN WHOSE NAME Was [save: 


As therefore it is written that ta city that is built upon a mountain cannot 


be lid ?. so also the light of the excelent manner of life of perfect men who 


Vo ONES te: 2. Matti. Vee 


[467] LIFE OF ISAAC. 669 


aoo Nl Nipo Jis «2o auge aana] ba Da [1524 L p 
p Jiad aho Janno a Joo Mu] Juuso hioo JUNGl ol p Joa 
has? c) Sao; JNoySo .farso] fioo Jlad pao soo p> Joo «el 
saucy Be yel hiso Jlo JNa waass LoD hands LOB qx» 
Jla Naapa wio haio ya, LL [aes hao DA 
Jisas aano auau Jlad Xa Joes qaad DA fasaa 0 
JE x36 «Dé pal soo Spero wea «Noa Jom Kus, haao 
hauo; bipul holes Joa sao} faao jlasatsy Jiso1. JLararscls £50 
sx Jess. vasqqaims vue Jed [iso werd Gall! Milian 
mano Jopo aasa | $5 rol asco -Afan wos JNa 
A AMO : Jasio La «Je amr Gono <0 vaasan ooo 
Joss»; JN T Joa sao? Jen; [drow Linars Daw Loo 


have employed themselves in works of excellence cannot be concealed. 
This blessed Isaac therefore was by his birth (yévoz) from the city of Dara, and 
he had also a wife and children and a house, and the ofhtee of a protector’, 
while he was constantly occupied in fasting and prayer and constant 
vigil. and in perpetual alms, so that out of the fervour of divine zeal he left 
house and wife and children as it is written? for the sake of the hope of the 
promise of eternal life, and departed, and came to the roval city, And, 
having entered the ministering office? (diaxevtz) of those who bathe the sick 
at meht, and laboured with them in the labour and service of the house of 
God, he began to be knowi and honoured by many. Aud, being constantly 
occupied in practices of asceticism and so on, he secretly formed the plan of 
engaging in another spiritual employment; and so lie secretly went oat to onc 
of the hospitals (2ev9347zz) * that was a little way from the city and hired 
himself out in it as a sick-attendant. And he took off all his clothes and sold 
them and gave to the poor; and he bought some hempen sackeloth and 
clothed hinuself in it. And thus he was henceforth a diligent attendant on 


the sick, since the affair of the sick openly gave him an opportunity and an 


1. The protectores were a division of the honrsehold cavalry Babul in. Ree. Hist.. oXiv, p. 225: 
EXV p. 225.: bul in this ease the post was appy. honorary. — 2. Matth., NMIN. 29. A32 Or ‘deaconry |, 
i e. a house established by the church for the care of the sick and poor under the superintendence 

J, 


of the deacons. Cf. p. 478 and JAE. 1, 18, D. aud see DPueange, s. v. diaconi. — 4. Eveseye, = 


Sevasoyeioy is nol found in Grech writers. 


bid IH Fan Soe E 


tpa pe n 


"TRE OHUN OF EPHESIE 8. [AGS 


JKasaatho galopado oes . Kiso. limo >o NLIS 1a a soo hl 
vootasas ls Se -Ja ero polos Aao clo MM 2 JLN, 


LS Ho eaa Co gaahi omo Loa, haas] okana 


M 


ons: too ]i5:a 125 ye Joya aaas -r Lopa M Sas words 
LANs o fu fisals O1300 o onoao olla Nass -7 p307 Noo ooo vonal 
„Joa Sy] Jla Nispa, loa Mod. alio]? ra Oats! 


Oo low Loco fopshoso JL eo Lj E Y o8 N 5 sa Slo NJ o 
Jajo wsaaso KaD amaha, beast wo loo Kos o fal 
[Lau Les) mao asou foa LaNa A Mo voids Aso Mj] p20 
xr Je V or j eo apres kapao loa [asd 2o p 
J fer aol Jhs coelo cassaoh JI Jia edo aM GJ o» Xa 
Libo ch badas Xs oe lo hoa ody Wl Ka] aso 
oH XX NSoslllo abXso “MX ao Scot eo AEN cs NS 
I.» LOM&5 Natio Mjle Nasa oina Nee nó Jl: o BY ol 


LI 


ix wbled kiler 2. Ms, «Aao. 


outlet for his secret manner of Hie, for fuis. watching and vigilance and the 
recitation of servies by might. he being vigilant and regular and diligent and 
standing before the siek, and busving hunself abont ministering to them 
aud relieving them. so that all to whom he ministered blessed. him, and 
contimmally prayed for htm: but the other sick-attendants with the superin- 
tendent i(£evo3og xzioz) and all who were with him marvelled and wondered at 
the diligence and watehing and fasting of the vigilant and diligent blessed 
mau Isaac. Bat his wife, having learned that he had gone to the royal erty, 
herself also too quickly went out after him, and she went about for a long 
time seeking him. insomuch that she learned from others that he was atten- 
ding on the sick in sueli-and-sneh a hospital Gevodoyeiov . And, when she 
went and asked about him and he heard about it, he hid himself trom her for 
alone time, while she lay in wail and went up and down to see him, and 
was quite unable to do so. But at last he sent lier a message : « Go away 
from here, donot Te im watt and go up and down, Yon eaunot see my face 
now: but go away now and wait, keeping quiet: and at the end ol 
two month» vou shall come and see me ». Having therefore received his 


word awdl put confidence in. his truthfulness, kuowing indeed that he would 


[A469] LIFE OF PAUL OF ANTIOCH. 071 


Jer» Oros My] Nl ual. «oor Ao pO cup aks [3252.22 
uà JLN? p [30,003 22300 ouaaa Ss joa eoo “Minne, olus] 
NS. -N-o jlah Sipe SX aaao Mlo ANAN o 
[aas y ado «Jos Nw Nse, fasasce | fisiaasyo Nape] Lasopado 
JL eo [xa Jaio x92? So oc) Lasao Jongas JNasas NS. asas QAM 
JÉ-a2lo Lə; buoys o wash] [iseo nanos] Ladd voona, 

JoJ ^ asao OD 430) Ao aL aD p JE 


woos musk aapa m'óuirdh dole 


smaduren walad isapa diva asair eduard aah 
ehun nacre n ram 


frend Laso Lod wanas, o) JANaakh Laas Jer Saa JJ 
Joe q washes songs, jas aM» Jlanjss ly Jas Je. xr 


i. Ms. on. © 


uot break his word, she withdrew and went away and sat quiet until the 
end of two months; aud after that time. having gone with conlidenee to see 
him in the morning, she found that he was dead, and had been laid on a bench 
(c«xustos), and wrapt in a sheet; aud that woman by her wailing and 
lamentation and weeping declared the truth of the miracle, and the foreknow- 
ledge and! that inthe exercise of diseretion and humility for God's sake, and 
uot as aman in need, he had submitted to minister to the sick. And so 
everyone who heard of it was astomshed, and a great number of people 
hastened to accompany the blessed Isaae to the grave; and thus his body was 
buried with a great procession and much honour, everyone marvelling and 
wondering at him and serving God. 


The history of the perfect blessed man Isaae is ended. 


NEXT THE FORTY-SINTIE HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED Paru, WHO WAS FROM THE 


CITY or ÅNTIOCNŽŤ. 


l is therefore no small thing that the memory of the history of Paul also 


the divine man and strenuous worker, who worked in his Lord's vinevard 


l. Ms. om. — 2. See H. E., ur 15. 
PATR. On. — T. XVII. — F. 


ds A't 


* |10-y* à. 


* d IL 


br, 


nd JOHN OF EPHESUS. ^70] 


eaa 2. [rane bei ba Suse haag casas sh] Jue hoa Js: 
whio [pron v2 joa Gotoku] Loanda] Joa saoi? T> aye 


Lao -ods Joco <>! La? ala Dg «2e JoaSx NS [aM 
NS eut ha ooo mean Koo Jhassfsass cM limao .]jj*o Joos 


bas" Jlaw Xs erg’ Jesu: Lind cer od foot fens oon huko . Joss 
Nep «lle 2-443 Joa [26 sardo .Jeng2o Lado Lindo 
Je zl rar ee Kad Joe Lasoo Xsaseo -ooko SN uxo Qasr 
LOOSE per pe NSN foot anny ao yal aai foot iko o Jor anat 
ooo x9 l'aso oars Ll ^ J oot o4 Jen oot) yopo [asao 
aad Jay Lod ha Joor JJ £2 sos o Joa klo Ny lo oia s 
RY Wms Jie oy Lael Jha geo Les) Jes £e fis lee JI] 
«Qo OD pels sdrad aS 45 Loa s. Crolokaso ooon, ouis 
o Joas rot JNa” cusa, jede “Nao + OPXSAN <x aiao 
nase, Lal Joniso hais farts, JNa Jao yas Sas opeka 


from morning till evening without growing weary, should be omitted from 
the order of those who have been inserted in this spiritual company. Fhis 
great and earnest Paul therefore was by his birth (yivog) from Antioch ; and 
lie was earnest and fervent in religious zeal [roin his boyhood, so that from 
the greatness of his zeal he became stern and harsh, and a rebuker of those 
who approached religions work sluggishly in any manner; and the object of 
his zeal was to carry poor and old and sick persons by night, and he would 
take them and bathe and anoint them, and mend and change the clothes 
of those who were in need, and take them and give them to drink each one 
according to what was suited for him, and hie would give small cotns as was 
suited for each one of them. And thus before daybreak in company with 
others who shared his enthusiasm with him he would carry him', and would 
zo and lay him in his place (and he used to do this not to men only but also 
to women, for a long time: so that in consequence of this he by his zeal 
instigated many persons to share his labour, after teaching everyone from 
his house and fromthe produce of his labour to carry in bis hand every day and 
bring for the use of the poor and sick needy persons according to his power, so 


that accordingly many of them became enthusiastic and used secretly to hasten 


[471] LIFE OF PAUL OF ANTIOCH. 673 


lasis ro Jiga pay ol Jamas Le Aass gahi Q9ooueo seab 
qani Laio Jrancolo voan] ooo — LIN apao fasso 


t 


Lon coor q>; sete - oot 9" [o LOAM CADDO JNaæäïso ooa ona 
JA [S00 hamo Joni» “Pamias ooo qao +. cod, io 
oi Nas. so y SCREEN Nl J Ass jo cootssasl ors 2 dxardo 
Nao dee wr os Luan omits coormsjaas ooo aai 
Landu] oi La Sos lia, jja JNa ónpso yano t2 awaa 
JN- iD BIO WLS JE <% Laos [Aus hado fuo 
Nsa NS 50.2360 jpasdo lagan Aano A £5 lapas [Naso 
SX Coord Sees chadao HRS fas] paa Hð Sas fha 
lao Qr p ND lia Hola D> oaao nooi hojas 
ja JN saat JS AX Aware :oaurdo joo Bd. Jao bor 
Je. of uL of Ns Jpn Joa paxo -JNa wary jal was Lado: 


. 


hag aasan col .2à JNa opaa jiKalo jo] | Jena feao i reb. 


1. In erasure (?). — 2. Ms, [basSaas. — 3, Ms, mo. — ^. The letters D3 are wrilten as a eor, 
reclion from something else. 


to this labour. For many even of the great and eminent men of the city, 
having put olf their apparel (57z22) and clothed themselves in poor men's 
apparel (e772) and hoods that concealed their heads and faces, would thus put 
straps on theirnecks and carry the chairs of the sick and poor, and old men and 
women, and perform all the ministration to them, while in their earnest zeal 
they gladly spent money for each man according to his state in life to make 
provision for them, But Paul the earnest in spiritual things, having insti- 
tuted and organized this ministration to the poor in Ins city of Antioch, and 
seen that it was being carried out by many persons with earnest zeal, with- 
drew and departed to the other great cities, stirring zeal and enthusiasm in 
many, and organizing aid instituting this ministration in all cities through 
certain earnest and Christian men who concerned themselves about therr 
lives’ salvation, and earnestly endeavoured to gain the inheritance of eternal 
life. When this strenuons worker had been teaching and rousing entha- 
siasm, and instituling the work of this ministration to the poor in any one 
city, and had passed one year or two or more, and saw that his work had been 


instituted and organized in that city, his zealous plan would next draw him 


SUM 


[A79 


61^ HOLES OF EPIESUS. ie 
Niao Joss a "Waaso [Jisoo .o Joa ONY JN sexo JL) 
J Ness ol Wl Ja [Nasast, js yaam Joa v» hia (1242.5) 
aam flo foo | -> ls god “abl Dax Q2 JN si 300 Jo 
LX No «Joo x39 [UL Sanco - Yow JNa Mad awaa "oot Joa 
Da pads Lal ba Jpad Sx Egi pdodo joo Aas Jind 
SKZNMoo Loam Jap ise qin Da 30 Nos Jae no Los 
mt Jor. [ET La. Jaco ras Jia oo Laos Nas 5a olio 
Slo audo gai JAM |N ha Jason NS. aaoo utlso jpa 
mamo haus aal Bes) Layo ors olh han] .Jlaadso Nupa 


1, ooo Lslaso flras |i» fasuso Listes «2o Xo Qi? ot Naso 


NN r2 olx asas «Mo viflo Sw Daw jholl, .-optasaals 
aao ad; Jing .barsasts 9] Aa: LXYYs [sas flo Lore Joo 
wnt lasso Kanda [3200 [samo Jio Jongso Jar eoo [ECT ERN 


L Ms. om. — 2. Something seems Io haye here fallen out, and, as there is a similar heen alt p. 


Woah 48, 6€ mer That thee seribe’s ms. was torn. — 4. M~s. 909. 


to another city: and so accordingly he aeted in this way and instituted the 
work of this ministration not in eastern cities only ', but also in many western 
cities tage When aecorndingly.. 22 es that le was uot able nd sili- 
cient himself in person to repair to every city, he used accordingly to send 
others, and rouse the citizens, and advise and instigate them to take up this 
work, so that this great and holy work, which is more pleasing to God than 
all labours, grew and increased, and was instituted in every place and city, 
through the zealous enthusiasm of the man of God. When he had organized 
and built up and instituted this ministration in many cities, he in his zeal 
repaired to the roval city also besides, insomuch that in a short time he 
succeeded in beginning and gaining distinction and extending it there, and 
instigating many of the great and eminent men to become fellow-labourers 
and partners in his ministration, so that conseqnently his ministration was 
manifestly extended and increased and magnified, there being no rest or 
intermission all the night and in the day, so that he relieved and fed and 
refreshed not only the poor and maimed and sick and lame and blind and old 


l. Ms. om. — 2. some words have fallen out. 


[473 LIFE OF PAUL OF ANTIOCIL 675 


orsa, x9 Sas; ja» oa Slo Jl -paciaso eax 0 joa 
n1 ae 308-2. Jo ” Jopas oer JNa gaa olo JN, 
Jaass o] p uoau, ] o [sopdo JAM iot “Luwcslo uasjaco 
oS Joa Dai, fao] So <% JE W420 Sao A260 Joo cJ 
Jaian oor Joos poy Jann So yar Jada Jhon | p 
pases joo wp Ao Le Jaan Hao ooa Daoa Laino 
J ol Joa fsoorse jl T Jla Auras DE Judea fupsos o» 
JNa NS [Kaas Joa - U . «Dono usps xot Jal Jogos, 
alajaam e| enis JL Snare 2065 24100 Joa Opty dt 


TE Je t Joa Jf JI] wawanss, fas sagao ooo «2.3830 
pAdO a aaao Loro Laso; «ador Jose Ludo oon Liu; ol Jii 
jM Jla Nipaa 643 waas fusa) liso .aghoas [Noax 
jasia Join? TAANS MSS 6JNag Jloyonz 3 — 2otp2os hai 


l. Marg, Sao. — 2, Ms, epe. — 3. Erasure alter. — 4, Ms, bà o220. — 5. Ms. los;3lo; 


corr. Nold. lzo;3l. — o. Something seems lo have fallen oul; see p. 472, n. 2 


in the royal city, but also in all the suburbs beyond the water in all quarters 
of the same city besides, and also in all the cities round, Chalcedon and Nico- 
inedia, and Cyzicus and Prusias! and Heraclea, aud as far as the sea ol Pontus, 
while he also bought clothing and brought it out and distributed it and gave 
it to many from any source from which it fell into his hands, while he also 
provided relief and refreshment with every kind of bathing for the poor and 
the strangers who were present. And so this man went cn gaining distinc- 
tion and showing prowess in the Lord's work in the royal city for many years, 
while not neglecting to send money to other cities round Sycae? also for the 
expenses of that ministration, which be had planted and instituted in them. 
And accordingly many emulated his zeal and his earnestuess and imitated 
it, so that other deacouries (9:zzovízc)? were established uot for men only but 
also for women and great and lowly in ardent zeal hastened to minister, and 
to take part by means of gifts. And so the blessed Paul ended the course of 
lis practices in the same royal city, bearing good testimony’... . . . only 


1. Ms. co fas qa’. —2. The suburb beyond the Golden Torn, now Galata and Pero; see p. 27 and 


p. 431. We are perl. ta understand that lie was living in the Syrian monastery. — 3. See p. 467, n. 3, 


and JLE., u, 15. — . Some words have fallen out. 


pies wow pe 


O70 ACHT S OF AS DASS i [A74] 


aX. Jor sea. Lao mio | Fad «30 CoA jo) faasoo 
cies Sas agax* Maa alas; ol p Jiao Jhopepso Jisas «DO Arye 
oui) Daw lige Q5 Jlaavse Musas Rufpebro fs, 39.30 Lupa 
INa'llo iħullo Laily hop -ha Jaaa DA Jilo aad 
kas Ja | ccn NS. Joal yoas Was Jlaaaol o} poy nas 


en Yam maduri walas rasala rduanrdkh danis 
Sr ouam race 


Maan ran dsa saara aaaea Charh aah 

raxas aulas upp ovana rhal aaah dias 

Eris duas c rChealo damas nan da coa 

raa axaóm daln meam rnduvnana 
eir ao3acaa bindni rdhaalyaa 


J Nuansa Jess. lasso Musas) šad, [yor Naser Lasan So 


j. In ink. Pul the grammar seems to show Chat the words are part of the title, and this is eonfirmed 


bs the faet that the nest sentenee according to the authors practee in besinuiug a dfe is intioduced 
In Sato. 


of dry bones and shin bud over them ontside ike wood: aud thus his whole 
body was dried. up from the labour and abstinence and watching, his praver 
also accompanying his action in all cities in the east and in the west, and 
especially in the roval city, while many consequently clothed themselves 
in his zeal cud added something to this ministration, until it grew aud in- 
ereased and expanded everywhere, ind every day au iddition was made to 
God s glory and the relief of the poor. 


The history of the blessed Paul, icho was from the cili of Antioch, is ended, 


NEAT THE PORTY-SEVENTH HISTORY, CONCERNING TOE HOLY COMMUNITIES. WIOGH 
THEODORA THE QUEEN GATHERED TOGETHER IN CONSTANIINOPLE, COMMUNI- 
TIES 1HOM EVERY PLACE IN THE ROYAL CITY WHICH WERE GATHERED TOGE- 
THER IN THE ROYAL MANSION CALLED THAT OF llonurspis BY THE BELIEVING 


OLEEN- LHkopORS SCHUSE. SOUL. IS AP RESE 


On the subject therefore of the community of blessed men which was 


[475] OF THE REFUGEES IN CONSTANTINOPLE. 677 


» Jhoshly lazas Lido Jhay haia ero joa aaao Laso, Lapa 
osa. Jp» p> Jl: ba «+ oases 2o M Wem <r Ne o, V xe» 
xor Jb geo Joa wok] Lal o} p faop as ao oio No sas, <% 
pls [15e .Jess0t0 ^ 330? Laio ooo pP J| Jesse; Jairo said 
J--—b-a- Lado! ro Jo: Jaaa shmo8 Be.) soomaa Joa 
Joo wa-d0, p50 Jlosh] <% verid? iy Lasai «6 aaup Looy, 
Liamo haamo hauspo iD Sar r hauo Laso Jesas wajao 
Lipad o Lolo [esee bians) hano haoaas hailo 
ooo gigt Jlanasos Lrsd> bil «oo phe oaa Josh] s Lai dsyaso 
„Jyo hoN sd LA 2; dilad Saxo t2 „neous haso foo - P 
ei 3o N So naaa foot Na] loea Jonwrolo Lə; jara, y! 
CDa fips Jlaracso jlha oala opi NS So A99 oe n s 
woe senos Qoo Jiao «o014300.5.20 OMS Jaano axo 


Ms. Lossaao. 


gathered together in the royal city by the believing queen at the time of 
the persecution, out of many peoples and various local tongues, we wish tō 
leave a record at short length; and the history of it is sufficient to cause 
discerning men to marvel at it, sinee it was indeed composed of many blessed 
inen who did not fall short of the number of five hundred, and with’ great 
and venerable old inen; and the congregation of persecuted saints was so 
widely extended that? it shone with many who had under the coustraint of 
the persecution come down from columns and been ejected from places of 
seclusion, and been expelled from districts, and their congregation was 
rendered illustrious by great aud distinguished. heads of convents from all 
quarters of the cast aud of the west, and Syria and Armenia, Cappadoeia 
and Cilicia, [sauria and Lveaonia, and Asia and Alexandria and Byzantium, 
countries Which beyond others burned with zeal for the faith, while one 
might consequently go into the palace (x27) itself called that of Hormis- 
das, as into a great and marvellous desert of solitaries, and marvel at their 
numbers, and wonder at their venerable appearanee, and the same men's 
honoured old age, and be affected by the crucilixion of their bodies and their 
practices of standing and the same men’s spiritual songs which were heard 


]. Sie sw., — 2, Or Sheeause’, 


G78 JOUN OF EPHESUS., [^76] 
brat QeoncM Ao Jol Liao .'ooo «aoo Karo X. So 
Mat voe MSeS: durrdopfo ^ Jiu MIee fladx“s0 JN \oodas 
mo ceca aano «foo, Cac Qd200 Kp} Mo "0004 cnr’ Karo 
me Mas p o hh Jasno JN sso sQoodNoM To eds 
J aS so: Ilas os hors Je Mo: Ji Joa Ku] haios Laco 
jadoo seo Jao Lsioio lio fail [RX to gol Llo 2oà 
voaa ooa oa Aoo, Had vxo pho cbe Ja o 
mi mA) y] JNa 22 bs haass q30 Emo od Cards; JNa 
l j yl Jiokoo “LMSa0 Naio Jpaio J Nsoasl Jewo Jisas 
po ooa oia Mls] jas, forsaaso [aa Aao neo Joo 
JNN eoo a] NOS ener al Saig bie biel do 
Kalon ING <>} Kalo Laso <>} KA] ooo dh hoh Lasso 


Mese Law? Jiono Lusso S080 Laio Ji» e [aso Jng I 


L Ms, wor eg393 eioslo. — 2, M~. Meee, corr, Irom bo2296; cort; v. DL and L. 


from all sides, and at [hetr marvellous eantieles and their melancholy voices 
which were performed and uttered in all the chambers and courts (22:622) and 
cells and halls (72031993) of that palace (722.zs00v), and they were ranged in order 
and full in every place, nud they were crowded and packed and their cells were 
full, as well as every chamber and room in that place; while one might sce 
in each of the great halls (2:5«vo;) that they were filled by rows of planks, 
for by the care of the queen cells had been made and provided for tlie old and 
great and honoured meu amoug them, and some of the stylites and recluses 
aud solitaries, besides all the quantity of cells that were in all the quarters of 
that palace (z:3zzwv, and besides the great community which in one chamber 
had as it were the organization of one convent and one service, aud an 
archimandrite and a steward, and servitors' and a table together, and were 
continually governed according to the whole perfect organization of a convent; 
while all the other halls (22604voc) besides, as we have stated above, were Tull 
of the blessed men’s cells and booths, some of wood and some of curtains, 
and some of matting and so on, while severe labours and protracted fasts and 


constant vigils aud perpetual pravers, as well as celebrations and descents of 


u See paG 3: 


[477 Ot THE REFUGEES IN CONSTANTINOPLE. G79 


Saas fuss 49 .c0o To faoa, fanoto fasdio o} C. e Daa, 
hals or Jhan Larsasdiroy fran ad Welaso, jio] ooo v8 Jaos 


Lasi» ooa ehao Golo walo veo thanio) ooo oS 
Nn <= = N : 
qa faapo, NORLI par pew Soo Lad oog v d96o : Laros ca 
WIS q ays qda <% el Ji? ENS o$ S soo a», 2 NL S88 
xo Jiothy odt barar aama ooo 095 "OOA «oot Na]. «ooasias 
a Jal ooo x 218300 xe Iso 2 wo rahsoo «olo v-o ooo 
faapo «o [422215 Lad JA Lise JL o fran Lao. Sios y CNuaaaso 
«002.2» Lolaiiso <% Jye əl, La? xp Sas ww SNsa2o J nao My 


* 


909 qeka «ct PD loot fads soalan Las NS, vot Locas 
oan; Joa JLseNso -,014.905,. JOOS ocot «AS so Joal hia Lasas 
Jlaglas coo Maso Joao Jlaslass ooo yaio „haas lolo feu 
JRardrss o} p2 haas Sas ENT ooo qawl [Lasao OOAD 
Lo Sl y vala «,Jsoa. JASN” el ids ]- : J Nusasoiso 


1. Ms. om, 


the Spirit in every place were being earried on, while altars were fixed up 
everywhere, so that in consequence not only! did the believing people run 
to the amazing sight, and sec and marvel and be astonished and wonder at 
these spiritual congregations, and run to each one of these saints to be blessed 
and to be assisted by their pravers, but even some of those who did not 
belong to their communion would run to that amazing community about 
which they had heard, and see and marvel and be astonished and dumbfounded 
and edified, and would give thanks to God, and in consequence a great 
number of the people of the city like a fnll river turned aside to these holy 
communities, and flowed on and overflowed at all times; insomuch that many 
of the participators with the synod of Chaleedon, which was a cause of scandal 
and of the persecution of the blessed men, when they saw this marvellous 
community, «nd learned the causes of the persecution of it, had their mind 
filled with atlliction and contrition, and renounced the Chaleedonian commu- 
nion, and asked for communion with them, and thus many were added to the 
believers; while the believing queen also would regularly once in every two 
or three days come down to them to be blessed by them, being amazed at 


l. Ms. om. 


ONDO IEN OFE EPHESUS. A78 


Jrsorbivce . ASF D0p 30 LOO BALAS Jeol. r2 Jbasasols boo JKtus 
So v6 Lanao - oof | uoo LAAN Lorolsoo gola so logra 
Sos Maas loo TES CDa JNa po Nla] oomo rA or 
wora KXAN vo Qoo aM jos memos oà [ae og | p -yr 
joa m] Care. JL ya oa Slo Ll eoa Joa al ropa dens 
Lasai wr Lasao copo ya Noo Joa Ww aas6 Mlalo nooo 
' h.l e Toe [Naisa o 308.2 LoD „J20 lax Nas lə; bot 
saatas ha oix» ol Auko haaa soas l.S glaso Ks xo 
e| orp cas] awilo as] calo NON) Sr ANS ons doa 
EM ous, haapa v2) ad aso vaca JÍsaix) Mas SLM. haor S 
sias Q6 qa) Jens © ol p eo NA] "oa Sox cot pun! Lao 
bo LA ` "Loops Slo Rue sso re ol ba Lasai oasa 


Ad waaa o} vo L> [5j PD ADAG OAD Ono) Jaso; ory 


1. Corr, in later hand. [o omaan. — 2, Ms. eo — 3, Ms, $9: This sentenee is either very corrupt 


or Very earelesIy composed, and the emendations are doubtint. 


their community and there practices, and admiring their hououred old age, 
aml going round among them and making obeisance to them, and being 
regularly blessed fy each one of them, while she provided. tlie expenses 
required. for them liberally in every thing; while the king also, who was 
ranged against them on accouut of the synod of Chalcedon, marvelled at their 
congregation, and himself also was attached to many of them and trusted 
them, aud was constantly received and blessed by them. And thus this 
great community became illustrious by a variety of practices all the days of the 
blessed queen's life, while even after her death © she laid au injunction upon 
the kiug about it, and it was preserved, aud all the lifetime of Justinian the 
king he looked after them and honoured them, and supported the remuant of 
them, even to the present time which is the vear ctght hundred and seventy- 
seven”, that is the remnant that was left of it to the present time (but it is 
the samej: while our meanness also from the beginning of the collection of 
this community and before it was completely collected, aud even down to 
tbis time at which we have in it set down the record that tells of it (since for 


a considerable time we were with it also in the same royal city at that line) 


]. 2*9 June, 548. — 2. a5 G, 


— 


[479] OF THE REFUGEES IN CONSTANTINOPLE. 681 
MY» 0 “(Loot oN. ]) eios. 4 yopo | e001 owl Jas. so Nia 
KO atte TANS pads hsa ado Los Lapas I Jla fhacoss 
2] Ja. 5 3621 y he sJleMe. Jlaang q: Jarni JNx 
Jal hope p> Jas. po p> hwl, Jloshl> JN; Jaah, Jiasi So 
Jtrolo qanal Jo ^ JAaga e aoM asso a M, liso) Jan's 
xo» EY sas Loss JKadso «01 Js JN oulo jos 5L Jiyao 
J 8.33 NS, y doo Lado NIS Jo Lal annoa 2] 
Jla Nupa Grande, Jas "we Beg [0 agro s] Jo 
J Nua, y D Nas No ol Nee Na au! 
wardens law. M» o) JR soe; [£05 la; Lpoas Joot Ji 
Jan] Doa po JaN L>opso fusas v% La hasans Da Joot fords; 
Vala Joa wasio hN", faan dio, fos Lasas so] cro} 
per Q9ouce, kajaa oolasyo :cooila® "0 Vaisa DA Liag, 


I, Ms. ins. 2 — 2. Ms. om. — 3. Ms. 0,99. dMeosel. 


was! 


with it first on account of the persecution, and at the end which is the 
rest of all this long time, which passes thirty years?, on account of the 
conversion from the error of paganism, which as by the dispensation and 
assistance of God's grace was performed im the districts of Asia by the 
instrumentality of our meanness, so that cighty thousand were converted 
and rescued from paganism, and ninety-@eht churches and twelve monaste- 
ries, aud seven other churches transformed from Jewish synagogues were 
founded in these four provinces ($z227:2:)^, Asia, Carta, Pheygta, aud Lydia. 
These things we have recorded for the glory of God, and, mm case anyone 
should lind fault or be offended on account of the length of our stay in the 
royal city, by way of explanation *. 

It would not be irrelevant to set down also a record of the loving care of 
God that was shown to this community from the beginning even to the end. 
Since, as we said before, a great congregation amounting to thousands in 
number used to assemble in the presence of the blessed men for the sake of 
their blessings and their prayers, and to have the privilege of receiving the 


CN 


L Ms, ein. The sentence is either murch confused or very eormipt; — 2. This ime be reckoned 
From his first visit in 535: see Introd; p. 1v. He cannot mean Hiat he was living in the palace of 
Hornisdas all tliis tute; for we hues Chad he lived in the mouasters at >yeaec bat only thal he was 
one ol (ie Monoplissite community iu CP. See Introd., p. vi. — 3. Pee p. 4106, 1n. 3. — ^. The sentence 


is Ungraded. 


S gy. 


UN? JOUN OF EPHESUS ANO] 
x? on „hoa Nl opsse a oc Nes c oà fotos Lo ord <% 
hoa <>! yl . [amas Jaw “dlo Joa auo [aol ba e oa. 
e Uu NNUS "oo Juss M. ssl] NUT WS Lyne M <> + oars JL eo 
[Los - Loot JLaolo J|Nxojo Aa <> JRA £20 Lasaia aX" A> oh 
xe Js» wea] Jos NS [ES EN JL [2 Na JNS, 
«Do100t1a.caN, «Mat Jl, «^ot x Lice [SN] oa so, Mos ado 
«20 Laio "ws NN He Na JaN; otfarsaopsos Jai so x! vdo 
] La. 300 eJ! J „ORLO J~ Laos, La? Jae: TAn valad 75 
Luso JL aay he Ke SAX a x Joal Ji LOOHSO pe} Jin 
T UTE £09) |N aas TY LOAD amo [iot oaia tard” 4d 
WITH o aaao lago Na ASOL-130 27] J/otolo JN. oj «o 
. NV ooo mero Neo - Jlase «oo cas] o9: Jord | oaao Kam nao 
al jo „ealas loos Jlase <>} Joias, [Mas ha JlasesN Nou wee) s 


(Aig: eue Ms. om. slop following, 


oblation consecrated by them in one of the greal halls (225O«vs2), inside whieh 
there was also a martyrs! chapel, one day, when a great crowd was assembled 
amd R was filled from end to end, on account of the great weight of the people 
suddenly at the time of the celebration that chamber broke in and fell, 
thousands of people going down with it. And, when shrieking and terror 
and panie suddenly arose, so that the sound of the shrieking was heard a long 
distance, as far as the great palace (722.2710), and a sudden report went about 
« Many thousands ol those who do not assent to the synod have been killed », 
then indeed the descent of God's mercifulness descended*, and was made 
manifest upon these multitudes by the prayers of the saints themselves, so 
that not one soul among them perished, and there was not a hurt on the bodv 
ol any of them, although many fell on tlie top of one another, among them 
women carrying their children: and thus they all rose from that fall, and it 
was only from the terror and panic that some of them received a shock. And 
they came out thanking and praising and blessing God who saved them from 
death. aud all who saw them woudered at this greal miracle of deliverance 


from death which had happened to Ihem; while this story filled the king und 


loSi 8M 


F481] OF THE REFUGEES IN CONSTANTINOPLE. 683 
Joa jaN JA so oU» Laado jas; Lazi ba Bx 
Jar tdussed, Towers: ose iss asco ay esee esa th se 
LMonN o Ile LN pas Jes) fare! aul Sad Joa Jan 
þa Lasar, otoop> JN pneu) Nasl coy JlasoL uoaa Da, 
sfasa Loot [52.0 
wit Jola qae e] p JND Jioll Jaoor adeo iS cso 
Had Laan flsao dy; ea dor Lope sEh) oot Lasas 5 poh! Joe o 
FIR, JN Aaso . JKinsopo và J Koos «26 crags, [3333 opaa lo 
eas Jono Läim LoL be 10 .&aasiol: LieMse,. Jad, 
JNuupelo rota 9» Ha ads! Maand, qoot ooo Ka] JN o 
J.syaroy fas! cod) eoan od Jill 2eeJlseo - cats ly cl 
LOMHPIANIAN Vohra gy op aco Cad pao .0001 Cad Naso Joi; JNasaslo 
JA] oSaad ed oclo NS.a p> OAM LA. «oo Jars Joi Joey 


l. Ms, ALL. 


queen and the maguates also, and the rest of the people throughout the city 
with astonishment, and called forth praise and thanksgiving to God, aud 


rendered the community of the blessed meu itself honourable in the eves of 


everyone, so that at last the king sent, and made the hall (z260«vo2) itself that 
fella portico. And a second miracle which God wrought in the place where 
this holy community was happened as follows. 

After the death of the believing Theodora the queen, when this com- 
munity bad also lost some of its earlier numbers, the adversaries were 
stirred up with envy against 1t, and induced the king to eject them from the 
former place, and remove them to another place belouging to the crown 
called the house of Urbicus'. And, while a Tew of the holy old men were 
m these cells, the adversaries Introduced some women with their husbands, 
and others who were not chaste, and filled the place where the blessed men 
lived, where the sacrament and the serviee of God used to be performed; 


and, whereas these men thought to defile the saints’ dwelling, God purified 


it by a sudden lire, in that fire fell and burut the whole of that place, only 


l. Rather Urbhicius. 


* 11^ 1? b. 


TI JOHN OF EPHESUS, 'Au2] 


«ona ol heo Koo je .NoLiiasJ J HIANS JE asso £D oð 
ewe boe hòro Mand conl] Jima hao eat" bolo adoa Hia 
JReaarads faots [Be dsl Nasol] 2à [Meses Jio uan em 
oM Lido weer o haas usis baado oaa, Joel DA fors, 

TOD 0 wio 


raanacdh dam dxan earan Jaa ehard dandle 
vouladulil wans daln 


aripa Sapa ndha wastes hard oad 
2r A Aamarca an wide rhadaan rima xv» 


é 


frdtars Loasoi ta I Repl] farsi agro "Wan JS] ~ 
Jlrs] fasady JKRural of -JNass rae Cobh pois vx Japa 
Jiofico sess done Jil aas ofrsoto [stoi Jlaxyo TN 
pel KOH 0,0» xo cpa dado NE ! ense Ns lo «02.4.2030] Lo 


1. Ms. eaa Nle 


a sinall portion of it eseaping, while the fire also caneht some of these women 
themselves and burnt them. iid so at last ib was given to the martyrs’ 
ehapel of the holy Mar Sergius, aud à monastery was built on. that spot; 
amd it remains to the present time to the glory of God, and for the purpose 
of the confession of his name, and to fullil that whieh is written, «© Phe Lord 


knoweth Ins own and is known by his own » '. 


The history concerning the communities which Theodora the queen gathered 


together in Constantinople is ended, 


NEXT FHE JIoHT3-LiGIHU1E HISTORY, OF THE FIVE BLESSED PATRIARCHS WHO Pis- 


TUNSGUIESIEI: “EHR MSEL VES EN ENILE (40s%%) IN THE TIME OF THE PERSECUTION, 


It seemed to us a necessary thing and one that is very proper that by 
means of wrilten memorials the history also of the perfeet. blessed fathers 
aud great and spiritual pastors. the arch-fathers, the live palriarchs, Severus, 


Theodosius, Xnthinus, Sergius, and Paul, should be given to the huowledye 


IE Pius ee pav e. 


[483] LIVES OF FIVE PATRIARCUS. 6S5 


Ns J|a2.55 [2-20 LN hayi Jiohao [i224 fpatyo J pate 
Jpop ado JNa hirra asso + 95h! JN aano Lasand] ene + Joa 
joa soos] yapo «o Sly cà jJlasgon hans Q5 rx wei per 
faokols Lan | el e Joa hsasso Kj esos Ahaan reo KG Jis seca. so 
hag Slo «e! Le yar WM Nolana ys l Laaa Lan Dao 
Ced] Laosa carat 8.420 p> aao CTN Lipra «20 wano) 
e JKt 430 "Nro joe d: Jaamas! Joe vaod], «ax No| [ise coo 
cà mwao NI -oopa JloiN4 so Sdsoo -upol! Jad Nispas 
«0249037. Jos. 330 Ja Laias Laj p20 „soia ] Jlaxsse Nispas ois 
ado - arsoos|lo Jiolæ fasäg, «90142055 Xx Quo 5820 see Las od; 
Joop a5) «01052420; Jlasraso leans obs) soos, JN. ado 


gary easy Je swt! yar Jows b Sofa; 353 faas Jaso.2 of Jaw 


I, Mx, Jecnsjadal.— 2. Ma. Myers. 


of posterity in writing, among whom the blessed Severus like a valiant and 
heroic man first distinguished himself in mighty and intense conlliets (Zyàv) 
of persecution, having been chased from the city of Antioch, and departed 
to the city of Alexandria, and withdrawn to the deserts of Egvpt, while he 
carried out te the full the monastic model in which he had before also 
lived a life of austerity and poverty, and he engaged ina splendid conflict 
(zyov) of contention against Julian of Halicarnassus '. Besides him moreover 
the blessed Theodosius also besides was eliased and departed from Mexandria. 
While these were in banishment’, the blessed Anthimus, who was bishop 
of the city of Trebizond, was summoned to the roval city, and on account 
of the excellence of his mode of life he was raised to the IHirone (824792). of 
the roval city itself; and, when he had retained the administration of that 
greal throne (825v: for a considerable number of years‘, and had heard. and 
learned about the perseention of the blessed inen Severus’ and Theodosius, 
and tuvestigated and learned the reason of their banishinent, which is the 
evil faith of the synod of Chaleedon, he chose for himself dike the great Moses 


to undergo allliction with his brothers, and not for a short time take his 


Lo *Zaeh Rho iN. ls. — 2. Theodosius was expelled after Anthinns, bual at tbe time of Vus 
accession he had been driven ont by dlc dulianists, — 4. Or "ealled. ose. lo the bishoprie. . — Really 
10 1nonllis (Mune. 93522Mar., a36) — 5. 8. was banished 17 sears before the appointinent of Anthiuins, 


but during |. episcopate lie was in C IS, and was foreed to ieave at the liie of his expulsion, 


oae dy; 


ONG LOEN OP EPHESUS. ASA | 


Lo» Ss haa farsa [isse frsoptads haao laxi jac 
aano Noose uix] Ji Q5 code]: [Muyo Weso .unas[o Soo [Ly 
Sous] La os EN Si £P S300 Jars» OAS0,-0 LA sexo Nux Jao 
| yaa haao ooo Op, [2.39022 EN ala of) Lal Jue 
JN 3S so my P loot Lasascises Jan o3» Jis: Jlopvo -, 0004 opas h] 
TEN D) | Wwe wawatu] haal Ww». [3*3 — ENSE ls 
S Jh kal 952. Q5 JMian aago oNS.aa - Jl go 
T ali Ais Ji/saao «le va eX N Jj] ooa Diss Lasaia 
| N> ~ as olpao aKasly SNL au] Da, hano Laa o 
vaata Sl ro fei hao Ja JNS œ; yl hoak Jog [1500 . So 
«o joa sao] Li Oly DA Joa Asars fusioy soopaoso Jr2a. 
JN Jes J olo - Joo » Il EX bands INS -— Slo aso 
Ls o! pe JNa; Jsa Jlopyprs ot Joa Kul «is mao vene p Joo 


pleasure! among the evil impieties of Chaleedon, And so he spoke much 
with the king and made entreaty to him with regard to the peace of the 
churches, and with regard to summoning his brothers, and, when no atten- 
lion was paid to him, he took his pall aud laid it on the altar before the 
king himself and departed, while he also wrote letters to the two patriarchs, 
as they also composed synodical letters to him?: and thus they made union 
with one another, and all the party of the believers was atfected with great 
joy. But, when the queen saw the Kings wrath agaist the blessed Anthi- 
mus on account of what he had done, and his great threatening, she took 
him and hid him in a chamber in hee palace (w22zt:0v), in order that men 
might not know what had. befallen him, except only herself and two cham- 
berlains her accomplices, while even the king aud everyone else might 
think that she had removed him and banished him entirely outside the city. 
And so for this reason the blessed man was in great peace, while he also 
performed his honourable labours and his great practices; because he had 
in fact been a monk before and he was so afterwards also, who never tasted 
bread, and also never drank wine, and had passed twenty-five years in this 


great abstinence. it having been in fact the whole time of the eptscopate and of 


|E Telit an 35S ach dd 4X. 2-3. 


[485] LIVES OF FIVE PATRIARCEIS. 087 
o Maaso js slo yar [isso alash Ao 9) Joa fJja&am.e] o 
+ wa 06 H xl Rm») hi3) o jM ol p ohn | 52.22. Io 
JNa, alaw, fuss sop “oS Mes la tool Y json 
Jaslo -opsar wh el p pads <% Daol lo Slo MM [soto 
CVEN DS Ones Ne po haaay oot zu, Laaa Lo s AX Joo pane 
Laz -—— Jho Oj14a Sadso «a0 re J5ol.co < Lisak Joa 
DAs -A T JA] stds o? Pos o JL ise e] Jans Kissa 
qoa OO Pa Jooss re y Jal S Jo wil So; Jiao, pad 
„axo rds ada vel) pa do wre Loa Lojas Las raal? 
Jp, Jussash IlosLji yaa -joa JI P? abso foaddiay Jpn p20 
Jlsaro Joa rl Jil, LN; frasrso jlasairss haza j>a £2 
glaas Ls; Liaj o oO yo Nafisa Joa Jass Jlopspso Las 


his patriarchate; and thus he carried out the rule even after his expulsion 
also down to the end of his life, when he had also completed a space often years 
in hiding, until many thought that he was dead, until the time of the queen's 
death ', and so he was discovered and made known, and he was received by the 
king, while he also made peace with him, and held him in great honour, 
till the end of the blessed man’s life, and he used to make entreaty 


with regard to the peace of the church. But the blessed Severus bad before 
: ] 


these things been summoned by the king to the royal city on account of 


the peace of the ehureli; and under great pressure from everyone he came, 
saying, « Since it is everyone's will lo! | will go up, but it is impossible 
that anvthing whatever will be done by those who are in. power »; and so 
he went up, and passed two vears? labouring and teaching. And, when 
he saw that his statement that nothing would be done was being accom- 
plished, he went back to the southern regions of Alexandria, coustantly 
occupying his time in the desert in retreat and asceticism and studying the 
writings of the fathers, and perfectly carrying out great labour and an 
abstemious life. And, when he had completed a period of some years in 


l. Theodora lived. 12 years after As deprivation, In the Eccl. Hist. Land, p. 388; J. says that he 
was 7 sears in hiding. — 2. Really 535-Mar., 536 (Zach. Rh.. 1x, 05i. 


Il seems clear thliat d. had never 
Seen s.s, and Therefore deft CP. before his arrival (Dyakonov, p. %9.: but L eannet follow Dyakonov 
in rejecting (lie. sfatement of ^ Zach. That S. arrived in ind. 12, and therefore before. 1 Sept. 


2300. 


PATR. UR. — T. XVIII. — F. 4. 


to; 


ph a 


OSS OEN OF EPHESCS. LANG) 


wada | ] Naa J-> > wna as erikso oiaas ros 
sex las Ny lo sagt: Ha pada gio «Jamo [pos ` 
«o flaami babs hima, fos soa-co]h q- koag 
[3X3 oon is; Nad oa o] Jos soso NJ HM Iz] Lij 
Nona o AG], Lia L> ol alas jMs5 <% ol dde. 
woos | yel JNa 0&5 I Jarsd o] p Naso Cadaso Jhsassol 
woanmorof) fisad par eM JroKaso ol je JaA wasn oM po 
Læ bos < Liamsl> whsK>o wd! Laia yl jo Sheds ALAS 
o> JNa a> ooepsen Loi oa Slo wy 5X» Jil Jill qx. 
Junta dooas oda: odas jio We vc hal 5 N35 Jla Mirae 
we} 9 pada a Jos JH Jhar Jaa Lpracas yopo pa fad 


AIO Jro e NI Laia + [bop boos ed Lianslo Jas si; Län Ls 


his banishment, he fell into a sickness; aud afterwards they carried him from 
the desert to a city of Egypt called WKsoi', and there he ended the course of 
his conflict (464), smd went to the Lord *. 

But the blessed Theodosius, patriarch of Alexandria, also had been 
bravely contending inthe conlhet 2yo) of persecution for a considerable tine, 
during all the lifetime of King Justinian, and ihid so after his death”, even 
to the present time, which is the vear eight hundred and seventy seven *, 
anew king having also succeeded in the same year, who is Justinian’s sister's 
son. Who also promises with the help of the blessed Theodosius to bring about 
the peace of the church), having carried on a contest for about thirty years 
in exile Z2s26. from place to place and from country to country. Aud’ he 
also as well ended the course of his practices in the sime year, in the same 
roval city, nine months after the death of the same Justinian the king ®, 
nothing whatever having been done in the matter of the union of the church. 


And he completed thirty-one years aud a half? in the eontlrets (2yo) of 


to Naw (Plal IV, v, n: Steph. Bizari Plinn v9. — SN eha 538. — 3 06 Nove. obo. — T a 
— 5. Thi- sentence and the following, inconsistent wilh the preceding and with The end of the chi; 


are clearly a ater addition of the author: sci Patrol, p. vir — 6. This wonld plaer his deaths im Aug, 


abt: bul ' Pionssius', who usually follows John, places it on Be dune, carl iu the Coplie calendar 


he is celebrated on 22 June. — 7. This must be rechoned. from his expulsion. bs Ihe Juliaui-ts iu 


Leb.. 535. 


[487 LIVES OF FIVE CR LYRIS: 680 


Jas Sulo - Lrscoatss wey LM. oa osos lo mph 2] + 
pao .Jiole Lied: alas hais eese Loy iNo vx feat Le 
han JAM Joa saoi? AMLI a Lsa} Jimroslifs aN 
JN Nago Janso fripelo Jess fas] uia Miso Jfpraco Jiao 
-Maàslh Lasaso LaNa, faspoo Laza yio ico Jryso bras’ Joss 
+ Ss aam0 obisas prose Joo, [i] 
Moses aoo. t3 jas ENS: woa] Luajoprads TE Lot 
TD MENS aao hao ILa adsd D Lys sp > paso Jlandin 
Jlosoo lasis purrs. Wale) is «2e (AND LL hoa Jiya 
Mops a> hy I2 «Do See laS V33) lo -ongoa Ms JN 
Jason Jas soa] .. rors oars MSL Lis x SMS „Jla 
Aaa Aas foira w] jasoa pa o uà Lawa o. 


persecution and exile (2252/2) from place to place, having also gained distinc- 
tion and renown all over the commonwealth (zodwtetz) of us Romans, and he 
went in heroie Fashion to the Lord. A period of some years therefore 
after the death of the blessed Severus the blessed Sergius suceceded him in 
orthodoxy (22093526; ', who was by his birth (yévos) a man of Thella?, a learned 
and well-read man, and among men renowned and well-known and honoured, 
and as regards God devout and given to fasting and a Nazirite, and a keeper 
of vigils, and a lover of quieinde, and of. reading the Scriptures and the 
exposition of the fathers, so that le was skilful in his speech, and a man of 
understanding. * 

This man therefore, having attained ordination (yetsorovex) to the patriar- 
chate while in the royal city, and presided over the church, teaching and 
comforting and edifying and establishing everyone in the truth for three 
years after lie had received the right hand of the high-priesthood of Antioch, 
ended hts course, and was earried from the life here to our Lord in the same 
royal city. Alter three years from this man’s decease a certain Alexandrine 


whose name was Paul attained the high-priesthood of the same see, that is 


I. FL. e in the Monophysite succession, as opposed to the Chaleedonian patriarchs, — 2. Cons- 


tantina, doc See p ANN 


Lb) ET ba 


a. 


cn JOHN OL EPHESUS ASS 
Lasi yar oe woos] Los Aowa farsor alas iNo hao es Sls ba 
oancdosfl foramiss 


MÁDAI rx?» peas aapa hard hlr 
eT Aataarcia an eddie rZha9,232 


ceni aapa sarda aimes rduarndh aah 
2r3hlua re uolo poal ra rfS nca 9re 


Caan, Laag aaah, [553 au] JNS Js LA, Loot DSa JI 

ew yio JINASaL. Lasan, Lo No ots «oo Neo ua Ji Gd. xo NS 
Liaaso Jipa Mani Dad JH] 22380 Sao Gro v6 So Odo ora 
QNS pe - nod soersas [soot Joy orsa, JENA so vao. SS 
sting h fom, |o faso Naaa Lot chee goaa JK dos : Naso Mr 
oM] ..Joot ooo Na] JIL «Qo Oda.» oí el D „alan D < Kohas 
Lag yary JNA y alio sj NM Jpoldsoy Jeans Dapa Jian wt 


outside in banishment: who also down to the present dav after king Justinus 
death is in the body with arelibishop Theodosius. ! 


The history of the five blessed patriarchs who distinguished themselves in erie 


(eZecta) in the time of the persecution is ended. 


NENT THE TORTY- NINTI HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED JAMES THE BISHOP AND 


BRAVE AND VALIANT COMBATANT fzzteovta vts]. 


It would not therefore be easy for any one to approach the task of relating 
the history of the blessed James without fear, a history which transcends all 
the extent of the limits of narrative, a man whose story is higher than all 
words and all understandings: but out of love of truth we will through our 
poor language and in our contemptible writing make both a memorial ol a 
few of his own excellencies and a picture of the exhalation of his spiritual 
heanties. This saint therefore and veritable man of God from his boyhood, 
while he also was by his birth (voz: from Thella*, was trained in the eele- 


brated convent of the monastery called that of Fsiltha*, but some cause 


Lo See cl o0, — 2. Conslantini — 3. 5e. "Ie quarry’ 


489] LIRE OF JAMES. 6 
waar, lias ous oa 2l; cie Qro Lb] MX «Dé! OH vna HO 
Noe joo amg oaz rca x0! . Jla Jas 3$ Jas votre! 
[55 frosts JKardrso JNa «3o $0 Jhassasoy [Xs eso JI a 229.36 
oa waaso «oo sS [ocio Jo ol «so Bone :coo aw ael] 
Jlsdxo £53 Laaa Joo par Mes Jhesjy [Kudos cea Jusad 
Jaos Jlonsol Col Jlaramsaso .JN asso <x SAS; Jlasatro Jangl 
VIALS «aco + Joo aaia BINS Mie Lasoo rar pa JL, po haao 
J5op-20 foro p> ad p20 Joa CAM ' Jas) aano saad jiosaco 
<% wolokasco oD joa yaxa «na Ho jasa} slo -.JKsrd0/ JXasaslo 
Lents Wee foot uui ag uoopo laasoo onda; cer JAn 
Laag .oorsar Neg, Joa S1 Neo ootlas ooo whl JA «cx 
Joot Jj Na: Oly ud yar -foor NS) eso eS «AMO co OAD vot 


summoned him together with the blessed Sergius whom we mentioned 
above', who also attained the honour of the bigh-priesthood through the 
blessed James, with him first to go up to the royal city on account of the 
faith?. And, when they had been received with great honour hy the bele- 
ving queen, and she had given them also a house and the rest of what they 
needed, thenceforth the blessed James dwelt alone in a little cell, in vreat 
retirement and arduous labours, and asceticism beyond measure, and i 
extraordinary poverty moreover in mode of life and in clothing, since he 
would eut one thick and ugly cloak of withes (?) into two, and out of its 
halves make what was required for his clothing aud his scanty covering“, aud, 
though the blessed Sergius also as well did as he did and associated himself 
with him in lasting and. vigil and constant recitation of service, yet he fell 
very far short of the standard of his retirement and his severe practices, on 
account of the communications brought by many who used to come to them 
and with whom he was required to speak: but the blessed James entirely 


refused to take part in these things, and refused also to appear during the 


1. P. 487. — 2 According to the spurious life (see Appendix) for a conference with the Chalce- 
donjans; but, if he became a bp. in 542 (eli. 50) and lived. 15 yrs in CP., he musl have come 11527; 
whieh is before the time of the conferences, — 3. See p. Si n. 2. The meaning may itso he that 
he used half for clothing and bdt fora nuight-eovering. Prom this attire he got the nickname * Purl- 
‘ava’ or * Burd‘ana’ (the man of the patchwork garment); et. ju 425. 


Pas 


n. 


(o JOHN. OF EPHESUS [40] 
JL3à 5 fion s sons Laster foo flrs; yl Se oO ao <> wad baw h> 
Sas o ódaS Ns «ro QNA as Jlaa so Ki sas H> ot 
li» - spol! Jaanam Jem Jirgro qo -JKads0 JKisa.cps0y 
Lan oM Jox io? Xo Jiorofl oaa, haaa Jil! xo Jrsad 
Laaa s EN LANs aas JLasan, Laag Gol pamo - [asasopsos 
JNa vaiojs waas 1.524 x) aot Qao oon Jlasopo lass; p20 
oi s saa Jar dase ney ey | ON xr) | eo alec |] er JioyoJ Lo) 
shao JLosh} oaa JN uo Ss oma, Jla ward via Da V5 
Hes Jor si JK»e5 kuio aod PD +e oat Wdoats L>; hou yl 
La: J| No yl d spraras|yo LAS, | Secret ol Jide Jl: » brsuoso J pane 
jawo yo .JLaisesot Loa soo Ls olo Ja.) Jos oars 
Jed poo Lose» .flsamso husano fips SOS uy faoksl p9 . Loia, 


|, Ma miaa: 2 Ms. aun; ins. from ch. oo, 


day outside his cell. But, when he had been engaged for a period of abont 
fifteen vears in these labours in the same royal city i his cell, then by the 
provision and at the instigation of the believing queen he was under great 
pressure summoned to the episcopacy, together with another blessed man 
from the country of Arabia whose name was Theodore ; because the party of 
the believers had diminished and a deficiency had moreover arisen in the 
order of the priesthood over all the commonwealth (zoreti) of the party of 
the believers. And, when both had received the high-priesthood, that is the 
blessed James that of the city of Edessa and Theodore that of Hirtha of the 
Saracens', then he armed himself with divine strength, and went oul to the 
work of his ministry, while he thenceforth began to pour out the priesthood 
derived from him copiously over the regions in all the eastern districts, like 
a gwat river in the days of Nisan?, having entered upon the high road of 
heroism at a vigorous spiritual pace without ceasing or resting night and 
day, while in accordance with the saving of the apostle he clothed himself in 
the breastplate of righteousness, and girded his loins with the perfection of 
faith, and took hold of the shield of salvation?, while he was at all. times 


carrying on a contest on behalf of the truth * on the right hand and on the left, 


1. Also called Hirth d. Numan (p. 145. The menlion of Theodore and his see has been omilted 


m Ibe m>. and is supplied from ch. >o, 3s Xpribo A Epha vB Mel. 


[491 | LIFE OF JAMES. 693 


Jumps; bean x39 .5: Lalo LOMA" flothl> Lise Joa DX» was 
«9o 3o Lean aS JI ol Mas [LM Nac [laxo Nae [0,0 
JKarsasbs TS Jhsdasoo .. 2s. Jh Joa Yas Jopay j paw Ham» - fhosh] 
JN aaao «op roy [aa MS sands ad .amosl3! Laia CEAL, 
Jon adna, hadar Lawo Laso fhaa JLas ^| J? » Jlasoras 
Joa sso sso eis Dar aad Saar fuss] lao Was) Lisat 
BL wo Jona c [2.2.2279] «ooa», faas] -Lasp 300 sL} Ssaso 
qio Da po .olansarddso apka saaa aaa o + oaoa 
A! Jo JNN J1a.224) «2o Nol -ooa qà; props oss 
Jlosh/ «DO e PA, SD HMA coo ced? wel 912.2055; oos 
oia sa a has aD :joaxul po apy OLX rs „Joa Nj 
aKa; Jlas qad PK o? we GDS) Le] Soo -Joa Jas 
OA +, wHados3 o. 5 4&asuo Joa woos Jill Lore ws [2o Joa DO 


«o 2 d Jills, eA aaan joo soia galopa e 


in glory and in dishonour''. And so in the upper aud lower countries, while 
he was running the vigorous course of heroism without ceasing from the 
Persian frontier even as foras the royal eity of Constantinople, and Alexandria 
and all the countries, and fulfilling the work of the ministry to all the orthodox 
(aphoðoko) believers, not only by organizing the clergy and the giving of the 
priesthood, but also by consoling and comforting and edifying and strengthe- 
ning and teaching all the party of the believers everywhere’; so that conse- 
quently his fame was carried over all quarters, and in every country and city; 
so that all the svnodite bishops from all sides were exasperated, aud made 
threats against him to arrest him and tear him in pieces. And, while they 
were running after him with menaces in all quarters, he was sheltered by 
the divine graee, and was not delivered into the hands of his pursuers, and of 
those who sought his life*. For, whenever he went to any district, he would 
complete all the work of his ministry in one night perhaps and one day, and 
would pass the next night thirty or forty miles or more farther on; and, 
whenever news of him was heard in one district, and his pursuers went out 


after him, the brave man would be found in his heroism fulfilling his work in 


|. Uf Cor, vi, 7. 5 — 2. The sentence is left unfinished, — 3. Jer.. Ntv. 30. 


Toy cre 


a. 


bas i ae 


(ns OHUN OP EPHESUS., 192] 


25 fp mts vaoKas - coo c lanado dox ois; 
pe XD JN JL o Ns 9996 CADDY aeti | ware vioo Ao 
hoa Lusoas pao aa AND CRM word ano Nossa cao 
eet ela of Teasa a dia ea a ong [Kits 
Luiol> ol rasa aAa Joa aiaa pags oar Jos Jri co Jol 
Wes n. p Joa fas J pan Hos Lose Lani 4 p» oro Loo) 
U Nal, flopepso Laso, e Jlag JNa coo aaa hanas Jass 
aaa [usd Jaga a Las! aau JP oly hal joo agio 
aloo gaa ola co Ja» Jis) Woo «2o woh. olassasso So 
“kassar EN sov el 5. cose qaa J o mo Mee 


. 


oa co mary $2 Pl opera of «3a.» oped, Joot «nas Nso 


lng Slo joa Ww Nse JN. flog x! “ò ya i ro Joot [hsasso 
Jlaawolo., Joa flsasso flaasyys priols Lor?» hooo Joa [4.5 011435 prow. 


b. Ms. 2. Me. be, corro from tlie interpolaled life (see Introd, p. viv V. D. and DL. render 
"aurum, but do not sive loos asan emendation, — 3. Ms, aaa Sos. 


another distriet, while those who were running after him to the right and to 
the left were found beating the air (262), and ', exasperated and biting their 
lingers, they would turn back with great shame, filled with bitterness and 
confusion and gnashing their molars against the man mighty in his Lord, 
and that while news of him was flying about to-day in one quarter and to- 
morrow in another; while for his part he resolutely refused to allow even a 
travelling-companion to carry any gold? or silver or bronze with him, or any 
food upon the journey, though he would travel extended stages (uzyotev) al a 
Vigorous pace, since on many days they would traverse more than the miles of 
the stage cuxvíes . while he would not consent to the fast and abstinence 
being broken: insomuch that on many days men could not travel with him 
and minister to him more than a short time, since they could not hasten on 
with his old age and support and endure his abstinence ; while he also would 
uot consent to avail himself of the use of an animal for riding or for driving, 
hut he used to accomplish his travelling on foot, since besides being 
strengthened by divine grace he further also possessed a sound body by 
nature. And thus he would accomplish: the course along the road. of 


o 


Mo om. — 2. So I emend from the interpolated life isee Introd.. p. NIV, n. 7 


[493] LIFE OF JAMES. 695 


fans] Lusamwo Luäs LH Sas Joa DA Lisas >s Jaw So joo 
oi Ns gapo aso Joo paso Naso Jaaa, do 4| Sas pags 
> Jun No e Sor vol -Joor LAs axma hja 10 JNS3e Jloshhs 
«ae oasis Lasso Looss, oha ga Naw p Joa uw aa} Lec 
Lado e 2l; ho]. x? hex CEN 95 ry Lo 
DRO + AR S Jif eo JNa o 935) xo Laaa yb coor 
franco on oc) pds osos pad Syiar pol ced] e» Sas voids 
amaa oi Non 3X Loo Laus janjo fly [Koos «e? 900 +. popad woh waar, 
JNeopsy oo vae] hu] cro Maia 9S ol} ee a eae 
EN obl ce} lo Joo yeah qlo „Joa oot Na] Kado 
wee Jans, -20 | (axsas) Jj]: y OLLSO aot 2 LOS wohl xp: 
gol y o NS so pel ooo 195 ajho ooo — ot (ofS) 900i 
2otJax)o Nas Jl JNS pars Juss oom” vod reso Lasao 


1. Ms. om. 


righteousness, and would make an addition to the party of the believers every 
day in every place, among Greeks and among Syrians; so that his fame 
which wasin every place sorely exasperated the adversaries, and disturbed 
them and made them run after him over the roads and districts and quarters. 
And, when the report of him reached this place, the news of him would 
further rouse excitement over an unlimited space in one day, while conse- 
quently pursuers aud horses would run after him in droves from all sides, 
meeting one another; insomuch that as chance would have it those who were 
pursuing him often met the blessed James himself, and asked jum = about 
hinself, saving, « Have vou heard any secret news of that deceiver James 
anywhere there? », and he on his side would name to them a place no small 
distanee behind him, saying : « Yes, 1 have heard from some men who were 
saving that he was in such-and-such a place, and was going about there: 
and, if yon set out, perhaps you will cateh him. » Having heard! these 
things from him as a piece of secret information and supposing him' to be a 
partisan, they would leave him himself, and run after him in accordance with 


the story that he had told them?. And so their outward eyes were closed 


l. Ms. om. — 2. The same story is lold of Simeon of Heth Arsham p. Vo 


PATR. ON. — T. NVI — F. 4 15 Jus. 


Sp NI 


60 FOREN OE? Le PARSE SS. ^U | 


NT xS eo oce gaoi oc Ms Cer A a p Laa d 
waa: con obse: «VJ oon [sos jax ad t2 J3X36 oas] 
IL pd: hal Lop Loads"o Ju Jure baam) shoe o. 
Laa "xo Lah oaa oa; of sotadsco othasor yo olopaa? oja 
Daw JL omo Diaa footy o yo Joa Jroasoy où I5: 
«aeo who <% -haos xao ooo qejokiasco - OD 00% mates 
JL Lo J'asasLls com c5 £D! OLO Kalo „aiao Laas, JI5e NS 
gedeghsco eco qoia Lsiaao JKupsa>0 Jado j>a M sas 
Lots 9] T da xonanso Dado ooo xpo J «a» ESNS Jaa T 
pasa Da handa Larrsd; alas AaS alo so, JU 
Jlsassoo L4] y Nolo -opsas Suis Load oo p wot aao 
| Jrsooat Naas oœ banao - fotos JLotou y Jlasoo = so sca a 
pac Ji aan” Jlo ots oM wel» saas au] Jt faunas] Joa 


as well as their inner ones, that they might not recognise the blessed man, 
while it was not these only who were exasperated and disturbed by the news 
of him. but also the king himself. who gave no small amount of gold to those 
who promised to capture the blessed man, bishops and many monks and 
several laymen: so that many, when they saw his intentness and his eager 
desire and the gitt that he gave for the capture of the blessed man, and that 
everyone who promised to capture him received from him a large quantity 
of gold. as much as he asked, used consequently to deceive him, and promise 
and receive gold. from two hundred and three hundred daries, and go out, 
And there are some of them who while they were making search with greal 
diligence in every place, in deserts and on mountains and in eities and m 
villa ees NN Ode dazed and wearied, while they were unable to find the bondman 


D 
= 


of God on account of his abstemiousness', though these things continuel to 


t 


be carried onin this way for many vears, indeed even tll after king Justinians 
death, while the blessed man was strengthened in his Lord, and was confident 
like a Hon. and accomplished his ministry, causing the priesthood to dow 
like great rivers over the whole world of the Roman dominions: so that, Wa 


man take upou himself to sav thata hundred thousand were ordained by bin. 


1. This appy means that he was able to travel so rapidly because te travelled so light aud dtd not 
stop tu tike food, 


[495] LIFE OF JAMES. 007 
ele hma wia Jh [ease] ol, Las] Jhon oo was; hl 
Lual Sx» haris pas, y oio: bil eS ouo Kasih JM MS 
Daa 24-00 «e! «eon ot3à.s «oon Na], T Joal fusal road e 
slo jaamio] [ye] ye» doh cas] exe -JNus rs i hima Do 
AJ sa, Joa. Je» “Aia aano «2.24 haoo J92-a2..9"| Loo 
ol + : Laz Larder; odes ce, JN eso.o jo Jaa hor ol, 2à 
Jipa J Jas ha ol y Jia Da adol] Jaanas 
JN sa) Ll pe Jh wu xoa] eot s, JN] uias, pany, ba! 
pO vt a Jus far ol fas. [xMals saoi? fro pols aot ss 
yl Lasag; o2 a9o oot dor o) vorasoh ol, Lan? D x6 No 
Jas oss: fraps od, S aaoo o Suo suot Ae! Jo, Ja 3a NS, 
slo <>! TS [aso Qoo. je olas p> «or Laul vues) 
sans rmdliua re wal aapa dui Av 
erioa ra rédanndre 


[do not think he will depart from the truth; even as no small number of 


bishops and two patriarchs! also received ordination (yzozoviz) from him and 
from others who were with bim as is enjoined in the canons. First he took 
two admirable blessed men whose names are Eugene and Conon and entered 
the city of Alexandria, and there with other bishops he made them also as 
well bishops, and so he went out; and with them he heroically performed the 
work of the ministry, which has been going on even down to this first year 
of the reign of Justin the king ?. though he has now reached an honoured 
old age. though he does not fall short of the work of youth. For, as we 
declared at the beginning of the history that is concerned with him that the 
history that is concerned with him cannot be related in accordance with what 
he is, so also we state now at the end, having recorded a small portion of the 
conflict (xyov) of the blessed man’s contests and of his pursuits and his work 
for the glory of God, who chose him and strengthened bim and set him up 
in his ehurehi in. the time of the persecution, in order that we may all be 


assisted by his prayer together with that of all the saints Amen and Amen! 


The history of the hrave aud valiant blessed man James the bishop and combatant 
(Xofeovte Ts) is ended, 


l. Sergius and Paul. — 2. 5665. 


SES 


Goa Eo 


FABLE OF CONTENTS 


Pages. 
iecaso nce iieis eae a a eae a ctn a A a AR 
Latest ohn ol Mep Wars EODYOTISG d sc a e a NUS ehe eet ee et td 33^ 
ieh hiemis oe Amasus eaa a a E a TENER ITUTTELAM IO 
BARES ZI a a E A ee. E S E A EE E E M i 
Rates Tames vce) c Rc A eee oA ves SA EAA a ene 
EA N E AE A E A A a A E T MEI 
E NAE aira ase og cobs CIS A e ge a A a a EA C E 
Lives of Elijah RUM LOCA haves arcana METRE OO QNO ea erty ta teh 
"OGNI EIE oy a os ences he eed Ee ket a gee ne tee 
IIR A BI TR E A MET PATI WI PEE xcu EMIT ME L) 
[chin cas ETT Lie SO Piet E IR TET 8S seth one ek a yaar ET UICE E d 
COC ea A OM CC courenta a iid aoe eho andes ah coaeiewores Gets tua ee eee ee AOD 
Lib op Mace Oe SORTS er ence Ust DA eee soU phe kee Sect 422 
missing. 

Bethy rey ees MC TR C CC EODEM tle, WAT Whe Gah te gS E 
INN NECI EP QOO a TE TIE URL I ED 
Vifte of Ahraham thepresbyters s oeo S cess sosta eani ee 09S quoti tone ro SER 
taires ot Bassinn and Romanis ao oe as Gee ee IUE LITER RN. 
Lives of Mari, Sergius, and Daniel... used od soe a te tee, osi ee 453 
]|uséscotdourdioaeoüb5u c Duc ae on EE AE QUAM NI POE meee E M d eens wea ASTU 
Dilcur i ribinis CI acre ace IUD US a A arcc de Me Tc 
IB CAT M NM PI ED xT E EE 
]Evte vob Dua lee tob ue rte que aie ba LE ee tea cM c doc 
OL the refuges in Constantinople. ste c4 ae (ra rete ode o disce cf S eer ATA 
ives ait ivepatriarchsa cow ares eee v eee S ee egg Ses quee eee ASA 
RERO MINI ERN ae ae ee ee ee ee ng hy eee seca CE 


MSS. USED EX FRE PRESENT FASCICULE 


A o Brite Mus. Add. 14047 (688). 
ae - 14650 575. 

D= — — — 7190 12" cent... 
ES -= 14651 838 

G= — - 18805 v^ cerit). 
H = — — 14735 052 cent.). 


SV VPN 


R. GRAFFIN — F. NAU 


PATROLOGIA ORIENTALIS 


TOMUS DECIMUS NONUS 


I, — G. BAYAN, 
LE SYNAXAIRE ARMENIEN DE Ter IsnaEL. (VI. Mois de Aratz. 
IH. — E. W. BROOKS: 
Joux or Epnescs. Lives of the Eastern Saints Ay. du. 
e p 
IH. — M. JUGEH. 
HOMÉLIES MARIALES BYZANTINES (II). 
IV. — M. ASIN ET PALACIOS. 
LOGIA Er AGRAPHA Domini festus arup MOSLEMICOS. 
YV. — N. MARR. 
Le Synaxame GEonGiEN. (Ik Redaction auecienne de 
l'Union. Arméno-Georgienne, d'apres le manuserit du 
couvent. Jeirou du Mont. Athos. 





PARIS 
FIRMIN-DIDOT ET C IMPRIMEURS-EDITEURS 
LIBRAIRIE DE PARIS, 56. RUE JACOB 


1926 


JOHN OF EPHESUS 
LIVES OF THE EASTERN SAINTS 
[x3 


E. W. BROOKS 


III 


PAIR. OR. — r. MIN. — r. 2 


raans ademas aa ,eenuls ana e daah aad s 

SmAeaem he oaas Eala räd máiàel Qi 

daa saam rhaalss duina regar eua anara 

nhal wis JÉsania ma amn hami hata 
erdal iaradh ndum daanodaao 


No heann Ana alad asla Mao woda Da yopo 

Jh, [962229] S Je3. NS [Mesas] haak, odo) Lay 
J.os!.5 leo õn, Jlopmonn Dan po jd x49 pray : JN 
JA rA bo ERES EST earl fracas c! Naja Nso : [5:30:10 fipo 
Laana Kaai «2o ooo ashe Jo Lissa] pes cL "La; Bs 
JKsa5 JS of [oaamss”! ceil CESE loa saaskl, - Jiosofl JNS 
JN-az > JN wa loo lop, DA .Liams amsoli? «o» 


1. Ms, hæla. — 2, Corr. from Ia. ]25. 


NEXT THE FIFTIETH HISTORY, CONCERNING THE SAME TWO BISHOPS, PHE ENGEL- 
LENT AND DIVINE BLESSED WEN Javes AND TukobponE, WHO WERE TOGETHER 
IN TIE ROYAL CITY AT THE TIME OF THE PERSECUTION, AND CONCERNING THE 
ACTIVE WORK THAT WAS PERFORMED Bẹ THEM DURING THE SAME PERSEGU- 
TION, BY THE INSTIGATION AND THE COMMAND. OF THE RELIEVING Tigonona 


THE QUEEN. 


Before these things therefore, in the sixteenth vear of the reign of Justi- 
uian', after the time of the martyrdom of the blessed combatant (zyevszá2) 
lor religion Jolin bishop of the city of Thella at the hands of Ephraim of 
Antioch ?, when a lack of priests had consequently arisen in the countries of 
the east and of the west, and especially of bishops, then the glorious Hereth 
Bar Gabala, the great king of the Saracens, with many others asked. the 
Christ-loving queen Theodora to give orders that iwo or three bishops might 
immediately be instituted by the orthodox (4200d020) In Syria. And, since 


the believing queen was desirous of furthering everything that would assis! 


h 332, — 2, see ch, 25, 


x S ETSESS Shi 


S Use ams. 


J54 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 500! 


Vpn 


* 


oaia «Lois lo. Jena hasl wih asa oco amak lo 
saasso « Jioyofh Coy aso Liz JA r^ J5o:o]1o Waar. co «oo Nd 
Jpnrpdoo haan |fassash JAoshbs Jiosofl Lasag £20 Jtapd0 woof) 
SHG 11294 .. Asio] Laon Joa BN Kal Jas Menu 9o [Aseo oio 
Voa ojos wooo Jioni? Lah aco jo Nyo «yl r 
Joa Is gSa Janaa Sad Lauwo Liaw sands Joa J :flosl/ 
ooo y J5as Iso. «ooa Moje. Lacarshifs Liaw S PO 
L2»e23a9)0 oe» Liam. Lao: Jloillso yaso yaso iei soo 
03030 coo, 90.0 Lo: DINE Lolo JLo [rope froao :fusoado 
wi :daMa9 Jrdidmao Jlar Nae Loco Jie dNAs00 «002.50 
sJlasoray fond) ~ JLseo sual Jopay Ljos -.JLosL} Loona yar o> ol, 


l. Ms. fete siej UMS 1209905. 


the opponents of the synod of Chateedon, she gave orders and two blessed 
men, Well-tried and divine persons, whose names were James and Theo- 
dore, were chosen and instituted, one Tor [Hirllia of the Saracens', that is 
Theodore, and James for the city of Edessa. And. while the blessed 
Theodore exercised anthority m the southern and western? countries, and the 
Whole of the desert and Arabia and Palestine, as far as Jerusalem, the blessed 
James, having armed himself with religion. and clothed himself in the zeal of 
heroism, exteuded tis course over all the countries not onty of Syria and the 
whole of Armenia and of Cappadocia, all of which down to the little ones? 
were especially distinguished. and strong in orthodoxy \osfodoziz no less 
than Syria, Sand besides these * in the countries alsa of Cilicia and the 
Whole of Esauria and of Pamphylia and Lbyeaonia and Lyeta and Phrygia and 
Caria and Asia, and in the istids of the sea Cyprus and’ Rhodes, and 
Chios and Mitylene ^, and as far as the royal city of Constantinople, in which 


also besides all the countries he displayed the course of heroism, and filled 


Fdhie Hira se. cesunp^s the seat of the Roman Saracens, is probably different from Hirtlia d 


Nile aie pe 1, The seat the Persian sauraeenss — 2. We rather require “eastern Perl, 
however the cuthor is speaking from the point of view af the Svrine world. whieh exleuds from 
Hie Mesdliblerraness te dhe Tigris. — 3. Se. children. — 4. We require ‘hu. The anthor has, as 
olen. forsoalb how de besin Ure sentence — 5. Vs. ans = 6. This is probably the carliest use of 


Milene’ ford, 


01 pu D IP SA hi ek Ae its. boy 


Il gio Xe» jiso io yoo jours Jh be shamoli] 2 Male 
[52.2.27] xor OU» Lào 25 flolo - Jos NS lose hon colo 
Jato, Loa AS yo anal vik] Sons yarmio pans fuaely nopothsy fol 
«9| . faamsol Joons Jl «4322. o] INS. pede) tp} Joo 1201 
rao | PST RS Ke ore JlosMusas oog ete a} wo Lane oad w:o 
Nac Jlarmasoo fadso £26 Jla Kissa wao E e eS <% 
y JA a. a2 cse Nispa A! T lon AS «naco|A haag, 
waar, jasad oo Aayi p „Joa jla flassausoty jipa cM Lsamofo; 
JNa.) Jlosarc p2 JN asp L5. anas JI op dofhly cae Lis Or 
[>a omn hoop Jlaa so Naapa <>? Jlosh{ eana X20 Jlasorns 
yl nk, IA Joa Lano pao hipa |i We haao farsas, 
DoR oL 20 costa)! Joe NS acon iaag «20 wena: leon ; 
JN -1—30 was aio joai oaas S Joanmas’) Li384 wil 


Liso . 5a ena ls JN aaao [0222.5 NI oss [pajo «Lan o 


]. « erased. 


the ranks of the priesthood, and spread orthodoxy DUET abroad, who nol 
only marshalled priests and supplied all quarters, but further abso in keen 
religious zeal did not shrink even from making proviston for ordaining ind 
appointing high-priests, that is bishops, also in every place; so that. since 
he was careful to observe the regulations of the canons whieh command 
that withont three bishops no bishop shall be instituted, he contrived to 
bring with him (wo monks of voul repute Tor excellence of Hlfe; one from 
Cilicia and one [rom Isauria, and proceeded to the royal eus anal, havmig 
received the advice and permission of the blessed Theodosius patriarch ol 
Alexandria. who had been detained ii the same roval city by way of exile 
dix) on behalf of the truth of the faith, the blessed dames with the above- 
ETT monks directed his path to the city of Alexandria, alter fully 
carrying out the ministry of the priesthood in all the countries from the rov al 
cily as far as the sea-coast of l.veaonia ; and so he entered Alexandrias cnd, 
after he had been in communication with the saintly men there, in aceordaucc 
with the mandate received from the blessed Pheodosins the patriarch. they 
assembled. and made these (wo blessed men bishops. one whose mime: wee 


Conon in the city of Tarsus of Cilicia, aud the other whose mune was Eugene 


serie LA RA E 


* 119 v^ 


ile 


156 JOS OE FASS, [502] 
Qn haio, JL yl [iso Jinas fA [sams pogo sal py 
je» woo Je: Joa aaas ~ . foanmis! uss «2! St | a sor so 
Naar [es qo vues Jos oce) Lalo -Niao han Luekel 
pohly Limah oco «xot ee Lalo J fuiacy hoan ups w} 
Joa oaas Lipo LaaSo moms aro Joa aaan Sos «oo 
nas ha [jams wol jenasazo]) azao bias!) honna ag! 
Jo? «o m HD joa ois; Liho cop Rtas Was eo Kiss Jes 0 
Juste vido Nase Jpop «36 twas jos oaar hido pus fro!) 
ed eas Joaamss! arano) «oM» yl : p20 Jasoa, Jia 
Lachs hoN coparo . Jlaasso Naapa QS aseo oM aur 
Joa 13954 Naso JL ee NE Joa oaas auh day Jlaaspas 


L Ms, besaaalde: ears v. D, and Lo; see nole on translation, 


in the city of Seleucia of Isauria': and so he took them and eame back to 
Syria with admirable zeal. And so in accordance. with the provision of 
Ihe canons they made metropolitans, that is arehbishops*, one whose name 
wis Dimet? from the monastery of Aphtliouia * in the city of Laodicea, and 
another whose name was John from the monastery of the house of Mar Bzy 
in Seleucia in Syria”, and another from those who were instituted at Alexan- 
dria who was inentioned above, whose name was Conon, in Tarsus in 
Cilicia, and the other whose name was Eugene in Seleucia in lsauria; and 
the other bishops also in Syria as follows, John from the monastery of the 
house of Mar Bassus in Kenneshrin®, and another whose name was Sergius 
Irom the monastery of Aphthonia in Charrhae, and another whose name was 
Jolm from the monastery of the house of Mar Hanina in Sura Bomanorum. 
And, when they had set up bishops for the various cities of Syria as has 
been deseribed, afterwards they went up to the royal eity, and in our pre- 
sence (hey ordained a patriarch in Antioch, a man whose name was Sergius 


from the city of Thella, who was living in the roval eitv? and was versed 


h The interpolated life adds Antony aud Antonius: see note Iher». — 2. The distinction between 
melrepolilins and arelibishops is later, — 3. Probably a shortened forn of Demetrius (nol Domilins, 
usc ost deb Vo is nid oak 5. The monastery which dohn son of Aphthouia established ad 


Kenmeshre on the Enptiates after if had teen expelled. from Seleucia al the perseention “Zach. 
Bh, uo 0, Ms. Tsanriat: see uate on bext., Eugene was made bp ol 8. n tsauria. Phe inter- 


1 


polated tite of dames las Seria’, — 6, Chaleis in Syria, — T. See eh. 49, 


15303 PANES OB TAMERS AND E MEOW ORIS 21 


NS Ls [2e Jaz NS, Laħam Joa qMaM3seo lans Maas 
— Jas Joot opsany sul) Lona vol La iNo [528 s «2o 2) CANO 
al] «0t Lao e Slo -aN Aso ooot JL oo feats: Lii Lipan 
„maaa Joa oes; au LAD aA raa Jud pole volo 
JosL Wo .Jlaa yo Nispa a> EIL «RM, ouse Jul y» Joa 3255 
|.5a-2.2.z:9l Ord edo A wanno. Lisa); 0,2225 wada? 
warfsl, JNaSmis JK i jans Nua as Jeol posi 
J -coancozofl La Ao oo «o pel JL o woja o ya 0a NS [16 


* 


Jor wos Nao aawa 36 mas, eo oD py Joa Nino 
Lop ado exe Jus lol Jiosh] ees: carlo Laas. [isa 
Lajan «iso. - Jor oaa; su] coamofs po xsi] Lee foaomis/ 
Joa oaas Lipalo crop Mo Joa ota: asl Nsjasopso haiu paai 


JN EENEN + 00,9 foa o2. Lillo Nia | so Ha xi 


t. Ms. bosno. — 2, Mx, uy; pa. 


in religious learning. And, when he had completed three vears, he depart- 


ed from the world: and after a time again they ordained a man whose name 


was Panl from Alexandria. About this man many controversies arose ' 
and continue to the present time when these things were written. And 


again in the eity of Amida they ordained as metropolitan a man whose name 
was Eunomius. who had been expelled with others among Ihe same clergy 
of Amida, in the same roval city. And for the countries of Egypt, by the 
mandate of the blessed Theodosius the patriarch, they ordained twelve 
bishops at once in the roval city itself, [or various cities of Thebais and of 
Egypt besides a large number of clergy; Inasmuch as the patriarch Theo- 
dosius would not consent to ordain priests after he hul Jett his see. And 
alterwards the blessed James and his companions went out to the countries 
of Asia for the second time, and they ordained four bishops in Asin, one ni 
Ephesus a man whose name was John the Syrian, the converter of the pagans? 
and in Smyrna a man whose name was Peler’, and another whose mame was 
John in the city of Pergamum, and another whose name was Peter in the 


city of Tralles. And after these things they crossed) to the island of Chios 


le: ILE.. INg 15: Mieh.. p. 325 Dyukonov, [^ ba zo Ws agli Ses fiitrod.. p Aito Woo ea 


ch. ^f. 


]It s 


h. 


Pe VASE? 


d. 


155 JOHN OF EPHESUS, [504] 
awaa si) . laamas] a> \arsarolo IRN wad Lhaa edo Ao 
Jt «ae soon]. ooa Lool, umama], ciues oar 0 ras joo 
vasanclo ..JLio: Jost Vopaso Lansa Lolo el «mo uix Nous, 
Syn cr9049/ Haas JNa waras foa oras; rM x». foams] wh. 
CL qa Jas aay [Nupa je Joa opasy Llo 
Aalha i oHa Lusa ody foaamis/ wasio [oaaao] 
Je» su bia] leans], Lops yas waans Laoag coy wih benuMe 
KO xe Jm Js» fansa Jhosl! ooann JJ ngs ono 
Nola. goas won Jipa D p) +,0001 «oer Jaapan oa «Set 
le «ess Ms ce Js rd; polo AN] fios eho ORD Ns] oso 
olopaa o ako Suo zaoo, [3605 wey SO «xxl wih. Daas, [32.265 

ja ero} Js Ms «D» 001 ass - aad. Jaca, 


rida aap wih anodn’s hash hole 
ereranardha saps, imdoalna 


l. Ms. Vinsw 07]: corr. Nold. 


and set up a bishop in it, a man whose name was Kashish! from the monas- 
tery of Jobn of Ephesus, both of whom were from the monastery of the 
house of Mar John at Amida. And again they went back and crossed to 
the regions of Caria, and there they set up two bishops, one whose name 
was Paul m a city the name of which is Aphrodisias*, and another whose 
name was Julian in a city the name of which is Alabanda”. These are all 
the bishops and archbishops, who are in number twenty-seven, besides two 
patriarchs whom the blessed James ordained with all the other bishops, 
besides many clergy in all the eastern and western countries. Many of all 
these were instituted in our presence, and with regard to the truth of all 
these things we give confident and truthful witness that they were done as 
above, and we have made a commemorative record of them for the knowledge 
of posterity: but of the sublime manner of life of the blessed James, and his 
courage and perfection, we have made a record in the preceding history. 
The history of two bishops the e.rcellent and divine blessed men, dames and 
Theodore, is ended. 


|. See p. We and. eli st. 2. Met (rwidlhsyr'. — s. The inlerpoluted life adds John of Dara; 


see nole there, 


505 LIFE OF WKASTHSTE KT 


warp aapa vano ernu edad aah 
ere haw, wasan rSancougsre 


ot sa), Lapas Kr Daas JNa eo J IN ss) «e Iss el NDIA pI 


Mo Loss S> o? +2 Jaama] ao - <] JaN, [155 Load - 


SS soot) ouyas Ms > JI Slo xS Kal JE + Joor eoo. | co 
S901 £p Jinas sIAdxd:0 [53505 2otp5o5 [i295 Jilan fbr I 
Ib <> CRAS, lx. Lo Laoi [Nho <% Larg oot Laso 
we poh] hasy Joa san] L Da p joa vaoo] aaas, 
[RENE pM do aao Loodalo Mi. 2-340 Jo, Jaang 
wel es ete Slo po SNe paly cines vido Mas) dx Qa 
yl Jesoars oft vo [laj pando Ja»; Joao, [Naass «209 
lupao - flsars 200 wr Koo Jae yl Nwaaxo Spasse fais ais 
PLY BL grey Jansy GN Lis Sly ha Je! xe Jods, 


NEXT THE ?!IbrY-HIRST. HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED Kasinsn BISIO or. THE 


ispxp oi Gu ms. 


Since therefore in one of the previous histories also we made mention of 
the subject of the history of the great blessed. man of God our father Kashish 
the bishop ', when he was indeed still iu the life in the body with us, we lid 
not think it right even alter his decease also to withhold the treasure full of 
spiritual riches of his great modes of life and of his honoured fabours. Fhis 
saint therefore was by birth (yop from a village called that ol Aina di 
Frakha? whieh is beyond Nirba? d Skws, and, while he was still a little 
bov, he was called by God's grace, and deft his kin (vog aud his parents, aud 
went out, and entered our holy convent ol the house of Mar John iu the city 
ol Amida and received instruction there, while we ourselves also besides were 
in the same convent at an early period of age: and we emne to the convent al 
the same time when about fifteen years old; and thenceforth we were 
trained together in labour and in the reading of the holy Seriptires TT 


brotherly fashion; insomuch that together we endureid aud supported thirty 


]. Ch. 34. — 2. Se, * prine of the banple’ 3. Siy suet 


160 LONN OE EPHESUS. 1506} 


*am a. eseaxo shines gino [sito võ] «oor» yar f Damo anD Jp] 


Faly 


l. 


haaa jLeslJl S pels [DSSS <>? Jio. «fend pd0 EET, hasko 
J Jlaasys JNa; Lael: hlos 'oċ Jamo po hah] Jiag Jantaka 
lel. as qas Js pA J Fasos ]&se» Lootasely Jisas qo aaa 
oprdo XL EE ep Jas JLosLJs haos? «los Musey Joa). 
ea, JNa onu Nseu Joshi, [orso Laoco Loc Slo -naaa 
AN lasas franco! ol, furs] [Spay Jlaasupoo .flarsoo! Kanpa 
pass ol paias haao) Dads Jh La? -Jlarscdds; Laa A Joa 
Jino frascuso hans Kars - fraruac Lano pel Wl fas? po «2o 
[^.$oo Lào Mile fis» himo Dawo foa poao Lao; Da 
aras joot yam; ud m> pay ae qoo Joot ^ Lar Ns Janin], 
AU Il oom JD poo biwi flsax qx nates JD ao] v3 aang, 


Jas 'Proadsdoo .?JNaarsdo feram] Joa Da Hops!) Jie «e 


I. Ms. ins. ge- 2. Ms, un blslso. — 3. Corr. from I8naZ-so. — 4, Ms, hoadatmano. 


years of chasing from one district lo another with all our holy fathers and 
spiritual brothers, aud the holy convents throughout the East; so that for 
such reasons we were led to the western districts on a long peregrination, 
While That saint did not cease running along the great road of righteousness, 
nor diminish the labour of his marvellous greal practices; but at last he was 
seized by the keen impulse of the excellent lile, so that in love of peregrina- 
lion and al a distance [rom acquaintances he extended his own travels to 
Ihe remote countries of Egypt and Thebais and Greece and the whole of 
Hivricum, and even as far as Rome and the other countries; insomuch that he 
changed the monastic habit iezzux) for lay attire, in order that he might not 
on account of the habit (eyau%) be venerated or honoured by any man, but 
as an ordinary poor man he went about everywhere among poor ordinary 
needy men; and consequently he suffered blows and distresses in a labo- 
rious, distressing, severe, and hawd life of peregriuation, especially in con- 
sequence of the fact that he had determined in bimsel not to receive charity 
from anyone and not to reap any enjoyinent whatever from the labour 
ol others, eseept from the work of his hands, for he used to make baskets 
amonóx) and pairs of bellows, and handsome tiaras (z2penaux'a)' of various 


|l. MATATA A GRUpiÂa «ci Riou ta WIES TÓ:gíva Code. Mop. 297); appy. a hind of straw hal 


Ve E Rai NTS Tks 


[507] LIFE OF KASHISH. TN 


Joo ee) Jos! Wwe» fase wa frag {> Joa Gada oJ SS Eso Jew 
wad. Ness Ja] Ji] oc oaan yards ad Joo aso Joa o 
Jost Wo, x 2o Nano, Janmarsdo harian 5]. udrarad Jjadse o joa 
pbs Jes o aaa Jii JNa < fopas oaas fopad oA 
Low «2o alano «foo LNS, zl Ja qatiy aul .Rufsios Joo 
aaia OLLd0 vet E Jie Ios] Jslo T% of -loa Loa Jpsys 
sje» Jls, olor s o eau NS werdoy A00 A09 «zoo Kao +, aoo 
[Xo «^o sade opnama barons oS oaa joo k>a, 
mad Jilani), oo bel hasi. Lis y von Lasoo 
» fa sts choo Lad: Mense «2o “pakl JLX’ Jhotl], Loja No 
oo Na Jes. po Js Posh] <> psoas BIRN wann wudo Llo 
Laa |N as o5 AO L>; hoo Jopas] Jusads HAO Kraay 
às L.2o5 TE JA Laas ol, Dad I prado ud Ja ORS 


JNS Jioojl as loa Lady [soas] KNSS «0 00000 ene 


colours, which he had learned in Egypt. Thus wherever he was settled he 
worked; and he would make things not only for his own special need, but 
where he could find material for his trade he would also give the rest of his 
earnings to the strangers and the poor who were al hand. But m the other 
places where i! was impossible to carry on lis trade he was im great struts: 
so that, as he would relate, his sustenance offen came from wild herbs, 
or Trom the fruit of the trees of the desert. But. when we heard these things 
from him, we used to marvel and wonder at the fortitude and heroism of the 
strenuous worker, how great his strength was to bear trials and to endure 
these grievous aud severe mischanees. When he had completed about 
thirteen years in these conlliets (zy6v| of peregrination, and in wearisome 
travelling through the upper countries, he was coustrained by love of the 
brotherhood that was with us to embark upon a ship, and he came and 
arrived at Chios an island of the sea (rom the upper countries: and, when he 
had received the privilege of worshipping the collin of the blessed Isidore 
the great martyr, aud had remained there some days, that island pleased tun, 
and he took up his residence in it; since many believers were indeed to be 
found iu it at the time of the persecution, ou account of à hospital (Zevdogn | 
which Theodora the queen had made in i and she established monks there, 


|. Sec p. 467, n. ^. 


ui Lo UIT 


big Wet) Cena aad Ue 


Lo2 JOHN OF EPHESUS., [508] 


«2)5 9 oow a Jg lass Jeaaznas'le Jp «34 Nawo 
Joa JL? IEN luotianso Jla.c, JlaS so las slo Naso jx» 
Se» Daas daa) Joa port] huas Lads BMG. GM eh Jya 
Ne eee | sotop.d03y Jis» + Joo yama Ns od flip Saano Lacs 
loo hanas, 3 pel - Jor 22 Nolae sso »etopz| [AMO Joa Jlsasse 
Da won «ol. A CENSET J Seen 338 los"! <>} Jhal, Logd: Poor 
[29 Joo <24 ~910,3/ BAM „Joa Sssatio woo :Joo flsasse Loo 
— „Joa ats aaa oix» «foot pad arasan Jliasy [JNa 
HD uN v» Jana] Jogoo fasadso fany wo Jiga o „Laina oM 
akopo saoao ANman Xx Joot l 5 pI EAA vaias yl JL; bye 
Lasi oot Jooss Jage x3ehy Jasasass woods fs x) dt » oasasso 
Marah basai Sos Od: La caax fasad p2? Jain] Lino Lusso 
„haal, JLosl] — Jhi Joe OS pado - som." vrl cil AN R2) 


and many banished bishops resided in it [rom time to time), while he had 
now indeed also reached the feebleness of old age! and many diseases, for 
which reason also especially he was led to seek the rest of quietude. And 
thenceforth, while he was enjoying the quietude of the residence in that 
island. he diligently performed the labour of his practices, and he emploved 
himself in his handiwork on a large seale, inasmuch as material (swa) was to 
be Found in the date-palm leaves. from the Alexandrine ships whieh touched 
there?) While hie was performing these tasks in this way, amd working and 
labouring, he used to sell his handiwork: and retaining a small portion for 
his needs, he would spend all his earnings, and distribute them to the poor 
and the lame and the maimed and the blind and the siek, so that, when he had 
completed about live years in the island, while everyone was marvelling at 
his labour and his praetices and his abstinence and his asecticism, then many 
believers in the place asked him to be their chief and spiritual pastor: so that, 
When the blessed James, whose history has been recorded above, brought two 


other bishops with him. and crossed to the island Irom the districts of Asia, 


LJ. bas told us above that K. was abont Ihe same age as himself and thal they entered the monas- 
Pen When about do cet 3; see Inktrol., paiva Now. since KR, started on his perezsrinations with J., 
who settled am CP. in 249. see Introd. p. ya this can hardly have been tater than hat ear, and 
be therefore settled in Gliies at latest in cen when he was obont t Dyakonov, p. Sb, 821. 4. lived over 


AO yers Toned, — 2. see ID Loe, 


900: LIEBE OY 1 VSTi bts 


Nna | z JI ea t OX.) hasans Jaano) pano Jda oa: 


saoo? hais Pe «3o Janno ad p20 Jl] el JI farce DJIN op do 
ean janana franmfcss 06 of Xoo pam), DM <! vt » Jif goo Joa 
„000l «0301 tise o2 MUN. Kapok ha oo] Sad 499 Jano] Lo Joo 
Jpads ele ads hem) fei] de of ds Neue Jus] eroe 
I “Lasy MOM Mane Mos -Jadra E [asaos JKasaal, 
hasan lopan ohaaas rad Jaco Jlsaso Lasa o? ro Joa Ws 
n oj he «Do Col px ol +3 .Joot pad XM mooo Jlsaro 
c cas oce p20 pl Jes xe J oly Lil lesa 
Qux) lesse Kissa Jol và [Naaa -Jya Nais Q2] JXorsal 
ANa 6o vpolls BISE a ossaaly Jya -fasad oo 2l p 
PID Danio fraro updo basso: fears J; JL pas vat Je ono xo 
JL3&-» Lie Qo JA» LAM us Joa pas Kwo -aslo Joa 


1l. Ms. oin. slop bere and ins. after 40>. — 2. In erasure. 


lie seized him by force, and ordained him bishop of the believers ef the same 
island ', while he lamented and fled and refused: and he did not thus escape : 
bat, although he had been a presbyter many years before, be was then foreed 
to shave his hair which he had left in day fashion sya); so that, when this 
became known to everyone, they marvelled at him all the more. [faving 
completed a short time, he crossed to us also in the countries of Asta, and 
also laboured earnestly and zealously with ns for a considerable time in the 
work of the ministry of converting men from paganism, while much comfort 
and consolation was also bronght about for us by bis devoutness and his 
venerable old age and the laboriousness of his practices, while we also never 
again separated from one another in our oll age, just is we had not done so 
in the time of our youth: but, after we had been carrvine on the work of the 
ministry for about one year, that time we came together to the roval city, 
while the blessed man also ended the work of his ministry in the same island 
in Which he had been summoned to the bishopric. and removed to the quictide 
of the monastery which by the power of God we had erected by the holy Mar 
Mama bevoud the water? and resided there and rested, imd he enjoyed the 


quiet restfulness of the place. And, when he had in this way been carrying 


]l. See p. 50$. — 2, See p. 228. 0. 2. 


tops 


h. 


164 JOHN OF EPHESUS, [510] 


„ooko [hots je» + cade NS, HSS Lp Joa flsaase vooo, 
PES oS >) Jit Jes 9o Je eR ye 2llo USE Te ax ls 
Miao) Jio Lay yana quu Ns Qoo Loco cores po Lco CAT 
Joan Ly amaa yano, Jlo Hes" b yas IAAI FA Kro.co 


ofl Dee JNa Jes JAMZ2aasNS aeo" Na JS. 


Maran rS nouQdré xn risala mrduand dials 
ere dak 


aiaj rexia sehida “ars wrhoasarh aao 
Sala relsi abn asabircn lex ax rapa 
howe ea ma wair rharaminaa msn 


eer nacre 


hot Jhay Se J elo +, yaa3; tAds D Napl? Loy: Joa JI 


A This ch. is in Ds e aar Doom. wel. — s, p om. — 3. X wee a 4. A this 5 ar 6 leaves 
ate los in A. — 5. Ms Lhes: — 6. Ms. ins. þæls duas epe Oy. 


out tlie labour of liis practices uuto a space of three years, he ended tlie course 
of his practices: ind he fell asleep and his holy body was buried and laid in 
this same monastery; ly whose prayers with those of all the saints who 
pleased the Lord may we all find grace in the day of judgment, and may the 
monastery which received his collin, with the other churches and monasteries 
whieh he erected in the mane of the Lord God of the ages’, be established to 


the glory ol the Holy Trinity unto the end. 
Phe history of the blessed Kashish bishop of the island of Chios is ended. 
NENT CHE FRETY-SKGUND. HISTORY, OF CERTAINS GREAT AND HOLY PERSONS CHIL- 
DREN OF EMINENT MEN 01 ANTIOCH. WHO DESPISED THE WORLD AND ALL THAT 
IS IN IT ANDP LIVED A HOLY GIRS IN JT IN POVERTY OF SPIRIT EN AN ASSUMED 
GARB (Gy n o). 
Holil not seem to be a right thing to withold this spiritual trallie also 


bose in Asiat see po aTa AS he was alive when eli 39 was wrillen. lie moist be presumed to have 
died qn OGG rd cedue tee CU, an Ds, 


[511] FIVES OTe PAVO) SS TIOCHENIS. 165 


SA ca Je dy jan Ae L$51a4. La; Ja so Lha eoo A ere ey 
fanaa" hilan creo “Om Ras. Ja? | 5e AJ Ss ee es) v zi 
JM vee NM a]soor2 <l; wd eS ‘19059 «o? «MI fatuo 
l sae JN. a aa JI yo Sep Jant, T JN Naa 
[520 Lj, oà JAD, pad Cd ON OS PP ot — SOTET, 
Nolans aco oom haa Dao Joa hasio gado | Seo LOH Na} 
Ladna bor Lal "Lais ead} Joe) :Luch pro Aaaa ulado 
"Lis aw) le P KOHL} fso yo: Loa Jas, Il -Joa soais 
Lz N ~~ faapo EN La "Waco oo Jon wou x. 
uoto] -— |a] - meh Kiss JN pòl = „Joa cooks! 
JN iso Vea” | oe Da Lo cies wo Joot oaa ask o: 
As) X DM Was Woo ens J.a2*.o Mussa T% jans ->an 
< JA 3ea3&. seo qan "oras eet} [Ks So ds e 


I, Corr. from Poe. — 2. M>. hitas. — gs Ms. bae — 4. Ms. with points. .— ^. M~. wass. 


besides and the great abundance of massed profits which spring from many 
persons to all who are desirons of the good trafie that is eouceryed with 
their lives and rejoice in the double spiritual profits which will arise from 
the persons (mpisozov) whose marvellous lihenesses we are about. though 
obscurely to trace by means of our contemptible words, by no means stalling 
more than what we received by report and aceurately learned from God's 
bondman who saw and was in close contact with these same holy persons 
(xcécmmov) and learned. the rest from them in secret and imparted it to me 
by repetition, who was a fellow-resident with ns for eight years OH the end 
ol his life, who for seven years went out in quest of the same persons (29250 
z^») of whom he had been deprived and from whom he had been separated. 
This perfect saint therefore belonged to a distinguished family cyévez) from 
the city of Amida in Mesopolamia, wearing the habit ecyzuxi of a eleta aii 
and his name was John. This man therefore during the whole of the re~i- 
dence with us in the royal eily we always saw shedding eopious fears and 
sobbing, so that. when we questioned him closely as to the reason of these 

L From Ihis we should suppose that he did not tell the story Ilt the omd os his S years in CT pve 


from Ihe words put. in the narrator's mouth Che story app ors d ve been foll itamediatel 
after the 7 years’ perezriualions. 


etd Ve 


166 KHIN OF EPHESUS. [512] 


- 


Lily aay exl) S Kal fuses 3$] y» [Maas Joa paoa - Kus. 
Ll «95 fre” was, ji) Jor hiwa dese] IN Los Jh p>! Le: 
fans] Noia? YP GN ais o JNa JAoslh3o frasaxs L? ya, No 
và Jal SX Dwa 45 AL ha Nsa Jans, ha Nispas ol, 
lad ope Jory ais Jats p S Joa [uXtso oan woot RADON 
Napis er} Jia, il ey | ras Kaas ful New fly vazal ful pool 
Lasa” re J Nes "Qs S220 jo . | oori3oo Jn dea Laila Kasano 
Iha Jiao [Nenana Moco «elo Kaoa fixo Nod eu] sal 
lees paaa pr [ie dK Lasan fraracfs, pol Muod JE: Nao 
Ya) ak eaa eee ANo "fly Jaana IRG col oase 
oà [sacs Jae ooo qaa Ao :o& loa Lana; hijas, baas] 
oo] Lace) apo Baw sul Be LD aad y Lja 


L Hore begins a frasi. in Fo seo Intr., p. vii. L 112 e (the preceding leaf being lost), trom whieh 
| supply illesible words and letlers, — 2. Ms. with points:. — 3. Ms. with poinls;. — 4. Ms. sose. 
Points e follow. — >. Ms. $26]2 


things, and especially with adjurations, he would weep bitterly, saying, 
« What have Pho say to vou? for L, unhappy man that | am. suffered a spiritual 
loss, and to-day it is now a space of seven vears that ] have been going out 
and going round Ihe peoples and Ihe countries and the cities, and I have not 
succeeded in finding t, insomuch that it was on this quest that ] eame to this 
roval city >. Wlien we questioned him as to that loss, he would tell us 
Ihe story, weeping and saying, « Lo! in the sight of God T say, my brethren, 
that E will not he to von in telling the astounding story of what } saw and 
heard in eertain perfeet persons and! from them. When I was in the city 
of Amida nine years ago*, and was constantly devoting myself to reciting 
Ihe services and to vigil in the holy church, E used lo see a young man of 
handsome appearance as in the garb (ozzgz) of a mime-actor (yivog), and 
wilh him moreover a young girl whose beauty cannot be portrayed and 
Whose appearance was comely aud marvellous accompanied him in the garb 
iynpx) of a courtezan (mva, ind they used to go about the city in. that 
assumed garb (ayapa) in order 10 deceive the spectators, lest anyone should 
pereelve and know what they were, and they used constantly to perform 


Do Mẹ ons — 2. This mast have been after the sathor left A mida (237 , and was probably nol 
mel before od) see end of eli. , 


[513] LIVES OF TWO ANTIOGHENES. 167 


ooo eO He Hes 2 «Nobel ooo wr Laz Ma lo Leo 
Ss -Ó vo nal Ssado Jazz aM — Liz] y-l 
bes [33e] [xa^ voor as O aLa Sox Lasand yl al 
JenLse . Jon. soka SA kauhaa ACA Joor papas Jaye 
wamo LAA o -ooa qA aso osos £D gore So r9) 
J AD) fools KAAS Q5 fasts ! Jos aN Nora Ss 
Ja JA sess, iSo 7-93 Jo e fasts «26 Jo E faas? ‘aspal | 
ooa paoa ol v» Leha aao ooa vus NOS Mjaa os) 
RIBS gjdo OOF wl a aso ooh 4S9, LOX, barm 
a pol] Yo 55223325 & aja V. o JNa, Annas «oos aao 
SN EA 0001 xoa aoo caus QNS fous! «ae JL E Cw, 
Sls và hoars danao aa, J ese: hasap amas] :KuJraa, 


y cà 93} Lias? |. Loasa paol, ápan, GOW ipao Dos po 


l. wo deleted follows in ms. 


drolleries (ra:yvidiz) and bulfooneries, being constantly in. the courts of the 
church like strangers, jesting at the ciergymen and everyone, aud. being 
hoxed on their heads by evervone as mime-actors (pivos), While at all hours 
of the day a large number of people surrounded them, chielly on account of 
Iheir marvellous appearance, and the comeliness of their faces (zgósozov, 
joking and playing with them, and giving them slaps (x4555»;) on their heads, 
but at nights men were not able to find out and learn where they slept, so 
that many of the lroward men, having been by the appearance of the young 
woman's lace (mposezov) ardently smitten and kindled with the passion. of 
desire for her, while they also made plans to fullil their desire in the dark- 
ness of night and commit fornication with her, wearied themselves and kept 
awake and watchful and went round all the streets of the city and its comers 
(yevix) to find her, and they were not able to do so; so that many of the 
distinguished men, having been smitten with passion, and being ardently 
inflamed with desire for her, begged the governor (#yznev) of the city to 
arrest her and set her in the street, which he indeed did immediately, and 
he sent and seized her to foree her lo stand im the street, so that when the 


man dressed like a mime-aclor (vives) who was with ler saw it le wailed 


PALA DOR cle NING CSE Sy i 


168 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [514] 


ho, lo ror SLAG], [xo e» gaio hs; Jes Sa] Jh 6e» Lax 
Jas «e JLono Jaca JRxopelo JNa cy HA '.Joass yoaoly Ll 
Jase. ot Nas) «30 alos Lipso Moss] Nasa p aao Joa aaas 
lanmo asoa, Jloonesel rad va Slo lk. £e raaa dale 
Lòs 4p» ad Jis Da, J l z S loa Like «toot Lanan Las; 
why] Jladx asco - Jlansy; Lanas Msas ia | Rw JN ei p 236240 
qa EG ee fans] sea» oh] lanso Unasas ual frofkardo 
«ao Jo ET GSS >; olo vel Jie loa Laa loa haaa 
tudi fins 
J oa Jile Leo Q5 aaoo Lasoo commas aA qe 59 No 
Lasag Joor pal “udor DD oD Jag po “as! aaor Nape 
9e ol yir a] + poll! YP HeN 2X3, EC NY Juas iios 
way b] cx MÀ p J; Jaang qe) pol 2e Ll Nos] 


i. Ms. with points." . — 2. Ms. om. slop. — 3. Ms. pl. (corr. F). — 4. Ms. Qus c5. Ms, wooro 


with a loud voice, and ran erying ‘She is my wife, and T do not wish her 
to stand in the street’, But a great and distinguished devout and God- 
fearing woman whose name was Cosmo! on learning it was distressed, and 
she sent and took her from the governors (726v) men and brought her up 
to her house. And, when she also too saw lier marvellous face (w20c@xov) and 
that she was wearing the garb (742) of a courlezan (zó2va), she continued 
admonishing her, saying : ‘Wherefore, my daughter, whose person is like 
a beautiful pearl, have you fallen into the mire of formeation, and wherefore 
are you polluting and staining. your soul and impairing your beauty ?’, so 
that, when she on her part heard these things, she continued weeping and 
saying: ‘Yes, madam, pray for me that God may draw me out of the mire 
ol my sins’. 

After these things they went back to their former habits, and. that lady 
did not learn what they were. And, while much was being said about 
them » (the blessed John would say), « and no one suceceded in discovering 
or learniug the resting-place where they slept at nights, 1 myself as if by the 
grace of God discovered it by my reasonings, inasmuch as I reasoned * These 


1. Dyakonov p. 370) suggests thal this may be the sister of Thomas the hermit p. 197 ; see Introd., 


Pa Seti: 


[515] LIVES OF TWO ANTIOCHENES. 


160 
<x “asl Linos <? |; £»o:z2.3 gon Nul x Ns lasiw brarcofs; 
gos os Lao; V> acu Ream soo Ly] Jos Moya pad wm) vd 
Spo val Joss sl Jf S so EE ood b] Gras Sano mo Q2 
eoe caseo JNa GX Loot flsaatsor [soy Lares odo soos 
TH (OL. Qra'su0 Loas a e : Kafas a) JL loa&5 
Nes Qeon Nos vxo fu] ol, SM Ja] JN JMadAs JN 
fre” MM) el whl » [aa Qe Mucor Gros Ju Do SA 
JN Jarra foots x. Jiass Jad [asao :uSo1 E2332 a vex LSS, 
“Noa aN roots Nfa A hl ol £2 hiad aad m0 oh 
230.0) «esl Mop Neo ias; JI SS uses Mas L? P» r20 
Jy Jhaso,> fusasds Jha po LOADS) a. soo noero Daas owt 
Voo] Sx aau volo axso JI ps TE So adea hes Noo 


ash iNo JE Le asrdsaia [isco ado ool araco JI p> 


1, Ms. ins. o% — 2, Ms. with points... 


persons who in garb (z7zvx) appear to be mime-actors (g£goz) are in actions 
spiritual persons’, and from that. time | began to observe them, and at 
evening time | posted myself behind them, keeping close opposite to them, 
while they, in order that no one should observe them and find. them out. 
continued the whole evening until the whole city was being gathered in 
going round many streets by a long course, going in by one street and 
coming out bv another, and crossing rough and dark places, so that I also 
followed after them at a short distanee, so that two or three hours of the 
night' were already past, and so, after the city had become still, they directed 
their course to the line of the wall, and mounted the wall, while I also was 
stealthily mounting after them. And, keeping myself close to a pinnacle 
of the wall, 1 stood up, and I saw that both placed themselves standing 
with their faces toward the east, and stretched out their arms to heaven 
in prayer in the form of a cross, aud after a time they fell upon their faces 
in prayer, and they stood up and again fell upon their faces in. prayer, and 
they stood up again and fell down and they went through the same form for 


1. Here again the hours seem to be rechoned from midnight, «ince the city ein hardly have been 
quiet at S or YPM: see p 209, ned, 


170 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [516] 


Leo ,5 +. 00tm 30,0 wis} Sa Dros Kyo b] y hooo Qaod, 
Laa] Jo. «09 Lisos Jiya x aay Wy oo ram Jos «oos bl 
wis! yo aed) JXsi JA-a a.a.o arth! yas ey caso 
OM banda bia Na] Iss Jasco Nl fro Loc NI 9 Jeans + ad 
Lamia yc May DA ast; Ku] jac» Lise Lasao wo 
Jsoüse Loot Naot oo» aa digh! Suaso Jory cà “pel oor 
SaL, bos urease edo fas] ais cards gaia Jy Juno [Ns 
Jl] Wy seuils v3 a» antl! So coped Lha JNa 
Jo oada Ja of l paul ol frasals Coonan L) Dan, 
Noaaiclo . as “Lasai, pol «992 pan) Lanman 2à x JoL] 
+3] T JNda Tuas oà jan was] » xe l [uot Loos LOOKS 
doo ha L5; beso pas paw! Lot er o ai]? Jad Snare, of 
gutia wilo an Jos aNu pars coin Sx A DA oa 9] : 
met RY nee Lain GX Daa cà polo - Jy Jas voe 


1, Ms. wilh points... — 2. Ms. gels. — 3. Ms. ins. stop here and om, after ®. — 4. Ms, eo. 


along time, and afterwards they sat down to rest, and thus I on my part ran 
and fell on my face before them, adjuring them by God the All-Ruler not 
to hide from ime the truth as to what and whence they were. And they 
on their side were alarmed and very greatly annoyed, saving, ‘Man, who 
are you and what do you want? Aud why do you want to prove us here? 
And what do vou want to learn from mime-actors (wines)?’ And, because 
| recognised the trouble which their minds felt, as il they had already been 
laid bare, | gave them a great and terrible oath, * No men shall hear from my 
mouth about vou as long as vou are m this city’. Then they were a little 
appeased, requiring at my hands that I should not be seen speaking 
with them by day or honour them or greet them, and should not be 
prevented [rom slapping (zossisan them as mime-actors (wives) as they said. 
And 1 gave them this promise. Then that man begged that young woman, 
saying to her, ‘Now that this our brother has found us out, because perhaps 
the Lord wished it so, since he himself also has regard to his life together 
with his sister, for it is twenty-lour years that they have been living together, 
and he is supposed to have taken her to wife, but both have been preserved 


Lolz) LIVES OF TWO ANTIOCIIENES. Gd 


Olas. NON Ca ja DA -hao S J| às. o Ks, Jhase00 Jland-> Loos. 
RSS Sct Ne fee Baa, Nao NI NI gs 
JNa} cy vor Sa J Naio aapio fotos Lewo Sipa Kixps0 

Ni? Jens ahi] po | «M wane od Jo] £2 vol have 
Moises | GSSe UNS: wre hac s e os ea wol, A oot * Shiro 
poly Lowe iu das Napa, Linares ose] yard [aso po Jlo 
ood slo Mos S S gA Soro alaan D0 cos Sa soloM 
bli hasl tpebdry us Dao ono ofp Ww» colo sors cx <l, 
LSN JN osa: oaas zo; JNa Jan [339,5 aoao 79» 
JL ads Pay Joa fial “Lod LXS; Gotare «oS v sul pasu -Loa 
lawl, woja 2 ois "eo was 2à [Nua aa 3e) re 
pte pd ets ein Sly “aul law Wh cre] BP cel oe 
Dys so 0 amas, Nano] y joe F <2 SY m SH as) fass 
Lise 7.2. ams} wiojoy Neo p20 e ala aco’! MM 


1. Ms, Nhac. 2, Ms. with points... — 3. Corr. from 12353254. 4. Ms, 0192225, but diacr. mark perh. 
deleted. — 5. Ms. evi — (6, Corr. froni a2: *- 


in the purity and holiness of virginity co the present time, therefore speak 
with him, and be under no restraint’. But I on hearing these things was 
the more frightened and alarmed, and | knew that they were in truth great 
spiritual persons and knowers of seerets. But the blessed woman answered 
again, saying to him, * Pardon. me, my brother. The priority is yours you 
speak’. But he again enjoined her, saving, ‘Speak with him, my sister, 
without eontention, and be under no restraint’. And. so the bondmaid of 
Christ began with sighs and affliction to speak to me about the world and 
about its deceitfulness, and about all its evil things aud the destruction ol 
those who go astray in it, and again about tts end aud dissolution, and 
about the future judgment, so thal I and they spent all the hours of that 
night in sobbing tears and with the word of life spoken by the same blessed 
woman, for what proceeded from the mouth of that blessed woman was a 
matter to cause awe-struck astonishment. Afterwards they dismissed me 
to go down from that place, saving, * Depart and go down, our brother, for 
we also are going down while it is dark, lest anyone perceive or recognise 


us’. And so l begged them to allow me to go up to them by night without 


o 


Qe 
eo rt, 


172 JOIN OF EPHESUS. [518] 
Au aa h Lal -JN Jo 5o oS goes vxo INL 
! ocot beso ado la Janan, Jan jo p20 Jie» ENS 
Jes" uta] Ww 20 oala Col Nad mo be Lips Ze x LAD 
p qlo RR vas] my WO ade Jl «oo. Aon As» Ns L? 
(SAN <+] < EET „oooi rewi] culo Loo LOL AD 
aab flo eds iN aed. Jip Os Nl HY [Soo Nelo eel 
HAs $n]. hoa Ramses "Qh uuu edes edo ssclo S 
al, ol coors Maar] pao B Orde «ue yaan J Snare Kine 
-Lho 24 20J). ooh. / P aia, -poaa Nao Sy os «opel 


tho JN, dus oes: JS Tacos MO xL ve «Nl 
cel Lua haao) JaN, lias BA e hal, me «o0 bee 
LA waa. p] e Mesa Jos. Jas] “soo Ls Ne No 
al <% SAN pach "aoo Gs | vis jassa po pl jas) [M 


l. Ms with points. — 2. Ms. vaod. — 3. Ms. aon — 4. Ms. 52 (corr. F) — 5. Ms. ins. Nlo 
SH deleted, — 6. Ms. @oesatas. — 7. Ms. pal (corr. Fj. — 8. Ms. pee 


restraint; and, having strictly cautioned me, they gave me permission. And 
so Ewent down from them, in fear and in great joy, as they too went down 
to the court of the church, and when day broke they were to be seen acting 
mimes before everyone. But on the second night | waited for the hour, and 
went np again to them, and, having cast myself upon my face, | continued 
entreating them not to conceal from me what they were, and what and of 
what nature their service was, and what their names were and how the 
names ran. They on their side say to uie, ^ Do you also give us your word 
that vou will keep truth to us to keep our matter seeret, and not cause ns 
distress and give information about us, because we like being in this city which 
isa city of Christians, and we on our part will thenceforth not hide anything 
Irom you’. And on my giving them my word as they required of me they 
said lo me: ‘Know then first that our names are Theophilus and Maria, and 
we are by our birth (yéves) from Antioch the great, children. of men of emi- 
ueuce in the eity, and we were both only children of our parents: but how 
u was that by God's help we came to adopt this garb (5725&x) hear Tor your 
edification and for God's glory, When} Theophilus the sinner was a little lad 


of about fifteen yours, I was ordered by my lather to take five horses and some 


[519] LIVES OF TWO ANTIOCIIENES. 173 


! Jota: pe Na waslo Odo Lass [ase ox aa] Lis 
Ge |L- fas er Aado land LAD Mes jx ju] 
La zx"; Napo Lie - ISAS Kadse po Sash], ps] waslo «xl; o> 
Lao; <> Napas roo “Jäs oo Lasky jas” mo HOY Jas flo, 
jas, «e» Kass w? Nà; SONGS DAL € waco! » hawo Ma'yo 
Joa y» hea L So yko, jams p~ han Moo «jx. 


Lh 


q% Jya So «20» F202 300 [Seca soo| Åi SAAS 
Mapa Qo Aaaa a o5 nouo sfiasy Lady orty MET 
l sas of Jia dD (N!) vh aly uaaa LAAS hilo Lorsolo 
po JL anias awaa AA Maxoo ! E JI oe: opolo 
og Joa 1.504) 9.3 wo oà flay D> aaas Jya „oà Lans udo woos 
walo ..Joot RAD A KD haoro -joa waa o) Wee o 
“apo ores “sade Nfs foouy - Johar fano Laus] S 


1. Ms. with points. — 2. Ms. with points :. 3. Ms. ins. Sd deleted. — 4. Ms. SIE: — 5. Ms, 


Om. — 6, Ms, eoo. — 7. Ms. with stop following. 


slaves, and go out to the village before daylight. And, when I on my side 
had risen during the night to go down to our stable (2225209) in which were 
many horses to take some and go out as I had been ordered, and when I had 
arrived at the door, | looked and saw alarming rays of light coming out from 
the chinks of the door and from the windows: and, having seen it from a 
distance and been frightened and thought that our stable (672407) was on 
fire, Į eried out. And Ð ran and looked through the chinks of the door, and 
| saw a poor man standing on the horses’ dung on which he used to sleep 
with his hands stretched out to heaven, aud rays of light proceeding from 
lis mouth and from each of his fingers, and the whole building richly lighted. 
And, having seen and marvelled, 1: then said to the slaves with me, « Do 
(voui' see that glorious hight?» And they said « We have not seen any- 
thing». And Teried to the stablemen (6722242193) to rise and open the door. 
And, when that poor man heard my voice, he threw himself upon that 
dung, and had already buried himself, sinee he was in fact naked, and was 
clad in rags only, and he had begeed the stablemen (726729195) on account 
of the severity (avzyz) of the cold of winter that he might come in and bury 


himself in the horses! dune, in order that he might warm himself ii il and 


Iie MS Otte 


aes Sa Pn iar 


17^ JOHN OF EPHESUS. [520] 


«Deo xe» eM ve £2 ero A> «Mo Joos DAS - fpr; 
Jooto „h>; oà fiaa Been Ff Soror] wapo OL&9J "Jeso AX aM 
Lap Jeu esule JE! ejes eM po P JN odas hass 
Jal soy po haa od eoe TAS Ss Naas Mjoso MS - an Moo 
„aeaa so hailo Lass rads cà Jobs o L? base L? x3 N39 
plo M Joa tA oA p2 :eot Na] fiseo soo] Lasas? q% SQ} 
Maas! Joo, Lais] DA - Lo, QNML| hans, :GM wana updo 
ses soe flops bl suse bl Sya fases Des b] SIS Nod 
Sw» Aoa Jes pes Li] eo NL y MA] ase ber elis hamo | 
J: oS L| [xL po so Qoo*-» ioko rods JL] [sexe om 
Moor DM » JL is £20 Jis Ns aM AG] ssa200 Lior <>% L? yle 
Lano XM» opa) uM pa] aD qe bl wie jh Jewo o 
vans; Aado LAA oot Mapa’ pad p20 pas L? SSsarseo 
ro Lalo Wks Maaco Lo ws NS Ls ups fixes sob) wpe’ - pad 


1. Ms. with poinis’.. — 2. Corr. from hho 3. M>. aSeblo. 4. Ms, Os. — 5. Ms. peo corr. F`. 
— à. A few lelters at the beginning of the first 3 lines of this page are illegible and are supplied from I. 


sleep. But, when he heard our voiee, mine and that of the slaves, and threw 
himself down and drew in his hands, then that great light was obscured, 
and darkness Tell over the whole building. And, the stablemen (¢t25)2200¢) 
having run and kindled torch-lights and opened the door, | went in and ran 
and fell at that poor man’s feet trembling and beseeching and adjuring him 
by God who made heaven and earth and all that is in them to let me know 
whence he was, and what he was, while he on his side continued repelling 
me and saying : « Sir, pardon me, for I am a miserable poor man, and on 
account of the severity (gváyxa) of the winter I had begged permission to 
come m al evening time and sleep and warm myself in this dung; and from 
a poor man of this kind what can you learn? » And when I on my side had 
thrown mysell at his feet and was adjuring him, and they were all amazed 
at me. while | swore to him « I will not rise from this place and you shall 
inform me of the truth », and when I continued to press him greatly and he 
saw that I would not leave his feet he said to me, « Dismiss your slaves and 
let them withdraw and E will speak with vou». And, when I had dismissed 


the slaves and the stableinen (esa6Xéet0s) telling them to go outside, he began 


521 LIVES OF TWO ANTIOCITENES. e 


: oot x? wd el les es y xe ooo XAR Jia» lossy, Jojo 
-proiaas jos EX. DA J] su Na] xot poles pee e L| ads 
Kod DM ol je» wr P ES T EN Loa hot Ix yo LS 
[*1232W oot h Ly Jo ful eso ly JNS JNa “od 
b>, jaN; yards Wee: qc .5 2$ Py Me a er Hanus 
Jap bl: JX, Js fas Lolo [sew x woal, ius GN 
55 GKulo sooo? Fumasacie x eo bes sos Na] Jj Lanao 


oo 


copay as JIN] wits] US opas pao foods fnaslo basos fas] Wis 
JSP Nye Kasia ful «Joo Lasag yoo doses pel flows oS 
fsa sy oia p deae cdo JLo Mouse ..JocSw s Je. 36 rane 
Nil jj] pol ha su] Joe sei) So Mac saasa akas"o 
PRS we „Lans wd, wua ssa ups [aot etary J Lace for aM 
va Sl; JI aso y^ op ado x3 II Ma] Ll ^ Jor DS rho) 


l. Ms. wilh points... — 2. My. with stop following. — 3. Ms. «230053 =! 8 ins, above line. — 
1. Ms. 9 


to say, « What, my son, did vou see in me that vou were so insistent with 
me?» And | said to him, « A vision of rays of fire proceeding from your 
mouth while you were praying ». fle on his side said to me, « It is mot 
I. my son, who am anything of this kind, but because God wishes for your 
salvation and wishes to bestow this sight upon vou it appeared to vou in 
this wav >. But, when I went on continuing to press him with terrible oaths 
that | would not give any information or disclosure to men about him while 
he lived, then he began to relate a story to me saving : « Since God wished 
to choose vou, my son. that vou may flee from the world and live a life 
without care, listen. As for me. the sinner and poor man whom von see, 
my name is Procopius, and ] am son of great and distinguished people oi 
Rome. And, when my pareuts betrothed a wife to me, and wished to hold 
a marriave-feast for me according to the worldly custom, and when the 
preparations had been made, I for mv part left. them and went on board 
ship, and hy the guidance of God T arrived in these eastern countries, having 
taken into consideration the evils of the world aud its distresses ind tempta- 
tions, and now lo! | have heen as you see me for no small number of vears. 
And now, my son, hear Irom me myself the poor man, and know what is 
ni store for vou. Lot you “are. the only child of your parents, and they 
betrothed a bride to vou who is also the only child of her parents. Kuow 


* 350 [^ 


176 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [522] 


ASA Jas] gas ha Juss Da sy ‘onward! vor Noras] 
Wyo Lah Joi. Myon: Ml fs), lo Neth] pops RECTUS 
«uS Jigs [ee Loaleo JLexzm fonds qx: fords; Lalo Jo 
SHO or X905 Suo -hanso [inde M oo JT yel oso 
slo ahis muro ^ Laroto L LOHMIADSO Qoo xu JNa Lords 
NS o yi IN, S No y ael]; wi JN» opacoo/ 
waar £o ‘ Jlarsoofoo fifa francls waso wsha [iso 2909 Ll, 
ECCL Deu ENERO] q) Jos Kk sso, JNa; Je wohl 
azan |J] pro's oS Kuyoha] Re SM Eu ces Tx SJ. Laas 
x4 og laana ULaspo oe <% ab Pes Hy! ot anolo -oponas 
wot fon -Jon ^s wo] je eM oyoNa] .saa«aos9 Jo, Lapo Jasad 
ol A» PEE |Soso D NM Je-s Jl yas [a9 Ww» Spe je» 
l| x Mosen oul pal C» Bs] fopsco i2 ude: Nul $e 
ere vlad Nol wpolso of Kiuas) oce» Kul Wee flo La [sys 


i. Ms. wilh points *.. — 2, Corr, from 19125, marg. [Matas 3. The ff. to «o. bU (p. 522, 1 5.) ts 
missing in F, a leaf being lost. — 4. Corr. froni N ;5sol.ls. — 5. Ms. E — 6. Ms. wilh stop 
following. 


therefore that during this year the parents of both of you will die, and both 
the properties (o%sta:) will fall into your hands; and, if you wish to live a 
religions lfe and without care and the ruin of sins whieh much real and 
personal wealth brings 1o many, dispose of all your property (oòcia) and sell 
it and give to the poor and needy, and free all your bondmen, aud give them 
presents to support and provide for them, and similarly dispose of the house 
and the property oòsiz) also of the young woman who was betrothed to you, 
since she will acquiesce m vonr desire in whatever vou say to her, and so 
take her and go ont in an assumed warb (sy7ux) and in strange countries, 
hiding the great profit of exeellence which you are earning, Test it be 


a 


-uatelied from you, that thus vou may five the spiritual life ». But Ifor my 
part promised to carry out all that he ordered, and | begged him not to 
deprive me of the sight of him, and abandon me and depart. And the holy 
blessed man of God Procopius made me a promise, saving, « This know, 
that, as long as you do not show me the appearance (z205ozov! of amy respect, 
or show that vou have any regard Dor me, and leave ime as Tam, that I may 


sleepin this dung, aud are uot constantly speaking witli me or approaching 


[523] LIVES OF TWO ANTIOCIIENES. 177 


A -— he -r Jd NS UN «ot [Sas uw NL deu bap 
je» Noa QM) hooo JL. E wy Nat Jea sel Jl ales. xul 
“Laoi - ons Kuso re JNa do pad of cata: INardpso oes 
. oN aa «oh Jord! ‘Kas dros Lopa + JKrswos olarsliso vxo 4l 
SONA GM Radia ol, Jana] - yopsaddo up oó Ioco 0,029 pelo 
abosaso od. Xo alaa Ps. MoMa] 2o «|» Woo + prahas Jos 
bso Jor «ole Ns, Jh» frm MS PADIS +004 loeo: oa] soo 
J ja ajo sXe ol) J jNBzakm Jlasless cir rm 49 » jao 
Weder A pss from INST UW os I lie belo hen! 
qH! M.-n-90.-.00}-9 a] faso, oS qi facto Loot y 2 Ljan 
JH] hanl yo «5 Mal E~ flo jia CS Nl AN ba Se» +, plas 
wh! Jou Be QJ? xui Nano a> ka -Lasam haro] yl J 
ls d sp S pel fet cr fg N Jio Kansas 


l. Ms. with points ..— 2. Ms, Seadoo. — 3, Ms, bes — 4, Corr. from làna. -.5. Ms. om. pl. 


marhs, but ins. under line, 


me before onlookers, vou shall see me as long as vou observe these things. 
But, if you practise any of these things toward me, you will uot see me 
again in this hfe ». And so [ used to observe times, and make obeisance 
to him in secret places or outside the city, and receive consolation [rom his 
spiritual admonition, until in the same year the parents ol both of us died, 
and we did everything as that saint ordered, even as my spiritual sister 
acquiesced in my purpose in everything, since she too received the privilege 
of the prayer and the sight and the blessing and the admonition of that saint, 
and we went out in pursuit. of the life without care and have so continued 
to the present time, while neither ol us has been besmirched by carnal inter- 
course, and this has not been revealed to anyone, and no other except vou 
knows our secret, which we think has happened lor your profit. And now 
we ourselves say to vou the words of our holy father Procopins, that, as 
long as you keep faith with us, and do not look upon us before men except 
in the guise (27zpx) of mime-actors (pzpoz, under which we are concealing 
our traflic, lo! we shall be in this city and you shall see us, but, if vou show 


any other behaviour toward us, know that vou have heen deprived of the 


* 


A3 vU. 


178 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [524] 


qas Lisa? oso ot Saa Laa Loar ol, Jio Teer Le < 
Joa LN caro Jie Jo jlaaswol Jl - Jos, JS JMscdsas 
ya K pas JN, hasy yl je je p20 lo Ne Joa Jats p i 
Jo runai JN; hl yo! coor qrsioio MI «Sors Nooo 
wanas imah) Qoo joo cs yl alaz, hap Nooa wpa 


5 


fusca. a Me ayl foul NS "JI «olo . fu psc esl «Do Qao 


Laaa) vol, «cota d «2l Maas plo pois as ll 23, us Sas 


Jes. p Cx wihy oaas aajo reals] «2o! y NS 20 wi 
ps <r pads oopan jlaso oot pad ctsoha! ool «Pg wei per 
MS) e oa Aada ©] po fare Poan vno sj Ne 


1. Ms. Do ie. — 2, Ms. om. pl. marks. — 3. Corr, from eol. .*, Ms. wilh points.. — 5. € corr. 
from l 


sight of us in the body’, which indeed happened ». 1n this way therefore 
the blessed John was repeating all these things in our presence with terrible 
oaths by God without addition and without diminution, while he wept with 
sobs and said : « After | had been delighting myself in the conversation of 
the saints for the period of about one year, and they had been great in my 
eves as angels of God, and I had not dared to make use of insult toward 
them as they desired, they left me and departed from the city of Amida, and 
| never again discovered where they went, and it is to-day seven years that 
| have been going out seeking them, and have not again been able even to 
hear news of them». We ourselves therefore from the descriptions of them 
and the time of their disappearance which he repeated before us, when we 
directed our steps to the desert of Egypt', gained the privilege of seeing 
them, and of passing a night with them ? outside the city of Thella*, and we 


enjoyed their holy conversation, while that young woman also said to us 


l. He seems to mean that he saw them hefore the above story was told him and from it identified 
them, His last visit to Egypt was in 551 (introd., p. v, whieh would make the event fall white he was 
-HIE in Amida, if he had already beard the narralive given 9 yrs. a'terwards p. 512). Moreover 
Ihe ref. lo the lime seems to imply that he saw them soon afler they left Amida, 2 Wl this is true, 
itis strange Chat he tells their story secondhand, and 1 suspect that the statement is made in order 
that he may nob appear to depart from the rule of nol retating lives of persons not personally known 
lo him, though he mas well have seen a couple whom he supposed to be the heroes of the story. — 


3. Gonsdantiui. 


[525] LIFE OF PRISCUS. 170 

wo tats Loo Ah po Sad . prod furor Sool Jfs cese] peers, 

e 

Sut rxa^Ba aiai sins hard Ali 

Whaammaa ann dala rc alra mascara 
ere Lr wonsacrdsa darsan ay ma wair 


reale ala rida arw Wduand aah 


^O) D£0,19 


Laag «oo. soo funders oo ud do Qa Lon Gi ol 

Loa JAN Lo; Jes ees Jlos N30. Dado oot Na] Son M30 eo xao 
„joa poao Jos; JXssosks q3, Bleo w? m> yol rA 
asl «2o ype Ix fy = 2 Ce aad = JNoia> os e 


1. Ins. under line. — 2. Corr. from le 


three times, « Fear not lor the Lord is with vou wherever vou go », and 


thus we departed [rom one another. 


(The history of certain great and holy persons children of eminent men of 


Antioch, who despised the world and all that is in it aud lived a holy life in it i 


poverty of spirit in an assumed garb (552), (s finished, 


NEXT THE FIFTY-THIRD HISTORY, OF THE DEVINE BLESSED MAN Piscis, ! 


we came to the conclusion that this was rather (4323s) one of those poor in 

spirit to whom a blessing is given by our Lord?, and he eondueted. himself in 

this wav in spiritual knowledge in order to attain to excellence, Then, 
| 


having learned that he did not beg for anything from anyone, we sent him a 


1. The beginning is lost. — 2. Matth., v, 3. 


NM ea 


Pe pastas 


180 ACHTEN: OF EPHESUS. [526] 
lot r og peih fas) ons ops Jò paa polo copasams oA Joouy 
Jr Mens w upa aaah Jh pa seen frase Jipa yal 
saaana AS Ssoly wy oN Joo woos] Jos eds Jio] Sido 
Jage <% rol p [usa x! 90 Kins o [30230 = who Yo upa 
ko “hay No] a ha Sos oM xl p .JKx0asd Dad js 
saaa, hoa JMojas y. I wal, o vx] x? oo Lunnas aM Ku! 


Jl «m Ji bl od n, do] piosaso Jhsdo JM em JN] «uo 


e haas X Kal 1 o4. pol o aad ey o£ exl ha So 
|a ào Jess or con (xeu) «6 pM J jas P owe) Jl Sos 
elo Jl] cà han Juscio opao Lasas ~ S220 otpa! B32 we} og 
oo . 1004 Lams oot Lascoss d ks] me vot aor» o > 
we A haamo soo] XS, unus DA on sso LJN; "coi 


1, Ms, om, stop. 2, Ms, 0,0. 


present of one tremissis by a certain gentleman who was occupied with usin 
God's service, that it might assist him to supply bis needs, and in order that 
we might thereby discover the object that he had before him. But this man 
who was in very truth poor in spirit on seeing the tremissis began to run 
away at a rapid pace, since he was in fact not advanced in years; and the man 
who brought the tremissis to him began Io run after him, adjuring him to 
stop. But the blessed. man, having put a distance between himself and 
many (2)', stopped on account of the adjurations, saving to him, « Wherefore, 
man, are vou worrying yourself and worrying me the poor man? » He satd to 
him, « The abbot (466a3) sent you this present because he heard that you were 
m nerd, Take it and supply vour need ». That man said « For my part | 
do not need this. But say te the abbot (22622), Run that vou may attain’. M 
vou have one follis, I will take it ». Then, having seen that he had run away 
from the tremissis, he gave him ten folles; and he on his side stretched ont 
his band and took one follis, and ran away. And so that man came, and 
related all these things to us. Then we were assured that that poor man was 
a spiritual person, and a bondman of God, and was poor of his own will Tor 
the sake of eternal life. Alter these things in the time of the winter-cold, 


l. Lean make nothing else of this. We require ‘pula greal distance. between himself and his 
pursuer’. It is probably a phrase tor * run. very fash’. V. D. and L. have ‘procul’ for the whole 


clause. Loses o Exe. 


[527] LIFE OF PRISCUS, iSi 


AN ety NS maa eter see p Joao, asian 345 x 
we Kiso may of «nao r oX hay pad ipso „Jiono Lrslas 
porsche Dy: ex] p a Re 2oas] poa Jpn CLE JoNa> 
nial gam 05 vor OFS ous hanan QM AG] aaa uscd Je 
o £35] TA ipao 3j Joao, alosa Dado [5a DAS aad); 
1D, Lool, Subs Lask flo ipa GKasoy, a oD pool D, o 


T>, 064 han “pa ey 4! x00 Gans; aakh) J [iso Les) 
030 Joa works! Lago Anan DA - od Jao be oD A 
Lanas Je oe Joa Mols y cea. T pao Losaao M) Cd 
Lisso firs], Ji Nia, E? Lao Nu sw Jae «2o RAM OD - 051 
Jaana Hs waa saa of Jila ol; has? aaa Od laas 
basa woop | «X30 JLo p Le p> Okap . Joa yoo Daas <% p 
Lops yel Joa £123» eia We ecl], Ja: Jopu wire qo 


l. Wrillen again and erased. 


having seen that he was uncovered and sore bested, we bought him a tunic 
and a cloak, and sent them by that man, begging him to put them on and 
warm himself during the winter. But he on seeing them turned his face 
away, and showed displeasure against him. saying, < Go yonr way, man, 
wherefore do vou worry me the poor man! » The man who was sent by us 
answered him, « The abbot (2222:) out of charity and beeause of the hardness 
of the winter bought them and sent them to you ». [le on his side says to 
him : « Go say to the abbot (2662:), Send things that last, and do not try to 
concern yourself about stripping naked lest vou be stripped naked! ». And 
so he would not consent to accept them. And from that time the man who 
was with us began to mark times and observe him, because he too was an 
earnest and zealous man, and by his birth (yévoz) a Cappadocian, Aud one 
day, as was that poor man's custom, he weut seeretly outside the city to some 


enclosed garden-land hidden by trees and reeds to prav; insomuch that 


that gentleman observed him, and secretly went oul after him, standing 


facing him; and he saw him standing in prayer with his hands stretched out 
to heaven, and suddenly an awe-inspiring spectacfe that was laid upon his 


face (marora and Mashed like lightning, and rays of tire were proceeding 


i. The meaning perh. is thal whoever wears earthb clothes will eventually b: Tell naked throuel 
their wearing out. V, D. aud Ls *eurave nudatum’ is nol iu the Syr. 


182 JONN OF EPHESUS. [528] 
Mosel, Jie JX.) JNaso A90 «36 0004 qaa Jia fardyo 


JL— be Jorn 120 Ja; Jiao ofS Ho + SA plo p omw DS 
Sx soas Da Daso cwuJll] Joa Jp J,a = Lam oa> oi Jay 


Jao S 49 ds fofus Wer ]Lle wao yao Do joo ASG 


e» gx ea ey JMsejo soos Ns elus qe s] Lal jail 
paw! Jes A hao aaoo oaaao Ns aAa] Jae aian 
ol JL J, -hams cos o Npa joy. ofdo bo ..[" Sas 
plo Naas [ie p Nopo aoi aajo a ayo yo JNa 
aa" yasil, Malo Naaa) cok J, Lal Noso Mams oà Jars 
JL: à Jopa «ce 30,300 wJjo anas p noD [sens cay foa opaa 
pA AG So Dao -Joa y" Jos] onan! Syl <? LASN 
oS pelo Nan JS wpe a Gr og a Qe Lio Jas 
Hy So] Ss Gast; -Mioss sanns io fray Dad fro So; 


from his face (xodewrov), and an awful bow of fire that was stretched out above 
him while he stood within it, anda great light surrounded him. And, when 
that man saw this awful spectacle on that poor man as he was praying, he was 
frightened, and fell on his face on the ground. And after a little time he rose 
and fled and came to us at a great pace, shaking and trembling and weeping; 
insomuch that we ourselves were alarmed at the sight of him, and were brought 
to a state of sudden fright, inquiring what was the cause of his agitation and 
fright. And he swore to us by God the Ruler of all the ages, « 1 saw all this 
spectacle on that poor man, without falsehood or any exaggeration; and my 
heart quaked, and my limbs shook, and | fled, leaving him standing thus i 
that awful splendour, and 1 fled', so that I never again had the power and 
the boldness to lift my eyes toward him. » And during the whole of the 
day he was in a condition of stupor and tremor and perturbation from that 
awful spectacle ; but at night he went and found him in the place where he 
used to sleep, and he fell at his feet, weeping and trembhne trom his fear. 
jut the blessed man knew the cause of his fear, and said to him: « Where- 
fore, man, did you come oul after my poverty, to inquire into things which do 


not concern you? ».. And, adjuring him by the living God, he continued 


I. Sie Syr. 


A ETE E OL ESSE lo: 
li», oras) oM Joa aasi Lite Jodl oiv [ease 5o 
wad ol E J fas? iN, Nw oM oa əl axlo saou] 


wa? Li hl J, p30 Ji Læs, ma} x [SUNT aset M! OOF NEN 


DS Ne», polo oV [30230 e alas Aus we! oo ha] was Ji m 


naM hamo hamal, sali eos gS ato sas aah Jo wall J 
efle» Lb) aoliss5.o Jad say QOXXM, do jeans Soro 
qH Bas Jl- caasa Dl swo holy Nl Jpn Joas Ja JLarnnsaso 
hex laS dd. [Nas <>) Jo Ade xA» Ahaa Loa ess Es] 
wie gaa Ao pas 9 pa vihja% -JN o0, T ML vrao 
Ns] Jot ottano osos Ltrs x3 pe SO [iso Ade gatai 
eM Ra] fade ws) Ar Naa <% Sci JIN Sse NS Sk T ks 
aaa Waa wul Mido sOQ.9ouuse fs] s exe; 2à Aafaa as 
„aaau [io o! Oei Se «lh ‘and! wajo LX alias flo 
o$ han M wd oor» «Mà «^t or^ ope lanaa ules Je. Ys 


l. In erasure 


beseeching hin to inform him what he was. Aud he also required oaths from 
Him that he would not make any diselosure or give aay imndorinaltou lo men 
about him. And he on his side said è. Only Trom the abbot 76640: | eannol 
conceal it; buat te others T will ive no tiformation whatever, Then he 
answered hini, adjuring him aud saving : c Do nob omake demands or 
Inquiries of me about many things: it is enough Tor von to knew that bana 
stranger and à poor man, and for the sake of the hope of ins. eternal fife Faun 
endring labours and bulfetings in strange kinds. and inthis poverty in whieh 
vou now see me; and not T only, but we are seven brethren who are scored ly 
labouring in this fashion. and onee inthe whole week we meet together in one 
place. and receive cousolation in one anothers company, and comfort aud 
edification: and thus each of us returns to his phe amd to his employment. 
| have given vou the information; see thal vou do not rake vourself the cause 
alter moving from this eity. m whiehl 1 have mucli peacefulness. and especi 
ally the fact that Eam reekoned a madman by them. and there ts no one who 
speaks with me or who worries me. Vid beg the abbot 726%: that. thonsh 
these things are huown to him, he will leave me as bran. and uot show anv ltl 


ference Lowürid [EE GS; The DAU who Wits with Ip havin reposted all these 


E ASO oe ele DX = d pu I 


T 23: 


[74 1 


hb 


184 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [530] 
„hanas JKisoa.y bea JaA Jib J. p30 NER E Lipia + ASAD) 
„Aaso Gro vl yn M de V5 wong] flo par 5e so 
Skala VD J-a p30 wad joo fara wo Jal) boas JanS exo ey _ 
JKsxodsas haas yl :ji2cnso oós odo Joa Dyl, Lel «9» où hay 
maal, dS p30] yro og „aaa y We] bl) re NJL Jods; 
MoNsle fara, Nw] [uae Soy o! pol IX LADS’ Loot JNa? 
eM wel «Jio pod ad 2px» o Juss] Ll oe po Jya lamas 


a hay JL? p Liss] ool] Jhzee Ma %0 + ppd Jasos Utuaw wads 


e», Jodi Nolo Nopa 7J 30030 Ja Joab. asso] >a x0 iog 
Dao Jlo an vhu VAa <> n alas ey volo :o3à Laaa 
cae JAN. [o No DSA Aon Jes «2o oaa Da, oo 


V. Corr. from Srl. — 3, Corr. from [3605 0. 


things to me, I sent and begged him, if possible, to come to us secretly at sup- 
pertime, and eat with us', and he would not consent, sending me a message 
that we should attend to things that are helpful and lasting. One night I was 
suddenly attacked by the disease of fever; and in the morning, when the man 
who was with me who used to go to that poor man saw hin’, as he swore 
with fearful oaths by God, « Before | on my side spoke to him, he first said 
tome: ‘Theabbot (266522) was attacked by fever during the night. Go say 
to him, « Wherefore did you eat dry food and drink a vinegar-posset (zexz)* 
with cold water? »'.. Aud, when lon iny side said to him, * Sir, who showed 
vou this", he said to me ‘My heart showed me that he did so, and in conse- 
quence of the vinegar and the cold water he fell il »; so that, when that 
man came, and informed me of these things, E was struck with great astonish- 
ment and wonder, and | gave thanks to God who dwells in his saints. With 
regard to many other characteristic things which that man used to relate that 
he saw in that poor man, and moreover that one of his companions came 
to him and saw him with him, aud he hunsell refused to speak to him, in 
consequence of the large number of these we lave on account of the length 


L As this was nol later than 542 (see below), J. was probably living in the house of Probus (see 


Introd., p. vi). 2. The sentence is lefl unfinished, and the sense completed in another form. — 
3. This word posea) is not known in Gh., butthe Syr. implies a Gh. form. 


[531] LIFE OF CAESARIA. 18 


JXu sa à» oò [aso ojos jas hoo wl sh De 
LAL vc ral: mage gtask] eA duo wl p20 Alo 
Jot saas Moone spy Neo eor paul! wel po col 
va] J| ease Sos "ase eo JA] JL 6.200 Joas [55 blass Ns. «aeo 
WIENS duct; Nad jose Nuss of foi; Jaat do 


wana role napa EER. Ani 


ins rhusaba aaia erwi hard aah 5084 
ma duraduna duria hini ran’ reita 
shale alra riras 


JLN}, Naal ol .Mulsjos ans jaAa, < ep Da loo JI 
sJIaaSo, JNa; Lacs © 2À JNa; pe] Gis Proce Joi Pe Jya 


l- Ms. l. — 2. Ms. om. 9. — 3. Ms, [doada 


of the history refrained from speaking. But, wheu we had departed to another 
place, that samt ended his course in the same city aud was buried; and, 
when we came aud heard of it, we were much distressed at having been 
deprived ol his society, even at second-hand. Aud we made great endeavours 
to discover the coflin which held his holy remains; and in consequence of the 
great pestilence which had occurred’ and the numbers that were laid above 
him we could not do so. These things we have recorded for the glory of 
God who strengthens and helps all that trust in him. 


The history of the divine blessed man Priscus is ended. 


NEXT TUE FIFTY-FOURTII HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED CAESARIA THE PATRICIAN Ë, 


WHO BEGAN AND TUROUGHN GOD'S NELP ENDED IIEROICALLY AND EXCELLENTLY. 


The history therefore of this woman also, great before God and before 
men, was oue that could not but excite great admiration, a woman who from 


a great roval race? brought herself down to humiliation undertaken for 


1. 542. — 2. To whom a large proporlion of the extant letters of Severus is addressed. — 3. A nalive 
of Samosata can hardly have come of an imperial family; bul hec husband may have been of imperial 
descent. 


186 JOUN OF EPHESUS. 15321 
Jsanco] Lado .-'Jloperado MAN LH] fauce Lino Jot XQdso; fasarad 
Jl qio asco xil NS a 201 y Ao aA lo Koti Jhaspos90 Jes; 
<>? Jsasy flrs pel -ha JINisads aburals Jisas ym) giaa 
«2040 .J*asàs. [51a2Xo Joris, Ja 33 NS, yl Jn2os Ja». jx 
Daaa JRassad sod bila. yadai, wl LaS yaspa <5] vi~ 
Le V0 ca Iag + Loot Lyons [aoo gwasa JNN Jot 
e ae T . 0l Jos dal JNa Parson 


n Jo, — S bja p Janel TENE JNa Lipina) aS p pcos 


JNasash, Jaxoh Jans qos Stone! o Joa La; Jluaso .Mudssoh! JNa; 
Jlazaixo Jac L5:aso JM J es^) JNN Jlaxss [Naso 
oBausil] law Jl» fosaatsy Jyo poly ANd Njia Jass cao pad; 


lL. Ms. om. © — z, One ui two leave- losl. 


the sake of God and the promised life and! to a mean position, and betook 
hersell to the habit (¢y4u%) of the solitary and monastic life and sought refuge 
miU. In admiration therefore and confessing that we are not capable of 
compassing the beauties of the history of this blessed woman. we set 
ourselves for the sake of God's glory and the profit of the hearers to record 
as it were à small measure taken from the sea of spiritual riches, addressed 
to those who love matters of spiritual profit, This divine blessed) woman 
therefore, who was called by name Caesaria, and by her birth (yévoz) vame 


originally from the city of Samosata” 


to do, when we cune to ler the in city of Alexandria’; so that when she saw 
us she was filled with great joy, and received great. consolation. But we 
found her engaged in severe labours of recitation of service and of quietude 
aud intense supplication, and constant pravers and frequent genuflexions and 


iseetieisin beyond ineasure, and especially in the vase of a woman like this 


I, Ms. om. — 2, When Sev., Nelecl Leffers; N, 7, was wrillen, C. wished to leave her husband and 
live in asectie hie, but S. dissuaded hei. Either Therefore he was unsuccessful. or her hüsband 
alterwards died. 3. A deal or two leaves lost, see Trdrod., p. vite 4. Hardlys on his U' visit in 535, 
as Dyakonov (p. 47) supposes, but on his 27 iu dA. I8 € had adopted the ascelic life in Sey.'s Bielie, 


one would have expected botit some mention ot il in his lelters.. ee ulso p. 038. n. 2. aud. p. 255, 11. 1l. 


[533] LIFE OF CAESARIA. I87 


metho ga «2e! lamas uia «o leoi d jla, ] 5o 
SCR MNT UE SUI J ieee: TOU aana l 
Laxa [aw Len v8. AS ] eo loo Nas PX frauds 
Loot lass, hai) Ss [ac Soo cloa Jpashoorse frartlo fusso Jl. fluo 
JL — o L.5&.o Lseaam.s”!, Jes SON SA [52.20 < Ja 
oia» fro e Jans] aA lxil Llona DD- Loase: (Na! 
IN «2o aas. xA» 390 OHS on X - 4102] flarsoo flaca 
peal haao Lese of Woo of Jj Ji t2 ENT, J Nas qo joo 
loa» "ws t2 JA 1524 me? va wash cao» vxo fasu? <>? pœ Llo 
Losan Jo aaa? < Sokals Jprxdlo Loa Jad po - hoor Aasaa pido 
<1 t2 Jato] fas, haee yards) suas] el woods oopds Jno? 
Lawo Jas of p :JAosN ses loa Laso JI so; Jie 4 J NS. oo! 
NSS Arg co OS joo wider -looa leu NA los! TANT J3N25 Lupas 


l. MS. Qao. 


who had been reared in endless luxuries, and had grown accustomed to roval 
habits. who suddenly eame to be cut off from all these things, and subjected 
herself to asceticism beyond measure, so that she completely eut herself otf 
from eating bread, and every other day she would feed on cooked herbs with 
salt and vinegar without oil and moist rolls, and she nsed to sleep on sach- 
cloth on the ground, but on the sabbath and the tirst day of the week under 
pressure [rom the bishops and many blessed men she consented that a little 
oil should be put on the herbs for her: so that, having found her living im all 
this asceticism and hardship, we continued bhkuning her and advising her to 
give up high things and embrace moderate things, lest. being auable to 
endure she might either lose her strength or fall into severe illness aud be 
forced from necessity (Zvzyzz) to give it all up. But the blessed woman, when 
she heard us speak of illnesses, continued praying aud saytug :« Would that 
God had granted me bodily illnesses all the days of my lie; in order that | 
might possess health of soul only. » Moreover, since she thirsted after the 
spirinal gain of the exeellent life; though she was wise and learned in the 


reading of the Seriptires aud of all the fathers. it pleased her ereath to ash 


it (ee ta 


E EA 


1838 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [534] 
Le JaNMzM Lal adji Dial [Aaa Dao Ji: Joss, [iu 
frase! ofdas, Lenses na i> « fisasy Jes. JN Jas hoa 
Juritro yrs ls „Jlo loa Loras JKussad loo ANN so p2 
Je haia «o? chia aS KG] Jlrs LOH DAD) JA Aio ffsaraas 


n asap LAD fat ol, Lal suso ^ Buy boa ooa] aos 


sJoi$«, JND auw wa] yl uaaa [afro uwaa mashi Jlo 
ee pee SNo Japa Do seeds) floiagio fai ajas ro 
aie] SX wde Oo +00 cM Lo Luso JM x 342 z v. 
>? wiksaifo ulao? E Joa Ras và [Naag apo Iss] Ss 
aw» Jao s^olysu ha aso. Say -dilad fy] «xl p Je ha Lado 
Jao, saou] fies aM “uprsolo "3950 uaa ."alasoi] Ier 


2o bl hme fly -jil p dloa fanai jJ yanan x) oo who] 
pricoo o Maas Ka] Wax forms ro JAn GX Ko] oen JI]. poser 


io] Sx loo Lass MALAM) Aad D0 D bl hanas, re Ks] 


1, Ms. ems. — 2. Ms. om. » fin. 3. » ins. later in another hand. 


and inquire! about the passions of the soul aud of the body aud about thoughts, 
so that after spiritual conversation all day we spent many nights in this way 
in discussion and helpful speech, while the blessed woman condescended 
to make confession and sav. « I have here more than seven hundred volumes 
in number of all the fathers, to which my intellect and my attention have 
been devoted for many years, insomuch that now my mind has no rest and 
my soul also is stirred with passion night and day to hear from you the word 
of God, and about discernment of passions and observance of commandments, 
and about the other spiritual things. » One day, while we were sitting 
occupied in speech and divine conversation, suddenly that blessed woman fell 
on her face ou the ground before ine, filling me with amazement and alarm 
by suddenly doing tins, while I said to her, « Wherefore have you done this, 
and laid a weight upon me the mean one? be so good as to rise and tell me 
what it is that you command ». But she would not consent to rise, saying, 
« Twill not rise hence unless you give me your word before God that you will 
agree to my request aud do what I require of you. » And, being troubled 


in iny mind because she was lying on her face, | said to her: « Be so good 


|; See p. 39. qn. 2. 


[535 LIFE OF CAESARIA. 189 


Ju] mawo VM wanes V] Nl Jao ypo - urease uaaa N Lidl 
Naos hal p2 Janas < Kaya „Nao aama joao Lil ix 
Jaia «oo NL sa Jasle LNs oll’) Kalsuo cdegseo Kas Kaas, 
SsyJlo sass wo., Jy Js] 12-5 Kso fro -aas Ku] Lasag > 
a Naso fussy je) Jel SNo D [exe Jamas Lay fra 
oy sanna Joao mo JLo caso J je» lasado onse») Jiflo 
Law n? AO sas oye «00 uot prado, Jars <> Jo ro Ses 
Lan A, «99 DAE cada aso £e Lydd! Sw J o ei 
|-2-3à s, haasi dieto SOLA x a. xy xd woke! Ji eM 
Oso dase 36 prdyjo E falsus Ot vc) wee Jools Da 
Alo a) SX onere irse JLo yaro .coot «oot e| opmayo 
v! £2 J2s&no La fold saoi] fairs > fban oo M] 

Gu vM ois war DASOpL AO o. Vadbo sO qta 
ias Laau Codd da Aia, Siaa Heal, op Aan] ns dS 


]. Ms. sing. — 2. Ms. Šræs. — 3. Ms. 2%. 


as to rise, and what you command, if it is within my power and capacity, 
I will do. » And so she reluctantly rose; and she began to request me, 
saying : « Now that I have left my house and my property and come out to 
settle down in retreat and weep for my sins, and here my soul is in the same 
turmoil, | make this entreaty of you, to save my soul, and go privily to the 
inner desert and search out for us a place in which there is a well of water, 
and come and take me secretly with one chamber-woman and one chamber- 
lain only that we may settle down in retreat, and be quit of the evil things of 
this world, and ofall its turmoil, for | thought to escape from it but have not 
vet succeeded. » When therefore we heard that she intended to do these 
things, we would not promise to agree to her request, and to be ourselves the 
ministers of these plans, because we saw that they were unnecessary, and 
they were beyond her capacity and strength and condition; and, besides many 
arguments that we arrayed before her on these matters, we were afraid lest 
this ardour and the plans came from the evil one, while we further explained 
and showed her that these plans if put into effect by her would even bring 
danger (ztvduves) upon her, the danger of the destruetion involved In the 


scattering ol all the souls that had gone out with her. ‘Then in distress and 


oe ae 


^o Ls c pea 


pon FOTIN OAS ERES nsi [536 


Lut Ese Na xen COOL Lysol kaaso Josue t? xor 
oH] po laa aan oamssy JI Nas cur PS vont khao ook] 
Nwoncoa7M. nano Jp flo aaQ4NG] Jamo JX wus JIN ly wn 
Kage? Nase ow J slo .X3N35o edo woksas woo AADAC 
Ji Dado . Naal) JE JEn: aX uarse Joa cn Za «Sos. 23 
sb y aes eco), rd wado [asa <> qsa, xh a 
D lx») ha T qas., „Laua uhaaso sone whao 
La jaaa, ha «36. HOLA voada daaa | JA Da Jlsaxns 
Na e Jio Joa od vaat] Jy er Laxxo Lasas E oa 9. 
"an d04-00049 coos Maajo :Muforrsolo Kufsios He wr NNS aao 
Jlsaxn Daan óc» vor Sly 2à Uy |o Sirs Jes je) bead + [aan 
J acis a5 < ol £D Jpeareasan Lis bdo, „Klaso Mlanao loo 
JNatsad «xh gro Naso -fhial Joes mot pe Nasl Jes: (X 


00M iiu cm Id * EN] eel ( i i «eec coe Ved) atl T. 


tears she said.» Tt ts from these very persons above all that | seek to flee. » 
Vnd we contiuned odmonishing her very strongly in order to suppress her 
thoughts, saving. Know that vou are an old and teebte woman, and your 
nature is not strong enough to hold out august these thonghts of yours and 
endure and stragele: for neither indeed has the assault of temptations vet 
fallen upon vou, and vou have not been tried by! the cumming of the fiends : 
and therefore we advise you to give up these plis, being satistied with having 
left vonr country and vonr house and gone out into a strange land lo dwell 
m the monastery Chat vou. have Taulk oo With great labour therefore we 
-ucceeded in restrainmg her ardour from going out into the inner desert, while 
she showed vexation and annoyance toward us because we did not vield to her 
in this matter, And so. when she had built and completed the monasteries 
in a grand and admirable style, and had bought a large gold-mine (yevsmsu- 
yeu” for them’, she made one monastery for men, and one for women, in 
whieh she herself also thenceforth perlormed severe and sublime labours, for 
Geen vears, Uhough she declined the headship af the same monastery, hil 
sent do another monastery, and took thence a certain blessed woman greal in 


M- ain E E A a g E | adap Hie anna e ad ov. D uud Tot Mie. 


temales eb Elie monisferees. 


Ses dhe 


597 LIVES OF JOHN AND ĐSOSIANA. 19] 


=o E? Je Nas; Nx ol Ao Laaaojao Joa AAs O20. JK55 em 

Le, Joa Jls hao Log jas Naso o9 JKuamsoo fliaxy JM y 

+ Ohspd099 hlas Naaa Lao oaia jassa jA Jooty otai LaNa 
Ajia JS S TENES Jai [loss 

Lano Oey + [aod Ios əl, ha ha 9&5 Mranclllo LIN. soo 

» JKRrtsags 6n £50)0 oss «oe Lais Wo «Set Lro fhaa Ao 

La-b453 hlas Sx edas cals [islas Jot, | Naas AS, yl 


aS 
“anil imap re duisalba rohuarh hol 


hidu hdura same qaas ge€'duirdh aah ey | 

rcóuiaxrss» cla m"lsaap aam Laaduri caialaa 

umawa wa: amc acné. Urita 
erlhaidunn mu awn 


aans foods «6 ADI SRA t Jes IN? ha sot. Lawan 


|. M- wane laseoes eos, soe note on Iransk. 


her modes of lile whose name was Cosmin. and her she appointed arebinian- 
dritess, she herself submitting to her like an insignificant aud poor sister. 
And so she continned to labour till the end of her life; which happened alter 
fifteen years!. And so she completed the course of her practices heroteally, 
hearing greal testimony and nudergoing mighty conthets (zy6v. 

And she died and was laid in this monastery. whieh even to the presen 
day is called the monastery of Caesaria the patrreran. These few memorials 
taken from the blessed woman's labour and practices we have recorded for 


the glory of God and the prolit ol those who are desirous of spiritual profit. 
SUL | 

The history of the blessed Caesaria the patrician is ended, 
NEAT tie PiS- ris EI TIS ORY, OE XX EXCELEENT- WAMAN AND 0b HER TST, 


WHO WERE CHAMBERLAINS OL THE SAME GLORPOUS PAPRECIAN T, WHOSE NAMES 
Ou Loin AN SUSEVN E. WU RINE) HIRES! OE ESCEEEESGES 

This perfect womau Sosiana therefore, when her husband departed from 

Ms. nase. bul, as Caesia ds clearhy meant, | have emeuded the text, eb pa ois, 


i. CI e ob, 


12 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [538] 


x95 qao Jiao) Alo Ji jg» eu QNS ouis Down Joa 
yl: He ad Nbre ooo x^ 9lolaso PAO y p :Jhonop> Que Lais 
[552.250 JI so los fasirso - JLasap aso Jlascso ]la2315 qf p 
— Sad oA ooo qi jawo, los jo Aa. Zw, Jiono JKaraalo 
RAMPS pa 000 Q^a230 LOO; 2omxs; LaNa [uso Me f \ooptr 
p2 Jo Lads; JNN Je Jha p= raise axe] Or we rto 


Lada «3e was Jii be xima aset V5 Ael y JL Joon 


dh] Sods 2e Laado "Lem olo wolo :JNo; fha Jlororms 


kkas ha sot JNisag Lian pea q) aà Jaaa Naos 
' acoso Sy JN 3565 Lee iSo fo 1 Jaai LLIS eoa : Luwa 
hayo Li faao “Jiiadose hän y» h, opens Laado 


TAMS: 9.02100 s. 2, Ms. Ssapaso ware. 


the world, whose name was Jolin‘, after they bad lived together thirty 
years, and as is said lived all these years in purity, never holding carnal 
intercourse with one another, but living im devoutness and honour and 
holiness, oceupving themselves in fasting and prayer, and wenullexion and 
recitation of service and watching by night, while hair-mats were laid down 
for them each apart. and in this way they passed the whole length of the 
nivht-hours, kneeling and lying on their faces, and weeping in praver and 


mighty erving to God, without this becoming known to many. When then 


T 
this excellent John departed from the world, bearing this great testimony, 
and moreover Caesaria the patrician also as well whom we mentioned above 
had gone out to the desert, i. e. first to Alexandria ^, this excellent blessed 
woman Sasiana therefore laded three of her slaves with all her husband's 
splendid clothes, great cloaks (yiawidix) of pure silk (62952:25v) and. valuable 


raw silk garments (uétaža), with l'eolours and pictures (mwcosge)*. and 


1. The sentence is left unlinislied, and the sense completed in another form. -- Z2. This is nol 
inconsistent with ch. bi. €. did not go lo live a hermit life in the inner desert, but left Alexandria 
and lived in her convent in. the desert. Sinee S. sent the things for the churches and inonasleries 

P1 


founded by J., i. e, during his mission to Asia (eh. ^7, whieh did not begin till 542 see Introd., p. v). 
G8 honsehold was appy. broken up not long before that lime; see p. 2532, n. 4. 3. so I read with 
two slight emendations, V. D, and L. connect the words with yów and pectus and render * zeunalibus 
eb pecloralibus’. but neither word is known in Greek, and the context requires that the words should 
refer to The value of the garments, not their use or shape. The *pictures? would be not. pieture- 
proper, but embroidery; ef) Virg, fea , 1. ^8 ^ pieturalas auri sublegmine vestes, See p. 550, d. D. 


The word ziz:626a however is not known in Greek, 


[539] LIVES OF JOHN AND SOSIANA. 195 


shassi soo Lrroare pa et logie Lipase |g JST Nes] - fase, 
scape Nu] Se «Ml JN csan nace. oo cas je cada 
Sg So - JXadNlo Lops Loooto - Jlasd.o Jaaa Jans") «83.2.40 
Jad Lise b. Jae, Wee .cohs/ Net Sot Isto Jon 327. 
wu Ax NS Q3 Alio cin Qocel Soa wie DOS cL 
ad hban AAS sad. ad; LIS wanas, las; bl» loa Jy -qaa 
a-u - [assy n» vel ia «S0 HW) oom pee Joa 
<> yl sey] JBN JIM]; des Be Lasam ' [asco .fusmsa 
sHs -jal 2 wol Sx Mrs Jh x) sg rA S 0d ja wots 
fas 30 eMe, Sia ss LOOKERS) : Joi ere 5 Loo S Ne 
: 0) JLasä L LA wos cadaso Niao hopo ooo supa 
Jas e Sots; je oe» je» Jo; hasce Laja Lalo 
ja Slo axso -D5 uA coor oD Maialo frase, oaan DA 


l. Ms, o. 


the other clothes of high price, and sent them to our meanness’, adjuring 
and beseeching us, « Let all these be cut into such sizes as vou think fit, 
sir, and let handsome crosses and corners (yovix) be put upon them, and 
let them be made into cloths and veils, and distributed amone the holy 
altars as you shall decide, because I made this vow to the Lord God. » 
We then on seeing these things marvelled greatly, thinking in ourselves, 
« The thing would not be right that we should cut up articles of clothing 
each of whieh is well worth more than a pound (iz2x) of gold ?, but rather 
(uxaov) that these should be sold for a great price, and given to the 
poor? ». And so with this thought in our mind we went to the excellent 
woman herself, in order to give her this advice. But the excellent woman 
fell upon her face, saying, « Sir, since | made this vow before God, that 
all the tine clothes belonging to myself and to my husband whose soul 
is at rest should be made into cloths and veils, and crosses and gilded 
corners (eviz) should be put upon them, and they should be distributed 
among the holy altars of God, together with all the silver whieh God 
gave us, for the sake of the love of God whom I have loved be my helper, 

l. Tt is clear from this that $. was living in CP., and we may therefore inter that €. lived there 


also, and that Severus made her acquaintance during his residence there in 508-11. — 2. Cire. 8 44 
= fr. 1135, — 3, Malth,, xxvi, 9. 


Sd onc car. 


Ri 


h. 


UA JONN OF EPHESUS. [540 


Jha” Eo cots M Ja lo pedal Jos Dad JN sn 
[jiä anao yaz JN [365 lal So of JAN yao yeh Jo 
aj] ds Op do Pp Js -Jal bl hanw M KG); ere oà 
Sas. oll irs 00 woe Aad usando «00490 050 upro Joos J] 
Joon amo . Jufso Sas Joa Maly JKusdso Sanaddo ALN olle 
s Kajoras «aoi 0001 gps pre ADP DOF ADO ollo. JL pa30 Læs J Nial. 
Laspao Jorrsolo Jäs Loj- ol p» OA 10 SUA, Opa ooo x2 N50 
Loa Opa) JLo me} op COORD ooo! wooo „loa JAN Aso haoo 
Jano Laas oa Slo-jarpo fy [4x55 LLS col Nas KN] 8.22.9] 


„aapon o Landano LaNa fles. Jeo Io "gota Joo Ku] 


soa [case Nfi JaA ha bady IT ani wol, po .h-apao 
loo fupabtso 2o0 os yoo x elo iion so caso Kio CE 
faa oa DS OANE Laos JKuxal <> Qu! EU Q.a.ca. S 8v 


and perform this serviee for me also as well, because this also as well 
is of God: and divide these among all the churches and monasteries 
whieh God established through vou! , or wherever God puts it into your 
mind; and from the poor, as far as in me lies, | trust in God that nothing 
will be taken away by me; since for my part l have no one except God 
my Lord and my Creator and my Saviour and my Life-giver ». And 
from that time stileliers were summoned and came; and cloths and veils and 
napkins (uavddin)* were cut out according to the size of each article of elo- 
thing; and men came who were occupied in gilding and decorating them in 
a marvellous manner, and inscribing lier own name and ber husband's, white 
she also continued to bring clean and marvellous linen. cloths and Perstan 
cumbries, and they were all overlaid *. And, when all her husband's clothes 
had been eut up, she went on to bring her own fine clothes in no small 


> 


"ures made 


number, and the woven gold also was upon them, and fine tig 


of various silks and raw silks (pitazz), and pure silk (6206z219v, and so on. 
And, while we were again thinking, « Perhaps tt would have pleased God 
iore that they should be sold and given to the poor », and were saying so to 
her and she on lier part was insisting on cutting them up, we were frightened 


hy our Lord's expression in the gospel (süx y yan) about the fine ointment of 


JY. During his inissionary expeditions iu Asia Minor; see eh. 47. 22]. allareeloths. veds for 


fhe Saered vessels, and puriticaters, — 3. Be. weth guld. 


5^1 LIVES OF JOHN AND SCIST Oe ae 


o-ga orae Col, p9 OLR New INI Naal, fase’ € Lass; 
— dao i Ses] y» JR Natso Jlosflas ad; fasar.2d0 Jrootes ey a 
jpa auha loots anso] qo} ro ‘HAD posto 2o! JING à 33 sau, 
ves ja> p> aal Q5 loa fana, fraruso [Aza Lihaa, [see 
TEE wilare y POD reo .ouajac od aas -oD ee 
ay ee Jes L3 pu [224 DAS Ji «anh J| spso CM - Jiro] 
4 bl Ee fasas? «2o = adr bl Laas clo dS NN fioc JNa <x 
e qoM ha p30 ehl ilna ottas [lo oond wads waas 
Rd! hol xb» Hel NJ eA Haru frad'as Sx Lams Noro, 
and0/ vos S Kals ers xvas PAM po Na] Jipa MASA «OS 
Less. wu AA vs cothof a0 xao Jeans asl qoos 
iN Joa oot Na exe. NN] vent OWN, Sad [oprsado 
alle -Josko JE - xo [21z2o ..JKa&so [i5 coos “Sotho Jhe 12; v" h, 


1. Ms, Salo. — ». Ms. a2 ol lo 


great. price which the woman poured on his head, when also the advice 
and desire of Judas the traitor which he. proferred contrary to what was 
right and proper was blamed ', and we ceased advising that woman so and 
standing in the way of her wish. And, when all her valuable clothes had 
heen used up, until she was left. with the cheap ordinary clothes that she 
was wearing only, when we were finding fintt with her in this matter, thet 
she might leave herself what she needed, vet we did no good whatever. 
sinee she said, « Do not pity me in this matter, xir, since ] have not a single 
day in the life of the body bevond this vear; and, W T spare these; y benee 
do 1 know if courtezuns (z5g:) will wear them, and T on mv. part shall be 
called to account for them ?? » And on hearing this declaration, which she 
plainly made in advance about the end of her lile; we said : « IF this has been 
revealed to vou, vou do rightly in sending all that von have in advance 

When all her preetons articles of clothiug lad been used up, and we had 
begun out of the multitude of them to distribute to the east and to the west 
everything that came to hand, then she bronght her silver whieh amounted 
to many pounds (ersz, and it was given up and chaliees and patens were 


made, aud many dishes izivzzz and spoons, and they were distributed by 


beeline, T 525 DEUS Aficio oa qve Sra, Ae A 


496 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [542] 


fuged Sins ulas, hoa sor | £5 cy JD: l se; Da vn 
Jad haso JNuaag h po doa [erase Spila aano Sad 
yl NL aaan Sr» Namo Kaspo, oà fisy «o9 c x! ob 
jesus JKsod.s ypo xe 2À JN»; adaa po oa upo ódN Sao 
HOS panto [seine yann » Laam e e lio eso .oiaas Ness 
Jae, 3&5 Ll Wy) Joy JS As S Oo eM ue BIN 
oà Joi. Dad Ji] cords Ds Jaros! Nelly e Las sd 
lad; JM a6 cooked ps Jos wd xpo ooo + ofS «Sil DM» 
ANS, hamo Qo] -hasans Dess ode in| 49 jasee Jos 
RAHAAWO CO yaco Joo rl anD Jal je bodes Mass 

jaro ^ óRKS «20 aR, Kafriatio - Jor 


“pu manmd ua radu eura wduarnh Al 


us everywhere, as God. knows, while she also with her own hands distri- 
buted all the rest of the contents of her house to all who were in need, while 
the blessed woman rejoiced and gave thanks to God. But we on our side 
were noting the time which she fixed beforehand with regard to her end, 
to see if it was uear as she had stated. And, when the end of that year 
approached, five days before, she fell into an illness ; and she sent and ealled 
us, begging us to set forth meense, and make expiation for her, saying, 
« Sir, pray for me, for the sinner; for lo! after five days ] am going to our 
Lord, to make answer (azohoyta) for my sins. But for God's sake remember 
me the wretched one in your acceptable prayers to God ». And thus while 
we were constantly with her on the fifth day as fixed by what she had said 
she fell asleep in peace, while everyone was overcome with astonishment; 
and they thanked and praised God, and ran to receive a blessing. from her 
holv body. 


The history of some excellent persons, John and Sosiana, ts ended, 


[543] LIVES OF PETER AND PHOTIUS. 107 


am Arn wails raahaa dua urna m'óuiró aah 
muss joann rain ar milalias apasa rila 
eredu ea aa 


Lise vaia slo oohh hiar Laaro, Woo vot Las 

JNa, ooo + yopoads aso erdot ica deso wmo,o Ji... 
„aoha? je-»| ool p oi Naad Loo] Qaa Lime Lage 
Jia adj] aaso A>, «oo adao sad s SX opm'so 
add -pasdubso «asi laser, Jparanco Jisan yopoad; S soo 
Jaial, Jrobsos Jean Ses SL ‘Jorassdo [as Jiwasa aS. 2.ollo 
[aooo [o .JAa1x3eN soo. flatamso ] aso fasanan 400442) aso, e 
20008 «oL. Miforarso AJia fas] bps) | [ase Jiorso Je e 
Jiasjo fais «ooo Jas) sep -oll Mais, Jopao Jhopys Lads wre qo; 


LOB OOL TERN ol Jae ooo Lal oà jas, 


NENT THE FIFTY-SIXTH HISTORY, OF THE BLESSED PETER, WHO HIMSELF. ALSO 
WAS CHANCELLOR AND PuoTims TIE CHARTULARY WITTE THE REST OF Hs 


COMPANIONS, FROM THE SAME HOUSEHOLD '. 


The history of the excellent blessed men Peter and Photius also besides 
is therefore worthy of being committed to written records; men who were 
themselves the first, even before the blessed patrician Caesaria herself, to 
prepare the way for that household, in that both of them together were 
thought worthy to despise the world, and treat all its affairs with contempt, 
and go out and go to the desert. And, in order that they might first be 
instructed and taught in a convent and in the subjection of monasticism, They 
entered a great and renowned convent in the Ennaton? of Alexandria which 
is called that of the Fathers and were received in it, giving themselves to 
humility and submission aud poverty and obedience, and sorrow and fasting 
and prayer, and watching and manual work, men who had been accustoned 
to a high and luxurious life, who suddenly came to abstinence and the other 
labours, so much so that all the inmates of that convent great aud small used 


to marvel at them, and were astonished at their type of life and sorrow and 


|. Se. thal of Caesaria. — 2. See p. 325, 384, 


a) 


12 


4 


r? p. 


108 OHN OF EPHESUS. D 
fipa EMITE Jans] .cooilarnsoi asco «99a a «asco . oon 3530 
velo w> sor qanan, vx» s] oik Qoo NS ese oo J-a 
„aoia Loot JNa; hopes p3 2000 aa ALEN . otio)! [rsa DA 
Daa p Jlos Muses DS, lanao [asà.: foto Xx qnas cool gaarxso 
Jud Je XS ase «asus Jiao janisl nis pel wt Jer Qa so 
JLos Muses Jpop cas Sl) frou] Jas s, francs od coo Ku] J No 
Lese „ooa Ladd} Jiadopso «oot "o (ator fans! ufsios ooo vi 
Ijas A ol p» 900 meaner [anims Teen y JKRasaabyo Jaw 


Kons loo aw khh od JN iapa ox» lia] .ooa ohne JLopaso Jlaasso 
dedo Lesa d omy Aan O O20 renee NS a. 20 ECE „OOHO pO 
T% aaao kho -yooldaxs flsaso a] jaxauo Joo M: 
Wl JN eS Joi s] SAS ad paanan fused DM el 99 Jn 


| Corr, fram bets. — 2; Ms, voto 


tears, and their liimility and obedience: so that at the time when we came 
to Alexandria! we went to that convent to see them for the sake of the bles- 
sed meu themselves, inasmuch as we were acquainted with them, and 
moreover ou aceount of the report of their manner of life; when they felt great 
joy. and. would discuss with us fights against thoughts and the other works 
of excellence. When then they had completed about eighteen years in that 
monastery in spiritual practices, the blessed Peter had? à brother and a sister 
wearing the lay garb zx). as Uey too were living a great life in practices 
of excellence, so that they and their slaves used to learn the psalms, and kepl 
hours of pravers and service as in a monastery of recluses, while they also 
directed their steps to the civ of Smyrna for the sake of the quietude of a 
strange land, and there thenceforth they lived a religious, devout, pure life, 
so that all that city used to marvel at them and at their practices. They 
therefore used to write and worry the blessed Peter to come and visit them 
and encourage them, and let them be consoled and comforted by one another, 


whieh the blessed man was also constrained to do, not for the sake of bodily 


I. This musl have been on his 27 visit lo Ezspt (fli, for he had known them hetore, whieh mnst 
have been in Gl (p. 3 n. da, where he had never been Ul after his visit lo Egypt m oat Farther, 
sinee His were dn Gb. in 2i» and left it before Caesaris; his visit 10 Caesaria in Egspl inis alse bave 
hrs db el emm pe eS sos Vee Sane Cal peste. d 


[545] LIVES OF PETER AND PHOTIUS. 199 


w] Jo JL «or Jarno; ooo! oot. | Jpop Joo Sp DSA 
«2300390 «4375 ,5 uoaaars flo oae yaso, wads! yaw Su] Mo 
LOMA AR po jas, pl Jasco cay] wares fy frre Jods os 
Ad vois wai! po qol] Jede Qo Jlaaam of) rie soon 
woe oclo uses Lin ban p iw! sean] yar [odo oo aa 
aaao [ee - Shem busy fargo [x25 Nao -Nso Jaco v 
*L-naos òga Sx Maco! hago fax x Col Jha Jal, rims 


aulassa rilon wails runapa rcdusxdh Avo 
ore ilap ia 


relationship, but because he knew that thev were spiritual persons in manner 
ol life. But, when he had come and seen them and comlorted them, he 
set his face to return to his monastery, and they would not let him, weeping 
and adjuring him by the living God not to leave them; and thus he was 
constrained to stay. And, when he had completed five years with them, 
he was raised by force to the bishopric’; and, when he had completed four 
years, he departed from the world with his other brother, having lived a 
spiritual and divine life. But their sister the holy old woman remained in the 
bodily life a long time, down to the writing of this history, having further 
multiplied her spiritual practices many times. 


The history of the blessed Peter the chancellor and Photius the chartularg 


is ended. 


|. Of Smyrna fp. 503). Since he was ordained with the author, the date was not earlier than 555 
p.>08.n. l, and Introd., p. v), and therefore, ifthe figures are correct, lie left CP. not later than 535, bul 
as J. saw him in CP. in 535 (p. 5*5. n. 1. it was nol earlier than that year, so that his ordination and 
J.> are fixed to 558. 


PATH. OR, SUDORE Meg gs S 


200 JOHN OF EPHESUS. 5^6] 


réjeeh muisela Qaa ux rcóuxróh aah 
rikdsa aan am "alo ‘auna mna rilpans 
isidi alra rum risar ram eade 


erlam 


Jla-az, eda: JNa; JlanMas -Jioyofh La Src Laag 
Slo JaN yro, Lə; Jae Joa wrasse Pa wo p Joa saoo? 
oa Slo Joa uoro../o L Nola aaa) Joa OF fas] Gis Mus 
eol Joot WMoaasdo jasno fisanprsoo ‘furdoop Lan wadana 
Jh posh Jhatsasot jipa cM. Liana) of) Lex JAM ooa 
Nze Ls o hal Jor a Soy woojqams loka fly . Sato 
i acude adaos vuelo eae unol Jis isse Liam àa jon 
Loss fpr pel £ fois M3oa amas Jk bus” eso Q4» aue 


l. Ms. 92360000; see below. — 2. Ms. ins. bo — 3. Ins. in marg. in anolher hand, but from p. 547 
il is clear Hal Ihe words are original. 


* 4 
NEXT THE FIFTY-SEVENTH HISTORY, OF TIE BLESSED THEODORE THE KINGS 
CHAMBERLAIN AND castrensis, WHO, WHILE HE WAS IN TRE BODY, PRACTISED 


A HEAVENLY AND DIVINE MODE OF LIFE, 


This blessed Theodore therefore held a high ollice in the royal palace 
(xwv), having previously been in the service of a great man before God 
(and he was great among men also) whose name was Mishael', who also 
was further the king's praepositus”, a Christian and merciful and aseetic 
man, and was moreover perfect iu all spiritual things, insomuch that he 
underwent exile (2ogiz) lor the sake of the truth of the right faith, that le 
might not communicate with the synod of Chaleedon, insomuch that he spent 
a considerable number of years in the exile (zzoz:x), and so was at last invited, 
and came in, and was restored to his place, and completed his time’, and 
retired, haviug lived many years in all religious habits, while like an ordinary 


l. Tor these words see lexi, n. 3. For M. see Sev, Select Letters, 1, 127 XI, 1; CS. C Oa 
L XXV 41, p. 15; Jo. Mal., Ere. de Ins. (ed. De Boor), 92. He may be the deacon of Sel. Letters. 


1, 63: Ht, 3; bul, if so, one would expect J. lo say that he took orders in his old age. If he is the 
M. of Jo. Anl., Ecc. de Ins. (ed. De Boor, 43, he musl have lived to most extreme old age. — 2. Se. 


sacri cubiculi. — 3. See p. 547, l, 16. 


1547] LIFE OF THEODORE THE CASTRENSIS. 201 


Joo «2360 Joa. Jlantsse Longs c9" Ls Nw3Àxo Joo ao 
Kal Sas fos Los Soa oM, sns je» chanai Cato 
sese NaS: «Qo 2) Jasco .JAMa x» Jasco Lees -Molanna 
Aa | je „laag J59:o]A. aaa L) Sasa ras .] Li nao JNa; Jlo 
JaN, ooa da] Ji caro Kool, faa] mias Joo oaas [n] 
Phoosys JpRrs0 [350 feu JM] Jas yo Isoo p> ve - 


Ne Neo JE Eo I oa. iN s olo Naso Jrsas OQ 2 20 
Loo Jeon <> | Fy a Pr » Joo wok. | Joico Laas SA» Liag? 
aao a> joa jus ol; oà tfixtndiooa, [35e — S fa. Jhasarro 
cr WABIo Jay! La.) annn ass, uaaa ^ foo panao 
Joi. Da hadaa yards Lisio Js. o Ao A, Jes 
way od pa- Lad) yao Lans od wakl] ol, Lal 
Jaga Jaia Q9 wrasse aD s vods lil, XQro orm ano 


l. Ins. later in same hand. 


man he used to work and labour with his hands at carpentering and building 
aud carving, and sell and give to the poor, besides all the rest of his wealth, 
while he lived an ordinary and poor lile, down to extreme old age, and thus 
departed Irom the world bearing great and noble testimony. This man then 
the blessed Theodore imitated with another brother of his whose name was 
Jolin, so that they were both chamberlains of the king, while living in fas- 
tine and constant pravers, and sorrow and tears and works of charity, both 
during the life of the blessed Mishael and also alter his death [or many years. 
And, because the blessed man was feeble and sickly of body, and the more 
so from walehing and fasting and abstinence, he asked king Justinian, who 
was also edified by him and loved him and in whose eves he was honoured, 
that he might retire as castrensis', in order that he might escape aud retire 
from the turmoil of the palace zanimo), and settle down in quietude, and 
devote himself to the practice of religion only; insomuch that the king assen- 
ted to his request and carried ont his desire, and ordered him to retire as 
castrensis, because he? serves two vears only ?, many olliees being subordinate 

1. This is a diflienlt. phrase, which [understand as above. Apps. he wished to resign the chan 
berlainship and become castrensis, beeanse he could then relire altogether after 2 years see n.i. 


The castrensis was a hind of purveyor lo the court, originally the quarteraiister of à eap Pauls 


Wissowal ~. v.. 3. Re. the castrensis. 3$. la Cod. Just. NH. yxy. pr. this provision is laid 


SBS pe b. 


* 38S xoa. 


202 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [548] 


yos Wo s so oS vM Jingo fuilaro od Q Q2 $36 
Lisad oo Snot as ware L5 Jilax oda-5lo aas | wa Ne cn 9,9 
Lai plaso Jh. hor a,240 eMNalo catia Vus] wdodso Jy 
ailan of», oiojJo oò Jon) aaas ops No Lo Nobis. eresio 
Jav XS "Nase p Lans, JNa Lesl wohl, JRSQ Iss 

ouo; [sx liopa oof Joa Xo :Joo wats SALAS BO I 
Da Joa woo. JI p EAM oc oou og Ware Jor aayo 
Jl] haai Joa co hanss sacks JMS ol wil “aS e Je 
o «oca. c Daan Jj po rcaso ‘Jiao [Jasal Malo Jas, Nolo 


* oe 


RXM Y» „joa «aos ww DSD [2 jando jl] Joey OL 13.000 
as Je Jas, Laa La? ean Jho Njal alad oM Jio 
Laas o5 uols hops Bx Jena ro vA of zs Ness yards 


1. Ms, woaps.3;9. 


to him’, and large profits coming in to him, and in two years like the prae: 
positus he retires, and like him expends? much wealth. The illustrious bles- 
sed man therefore retired, and completed two years; and he was released 
and retired with much gold aud great wealth. And then he began eagerly 
and joyfully to seatter that gold, and to sow all his wealth in good soils which 
are the hands and bellies of the poor, since he would theneeforth load two 
of his F'eontidential servants? during the night, and himself put on a eape and 
cover his head, and would go out and distribute it all night with his own 
hands, not trusting any man, giving the poor not two or three daries only, 
but sometimes even ten, and sometimes eight, and six and seven, while 
consequently the poor of the city were not enough for him, but he used also 
to go out to the suburbs beyond the sea on all sides, crossing aud scattering 
his wealth profusely and without stint; so that in the space of one year he 
scattered more than fifteen or twenty hundredweights (xevzovxovov) ', until. he 
had used up all the gold. And his slaves and all who were attached to him 


down wilh regard to the chief casfrensiani, but it is hard lo see how il can have applied to the 


castrensis himself, still more lo the praepositus, a high officer of state. 


|. Sc. the castrensiani. — 2. ] cannot render S3% in. this context otherwise. Appy. the meaning 
is that large sams pass through his hands. V.D. and L.'s translation. of all this passage bears 
no relation to the Syr. — 3. The word usually moans ‘eunuchs’. — ^. 20 xevtnyápia would be about 


X 90,000 — fr, 2,269,800, an almost incredible snu, 


[549] LIFE OF THEODORE THE CA ASTRENSIS. 203 
Las? o xS Aoo dee OS ooo! qaan so ooo i asao 
AAD «Jide Co HDX uoo aree: KH je] Jhade CM 
haa Le» juo «ue ln ££ fan] 4x: JLge Ld po 
Woo qe $30 : 0230 [52 P o wu] fle sosas Los Los 
o eo wil „JN; jan? otti ÀA so OM 2p» ooo wiry Kiso ws | 
JL Jae») afer 0032) Qeon NIS ouis Agi BSN yopoads «nhs; 
Lasag xr o9 Up] Sd Jo Pas Cdr wel I “Nal hoN *(,9) 
LAN? «um aoao b] JoMasy - Jods ypo vasas ago - Joot pal 
ooa onde RRQ 0G JI Feel Carte Wo edo tas cao 
Ji hiy fou] JaN, a, Kus frie Pos «MIN CI 
[3e ex SX wd pM waar ley RH rang Ilo c $9 
» Kasasor'h]s Jer Jur vis aano [ides wipo Aum clo J£ 
AD o7 vanas Nay Sr lo J| oe vrs} a` pal x» 


1. Erasure after 1. — 2. Ms. om. — 3. Ms. «est. 


began to murmur and find fault with him, so that they received us and many 
others with many complaints against him, inasmuch as we had been habi- 
tually in his company from the beginning: so that, when we saw that his 
soul was thus intoxicated with the fervour of divine love, and no wortdly 
property was regarded by him, and while we and everyone were wondering 
ab the disposition and zeal of the man of God, we used to say to him 
« It is written ‘First teach them to show charity among those of their 
household’'. Beware lest hy feeding a large number of people you strip 
these quite bare and dissipate it on others ». But the blessed man would say, 
« This is our boast before God, that V and they may be thought worthy to 
receive the command (vrezi)? and then die. These do not know the thing 
that is helpful. We trust that what is given away will be preserved in the 
heavenly storehouse in the treasury of God, ‘where thieves do not break 
through nor steal’*. For who then (#2) ean guarantee me life till the evening? 
And, if it has happened that the end overtake me and this which has been com- 


mitted to me remain after me, who will tell me into whose hands tt will come? 


1.1 Tim., v, 8 (2. — 2. Cf. p. 75. L ult. 864 is perh. an emph. form uf Mel. Cf. pasl cp. 285, 
lL 4, and p. 620). — 3. Matth., vi, 20. 


* [93 vs h 


EAE 


204 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [550] 
wohl «OAM e jio alo eon) fl salbso blo -o ay 
JN. 3oia.36 v oo -AOp Te" xr fal BAM «9.394029 SS 2.230 Sas 


naamal J| Sunraso Jory 36] £9 .ofS 0001 Lacs Js Lio oof 


amwa Cols cine Say i ortho Aaa, eha r0 ha? Aa); Jle 


eM wo") Ws alas JAA 
eo JNisy MM ol ofa» DA omo], nc 3S oe 
KO xu Dal p anu] oaa Dao aa farado Joa Jya 
Jda odo j-:no Joa ipado Dam Lul haol, Jol aaas, 
jw .' fu lonsad Gono Jinas vaiko ako g ups Dao 
Szo V J? o o peas Py fos [ops Rupr]. aao Naso 
SS ol poaa, gada Molino jos fai ups’ Da0 Ji das 
‘attics Ia» «soda joa pal «o oor -o> oes Noo uota» OF caido 
anma Sancio fas] aZ. JI] Joi roku] casibss JI yd sob] 


l. l'arlly erased. 


and perhaps those who find it will spend it on harlots, and I shall be called 
to answer for it'. And if, sir, you advise me so, E will now do your 
bidding ». Then he treed his slaves, and gave gifts to them, and to the 
Ircebori who were attached to him, saving, « See, be no longer grudging, 
and do nol murmur »; so that, seeing the man's disposition and zeal, we 
abstained from going on to address further words to himi on these matters. 

Alter therefore he had used up all his gold, he often threw a hundred- 
weight (xevzavzetov)? upon us also? that we might take it and distribute it 
with hun: so that, when we refused to take it, m the fervour of his love he 
would send it to the regions of Asia and throw it upon us perloree. And 
henceforth he began to sell his silver and his valuable clothes, and give to 
the poor, with such thoroughness and liberality that eventually nothing was 
left for hini except a Tew necessaries, And thenceforth he began to live 
sparingly and those with him, though they were still murmuring against him 
wud finding fault with him. But he said to them several times, « You do not 


think the things of God but those of men’, and you concern yourselves about 


oho p 28a. 02: pi 55d, |. 00, — 2. cire, g 4500 = Tr, 113.490, — 3. Au obvious contradiction, 


[551] LIFE OF THEODORE THE C.ESTRENSIS 205 


vokato Ja do D call; Jer od coh] ce e flo „oial pes tz 
xe Nha p onn; x». flo hago faxes GQ echa sol 
SNL +5930 Joa Jo Jhoana Joa Jy pen the oe ^ n9 Ni 
ec» 0 peu jason so Joa Lajo uoo ipso -hininga [xs 
wey o0 rary, fas JNa so flasig od foot Coro soais Ted 
Jal ie Joot Jpn’ 99 don ad lasug Jlanandy duse o] fiue 
„Jaw joa Jo N30) «a eor. foot par Senso Lasao Ja 2o enis 
Jiao Jla p30 [>o p> Joa wl = Sauka asa caw Jost yo, Ea] 
pel 999 tao | yo Jor fin’ JoS& Kin, ora; haso Jie 
win e „Joa KL. Lan yl JJ |. wmrxduc edo] Ss iy fos 
p Joo «nagd Ms flo o OH CAMARO x09 A dO J| eoo 
Jlsaro, [Mey Lob» yaon flo -Jp [hs Src ARI 
p JN; ba han perso ops Jho pa " hay Les Leo eli 


i. Corr. from E — 2. In erasure. 


your belly and your purses; and you do not know that we gave away the whole 
of what was given us by God that he may give us many times as much, and 
we may not be called to account for it through administering it badly. » 
But, after he had come to want, and was rejoicing and delighting himself, 
king Justinian heard of it, and he sent and called for him, and continued 
upbraiding him for having thus suddenly dissipated his property completely ; 
and he gave him a bounty of a thousand daries every year. But the exccilent 
man out of the very bounty itself used to perform acts of bounty, while he 
rejoiced and exulted that he lad been thought worthy to receive bounty. 
And so thenceforward he lived in a villa called Sema (©), where Mishael 
whose soul is al rest was laid, being constantly occupied in fasting and 
prayer, and much watching, and living a life devoted to all religious habits, 
and he would not consent to recline upon a couch (zo rov) like a great man, 
and eat, but used to sit like a poor man, while we and many others were 
reclining, and begging him todo the same, and he would not comply, saying, 
« It is preseribed for us to enter by the narrow gate, and that we should 
not walk in the way that is broad that leads to destruction’! ». And thus this 
man of God began and ended in this brave conflict (zyóv), while he had now 


Yo bd. Vly x 


dst ee pa 


le Vee: 


206 JOHN OF EPHESUS. (552 


hao ys! Jooo «e o | J Joos sae Jle.ais, jäs mx wade 
yallo + OQ C oL SAA ee Liste (lex o5 JC 
Joa Jaa oo o] PD ooa g eoa] Dha hoak x26 NS xx 
NS os ese odor oot o] Pao JL Jusy ois | em t. wooo 

Joos 


Tilpass maanarrch uapa réuarh danir 
eral 'eaxta i apa 


aman stax da nnda arnan hard aah 

rex abria es Na stn dua ran einas 

har CD wt aim dua c» eX aom r^ n5 

mrrémimh dul ra soma rar 
sala rta wana 


ósea SMa yaa và Obs] JNS b0 Loss D Rupe] Scot JI 
jas occas vias Ws kaspo wats! Lic <% = Nest Jo’ 


1, Ms. om, hut | seems to have been erased. — 2, Mx, wastfeado. 


become dried and shrivelled from the labours of asceticism, and the whio'e 
of his body had become like dry wood. And thus he ended his life in that 
same villa, and was iaid above the blessed Mishael. But his brother John. 
who also imitated his mode of life, lived a long time after him; and he also 


ended lis eourse in the practices of religion. 


The history of the blessed Theodore the king’s chamberlain and castrensis 


is ended, 


NEXT THE FIFTY-EIGHTI HISTORY, CONCERNING THE ORIGINAL FOUNDATION OF THE 
HOLY CONVENT OF THE HOUSE OF Man Jon aT Amis, AND WHO WERE ITS 
NEADS AND FOUNDERS FROM THE BEGINNING, $f. E, FROM THE YEAR SEVEN 
HUNDRED OF ALEXANDER, AND DOWN TO THE YEAR EIGHT HUNDRED AND 


SEVENTY-EIGHT OF TILE SAME.. 


It dil not therefore seem to us to be just and a fitting thing that we should 
withold the good deposit whieh was committed to ns by old men our holy 


). SUM 


593] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OF JONN URTAYA. 207 


Naap woo laso; Lio so nl, Has uxo Kass c, oe foe 


JN ssl. UXOR Nojah] ass mde hiko, Jil Os Laio Laias oco! 
worojasany fora LoS . KUJKUN Vo Cos Njia Chalo Ol) pu! voids; 
[ico JANI <% JLassodss0 mo haal -Ja Aal pas pauo Sa. 
alaso, La «36 vooraan, vM ce uo ENT [Ksa Goss 
wi Daxa u fs) ho <x Rokok «2? UH ooa JLiso,00 JN; 
Neal. joa oot Na] aasan Je [aisy «2o? sot jas oca, Lanio 
sjaa ey vol wHAD-O vxo [sod Ving hasha [dao Wr oot Slo 
E taps ol Wasa Lo Lag xr og J5e3a* a> ooa oaao 
əl ple Jos wian, quis cA $30 0 J[3a130] NaN Jse,d0 
à - Luar"lo Lajos ` »otr2on Lio: per <0 aul Llo .Jlassyis han L5 
ado o e Lusa, Loo so, Je -BLL biada xh Lomas 
JN ps apo Tosantoo dso panl fasts pel par do Jisan 


l. Ms, 9v» oo. 


fathers concerning the original foundation of this our holy convent of the 
house of Mar Jolin at Amida, and concerning the great old men who were 
the founders and builders of it from the beginning; but it seemed to us to 
be right aud very proper that through this our narrative we should hand 
down and transmit to the rest of its inmates the history concerning it even 
as we received and truly and accurately learned it, as we received and 
learned through tradition from three seniors advanced in years, who were 
inmates of it from the time of its great earlier prosperity, that is especially 


from the great sentor Mar Samuel arelipresby ter of this same convent, who 


had been an inmate of it fora long time, who himself also as well received it 


from aneient seniors ol protracted life who were before him, who were inmates 


in it from its earliest foundation. But this blessed Samuel lived even in our 


times, and down to the year eight hundred and fifty of Alexander': and he 
gained distinction also in the conflict (z6v) of persecution ; and he fell asleep 
and finished the course of his great and divine practices in the second exile 
(eocéa) itself in the district of Claudias, in the monastery called that of the 
Huts, while the whole convent also dwelt in it for about twelve vears?, aud 
built it and set it up and made plantations there, As then we received aud 


l. 939, — 2. 539-51: see p. 570 and note. 


* 


EION 


(Uae p 


* o yeu 


208 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [554] 


«Do poa vo aa Da oih Co ana Decor Da La? 
AOD ws} deg 3 (x dee dens Js. » Ne, jasas La jaag 
Mol aho Jiary huas aN ba Jpsoar, 59 yopo ise on... 
hi5; Jhosrouws baH oet Sly ha . acojas/ AN op: HoN, + 00 
FTCN aaa Soo jaz, lo v~a- 20 jasak Ymd Joa ~'h] [dope 
Tuscus Diel [2525 o pam} - Jhsaxas wee dd y Joo JL? 
Lael 9l be Joar aah] oso - JKoo,> HS Lapo <> So 
fads > Xs; -Jyo yel JANA T% J} -oN ->00 Joa pok.core 
yo fago; Jil mato ' Joot SLX -joa saN) faa .00 Jara. ANo 
dy Lael lass a]; had JE Neo Aoo axo Jh 
COL > ad p Jl elle Jes paN je poles JS < Joa 
ehe Joo saoo? 
pry iadoo orolssco :joot w x Jas. s Jlsa5 fiza} oo SK. P 
Io Jorsdsso casa Slo ol wil Jaša} oad ol] + Sarco <% 


learned from these blessed men, that is in the lirst place from this blessed 
Samuel, we record the history, which he often related in our presence; which 
is as follows. Before this convent was firmly established, there were a few 
huts onits site, which were called (the informant stated) those of Mar Af wrsm, 
who himself also gained distinction for a considerable time in ihe conflict 
(zyéy) of seclusion. Then the blessed Mar Join, by whose name the convent 
was called, came about the year seven huudred', and made another hut for 
himself a little distance from the earlier ones in the same place, and shut 
himself up in it, who was also thought to be an Urtava and so ealled for some 
such reason as this. Because (the informant stated) he was a zealous man and 
an expounder? and a teacher, he used to go in and out of the country of the 
Urtave?^, warning and teaching and expounding and correcting many, 
insomuch that he learned. the language of the Urtaye, so that for such a 
reason he was thought to he and was ealled an Urtaya, though by his birth 
(yivog) he was a Syrian. 

While then the blessed mau was winning distinction in the labour of 


seclusion, and gaining renown and reverence from many, two other blessed 


]. 389, — 2, Or ‘interpreter’, linguist’. — 3. I. e., Anzelene or part of il;see p. 135, n. 2. 


adil nd 


i555] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OE OUN UR TAYA: 209 


rao Neojases Joa oio rM pases [oM jian oco qoos] 
JL Jess as No, ot Ol) Lote]: Je Loos joa paaa . Ma. 
Neqoe jawan o> ai fsa pa alo aood wash; ©; 

Lä} au soiamads! -ookan Jlaslo Dado fisagy oloaan 

opa» oooo as] Nao aaa, Jprarxsad vosu, -Nao Dujara , 
fusSaso Jlasains flsans Nofi ` casa Slo alado ose» Of p3? Beva 
Qo Jisan ups’ SKn001 Q5 .casiyhsoo ooo eeadulss Joos Moon 

oles, E jas eMe MNs Juss ol, ES : ota as. 
«t L34-sa bor sJlawly Juss Naso Jas") aA :Kufssos 


«2o ADO nuno updo Lisa uoopo [Yori yoda qoo ace 
Laag .SuJasas asa PS aaas, alapapo Shs ooops ian 92 ads 


EEES ERETI p20 Jae: eoe Jisas vx joo awil as ca 


]. Ms. «245. se. 


men came to him, and they also were renowned and famous men, and 
teachers and firstrate seribes, one of whom was named Samuel and the other 
Jonathan, who had been living in the monastery of the. Edessenes ! at Amida, 
who transcribed? many books, which by virtue of their wills (2129x2z) have 
been handed down in the convent even down to the present day itself. And 
in consequence of the blessed man’s renown and in consequence of his beau- 
tiful manner of life the blessed men Samuel and Jonathan begged him that 
they might be granted the privilege of living with hin; and he accepted 
them, and they took up their abode with him, while they also too with him 
and in his company received more teaching and instruction in the labours 
of ascetieism and the teaching of religion. When then the convent had 
begun to advance and progress, so much so that with all its belongings it 
in a great fashion attained to a large increase in buildings and belongings 
and increase of the brotherhood up to the number of fifty men, then the bles- 
sed Mar Jolin ended the course of his practices, and departed Trom the world, 
having left as his successor in the government of the convent the blessed 
Samuel. — But the blessed Jonathan had removed from the convent during 


the blessed man’s lifetime: and when he had fallen asleep he came back, and 


l. See p. 22h and p. 391. — 2. Or f wrote’; but the lille cseribes' points to the ether Meanie. 


t CEU 


! 


210 LOAN OF EPHESUS. [556] 
haas ha aso Ns lea] J pel oaaao . SuJasaa Lisad je» prado Joa 
Nes pas bo hf a £0 J Nawo] jt Jans! .SuJasas Lisal, opadaad 
Rd q% alas Wo» aso foods «2o og Slo was - fpsoar 


th BAe, < oo slo uss maso Jass alas, wos JN A aN 
NMolnsoso N.leaseo N.N ba elo X2] Laoag ais <% aco 
«2e 6-00 Jie Joh JA», [33s «2o aayo ‘sas Qoo 5 Vy 
Joo 2e Na] JK de e» Sly do yes] Laag Jiwan, wsio otis 
Joel foots Falo Jaco pelo Joys o£. Joo Kul Jas yas bas 
Laso Lag yar wl -oa pa jaan NA] SN so JL. eo Jasy p20 
q) oo y SO. oana 4d faan uit T mo or 2227s 
Da fao; oo «oa £20 ^2Ói0 aa aN utd Nha hwa 
pols: Jarama o anna a. pol] J vos - Jor was Ser uo"! 


I. Ms. Pe blel. — 2. Ms. om. stop. 


lived with the blessed Samuel, and they lived together in. brotherly and 
spiritual fashion. until the decease of the blessed Samuel: so that, when this 
man had made a great addition to the convent, he also as well departed [rom 
the world; and over the government of it after him he left. the blessed 
Jonathan. And this man again by great knowledge and sound government 
brought about an increase in all the belongings of the convent: and after- 
wards he also as well departed from the life here: and the blessed Job was 
appointed. to succeed him: and this man also governed excellently and law- 
fully and spiritually all his days, and he departed from the world of distresses 
to the country of jovs: and the blessed Abraham was appointed to succeed 
him at the head of the monastery, who was also a native of the eity. This 
man (the informants stated) had a house in the city, and an old. mother, 
and brothers and a considerable number of kinsmen ' (yvez. And, when 
he had been governing the convent excellently for a long time, unfounded 
ill-feeling was stirred up against him (they stated) by certain members of 
the convent who suspected of lim that he was secretly providing for his 
household and making them gifts Trom the convent; and, while he for his 


par defended himself from these charges on every point, they on their 


1 Or ‘distinguished kin’. 


557] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OF JOHN URTAYA. 214 


„aN ana ooo oA JAA Japano a 59s Noe. Ihot 


aaa adr SJKialo + Jods Laid» oo Slo 5 Nol wks cao; Loa 
Sd aas p.o jans 0 Slo Jil jas ohasy>p00 Jhatssi «xo 
wat axes jx flo - vol, Tops pros fly Judo JNscarsdis ogsa 
Nos Jes paso "xo oma wa Loo . oS: <% Luisa Lo, 
ON Laso .ax3eo joa wsltse yas hioj i> p QNA aS Mufaaso 
aau e|, [uae] opaan Jane ce aglo bans eo ada Ss 
«ael jars, o9 coo anaa ,3 > joa aspa seo fhaa joo 
AA jio Jl Jes aA pags y~oo j-xaa qe) joo wanags Jlo 
» Jaosopo Jurnac Jgax-o LL Lese odas oioax 4): [rool oc» Joa as 
usa, Sas Joo cu Ns p Je jede abs po Joa aso re 
J> fused othe Qo v Je fae qe way! das coss 
alasya, Lias qo ba Joa soo] yol haas o2 Sl D NS so 
dca ol e Miferolo Kufsios opciiasce pa bso "peo ore 


1. Ms. e 


side could not abandon such a suspicion, but (the informants stated) by tlie 
operation of Satan contended the more against him, so that afterwards (they 
stated) he himself also besides was instigated by the impetuosity of anger, 
and gave up not only the headship and the government of the convent, but 
even residence in it as well, having bound himself by stern oaths not to 
reside in it longer, nor taste even water that belonged to it as long as he 
lived. And so he left. it, and went into the city and lived there in retreat 
and devoutness in his house; while after a time (they stated) he used to sigh 
and distress himself and weep with sobs, because he had been overreached 
by the evil one and robbed of residence in his convent; insomuch that at 
last he would vo out and visit it and look into it while they begged lim to 
take food in it, and he would not consent to taste anything whatever from 
the convent; but at last (they stated) he used to make all the provision for 
his meals at home, even to cold and hot water and herbs, and so he would 
bring it out from his house and eat it in the monastery, while he sighed all 
the days of his life that he had been thus overcome by passion. And his 
suceessor was a brave and valiant blessed man, whose own name also was 
Abraham, who from the beginning of his government began to win distinc- 


tion and show prowess and gain renown on a great and extensive seale, 


E td a 


T (3) Jesh ert 


212 IOUN OF EPHESUS. [558 | 
-fiaios papro Joa Sans ol p2 ufaios Jproaxrs aaolo aaiol Lasy 
Jars Lad [xe bh Jin ILo JN esos Jaaioso haass «oo» So 
acoso sje Jaotus lesa? yas Janso Musso sos dew oral 
Ss Ie ore iss ines) Dess sse ages E 
Laso Jiady JNIal Wee Dha oP Cote jns daa, LOO D Jills 
amo Jiag, othasio alanoj Jio lasso Musso xo Min sy v5 doao 
Joa 35 ol No . otio Sa: JA o rE, Jc ooo E 
ja S espa | Jprarsily haad of [dsard ciao suono] pel Aeon 
pat. Laaa, oibsoars Lia jawas aolo epo cias px Laak, oa 
„uao Ja x 300 oa o] Sado.) Kis d0 d. J:3e2s. oo as «e 


MU] Jilla je! Naaa Joomas! Jose Jem jeje el 
yasni „Naasjo Mau] apaan wis Ton azo :Joot Jyo < t 


KO oA p „aÑ aopa Jiao [525 Qoo ay » Lana x of ooo! 


1. Ms. Im; corr. Nold. 


while he also in a short time greatly increased and extended the convent, 
being also formidable and severe and stern toward all the chief men and 
magnates of the city and of the distriet; insomuch that his fame penetrated 
even to the king', and he was summoned by an order to the royal city, 
and went up and was reecived with great honour, so that in addition to great 
presents he gave him a village also as well for which he asked m the district 
of Ingilene the name of which was Narda, for which he had asked on account 
of the usefulness of its wooded heights and so on. But on coming down 
from the royal city and seeing the spaciousness and magnitude of the heights 
he ent off half of it and gave it to the monastery of the village of Zuknin? 
who had asked him for it, since he indeed loved them as his brothers. And 
he began to raise his own convent of the blessed Mar John to the number of 
four hundred men: and this convent grew and increased in the blessed man’s 
days beyond all the convents round the city. And on account of tlie perfec- 
tion of his character and the sublimity of lis mode of life great constraint 
was pat upon him, and he was made bishop in the land of the Urtaye in the 
district of Anzetene ?; and, when this happened, both he and all the members 
of lis convent were smitten with sorrow and distress. and they continued 


begging and entreating him to appoint a head and governor for them in his 


|. Probably Zeno. Hees 87. elt S IHanzit^. 


559] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OF JOUN URTAYA. 213 


od 


Monge Wipe uM Jad Karo, sacala pl p Joa SJ Maso jsa 
wohl der odo aaia asso Sos] opa ansary Jaan <% 
hiha ol - ol Jia Hoja) aada amano] aD a 
PA Jh il p oad oo Do Dido x) SUO AS. 
wool, - poops Las; > jh re beset xao wash, La! y MET 
yaad yancoly oil v3 OX vd] a Woolas oo Uwe pod 
coors So CT volo (So sd, y «oJ. JI * whoop> bee 
A939 ful x oL eM Jers, <> 0h Pl eh M Ku! 
“OSX ooo <p wol Loa poo wattihio asc pols Js fads, ojo 
NS. So Jes poo JN NS Vda amoo Laan aao pas 
Ji 395 JK carte JS Ilo pao + Jiro oNw3a5 avo sls 
Jipa oi Na aM Lao PEL haag pads xr Jes Pre «2322.91 le 
NANS joa oot Na] um Jaco Sx ota] uroilo JK pes haao e hän! 


PA lenN.le Jida oM La.» cuo oaa wis Je «co 


1. Ms. ovebulo. 


place, while he refused to do this, saving to them, « Now that ] for my part 
have been deprived by my sins of residence with vou, do vou look out, and 
deliberate among yourselves, and the man whom you know to be suited for 
you set over vou as head, lest eventually you find fault either with me or 
with someone else ». But they argued the more with him, saying, « We 
will not allow you, our father, to depart hence until you appoint a head for 
us in your place ». Again. (the informant stated) he on his part answered 
them, saying, « If you insist that l shall set up a governor for vou in 
my place, think not that J shall make an appointment in the way that vou 
suppose and appoint men who are thinking about themselves; but whoever 
appears to me to be fitting I will appoint for vou, And beware lest in the 
end he be displeasing to von and you murmur ». And, as they again con- 
tinued to press him in this wav, he gave orders and the bell sounded, and 
they all stood up for serviee. And, having spoken at great length and given 
warning and instruction in his clear speech, he gave orders and the arehi- 
mandrite’s hood and wand were brought, and laid before the altar. Then 
(the informants stated) the blessed man turned and looked behind him at the 
lines of the companies, and passed down the middle and Lud his hand 


on a eertain old man who held a low place among the members of the convent, 


CN 


b. 


* 132 Y 


214 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [560] 


ooo -DJA faio Jy. Aso t2 Joa oaa yal o» ol; oà Jae 
loa Asi lAa oi 3380 Aoi aas Ja oi Ns o Daso Ja pas 


a. Jepo Nds JN ro «0o » firs Joa sao? JlatLens «2o CI Jus] ERE i 


Laa a Slo talas iNo Slo oem oaa Joa Jrobsoo .Liasse, JIL 
ILa JNaaso Jig fam c2 oo Je» poops] 22e Jian o> 
Jans,30 So s LAM eae frags M vido Pp Jas -Joa £39] 
exl. exl je alas wus fisad v oot ING] yaaa bo pols jas, 
Jr Joo, fas) wis je Lao «20? ely WOOK AD Lady Qux) aldose ad 
latins -fharoy JNa Lis, flaws «2o Lsa Ni] oh Lal JL 
[OOM 9o] Lasso LXS, ud: eet Janis) JRX LAYS [ass Jhsaal 
Nal per pago :Qo0t&24 Sa 0000 qa Jig. x90 [s2 M. 2o id sas OT 
| 5.20 han: Ops v2 :J Lo S 325. pose pado qe oon Oaa Nw Joa 


l. Ms ovas s. — 2. In erasure. Stap following omilled, bul ins. in marg. — 3. Ms. oim. * 


and drew him out, dragging him by force, and brought him before the altar 
(whose name also was Abraham), while he objected and wept and relused. 
And he on his side made a prayer and took him and clad him in the hood 
of the archimandriteship, and put the stalF of the pastorate of the convent 
in his hand, even as he came from the occupation of shepherd of a flock, 
and froma village called Thella d Mikhaua', and all his life and even after 
his death, and even to (he present time in the same convent he was called 
‘Mar Abraham the shepherd’. But the old man continued saying with sobs 
and with much weeping, « How is it, sir, that you appoint me a plain man 
(duoc) anda shepherd to govern such a convent as this? » But the blessed 
man answered him, saying, « Remember our Lord's saying to Peter when 
he says, *Heneeforth thou shalt catch men to life '?; even as you now after 
being shepherd of a dumb flock of animals shall carry out the. duties of 
shepherd of a rational flock of men ». Bat those who were in high and 
prominent place, and thought of themselves that? they were wise and 
learned and teachers, and of whom each one was confident. concerning 
himself that it would be he who would be raised by force to the governorship, 


when they saw that he had appointed an old man and a shepherd wlio held 


LSe hill of the irrigation; engine (unyavay. CE Gryrlhneus Papyri, ne V831,13:n7? 1913, I. ‘Zach. 
Hh. sir, 0) eats hin ta Persian". d. 6, a mative ol Persian territory, — 2. Luke, v, 10. — 3. Ms. om. 


561 HISTORY OPF THE CONVENT OF JOHN URTAYA. 21 


opa 9l. lo LoD soll] -flasa NS aaao Ilag i - KNS, oso 
wis yar jl Wee pal haag Jp p20 „ohi Quy a0 ees lo 
wd) wc? NS. A30 Jlas p oi. 3o. Laa p» ore <>? hu | xw 
weit Cando xo wha US Maul Le fac M - Jpoa ds copsohups 
Kaio] 22 do — Ines ful St e| p .Lhe Jpseary, opcoujaas 
Da bl Jod MS 49.33.25 [2o JE o Jasy <> JY 5 eer Jia 
sS ao Memo RAM bl Jp bas n JAD Oto nas a] 
«0-206300 Nasas os worn qo DA j wan aaan Aao 
—L300 DN GM oaaao oailo o aaa, odo so, [7] 
T? ad Jot Jaan voto ul ha Aaaa lsc ORSON Jp No, OHO 
LIJ Sy lo A> 40 y - jaama] Jasad ogo haao] Lisa ot 
o 5a. Lio fispa foams «9914.24 Qs JL eo rt OS aol: 
Jha seo «o Ruta; Laio hasian yas ERES, sl 2 pal haak, 
«2.54.20 Jio» «234.20 Je CHAD Opa [asao fous vM jl 


I. Ms, oada]. 


a low place to the governorship, showed displeasure and indignation and 
found fault and began to murmur. And, when the blessed man saw it, he 
said to them : « Yon know, my sons. that for my part I at first committed 
the matter to your diseretion. But, now that vou threw the burden upon 


me, I on my side thought this old man fitter than all of you to administer 


the affairs of this convent, while | know also what I have done and whom | 
have appointed, a man whom 1 have seen for a long time, and, while I observe 
all of vou, and see that cach concerns himself only with himself and his 
gratification, I see that this man is vigilant and energetic. and earnest, 
and eager lo promote the interests of the convent. And for all these reasons 
it is to him that I have entrusted and am entrusting my place. And he who 
obeys him, and receives and pleases him receives and pleases me: and he 
who strives with him and opposes him is superlluous im this convent ». 
When these things had been carried out in this way, and the blessed bishop 
had given his blessing and prayed and gone to the district to which he had 
been summoned, then many stood forth in envy and bitter strife against the 
same blessed Abraham saving, « He set as head over us a man who is a 
peasant and a shepherd holding a low place ». Aud so they made one com- 


pany (zowdy), and rose up in strife, and separated themselves: and sixty men 


(CMTS OS Du NIN oe l5 


M pad 


E IS aaa 


b, 


216 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [562] 


yn INSA «2o ows) Jan EN NM em q% aao ORD 
Lao p> ols I2 jk Maso Jh Qoo asao yaad aNjlo ha 


eos] lsak way oof JNa po Mas, pobre, JNa -woo 
aaa Sox Nase M Qian’ Masco .-33Kas00 SS eso Nul 
l.&àío Dao olds, xoa» JNa; Jaso ps Nao Jia, ona spo 
Lə; paa] flisa} aK Sars ol p2 062) LoDo fatwod Laigo frodnto 
JNa JKd 00 JNa JNX3as Jri Ups eras sexo", OÑ 
Joe 922 oo Slo oio, Na ssos ol; hal flop oso : Jaca dso 
Nes, ba jas ol; ba Sufarsaa op jasak olo JL - fray v? No 
haan ups’ 90.15 yano [xao oD Sao Pea p eno oaa 


ooo rl esos we t2 .o Joa M Js eos] Lasag -haas 


le ANS rawo b JN Seo Joa > -JN add 
TS ooo qa haao -LAS ooa ipao ooa qoo ooo 


left the monastery in one body for such a reason as this. And they went 
and occupied a site and built a monastery lor themselves and a well-known 
martyrs’ chapel whieh exists even to the present time, in the village called 
that of Beth Bar srubtha'. But the blessed Abraham was strengthened, and 
began to act with vigour and show firmness, and to display proper energy in 
all the government of the convent, and great carefulness for all its belongings, 
and lor the canons and regulations and all the spiritual ordinances in it, 
while he also began to walk in every. point in the footsteps of the blessed 
Abraham the great his predecessor, in. speech and in wisdom, and sound 
knowledge, and orderly and honourable conduct, insomuch that he also as 
well gained great renown over the whole East. But after a time came the 
blessed Mar Samuel also besides who also founded the eonvent ealled after 
his name?, having first set up a standing-post lor himself, and taken up his 
position on it. And, when he began to build the couvent, the blessed 
Abraham used to give him much assistance, sinee, alter the eltv-gates were 
shut, he would take a party of forty and Alty meu, aud they would vo and 
work with them, and give assistance all the night, and thus they would 


return to the monastery m the morning; beeause (the informant stated) 


l. Se. tson of Friday’, — 2. * Zach. Rh, virt, 5. He is probahty the S. of ‘Zach’, vit, 6, though 


his arrival is there placed after the Persian siege. His monastery is mentioned in ch. 39. 


[563] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OF JOHN URTAYA. 215. 
Jus] pir” coor v jol Valans ya x22 Sly Ww. Jsa 


JN > wl Al = wy :,0001 «el he 2 OOO <a En yas +3) 


ocot op ho omsl Ji Lic yar Loo T Neal: FN 
Laad Sis osoars ool J $302 «9922; Lope yar -Laios Jer 
lasso Kaas -Jipa à] Se amies fase yao JL! sas pests! 
malio lé mo soo . dad Je Slo p .à3so nado Jens NS Lo 
Jaco f) 4o Ss JNa Daoa Joa yas co]; [Niana - fos 96,309 
Jes 95M Sosod vast] aw wpe “py (S wih)! JR pa cs 
Jr yaio] <% Od fbann, Jills «C290 cs! we} po? 
Lipanj yopcad Mr e: fae] caesa Muss roof) osos ree 
Jaco voasa] - fro fpsoaxs os. ce «o9 [o Np | Ms JN 
«e. g p Slaam vo jasy “Joo J JI 9] p Na Ja cà 


1. Ms, OmeaetOo- — 2. Mx. 9 — 3. In smaller letters in erasure, 


when they were shepherds also they used to feed the flocks together, so that 
(the informant. stated) jesting with one another they would say, « Woe to 
us if God requires from us the stolen sheep that we have eaten ». Aud so 
(it was stated) the two heroic old men distinguished themselves by great 
modes of life, together with all the other convents their brethren. In the 
davs of the blessed Abraham the shepherd therefore Kawad king of the 
Persians came against the city of Amida in the year eight hundred and 
thirteen '; and he took it? and earried off eaptives from it, while he also 
razed the monastery too to the ground, and piled its wood and its stones 
and its clay on to the ‘mule’? which he had set up against the eitv. The 
story of these events ‘was related to us* by an old man with venerable 
white hair whom * once when we had set out to vo into the desert of Egypt 
we found in the country of Palestine beyond Jerusalem in a monastery called 
that of Mar Thomas at Beth Gubrin *, so that, when we had first zealonsty 
directed our course to the city of Alexandria, and had arrived at this con- 
vent ê, we found that venerable old man sitting, though he was unable to 


|. 5012; IL was really in 81l% (5093 ses ‘Josh, SINE; xax, L -- 2. ‘Zach. Bh? (yn 4 say- 
that il was lahen through the drunkenness and carelessness of the mouks of this monastery. aud bs 
the remark that the archimandrile was a Persian he seems lo suggest treachery. Cf. * Josh... LIIN. 
3. A mound ou which the besiegers 2lood in order to be level with the top of the wall. See * Zach.’ 
vit, 3, and * Joshi, LIX. — %. Ms. om. — >. Eleutheropolis, Arab. Ban Gabrin, — 6 
‘to mean (hat he visited the conveul on his return, but the sentence is very 


came from Amida. his t visit in 53% is intended 


. ] nnderstamed this 


uiabigueus, Since h 


* 133 7° b 


218 JOHN OF EPHESUS, (564) 
coh] Jas] «aer 9] 99 SES Lone yN o sag: la 
Le: w oho] BL quer aol po oad a ey vns io 
y» pao Molga 23$) waslo ool og Joa waa Lesly fas qor pa 
Dha pads ly Hel Jng of haw joa jaN Laas j Jm 
nalad gat? eer sies OMT ade epo Pai] Rane wid oad Hl 
vaada La vo 00b ted] te KAD poy opdoo Cao vido sans, 
epe Nas Lpobsoy Jes Mal dox po SS Sha Duy bor Jia, 
susp dO «l o “rele JMun3lle fias an So pop Loi Do os 
war AfM Lisad eran Jit n ro Nel arr Slo wolo Lua 
Listy b pd eee ue pool! Lan») fad of > .dsaads 
cà ha yool 210 oed. v6 s.a! jj: Noo SML] Jiaras wu je 
loo e Maul LL of 2 Moca vu] LM ro - Jeanne! Joos 
WROD Do vue Cops - pel yao JL] pods poo coe Jhansi, 


1. Ms. pl. — 2. Ms. eilo. 


see from age. But, when we approached him to make obeisance to him 
and receive his blessing, he asked us saying, « Whence are you, my sons? » 
And we on our side answered him, saying, « We are, sir, from the district 
of Amida». When he on his side heard the name of Amida, he was struck 
dumb and shed copious tears with sobs. And, when that old man had been 
violently weeping and sobbing for a long time, he said : « If I ask you, my 
sons. do vou know anything in the territory of Amida? », and we answered 
him, « Be so good as to ask, sir; and what we know we will say ». But 
the old inan asked us about this our own convent, saying, « Is there a 
monastery called that of the house of Mar John on the north of the city by 
the side of the wall and has it been built?» And we said to him « Yes, sir. 
It has been built and it exists, and it is im fact from it that we come ». 
When the blessed man heard this, he vearned the more toward us, while he 
also betook himself to showing emotion by weeping with many sobs, saying, 
« 1, my sons, was an inmate of that monastery, from the days of Mar Abraham 
the great who became a bishop, when I was a boy, when the numbers also 
amounted to four hundred men. And, when Kawad eame to Amida, we fled 
and we all went inside and took up our abode in the school (syo}4) called 


565] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OF JOHN CRTAYA. 219 


£ «cM Je NU. yl Jia xo A Sols lob. so; Jaala sissy a 
aso Lopo aXXo IN ror Naal] po .asL»o ooo oip>'Li fopa 
NAM: [Laa aao lax; JNa A” mm JK\aaso I5 «do Llsgss 
axxo hopo flaw aA £O acALAM" juo Snare fon. [xc T 
roo JN Ius <> wre ADA} Jr) LN 5,10 Of 
OA Se cpu CH PP Do) p SX Qamokpo Ciro fala] 
J-a, ola, ID SE el ad [Laas > aslo Nt ia MEAE 
Ad «Nelle JASN D Ruluo OD WH J Koodo NN SL] T e 
Is -Jol hano Manolo Jil] od ofss o Drops wem moo Juge 
wa „oà [2 JA o Exo fai Lej» x) haao ool AAs | 
| cad ' Ur) Jo Da, La? ADM Joa LN o ee med 
oot alo JNa 1 lie] wol hawo ADO pb «rl IM e eL * 133 v* b 
Joà oo S M5 Jiase La jawas, alano, Latoa Loops, JA SA pra. 


l. Ms. om.; corr. v. D. and L. 


that of the Urtave within the wall, about three hundred men, the rest 
having been scattered and fled. And, when the city was laken and the 
Persians came in and began to slaughter, we all stood up sorrowing and 
weeping for the service of our death and of our lives’ end, slaughter being 
now set before our eyes. And, when the Persian soldiers arrived, and. they 
came in and saw long rows of men’standing, they began a fearful slaughter 
among us. And, having beheaded ninety of us in one massacre while 
our eyes beheld it, they then ceased slaughtering; and they took us and 
carried ns away as captives, while they also made spoil of all the belongings 
of the convent. But, when the city was thrown open, God delivered us 
and strengthened us and many of us escaped. And from that time I fled 
from all that country; and I made a vow to God not to see it again 

And so that old man was piteously relating all these things to us with great 
emotion and many tears: so that for a long time he was nnable! on account 
of his sobs to relate them before us. And again another old man of many 
days (and he too had venerable white hairs), who during the same times of 


the prosperity of this convent had been in his bovhood an inmate m it, 
| ł Y à 


l. Ms. table’. 


220 JOUN OF EPHESUS. [566] 


waas, LL] saol, SE J Lopsass6 j> joa 2oto al» :ot5 o Joa 
wa fpscads odasu 5 Sudo Lala ere el be sJoor Jose Layil 
alaras Sx uaaa «oo 25 JL ro Joo LA e .jadm qx 
Pe A> goa volo] Lose» copay ad Jani], il o£ Je» 
seen apo lasad} Le jan lo joo voor jio sao opaa 
arse! . hias, oM. jiannn Jill ya aA Joa rs 1} Jao! 
JNa, Jäms ans;? fusan JAN Kaas Loa; ~ Js oN aan, 


Lisäk yas] «eS onus ooo v p Jans] Joada aana, copays 


" oho 0096 KAO JN ssp J Niao Ia» Joa ra No, [so Jes 


ed ooa VAS aao faaoo be ANS ootd lego Jet oe Je p 
«MAX [sees aoia CR Faro caue SO pee Ceo aaao . Jo[72s. 
PAN] JI sl t2 „Jamol of har uol) Loo husa Sx qsoh»s00 
E shares Jiad- S a S SS 


who was in the renowned monastery of the Orientals at Edessa', who was 
called Paul of Arzen ?, who also departed from the world a few years before 
during the persecution of the convent*, used all his days in the presence 
of many persons to tell about the prosperity of the convent, saying 

« Before the deportation by Kawad we numbered four hundred men in it; 
and so prosperous and extensive was the convent of the blessed Mar John, 
that, since their space was too much confined for the purposes of occupation 
by the same convent, they formed the plan of building for themselves a 
large house for a chapel. And so the masons of the city applied themselves 
to hewing out metopes (uétoxx); so that, when the blessed men wished to 
convey them to the monastery after the gate (mogra) of the city was slut at 
dusk, they used to go out and fetel them in one line from the monastery 
right up to the quarries (Axozoy/x) themselves: and thus they would hand on 
the stones and pass them from one to another, and they are passed down 
their lines till they enter the precincts and are piled upon the building, and 
thus that extensive building was built, though it was not completed on 
account of the deportation by the Persians and the scattering of the bro- 
therhood: so that, sinee a heap (?)' remained after the Persians, a large 


I. Cf. Land, p. vol, 2. Arzanene, olherwise called Arzun (p. 145. ‘This was in Persian territory, 


O5. 521-40; see Introd , p. iv. — 4. Lil. Simountain’, perh, a heap of debris like the Mons Testaceus 
itl Tome, 


[567] IHSTORY OF THE CONVENT OF JOUN URFAYA. 331 
o» -Lila Jiao Nass hära Kis vlomssllo past! ars Spass ENT 
Ne A520 sone So — panl] J Narso JLS wel Slo asal] o0 
Jaio Mi) p> Je jas oa wnal] we? peA MaD alo 
hja pain uol] haa ol, cà pal < lasag Jlauls brrssaso 
„haas, Jla Da ots «e aco JA laan Mirco ooko, 
fomrsso Jo í Joa IS asso Lia oot Sly ba Lamao [1324 
aaa Loo mada] Koa laD La o5 La CE p> 
njan alapapo alassa Sx ois q30 q pao faao awan 
la Joa cook. Laig: Nio Few Qo Hed) [rr ens eoo [120] 
fora yor Leon aay Loco oot Jue SX o h-zo o |4265.25 
Slo Jo» flax (oo aso - Jlaaiyss bes "pe :Jesoas. soo, 


]. Ms. ahg eaaa. 


portion of the monastery was quarried and built from it; and the whole of 


the martyrs’ chapel dedicated to Kyra Maria was also built. from it, and 
further much was also quarried and brought in from it for the church aud 
the city. »' And its kiln is still standing. But this convent was rebuilt on 
a smaller scale, both in buildings and in the number of the brotherhood. 
But the blessed Abraham, who was also called ‘the shepherd’, ended the 
course of his practices, and ‘died in a good old age’*. And to sueceed him 
in the government of the convent the blessed Cosmas was appointed, who 
also showed himself an excellent governor and head; and he governed 
during his days in tranquillity and quiet, having lived the whole of the time 
of the reign of Anastasius*; and so he fell asleep in his convent in peace *. 
And to suceeed him in the headship and government of the convent the 
blessed Sergius was appointed, who by his birth (yévo2 came from the village 
of Gadara which was in the north; who in the first persecution thal arose 
against the church® was the first to go oul in banishment with all the rest 


of the convents, and gained distinction in the conflicts (2yév) of persecution, 


1 lE is not elear where Paul's words end. The statement about the kilo is clearly d. >. and perb- 
the whole story of the completion of (he rebuilding is his, for P. probably left Anida ab the tine of 
the siege. Perb. J. with his nsual carclesness has forgotten thal he is reporting Pes words. — 2. 1 
CEI XXIX, 28, — 3. l-5138. |le cannot have become arehimandrile before 505, and Uie meamnge can 
therefore only be that be survived Anastasius. — ^4. ‘Zach. Bh vid. 5 erroneousls names C. amon 


lhe banished arehimandriles. — 5. 521; see Introd... p. 1v. 


Po 


Ep Ns 


222 JONN OF EPHESUS [568] 


hason A> ojos eo oom) Lay GSO JAM M Jeu s 325 
Jaco haag ais wo «à? LO .| (frase 31) Loo, Jes ja ollo Miro 
da ad; bor Lagi] Joa voi] ese MLD) WALD ones, 3) 
qi «O6 PD 0001 Cd; JKooats - framace MA MD eo] 39.0) wh 
woks | hxano os) jaana aA, Lopes aa HO lae awai 
wao haaa MS mH haad opaa ihe 7 36 Da po te 
l po QJ Keasoo foo Ji Mso qar oof + Jhfsy oo ga] Jaapan 
DAL «2o mia DAS Loo NS Sx [slo obl] ou] A> WIAasasy 
IRs Qe elo po WS KAN yo, C RAO [x2 2690 Cattle 
Las aso 2010 ps J| ASE) Na] NINAN fipa 2à alanas 
Joa ribs 2 Aufrstss0o Rupa tk naa, foo y Jada... 
Joa soa- Kp Dao fiona JKasasks LAD hawako Jlisoo 


I. The name has fallen out; see note on lransl, — 2. Ms. 9:226, marg. in later hand 9e. 


and in all the labours of monasticism, as well as in excellent government all 
the time of his life. And he ended his course during the same persecution; 
and he died and was buried in the monastery called Tthat of Mar Mama‘. 
But to succeed him a great blessed senior was appointed whose name was 
5vmy?: who by his birth (yéves) was a native of Arzen”: who with his two 
predecessors Sergius and Cosmas were * in our days, since we indeed in the 
days of the blessed Sergius and the others who succeeded him received the 
privilege of residing in the convent. When then after the decease of the 
blessed Sergius they were urging the blessed Symy to take up the vovern- 
ment, he continued objecting and refusing, saying, « Allow me, my brothers, 
1o repent and make entreaty on account of my sins, because | have not one 
day beyond three years and a hall in the body ». And, since not even alter 
his prophecy also (which was shown to be exact truth) did he escape, but 
they constramed him and he took his place at the head with earnestness as 
it is written? excellently and like a teacher, expounding and admonishing 


day and night with service and Cwith vigil. he would also at all times 


I. Ms. oin. The ehronology in this ch. and ch. 35 makes it elear Ihat the ionasters of Mama is 
intended. 2. CE. Zach. HB, viin, b, where he is placed among the banished archimandrites, while 
Sergius is omitled. B mee p 066, n. Z, — A. Sie syr. — 5. 1 do not know tlie source of the ref, — 
5, Ms. caffer it^ aucauinglessls , and in marg. in later hand ‘Abraham, 


[560] HISTORY OL TUE CONVENT OE JOUN URTAYA. SEE. 
p haos vaaia Js Sx ad Nac NSa So afpa asl DA joipsdo 
Lan whaso lad odanlLsaso coo «ou No galarazia Jingo 9] 
x? looi aK, | Jos Ji «218360 xor Koo +2 + COO whl fx 3640 fauo 
aLaaa anona aM, jjo (pol) Jlawasyo LS T JK3otaso o? oad, 
hohe p> Jas əl, has? JI o JN Gast NS Slo yi js Lio Se Pre 
x22 s Koo finas JNS; edo JL ga Ix Ko fauko poly Lias Qu 
Slo aNS so, [300..] —~ ipoh] jo Jail Sex Noa Jl eod paus ara 
Ves, haa brads; DA EEA, frasos <% TAT dot .J sot es 
Sd ams; h yada ba woo e JNaso; Jat gH xp AD 
Jamo ys! haeo .widad igo paso yhoo jo JNSa yo -oaa 
JNa Loses ja> sha Jill Lrsosp> a okoa yoda - ams; 
Juno’ po ido fasta e! iNo Joa pax Gs Lasan aa. ol; he 


o ba. Lo MOHAIR axa. ado Ne xoa] d „loa [4.2055 wo 


1. Ms. om. and ins, stop. — 2. Ms, l8 o5 aes. 


adjure and warn everyone to bestow care and earnestness upon finding 
spiritual life, and many were in fact enlightened by his teaching, and by 
his admonition were brought to open their hearts and to sorrow and fears, 
wondering and giving thanks to God. But his prayer and the gift of reve- 
lations and of prophecy was of such a kind that not only did he gain know- 
ledge of his departure beforehand and prophesy it, but even concerning many 
other things also, insomuch that at the beginning he spoke and uttered 
many prophecies to our own mean self also, of which we truthfully assert 
that none has fallen to the ground or fallen short of the pronouncement 
nttered by htm even down to this very day; which we refrain from recording, 


lest we be thought to be destrous of displaying great things abont ourself, 


When therefore this man had completed the time which he decreed for 
himself, some days before ' he ealled and blessed and commanded and warned 
everyone, and so according to the decree which he laid down he ended his 
course during the same persecution in the country of the East in the mon- 
astery called that of the Poplars ?, in which also the whole community was 
residing. But after five years, when the recall from banishment came, we 


ourselves were privileged to carry and convey his holy bones into the convent 
[ e LUI a L2 


|. Sie 2Mro— 2. See p. 317. 


Tg 


b. 


* Gp 


a. 


224 JOHN OF EPHESUS. [570] 
«19.300 wo Laag A> D xc i PO iMa upto Riss jan 
saoi} Jib] «2o a oo ol; ha fs] Joa aaa, - tardy < 
qia xi? xo) IMs .olpwse aAa prolo < Joot Das Lasst, Joa 
alaani vjan JN Jeseadry «corso JNx33e loo alasya, 
wae faia yl jyan «oot2 che cae +20 JD haiwan, 
Aas L.so Joa 9e flys” oals o0 fram Joo -ogo 
Solo hasad JN ul: bop Qo aal Nao par «juae 
a> ao «36? 2! ia fy pol Alo -Jiwan ada asl]! 
ol ee ast] "Wc hay theo JA asa hopoi o> opazo 
JaA Dxdo - of d0a% oa» yar Lal fasa} oo Sy lo jyan awr2'hlo 
Jay Licks; he ok Gare „jokea Lyoss Jio) [ecole Lops 


ot husan, J> Spo 3 Lea — N en MS Naso 


of the house of Mar John itself'. And to succeed him there was appointed 
our blessed master and teacher from our boyhood, whose name was Abba; 
who also was by his birth (yévos) from the district of Arzen*; and he was 
reverend and imposing in his speech and in his appearance. But after four 
vears of his government occurred the entry into the city-convents themselves 
at the beginning of the reign of Justinian the king. And, when we had 
completed about seven years and a half? in the convents themselves, the 
envy of those who ruled the churches was aroused, and the persecution was 
renewed over the whole of the Kast, through the descent of Ephraim patriarch 
of the city of Antioch to the East; and all the convents were again expelled, 
and they went together to the monastery which they had previously built and 
took up their abode in 3t, which was called that of the Poplars. And after a 
httle time they were expelled thence, and the convents were divided; and the 
blessed Abba with all his convent went away, and they went into the steep 
towering mountains ol the village called "bdvhr':; and we took up our 
abode there in a monastery called that of the Nut. And after three years” 
we left and went into the district of Claudias, and took up our abode in the 


Il. Since we are lold below that the return to Amida happened after 4 years of Abba’s rule, the 
translation of the bones cannol have been contemporaneous wilh it. The restoralion having been in 530 
(see Introd., p. 1), we get 522,3-526/7 as the date of Symy’s archimandriteship., — 2. See p. 566, n, 2. 

: 3. Since the descent of Ephraim was at (lie end of 536 or beginning of 537, the time cannot have 
exceeded 512 years Dyakonov, p. 30, n. 166); see p. 418, nt. - 4. See p. 232. — 5. Since Samuel died 
iu the monastery of (he Huts in 539 pe 548), the date must be 539, not 540, 3 yrs. affer the expulsion 
from Amida. 


[594] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OR IOUN URTAYA. 243 


~ plo pom! b) haag £9 unas ouall SOQ. oo ol; 
fass y» «ol LAM Jas; +20 Jla Kupas anao OPS [Adan 
Nee le :Jioyofl J NaS Jasasopsads Joa i230 yoy Xo x20) lisasto, 
D rapa yao, od Joa Jarmo 5x aria Joao :Kufaios Garo 
Ja 2 22.2 x20]. ojos yas so. JLI Lazana Jisas oot Joa oot Sa | ases 
Risso g eatls MSI); ha Ms Kew cre ol +2? La? JR 


jan oi oa Slo Layo waah ipao cin Daa . JlaaXso 
ba eos] haag - Jpsoasy oou So Sa wN LO y, ro JNas> 
qoa AMAA bo o Liso, Joa oot NA Apa «DO a: 
aal gis Vs a s Jas AAA) i Je So || PTT 
was He Joa Duy] alojar, yal jo „Jwana or» 5 cl!le oa Slo 
Jasag eh q% q ro Joa JI poo joa 533 yl or pacllo 
Joao; -Nipo ouo Aapa uao] Naa 0 ba -paol eno eo 


monastery of the Huts‘, which we also mentioned above in our history., And 
the blessed Abba, having been arrested and maltreated by the Synodites, 
Hed and went up to the royal city; and, when he had passed some time there 
with the concourse of believers that had been gathered from every quarter 
by the believing queen Theodora, and had a great reception from her, and 
had been there live vears, then it was his pleasure to return to liis convent, 
while the convent was still in the district of Claudias, and he ended his 
course there ‘in a good old age’*; so that, when alter a space of three years 
we ourselves too went down from the roval city. we took his holy bones 
also as well and sent them to the city-eonvent itself. And to sueceed him 
in the government of the convent the blessed Abraham was appointed, who 
by his birth (yévo;) was from Anzetene *, and was a great and earnest admi- 
nistrator in all the spiritual and bodily alfairs by whieh a convent is 
maintained. And, when this man had completed some years, he also as 
well fell asleep and was laid in the convent, since he had gone for the 
purpose of visiting it, and fell asleep and was buried in his monastery, as he 
desired and praved*. After him was appointed Ihe blessed. Sergius of 


Amtda, who comes of a distinguished family from the city itself valled the 


I5: SOc ie. dado oe SOP CMI. NSIN ORS 5s Be. al midis “ie dale as (to billy, i8. Se VF, 


'Hanzit. — 5. J. omis to state thal Ihe monks lor a short time returned to Armida p. ve’, 


raus. 


230 JOIN OF EPHESUS. [572] 


Jan ot» woods! saama oilopae q x) Lo Jj) p Kas 
Va- 2] mp hlo Jes 25 [sao lise used. Gro a> olo 
aso «Aso J[3aisol Maa; fron Nass props -hajan oy Jag 53. hä 
woo] [ico «ooi ja» +. yopoad ,5 .fsadr qao hadas oaa 
X039. 300 242230 Joo aoa] 54] Saas ooa [4.2055 ujas x2 a 
„aio Hatlo L] Naji «yao Jesoary Jlarss So Dx! Jesus 
jao p joa 235,30 joo. joo? 3o Job Bl ero RRS 
+> yl Ji poo Lopaso JN se repo «0 r0 Loa Ape as wasrdo 
slo x45 sdso JA] aaas Lad 2D Jha :Joo 2oto Na] Jado 
Da maio Jusi potas qo voids! pool Jos NS aes 
umo'blo amado -fopao fasdmso JA&xexx4 JM xofso Soo Jen) [ada 
fsasasly Picks ] à. o JN 38.8.0 Jsoo o sJIlozopo Jlosass ye Je 


Jem Y» pec] bheeas loe so exe» voe fornrsolyo LAX dsyo 


house of Bar Deha'. This man was placed by his parents in the same con- 
vent from his childhood, and he was brought up in it from the days of the 
blessed Cosmas the archimandrite, and he gained distinction also in all the 
conflicts (zy6v) of persecution from the beginning down to the present year, 
which is the year eight hundred and seventy-seven, the year in which Justinian 
departed from the world’, having first been bulleted in every place with all 
the old men his fathers who had lived since the beginning of the persecution 
while he endured and remained firm. But at last, when he was appointed 
to the headship of the convent, he increased in strength and prowess and 
firmness, while he was more frequently driven from district to district and 
from place to place, uttering thanks and praise at all times; a man who, 
having been at first luxurious and delicate and smart as being a citizen, and 
at last come to himself’, and been smitten with remorse and bronght himself 
into a religious frame of mind, turned his face away from all visible 
things, and came to despise clean clothes and delicious foods and unguents 
and so on, and clothed and covered’ himself with garments of hair, and 
embraced asceticism and abstinence, and fasting and services and protracted 
prayers by day and night, and what is more admirable than all, the practice 


of observing the divine commandments, having stored up in his mind the 


1. Sc. ‘son of a wolf’, — 2. 565,6. — 3. Luke, xv, 17; ef. p. 171. — 4. See p. 319, n. 2; p. 489, n. 3. 


[573] HISTORY OF THE CONVENT OF JOHN URTAYA. 


ie 
lv 
-1 


Joal, «olo Mo o NS So y oM jan owl e042} AN Ld 
«2o JN seo EX „asau Sx games hao H flo l el aN 
Slo vaol exo el p „haa e olo pado ipao yano „oaol J amao 
Wpols Jitka bg] Jpsoar 2o] Qoo. yar aaa, Jlaasp> hao l p> 
«e ja salo veas fhrairel Mia òM, Lao [sos Lusor ot 
Cod, haori Las q>) Laia goy ia kilo Alo Jharsoh Nia 

Tents” aaao <il Kasil] SS esos ha Jas Lo, 


reap rimsasa cavDnap sian ds hard Amin 
rhe meni abrasa Area Xe. 212 duan 


vhu en ml aac 


words of our Saviour who says, « He who loveth me keepeth my word », 
and again « Let your speech be * Yea, yea’ and ‘Nay, nay .»', and so decided 
it for himself that an oath should never proceed from his mouth. And he 
persevered and kept and maintained his resolution even down to the present 
time also, since he is actually in the body even down to the present time also 
during the persecution of his convent, as well as of all his brethren the other 
convents in tle distriet of Izla? in the same persecution, down to tlie present 
time whieh is the year eight hundred and seveuty-nine ?, from the year eight 
hundred and thirty-two ', which makes forty-seven years from the beginning 
of the persecution of the same down to the year stated above. 


The history of the original foundation of the holy convent of the house of Mar John 


at Amida, and who were its heads and founders from the beginning ts finished, 


l. John, xiv, 23; Matth., v, 37. — 2. See p. 519, n. ^. — 3. 567/8. This was clearly wrilten some 
lime after the preceding. See lntrod., p. vi. — 4%. 521. The confusion between the whole time 
from the 1* perseculion and the time spent at Izla is au instance of J's careless method of writiuz. 


np] 


* S 166 1" 
*(1985 v9 


APPENDIX 


; falas pa caps. mea sana eian m'duird 


ead Grm ac iaw m'àeiórEse iara 
c» "uem Foam dana rwn hri reéma8 
wirms ccacoaarcha eal rero 
Wharton rsasunds rama aslasrceulil ons 
Hra une. macy adani 


eb iaa Loos Sy sso ropax Sx Jo Piso unas ,5 
ota.-S0, 0 „hasas oua» Woo june Ma, [od 2) oro} [Lao 


1. Ms. sing. — 2. In C the tit. is SOM, «e? So eumsols [Baam] «saos. oio la^,9 Noy [Saal 
Laos Juas is v 1355» *Laavtas. east] o SS Beso Slo ssa woos oto : aa wp 
IL. [Aoh wdarswo [Site padi. S marg, 4822» ado iso doal mudal E 0834s 
EN 2539. Na. ls 33a26, wl. Me Laj loo I Lojola : J23005 hass- .Losol. — 3. C [Nvonal 
yov posso fasts na: haaa ome. OAS e | Boa o I5 Las ON suona. un TES Bays lo» d 
on p Hio pono =) du i2099 ubtrol D20 osea eas la unt 00 SE Ios ondata Ns e» 
262445 IE as ovas. DUM: bos & Mld Louis Dast Goto wa (sic) o hiad- uo obl wo 
han Ius (sic) «e pliks sISsaul E (Xd. [a9:2o My PA meas Qa) IS "Oeo y [Lazat 
laaa h90 uil o z cei lassa 0 0lo mba Sx sic ons Lie N Sy po -uorotsors 
abas p45 > S. «12204. o ods bo ‘Otay dajteso XII haas E esl, hajas Sls bo fates vol, 
Vn ) voa Ls bros ys «155-28-50 lose Oo ere amaya (a0 Pepe. 


Tie HISTORY OF THE WABITS OF LIIE OF THE. SAINTLY Jaw Es METHOPOLITAN OF 
lÉngssa AND OF THE COUNTRIES OF SIS. Wil WAS ALSO ENTRUSTED WITH 
THE SUPERVISION OF THE CHURCHES OF THE KAST, AND RECEIVED. ORDINATION 

x rq x 
FROM THE BLESSED SEVERUS AND l'ukgoposiUs or ALEXANDRIA IN CONSTAN- 
TINOPLE, ANI BECAME AN UPHOLDER OF THE 1 3TII, WRITTEN BY THE SAINTLY 


Jons of Asia 


Since then God had merey on his people, and sought to give them help. 


the Lord stirred up the spirit of hing Justinian, and putinto lis mind the plan 


I. Iur C the tl is : 9 A bistory eonverning the holy Mar J., bp. of Edessa (or rather (anov) of 
alt the orthodoxy, who is known as Burd tana, and on aecount of whout also we were termed Jaco- 
bites, aud itis written by the ely d. ot AL. the converter of pagans and author of the ecclesiastical 
histories », and the text opens with the words « Praise lo God who adorned his ehurch with his 
saints cad tilled at with Hie riches and. treasures of their relies. aud decorated ib with the elorious 


[575] SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 229 


rao Jhouwseso "JN fsaomis/o IMS qan -| alaaa 
JlaaS_sd Mos Qoo, uoo cà dado ^ Loasosol si Ja oot 
v9 italy Aa; aana Q39 yl! «Mas ‘Aa Ama 
POL «or adr cris Xo cre Jingo adl >. as fs0a2 pao Jays 
«ooa DD Sc PEOR wmanmooflo Jpolo upr bro 
Moos aaoo ..[am5oolso|! ooo! ee Loa, fjas; foanomislo 
soaa Loasa "pao Jaga fasy fad "asl uli Sao s. Lasso 
NS Soo J Nae. asso. JLA ecl Laipa soirassa ooo sr 
wawo]. [,.3ad lad i aoo! Niso jas KO Än £2 009 


1, C alasioso (added in marg. in fainter ink — 2. C ins. Ilija. — 3, € aoadoz0lFol. — 4, C 
anpupeooan N marg. (sic) mallo mao 90/35. wad, $S ;9 153. vasla > Canis Qo uoa Q0 
foto OP. — 5, € Po. — 6. C o. — 7. € ee. — S, Com, — 9. C oe el palo amdorol Fol. 
— 10, C P. — 1IL C eS. — 02; U Eel. — 13. C Ido. 


of letting the patriarchs and bishops examine the subject of the faith before 
him and in his presenee; and he ordered both parties, the orthodox (626430203) 
and the Chalcedonians, to meet in the royal city of Constantinople, in order 
that the general questions might be examined in the king’s presence'. And, 
when the order went forth, many assembled from all quarters; and the holy 
Mar Severus also went up and Theodosius of Alexandria?, who themselves 
alone and a few bishops with them were left among the orthodox (60680395), 
and tliey stayed in tbe royal eity, because the king detained them for a long 
tme, And, all the believers being desirous of sending eloquent aud learned 
men to the conference, they occupied a little over a year in choosing men from 
the convents and the eities and sending them to the blessed Theodosius the 


lowers of their practices, which are recorded in their histories, and painted before the eyes of the heart 
of believers; and, whenever we read of the manner of life of oue of them, we are consoled by him as 
if he were with us and our minds exult in love for him, esp. of this saint who adorned the ehureli bs 
the gifts of grace wherewith he filled it, and delivered himself up for it; of whose practices our feeble 
speech does not sullice to describe a small fragment; whom if the Lord had uot had meres on his 
church and raised up, it would have been brought to destruction through the evil persecution of the 
Diphysites; the beginning of whose story we begin 1o make clear from examination aud study: whom we 
entreat lo help ns by his prayers, thal we may speak and write all about him, Accordingly from this 
point we begin to place the memorial of his history on record ». S marg. « This history is of 
J. Burd'ana, and not of James of Edessa, the interpreter of the Seriptnres. since the Edessene's lime 
was hnown lo be (?; the year 1054, and Burd‘aua died in the year 889 ». 

l. N (Introd., p. xiii) has here au. Arabic note. « This is the slory of James Burd'ana the liar the 
cursed heretie. And he has made the whole narrative (7) mendacivus and false». - 2. Sev. left CP. 
about 9 mos. before Th. arrived, aud the conference was held at a much earlier lite. 


* S 166? u. 


*(. 


285 V? b. 


230 APPENDIN. [5767 
HL sor sory Ihiasy JNa Janpiupmaos ve Joa Kul | apap ro 
! Joo opaa, JNa wia v6 [2420 s]. Sur: hoj re NSja3o 
en a so, Laj wopo «6 JAJ Sao bag’ hay asa V3 JLoojl 
a oo ooo «oot J [zio :NM loas ‘Looks JAN; |. œa, S seo 
wonadhy «oof plo ja> fra. JoJ "oie -,42haa0 ool ado ar, 
Saal oes Passo Ph dad; lenses hapo Jua Lax 
Wand. OAs "leo -jpa o won Jom op ras p ox JS aam, Je 
J-zh> J N..22.9 Jom OS :ootXS| ooo saada] "wo [35 pao 
EEEN Jprop> saD] 5S Jap do50 Janso wos Xoo] updo faa 


1. C om. — 2. (€ wadsaSanpupamans — 3, G agio. — ^, O wy». — 1 [Bees - 6. C pref. o- 
— 7M cM bipes. — 8, Cum v. oo. — 9, (lo 1510 sliona do faond JU NAE epe an eu l2 
enbllo :paao his: ógso ab 61 ir JB. d coos Pelle. — 1o. € gw% usil) be 


ANo i3. G.S casos uina Mb ls ei 2B le, Hy Qo Jos so lla3.., dad .oo00o075ls 
yoni c» unal dca „Laada, |Qwaaras fA Po ‘ase hajam haa Vis md [was Salo 
e Lan. |o. wheel Xo 120 Via yaad aeos] Lapeool € urijo Odi VADE . ho o*.2olo anne, 


patriarch. Now there was living a short time before in the small city of 
Constantina which is Thella d Mauzlath among the citizens a presbyter whose 
name was Theophilus Bar Manu a good and religious man, one of tlie 
reverend clergy of his city; aud, since he had lawfnlly taken a wife 

marriage, and they had no children, be and his consort, having fasted and 
prayed, made a vow to God that the first son who should be born to them 
they would give to the Lord in the holy convent of ‘strly bys! by the city of 
Thella, which is the monastery of Fsiltha?. And God heard him, and gave 
him a son, and he ealled his name James; fand, when he had grown a little, 
his parents banded him over to the same monastery of Fsiltha theongli the 
devout Mar Eustace presbyter and archimandrite.? And, when! his training 
was completed, he used to practise perfect modes of life surpassing the 


U 


LL GCstrilys^ We should perh. read ‘siratelates’, and suppose >. Miehael to be meant; but 
his usual litle is àgytozpztnyó; — 2. See p. A88, n. 3, —- 3. C. ‘This son was brought up by his parents 
Will all care and in all religion; and, when he was 2 or 3 years old, they sent lim lo school, and 
he was taught and instructed in all the learning of the church, in Syriac and Greek. And, when 
he reached the age of puberty, his tather look him with a filling present and brought him to 
lhe monastery, and commilled him to the hands of Mar Eustace the archimaudrile : and, when he 
had received the revered monastic babit’. — 4. G oin. 


702 4.] SI ESTE OD ENT I 23] 
Mas Joo AM jo ! Joot zle Joa paso fasisas Lan 39 ` D0 
ohan SIN olo 08, frase “Plo x8. JN. PSs T 
LLS ! oo Joa yr Liasis oap Joo pl Jn eo Jorsolo vae 
Js» cotasbsly ^ oe] Joa Jas Lge xxu Jac pt 
JL ON Jes MUS) 2à ras .of loo jw ue rs Joa ens Ns flo 
JL ds 120 "foot hoy Tsay aoan + ess was! og J Ji 
Sega tuse Me] ease EN ce coa «e| oko! <% Joo | ro 
po axe Janso J UNS waas lasl coy jeer vu] Joc JI 
|o Li» ‘cos Aco! omano o Japs Jos fda fl "hia of) 
Lm of 229 asas sums Co] «Jot lad a9 UE elo usadrro 
“aps “p> EK d Lojas pad lae aa ods prolo wre] Sa fI 
vato, Jilaso JNN JND coras! lo o0] WIN Juss < 


oe oe l * 
Je 2o x» S «^! 00M aaas DANa «Sors jJ. 2o aas ooo 


L.-— ultio ua. IBS ESS eats wl > iDo haws pao. Aslon. -- 3. (0 [Osinlle 
o wm». — 4, C Mo rma TMastlto unashuka zel | Ni pad aS aS E de Sao A ee 
walam]. — s, C oly Jamae. — 9. C pref, 6. — Ju, (C ins, ev. — 11. c1 Naa. 


strength of men; and in the eourse of his employment in the monastery he 
would fast three days ata time and at last seveudavs, aud again at last twenty- 
one: and all who saw him were held in great astonishinent al the way in 
which he repressed the powerful impulses of boyhood. But many times his 
mother wished to bring him tuto the world, and he would not yield to her 
persuasion: and she used to urge him greatly, beeanse she had no heir except 
him: but his father wished his promise to be carried out. And, being much 
pressed by his mother, he said to lier : « Cease speaking to me, O my mother, 
do not weary me. Do you not understand that | have betrothed myself once 
for all to Christ the immortal bridegroom? », and, when even so she did not 
cease, he spoke to his own master and his teacher Eustace and said: «€ My 
teacher and lather, pray for me to God that he may either take my soul from 
me or impose silence upon my mother. » Aad his master said to him 

« The Lord will eect deliverance if he is pleased with vou. » Aud a vear 
later his mother died, and in the third year his father also; and the wealth 


which they possessed they left to their own son dunes: iid they fell. two 


]. 6 otn. 
PAEH. OW. — T. MIN. — r. Z. Ht 


tS OGA 


FANEN 


srs ae bi 


d. 


232 APPENDIX. [578] 


«SMS juo ivoa] chus e [dso Le 24 cea Jo]; 
! flo aa flo frrtoo! fro! je» Js oor Coo <a) T OO Sd 
E JM 0 LS oos fsa oy cao ow Joa p36} Laaa re 
|-A-»o,.7& FDI + Olpp> HD Jlarssassro Joa Wo + »~ S20 hoj 
Jl ss -lansol fee Ya boops po ioar oops Hollar “floras 
Looks] oetorso: Ws , yoa. «2e : yao Joa naana foll, JND ča 

euo <% £3» Jamda JheMs ye Joa ks", < J Joa awas 
< fy jasa ala ooo <^} eoora2o» laxas <% Lasasoo Tann 
ALAS ooo! “esas Joarx.sso lasas T “Foor Aa? » hao Maas Leal 
S 


oom xr J f£ oog Koo Nso oU scs. p> he eed ooo mere! oazo 


Leo Laois Jopa 92 Joa pio JNanaus JKisols an UEN „o> 


ood gao haana I" ook joor JjuDrsoo . cos “Joa Jpn Joa Prad 


| WS a Wo haitoo — s. 0 om, — i € Ibod w8 |ia. — i ins. hego — 5. € 
he du Dls Læs, bheasL w% — Ft «20e. NO UR ES: Əl ola) — 9g, C Gl ke 


Js. 45 ou». 


slaves and a large amount of property (ssia). But the divine James, as soon 
ax he saw thal lis. parents were dead, called Ins two slaves, and set them 
free: and he gave them the house with the property (ste) and the chattels, 
and he did nol take even one minas for he used to say « Let the things of the 
world be given to the world. » And aftera short time, when he had received 
deaeon's orders in his same monastery, he would cause himself to copy 
the pattern of the angels’ watelifulness, embracing the immaterial obser- 
vances of the angels with much Tasting and constant vigil, and day by day 
adding to his divine practices. But he refused to let himself be seen outside 
his cell at all during the day: and all the believers used to betake themselves 
to him on acconnt of the fame of his practices: so much so that even from the 
frontier of the Persian territory those who bad various infirmities used to Hock 
to him: and as soon as they were resting in his monastery they were cured 
without seeing ham. For he would visit many hy long journeys! having seen 
them beforehaud by the vision of the Holy Spirit, and be seen by them in 


a dream land they would be healed of their diseases ?; insomuch that he often? 


Il. Le. in spiril — 2.€ oun. 


[579] SPERIOCS LEE AI ee SS 


warta Mono AN) [Kado BH [a cae Oly Laas) l ooko <% 
M5 Jigal Daso .fascods Larin hin [439 Lasso voopsha Lory 
whe £9 :Jaesoos ' ey LaNa poids EN Joy. xol] Dal ofxas 
"ois ola Jet alaso Spr anaso EU eel Jas 
janas, firs] -copataios p "s p> ‘hpa ‘foot oes KOKA NDO 
o D, lao yar [oo rem OA op» aao ooo, 25 JAN ai 
p Ads va jroo) otha Es l soosik JaN TAN- J Jac. 
£ Otay JLN fio Leo o V5 Laaa o5 Jor <% o à MAC 
prolo az» fros o "etse. aco]. 5 Iso oo LAM Qo sph! 
Neg JAN; aaas Da Kool! Lpa hay ol Jase. SEUSS coe 


-— yx au? enel: Jj RAO + Paddjoyo A] pull I! paso 


1 C oim. — 2, (1 Bool. — 3, c hans, jaN woanupmane. — 4. (1 9». — 25, € obade. — 
6, Mss. a. — 7. €. wilh points denoting e under both syllables, S. € Aks wilh points 
denoling a over first 2 syllables). — 9. G fevers Jas þaaawja. — 10. C ins, o pad. — 11. C ins. ee 


showed himself to queen Theodora herself wile of Justinian kine of the 
Romans! astu a dream holding à golden paten (9iz*2v) in his hands and giving 
the armies of the Romans living? water to drink; and accordingly the 
miracles which he performed caused all the world to marvel, The bands of 
the Christian Saracens attached to the Romans, having once been attacked 
by msanity, and having heard about the man's holiness, sent their king” 
Whose name was Hereth Bar Gabala with them magnates to him, in order 
that God might visit them through lim; and Hereth took vold with him with 
offerings to give the saint if God’ would visit them Ubrough himt by his 
prayers. But as for the blessed James, the whole of their allair having been 
revealed to lim by God, when they bad crossed the river Euphrates to come 
to his monastery, the saint appeared to the Saracens in his habit (57752) al 
full morning, and said to Hereth : « Why, O barbarian‘, did vou doubt of the 
eiftof God? Go return to vourland, you and your magnates, and release the 


man from Mt. Sinai whom someone is detaining in your camp, aud you will 


1G) reeks’) The phrase shows that the author wrote afler the Vrab conquest, since ollierwise 
he would have said ‘the king’ only. — 2. € om. — 5. Mass. ^llicir hing sent’: but clearly he went 
himself — 4. € the’. — 5. € cta. 


"(12861 dy 


osos 


Goat: 


Sr 


234 APPENDIX: 5807 


234 
ay alin. dso Ji dol < oly | lajo a ora po aaO sal 
Ios saa wala, Me Le 3 Brora J os) Laor «o» oan 
hoa JRF DQ Nady wee AL pros pano WOODS PMG] SL 
laiss Sco] otxol] LAM <> Lsa Jopa p20 JN yar tyop 
JKxa và qos n aaa] Ws p0 oia aaa sy] PDA + wOIALDIOF SO 
JMxs vay Suse s pas Jado] Nai Jh daaag em jel) 
hay a-aslo aNu oaa 'axaso adfiso aaah] psoas’ oóno 
COLO 142 JaA ipto worspso hasz ag Joa n432) Sfp -— 
joo wams joa. «30 yas lano, Jvoans odo "oniassas oA) 


Joo [aan Nos hag v! oo Aapan 200a aJ: sess veas 


Joa Jaisa fsasdso Jy»os Jlor.»l ' flosmrsanwsase farol flsaxo 


O_O Joa was ge 90 ogy ainos IRS Laso REN re L az 


]o( eoad. — 2. 0 |o IDa. a CoN esso 05, 6 dne. eC eRe G œ l soll 
anaa] «asl adfa 0 -ands pana azio oon aBa „umanoide Leas: Sy 05s wel. SIT, 
Saro AXI des omy ca. ulle pL as essi s € = EID anale. — 'L t om. — 
Lis 20 Waka. — |] € adis MPS foo — 12 (6 o pap p We D .[Lorasol Lanm Slo. 


zn ue OSs 


inummediately be delivered from the distress; for it is because of him that 
vou were allicled. Du henceforth Satan will not be permitted by the Lord 
to work destruction simone vou, until vou enter the camp, And ‘thy money 
go with thee’ *, since we have no desire to possess aught beside God. » And, 
this openlv-shown vision having eaused Hereth the king and his maguales to 
marvel, he went back to his camp. and npon ashing he found that from the 
hour that the blessed man said to him. « The devil shall not work destruction 
in vour camp », from that very honr and that very day they? were cured. 
Aud they ® asked and inquired over the whole of his camp, aud they” found a 
certain monk who was bound inside a tents; aud he released him and sent liim 
to Mt. Sinai and the man who bad bound him Fin his tent he slew with the 
edge of the sword; and diy by day Hereth Bar Gabala was yearning to see 
the saint. But the blessed man would quietly labour with arduous labonrs 
andexercise himself in iarvellons endurance in the way of modes of life and of 


clothing; for he would cut a thick ugly cloak inte two, and he clothed himself 


| Aels. vin. 20, — 2; Ge imnonient the pestilence wies stayed and all (he sick’. —3. G * ho^. — 5. Com, 


JSI SPERIOUS LIPE JANI S 235 
Jo "Mao JI Je “lasap laaa khia Joa use flo Joa Lasis 
ow «dr Fry Joa l .'Jea Jus [x22$ o5: frond * Joao 
ARE bso} we dor> Jn? Ado jas ol + Jhos ares "ese. [ama Cac. 
Ji; “foot jans fao Jagas „Joa wees Jlaseo> Daa 49 
pobiuyo sot VO xis lop e jo JN La eso JI. - [Ies «o3 A.N 
Moo Jos, o «coo aot Js|2 vos qand Jh JNa yo 
adil ]i3.5 eos Lanos alad wash] Lia, y wor aX Jl 
Jos aro ede po xaxa Dhs JKaapre «Qo AKIO oops 
spa0 LA? LoD huo fasas >N SEES Je Mansy d 
^ v có. S 295149 meh pools, oaaao su] x ool 


t 


TAA URGE Q5 va! ea n mop ot» wear Re ea a BA Nu 


L Aa. — 2, (Bus ood ti pref, sS — w Cline, By 582 medal fron goo one Li pal. — 
5. (€ usb. — ds G ins. Hag. o 7. 0 Dsp» [Lamesa o go QT. s, t otn. HE. fo lors 
ip. 282, [, 2, — 9. Ff. lo BS s ru asa, Lo DL ins, dn marg. in S. — les eT carro NJ 


with half of it and covered himself with hall of it: and he would not change 
this raiment for a considerable time, not im summer nor in winter, until it 
appeared to be all rags?: for le would say « Ht is better for the soul to clothe 
itself in practices of excellence than for the body to luxurtate in things that 
drag lo perdition ». Being therefore resplendent in holiness he used to as- 
tonish many by miracles. [Two barren women from the city of hella, being 
distressed by the deprivation of children, and who were looking for the fruit 
of their wombs more than the breath of the air (79), and had gone to many 
places to seck assistance, resolved to go up to the same saint at the tme 
when he was present in his monastery; and they went out from the city to vo 
to hiseonvent. When they had reached and crossed the river Harba that is 
between the monastery and the city, a revelation was made to the saint by the 
divine Spirit : then (sizz) be sends a deacon of his to them to tell them to 
return to the city; « For our Lord » (he says) « will give von children il you 


confess his holy name ». And they on hearing these words returned to the 


]. See psd n. 3. In. the senuiue pe thas ts referred: fa He Hone of his residence in. CIP J 


ins. like a pach-sarddle, atul teow Chis he was imeaned Diod an 


"So? v^h. 


* (9st Nite 


236 APPENDMIN. [582] 
con Jy Jas ray ie Nas J.A Lapos oi NS Soo Jess aao 
JoAN, a cdo xo 300 JKs50 Lu «Si Nso piss QR «o 
fsa x2 Joo WH Jos fasaa lasopao ipad lx La s fro 
N&& xus s]JIacaS so Naapa aas, . forms; Jlaang <% waa! -boa 
«rox Joa L5 YP a of JIasle Isto Las] yar Jlassasory JNS 
Joka wiso “paseo od oculi]? “Joped foot ana Nso lps «Jor uasa 
jja o asomo olde ol Jl. jJseancaas] was u}d00 LESSE 
Laa axo Lsasdisey ‘Lais Je» Sy yao P bee o» oplo Jlazs5, 
Jes) pe vardqoo] o ums “Siarsco Ld], «oo wal ido xt 
AJ] + offs xe "o salo aas A Nr Nana aS SPH Wh ase 
hoe: odo jas) Nas hul sees Jos frobsoy VLD o fram 
pua : | Lasso Kasra ih ax1360 Í al poo Joaamao] Joa foot 


l. (1o .loo Sx p> «o2. — v C dns, oo — 3, C ins, Mu o — 7 C oom. — 5. (ins, oss. 
OOO quen. — 6. U pl — 7. sine, — s. C ho bo lone go jda! po dmm. — 9, C ibs 


s ms aaMtl CMS coz. aSan AAwa |^a-.360 [Lan so Dua pas. PEIUS EET RU NET 12.45. 


ely. And the saving of the saint was aecomphshed; for after one year our 
Lord wave them children, and afterwards sous and dat ehters, and they 
continued praising the name of God.! 

But, after à considerable time bad past, and he was radiating heht in this 
world like a bright sun, he was chosen by the grace of God to go up to the 
royal city, to argue on behalf on the faith in eonjinetion with certain saints 
and fathers?., He was vuwilhng todo so, but nevertheless he was going up 
iu obedience to a vision which appeared to him, the holy Mar Severus 'the 
patmiarch* and Mar Jolm bishop of Thella t, who came to lim and gave hima 
pastoral stall and said to him with a threat, « Rise go with the companies of 
believers and feed our sheep, and keep them from the wolves »; and thereupon 
he took a small gospel ieierydassv) and set out to go on foot to Constantinople. 
And there joined Inn from his monastery a certain well-tried and divine man 
who was called Sergius, who after atime was made a bishop by the blessed 
mau himself And, when the two had gone to the reyal city and arrived 


I. C oma, prob, because the scribe did not wish lo bring J. into any connexion with the procreation 
fc hildren: ef; below ]5 Ns 2. In the 
on decount of the failli; see p. 880, n. v. — 3. C om, — 5. C ins, ^ wliy were both dead’, Both in 


fact lived tll 538 cand John was present at Ube conterences p. SIR n. 34 — The insertion i> also 


original life no reason Tor the journey js given exe. 


inconsistent with Weder 


le 


~l 


83] SOS SEALS Ge Sh ev s 

[fM S Jil Nass po waar. kol Jbl: JM sas as 42 

me og harass fonao Js Loos Mono JE jada cas] MY a0 

This Joa PANE „panio wi. AALO [.5o Joa Dw haag 

LEN cots Lasgo Laio Maaa pts hasian par hasas Lao 

oy frsatas «9 MnO Wass Ad Jasdo 900 p20 Joa jpo 

aaa LSID Aai Lia Lots paa p30 ame Loop» ooa sues 

Jas) "JR.Xoo - Jlarsasoy Jipa Danad, oD ao Jii» Jog 

(Me FP Laag} ^| ufsaso! JorSs je» Joot Jar aao o5 Noor y 

Jano, Loo Jm 2eepxen xor Jiaase qe jos Lee Jje2e2c0o90 8 
ejoa aad “Saar. 

Ma sasdl} lasso Nispa [isnaon8 3 Lanino hin ’ Nico E 

faapa o» Joi Nos fui] basse llanas [440 j9eadzie] 


L € e 1855 [hope “bys fart osol - 2, (0 123. — 3, Case Dexo — "s. C on. — à C 
Ibias. — 6, € 1536 Slo — 7, 1: o bo w loo oN, eel a CNT Ne wu use 
]O:- 6; o roll. — Il. (€ bysso i0;2200. 


there, the report [Hew about in the ete « Father James lias come»; and, when 
Theodora the queen heard it, she received them with mueh honour, and she 
wave them a house and the rest of what they required. Fat the blessed min 
was eloquent and educated and skilled and exercised and practised, and! he 
was versed in the Greek language as well as the Syriac to a specially high 
degree, and he read the Holy Seriptires in both languages; Tand, when lie 
carried on debate with the chiefs of the heresy there in their own assembly, 
he put them all to light, while he also through the mighty Washes ol Pie 
divine doctrines (3cyuazz) exposed their tricks and frauds against the truth of 
the faith, and? he took possession of a little cell, and in it F'eouversed. with 
God? continually’. The blessed Sergius. also! lived an ase etie life; but he 
felle far short of the standard of the high aad divine practices ol the holy 
James’ 

When then dense erowds of believers came to the royal eily, bishops and 


monks and clergymen, and lavmen zealous for religion, they used to boast of 


1. (€ * And, beenuse’, — 2. G * also farther’, — 3: (78a. -- 4. Cor will te sdisine and blessed S. tre’ 
(ioe ack heen ten. "iis chimen in thease! The tial os could nob. dive as d. did 
because he Bad to alend do sisters is omitted by eur author. prob. iu order to exalt his hero al 


the expense of bi~ companion. 


bd NI prep 


238 APPENDIX. [584] 
$| sos p Ixzjv passo Jay r> eh lak ooa «iota aso 
I^9os£5 :[rsaso1rds Lan oS joa 3); seo. flann Kis rad JL] oa 
J&3x3e JN Naoc M onan Jörn] vai lo Jha H les unas] Jaio 
m L Liama [esazis| JNS. of Cub oraa qoos wash, -.°J5y0f) 
J Jiad r^ JNS KX hdo [jas Aa ‘lsoomas/ Joa as 
JNa Loot Is pos Ne Neo Lesen s Jl Ness rao Jawo Mas puo 
1 -a-o ops aos woan Pa oos ERI) IT JR SSRN JI So 


E 


Lian, ‘coa.n00030f Io Mo Laso T% ea "eot Opa) 
Jur cess po - [Seams] Can | PPRS o xd anaa JIàis]o 
SETY x) lel hwl deco oM» Laado JN saol “LoD 
Soe ST ^ hanao Jaaa N as JNa "head + Jiosofh 
JNa «o Jlasaam«s! Daio TTN «» WAAR aajo) i 


p-a ON loo Auto -NaN flarmasaso [jazza wanno], 


|. C MS — 2c [Sates fiosolk. — 3, (€ boas. — i 0 pl. — 5. (C hiaaadja pielo. — 56. C 
eno FAL is. OO — 8, Om. — 9. 41 1s». — 10, (€ lp o haao — 1I. (loo Quos Soo. 


ihe same saint, insomuch that Hereth Bar Gabala, king of the Saracens, when 
he heard it, came himself also to the royal city; and because the parly of the 
believers had diminished under persecutions and tortures, Hereth Bar Gabala 
and some fathers with him begged the God-loving queen Theodora to give 
them leave to make two or three bishops in Syria (for there was not a bishop 
lo he found in the whole of Syria except three '; one on the mountain of Marde, 
and one in Persian territory, and Tone who had gone into? Alexandria). And, 
since the believing queen was desirous of furthering such measures as would 
he of assistance against the synod of Chalcedon, she ordered them to make the 
bishops. Then two well-tried men were chosen hy the holy patriarch 
Theodosius of Alexandria and the fathers who were with him to be bishops, 
one this divine? James for the city of Edessa and all the rest of Syria and Asia, 
and another whose name was Theodore for the city of Bostra* fin the south, 
and Palestine*, and Arabia as far as Jerusalem. The divine James, having 
received. the bishop's ofice from the blessed Theodosius by the adviee and 
permission of the queen (for after he had left his see he was afraid to ordain 


Lo Voni-tnder-fanding of the statement in eh. 2 that at 2 anuch earlier time) there were no bps. 
exe dn these iP places, P. (0i tanolher in — 2. C on. — Cn In the original life + Iirtha of the 


[585. SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 2M) 
«o Jlar flarmaso XS oman Cd WAI; xx [Saami] 
J| ejos Noo Jlaosy, fae ado Jos ND Jes cy! Die 
JAosl 3o [r.00,2.030 OMS Lass Ol Jl Liaw, floshls “sands Joa 
"eser9lo “Lava o "hoad o Laas ado Shjamslo fradros 
hops fda purse WOAAD 00305 ‘\p0,9an0 [322 JESL [^clo Loo 
J|» pao frescos! “do oe 4 Meo lasso Muss “os 
"Pol Wl gaia Ss HIN jm jo panD No faï} 2360 
eoelle omano [ase ele xx] |’ Udo xA "ue Jes. <> 
Hasse soto! Jio haro, PSAo joi, ods dison furs]; 
HSA $350 pool . [saamas] Joos I frail of fsaamss! JM! 
peo longo vae pe loina | oo caps Nesey) ih Jona cad 


1. UL ellam, Eas o j9e6aza9[ Os Sha» os v0.9 / wmamosoll haak ero I SED) 


cata Loa. Vta — 2 Q yasdsa as, — 3. (0 l3ae.|o Ladas, d€Lo*sl|5 Blo .LoesI9oso. — 
4, S 935. Erasure follows. — 5. (i ins. * afler o inil. — 6, C ha oiS o. — 7, (1 woSas. — s, (0 
eaae. — Uu, (€ oni, — 10. S pl. (€ oin; — DI. (ins, lee, 12. C ins, We — poc Oso. — 0. € 


o6 aaa, loo Rate om 545 «eto onse, In, € hoo. 


bishops ' without permission of the crown’), then accordingly ! armed himself 
with religion, and clothed himself in the breast plate of righteousness’, and 
extended his course not only iu the districts of Syria but also in Those of 
the whole of Armenia, and of Cappadocia and in the districts of Cilicia, and 
the whole of Isauria, and of Pamphylia and Lyecaonia and Lycia and Phrygia 
and Caria and Asia and the islands of the sea, Cyprus, Rhodes, Glilos; 
Mitylene, up to the royal city itself: fand he propagated and expanded all 
orthodoxy (éefodegtz), * and made priests, and tilled the ranks. And not ouly 
did he marshal priests and supply all quarters, but he did not even neglect 
churches that were at a distanee; and the Lord put it into his mind, and he 
contrived means of adorning the church of God. And, since there is a 
prudent canon that without three bishops or four no bishop shall be instituted, 
he considered the matter an I took with him two monks who had a reputation 
lor excellence of life, one from Cilicia, and one from Isauria, and took them 


1. In the original (eli. 50) this statement is made on the oceisien of the conseeralion of bps. for 
Egvpt by James, and there are no qualifying words, — 2. (€ ‘queen’, a. Hie blessed. YI 
secretly permitted. him fo make bps. iud. perform: all the Dinetion- [tle priesthood. And then d 


saintly J.'. — 4. Eph, vir, 15. — 5. C ou. 


rises. 1s 


ACNE) s 
SIS d 


2^0 (20 APPENDIX. 586] 
l lasmasos [3.36 aao Jla Mi, 38M as 230 Lisa] <% 
joa &3» foiamalss y liaj oò, opr Ao wano). Laso «2o 
yr «ooh "esl Jana) eo ~ fj dona sl ANsyd0 | jlo ^ + esol 
Loran <> Aa foaamas! Joe KA Liams, vos m vo 
nue “Joa Kul [ope aD, we! ! e00, 42.20» Jansoyobio] Lk Mo 
sJotSx NS ay fom [205 JNa ' exo «oo "^ wey, 9l ? pa dts 
«o» JLosh] ToN a> oXasaals ]Losas.eo uc sank, "Jaco <? oA 


hiad Sx Lao -Joa Lasso has upaa Poa Jadno Nipo 


]3 li 


ooo Ro A. 300. 0, 
Jo Jlesl flo . qo I^ Noshfis Palas Laso Jie Laapas o aS S sa ca 58.2 
-«02.4.20030]]. foro l/Ksed x æ% joa Daas, Loa pel Jona.» flo Lams 


aaz, frod? wo» vos 9.2.50 ^Jeaaszs]| l.& asa! "apse 


L5a.a.m x] farcry !! (Joar) Lis s p20 


Bera Viona An TS, kajo = d. C oom. — 4. (1 amadogolFol Pisga WI .19anc.5[ e l Ml 


oO AR. — 5. ins, OD. 6, sS ph c P2519, — 7. € el — 8. G baap 20 «lo Diass — o C 
em uM. Jo G pref. e: — H. Mes. oni, ins. ori p. ool. hi 41. — 402. C violo OOM .45203D.». 
— a: pags — 14. C ins, leo — Ge Soom, i9 — 16, (0 Tasso eo us adl» buia haag. 


to the roval eity. And he. received advice and permission from the liolv 
Theodosius the patriarch who was al that tine residing there by way ol exile 
(Eoi), and he directed his path to Alexandria, ‘with these two blessed men! 
thal he might there eousecrate them bishops, because there was no bishop in 
Sveit except one, nor an orthodox (0:5589252). pod riarch ; but of the svuod of 
Chalcedon there was a patriareh fat Antioch !, Ephraim ‘the heretie', from the 
city of Amida, the wicked persecutor of religion. 

But the holy James, when he had completely performed his ministry in all 
the countries [rom the royal city as far as the sea-coasts, then thus entered 
Alexandria; and when The had been? in intercourse with the saintly? bishops 
there then they admired the saints austerity, that he had travelled through 
these countries without an animal to ride, and withont a wallet or bronze 
coins or it purse, according to the commandment received from the blessed 
patriarch Theodosius !. And. accordingly "the saintly bishops? assembled, 


and inade the two blessed men who were with him bishops, one whose name 


J, 


h C onmi, — 2. Mss. om. — 5G itis, canem and’, — 4. € tor rather tă ovi from Christ (Malth. vou 


In the orisinal elis 50 the commandment refers to the communication wilh the bps. — 2. € ‘they’. 


587] SPU eUS LICE OF JAMES., 211 
bue .! Laco: Napa «nia M5 ao Joo oas, ~ - Joaams/ 
fra mI saca "uolo d L sanan excel SNET, 
[saio flan pul MESS Jia 230 asl p0 "Luadulo 
Qo JM "Joo ejes, "LoSw sul Jin. “hassj ! NS ese so 
Loads, jas aper Jit xao ente oraa Leslie]; aaro fincas 
ALARY I ipjo LAD a Q3 UN ss Je <% € Lias 
-— lost iando Luona?! Naas ed pee >] JNa e 
Joanmss] je-o| sash; y £20 P Nee Jiass Laine o£: Jes 
"pane ,JAa 2856 Kupa D CAT woke Hð cies | T Sipe 
J Ntopdo JL cdo trang ico "Joot oaas, sul Laja © pa Qua) P Popa AS (ais p. 
p20 Jad Das lö laaan foot poo -jla Nipaa Joot pas 
sa) osN S Myas ha Dina Jods ga aa ode UNOL Las 


]. € vorr. below) Jaa» 181a so waw Hd. — 2, 8 Kol i val < colo hjam». — 
^. C ins. bial Baoæs.S]. — 5. (t aisle. — 6. C oso. nod d8Se93e;Boe — wo be» (60 
l-a»»oMa. — 9, € om. — lo. C 9 Has go Biel. — IL thom, DX — 12 ee lam umodals, — pit 
Jatin EX. TD QO leds asy yas IS xc lasso. —— 14. U [9ao227:9(0 boa aaO]. — ae e bit 
— 16. € pl. — 17, Cins. He 18. € pref; oe —19.. C Qe 02> 


was Conon in Tarsus a city of Cilicia, and the other whose name was Eugene 
in the city of Seleucia'; and further for Svria two. Autouy and Antoninus”. 
And he took them with hin and set out for Syria: and in accordance with the 
provision of the canons he made metropolitan in the eily of Laodicea a divine 
man whose name was Dimet? from the holy convent of Aphthonia, aud another 
whose name was John from the monastery of Mar Bwzy of Seleucia in Syria; 
and John Irom the monastery of the house of Mar Bassus in Nenneshriu : and 
another whose name was Sergius in the city of Charrhae, Irom the monastery 
of the house of Aphthonia; and another John from the monastery of Mar 
Hananya of the city of Sura. And, when he” had, as described, set up bishops 
and priests in various cilies, afterwards they went up to the royal city: and he’ 
made patriarch for Antioeh in* Syria a man whose name was Sergius from the 
city of Thella, who was residing in the roval eitv?*, and was illustrious for 


religious learning: and", having completed three vears, he departed. from 


& 


the world. After a time he? ordained as his successor an Alexandrine whose 


l. C ins, wrongly) sof Syna’. — 2. There is no mention of these iu the original life, tlie names being 
taken from H. E., 1v, 11, where iwo Antonini are said to haye been reecnlls events recorded tap 
pened in 578, consecrated by James for Syria. =- o See pe bor. 2. — 0s Clialeis in ria. d. 


"Mises -— 6. Q'of'. — 7, see above pzssinee-58. C ins. Stel’. 


p: 


28; 


V. 


2493 APPENDIX. SS] 
aj) + vow da} Aso rad qe} æl> fas Joa aas, Lipan i 
9: eoo yar Jos 28, SNo paol v6 wanao] Joo oan, 
Jg o |3aacnzo] Joa paso .Jla3w3e Nispa Joa laeto alo oly 
ello Jas) "Less Jlosl]] Lisad foot aa caisse onda. J 
IAM GX Jam] azao «ems "E 3| samme! ‘joa pado 
Ka <% al, Jhprs "[NA ss) oNasoo hais peso P Lasse wa 


hise 


oanfas Joot ll aaay af) Naapa Liasopoo . sols xia 236 
JI JG wanno olo .!'LNoips «oos No -Nas MINCE a: 
xA -.-20? An jas p> NX WW We) Joa ADA, Mas EST Low! 


Lo fena es [eaacnas] eor Jpop x Jy ver par e rol 


Lori Bojs — 2. € mG SaSe;pee or qe) (elo. — a. Go eel one eene]. — h, C ply 
ao otl. -a G Pelo ser p m bos, veo aa SD all. — n, Mes, bsazos: corr, Kleyn dae. Baradaciis, 
p. 80. — 7. Com, 8s C bhlas — go pl — do, C pals — IL C, oos s c 12, C wagas, 
hist g letters illes. du S, pul t beter loaks hke ->} N wages. — 13. C Jan siaa — dà. G Sessa. 

|». (€ pale. — dn, G dns; œ Delhaas perh, genuine and fallen oul through homocoleleulon in. S). 


name was Paul. And in Amida be made à man whose name was Eunomius 
from the eity of Amida metropolitan, who had been expelled with the clergy 
of the same Amida, cad was in the royal city: and he made many bishops Tor 
Revpt'. Aud afterwards the blessed men set out for the districts of Asia? 
for the second time; and he made Tour bishops, one in Ephesus and in the 
Whole ol Asia, me the sinful Jolm the Syrian, the converter of the pagans, and 
author of the Eeelesiastieal (History, who am trom the house of Mar dohn at 
Amida: and in the city of Smyrna a man whose name was Photius? and another 
John in the eity of Pergiumnin : and Peterin Dorvlaeum '; and also in the island 
of Chios a divine man and worker of miracles whose name was Kashish, a 
member of my monastery of Mar John at Amida; and for Dara he made John 


bishop a divine man from the monastery of Warthamin’. And in the whole 


boo Tenatius and others’, — 2. Mss. Syria’) — 3. In the original text * Peter’. Photius, as we 
learn trom och. 56; was a canipanion of Peter, — 4 In the original text ^ Tralles '. 5. The original 
leM says nothing abont Dari whieh is outol pliee in an aecount ef the bps. of Asia, bul il mentions 
2 Carian Pps. here enmitled. Johu of Dara is probably the same as the bishop who had heen 
arehin of Karthamin mentioned on p. 613 tram A. Ea àv. 55, and. was no doubt consecrated later 
Dyakonov. ps 28. ne TID. See above, p. 2N7, n. 2. ^ Dion? however (Kleyn, Bijdrage, p. 73, calls this J. 
af Narllianii who died in 278 hp. of Amida. 


[580 SPURIOUS dt H5 OF JAMES, 2453 
po n [oper Aoo isaac vhat Daal adas foaamas) ! je--0o 
fa; ' Jlosho ranama NM Joa “aas -joa «3 baD Jana 
Loj anaa d La; hon yl Phasors Joa waas 
Lapa aD s Day PIND alo faswoio | p "Hes «lora 
jipa AD ‘feoslo .Jlassasoty fodrcoans onus ) po polo .Jlaasjs 
[AN Jesse Joa UA saa Jed eo Lasas lsano firrsarss 
"Eater aas Jlo » Jlaa so Nipa Jso,d0 "Loco Nuus De VN ls 
ja> Joa fl-ras.r00 Joa gò J fo bdo JNa pa “Lous JIoslJlo 
HL - Jlasas |Jsotasaso oor) od fmads sacds ad Lol Nasa, 
hay AD -laaa Jamo [isso fs sad so Mas l"JLass5 
Jeo No, pee Jia AN JL ..Hjleslha joa Fs; ue ; x Capo Laso, 
Nes uoo] p20 JN [spol so) J pas Jie Soe] 


Te eas lonan Sali ao oe ats ws: Jom etl los. — 4, € wSatxeo. laries toasts so ace 
aE o: llors — 45, E 9S. — 7. Mss, S from po im, o e an — 8. E — 
USATI vem Ae un eere db ote T es ee ts paasee 13-5 Fy d. ie. SEE 


15. Cots leo. 


world lie appointed eiglity-seven! bishops, and two patriarchs. — And, being 
armed with divine strength, he would go out to his ministry, and would pour 
out the priesthood over the countries of the East like a great river in the days 
of Nisan?, having entered upon the road of heroism at à vigorous and spiritual 
pace, and according to the saving of the apostle clothed himself in the breast- 
plate of righteousness, and girded his own loins with the perfection of faith’: 
and he was at all times curying on a coulest oi behalf of the truth son the 


right hand amd on the left in glory and in dishonour And be would run 
al a vigorous pace through the upper and lower countries, Hrom the Persian 
& © 
territory’ even as far as the royal city. and Alexandma aud the countries 
between. and fulfil the work of his ministry not ouly by organizing the elerey 
and vivine the priesthood, but by consoling and comforting. and edifying 
As V 5 4 , 

and strengthening in teaching all the party of the believers. Once when he 
was travelling through the districts he came toa mountaiu-rangze called Ed: 
and he went into a village called Gunitha® : aud, while he was In the village, 

Iz Tr lisa tex eae HRS ae ox. Ne oe o alin bois oo a, Ie. he 38 ad 


Ci =e tse ub dac Lek ee re qu HP ne dom S ee tse eh, so pe PAS ess CE 


hawever Was not a vilage. bata district. 


SPs t 


Vet lI 


*S leeds, 


2AA APPENDIX. [590 
p> 9. .akss.2 [e foor Lxx» (Jan l Layo0t. EN re Ns sco. co] 
PLU po P aetaseLo olas NN sos ra. haoo ox faak Taaa 
Nl hice sJKso flax pris han of Nl xao han o prolo Las 
jo woaal flo sous “Jooth Daw feos “hpi asso] SS aoad 
aonuile .ous$ 2. JNa àso Joss; Naoha? J J Sook 
e» fideo aa -ha jana fans “yao po dolo yel Joao 15Na] 

Ist plo læ; Ja. Salo -Lasas Laza oo Lasota saN y eee 
Laco HD PIAS o wads Aoo o SS yeMj «o ranma] aas ys 
lio JM odo way 0&4 So ote, "e «exa Q0. Soon, 
ooo vc Ja» ojoh] | ae o. Ja. JNa oni» paolo Laak 
eag [.15) a x2olo [opazo D anoj Udy JNupo, oy c! 
a-3a.2n.:5J p20 JN iapa “aio! “Joa JL]? P xen wis! oot sok Xoo 


A9 oly [13395 p> LAM. OO vn ew sob Jaa aot 34.2 


LoCo lina — 2 (doo wee os — i (c oS Gowodus «o3 fajas — 4. s sine, — 5. (C Moon — 
6. C9 Dim, ins; kaler afia mann eowdssqde/ at UN wal Wo Nel. rA eet... 2S TIR 
9, (C ins; loo. loa, € Jess. — 11. C. ins; lai — 12. € dns. Mm — 15. Goes. — li C ins. 
EN coi qoas. et 4n laxe ka OM. — 17. € 3550. 


a certain Jewish! sorcerer was there, who was deceiving the people hy his 
soreeries, When the blessed man heard about the same Jew", he ordered 
them to bring him before him; and, when he came, he spake and es to him : 

Wherefore, Onnpious man, are vou doing iniquity aud wrong, and opposing 
the right ways of the Lord?” Accordingly you shall be silent, and not hear 
nor speak uuless you confess Christ. » And the same hour his longue 
withered and his ears were stopped, aud he became like a stone. And, 
When the people stood iu great astonishment, Satan came out from under the 
[eet of that Jew in the forin of an Ethiopian, and he wailed with a loud voice 
and said, « Ont upon vou, bishop James: for from your boyhood vou have 
been a vexation i?) to me». And the holy James rebuked him; and le lefi 
the village with his hands ud upon his head. And the blessed man spake, 
and said to the proprietors of the village : « Satan has Hed, be enlightened in 
the Lord». But the proprietors of that village had gone astray in the heresy 
of Chaleedon; and he stayed there a long time in order to correct them. But 
afterwards he came to the city of Edessa; and, when the believers there had 
heen refreshed by his words, then it happened that suddenly a son of a 


1. Ci our — 2. t Soreerer'? — so Nels, xin Do; ll. 


[DOE SPURIS LESE DESEAN ALIS; 


2^5 


«2o M Jla oma o ay? pre x lex -oojoo Joa 
Ss! JS uo l43.59 [ied og ssis JN, 129 "ease JS ses. 
Pohl Na Dal JN aopo) hsa jlo oa faso paolo ooa aasar «2300» 
"Jo ANZ: SIS Ca < Kiso! oojoyofh Lajos $2» D 
Joi. aanas, JI} haa JJ aoo paolo ^ faspo haag ha sasol, 
eco KAD 00 od Jase, ol Nass exea ps Nylo ab Qs 
«aol Ji Aer o0 EE. x la Los Lasas elo JNa S 
L-s-i-5 > «el Je +90 Js] Sas eM Jo p> yi Soin SA ON 
Ml: PINO fly fuo px Calea Sada Q3) O64 3 Naso: 
Jas o, pel -heros oS so? dano UEA yao hano Mrs 
FO IN anal» 2emaogeo vaoia] | uoiad{s £20 : j&.00 où Le eS LL 
auto «| Mood mag Aasia Q5 jian fea. OSs Jl «poof exl 


] (NS — 2, feat — 3, (€ eas s». — i C logt has Soo: h»ableo -— 5 > nete c 
anto., — 6, G ins. 90925» [teas — 7, (C Dese Nast. — MN, Going. -- 0 o9 agata(s Ie o Eas Bass 
adds, — |l. (C in. e, dup € lAs cos mdse Sil oso haso. — quoc dues %2 EET 
l>} ud lh po ls pias. E IEEE Dd = lnc65 [a o ex c Moss. e dus 42 pee. 
— Is. € eoo «cesa ,5o. Daso — ]u, C lol sema 9 dins added in later hand, aads. 


great lamily of the place whose name was Theodore died suddenly! within 
his chamber: and he eaused much sorrow to the city by his death. ud, 
when the blessed man heard the wailings and weeping and sobbing, he asked 
those who were near and said, « What is this outery whereby the city has 
heen disturbed? ». And they said to him : « A son of great family, Theodore, 
has died suddenly: and we sav that it is on account of the sius of his parents. » 
The holy blessed man answered and said to them : « Nol so, but in order 
that God may be glorified throngh him »?.. And he went on his feet to 
that dead man’s house; amd the eilizens were laughing and saving 

« What, prav, are. this fellaw's patches afler? o. Dut he did. uot give 
wav to their words: but he knelt upon the ground in prayer: and ou rising 
he said in presence of the multitudes of the city, « In the name of onr Lord 
Jesus Christ, one undivided nature, who was crucilied for us on the cross, 
rise walk? ». And, as the saint spoke, thal young man woke as Il from 
sleep and stood up; and when his parents and Kinsmen asked Tim, « How did 


it happen to vou? », he said to thems « A man of fire came npon me while | 


I Sie bie = 2 Jolin at 7 ak A Is 


^ 


tes DOSES 


Gur SLT ops 


MI 


E x 


2881 Lh. 


2^6 APPENDIX. [5927 
sx» ls Lado haape (oes. E E EEAS ET aao Opa | 
w3e Naso, ias J.A ponas Najo marin JN v3 ooo q>; 
N oto alx.mo -fa “Laapas assoc Yi oN werd} re Sad 
wlrsadS Famaathlo asso J) eoo Jas 
Ns jf. La. + Jhpap-do Js CO PND V2 Vas pss q! Lolo 
Joot W430 .00of apa p-20 fisoano 236 faapo, jas, «o Jl jaxa 
laser flay Hed i p20 DNTS Rp Lansas laz Saar. o 
fusmdaaso hasaan of paolo wsas, Jlo ford à Loa Jazas 
par flo farsas vaso shia Jin ful SE p> XS Jao ^ Joiw, oss, 
aal OES «zelo ..0à j as ULS Gora 520 054 jaan NS Lo, 
eh] CANS [ad oor 30/0 fano hasas, jsa [biases Gor haso 
yl Jlassas cans foal NL ZIP «por arsed wol xo No Js 


i. G Nguo., — 9, 0 dns, Slo. — 5, (1 122,929 amomo arcaa [i]. vD ‘ort S 3 INS O2! )Qo. — 
^. 4i dns, OS 5 (Dh 355 oon, (0 SSO pee a Cho ots loo loas. — s, (1 0 05;20 [Mesos 
[os vaas oaa «fas. v. (C ins, Jess. — qu, (€ olo Jasana mo «oaa. jaN Lad wna fo 

"il ; p do 1 ] 
]a256- v. OSE ]: o6 esos 


was lying on my rug, and moved his hand and took my soul from me; aud 
Isaw this saint, and two old monks, who were making request of God on my 
behalf; and the man of fire was sent with them, to obey every order that 
they gave hint.’ But believe on this saint, and receive all blessings from 
him». And many helieved and were convinced by the blessed man. 

Again another tine, while he was visiting the churches and the monaste- 
ries, he wished to go and visit two brothers who were residing in the convent 
of the holy Mar Navuina: and the full ovening had now almost arrived; and, 
when half of the «uns disk had set; he showed ardent desire before God in 
the vehemence of bis spirit. and said : « O sun, servant of the ereatures Tof 
God,? wait for me till I enter that convent. » And the sun waited and did 
nol set till he entered that convent. And , when the members of that convent 
asked him, aud sav? to him, « Our father, what is this miracle of the sun? », 
theu he answered, and sabl to them : « Are you so dull that vou do not 


remember the words of our Lord who said, ‘if there be in you faith as a 


Goins. cand he took my soul and restored it fo mmy body; — 2. G and. creature of God, in the 
nate ot Nazareth. Soi the found the brethren looking in wonder and astonishment at (le 
>u Lt 


[593] SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 


iis. 


- 4 


* 


So den) wis Jeouo hana Dass Jor fia ds opr] ibis Jh suu 
Nl ja’, oS polo Nolo. foot ot» why ST ~~ pend waa lo 
NS bi WA xol we 05 J/a32 NS wohkal “ol eS las just, 
JKasasks LOO ow3o pre Jaw Mu] fase foes «n9 so Velo 
sas! <! OOS uani jada J2, CE hol DA foot saoi] 
JN JI Ics Goo pS ET LMS an yal otha; floats 


ivo! < Sy] cos „Laas qi, Jody y^ An op Jo 
alao -adao ha Au ANa JL] -Sosta [Kiss ” »ab/o 
pro! Eade «o IND Lasso asl? EQ Iie oot fepuhso ‘Nas 
ALS + busrso Ja y Jes p20 JNS loa Linco fens Jla Ondo 
1) rot Loot JasylKsoy bso] !Loy LAD T? joa Syard .oà Jass TEC 
Jaco, Pad Sas ois qop Nuus ccf Gilly [prac |! colds - [oss 


L C 3890 + looo pete S299 — 2, C ins; * Al bss — 3. C Lados bl Kang) Oly cod [8 
p> visio [9s hoap od ol dool pusas. — OY eae. 5 C om, 6: — no G es eae 
ILanas Auo «2 aa Aaaa |l(o fLottlo — 7, Com 8 Caa — 9, S o — [0, S oni. — 
Il. C geome. — 12. C 1Ibg2eo3. 


grain of mustard, ye shall tell this mountain to fall into the sea and it shali 
be done’? » Afterwards he went in and found one of the brothers there 
seriously ill, and he said to him, « Do you wish to depart to our Lord, or be 
left for repentance? ». And he said, « | desire to fly away? ». And he said 
to him: « Therefore to-morrow morning f vou shall depart to our Lord? ». 
And all the night he was engaged in reciting service on behalf ofthat brother: 
and at the hour of matins he ended his life. But the other brother he duly 
fortified like a mighty man, and said to him « Our Lord will not give vou 
lile except for one year. However lay up the provisions needed for depar- 
ture». Having left that place, and gone round the cities and countries, he 
came to Constantinople, and his mighty power was indeed shown. A certain 
citizen's daughter, a virgin, suddenly tell under the power of an evil fiend, 
and was erving and foaming: and, when he had anointed her with the oil of 
prayer, that demon departed from her. And, whenever the proper policy 
was being decided, he used to tell the victorious king all the actions that were 


going to be enacted throughout the commonwealth (morez) of the Romans; 


1. Matth., xvi, 20. 2, C ins, ‘and be with Christ’. 3. C owe all bres you’, 


PATIO OR. — ls NING — quoX 


s TURON 


a ik 


CAS Ah, 


24S APPENDIN. 1594] 


EN Lseosa Jase,.5 "or ad «2 | y. aS. alpo, Lojaxco «2o? jaa] 

Slad axsa -Lanus fsardso Lawas hasoos, [tay [233-320 foot was 
ON : : 

= + Dopada, m9 1r [52.2.22.:9] Loose! Jen 2 osos od gos). 

„sotaansa 13a NS. «ocn aaao | saan ON ce Ra Ns. 


lax} <% SN eo] ^ :eoot x95 "So e os Ns vio Sas yoo 
EE EET pec < also ot 9055 Ne pers! flo. JUokS 
» Jaaa] wo ary J LNS p> “Joa b> Say fay JLosh] < m> NN 
[seas | Lass xl “oh Dao :Joo flare oM sso). Je Ord 
awau Joa X fost Wo Jor Jlas.g <> Joo Nase Ll 
y. Jy p I! Joa ZI oà J34Jl. Joa Ny] JaN, Leoa -oftasaal So 
JL» < JNscdas | othoiaxdy hasj Mop. vaania Luo asi TAY 
JL Niep wis v3 E hay Lacon sao) | Joa ado .,o 30a» foa 


|l; tt Nas esl vr. docu enm a Idbor ee ee |9an23.:9|. 53 umwamsoro omni 


unc | 5 | s. 5. (1 SAS Do paap uosa.: conem. ss \Lasos x? Janel . eoo], la^, 


ns C d ES E hee — 7. dns, COO — N G wipes loo ta" " um. Hay — 9 (i 9. — 10, G 
aie dq peus nods haat eo loo 50. iv s bi. — qua; € Ao umate oA. — |, C 


oun, I. to bois p 397, T. 77. 


so that in consequence of his performance of miracles his lame was wafted 
toall quarters ike choice spices (zou), and the victorious kings of the Romans 
and of the Persians aud remote peoples heard the lame of the same saint's 
miracles, and all the bishops of the heresy of Chalcedon lrom all sides were 
indiguant agatust him, and sought to seize ‘the blessed man and tear hin! 
in pieces. And, while they were running after him with threats in all 
quarters, he was sheltered by the divine grace, and was not delivered into 
the hands of bis pursuers and of those who sought his life? ; for, when he 
wished to go to any district, he would complete the whole work of his 
ministry in one night perhaps and one day, and on the next day he would by 
the divine grace be found “thirty and? forty miles away. And, wherever he 
wished Mo ad 1 to his ministry, he would. go by the Spirit of God to the 
district whieh he wished’, without wearving: for he never rode an animal 
in his life all the time of his activity. fn? the days when he was staying in 


his convent, a eertain man among the eitizeus of Thella used to go up to the 


lC him in order by reason of the drunkenness of their envy ta tear the blessed man’. — 2. Jer, 
XALIV, 30; — 4 Coon w 0o he would be lound by the grace of the Spirit. — >. This story has been 


omilted by Uheseribe of €. obviously because be thought it unedilvins. 


[595] SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 240 
thas)" Sfieso fsa «2o yos e y JaIz NS, Laaa 
e Joor Mal pig Haas SL sy x ba Je x) jos pal 
[39.0 voha Susot p .Joot oot Nol [aso Ie be , a ie jx 
KG] Wesce [oM wots e| - jusad t^] Joa Wy] Naal, o1 2:222 
ry? "KNL, Uys m> Nil eso Ca «Qo pa 12222 


T og yx. JJ J sess PAS A20 saana] cea ups 


osa JA30 raw) [3*2 oad Joa DU C950: ve p9 Larson - 


i L wm p Lo jay Jhysoyh of aana Jo eo: 2109) 
Jr [p Jos [ie og c! Jadoo .crsar Sj [ns “aglo ] 3.2.0 Oa 
«De apo; oy! Lo [aano fladrous, lrarasds coors NS, 
reo Je! ~o109) | Qir vol Jl Jans] Jen Nis LOO ww sod 
JS JLRS] odes c Naass, opas ija o Zo, [xj] Sx aad 
„oaas Qo] ..oÓ [axo syn jo Jae L2 poh soy Jojo eR 


1 8 be^ Vag oT. N, —3. 8 90 tvcorr. No 


saint in religious discretion, that he might be blessed by the blessed man and 
ask his prayers: and he had followed this practice for a loug time. But 
this man had a co-sponsor! who was a presbyter in the order (22792. of the 
church. When then the presbyter saw his co-sponsor going constantly to 
the blessed man, he said to him : « Wherefore do vou ueglect your employ - 
ment day hy day, and suffer loss by giving your lime to going to Mar James 
the bishop? It is enough for vou to be blessed once a month. » But his 
co-sponsor, when he heard these things, continued pressing the presbyter to 
make the journey to the same saint with him, to show him the miracles of the 
inan of God; and one day the presbyter gave him pleasure and consented to 
go with him. But Satan the hater of good things ou seeing the two co- 
sponsors going in earnestness aud in divine love to be blessed by the blessed 
man showed them an apparition (ozvzzstx). in order that they might not again 
come to the saint's own presence: and, when they reached the door of his 
cell in the mouastery, they saw that a girl beautiful to look at came out 
from his presence merry and Jaughineg, and, when, that presbyter saw her, 


he said to his co-sponsor : « See to whom vou are nrgtug me to conte and 


]. jaata aa are men who are zodlatliers or father amd godfather to the same child, otd Enel. gossip- . 


=o 


h. 


"Slz0v*a- 


250 APPENDIX. [596] 


EE REN ad Joa Daal? 1e Jr] oS (NJ) QM V LaS Jon 
Opay oor] adsl! NUN, + 20103) ssl opm flo :[isej: ode ars 
o! qe! jyan Joo octo Na | saosan p oZ «3 loo Laas, JLN? 
SAD Laana akole «36 wyl £5 alas Joa anio Klal, 
oN Nau ua odd al opo Laak 4030.0 Okaa flsas 
«5 Mang?) Jo c plasso 0 prey o eM Mjos ba formas 
ael ede Jane lago lope lata sola euo aat fee Iud 
ende e Jh pope Noc Masih! e. Ll ele «xx be 
oà Jie Loot eno] files Laado, seul - con 2d otra po Lio od 
peda 2 dot fal oases, oly Jl Gaede WNT: ING 
ERNST. +, «oil € at ver JAN JI «oos. alo sas] DLs 
: [jar oo pa po AS Sors EA quo rae S or? .o*36] 
Laas o s "sotan pur Jai woes hoy oà JoJ joa wanas 
ops oà lazos oc»: JIN] lasa hul QD ue foo] Jis. 


1, Som, (corr, N). — 2. 8 «o0» (corr. N). 


be blessed »; lor he was scandalized. And on coming in to the blessed 
man, and seeing no one with him they were both more scandalized, since 
they had seen a woman coming out of his cell while lie was alone. But 
the man who was constantly going up to lim, overeome by abundance of 
love, revealed before the blessed man himself the scandal that had tronbled 
their minds, and began to say to him : « Sir, | urged this presbyter to 
come to you with me, to be blessed by your holiness; and he saw that a 
woman met ux who was coming out from your presence, beautiful to look 
at, merry and laughing, and this our companion was much seandalized : 
and even I too was scandalized at seeing something unusual. » But that 
divine man on hearing it knew immediately that that false appearance of 
a woman was au apparition (pavrasia) ol a fiend; and he thought « Itis not 
right that these men should be left seandalized »: and. he asked them, and 
said : « Shall you kuow that woman if vou see her? » And they said 
« We shall know her well. » Then he ordered them to pray; and he himself, 
having kneh down, continued entreatiug God, who wishes for the life of men, 
by his seeret power to force the fiend who had appeared to these men in the 


form of a woman to come and appear in the same guise (277142) which they 


5971 SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 201 
vas! No JA T aN Kao uà JN) 2a xo pe Kuo JLL 
Mafpepe Oped] uin lois] eer Laat seas JL] vot ho ly fused 
pho Iso a a2. + feos Ns 3M vor ILM ls ooo BEES 
paso Laaa JND ool Joot flo - fers Jila Lyall Sy aalo fad, 
wert Joa ope $20 0nd -O QO Nitec ud JIN] Loot fash ysl ot e 
f Los JL us amaso -Sna fA, eS eas, frag 

toms, JA X4) cass soo Qood, cope po oto oan as 
Spo Jo JI. Joa ass ro Sos A> haak G5 DSa ps 


Di? x29 ended. eem „oi hloa AA Joo » JA o», [rojas 
P Joa Nel um x3. «20 T? —— ! Joo NSC SUN 2o Joa 
JI ee Sx @] Scio y» eas Lə} .ps0lo reed] Jaro .Jis> 


Kul «4236 paaa aas, foflsad lues Mal anaw J oA «ele! 
"awe .'JNaa sal <> ods Ji JI o Jha» ow hot SAM 


Ll. S mel corr, Np — 2. € oues ME iR — 3. E Baa eco. 4, Coon, — b. GC ins 9> 


— 6. C» baap o «3o. 


had seen. And suddenly that woman stood among them, looking gloomy. 
And the blessed man asked them, « Is this the woman whom you saw? » 
And thev said, « It is certainly she.» And, while they still supposed that 
it was a woman clad in flesh, the saint breathed upon her and made the 
sign of the eross, and said : « Go to perdition, evil fiend, and be not a 
stumbling-bloek to believers. » And as he spoke that woman became like 
smoke, and vanished from belore them. And, when the men who had been 
scandalized saw this, they feared with great lear, and praised the power ol 
God which dwells in his saints; and they went down to their eity rejoremy, 
and repeating the praises of God. 

[The blessed man then, having remained in his monastery, was lor a 
short time‘ making entreaty to God for the salvation of the whole ehureh. 
For at that time he would fast for twenty ? days and then eat/: and he would 
eat sitting’. But one day while he was eating he fell asleep: and his disciple 
spoke and said : « Father, rise and sleep a little time on a mat also ». And 
he said to him : « Iff, my son,” vou request the angels Jo sleep, vou do 


rightly in requesting me. The holy armies cease not From praise *, and do 


1, C ‘Bul, when he eame lo his monasters, lie was’, — 2. G tten. — 3. G om 


TY 


Ys bbs n 


ue (et ih aa 


252 APREN DIN: [598] 
saa JI eis] Joor nt pag Jis pes En] S ul fos 
wo foa »b CE T e ..Joot ~ propo ary Jo soais leo Joa 
JNS. Loos JNa -— J pmo JIN?! -yä O ye) ma d ye 
OS ooo —rran0 flo cof Karoo fais GX co «soot p> : fih, Jad Sass; 
Css [2 os 35 alos CIS yas) sedi odes cotes 
| sIla fais S. opoo Jiad 
jA lopann, “Lja NYC Veo Ain NN <% en ool 

fotos el, be» ly bbs qr Tubs io Kas "amas lor 


Joe Lao Jpdo aso AKL - ferrin [ioo op. we? p 000 83h 
ll 


Han! oap xe! MOE] oli Caan, "Lasag, oad; Lej o 


9 


xo poo saajan Aus on je „Laso EAN „anaa add SO yo 
Ax. JMOL O5] Sa JEN his vino Jae jf] ' Joo -ala 


l (, gor às. — v. C pese — o ins, loo — 4, G beeps ous pl gy Gol sordarsaads [oo foo. 

^ € hm) — a C oa loo — 7. C Mio. o s, G Ilha waan devo woo uai srl] 
læsa l Slo. An erasure of about ^. Ielters follows in 8S. — 9. C laars. = d debis qM. 
ins, MOADSHS. .]2, ( were wd yo. o 13. € WSS Luomo jann poco 3. 


vou desire me to remain silent through sleep? » (for he used not to sleep 
like men, but kept watch all his lile; aad, if he happened to fall asleep, he 
would sleep a Intle time while sitting’). One? day a woman from a village 
called Theltha*, in the territory of Thella. since she had had children and 
they had died and no children remained to her, came to the same blessed 
man with her domestic slaves; and the blessed man gave her unetion through 
praver, and she had many children. 

Again on account of men’s sins there was a drought caused by Jack of 
rain over the whole of Mesopotamia, and especially in the land of Thella, 
insomuch that the rivers became dry. But, when people saw this, many 
villages and hamlets assembled and made an agreement to come to the same 
blessed James’. And they came to his monastery and found him; and, when 
they had spoken with him, he prayed and wept, and he placed his head 
between his knees, And, while they were standing before him, the atmo- 


sphere (222) beeame dark, and the clonds poured rain upon the earth, for 


[oC ins. taud ise do perform: servire’. 2. This story is omitted idu G; see p.582, nu. d. — 
loc measure v deadb T hlatha = three. ^. C ' holy J. in his cell’. 


Le 
moll 
v2 


[399] SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 
Pere p “dol qa antac -Jo [sas oid. anaso Ses JN 
Ja, sor ja> JNa Qe "Hesosls eerthofing co" Nw j) Lio 

oor] 0096 «495 «ajo! fla. Joo pes faso Ha bance yl 
os xS soo AD 0000 «AMD V P 3j Joa jaN Ee 
Baad; [nose vaas, hoah od >» JL “Prods +, coor «I p3 
Jo w o Joa paas oà JJ Qoo Joo pow x 90 bases 
pany) Jes wis 8 MS ases JH] Lasia Joo "NM, Mese JN, 
ol Lao yao ‘oor pj pesado voy Ip] Nas eon, ors 
joo aaa oca» foot [55 o3 Jie] joa Diaw JJ "lana ol Lako 
Wes Lor J pane Juancasos JNa, l»ax lo Lass Ji toads 
Jars) Joa 24 Mo JJ Nal JNaao JLoysjio so, +2 „Joa Jy 592 
D x0 pols solNssnasN So Jsdas oan jaaa Lasai amass Jl. 


|l. S apps. e1 il ins. Ma Hs. B. A AM ii n Ut des Lolo. -- ^. €) tae irit, 
eoo br. — 6. C Bat -- 7. C om. — 8. (sje) hoas waad, came hogi. — u, C ins, lem — 
in, opie — 11, Ces — I2; Som: sre p. 12, Ll eS on, p, MES ESSE 1s 6 


|55.a L Qus. 


three days and three nights: and all the people praised God, and departed 
thence rejoicing. 

What shall | say about the multitude of miracles which the bondman of 
God performed in creation? lor he used to do mighty works like the holy 
apostles. And to those who were pursuing in order to catch him be caused 
muel astonishment; and often they would meet him and ask him, saving, 
Have you seen that blessed! dames the deceiver who ts dressed in patelies ? ». 
and he would turn them back to a distiiet which he had passed through 
and say : « He was al such-and-such a place yesterday evening: but pursue 
after him ». For the report of him would be tying about to-day in some 
village, and to-morrow in another; and he himself would not accept any 
eold or silver or bronze whatever, nor would he allow. his travelling-com- 
panion to earry any, nor money or food to eat; and every day he would travel 
a stage (navstevy) covered at a vigorous pace, while he would not consent to 
the fast anl severe abstinence being broken; so that men could nol travel 


with him for a number of davs and minister to him more than a very short 


1. This word is used ot ats monk or ascetic aanl does nol necessarily sean more than our sieves 


romb eh peus ML 


+o Lees. 


*¢, 289 6° a. 


251 APPENDIN. 1600) 


pany joa J'y froflso lonsoi oaas ooa gaand peu A Jia») hoy 
-— 7 D0 „asio JD Lone) Jus. Sr p uo S ES OTE y 
proe Joa 5o —— TN CO OR Noel. foot Sutubse Joao. Jaang 
oa so! Joo eM Loasa Jlaawol p jy ŝoko yl A Joa 
qia Dao “Loot Jasoa Mhao Jlsaa ds, sadad ! opas 
(9000 Rare? "ye po 000 XL ajho jsr9o [ass yan ] 2055; vA 
Sa 4} Juss] cod oog whe Ho seana Joa LON sol tco s00 Jaro 
HD. ops wiry ops wyohkal L5; re aaa ANa Jad se 
x30 Toso "bass; PILNS. JLN. Jlo ooa dono 
ooo aao y Se + Jesa.ase Jes 32-20 "Jes Jlaansfs o coo 
aly lal „Jaap >00 44] Sas | Joot waas Jlascrse Joy ja> Io 


|. € om naos ho» ojaan oon gatas Ns NS oo Joe 5234 SSO Lis; at Wl mlaman flo, 


2. 0 ins. DS qe eel. zel- — 3. € 9. — ^. ( pref. œ — 5. C ins, gewo — 6. C ins. ee 
aloppo woraldtiaas. eu wadas alaa Aao — s. (€ lom f»; Lao ls009. — 4 (ms fads 
|» Slo .com ebai ea» faya. — |n, C * [or o — liL € «earns. — 12. Ci om. 13. te 
þan, S with erasure after 9» — In C OS qao» oom gyoMaso: — 15, C ins. Iy»aso. 


l5, € o — 17, € [Land aawo loo lss «ease jao c» o0 who 0x5 5 com e90 di. 


time; for they could not endure the hardship of his angelic mode of life. 
For he used to travel on foot like an active man', and had no need to use an 
animal: and, while he was strengthened by divine graee, his body also was 
sound by nature; but he was dry like a stone*. However every day he 
would make an addition among the believers; and This benefieence every- 
where* would sorely provoke the adversaries: and consequently droves of 
pursuers with horses and horsemen would pursue after him, and would 
meet one another, and perhaps he would also be present among them, and 
they would not see him; so that, when king Justinian heard of it, he pro- 
mised something great to those who would bring‘ him to his presence; and 
many men reecived three hundred daries eaeh to” bring him: and they would 
seek him diligently on mountains and in deserts and in villages, while they 
did not find the bondman of God"; and he was pouring out. the priesthood 


L Coins. tas we said above’. - 2. G ins. ^ by his labonrs and abstinence — 3, C ^ by his industry 
in everstliimme le’. It would make better sense if we could reuder ‘readiness’ or ‘ presence! in place 
of * benelicence'; bul [fo.$ is not known in Ihis sense’ (p. 493, 1. 2, *fame'). — ^. tn the original life 
the reward is offered to any who would promise to bring him. Onr author's story is. inconsistent, 
— ». Grand promised to’. - 6, C ins, ‘and returned in shame’, 


(601: SPURIOUS LIFE OF IAMES. 255 


rko bl palo JD heo! KASS Jlo oux opahi, iun] (xls oe 
AaN:3lo vloa Laas WM £25) Je: JAa13e2ot Pay ato! Jipa <r 
Hn 999 Joa x! RS ^ orsus le MUNS enw} aod 
Thaian das! ly Lois pos So HAL -haags ou). oro vo. [rancid 

vr haag m dues Jiu Joot Jd pay I eos opas) flo 
Jo» $uke "rale wiolo Déco [saacnis| fam dd sco ^ Jao 
ipao CATTI ENE „Lös Joaamse] paz T æa kloa haass 
RN LANS faaan J poh Jdassasoty Jijas “Loot coh} oof! Joo 
Nol cu fropanssas "Laipo «fro hadassa foot ooh] 
flo] p2 sms) jos Nas fo"Ko q0) fh sar050 I! asa sosol3o]; 
er — 300 madre osa coo VLL nao cS i as asuo Jenico 


Loon «210 No "Peas Caan, ope Jean o] JKjpoo 7 faapo So 


C tS Jio ous malls ia pL. — s. (€) wm2m| s | Sands e anoll ots. — ou. C wio — 
— 4, C bL oz liia oom a9Lobal. — 5. C Bo SS reo aearosol5ol. 6. € hatao hajan mids 
di x»3le .|9anze9lo lhaxtaxo. — 7, G 20535 Isbls0. — 8. © oom Quae nx Lad. — 

Dleo i ao — 10, S ins. B= erased after * init. — 10. C «Sat Vig eo WS! ,5 angie. — 
12. a ins. BLle. — 13. C ins, e com iial. — 14, C om. 


copiously in every district and city; so that, if anyone say that a hundred 
thousand priests were ordained by him, I do not think he will stray from the 
truth. But he raised up the faith of the chureh that had almost disappeared, 
and he contended powerfully against heresy, and lifted up the head of the 
church that was bowed down. For before the blessed man's tine the 
believers had been more than ten years without receiving the oblation, or 
having their children baptized '; for a priest coulil not show himself at all. 
And the holy blessed man both filled Syria with bishops and priests and 
magnified and strengthened the horn of the church that was laid low, and 
made bishops and priests in Persia; and he used to send eneyelical letters to 
them that were full of confirmation of the orthodox faith. For he was power- 
fn] in divine doctrine, and practised in defending the confession of orthodoxy 
(6o$0dezi2); and by speaking from the Scriptures he used to silence the 
heretics, since not even advocates (suviyopos) and? ghb-tougued men were 
able to repress his words. And from that time every city and village and 


convent of monks used to repeat ‘James, James’: and, if “the merciful? God 


1. This statement js not in the original life. — 2, C om, 


aca) Bet a Saat | 


* (1280 r* b. 


saprai Wis 


256 APPENDIX. 6021 
Saks rp 2 oe olo oes Sx «mas JH :'Rhixeoso Jor ass; [a 
Soa. qe) oe D Laws JA aso 20i *én No Re Oo Joa [49a 
JA a Phys ara a oo NS] ya dsiols [5o foanmas/] 
Sao Ga dS so aza»»olso]y LA» on EN COA CAR Qe? £5 NNAL 
oaaxa, Jaxse.ot «Q6? +0001 aLa en 2.2n5o:o] so] Ael <: "ooo 
KM JRO? ha sla] paa «Per voiaw ol haas Leo Tox hes! 
of -Lapal l, Jia. T "Sor Jo La oaas. Cal 
JN" Naas hja x20 jos. Daaa, je : hawo xi mar 
Aci Oy Ja sesot xe? | ases lo 04.99 Jloshloo jam òa 
Janel = woancoojofly -JNS Naas Col oe pace Leona so 
Jasadrs l'Losaco Tel pot Lasas 4oot3ol a az eo, JI bja <>} 
Sanad, foun 4 Aso alasan ao apao haak ey oof 


1. Gom, -- 2. Cins. e JES. 5. 7 sing. G om. 4, 69 for s à. C &gmab!s(so amsslïols 
lm oom Alais. EXTR ie ds COE fasaa ek. ics 2 Jan. s. 0 bo c 1752.30 ass. at 
Wt ro — 10, (oom sex N mare. (appy. in orig. Nand) © hei Gaede a'o — lI. (C ins. 
kailo. — 19- C eet pete bos teas, ILosbloqo «swans. wiry — ] C ha 2o33o1L. - lt. € orn 
bb3azeo <iper- 15. C miho mlamas Slo: casn lar bos v 0025, 


had not had pity on his church and raised him up in it, it would almost have 
disappeared. or he stood up and preserved the faith of the apostles whieh 
was handed down by James the first bishop of Jerusalem, and filled the whole 
church with beauties, and consequently, when the parties of the orthodox 
(42053001) and of the hereties met one another, they would ask, « Who are 
vou? »; and the orthodox (62460050) would answer, « We for our part are of 
the faith of James the first of the apostles Mand he was termed brother of 
our Lord in the flesh) ', which this divine James also proclaims to us »; while 
the adversaries would answer, « Of Ephratm of Amida », or « Of John of 
Srwin »* (the patriarch opposed to God)”: and hence throughoat Syria and 
in the countries of Persia and of the Armenians the expression became cur- 
rent « We are of the faith of James »; and in Alexandria and in Egypt again 
the expression became current, « We are of Theodosius » so that on this 


A 


account the believers of Egypt were named Theodosians, aud the Syrians 


Jacobites'. And the blessed man by his manner of life and by liis innocence, 


Il. Gom. 2. John ix tod Ynořyvs near Antioch /Evasr.; iv, 38, ad fin), patr. of CP. 565-77. Ephraim 
pal. of Antioch died in 545. — 3. C om. N has the erroneous marginal nole This is the holy John 
Maro’. ^. This name probably arose out of the schism about the deprivation of Paul of Antioch 


ind is opposed to Paulites, 


1603] SPURIOUS LIFE OF AMES. 257 
LN sen. -alaan bene alah xx) Lee: Lago haars 
Bed pay p3 JSN Jh Jiarcoo ekel| Jhassasoty fisanasoo 
a) 5e Nolo mH Joa [5 “feeds Janay eS yl MLD 
hup oly JM Le J3LU FLNS oa Lo soopaa. <% 
e» ee o. NE [ny N) p ud ydo hasaa oaoMasa 
polo ansa aA Porte Oeo] Joa Jo Je jroo ps JL: <i]! 
wD Jo [LL Sr frac aaoo Swol won Joa "Lani oops 
vorjwo jasah usol! | <P eae sol La, Le, dnd ps meal. 3001 e recast 
- plod jr es Joc. -— fraud Uso Ja Oo vxo] sop M0 I! oasoy 
-saasaa Ss 43.00 ooo Joa o: Jiary S ode q Nj lo 
liso ax] E seed Sce eoo voro Jsasht Leo fossero 


ok oaa! x S089 aal 1yo Apa NS, L2. Vo Nas] KS: 


1. (; mlas’sæs Lops. — 9 ( a2! ukre aA. — d. C ins. Ls. — igh G aps. — 5, C bian 
asses -fasas s moodatay haaat 0 6. So om. — 7. 60 pl. S. 040 lao aor lse; Dee 
o OY ence haags ovs ws foo dotes (i Aad. — ]à. (€ leony had IET B ER 


9» «Sols — 12, € ole. =- 13. C ins. pe — M C om. — 15, C bes — 16. C ins, 9> 


and by his keen zeal against tlie enemies, and great contests (zyov) endured 
(rom his boyhood and down to his old age showed himself a cherisher and 
upholder of the faith, and a worker of divine miracles. Once, when he was 
secretly travelling to Mt. Sinai in order to visit the saints, with one of his 
diseiples to attend upon himself, and had reached the desert region 1n the 
davs of the month of Ab' in the burning heat of the sun, and was walking 
very vigorously with divine singing for more than forty miles in a pro- 
tracted last. his disciple became thirsty, and began to feel faint; and he 
was afraid to tell his master. But, when he had become desperate and lost 
hope of lile, he called to his master, saving : « My father, help me. [Thirst 
lor water has killed me? ». And the blessed man on turning and seeing 
that he was already finished said to him : « Pray and beg merey from God 
until I come to you ». And he went from him to a little watercourse that 
was near them: and he went down on his knees, and offered supplication 
to the mereiful* God, and as the old man spoke that place shot out a spring 


of water. Then he called his disciple and said : « Drink and satisfy vour- 


]. August. — 2. CI am killed by thirsl'. — 3. C om, 


258 APPENDIX, [604] 
talaang Sa Jods JI ooo gam pa ooo Kio) NSN 2Malo KON 
IJlokL] jans, Dy] oa filo casco ag qo haor a fro 

Lie Laa DA andada vit Mao “poly cor Jea 
Paoa ay Jla poaa Mans] ssipisoo :Nauo loot beast! 
Wh, wo fax p aklas oh lo BE lied oo JA wid 
«e! O99 SaDa OO LOOKS 4-09 5. Ney fay woll] xo! ooo 
rao Q2 loo [4363 Ie - O3) ws JN eese "oos o» Ww 
lao SOX Fad v0: od mU ——— i533 «3e Je JINI] + craroior 
palo NAD Aaa o) cf M» je] wire halo Jos hano 
KN LUE] otxrapso haaa sane co ulis asc .!'ixelo ls 


|. (€) oas lo uaa ay pnxeslie :]j3a23 ln {glia (sic) bod | peas buf IL lo do. IQs mar 


uo 042707s. LOCO [Reto [e 570,2 Dro rukoa A199 et QO Qo Sx Japs walao Lojo 
solo v partly lap ov» [19 gols jayo go pille. EXT eel: ver lla siao pasats y. 

h C aAa — 5. Coins, haa Dol 6, C ins gy 7. G ins, MS — s. 6 o — 9, CAL 
Nao Qoosto. — jn, C wœ Loo jaot fefe: 2 “(Manos h3365 Nuts po | yao IE i qs x5 Q3 la^, 
ev holo owela ov,» lo dasad el: — 12. 6 om. 


self out of the vift of our God »'. And he drank and was strengthened. 
And fthey travelled on thanking God for his kindness. 

But, after he had returned from Mt. Sinai and come to his convent, ? he 
went to visit ihe distriets?. Now, since the church of the metropolitan city 
of Amida had been razed to the ground and fallen when the Persians devas- 
tated the city’, and had been rebuilt by order of the crown, the citizens 
wished the blessed man to consecrate it; and they came to him begging him 
to go with them; and", having consented to go,” he on his part ordered them 
to vo before him; and he himself entered the city after them. And a certain 
woman, one of the great persons of the city, was lying with paralysed limbs 
by the city gate; who when the saint passed by her continued erying and 
saving. « Sir, have merey upon me »; and he reached toward her, and took 
hold of her hand and said : « May Tour Lord? Jesus Christ heal vou, my 


daughter »; and immediately she was cured", and went into the chureh. 


1. € ins. * And the brother came and saw the water in Uie desolate place in the wilderness, and he 
wondered greatly and praised God who hears his sainls', —2. € * he exnited and praised the Lord for 
his gift. But, afterthey had reached Mt. Sinai nud he had prayed inthe holy places, and been blessed bs 
Ihe sainls There, he returned to his monastery where he had been trained. and again’. — 3. G 
ins. *of the believing peoples’. — ^. In 503, about 50 yrs. before J.’s time. * Dion. however (A. 0. G., 
H, 45) makes Ihe Persians take Amida jm 560. 5. C om. — 6, C ins, tand rose’, 


[605] SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 259 


E JL imo see pel kapo JLS D c No Jha NS xo 
"Das "ole - fasatas [oo lo mY P JLiasoyh JN can .'ooot 


~ 900 yr”? f | Laa- a-y oo% X300 wp aad SJal, i 
- bsasaiiseo Liia «oo! Aao «JL XN depos c? ES xe Ja ass 


«IK 5 LA~? Lp Ssf> Cr meres vas! wol t2 goa «2o ois 
wasaa! Hr xi S Jlar ni! 25 „La SA 
wo Jl Lopa, ! e50HJQ.2o «29 oao Ja NS aa; "fy Sol <% 
DA yio Mus ado Sa Joos TAN ipa S Loads pal! eps 
Jhonte -Aoao solo waiolo ae Nes MUN. ferric, "Jod 
e! whe JSS xo ro flass! I? Njasshlo fads JLoorsaso ! ao: 
"iao ooo atao «23.4.00 [12 AT 0004 BS SSS Pasos 


1. C Hos bea ah pel ota FE foo Say e) 350 IL Naso Naio. — 2, (1 onn — 3. S sing 


— a (0 Mason Oa loo epus asus c aqu soon «i ajaa So haia 3520 -baobh ws bs. 
— 6. € ban lz50o bel «9 wn 3an3 Slo. — 7, (1 [some uoosabas. — s, paila, al dos ao, 
— 4, Coombe. - - 10. (€ uarolo Ve Sao exl S om. vosolo, bul cf. p. 606. 1. 2. - 0. € |Lo:89,. 
— 12, È Naosllo. — 13, C elo Ihe. — Iw. S Daw. 


And having entered the church he consecrated it in the customary way. 
And to many who were in the congregation God showed a miracle; for, 
while he was standing in the holy place, thev saw' hosts of angels who 
were dancing and uttering praise within the sanctuary and rejoicing in a 
song of praise. And after consecrating the church and ordaining priests 
and deacons there he departed from among them, having informed them that 
they were about to suffer tribulations. Then (i72)? after a short time certain 
persons in various cities and iu villages under the pressure of the authorities 
denied the faith of the church, and went over to the synod of Chaleedon : 
but they are forthwith chastised for the purpose of correction. For God 
sent upon the whole of Mesopotamia on aceount of the sins of men, espe- 
cially upon Charrhae fand Edessa? and Amida and Maiferkat, raging madness 
and blindness of heart, and the population became possessed by demons, 
except a few, but especially at Amida. Men wailed and jumped, and were 


1. C om. — 2%. This event is related from another source by ‘Dion.’ Nan in. R.O.C.. 0n, p. 587; 
Kleyn, Bijdrage, p. 713; cf. id., Jacobus Baradaets, p. 106) withoul mention of James and dated ind tV 
(ang). Tron)‘ Dion. it is repealed by Mich. p. 323) and in Berlin ms. Sachau 3l». C. Ss. €. O., tom IV, 
pe 831), and in the latter the intervention of J. is added, perl. from onr fest; Tn these two sources 
iL is dated in 560. ]b was perh. an outbreak of bydrophobias ef. Zach. Bho, vin Ki Theoph. 
A. M. 6008, und above, p. 579 4. 7 ome. Ree p. 606, T. 3. 


* (1289 ye Hi, 


rosis 


* LV 


Airai 


jd. 


260 NPPENDIX. [606] 
| oooi «A930 pass pel ooo eam sO oats Kis ooo 95 Lajo od pel 
VHS pudo QopAadar 20 coim 3 oot yha po S001 Piao 
hoa Jpn PJN; Jlaxis JN2opd0 ‘pele Joa Nl Pyne Noo 
proo] Sa Nee cis ope nasa (yo JI Ze so LS NS oN 
P faapo, pw TN RINT WWE ax ia. fades Sm CASS 
< Las asl TW TD Mase ooot vc Jf acco! [aojo „000l v5 
xA yD sae LOAD Joey oh | v1 < al coos polo Laso 
J| LAD JH pa a aia GIRS Moka drar00 Volos oh] 
tog A] 
Jer ha hanns qx QM 049 yards "asl Pad, H, 
Fad rere oN Nes er p Jie poll Syl ao ao wolo 
Se P Jes mo Walja x20 OLS ga CHOP | Quy 


.oxxe[ x? SWS Jor 23s QNID v AEN oh | nnn S dese 


l. C erao. — 2.8 demo Com. 3. Com, — 4,6 pla — 5. C ins, 9 loo Ml. — 6. C ins. «et 

(1990. — 8, B ins. Ny. zd qnss does Ms tae a oes bo ee I CER Ati, "5 enia 

1k, (| 9 coo yA. — 14, C 92 hA. — 15, C ins, e — 16. C ow - 17. C 9 „a3 

dei ool pep) ea — 18. € v WS, 2 : pell Qoa» Sa. — 19, S losso fla ae (prob. 
from p. 607, 11). — 20. C aras œo epe oo. 


mad and ran as if horsemen were riding after them; and they barked like 
dogs, and howled, and in their madness they bit their flesh; and, while at 
Mailerkal and at. Charrliae and at dessa it was a small matter. in the city 
of Amida great madness prevailed, especially among boys and girls. When 
then the citizens saw these things they were overcome with alllietion at thin- 
king what Ta horrible thing! hal happened to their city, and they were 
running to the same saint, and begging him with many lears to visit then. 
But the saint answered and said to them: « Ilow do vou wish the Lord to 
have merey upon you when you deny his Godhead and divide the one and 
indivisible into two natures? — Bul, if so be you will obey me, God will visit 
you». And they said : « We will do your will, our father; only deliver us 
from this grievous infliction ». And he granted their request, and rose and 
went to the city of Amida. But, when he entered? the city, those who had 


gone mad began to run away from the sight of him and seck refuge under 


i (oom. = 2.8 ins, Sinside the church and’; see below. 


[6071 SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 261 


Mena SOP) "Qao Je re | Amo Je 3M Jes. as 
oo n t2 JN epson Jias "Wwso JM Sao TOTE Jods Loona 
JI Bdrsaso fasiac oios eds [5 Joa «oto Nu] La . Jens =r 
“aao * qataisseo Ca “pay whl [ea ts) akan a” Laias 
lars -odds "oà LAS M [ET je Laz; C colo Jods) 
[Nesa I? so J. Laro xl eut ors p> ADAE Joa ease Jo 
ads cao! AN asao 2 Nasco lo "Loa Norsk] fly faos ee 
pap qmo i sacas OLLSO SQ! ADAM A300 yard = Jos Jas. 
“Lisa os Joi, Jas] asas Ao - fsacdo] 328. -haag oA 
DEEA eS . 


MA votioffo JIKRSo Doaa D Olo Jul ats jy Jo. JI 


OO ama S0 Q2 |B fro rscors | JN aeo x» Joa aas 


|. (C anata 0 L9 asdal. 2. (1 ins, oo — 4, G 56 |dato [552530 
Eri deser i qu ds de eo eoe Lo LL s. C ins, oom. 9 (om, le. €; 
ladh loo ine. I. C ins. boas. — 12 S a&9. — 13. G lowiàs. — 14. (€ Dyowllo — dq. G 
TAX go hass axso com e3a5*3oeo loi [a72aa Qeon lupe wits. — 16. 0 beo. — 17. 5 ins. 
what looks like 82 (perh. a blundering beginning of L»30:2 18. C dus, Wagae ote c - 


Lo. C Dja. — 20, (6 Vy] haah oomo. 


walls; and having goue into the inside of the church he brought incense 
and set it before the altar; and he ordered them to carry it over all the streets 
of their eity and the houses, and on the walls of the city all round; and the 
day was the first day of the week. But, after he had offered the oblation 
and celebrated the awful mysteries, men began to come to their senses and 
recover their intellects and praise God. Aud again at the vesper hour he 
set down incense, and prayed; and all that night he was ollering petition 
to God on their behalf. And at morning on the second day of the week 
there remained not a soul Fin that eity ! which had not been cured and come 
to its senses, and those who had been alllicted? began to utter exclamations 
ol praise to God, giving thanks and praise, and begging merey from him. 
Then the blessed man ordered them to elothe and cover? themselves in black 
for several days. And so he left the city wilh high reputation *, while all the 
multitudes praised God the lover of mankind; and he went to Maiferkat and 


to Yhella and to Edessa, and to Charrhae; and he visited them in the same 


f, , 


1 C tainong the sick’. 3. Ç ‘alt the citizens’. — 3. See p. aston. 3. — *. CU ins. " and a great 


procession 5: 


SONS 


b. 


*(i2u01t* b. 


262 APPENDIX. [608] 
Da JLo "(Jem J) ama SDa vx pa Jaa Xo ! Lasoo 
wis fusad "Joo Jeo Jas. ads < ræ p> Jsasy | Ksoa. "oae s 
Asa] i39; osa» Sx auus se n]le 293] Qoo» palo lo Scans 
JS Asad "Ss; Jo Lipan, "Jona wano). Nag fas -— 
+h JN v: Loa SUN. Jor! anos SX! DNS X bas Laso 
2!" aeos Len aS, RNC W Y- vho Jhsansol Kas 
opas JA] "5 |o ro? ` fasps "9l q Lol 
Ma) Joa JL? tea SENS paolo Lasao :4j9 Soy I? aos «die Slo 
v agr 5. NL tus Jj pO + Oba Rady CDa faao voto] Xs 
No Üopmac& oS! Joor cs P':jaaau fme "Joo osaa, laid 
So PJs aa; oda dud paaa, . ora Sco "Lies Sx JAM 


Lawo fad sd ja 0&2 » 


1, C Laden. — 2, S leo (corr. N) € wl. — 3. € wo. 1. Som. C owa B bo bel» ooo. 
— 5. € 385 eie M o. — 6. C om. -- 7, € ei» — 8, G Bhigi baag riage Jad wo Node], 
«6 à400 o3 o] wis oN, — u. G eco. — 10. C waa. 35 200 $1225 9 fussa. — I G [à gims. 
— iz, C b3aoo Ii» aielo mdp O90 beds. 13. C ILo I` — 14. C ins. Ibape Dp» 
|Llo 909! sorgany |Lamolo otas foasy — 15. C o lato laa. eoo» — 16. C oret. — 17, € 
o. b bon: | le. 


way; for Tthere was not' a dead man among those who had been alllicted. 
And he came and went into his monastery for a few days; and one night he 
called the blessed men the members of his convent, and said to them « My 
fathers and my brothers, let us sorrow for the Lord's people, since fit. has 
been bereft of tlie? blessed pastor Theodosius patriareh of Alexandria. and 
he has gone to the tents of the saints; for this night he committed his spirit 
to God ». Now that year was the year eight hundred and eighty-seven of 
Alexander’, 

Again too in the period before this, when Khosrau son of Kawad the 
Persian king came and laid waste the cities and villages on the Euphrates, 
and ravaged and destroved Batnae, he came also against Edessa *, and 
encamped against it to take it, and, when he was unable to do so,’ a man 
of craft in destruction whose name was Cometas, a spy, who used to teach 
Khosrau all kinds of evil plans against Syria*, advised him to order his 


l. Som. C in place of this clause has ‘for none of those who sutfered in thìs atlliclion died’. — 
2. C tthere has been taken from us our’. — 3, 576. Really he died in 566; see p. 486, n. 6. — 


^.555. Bul Balnae was taken in 540, when lie took a ransom front Edessa withoul besieging il (Proc. , 
Bell. M, xil, XXV). — 5. € ins. ‘on account of the numbers of people in il and the strength of the 


wall. he was troubled: and’. — 6. C ‘the excellent people of the Syrians‘. 


[G09] SPURIOUS LIFE OF JAMES. 203 
-lJa Lao] Napo wis ansas g! pI O0 Əl 2à On pro Jo 
AX Joa pol. Sk RT pO +9004 hi ca ax, kaso, alaz 
„JaN on} id Neo: aLojao Ne Nos . [sofas "Napok lo SJN apa 
N25) Jos! ko fm <] opalo alas [Loso| ob] Sssarsoo 
J Jaag «o£» ialo SAs Jaano bor frag cro ooa 
4° LSS ^ Lets «Gras arac sours flansa siaa Cady) 
ss] aiaa J Jess ero . «sol <% CRT- y JN ofS 
LI 20 TB NE) lO sg LA "fas Soy d. aaa Ns ja SO 
i JO “8 < 

eel JN sos. s x24 HE asso ..J5ass. Lass Hopas ss NX Y 
Mo MUST Jasas yar flo elo Neo <% hz» yao oA 
[iso flo Lxo ob operas ba Jona en e ORAL. ofdado yO 


|. Sie ms. P. Still gives bæ;9] as masea bul without examples. — 2, G 1825 Ba go ja 
S200» ws haab saad »os.lo w po [z23a9 umsol cts aan Íl 120 AYO dado DULL 
Qo 15a att woS$ols o s exei for poll. — 3 Hers S hreak- off Ihroneh the tos- 
of u leaf. — 4. C ajas. -— a, C œ of elo alas odd [Dp wits aaa5llo .mis. — n. C Won 
> — 7. U wuSo AQSats mbans:.r ceo njan SNe didis loo — u ( haab oo ECR OMe AS 
[Las jo. — lo t1 om. — II. N AOS Pe sie. — 12. C Ie iL. lotre Daas- N vin, — 13. € ied 
lats. — qu. N om. — 15. C gelo. — 1G. C laaa Dm ges SSCCM os 15 Coe Ic Mee 
jos Mas hbo eoim. ' 


forces to build houses! against the city and Mo reduce it to straits as he 
actually did?. |— But, when the citizens heard of this contrivauce, "they were 
running to the same holy James; for he? had arrived in the city a short time 
before, and it became known to discerning men that God had brought him 
to save the city. „And accordingly the Hdesseues came to him and said : 
« Our saintly father, offer supplication to God, that he may save H’ from 
this man and the? impious kingdom ». And the blessed man said to them : 
e Fear not, ve of little faith*. Only believe in our Lord. This night God 
will drive him away like Sennacherib from Jerusalem; and at daybreak none 
of the Persians shall be found in your borders». And the blessed. man 
prayed all that night; and at midnight Khosrau saw” horses of fire’, aud 
horsemen * elad in flame saving to him : « Rise depart from our city; and, 
if also you have not done so when the sun rises, we will slay you and all 


your army ve Aud, when this vision had appeared to WKhosrau, ‘a stern 


l. Goins. fontside (he wall and towers’. — 2. mak cpt spoil of a. 33.6! Thi dieser 
trembled and was disturbed. but the blessed J.. — 4. Ste N. € cusi — 25. C ceruac man aud his’. — 
6, Malthe. vit, 28, — 7. Noom 6 dus. ca fearful vision. — 8, Note. 


PATR. OR. — T. XIS. — V. 2. Is 


NN DNE 


bam td (0 aed 


+N garh, 


204 APPENDIX. [610] 
e DIRS Jar Nispa QO ad.aslo odes XA» vol ati le 
Halan s Så JND Lpa w0 .' loo hasis haa Laopo oU NS so 
edis) wma pu haan [xz x] qo Jeux o> c Joo Kul 
ye uso OE ipso] ceps xo XS] pao odas Nj]. Laak, 
ES ce quus us ns) NS Sn e ces: 
Rado SPAR vot HP rN Aso open woes pel JheseM Jes sass 
2-0 ela cono Mi solo ces gyshe hosna <x Las -Lasag 
H paolo vaaraa” Kd ALa 0.200 ALA ooo J, L IN Lash 
press byrne "yee [iam 93e JD NS ERA lLhueMse shox sass 
rum oà p [39.2 JM». dao ." ae yr oaKSs Jiors woh 
Jot jan Dasa Najiarss .ooot xl o Jot] amaso fats ooixolo 
V». Lex Jesus) [rods [xa ejas: Sylo Juss vae "paso 


1. o Spo o3, haya eo waal WS) Loos go Aupo go com — 2, C Mey piae = 
ug. ox la^, Ds JL oS, 2 uldu pos quam. — 4, (ME 0o diat: oil ysesL woe e — 5. C pref, e 
— 6 Com. — LN om. C dns, $59 aller e. — 8. N wilh plo mmerks. — u. G waa 8 haab wo om 
edo 1, Cans 0> — 1 C o for b = 12. € dns boisa — 13. 60 Jeane boy — 1*5 C ins 
loa. — ja. N aro U wm@gdsl boe — 16, C a, sage + lo. — 17, € pees. — 1s. Ni 


voiec eried ! aud alarmed his forees and they retired from the city Tin great 
fear?. Then the saints word was being carried into. effect, and the Lord 
saved that city by his prayers. Now there was in the same city among the 
distinguished men a cerkun blind man; and he heard of the blessed man's 
miracles, and went to lim by the help of some of his servants, and said to him 
« Sir, have mercy upon me as your Lord had merey on Timaeus Bar Timaeus 
the blind man, and crant me in his name to see Hight, in order that his name 
may he elorified because of mo ». And, when the blessed man heard. these 
words, he wept for sorrow; and he was strongly moved in his spirit? and 
sald : « Come near to me and see the Lord's glory». Aud he came near to 
him; and he plaeed his right hand on his eyes and said, « Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, fashtoner of our frame, indivisible, oue, Only one, in thy name may 
the pupils of this thy bondman see light». And the same hour that blind 
man saw: and the multitudes marvelled, and they praised God and continued 


saving: « Truly this is a divine mans’. Aud he lelt the city and went to 


I. Go the eried with a loud voice’. — 2. 6 cand, when the day broke, none of the Persians was 
found round the eily’. — 3. Jolin, Ar, 383. — ^. Luke, AAT, ^7. 


ford, SPURIOUS LIFE OF AMES. 265 

AS XS po alaa DAA oM joo Gis ry OY Jo] 

e Joo wol] ow Noj Lya pad pel prado "GN ses lasos " [an 8o 

RiJbpee prod) "fang oboe RS or rad "Laias foa opao PA ERG 

p Joa, fiso ios xao ^a Nar JRheo «ael. Ns. so Neo] 

a Je» Lw; EET I5) 35, JAN Me Lajas So epo 

fshas lasas ooo cos Ly ssa Joa Dais, qda, Jro Lo 
sjaj aso où hha «20:400 JL 

J| NS.3a.20 Paso]: Les jaaa Ny lo jasan ~~ Lag wey ay 

Laja - ard oly Jawo .Joot cam ” H Lisas QooX 3$ Joel seen 

eUNssaalo LaNa vpk) bss ^ eoa ao y we? p Joa jaa Lasso 

aL Ss. S139 sees EJ lis ed Nd E) ERN Jlassascio ., asia 


LE > Ika Ww loo wall Delhi. — 2, G sing, — 3. G wie — 4. G po — D. C om, 
— 6, C Sans sa» — 7, (1 009 e Repo: — s, C ics testo N om. -- t. G haas N pl. — io. € 
Jest. fal; foo SloBanses — 1L C o>- — pog gel: — dà, G onm r ds C Heo tht) — 
15. G om wuedsel9 rl Sog leo wa. — 16, G ba Lào ebaiseo o. X m Dana L Slo 


v? har beas. — 17, N buta 


«reet the blessed men of the divine convent of Bar Xphthonia'; lor he loved 
it greatly on account of its virtues: and, haying entered the convent, he 
both filled up the ranks of the priesthood and did what was customary? 
(for it had recently been built). But oue day, while he was otlerimg the 
oblation, a certain Saracen who had recently been baptized was present 
there; and he saw that fire came down from heaven, and saw tongues of 
flame hovering over the oblation, and hosts of angels with bowed? head 
belore the divine sacrifice*: and he saw that. whenever anyone received the 
oblation, they wrote his name in the book of life: and that barbarian believed, 
and praised God. 

And the blessed man left the convent and went to visit the churches in 
Asia; and he visited all the believers? with the divine word, and proclaimed 
ihe news of the gospel (sdayyer.0v) to near aud far. Having appeared in the 
world like the great Paul, and completed his ministry, and perfeetly kept 


the Futh*. he assisted God's church for à spaee of forty vears. favie 
l uon g 


|. A1 Kennesbrin on the Euphrates Zache Dh VII 2. — 2. Se. consert itel the building — 3. N 


, 


omi —-—4.- 0 alla a 3:45 tories’: — 6. DE Pili IV. 


EN BIDAN, 


266 APPENDIX. [612] 
Joel ya PX alo faoss [aNs warata A Da uiis e JAS, 
resa foot Ies laden, iler oi dab najaag LS Joop 
<x oar flo flay, MN so] <% ohkasd aX JJ eget vM 
lad) yor [x2 Maas» Jlasams “Foor wau eos ja LJN Joss 
ooo! — "J-2-2-o og Slo. ]-5,-2-0.-9 “Yass ud rae Jis Sa 
psa) oo hamn [rasan par Jha age Hian Joon My S deseo P ases 
AHSAN $30 hespa- yE Lizaso, ) sok pro Sy Js ; wank. 
JAexels Erais L2. i-e s Jlaasos "^ yo Lal bul foanmss)) 
j; p> aso 100A «25 Jusol> et y RIND <% 2:5 EN OLALRAW 
Je AND pao ceo La oso "uoo d Seo]: IAN, JNa; J pe 
T Soo "al ` FORIADY LAID lo Laso La cad ye esas 
poly ‘Soo. Sane JACMBe L fis] -hsp baw Bo cenae lason Jao 


DON Eee o G ins deo — 03. O a Bngeeas 9029 oon uenia. 4. E Dadoa voor 
leiel geo — 5. (€ 0 kp bes. — 6.0 om. — 7. C ins, haags mblanms qay ee — s. 41 Nese 

u, C aaas oi Jas omo — |n. € ins. 000) sic ere No lLax Des lija Wie — 16. C 
eie aab. — Jo, (1 o lado: bial Basats] Lamel. — qu. N euro. — 14. C apio — do. G fils 
Lauds ueaBSeis — 11), € oiae — 17 N eue IS. C its, geo hads — ju, € geo ode. 


received ordination during the years of Justinian king of the Romans, The 
was living! down to the years of Tiberius the king the successor of Justin’; 
and during these forty years his steps did not pass away from the paths of 
righteousness, nor his tongue from the divine words. But, when he had 
reached advaneed old age, a certain seandal-causing calamity sprang up in 
the chureh, through the faet that Paul ihe patriarch and the saint? also 
were zealous for the Lord: and, in order thal a scandal might not arise 
within tlie church, the blessed James made a secret. resolve lor the sake of 
(he correction of the believers to go as far as Alexandria’: and he took with 
him cight other bishops and hastened to Alexandria as T said; for Chis 
inteution was a seeret® from everyone., And, as they were journeying along 
he road. they reached a luge monastery on Ihe frontier of Egypt called 
that of Casium?.— And, when they had gone into the monastery and fput 
up” and praved, the saint spoke and ERI to those with him : « Pray, my 
brothers, since the Lord showed me that bere | aud three of you will depart 


L Con. —2 (oc dustinian’. ames d. 30. Juls, 578. Miel, p. 368; C. 8.0. 0., lor, IV, p. 1%) 
and dustin lived HH à 0cl.— H. E.L arr 6). 3. G ^ holy Mar J. — 4 € ins. "and contended to death 
for the faith. eden TPP Ivo Tht, Rem cue. Tied eid at Guar slate. ONS hiecuds 
concealed himself. — 8. X mountain on the borders of Egypt and Palestine (Arm, Mare., XXII, X1v. ^ 


=, dGohept vizit'. 


[613] SPURIOUS- LIE OR JAMES. 267 
x Jooty oes, Ado! v6. vs foaam.s! Naso -haass HDS cao 
ao M» Loo Je faso Law ogo col eo Jyroars Jipsi i re 
Moss Shy S Noes "oo Sly asan NE colo [1532.0 
Jor EE "sean Jas oao; "oot y.al | qa. AST S Reso 
La? nods costs ECT «noto “omanaan | oss colo 
od yon Josl.3 Ləl} aso P Copsey ho fasas vanas foro; 
Jlaspa Ljan) aasa | J00, ahuad wias o] rl p30 JI Ls oon 
haama S lisa ANS 15 sorasa. "xn: jaz, < Lye JNa; 
[ansu Law, opan cf inan Se veol t Je aeo FUA E | saaa. o 


JNa JL aao olo .ooa wee son. aoo Opa pads oog whl Prado Loo 


1, (1 34,55o loo vmod soos. arom. a (0 050 — 3 (0 loo c5. 0m, — a (1382 3520. 
EE vzalo + Aa.-00 oid L] n oaon Laag S-L (553 law ba boe. — 7 (€ «e? bas. SG arc 
Vista lanko ohsh wat poe. ibas hado faato [Los] ox decli] ow ee LM uas wh Org 
Laas Ouaseao Slo. lod Su co [1a NS So e. ae U. CL gS for — pu. G ine. lso NS ( 
Qs HS was bh fy dein: wits Ness op have: lasko — [3, 41 024,98. — 15, 41 fos. — 1h, N 


lL jaw md (0 o5 hjam. 


from the hfe of timo ». And after he had said these words at daybreak one 


of the bishops who were with bin died, who was formerly archimandrite of 


the convent of Karthiunin': and the holy old man /stood up and? offered the 
oblation for him. And again Sergius his syncellis who also had become a 
bishop fell siek and died. And after three days The himself? delivered up 
his soul to God, Ton the day ou* which God commanded Mit; and again after 
him his? deacon also, and all these in twelve days, so that meu were reduced 
to astonishment and wondered. And the report went out over (he countries 
‘that the light of the church had been extinguished. And his companions, 
overcome with wonder, returned to Syria in greal sadness. Bat the monks 
of the convent of Casium taid? the blessed man lin a collin (yrossózouov) and 
took possession of him? with great honour. ‘Then the whole of Svria sor- 
rowed over the oll man’s death; and many eame to his monastery and were 


visited. And the people of tlie? city of Thella also sullered many distresses 


I, Nee p ME Mod; op. 8S, n.o à. — 2. C ets Soe this divine Tight of all the werkt the blessed 
J. fell sich and died and’, 5, Gould at the Tne ath — 5. C Alet thee weary man should rest from 
his labour this second Panl and bwe disaple and vowbalant for rebgion was ealliered to his heb 
fathers and the doctors of the ehureli; aud the wants’. 6, i tandan alb quarters ol erection thal 


the pastor of dhe church had gene ta his test. Se bids ecd ess, 


CONG: 


LIE ur 


Beha Wek el hae 


268 APPENDS, [614] 
waka VAa Jio aeo) HAMAD loj cM es aM aso JE zs 
J.-e slo lansan ADs oğ Jars, JL-— V Joa pawo edes p ooo 

+q] «xS X» Jho 


stm madari sapasi aanas hard thls 
wrer xo, 


Mota rSanmadré rpaapn 195 n áhoeiham | 
Gaps, V rés Smals 


JNa, “Lapo Jhan > Joaomuas! saan urs NA Q2 
wa ea Se Io N26 Jo fasy Pe «9 po law usta 
scm "à ! cn oa jamos, fads Gol cupak) foi od wodo Loja 


Jow, l"Luss Jl aoa duior E yawo :amsojolso/ 19a.2.:29J] ,ooda.203a5 


|. C ihg [Bae oS po. — 2, C oni — 3, 0 lee bern uoaa s los ods. fase eoa Tas 
e «paso. — 4. N 9S (om. — 5, G e» daas. — 6. Go uona ell lse Tei — 7. C qo 
la 4,0 NSW E 2o eyw, PE Ves wor — t, C zac pil oi Biho — 1o, € wanas. 


— il Saree. — 12, d bka huya ML. anpii gonads. 


al being deprived of the saint s bones; and so they were always asking for 
his pravers; and the power of God would visit them; to whom be glory and 


honour and worship, for ever and ever. Amen! 
The history of dames the bishop written by Mar John of Asia is ended, 


1 


A WRITING or! Mar Cyriac gpisnor or LOMBA ABOUT THUE SAME” NOLY 


Mar JAMES’. 


When then Mar James the bishop from the holy convent of Fsiltha had 
departed to our Lord a considerable time before, and the patriarch Mar 
Athanasius had arisen upon the see of Peter the great*, Phocas king of the 
Romans again expelled the orthodox (92023929). bishops from their sees aud 


appointed herettes^, but by the judemerts of God the Persian king Khosrau 


2 
[Lo dus. ‘the holy’. — 2. C * Marde, how the bones of the’. — 3. €. ins. came from Ihe monastery 
of Cassimin fo fis monastery’, — 4. Se. the apostle, nof surely, as M. Kugener thinks, (he patriarch Peter 
of. Gulliuieus, 5. Nothing is hnown of this, and in. Phocas! time (here were no Monophysiles in 


open [sse 108 a soes, 


[615] TRANSLATION OP THE RELICS OF JAMES. Di) 
—f13 Mas ods lhaa Nw.aso .9430)00 $5 opm l.c hN JL] 
< don "JNA qra [wo — JoAN; Lasia paso Js 
Lamdosol3/ Xo oS jecoo Jor [saamis] . 19 andy 203 JNa 
apaw hansa Thana] uao cotiolso SWwojasas up EE q QUO 
Sas ooo! vex. De Jaupd00 4| Was [aseo sy upro Iso us] 
Ue) apse pe is; "bros Woo "ors JM LKMk3saNM .- jeg 
| Ure e xà „oaan uha Lisa), alasso Spo SA ] JJ, lsancm.o/ 
iho oscars qd [12584 [53] ipao NS le 2, p20 Nasya và Laado 
Sh, - fads ol MAXLXS Jaana vas! ojo JN aapa, AAND Ke 
LOO 50.000 | xol. xao M ERES Op anes oò qao, Jes 
Kass soaNMjb oa ee) o Ns] nal ipso Lop dan Lias], Lease 
LL S008 Jaw39 loia Jl] Leapa loo Jasas, ASlo «No Jlsarncsl 
ou], xS eon [oops Jaca cas! nde 49 Aan 93 oaa oaao 


]. € EP i bap Doac Letom —7 |. 0 J152. end ladis LE Scis eS ES uao 


mola -amdoyeltal pado aawo niwon [Sanat]. . 4, € uoo boal upoo — n 
wao pos RREPTA) haag ooo — E anya boats axi. ce LL]. c Ue DUE i6 19225 eee the D. 
E AN a «S730, peas S/o. DU, O oanu aa O39 los YNAD uio C Higa ugao dus. — 
IL. Codal Poo — I2, € 0S: — L4 (C latas. 


son of Iformizd eame and took all the country east of the Euphrates m war! ; 
and by God's provision fand queen SInrin’s advice he? expelled the bishops 
of Chaleedon from the cities east of the Euphrates, and appointed orthodox 
(G9fede20) bishops in their places, viz. in Amida Mar Samuel, aud in Edessa 
Mar Isaiah, and in Rhesaina Mar Addai, and in Vhella Mar Zakkhai; aud so 
in every district and eity ^, while they agreed in everything with the blessed 
patriarch. At this same time therefore. when Mar Zakkhai bishop of Thella 
had heard and learned of the holiness of the blessed Mar James. he was 
zealous for the Lord aud for thal holy soul aud exerted and bestivred himself, 
and sent [our blessed men from his convent, and two of the clergymen of the 
eitv (and le supplied them with a swift animal and money: to voto the monas- 
tery of Casini in whieh he fell asleep, fand steal lim’ thence. And he laid 
down a law (vóuszi for them as to how they should act and dispatched them. 
Now those who went were sent in the year nine hundred and thirty-three of the 
Greeks?. And at the same time fferaelius king of the Romans’ came, and 


took all the country east of tlie Euphrates, and drove the Persians as far as 


p. Gta shori Cine’, — 2.46: othe hing and Shirin the queen ordered ond zig bo ai pepe 


and clergymen were appointed, — t. Codo teteh his bady’ ntti oU ape Rss 


e (esol ta at He 


Psp hs 


PX sdb vit. 


270 AREENAN [616] 


Taal 2&3 lau xz» -ji wis 5.4 Dylo food! Kus 
aao, Jem | asao adj | < 9 JN “Joa |i5N sos Jet 
ks] P SM2Q Ma x6 Joo «oo a5,:3) lo Sas}.c0 QAM "Spon ads 
Jas [ec Jha qH hnl: anto cup 134]; aA Na? yo oly 
‘esol, o3 N53! Scot ^Y JE o jal Aal) ^ wero foi scars, Jas 
NS] Looks Cu joo pads JN hasan y T wil 
WHF 2s Qao SUCRE: INS i350 IRE. p2 Jn? La v» 
Loco) oues Qoo raed "Mas uotoso| Taa po . gaio orol hse 
|. (| ]9aaz.9| hajan oS Borne Wy uoa efla Sx 9095 Mojo molo . Laya oat, pheasl 
c» fy e haaa [9aoa9] om o foo sst D -Aau [dai wo wooly Ila uomioly lx] 
bo [Saco -hajan oS (Ll ins. above alia manu) coz U ponada, 400,01 ac22s ladas cenas d 


as; l om 1.242 s ponada, canal ah. 9o ., aie", Nso .as:90 asz et lam Ns Jr. 2059 eps t. 
tco buo Ss, ie RUDI mS ss ILS. bs aa Nt aS ao. —t. G pret o-— 7. C 


JOS. |o: PM loo paas- wp de see 3 Ja» - 50 anata! | - 000 yyt lose! 


amasl L? EI Jas 0 wo lddors G00 «aan. — 8, (1 WD! NER D: And obo pw sje) ad Qro. 
E o, «2150-2 0. 


Nisibis which is on the frontier’. And? the members of the monastery went 
in the days of the devout Mar Stephen who was termed Shbiliya?; and, having 
gone and arrived at the monastery of Casium, they went into the monastery 
and prayed Fand came near? and were blessed by the holy Mar James, and 
bv? the brothers of the house. And on being asked whither they were 
travelling they answered « We are envoys of the church of Syria to the pope 

f. Alexandria. » ‘Then they were received with much honour. When then” 
they had remained there two days, fin accordance with a plan aud trick that 
had been concerted by them on the way,‘ one of “hese monks, * the envoys, 
setup a wall being possessed by a demon? and foaming Fand went out of lis 


mind And his companions began to be distressed and weep; aud in 


sorrow they went on to fasten their companion to the sarcophagus of the 


|. 622-0 — 2, € "ol the Greeks aud the Persians. And D. instituted a persecution against the 
chure, because hp. Isaiah of Edessa did not give the oblation lo the hing in the great church of 
Lilessa, hbecause the bishop demanded of die hing thal, unless he anathematized the synod of 


Chalecdon in writing. be did uel vive him the oblation i316. Aud for this reason Christians 
williont number who stood dirin and held fast were oppressed; and those who did not show 
enetanes returned to the heresy of Ghalecdon. At Chat tinie^; ef. Mieh., p. ut — 3, Se. tthe man 
or the path? 7). — 4. Gom. — 0. Gt erected’. — 65, Coins. thes were travelling on the road, they deli- 
berated fhns : 5 As soon as we reach (he donastery, one of. as will purposely have a seizure, that 
on this preteat we may be able to approach the place where the saint is ». And, when’. — 7. G ^con- 


vulscd 


617 TRANSLATION OF PUE RELICS OF JAMES. 371 


OMNE Jo ou TC Suy Lash abs Lhal oaan uja 
> ooo D vei Jie: oj oU NS A so alas ooN Kx ae, [oe UU 
Joa isd’ re .O 000 «maso FoR Jer oà 3a. [3e .. 22 
2 EE: ssp rere | Xo alan aaas ^ [nsa Loot 
Ml, DA opo xi racemos Jpop R2 ov] eel -. Loot Naso 
SERGE Ji J^ Joss ba [6l " [siot sKasy <a J DIRAN gaa 
«| aA aA Le ko", e Juss e ANS SN S Seu 55 MES p oi aN. 
HL doy alise fpo Jwana iind | Rollo > yin 
a eco jp LN aS hoops ob] ese — Pasa p20 TS as, 
[sapos agad voiadosc LAS amo aama Jes Jaws od t 
Wootton ad MYX. fps Dao l Lysa saas - Saas. vido 

2 P yes aaor Jeno pal Sa TAN 


12265 “nori lads ugoy oro a lid eo fin. added alia manu DOL! abr 


2, C om. — 3. C eios. — 1. (1 0,0 om fom losa. —— 5. S appy. ex» l>a, (i Joos Na loa Sy, 
— 6. U yomats. 7. 0 |[Saed9 gar Oo dals SOx uml des Mo 6L» ieee eee ae jae 
9 Cle [edo Gan o- p, G SDa Mo. — Ih G ins. 95. 12. «ideo uks May — I cas 
— 14. € eos EE lia + Qo:5:2 2s endo E a Aaa. Ln l5. (! jas Os. le. as HS: 
17. € bisa. — 18. C ude 9S gomas Lad apo: — 19, € %09: 


holy Mar dames, in order that The might learn how! to steal that holy body, 
while his companions fon his account slept? with him close by the sarcophia- 
gus itsel. But during the melt they would bore, and in the day cover the 
borings that they had made. And, when the task lad become easy for them, 
they took the keys (zie) of the monastery to themselves, that their task 
might be easily aceomplished*. Then they sail to the members of the 
monastery of Casium, « We, sirs', sinee we have a letter with us, cannot 
remain here with this sick man‘: but we will leave one of us with him and 
aswilt animal, in order that, when the Lord pleases and he recovers, he may 
quickly join us at Alexandria, in the holy convent of Marth Zoila^, but pray 
lor us ». And, having gone thence, they came as far as Palestine ou their 
return: and the man who had feigned madness aud his companion rose by 
night and took the body of the holy Mar dames, and wrapped it in silk 
shrouds, and came on the swift animal to their companions in Palestine 
according to the agreement that they had made with one another. 


[C they might set themselves’. — 2, € were’. = E give Ihe sense frome € see n on desh. 


r - 


1 8 Sir C omms brothers .— 3. C ^ our compiten; — 8, € 7 Mar Zoilu-'. 


* i30] vh. 


C ET NC 


202 APPIENDEN: ,018] 
O9 ans opo he, amao D ganan, dessus < hg 

A996 S ady/ cris Sado AN uso JNa «ooo axa. | Je 
<% eas] q, Lisak errno! + Soap 2.9000 asl qaas] flo 
vie M 99 J Miss INS Na a2o06 "ax136o asp .0o «ado [i en 
ij JNa aïo Iwo 2o "Loaamnao] xaa p20. Laso AgI LAA 
p : JN aap WND aoa».5lo Naaa" Nao hadio fpo aniol aaas 
LAAN eraot 9 Luo, !|Nsasiso «pasos !"]sasejy2. oi vand 
i doces. faso og Joot aay Jasoa.. JX Ams) à j was oae WOIAda.s00 


JK.caasdSo frosplo l! fascis «oor», Jlansolfo Lax «ool. uoto. lo 


LG isas — 2, Chins, e Sl 3, 0 ins; (Aani o — 4, C ete. — 5. (1 890 upad: — 6. C 


|3aoz."9| arse 9 aoo. — 7. s pl — SN. t exige. — 9, (€ MXooro [Autaads9q frtmsag. — 
1o, (i kaob. — 1]. C HMezase. — 12. (€ 0 oia anpa geo — 13. C6 oa, NS ise -has haola oa 
[QSsm08y he» pasttio usili — pc MAW Daa amwa dos AN o5. þisaso \Lasooll. 


But the blessed men the members of the monastery of Casium, when 
they rose in the morning and saw that the saint’s body had been taken 
away, lifted up their voice in weeping aud in sobs; and they went in all 
directions alter them. and did not find them’; and they returned to their 
monastery mourning. But the blessed inen departed from Palestine, them- 
selves and the elerzvmen, and rapidly arrived at the city ol Thella, car- 
rying his holy body with them. And, when the bishop? and the clergy 
and. the citizens” heard of it, they went to meet it with lights and incense 
and songs of praise, and carried it round the whole city, accompanying it 
with spiritual odes, and chants of the Holy Spirit. And then they’ wrapped 
it round and laid it in This monastery, the convent of Fsiltha, in the temple 
which the saint had built iu his hfetnme’, and it is there for the assistance 


and healing of all meu*, and Tor the honour and praise of Christ his* God : 


l. GC anMhing'. — 2. C * bisliops ". — 2, € men of his city’. — *. Cins. "eame to his monastery and’. 
— 5. G Sib with greal honour, sinee he had been eduealed and trained in it, in the monastery of 
Psillha'. The date was probably 21 Mar., 622, 4. is celebrated on 21 Mar.. 31 July, and 23. Nov.; 
and, as 31 July is die day of his death or burial, and 28 Noy. arises from à confusion with J. of 
Lalman, 21 Mar. is probably the date of his (ramshilion, and was in facta Snuday in 622, — 6. € ^ who 
lake refuse ab his eottin'; — 7. € cour’. 


610) TRANSLATION OF THE RELICS OF JAMES. 273 


kastol 9 a “cise y> waiasflo ods loài oto TET 
eol S ys So «Pao Jao : 30130050 S 


“sepia; danas saps, Ql hard Aon 


Je Nolo ferro oval wires Jla draws "ioi Ja c! NN] 
Jos Naa Jass Aay Jos sos bloli 0 Mn PRX Lm 95 Joss 
445.00 20 «allo «9S6 


LoG os. aa Py Se Sivas HS CS bad, „Ussia ooms [D> caos upo fos 
[ats ,oo 352 ea. "The eoloplion following isin S only. — 2. Tus. aboye in sume hand, 


to whom and to his Father with Ins‘ Holy Spirit be praise and honour 


and worship fand exaltation, now and always and? for ever and ever. Amen! 


The history of "Mar James bishop af Edessa? is ended, 


This history was written by the industry of Mar Theodosius presbyter and 
stylite of the monastery of Fsiltha, in the days of Mar Stephen, archi- 
mandrite of the same convent, in the year a thousand and tifty-two 

of Selencus t. 


[6 dios Ep 3. G*llie holy Mar J. of Psiha who is Bard cana. his prayer be with us 


in both worlds). — 5. 741. This colophon comes from 5 only. See Introd. 


VOCABULARY 


VUE tb ar as dion Pc 
:v9254 « hospice 507. ult. Cl, porua below. 

Cana aaan, == GROG T,OLKGY 208. 10 (ms. aama |: tiep ER TIS qe T 
lbs]. abel — von command 75. WL; 0^9. 8 see note 2 on transl.). 


: gtabhov alt, 2. 5 1, 5 ms. sel]. 





ejeam| : oxeuxcioy udensil IO 100, A, 

tas;o] fem. GOO. 1. 

amm doy, Y 285. ^, Perk. an emph. form.: see pagr above. 

kopal ttentness ^U^, ^, 

oso Na» lil. Sof my Jord's house’, appy. men who performed certain menial ollices in 
monasteries 361. 6 see nole); 263, 6: 304. G; 365, 7. 

no = po worn garment 209, 0: 217, 4. 

ege wo pol run very fast? lit. distunce many 526, ^. 

wat) te packed tightly ?; ^15. 8. 

Res (PL Ue Idi Scc Nole 

Nba Mt bereaved fusion 685. 7. 

ly become manifest 189. 6. 

bs cipe space 132. 10, See Smith. s. v. pag: 

haway fearful nature 8. 10. CE Sey.. Select Letters, 145. 12. Sm. admirabilitas. 

Capg = qoasi Dond 11. 7. Sm. and Brockelm. cite lexx. only. 

Jawai. aauan. = Stansted, Svxkovicov vestry 103. penult. ; 572. 2. Sm. lexx. only. 

Jo: scouring 7) 302, 8, Drockelm. olera pura. 

vemasxeo Augo 212. ^. 

ib throw 217. 20. 

So) post up. 7) 320, 0, 

Nail in confined fashion ^us. 10. 

Ln, ave at with inf. Tollowing) 410. 7. 

poi. body of s. gentry 183. 10. 

pay heap of débris) ? 566. ult. 

ha smear with ace. of thing smeared and o preceding thing on which it ts sneared) 
DTE 

sei be formed iof a slain) 550., 10, 

Lasas comluctor GO, 10. Sm. lexx. only. 

ex, dsk like zusôgvouat 59.9; Pek. 7; 149. penult; 151. 4; 2:53. 03 9 4. 

nhas angrily 05:3. 1. 

soja» — ys; GAS. 8. Sm. lexx. only with obsenre interpretation. 


we axatl slop al, rest content with W2, 12. 


(621) VOCABULARY, 


-ma3oaicms —— 650207 12 ATO. 19. Cf. J5era 1a | above. 
«43e obscure word probably denoting some utensil 191. t. 
wopuapss - uitxvotas prostrations 20%, ult. 


haa» = nnz, denoting au irrigation engine. then a plot so irrigated. >00. 5. ser 


note). 
has overshadowed 236. ult. Sin. lexx. only. 


Nhat over a wide area 5102.5. 


- 


wy scour (7) 247. penult. Sm. Brockelm. aufugit, ecpugnasit. 
wp Pael plant 553. ult. Sm. cites Hexaplar only. 


r haw on the other side at 298. 7; 387. 7 see notes). 


Hae -— mo: ever 435. 5: ^35. 9. Sm. Dr. connect with root gos contempsit . but 


ye aed d. 


this needs a forced meaning and different meanings in the two passages. 
unquam. 

wastes --. mopvas O41, S. 

wars divide among 5^0. 1. 


laxo = rza paved precinct (2) 33; 


le 
. 


NJ aasase Jut ruriousty 5^3. 14. 


jams gap (in mountains. 132. 11. 
M^ A 


NI pa 4. raas If you please, be so good as to 79. LO; S0. ^; LOG. 11; 363, 11; 3 


334: 2395119 5042-6: 
apas MS. Biakas == mtatodsx embroidery ? 238. ull. see note. 
We po discover 128. 0; 130. ult. 
fonamas = 5581521 Slap 516. 10. See waso below. 
Suwanee (TIS. adoseaapo = xatyyouutvioy womens gallery 330, X, 
geo go Saxo (nothing whalever 173. 8. 
wamo — 4990003 Slups, 513. 5. Dr. mssi. See tarmac above. 
voral be laid out for burial 108, 9. 
lax name of a tree. perh. syagrus, 30. 11 see note. 
Nout. Soul be bruised, be buffeted, 181. 1. 328. 5. 


PUR 


INDEX ' 





Aaron, 430-444, 448. ^^t. 


Abarne, 417. 

Abba, 
Jo1:953. 

Abhi, 213- 

Abraham, anchorite, 200, 300, 

Ar'a Rabtha. 


of convent of lohn Urtaya, 
241. 


archim. 
SU Tete EU od. 
220); 

— archim. of 56-250, 
FEES S 

l, archim. ofeonventofJolin Urtaya, 


Oo 973 


— H, do. See A., bp. of the Urtaye. 
— Ill, ithe shepherd), do. 559-563, 
DOT. 

tr Ped Sort, 


136. 


22077302, a6. 


hp. of Amida, 96, 101, 105, 
bp. of the Urtaye, 
deacon, 


layman and recluse, 118-124. 


^5(-^4598. 
— presbyter, 445-440. 


DA EU 


Absolution, 334, 
Addai, anchorite, 299, 300. 
— bp. of Rhesaina, 615. 
— chorepiscopus, 124-1:34. 
— deacon, 265. 
Acthiopia, king of, 155 


APRES M 004. 


Agapetus, pope, 20-25, 30, 31. 

‘Aina da Frakha, 505. 

Alabanda, 204, 

Alexandria, [505 190. IG 203 320. 3371319; 
MONG hot ail. Wine all leat ORC ORO, 


580, 602, 612, G17; difliculty of ordimation 
at, 
at, 
DBA: pope of, 516: 
ETT 
Aulda, 101. 


Is. L 


BM A bane: at, 428: John of Eph. 


336, 532, 563: mouophysite bps. at.317, 


territory of, 325, 384, 


160, 181, 184 


aa62358. 550, 


377; 803, 51; 


588, 004-606, 607, 


The referenees are to the bracketed munbers. 





615; convents of, 84, 221, 240, 200, 300, 
301, 319, 390, 405-421, 552-573 ; province 
of, 416, territory of, 56, 91, 109, 190, 
niv 

Anastasius, emperor, 142, 143, 137, 567. 

104, LESS. 761. 2905 


mayer 


ed 1 


Anchorites (pis, 102, 


313, 357, 42A. 


Andrew. convent ol, 387. 
Anthemius, palace of i: ‘AvOsptov , 329. 
Anthimus, patr. of CP., 482-485. 
Anlioch (in Caria), 448. 
— (in Syria), 207, 25^ , 293, 520, 469- 
471, 483, 003; 518, 586., 5S7. 


Antoninus, 

Antony, bp. in Syria, 587. 

Anzetene, 125, 135, 158, 383, 417, 
aus 

Aphrodistas, 50^. 

Me 28, 379, 350, 


bp. in Syria, 587. 


-9 --Q 
453, 908, 


AToxpice ^02. 


Apocristarius, ^53. 
Arta Rabtha, 56. 457. 
Arab; 582, 419, 020. 


Arabia, 490, 500, 584. 


Archbishop, 156, 320, 458, 502, 50^ 

Armenia, 104, 28^, 293, 204, 208, 317, 475. 
500, 570, 355, 602. 

Arsacids. 286. 

Arsamosata, 159. 

Arzun (Arzen), £45, 317, 340. 

Ascalon, 3^2. 

Asia. 333. 335. 448. 457. ^75. 479. 500. 503, 
500. 550. 28^. 585. 588. GIL. 


Athanasius. patr. of Antioch. 614, 615. 
Babai. catholicus of Seleucia. 145. 1^7. 148 
28^ (see note). 204. 
Banker (sgansttvaczj. 11. 

Bar Daisan. 139. 155. 


2791 


Bar Deba. 572 


Balabitene |(?;. 


[623] 


Bar Nbyl. archim. of Fy tr. t 
Barhadbshabba. 456-458. 
Bassian, 450-453. 
Bassus. convent of. 502. 537. 
Batnae, 608. 

bd hy re 232. 5370. 
Bell (for services), 
Berytus, 254. 

Beth Arsham. 152. 
Deth Bar 
Beth Gubrin (Eleatheropolis’. 


Beth Marka. ^25. 


215. 357 


 rubtlia, 562, 


y 
Do». 


Beth Musika. 224. 
Beth Rwimnt’ 450. 
Beth Shurla. 197. 
Beth Urtaye. 135. See also * Urtaye" 
Bostra. 554. 
tbwbnt. re. 
Byzantium, 475. 


Bzy (Bwzy}. convent of. 502. 087. 
Caesarea in Palestine). 335. 
[2555,27 


i; convents of. 537 


Caesaria. 53 556. 537. 
Callinieus. 313. 382, 

Cappadocia. t30. 290, 577, 
Caria, 448; 479, 500, 504, 585. 


Casium, convent of, 612. 613, 615-613. 


se 


1120. 


200. 993. 


Castrensis, 540-5145, 


Catechumenia (ol a eliurcli. 5530. 

145. 147, 143-151. 

Cellarer of a bishop . 192. 

Cellia. 38^. 

Chaleedon, ata; synod of. 98, 126, 187, 
312. 178, 483, 454, 500, 546, 384.5 


Catholicus, 


294. 
605. 
Chalcedonians, 312, 461, 477, 575. 
615. See also ` Synodites’. 
Chalcis. See 
Chamberlain, 
535, 237, 546, 
Chancellor, 543. 


ISO, 504 
' kenneslirin '. 


^51-^433, 436, 437, 


s 


218. 
‘Oratory’ and‘ Marty 
Charrhae, 502, 587, 605-007, 
Chartulary, 543. 

337, 500, 503. 507-500, 282, 588. 
Chorepiscopus, 12^, 125, 158. 160, 204. 
Cilicia, 3325, 475, 500-502. 


Chapel of eonvent,, 204, Dos AO NOU. 


See also 


Chios, 


INDEN, 


213. 
90, 


Lil 
oO, 409, 


Is, ae 


-1 
~i 


L- 


Claudias. 232, 
OOS, 
Conon, bp. of Tarsus, 495, 501, 50 
Constanlina, See * Thella d Mauzlath’. 


200. 2535 4 0G Dads 
| Cometas, 


D A A 





Constantinople, 21, 26, 142, d ISS, 207, 
Apos 230 a9 K doe nt eL atlas 
rOl, ee a d MAG, ^as lE 
A07, 408, toD Pact ES Od T a 


589, 595. 
Count, 459, 462; 


| Cosmas, 97, DGN, 572. 





Cosmiana, archimandritess of convent of 


Caesaria, 537. 

[o2 quse 
Co-sponsor, 595. 

Cyprus, 50. 500, 355. 
bp. of Amida 61^. 
ANG-4608. 


Cosimo, 


Cyriac, 

— «deacon, 
Cyrus, bp. of Edessa, 139. 
Cyzicus, 473. 
Dada, archim. of Pytr. 6. 


Daniel, archim. of convent of thems3 v k^, 452 
' > 


fo, ti 
— presbyter, 445, 447, 448. 
Dara, 373, 420, 467, DSS. 
Darie, 494, 548, 551, 600. 
Deaconess, 194. 
Demoniacs, 15. 15. 43. 604, 05, 222. 223, 593, 
605-607. 616. 
Denarins, A30, 100, 212, 215, 203, 376 
Dereus; 35, 320. 
Guxxoyta, 467, ^73. 
Ounaoveagy, otaxoving, 103, 373. 
Dimet, bp. of Laodieca in Syria, 502, 587. 
|, (i Dorylaeum, 588. 
| Kast dioecesis ÖOrientis\, X0, TRE 191, 207, 
25250 eee ee PALE AE E T ETN EEE 
district near Amida’, 417. 
| Edessa, 159, 293, 5105. 384, 590. oul, 005- 
610, 615. 
ldessenes, convent of the, 221, 500, 555, 
| Ayepov (vovernor!, 51^. 
Bon Pll St, 9. TEE SO. car Duo, 0s 





ados, Dd ops 
See * Be 
Kijal of Dara, 3723, 474, 


245 


Eleutheropolis. ‘th Gubrin . 


ine QUE 
s= EIE CESTA 


trader, 


376 INDEX. [024] 


J 
lneyelical letters, 601. | llormisda. palace of. 398. 474-476. 
Ennaton. 325, 384, 2^3. | lMours. 132. 204. 215. 410.515: (services), 
Iphesus. 336, 507, 505, 588. zl hoe OS D70 0915, 3910: 994.-25 3; 
Ephraim. patr. ol Antioch, 351. 29%, 320, | 280, 361, 3563. 364. 381. 402, 407. ^08. 413. 
2a ely OC 505 99D. DU, | AW. 4^0, 550, 593. 607. 
Eugene, bp. of Seleucia in Isauria, ^95, | Hula, 135. 454. 
501., 587. llundredweight of gold (xeveavxgvov), 212,430- 
Mulogia, 341 isee note. 432. 548. 550. 
lnnomius, hp. of Amida, 503, 588. | Huns. 19. 20. 80:82. t15. 245. 


lluts. convent of the. 553. 571. 

Hayne 214. 260. 460. 
Ignatius. bp. of Antioch, 312. 321 ; cited, 321. 
Il yrieum. 506. 


luphemia. 166, 167. 171-186. 

Iustace, arehiin, of F'siltha. 576, 577. 

l;utvehianists, 158. 

l-xcubitors, 28. 

l'ardaisa. 122. Ingila. bp. of, 98; territory of (Ingilene). 56, 
407. 423. 443, ^57. 558. 


Isaac ol Dara. 466-469. 


fathers. convent of the. 545. 

Follis, 526, 

Fstltha. convent of. 488. 576. S8t. 582. 594 
597. O98, 6035, 61^-616, GIS. G19, 


Isaiah. bp. of Edessa. 615. 
Isauria 475. 500. 501. 585. 
I y daft Ishakuni Bar Tire y. 191. 
Gadara near Amida | 467. Isidore. bp. ot Nenneshrin (Chalcis). 189. 
CHAZ, 323: 3432, 

Golgotha. [67- tot. 


Gordiana. convent of, 448, 


— martyr, 507. 
Izla. 419. 420, 573. 589. 
Jacobites, 002, 
Greece, 506, dames Burd ‘ana’. bp. of Edessa. 488-504. 

508. 509, 574-618, 
— St.. bp. of lerusalem, 602. 
— monk. 220-228. 


Greek language. 459. ^61. 582, 
Creeks 2925 ie 


Gumtha. 418. 589. 


aeann M — M —— a a m a a 








ry] m, conventol: 95. Jerusalem. 167. 170. 183. 34t. 342, 500, 

Halhih arehim. of Fy tr. 4-19. 33. ^00. ^6L-|. 20399095. 

llala. 390-599, Jews 00: 1022115234 2AL 4205 090; 

lamimtha hot springs). 224. 335. ^17. Job, archim. of convent of Jolin Urtaya. 556. 

llananya. 17. 35. John. son of Aphthonia, convent of, 502. 587, 

llanina | Hananya . convent of. 502. 587. oll. 

Harha. 581. — Urtaya , archim. of convent of John 

larfat. 158-166. Urtaya. 551. 355; convent of. 1. 197, 198, 

Jlebdomadarii iservitors . 62. 221. 280. 379. 214. 249. pU. AUT. AnA. 50%. 505. 552- 
39 EEA E DOLEO, 573. 555. 

llephaestopolis. 524. 325. — bp. of Chios. See’ Nashisl’. 

Heraclea in Honorias? or in Thraec?. ^73. |. — bp. of Dara, 588. 613. 

Herachus. emperor. 615, — bp. of Ephesus. inlaney, 61-64: in con- 

Hereth Bae Gabala. Arab king. 409. 572.) vent of Maro. 72. 26-79. 100; moves to 
380. 53^. convent of John Urtaya, 84. ^06. 407. 505: 

Miha. bp. of Edessa. 130. at Lz sn. 217-220: 228, 260, 263, 415. 416; 

Hierapalis. See * Mabbng’. EN 19t, 196. 197, 199-209, 249, 251. 

Hirtha Nu * man. 145. o 25%, 255-259, 360, 361, 370, 570, 371; 
— of the Saracens, 500. V visits to Egypt. 209-211. 335, 336. 340. 


Hinana, 70. 242. ah, O R aT 9023, 


[625] 


INDEX. 


250 


to CP., 32, 33, 211, 380-382: in exile, 44- | Nayuma, convent of, 502. 
oo, I31- 13^, 291, 202, 505, 506; in house | Kenneshrin (Chalcis), 502, 537. 


of Probus, 155, 137. 158; in CP., 94, 95, | xevryyzouov. 


520, 


479, 


Di1, 512, 525-531, 539-542, 550; mis- 
sion to pagans, 444, 438, 449, 456, 458. 
479, 503, 509, 539, 550, 588; his convent 
in CP., 463, 464, A60. 507, 509, 510; 
ordained deacon, 319; bishop, 503, 588: 
intercourse with asceties and others, 116, 
164-166, 266-278, 283, 300, 373. 430; 
works, 1-4, 405, 419, 420, 588. 

John, bp. of Ilepliaestopolis, 325-339. 

bp. of kenneshrin /Clialeis;, 502,587. 

bp. of Pergamum, 503, 588. 

bp. of Seleucia in Syria. 502, 587. 

bp. of Sura, 502. 587. 

bp. of Thella (Constantina , 228, 311, 

324, 338, 339, 499, 582. 

imperial chamberlain, 547, 552. 

chamberlain to Caesaria, 537-539. 

(the Nazirite), monk of Zuknin, 36-55. 

(of Sirimis), patr. of CP., 602. 

presbyter, 511-524, 

St. (the Apostle), church of at Eplie- 

sus, 330, 337. 

— satrap of Balabitene (?) 

295), 294-296. 


— 
— 


— 


(Land, n, 


Jonathan, areliim. of convent of John Ur- 
taya. 555, 556. 

Julian, bp. of Alabanda, 504. 

bp. of Ilalicarnassus. 483. 

Justin I, emperor, 187. 189, 284 7. 

I], emperor. 436. 611. 


Justinian, emperor. 21-28. 35, 127, 189. 
995, 318. 332, 373. 413. 420, 0528-4305 
436, 437, 439, 478, 484-486. 488. 547, 
501, 570, 579.903. 504. 00, G12; his 
death, 486. 404. 572. 

Kalesh, 56, 84, 90, 91, 110. 


xanehauxta, 506. 

Karhe, 229. 

Karthamin, convent of, 502, 587. 

Kashish (John), bp. of Chios. 444. 504-510. 
588. 

záotowua, 225 ‘ef. 306). 

Kawad. king of Persia. 142. 143. 
150, 563, 364. 566. 


Park: OR. — T. XIX. — FL 3. 


‘See Hundredweicht’. 


328, 337, 400, 401, 440-442, 478.! Khosrau I, king of Persia, 156. 157. 608- 


610. 
IT. king of Persia. 61^, 615. 
Ksot. 486. 


Kyra Maria. 567. See also ‘Mary. St.’ 

Kyrie eleeson. 414. 

587. 

Leontius, 443-445, 448. 440. 

Libya. 190, 349. 384. 

Lord of the world 
2025 453; 

Lycaonia. ^75, 500. 


l.aodicea (in Syria), 502, 


= sacred elements’, 


Lycia. 500. 

Lydia, 333. 479. 

Mabbug /lHierapolis . 383. 

Magians. 141. 142. 14%. 147. 148. 153. 

Magister. See ‘Master of the ollices’. 

Magistrians. 207. 

Maiferkat | Martyropolis'. 11, 457, 605-607. 

Malkha, 360-372. 

Mama, convent of, ^06. 568: palace of. 208. 
42. 509. 

Mani. 138, 139. 

Manichees, 158. 

Marcion. 139. 

Marde. 228, 317, 584^. 

Mare, bp. of Amida, 187-192, 194-105. 
— the solitary. monk of Beth Marka. 
427-499. 442; sepulchre of at CP., 422. 
42375838. 5311 14971590. 5203. 490 es ee 


(Mari, monk of lula, 135-137, 453, 


AOA. 
Mari, archimandrite, 453-455. 
Maria of Amida, 171, 172, 174-177. 
of Antioch, 510-518, 521-525. 
the Armenian, 286. 290, 297, 208, 


182-186. 


JMarmitha (division of the Psalms), 20 4. 

Maro. archim. of Arta Rabtha, 50-85, 98- 
101, 197. 

archim. from Palestine, 330. 

child, 7 

Martyropolis. See ‘Maiferkat’. 

Martyr'siechapeh 48, 91,93: 122,102, 323, 
99 ad: g517 119,450, 5350. 054 On ka 


19 


280 
307-360. 
chapel of, 91, 


Mary (the anchorite), nun, 
— S4. (the Virgin), martyr's 
92, 567. 

of Thella, 166-171, 181, 183, 

Alarzban, 147, 450, 151. 

Master of the offiees (magister), 28. 

Master of the soldiers (stparqhatys), 189. 

Melitene, 377, 419. 

Menas, patr. of CP., 28. 328. 

, convent of, 209, 345, 557. 

Mendis (Mendia , 190, 209, 346, 587. 

Mesopotamia, 183, 511, 598, 605. 

gevdvowx (prostration in token ol penitence, 
204. 

wéromov, 560. 

Metropolitan, 
588. 

Mimc-actors, 512, 513, 515, 516, 523. 

Mina, 168, 443. 

Mishael, 546, 547, 

Mitylene, 500, 585. 

Monasticism, admission to, 120, 121, 
283, 359, 383, 440, 447, 461, 576. 

M‘*rbn’, 230. 

Msyk’, convent of the, 455. 

Mule (siege-contrivance), 563. 

Mzyqn (utensil, 191. 

Narda, 558. 

Nazirites, 90; 40, 104, 111. 136, 219, 453. 

Nestorians, 138, 140, 142, 145, 146, 152, 157 
158. 

Nestorius, bp. of CP., 

Nirba dSkw, 

Nisibis, 139, 153, 616. 

N-ns;285 

Notary, 187, 188. 

Nu'man, tribe of, 140. See also *lHirtlia d 
Nu'man’. 

Nut, convent of the, 

Oratory, 112, 121. 

Ordination, 226, 227, 314-320, 322, 327, 328, 
332-334, 336, 444, 445, 447, 487, 490, 491, 
494-504, 509, 578, 584-589, 600, GUL, 011. 

Orientals, convent of the, 566, 

242, A44 


185, 186. 


187, 333, 502, 583, 587, 


"i 
523, 


551, 552. 


278- 


138. 


505. 


570. 


Pagans, conversion of 152, AAS, 
AND, 456-458, 479, 503, 509, 588. 


Palestine, 190, 337, 349, 500, 563, 584, 617. 


INDEX: 


Palestinian, 325. 
Pall (bishop's), 484. 
Palm-leaves (used in manufacture,, 190, 508. 
Patchwork garment, 102, 319, 423, 489, 580, 
581, 591, 599. 
Patrician, 157, 189, 191, 531, 537, 543. 
Paul of Antioch, 469-474. 
— archim. of Surtha, 111-118, 424-426. 
(of Samosata), bp. of Antioch, 


20. 


— -— bp. of Aphrodisias, 504. 
(of n monk, 566, 567. 


$2, 487, 488, 503, 588, 


— LÁ 


— patr. of Antioch, 4 

612. 

— presbyter, 157, 158. 
Penance, 228, 240, 33^, 300. 
Pergamum, 503, 588. 
Perrhe, 419, 
Persia, 12; 59, 138, 

37. 390, 1 00950) 

584, 589, 601, 602 : 

146, 152, 153, 594 

‘ Khosrau’); queen of, 157, 615. 
Persians, 138, 139, 152, 153, 565-567, 604, 

609, 615; school of the, 139. 

Pestilence, 212, 261, 437, 531. 
Peter (the Iberian), bp. of Majuma, convent 


141, 145, 146, 156, 157, 
37^, 377, 457, 491, 578, 
king of, 142, 143, 145, 


(see also ‘Kawad’ and 


of, 325. 


— bp. of Smyrna, 503, 543-545. 

bp. of Tralles, 503, 588. 

St. the apostle , seeofatAntioch, 614. 
Petra, 188. 

Phocas, emperor, 614. 

Phoenice Maritima, 325. 

588. 


Photius, 543, 54^, 
Phrygia, 479, 500. 
Pilgrims, pegumoen 
34052051. 506. 507. 
Pontus, sea of, 473 
Pope (of Alexandria), 516. 
417. 


(peregrination), 1, 3, 


Poplars, convent of tlie, ^18. 569. 570. 
Praepositus, 546, 5^8. 
Praetorium, praetoriant, 159. 204, 
Prefect (napyos), 435, 436. 
Priscus, 525-531. 

Probus; 157. 


Procopius, 519-525. 


[627 
Propitiation (for a dying man , 262. 
Protector, ^67. 

Prusias. 475. 

Qlwfyte, 106. 


Recluses, 84-86, 90, 03, 07, 98-100, 110, 118. 
12112275025 
Relies, 70, 114, 118, 262. 384, 387. 388, 507. 


G14, 615, 617, 018. 
Rhesaina, 615. 
Rhodes, 335. 500, 555. 
Romanus. 450, 452, 453. 
Rome, 26. 438, 157. 506, 523. 
Sacellarius, 430. 
Samosata, 532. 
Samuel, archim. of convent of John Urtaya. 
555, 556. 


— archim. of convent of Samuel, 562 


503; convent of, 443. 
archpresbyter of convent of Jolin 


Urtaya. 553, 554. 


— bp. of Amida, 615. 
— monk, 350. 
Saracens, 140, 146. 579. 611. 


284-256, 
ee, 587 
597. 


Satrap. satrapy, 294. 

Seleucia in Isauria 
- an Syria., 502, 

Sema. 551. 

Senate, senators. 22. 26. 202, 433. 456, 439. 
463 

Seniors (in a convent . 
264. 553. 


Sergius, areliim. of Gyln. 453. 455 
— ! 


3195. 9 


. ^50. 


. archim. of convent of John Ur- 


taya, 567, 508. 
— Modor 921-7272 
— bp. of C m 502. 557. 
— deacon. 456-458. 
— (the recluse , monk, 84. 59-95, 96- 
103. 
- patr. of Antioch, 482, 487,480, 502. 
582, 583, 537. 


syncellus of Amida, 158. 

-- syacellus Vo James Burd‘ ana, 615. 

— , martyr’s chapel of, 482. 
‘Hebdomadarii . 

Severus, patr. of Antioch, 575. 567, 482, 485 


57^, 568, 582. 


Servitors. See 


INDEN 


2st 


Shirin, queen of Persia, 615. 
2^ 


Simeon the mountaineer),anchorite, 229- 


ADO. 


arehimandrite, 


SML. 


(the recluse), arehim. of Kalesh, 54- 
03-06; 105, 108-114. 

bp. of Beth Arsham, 157-158. 

(the solitary), monk, 300-304. 

the seribe, 399-404. 
Sinai, Mt., 579, 580, 602. 603. 
Smyrna, 503, 544, 588. 


ee 


Snq. 284-286. 

Solitaries, 1, 257, 300, 301. SLI. 
422, 423, 450. 

Son of the covenant. 

Sophanene, 6, 111,327 

Sosiana. 537-542. 

Stephen I SAbiliya\, archim. of Fsiltha, 616, 
— Ii, do. 619. 

deacon and syncedlus, 187- 
206-209, 214-213. 

otputy datas, 199. 

'strltys, convent of, 576. See also ‘Fsiltha’. 

Stylites, 20, 21. 56-60, 63, 68, 74, 79, 82-84, 
l9. 

Supper monastici, 43, 87. 88, 151-153. 361, 

400, 402-404, 413-410. 

Sura Romanorum, 502. 587. 

Surtha, 111. 

Susan, 330-350. 

Syeae 27, 422. 433. 0. 

Symy, 568-570. 

Synagogue, 01-05, ^79. 

Syncellus, 187. 188, 6L 

Synodical letters. 48^. 


384. 385, 


241. 244, 217, 495. 


445, 455. 409. 


198. 204, 


362. 364, 


. 


Synodites, 20, 418, 491. See also * Chalee- 
donians’. 

Syria. TT alg 0, 10-971 99542204. 29003183. 
423 447, 407, 475, 499, 500, 502. 574. 584- 
588, 601, 002. 608, 613 

Syriac, 459, 483. 

Syrians, 27. 35. 335. 26. 403; convent o 


the, 208, 422, 4259, 442, 4^5, 440, 403, 464, 
AGG, 500. 

Tabitha Tcl. IS. 

Tarsis, 339. 3 E OILS 903, 097. 


Thebais. 427, 


Thel ‘Adda, convent of, 450, 453. 


503, 200. 


382 INDEX. [628] 
Thella d Mauzlath (Constantina), 166, 181. | Tiberius, emperor, 611. 


312, 487, 488, 502. 524, 576, S81, 287, 504, 

509 607, 613. 015, GIS 

d Mikhana, 560. 

d Thuthe, 418. 

Thelitha, 598. 

Theodora, empress, relations with Mono- 
physites, 24, 25, 27, 195, 207, 327, 329, 
231-333; 399, 429-432; 434. 430, 437, 439, 
474-478, 484, 485, 489, 579; 
consecration of bps., 499, 500, 
founds hospital, 507.584; writes to Persian 
queen, 157; her death, 478, 481, 485. 

Theodore, bp. of Hirtha, 490, 400, 500, 584. 

bp. of Mopsuestia, 138. 


procures 


571, 583; 


castrensis, 546-002. 

of Edessa, 590-502. 

trader, 374-383 

Theodosians, 602. 

‘Theodosius, pur of Alexandria, 35, 325 
, 328, 330, 482, 483, 486, 488, 501, 503 
575, DS% as 602, 608. 

presbyter and stylite, G19. 


326 

h 574 , 

Theophilus of Antioch, 510-525 
— Dar Ma'nu), presbyter, 576 

od d. 

Thomas, bp. of Damaseus, 338. 339. 

(the Armenian), monk, 283. 298. 

St., convent of at Beth Gubrin 

‘Eleutheropolis , 563. 

187-211. 


syncellus, 


Thrace, 326-327 


Tigris, 111. 
Tonsure, 104, 


120, 121, 145, 242-245, 
251, 282, 359, 444, 509. 


Tralles, 330, 503. 


tpametitys, 11. 

Tremissis, 526. 

Tribunus, 459-466, 

‘tryz, convent of, 104, 

T y Sf, 214, 260, 406. 

Unction, 87, 598. 

bnapyia — enapyta, 416, 417, 458, 479. 

Uma /06, ^36. 

Urbicus, palace of, 481. 

Urtaye, 135, 383, 555, 558; school of the at 
Amida, 565. 

Villa (npozeretov), 27, 332, 334, 335, 436, 551, 
552. 

Visitor (of a convent’, 450. 

E¢voddyos, 180, 379, 467, 


105. 


Dur 
43D, 


£cv000/ 1, 
408, 507. 

Zacharias, 266-273. 

Zakkhai, bp. of Thella, 615, 618. 

, convent of, 313. 

Zeno (?), emperor, 558. 

Ziyat, 112. 

Zoila, convent of, 617. 

Zuknin, 558; convent of, 37, 558. 

Zura, 10, 17-35, 320, 460-463. 

Awl? (Zauta?), deacon and syzcellus, 
206, 210, 

presbyter, 445, 447, 449. 


5evodoy stov, 


198, 


P. 
I 
P. 


p 


P. 
R 


P. 


I5 
P: 


I 
P. 
P. 
1? 
P: 


ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA 


IN TOM. XVII, FASC. 1 


30. 31. Om. 'this.... them’. 

3. For ‘595° read ‘585°. 
vin, l. 25. After ‘contains’ ins. * most of’. 
xt Delen. 2. 


— ,n. 5. For ‘149° read ‘249’. 


273, text, n. 1. Read ‘ms. gpaw’. 
285, transl., 1. 7. For apeta read zp74. Cf. p. 549, n. 2. 
305, 1. 4. The ref. in the 2"! clause is to text, I. ult. 


IN TOM. VHT FASC. 4%. 


311, transl., n. 1. For ‘Quwrsws’ read ‘Q(w)rsws’. 

315, transl., l. 14. For ‘serve my own self we should perh. 
form service’. 

319, text, l. 10. For «iə read “ai>. See p. 306, n. 1. 


render ‘myself per- 


335, transl., n. t. Om. ‘probably’, and add. ‘Cf. 77. E., 11, 46". 


346, text, n. ^. For hys read pos. 
35^, text, n. 5. For eias read cias, and for cag read pay. 
l. 4 


369, transl., 


For ‘account’ we should perl. write ‘reckoning’ and think of a 


eriminal with his yetpóypzyov tied to his hands. | owe this sug- 


gestion to Prof. Burkitt, 


402, transl., 1. ult., p. 463, 1], 1. For ‘the food... have’ read ‘and placing the food 


of each, one of them in his mouth’, and dele n. t. 


405, text, 1. 2. For róa rés read ral rea. 


407, transl., |]. ult. For ‘those of the canon’ read ‘the common (xow5v) ones’ and 


dele n. 4. 


. 422, transl., n. 3. For ‘p. 387, n. 3° read ‘p. 387, n. 2. 
. 428, text, n. 6. For &asaxses read jams. 

. 431, text, 1. 3. For was. read pan, and dele n. 3. 

. 433, transl., 1. 2. Add note ‘Cf. p. 190 and p. 508°. 

. 438, transl., 1. 11, 14. For ‘collin’ (?) read ‘ vault’. 

. 453, text, 1.1. For pas read jnas 

. 464, transl., 1.13. For ‘‘inn 


$4 


read ‘a label’ and dele n. 1. 


1. The references are to the bracketed numbers. 


284 


p 


407, 


ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. [630] 


transl., 1.8. For ‘the ministering office read ‘a deaconry , and om. the first 
2 words of n. 3. 


P. 470, transl., 1. 9. For ‘take’ read ‘feed’. 
P. 485, text, l. ult. For į» read ps. 


) 


— 


Pp 


Pà 


P; 


. ^96, 


ANE 
. 593, 
. 600, 


601, 
603, 
60^, 


I 
dde 
p 


Ps 
|>. 


606, 
609, 
614, transl, 


615, 


620, 


ch. ^7. For ‘refuges’ read ‘refugees’. 
list of mss. Add * F = Brit. Mus. Add. 14730 (12'^ cent... 


IN TOM. XIX, FASC. 2. 


. 502, transl., n. 1. For ‘Antonius’ read ‘ Antoninus’. 
Ak. 
. 510, 
. 019, transl., 1. 12. Om. brackets. 
n522: 
1529, 
(OCIO, 
. 540, 
$09]; 
. 561, 


ine 
D. 


text, 1.8. For 4o read Gao. 
transl., L. ult. For * withold' read ‘withhold’. 


text, ]. 4, 5. l'or es» read sòs, and for oos read (oon 
text, 1.3. After pay om. stop. 

transl., n. 3.1, 5. For*15'read *1^*. 

transl., 124, Om. ‘for me’. 

transl., n. 2. Fortu. dread ST. 

text, l. 6. For pasang: read past. 

transl., l. ult. For * withold' read * withhold’. 


. 555, text, L. ult. lor muto read au. 
. 574, text, n. 2, L4. For pi read cr 

. 575, 
soa De 
. 578, 
580, 


587, 


transl., notes, l. 11. For ‘1054’ read ‘1014’. 
text, l. 1. Om. stop at end. 

transl., 1.9. For ‘himt’ read ‘him?’. 
transl., 1.8. For ‘day’ read ‘Tday’. 

text, n. 1. For pado read paoro. 

transl; n: 3- Eor“. 2 réead>n: 3% 


- 


text, n. 5. l'or sapag read map. 
text, 1. 10. After poss om. points. 


text, l. 1. For jaawo: read Jxawot, and so at p. 474, l. 5. p. 492, l. 13, and 
Proli Iya: 
text, l. 4, l'or oasi read es; 
text, n. 8. For xy read '(sic) ov’. 
text, n. 1.. For y read jpu. 
— n.b. For. read q. 
7,8. For “16 rond. P^. and for «3 read "155 
text, 1.7. or jxaot read joxaiot. 
1.2. After ‘God’ ins. ref, to note ‘C. ins. « which resides in the saint's 
bones » '. 
text, n. 5. Om. Sog. 


text, 1. 


1.3. For ‘ms. aajzmax’ read ‘MS. aujas . 
l. 16. For npg% read sio. 
l. 22. For ‘olera pura’ read *(ed. 2) purgamenta olerum’. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


à 1 
‘Vira 
Pages, 


BOT Vines James and Theodore -r B20 EN DUE ed nce cleat Ee MT ai vcio ed ve NP S 499 
pee oR asis Ie E COO ITO ee a E EAE ee reer DEP Ser ee 505 
Oa MOS oA NNO NDOCI eS aAa EE atte Syn a A T a a LU 510 
Sad EM asef ^ PISOUSC vt asco E oe St ee Mn Po E MED RETE 525 
pa Pent gOSOHRIS Oy ee t a Ge satay ao te uui E A A AA 531 
BSAlcivies- ol Joli Sosina. es car d as AES AREE Gah OE EE et e Caer ee, UP ree none MT 537 
sau Jasossor-Petercanu POLOS. Com eoe et o Er toute arto eee p br E P a iy Ghee lord 543 
S2 deerit Wlieodope the tas enste 28 cm TECTA S aS Ieee! Ge NETTE Anar EC STET S DAG 
58 History of the convent of John Urtaya. s saaa e 332 
Appears; Spurious life of James. «3. 9 e ence e A qoe Y» Ss ee USUS cen d 57^ 

— CEL Aton ok the Eel LCS E dates uo s veto ho dT SION MERDA ERE ven s 614 
Vocabulary cos ona any ee T KU us DK MM LUE LA eee uL UA SU are, a 620 
inder e QURE UE CR RE DUE EU M E P E P A oP CT 622 
a:Addendacand Gorriceida, n ma ores e Os o Ses tua e n acci cod sedibus cy 620 


MSS. USED IN THE PRESENT FASCICULE 


A = Brit. Mus. Add. 14647 (688). 
D= = — — 7190 |12" cent.}. 
]ou— wem ee il gent) 


In the appendix : 
C = Brit. Mus. Add. 12174 (1197). 
N = Paris Syr. 235 (13" cunts): 
S = Berlin Sachau 321 (8'^ cent.). 


