Title: The Liturgies of SS. Mark, James, Clement, Chrysostom, and Basil, and the Church of Malabar
Creator: Translated by John Mason Neale (1818-1866) and Richard Frederick Littledale (1833-1890); the liturgies themselves are anonymous or traditionally attributed (Mark, James, Clement, John Chrysostom, Basil of Caesarea, and the Malabar/East-Syriac rite)
Publisher: London: Griffith Farran & Co., [187-?] (Neale's translations first published 1859; the scan is a 1870s printing)
Publication Date: [187-?]
Rights: Public Domain
Source: Internet Archive item liturgiesofssmar00neal (University of California, Los Angeles library copy), full-text OCR file liturgiesofssmar00neal_djvu.txt, fetched directly by the library/source-research thread, 2026-09-29. Item page marks possible-copyright-status NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT.
Provenance note: Header prepended by the library thread; the OCR text follows unchanged, apart from this header. Rights basis: the scan's printing date is 187-?, more than 95 years before 2026, so it clears this registry's public-domain-by-date rule; the host's own NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT tag agrees. OCR artifacts typical of a 19th-century print (e.g. 'CHPtYSOSTOM', 'CLE:\rENT' on the title page) are left as found.
Content note: A compilation of six rites with Neale's own introduction and notes, in this order: Mark (Alexandria), James (Jerusalem/Antioch), Clement, John Chrysostom, Basil, and the Malabar liturgy. Each liturgy's traditional attribution to its named saint is a matter of scholarly dispute; the Byzantine Chrysostom and Basil texts are later redactions of earlier rites. Neale is a 19th-century Anglican editor: his introductions and footnotes are secondary commentary, not the liturgies' own voice.

---

;; 


ti  v  ■. 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


V^v:y^ 


m 


;s?^v 


i 


THE  LITUKGIES 


OP 


SS,     MAPtK,     JAMES,     CLE:\rENT, 
CHPtYSOSTOM,  AND  BASIL, 


AND 


THE  CHUIiCH  OE  MALABAli. 


ho.    t^\i, 


EXPLANATION  OF  FBONTISPIECB. 


The  Fkoktispiece  is  taken  from  one  of  the  Beries  ol 
nine  plates  in  a  beautiful  MS.  of  the  Greek  Liturgies  now  in 
the  Vatican;  but,  in  a.d.  1600,  in  the  Monastery  of  S.  Mary 
at  Gethsemane.  They  have  been  engraved  by  Cardinal  Mai, 
in  the  Sixth  volume  of  the  "  NovaBibliotheca."  The  intention 
of  the  designer  is  to  show  the  fellows-ministration  of  angels  with 
men  iu  the  Liturgj-.  This  i?late  (the  sixth)  represents  the 
Great  Entrance  :  (see  pp.  xxLx.  and  108).  The  Priest,  carried 
by  angels,  brings  in  the  chalice  covered  with  the  aer :  in  his 
right  hand,  he  holds  the  paten,  covered  with  its  veil.  The 
door,  oat  of  whicli  he  comes,  is  that  of  the  prothesis.  The 
Deacon,  with  a  taper,  and  the  stole  marked  with  the  Ter 
Sanctns,  bows.  To  the  right,  an  archimandrite  stands  up: 
by  him  is  S.  Michael :  in  answer  to  the  prayer,  "  Grant  that 
with  our  entrance  may  be  an  entrance  of  the  holy  angels." 
In  front  of  the  altar,  the  Priest  is  represented  again  :  he  wears 
the  stoicliarion,  or  alb ;  over  it  a  plain  phcelonion,  or  chasuble : 
on  his  left  (by  the  designer's  mistake  for  his  right)  is  seen  a 
part  of  the  epigonation.  On  the  altar  are  the  two  tapers : 
the  chalice,  covered  with  the  aer;  the  asterisk  covered  with 
the  veil ;  and  behind,  the  books  of  the  Epistles  and  Gospels. 
The  Great  Entrance,  as  we  shall  see,  is  the  grandest  piece  of 
ritual  in  the  Eastern  Ghuich,  and  mystically  represents  the 
Incarnation. 


Cljr   ilitiirsies 


OF 


SS.     MAEK,     JAMES,     CLEMENT, 
CHEYSOSTOM,  AND  BASIL, 


AND 


THE  CHURCH  OF  MALABAR. 

TBANSLATED,  WITH  INTEODUCTION  AND  APPENDICES, 


BY 


THE  REV.  J.  M.  NEALE,  D.D., 

SOltf.Tl'.U:    ■.VAttDKX   OF    S.^CIIVILLE   COLLEGE,   EAST   GRINSTEAD, 


THE  JIEV.  R.  F.  LITTLEDALE,  LL.D,, 

BOilKTIMK   BCIIOLAB   OF   THINITY    COLLEOE,   DUBLIN 


SEVENTU    EDITION 


LONDON 

GRIFFITH     FARRAN    &    CO.,    Limitbd 

NEWBERY  HOUSE,  39  CHARING  CU088  ROAD 


37  tT 

PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 


In  this  re-issue  of  the  English  Version  of  tlie 
Primitive  Liturgies,  the  translation  has  been  care- 
fully revised  and  compared  with  the  original  texts, 
and  a  few  additional  notes  have  been  appended  to 
elucidate  difficulties.  The  Liturgy  of  S.  Basil, 
already  printed  in  the  Greek  edition  which  ranges 
with  this  volume,  is  now  given  in  English  also. 
And  the  Appendix  of  Formuhe  of  Institution  has 
not  only  been  corrected,  but  also  very  considerably 
increased,  as  it  now  contains  excerpts  from  the  Ana- 
phorae  of  twenty-four  Liturgies  either  unknown  to 
Dr.  Neale  or  beyond  his  reach  at  the  time  when  tlie 
first  edition  of  this  book  was  published.  These  (dis- 
tinguished by  asterisks)  are  taken  from  Syriac  and 
Ethiopic  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  and  I  am 
indebted  to  my  brother-in-law,  Dr.  Wright,  lor  tlio 
extracts  and  versions.  I  have  added  references  to 
their  places  in  the  Museum  Catalogue,  to  facilitato 
the  studies  of  those  who  may  desire  to  examine 
them  for  themselves.  It  is  unnecessary  to  dwell 
on  the  cumulative  wei;rht  of  so  much  additional 


1  iiA  r,'y:<'^ 


vi  PREFACE    TO    THE    SECOND    EDITION. 

testimouy  to  the  liturgical  doctrines  and  usages  of 
ancient  Christendom,  all  the  more  cogent  and 
valuable  because  of  the  innumerable  minor  variations 
of  phrase  and  structure  which  prove  the  independ- 
ence of  the  witnesses,  and  it  will  suffice  to  say  that 
only  in  the  light  of  these  documents  is  it  possible 
to  interpret  truly  the  language  of  the  Fathers 
touching  the  Holy  Eucharist. 

R.  F.  L. 

London,  Julii^  1S60. 


PREFACE. 


As  I  have  said  in  the  Introduction  to  ray  Edition 
of  the  Liturgies  in  Greek,  it  has  for  many  years 
been  my  desire  to  render  these  most  pm-e  sources  of 
Eucharistical  Doctrine  accessible  to  all  my  brethren. 
Hitherto  the  whole  of  them  have  not  been  pro- 
curable in  Greek,  except  with  difficulty,  and  at  a 
heavy  expense  :  in  English,  not  at  aU. 

I  had  not,  however,  intended  to  translate  them ; 
but  the  united  advice  of  all  the  Ecclesiastical 
Reviews,  and  of  many  private  friends,  and  many 
Priests  with  whom  I  was  previously  unacquainted, 
has  encouraged  me  to  undertake  that  task  also  : — 
and  the  result  is  now  before  the  reader. 

A  brief  introduction  is  prefixed ;  but  to  enter,  in 
such  vei7  narrow  limits,  at  any  satisfactory  length 
on  the  8ul)ject,  is  impossible. 

The  reader  wlio  desires  to  study  it  more  deeply 
may  consult : — 1.  Mr.  Palmer's  Essays  on  the 
Eastern  Church  :  2.  My  own  Introduction  to  its 
Histoi-y  :  3.  (which  may  easily  be  procured  through 
Messrs.  Williams  uud  Norguto,)  the  translation  of 


Vlll  PEEFACfc;. 

M.  Monravieff's  work  on  the  Eastern  Eitnal,  by 
Theodore  Ballianus.  {i'Tria-ToXal  irepl  rwv  lepcov 
aKoXovdioiv  rri<i  avardXiKT]^  6p6oS6^ov  ^EKKX-rjaiaf;. 
Athens:    Philadelphcus,  1857.J 

The  Translations  in  the  present  volume  are  as 
follows : 

S.  Mark")  The  pro-anaphoral  portion,  new  :  the 
>■     anaphoral,  slightly  altered  from  my 

S.  .TjS^jks)      Introduction. 

S.  Clement.  The  pro-anaphoral  portion,  new  : 
the  anaphoral,  corrected  from  Dr.  Brett's 
Translation. 

S.  Chrysostom  ■)  Slightly  altered  fi'om  my  In- 

TiiE  Prothesis  5      troduction. 

The  Malabar  Liturgy — entirely  new. 

I  have  endeavoured,  most  carefully,  to  abstain  in 
my  notes  from  all  polemical  remarks;  but  one 
observation  I  should  not  feel  justified  in  omitting. 
For  nearly  twenty  years  these,  and  the  other  early 
Liturgies,  have  been  my  daily  study :  there  are 
very  few  passages  in  them  which  I  could  not  repeat 
by  heart ;  and  scarcely  any  important  works  on 
the  subject  which  I  have  not  read.  I  may  there- 
fore claim  some  Httle  right  to  be  heard  with  respeci, 
to  them.      And   I  say  most  imhesitatingly,  that 


PREFACE.  IZ 


while  I  can  conceive  that  some  passages  in  them 
might  be  tortured  into  a  Calviuistic  sense,  were 
sufiBcient  ingenuity  employed;  no  ingenuity  can 
make  any  single  clause  even  patient  of  the  theory 
of  equivalence,  which  the  "  Opinion"  of  a  Scotch 
Bishop  seems  to  endorse.  If  that  theory  be  true, 
the  Eucharistic  teaching  of  every  Eastern  Liturgy 
is  absolutely  false. 

I  would  conclude  by  praying  that  the  doctrine  of 
these  Liturgies  may  spread  more  and  more  widely 
amongst  us  ;  and  that  this  poor  little  effort  of  mine 
may  be  blessed  to  that  end. 

SackvilU  College,  Michaehnoi,  1850. 


iNTRODTICTION. 


1.     Litun/ical  Families. 

1.  Primitive  Liturgies  may  be  divided  into  five 
principal  families.  (1.)  That  of  S.  James,  or  Jeru- 
salem;  (2.)  That  of  S.  Mark,  or  Alexandria;  (3.) 
That  of  S.  Thaddeus,  or  the  East ;  (4.)  Tlmt  of  S. 
Peter,  or  Eome  ;  (5.)  Tliat  of  S.  John,  or  Ephesus. 

2.  That  of  Jerusalem  may  be  divided  into  three 
branches  :  the  Clementine,  Cesarean,  and  liiero- 
Bolymitan.(') 

8.     Of  these,  the  Clementine  has  no  branches. 

4.  Tlie  normal  form  of  tlie  Ctesarean  Liturgy  is 
that  of  .S'.  Bfisil.  This  on  the  one  hand  branclics 
out  into  that  of  S.  ChnjuoHlom ;  on  the  other,  into 
the  Armenian. 

5.  The  norm  of  the  liierosolymitan  fiiniily  is 
the  Liturgy  of  S.  James  :  and  this  family  hat>  three 


(i)  In  my  Inirocliiclion  to  the  History  of  the  Holy  Eiistero 
Churcli  I  had  cIuhkuiI  tlie  Clcmoiitiiio  Liturgy  by  ituclf;  but 
Dr.  Daniel,  in  his  obHcrvdtions  on  my  booh,  HceniH  to  me  to 
liftve  shewn  that  it  has  a  very  close  connection  with  the 
Liierosolymitan,  or,  as  he  prefers  to  call  it,  Antiochone. 


Xii  INTRODUCTION. 

divisions.     (1.)   SiciJian   S.  James,   as   said   in   that 
island  before  the  Saracen  conquest,  and  partly  assi- 
milated to  the  Petrine  Liturgy.     (2.)  S.  Cyril :  where 
used  uncertain,  but  assimilated  to  the  Alexandrian 
form.     (3.)  Syriac  S.  James,  the  source  of  the  largest 
number  of  extant  Liturgies.     They  are  these :    [1.] 
Lesser  S.  James.       [2.]    S.  Clement.       [3.]    S.  Mark. 
[4.1  S.  Dionysius.     [5.]  8.  Xystus.     [6.]  S.  Ignatius. 
[7.]  S.  Peter  I.      [8.]    S.  Peter  II.      [9.]  S.  Julius. 
[10.]   S.  John  Evanyelist.     [11.]  S.  Basil.     [12.]  (5.) 
Dioscorus.      [13.]   S.   John   Chrysostum  I.     [14.]  All 
Apostles.       [15.]    S.  Maruthas.       [16.]  S.  Eustathius. 
[17.]   Philoxenus   of  Mabug   I.       [18.]    Matthew   the 
Shepherd.      [19.]  James  Baradaeus.      [20.]  James  of 
Batnoi.      [21.]  James  of  Edessa.      [22.]  Moses  Bar- 
Cephas.  [2Q.]  Thomas  of  Her aclea.    [2i.]  Holy  Doctors, 
[25.]   Philoxenus  of  Mabug  II.     [26.]   S.  John  Chry- 
sostom,  II.     [27.]  AUClfaraj  I.     [28.]  John  of  Vara. 
[29.1  S.  Celest^ne.     [30.J  John  Bar-Susan.    [31.]  Ele- 
azar  of  Babylon.     [d2.]  John  the  Scribe.     \3Q.]  John 
Maro.      [34.]  Dionysius  of  Cardu.       [35.]  Michael  of 
Antioch.      [36.]  John  Bar-Vahib.      [37.]  John  Bar- 
Maaddn.      [38.]  Dionysius  of  Diarhekr.      [39.]  Philo- 
xenus of  Bagdad.     [4.0. ]  S.  Gregory  Nazianzen.     [41.] 
qyriacus  of  Antioch.    [42.]  Dionysius  Bar-Salibi.    [43.] 
Abulfaraj  11.     All  these,  from  Syriac  S.  James  in- 
clusive, are  Monophysite  Liturgies. 

6.  The  norm  of  the  Alexandrian  family  is  S. 
Mark.  From  this  are  derived  these  Liturgies  :  (1.) 
S.  Cyril.     (2.)  S.  Gregory.     (3.)  S.  Basil. 


INTKODTTCTION.  X.U1 

From  S.  Basil  another  family  springs,  used  iu 
Ethiopia,  and  for  the  most  part  very  barbarous. 
The  norm  of  this  is  the  Lititrrpj  of  all  Apostles.  From 
this,  as  from  their  source,  spring  the  following 
Liturgies :  [1.]  S.  John  Evangelist.  [2.]  Tlie  Three 
Hundred  and  Eighteen.  [3. J  S.  Epiphanius.  [4.] 
James  of  Serug.  [5.]  Our  Lord  Jesus  I.  [6.]  (S.) 
Diuscorusl.  [1.]  S.  Gregory  of  Armenia.  [8.]  S.  Mary». 
[9.]  S.  John  Chrgsostom.  [10.]  S.  Gregory  of  Alex- 
andria. [11.]  S.  Basil.  [12.]  S.  Cyril.  '  [13.]  S. 
Athanasius,  [14.]  Dioscorus  II.  [15.]  Our  LoBi> 
Jesus  //.     [16.]  All  Aiiostles  II. 

There  is  a  bastard  Liturgy  between  Egyptian  S. 
Basil  and  Syriac  S.  James,  called  John  of  Ba.ssora. 

7.  The  Eastern  family  is  much  less  numerous. 
The  norm  of  this  is  All  Apostles.  From  tliis  there 
spring  (1.)  Theodore  the  interpreter.  (2.)  Xestorius. 
(3.)  Narses  the  Leper.  (4.)  The  Liturgy  of  Malabar  or 
•b".  Thomas.  But  this  last  is  rather  collateral  with, 
tlian  derived  from.  All  Apostles.  The  first  four  of 
these  are  Nestorian.  The  lifth,  originally  Nestoriau, 
has  since  become  Jacobite. 

8.  The  Pctrine  family  has  only  one  Liturgy,  the 
Roman. 

There  is  a  bastard  between  Eastern  and  Petrino, 
called  liomano-Chaldee. 

9.  The  Eplicsino  family  may  bo  divided  into  two 
orders,  (1.)  The  Mozarabic.     (2.)  The  Gulhcan. 

But  springing  from  the  mixture  of  these  with  the 


XiV  INTRODUCTION. 

Roman,  are  [1.]  The  Ambrosian  lAtiirgy.  [2.]  The 
Vatriarchine,  or  that  used  in  the  province  of 
Aquileia. 

And  these  are  all. 

II.     Difference    between    Eastern    and     Western 
Liturgies. 

By  Eastern,  I  mean  those  of 
S.  James, 
S.  Mark, 
S.  Thaddeus, 
S.  John. 

1.  The  Eastern  have,  the  Western  have  not,  o 
distinct  invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  withoul 
which  the  transmutation  of  the  Elements  is  not 
considered  perfected.  It  is  true  that  this  has  heen 
obliterated  from  the  Mozarabic  rite,  but  there  it  was 
originally :  in  the  Galilean  it  is  still  visible. 

2.  The  Western — and  that  of  S.  John — have 
varying  Collects,  as  well  as  Epistles  and  Gospels — 
the  others  have  not. 

3.  The  three  purely  Eastern — S.  James,  S.  Mark, 
and  S.  Thaddeus — have  only  one  Preface  for  every 
day  in  the  year. 

4.  The  Mozaiabic,  Galilean,  and  Ambrosian,  have 
a  different  one  for  every  festival :  the  Eoman  had, 
and  has  several  still. 


INTEODUCTION.  XV 

III.      Distinctive  marks  of  Oriental  Liturrjies. 

These  are  principally  to  be  found  iu  the  position 
of  the  intercession  for  quick  and  dead. 

(1.)  In  the  Hierosolymitan  family,  it  is  between 
the  Invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Lord's 
Prayer. 

(2.)  In  the  Alexandrian,  it  is  before  the  Com- 
memoration of  the  Institution. 

fS.)  In  the  Nestorian,  it  is  between  the  Comme- 
moi-ation  of  Institution  and  the  Invocation  of  the 
Holy  Guost. 

IV.      The  Order  of  the  Ldturfjics  thciiiselvefi. 

1.  Every  Liturgy  may  be  divided  into  two  parts  : 

The  Pro-Anaphoral :  and 
The  Anaphoral  portion. 

The  former  extends  to  the  Sursum  cnrda  ■  the  latter 
from  thence  to  the  end. 

2.  The  Pro-Anaphoral  portion  is  divided  into 

The  Mass  of  the  Catechumens  :  and 
The  Mass  of  the  Faitliful. 

8.  The  Anaphoral  portion  lias  these  four  divi- 
eions : 

The  Great  Eucharistic  Prayer  : 
The  Consecration  : 


XVI  INTEODUCTION. 

The  Intercession  for  quick  and  dead  :  and 
The  Communion. 

4.  The  Mass  of  the  Catechumens  consists  of  these 
parts : 

The  Prefatory  Prayer : 

The  Initial  Hymn,  Introit,  Ingressa,  Anti- 

phon,  or  by  whatever  other  name  ?'*■■  may 

be  caUed : 
The  Little  Entrance  : 
The  Trisagion  : 
The  Lections  :  (in  some  rites,   Pro;  'lecy, 

Epistle   and   Gospel;    in    others,    only 

Epistle  and  Gospel :) 
The  Prayers  after  the  Gospel,  and  1  xpul- 

sion  of  the  Catechumens. 

5.  The  Mass  of  the  Faithful  consists  of 

The  Prayers  of  the  Faithful :  or,  After  the 

unfolding  the  Corporal. 
The  Great  Entrance : 
The  Offertory  : 
The  Kiss  of  Peace : 
The  Creed. 

5.  Proceeding  to  the  Anaphora  :  under  the  Great 
Eucharistic  Prayer  we  have 
The  Preface : 
The  Triumphal  Hymn  : 
The  Prayer  of  the  Triumphal  Hymn : 
Commemoration  of  our  Loed's  Life : 
Commemoration  of  Institution. 


INTRODUCTION.  XVU 

8.  Under  the  Consecration  we  have 

Words  of  Institution  for  the  Bread : 
Words  of  Institution  for  the  Wine  ; 
Oblation  of  the  Body  and  Blood  : 
Prayer  for  the  Descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  : 
Prayer  for  the  change  of  Elements. 

7.  Under  the  Great  Intercession  we  have 

The  Prayer  for  quick  and  dead  : 
The  Prayer  before  the  Lord's  Prayer : 
The  Lord's  Prayer : 
^1       The     Enil)olisnius  ;    or     Prayer     against 
Temptation. 

8.  Under  the  Communion  we  have 

The  Prayer  of  Intense  Adoration : 

The  Sancta  Sanrtix: 

The  Elevation  of  the  Host : 

The  Fraction  : 

Tlie  Confession : 

The  Communion : 

The  Antidoron  : 

The  Prayer  of  Thanksgiving : 

The  Dismissal. 

V.     Arrangement  of  an  Oriental  Church. 
1.  Tlic  rubrics  of  the  Liturgies  arc  so  closely  con- 
nected with  the  parts  of  an  Eastern  Cliurcli,  that  a 
short  description  of  one  is  absolutely  necessary. 

The  following  is  the  ground-plan  of  8.  Theodore 
at  Athens. 

a 


xvm 


INTRODUCTION. 


1.  The  ayiov  firnxa,  or  sanctuary. 

2.  The  altar,  in  the  centre  of  the  chord  of  the  apse. 

3.  The  prothesia      ]    which  when  divided,  as  here,  by  walls 

4.  The  diaconicon  J    from  the  bema,  are  called  parabemata. 

5.  The  iconostasis. 

6.  The  trullun,  or  dome  :  under  it  the  choir. 

7.  The  trapeza,  or  nave,  not  architecturally  divided  froin  the 

choir. 

8.  The  narthex. 

2.  Every  Eastern  Church  consists  of  four  por- 
tions : 

Bcfun  or  Sanctuary : 
Clioir  : 

Tra/jcza,  or  Nave  : 
Narthex,  or  Western  Porch. 

But,  as  in  the  West,  the  sanctuary  and  the  choir 
have  hardly  any  separation,  and  go  together  under 
the  name  of  chancel,  so  in  the  East  the  choir  and 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 

nave  have  hardly  any  separation,  and  go  together 
under  the  name  of  7iaos. 

3.  The  bema  is  separated  from  the  naos  by  a 
BoHd  screen — the  konostasis  :  so  termed  because  of 
the  icons  on  it. 

This  answers,  not  to  the  rood-screen  of  the  Westei'n, 
but  to  the  altar-rails  of  the  English,  Church.  Its 
doors  are  called  the  Holy  Doors. 

4.  North  of  the  altar — there  is  only  one  altar  in 
every  Eastern  Church — is  the  chapel  of  the  pro- 
thesis,  with  the  table  at  which  the  preparation  of 
the  Elements  takes  place.  TJieuce  the  Little  and 
Great  Entrances  are  made. 

5.  South  of  tljc  altar  is  the  diaconicon,  skeuophy- 
lakion,  or  sacristy. 

VI.  'The  Liturgies  contained  in  the  present  volume  a*"" 
tliose  of 

S.  James,  S.  Mark, 

S.  Chrysostom,         S.  Clement,  (') 
The  Church  of  Malabar. 

The  Anaphone  of  the  first  four  have  been  trans- 
lated by  Dr.  lirctt  ;  the  whole  of  S.  James  by  Dr. 
Kattray  ;  and  of  b.  ChrysoBtom  by  Dr.  King  and 

(')  I  am  nnxious  to  correct  n  iiiiHtii]<(i  in  my  jircfiico  to  llio 
Grf!ok  edition  of  tliiH  Litur^'y,  into  wliidi  I  whb  Icil  liy  too  im- 
plicitly following  an  aHHcrlion  of  my  friend  Dr.  J)iinirl.  It  iH 
that  tlio  exprcHHion,  "  cluanHing  ourHclves  from  all  f)ltliin<'«9 
both  of  the  Ik'nh  and  wpirit,"  is  quoted  Hcvon  timiH  in  the 
Clementine  Liturgy,  I  ought  to  have  Haid  that  tlie  verse, 
which  contains  that  expresHion.  iH  referred  to  Jivr  timpK  in  that 
Liturgy. 

.'  2 


XI  INTRODUCTION. 

Dr.  Covel.  I  believe  that  the  whole  of  these  Litm- 
gies  has  not  appeared  before  in  English  :  the  whole 
of  S.  Chrysostom  and  the  Anaphoras  of  S.  James 
and  S.  Mark  may  be  found  in  my  Introduction  to 
the  History  of  the  Eastern  Church.  The  Malabar 
Liturgy  is  given  as  a  specimen  of  the  family  of  S. 
Thaddeus,  rather  than  one  of  the  three  Nestoriau 
Liturgies,  as  not  less  valuable,  and  not  having  been 
before  translated. 

To  these  I  add  the  oflSce  of  the  Prothesis;  as 
now  said  all  over  the  Eastern  Church. 

The  Liturgy  of  S.  Chrysostom  is  the  normal 
Liturgy  of  the  Eastern  Church.  That  of  S.  Basil 
is  said  on  all  the  Sundays  in  Lent,  (except  Palm 
Sunday,)  Maundy  Thursday,  Easter  Eve,  the 
Vigils  of  Christmas  and  Epiphany,  and  the  Feast 
of  S.  Basil  (Jan.  1.)  That  of  S.  James  is  said  in 
some  of  the  Greek  islands  on  the  Festival  of  the 
Saint.  That  of  S.  Mark  has  been  obsolete  since 
the  time  of  Theodore  Balsamon.  This  prelate,  a 
complete  Oriental  ultramontane,  was  for  squaring 
everything  according  to  "  the  most  strictest  "  rule 
of  the  Great  Church  ;  and  procured  the  abohtion  of 
this  Litm-gy,  more  venerable  than  his  own,  just  as 
Piome  has  abolished,  and  is  still  abolishing,  the 
national  Liturgies  of  other  Churches. 

The  Malabar  Liturgy  I  have  never  been  able  to 
see  in  the  original ;  and  an  unadulterated  copy  of  the 
original  does  not  seem  to  exist.  Diligent  inquiry, 
but  in  vain,  was  made  for  it  in  India  by  the  late 
Dr.  Mill.     As  it  is  now  printed,  it  was  revised  by 


rNTEODUCTION.  XXI 

the  Portuguese  Archbishop  of  Goa,  Alexis  de 
Menezes,  and  the  Synod  of  Diamper,  (1599) — a 
revision  which,  as  even  Roman  Litnrgists  allow, 
shews  utter  ignorance  of  Oriental  Liturgies.  Kaulin, 
in  his  edition,  professes  to  point  out  all  the  altera- 
tions made  by  the  Synod,  and  to  give,  in  a  note,  tlie 
original :  but  the  least  study  of  his  work  will  shew 
that  some  important  changes  pass  without  the  least 
notice  by  him. 

VII.  Mijstical  Interpretation  of  Oriental  Liturgies. 

The  best  key  to  the  mystical  explanation  of  the 
Liturgy  of  S.  Chrysostom  is  to  be  found  in  the  Com- 
mentary of  Symeou  of  Tliessalonica — a  translation 
of  the  latter  part  of  wliieh  hero  follows.  This  pre- 
late— a  man  of  the  highest  character  for  learning 
and  piety,  and  the  stay  of  the  whole  Eastern  Church 
in  troublesome  times — died  in  1129.  To  his  treatise 
should  be  added  that  of  Theodore  of  Andula,  a 
writer  of  uncertain  age,  first  published  by  Cardinal 
Mai,  in  the  sixth  vol.  of  his  Nova  JJibliolheca,  in 
1855. 

"  The  Bishop  therefore  who  is  about  to  celebrate, 
descending  from  the  throne  in  which  he  has  been 
Btationed,  figiirfs  tlie  condescension  of  God  tbc  Son 
to  us.     And  having  put  ou  the  holy  stole,  (")  he 


0  The  Htole,  used  by  I'lifHtK  in  the  Eastern  Church,  \h  also 
called  epitrachclion  iind  Imnirion,  or  oriirion  :  it  ditTcrs  in 
shape  from  that  of  the  West.  It  is  merely  a  long  piece  of 
Bilk  or  other  atufi,  KomethinK  more  than  doulde  the  width  of 
the  Western  Htolo,  and  witn  ii  hole  in  tlie  middle  of  the  upper 
part,  through  which  the  celebrant  puts  bis  bead.    Ah,  however, 


KXU  INTRODUCTION. 

figures  the  Lord's  most  lioly  Incarnation  ;  and  going 
out  to  the  gates  of  the  temple,  His  presence  and 
manifestation  on  earth,  even  till  His  death  and 
descent  into  hell.  This  is  signified  by  the  Priest 
going  towards  the  West  and  as  far  as  the  Church 
doors. 

"  Now  when  the  holy  Liturgy  is  begun,  which  is 
when  the  Bishop  gives  the  sign— for  no  one  can 
attempt  to  commence  anything  without  him — the 
Priests  within  the  bema  commence  the  prayers,  and 
the  singers  modulate  the  Antiphons  and  divide  them 
into  three  portions,  and  those  things  which  are 
taken  from  the  Psalms  :  (*)  to  these  they  add  the 
hymns  which  pertain  to  the  time  of  grace.  By  the 
Psalms,  the  prediction  of  the  Licarnation  of  the 
Word  to  those  of  old  time  is  set  forth  :  by  the 
hymnody  which  follows,  the  perfect  completion  of 
grace  is  typified  to  the  bystanders,  and  the  Son  of 
God  incarnate,  and  all  the  things  which  He  worked 
for  our  sakes.  Wherefore  also,  first  of  all,  we 
honour  her  who  virginally  bare  Him,  and  beseech 
her  mediation  for  us,  saying :  By  the  intercession  of 
the  Mother  of  God,  O  Saviour,  hear  us.  Then,  com- 
memorating the  Saints,  who,  agonising  for  the 
mystery  of  faith,  died  a  holy  death,  we  beseech  their 
supplications    also  ;    and    last   of    all,   venerating 


it  has  an  embroidered  seam  down  the  middle,  its  appearance 
is  much  the  same  as  that  to  which  we  are  accustomed. — 
Sijmeon  on  the  Liturgy. 

Cj  The  threw  Antii)hous  of  the  ConstantinopoHtan  rite  will 
be  seen  in  the  Liturgy  of  S.  Chrysostum,  where  an  explanation 
of  them  is  given. 


INTRODUCTION.  ZXIH 

Christ,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  salvation,  we 
crj'  out  with  a  loud  voice,  Save  us,  0  Sou  of  God.  (^) 
But  when  the  Bishop  has  finished  his  holy  prayers 
without  the  beuia,  the  Deacons  stand  by  him,  who 
typify,  not  only  the  Apostles,  but  also  the  Angels, 
who  minister  also  in  the  mysteries  of  Christ.  But 
when  the  Priests  within  the  bema  have  also  finished 
their  own  prayers,  and  come  forth,  the  descent  of 
the  holy  Angels,  which  took  place  in  the  Ascension 
of  Christ,  is  signified.  And  when  the  torches  are 
borne  forth,  and  the  Deacons  advance  by  two  and 
two,  and  the  Holy  Gospel  is  carried  in  pi'ocession, 
and  the  Bisliop,  supported  on  cither  side  by  Deacons, 
advances,  and  the  other  Priests  follow  behind,  and 
sing  out  clearly,  0  come  let  tin  uors/iip  Christ,  and 
the  acclamations  of  good  wishes  to  the  Bishoi)  lo- 
eound,  and  the  Deacon  after  the  prayer  of  the 
Entrance,  while  he  holds  the  Gospel  in  his  hands, 
exclaims:  Wisdom;  stand  vp :  {^)  the  llcsurrectioii 
and  Ascension  of  the  Saviour  is  shadowed  forth. 
For  the  Deacon,  wliile  he  thus  cries  out,  announces 
the  Piesurrection  of  Christ  ;  and  the  clioir  of  Priests 
and  J)eacons,  as  we  said  bcfort;,  typify  the  Apostles 
present  with  the  houu  and  beholding  llim,  and  the 
most  lioly  Angels.  But  tlic  Bisliop  is  a  type  of  the 
Lord  Himself  made  manifest  to  the  disciples,  and 

{^)  The  reader  in  rcf^oinmfTxlofl  to  follow  the  Liturgy  of  S. 
Chrysostom,  hh  h'wum  bijow,  wliilo  Ik;  riuds  tlitj  fX])liiiifitii(H  of 
Syineon,  compnriiiK  it  iit  the  buiuo  time  with  the  grouud-itlan 
of  H.  Theodore,  above. 

(")  This  refers  to  the  eeremonies  of  the  Little  Eutrniice.  of 
which  more  at  length  hortiifter. 


XXIV  INTEODUCTION. 

taken  up  from  earth  to  heaven.  Wherelore,  as  we 
have  said,  the  whole  of  the  exterior  news  is  a  type  of 
y  earth  ;  the  most  holy  hema  represents  heaven. 
Wherefore,  as  David  also  prophesies,  when  the  Lord 
ascended,  the  Angels  assisted  in  His  triumph ;  and 
cried  out  to  them  that  were  ahove,  Lift  up  your 
doors,  and  they  named  Him  King  of  Glory  and 
LoED,  and  confessed  Him  the  Mighty.  Thus  too 
doth  the  Church,  while  she  honours  the  celebrant 
entering  with  the  pomp  of  a  procession  into  the 
Holy  of  Holies  :  and  the  holy  doors  of  the  bema, 
shut  before  that  procession  enters,  and  opened  that 
it  may  enter,  signify  the  same  thing. 

But  when   the   celebrant    lias   entered   and  has 
censed  the  holy  table   around,  the   advent  of  the 


Nl/         S)K 


Holy  Ghost  is  signified  by  him.  For  the  Spirit 
came  to  us  from  heaven,  when  Christ  went  up  into 
heaven.  Furthermore,  the  Bishop,  signing  the 
Gospel  crosswise  by  a  certain  double  taper,  dikeriotit 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV 


typifies  the  illumination  brought  to  pass  both  in 
heaven  and  earth  by  the  Incarnation  of  Jesus  in 
His  two  natures.  For  by  the  Incarnation  of  the 
Word  of  God,  He  not  only  gave  light  to  men,  but 
also  to  the  Angels. 

The  Trisagion,  which  is  forthwith  said,  manifests 
the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  ;  which  the  Incarnation 
of  one  person  of  the  Trinity  manifested  to  men  ;  (') 
and  also  the  sympathy  and  union  of  Angels  and 
men.  Wherefore  also  it  is  sung  within  the  bema 
by  the  Priests,  and  without  it  by  the  clerks  and 
laity  :  for  one  Church  of  Angels  and  men  hath  been 
formed  through  Christ.  It  is  this  which  the  Pontiff 
proclaims,  while  he  signs  the  Gospel  crosswise  with 
ft  three-headed  taper,  (inkcrioti,)  and  shev/s  that  the 


(I)  Tlio  exproHsion  •' One  of  tlm  Tisinitt  "  is  not  used  acci- 
dentally by  Symfon,  but  is  a  profoHnion  of  tbo  fiiitli  ot  tlio 
writer  with  respect  to  the  pUrnKO  so  much  controvert  id  in  tbo 
Munopbysite  discussionH,  "  Ono  of  the  Tuinitv  suCrered  for 
man." 


XXVI  INTBODUOTION. 

preaching  of  the  Trinity  is  contained  in  the  same,  and 
prays  that  by  it  we  may  be  confirmed  and  established. 
But  also  while  he  advances  to  the  divine  syn- 
thronus,  (®)  which  typifies  the  session  of  Christ  at 
the  Plight  Hand  of  the  Father;  and  then  blesses 
the  people  crosswise  with  the  trikerion,  he  assures 
us  of  the  sanctification  which  is  through  the  Trinity, 
and  reminds  us  that  Christ,  having  ascended  into 
heaven,  sent  down  upon  us  the  splendour  of  the 
Trinity,  typified  by  the  light,  and  the  blessing. 
And  sitting  down  in  the  synthronus,  where  he  is  a 
type  of  Christ,  and  where  he  has,  as  his  fellow- 
assessors,  his  brother  Bishops  and  Priests,  who  re- 
present the  figure  and  the  similitude  of  the  Apostles, 
he  gives  peace  to  all ;  and  this  is  a  symbol  of  Chris- 
tian union.  For  it  is  Christ,  saith  Paul,  Who  hath 
put  an  end  to  enmity  in  His  Flesh,  and  hath  made 
both  one,  both  things  in  heaven  and  things  in  earth. 
Then  follows  the  lection  of  the  Apostolic  words, 
which  allegorises  the  mission  of  the  Apostles  to  the 
nations.  And  the  Bishops  and  Priests  sit  while 
these  are  read,  but  the  Deacons  do  not ;  because  the 
former  also  possess  the  grace  of  the  Apostolate. 
Then  follows  the  hymn  Alleluia,  {^)  which  manifests 
the  praise  of  God,  and  the  advent  of  the  Divine 

(8)  The  synthronus  is  the  seat  in  the  depth  of  the  Eastern 
apse,  in  the  centre  of  which  tlie  Bishop  sat  with  his  face  west- 
ward towards  the  altar, — the  altar  itself  occupying  the  central 
position  in  the  chord  of  that  apse, — and  having  his  Clergy  on 
liis  right  and  left  hand. 

(9)  See  the  note  on  this  Alleluia  in  the  Liturgy  of  S.  Chryso- 
atom  between  the  Epistle  and  Gospel. 


niTRODTICTlON.  XXVH 

grace,  which  is  the  lection  of  the  Gospel.  Now  thi& 
lection  sets  forth  the  i:)reaching  of  the  Gospel 
throughout  the  whole  world,  which  was  brought  to 
pass  after  the  Ascension  of  the  Lord,  by  the  hands- 
of  His  Disciples.  Wherefore  also,  we  first  read  the* 
Epistle,  then  the  Gospel  ;  because  the  Disciples 
were  first  invigorated  and  sent  forth,  and  after- 
wards, performing  their  circuit  tlirougliout  the 
world,  preacbed  the  Gospel.  And  before  the  Gospel, 
incense  is  ofiered  on  account  of  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  which  by  means  of  the  Gospel  was 
given  to  the  whole  world. 

But  while  the  Gospel  is  being  read,  the  Bishop 
lays  aside  his  oraophorion,  (^"j  thereby  making  pro- 
fession of  his  service  to  the  Lord.  For  since  it  is 
the  Lord  Wlio  is  represented  as  speaking  by  the 
Gospel,  and  is,  as  it  were,  Himself  present,  the 
Bishop  at  tliiit  time  ventures  not  to  be  arrayed  with 
the  symbol  of  His  Incarnation — I  mean  the  omo- 
pborion  ;  but  taking  it  oil'  from  his  shouklcrs  ho 
gives  it  to  tlie  Deacon,  who  holds  it  folded  in  his 
right  hand,  liimself  standing  near  the  Bisliop,  and 
preceding  the  holy  gifts.  He  also  holds  the  trikerioii 
in  his  hand  :  aJid  tliis  signiiies  that  in  tlie  world  to 
come,  Jksus,  Wbo  was  Incarnate  and  woundod  for 
us,  and  being  one  of  the  Trinity  sliiiiing  upon  us 
with  the  rays  of  Godhead,  will  be  manifestly  revealed 
to  all.     Then  the  Pontilf,  descending  from  the  syu- 

('")  This  oin<Jii)iorion,  which  in  worn  by  every  EftRtorii  IJiHliop, 
resembles  the  Lntiii  imlliuni,  except  that  it  in  ])r(iii  br  nnd  tied 
round  t.lie  iieul;  in  u  knnt. 


XXVUl  INTRODUOTIOW. 

thronus,  and  after  the  Gospel  and  the  prayer  for  the 
Emperors,  blessing  the  peojile  with  the  trikerion, 
makes  manifest  that  the  pious  empire  and  the 
priesthood  exist  by  means  of  the  Gospel,  and  prays 
that  they  may  remain  by  the  grace  of  the  Trinity. 

And  now,  approaching  the  altar,  he  begins  the 
work  of  prayers,  manifesting  himself  to  be  the 
minister  of  the  mystery.  And  forthwith  the  cate- 
chumens are  dismissed,  and  the  faithful  are  ex- 
horted to  remain ;  because  that  moment  represents 
the  season  of  the  end  of  the  world.  "  For,"  saith 
he,  "  the  Gospel  must  first  be  preached  throughout 
all  the  world,  and  then  shall  the  end  be,"  And 
again  he  saith,  "  He  shall  send  forth  His  Angels,  ^^ 
and  they  shall  sever  the  wicked  from  the  good." 
Thus  also  the  Church  doth  when  she  commands  the 
catechumens  to  depart,  and  the  faithful  alone  to  re- 
main. Whence  also  we  may  learn  how  careful  the 
faithful  ought  to  be  that  they  communicate  not  with 
them  with  whom  there  ought  to  be  no  communion  ; 
and  this  is  more  particularly  the  duty  of  Priests. 
For  if  it  is  unlawful  to  associate  in  prayer,  how 
much  more  in  the  Sacrifice '?  Neither  ought  they 
to  receive  the  oblations  for  the  sacrifice  of  those 
faithful  who  are  open  and  notorious  sinners,  but 
first  to  require  from  them  penitence.  For  mutual 
communion  arises  from  the  oblations  that  are 
brought  to  the  altar  ;  and  it  is  not  meet  that  the 
unworthy  should  partake  in  the  sacrifice.  And 
when  the  Divine  gifts  are  about  to  be  oft'ered,  the 
Pontiff  first  washes  his  hands  before  all,  thereby 


INTEODUCTION.  XXIX 

manifesting  his  purity  and  irrepreheusibleness  Lu 
this  hierui-gy  ;  and  that  it  is  right  to  approach  that 
which  is  so  pure  without  any  manner  of  poHution, 
60  far  as  is  possible  for  man,  and  thus  to  minister 
in  those  most  pure  myhteries. 

But  the  procession,  after  these  things,  of  the 
Divine  gifts,  is  with  great  pomp  of  Keaders, 
Deacons,  and  Priests,  with  the  lamps  and  holy 
vessels  preceding  and  following  :  (")  because  this 
symbolises  the  last  Advent  of  Christ,  when  He  shall 
come  with  glory.  Whence  the  omoi^horion  marked 
with  the  Cross  goes  before,  which  sets  forth  the  sign 
of  the  Sox  of  Max,  which  will  appear  from  heaven, 
and  the  Son  of  Max  Himself.  And  after  this  follow 
the  Deacons  in  order,  symbolising  the  ranks  of 
Angels ;  and  this  also  the  Fans,  ('-)  as  they  aro 


(I'j  That  is  tlio  Great  Eiitrance,  for  which  seo  puges  10,  108 ; 
and  uIho  the  frontispiece. 

('*)  Thetio  Fans  are  a  not  unimportant  part  of  the  plate  of 
an  Oriental  Church  ;  tlioy  are  now  goncnilly  made  of  silver, 
and  in  the  hhape  of  the  heads  and  wings  of  cheriibini.  Thtv 
Clementine  Liturgy,  (see  page  05)  orders  them  to  be  made  ol 
silk  or  peacock's  feathers,  or  some  other  liglit  material :  they 
were  originally  intended  to  prevent  flies  and  the  like  insects  \/' 
from  settling  on  tin;  Holy  Mysteries,  and  in  jiroccsH  of  lime 
came  to  signify  mysticully  the  vibration  of  tlie  wings  of  thi« 
Seraphim  before  the  throne  of  God.  Under  the  nanir  of 
Flabella  or  Muscaria,  they  were  employed  in  early  Western 
ritual.  Hildebert  of  Le  Mans  has  an  elegant  and  playful 
letter  to  a  fri<nd  who  presented  him  witli  a  jiair.  8.  Udalric, 
in  his  Const  it  utioiiH  of  Cluny,  bodk  ii.  cliaj".  2'.l,  tlins  writes  : 
"And  one  of  the  Deacons,  of  wlioni  tliere  always  ought  to  be 
two,  shall  stand  witli  a  fan  near  tlie  Priest,  from  the  time 
that  flies  begin  to  be  troublesumo,  till  the  end  of  tlie  service, 
that  he  may  rlrive  them  away  from  the  aacrifice  and  from  the 
altar."      Duiundua  thus  writes,  iv.  35—8 :    "  But   lest  fliea 


■X.X1  INTRODUCTIOX. 

called,  set  forth,  which  S.  Dionysms  names  wino;.'!!. 
Then  come  they  who  carry  the  Holy  Gifts,  after 
whom  follow  the  rest,  and  they  who  bear  on  their 
head  the  holy  veil,  which  represents  the  veil  that 
was  wrapped  about  the  Body  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
These  then,  going  round  the  Temple  processionally, 
and  praying  for  the  people,  enter  in  to  the  altar, 
and  all  of  them  pray  for  the  Pontiff ;  and  they  give 
heed  to  no  other  prayer,  but  only  for  the  kingdom 
of  God.  Now  all  these  things  teach  that,  in  the 
end  of  the  world,  after  the  departure  of  the  wicked, 
when  the  Saviour  shall  have  appeared,  there  shall 
be  no  other  heritage  for  the  faithful,  save  the  King- 
dom of  God.  Now  Christ  Himself  is  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  and  the  contemplation  of  His  dispensation : 
His  having  been  humbled  even  to  death  ;  His  having 
been  sacrificed  for  us  ;  to  behold  that  sacrificed  and 
divine  and  quickening  Body,  manifesting  its  wounds 
— the  Body  That  indeed  tasted  of  death,  but  is  the 
earnest  to  us  of  victory  over  death  ;  the  Body  which 
bestows  on  us,  out  of  its  wounds,  immortality  and 
life  and  the  Beatific  Vision  with  the  Angels,  and 
food  and  drink,  and  life  and  light,  the  very  Bread 
of  Life,  the  True  Light,  eternal  life,  Christ  Jesus. 
Wherefore  this  entrance  symbolises,  at  the  same 
time,  both  the   Second  Advent  of  Christ  and  His 


Bhonld  come  and  spoil  the  sweetness  of  the  ointment,  that  is, 
lest  troublesome  thoughts  should  arise  and  destroy  the  devotion 
cf  prayer,  they  are  to  be  driven  away  by  the  fan  of  tiie  spirit. 
And  to  signify  this,  in  summer  time,  a  material  fan  should  be 
used  while  the  tecreta  is  being  said." 


INTKODUCTION.  XXXI 

eepultnre  :  for  it  is  He,  as  we  have  said  before,  "Who 
will  be  our  Beatific  Vision  in  the  life  to  come.  Then 
all  the  faithful,  as  is  meet,  fall  down  before  the 
Priests,  partly  as  desiring  their  prayers,  and  to  be 
remembered  in  their  hierurgy,  and  partly  venerating 
the  Divme  gifts.  For  although  they  have  not  yet 
been  sanctified,  yet  they  have  been  dedicated  to  God 
in  the  prothcsis  ;  and  the  Priest  there  presented 
them  to  God,  and  besought  that  they  might  be  re- 
ceived upon  the  heavenly  altar.  Although  then 
their  sanctification  is  not  yet  complete,  yet  they  are 
prepared  for  completeness,  and  are  dedicated  to 
God,  and  an  antitype  of  the  Lokd's  ]]ody  and  Blood. 
If  then  we  attribute  honour  and  adoration  to  holy 
images,  how  much  more  do  these  gifts  which,  as  the 
great  Basil  says,  are  the  antitypes  of,  and  are 
brought  in  to  the  end  that  they  may  become,  the 
Body  and  Blood  of  Christ.  ('")  ....  And  the 
people  saith  not  Kyrie  FJcison,  but.  Fur  vuunj  yrar.i, 
O  Lord;  asking,  as  it  were,  that  he  sliould  proceed 
prosperously  in  his  hierurgy,  and  should  continue 
his  sacrificial  functions  for  a  long  time.  When  he 
has  entered  in,  the  doors  are  slnit;  because  it  is  not 
fitting  that  the  Mystery  sliould  be  behold  by  all,  but 
only  by  those  who  have  been  invested  with  the 
priesthood.     Furthermore,   in    the   same   way   that 

('»)  Symeon  in  r<filying  to  tlie  oljjnctions  brought  by  Tjatin 
writers  apninst  tliis  anticipativo  n<liirati<>n,  wliirli  iw  rniimion, 
as  we  shall  ficv,  to  all  the  lOaHteni  (!riiiiiiiiiiiio)iH,  hctfrnddx  as 
V7ell  as  Catholic,  atrl  which  is  f!vcn  dcffiidcil  hy  iiiaiiy  Unman 
writers.  Some  seiitonces  in  the  text  whicli  dilate  ou  this  Rub- 
ject  are  omitted. 


XXXll  INTRODUCTION. 

there  is  order  and  rank  in  the  blessed  Angels :  for 
tney  that  are  highest  enjoy  the  Beatific  Vision  with- 
out any  intermediation,  the  second  rank  through 
the  first,  (")  and  the  third  through  the  second,  as 
Dionysius,    (^^)    endowed    with    heavenly    wisdom, 
teaches,  so  also  is  the  case  in  the  Church.     The 
Pontiff  approaches   the  Divine  altar  without  any 
intermediary  ;  the  Priests  and  other   ecclesiastics, 
by  means  of  him.     And   by  the  Priests   and   the 
Ministers  the  people  is  admitted  to  a  participation 
in    the    tremendous    Communion   and    the    sacred 
hymns.     But  when,  after  the  first  set  of  prayers, 
the  Creed  has  been  recited,  comes  the  Kiss  of  Peace, 
because  by  the  true  confession  of  the  Trinity,  and 
of  the  One  of  the  Trinity  That  was  Incarnate,  we 
are  united  with   each   other,   and   that  confession 
associates   us  with  the  Angels.      And  because  we 
ought  to  love  each  other,  since  Christ  became  an 
oblation  througli  love,  and  whoever  is  about  to  com- 
municate,   ought   to   present   himself  without   any 
feeling  of  anger  ;  and  because  all,  in  the  world  to 
come,  are  in   union  mth  each  other,  and  no  one 
there  can  be  an  enemy.     But  they  keep  the  sacred 
veil  over  the  gifts  until  the  holy  Creed  is  finished  ; 
because  we  must  first  make  a  true  and  sincere  con- 
fession about  tlie  Lord,  before  we  can  behold  Him 
without  any  veil.     After  this,  the  Pontiff  who  is  to 

(")  See  this  idea  worked  out  with  greater  fulnefis  in  the 
Liturfry  of  .Joseph  Bar-Vahib  :  lleiiaudot,  torn.  ii.  p.  525. 

(15)  The  writer  is  of  course  refeniiig  to  the  Treatise  of  Pseudo- 
Dionysius  the  Areopagite  on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy. 


INTRODUOTION.  XXxili 

celebrate  approaches  the  altar,  and  praises  the  works 
of  God,  aud  giving  thanks  for  all,  associates  himself 
with  the  Angels,  aud  vociferates  with  them  the  tri- 
umphal hymn,  the  Holy,  Holy,  Holy :  and  the  people 
also  recite  it,  typifying  the  equality  of  peace  which 
we  shall  hereafter  enjoy  with  the  Angels,  and  our 
union  with  them.  Then  the  Pontiflf  having  praised 
the  greatest  of  the  works  of  God,  the  Incarnation 
of  the  Only-Begotten,  and  again  the  greatest  act  of 
His  dispensation,  His  Death  for  us,  goes  on  to  the 
commencement  of  the  Mysteries,  and  utters  the 
holy  words,  the  same  which  our  Lokd  used  Avhen 
Himself  sacrificing.  Then,  having  given  thanks 
for  all  things,  and  offering  the  gifts  on  account  of 
ill),  ho  invokes  upon  himself,  and  upon  the  Mysteries 
laid  on  the  altar,  the  divine  grace  of  the  Spirit.  By 
which,  having  accoiiiplislied  the  rite  by  the  seal  of 
the  Cross,  and  the  invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
he  forthwith  beholds  the  living  Jesus  lying  before 
him,  and  Him  in  His  very  essence,  being  truly  the 
Bread  and  the  Cup.  For  His  is  that  saying,  Tliis 
Bread  is  My  Body  ;  and  His  again  is  this  saying, 
That  which  is  in  the  cup  is  My  Blood.  And  tiio 
sacrifice  for  the  whole  world,  and  the  common  pro- 
pitiation, and  the  living  delicacy,  and  the  infinite 
joy,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  lieavons,  and  the  only 
■:;:scutial  good,  is  set  Ix.'fore  all  on  the  Divine  table; 
wherefore  also  the  celebrant  prays  with  the  grciilor 
boldness  on  lichalf  of  all.  For  he  takes  confidence 
when  lie  beholds  Him  Who  is  the  patient  Lover  of 
men,   lying  before  liim   a  sacrifice  ;  and   he  ofTcrs 

// 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

praise  and  makes  supplication  for  all,  and  remem- 
bers those  that  are  absent,  and  more  especially  the 
Maiden  Mother  of  God,  who  virginally  bare  Him. 
Testifying  also  in  this  how  we  are  one  with  the 
Saints,    and   by   this   sacrifice   are   partakers  with 
them,   and  that   they,  having   boldness  with  Him 
"Who  loves  and  is  loved,  have  the  power  to  reconcile 
and  unite  us  with  Him.     At  last,  having  exhorted 
us  with  one  mind  and  one  mouth  to  praise  our  God, 
and  having  called  down  upon  us  the  mercies  of  our 
great  God  Jesus  Christ,   He  leads  us  up  to   our 
adoption  by  our  heavenly  Father,  and  prays  that 
we,  being  purged  from  sin  by  Him  Who  is  His  Son 
according  to  nature,  may  become  His  sons  according 
to  grace ;  and  that  Ave  may  be  able  rightly  to  call 
Him   our  Father,  Who  is  the  Father   of  heaven. 
And   this  is  the  sign  of  the  union   in   the  future 
world,  and  of  our  being  united  to  God,  through  the 
Only-Begotten  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     Whence  the 
Pontiff,   having    prayed    for    peace    and    returned 
thanks,  calls  upon  Jesus  that  He  would  make  him 
partaker  of  the  Holy  Mysteries,  that  the  rest  may 
be  counted  worthy  to   become  partakers  of  them 
through  Him. 

When  he  has  finished  the  Liturgy,  and  comes  to 
the  Communion,  he  again  assumes  the  omophorion, 
manifesting  that,  before  this,  he  was  one  of  the 
ministers,  and  was  afraid  to  put  upon  himself  that 
holy  garment.  But  when  the  work  is  accomplished, 
and  he  goes  on  to  elevate  the  Bread  and  to  divide  it 
into  parts,  and  to  receive  it  himself  and  distribute 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

it  to  others,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  put  on 
all  the  sacred  symbols  of  his  dignity  :  and  since  the 
omophorion  is  the  principal  vest  of  a  Pontiff,  he 
necessarily  assumes  that,  and  in  that  is  partaker  ol 
the  most  divine  Things.  Having,  therefore,  put  it 
on,  and  having  made  the  elevation,  and  having  pro- 
claimed the  Holy  Things  for  Holy  Persons,  he  in 
vites  all  holy  persons  to  that  divine  and  living  food 
of  the  Holy  Table.  And  the  people  with  one  mind 
cry  out.  One  Holy,  One  Lord,  Jesus  Christ,  to  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father.  And  this,  as  S.  Paul 
saith,  shall  be  preached  in  the  Last  Day,  when 
every  knee  shall  be  bowed  to  Ji';sus,  and  every 
tongue  shall  confess  that  Jksus  Christ  is  Lord,  to 
tbe  glory  of  God  the  Father.  Hence,  then  the 
common  union  of  all  the  faithful  is  published,  and 
the  consent  of  all  concerning  the  preaching  of  the 
Licarnate  Son  of  God,  Who  shall  reign  over  all, 
mid  of  His  Kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end,  as  it  is 
written.  But  the  answer  made  to  the  Holy  Things  to 
Holy  Persons,  namely,  There  is  One  Holy,  &c.,  Tirst 
signifies  to  us  the  essential  sanctity  of  God  Him- 
self, and  tliat  from  Piim  is  the  sanctilication  of  all 
things  that  are  hallowed.  And  ifc  is,  as  it  were,  an 
expression  of  hiiniilily  ;  and  if  wo  said,  Who  of  us 
is  holy,  or  who  of  us  is  pure  ?  One  only  is  holy, 
One  only  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who  will  of 
His  mercy  sanctify  us. 

Now  tlic  elevation  of  the  Bread  sets  forth  to  us 
the  elevation  of  Jksus  on  the  Cross  ;  wliercforo  also 
the  cup  itself  lies   before  our  eyes  contuiniiig  the 

//  2 


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION . 

Blood  and  Water  which  flowed  from  His  Holy  Side. 
The  bread  then  he  divides  into  four  parts,  and  places 
them  crosswise,  and  in  this  he  sees  Jesus  cnicilied. 
Nor  can  there  be  any  greater  spectacle  than  the 
vision  of  the  Most  High  God  liumbled  for  our  sakes. 
Then  taking  the  upper  portion,  and  with  it  making 
the  sign  of  the  Cross,  he  dips  it  in  the  chalice,  and 
makes  the  union  of  the  mysteries ;  and  then  he 
pours  the  warm  water  into  the  cup.  {^'^)  And  this 
he  does  to  signify  that  the  Lord's  Body,  even  when 
dead,  and  when  the  Divine  Soul  was  separated  from 
it  still  remained  possessed  of  its  quickening  powers : 
the  Divinity  never  being  separated  from  it,  as 
neither  any  of  the  energies  of  the  Divine  Spirit. 
Since  then  warm  water  affords  bj'^  its  heat  a  type  of 
life,  it  is  then  employed  m  the  time  of  Communion 
that  when  our  lips  touch  Uie  chalice  and  participate 
in  the  Blood,  we  may  be  so  affected  as  if  we  received 
it  from  that  quickening  side.  There  are  other 
reasons  also,  and  that  of  marvellous  depth,  assigned 
by  writers  far  superior  to  ourselves  ;  but  that  which 
we  have  mentioned  may  suffice  for  us.  For  we  may 
understand  from  the  words  that  accompany  the 
injection  of  warm  Avater,  that  this  which  we  have 
mentioned  is  the  intention  of  Church.  For  he 
saith,  "  The  fervour  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  a 
still  clearer  proof  is,  that  this  admixture  also  takes 
place  in  the  Liturgy  of  the  Presanctified.(")         For 


(^)  See  all  these  rites  more  fully  explained  at  page  120. 
f'^)  The  Liturgy  of  the  Pre-sauctified,  or  of  S.   Gregory,  is 
employed  by  the  whole  Eastern  Church,  and  has  heen  so  at 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVll 

there  Avould  be  no  use  in  this,  were  the  reason  of 
the  rite  any  other  than  that  we  have  assigned ; 
seeing  that  in  the  previous  Liturgy  it  had  abeady 
been  mixed  with  the  Gifts.  But  the  Pontiff,  dividing 
the  Bread  into  many  particles,  intimates  in  that 
action  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ.  For  it  is 
wi'itten,  He  took  bread  and  brake  and  gave  to  His 
disciples.  He  first  then  liimself  communicates  in 
the  Bread,  and  participates  in  the  tremendous 
Chalice.  For  no  one  else  administers  it  to  him, 
except  it  be  some  one  of  his  own  rank,  namely 
another  Pontiff.  Then  he  imparts  the  Connnunion 
to  all  the  rest,  who  kiss  his  hand  and  chock,  by 
which  he  proclaims  the  communion  of  the  Jiody  of 
Jesus,  even  in  the  future  world,  which  shall  be  for 
ever  and  ever.  But  the  hand  and  clicek  receive  the 
kiss — the  former  as  the  agent  in  those  tremendous 
mysteries — the  latter  as  the  instrument  of  speech, 
by  which  prayers  arc  offered,  and  because  of  lovo 
and  communion  in  Christ  ;  which  is  confu-nied  by 
that  which  is  then  said — Cmkist  is  in  the  midst  of 
ns.  l"'urtIiermore,  because  the  Jjord  was  smitten  on 
tlie  cheek,  so  that  the  Pontiff  may  be  reminded  of 
how  great  huniihty  the  Jjohf;  showed  Jliniself  to  bo 
possessed  of,  and  may  never  be  lifted  up  in  functiona 
BO  divine  and  so  great. 

Those  then  of  the  altar  communicate  at  tlio  altar, 


least  HJnce  tlie  tiiiK;  of  tlie  Cniiiicil  in  'J'liillo,  on  ovi  ry  duy  ef 
5>ciit  except  the  SatiiidiiyH,  tLc  yuniltty.s,  tlii!  ADiiuncmtiou^ 
and  Maundy  Tliursday- 


XXXVIU  INTRODUCTION. 

and  analogously  with  their  order,  as  Paul  also 
teaches  of  the  future  life  :  Every  man,  saith  he,  in 
his  own  order  :  taking  the  divine  Bread  in  their  own 
hands,  and  receiving  the  Chalice  with  their  lips ; 
and  after  this  he  exhibits  to  tne  people  the  Holy 
Gifts  veiled.  Tliis  teaches  that  it  is  not  lawful,  as 
hatli  been  said  before,  for  all  men  to  see  them  un- 
veiled. But  if  any  one  is  in  a  proper  state  to 
communicate,  he  then,  advancing  with  reverence 
and  fea)',  participates  of  them,  but  mediately :  for 
he  receives  the  mysteries  at  the  hand  of  the  Pontiff 
by  the  spoon.  {^^)  And  thus,  when  prayer  has  been 
offered  for  the  heritage  of  God  and  His  innumerable 
people,  the  Pontiff  goes  and  censes  the  gifts,  and 
adds  that  which  signifies  the  Ascension  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  glory  of  the  subsequent  preaching  of  Him 
to  all  creation.  As  if  he  thus  spake  to  the  Saviour, 
and  said :  Thou  didst  descend  even  to  us  and  wast 
seen  amongst  us,  and  didst  ascend  again  into 
heaven ;  and  being  taken  ux?  from  the  earth.  Thou 


(18)  The  mystical  reference  is  to  tlie  tongs  by  wliicli  the  live 
coal  from  the  altar  was  laid  on  the  prophet's  lips.  The  luity 
in  the  Eastern  Church  receive  the  Body  and  Blood  of  our 
Ijobd  together,  tlie  former  having  been  dii)ped  in  the  latter. 
The  mori  ancient  way  was  to  receive  the  latter  by  means  of  a 
tube  which  they  held  in  their  own  hands  and  put  into  tho 
Chalice  for  themselves.  This  was  also  the  custom  in  the 
West,  till  the  introduction  of  the  present  corruption  of  the 
disuse  of  the  Chalice  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  ccntui-ies. 
I  have  seen,  in  the  French  catliedrals,  as  many  as  four  of 
tliese  tubes,  or  reods  as  they  were  called :  one  of  gold,  the 
other  three  of  silvcr-i,'ilt.  At  present,  the  united  eleuients  are 
administered  in  the  East  by  a  spoon. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXSIX 

dirlst  with  Tliy  glory  fill  the  earth  ;  by  which  we, 
performing  the  hitvuvpry  of  these  Thy  mysteries, 
are  both  partakers  of  Thee,  and  without  intermis- 
sion hold  Thee.  After  this,  the  sacred  Gifts  being 
carried  back  to  the  prothesis,  the  Deacon  holdhig 
the  paten  on  his  head,  and  the  Priests  the  chalices, 
he  giveth  thanks,  and  having  waslicd  his  hands, 
goeth  forth  to  give  that  wJiich  is  called  the  Antido- 
ron  to  the  people.  (^®)  For  since  the  iontiff,  as  we 
have  said,  expi-esscs  the  character  of  Christ,  and 
has  both  offered  Him  and  received  Him,  and  has 
distributed  Him  to  them  tliat  are  sanctified,  it  is 
necessar}'  also  that  the  people  should  partake  of 
sanctification,  that  is  to  say,  as  far  as  it  can  be  in- 
tellectually conveyed  to  them  by  prayer  and  tlie 
tremendous  hierurgy.  And  since  we,  who  are  endued 
with  a  body,  must  of  necessity  receive  sanctification 
by  sensible  things,  it  is  given  us  by  the  Antidoron. 
This  is  the  sanctified  bre.-id,  over  wlilcJi,  on  the 
table  of  prothesis,  prayers  have  been  poured  forth, 
and  the  uppermost  part  has  been  cut  out  and  has 
been  consecrated.  Tliis,  iifter  beiug  signed  with 
the  spear,  (^')  and  hallowed  by  the  divine  words  said 
over  it,  is  distributed   instead   of  the   tremendous 


('")  Antidoron.     Sen  tioto  at  jMifo  12.'». 

(20j  For  ail  nxpliiprition  of  thu  r[)oiir,  liy  tho  nioiinH  of  wliifih 
tl  10  Lamb  is  cut  out  Jind  Htalibcd,  bco  tlio  odicc  of  protlicsiH, 
at  tlie  piul  of  flic  book.  Tlio  oblfition  HOivtH  two  usoh  :  tlio 
Bcnl  or  Lftinb  «tanipc'd  with  IC  XC  NIKA  Horvi'H  for  tbc  Siicr*- 
uicnt ;  the  remaining  part,  as  hero,  for  the  unlidoron. 


XI  INTRODUOTIOW. 

Gifts  to  those  who  have  not  communicated.  Which, 
when  the  Pontiff  has  done,  and  has  prayed  over 
the  people,  he  puts  an  end  the  Liturgy.  .  .  .(^^) 


(21)  The  rest  of  the  treatise  is  taken  up  by  the  author's 
apology  and  by  a  few  remarks  on  the  Prothesis,  which  will 
better  be  givtu  under  that  rite. 


THE    DIVINE    LITURGY 


OF 


^.  iHavft. 


rj^HE  PRIEST.  Peace  be  with  all. 
Peoph:.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Pray. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy.  Lord,  have  mercy. 
Lord,  have  mercy. 

Priest  {m-rrfh/).  We  yield  Thee  thanks,  we  yield 
Thee  exceeding  thanks,  O  Lord  our  God,  Father  of 
our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesijs  Christ,  for 
fill  tilings,  and  through  all  things,  and  in  nil  things  : 
for  that  Thou  hast  sheltered,  assisted,  def.-i.d  mI,  and 
brought  us  through  the  past  time  of  our  life,  and 
hast  guided  us  to  this  hour,  vouchsafing  again  to 
set  l^efore  Thee,  in  Thy  holy  pbice.  us  who  jisk 
pardon  of  our  sins,  and  propitiation  for  all  Thy 
people.  And  we  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  O  fiover 
of  men,  0  good  God.  give  us  to  accomplish  (')  this 
holy  day  (»;  and  all  the  time  of  our  life  sinlessly, 
with  all  joy,  health,  safety,  and  with  all  sam-tifica- 
tion  and  Thy  fear.  But  all  envy,  all  fear,  all  temp- 
tation, every  Satanic  operatiou,  every  plot  of  wicked 

(')  I  know  not  but  thiit  the  word  iirtrixttrat  may  Ihtc  partly 
retain  itn  roliKiouH  HJ^'nification,  "to  ofTir  hh  a  Hucritirc  :" 
thas  £lian  in  liin  ViiriouH  HiHtory  :  Kol  KaO'  tKarrrov  trot 
iirtriXovv  aiirt^.     (Lib.  12,  cap.  fil.) 

(')  It  in  a  nii«take  to  roncludo  from  tbJH  fxproRHioii  tliat  this 
T.i^nrKj-  wan  only  nsfd  f>ii  tlir-  Hnndiiy  ;  Hinnu  wc  know  from  the 
r-plij'H  of  Tiniothf  UH,  Patriarch  of  Alexandrio,  (a.u.  3yO— 385,> 
that  it  wa»  said  daily. 

a 


2  LITURGY   OF 

men,  repel  from  us,  0  God,  and  from  Thy  holy 
Catliolic  and  Apostolic  Church.  That  which  is 
good  and  profitable,  do  Thou  supply  to  us :  if  we 
have  at  all  sinned  against  Thee  in  word  or  deed,  or 
by  thought,  do  Thou,  as  good  and  the  Lover  of  men, 
vouchsafe  to  overlook  it,  and  forsake  not  us,  0  God, 
who  put  our  trust  in  Thee,  nor  lead  us  into  tempta- 
tion, but  deliver  us  from  the  evil  one,  and  from  his 
works,  through  the  grace  and  pity  and  benignity  of 
Thine  Only-Begotten  Son  :  (aloud)  through  Whom 
and  with  Whom,  be  to  Thee  the  glory  and  the 
might,  in  Thine  all-holy  and  good  and  life-giving 
Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Pray  for  the  king. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy.  Lord,  have  mercy, 
Lord,  have  mercy. 

Priest  [secretly).  Master,  Lord,  and  God,  Father 
of  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  we 
beseech  and  supplicate  Thee  that  Thou  wouldest 
perpetually  keep  our  king  in  peace  and  fortitude 
and  righteousness.  Subject  to  him,  0  God,  every 
enemy  and  adversary  :  lay  hand  upon  the  shield 
and  buckler,  and  stand  up  to  help  him.  Grant  to 
him,  0  God,  victories,  and  that  he  may  be  peaceably 
disposed  towards  us,  and  towards  Thy  holy  Name.  (■') 
That  we  also  in  the  tranquillity  of  his  days,  may 

fs)  This  is  a  clear  proof  that  this  prayer  was  composed  before 
the  be;j!inning  of  the  great  Tenth  I'erseeution  ;  during  which  it 
Would  have  been  differently  woi'ded,  and  after  which,  it  would 
have  been  inappropriate.  In  fact  there  is  no  doubt  that  these 
three  prayei's  are  of  the  most  remote,  antiquity ;  and  this  par- 
ticular clause,  with  its  singularly  crabbed  construction,  may, 
not  improbably,  contain  the  orij^iual  words  of  the  Apostle. 


SAINT    MARK.  3 

lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and 
honesty,  {*)  through  the  grace  and  mercies  and  be- 
nignity of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Sox  :  (alntuJ)  through 
W'honi  and  with  Whom,  be  to  Thee  the  glory  and 
the  might,  in  Thine  all-holy  and  good  and  life- 
giving  Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Pray  for  the  Pope  and  the  Bishop.  (*) 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy.  Lord,  have  mercy. 
Lord,  have  mercy. 

Piient.  Master,  Lord,  and  God,  the  Almighty, (") 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  tuid  God  and  Saviour  Jksus 
Christ,  we  beseech  and  supplicate  Thee,  0  Lover  of 
men,  0  good  God,  preserving  our  most  holy  and 
blessed  Pontiff,  the  Pope  N.,  and  the  most  sacred 
Bishop  N.,  preserve  them  to  us  peacefully  many 
years,  executing  the  holy  Arch-])riesthO(Kl  intrusted 
by  Thee  to  thom  accordin'^  to  Thy  holy  and  lilcssed 
word,  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  trutli,  with  all 
orthodox  Bishops,  Priests,  Deacons,  Sub-deacons, 
Picadcrs,  Sijigers,  and  laymen,  witli  the  wliolc  ful- 
ness of  Thy  holy  and  only  Catholic  Church,  granting 
to  them  peace  and  health  and  salvation.  And  their 
prayers  which  they  make  for  us,  and  we  for  them. 


(♦)  Notice  the  coincidenco  of  tlioHe  expreBRions,  with  those 
in  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  ;  iiiul  iciimiiiIkt  that  it  ia 
quite  as  likely  that  the  Apostle  was  quotiu;;  from  the  Liturgy, 
aa  the  Liturgy  from  the  Apostle. 

(*)  By  the  l'oi>e  is  of  course  meant  the  I'litri'irch  of  Alex- 
andria, I'opo  iteing  his  specific  title,  as  Patriarch  was  that  of 
the  Metropolitan  of  Antiodi,  and  Archliislm])  that  nf  him 
of  Constaiitinojde.  Prol>ahly  the  original  hidding  ]iriiyiT  was 
simidy. —  Pray  fur  the  Bishoj). 

C)  I  take  the  epithet  hy  itself,  aa  more  in  accordance  with 
the  structure  of  tbe  commonnemetit  of  the  second  pravcr. 

K  2 


4  LITURGY   OF 

receive,  0  Lord,  unto  Thy  lioly  and  heavenly  and 
reasonable  altar.  And  every  enemy  of  Tliy  holy 
Church  subdue  speedily  under  their  feet,  through 
the  grace  and  mercies  and  benignity  of  Thine  Only- 
Begotteu  Son  :  [aloud)  through  Whom  and  with 
Whom,  be  to  Thee  the  glory  and  the  might,  in 
Thine  all-holy  and  good  and  life-giving  Spirit,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

Peojile.  And  Avith  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.   Stand  for  prayer. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy.  Lord,  have  mercy. 
Lord,  have  mercy. 

The   Priest  subjoins  the  Prayer  of  the  Entrance  (') 

and  for  the  Incense  ; 

Master,  Lord,  and  our  God,  Thou  Who  didst  elect 
the  twelve-lighted  lamp  of  the  twelve  Apostles,  and 
didst  send  them  into  the  whole  world,  to  preach  and 
to  teach  the  Gospel  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  to  heal 
every  sickness  and  every  infirmity  in  the  people ; 
and  didst  breathe  into  their  faces,  and  didst  say  to 
them,  Keceive  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter : 
whose  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them  ; 
whose  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained  ;  thus  do 
Thou  also  upon  us  Thy  servants  that  stand  around 
in  the  Entrance  of  our  holy  ministry  *  *  '■'  '■'■  with 
the  Bishops,  Priests,  Deacons,  Pieaders,  Singers, 
and  laity,  together  with  all  the  fulness  of  Thy  holy 
Catholic  and  Apostolic   Church.      Preserve   us,   0 


O  That  is  to  say  the  Little  Entrance,  or  the  bringing  in  of 
the  Gospel — a  ceremony  of  considerable  pomp.  Preceded  by 
tapers  and  incense,  the  Priest  and  Deacon  carry  the  Holy 
Gospels  from  the  Prothesis,  and  so  through  the  Holy  Doors  to 
the  Altar. 


SAINT    M/^EK.  • 

Lord,  from  curse,  and  ban,  and  from  anathema, 
and  binding,  and  excommunication,  and  from  the 
part  of  the  adversary,  and  purify  our  lips  and  our 
heart  from  all  pollution  and  from  all  iniquity  ;  that 
with  a  pure  heart,  and  pure  conscience,  we  may 
ofier  to  Thee  this  sacrifice  for  a  sweet-smelling 
savour,  and  for  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  of  the 
sins  of  Thy  people  :  through  the  grace  and  mercies 
and  benignity  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son  :  {aloitil) 
through  Whom  and  with  Whom,  be  to  Thee  tlie  glory 
and  the  might,  with  Thine  all-holy  and  good  and  life- 
giving  Si'iHiT,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Priest.  Amen. 

Deacon,  btand  up.  (®) 

And  titeij  s'uKj  the  Only- Begotten  Son. 

Priest.  Only-Begotten  Son  and  Word  of  God, 
immortal,  Who  didst  vouchsafe  for  our  salvation  to 
take  Hesh  of  tlic  holy  Motber  of  Ood,  and  Ever-Virgin 
Mary,  and  didst  without  mutation  become  man,  and 
•wast  crucified,  Christ,  our  God,  and  by  death  didst 
overcome  deatb,  being  one  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  and 
glorified  togetbcr  with  the  Father  and  tlie  Holy 
GuosT,  save  us.  ( 'j 

And  the  Entrance  oj  the  Gospel  takes  place. 

Deacon.  For  prayer. 
Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 
People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 
Deacon,  i'or  prayer. 

(*)  This  word,  opQoi,  Ikih,  like  otlior  Khort  h|ippc1k'8  of  the 
Dciir-oii,  beoii  rcltiiiicd  untrauHhitcd  iu  otiier  Lituigios  :  thui 
the  Arinenian  ((iveH  it  nrti. 

(")  ThJH  iintiicni,  which  is  in  tlio  oriKinnl  Hini|ily  n'forrod  to, 
is  clfiirly  of  later  cliito  than  tln'  Cipimcij  of  l'j|i|icnr.s,  uud  in 
cme  of  the  four  employed  in  the  Oriental  Liturga-n. 


6  LTTURGY   OP 

People.  Lord,  Lave  mercy. 

The  Priest  saith  the  Prayer  of  the  Tris(irfion.(^'^) 

Master,  and  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  co-eternal  Word 
of  the  self-existent  Father,  Who  didst  become  like 
us  in  all  respects,  sin  excepted,  for  the  salvation  of 
our  race  :  Who  didst  send  forth  Thy  holy  disciples 
and  Apostles  to  preach  and  teach  the  Gospel  of  Thy 
kingdom,  and  to  cure  all  sickness  and  all  infirmity 
among  Thy  people,  do  Thou  Thyself,  0  Lord,  send 
out  thy  light  and  Thy  truth,  and  enlighten  the  eyes 
of  our  understanding  to  the  comprehension  of  Thy 
Divine  oracles  ;  and  enable  us  to  be  hearers  of  them, 
and  not  hearers  only,  but  also  doers  of  the  word, 
that  we  may  bring  forth  fruit  and  produce  good 
fruits,  thirty-fold,  and  an  hundred-fold,  that  we 
may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
{Aloud.)  And  let  Thy  mercies  speedily  prevent  us, 
0  Lord,  for  Thou  art  the  good  tidings,  Saviour,  and 
guardian,  of  our  souls  and  of  our  bodies.  Lord  our 
God  ;  and  to  Thee  we  siaid  up  glory  and  giving  of 
thanks  and  the  hymn  of  the  Trisagion,  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages 
of  ages. 

People.  Amen.  Holy  God,  Holy  and  Mighty, 
Holy  and  Immortal,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Atid  after  the  Trisciffiov,  the  Priest  signs  [^^)  the 
people,  saying,  Peace  be  with  all. 


(10)  This  prayer  is  said  in  a  low  voice,  while  the  people  are 
Binging  the  Trisagion,  as  presently.  This  little  anthem  is 
usually  ascribed  to  a  miraculous  origin,  in  the  time  of  S. 
Proclus  (43-1 — 437),  but  it  is  probably  far  older,  and  if  not 
Apostolic,  is  at  least  Isapostolic.  The  troubles  excited  by  the 
addition  made  by  Peter  the  Fuller,  ' '  Thou  That  wast  crucified 
for  us,"  are  well  known. 

(U)  That  is,  makes  the  sign  of  the  Cross  towards  or  on  thero. 


SAINT    MAKR.  7 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Ayid  the  Attend  ;  ('-)  the  Apostle  ;  the  Prologue  of 
the  Alleluia.  The  Deacons,  according  as  they  are 
enjoined,  say — 

Sir,  give  the  blessing.  (^^) 

Priest.  The  Lord  bless  and  minister  with  you  by 
His  grace,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

The  Priest  before  the  Gospel  offers  incense  and  saith 
thus : 

We  ofifer  incense  before  Thy  glory,  0  God  ;  do 
Thou  receive  it(")  to  Thy  holy  and  super-celestial 
and  intellectual  altar.  Do  Thou,  in  its  stead,  send 
down  the  grace  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  for  Thou  art 
blessed,  and  do  Thou  send  forth  Thy  glory. 

When  the  Deacon  is  about  to  read  the  Gospel,  the 
Priest  saith : 

The  Lord  bless  and  strengthen,  and  make  us  to 
be  hearers  of  His  holy  Gospel, — Who  is  Goo  That 
is  blessed,  now  ;ind  evfr,  nnrl  to  ages  of  ages. 
Amen. 

Deacon.  Stand  :  let  us  liear  the  hoi}  Gospel. 

Priest.  Pcjico  bo  with  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

("»)  TliiH  Rnbric  reqiiirfs  oxplnnntion.  Attm/f,  \a  a  not  un- 
frf-qiient  excliiiiiuf ion  of  tlic  Dcacnii  in  tin-  Oiiciitiil  lilfH.  Tlio 
irpitTxn>tt.*v  of  tlio  Greek  is  literally  rt'tiiincil  in  tin-  ArnHniun, 
Prtisrhumf.  TIk'  .Ijttintlf  in  tiio  nioro  hhhiiI  tillo  in  the  Ori- 
entiil,  &H  it  wnH  in  the  Oiillirnn,  I>itur;;y,  f(jr  tlie  F.jiistlr.  Tiie 
Prologue  of  the  Allcluiii  secniH  to  Inivo  been  .sonio  iiriiyor 
recited  by  the  Priest,  while  the  Alleluia  wan  recited  by  the 
people. 

('•')  This  miglit  nlno  be  tranBlnted,  Lord,  hlf$» :  but,  by  the 
an.ilu^ry  of  the  Wcsteni  Churcii,  I  prefer  the  version  wliich  I 
have  given. 

('•)  The  reading  seems  rather  cormpt,  but  it«  soDse  is  m»« 
nifest. 


8  LITURGY    OF 

The  Deacon  saith  the  Gospel.     The  Priest  subjoins  the 

Collect :  {'') 

Visit,  0  Lord,  in  thy  x^ity  and  mercies,  those  of 
Thy  people  that  are  sick  :  those  of  our  hrethren  that 
have  departed,  or  are  about  to  depart,  give  to  each  a 
prosperous  journey  in  his  place,  and  seasonably. 
Send  down  rains  on  the  places  that  want  and  stand 
in  need  of  them.  Raise  the  waters  of  the  river  to 
their  measure,  through  Thy  grace.  {^°}  Increase  the 
fruits  of  the  earth,  to  seed-time  and  to  harvest ;  guard 
the  kingdom  of  Thy  servant,  whom  thou  hast  ap- 
pointed to  rule  over  the  land,  in  peace  and  courage 
and  righteousness  and  tranquillity.  This  humble 
and  poor  and  Cup.isT-Ioviug  city,  preserve  it,  0  God, 
from  evil  days,  from  famine,  plague,  and  incursion  of 
the  heathen,  as  Thou  didst  spare  the  city  of  Nineveh  : 
because  Thou  art  full  of  mercy  and  pity,  and 
keepest  not  in  remembrance  the  iniquities  of  man. 
Thou,  by  Thy  p)-ophet  Isaiah,  hast  said,  I  will 
protect  tliis  city,  and  save  it  for  My  sake,  and  for 
My  servant  David's  sake.  Wherefore  we  beseech 
Thee,  and  supplicate  Thee,  0  Lover  of  men,  0 
good  God,  guard  this  city  for  the  sake  of  Thy 
Martyr  and  Evangelist,  Mark,  who  showed  to  us 
the  way  of  salvation,  through  the  grace  and  mercies 
and  benignity  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son  :  (aloud) 
through  Whom  and  with  Whom,  be  to  Thee  the 
glory  and  the  might,  in  Thine  all-holy  and  good 

(1*)  Synaptc.  literally  Collect ;  but  in  no  way  responding  to 
the  prayer  so  called  in  the  NN'estern  Church,  to  which,  indeed, 
the  East  offers  no  parallel.  This  answers  much  more  nearly 
to  the  Ectene,  or  Jlissal  Litanj- — perfect  examitles  of  which 
will  be  fomid  in  tlje  Litnrt,'ies  of  S.  .James  and  8.  ChryKOstom. 

(i«j  The  rise  of  the  Nile  being  a  point  of  such  vital  import- 
ance to  the  Egyptian  harvest,  is  a  subject  put  prominently 
forward  in  all  tJie  Coptic  Liturgies. 


SAINT    MARK. 


9 


and  life-giving   Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages 
of  ages.  (^^) 

Deacon.     Begin. 

And    theij   say   the   Stichos.       The   Deacon   saith    the 

Three.  (^*) 

Priest.  Master  and  Lord,  God  the  Almighty,  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  pray  and 
beseech  Thee,  assign  the  peace  which  is  from  heaven 
to  the  hearts  of  all  of  us,  and  also  bestow  on  us  the 
peace  of  this  world.  Our  most  holy  and  blessed 
Pope  N.,  and  our  most  saci-ed  Bisliop  N.,  guard  to 
us  for  many  years,  peacefully  accomplishing  the 
holy  Arch-priesthood,  intrusted  by  Tlioe  to  tliem,  ac- 
cording to  Thy  holy  and  blessed  will,  rightly  dividing 
the  word  of  truth  ;  with  all  orthodox  Jiisliops,  Priests, 
Deacons,  and  Sub-deacons,  Pieaders,  Singers,  with 
all  tlif  fulness  of  Thy  holy  Catholic  and  Apostolic 
Church.  Bless,  O  Lord,  our  assemblies  ;  grant 
them  to  be  without  let  and  witliout  hindrance,  ac- 
cording to  Thy  lioly  will.  (Irant  tliem  to  ])e  houses 
of  prayer,  houses  of  blessing,  to  us  and  to  Thy 
servants  after  us  for  ever.  Arise,  0  Lord,  and  let 
Thine  enemies  be  scattered  ;  let  them  also  that 
hate  Thee  ibc  before  Thee.  And  bless  Thy  faith- 
ful and  orthodox  people  ;  increase  them  to  myriads 
of  myriads,   and  let  not  the  death  of  sin  prevail 

(I')  It  is  almost  iinnecetHary  to  remark  that  the  roforenco  to 
tlio  EvfiTiKcliHt  iH  of  fur  Inter  iliite  tlmii  tlic  (.riK'iniil  Ijitiiri^y: 
and  tin;  wln.le  ipniyer.  uh  jm  rlm]m  tlio  next  uIko,  hcciiih  to  mo 
iiiiide  up  from  tlii-  (Mtiit  Iiitf-rcesHion  for  ciuick  ami  di'iid,  to 
which  we  hIiiiII  ])reHi'iitl.v  come. 

('«)  The  Slirhfin,  or  Versicle,  whh  no  doulit  Home  viiryiiig 
anthf-m  for  differpiit  toHtivnlK.  Wiiat  in  intruded  hy  !//<•  Tlinr, 
\H  nut  agreed.  Some  take  it  to  mean  three  collectH  to  be 
recited  in  tliiH  phice  :  ollierH,  a  verhe  IxKinninK.  ^' The  Tliroe 
PeraouB  find  One  Essence,"  or  something  of  u  wimihir  kind 


10  LITURSY    OP 

against  tis,  nor  against  all  Thy  people,  through  the 
grace  and  mercies  and  benignity  of  Thine  Only- 
Begotten  Son  :  {aloud)  through  "Whom  and  with 
"Whom,  be  to  Thee  the  glory  and  the  might,  in 
Thine  all-holy  and  good  and  life-giving  Spirit,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Look  lest  any  of  the  Catechumens... (") 

Here  they  shig  the  Cherubic  Hymn. 

Let  us,  who  mystically  represent  the  Cherubim, 
and  sing  the  holy  hymn  to  the  quickening  Trinity, 
lay  by  at  this  time  all  worldly  cares,  that  we  may 
receive  the  King  of  Glory,  invisibly  attended  by  the 
angelic  orders.     Alleluia.     Alleluia.     Alleluia.  (^°) 

The  Priest  offers  Incense  for  the  Entrance,  and 
prays.  (^^) 

Priest.  Lord  our  God,  "Who  hast  no  need  of  any 

(19)  Here  followed  the  expulsion  of  the  Catechumens  and 
penitents,  preceded  probably  in  this,  as  in  the  Constantinopo- 
litan  ritual,  by  tlie  Priest  unfolding  the  Corporal.  We  shall 
find  a  fuller  form  for  this  expulsion  in  other  Liturgies. 

pJ)  This,  one  of  the  four  Liturj^dcal  hymns,  is  not  earlier 
than  the  time  of  Justinian  ;  and  accordingly  does  not  occur  in 
any  of  the  heretical  Liturgies  except  the  Armenian.  It  is 
found  in  all  the  great  rites,  except  the  Clementine. 

f^'j  This  is  the  Great  Entrance  ;  the  carrying  the  Elements 
from  the  Prothesis  to  the  altar.  It  is  the  most  imposing 
ceremony  in  the  Eastern  Church.  The  anticipative  worship 
paid  to  these  Elements  by  the  congregation,  who  fall  down  in 
the  very  path  of  the  Priest,  is  defended  with  difficulty  by  Greek 
ritualists;  but  at  all  events  proves  thus  much,  with  how  true 
and  real  a  worship  they  must  adore  those  Elements  after 
Consecration,  which  before  it  were  counted  worthy,  as  they 
themselves  seem  to  say,  of  anticipative  latria. 


»»MNT    MARK.  11 

gift,  accept  tliis  iuceuse  offered  by  an  unworthy 
hand,  and  count  lis  all  worthy  of  the  blessiug  which 
is  from  Thee  ;  for  Thou  art  our  sauctitication,  and 
to  Thee  we  ascribe  glory. 

And  the  Hohj  Thiurfs  enter  to  the  Altar,  and  the 
Priest  praj/eth  thus . 

Holy,  Most  High,  terrible.  Thou  "Who  restest  iu 
the  holies,  0  Lord,  Thyself  sanctify  us,  and  count 
us  worthy  of  Thy  fearful  Priesthood,  and  cause  us 
to  approach  to  Thy  venerable  altar  with  all  good 
conscience  :  and  purify  our  hearts  from  every  pol- 
lution :  chase  away  from  us  every  evil  sensation  : 
hallow  our  mind  and  our  soul,  and  grant  us  to 
accomplish  the  worship  of  our  holy  fathers  with 
Thy  fear,  propitiating  Thy  Face  at  all  times  ;  for 
Thou  art  He  that  blessest  and  sanctitiest  all  things, 
and  to  Thee  we  ascrilje  the  glory  and  the  giving  of 
thanks. 

Deacon.  Kiss  one  the  other. 

The  Priest  saith  the  prayer  of  the  Kiss. 

Master,  and  Loud  Almighty,  look  down  from 
heaven  u]i()n  Thy  Church,  and  u])on  all  Thy  ix'oplo, 
and  all  Tliy  Hocks,  and  save  all  of  uh  Tliinc  un- 
worthy servants,  the  creatures  of  Thy  fold  ;  and 
gi'ant  to  us  Thy  peace,  and  Thy  love,  and  Tiiy  li<  Ip, 
and  send  down  upon  us  the  gifts  of  Thy  niost  IIoi.y 
Hpirit,  that,  in  a  pure  heart,  and  with  a  good  con- 
science, we  may  salute  one  another  with  an  iioly 
kiss,  not  in  liypocrisy,  not  taking  ])art  with  the 
Alien,  {^^),  but  Idamelcss  and  unspcjtted,  in  one 
spirit,  in  the  boiul  of  peace  and  of  love,  one  body 
and  one  spirit,  in  one  faith,  as  we  have  also  becu 


(B)  There  is  something  here  corrupt. 


12  lilTURGY    OF 

called  in  one  hope  of  our  calling,  that  we  may  all  of 
us  arrive  at  the  Divine  and  boundless  affection,  in 
Christ  Jksus  our  Lord,  with  Whom  Thou  art 
blessed. 

Then  the  Priest  offers  Incense,  saying : 

Incense  is  offered  to  Thy  Name.  Let  it  ascend, 
we  pray  Thee,  out  of  the  poor  hands  of  us  sinners, 
to  thy  suiter-celestial  altar,  for  a  sweet-smelling 
savour  for  the  propitiation  of  all  Thy  people.  For 
to  Thee  is  due  all  glory,  honour,  worsliij),  and  giving 
of  thanks,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

And  after  the  Kiss  of  Peace,  the  Deacon,  aloud : 

Stand  to  make  your  offerings  according  to  your 
order.  [^) 

The  Priest  signing  ivith  the  Cross  the  patens  and  the 
chalices,  saitli  n-ith  a  loud  voice — 
I  believe  in  one  God  the  Father  Almighty, 
Maker  of  beaven  and  earth,  and  of  all  things  visible 
and  invisible  :  and  in  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Only-lk'gotten  Son  of  God,  begotten  of  His  Father 
before  all  words.  Light  of  Light,  very  God  of  very 
God,  begotten,  not  made,  being  of  one  substance 
with  the  Father  ;  by  Whom  all  things  were  made  : 
Who  for  us  men,  and  for  our  salvation,  came  down 
from  heaven,  +  and  was  Licarnate  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  was  made  man,  and 
was  crucihed  +  also  for  us  under  Pontius  Pilate. 
He  suffered  and  was  buried,  and  the  third  day  He 
rose  again  according  to  the  Scriptures,  and  ascended 
into  heaven,  and  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  the 

(23j  This  I  take  to  he  the  meaniug  of  Karh  tootSvs.  Be- 
naudot  translates  it  modestly. 


SAINT    MARK.  13 

Father.  And  He  shall  come  again  with  glory  to 
judge  both  the  qiiick  and  the  dead  :  Whose  kingdom 
shall  have  no  end.  And  I  believe  in  the  +  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life,  Who  proceedeth 
from  the  F.ather,  Who  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son  together  is  worshipped  and  glorified,  Who  spake 
by  the  Px'ophets.  And  I  believe  one  Cathohc  and 
Apostolic  Church.  I  acknowledge  one  Baptism  for 
the  remission  of  sins  :  and  I  look  for  the  Resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead,  and  the  life  of  the  world  tc  come. 
Amen. 

Deacon.  Stand  for  prayer. 

Prii'at.  Peace  be  with  all. 

Deacon.  Pray  for  them  that  offer. 

The  Priest  saith  the  prayer  of  the  Ojf'frlorjf. 

Our  Master,  Jesus  Christ,  Lord,  co-eternal  Wori> 
of  the  self-oxist(-nt  Father  and  oi  the  lloi.v  (thost. 
Thou  that  art  the  Great  High  Priest,  the  Bread  that 
comest  down  from  heaven,  and  briiigest  up  our  life 
from  con-uption.  That  didst  give  Tlnsclf,  a  spotless 
Lamb,  for  the  life  of  the  world,  we  pray  and  Iteseech 
Thee,  O  Lord,  Lover  of  men,  cause  Tliy  face  to 
shine  upon  this  Ijread  iiml  iiiiou  these  chiilices, 
which  tlie  most  holy  taljle  receives,  tin-ougli  the 
ministry  of  angels,  and  the  surrounding  choir  of 
archangels,  and  the  priestly  hicrurgy,  to  Thy  glory 
and  tlie  renovation  of  our  souls  ;  tbrougli  the  grueo 
and  mercies  and  love  to  men  of  Thine  ()iily-l5eg(»tten 
Son,  through  Whom  and  with  Wiiom,  be  to  Thee 
the  glory  and  the  might.  (*') 


(*•)  Obflerve  the  comiption  which  aflixes  mu-h  nn  ornlinR  to 
a  prnycr  nfldrcsmd  to  ilif  Son  ;  ihiIohh  by  ii  iiioHt  vinliiil  cod- 
struction  wo  k-nvo  the  former  jmrt  of  tlio  priiycr  witlnmt  any 
fipodoBis,  ftnd  conceive  the  clnuHe  thnt  beginB,  "  Wc  pray  nul 
beseech  Thee."  to  be  iildresr.cd  to  the  Fatiif.k. 


J  4  LITURGY    OP 

At  the  end  of  the  Creed,  the  Priest  signs  the  people  ivith 
the  Cross,  saying  aloud—' 

The  Lord  be  Avitli  all. 

People.  And  -with  thy  spirit. 

Priest.  Lift  we  up  our  hearts. 

People.  We  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord. 

Priest.  Let  us  give  thanks  to  the  Lord. 

Priest.  It  is  meet  and  right. 

The  Priest  begins  the  Oblation. 

It  is  verily  meet  and  right,  holy  and  becoming, 
and  advantageous  to  our  souls,  I  Am,  Lord  God, 
Father  Almighty,  to  worship  Thee,  to  hymn  Thee, 
to  give  thanks  to  Thee,  to  return  Thee  praise,  both 
night  and  day,  with  unceasing  mouth,  and  lips  that 
keep  not  silence,  and  heart  that  cannot  be  still : 
Thee  Who  madest  the  heaven  and  the  things  that 
are  in  heaven,  the  earth  and  the  things  that  are  in 
the  earth,  the  sea,  the  fountains,  the  rivers,  the 
lakes,  and  all  things  that  are  in  them :  Thee  Who 
didst  make  man  after  Thine  own  image  and  likeness, 
and  also  gavest  him  the  delights  that  were  in  para- 
dise, and  didst  not  overlook  him  Avhen  he  fell,  nor 
desert  him,  O  good  God,  but  didst  call  him  back  by 
the  Law,  didst  educate  him  by  the  Prophets,  didst 
reform  him,  and  renew  him  by  this  tremendous  and 
life-giving  and  heavenly  mystery.  All  which  things 
Thou  hast  done  by  Thy  Wisdom,  the  true  Light, 
Thine  Only-begotten  Son,  our  Lord  and  God  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  by  Whom,  rendering  thanks 
to  Thee  with  Himself  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  offer 
to  Thee  this  reasonable  and  unbloody  sacrifice,  which 
all  nations  offer  to  Thee,  0  Lord,  from  the  rising  of 
the  sun  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same  ;  from  the 
corth  and  the  south  ;  for  Thy  name  is  great  among 


SAINT    MARK.  15 

the  Geutiles,  and  in  every  place  incense  is  offered 
to  Thy  name,  and  a  pure  offering. 

And  we  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  0  Lover  of  men, 
0  good  God  : 

Eemember,  0  Lord,  the  holy  and  only  Catholic 
and  Apostolic  Church,  which  is  from  one  end  of 
earth  to  the  other  end  of  it,  all  peoples  and  all  Thy 
flocks.  Vouchsafe  to  all  our  hearts  the  peace  which 
is  from  heaven,  and  also  bestow  on  us  the  peace  of 
this  life. 

Tlie  king,  the  militaiy  orders,  the  princes,  the 
councils,  the  borouglis,  every  ueighlKJurliood,  our 
comings  in  and  our  goings  out,  set  in  order  in  all 
peace. 

O  King  of  peace,  give  to  us  Thy  peace  in  concord 
and  love  :  possess  us,  0  Gou  ;  beside  Tlu'C  we 
know  none  other  :  we  are  called  by  Thy  Name  : 
quicken  all  our  souls,  and  the  deatli  of  sin  shall  not 
have  dominion  over  us,  nor  over  all  Thy  people. 

Tliem  that  aix'  sick,  U  Lord,  of  thy  people,  visit 
in  Tliy  pity  and  mercies,  and  heal. 

Avert  from  them  and  from  us  all  sickness  and 
iniirmity,  drive  awiiy  from  tbcm  tlic  spirit  of  weak- 
ness :  raise  up  again  them  that  are  lying  in  long 
sickness  ;  lieal  tliem  that  are  vexed  of  unclean 
spirits,  them  that  are  in  j)risons,  or  in  mines,  or  in 
courts  of  justice,  or  with  sentence  given  a/^ainst 
them,  or  in  bitter  slavery,  or  tril)ute,  liave  mca-cy 
on  all,  free  all  :  for  Thou  art  otir  God,  Hi;  tluit  sets 
free  the  bound,  He  that  raises  tliose  tliat  arc  in 
misery,  the  hope  of  tlie  hopeless,  the  succour  of  the 
defenceless,  the  resurrection  of  the  fallen,  Iho 
harbour  of  the  tem|)est-tost,  tlic  avenger  of  l)io 
afllicted.  To  every  Christian  soul  that  is  in  trouble, 
and  that  is  a  petitioner  to  Thee,  give  mercy,  give 
remission,  give  refrchmncut.    Furthermore,  (J  Lokd. 


16  LITURGY    OF 

heal  the  diseases  of  our  souls,  cure  our  bodily  weak' 
nesses,  0  Physician  of  souls  and  bodies  ;  overseer 
of  all  flesh,  oversee  and  heal  us  by  Thy  salvation. 

To  our  brethren  that  have  departed  from  us,  or 
are  about  to  depart,  in  whatever  place,  give  a  fair 
journey,  whether  by  land  or  rivers,  or  lakes,  or 
liighways,  or  in  whatever  way  they  may  be  travel- 
ling, restore  them  all  everywhere  to  a  tranquil 
harbour,  to  a  safe  harbour :  vouchsafe  to  be  their 
fellow-voyager  and  fellow-traveller.  Give  them 
back  to  their  friends,  rejoicing  to  the  rejoicing, 
healthful  to  the  healthful. 

And  preserve,  0  Lord,  to  the  end,  oi;r  sojourning 
also  in  this  life,  without  harm,  and  without  storm. 

Send  down  richly  good  showers  on  the  places  that 
need  them  and  desire  them  ;  rejoice  and  renew  by 
their  descent  the  face  of  the  earth,  that  in  their 
drops  it  may  be  made  glad,  and  may  spring  up. 
Eaise  up  the  waters  of  the  river  to  their  full 
measure  ;  rejoice  and  renew  by  their  ascent  the 
face  of  the  earth :  water  her  furrows,  multiply  her 
increase.  Bless,  0  Lord,  the  fruits  of  tlie  earth. 
Preserve  them  continually  whole  and  unhurt ;  pre- 
serve them  to  us  for  seed  and  for  harvest.  Bless 
also  now,  0  Lord,  the  crown  of  the  year  of  Thy 
goodness,  for  the  poor  of  Thy  people,  for  the 
widow,  and  for  the  orphan,  for  the  proaelyte,  {'^^) 
for  all  of  us  who  hope  in  Thee,  and  who  ari?.  called 
by  Thy  holy  Name  :  for  the  eyes  of  all  wait  upon 
Thee,  and  Thou  givest  them  their  meat  in  due 
season.     Thou  That  givest  meat  to  all  flesh,  fill  our 


(25)  If  this  word,  as  is  probable,  is  to  be  taken  in  its 
Jewish  meaning,  it  must  fix  the  date  of  this  intercession  to  a 
period  of  the  most  remote  antiquity,  prior  to  the  destructioa 
of  Jerusalem. 


BAINT    MARK.  17 

hearts  vnth  joy  aud  gladness,  that  we  always,  having 
all  sufficiency  in  all  things,  may  abound  unto  every 
good  work,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  Lords,  -  *  *  *  *  the 
kingdom  of  Thy  servant,  the  orthodox  and  Christ- 
loving  king,  whom  Thou  hast  vouchsafed  to  rule 
over  the  land  in  peace  and  might  and  justice.  ''■'  * 
■■'■  *  0  God,  every  enemy,  both  native  and  foreign. 
Lay  hand  upon  the  shield  and  buckler,  and  stand 
up  to  help  him  ;  bring  furth  the  spear,  and  stop  the 
way  against  them  that  persecute  him.  Cover  his  head 
in  the  day  of  battle  :  cause  them  that  spring  from  his 
loins  to  sit  on  ^his  throne  -:=  *  *  ■'•  (*')  speak  good 
things  to  his  heart'  for  Thy  holy  Catholic  and  Apos- 
tolic Church,  and  all  the  people  that  loveth  Christ  : 
that  we  also  in  his  tranquillity  may  load  a  quiet  and 
peaceable  life  in  all  g(jdliness  and  hdiiesty.  CJivo 
rest  to  the  souls  of  our  fathers  and  brethren  that 
have  heretofore  wlept  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  O  Lord 
our  God,  remembering  our  ancestors,  fathers,  pa- 
triarchs, prophets,  Apostles,  martyrs,  confes.sors, 
Bishops,  holy  and  just  persons,  every  spirit  that  has 
de))arted  in  the  faitii  of  Chuist,  and  those  wIkum  to- 
day we  keej)  in  memory  and  our  lioly  fiiiln  r  Murk. 
the  Apostle  and  Kvaugelist,  who  made  known  to  us 
the  way  of  salvation.) 

(Hail,  thou  that  art  full  of  grace,  the  T^ord  is 
with  thee;  blessed  art  thou  among  women,  and 
blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  woml),  because  thou 
didst  bring  forth  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  inlond) 
especially  the  most  holy,  stainlesH,  blessed,  our 
Lady,  Mother  of  (»od,  aud  ever- Virgin. 


(*")  We  mny,  I  think,  nee  in  the  broken  and  oorrnpted  Htnto 
r>(  tlie  petitions  for  tlic  Emiiornr,  tliul  tlmy  fcrnic<I  im  |>iulof 
the  oriKitml  Liturgy.  )«it  wiro  a  later  editiou,  vsLeii  tl.c  (Jo%erD- 
ment  had  become  Chrigtiao. 

C 


18  LITURGY    (.y 

Beacon.  Sir,  pray  for  a  blessing. 
rrii'st.  The  Lord  shall  bless  thee  with  His  grace, 
now  and  ever,  aud  to  ages  of  ages. 

The  Deacon  reads  the  Diptychs  of  the  departed.  (*^) 
The  Priest  bows  down  and  prays : 

And  to  the  spirits  of  all  these  give  rest,  our 
Master,  Lord  and  God,  in  the  Tabernacles  of  Thy 
Saints,  vouchsafing  to  them  in  Thy  kingdom  the 
good  things  of  Thy  promise,  {^)  which  eye  hath  not 
seen,  and  ear  hath  not  heard,  and  it  hath  not  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  Thou  hast 
prepared,  0  God,  for  them  that  love  Thy  holy  Name. 
Grant  rest  to  their  souls,  and  vouchsafe  to  them  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  ;  and  to  us  grant  that  the  end 
of  our  lives  may  be  Christian  and  well-pleasing  to 
Thee,  and  without  sin,  and  grant  to  us  to  have  a 


(27)  That  is  to  say,  the  names  of  the  former  Prelates  of  the 
See,  and  of  celebrated  benefactors  to  the  Church.  The  name  is 
derived  from  their  being  inscribed  on  a  board  with  two  leaves, 
like  a  modern  book :  just  as  Triptych  is  a  board  with  three 
leaves,  two  of  which  overlap  and  cover  the  third.  The  inser- 
tion of  a  name  in  the  Di  jitychs,  or  its  erasui-e  from  them, 
was  equival  ent  to  a  declaration  that  its  possessor  died  in,  or 
out  of,  the  Communion  of  the  Church  ;  and  hence  fierce  con- 
tests in  the  earlier  ages,  especially  between  Eome  and  Con- 
stantinople, on  this  fiuliject.  The  only  rite  which  at  present 
retams  the  lection  of  the  Diptychs  as  a  part  of  the  Liturgy,  is 
the  Mozarabic. 

f*j  Observe  liere,  (1)  one  of  the  many  examples  of  prayers 
for  the  dead  as  an  Isapostolic  practice  ;  (2)  that,  nevertheless, 
every  single  expressioji  contained  in  them  militates  against 
the  doctrine  of  a  purgatoiy, — i.e.  in  the  sense  of  a  place  of 
pain.  As  this  is  a  subject  of  such  great  importance,  I  have 
thrown  together  in  an  Ai)pendix  the  prayers  for  the  departed 
contained  in  the  princijial  Liturgies  not  here  translated;  the 
exceeding  beauty  of  the  language  will  render  them  acceptable 
to  Those  who  have  no  need  of  a  proof  of  the  doctrine. 


SAINT    MARK.  19 

portion  and  a  lot  with  all  Thy  saints.  The  thanl<- 
offerings  of  them  that  otier  sacritices  and  oblation^ 
receive,  0  God,  to  Thy  holy  and  super-cc4estial  and 
spiritual  altar,  to  the  height  of  the  heavens,  by  Thy 
arch-angelic  ministry;  of  them  that  oft'ored  much 
or  little,  secretly  and  with  open  boldness,  of  them 
tliat  desired  and  had  not  wlierewitiial  to  otl'er  :  and 
cf  tliem  that  have  brought  this  day  their  oblations : 
as  Thou  didst  receive  the  gifts  of  Thy  righteous 
servant  Abel;  laud  the  I'ricst  n/l'irs  hivense  dinl  saitli,\ 
the  sacritice  of  our  father  Abraham,  the  incense  of 
Zacharias,  the  alms  of  Cornelius,  and  the  two  mites 
of  the  widow,  receive  also  their  thank-offurings, 
and  give  to  them  instead  of  things  earthly,  things 
licaveuly  ;  instead  of  things  temporal,  things  eter- 
nal. The  most  holy  and  blessed  I'npo  N.,  whom 
Thou  didst  foreknow  and  ■'■■•  ■■'■  ■'■'■  to  take  in  hand  the 
government  of  Thy  holy  CatlioHc  and  Apostolic 
Church,  and  our  most  sacred  IJisiiop  N.,  guard  them 
by  Tliy  care,  for  many  years,  in  peaceful  time,  ac- 
complishing Thy  holy  Archpriesthood  intrusted  to 
tliem  by  Thee,  according  to  Thy  holy  and  blessed 
will,  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth.  And 
remember  also  all  orthodox  Bishops  everywhere, 
I'resbyters,  JJeacons,  Sub-deacons,  Headers,  Singers, 
Monks,  cvcr-vir^'ins,  widows,  laymen.  Kemcmber, 
O  Loan,  the   holy  city  (■")  of  Cnuisr   our  (Jon,  and 

(")  Notice  the  extreme  antiquity  of  tliiH  collncutinn,  wliich 
places  JcniHalcm  tirst.  I  am  iiiclincil  t'l  tliiiik  tlmt  the 
"roiHiiinK  city  "  jh  not  CriiiMliiiitiii()|)l<',  Imt  Iloiiif  :  Hinic  it  iw 
liardly  likely  tliat,  \vi'r<t  tliiH  cluUHfi  |Kmt('rii>r  to  tint  tiiiio  of 
ConHtfiiitinc,  thrff-  of  tlie  I'lttriiirrlml  tlir<>iicn  Hiimild  lir  iiiun- 
tioiH'fl  witliniit  tlint  which  wiih  liy  luiivtTHiii  coiiHijit,  flin  firHt. 
Anylu)W  it  iH  rcmnrkablc,  tlmt  IIouk-  [h  i-itlxT  omittfil  alto- 
getlicr,  or  is  i>r('C<<l<  il  by  Ji-niHuloiii ;  nnd  tlmt.  too,  in  the 
Liturgy  of  Aloxnndriu,  the  Cliurcli  wbicb,  of  all  in  the  Fjinl 
clung  moat  clouely  to  the  Lntin  See. 

C2 


20  LITURGY  OF 

tLe  reigning  city,  and  this  our  city,  every  city  and 
region,  and  those  that  dwell  in  it  in  the  orthodox 
faith  of  Christ,  their  peace  and  safety.  Remember, 
0  Lord,  every  Christian  soul  in  affliction  and 
trouble,  that  needs  the  mercy  and  succour  of  God, 
and  the  conversion  of  them  that  have  wandered. 
Remember,  0  Lord,  our  brethren  that  are  in 
bonds;  grnnt  them  to  find  mercy  and  pity  in  the 
sight  of  all  those  that  have  carried  them  captive. 
Remember,  0  Lord,  also  us,  as  sinners  and  Thy 
unworthy  servants,  and  blot  out  our  sins  as  the  good 
God,  and  Lover  of  men.  Remember,  0  Lord,  also 
me,  Thy  humble  and  sinful  and  unworthy  servant, 
and  blot  out  my  sins,  as  the  God  that  is  the  Lover 
of  men.  Be  present  with  us  who  are  ministering 
to  Thy  all-holy  Name.  Bless,  0  Lord,  our  congre- 
gations. Root  out  idolatry  wholly  from  the  world  : 
bruise  Satan  and  all  his  power  and  wickedness 
beneath  our  feet.  The  enemies  of  Thy  Church,  0 
Lord,  as  at  all  times,  so  now  also  humble.  Lay 
bare  their  pride,  speedily  make  manifest  their  weak- 
ness :  bring  to  nought  their  plots  and  their  villany 
whicli  they  employ  against  us.  Arise,  0  Lord,  and 
let  Thine  enemies  be  scattered,  and  let  all  them 
that  hate  Thy  holy  Name  flee  backward.  (*')  [Bless] 
Thy  faithful  and  orthodox  people,  them  that  do  Thy 
holy  will,  with  a  thousand  thousand  and  ten  thou- 
sand times  ten  thousand  blessings. 

Deacon.  Ye  that  are  sitting,  stand  up. 

Priest.  Free  them  that  are  bound,  bring  forth 
them  that  are  in  necessities.  Satisfy  the  hungry, 
comfort  the  pusillanimous,  convert  them  that  have 
strayed,  enlighten  them  that  are  in  darkness,  raise 
the  fallen,  establish  those  that  are  wavering,  heal 

(K>)  The  passage  is  manifestly  corrupt :  but  this  is  the  sense. 


SAINT    MARK.  21 

the  sick :  direct  all,  0  good  God,  into  the  way  of 
salvation,  and  uuite  them  to  Thy  holy  ilock  ;  and 
preserve  us  from  our  iniquities,  heiug  in  all  things 
our  guard,  and  our  defender. 
Deacon.  To  the  East. 

The  Priest  hows  down  and  j^rays. 

Thou  art  ahove  all  power  and  dominion,  and 
might,  and  principality,  and  every  name  that  is 
named  not  only  in  this  world  hut  also  in  that  which 
is  to  come,  liound  Thee  stand  thousand  thousands, 
and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  armies  of 
holy  angels  and  archangels.  Round  Thee  Thy  two 
most  honourahlc  creatures,  the  Cherubim,  with 
many  eyes,  and  the  Serapliim  with  six  wings,  with 
twain  whereof  thoy  cover  their  feet,  with  twain  their 
face,  and  with  twain  they  do  fly  :  and  cry  one  to  the 
other  with  incessant  voices  and  porpi.'tual  praise, 
singing,  vociferating,  glorifying,  crying,  and  saying 
to  the  Slajcsty  (if  Thy  glory,  tlic  triiuiiplial  Trisa- 
gion  :  Holy,  iloly.  Holy.  Lduu  of  Saliaotli  :  heaven 
and  earth  are  full  of  Thy  holy  glory.  (Aloud.)  Tliou 
ever  saiictifiest  all  :  hut  with  all  that  glorify  Tln'C, 
receive,  0  Lohd,  our  praise  also,  who  with  them  laud 
Thee  and  say, 

I'efjpU-.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord. 

Thr  Prienl  s'njns  the  lloli/  Mi/sliiics  wilh  the  Cross, 

sayinif, 

Verily  earth  and  heavr-n  arc  full  of  Thy  lioly 
glor}',  through  the  maiiifcsfaf ion  of  our  l,(iui)  and 
God  and  Savioi:h  .Jksls  Chiiist  :  fulfil  also,  0  God, 
this  sacrifice  with  Thy  heavenly  hlessing,  by  the 
coming  down  on  it  of  Tliy  mnst  lIoi.Y  Ghost.  For 
the  Loud  Himself  and  our  God  aii'l  universal  King, 


22  LITURGY    OP 

Jesus  Christ,  in  the  night  wherein  He  surrendered 
Himself  for  our  sins,  and  ....  [underwent]  death 
in  tlie  fiesli  for  all,  sitting  down  at  supper  with  His 
holy  Disciples  and  Apostles,  took  hread  {^^)  in  His 
holy  and  pure  and  spotless  hands,  looked  up  to 
Thee  His  owai  Father,  our  God  and  the  God  of  all, 
and  gave  thanks,  and  hlessed,  and  hallowed,  and 
brake,  and  distributed  to  His  holy  and  blessed  Dis- 
ciples and  Apostles,  saying,  [aloud)  Take,  eat. 

Deacon.  Pray  earnestly. 

Priest.  For  this  is  My  Body  which  is  broken  for 
you,  and  distributed  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

Choir.  Amen. 

Priest.  Likewise  also  the  cup  after  supper,  having 
taken,  and  mingled  with  wine  and  water,  and  look- 
ing up  to  heaven  to  Thee  His  own  Father,  our  God, 
and  the  God  of  all,  He  gave  thanks,  He  blessed.  He 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  He  distributed  it  to  His 
holy  and  blessed  Apostles  and  Disciples,  saying, 
{aloud)  Drink  ye  all  of  this. 

Deacon.  Yet  pray  earnestly. 

Priest.  This  is  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament, 
which  is  shed  and  distributed  for  you  and  for  many 
for  the  remission  of  sins. 

People.  Amen. 

Pr'n'fit.  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye 


(81)  The  points  dwelt  on  in  the  Oriental  Liturgies  vnih 
respect  to  the  institution  of  the  Blessed  Eucharist  are  princi- 
pally these.  Of  the  Bread  ;  that  our  Lord  (1)  looked  up  to 
Heaven  :  (2)  took  leavened  bread  :  (3)  blessed  :  (4)  brake  : 
(5)  Himself  received  :  (Gj  distributed  to  His  Apostles.  Of  the 
Chalice:  (1)  that  He  miufjled  it  with  wine  and  water:  (2) 
looked  up  to  lieaven :  (3)  blessed:  (4)  Himself  received:  (n) 
distributed  to  His  Apostles.  In  Appendix  II.,  I  give  the  words 
of  institution  from  all  known  Lituriries. 


3AINT    MARK,  23 

shew  forth  My  death,  and  confess  My  Resurrection 
and  Ascension  till  I  come. 

0  Ahnighty  Lord  and  Master,  King  of  heaven, 
we,  announcing  the  death  of  Thine  Only-begotten 
Son,  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
and  confessing  His  l)lessed  Resurrection  from  the 
dead  on  the  third  day,  confess  also  His  Ascension 
into  heaven,  and  His  session  on  Thy  right  hand, 
His  God  and  Father,  looking  also  for  His  second 
and  fearful  and  dreadful  coming,  -when  He  shall 
come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  in  righteous- 
ness, and  to  render  to  every  man  according  to  his 
works : 

0  Lord  our  God,  we  have  set  before  Thee  Thine 
own  of  Thine  own  gifts. 

And  we  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  (^-)  0  good  God 

(«)  We  now  come  to  the  Invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by 
which,  according  tu  tlie  doctrine  of  the  Eastern  Church,  and 
not  by  the  words  of  institution,  the  bread  and  wine  are 
"changed,"  "  transninfed,"  "transeleniented,"  "transubstan- 
tiated,"  into  our  Loui.'s  Body  and  lllood.  This  li.iii  ulwiiys 
been  a  point  of  contention  between  the  two  Clnirches— the 
time  at  wliictli  tlie  cliantro  takes  i>hico.  Originally,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  the  Invocation  of  tlie  Hoi,y  Ono.ii  formed  a  jiart 
of  all  I^iturgies.  The  I'l  trine  has  entirely  lost  it:  the  Ephesino 
(Gallican  and  Mozarabie.)  more  or  less  reta-.ns  it :  as  do  also 
those  mixtures  of  the  Kphesine  and  I'etrine, — the  Anibrosian 
and  rutriarcliine  or  A'luileian.  To  use  the  words  of  the  au- 
ihori/.ed  Kussian  catechism  :  "Why  is  this  (the  Invoeatinn)  bo 
essential  ?  Because,  at  the  moment  of  this  act,  the  br('a<l  and 
wine  are  changed  or  transuhstantiated  into  the  very  Body  of 
(JnaisT,  and  into  the  very  Jjlood  of  Ciiiiiht.  How  are  we  to 
understand  the  word  Transiibctantiation  ?  In  the  exposition 
of  the  faith  by  the  Eastern  ratriarchs,  it  is  sai<l  that  tlie  word 
is  not  to  be  taken  to  detinetlie  manner  in  which  the  bread  and 
wine  are  changed  into  the  Body  and  Blood  of  our  Loan  ;  for 
this  none  can  undersl'ind  hut  (ion;  but  only  this  much  in 
siis'nitiod.  that  the  bread,  truly,  really,  and  Rubstantiiilly 
becomes  the  very  tru"  Body  of  the  Loan,  and  the  wine  the 
very  Blood  of  the  Loicn." 


24  LITURGY   OP 

and  Lover  of  men,  to  send  down  from  TLy  holy 
height,  and  appointed  habitation,  and  incircum- 
script  bosom,  the  very  Paraclete,  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  the  Holy,  the  Lord,  the  Life-giving  :  Who 
spake  in  the  Law  and  by  the  Prophets  and  the 
Apostles ;  Who  is  everywhere  present,  and  filleth 
all  things,  and  works  of  His  own  free  will,  and  not 
as  a  minister,  according  to  Thy  good  pleasure,  in 
those  in  whom  He  wills,  sanctification.  One  in 
His  nature,  manifold  in  His  energies,  fountain  of 
Divine  graces  ;  consubstantial  with  Thee,  proceed- 
ing from  Thee,  fellow-sharer  in  the  Throne  of  Thy 
kingdom,  and  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  our 
Lord  and  God  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  Send 
down  then  on  us,  and  on  these  loaves,  and  on  these 
cups.  Thy  Holy  Ghost,  that  He  may  sanctify  and 
perfect  them,  as  God  Almighty.  (Aloud.)  And 
make  this  bread  the  Body. 

Peojih.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  this  cup  the  Blood  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, of  our  very  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  and 
universal  King,  Jesus  Christ. 

Deacon.  Conic  down,  ye  Deacons. 

Priest.  That  they  may  be  to  all  of  us  who  partici- 
pate in  them  for  faith,  for  sobriety,  for  healing,  for 
temperance,  for  sanctiiication,  for  renovation  of 
80 111,  body,  and  spirit,  for  participation  of  the 
blessedness  of  eternal  life  and  immortality,  for  the 
glory  of  Tliy  holy  Name,  for  the  remission  of  sins, 
that  Thy  most  holy  and  precious  and  glorious  Name 
may  here,  as  also  in  every  place,  be  hallowed,  and 
hymned  and  sanctified  with  Jesus  Christ  and  the 
HoLy  Ghost. 

People.  As  it  was  and  is. 

P'iest.  Peace  be  with  alU 

Deacon.  Pray. 


SAIKT   MARK.  25 

Priest.  God  of  light,  Father  of  life,  Author  of 
grace,  Framer  of  the  worlds,  Founder  of  knowledge, 
Giver  of  wisdom,  Treasure  of  holiness.  Teacher  of 
pure  prayers,  Benefactor  of  the  soul,  Who  givest  to 
the  weak-hearted  who  trust  in  Thee  those  things  into 
which  the  angels  desire  to  look  :  AVlio  hast  raised  us 
from  the  abyss  to  liglit,  hast  given  us  life  from  death, 
hast  granted  us  freedom  from  slavery,  hast  dissolved 
in  us  the  darkness  of  sin  by  the  coming  of  Thine  Only- 
Begotten  Son;  now  also,  0  Lord,  illuminate  the 
eyes  of  our  understanding  by  the  visitation  of  Thy 
Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  without  condcnniation 
partake  of  this  immortal  and  heavenly  food  ;  and 
sanctify  us  wholly,  soul,  body,  and  spirit,  that  with 
Thy  holy  lJiscii)los  and  Apostles  we  may  say  to  Thee 
this  prayer.  Our  i-ATiiER,  &c.  And  i:;ake  us  worthy, 
O  Lord  and  Lover  of  men,  with  boldness,  without 
condemnation,  with  a  pure  heart,  with  anenlightened 
tioul,  with  a  countenance  that  needeth  not  to  be 
ashamed,  with  hallowed  lips,  to  dare  to  call  upon 
Thee  our  holy  God  and  Father,  Which  art  in 
Leaven,  and  to  say, 

Peojile.  Our  Father,  &c.  (^) 

Priest.  Even  so.  Lord,  Lord,  lead  us  not  into 
temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  tiic  i-vil  f)iie  :  for  Thy 
great  mercy  knowflh  that  we  are  unable  to  bear  u]) 
through  our  much  infirmity  ;  but  make  with  the 
temptation  also  a  way  of  escape,  that  wo  may  be  aide 
to  bear  it  ;  for  Tiiou  hast  given  us  power  to  tread  on 
serpents  and  scoipions,  and  on  all  the  miglit  of  the 
enemy  :  (aloud)  for  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  tl  3 
power. 

(^)  The  Loni)'8  Prayer,  nB  is  well  known,  furniH  u  juirt  of 
fvcry  Litiirgj-,  exrijit  tlie  Clfcinciitine  ;  and  is  nhvu^K  fulliiwcd 
I'V  tbo  Hhort  8iiii]iliciition  agaiubt  teuii'tutiou,  technically 
kiiown  as  tlie  Einholismus. 


26  LirUKGY   CF 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  ^vith  all. 

Deacon.  Bow  your  heads  to  Jksus. 

People.  To  Thee,  0  Lord. 

Priest.  {^^)  Master,  Lord,  and  God  Almighty, 
Who  sittest  upon  the  Cherubim,  and  art  glorified  by 
the  Seraphim  ;  Who  didst  prepare  the  heaven  from 
the  waters,  and  didst  adorn  it  with  the  choirs  of  the 
stars  ;  Who  hast  arranged  the  bodiless  armies  of 
angels  in  the  highest,  to  sing  Thy  praise  everlastingly, 
to  Thee  we  have  bowed  the  neck  of  our  souls  and 
bodies,  signifying  the  outward  appearance  of  service  ; 
and  we  pray  Thee,  disperse  the  dark  attacks  of  sin 
from  our  understanding,  and  enlighten  our  soul  with 
the  divine  rays  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  we,  being 
filled  with  the  knowledge  of  Thee,  may  worthily  par- 
ticipate in  the  good  things  that  are  set  before  us,  the 
spotless  Body  and  precious  Blood  of  Thine  Only-Be- 
gotten Son,  our  Lokd  and  Saviour  Jksus  Christ,  for- 
giving us  every  kind  of  sin,  through  Thy  great  and 
unsearchable  goodness,  through  the  grace  and  mercies 
and  benignity  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son  ;  [aloud) 
by  Whom  and  with  Whom,  be  to  Thee  the  glory  and 

(84)  This  is  the  prayer  of  Intense  Adoration,  which  has  its 
place  in  all  Oriental  Liturgies,  and  answers  to  the  worship  paid 
by  the  Western  Church  to  our  Luud's  Sacramental  Body  and 
Blodd  at  the  Elevation  of  the  Host.  An  attempt  has  been  made 
to  prove  that  the  East  does  not  agree  with  the  West  in  paying 
the  worship  of  latria  to  that  Body  and  that  Blood,  from  the 
long  interval  which  separates  the  prayer  of  Intense  Adoration 
(in  all  Litu)gies  excejit  the  present  one)  from  the  Invocation  of 
the  Holy  Giiost.  Nuthingcan  he  more  futile  :  the  obvious  tan- 
gible reason  being,  that  during  the  consecration,  the  holy  doors 
were  closed,  or,  in  the  Ai-menian  Church,  the  veil  was  drawn ; 
BO  that  the  people  could  hardly  be  called  on  to  worship  that 
which  was  not  presented  to  their  eyes,  as  they  can  be  and  are  in 
the  Western  Clnirch.  where  it  is  so  presented.  But  now  the  holy 
doors  are  opened ;  hence  the  reason  of  the  position  of  this  piajer. 


SAINT    MARK.  27 

the  miglit,  in  Tliiue  all-holy  aud  good  and  life-giving 
Spirit. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

Deacon.  With  the  fear  of  God. 

Priest.  Holy,  most  high,  tremendous  Lord,  Wlia 
restest  in  the  holies  :  sanctify  us.  Lord,  by  the  word 
of  Thy  gi-ace  and  the  visitation  of  Thy  most  Holy 
Spirit.  For  Thou,  Lord,  hast  said.  Be  ye  holy, 
for  I  am  holy.  0  Lord  our  God,  incomprehensible 
Word  of  God,  consubstantial  and  co-eternal,  and 
ruhng  C^)  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
receive  the  pure  hymn,  with  Cherubim  and  Seraphim, 
and  from  me  a  sinner  aud  Thine  unworthy  servant, 
crying  and  saying  from  my  unworthy  lips, 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy,  (tliricc.) 

Priest.   Holy  Things  for  Holy  Persons.  ("") 

One  holy  Father,  one  holy  Son,  one  Holy  Ghost  ; 
in  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Amen. 

Drticon.  For  salvation  and  succour.  Sec. 

Tlie  Priest,  si[/iiiii<j  the  people  irilk  the  siyn  of  the 
Cross,  sctith, 

The  Lord  be  with  all. 

fie  bnaks  the  bread,  and  sailh, 
0  praise  God,  (Ps.  el.) 
The  Priest  diridcs  it  amomj  the  assistants,   and  saith. 

The  Lord  shall  bless  and  minister  with  you, 
through  His  great  mercy, 

(W)  trvvapx*  '•  ii'ilfiSH,  inflccd,  tho  trno  reading  bo  rntlior 
ffwdvapxf,  t'lf/rtbrr  irith  Tlum  without  nrviin. 

(«")  Tlio  ffimoUH  cxfldinatiou  which  irifikcn  ii  pfirt  of  (ill 
Eastorn  Liturgies,  ftiid  is  iiccoinimiiiod  with  tin-  Elrfviitinn  of 
the  Host.  These  wr)rdH  arc  no  doul)t  cf  Apusldlic  (iiJKin  and 
are  quoted  over  and  over  a(?ain  by  the  Enstcrn  FntlicrB.  It  is 
the  more  wondirfnl  that,  to  carry  out  a  niivcl  tlioory.  an  emi- 
nent Hcliolar  shiml)  latply  liavo  attpniptfd  to  tran«luto them: 
"  The  holy  things  aie  lifted  up  to  Die  holy  placcrt." 


28  LITUEGY    OF 

Priest.  Command. 

The  Clerks.  The  Holy  Ghost  commands  and 
sanctifies. 

Priest.  Behold,  they  are  sanctified  and  consecrated. 
The  Clerks.   One  Holy  Father,  &c.  [thrice). 
Priest.  The  Lord  be  with  all. 
The  Clerks.  And  with  thy  spirit. 
Priest.  Himself  hath  blessed  it. 

And  the  Priest  saith  either  the  prayer^ 

According  to  Thy  mercy.  ("'') 

Or  else  Psalm  xlii.     Quemadmodum 

And  lie  (■(iiiiDuinicates.     And  ivJicii  he  gives  the 
Cdiiniiunion  to  any  one,  he  saith, 

The  Holy  Body. 

And  ichen  he  gives  the  Chalice,  he  saith, 

The  precious  Blood  of  our  Lord  and  God  and 
Saviour. 

When  all  is  ended,  he  saith^ 

Stand  for  prayer. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

Deacon.  Pray. 

Priest.  We  give  Thee  thanks.  Master,  Lord,  and 
our  God,  for  the  reception  of  Thy  holy,  spotless, 
immortal,  and  heavenly  mysteries,  which  Thou  hast 
given  us  for  the  well-doing  and  sanctification  and  sal- 
vation of  our  souls  and  bodies  ;  and  we  pray  and  be- 
seech Thee,  good  Lord,  and  Lover  of  men,  to  grant 
that  the  participation  of  the  holy  Body  and  precious 
Blood  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  may  be  to  faith 
that  shall  not  be  ashamed,  to  love  unfeigned,  to  the 


(^)  This  prayer,  as  so  much  else  oi  the  ritual  of  S.  Mark, 
Hppears  to  be  lost. 


SAIMT    MAr.K.  29 

fulfilment  of  piety,  to  the  turning  away  the  enemy,  to 
the  keeping  Thy  Commaudmeuts,  to  a  provision  on 
our  way  to  eternal  life,  to  an  acceptable  defence 
before  the  fearful  tribunal  of  Thy  Christ  :  (aluud) 
by  Whom  and  with  Whom,  &c. 

Then  the  Priest  turns  to  the  people,  and  saith, 

Mighty  King  and  co-sharer  of  Thy  Father's  rule, 
Who  didst  by  Thy  might  spoil  hell,  and  trample  on 
death,  and  didst  raise  Adam  from  the  tomb,  by  Tliy 
god-like  might,  and  by  the  illuminative  splendour  of 
Thine  ineffable  Godhead,  do  Thou,  O  Lord,  by  the 
participation  of  Thy  spotless  Body  and  precious 
Blood,  send  forth  Thine  invisil)lc  right  liand,  that  is 
full  of  blessings,  and  bless  us  all  ;  pity  and  strengthen 
by  Thy  divine  power,  and  destroy  in  us  the  vicious 
and  sinful  working  of  floslily  lust :  enliglitcn  tlie  eyes 
of  our  souls  from  tln'  darkiiess  of  sin  tbut  lies  around 
them  ;  unite  us  to  the  all-blessed  company  that  is 
well-pleasing  to  TJiee  :  for  throu^'h  Thco  and  witli 
Thee,  to  the  Father  and  the  Holy  (Jiiost,  every 
hymn  is  due,  honour,  might,  adoration,  and  giving 
of  thanks,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Deacon.  Depart  in  peace. 

People.  In  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Priest,  (aloud.)  The  love  of  God  and  tlie  Fatiiku, 
the  grace  of  tlie  Son  and  our  I^oud  .Iksik  Ciikist, 
the  communion  and  gift  of  the  Hoi,v  Ghost,  be  with 
US  all,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

People.  Amen.    Blessed  bo  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 


(«)  In  the  printed  copies  there  is  another  prayer  "  to  bo 
Pftid  in  the  Sfirristy  :"  which,  as  clearly  having  no  buhinoBbin 
this  place,  I  have  omitted. 


^\^ 


THE    DIVINE    LITUriGY 


OF 


^.  31atne0. 


Priest.  Master,  Lord,  and  our  God,  reject  me  not 
utterly,  though  poJhited  with  the  multitude  of  my 
sins  ;  for,  behold,  I  have  come  to  this  Thy  divine 
and  heavenly  mystery.  Not  as  being  worthy,  but 
looking  up  to  Thy  goodness,  I  address  my  voice  unto 
Thee.  0  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  :  I  have 
Binned  against  heaven  and  before  Thee,  and  am  not 
worthy  to  present  myself  before  this  Thy  sacred  and 
spiritual  Table,  whereon  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son, 
and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  mystically  set  forth  as 
a  sacrifice  for  me  a  sinner,  and  marked  with  every 
stain.  Therefore  I  ofier  unto  Thee  this  supplication 
and  thanksgiving,  in  order  to  the  sending  down  upon 
me  Thy  Spirit  of  consolation,  to  confirm  and  prepare 
me  for  this  service  ;  and  do  Thou  make  me  worthy 
to  declare,  without  condemnation,  the  word  delivered 
by  me  to  Thy  people  from  Thee,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  ;  with  Whom  Thou  art  blessed,  together 
with  Thy  most  holy,  and  good,  and  quickening,  and 
consubstantial  Spieit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of 
agesV    Amen. 

Prayer  of  Standing  before  the  Altar. 

Glory  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Trinal  and  only  light  of  Godhead, 
existing,  one  Substance  in  Trinity,  and  undividedly : 
for  the  one  Almighty  God  is  the  Trinity,  "Whose 
glory  the  heavens  relate,  and  the  earth  His  power, 
and  the  sea  His  might,  and  every  sentient  and  iutel- 


LITURGY    OF    S.    JAJIE3. 


o  1 


ligent  creature  heralds  everywhere  His  greatness  : 
for  Him  befits  all  glory,  honour,  might,  greatness, 
and  magnificence,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 
Amen. 

Prayer  of  the  Inceiise. 

Master  and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ,  0  Word  of  God, 
Who  didst  voluntarily  offer  Thyself,  a  spotless  sacri- 
fice, ui^on  the  Cross  to  God  and  the  Father,  the 
coal  of  two  natures,  Who  didst  kindle  with  the  tongs 
the  prophet's  lips,  and  didst  take  away  his  sins, 
kindle  also  the  perceptions  of  us  sinners,  and  purify 
us  from  every  spot,  and  cause  us  to  stand  pure  before 
Thy  holy  altar,  that  we  may  ofifer  to  Tlxo  the  sacri- 
fice of  i»rai.se  :  and  receive  from  us,  Thino  unpro- 
fitable servants,  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour,  and 
make  sweet  that  which  is  unsavoury  both  in  our  souls 
and  our  bodies  ;  and  sanctify  us  will;  llic  sanctifying 
power  of  Thy  most  Holy  Spiuit  :  for  Thou  only  art 
holy.  Who  sanctiliest,  and  art  distriljutod  to,  Thy 
faithful  people  ;  and  glory  befits  Thee  with  Thy  self- 
existent  Fathf.r,  and  Thy  most  holy  and  good  and 
quickening  Si'ii:n,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of 
ages.     Amen. 

Jiitrodiictorif  Praj/rr. 

0  Beneficent  King  of  Ages,  and  Arnlcor  of  the 
whole  Creation,  accept  Thy  Church  upproaching 
Thee  through  Thy  Christ  ;  fulfil  that  which  is  pro- 
fitable to  eacli  ;  bring  all  to  perfection  ;  and  nuike 
us  worthy  of  the  grace  of  Thy  sanctilication  ;  gather- 
ing us  together  in  Thy  holy  Church,  which  Thou 
hast  purchased  by  the  precious  IJlood  of  Thino  Only- 
Begotten  Son,  our  Tjord  find  S.iviour  jEstrs  Chhist; 
with  Whom  Thou  art  bh;ss(  d  and  ghtrified,  together 
with  the  most  holy  and  good  and  quickening  Si-iRii, 
now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 


82  LITURGY    OP 

Deacon.     Let  us  yet  pray  to  the  Lord. 

Priest.  0  God,  Who  didst  receive  the  gifts  of  Abel, 
the  sacrifice  of  Noah  and  Abraham,  the  incense  of 
x\aron  and  Zacliarias,  receive  also  out  of  the  hand  of 
us  sinners  this  incense  for  a  sweet-smcHing  savour, 
and  for  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  of  all  Thy 
people  ;  for  Thou  art  blessed,  and  to  Thee  glory  is 
due,  Father.  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever. 

Deacon.  Sir,  give  the  blessing. 

Priest.  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord  and  God,  Who, 
through  the  exceeding  greatness  of  Thy  goodness, 
and  Thy  love  not  to  be  restrained,  wast  crucified, 
and  didst  not  refuse  to  be  pierced  by  the  spear  and 
the  nails  ;  Who  didst  provide  this  mysterious  and 
fearful  rite  as  an  eternal  rememl)rance  to  us  con- 
tinually ;  bless  thy  ministry  in  Christ  our  God,  and 
bless  our  Entrance,  and  accomplish  perfectly  the 
ministration  of  this  our  Liturgy  by  His  ineffable 
loving-kindness,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Pesponsory  prayer  from  the  Deacon. 

The  Lord  bless  and  vouchsafe  to  us  to  bring  pre- 
sents to  Him  seraphically,  and  to  sing  the  widely- 
celebrated  hymn  of  the  divine  Trisagion,  by  the 
measureless  fulness  of  all  the  completeness  of  sanc- 
tification,  now  and  ever.  (^) 

The  Deacon  sings  in  the  Entrance. 

Only-Begotten  Son  and  Word  of  God,  immortal. 
Who  didst  vouchsafe  for  our  salvation  to  take  flesh 
of  the  holy  mother  of  God,  and  ever- Virgin  Mary, 
and  didst  without  mutation  become  man,  and  wast 
crucified,  Christ,  our  God,  and  by  death  didst  over- 


(!)  These  Prayers  except  the  first  and  fourth,  have  a  compa- 
ratively later  origin,  and  cannot  be  considered  more  ancient 
tkiui  the  time  of  S.  Proclus. 


S.    JAMES.  88 

come  death,  being  one  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  aiul 
glorifiecl  together  with  the  Father  and  the  Kolv 
Ghost,  save  us. 

The  Priest  saith  this  prayer  from  the  rjates  to  tht, 
Altar. 

0  God,  the  Ahnighty  and  glorious  Lord,  Wlio 
hast  given  to  us  an  Entrance  to  the  Holy  of  Holies, 
by  the  sojourning  on  oartli  of  Tliine  Only-Begotten 
Son,  our  Lord,  and  (Iod,  and  Saviuur,  Jksus  Christ, 
wo  beseech  and  supplicate  Thy  goodness,  seeing  that 
we  are  full  of  fear  and  trembling,  when  about  to  stand 
before  Thy  holy  Altar,  send  down  upon  us,  O  Lord, 
Thy  good  grace,  and  sanctify  our  souls  and  bodies 
and  spirits,  and  change  our  dispositions  to  jucty,  that 
we,  with  a  pure  conscience,  may  ofTor  to  Tlice  gifts, 
presents,  fruits,  to  the  puttijig  away  of  our  trans- 
gressions and  for  the  propitiation  of  all  Thy  people, 
through  the  grace,  and  mercies,  and  love  to  man  of 
Thino  (Jnly-liegotten  Son,  with  Whom  Thou  art 
blessed  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

And  nfter  entering  to  the  AUur,  the  L'riesl  saith — 

Peace  be  with  all. 

Peoplr.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Prii'sl.  The  Loan  blcHs  us  all,  and  hallow  us  in 
the  entrance  and  hitrurgy  of  the  divine;  nnd  .spotless 
Mysteries,  giving  peace  also  to  the  blessed  souls  with 
the  holy  and  the  just,  through  His  grace  and  love  to 
man,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

Thrn  tht;  Pinmn  snith  the  Cnllrrl. — In  poaco  let  U8 
make  our  suj)plicatiou  to  the  Loud. 

For  the  peace  that  is  from  above,  and  lli<'  loving- 
kindnesfl  of  God,  and  the  salviition  of  our  souls,  lot 
us  make  our  supi)lication  to  tiie  Loud. 


81  LITURGY    OF 

For  the  peace  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  union  of 
all  the  holy  Churches  of  God,  let  us  make  our  sup- 
plication to  the  Lord. 

For  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  and  the  remission 
of  our  transgressions,  and  that  we  may  be  preserved 
from  all  afdiction,  wrath,  danger,  and  necessity,  and 
the  insurrection  of  our  enemies,  let  us  make  our 
supplication  to  the  Lord. 

Then  the  Singers  sing  the  hymn  of  the  Trisagion. 

Holy  God,  Holy  and  Mighty,  Holy  and  Immortal, 
have  mercy  upon  us. 

Priest  [bowing  claim).  Merciful  and  pitiful,  long- 
suffering,  and  gracious,  and  very  Lord,  look  i;pon 
us  from  Thy  prepared  habitation,  and  hear  us  Thy 
suppliants,  and  preserve  us  from  all  temptation 
whether  of  the  devil  or  of  man,  and  set  not  Thy  help 
far  from  us,  nor  bring  upon  us  chastisements 
heavier  than  we  can  bear :  for  we  are  not  able  to 
conquer  the  things  which  are  adverse  to  us :  but 
Thou  art  able,  0  Lord,  to  save  us  from  all  ad- 
versities. Save  us,  0  God,  from  the  difficulties  of 
this  world,  according  to  Thy  goodness ;  that  we, 
entering  with  a  pure  conscience  to  Thy  holy  Altar, 
may  without  blame  send  up  to  Thee,  together  with 
the  heavenly  powers,  the  blessed  hymn  of  the  Tris- 
agion ;  and,  accomplishing  the  Liturgy,  well- 
pleasing  to  Thee  and  divine,  may  be  counted  worthy 
of  everlasting  hfe. 

Exclamation.  For  Thou  art  holy,  0  Lord,  our 
God,  and  Thou  dwellest  and  restest  in  the  Holies, 
and  to  Thee  we  ascribe  glory,  and  the  hymn  of  the 
Trisagion,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and 
fever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

People.  Amen. 


SAINT   JAMES. 


35 


Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 
People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 
The  Singers.  Alleluia ! 

Theii  are  read  consecutively  (^)  the  sacred  oracles  of  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  Prophets ;  and  the  Incar- 
nation of  the  Son  of  Man,  His  silverings  and  Re- 
surrection from  the  dead,  His  Ascension  into  heaven, 
and  His  Second  Coming  uith  glory,  are  set  forth. 
And  this  is  done  every  (^)  day  in  the  holy  and  Divine 
Service.  And  after  the  reading  and  teaching,  the 
Deacon  says, 

Let  us  all  say,  Lord,  have  mercy. 

Lord,  Almighty,  God  of  our  Fathers,  we  beseech 
Thee  to  hear  us. 

For  the  peace  that  is  from  above,  and  the  salvation 
of  our  souls,  let  us  make  our  supplication  to  the 
Lord. 

For  the  peace  of  the  whole  world,  and  tlie  unity  of 
the  holy  Churches  of  God,  let  us  make  our  supplica- 
tion to  the  Lord. 

For  the  salvation  and  succour  of  all  the  Christ- 
loving  people,  we  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us. 

That  we  may  be  delivered  from  all  affliction, 
wrutli,  danger,  and  necessity,  bondage,  bitter  death, 
and  our  iniquities,  we  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us. 

For  tlio  i)oople  tliat  is  standing  round  about,  and 
expecting  the  rich  and  great  mercy  that  is  from 
Thee,  we  beseech  Thee,  be  compassionate  and  have 
mercy. 

(»)  8ic{o5iKciTOTo.  So  they  usimlly  interpret  the  word,  though 
others  will  Imvc  it  to  iiuiiii  nt  vrrij  great  length.  The  llubric 
ia  of  the  moHt  venenible  niitiquity. 

(^)  Kaff  4»c<£(TTT)v.  It  is  raowt  natural  to  underBtand  vfitpav. 
ThiH  pfiHsftK''  i*<  Hiiotlior  proof  tlitvt  tho  Primitive  Liturgies 
were  not  contined  to  Sunduy  ouly. 

D  2 


8G  MTURGY    OP 

Save,  0  Lord,  Thy  people,  and  bless  Thine  in- 
heritance. 

Visit  Thy  world  in  mercy  and  loving-kindnesses. 

Raise  the  horn  of  Christians,  by  the  might  of  the 
precious  and  quickening  Cross. 

We  beseech  Thee,  0  Lord  of  many  mercies,  bear 
us  who  supplicate  Thee,  and  have  mercy. 

People  [thrice.)  Lord,  have  mercy. 

Deacon.  For  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  and  the 
remission  of  our  offences,  and  that  we  may  be  pre- 
served from  all  n*'tiiction,  wrath,  danger,  and 
necessity,  let  us  make  our  supplication  to  the  Lord. 

Let  us  beseech  from  the  Lord,  that  we  may  pass 
through  this  whole  day  in  perfectness,  holiness, 
peace,  and  sinlessness. 

Let  us  beseech  from  the  Lord,  an  Angel  of  peace, 
a  faithful  guide,  guardian  of  our  souls  and  bodies. 

Let  us  beseech  from  the  Lord,  pardon  and  remis- 
sion of  our  sins  and  transgressions. 

Let  us  beseech  from  the  Lord,  such  things  as  are 
good  and  convenient  to  our  souls,  and  peace  to  the 
world. 

Let  us  beseech  from  the  Lord,  that  we  may 
accomplish  the  remainder  of  our  lives  in  peace  and 
health. 

Let  us  beseech  that  the  ends  of  our  life  may  be 
Christian,  without  pain,  and  without  shame,  and  a 
good  answer  at  the  dreadful  and  fearful  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ. 

Priest.  For  Thou  art  the  good  tidings,  and  the 
illumination,  the  Saviour  and  the  Guardian  of  our 
souls  and  bodies,  God,  and  Thy  Only-Begotten  Son, 
and  Thy  all-holy  Spirit,  now  and  ever. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Commemorating  our  all-holy,  spotless, 
exceeding  glorious  Lady,  the  Mother  of  God,  and 


SAINT   JAMES. 


37 


ever-Virgin  Mary,  with  all  Saints,  and  just  men,  let 
us  commend  ourselves,  and  each  other,  and  all  our 
life  to  Christ,  our  God. 

People.  To  Thee,  0  Lord. 

Priest.  0  God,  Who  hast  sounded  into  our  ears 
Thy  divine  and  salutary  oracles,  illuminate  the  soulu 
of  us  sinners  to  the  comprehension  of  that  which  han 
been  before  read,  so  that  we  may  not  onlj-  b»  seen  to 
be  hearers  of  spiritual  things,  but  doers  of  good 
works,  following  after  faith  without  guile,  blameless 
life,  conversation  without  charge  of  guilt. 

Exclamation.  In  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  with 
Whom  Thou  art  blessed,  with  Thy  most  holy  and 
good  and  quickening  Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to 
ages  of  ages. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

People.   And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Let  us  bow  our  heads  to  the  Lord. 

People.  To  Thee,  0  Lord. 

Priest.  LoHD  and  Giver  of  Life,  Sujiplior  of  good 
things.  Thou  Thiit  didst  give  to  men  the  blessed 
hope  of  everlasting  life,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ; 
vouchsafe  that  we  may  in  holiness  accomplish  this 
divine  Liturgy  to  Thee,  to  the  enjoyment  of  future 
blessedness. 

Exclamation.  To  the  end  that  wo,  ever  guarded  by 
Thy  might,  and  conducted  to  the  light  of  truth,  may 
send  u})  to  Thee  glory  and  tlianksgiving,  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever. 

People.  Amen. 

Beacon.  Let  none  of  the  Catechumens,  let  none 
of  the  uninitiated,  let  none  of  those  who  arc  not  able 


88  LITURGY    OP 

to  join  with  us  in  prayer  ; — look  upon  (*)  one  an- 
other. The  doors  !  All  upright !  Let  us  jn-ay  yet 
to  the  Lord. 

Prayer  of  the  Incense. 

Priest.  Master,  Almighty,  King  of  Glory,  Who 
knowest  all  things  hefore  their  origin,  be  Thyself 
present  with  us  who  call  upon  Thee  in  this  holy 
hour,  and  ransom  us  from  the  shame  of  our  falls. 
Purify  our  mind  and  our  thoughts  from  impure  con- 
cupiscences and  worldly  deceit,  and  every  diabolic 
influence  ;  and  receive  from  the  hands  of  us  sinners 
this  Incense,  as  Thou  didst  receive  to  Thyself  the 
otiering  of  Abel  and  Noe,  and  Aaron  and  Samuel, 
and  all  Thy  Saints  ;  dcfeuding  us  from  every  evil 
thing,  and  preserving  us  to  the  being  evermore  well- 
pleasing  to  Thee,  and  worshipping  Thee,  the  Father 
and  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  and  Thy  most  Holy 
Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

And  the  Headers  bc(/in  the  Cherubic  Hymn. 

Let  us,  who  mystically  represent  the  Cherubim, 
and  sing  the  thrice -holy  hymn  to  the  quickening 
Trinity,  lay  by  at  this  time  all  worldly  cares,  that 
we  may  receive  the  King  of  Glory,  invisibly  attended 
by  the  angelic  orders.     Alleluia. C^) 

Priest.  Let  all  mortal  flesh  keep  silence,  and 
Btand  with  fear  and  trembling,  and  ponder  nothing 
earthly  in  itself;  for  the  King  of  Kings,  and  Lord 
of  Lords,  Curist  our  God,  cometh  forward  to  be 
fiacrificed    and  to  be  given  for  food  to  the  faith- 


(*)  So  as  to  be  sure  that  none,  whom  any  worshipper  l^new 
to  be  a  Catechumen  or  heretic,  might  conceal  himself  ia  the 
church. 

(*j  See  this  hymn  in  the  Liturgy  of  S.  Mark. 


SAINT   JAMES.  89 

fnl ;  and  He  is  preceded  by  the  choirs  of  the  Angels, 
with  every  Domination  and  Power,  the  many-eyed 
Cherubim,  and  the  six-winged  Seraphim,  that  cover 
their  faces,  and  vociferate  the  hymn.  Alleluia, 
Aileluia,  Alleluia. 

The  Priest  brings  in  the  Holj/  Gifts,  and  saith 
this  prayer. {^) 

0  God,  our  God,  "Who  didst  send  forth  the 
heavenly  Bread,  the  nourishment  of  the  whole 
world,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour  and 
Kansomer  and  benefactor,  blessing  and  sanctifying 
us,  Thyself  bless  this  offering,  and  receive  it  to  Thy 
super-celestial  Altar.  Kemember,  as  good  and  the 
Lover  of  men,  them  that  brouglit  it,  and  them  for 
whom  they  brought  it :  and  continually  guard  us 
witliout  condemnation,  in  the  hierurgy  of  Thy 
divine  mysteries.  For  hallowed  and  glorified  is 
Thine  all-honourable  and  majestic  Name,  of  Father, 
and  Son,  and  Holy  GiKJSx,  now  and  ever,  and  to 
ages  of  ages. 

Priest.  Peace  be  witli  all. 

l>eacon.   Sir,  give  the  blessing. 

Priest.  Blessed  be  God,  Who  blesseth  and  hal- 
loweth  us  all  at  the  offering  of  the  divine  and 
spotless  mysteries,  and  givetli  rest  to  the  blessed 
souls  witli  the  Saints  and  the  just,  now  and  ever, 
and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Deacon.  Let  us  attend  in  wisdom. 

I'lic  Priest  begins — 

I  believe  in  one  God  the  Fatiikr  Almighty, 
Maker   of    heaven    and   earth,   and  of   all    things 

(«)  Thf  (iTont  Enti(Mi<f  :  for  which  Bee  the  parallel  pansage 
in  the  Liturgy  of  S.  ^Itisk. 


\Q  LITURGY    09 

visible  and  invisible  :  and  in  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Only-lk'goUen  Son  of  God,  begotten  of  His 
Father  before  all  worlds.  Light  of  Light,  very  God 
of  very  God,  begotten,  not  niade,  being  of  one  sub- 
stance with  the  Father  ;  by  Whom  all  things  were 
made  :  Who  for  us  men,  and  for  our  salvation  came 
down  from  heaven,  and  was  Licarnate  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  was  made  man, 
and  was  crucified  also  for  us  under  Pontius  Pilate. 
He  suffered  and  was  buried,  and  the  third  day  He 
rose  again  according  to  the  Scriptures,  and  ascended 
into  heaven,  and  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father.  And  He  shall  come  again  with  glory  to 
judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead :  Whose  kingdom 
shall  have  no  end.  And  I  believe  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life,  Who  proceedeth 
from  the  Father  :  Who  Avith  the  Father  and  the 
Son  together  is  worshipped  and  glorified,  Who 
spake  by  the  Prophets.  And  I  believe  one  Holy 
Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church.  I  acknowledge  one 
Baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins.  And  I  look  for 
the  Piesurrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  life  of  the 
world  to  come.     Amen. 

Then  he  prmjeth,  bowing  the  neck. 

God  and  Master  of  all  things,  make  us,  the 
unworthy,  0  Lover  of  men,  worthy  of  this  hour, 
that  we,  remaining  pure  from  all  guile  and  all 
hj-pocrisy,  may  be  united  together  by  the  bond 
of  peace  and  of  love,  being  stablishcd  by  the  sanc- 
tificatiou  of  Thy  divine  Icnowledge,  through  Thine 
Only-Begotten  Son,  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ  :  with  Whom. 

Deacon.  Let  us  stand  well :  let  us  stand  piously; 
let  us  stand  Avith  the  fear  of  God,  and  compunction 
of  heart.     In  the  peace  of  the  Lord,  let  us  pray. 


SAINT    JAMES.  41 

Priest.  For  the  God  of  peace,  mercy,  love,  bowels 
of  compassion,  and  love  to  man,  art  Thou  and 
Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  and  Thine  all-holy  Spirit, 
now  and  ever. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Let  us  kiss  one  another  C)  with  an  holy 
kiss.     Let  us  bow  our  heads  to  the  Lord. 

The  Priest  boaing  doivn,  saitli  this  prayer. 

Thou  Who  alone  art  Lord  and  merciful  God,  on 
them  that  bow  down  their  necks  before  Thine  holy 
Altar,  and  seek  the  spiritual  gifts  that  are  from  Thee, 
send  forth  Thy  good  grace  ;  and  bless  us  all  with 
every  spiritual  blessing,  that  cannot  be  taken  away, 
Thou  Who  dwcllest  on  high,  and  rcgardest  things 
that  arc  humble. 

E.i'cl(nnatio)i.  For  laudable  and  adorable  and 
exceeding  glorious  is  Tliy  most  holy  Name,  of 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and 
to  ages  of  ages. 

Veacon.  Sir,  give  the  blessing. 

Priest.  The  Lord  shall  1)loss,  and  shall  minister 
with  all  of  us  ill  His  gracn  .'iiid  love  to  men.  Ami 
af/fiin.  Tlie  Lord  sliiill  Mi  s.  mid  make  us  worthy 
of  standing  l)ofore  His  Jioly  Altar,  always,  now  and 
ever,  and  to  tlie  ages,  .iml  ni/uin.  iJlessed  be  God, 
Who  blessetli  and  sanctifictli  all  of  us  in  our  pre- 
sence at,  and  liiernrgy  of.  His  spotless  mysteries, 
now  and  ever,  and  to  the  age8.(') 


P)  Obseno  tliat  the  Kiss  of  Ponce  followH  tlie  Creed  in  this 
Liturgy— precc<les  it  in  that  of  S.  Mink. 

C^)  It  is  not  eaHy  to  nay  whftlier  thoKe  niu  dil'fciiiit  versions 
of  the  Hfime  blessing,  or  whetlier  they  benr  any  reference  to 
the  Blessed  Trinity. 


42  LITURGY   OF 

The  Deacon  makes  the  universal  Litany. 

In  peace  let  us  make  our  supplication  to  the 
Lord. 

People.  Lord  have  mercy. (®) 

For  the  peace  tliat  is  from  above,  and  the  love  of 
God,  and  the  salvation  of  our  souls,  let  us  make 
our  supplication  to  the  Lord.  [Each  clause  ends  in 
the  same  wai/.] 

For  the  peace  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  unity 
of  all  the  holy  Churches  of  God. 

For  them  that  hear  fruit  and  do  good  deeds  in 
the  holy  Churches  of  God,  that  remember  the  poor, 
the  widows  and  the  orphans,  the  strangers,  and  them 
that  are  in  need  ;  and  for  them  that  have  desired 
us  to  make  mention  of  them  in  our  prayers. 

For  them  that  are  in  old  age  and  infirmity, 
the  sick,  the  distressed,  and  that  are  vexed  of  un- 
clean spirits,  their  speedy  healing  from  God  and 
salvation. 

For  them  that  lead  their  lives  in  virginity,  and 
purity,  and  asceticism,  and  in  venerable  marriage, 
and  them  that  carry  on  their  struggle  in  the  caves 
and  dens  Q")  and  holes  of  the  earth,  our  holy  fathers 
and  brothers. 

For  Christians  that  sail,  that  journey,  that  are 
strangers,  and  for  our  brethren  that  are  in  bonds 
and  exiles,  and  imprisonment  and  bitter  slavery, 
their  peaceful  return. 

For  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  and  remission  of 


O  The  Deacon  in  the  printed  texts,  continues,  Preserve, 
have  pity,  and  guard  us,  0  God,  by  'Thy  grace.  This  petition 
is  clearly  mis-placed  here  :  it  may  have  belonged  to  the  end. 
Compare  this  "  Catholic  Synapte  "  with  the  Ectene  of  the 
Liturgy  of  S.  Chrysostom. 

0")  A  clause  probably  added  in  the  4th  centurj'. 


SAINT    JAMES.  43 

our  offences,  and  that  we  may  be  preserved  from  all 
affliction,  wratli,  danger  and  necessit}-,  and  the  in- 
surrection of  enemies. 

For  good  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  peace- 
ful showers,  pleasant  dews,  abundance  of  fruits, 
fulness  of  a  good  season,  and  for  the  crown  of  the  year. 

For  those,  our  fathers  and  brethren,  that  are 
present  and  pray  together  with  us  iu  this  holy  hour 
and  at  all  seasons,  their  diligence,  labour,  and 
readiness. 

And  for  evei*y  Christian  soul  in  affliction  and 
distress,  and  needing  the  morcy  and  succour  of 
God,  and  for  the  conversion  of  the  erring,  the  health 
of  the  sick,  the  rescue  of  the  prisoners,  and  the  rest 
of  them  that  have  departed  afore,  our  fathers  and 
brethren. 

That  our  prayer  may  be  heard  and  acceptable 
before  God,  and  that  His  rich  mercies  and  pities 
may  be  sent  down  upon  us. 

Let  us  comnieniorate  the  most  holy,  spotless,  ex- 
ceedingly glorious,  blessed  Lady,  the  Mother  of  God 
and  l-^ver- Virgin  jMary,  witli  all  tlu;  Saints  together, 
that  we  may  obtain  mercy  through  their  prayers 
and  intercessions. 

And  for  the  proposed,  precious,  heavenly,  ineffable, 
spotless,  glorious,  fearful,  t('rril)lc,  divine  gilts,  and 
the  salvation  of  the  I'ricst  that  stands  by  and  oilers 
them,  let  us  supplicate  the  Loud  our  God. 

People.  Lord  have  mercy. 

Then  the  Priest  si/pis  l/ir  (lifts  irilli  the  Cross,  mid 
sl.andinij  stiilh  sccrtthj  tints — 

Glory  to  God  iu  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace, 
good-will  to  men.  [Thrice.) 

0  LoRi),  oj)en  Thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth  shall 
shew  forth  Tliy  ])raiKc.  (Thrice.) 


44  LITURGY    OP 

Let  my  mouth  be  tilled  with  Thy  praise,  0  Lord, 
that  I  may  set  forth  Thy  glory,  and  Thy  majesty 
all  the  day  long.   {Thrice.) 

Of  the  Father,  Amen.  And  of  the  Son.  Amen. 
And  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Amen.  Now  and  ever, 
and  to  ages  of  ages.  Amen. 

And  hoidiKj  to  this  side  cnid  that,  he  saitii — 
0  magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us  exalt  His 
Name  together. 

And  they  answer,  bowing  doivn. 

The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the 
power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee. 

A)id  the  Priest  at  lejii/th. 
Lord  and  Master,  Thou  That  dost  visit  us  with 
mercies  and  loving-kindnesses,  and  hast  freely  given 
boldness  to  us  Thy  humble  and  sinful  and  unworthy 
servants,  to  stand  before  Thy  holy  Altar,  and  to 
oifcr  to  Thee  the  fearful  and  unbloody  sacrifice  for 
our  sins  and  for  the  ignorance  of  the  people,  look 
upon  me.  Thine  unprofitable  servant,  and  blot  out 
my  sins  by  Thy  tender  mercy :  and  cleanse  my  lips 
and  heart  from  all  pollution  of  flesh  and  spirit ; 
and  remove  from  me  every  unseemly  and  foolish 
thought,  and  make  me  fit,  by  the  might  of  Thine 
all-holy  Spirit,  for  this  Ijiturgy  ;  and  receive  me 
by  Thy  goodness,  approaching  to  Thy  holy  Altar  ; 
and  vouchsafe,  0  Lord,  that  these  gifts,  brought  to 
Thee  by  our  hands,  may  be  acceptable,  condescend- 
ing to  my  weaknesses  :  and  cast  me  not  away  from 
Thy  Face,  neither  abhor  Thou  mine  unworthiness  : 
but  pity  me  according  to  Thy  great  mercy,  and  accord- 
ing to  the  multitude  of  Thy  loving-kindnesses  pass  by 
my  transgressions  :  that  1,  coming  blamelessly  into 
the  presence  of  Thy  glory,  may  be  counted  worthy  of 


8AIXT    JAMES.  46 

tho  protection  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  and  of 
tlie  illumination  of  the  most  Holy  Spirit  ;  and  may 
not,  as  a  blave  of  sin,  be  rejected,  but,  as  Thy 
servant,  may  find  grace  and  mercy  and  remission  of 
sins  before  Thee,  in  this  world,  and  in  that  which  is 
to  come.  Yea,  all-ruling  Master,  Almighty  Lokd, 
hear  my  supplication ;  for  Thou  art  He  That 
workest  all  in  all,  and  we  all  seek  in  all  things  after 
the  succour  and  assistance  that  is  from  Thee  and 
Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  and  the  good  and  quicken- 
ing and  consubstantial  Spirit,  now  and  for  ever. 

0  God,  Who  through  Thy  great  and  ineffable  lovo 
to  man  didst  send  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son  into 
the  world,  that  He  might  turn  back  again  the  sheep 
that  had  gone  astray  ;  turn  not  back  us  sinners, 
that  take  hold  of  Thee  in  the  fearful  and  unbloody 
sacrifice  :  for  we  trust  not  in  our  own  righteousness, 
but  in  Thy  good  mercy,  by  which  Thou  rcdoemest 
to  Thyself  our  race.  We  supplicate  and  beseech 
Thy  goodness  that  this  Mystery  planned  for  our 
salvation  may  not  be  for  condemnation  to  Thy 
people,  but  for  the  blotting  out  of  sin,  for  the  re- 
newal of  souls  and  bodies,  for  the  well-pleasing  of 
Thee,  our  God  and  Father,  in  the  mercy  and  love  to 
men  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  with  Whom  Thou 
art  blessed,  witli,  &c. 

Lord  God,  Thou  That  didst  form  us  and  bring  us 
to  life,  Thou  That  liast  manifested  to  us  ways  to 
salvation  ;  Thou  That  hast  vouchsafed  to  us  tho 
revelation  of  celestial  Mysteries,  and  didst  place  us 
in  tliis  ministry  in  the  might  of  Thine  all-lioly 
Spirit:  vouclisafc,  Master,  lliat  we  nniy  1><'  servnnts 
of  Thy  New  Testament,  ministers  of  Thy  spotless 
mysteries,  and  according  to  the  multitude  of  Thy 
mercy  receive  us  who  approach  to  Tliy  holy  Altar, 
that  wc  may  be  worthy  to  offer  to  Tb(?e  gifts   and 


46  '  LITURGY   oy 

sacrifices  for  our  own  ignorances  and  for  those  of 
the  people;  and  grant  us,  0  Lord,  with  all  fear  and 
with  a  good  conscience  to  set  before  Thee  this 
spiritual  and  unbloody  sacrifice,  receiving  which 
unto  Thy  holy  and  super-celestial  and  rational 
Altar,  for  a  savour  of  spiritual  sweetness,  send  down 
to  us  in  its  stead  the  grace  of  Thine  all-holy  Spirit. 
Yea,  0  God,  look  upon  us,  and  have  regard  to  this 
our  reasonable  sacrifice,  and  receive,  as  Thou  didst 
receive  the  gifts  of  Abel,  the  sacrifices  of  Noe,  the 
priestly  offerings  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  the  peace- 
ofi'erings  of  Samuel,  the  repentance  of  David,  the 
incense  of  Zacharias :  as  Thou  didst  receive  from 
the  hand  of  Thine  Apostle  this  true  worship,  thus 
receive  also  from  the  hands  of  us  sinners,  in  Thy 
goodness,  these  gifts  that  are  laid  before  Thee. 
And  grant  that  our  oblations  may  be  well-pleasing 
to  Thee  and  hallowed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  a  pro- 
pitiation of  our  transgressions,  and  of  the  ignor- 
ances of  the  people,  and  for  the  repose  of  the  souls 
that  have  fallen  asleep  ;  that  we  also,  Thy  humble 
and  sinful,  and  unworthy  servants,  being  counted 
worthy  to  minister  without  guile  at  Thy  holy  Altar, 
may  receive  the  reward  of  faithful  and  wise  stewards, 
and  may  find  grace  and  mercy  in  the  fearful  day  of 
Thy  just  and  good  recompense. 

Prayer  of  the  Veil.  (") 

We  render  thanks  to  Thee,LoiuJ  our  God,  for  that 
Thou  hast  given  us  boldness  to  the  entrance  in  of 
Thy  holy  places,  the  new  and  living  way  which 
Thou  hast  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil  of 
the  Flesh  of  Thy  Christ.     We  therefore,  to  whom  it 


(^)  Because  the  Veil  is  now  raised,  and  the  Holy  Mysteries 
■exposed  to  view. 


SAINT   JAMES.  47 

hath  been  vouchsafed  to  enter  into  the  i^lace  of  the 
tabernacle  of  Thy  glory,  and  to  be  within  the  veil, 
and  to  behold  the  Holy  of  Holies,  fall  down  before 
Thy  goodness :  Master,  have  mercy  iipou  us :  since  we 
are  full  of  fear  and  dread,  when  about  to  stand  before 
Thy  holy  Altar,  and  to  offer  this  fearful  and  un- 
bloody sacrifice  for  our  sins  and  for  the  ignorances 
of  the  people.  Send  forth,  0  God,  Thy  good  grace, 
and  hallow  our  souls,  and  bodies,  and  spirits  ;  and 
change  our  disposition  to  piety,  that  in  a  pure  con- 
science we  may  present  to  Thee  the  mc  rcy  of  peace, 
the  sacrifice  of  praise.  (^) 

Kxclatixntion.  Through  the  mercy  and  love  to  men, 
and  Thine  Only-Begotten  Hon,  with  Whom,  &c. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

Deacon.  Let  us  stand  with  piety  ;  let  us  stand 
with  the  fear  of  God  and  compunction  of  heart ; 
let  us  attend  to  the  holy  Anaphora,  to  ofter  peace 
[i.e.  a  peacc-ofl'eringj  to  God. 

People.  The  mercy  of  peace,  the  sacrifice  of 
praise. 

I'ru'Ht.  And  do  Thou,  uncovering  the  veils  of 
enigmas  which  mystically  surround  this  holy  rite ; 
make  them  gloriously  manifest  to  us :  and  till  our 
intellectual  eyes  with  incomjirohcnsiljle  light;  and, 
having  cleansed  our  poverty  iVorn  every  pollution  of 
flesh  and  si)ock,  make  it  worthy  of  tliis  fearful  and 
dread  ministration  :  for  Thou  art  the  God  of  ex- 
ceeding tender  mercy  :  and  to  Thee  we  send  up  tlie 
glory  and  giving  of  thanks  to  (he  Fatiikk,  the  8on, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  for  ever. 


(")  Notice  the  sublime  depth  of  thiH  prayer,  wliich  Hcemi 
perfectly  npostolic.  Did  the  writer  (|iu)te  S.  I'lml,  {llrb.  x. 
19,  20,)  or  did  S.  Paul,  in  writing  to  the  Hebrews,  quote  their 
own  Litnrfy? 


48  LITURGY   OF 

Then  he  exclaims — 
[Here  beginneth  the  Anaphora.] 

The  love  of  the  Lord  and  Father,  the  grace 
of  the  Lord  and  Son,  the  communion  and  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  with  us  all. 

Feople.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Priest.  Lift  we  up  our  mind  and  our  hearts. 

People.  It  is  meet  and  right. 

Pj'iest.  It  is  verily  meet  and  right,  fitting  and  due, 
to  praise  Thee,  to  hymn  Thee,  to  bless  Thee,  to  wor- 
ship Thee,  to  glorify  Thee,  to  give  thanks  to  Thee, 
Who  madcst  all  creation  visible  and  invisible ;  the 
Treasure  of  eternal  good  things,  the  Fountain  of  life 
and  immortality,  the  God  and  Master  of  all  Things, 
Whom  lieaven,  and  the  heaven  of  heavensh,  ymn, 
and  all  their  powers  :  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  all 
the  choir  of  the  stars ;  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  all 
that  is  in  them ;  Jerusalem  the  celestial  assembly, 
the  Church  of  the  First-born  written  in  heaven  :  the 
spirits  of  just  men  and  of  Prophets  ;  the  souls  of 
Martyrs  and  Apostles  ;  Angels,  Archangels,  thrones, 
dominations,  principalities,  virtues,  and  the  tre- 
mendous powers  ;  the  Cherubim  of  many  eyes,  and 
the  Seraphim  that  have  six  wings,  with  twain  whereof 
they  cover  their  faces,  and  with  twain  their  feet,  and 
with  twain  they  do  fly,  crying  one  to  the  other,  with 
ceaseless  tongues  and  perpetual  doxologies,  the 
triumphal  hymn  to  the  majesty  of  Thy  glory,  sing- 
ing with  a  loud  voice,  crying,  praising,  vociferating, 
and  saying, 

Choir.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy  Lord  of  Sabaoth  ;  heaveu 
and  earth  are  full  of  Thy  glory.  Hosanna  in  the 
highest :  blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  Name  ol 
the  Lord  :  Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

Holy  art  Thou,  King  of  ages,  and  Lord  and  Giver 


SAINT    JAMES.  49 

of  all  holiness  :  holy  also  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son, 
our  LoKD  Jesus  Christ,  by  Whom  Thou  didst  make 
all  things  :  holy  also  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who  searcheth 
all  things,  yea,  even  the  deep  things  of  God  :  holy 
art  Thou,  0  Omnipotent,  Almighty,  Good,  Tre- 
mendous, Long-suffering,  and  of  great  compassion 
towards  Thy  creatures  :  Thou  Who  didst  make  man 
from  the  earth  after  Thine  image  and  likeness  :  and 
didst  give  him  the  dehght  of  Paradise,  and  when  he 
transgressed  Thy  commandment  and  fell.  Thou 
didst  not  disregard  nor  leave  him,  0  good  God  :  but 
didst  correct  him  as  a  tender  Father,  didst  call  liim 
by  the  Law,  didst  educate  him  by  the  Propliets ; 
and  lastly  didst  send  forth  into  the  world  Thine 
Only-begotten  Son,  our  Loud  Jesus  Chbist,  that  He 
might  come  and  renew  and  restore  in  us  Tliine 
image:  Who  descended  from  heaven,  and  being  in- 
carnate of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  Mary  tlie  Virgin 
and  Mother  of  God,  and  having  had  His  conversation 
with  men,  accomplished  all  the  dispensation  for  the 
salvation  of  our  race,  and  Wlio  being  about  to  endure 
His  voluntary  and  life-giving  deatli  on  the  Cross, 
the  sinless,  for  us  siiniers,  in  the  night  wherein  He 
was  betrayed,  or  rather  surrendered  Himself  for  tlie 
life  and  salvation  of  tlic  worhl  {lifn:  llir  rrlrst  tahrs 
the  bread  in  liis  liaiidsj,  taking  bread  in  His  holy  and 
spotless  and  pure  and  immortal  hands,  and  luoking 
up  to  licavon,  and  shewing  it  to  Thee,  His  God  and 
Father,  Ho  gave  thanks,  and  hallowed,  and  brake,  and 
gave  to  us  His  Apostles  and  Disciples  ('"),  saying, 

The  Deacoim.  For  the  remission  of  sins  and  eternal 
life. 

('")  Notice  the  worfl  im,  which  in  fonml  in  (liis  rniinrrtion 
in  no  other  Liturgy,  howevtT  nncitiit,  or  bcftrinn  tin'  iiuiiir'  of 
any  otlipr  Apontlc.  It  BeemH  to  ilenole  the  autliorwliip  of  one 
T%ho  was  present  at  the  Last  Supper. — L. 

F. 


50  LITURGY    OP 

Finest  (aloud.)  Take,  eat :  this  is  My  Body  which 
is  broken  for  you,  aud  is  given  for  the  remission  of 
sins. 

People.  Amen. 

Theti  he  takes  the  cup,  and  saith, 

Likewise  also  the  cup  after  sujiper,  having  taken, 
and  mixed  it  with  wine  aud  water,  and  having  looked 
up  to  heaven,  and  displayed  it  to  Thee,  His  God  and 
Father,  He  gave  thanks,  and  hallowed,  and  blessed, 
and  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  gave  it  to  us. 
His  Disciples,  saying, 

Diiuk  ye  all  of  this  : 

This  is  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which 
for  you  and  for  many  is  shed  and  distributed  for  the 
remissioji  of  sins. 

Pcuple.  Amen. 

Priest.  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  set 
forth  the  death  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and  confess  His 
resurrection,  till  He  come. 

Deacon.  We  believe  aud  confess. 

People.  We  set  forth  Thy  death,  0  Lord,  and 
confess  Thy  resurrection. 

I'ricst.  We  therefore  also,  sinners,  remembering 
His  life-giving  Passion,  His  salutary  Cross,  His 
Death,  and  Eesurrection  from  the  dead  on  the  third 
day.  His  Ascension  into  heaven,  and  session  on  the 
right  hand  of  Tliee,  His  God  and  Father,  and  His 
glorious  and  terrible  coming  again,  when  He  shall 
come  with  glory  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and 
to  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works,  offer 
to  Thee,  0  Lord,  this  tremendous  and  unbloody 
sacrifice,  beseeching  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  not 
deal  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  reward  us  according 
to  our  iiiiquities :  but  according  to  Thy  gentleness 


SAINT   JAMES.  51 

and  ineffable  love,  passing  by  and  blotting  out  the 
hand- writing  that  is  against  us,  Thy  suppliants, 
wouldst  grant  us  Thy  heavenly  and  eternal  gifts, 
which  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive 
the  things  which  Thou,  0  God,  hast  prepared  for 
them  that  love  Thee.(")  And  set  not  at  nought 
Thy  people,  0  Lord  and  Lover  of  men,  for  me  and 
for  my  sins.  (He  rqicnts  thrice.)  For  Thy  people 
and  Thy  Church  supplicate  Thee. 

People.  Have  mercy  upon  us,  Lord  God,  Fatheb 
Almighty. 

Prient.  Have  mercy  on  us,  God  Almighty, 

Have  mercy  on  us,  God  our  Saviour. 

Have  mercy  on  us,  0  God,  according  to  Thy 
great  goodness,  and  send  upon  us,  and  upon  these 
proposed  gifts,  Thy  most  Holy  Ghost,  {he  bnuls  his 
head,)  the  Lord  and  Life-giving  ;  sharer  of  the  throne 
and  of  the  kingdom  with  Thee,  God  and  Fatiikr, 
and  Thine  Only-liegotten  Son,  consubstantial  and 
co-eternal,  ^V)l0  spake  in  the  Law,  and  the  Prophets, 
and  Thy  New  Testament,  Who  descended  in  the  form 
of  a  dove  on  our  Lord  Jksus  Christ  in  tlie  river 
Jordan,  and  rested  on  Him,  Who  descended  upon 
Thy  holy  Apostles  in  the  likeness  of  fiery  tongues  in 
the  upper  room  of  the  holy  and  glorious  Sion,  at  the 
day  of  Pentecost :  send  down  the  same  most  Holy 
Ghost,  Lord,   upon  us,   and  upon  these  holy  and 

proposed    gifts,    {hr    idisrs    himsrif,    iiinl    siiith    iilaiid,) 

that  coming  upon  them  with  His  holy  and  good  and 

(")  TliiH  iH  tlio  famouH  puKHnge  wliirli  in  fnnnd  in  1  Cor.  ii. 
9,  but  which  is  tlifre  a  quotation,  and  irrcKnIar  in  Kniiuuiatical 
coDbtruction.  It  in  commonly  reft-rrcd  to  Isaiali  Ixiv.  4,  but 
when  tested  by  the  LXX.  proves  to  have  only  a  wnperficial 
resemblance  to  it.  The  inference  Ih  that  this  is  the  original 
context,  and  that  S.  I'anl  quotes  the  Liturgy. — L. 

E    2 


52  .  LITURGY    OP 

glorious  presence,  He  may  hallow  and  make  this 
bread  the  holy  Body  of  Thy  Christ. 

People.  Amon. 

Priest.  And  this  cup  the  precious  Blood  of  Thy 
Christ. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest,  rising  up,  in  a  low  voice, 

That  they  may  he  to  those  that  partake  of  them, 
for  remission  of  sins,  and  for  eternal  life,  for  saucti- 
fication  of  souls  and  bodies,  for  bringing  forth  good 
works,  for  the  confirmation  of  Thy  Holy  Catholic 
Church,  which  Thoii  hast  founded  upon  the  rock  of 
faith,  that  the  gates  of  hell  may  not  prevail  against 
it ;    freeing  it  from  all  heresy  and  scandals,   and 
from  them  that  work  wickedness,  and  preserving  it 
till  the  consummation  of  all  things.     {Bending  his 
head,   he  continues.)     We  offer  them  also  to  Thee, 
0    Lord,    for    Thy  holy   places  which    Thou   hast 
glorified  by  the  divine  apparition  of  Thy  Christ, 
and    by    the    advent    of    Thine    All-Holy    Spirit: 
especially  for  the  glorious  Sion,  the  mother  of  all 
Churches.      And  for  Thy  holy  Catholic  Apostolic 
Church  throughout  the  world.     Supply  it,  0  Lord, 
even   now,  with  the   plentiful  gifts  of  Thy  Holy 
Ghost.     Eomcmber  also,  0  Lord,  our  holy  fathers 
and  brothers  in  it,  and  the  Bishops  that  in  all  the 
world  rightly  divide  the  word  of  Thy  truth.     Re- 
member, also,  0  Lord,  every  city  and  region,  and 
the  Orthodox  that  dwell  in  it,  that  they  may  inhabit 
it  with   peace   and  safety.      Remember,    0   Lord, 
Christians  that  are  voyaging,  that  are  journeying, 
that  are  in  foreign  lands,  in  bonds  and  in  prison, 
captives,   exiles,    in   mines,    and   in   tortures,    and 
bitter  slavery,  our  fathers  and  brethren.    Remember, 
LoED,  them  that  are  in  sickness  or  travail,  them 


SAINT    JAMES.  53 

Hi  at  are  vexed  of  unclean  spirits,  that  they  may 
Bpeeclily  be  healed  and  rescued  by  Thee,  0  God. 
Remember,  Lord,  eveiy  Christian  soul  in  tribulation 
and  distress,  desiring  the  pity  and  succour  of  Tliee, 
0  God,  and  the  conversion  of  the  erring.  Re- 
member, Lord,  our  fathers  and  brethren  that  labour 
and  minister  to  us  through  Thy  holy  Name.  Re- 
member, Lord,  all  for  good ;  have  pity.  Lord,  on 
all ;  be  reconciled  to  all  of  us  ;  give  peace  to  the 
multitude  of  Thy  people ;  dissipate  scandals ;  put 
an  end  to  wars  ;  stay  the  rising  up  of  heresies. 
Give  us  Thy  peace  and  Thy  love,  O  God  oar 
Saviour,  the  succour  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth, 
Remember,  Lord,  the  healthfulness  of  the  air. 
gentle  showers,  healthy  dews,  plenteousness  of 
fruits,  the  crown  of  the  year  of  Thy  goodness,  for 
the  eyes  of  all  wait  upon  Thee,  and  Thou  givest 
them  their  meat  in  due  season ;  Thou  openest 
Thine  hand,  and  iillest  all  things  living  with 
plenteousness.  Renioiubcr,  Lord,  tlioiii  tliat  bear 
fruit  and  do  good  deeds  in  Thy  holy  Churclies,  and 
that  remember  the  poor,  the  widows,  the  orphans, 
tlie  stranger,  tlie  needy;  and  all  those  wJio  have 
desired  us  to  remember  them  in  our  prayers. 
Furthermore,  0  Lord,  vouchsafe  to  remember  tliose 
who  have  tliis  day  brought  these  oblations  to  Thy 
holy  Altar;  and  tlie  things  for  which  each  l)r()Ught 
them,  or  wliicli  lie  had  in  his  mind  ;  and  fhoso 
whom  we  have  now  commemorated  before  Tlieo. 
R<nicmber  also,  0  Lord,  according  to  the  mulfitudo 
of  Thy  mercy  and  pities,  me  Thy  hnmljle  and  un- 
worthy servant ;  and  the  Deacons  that  surround 
Thy  lioly  Altnr.  Grant  them  blamelessness  of 
life,  preserve  their  ministry  spotless,  keep  in  safety 
their  goings  for  good,  that  they  may  lind  mercy  and 
gi'ace  with  all  TJjy  Saints  that  have  been  pleasing 


64 


LITURGY    OF 


to  Thee  from  one  f^eneration  to  another,  since  the 
begiuninf,'  of  the  world,  our  ancestors,  and  fathers, 
Patriarchs,  Prophets,  Apostles,  Martyrs,  Confessors, 
Teachers,  Holy  Persons,  and  every  just  spirit  made 
perfect  in  the  faith  of  Thy  Christ. 

(^^)  Hail,  Mary,  full  of  grace ;  the  Lord  is  with 
thee ;  blessed  art  thou  among  women,  and  blessed 
is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb,  because  thou  hast  brought 
forth  the  Saviour  of  our  souls.  (Aloud.)  Especially 
the  most  holy,  spotless,  excellently  laudable,  glorious 
Lady,  the  Mother  of  God,  and  Ever- Virgin  Mary. 

C'/ioir.  It  is  very  meet  to  bless  thee,  the  Mother  of 
God,  the  ever  blessed,  the  entirely  spotless,  ("')  more 
honourable  than  the  Cherubim,  and  infinitely  more 
glorious  than  the  Seraphim,  thee,  who  didst  bear 
witlKUit  corruption  God  the  Word,  thee,  verily  the 
Mother  of  God,  we  magnify. 

In  thee,  0  full  of  grace,  all  creation  exults,  and 
the  hierarchy  of  Angels,  and  the  race  of  men  ;  in 
thee,  sanctified  temple,  spiritual  paradise,  glory  of 
vu-gins,  of  whom  God  took  flesh  ;  our  God,  That 
was  before  the  world,  became  a  child.  For  He 
made  tliy  womb  His  throne,  and  rendered  it  more 
extended  than  the  lieavens.  In  thee,  O  full  of  grace, 
all  creation  exults  :  glory  to  thee. 

The  Deacons.  Remember,  Lord  our  God. 

Prient  {hou-itiij).  Remember,  Lord,  tlie  God  of  the 
spirits  and  all  flesh,  the  Orthodox  whom  we  have 
commemorated,  from  righteous  Aiel  unto  this  day. 

(15)  The  introduction  of  the  angelical  salutation  is  clearly 
a  later  intei-polation,  as  interrupting  the  sequence  of  the  prayer. 
And  so  is  the  M  (to\  xai'pei,  the  thoughts  in  which  seem  bor- 
rowed from  the  magniticent  sermon  of  S.  Proclus,  delivered  at 
Constantinople,  March  25,  a.d.  42!). 

(i«j  It  is  impossible  in  English,  without  tautology,  to  repeat 
the  7)ixT(pa  Toil  &iov  rifjuu,  after  having  already  given  tlie 
9eoT6Koy 


""  SAINT   JAMES.  55 

Give  them  rest  there,  in  the  land  of  the  living,  in 
Thy  kingdom,  in  tlie  delight  of  paradise,  in  the 
bosom  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  our  holy- 
fathers,  whence  pain,  sorrow,  and  groaning  is  exiled, 
where  the  Ught  of  Thy  countenance  looks  down,  and 
always  shines.  And  du-ect,  Lobd,  0  Lord,  in  peace 
the  ends  of  our  lives,  so  as  to  be  Christian,  and  well- 
pleasing  to  Thee,  and  blameless  ;  collecting  us  under 
the  feet  of  Thine  olect,  when  Thou  Avilt,  and  as  Thou 
wilt,  only  without  shame  and  oftence :  through 
Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  our  Lord  and  God  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ;  for  He  alone  hath  appeared 
on  the  earth  without  sin. 

Dea/^oti.  And  for  the  peace  and  stability  of  the 
whole  world,  and  of  the  holy  Churches  of  God,  and 
for  tliat  for  which  eacli  liatli  brought  his  offering, 
or  hath  in  his  mind  :  and  for  the  people  that  stand 
around,  and  for  all  both  men  and  women. 

People.   For  all.  both  men  and  women. 

Priest.  For  which  things'  sake,  to  us  also,  as  being 
good,  and  the  Lover  of  men. 

People.  Remit,  forgive,  pardon,  0  God,  our 
offences,  voluntary  and  involuntary,  in  deed  and 
word,  by  knowledge  and  ignorance,  by  night  and  by 
day  ;  in  mind  and  intention  :  forgive  us  all,  as  being 
good,  and  the  Trover  of  men. 

I'rirst.  Through  the  grace,  and  pity  and  love  of 
Tliine  Only-Begotten  Hon,  with  Whom  Thou  art  to 
be  l)lcssed  and  glorified,  together  with  the  most  holy 
and  good  and  life-giving  Si-ikit,  now  and  ever,  and 
to  all  ages. 

Pro  pi  I'.  Amen, 

Pr'u'Ht.  Peace  be  with  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Again  and  always  in  pcaco,  let  us  make 
our  supplications  to  the  TiORo. 


56  LITURGY   OP 

For  the  oblations,  and  hallowed,  precious,  celes- 
tial, iueflfable,  stainless,  glorious,  terrible,  tremen- 
dous, divine  gifts  to  tlio  Lord  God. 

That  the  Lord  our  God  having  received  them  to 
His  holy,  heavenly,  intellectual  and  spiritual  Altar, 
for  the  odour  of  a  sweet-smelling  sacrifice,  would 
send  down  in  their  stead  to  us  divine  grace,  and  the 
gift  of  the  most  Holy  Ghost. 

Having  prayed  for  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  the 
participation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  let  us  commend 
ourselves  and  each  other  and  all  our  life  to  Chrisi 
our  God. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  and  God  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  the  mighty  Lord,  blessed 
nature,  ungrudging  f;;oodness,  the  God  and  Lord  of 
all.  Who  art  blessed  for  evermore  :  "Who  sittest  upon 
the  Cherubim,  and  art  glorified  by  the  Seraphim  : 
before  Whom  stand  thousand  thousands,  and  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand  armies  of  holy  Angels, 
and  Archangels.  Thou  hast  received  in  Thy  good- 
ness the  gifts,  presents,  fruits  that  have  been  offered 
before  Tliee  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour,  and  hast 
been  pleased  to  sanctify  and  perfect  them  by  the 
grace  of  Tliy  Christ,  and  the  visitation  of  Thy  most 
Holy  Spirit  :  sanctify  also,  0  Lord,  our  souls, 
bodies,  and  spirits  ;  touch  the  powers  of  our  minds, 
search  out  our  consciences,  and  cast  out  from  us 
every  evil  tliought,  every  impure  imagination,  every 
base  lust,  every  unfitting  motion,  all  envy  and  pride 
and  liypocrisy,  all  falsehood  and  guile,  every  worldly 
distraction,  all  avarice,  all  vainglory,  all  idleness, 
vice,  anger,  passion,  remembrance  of  wrongs,  blas- 
phemy, all  motion  of  body  and  soul  at  variance  with 
the  will  of  Tliy  liohncss.  (Ahunl.)  And  grant  us. 
Lord,  and  Lover  of  men.  with  boldness,   without 


8.MNT   JAMES.  67 

condemnation,  with  a  pure  heart,  with  a  broken 
spirit,  with  a  face  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed, 
with  hallowed  lips  to  dare  to  call  upon  Thee,  our 
holy  God  and  Father  in  the  heavens,  and  to  say, 

People.  Our  Father,  &c. 

Priest  (boninri).  And  lead  us  not  into  temptation, (") 
Lord  God  of  Hosts,  Who  knowest  our  infirmity, 
but  deliver  us  from  the  evil  one,  and  his  works,  and 
all  his  insults,  and  devices,  for  Thy  holy  Name's 
sake,  by  wliich  our  humility  is  called. 

Aloud.  For  Thine  is  the  kincrdom,  the  power,  and 
the  glory,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and 
ever. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  to  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  Let  us  bow  our  heads  to  the  Lord.  ('*) 

People.  To  Thee,  0  Loud. 

Priest.  To  Tlieo,  0  Lord,  we  Thy  servants  have 
bowed  our  nocks  before  Thy  holy  Altar,  waiting;  for 
the  rich  mercies  that  are  from  Thee  :  send  down 
upon  us,  0  Lord,  Thy  rich  grace  and  blessing  ;  and 
sanctify  our  souls,  bodies,  and  spirits,  that  we  may 
become  wortliy  partakers  and  communicants  of  Tliy 
holy  mysteries  :  to  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  and 
eternal  liff. 

AIniiil.  For  Thou  art  to  bu  worsliipped  and  glori- 
fied, 0  our  God,  and  Thine  Only-iJegotten  Son,  and 
Thy  most  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  ever. 

Pe<>ph\  Amen. 

("I  TliiR  iH  the  EmbnliamiiH,  or  Prayer  against  Temptation, 
wliirli  follows  tlic  Loiid's  Prayer  in  every  Litur^'y.  Scr  S. 
Mark,  p.  25. 

f")  In  the  printed  Greek  Liturgy  <>f  S.  JaracH  tliere  ifl  a 
dmililo  pn.rlmnafion  by  tlif  Deacon,  and  a  double  iirnycr  of 
inclination  ;  but  one  of  these  iH  so  clearly  a  second  edition  o( 
the  other,  that  I  have  ventured  to  omit  it. 


58  LTTUBGY    or 

Priest,  {aloud).  And  the  grace  and  mercies  of  the 
Holy  and  consubstantial  aud  uncroated  and  ador- 
able Trinity  shall  be  with  us  all. 

People.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Beacon.  With  the  fear  of  God  let  us  attend. 

The  Priest  saith  secretly. 
Holy  Lord,  That  restest  in  the  hoUes,  hallow  us 
by  the  word  of  Thy  grace,  and  by  the  visitation  of 
Thine  All-holy  Spirit,  for  Thou,  6  Lord,  hast  said, 
be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy.  Lord  our  God,  incom- 
prehensible Word  of  God,  consubstantial,  co-eternal, 
indivisible,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
receive  the  pure  liymn,  in  Thy  holy  and  spotless 
Sacrifice,  with  the  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  and 
from  me  a  sinner,  crying  and  saying. 

Then  he  elevates  the  gifts,  and  saith. 
Holy  things  for  holy  persons. 

People.  One  holy,  one  Lord,  Jesus  Christ,  in  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father,  to  Whom  be  glory  for 
ever  and  ever. 

Deacon.  For  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  the 
propitiation  of  our  souls,  and  for  every  afflicted  and 
distressed  soul,  that  needeth  the  pity  and  help  of 
God  :  and  for  the  conversion  of  them  that  have 
strayed,  the  healing  of  them  that  are  sick,  the 
liberation  of  them  that  are  in  captivity,  the  rest  of 
our  fathers  and  brethren  that  have  fallen  asleep 
before  us,  let  us  pray  earnestly  and  say,  Lord,  have 
mercy. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy.  {Twelve  times.) 

Then  the  Priest  breaks  the  bread,  and  holds  the  half 
in  his  right  hand,  and  the  half  in  his  left ;  and  dips 
in  the  chalice  that  which  he  holds  in  his  right  hand, 
saying, 


SAINT    JAME8.  69 

The  union  of  the  most  holy  Body  and  precious 
Blood  of  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
Then  he  signs  that    irJiich   he  holds  in  his  left  hand: 

then  icith  that  iihich  is  signed   the   other   half:  then 

he  begins   to  divide  before  all,  and  to  distribute  one 

part  into  each  chalice,  saying. 

It  hath  heen  united  and  sanctified  and  accom- 
plished in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever. 

And  uhen  he  signs  the  bread,  he  saith, 

Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Son  of  the  Father, 
That  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  sacrificed 
for  the  life  and  salvation  of  the  world. 

And  when  he  distributes  one  part  into  each  chalice, 
he  saitli, 

A  holy  portion  of  Christ,  full  of  grace  and  truth, 
of  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  Whom  he 
the  glorj'  find  the  might,  for  ever  and  ever. 

Then  he  begins  to  break,  and  to  say, 

Psalm  xxiii. 

Psalm  xxxiv. 

Psalm  cxlv. 

Psalm  cxvii. 

Deacon.   Sir,  hloss. 

Priest.  The  Loni>  sliall  hless  us  and  keep  us  witliout 
condemnation  for  the  communion  ol'  His  spotless 
gifts,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all  ages. 

Deacon.  Sir,  hless. 

Priest.  The  Lord  shall  hless  us  and  make  us  to 
receive  witli  the  pure  tongs  of  our  fingers  tlio 
burning  coal,  and  to  place  it  in  the  moutlis  of  the 
faithful,  for  the  purification  and  renewal  of  their 
souls,  and  hodics,  now  and  ever. 

0  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good  :  lie  That 


60  LITURGY    OF 

is  broken,  and  not  divided,  distributed  to  the 
faithful,  and  not  consumed,  for  the  remission  of 
their  sins  and  eternal  life,  now  and  ever,  and  to 
all  ages. 

Deacon.  In  the  peace  of  Christ  let  us  sing. 

Choir.  0  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good. 

Priest  [before  communicatinrj).  Lord  our  God,  the 
Heavenly  Bread,  the  Life  of  the  world,  I  have 
sinned  against  heaven  and  before  Thee,  and  am  not 
worthy  to  partake  Thy  spotless  mysteries  :  but  do 
Thou,  Who  art  a  compassionate  God,  make  me 
worthy  by  Thy  grace  to  communicate  without  con- 
demnation in  the  holy  Body  and  precious  Blood,  for 
the  remission  of  sins,  and  eternal  life. 

[The  Priest  communicates.] 
But  when  the  Deacons  take  up  the  patens  and  chalices 
to    communicate    the  people,  the  Deacon    that  takes 
the  first  paten,  says, 

Sir,  bless. 

Priest.  Glory  to  God,  "Who  hath  sanctified,  and 
sanctifieth  us  all. 

Deacon.  Set  up  Thyself,  0  God,  above  the  heavens, 
and  Thy  glory  above  all  the  earth  ;  and  Thy  king- 
dom remaineth  for  ever  and  ever. 

And  when  the  Deacon  is  about  to  take  it  up  from  (") 
the  side  table,  the  Priest  saith. 

Blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  God  for  ever. 

' 

f'^)  All  the  editions  read  below,  i-Kaifia  -rhv  SiaKov  0,1:6  "rov 
■KapcLTpaTTt^ov,  and  here,  Sre  fj.4K\ei  6  StuKovoi  riOeuai  ets  tJ> 
■jraparpd-n-({ov.  It  is  nearly  certain  that  the  rubrics  have  been 
misplaced.  The  point  is  one  of  great  difficulty,  but  the  com- 
mentators entirely  neglect  it.  The  first  question  is,  what  is 
the  irapaTpaTTtCov .  Du  Cange  will  have  it  to  be  that  on  which 
tlie  sacred  portions  were  lying,  the  /nfpiSes  of  the  office  of 
prothesis.     But  it  is  clear  that  the  Deacons  are  now  in  the 


SAINT    JAMES.  61 

Deacon.  With  the  fear  of  God,  and  faith,  and 
love,  draw  near. 

People.  Blessed  be  he  that  cometh  in  the  Name 
of  the  Lord. 

[The  Communion.] 

And  again,  when  the  Deacon  puts  the  paten  down  on 
the  side  table,  he  saith, 

Sir,  bless. 

Priest.  O  Lord,  save  Thy  people :  and  bless 
Thine  heritage. 

Glory'  to  our  God  Who  hath  sanctified  us  all. 

Deacons  and  peaplf.  Fill  our  mouths  with  Thy 
praise,  0  Lord,  and  fill  our  lips  with  thankfulness, 
that  we  celebrate  Thy  glory  and  Thy  majesty  all  the 
day  long. 

naos,  or  just  on  the  point  of  leaving  the  boma.  Tlio  antidoron 
then  is  out  of  the  question,  for  tlio  Coniumiiion  has  ndt  yet 
taken  phice.  We  must  imaj^'inc  tlie  irapaTf)dwt(of  in  tliis  iu- 
stance  to  be  a  side  table  jibiced  in  the  Ijcina,  on  wliich  the 
chalices,  Arc,  were  sot  down  (l)y  the  rubric  before',  orav  SiS'k  /xtpiba 
air\rii/  (is  (KaaTov  Kparnpa,  \(y*i,  it  is  clear  that  several 
were  contemplated)  in  order  that  the  Deacons  might  take 
them  tlicnce,  and  not  from  the  Altar.  By  the  transposition  of 
the  rubrics,  all  is  now  clear:  wiien  tlic  Deacnn  takes  the  paten 
up,  for  the  purpose  of  administering  to  tlie  people,  he  says, 
"  Blessed  be  the  Name,"  &c.  lie  tlien  desires  the  people  to 
approach  ;  and  they  accordingly  communicate.  After  this  ho 
returns  to  the  iraparp6.irf(ov,  and  srttivg  dmin  the  paten  or 
chalice,  says,  "  Sir,  bless,"  &c.,  as  below.  But  if  the  altera- 
tion in  tlin  rubrics  bo  not  allowed,  the  only  possible  way  of 
making  sense  is  the  arrangement  which  I  adopted  in  another 
place,  where  1  did   not    feel  justified   in   making   the  cbango. 

ITetrulog.  Liturgic.  p.  192.)  The  Deacon,  receiving  tbe  chalice 
rom  the  Priest  to  set  it  on  the  side  table,  says,  "  Bb'ssed  bo 
the  Name,"  <fec.  Ho  sets  it  down.  He  calls  the  jieojile  to 
approach.  He  then  lifts  it  uj),  and  says,  "  Sir,  bless  :  "  but 
the  Priest  does  not  bless  till  after  the  Communion  is  finished. 
The  great  awkwardness  of  this  is  clear. 


(52  LITURGY    OF 

We  give  Tliee  thanks,  Christ  onr  God,  that  Thou 
bast  vouchsafed  to  make  us  partakers  of  Thy  Body 
and  Blood,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  eternal 
life.  Keep  us,  we  heseech  Thee,  without  condem- 
nation, because  Thou  art  good,  and  the  Lover  of 
men. 

The  Prayer  of  Incense  at  the  last  Entrance. 

Priest.  We  thank  Thee,  God  and  Saviour  of  all, 
for  all  the  good  things  which  Thou  hast  bestowed 
on  us  ;  and  for  the  participation  of  Thy  holy  and 
spotless  mysteries.  And  we  offer  to  Thee  this  in- 
cense, praying  Thee  to  keep  us  under  the  shadow  of 
Thy  wings  ;  and  vouchsafe  that,  till  our  last  breath, 
we  may  receive  Thy  sanctifications  ;  for  the  sancti- 
fication  of  souls  and  bodies,  for  the  inheritance  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven :  for  Thou,  0  God,  art 
our  sanctification,  and  to  Thee  we  ascribe  glory  and 
thanks,  &c. 

The  Deacon  begins  in  the  Entrance. 

Glory  to  Thee,  glory  to  Thee,  glory  to  Thee, 
Christ  the  King,  Only-Begotten  Word  of  the  Father, 
for  that  Thou  hast  vouchsafed  us  sinners  and  Thy 
unworthy  servants  to  enjoy  Thy  spotless  mysteries, 
for  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  for  eternal  life  :  glory 
to  Thee.  ('"} 


(^)  Here,  ixi  the  editions,  follows  this  : 

And  when  he  makes  the  entrance  the  Deacon  begins  to  say 
thus, 

Again  and  again,  and  evermore  in  peace,  let  us  make  our 
Bupplications  to  the  Loud. 

That  the  participation  of  His  sanctification  may  be  to  us 
for  the  turning  away  of  every  evil  thing,  for  a  viaticum 
of   eternal   life,  for  the  participation  and  gift  of  the  Holt 

CrHOST. 


SAINT   JAMEb.  63 

And  when  he  puts  down  the  chalice  on  the  holy  table,  the 

Primt  saith, 

{^)  Blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord  for  ever  and 
ever. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 
People.  Aud  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  In  the  peace  of  Cueist  let  us  chant. 
A7id  aijain.  In  the  peace  of  Christ  let  us  depart. 
People.  In  the  Name  of  the  Lord  ;  Lord,  blesa 
us. 


Priest.  Comiuemoratiug  the  most  holy,  &o. 

People.  To  Thee,  0  Loud. 

Priest.  God,  Which  through  Thy  great  aud  ineffable  love  to 
man  didst  condtsccnd  to  the  wt-iikness  of  Thy  servants  and 
hast  vouchsafed  that  we  sliould  jmrtake  of  this  heavenly 
Table,  condemn  us  not  in  the  participation  of  Tliy  .si)otlesa 
mysteries,  but  guard  us,  good  God,  by  the  sanctiliciition  of 
Thy  Holt  Ghost  ;  that,  l)eing  lioly,  we  may  find  part  and  in- 
heritance with  all  Thy  Saints  who  liave  pleased  Thee  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world,  in  the  light  of  Tliy  countcnauco, 
through  the  mercies  of  Thine  Only-liegottfu  Son,  our  Ijoud 
and  God  and  Saviouu  Jesus  Cuiust;  with  Whom  Thou  art 
blessed,  with  Thy  most  holy  and  good  and  quickening 
Sfikit,  &c. 

People.  Amen. 

But,  in  all  prolialulity,  this  is  nothing  but  a  second  edition 
of  the  two  last  praters;  it  is  liurdly  |K)ssibie  to  conceive  tliat 
botli  the  I)cacoii  and  tlif  I'riost  wfjuld  say  over  again,  in  other 
words,  what  each  of  tliem  has  just  been  already  saying;  and 
the  more  ho  as  the  time  is  limited  to  tliat  of  the  entrance.  It 
will  be  seen  that,  as  wo  at  presciit  have  the  Liturgy  of  S. 
James,  the  Priost  remains  at  the  Altar,  while  tlie  beacons 
distribute  to  the  people. 

(*'^  Here  I  have  made  another  change.  In  tlie  editions,  the 
rubric  precedes  tlie  prayer  of  incense  at  the  last  entrance. 
But  as  it  is  clear  tliat  the  Deacon  must  have  entered  llio  boiua 
before  he  can  set  down  the  chalice  on  the  Altar,  I  have  reversed 
the  order. 


G-1  LITURGY   OF   SAINT   JAMES. 

Prayer  of  Dismissal  said  by  the  Deacm. 

From  glory  to  glory  advancing,  we  hymn  Thee, 
the  Saviour  of  our  souls.  Glory  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  hymn 
Thee,  the  Saviour  of  our  souls. 

The  Priest  saith  this  prayer  as  he  goes  from  the  Altar 
to  the  Sacristy. 

From  niiglit  to  might  advancing,  and  having  ac- 
complished all  the  Divine  Liturgy  in  Thy  temple, 
we  now  also  pray  Thee,  vouchsafe  to  us  Thy  full 
mercy ;  rightly  divide  our  paths :  root  us  in  Thy 
fear ;  and  count  us  worthy  of  Thy  heavenly  kingdom, 
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  :  with  Whom,  &c. 

Deacon.  Again  and  again  and  evermore  in  peace, 
let  us  make  our  supplications  to  the  Lord. 

Prayer  said  in  the  sacristy  after  the  dismissal. 

Thou  hast  given  us,  0  Lord,  sanctification,  &c. 
As  in  the  Lituryy  of  S.  Mark.  [^) 


P)  It  cannot  be  parallelised  with  that  prayer,  becauee  this 
follows,  that  precedes,  the  disjniss-xl. 


V-^/O 


THE    DIVINE    LITURGY 


or 


^»  Clement. 


And  after  the  rcud'uuj  of  the  Lair  and  the  Pinphefs, 
and  our  Eplstlea  and  Acts,  and  tJie  (rospeh,  let  hi.n 
that  hath  been  elected  salute  the  Church,  saijinf/. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  love  of 
God  and  our  Fatuhr,  and  the  Commuuiou  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all. 

And  let  all  answer :  And  with  thy  spirit. 

And  after  this,  let  him  address  to  the  Peojile  words  oj 
exhortation,  and  when  lie  hath  atroinplished  the 
Word  of  Tcacliinij,  I,  Andrew,  the  brother  (f  Peter, 
sajj :  All  stanilin(j  up,  let  the  Dracon  asemdint/  to 
some  high  place,  proclabn:  Let  none  of  the  audi- 
tors :  let  none  of  the  unbelievers.  And  when  quiet 
hath  been  made,  let  liim  say : 

Ye  that  arc  Catechumens,  pray. 

And  let  all  the  faithful,  as  they  will,  j^ray  for  them^ 
saying, 

Lord,  have  mercy. 

And  let  him  minister  on  their  behalf,  sayin/j : 

Let  us  all  beseech  God  (')  for  the  Catechumens, 


(')  S.  Chrysnstom,  in  his  third  homily  on  the  iucoinprehon- 
Bililo  niitnro  of  God,  refers  to  this  prayer,  when  ho  suys — 
'•  Immediately  after  this  exhortation  follows  the  prayer."  And 
the  same  thin;;  is  to  be  foiuid  in  the  nineteenth  canon  of  tbo 
Conncil  of  La<jdicea.  (a.d.  3').3  or  305.) 


OG  LITURGY   01' 

that  He  Who  is  good  and  the  Lover  of  men,  may 
mercifr.lly  hear  their  prayers  and  supplications,  and 
receiving  their  requests,  may  assist  them  and  grant 
them  their  hearts'  desire  as  may  be  expedient  for 
them,  and  may  reveal  to  them  the  Gospel  of  His 
Christ,  and  may  enlighten  them  and  cause  them  to 
understand  and  may  instruct  them  in  Divine  know- 
ledge, and  may  teach  them  His  commandments  and 
judgments,  and  may  implant  in  them  His  true  and 
salutar}'  fear,  and  may  open  the  ears  of  their  hearts 
to  discover  the  things  that  are  in  His  law  day  and 
night,  may  stablish  them  in  piety,  may  unite  and 
may  number  them  together  with  His  holy  fold,  may 
count  them  worthy  of  the  laver  of  regeneration,  of 
the  vestment  of  immortality,  of  the  true  life ;  may 
preserve  them  from  all  impiety,  and  may  give  no 
place  to  the  enemy  against  them ;  but  may  purify 
them  from  all  pollution  of  flesh  and  spirit,  may 
dwell  in  them  and  walk  in  them  by  His  Christ, 
may  bless  their  comings  in  and  their  goings  out, 
and  may  direct  that  which  lies  before  them  as  may 
be  profitable.  Furthermore,  let  us  earnestly  suppli- 
cate for  them,  that  having  obtained  the  remission 
of  their  transgressions  through  the  initiation  of 
bai)tism,  they  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  holy 
mysteries,  and  of  perseverance  with  the  Saints. 
Ye  that  are  Catechumens  arise. 

Ask  for  the  peace  of  God  through  His  Christ  ; 
that  this  day  and  all  the  time  of  your  life  may  be 
peaceful  and  sinless ;  that  your  ends  maybe  Christian ; 
that  Gou  may  be  merciful  and  gi-acious ;  that  your 
sins  may  be  remitted ;  commend  yourselves  to  the 
Only,  Unbegotteu  God,  through  His  Christ.  Bow 
down  and  receive  the  blessing. 

And  for  each  of  these  idiom  the  Deacon  addresses^  as 


SAiNT    CLEMKNT.  07 

f 

tve  have  said  before,  let  the  people  say.  Lord,  have 
mercy :  and  before  all  the  children.  (-)  And  while 
they  bow  down  their  heads,  let  him  that  hath  been 
elected  Bishop,  bless  them  with  this  blessing : 

The  Almighty  God,  the  Unbegottcn  and  Un- 
approachable, the  only  true  God,  the  God  and 
Father  of  Thy  Christ,  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son, 
the  God  of  the  P.u{aclete,  and  the  Lord  of  all : 
Thou  Who  didst  by  Christ  constitute  Thy  disciples 
as  teachers  of  piety  ; — do  Thou  Thyself  also  now 
look  upon  these  Thy  servants,  the  Catechumens  of 
the  Gospel  of  Thy  Christ,  and  give  to  them  a  new 
heart,  and  renew  within  them  a  right  spirit,  to 
know  and  do  Thy  will  with  a  full  heart  and  willing 
soul.  Make  them  worthy  of  the  holy  initiation  of 
baptism,  and  unite  them  to  Thy  holy  Church,  and 
make  them  participators  of  the  Divine  mysteries, 
through  Christ  our  Hope,  Who  died  for  them : 
through  Whom  be  to  Thee  the  glory  and  the 
worship,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  all  ages. 
Amen. 

And  after  this,  L,:t  the  Deacon  say,  Go  forward, 
ye  Catechumens,  in  peace.  And  after  their  having 
gone  forth,  let  hiins  ay :  Pray,  ye  that  are  troubled  by 
unclean  spirits.  Let  us  all  earnestly  pray  for  ihem, 
that  God,  the  Lover  of  men,  may,  through  Christ, 
rebuke  the  unclean  and  wicked  spirits,  and  may  pre- 


(«)  It  has  boon  diKfUHHed  whut  children  are  here  intended. 
Cotelerius  would  underHtiind  it  of  th(!  choir  ;  but  I  iiiu  inclined 
to  think  that  the  wonln  are  Hjioken  of  all  (he  children  prcm^nt ; 
the  Hamo  Avho  are  afterward  committed  to  the  charj^'o  of  their 
mothers.  The  explanation,  ^iven  by  H.  ChryHostoin  in  bis 
Beventy-Hecond  homily  on  H.  Matthew.  HcemH  to  iniikc  fliiH  in 
terprctation  clear;  and  I  am  glad  to  see  that  my  friend 
Dr.  Daniel  also  adopU  it. 

f2 


08  LITURGY   OF 

serve  His  suppliants  from  the  over -mastery  of  the 
enemy :  He  that  rebuked  the  legion  of  fiends,  and 
the   primieval  source  of  evil,   the  Devil,  let  Him 
rebuke  also  now  the  apostates  from  piety,  and  pre- 
serve His  own  handiwork  from  the  energy  of  Satan, 
and  purify  them  whom  with  much  wisdom  He  made. 
Furthermore,  let  us  intently  pray  for  them  :   Save 
and  raise  them  up,  0  God,  in  Thy  might.     Bend 
your  heads,  ye  Energumens,  and  receive  the  blessing. 
And  let  the  Bklwp  pray  over  tlie)>i,  sayinr/,  Thou  That 
didst  bind  the  strong  man,  and  spoil  all  his  goods : 
Thou   That   didst    give   us   power   to   tread   upon 
6eq)ents  and  scorpions  and  all  the  might  of  the  ad- 
versary :  Thou  That  didst  give  over  to  us  bound, 
the  man-slaying  serpent,  as  a  sparrow  to  children  :  C*) 
Whom  all  things  fear  and  trcnable  at  from  the  face 
of  'J'hy  power  :  Thou  That  didst  break  him  as  light- 
ning from  heaven,  not  with  a  local  fracture,  but 
from  honour  to  dishonour,  through  his  own  evil- 
mindedness  :     Thou    Whose    look    drieth    up    the 
abysses,  and  AVhose  threat  wasteth  the  mountains, 
and  Whose  truth  remaineth  for  ever ;    Whom  in- 
fants j)raise,  and  sucklings  bless  :  Who  lookest  upon 
the  earth,  and  makest  it  to  tremble.  Who  touchest 
the  mountains,  and  they  smoke :  Who  threatenest 
the  sea,  and  driest  it  up,  and  utterly  destroyest  all 
the  rivers  :  to  Whom  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  Thy 
feet :  Thou  That  walkest  upon  the  sea  as  upon  a 
foundation  :  Only-Begotten  God,  Son  of  the  Mighty 
Father,  rebuke  the  evil  spirits,  and  preserve  the 
works  of  Thine  Hands  from  the  energy  of  an  adverse 
spirit :  for  to  Thee  is  glory,  honour,  and  worship. 


(3j  The  allusion  is  to  Job  xli.  5—"  Wilt  thou  play  with  him 
as  with  a  bird,  or  wilt  thou  bind  liiiii  for  thy  maidens  ?  " 


SAINT    CLEJIENT.  C9 

and  by  Thee  to  Thy  Father,  and  the  Holy  Gnosi. 
Amen. 

And  let  the  Deacon  say:  Pass  forward,  ye  Ener- 
gumens.  And  after  this  let  him  cxchtiui :  Praj',  ye 
that  are  inuminated.  Let  us,  the  faithful,  all  jiray 
earnestly  for  tliem,  that  the  Lord  may  count  them 
worthy,  havmg  heeu  initiated  into  the  death  of 
Christ,  raise  them  up  together  with  Him,  aud  to 
become  partakers  of  His  kingdom,  and  sharers  of 
His  mysteries,  that  He  may  unite  and  may  collect 
them  together  with  those  that  are  saved  in  His 
Holy  Church.  Save  and  raise  them  up  in  Thy 
grace.  Lot  them  that  have  been  sealed  to  God  by 
His  Christ,  bow  down  and  be  blest  with  this  bless- 
ing from  the  Bishop.  Thou  That  saidst  aforehand 
by  Thy  lioly  Prophets  to  the  initiated.  Wash  you, 
make  you  clean,  and  didst  through  Christ  give 
them  the  lav/  of  spiritual  regeneration, — do  Tliou 
Thyself  now  look  upon  the  baptized,  and  bless  them 
and  hallow  them,  and  prepare  them  so  as  to  be 
wortliy  of  Thy  spiritual  gift,  and  tlie  true  adoption 
of  Thy  spiritual  mysteries,  the  gathering  together 
witli  them  that  are  saved,  through  Christ  our 
Saviour  :  (*)  through,  &c. 

And  let  the  Deacon  say :  Pass  forward,  ye  that 
are  illuminated.  And  after  this,  let  him,  pnx-htini: 
Pray,  ye  tluit  arc  in  penitence.  Let  us  earnestly 
supplicate  for  our  brethren  that  are  in  penitence, 
that  God,  the  very  pitiful,  mo,y  point  out  to  them 
the  way  of  repentance,  may  receive  their  recantation 
and  their  confession,  and  may  bruise  Satan  under 
their  feet  shortly,  and  may  ransom  them  from  tJie 


(*)  Tliifl  prayer  would  appear,  from  the  Council  of  Lnodifon, 
anrl  from  tlif  .silence  of  S.  CbijKOHlom,  to  bo  of  later  Uute  ).Lun 
tilt!  tniiers. 


70  LITURGY    OF 

hjuai-e  of  the  devil,  and  the  insult  of  demons,  and 
may  deliver  them  from  every  unlawful  word,  and 
every  unseemly  deed  and  wicked  imagination  ;  may 
pardon  them  all  their  falls,  voluntary  and  in- 
voluntary ;  and  may  hlot  out  tlie  handwriting  that  is 
against  them,  and  may  ■wT.-ite  them  in  the  Book  of 
Life,  and  may  cleanse  them  from  every  pollution  of 
flesh  and  spirit,  and  may  restore  them  so  as  to  unite 
them  to  His  holy  flock :  for  He  knoweth  our  frame. 
For  who  can  hoast  that  he  hath  a  pure  heart  ?  Or 
who  can  he  •confident  that  he  is  pure  from  sin? 
For  we  are  all  suhject  to  penalty.  Let  us  yet  pray 
more  earnestly  for  them,  because  there  is  joy  in 
heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  that  they, 
turning  away  from  every  unlawful  work,  may  he 
made  familiar  with  every  good  deed,  to  the  end  that 
God,  the  Lover  of  men,  may  speedily  receive  their 
prayers  with  favour,  may  give  them  the  joy  of  His 
salvation  again,  and  may  stablish  them  with  His 
Princely  Spirit,  that  they  may  be  no  more  shaken : 
that  they  may  become  partakers  of  His  holy  things, 
and  sharers  of  the  Divine  mysteries,  and  being 
manifested  as  worthy  of  adoption,  may  attain  eternal 
life.  Let  us  yet  say  earnestly  for  them :  Lord, 
have  mercy  :  save  them,  0  God,  and  raise  them  up 
by  Thy  mercy.  Eise  up  and  bend  your  heads  to 
God,  through  His  Christ,  and  receive  the  blessing. 
Then  let  the  BishoiJ  2"'"'J  "/'cr  this  fashion.  Al- 
mighty, everlasting  God,  Master  of  all.  Creator  and 
Governor  of  all  things,  Thou  \Yho  didst  through 
Christ  consecrate  man  to  be  the  ornament  of  the 
world,  (*)  and  didst  give  him  a  law  implanted  in 
him   and   written,   to  the  end  that  he  might  live 


(*)  Ornament  of  the  world.     It  is  of   course  impossible  to 
preserve  the  paronomasia,  KSaixov  tov  k6<tixcj. 


SAINT   OLEMEXT.  71 

according  to  Thy  statutes,  as  is  reasonable :  and 
didst  by  Thy  goodness  give  to  him  when  he  had 
sinned  a  warning  to  repentance  ;  look  down  upon 
these  that  have  bowed  to  Thee  the  necks  of  their 
souls  and  their  bodies :  for  Thou  wiliest  not  the 
death  of  a  sinner,  but  his  conversion,  so  as  to  turn 
him  from  his  evil  ways  that  he  may  live.  Thou 
That  didst  receive  the  repentance  of  the  Ninevites  ; 
Thou  That  wiliest  that  all  men  should  be  saved  and 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;  Thou  That 
didst,  through  Thy  fatherly  pity,  receive  the  son  who 
devoured  his  substance  in  riotous  living,  because  of 
his  repentance  :  do  Thou  Thyself  now  receive  the 
repentance  of  Thy  suppliants  ;  for  there  is  none 
who  sinneth  not  before  Thee  ;  for  if  Thou.  Lord, 
shalt  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss,  0  Lord, 
who  may  abide  it  ?  for  witli  Thee  there  is  mercy. 
And  restore  tliein  to  Thy  lujly  Church  in  reputation 
and  honour,  through  Christ,  our  God  and  Saviour : 
through  Wliom,  &c. 

Av(L  let  the  Deacon  saij :  Depart,  ye  that  are  in 
penitence.  And  let  him  add  :  Let  none  of  those  that 
are  not  able  to  pray  with  us,  pass  forward  :  let  as 
many  as  are  fiiitliful  kneel  with  us.  Let  us  all  with 
one  accord  call  upon  God  through  His  Christ.  For 
the  peace  and  gf)od  condition  of  the  world,  and  Iho 
holy  Cliurches,  Ift  us  make  our  supplication;  that 
He,  Who  is  the  God  of  all,  may  bestow  peace  on 
us,  eternal,  and  that  cannot  be  taken  away,  to  the 
end  that  Ho  inny  preserve  us  persoveriugly  in  the 
fulness  of  that  virtue  which  is  according  to  godli- 
ness. For  the  Holy  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Cliurch, 
which  is  from  one  end  of  the  eartii  to  the  other,  let 
us  make  our  sujiplication  ;  tliat  tlir  Lonn  would 
preserve  it  and  guiird  it  contiuuiiJIy,  uiisjinkcn  and 
without  storm,  unto  the  consummation  of  nil  things, 


72  LITURGY   OF 

founded  upon  the  rock.  {'')  And  for  the  holy  parishes 
here,  let  us  make  our  supplication,  that  He  Who  is 
the  Lord  of  all  may  vouchsafe  to  give  ixs  a  share  in 
His  heavenly  hope,  and  to  bestow  unceasingly  the 
reward  of  our  prayers. 

For  every  Episcopate  under  heaven  of  those  who 
rightly  divide  the  word  of  Thy  truth,  let  us  make 
our  supplication  :  and  for  our  Bishop  James  and  his 
parishes,  let  us  make  our  supplication :  for  the 
Bishop  Clement  and  his  parishes,  let  us  make  our 
supplication :  for  our  Bishop  Euodius  and  his 
parishes,  let  us  make  our  supplication.  C)  That 
the  merciful  God  may  vouchsafe  them  to  their  holy 
Churches  safe,  honourable,  full  of  length  of  days, 
and  may  afford  them  an  honourable  old  age  in  i)iety 
and  righteousness. 

And  for  their  Presbyters  let  us  make  our  supplica- 
tion :  that  the  Loud  would  preserve  them  from  every 
unseemly  and  wicked  thing,  and  afford  to  them  their 
priestly  office,  safe  and  lionourable.  For  all  the 
diaconate,  and  ministry  in  Christ,  let  us  make  our 
supplication,  that  tlie  Lord  may  preserve  their 
services  blameless. 

For  Readers,  Singers,  Virgins,  Widows,  and 
Orphans,  let  us  make  our  supplication  :  for  them 
that  are  in  the  yoke  of  marriage,  and  the  production 
of  children,  let  us  make  our  supplication  :  that  the 
Lord  may  have  mercy  on  them  all. 

For  Eunuchs,  Avalking  holily,  let   us  make  our 


(6)  Obsei-ve  tliat  the  reference  is  not  to  S.  Matthew  xvi.  18, 
but  to  S.  Mattbfcw  vii.  25. 

(')  Tliese  names  are  manifestly  an  insertion  by  way  of  a 
pious  frau  1  on  the  jjart  of  the  compiler  of  the  Apostolic  Con- 
stitutions. In  some  MSS.  instead  of  Euodius,  Anianus,  the 
fiist  Bishop  of  Alexandria  after  S.  Mark  is  mentioned. 


SAINT    CLEMENT.  78 

Bupplicatiou  :  for  those  that  are  iu  continence  and 
piety,  let  us  make  oi;r  supplication  :  for  them  that 
iDring  fort]i  fruit  in  the  holy  Church,  and  do  alms  to 
the  poor,  let  us  make  our  supplication ;  and  for 
them  that  bring  offerings  and  first-fruits  to  the 
Lord  our  God,  let  us  make  our  supplication :  that 
the  all-good  God  may  recompense  them  with  His 
heavenly  gifts,  and  may  give  them  a  hundred-fold 
more  in  the  present  world,  and  in  the  world  to 
come,  life  everlasting,  and  may  grant  to  them  of 
His  grace,  for  things  earthly,  things  heavenly. 

For  our  newly-illuminated  brethren,  let  us  make 
our  supplication  that  the  Lord  may  confirm  and 
stablish  them. 

For  our  brethren  that  are  exercised  by  sickness, 
let  us  make  our  su2)plication  ;  that  tiio  Lord  may 
preserve  them  from  all  diseases  and  inlirmity,  and 
may  restore  them  safely  to  His  holy  Church. 

For  them  that  sail  and  that  journey,  let  us  make 
our  supplication  :  for  them  that  are  in  mines  and 
exiles  and  prisons  and  bonds  for  the  Name  of  the 
Lord,  let  us  make  our  sui)plication  :  for  them  that 
travail  iu  bitter  slavery,  let  us  make  our  supplica- 
tion :  for  our  enemies,  and  them  that  hate  us  for 
the  Lord's  sake,  let  us  make  our  supplication  :  that 
the  Lord  may  soften  their  mind,  and  disperse  their 
passion  against  us. 

For  them  tliat  arc  without  and  wandering,  let  us 
make  our  supplication  :  that  the  Lord  may  convert 
them. 

Let  us  remember  the  little  ones  of  the  Church, 
tliat  the  Lord,  perfecting  them  in  His  fear,  may 
bring  fbfm  to  the  full  measure  of  age  :  for  each 
other,  Itt  us  make  our  su^jplication  ;  that  the  Lord 
may  guard  us  and  preserve  us  by  His  grace  to  tho 
end,  and  may  defend  us  from  the  wicked  one,  and 


74  LITURGY    OP 

all  the  scandals  of  them  that  work  iniquity,  and  may 
save  us  to  His  heavenly  kingdom. 

For  every  Christian  soul,  let  us  make  our  supjili- 
cation.  Preserve  and  raise  us  up,  0  God,  hy  Thy  pity. 

Let  us  rise  up. 

Having  earnestly  made  our  supplication,  let  us 
commit  ourselves  and  each  other  to  the  Living  God, 
through  His  Christ.  Tlicn  let  the  Bishop  inay  over 
them  and  say  :  Lord  Almighty,  Most  Highest,  Thou 
That  dwellest  in  the  highest.  Thou  Holy  One  That 
restest  in  the  Holies,  Thou  That  art  without  begin- 
ning, Thou  That  art  only  lluler :  Thou  Who  through 
Christ  didst  give  us  the  preaching  of  knowledge  for 
the  acknowledgment  of  Thy  glory  and  of  Thy  Name 
which  He  manifested  to  our  comprehension  :  do 
Thou  Thyself  now  look  down  through  Him  upon  this 
Thy  flock  :  and  free  it  from  all  ignorance  and  evil 
practices,  and  grant  that  it  may  entirely  fear  Thee 
and  perfectly  love  Thee,  and  may  be  endued  with 
the  glory  of  Thy  countenance :  be  Thou  propitious 
to  them,  and  merciful,  and  ready  to  hear  their  sup- 
plications, and  keep  them  without  turning,  without 
blame,  without  accusation  ;  that  they  may  be  holy 
in  body  and  soul,  not  having  spot  nor  wrinkle,  nor 
any  such  thing  :  but  that  they  may  be  perfect,  and 
not  one  of  them  may  be  imperfect  or  incomplete. 
Thou  That  art  the  Helper,  the  Mighty,  Thou  That 
respectest  not  the  persons  of  men,  become  Thou  the 
assistance  of  this  Thy  people,  whom  Thou  didst 
purchase  with  the  precious  Blood  of  Thy  Christ. 
Defender,  Guardian,  Steward,  Most  secure  Wall, 
Fence,  Security,  for  none  can  pluck  out  of  Thine 
Hands  :  nor  is  there  any  other  God  like  Thee, 
for  in  Thee  is  our  trust.  Sanctify  them  in  Thy 
truth,  for  Thy  word  is  truth.  Thou  That  art  not  to 
be  flattered,  Thou  That  canst  not  be  deceived,  pre- 


8A.INT    CLEMENT.  75 

serve  thorn  from  all  sickness  and  all  infirmity,  from 
every  fall,  from  all  injury  and  deceit,  from  the  fear 
of  the  enemy,  from  the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day, 
from  the  thing  that  walketh  in  darkness :  and 
vouchsafe  to  tliem  the  eternal  life,  which  is  in 
Christ  Thine  Unly-Begotten  Son,  our  God  and 
Saviour,  through  Whom. 

And  ajter  this  let  the  Deacon  say  :  Let  us  attend. 

And  let  the  Bishop  salute  the  Church,  and  say :  Let 
the  peace  of  God  be  with  you  all. 

And  let  the  people  answer,  And  with  thy  spirit. 

And  let  the  Deacon  say  to  all.  Salute  one  another 
with  an  holy  kiss. 

And  let  the  Cleryi/  liiss  the  Bishop;  ami  of  the  Laity, 
the  men  the  men,  and  the  inniirn  the  women.  And  let 
the  children  stand  by  the  Bema.  And  let  a  Deacon 
preside  over  them,  that  they  may  not  be  disorderly.  And 
let  other  Deacons  nallc  about  and  observe  the  men  and 
the  tvomen  that  there  may  be  no  disturbance,  and  that  /u> 
one  nod,  or  whisper,  or  wink.  And  let  the  Deacon 
stand  at  the  doors  of  the  men,  and  the  Sub-Deacons  at 
those  if  the  women,  that  no  one  may  yo  out,  and  that 
the  door  may  not  be  opened  even  ihouyh  it  may  be  by  one 
of  the  faithful,  duriny  the  time  (f  the  Anapliora.  And 
let  one  Sub-Deacon  yire  uuiter  to  the  I'rirsts  to  wash  their 
hands,  the  symbol  of  the  purity  of  the  souls  devoted  to  GoD. 

'J'he  order  of  James,  thr  bmthrr  of  John,  the  sou  if 
Zeliedce. 

And  I,  James,  the  brother  of  Jo/ni,  the  son  of  Zebedee, 
command  that  forthwith  the  Deacon  say. 

Let  none  of  the  Catochumcns,  none  of  the  hcjirors, 
none  of  the  unbelievers,  none  of  the  heterodox,  stay. 
Ye  who  have  prayed  the  former  prayer,  dfi)art. 
Motlici-s,  tiike  up  your  childi-cii.  lict  no  one  have 
ought  against  any  man.  Let  none  be  in  hypocrisy. 
Let  us  stand  upright,  to  present  unto  the  Lord  our 
offerings  with  fear  nud  trembling. 


76  LITURGY    OP 

When  this  is  done,  let  t/ie  Deacons  bruiy  the  gifts  to  the 
Bishop  at  the  Altar ;  and  let  the  Priests  stand  on  his 
light  hand,  and  on  Jiis  left,  as  disciples  by  their 
Master.  But  let  two  of  the  Deacons  on  each  side  of 
the  Altar  hold  a  fan  made  up  of  thin  membranes,  or 
peacock's  feathers,  or  fine  cloth,  and  let  them  silently 
drive  away  jlics  and  gnats,  that  they  may  not  fall  into 
the  ciq)s.  Then  the  Bishop,  after  having  i^^'ciy^d 
secretly,  {and  likewise  the  Friests,)  and  having  put  on 
his  splendid  vestment,  (®)  and  standing  at  the  Altar, 
and  signing  himself  tvith  the  sign  of  the  Cross  upon 
his  forehead,  let  him  say, 

The  grace  of  the  Almighty  God,  and  the  love  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  fellowship  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all. 

And  let  all  with  one  voice  say,  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Bishop.  Lift  up  your  mind. 

People.  We  lift  it  up  unto  the  Lord. 

Bishop.  Let  us  give  thanks  to  the  Lord. 

People.  It  is  meet  and  right. 

Bishop.  It  is  indeed  meet  and  right  before  all 
things  to  sing  praises  to  Thee,  the  true  God,  from 
everlasting,  of  Whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven 
and  earth  is  named ;  Who  alone  art  unbegotten, 
without  beginning,  the  supreme  Lord,  Almighty 
King,  and  self-sufficient;  the  Author  and  Giver  of 
all  good  things,  without  cause,  without  generation, 
self-existing  ;  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever.  At  Thy  Word,  as  from  a  necessary  original, 
all  things  started  into  being.  For  Thou  art  ever- 
lasting knowledge,  sight  before  all  objects,  hearing 

(9)  This  very  ancient  rubric  establishes  the  use  of  a  special 
Euchiiristic  rolje  at  an  exceedingly  early  date.  It  is  unlikely 
to  be  an  interpolation,  because  there  is  no  trace  of  this 
Liturgy  having  ever  been  actually  employed  in  public  wor- 
ship.— L. 


SAINT   CLEMENT.  77 

before  all  sounds,  wisdom  without  instruction  ;  the 
first  in  nature,  the  law  of  being,  exceeding  all  num- 
ber.    Thou  createdst  all  things  out  of  nothing  by 
Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  begotten  before  all  ages 
by  no  other  means  than  Thy  will.  Thy  power,  and 
Thy  goodness  ;  God  the  Word,   the  Only-Begotten 
Son,  the  Living  Wisdom,  the  First-born  of  every 
creature,  the  Angel  of  Thy  gi-eat  counsel,  Thy  High 
Priest,  but  Lord  and  King  of  all  sensible  and  intel- 
lectual creatures.  Who  was  before  all  things,  and 
by  Whom  all  tilings  were  made.     Thou,  0  eternal 
God,  didst  make  all  things  by  Him,  and  by  Him  too 
dispensest  Thy  providence  over   them  ;  for  by  the 
Same  that  Thou  didst  graciously  bring  all   things 
into  being,  by  Him  Thou  continucst  all  things  in 
well-being.     The  God  and  Fatheu  of  Tliiiin  Oiily- 
J>egotten  Son  ;   Who  by   Him  didst   niaki'   first  Ihe 
Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  the  Ages,  Thrones,  Arch- 
angels, and  Angels,  and  after  these   didst  by  Him 
create  this  visible  world,  and  all  things  wliich   are 
therein.     For  it  is  Thou  Who  hast  fixed  the  heaven 
like  an  arch,  and  stretched  it  out  like  the  covering 
of   a   tent ;    and  didst    establish    tiic   earth    upon 
nothing  by  Tliy  will   alone;   Who   hast   estiiblished 
the  firmament,  and  prepared  the  night  and  the  day, 
bringing  ligiit  out   of  Thy   treasures,   and  darkness 
to  overshadow  it,  that  under  its   covert    the  livinj;^ 
creatures   of  this  world   might   take  their  repose. 
Thou  hast  appointed  the  sun  to  rule  the  day,  and 
the  moon  to  govern  the  night;  and  moreover   bast 
inscribed  in   the  heavens  a  choir  of  stars  for  the 
honour    of     Thy    glorious    majesty.       Thou     hast 
made  water  for  drink,  jind  for  cleansing,   tiic  vital 
air  for  respirjition,  and  conveyance  of  sounds  hy  tho 
tongue's  striking  of  it,  and  the  hearing  which  co- 
operates with  it,  so  as  to  perceive  the  voice  when  it 


78  lilTURGY    OF 

is  received  by  it,  and  falls  upon  it.     Tbou  madest 
fire  for  our  consolation  in   darkness,   and  for  the 
relief    of   oui-  necessities,  that   we   might  be  both 
Avarmed  and  enlightened  by  it.     Thou  didst  divide 
the  great  sea  from  the  land,  making  the  one  naviga- 
ble, "and  the  other  a  basis  for  our  feet  in  walking  ; 
the  former  Thou  hast  replenished  -with  small  and 
great  beasts,  the  latter  too  both  with  came  and  wild  ; 
and  hast  moreover  furnished  it  with  various  plants, 
crowned  it  with  herbs,  beautified  it  with  flowers, 
and  em-iched  it  with  seeds.     Thou  didst  constitute 
the  great  deep,  and  didst  set  about  it  a  mighty  hol- 
low ;  (^)  seas  of  salt  waters  stand  as  an  heap  bounded 
on   every   side  with   barriers   of   sand ;   sometimes 
Thou  dost  swell  it  by  the  wind,  so  as  to  equal  the 
high  mountains,  and  sometimes  smooth  it   into  a 
plain  ;  now  making  it  rage  with  a   tempest,   then 
stilling  it  with  a  calm,  for  the  ease  of  mariners  in 
their    voyages.     The   earth,    which   was   made   by 
Thee,  through  Christ,  Thou  hast  encompassed  with 
rivers,  watered  with  currents,  and  moistened  with 
springs  which  never  fail ;  Thou  hast  girt  it  about 
with  mountains,  that  it  may  not  be  moved  at  any 
time ;  Thou  hast  replenished  and  adorned  it  with 
fragrant  and  medicinal  herbs,  with  many  and  various 
kinds  of  living  creatures,  strong  and  weak,  for  food 
and  for  labour,  tame  and  wild  ;  with  the  dull  harsh 
noises   of  those   creatures   which   move   upon   the 
earth,  and  the  soft  sprightly  notes   of  the   gaudy 
many-colom-ed  birds  which  wing  the  air ;  with  the 

(9)  Brett  translates  "  didst  cast  a  mound  about  it."  But  I 
cannot  see  what  is  the  authority  for  this  signification  of  kyitos. 
It  is  best  to  take  it  in  the  sense  of  a  great  hollow  or  chasm. 
See  Buttman's  Lexilogus,  under  the  word  KrjTweaaa.  Had 
that  distinguished  scholar  been  acquainted  with  Patristic 
writings,  he  would  have  been  glad  to  find  in  this  passage  a 
corroboration  of  his  hypothesis. 


8A1NT    CLEMENT.  79 

revolution  of  years,  the  number  of  months  and 
days,  the  regular  succession  of  the  seasons  ;  with 
the  courses  of  the  clouds  big  with  rain,  for  the  pro- 
duction of  fruits,  the  support  of  living  creatures  : 
where  also  the  winds  take  their  stand,  which  blow 
at  Thy  command,  and  for  the  refreshment  of  trees 
and  plants.  And  Thou  hast  not  only  created  the 
world,  but  man  likewise  the  citizen  of  it ;  mani- 
festing in  him  the  beauty  and  excellency  of  that 
beautii'ul  and  excellent  creation.  For  Thou  saidst 
to  Thine  Own  Wisdom,  Let  us  make  man  in  Our 
Own  Image,  and  after  Our  likeness,  and  let  them 
have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  tlio  sta,  and  over 
the  fowl  of  the  air.  Wlierefore  Thou  niadest  him 
of  an  immortal  soul,  and  jjerishable  body,  the  soul 
out  of  notliing,  the  body  of  the  four  elements;  this 
endued  with  live  senses,  and  a  power  of  motion ; 
that  with  reason,  and  a  faculty  of  distinguishing 
between  religion  and  irrcligion,  tlie  just  and  the 
unjust.  Tliou,  O  Almiglity  God,  didst  also  by 
Christ  plant  a  garden  eastward  in  Eden,  adorned 
with  every  plant  that  was  meet  for  food  ;  into  this 
Thou  didst  put  him,  a  rich  and  magnificent  habita- 
tion ;  having  given  him  a  law  in  his  nature,  and 
such  powers  that  without  the  assistance  of  other 
means,  even  in  hiinscir  he  might  ]m\(>.  the  jirinciplcs 
of  divine  knowledge.  And  when  Thou  didst  put 
him  into  this  paradise  of  pleasure,  Thou  gavest  him 
tlic  privilege  of  enjoying  all  its  dcliglits,  with  this 
only  exception,  that  he  should  not  out  of  vain 
curiosity  in  hopes  of  bettering  his  condition,  taste 
of  one  tree,  and  immortality  was  to  be  the  reward 
of  his  obedience  to  tbis  command  ;  but  when  hr  bad 
broken  through  it.  and  eaten  of  the  forbidden  IVuit, 
over-reached  by  the  subtilty  of  the  serpent,  and  the 
counsel  of  the  woman,  Thou  didst  justly  drive  him 


80  LITURGY   OF 

out  of  paradise  ;  but  in  Thy  goodness  didst  not 
despise  him,  nor  suffer  him  wholly  to  perish  ;  for  he 
was  the  Avork  of  Thine  own  hands  :  but  Thou  gavest 
him  dominion  over  all  things,  and  by  his  labour,  and 
the  sweat  of  his  face,  to  procure  his  food.  Thy  provi- 
dence co-operating  with  him,  so  as  to  make  the 
fruits  of  the  earth  to  spriiig  up,  inci'ease,  and  ripen. 
And  having  sul)jected  him  for  a  while  to  a  tem- 
porary death,  Thou  didst  bind  Thyself  by  an  oath 
to  restore  him  to  life  again  ;  loosing  the  bands  of 
that  death,  by  the  promise  of  a  resurrection  to  the 
life  which  is  eternal.  Nor  was  this  all  ;  but  Thou 
didst  likewise  multiply  his  posterity  witliout  number, 
glorifying  as  many  of  them  as  were  obedient  unto 
Thee,  and  punishing  those  who  rebelled  against 
Thee.  Thou  didst  accept  the  sacrifice  of  Abel  on 
account  of  his  lightcousness,  and  reject  the  offering 
of  Cm  in  who  slew  his  brother,  because  of  his  un- 
worthiness.  And  besides  these,  Thou  didst  receive 
Seth  and  Enos,  and  translate  Enoch.  For  Thou 
art  the  creator  of  men,  the  author  of  life,  the  sup- 
plier of  our  wants,  the  giver  of  laws,  the  rewarder 
of  those  who  keep  them,  and  the  avenger  of  those 
who  transgress  them  ;  Who  didst  bring  tlie  great 
flood  upon  the  world  because  of  the  multitude  of 
the  ungodly,  but  didst  deliver  righteous  Noah  from 
it  with  eight  souls  in  the  ark,  the  last  of  the  fore- 
going, and  the  first  of  the  succeeding  generations  ; 
Who  didst  kindle  a  dreadful  fire  in  the  five  cities  of 
Sodom,  and  turn  a  fruitful  land  into  a  salt  lake  for 
the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwelt  therein ;  but 
didst  snatch  holy  Lot  out  of  the  conflagration.  Thou 
art  He,  Who  didst  preserve  Abraham  from  the  ido- 
latry of  his  forefathers,  and  appoint  him  the  heir  of 
the  world,  manifesting  unto  him  Thy  Christ  ;  Who 
didst  ordain  Melchisedeck  an   high  priest  for  Thy 


BAIKT    CLEMENT.  81 

worship;  Who  didst  approve  Thy  servant  Job  by 
his  patience  and  long  suffering,  the  conqueror  of 
that  serpent,  who  is  the  author  and  promoter  of  all 
wickedness ;  Who  madest  Isaac  the  Son  of  the  pro- 
mise, and  Jacob  the  father  of  twelve  sons,  Avhom 
Thou  didst  multiply  exceedingly,  bringing  him  into 
Egypt  with  seventy-five  souls.  Thou,  0  Lord, 
didst  not  overlook  Joseph,  but  gavest  him,  as  the 
reward  of  his  chastity  for  Thy  sake,  the  government 
over  the  Egyptians.  Neither  didst  Thou,  0  Lord, 
overlook  the  Hebrews  Avhen  in  bondage  under  the 
Egjrptians,  but  according  to  Thy  promises  made  to 
their  fathers.  Thou  didst  deliver  them,  and  punish 
the  Egyptians.  And  when  men  corrupted  the  law 
of  nature,  and  esteemed  the  creation,  sometimes  as 
the  effect  of  chance,  and  sometimes  to  be  worthy  of 
honour  equal  to  Thine,  Who  art  the  God  of  all, 
Thou  didst  not  suffer  them  to  wander  in  error  ;  but 
didst  raise  up  Thy  holy  servant  Moses,  and  by  him 
give  a  written  law  to  strengthen  the  law  of  nature, 
and  sliew  the  creation  to  be  Tliy  work,  and  tliat 
tliere  were  no  otlier  Gods  Ijosides  Thee.  Thou  didst 
adorn  Aaron  and  his  posterity  with  the  honour  of 
the  priesthood.  Thou  didst  ])unisli  the  Hebrews 
when  they  sinned,  and  receive  them  again  wlien 
they  returned  to  Thee.  Thou  didst  torment  the 
Egyptians  with  ten  plagues,  and  divide  tlie  sea  for 
the  IsraeUtes  to  pass  tlirougli,  overwliclmiug  tlio 
Egyptians  in  their  pursuit  after  them  with  the 
waves  thereof.  Tliou  didst  sweeten  the  bitter  water 
witli  wood,  and  })ring  water  out  of  tlut  ])recipit()UH 
rock.  Thou  didst  rain  manna  from  iieuveii,  and 
quails  out  of  the  air  for  food.  Tiiou  madest  a 
l>illar  of  fire  to  give  them  light  in  the  uiglit,  and  a 
pdlar  of  acUjud  to  shadow  them  from  the  heat  in  tho 
day.     Thou  didst  raise  up  Joshua  to  bo  a  general  of 


82 


LTTURGY   OF 


their  armies,  and  by  him  destroy  seven  nations  of 
the  Canaanites.  Thou  didst  divide  Jordan,  and  dry 
up  the  rivers  of  Etham.  Thou  didst  overthrow 
walls  without  engines,  or  any  assistance  of  human 
force.  For  all  these  things,  glory  be  to  Thee,  0 
Lord  Almighty;  Thee  the  innumerable  hosts  of 
angels,  archangels,  thrones,  dominions,  principali- 
ties, virtues,  powers,  Thine  everlasting  armies 
adore.  The  Cherubim  and  Seraphim  with  six  wings, 
with  twain  they  cover  their  feet,  with  twain  their 
heads,  and  with  twain  they  fly,  and  say,  together 
with  thousand  thousands  of  archangels,  and  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  angels,  crying 
incessantly  with  uninterrupted  shouts  of  praise  ; 

And  let  all  the  People  say  with  them: 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  heaven 
and  earth  arc  full  of  His  glory.  Blessed  be  He  for 
evermore.     Amen. 

After  this,  let  the  Bishop  say. 

Thou  art  indeed  holy,  and  most  holy ;  the  highest, 
and  most  highly  exalted  for  ever.  Holy  also  is 
Thine  Only-]3egotten  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  God.  Who,  always  ministering  to  Thee  His 
God  and  Father,  not  only  in  the  various  works  of 
the  creation,  but  in  the  providential  care  of  it,  did 
not  overlook  lost  mankind.  But  after  the  law  of 
nature,  the  admonitions  of  the  positive  law,  the 
prcjphetical  reproofs,  and  the  superintendency  of 
angels,  when  men  had  perverted  both  the  positive 
and  natural  law,  and  had  forgotten  the  flood,  the 
burning  of  Sodom,  the  plagues  of  the  Egyptians, 
the  slaughter  of  the  nations  of  Palestine,  and  were 
now  ready  to  perish  universally ;  He,  Who  watf 
mnu's  Creator,  was  pleased  with  Thy  consent  to 


8AINT    CLEMENT.  P3 

become  man  ;  the  Lawgiver  to  be  under  the  law ; 
the  Priest  to  be  Himself  the  sacrifice  ;  the  Shep- 
herd a  sheep ;  to  appease  Thee  His  God  and  Father, 
to  reconcile  Thee  (")  to  the  world,  and  deliver  all 
men  from  the  impending  wi-ath.  He  was  incarnate 
of  a  Virgin,  God  the  Word,  the  beloved  Son,  the 
First-born  of  every  creature ;  and,  as  He  Himself 
had  foretold  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophets,  of  the 
seed  of  David,  and  of  Abraham,  and  of  the  tribe 
of  Juda.  He,  Who  forms  all  that  are  born  in  the 
world,  was  Himself  formed  in  the  womb  of  a 
Virgin  ;  He  That  was  without  flesh,  became  flesh  ; 
and  He  Who  was  begotten  from  eternity,  was  born 
in  time.  He  was  holy  in  His  conversation,  and 
taught  according  to  the  law;  He  cured  diseases,  and 
wrought  signs  and  wonders  amongst  the  people ; 
He  Who  is  the  feeder  of  the  hungry,  and  fills  every 
living  creature  with  His  goodness,  became  partaker 
of  His  own  gifts,  and  eat,  and  drank,  and  slept 
amongst  us :  He  manifested  Tliy  Name  to  them 
that  knew  it  not ;  He  dispelled  the  cloud  of  ignor- 
ance, restored  piety,  fulfilled  Thy  will,  and  finished 
Thy  work  which  Thou  gavcst  Him  to  do.  And 
when  He  had  regulated  all  these  things.  He  was 
seized  by  the  hands  of  a  disobedient  people,  and 
wicked  men  abusing  the  office  of  Priests  and  High- 
Priests,  Ijeing  betrayed  to  tlxtn  by  one  wlio  (ixcclbxl 
in  wickedness  ;  and  when  He  had  sullered  many 


0  Notice  here,  and  again  presently,  this  "  unRcriptural " 
phraHe.  Accorrlingto  S.  I'liurB  tfiicliing,  it  in  man  tliat  must  be 
reconcilfd  td  Hov,  not  God  to  iniin.  TIiIh  appcnrw  fn  mo  a 
gnod  firKuinunt  in  favour  of  tlio  Ix'licf  tliat  S.  Clcnicnt's 
Liturgy  was  nover  really  employed  by  any  Churcli.  Siic-li  an 
error  might  eanily  escape  the  notice  of  an  individual  writer ; 
hut  th(,'  mar^f'llouH  theological  accurury  of  early  Liturgiea 
Would  not  have  allowed  the  iihrasc  to  remain  in  use. 

G  2 


b4  LITURGY    OP 

things  from  tliem,  and  been  treated  with  all  manner 
of  indignity,  He  was  by  Thy  i)ermission  delivered 
to  Pilate  the  governor  ;  the  Judge  of  all  the  world 
was  judged,  and  the  Saviour  of  mankind  con- 
demned ;  although  impassible.  He  was  nailed  to 
the  cross ;  and  although  immortal,  died.  The 
Giver  of  Life  was  laid  in  the  grave,  that  He  might 
deliver  those  from  the  pains  of  death,  for  whose 
sake  He  came  ;  and  that  He  might  break  the  bands 
of  the  devil,  and  rescue  man  from  his  deceit.  He 
arose  from  the  dead  the  third  day  ;  and  after  con- 
tinuing forty  days  with  His  disciples,  He  was  taken 
up  into  heaven,  and  is  set  down  on  the  right  hand 
of  Thee  His  God  and  Father. 

Calling  therefore  to  remembrance  those  things 
which  He  endured  for  our  sakes,  we  give  thanks 
unto  Thee,  0  God  Almighty,  not  as  we  ought,  but 
as  we  are  able,  to  fulfil  His  institution.  For  in  the 
same  night  that  He  was  betrayed,  taking  bread  into 
His  holy  and  immaculate  hands,  and  looking  up  to 
Thee  liis  Goi>  and  Father,  and  breaking  it,  He 
gave  it  to  His  disciples,  saying.  This  is  the  Mystery 
of  the  New  Testament ;  take  of  it ;  eat ;  this  is  My 
Body,  which  is  broken  for  many  for  the  remission 
of  sins.  Likewise  also  having  mingled  the  cup 
with  wine  and  water,  and  blessed  it.  He  gave  it  to 
them,  saying  :  Drink  ye  all  of  it :  this  is  My  Blood, 
which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins  ; 
do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me  ;  for  as  often  as  ye 
eat  of  this  bread,  and  drink  of  this  cup,  ye  do  shew 
fortli  My  death  till  I  come. 

Wherefore  having  in  remembrance  His  passion, 
death,  and  resurrection  from  the  dead,  His  return 
into  heaven,  and  His  future  second  appearance, 
when  He  shall  come  with  glory  and  power  to  judge 
the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  to  render  to  every  man 


SAINT   CLEMENT.  86 

according  to  his  works  ;  we  offer  to  Tliee,  our  King 
and  our  God,  according  to  this  institution,  this 
bread  and  tliis  cup ;  giving  thanks  to  Tliee  through 
Him,  that  Tliou  hast  thought  us  worthy  to  stand 
before  Tliee,  and  to  sacrifice  unto  Thee.  And  we 
beseech  Thee,  that  Thou  wilt  look  graciously  on 
these  gifts  now  lying  before  Thee,  0  Thou  self- 
sufficient  God  ;  and  accept  them  to  the  honour  of 
Thy  Christ.  And  send  down  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  the 
Witness  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  on 
tliis  sacrifice,  that  He  may  make  this  bread  the 
Body  of  Thy  Christ,  and  this  cup  the  Blood  of 
Thy  Christ.  That  all  who  shall  partake  of  it  may 
be  confirmed  in  godliness,  may  receive  remission  of 
their  sins,  may  be  delivered  from  the  devil  and  his 
wiles,  may  l)e  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  may  1)0 
made  worthy  of  Thy  Christ,  and  may  obtain  ever- 
lasting life  ;  Thou,  (^")  0  Lord  Almighty,  being 
reconciled  to  them. 

We  further  pray  unto  Thee,  0  liOitn,  for  Thy 
holy  Church,  spread  from  one  end  of  the  world  unto 
the  other,  which  Thou  hast  purchased  by  the  pre- 
cious Blood  of  Thy  Christ,  that  Tliou  wilt  keep  it 
etedfast  and  immovable  unto  the  end  of  the  world ; 
and  for  every  Episcopate:  rightly  dividing  tlic  word  of 
truth.  Further  wo  call  upon  Thee  for  my  unworthi- 
ness,  who  am  now  offering  ;  and  for  the  whole  Pres- 
bytery ;  for  the  Deacons,  iind  ;ill  the  Clergy;  that 
Tliou  wouldst  endue  tliem  with  wisdom,  and  fill 
them  with  tlio  Holy  (inosT.  Further  we  call  upon 
Thee,  0  Lord,  for  the  King  and  all  that  are  in 
authority,  for  the  success  of  tlie  firmy,  that  they 
m;iybe  kindly  disposed  towards  us;  tliat  leading  our 
whole  life  in  peace  and  quietness,  we  may  glorify 


{'0)  Notice  wlifxt,  is  Hfiid  licfoifi  of  Ihis  expresHion. 


86  LITURGY    OF 

Thee  throiigli  Jesus  Christ  our  hope.  Further  we 
ofi'er  to  Thee  for  all  the  saints,  who  have  pleased 
Thee  from  the  beginning  of  the  world :  the  pa- 
triarchs, prophets,  righteous  men,  apostles,  martyrs, 
confessors,  bishops,  priests,  deacons,  sub-deacons, 
readers,  singers,  virgins,  widows,  laymen,  and  all 
whose  names  Thou  knowest.  We  further  offer  to 
Thee  for  this  people  ;  that  for  the  glory  of  Thy 
Christ  Thou  wilt  render  them  a  royal  priesthood, 
an  holy  nation  ;  for  the  virgins,  and  all  that  live 
chastely  ;  for  the  widows  of  the  Church  ;  for  those 
that  live  in  honourable  marriage,  and  child-bearing; 
for  the  young  ones  among  Thy  people  ;  that  Thou 
wilt  not  permit  any  of  us  to  become  castaways. 
Further  we  pray  unto  Thee  for  this  city,  and  the 
inhabitants  thereof ;  for  the  sick  ;  for  those  that 
are  in  bitter  slavery  ;  for  those  that  are  in 
banishment ;  for  those  that  are  in  prison  ;  for  those 
that  travel  by  land  or  by  water ;  that  Thou  wilt 
be  to  all  of  them  an  helper,  strengthener,  and  sup- 
porter. 

We  further  beseech  Thee  also  for  those  who  hate 
us  and  persecute  us  for  Thy  Name's  sake ;  for 
those  that  are  without,  and  wander  in  error  ;  that 
thou  wouldst  convert  them  to  that  which  is  good, 
and  appease  their  wrath  against  us.  Further  we 
pray  unto  Thee  for  the  catechumens  of  the  Church; 
for  those  Avho  are  under  possession,  and  for  those 
our  brethren  who  are  in  the  state  of  penance  :  that 
Thou  wilt  perfect  the  first  in  Thy  faith,  deliver  the 
second  from  the  power  of  the  wicked  one,  accept 
the  repentance  of  the  last,  and  grant  unto  them  and 
to  us  the  remission  of  our  sins.  Further  we  offer 
unto  Thee  for  seasonable  weather,  and  that  we  may 
have  plenty  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  :  that  receiving 
the  abundance  of  Thy  good  things   we  may  inces- 


SAINT  CLEMENT. 


87 


flantly  praise  Thee  Who  givest  food  to  all  flesh. 
Further  we  pray  uuto  Thee  for  all  those  who  are 
absent  upon  a  just  cause  ;  that  Thou  wilt  preserve 
all  of  us  in  godliness,  and  gather  us  together  in  the 
Idngdom  of  Thy  Christ  our  king,  the  God  of  every 
sensible  and  intelligent  being.  And  that  Thou  wilt 
keep  us  stedfast,  unblameable,  and  unrcproveable. 
For  to  Thee  is  due  all  glory,  adoration,  and  thanks- 
giving, honour,  and  worship  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  both  now  and  ever, 
and  world  without  end. 

And  let  all  tlu-  L'l'ojilc  say.  Amen. 

And  let  the  Bishop  say,  The  peace  of  God  be  with 
you  all. 

And  let  all  the  people  say,  And  with  thy  spirit. 

And  let  the  Deacon  ayain  proclaim. 

Again  and  again  let  us  pray  to  God  througli  His 

Christ,  in  bclialf  of  tlie  gift  that  is   offered  to  the 

Lord   God  ;    that   the   good   God   will   receive    it 

through    the    mediation    of     His    Christ    at    His 

heavenly  Altar  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour.     Let 

us  pray  for  this  Church   ami   people.     Let  us  pray 

for  every   I'ipiscopate,  for  tlie  whole    Pnjsbytery,  for 

all  the  Deacons  and  Ministers  in  Christ,  for  the 

whole  congregation  ;   that  the  Lord  will  preserve 

and  keep  them  all.     Let  us  pray  for  kings  and  all 

that  are  in  authority,  that  they   may   be   peaceable 

towards  us  ;  so  tliat  enjoying  a  quiet  and  peacciiblo 

life,  we  may   spend   our  days  in  all  godliness  and 

honesty.     Let  us  commemorate  the   holy   martyrs, 

that  we  may  be  deemed  worthy   to   be   purtal<eis  of 

their  trial.     Let  us  pray  for  all  those  who   have 

fallen  asleep  in  the  faith.     Let  us  pray  for  the  good 

condition  of  t!ie  air,  and  tlie  ripening  of  tlie  fruits. 

Let  U3  pray  for  those  that  are   newly-baptized,  that 


83  LITURGY   OV 

they  niaj'  be  confirmed  in  the  faith,  that  all  may  be 
mutually  comforted  by  one  another.  Raise  ns  up,  0 
God,  by  Thy  grace.  Rising  up,  let  us  devote  our- 
selves to  God  through  Jesus  Christ. 

And  let  the  BisJiop  say, 

0  God  Who  ari  great,  great  in  name  and  counsel, 
powerful  in  Thy  works,  the  God  aiid  Father  of  Thy 
holy  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  look  upon  this 
Thy  flock,  which  Thou  hast  chosen  through  Him  to 
the  glory  of  Thy  Name ;  sanctify  us  in  body  and 
soul  ;  and  grant  that  we  being  purified  from  all 
filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,  may  partake  of  the 
mystic  blessings  now  lying  before  Thee,  and  judge 
none  of  us  unworthy  of  them,  but  be  Thou  our 
supporter,  our  helper,  and  defender,  through  Thy 
Christ,  with  Whom  glory,  honour,  laud,  praise,  and 
thanksgiving  be  to  Thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost  for 
ever.     Amen. 

And  after  all  have  said  Amen,  let  the  Deacon  say, 
Let  us  attend. 

And  the  Bishop  shall  speak  aloud  to  the  People  in 
this  riiaiiner ; 

HOLY  THINGS  FOR  HOLY  PERSONS. 

And  let  the  People  answer:  There  is  one  Holy, 
one  Lord,  one  Jesus  Christ  to  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father,  blessed  for  evermore.  Amen.  Glory  be 
to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will 
towards  men.  Plosanna  to  the  Son  of  David. 
Blessed  be  He  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord: 
God  is  the  Lord,  and  He  hath  appeared  unto  us. 
Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

After  this,  let  the  Bishop  receive ;  then  the  Pres- 
byters, and  Deacons,  and  Sub-Deacons,  and  Readersp 


SAINT    CLEMENT.  89 

and  Sinfjers,  and  Ascetics;  and  of  the  women,  the 
Deaconesses,  Viry'ois,  and  Widows.  After  wards  the. 
Children,  and  then  all  the  People  in  order  with  fear 
and  reverence,  without  tumult  or  noise.  Arid  the 
Bishop  shall  r/ive  the  oblation,  saying.  The  Body  of 
Christ. 

And  let  him  that  receives  say.  Amen. 

And  the  Deaco)i  shall  hold  the  cup,  and  when  he  gives 
it,  let  him  say,  The  Blood  of  Christ,  the  cup  of  life. 

And  let  him  that  drinlcs  say.  Amen. 

Let  the  Tliirty-third  Psalm  he  said  ivhile  the  rest 
are  receiviny ;  and  uJien  all,  both  men  and  ivomen, 
have  received,  let  the  Deacons  take  np  that  which  is 
over  and  carry  them  into  the  Saoisty.  (") 

And  let  the  Deacon  say,  when  the  Singers  have 
finislied. 

Having  received  the  precious  Bod}'  ;ind  precious 
Blood  of  Christ,  let  us  give  thanks  to  Him  Who 
Latli  vouclisafed  that  we  slionld  receive  His  holy 
mysteries, — and  let  us  beseech  Hiiu  that  they  may 
not  he  to  us  to  judgment,  but  to  salvation  ;  to  the 
advantage  of  soul  and  body,  to  the  preservation  of 
godliness,  to  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  to  tlie  life  of  the 
■world  to  conic.  Let  us  rise.  In  the  grace  of  Christ, 
let  us  commend  ourselves  to  God,  the  only-unbegotten 
God,  and  to  His  Christ. 

And  let  the  Bishop  give  thanks. 
Master,   God  Almiglity,   Father  of  Christ,    Thy 

(")  'Eij  tA  iraffToipipta.  The  word  seems  originally  to  have 
been  used  of  that  which  was  borne  on  a  fhrine  :  from  iramSy, 
a  small  cha])(I ;  imd  that  u^aiii  froin  ndirfTu,  oitlior  in  the 
BciiHo  of  onianifntal  work  gciicnilly,  or  of  cinhroidt'ry  in  par- 
ticular, from  the  curtain  hung  before  suuh  a  Hhriiic. 


i)0  LITURGY    OP 

Blessed  Son,  Wlio  art  ready  to  hear  them  that  with 
uprightness  call  upon  Thee  ;  Who  also  knowest  the 
petitions  of  them  that  are  silent ;    we  yield  Thee 
thanks  that  Thou  hast  vouchsafed  us  to  receive  Thy 
holy  mysteries,  which  Thou  hast  afforded  us,  to  the 
preservation   of  godliness,  to  the  remission  of  sins, 
because  the  name  of  Thy  Christ  has  been  called 
upon  us,  and  we  have  been  made  members  of  Thy 
family.     Thou  That  hast  separated  us  from  fellow- 
ship with  the  wicked,  unite  us  witli  them  that  are 
hallowed  to  Thee  :  establish  us  in  the  truth  by  the 
coming  down  of  the  Holy  Ghost  :  that  which  we 
know  not  do  Thou  reveal :  that  which  is  wanting  in 
us  do  Thou  fill  up  ;  in  that  which  we  know  do  Thou 
strengthen  us  :  guard  continually  Thy  Priests  blame- 
less in  Thy  service  :  keep  evermore  kings  in  peace, 
rulers   in   righteousness,   the   atmosphere  in  good 
temperature,  the  fruits  in  abundance,  the  world  in 
all-powerful  {^'^)  forethought.      Soften   the   natures 
that  delight  in  war:    turn  again  that  which  has 
gone  astray  :  hallow  Thy  people  :  continually  pre- 
serve   them    that    are    in    chastity  :    preserve  _  in 
ftiith  those  who  are  in  marriage  :  fill  with  might 
them  that  observe  continence  :  bring  the  babes  to 
ripe  age  :  confirm  the  newly-initiated :  educate  the 
catechumens,  and  cause  them  to  become  worthy  of 
initiation  ;  and  bring  us  all  together  to  the  kingdom 
of  heaven :  through  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  :  through 
Whom. 

Ai^d  let  the  Deacon  say, 

To  God,  through  His  Christ,  bow  down  and 
receive  the  blessing. 

(12)  I  would  propose  to  substitute  for  iravaXKii,  which  does 
not  seem  to  give  any  particuhir  sense  here,  the  word  -KavaKQii, 
which  is  used  by  Nicander,  in  the  sense  of  all-healing,  and 
which  would  better  respond  to  the  gtneral  sense. 


SAINT    CLEMENT.  91 

A)id  let  the  Bishop  pray,  saying, 

God,  the  Almighty,  the  True  and  Incomparable, 
Who  art  ever  existent,  and  all  present,  and  existest 
in  nothing ;  Thou  Who  art  not  circumscribed  by 
places,  Who  art  not  aged  by  times.  Who  art  not 
limited  by  ages,  Who  art  not  led  aside  by  words  ; 
Who  art  not  subject  to  generation,  Who  needest 
not  guard,  Who  art  superior  to  destruction,  Who 
art  unsusceptible  of  turning,  Who  art  immutable 
by  nature.  Who  inhabitest  the  light  which  no  man 
can  approach  unto,  Who  art  comprehensible  to  all 
rational  natures  that  seek  Thee  with  good  feeling, 
Who  art  invisible  by  Thy  nature.  Who  art  compre- 
Jicnded  of  tliem  that  with  good  will  scelv  Thee  :  the 
God  of  Israel,  of  him  that  truly  (^'*)  seeth  Thee  :  of 
Tliy  people  that  believeth  in  Christ  :  be  favourable 
and  hear  me  for  Thy  Name :  and  bless  them  iliat 
have  bowed  down  their  necks  to  Thee,  and  give  to 
them  the  desires  of  their  liearts  so  far  as  may  bo 
expedient  for  them ;  and  grant  that  none  of  tlieiu 
may  bo  rejected  from  Thy  kingdom  ;  but  sanctify 
them,  guard,  shelter,  assist,  preserve  them  from  tlio 
enemy,  and  from  every  adversary.  Guard  their 
houses  ;  preserve  their  comings  in  and  tlicir  goings 
out:  for  to  Thee  is  glory,  I.muI,  iiingiiificcncc, 
worship,  adoration,  hikI  to  Thy  Son  Jes(;s,  Thy 
Cmuist,  our  LoKD  and  God  ajid  King,  and  to  tlio 
Hoi.Y  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  and  ages. 
Amen. 

And  Irt  the  Deacon  sai/.  Depart  in  peace. 
These   thhiffs  we,   the    AjkikIU's,    nijoin.    concenihirj   the 

MyHtic  Service  to  you,  the  Bvihopa,  the  Priests,  and 

the  Deacons. 


(")  Allusion  is  made  to  the  derivation  of  Israel— "that  Fees 
God." 


THE    DIVINE    LITUEGY 


OF 


^.  €l)r^0O0tom» 


Deacon.   Sir,  give  the  blessing. 

Priest.  Blessed  be  the  kingdom  of  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to 
ages  of  ages. 

Choir.  Amen. 

Deacon.  In  peace  let  us  make  our  supplications  to 
the  Lord. 

Choir.  Lord,  have  mercy  :  (and  so  at  the  end  of 
every  petition.) 

Deacon.  For  the  peace  that  is  from  above,  and  for 
the  salvation  of  our  souls,  let  us  make  our  supplica- 
tions to  the  Lord. 

For  the  pt'uce  of  the  whole  world,  the  stability  of 
the  holy  Churches  of  God,  and  the  union  of  all,  let. 

For  this  holy  house,  and  them  that  in  faith,  piety, 
and  the  fear  of  God  enter  into  it,  let. 
.  For  our  Ai-chbishop  N. ;  the  venerable  Presbytery, 
the  Diaconate  in  Christ,    all  the  Clergy  and  the 
laity,  let. 

For  our  most  pious  and  divinely  preserved  kings, 
all  their  palace  and  their  army,  let. 

That  He  would  liglit  on  their  side,  and  subdue 
every  enemy  and  adversary  under  their  feet,  let. 

For  this  holy  abode,  the  whole  city  and  country, 
and  them  that  inliabit  it,  in  faith,  let. 


LITURGY    OF   SAINT    OHRYBOSTOM.  93 

For  healthfuliiess  of  air,  plenty  of  the  fruits  of  the 
earth,  and  peaceful  times,  let. 

For  them  that  voyage,  that  joi;ruey,  that  are  sick, 
that  labour,  that  are  in  bonds,  and  their  safety,  let. 

That  we  may  be  preserved  from  all  tribulation, 
wrath,  danger,  and  necessity,  let. 

Assist,  preserve,  pity,  and  protect  us,  0  God,  by 
Thy  grace. 

Commemorating  the  all-holy,  spotless,  excellently 
laudable,  and  glorious  Lady,  the  Mother  of  God  and 
Ever- Virgin  Mary,  with  All  Saints,  let  us  commend 
ourselves  and  each  other  and  all  our  life  to  Christ 
our  God. 

Choir.  To  Thee,  0  Lord. 

Priest  (aloud).  For  all  glory,  worship,  and  honour 
befits  Thee,  Fathkr,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

The  first  Antiphon  is  sumj  by  the  Choir,  and  the 
Priest  saith  the  Prayer  of  the  first  Antiphon.  The 
iJeacon,  having  wade  a  reverence,  leaves  his  place,  and 
goes  and  stands  hrforc  the  Icon  if  the  Mother  (f  GoD,(^) 
looking  towards  the  Icon  of  Ciiiuht,  taking  hold  of  the 
Oration  with  three  fingers  of  his  right  hand. 

[First  Antiphon.  (*) 

Stichos.  Tlio  lieavcns  declare  the  glory  of  God  : 
and  the  firiiiaiiH'nt  shewc^tli  ]  lis  handywork. 

I3y  the  intercession  of  the  Mollier  of  God. 

(')  This  rnbrin  jh  not  given  in  tlio  ol'lor  erlitinnH.  In  the 
Russiun  Clinrcli  it  is  worded  diffi'it-nlly,  but  with  tbo  Hiinio 
moaning.  "  Tiio  Deacon  goes  and  HtiinilH  bchiri!  tlio  icon  of 
Chkist."  But  botli  dircctionH  simply  place  him  on  the  north 
side  of  the  holy  doors,  under  the  icon  of  the  Panaghia,  there 
represented. 

(»)  As  an  example  of  these  Antiphone,  I  have  given  those 
(or  Pentecost ;  and  shall  do  so  in  the  Bucceediug  Antiphons 


94  LITURGY    OF 

Stichos.  One  day  telleth  another :  and  one  night 
certifieth  another. 

By  the  intercession  of  tlie  Mother  of  God. 
Stichos.  Tliere  is  neitlier  speech  nor  language  :  but 
their  voices  are  heard  among  them. 

By  the  intercession  of  tlie  Mother  of  God. 
Stlchns.  Their  sound  is  gone  out  unto  all  lands  : 
And  their  words  unto  the  end  of  the  world. 

By  the  intercession  of  the  Mother  of  God. 

Glory.     Both  now. 

By  the  intercession  of  the  Mother  of  God,] 

Prayer  of  the  first  Antiphon. 

Lord  our  God,  of  boundless  might,  and  incompre- 
hensible glory,  and  measureless  compassion,  and 
ineffable  love  to  man,  look  down,  0  Lord,  according 
to  Thy  tender  love,  on  us,  and  on  this  holy  house, 
and  shew  to  us,  and  to  them  that  pray  with  us,  the 
riches  of  Thy  mercies  and  compassions. 

And  after  the  Antiphon  hath  been  sung,  the  Deacon 
comes  and  stands  in  the  accustomed  place,  adores  and 
*ays, 

Again  and  again  in  peace  let  us  make  our  sitppH- 
^ations  to  the  Lord. 

Assist,  preserve,  pity,  and  protect  us,  0  God. 

Commemorating  the  all-holy,  undefiled,  excel- 
lently laudable,  glorious  Lady,  &c. 

Exclamation.  For  Thine  is  the  sti'ength,  and 
Thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power  and  the  glory, 
Father,  &c. 

In  like  manner  the  Choir  sing  the  second  Antiphon. 
The  Deacon  doth  the  same  as  in  the  former  Prayer. 


SArST    CHEYSOSTOM.  95 

[Second  AntipJion. 

Stlchos.  The  Lord  bear  tliee  in  the  day  of  trouble  : 
the  Name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee. 

Save  us,  0  good  Paraclete,  who  chant  to 
Thee  Alleluia. 
Stichos.  Send  thee  help  from  the  Sanctuary  :  and 
strengthen  thee  out  of  Sion. 

Save  us,  0  good  Paraclete,  who  chant  to 
Thee  Alleluia. 
Stichos.  Kemember  all  thy  offerings  ;  and  accept 
thy  burnt  sacrifice. 

Save  us,  0  good  Paraclete,  who  chant  to 
Thee  Alleluia. 
Glory.     Both  now. 
The  Only-Begotten  Son  and  Word  of  God.] 

The  Prayer  of  the  Second  Antiphon. 

Lord  our  God,  save  Thy  people,  and  bless  Thine 
inheritance  ;  guard  tlie  fuhioss  of  Tliy  Church : 
hallow  them  that  love  the  beauty  of  Thine  house. 
Glorify  them  in  recompence  with  Thy  divine  power: 
and  forsake  iictt  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Thee. 

Deacon.  Again  and  again,  in  peace,  (tc. 

Assist,  preserve,  &c. 

Commemorating  tlic  most  holy,  &c. 

Kdclamalion.  For  Thou  art  the  good  God,  and  the 
lover  of  men,  and  to  Tlico  we  ftscrilK',  kc. 

The  Prayer  oj  the  Tliird  Anli/ihan.  (') 

Tliou,  Who  hast  given  us  grace,  at  this  time,  with 
one  accord,  to  make  our  common  supplications  unto 

(')  It  wonld  be  curiouH  to  trace  how  this  prayer  came  into 
onr  I'rayer-ljook  :  for  there  is  no  reaHon  to  Huppose  the 
RoformerH  intimately  acquainted  witli  tlie  formuliiries  of  tho 
Eiibtem  Church. 


96  IITURGY   OF 

Thee  :  and  dost  promise  that,  when  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  m  Thy  Name,  Thou  wilt  grant 
their  requests  :  fulfil  now,  0  Lord,  the  desires  and 
petitions  of  Thy  servants,  as  may  be  most  expedient 
for  them  :  granting  us  in  this  world  knowledge  of 
Thy  truth,  and,  in  the  world  to  come,  life  ever- 
lasting. 

And  while  the  Third  Antiphon  is  being  sung  by  the 
Choir,  or,  if  it  be  Sunday,  the  Beatitudes,  (*)  when 
they  come  to  the  Doxology,  the  Priest  and  Deacon 
■make  three  reverences  before  the  Holy  Table.  Then 
the  Priest,  taking  the  Holy  Gospel,  giveth  it  to  the 
Deacon :  and  thus  going  through  the  north  portion  of 
the  Sanctuary,  preceded  by  lamps,  they  make  the  Little 
Entrance. 

[Third  Antiphon. 

Stichos.  The  king  shall  rejoice  in  Thy  strength, 
0  Lord  :  exceedingly  glad  shall  he  be  of  thy  sal- 
vation. 

Blessed  art  Thou,  Christ  our  God. 
Thou  hast  given  him  his  heart's  desire  ;  and  hast 
not  denied  him  the  request  of  his  lips. 

Blessed  art  Thou,  Christ  our  God. 
Stichos.  For  Thou  shalt    prevent  him   with   the 
blessings  of  goodness  :    and  shalt  set  a  crown  of 
pure  gold  upon  his  head. 

Blessed  art  Thou,  Christ  our  God. 
Stichos.  He  asked  life  of  Thee,  and  Thou  gavest 
him  a  long  life  :    even  for  ever  and  ever. 

Blessed  be  Thou,  Christ  our  God. 


(<)  It  is  strange  that  Goar  should  not  have  known  that  our 
Lord's  Beatitudes  were  here  intended ;  or  at  least  should  not 
have  been  certain  of  it.  "  Hymni,"  says  he,  "  sanctorum 
beatitudinis  memoriam  recolentes :  vel  potius  ese  beatitudines 
de  quibus  S.  Matthaei  v. :  vel  tandem  pia  viventium  vota  pro 
defunctorum  requie." 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  97 

Isodicoji.  (*)  Be  Thou  exalted,  T.ord,  in  Thine 
own  strength :  so  will  we  sing  and  praise  Thy  power. 

Save  us,   0   good   Paraclete,  who  sing  to 
Thee  Alleluia.] 

Deacon  (in  a  low  voice.)  Let  us  make  our  supplica- 
tions to  the  Lord. 

Priest  secretly  saith  the  Prayer  of  the  Entrance, 

Master,  Lord,  and  our  God,  Who  hast  disposed  in 
heaven  troops  and  armies  of  Angels  and  Archangels, 
for  the  ministry  of  Thy  glory  :  grant  that  with  our 
entrance  there  may  be  an  entrance  of  holy  Angels, 
njiuisteriug  together  with  us,  and  with  us  glorifying 
Thy  goodness. 

For  to  Thee  is  due  all  lionour,  &c. 

The  Prayer  heiiiy  jinishcd,  the  Deacon  pointintf 
with  his  right  hand  to  the  east,  and  holding  his  Orarion 
with  three  Jitigers,  saith  to  the  Priest, 

Sir,  bless  the  Holy  Entrance. 
Priest.  Blessed   be   the   eiitrniice  of    Tliy   Saints, 
always,  now  and  ever,  aiid  to  ages  of  ages. 

Then  the  Deacon  thus  goes  to  the  Hegumen,  (")  if  any 
be  present,  who  kissrlh  the  Gospel ;  but  if  none  be  pre- 
sent, the  Priest  kisscth  it. 

And  when  the  Troparia  are  ended,  the  Deacon  comes 
forth  into  the  middle,  and  stand iiiy  before  the  I'riest, 
raiselli  Ins  hands  a  little,  and  showing  the  Holy  (joxpel, 
saith  with  a  loud  voice, 


(*)  The  antlifm  accompanying  tho  Little  Entrance. 

|«)  Tlifit  i.H,  the  Aliliiit.  Tho  nilnicH  of  tliiw  Litnrio'  asHumo 
that  cclohratiou  in  a  monaatery,  or  in  a  jiariBh  church  served 
by  muiika,  is  the  rule. — L. 

a 


98  .     LITURGY    OF 

Wisdom,  stand  up.  ('') 

Then  he  himself  adores,  and  the  Pnest  behind  him', 
and  they  both  go  to  the  holy  Bema,  and  the  Deacon  puts 
down  the  Holy  Gospel  on  the  Holy  Table,  and  the  Choir 
siny  the  accustomed  Troparia,  and  n'hen  they  are  singing 
the  last,  the  Deacon  saith, 

Let  us  make  our  supplications  to  the  Lord.  (^) 

Priest.  For  holy  art  Thou,  our  Gtod  ;  and  we 
ascribe  glory  to  Thee,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  now  and  for  ever. 

Deacon.  And  to  ages  of  ages. 

Choir.  Amen. 

The  Choir  siny  the  Trisayion. 
Holy  God,  Holy  and  Mighty,  Holy  and  Immortal, 
have  mercy  upon  us.  {Five  times.) 

In  the  meantime  the  Priest  saith  secretly  the  Prayer 
of  the  Trisayion. 

God,  Which  art  holy,  and  restest  in  the  holies, 
Who  art  hymned  with  the  voice  of  the  Trisagion  by 
the  Seraphim,  and  glorified  by  the  Cherubim,  and 
adored  by  all  the  heavenly  powers  ;  Thou  Who 
didst  from  nothing  call  all  things  into  being  ;  Who 
didst  make  man  after  Thine  image  and  likeness, 
and  didst  adorn  him  with  all  Thy  graces ;  Who 
givest  to  him  that  seeketh  wisdom  and  understand- 
ing, and  passest  not  by  the  sinner,  but  dost  give  re- 
pentance unto  salvation  ;  Who  hast  vouchsafed  that 
we,  Thy  humble  and  unworthy  servants,  should 
stand   even  at  this  time  before  the  glory  of  Thy 

(J)  This  seems  the  more  natural  reading ;  hut  many  editions 
read,  aocpia,  wliiclj  must  be  interpreted  to  mean,  "  In  wisdom 
stand  up  ;  "  and  thus  be  a  warning  against  the  sin  and  folly  of 
aow  sitting. 

(8)  In  the  older  copies  this  is  thus  given :  "  Sir,  bless  the 
time  of  the  Trisagion." 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  99 

holy  Altar,  and  should  pay  to  Thee  the  worship  and 
praise  that  is  meet :  receive,  Lokd,  out  of  the  mouth 
of  sinners  the  hymn  of  the  Trisagion,  and  visit  us 
in  Thy  goodness.  Forgive  us  every  offence,  volun- 
tary and  involuntary.  Sanctify  our  souls  and 
bodies,  and  grant  that  we  may  serve  Thee  in  holi- 
ness all  the  days  of  our  life  ;  through  the  inter- 
cessions of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  and  all  the 
Saints  who  have  pleased  Thee  since  the  beginning 
of  the  world.  (Aloud.)  For  holy  art  Thou,  oar  God, 
and  to  Thee. 

Wheti  this  Prayer  is  Jinishcd,  the  Priest  also  and 
Deacon  say  the  Trisagion,  makiiuj  at  iJie  same  time 
three  reverences  before  the  holy  Table.  Then  the  Deacon 
saith  to  the  Priest, 

Sir,  give  the  order.  And  they  yo  towards  the 
throne. 

And  the  Priest  saith  as  he  goes, 

Blessed  is  he  that  comctli  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord. 

Deacon.   Sir,  Idoss  ilie  throne. 

Priest.  Blessed  art  Thou  upon  the  throne  of  Thy 
glory,  Who  sittest  upon  the  Cherubim,  always,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

And   when    the    (Jhnlr  hare  Jinishrd  the  Trisagion,  the 
Deacon,  com  in;/  before  the  holy  doors,  saith, 
Let  us  attend. 
Reader.  Alleluia.  (") 

(')  Hore,  as  in  the  Rubric  nt  the  end  of  the  EpiHtle,  the 
Greek  ruiiM  thus  :  Alleluia,  a  PBalin  of  David.  But  no  pHiilin 
Ib  horo  8unj5 ;  and  tht  reforo  the  queHtlon  ariHCB,  what  iH  the 
reason  of  the  inBortiou.  Some  comnientatorH  receive  it  hh  an 
exj'lanation  of  the  Alleluia;  as  tuudi  as  to  sav,  that  this 
ascription  of  praise  waH  of  the  eomposition  of  I)avid.  But 
this  seems   very   harsh.       Were   there   aiiv   trace    in    Greek 

u   2 


100  LITURGY   OF 

Deacon.  Wisdom. 

The  Reader  saith  the  Prokimenon  Q°)   of  the  Apostle, 
e.  g.  on  the  Festival  of  S.  Demetrius. 

The  righteous  shall  rejoice  iu  the  Lord. 
Stichos.  Hear,  0  God,  my  voice. 
Deacon.  Let  us  attend. 

The  Apostle  is  read. 
And  the  Apostle  being  ended,  the  Priest  saith, 
(")  Peace  be  to  thee. 
Beader.  Alleluia. 

■  While  the  Alleluia  is  being  sung,  the  Deacon  goes  to 
the  Priest,  and  after  asking  for  a  blessing  from  hint, 
censes  the  holy  Table  in  a  circle,  and  the  whole  sanctuary, 
and  the  Priest.  A)id  the  Priest  saith  the  Prayer  before 
the  Gospel. 

0  Lord  and  lover  of  men,  cause  the  pure  light  of 
Thy  Divine  knowledge  to  shine  forth  in  our  hearts, 
and  open  the  eyes  of  our  understanding,  that  we 
may  comprehend  the  precepts  of  Thy  Gospel.  Plant 
In  us  also  the  fear  of  Thy  blessed  commandments, 
that  we,  trampling  upon  all  carnal  lusts,  may  seek 

ritualists  of  a  psalm  having  anciently  followed,  I  should 
believe  that  after  the  rite  was  given  up  the  Bubric  remained. 
The  addition  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Slavonic. 

Q")  The  Prokimenon,  or  short  anthem  before  the  Epistle, 
consists  of  a  verse  and  response :  goiiorally,  but  not  always, 
taken  from  the  Psalms,  but  hardly  ever  consisting  of  consecu- 
tive phrases.  According  to  S.  Germanus,  the  i'rokimenon 
signities  the  previous  proclamation  by  the  Prophets  of  that 
Christ  of  Whom  the  Ejustle  is  about  to  tell.  And  the  ver- 
sicles  are  chosen  with  that  intent,  e.g.  in  the  festival  of  the 
Expectation  of  the  Nativity  : 

r.  The  Lord  said  unto  Me,  Thou  art  My  Son. 

R.  Desire  of  Me,  and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for 
Thine  inheritance. 

(^'j  This  is  technically  called  fipiivfvuv  rbv  'kiT6ffTo\ov. 


SAINT    CHEYSOSTOM.  101 

a  lieavenly  citizenship,  botii  saying  and  doing  al- 
ways such  things  as  shall  well  please  Thee.  For 
Thou  art  the  illumination  of  our  souls  and  bodies, 
Christ  our  God  ;  and  to  Thee  we  ascribe,  &c. 

And  the  Deacon  drmviwj  niijh  to  the  Priest,  and 
laj/inii  aside  his  cense)-,  and  hnuintj  to  the  Priest  and 
holding  the  Orarion  uith  the  lloli/  Gospel  with  the  tips 
of  his  fingers,  in  the  place  of  the  Holy  Table  whereon  it 
lies,  saith. 

Sir,  bless  the  preacher  of  the  holy  Apostle  and 
EvangeUst  N. 

And  the  Priest,  signintj  him  with  the  Cross,  saith, 

God,  tlirough  the  preaching  of  the  holy  and 
glorious  Apostle  and  Evangelist,  N.,  give  the  word 
with  much  power  to  thee  who  evaugelizest,  to  the 
accomplishinnnt  of  the  Gospel  of  His  beloved  Son 
our  Loiw  Jksus  Chuist. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

And  harimj  adored  with  reverence  the  Holy  Gospel, 
he  takes  it  up;  and  yoiny  tJiroiiyh  the  holy  doars, 
preceded  by  tapers,  he  stands  in  the  ambon,  or  in  the 
appointed  place.  And  the  Priest  standing  before  the 
holy  Table,  and  looking  towards  the  west,  saith,  with  a 
loud  voice. 

Wisdom,  stand  u]» ;   let  ns  hear  tb(;    Holy  Gospel 
Peace  to  all. 

Deacon,  The  Lection  from  the  Holy  Gospel  accord- 
ing to  N. 

Priest.  Let  us  attend. 

Thr  Gospel  is  read. 
When  it  is/inishrd,  the  Priest  saith  to  the  Deacon, 
Peace  bo  to  thee  that  evan''elizcst. 


102  LITUBGY    OF 

And  the  Deacon  going  to  the  holy  doors,  retwvs  the 
Holy  Gospel  to  the  Priest ;  and  standing  in  the  accus- 
tomed place,  begins  thus : 

Let  us  all  say  with  our  whole  heart  and  soul, 

Choir.  Lord,  have  mercy.  (Thrice.) 

Lord  Almighty,  God  of  our  fathers,  we  pray 
Thee,  hear,  and  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Have  mercy  upon  us,  0  Ctod,  after  Thy  great 
goodness :  we  pray  Thee  hear,  and  have  mercy  upon 
us. 

Prayer  of  the  Ectene. 

Lord  our  God,  wc  pray  Thee  to  receive  this  in- 
tense supplication  from  Thy  servants,  according  to 
the  multitude  of  Thy  mercy,  and  send  down  Thy 
compassions  upon  us,  and  upon  all  Thy  people, 
which  is  expecting  the  rich  mercy  that  is  from  Thee. 

Deacon.  Further  we  pray  for  pious  and  orthodox 
Christians.  . 

Peojile.  Lord,  have  mercy.  {And  so  at  the  end  oj 
every  petitioii.) 

Further  we  pray  for  om-  Archbishop  N. 

Further  we  pray  for  our  brethren.  Priests,  Monks, 
and  all  our  brotherhood  in  Christ. 

Further  we  pray  for  the  blessed  and  ever  memor- 
able fomiders  of  this  holy  abode,  and  for  all  our 
fathers  and  brethren  that  "have  fallen  asleep  before 
UB,  and  he  here,  and  the  orthodox  that  lie  every- 
where. 

Further  we  pray  for  mercy,  life,  peace,  health, 
safety,  protection,  forgiveness,  and  remission  of  sins 
of  the  servants  of  God,  the  brethren  of  this  holy 
habitation. 

Further  we  pray  for  them  that  bring  forth  fruit 
and  do  good  deeds  in  this  holy  and  all-venerable 
temple,  that  labour,  that  sing,  and  for  the  people 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOJI.  103 

that  stand  around,  and  are  expecting  the  great  and 
rich  mercy  that  is  from  Thee. 

Exclamation.  For  Thou  art  the  merciful  God  and 
the  lover  of  men,  and  to  Thee  we  ascrilic. 

Deacon.  Catechumens,  pray  unto  the  Lord.  Let 
us,  the  faithful,  pray  for  the  Catechumens,  that  the 
Lord  may  have  mercy  upon  them,  avA  may  teach 
them  the  word  of  truth. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy.  And  so  nt  the  end  of 
each  pt'titinn. 

That  He  may  reveal  to  them  the  Gospel  of  right- 
eousness. 

That  He  may  unite  them  to  His  Holy  Catholio 
and  Apostolic  Cliurch. 

Preserve,  have  mercy,  support,  and  continually 
guard  them,  0  God. 

Catechumens,  bow  your  heads  to  the  Lord. 

Prayer  nf  the  Catechumens  before  the  holy  Oblation. 

Lord  our  God,  Who  dwellcst  on  higli,  and  be- 
holdest  the  liumble,  Wlio  didst  send  forth  the  salva- 
tion of  the  race  of  man.  Thine  Only-iiegotten  Son, 
our  God  and  Lord  Jksus  Christ,  look  down  upon 
Thy  servants,  the  Catechumens,  who  have  bowed 
their  necks  unto  Thee;  and  make  them  worthy,  in 
due  season,  of  tlie  laver  of  regeneiation,  of  the 
forgiveness  of  sins,  of  the  robe  of  immortality  ; 
unite  tliem  to  Tliy  Holy  Catholic  and  AposloUo 
Church,  and  number  Ihem  togelher  with  Thy  elect 
flock.  {Aloud.)  That  they  also,  together  with  us, 
may  glorify  Thy  honourable  and  majestic  Name, 
I'ather,  Son,  and  Hoi.v  (iiiosT,  now  iuid  (!ver,  and 
to  ages  of  ages. 

Choir.  Amen. 

77/''  I'rie^l  mifUhls  ihr  ( !ni/ii)iuL 


104  LITURGY   OF 

EXPULSION    OF    THE    CATECHUMENS. 

Deacon.  Let  all  the  Catechumens  depart;  (^^)  Cate- 
chumens depart ;  let  all  the  Catechumens,  depart : 
let  not  any  of  the  Catechumens  — ;  let  all  the 
faithful ; — 

Again  and  again  in  peace  let  us  make  our  suppli- 
cations to  the  Lord.  And  he  saith  the  short  Ectene : 
while  the  Priest  saith  secretly 

The  first  Prayer  of  the  Faithful,  after  the  unfolding  oj 

the  Corporal. 

We  yield  Thee  thanks,  Lord  God  of  Sahaoth, 
Who  hast  thought  us  worthy  to  stand  even  now  at 
Thine  Altar,  and  to  fall  down  before  Thy  mercies, 
for  our  sins  and  the  ignorances  of  Thy  people  : 
receive,  0  God,  our  supplications ;  make  us  worthy 
to  offer  to  Thee  supitlications  and  prayers,  and 
unbloody  sacrifices  for  all  Thy  people ;  and  strengthen 
us,  whom  Thou  hast  placed  in  this  Thy  ministry, 
with  the  strength  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  we  may 
without  offence,  and  without  scandal,  in  a  pure  testi- 
mony of  our  conscience,  call  upon  Thee  in  every 
time  and  place  :  that  hearing  us  Thou  mayest  be 
merciful  to  us  in  tiie  multitude  of  Thy  goodness. 

iJeacun.  Assist,  preserve,  pity. 

Wisdom. 

Priest.  Exclamation.  For  to  Tlioe  belongeth  all 
gloi-y,  honour,  and  worship.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

TJi'dcon.  Again  and  again  in  peace  let  us  make  our 
supplications  to  the  Lord.  And  he  saith  the  short 
Ectene ;  while  the  Priest  saith  secretly 

P2)  Literally,  pass  forward,  (wpoeAdtTe)  but  used  quite  in  the 
Beose  of  depart ;  and  bo  translated  in  the  Slavonic. 


6AINT    CHRYSOSTOAI.  105 

The  second  Prayer  of  the  Faithful. 

Apain  and  oftentimes  we  fall  down  before  Thee, 
and  beseech  Thee,  0  good  God  and  lover  of  men, 
that  Thou  wouldest  look  upon  our  prayers,  purify 
our  souls  and  Itodies  from  all  pollution  of  flesh  and 
spirit,  and  grant  that  our  standing  before  Thy  holy 
Altar  may  be  irreprehensible  and  unblameable. 
Grant,  0  Lord,  to  them  who  pray  together  with  us, 
advance  in  'holy  life,  wisdom,  and  spiritual  under- 
standing: grant  them  at  all  times  with  fear  and 
love  to  serve  Thee  irreprehensibly  ;  and  without 
condemnation  to  partake  of  Thy  holy  mysteries,  and 
to  be  tliought  worthy  of  Thy  heavenly  kingdom. 

Deacon.  Assist,  preserve,  etc. 

Wisdom. 

Priest.  Exclamation.  That,  being  ever  guarded 
by  Thy  might,  we  may  ascribe  glory  to  Thee, 
Fathkk,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and 
to  ages  of  ages. 

Choir.  Amen. 

The  Choir  siny  the  Cherubic  Hipnn. 

Let  us,  who  mystically  represent  the  Cherubim, 
and  sing  tlic  lioly  liymn  to  the  quickening  Trinity, 
layby  at  tliis  time  nil  worldly  cares;  that  we  may 
receive  the  King  of  ('lory,  invisibly  attended  by  the 
angelic  orders.     Alleluia,  Alb-hiia,  Alleluia. 

Prayer  which  the  I'riest  sailh  secretly,  uhile  the 
('henihir  Ilifinn  is  luini/  siinr/.  (^*) 


(^*)  Ah  t)io  Clit;rti))ic  liymu  waH  coinjxmed  only  in  the  time 
of  Justinian,  it  iw  clcur  tliat  tlio  prayer  of  thiit  hymn  ninHt  1)6 
an  inHertioii.  And  accordingly,  it  in  not  to  be  fnuiid  in  the 
very  ancient  Bnrbrrini  >[S.  of  thig  Liturgy,  to  wliicli  Goar  hu 
often  refers. 


106  LITURGY   O^ 

None  IS  wortliy  among  tlicm  that  are  bound  with 
fleshly  desires  and  ijleasures  to  approach  Tliee,  nor 
to  draw  near,  nor  to  sacrifice  unto  Thee,  King  ot 
Glory  ;  for  to  minister  to  Thee  is  great  aiid  fearful, 
{.' veu  to  the  heavenly  powers  themselves.  Yet  through 
Thine  inet!'able  and  measureless  love,  Thou  didst 
unchangeably    and    immutably   become   man,  and 
didst  (")  take  the  title  of  our  High  Priest,  and  didst 
give  to  us  the  Hierurgy  of  this  liturgic  and  un- 
bloody  Sacrifice,  as  being  Lord  of   all :  for  Thou 
only,"0  Lord  our  God,  rulest  over  things  in  heaven 
and  things  on  earth,  Who  sittest  upon  the  cherubic 
throne,  Lord  of  Seraphim,  and  King  of  Israel,  only 
holy,  and  resting  in  the  holies.     On  Thee  I  impor- 
tunately call,  {'')  That  art  only  good  and  ready  to 
hear,  look  upon  me,  a  sinner,  and  Thine  unworthy 
servant,   and  cleanse  my  soul  and  heart  from  an 
fvil  conscience  ;  and  strengthen,  with  the  might^  of 
Thy  Holy  Ghost,  me  that  have  been  endued  with 
the  grace  of  the  Priesthood,  that  I  may  stand  by  this 
Tliy  holy  Altar,  and  sacrifice  Thy  holy  and  spotless 
Body  and  precious  Blood.     For  Thee  I  approach 
bowing  my  neck,  and  pray  of  Thee,  Turn  not  Thy 
face  away  from  me,  nor  reject  me  from  the  number 
of  Tliy  sons  ;  but  condescend  that  these  gifts  may 
be   ofl^ered   to    Thee   by   me,  a   sinner  and  Thine 
unworthy  servant.  For  Thou  art  He  that  offerest,(*®) 

(M)  'Exprj/tiiTiiraj.  King,  less  correctly,  "  becamest."  But 
in  the  new  Greek,  this  verb  means  to  assume  a  name ;  ao 
Polybius,  more  than  once. 

pj  King,  "I  call  upon  Tbee:"  Goar,  "Te  deprecor."  But 
Suaunai  is  more  than  this  ;  it  is  "  to  put  a  man  out  of  counte- 
nance," and  so  "to  Ije  importunate:  "  and  is  frequently  thus 
used  by  Plutarch,  though  not  by  more  classical  authors. 

(J6j  That  ojfirest  and  art  offered,  and  receivest  and  art  dis- 
tributed. One  should  have  thought  that  no  great  dilticulty 
could   be  found  or    made   in  these  words.       That  oj'erest — 


ilAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  107 

and  art  offered,  and  receivest  and  art  distributed, 
Christ  our  God  ;  and  to  Thee  we  ascribe,  &c. 

When  tJiis  prayer  is  finished,  they  also  say  the 
Cherubic  Hymn.  Then  the  Deacon,  takinfj  the  censer, 
and  pnttiny  incense  on  it,  goes  to  the  Priest :  and  after 
receiving  a  blessing  from  him,  censes  the  holy  Table  in  a 
circle,  and  all  the  sanctuary,  and  the  Priest :  and  he 
saith  the  51st  Psalm,  and  other  penitential  Troparia, 
such  as  he  will,  with  the  Priest.  And  they  go  to  the 
Prothisis,  the  Deacon  jneceding .  And  thfi  Deacon  having 
censed  the  holy  things,  and  said  to  himself, 

God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,  saith  to  the  Priest, 
Sir,  lift  up. 

And  the  Priest  raising  the  Air,  (")  puts  it  on  the  left 
shoulder  of  the  Deacon,  saying, 

Lift  up  your  hands  in  the  sanctuary,  and  bless 
the  Lord. 

Then,  taking  the  holy  disk,  he  puts  it  with  all  care 
and  reverence  on  the  Deacon's  head,  the  Deacon  also 
holding  the  censer  with  one  of  his  fingers.  And  the 
Priest  himself  taking  the  holy  chalice  in  his  hands, 
they  go  through  the  nurth  part,  preceded  by  tapers,  and 
nifikr 

"  for  tliiH  Ho  did  ouco,  wLeu  lie  ofTeri^il  up  Himself," — and  art 
offi-red,  ill  the  Oblntion  of  tho  MyHtic  Sncrifico, — 'Diat  receivest 
tliiit  Sacrifice,  and  art  received  by  tiicin  thut  present  it.  How- 
ever, about  the  year  1155  a  jfreat  diHimie  arose  on  tho  ques- 
tion. A  Deacon  of  Constantinople  taught  that  this  could  not 
be  the  nieanin<{of  the  paHHa;;e,  liecaiise  tlin  Hncrilico  was  not 
oflfered  to  Chuiht,  but  to  tlie  FATnr.u  and  the  fIor>Y  (Iiiost 
alone.  A  Council  met  at  ConHtantiin)|)k',  .lanutiry  'Jfilh,  115G, 
under  tlic  Patriarch,  Luke  Chrysobcrges,  to  decide  the  (luea- 
lion  :  ami  Sotorichus  Panteugeuus,  I'ntriarcii  elect  of  Antioch, 
who  had  tauglit  the  now  dogma,  was  declared  unworthy  of  hia 
ofBce. 

P')  The  fine  veil  v.  Inch  lies  over  the  paten  and  chalice.  — L. 


108  liturgy  of 

The  Great  Entrance,  ('*) 

both  praying  for  all,  and  saying,  The  Lord  God 
remember  us  all  in  His  kingdom,  always,  now  and 
ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

And  the  Deacon,  going  within  the  holy  doors,  stands 
on  the  right  hand;  and  when  the  Priest  is  about  to  enter 
in,  he  saitli  to  him. 

The  Lord  God  remember  thy  Priesthood  in  His 
kingdom. 

Prient.  The  Lord  God  remember  thy  Diaconate  in 
His  kingdom,  always,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of 
ages. 

And   the   Priest  sets  down  the  chalice  on  the  holy 

Table,  and  taking  the  holy  disk  from  the  head  of  the 
Deacon,  he  places  it  tliere  also,  saying, 

Honourable  Joseph  took  Thy  spotless  Body  from 
the  cross,  and  wra])ped  it  in  clean  linen  with  spices, 
and  with  funeral  rites  placed  it  in  a  new  tomb. 

In  the  grave  bodily,  in  Hades  spiritually,  as  God, 
with  the  thief  in  paradise  as  in  a  throne,  wast  Thou, 
0  Christ,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Who  art  incircumscript  and  fillest  all  things. 

How  life-giving,  how  more  beautiful  than  para- 
dise, and  verily  more  splendid  than  any  royal 
chamber,  is  Thy  tomb,  0  Christ,  the  fountain  of 
our  resurrection. 

(^)  It  is  the  custom  of  those  who  are  sick,  or  who  stand  in 
need  of  any  especial  blessing,  to  kneel  in  the  path  of  the 
{■Jreat  Entrance,  in  order  to  receive  the  virtue  of  the  Holy 
Mysteries.  The  custom  of  adoring  that  which  is,  as  yet,  mere 
bread  and  wine,  with  anticipative  adoration,  has  idways  cost 
tlie  Orientals  much  trouble  to  defend  it ;  and  it  has  been 
abolished  by  the  Roman  Censors  in  Uniat  rites.  A  treatise 
on  the  s'lbjest,  by  Gabriel  of  Philadelphia,  was  pubHshed  at 
Venice  in  1C04. 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  109 

Then,  taking  the  coverings  from  the  holy  disk  and 
the  hohj  chalice,  he  places  them  on  one  part  of  the  holy 
Table ;  and  taking  the  Air  from  the  Deacons  shoulder, 
and  censing  it,  he  covers  with  it  the  holy  things,  saying, 

HonoiU'able  Joseph,  down  to  in  a  new  tomb. 

And   taking    the  censer  from  the  Deacon's  hands,    h» 
censeth  the  holy  things  thrice,  saying. 

Then  shall  they  offer  young  bullocks  upon  Thine 
Altar. 

And  putting  down  the  censer,  and  letting  fall  his 
phetonion,  ('^)  and  bowing  his  head,  he  saith  to  th& 
Deacon, 

Eemember  me,  brother  and  fellow-minister. 
Deacon.  The  Lord  God  remember  thy  Priesthood, 
in  His  kingdom. 

Then  the  Deacon  also  himself  slightly  butriiig  his 
head,  and  holding  his  Orarion  with  the  three  fmyers  of 
his  right  hand,  saith  to  the  Priest, 

Holy  Sir,  pray  for  me. 

Priest.  The  Holy  Ghost  siiall  come  upon  tbee, 
and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow 
thee. 

Deacon.  The  same  Spirit  sball  bo  fellow-minister 
with  us,  all  the  days  of  our  Hfe. 

And  again,  Holy  Sir,  remember  me. 

Priest.  Tlio  Loud  God  rciucmbcr  thee  in  His 
kingdom,  always,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of 
ages. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

And  having  ki.tscd  the    Priest's    hand,  he  goes   nut,  and 
standing  in  the  customary  place,  saith, 

(«)  The  Eastern  chasuble.— L. 


110  THE    LITURGY    OF 

Let  US  accomplish  our  supplications  to  the  Lord. 

Choir.  Kyrie  eleisou.  And  so  to  the  end  of  each 
snj'raye. 

Deacon.  For  the  precious  gifts  that  have  been 
proposed,  let  us  make  our  suppUcatious  to  the  Lord. 

For  this  lioly  house,  aud  them  that  with  faith, 
reverence,  and  the  fear  of  God,  enter  into  it,  let. 

That  we  may  bo  delivered  from  all  afflictions, 
passion,  danger,  and  necessity,  let. 

Assist,  preserve. 

That  the  whole  day  may  be  perfect,  holy,  peaceful, 
without  sin,  let  us  ask  from  the  Lord. 

Chair.  Grant,  0  Lord.  And  so  at  the  end  of  every 
suffrage. 

Deacon.  The  angel  of  peace,  faithful  guide,  guar- 
dian of  our  souls  and  bodies,  let. 

Pardon  and  remission  of  our  sins  and  our  trans- 
gressions, let. 

Things  that  are  good  and  profitable  for  our  souls, 
and  peace  to  the  world,  let. 

That  we  may  accomplish  the  remainder  of  our 
lives  in  peace  and  penitence,  let. 

Christian  ends  of  our  lives,  without  torment,  with- 
out shame,  peaceful,  aud  a  good  defence  at  the  fear- 
ful tribunal,  let  us  ask  from  Christ. 

Commemorating  the  all-holy. 

As  this  Ectene  (^)  is  being  said,  the  Priest  saith 
secretly  the  Prayer  of  Oblation,  after  the  Divine  Gifts 
are  placed  on  the  holy  Table. 

Lord,  God  Almighty,  Only  Holy,  Who  receivest 
the  sacritice  of  praise  from  them  that  call  upon 
Thee  with  their  whole  heart,  receive  also  the  sup- 

(*)  It  is  not  worth  while  to  notice  the  verbal  differences  of 
this  Ectene.  In  no  part  of  the  Liturgy  do  MSS.  and  editions 
«o  much  ^a^y.     But  the   variations  are  quite  non-essential. 


BAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  Ill 

plication  of  us  sinners,  and  cause  it  to  approach  to 
Thy  holy  Altar,  and  enable  us  to  present  gifts  to 
Thee,  and  spiritual  sacrifices  for  our  sins,  and  for 
the  errors  of  the  people :  and  cause  us  to  find  grace 
in  Thy  sight,  that  this  oiu"  sacrifice  may  be  accep- 
table unto  Thee,  and  that  the  good  Spirit  of  Thy 
grace  may  tabernacle  upon  us,  and  upon  these  gifts 
presented  unto  Thee,  and  upon  all  Thy  people. 

Priest.  {Exchnnntion.)  Through  the  mercies  of 
Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  with  Whom  Thou  art  to 
be  blessed,  and  with  the  all-holy,  and  good,  and 
quickening  Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Peace  to  all. 

Deacon.  Let  us  love  one  another,  that  we  may 
with  one  mind  confess. 

Choir.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  the  Con- 
substantial,  and  Undivided  Trinity. 
And  the  Priest,  hdviiuj   tlirici'   ddored,  kisses  the    Holy 
Gifts,  as  they  lie  veiled,  saying  secretly  thrire. 

I  will  love  Thee,  0  Lord,  my  strength  ;  the  Lord 
is  my  stony  rock  and  my  defence. 

7/  there  he  tuo  or  iiiori'  Priests,  each  kisses  the  Holy 
Thiiiys,  aud  then  each  other  on  l/ie  shotildrr,  saying, 

Christ  is  among  us. 

He  is  and  will  be. 

//(  nice  manner  also  the  Dearon  adores  thrice  where 
he  stands,  and  kisses  his  Orariun  on  its  cross,  and  thus 
exclaims, 

The  doors !  the  doors  I  (")  Let  us  attend  in 
wisdom. 

{^)  The  meaning  of  thiB  sentence  is  very  obscure.  Some 
autliors,  as  CnbiiHilaH,  ox]ilain  it  mysticnlly,  as  au  injnucttion 
to  rIoHo  the  doorH  of  thn  mind  again. -t.  worldly  busiiii'SH  iiud 
tlinn^jlits;  others,  much  more  naturully,  take  it  as  au  injunc- 
tion to  the  Clerks,  not  to  allow  heathens,  &c.,  to  be  iirosent 
at  the  Divine  Mysteries. 


112.  THE   LiTUBGY   OF 

People.  I  believe  in  one  God,  &c. 
Deacon.  Stand  we  well:  stand  we  with  fear :  let 
us  attend  to  offer  the  holy  Oblation  in  peace. 

Choh .  The  mercy  of  peace,  the  sacrifice  of  praise. 

And  the  Deacon  adores,  and  comes  to  the  holy  Bema; 
and  taking  the  fan,  fans  the  Oblation  reverenthj. 

And  the  Priest  taking  the  Air  from  the  Holy  Gifts, 
lays  it  on  one  side,  saying. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love 
of  God  the  Father,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  be  with  you  all. 

Choir,  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Priest.  Lift  we  up  our  hearts. 

Choir.  We  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord. 

Priest.  Let  us  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord. 

Choir.  It  is  meet  and  right  to  worship  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  consubstantial 
and  iindivided  Trinity. 

Priest.  It  is  meet  and  right  to  hymn  Thee,  to  bless 
Thee,  to  praise  Thee,  to  give  thanks  to  Thee,  to 
worship  Thee,  in  every  part  of  Thy  dominion.  For 
Thou  art  God,  ineffable,  inconceivable,  invisible, 
incomprehensible,  the  same  from  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting ;  Thou  and  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost.  For  Thou  broughtest  us  forth  to 
being  from  nothing,  and  when  we  had  fallen  didst 
raise  us  up  again,  and  gavest  not  over  until  Thou 
badst  done  every  thing  that  Thou  mightcsc  bring  us 
to  heaven,  and  bestow  on  us  Thy  kingdom  to  come. 
For  all  these  things  we  give  thanks  to  Thee,  and  to 
Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  and  Thy  Holy  Ghost, 
for  Thy  benefits  which  we  know,  and  which  we 
know  not,  manifest  and  concealed,  which  Thou  hast 
bestowed  upon  us.  We  give  Thee  thanks  also  for 
this  ministry  which  Thou  hast  vouchsafed  to  receive 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  113 

at  our  hamls  :  although  there  stand  by  Thee 
tliousauds  of  Archangels,  aud  teu  thousands  of 
Angels,  the  Cherubim,  and  the  Seraphim  that  have 
six  wings,  and  are  full  of  eyes,  and  soar  aloft  on 
their  wings,  singing,  vociferating,  shouting,  and 
saying  the  triumphal  hymn  : 

Choir.  Holy,  Holy,'  Holy,  Lord  of  Sabaoth ; 
heaven  aud  earth  are  full  of  Thy  glory.  Hosanna 
in  the  highest :  blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  :  Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

Then  the  Deacon,  takhuj  the  asterisk  from  the  huly 
disk,  si(i)iH  it  with  tlie  sifjn  of  the  cross,  and  having 
saluted  it,  replaces  it. 

Priest,  We  also  with  these  blessed  powers,  Lord 
and  Lover  of  men,  cry  and  say,  Holy  art  Thou  and 
All-Holy,  Thou  aud  Thy  Only-J3ogotten  Son,  and 
Thine  Holy  (nrosT.  Holy  art  Thou  and  All-Holy, 
aud  great  is  the  majesty  of  Thy  glory  : 

Who  didst  so  love  Thy  world,  as  to  give  Thine 
Only-Begotten  Son,  that  whoso  lielievetli  in  lliiu 
might  not  perish,  but  might  have  everlasting  life  : 
Who  having  come,  and  having  fulfilJed  for  us  all 
the  dispensation,  in  the  niglit  wherein  He  was 
betrayed,  or  rather  surrendered  Himself  for  the  life 
of  the  world,  took  bread  in  His  lioly  and  pure  and 
spotless  hands,  and  gave  thaidts,  and  blessed,  and 
hallowed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His  holy  Hisciples 
and  Apostles,  saying,  [(timid,)  Take,  eat :  this  is 
My  Body  which  is  broken  for  you  for  the  remission 
of  sins. 

(Jhoir.  Amen. 

Priest,  [in  a  low  voice,)  Likewise  after  supper  Ho 
took  the  cup,  saying,  (aloud,)  Drink  ye  all  of  thiw  : 

This  is  ^[y  P.lood  of  tlie  New  TcHtamrnt.  wliicli  is 
shed  for  you  and  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

I 


114  IHE   LITURGY   OP 

Choir.  Amen. 

Priest,  (in  a  Imv  vnue,)  We  therefore  remembering 
this  sahitary  precept,  and  all  that  happened  on  our 
behalf,  the  Cross,  the  Tomb,  the  Eesurrection  on 
the  third  day,  the  Ascension  into  heaven,  the  Session 
on  the  right  hand,  the  second  and  glorious  coming 
again,  (aloud,)  in  (-'")  behalf  of  all,  and  for  all,  we 
offer  Thee  Thine  own  of  Thine  own. 

Choir.  Thee  we  hymn,  Thee  we  praise  :  to  Thee 
we  give  thanks.  Lord,  and  pray  to  Thee,  our  God. 

Priest,  (i)i  a  low  voice,)  Moreover  we  offer  unto 
Thee  this  reasonable  and  unbloody  sacrifice  :  and 
beseech  Thee  and  pray  and  supplicate  ;  send  down 
Thy  Holy  Ghost  upon  us,  and  on  these  proposed 
gifts. 

The  Deacon  lays  doivn  the  veil,  and  goes  nearer  to 
the  Priest,  and  they  both  adore  thnce  before  the  holy 
Table,  praying  secretly,  saying, 

God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner. 

Then 

Lord,  Who  didst  send  down  Thy  Holy  Ghost  the 
third  hour  on  the  Apostles,  take  Him  not  from  us, 
0  good  God,  but  renew  Him  in  us  who  pray  to 
Thee: 

Then 

Make  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God,  and  renew  a  right 
spirit  within  me.  Cast  me  not  away  from  Thy 
presence. 

Glory. 

Blessed  art  Thou,  Christ  our  God,  Who  didst  fill 
the  fishermen  with  all  manner  of  wisdom,  sending 
down  upon  them  the  Holy  Ghost  :  and  by  them 

P)  Kori  irdvra  is  better  rendered  by  in  relation  to  all,  or  in 
behalf  (if  nil,  tljan  by  the  usual  verBion,  m  all. 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM. 


115 


hast  brought  the  whole  world  into  Thy  net,  0  Lover 
of  men  :  glory  be  to  Thee. 

Both  now. 

When  the  Highest  came  down  and  confounded  the 
tongues,  He  divided  the  nations ;  when  He  distri- 
buted the  tongues  of  fire.  He  called  all  to  unity,  and 
with  one  voice  we  praise  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Theyi  the  Deacon  bowing  his  head,  and  pointing 
with  his  Orarlon  to  the  Holy  Bread,  saith  in  a  low 
voice. 

Sir,  bless  the  holy  bread. 

The  Priest  standeth  iip,  and  thrice  maketh  the  sign  of 
the  Cross  on  the  Holy  Gifts,  saying. 

And  make  this  bread  the  precious  Body  of  Thy 
Chkist. 

Deacon.  Amen.     Sir,  bless  the  holy  cup. 

Priest.  And  that  which  is  in  this  cup,  the  precious 
Blood  of  Thy  Christ. 

Deacon.  Anion.     And  pointing  wiilt,  km  Urarion 
both  the  Holy  Tlihigs, 

Sir,  bless. 

Priest.  Changing  them  by  Tliy  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 

Then  the  Deacon  hows  his  head  to  the  Priest,  and 

saith, 

Holy  Sir,  remember  mo  a  sinner. 

Then  he  stands  in  his  fornwr  place,  and  taking  the  fan, 
fans  the  Olilntiini  a.s  hrfore. 

Priest.  So  tliat  they  may  be  to  those  that  partici- 
pate, for  purification  of  soul,  forgivoiicss  of  sins, 
communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  fnlfilmnnt  of  the 
kingdom  of  lieavcn,  boldness  towards  Thoe,  and  not 
to  judgment  nor  to  condemnation. 

I  2 


116  LITURGY   OF 

Aud  further  we  offer  to  Thee  this  reasonable  ser- 
vice on  behalf  of  those  who  have  departed  in  the 
faith,  our  ancestors,  Fathers,  Patriarchs,  Prophets, 
Apostles,  Preachers,  Evangelists,  Martyrs,  Con- 
fessors, Virgins,  and  every  just  spirit  made  i^erfect 
in  the  faith. 

The  Deacon  censes  the  holy  Table  in  a  circle,  and 
commemorates  such  of  the  living  and  dead  as  he  will. 

Priest,  (aloud.)  Especially  the  most  holy,  undefiled, 
excellently  laudable,  glorious  Lady,  the  Mother  of 
God  and  Ever- Virgin  Mary. 

Choir.  In  Thee,  0  full  of  grace,  {as  in  the  lAtnrgij 
of  S.  James.)  t^-'^'' 

The  Deacon  reads  the  diptychs  of  the  dejyarted. 

Priest.  The  holy  John  the  Prophet,  Forerunner, 
and  Baptist,  the  holy,  glorious,  and  all  celebrated 
Apostles,  Saint  N.  {the  Saint  of  the  day),  whose 
memory  we  also  celebrate,  and  all  Thy  Saints, 
through  whose  prayers  look  down  upon  us,  0  God. 
And  remember  all  those  that  are  departed  in  the 
hope  of  the  resiuTection  to  eternal  life,  and  give 
them  rest  where  the  light  of  Thy  countenance  shines 
upon  them.  Furthermore  we  beseech  Thee,  re- 
member, 0  Lord,  every  orthodox  bishopric  of  those 
that  rightly  divide  the  word  of  truth,  the  presbytery, 
the  diaconate  in  Christ,  and  for  every  hierarchical 
order.  Furthermore  we  offer  to  Thee  this  reason- 
able service  for  the  whole  world :  for  the  Holy 
Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church,  and  for  them  that 
live  in  chastity  and  hohness  of  life.  For  our  most 
faithful  kings,  beloved  of  Christ,  all  their  court  and 
army.  Grant  to  them,  Lord,  a  peaceful  reign,  that 
we,  in  their  peace,  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable 
life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty.    {Aloud.)    Chiefly, 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  117 

0  Lord,  remember  our  Archbishop  N.,  whom  pre- 
serve to  Thy  lioly  Churches  in  peace,  in  safety,  in 
honour,  in  health,  in  length  of  days,  and  rightly 
dividing  the  word  of  Thy  truth. 

The  Deacon,  by  the  holy  doors,  saith, 

N.  the  Patriarch,  Metropolitan,  or  Bishop,  {as  the 
case  may  be.) 

Then  he  commemorates  the  dlptychs  of  the  living. 

Priest,  (secretly.)  Remember,  Lord,  the  city  in 
which  we  dwell,  and  every  city  and  region,  and  the 
faithful  that  inhabit  it.  Remember,  Lord,  them 
that  voyage,  and  travel,  tliat  are  sick,  that  are 
labouring,  that  are  in  prison,  and  their  safety.  Re- 
member, Lord,  them  that  bear  fruit,  and  do  good 
deeds  in  Thy  holy  Churches,  and  that  remember 
the  poor.  And  send  forth  on  us  all  the  riches  of 
Thy  compassion,  (aloinl,)  ami  grant  us  with  one 
mouth  and  one  heart  to  glorify  and  celebrate  Thy 
glorious  and  majestic  Name,  Fathkr,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 
And  the  mercifs  of  tlio  great  (Iod  and  our  Saviour 
Jksus  Ciihist  shall  bo  with  all  of  us. 

The  Dracoii    takiinj    his    liinr  frniii   the    Prif'st,    and 
standing  in  the  accustomed  place,  saith. 

Commemorating  all  Saints,  again  mid  again  iu 
peace  lot  us  make  our  supplications  to  the  Lord. 

Choir.  Lord,  have  mercy.  [And  so  at  the  end  oj 
each  petition.) 

Drarnn.  For  the  vcncrablc  gifts  now  offered  Ixfore 
Him  and  liallowcd. 

That  our  merciful  God,  the  Lover  of  mankind, 
Who  hath  received  them  unto  His  holy  and  lieavenly 
and  spiritual  Altar,  for  the  savour  of  a  sweet  spiritual 


118  LITURGY    OF 

scent,  may  in  return  send  down  on  us  His  Divine 
grace,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

That  we  may  he  preserved  from  all  affliction, 
wrath,  &c. 

The  Deacon  continues  the  Ectene  down  to  Christian 
ends  of  life. 

The  Priest  meanwhile  saith  secretly, 

To  Thee,  0  Lord  and  Lover  of  men,  we  commend 
in  pledge  all  our  life  and  our  hope,  and  hescech  and 
pray,  and  supplicate  :  make  us  worthy  to  partake  of 
Thy  heavenly  and  terrible  mysteries  of  this  holy 
and  spiritual  Table,  with  a  pure  conscience,  for  the 
remission  of  sins,  forgiveness  of  transgressions, 
participation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  inheritance  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  boldness  of  access  to  Thee  :  not 
to  judgment  nor  to  condemnation. 

Deacon.  Having  prayed  for  the  oneness  of  the 
faith,  and  the  participation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  let 
us  commend  ourselves  and  each  other  and  all  our 
life  to  Christ  our  God. 

Priest,  [aloud.)  And  make  us  worthy,  0  Lord, 
witJi  boldness  and  witliout  condemnation  to  dare  to 
call  upon  Thee,  om*  God  and  Father  which  art  in 
heaven,  and  to  say, 

People.  Our  Father. 

Priest.  For  Thine  is  the  kingdom. 

Priest.  Peace  to  all. 

Deacon.  Let  us  bow  our  heads  to  the  Lord. 

Priest.  We  render  thanks  unto  Thee,  0  King 
invisible.  Who  hast  framed  all  things  by  Thy 
measureless  power,  and  in  the  multitude  of  Thy 
mercy  hast  brouglit  all  things  into  being  from  non- 
existence. Look  down,  0  Lord,  from  heaven,  upon 
them  that  have  bowed  their  heads  unto  Thee,  for 
they  bowed  them  not  to  flesh  and  blood,   but  to 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  119 

Thee,  the  fearful  God.  Bestow,  therefore,  0  Lord, 
on  all  of  us  au  equal  benefit  from  these  offerings, 
according  to  the  need  of  each  :  sail  with  them  that 
sail,  journey  with  them  that  journey,  heal  the 
sick,  Thou  Who  art  the  Physician  of  our  souls  and 
bodies. 

(Aloud.)  Through  the  grace,  and  mercy,  and  love 
to  men,  of  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  with  Whom, 
together  witJi  the  most  Holy,  and  good,  and  life- 
giving  Spirit,  Thou  art  bles.sed,  now  and  ever,  and 
to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

Hear  us,  0  Lord  Jksus  Christ  our  God,  out  of 
Thy  holy  dwelling-place,  and  from  the  tin-one  of  the 
glory  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  come  and  sanctify  us, 
Thou  That  sittest  above  with  the  Father,  and  art 
here  invisibly  present  with  us  :  and  ])y  Thy  mighty 
hand  make  us  worthy  to  partake  of  Thy  spotless 
Body  and  precious  Blood,  and  by  us  all  Thy  people. 

The  t'liest  and  the  Dfcictma  adore  in  the  place  where 
the;/  stand,  sayintf  secretly  thrice, 

God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner. 

And  irhen  the  Deacon  sees  the  Priest  slrelcltimi  forth 
his  hands,  and  tnnchinrf  the  hull/  Bread,  to  make  the 
holy  elevation,  he  exclaims, 

Let  us  attend. 

And  the  Priest,  clcralintf  the  holy  Bread,  exclaims. 
Holy  things  for  holy  persons. 
Choir.  One  Holy,  one  Lcnio,  Jesus  Christ,  to  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father. 

And  the   Clwir  siny  the   Koinonicon:  (")   e.g.   on   the 
festivals  of  Ajiostlcs. 


(")  ThiB  is  H  HtiolioH,  rlcriviii^;  itH  iiuiiio,  .if  rfiiirKp,  from  the 
Communion  which  it  procedoH ;  iiinl  in  ofiniviiloiit,  though  not 
exactly  answering  in  place,  to  the  Mozarabic  Communion. 


120  LITURGY    OF 

Their  sound  is  goue  out  into  all  lands  :  and  theii 
words  into  the  ends  of  the  world. 

The  Deacon  then  girds  his  Orarion  crosswise,  and 
goes  into  the  holy  Bema,  and  standing  on  the  right 
hand,  [the  Priest  grasping  the  holy  Bread,)  saith, 

Sir,  break  the  holy  Bread., 

And  the  Priest,  dividing  It  into  four  parts  with  car 
and  reverence,  saith, 

The  Lamb  of  God  is  broken  and  distributed ;  He 
That  is  broken  and  not  divided  in  sunder  ;  ever 
eaten  and  never  consumed,  but  sanctifying  the  com- 
ini;nicants. 

And  the  Deacon,  pointing  with  his  Orarion  to  the  holy 

Cup,  saith, 

Sir,  fill  the  holy  Cup. 

And  the  Priest  taking  the  upper  portion,  (that  is,  the 
IHC,)  makes  with  It  a  Cross  above  the  holy  Cup,  saying. 
The  fulness  of  the  cup,  of  faitli,  of  the  Holy  Ghost: 
and  thus  jnds  It  into  tJie  holy  Cup. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

And  taking  the  warm  water,  he  saith  to  the  Priest, 
Sir,  bless  the  warm  water.  (^^) 

And  the  Priest  blesseth,  saying, 

(«)  This  very  strange  rite,  the  pouring  warm  water  into  the 
chalice  after  consecration,  occasioned  the  greatest  astonish- 
ment among  the  Latins  at  the  Council  of  Florence.  DorotlieuB, 
Bisliop  of  Mitylene,  is  said  to  have  given  the  Pope  ample 
Batisfaction  bv  his  explanation,  wliich,  however,  is  unfortu- 
nately lost.  But  S.  Germanus  tells  us  :  "As  Blood  and  warm 
Water  flowed  both  of  them  from  the  side  of  Chkist,  thus  hot 
water,  poured  into  the  chalice  at  the  time  of  consecration, 
gives  a  full  type  of  tlio  mystery  to  those  who  draw  that  holy 
liquid  from  tht>  chalice,  as  from  the  life-giving  side  of  our 
"Lord." 


8AINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  121 

Blessed  is  the  fervour  of  Thy  Saints,  always,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 
And  the  Deacon  pours  forth  a  sulficieucij  into  the  holy 
Cup,  in  the  form  of  a  Cross,  Sftying, 

The  fervour  of  faith,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Amen.  (TJuice.) 

Then,  setting  down  the  warm  water,  he  stands  a  little 
uayoff.  Anil  the  Priest,  taking  a  particle  of  the  holy 
Bread,  saith, 

(**)  The  l)lessed  and  most  holy  Bo'^ly  of  our  Lord 
and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Chkibt  is  communi- 
cated to  me,  N.,  Priest,  for  the  reniiboiun  of  my  sins, 
and  for  everlasting  life. 

I  believe,  Loun,  and  confess. 

Of  Thy  Mystic  Supper  to-day. 

Let  not,  0  Lord,  tlie  communion  of  Thy  holy 
mysteries  be  to  my  judgment  or  condemnation,  but 
to  the  healing  of  my  soul  and  body. 

And  thus  he  jxirtdlces  of  that  which  is  in  his  hands  with 
fear  and  all  caution.     Then  he  saith, 

Deacon,  approach. 

And  the  Deacon  apprnnches,  and  reverently  makes 
an  olieisnnce,  askitiy  foryivcness.  And  the  Priest, 
tiikiny  the  holy  lirrtid,  gives  it  to  the  Deacon;  and  the 
Deacon,  Idssing  the  hand  that  gives  it,  saith, 

Sir,  make  me  partaker  of  the  precious  and  lioly 
Body  of  our  Loud  and  God  and  Saviour  .Jksub 
Christ. 

Priest.  N.  the  lioly  Deacon  is  made  partaker  of 


p)  Tbo  MSS.  find  j)rintc(l  PflitioiiH  vary  pxccHHively  in  the 
whole  Coiniiniiiioii  Imtli  of  th<!  I'riest  iinil  llio  people:  so  tliut 
it  would  be  hard  to  find  two  copies  exactly  alike. 


122  LITURGY    OF 

the  precious  and  lioly  and  spotless  Body  of  our  Lord 
and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remis- 
sion of  his  sins,  and  for  eternal  life. 

And  the  Deacon  going  behind  the  holy  Table,  boweth  his 
head  and  lyrayeth,  and  so  doth  the  Priest. 

Then  the  Priest  stauilinf/  up,  takes  the  holy  Chalice 
witJi  its  covering  in  both  Jiands,  and  drinks  three  times, 
saying,  I,  N.,  Priest,  partake  of  the  pure  and  holy 
Blood  of  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  for  the  remission  of  my  sins,  and  for  eternal 
life. 

And  then  he  wipes  the  holy  Cup  and  his  own  lips 
with  the  covering  he  has  in  his  hands,  and  saith, 

Behold,  this  hath  touched  my  lips,  and  shall  take 
away  my  transgressions,  and  purge  my  sins. 

Then  he  calls  the  Deacon,  saying.  Deacon,  approach. 
The  Deacon  comes,  and  adores  once,  saying, 

Behold,  I  approach  the  Immortal  King. 

I  believe.  Lord,  and  confess. 

Priest.  N.  the  Deacon  and  servant  of  God  is  made 
partaker  of  the  precious  and  holy  Blood  of  our  Lord 
and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remis- 
sion of  sins,  and  for  eternal  life. 

And  when  the  Deacon  hath  communicated,  the  Priest 

saith. 

Behold,  this  hath  touched  thy  lips. 

Then  the  Deacon,  taking  the  holy  disk,  and  holding 
it  over  the  holy  Chalice,  wipes  it  thoroughly  with  the 
holy  sponge;  and  irith  care  and  reverence  covers  it  with 
the  veil.  In  like  manner  he  covers  the  disk  with  the 
afterisk,  and  that  uith  its  veil. 

The  Priest  saith  the  j)rayer  of  Thanksgiving. 

We  vield  Thee  thanks,  0  Lord  and  Lover  of  men. 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  123 

Benefactor  of  our  souls,  that  Thou  hast  this  day 
thought  us  worthy  of  Thy  heavenly  and  immortal 
mysteries.  Eightly  divide  our  path,  conhrm  us  all 
in  Thy  fear,  guard  our  life,  make  safe  our  goings  : 
through  the  prayers  and  supplications  of  the 
glorious  Mother  of  God  and  Ever- Virgin  Mary,  and 
all  Thy  Saints. 

(^)  And  thus  they  oj)cn  the  doors  of  the  holy  Bema; 
and  the  Deacon,  having  made  one  adoration,  takes  the 
Chalice  with  reverence,  and  goes  to  the  door,  and  raising 
the  Jinly  Chalice,  shews  it  to  the  ])eople,  saying,  Ap- 
proach with  the  fear  of  God,  faith  and  love. 

2'hcy  who  are  to  communicate  draw  near  ivith  all 
reverence,  and  hold  their  arms  crossed  on  their  breast; 
and  the  Priest,  as  he  distributes  the  mysteries  to  each, 
taith, 

N.  the  servant  of  God  is  made  partaker  of  the 
pure  and  holy  Body  and  Blood  of  our  Lord  and 
(lOD  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of 
his  sins,  and  life  everlasting. 

The)i  the  Priest  blesseth  the  pcofdc,  saying  aloud, 

0  God,  save  Thy  people,  and  bless  Thine  licri- 
tage. 

(^■)  From  tlio  Cfinitnunion  to  tlic  end  of  Uic.  cnicc,  nil  tlio 
Liturj^ic'H,  except  tlint  of  S.  ClirysoKtoin  nnd  tlie  Arnicninn, 
where  we  }mve  the  rul)ric8  in  full,  liocomo  aliiioHt  iiicxtri(rably 
confiiseil ;  but  moKt  of  all  that  of  H.  .TnmeH.  Three  different 
Htnj^eH  have,  liowever,  to  be  distiiij^nislied  :  1.  The  return  of 
the  I'lie-tt  to  the  Altar;  2.  IliH  K"'"K  thence  lo  the  iiKthcHis. 
which  in  some  of  the  FjiturKieH  precedeK,  in  othc^rw  fdllnWK,  the 
diHiiiisHul  ;  .'5.  IIIh  return  to  the  Altiir,  the  K'ft  of  the  itiitidnrou, 
ami  the  diHrolauK.  which  in  the  ConHtantinoiiolitan  family  in 
done  before  the  diHuiifial  :  to  which  H.  James  adds,  4.  The 
prayer  said  as  he  finahy  ,'oe8  to  the  sacristy. 


124  LITURGY    OF 

The  Deacon  and  the  Priest  return  to  the  hoh/  Table,  and 
the  Priest  censeth  thrice :  saying  secretly. 

Be  Thou  exalted,  Lord,  above  the  heavens  :  and 
Thy  glory  above  all  the  earth. 

Then,  taking  the  holy  disk,  he  puts  it  upon  the  head 
of  the  Deacon,  and  the  Deacon  takiny  it  with  reverence, 
and  looking  out  towards  the  door,  goes  in  silence  to  the 
prothesis,  and  puts  it  down:  and  the  Priest  having 
made  obeisance,  takes  the  holy  Chalice,  and  turns 
towards  the  doors,  saying  secretly. 

Blessed  be  our  God  :  [then  aloud,)  always,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

And  the  Deacon  having  come  out,  and  standing  in  the 
accustomed  place,  saith. 

Standing  upright,  and  having  partaken  of  the 
divine,  holy,  spotless,  immortal,  heavenly,  life- 
giving,  and  terrible  mysteries  of  Christ,  let  ns 
worthily  give  thanks  to  the  Lord. 

Assist,  preserve. 

That  we  may  pass  this  whole  day. 

Exclamation.  For  Thou  art  our  sanctification,  and 
to  Thee  we  ascribe  glory,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Choir.  Amen. 

Priest.  Let  us  go  on  in  peace. 

Deacon.  Let  us  make  our  supplications  to  the 
Lord. 

Prayer  behind  the  amhon,  (^)  said  aloud  by  the  Priest 
without  the  bema. 

Lord,  Who  blessest  them  that  bless  Thee,  and 
Bunctifiest  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Thee,  save 


(W)  This  means  behind  the  ambon  as  respects  the  bema : 
that  is,  before  it  as  regards  the  people. 


SAINT    CHRYSOSTOM.  125 

Thy  people,  and  bless  Thiue  inheritance :  guard 
with  care  the  fulness  of  Thy  Church  :  hallow  those 
that  love  the  beauty  of  Thiue  house.  Glorify  them 
in  return  by  Thy  divine  might,  and  forsake  not 
them  that  put  their  trust  in  Thee  ;  give  Thy  peace 
to  Thy  world,  to  Thy  Chui'ches,  to  our  Priests  and 
Kings  r  to  the  army,  and  to  all  Thy  people  ;  because 
every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above, 
and  corneth  down  from  Thee,  the  Father  of  lights: 
and  to  Thee  we  ascribe. 

This  beiiKj  ended,  the  Priest  goes  through  the  hohj 
doors,  and  departs  into  tJie  irrothesis,  and  saith  this 
Prayer. 

Thou,  0  Christ  our  God,  Wlio  art  Thyself  the 
fulness  of  the  Law  and  of  the  Prophets,  Who  didst 
accomplish  all  the  dispensation  of  Thy  Father,  fill 
our  hearts  with  joy  and  gladness  always,  now  and 
ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

Deuvun.  Let  us  make  our  supplication  to  the 
Loud. 

Priest.  The  blessing  of  tlie  Lord  u]ion  you.  Then, 
Glory  to  Tlioe,  our  Goi^  :  (ilory  to  Thee. 

People.  Glory,     liolh  now. 

Then  the  Deacon,  also  going  through  the  north  part, 
gathers  tog<ihrr  the  llolg  Things,  irilh.  fi'ar  mul  all 
sdji  tg  :  SI)  Ihtil  nut  the  very  smallest  jiarlicli'  should  Jail 
out,  or  be  left:  nuiL  he  washes  his  hands  in  the  accus- 
tomed jilare.  And  the  Priest  goes  forth,  and  gins  thr 
antidoron(^)  to  the  people.      Tlien  he  goes  into  the  holy 

(»)  The  Anticloroii  in  the  brood  which  has  been  offered  for 
the  Horvice  of  tliu  Altar,  hut  wliicli  hiin  uot  been  r('(|iiir('<l  for 
conHecratioii  :  it  in  hoiiio  reHpectH  rt-Hembk'H  the  ]i<iin  hrni  of 
most  of  the  French  riten.  It  is  not  ho  very  unuHiuil  ii  thing  in 
BuBsia  that  those  luonkH  who  jiractiHo  the  most  reguhir  aHce- 
ticinm,  should  t.il;o  no  other  food  during  Lent,  oxcei>t  th» 
/Vntidorou. 


126  LITURGY    OF    S.    CHRYSOSTOM. 

bema,  and  puts  off  his  priestly  vestments,  saying,  Nunc 
dimittis,  the  Trisagiou,  and  the  other  things.  Then- 
he  saith  the  dismissory  prayer  of  S.  Chrysostom. 

The  grace  of  Thy  lips,  shiniug  forth  like  a  torch, 
illuminated  the  world,  euriched  the  universe  with 
the  treasures  of  liberality,  and  manifested  to  us 
the  height  of  humility  :  but  do  thou,  our  instructor 
by  thy  words,  Father  John  Chrysostom,  intercede 
to  the  Word,  Christ  our  God,  that  our  souls  may 
be  saved. 

Lord,  have  mercy,  (twelve  times.) 

Glory.     Both  now. 

Thee,  the  more  honourable  than  the  Cherubim. 

And  he  makes  the  dismission:  and  having  adored, 
and  given  thanks  to  God  for  ail  things,  {^)  he  departs. 

(*)  This  expression  is  taken  from  the  favourite  exclamation 
of  S.  John  Chrysostom — the  last  vvorda  which  he  spoke — 
"  Glory  be  to  God  for  all  thinga." 


THE    DIVINE    LITUEGY 


OF  OCR  FATHER  AMONG  THE  SAIXTa, 


'Ba0il  tl)e  d^reat* 


Prayer  for  the  Catechumens  before  the  Holy  Oblation, 
which  the  Priest  utters  nccretly. 

O  Lord  our  God,  Who  dwellest  iu  the  highest,  and 
lookest  upon  all  Thy  works ;  look  upon  Thy  servants 
the  Catechumens,  who  have  howed  down  their  necks 
before  Thee,  and  grant  them  the  easy  yoke  :  make 
them  worthy  members  of  Thy  holy  Church,  and  fit 
them  for  the  laver  of  regeneration,  llie  forgiveness 
of  sins,  and  the  garment  of  incorruption,  unto  the 
knowledge  of  Thee,  our  Very  God. 

Exclamation. 

That  they  with  us  may  glorify,  etc.,  a.s  in  Litwyy 
of  S.  ChryHostom. 

First  Prayrr  (f  the  P'airhful  after  thr  Corporal  is  Pin- 
folded, uhirh  the  Priest  utters  secretly. 

Thou,  O  Lord,  hast  disclosed  to  us  the  great 
mystery  of  salvatifin  ;  Thou  hast  counted  us,  Thy 
humble  and  unworthy  servants,  worthy  to  be  minis- 
ters of  Thy  holy  Altar,  do  Thou  make  us,  Ijy 
the  power  of  the  Hoi.y  Ghost,  tit  for  this  oflice,  that 
standing  uucondcmned  before  Thy  holy  glorj',  we 
may  present  unto  Thee  tlie  sacritice  of  praise.  For 
Thou  art  He  that  workest  all  things  in  all  men  ; 
gi'aut,  0  Lord,  that  our  sacrifice  may  be  acceptable 


128  LITURGY    OF 

and  well-plcasinfT  in  Thy  sight,  for  our  o^vn  sins, 
aud  for  the  iguorauces  of  Thy  people. 

When  the  Priest  has  said  the  prayer,  the  Deacon  re- 
cites the  petition  for  Peace,  if  appointed,  outside  the 
holy  Bema. 

Again  and  again.  Assist,  preserve.  Making 
mention  of  the  all-holy,  immaculate. 

Deacon. — Wisdom. 

The  Priest  (aloud). — For  thee  befits  all  glory, 
honour,  and  adoration,  the  Fathke,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all  ages 
of  ages.     Amen. 

Second  Prayer  of  the  Faithful,  which  the  Priest  uttert 

secretly. 

0  God,  "Who  lookest  in  pity  and  compassion  on 
our  lowUness,  Who  hast  set  us,  Thy  lowly  and 
sinful  and  unworthy  servants,  before  Thy  holy  glory, 
to  minister  at  Thy  holy  Altar,  do  Thou  strengthen 
us  by  the  might  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit  for  this  ofiice, 
and  give  us  a  word  in  the  opening  of  our  mouth,  to 
invoke  the  grace  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  gifts 
about  to  be  set  before  Thee. 

Prayer  of  the  Offertory,  after  the  deposition  of  the 
divi7te  Gifts  upon  the  Holy  Table,  which  the  Priest 
utters  secretly. 

0  Lord  our  God,  Who  hast  created  us,  and  brought 
us  into  this  life,  Who  hast  shewn  us  ways  unto 
salvation.  Who  hast  graciously  bestowed  on  us  the 
revelation  of  heavenly  mysteries  ;  Thou  art  He  Who 
hath  appointed  us  unto  this  ofiice,  in  the  power  of 
Thy  Holy  Spirit.  Vouchsafe  then,  0  Lord,  that 
we  may  be  ministers  of  Thy  New  Testament,  cele- 
brants of  Thy  holy  Mysteries:  receive  us,  according 
to  the  multitude  of  Thy  mercy,  drawing  near  to  Tliy 
holy  Altar,   that  we  may  be  worthy  to  offer  Thee- 


BASIL  THE  GREAT.  129 

this  reasonable  and  unbloody  sacrifice,  for  our  own 
sins,  and  for  the  ignorances  of  the  people  :  receiving 
which  at  Thy  holy  and  spiritual  altar,  for  a  sweet- 
smelling  savour,  send  down  on  us  in  retui'n  the 
grace  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit.  Eegard  us,  0  God,  and 
look  upon  this  our  service,  and  accept  it,  as  Thou 
didst  accept  the  gifts  of  Abel,  the  sacrifices  of  Noah, 
the  whole  burnt-oil'erings  of  Abiahiim,  the  priestly 
ministrations  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  the  peace-offer- 
ings of  Samuel,  as  Thou  didst  accept  this  true  ser- 
vice from  Thy  holy  Apostles,  so  accept  these  Gifts 
in  Thy  goodness,  0  Lord,  from  the  hands  of  us 
sinners,  that,  counted  worthy  to  minister  blame- 
lessly at  Tliy  holy  Altar,  we  may  find  tbo  vowavd  of 
fiiithful  and  wise  stewards,  iu  the  di'cadful  day  of 
TJiy  just  retribution. 

The  Priest  aloud. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love 
of  God  the  Father,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  be  witli  you  all. 

Choir ,  And  with  tliy  spirit. 

Priest.  Let  us  lift  up  our  hearts. 

Chair.  We  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord. 

Priest.  Let  us  give  tlianks  unto  the  Lord. 

Choir.  It  is  meet  and  right  to  worsbip  tlie  Pathkr, 
Son.  and  Holy  Ghost,  consubstantial  and  undivided 
Trinity. 

The  Priest,  bend  in  r/  doivn,  prni/s  sccrrlh/. 

Jehovah,  Master,  Lord,  God,  Father  Almkjhty, 
adored  :  it  is  truly  meet,  and  riglit,  and  belittnig  tbo 
majesty  of  Thy  holiness,  to  praise  Thee,  iiynm 
Thee,  bless  Thee,  worship  Tbce,  give  lluuiks  to 
Theo,  glorify  Tbee,  the  one  only  God,  and  to  olTer 
'Uheo  this  our  reasonable  service  iu  a  contrite  heart 

K 


l;50  LITURGY   OP 

and  a  spirit  of  lowliness  :  for  Thou  art  He  Who  hath 
vouchsafed  unto  us  the  knowledge  of  Thy  truth. 
And  who  is  sufficient  to  express  Thy  noble  acts,  or 
make  all  Thy  praises  to  be  heard,  or  to  tell  of  all 
Thy  wondrous  works  at  every  time  ?  Master  of  all 
things,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  of  every 
creature  visible  and  invisible,  Who  sittest  upon  the 
throne  of  glory,  and  beholdest  the  abysses,  unbegin- 
ning,  invisible,  incomprehensible,  uncircumscript, 
unchangeable  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the 
great  God  and  Saviour  of  our  hope.  Who  is  the  image 
of  Thy  goodness,  seal  of  equal  type,  manifesting  in 
Himself  Thee  the  Father,  Living  Word,  Very 
Goobeforethe  worlds,  .Wisdom,  Life,  Sanctification, 
Power,  Very  Light,  by  Whom  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
disclosed,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  the  grace  of  adoption, 
the  earnest  of  future  inheritance,  the  first-fruits  of 
eternal  blessings,  the  quickening  might,  the  fount  of 
sanctification,  by  Whom  every  reasonable  and 
spiritual  creature  empowered  serveth  Thee  and 
sends  up  to  Thee  the  everlasting  doxology,  for  all 
things  are  Thy  servants.  For  the  angels,  arch- 
angels, thrones,  principalities,  powers,  dominations, 
virtues,  and  many-eyed  cherubim  praise  Thee,  and 
the  seraphim  stand  around  Thee,  the  one  having 
six  wings,  and  the  other  having  six  wings,  and  with 
two  cover  their  faces  and  with  two  their  feet,  with 
two  they  do  fly,  and  shout  one  to  the  other  with  un- 
ceasing mouths,  with  unsilenced  doxologies, 

The  Priest,  aloud. 

Singing,  crying,  shouting,  and  saying  the  triumphal 
byniu  : 

Choi).    Holy,  holy,   holy,   Lord    God   of  Hosts, 
Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  Thy  glory.     Hosanna 


BASIL  THE  GREAT.  131 

in  the  highest.     Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the 
Name  of  the  Lord.     Hosanna  in  the  highest. 

Then  the  Deacon  does  the  same  as  is  set  down  in  the  Liturgy 
of  Chrysostom,  and  the  Priest  prays  secretly  : 

With  the  blessed  Powers,  0  loving  Master,  we 
sinners  also  ciy  and  say.  Holy  art  Thou,  of  a  truth, 
and  All-holy,  and  there  is  no  measure  for  the 
majesty  of  Thy  holiness,  and  Thou  art  sacred  in  all 
Thy  works,  Ijccause  in  righteousness  of  true  judg- 
ment Thou  hast  done  all  things  unto  us  ;  for  having 
formed  man,  taking  clay  from  the  earth,  and. 
honouring  him,  O  God,  witli  Thine  own  image, 
Thou  didst  place  him  in  the  Paradise  of  pleasure, 
promising  him  immortality  of  life  and  enjoyment  of 
eternal  blessings  in  the  keeping  of  Thy  command- 
ments, but  when  he  disobeyed  Thee  the  Very  God. 
his  Creator,  and  was  led  away  by  the  guile  of  thf^ 
serpent,  and  died  in  his  own  transgressions.  Thou 
didst  drive  him  forth  in  Tby  riglitoous  judgment,  O 
God,  from  Paradise  into  tliis  world,  and  madest 
him  return  to  the  eartli  whence  he  was  taken,  pro- 
viding for  him  the  salvation  which  is  of  regenera- 
tion, whicli  is  in  Him  Thine  Anointed.  For  Thou 
didst  not  turn  away  utterly  from  Thy  creature  which 
Thou  madfst,  0  Good  One,  nor  didst  forget  the 
work  of  Thy  liands,  l)ut  didst  visit  it  in  many  ways 
throiigli  tlie  bowels  of  Thy  mercy.  Thou  didst  send 
out  proi)hcts  ;  Thou  wroiiglitest  mighty  things 
througli  Thy  Saints  who  [)leiised  Thee  in  each 
generation.  Thou  spakest  unto  us  by  the  month 
of  Thy  servants  the  Prophets,  foretelling  us  the 
future  salvation  ;  Thou  gavcst  the  Law  for  an  help  ; 
Thou  appointedst  Angels  as  guardians.  And  when 
the  fulness  of  the  times  was  come,  Thou  .spakest 
unto  us  in  Thy  Son  Himself,  by  Whom  Thou  madest 

k2 


132  LITURGY   OW 

the  worlds.  "Who  being  the  brightness  of  Thy  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  Thy  Person,  and  upholding 
all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power,  thought  it  not 
robbery  to  be  equal  to  Thee,  His  God  and  Father, 
but  being  God  before  the  worlds,  was  seen  upon 
earth,  and  mingled  with  men,  and  incarnate  of  a 
holy  Virgin,  emptied  Himself,  talking  the  form  of 
a  servant,  made  like  to  the  body  of  our  humility, 
that  He  might  make  us  like  unto  the  image  of  His 
glory.  For  whereas  sin  entered  into  the  world  by  man, 
and  death  by  sin.  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  Who  is 
in  the  bosom  of  Thee,  God  and  Father,  born  of  a 
woman,  the  holy  Mother  of  God  and  ever- Virgin 
Mary,  born  under  the  Law,  was  pleased  to  condemn 
sin  in  His  Flesh  ;  that  they  who  died  in  Adam 
might  be  made  alive  in  Him  Thy  Christ,  and 
dwelling  as  a  citizen  in  this  world,  giving  us  statutes 
of  salvation,  and  withdrawing  us  from  the  error  of 
idolatry.  He  brought  us  unto  the  knowledge  of  Thee, 
Very  God  and  Father,  having  acquired  us  for  Him- 
self a  peculiar  people,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy 
nation,  and  having  cleansed  us  in  water,  and  hal- 
lowed us  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  He  gave  Himself  a 
ransom  unto  death,  wherein  we  were  held,  sold  under 
sin,  and  passing  by  the  Cross  into  Hades,  that  He 
might  fill  all  things  with  Himself,  He  loosed  the 
pains  of  death,  and  arising  the  third  day,  and  having 
made  with  His  flesh  a  way  for  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  because  it  was  not  possible  that  the  Prince  of 
Life  should  be  overcome  of  corruption,  He  became 
the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept,  the  first-born 
from  the  dead,  that  He  might  have  the  pre-emi- 
nence in  all  thiiigs  over  all  men,  and  ascending  to 
the  Heavens,  he  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  Thy 
Majesty  in  the  liighest.  And  He  shall  come  again 
to  reward   every  man   according  to  his  works,  and 


BASIL  THE  GREAT.  133 

He  hath  left  us  as  a  memorial  of  His  saving  Passion 
these  things,  which  we  have  presented  according  to 
His  commandments  ;  for  when  He  was  about  to  go 
to  His  vohmtary,  and  famous,  and  quickening  death, 
in  the  niglit  wiien  He  gave  up  Himself  for  the  life  of 
the  world,  taking  bread  into  His  holy  and  spotless 
liands,  having  shewn  it  to  Thee,  His  God  and 
Father,  having  given  thanks,  blessed,  hallowed, 
broken  it, 

The  Priest,  lifting  the  holy  Paten  uith  his  right  hand, 
shews  it,  saying  aloud. 

He  gave  it  to  His  holy  Disciples  and  Apostles, 
saying  :  Take,  eat  :  this  is  My  Body  which  is 
broken  for  you,  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

The  Choir  chfini.s.  Amen. 

'J'heu  llie  Priest  and  the  Deacon  do  exactly  as  in   the 
Litnrgy  uj   Ohrysostom. 

The  Priest,  secretly. 

Likewise  takiir^'  the  Clialice  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine, 
having  mingled,  given  thanks,  blessed,  hallowed  it. 

And  lifting  the  holy  Chalice  in  like  manner  reverently 
with  his  riijld  hand,  he  shews  it,  saying  aloud, 

Jlegave  it  to  His  holy  Disciples  and  Apostles,  saying, 
Drink  ye  all  of  it,  for  this  is  My  Jilood  of  the  Now 
Testament,  which  is  shed  for  you  and  for  many, 
for  the  remission  of  bins. 

The  Choir  chants.  Amen. 

The  Priest,  bowing  his  head,  prays  secretly  : 

Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me.  For  as  often  as 
ye  sliall  cat  this  J>niid,  and  drink  this  Cu}),  ye 
d.  clare  My  Death,  and  confess  My  Resurrection. 
Therefore,    we   also,    O   Master,   remembering  thisi 


184  LITURGY   OP 

saving  Passion,  the  quickening  Cross,  the  three  clays' 
Burial,  the  Eesurrection  from  the  dead,  the  Ascen- 
sion to  the  heavens,  the  Session  on  Thy  Right 
Hand,  God  and  Father,  and  His  glorious  and  ter- 
rible second  Coming, 

The  Priest,  alovd. 

Offer  Thee  Thine  own  of  Thine  own,  according  to 
all,  and  through  all.  (^) 

The  Choir  chants.  We  hymn  Thee,  we  bless  Thee, 
we  give  thanks  to  Thee,  0  Lord,  and  beseech  Thee, 
our  God. 

The  Priest  bottinr;  his  head,  prays  secretly. 

Therefore,  All-holy  Master,  we  also.  Thy  sinful 
and  unworthy  servants,  who  have  been  counted 
worthy  to  minister  at  Thy  holy  Altar,  not  through 
our  own  righteousness,  (for  we  have  done  no  good 
thing  upon  the  earth)  but  through  Thy  mercies  and 
compassions,  which  Thou  hast  richly  poured  upon 
us,  have  courage  to  draw  near  to  Thy  holy  Altar, 
and  presenting  the  antitypes  of  the  holy  Body  and 
Blood  of  Thy  CiipasT,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  invoke 
Thee,  Holy  of  Holies,  through  the  good-will  of  Thy 

(1)  Kara  iravra,  Kol  5<a  -jrivra.  This  is  obscure,  but  from 
the  immediate  sequence  of  the  hymn  of  the  Choir,  I  think 
the  words  belong  to  it,  rallier  than  to  the  words  of  oblation, 
and  that  we  may  supply  xp^fou  to  the  first  irdura,  and  ^wpia  to 
the  second.  The  whole  will  then  run  thus  :  Priest.  At  all 
times  and  in  all  places.     Choir.  We  hymn  Thee,  &c.     L. 

('■')  This  word  is  not  peculiar  to  S.  Basil.  It  is  found  in 
this  same  sense,  applied  to  the  visible  species  of  Bread  and 
"Wine,  in  S.  Macarius,  Hom.  xxviii.,  S.  Greg.  Nazianz.  Orat. 
xi.,  Germanus,  Theor.  Eccles. ;  Theodoret,  Dialog,  ii.,  and  in 
the  Apostolical  Constitutions,  v.  1?>.  S.  .Jolni  Damascene 
and  Mark  of  Ephesus  both  agree  that  the  phrase  is  used  only 
before  consecration,  just  as  Westerns  similarly  use  the  v.ord 
elementg,  but  not  afterwards.    But  this  is  hardly  borne  out  by 


BASIL  THE  GREAT.  185 

bounty,  that  Thy  Holy  Ghost  may  come  upon  us, 
and  on  these  (xifts  lying  hefore  Thee,  and  bless,  and 
hallow,  and  shew.  (^) 

The  Deacon  lays  aside  the  fan  ivhich  he  was  holding, 
or  the  veil,  and  comes  nearer  to  the  Priest,  and  both 
adore  thrice  before  the  holy  Table,  praying  moreover  to 
themselves. 

God  be  merciful  to  mo  a  sinner.  They  say  it 
secretly  thrice. 

Then, 

0  Lord,  Who  at  the  tliird  hour  didst  send  down 
TJiine  All-holy  Spikit  on  the  Apostles,  take  Him 
not,  0  good  (Jue,  away  from  us. 

Versicle.  Make  nic  a  clean  heart,  0  God,  and 
renew    a    li'.dit     spirit    within    me.       Glory,    &c. 


the  language  of  the  Fathers  generally,  as  for  example,  Ter- 
tiillian  and  S.  Augustine,  who  use  tlio  terra  Jigura  of  the  con- 
secrated Bpecies.  The  true  explaniition  seems  to  be  that 
tlie  visible  Body  and  Blood  of  CiriusT  is  culled  the  tuttoj,  or 
Heal,  bearing  the  Imago  of  God,  and  the  consecrated  spc(^i('s  the 
dcTiTi/TToi/,  impressed  by  the  jjower  of  that  seal,  brought  ii])on 
tlicni  by  the  Holy  Ojiost,  and  yet  not  locally  nor  numerically 
commensurate  (as  S.  Thomas  Aijiiinas  points  out)  with 
Ciiiust's  visible  human  form,  though  mystically  identical  with 
it.— L. 

(")  ovootijai.  The  Latin  copies  add  hero  directly,  "  this 
Breiul  to  be  the  precious  Body  of  our  Loiu>  and  (ion  and 
Savioijb  Jesus  Chkist,  and  that  which  is  in  this  (Jindice  the 
very  Blood  of  our  Loan  Goi>  and  Haviouk  Jksijs  Cniiisr,  which 
was  shed  for  the  life  of  the  world."  And  as  Marii  of 
Kphesus  actually  cites  these  words  in  Greek  as  found  in  8. 
Basil,  it  seems  that  they  have  either  dropped  out  \wrv.  tlirough 
the  carelessness  of  cojiyiHts,  or,  as  is  more  i)robable,  that  the 
passages  which  precede  thom  are  later  interpolations.  The 
verb  ava^tiKvi'iia  does  not  merely  mean  tn  nhmr,  but  to  mitkc  or 
cruixtitiiir  siiraetbing,  f-'iving  it  a  cbuiacter  which  it  had  not 
before,  and  is  so  used  more  than  once  by  the  LXX. —  L. 


186  jlIturgy  op 

Blessed  art  Thou,   Cheist  our  God,   &c.,  {as  in  S. 
Chri/sotitom,  p.  90.) 

Now  and  ever,  dc.  When  the  Highest,  descending, 
&c. 

Then  the  Deacon,   lowing  his  head,  points  to  tlie  holy 
Bread  with  his  stole,  and  says  secretly, 

Sir,  hless  the  holy  Bread. 

And  the  Priest,  standini/  up,  sif/ns  the  holy  Gifts^ 
sayincj  secretly, 

This  bread  to  be  the  precious  Body  Itself  of  our 
LoED,  and  God,  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

Dcdcoit.  Amen.  And  then  again.  Sir,  bless  the 
holy  Chalice. 

And  the  Priest,  blessing,  says, 

And  this  Chalice,  the  Precious  Blood  Itself  of  our 
Lord,  and  God,  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
Deacon.  Amen. 
Priest.  Which  was  shed  for  the  life  of  the  world. 

Deacon.  Amen.  And  again,  pointing  with  his  stole 
to  both  the  Holy  Things,  he  says, 

Sir,  bless  both. 

And  the  Priest,  lAessing  loth  the  Holy  Things  with  his 

hand,  >^ays. 

Changing  them  by  Thy  PIoly  Spirit. 
Deacon.  Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 

And  the  Deacon,  bowing  his  head   to  the  Priest,  and 

saying,    Remember,  0  Holy  Master,  me   a   sinner, 

shifts  to  his  former  position,  taking  up  the  fan  again, 
as  before. 

Priest.  That  Thou  wouldest  unite  all  of  us,  who 
are  partakers  of  the  One  Broad,  and  of  the  Chalice, 
to  one  another  unto  the  fellowship   of  one  Holy 


BASIL  THE  GEE  AT.  137 

Spirit,  and  not  cause  any  of  us  to  partake  of  the 
holj'  Body  and  Blood  of  Thy  Christ  unto  judgment 
or  condemnation,  but  tliat  we  may  find  mercy  and 
grace  with  all  Thy  Saints,  who  have  pk-ased  Thee  from 
[the  beginning  of]  the  world,  Forefathers,  Fathers, 
Patriarchs,  Prophets,  Apostles,  Heralds,  Evange- 
lists, Martyrs,  Confessors,  Teachers,  and  every  just 
spirit,  perfected  in  faith.  (Aloiul.)  Especially  of  our 
all-holy,  immaculate,  supereminently  blessed,  glori- 
ous Lady,  the  Mother  of  God,  and  evci:- Virgin 
Mai*y. 

IVie  Choir  chants.  The  whole  creation  [as  in  Liturgy 
of  S.  James,  p.  54.]  Bat  if  it  he  Maundy  Thursday, 
they  chant,  to  the  second  oblique  tone,  (*) 

0  Son  of  Cod,  receive  me  to-day  as  a  guest  at  Thy 
mystic  Supper,  f(jr  I  will  not  disclose  Thy  mystery 
to  Thy  foes.  I  will  not  give  Thee  a  kiss,  like  Judas, 
but  like  the  thief.  I  confess  to  Tliee.  Eemembcr 
mc,  0  Lord,  in  Thy  Kingdom. 

]f  it  be  Holy  Saturday,  they  sing  the  troparion  to  the 
firnt  obli/jue  tone.  (") 

Let  all  mortal  flesh  be  silent,  &c.,  [as  in  Liturgy 
oj  S.  JaincH,  p.  tJB.) 

The  Deacon  censes  thr  I  Inly  Tulilc  round  about,  and 
commemorates  the  Dijitychs  of  both  the  living  and  the 
Hleeping,  uhonisoever  he  will. 

The  Prii'st  prays  secretly.  [Commrwornting]  Saint 
John,  FoicruiJiier  and  I'.aptist,  the  holy  and  all- 
celebrated  Apostles,  Saint  N.  whoso  memorial  we 
obaervT,  and  all  Tliy  Saints,  through  whose  inter- 
cession look  upon  us,  0   God.     And  remember  all 


i*)  The  Fourth  Gregorian  Toc9  of  the  Western  Church. 
•    Second  Gregorian  Tone. 


138  LITURGY   Oi" 

who  have  fallen  asleep  in  the  hope  of  resurrection 
unto  life  eternal. 

Then  the  Priest  comviemorates  whom  he  will,  living 
and  dead.     And  for  the  livi)ir/  he  saith, 

For  salvation,  visitation,  remission  of  sins  of  the 
servant  of  God,  N. 

And  for  the  dead,  he  saith, 

For  repose,  and  remission  of  the  soul  of  Thy 
servant  N.  in  a  place  of  light,  where  sorrow  and 
sighing  are  put  away.     Give  him  rest,  0  our  God. 

Then  this  prayer,  secretly. 

And  give  them  rest,  where  the  light  of  Thy 
countenance  looketh  upon  them.  Further  we  be- 
seech Thee,  0  Lord,  remember  Thy  holy  Catholic 
and  Apostolic  Church,  from  one  end  of  the  world 
unto  the  other,  and  give  peace  unto  it,  which  Thou 
hast  purchased  with  the  precious  Blood  of  Thy 
Christ,  and  strengthen  this  holy  House  until  the 
consummation  of  the  world.  Remember,  0  Lord, 
them  who  have  offered  their  holy  gifts  unto  Thee, 
and  them  for  whom,  and  through  whom,  or  for 
what  ends  they  have  offered  them.  Eemember,  O 
Lord,  them  Avho  bring  forth  fruit,  and  do  good 
works  in  Thy  lioly  Churches,  and  who  remember  the 
poor.  Recompense  them  with  Thy  rich  and  heavenly 
graces.  Vouchsafe  them  things  heavenly  for  things 
earthly,  eternal  for  temporal,  incorruptible  for 
corruptible  things.  Eemember,  0  Lord,  those  in 
deserts,  and  mountains,  and  dens,  and  caves  of  the 
earth.  Eemember,  0  Lord,  tliem  who  live  in  vir- 
ginity, and  piety,  and  discipline,  and  holy  conver- 
sation. Remember,  0  Lord,  our  most  i>ious  and 
faithful  Sovereigns,  whom  Thou  hast  given  tlie  right 
to   reign   over  the  earth.      Crown  them   with  the 


•o^ 


BASIL  THE  GREAT.  131) 

shield  of  truth,  the  shield  of  good  will,  (")  over- 
shadow their  head  in  the  day  of  battle,  strengthen 
their  arm  ;  uplift  their  right  hand,  sta])lish 
their  kingdom ;  put  all  barbarous  nations,  which 
desire  war,  under  them,  vouchsafe  them  profound 
and  inviolate  peace  ;  speak  good  things  xmto  their 
heart  for  Thy  Church  and  all  Thy  people,  that  we 
may  spend  during  their  calm  time,  a  quiet  and 
tranquil  life  in  all  piety  and  holiness.  Remember, 
0  Lord,  every  magistracy  and  authority,  and  our 
l)rethre)i  in  the  palace,  and  all  the  army.  Preserve 
the  good  in  Thy  goodness,  and  make  the  evil  good 
in  Thy  bounty,  lieniember,  0  Lord,  the  people 
which  stand  around,  and  those  who  are  absent  for 
reasonable  causes,  and  have  mercy  on  them  and  us, 
according  to  the  multitude  of  Thy  mercy.  Fill 
their  stores  with  every  good  thing,  keep  their  unions 
in  peace  and  concord,  rear  up  the  infants,  guide;  the 
youth,  strengtlien  the  old,  comfort  the  timid,  collect 
the  scattered,  bring  l)ack  the  erring,  and  unite  thcin 
to  Thy  holy  Catbolic  and  Apostolic  Church.  Free 
those  troubled  by  unclean  spirits  ;  sail  together  with 
them  that  sail;  journey  with  travellers,  stand  Ijeforo 
tlie  widows,  shield  the  ori)b:ins,  doiiver  tlie  captives, 
heal  the  sick,  llemember,  O  (Jon,  tbem  that  are  in 
trials,  and  Ininishments,  and  all  tribulation,  and  ne- 
cessity, and  distress,  and  all  tlieiii  tliat  need  Thy 
great  loving-kmihiess,  and  tliein  wiiicJi  love  us,  and 
which  hate  us,  and  those  who  have  enjoined  us, 
unwortby  as  we  are,  to  pray  for  them.  And,  O 
Loiti)  our  Goj),  remember  nil  Thy  people,  and  ])our 
out  on  all  men  Thy  rich  mercy,  granting  tf)  all  their 
petitions  unto  salvation.  And  them  whom  we, 
through  ignorance,  or  forgetfulness,  or  the  number  oi' 


(6)  pBalni  V.  13.     LXX.  lui  1  Vulgate. 


140  LITURGY    OF 

names,  have  not  remembered,  do  Thou,  0  God,  remem- 
ber them,  Who  knowest  tlie  age  and  the  name  of  each 
cue,  Who  knowest  each  from  his  mother's  Avomb. 
For  Thou,  0  God,  art  the  Help  of  the  helpless,  the 
Hope  of  the  hopeless,  the  Saviour  of  the  tempest- 
tost,  the  Harbour  of  mariners,  the  Physician  of  the 
sick.  Be  Tliou  Thyself  all  things  to  all  men,  Who 
knowest  each,  and  his  petition,  his  dwelling,  and 
his  need.  Deliver,  0  Lord,  this  city,  and  every  city 
and  country,  from  famine,  pestilence,  earthquake, 
inundation,  fire,  sword,  incursion  of  foreigners, 
and  from  civil  war.  (Aloud.)  In  the  first  place, 
remember,  0  Lord,  our  Archbishop  N.,  whom  vouch- 
safe to  Thy  holy  Cliurclies  in  peace,  safe,  honoured, 
hoalthful,  long-hved,  and  rightly  dividing  the  word 
of  truth. 

And  the  Deacon,  stand'mrf  hy  the  door,  saith, 

For  the  most  sacred  Metropolitan,  or  Bishop,  N., 
and  for  him  who  presents  these  holy  gifts,  etc.,  as  far 
as  And  of  all  Thy  servants  and  handmaids. 

Thr  Choir  chants.  And  of  all  Thy  servants  and 
handmaids. 

Priest,  {secretly.)  Eemember,  0  Lord,  every  see  of 
tlie  orthodox,  who  rightly  divide  the  word  of  Thy 
truth.  Remember,  0  Lord,  according  to  the  mul- 
titude of  Tliy  compassions  and  of  my  unworthiness  ; 
forgive  me  every  offence  voluntary  and  involuntary, 
and  withdraw  not  the  grace  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit 
from  the  Gifts  lying  before  Thee,  because  of  my 
sins.  Eemember,  0  Lord,  the  Presbytery,  the 
Diaconate  in  Christ,  and  every  priestly  oi-der,  and 
make  none  of  us  ashamed  who  compass  Thy  holy 
Altar.  Visit  us  in  Thy  Ijountj,  0  Lord,  be  mani- 
fest unto  us  in  Thy  rich  compassions,  vouchsafe 
Ub    temperate    ar?.d    wbolesome     weather,     bestow 


BASIL  THE  GBKAT.  141 

showers  on  the  earth  for  the  produce  of  fruit, 
bless  the  crown  of  the  year  of  Thy  goodness,  quiet 
the  schisms  of  the  Churches,  quench  the  boastings 
of  the  nations,  quickly  destroy  the  uprisings  of 
heresies,  by  the  power  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit  ;  receiving 
us  all  into  Thy  kingdom,  making  us  children  of 
light,  and  children  of  the  day.  Vouchsafe  us  Thy 
peace  and  Thy  love,  0  Lord  our  God,  for  Thou 
hast  given  us  all  things.  (Aloud.)  And  grant  us 
with  one  mouth  and  one  heart  to  glorify  and  praise 
Thine  all-honoured  and  majestic  Name,  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,^ 
now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

The  Priest  turns  to  the  door,  and  blessing,  saith  aloud, 

And  the  mercies  of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  shall  be  with  us  all. 

And  the  Deacon  {if  he  he  presini,  nihcrwise,  the 
Priest)  goes  forth,  dud  standimj  In  the  usual  place, 
saith. 

Making  mention  of  all  the   Saints.     Again    and 
again  in  peace,  let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 
Choir.  Lord,  have  mercy. 

And  so  on,  as  in  the  lAturgy  of  Chrijsostom. 

For  the  precious  Gifts  offered  and  hallowed. 

Tliat  our  loving  God. 

That  we  may  be  delivered. 

Priest,  (siririli/.)  0  our  GoD,  GoD  of  salvation^ 
teach  us  Thyself  to  give  Thee  wortliy  thanks  for 
Tliy  benefits,  which  Thou  hast  done,  and  still  doest 
amongst  us.  Do  Thou,  our  God,  Who  accci»tcst 
these  Gifts,  purify  us  from  every  pollution  of  tlesh 
and  spirit,  and  teach  us  to  maintain  perfect  holinesa 


142  LITURGY    OP 

in  'I'liy  fear,  that  receiving  in  the  pure  witness  of  out 
conscience  the  portion  of  Thy  hallowed  things,  we 
may  be  united  to  the  holy  Body  and  Blood  of 
Thy  Christ,  and  receiving  them  worthily,  w6  may 
have  Christ  dwelling  in  our  hearts,  and  become  the 
temple  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit.  Yea,  0  our  God,  and 
make  none  of  us  guilty  of  these  awful  and  heavenly 
mysteries,  nor  weak  in  soul  and  body  from  partak- 
ing of  them  unworthily  ;  but  grant  us  unto  our 
last  breath  worthily  to  receive  the  portion  of  Thy 
hallowed  things,  as  the  viaticum  of  life  everlasting, 
as  an  acceptable  plea  at  the  terrible  Judgment- 
seat  of  Thy  Christ,  that  we  also,  with  all  Thy 
Saints,  who  have  pleased  Thee  from  [the  beginning 
of]  the  world,  may  become  partakers  of  Thine  ever- 
lasting good  things,  which  Thou  hast  prepared,  0 
Lord,  for  them  that  love  Thee. 

Deacon. 

Assist,  save,  have  mercy,  &c. 

That  we  may  pass  all  this  day. 

The  angel  of  peace,  a  faithful  guide. 

Pardon  and  remission. 

What  are  good  and  profitable  to  our  souls. 

That  we  may  pass  the  remainder  of  our  time. 

That  the  ends  of  our  life  may  be  Christian. 

Asking  for  the  unity  of  the  Faith,  and  the  fel- 
lowship of  the  Holy  Spirit,  let  us  present  ourselves 
and  one  another,  and  all  our  life  to  Christ  our 
Lord. 

Priest,  (aloud.)  And  count  us  worthy,  0  Master, 
boldly  to  venture,  uncondemned,  to  call  on  Theo 
our  heavenly  God  and  Father,  and  to  say. 

People.  Our  Father,  &c. 

Priest.  For  Thine  is  the  Kingdom,  &c.  Then. 
Peace  to  all. 


BASIL  THE  GREAT. 


143 


Veacon.  Let  us  bow  down  our  heads  unto  tbe  Lord. 

Briest.  Master,  Lord,  Father  of  compassions, 
and  God  of  all  consolation,  bless,  hallow,  strengthen, 
•stablish  them  who  have  bowed  down  their  heads 
unto  Thee,  withdi-aw  them  from  every  evil  deed, 
unite  them  to  every  good  deed,  and  make  them 
worthy  to  partake  uncondemned  of  these  Thy  spot- 
less and  quickening  mysteries,  for  the  remission 
of  sins,  for  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
{Aloud.)  Through  the  grace,  and  comiiassion,  and 
loving-khidncss  of  Thine  Only- Begotten  Sox\,  with 
Whom  Thou  art  blessed,  together  with  Thine  all- 
holy,  and  good,  and  quickening  Spirit,  now  and 
ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

Prirst.  Advance,  0  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  God, 
from  Thy  holy  dwelling-phice,  and  from  the  throne 
of  the  glory  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  come  to  hallow 
us,  Who  Kittest  on  liigh  with  tlio  Father,  and  art 
here  iuvisildy  present  with  us,  and  deign  with  Thy 
mighty  Hand  to  give  us  a  share  in  Thy  spotless 
Body  and  Precious  Blood,  and  by  us  to  all  the 
people.  {Aloud.) 

Deacon.  Let  us  attend. 

Priest.  Holy  things  for  holy  persons. 

When  the  Communion  is  ended,  and  lite  hulij  Mysteries 
have  been  taken  from  the  sacred  Table,  tlie  I'riest  praijs. 

We  give  thanks  to  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  for 
the  reception  of  Tliy  lioly,  spotless,  immortal,  and 
heavenly  myi-teries,  which  Thou  liast  given  ns  lor 
the  benefit  and  sanctitication  and  healing  of  our 
souls  and  Ijodics.  Thyself.  O  Master  of  sill  things, 
grant  that  tbe  Coiinnuiiion  of  the  holy  Body  and 
Blood  of  Thy  Christ  may  be  to  us  unto  faitb 
that  maketh    not    ashamed,  unto    love    unfeigned 


144  LITURGY    OF 

unto  fulness  of  wisdom,  itnto  healing  of  sold  and 
body,  unto  defeat  of  every  foe,  unto  fulfilment  of 
Tliy  commandments,  unto  an  acceptable  plea  at  the 
terrible  judgment-seat  of  Thy  Christ. 

Deacon.  Eiglitly  partaking  of  the  divine,  holy, 
spotless,  immortal,  heavenly,  and  quickening  mys- 
teries. 

Assist,  preserve,  have  mercy,  &c. 

Priest,  [aloud.)  For  Thou  art  our  sanctification,  and 
unto  Thee  we  ascribe  the  glory,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.  Amen. 

Priest.  Let  us  go  forth  in  peace. 
Deacon.  Let  us  beseech  the  Lord 

Prayer  behivd  the  Ambon,  pronounced  by  the  Priest. 

0  Lord,  Who  blessest  them  that  bless  Thee, 
and  hallowest  them  that  trust  in  Thee,  save  Thy 
]icople  and  bless  Thine  inheritance ;  guard  the 
fulness  of  Thy  Church,  hallow  them  that  love 
the  beauty  of  Thine  house  ;  give  them  a  glorious 
reward  through  Thy  divine  power,  and  leave  us 
not,  who  hope  in  Thee.  Grant  peace  unto  Thy 
world,  to  Thy  Churches,  to  the  Priests,  to  our 
sovereigns,  to  the  army,  and  to  all  Thy  people, 
because  eveiy  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift  is 
from  above,  coming  down  from  Thee,  the  Father 
of  lights ;  and  to  Thee  we  ascribe  the  glory,  and 
thanksgiving,  and  adoration,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Prayer  while  the  Holy  Things  are  put  away. 

The  Mystery  of  Thy  dispensation,  0  Christ  our 
God,  is  accomplished  and  perfected,  so  far  as  lies 
in  our  power.  For  we  have  the  memorial  of  Thy 
death,  we  have  seen  the  figure  of   Thy   resurrec- 


BASIL    THE    GREAT.  145 

tion,  we  have  beeu  filled  with  Thine  unending  life. 
We  have  enjoyed  Thine  inexhaustibh  pleasure,,  of 
which  vouchsafe  to  count  us  all  worthy  in  the  world 
to  come.  Through  the  grace  of  Thine  unbegin- 
ing  Father,  and  Thy  holy,  and  good,  and  quicken- 
ing Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 
Ameu. 


'W^ 


THE   LITUKG^ 


OP 


iaalabar< 


The  Priest  advances  with  the  Deacon  to  the  Altar, 

Priest.  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

Priest.  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

Priest  and  Deacon.  And  on  earth  peace,  and  a 
good  hope  to  men.  Our  Father,  Which  art  in 
heaven,  hallowed  he  Thy  Name  :  Holy,  Holy,  Holy  : 
Our  Father,  Which  art  in  heaven,  heaven  and  earth 
are  full  of  the  majesty  of  Thy  glory,  and  Angels  and 
men  exclaim  to  Thee,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy.  Our 
Father,  Which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  Thy 
Name :  Thy  kingdom  come  :  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven  :  Give  us  this  day  the  bread 
of  our  necessity :  And  forgive  us  our  sins,  as  we 
also  forgive  our  debtors  :  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  evil :  for  Thine  is 
the  kingdom,  and  the  power  and  the  glory,  for  ever 
and  ever.     Amen. 

Priest.  Strengthen,  0  Lord  God,  our  infirmity 
by  Thy  mercy,  that  we  may  minister  in  Thy  holy 
Sacraments,  given  for  the  salvation  and  renewal  of 
our  nature,  through  the  love  of  Thy  most  dearly 
beloved  Son,  0  Lord  of  all  things,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Amen. 


LITURGY   OF   MALABAR.  147 

Priest.  Adored  and  glorified,  honoured  and  exalted, 
landed  and  blessed  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  be  the 
glorious  Name  of  Thy  most  resjilendent  Teinity,  at 
all  times,  0  Lord  of  all  things,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

The  Priest  and  Deacon  say  alternately  Psalms  15. 
150,  and  117. 

Priest.  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  from  ages  to  ages.  Amen 
and  Amen. 

Deacon.  Set  me,  0  Lord,  with  pure  thoughts  be- 
fore Thy  altar. 

Priest.  LoKi),  wlio  shall  dwell  in  Tliy  tabernacle, 
and  who  shall  rest  upon  Thy  holy  hill  '?  How 
glorious  and  lovely  is  Thy  sanctuary,  God,  the 
Sanctifier  of  all  things. 

Deacon.  Peace  be  with  us. 

Priest.  Before  the  exceeding  glorious  throne  of 
Thy  Majesty,  my  Lord,  and  the  lofty  and  supreme 
seat  of  Tliy  doiniiiiition,  and  the  Altar  of  expiation, 
which  Tiiy  will  liatli  fixed  in  the  place  of  the  liabi- 
tation  of  Tliy  glory,  we  Thy  people,  and  tlie  sheep 
of  Thy  pasture,  with  the  thousands  of  Serai)him 
that  praise  Thee,  and  the  ten  thousands  of  Angels 
and  Arcliangels  tliat  minister  to  Thee,  bend  our 
knees  before  Thee,  and  ever  adore  and  glorify 
Fatmkr,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  to  ages  of  jiges. 

To  the  Niiiue  of  Tliy  ever-glorious  Trinity,  great, 
formidable,  lioly,  laudable  and  incomprehensible  ; 
also  to  Tby  mercy  which  Tlioii  hast  manifested  to- 
wards our  nice,  we  are  bound  to  return  contiuuiiL 
thanks,  and  to  attriltute  laud  and  adoration  ;  0 
Lord  of  all  things,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghobt 

H.  Amen. 

Priest.  Thee,  the  Lord  of  all  tbings,  we  ju-aise  : 

L    2 


148  LITDKGY    OP 

Thee,  Jesus  Christ,  we  glorify;  becanse  Thou  art 
the  raiser  up  of  our  bodies,  and  +he  most  holy; 
Saviour  of  our  souls ;  I  liave  washed  my  bauds  in 
innocency,  0  Lord,  and  have  compassed  Thine 
altar. 

Deacon.  Thee,  the  Lord  of  all  things.  [As  the 
Priest,  who  thni  repeats  it  (ujaiv.) 

Deacon.  Peace  be  Avith  us  all. 

Priest.  Thou  art  truly  my  Lord,  and  the  raiser  up 
of  our  bodies,  and  the  good  Saviour  of  our  souls, 
and  the  constant  Keeper  of  our  life  :  and  it  is  meet 
that  we  should  laud  and  glorify  Thee  at  all  times, 
Father,  Sox,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

Priest.  Lord,  our  God,  when  the  most  sweet  odour 
of  Thy  goodness  and  love  shall  breathe  upon  us, 
and  when  our  souls  shall  have  been  enlightened 
with  the  splendour  of  Thy  truth,  then  we  shall 
meet  Thy  most  beloved  Son  Who  shall  be  revealed 
from  heaven,  and  in  Thy  Cliurch,  already  honoured 
with  the  crown,  shall  praise  Thee  incessantly,  for 
Thou  art  the  Lord  and  Creator  of  all  things,  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Amen.  Bring  your  voices,  and  praise,  0 
all  ye  people,  the  Living  God. 

Priest.  Holy  God,  Holy  and  Mighty,  Holy  and 
Immortal,  have  mercy  upon  us.  Glory  be  to  the 
Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Holy  God,  Holy  and  Mighty,  Holy  and 
Immortal,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Priest.  From  everlasting  to  everlasting.  Amen 
and  Amen. 

Deacon.  Holy  God,  &c. 

Priest,  tumimi  to  the  people.  Let  us  all  stand  in 
order,  and  with  joy  and  gladness  let  us  seek  and 
Bay, 


MALABAR.  149 

People.  0  our  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us.  {And 
so  at  the  end  of  every  petition.  (■) 

Deacon.  Father  of  mercies  and  God  of  all  Con- 
Bolation,  we  beseech  Thee. 

Our  Saviour,  the  Dispenser  of  our  salvation,  and 
the  Captain  of  all  things,  we,  &c. 

For  the  peace  and  unity  and  well-being  of  the 
whole  world,  and  of  all  Churches  : 

For  the  healthfulness  of  the  air,  the  richness  of 
year  and  its  provisions,  and  the  beauty  of  the  whole 
world  : 

For  our  holy  Fathers,  our  Patriarch,  the  universal 
Pastor  of  the  whole  Catholic  Church ;  and  our 
Bishop,  that  tJiey  may  enjoy  good  Jieullh  : 

The  merciful  God  Who  governeth  all  things  by 
His  love : 

Him  That  is  ricli  in  mercy  and  Whose  loving- 
kindness  is  shed  abroad  : 

Him  That  is  good  in  His  Essence,  and  the  Giver 
of  all  gifts  : 

Him  that  is  glorious  in  heaven,  and  exceeding 
laufhible  upon  earth  : 

The  Inniiortal  Nature  That  iiihiibits  that  most 
gioricjiis  liglit,  we  beseech  : 

Save  us  all,  0  Ciirist,  our  Loud  and  (i(ii>,  by  Thy 
grace,  and  multiply  in  us  peace  and  love,  and  have 
mercy  upon  us. 

Let  UH  pniy  and  beseech  the  Lord,  the  God  of 
all,  that  He  may  hear  the  voice  of  our  prayers,  and 
listen  to  our  supplications,  and  have  mercy  upon 
us. 

Let  us  pray  also  for  tlic  holy  Catholic  Church, 
which  is  spread  over  the  whole  orb  of    the   worM, 


(')  TliiH  miinifeHtly  aiiswfrs  to  tlu'  first  Ectene  in  the  pre- 
ccdiug  Liturgies,  although  the  form  diilerH  cousiderably. 


150  LITURGY   OF 

that  the  peace  which  is  from  God  may  remain  in  it 
till  the  consummation  of  all  things  : 

Let  us  pray  also  for  the  holy  Fathers,  our  Bishops, 
that  without'  blemish  and  complaint  they  may 
remain  all  the  days  of  their  life  in  the  government 
of  their  Churches  :  but  chiefly  we  arc  bound  to  pray 
for  the  safety  of  the  Lord  Patriarch,  the  Pastor  of 
the  whole  Church,  and  the  Lord  Bishop  of  this  Me- 
tropolis :  let  us  pray  that  the  Loud  may  keep  them 
and  preserve  them  at  the  head  of  their  flocks,  that 
they  may  feed  and  govern  and  prepare  for  the  Lord 
a  perfect  people,  zealous  of  all  good  works. 

Let  us  iH-ay  also  for  the  Presbyters  and  Deacons 
who  are  occupied  in  the  ministry  of  the  truth ; 
that  with  a  good  heart  and  a  pure  conscience  they 
may  accomplish  their  ministry  before  God. 

Let  us  pray  also  for  every  holy  and  sober  congre- 
gation of  the  sons  of  the  holy  Catholic  Church,  that 
they  may  accomplish  the  most  excellent  course  of 
sanctity,  and  may  receive  the  hope  and  promise  of 
the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  Living. 

Let  us  commemorate  the  most  blessed^  Viigin 
Mary,  the  Mother  (^)  of  Christ  and  our  Saviour. 

Let  us  pray  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who  dwelt  in 
her,  may  sanctify  us  by  His  grace,  and  accomplish 
His  will  in  us,  and  sign  His  truth  in  us,  all  the 
days  of  our  life. 

Let  us  venerate  the  memory  of  Prophets,  Apostles, 
Martyrs,  and  Confessors  :  let  us  pray  that  by  their 
prayers  and  the  passions  which  they  endured,  God 
may  give  to  us  with  them  a  good  hope  and  salva- 

(2)  Mother  of  Christ.  Notice  here  the  Nestorian  heresy — 
Mother  of  Chisist,  instead  of  Mother  of  God.  This  is  one  of 
the  few  expressions  -which  was  rightly  altered  at  the  Synod  of 
Diamper. 


MALABAE.  151 

tion ;  and  that  we  may  be  made  worthy  of  theh- 
blessed  commemoration,  and  their  living  and  true 
promises  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Let  us  com- 
memorate also  cm-  fathers  and  the  doctors  of  truth, 
S.  Nestorius,  f)  S.  Diodorus,  S.  Theodore,  S. 
Ephraim,  S.  Abraham,  S.  Narcissus,  and  all  Doctors 
and  Presbyters,  followers  after  truth.  Let  us  pray 
that  by  their  prayers,  the  pure  truth  and  the  sincere 
doctrine  which  they  taught  may  be  ijreserved  in 
the  holy  Chm-ch  till  the  consummation  of  the 
world. 

Let  us  remember  also  our  fathers  and  our  brethren 
who  have  departed  out  of  this  world  in  the  orthodox 
faith  ;  let  us  pray,  I  say,  to  the  Lord  that  He  may 
absolve  them,  and  may  forgive  them  their  offences, 
and  may  vouchsafe  that  they,  with  all  just  and 
rigliteous  men  who  have  obeyed  the  Divine  will, 
may  rejoice  for  ever  and  ever. 

Also  for  this  province  and  city,  and  for  them  tluit 
dwell  therein,  especially  for  this  congregation;  let 
us  pray  that  the  Lord  by  His  grace  may  turn  away 
from  us  sword,  c;i]itivity,  rai)ine,  eartli({uake, 
famine,  pestilence,  and  otlier  things  which  are  in- 
jurious to  the  soul  and  the  body. 

For  those  also  that  have  dci)artpd  from  tlio  true 
faith,  and  are  lieid  in  captivity  by  the  net  of  Satiiii: 
let  UH  pray  that  Die.  Loito  (ioi>  may  convert  their 
hearts,  and  that  tljcy  may  verily  acknowledge  God 
tho  true  Father,  and  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  our 
Lord. 

Let  us  pray  also  for  tlic  sick  :  and  especially  for 
them  who  are  vexed  with  cruel  diseases,  and  are 
tried  by  most  evil  spirits:  we  pray  that  the  Lord 
our  God  may  send  to  them  His  holy  Angel  of  love 


(•)  The  arcb-beretic. 


162  LITURGY    OF 

and  salvation,  and  may  visit  and  heal  and  help 
them,  through  the  greatness  of  His  grace  and 
mercy. 

Also  for  the  poor,  orphans,  widows,  and  afflicted ; 
and  them  that  sufi'er  persecution :  let  us  pray 
that  the  Lord  may  govern  them  hy  His  grace, 
and  nourish  and  console  them  by  His  pity,  and  hy 
His  loving-liindness  set  them  free  from  them  that  do 
violence  to  them. 

Pray  and  beseech  the  love  of  the  God  of  all,  that 
we  may  be  to  Him  a  kingdom,  a  priesthood,  and  a 
holy  people.  Cry  to  the  Lord,  the  mighty  God, 
with  all  your  heart,  and  all  your  soul,  for  God  is  a 
tender  Father,  and  morciful  and  clement,  and 
willeth  not  that  His  handywork  should  perish,  but 
rather  should  be  converted  and  live.  But  above 
all  things  it  is  fit  and  meet  that  we  should  pray  to, 
laud  and  adore,  glory  and  adore,  glory  and  honour, 
and  exalt  the  One  God,  the  Father,  the  Lord  of  all, 
most  worthy  of  adoration,  Who  by  Christ  hath 
made  to  us  a  good  lio):)e  and  salvation  for  our  souls, 
that  He  may  accomplish  His  grace  and  love  in  us 
even  to  the  end. 

While  the  Deacon  saith  these  things,  the  Priest, 
standing  in  the  middle  of  the  Altar,  talceth  the  Paten ; 
and  the  Deacon  giving  incense,  and  holding  the  Thurible 
uith  both  hands,  he  censeth  it  in  the  form  of  a  Cross, 
saying, 

Lord,  our  God,  cause  this  paten  to  have  a  swect- 
Bmehing  savour,  after  the  pattern  of  Aaron,  the 
most  illustrious  Priest  in  the  tabernacle  of  testi- 
mony, Thou  That  art  the  Creator  and  the  Lord  of 
the  roots  and  spices  that  breathe  a  sweet  odour,  in 
the  Name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  lioLY  Ghost.     Amen. 


MALABAB.  153 

TTieu  he  censeth  the  Veil  of  the  Chalice,  and  saith : 

Lord,  our  God,  cause  this  veil  to  have  a  sweet 
savour,  after  the  fashion  of  the  mantle  wherewith 
Elias,  the  prophet  of  truth,  clothed  himself ;  in  the 
Is&me. 

Theii  he  censeth  the  Chalice,  and  saith . 

Lord,  our  God,  cause  this  chalice  to  send  forth  a 
sweet  smell,  after  the  fashion  of  Aaron  the  Priest  in 
the  tahernacleof  witness,  Thou  Who  art  the  Creator 
of  roots  and  spices  that  hreathe  forth  a  sweet  odour, 
in  the  Name. 

2'hen  he  poureth  wine  into  the  Chalice,  and  saith  : 

Let  the  precious  lilood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
be  mingled  in  the  chalice.  (*) 

He  poureth  in  water,  and  saith  ; 

One  of  the  soldiers  came,  and  with  a  spear  pierced 
the  side  of  our  Lokd  Jesi's  Christ,  and  forthwith 
came  thereout  IMood  and  Water,  and  he  that  saw  it 
bare  record,  and  his  record  is  true. 

Aij'ii7i  iK)urin(f  in  nine,  he  .saith  : 

Let  water  be  mingled  with  wine  and  wine  with 
■water,  in  the  Name  of  the  Fatukr,  and  of  the  Hon, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (")  Then  he  saith  :  Expect- 
ing I  expected  the  Lord,  the  Body  of  Christ,  ami 


1*) 

•'  tlu- 


(*)  Thia  anticipative  calling  that  which  Ib  simple  wine, 
Blood  of  CiiiiiHT,"  iH  on  a  jiar  with  the  anlicipiitive 
adoration  of  the  Holy  MyHtcri<'K  at  the  Great  Entrauce, 
common  through  all  the  EaHti-rn  Church. 

C'l  Here  follows,  in  tlio  niodf-ni  fditinii,  a  lon^;  ruhric,  of  the 
insertion  of  wliich  no  notice  is  };;iven,  hut  whifli  is  tvideutly 
taken  from  the  Boman  MImbuI. 


154  LITURGY    o;f 

His  precious  Blood  on  the  holy  Altar.  Let  us  all 
offer  it  witli  iVar  and  Iionour,  and  with  the  Angels 
let  us  exclaim,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  is  our  Lord  God. 

Deacon.  The  poor  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied  with 
the  Body  of  Christ  and  His  precious  Blood  upon 
the  holy  Altar :  let  us  all  offer  it  with  fear  and 
honour,  and  with  Angels  let  us  exclaim,  Holy,  Holy, 
Holy,  is  our  Lord  God. 

Let  us  pray.     Peace  be  with  us. 

Priest  (sccretli/).  Let  glory  be  offered  and  immO' 
lated  to  Thy  ever-glorious  Trinity,  for  ages  of  ages  : 
and  may  Christ  Who  was  offered  as  an  oblation  for 
our  salvation,  and  has  commanded  us  that  we  should 
sacrifice  in  memory  of  His  Passion,  Death,  Sepul- 
ture, and  Eesurrection,  receive  this  sacrifice  from 
our  hands,  through  His  grace  and  His  love,  for  ever 
and  ever. 

He  puts  the  Holy  Gifts  on  the  Altar. 

Let  these  exceeding  glorious,  holy,  and  life-giving 
mysteries  be  constituted  and  ordained  upon  the  holy 
Altar  of  ChrioT,  until  the  glorious  Advent  from 
heaven  of  the  Same,  to  Whom  is  laud,  glory,  and 
adoration  now  and  at  all  times,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

(Aloud.)  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  Be  there  a  commemoration 
u])on  the  holy  Altar  of  the  Vii'gin  Mary,  the  Mother 
of  Christ. 

Deacon.  From  everlasting  to  everlasting.  Amen 
and  Amen.  Apostles  of  the  very  Son,  friends  of 
the  Only  Begotten,  pray  ye  that  there  may  be  peace 
in  the  creation. 

Priest.  Let  all  the  people  say  Amen  and  Amen. 
Be  Thy  commemoration.  Apostle  Thomas,  our  holy 
father,  upon  the  holy  Altar,  together  with  the  just 


MALABAR.  155 

who  have  conquered,  and  the  martyrs  who  have 
received  the  crown. 

Deacon.  The  Mighty  God  is  with  us,  our  Father 
is  with  us,  our  Angel,  and  our  Helper,  the  God  of 
Jacob. 

Priest.  The  little  ones,  with  the  elders,  behold  all 
the  faithful  who  have  fallen  on  sleep  in  a  good  Iwpe, 
who  have  paid  the  debt  of  humanity.  By  Thy  ex- 
ceeding glorious  resurrection.  Thou  shalt  raise  them 
ap  to  Thy  glory.  (") 

beacon.  Pour  forth  before  him  your  hearts  in 
prayer,  fasting  and  penitence.  They  have  made 
propitiation  to  Christ,  the  Fathkr,  and  His  Spirit. 

The  Priest  salt  It,  ahile  he  coveretk  the  Oblations, 

Thou  covere^it  Thyself  with  light  as  with  a  garment, 
and  stretchcst  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

While  the  Priest  washeth  his  hands  the  Deacon  saith  : 

By  tlie  prayer  and  supplication  of  the  Angels  of 
peace  and  of  love,  we  ask. 

People.  From  Thee,  0  Lord. 

Deacon.  Night  and  day,  and  all  tlie  days  of  our 
life,  we  ask  for  eternal  pt;acc  to  Thy  Church,  and  a 
life  witliout  sins. 

I'eople.  From  Thee,  O  Lord. 

J)itir',n.  KeinisKion  of  sins,  and  tliat  which  may  bo 
profiliilde  to  our  life,  and  may  appease  His  iJivinity, 
we  ask, 

O  If  we  compare  these  verHicles  nm\  rimpotiHOB  witli  the 
"  (tni)  in  witli  lis."  ill  tlic  Ori'dt  Aiioili-ipnoii  of  tlio  Cotintftnti- 
li(i])<ilitiin  rite,  (wliic.li  \vc  know  to  bi',  iit  the  very  liitest,  of 
tlie  liej^imiiriK  of  tlie  fourth  century,)  we  nuiy  concinde  them 
in  like  mnnner  tc  be  of  the  most  remote  antiquity. 


15G  LirURGY    OF 

People.  From  Thee,  0  Lord. 

Dericou.  The  mercies  of  the  Lord,  and  His  be- 
nignity, ever  and  at  all  times  we  ask, 

People.  From  Thee,  0  Lord. 

Deacon.  Ourselves  and  our  souls  let  us  commend 
to  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Gkost. 

People.  To  Thee,  0  Lord  God. 

Priest.  We  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  Lord  God,  tlie 
Mighty,  perfect  in  us  Thy  grace,  and  by  our  hands 
pour  forth  Thy  gifts  and  love,  and  the  tender  mercy 
of  Thy  Divinity  ;  and  let  them  be  for  the  propitiation 
of  the  debts  of  Thy  people,  and  for  the  remission  of 
all  the  sins  of  the  sheep  of  Thy  pasture,  which,  by 
grace  and  Thy  love,  Thou  hast  chosen  to  Thyself: 
of  all,  0  Lord,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Amen.  Bow  down  your  heads  for  the 
imposition  of  hands,  and  receive  the  blessing. 

Priest  (secretly).  Lord,  Mighty  God,  Thine  is  the 
holy  Catholic  Church,  purchased  by  the  wonderful 
Passion  of  Thy  Christ  :  on  the  sheep  of  Thy  liock, 
by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who  is  equal  to 
Thee  in  most  glorious  Deity,  the  orders  of  true  priest- 
hood are  conferred.  Thou,  my  Lord,  by  Thy 
clemency,  liast  vouchsafed  to  the  exiguity  of  the 
nature  of  our  misery,  that  we  men  should  become 
glorious  members  of  that  mighty  body  which  is  the 
Catholic  Church,  and  by  Thy  ministry  may  confer 
on  believing  souls,  spiritual  helps.  Do  Thou  there- 
fore, my  Lord,  accomplish  in  us  Thy  grace,  and 
pour  forth  by  our  hands.  Thy  gifts  :  let  also  Thy  love 
be  upon  us,  and  the  piety  of  Thy  Deity  upon  this 
people  which  Thou  hast  chosen  to  Thyself.  {Aloud.) 
Grant  also,  my  Lord,  through  Thy  mercy,  that  we 
all,  in  all  the  days  of  our  life,  may  equally  please 
Thy  Deity  by  the  best  works  of  righteousness,  which 
render  us  acceptable  to  the  glorious  will  of  Thy 


MALABAR.  157 

Majesty ;  and  that  in  this  manner  we  may  be  made 
worthy  of  the  assistance  of  Thy  grace,  that  we  may 
ever  offer  to  Thee  hymns,  honour,  laud,  and 
adoration.  Lord  of  all,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost. 

[Expulsion  of  the  Catechumens.] 

Deacon,  Amen.  He  that  hath  not  received  baptism 
let  him  depart. 

Choir.  Amen. 

Deacon.  He  that  hath  not  received  the  seal  of  life, 
let  him  depart. 

(Jhoir.  Amen. 

Deacon.  He  that  hath  not  received  it,  let  him 
depart. 

Priest.  Go,  auditors,  (')  and  see  the  doors.  Let  us 
pray  :  peace  bo  witli  us.  illuminate,  O  Lord  our 
God,  the  motions  of  our  thoughts,  that  we  may  listen 
to  and  undcrstiiiid  the  most  sweet  voice  of  Thy  pre- 
cepts, lifo-conforriiig  and  divine.  Grant  to  us  also 
by  Thy  grace  and  Thy  loves,  that  from  them  wo  may 
gather  advaiitagc,  that  is  to  say,  love,  liope,  and  sal- 
vation, as  may  be  expedient  to  soul  and  to  body, 
and  that  we  may  ever  sing  praise  to  Thco,  without 
cessation,  at  all  times,  Loud  of  all  things,  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Guost, 

Jh'ticon.  Amen. 

I'ricHt.  Thee,  the  most  wise  Governor  and  niitrvcl- 
lous  preserver  of  Thy  servants,  and  great  treasury 
whence  every  good  thing  and  all  help  proceodcth 
from  Thy  mercy  :  wo  beseech  Thee,  turn  Thee,  0  my 
Lord,  and  be  propitious  to  us,  and  have  mercy  upon 


O  He  is  ftfldroBHing   of  courHf  tliat  class  of  Cateohumena 
who  art-  called  Auditors  or  AudiciiU*. 


158  LITUEG¥   OF 

US  always,  as  Thou  art  accustomed,  Lord  of  all, 
Fathp;r,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  Keep  silence.  Paul  the  Apostle :  the 
Epistle  to  the my  brethren :  Sir,  bless. 

Priest.  Christ  bless  thee.  (^) 

[The  Epistle  is  read.] 

Choir.  Glory  to  Christ  the  Lord. 

Priest,  (^)  before  the  middle  of  the  Altar,  bowing: 
Thee,  the  splendour  of  the  glory  of  the  Father  Him- 
self, and  the  Image  of  the  Substance  of  Him  That 
begat  Thee,  Who  didst  appear  in  the  body  of  our 
humanity,  and  didst  illuminate  our  soul  by  the  light 
of  Thy  life-giving  Gospel,  Thee,  I  say,  we  laud  and 
adore  and  glorify  at  all  times.  Lord  of  all.  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Make  me  wise,  0  Lord,  with  Thy  holy  wisdom, 
and  grant  to  me  that,  without  intermission  and  with- 
out spot,  I  may  minister  to  Thee  by  the  keeping  of 
Thy  Commandments,  life-conferring  and  divine, 
Lord  of  all,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Deacon.  There  is  silence.     Be  silent. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  us. 

Choir.  With  thee  and  with  thy  spirit. 

Deacon.  The  holy  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Ghrist,  the  preaching  of 

Choir.  Glory  to  Christ  the  Lord. 

Deacon.   Sir,  bless. 

Priest.  Christ  bless  thee. 


(8)  The  respective  speeches  of  the  Priest  and  Deacon  are 
■curiously  counterchanged  in  the  printed  copies.  The  actual 
Liturgy  given  is  that  for  a  departed  Priest :  the  Epistle  is 
2  Cor.  V.  1—12 ;  the  Gospel,  S.  John  vi.  24—25. 

(')  Here  again  I  follow  Le  Brun  :  Eaulin  gives  this  prayer 
io  the  Deacon. 


MALABAR.  159 

[The  Gospel  is  read. 
Choir.  Glory  to  Christ  the  Lonu. 

The  Nicene  Creed  is  recited  as  at  page  12. 

Deacon.  Let  us  pray.  Peace  be  with  us.  Pray, 
bearing  in  memory  our  fathers,  the  Catholics,  '^'') 
aud  all  Presbyters  and  Deacons,  youths  and  virgins, 
and  all  the  faithful  who  have  departed  from  the 
living  and  are  dead  in  the  true  faith.  And  all  our 
fathers  and  brethren,  and  sons  and  dauj;iiters  :  also 
faithful  kings  beloved  of  Christ,  and  all  Prophets, 
Apostles,  and  Martyrs  :  let  us  pray,  1  say,  that,  in 
the  resurrection  from  the  dead  they  may  be  rewarded 
Ijy  God  with  the  crown,  with  a  good  hope,  and  the 
inheritance  of  the  life  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  : 
furthermore,  that  this  oblation  may  be  confidently 
received,  that  by  the("j  ^Vord  of  Gun  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  it  may  be  consecrated,  that  it  may  be  to  us 
for  help  and  salvation  and  ftcniiil  life  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  through  the  grace  of  Christ. 

In  the  vuamvhile  the  Prit'st  saith  secretly :  Glory 
be  to  Thee,  Finder  of  them  that  were  lost :  glory 
be  to  Thoe,  Collector  of  them  that  are  dispersed, 
and  liringor-back  of  them  tiiat  are  afarulT:  glory  to 
Tliee  Who  convertest  the  erring  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth.     Glory  to  Thee,  my  Loko,  Who  hast 


(•")  The  original  petition  referred  of  course  to  the  Catholic 
of  IJftbylon  or  MohuI,  the  Hj)iritiml  licrid  of  the  Church  of 
Malabar.  But  it  waH  left  by  the  li(jiuan  CenHors,  as  it  stood, 
they  intending  to  receive  it  in  the  sense  of  "  our  Catholic 
Fathers." 

(")  The  reference  is  1  Timothy  iv.  5,  as  alluding  to  the 
Words  of  institution,  and  i)rayer  for  the  Descent  of  the  IloiiV 
C'lHosT,  as  both  necessary,  according  to  the  teaching  of  the 
Eastern  Church,  to  a  valid  P^ucliarist. 


IBW  LITURGY    OF 

called  wretched  me  by  Thy  mercy  and  grace  to  ap. 
proach  to  Thee,  and  hast  made  mo,  as  it  were,  an 
illustrious  member  in  the  mighty  body  of  the  Holy 
Church,  that  I  may  offer  to  Thee  this  one,  holy,  and 
acceptable  Sacrifice,  which  is  the  memorial  of  the 
Passion  and  Death,  Burial  and  Eesurrection  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviom'  Jesus  Christ,  through  Whom  it 
pleased  Thee  to  forgive  the  sins  of  all  men. 

The  Priest  censeth  those  who  are  on  the  right  of  the 
Altar,  and  saith  to  them  :\ 

Bless,  my  lords,  and  pray  for  me,  my  fathers,  and 
my  brethren,  and  ray  masters,  that  this  oblation 
may  be  consecrated  by  my  hands, 

They  reply  with  the  Deacon : 

May  Christ  hear  thy  prayers  and  receive  thy 
oblation,  and  cause  thy  priesthood  to  shine  before 
Him  ;  and  may  He  be  well-pleased  with  this  sacrifice 
which  thou  offerest  for  thyself,  for  us,  and  for  all  the 
world,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  through  Thy 
grace  and  love  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

The  Priest  adores,  bowing  before  the  Altar. 

Yea,  0  Lord  our  God,  look  not  upon  the  multi- 
tude, nor  let  Thy  domination  be  angry  at  the  weight 
of  my  sins  ;  ln;t  by  Thy  ineffable  grace  consecrate 
this  great  sacrifice,  and  bestow  it  in  virtue  and 
power,  that  it  may  abolish  our  many  sins  :  and  when 
at  the  latter  day  Thou  appearest  in  the  human 
body  which  Thou  didst  assume  of  our  race,  we  may 
find  before  Thee  grace  and  love,  and  may  be  mado 
worthy  to  praise  Thee  with  the  multitude  of  angels. 


MALABAR.  IGl 

Rising,  he  saith : 

TVe  confess  and  praise,  Lord  our  God,  the  riches 
of  Thy  grace  shed  abroad  over  us  ;  for  when  we  were 
sinuers  and  weak.  Thou  nevertheless,  through  the 
laultitude  of  Thy  mercy,  didst  make  us  Avorth}-  of 
the  dispensation  of  the  holy  sacrament  of  the  Dody 
and  Blood  of  Christ  :  we  beseech  therefore  Thy  help, 
the  Strength  of  our  souls,  that  with  perfect  love  and 
true  faith,  we  may  administer  Thy  gift  which  we 
have,  and  may  offer  to  Thee  hymns,  honour,  laud 
and  adoration,  now  and  for  ever. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

Priest.  Peace  be  with  all. 

Deacon.  ^Vith  thee  and  with  thy  spirit. 

Priest.  Give  the  peace  to  each  other. 

And  for  Patriarchs,  ]5ishops,  Presbyters  and  Dea- 
cons, and  for  those  who  having  accomplished  this 
life,  liave  departed  out  of  this  congregation  of  the 
Church;  and  for  the  peace  of  the  world  and  the 
crown  of  the  year,  that  it  may  be  blessed  and  lillcd 
with  Thy  mercy:  and  for  all  Thy  servants,  and  fiir 
us  aU,  that  this  oblation  be  accepted  for  ever  vjud 
ever. 

Deacon.  ('*)  Let  us  confess,  and  let  us  all  of  us 
beseech  tlie  Loud  with  tiie  voice  of  cboral  melody; 
stand  riglitly  and  attend  to  these  tilings  which  are 
done  in  the  tremendous  mysteries  wbich  are  conse- 
crated: tlio  Priest  is  jiraying  tliat  by  bis  intercession 
peace  may  be  multiplieil  in  you  :  cast  your  eyes 
down  to  the  ground,  and  vigilantly  take  care  to 
raise  your  mind  to  heaven  ;  seek  and  petition  at 
this  time,  and  let  no  one  vcntare  to  spcuk  ;  and  he 

P*)  The  following  speech  is  not  in  the  books  nttrihutrrl  to 
tbo  Deacon,  but  clearly  belongs  to  iiiin.  uml  is  followed  by  t, 
prayer  which  is  "  said  in  tJie  meanwhile  "  by  the  Priest. 


162  LITURGY    OF 

that  i^rayeth,  let  him  pray  mentally,  while  he  re- 
maineth  in  silence  and  fear.     Peace  be  with  us. 

7?i  the  meanwhile  the  Priest  saith  : 

Lord,  Mighty  God,  strengthen  my  weakness  by 
Thy  mercy,  and  make  me  worthy  of  the  assistance 
of  Thy  grace,  that  I  may  offer  to  Thee  an  oblation 
for  the  benefit  of  all  men,  and  to  the  praise  of  Thy 
exceeding  glorious  Trinity,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  for  ever. 

He  unveils  the  mysteries  and  blesses  incense,  and  puts 
it  in  the  censer  and  saith  : 

[beginning  the  Anaphora.] 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
love  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  communion  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  us  all,  now  and  for  ever. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

Priest.  Lift  up  your  hearts. 

Choir.  To  Thee,  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Israel,  the  exceeding  glorious  King.  {^^) 


(13)  This  sentence  is  precisely  the  same  as  that  in  the 
Liturgy  of  the  Apostles,  which  is  the  Nestorian  norm.  In  the 
Liturgies  of  Nestorius  and  Theodore  the  Interpreter,  them- 
selves apparently  of  the  fifth  centui7,  it  is  very  much  amphfied, 
as  thus  iu  the  former : 

Prient.  Up  in  the  sublime  heights,  in  the  feaful  and  glorious 
region,  where  the  Cherubin  cease  not  to  agitate  their  wings, 
and  there  is  no  end  to  the  hymns  and  the  sweet  sounds  of  the 
eanctittcation  of  the  Seraphim,  there  be  your  minds. 

Choir.  They  are  lifted  up  to  Thee,  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Israel,  King  of  Glory. 

Hence  I  gather  the  extreme  antiquity  of  the  Malabar 
Anaphora,  clearly  a  much  earlier  form. 


:\tALAHAR.  163 

Priest.  The  oblation  is  offered  to  the  Lord,  the 
God  of  all. 

Clwir.  It  is  meet  and  right.     Peace  be  with  us. 

Priest.  Lord,  Mighty  God,  give  us  boldness  be- 
fore Thee,  that  we  may  confidently  perform  this 
quickening  and  holy  ministry  with  consciences  pure. 
and  free  from  all  malice,  simulation,  and  guilt,  and 
bitterness,  and  sow  in  us,  my  Lord,  charity  and 
mutual  unity  of  soul ;  and  guard  Thy  holy  Catholic 
Church  here  and  everywhere,  from  everything 
noxious,  from  all  fault  and  perturbation,  by  Thy 
gi-ace  and  love  for  ever. 

Choir.  Bless,  my  Lord. 

Priest.  By  the  mouth  of  all  be  it  glorified,  by  the 
tongue  of  all  be  it  praised,  by  all  creatures  be  it 
worshipped  and  exalted,  the  adoraljle  and  exceeding 
glorious  Name  of  the  most  illustrious  Trinity, 
Father,  Hon,  and  Holy  Ghost,  Who  created  the 
world  and  all  that  dwell  therein  by  His  goodness, 
and  hatli  saved  the  sons  of  men  by  liis  loving- 
kindness,  and  hath  shown  great  mercy  to  mortals. 
Tliy  Majesty,  niy  Lord,  is  adored  and  venerated  l)y 
thousand  tliousands  of  heavenly  beings,  and  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  holy  Angels  ;  and 
the  hosts  of  the  Spirits  of  fire  glorify  Thy  Name. 
And  with  holy  Cherubim  nnd  Serii})liiin,  they  offer 
adoration  to  Thy  greatness,  they  cry,  they  glorify 
without  intermission,  and  say  one  to  anotlier  : 

Clioir.  iloly.  Holy,  Holy,  Lord,  miglity  God: 
heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  His  songs  :  llosanna 
in  the  highest :  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  : 
blessed  is  He  That  cometh  and  shall  come  in  the 
Name  of  tlie  Lord  :   llosanna  in  tlie  highest. 

Priisl.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord,  mighty  God  :  ^  ^ 
full  are  the  heavens  and  the  earth  of  His  songs,  ^  *' 
and  of  the  essence  of  His  substance,  iind  tlusplendonT 

xr     ^ 


164  LITURGY    OP 

of  His  exceeding  glorious  beauty,  so  that Do  I 

not  fill  heaven  and  earth,  saith  the  Lord  ?  Holy 
art  Thou,  God,  the  Father  of  Truth,  from  "Whom 
all  paternity  in  heaven  and  in  earth  is  named  :  holy 
also  is  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  by  "Whom  all  things  were  made  :  holy  also 
is  the  Spirit,  the  cause  of  all  truth,  by  Whom  all 
are  sanctified.  Woe  is  me,  woe  is  me  ;  for  I  am 
astonished  ;  because  I  am  a  man  of  polluted  lips, 
and  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  peoj)le  of  polluted 
lips,  and  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord 
of  Hosts.  How  terrible  is  this  place  to-day,  in 
which  face  to  face  the  Lord  is  seen  !  And  now,  0 
Lord,  let  Thy  mercy  be  upon  us,  and  purify  our 
filth,  and  sanctify  our  lips,,  and  commingle  the  voices 
of  our  imbecility  with  the  praises  of  Seraphim  and 
Archangels,  who  sing  glory  to  Thy  love:  for  cor- 
IDoreal  men  Thou  hast  associated  with  spirits.  With 
these  celestial  hosts  then,  we  also,  Thy  miserable 
servants,  weak  and  useless,  praise  Thee,  my  Lord, 
because  Thou  hast  shewn  great  mercy  to  us,  for 
which  we  cannot  return  equal  thanks.  For  Thou 
uidst  take  upon  Thyself  our  humanity,  that  Thou 
miglitest  quicken  us  with  Thy  divinity  ;  Thou  didst 
exalt  our  humanity,  and  set  up  our  fall,  and  forgive 
our  sins,  and  justify  us  by  wiping  out  our  offences, 
and  didst  illuminate  our  understandings,  and  didst 
prove,  0  Lord  our  God,  our  enemies  to  be  guilty, 
and  because  of  the  love  of  Thy  grace  shed  abroad 
over  us,  didst  bestow  the  victory  on  the  weak 
exiguity  of  our  nature.  For  all  helps,  therefore, 
and  mercies  bestowed  on  us,  let  us  oft'er  to  Thee  a 
song,  laud  and  honom%  and  adoration,  now  and 
ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Deacon.  Amen.     Pray  in  your  hearts.     Peace  be 
■v\'ith  us. 


MALABAR.  165 

He  kisseth  the  Altar  thrice,  and  saith :  Glory  to  r„  -. 
Thy  Holy  Name,  and  adoration  to  Thy  Divinity,  '-  -• 
at  all  times,  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  Living  ]>read,  giving 
life,  Who  didst  descend  from  heaven,  and  (juickenest 
the  whole  world,  and  they  that  eat  this  Bread  shall 
never  die,  and  they  that  receive  it  in  truth  are  freed 
and  sanctified  by  it,  and  are  cleansed  and  live  for 
ever. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (")  in  the  same  night 
wherein  He  was  betrayed,  took  the  holy  bread  into 
His  pure  and  loving  hands,  and  lifted  up  His  eyes 
to  heaven,  and  gave  thanks  to  God  the  Father,  the 
Creator  of  all  things,  and  blessed  and  brake,  and 
gave  to  His  Disciples  and  said, — Take  and  eat  of 
this  bread  all  of  you :  for  this  is  My  Body.  In 
like  manner  after  He  had  supped.  He  took  the 
Cualice  into  His  pure  hands,  and  gave  thanks,  and 
blessed,  and  gave  to  His  Disciples,  saying.  Take 
and  drink  ye  all  of  this  Chahce  :  for  as  often  as  ye 


(")  I  have  vcntiirod  to  make  a  coriKidcnible  altcnition  in  tlie 
order  of  tin;  uliovc  iirayors.  As  wc  liavo  the  Malabar  Ijitiirgy 
frum  thf!  I'ortui^uesc  rovistTS,  the;  KiMiiit-nct!  of  tlie  Collects  is 
that  wliicli  is  given  by  bracketed  iiiirnerals  in  the  margin. 
Mere  the  Invocation  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost,  contrary  to  the  use  of 
every  otlier  Oriental  Liturgy,  preceded  the  words  of  Institution. 
Tliis,  in  itself,  would  be  a  sudicient  proof  that  an  nlieration 
liail  been  made  ;  thougli  very  carelessly,  if  not  iiuth'i  jide,  no 
notice  is  given  of  it.  JJut  fortunately  the  Nestorian  Liturgy  of 
Tlieodore  the  Literjireter  bears  a  suHioient  resemblance  to  this 
to  kIiow  what  was  the  original  order  :  I  have  therefore  arranged 
the  prayers  according  to  that.  The  Fiiturgy  of  All  Aposth'S,  the 
Nestorian  nonn,  bears  as  would  be  natural,  a  closer  resemblance 
still  to  the  Malabar;  but  as  All  Apostles,  from  whatever  cause, 
has  not  the  words  of  Lislitution  at  all,  it  is  not  so  useful  in 
chewing  liow  the  Miilabar  was  arranged.  IJenauiiot  litis  a  note 
on  the  Malaiiar,  (vol.  ij.  ]..  oW',).  edit.  I,i  sliij,  but  he  mani- 
festly refers  to  a  very  dilTerent  edition  of  it  from  that  which 
we  ureemployiiifr. 


166  lilTURGY   C>- 

eat  this  Bread,  and  drink  this  Cup,  ye  shevr  forth 
My  remembrance  :  for  this  is  the  ChaHce  of  My 
Blood,  of  the  New  Testament,  which  for  you  and 
for  many  shall  be  poured  forth  for  the  remission  of 
sins  :  this  shall  be  My  pledge  even  to  the  consum- 
mation of  all  things. 

Glory  to  Thee,  my  Lord  :  glory  to  Thee,  my  Lord  : 
glory  to  Thee  my  Lord,  for  Thine  ineffable  gift. 

The  Priest  sif/ns  the  Oblations,  (iiid  sdith  : 

Lord  God  of  Hosts,  hear  the  voice  of  my  cry, 
ro  -  and  listen,  my  Lord,  and  give  ear  to  my  groans 
^  ■-'  and  my  sighs,  and  receive  the  prayers  of  me,  a 
sinner :  for  in  tliis  hour  in  which  the  Sacrifice  is  offered 
to  Thy  Father,  I  beseech  Thy  grace  to  have  mercy 
upon  all  creatures  ;  to  forgive  the  offenders,  to 
bring  back  the  wanderers,  to  console  the  afflicted, 
to  give  peace  to  the  disturbed,  to  lieal  the  infirm,  to 
hear  them  that  are  truultled  m  spirit,  and  to  impart 
tranquillity  to  them;  to  accomplish  the  almsdeads 
of  them  that  work  righteousness,  and  for  Thy  holy 
Name's  sake  to  be  propitious  ever  to  me,  a  sinner, 
thi'ough  Thy  grace. 

Thanks  be  to  Thee,  Lord  God  of  Hosts  :  let  this 
rq  1  oblation  be  received  for  tlio  whole  Catholic 
■-  '-  Church,  and  for  priests  andprinces;  for  the  poor 
also  that  are  oppressed  in  soi'row  and  misery,  and  for 
the  faithful  departed,  and  for  all  them  who  desire  the 
prayer  of  my  weakness,  and  for  my  sins.  Yea,  O 
Lord,  my  God,  visit  Thy  people,  and  my  un- 
happiness,  according  to  Tliy  love,  and  the  multitude 
of  Thy  mercy,  and  not  according  to  my  sins  and 
inirpiities  :  but  grant  that  we  may  be  made  worthy 
of  the  remission  of  our  sins  by  the  Holy  Body  which 
we  shall  in  faith  receive,  through  grace  which  ia 
irom  Thee.     Ameu., 


MAIiAEAK.  1G7 

Prostratinrf  himself,  he   continues:  Tliou,  my  Lord, 
according  to  Thy  exceeding  love,  receive  this  best  ,^  -, 
and  acceptable  commemoration  of  the  fathers  *-  '-' 
who  are  just  and  upright,  and  please  Thee, — the  re- 
membrance of  the  Body  and  Blood  of   Thy  Christ, 
which  we  shall  otter  to  TJiee  upon  the   pure  and 
holy  altar,  as  Thou  hast  taught  us,  and  give  peace 
to  us  and  ti-an(juillity  all  the  days  of  our  life.     Yea, 
0  Lord,  give  us  peace,  that  all  the  inhabitants  of 
tlie  earth  may  know  that  Thou  art  God,  ihe  only 
Father  of  trutli.     Thou   didst   send  Thy  most  be- 
loved  Sou,  and  He  the  Lord  our  God  came  and 
taught  us,  all  the  hohness  and  purity  of  Proj)hets 
and  Apostles,  Martyrs  and  Confessors,  Bishops  and 
Doctors,  Priests  ai:d  Deacons,  and  all  the  sons  of 
the  holy  Catholic  Church,  who  have  been  sealed 
with  holy  baptism.     We,  therefore,  my  Lord,  Thy 
weak  and  unprofitable  servants,  who  are  gathered 
togetlicr  in  Tliy  Name,  and  at  this  time  stand  before 
Thee,  and  by  lioly  tradition  have  received  a  pattern 
fiom  Thee,  witli  exultation   and  joy,   glorify,   exalt 
and    venerate    this    momorial,    and    sacrifice!    this 
Mystery,  great,   terrible,    holy  a  ml   divine,  of   the 
Passion  and  Dciitli,  Burial  and  liesurrcction  of  our 
LoBD  and  Saviour  Jkst;s  Ciiitisr. 

And  Ihr  I'liest  slirlrhcth  J'nrth,  iniiili/,  his  hanels  ^p  , 
to  heini'H  and  crnmecnifcth  the  Both/  and  Jilood  of  -  *-' 
Christ. 

Send  then,  my  Lord,  Thy  TlolySi'iRiT,  and  let  Him 
rest  upon  tliis  o])lation  of  Thy  servants  and     ^. 
sanctity  it,  that  it  inny  be  to  us,  my  Lord,  for     [.  '-I 
the  payment  of  our  dcl>ts  in  id  the  remission  ot 
our  sins,  and  the  great  ]u}\)(:  of  resurrectif)n  from  the 
dead,  and  a  new  life  in  tin;  lieavenly  kingdom,  with 
all  who  liave  pleased  Thee.     Moreover,  for  all  Thy 


168  LITURGY    OF 

admirable  dispensation  carried  on  towards  us,  we 
praise  and  glorify  Thee  without  ceasing  in  the 
Church,  which  hath  been  redeemed  by  the  Blood  of 
Thy  Son,  and  with  open  mouth  and  unveiled  coun- 
tenance, we  will  offer  unto  Thee  a  song  and  honour 
laud  and  adoration,  to  Thy  living,  holy,  and 
quickening  Name,  now  and  ever  and  to  ages  of 
ages.     Amen. 

The  Priest  saith  Psalm  li.  1 — 13  ;  and  Psalm  cxxiii. 
j-g  -J  1 — 3.  Then  :  Stretch  forth  Thy  hand,  and  let 
^  '-■  Thy  right  hand  save  me,  0  Lord  ;  let  Thy  love 
remain  over  me  for  ever,  and  despise  not  the  works 
of  Thy  hands. 

He  rheth  and  .saith :  CnrasT,  the  peace  of  things  that 
|-g  1  are  on  high,  and  the  great  rest  of  those  that  are 
I-  '-'  below,  stablish,  0  Lord,  in  Thy  peace  and  rest, 
the  four  regions  of  the  world,  but'  principally  Thy 
holy  Catholic  Church,  and  destroy  wars  and  battles 
fi-om  tlie  ends  of  the  earth,  and  disperse  the  people 
that  delight  in  war,  and  pacify  by  the  mercy  of  Thy 
Divinity,  the  Priesthood,  and"^the  kingdom,  that  we 
may  have  a  secure  habitation  with  all  sobriety  and 
piety,  and  for^nvc  the  debts  and  sins  of  them  that 
have  departed  this  life,  through  Thy  mercy  and  love 
for  ever. 

The  Priest  blesses  Incense,  and  puts  it  in  the  thurible^ 

saying : 

Let  us  offer  a  hymn  to  Thy  most  glorious  Trinity, 
at  all  times  and  for  ever.  0  Lord  our  God,  cause 
the  savour  of  our  s(;uls  to  be  i)leasant  to  Thee,  through 
the  sweet  savour  of  the  mercy  of  Thy  love,  and  cleanse 
us  by  it  from  the  defilements  of  sin. 

He  censeth  the  Oblations  therewith,  and  saith  thrice : 

The  Lord  our  God  give  us  access  by  the  clemency 


MALABAR.  169 

of  His  mercy  to  these  sacrameuts..  most  glorious,  holy, 
quickening,  and  divine.  For  in  trutli  we  are  not 
•worth}'. 

Deacon.  I  am  tlie  Living  Bread  "Which  came  down 
from  heaven :  I  am  the  Bread  Wliich  descended  r^  -, 
from  on  high,  said  the  Saviour  in  a  Mystery  to  '■  *-' 
His  Disciples  :  whosoever  approacheth  in  love,  and 
receiveth  ]\Ie,  shall  live  in  me  for  ever,  and  shall  hy 
heritage  acquire  the  kingdom. 

Choir.  The  ministers,  who  do  His  will.  Cherubim 
and  Seraphim,  and  Archangels,  stand  with  fear  and 
trembling  before  the  Altar,  and  behold  the  Priest, 
wj'.cn  he  breaks  and  divides  the  Body  of  Christ  for 
the  propitiation  of  sin. 

Jh'iifon.  Open  to  me  the  gates  of  righteousness, 
O  Thou  Merciful  One,  Whose  door  is  open  to  peni- 
tents, and  \\]](>  invitest  sinners  to  draw  near  to 
TJiee  ;  open  to  us,  my  Lord,  tlie  gate  of  Thy  loves, 
that  we  may  enter  in,  and  sing  praise  to  Thee  day 
and  night. 

(Jkoir.  Sot,  U  Lord,  a  watch  l)eforc  my  mouth. 
Glory  be  to  the  Fatiikk,  Son,  and  Holy  Gjiost. 

Ihiicoii.  0  Merciful  One,  have  pity  on  us,  and  show 
nicroy  to  us  ;  and  despise  us  not  in  tlie  time  of  [1^1 
aftliction,  for  night  and  day  we  ho[ie  in  Thee  :  ^  '-' 
and  they  tliat  trust  in  Thee  shall  not  be  con- 
founded. 

(J/wir.  Let  all  the  people  say.  Amen  and  Amen. 
Isaiah  kissed  the  lire  in  th(!  kindled  coal,  and  his  lips 
were  not  l)urnt,  but  his  iniquity  was  pardoned  : 
mortals  in  this  very  bread  receive  fire,  and  it  guards 
their  bodies  and  burns  out  their  sins. 

Dmcoii.  From  everlasting  to  everlasthig:  the  Altar 
is  fire  in  fire:  fire  surroiinds  it :  let  Priests  beware  of 
the  terrible  and  trenjcndous  lire,  lest  they  fall  into  it, 
and  be  b  irut  for  ever. 


170  LITURGY    OP 

The  Priest  breaks  the  Host,  and  saith  ■ 

We  draw  near,  my  Lord,  in  the  faith  of  Thy 
Name  to  these  Holy  Mysteries,  and  in  Thy  love 
we  break,  and  in  Thy  pity  we  sign  the  Body  and 
Blood  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

The  Priest  layeth  that  part  of  the  Oblation  which 
he  holdeth  in  his  left  hand,  on  the  paten :  he  dips  the 
other  in  the  Blood,  up  to  the  midst. 

Let  the  Precious  Blood  be  signed  with  the  Holy 
Body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  Name  of 
the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

(^^)  The  Priest  marks  ivith  his  right  thumb  nail 
that  part  of  the  Oblation  which  hath  been  dipped  in 
the  Blood. 

Let  the  Holy  Body  be  signed  with  the  Blood  of 
Propitiation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

Then  joining  the  two  together,  he  says  : 

These  predestinated  Mysteries,  exceeding  glorious, 
holy,  and  quickening,  and  divine,  are  consecrated, 
perfected,  completed,  and  united  together  in  the 
venerable  and  illustrious  Name  of  the  glorious 
Trinity  ;  that  they  may  be  to  us,  0  Lord,  for  the 

(I'j  This  rubric  was  altered  by  the  Portuguese  censors  ;  for 
which  Le  Brun  sharply  rebukf  s  them  ;  and  it  is  not  very  easy 
to  make  out  from  the  rubrics  that  remain,  what  the  original 
direction  was. 


MALABAR.  171 

propitiation  of  our  sins,  and  a  great  liope  of  resur- 
rection from  the  dead ;  and  the  renewal  of  life  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Glory  to  Thee,  my  Lord,  boicause  Thou  didst  create 
me  by  Thy  grace  :  glory  to  Thee,  my  Lord,  because 
Thou  didst  call  me  by  Thy  mercy  :  glory  to  Thee, 
my  Lord,  because  Thou  liast  made  me  the  mediator 
of  Thy  gifts  ;  and  for  all  the  dispensation  which 
Thou  hast  carried  out  towards  my  weakness,  let 
praise,  laud,  honour  and  adoration  ascend  to  Thee, 
now,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love 
of  God  the  Father,  and  the  communion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  be  with  us  all,  now  and  ever,  and  to 
ages  of  ages. 

Deacon.  Let  US  all  with  fear  and  reverence  approach 
the  mystery  of  the  Body  and  precious  Blood  of  our 
Saviour  :  and  with  pure  heart  and  true  faitli  let  us 
call  to  memory  His  Passion  and  Ilcsurrection,  and 
understand  it  plainly :  for  our  sakes  the  Only- 
Begotten  took  on  Himself  a  mortal  luxly,  and 
spiritual  reason  and  immortal  soul :  and  in  His  pre- 
cepts, which  confer  life,  and  in  His  holy  law,  has 
brought  us  back  from  (,'rror  to  the  acknowlcdgcnicnt 
of  the  truth  :  and  after  all  the  dis])ensiiti()iis  which 
Ho  wrought  for  us.  He  oiVcred  the  lirst-fniits  of  our 
nature  as  a  sacrifice  on  tlic  Cross,  and  bestowed  on 
us  tliis  Holy  Sacnimciit,  liy  moans  of  which  we 
might  remember  all  the  grace  which  He  niiiiiift'sted 
to  U8.  Let  us  then  with  overflowing  cluirity,  iiiid 
humble  will,  receive  the  gift  of  eternal  life,  and  witli 
piux'  prayer,  and  earnest  grief  for  our  sins,  Ikj  made 
partakers  of  the  Holy  Mysteries  of  the  Church,  and 
be,  by  the  hope  of  penitence,  converted  from  our 
iniquities,  and  grieve  for  our  transgressions  :  let  us 
furthermore  ask  for  love  and  mercy,  and  let  us  call 


17*2  LITHBOT    OF 

on  God  the  Lord  of  all,  and  let  lis  forgive  the  debts 
of  our  fellow  servants. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  on  the  sins  and  iniqui- 
ties of  Thy  servants.  \  And  so  on  at  the  end  of  each 
clauseJ] 

Deacon.  Let    us    cleanse    our  consciences    from 

division  and  contention  ; 
Let  our  souls  be  thoroughly  perfect,  both  from 

all  hatred  and  malice  to  others. 
Let  us  receive,  sanctity,  and  be  inflamed  by  the 

Holy  Ghost. 
Let   us  receive   the    fellowship    of    the    Divine 
Mysteries  in  unanimity  of  mind  and  mutua 
peace. 
And  may  it  be,  0  Lord,  to  us  for  the  resurrec- 
tion of  our  bodies,  and  the  salvation  of  our 
souls,  and  the  life  that  is  to  ages  of  ages. 
Amen. 
Meanwhile  the  Priest  saith:  Blessed  art  Thou,  Lord 
God  of  our  fathers,  and  highly   exalted   and  excel- 
lently laudable  is  Thy  Name  for  ever :  in  that  Thou 
hast  not  dealt  with  us  after   our  sins,  neither  re- 
warded us  according  to  our  iniquities,  but  according 
to  the  multitude  of  Thy  love  hast  dehvered  us  from 
the  power  of   darkness,  and  hast  called  us  to  the 
kingdom  of  Thy  most  dearly  beloved  Son  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  by  Whom  Tliou  hast  made  bare,  and 
hast  brought  to  nought,  the  power  of  darkness,  and 
hast  bestowed  on  us  life  incorruptible.     And  now, 
0  Lord,  Thou  Who  liast  vouchsafed  that  I  should 
stand  before  this  Thy  pure  and  holy  Altar,  to  otier 
unto  Thee  this  loving  and  holy  sacrifice,  make  us 
also  worthy,  by  Thy  love,  that  in  all  pureness  and 
holiness  we  may  receive  the  Gift  :  and  that  it  may 
not  be  unto  us  for  judgment  or  vengeance,  but  for 
love  and  piety  and  the  remission  of  sins,  and  resurrec- 


MAIiABAB.  173 

tion  from  the  dead,  and  eternal  life  :  so  that  we  may 
all  be  the  fullest  witnesses  of  Thy  glory,  and  the 
habitation  of  a  holy  shrine :  that  after  we  have 
been  incorporated  into  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Thy 
Christ  with  all  Thy  Saints,  we  may  shine  with 
light,  in  His  ever-glorious  and  lofty  revelation  :  for 
to  Thee  and  to  Thine  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  glory 
and  honour  and  laud  and  adoration,  now  and  ever, 
and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Blot  out,  0  Lord,  the  sins  and  transgressions  of 
Thy  servants,  and  sanctify  our  life  by  the  songs  of 
tlie  Holy  Ghost,  to  the  end  that  we,  with  all  Thy 
Saints,  may  offer  to  Thy  most  High  Divinity  the 
fruits  of  glory  and  praise  ;  and  make  us  worthy,  0 
Loud,  to  stand  in  Thy  Presence  ever  with  pure 
heart  and  open  countenance ;  and  that  with  the 
confidence  which  by  Thy  love  is  conferred  on  us, 
we  may  all  of  us  together  invoke  Thee,  and  tluis 
Bay: 

Our  Fatiikh. 

Priest.  Yea,  0  Loud,  (")  Gon  of  Hosts,  ()  our 
most  glorious  God,  and  our  merciful  I'atiikk,  wo 
earnestly  ask,  beseech  and  inijilore  the  clemency 
of  Thy  goodness:  lead  us  ncjt,  my  Lord,  into 
temptation,  but  save  and  deliver  us  from  tlie  evil 
one,  and  from  bis  host;  for  Thine  is  the  kingdom 
and  the  strength,  the  gh)ry  and  the  power,  the 
enijiire  and  th(!  might,  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  now 
and  to  ages  of  ages. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

Prirst.  Pencf"  be  with  you. 

Dtmion.  And  with  tliee  and  with  thy  spirit. 


('•,  The  Emboli  smut :  aa  in  S.  Murk,  p.  '26;  S.  IiinioH,  ji. 
67  ;  S.  Bftsil.  p.  143. 


174  LITURGY  or 

Priest.  That  whicli  is  holy  befits  the  holy,  my 
Lord,  to  be  received. 

Deacon.  One  holy  Father,  one  holy  Son,  one 
Holy  Ghost.  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  ages  of  ages. 
Amen. 

The  Deacon  goes  to  the  Altar  :  the  Priest  takes  his  right 
hand  and  j)nts  it  into  the  Paten. 

Deacon.  The  glory  of  our  Lord. 

Priest.  Be  with  them  and  with  us,  in  the  heavenly 
kingdom  :  glory  be  to  the  Living  God. 

Deacon.  Glorify  the  Living  God. 

People.  Glory  to  Him  and  to  Thy  Church  :  His 
love  and  His  pity.     Amen. 

Priest.  Lord,  my  God,  I  am  not  worthy,  nor  is 
it  indeed  meet  that  I  should  receive  Thy  Body  and 
the  Blood  of  propitiation,  nor  that  I  should  touch 
them  ;  but  let  Thy  words  sanctify  my  soul,  and  heal 
my  body,  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

A7id  he  receives  the  Body  of  our  Lord.     In  the  mean- 
time the  Deacon  sings  : 

Let  this  oblation  be  received  above  in  the  hea- 
venly places,  together  with  that  which  Abel,  Noah, 
and  Abraham  offered  to  the  heavenly  kingdom. 

Priest.  Let  the  gift  of  the  grace  of  our  Saviour 
Himself,  Jesus  Christ,  be  accomplished  through 
love  in  all  of  us. 

Deacon.  To  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

Tlie  Priest  receives  the  Chalice,  and  then  saith : 

The  Blood  of  the  propitiation  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  nourish  my  soul  and  body  in  this  life,  and  in 
the  life  to  come. 


MALABAR.  175 

Deacon.  My  brethren,  receive  the  Body  of  the  Son 
Himself,  saith  the  Chui'ch,  and  drink  His  Blood. 

And  while  the  people  communicate,  the  Deacon  saith  : 

Strengthen,  0  Lord,  the  hands  which  are 
stretched  out  to  receive  the  Holy  Thing  :  vouchsafe 
that  they  may  daily  bring  forth  fruit  to  Thy 
Divinity  ;  that  they  may  be  worthy  of  all  things 
which  they  have  sung  to  Thy  praise  within  Thy 
sanctuary,  and  may  ever  laud  Thce.('')  Grant, 
moreover,  My  Lord,  that  the  ears  which  have  hoard 
the  voice  of  Thy  songs,  may  never  hear  Ihe  voice  of 
clamour  and  dispute.  Grant  also  that  tlie  eyes 
wliich  have  seen  Thy  great  love,  may  also  bcliold 
Tliy  Blessed  hope  ;  ('")  that  the  tongues  which 
have  sung  the  Sanctiis  may  speak  the  truth.  Grant 
that  the  feet  which  have  walked  in  the  church  may 
walk  in  the  region  of  light  :  that  the  bodies  which 
liave  tasted  Thy  living  Body  may  be  restored  in 
newness  of  life.  On  this  congregation  also,  which 
adores  Thy  Divinity,  let  Thy  aids  be  multiplied, 
and  let  Thy  great  love  remain  with  us  ;  and  by 
Thee  may  we  abound  in  the  manifestation  of  Thy 
glory,  and  open  a  door  to  the  prayers  of  all  of  us. 
We  all  then,  who  have  drawn  near  by  the  gift  of 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  wlioni  it  has 
been  vouchsafed  to  become  fellow  participators  in 
the  reception  of   these    mysteries,  most   excellent, 


(")  Thin  seems  to  be  the  sense  of  a  very  obHcnre  expres- 
flion. 

('")  Notice  this  n'innrkdblo  pmyt-r,  which  has  no  piiriillcJ 
that  I  fiin  Hwnro  of  in  iiny  Eftstem  rite  :  there  iH  notliint^  like 
it  in  tlio  kindred  Nestorian  LitnrnieM.  nor  in  tlie  mongrel 
Nestorian  scrvico  of  .John  of  BasHora.  It  appears  to  ine  of  the 
moHt  remote  antiquity. 


176  LITURGY   OP 

holy,  divine,  and  quickening,  let  us  all  praise  and 
exult  in  God,  the  Giver  of  them. 

Priest.  Glory  be  to  Him  for  His  unspeakable  gift. 
It  is  meet,  just,  and  right,  0  Lord,  that  at  all  times, 
and  days,  and  hours,  we  should  laud,  adore,  and 
glorify  the  terrible  Name  of  Thy  Majesty  ;  since  by 
Thy  grace  and  Thy  love,  my  Lord,  Thou  hast 
vouchsafed  to  the  Aveak  nature  of  the  mortal  sons 
of  men,  to  hallow  Thy  Name  with  blessed  spirits, 
and  hast  given  us  to  be  partakers  of  the  gift  of  Thy 
mysteries,  and  to  be  delighted  with  the  sweetness 
of  Thy  words  which  give  life  and  are  divine,  and 
always  to  offer  praise  to  Thy  Divinity,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost.  (") 

Then  all  say,  Our  Father. 

The  Priest  turneth  to  the  people,  and  blesseth  them, 

sciyimj, 

He  Who  blesseth  us  with  all  benediction  in  hea- 
ven, by  the  Son  of  humanity,  \^""')  and  hath  invited 
to  His  kingdom  and  eternal  sweetness : 

And  Who  hath  given  His  promise  to  the  apos- 
tolic congregation,  and  also  in  verity  hath  signed 
His  word,  that  there  should  be  no  doubt  m  it : 

Ye  shall  say,  Verily,  verily,  I  say,  and  in  verity 
I  sign  My  words  :  every  one  that  eatcth  My  quicken- 
ing Body,  and  drinketh  my  Blood  of  the  salutary 
Chalice, 

I  forgive  him  all  his  debts,  and  I  blot  out  all  his 
sins,  and   I  call  him  to  the  kingdom  ;  and  let  it 


P^j  Then  follows,  in  the  orif,dnal,  a    thanksgiving     alter- 
native with  the  above. 

(2°)  This  singular   substitution  for  the  Son  of   Man  was 
altered  by  tlieDiamDerep.fi  censors  into  His  Son. 


MALABAR.  177 

deliver  you  from  affliction,  and  save  you  from 
scandals. 

He  bless  (")  the  seeds  of  your  fields,  He  bless 
the  fruits  of  your  trees,  and  He  multiply  and  bless 
your  substance,  and  of  His  love  give  you  long  life. 

0  God,  the  Lord  of  men,  bless  this  congregation, 
and  give  strength  to  the  weak,  for  behold,  he  be- 
ginneth  from  the  beginning. 

By  the  living  sign  of  Christ,  may  the  glorious 
throne  of  the  Oriental  Catholics  be  blessed,  that 
righteousness  may  rise  and  slune  in  it. 

Let  the  father  full  of  spleiulour,  the  Bishop  who 
is  pastor  and  lord  of  the  whole  Hock,  full  of  sobriety, 
bo  guarded  from  evil. 

Bless  the  holy  presbyters,  clerks  and  ministers  : 
let  them  be  set  free  from  dangers  and  devils,  and 
very  evil  men. 

To  the  ancient  of  days,  to  old  men,  illustrious 
through  age,  may  the  Lohd  give  them  a  good  end, 
and  call  them  to  the  kingdom. 

Young  men,  fair  in  stature  and  possessed  of 
strength,  may  ilo  cause  them  to  increase  in  splen- 
dour, and  till  them  with  purity. 

The  frail  nature  of  women,  virgins  also  and  the 
wedded,  may  they  be  kept  from  fall,  from  snares  and 
scandals. 

The  Lord  that  sitteth  in  heaven,  give  us  a  quiet 
peace,  a  good  and  sweet  peace,  that  we  may  rejoice 
day  and  night. 

He  give  you  peaceful  times,  that  we  may  ever 
rejoice  and  not  be  turbulent  and  unquiet,  but  loving 
eacli  other  through  charity. 

And  since  ye  are  assembled  together  this  day,  in 

(^)  This  verb  of  course  is  to  be  connected  with  the  first 
clause  of  the  benediction. 

N 


178  LITURGY    OP   MALABAK. 

the  solemnity  of  this  oblation  may  the  Cross  of  the 
Celestial  Kiug  guard  you. 

The  Lord  receive  your  oblation  and  your  sacri- 
fice, and  your  prayers,  and  may  His  Spirit  rest  upon 
your  alms,  and  may  your  petitions  enter  into  His 
Presence. 

May  he  that  is  illustrious  in  the  congregation  of 
the  Saints,  the  religious  Hormisdas,  (^^)  the  holiness 
of  holinesses,  keep  you  from  plague  and  devils  and 
very  evil  men. 

May  he  pray  also  for  this  crowd,  the  poor,  the 
miserable,  for  they  are  disciples  of  this  Saint,  that 
thus  they  may  be  free  from  calamity. 

Furthermore  may  they  who  have  modestly 
laboured  and  served  with  simplicity  in  this  world, 
be  guarded  in  righteousness  from  ill. 

And  they  who  are  strangers  among  us,  and  are 
far  off  from  their  homes,  may  the  King  of  ages  of 
ages  cause  them  to  return  m  peace. 

Let  this  feast  be  holy  upon  you,  0  humble  people, 
and  may  the  Lord  be  your  establisher  and  counsellor 
to  good  things. 

Now  and  ever,  and  at  all  times  and  occasions,  by 
nights  also  and  days,  and  even  to  ages  of  ages.(^) 

(22)  Hormisdas,  a  celebrated  ascetic  in  Malabar,  bears  the 
same  relation  to  tbe  Church  of  India  that  S.  Antony  does  to 
Egypt,  S.  Sabbas  to  Palestine,  or  Tekla-Haimanoth  to 
Ethiopia. 

(23)  In  the  original  there  follow  three  alternative  benedic- 
tions. That  translated  above,  I  take  to  be  for  lesser  festivals. 
The  others  are — 1,  For  the  highest  feasts  :  2,  For  ferial  days  : 
3,  For  masses  of  the  dead — which  last  I  imagine  to  be 
lioman. 


(  179  ) 


THE  OFFICE   OF   THE  PEOTHESIS. 


The  Order  of  the  Holy  Prothesis,  as  per- 
formed IN  THE  Great  Church,  and  the  Holy 
Mountain. 

The  Priest  and  Deacon  go  to  the  prothexls,  (')  and  wash 
their  hands,  (-)  saying,  (') 

I  will  wash  my  liaiids  in  inuoccucy,  0  Lord, 
and  80  will  I  go  to  Thine  Altar,  to  the  end  uf  the 
Psalm. 

Then  they  make  three  adorations  before   the  prothesis, 
and  each  saith, 

God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,  and  have  pity 
upon  me. 


P)  i.e.  into  the  chapel  of  np69f<rtt :  tlie  name,  being  the 
snmo  for  brith  it  and  the  croiloiice,  niiiy  cn-atc  confiiHion. 

('•'j  In  inoHt  churches,  tlioro  is  a  hivatory  fur  this  inirpose 
near  to  the  crcflenco. 

(«)  The  antiquity  of  this  rito  in  the  Eastern  Cliurch  is 
shrwn  by  S.  Cyril,  (Catoch.  Myst.  5.)  "  Yo  havo  Hccn  the 
D(t(icon  Kivin;,'  water  to  tlio  I'riost  to  wawh  his  hands,  and  to 
thd  ProHbytcrs,  wlio  Hurniuiided  tlio  Altar  of  (ion.  Did  he 
givfi  it  thoni  to  tlio  end  that  the  filth  of  the  body  mi^lit  be 
purged  away?  I  trow  not :  for  wo  nsn  not  to  enter  the  Clairoh 
polhited  with  filth.  But  that  cleansing  of  tlio  hands  is  a 
symbol,  that  we  must  be  made  clean  from  all  our  sins  and 
iuiiiuitios."  And  of  old  the  custom  was.  that  all  who  intended 
to  bo  communicants  should  wash  their  liiinlM.  S.  >raximus  : 
"All  men  who  propose  to  communicate  first  wa^h  their  hands." 

N   2 


180        THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  PE0THESI3. 

Thou  hast  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
by  Thy  precious  Blood,  being  nailed  to  the  Cross, 
and  wounded  with  the  lance,  and  didst  pour  forth 
streams  of  immortality  to  men :  glory  be  to  Thee, 
our  Saviour. 

Deacon.  Sir,  give  the  blessing. 

Priest.  Blessed  be  our  God  always,  now  and  ever, 
and  to  ages  of  ages.     Amen. 


Then  the  Priest  takes  in  his  left  hand  the  Oblations  (*) 
and  in  his  right  the  holy  spear. 

In  remembrance  of  our  Lord  and  God  and  Savi- 
our Jesus  Christ.     [This  he  saith  thrice.) 

He  then  thrusts  the  spear  into  the  right  (")  side  of  the  (^) 
seal,  and  saith,  as  he  cuts, 

(*)  Five  small  loaves,  of  the  f(jrm  indicated  in  the  text,  are 
provided  in  the  prothesis.  They  are  round,  symbolically 
representing,  under  the  shape  of  a  piece  of  money,  the  price 
of  our  redemption,  (Durandus,  4,  41 ;)  but  each  has  a  square 
projection  rising  from  it,  usually  called  the  Holy  Lamb,  but 
sometimes  simply  the  Holy  Bread.  This,  in  the  Greek  Church, 
is  stamped  with  the  words,  IC  XC  NIKA,  Jesus  Cheist 
conquers. 

(■'j  That  is,  of  the  Holy  Lamb,  which  he  is  now  going  to 
divide  from  the  rest  of  the  Oblation. 

(6)  The   seal   {a-cppayisj   is,  properly  speaking,    the    Crosa 


THE    OFFICE    OF   THE    PROTHESIS.  181 

He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter. 

Into  the  left,  saying, 

And    as    a    blameless    lamb   dumb   before  His 
shearers,  so  He  opened  not  His  mouth. 

Into  the  tipper  part,  saying. 

In   His  humiliation  His  judgment  was    taken 
away. 

Into  the  loner,  saying. 
And  who  shall  declare  His  generation  ? 

Tlie  Deacon,  looking  devoiith/  on  this  rite,  saith,  at  each 

inci.'iion, 

Let   us   make   our  supplications   to   the   Lord  : 
holding  his  oranun  in  his  hand.{^) 

After  these  things,  (*)  he  saith, 
Sir,  take  up. 


impressed  ou  tlie  Holy  Lamb,  and  is  so  to  be  taken  here  ;  but 
is  sometimes  used  for  tlio  tiling  tlius  sealed,  namely,  the  Holy 
Lamb  itself,  as  in  what  follows. 

C)  The  i)Osture,  which  continually  occurH  in  the  Liturgy, 
can  scarcely  be  iinderHtood  excejit  from  actual  sight.  The 
Deacon  is  now,  like  H.  John  the  liaptiHt,  preaching  the  Lamb 
of  God  ;  or,  according  to  the  before-named  system  of  S. 
Germanus,  he  represents  the  Angel  naliiting  the  Blessed 
Virgin  at  her  Ariri\w<mli<m,  rhv  &yyt\ov  ntfitlrat  rh  x"*^?*  "^V 
napO(u(p  irporKpOfyydfuii/ov.  In  the  Haiiie  way,  the  neparation 
of  the  Lamb  from  the  Oblation  sets  fortii,  so  to  speak,  the 
separation  of  .mr  Loud  from  His  Mother  at  His  birth : 
V  irpoiTipnpb.  .  .  n'j  Ttmov  rrii  kairapOtvov  \an0di/tTaf  rbKvpiaKov 
2u>na,  ij  ^K  Tivhi  KoiKtai  .  .  Tov  u\ov  UpTov,  (prj/il,  otm^nufTat. 

C)  The  Holy  Lamb  being  now  entirely  separated  from  the 
Oblation. 


182  THE    OFFICE    OF    THE    PE0TIIESI8. 

And  the  Priest,  tlirusthig  the  holy  spear  ohliqueJij 
into  the  riffJit  side  of  the  Oblation,  raises  up  the  holy 
Bread,  (^)  saying, 

For   His   life   is   taken   away  from   the    earth ; 
[always,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages.] 
And  laijeth  it,  cross  dotrmvards,  (^)  in  the  holy  disk. 
The  Deacon  saith.  Sir,  sacrifice. 
The  Priest  saith,  while  he  cuts  it  crosswise. 
The  Lamb  of  God  is   sacrificed,  Which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world,  for  the  life  and  salvation 
of  tlae  world. 
Then  he  turns  ilt  civss  upwards,  Q'^)  and   the  Deacon 

saith,  Sir,  stab. 
And  the  Priest,  piercing  thf  right  side  (^^)  with  the  holy 

spear,  saith, 
One  of  the  soldiers  with  a  spear  pierced  His  side, 
and  forthwith  came  thereout   ])lood   and   Water  : 
and  he  that  saw  it  bare  record,  and  his  record  is 
true. 

The  Deacon  then  pours  into   the  holy  chalice  wine  and 
watrr,  first  saying  to  the  Priest, 
Sir,  bless  the  Holy  Union.     And  the  Priest  blesses 
them. 

(■')  That  is,  the  Limib. 

('")  This  is  evidently  done  for  convenience,  that  the  softer 
part  of  the  bread  may  be  cut  by  the  holy  spear :  but  mysti- 
cally represents  the  helplessness  of  a  lamb  expiring  under  the 
deathblow. 

(")  This  is  explained  of  Christ's  bearing  His  Cross.  6  yap 
<rravp6s,  says  an  anonymous  writer  quoted  by  Gear,  ovk 
(fx-npoaOiv,  aAA'  uirtffdfv  tov  (Tci/jiaTos  tov  Kvpiou  iTtOy]-  ra  Se 
CTroKaTtv—l.e.  of  the  Lamb — ra  ffJ-TrporTOef  tovtov  ai/an(pi^6\a>s 
SriKoi. 

(^«)  This  shews  that  the  Greek  Church  liad  the  same 
tradition  as  the  Latin,  that  our  Loiid's  Wound  was  on  Hia 
right  side 


THE    OFFICE    OF   THE    PROTHESIS. 


183 


Then  the  Priest,  taking  the  second  (^')  Oblation,  saith, 

In  honour  and  memory  of  the  most  excellent  and 
glorious  Lady,  the  Mother  of  God  and  Ever- Virgin 
Maiy,  by  whose  intercessions  receive,  0  Lord,  this 
Sacrifice  to  Thy  heavenly  altar. 


a  The  Holy  Ijamb  //  Tlio  i)ortiou  of  8.  Mary. 

c  Tlio  nine  jiortionH  of  ProphotH,  ApoHtloH,  MiirtyrH,  (fee. 
d  rortions  for  the  living.  c  rortions  for  the  dead. 

C)  According  to  tlic  prcHt-nt  use  of  tlio  EaHtcrii  C'lmroh, 
five  Oldiitionn  arc  nrij^iiiully  nut  on  tho  proilicHiH,  prohnlily  in 
comnninonitioii  of  the  niiniclo  ol  the  livo  loavcH.  Anciently, 
indeed,  tho  numlicr  of  Olilutions  varied  with  the  nunibor  of 
offerers.  But,  though  five  be  the  iiHiial  number,  and  invari- 
able in  the  liussian  Clinrch,  yet  oft.in  in  Greece  one  Oblutioii 
only  is  offered  ;  tlie  portions  being  taken  from  tho  same  loaf 
from  which  the  Holy  Lamb  Ima  been  previoiiflly  cut.  And 
this  not  only  in  nmall  places,  but  even  in  the  I'atriarchul 
Church. 


184        THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  PROTHESIS. 

And  takhiff  a  portion,  (")  he  places  it  on  the 
right  side  of  the  holy  Bread  near  its  middle  part, 
saying, 

At  Thy  right  hand  did  stand  the  Queen  in  a 
vesture  of  gold,  Avrought  about  with  divers 
colours. 

Then,  taking  the  third  Oblation,  he  saith, 

Of  the  honourable  and  glorious  Forerunner, 
Prophet,  and  Ba^jtist  John. 

And  taking  one  portion,  he  places  it  on  the  left  side 
of  tlie  holy  Bread,  making  a  beginning  of  the  first  row  : 
then  he  saith  : 

Of  the  holy  and  glorious  Prophets,  Moses  and 
Aaron,  Elijah,  Elisha,  David  and  Jesse,  the  Three 
Holy  Children,  and  all  holy  Prophets. 

And  he  places  the  second  portion  orderly  under  the  first. 
Then  he  saith : 

Of  the  holy  and  glorious  and  all  celebrated 
Apostles,  Peter  and  Paul,  the  Twelve,  and  the 
Seventy,  and  all  holy  Apostles. (^^) 

And  thus  he  places  the  third  j^ortion  below  the  second^ 
finishing  the  row.     Then  he  saith  : 

Of    our   holy   Fathers,    and    oecumenical    great 

(»)  This  portion,  fxfpis,  is  called  the  Virgin's ;  and  hence, 
perhaps,  arose  the  error  by  which  the  Greeks  were  accused  of 
pretending  to  consecrate  it  into  the  body  of  S.  Mary.  The 
portions  are  pyramidal  pieces  of  bread,  cut  out  of  the  Obla- 
tion with  the  lioly  spear. 

(1-^)  The  Eastern  Church  commemorates  in  the  Mensea  the 
Seventy,  and  others  who  were  immediately  connected  with  our 
Lord  as  Apostles :  hence  the  necessity  for  the  addition. 
Saints,  next  in  her  estimation,  she  denominates  jVa7ro<rT({A.oi, 
the  equals  of  the  Apostles. 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  PROTHESIS.        185 

Doctors  and  Hierarchs,  Basil  the  Great,  Gregory 
the  Theologian,  and  John  Chrysostom,  Athanasius 
and  Cyril,  Nicolas  of  Myra,  and  all  holy  Hier- 
archs. 

And  taliiii'f  the  fourth  portion,  he  places  it  near 
the  first,  beginning  a  second  row.  Then  he  saith 
again, 

Of  the  holy  Proto-martyr  and  Archdeacon 
Stephen,  the  great  and  holy  Martyrs  Demetrius, 
George,  Theodore,  and  all  holy  Martyrs,  hoth  men 
and  women. 

And  taking  the  fifth  portion,  he  lays  it  under  the  first 
of  the  second  row.     Then  he  saith,  : 

Of  our  holy  Fatliers,  filled  with  God,  Antony, 
Euthymius,  Sahhas,  Ouuphrius,  and  Athanasius 
of  Mount  Athos,  and  all  holy  ascetics,  men  and 
women. 

And  thius,  taking  the  sixth  portion,  he  places  it  below 
the  second  portion,  to  the  accoinjilishnu  itt  uf  the  second 
row.     After  this  he  saith  : 

Of  the  wonderworking  and  unmercenary  Saints, 
Cosnias  and  J^aniiaii,  Cyrus  and  John,  Pantelcumou 
and  HermolauH,  and  of  all  unmercenary  Saints. 

Then  taking  the  seventh  portion,  he  puts   it   at  the  top, 
beginning  the  third  row. 

Of  the  holy  and  just  parents  of  Gon,  Joachim 
and  Anna,  of  N.  {the  Saint  (f  the  day,)  and  all 
Biiints,  through  whose  intercessions  God  look 
upon  us. 

And  taking  the  eighth  portion,  he  places  it  in  order  a 
little  below  the  first  [of  the  third  row.) 
Yet  further  he  saith: 


3.86  THE    OFFICE    OF    THE    PR0THESI3. 

Of  our  holy  Father,  John  Chrysostom,  Arch- 
bishop of  Constantinople,  {if  his  Litiiri/i/  be  said  that 
daij ;  but  if  S.  BiiaiVs,  he  commcDiorates  him.) 

And  thus,  taking  the  ninth  portion,  he  finishes  with 
it  the  third  row.  Then  taking  the  fourth  Oblation,  he 
saith  : 

Kemember,  0  Lord  and  Lover  of  men,  all  Ortho- 
dox Sees,  our  Bishop  N.,  the  venerable  Presbytery, 
the  Diaconate  in  Christ,  and  every  hierarchical 
rank,  the  Hegumen  N.,  our  brothers  and  fellow- 
ministers.  Priests  and  Deacons,  and  all  our  brothers, 
whom  Thou  hast  called  to  Thy  Communion,  through 
Thy  mercy,  0  good  Lord. 

And  taking  a  portion,,  he  places  it  below  the  holy 
Bread.  Then  he  commemorates  also  those  living  whose 
names  he  has,  (^^)  and  thus  taking  their  portions,  places 
tlunn  below  the  holy  Bread.  Then  taking  the  fifth 
Oblation,  lie  saitJi : 

For  the  memory  and  forgiveness  of  sins  of  the 
blessed  founders  of  this  holy  habitation. 

(ic)  "  Before  they  go  to  the  protbesis  to  begin  the  Liturgy," 
r;ays  Dr.  Covel,  "  all  good  people  who  are  disposed  to  have 
their  absent  friends,  dead  or  living,  commemorated,  go  to 
them  that  celebrate,  and  get  their  names  set  down,  there  being 
two  catalogues,  one  for  tiie  living,  one  for  tlie  dead,  for  which 
they  deposit  some  aspers,  or  richer  presents,  in  silver  or  gold, 
as  they  are  able  or  dis])o.sed  ;  tliis  being  a  great  part  of  a 
common  Priests  maintenance,  especially  in  comitry  villages. 
And  as  the  Priest  reads  over  these  catalogues,  at  every  name 
there  written,  there  is  a  scrape  made  upon  the  crust  to  rub  off 
some  mites  as  their  particular  jiortions."  This  custom  much 
resei/ible.s  that  which  is  referred  to  by  S.  Innocent  I.,  in  his 
Epistle  to  Decentius  :  "  The  Oblations  are  first  to  be  com- 
mended to  God,  and  then  their  names,  whose  are  the  Obla- 
tions, to  be  recited,  that  they  may  be  named  in  the  mysteries." 
And  S.  Jerome  (Homil.  in  Ezech.,  cap.  G  and  18,)  rebukes 
the  pride  which  some  offerers  took  in  henriiig  their  names  thui 
recited. 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  PROTHESIS.        187 

He  then  commemorates  the  Bishop  that  ordained  him, 
and  such  other  of  the  dead  as  he  pleases  ;  and  lastly, 
saith  thus : 

And  of  all  our  Orthodox  fathers  and  brethren, 
who  have  departed  in  the  hope  of  the  resurrection 
and  in  Thy  communion  to  eternal  life,  0  Lord  and 
Lover  of  men.     {And  he  takes  a  portion.) 

Then  the  Deacon,  himself  also  taking  a  Seal  and  the 
holij  spear,  commemorates  (")  those  of  the  liviny  whom 
he  J 'leases  ;  and  hislbj  saith  thus: 

Remember  also,  0  Lord,  my  unworthiness,  and 
forgive  me  every  sin,  voluntary  and  involuntary. 

Tlien,  in  like  manner,  he  takes  another  Seal,  and 
commemorates  uhom  he  will  (f  the  drpnrled  :  and  puts 
the  portions  below  the  holy  Bread,  in  the  same  way  as 
the  Priest.  Then  he  takes  the  sponge,  ('^)  and  yathers 
toyrlher  the  portions  in  the  dish  under  the  holy  Bread, 
HO  thai  they  are  safe,  and  that  nothiny  can  fall  itjj.  Then 
the  J)(!aciin,  Inkiny  the  censer,  and  incense  iu  it,  sailh  to 
the  Priest : 

Sir,  bless  tlic  incense.  Let  us  make  our  suppli- 
cations to  the  Loud. 

The  Priest  sailh  the  prayer  rf  Incense. 

We  ofTcr  to  Tlice  inconsn,  0  Ciiiust  our  (ton.  for 
a  savour  of  a  spii-itual  perfmno  :  receive  it  unto  Tliy 

('^)  This  is  an  innovation.  H.  Synieon  of  Tliossalonica 
distinctly  c()n<loniiiH  it.  "  Tlio  Duiicoiis  must  not  offer  por- 
tions;  for  tliey  liavo  not  tlio  grace  of  olTuriiig  to  (ioi>." 
(ov  8(7  ZiaKuvovs  fXfpiSas  irpo(T(p^p(iv  .  .  .  ind  Kal  rh  x'^f'^'M" 
rod  Trpo<r<pip(iv  rtf  9tf  ovk  ixouni. 

('")  Thp  flrceks  use  a  "  lioly  sponge,"  in  i)lacf'  of  the 
nuri/icaluriiim  of  the  Latins.  It  is  generally  callfil  27r(i7-yo», 
out  here  novtra,  tlie  more  modern  term  for  the  same  thiDR. 


188 


THE    OFFICE    OF    THE    PROTHESIS. 


heavenly  altar,  and  send  down  in  its  stead  the  grace 
of  Thy  most  Holy  Spirit. 

Deacon.  Let  us  make  our  supplications  to  the  Lord. 
The  Priest  censes  the  Asterisk,  (^^)  and  places  it  over  the 
holy  Bread,  saying : 


^ 


czy  ^ 

And  the  star  came,  and  stood  over  where  the 
young  Child  was. 

Deacon.  Let  us  make  our  supplications  to  the  Lord. 
And  the  Priest  taking  the  first  veil,  {^)  covers  with  it 
the  holy  Bread  with  the  disk,  saying : 


(19)  The  asterisk  is  as  shown  in  the  text ;  it  folds  and 
unfolds  for  the  purpose  of  being  more  conveniently  put  away. 
Its  use  is  to  prevent  the  veil  of  the  disk  from  disarranging 
the  order  of  tlie  jwrtions  ;  its  mystical  meaning,  as  the  versicle 
Bhews,  is  the  star  which  led  the  Wise  Men  to  the  Infant 
Saviour.  S.  Germanus,  who  usually  finds  a  reference  to  the 
Nativity  where  the  context  of  the  office  refers  to  the  Death 
of  our  Saviour,  here  finds  a  reference  to  the  latter  where  the 
Liturgy  intends  the  former,  and  explains  the  asterisk  of  our 
LoRi/s  bier  and  its  coverings. 

(2UJ  This  veil  is  called  the  SicTKOKaKvuixa.  The  second  veil 
has  no  distinctive  name,  but  the  third  is  called  'Arjp  or  vt(pi\-r\. 
It  is  called  air,  because,  as  the  air  surrounds  the  earth,  so 
does  this  surround  the  holy  gifts ;  and  cloud,  because  it  is 
•written,  "  There  came  a  cloud  and  overshadowed  them." 
This  name,  air,  has  found  its  way  into  our  own  Church, 
through  Bishop  Andrewes  and  the  divines  of  his  time,  •who 
(especially  Wren)  were  welJ  versed  in  the  Eastern  Liturgies. 


THE    OFFICE   OP    THE    PROTHESIS.  189 

The  Lord  hath  reigned ;  He  hath  put  on  glorions 
apparel :  the  Lord  hath  put  on  His  apparel,  and 
girded  Himself  with  strength. 

Deacon.  Let  us  make  our  supplications  to  the 
Lord.     Sir,  cover.  (koXv-^ov,) 

And  the  Priest,  censing  the  second  veil,  covers  with  it 
the  holy  chalice,  saying  : 

Thy  glory,  0  Christ,  hath  filled  the  heavens,  and 
the  earth  is  full  of  Thy  praise. 

Deacon.  Let  us  make  our  supplications  to  the 
Lord.     Sir,  shelter.  {crKkiraaov.)  (".) 

The  Priest  censing  the  covering  which  is  called  the 
Air,  and  covering  both  chalice  and  disk  with  it, 
iaith  : 

Shelter  us  with  the  covering  of  Thy  wings,  chase 
away  from  us  every  enemy  and  foe  ;  give  peace  in 
our  time  ;  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  ou  Thy 
world,  aud  save  our  souls,  for  Thou  art  good,  and 
tlie  lover  of  men. 

Then  the  Priest,  taking  the  censer,  censes  the  2>t'<^ihesi3, 
saying  thrice : 

Blessed  be  our  God,  who  is  thus  well  pleased : 
glory  be  to  Tliee. 

The  Deacon  saith  at  each  time  • 

Always,  now  aud  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 
Amen. 


(")  The  difTerence  of   the   two  expresBions   used   for  th« 

coverinj;  with  the  first  and  willi  the  second  veil  will  show 
the  propriety  of  the  exclamations  by  the  Priest  that  follow 
each. 


190  THE    OFFICE    OF    THE    PEOTHESIS. 

Then  they  both  adore  reverently,  three  thiies.     Then  the 
Deacon,  taking  the  censer,  saith  : 

At  the  oblation  of  the  Holy  Gifts,  let  us  maiie 
our  supplicatious  to  the  Lord. 

The  Priest  saith  the  Prayer  of  Prothesis  :  (^^) 

0  God,  our  God,  Who  didst  send  forth  the 
Heavenly  Bread,  the  nourishment  of  the  whole 
world,  our  Lord  and  God,  Jesus  Christ,  as  a 
Saviour  and  Kedeeraer  and  Benefactor,  blessing  and 
hallowing  us  ;  Thyself  bless  this  Oblation,  and 
receive  it  to  Thy  heavenly  altar  :  remember,  of  Thy 
goodness  and  love  to  men,  them  that  offered  it,  and 
them  for  whom  they  offered  it ;  and  keep  us  without 
condemnation  in  the  celebration  of  Thy  holy 
mysterier,.  For  blessed  and  hallowed  is  Thy  holy 
and  glorious  Name,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of  ages. 
Amen. 

And  after  this  he  there  makes  the  Dismission,  saying 

thus : 

Glory  be  to  Thee,  Christ,  our  God  and  Hope  : 
glory  be  to  Thee. 

Deacon.  Glory.  Both  now.  Lord  have  mercy. 
Sir,  give  the  blessing. 

And  the  Priest  gives  the  Dismission,  saying: 

(if  it  be  Sunday,  Christ,  that  arose  from  the  dead,) 
\if  not  Christ,  our  true  God,  j 

through  the  intercessions  of  His  spotless  Mother, 
and  our  holy  Father,  John  Chrysostom,  Archbishop 

(22)  This  prayer  is  word  for  word  from  the  Liturgy  of 
S.  James,  where  it  is  said  by  the  Priest  when  the  Oblations 
are  brought  from  the  Prothesis  to  the  altar,  i.e.  at  the  Great 
Entrance. 


THE    OFFICE    OF    THE    PROTHESIS.  191 

of  Constantinople,  (or,  if  it  be  the  Liturciy  of  S. 
Basil,  of  S.  Basil  the  Great,  of  Casarea  in  Cap- 
padocia,)  and  All  Saints,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
save  us ;  for  Thou  art  good  and  the  lover  of 
men. 

Deacon.  Amen. 

After  the  Dismission,  the  Deacon  censes  the  holy 
prothesis ;  then  lie  f/oes  and  censes  the  huh/  Table  all 
round  in  the  form  of  a  Cross,  saying  secretly  : 

In  the  tomb  bodily,  in  Hades  spiritually,  in 
Paradise  with  the  tliiof,  while  Thou  wast,  0  Christ, 
with  the  Fathku  and  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  throne, 
as  God  filling  all  things  and  incircumscript.  Then 
he  saith  the  Jifty-first  Psalm.  In  the  viraiitima  he 
censes  the  Sanctuary  and  all  the  Church,  ami  comes 
again  to  the  holy  Altar,  and  again  censes  the  holy  Table 
and  the  Priest  ;  then  he  jnits  down  the  censer  in  its 
place,  and  comes  close  to  the  Priest  ;  and  they  stand  in 
front  of  the  holy  Table,  and  make  three  reverences; 
praying  secretly,  and  saying  : 

0  Heavenly  King,  the  Paraclete,  the  Spirit  of 
truth.  Who  art  every  where  present,  and  fillest  all 
things,  tlie  Treasuro  of  good  things,  and  Giver  of 
life,  come  and  tabernacle  in  us,  and  cleanse  us  from 
all  stain,  and  save  our  souls,  0  good  God. 

Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace, 
good-will  towards  men.     Tuire. 

0  Loiu),  open  Thou  my  lips,  iind  my  mouth  shall 
shew  forth  Thy  praise. 

Then  the  Priest  kisses  the  Holy  Oospel,  and  the 
Deacnn  the  holy  Table.  Thru  the  Deacon,  hauing  his 
head  to  the  I'riest,  and  holding  his  orariun  nith  the 
three  fingers  of  his  right  hand,  saith: 


192        THE  OFFICE  OP  THE  PEOTHESIS. 

It  is  time  to  sacrifice  (**)  to  the  Lord.  Holy  Sir, 
give  the  blessing. 

The  Priest,  signing  him  with  the  Cross,  saith : 

Blessed  be  our  God  always,  now  and  ever,  and  to 
ages  of  ages.     Amen. 

Beacon.  Holy  Sir,  pray  for  me. 

Eriest.  The  Lord  make  straight  thy  goings  to 
every  good  work. 

Deacon.  Holy  Sir,  remember  me. 

Priest.  The  Lord  our  God  remember  thee  in 
His  kingdom,  always,  now  and  ever,  and  to  ages  of 
ages. 

Deacon.  Amen.  Then  he  makes  a  reverence,  and 
goes  Old,  and  standing  in  the  accustomed  place,  over 
against  the  haJg  doors,  innkes  three  reverences,  saging  to 
liimself:  0  Lord,  open  Thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth 
shall  shew  Thy  praise..  After  this,  he  begins,  Sir» 
give  the  blessing. 

Priest.  Blessed  be  the  kingdom,  &o. 

[The  Liturgg  will  be  found  at  page  92.] 


(^)  noif7v.  King  translates  "  to  perform ; "  and  Goar, 
doubtfully,  "  faciendi."  The  word  often,  in  late  Greek, 
signifies  to  sacrifice.  So  the  LXX.  Isaiah  xix.  21 ;  1  Kings 
xi.  33;  Levit.  ix.  7.  So  in  S.  Luke  ii.  27,  "tou  iroirjffat 
avrovs  Kara  rh  elenTfjLfvov  tov  v6ixov" — ought  to  be  translated — 
"that  they  might  offer  a  sacrifice  according  to  the  custom  of 
the  law."  So  facere  is  often  used  in  Latin,  Virg.  iii.  77, 
"  Cum  faciam  vitula  pro  frugibus."  And  the  similar 
word  ^(Cfiy,  as  every  one  knows,  constantly  means  the  same 
tbiiig. 


103 


APPENDIX  I. 


THE  FOEMUL^  OF  INSTITUTION 

As  they  occur  in  every  extant  Liturgy. 

[alpuabeticallv  arranged.] 


1.     All  Apostles.  I. 
[Ethiopic :  Monophysite.] 

In  the  same  night  in  which  He  was  betrayed,  lie 
took  bread  into  His  bauds,  holy,  blessed,  and 
immaculate.  He  looked  up  to  heaven,  to  Thee,  His 
Fatheh,  He  gave  thanks.  He  blessed,  He  sanctified, 
and  gave  to  His  disciples,  saying :  Take,  eat  ye  all 
of  this  :   This  Bukau  is  My  Bouy,  which  is  broken 

FOR    YOU    FOR    THE    REMISSION    OF    SINS.       Amcn. 

People.  Amen.  Amen.  Amen.  We  believe  and 
are  certain.  We  praise  Tlice,  0  Loro,  our  God  : 
this  is  truly,  and  we  thus  believe.  Thy  Body. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  the  cup  of  tluiuksgiving 
He  blessed  and  sanctified,  and  said  to  them  :  Take, 
drink  ye  all  of  it  :  This  is  the  chalice  of  ]\rv 
Blood  which  shall  ue  sued  for  you,  for  the 
bedemption  of  many. 

People.  Amen.  This  is  verily  Thy  Blood  :  we 
believe. 

o 


194  APPENDIX   I. 


[  The  first  formula  has  'been  made  the  subject  of  gi-eat 
rejoiciug  by  Protestants  :  while  by  some  Liturgical  wiiters 
it  has  been  considered  invalid.  But  the  extremely  strong 
language  employed  in  the  response  of  the  people,  ought 
to  set  the  Ethiopic  canon  above  susjDicion.  I  do  not 
mean  to  defend  its  compilers  from  the  charge  of  pre- 
sumption in  altering  our  Lord's  own  most  sacred  words: 
I  would  only  urge  with  most  Catholic  writers,  that  they 
are  perfectly  orthodox.  When  the  Priest  says,  holding 
the  paten  in  his  hand, — This  bread,  that  which  is  in  the 
paten  is  bread,  and  no  more  :  were  he  to  terminate  then, 
tlte  bread  would  be  only  so  far  sanctified  as  being  an 
oblation  to  Gon,  but  true  bread  still.] 

*  2.  All  Apostles.   II.     {Ethioinc.)  Q) 

In  that  night  in  whicli  they  betrayed  Him,  He 
took  bread. 

People.  We  believe  that  this  is  He,  truly  wc  believe. 

Priest.  In  His  holy  and  blessed  hands,  which  are 
■without  stain  ;  He  looked  up  to  heaven  unto  Thee, 
unto  His  Father,  gave  thanks,  blessed,  and  brake, 
and  gave  unto  them,  to  His  own,  His  disciples, 
and  said  to  them  :  Take,  eat,  this  bread  is  My  Body, 

WHICH  IS  BROKEN  FOR  YOU  FOE  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS. 

Peoj^le.  Amen.  Amen.  Amen.  We  believe  and 
are  sure  ;  we  praise  Thee,  our  Lord  and  our  God, 
this  is  He,  truly  we  believe. 

Priest.  Likewise  the  cup  too  He  blessed,  conse- 
crated, and  sanctified,  and  gave  it  to  them.  His  own, 
His  disciples,  and  said  to  them  :  Take,  drink,  this 
CUP  IS  ]\Iy  Blood  which  is  poured  out  for  you  fob 

THE  remission  OF  SINS. 

People.  Amen.     Amen.     Amen. 
Priest.  And  when  ye   do  this,  make  commemo- 
ration of  Me. 


(i)  Brit.  Mus.,  Orient.  545,  foL  47  a. 


appejjdix  i.  195 

3.     Ambrosian. 

Who,  on  the  day  before  He  suffered  for  the  salva- 
tion  of  us  and  of  all,  taking  bread,  He  lifted  His 
eyes  to  heaven  to  Thee,  God,  His  Father  Almighty  ; 
giving  thanks  to  Thee,  He  blessed.  He  brake,  and 
gave  to  His  disciples,  saying  to  them  :  Take  and 
eat  ye  all  of  it ;  for  this  is  My  Body. 

In  the  like  manner,  after  they  had  supped,  taking 
the  chalice,  He  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven,  to 
Thee,  God,  His  Father  Almighty :  also  giving 
thanks  to  Thee,  He  blessed,  and  gave  to  His  dis- 
ciples, saying  to  them  :  Take,  and  drink  ye  all  of 

it  ;    FOR    THIS    IS    THE    CHALICK    OF    My    BlOOD,  OF    THE 

New  and  PjTernal  Testament,  the  Mystery  of 
Faith,  which  for  you  and  for  many  shall  hk  poured 
forth  for  the  remission  of  SINS.  Commanding  also, 
and  saying  to  thorn,  These  things  as  oft  as  ye  shall 
do,  ye  shall  do  tlioni  in  memorial  of  Me  :  ye  shall 
preach  My  Death  :  yc  shall  announce  My  Resur- 
rection :  ye  shall  liope  for  My  Advent,  till  again  I 
shall  come  to  you  from  heaven. 

4.     Apostles   (Nentorian). 
[In  this  TAtitryij  the  Wanls  of  InstUution  are  wanting.] 

5.     Apo8tle3  (Syro-Jacobite).  (") 

Who,  wlien  for  us  He  was  made  man,  without 
mutation,  He  came  to  the  Cross  ;  and  before  His 
quickening  Passion,  He  took  bread  into  His  holy 
hiiuds,  He  blosHf'd,  He  sanctified,  He  brake,  and 
ate,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  saying  :  Take  and  eat 
of  it :  For  this  is  My  Body,  which  for  you  and  fob 


(2)  Brit.  Mu8.,  Add.  14.493;   14,4%;  14,093;   17.128. 

o  2 


190  APPENDIX   I. 

MANY  IS  BROKEN  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE  REMISSION    OF    SINS 
AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  WVc  manner  the  chalice  also,  after  they 
had  supped,  lie  mingled  with  Avine  and  water,  He 
blessed,  He  sanctified,  and  when  He  had  tasted  it, 
He  gave  it  to  His  disciples,  saying  :  Take,  drink  ye 
all  of  it  :  FOR  this  is  the  New  Testament  in  My 
Blood,  which  for  you  and  for  many  is  poured  forth 

FOR  the  expiation  OF  SINS  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  As  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this  bread  and 
drink  this  chalice,  ye  shall  make  memory  of  Me  till  I 
shall  come. 

People.  Amen. 

6.     Armenian. 

He  instituted  this  great  mystery  of  faith  and  reli- 
gion when  He  was  about  to  give  Himself  up  to  death 
for  the  life  of  the  world. 

People.  We  believe. 

Priest.  Taking  bread  into  His  Hands,  holy,  divine, 
most  spotless,  and  venerable,  He  blessed.  He  gave 
to  His  elect,  holy,  and  fellow-disciples,  saying, 

Deacon.  Sir,  bless. 

Priest.  This  is  My  Body,  which  for  you  and  for 

MANY  is  GIVEN  FOR  REMISSION  AND  PARDON  OF  SINS. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  He  took  the  chalice,  He 
blessed,  He  gave  thanks.  He  drank,  and  gave  it  to 
His  elect,  holy,  and  fellow- disciples,  saying. 

Deacon.   Sir,  bless. 

Priest.  This  is  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament, 
which  for  you  and  for  many  is  shed  for  the  re- 
mission and  pardon  of  sins. 

People,  0  Heavenly  Father,  Who  didst  give  up 


APPENDIX   I.  197 

Thy  Sox  to  death,  as  the  Debtor  of  our  debts,  we 
beseech  Thee  for  the  sake  of  His  Blood,  which  hath 
been  shed,  to  have  mercy  upon  Thy  rational  flock. 

Deacon.  Sir,  a,i\Q  the  blessinof. 

Priest.  And  Thine  Only-Begotten  Sox,  the  Lover 
of  men,  commanded  us  to  do  this  in  remembrance 
of  Him. 

*  7.     S.  Athanasius  {Ethiopic).  (*) 

Thou  didst  take  up  bread  before  them,  didst  give 
tlianks,  bless,  and  l)reak,  and  give  unto  them,  saying  : 
Take,  eat;  this  uhead  is  My  J^ody,  from  which  there 
is  no  being  separated.  And  in  like  manner  the  cup 
too  Thou  didst  mingle  (with)  water  and  wine,  didst 
give  thanks,  bless,  and  consecrate,  and  say  :  Take, 
drink  :  this  cup  is  My  Blood,  from  wliich  there  is 
no  being  divided.  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  Bread  and 
drink  tliis  Cup,  set  forth  My  Doatli  and  My 
Resurrection,  and  confess  My  Ascension  to  heaven 
and  My  coming  again  witli  glory,  whilst  ye  await. 

8.     S.  Basil  {Orthodox). 

[Sec   page  127.] 

9.     S.  Basil  (Copto-Jncohlte). 

He  instituted  this  great  mystery  of  pi(ity  and  rcli' 
gion  wlien  Ho  had  determined  to  give  Himself  up  to 
dcatli  for  the  life  of  the  world. 

People.  We  believe  that  it  is  in  triiili  so. 

Priest.  He  took  bread  into  His  hands,  lioly,  pure, 
immaculate,  blessed  and  life-giving,  and  looked  up 
to  lieaven  to  Thee,  0  Goo,  His  Father,  and  the 
LoiM)  of  all. 

People.  Amen, 

(8)  Brit.  Mus.,  Orient.  ;'i.5,  fol.  8G^  ;  Add.  1G,202. 


198  APPENDIX    I. 

Priest,  (raising  his  eyes.)  And  gave  thanks.  Amen. 
And  blessed  it.  Amen.  And  sanctified  it.  Amen. 
And  brake  it,  and  <2:ave  it  to  His  holy  Apostles  and 
disciples,  saying  :  Take,  eat  ye  all  of  this  :  For  this 
IS  My  Body,  which  for  you  is  broken,  and  for  many 
IS  GIVEN  for  the  REMISSION  OF  SINS  :  do  tliis  in  remem- 
brance of  Me.  Amen. 

Priest.  Likewise  also  the  cup  after  supper,  He 
mingled  mth  wine  and  water.  Amen.  He  gave 
thanks.  Amen.  He  blessed.  Amen.  He  sanctified 
it.  Amen.  He  tasted,  and  gave  it  to  His  disciples 
and  holy  Apostles,  saying :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it : 
for  THIS  IS  Mv  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which 

IS  SHED  FOR  YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF 

SINS  :  do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me. 

Peojyle.  Amen.     It  is  so. 

Priest.  As  often  as  ye  shall  cat  of  this  Bread  and 
drink  this  Chalice,  ye  shall  set  forth  My  ])eath  and 
confess  my  Eesurrection,  and  remember  Me  until  I 
come. 

10.     S.  Basil  (Syro-Jacobite.) 

For  when  He  was  about  to  go  forth  to  His  volun- 
tary and  salutary  Cross,  in  the  night  in  whicli  He 
was  betrayed  for  the  life  and  redemption  of  the 
world.  He  took  bread  in  His  holy,  immaculate,  pure, 
and  spotless  hands.  He  gave  thanks,  He  blessed.  He 
sanctified,  He  brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples  and 
His  holy  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  eat  of  this  :  for 
THIS  IS  My  Body,  which  foe  you  and  for  many  is 

BROKEN  AND  DIVIDED  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRES- 
SIONS, AND  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  FOR  LIFE 
ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also  the  Chalice  of  wine 
from  the  vine,  after  they  had  supped,  He  took,  He 


APPENDIX    1.  199 

mingled  with  water,  He  gave  thanks,  He  blessed, 
He  sanctified  and  tasted  and  divided  to  His  discij)les 
and  holy  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it : 

THIS  IS  THAT  My  BlOOD  OF  THE  NeW  TeSTAMENT, 
WHICH  FOR  YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  IS  POURED  FORTH  AND 
SPRINKLED,  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  AND 
REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  FOR  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

Peojjle.  Amen. 

Priest.  For  as  often  as  ye  do  this,  ye  announce 
My  Death,  and  celebrate  the  memory  of  My  Burial 
and  Resurrection,  until  I  sliall  come. 

Peo])li'.  We  announce  Thy  Death,  0  Lord,  and 
confess  Thy  Resurrection,  and  expect  Thy  Second 
Advent :  let  Thy  mercies  be  upon  all  of  us. 

*  11.     S.   Basil  {Ethiopic).  (') 

He  took  bread  in  His  holy  and  pure  hands,  which 
are  without  pollution,  and  blessed  and  life-giving. 
He  looked  up  to  heaven  unto  Tliee,  unto  His  Father, 
God  and  Loud  of  all,  Wlio  is  above  all.  He  gave 
tluinks,  blessed,  and  brake,  tasted,  and  gave  unto 
His  own.  His  holy  disciples  and  His  pure  Apostles, 
and  said  to  them  :  Take,  eat  of  it,  all  of  you  ;  this 
ijRKAi*  IS  My  Jjody,  which  is  huokkn  for  you  kou  thk 
remission  of  sin  ;  and  thus  makk  co.mmemoration  op 
Me. 

I'edjilc.  Ameu. 

Priest.  And  in  like  manner  the  cup  too  after  they 
had  supped,  He  ininghid  wjiter  and  wine,  gave  thanks, 
blessed  and  consecrated,  tasted,  and  gave  to  His  own, 
His  holy  disciples  and  His  pure  Apostles,  and  said 
to  them  :  Take,  drink  of  it,  all  of  you  ;  This  cup 
IS  My  Blood,  which  is  shed  rou  you  for  thk  pe- 


(*)   Brit.  Mus.,  Orient.  '.16,  fol.  113  b. 


200  appendix  i. 

mission  of  sin  ;  and  thus  make  commemoration  of 
Me. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Whenever  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this 
cup,  set  forth  My  Death  and  confess  My  Resur- 
rection, and  make  commemoration  of  Me  until  I 
come. 

People.  We  set  forth  Thy  Death. 

*  12.     S.  Celestine  (Syro- Jacobite).  (") 

He  Who,  when  He  was  about  to  give  completion 
to  His  dispensation  in  the  flesh,  on  that  evening, 
priestly  and  full  of  mysteries,  in  the  upper-chamber, 
handed  to  His  holy  disciples  the  mystery  of  the 
mystic  service  of  His  sacrifice,  when  He  had  taken 
bread  into  His  hands,  holy  and  spotless  and  im- 
maculate, and  showed  (it)  to  Thee,  God  the  Father  ; 
and  when  He  had  given  thanks.  He  blessed,  con- 
secrated, brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  the  holy 
Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  eat  of  it,  all  of  you  ;  this 
IS  My  Body,  which,  for  your  sake  and  that  of  many, 
is  broken,  and  given  for  the  remission  of  sins  and 

FOR  everlasting  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  thus,  over  the  cup  too,  when 
He  had  given  thanks.  He  blessed,  consecrated,  (and) 
gave  to  His  disciples,  the  holy  Apostles,  saying  : 
Take,  drink  of  it,  all  of  you  ;  for  this  is  My  Blood 
OF  the  New  Testament,  which  for  you  and  for  many 
IS  shed,  and  given  for  the  remission  of  sins  and  for 
life  everlasting. 

People.  Amen. 

Pnest.  For  whenever  ye   celebrate   this   service, 

(sj  Brit.  Mu8.,  Add.  14.493. 


APPENDIX   1. 


201 


for  the  preservation  of  your  lives,  ye  perforin  the 
commemoratiori  of  My  Death  and  Kesiu-reotion 
until  that  I  come. 

13.     S.  Chrysostom. 
[See  page  92.] 

*  14.     S.  Chrysostom  {Ethlopic).  (®) 

He  took  bread  in  His  Hands,  holy,  and  blessed, 
and  pure,  wbicli  are  without  stain  ;  He  looked  up 
to  heaven  unto  Thee,  unto  His  Father,  God  and 
Lord  of  all,  Who  is  above  all.  He  ^i^ve  thanks, 
blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  unto  His  disciples,  and 
said  to   them  :      Tins    is    My   Body,  the    food  of 

RIGHTEOUSNESS,    WHEREOF    VERILY    HE    WHO    EATS    HATH 

EVERLASTING  LIFE  ;  take.  Cat  of  it,  all  of  you.  And 
similarly  the  cup  too  He  mingled  (with)  water  and 
wine,  gave  thanks,  blessed  and  consecrated  and  gave 
to  His  disciples,  and  said  to  tlioni  :  This  is  My  Blood, 

THE  DRAUGHT   OF  LIFE,  WHEREOF  VERILY  HK  WHO  DRINKS 

HATH  EVERLASTING  LIFE  ;  take,  drliik  of  it,  all  of 
you  ;  a  sign  it  is  to  you  and  to  those  after  you  ;  and 
thus  make  commemoration  of  Me  until  I  come  ; 
and  whenever  ye  are  gathered  together  in  My  Name, 
set  forth  My  Death  and  My  Resurrection  and  My 
Ascension  into  heaven. 

15.     S.  Chrysostom.  I.  (Syro- Jacobite).  C] 

For  in  that  night  in  wliicli  Ih;  Wiis  liotrayed  to 
death,  for  the  life  and  salvation   of  tlii!   world,  He 

{«)  Brit.Mus.,  Orient.  54.5,  fol.  70  h  ■  AM.  10,202  ;  Bodloian, 
(7)  Brit.  Mua.,  Add.  14,690  ;  17,128;   17,220. 


202  APPENDIX  r. 

took  bread  into  His  holy  hands,  He  looked  up  to 
Thee,  God  and  Father,  and  gave  thanks,  He  sanc- 
tified, and  brake,  and  gave  it  to  His  disciples  the 
holy  Apostles,  saying :  Take,  eat  of  it :  for  this 
IS  TRULY  My  Body,  which  for  you  and  for  many  is 

BROKEN  AND  GIVEN  TO  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  LIFE 
ETERNAL. 

In  like  manner  also,  taking  the  Chalice  after  they 
had  supped,  He  mingled  it  moderately  and  temper 
ately  with  wine  and  water,  He  gave  thanks.  He 
blessed,  He  sanctified,  and  gave  it  to  the  same  His 
disciples,  the  holy  Apostles,  saying:  Take,  drink  ye 
all  of  it  :  FOR  this  is  truly  My  Blood,  the  same 

which  for  you  AND  FOR  MANY  IS  POURED  FORTH  AND  IS 
given  FOR  the  remission  OF    SINS,  AND    LIFE    ETERNAL  ' 

do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me.     For  as  often  as  ye 
shall  eat  this  Bread,  and  drink  this  Chalice,  ye  shall 
set  forth  My  Death,  until  I  come. 
People  {As  in  18.) 

Notice:  1.  the  remarkable  addition, <*•((///  My  Body  :  truhj  My 
Blood:  as  some  of  the  Nestorians  bold  extremely  unsound 
doctrine  on  the  Blessed  Eucharist,  this  likewise  may  be 
considered  a  protest  against  that.  The  date  of  this  Litur;(y 
is  only  to  be  guessed  from  internal  evidence  :  from  which 
I  should  be  disposed  to  consider  it  neither  one  of  the  ear- 
liest or  latest : — perhaps  of  the  8th  or  0th  centuries. 
2.  Observe  also  the  temperately  and  moderately,  as  applied 
to  the  mixed  Chalice. 

IG.     S.  Chrysostom.  II.    [Sijro- Jacobite.) 

And  in  the  nic^dit  of  His  Passion  He  took  bread 
into  His  holy  hands,  He  blessed.  He  sanctified.  He 
brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  saying :  Take,  eat: 
This  is  My  Body,  which  is  gi\'en  for  the  remission 

OF  SINS,  AND  the  NeW  LiFE  WHICH  IS  FOR  EVER. 

In  like  manner  also  He  took  the  Chalice,  and 
blessed  and  gave  to   His  disciples,  and  said  :   Take, 


APPENDIX   I. 


203 


drink  ye  all  of  it :    This  is   My  Blood,  which  for 

YOU  IS  POURED  FORTH  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANS- 
GRESSIONS,    THE    REMISSION    OF     SINS,      AND      THE      NeW 

Life  which  is  for  ever.  And  in  the  first  place  He 
commanded  them,  saying :  As  often  as  ye  shall 
celebrate  this  Mystery  of  Gladness,  ye  shall  com- 
memorate My  Deatli  and  Resurrection,  until  I  shall 
come. 

People.  [A$  in  18.) 

17.     S.  Clement. 
[See  page  65.] 

18.     S.  Clement  [Sijro- Jacobite). 

Wlien  therefore  He  was  prepared,  of  His  own  free 
will,  to  taste  of  His  Passion,  to  ascend  tlie  Cross 
and  the  place  of  suffering',  and  to  undergo  dcatli  for 
the  life  of  the  whole  world,  in  that  evening  in  which 
He  accomplished  the  consummation  of  mysteries 
and  marvels,  Ho  took  bread  into  His  pure  and  holy 
hands,  and  giving  thanks.  He  idcssed,  and  sanctilicd, 
aiul  brake,  and  gave  to  them  that  were  initiated  in 
this  His  Mystery,  His  holy  Apf)stlcs,  saying  :  Take, 
and  eat  of  it :  because  this  is  My  JJody,  which  fou 

YOU  IS  HliOKKN  AND  GIVEN,  FOU  THE  KOROIVENKSS  OF 
ALT,  THE  KAITIfFUL,  OF  VEUY  MANY  FOR  WHOM  IT  IS 
IMMOLATKI)  AND  DIVIDED,  TO  THE  PROPITIA  HON  OF 
TRANS(;RESSI0N8,  the  RKMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  LIFE 
ETERNAL. 

Pcn]i1c.  Amen. 

Pricsi.  After  that  mystical  supper,  He  mingled 
the  Chalice  of  Life  with  wine  and  water,  and  raising 
His  eyes  to  Thee,  God  and  Father,  He  gave  thanks, 


204  APPENDIX    I. 

blessed,  sunctified,  and  gave  to  the  band  of  His 
elect  disciples  and  holy  Apostles,  and  said  :  TakO; 
drink  ye  all  of  it :  this  is  My  Blood,  which  coNKiRMa 
THE   Testament   of  My  Death  :    which  for  you  is 

POURED  FORTH,  AND  FOR  MANY  IS  GIVEN  AND  DRIDED, 
TO  THE  PROPITIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION 
OF  SINS,  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  When  therefore  ye  shall  communicate  of 
this  Bread,  and  shall  use  this  Chalice  of  Life,  ye 
shall  make  commemoration  of  My  Death,  and  make 
memorial  of  My  Piesurrection,  until  I  shall  come. 

People.  We  make  memory,  0  Lord,  of  Thy  Death, 
we  confess  Thy  Eesurrection,  and  we  look  for  Thy 
Second  Advent :  we  beseech  from  Thee  mercy  and 
grace  :  we  pray  for  the  redemption  of  our  sins  :  let 
Thy  mercies  be  upon  us  all. 

*  19.     Cyriacus  of  Antioch  (Syro- Jacobite).  (') 

And  when  He  had  taken  bread  into  His  priestly 
hands.  He  looked  up  to  heaven,  gave  thanks,  blessed, 
consecrated,  brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  the 
holy  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  eat  of  it  ;  this  is  My 
Body,  which  is  broken   for  you  and  for  many,  and 

GIVEN  for  the  remission  OF  SINS,  AND  FOR  LIFE  EVER- 
LASTING. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  in  like  manner,  over  the  cup  also, 
after  the  mystic  supper,  He  mingled  it  in  modera- 
tion  with    both    wine     and   water,    gave    thanks, 


(«)  Brit.  Mu8.,  Add.  14,690,  fol.  106  b. 


APPENDIX    1.  205 

blessed,  consecrated,  and  gave  to  His  disciples, 
the  holy  Apostles,  saying :  This  is  My  Blood  of 
THE  New  Testament,  which  is  shed  for  you  and  for 

MANY,  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  FOR 
LIFE  EVERLASTING. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  "Whensoever  then  ye  eat  this  bread  and 
drink  this  cup,  ye  proclaim  My  Death  and  confess 
My  liesurrection,  until  I  come. 

20.     S.  Cyril  {Cojito-Jacohite). 

For  Thine  Only-Begotten  Son  our  Lord  God,  the 
Saviour  and  Universal  King  Jesus  Christ,  in  that 
night  in  which  He  gave  Hiinself  up  that  He  might 
sutfer  for  our  sins,  before  the  death  which  by  His 
own  free  will  He  undertook  for  us  all. 

People.  We  believe. 

Priest.  He  took  bread  into  His  holy,  immaculate, 
pure,  blessed,  and  quickening  hands,  and  looked  up 
to  heaven,  to  Tliec  His  God  and  Father,  and  the 
Lord  of  all,  and  gave  thanks. 

People.  Amen. 

Prirsl.  And  blessed  it. 

People.  Ainen. 

Priest.  And  sanctified  it. 

Priest.  And  brake  it,  and  gave  it  His  holy  dis- 
ciples and  pure  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  eat  yc  all 
of  it  :  FOR  THIS  IS  My  Body,  whicu  shall  ijk  broken 

FOR  YOU,  AND  FOR  MANY  SHALL  BE    GIVEN    FOR    THE    RE- 

MiHHioN  OF  sins:  do  this  in  rrmomlirance  of  Me. 

I'lople.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also  He  mingled  the 
Chalice  after  supper  with  wiue  and  water,  and  give 
thanks. 

People.  Amen. 


206  APPENDIX   I 

Priest.  And  blessed  it. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  sanctified  it. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  tasted  it,  and  gave  it  to  His  gloriona 
holy  disciples  and  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  drink  ye 
all  of  it :  This  is  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament, 

WHICH  for  you  is  POfRKl)  FORTH,  AND  FOR  MANY  SHALL 

BE  GIVEN  TO  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS :  do  tliis  in  re- 
membrance of  Me. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  For  as  often  as  ye  shall  eat  of  this  Bread 
and  drink  of  this  Ciialice,  announce  My  Death,  and 
confess  My  Eesurrection,  and  keep  My  memory  till 
I  come. 

People.  We  announce  Thy  Death,  0  Lord,  and 
we  confess  Thy  Eesurrection. 

Note.  S.  Cyril's  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  the  second 
class  of  Liturj^es.  From  its  sinj?iilar  resemblance  to,  and 
in  some  res])ects  its  even  more  singular  departure  from, 
that  of  S.  Mark,  it  is  very  probahh/  the  real  composition, 
or  rather  edition,  of  the  Saint  whose  name  it  bears. 

21.   S.  Cyril  (Sijro-Jacobite).  (») 

He  then  Ijefore  His  salutary  Passion  took  bread 
iato  His  holy  hands,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and 
gave  it  into  the  hands  of  His  disciples,  and  said  : 
This  is   My   Body,   which   is  broken  for  you  and 

PBEPARES  you  AND  MANY  OF  THE  FAITHFUL  TO  LIFE 
ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  He  also  mingled  with  wine  and  water  the 
Chalice  of  Life,  and  blessed  it,  sanctified  it,  and 

(e)13rit.  MuB.,  Add.  11.193;  14,195;  14,690;  14,691;  17,12b. 


APPENDIX    1.  ^01 

gnve  it  to  tlio  band  of  His  disciples,  and  said :  This 
IS  My  Blood,  which  seals  the  Testament  of  My 
Death,  and  prepaees  you  and  many  of  the  faithful 
to  eternal  life. 

F topic.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  -wlion  He  had  made  them  partakers  of 
holiness,  and  of  the  benefit  of  remission  of  sins, 
and  of  His  Blood,  He  first  commanded  them  and 
enjoined,  When  ye  shall  commiuiicate  of  this  Bread 
and  this  Chalice,  be  mindful  of,  and  celebrate  the 
memory  of  My  Death,  and  make  its  commemoration 
until  I  shall  come. 

People,  (as  in  18.) 

*  22.     S.  Cyiul  {Ethiopic).  (1") 

In  that  night  in  which  thcj'  boti-aycd  Him,  He 
took  bread  in  His  Hiiiids  holy  and  blessed,  which 
are  ■without  stain  ;  He  looked  up  to  Heaven  to 
Thee,  to  His  Father  ;  f,'ave  thaiiks,  blessed,  and 
brake,  and  said  :  Take,  eat ;  this  ijread  is  My  Body, 

WHICH  IS  imOKEN  FOE  YOU,  AND  IS  GIVEN  FOR  THE  RE- 
DEMPTION OF  THE  WHOLE  WORLD  THROUGH  THE  REMISSION 

OF  SIN.  And  af,'uin,  after  they  had  supped.  He  took 
the  cup,  gave  tlianks,  blessed  and  consecrated,  and 
said  to  His  disciples:  Take,  drink  ;  this  cup  is  My 
Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which   is  shed   for 

YOU,  FOR  the  ItEDEMPTION  OF  THE  WHOLE  WORLD 
THROUGH  THE  REMISSION  OF  SIN. 

23.      S.  DiONYSius  OF  Athens  {Si/ro-Jacohitc).  (") 

And  at  the  end  and  consummation  of  His  dispen- 
sation, for  our  sakes,  and  before  His  salulary  Cross, 


(•")  Brit.  Mns.,  Orient.  .51.^,  fol.  12i  b. 
(»';  Brit.  MuB.,  Add.  ll.Oyo,  fol.  CG  6. 


208  APPENDIX    I. 

He  took  bread  into  His  pure  aucl  holy  hands,  and 
looked  to  Thee,  His  God  and  Father,  and,  giving 
thanks,  blessed,  sanctified,  brake,  and  gave  to  His 
disciples,  tlie  holy  Apostles,  saying,  Take  and  eat 
of  it  :  and  believe  (^'^)  that  This  is  My  Body  :  the 

VERY  SAME  WHICH  FOR  YOU  IS  BROKEN  AND  GIVEN  FOR 
THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION  OF 
SINS,  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  the  same  manner  also  over  the  Chalice, 
which  He  mingled  with  wine  and  water,  He  gave 
thanks.  He  blessed,  He  sanctified,  and  gave  the 
same  to  His  disciples  and  holy  Apostles,  saying: 
Take,  drink  yc  all  of  it :  and  believe  i^"-)  that  This  is 
My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which  for  you 
and  for  many  is  poured  forth  and  given  for  the 

EXPIATION  OF  transgressions,  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS, 
AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  He  gave  to  the  whole  company  and 
congregation  of  the  faithful,  tlirough  the  same  holy 
Apostles,  this  precept,  saying.  Do  this  in  remem- 
brance of  Me :  as  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this  Bread 
and  drink  that  which  is  mingled  in  this  Chalice, 
and  shall  celebrate  this  feast,  ye  shall  commemorate 
My  Death  until  I  shall  come. 

People.  {As  in  18.) 


Q^  This  most  presumptuous  and  unlawful  alteration  does 
not  render  the  formula  invalid,  since  it  leaves  the  vital  por- 
tion, This  is  My  Body,  This  is  My  Blood,  untouched.  Tlio 
disposition,  however,  to  interfere  with  the  plain  words  of  our 
LoKD,  here  manifested,  led,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  to  con- 
sequences more  serious  on  some  of  the  Syro-Jacobite  Liturgies- 


APPENDIX  I.  209 

*  24.     DiONYSius  B.vk-Salibi  {Sijro-Jacohlte).  (") 

And  when  He  had  prepared  Himself  for  the  saving 
Passion,  the  bread  which  He  took,  He  blessed,  brake, 
and  named  it  His  holy  Body  for  Ufe  everlasting  to 
those  who  receive  it.  And  the  cup,  which  He 
mingled  with  wine  and  with  water,  He  blessed,  and 
consecrated,  and  perfected  it  (into)  His  precious 
Blood  for  life  everlasting  to  those  who  receive  it. 
And  when  He  had  delivered  this  to  His  holy  Apostles, 
He  commanded  them,  saying,  Thus  do  for  My  com- 
memoration until  I  come,  (") 

25.    [S.]  DioscoRus.  I.  {Ethiopic). 

In  that  night  in  which  they  betrayed  Him,  He 
took  bread  into  His  hands,  holy,  pure,  and  imniacu- 
late  ;  He  looked  up  to  Heaven,  there,  where  His 
Father  is.  He  gave  thanks.  He  blessed  and  brake, 
and  gave  to  His  holy  disciples  and  pure  Ap<jstles,  and 
said  to  them  :  Take,  cat :  this  hre^vd  is  My  Body, 

WillCH  IS  IJROKEN  I'OR  YOU   FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS. 

In  like  manner  also  He  mingled  wine  and  water, 
He  gave  tlianks,  He  blessed,  sanctilicd,  and  gave  to 
His  holy  disciples  and  His  pure  Apostles,  and  said 
to   them  :    Take,  drink  ;    this   cup   is   My   Blood, 

WHIf  II    FOR    YOU    13    POURED  FORTU    FOR   TUE   REMISSION 
OF  SINS. 

j_-nii3  iH  traiiHlated  from  the  very  rare  cdifion  of  Wanslnli.  I 
suppose  that  tlio  rcspoiisoH  of  the  pf(ii)lc  arc  HHii>lif(l  from 
the  Kthiopic  norm,  whence  the  expression,  thit  bread,  ia 
Imrrowed. 


[}")  J5rit.  MiiH..  Add.  14,091,  fol.  104  a. 
('*]  An  invalid  formula. 


210  APPENDIX    1. 

*  26.     [S.J  DioscoKUs.  II.  (Ethiopic).  (^^) 

In  that  ni,Q;ht  in  which  they  betrayed  Him,  He  took 
bread  in  His  holy  and  blessed  hands,  which  are 
without  stain,  He  looked  up  to  Heaven,  to  Thee,  to 
His  Father,  gave  thanks,  blessed,  and  brake,  and 
gave  to  His  own,  His  disciples,  to  His  disciples  the 
holy,  and  to  His  Apostles  the  pure,  and  said  to  them  : 
Take,  eat ;  this  bread  is  My  Flesh,  which  is  broken 
FOR  YOU  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SIN.  And  again,  after 
they  had  supped.  He  mixed  water  and  wine,  gave 
thanks,  blessed  and  consecrated,  and  handed  to  His 
disciples,  to  His  disciples  the  holy,  and  to  His 
Apostles  the  pure,  and  said  to  them :  Take,  drink  ; 
THIS  CUP  IS  My  Blood,  which  is  shed  for  yoi'  fob 

THE  redemption  OF  MANY. 

*  27.     DioscoRus  OF  Alexandria  {Syro- Jacobite),  i^''') 

He  Who,  when  He  wished,  in  His  dispensation  as 
Saviour,  before  His  life-giving  passion,  after  He  had 
feasted  with  His  disciples  on  tlie  Mosaic  lamb,  tooK 
the  bread  of  life  in  His  hands,  pure  and  stainless 
and  with  blessings ;  blessed  it,  and  consecrated  it, 
and  handed  to  the  Apostolic  band,  saying:  Take, 
eat ;  verily  this  is  My  Body,  which  for  the  sake 
OF  the  life  of  the  world  is  broken  and  divided  fob 

THE  remission  OF  SINS  AND  FOR  LIFE  EVERLASTING. 

Peoj)le.  Ameu, 

Priest.  Similarly  also,  over  the  cup  of  life,  when 
He  had  mingled  it  Avith  wine  and  water  moderately, 
and  with  His  holiness.  He  blessed,  and  consecrated, 
and  perfected,  and  handed  it  to  His  holy  Apostles, 
Baying :  Take,  drink  of  it,  all  of  you ;  for  in  truth 


5)  Brit.  Mus.,  Orient.  545,  fol.  105  b. 
ifi)  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  14,690,  fol.  15o. 


^ 


APPENDIX   I.  211 

THIS  IS  My  Blood,  which  for  the  sake  of  the  lip's 

OF  TTIE  WORLD  IS  SHED,  AND    DIVIDED  FOR  THE  REIITSSION 
OF  SINS  AND  FOR  LIFE  EVERLASTING. 

People,  Amen. 

28.     [S.]  DioscoRUS  OF  Cardu  {Syro-Jacobtte). 

But  in  that  ni,f,'ht  in  which  He  was  prepared  to 
.sufl'er  for  the  life  of  creatures,  He  gave  to  us  the 
pledge  of  life,  and  prepared  for  us  the  mystery  of 
His  holy  Body  and  Blood  :  He  took  bread,  after  Ho 
had  acconi])lishcd  the  Mosaic  Pascha,  and  laid  it 
upon  His  holy  hands,  in  tlie  sight  of  the  hand  and 
fellowship  of  His  disciples,  gave  thanks  to  Thee, 
God  the  Father,  ])lesscd,  sanctified,  brake  it,  and 
gave  to  the  band  of  His  twelve  after  He  Himself 
had  communicated,  and  said  :  Take,  eat  of  it ;  this 
IS  My  Body,  which  for  the  life  of  the  world  is 

BROKEN   AND    GIVEN    FOR    THE    EXPIATION    OF    TRANSGRES- 
SIONS, and  the  remission  of  SINS. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner,  after  they  had  supped,  He 
took  the  Chalice  (jf  Life,  mingled  it  temperately  with 
wine  and  water,  gave  thanks,  blessed,  sanctified  it, 
and  gave  it  also  to  the  same  band  of  holy  Apostles, 
saying  :  Take,  driuk  yo  all  of  it :  this  is  My  ]5r,f)0D 
OF  THE  New  Testament,  which  for  you  is  poured 

forth,    AND    PREI'ARETH    YOU,    AND   MANY    THAT   BELIEVE, 
FOR  ETERNAL  LIFE. 
Pcnplv.    Allien. 

Priest.  And  when  ye  shitll  celebrate  this  quicken- 
ing and  holy  Mystery  bolievc;  and  be  cerfiiin  tluit 
ye  eat  of  My  Body  and  live  ;  and  drink  of  My  Blood, 
to  the  expiation  of  transgressions,  and  the  remission 
of  sins.  And  when  ye  perform  all  those  things,  re- 
member and  connnemorate  My  JJcath,  Sepulture, 
and  Kcsurrection,  until  I  come. 

p  2 


212 


APPENDIX   I, 


* 


28.     Eleazar  ok  Babylon  ("),  otherwise  called 

Lazarus  bar  Sabta.  (Syro-Jacobite).  (^®) 

And  wlien  He  Avislied  to  aid  His  creatures  by 
means  of  His  divine  gifts,  and  destroyed  the  power 
of  deatli  by  His  dcatli — and  this  before  His  salutary 
Passion— He  took  bread  into  His  pure  and  holy 
hands,  and  looked  up  to  heaven,  and  shewed  (it)  unto 
Thee,  God  the  Father.  When  He  had  given  thanks, 
He  blessed,  consecrated,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His 
disciples,  the  holy  Apostles,  and  said :  Take,  eat  of 
it ;  THIS  IS  My  Body,  which  is  broken  for  you  and 

ON  ACCOUNT  OF  JMANY,  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE  EXPIATION 
OF  OFFENCES  AND  THE  REMISSION  OP  SINS,  AND  FOR  LIFE 
EVERLASTING. 

People.  Amen. 

Pricsi.  In  like  manner,  too,  after  they  had  supped, 
when  He  had  mingled  with  wine  and  water,  and 
given  thanks,  He  consecrated,  blessed,  and  gave  to 
His  disciiiles,  the  holy  Apostles,  and  said  :'  Take, 
drink  of  it,  all  of  you ;  this  is  j\1y  Blood  of  the 
New  Testament,  which   is  shed  fob  you   and  for 

MANY,  and  given  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  OF  OFFENCES  AND 
THE    RKMISSION     OF     SINS,    AND    FOR     LIFE     EVERLASTING. 

This  do  for  a  remembrance  of  My  Death,  because, 
whenever  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  the  mixture 
which  is  in  this  cup,  ye  are  accoraplisliing  the 
memorial  of  My  Death  and  Eesurrectiou  until  I 
come. 


(")  [This  writer  is  identical  with  Philoxenus  of  Bagdad, 
cited  below  by  Dr.  Neale  ;  but  the  Anaphora  there  given  ia 
not  identical  with  tliis  one. — L.] 

(i»j  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  14,690,  fol.  lU  b. 


APPENDIX    I.  213 

*  SO.     S.  Epiphaxius  {Etliiopic).  ('«) 

in  that  uight.  the  evening  of  Thursday  to  the 
dawning  of  Friday,  when  He  had  sat  down  in  the 
house  of  Lazarus  His  friend,  He  took  unleavened 
wheaten  bread,  of  that  which  tlicy  had  brouglit  to 
Him  for  supper,  gave  thanks,  blessed,  and  brake,  and 
gave  to  His  own,  His  disciples,  and  said  to  them : 
Take,  eat  ;  this  bread  is  the  commuxiox  of  My 
Body,  which  is  broken  for  you.  And  again.  He 
mingled  the  cup,  wine  with  water,  gave  thanks, 
blessed,  and  consecrated,  and  gave  to  His  own.  His 
disciples,  and  said  to  them  :  Take,  drink  ;  this  cup 
IS  My  Ulood,  which  is  shed  for  you.  And  let  this 
rite  be  to  you  for  the  commemoration  of  My  Death 
and  My  Kesurrcction. 

Observe  the  express  mention  of  unleavened  bread, 
peculiar  to  this  Liturgy.] 

8L     S.  Eustathius  (Si/ro-Jacohite).  (--) 

Who,  when  by  J  lis  own  free  will,  He  went,  as  it 
were,  a  substitute  for  us  sinners  to  death,  took  bread 
into  His  holy  hands,  He  blessed,  sanctified,  l)rakc, 
and  gave  to  His  iioly  disciples,  and  said  :  Take,  eat 
of  it ;  This  is  My  Body,  which  pricparkth  you,  and 

ALL  the  faithful  THAT  EECEIVE  IT,  FOR  LIFE  ETERNAL, 

PcDjilc.  Amen. 

Prii'st.  In  like  manner  the  Chalice  which  He  had 
mingled  of  wine  and  water.  He  blessed.  He  sancti- 
fied, and  gave  to  the  same  His  holy  disciples,  and 
said  :   Take,  drink  of  it  ;  This  is  My  Blood,  whhjh 

PBEPARETH  YOU,  AND   ALL    THE    FAITHFUL    THAT    BECEIVE 
IT,  TO  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Ameu. 

(19)  Brit.  MuH.,  Orient.  FA'),  fol.  Dl  h.     Bo.llrinn,  xvii. 

{»>)  But.  .Mus.,  Aa.J.  1  [,l'JH;  11,0'Ji  ;  U,{i'J6  ;  ll,7;;7  ;  li,738. 


214:  APPENDIX   I. 

Priest.  Moreover,  when  ye  shall  celebrate  this 
mystery,  keep  the  memory  of  My  Death,  until  I 
shall  come. 

Feojde.  {As  in  18.) 

32.     S.  Gregory  [Copto-JacoUte). 

Priest.  For  in  the  night  in  which  Thou  didst  will 
to  be  given  up,  by  Thine  own  will  and  power. 

People.  We  believe. 

Priest.  Thou  takest  bread  into  Thy  holy,  pure, 
spotless,  blessed,  and  quickening  hands,  Thou  didst 
look  up  to  Thine  own  Father,  our  God,  and  the 
God  of  all,  and  Thou  didst  give  thanks,  Thou  didst 
bless  it.  Thou  didst  hallow  it,  Thou  didst  break  it, 
Thou  didst  distribute  it  to  Thy  glorious  holy  dis- 
ciples, and  say  to  Thy  pure  Apostles,  Take,  eat. 
This  is   My   Body,  which  is  broken   for  you  and 

SHALL  BE  given  FOR  MANY  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF    SINS  : 

do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me. 

In  like  manner  after  they  had  eaten.  Thou  didst 
take  the  Chalice,  and  didst  mingle  it  of  the  fruit  of 
tJie  vine  and  of  water.  Thou  didst  give  thanks  and 
bless  it,  and  liallow  it,  and  distribute  it  to  Thy 
glorious  holy  disciples,  saying  to  Thy  pure  Apostles, 
Drink  ye  all  of  it :  This  is  My  Blood  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  for   you  is  poured  forth  and  is 

GIVEN  FOR  MANY    FOR    THE    REMISSION    OF  SINS  :    do  this 

in  remembrance  of  Me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this 
Bread  and  drink  this  Cup,  ye  shall  set  forth  My 
Death,  and  confess  My  Resurrection,  and  make 
memorial  of  Me,  until  I  come. 

People.  Arnen.  Amen.  Amen.  We  announce  Thy 
death,  0  Lord,  and  set  forth  Thy  resurrection. 


APPENDIX    I.  215 

*33.     S.  Gregory  of  Alexandria  (Ethiopic).  (^^) 

He  took  bread  in  His  hands,  who  was  pierced 
and  who  created  om*  father  Adam ;  pure  is  He, 
without  siu,  and  clear  is  He,  without  fraud ; 
He  gave  thanks,  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His 
own,  His  disciples,  and  said  to  them  :  This  is  JMy 
Body,  the  food  of  righteousness,  whereof  verily  he 
who  eats  shall  live  for  ever  and  ever.  and 
again.  He  looked  upon  this  cup,  the  water  of  life 
with  wine  ;  gave  thanks,  blessed  and  consecrated, 
and  handed  it  to  His  own,  His  disciples,  and  said 
to  them  :   This  is  My  Blood,  the  draught  of  life, 

WHEREOF    verily    HE     WHO     DRINKS    HATH    EVERLASTING 

LIFE.     Take,  drink  of  it,  all  of  you  ;  let  it  be  to  you 
for  life  and  for  salvation. 

*  34.     S.  Gregory  op  Armenia  {Ethiopic).  (**) 

Mingle,  0  Lord,  our  humanity  with  Thy  Divinity, 
Thy  greatness  with  our  humility,  and  our  humility 
witli  Thy  greatness,  that  we  may  offer  this  ol'l'ering 
which  Tiioii  didst  give  to  Thy  disciples,  saying  : 
Take,  eat ;  this  hread  is  My  Body  which  is  broken 

FOR    YOU,    AND    IS     GIVEN     THAT    SIN    MAY    liE    REMITTED 
AND  FOR  EVERLASTING  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  similarly,  over  the  cup  too,  Thou 
didst  speak  to  them,  saying:  Take,  drink  ;  this  cup 
IS  My  Ijlood,  which  is  poured  out  for  you,  and  is 

GIVKN     THAT     SIN      MAY      liK     UICMITTED    AND    FOR    EVER- 
LASTING LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.   And  thus  make  commemoration  of  Mo, 


f")  Brit.  Mu8.,  Orient.  545,  fol.  101  6. 
(«J  Brit.  Mu8.,  Orient.  5  io,  fol.  120  6. 


2i('»  APPENDIX   I. 

Thou  diflst  say  to  them,  whenever  ye  eat  this  hrend 
and  drink  this  cup,  whilst  ye  set  forth  My  death  and 
whilst  ye  rise  with  My  resurrection  and  helieve  (in 
it).  And  make  commemoration  of  Me  with  glory 
and  praise  and  thanksgiving  and  honour. 

*  85.    Gregory  BAR-HEBRiEus  [abu'lfara.j] 
{Sijro- Jacobite).  (^) 

Frirsi.  When  then  He  had  made  ready  to 
receive  voluntary  death  for  us  sinners,  He  Who 
is  without  sin.  He  took  bread  in  His  holy  hands, 
and  when  He  had  given  thanks,  He  blessed, 
consecrated,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His  holy 
disciples,  and  said  :    Take,   eat  of  it  ;    this  is  My 

BODY,  WHICH  FOR  YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  IS  BROKEN,  AND 
GIVEN  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS  AND  FOR  EVERLASTING 
LIFE. 

Peo2)le.  Amen. 

Pried.  Similarly  too  as  to  the  cup,  when  He  had 
given  thanks.  He  blessed,  consecrated,  and  gave  to 
His  holy  disciples,  and  said  :  Take,  drink  of  it,  all  of 
you  ;  THIS  IS  My  Blood,  which  for  you  and  for  many 

IS  SHED,  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS  AND  FOB 
LIFE  EVERLASTING. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  This  do  in  commemoration  of  Me,  (and) 
when  ye  communicate,  remember  (Me)  until  I  come. 

■■^'  8G.  Gregory  Bar-Hebr^eus.  II.  [Hyro-Jacohite). 

Who,  when  He  had  voluntarily  fulfilled  His  whole 
dispensation,  and  had  come  to  His  voluntary, 
quickening,  but  unmerited  Passion,  gave  us  a  great 


(^j  Brit.  Mub.,  Ada.  14,693,  fol.  104. 


APPEKDrX  1.  217 

type  and  hope  of  life,  to  wit,  bread  which  was  made 
His  holy  Body,  He  took  it  with  His  holy  Hands 
before  the  eyes  of  the  band  of  His  devout  disciples, 
and  looking  with  uplifted  eyes  to  heaven  and  gazing 
on  Thee,  God  and  Father,  He  gave  thanks  to  Thee, 
blessed,  hallowed,  brake,  and  when  He  had  eaten. 
He  gave  it  to  His  holy  disciples,  and  said :  Take, 
oat  of  it ;  Tins  is  My  Body  which  is  broken  and 

DIVIDED  FOR  YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  BELIEVING  IN  Me,  FOR 
THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS  AND  THE  REMISSION 
OF  SINS,  AND  FUR  NEW  LIFE  FOR  EVERMORE. 

People.    Amen. 

Priest.  And  the  wine,  which  became  His  atonini; 
Blood,  after  tliat  mystic  supper,  when  He  had 
moderately  mingled  it  with  water.  He  gave  thanks, 
blessed,  hallowed,  and  gave  to  the  band  of  the  holy 
Apostles,  and  said  :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it ;  This 
IS  My  Blood  which   is  sukd  and  given  for  you  and 

FOB  many  believing  IN  Me,  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  of 
transgressions,  the  remission  of  SINS,  AND  NEW  LIFE 
FOR  EVERMORE. 

People.    Amen. 

Priest.  And  when  He  had  delivered  the  Sacrament 
to  the  company  of  His  Apostles,  He  enjoined  them, 
and  commanded  them,  saying,  "Celebrate  this 
Sacrament  evermore,  because,  wlien  ye  sliall  eat 
this  bread,  and  drink  what  is  mingled  in  this  cu]). 
ye  shall  make  conimomoration  of  My  l)ealh  and 
KesuiTcction  until  1  come." 

*  87.  S.  Greooky  Nazianzen  {Syro- Jacobite).  (■^') 

And  when  Ho  had  voluntarily  made  preparation 
for  the   saving  i'assion,  on  the  last  night  of  the 

f«')  Erit.  llus..  Add.  li.O'JO,  fol.  70  a. 


218  APPENDIX   I. 

conclusion  of  his  dispensation  on  our  behalf, 
He  took  bread  in  His  holy  hands  and  shewed 
it  unto  Thee,  God  the  Father,  gave  thanks, 
blessed,  consecrated,  brake,  and  distributed  to  His 
disciples  the  Apostles,  saying :  Take,  eat  of  it ;  for 
THIS  IS  My  Body,   which  on  your  account,  and  on 

BEHALF  OF  MANY,  IS  BROKEN,  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE  REMIS- 
SION OF  SINS  AND  FOR  LIFE  EVERLASTING. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  SO  regarding  the  Cup  also.  He 
gave  thanks,  after  He  and  His  disciples  had 
rejoiced  over  the  mystic  table,  with  the  offspring  of 
the  vine  and  with  water  He  mixed  it  moderately, 
and  blessed,  and  consecrated,  and  gave  to  Plis  same 
disciples  the  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  drink  of  it, 
all  of  you  ;  this  is  My  Blood  of  the  New  Covenant, 

WHICH  ON  YOUR  BEHALF,  AND  FOR  MANY,  IS  SHED,  AND 
GIVEN  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OP  SINS  AND  FOR  LIFE  EVER- 
LASTING. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Ye  then,  be  ye  so  celebrating  the  memory 
of  My  Death,  for  when  ye  eat  this  Bread,  and  drink 
this  Cup,  ye  make  commemoration  of  Me  and  pro- 
claim My  Death  until  I  come. 

38.     Holy  Doctors  (Syro-Jacnhite). 

[This  is  vierehj  a  cento  from  the  Liturgies  held  in 
most  esteem  by  the  Syro-Jacolntes.  The  Institution^ 
from  the  beginning  down  to  This  is  My  Blood  of  the 
New  Testament,  is  from  the  Syriac  S.  James  ;  posterior 
to  tluit,froiu  the  Syro- Jacobite  S.  Cyril.] 

89.     S.  Ignatius  of  Antioch  (Syro- Jacobite).  (") 
"Who  accomplished  the  whole  salutary  dispeusa- 

(*:)  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  14.690  ;   14.691 ;   17,128  ;  17.229. 


APPENDIX   I.  219 

tion  for  us,  and  by  His  holy  Passion  demonstrated 
the  verity  of  His  advent  in  the  Flesh. (2'^)  For  in 
the  night  of  the  Pascha  in  which  He  was  betrayed 
for  the  life  and  salvation  of  the  world,  He  took 
bread  into  His  holy  hands,  He  sanctified  it,  and 
brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples  the  holy  Apostles, 
saying.  Take,   eat  of  it :  This  is  My  Body,  which 

PREPAUETH  YOU  AXD  MANY  FOK  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS 
AND  ETERNAL  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also,  when  He  had  mingled 
the  Chalice  of  Life  with  wine  and  water,  He  sancti- 
lied  it,  and  gave  it  to  His  holy  disciples,  saying, 
Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it :   This  is  My  Blood,  which 

FOR  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  WOULD  GIVE  I,  AND  WHICH  PRE- 
PARETH  YOU  AND  MANY  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  BINS  AND 
LIFE    ETFCRNAL. 

People.  A  men. 

Priest.  Do  tliis  iu  remembrance  of  Me  :  for  as 
often  as  ye  sliall  cat  this  bread  and  drink  this 
chalice,  ye  shall  commemorate  My  Death,  and  con- 
fess My  llesurrectiou  until  I  come. 

Peopjle.   (As  in  I'd.) 

40.     Ignatius  Bar  Wauu  {or  Vahib)  (Si/ro-Jacobite). 

Priest.  Who,  when  He  had  willed  to  taste  the 
cup  of  death,  tliat  He  iniglit  comfort  and  confirm 
us  mortals  against  death  appointed  for  us  by  the 
law  of  miture,  and  to  descend  into  the  al)yss  of  them 
that  are  buried,  that  they  miglit  not  be  deprived  of 
His  quickening  visitation  ;  in  that  night  which  was 

(»)  This  expreHflion,  clearly  directed  against  the  rhantnsiasti 
mfl  othor  heretics  of  a  similar  cliaracter,  shew  the  conipara- 
live  lateness  of  this  Liturgy. 


220  AfPENDlX  I. 

of  tlie  beginning  and  of  the  end,  {^'')  He  took  perfect 
bread  (-'')  into  His  bauds  full  of  benedictions,  out  of 
wbicli  His  holy  Body  was  composed  in  the  Virgin, 
who  knew  not  the  nuptial  couch,  before  His 
friends  :  giving  thanks,  He  blessed,  He  sanctified, 
and  brake  it,  and  divided  it  into  parts,  and  gave  it 
to  His  twelve  companions,  and  said  :  Take,  eat  : 
This  is  My  Flesh,  wincii  for  you,  and  for  many 

LIKE  YOTJ,  is  broken,  SANCTIFIED,  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE 
ABOLITION  OF  SINS  AND  LIFE    ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner,  having  raised  His  eyes  to 
heaven,  signifying  that  His  Will  was  one  with  that 
of  His  Father  and  His  Holy  Spirit,  as  if  to  confirm 
the  verity  of  His  voluntary  Death,  for  the  salvation 
of  His  image  which  lay  in  corruption.  He  took  also 
the  Chalice  of  Life,  which  He  had  mingled  with 
wine  of  gi-ape  and  natural  water,  according  to  due 
measure,  after  they  had  feasted  on  the  Sacraments, 
and  gave  thanks,  blessed,  sanctified,  and  in  like 
manner  reached  it  forth  to  His  friends,  and  said. 
Take  and  drink  each  from  the  hand  of  the  other  : 
FOR  THIS  IS  My  living  Blood  which  is  poured  forth 

FOR  THE  HUMAN  RACE  THAT  BELIEVE  IN  Me,  FOR  THE 
ABOLITION  OF  FOLLIES  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  wlien  He  had  Himself  accomplished 
this  in  His  person.  He  enjoined  them  in  His  com- 
mandments, and  said,  As  often  as,  being  in  union 


(25)  That  is,  the  beginning  of  the  New  and  the  termination 
of  tlie  Old  Passover. 

('*)  That  is,  leavened  bread  ;  a  clear  proof  that  this  Liturgy 
is  not  older  than  the  time  of  Photius.  Ignatius  Bar  Vahib 
filled  the  Jacobite  throne  of  Antioch  from  his  election  in 
12'J3  till  his  death  in  1332.  Assemani.  Lib.  Orient. 
iii.  461. 


APPENDIX   I,  221 

among  yourselves,  ye  are  joined  together  by  these 
things,   keep  the  memory  of  My  voluntary  Death, 
make  commemoration  of  My  salutary  Resurrection, 
and  exi^ect  my  Advent  until  My  coming  again. 
People.  {As  in  18.) 

41.     S.  James  (Orthodox), 
[See  page  30.] 

42.     S.  James  (Syro-Jacuhitc). 

[This  is   the  same  as  the  last,  irith  one  or  two  verbal 
differences  not  uortli  7iotice.] 

43.     S.  JA!\rES  (the  shorter  ;    Sjjro- Jacobite). 

[Abbreviated   by    Gregory,    Catholic   of    the   Easty    in 
the  year  1591. J 

Priest.  And  when  He  was  prepared  to  undergo 
voluntary  Deatli  for  us  siniicrs,  He  Who  had  done 
no  sin,  He  took  bread  into  His  holy  hands,  and 
gave  thanks,  l)hjsscd,  sanctified,  and  brake,  and 
gave  to  liis  Indy  Apostles  and  said  :  Take,  eat  of  it  : 
This  is  My  Bodv,  which  fou  you  and  for  many  is 
r,noke\  and  given  for  tue  remission  of  sins  and  life 

ETERNAL. 

People.    AmtlJ. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also  He  took  tho  chalice 
and  gave  thanks,  blessed,  sanctified,  and  gave  to 
tlie  same  His  holy  Apostles,  saying,  Take,  drink  yo 
all  of  it :  Tins  is  My  Blood,  wnicii  fok  you  and  for 

MANY  IS  poured  FORTH  AND    GIVEN    FOU    Tin;    REMISSION 
of    SINS    AND    LIFE    ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

priest.  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me  :  when  ye 


222  AVPENDIX    U 

Bliall  communicate  in  this  mystery,   commemorate 
My  Death  and  My  Resurrection  until  I  come. 
PeoiAe.  {As  in  18.) 

44.  James  BARAOiEUS.  (-')  {Si/ro-Jacohite.) 

Priest.  Who,  when  He  had  accomplished  all  Hia 
salutary  dispensation,  above  the  condition  of  human 
nature,  Himself,  God  the  Word  Incarnate  for  our 
sakcs :  in  that  night  in  which  it  was  to  be  that  He 
should  suffer  voluntarily.  He  took  common  bread 
into  His  holy  hands,  and  giving  thanks.  He  blessed. 
He  sanctified  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His  Apostolic 
band,  and  said  to  them :  Tins  is  My  Body  ;  take, 

AND  EAT  OF  IT,  BECAUSE  WITHOUT  ANY  DOUBT  IT  IS 
BROKEN  FOR  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  WORLD,  AND  SHALL  BE  TO 
YOU,  AND  TO  ALL  THAT  BELIEVE  IN  Me,  FOR  THE  PRO- 
PITIATION OF  OFFENCES,  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND 
ETERNAL    LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  after  they  had  supped,  He  took  the 
chalice  mingled  with  wine  and  water  into  His  pure 
hands,  and  giving  thanks,  He  blessed,  He  sanctified, 
and  gave  to  His  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  This 
IS  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament  ;  take,  drink 

YE  ALL  OF  IT  ;  FOR  WITHOUT  DOUBT  IT  IS  POURED  FORIH 
for  the  LIFE  OF  THE  WORLD,  AND  SHALL  BE  TO  YOU  AND 
OF  ALL  THAT  SHALL  BELIEVE  IN  Me,  FOR  THE  PROPITIA> 
TION  OF  OFFENCES,  THE  REMISSION  OP  SINS,  AND  ETERNAL 
LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 


(»)  The  celebrated  heretic  from  whom  the  sect  of  the  Mono- 
physites  derive  the  more  usual  name  of  Jacobites.  He 
flourished  in  the  sixth  century ;  but  the  Liturgy  which  goea 
under  his  name  is  of  far  later  date. 


'  APPENDIX    J,  223 

Priest.  As  often  therefore  as  ye  shall  eat  this 
bread  aud  drink  this  cup,  ye  sliall  commemorate 
My  Death  and  Eesurrection  until  I  come. 

Peojjle.  {As  in  18.) 

45.     James  of  Edessa  [Syro-Jacnhite.)  ('") 

Priest.  When  therefore  He  was  eating  that  legal 
Lamb,  which  was  the  type  of  the  Heavenly  Lamb, 
with  His  holy  disciples,  and  v.illed  to  deliver  us 
from  corporal  sacrifices  of  lambs,  of  bulls,  and  of 
kids,  and  to  raise  us  to  more  worthy  sacrifices, 
celestial  and  divine  mysteries, — in  that  evening,  in 
which  He  was  about  to  give  Himself  up  to  be  a 
Sacrifice  for  us,  Ho  took  bread  into  His  holy  hands, 
free  from  all  stain,  and  raising  His  eyes  to  heaven, 
to  Plis  Father,  He  gave  thanks.  He  blessed.  He 
brake,  Ho  ate,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  saying  : 
Take,   eat  of  it :  Tins  is  My  Body,  which  for  the 

LIFE    of    creatures    IS    BROKEN    AND  DIVIDED  FOR  THE 
remission  of  sins  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  maimer  He  temperately  mingled 
the  cup  with  wine  and  water.  He  gave  thanks  over 
it,  after  He  had  supped  with  His  disciples  in  the 
mystical  table,  He  blessed,  He  sanctified,  and 
reached  fortli  to  His  holy  Apostles,  and  said :  This 
IS  My  Blood,  which  I  pour  forth  for  the  life  of 

THK    WOULD,    AND    WHICH     PRKPARKTH,    FOB    THEM  THAT 
BELIEVE  IN   Me,   eternal  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  This  do  as  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this  Body 


(»)  Brit.  Mu8.,  Add.  14,691,  fol.  74  a- 


224  ArrENDix  i. 

and  drink  this  Chalice  :  keep  memory  of  My  Death 
till  I  shall  come. 
People    {As  in  18.) 

*  4G.     James  of  Skrug  or  Batn^  (Ethiopic).  (") 

Thou  didst  take  hroad  in  Thy  holy  hands,  that 
Thou  mi,L;htest  give  it  to  Thy  holy  disciples.  Thou 
Who  didst  then  hless.  Who  art  with  glory,  bless 
now  this  bread.  Thou  Who  didst  then  break,  Wlio 
art  witli  blessing,  break  now  this  bread.  And 
again,  Thou  didst  mix  the  cup  of  wine  with  water, 
that  Thou  mightest  give  it  to  the  pure  Apostles. 
Thou  who  didst  consecrate  then,  consecrate  now 
this  cup.  Thuu  Who  didst  hand  then,  hand  now 
this  cup.  Thou  Who  didst  unite  then,  unite  now 
this  bread  to  this  cup.  Let  it  be  Thy  Flesh  and 
Thy  Blood.  H 

47.     James  of  Serug  [Syro -Jacobite).  (") 

Priest.  And  when  He  was  prepared  to  suffer.  He 
left  us  a  commemoration  of  Himself.  For  in  that 
evening  in  which  were  accomplished  all  the  mys- 
teries of  the  type,  and  the  miracles,  in  that  night 
in  which  Ho  was  betrayed  for  the  life  and  salvation 
of  the  world,  taking  bread  into  His  holy  hands,  He 
looked  up  to  Thee,  God  the  Father,  He  gave 
thanks.  He  blessed.  He  brake,  and  gave  to  the 
assembly  of  His  disciples,  and  said  to  them.  Take, 
eat  of  it :  Tms  is  My  Body,  which  for  you  and  for 


(31)  Brit.    Mus.,    Orient.   545,    fol.    108  &;     Add.   16,202; 
Bodleian,  xvii.  4. 

(32)  This  is  one  of  the  invalid  forms,  as  there  is  no  recitation 
of  the  words  of  institution. 

(»j  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  14,690,  14,692,  17.229. 


APPENDrx  1.  225 

MANTIS  BROKEN  AND  GIVEN  FOB  THE  REMISSION    OF    SINS 
AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amcu. 

Priest.  In  like  manner,  after  they  had  supped, 
He  mingled  also  the  Chalice  of  Life,  of  wine  and 
water,  and  sanctified,  and  gave  to  the  assembly  of 
His  disciples,  and  said  to  them,  Take,  drink  ye  all 
of  it  :  This  is  the  Chalice  of  the  New  Testament 
IN  My  Blood,  which  for  you  and  for  many  is  poured 

FORTH  and  given  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS    AND    LIFE 

eternal. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  As  often  as  ye  sliall  eat  tliis  Broad  and 
drink  this  Chalice,  ye  shall  set  fortli  My  Death  and 
Eesurroction  till  1  come. 

People.  {As  in  18.) 

48.     John  Bar-Maadan  {Syro-Jacohitc). 

Priest.  But  when  He  had  accomplishrd  and  ful- 
filled in  Ilinisolf  the  figiiroH  and  sIkkIuws  of  the 
ancient  law,  as  the  Lord  of  both  Testaments,  and 
willed  to  take  away  from  the  eyes  of  the  Apostolic 
band  the  typical  veil  of  prophecy,  and  to  bear 
witness  that  that  true  Body  which  of  old  was 
obscurely,  and  as  it  were  afar  off,  prefigured,  was 
now  in  a  certain  excellent  manner  close  at  hand  ; 
in  that  night  which  destroyed  the  night  of  sin  and 
death  ;  in  that  very  night  in  which  He  was  about 
to  celebrate  this  religions  sacrifice  as  a  Priest  for 
the  expiation  of  the  whole  world  ;  Ho  took  bread 
into  His  holy  hands  which  created  the  world,  and 
raised  His  calm  face  to  the  height  of  lieaven,  to 
the  Father,  and  giving  thanks.  He  bloHsed,  and 
brake,  and  ate,  and  gave  to  the  conip.'uiy  of  His 
holy  Apostles,  and  said  :  Take,  cat  of  it  :  Tins  is 

Q 


226  appendix  i. 

My  true  Body,  which  for  the  life  and  salvation 
of  the  whole  human  race  is  broken  and  given 
for   the   expiation     of    transgressions    and    life 

ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Thus  also  He  mingled  the  Chalice  mysti- 
cally of  wine  and  water,  after  He  had  refreshed  them 
at  the  Table  of  Life,  He  gave  thanks,  He  blessed. 
He  sanctified,  and  gave  to  the  band  of  the  holy 
Apostles,  and  said  :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it :  This 
IS  My  living  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which 
IS  poured  forth  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole 
world,  and  which  prepareth  those  that  believe  in 
M>;  to  life  eternal. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  again  He  admonished  them,  saying, 
As  often  as  ye  are  gathered  together  and  break  this 
Eucharist,  ye  shall  keep  and  renew  the  commemo- 
ration of  My  voluntary  Death  and  Eesurrection 
and  shall  not  suffer  it  to  pass  into  oblivion  until  1 
come. 

People.   (As  in  18.) 

*  49.  John  Bar- Susan  (Syro-Jacobite).  (") 

And  before  the  voluntary  passion  of  the  Word 
God,  He  took  in  His  divine  hands  simple  bread  and 
wine  that  (was)  mingled  moderately  with  water, 
blessed,  and  consecrated,  and  brake,  and  handed  it 
to  the  band  of  the  twelve,  saying  :  Take,  use  (it) ; 
and  when  of  these  ye  eat  and  drink,  believe  that 
they  are  Mj'  Body  and  Blood,  which  I  give  for  the 
salvation  of  tlie  world,  and  they  shall  be  to  you, 
and  through  you  to  the  whole  world,   for  the  com- 

(«J  Brit.  MuB.,  Add.  14,693,  fol.  94  a. 


APPENDIX    1.  227 

meinoration  of  My  Burial  aud  Eesuirectiou,  uutil 
that  I  cojne.     {^) 

60.     John  of  Bassora  {Si/ro-Jacohite).  (^) 

Priest.  He  then,  the  Prince  of  the  lieveiation  ot 
our  good  things,  on  that  evening  of  His  voluntary 
groaning,  exj)laining  by  these  quickening  aud  easily- 
to-be-handled  Elements,  this  Mystery  which  cannot 
be  expressed  in  words,  He  took  bread  into  His  holy 
hands,  and  as  the  High  Priest  and  Apostle  of  our 
confession,  rendering  thanks  for  us.  He  gave  thanks. 
He  blessed,  He  sanctified,  He  brake,  and  gave  to 
His  disciples,  saying :  Take,  eat  of  it :  This  is  My 
Body,  which  fop.  you  and  for  many  is  broken  and 
divided  for  thk  expiation  of  transgressions,  and 
life  eternal. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also,  when  He  had  mingled 
the  Chalice  with  wine  and  water,  lie  blessed,  He 
sanctified,  and  divided  to  His  discii)le8,  saying : 
Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it  :  This  is  Mv  ]5lood  of  the 
New  Testament,  which  for  you  and  for  many  is 
poured  forth  and  given  for  the  rkmission  of  sins 
and  eternal  life. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  This,  saith  He,  do  in  remembrance  of  Me  : 
for  I  say  unto  you  that  I  will  be  in  the  midst  of 
you,  and  will  give  holiness  to  those  rites  which 
shall  be  accomplished  :  for  be  that  cat»;th  My  Body, 
and  di-inketh  My  ]5lood,  dwelleth  in  Me  and  I  in 
him  ;  and  as  I  live  through  the  Father,  so  also  he 


(»)  An  invalid  formulii.        ("•(  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  11,525. 

Q  2 


228  APPENDIX   I. 

that  eateth  Me,  shall  live  through  Me.  Eeceiving, 
therefore,  this  mystical  institution,  according  to 
the  disposition  of  Thy  laws,  0  God  the  Word,  we 
have  prepared  Bread,  and  have  mingled  the  Chalice 
— commemorating  over  them  all  Thy  dispensation, 
fi-om  the  first  assumption  of  our  flesh,  which  took 
place  in  a  moment  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
even  to  the  Passion,  the  Death,  the  Cross,  and  the 
Eesurrection  worthy  of  God  ;  with  a  pure  heart, 
and  with  one  voice,  according  to  that  Thy  divine 
precept,  Ye  shall  set  forth  My  Death  and  confess 
My  Eesurrection  until  Mine  Advent. 
People.  {As  in  18.) 

*  51.     S.  John  the  Evangelist  [Ethiopic).  (•'^) 

He  took  bread  in  His  holy  and  blessed  hands, 
a  marriage-gift  for  Thy  spouse,  and  a  divorce  for  lier 
whom  He  left,  the  Synagogue.  He  gave  thanks, 
blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  and 
said   to   them :     This   is   My    Body,    the  food  op 

RIGHTEOUSNESS,  WHICH  VEKILY  HE  WHO  EATS  SIIALIi 
NOT  DIE,  AND  HE  WHO  TAKES  SHALL  NOT  PERISH.       Take, 

eat  of  it,  all  of  you.  And  similarly  He  praised 
(God)  over  the  Cup  too,  and  said  :  This  Cup  is  My 
Blood  of  the  New  Testament  :  take,  drink  of  it, 
all  of  you.  A  wondrous  sign  it  is  to  all  those  who 
worship  Him,  a  bar  of  judgment  to  the  crucifiers, 
which  is  written  with  His  Blood,  and  sealed  with 
His  Cross,  and  signed  with  His  Death,  for  ever- 
lasting life,  whereby  sin  is  forgiven.  And  thus 
make  commemoration  of  Me  when  ye  are  gathered 
together. 

(»7)    Brit.    Mu8.,    Orient.    545,     fol.    67 ;     Add.    16,202  ; 
Bodleian,  xvii.  1. 


APPENDIX    I. 


229 


82.  S.  John  the  Evangelist  [Syro-Jacohite).  f®) 

Fih'st.  And  when,  by  His  own  free-will,  He  had 
come  to  His  salutary  Passion  for  our  salvation,  He 
took  bread  into  His  holy  hands,  before  the  eyes  of 
tlie  band  of  His  disciples ;  He  looked  up  to  heaven, 
Ho  gave  thanks.  He  blessed,  and  sanctified.  He 
brake,  and  gave  to  His  holy  Apostles,  and  said : 
Take,   eat  of  it :  This  is  My  Body,  which  for  you 

AM)  for  all  that  believe  IN  Me  IS  BROKEN  AND 
IJIVIDED  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE 
REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  THE  LIFE  TO  COME  THAT  IS  FOB 
EVERLASTING. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  after  that  His  mystical  supper,  He 
also  received  the  Chalice  of  wine  and  water,  and 
gave  thanks  over  it  and  blessed,  sniictiiifd,  and  gave 
to  the  band  of  His  Ajjostles,  and  said  to  them  : 
This  is  the  Chalice  of  My  Blood  of  the  New 
Testament  :  take,  drink  ye  all  of  it  :  this  is  shed 
forth  for  the  life  of  the  world,  for  the  expia- 
tion  of  transgressions,   the  remission  of  sins  to 

ALL  that  believe  IN  Me  FOR  EVER  AND  EVER. 

I'rople.  Ainon. 

I'lient.  Tlius  sluiU  ye  do  in  remembrance  of  Me  ; 
for  as  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this  Sacrament,  and 
shiill  drink  this  Blood,  ye  shall  set  forth  My  Death 
till  I  come. 

People.  {As  in  IB.) 

[Observe  in  thiH  Liturgy  the  remarkable  transposition  of 
tlio  two  cliiUHea  regarding  the  Chalice — "  This  is  the 
Chalice,"  and  "Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it."] 


(»)  Brit.  Mu8.,    Add.   ll.f.'.lO  ;    14,Cy3  ;      14.G94  ;    14,738, 
17,229. 


230  APPENDIX    1. 


58.     John  Maeo  [Syro- Jacobite). 

[TMs  Liturgy  has  not  been  -pn-blislied,  nor  have  I  been 
able  to  j^rocure  it.] 

54.  John  the  Scribe  {Syro -Jacobite). 

Priest.  For  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  whcu 
it  was  about  to  be  that  He  was  to  undergo  a  volun- 
tary death  for  us  ssiuners,  Himself  free  from  sin, 
He  took  bread  into  His  holy  and  immaculate  hands, 
and  looked  up  to  Thee,  God  and  Father,  and  giving 
thanks,  He  blessed,  and  sanctified,  and  brake,  and 
gave  to  His  disciples  who  were  to  be  initiated  in 
His  mystery,  and  said  :  Take,  eat  of  it :  This  is 
My  Body,   which  for  you  and  for  many  is  broken, 

AND  given  for  THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE 
remission  of  SINS,  AND  ETERNAL  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Thus  also  the  Chalice,  which  He  had 
mingled  of  wine  and  water ;  giving  thanks,  Ho 
blessed.  He  sanctified,  and  gave  to  His  holy  dis- 
ciples,  and   said  :    This   is   My  Blood  ;   take,    and 

DRINK  YE  ALL  OF  IT  ;  THIS  IS  POURED  FORTH  FOR  THE 
LIFE  OF  THE  WOlilJ),  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRES- 
SIONS, THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  LH'E  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  when  ye  shall  accomplish  this 
mystical  ministry,  according  to  My  doctrine,  for  the 
salvation  of  your  life,  and  shall  eat  this  Bread  and 
drink  this  Chalice,  ye  shall  ^^et  forth  My  Death, 
and  confess  I\ry  Besurrection,  until  I  shall  come. 

People.  [As  in  18.) 


APPENDIX   i.  231 

65.     S.  Julius  {Syro-Jacubitt).  (^^) 

Priest.  In  that  last  evening  in  which  He  was 
about  to  give  Himself  up  for  the  life  and  salvation 
of  the  world,  He  took  bread  into  His  hoi}'  hands, 
and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His  lioly  disciples, 
and  said  :  Take,  eat  of  it :  This  is  My  Body,  the 

VERY  SAME  WHICH  FOR  YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  IS  GIVEN  FOR 
THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION  OF 
SINS,  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also.  He  gave  thanks  over 
the  Chalice,  Ho  blessed,  He  sanctified,  and  gave  to 
His  disciples,  the  holy  Apostles,  and  said:  Take, 
drink  ye  all  of  it :  This  is  ]\Iy  Blood  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  for  you  and  for  many  is  given 
fob  the  expiation  of  transgressions,  and  remission 
op  sins,  and  eternal  life. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  For  as  often  as  ye  shall  celebrate  this 
mystery,  ye  shall  accomplish  the  commemoration 
of  My  Death  and  Resurrection,  until  I  shall 
come. 

People.  {As  in  18.) 

50.     S.   Mark  {Orthodox). 
[See  page  l.j 

67.     S.  Mark  {Syro-Jacohite).  (*") 

Priest.  When  therefore  He,  for  our  sake,  had 
come  to  His  Passion  in  the  flesh,  by  His  grace,  He 

(»)  Brit.  Mu8.,  Add.  14,4;»:i  ;  14,490  ;  14,090  ;  14,694; 
17,229. 

('«)  Hrit.  Mns.,  Add.  14,092  ;  14.094  ;  17,229 


232  APPENDIX   I. 

in  Whom  sin  was  not  fuiiud,  took  bread  into  His 
lioly  liands,  and  looked  up  to  heaven,  and  gave 
thanks,  and  blessed,  and  sanctified,  and  brake,  and 
said  to  His  disciples  :   This  is  My  Body  ;  take,  eat, 

FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS  OF  YOUESELVES,  AND  OF  ALL 
THE  TRUE  FAITHFUL,  AND  FOR  ETERNAL  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also,  mingling  the  Chalice 
of  wine  and  Avater,  Ho  blessed  and  sanctified,  and 
gave  to  His  disciples,  and  said  :  This  is  My  Blood 
OF  THE  New  Testament  ;   take,   drink  ye   all  of  it, 

FOR  the  remission  OF  SINS,  OF  YOU  AND  OF  ALL  THE 
TRUE  FAITHFUL,  AND  FOR  ETERNAL  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  when  ye  shall  accomplish  these  My 
precepts,  ye  shall  set  forth  My  Death  and  Resur- 
rection, until  I  come. 

People.  [As  in  18.) 

68.     S.  Maruthas  (Syro-Jacohite).  (^) 

Priest.  And  in  that  last  night  in  which  it  was 
ordained  that  He  should  save  the  world,  and  should 
seal  and  fulfil  the  law,  and  should,  at  the  same 
time,  begin  the  New  Testament,  and  should  teach 
to  those  that  were  saved  by  Him  the  doctrine  full 
of  life ;  He  took  leavened  bread  into  His  pure 
hands,  and  giving  thanks  to  the  Father,  He  blessed, 
He  sanctified,  He  brake  and  divided  to  His  disciples, 
and  8  lid  :  Take,  eat :  believe  and  be  certain,  and 
thus  preach  and  teach,  that  This  is  My  Body,  which 

FOR  the  salvation  OF  THE  WORLD,  IS  BROKEN,  AND  TO 


(-1)  Brit,  Mus.,  Add.  14,094,  fol.  64  o. 


Ax'PEXDlX   I.  233 

THEM  THAT  EAT  IT  AND  BELIEVE  IN  Me,  GIVETH  EXPIA- 
TION OF  SINS,  AND  ETERNAL  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Continning  iu  like  manner,  He  took  also 
the  wnne,  and  when  He  had  mingled  it  in  just  pro- 
portion with  water,  He  blessed,  He  sanctified,  and 
gave  it  to  the  same  disciples,  and  said  :  Take,  drink 
ye  all  of  it,  and  believe  and  be  certain,  and  thus 
preach  and  teach,   that  Tins  is   My  Blood,  which 

FOR  THE  SALVATI(JN  OF  THE  WOULD  IS  POURED  FORTH, 
AND  TO  THEM  THAT  DRINK  IT  AND  BELIEVE  IN  Me, 
GIVETH  EXPIATION  OF  SINS  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  while  making  them  partakers  of 
His  Body  and  His  holy  lilood,  He  taught  them  with 
His  holy  doctrine,  saying :  As  ye  have  seen  Me  do, 
thus  do  and  teach  ye  in  the  never-to-be-forgotten 
commemoration  of  My  dispensation,  and  to  the 
salvation  of  your  life.  Believe  also  My  Kesurrec- 
tioii,  hope  in  Me,  and  at  the  same  time  expect  My 
Advent,  until  I  come. 

People.   {As  in  18.) 

6 J.     Malauar,  nrl(ilnaUij  Nestorian. 
[See  page  1 JC] 

*  GO.     S.  Mauy  {F.ihiuj.ic).  («) 

In  it  [viz.,  in  that  niglit]  Jehus  Christ  took  Bread 
in  His  holy,  and  blessed,  and  pure  hands,  which  are 
without  stain,  He  looked  up  to  heaven,  to  His 
Father,  and  implored  mercy  of  His  parent,   and 


(*2)  Brit.  Mu8.   Orient.  .54.5.  fol.  C3  b  ;  Bodleian,  xvii.  8. 


284  APPENDIX    1 

commenflcd  (to  Tlim)  His  disciples,  that,  Ho  might 
guard  th(_ni  from  all  evil.  He  blessed,  whilst  it  is 
blessed,  He  brake,  whilst  it  is  holy,  and  gave  to  His 
disciples,  and  said  to  them :  Take,  eat ;  this  Bread 
IS  My  Body,  which  is  given  for  you  and  for  the 
REDEMPTION  OF  THE  WHOLE  WORLD.  Aiid  similarly 
the  Cup  too,  after  they  had  supped,  He  looked  up 
and  said  :  Take,  drink  ;  this  cup  is  My  Blood,  which 

FOR  you  the    speak    SHALL    SHED.       Aud    wllCH    yC    do 

this,  ye  shall  make  commemoration  of  My  Death, 
and  commemoration  of  My  Eesurrection  ye  shall 
set  forth. 

61.     Matthew  the  Shepherd  (Syro-Jacohite).  (*') 

Priest.  And  when  He  willed  to  give  a  New  Testa- 
ment, by  which  the  Old  should  be  abolished.  He  took 
leavened  bread,  in  which  the  mystery  of  life  was 
concealed,  and  earnestly  looking  to  Thee,  Father, 
He  gave  thanks.  He  blessed.  He  sanctified,  He 
brake,  and  gave  to  them  that  were  lying  at  His 
sui)per,  saying  :  Take,  eat  of  it :  This  is  My  Flesh, 

WHICH  FOR  ALL  THE  FAITHFUL  THAT  ADHERE  TO  Me  IS 
DIVIDED,  THAT  IT  MAY  BE  EATEN  FOR  THE  EXPIATION  OP 
TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  ETERNAL 
LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Deacon.  In  like  manner  also.  He  took  the  Chalice 
of  Life,  which  He  had  temperately  mingled  with 
the  fruit  of  the  vine  and  water,  and  gave  thanks, 
blessed,  sanctified,  and  gave  also  to  them  that  were 
initiated  in  His  mystery,  and  exhorted  them  that 
all  should  communicate  of  it,  and  declared  that  in 
it  should  be  salvation  to  them  that  drink  it,  when 
they  use  it  in  a  pure  conscience,  to  the  expiation 


(«j  Brit,  Mus.,  Add.  14.093. 


APPENDIX   I.  235 

of  transgressions,  the  remission  of  sins,  and  eternal 
life. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  He  adjoined  also  an  admonition  and 
declaration,  saying:  As  often  as  ye  shall  be  partakers- 
of  the  Mysteries,  ye  shall  celebrate  the  memory  of 
My  Death  and  Kesurrection  until  I  come. 

People.  [As  in  18.) 

[Observe  that,  valid,  though  much  corrupted,  in  the  first 
part  of  the  Institution,  this  formula  is  invalid  in  the 
second.] 

62.     Michael  of  Antioch  {Syro- Jacobite). 

Priest.  And  He  thus  accomplished  our  salvation 
by  His  Divine  dispensation,  and  set  forth,  accom- 
plished, pointed  out  and  taught,  these  Mysteries  full 
of  life.  Taking  bread  into  His  holy  Jiands,  He 
blessed  it,  sanctified  it,  brake,  and  gave  to  His  Apos- 
tles, and  by  their  hands  to  the  entire  Holy  Catholic 
Church,   saying:   This  is  My  Body,  which  for  you 

IS  BROKEN,  AND  GIVEN  FOB  THE  EXPIATION  OF  OFFENCES, 
TIIK  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  THE  NeW  LifE  THAT  IS  TO 
COME. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Together  also  with  the  Bread,  He  took  the 
Chalice,  when  Ho  had  first  niinghd  with  wine  and 
water,  He  blessed  it,  He  siinctified  it,  and  com- 
mended it  by  the  hands  of  His  Apostles  to  His 
Churcli,  saying  :  This  is  My  Blood,  which  for  yoi 

IS  GIVEN,  TO  THE  EXPIATION     OF    OFFENCES,     THE    REMIS 
8I0N  OF  SINS,  AND  THE  NeW  LiFE  THAT  IS  TO  COME. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Ye  shall  pcrpotuiilly  make  tliis  conmiemo 
ration  of  My  Death  and  Kesurrection,  until  I  shall 
come. 

People.  (As  in  18.) 


236  APPPENDIX   J. 

63.     Moses  Bar-Cephas  (Syro-Jacobiu).  (") 

Priest.  And  in  the  evening  of  His  salutary  Pas- 
sion, He  ate  and  abrogated  the  legal  Lamb  :  then 
He  took  bread  into  His  holy  hands,  and  looked  up 
to  Thee,  God  the  Father,  giving  thanks :  He 
blessed  and  sanctified,  and  brake  and  gave  to  His 
holy  disciples,  saying  :  Take,  eat  of  it :  This  is  My 
Body,  which  for  all  that  believe  in  Me  is  broken 

AND  divided  for  THE  EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS, 
THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  He  took  the  Chalice,  tem- 
perately mixed  of  wine  and  water,  and  giving 
thanks.  He  blessed  and  sanctified,  and  gave  to  His 
holy  disciples,  and  all  His  Apostles,  saying  :  Take, 
drink  ye  all  of  it  :  This  is  My  Blood,   which  for 

YOU,  AND  for  them  THAT  BELIEVE  IN  Me,  IS  POURED 
FORTH  AND  GIVEN,  AND  WHICH  PREPARETH  ALL  THEM 
THAT  RECEIVE  IT  FOR  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  As  often  as  ye  shall  thus  accomplish  these 
things,  believe  and  be  certain  that  ye  eat  My  Body 
and  drink  My  Blood,  and  keep  ye  memory  of  My 
Death  and  Sepulture  and  Kesurrection,  until  I  shall 
come. 

People.  (As  in  18.) 

64.  Mozarabio. 

Priest.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  same  night 
in  which  He  was  betrayed,  took  bread ;  and  when 
He  had  given  thanks.  He  blessed,  and  brake,  and 
gave  to  His  disciples,  saying  :  Take,  and  eat :  This 
IB  My  Body,  which  shall  be  given  for  you.     As 


'")  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  14,692. 


APPENDIX  I,  237 

often  as  ye  shall  eat,  this  do  in  rememhrance  of 
Me. 

In  like  manner  also,  the  Chalice,  after  He  suj^ped, 
saying  :  This  is  the  Chalice  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment IN  My  Blood,  which  fob  you  and  foe  many 

SHALL    BE    POURED    FORTH    FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF    SINS  ; 

as  often  as  ye  drink,  do  this  in  remembrance  of 
Me. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  As  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this  Bread  and 
drink  this  Chalice,  ye  shall  set  forth  the  Death  of 
the  Lord,  until  He  come  in  glory  from  heaveji. 

People.  Amen. 

66.     Narses  THE  Leper  (Nestorian). 
[This  Liturgy  I  cannot  procure.] 

66.     Nestorius  (Nestorian). 

Priest.  For  wlicu  tho  time  liad  conio  in  wl)icli  Ila 
was  betrayed  for  the  life  of  the  world,  after  lie  luul 
supped  on  the  Passover  of  the  Mosaic  law,  He  took 
bread  into  llis  lioly,  iminaculalo,  and  unpoHiited 
hands  :  He  blessed,  and  brake,  and  ale,  and  gave  to 
His  disciples,  and  said:  Take,  eat  ye  all  of  it  :  Tuia 
IS  My  Body,  which  for  you  is  ihioken  for  the 
remission  OF  sins. 

In  like  manner  also  He  mingled  the  Chalice  of 
wine  and  water,  and  blessed,  and  drank,  and  gave 
to  IFis  disciples,  iiiid  said  :  Drink  ye  all  of  it :  Tins 
IS  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  wuiou  for 
biany  is  poured  forth  for  the  remission  of  sins  ; 
and  this  do  ye  in  remembrance  of  Me,  until  I  sliall 
come.  For  as  often  as  yc  shall  eat  of  this  Bread, 
and  drink  of  tliis  Clialice,  ye  shall  set  forth  My 
Death,  until  My  coming. 


-288  APPENDrs  I. 

67.     Nonjurors. 

And  when  His  hour  was  come  to  otfer  the  pro- 
pitiatory sacrifice  on  the  Cross,  when  He  Who  had 
no  sin  Himself,  mercifully  undertook  to  suffer  death 
for  our  sins  ;  in  the  same  niglit  that  He  was  hetrayed, 
He  took  bread  :  and  when  He  had  given  thanks, 
He  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  His  disciples,  saying : 
Take,  eat :  This  is  My  Body,  which  is  given  for 
YOU  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  Me. 

People.  Amen. 

Likewise,  after  supper,  He  took  the  Cup,  and 
when  He  had  given  thanks.  He  gave  it  to  them, 
saying  :  Drink  ye  all  of  this  :  for  this  is  My  Blood 
OF  THE  New  Testament  which  is  shed  for-  you  and 

FOR  MANY  for  TIIK  REMISSION  OF  SINS  :    do    this,    aS  oft 

as  ye  shall  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  Me. 
People.  Amen. 

G8.     Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  T.   {Ethiopic.) 

Priest.  In  the  same  night  in  which  He  was 
betrayed,  He  took  bread  into  His  blameless  hands, 
full  of  blessings,  and  looking  up  to  heaven  to  Thee, 
His  Father  and  our  Father,  He  blessed.  He  sancti- 
fied. He  brake,  He  ate,  He  gave  to  His  disciples, 
saying :  Take,  cat  ye  all  of  it  :  This  ijread  is  My 
Body,  which  is  given  for  you  and  for  many  for  the 

REMISSION  of  sins. 

People.  Amen,  Amen,  Amen.  We  believe  and 
are  certain. 

Priest.  In  like  manner,  He  took  the  Chalice,  He 
blessed,  He  sanctified.  He  received,  and  said : 
Drink  ye  all  of  it:  This  is  the  Chalice  of  My 
Blood,  which  is  shed  for  you  and  for  many. 

People.  Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 


APPENDIX   1.  239 

*  69.     Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  II.  {Ethiojjic.)  (*^) 

In  that  night  in  which  they  delivered  Him  up,  He 
took  bread  in  His  holy  and  blessed  hands,  which 
are  without  stain,  He  gave  thanks,  blessed,  and 
brake,  and  handed  to  His  discijiles,  saying :  Take, 
eat ;  this  bread  is  My  Body,  which  is  broken  for 
YOU  for  the  REiiisgiON  of  sins  ;  and  when  ye  do 
this,  make  commemoration  of  Me.  And  similarly 
the  Cup  of  wine,  Thy  mixing,  giving  thanks,  bless- 
ing, and  consecrating,  and  Thou  gavest  to  them  ; 
verily  this  is  Thy  Blood,  which  was  poured  out  for 
our  sins.  {*^) 

.  70.     S.  Peter.  I.  {Si/ro-Jncohitc.) 

Priest.  And  when  He  was  preparing  that  banquet 
of  His  Body  and  holy  Blood,  imparting  it  to  us,  and 
near  was  His  salutary  Passion,  He  took  bread  in 
His  immaculate  liauds,  and  lifted  it  uji,  and  vouch- 
safed to  bestow  on  it  His  visible  aspect  and  insen- 
sible benodiclion,  and  Itlcssed  it,  and  sanctilied  it, 
and  gave  it  to  the  disciples.  His  Apostles,  and  said  : 
Let  these  mysteries  be  the  support  of  your  journey ; 
and  whenever  ye  eat  this  in  the  way  of  food,  believe 
and  be  certain   that  Tjiis  is  My  Body,  which   for 

YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  IS  JJROKEN  AND  IS  GIVEN  FOR  THE 
EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS, 
AND  LIFE  ETEKNAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Prieni.  in  like  manner  the  Chalice  also  ;  after 
He  had  supped.  He  mingled  wine  and  water,  and 
blessed,  and  sanctified,   and  gave  to  the  discijplcs, 

^«)  Brit.  Mns.,  Orient.  545,  fol.  56  b. 

(*")  Tlie  latter  jmrt  of  this  formula  is  invali'l.  and  there  is  no 
lionsecration  of  the  Cup. 


240  APPENDIX   I. 

His  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it ;  for 
Tms  IS  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which  for 

YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  IS  POURED  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE 
PARDON  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS,  AND 
ETERNAL  LIFE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  that  they  might  receive  the  most 
sweet  fruit  of  that  divine  operation,  He  commanded 
them  after  this  fashion :  As  often  as  ye  shall  be 
gathered  together,  keep  memory  of  Me,  and  eating 
this  offered  Bread,  and  drinking  that  which  is 
prepared  in  this  Cup,  ye  shall  do  it  in  remem- 
brance of  Me,  and  shall  confess  My  death,  until  I 
come. 

71.     S.  Peter.  II.  [Syro  Jacobite.) 

Priest.  Who,  when  He  willed  to  taste  death,  and 
was  accomplishing  the  Pascha  in  the  evening.  He 
took  bread  into  His  hands.  He  blessed.  He  sanctified 
and  brake,  and  gave  to  the  company  of  the  holy 
Apostles,  and  said.  Take  and  eat,  for  the  remission 
of  sins  and  life  eternal. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner,  mingling  the  Chalice  of 
wine  and  water,  He  blessed,  sanctified,  and  said  to 
them.  Take,  and  drink  ye  all  of  it,  for  the  remission 
of  sins  and  life  eternal. 

People.     Amen. 

Priest.  This  He  commanded  and  admonished 
them.  That  as  often  as  ye  shall  accomplish  these 
mysteries,  ye  shall  commemorate  My  Death  and 
Resurrection  until  I  come. 

People.  [As  in  15.) 

[This  is  one  of  the  liturgies  which  is  invalid  from  thft 
omission  of  the  words,  This  is  My  Body,  This  is  My  Blood. 
It  is  one  of  the  shortest  of  all  the  Syro-Jacobite  office** 


APPENDIX    I.  241 

ftod  perhaps  the  composer  ignorantly  thought  that  the 
Invocation  of  the  Holt  Ghost,  which  is  singularly  plain 
and  expressive,  might,  by  itself,  avail  for  the  transmuta- 
tion of  the  Elements.  He  might  also  wish  to  express  his 
dissent  from  the  Latin  practice  of  entirely  omitting  the 
Invocation.  Some  copies  of  this  Litm-gy  have  the  words 
inserted  by  a  later  hand.] 

72.     Philoxenus  ob*  Bagdad  ^Syro-Jacobite), 

Priest.  But,  desiring  to  assist  the  work  of  His 
hands  by  His  gifts,  and  to  destroy  the  dominion  of 
death  by  His  own  death :  He,  before  His  sahitary 
Passion,  took  bread  into  His  pure,  immaculate,  and 
unspotted  hands,  and  looked  up  to  Thee,  God  the 
Father  ;  and  giving  thanks.  He  blessed,  sanctifted, 
brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples  and  holy  Apostles, 
saying:  Take,  eat  of  it:  This  is   My  Body,   that 

SAME  WHICH  FOR  YOU  IS  BROKEN  AND  GIVEN,  FOR  THE 
F.XPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS, 
AND  LIKE  ETERNAL  TO  THE.M  THAT  RECEIVE  IT. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also,  after  they  had  sup- 
ped, mingling  tlie  Chalice  with  wine  and  water,  and 
giving  thanks,  He  blessed.  Ho  sanctified,  and  gave 
to  the  same  His  disciples  and  holy  Apostles,  say- 
ing :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it :  This  is  My  Blood 
OF  THE  New  Testament,  that   same   which  for  you 

AND  for  many  is  POURED  FORTH  AND  GIVEN  FOR  THE 
EXPIATION  OF  TRANSGRESSIONS,  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS, 
AND  LIKE  ETERNAL  TO  TUEM  THAT  RECEIVE. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me  ;  for  as 
often  as  ye  shall  cat  this  J3rcad  and  drink  tliis 
Chalice,  ye  shall  set  forth  My  death,  until  I  shall 
come. 

People.   {As  iu  18.) 

B 


242  APPENDIX   I. 

73.  Philoxenus  op  Mabug.  I.  [Syro-Jacohite.) 

Priest.  And  wlicu  He  willed  of  His  own  free  will 
to  taste  death  for  us,  and  to  accomplish  the  legal 
Passover,  He  took  bread  into  His  holy  hands,  and 
lifted  up  His  eyes  to  Thee,  God  the  Father; 
He  gave  thanks,  He  blessed,  He  sanctified,  He  brake, 
and  gave  to  the  order  of  His  holy  Apostles,  and 
said  :  This  is  My  Body,  which  foe  you   and   fob 

MANY  IS    BROKEN  AND  DIVIDED,    FOE    THE    REMISSION    OP 
SINS  AND  LIFE  ETERNAL. 

Pcojjle.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  He  also  mingled  the  Chalice 
of  wine  and  water.  He  gave  thanks.  He  blessed.  He 
sanctified,  and  gave  to  the  company  of  His  holy 
Apostles,  and  said :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it :  This 
IS  My  Blood,  which  for  you  and  for  many  is  poured 
forth  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  life  eternal. 

Peojjie.  Amen. 

Priest.  Thus  also  He  commanded  and  admonished 
them  :  As  often  as  ye  shall  celebrate  these  Mysteries, 
ye  shall  do  it  to  commemorate  My  Death  and  Piesur- 
rection,  until  I  shall  come. 

People.  (As  in  18.) 

74.  Philoxenus  of  Mabug.  II.  (Syro-JacnUte.) 

Priest.  Who,  when  He  had  accomplished  all  His 
dispensation,  salutary  and  full  of  life,  and  had  exhi- 
bited \ii'tues  and  miracles  to  all  creatures,  and  had 
m  all  places  destroyed  the  power  of  the  Eebel  and 
Seducer,  and  coming  to  His  salutary  Passion  through 
love  to  us  men.  He  had  eaten  that  legal  Lamb  with 
the  company  of  His  disciples  ;  taking  bread  into 
His  pure,  holy,  immaculate  and  unpolluted  hands, 
raising  His  eyes  to  heaven,  He  looked  up  to  Thee, 
God  the  Fatheb,  and  gave  thanks,  blessed,  saucti- 


APPENDIX   I.  "TiiB 

fied,  brake,  and  gave  to  His  holy  disciples,  saying  : 
Take,  eat  of  it :  This  is  My  Body,  which  peepareth 

YOU  AND  MANY  F/VITHFUL  TO  LIFE  ETEENAL. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also  He  took  the  Chalice, 
tempered  with  -wine  and  water,  and  gave  thanks, 
blessed,  sanctified,  and  gave  to  the  same  disciples, 
His  Apostles,  saying :  Take,  drink  ye  all  of  it : 
This  is  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which 
peepareth  you  and  many  faithful  to  life  eiernai,. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  And  ever  do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me : 
for  as  often  as  ye  shall  eat  this  Bread  and  shall 
drink  this  Chalice,  ye  shall  make  memory  of  My 
Death  and  announce  My  Resurrection,  until  I 
come. 

People.  (^As  in  18.) 

75.     Roman. 

Priest.  Wlio,  tlic  day  before  He  suffered,  took 
bread  into  His  lioly  and  venerable  liaii'ls :  and 
having  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  licavcn,  to  Thee  His 
Father  God  Almighty,  He  blessed,  He  brake,  and 
gave  to  His  disciples,  saying  :  Take  and  eat  ye  all 
of  this :  Fob  this  is  My  Body. 

In  like  manner  after  they  supped,  takijig  also 
this  glorious  Chalice  into  His  holy  and  venerable 
hands ;  also  rendering  thanks  to  Thee,  He  blessed 
and  gave  to  His  disciples,  saying  :  Take,  niid  drink 
ye  all  of  it :  For  this  is  the  Chalice  of  My  Blood, 
OF  tiik  New  and  Eternal  Testament,  the  Mystery 

OF    i''AITU  :    WHICH     FOR    YOU    AND    FOR    MANY    SHALL    HE 
POURED  FORTH  FOR  THE    REMISSION    OF    SINS.       As    oftoil 

as  yc  do  these  things,  ye  shall  do  them  in  memory 
of  Me. 

B  2 


244  appendix  i. 

*  76.  Eomano-Chaldee.  (*^ 

Glory  to  Thee,  God  the  Fathek,  who  didst  send 
Thy  only  Son  for  onr  deliverance  ;  and  He,  on  the 
day  before  His  Passion,  took  bread  in  His  holy 
hands,  and  lifted  up  His  eyes  unto  Thee,  God,  His 
Father  Omnipotent,  and  gave  thanks  to  Thee,  and 
blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  say- 
ing :  Take,  eat  of  it,  all  of  you ;  this  is  My  Body. 

In  the  same  way,  after  they  had  supped,  He  took 
in  His  pure  hands  this  pure  Cup,  and  gave  thanks 
to  Thee,  and  blessed,  and  gave  to  His  disciples, 
saying  :  Take,  drink  of  it,  all  of  you ;  this  is  the 
Cup  of  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which  is 

FOR  EVER  THE  MYSTERY  OF  FaITH,    WHICH    FOR   YOU  AND 
FOR  MANY  IS  SHED  FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS. 


77.     Scottish. 

Priest.  Wlio,  (by  His  own  oblation  of  Himself 
once  offered,)  made  a  full,  perfect,  and  sufficient 
sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of 
the  whole  world  ;  and  did  institute,  and  in  His  Holy 
Gospel  command  us  to  continue,  a  perpetual  memo- 
rial of  that  His  precious  death  and  sacrifice,  until 
His  coming  again.  For  in  the  night  that  He  was 
betrayed,  He  took  bread,  and  when  He  had  given 
thanks,  He  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  His  disciples, 
saying :  Take,  eat  :  This  is  My  Body,  which  is  given 
FOR  you  :  do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me. 

Likewise,  after  supper,  He  took  the  cup ;  and 
when  He  had  given  thanks,  He  gave  it  to  them, 
saying :   Drink  ye   all    of  this :    For   this  is   My 


H  Brit.  Mu3.,  Add.  25,874,  fol.  21  b. 


appendix  i.  245 

Blood  op  the  New  Testament,  which  is  for  you, 

AND    FOR    MANY,    FOR    THE    REMISSION    OF  SINS  :    clo  tlllS, 

as  often  as  ye  shall  diiuk  it,  in  remembrance  of 
Me. 


78.     Severus  op  Antioch  (Syro-Jacohite). 

Priest.  "Who,  when  He  left  His  salutary  Passion 
and  Cross  for  a  memorial  to  us.  He,  the  Physician 
of  our  wickednesses,  offering  the  oblation  of  Himself 
for  us  to  Thee,  God  and  I^'ather,  took  bread  into 
His  hands,  and  stretching  them  to  heaven,  He 
blessed,  He  sanctified.  He  brake,  and  divided  to 
His  disciples  the  Apostles,  saying:  Take,  eat  of  it : 
For  this  is  My  13ody,  which  for  you  and  for  many 
IS  broken  and  given  unto  life  eternal. 

Pcojjle.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner  also  He  took  the  Cliulice, 
after  they  had  supped,  and  mingling  it  with  wine  and 
water.  He  gave  thanks,  and  sanctified,  and  divided 
to  His  disciples  the  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  drink 
ye  all  of  it  :  Tins  is  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, which  for  you  and  for  many  is  poured  forth 

AND    given    for    the    REMISSION    OF    SINS.        Do    this    ill 

remembrance  of  Me  ;  for  as  often  as  ye  shall  eat 
this  Bread,  and  sliall  drink  this  Chalice,  ye  shall 
Bet  forth  My  dcntli. 
People.   (As  in  18.) 

79.     Theodore  the  Interpreter  {Nestori/m). 

Priest.  Who,  with  His  Apostles,  in  that  night  in 
which  He  was  betrayed,  celebrated  this  Mystery, 
great,  tremendous,  holy  and  divine  :  taking  bread, 
He  blessed  and  brake,  and  gave  to  His  disciples, 


246  APPENDIX   I. 

and   said :    This  is  My  Body,   wnicH   for   you   is 

BUOKEN    FOE    THE    REMISSION    OF    SINS. 

In  like  manner  also  the  Clialice  :  He  gave  tlianks, 
and  gave  to  them  and  said :  This  is  My  Blood  of 
THE  New  Testament,  which  for  many  is  poured 
forth  for  the  remission  of  sins.  Take  ye  all, 
therefore,  and  eat  of  this  Bread  and  drink  of  this 
Chalice,  and  do  thus,  as  often  as  ye  shall  be  gathered 
together,  in  remembrance  of  Me. 

80.     Thomas  of  Heraclea  [Syro-Jacohite).  (^') 

Priest.  Verily  and  certainly  He  took  on  Himself 
the  form  of  a  servant,  that  in  that  form  He  miglit 
accomplish  the  things  that  were  to  be  for  our  salva- 
tion, and  the  life  that  was  to  be  given  us.  He  took 
bread  and  wine :  He  blessed.  He  sanctified.  He 
brake,  and  gave  to  His  Apostles,  saying  :  Take,  use, 
and  thus  do.  And  when  ye  shall  receive  these 
things,  believe  and  be  certain  that  ye  eat  My  Body 
and  drink  My  Blood,  doing  it  in  remembrance  of 
My  Death,  until  I  shall  come. 

People.  (As  in  18.) 

[This  is  one  of  the  invalid  formuljB :  the  words  inserted  in  the 
second  clause,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  best 
ritualists,  scarcely  avail  to  make  good  their  omission  in 
the  £rst.] 

*  81.     The  Three  Hundred  and  Eighteen. 
(Fathers  of  Nica^a).     (Ethiopic).  H 

He  went  along  with  them,  and  shewed  them  the 
order  of  the   mystery  of  the    Sacrifice.     He   took 

(«)  Brit.  Mas.,  Add.  14,692,  fol.  36  6. 
(«9)  Brit.  Mas.,  Orient.  545,  fol.  976. 


Appjuauix  1.  247 

bread  in  their  presence,  blessed,  and  said  :  Take, 
eat :  this  uread  is  My  Body,  which  is  broken 
FOR  YOU,  FOB  THE  REMISSION  OF  SIN.  Aud  Hkewise 
the  Cup,  He  blessed,  and  said  :  Take,  drink ;  this 
Cup  is  jiy  Blood,  whioh  is  given  for  you,  for  the 
remission  of  sin. 

82.     S.  Xystus  {Sijro- Jacobite).  {'^) 

Priest.  Who,  when  He  was  prepared  for  His 
salutary  Passion,  in  the  bread  which  by  Him  was 
blessed,  sanctified,  broken,  aud  distributed  to  His 
holy  Apostles,  sanctifying  His  Body,  He  gave  it  to 
us,  saying  :  Eat  ye  of  it :  For  this  is  My  Body, 
which  for  you  and  for  many  is  uroken  and  divided, 
fob  the  expiation  of  transgressions,  and  the  re- 
mission OF  sins,  to  eternal  life. 

Pen], It'.  Amen. 

Priest.  In  like  manner,  in  the  Cup  which  was  by 
Him  signed,  sanctified,  and  given  to  the  same  holy 
A})Ostl(;s,  givin;,'  to  us,  His  propitiatory  Blood,  He 
said  :  Take,  driak  ye  all  of  it :  For  this  is  the 
Ch/Vlice  of  My  Blood  of  the  New  Testament, 
which  for  you  and  many  is  given  for  the  expiation 
of  transgressions,  and  hath  given  to  us  the  re- 
mission of  eternal  life. 

People.  Amen. 

Priest.  He  also  added  tliis  admonition,  saying : 
As  often  as  ye  shall  commiiuicato  in  tliis  Bread, 
ye  shall  set  forth  My  Death  and  iicsurrection,  until 
I  come. 

People.  [As  In  IB.) 


{»)  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  14,691,  fol.  lOOa;  14.091,  fol,  103  a. 


f     248     ) 


APPENDIX  II. 


PRAYERS  FOR  THE  FAITHFUL  DEPARTED. 


In  the  following  Appendix  I  propose  to  give  the 
more  interesting  among  the  intercessions  for  the 
faithful  departed  which  occur  in  the  whole  body  of 
Litui'gies.  The  more  they  are  examined,  the  more 
clearly  two  points  will  appear.  1.  That  prayers  for 
the  dead,  and  more  especially  the  oblation  of  the 
blessed  Eucharist  for  them,  have  been  from  the 
beginning  the  practice  of  the  Universal  Church. 
2.  And  this  without  any  idea  of  a  purgatory  of  pain, 
or  of  any  state  from  which  the  departed  soul  has  to 
be  delivered  as  from  one  of  misery.  The  examples 
are  arranged  in  alphabetical  order  ;  and  the  many 
that  are  omitted,  are  omitted,  not  because  they 
contravene  the  above  statements,  (a  polemical  deceit 
of  which  God  forbid  that  I  should  be  guilty,)  but 
only,  either  because  they  say  less  strikingly  what 
is  better  expressed  in  some  example  that  I  have 
given  ;  or  as  being  conceived  in  precisely  the  same 
words. 

1.     Armenian. 

Remember,  Lord,  and  have  mercy,  and  be  pro- 
pitious to  the  souls  of  the  departed,  nnd  give  them 
repose  and  life,  and  set  them  with  Thy  Saints  ia 


ArPENDis.  n.  249 

the  kingdom  of  heaven,  maldng  them  worthy  of 
Thy  mercy. 

2.     S.  Basil  (Coj^to- Jacobite). 

In  hke  manner,  0  Lord,  remember  also  all  those 
who  have  already  fallen  asleep  in  the  Priesthood, 
and  amidst  the  laity  ;  vouchsafe  to  give  rest  to  all 
their  souls,  in  the  bosoms  of  our  holy  fathers, 
Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Bring  them  in  and 
collect  them  in  a  place  of  greenness,  by  the  water  of 
comfort  in  the  paradise  of  pleasure,  where  grief  and 
misery  and  sighing  are  banished,  in  the  brightness 
of  Thy  Saints. 

3.     S.  Clement  (Sijro- Jacobite). 

And  at  Thy  spiritual  and  holy  altar,  0  Lord, 
grant  rest,  good  memory,  and  felicity  to  all  the 
Bonis,  bodies,  and  spirits  of  our  fathers,  brethren, 
and  sisters,  corporal  or  spiritual,  who  have  departed 
in  whatever  regions,  cities,  or  states  ;  or  have  l)con 
BuiTocated  in  tlie  sea  or  in  rivers,  or  who  have  died 
in  travel,  and  of  whom  there  is  no  memory  in  the 
Churches  constituted  on  earth.  Thou,  0  Lord, 
give  them  good  mcmorj',  wlio  have  departed  to  Tlico 
in  the  ortliodox  fjiitli,  togetlier  with  those  whose 
names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life. 

And  to  all  of  them  wlio,  having  run  tlio  race  of 
this  life,  have  appeared  perfect  and  ilhistrious  Ik  tore 
Thee,  and  having  been  set  free  from  tlio  ocean  of 
Bins  have  reached  Tlice,  our  fntlmis  and  brethren 
according  to  tlic  flesh  and  the  spirit, — give  rest, 
()  Lord,  in  that  spiritual  and  mighty  bosom.  Give 
them  the  spirit  of  joy  in  the  habitations  of  light  and 
pbidiiess,  in  the  tabernacles  of  shade  and  rest,  iu 
the  treasiu'es  cf  happinesii,  whence  every  sorrow  is 


250  APPENDIX  n. 

fax-  banished,  and  the  souls  of  the  pious  wait  without 
labour  for  the  first-fruits  of  life  ;  and  the  spirits  of 
the  righteous  in  like  manner  are  waiting  for  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promised  reward  :  in  that  region, 
where  the  labourers  and  the  weary  look  towards 
Paradise,  and  tliey  that  arc  invited  to  the  wedding 
long  for  the  celestial  Bridegroom  :  when  they  that 
are  called  to  that  feast  wait  till  they  go  up  thither, 
and  ardently  desire  to  receive  that  new  state  of 
glory :  where  sorrows  are  banished  and  where  joys 
are  found ;  for  love  only  has  appeared  not  entangled 
in  the  passions  of  sin  of  all  who  have  been  arrayed 
with  the  human  body,  namely,  Thine  Only-Begotten 
Son,  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord,  through  "Whom 
also  we  hope  to  obtain  mercy  for  ourselves  and  for 
them. 

4.     Gregory  Abu'lfaraj  (Syro-Jacobite). 

Because  Thou  art  the  just  remunerator  of  the 
living  and  the  dead,  and  because  in  Thy  hands  are 
the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  we  pray  Thee,  Lord,  for  all 
men  who  have  passed  to  Thee  out  of  this  temporal 
life,  who  have  departed  in  the  orthodox  faith,  that 
Thou  wouldst  remember  them,  of  Thy  mercy,  and 
hear  these  our  prayers,  and  neglect  not  these  our 
supplications  on  their  behalf;  for  they  are  created 
in  Thy  king- like  image  ;  but  spare  them  of  Thy 
grace  ;  forgive  tliem  according  to  Thy  clemency  ; 
lead  them  into  Thy  dwellings  ;  direct  them  to  Thee, 
adding  them  to  the  numbers  of  heavenly  hosts. 
where  Thy  Only-Begotten  Son  is  celebrated  and 
glorified  by  hymns,  and  is  honoured  and  extolled  by 
hymns  returning  in  a  circle.  According  to  the 
promises  made  by  Him  to  us,  we  hope  in  Thy 
mercy  and  the  remission  of  sins,  as  well  for  us  as 
for  them. 


APPENDIX   II.  251 

5.  S.  Ignatius  [Syro- Jacobite). 
Placidly  and  tranquilly  receive  tlirougb  Thy 
goodness,  0  Lord,  the  souls  and  spirits  of  Thy 
servants  and  worshippers,  who  have  departed  to 
Thee  out  of  the  present  life  ;  but  chiefly  them  for 
whom,  and  on  account  of  whom,  this  sacrifice  is 
offered  and  perfected.  Eemember  them,  grant  them 
rest,  and  place  them  in  the  habitations  of  light,  in 
the  abodes  of  blessed  spirits,  in  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem,  in  the  Church  of  the  First-born  who  are 
written  in  heaven  :  and  bestowing  on  them  good 
memory  and  a  most  hnppy  rest,  through  Thy  love 
to  men,  give  them  the  life  that  knoweth  not  old  age, 
the  good  things  that  pass  not  away,  the  delights 
tliat  liave  no  end.  Mercy  may  they  obtain  through 
Thy  clemency  :  rest  may  they  be  possessed  of 
tlirough  Thy  mercy  :  let  tliem  be  hid  under  the 
wings  of  Tliy  grace  and  not  condemned,  because 
they  liave  put  tlieir  trust  in  Tlice  and  Thine  Only- 
Begotten  Son,  througli  Wliom,  &c. 

6.  Jamks  Barad/eus  [Syro- Jacobite). 
Lord  God  of  spirits  and  of  all  flesh,  grant  that 
all  they  whom  we  have  commcnujrated,  and  they 
also  wliom  we  have  not  comnicmorated,  who  have 
departed  in  the  orthodox  faith  out  of  this  mutaljlo 
life,  may  become  worthy  of  that  indefectible  exist- 
ence in  tlie  bosom  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
where  are  all  Saints  :  where  gi-iefs  and  straits  are 
not  found,  but  where  beatitude  and  joy  only  reign  : 
where  Thine  Only-1'ogotten  Hon  is  glorified  with 
Thee  by  all ;  through  wliom  also  we  hope  to  obfiiin 
mercy,  and  revelation  of  face,  before  Thee,  and  for 
His  sake  as  well  for  them  as  for  us. 

7.     James  of  Serug  {Syro -Jacobite). 
Grant,    0    Lord,  rest  to    their   souls   whom  we 


252  APPENDIX  n. 

commemorate,  and  write  their  names  in  the  book  of 
life,  and  make  them  worthy  of  the  pleasure  which 
is  received  in  Paradise.  Set  them  in  the  region  of 
the  just,  and  join  them  to  the  ranks  of  the  pious, 
and  cause  them  to  arrive  in  the  harbour  of  life, 
where  is  the  habitation  of  rest,  where  griefs,  infir- 
mities, groans  and  miseries  fly;  where  all  the  Saints 
enjoy  blessedness,  where  all  the  pious  rest.  Cast 
out  none  of  them,  or  of  us,  in  condemnauion  from 
Thy  heavenly  kingdom  ;  for  One  only  hath  appeared 
upon  earth  without  sin,  &c. 

8.     John  Bar-Maadan  (Syro- Jacobite). 

Them,  who  with  true  faith  and  confidence,  and 
in  the  orthodox  belief,  have  been  set  free  from  this 
temporal  life,  according  to  the  sentence  promulgated 
by  Thy  equity,  and  have  returned  to  Thee,  0  God, 
as  to  their  first  omnipotent  cause  ;  spare  them  by 
Thy  mercy  :  reckon  them  among  the  number  of 
Thine  elect :  cover  them  with  the  bright  cloud  of 
Tliy  Saints  :  (^)  set  them  with  the  lambs  on  Thy 
right  hand,  and  bring  them  into  Thy  habitation  : 
cause  them  to  arrive  in  the  blessed  dwelling  of  Thy 
kingdom ;  grant  that  they  may  be  invited  to  Thy 
banquet,  and  bring  them  into  the  region  of  exulta- 
tion and  joy,  where  place  there  is  none  for  grief  and 
misery,  and  passion  and  sighing  is  at  an  end. 
Examine  them  not  severely,  since  they  beseech 
Thee  to  deal  mercifully  with  them,  because  of  the 
errors  to  which  tliis  flesh,  formed  of  clay  and  sub- 
ject to  sin,  is  liable  ;  but  in  that  terrible  hour  of 
judgments,  let  them  be  patterns,  0  Lord,  for  us  and 
for  themselves,  for  none  is  there  without  sin,  &c. 

(1)  A  very  beautiful  allusion  to  the  bright  cloud  which  over- 
•liadowed  the  Ajjostles  durina  thf>  Transfiguration. 


APPENDIX   II.  253 

9.     S.  John  Chrysostom  (Syro- Jacobite). 

And  remember  tliem  who  with  purity  of  heart, 
and  sanctity  of  soul  and  body,  have  departed  from 
this  world,  and  have  come  to  Thee,  0  God.  Them 
whom  from  the  first  Adam,  the  first  made  of  our 
creation,  in  all  generations  have  pleased  Thee,  and 
confessed  Thee,  and  have  hoped  for  and  expected 
the  manifestation  of  Thiue  Only-begotten  Son,  and 
have  desired  to  see  His  great  and  glorious  day. 
Them  who  in  the  spiritual  bosom  of  Baptism  have 
put  Thee  on  splendidly  and  have  believed  in  Thy 
Name.  Give  them  rest  in  Thy  celestial  habitations, 
in  the  paradise  of  delights,  in  the  tabernacles  of 
light,  in  quiet  dwelling-places.  Enter  not  into 
judgment  with  them,  0  Lord,  for  in  Thy  sight 
shall  no  man  living  be  justified  ;  for  there  is  only 
One  Who  hath  appeared  upon  earth,  pure  and  with- 
out blemish,  kc. 

10.     John  the  Scribe  [Syro- Jacobite). 

Maker  and  Creator  of  all  things,  God  and 
Fathkr,  grant  that  the  bodies  and  spirits  of  Thy 
servants  who  have  departed  in  Thy  hope,  may  come 
to  celestial  good  things  and  to  those  pleasures  which 
have  no  end,  to  those  joys  which  are  without  ter- 
mination, to  the  indesinent  banquet.  Write  their 
names  in  the  book  of  life,  gladden  them  with  the 
aspect  of  Thy  countenance  ;  set  them  in  the  region 
of  tlie  righteous,  count  them  among  the  bands  of 
the  pious.  Grant  tliat  tlicy  may  rejoice  in  the  good 
things  of  the  Saints  ;  grant  that  they  may  lie  down 
at  Thy  spiritual  Table  ;  forgive  their  sins  through 
Thy  mercy ;  save  tlicni  from  grief  and  sighing  ; 
deliver  them  from  the  burnings  of  Gehenna ;  cause 
them  to  pass  beyond  those  terrible  straits  of  the 


254  APPENDtXII. 

place  of  fear(^) ;  set  them  m  the  tabernacle  of  light: 
grant  them  rest  in  the  bosom  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  our  fathers,  in  Thy  celestial  habitations, 
in  places  of  quiet.  Enter  not  into  judgment  with 
Thy  servants,  for  in  Thy  sight  shall  no  man  living 
be  justified. 

11.     S.  Maeuthas  {Syro- Jacobite. 

Eemember,  0  Lord,  through  Thy  grace,  all  those 
who  by  means  of  the  sentence  pronounced  against 
our  first  father  Adam,  have  departed  out  of  this 
miserable  life,  and  are  gone  where  Thou  only  know- 
est ;  and  give  them  rest  among  those  delights  which 
Thou  hast  promised  to  them  that  love  Thee,  not 
calling  to  memory  their  sins  and  ours,  for  no  man 
is  without  sin. 

12.     S.  Mark  {Si/ro-Jacobite)» 

And  remember  those  who  are  worthy  of  pious 
commemoration  through  Thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  priests, 
deacons,  and  chaste  sub-deacons,  readers,  singers, 
and  all  the  departed  faithful,  especially  our  fathers, 
brethren,  and  masters,  and  all  who  have  sought  the 
prayers  of  our  littleness,  and  all  who  have  been 
made  partakers  of  any  ecclesiastical  dignity,  and 
all  who  have  communicated  to  tlie  necessities  of 
all  the  poor  of  our  society,  and  those  whom  we 
desire  to  remember.  We  beseech  Thee,  Lord  God 
of  the  holy  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
and  of  all  the  company  of  the  just  and  pious,  that 
Thou  wouldst  give  rest  to  them, — to  them  all  who 


(2)  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  constant  association  witli  Ma- 
hometan theology  had  somewhat  influenced  the  writer's  id^as 
of  the  passage  from  this  world  to  the  next. 


APPENDIX  n.  255 

have  left  us  and  departed  to  Thee,  and  to  Tliy 
blessed  seats.  Blot  out,  forgive,  and  remit  all  their 
sins,  known  and  unknown,  voluntai'y  or  involuntary; 
for  none  liath  appeared  upon  earth  without  sin, 
excepting  Thy  Only-begotten  Son,  our  Lord  God 
and  SA^^ouR,  Jests  Christ,  by  Whom  also  we  desire 
to  obtain  mercy  and  the  remission  of  sins  which  is 
for  His  sake,  both  for  them  and  for  ourselves. 

13.     Michael,  Patriarch  of  Antioch. 
{Syro- Jacobite). 

0  our  God,  Artificer  of  our  nature,  only  to  be 
adored  and  knowing  all  things,  "Who  desii-est  the 
life  and  salvation  of  all,  give  by  Thy  mercy,  good 
memory,  and  remission  of  transgressions  and  for- 
giveness of  sins,  to  our  fatlicrs,  masters,  and  doctors, 
and  all  the  sons  of  Thy  holy  Church,  who  by  the 
decree  which  Thy  equity  hath  pronounced  against 
us,  drank  of  old  time  the  sad  cup  of  death,  and  of 
most  bitter  separation.  Visit  them,  0  Lord,  and 
console  them  in  the  habitations  in  which  they  rest, 
by  Thy  divine  and  most  wise  decree,  by  Thy  just 
dispensation,  by  the  feeling  of  Thy  SriniT,  blessed, 
sweet,  and  full  of  clemency,  by  this  mystical  sacri- 
fice, full  of  all  blessed  hope,  Lord,  receive  our 
prayers  for  tliem,  and  blot  out  their  sins  and  defects, 
and  purify  their  faults ;  for  there  is  none,  &c. 

14.     PniLOXENUS  OF  Mabuo.  II.  {Syro- Jacobite). 

Grant,  0  Lord,  that  Thy  servants  who  have 
departed  with  Thy  liope  in  faitli,  may  arrive  at  those 
celestial  good  things,  and  unfailing  delights,  and 
the  pleasures  which  perish  not:  to  the  port  in  which 
the  weary  and  tempost-tost  rest  together  :  to  that 
feast  in  which  martyrs  and  confessors  exult,  and  to 
the  supper  prepared  for  all  the  blessed  :  preserving 


25G  APPENDIX   IT. 

them  from  fire,  darkness,  aud  the  worm  that  dietb 
not,  because  uoue  is  free  from  sm,  &c. 

15.     Severus  of  Antioch  [Sijro-Jacobite). 

And  give  rest  iu  the  bosom  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  in  the  Paradise  of  pleasure,  in  the  place 
of  repose,  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  Saints,  where  is 
the  multitude  of  them  that  keep  the  glorious  holy- 
day,  to  the  souls,  bodies,  and  spirits  of  them  who 
have  come  to  Thee  out  of  flesh  aud  blood,  to  Thee, 
0  Lord  of  all  flesh  :  where  is  the  perfection  of  life 
without  molestation,  and  the  first-fruits  of  ineffable 
promises ;  of  the  consummation  whereof  make  them 
worthy,  not  reckoning  to  them  their  offences,  not 
entering  into  judgment  with  Thy  servants,  for  in 
Thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justified,  for  One 
only  is  without  sin,  &c. 

IG.     Theodore  the  Interpreter  (Nestorian). 

Lord,  our  God,  receive  from  us,  through  Thy 
gi-ace,  this  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  namely,  the 
reasonable  fruits  of  our  lips,  that  the  memory  may 
be  good  before  Thee  of  the  ancient  righteous  men, 
holy  prophets,  blessed  Apostles,  martyrs,  and  con- 
fessors, bishops,  doctors,  priests,  deacons,  and  all 
the  sons  of  the  holy  Catholic  Church,  who  with  true 
faith  have  departed  out  of  this  world,  that  by  Thy 
grace,  O  Lord,  TJiou  mayest  give  them  pardon  of 
all  sins  and  transgressions,  which,  in  this  world,  in 
a  mortal  body,  and  a  soul,  subject  to  temptation, 
tliey  have  sinned  and  ofl'ended,  for  there  is  no  man 
that  sinnetb  not. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


"bec'd  ld-uri 


/>PR  11  1993 


BX    375.       L4N25    1870 


III 


3   1158  00286 


0376 


UC  SOUTHFRN  RtGIONAL  LIBRARY  FAPIl  I 


llllllllll 


AA    000  632  608    6 


