Title: Bohemia: An Historical Sketch
Creator: Count Francis Lutzow
Publisher: London: J. M. Dent & Sons (Everyman's Library), first 1910, this printing 1920
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1920 (first ed. 1910); public domain by
  date. Archive.org item metadata carries no explicit
  possible-copyright-status tag but shows access-restricted-item:
  None (freely downloadable), checked directly against the item's
  own metadata, 2026-09-25, this session; pd-us-by-date applies
  independently given the 1920 publication date.
Source: Internet Archive item bohemiahistorica1920lt
  (archive.org/details/bohemiahistorica1920lt), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors.
  Secondary general history of Bohemia, English, providing broader
  political/national context for the movement. Vendored 2026-09-25
  as part of a post-Step0-Revision-2 PD source-acquisition pass.

*^ if^MirttiV. 


university  of 

Connecticut 

libraries 


3  11S3  01064516  D 


\ 


EVERYMAN'S   LIBRARY 
EDITED    BY    ERNEST     RHYS 


HISTORY 


BOHEMIA 

AN   HISTORICAL  SKETCH 
BY  THE  COUNT  LOTZOW 


THIS  IS  NO.  482  OF  evsiirMJi^His 

LIB%^%T,  THE  PUBLISHERS  WILL 
BE  PLEASED  TO  SEND  FPvEELY  TO  ALL 
APPLICANTS  A  LIST  OF  THE  PUBLISHED 
AND  PROJECTED  VOLUMES,  ARRANGED 
UNDER    THE    FOLLOWING    SECTIONS: 

TRAVEL    ^     SCIENCE    ^    FICTION 

THEOLOGY    &    PHILOSOPHY 

HISTORY     ^     CLASSICAL 

FOR     YOUNG     PEOPLE 

ESSAYS    ^    ORATORY 

POETRY  &  DRAMA 

BIOGRAPHY 

REFERENCE 

ROMANCE 

IN  FOUR  STYLES  OF  BINDING!  CLOTH, 
FLAT  BACK,  COLOURED  TOP;  LEATHER, 
ROUND  CORNERS,  GILT  TOP;  LIBRARY 
BINDING  IN   CLOTH,    &    QUARTER  PIGSKIN 

London:  J.  M.  DENT  &  SONS,  Ltd. 
New  York:     E.   P.    DUTTON   &    CO. 


m 


€C 


ONSIDER 
MISTORY 

WITH  the: 

BEGINNINGS -or 
ITSTRETCIilNO 
DIMLYINTOTHL 
remote:  TIME.:  E 
MERGING  DARK 
LY  OVX  Qr  THE 
MVST^EIR  loVS 

eteirnity:®  ® 
the-  trve  epic 

poelm-and- vni 

VERSAL  divine: 
SCRIPTVRE.-    •   "' 


c^CARlYLE,    ^ 


^^S^^ 

ii<2r^g 

^i^lj^^ 

^g 

^^^^^v^r 

^^m 

^9 

^^^^^^ 

^^ 

8 

^S 

^^P 

^m. 

^^^7^ 

j^& 

8 

® 

^^^^^^B 

1 

BOHEMIA 

S^n  Historical 

SRetcfi  djrtfie 

CountUJTZOW 


LUtzoM, 


LONDON:PUBLlSHED  p. 
IbyJMDENTSSONSn?' 
'and  in  new  YORK 
BYEPDUTTONSCO 


DB 


o(0S' 


First  printed  in  Everyman^ s  Library  igio 
Reprinted  igso 


All  rights  reserved 


2)et)fcateD 

TO 

THE  COUNTESS  GROSVENOR 


Non  modo  excultarum  Uteris  verum  et  barbararum 
gentium  complurium,  typis  non  ita  pridem  de- 
scriptae,  ac  in  publicum  emissae  Respub.  mihi 
imposuerunt  quandam  quasi  necessitatem  de 
Repub.  gentis  raeae  aliquid  simile  meditandi 
inque  literas  conferendi "  (Paulus  Stransky, 
Respiiblica  Boje/na,  1643). 


INTRODUCTION 

By  Professor  T.  G.  MASARYK, 

First  President  of  the  Czecho-Slovak  Kettiblic. 

The  History  of  Bohemia,  by  Count  Liitzow,  whose  un- 
timely death  during  the  AVar  was  equally  lamented  by  the 
Czech  and  English  peoples,  presents  the  EngHsh  reader 
with  an  accurate  picture  of  our  past.  In  this  work  Count 
Liitzpw  succeeded  in  correctly  interpreting  the  spirit  of 
Bohemian  history,  the  significance  of  which  lies  as  much 
in  the  nation's  fight  for  freedom  of  conscience  as  in  a 
struggle  for  national  existence  against  the  mighty  pressure 
of  Germanism.  There  is  much  in  Bohemian  history  that 
will  appeal  to  the  English  reader.  What  Englishman  could 
fail  to  find  interest  in  the.  history  of  that  nation  which  was 
once  ruled  over  by  the  "Goode  King  Wenceslaus  "  of  the 
old  English  carol  and  by  the  blind  King  John,  the  news  of 
whose  valiant  death  brought  tears  to  the  eyes  of  Edward  III ; 
of  that  nation  which  gave  England  one  of  her  most  popular 
queens — Queen  Anne,  wife  of  Richard  II  and  daughter  of 
the  greatest  of  our  Czech  kings  ? 

Bohemia,  though  one  of  the  lesser  nations,  gave  more 
than  one  man  to  the  world,  "  revered  in  all  hearts  that  love 
light."  Huss,  whose  teachings  and  death  gave  rise  to  the 
Hussite  Reformation  and  thus  brought  about  the  inauguration 
of  modern  spiritual  life ;  Chelcicky,  the  founder  of  the  Unitas 
Frairum^  the  Church  of  Bohemian  (Moravian)  Brethren, 
who  in  his  interpretation  of  Christian  love  in  its  form  of 

V 


vi  Introduction 

non-resistance  to  evil  anticipated  the  famous  teachings  of 
Tolstoy;  Komensky  (Comenius)  the  great  humanitarian 
teacher  of  all  nations  and  apostle  of  universal  peace ;  the 
democratic  king  George  of  Podebrad,  who  was  bending  his 
endeavours  toward  the  same  end ;  all  these  are  men  whose 
significance  stretches  far  beyond  the  frontiers  of  their  native 
country.  Palacky,  our  greatest  historian,  rightly  observed 
that  the  Czech  Reformation  contained  the  germ  of  all 
modern  teachings  and  institutions ;  and,  as  M.  Denis,  the 
French  historian  of  Bohemia,  adds,  it  was  at  once  the  merit 
and  happiness  of  Bohemia  that  its  own  cause  was  always 
bound  up  with  the  cause  of  humanity  in  general. 

To  the  second  edition  of  this  book  Count  Liitzow  added 
a  chapter  dealing  with  Bohemian  history  subsequent  to  the 
year  1620,  the  date  of  the  battle  of  White  Mountain.  It 
seemed  to  him  that  an  history  coming  to  an  end  in  the 
darkness  which  at  that  time  fell  over  Bohemia,  and  with 
it  over  all  Europe,  must  leave  in  the  reader  a  feeling  of 
depression  and  disappointment.  But  at  the  time  when 
he  concluded  this  additional  chapter  the  outlook  seemed 
no  better;  he  foresaw,  indeed,  very  dark  prospects  for 
Bohemia— darker  than  they  had  been  for  many  a  year. 
"Dark  clouds  seem  to  surround  the  future  of  Bohemia," 
are  his  last  words.  It  was  not  granted  to  Count  Liitzow  to 
see  how  these  dark  clouds  dispersed  after  the  tempest  of 
the  War,  a  tempest  which  had  already  begun  to  gather 
when  he  wrote  his  book :  it  was  not  granted  him  to  see  the 
sun  of  freedom  shine  down  once  more  upon  the  Czech  and 
Slovak  people,  re-united  in  one  free  nation  and  claiming 
their  part  in  the  task  of  the  regeneration  of  Europe  and 
humanity. 

It  affords  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  conditions 
from  which  the  Czecho-Slovak  people  escaped  by  their 
revolution  against  Austria-Hungary,  to  add  that  the  Czech 


Introduction  vii 

translation  of  the  present  book  was  at  first  suppressed  by 
the  Austrian  authorities,  and  that  subsequently  not  more 
than  twenty  pages  of  it  were  allowed  to  be  read  by  the 
very  nation  to  whose  history  it  was  devoted. 

Finally  let  me  add  a  little  personal  reminiscence  which 
emphasises  Count  Liitzow's  devotion  to  the  Czech  cause. 
When  I  was  in  Geneva  in  19 15  the  Count  was  also  near  in 
Switzerland,  and  was  closely  watched  by  Austrian  agents. 
Desiring  in  no  way  to  compromise  him  I  kept  aloof,  but 
I  soon  found  out  that  the  Count  was  in  touch  with  our 
agents  who  worked  in  Switzerland,  and  that  he  was 
rendering  them  substantial  financial  support. 

T.  G.  Masaryk. 

Prague, 

December  i^th^  19 19. 


PREFACE 

It  is  to  me  a  subject  of  great  satisfaction  that  a  new  edition  of 
my  Bohemia:  A?t  Historical  Sketch — first  published  in  1896 — 
should  be  required.  The  study  of  Bohemian  history  is  very 
important,  as  that  history  is  closely  connected  with  the  present 
political  situation  of  the  Austro-Hungarian  empire,  and  with  the 
demand  for  autonomy  raised  by  the  Bohemian  people  at  the 
present  time.  Without  at  least  a  slight  knowledge  of  Bohemian 
history  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  foundation  of  this 
demand,  and  the  contemptuous  silence  with  which  it  is  often 
treated  in  Western  Europe  is  largely  founded  on  ignorance. 

Of  late  years  historical  study  has  made  rapid  progress  in 
Bohemia,  and  a  considerable  number  of  statements  and  appre- 
ciations contained  in  the  first  edition  of  this  work  have  had  to 
be  altered.  All  interested  in  Bohemian  history  are  greatly 
indebted  to  the  valuable  studies  published  in  the  Cesky  Casopis 
Historicky  (Bohemian  Historical  Review),  which  is  so  ably 
edited  by  Professors  Goll  and  Pekdf.  Though  much  new  light 
has  been  thrown  on  the  past  of  Bohemia,  no  new  history  of  the 
country  superseding  Palacky's  monumental  work  has  appeared. 
Recent  research  had  indeed  proved  that  the  work  of  Palacky — 
to  whom  many  now  accessible  documents  were  unknown — is  not 
free  from  mistakes,  yet  it  still  remains  precious.  Professor 
Rezek's  plan  of  continuing  Palacky's  history,  which  ends  in  1526, 
up  to  1620,  and  perhaps  even  further,  remained  unfulfilled  in 
cpnsequence  of  the  illness  and  subsequent  death  of  that  brilliant 
historian.  Professor  Bachmann  ^  has  recently  published  a 
history  of  Bohemia.  Written  in  German,  it  is  more  accessible  to 
English  readers  than  books  written  in  the  national  language  of 
Bohemia.  The  work  is,  however,  imbued  with  a  fierce  hostility 
to  the  Bohemian  nation,  and  should  be  read  with  great  caution. 

While  I  have  been  able  to  introduce  considerable  alterations 
and,  I  hope,  improvements  into  this  new  edition  of  my  book,  I 
have  also  made  two  important  changes  in  the  structure  of  my 
work.  In  the  first  edition  of  Bohemia  :  An  Historical  Sketchy 
the  last  chapter  contained  a  brief  account  of  Bohemian  litera- 
ture. I  had  not,  fourteen  years  ago,  given  to  that  interesting 
subject  the  amount  of  study  which  I  have  devoted  to  it  of  late 
years.  The  result  of  these  studies  is  contained  in  my  History 
of  Bohemian  Literature}  This  work  can  be  considered  as  super- 

^  I  have  briefly  reviewed  Professor  Bachmann's  work  in  the  EttglUh 
Historical  Review  {ox  ^xAy  1906.  2  jgj.  g^j    1899,  2nd  ed.  1907. 

A  2  « 


X  Preface 

seding  the  last  chapter  of  the  first  edition  of  Bohemia :  An 
Historical  Sketch,  and  that  chapter  has  therefore  been  omitted. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  have  been  frequently  told  that  a  history 
of  Bohemia  which  ends  in  1620  must  necessarily  appear  dis- 
appointing to  many  readers.  It  is  true  that  the  year  of  the 
battle  of  the  White  Mountain  was  long  considered  as  the  date 
which  marks  the  end  of  Bohemian  independence  and  of  the 
ancient  constitution.  Yet,  as  Professor  Rezek  has  ably  pointed 
out,  it  was  only  the  treaty  of  Westphalia  which  rendered  the 
results  of  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain  final.  During  the 
Thirty  Years'  War  it  sometimes— for  instance,  during  the  Saxon 
invasion  in  1631 — appeared  probable  that  the  Bohemians  would 
again  obtain  autonomy  and  religious  freedom.  In  1648  only 
did  the  Bohemians  abandon  all  hope.  Then  only  did  Komensk^ 
(Comenius),  the  greatest  exile  and  the  greatest  man  of  Bohemia, 
address  the  Chancellor  Oxenstierna  in  the  despairing  words  : 
"  If  there  is  no  help  from  man,  there  will  be  help  from  God, 
whose  aid  is  wont  to  begin  where  that  of  men  endeth." 

It  is  also  worthy  of  notice  that  the  results  of  the  battle  of  the 
White  Mountain  have  not  in  every  way  proved  as  final  as  they 
would  have  appeared  to  one  writing  a  century,  or  even  fifty 
years,  ago.  It  has  always  been  an  axiom  of  the  Bohemian 
patriots  that  "  as  long  as  the  language  lives  the  nation  is  not 
dead."  In  this  respect  at  least  the  future  of  Bohemia  is  assured, 
for  never  has  the  literature  of  the  country  been  as  extensive  and 
as  valuable  as  at  the  present  moment.  The  political  position 
of  Bohemia  also  for  a  time  seemed  more  satisfactory  ;  a  certain 
amount  of  autonomy  was  obtained  ;  little  more  than  thirty  years 
ago  an  imperial  decree  promised  the  Bohemians  the  restoration 
of  their  ancient  constitution  in  a  modified  form. 

The  fact  that  the  outlook  for  Bohemia  is  at  the  present 
moment  darker  than  it  has  been  for  many  a  year,  does  not 
therefore  deter  me  from  devoting  the  last  chapter  of  this  work 
to  a  brief  outhne  of  the  history  of  Bohemia  from  the  year  1620 
up  to  the  present  day.  This  has  often  been  a  matter  of  con- 
siderable difficulty,  as  it  is  frequently  not  easy  to  fix  the 
boundary  between  those  matters  that  belong  to  the  general 
history  of  Austria  and  Germany,  and  those  that  specially 
concern   Bohemia. 

LtJTZOW. 

Zampack, 
October  1909. 


PREFACE 

TO   THE   FIRST    EDITION 


Many  English  visitors  to  my  Bohemian  home  have 
remarked  to  me  on  the  absence  of  any  history  of  my 
country  in  the  English  language.  German  and  Bohe- 
mian (Cech)  historians  are  numerous,  and  include  many 
who  have  written  in  the  present  century,  since  freedom 
of  writing  and  of  research  into  archives  have  existed  in 
Austria.  Most  of  these  are  valuable  and  trustworthy; 
but  I  think  I  may  lay  claim  to  having  compiled  the  first 
narrative  or  sketch  of  Bohemian  history  in  English 
from  original  and  other  authorities. 

My  little  work  professes  to  be  no  more  than  a  sketch, 
and  I  have  purposely  selected  this  title  for  the  volume. 

I  have,  therefore,  though  briefly  noticing  the  earliest 
records  of  Bohemia,  devoted  most  of  my  attention  to 
the  period  of  the  Hussite  wars  and  of  Bohemian 
independence.  Bohemia  as  an  independent  State  prac- 
tically ceased  to  exist  after  the  battle  of  the  White 
Mountain  (often,  I  think,  called  the  battle  of  Prague 
by  English  writers)  in  1620;  and  at  this  point  my 
sketch  of  Bohemian  history  ceases. 

But  up  to  that  date,  the  annals  of  Bohemia  are  full 
of  picturesque  incident,  and  have  considerable  bearing 
on  the  general  development  of  Europe.  In  King  John 
Bohemia  gives  us  the  embodiment  of  mediaeval  chivalry, 
and  its  most  remarkable  crowned  representative.  The 
religious  questions  that  afterwards  convulsed  Europe 
were  first  thrashed  out  in  Bohemia,  and  John  Hus 
and  his  followers  maintained  and  developed  there  the 
ideas  that  were  first  broached  by  Wycliffe  in  England, 
but  for  the  time  found  little  support  in  that  reformer's 
native  country.  These  points  are,  I  think,  clearly 
brought  out.  Political  liberty  and  democratic  principles, 
unsuccessfully  contended  for  as  they  were,  receive  some 
of  their  earliest  illustrations  from  Bohemian  history. 


xii       Preface  to  the  First  Edition 

The  art  of  war  also  was  early  developed  by  the  genius 
of  leaders  such  as  Zizka  and  the  two  Prokops. 

I  have  little  space  in  my  "  Sketch "  to  deal  ^ith 
these  matters,  and  I  leave  my  readers  and  critics  to 
draw  such  conclusions  from  the  facts  narrated  as  they 
think  justified.  Every  effort  has  been  made  to  reduce 
the  bulk  of  my  narrative ;  only  those  of  my  friends  who 
know  the  enormous  mass  of  material  in  German,  Latin, 
and  Bohemian  to  which  I  have  had  recourse,  will  be 
able  to  gauge  the  labour  involved  in  limiting  the  growth 
of  the  book.  The  interest  to  me  has  grown  as  the  work 
has  progressed,  for  the  history  of  Bohemia,  so  little 
known  to  English  readers,  may  be  regarded  as  a  drama, 
and  even  perhaps  as  a  tragedy. 

Though  Bohemia  has — undoubtedly  to  its  ultimate 
advantage — long  formed  part  of  the  vast  Empire  now 
known  as  Austria-Hungary,  the  country  still  retains  a 
language,  a  literature,  and  a  history  of  its  own.  To 
outline  within  the  limits  of  a  sketch  some  of  these 
elements  of  its  interest  is  my  sole  object.  Though  I 
have  the  materials,  I  have  not  the  time  nor  opportunity 
to  write  a  history  of  Bohemia  in  English ;  I  only  ask 
my  readers  to  judge  of  my  book  as  being  what  it  is — a 
sketch  of  a  great  country's  history. 

My  principal  authorities  are  the  numerous  works 
published  during  the  present  century  in  German  and 
Bohemian  by  Palacky,  Jungmann,  Tomek,  Tieftrunk, 
Ilelfert,  Hofler,  Rezek,  Bilek,  Goll,  Gindely  and  many 
others.  I  have  endeavoured,  by  means  of  references 
and  notes,  to  mention  as  far  as  possible  the  authors  to 
whom  I  am  indebted.  An  enumeration  of  all  the  works 
consulted,  which  would  of  course  include  the  older 
authorities  also,  would  have  unduly  lengthened  the 
book.  Many  points  of  Bohemian  history  being  still 
contested,  I  have  been  obliged  to  give  in  my  foot- 
notes longer  and  more  numerous  quotations  than  might 
perhaps  appear  necessary.  Readers  who  omit  them  will 
yet  be  able  to  follow  the  general  outline  of  the  narrative. 
Besides  the  modern  writers  mentioned  above,  I  have 
availed  myself  of  the  information  contained  in  the 
"Journal  of  the  Bohemian  Museum"  {Casopis  Musea 
Ceskeho)y  so  rightly  described  by  Mr.  Morfill  as  "a 
mine  of  Slavonic  lore." 


Preface  to  the  First  Edition     xiii 

The  historians  of  the  present  century,  who  have  had 
access  to  many  formerly  unknown  sources  of  informa- 
tion, have  to  a  considerable  extent  reconstructed  the 
history  of  Bohemia ;  and  many  of  the  older  writers  have 
to  be  studied  with  great  caution.  I  have,  however,  not 
entirely  neglected  to  consult  the  old  chroniclers,  such 
as  Cosmas,  Weitmil,  Pulkava,  Hajek,  and  many  others. 
The  latter  historians,  Habernfeld,  Skala  and  Slavata,  are 
still  of  the  greatest  value  for  the  history  of  Bohemia, 
and  I  have  carefully  studied  their  works.  I  have  given 
a  short  notice  of  some  of  the  old  historians  of  Bohemia 
in  the  eighth  chapter,  which  deals  with  the  Hterature 
of  the  country. 

Though  the  purpose  and  scope  of  my  book  almost 
appear  to  exclude  original  research,  I  was  very  glad  of 
the  opportunity  afforded  me  during  a  visit  to  Venice, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1895,  of  examining  some 
of  the  documents  referring  to  Bohemia  preserved  in 
the  State  Archives  at  S>  Maria  de'  Frari.  I  take  this 
occasion  to  thank  Commendatore  Stefani,  Director  of 
these  Archives,  for  his  great  attention,  and  I  have  been 
able  in  several  passages  to  refer  to  some  of  the  more 
interesting  documents  which  I  examined.  I  also  wish  to 
express  my  thanks  to  the  Hon.  Madame  Wiel,  who  has 
very  kindly  assisted  me  in  correcting  the  proofs  of  this 
book,  and  to  Messrs.  Chapman  &  Hall,  to  whom  I  am 
indebted  for  the  two  sketch-maps.  1 

In  Chapter  VHI  I  have  included  a  few  notes  on 
matters  that  occurred  to  me  in  the  course  of  a  rather 
extensive  study  of  the  old  Bohemian  writers,  both  in 
6ech  and  in  Latin.  These  notes  have,  of  course,  no 
pretension  to  be  considered  as  a  history  of  ancient 
Bohemian  literature.  I  should  in  no  case  consider 
myself  as  competent  to  undertake  such  a  work,  nor 
would,  I  think,  a  large  book  on  this  subject  be  of  much 
interest  to  English  readers.  In  the  chapter  of  his  work 
on  Slavonic  Literature  which  treats  of  Bohemia,  Mr. 
Morfill  has  given  a  short  but  lucid  and  trustworthy 
notice  of  all  the  more  important  Bohemian  writers, 
from  the  earliest  period  to  the  decline  of  the  language 

^  As  these  sketch-maps  did  not  in  my  opinion  add  to  the  value  of 
my  book,  they  have  not  been  reproduced  in  the  present  edition. 


XIV      Preface  to  the  First  Edition 

after  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain.  To  this  book 
I  can  confidently  refer  my  readers.  Of  other  recent 
English  works  on  Bohemian  literature,  the  Native 
Literature  of  Bohemia  in  the  Fourteenth  Century,  and 
John  Hus,  both  by  the  late  Rev.  A.  H.  Wratislavv,  must 
be  mentioned  as  the  best. 

Bohemia  is  justly  proud  of  her  history,  and  I  think 
her  recent  historians,  whether  using  the  native  or  the 
German  language,  have  done  credit  to  her  greatness; 
but  to  write  even  a  sketch  of  Bohemian  history  requires 
a  thorough  knowledge  not  only  of  the  Bohemian,  but 
also  of  the  English  language.  I  am  deeply  conscious  of 
my  shortcomings  on  this  point.  I  am  not  writing  in  my 
own  language,  and  constant  study  of  German  and  Bohe- 
mian books  has  left  its  impress  on  my  use  of  English  in 
writing.  To  numerous  lapses  from  the  most  approved 
methods  of  English  writing  I  must  beg  my  readers' 
indulgence ;  and  this  I  do  not  without  hope,  seeing  that 
to  some  at  least  of  them  I  am  known  personally,  while 
all  will  alike  recognize  the  difficulties  to  which  I  thus 
refer.  I  trust  at  all  events  that  my  meaning  is  clear, 
even  when  I  have  had  to  struggle  with  the  difficulty  of 
making  it  so. 

I  have  added  a  chronological  table  giving  the  names 
of  the  rulers  (princes,  afterwards  kings)  of  Bohemia, 
with  the  dates  of  their  accessions  and  deaths. 

The  spelling  of  Bohemian  (Slav)  names  presents  con- 
siderable difficulty,  and  even  Cech  writers  are  not  agreed 
on  this  matter.  Though  complete  uniformity  is  perhaps 
impossible,  I  have  generally  adopted  the  spelling  now  in 
use.  Names  of  towns,  and  especially  of  families,  have 
sometimes  retained  an  older  form  of  spelling,  which  I 
have  followed  where  I  believed  it  to  be  in  more  general 
use.  Some  towns  also,  where  the  nationality  of  the 
population  has  varied  at  different  times,  possess  German 
and  Bohemian  names,  both  of  which  are  still  in  use.  In 
all  these  cases  I  have  without  pedantry  adopted  the 
designation  that  seemed  to  me  the  most  intelligible  to 
English  readers. 

I  must  add  one  remark,  which  is  only  intended  for 
readers  who  are  my  countrymen,  in  the  unlikely  case 
that  this  little  book  should  come  into  their  hands.  In 
no  country  has  the  habit  of  using  the  events  of  the  past 


Preface  to  the  First  Edition        xv 

as  examples  or  arguments  applicable  to  the  political  dis- 
sensions of  the  present  day  prevailed  so  extensively  as 
in  Bohemia.  Nothing  is  to  my  mind  more  unscientific, 
and  indeed  more  reprehensible.  I  have  exercised  special 
care  in  avoiding  any  remark  which  might  have  even  the 
appearance  of  an  allusion  to  the  religious  or  political 
controversies  in  Bohemia  at  the  present  time. 

LiJTzow. 

Zampach^ 

December  1895. 


The  following  is  the  list  of  Count  LutzoVs  works  : — 

Bohemia,  an  Historical  Sketch,  ist  edition,  1896;  A  History  of 
Bohemian  Literature,  ist  edition,  1899,  2nd  edition,  1907  ;  Prague 
(Mediaeval  Towns  series),  1st  edition,  1902,  2nd  edition,  1907;  "The 
Labyrinth  of  the  World,"  by  Komensky  (Comenius),  Translated  and 
Edited  by  Count  Ltitzow,  ist  edition,  1900,  2nd  edition,  1902  ;  The 
Historians  of  Bohemia  (being  the  Ilchester  lectures  for  1904),  1905  ; 
The  Life  and  Times  of  Master  John  Hus,  1909  ;  and  various  articles 
and  reviews  in  English  and  Czech. 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGS 

I.      THE   EARLIEST  *  INHABITANTS    OF    BOHEMIA    (tO 

THE   YEAR    45 1    P.C.N.)       ....  I 

II.  FROM  THE  ARRIVAL  OF  THE  CECHS  IN  BOHEMIA 
TO  THE  DEATH  OF  PRINCE  BOLESLAV  II 
(451-999)  7 

IIL       THE     BOHEMIAN     DUKES     AND     PRINCES     (999- 

II97) 24 

IV.  IHE  BOHEMIAN  KINGS  FROM  PREMYSL  OTTOKAR 
I  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  JOHN  OF  LUXEM- 
BURG   (1197-1346)  .  ._  .  .38 

V.       FROM      THE      BEGINNING     OF      THE      REIGN      OF 
CHARLES     IV     TO     THE     CORONATION      OF 
^  KING    SIGISMUND    (1346-1420)  .  .  69 

YI.       FROM    THE   CORONATION  OF  SIGISMUND  TO  THE 

DEATH    OF    KING    LOUIS    (1420-1526)  .       1 29 

VII.  THE  KINGS  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  HABSBURG  UP 
TO  THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  "  WHITE  MOUN- 
TAIN"    (1526-1620)  ....       202 

VIII.  THE  KINGS  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  HABSBURG  FROM 
THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  "  WHITE  MOUNTAIN  " 
TO    THE    PRESENT    DAY    (1620-1910)  .       279 

INDEX 353 


BOHEMIA 


CHAPTER  I 

THE    FIRST    INHABITANTS    OF    BOHEMIA 
(up    to    THE    YEAR    43 1 ) 

Bohemia,  now  a  part  of  the  great  Habsburg  Empire, 
has  a  history  which  is  a  record  of  much  past  greatness. 
It  is  situated  in  the  centre  of  the  European  continent,  and 
divided  by  high  chains  of  mountains  from  the  neighbouring 
German  countries — Prussia,  Saxony,  Bavaria,  and  Austria. 
Only  in  the  direction  of  the  sister-land,  Moravia,  is  there 
no  such  mountainous  frontier.  Bohemia  is  inhabited  by  a 
population  the  largest  part  of  which,  except  in  the  earliest 
times,  has  always  been  of  the  Slavonic  race ;  but  aU  the 
surrounding  countries,  except  Moravia,  which  is  also  mainly 
Slavonic,  are  inhabited  by  Germans.  Moravia  has  almost 
always  been  under  the  same  domination  as  Bohemia,  and 
the  two  countries  were  together  known  as  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown ;  ^  though  during  the  days  of  Bohemia's 
greatness  parts  of  Northern  Germany  and  of  the  Slavonic 
lands  joining  Bohemia  were  also  governed  from  Prague. 
The  geographical  position  of  Bohemia  supplies  to  a  great 
extent  the  key  to  the  history  of  that  country.  The  great 
chains  of  mountains  which  divide  it  from  the  neighbour- 
ing German  lands  give  Bohemia  a  separate  and  isolated 
position.  The  country  therefore  forms  a  continent  within 
the  continent  of  Europe,  as  Gothe  has  well  expressed  it. 
This  is,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  causes  why  the  Slavonic  race 
has  to  a  great  extent  retained  its  hold  over  Bohemia,  whilst 
the  adjoining  territories  of  Northern  Germany,  the  popula- 
tion of  which  was  formerly  Slavonic,  have  long  since  been 
Germanized.  Attempts  were,  however,  always  made  by 
the  German  princes  and  people  to  attain  a  similar  result 
in  Bohemia  also,  and  this  struggle  between  rival  races  is  the 
leading  feature  in  Bohemian  history.  Modern  research  has 
proved  that  this  idea  dominates  the  many  religious  conflicts 

^  Silesia  and  Lusatia  were  also  at  certain  periods  counted  among  the 
lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown  ;  but  their  connection  with  Bohemia  was 
neither  as  close  nor  as  lasting  as  that  of  Moravia. 


2  Bohemia 

in  this  country  to  a  greater  extent  than  would  appear 
from  the  writings  of  the  old  historians,  who  treat  the 
subject  almost  entirely  from  the  point  of  view  of  religious 
controversy. 

In  consequence  of  the  geographical  position  of  Bohemia 
we  find  few  references  to  that  country  in  the  old  Greek 
and  Latin  writers,  and  its  earliest  history  is  therefore  very 
obscure.  According  to  a  theory,  whose  origin  can  be 
traced  back  as  far  as  ^nseas  Sylvius,  and  which  will  be 
mentioned  presently,  Bohemia  had  first  a  Celtic  and 
then  a  Teutonic  population.  Recent  research,  founded,  in 
the  absence  of  all  historical  evidence,  on  craniology  and 
archaeological  research,  has  rendered  it  probable  that  at 
least  part  of  Bohemia  had  an  autochthonous  Slavic  popula- 
tion. Of  the  two  great  recent  authorities  on  this  difficult 
subject  Dr.  Pic  affirms  that  there  were  certainly  Slavs  in 
Bohemia  before  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  and  Dr. 
Niederle  that  Slavs  can  be  traced  as  far  back  as  the  fifth 
century  before  Christ.  According  to  the  formerly  generally 
accepted  account,  the  earliest  inhabitants  of  Bohemia  were 
the  Boji,  a  branch  of  the  Celtic  race.  Livy  tells  us  that 
in  the  time  of  the  king  Tarquinius  Priscus,  the  Celtic  king 
Ambigatus  in  Gaul,  finding  it  difficult,  in  consequence  of  his 
age,  to  rule  over  the  ever-increasing  population,  ordered  his 
nephews  Sigoves  and  Belloves  to  lead  a  large  part  of  the 
people  to  other  lands.  The  flight  of  birds  was  to  decide 
the  direction  of  their  travels,  and  according  to  it  Sigoves  set 
out  for  the  east  and  settled  in  the  Hercynian  forest,  a  district 
that  may  be  roughly  identified  with  the  present  Bohemia. 
This  legend,  though  its  historical  truth  has  (at  least,  as  far 
as  the  date  is  concerned)  been  disproved  by  Niebuhr,  is 
evidently  founded  on  old  traditions  of  the  Celtic  druids. 

We  find  few  references  to  these  earliest  inhabitants  of 
Bohemia  in  the  classical  authors,  and  the  first  positive  fact 
concerning  them  that  has  come  down  to  us  dates  from  the 
year  115  B.C.  In  that  yenr  the  Cimbri  left  their  homes  in 
the  country  that  is  now  Southern  Russia,  and  marched 
westward  through  the  present  Galicia  and  Moravia,  where 
in  a  battle,  the  probable  site  of  which  was  in  North-eastern 
Moravia,  they  were  entirely  defeated  by  the  Boji.  The 
Cimbri,  in  consequence  of  this  defeat,  altered  their  li.ie  of 
march,  and  passing  through  the  countries  now  knovm  as 
Styria,  Switzerland,  and  France,  entered  Italy,   This  victory 


An  Historical  Sketch  3 

over  an  army  that  even  Rome  only  defeated  with  great 
difficulty,  proves  that  the  Boji  were  at  that  time  a  powerful 
and  warlike  nation. 

We  next  hear  of  the  Boji  in  connection  with  Julius  Caesar's 
campaigns  in  Gaul.  A  certain  number  of  Boji  had  joined 
the  Helvetii,  who  were  also  of  Celtic  race,  in  their  attempt 
to  settle  in  Gaul.  Though  this  attempt  was  frustrated  by 
C?esar's  victory  at  Bibracte,  the  Boji  were,  at  the  request  of 
Caesar's  allies,  the  Aedui,  allowed  to  settle  in  their  country.^ 
The  evidence  as  to  what  number  of  Boji  left  their  country 
and  settled  in  Gaul  is  contradictory.  It  seems  probable, 
however,  that  the  nation  was  greatly  weakened  by  this 
emigration ;  for  it  proved  unable,  ten  years  later,  to  resist 
the  Dacian  king,  Boerebistes,  who  ruled  over  the  lands  now 
known  as  Transylvania  and  Hungary.  He  attacked  them 
in  that  part  of  their  country  now  known  as  the  Archduchy 
of  Austria,  and  defeated  them  in  a  battle  which  was  probably 
fought  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  river  Raab.  The  Boji 
retreated  to  Bohemia,  where  Boerebistes  does  not  seem  to 
have  pursued  them  ;  but  he  devastated  the  land  he  had 
conquered  so  cruelly,  that  it  was  known  long  after  as  the 
*'  Bojian  Desert."  The  empire  of  Boerebistes  does  not 
seem  to  have  survived  his  death ;  but  the  Boji,  weakened 
by  these  unsuccessful  wars,  soon  fell  an  easy  prey  to  the 
Germanic  tribe  of  the  Marcomanni.^ 

Opinions  differ  as  to  the  original  home  of  the  Marcomanni, 
though  it  seems  most  probable  that  they  occupied  lands 
near  the  upper  course  of  the  river  Oder,  and  that  they  after- 
wards moved  to  Moravia  and  Upper  Hungary.  They  were 
on  terms  of  friendship  with  Rome,  as  Marbod,  a  son  of  one 
of  their  princes,  was  educated  at  the  court  of  the  Emperor 
Augustus.  A  man  of  great  talent  and  ambition,  his  natural 
capacities  as  ruler  and  commander  were  developed  by  his 
residence  in  the  capital  of  the  world.  On  his  return  to  his 
country  he  seized  the  sovereign  power  and  organized  his 
army  according  to  the  Roman  fashion.  The  country  he 
first  attacked  was  that  of  the  Boji,  whom  he  seems  to  have 
conquered  without  great  difficulty  (probably  in  the  year  1 2 

1  Caesar,  Bell.  Gall.  i.  28. 

^  Mommsen  remarks  {Rdvi.  Geschichte^  iii.  243,  244)  that  there  is  no 
historical  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  Marcomanni,  as  a  separate 
people,  before  Marbod's  time ;  the  name  may  originally  only  have 
meant  what  it  etymologically  signifies — ^frontier  defenders  ("march- 
men  "). 


4  Bohemia 

B.C.).  He  made  their  capital,  Buiamum,  his  residence, 
changing  its  name  to  Marobodum.  From  Bohemia,  where 
his  position  in  consequence  of  the  mountains  and  dense 
forests  which  surrounded  the  country  was  very  strong, 
Marbod  undertook  the  conquest  of  the  neighbouring  German 
tribes,  and  appears  to  have  become  the  chief  of  a  powerful 
empire.  He,  however,  soon  found  a  rival  competitor  in 
Arminius,  or  Hermann,  prince  of  the  Cherusci,  who  by  his 
victory  over  the  Romans  in  the  Teutoburg  forest  had 
delivered  a  great  part  of  Germany  from  the  Roman  yoke. 
Marbod  had  remained  neutral  during  the  struggle  between 
Rome  and  the  German  tribes  led  by  Hermann,  and  had 
thereby  incurred  great  hostility  among  the  Germans.  War 
soon  broke  out  between  the  two  chiefs — the  first  great  war 
between  German  tribes  known  to  history.  A  great  battle 
was  fought  between  the  two  armies  in  the  country  now  known 
as  Saxony  ;  and,  though  the  result  was  not  decisive,  Marbod 
retired  into  Bohemia  and  invoked  the  aid  of  the  Emperor 
Tiberius.  The  Roman  Emperor  afforded  him  no  aid, 
though  he  sent  his  son  Drusus  to  mediate  between  the 
German  princes  ;  and  as  the  German  tribes  formerly  subject 
to  Marbod  now  revolted  against  him,  he  soon  lost  all  his 
conquests  except  Bohemia.  This  country  also  he  was  not 
destined  to  retain  long.  Kattwalda,  prince  of  the  Goths, 
secretly  encouraged  by  the  Romans,  entered  Bohemia 
(13  A.D.)  with  a  large  army,  and  by  treachery  possessed  him- 
self of  Marbod's  capital.  Deserted  by  every  one,  Marbod 
was  obliged  to  seek  refuge  in  Italy ;  and,  by  permission  of 
the  Emperor  Tiberius,  he  took  up  his  residence  at  Ravenna, 
where  he  remained  up  to  his  death,  eighteen  years  afterwards. 
Tacitus  mentions  that  in  his  time  the  speech  was  still  in 
existence  in  which  the  Emperor  Tiberius  expatiated  on  the 
former  greatness  of  Marbod's  power,  and  on  the  means  by 
which  he  had  been  forced  to  surrender  himself  to  Rome.^ 

Kattwalda  was  not  destined  to  retain  his  conquest  long. 
After  a  reign  of  only  two  years  he  was  driven  from  his 
country  by  Vibilius,  prince  of  the  Hermunduri,  whom  the 
Romans  (always  desirous  to  create  dissensions  among  the 
German  tribes)  had  probably  instigated.  Kattwalda  was 
obliged  to  seek  refuge  with  the  Romans,  but  they  would 
not  allow  Vibilius  to  retain  the  land  he  had  conquered. 
Aided  by  Rome,  Vannius,  king  of  the  Quadi,  possessed 
1  Taciliis,  Annal.  ii.  64. 


An  Historical  Sketch  5 

himself  of  the  lands  of  the  Marcomanni ;  and  that  name, 
which  Marbod  had  rendered  famous,  now  sinks  into 
obscurity.  The  Marcomanni,  as  well  as  the  Quadi,  fell 
under  the  domination  of  other  tribes,  probably  the  Her- 
munduri.  All  these  tribes  appear  to  have  been  to  a  certain 
extent  dependent  on  Rome ;  and  we  read  that  the 
Emperor  Domitian,  having  demanded  aid  from  Quadi  and 
Marcomanni  in  his  war  with  Decebalus  of  Dacia  and 
receiving  an  unsatisfactory  answer,  caused  their  envoys  to 
be  murdered  and  attacked  their  country  (90). 

During  seventy-five  years  from  this  date  we  find  no 
historical  mention  of  the  tribes  which  inhabited  Bohemia, 
and  only  from  the  time  of  the  beginning  of  the  Marcomannic 
war  (a.d.  165)  we  find  some  slight  mention  of  Bohemia  and 
the  neighbouring  countries.  This  war  is  known  in  history 
as  the  Marcomannic  war ;  probably  more  because  the  namt 
was  better  known  to  the  Romans  than  those  of  other  tribes 
living  further  from  the  frontiers  of  the  empire,  than  because 
that  tribe  took  a  very  prominent  part  in  it.  Numerous 
tribes,  whose  partly-distorted  names  are  recorded  by  the 
Roman  historians,  and  among  whom  we  find  mentioned  the 
Marcomanni  and  Quadi,  driven  southward  by  other — 
probably  Slavonic — tribes,  simultaneously  attacked  the 
Roman  Empire.  Only  insufficient  and  contradictory 
accounts  of  this  great  war  have  reached  us.  The  Roman 
Emperor,  Marcus  Aurelius,  having  defeated  the  German 
tribes  in  several  battles,  formed  the  plan  of  incorporating 
the  lands  of  the  Marcomanni  and  Quadi  (that  is  to  say,  the 
districts  now  known  as  Bohemia,  Moravia,  and  Upper 
Hungary)  entirely  with  the  Roman  Empire.  A  great 
insurrection  in  the  east,  however,  obliged  Marcus  Aurelius 
to  renounce  these  plans  and  to  conclude  peace.  Faithful 
to  the  Roman  system  of  separating  the  various  German 
tribes,  the  Emperor  granted  them  peace  under  different 
conditions  ;  and  those  imposed  on  the  Marcomanni  appear 
to  have  been  the  hardest.  They  and  the  Quadi  were 
obliged  to  receive  in  their  land  and  maintain  a  Roman 
army  of  20,000  men.  The  severity  of  this  condition,  and 
the  depredations  committed  by  the  Roman  army  of  occupa- 
tion, soon  caused  the  Marcomanni  to  renew  the  war  with 
Rome.  They  were  again  defeated  by  the  Emperor  Marcus 
Aurelius,  but  he  was  not  able  completely  to  conquer  their 
country ;  and  after  his  death  the  Emperor  Commodus  made 


6  Bohemia 

peace  with  the  Marcomanm.  The  conditions  were  less 
onerous  than  those  of  the  former  treaty.  Though  they 
were  to  remain  dependent  on  Rome,  the  land  of  the 
Marcomanni  was  no  longer  to  be  occupied  by  a  Roman 
army.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  long  war  had 
greatly  weakened  the  Marcomanni  and  diminished  their 
number.  We  find  occasional  mention  of  their  name  in 
connection  with  those  of  the  German  tribes  who,  during 
the  reigns  of  the  successors  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  invaded  the 
Roman  Empire  in  every  direction.  They  are  mentioned  as 
having  invaded  the  Roman  territory  dining  the  reigns  of 
the  Emperors  Caracalla,  Alexander  Severus,  Maximinus, 
Valerianus,  Gallienas,  Aurelian,  Probus,  Diocletian,  and 
(in  ^^S)  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Julian.  Hardly 
any  records  of  these  expeditions,  that  seem  to  have  been 
undertaken  more  for  the  sake  of  plunder  than  of  conquest, 
have  reached  us.  In  the  year  404  the  German  prince 
Radagaisus  attacked  Italy  at  the  head  of  a  large  army,  to 
which  the  Marcomanni  sent  a  contingent.  He  was,  how- 
ever, defeated  in  the  following  year,  and  almost  his  whole 
army  perished  on  the  battle-field.  A  great  number  of 
Marcomanni  also  joined  Godegisil,  king  of  the  Vandals,  in 
his  expedition  to  Africa, 

It  is  probable  that  only  a  scanty  population  now  re- 
mained in  the  lands  near  the  Hercynian  forest.  The  Mar- 
comanni who  had  remained  in  their  former  abode  were, 
like  the  neighbouring  tribes,  imable  to  resist  the  attacks  of 
the  Huns,  and  soon  became  subject  to  them.  The  last 
notice  concerning  the  Marcomanni  which  we  find  in  history 
tells  us  that  they  were  among  the  Germans  subject  to 
Attila,  who  formed  part  of  the  army  with  which  he  attacked 
GauL  They  took  part  in  the  battle  of  the  Catalaunian 
fields,  in  which  Attila  was  defeated,  and  it  is  probable  that 
most  of  the  few  remaining  Marcomanni  perished  there. 
Bohemia  had  after  this  battle  probably  but  a  small  popula- 
tion. The  Celtic  Boji  and  the  Teutonic  Marcomanni  were 
now,  however,  to  have  as  successors  Slavic  tribes,  of  which 
the  Cechs  were  the  most  powerful.  Though  there  may 
have  been  an  autochthorious  Slavic  population  in  Bohemia,  it 
was  only  then  that  the  Cechs  began  to  form  the  majority  of 
the  population  of  Bohemia,  as  they  have  continued  to  do  up 
to  the  present  day. 


An  Historical  Sketch 


CHAPTER   II 

FROM  THE  TIME  OF  THE  OCCUPATION  OF  THE  COUNTRY 
BY  THE  BOHEMIANS  (CECHS)  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  PRINCE 
BOLESLAV    U    (451-999), 

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  Cechs,  who  after  the 
extinction  of  the  Marcomanni  settled  in  Bohemia,  were  a 
branch  of  the  great  Slavonic  race.  It  is  probable  that 
the  Slavs  inhabited  a  large  part  of  Eastern  Europe  from  the 
earliest  historical  times,  though  all  attempts  to  identify  the 
lands  they  occupied  are  mere  conjectures. 

As  Bohemia  was  henceforth  to  be  inhabited  by  the 
Slavonic  race,  it  will  be  well  to  throw  a  glance  on  the 
social  and  political  condition  of  the  Slavs  at  that  period, 
as  far  as  the  scanty  records  that  have  reached  us  render  it 
possible. 

Of  the  religion  of  the  ancient  Slavs  hardly  anything  is 
known.  The  writers  of  the  earUer  part  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  in  the  absence  of  all  genuine  records  often  relied 
on  documents  that  have  since  been  proved  to  be  forgeries. 
Such  were  the  so-called  ]MSS.  of  Zelena  Hora  and  Kralove 
Dvur,  and  particularly  the  notes  that  were  interpolated  in 
a  genuine  IMS.  entitled  the  "  ^Slater  Verborum."  It  is  to 
the  learned  Mr.  Patera,  formerly  Hbrarian  of  the  Bohemian 
Museum,  that  the  discovery  of  the  fraudulent  insertions  in 
the  "  Mater  Verborum"  is  due. 

The  earliest  political  institutions  of  the  Slavs  were  of 
the  most  primitive  nature ;  they  appear  when  we  first  read 
of  them  to  have  known  neither  princes  nor  nobles,  and  the 
only  existent  authority  was  that  of  the  starosta  or  elder  of 
each  village.  We  hear  that  the  Slavs  in  the  earliest  times 
were  less  warlike  than  their  Germanic  neighbours,  which 
perhaps  accounts  for  the  absence  of  any  military  institu- 
tions, and  for  the  facilit}^  with  which  they  were  conquered 
and  partly  extirpated  by  the  Germans. 

The  great  struggle  known  as  the  migration  of  nations, 
forced  the  Slavs  to  imitate  their  neighbours  by  strengthen- 
ing their  organization.  The  Slavs  of  Bohemia  were,  at  a 
time  which  it  is  difficult  to  determine,  divided  into  tribes, 
each  of  which  was  ruled  over  by  a  chief  named  "voyvode." 
The  voyvode  of  the  most  important  of  these  tribes,  the 
Cechs — a  name  which  was  gradually  extended  to  all  the 


8  Bohemia 

Slavonic  tribes  in  Bohemia — appears  to  have  exercised  a 
certain  supremacy  over  the  other  voyvodes,  and  to  have 
been  known  as  the  knez  (prince).  When  some  of  the  tribes 
increased  in  number  the  voyvodes  divided  them  into  several 
zupa  (districts),  over  each  of  which  they  appointed  a  zupan 
(chief).  The  voyvodes,  as  well  as  the  supreme  voyvode  or 
knez,  were  elected  by  the  members  of  their  tribe  ;  but  this 
selection  soon  tended  to  become  merely  nominal,  as  it 
became  established  that  the  choice  should  be  limited  to 
members  of  certain  powerful  families. 

The  knez  or  prince,  as  well  as  the  voyvodes  and  zupans, 
seem  to  have  united  all  civil  and  military  authority  in  their 
persons.  The  prince  was  judge  over  the  whole  people,  and 
the  voyvodes  and  zupans  acted  in  the  same  capacity  with 
regard  to  their  tribe  or  district.  These  same  chiefs  were 
also  the  leaders  in  time  of  war. 

Hardly  any  record  of  the  conquest  of  Bohemia  by  the 
Cechs  has  reached  us,  and  the  date  is  also  uncertain,  though 
it  seems  sure  that  this  event  occurred  during  the  fifth 
century .1  The  modern  Bohemian  historians,  Palacky  and 
Tomek,  consider  the  year  451  the  most  probable  date. 
According  to  old  legends,  Cechus,  or  Cech,  a  noble  of 
Croatia  ^),  having  committed  homicide,  fled  from  his  country, 
and  with  his  companions  sought  a  new  abode  in  Bohemia. 
Old  traditions  tell  us  that  Cechus  and  his  followers,  after 
having  crossed  three  rivers,^  first  fixed  their  abode  on  the 
mountain  Rip  (Georgsberg,  mountain  of  St.  George),  a  hill 
near  R6udnice,  overlooking  the  Elbe. 

Scarcely  anything  is  known  to  us  of  the  history  of  the 
Cechs  in  the  earliest  times  after  their  settlement  in  Bohemia. 
The  old  legends  referring  to  this  time  tell  us  of  numerous 
wars  with  the  neighbouring  German  tribes,  probably  the 
Thuringians  and  the  Franks,  and  already  show  a  spirit  of 
racial  hatred  against  the  western  neighbours. 

At  some  period  in  the  sixth  century  the  Bohemians,  or 
Cechs,^  became  tributary  to  the  Avares,  a  tribe  of  Asiatic 

^  See,  however,  p.  2,  where  I  have  mentioned  that  there  was 
probably  a  Slavic  population  in  some  parts  of  Bohemia  long  before 
this  period. 

*  The  situation  of  this  Croatia  is  very  uncertain.  It  may  have  been 
the  present  Austrian  province  of  Galicia. 

^  Many  not  very  successful  attempts  have  been  made  by  Bohemian 
historians  to  identify  these  three  rivers. 

*  The  Bohemian  historians,  when  writing  in  German,  always  designate 


An  Historical  Sketch  9 

origin,  which,  having  conquered  Hungary,  now  began  to 
invade  Western  Europe.  Nothing  is  known  either  as 
regards  the  duration  or  the  extent  of  the  domination  of  the 
Avares  over  Bohemia.  Recent  research  has,  however, 
proved  that  their  power  was  greater  in  Pannonia  (which 
roughly  corresponds  to  the  present  Hungary)  than  in 
Bohemia.  It  is  not  even  certain  that  the  Avares  ever 
permanently  occupied  Bohemia,  where  no  archseological 
traces  of  their  sojourn  have  been  found.  It  is,  however, 
certain  that  they  frequently  plundered  and  ravished  the 
country.^  The  old  German  chronicles  tell  us  that  in  the 
year  623  Samo,  who  probably  belonged  to  one  of  the 
Slavonic  tribes  that  then  inhabited  Northern  Germany, 
aided  the  Bohemians  in  their  struggle  against  the  Avares, 
and  that  with  his  help  they  succeeded  in  freeing  their  country 
from  alien  domination. 

The  grateful  Bohemians  chose  Samo  as  their  king,  and 
he  is  said  to  have  been  the  founder  of  the  first  great  Slavonic 
State.  Bohemia  was  the  centre  of  his  dominions,  and 
Samo's  residence  was  traditionally  believed  to  have  been 
the  castle  of  the  Vysehrad.'^' 

The  formation  of  this  great  Slavonic  State  excited  the 
jealousy  of  Dagobert,  king  of  the  Franks,  and  he  invaded 
the  lands  of  Samo  in  several  directions.  His  main  army 
was,  however,  defeated  in  a  great  battle  fought  at  Wogastis- 
burg  (probably  near  the  present  town  of  Cheb),^  which  lasted 
three  days.  After  this  victory  Samo  is  said  to  have  still 
further  extended  his  dominions.  He  appears  to  have  lived 
up  to  the  year  658. 

From  this  date  up  to  nearly  the  end  of  the  eighth  century 
the  history  of  Bohemia  is  a  complete  blank,  and  our  only 
authority  for  this  period  is  Cosmas  of  Prague,  who  lived 
four  centuries  later,  and  whose  writings  deserve  the  name  of 
fairy-tales  more  than  that  of  history.*      These   tales,    un- 

their  countrymen  as  Bohemians,  not  Cechs  ;  and  I  shall  henceforth 
follow  their  example. 

^  This  has  been  clearly  shown  by  Dr.  Niederle  in  the  Cesky  Casopis 
Historick  (Bohemian  Historical  Journal)  for  1909,  p.  345-349. 

2  A  hill  near  Prague,  now  incorporated  with  that  town. 

'  In  German  Eger. 

*  The  modern  Bohemian  historians  Palack/  and  Tomek  quote  the  so- 
called  MSS.  of  Zelena  Hora  and  Kralove  Dvur  as  authorities  for  this 
period.  Recent  research  has  proved  that  they  are  forgeries  dating 
from  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century. 


lo  Bohemia 

doubtedly  founded  on  old  traditions,  have  remained  widely 
popular  in  Bohemia,  so  that  it  may  be  well  briefly  to  notice 
them.  Cosmas  tells  us  that  the  Bohemian  prince  Krokus 
(or  Krok),  whom  he  calls  the  first  ruler  over  the  country, 
had  three  daughters,  Kazi,  Teta  (or  Lethka),  and  Libussa. 
Kazi,  the  eldest,  was  equal  to  the  Colchian  Medea  in  her 
knowledge  of  medicine  and  poisons ;  whilst  the  second, 
Teta,  was  learned  in  religious  rites,  and  taught  the  ignorant 
people  to  worship  Oreades,  Dryades,  and  Hamadryades.^ 
"The  Third  (sister),  smaller  in  the  number  of  years  but 
greater  in  wisdom,  was  called  Libussa  .  .  .  she  was  a 
wonderful  woman  among  women ;  chaste  in  body,  righteous 
in  her  morals,  second  to  none  as  judge  over  the  people, 
affable  to  all  and  even  amiable,  the  pride  and  glory  of  the 
female  sex,  doing  wise  and  manly  deeds ;  but  as  nobody  is 
perfect,  this  so  praiseworthy  woman  was,  alas,  a  soothsayer."  ^ 
Libussa,  though  the  youngest  of  the  three  sisters,  was  chosen 
by  the  people  to  be  their  ruler ;  whether  in  consequence  of 
her  many  qualities  that  he  enumerates,  Cosmas  does  not  tell 
us.  Libussa  reigned  for  some  time  over  the  people,  and  is  said 
to  have  founded  the  city  of  Prague  at  the  foot  of  the 
Vysehrad,  and  to  have  foretold  its  future  greatness. 

At  length,  however,  the  Bohemians  became  discontented 
with  female  rule,  and  w^hen  Libussa  was  judging  a  dispute 
betw^een  two  nobles,  the  one  against  whom  she  decided 
insulted  her,  and  said  that  his  country  was  the  only  one 
that  endured  the  shame  of  being  ruled  over  by  a  woman. 
Libussa  then  said  to  the  people  that  she  saw  they  were  too 
ferocious  to  be  ruled  over  by  a  woman.  She  begged  them 
to  disperse,  and  on  the  following  day  to  choose  a  man  to 
rule  over  them ;  whomsoever  they  might  choose  she 
promised  to  take  as  a  husband.  The  people  replied  by 
asking  her  to  choose  a  husband,  whom  they  would  acknow- 
ledge as  their  prince.  Libussa  consented,  and  on  the 
following  day  said  to  the  assembled  people,  pointing  to 
the  distant  hills,  "  Behind  these  hills  is  a  small  river  called 
Belina,  and  at  its  bank  a  farm  called  Stadic.  Near  that 
farm  is  a  field,  and  in  that  field  your  future  king  is  plough- 
ing with  two  oxen  marked  with  various  spots.     His  name 

1  Under  these  classical  denominations  Cosmas  evidently  designated 
the  Rusalky  or  fairies,  in  whose  existence  the  heathen  Bohemians 
believed. 

2  Cosmas,  Prageiisis  Chronica  Bohemortini^  pp.  2,  3. 


An  Historical  Sketch  ii 

is  Pfemysl,  and  his  descendants  will  reign  over  you  for 
ever.  Take  my  horse  and  follow  him  ;  he  will  lead  you  to 
the  spot."  The  people  chose  several  out  of  their  number, 
who  immediately  set  out,  and  following  the  guidance  of 
Libussa's  horse  reached  the  place  described  by  her,  and 
there  found  a  peasant,  whose  name  they  ascertained  to  be 
Pfemysl,  ploughing  his  field.  They  immediately  saluted 
him  as  their  prince,  and  conducted  him  to  the  castle  on 
the  Vy^ehrad,  where  he  was  married  to  Libussa,  and  seated 
on  the  princely  throne.  Modern  Bohemian  historians 
assert  that  Pfemysl  was  the  voyvode  of  the  Lemuzes,  one 
of  the  tribes  into  which  Bohemia  was  then  divided ;  and 
they  have  also  made  various  not  very  successful  attempts  to 
identify  the  locality  where  he  was  found.  According  to 
the  old  traditions,  Pfemysl  was  a  great  law-giver;  and  in 
later  times  all  the  most  ancient  laws  and  regulations  were 
attributed  to  him. 

Beginning  with  Pfemysl,  the  ancient  Bohemian  chroniclers 
have  constructed  a  regular  genealogical  table,  and  his 
successors  in  the  male  line  ruled  over  Bohemia  for  more 
than  five  centuries  (up  to  1306);  whilst  the  Habsburg 
dynasty,  now  reigning  over  Bohemia,  also  descends  from 
him  in  the  female  line.  Nothing  except  their  names,i  not 
even  the  length  of  their  reigns,  is  known  of  the  first 
successors  of  Pfemysl ;  though  Hajek  of  Libocan,  and  other 
Bohemian  writers  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries, 
give  long  but  entirely  imaginary  accounts  of  their  reigns. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  eighth  century  the  German 
chroniclers  again  begin  to  throw  some  light  on  the  events 
that  occurred  in  Bohemia.  Ever  since  the  beginning  of  the 
greatness  of  the  Carlovingian  dynasty  these  sovereigns  had 
attempted  to  extend  their  power  in  Eastern  Germany ;  and 
had  succeeded  in  subduing  not  only  the  Saxons,  but  also 
some  of  the  Slavonic  tribes  that  then  inhabited  a  large 
part  of  North-eastern  Germany. 

The  Slavonic  tribes  of  the  Obotrites,  Wiltes,  and  Sorbes — 
whose  dwelling-places  may  be  roughly  identified  with  Meck- 
lenburg, Brandenburg,  and  Saxony — were  successively 
overcome  by  the  Carlovingian  monarchs,  especially  by 
Charles  the  Great.  As  was  inevitable,  Bohemia,  which  in 
so  many  directions  joined  the  lands  he  had  conquered,  also 

^  These  names  will  be  found  in  the  list  of  sovereigns  of  Bohemia 
contained  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 


12  Bohemia 

attracted  the  ambition  of  the  great  Emperor ;  particularly 
after  that  his  coronation  in  Rome  (8co)  had,  according  to 
the  then  prevalent  ideas,  invested  him  with  supreme  power 
over  Western  Europe. 

There  are  no  historical  records  as  to  the  direct  cause 
which  induced  Charles  the  Great  to  attempt  the  conquest  of 
Bohemia;  we  only  learn  from  contemporary  German 
chroniclers  that  he  (805)  attacked  that  country  from  several 
directions,  the  main  army  being  commanded  by  the 
Emperor's  son  Charles.  The  campaign  does  not  appear  to 
have  been  a  successful  one,  nor  do  the  Germans  seem  to 
have  remained  long  in  Bohemia.  It  is,  however,  probable 
—  though  evidence  is  very  contradictory  —  that  Bohemia 
became  to  a  certain  extent  tributary  to  the  Carlovingian 
monarchs.  Should  the  Bohemians  then  have  consented  to 
pay  a  tribute,  we  have  every  reason  for  supposing  that  such 
payments  only  took  place  during  the  lifetime  of  Charles  the 
Great,  and  not  during  the  reigns  of  his  successors.  During 
the  intestine  disturbances,  which  broke  out  in  the  empire  of 
the  Franks  after  the  death  of  Charles  the  Great,  his  suc- 
cessors were  too  much  occupied  to  think  of  attempting  any 
new  attack  on  their  Slavonic  neighbours.  It  was  only  after 
the  treaty  of  Verdun  (843)  that  the  Bohemians  again  had  to 
defend  their  independence  against  the  Germans.  By  the 
partition  which  had  been  agreed  on  at  Verdun,  Louis,  sur- 
named  the  German,  had  become  ruler  of  Germany,  and,  as 
such,  heir  to  the  claims  of  supremacy  over  the  neighbour- 
ing Slavonic  tribes.  It  was  not,  however,  against  Bohemia 
that  he  first  turned  his  arms,  but  against  the  sister-land, 
Moravia. 

The  earliest  history  of  Moravia,  up  to  the  beginning  of 
the  ninth  century,  is  involved  in  even  more  complete 
obscurity  than  that  of  Bohemia.  We  have,  however,  every 
reason  to  believe  that  in  those  days  it  shared  the  fate  of  that 
country  ;  that  it  was  conquered  by  the  Avares,  then  liberated 
by  Samo  ;  and  that  it  formed  part  of  his  empire. 

About  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  Moravia  was 
governed  by  Mojmir,  who,  from  the  scanty  record  that  has 
reached  us,  appears  to  have  been  a  ruler  of  great  ability. 
He  united  the  scattered  tribes  under  his  dominion,  and  was 
the  real  founder  of  the  great  Moravian  Empire,  which  for 
some  time  included  Bohemia  also.  In  846  Louis  "  the 
German "  sent  a  large  army  into  Moravia,  and  appointed 


An  Historical  Sketch  13 

Mojmir's  nephew,  Rostislav,  ruler  of  the  land.  Moravia 
having  been  forced  to  acknowledge  German  supremacy,  the 
German  army  now  attacked  Bohemia.  The  Bohemians, 
however,  were  successful  in  their  resistance,  and  defeated 
the  invading  army.  From  this  time  forth  war  raged  be- 
tween Germany  and  Bohemia  for  thirty  years.  The  vague 
and  contradictory  reports  of  battles  that  have  reached  us 
are  of  no  interest  to  English  readers.  It  is  of  more  interest 
to  turn  our  attention  to  an  event  of  immense  importance 
to  Bohemia  that  occurred  about  this  time,  namely,  the 
conversion  of  the  country  to  Christianity. 

It  is  probable  that  Christianity  penetrated  into  Moravia 
earlier  than  into  Bohemia,  and  Palacky  gives  documentary 
evidence  that  as  early  as  the  year  836  a  Christian  church 
was  consecrated  at  Neutra  in  Moravia  by  the  Archbishop  of 
Salzburg.  In  884  we  read  that  fourteen  Bohemian  nobles 
appeared  at  the  court  of  King  Louis  "the  German"  at 
Regensburg,  and  that  they  were  baptized  on  the  ist  of 
January,  845.  It  is  very  probable  that  these  nobles  had 
been  obliged  to  fly  from  Bohemia  in  consequence  of  one 
of  the  many  feuds  that  then  desolated  the  country,  and  that 
they  hoped  by  accepting  the  Christian  faith  to  secure 
German  aid  against  their  internal  enemies. 

Christianity  introduced  through  the  agency  of  Germany 
was  not  likely  to  gain  many  adherents,  as  the  Christian  faith 
was  necessarily  in  the  eyes  of  the  Bohemians  connected 
with  the  hostile  German  race.  It  was  from  the  east  that 
Christianity  completely  and  permanently  penetrated  into 
Moravia  and  Bohemia.  In  862  the  Moravian  Prince 
Rostislav,  who,  though  invested  with  sovereignty  by  the 
Germans  had  soon  renewed  the  national  feuds  with  them, 
sent  a  mission  to  the  court  of  the  Greek  Emperor  at  Con- 
stantinople, asking  him  to  send  Christian  teachers  of  the 
Slavonic  race  to  Moravia. 

The  envoys  thus  addressed  Michael,  the  then  ruler  of  the 
Eastern  empire  :  "  Our  people  have  rejected  paganism  and 
already  observe  Christian  law.  But  we  have  no  teachers 
who  can  in  our  own  language  teach  us  the  true  Christian 
faith,  so  that  other  countries,  seeing  this,  may  follow  our 
example.  Send  then,  O  Emperor,  such  a  bishop  or  teacher, 
you  from  whom  all  good  law  proceeds."  ^    It  is  probable 

i  Dr.  Pastruck,  Dejiny  Slovanskych  apostohi  Cyrilla  a  Melhoda 
(History  of  the  Slavic  apostles  Cyrillus  and  Methodius). 


14  Bohemia 

that  these  simple  words,  as  noted  in  the  legend,  express  the 
true  purpose  of  Rostislav.  The  mission  had,  however, 
undoubtedly  also  a  political  purpose.  Rostislav  and  his  uncle 
intended  to  form  a  great  Moravian  empire  independent  of 
the  Franks,  and  for  this  purpose  to  free  themselves  from  the 
Frankish  hierarchy;  for  the  German  priests  in  Moravia 
endeavoured  to  serve  the  interests  of  their  race,  as  well  as 
those  of  their  religion. 

The  emperor  Michael  received  the  envoys  favourably  and 
selected  two  priests,  the  brothers  Constantine  and  Metho- 
dius, to  accompany  them  to  Moravia.  "  You  are,"  he  said, 
"citizens  of  Solun,^  and  the  citizens  of  Solun  generally 
speak  pure  Slavic." 

We  read  that  when  the  brothers  stai  ted  on  their  journey 
Constantine  brought  with  him  a  translation  of  the  Bible 
written  in  the  language  of  the  Slavic  inhabitants  of  Mace- 
donia. For  this  translation  Constantine  used  the  letters  of 
the  new  alphabet,  which  he  had  himself  invented,  and 
which  from  the  name  he  afterwards  assumed  became  known 
as  the  Cyrillic  alphabet.  It  renders  with  great  precision  the 
sounds  peculiar  to  Slavic  languages,  and  it  is  still  largely 
used  in  Eastern  Europe.  This  event  is  undoubtedly  of 
great  importance.  Not  only  did  the  Slavic  language  thus 
become  a  written  one,  but  by  its  use  in  religious  services 
it  took  its  position  with  Latin  and  Greek  as  a  liturgic 
language. 

Ihe  undertaking  of  the  saintly  brothers  was  fully  success- 
ful. Numerous  churches  were  built,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  Moravia  eagerly  flocked  to  the  religious  services,  which 
were  held  in  the  Slavonic  tongue.  The  fame  of  the  new 
preachers  spread  beyond  the  borders  of  Moravia,  and  the 
Slavonic  inhabitants  of  the  adjoining  districts  of  Pannonia 
(Hungary)  also  accepted  the  teaching  of  Constantine  and 
Methodius. 

It  seems  more  than  probable  that  the  German  priests, 
and  particularly  the  Archbishop  of  Salzburg,  to  whose 
diocese  these  lands  belonged,  regarded  the  brothers  as 
intruders,  and  attempts  were  repeatedly  made  to  denounce 
them  to  the  Holy  See  as  heretics.  These  attempts  were 
favoured  by  the  Eastern  origin  of  Constantine  and  Metho- 
dius. It  became  known  that  they  had,  while  at  Constanti- 
nople, enjoyed  the  favour  of  the  patriarch  Photius,  through 
^  The  present  Salonike. 


An  Historical  Sketch  15 

whose  influence  the  schism  between  the  Eastern  and 
Western  Church  took  place.  It  should,  however,  be  noted 
that  the  brothers,  from  the  time  of  their  arrival  in  Moravia, 
always  sided  entirely  with  the  Church  of  Rome. 

To  justify  their  conduct  before  the  Pope,  the  brothers  pro- 
ceeded on  their  first  journey  to  Rome.  Constantine,  shortly 
after  their  arrival  there,  feeling  his  end  approaching,  entered 
a  monastery  and  there  assumed  the  name  of  Cyrillus,  by 
which  he  is  generally  known.  He  died  a  few  weeks  after- 
wards. Shortly  afterwards  Methodius  left  Rome  and 
proceeded  for  a  short  time  to  Pannonia,  on  a  visit  to  Kocel, 
the  prince  of  that  country,  who  had  requested  the  Pope  to 
send  him  a  priest  who  was  acquainted  with  the  Slavic 
language.  After  a  short  stay  in  Hungary,  Methodius  re- 
turned to  Rome  to  report  to  the  Pope  on  the  success  of 
his  mission.  He  then  returned  to  Moravia,  where  he  con- 
tinued almost  up  to  the  end  of  his  life  to  be  subject  to  the 
persecutions  of  the  German  priests.  During  a  third  visit  to 
Rome,  Methodius  obtained  from  the  Pope  the  title  of 
Archbishop  of  Moravia  and  Pannonia,  and  the  formal  recog- 
nition of  the  Cyrillic  alphabet.^ 

Though  we  have  no  direct  evidence  to  the  purpose,  it 
seems  highly  probable  that  the  differences  between  the 
German  and  Slavonic  priests  were  in  some  sort  of  connec- 
tion with  the  ever-recurring  hostilities  between  Germany 
and  Moravia.  In  864  and  868  we  again  find  the  armies  of 
the  German  King  Louis  attacking  the  domains  of  Prince 
Rostislav,  who  received  assistance  from  the  Bohemians. 
These  wars,  in  which  the  Germans  do  not  appear  to  have 
been  successful,  were  ended  by  a  treaty  ;  but  Rostislav's 
downfall,  which  the  Germans  had  so  long  vainly  attempted 
to  achieve,  was  at  last  brought  about  by  treachery.  Rosti- 
slav's nephew,  Svatopluk,  who  governed  the  district  of 
Neutra  under  the  supremacy  of  his  uncle,  allied  himself 
with  the  Germans.  He  succeeded  in  making  his  uncle 
prisoner,  and  delivered  him  over  to  Carlomann,  son  of  the 
German  King  Louis  (870). 

^  Dr.  Pastruck's  book,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  renders  it 
certain  that  Methodius  in  no  way  opposed  the  dogma  of  the  Roman 
Church.  It  also  proves  that  the  attitude  of  the  Pope  towards  Methodius 
was  a  somewhat  ''opportunist"  one,  perhaps  based  on  the  desire  to 
found  a  Romanist  Church  with  Slavic  rites  in  opposition  to  the  schis- 
matic Photius. 


i6  Bohemia 

Immediately  afterwards  Carlomann  entered  Moravia,  con- 
quered the  whole  country,  and  appointed  two  brothers.  Mar- 
graves of  Austria,  its  governors.  The  German  governors 
seized  the  Archbishop  Methodius,  and  delivered  him  as 
prisoner  to  his  enemies  the  German  bishops.  Shortly  after- 
wards they  caused  Svatopluk  also,  whose  fidelity  they 
mistrusted,  to  be  imprisoned  and  sent  to  Germany.  He 
appears  to  have  ingratiated  himself  with  the  German  con- 
querors ;  for  when  an  insurrection  broke  out  in  Moravia, 
shortly  afterwards,  he  was  appointed  leader  of  the  German 
army  sent  to  suppress  it. 

Svatopluk  now  requited  by  treachery  the  treachery  that 
had  been  used  against  him.  Deserting  the  Germans,  he 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  countrymen,  and  defeated  the 
Germans  in  a  decisive  battle  in  which  both  the  Austrian 
Margraves  fell  (871).  Svatopluk,  now  uncontested  lord  of 
Moravia,  tried  to  strengthen  his  power  against  the  Germans 
(who  were  certain  again  to  attack  him)  by  an  alliance  with 
the  Bohemian  Prince  Bofivoj — a  relation  of  whom,  probably 
a  sister,  he  subsequently  married.  The  relative  positions  of 
Bohemia  and  Moravia  at  this  period  are  very  uncertain ; 
but  it  is  probable  that  when  Svatopluk's  power  increased 
Bofivoj  became  to  a  certain  extent  subject  to  him. 

The  following  year  (872)  the  Germans  again  attacked 
both  Bohemia  and  Moravia ;  and  though  they  succeeded 
in  penetrating  into  Bohemia,  they  were  on  the  whole  un- 
successful. After  Svatopluk  had  in  the  following  year 
carried  the  war  into  the  enemies'  country  by  attacking 
Carlomann  in  Germany,  his  father,  King  Louis,  who  had 
come  to  his  aid,  considered  it  wiser  to  enter  into  negotia- 
tions for  peace.  These  negotiations  resulted  in  the  treaty 
of  Forcheim  (874),  which  was  favourable  to  Svatopluk,  and 
secured  to  him  the  possession  of  his  conquests  in  Northern 
Hungary,  though  under  German  supremacy. 

After  this  treaty  Methodius  was  released  from  custody, 
and  returned  to  Moravia.  One  of  his  first  deeds  after  his 
return  was  probably  the  baptism  of  the  Bohemian  Prince 
Borivoj ;  both  the  locality  and  the  exact  date  of  this  im- 
portant event  are  uncertain.^    At  the  same  time  Bofivoj 's 

^  The  legend  that  Borivoj  became  a  Christian  because,  dining  with 
Svatopluk,  he  was  requested  to  sit  apart  on  a  low  stool,  since  he,  being 
a  heathen,  was  unfit  to  sit  at  table  with  Christians,  is  of  recent  origin, 
and  is  treated  with  contempt  by  modem  Bohemian  historians. 


An  Historical  Sketch  17 

wife,  Ludmilla,  was  also  received  into  the  Christian  Church ; 
and  the  example  she  set  by  her  saintly  life  greatly  aided  the 
rapid  spread  of  Christianity  in  Bohemia.  Bofivoj  is  said  to 
have  built  several  churches :  the  one  at  Levy  Hradec,  near 
Prague,  is  specially  mentioned  as  having  been  built  by 
him,  and  is  the  oldest  Christian  church  in  Bohemia.^  The 
earliest  church  on  the  Hradcany  hill  at  Prague  is  also 
believed  to  have  been  built  during  the  reign  of  Bofivoj. 

In  885  Methodius,  "the  apostle  of  the  Slavs,"  died.  The 
numerous  legends  which  supply  almost  all  the  evidence 
concerning  him  give  a  very  touching  account  of  his 
death. 

Svatopluk  of  Moravia,  after  having  secured  for  his  country 
independence  from  Germany,  extended  his  dominion  in  all 
directions,  and  he  soon  became  the  chief  of  a  mighty 
Slavonic  empire.  It  is  equally  difficult  to  specify  the  limits 
of  his  dominion,  and  the  names  and  number  of  the  minor 
Slav  States  that  acknowledged  his  supremacy.  We  are  told 
that  Cracow  and  the  surrounding  part  of  Poland,  Silesia,  a 
large  part  of  Northern  Germany  reaching  as  far  as  Magde- 
burg, and  a  large  part  of  Northern  Bohemia,  had  probably 
long  before  acknowledged  his  supremacy;  but  after  Bofivoj's 
death,  Svatopluk  only  recognized  his  sons  Spytihnev  and 
Vratislav  as  local  chieftains  (voyvodes)  over  certain  districts, 
and  himself  became  supreme  ruler  over  Bohemia,  thus 
temporarily  effacing  the  dynasty  of  Pfemysl. 

Hostilities  between  the  Germans  and  the  Slavs  were 
renewed  not  many  years  after  the  treaty  of  Forcheim.  In 
890  Svatopluk  was  involved  in  a  great  war  with  the  German 
King  Arnulph,  an  illegitimate  son  of  Carlomann.  In  892 
Arnulph  obtained  aid  from  the  wild  Magyars  or  Hungarians, 
who  had  then  recently  appeared  in  Europe,  and  whose 
dwelling-place  at  that  period  probably  was  the  present 
Moldavia. 

Svatopluk  successfully  resisted  these  various  attacks,  but 
the  greatness  of  the  Moravian  Empire  ended  with  his  death 
(894).  The  quarrels  between  two  of  Svatopluk's  sons, 
Mojmir  and  Svatopluk,  hastened  the  ruin  of  the  country. 
The  Bohemian  Prince  Spytihnev  seized  the  opportunity, 
which  the  intestine  struggles  in  Moravia  afforded  him,  for 
the  purpose  of  shaking  off  Moravian  supremacy  and  re- 

^  This  church  is  still  in  existence,  but  was  considerably  altered  in  the 
fifteenth  century. 


1 8  Bohemia 

establishing  the  rule  of  the  dynasty  of  Premysl  over  the 
whole  of  Bohemia. 

To  strengthen  himself  against  Moravia,  Spytihnev  sought 
the  alliance  of  Germany ;  and  he  and  his  brother  Vratislav 
appeared  at  Regensburg,  at  the  court  of  the  German  King 
Arnulph,  imploring  his  aid.  Taking  into  account  the  close 
connection  then  existing  between  political  and  ecclesiastical 
affairs,  it  seems  certain  that  the  Bohemians  accepted  the 
supremacy  of  the  Bishop  of  Regensburg,  and  with  it  the 
Latin  liturgy.  The  Slavonic  liturgy,  however,  also  con- 
tinued side  by  side  with  the  Latin  one :  and  we  find 
evidence  even  late  in  Bohemian  history  that  the  memory 
of  the  original  Eastern  origin  of  Christianity  in  the  country 
remained  unforgotten  among  the  people. 

Whilst  Germans  and  Slavs  were  exhausting  their  forces 
in  constantly-recurring  struggles,  the  new  Asiatic  tribe,  which 
the  Germans  had  originally  called  in  to  their  aid,  had 
widely  extended  its  power.  The  Germans  and  Slavs  now 
made  common  cause  against  the  Magyars ;  but  in  a  great 
battle  which  took  place  at  Presburg  (907)  they  were  totally 
defeated.  The  Magyars  now  ravaged  Germany  and  the 
neighbouring  Slavonic  lands  with  impunity.  About  the 
time  of  this  great  battle — the  exact  date  cannot  be  ascer- 
tained in  the  complete  absence  of  contemporary  evidence — 
the  Magyars  entirely  conquered  Moravia,  which  remained 
in  their  power  for  more  than  half  a  century ;  only  a  small 
western  district  fell  to  Bohemia. 

"  The  invasion  of  the  Magyars  and  their  establishment  in 
Hungary  is  one  of  the  most  important  events  in  the  history 
of  Europe ;  it  is  the  greatest  misfortune  that  has  befallen 
the  Slavonic  world  during  thousands  of  years.  The 
Slavonic  races  in  the  ninth  century  extended  from  the 
frontiers  of  Holstein  to  the  coast  of  the  Peloponnesus,  much 
divided  and  disconnected,  varying  in  habits  and  circum- 
stances, but  everywhere  able,  diligent,  and  capable  of 
instruction.  In  the  middle  of  this  extended  line  a  centre 
had  been  formed  by  Rostislav  and  Svatopluk,  round  which, 
both  by  inner  impulse  and  through  the  force  of  external 
circumstances,  the  other  Slavonic  tribes  would  have  grouped 
themselves."  1 

In  the  complete  absence  of  contemporary  records  it  is 
impossible  to  ascertain  how  Bohemia  escaped  the  fate  that 
1  Palack^. 


An  Historical  Sketch  19 

befell  Moravia.  The  ability  of  the  princes  of  the  house  of 
Premysl,  who  then  ruled  over  Bohemia,  may  have  largely 
contributed  to  preserve  the  country  from  the  Magyar  invaders. 
Old  legends  tell  us  that  Vratislav,  who  about  this  time 
succeeded  his  brother  Spytihnev,  was  a  glorious  prince,  so 
that  we  may  infer  that  he  was  successful  in  defending  the 
country  against  its  numerous  enemies.  Vratislav  died  about 
the  year  920/  and  after  his  death  dissensions  arose  in  the 
reigning  family.  Vratislav  left  three  sons  —  Venceslas, 
Boleslav,  and  Spytihnev,  the  last  of  whom  died  in  early 
youth.  The  widow  of  Vratislav,  Drahomira  of  Stodor, 
daughter  of  a  prince  of  the  still  heathen  tribe  of  the  Lutices 
(in  the  present  Lusatia),  assumed  the  guardianship  over  her 
two  other  sons.  She  is  described  to  us  as  a  proud  and 
imperious  woman,  who  soon  became  jealous  of  the  influence 
of  her  mother-in-law,  the  saintly  Ludmilla,  who  had  educated 
Prince  Venceslas  in  the  Christian  faith.  She  sent  murderers 
to  the  castle  of  Tetin,  whither  Ludmilla  had  retired,  and 
these,  finding  her  kneeling  at  prayers,  strangled  her  with 
her  own  veil  (921).  Ludmilla  was  afterwards  canonized  as 
a  saint  of  the  Catholic  Church. 

The  regency  of  Drahomira  did  not  prove  advantageous  to 
the  country.  Bohemia  was  soon  involved  in  war  with  Henry 
the  Fowler,  the  great  king  who  was  then  reigning  over 
Germany.  King  Henry  had  recently  subdued  many  of  the 
Slavonic  tribes  in  the  region  of  the  upper  Elbe.  It  is 
probable  that  Drahomira  incurred  his  hostility  by  assisting 
these  tribes,  to  one  of  which — the  Lutices — she  herself 
belonged ;  or  Henry  the  Fowler  may  have  considered  his 
victories  incomplete,  as  long  as  he  had  not  subdued  the 
Slavonic  Bohemians  also. 

Though  hostilities  had  probably  begun  before,  it  was  in 
928  that  King  Henry  entered  Bohemia  with  a  large  army 
and  advanced  as  far  as  Prague.  Venceslas,  who  by  this  time 
had  assumed  the  government  of  the  country,  felt  the  im- 
possibility of  resisting  the  German  power,  and  a  peaceful 
settlement  was  agreed  to.  Venceslas  consented  to  pay  an 
annual  tribute  of  six  hundred  marks  of  silver  and  one 
hundred  and  twenty  head  of  cattle.  Venceslas,  according 
to  the  contemporary  records,  appears  to  have  been  a  peaceful 
and  pious  prince.  We  are  told  that  he  spent  a  great  part 
of  the  night  in  prayers,  and  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  him- 

^  The  chronology  of  Bohemia  is  at  this  time  still  very  uncertain. 


20  Bohemia 

self  cutting  off  the  wheat  and  grapes  that  the  priests  required 
to  prepare  the  holy  wafers  and  the  wine  for  the  sacrament. 
His  great  generosity  to  churches  seems  to  have  caused  dis- 
content among  some  of  the  nobles  ;  and  the  ambition  of 
Venceslas's  younger  brother  Boleslav  induced  him  to  become 
the  head  of  a  conspiracy  against  the  prince.  Wenceslas 
had  the  pious  habit  of  attending  the  anniversaries  of  the 
foundation  of  churches — posviceni,  as  they  are  called  in 
Bohemia — in  every  part  of  his  dominions,  and  on  the 
invitation  of  his  brother  he  repaired  for  a  festivity  of  this 
description  to  Stara  Boleslav,  where  Boleslav  then  resided. 

On  his  way  to  early  mass  on  the  28th  of  September,  935, 
Wenceslas  was  attacked  by  his  brother  and  other  con- 
spirators, and  murdered  after  a  brave  defence.  Wenceslas 
was  canonized  by  the  Catholic  Church,  and  the  28th  of 
September  is  still  one  of  the  great  religious  festivals  of 
Bohemia. 

Boleslav,  surnamed  the  Cruel,  now  became  sovereign  of 
Bohemia.  He  was  "one  of  the  most  powerful  monarchs 
that  ever  occupied  the  Bohemian  throne."  ^  He  greatly 
extended  the  frontiers  of  the  country,  and  also  consolidated 
it  internally.  His  reign  began  with  a  renewal  of  the  inter- 
mittent but  ever-recurring  war  against  Germany.  Probably 
King  Henry  considered  the  murder  of  his  ally  Wenceslas  as 
a  sufficient  reason  for  resuming  hostilities. 

Henry  died  before  he  had  had  time  to  open  the  cam.paign ; 
but  in  938  the  powerful  king  and  emperor  Otho  I,  who 
succeeded  him,  sent  two  armies  into  Bohemia.  Though  the 
records  of  this  war  are  very  obscure,  it  seems  probable  that 
Boleslav  succeeded  in  defending  his  country  against  the 
invaders,  at  least  for  a  time;  it  is  also  reported  that  he 
succeeded  in  subduing  some  of  the  Bohemian  nobles  who 
had  allied  themselves  with  the  national  enemy.  War  now 
continued  between  the  two  countries  with  varying  success, 
but  few  details  concerning  this  struggle  have  reached  us. 
We  read  that  in  946  the  Bohemian  prince  sent  hostages 
to  Otho ;  but  this  evidently  does  not  indicate  a  decisive 
victory  of  the  Germans,  for  in  950  Otho  himself  entered 
Bohemia  with  a  great  army.  Boleslav,  seeing  that  his 
forces  were  insufficient  to  resist  the  whole  power  of  the 
victorious  Emperor,  consented  again  to  pay  the  tribute 
which  Wenceslas  had  promised.  Boleslav  henceforth  lived 
1  Palacky. 


An  Historical  Sketch  21 

on  peaceful  terms  with  his  western  neighbours,  attempting 
rather  to  extend  his  dominion  in  the  direction  of  the  east. 

In  the  year  955  we  find  the  Bohemians  as  allies  of  the 
German  monarch.  The  Magyars,  or  Hungarians,  who 
ever  since  the  battle  of  Presburg  had  almost  annually 
ravaged  Western  Europe,  in  that  year  attacked  Germany 
with  greater  force  than  before.  They  were,  however, 
signally  defeated  in  a  great  battle  near  Augsburg — one  of 
the  most  sanguinary  and  decisive  battles  fought  during  the 
Middle  Ages.  A  Bohemian  contingent  of  a  thousand  men 
formed  part  of  the  victorious  army,  but  Boleslav  himself, 
with  the  greater  part  of  his  troops,  remained  to  guard  the 
frontiers  of  Bohemia.  The  defeated  Hungarian  army, 
having  attempted  to  force  a  passage  through  Bohemia,  was 
completely  defeated  by  Boleslav,  who  took  the  Hungarian 
leader,  Lehel,  prisoner. 

We  have  very  little  information  as  to  the  successful  wars 
that  filled  up  the  later  years  of  the  reign  of  Boleslav.  Only 
a  list  of  the  lands  which  he  conquered  has  reached  us.  He 
probably,  soon  after  his  victory  over  the  Hungarians, 
succeeded  in  freeing  Moravia  from  their  domination  and 
in  uniting  it  with  Bohemia.  We  learn  that  Boleslav  also 
conquered  a  large  part  of  the  present  Hungary — the  wide 
lands  between  the  Carpathian  mountains  and  the  Danube. 

The  country  north  of  the  Carpathian  mountains,  then 
known  as  Croatia,^  is  also  included  among  the  countries 
then  subject  to  the  Bohemian  princes ;  but  we  have  little 
knowledge  whether  the  conquests  in  this  country  were  made 
by  Boleslav  I,  or  by  his  son.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  the 
possessions  of  Boleslav  I  at  this  period  joined  the  territory  of 
the  Polish  dukes,  and  amicable  relations  were  established 
between  the  two  princes.  Boleslav  married  his  daughter 
Dubravka  to  the  Polish  Duke  Mieceslav  I,  and  her  influence 
over  her  husband  induced  that  still  heathen  prince  to  accept 
the  Christian  faith.  His  conversion  was  soon  followed  by 
that  of  his  subjects. 

Boleslav  I  died  in  967,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son 
Boleslav  II,  surnamed  the  Pious.  It  seems  probable  that 
the  natural  detestation  that  the  old  chroniclers  felt  for  one 

1  This  Croatia,  the  extant  and  geographical  position  of  which  is  very 
uncertain,  must  not  be  confused  with  the  present  Croatia.  It  was 
probably  situated  in  the  lands  north  of  the  Carpathians  now  known  as 
Galicia. 


22  Bohemia 

who  had  obtained  the  throne  by  the  murder  of  his  brother 
induced  them  somewhat  to  praise  Boleslav  II  at  the 
expense  of  his  father,  and  to  attribute  to  him  conquests 
that  had  already  been  made  by  Boleslav  I.  It  is  certain 
that  early  in  the  reign  of  Boloslav  II  we  find  the  Bohemian 
frontiers  more  widely  extended  than  at  any  other  time,  even 
during  the  reigns  of  Ottokar  II  and  Charles  IV. 

Besides  Bohemia  itself,  Moravia,  a  large  part  of  Hungary 
stretching  from  the  Carpathians  to  the  Danube,  the  greater 
part  of  Silesia  including  Breslau,  wide  districts  of  Poland 
reaching  nearly  up  to  the  town  of  Lemberg,  and  touching 
the  frontiers  of  the  Russian  rulers  of  Kiew,  were  subject  to 
Boleslav  II. 

The  great  power  acquired  by  Boleslav  allowed  him  to 
assume  a  more  independent  attitude  towards  the  German 
kings ;  and  ecclesiastical  affairs  then  being  so  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  political  situation,  he  now  endeavoured  to 
render  the  Bohemian  Church  less  dependent  on  Germany. 

On  the  occasion  of  an  interview  with  the  Emperor  Otho 
(973),  Boleslav  obtained  his  consent  to  the  separation  of 
Bohemia,  and  the  wide  lands  then  incorporated  with  it, 
from  the  diocese  of  Regensburg.  Prague  was  to  become 
the  seat  of  a  bishopric:  and  the  Pope  gave  his  consent, 
though  under  the  express  conditions  that  the  new  bishopric 
was  not  to  be  considered  a  continuation  of  the  old  Moravian 
archbishopric,  and  that  the  liturgy  should  be  the  Latin,  not 
the  Slavonic  one,  which  still  had  many  adherents  in  the 
country.  The  Bohemian  bishopric  was  also  placed  under 
the  supremacy  of  the  German  archbishops  of  Maintz.  On 
the  proposal  of  Boleslav,  Thietmar,  a  German  who  had 
long  lived  in  Bohemia  and  was  thoroughly  versed  in  the 
language  of  the  country,  was,  by  the  clergy,  the  nobles,  and 
the  people,  elected  first  bishop  of  Prague  (973). 

Thietmar  only  lived  nine  years  after  his  election,  and 
Adalbert  or  Voytech,  a  Bohemian  noble,  son  of  the  voyvode 
of  Libitz,  was  then  chosen  as  bishop.  It  was  through  the 
efforts  of  Adalbert  that  Christianity  was  finally  estabhshed 
in  Bohemia ;  for  the  German  priests  of  the  diocese  of 
Regensburg,  to  which  the  country  had  formerly  belonged, 
had  made  little  impression  on  the  people,  whose  language 
they  mostly  did  not  understand. 

Adalbert,  however,  found  the  ruling  of  his  extensive 
diocese  very  difficult,  and  his  efforts  to  extirpate  polygamy 


An  Historical  Sketch  23 

and  other  still-prevailing  heathen  customs  unsuccessful. 
Becoming  discouraged,  he  obtained  permission  to  retire  to 
Rome,  where  he  entered  a  convent ;  but  he  returned  to 
Bohemia  three  years  later  on  the  urgent  request  of  Prince 
Boleslav.  Adalbert,  however,  later  again  left  Bohemia  in 
consequence  of  a  feud  with  other  nobles,  in  which  his 
brothers  had  become  involved,  and  in  which  Boleslav  had 
taken  the  part  of  their  enemies.  The  castle  of  Libitz,  to 
which  Adalbert's  brothers  had  retired,  was  stormed,  and 
they  were  put  to  death  by  order  of  Boleslav.  Adalbert 
himself  died  as  a  martyr  (997)  during  a  journey  in  the 
country  of  the  heathen  Prussians,  whom  he  had  attempted 
to  convert  to  the  Christian  faith. 

The  reigns  of  Boleslav  I  and  II  are  memorable  for  the 
great  centralization  of  the  sovereign  power  which  was 
achieved  by  these  princes.  It  has  been  mentioned  ^  that 
the  Bohemian  princes  originally  only  governed  directly  a 
certain  part  of  the  country — the  centre  of  which  was 
probably  the  castle  of  the  Vysehrad  near  Prague — and  that 
they  only  exercised  a  certain  ill-defined  supremacy  over  the 
voyvodes  who  ruled  the  other  parts  of  Bohemia.  This 
organization,  or  rather  absence  of  organization,  had  led  to 
innumerable  feuds  among  the  voyvodes,  as  well  as  to  con- 
stant revolts  on  their  part  against  the  prince.  The  Bohemian 
historians,  referring  to  this  period,  give  numerous  de- 
scriptions of  these  small  intestine  wars,  which  have  been 
omitted  here  as  being  of  no  interest  to  English  readers. 

Boleslav  I  and  II  succeeded  in  successfully  subduing 
these  local  rulers;  and  after  the  death  of  the  lords  of 
Libitz,  mentioned  above,  there  was  no  hereditary  voyvode 
in  Bohemia  except  the  prince.  Bohemia  was  henceforth 
only  divided  into  districts  (zupa),  at  the  head  of  each  of 
which  a  zupan  (burgrave)  appointed  by  the  prince  was 
placed. 

These  government  officials  soon  formed  a  new  nobility, 
which  gradually  took  the  place  of  the  old  territorial  nobles 
or  voyvodes.  During  the  powerful  reigns  of  the  two  first 
Boleslavs  the  princely  authority  was  greatly  strengthened, 
and  the  assemblies  or  Diets  which  still  took  place  ended 
by  having  a  merely  nominal  character ;  their  purpose  was 
rather  to  hear  the  prince's  will  than  to  formulate  the 
wishes  of  the  people. 

^  See  page  9. 


24  Bohemia 

Boleslav  II  died  in  999,  and  with  him  for  a  time  also  the 
greatness  of  his  country,  which  rapidly  declined  during  the 
rule  of  his  successors. 


CHAPTER    III 

THE  BOHEMIAN  PRINCES  FROM   THE   DEATH  OF   BOLESLAV    II 
TO    THE   ACCESSION    OF    PREMYSL   OTTOKAR    I    (999-II97) 

The  great  Bohemian  Empire  of  Boleslav  II,  like  most 
Slavonic  States  at  that  and  even  later  periods,  was  not 
destined  to  be  of  long  duration.  As  after  the  death  of 
Vratislav  I  of  Bohemia  and  Svatopluk  of  Moravia,  dissen- 
sions in  the  reigning  family  were  the  first  cause  of  the 
decline  of  the  country.  Boleslav  II  had  three  sons — 
Boleslav  III,  who  succeeded  him,  Jaromir,  and  Ulrich. 

Boleslav  III  is  described  as  being  cruel,  avaricious,  and 
distrustful.  An  old  chronicler^  tells  us  that  he  "vice 
basilisci  noxii  regnans  populum  ineffabiliter  constrinxit." 
The  dissensions  between  Boleslav  and  his  brothers  appear 
to  have  begun  immediately  after  their  father's  decease ;  and 
in  the  very  year  of  the  death  of  Boleslav  II  (999)  the 
Polish  Prince  Boleslav,  surnamed  Chrobri  (the  Brave),  son 
of  the  Bohemian  Princess  Dubravka,  invaded  the  territories 
of  his  brother-in-law.  Boleslav  (the  Brave),  first  attacked 
and  stormed  Cracow;  the  Bohemian  garrison  of  which 
town  was  slaughtered  after  a  brave  defence.  We  are  told 
that  in  the  almost  incredibly  short  period  of  one  year 
Boleslav  the  Brave  also  conquered  Moravia,  Silesia,  and 
the  whole  dominion  over  which  Boleslav  II  had  reigned, 
with  the  exception  of  Bohemia  itself.  Poland  now  for  a 
time  took  the  place  of  Bohemia  as  the  great  West-Slav 
power. 

Boleslav  III,  entirely  occupied  by  the  internal  divisions 
of  Bohemia,  seems  to  have  made  little  or  no  effort  to  defend 
the  dominion  to  which  he  had  succeeded.  Having  driven 
his  two  brothers  out  of  Bohemia,  he  hoped  now  to  reign 
uncontestedly ;  but  the  Bohemian  nobles  and  people,  to 
whom  his  tyranny  and  cruelty  had  become  intolerable, 
called  to  the  throne  the  Polish  Prince  Vladivoj,  a  brother 
of  Boleslav  the  Brave,  and  son  of  the  Bohemian  Princess 

^  Thietmar  of  Merseburg,  quoted  by  Palacky. 


An  Historical  Sketch  25 

Dubravka.  Boleslav  III  was  obliged  to  fly  from  Bohemia, 
and  after  wandering  through  Germany  at  last  sought  refuge 
with  his  former  enemy,  Boleslav  the  Brave  of  Poland.  In 
the  meantime  Vladivoj,  finding  that  the  dynasty  of  Pfemysl, 
whose  claims  in  consequence  of  the  crimes  of  Boleslav  III 
now  reverted  to  his  brothers  Jaromir  and  Ulrich,  had  still 
many  adherents,  endeavoured  to  strengthen  his  hold  on 
Bohemia  by  German  aid. 

He  therefore  appeared  at  the  court  of  the  German  King 
Henry  II  at  Regensburg,  and  not  only  consented  to  the 
payment  of  the  tribute  which  had  already  been  extorted 
from  several  Bohemian  princes,  but  also  became  a  vassal  of 
the  German  monarch  under  the  (German)  title  of  duke. 
Wladivoj  only  ruled  Bohemia  a  few  months,  and  died  in 
the  year  1003.  The  Bohemians  now  recalled  Jaromir  and 
his  brother,  and  chose  the  former  for  their  prince ;  but  his 
reign  also  was  only  of  a  few  months'  duration.  His  brother, 
Boleslav  III,  who  had  fled  to  Poland,  now  returned  to 
Bohemia,  under  the  protection  of  the  Polish  Prince  Boleslav 
the  Brave.  Boleslav  III  had  hardly  reassumed  the  govern- 
ment of  the  country  when  he  attempted  to  revenge  himself 
on  those  who  had  formerly  caused  his  downfall.  By  his 
order  many  of  the  nobles  were  murdered  at  a  banquet,  and 
the  Bohemians  again  revolted  against  the  tyrant. 

Called  in  by  the  Bohemians  themselves,  Boleslav  the 
Brave  again  entered  their  country,  and  after  having  caused 
his  brother-in-law  to  be  blinded  and  imprisoned  in  Poland, 
he  himself  assumed  the  government  of  Bohemia.  We  are 
told  that  he  meditated  making  Prague  the  capital  of  his  vast 
dominions,  and  that  he  preferred  Bohemia  to  his  more 
eastern  possessions. 

The  great  power  of  Boleslav  the  Brave  soon  became 
obnoxious  to  the  Germans,  who  always  considered  the 
existence  of  a  strong  Slav  power  on  their  frontier  as  a 
danger.  The  German  King  Henry  II  sent  envoys  to 
Boleslav  the  Brave,  requiring  him  to  acknowledge  himself  a 
vassal  of  the  German  Empire  in  respect  of  the  newly-con- 
quered Bohemia.  Boleslav  refused  this  proposal,  and  war 
with  Germany  broke  out  (1004).  The  princes  of  the  house 
of  Pfemysl,  Jaromir  and  Ulrich,  entered  Bohemia  as  allies 
of  the  Germans,  and  with  the  aid  of  sympathizers  in  thie 
town  succeeded  in  capturing  Prague  by  surprise,  and  ex- 
pelling the  Poles  from  it,  even  before  the  Germans  had 
B2 


26  Bohemia 

arrived  before  the  city.  With  German  aid  the  Poles  were 
driven  out  of  Bohemia,  and  Jaromir  ascended  the  throne 
with  the  sanction  of  the  German  king,  probably — though 
this  is  not  positively  mentioned — under  the  condition  of 
paying  the  former  tribute.  The  Bohemians  continued  the 
war  against  Poland  as  allies  of  the  German  king  up  to  the 
year  1013,  when  Henry  II  made  peace  with  Boleslav  the 
Brave.  By  this  treaty  Boleslav  was  to  retain  all  his  con- 
quests, with  the  exception  of  Bohemia,  that  country  being 
thus  reduced  to  its  narrowest  limits,  its  natural  frontier. 

Even  their  great  misfortunes  did  not  induce  the  princes 
of  the  house  of  Pfemysl  to  desist  from  their  family  quarrels. 
About  this  time  Ulrich  revolted  against  Jaromir  ;  and  both 
brothers  appealing  to  the  German  king,  Henry  II,  foi 
reasons  which  are  not  stated  by  the  chroniclers,  awarded 
the  crown  to  Ulrich.  He  also  caused  Jaromir,  who  had 
sought  refuge  with  him,  to  be  delivered  over  to  his  brother, 
by  whose  orders  he  was  imprisoned  in  the  castle  of  Lysa. 

The  only  two  remaining  princes  of  the  house  of  Pfemysl  ^ 
having  no  descendants,  it  seemed  at  this  period  probable 
that  Libussa's  prophecy  would  prove  untrue ;  but  the  old 
chroniclers  tell  us  that  the  extinction  of  the  race  of  Pfemysl 
was  averted  by  a  romantic  incident.  When  Prince  Ulrich 
— whose  wife  was  childless — was  returning  from  a  hunting 
expedition  to  his  castle  of  Postelberg,  he  rode  through  the 
village  of  Peruc,  and  saw  a  young  and  beautiful  maiden 
who  was  washing  linen  at  a  fountain.^  Ulrich  immediately 
became  violently  enamoured  with  this  maiden,  whose  name 
was  Bozena,  and  he  married  her.^  She  became  the  mother 
of  the  brave  and  handsome  Bfetislav,  the  restorer  of  the 
greatness  of  Bohemia. 

The  power  of  Poland,  which  country  had  for  some  time 
taken  the  place  of  Bohemia  as  the  most  powerful  West-Slav 
State,  did  not  outlast  the  life  of  Boleslav  the  Brave.  After 
his  death  (1025)  dissensions  broke  out  among  his  sons,  and 
both  Hungary  and  Bohemia  became  involved  in  these 
intestine  dissensions.  Ulrich  sent  an  army  under  his  brave 
son  Bfetislav  into  Moravia,  which   the   Bohemians  always 

*  Boleslav  III  had  died  in  prison  in  Poland. 

^  Bozena's  fountain  is  still  shown  at  Peruc. 

^  The  old  chroniclers  insist  on  this  marriage  to  vindicate  the  legiti- 
macy of  Bfetislav,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  polygamy  lingered  in 
Bohemia  some  time  after  the  Christian  faith  had  been  accepted. 


An  Historical  Sketch  27 

considered  a  dependency  of  their  crown,  but  which  at  that 
time  was  also  claimed  by  the  Hungarian  King  Stephen. 
Bfetislav  succeeded  in  defeating  the  Hungarians ;  and  war 
was  ended  in  1031  by  a  treaty  which  divided  the  ancient 
Moravian  lands.  The  country  now  known  as  Moravia  re- 
turned to  Bohemia,  whilst  the  other  former  Moravian  lands 
(now  the  Slav  districts  of  Northern  Hungary)  fell  to  the 
Hungarian  king.  The  line  of  boundary  then  agreed  upon 
has  remained  the  frontier  between  Moravia  and  Hungary 
up  to  the  present  day.  Ulrich  appointed  his  son  Bretislav 
ruler  of  Moravia  under  his  own  supremacy,  and  this  position 
has  since  then  often  been  held  by  the  heir  of  the  Bohemian 
crown. 

Unfortunately,  Ulrich  soon  became  jealous  of  his  son  and 
drove  him  from  Moravia.  Bretislav,  who  had  also  incurred 
his  father's  displeasure  by  taking  the  part  of  his  uncle 
Jaromir  (whom  Ulrich  had  released  from  the  castle  of  Lysa 
and  who  claimed  to  share  the  sovereignty  with  his  brother), 
fled  to  the  court  of  the  German  Emperor  Conrad.  The 
Germans,  ever  glad  of  an  opportunity  for  interfering  in  the 
affairs  of  Bohemia,  supported  the  claims  of  Jaromir  and 
Bfetislav,  and  invaded  the  country,  into  which  they  were 
sumfnoned  by  some  claimants  to  the  Bohemian  throne. 
Ulrich's  death  at  this  time  (1037),  however,  secured  the 
crown  to  Bfetislav,  in  whose  favour  Jaromir  also  renounced 
all  claims. 

Bfetislav  I,  whom  Palacky  calls  the  restorer  of  Bohemia, 
strengthened  his  country  both  by  conquests  and  by  re-estab- 
lishing internal  order.  One  of  the  chief  causes  that  defeated 
Bfetislav's  plans  (and  undoubtedly  these  plans  aimed  at 
nothing  less  than  the  formation  of  a  great  West-slav  empire) 
was  the  accession  about  this  time  of  Henry  III  of  Franconia, 
one  of  the  most  powerful  sovereigns  Germany  ever 
possessed.^  Poland,  at  the  time  of  the  accession  of 
Bfetislav  I,  was  in  a  state  of  complete  anarchy,  and  he 
seized  on  this  opportunity  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  that 
country.  Bfetislav  successfully  overran  Silesia  and  sub- 
sequently the  western  districts  of  Poland,  where  the  town  of 
Cracow  was  taken  by  storm.  The  victorious  Bohemian 
army   then    marched   further   into   Poland   and    captured 

1  Palacky  notices  that  the  most  enterprising  princes  of  ancient 
Bohemia,  Boleslav  I  and  Bfetislav  I,  were  contemporaries  and  adver- 
saries of  Germany's  two  greatest  emperors,  Otho  I  and  Henry  III. 


28  Bohemia 

Gnesen,  the  former  capital  of  the  country.  The  body  of 
St.  Adalbert,  the  former  Bishop  of  Prague  (who  had  suffered 
martyrdom  near  Gnesen  and  was  interred  there),  was 
carried  away  to  Prague  by  the  victorious  Bohemians  (1039). 

Bohemia,  Moravia,  Silesia,  and  Poland  now  being  united 
under  one  ruler,  the  idea  of  a  West-Slav  empire  seemed  on 
the  point  of  being  realized ;  but  this  time  also  Germany 
stepped  in  to  prevent  the  formation  of  a  powerful  Slav 
State  on  her  borders.  Queen  Richsa  of  Poland,  who 
governed  that  country  for  her  infant  son,  appealed  to  the 
German  Emperor  Henry  III  for  aid,  which  was  immediately 
granted.  In  the  folio wmg  year  (1040)  two  German  armies 
attacked  Bohemia. 

The  one  commanded  by  the  Emperor  himself  attempted 
to  enter  the  country  from  Bavaria,  but  was  signally  defeated 
in  a  great  battle  which  was  fought  in  the  defiles  of  the 
Sumava  (Bohemian  forest),  the  woody  mountains  that  then, 
as  now,  form  the  frontier  between  Bavaria  and  Bohemia. 
In  consequence  of  this  defeat  the  other  German  army, 
which  had  entered  Bohemia  by  the  Krusne  Hory  (Ore 
Mountains),  by  order  of  the  Emperor  also  retired  into 
Germany. 

The  Germans  were,  however,  not  long  in  seeking  revenge, 
and  again  attacked  Bohemia  in  the  following  year  (1041). 
The  western  army,  again  commanded  by  the  Emperor, 
succeeded  this  time  — guided  by  a  German  hermit — in 
crossing  the  passes  of  the  Sumava.  The  other  German 
army  entered  Bohemia  through  the  Krusne  Hory  almost 
without  resistance,  through  the  treachery  of  the  leader  of  the 
Moravian  troops,  to  whom  Bfetislav  had  entrusted  the 
defence  of  that  part  of  the  frontier.  When  the  victorious 
German  armies  had  arrived  before  Prague,  Bfetislav  was 
obliged  to  conclude  peace  on  very  unfavourable  conditions. 
He  submitted  to  paying  tribute  to  Germany,  and  was 
obliged  to  give  up  all  his  conquests  in  Poland.  Only 
Moravia  and  a  small  part  of  Silesia  remained  with  Bohemia. 

The  later  years  of  Bfetislav  I  were  peaceful,  and  from  the 
scanty  records  of  his  reign  it  appears  that  he  exerted  him- 
self to  restore  order  and  prosperity  to  a  country  that  had 
suffered  so  much  from  civil  and  foreign  wars.  Bfetislav  also 
established  a  regular  order  of  succession  to  the  throne,  to 
obviate  the  constant  strugQ,lcs  among  the  members  of  the 
reigning  family  (1054).     With  the  consent  of  the  nobles  he 


An  Historical  Sketch  29 

decreed  that  the  oldest  member  of  the  house  of  Premysl 
was  alone  to  be  sovereign  ruler  of  Bohemia,  which  was 
always  to  remain  undivided.  The  younger  princes  of  the 
reigning  family  were  to  receive  lands  in  Moravia,  which 
they  were  to  rule  under  the  supremacy  of  the  head  of  the 
Pre  my  slide  dynasty. 

Bfetislav  I  died  in  1055,  and  left  five  sons,  the  eldest  of 
whom,  Spytihnev,  who  had  been  ruler  of  Moravia  during 
his  father's  lifetime,  succeeded  him.  Spytihnev  only  reigned 
six  years,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  brother  Vratislav 
(1061)  j  ^  whilst  the  government  of  Moravia  was — under  the 
supremacy  of  Vratislav — divided  between  two  of  the 
younger  brothers,  Conrad  and  Otho  ;  the  former  of  whom 
was  to  reside  at  Brunn,  the  latter  at  Olmiitz. 

Bohemia  having  long  been  to  a  certain  though  limited 
extent  dependent  on  the  powerful  German  Empire,  it  was 
inevitable  that  the  country  should  become  involved  in  the 
internal  troubles  which  at  that  time  broke  out  in  Germany. 
A  great  number  of  German  princes  had  taken  the  part  of 
Gregory  VII  in  that  struggle  with  Henry  IV — who  had  in 
the  meantime  succeeded  his  father — which  is  known  in 
history  as  the  "  struggle  for  investitures."  Vratislav  sided 
with  the  Emperor,  and  successfully  availed  himself  of  the 
opportunity  which  the  dissensions  in  Germany  afforded  for 
the  purpose  of  strengthening  the  independence  and  increas- 
ing the  power  of  Bohemia.  The  Bohemian  troops  took 
part  as  allies  of  the  German  Emperor  in  the  many  battles 
that  he  fought  against  the  Saxons  and  other  supporters  of 
the  Pope ;  and  we  are  specially  told  that  Henry  IV's  great 
victory  at  Hohenburg  on  the  Unstrutt  (1075)  was  largely 
due  to  his  Bohemian  allies.  We  also  read  that  three  hun- 
dred Bohemian  warriors  formed  part  of  the  Emperor's  army 
which  attacked  Rome  (1081),  and  that  their  leader,  Wiprecht 
of  Groitsch,  was  one  of  the  first  to  scale  the  walls  of  the 
Leonine  city.  The  chroniclers  also  tell  us  that  the  bravery 
of  the  Bohemians  v/as  so  great,  that  only  nine  of  the  three 
hundred  returned  to  their  native  land. 

It  was  only  natural  that  the  German  Emperor  should 
reward  the  Bohemian  prince  who  had  proved  his  friend 
when  the  greater  part  of  Germany  had  deserted  him. 
Henry  awarded  to  Vratislav  the  lands  of  the  Margrave  of 
Austria,  who  had  sided  with  the  Pope  ;  but  though  Vratislav 
^  Has  prince,  I  as  king  of  Bohemia. 


30  Bohemia 

defeated  the  Austrians  in  the  great  battle  of  Mailberg  (1082) 
he  did  not  succeed  in  permanently  retaining  their  country. 
In  1086  the  Emperor,  as  a  further  reward,  granted  Prince 
Vratislav  the  title  of  king,  and  presented  him  with  a  golden 
crown.  The  coronation  of  Vratislav  at  Prague  is  an  event 
of  great  importance  in  Bohemian  history,  for  the  title  of 
king  was  then  for  the  first  time  borne  by  a  ruler  of  that 
country.  Henry,  however,  stipulated  that  the  title  of  king 
should  only  be  used  by  Vratislav  himself,  and  should  not 
be  hereditary.  It  was  settled,  probably  at  the  same  time, 
that  in  consequence  of  the  sums  lent  by  Vratislav  to  the 
Emperor  the  former  tribute  should  no  longer  be  paid  by 
the  Bohemian  prince.  They  were,  however,  obliged  to 
send  three  hundred  soldiers  as  auxiliaries  to  the  German 
kings  on  the  occasion  of  their  expeditions  to  Italy,  which 
were  undertaken  for  the  purpose  of  being  crowned  at  Rome 
by  the  Pope.  Henceforth,  down  to  the  fifteenth  century, 
this  remained  the  only  real  charge  and  obligation  by  which 
Bohemia  was  permanently  rendered  dependent  on  the 
supremacy  of  the  German  Empire.^ 

The  dissensions  among  the  reigning  family,  so  frequent 
in  the  history  of  Bohemia,  did  not  cease  under  King 
Vratislav.  We  read  of  conflicts  between  him  and  his 
brothers,  the  rulers  of  Moravia,  and  a  serious  quarrel  broke 
out  in  1092  between  the  king  and  his  eldest  son,  Bfetislav. 
Bfetislav,  having  been  insulted  by  a  courtier  of  his  father 
named  Zderad,  caused  him  to  be  murdered,  and  fled  to  the 
Hungarian  court,  where  he  remained  until  his  father  died. 
Vratislav  was  killed  by  a  fall  when  out  hunting  (1092),  and 
was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Conrad,  as  the  family  regula- 
tions made  by  Bretislav  I  awarded  the  throne  to  the  eldest 
member  of  the  house  of  Pfemysl,  not  to  the  eldest  son  of 
the  late  reigning  prince. 

Conrad  only  lived  eight  months  after  his  accession  to 
the  throne,  and  Bretislav  II  now  became  prince  of 
Bohemia.  We  are  told  that  he  greatly  exerted  himself  to 
extirpate  paganism,  which  still  lingered  in  the  outlying 
districts  of  Bohemia ;  and  that  he  forbade  the  pilgrimages 
which  the  heathen  in  Bohemia  still  undertook  to  the  pagan 
sanctuary  of  Arcona,^  their  temples  in  Bohemia  having 
been  destroyed. 

As  a  proof  that  the  custom  of  holding  religious  services 
^  Palack/.  2  On  the  island  of  Rugen  in  the  Baltic  Sea. 


An  Historical  Sketch  31 

in  the  language  of  the  country  had  not  died  out  in  Bohemia 
at  this  period,  it  is  of  interest  to  read  that  Bretislav  II 
availed  himself  of  dissensions  among  the  Slavonic  monks 
of  the  monastery  of  St.  Prokop  on  the  Sazava,  for  the 
purpose  of  driving  them  out  of  their  convents  and  replacing 
them  by  Latin  monks  (1096).  Bretislav  II  is  greatly 
blamed  by  Bohemian  historians  for  having  changed  the 
order  of  succession  established  by  his  grandfather,  Bretislav 
I,  by  appointing  his  brother  Bofivoj  his  successor,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  just  claims  of  Ulrich,  son  of  Conrad,  then  the 
eldest  prince  of  the  dynasty  of  Pfemysl.  Bretislav  II  was 
murdered  shortly  after  this  (noo),  probably  by  the  emissary 
of  some  nobles  whom  he  had  offended. 

The  wearisome  dissensions  in  the  reigning  family  of 
Bohemia  began  afresh  immediately  after  Bfetislav's  death, 
but  a  detailed  account  of  them  can  be  of  little  interest  to 
any  but  Bohemian  readers.  These  dissensions  were  en- 
couraged by  the  nobles  of  the  land,  who,  at  first  mere 
officials  appointed  by  the  princes,^  were  now  gradually 
assuming  a  more  independent  attitude.  The  foundations 
of  the  princely  power,  such  as  it  had  developed  itself  since 
the  final  overthrow  of  the  former  hereditary  voy vodes,  were 
undermined.  The  new  nobles,  aware  of  the  advantages 
which  dissensions  in  the  reigning  family  afforded  them, 
incited  the  Pfemyslides  one  against  the  other  as  much  as 
in  them  lay ;  caused  wars  between  them ;  enriched  them- 
selves, and  raised  their  own  power  to  the  prejudice  of  that 
of  the  prince.2 

Bofivoj,  according  to  the  decision  of  his  brother,  ascended 
the  throne,  and  at  first  successfully  defended  himself 
against  Ulrich,  son  of  Conrad,  who  considered  himself  the 
rightful  heir  to  the  throne.  Bofivoj  was,  however,  de- 
throned shortly  afterwards  by  another  cousin,  Svatopluk, 
son  of  Otho,  lord  of  Olmiitz.  His  short  reign  is  only  a 
record  of  incessant  struggles  with  the  all-powerful  nobles, 
by  one  of  whom  he  was  assassinated  (1109),  after  having 
ruled  Bohemia  only  two  years. 

After  Svatopluk's  death  there  were  three  parties  in 
Bohemia — one  favouring  the  reinstatement  of  Bofivoj, 
whilst  another  recognized  Otho  of  Olmiitz,  brother  of 
Svatopluk,  as  sovereign.  A  third  party,  which  ultimately 
proved  successful,  supported  Bofivoj 's  brother,  Vladislav. 
1  See  Chapter  II.  2  Tomek. 


32  Bohemia 

The  rival  competitors — as  usual — appealed  to  the  German 
Emperor  (then  Henry  V),  who,  though  he  appears  to  have 
lured  them  all  with  promises,  finally  awarded  the  throne  to 
Vladislav.  Civil  war  continued  till  Henry  V,  called  in  by 
Vladislav,  entered  Bohemia.  Bofivoj  was  made  a  prisoner, 
and,  by  order  of  the  German  Emperor,  imprisoned  in  a 
castle  on  the  Rhine;  whilst  Otho  was  confined  by  his 
cousin  in  the  castle  of  Piirglitz  in  Bohemia.  Bofivoj's 
adherents  continued  the  civil  war ;  and  Sobeslav,  a  brother 
of  Vladislav  and  Boleslav,  became  their  leader.  Sobeslav 
obtained  aid  from  the  Polish  King  Boleslav,  who,  entering 
Bohemia,  defeated  Vladislav  in  a  battle  which  was  fought 
at  the  foot  of  the  Krkonose  or  Giant  mountains. 

A  compromise  was  then  arrived  at  (mi),  by  which 
at  least  temporary  tranquillity  was  restored  to  Bohemia. 
Vladislav  remained  sovereign,  whilst  certain  districts,  both 
in  Bohemia  and  in  Moravia,  were  allotted  to  Bofivoj  and 
Sobeslav — and  probably  also  to  Otho — which  they  were  to 
rule  under  the  supremacy  of  Vladislav. 

Vladislav  died  in  1125,  and  a  few  days  before  his  death 
declared  his  brother  Sobeslav  his  successor.  As  usual,  the 
discarded  claimant  to  the  throne,  Otho,  applied  for  German 
aid,  and  the  Emperor  Lothair,  who  in  this  year  (1125) 
succeeded  Henry  V,  also  followed  tl>e  example  of  his 
predecessors,  and  took  up  Otho's  cause.  Lothair  seized 
this  opportunity  for  reaffirming  certain  claims  of  supremacy 
which  the  German  sovereigns  had  always  maintained,  but 
which  the  Bohemians  had  always  refused  to  recognize.  He 
declared  that  no  prince  had  a  right  to  ascend  the  Bohemian 
throne  before  having  received  that  country  as  a  fief  from 
the  rulers  of  Germany.  Sobeslav  refused  to  recognize  these 
claims,  and  in  spite  of  the  intestine  divisions  he  seems  to 
have  been  supported  by  his  countrymen.  In  a  very  short 
time  he  collected  a  large  army,  v/ith  which  he  defeated 
(at  Kulm,  near  Teplitz)  the  German  troops  of  Lothair,  that 
had  crossed  the  Giant  Mountains.  Lothair  himself, 
and  the  remnants  of  the  German  army,  were  entirely 
surrounded  by  the  Bohemians.  An  interview  then  took 
place  between  Lothair  and  Sobeslav,  when  the  latter 
declared  that  though  always  ready  to  maintain  the  former 
agreement  between  Henry  IV  and  King  Vratislav,^  he 
could  not  consent  to  any  further  limitation  to  the  indepen- 
^  See  page  30. 


An  Historical  Sketch  33 

dence  of  Bohemia.  Lothair  consented  to  these  terms,  and 
from  this  time  peace  between  Germany  and  Bohemia 
remained  undisturbed  for  some  years. 

As  a  proof  of  this  we  read  that  Conrad  III,  Lothair's 
successor,  conferred  on  Sobeslav  the  title  of  hereditary  cup- 
bearer of  the  Empire,  thus  granting  him  a  certain  influence 
on  the  election  of  the  German  kings.  "  Bohemia,  which 
hitherto  had  only  had  certain  obligations  towards  its  power- 
ful neighbour  the  German  Empire,  henceforth  also  enjoyed 
certain  rights  with  regard  to  Germany."  ^ 

Sobeslav  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  have  been  successful  in 
suppressing  the  intestine  dissensions  which  constantly  broke 
out  afresh,  particularly  now  that  the  members  of  the 
Pfemysl  dynasty  'had  become  very  numerous.  At  a  Diet 
which  assembled  at  Sadska  in  1138,  he  obtained  the  consent 
of  the  nobles  to  a  change  in  the  order  of  succession,  by 
which  his  eldest  son  Vladislav  was  declared  heir  to  the 
throne. 

Sobeslav  died  two  years  afterwards  (1140).  On  his 
death  the  nobles,  who  had  only  consented  to  the  succession 
of  his  son  from  dread  of  the  father,  elected  Vladislav  11,^ 
son  of  Vladislav  I  and  nephew  of  Sobeslav,  as  their  prince. 

Vladislav  II  had  probably  been  elected  in  the  place  of 
his  cousin  beca.use  the  nobles  hoped  to  find  him  more 
amenable  to  their  wishes ;  but,  relying  on  the  German 
alliance  which  he  maintained,  he  soon  attempted  to  rule  as 
an  autocrat.  An  insurrection  broke  out  only  two  years 
after  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  and  the  malcontents,  among 
whom  was  Vladislav,  son  of  Sobeslav,  now  proclaimed 
another  member  of  the  Pfemysl  dynasty,  Conrad  of  Znoymo,^ 
as  their  prince. 

Vladislav,  though  at  first  defeated  by  the  insurgents, 
finally — with  the  aid  of  the  German  Emperor  Conrad — 
succeeded  in  re-establishing  his  sovereign  rights  over  the 
whole  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia  (1143). 

We  read  that  in  the  same  year  the  Pope  sent  Cardinal 
Guido  as  his  legate  to  Bohemia,  with  the  mission  of  re- 
establishing order  among  the  Bohemian  clergy,  which  had 
been  greatly  disturbed  during  the  many  civil  wars.    Cardinal 

1  Tomek. 

2  II  as  prince,  I  as  king  of  Bohemia  ;  this  Vladislav  must  not  be 
confounded  with  his  cousin  Vladislav,  son  of  Sobeslav. 

^  In  German  Znaym. 


34  Bohemia 

Guido  was  also  instructed  to  affirm  the  regulations  of  the 
Roman  Church  with  regard  to  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy, 
and  he  decreed  that  all  married  priests  were  either  to 
separate  from  their  wives,  or  to  renounce  their  dignities.^ 

During  the  reign  of  Vladislav  II  the  second  crusade  took 
place.  The  Bohemian  prince  took  part  in  this  crusade,  the 
leaders  of  which  were  his  ally  the  Emperor  Conrad  III, 
and  King  Louis  VII,  of  France.  Vladislav  himself  led  the 
Bohemian  forces  to  the  East ;  but,  discouraged  by  the 
unfavourable  results  of  the  campaign,  he  left  his  army 
in  Asia,  and,  recommending  his  troops  to  the  protection 
of  the  French  king,  returned  to  his  country  by  way  of 
Constantinople.^ 

After  the  death  of  the  German  Emperor  Conrad  III 
(1152),  the  relations  between  his  successor  Frederick  I 
(Barbarossa)  and  Vladislav  were  at  first  somewhat 
strained.  The  German  sovereign  favoured  the  claims  of 
several  of  the  Pfemysl  princes  who  had  appealed  to  him ; 
and  he  occupied  Upper  Lusatia,  which  Vladislav,  after  the 
extinction  of  the  line  of  local  rulers,  claimed  as  a  fief  of 
the  Bohemian  crown. 

A  settlement  was  soon  arrived  at,  as  Frederick  Barbarossa 
at  that  time  desired  to  collect  a  large  army  against  Milan 
and  the  confederate  towns  of  Northern  Italy.  By  a  treaty 
concluded  in  11 56  the  German  king"  ceded  Upper  Lusatia 
to  the  Bohemian  prince,  and  also  conferred  the  title  of  king 
on  him  and  all  his  successors. 

On  the  other  hand,  Vladislav  promised  to  join  the 
German  army  in  its  march  to  Italy  with  a  large  force, 
though  the  former  treaties  only  obliged  him  to  send  three 
hundred  auxiliaries.  Vladislav  assembled  an  army  of  ten 
thousand  men  ;  and  we  are  told  that  this  campaign,  more 
than  any  previous  one,  spread  the  fame  of  the  bravery  of 
the  Bohemians  through  the  most  distant  lands.  The 
Bohemian   army   took   part   in    the   siege   of  Milan,   and 

^  It  may  be  noticed  as  a  proof  of  how  frequent  marriage  at  that  time 
was  among  the  Bohemian  clergy,  even  of  the  highest  rank,  that  we 
find  Jurata  provost  of  Prague,  Peter  dean  of  the  cathedral  of  Prague, 
Hugo  provost  of  Vysehrad,  Thomas  dean  of  the  cathedral  of  Olmiitz, 
mentioned  among  the  married  ecclesiastics. 

^  Palacky  tells  us  that  while  at  Constantinople  Vladislav  concluded 
a  treaty  with  the  Greek  Emperor  Emanuel,  and  that  he  was  henceforth 
by  the  Greeks  considered  as  a  vassal  of  their  Emperor.  Palacky  gives 
us  no  details  as  to  these  mysterious  negotiations. 


An  Historical  Sketch  35 

Vladislav  himself  is  said  to  have  killed  Dacio,  one  of 
the  leaders  of  the  Milanese,  on  the  occasion  of  a  sortie. 
After  the  capitulation  of  Milan,  Vladislav  II  returned  to  his 
country,  and  arrived  at  Prague  towards  the  end  of  the  year 
1158. 

Not  long  after  this  (1164)  Vladislav  became  involved  in 
a  war  that  had  broken  out  in  Hungary,  between  tw^o  rival 
claimants  to  that  throne.  In  this  war  also  Vladislav  II 
was  victorious;  and  he  succeeded  in  establishing  Stephen 
III,  who  had  invoked  his  aid,  on  the  throne,  though  the 
rival  claimant  had  obtained  aid  from  the  Greek  Emperor. 

In  1 173  Vladislav,  tired  out  by  his  many  wars,  and  per- 
haps still  more  by  the  internal  dissensions  which  still  con- 
tinued, abdicated  in  favour  of  his  eldest  son  Frederick,  and 
retired  to  the  monastery  of  Strahow  near  Prague. 

The  years  following  the  abdication  of  Vladislav  are 
noticeable  because  of  the  uninterrupted  struggle  for  supre- 
macy between  numerous  members  of  the  dynasty  of  Pf  emysl, 
in  twenty-four  years  no  less  than  ten  changes  occurring  in 
the  person  of  the  sovereign.  As  Palacky  himself  tells  us 
that  the  genealogy  of  the  family  of  Premysl  at  this  period 
is  very  obscure,  it  could  be  of  no  interest  to  attempt  to 
decide  the  legitimacy  of  the  claims  of  the  various  pretenders, 
or  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  the  feuds  which  ensued. 
It  is  of  more  interest  to  note  that  in  consequence  of  these 
civil  wars,  the  authority  of  Germany  over  Bohemia  became 
far  greater  than  before. 

Frederick  was,  almost  immediately  after  his  accession, 
driven  from  the  throne  by  Sobeslav  (II),  one  of  his  rivals 
(11 74).  Sobeslav  maintained  himself  for  some  time  with 
the  aid  of  Frederick  Barbarossa,  who  recognized  him  as 
Prince  of  Bohemia,  though  he  decreed  that  the  title  of  king 
should  no  longer  be  borne  by  the  rulers  of  that  country. 
The  German  Emperor,  however,  soon  changed  sides.  En- 
couraged by  him,  Frederick  returned  to  Bohemia  (1178),^ 
and  waged  war  against  Sobeslav  up  to  the  time  of  the  latter's 
death  (1180).  Frederick,  unfortunately,  soon  found  a  new 
rival  in  Conrad  of  Znoymo,  also  a  prince  of  the  Premysl 
dynasty.  Frederick  was  again  obliged  to  fly  from  Bohemia ; 
and  the  Emperor  Frederick  Barbarossa  now  summoned 
Conrad  and  the  Bohemian  nobles  who  adhered  to  him,  to 
appear  at  the  Imperial  court  at  Regensburg,  as  he  claimed 
the  right  to  settle  the  dissensions  in  Bohemia. 


36 


Bohemia 


Conrad  and  the  Bohemian  nobles  obeyed  the  Imperial 
command,  and  thus  tacitly  admitted  the  claims  of  Frederick 
Barbarossa.  The  Emperor  awarded  Bohemia  to  Frederick, 
and  Moravia  to  Conrad ;  and  we  are  told,  as  a  proof  of  the 
terrorism  he  exercised,  that  when  the  Bohemian  prince  and 
nobles  appeared  before  him  to  hear  his  decision,  he  caused 
a  large  number  of  executioners'  axes  to  be  brought  into  the 
hall  where  he  received  them. 

This  settlement  was  not  of  long  duration.  Besides  the 
two  candidates  already  mentioned,  the  Pfemysl  princes 
Venceslas,  Pfemysl  Ottokar,  a  brother  of  Frederick, 
Bfetislav,  and  Vladislav,  all  claimed  the  throne  about  this 
time.  Another  prolonged  struggle  ensued,  and  it  was  only 
after  the  deaths  of  Frederick,  Conrad,  and  Bfetislav,  and 
the  renunciations  of  Venceslas  and  Vladislav,  that  Pfemysl 
Ottokar  became  undisputed  ruler  of  Bohemia  (1197);  the 
government  of  Moravia  fell  to  Vladislav,  with  the  title  of 
margrave,  and  under  the  supremacy  of  Pfemysl  Ottokar. 

The  period  in  the  history  of  Bohemia  which  ends  with 
the  accession  of  Pfemysl  Ottokar  I  is  noticeable  for  two 
important  facts — the  rise  of  the  power  of  the  nobility,  and 
the  extension  of  German  influence. 

The  constant  struggle  between  the  Pfemyslides  had  very 
often  obliged  them  to  seek  aid  from  the  powerful  nobles, 
who  from  having  been  government  officials  had  gradually 
become  territorial  magnates,  as  they  demanded  and  received 
large  grants  of  land  from  the  princes  whose  cause  they 
favoured.  These  lands  v,'ere  usually  granted  as  hereditary 
gifts,  and  their  owners  therefore  became  less  dependent  on 
the  favour  of  the  reigning  prince,  though  they  still  desired 
to  hold  the  great  State  appointments,  and,  indeed,  soon 
began  to  consider  themselves  as  having  an  exclusive  claim 
on  them.  It  is  an  interesting  proof  of  the  increasing  im- 
portance of  the  nobility  that  some  of  the  oldest  noble 
families  of  Bohemia — a  few  of  whom  are  still  represented — 
are  able  to  trace  their  origin  up  to  this  period ;  surnames, 
however,  were  not  yet  fixed. 

The  influence  of  Germany  over  Bohemia  became  greater 
at  this  period,  both  with  reference  to  the  external  relations  to 
that  country  and  as  regards  the  internal  condition  of  Bohemia. 
Legally,  the  only  bond  which  denoted  the  dependency  of 
Bohemia  on  Germany  was  the  obligation  of  sending  three 
hundred  soldiers  to  take  part  in  the  Italian  expeditions  of 


An  Historical  Sketch  37 

the  German  kings  ;  but  when,  as  at  this  period,  Germany  was 
strong  and  Bohemia  weak,  and  divided  against  herself,  the 
German  kings  claimed  and  exercised  far  greater  rights  ;  they, 
in  fact,  claimed  the  power  of  nominating  the  sovereigns  of 
Bohemia,  or  at  least  of  confirming  their  election. 

We  have  already  read  by  what  arguments  Frederick 
Barbarossa  persuaded  the  Bohemian  nobles  to  accept  his 
settlement  of  their  differences ;  and  Henry  VI  is  even  said 
to  have  promised  the  crown  of  Bohemia  to  Pfemysl  Ottokar 
on  payment  of  6000  marks  of  silver. 

While  Bohemia  thus  became  more  dependent  on  Germany, 
the  German  element  also  acquired  greater  importance  in  the 
country  itself.  As  early  as  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century 
a  small  German  settlement  existed  at  Prague,  which  received 
certain  privileges  from  Sobeslav  II ;  the  clergy  was  largely 
of  German  nationality,  and  perhaps  from  dislike  to  the 
cust.om  of  holding  the  religious  services  in  the  language  of 
the  countr)^ — a  custom  that  for  a  long  time  partially  con- 
tinued in  Bohemia — favoured  the  German  element  in  every 
way.  Another  cause  of  the  spread  of  the  German  language 
and  nationality  at  this  period  was  the  circumstance  that  all 
the  wives  of  the  Bohemian  princes,  with  the  exception  of 
the  peasant-princess  Bozena,  were  of  foreign,  frequently 
of  German,  nationality.  These  princesses  often  brought 
German  chaplains  and  other  dependents  in  their  suite,  and 
the  Bohemian  nobles  also  acquired  the  German  language, 
which  became  to  a  certain  extent  the  language  of  the  court ; 
the  German  princesses  naturally  taught  their  children  their 
own  language  from  earHest  youth. 

This  feeling  is  strongly  expressed  by  the  contemporary 
chronicler  Dalimil,i  ^y^-^q  niakes  the  Bohemian  prince 
Ulrich  say — 

"  Rather  would  I  entrust  myself  to  a  Bohemian  peasant 
girl  than  that  I  should  take  a  German  queen  for  my  v/ife. 
Every  heart  clings  to  its  own  nation ;  therefore  would  a 
German  woman  less  favour  my  language.  A  German 
woman  will  have  German  servants ;  German  will  she  teach 
my  children." 

^  See  my  History  of  Boheinian  Literature,  2nd  ed.  pp.  29-35. 


38 


Bohemia 


CHAPTER   IV 


THE  BOHEMIAN  KINGS  FROM  THE  ACCESSION  OF  PREMYSL 
OTTOKAR  I  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  JOHN  OF  LUXEMBURG 
(1197-1346) 

At  the  time  when  Premysl  Ottokar  I  became  undisputed 
ruler  of  Bohemia,  the  internal  condition  of  Germany  was 
favourable  to  the  interests  of  the  Bohemian  princes,  for 
whom  the  only  possible  policy  consisted  in  maintaining 
their  country's  independence  from  Germany,  as  far  as  the 
political  situation  enabled  them  to  do  so.  At  this  period 
Bohemia's  connection  with  Germany,  formerly  so  burden- 
some, suddenly  became  the  source  of  many  advantages. 
During  the  internal  struggles  in  Germany  the  Bohemian 
king,  as  the  most  powerful  and  the  most  independent  of  the 
princes  of  the  Empire,  was  able  to  obtain  preponderance 
for  whichever  of  the  claimants  to  the  German  crown  he 
favoured. 

The  German  Emperor  Henry  IV  died  in  the  year  of 
Premysl  Ottokar's  accession  to  the  throne  (1197).  The 
Electors  did  not  agree  as  to  the  choice  of  his  successor; 
while  some  wished  to  elect  Philip,  Duke  of  Swabia,  guardian 
of  Henry  VFs  minor  son,  as  king,  others  wished  to  exclude 
the  house  of  Hohenstaufen,  and  to  raise  Otho,  Duke  of 
Brunswick,  to  the  throne. 

Ottokar  at  first  sided  with  Philip,  though  not  before  he 
had  obtained  some  important  concessions.  Philip  renounced 
all  claims  to  the  nomination  of  the  rulers  of  Bohemia,  and 
contented  himself  with  a  nominal  right  of  confirmation. 
He  also  renounced  all  claims  to  the  appointment  of  the 
bishops  of  Prague,  and  lastly  conferred  the  hereditary  title 
of  king  on  the  Bohemian  sovereigns  for  all  time.  Ottokar 
was  crowned  king  of  Bohemia  (1198)  at  Maintz  at  the  same 
time  as  Philip  received  the  German  crown.  The  Bohemian 
king  now  became  Philip's  ally  in  the  civil  war  that  broke 
out  between  him  and  Duke  Otho,  but  the  alliance  did  not 
continue  long. 

Philip  continued  the  struggle  with  the  Pope,  then  Inno- 
cent III,  which  had  embittered  the  reigns  of  the  former 
emperors  of  the  house  of  Hohenstaufen.  The  Pope,  in 
consequence,  summoned  the  German  princes  to  recognize 
Philip's  rival,  Otho,  as  their  sovereign.    Ottokar  was  obedient 


An  Historical  Sketch  39 

to  the  wishes  of  the  Pope ;  and  about  the  year  1203  we  find 
him  fighting  in  Thuringia  on  Otho's  side  against  the 
adherents  of  Philip.  Otho  naturally  rewarded  him  by 
confirming  his  title  as  hereditary  king ;  and  the  Pope  also 
for  the  first  time  recognized  the  kingly  title  of  the  Pfemysl 
princes,  and  guaranteed  to  them  all  the  privileges  they  had 
obtained  from  the  German  monarchs  (1204).  Ottokar 
seems  to  have  pursued  a  dynastic  policy,  striving  to  increase 
the  power  of  the  house  of  Pfemysl,  and  alternating  in  his 
allegiance  between  the  rival  German  sovereigns.  In  1206 
we  again  find  him  an  adherent  of  Philip,  and  it  was  only 
after  that  prince's  murder  (1208)  that  he  again  recognized 
Otho  as  king. 

Otho,  now  undisputed  ruler  of  Germany,  soon  became 
involved  in  the  same  dissensions  with  the  Pope  as  his  former 
rival ;  and  Innocent  III  therefore  invited  the  German  princes 
to  raise  to  the  throne  Henry  VI's  son,  Frederick  II,  who 
was  afterwards  to  become  so  dangerous  an  enemy  to  the 
Papacy.  Ottokar  was  again  subservient  to  the  wishes  of 
Rome;  and  Otho  attempted  unsuccessfully,  though  aided 
by  an  insurrection  in  Bohemia,  to  revenge  himself  on 
Ottokar  for  his  desertion.  The  Bohemian  king  became 
an  ally  of  Frederick  II,  who,  besides  confirming  all  former 
privileges  of  the  Bohemian  princes,  granted  them  permission 
to  liberate  themselves,  whenever  they  wished  it,  from  the 
obligation  of  sending  three  hundred  men  to  escort  the 
German  kings  on  their  journey  to  Italy  by  the  payment  of 
three  hundred  marks  of  silver.  Frederick  further  decreed 
that  the  attendance  of  the  Bohemian  monarchs  at  the 
Imperial  Diets  should  only  be  obligatory  when  these 
assemblies  were  held  in  towns  near  the  Bohemian  frontier 
— Bamberg,  Niirnberg,  and  Merseburgh  were  specified  as 
being  such  towns.  Ottokar  was  present  at  Frederick's 
coronation  (12 13),  and  the  German  king  became  undisputed 
ruler  after  Otho's  death  (12 18). 

About  this  time  Pfemysl  Ottokar,  to  prevent  the  renewal 
of  the  troubles  so  often  before  caused  by  the  uncertainty^ 
of  the  succession,  persuaded  the  Bohemian  nobles  and 
Vladislav,  Margrave  of  Moravia,  to  recognize  his  son 
Venceslas,  then  only  eleven  years  of  age,  as  heir  to  the 
throne  (1216). 

The  later  years  of  the  reign  of  Ottokar  were  troubled  by 
difficulties  with  the  ecclesiastics,  of  which  we  have  only 


40  Bohemia 

scanty  and  contradictory  contemporary  records.  They 
seem  to  have  been  a  reflection  of  the  greater  struggle 
between  the  German  emperors  and  the  popes,  which  is 
known  as  the  contest  as  to  investitures.  Andrew,  bishop 
of  Prague  (from  the  year  12 14),  seems  to  have  been  a 
priest  of  an  austere  but  authoritative  nature,  who  carried 
the  claims  of  the  Church  further  than  any  of  his  pre- 
decessors had  done.  He  claimed  absolute  immunity  from 
the  temporal  law-courts,  not  only  for  all  ecclesiastics,  but 
also  for  all  their  servants  and  dependents ;  and,  while 
demanding  perfect  freedom  from  taxation  for  all  Church 
property,  he  attempted  to  enforce  on  the  whole  country  the 
payment  of  Church-tithes,  to  which  only  certain  estates 
had  hitherto  been  liable.  He  further  denied  to  laymen  all 
right  of  conferring  ecclesiastical  offices,  though  he  himself 
appears  to  have  accepted  investiture  from  King  Ottokar. 

These  claims  were  energetically  resisted  by  the  king  and 
people  of  Bohemia  ;  and  Andrew,  fearing  for  his  life,  fled 
to  Rome,  and  there  declared  Bohemia  to  be  under  inter- 
dict. It  is  curious  to  notice,  as  a  proof  of  the  independence 
of  the  Bohemian  clergy,  that  the  interdict — according  to 
which  all  religious  services  were  to  be  suspended — was  not 
generally  observed,  and  that  the  canons  of  Prague  and 
most  of  the  lower  clergy  continued  to  celebrate  mass  and 
perform  the  religious  functions  as  before. 

Negotiations  between  the  Pope  and  the  king  continued 
for  many  years,  and  a  temporary  settlement  was  achieved ; 
Bishop  Andrew  even  returning  to  Prague  (1222).  The 
quarrel,  however,  broke  out  afresh  almost  immediately ; 
Bishop  Andrew  again  fled  to  Rome,  where  he  died  soon 
after  (1224). 

Pope  Honorius  himself  succeeded,  during  the  vacancy  of 
ihe  See  of  Prague,  in  ending  this  struggle  in  a  manner 
favourable  to  the  Church.  By  an  agreement  between  him 
and  the  king,  it  was  decided  that  the  Bishop  of  Prague 
•should  in  future  be  elected  by  the  canons  of  the  cathedral. 
The  right  of  investiture,  which  had  been  exercised  first  by 
the  German  and  later  by  the  Bohemian  kings,  was  abolished. 
This  right,  as  in  Germany,  appears  to  have  been  the  principal 
cause  of  discord;  the  minor  differences  were  also  settled 
favourably  for  the  Church.  Shortly  before  his  death 
Ottokar  caused  his  son  Venceslas,  whom  the  nobles  had 
-already  recognized  as  heir  to  the  throne,  to  be  crowned  as 


An  Historical  Sketch  41 

king  of  Bohemia  (1228).  Pfemysl  Ottokar  I  died  in  the 
year  1230. 

His  successor,  Venceslas  I,  ascended  the  throne  without 
any  opposition,  such  as  had  almost  always  arisen  on  the 
occasion  of  a  change  in  the  person  of  the  sovereigns  of 
Bohemia.  His  reign  is  notable  for  the  great  increase  of 
German  influence  in  his  dominions.  Pfemysl  Ottokar  I 
had  in  the  last  years  of  his  reign  begun  to  favour  the 
immigration  of  German  colonists  to  Bohemia,  and  this 
immigration  became  far  more  extensive  during  the  rule  of 
his  son.  Venceslas,  to  encourage  the  German  settlers, 
granted  them  a  large  amount  of  autonomy,  allowing  them 
to  administer  law  in  their  settlements,  independently  of  the 
Bohemian  law-courts,  according  to  the  "  law  of  Magdeburg," 
which  had  at  that  time  been  accepted  by  many  towns  of 
Northern  Germany.  Such  privileges  were  first  granted 
(about  the  year  1235)  to  the  part  of  Prague  where  the 
Germans  had  settled,^  then  to  the  Moravian  towns,  Brno 
(1243)  and  Iglau  (1250),  and  later  to  a  considerable 
number  of  towns  in  Bohemia.  The  Germans — partly  to 
defend  themselves  against  the  enmity  of  the  Bohemians, 
partly  to  mark  the  limits  of  their  privileged  jurisdiction — 
were  allowed  to  enclose  their  settlements  with  walls.  The 
custom  of  fortifying  the  cities  soon  became  general  in 
Bohemia. 

Perhaps  in  emulation  of  the  towns,  the  Bohemian  nobles 
also  began  to  fortify  their  castles  about  this  time.  Follow- 
ing the  fashion  of  the  court,  they  mostly  gave  their  castles 
German  names,  and  these  names  soon  became  the  surnames 
of  their  owners ;  indeed,  it  was  only  from  the  reign  of 
Venceslas  I  that  hereditary  family  names  came  into  use  in 
Bohemia. 

There  is  but  little  record  of  the  political  events  during 
the  earlier  part  of  the  reign  of  Venceslas  ;  but  we  read  that 
Bohemia,  as  was  inevitable,  soon  became  involved  in  the 
great  struggle  between  the  German  Emperor  Frederick  II 
and  the  Popes  Gregory  IX  and  Innocent  IV.  The  policy 
of  Venceslas  during  this  contest,  dictated  as  it  was  entirely 
by  the  interests  of  Bohemia,  was  not  consistent,  and  he 
undoubtedly  changed  sides  several  times. 

^  The  present  "old  town."  The  three  towns  so  often  mentioned  by 
historians  were  the  old  town,  new  town,  and  the  "small  quarter" 
(Mala  Strana). 


42  Bohemia 

Almost  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign  we  find  Venceslas 
at  war  with  Leopold,  Duke  of  Austria  (1231),  and  the  King 
of  Bohemia  was  on  the  whole  successful  in  this  contest. 
The  Emperor  Frederick,  then  his  ally,  decreed  the  ban  of 
the  Empire  against  the  Austrian  duke  (1236). 

The  friendly  relations  between  the  German  Emperor  and 
the  King  of  Bohemia  did  not  continue  long.  Frederick's 
power  was  at  this  time  (1237)  at  its  height;  he  had  sup- 
pressed all  insurrectionary  movements  in  Germany,  he  had 
at  last  defeated  the  Lombards,  and  had  also  united  the 
kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies  with  the  Empire.  Though 
the  contemporary  records  are  very  obscure,  it  seems  most 
probable  that  Frederick  now  wished  again  to  render 
Bohemia  as  dependent  of  the  Empire  as  it  had  at  one  time 
been.  The  nominal  cause  of  the  quarrel  was  Frederick's 
demand  that  Venceslas  should  restore  to  him  certain  castles 
on  the  frontier  of  Bohemia  and  Saxony,  which  had  for  some 
time  been  in  the  possession  of  the  sovereigns  of  Bohemia.^ 
Venceslas  now  reconciled  himself  with  the  Pope  Gregory 
IX,  and  on  his  request  became  the  ally  of  Duke  Leopold 
of  Austria  against  the  Emperor  Frederick.  Leopold 
promised  to  add  the  part  of  the  Austrian  duchy  north  of 
the  Danube  to  the  Bohemian  kingdom  ;  but  failing  to  keep 
his  promise  the  friendly  relations  only  lasted  a  short  time. 
These  contests  between  the  German  princes  were  suddenly 
interrupted  by  a  most  unexpected  event,  the  invasion  of 
Eastern  and  Northern  Europe  by  the  Mongols  or  Tartars, 
as  they  were  generally,  though  incorrectly,  called. 

The  Tartars  left  their  original  homes  in  Asia,  probably 
North  of  China  and  not  far  from  the  region  of  Lake  Baikal, 
in  the  first  years  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and,  conquering 
all  the  countries  through  which  they  passed  on  their  march, 
reached  the  boundaries  of  Europe.  They  easily  defeated 
the  disunited  Russian  princes ;  and  when  it  became  known 
that  they  had  stormed  and  burnt  the  cities  of  Kief  (1240) 
and  Cracow  (1241),  terror  spread  all  through  Europe. 
Bohemia  was  directly  menaced  after  the  defeat  of  the 
Polish  and  Silesian  princes  by  the  Tartars  at  Liegnitz 
(1241).  Venceslas  seems  to  have  behaved  with  courage 
and  prudence  in  this  emergency.     He  hastily  fortified  the 

^  The  Bohemian  frontier,  in  the  direction  of  Saxony,  then  extended 
further  to  the  north-west  than  at  present,'  reaching  as  far  as  the  fortress 
of  Konigstein. 


An  Historical  Sketch  43 

passes  leading  from  Silesia  into  Bohemia.  When  the 
Tartar  army  attempted  to  force  these  passes  they  were 
bravely  repulsed  by  the  Bohemian  soldiers.  After  three 
weeks  the  Tartars  abandoned  all  hopes  of  entering  Bohemia, 
and  turned  their  attention  to  Moravia.  They  ravaged  the 
open  country  in  Moravia,  though  they  were  unable  to  storm 
any  of  the  towns. ^  After  devastating  also  Hungary  and  the 
neighbouring  districts  of  Lower  Austria,  the  Tartars  disap- 
peared from  Europe  almost  as  suddenly  as  they  had  arrived 
there. 

As  soon  as  the  danger  from  the  Tartars  had  passed  over, 
both  the  struggle  between  the  Pope  and  the  Emperor,  and 
the  feud  between  Venceslas  and  Duke  Frederick  of  Austria, 
which  was  to  a  large  extent  influenced  by  the  greater  conflict, 
began  afresh.  Venceslas  at  this  period  took  the  part  of 
the  Pope,  and  became  one  of  the  supporters  of  William  of 
Holland,  whom  the  Papal  party  in  Germany  had  chosen  as 
king  (1247). 

In  the  following  year  a  great  insurrection  broke  out  among 
the  Bohemian  nobles,  the  causes  of  which  are  not  certainly 
known,  though  the  great  extravagance  of  the  king  appears 
to  have  been  the  principal  one.  Venceslas's  son,  Pfemysl 
Ottokar,^  who  now  governed  Moravia  under  his  father's 
supremacy,  became  the  leader  of  the  insurgents,  who  chose 
him  as  king. 

The  pretext  for  this  insurrection  was  the  king's  command 
to  his  nobles  to  take  part  in  the  crusade  which  Pope  Inno- 
cent IV  had  again  decreed  against  the  German  Emperor 
Frederick  II.  Civil  war  continued  in  Bohemia  up  to  the 
year  1250,  when  an  agreement  was  arrived  at.  Pfemysl 
Ottokar  made  submission  to  his  father,  who,  on  the  other 
hand,  again  entrusted  the  government  of  Moravia  to  his 
son. 

In  the  following  year  the  Estates  of  Austria  chose  Ottokar 
as  their  duke,  and  he  made  his  entrance  into  Vienna  shortly 
afterwards.     Though  his  deceased  brother  had  been  married 

^  Many  legends  referring  to  the  defence  of  the  Moravian  towns,  and 
particularly  of  Olomonc,  afiervvards  sprang  up  ;  some  of  them  are  repro- 
duced in  the  so-called  MS.  of  Kralove  Dvur. 

2  Premysl  Ottokar  {II  as  king  of  Bohemia)  was  the  second  son  of 
Venceslas.  His  elder  brother,  Vladislas,  who  had  been  Margrave  of 
Moravia,  and  who,  during  one  of  the  temporary  truces  between  the  two 
countries,  had  married  the  daughter  of  Duke  Frederick  of  Austria,  died 
in  1247. 


44  Bohemia 

to  the  daughter  of  the  last  duke  of  Austria,^  Ottokar  had  no 
hereditary  rights  to  the  duchy.  In  order  to  strengthen  his 
position  by  an  alliance  with  the  former  reigning  dynasty,  he 
married  Adela,  sister  of  the  late  Duke  Frederick,  though  she 
was  then  forty-six  and  he  only  twenty-five  years  of  age. 

The  duchy  of  Styria  had  long  been  connected  with  that 
of  Austria,  and  Ottokar  therefore  claimed  it  after  his  election 
by  the  Austrian  Estates.  He  thus  became  involved  in  war 
with  Bela,  King  of  Hungary,  who  had  long  coveted  Styria. 
Whilst  occupied  with  this  war,  Ottokar  received  news  of  the 
death  of  his  father,  King  Venceslas  (1253).  The  necessity 
of  returning  to  Bohemia  induced  him  to  conclude  peace 
with  Hungary  (1254) ;  and  it  was  settled  that  v/hile  certain 
districts  of  Styria — since  incorporated  with  Upper  and 
Lower  Austria — were  to  be  made  over  to  Ottokar,  the 
greater  part  of  the  disputed  lands,  consisting  of  Styria  in  its 
present  limits,  was  to  be  ruled  by  King  Bela's  eldest  son 
Stephen,  with  the  title  of  duke. 

Pfem)'sl  Ottokar  H,  who  now  became  ruler  of  Bohemia, 
was  certainly  one  of  the  greatest  sovereigns  that  country  has 
ever  had.  Though  his  reign  ended  disastrously,  he  un- 
doubtedly for  some  time  raised  Bohemia  to  the  rank  of  a 
great  European  Power.  The  great  reproach  levelled  against 
him  by  Bohemian  writers  is  that  he  unduly  favoured  the 
German  element ;  and  it  is  undeniable  that  he  endeavoured 
by  all  means  to  attract  German  colonists  to  Bohemia.  The 
towns  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia  during  his  reign  became 
almost  entirely  German,  and  in  consequence  of  the  large 
degree  of  autonomy  that  was  granted  them,  governed  them- 
selves according  to  the  old  German  town-laws. 

One  of  the  great  motives  of  Ottakar's  policy  was,  nf> 
doubt,  the  intention  of  counterbalancing  the  excessive  power 
of  Bohemian  nobility  by  the  formation  of  a  middle  class, 
composed  of  the  citizens  of  the  towns  ;  but  he  may  have 
been  influenced  by  other  less  obvious  considerations.  As 
Duke  of  Upper  and  Lower  Austria,  and  later  of  Styria  and 
Carinthia,  Ottokar  had  become  lord  of  vast  German  lands, 
and  indeed  the  most  powerful  prince  of  the  German  Empire, 
over  which  he  aspired  to  rule  either  with  the  title  of  king 
or   by    his    influence   over   an   insignificant   and    nominal 

^  Frederick  II,  Duke  of  Austria,  commonly  known  as  "der  Streit- 
bare"  (the  Warlike),  died  in  1246  ;  he  was  the  last  Austrian  duke  of 
the  Babenberg  line. 


An  Historical  Sketch  45 

king  1  It  was  therefore  good  policy  for  him  to  strive  to 
hide  his  Slav  origin,  and  to  appear  as  a  German  prince  ruling 
over  a  mainly  German  population. 

At  the  beginning  of  his  reign  Pfemysl  Ottokar  II,  aided 
by  several  German  princes,  engaged  in  a  campaign  against 
the  heathen  Prussians  (1255),  and  after  defeating  them  in 
several  battles  succeeded  m  converting  a  large  part  of  the 
population  to  Christianity.  The  town  of  Konigsberg  was 
founded  at  this  time,  and  called  after  the  King  of 
Bohemia. 

Probably  in  consequence  of  this  successful  campaign,  the 
German  princes  (1256)  offered  the  sovereignty  of  their 
country  to  Ottokar.  The  Bohemian  king  at  this  period 
does  not  seem  to  have  desired  the  German  crown,  but  to 
have  favoured  the  choice  of  a  weak  and  powerless  prince, 
who  would  be  unable  to  interfere  with  his  plans  for  the 
aggrandizement  of  Bohemia.  Ottokar,  therefore,  contributed 
to  the  election  of  Richard  of  Cornwall,  with  whom  he 
remained  on  terms  of  friendship  during  the  whole  of  his 
nominal  reign. 

By  the  treaty  concluded  with  Hungary  in  1254,  that 
country  had  retained  the  supremacy  over  Styria ;  but  this 
soon  became  very  irksome  to  the  Styrian  nobles.  In  the 
year  1259  they  chose  the  occasion  of  a  new  dispute,  that 
had  arisen  between  King  Pfemysl  Ottokar  II  and  Bela, 
King  of  Hungary,  for  revolting  against  the  Hungarians  ; 
and  Ottokar,  arriving  at  Gratz  in  the  same  year,  took 
possession  of  Styria  and  appointed  a  Bohemian  governor  of 
the  country. 

The  Hungarians  immediately  decided  to  repel  this 
aggression,  and  during  the  following  winter  they  raised  an 

^  Thoup:h  the  comparison  may  seeai  far-fetched,  there  is  some  analogy 
between  I'iemysl  Ottokar  II's  policy  and  that  pursued  by  the  Austrian 
Government  during  the  earlier  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  (1S15- 
1866).  Austria,  holding  the  rii^ht  of  presidency  over  the  German  Diet 
at  Frankfort,  was  still  nominally  the  greatest  German  Power  ;  and  the 
Austrian  Government  constantly  endeavoured,  by  attempts  of  "  Ger- 
manizing "  the  non-German  populations  of  the  Empire,  to  justify  the 
predominance  of  that  country  in  Germany.  It  may  be  remembered  tliat 
the  Austrian  ministers  several  times  attempted  to  obtain  the  inclusion 
of  the  whole  Empire  in  the  Germanic  confederation.  It  is  only  a 
natural  reaction  against  this  attempted  "  Germanization "  that,  since 
the  treaty  of  Prague  (1S66)  has  dissolved  all  the  bands  that  connected 
Austria  and  Germany,  the  German  influence  and  language  have 
constantly  receded  and  still  recede  in  Austria. 


46 


Bohemia 


enormous  army,  which  is  said  to  have  consisted  of  140,000 
men.  Daniel  Romanovic,  King  of  Russia  and  Prince  of 
Kiew,  the  Prince  of  Cracow,  and  many  of  the  tribes  of 
Eastern  Europe,  Servians,  Bulgarians,  and  Wallachians, 
joined  the  Hungarian  standard. 

In  the  meantime  Ottokar  had  also  assembled  an  army  of 
100,000  men,  and — a  mountainous  country  like  Styria  not 
being  adapted  to  the  movements  of  enormous  armies,  which 
largely  consisted  of  cavalry — the  plains  on  the  frontier  of 
Hungary  and  the  duchy  of  Austria,  through  which  the  river 
March  flows,  became  the  seat  of  war.  On  the  banks  of  this 
river,  near  the  village  of  Kressenbrunn,  a  great  battle  took 
place  (1260),  in  which  the  Hungarians  were  defeated  with 
great  slaughter;  we  read  that  they  lost  18,000  men  in 
battle,  and  that  14,000  more  were  driven  into  the  river 
March  while  flying  from  the  field.  King  Bela  now 
renounced  all  rights  on  Styria;  and  Ottokar,  to  strengthen 
his  hold  on  that  country,  induced  the  German  King  Richard 
of  Cornwall  to  invest  him  with  it  as  a  fief.  After  their  great 
defeat  at  Kressenbrunn  the  Hungarians,  though  they  were 
in  1270  already  again  in  arms  against  Ottokar,  avoided 
meeting  the  Bohemian  army  in  the  open  field  till  they 
obtained  a  powerful  ally  in  Rudolph  of  Habsburg. 

In  1268  King  Pfemysl  Ottokar  concluded  a  treaty  with 
his  nephew  Duke  Henry  of  Carinthia,  by  which  that  prince 
recognized  him  as  his  heir  in  case  of  his  dying  without  male 
descendants.  On  Duke  Henry's  death  in  the  following 
year  Ottokar  was  able  to  add  Carinthia,  with  the  dependent 
lands  of  Carniola  and  Istria,  part  of  Friulia,  and  the  town 
of  Pordenone,  to  his  already  vast  dominions ;  several  towns 
of  Northern  Italy,  Treviso,  Feltre,  Verona,  and  others,  also 
recognized  him  as  their  "  over-lord  " 

Ottokar's  power  had  now  attained  its  summit  (1269) ;  but 
dangers  arising  from  the  election  of  a  German  king  already 
began  to  menace  it.  Ottokar  was  probably  not  anxious  to 
obtain  the  German  crown,  which  indeed  he  had  declined 
before,  as  long  as  that  crown  remained  in  the  hands  of 
King  Richard,  who  had  no  power  of  his  own  in  Germany, 
and  was  entirely  in  accord  with  the  Bohemian  king. 

The  death  of  Richard  of  Cornwall  (1272)  caused  a 
complete  change  in  the  prospects  of  Ottokar;  his  great 
conquests  had  aroused  the  animosity  of  the  German  princes, 
specially  of  Louis,  Count  Palatine  of  Bavaria;    and   the 


An  Historical  Sketch  47 

choice  of  the  German  electors  was  therefore  likely  to  fall  on 
one  of  the  Bohemian  king's  many  enemies. 

Pfemysl  Ottokar  II  was  thoroughly  aware  of  this  ani- 
mosity, which  his  Slav  nationality  ^  probably  rendered  more 
bitter,  and,  consequently,  of  the  difficulties  which  stood  in 
the  way  of  his  obtaining,  and  far  more  of  his  retaining,  the 
German  crown.  It  was  only  after  a  declared  enemy  had 
been  chosen  by  the  German  electors  that  Ottokar,  when  it 
was  already  too  late,  attempted  to  obtain  the  German  crown 
by  the  aid  of  the  Pope. 

On  September  29,  1273,  Rudolph,  Count  of  Habsburg, 
was  elected  German  king — unanimously,  since  the  German 
Electors  declared  Ottokar' s  own  right  of  voting  as  cup- 
bearer of  the  Empire  to  be  invalid.  The  German  princes 
at  the  same  time  signed  a  declaration,  according  to  which 
all  fiefs  granted  since  the  death  of  Frederick  II  were  to  be 
considered  as  void.  This  was  aimed  directly  at  Ottokar, 
who  had  acquired  Austria,  Styria,  and  Carinthia  since  that 
date.  Ottokar  disputed  King  Rudolph's  election,^  and,  as 
mentioned  above,  appealed  to  the  Pope;  but  it  was  from 
the  first  moment  certain  that  the  fate  of  war  only  could 
settle  the  difference. 

At  a  Diet  held  at  Regensburg  in  1274,  Pfemysl  Ottokar 
II's  rights  to  all  his  newly-acquired  lands  were  declared 
invalid ;  and  his  subjects  in  Austria,  Styria,  and  Carinthia 
were  called  on  to  rise  against  the  Bohemian  domination. 
In  1275  the  ban  of  the  Empire  was  decreed  against  the 
Bohemian  king;  and  in  the  following  year  (1276)  German 
armies  invaded  his  dominions  in  all  directions,  while  the 
Hungarians  also  chose  this  moment  to  seek  revenge  for 
their  former  defeats.  Styria  and  Carinthia  were  soon 
conquered  by  the  Germans,  a  large  part  of  the  nobility 
having  deserted  the  Bohemian  cause.  The  principal 
German  army,  commanded  by  Rudolph  in  person,  entered 

1  Pubitschka  {Chronologische  Geschichte  von  Bdhmen)  tells  us,  quoting 
from  a  contemporary  chronicler,  "Rex  Bohemus  Odoacrus  (Ottokar) 
nuntios  et  multam  pecuniam  et  numera  ad  curiam  domini  Papae 
Gregorii  transmiserat  eo  quod  ipse  ad  imperium  aspiraret.  Papa 
munera  non  attendens  circumsedentibus  dicebat :  Cum  in  AUemania 
plures  principes  et  Coraites  habemus  quare  vellemus  Sclavtun  ad 
imperium  sublevare." 

^  Space  does  not  admit  of  my  entering  into  the  controversy  as  to  the 
election  of  Rudolph  of  Habsburg  ;  the  details  will  be  found  in  all 
histories  of  Germany  or  Bohemia  dealing  with  this  period. 


48 


Bohemia 


Austria  by  Passau,  and,  rapidly  traversing  Upper  Austria, 
soon  arrived  before  Vienna. 

Ottokar,  who  appears  at  first  to  have  expected  to  be 
attacked  in  Bohemia,  now  hurried  to  the  aid  of  Vienna, 
which  town  bravely  resisted  the  invaders,  and  seems  almost 
alone  to  have  remained  faithful  to  the  Bohemian  king. 
Unfortunately,  while  the  king  was  in  Austria  an  insurrection 
against  him  broke  out  among  the  Bohemian  nobility. 
This  last  blow  induced  Ottokar  to  seek  for  peace  and  not  to 
risk  a  battle,  the  result  of  which  was  absolutely  certain — 
seeing  that  his  army,  in  consequence  of  numerous  defections, 
consisted  of  only  20,000  men,  while  that  of  his  enemies 
numbered  five  times  that  amount. 

The  conditions  of  peace  were  very  onerous  ;  Ottokar  was 
obliged  to  renounce  all  claims  to  Styria,  Austria,  Carinthia, 
Carniola,  Istria,  and  the  towns  of  Eger  and  Portenau 
(Pordenone).  He  only  retained  his  hereditary  lands, 
Bohemia  and  jNIoravia,  and  recognized  Rudolph  as  his 
over-lord.  A  marriage  was  arranged  between  Ottokar's  son, 
Venceslas,  and  one  of  the  daughters  of  King  Rudolph. 

On  November  26,  1276,  Ottokar  appeared  in  the  German 
camp  to  do  homage  to  the  German  king.  In  presence  of 
the  German  princes,  most  of  whom  were  his  bitter  enemies, 
the  King  of  Bohemia  bent  his  knee  before  Rudolph,  who 
was  seated  on  the  throne,  swore  fidelity  to  him,  and  was 
invested  with  Bohemia  and  Moravia  as  fiefs  of  the  Empire.^ 

It  was  almost  impossible  that  this  settlement  should  prove 
definitive.  It  was  difficult  for  Ottokar  to  reconcile  himself 
to  the  loss  of  the  vast  dominions  of  which  he  had  been 
deprived  almost  without  having  struck  a  blow ;  on  the  other 
hand,  Rudolph,  and  still  more  Ottokar's  enemies  at 
Rudolph's  court,  did  not  consider  their  victory  complete 
till  they  had  completed  the  humiliation  of  the  proud  king 
of  Bohemia. 

Dissensions  broke  out  almost  immediately.  Rudolph 
attempted  to  interfere  in  the  internal  government  of 
Bohemia  to  a  far  greater  degree  than  any  of  his  predecessors 

^  The  story,  which  has  been  often  told — in  a  most  amusing  way  by 
Carlyle  {History  of  Frederick  the  Great,  Book  II,  chap,  vii) — that 
Premysl  Ottokar  requested  to  do  homage  tQ  King  Rudolph  privately, 
and  that  the  ceremony  took  place  in  a  tent,  the  sides  of  which  were 
suddenly  drawn  up,  is  entirely  unhistorical.  Aenaeas  Sylvius  {Historia 
Bohemiae,  chap,  xxvii),  who  wrote  two  hundred  years  after  these 
events,   is  the  first  historian  who  mentions  it. 


An  Historical  Sketch  49 

had  done,  and  specially  claimed  a  right  of  protection  over 
the  Bohemian  nobles,  who,  as  mentioned  before,  had 
rebelled  against  King  Ottokar.  The  only  choice  that  now 
remained  to  the  king  was  between  renouncing  his  inherited 
independent  sovereignty  over  Bohemia,  or  again  appealing 
to  the  fortune  of  war.  Ottokar  chose  the  latter  alternative. 
In  the  year  1278  he  entered  Austria  with  a  large  army,  and 
advanced  to  the  banks  of  the  river  March,  near  the  scene 
of  his  former  victory  at  Kressenbrunn.  Rudolph  was  not 
unprepared,  as,  not  thinking  that  the  former  settlement 
would  be  final,  he  had  remained  in  Austria.  His  army  was 
almost  immediately  joined  by  a  large  Hungarian  contingent. 
On  the  advance  of  the  Austrians,  Ottokar  retreated  as  far 
as  Durrenkrut,  and  near  this  place  a  decisive  battle  took 
place  on  the  day  of  St.  Rufus  (August  26),  a  day  destined 
then,  not  for  the  last  time,  to  be  fatal  to  Bohemia's  kings. 
Ottokar  was  decisively  defeated,  principally  through  the 
treachery  of  Milota  of  Dedic  and  other  Bohemian  nobles. 
When  the  Bohemian  king  saw  that  the  battle  was  lost  he 
plunged  into  the  thickest  ranks  of  the  enemy,  and  died 
fighting  desperately. 

The  reign  of  Pfemysl  Ottokar  II,  one  of  Bohemia's 
greatest  kings,  ended  with  complete  disaster;  and  it  is 
difficult  to  understand  the  complete  and  sudden  downfall 
of  such  a  powerful  empire.  The  fact  that  Ottokar  had,  by 
the  privileges  he  granted  the  towns,  alienated  many  of  the 
powerful  Bohemian  nobles,  who  therefore  deserted  him  in 
the  hour  of  peril,  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  principal 
causes  of  his  downfall.  Another  still  more  potent  con- 
sideration was  the  question  of  nationality.  Ottokar  was, 
justly  or  unjustly,^  accused  of  favouring  the  Germans  to 
the  disadvantage  of  his  own  countrymen,  and  he  had  thus 
become  unpopular  with  the  Bohemians.  The  stimulus 
of  national  pride,  which  has  sometimes  animated  the 
Bohemians  to  most  heroic  deeds,  did  not  therefore  incite 
them  to  rally  round  their  king,  whom  many  of  them 
considered  nearly  as  much  a  German  as  his  opponent. 

Rarely  has  the  death  of  one  man  had  such  melancholy 
results  for  a  whole  empire.  The  Bohemian  people,  van- 
quished by  their  enemy  in  a  murderous  struggle,  were 
suddenly  deprived  of  the  strong   hand  which   for   twenty 

^  Palacky,  whose  national  feeling  is  very  strong,  yet  denies  that 
Premysl  Ottokar  II  unduly  favoured  the  Germans. 


50  Bohemia 

years  had  held  the  reins  of  the  .State.  It  was  inevitable 
that  the  country  should  now  become  the  scene  of  internal 
anarchy  as  well  as  the  prey  of  aliens.^ 

Rudolph's  victorious  army  immediately  marched  into 
Moravia,  and  the  German  king  was  favourably  received 
by  a  part  of  the  inhabitants,  specially  by  the  population  of 
the  Moravian  towns,  most  of  whom  were  Germans.  In 
Bohemia  complete  anarchy  prevailed,  and  it  was  at  first 
uncertain  who  had  the  strongest  right  to  the  guardianship 
of  Ottakar's  son  Venceslas,  then  only  seven  years  of  age. 
After  some  dispute  the  Bohemian  nobles  recognized 
Ottokar's  nephew,  Otho  of  Brandenburg,  as  the  guardian 
of  the  young  Prince  Venceslas.  Otho  appeared  in  Bohemia 
with  a  small  force,  and  the  country  prepared  to  resist 
Rudolph,  whose  army  by  this  time  entered  Bohemia. 

A  treaty  w^as,  however,  soon  concluded  (1278)  by  which 
at  least  a  temporary  settlement  was  obtained.  Otho  was 
to  govern  Bohemia  as  Venceslas's  guardian  for  five  years, 
and  Rudolph  Moravia  in  the  same  capacity  and  for  the 
same  period.  It  was  also  arranged  that  Venceslas  should 
marry  Rudolph's  daughter  Gutta ;  and  the  German  king's 
son  Rudolph,  Agnes,  daughter  of  the  deceased  King 
Ottokar. 

Otho  ot  Brandenburg  had  hardly  obtained  the  govern- 
ment of  Bohemia  when  he  began  shamefully  to  misuse  the 
power  of  guardianship  that  had  been  conferred  on  him.^ 
Aided  by  the  German  part  of  the  population  of  Prague  he 
seized  the  heir  to  the  throne,  and  imprisoned  him  in  the 
castle  of  Bosig.  This  treachery  caused  great  indignation 
among  the  Bohemian  nobles,  and  a  great  number  of  them 
entered  into  a  confederacy  for  the  purpose  of  rescuing  their 
future  sovereign.  Civil  war  broke  out  while  Margrave  Otho 
had  tem.porarily  returned  to  his  own  country,  carrying 
Venceslas  as  a  prisoner  with  him  to  Brandenburg.  Otho 
had  left  Bishop  Everard  of  Brandenburg,  a  warlike  and 
unscrupulous  prelate,  at  Prague,  as  his  representative,  and 
the  latter  energetically  defended  the  margrave's  authority. 

1  Palacky. 

2  Recent  German  historians  have  endeavoured  to  defend  Otho  against 
the  unanimous  condemnation  of  the  contemporary  chroniclers.  Dr. 
Novak  has  in  an  interesting  article  in  the  Cesky  Casopis  Historicky 
(Bohemian  historical  year-book)  proved  that  the  traditional  account  is 
correct. 


An  Historical  Sketch  51 

To  resist  the  Bohemians  Everard  called  in  a  large  number 
of  German  mercenaries,  who,  aided  by  the  German  settlers 
in  the  country,  pillaged  and  ravaged  Bohemia  in  every 
direction.  It  was  said  that  the  Germans  thought  the  time 
had  come  when  the  Slavs  of  Bohemia  were  to  share  the 
fate  of  their  countrymen  in  the  formerly  Slav  lands  of 
Northern  Germany.  The  result  of  this  civil  war  was  just 
the  reverse.  The  greater  part  of  the  Bohemian  nobility, 
indignant  at  what  they  considered  the  insolence  of  the 
German  townsmen,  drew  nearer  to  their  own  countrymen ; 
and,  out  of  hatred  to  the  Germians,  largely  abandoned  the 
use  of  the  German  language,  which  had  before  this  tim.e 
been  widely  adopted,  particularly  at  the  court  of  the 
Bohemian  sovereigns. 

The  anarchic  state  of  Bohemia  brought  about  the  inter- 
ference of  the  German  King  Rudolph  (1280);  through  his 
mediation  a  truce  was  agreed  to,  and  a  Diet  assembled  at 
Prague  to  restore  order  to  the  country.  It  was  decided  that 
Otho  of  Brandenburg  should  retain  the  guardianship  of 
Prince  Venceslas  up  to  the  end  of  the  five  years  for  which 
it  had  originally  been  conferred  on  him.  He  was  obliged 
to  promise  in  future  to  appoint  a  native  only  as  his  repre- 
sentative whenever  he  should  absent  himself  from  Bohemia. 
He  further  promised  to  withdraw  his  German  mercenaries 
from  the  country,  and  to  order  all  Germans,  not  resident  in 
Bohemia,  to  leave  the  country  within  three  days ;  ^  other- 
wise they  were  to  be  treated  as  thieves  and  murderers.  Otho 
lastly  promised  to  allow  Venceslas  to  return  to  Bohemia 
on  payment  of  15,000  marks  of  silver;  but  though  this 
agreement  was  made  in  1281,  it  was  not  until  the  year  1283 
that  the  young  prince  returned  to  his  country. 

Though  only  twelve  years  of  age  Venceslas  II  nominally 
assumed  the  government  of  Bohemia,  as  the  office  of 
guardianship,  after  the  late  events,  naturally  inspired  dis- 
trust. The  real  ruler  was  one  of  the  nobles,  Zavis  of 
Falckenstein,  with  whom  Ottokar's  widow  Kunhuta  had 
formed  a  connection ;  on  the  birth  of  a  son  secrecy  was  no 
longer  possible,  and  a  marriage  between  Zavis  and  Kunhuta 
took  place  in  1280.  Though  she  died  not  many  years  after 
the  marriage  Zavis  retained  the  high  positions  at  court  that 
he  had  obtained  through  her  influence,  and   became    the 

^  All  the  Bohemian  historians  agree  in  stating  that  only  this  ahiiost 
incredibly  short  respite  was  granted. 


52  Bohemia 

principal  councillor  of  the  young  king.  His  influence  for 
a  time  seems  to  have  been  unlimited ;  and  the  towns  of 
Landskron  and  Policka,  and  the  castle  of  Landsberg,  are 
mentioned  as  only  a  few  of  the  many  estates  that  Venceslas 
granted  to  him. 

Zavis  was  undoubtedly  a  great  statesman.  His  poHcy 
provided  a  Hnk  between  the  reigns  of  Ottokar  II  and 
Venceslas  II.  He  constantly  reminded  the  young  king 
of  the  greatness  of  Bohemia  during  the  reign  of  Ottokar.^ 
He  thus  naturally  incurred  the  displeasure  of  Rudolph,  and 
Habsburg  intrigues  were  undoubtedly  the  cause  of  his  fall. 
To  secure  a  foreign  alliance  Zavis  obtained  the  consent  of 
King  Ladislas  of  Hungar)^  to  his  marriage  with  the  king's 
sister  Jutta,  and  after  his  marriage  retired  to  one  of  his 
castles.  It  is  probable  that  he  knew  that  the  Habsburg 
party  at  the  Bohemian  court  had  already  influenced  the 
young  king  against  him ;  still  Zavis,  on  the  birth  of  a  son, 
requested  Venceslas  to  be  present  as  godfather  at  the 
christening ;  and  the  king,  thinking  he  had  now  found  an 
opportunity  of  ridding  himself  of  his  over-powerful  vassal, 
accepted  the  invitation  on  condition  that  Zavis  should  first 
come  to  Prague  and  escort  his  sovereign  to  the  castle  where 
the  baptism  was  to  take  place.  On  arriving  at  Prague, 
Zavis  was  immediately  confined  in  a  dungeon ;  he  was 
accused  of  having  illegally  appropriated  lands  belonging 
to  the  Crown,  and  all  his  estates  were  confiscated.  The 
powerful  relations  of  Zavis,  supported  by  other  Bohemian 
nobles,  took  his  part  against  the  king,  to  whom  they  refused 
to  give  up  his  castles,  which  they  had  occupied  with  armed 
forces.  Venceslas,  k  is  said,  on  the  advice  of  "the  German 
King  Rudolph,  resorted  to  a  cruel  device  for  the  purpose 
of  subduing  their  resistance.  He  obliged  his  step-father  to 
accompany,  as  a  prisoner,  the  force  with  which  he  besieged 
the  castles  held  by  the  rebels,  and  forced  them  to  capitulate 
by  the  menace  of  immediately  putting  Zavis  to  death.  The 
menace  was  successful  in  several  cases ;  but  when  the  king's 
forces  arrived  before  the  castle  Hluboka,^  which  was  held 
for  Zavis  by  his  brother  Vitek,  the  latter,  not  believing  the 
king  capable  of  the  cruel  act  which  he  threatened  to  do, 
refused  to  capitulate.  Zavis  was  thereupon  decapitated  in  a 
meadow  just  outside  of  the  castle  walls  in  view  of  his  brother. 

1  Dr.  Novik  (in  the  Cesky  Casopis  Historicky). 

2  In  German  Frauenberg. 


An  Historical  Sketch  53 

It  is  only  from  this  date  that  Venceslas  can  really  be 
said  to  have  reigned  over  Bohemia.  After  a  short  inter- 
ruption he  resumed  the  policy,  hostile  to  the  house  of 
Habsburg,  which  Zavis  had  adopted.  It  is  probably  for  this 
reason  that  the  contemporary  chroniclers — mostly  Germans 
— have  done  scant  justice  to  Venceslas.  Bohemia  was 
certainly  very  prosperous  during  his  reign,  and  we  read  that 
the  silver  mines  of  Kutna  Hora,  the  great  source  of  pros- 
perity for  Bohemia  in  the  Middle  Ages,  were  again  worked 
during  the  reign  of  Venceslas  II.  The  richness  and  pros- 
perity of  the  country  at  this  period  no  doubt  attracted 
notice  in  the  neighbouring  countries,  Hungary  and  Poland, 
and  inspired  the  people  with  the  wish  of  also  being  under 
the  mild  rule  of  King  Venceslas. 

During  more  than  a  hundred  years  Poland  had  been  in  a 
state  of  complete  anarchy,  principally  caused  by  the  rival 
claimants  to  the  throne  and  by  the  incessant  and  ever- 
varying  partitions  of  the  country,  which  were  made  to  satisfy 
the  numerous  pretenders.  In  the  year  1291  Venceslas 
was  requested  by  a  large  party  in  Western  Poland  to 
undertake  the  government  of  their  country.  The  king 
consented,  and  occupied  these  lands  after  very  slight 
resistance,  assuming  the  title  of  Grand  Duke  of  Cracow, 
from  the  name  of  the  principal  city  in  the  district.  A  few 
years  later  (1300)  King  Venceslas,  again  at  the  request  of  the 
Polish  nobles,  occupied  the  whole  of  that  country,  and  was 
crowned  King  of  Poland  at  Gnesen.  Bohemia  and  Poland 
were  thus  again  for  a  short  time  under  one  king. 

In  the  following  year,  on  the  extinction  of  the  old  royal 
family  of  Hungary,  a  large  party  in  that  country  wished  to 
elect  Venceslas  II  as  king.  They  sent  envoys  to  Bohemia, 
and  Venceslas  declared  to  them  that,  being  already  King 
of  Bohemia  and  Poland,  he  feared  the  burden  of  another 
crown,  and  advised  them  to  elect  his  son  Venceslas,  then 
only  twelve  years  of  age,  as  their  king. 

King  Venceslas  may  also  have  thought  that  his  son, 
because  of  his  youth,  would  be  more  likely  to  adapt  him- 
self to  the  customs  of  Hungary.  The  Hungarians  followed 
the  king's  advice,  and  the  younger  Venceslas  was  crowned 
as  King  of  Hungary  at  Stuhlweissenburg  (1301),  and  for 
some  time  resided  at  Ofen,  the  Hungarian  capital. ^ 

^  The  iirst  wife  of  Venceslas,  Gutta,  daughter  of  King  Rudolph,  died 
in  1298  ;  he  shortly  afterwards — about  the  time  of  his  coronation  at 
Gnesea — married  a  Polish  princess. 


54  Bohemia 

King  Rudolph,  father-in-law  of  King  Venceslas,  had 
died  in  1291,  and,  contrary  to  the  expectations  of  his 
son  Albert,  Adolphus,  Count  of  Nassau,  had  been  chosen 
as  Rudolph's  successor.  Venceslas,  between  whom  and  his 
brother-in-law  Albert  a  personal  enmity  existed,  favoured 
the  election  of  Adolphus  of  Nassau.  Later  on  Albert's 
sister,  the  Bohemian  queen,  appears  to  have  exercised 
her  influence  over  her  husband  to  such  an  extent,  that 
he  at  least  did  not  oppose  the  deposition  of  Adolphus 
and  the  election  of  Albert.  The  death  of  Adolphus  of 
Nassau  at  the  battle  of  Gellenheim  (1208)  made  Albert 
undisputed  ruler  of  Germany. 

Friendship,  however,  proved  impossible  between  the 
kings  of  Germany  and  of  Bohemia.  Albert  seems  to 
have  been  irritated  by  the  power  of  the  Bohemian  king 
in  Poland  and  Hungary ;  he  therefore  favoured  the  Papal 
cause,  when  the  ambitious  Pope  Boniface  VIII  contested 
the  rights  of  Venceslas  over  Poland  and  Hungary,  declar- 
ing that  the  right  to  confer  the  crowns  of  both  these 
countries  rested  with  the  Holy  See.  War  broke  out 
between  Albert  and  Venceslas  (1304),  and  the  German 
king  invaded  Eastern  Bohemia,  hoping  to  possess  him- 
self of  the  silver  mines  of  Kutna  Hora ;  but  he  was 
forced  to  retreat  before  the  Bohemian  armies.  In  the 
following  year  Venceslas  II  was  preparing  to  invade 
Austria,  when  he  died  suddenly  at  the  age  of  thirty-four 
(1305).  Though  the  unfavourable  political  situation  and 
his  early  death  prevented  him  from  carrying  out  his 
ambitious  plans,  it  appears  certain  that  Venceslas  for  a 
time  seriously  contemplated  the  re-establishment  of  the 
great  Bohemian  empire  of  his  father. 

His  successor,  Venceslas  III,  was  then  only  sixteen 
years  of  age ;  and  as  he  only  reigned  one  year,  it  is 
difificult  to  understand  where  the  contemporary  chroniclers 
found  the  materials  for  their  long— mostly  unfavourable — 
reports  on  his  character  and  his  actions.  He  undoubt- 
edly concluded  a  somewhat  disadvantageous  treaty  with 
the  German  king,  to  whom  he  ceded  lands  (forming 
part  of  the  present  kingdom  of  Saxony)  to  the  north- 
west of  Bohemia  that  had  belonged  to  his  father.  On 
the  other  hand,  Albert  promised  not  to  interfere  in  the 
affairs  of  Poland  and  Hungary ;  his  claim  to  the  latter 
kingdom,  however,  Venceslas  ceded  to  the  Duke  of  Bavaria, 


An  Historical  Sketch  55 

perhaps  despairing  of  maintaining  his  hold  on  the  country 
against  the  rival  claimants. 

Though  Venceslas  had  given  up  his  claim  to  the  Hungarian 
throne,  he  determined  to  maintain  his  hereditary  rights  upon 
Poland. 

An  insurrection  against  the  Bohemians  having  broken 
out  in  that  country,  Venceslas  marched  to  Poland  to 
suppress  it.  Before  reaching  Poland  he  was  murdered  at 
Olomonc  ^  by  unknown  assassins.^ 

The  male  line  of  the  dynasty  of  Pfemysl,  that  had  reigned 
over  Bohemia  nearly  six  hundred  years,  thus  came  to  an 
end. 

The  sudden  extinction  of  the  house  of  Pfemysl  left 
Bohemia  without  any  legitimate  successor  to  the  crown.  Of 
the  royal  family  only  Elizabeth,  widow  of  Venceslas  II, 
Violet,  widow  of  Venceslas  III,  and  four  daughters  of  the 
former  king  remained.  The  eldest  of  these  daughters, 
Anne,  was  married  to  Henry,  Duke  of  Carinthia,  and  popular 
feeling  greatly  favoured  the  election  of  that  prince  to  the 
throne  of  Bohemia.  Venceslas  III  had  left  him  as  his 
representative  in  Bohemia  when  he  started  on  his  expedition 
to  Poland,  and  it  was  hoped  that  by  this  choice  the  Pfemysl 
dynasty  would  be  continued  in  the  female  line. 

The  German  King  Albert,  however,  declared  Bohemia  a 
vacant  fief  of  the  Empire,  and  appointed  as  king  his  eldest 
son  Rudolph.  The  nobles  assembled  at  Prague,  and, 
probably  intimidated  by  the  power  of  the  German  king, 
elected  Rudolph.  They  further,  on  the  request  of  King 
Albert,  who  accompanied  his  son  to  Bohemia,  declared 
Rudolph's  brothers  heirs  to  the  throne  in  case  of  his  death 
without  children.  As  a  concession  to  the  feeling  in  favour 
of  the  old  national  dynasty,  a  marriage  between  Rudolph 
and  Elizabeth,  widow  of  Venceslas  II,  was  arranged. 

1  In  German  Olmlitz. 

2  Many  historians  have  accused  King  Albert  of  being  the  instigator 
of  the  murder  of  his  nephew.  The  chronicler  of  the  monastery  of 
Klosterneuburg,  whose  evidence,  as  being  that  of  an  Austrian,  may  b^ 
somewhat  partial,  writes — 

"  Wenceslas  .  .  .  propter  insolentiam  contra  optimates  suos  in 
Olomucz  civitate  Moraviae  a  suis  occiditur  .  .  .  sicque  contra  vati- 
cinium  in  gente  ilia  ab  antiquo  vulgatum  Bohemiae  regnum  exhae- 
redatur  "  {Per  Scrip/ores  Reritm  Ati  striae  arum  I.  Chronicon  Claustro- 
Neoburgense).  The  last  words  refer  to  Libussa's  prophecy  (see  Chapter 
II). 


56 


Bohemia 


Rudolph's  great  parsimony,  which  contrasted  with  the 
splendour  of  the  former  Pfemysl  dynasty,  rendered  him  very 
unpopular,  and  many  of  the  nobles  refused  to  do  homage  to 
him.  While  besieging  Horazdovic,  the  castle  of  one  of  the 
opposing  nobles,  Rudolph  suddenly  fell  ill  and  died  (1307), 
having  reigned  less  than  a  year  over  Bohemia. 

One  of  the  first  consequences  of  the  extinction  of  the  line 
of  Pfemysl  had  been  the  ending  of  Bohemia's  domination 
over  Poland.  The  Bohemian  governors  of  Cracow  and 
Gnesen  left  the  country  as  soon  as  they  ascertained  that,  in 
consequence  of  the  disturbed  state  of.Bohemia,  they  had  no 
hopes  of  obtaining  aid  from  their  country. 

In  consequence  of  the  early  death  of  Rudolph,  the  Bohe- 
mian nobles  had  for  the  second  time  in  one  year  to  decide 
on  the  succession  to  the  throne  of  their  country.  Whilst 
one  party  wished  to  maintain  the  hereditary  rights  of  the 
house  of  Habsburg,  which  had  been  recognized  only  a  year 
before,  a  largjer  number  of  the  nobles  now  desired  to  choose 
Plenry  of  Carinthia  as  their  sovereign,  and  declared  the 
claims  of  the  house  of  Austria  invalid.^ 

The  Diet  which  had  assembled  at  Prague  in  1307  was  a 
very  stormy  one.  The  leader  of  the  Austrian  party,  Tobias 
of  Bechyn,  being  called  on  by  his  opponents  not  to  favour 
the  claims  of  foreigners  and  enemies  to  rule  over  his 
countrymen,  answered,  *'  If  you  wish  at  any  price  to  obtain  a 
native  prince,  go  to  Stadic,^  among  the  peasants  there  you 
will  perhaps  find  a  relation  of  the  extinct  royal  family;  bring 
him  here  and  seat  him  on  the  throne  of  your  country."^ 
Infuriated  by  this  insult  against  the  old  dynasty,  Ulrich, 
Lord  of  Lichtenburg,  rushed  across  the  council-room  and 
stabbed  Bechyn  to  death.  Several  other  nobles  were  also 
murdered  before  the  eyes  of  the  widowed  Queen  Elizabeth, 
who  was  present  at  the  council.  These  stormy  discussions 
were  ended  by  the  election  of  Henry  of  Carinthia,  who, 
accompanied  by  his  wife,  arrived  in  Prague  in  the  same 
year  (1307),  where  they  were  received  with  great  enthusiasm 
by  the  people. 

^  The  reason,  or  rather  pretext,  was  that  after  Rudolph's  election 
Albert  had  formally  appointed  his  son  King  of  Bohemia ;  thus  throwing 
doubt  on  the  validity  of  his  previous  election  by  the  nobles  of  the 
country,  and  reaffirming  the  claim  of  the  German  kings  to  appoint  the 
sovereifyn  of  Bohemia,  a  claim  that  the  Bohemians  always  contested. 

2  See  Chapter  II.  ^  Palacky. 


An  Historical  Sketch  57 

King  Albert  had,  however,  no  intention  of  giving  up 
peacefully  the  right  he  had  so  recently  obtained  for  his  de- 
scendants. He  immediately  invaded  Moravia,  and  succeeded 
for  a  short  time  in  securing  that  country  for  Frederick,  now 
his  eldest  son.  Albert  then  invaded  Bohemia,  but  with 
little  success,  though  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession 
of  a  few  frontier  towns,  in  which  he  left  German  garrisons 
on  retiring  from  the  country. 

Albert's  assassination  by  John  Parricida  (1308)  saved 
Bohemia  from  great  danger;  for  Albert's  son  Frederick, 
who  was  menaced  by  an  insurrection  in  Austria,  and  who 
had  not,  as  had  his  father,  the  support  of  the  Empire,^  soon 
came  to  terms  with  the  Bohemian  king.  Frederick  re- 
nounced all  claims  to  Bohemia  and  Moravia  on  condition 
of  receiving  a  large  sum  of  money. 

Henry's  rule  was  now  undisturbed  by  foreign  enemies, 
but  quiet  did  not  long  prevail  in  Bohemia.  Henry's  popu- 
larity had  been  founded  more  on  his  alliance  with  the  old 
and  national  dynasty  of  the  Pfemyslides  than  on  any 
personal  merits,  and  he  soon  proved  himself  incapable  of 
ruling  the  country  in  troublous  times.  Strife  had  arisen 
between  the  German  townsmen — among  whom  the  citizens 
of  Prague  and  Kutna  Hora  appear  to  have  obtained  a  pre- 
dominant position — and  the  Bohemian  nobility.  The  first 
cause  of  the  quarrel  seems  to  have  been  the  claim  of  the 
German  settlers  to  take  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  country,  in 
particular  to  attend  the  Diet  of  the  kingdom.  The  Germans 
attempted  to  attain  their  purpose  by  forcibly  seizing  and 
imprisoning  several  Bohemian  nobles,  who  held  the  highest 
offices  of  State.  As  a  necessary  consequence  civil  war 
broke  out,  and  Henry  was  unable  to  maintain  order  be- 
tween the  contending  parties.  The  King  on  the  whole 
favoured  the  German  townsmen;  but  his  incapacity  was 
now  generally  acknowledged,  not  only  by  the  Bohemian 
nobility,  but  also  by  the  majority  of  the  clergy,  and  even 
:he  townsmen;  and  the  necessity  of  choosing  a  new  king 
A^as  agreed  to  by  all  parties.  The  choice  fell  (13 10)  on 
[ohn.  Count  of  Luxemburg,^  only  son  of  the  new  German 
King  Henry. 

^  On  the  death  of  Albert,  Henry,  Count  of  Luxemburg,  was  elected 
King  of  the  Germans  (1308). 

2  "A  celebrated  place,  too,  or  name,  that  'Luxembourg'  of  theirs, 
with  its  French  marshals,  grand  Parisian  edifices  lending  it  new  lustre; 
C2 


58 


Bohemia 


An  embassy  was  sent  to  the  German  king  requesting  his 
consent  to  their  choice  (John  being  then  only  fourteen  years 
of  age),  and  also  to  the  marriage  of  their  new  sovereign  with 
the  Princess  Elizabeth,  second  daughter  of  Venceslas  II. 
After  some  negotiations  they  obtained  the  consent  of  Henry, 
who  sent  an  army  to  Bohemia  to  accompany  his  son  and 
the  Bohemian  envoys  on  their  journey. 

John  obtained  possession  of  the  country  after  a  slight 
resistance  on  the  part  of  Henry  of  Carinthia,  who,  however, 
soon  left  Bohemia.  In  the  following  year  (13 n)  John  and 
Elizabeth  were  crowned  at  Prague  as  king  and  queen  of 
Bohemia. 

It  was  a  great  misfortune  for  the  young  king  that  his 
father,  Henry  VII  of  Germany  (who  had,  as  was  customary 
with  the  German  kings,  undertaken  an  expedition  to  Rome 
to  be  crowned  there  as  Emperor),  died  suddenly  on  his  way 
back  to  Germany  (131 1).  Many  of  the  faults  King  John 
afterwards  committed  may  be  traced  to  the  fact  that  from 
his  earliest  youth  he  had  been  under  no  control.  We  read 
that  King  John  did  not  take  his  father's  death  much  to 
heart,^  and  he  attempted,  though  unsuccessfully,  to  secure 
the  succession  to  the  German  throne.  His  extreme  youth 
appears  to  have  been  the  principal  cause  of  his  failure. 

The  German  Electors  having  voted — some  for  Duke 
Frederick  of  Austria,  others  for  Louis,  Duke  of  Bavaria — 
one  of  the  many  contests  for  the  crown  took  place  which  at 
that  period  caused  so  great  a  decline  in  the  power  and 
influence  of  Germany.  In  this  struggle  between  the  houses 
of  Habsburg  and  Wittelsbach  King  John  sided  with  the 
Bavarian  prince,  and  his  forces  are  said  to  have  largely 
contributed  to  the  decisive  victory  of  Miihldorf  (1322). 
We  are  also  told  that  King  John  had  the  command  of  the 
whole  army,  which  on  that  day  defeated  the  Austrian 
duke. 

King  John's  rule  in  Bohemia  cannot,  on  the  whole,  be 
considered  as  successful.  His  heroic  death  has  made  him 
one  of  those  kings  whose  names  linger  in  the  memory  of  the 

what  thinks  the  reader  is  the  meaning  of  Luzzenburg,  Luxembourg, 
Luxemburg?  Merely  Llitzelburg  wrongly  pronounced,  and  that  again 
is  nothing  but  Littlcborough  ;  such  is  the  luck  of  names  ! "  (Carlyle's 
History  of  Frederick  the  Great). 

^  "Cito  patris  morte  in  oblivionem  tradita"  {Fez  SaHptoi-es  Kcruvi 
Austriacarum  I.  Anonytni  Leobiensis  Chronicoji). 


An  Historical  Sketch  59 

Bohemian  people ;  but  he  was  not  popular  during  his  life- 
time. Though  coming  to  Bohemia  at  so  early  an  age,  he 
never  appears  to  have  shown  any  affection  for  the  country, 
nor  indeed  to  have  thoroughly  mastered  its  language — a 
matter  on  which  then  as  now  popularity  in  Bohemia  perhaps 
depends  more  than  on  anything  else.  The  Bohemian 
chroniclers  complain  that  his  short  residences  in  Bohemia 
were  solely  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  financial  supplies, 
and  that  having  secured  this  object  he  then  immediately 
left  the  country  in  search  of  new  adventures,  His  dominant 
idea  seems  to  have  been  that  of  chivalry.  The  English 
King  Edward  III  called  him  corona  militiae.  His  nature 
was  that  of  a  knight-errant  or  a  Don  Quixote  ;  if  that  typ^, 
in  many  ways  so  touching,  had  not  through  being  misunder- 
stood long  since  acquired  comic  associations.^  It  will  be 
sufficient  to  give  a  mere  outline  of  the  various  warlike 
expeditions  of  King  John,  which  extended  from  Lithuania 
and  Hungary  to  Italy  and  France.  As  Palack^^  says :  "  It 
would  be  necessary  to  write  the  history  of  all  Europe  if  we 
attempted  to  describe  all  the  feuds  into  which  King  John 
entered  with  chivalrous  bravery,  but  also  with  frivolity.  It 
then  became  a  proverb,  that  '  nothing  can  be  done  without 
the  help  of  God  and  of  the  King  of  Bohemia.' " 

King  John's  reign  was  from  its  beginning  disturbed  by 
internal  dissensions,  mainly  caused  by  the  enmity  between 
his  wife.  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  EHzabeth,  widow  of  Ven- 
ceslas  II  and  Rudolph  I.  One  of  the  great  Bohemian 
nobles,  Henry  of  Lipa,  had  obtained  unlimited  influence 
over  the  widowed  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  he  aspired  to  play 
a  part  similar  to  that  of  Zavis  of  Falckenstein  during  the 
reign  of  Venceslas  II.  King  John  having  caused  Henry  of 
Lipa  to  be  imprisoned,  a  great  insurrection  of  the  Bohemian 
nobility  broke  out  shortly  afterwards,  while  the  king  was 
in  Germany.  Recalled  by  his  consort,  King  John  hastily 
returned,  and  after  much  desultory  fighting  the  differences 
with  the  nobles  were  settled  by  a  compromise  under  the 
mediation  of  the  German  King  Louis  (131 8).  Henry  of 
Lipa  regained  his  liberty,  and  was  reinstated  in  the  offices 
he  had  held  at  court.     He  seems,  indeed,  soon  to  have 

1  We  are  told  on  good  authority  that  King  John  intended  to  establish 
the  Round  Table  of  King  Arthur,  and  that  he  (1319)  invited  all  the 
most  celebrated  knights  in  Europe  to  a  tournament  at  Prague  ;  nobociy 
appears  to  have  responded  to  the  call. 


6o  Bohemia 

become  a  friend  and  councillor  of  the  inconstant  king. 
Probably  through  the  influence  of  Henry  of  Lipa,  whose 
connection  with  the  "  Queen  of  Kralov^  Hradec "  ^  made 
him  a  deadly  enemy  of  the  reigning  queen,  John  shortly 
afterwards  became  estranged  from  his  consort.  It  was  no 
doubt  also  Henry  of  Lipa  who  suggested  to  the  King  that 
Queen  Elizabeth  intended  to  dethrone  him  and  place  their 
eldest  son,  then  called  Venceslas,  but  afterwards  known  as 
Charles,  on  the  throne  under  her  own  guardianship.  John 
separated  the  queen  from  her  eldest  child,  whom  he  im- 
prisoned ;  and  as  the  citizens  of  Prague  took  the  part  of  the 
queen,  "  a  war  such  as  Bohemia  had  never  known  before, 
a  war  between  the  king  and  the  queen,"  now  broke  out. 

Happily  this  contest  did  not  last  long ;  a  temporary  re- 
conciliation between  King  John  and  his  queen  took  place, 
and  the  young  Prince  Charles  was  restored  to  liberty.  A 
few  years  later  (1323)  King  John,  on  the  occasion  of  one 
of  his  many  visits  to  the  French  court,  had  his  son,  then 
only  seven  years  old,  brought  to  Paris  to  be  educated  at 
the  court  of  Charles  IV.  On  the  occasion  of  his  confirma- 
tion the  young  Bohemian  prince  received  the  name  of 
Charles,  after  the  French  king.^ 

On  the  death  of  Waldemar,  Margrave  of  Brandenburg, 
King  John  became  involved  in  the  war  which  broke  out 
between  the  claimants  to  his  succession.  John  claimed 
Upper  Lusatia  as  a  fief  of  the  Bohemian  crown,  and 
succeeded  in  conquering  part  of  that  country,  including 
Bautzen,  the  capital  of  the  district. 

At  tl>e  beginning  of  the  year  1327  King  John  returned  to 
Bohemia.  Since  the  battle  of  Miihldorf  (1322),  which  had 
for  a  while  put  a  stop  to  the  war  in  Germany,  he  had  spent 
most  of  his  time  at  Luxemburg  or  at  the  French  court. 
Restless  as  ever,  he  undertook  an  expedition  to  Poland 
a  few  months  later,  wishing  to  re-establish  the  former 
sovereignty  of  the  Bohemian  kings  over  that  country. 
Marching  through  Silesia  on  his  way  to  Poland  he  forced 
the  small  princes  of  that  country  to  renew  their  former 
allegiance   to   the   Bohemian  crown,  which  had   been   in 

^  The  widow  of  Venceslas  II  was  known  under  that  name,  as  she 
generally  lived  at  Kralove  Hradec  (in  German  Koniggratz),  the  usual 
residence  of  the  widows  of  the  kings  of  Bohemia. 

^  King  John's  sister  Mary  was  married  to  the  French  King 
Charles  IV. 


An  Historical  Sketch  6i 

abeyance  since  the  death  of  Venceslas  II.  King  John, 
however,  abandoned  his  plan  of  reconquering  Poland, 
though  his  army  had  already  arrived  before  Cracow,  as  he 
received  news  that  the  King  of  Hungary  intended  joining 
his  forces  to  those  of  Poland  should  that  country  be 
attacked. 

Two  years  later  (1329)  we  find  King  John  again  in  the 
north,  this  time  on  a  so-called  crusade  against  the  heathen 
Lithuanians.  The  Teutonic  knights  often  required  aid  in 
their  struggle  against  the  pagans  in  Northern  Europe,  and 
the  German  princes  frequently  undertook  warlike  expedi- 
tions to  Lithuania  and  the  neighbouring  districts  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  the  former  crusades  to  the  Holy  Land,  which 
many  previous  failures  had  rendered  distasteful.  After  a 
great  deal  of  desultory  and  indecisive  fighting  King  John 
returned  to  Bohemia  through  Silesia,  and  succeeded  in 
obtaining  by  treaty  that  part  of  Upper  Lusatia  which,  after 
the  death  of  Waldemar  of  Brandenburg,  had  remained  in 
the  hands  of  one  of  the  Silesian  princes. 

King  John  had  spent  the  earlier  part  of  the  year  1329  in 
Lithuania  ;  the  latter  part  of  the  following  year  found  the 
errant  king  in  Italy.  Enmity  between  King  John  and  his 
predecessor  on  the  Bohemian  throne,  Henry  of  Carinthia 
and  the  Tyrol,  had  long  ceased ;  and  John  now  wished  to 
arrange  a  marriage  between  his  second  son,  John  Henry, 
and  Margaret,!  daughter  of  Duke  Henry,  and,  as  he  had  no 
male  descendants,  heir  to  all  his  lands. 

John  visited  Duke  Henry  (1330)  at  Innsbruck,  where 
the  negotiations  for  the  marriage  were  carried  on,  and  here 
received  a  deputation  from  the  town  of  Brescia  in  Lombardy, 
who  requested  his  aid  against  Mastino  della  Scala,  Lord 
of  Verona,  who  was  then  besieging  their  city.  The  ever- 
adventurous  king  promised  his  protection,  and  the  citizens 
of  Brescia  recognized  him  as  their  over-lord.  Mastino  della 
Scala,  not  wishing  to  encounter  the  powerful  Bohemian 
king,  abandoned  the  siege  of  Brescia,  and  King  John  made 
his  triumphant  entry  into  that  town  on  the  last  day  of  the 
year  1330.  The  Bohemian  domination  in  Italy,  destined 
to  be  of  very  short  duration,  at  first  extended  with  almost 

^  Known  in  German  history  as  Margaretha  Maultasche.  **  Mouth- 
poke,  Pocket- mouth,  Heiress  of  the  Tyrol — with  a  terrible  mouth  to 
her  face  and  none  of  the  gentlest  hearts  in  her  body  "  (Carlyle,  History 
of  Frederick  tlie  Great). 


62  Bohemia 

incredible  rapidity.  Within  the  first  three  months  of  the 
year  1331  the  towns  of  Bergamo,  Crema,  Parma,  Modena, 
Novara,  Vercelli,  and  many  others,  of  their  own  free  will 
accepted  King  John  as  their  over-lord.  Even  the  powerful 
Azzo  de'  Visconti,  Lord  of  Milan,  acknowledged  the  supre- 
macy of  the  King  of  Bohemia.  King  John  remained  in 
Italy  till  June  (1331),  when  dangers  nearer  home  obliged 
him  to  recross  the  Alps ;  he,  however,  left  his  son  Charles 
as  his  representative  in  Italy.  Charles,  though  only  seven- 
teen years  of  age,  for  a  time  successfully  defended  himself 
against  the  Italians,  who  had  soon  become  tired  of  the 
supremacy  of  the  Bohemian  princes.  Mastino  della  Scala 
of  Verona,  King  Robert  of  Naples,  the  lords  of  Mantua  and 
P'errara,  and  Azzo  de'  Visconti  of  Milan,  who  had  already 
changed  sides,  concluded  an  alliance  against  Prince  Charles. 
Charles,  who  fixed  his  residence  at  Parma,  one  of  the  few 
Italian  towns  that  remained  faithful  to  the  Bohemian 
princes,  defeated  the  confederates  in  a  very  sanguinary 
engagement  that  took  place  at  San  Felice,  near  Parma 
(1332).  This  victory  was  not  decisive,  and  Charles  appealed 
to  his  father  for  aid.  King  John  recrossed  the  Alps,  but 
with  very  insufficient  forces;  the  Bohemian  dominion  in 
Italy  collapsed  as  quickly  as  it  had  arisen,  and  both  King 
John  and  his  son  left  the  country  before  the  end  of  the 
year  1333. 

King  John's  rapid  departure  from  Italy  in  1331  had  been 
caused  by  troubles  north  of  the  Alps,  which  were  the  con- 
sequences of  his  Italian  conquests.  The  German  king 
considered  that  King  John  had  encroached  on  the  rights  of 
the  Empire  by  these  conquests;  John's  old  enemy  King 
Casimir  of  Poland,  the  dukes  of  Austria,  Charles  Robert, 
King  of  Hungary,  and  his  uncle  Robert,  King  of  Naples,  all 
joined  him  in  opposing  the  ambitious  King  of  Bohemia. 
King  John  succeeded  in  pacifying  the  King  of  Germany  by 
the  promise  that  all  lands  conquered  by  him  in  Italy  should 
become  the  joint  property  of  the  two  sovereigns.  He  then 
hurried  to  Poland,  and  by  besieging  his  town  of  Posen 
forced  King  Casimir  to  conclude  a  truce.  King  John  then 
proceeded  to  Paris  with  his  usual  rapidity,  leaving  Henry 
the  younger  of  Lipa  to  meet  the  attack  of  the  Austrian 
dukes,  who,  however,  defeated  him.  King  John's  second 
disappearance  from  Italy  has  already  been  mentioned. 

"  Whilst  King  John  was  thus  wandering  through  distant 


An  Historical  Sketch  63 

lands  the  decline  of  Bohemia  had,  in  consequence  of  the 
king's  irrational  government,  reached  its  lowest  point."  * 
The  king  seems  himself  to  have  felt  the  impossibility  of 
governing  alone  a  country  from  which,  in  consequence  of 
his  adventurous  life,  he  was  almost  always  absent. 

Shortly  after  leaving  Italy  King  John  proceeded  to  Lux- 
emburg, where  he  had  become  involved  in  a  feud  with  John, 
Duke  of  Brabant ;  but  he  left  his  son  Charles  at  Prague,  with 
full  power  to  govern  Bohemia  and  Moravia.  Always 
jealous  of  his  son,  John  had  formally  stipulated  that 
Charles  should  only  bear  the  title  of  Margrave  of 
Moravia. 

"  Margrave  Charles  was  unlike  his  father  in  many  respects ; 
he  inherited  neither  his  qualities  nor  his  faults.  John, 
chivalrously  brave  and  somewhat  vain,  was  mostly  guided 
by  his  temperament,  which,  though  vivacious  and  inconstant, 
was  generally  intent  on  noble  purposes.  He  loved  warfare 
above  all  things,  both  in  good  earnest  and  in  sport ;  he 
sought  out  wars  and  tournaments  ;  cared  more  for  glory  than 
for  gain ;  succeeded  in  conquering  more  than  he  was  able 
to  retain.  He  attempted  great  deeds,  but  his  want  of  thrift 
often  drove  him  to  petty  acts.  His  learned  and  serious  son, 
on  the  other  hand,  showed  everywhere  the  most  entire  self- 
possession,  and  in  all  matters  of  business  acted  according 
to  a  fixed  plan  and  with  calculation  ;  he  also  fought  bravely, 
but  he  preferred  to  obtain  his  purpose  by  peaceful  negotia- 
tion. Orderly  in  financial  matters,  he  showed  exceptional 
talent  in  the  art  of  government,  though  his  military  capacities 
were  not  great ;  he  obtained  far  more  by  the  arts  of  diplomacy 
than  he  ever  could  have  done  by  the  force  of  arms.  John 
hardly  disguised  the  fact  that  he  had  little  sympathy  for  the 
land  and  people  of  Bohemia  ;  love  for  them  seems,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  have  been  the  one  passion  of  Charles."  ^ 

In  a  comparatively  short  time  Charles  seems  to  have 
restored  order  in  the  disturbed  country,  and  to  have  at  least 
partially  improved  its  financial  situation;  though  his  task 
was  rendered  more  difficult  by  his  father's  constant  demand 
for  money.  About  this  time  both  Charles  and  his  father 
became  connected  by  marriage  with  the  royal  family  of 
France,  Charles  marrying  the  French  Princess  Blanche  of 
Valois,  and  King  John  ^  the  Princess  Beatrice  of  Bourbon. 

^  Tomek.  2  Palacky. 

^  King  John's  first  wife,  Elizabeth,  had  died  in  1330, 


64 


Bohemia 


The  result  of  these  family  connections  was  an  alliance 
between  Bohemia  and  France,  that  lasted  up  to  the  end  of 
the  reign  of  King  John. 

The  death  of  Uuke  Henry  of  Carinthia  and  the  Tyrol 
(1335)  was  followed  by  new  strife  in  Germany,  and  the 
ever-warlike  King  John  now  returned  to  Bohemia.  The 
German  King  Louis,  John's  former  ally,  joined  the 
Austrian  dukes  in  an  attempt  to  deprive  King  John's  son, 
John  Henry,  of  the  Tyrol  and  Carinthia,  to  which  lands 
he  had  become  entitled  as  husband  of  Margaret  "  Mouth- 
poke."  To  be  secure  in  the  north  and  east  King  John,  on 
the  advice  of  his  son  Charles,  came  to  a  peaceful  understand- 
ing with  the  kings  of  Poland  and  Hungary.  He  renounced 
all  claims  on  the  crown  of  Poland,  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
obtained  the  recognition  of  his  rights  over  Silesia  from  the 
two  kings. 

Unfortunately,  an  estrangement  took  place  about  this 
time  between  John  and  his  eldest  son.  Again  fearing  to 
find  a  rival  to  the  crown  in  Charles,  whose  popularity  in 
Bohemia  was  indeed  far  greater  than  his  father's,  King 
John  suddenly  deprived  him  of  all  share  in  the  government 
of  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  and  even  of  the  revenues  he 
drew  from  these  lands. 

Charles  acted  with  great  nobility  in  the  difficult  position 
in  which  he  found  himself.  Contrary  to  what  had  so  often 
happened  in  similar  cases,  he  declined  to  stir  up  civil  strife 
in  a  country  which  was  already  engaged  in  foreign  war. 
He  left  Bohemia  for  a  time,  and  joined  his  brother  John 
Henry  in  the  defence  of  the  Tyrol,  which  Louis,  King  of 
the  Germans,  had  already  attacked.  John  in  the  meantime 
entered  Austria  with  a  Bohemian  army,  and  succeeded  in 
separating  the  Austrian  dukes  from  their  ally,  the  King  of 
the  Germans ;  he  concluded  a  treaty  with  them,  by  which 
Carinthia  was  made  over  to  the  Austrian  princes,  while  the 
Tyrol  fell  to  the  share  of  John  Henry  (1336). 

King  John  soon  after  (1336)  undertook  a  second  crusade 
to  Lithuania,  during  which  he,  through  illness,  lost  the 
sight  of  one  eye — a  loss  that  was  soon  followed  by  complete 
blindness.  We  are  told  that  the  people  did  not  pity  him, 
but  said  that  his  misfortune  was  God's  punishment  for  the 
hardness  with  which  he — after  superseding  his  son  Charles 
— had  extorted  money  from  the  people  of  Bohemia.  Charles 
had  accompanied  his  father  on  this  Lithuanian  campaign ; 


An  Historical  Sketch  65 

but  he  returned  to  the  Tyrol  directly  afterwards,  and  it  was 
only  somewhat  later  (1338)  that  a  reconciliation  took  place. 
King  John  now  again  made  over  the  government  of 
Bohemia  to  Charles,  and  the  latter  was  afterwards  (1341), 
with  the  full  apiroval  of  his  father,  declared  heir  to  the 
throne  by  the  nobles  of  Bohemia. 

The  same  year  saw  the  beginning  of  new  troubles  in 
Germany.  Margaret  "  Mouth-poke  "  of  the  Tyrol,  inflamed 
by  a  violent  passion  for  King  Louis's  handsome  son,  Louis 
of  Brandenburg,  and  with  an  equally  violent  hatred  for  her 
husband,^  drove  the  latter  out  of  the  country,  and  married 
Margrave  Louis.  The  distance  of  Bohemia  from  the  Tyrol 
rendered  it  difficult  for  Charles  to  come  to  the  aid  of  his 
brother;  but  both  he  and  King  John  henceforth  became 
bitter  enemies  of  King  Louis,  who  had  abetted  his  son  in 
his  attempt  to  secure  the  Tyrol. 

King  John,  therefore,  probably  by  the  advice  of  his  son, 
entered  into  negotiations  with  Pope  Clement  VI,  who  had 
always  opposed  King  Louis,  and  was  now  endeavouring  to 
induce  the  German  Electors  to  choose  another  king.  Charles 
joined  his  father  at  Luxemburg  (1344),  and  thence  they 
both  repaired  to  the  papal  court  at  Avignon.  There  is  no 
doubt  th?t  the  deposition  of  King  Louis  and  the  election  of 
a  new  king  were  then  discussed,  though  the  result  of  these 
negotiations  only  became  evident  two  years  later. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Pope's  friendship  had  a  very  im- 
portant result  for  the  internal  development  of  Bohemia. 
On  Charles's  request  the  Pope  raised  the  Bishop  of  Prague 
— then  Ernest  of  Pardubic — to  the  rank  of  archbishop,  and 
declared  the  new  archbishopric  independent  of  the  German 
archbishops  of  Maintz.^  It  was  also  settled  that  the  kings 
of  Bohemia  should  in  future  be  crowned  by  the  new  Arch- 
bishop of  Prague.  We  are  also  told  that  through  the  Pope's 
influence  a  more  complete  reconciliation  between  King 
John  and  his  son  took  place;  and  it  is  noticeable  that 
during  the  short  space  of  life  that  still  remained  to  the 
king,  we  read  of  no  further  discord  between  the  two. 

^  The  old  chroniclers  give  amusing  but  not  very  edifying  details 
about  this  affair. 

-  It  is  curious  to  read  that  Charles  was  obliged  to  declare  on  his  oath 
that  the  language  of  Bohemia  was  a  Slavonic  one,  entirely  different 
from  the  Gemian  language;  that  the  distance  from  Prague  to  Maintz 
was  of  about  tw  elve  day-journeys  ;  and  that  the  road  lay  through  other 
dioceses. 


66  Bohemia 

On  leaving  Avignon,  King  John  and  his  son  first  went  to 
Prague  to  be  present  at  the  installation  of  the  new  arch- 
bishop. They  then  started  for  a  new  crusade  against  the 
heathen  Lithuanians,  which  they  probably  undertook  at  the 
request  of  the  Pope. 

Whilst  King  John  was  occupied  in  the  far  north,  the 
German  King  Louis  induced  the  kings  of  Hungary  and 
Poland,  the  dukes  of  Austria  and  several  of  the  Silesian 
princes,  to  join  him  in  an  alliance  against  Bohemia.  With 
almost  incredible  rapidity  King  John  marched  into  Poland, 
defeated  the  Poles  and  Hungarians,  and  besieged  Cracow.^ 
King  Casimir  demanded  a  truce,  which  through  the  media- 
tion of  the  Pope  soon  became  a  treaty  of  peace,  in  which 
Casimir's  allies,  with  the  exception  of  the  King  of  the 
Germans,  were  included. 

Against  the  latter  the  Bohemian  princes,  aided  by  the 
Pope,  now  struck  the  heaviest  blow  possible.  At  the  Pope's 
bidding  five  German  Electors,  among  whom  was  King  John, 
assembled  at  Rhense  (1346),  and  elected  King  John's  son. 
Margrave  Charles,  as  German  king.  This  rendered  further 
war  in  Germany  inevitable ;  but  the  attention  of  the  kings 
of  Bohemia  and  Germany  was  now  attracted  by  events 
further  west. 

War  had  for  some  time  been  carried  on  between  King 
Edward  HI  of  England  and  Philip  of  Valois,  King  of 
France,  with  whom  John  of  Bohemia  was  on  the  same 
terms  of  friendship  as  with  his  predecessor.  On  the  day 
following  Charles's  election  as  German  king  (July  12,  1346), 
King  Edward  and  his  son  the  Black  Prince  landed  on  the 
French  coast,  and  marching  rapidly  through  Normandy, 
advanced  nearly  up  to  the  gates  of  Paris. 

King  John  with  his  usual  impetuosity  immediately  decided 
to  come  to  the  aid  of  the  King  of  France.  Apart  from  his 
connection  with  the  royal  family,  he  had  always  felt  strong 
sympathy  for  France,  and  specially  for  Paris ;  he  was  even 
reported  to  have  said  that  he  cared  to  live  there  only,  as  it 
was  the  most  chivalrous  city  in  the  world. 

Not  stopping  to  assemble  an  army — though  he  would 

^  During  the  siege  of  Cracow,  King  Casimir  of  Poland  is  said  to  have 
provoked  the  King  of  Bohemia  to  single  combat,  as  a  means  of  ending 
the  war.  King  John  answered  that  he  was  quite  willing  to  accept  the 
challenge  on  condition  of  Casimir's  consenting  to  have  both  his  eyes  put 
out,  thus  rendering  their  chances  equal. 


An  Historical  Sketch  67 

probably  have  rendered  the  French  far  greater  service  had 
he  done  so — he  left  Luxemburg  (where  he  had  gone  im- 
mediately after  the  election  of  Rhense)  for  Paris,  accom- 
panied by  his  son  Charles  and  only  five  hundred  horsemen, 
mostly  Bohemian  nobles  and  knights.  When  they  arrived 
in  Paris,  the  enemy's  camp-fires  and  the  reflection  of  many 
burning  villages  in  the  sky  could  be  seen  from  the  towers  of 
Notre-Dame. 

King  Edward  marched  northward  shortly  afterwards  to 
join  the  Flemish  forces  that  were  gathering  at  Gravelines,^ 
and  the  Bohemians,  joining  the  French  army,  took  part  in 
King  Philip's  march  into  Picardy.  When  the  English  army 
essayed  the  passage  of  the  Somme  at  the  bridge  of  St.  Remy, 
near  Abbeville,  it  was  principally  the  Bohemian  troops  who 
prevented  the  attempt^  As  is  knovm  to  all  readers  of  English 
history,  King  Edward's  army  crossed  the  Somme  shortly 
afterwards  by  surprising  the  ford  of  Blanche-Taque. 

The  English  army  reached  the  village  of  Crecy  on  August 
25,  but  the  French  and  their  allies  only  arrived  there  on  the 
following  day.  Henry  Monch  of  Basel,  a  knight  serving 
under  the  King  of  Bohemia,  was  sent  forward  with  one  or 
two  followers  to  reconnoitre  the  position  of  the  English 
army,  which  the  French  still  believed  to  be  in  full  retreat. 
He  reported  that  this  was  entirely  untrue,  and  that  the 
English  army  was,  on  the  contrary,  preparing  for  battle. 
Henry  Monch  of  Basel,  and  with  him  his  warlike  king, 
therefore  strongly  advised  that  the  attack  should  be  deferred 
to  the  following  day,  as  the  troops  were  fatigued  by  a  long 
march.  As  is  known,  this  advice  was  over-ruled,  and  the 
battle  immediately  began.  The  Bohemians  remembered 
that  it  was  the  day  of  St.  Rufus  (August  26),  the  anniversary 
of  the  defeat  and  death  of  Pfemysl  Ottokar  II. 

1  The  old  Bohemian  chronicler  Dubravius,  with  uncritical  but  rather 
touching  patriotism,  accounts  for  the  change  of  King  Edward's  plans 
by  ihe  arrival  of  the  horsemen  of  the  King  of  Bohemia  :  "  Edoardus 
Angliae  rex  cogniio  Boiemororum  et  Germanorum  adventu  ab  absiciione 
Lutaetiae  Parisiorum  discedit"  (Dubravius,  Historia  Bohemiae,  lib.  xxi). 
Besides  the  Bohemians,  a  few  German  knights  from  Luxemburg  were 
under  King  John's  command. 

'^  "  Vicesima  secunda  die  Augusti  fuit  rex  Angliae  ad  Pontem  Remi 
in  Ponteu  versus  Abbeville  et  volebant  transire  Anglici  per  pontem  sed 
gentes  regis  Boemiae  et  ejus  filii  et  D.  Johannes  de  Bryaumont  restite- 
ruiit  et  ibi  conflictus  magnus  unde  ex  utraque  parte  plures  ceciderunt  " 
( Palacky,  quoting  from  a  contemporary  manuscript  of  Limuisis,  abbot 
of  St.  Martin  at  Tournay). 


68  Bohemia 

The  kings  of  Bohemia  and  Germany,  with  their  small 
band,  remamed  with  the  rear  of  the  army  at  the  beginning 
of  the  battle,  not  probably  very  confident  in  the  result  of  an 
engagement  which  had  been  brought  on  against  their  advice. 
When  the  defeat  of  the  French  seemed  certain,  some  of  the 
Bohemian  nobles  informed  King  John  of  the  unfavourable 
turn  the  battle  was  taking,  and  advised  him  to  follow  the 
example  of  the  French,  who  were  already  retreating.  King 
John  then  spoke  the  memorable  words  :  "  So  will  it  God, 
it  shall  not  be  that  a  king  of  Bohemia  flies  from  the  battle- 
field." 1 

King  John  then  ordered  two  of  his  bravest  knights, 
Henry  Monch  of  Basel  and  Henry  of  Klingenberg,  to  attach 
their  bDrses  to  his,  and  to  guide  him  to  where  the  Black 
Prince  stood.  He  then  gave  the  watchword  "  Praha " 
(Prague),  and  the  knights  and  nobles,  following  close  behind 
their  king,  charged  in  the  direction  of  the  English  army. 
Passing  rapidly  through  the  flying  Frenchmen  they  pene- 
trated, wedged  close  together,  into  the  thickest  of  the 
English  ranks,  and  had  for  a  moment  nearly  reached  the 
spot  where  the  Black  Prince  stood.  Soon  beaten  back  by 
overwhelming  numbers.  King  John  fell  from  his  horse 
mortally  wounded,  and  fifty  of  the  chief  nobles  soon  lay 
dead  round  their  king.  Hardly  any  of  the  Bohemians 
survived,  and  the  flower  of  the  Bohemian  nobility  perished 
on  the  battle-field  of  Cr^cy. 

The  charge  of  the  blind  King  of  Bohemia,  useless  and 
even  faulty,  from  a  military  point  of  view,  as  the  charge  of 
the  Light  Brigade  at  Balaclava,  is  equally  immortal :  even 
after  more  than  five  hundred  years  a  Bohemian  cannot 
write  of  this  "gallant  deed  of  arms"  without  feeling  his 
blood  stirred. 

Late  in  the  evening  King  John  was  found,  still  alive,  on 
the  battle-field,  and  King  Edward  caused  him  to  be 
carried  to  his  own  tent,  where  he  died  in  the  course  of  the 
night. 

On  hearing  of  his  death.  King  Edward,  we  are  told,  was 
unable   to  refrain   from   tears,  and   he  exclaimed  :    "  The 

^  Palacky  says  that  these  last  words  of  their  blind  king  remained  for 
ever  in  the  memory  of  the  Bohemians,  and  that  they  became  a  proverb 
in  the  country.  Palack^  also  notes  that  no  king  of  Bohemia  ever  fled 
from  the  battle-field,  and  that  neither  Premysl  Ottokar  II  nor  Louis  I 
survived  their  defeat. 


An  Historical  Sketch  69 

crown  of  chivalry  has  fallen  to-day;  never  was  any  one 
equal  to  this  King  of  Bohemia."  ^  King  Edward  and  the 
Biack  Prince  were  present  when  the  last  religious  rites  were 
performed  over  the  dead  king  of  Bohemia,  and  they  caused 
his  corpse  to  be  delivered  for  burial  to  his  son  Charles. 
King  Charles  had  himself  fought  heroically  by  the  side  of 
his  father;  and  after  he  had  been  severely  wounded,  the 
few  remaining  Bohemian  knights,  "  fearful  of  losing  both 
their  kings,"  ^  forced  him  to  leave  the  battle-field. 


CHAPTER  V 

FROM   THE   BEGINNING   OF   THE   REIGN    OF   CHARLES   IV   TO 
THE    CORO>fATION    OF    KING    SIGISMUND    (1346-I420) 

The  accession  of  Charles  IV  to  the  throne  of  Bohemia 
marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  period  in  the  history  of  the 
country.  His  reign  differed  as  widely  from  that  of  his  father 
as  did  the  personal  character  of  the  two  princes.  Whereas 
King  John  was  vacillating  and  uncertain  in  his  policy,  his 
son  Charles  appears  to  have  set  before  him  clearly  the  nature 
of  the  problems  with  which  he  was  to  deal.  While  John  was 
frequently  absent  from  his  country,  Charles  was  ever  ready 
and  anxious  to  pursue  its  true  interests.  In  the  reign  of 
the  father  Bohemia's  influence  in  European  affairs  remained 
stationary,  if  it  did  not  actually  decline.  But  Charles  not  only 
raised  it  to  a  position  it  had  never  before  attained,  but  sought 
out  every  means  of  improving  its  internal  condition.  It  is 
true  that  the  general  political  condition  of  Europe  was  more 
favourable  to  Charles's  policy  than  it  had  been  to  his  father's. 
The  German  princes  had  never  allow^ed  Bohemia  fair  play  ; 
this  impediment  to  the  progress  of  Bohemia  ceased  now 
that  Charles,  King  of  Bohemia,  himself  became  German 
Emperor. 

Professor  Freeman  has  given  it  as  his  opinion  that  while 
Charles  made  a  good  King  of  Bohemia,  he  "  sadly  lowered  " 
the  empire  both  in  Germany  and  in  Italy.  It  would  not 
be  easy  to  prove  in  what  way  Charles  "  sadly  lowered  "  the 
empire.  It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that  he  was  one  of  the  best 
kings  and  truest  patriots  of  Bohemia. 

As  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter,  Charles  left  the  battle- 
field of  Cr^cy  accompanied  only  by  a  few  knights.  He  at 
*  Benes  de  Weitmil.  *  Benes  de  Weitmil. 


70  Bohemia 

first  retired  to  the  monastery  of  Ourschamp  near  Nyon  to 
nurse  the  wounds  he  had  received.  Charles  then  returned 
to  Bohemia,  and  was  preparing  an  invasion  of  Bavaria  when 
the  sudden  death  of  King  Louis  (1347)  freed  him  from  his 
most  dangerous  enemy. 

The  party  in  Germany  opposed  to  Charles  did  not,  how- 
ever, despair  of  raising  up  another  rival  king.  Although 
King  Edward  III  of  England  had  already  recognized  the 
right  of  King  Charles  to  the  German  throne,  it  was  on  him 
that  the  choice  of  the  enemies  of  Charles  first  fell,  as  his 
victory  at  Crecy  had  made  his  name  prominent  throughout 
Europe. 

King  Charles  sent  William,  Margrave  of  Juliers  (Jiilich), 
as  envoy  to  the  King  of  England,  with  the  mission  of 
dissuading  him  from  accepting  the  German  crown.  This 
mission  proved  successful,  and  Edward  (1348)  refused  the 
crown  that  was  offered  to  him,  and  even  concluded  a  treaty 
of  alliance  with  King  Charles. 

Unable  to  find  any  prince  who  was  willing  to  oppose 
Charles  as  King  of  the  Germans,  his  enemies  now  chose 
Count  Giinther  of  Schwarzburg  as  king,  a  noble  who  was 
almost  without  territorial  possessions,  but  who  had  enriched 
himself  as  a  soldier  of  fortune.  Count  Giinther's  death  in 
the  following  year  (1343)  for  a  time  put  an  end  to  civil  war 
in  Germany,  and  we  are  told  that  King  Charles,  as  a  proof 
that  he  bore  him  no  malice,  was  himself  present  at  the 
funeral  of  the  Count  of  Schwarzburg.  The  troubles  caused 
about  this  time  by  the  appearance  of  the  "  False  Valdemar  " 
in  Bradenburg,  and  the  part  King  Charles  took  in  them, 
belong  to  German  rather  than  to  Bohemian  history,  and  it 
will  be  of  more  interest  to  notice  the  various  measures  by 
which  Charles  strove  to  improve  the  social  and  political 
condition  of  Bohemia. 

During  the  past  reigns,  particularly  that  of  King  John, 
the  great  nobles  had  profited  by  the  constant  financial 
difficulties  of  their  sovereigns  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring 
almost  all  the  Crown  lands  which  they  held  as  securities  for 
various — mostly  very  small— loans  which  they  had  made  to 
their  kings.  Charles  had  already,  as  regent  during  his 
father's  lifetime,  succeeded  in  redeeming  a  great  number  of 
the  pledged  lands  and  castles,  and  during  his  reign  he 
entirely  carried  out  his  design  of  liberating  the  Bohemian 
crown  from  a  position  of  humiliating  dependency.     One  of 


i 


An  Historical  Sketch  71 

the  first  measures  of  Charles  consisted  in  the  re-establish- 
ment of  a  regular  administration  of  the  law.  During  the 
reign  of  King  John  the  former  law-courts  had,  in  consequence 
of  the  anarchical  state  of  the  country,  almost  entirely  ceased 
to  exist.  Charles  now  divided  the  whole  country  into 
thirteen  districts  for  the  administration  of  justice,  and  he 
established  a  court  of  justice  in  the  central  town  of  each  of 
these  districts. 

He  also  created,  or  perhaps  re-established,  a  High  Court 
of  Law  at  Prague.  In  all  these  courts  of  law  the  Bohemian 
language  was  to  be  exclusively  used.  What  has  more  than 
anything  else  endeared  the  memory  of  Charles  to  the 
Bohemian  people  is  the  favour  he  always  showed  to  the 
national  language,  to  which  the  Bohemians  have  at  all 
times  been  devotedly  attached.  During  the  period  from 
the  reign  of  Pfemysl  Ottokar  I  to  that  of  King  John  (1192- 
1346),  the  Bohemian  language  was  several  times  near 
sharing  the  fate  of  the  Slav  dialects  of  Northern  Germany. 
The  greater  development  of  the  Bohemian  language,  which 
at  that  time  already  possessed  a  literature  of  its  own,  and 
the  influence  of  the  Bohemian  nobles,  who  from  hostility  to 
the  German  settlers  soon  again  began  to  use  their  native 
tongue,  preserved  it  from  that  fate.  It  was  by  the  influence 
of  Charles  alone  that  Bohemian  again  became  the  language 
of  the  court,  and  he  himself — though  he  used  the  Latin 
language  for  his  writings^ — soon  spoke  the  language  of 
his  country  fluently.  It  is  said  that  on  his  first  return 
from  France  (where  he  was  educated),  his  earliest  thought 
was  to  acquire  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  Bohemian 
tongue.  One  of  the  consequences  of  Charles's  predilec- 
tion for  the  Bohemian  language  was  that,  though  main- 
taining the  privileges  conferred  by  his  predecessors  on 
the  German  colonists,  he  yet  secured  equality  for  the 
Bohemian  language  in  the  towns  that  were  mainly  inhabited 
by  Germans.  Charles  decreed  that  at  the  assemblies  of  the 
town  magistrates  the  speakers  should,  according  to  their 
own  choice,  use  either  the  Bohemian  or  the  German 
language,    that   no   one  speaking  German   only  should  be 

^  The  very  interesting  Latin  autobiography  of  Charles  IV,  Commen- 
tarius  de  Vita  Caroli  Bohemiae  Regis  ab  ipso  Carolo  conscriptus,  has 
been  preserved,  and  is  printed  in  Frehertis  Reruni  Bohemiarum  Antiqni 
Scriptores.  It  unfortunately  relates  only  to  a  small  part  of  the  patriot 
kincr's  life. 


72  Bohemia 

appointed  as  judge,  and  that  all  German  parents  should  be 
called  on  to  have  their  children  taught  the  Bohemian 
language. 

It  seems  that  Charles  not  only  favoured  the  national 
language,  but  that  he,  with  the  political  insight  which  was 
his  characteristic,  also  realized  the  connection  of  the 
language  and  people  of  Bohemia  with  the  other  Slav  races, 
an  idea  which  is  generally  known  under  the  foolish  and 
incorrect  denomination  of  Panslavism,  and  is  usually 
supposed  to  be  of  modern  origin.  Charles  showed  his 
knowledge  of  the  connection  of  the  Slav  races  by  the 
foundation  of  a  Benedictine  monastery  in  Prague,  which 
was  to  revive  the  traditions  of  the  former  monastery  of  St. 
Prokop  on  the  Sazava.^  For  the  monks  of  this  convent 
Charles  obtained  the  Pope's  permission  to  use  the  Slavonic 
tongue  for  all  ecclesiastical  functions,  and  to  make  use  of 
the  Cyrillic  alphabet.^  This  scheme  seems,  next  to  the 
foundation  of  the  University  of  Prague,  to  have  been  one  of 
King  Charles's  favourite  plans,  and  in  spite  of  the  many 
difficulties  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign  he  was  able,  in  the 
year  1347,  to  assemble  numerous  monks  from  Croatia, 
Dalmatia,  and  Bosnia  in  the  new  monastery. 

The  great  interest  which  Charles — who  was  less  inclined 
than  any  man  to  pursue  merely  imaginative  aims — showed 
for  this  foundation  has  attracted  the  attention  of  Bohemian 
historians.  Palack^^  believes  that  the  plan  of  uniting  the 
Eastern  with  the  Western  Church,  which  then,  as  at  so 
many  other  periods  of  history,  was  being  discussed,  may 
have  been  one  of  King  Charles's  m.otives,  apart  from  his 

1  See  Chapter  III.  1 

2  The  foundation  of  this  convent  is  of  some  importance  with  regard 
to  the  controversy  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Hussite  movement.  The 
almost  general  opinion  of  Russian  authorities  is  in  favour  of  considering 
that  movement  as  one  caused  by  the  desire  of  the  Bohemians  to  return 
to  the  Eastern  Church,  from  which  their  country  had  first  received  the 
Christian  faith.  In  his  letter  to  Pope  Clement  VI,  in  which  he  requests 
the  Pope's  consent  to  the  establishment  of  the  Slavonic  ritual  in  the 
new  monastery,  Charles  says  that  "there  are  many  dissidents  and 
unbelieving  people  who,  when  the  gospel  is  explained  and  preached 
to  them  in  Latin,  will  not  understand,  and  that  they  might  (thus) 
perhaps  be  directed  to  the  Chris' ian  faith"  (Professor  Kalousek,  in 
the  Casopis  Musea  Ceskeho  (Journal  of  the  Bohemian  Museum)  for 
1882).  Professor  Kalousek  thinks  that  these  words — though  their 
meaning  seems  very  clear — contain  a  "  pia  fraus"  on  the  part  of 
King  Charles. 


An  Historical   Sketch  73 

wish  to  obtain  an  alliance  with  the  then  powerful  Servian 
princes  against  the  ever-menacing  Turkish  Empire.^ 

In  134S  Charles  assembled  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  at 
Prague,  and  in  his  capacity  as  King  of  the  Germans 
confirmed  all  the  privileges  which  former  kings  had  con- 
ferred on  the  country,  but  which,  specially  since  the  end 
of  the  reign  of  Pfemysl  Ottokar  II,  had  been  in  abeyance. 
The  right  of  the  Estates  to  choose  their  king  was  again 
sffirmed,  but  with  the  qualification  that  it  should  only  come 
into  force  in  the  case  of  the  extinction  of  the  royal  family, 
which  meanwhile  was  to  succeed  to  the  throne  according 
to  the  rule  of  primogeniture.  By  further  enactment  Charles 
defined  the  position  of  Moravia — then  governed  by  the 
king's  brother,  John  Henry — with  reference  to  Bohemia, 
and  also  decreed  that  Silesia  and  Upper  Lusatia  should 
henceforth  form  parts  of  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown. 

At  this  Diet  King  Charles  also  announced  his  intention 
of  founding  a  university  at  Prague.  It  is  characteristic  of 
his  interest  in  this,  his  favourite  creation,  that  he  had, 
shortly  after  the  battle  of  Crecy — even  before  his  return 
to  Bohemia — written  to  the  Pope  asking  his  consent  to  the 
foundation  of  the  new  university,  a  consent  that  was  readily 
granted.  A  not  very  well  authenticated  report  tells  us  that 
Charles  had  as  a  youth  studied  at  the  University  of  Paris, 
but  it  is  more  probable  that  during  his  first  stay  in  Italy 
he  had  acquired  a  love  of  learning,  at  that  time  very  un- 
usual among  the  princes  and  nobles  of  Northern  Europe. 
The  king  himself  superintended  the  organization  of  the 
university,  which  was  destined  soon  to  acquire  a  world- 
wide reputation  as  the  centre  of  the  Hussite  movement. 
In  his  invitation  to  the  scholars  of  all  countries  to  fre- 
quent the  new  university,  Charles  assured  to  them  all  the 
privileges  and  the  immunities  which  the  students  of  Paris 
and  Bologna  enjoyed.  Charles  appointed  the  Archbishop 
of  Prague,  Ernest  of  Pardubic,  as  first  chancellor  of  his 
new  university,  and  divided  it  (according  to  the  system  still 
prevalent  in  Germany)  into  four  "faculties,"  the  theological, 

^  Palacky  quotes  a  letter  which  Charles  wrote  to  Stephan  Dusan, 
then  ruler  of  Servia,  in  wiiich  he  alludes  to  their  common  nationality; 
"DeVobis  .  .  .  quern  Nobis  regiae  dignitatis  honor  fraternal!  dilectione 
parificat  et  ejusdem  nobilis  Slavici  idiomatis  participatio  facit  esse  com- 
munem  cum  ejusdem  generosae  linguae  sublimitas  nos  felicibus,  auctore 
domino,  et  gratis  auspiciis  parturiverit." 


74  Bohemia 

the  juridical,  the  medical,  and  the  philosophical  one.  The 
university  was  also  divided — according  to  the  nationality 
of  the  students — into  "nations,"  of  which  the  Bohemian 
"  nation"  also  included  the  students  from  Moravia,  Hungary, 
and  the  southern  Slav  lands.  The  Bavarian  "  nation," 
besides  the  inhabitants  of  that  country,  also  comprised  the 
Austrians,  Swabians,  Franconians,  and  inhabitants  of  the 
Rhine-lands,  whilst  the  PoHsh  "nation"  was  composed — 
besides  the  Poles — of  Silesians,  Russians,  and  Lithuanians. 
The  fourth,  the  Saxon  "nation,"  contained,  besides  the 
Saxon  students,  also  those  from  Meissen  and  Thuringia,  as 
well  as  those  from  Denmark  and  Sweden. 

It  was  undoubtedly  in  connection  with  this  foundation  ^ 
that  King  Charles  decided  on  enlarging  the  town  of  Prague 
by  building  the  "new  town"  (Nove  Mesto)  between  the 
Vysehrad  hill  and  the  banks  of  the  Vltava.^ 

Among  the  many  efforts  of  King  Charles  to  increase  the 
prosperity  of  Bohemia,  we  must  not  omit  the  protection  he 
afiorded  to  the  commerce  of  the  country.  "  Every  one  of 
the  treaties  of  peace  and  conventions  he  m.ade,  as  a  rule, 
contained  stipulations  in  favour  of  the  Bohemian  mer- 
chants." ^  Some  of  the  dispositions  he  made  appear  strange 
from  the  point  of  view  of  modern  national  economy,  but 
were  no  doubt  adapted  to  the  times.  Among  other  similar 
regulations,  Charles  decreed  that  all  foreign  merchants  who 
crossed  the  Bohemian  frontier  should  be  compelled  to  come 
to  Prague,  and  there  for  a  time  exhibit  their  goods  for  sale. 
Foreign  merchants  were  further  forbidden  to  transact  any 
business,  especially  banking  business,  among  themselves, 
but  were  only  to  do  so  through  the  medium  of  a  Bohemian 
merchant. 

Two  institutions  created  by  King  Charles,  which  still  bear 
his  name,  date  from  about  this  time.  In  the  year  1348 
Charles  began  to  build  a  large  fortified  castle  in  a  very 
strong,  indeed  at  that  time  impregnable,  situation  on  the 
summit  of  a  steep  rock  to  the  west  of,  and  not  far  from,  the 
city  of  Prague.  This  castle,  to  which  Charles  gave  the 
name  of  Karlstein,  was  intended  to  be  a  safe  depository 
for  the  Crown  jewels  and  treasures  of  the  Bohemian  kings, 
as  well  as  the  State  archives  of  the  country.     It  could  also 

1  The  number  of  students  during  the  lifetime  of  King  Charles  already 
amounted  to  between  five  and  seven  thousand. 

2  In  German  Moldan.  ^  Palacky. 


An  Historical  Sketch  75 

serve  as  a  stronghold  to  which  the  members  of  the  royal 
family  could  retire  in  time  of  danger.  Charles  appointed 
two  burgraves,  one  chosen  from  among  the  nobles  and  the 
other  from  the  knights,  as  governors  of  the  Karlstein,  and 
these  burgraves — who  were  considered  not  only  as  Court 
but  also  as  State  officials — afterwards  ranked  among  the 
most  important  dignities  of  Bohemia. 

Another  very  different  foundation  has  also  retained  the 
name  of  Charles ;  it  is  the  now  well-known  w^atering-place 
of  Karlsbad.  The  legend  tells  us  that  when  the  king  was 
pursuing  a  stag  he  was  surprised  to  hear  one  of  his  hounds 
suddenly  howl,  and  that  he  then  noticed  that  the  animal 
had  been  badly  scalded  while  crossing  a  stream.  He  is 
said  to  have  caused  the  water  of  this  stream  to  be  medically 
examined,  and  its  salutary  effects  thus  became  known.  It 
seems  probable  that  the  existence  of  these  hot  springs  was 
locally  known  before  the  time  of  King  Charles,  but  it  was 
undoubtedly  due  to  him  that  their  fame  spread.  Charles 
built  himself  a  castle  near  these  springs  which  he  called 
Karlsbad,  a  name  that  soon  extended  to  the  few  dwellings 
then  standing  near  the  spot. 

While  endeavouring  to  secure  order  and  prosperity  to 
Bohemia,  Charles  also  successfully  essayed  to  extend  the 
frontiers  of  the  country.  German  authors  have  indeed,  not 
without  truth,  often  accused  him  of  preferring  Bohemia  to 
their  own  land.  Early  in  his  reign  the  king  acquired  by 
purchase  twenty  towns  and  castles  in  the  Upper  Palatine, 
thus — for  the  time — extending  the  Bohemian  frontier 
nearly  to  the  gates  of  Nuremberg.  Towards  the  end  of 
the  year  1354  Charles  undertook  the  expedition  to  Rome 
which  had  become  almost  obligatory  for  the  German  kings. 
He  first  proceeded  to  Milan,  where  he  was  crowned  with 
the  iron  crown  of  the  Lombard  kings,  and  then  continued 
his  journey  to  Rome,  where  his  coronation  as  Emperor 
took  place,  two  cardinals  sent  from  Avignon  by  Innocent 
VI  acting  as  the  Pope's  substitutes.  On  his  return  north 
the  new  Emperor,  while  at  Pisa,  was  attacked  by  one  of  the 
factions  then  disputing  for  the  domination  of  the  town,^  and 
only  saved  by  the  bravery  of  his  body-guard.     After  having 

^  Benes  de  Weitmil  {Chronicon,  lib.  iv)  calls  them  "fraude  diabolica 
pleni  et  in  omni  malitia  experti."  Weitmil's  account  of  the  events  at 
Pisa  agrees  with  the  Italian  account  contained  in  the  chronicle  of  the 
Villani. 


76 


Bohemia 


defeated  and   punished  the  aggressors,  Charles  left  Italy, 
and  arrived  at  Prague  on  August  15  (1355). 

During  the  king's  absence  from  Bohemia  order  had  been 
much  disturbed  by  bands  of  robbers,  who  rendered  the 
high-roads  unsafe.  Charles  toek  immediate  steps  to  restore 
security  to  his  country,  and — shortly  after  his  return  from 
Italy — he  besieged  Zampach,  a  castle  situated  on  the 
summit  of  a  steep  hill  belonging  ^o  John  of  Smoyno,  the 
leader  of  the  most  numerous  of  these  bands  of  robbers. 
John  of  Smoyno,  who  from  his  habit  of  always  appearing  in 
full  armour  was  known  as  "  Pancif  "  (the  man  in  armour), 
had  formerly  served  in  the  king's  army,  and  had  been 
knighted  by  him  for  his  bravery,  and  presented  with  a 
golden  chain.  Zampach  vras  taken  after  a  siege  of  some 
duration,  the  castle  destroyed,  and  the  "Pancif"  hanged 
by  order  of  the  king.  Charles  is  said  to  have  himself 
thrown  the  rope  round  his  neck,  telling  him  "  that  it  vvas 
not  only  golden  chains  that  he  had  in  his  gift."  Several 
other  strongholds  of  robbers  in  the  same  district  (that  of 
Kralove  Hradec),  which  had  been  the  most  disturbed  part 
of  the  country,  were  subsequently  destroyed  when  the  king 
returned  to  Prague  to  assemble  the  Estates  at  a  Diet.  We 
are  specially  told  that  the  Estates,  not  only  of  Bohemia,  but 
also  those  of  Moravia,  Silesia,  and  Lusatia,  were  convoked. 

Charles  proposed  to  the  Estates  the  adoption  of  a  code 
of  laws  founded  on  those  of  Rome,  but  this  proposal,  as 
being  in  many  ways  contrary  to  the  old  legal  traditions  of 
Bohemia,  was  very  unfavourably  received.  Charles,  with  his 
usual  prudence,  very  soon  gave  up  these  intended  changes. 
He  succeeded,  however,  in  obtaining  the  consent  of  the 
Estates  to  several  other  legal  dispositions,  particularly  to 
those  which  guaranteed  to  the  peasants  the  right  of  appeal- 
ing to  the  royal  law-courts  against  their  territorial  lords. 
The  necessity  of  this  enactment  proves  that  attempts  had 
already  been  made  to  introduce  into  Bohemia  the  system  of 
servitude  which  had  long  prevailed  in  Germany,  though 
serfs  were  entirely  unknown  to  the  original — Slavonic — 
constitution  of  Bohemia. 

In  the  same  year  (1355)  Charles,  after  the  termination  of 
the  Diet  of  Prague,  proceeded  to  Nuremberg,  where  an 
assembly  of  the  Electors  and  princes  of  Germany  took 
place.  The  deliberations  which  took  place  here,  and  which 
were   continued   the  following  year  at  the  Diet  of  Metz 


An  Historical  Sketch  77 

(1356),  resulted  in  the  publication  of  the  celebrated  Golden 
Bull,  in  which  the  Emperor  Charles  attempted  to  codify  the 
regulations  concerning  the  election  of  the  kings  of  Germany. 
The  Golden  Bull  belongs  rather  to  German  than  to  Bohemian 
history,  but  it  may  be  noted  that  it  contains  a  reaffirmation 
of  all  the  privileges  formerly  granted  to  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian,  and  that  it  contained  a  special  paragraph  which 
decreed  that  the  sons  of  the  Electors  and  other  German 
princes  were  to  learn  the  Bohemian  language,  as  it  was  a 
language  respected  in  the  Empire  and  useful  to  them.^ 

The  Golden  Bull  was  not  favourably  received  by  the 
Holy  See,  as  its  regulations  concerning  the  election  of 
the  German  kings  tacitly  ignored  certain  undefined  claims 
to  influence  these  elections  which  the  Popes  had  several 
times  raised.  The  friendship  between  Emperor  and  Pope 
decreased  for  a  time,  and  the  latter  even  favoured  the  plan 
of  certain  German  princes  to  depose  the  Emperor  Charles. 

The  Emperor,  though  he  has  always  by  German  historians 
been  accused  of  undue  subserviency  to  the  Holy  See,  showed 
great  firmness  on  this  occasion.  At  an  Imperial  Diet,  which 
assembled  at  Maintz  in  1357,  the  Emperor  very  strongly 
opposed  the  demand  of  the  papal  legate  who  was  present, 
that  a  tithe  should  be  collected  from  the  German  clergy  for 
the  benefit  of  the  papal  court.  Charles  called  on  the  bishops 
to  pay  greater  attention  to  the  morals  and  conduct  of  their 
clergy,  and  even  threatened  to  seize  the  ecclesiastical 
revenues  should  they  not  be  more  worthily  employed. 
Though  the  momentary  estrangement  between  Pope  and 
Emperor  may  have  been  one  of  the  motives  of  the  energetic 
language  which  Charles  used,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
Emperor,  a  man  of  earnest  and  unaffected  piety,  seriously 
desired  to  reform  the  habits  and  morals  of  the  clergy. 

At  no  time,  indeed,  was  such  a  reformation  more  necessary. 
Warfare,  tournaments,  hunting,  and  gambling  were  widely 
spread  among  the  clergy,  and  immorality  was  almost 
universal,  the  law  of  celibacy  having  fallen  into  complete 
neglect.^     This  degraded  condition  of  the  clergy  produced 

^  Tomek. 

-  Baron  Helfert,  Hus  ujid  Hieronymus,  p.  18,  says  that  the  immorality 
of  the  clergy  was  then  so  great  that  some  parishes  even  considered  it 
desirable  that  their  priests  should  live  in  concubinage,  "hoc  modo 
proprias  uxores  tutiores  ab  insidiis  existimantes."  This  cannot  be 
considered  as  a  party  statement,  as  Baron  Helfert's  book  is  written 
from  a  strongly  Catholic  point  of  view. 


78 


Bohemia 


an  agitation  during  Charles's  reign  which  was  to  develop, 
under  that  of  his  son,  into  the  Hussite  movement,  when 
Bohemia  for  a  time  attracted  the  attention  of  all  Europe. 

The  movement  in  Bohemia  in  favour  of  Church  reform 
v:as  originally  free  from  all  hostility  to  the  dogmas  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church.  The  earliest  leaders  were  among 
"the  truest  and  most  obedient  sons  of  the  Church."^  As 
the  two  earliest  of  these  reformers,  Conrad  Waldhauser  and 
Milic  of  Kromefize,^  died  before  the  Emperor  Charles,  it 
will  be  as  well  to  mention  them  here.  Conrad  Waldhauser, 
a  German  by  birth,  was  summoned  to  Prague  by  the 
Emperor  Charles  in  consequence  of  the  great  reputation  as 
a  preacher  which  he  had  acquired  in  Austria,  his  original 
home.  In  his  sermons  at  Prague  he  at  first  inveighed 
against  the  immorality  and  extravagance  of  the  citizens,  and 
the  result  of  his  preaching  w^as  most  extraordinary.  The 
women  of  Prague  left  off  wearing  jewels  and  costly  dresses, 
and  many  of  the  greatest  sinners  in  the  town  did  public 
penance.  Conrad  then  began  attacking  the  corruption  of 
the  clergy,  particularly  of  the  mendicant  friars.  He  was 
denounced  both  by  the  Dominican  and  Augustine  monks, 
but  the  Emperor  continued  his  protection  to  him,  as  is 
proved  by  the  fact  that  he  appointed  him  to  the  most  im- 
portant parish  in  Prague.  Waldhauser  therefore  remained 
unmolested  by  the  priests  up  to  his  death  in  the  year 
1369. 

Milic  of  Kromefize,  who  is  also  generally  considered  one 
of  the  precursors  of  Hus,  was  a  canon  of  the  cathedral 
of  Prague,  and  for  some  time  held  the  office  of  vice- 
chancellor  at  the  court  of  Prague.  Most  Bohemian 
historians  agree  in  attributing  the  Emperor's  attitude  at 
the  Diet  of  Maintz  largely  to  the  influence  of  Milic.  In 
T363  he  suddenly  renounced  all  his  dignities,  intending 
in  future  to  live  in  complete  poverty,  and  for  the  one 
purpose  of  preaching  the  gospel.  As  Milic — a  Moravian 
by  birth — spoke  the  language  of  the  country,  his  preaching 
attracted  more  attention,  and  had  a  wnder  influence  on  the 
people,  than  that  of  Waldhauser. 

On  the  other  hand,  he  seems  to  have  provoked  greater 
enmity  on  the  part  of  the  monks,  whose  view^s  he  very 
openly  exposed.     They  were  therefore  only  too  glad  when 

^  Baron  Helfert,  Hits  ii/id  IIierony?)ms,  p.  18. 
2  In  German  Kremsier. 


An  Historical  Sketch  79 

MiliS  fell  into  what  were  considered  errors  of  dogma.  The 
great  corruption  of  the  times  appears  to  have  inspired  him 
with  the  idea  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  near,  and  he 
gave  publicity  to  his  views  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  Libellus 
de  Antichristo.  Milic  started  to  Rome  to  defend  himself, 
and  was  imprisoned  there  during  the  absence  of  Pope 
Urban.  After  the  Pope's  arrival  in  Rome  an  interview 
between  him  and  Milic  took  place,  and  the  Pontiff,  evi- 
dently recognizing  the  purity  of  his  intentions,  ordered  him 
to  be  set  at  liberty.  It  has,  however,  been  noted  that  Milic 
henceforth  laid  less  stress  on  his  peculiar  views  concerning 
the  Antichrist,  though  he  never  formally  withdrew  them  ; 
his  zeal  for  the  reform  of  the  Church  became  even  greater 
than  before. 

Milic  returned  to  Prague  immediately  after  his  liberation, 
and  was  received  with  great  rejoicing  by  the  people,  if 
not  by  the  mendicant  friars,  who  had  considered  his  con- 
demnation to  death  as  certain.^  Milic  now  resumed  his 
preaching,  and  though  advanced  in  years  acquired  the 
knowledge  of  the  German  language  so  as  to  be  able  to 
preach  to  the  German  inhabitants  of  Prague  also.  The 
old  enmity  of  the  mendicant  friars  against  the  saintly 
priest  never  seems  to  have  grown  less,  and  they — despairing 
of  harming  him  in  Bohemia,  where  the  protection  of  Charles 
ensured  his  safety — again  denounced  him  to  the  Papal  See. 
Milic  again  appealed  to  the  Pope,  and  repaired  to  the  papal 
court  at  Avignon,  where  he  died  (1374),  before  his  case  had 
been  judged  by  the  ecclesiastical  tribunal.  Besides  Conrad 
Waldhauser  and  Milic  of  Kromefize,  Matthew  of  Janow,  a 
disciple  of  Milic,  and  Thomas  of  Stitny^  ^re  also  generally 
counted  among  the  precursors  of  Hus. 

It  is  probable  that  these  dissensions,  the  first  beginning 
of  a  movement  that  was  to  become  of  world-wide  import- 
ance, did  not  attract  much  attention  at  the  time,  and  were 
considered  of  hardly  greater  importance  than  the  contro- 
versies between  the  different  religious  orders,  which  were  so 

^  "Cumvero  Pragam" — Milic  and  his  companion — "venissent  quasi 
nova  lux  omnibus  Christi  fidelibus  orta  fuisset,  ita  gaudebant  quia  per 
viros  religiosos  mendicantes  saepe  in  eorum  praedicationibus  audiebant 
ubi  dicebatur :  Carissimi  ecce  jam  Milicius  eremabitur "  (from  the 
life  of  Milic  contained  in  the  learned  Jesuit  Balbinus's  Miscellanea 
Historica  Repii  Bohemiae,  vol.  iv). 

^  For  Thomas  of  Stitny  see  my  History  of  Bohemian  Literature^ 
pp.  63-79  (2nd  ed.). 


8o  Bohemia 

frequent  at  that  time.  The  estrangement  between  Charles 
and  the  Papal  See  was  not  of  long  duration,  but  the 
Emperor  always  maintained  his  opinion  as  to  the  necessity 
of  Church  reform. 

Shortly  after  his  reconciliation  with  the  Pope,  the 
Emperor,  who  had  for  some  time  been  at  war  with  Duke 
Rudolph  IV  of  Austria  and  Louis,  King  of  Hungary,  con- 
cluded a  treaty  (1364)  with  the  former  prince  by  which  the 
succession  to  the  Bohemian  crown  was — in  the  case  of  the 
extinction  of  the  reigning  family — assured  to  the  house  of 
Austria,  whilst  the  Austrian  duke  assured  the  succession  to 
his  lands  to  the  Bohemian  kings  should  the  dynasty  of 
Habsburg  become  extinct.  As  a  similar  treaty  had  already 
been  concluded  between  the  King  of  Hungary  and  the 
Duke  of  Austria,  Hungary  was  included  in  this  agreement, 
which  may  be  considered  as  the  origin  of  the  Austro-Hun- 
garian  Empire,  such  as  it  exists  at  the  present  day. 

In  the  following  year  (1365)  Charles  proceeded  on  a 
journey  to  Avignon  to  visit  Pope  Urban  V.  The  purpose 
of  this  visit  is  unknown,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  Emperor 
again  wished  to  attract  the  Pope's  attention  to  the  question 
of  Church  reform,  and  to  what  seemed  to  the  Emperor 
directly  connected  with  this  question,  the  transfer  of  the 
papal  court  from  Avignon  to  Rome.  This  appears  for  a  long 
time  to  have  been  a  change  on  which  the  Emperor  had  set 
his  whole  heart,  and  he  was  undoubtedly  influenced  by  a 
serious  concern  for  the  welfare  of  the  Church.  It  was  for 
this  purpose  that  Charles  had  at  one  time  attempted  to 
obtain  the  papal  throne  for  Ernest  of  Pardubic,  Archbishop 
of  Prague,  who  would  probably  have  willingly  acceded  to 
the  Avishes  of  the  King  of  Bohemia,  by  restoring  the  seat  of 
papacy  to  Rome. 

A  great  majority  of  the  cardinals,  particularly  those  who 
were  of  French  nationality,  strongly  opposed  the  transfer  of 
the  papal  court,  as  they  did  not  wish  to  leave  their  own 
country,  and  were  also  influenced  by  the  state  of  insecurity 
prevalent  in  Italy  at  that  time. 

From  Avignon  Charles  made  a  short  excursion  to  Aries, 
to  be  crowned  there  as  King  of  Aries,  ^  a  former  dependency 

1  "  The  kingdom  of  Burgundy  or  Aries  {regnum  Burgnndiae,  regnum 
Arelatense)  included  Provence,  Dauphine,  Savoy,  the  country  between 
the  Saone  and  the  Jura,  and  a  considerable  part  of  what  is  now  Swit- 
zerland.    On  the  death  of  its  last  independent  king,  Rudolph,  in  1002, 


An  Historical  Sketch  8i 

of  the  Empire,  but  of  which  the  greatest  part  had  already 
been  absorbed  in  the  kingdom  of  France. 

The  Emperor's  visit  to  the  Pope,  though  only  of  ten  days' 
duration,  was,  on  the  whole,  successful,  as  he  had  obtained 
the  Pope's  promise  to  transfer  the  Holy  See  to  Rome  as 
soon  as  Charles  should  be  able  to  enter  Italy  with  an  army, 
and  protect  the  Pope  against  his  enemies  in  that  country. 

On  his  return  to  Germany,  Charles  found  that  country  so 
disturbed  by  internal  dissensions,  that  he  was  not  immedi- 
ately able  to  fulfil  his  promise  to  the  Pope.  It  was  only  in 
the  year  1368  that  Charles  undertook  a  new  expedition  to 
Italy,  where  he  first  forced  Bernabo  de'  Visconti,  Lord  of 
Milan,  to  sue  for  peace,  and  then  marched  to  Rome  to 
visit  Pope  Urban  V,  who  had  already  arrived  there  the  year 
before.  Charles  remained  in  Italy  more  than  a  year,  but 
was  recalled  by  threatening  news  from  the  East.  King 
Louis  of  Hungary  and  King  Casimir  of  Poland  had  entered 
into  an  alliance  for  the  purpose  of  limiting  what  to  them 
seemed  the  undue  aggrandizement  of  the  house  of  Luxem- 
burg. They  particularly  wished  to  prevent  the  absorption 
of  Brandenburg  in  the  already  extensive  hereditary  dominions 
of  the  Emperor  Charles. 

Margrave  Otho  of  Brandenburg,  son  of  the  former 
German  Emperor  Louis  and  husband  of  Catherine,  daughter 
of  the  Emperor  Charles,  had  ceded  the  succession  to  his 
margravate  to  his  father-in-law,  mainly  on  account  of 
loans  he  had  received  from  him.  Otho,  principally  through 
the  advice  of  King  Louis  of  Hungary,  now  attempted  to 
deny  the  validity  of  this  engagement,  and  declared  his 
nephew  Frederick  (son  of  his  brother  Stephen,  Duke  of 
Bavaria)  his  heir.  Charles  considered  this  violation  of  his 
pledge  as  a  cause  of  war,  and  invaded  Brandenburg  (137 1). 
After  some  fighting,  Margrave  Otho  was  obliged  to  submit, 
as  he  was  insufficiently  aided  by  the  King  of  Hungary,  and 
the  death  of  King  Casimir  of  Poland  at  this  time  frustrated 
all  hope  of  help  from  that  country.  An  agreement  was 
arrived  at  (1373)  through  the  mediation  of  the  Pope — now 
Gregory  XL  Otho  renounced  all  his  claims  on  Branden- 
burg, even  during  his  lifetime,  on  payment  of  a  large  sum 
of  money,  and  on  the  condition  that  the  Emperor  should 

it  came  into  the  hands  of  the  Emperor  Conrad  II,  and  henceforward 
formed  a  part  of  the  Empire.     As  early  as  the  thirteenth  century  parts 
of  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  France  "  (Bryce,  The  Holy  Roman  Empire). 
D 


82  Bohemia 

cede  certain  castles  in  the  Upper  Palatinate  to  him. 
According  to  the  wishes  of  the  Estates  of  Brandenburg, 
that  country  was  incorporated  with  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown,  and  thus  became  an  object  of  more 
direct  interest  to  Charles. 

By  the  annexation  of  Silesia,  Lusatia,  and  Brandenburg, 
the  Bohemian  kingdom  had  in  itself  become  one  of  the 
great  European  Powers,  particularly  as  Charles  had  also 
obtained  possession  of  territories  in  Germany.  Large 
though  isolated  districts  in  the  present  kingdoms  of  Bavaria 
and  Saxony  had  become  either  domains  of  the  sovereign  of 
Bohemia,  or  fiefs  of  the  Bohemian  crown,  forming  what 
Palack)^  calls  "  Bohemian  islands  "  in  Germany.  It  seems 
very  probable  that  Charles  planned  the  reconstruction  of 
the  German  Empire  under  the  house  of  Luxemburg,  and 
with  Bohemia  as  its  centre.  This  plan,  "  had  it  succeeded, 
would  have  transformed  Germany  into  a  monarchy  such  as 
France  was ;  but  it  would  undoubtedly  have  resulted  in  the 
dissolution  of  the  Bohemian  nationality  as  such.  "  ^ 

It  was  certainly  in  view  of  these  ambitious  plans  that 
Charles,  at  the  price  of  great  sacrifices,  induced  the  German 
princes,  during  his  lifetime,  to  proclaim  his  son  Venceslas 
as  his  successor  (1376). 

Charles  died  two  years  later  (1378),  at  the  age  of  sixty- 
two,  at  a  moment  when  his  death  was  an  even  more 
irreparable  loss  to  Bohemia  than  it  would  have  been  at  any 
other  time. 

The  death  of  Pope  Gregory  XI  in  ihe  same  year  (1378) 
marks  the  beginning  of  the  great  schism  in  the  Western 
Church  which  tended  largely  to  give  a  revolutionary  turn  to 
the  movement  in  favour  of  Church  reform  already  existing 
in  Bohemia.  If  such  conjectures  were  not  in  themselves 
futile,  it  would  be  interesting  to  speculate  on  the  results 
had  Charles — not  then  a  very  old  man — lived  to  a  greater 
age.  As  a  man  of  acknowledged  piety  and  learning,-  faithful 
to  the  dogmas  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  yet  thoroughly 
convinced  of  the  necessity  of  the  reform  of  that  Church,  it  is 
probable  that  the  part  he  would  have  played  would  have 
differed  much  from  that  of  his  son  and  successor. 

Charles,  German  Emperor  and  King  of  Bohemia,  has 
been  very  differently  judged  by  the  historians  of  the  two 

1  Palacky. 

*  Palacky  calls  him  the  most  learned  sovereign  of  his  age. 


i 


An  Historical  Sketch  83 

countries.  It  has  been  attempted  in  these  notes  to  give 
some  idea— as  far  as  a  limited  space  allows— of  the  policy 
by  which  Charles  strove,  and  successfully  strove,  to  raise 
Bohemia  to  the  rank  of  one  of  the  great  Powers  of  Europe, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  secure  for  it  a  degree  of  prosperity 
the  country  had  never  enjoyed  before. 

On  the  other  hand,  Charles  has  been  very  severely 
criticized  by  the  German  historians.  The  title  of  "  Pfaffen- 
kaiser"  (Emperor  of  the  priests),  which  they  usually  give 
him,  is  entirely  unmerited,  in  so  far  as  it  implies  undue 
subserviency  to  the  Papal  See.^  The  Golden  Bull,  which 
very  seriously  curtailed  the  rights  of  the  Popes  as  to  the 
elections  of  the  kings  of  the  Germans,  the  attitude  of 
Charles  at  the  Diet  of  Maintz,  the  protection  he  afforded  to 
priests — such  as  Conrad  Waldhauser  and  Milic  of  Krome- 
fize — who  were  accused  of  heresy,  sufficiently  prove  that 
Charles  was  no  bigot.  That  his  disposition  was  truly  and 
unaffectedly  religious  is  indeed  clearly  shown  by  his  policy, 
as  well  as  by  his  own  autobiography.  Though  he  was 
undoubtedly  a  sincere  friend  of  the  Bohemian  nation  it  is 
impossible  to  agree  with  the  often-quoted  appreciation  of  the 
Emperor  Maximilian,  who  called  his  illustrious  predecessor 
the  "father  of  Bohemia  but  the  stepfather  of  the  Holy 
Roman  Empire." 

Venceslas,  son  of  Charles  by  his  third  wife,  Anna  of 
Schweidnitz,  was  only  seventeen  years  of  age  when  he 
succeeded  his  father.  The  Emperor's  joy  at  again  having 
a  male  heir  ^  was  perhaps  one  of  the  causes  of  the  excessive 
fondness  he  showed  for  his  son,^  of  which  he  gave  a  proof 
by  causing  him,  when  only  two  years  of  age,  to  be  crowned 
as  King  of  Bohemia.  Charles,  as  already  mentioned,  also 
secured  the  succession  to  the  German  throne  to  his  eldest 
son.  Of  the  two  other  sons  whom  Charles  left,  the  one, 
Sigismund,  inherited  Brandenburg,  the  other,  John,  a  part 
of  Eusatia.  Charles's  brother,  John  Henry,  had  died  three 
years  before  him,  and  had  been  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son 

^  It  is  curious  to  find  these  appreciations  of  German  authors — largely 
founded  on  national  antipathies — repeated  by  such  modern  English 
writers  as  Carlyle  and  Mr.  J.  R.  Green. 

2  A  son  of  Charles  by  his  second  wife,  Anna  of  the  Palatinate,  also 
called  Venceslas,  was  born  in  1350,  but  died  in  1351. 

2  Palacky  tells  ns  that  Charles,  anxious  to  obtain  as  tutor  for  his  son 
the  most  learned  man  of  his  age,  offered  that  post  to  Petrarch,  who, 
however,  declined  it. 


84  Bohemia 

Jodocus — or  Jobst.  Of  the  other  sons  of  John  Henry,  one, 
Prokop,  who  played  a  somewhat  important  part  in  the 
troubles  that  soon  broke  out  in  Bohemia,  inherited  lands  in 
Moravia,  while  the  other  became  Bishop  of  Litomysl,  and 
afterwards  Patriarch  of  Aquileja. 

In  the  beginning  of  his  reign  Venceslas,  still  surrounded 
by  the  old,  experienced  councillors  of  his  father,  gave  proof 
of  the  best  intentions  for  the  welfare  of  his  country.  He 
attempted  to  rule  the  country  on  the  same  principles  as 
Charles,  and  also  endeavoured  to  suppress  the  schism  in  the 
Western  Church,  then  the  all-important  matter  of  interest  in 
the  whole  of  Europe.  The  schism  began  almost  simultane- 
ously with  the  accession  of  Venceslas,  and  its  influence  on 
the  religious  disputes  of  Bohemia  can  hardly  be  overrated. 
The  practice  adopted  by  the  rival  claimants  to  the  papal 
throne  of  excommunicating  each  other,  and  of  employing 
the  most  terrible  threats  known  to  mediaeval  theology  against 
the  adherents  of  their  rival,  brought  these  weapons  of  ecclesi- 
astical warfare  into  discredit,  and  undermined  the  authority  of 
the  Church,  which  had  been  already  weakened  by  the  attacks 
of  Waldhauser  and  Milic  on  the  immorality  of  the  clergy. 

After  the  death  of  Pope  Gregory  XI  (1378)  the  cardinals 
had  elected  as  Pope  Bartolomeo  Prignani,  Archbishop  of 
Bari,  who  assumed  the  title  of  Urban  VI;  but  some  of 
their  numbers,  probably  influenced  by  the  French  court, 
which  desired  the  return  of  the  Popes  to  Avignon,  disputed 
the  validity  of  the  election  of  Urban  VI,  as  having  been 
forced  on  the  cardinals  by  the  menacing  attitude  of  the 
Roman  people.  They  assembled  at  Fondi,  in  the  kingdom 
of  Naples,  and  chose  as  Pope  Cardinal  Robert  of  Geneva, 
who  assumed  the  name  of  Clement  VII.  The  Emperor 
Charles  had,  during  the  last  months  of  his  life,  warmly 
defended  the  validity  of  the  election  of  Pope  Urban,^  and 
Venceslas  at  first  endeavoured  to  continue  his  father's 
policy.  At  the  Imperial  Diet  which  assembled  at  Frankfort 
in  1379,  Venceslas  induced  the  German  princes  to  recognize 
Urban  VI  as  legitimate  Pope,  and  to  renounce  all  connection 
with  "  Robert  of  Geneva,  the  so-called  Pope  Clement  VII." 

^  Palack^  tells  us  that  Charles,  in  the  last  months  of  his  life,  wrote 
letters  to  the  dissenting  cardinals  urging  them  to  recognize  Pope  Urban, 
and  that  he  also  wrote  to  Queen  Joan  of  Naples,  entreating  her  to 
afford  no  aid  to  the  cardinals  who  were  then  assembled  in  Neapolitan 
territory. 


An  Historical  Sketch  85 

It  was  even  declared  that  in  case  of  the  death  of  Venceslas 
nobody  should  be  chosen  as  his  successor  who  had  not 
previously  declared  that  he  recognized  Urban  VI  as  the 
legitimate  head  of  the  Church. 

The  able  counsel  of  the  old  ministers  of  the  Emperor 
Charles,  on  whose  advice  he  had  attempted  to  restore  unity 
to  the  Church,  and  who  had  guided  him  at  first  in  the 
government  of  Bohemia,^  soon  began  to  fail  the  king,  and 
he  gradually  fell  under  other  and  very  different  influences. 
Venceslas  more  and  more  incurred  the  enmity  of  the  higher 
nobility  and  of  the  great  State  officials  by  the  favour  he 
showed  to  persons  of  lower  rank,  knights  and  citizens,  on 
whom  he  even — to  the  great  indignation  of  the  nobles — 
conferred  court  dignities.  The  very  scanty  records  we  have 
of  the  earlier  part  of  the  reign  of  Venceslas  contain  repeated 
— probably  not  unfounded — complaints  of  the  increasing 
laziness  and  drunkenness  of  the  king,  whose  character  seems 
gradually  to  have  deteriorated. 

The  friendship  between  France  and  Bohemia,  which  had 
become  less  intimate  during  the  last  years  of  the  reign  of 
Charles,  ceased  entirely  in  consequence  of  the  support  given 
by  Venceslas  to  Pope  Urban  VI.  Shortly  after,  and  to  a 
certain  extent  in  consequence  of  this  event,  a  family  alliance 
between  the  houses  of  Plantagenet  and  Luxemburg  took 
place.  As  the  King  of  France  supported  the  claims  of 
Pope  Clement  VII,  Venceslas  hoped  to  secure  for  Urban 
the  adherence  of  England,  then  the  perpetual  adversary  of 
France.  He  addressed  a  letter  to  Richard  II,  informing 
him  that  he  and  the  German  princes,  including  his  brother 
Sigismund,  recognized  Urban  VI  as  the  legitimate  Pope, 
and  intended  to  support  him.  The  King  of  England 
evidently  agreed  with  the  views  of  Venceslas,  for  he  for- 
warded a  copy  of  this  letter  to  Peter,  King  of  Arragon, 
exhorting  him  also  to  recognize  Pope  Urban,  The  agree- 
ment between  the  two  sovereigns  as  to  the  then  all-important 
question  of  the  legitimate  succession  to  the  papal  throne 
was  shortly  followed  by  a  treaty  by  which  the  two  royal 
families  became  connected.^     Through  the  envoys  of  the 

^  "At  least  during  the  first  fifteen  years  of  the  reign  of  Venceslas 
public  order  and  tranquillity  were  as  secure  (in  Bohemia)  as  daring  the 
reign  of  his  father  "  (Tomek). 

'^  Want  of  space  renders  it  impossible  to  enter  into  details  as  to  the 
matrimonial  negotiations. 


86  Bohemia 

two  sovereigns,  a  marriage  between  King  Richard  and 
Anne,  daughter  of  the  late  Emperor  Charles  and  sister  of 
King  Venceslas,  was  arranged.  A  treaty  was  at  the  same 
time  concluded,  by  which  both  sovereigns  again  pledged 
themselves  to  recognize  Pope  Urban  and  his  legitimate 
successors.  It  was  further  stipulated  that  the  subjects  of 
King  Richard  should  be  allowed  to  come  to  the  (German) 
empire  and  Venceslas's  own  lands  for  purposes  of  trade, 
and  remain  there  without  hindrance.  No  reciprocity  was 
granted  with  regard  to  the  Bohemian  and  German  merchants. 
"  The  munificent  bridegroom  granted  his  future  brother-in- 
law  a  loan  of  20,000  golden  guldens,  for  which  no  guarantee 
was  claimed.  The  deed,  which  was  signed  by  the  envoys, 
provided  that  the  claim  on  the  money  lent  to  King 
Venceslas  should  be  invalid  from  the  moment  that  Princess 
Anne  arrived  in  England  or  at  Calais.  It  is  therefore  not 
surprising  that  the  people  of  England  should  have  said  that 
Venceslas  had  sold  them  his  sister — particularly  as  King 
Richard  also  promised  Venceslas  to  pay  the  sum  of 
80,000  golden  guldens  to  him  within  a  fortnight  of  the 
arrival  of  Princess  Anne  in  English  territory."  ^  On 
December  13,  1381,  the  Bohemian  princess  landed  at 
Dover,  and  we  are  told  that  she  brought  with  her  a  copy  of 
the  Bible  written  in  Latin,  Bohemian,  and  German.  There 
seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  Bohemian  princess  kept  up  a 
correspondence  with  her  country,  so  that  it  is  possible, 
though  not  probable,  that  she — according  to  the  general 
supposition — contributed  to  making  the  teaching  of  Wycliffe 
known  in  Bohemia. 

The  ever-increasing  hostihty  in  Bohemia  against  the 
clergy,  particularly  its  higher  orders,  at  that  time  extended 
to  the  king  also,  and^to  the  favourites  who  surrounded  him. 
One  of  these,  John  Cuch  of  Zasada,  who  held  the  office  of 
Court  Marshal,  became  involved  in  a^  quarrel  with  John 
Jenstein,  now  Archbishop  of  Prague,  for  a  very  paltry 
cause.2  The  king  energetically  took  the  part  of  his 
favourite,  and  caused  the  archbishop,  who  had  attempted 
to   secure   his    claim   by   force,    to  be  imprisoned  in  the 

^  Dr.   Hofier,  Anna  von  Lttxevdnirg,  Konigin  von  England. 

2  The  archbishop  accused  Zasada  of  having  constructtd  a  weir  on  the 
river  Elbe  near  the  lands  of  the  archbishop,  and  caused  the  weir  to  be 
forcibly  removed  by  his  retainers.  In  the  stru!];gle  which  ensued  fire- 
arms are  said  to  have  been  used  for  the  first  time  in  Bohemia. 


An  Historical  Sketch  87 

fortress  of  Karlstein ;  he  even  permitted  Zasada  to  revenge 
himself  on  the  archbishop  by  plundering  the  archiepiscopal 
lands.  This  quarrel  was  finally  made  up,  but  the  feeling  at 
court  against  the  archbishop  became  even  more  bitter  than 
before.  John  of  Jenstein  certainly  did  not  assume  a 
conciliatory  attitude.  At  a  moment  when  the  anti-clerical 
feeling  was  so  strong  in  Bohemia,  and  when  the  Church  was 
weakened  by  its  division,  he  attempted  to  enforce  claims 
that  would  have  been  challenged  even  in  quieter  times. 
The  question  as  to  the  limits  of  temporal  and  ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction  at  that  period  caused  great  difficulties,  as  persons 
enjoying  clerical  immunities  often  committed  the  greatest 
excesses.  In  the  year  1392  the  archbishop  excommunicated 
the  king's  vice-chamberlain,  because  he  had  ordered  several 
students  of  theology — who  had,  however,  not  yet  been 
consecrated  as  priests — to  be  arrested,  and  two  of  them  to 
be  executed.  The  vice-chamberlain  had  taken  this  action 
with  the  full  approval  of  the  king.  The  archbishop  did  not 
deny  the  justice  of  the  punishment,  but  he  complained  of 
the  infringement  of  the  ecclesiastical  immunities. 

The  excommunication  of  one  of  his  officials  for  actions 
done  with  the  knowledge  and  approval  of  the  king  violently 
irritated  him,  and  another  incident  that  occurred  shortly 
afterwards  raised  the  fury  of  the  irascible  king  to  the  highest 
pitch.  He  had  planned  the  foundation  of  a  new  bishopric 
in  Bohemia,  probably  by  the  advice  of  the  ecclesiastics  at 
his  court,  who  coveted  the  new  appointment.  Venceslas 
only  waited  for  the  death  of  the  Abbot  Racek  of  Kladrau 
to  suppress  that  convent  and  endow  the  new  bishopric  with 
its  revenues.  No  opposition  was  to  be  feared  from 
Pope  Boniface  IX,^  with  whom  the  king  was  on  terms  of 
friendship.  The  archbishop,  however,  frustrated  the 
plans  of  Venceslas  by  sending  to  Kladrau  his  vicar-general, 
John  of  Pomuk,  who  induced  the  monks,  immediately 
after  the  death  of  Racek,  to  choose  a  new  abbot,  whose 
election  Pomuk,  in  the  name  of  the  archbishop,  immediately 
confirmed. 

The  king's  fury  now  knew  no  bounds.  The  court  officials 
very  imprudently  arranged  a  meeting  between  Venceslas 
and  the  archbishop.  On  seeing  the  latter  the  king  was 
quite  unable  to   control   his   fury.     He   ordered   John    of 

^  Boniface  IX  had  succeeded  Urban  VI  in  1389.  In  1394  Benedict 
XIII  succeeded  Clement  VII  as  anti-Pope  at  Avignon. 


88  Bohemia 

Jenstein  and  the  ecclesiastics  who  accompanied  him  to  be 
immediately  arrested.  The  archbishop  escaped  by  the  pro- 
tection of  his  armed  retinue,  but  the  four  ecclesiastics  who 
were  with  him,  and  among  whom  was  John  of  Pomuk,  were 
thrown  into  prison  and  put  on  the  rack  by  order  of  the  king. 
Venceslas  insisted  that  they  should  give  a  written  promise  to 
abandon  the  archbishop,  and  act  in  future  according  to  the 
king's  wishes.  Three  of  them  immediately  submitted  to  the 
demands  of  Venceslas,  but  John  of  Pomuk  refused  to  do  so, 
and  was  so  cruelly  tortured  that  his  death  became  certain, 
whereupon  he  was  thrown  into  the  river  Vltava.^ 

The  archbishop  meanwhile  fled  to  the  court  of  Pope 
Boniface  at  Rome,  but  he  received  little  encouragement 
from  him.  The  schism  in  the  Western  Church  made  it 
impossible  for  the  Pope  to  risk  alienating  the  friendship  of 
the  German  king,  the  most  important  of  his  adherents 
among  the  reigning  princes.  Finding  no  support  in  Rome, 
John  of  Jenstein  returned  to  Bohemia,  and  soon  after 
voluntarily  renounced  his  position  as  Archbishop  of  Prague 

(1393)- 

Venceslas  had,  on  the  whole,  been  successful  in  reducing 
the  clergy  of  Bohemia  to  obedience,  but  he  now  found  him- 
self confronted  by  a  confederation  of  the  Bohemian  nobles, 
which  became  known  as  the  "  League  of  the  Lords,"  and  to 
which  many  of  his  nearest  relations  adhered — some  secretly, 
some  openly.  The  leaders  of  the  confederacy  were  Henry, 
Lord  of  Rosenberg,  and  the  king's  cousin,  Jocodus  of 
Moravia.  Albert  III,  Duke  of  Austria,  and  William,  Mar- 
grave of  Meissen,  also  joined  the  league.  Venceslas's 
brother  Sigismund,  King  of  Hungary,^  appears  to  have 
played  a  double  game.  While  assuring  Venceslas  of  his 
friendship,  he  was  all  along  in  complete  understanding 
with  the  league. 

The  nobles  who  belonged  to  the  league  accused  the  king 
of  various  misdeeds,  but  their  main  purpose  was  undoubtedly 

*  The  legend  of  St.  John  of  Ne'pomuk  derives  its  origin  from  this 
occurrence.  At  the  time  of  the  canonization  of  St.  John  Bohemian  history 
was  only  known  in  Western  Europe  through  the  utterly  unreliable 
chronicle  of  Hajek  of  Libocan. 

'  Sigismund  had  (1385)  married  Mary,  daughter  of  King  Louis  of 
Hungary,  and  had  (1387)  been  crowned  as  King  of  Hungary.  The 
expenses  he  incurred  in  maintaining  his  position  in  that  country  forced 
him  to  sell  Brandebourg  (1388)  to  his  cousin,  Margrave  Jodocus  of 
Moravia. 


An  Historical  Sketch  89 

to  restrict  his  rights  as  to  the  appointments  to  the  great 
State  and  court  offices.  They  therefore  demanded  a  promise 
from  the  king  that  he  would  in  future  govern  according  to 
the  advice  of  State  officials,  whom  he  was  to  choose 
among  the  higher  nobility  :  on  his  refusal  they  attacked  him 
in  his  castle  of  Beraun,  and  conducted  him  to  Prague  as  a 
prisoner.  The  lords  of  the  league  then  declared  Jodocus  of 
Moravia  "starosta"  (dictator).^ 

Venceslas  contrived  to  communicate  secretly  with  his 
brother  John,  Duke  of  Gorlitz  (in  Lusatia),  and  succeeded 
in  obtaining  aid  from  him.  The  people  of  Bohemia,  who 
had  no  cause  to  complain  of  Venceslas,  even  took  up  arms 
in  his  favour,  so  that  when  Duke  John  arrived  at  Prague  he 
was  amicably  received  by  the  citizens.  Further  help  arrived 
from  Margrave  Prokop,  who  had  long  been  at  enmity  with 
his  brother  Jodocus,  and  Venceslas  was  also  supported  by 
several  of  the  German  princes,  who  were  indignant  at  the 
imprisonment  of  the  King  of  the  Germans.  The  lords  of 
the  league  were,  at  the  time,  unable  to  oppose  such  numerous 
adversaries,  and  though  they  at  first  obliged  Venceslas  to 
follow  them  as  a  prisoner,  they  soon  saw  the  necessity  of 
conditionally  restoring  him  to  freedom.  The  only  condition 
demanded  appears  to  have  been  a  complete  amnesty  for  the 
lords  of  the  league,  which  was  guaranteed  by  Duke  John  in 
the  name  of  his  brother,  who  refused  to  enter  into  any 
negotiations  till  he  had  recovered  his  liberty.  Almost 
immediately  after  his  liberation  Venceslas  endeavoured  to 
make  preparations  for  renewed  warfare  against  the  league  of 
the  lords,  but  his  efforts  to  form  a  party  were  entirely  un- 
successful. After  the  death  of  Duke  John  (1396)  the  king 
was  obliged  to  ask  his  brother  Sigismund,  King  of  Hungary, 
and  even  Margrave  Jodocus,  to  mediate  between  him  and 
the  nobles  of  Bohemia. 

The  agreement  which,  through  the  mediation  of  King 
Sigismund,  was  now  obtained,  corresponded  entirely  to  the 
wishes  of  the  league.  Venceslas  undertook  to  appoint 
members  of  that  league  to  all  the  important  State  offices. 
The  head  of  the  league,  Henry,  Lord  of  Rosenberg,  became 
burgrave,  and  Margrave  Jodocus  remained  at  Prague 
practically   usurping   the   regal   powers.     Irritated   by   the 

^  This  title,  derived  from  the  earliest  times  of  Bohemian  histor)% 
ensured  to  its  bearer  almost  unlimited  power,  so  that  the  authority  of 
Venceslas  became  purely  nominal. 
D2 


90  Bohemia 

overbearing  attitude  of  Jodocus,  Venceslas  shortly  afterwards 
banished  him  from  Bohemia,  and  on  his  departure  for 
Germany  left  the  Margrave  Prokop — now  for  some  time  his 
most  trusted  councillor — as  his  representative  in  Bohemia. 

The  presence  of  Venceslas  was  at  that  moment  very 
necessary  in  Germany.  The  want  of  firmness  he  had  lately 
shown  in  the  administration  of  his  hereditary  lands  had 
encouraged  his  enemies  in  Germany,  at  whose  head  was  the 
ambitious  Elector  Palatine  Ruprecht.  He  summoned  a 
Diet  of  the  Empire  to  Frankfort  (1398),  but  this  step  was 
taken  too  late  to  disarm  his  enemies,  who  were  already 
planning  his  deposition.  From  Germany  King  Venceslas 
proceeded  to  France  to  consult  with  King  Charles  VI  as  to 
the  means  of  ending  the  papal  schism.  The  two  sovereigns 
decided  that  both  Popes  should  abdicate,  and  that  the 
united  assembly  of  the  cardinals  should  elect  a  new 
Pope. 

This  settlement  was  naturally  displeasing  to  Pope  Boniface, 
and  when  Venceslas  informed  him  of  his  wish  that  he  should 
abdicate,  he  became  an  enemy  of  the  king,  and  consequently 
a  supporter  of  the  Elector  Palatine.  Countenanced  by 
Boniface,  the  three  ecclesiastical  Electors  deposed  Venceslas 
(1400),  accusing  him  of  neglecting  the  affairs  of  the  Empire 
and  alienating  lands  belonging  to  it,^  and  in  his  place  chose 
Rupert,  Elector  Palatine,  as  King  of  the  Germans.  En- 
couraged by  Rupert,  the  lords  of  the  league  had  in  1399 
again  taken  up  arms  against  their  king. 

A  new  internal  struggle  began  in  Bohemia,  of  which  we 
have  very  scanty  record,  but  in  which  the  Confederates  on 
the  whole  had  the  advantage.  Venceslas  was  again  obliged 
to  come  to  terms  with  his  enemies,  and  to  appoint  a 
council  from  among  the  principal  nobles  of  the  country,  a 
point  that  had  always  been  the  principal  object  of  the 
league  of  the  lords.  The  new  Archbishop  of  Prague,  Wilfram 
of  Skvorec,  and  Henry,  Lord  of  Rosenberg,  were  to  hold  the 
principal  offices  of  State.  Venceslas  about  this  time  suc- 
ceeded in  detaching  Margrave  Jodocus  from  the  Confederacy 
by  giving  up  Lusatia  to  him  for  his  lifetime. 

King  Sigismund  of  Hungary  had  not  been  able  to  inter- 
fere during  the  new  troubles,  as  he  had  at  that  time  been 

^  This  referred  to  the  fact  that  Venceslas  had  conferred  the  title  of 
Duke  of  Milan  on  John  Galeazzo  de'  Visconti  without  consulting  the 
Electors. 


An  Historical  Sketch  91 

imprisoned  by  the  rebellious  Hungarian  nobles,  who 
behaved  towards  him  very  much  in  the  same  way  as  the 
Bohemian  lords  had  formerly  done  to  Venceslas.  King 
Venceslas  was  much  grieved  by  the  imprisonment  of  his 
brother,  whom  he  believed  to  be  his  friend,  and  it  was 
principally  through  his  efforts  and  financial  sacrifices  that 
Sigismund  at  last  regained  his  liberty. 

Foolishly  relying  on  the  gratitude  of  his  younger  brother, 
Venceslas  hoped  to  be  able  with  his  help  to  throw  off  the 
mastership  of  the  State  officials,  whom  he  had  been  obliged 
to  appoint,  and  who  had  practically  annulled  the  power  of 
the  Crown.  Venceslas  invited  Sigismund  to  Bohemia  as 
soon  as  he  had  regained  his  liberty,  and  associated  him  as 
co-regent  in  the  government  of  the  country.  He  wished 
his  brother  to  accompany  him  to  Italy,  intending  at  last  to 
journey  to  Rome  for  his  coronation.  Sigismund  abused 
the  confidence  of  his  credulous  brother  in  the  most  in- 
famous way.  During  the  journey  he  seized  Venceslas  as  a 
prisoner,  and  by  his  own  authority  appointed  Bishop  John 
of  Litomysl  Governor  of  Bohemia,  intending  to  deprive 
Venceslas  entirely  of  his  sovereignty  over  that  country. 
Margrave  Prokop,  whom  Venceslas  had  again  appointed 
regent,  was  imprisoned  by  order  of  Sigismund,  As  an 
insurrection  against  the  unconstitutional  rule  of  Bishop 
John  broke  out  almost  immediately,  Sigismund  hastened 
back  to  Bohemia,  leaving  Venceslas  as  a  prisoner  in  the 
custody  of  his  ally,  the  Duke  of  Austria.  Sigismund  was 
on  the  point  of  opening  hostilities  against  the  Bohemian 
towns  that  adhered  to  King  Venceslas,  w-hen  an  insurrection 
in  Hungary  recalled  him  to  that  country,  and  for  the  time 
freed  Bohemia  of  his  presence. 

Shortly  afterwards  (1403)  Venceslas  succeeded  in  escap- 
ing from  Vienna,  where  he  had  been  imprisoned  by  the 
Duke  of  Austria,  and  he  speedily  returned  to  Bohemia. 
He  was  this  time  cordially  received,  even  by  his  former 
enemies,  whom  the  outrageous  extortions  of  Sigismund  had 
alienated.  The  league  of  the  lords  was  voluntarily  dissolved, 
and  Venceslas  again  became  undisputed  ruler  of  Bohemia. 

The  movement  in  favour  of  religious  reform,  which  com- 
menced during  the  reign  of  King  Charles  IV,  had  constantly 
increased  in  the  ten  years  during  which  the  struggle  between 
Venceslas  and  the  Bohemian  nobles  had  lasted.  Wald- 
hauser  and  INIilic  had  died  before  the  accession  of  Venceslas ; 


92  Bohemia 

but  Matthew  of  Janow  had  gone  a  step  further  than  his 
predecessors,  as — besides  inveighing  against  the  notorious 
immorality  of  the  clergy — he  also  attacked  several  dogmas 
of  the  Church.  He  was  indeed  persuaded  to  withdraw  his 
heretical  statements,  but  this  in  no  way  impeded  the  growth 
of  the  movement,  which,  through  the  agency  of  John  Hus, 
was  soon  to  become  of  world-wide  importance. 

It  has  often  been  asked  why  the  general  degradation  of 
the  clergy  and  the  scandal  caused  by  the  schism,  seeing 
how  common  they  were  to  the  whole  Western  Church, 
should  have  aroused  in  Bohemia  a  wider  movement  than 
in  any  other  country.  One  of  these  reasons  is  generally 
supposed  to  be  the  influence  of  Wycliffe  in  Bohemia,  and 
it  is  certain  that  his  writings  were  more  studied  at  the 
University  of  Prague  than  in  many  places  nearer  England, 
and  that  several  of  his  doctrines  were  defended  by  Hus. 
The  influence  of  Queen  Anne  of  England  has  also  been 
put  forward  as  facilitating  knowledge  in  Bohemia  of  occur- 
rences in  England,  and  from  the  queen's  pious  disposition  it 
is  not  unlikely  that  the  correspondence  she  carried  on  with 
relations  and  friends  in  Bohemia  contained  allusions  to 
theological  matters.  The  fact  of  the  possession  by  the 
queen  of  a  Bible  in  the  vulgar  tongue  (a  fact  already 
mentioned),  has  been  made  an  excuse  for  many  suppositions, 
but  there  is  no  direct  evidence  that  the  queen  favoured  any 
movement  for  Church  reform  either  in  England  or  in 
Bohemia. 

If  the  writings  of  Wycliffe  attracted  more  attention  in 
Bohemia  than  elsewhere,  it  is  because  the  soil  was  already 
prepared  for  religious  changes.  The  movement  against  the 
Roman  Church  was,  on  the  whole,  an  indigenous  one,  and 
was  to  a  great  extent  caused  by  the  national  differences 
between  Germans  and  Bohemians. 

The  Bohemian  language,  which  had  been  neglected  at 
court  and  in  the  towns  during  the  reigns  of  the  last  Pf emysl- 
ides,  had  increased  in  importance  under  Charles,  and  still 
more  under  Venceslas.  The  principal  causes  of  this  change 
date  from  the  reign  of  King  Charles ;  they  were  the  crea- 
tion of  the  Archbishopric  of  Prague,  by  which  Bohemia  was 
detached  from  the  German  Archbishopric  of  Maintz,  and 
the  foundation  of  the  "new  town"  of  Prague  in  v/hich — 
contrary  to  the  customs  of  the  older  town — the  Bohemian 
language  was  used  for  the  purpose  of  administration  and 


An  Historical  Sketch  93 

justice.  A  further  step  in  the  same  direction  was  the 
decision  of  Venceslas  that  all  decrees  of  the  court  and  the 
Government,  for  which  hitherto  either  the  German  or  the 
Latin  tongue  had  been  employed,  should  henceforth  be 
published  in  Bohemian.  We  also  find  at  this  period  an 
increasing  movement  among  the  Bohemian  clergy  in  favour 
of  preaching  in  the  native  language,  even  in  the  towns ;  and 
it  is  probable  that  the  example  of  Milic  of  Kromefize,  whose 
sermons  had  so  deeply  stirred  the  people,  contributed  largely 
to  induce  the  clergy  to  use  the  native  language  for  their 
sermons. 

The  national  party,  as  soon  as  it  had  gathered  strength, 
began  to  view  with  displeasure  the  condition  of  the  Prague 
University,  the  great  intellectual  centre  of  the  country.  The 
management  of  the  university,  and  therefore  the  right  to 
confer  the  numerous  dignities,  professorships,  and  prebends 
which  were  in  its  gift,  was  entirely  in  German  hands.  It  has 
already  been  mentioned  that  the  university  was  divided  into 
four  "nations";  and  as  the  Polish  "nation,"  particularly 
after  the  foundation  of  the  University  of  Cracow,  was  largely 
composed  of  Germans  from  Silesia  and  Pomerania,  the  Slav 
Bohemians  found  themselves  in  a  permanent  minority  in 
their  own  country ;  this  was  considered  particularly  unfair, 
as  the  university  had  been  founded  and  endowed  at  the 
expense  of  Bohemia.  A  movement  against  the  predominance 
of  the  Germans  began  as  early  as  1385,  when  the  Bohemians 
specially  attacked  the  appointment  of  foreigners  to  the  offices 
of  the  university.  The  Archbishop  of  Prague,  to  whom 
both  parties  appealed,  decided  in  favour  of  the  Bohemians, 
declaring  that  preference  should  be  given  to  them,  and  that 
Germans  should  in  future  hold  the  offices  of  the  university 
only  in  the  absence  of  a  fit  Bohemian  candidate.  The 
Germans  appealed  to  the  Pope,  and  a  compromise  was  at 
last  obtained,  according  to  which  five  of  the  great  university 
dignities  were  always  to  be  held  by  Bohemians,  whilst  the 
sixth  one  should  alternate  in  the  sequence  that  after  two 
consecutive  German  occupants  one  Bohemian  should  always 
follow.  This  compromise  only  postponed  temporarily  the 
national  struggle  at  the  university,  and  it  was  inevitable  that 
when  a  leader  appeared  in  whom  both  the  religious  and  the 
national  tendencies  of  the  country  were  personified,  an 
outbreak  must  occur. 

Such  a  leader  was  found  in  John  Hus.     Before  giving 


94  Bohemia 

what,  for  want  of  space,  must  be  a  very  short  sketch  of  his 
career,  1  it  will  be  well  to  mention  one  of  the  theories  as  to 
the  origin  of  the  Hussite  movement.  It  is  connected  with 
the  now  uncontested  fact  that  the  struggle  between  the 
German  and  the  Slav  race  was  the  principal  cause  of  that 
movement. 

It  has  been  said  by  Bohemian  writers  since  the  seven- 
teenth century,  and  it  has  recently  been  re-affirmed, 
especially  by  Russian  historians,  that  the  Hussite  movement 
was  not  caused  by  a  desire  for  Church  reform,  as  were  the 
other  movements  that  subsequently  took  place  in  the 
Western  world,  but  that  it  was  rather  a  movement  in  favour 
of  joining  the  Eastern  Church;  and  that  "Hus  himself  was 
of  the  orthodox  Church  (pravoslaw)  in  his  views,  his  actions, 
and  his  endeavours."  ^ 

The  Eastern  origin  of  Christianity  in  Bohemia,  the  exist- 
ence from  remote  times  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Prokop  on 
the  Sazava,  which  celebrated  the  services  of  the  Church  in 
the  Slav  language,  the  revival  of  the  traditions  of  that  mon- 
astery by  the  foundation  of  a  Slavonic  Benedictine  convent 
by  Charles  IV,  the  fact  that  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy  and 
the  administration  of  the  Communion  to  laymen  in  one 
kind  only  were  introduced  into  Bohemia  far  later  than  into 
other  lands  subject  to  the  Western  Church,  are  the  principal 
points  in  favour  of  this  theory. 

The  positive  statement  of  Palacky^ — the  standard  au- 
thority on  Bohemian  history  up  to  1526 — that  in  spite  of  all 

^  For  a  full  account  of  the  career  of  Hus,  I  must  refer  my  readers  to 
my  Life  and  Times  of  Master  John  Hus. 

2  Professor  Kalousek,  in  a  very  remarkable  article  on  "Russian 
Researches  on  the  Causes  and  Objects  of  the  Hussite  Movement," 
published  in  the  Journal  of  the  Bohemian  Museum  for  1882.  The 
learned  professor  is  strongly  opposed  to  this  theory,  which  it  would 
perhaps  be  hardly  necessary  to  notice  were  it  not  that  its  veiy  general 
acceptation  in  Russia  gives  it  a  certain  importance.  In  the  article 
mentioned  above,  Professor  Kalousek  says  (quoting  from  a  recent 
Russian  writer),  that  the  theory  of  the  Greek  "orthodox"  origin  and 
tendency  of  the  "  Hussite  movement  has,  in  Russia,  been  introduced 
into  the  school-books  as  an  uncontested  fact ;  it  is  maintained  by  people 
otherwise  of  the  most  divergent  opinions  ;  we  hear  of  it  from  theologians 
and  publicists  on  the  most  varied  occasions,  at  Hus's  jubilee,  and  at 
the  foundation  of  the  Greek  Church  at  Prague,  at  the  Slav  Congress  at 
Moscow  (1867),  and  on  the  occasion  of  the  Old-Catholic  movement  in 
Germany  ;  everywhere  they  remind  us  of  the  '  orthodox '  tendencies  of 
the  Bohemians." 

^  Palacky,  Bbhmische  Geschichte^  vol.  iii.  bk.  vi.  chap.  iii. 


An  Historical  Sketch  95 

researches  among  contemporary  records  he  was  unable  to 
discover  any  trace  whatever  of  Greco-Slavonic  religious 
traditions  at  the  period  we  refer  to,  may  be  considered  as 
decisive. 

It  is  possible  that  the  religious  and  national  aspirations 
of  Bohemia  would  not  have  had  the  world-wide  importance 
which  they  attained  had  it  not  been  for  John  Hus,  who  is 
undoubtedly  the  most  prominent  representative  of  the 
Czecho-Slavic  race  in  the  the  world's  story. 

John  Hus  was  born  at  Husinec  in  Southern  Bohemia,  of 
parents  who,  though  of  humble  birth,  appear  to  have  been  in 
comparatively  affluent  circumstances.  The  date  of  his  birth 
is  uncertain  ;  the  most  recent  writers  place  it  between  1373 
and  1375.  He  studied  at  the  University  of  Prague,  at 
which  he  obtained  the  rank  of  "  Magister  "  (M.A.)  in  1396. 
He  became  Dean  of  the  faculty  of  Philosophy  in  1401,  and 
Rector  of  the  university,  for  the  first  time,  in  1402.  His 
marvellous  eloquence  as  a  preacher  from  the  first  attracted 
attention,  and  it  does  not  seem  to  have  impeded  his  career 
that,  about  the  year  1399,  he  was  already  accused  by  some 
of  his  colleagues  of  maintaining  doctrines  contained  in  the 
writings  of  Wycliffe  which  the  Council  of  Blackfriars  had 
already  condemned.  These  accusations  also  in  no  way  pre- 
vented his  gaining  great  favour  both  with  the  people  and 
with  the  court ;  and  Queen  Sophia,  wife  of  Venceslas,  about 
this  time  appointed  him  her  confessor.  A  large  part  of 
the  nobility  and  particularly  the  courtiers  and  favourites 
of  Venceslas,  then  openly  supported  Hus.  "  Among  the 
Bohemian  laymen  of  the  highest  rank  there  were  enhght- 
ened  men  who  were  thoroughly  interested  in  the  spiritual 
requirements  of  their  age;  others  also  who  had  from  old 
entertained  a  feeling  of  envy  towards  the  superior  eccle- 
siastics because  of  their  wealth  and  immunities,  and  viewed 
with  favour  the  hostile  movement  against  them  among  the 
lower  clergy  and  the  people.  The  courtiers  of  Venceslas 
almost  all  belonged  to  one  or  the  other  division  of  the 
furtherers  of  the  movement  which  strove  to  obtain  Church 
reform."  1 

The    estrangement    of    the    king   from   Pope   Boniface 

naturally  embittered  the  courtiers  against  the  higher  clergy, 

who  had  maintained  their  allegiance  to  Boniface  ;  though 

Sigismund,    while    ruling    Bohemia    during    his    brother's 

1  Tomek. 


96 


Bohemia 


captivity,  had  attempted  to  detach  the  country  from  its 
allegiance  to  that  Pope.  Sigismund  had  (1403)  instructed 
the  Bohemian  clergy  not  to  obey  any  orders  received  from 
Boniface,  who  had  previously  called  on  the  German  princes 
to  dethrone  the  house  of  Luxemburg,  and  to  recognize  the 
Elector  Palatine  as  king.  It  may  be  added  that  Boniface, 
not  having  the  whole  revenue  of  the  Church  at  his  disposal, 
had  aroused  great  indignation  by  exacting  enormous  sums 
for  his  confirmation  of  bishops  and  archbishops,  and  had 
even  established  a  rule  that  the  benefices  in  his  gift,  when 
vacant,  or  even  when  a  vacancy  was  expected,  should  be 
publicly  sold  to  the  highest  bidder.^ 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  Hussite  movement  was  at 
first  favoured  by  the  queen  and  court,  and  was  then  by  no 
means  the  democratic  movement  which  it  afterwards  became. 

There  was  only  one  element  in  Bohemia  that  was  from 
the  very  first  hostile  to  the  new  movement,  and  that  was  the 
German  party,  both  in  the  towns  and  at  the  university. 
The  doctrines  of  Wycliffe  had  been  freely  expounded  at  the 
university  in  1402,  during  which  year  Hus  was  Rector,  and 
several  of  his  friends,  also  belonging  to  the  Bohemian 
"nation,"  held  high  appointments  there.  The  German 
members  of  the  university,  both  from  national  and  from 
religious  motives,  opposed  these  doctrines,  and  when  Walter 
Harasser  of  the  Bavarian  "nation"  was  Rector  in  the 
following  year  he  convoked  a  general  meeting  of  the 
university,  which  declared  that  forty-five  articles  taken  from 
the  writings  of  Wycliffe  contained  heresies,  and  forbade  all 
members  of  the  university  to  circulate  them.  Hus  and  the 
Bohemian  "  nation  "  protested  against  the  decision,  as  they 
maintained — not  without  some  truth — that  the  articles  that 
had  been  read  out  were  falsified,  and  did  not  convey 
Wycliffe's  meaning.  This  debate  was  the  first  public  mani- 
festation of  the  reform  movement.  The  Bohemians  were 
greatly  incensed  at  having  been  outvoted  by  the  Germans,^ 
and  neither  this  decision,  nor  the  subsequent  prohibition 
addressed  by  the  archbishop  to  the  clergy  of  preaching  the 
doctrine  contained  in  the  forty-five  articles,  interrupted  the 
reform  movement  to  any  great  extent.     In  1408  the  forty- 

1  Tomek. 

2  The  compromise  of  1385  had  made  no  change  in  the  system  that  all 
important  votes  at  the  university  were  taken  by  "nations,"  a  system 
that  left  the  Bohemians  in  a  permanent  minority  of  three  to  one. 


An  Historical  Sketch  97 

five  articles  were  again  brought  before  the  university,  or 
rather  before  the  forum  of  the  Bohemian  "nation,"  in  which 
alone  these  doctrines  had  found  adherents.  The  articles 
were  again  condemned,  but  with  the  limitation  "that  no 
member  of  the  Bohemian  'nation'  was  to  defend  these 
articles  in  their  false,  erroneous,  or  heretical  sense."  As 
Palacky  remarks,  this  restriction  rendered  the  whole  pro- 
hibition illusory. 

During  all  this  period  the  still-protracted  schism  in  the 
Church  reacted  on  the  religious  struggle  in  Bohemia.  As 
both  the  Roman  Pope,  Gregory  XII,  and  the  Avignon  Pope, 
Benedict  XIII,^  refused  to  renounce  their  claim  to  be  con- 
sidered the  rightful  Pontiff,  the  cardinals  of  both  parties 
had — supported  by  the  kings  of  Germany  and  France — 
decided  that  a  Council  should  settle  the  question,  and  that 
in  the  meantime  neither  of  the  two  claimants  should  be 
recognized  as  head  of  the  Church. 

Venceslas  immediately  attempted  to  enforce  this  decision 
in  his  hereditary  lands,  and  on  the  refusal  of  the  Archbishop 
of  Prague  to  renounce  his  allegiance  to  Gregory  XII  he 
deferred  the  matter  to  the  Prague  University,  a  step  entirely 
in  conformance  with  the  ideas  of  the  time.  Another  general 
assembly  of  the  members  of  the  university  now  took  place 
(1408),  under  the  presidency  of  the  Rector,  Henry  of 
Baltenhagen,  a  German.  By  the  votes  of  the  three  German 
"nations,"  which  overruled  the  Bohemian  suffrages,  it  was 
decided  that  the  university  should  continue  to  recognize 
Gregory  XII  as  head  of  the  Church. 

Venceslas,  who  was  then  residing  at  Kutna  Hora,  sum- 
moned there  representatives  of  both  parties  at  the  university, 
wishing  to  consult  them  on  the  subject  of  the  deposition  of 
Pope  Gregory.  The  German  deputation,  headed  by  the 
Rector,  Baltenhagen,  was  first  received  by  the  king.  Bal- 
tenhagen cunningly  avoided  alluding  to  the  subject  on 
which  his  opinion  had  been  asked,  and  drew  the  king's  at- 
tention to  the  prevalence  of  "  Wycliffism  "  in  Prague.  He 
declared  that  the  good  fame  of  Bohemia  as  a  country  free 
from  heresy  was  imperilled.  This  was  a  point  on  which 
Venceslas  felt  very  strongly.  When,  therefore,  Hus  and 
Jerome,  as  leaders  of  the  Bohemian  deputation,  appeared 

1  Pope  Boniface  IX  died  in  1404,  and  was  succeeded  by  Innocent 
VII,  and  then  (1406)  by  Gregory  XII.  Benedict  XIII  had  (1394) 
succeeded  Clement  VII  as  anti-Pope  at  Avignon. 


98 


Bohemia 


before  him,  he  received  them  very  ungraciously.  He 
accused  them  of  fomenting  disorders,  and  threatened 
them  with  death  at  the  stake.  Baltenhagen  and  the  other 
Germans  left  Kutna  Hora,  assured  that  all  their  privileges 
at  the  university  would  be  maintained. 

The  ever-vacillating  king,  in  this  instance,  was  again  fated 
not  to  adhere  to  his  first  decision.  Through  the  influence 
of  those  among  his  courtiers  who  favoured  the  national 
movement  and  the  cause  of  reform,  Venceslas  was  soon 
persuaded  to  accede  to  the  wishes  of  the  Bohemian  party 
at  the  university,  and  to  change  the  system  of  voting.  He 
therefore  published  in  January  1409  the  famed  "decree  ot 
Kutna  Hora."^  This  decree  ordained  that  the  Bohemian 
"  nation  ^  should  henceforth  have  three  votes,  and  the  com- 
bined foreign  "  nations  "  only  one  vote,  both  in  the  general 
deliberations  of  the  university  and  in  those  of  the  separate 
faculties.  The  first  result  of  this  innovation  was  that  the 
university,  according  to  the  wishes  of  the  king,  now  decreed 
that  Pope  Gregory  should  no  longer  be  recognized  in 
Bohemia,  and  the  clergy  of  the  country  should  abide  by 
the  decision  of  the  Council.  Another  more  important 
consequence  of  the  king's  decision  was  that  the  German 
professors  and  students,  considering  themselves  injured  in 
their  rights,  left  Prague  to  the  number  of  about  five  thousand 
(i409).2  Only  the  German  members  of  the  Polish  "  nation  " 
joined  in  the  emigration ;  those  who  were  of  the  Slav  race 
remained,  and  became  part  of  the  Bohemian  "nation,"  with 
which  their  sympathies  had  been  enlisted  during  the  previous 
struggle.  Hus,  now  the  recognized  leader  of  the  national 
party,  was  elected  Rector  (1409),  though  he  had  served  in 
that  capacity  only  a  few  years  before. 

The  reform  movement  naturally  gathered  increased 
strength  from  its  success,  and  the  university,  formerly  its 
opponent,  now  took  the  lead  in  furthering  this  movement, 
of  which  it  henceforth  became  the  centre.  On  the  other 
hand,  many  of  the  patriotic  nobles  and  other  sympathizers 
with  the  claims  of  the  Bohemian  nationalists  had  little 
interest   in   theological   details,    or    animosity   against   the 

^  A  full  account  of  the  decree  of  Kutna  Hora  will  be  found  in  my 
Life  and  Times  of  Master  J.   Hus,  p.    105. 

^  This  seems  to  be  the  most  probable  number,  though  a  contemporary 
Bohemian  writer  tells  us  that  20,000  German  members  of  the  university 
left  Prague. 


An  Historical  Sketch  99 

Church  of  Rome.  These,  considering  that  the  object  of 
the  national  party  had  been  attained,  gradually  abandoned 
the  party  led  by  Hus  ;  for  not  only  had  the  university — the 
great  centre  of  political  life  in  Bohemia — fallen  into  the  hands 
of  the  nationalists,  but  they  shortly  afterwards  also  obtained 
the  municipal  control  over  many  towns. 

The  hopes  that  the  Council  then  assembled  at  Pisa 
would  undertake  Church  reform  (hopes  that  at  that 
moment  were  entertained  by  many  fervent  adherents 
of  the  Church  of  Rome)  proved  futile.  The  Council  may 
indeed  be  said  to  have  rendered  the  situation  of  the 
Western  Church  even  more  difficult  than  it  had  been 
before.  The  Council  (1409)  deposed  both  Gregory  XII 
and  Benedict  XIII,  and  chose  Alexander  V  as  Pope,^  but 
as  the  two  other  Popes,  Gregory  and  Benedict,  continued 
to  be  recognized  in  some  countries,  there  were  for  a  time 
three  popes  simultaneously.  It  is  curious  to  note  that  at 
the  same  period,  on  the  death  of  Rupert  of  the  Palatinate 
(1401),  some  of  the  German  Electors  chose  King  Sigismund 
of  Hungary,  and  others  his  cousin  Jodocus,  the  Margrave 
of  Moravia,  as  German  king.  Venceslas  (as  has  been 
previously  mentioned)  having  also  claimed  that  title,  the 
German  kingdom  had  three  kings  at  the  same  moment  as 
the  Roman  Church  had  three  popes.  Jodocus  died  (141 1) 
only  three  months  after  his  election,  and  Venceslas  and 
Sigismund  now  came  to  an  agreement.  The  terms  are 
not  exactly  known,  as  contemporary  writers,  entirely 
occupied  with  the  ecclesiastical  strife  then  raging  in 
Bohemia,  give  little  information  on  other  matters.  Ven- 
ceslas, ever  too  confident  in  his  treacherous  younger 
brother,  not  only  consented  to  the  election  of  his  brother 
as  German  king,  but  even  assured  him  his  own  vote. 
Sigismund,  on  the  other  hand,  promised  to  favour  in  every 
way  his  brother's  election  as  Roman  Emperor.  Sigismund 
was  soon  afterwards,  and  this  time  unanimously,  chosen  as 
king  by  the  German  Electors  (141 1). 

The  failure  of  the  Council  of  Pisa  to  achieve  or  even  to 
attempt  any  reform  of  the  Church,  undoubtedly  encouraged 
the  higher  clergy  of  Bohemia  to  oppose  more  energetically 
than  before  the  reform  movement  in  their  own  country. 
Zbynek  Zajic  of  Hasenburg,  archbishop  of  Prague,  had 
not  at  first  been  hostile  to  the  movement  in  favour  of 
^  He  was  succeeded  in  the  following  year  by  John  XXIII. 


lOO  Bohemia 

Church  reform.  He  soon  noticed  the  piety  and  eloquence 
of  the  young  priest,  John  Hus.  He  even  appointed  him 
preacher  to  the  synod,  and  entrusted  him  with  important 
missions.  It  was  only  gradually  that  Hus  lost  the  favour  of 
his  ecclesiastical  superiors,  and  only  from  the  end  of  the 
year  1408  did  the  Church  of  Rome  consider  him  as  an 
open  enemy.  After  having  obtained  the  consent  of  the 
pope,  Zbynek  decided  to  strike  a  decisive  blow  against  the 
Hussite  party.  He  issued  a  decree  ordering  that  all  writings 
of  Wycliffe,  wherever  they  were  found,  should  be  burnt; 
and  he  prohibited  all  preaching  except  in  parish  or  college 
churches,  or  in  convents.  This  was  directly  aimed  at  Hus, 
who  generally  preached  in  the  so-called  Bethlehem  Chapel, 
which  was  a  private  foundation.  Disregarding  the  appeal 
that  Hus  had  addressed  to  Pope  John  XXHI,  the  arch- 
bishop soon  afterwards  excommunicated  Hus  for  continuing 
to  preach.  At  the  same  time  a  large  number  of  manuscripts 
containing  Wycliffe's  writings  were  publicly  burnt  at  Prague 
by  order  of  the  archbishop.  Venceslas  may  at  this  time  be 
considered  as  still  siding  with  the  national  party — probably 
in  consequence  of  the  influence  of  Queen  Sophia,  who 
remained  warmly  attached  to  Hus.  He  ordered  the  arch- 
bishop to  indemnify  the  owners  of  the  manuscripts  which 
had  been  destroyed,  some  of  which  were  of  great  value, 
and  seized  on  part  of  the  revenues  of  the  archbishop  and  of 
other  higher  ecclesiastics.  He  also  wrote  to  the  Pope  in 
favour  of  Hus,  and  When  the  latter  was  summoned  to 
Rome,  Queen  Sophia  ^  addressed  a  menacing  letter  to  the 
cardinals,  warning  them  "that  if  the  Holy  College  did 
not  find  means  to  arrange  this  matter,  the  king  and  the 
Bohemian  lords  would  soon  see  their  way  to  settling  it 
according  to  their  views."  Both  the  king  and  the  national 
party  at  court  indeed  still  maintained  that  Hus  had  uttered 
no  heresy,  and  that  it  was  his  German  accusers  who  dis- 

^  Baron  Helfert,  writing  strongly  from  the  papal  point  of  view, 
severely  blames  Queen  Sophia,  and  pronounces  a  general  and  rather 
severe  judgment  on  the  female  sex:  "Women  have  with  rare  ex- 
ceptions, noted  in  history,  no  tact,  no  independent  judgment  as  to  how 
public  affairs  should  be  conducted.  ...  In  pohtics,  as  in  household 
matters,  they  are  led  more  by  sentiment  than  by  sense.  If  a  man  is  at 
their  side  .  .  .  they  are  attracted  by  his  political  views,  and  generally 
go  further  than  he  does"  (Helfert,  Htis  unci  Hieronymius).  Of  course 
the  supposed  influence  of  Hus  over  Queen  Sophia,  whose  confessor  he 
was,  is  alluded  to. 


An  Historical  Sketch  loi 

turbed  the  quiet  of  the  country.  The  king's  letter  to  the 
Pope  was  at  first  without  result,  and  the  Archbishop  of 
Prague,  indignant  at  the  loss  of  part  of  his  revenues,  placed 
the  town  of  Prague  under  an  interdict,  thus  prohibiting  all 
religious  ceremonies. 

At  this  time  occurred  one  of  the  many  temporary  and 
insincere  reconciliations  between  Venceslas  and  his  brother 
Sigismund,  and  there  appeared  to  be  some  hope  of  a 
peaceful  ending  of  the  ecclesiastical  conflict  in  Bohemia. 
Pope  John  temporarily  suspended  the  proceedings  which 
the  Roman  courts  had  already  begun  against  Hus;  and 
Sigismund,  during  a  visit  to  his  brother  at  Prague,  induced 
the  archbishop  to  remove  the  interdict  from  the  town,  and 
even  to  use  his  influence  in  favour  of  the  suppression  of 
the  proceedings  against  Hus  in  the  Roman  ecclesiastical 
courts.  The  hopes  of  those  who  wished  to  end  the 
ecclesiastical  strife  in  Bohemia  were  raised  by  the  death 
of  Archbishop  Zbynek,  and  by  the  choice  of  M  agister 
Albik  as  his  successor.  Albik  had  long  been  physician  to 
the  king,  whose  thorough  confidence  he  enjoyed.  This 
was  undoubtedly  the  principal  cause  of  his  election ;  though 
it  is  unfortunately  probable  that  he — as  was  then  so 
frequently  the  case — made  use  of  bribery  to  obtain  the 
pope's  consent  to  his  election.  Magister  Albik,  then 
already  an  elderly  man,  was  only  known  as  one  of  the  first 
medical  men  of  his  age;  although  in  his  youth  he  had 
been  admitted  to  the  lowest  of  minor  orders,  that  of 
acolyte,  he  had  been  married,  but  was  now  a  widower. 

Albik  is  described  by  all  contemporary  writers  as  a  man 
of  conciliatory  disposition,  and  the  intimate  relations  he 
enjoyed  with  the  king  render  it  certain  that  his  purpose 
was  the  appeasement  of  Bohemia.  It  was  natural  to  hope 
that  the  election  of  Albik,  an  elderly,  conciliatory,  opulent 
man,  would  at  least  cause  a  respite  in  the  theological  strife 
that  agitated  Bohemia. 

Events  in  distant  Italy,  however,  brought  on  a  crisis 
which  was  more  serious  than  any  of  the  former  disturbances 
in  Bohemia.  Ladislas,  King  of  Naples,  still  supported  the 
cause  of  Pope  Gregory,  and  war  consequently  broke  out 
between  the  king  and  Pope  John.  The  latter  proclaimed 
a  crusade  against  Ladislas,  and  promised  indulgences  to  all 
those  who  by  contributions  of  money  would  aid  him  in  the 
equipment  of  his  army.     Preachers  sent  by  the  Pope  arrived 


I02  Bohemia 

at  Prague  (141 2).  Preceded  by  drummers  they  entered  the 
city,  and  established  themselves  in  the  market-place.  They 
called  on  all  passers-by  to  contribute  money  or  goods  in 
exchange  for  indulgences.  The  sale  of  indulgences  had 
been  one  of  the  abuses  which  the  Bohemian  Church- 
reformers  had  from  the  first  most  strenuously  opposed. 
Hus,  in  his  Bethlehem  Chapel,  spoke  strongly  against  the 
granting  of  these  indulgences,  which  he  said  were  given  to 
aid  in  -the  slaughter  of  the  soldiers  of  Ladislas,  who  could 
but  obey  their  king.  At  the  same  time  he  disclaimed  all 
intention  of  taking  sides  in  the  quarrel  between  the  two 
Popes. 

Hus  also  succeeded — contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  arch- 
bishop— in  bringing  the  question  of  the  indulgences  before 
the  university.  A  very  stormy  meeting  of  the  professors, 
magisters,  and  students  took  place  under  the  presidency  of 
the  Rector  of  the  university,  Hus  and  Magister  Jerome  of 
Prague  violently  inveighed  against  the  sale  of  indulgences, 
which  they  declared  to  be  unchristian.  The  fiery  eloquence 
of  Jerome  appealed  to  the  younger  students  even  more  than 
that  of  Hus,  and  at  the  end  of  the  disputation  they  conducted 
him  home  in  triumph. 

Jerome  of  Prague — who  had  led  a  wandering  life,  visiting 
among  other  places  Oxford,  where  he  had  copied  some  of 
Wycliffe's  writings — had  first  become  known  in  Bohemia  by 
a  speech  he  made  (1410)  in  favour  of  WycHfife's  doctrines. 
Pie  had  then  left  Bohemia,  and  had  now  only  just  returned 
to  that  country,  which  he  again  quitted  shortly  afterwards. 
It  may  here  be  noticed  that  the  influence  of  Jerome  on  the 
religious  movement  in  Bohemia,  from  which  country  he  was 
often  absent,  has  been  greatly  over-rated.  His  visits  to 
many  countries  and  courts,  and  the  eloquent  letter  in  which 
Poggio  Bracciolini  described  his  death,^  attracted  the  atten- 
tion of  all  Europe  to  him  at  a  period  when  the  political 
condition  of  Austria  and  Bohemia  rendered  inquiry  into  the 
details  of  the  Hussite  movement  an  impossibility. 

The  echo  of  the  stormy  debates  at  the  university  still 
further  excited  the  people  of  Prague,  already  much  moved 
by  the  sermons  of  Hus  in  the  Bethlehem  Chapel.  To 
prevent  disturbances,  the  magistrates  of  Prague,  by  order 
of  Venceslas,  issued  a  decree  forbidding  any  one  under 
penalty  of  death  to  discuss  the  papal  decrees  pubHcly  ;  this, 
^  See  later. 


An  Historical   Sketch  103 

of  course,  specially  referred  to  the  sale  of  indulgences.  In 
accordance  with  this  decree,  three  young  men  who  ventured 
to  interfere  with  the  vendors  of  the  indulgences  were  seized 
and  publicly  executed.  A  band  of  students  obtained  posses- 
sion of  the  corpses,  and  singing  the  Church  hymn  "Isti 
sunt  sancti "  carried  them  for  burial  to  the  Bethlehem 
Chapel.  This  incident  marks  an  important  date  in  the 
Hussite  movement,  which  now  for  the  first  time  assumed  a 
revolutionary  character.  The  Pope  replied  to  these  attacks 
on  the  authority  of  the  Church  by  renewing  in  severer  terms 
the  decree  of  excommunication  against  Hus  :  all  true  Chris- 
tians were  forbidden  to  have  any  intercourse  with  him,  food 
and  drink  were  to  be  suppHed  to  him  only  under  pain  of  ex- 
communication;  all  religious  services  were  to  be  suspended 
in  every  town  which  he  entered  ;  finally,  Christian  burial  was 
to  be  refused  him,  and  the  Bethlehem  Chapel  was  to  be 
destroyed.  The  Germans,  obeying  the  orders  of  the  Pope, 
attempted  forcibly  to  take  possession  of  the  chapel,  but  were 
repulsed  by  the  adherents  of  Hus. 

The  king,  being  still  anxious  to  reconcile  the  contending 
parties,  begged  Hus  temporarily  to  leave  Prague,  and  he 
immediately  obeyed  the  request  of  Venceslas.  The  king 
promised  to  endeavour  during  his  absence  to  put  an  end 
to  the  conflict,  so  that  his  exile  might  not  be  of  long 
duration. 

Archbishop  Albik,  finding  that  his  conciliatory  attitude 
had  only  resulted  in  raising  up  enemies  against  him  among 
both  the  contending  parties,  now  resigned  his  office.  He 
was  succeeded  by  Conrad  of  Vechta,  formerly  Bishop  of 
Olomouc.  The  new  archbishop,  on  the  suggestion  of  the 
king,  convoked  a  synod  of  the  clergy  (14 13),  but  its 
deliberations  had  no  satisfactory  results,  as  the  reform 
party  still  maintained  that  changes  in  the  government  of 
the  Church  could  alone  restore  order ;  while  the  supporters 
of  the  Pope  declared  that  the  suppression  of  all  resistance 
to  ecclesiastical  authority  was  the  only  measure  required  to 
obtain  peace.  A  special  commission  was  now  appointed 
by  the  king,  before  which  the  more  prominent  divines 
of  both  parties  were  summoned  to  appear.  Still  the 
adherents  of  Hus,  on  the  whole,  maintained  a  conciliatory- 
attitude,  while  the  partisans  of  the  Pope  practically  declined 
any  sort  of  compromise  with  men  whom  they  considered  as 
heretics.     King   Venceslas,   whose   honesty   of  purpose  it 


I04  Bohemia 

is  impossible  to  deny,  and  who  evidently  wished  to  ignore 
the  details  of  theological  strife  and  to  restore  peace  to 
his  kingdom  at  any  price,  was  greatly  incensed  by  the 
attitude  of  the  ecclesiastics  of  the  papal  party.  Four  of 
them — among  whom  was  Stephen  of  Palec,  afterwards 
Hus's  chief  accuser  at  the  Council  of  Constance — were 
exiled  from  Bohemia  by  order  of  the  king. 

Hus,  on  leaving  Prague,  had  retired  to  the  castle  of 
Kozi  Hradek,  belonging  to  one  of  his  adherents.  Lord 
John  of  Austi,  and  which  was  situated  near  the  spot 
where  the  town  of  Tabor  was  shortly  to  spring  up.  Both 
while  staying  there,  and  during  his  stay  at  the  castle  of 
Krakovec,  the  seat  of  Lord  Henry  of  Lazan,  one  of  the 
king's  courtiers,  who  also  belonged  to  the  reform  party, 
Hus  continued  his  preaching :  it  often  took  place  in  the 
open  fields,  and  the  neighbouring  peasantry  flocked  to  it 
in  large  numbers.  Many  of  his  writings,  both  Latin  and 
Bohemian,  date  from  this  period,  and  it  is  noticeable 
that  he  now,  more  strongly  than  before,  affirmed  that  the 
Bible  was  the  only  true  source  of  Christian  belief.  This 
position  necessarily  incensed  the  adherents  of  the  papal 
authority  more  than  almost  any  other  could  have  done. 

King  Sigismund  had  meanwhile  repaired  to  Italy,  where, 
during  an  interview  with  Pope  John  at  Lodi  (1413),^  he 
obtained  the  Pontiff's  unwilling  consent  to  summon  a 
General  Council  of  the  Church  at  Constance.  King* 
Venceslas  believed  that  the  Council  would  afford  him 
the  best  means  to  put  an  end  to  the  rehgious  dissensions 
in  his  kingdom,  and  Sigismund,  with  his  brother's  approval, 
summoned  Hus  to  appear  before  the  Council  of  Constance. 
He  also  assured  him  of  such  ample  protection  as  that  he 
should  "  come  unmolested  to  Constance,  there  have  free 
right  of  audience,  and  should  he  not  submit  to  the  decision 
of  the  Council,  he  should  return  unharmed.^     Hus  there- 

^  Richenthal,  in  his  entertaining  though  unreliable  Chronik  des  Con- 
staiizer  Concils,  tells  us  that  the  Pope,  even  after  he  had  consented  to 
proceed  to  Constance,  expressed  great  displeasure  during  the  journey. 
His  imprecations  and  curses  terrified  the  pious  peasants  who  flocked 
to  see  him.  When  he  was  crossing  the  Arlberg,  his  carriage  was 
overturned.  He  then  said:  *' Here  I  lie  in  the  name  of  the  devil." 
When  in  sight  of  Constance  he  exclaimed,  **  Sic  capiuntur  vulpes." 

2  These  important  words  arc  quoted  froiii  Professor  Tomek,  who 
may  be  thought  one  of  the  first  Bohemian  authorities  on  this  period. 
'The   arguments   of  Bohemian  and  German   writers  as   to   the  exact 


An  Historical  Sketch  105 

fore  received  a  letter  of  safe-conduct  from  Sigismund,  and 
Venceslas  appointed  three  Bohemian  nobles  who  were  to 
accompany  and  assist  him  on  the  road.  Hus  started  on 
his  fatal  journey  to  Constance  in  October  (1414)-  He 
was  to  meet  there  most  of  his  Bohemian  adversaries, 
Stephen  of  Palec,  who  had  been  exiled  by  King  Venceslas, 
several  of  the  former  German  magisters  of  the  University 
of  Prague  (who  wished  the  fact  that  his  influence  on  the 
king  had  contributed  to  bring  about  the  secession  of  the 
German  students  to  be  included  in  the  act  of  accusation), 
and  above  all  John — surnamed  "the  Iron" — Bishop  of 
Litomysl,  perhaps  the  most  violent  of  all  the  enemies  of 
Church  reform.  The  latter,  before  starting  for  Constance, 
had  caused  a  collection  to  be  made  in  his  diocese  to 
aid  him  in  his  defence  of  the  existing  system  of  Church 
government. 

Principally  through  the  influence  of  the  "  Iron  "  Bishop  of 
Litomysl,  Hus  was  imprisoned  almost  immediately  after 
his  arrival  at  Constance.  Sigismund  only  made  his  entry 
into  the  town  somewhat  later  on  Christmas  Eve  (1414), 
when  the  Bohemian  lords  immediately  complained  to  him 
of  the  imprisonment  of  their  countryman.  The  king  was 
thoroughly  aware  that  violent  measures  against  Hus  would 
produce  troubles,  perhaps  even  a  revolution  in  Bohemia, 
but  his  sympathies  were  entirely  on  the  side  of  the  Roman 
Church.  The  well-known  remarks  he  afterwards  made  to 
several  of  the  cardinals,  advising  them  to  have  Hus  burnt  if 
he  did  not  retract,  and  warning  them  not  to  trust  him  even 
if  he  did  so,^  sufficiently  prove  this.  A  feeble  protest  was 
therefore  the  only  effort  he  made  in  favour  of  Hus,  and  this 
was  ignored  by  the  council.^     When  Pope  John  XXIII, 

'meaning  of  Sigismund's  letter  of  safe-conduct,  and  the  degree  of 
security  which  it  insured,  would  alone  fill  a  large  volume.  Baron 
Helfert,  who  may  be  considered  as  holding  a  brief  for  King  Sigis- 
mund, asserts  that  the  king's  letter  only  assured  the  safe  arrival 
of  Hus  at  Constance,  though  Hus  started  on  his  journey  long  before 
receiving  it  !  It  will  seem  to  many  that  Baron  Hclferc's  clever  book 
rather  proves  that  King  Sigismund  was  thoroughly  aware  of  the 
disastrous  consequences  which  violent  measures  against  Hus  would 
produce  in  Bohemia,  and  showed  more  foresight  than  the  members 
of  the  Council,  than  that  he  was  more  scrupulous  in  dealing  with  a 
•'  declared  heretic  "  than  they  were. 

^  Palacky. 

^  For  a  full  account  of  the  trial  and  death  of  Hus,  see  my  Life  and 
Times  of  Master  John  Htis. 


io6  Bohemia 

after  his  destitution  by  the  council,  secretly  left  Constance 
on  March  20,  1415,  Hus  became  the  prisoner  of  Sigismund, 
who  had  full  power  to  set  him  free.  The  Emperor,  how- 
ever, instead  of  doing  so  placed  Hus  in  the  custody  of  the 
Bishop  of  Constance,  who  imprisoned  him  in  his  castle  of 
Gottlieben.  He  was  here  treated  with  far  greater  cruelty 
than  at  Constance.  The  frequent  steps  taken  by  the 
Bohemian  nobles  then  present  at  Constance  to  obtain  the 
liberation  of  Hus  were  also  ineffectual.  Yet  they  had  at 
least  that  result,  that  the  forms  of  justice  were  to  a  certain 
extent  observed,  and  that  Hus  was  not  condemned  entirely 
without  trial.  Hus,  who  had  been  conducted  back  to  Con- 
stance early  in  June,  first  appeared  before  the  Council  on 
June  5.  His  trial  continued  on  June  7  and  8.  He  was, 
hov/ever,  never  allowed  freely  to  express  his  views  and  was 
treated  with  great  unfairness  and  brutality.  Many  of  the 
accusations  were  utterly  absurd, ^  but  others,  for  instance, 
that  he  rejected  papal  authority  and  recognized  that  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures  only,  he  himself  admitted.  He  wished  to 
argue  this  and  other  propositions,  but  the  Council  refused 
him  permission  to  do  so,  and  insisted  on  a  complete  and 
general  retractation  of  all  the  heretical  doctrines  which  had 
been  attributed  to  him.  This  he  refused,  preferring  to  die 
rather  than  retract  with  his  lips  opinions  that  he  held  in  his 
heart. 

After  June  8,  some  time  was  allowed  to  elapse,  as 
attempts  were  still  made  to  induce  Hus  to  retract  his 
opinions.  When  this  appeared  impossible  he  was  on  July 
6  brought  before  the  Council  and  for  the  last  time  called  on 
to  recant.  On  his  refusal  the  Council  immediately  declared 
him.  a  recusant  heretic.  This,  according  to  the  barbarous 
laws  of  the  time,  entailed  death  by  burning.  Hus  was 
given  over  to  the  magistrates  of  Constance,  who  caused  him 
to  be  led  directly  from  the  cathedral,  where  the  Council  held 
its  sittings,  to  a  meadow  half-a-mile  from  the  city  walls. 
The  cruel  sentence  was  then  immediately  carried  out. 
When  the  fire  had  already  been  kindled  and  Hus  was 
surrounded  by  the  flames,  his  loud  prayers  could  still  be 
heard.  His  sufferings  happily  did  not  last  long,  as  a  strong 
gust  of  wind  suddenly  blew  the  smoke  in  his  face,  and  he 

^  For  instance,  that  Hus  had  denied  that  there  were  only  three 
Persons  in  the  Godhead,  and  maintained  that  there  was  a  fourth, 
namely,  John  Hus. 


An  Historical  Sketch  107 

was  suffocated.  His  ashes  were  thrown  into  the  Rhine,  to 
prevent  the  Bohemians  from  carrying  away  any  relics  of 
him  to  their  country. 

The  career  of  Hus  has  almost  always  been  discussed 
from  the  point  of  view  of  theological  controversy;  whilst 
many  have  extolled  him  as  a  martyr,  others  have  described 
him — as  did  the  Council  of  Constance — as  a  "  recusant 
heretic."  His  sincere  piety,  his  conviction  of  the  truth  of 
his  opinions,  which  he  was  ready  to  maintain  at  the  cost  of 
his  life,  his  perfect  disinterestedness  in  one  of  the  most 
corrupt  periods  of  history,  and  the  personal  purity  of  his  life, 
no  impartial  student  of  those  times  can  deny. 

In  Bohemia,  whose  inhabitants  instinctively  saw  in  Hus 
the  greatest  man  of  their  race,  he  was  from  the  first  revered. 
Hus  the  Bohemian  patriot  is  loved  even  by  many  of  his 
countrymen  who  are  devoted  adherents  of  the  church  of 
Rome.  The  national  church  of  Bohemia  from  its  beginning 
conferred  on  Hus — as  will  be  mentioned  presently — the 
well-deserved  name  of  a  martyr. 

Before  referring  to  the  momentous  consequences  which 
the  death  of  Hus  entailed  on  Bohemia,  we  must  notice  the 
end  of  Jerome  of  Prague,  who,  prior  to  the  time  when 
researches  concerning  the  Hussite  movement  had  become 
possible  in  Bohemia,  was  generally  placed  at  the  side  of 
Hus  as  the  most  prominent  of  his  disciples. 

No  greater  contrast  can  be  imagined  than  the  lives  of 
Hus  and  of  Jerome.  Whilst  Hus  had  hardly  ever  left  Bohe- 
mia before  his  fatal  journey  to  Constance,  Jerome  had  visited 
Palestine  and  many  European  countries,  and  had  been 
received  at  various  courts,  where  his  learning  and  his 
attractive  manners  had  gained  him  many  friends.  Jerome 
had,  however,  several  times  been  imprisoned  for  uttering 
heretical  opinions,  and  after  a  journey  to  Constance,  where 
he  had  visited  Hus,  he  was  arrested  near  that  town  while  on 
his  way  back  to  Bohemia  and  thrown  into  prison.  His 
trial  lasted  some  time,  and  he  at  one  time — probably  from 
physical  fear — recanted  those  opinions  which  the  Council 
considered  to  be  heretical.  He  later  again  affirmed  these 
opinions  and  was  thereupon  condemned  to  death  and  burnt 
(May  30,  1416). 

The  description  of  the  trial  and  execution  of  Jerome 
given  by  the  papal  legate  Poggio  Bracciolini  is  well  known ; 
and  is  intensely  interesting,  as  representing  the  views  of  an 


io8  Bohemia 

Italian  humanist/  who  in  spite  of  his  official  position  could 
have  had  but  little  interest  in  the  subtilities  of  the  theolo- 
gical discussions  of  his  age.  Poggio  Bracciolini  tells  us  that 
"  none  of  the  Stoics  with  so  constant  and  brave  a  soul 
endured  death,  which  indeed  he  (Jerome)  rather  seemed  to 
long  for  .  .  .  Mutius  did  not  allow  his  hand  to  be  burnt 
with  more  brave  a  mind  than  this  man  his  whole  body. 
Socrates  did  not  drink  the  poison  as  willingly  as  this  man 
submitted  himself  to  the  flames."  ^ 

After  Hus's  departure  from  Bohemia,  the  movement 
against  papacy  in  that  country  by  no  means  declined,  but 
rather  assumed  greater  dimensions.  Towards  the  end  of 
the  year  1414,  one  of  the  most  prominent  magisters  of  the 
University  of  Prague,  Jacobellus  of  Stribro,  first  publicly 
preached  the  doctrine  that,  according  to  Scripture,  the 
sacrament  should  be  received  in  both  kinds  by  laymen  as 
well  as  by  priests.  Jacobellus  and  his  friends  at  this  time 
also  began  to  dispense  communion  in  the  two  kinds.  This 
was  first  done  at  Prague  in  the  churches  of  St.  Michael,  St. 
Martin-in-the-Wall,  and  the  Bethlehem  chapel.  This 
practice  —  concerning  which  Hus  was  consulted,  and  to 
which  he  gave  his  approval — soon  became  the  characteristic 
article  of  faith  to  which  all  the  friends  of  Church  reform 
in  Bohemia  adhered.  The  chalice  indeed  became  their 
emblem,  and  the  nobles  opposed  to  the  Pope  were  known 
as  the  lords  "sub  utraque,"' whence  was  derived  the  word 
utraquist,  which,  till  the  suppression  of  religious  freedom  in 
Bohemia  after  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain  (1620), 
designated  one  of  the  parties  in  the  country. 

1  "The  independence  of  mind  with  which  this  learned  member  of 
tlie  papal  curia  (Poggio  Bracciolini)  dared  to  admire  the  heroism  of 
.  .  .  (Jerome)  and  proclaim  him.  worthy  of  immortality  is  truly 
remarkable.  But  what  was  it  he  admired  in  him  ?  Not  the  martyr, 
not  the  reformer — on  the  contrary,  he  asserts  that  if  Jerome  had  indeed 
said  anything  against  the  Catholic  faith  he  would  have  deserved  his 
punishment.  What  he  admired  in  him  was  the  courage  of  a  Cato  or  a 
Mutius  Scaevola  ;  he  extolled  his  clear,  sweet,  and  sonorous  voice,  the 
nobility  of  his  gestures,  so  well  adapted  either  to  express  indignation  or 
excite  compassion  ;  the  eloquence  and  learning  with  which  at  the  foot 
of  the  pile  he  quoted  Socrates,  Anaxagoras,  Plato,  and  the  Fathers  " 
(Prof.  Villari,  Life  of  Machiavelli). 

2  Poggii  Florentini  de  Hieronymi  HeretUi  Supflicio  Narratio 
Lionardo  Aretino  (first  [?]  printed  by  Von  der  Hardt,  Magnum 
Concilium  Oecumenicum  ;  then  with  the  Historia  Boheinica  of  Aenaeas 
Sylvius  in  Freherus  Scriptores  Rerum  Bohemicarum^  and  elsewhere). 


An  Historical  Sketch  T09 

It  is  almost  unnecessary  to  state  that  when  the  news  of 
the  execution  of  Hus  reached  Bohemia  the  greatest  excite- 
ment prevailed  in  the  country.  All  the  priests  at  Prague 
who  were  opposed  to  Hus  and  his  teaching  were  expelled 
from  their  parishes,  and  in  the  country  also  the  lords  of  the 
reform-party  appointed  Hussite  priests  to  the  livings  that 
were  in  their  gift,  expelling  the  form.er  Romanist  occupants. 
Bishop  John  of  Litomysl,  the  most  important  among  the 
adversaries  of  Hus,  who  was  accused  of  having  at  the 
Council  incited  foreigners  to  hatred  and  contempt  against 
his  country,  also  severely  felt  the  results  of  the  national 
movement.  His  vast  estates  were  forcibly  seized  by  the 
neighbouring  nobles,  so  that  he  was — as  Palacky  says — for 
the  first  time  relieved  from  all  cares  with  regard  to  temporal 
possessions. 

King  Venceslas  showed  great  displeasure  when  he  was 
informed  of  the  death  of  Hus.  Queen  Sophia  also  made 
no  secret  of  her  indignation  at  the  treacherous  cruelty  with 
which  her  confessor  had  been  treated.  The  nobles  and 
knights  of  Bohemia  assembled  without  delay  at  Prague 
(September  2,  141 5),  to  deHberate  on  the  perilous  situation 
of  the  country,  and  they  were  joined  by  a  large  number  of 
Moravian  nobles.  The  result  of  their  deliberations  was  a 
protest  against  the  execution  of  Hus  couched  in  the 
strongest  terms,^  which  was  forwarded  to  the  Council  of 
Constance.  It  was  immediately  signed  by  ninety-nine 
nobles  and  knights,  and  was  afterwards  sent  to  many 
sympathizers  who  had  not  been  able  to  be  present,  so  that 
it  finally  bore  the  signatures  or  seals  of  four  hundred  and 
fifty-two  lords  and  knights.  In  this  protest  the  Bohemians 
declared  that  the  Council  had  unjustly  executed  Hus,  "a 
good,  just  and  catholic  man  who  consistently  loathed  all 
errors  and  heresies."  They  further  complained  that  some 
traitors  had  unjustly  accused  the  Bohemians  of  being 
heretics.     This  letter  caused  great  indignation  among  the 

^  This  document  has  often  been  printed  under  the  name  of  Protestatio 
Bohemorum.  The  edition  published  by  Dr.  Loder,  and  printed  at 
Leipzig  in  1712,  contains  the  notice  that  Dr.  Loder  had  copied  it  at 
Oxford  from  an  English  manuscript  entitled:  **A  true  Copy  of  the 
Bohemian  Protestation  against  the  Council  of  Constance  for  burning 
of  John  Hus  and  Hieronymus  Prage  Conlrare  to  their  safe  conduct  they 
had  given.  Given  to  the  university  library  of  Oxfort,  Dec.  2,  1695,  by 
Mr.  Anderson,  Keeper  of  the  publick  Library  at  Edinburgk."  I  have 
retained  Dr.  Loder 's  spelling. 


no  Bohemia 

members  of  the  Council,  and  their  indignation  became  yet 
greater  when  the  news  reached  Constance  that  most  of  the 
nobles  and  knights  had,  a  few  days  after  their  first  protest, 
united  in  a  solemm  covenant  for  mutual  defence.  They 
pledged  themselves  to  defend  the  liberty  of  preaching  the 
word  of  God  on  their  estates ;  to  accept  no  orders  from  the 
Council ;  to  obey  the  future  Pope  and  the  bishops  of 
Bohemia,  but  only  should  their  commands  not  be  in  con- 
tradiction with  the  Scriptures ;  and  in  the  meanwhile  to 
recognize  the  University  of  Prague  as  the  supreme  authority 
in  all  matters  of  doctrine.  They  finally  pledged  themselves 
to  act  in  common  during  the  duration  of  the  covenant, 
which,  it  was  agreed,  was  for  the  present  to  be  of  six  years. 
King  Venceslas  himself  was  invited  to  join  the  covenant 
and  to  become  its  head  ;  but  he  declined  to  do  so,  probably 
out  of  fear  of  his  brother  Sigismund.  The  lords  who 
favoured  the  papal  party,  few  in  number,  but  among  whom 
were  some  of  the  most  powerful  nobles,  now  also  united  in 
a  league,  and  pledged  themselves  to  continue  obedient  to 
the  universal  Church  and  to  the  Council. 

The  answer  of  the  Council  to  the  declaration  of  the 
nobles  was  a  very  firm  one,  and  contained  nothing  con- 
ducive to  appeasing  the  excited  Bohemians.  Jacobellus  of 
Stribro  and  the  priests  who  shared  his  views,  as  well  as  the 
four  hundred  and  fifty-two  Bohemian  knights  and  nobles 
who  had  signed  the  protest,  were  summoned  to  appear  for 
judgment  before  the  Council.  It  was  with  difficulty  that 
King  Sigismund  prevented  the  Council  from  beginning 
proceedings  for  heresy  against  King  Venceslas  and  his 
consort.^ 

These  decrees  were  entirely  ineffective  as  regards  Bohemia, 
the  greater  part  of  that  country  having,  for  the  time  being, 
entirely  renounced  the  allegiance  of  the  Roman  Church. 
Though  the  archbishop  renewed  the  interdict  over  Prague, 
his  own  vicar-general,  Herman,  was  induced  by  the  supreme 
burgrave  Cenek,  Lord  of  VVartenberg,  to  consecrate  a  number 
of  new  priests  without  previously  requiring  from  them  the 
promise  that  they  would  not  distribute   the   sacrament  in 

^  The  act  of  accusation  against  Queen  Sophia,  which  had  aheady 
been  prepared,  accused  her  of  having  confirmed  Hus  and  other  heretics 
in  their  obstinacy  ;  of  having  treated  the  papal  decrees  with  open  con- 
tempt ;  and  of  having  expelled  the  Romanist  priests  from  her  private 
estates,  replacing  them  by  Plussites, 


An  Historical  Sketch  1 1 1 

both  kinds  to  laymen — a  promise  always  enacted  by  the 
Roman  Church. 

The  University  of  Prague,  accepting  the  important  position 
the  nobles  had  conferred  on  it,  declared  (141 7)  that  com- 
munion in  both  kinds  was  necessary  to  the  salvation  of  the 
soul,  and  it  shortly  afterwards  proclaimed  Hus  a  holy  martyr 
for  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  decreed  that  July  6,  the  day  of 
his  martyrdom,  should  be  consecrated  to  his  memory.^  The 
party  of  reform,  which  now  had  its  centre  in  the  university, 
favoured  by  the  king  and  queen,  and  supported  by  the  larger 
part  of  the  nobility  together  with  the  great  majority  of  the 
people,  was  in  a  very  favourable  position,  particularly  as  for 
the  present  no  immediate  danger  of  foreign  intervention  was 
to  be  apprehended. 

Unfortunately  for  Bohemia,  differences  of  opinion  soon 
began  to  spring  up  among  those  who  supported  the  cause 
of  Church  reform.  A  considerable  party  gradually  formed 
itself  in  Bohemia,  which,  in  direct  antagonism  to  the  Uni- 
versity of  Prague  (now  the  recognized  theological  centre  of 
the  country),  professed  doctrines  that  went  far  beyond  any- 
thing the  earlier  reformers  had  asserted.  This  advanced 
party  rejected  the  mass  and  all  the  sacraments,  except 
baptism  and  communion,  the  doctrine  of  the  existence  of 
purgatory,  and  many  of  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the 
Church.  Its  adherents  maintained  that  the  Holy  Bible 
was  the  sole  authority  in  all  matters  of  religious  belief.  This 
party — destined  afterwards  to  become  celebrated  under  the 
name  of  the  Taborites — had  its  centre  in  the  little  town  of 
Austi  or  Usti  on  the  river  Luznic,  near  the  spot  where  the 
town  of  Tabor  was  soon  to  arise.  The  University  of  Prague 
from  the  first  opposed  the  tenets  of  these  more  advanced 
reformers,  and  several  times  (141 7  and  1418)  issued  decrees 
informing  the  faithful  that  the  Christian  doctrine  was  con- 
tained, not  only  in  the  Bible,  but  also  in  the  traditions  of  the 
Church,  which  were  only  to  be  rejected  when  manifestly  in 
contradiction  to  Scripture.  These  differences  gradually  be- 
came more  accentuated,  and  the  dissentient  parties  received 

^  In  the  earliest  printed  Bohemian  almanacks,  some  of  which  are 
preserved  in  the  National  Museum  at  Prague,  the  6th  of  July  is  called 
the  Day  of  Commemoration  of  Master  John  Hus.  It  was  long  kept  as 
a  holiday,  and  in  1592  the  Roman  Catholic  Abbot  of  Emaus  (at  Prague) 
was  attacked  by  the  people  and  threatened  with  death  because  he  had 
let  some  of  his  labourers  work  in  his  vineyards  on  the  6th  of  July. 


112  Bohemia 

separate  denominations ;  the  moderate,  or,  as  Palacky  calls 
it,  the  aristocratic  party,  becoming  known  as  the  Calix- 
tines  or  Praguers,  the  town  and  university  of  Prague  being 
their  centre ;  while  the  more  advanced  or  democratic  party 
received  the  name  of  the  Taborites,  from  that  of  the  new 
town  which  was  founded  near  Austi.  These  local  denomina- 
tions must,  as  Palacky  tells  us,  not  be  taken  too  literally. 
Prague  contained  many  Taborites,  and  Austi  counted  some 
supporters  of  the  Calixtine  party  among  its  inhabitants. 

The  people  of  Bohemia  had,  by  this  time,  so  entirely  dis- 
sociated itself  from  the  doings  of  the  Council  of  Constance, 
that — writing  of  Bohemia  only — it  is  scarcely  necessary  to 
notice  its  further  deliberations.  The  Council  had  succes- 
sively deposed  John  XXIII,  Gregory  XII,  and  Benedict  XIII, 
and  elected  Martin  V,  who  became  undisputed  Pope.  The 
question  of  Church  reform,  which  the  Council  had  at  first 
undertaken  to  discuss,  was  entirely  discarded,  and  the 
Council  was  soon  (141 8)  closed  by  Pope  Martin  V. 

Before  leaving  Constance  the  Pope  confirmed  all  the 
former  decrees  of  the  Council  against  the  Bohemians.  He 
declared  all  those  who  still  maintained  the  doctrines,  which 
the  Council  had  condemned,  to  be  heretics.  He  further 
exhorted  Sigismund  to  use  his  influence  on  his  brother 
Venceslas,  to  compel  him  to  extirpate  heresy  in  his  domin- 
ions, and  he  seems  at  this  moment  already  to  have  meditated 
a  crusade  against  Bohemia. 

That  country  now  found  itself  entirely  isolated  m  Europe, 
while  the  larger  part  of  it — for  the  Germans  in  Bohemia 
had  always  upheld  the  cause  of  Rome — was  in  antagonism 
with  the  whole  Western  world.  The  separation  of  Bohemia 
from  Rome  may  be  said  to  have  lasted  over  two  hundred 
years,  though  the  position  of  the  country  became  a  different 
one  after  the  rise  of  Protestantism  in  Germany. 

Sigismund  was  not  long  in  obeying  the  Pope's  command. 
In  the  concluding  year  of  the  Council  of  Constance  (141 8) 
he  addressed  a  letter,  or  rather  a  public  manifesto — for  it 
was  widely  circulated  in  Bohemia — to  his  brother,  reminding 
him  of  his  reiterated  promises  to  allow  no  heresies  in  his 
dominions,  in  consequence  of  which  promises  Sigismund 
had  prevented  the  intended  excommunication  of  Venceslas. 
He  further  warned  him  of  the  severe  measures  and  the 
crusade  which  were  under  contemplation  to  reduce  Bohemia 
to  the  papal  authority ;  and  ended  by  declaring  that  should 


An  Historical  Sketch  113 

Venceslas  not  endeavour  to  extirpate  in  his  kingdom  all 
opinions  contrary  to  Rome,  he  would  no  longer  consider 
him  as  his  brother. 

It  would  have  required  a  firmer  mind  than  that  of 
Venceslas  not  to  have  been  greatly  agitated  by  the  menaces 
contained  in  this  letter  of  his  younger  brother.  His  position 
appeared  to  him  a  hopeless  one  should  he  have  to  encounter 
the  whole  force  of  Europe  in  a  crusade  (a  word  that  only 
lost  its  terror  during  the  subsequent  Hussite  wars),  for  not 
only  did  his  rule  extend  over  a  comparatively  limited  terri- 
tory, but  it  was  further  weakened  by  the  German  element 
in  the  towns,  which  always  furthered  foreign  intervention,  and 
by  the  seditious  attitude  of  the  extreme  adversaries  of  papacy. 

It  is,  therefore,  perhaps  not  surprising  that  Venceslas 
decided  to  comply  with  the  wishes  of  his  younger  brother, 
and  to  attempt,  as  far  as  lay  in  his  power,  to  restrain  the 
anti-papal  movement  in  Bohemia.  He  issued  a  decree 
ordaining  that  all  priests,  both  in  Prague  and  in  the  country, 
who  had  been  expelled  from  their  parishes  because  they 
refused  to  administer  the  sacrament  in  both  kinds,  should 
be  allowed  to  return  and  resume  their  functions.  This 
measure,  as  was  inevitable  in  consequence  of  the  excited 
condition  of  Bohemia,  caused  great  disorder.  Venceslas 
had,  however,  permitted  that  the  use  of  three  churches  in 
the  city  of  Prague  should  be  granted  to  those  who  received 
the  communion  in  both  kinds,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country  districts,  deserting  the  parish  churches  when  they 
were  again  under  the  direction  of  the  papal  clergy,  assembled 
on  the  hills  or  in  other  secluded  spots,  to  which  they  gave 
biblical  names,  such  as  Tabor,  Oreb,  the  Mount  of  Olives, 
and  others.  Here  the  religious  services  were  held  in  the 
Bohemian  language,  and  communion  administered  in  both 
kinds  by  the  Hussite  priests. 

The  fact  that  religious  service,  according  to  the  rites  then 
accepted  by  a  large  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of  Prague, 
was  limited  to  three  churches  in  the  town,  appeared  unfair 
to  the  townsmen,  and  Nicholas  of  Hus,^  one  of  the  courtiers 
of  King  Venceslas,  but  a  firm  adherent  of  the  Calixtine 
party,  became  their  leader.  When  Nicholas  was  march- 
ing through  the  streets  of  Prague  at  the  head  of  a  band 

^  The  similarity  of  names  led  many  of  the  older  writers  on  Bohemian 
history  to  the  quite  erroneous  supposition  that  he  was  a  relation  of 
John  Hus. 


114  Bohemia 

of  Calixtines,  he  accidentally  met  the  king,  to  whom  he 
addressed  an  earnest  petition  entreating  him  to  cause  a 
larger  number  of  churches  to  be  allotted  to  those  who 
communicated  in  both  kinds.  Venceslas  was  very  in- 
dignant at  this  attempt  to  extort  concessions  from  him, 
and  ordered  Nicholas  of  Hus  to  leave  Prague. 

Nicholas  retired  to  Austi,  where  a  large  number  of  the 
more  advanced  Church-reformers  and  many  priests,  who 
had  been  driven  from  their  parishes  by  the  decree  of 
Venceslas,  flocked  to  him.  On  a  hill  near  Austi,  probably 
on  the  site  of  the  present  town  of  Tabor,  a  large  assembly 
took  place  (July  22,  1419),  at  which  more  than  42,000 
people,  men  and  women  and  children  from  all  parts  of 
Bohemia,  and  even  from  Moravia,  were  present.  Even 
Roman  Catholic  writers  describe  this  first  great  meeting 
of  the  Taborites  as  a  most  imposing  event.  From  all 
directions  bands  of  Taborites  marched  to  the  trysting- 
place,  priests  carrying  the  sacrament  heading  the  proces- 
sion. They  were  enthusiastically  received  by  those  already 
assembled  on  the  hill,  and  welcomed  as  ** brothers"  and 
"  sisters."  The  whole  day  was  spent  in  prayers,  in  confes- 
sion and  communion,  the  strictest  order  being  maintained. 
There  is,  however,  little  doubt  that  Nicholas  of  Hus  availed 
himself  of  this  opportunity  to  deliberate  with  the  leaders  of 
the  assembled  multitude  as  to  the  steps  they  were  to  take 
to  defend  their  faith  against  the  authorities  at  Prague.  It 
is  certain  that  at  the  court  of  Venceslas  the  design  of  seiz- 
ing the  Bohemian  crown  with  the  aid  of  the  more  advanced 
religious  reformers  was  seriously  attributed  to  Nicholas  of 
Hus. 

Trouble  nearer  home  was  destined  to  put  an  end  to  the 
life  of  King  Venceslas  before  the  plans  of  Nicholas  had 
arrived  at  any  sort  of  maturity.  On  July  30,  141 9,  when  a 
procession  of  Calixtines,  led  by  the  priest  John  of  Zelivo 
who  (as  had  now  become  the  custom)  carried  the  holy 
Sacrament,  marched  through  the  streets  of  Prague,  a  stone 
was  thrown  at  priest  John  from  one  of  the  windows  of  the 
town-hall  of  the  Nove  Mesto  (new  town).  The  exasperated 
people,  led  by  one  of  the  king's  courtiers,  John  ^izka  of 
Trocnov,  stormed  the  town-hall,  and  the  burgomaster  and 
several  of  the  town-councillors  were  thrown  from  the  win- 
dows, those  of  them  who  survived  the  fall  being  killed  by 
the  crowd  in  the  market-place  below. 


An  Historical  Sketch  115 

As  we  here  first  meet  with  John  2^izka  of  Trocnov,  to 
whom  it  was  undoubtedly  due  that  the  Hussite  movement 
did  not  collapse  at  once,  and  that  Bohemia  was  enabled 
to  resist  the  whole  of  Europe  in  arms  against  her,  it  will  be 
well  shortly  to  notice  the  early  life  of  the  great  warrior.  ^ 

John  ^izka  was  born  about  the  year  1378,  probably  at 
Trocnov,  a  small  estate  in  Southern  Bohemia,  which  was 
the  seat  of  his  family.  Hardly  anything  is  known  of  his 
early  youth  except  that  he  was  engaged  in  hereditary  feuds 
with  the  Lords  of  Rosenberg,  then  the  most  powerful  nobles 
in  Southern  Bohemia.  About  the  year  141 2  he  became 
attached  to  the  royal  court,  in  all  probability  as  chamberlain 
of  Queen  Sophia;  he  had  at  that  time  already  lost  the 
use  of  one  eye,  probably  fighting  for  the  king  against  the 
Bohemian  nobles,  in  one  of  the  many  contests  which 
occupied  so  large  a  part  of  the  earlier  years  of  the  reign 
of  King  Venceslas.  Zizka  only  followed  the  example  of 
the  great  majority  of  the  courtiers  of  Venceslas  in  joining 
the  party  of  reform,  of  which  he  immediately  became  (and 
continued  to  be  until  his  death)  a  thorough  and  disinterested 
supporter.  His  previous  knowledge  and  experience  of  war- 
fare at  once  designated  him  as  the  natural  leader  of  a  party 
which  was  directed  by  priests,  and  which  consisted  mostly 
of  peasants,  small  landowners,  and  townsmen,  entirely  un- 
used to  the  system  of  v/arfare  that  was  practised  in  those 
days. 

^izka,  who  undoubtedly  was  the  greatest  military  genius 
of  his  age,2  immediately  saw  the  difficulty  of  opposing  his 
forces,  consisting  almost  entirely  of  infantry,  to  the  attack 
of  heavily-armed  horsemen.  A  flail  mounted  with  iron,  a 
club,  or  a  short  spear  were  the  arms  with  which  the  peasants 
and  citizens  were  in  the  habit  of  fighting,  and  with  such  men 

1  The  standard  authority  regarding  Zizka  is  now  Professor  Tomek, 
whose  Jan  Zizka  was  published  (in  Bohemian)  in  1879,  The  learned 
professor  has  since  published  some  additions  to  this  biography  in  the 
Casopis  Mtisea  Ceskeho  for  1892.  The  history  of  the  great  Bohemian 
warrior  had  formerly  been  completely  obscured  by  legends  and  more  or 
less  absurd  inventions.  ^Palacky  makes  the  interesting  remark  that, 
of  those  who  wrote  of  Zizka  before  circumstances  permitted  serious 
study  of  the  period  of  the  Hussite  wars,  only  George  Sand,  with  singular 
intuition,  grasped  some  of  the  traits  of  the  character  of  Zizka  in  her  short 
work  entitled  Jean  Zyska,  though  her  only  authority  was  Lenfant's 
Guerre  des  Hussites. 

*  Palacky,  with  but  slight  exaggeration,  calls  him  the  originator  of 
modem  tactics. 


ii6  Bohemia 

and  such  weapons  he  was  now  to  prepare  to  encounter  the 
chivalry  of  Europe. 

The  hradba  vozova  (wagon-fort  or  lager  of  wagons),^  it 
not  absolutely  Zizka's  invention  became,  entirely  through 
him,  a  serious  feature  in  Bohemian  warfare.  From  the 
scanty  and  contradictory  accounts  that  have  reached  us  it 
appears  that  the  wagons  or  chariots  of  the  Bohemian  armies 
were  linked  together  by  strong  iron  chains,  and  were  used 
not  only  for  defence,  but  also  for  offensive  movements.  All 
the  warriors,  except  the  few  horsemen  as  well  as  the  women 
and  children  who  accompanied  the  armies,  found  shelter  in 
these  wagons,  which  in  time  of  battle  were  generally  formed 
in  four  lines  or  columns.  The  wagons  were  covered  with 
steel  or  iron — iron-clad,  to  use  a  modern  term — and  the 
best  marksmen  were  placed  next  to  the  driver  of  each  of 
them.  In  case  of  defeat,  the  wagons  formed  what  was 
practically  a  fortified  entrenchment.  When  an  offensive 
movement  was  undertaken,  the  drivers  of  the  wagons  at  one 
end  of  the  line  of  battle  attempted  to  outflank  the  enemy, 
and  after  Zizka's  men  had  become  accustomed  to  warfare, 
often  succeeded  in  doing  so.  It  may  be  noticed  that  the 
wide  plains  of  Bohemia,  which  then — as  now — were  little 
intersected  by  ditches  or  fences,  offered  every  advantage  to 
this  novel  system  of  warfare.  Zizka  also  seems  to  have 
given  his  attention  to  fire-arms,  as  the  picked  marksmen 
whom  he  placed  next  to  the  drivers  of  the  wagons  soon 
became  the  terror  of  the  Germans,  through  the  precision  of 
their  fire,  whilst  the  few  and  unwieldy  field-pieces  which 
accompanied  the  Bohemian  armies  were  yet  far  superior  to 
anything  the  Germans  and  other  enemies  could  then  bring 
to  battle  against  them.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  success 
of  Zizka,  in  creating  out  of  a  crowd  of  townsmen,  small 
farmers,  and  farm-labourers  an  almost  invincible  army,  at  the 
head  of  which  he  defeated  the  bravest  knights  and  warriors 
of  Europe,  is  almost  unique  in  history.  It  is  perhaps 
fantastic   to    suggest   some   resemblance    between    Oliver 

*  Since  writing  the  above  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  reading  Mr. 
Hereford  B.  George's  interesting  work  entitled,  Battles  of  Eno^lish 
History.  I  here  find  that  at  the  * '  Battle  of  the  Herrings  "  (1429)  Sir  John 
Fastolf,  who  commanded  the  English  troops,  "formed  his  wagons  in 
square,  within  which  extemporized  fort  his  men  stood  on  the  defensive." 
Mr.  George  very  truly  remarks  that  "  the  lager,  which  is  a  feature  now 
well  known  of  African  warfare,  is  the  same  thing  in  principle." 


An  Historical  Sketch  117 

Cromwell  and  the  one-eyed  leader  of  the  Bohemian  people,^ 
though  ^izka's  piety  and  simplicity,  his  sincerity  for  what 
he  considered  the  welfare  of  his  country,  his  unbending 
sternness  towards  those  whom  he  considered  as  God's 
enemies,  have  a  strong  element  of  the  Puritan  about 
them. 

It  is  certain  that  2izka  felt  more  keenly  than  most 
Bohemians  the  news  of  the  death  (or,  as  he  no  doubt 
regarded  it,  the  murder)  of  Hus.^  It  is  said  that  King 
Venceslas,  noticing  one  day  at  court  that  Zizka  seemed 
melancholy  and  absorbed  in  thought,  asked  him  the  cause 
of  his  depression.  Zizka  answered  :  "  How  can  I  be  gay 
when  our  trusted  leaders  and  the  faithful  teachers  of  the 
law  of  the  Lord  are,  by  the  order  of  infidel  priests,  un- 
deservedly and  unjustly  condemned  to  the  flames?"  The 
king  answered  :  "  Dear  John,  what  can  we  say  to  that  ?  Can 
we  alter  that  ?  If  you  know  of  any  way  to  do  so,  right  it 
yourself.  We  shall  be  pleased."  Zizka  took  the  king  at  his 
word,  and  said  with  his  permission  he  would  do  so.^ 

If  this  report  as  to  his  momentary  feelings  is  correct — of 
which  there  is  no  doubt — Venceslas  did  not  long  remain  in 
the  same  frame  of  mind.  When  the  news  of  the  defenestra- 
tion of  the  burgomaster  and  of  other  officials  of  the  new 
town  of  Prague  reached  the  king  at  the  neighbouring  castle 
of  Kunuratic,  his  fury  was  so  great  that  he  was  seized  with 
a  slight  apoplectic  attack. 

He  now  wrote  to  King  Sigismund  inviting  him  to  come 
to  Bohemia  to  aid  him  in  maintaining  the  royal  authority ; 
but  before  his  brother  could  arrive,  a  renewed  fit  of  apoplexy 
put  an  end  to  the  life  of  King  Venceslas  (August  i6,  1419). 
Little  need  be  said  as  to  this  Bohemian  king.  The  un- 
certainty of  purpose  which  was  the  most  characteristic 
feature  of  his  character  is  evident  even  from  this  slight 
notice  of  his  life.  His  intentions  were  generally  good,  and 
he  was  by  no  means  as  devoid  of  intelligence  as  has  often  been 
stated  by  his  detractors.     In  the  last  years  of  his  life  his 

^  When  first  writing  this,  I  was  quite  unaware  of  the  faj:t  that  the  late 
Bishop  Creighton  had  some  time  previously  compared  Zizka  to  Oliver 
Cromwell . 

2  The  tale  that  Zizka,  standing  beneath  the  oak-tree  under  Avhich  he 
had  been  born,  swore  eternal  vengeance  to  the  murderers  of  Hus,  is 
merely  a  legend.  It  has  furnished  the  Austrian  poet  Lenau  with  the 
subject  of  one  of  the  finest  scenes  of  his  Bilder  aus  dem  HussiUnkriege. 

'  Tomek,yflw  Zizka. 


ii8  Bohemia 

consort  Queen  Sophia  acquired  a  very  favourable  influence 
over  him. 

It  is  certain  that  he  oppressed  Bohemia  with  taxation  less 
than  many  other  sovereigns,  and  therefore  was  popular  with 
the  people  during  his  whole  life. 

The  news  of  the  death  of  the  king  caused  renewed  dis- 
turbances at  Prague.  The  churches  and  convents  which 
were  in  the  hands  of  the  Romanist  clergy  were  attacked,  and 
the  priests  and  monks  driven  out  of  them.  A  great  part  of 
the  higher  clergy,  and  most  of  the  German  inhabitants,  who 
were  almost  all  opposed  to  the  national  or  reform  party,  now 
fled  from  Prague.  Disturbances  also  broke  out  in  all  the 
towns  where  the  population  was  Bohemian,  specially  at 
Kralove  Hradec,  Laun,  and  Pisek.  These  troubles  rendered 
necessary  the  presence  of  Sigismund,  over  whose  religious 
views  great  uncertainty  at  first  prevailed.  Nobles  of  both 
parties  assembled  at  Prague,  and  begged  King  Sigismund, 
as  heir  to  the  throne,  to  proceed  to  Bohemia  as  soon  as 
possible.  A  petition  was  also  signed  begging  the  king  to 
grant  to  the  Estates  and  to  the  people  permission  to  continue 
to  receive  the  communion  in  both  kinds.  The  king  was 
further  requested  to  use  his  influence  with  the  Pope  to 
induce  him  to  revoke  the  interdict,  and  to  grant  the 
Bohemians  liberty  to  receive  the  sacrament  in  that  manner 
in  which  their  consciences  required  them  to  do  so.  Sigis- 
mund gave  an  evasive  answer,  merely  saying  that  he  would 
rule  as  did  his  father,  Charles  IV,  whose  memory  he  knew 
to  be  very  popular  in  the  land.  His  appointment  of  Queen 
Sophia  as  regent,  and  of  Cenek  of  Wartenberg  as  her  first 
counsellor,  were,  however,  considered  conciliatory.  Queen 
Sophia's  Hussite  sympathies  were  well  known,  whilst 
Cenek  was  then  considered  a  utraquist,  though  it  is  not  easy 
to  know  what  were  the  real  opinions  of  a  man  who  changed 
sides  twice  within  a  year.  The  nobles  of  the  utraquist  or 
Calixtine  party  were  therefore  for  the  present  in  favour  of  a 
peaceful  policy,  hoping  that  when  Sigismund  arrived  in 
Bohemia  he  would  see  the  necessity  of  tolerance  towards 
a  party  to  which  the  large  majority  of  the  nobles  and  knights 
belonged,  as  also  the  town  population — with  the  exception 
of  the  Germanized  citizens  of  some  towns— and  almost  the 
whole   of  the  peasantry. 

The  more  advanced  reformers  judged  the  intentions  of 
Sigismund  differently,  and,  as  events  proved,  more  correctly. 


An  Historical  Sketch  119 

The  meetings  of  the  adherents  of  the  extreme  party,  the 
first  of  which,  held  near  Austi,  has  already  been  mentioned, 
still  continued ;  the  movement  soon  spread  all  over  Bohemia 
and  parts  of  Moravia  ;  and  the  endeavours  even  of  the  utra- 
quist  nobles  to  calm  the  people  were  ineffectual.  These 
meetings  took  the  place  of  the  pilgrimages  to  which  the 
Bohemian  peasants  had  been  accustomed,  and  they  flocked 
to  them  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  deserting  home  and 
hearth.  A  sort  of  religious  mania,  which  the  contemporary 
writers  ascribed  to  a  peculiar  collocation  of  the  stars,  seized 
on  the  people  of  Bohemia.  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  more 
than  probable  that  Zizka  of  Trocnov,  Nicholas  of  Hus,  and 
the  other  leaders,  who  were  already  certain  that  they  would 
shortly  have  to  resist  the  armed  forces  of  Sigismund,  viewed 
with  favour  these  meetings,  which  kept  their  men  in  touch 
with  each  other,  and  prevented  their  dispersing. 

At  a  meeting  held  near  Prague  on  the  day  of  St.  Venceslas 
(September  28),  the  Taborites  decided  to  hold  their  next 
assembly  in  Prague  itself,  and  fixed  its  date  for  November  10. 
Though  the  great  mass  of  the  enthusiasts  this  time  also 
spent  the  days  in  prayers  and  devotion,  there  is  little 
doubt  that  the  leaders  held  a  serious  consultation,  and  on 
that  day  decided  to  obtain  possession  of  Prague. 

Queen  Sophia  was  probably  informed  of  their  intentions. 
She  obtained  aid  from  several  of  the  utraquist  lords,  and 
also  assembled  a  large  body  of  German  mercenaries. 
Doubtless,  in  consequence  of  the  arrival  of  these  mer- 
cenaries, the  people  of  Prague  rose  up  in  arms  (October  25) 
and  obtained  possession  of  the  old  castle  on  the  Vyse- 
hrad,  the  most  ancient  seat  of  the  Bohemian  sovereigns, 
possibly  with  the  connivance  of  the  soldiers  of  the  former 
bodyguard  of  King  Venceslas,  who  were  quartered  there. 
Meanwhile,  some  days  before  November  10,  armed  bands 
of  Taborites  began  to  arrive  in  Prague  from  every  direction. 
The  citizens  of  Prague,  encouraged  by  their  first  success 
and  by  the  arrival  of  the  Taborites,  now  led  by  Zizka  and 
Nicholas  of  Hus,  began  further  hostilities  against  the  troops 
of  Queen  Sophia.  They  attacked  the  quarter  known  as  the 
"  Mala  Strana,"  near  which  the  royal  palace  of  the  Hradcany 
is  situated.  The  attacking  party  were  received  with  dis- 
charges of  artillery,  then  still  a  great  novelty  in  Bohemia, 
and  very  bloody  street-fighting  ensued  (November  4,  141 9). 
"  It  was  a  night  of  fear  and  terror,  sorrow  and  lamentation, 


I20  Bohemia 

only  to  be  compared  to  the  day  of  the  last  judgment."^ 
The  citizens  of  Prague  were,  on  the  whole,  successful,  but 
they  failed  to  obtain  possession  of  the  royal  castle  of  the 
Hradcany,  from  which,  when  it  was  first  attacked.  Queen 
Sophia  had  fled.  The  situation  of  the  town,  however, 
remained  a  perilous  one.  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  who  in 
the  absence  of  Queen  Sophia  had  assumed  the  entire 
government  of  the  country,  requested  and  received  aid  from 
numerous  knights  and  nobles,  and  the  German  towns  of 
Bohemia  also  sent  large  forces  to  his  aid. 

A  large  part  of  the  "  small  quarter  "  of  Prague,  and  many 
buildings  in  other  parts  of  the  town,  had  been  burnt  down, 
and  the  citizens  were  anxious  to  obtain  at  least  temporary 
tranquillity.  An  armistice  was  therefore  concluded  (Novem- 
ber 13,  141 9)  without  much  difficulty.  The  utraquist 
nobles  promised  to  unite  with  the  Praguers  in  defending  the 
right  of  communion  in  both  kinds,  while  the  Praguers  again 
gave  up  the  castle  of  Vysehrad  to  Queen  Sophia.  Zizka, 
who  disapproved  even  of  this  temporary  compromise,  left 
Prague  with  his  followers  and  marched  to  Pilsen,  where  at 
that  time  a  considerable  part  of  the  population  was  in  favour 
of  the  Taborite  cause. 

On  hearing  of  the  disturbances  in  Bohemia  King  Sigis- 
mund,  who  was  then  in  Hungary,  abandoned  his  intended 
campaign  against  the  Turks,  and  hastened  to  Moravia. 
Shortly  after  his  arrival  at  Brno  (December  141 9)  Queen 
Sophia  met  him  there,  together  with  many  nobles — both  of 
the  utraquist  and  of  the  Romanist  party — and  envoys  of  the 
town  of  Prague.  King  Sigismund  again  gave  evasive 
answers  to  the  many  questions  as  to  his  religious  policy 
which  were  addressed  to  him.  He  declared  that  he  re- 
served his  decision  till  he  should  have  arrived  at  Prague. 
He  requested  the  lords  of  the  utraquist  party  to  refrain 
meanwhile  from  all  attempts  to  coerce  those  of  their  depend- 
ents who  were  of  the  Romanist  party.  He  also  requested 
the  envoys  of  the  town  of  Prague  to  cause  all  the  street 
fortifications  which  had  been  erected  there  during  the 
recent  disturbances  to  be  removed.  Queen  Sophia  now 
resigned  the  functions  of  regent,  which  she  had  only 
exercised  during  the  last  few  troublous  months,  and  King 
Sigismund,  for  the  present,  entrusted  Cenek  of  Wartenberg 
with  the  government  of  Bohemia. 

1  Palacky,  quoting  from  a  contemporary  writer. 


An  Historical  Sketch  121 

King  Sigismund  did  not,  as  had  been  expected,  im- 
mediately repair  to  Prague,  where  he  should  have  been 
crowned  as  king,  according  to  the  institutions  of  the 
country,  but  travelled  to  Silesia  (about  January  1420). 
There  is  little  doubt  that  he  did  not  wish  to  enter  Bohemia 
before  he  had  collected  sufficient  forces  to  become  absolute 
master  of  the  land,  and  thus  be  able  to  rule  it  according  to 
the  Pope's  desire,  suppressing  all  opinions  and  practices 
contrary  to  the  doctrines  of  Rome. 

Quiet  returned  to  Prague  for  the  moment.  The  fortifica- 
tions and  barricades  were  removed,  and  many  Germans  and 
other  adherents  of  Rome  returned  to  the  city.  That  party, 
relying  on  the  support  of  Sigismund,  now  assumed  a  more 
aggressive  attitude,  and  began  to  persecute  its  opponents. 
In  several  towns  the  utraquists  were  attacked,  but  the 
miners  of  Kutna  Hora,  mostly  Germans  and  fanatical 
adherents  of  Rome,  surpassed  all  others  in  cruelty.  They 
seized  all  utraquists  in  and  near  the  town,  and  threw  them 
alive  into  one  of  the  deepest  shafts  of  the  silver  mines,  which 
in  mockery  they  called  Tabor.  We  are  told  that  theii 
leaders  had  at  first  caused  the  utraquists  to  be  decapitated, 
but  that  the  executioners  refused  to  continue  their  work,  so 
numerous  were  those  who  were  condemned  to  death.  In 
the  course  of  a  few  months  about  1600  prisoners  were 
thrown  into  the  pit  of  Kutna  Hora. 

Meanwhile  Zizka,  who  had  disapproved  of  the  truce  which 
the  Praguers  had  concluded  with  King  Sigismund,  had 
marched  to  Plzefi,^  which  town  he  seems  at  first  to  have 
intended  to  make  the  stronghold  of  his  party.  In  the 
southern  parts  of  Bohemia  some  of  Zizka's  adherents,  led 
by  a  bell-founder  named  Hromadka,  had  surprised  and 
stormed  the  small  town  of  Austi  (February  21,  1420).  Not 
finding  the  situation  of  the  town  sufficiently  strong,  they 
removed  to  a  position  about  an  hour  from  Austi,  where  a 
castle  named  Hradiste  was  situated  in  a  very  commanding 
position.  They  immediately  began  to  fortify  the  land  round 
this  castle,  and  a  town  quickly  sprung  up  to  which  they  gave 
the  biblical  name  of  Tabor.  Hromadka  informed  Zizka  of 
this,  asking  him  to  send  aid  to  Tabor,  as  he  expected 
shortly  to  be  attacked,  ^izka  willingly  consented,  perhaps 
already  intending  to  make  the  new  town  the  stronghold  of 
his  party.  Plis  position  at  Pilsen  had  become  critical ;  he 
1  In  German  "Pilsen." 
E  2 


122  Bohemia 

was  besieged  by  a  large  army  of  the  adherents  of  King 
Sigismund,  while  the  Romanist  inhabitants  of  the  town 
were  strongly  hostile,  and  even  his  own  soldiers  were  losing 
confidence.  Zizka  was  therefore  glad  to  be  able  to  come  to 
terms  with  Venceslas  of  Duba,  the  commander  of  the 
besieging  forces.  A  treaty  was  concluded  through^  the 
intervention  of  the  citizens  of  Prague,  by  which  Zizka 
surrendered  Pilsen  on  condition  that  the  right  of  receiving 
the  communion  in  both  kinds  should  be  retained  in  the 
town,  and  that  he  and  his  followers  should  be  allowed  to 
march  to  Tabor  without  hindrance.  The  Roman  Catholic 
inhabitants  alone  remained  in  the  town,  and  Pilsen  hence- 
forth became  the  great  stronghold  of  the  papal  party  in 
Bohemia. 

Zizka  set  out  for  Tabor  with  only  four  hundred  warriors, 
twelve  equipped  wagons,  and  nine  horsemen.  A  large 
number  of  women  and  children  accompanied  the  expedi- 
tion. On  their  way  they  were  attacked,  near  the  village  of 
Sudomef,  by  Catholic  bands  who  were  marching  to  risinforce 
the  army  before  Pilsen,  and  who  did  not  consider  them- 
selves bound  by  the  truce  concluded  with  Zizka.  The 
enemies  consisted  of  two  thousand  horsemen,  all  wearing 
heavy  armour,  and  who  were  consequently  known  as  the 
"iron  men."  Zizka,  as  soon  as  he  saw  that  there  was  no 
hope  of  evading  the  unequal  combat,  drew  up  his  little 
army  near  one  of  the  fish-ponds  that  are  very  numerous  in 
that  part  of  Bohemia,  in  a  position  in  which  one  of  his 
flanks  was  protected  by  a  steep  dyke.  The  war-chariots 
were  drawn  up  in  a  line  that  faced  the  foe,  and  the  enemy 
were  obliged  to  dismount  to  attack  Zizka's  position.  He  is 
said  to  have  ordered  the  Taborite  women  to  spread  out 
their  long  veils  on  the  ground,  hoping  that  the  heavy  spurs 
of  the  enemy's  dismounted  horsemen  would  catch  in  them. 
The  Taborites  defended  themselves  with  desperate  courage, 
and  though  a  few  were  made  prisoners,  they  succeeded  in 
beating  off  the  attacking  forces.  The  skirmish,  which  was 
very  bloody,  lasted  till  sunset,  when  the  Catholics  retired. 
Darkness  set  in  earlier  than  usual  at  that  time  of  the  year, 
and  the  pious  Taborites  thought  that  God  had  ordained 
this  for  their  protection.  The  skirmish  at  Sudomef  (March 
25,  J420)  was  the  first  fight  in  the  open  field  during  the 
Hussite  wars,  and  it  established  Zizka's  reputation  as  a 
leader,     ^izka  and  his  band  encamped  on  the  battle-field 


An  Historical  Sketch  123 

in  sign  of  victory,  and  continued  their  march  next  day  with- 
out further  attack.  When  they  arrived  near  Tabor  they 
were  met  by  a  large  number  of  "brethren"  who  were 
marching  to  their  aid,  and  these  conducted  ^izka  into  the 
new  stronghold  with  great  honours  and  rejoicings.^ 

Tabor  now  became  the  stronghold  and  centre  of  all  those 
who  most  energetically  opposed  the  government  of  King 
Sigismund.  Townsmen,  peasants,  and  even  nobles  from  all 
parts  of  Bohemia  flocked  to  the  new  town,  in  which  no 
differences  of  rank  were  recognized,  and,  following  the 
example  of  the  primitive  Christians,  all  were  "  brothers  and 
sisters."  All  the  advanced  opponents  of  Rome  among  the 
clergy  also  assembled  at  Tabor,  where,  besides  establishing 
communion  in  both  kinds,  they  organized  religious  services 
which  in  many  ways  differed  from  the  customs  of  the 
Church  of  Rome.  All  vestments  were  prohibited,  the 
priests  officiating  in  ordinary  clothes.  The  use  of  Latin  in 
Church  services  was  alsp  abolished,  and  was  replaced  by  the 
Bohemian  language. 

The  accounts  we  possess  as  to  the  internal  constitution  of 
the  community  of  Tabor  are  unfortunately  both  insufficient 
and  contradictory.  The  organization  was  undoubtedly  a 
military  one,  and  almost  immediately  after  Zizka's  arrival 
at  Tabor  four  captains  ("  heytmane  "  in  Bohemian)  were 
chosen,  of  whom  he,  of  course,  was  one.  We  also  find  the 
name  of  Nicholas  of  Hus  among  the  first  captains  of  the 
Taborites.  Besides  the  military  leaders,  the  most  pro- 
minent and  popular  among  the  clergy  exercised  a  great, 
though  ill-defined,  influence  over  the  community  of  Tabor. 

Zizka,  immediately  after  his  arrival  at  Tabor,  undertook 
a  thorough  military  organization  of  his  followers,  most  of 
whom  had  no  previous  military  training,  and  were  merely 
religious  enthusiasts.  From  among  them  he  soon  formed 
an  almost  invincible  army.  Several  small  but  invariably 
successful  raids  against  the  neighbouring  lords  of  the 
Catholic  party  soon  gave  them  greater  self-confidence. 

Zizka  had  indeed  no  time  to  lose  if  he  hoped  successfully 

^  I  am  principally  indebted  for  these  notes  on  the  foundation  of 
Tabor  and  the  skirmish  of  Sudomer  to  Professor  Tomek's  Life  of  Zizka, 
the  most  graphic  and  accuiate  account  of  the  campaigns  of  the  great 
Hussite  leader.  I  much  regret  that  want  of  space  will  not  allow  me  to 
borrow  more  largely  from  this  interesting  work,  written  in  what  is  in 
Western  Europe  practically  an  "unknown  tongue." 


124  Bohemia 

to  resist  the  onslaught  of  King  Sigismund.  In  accordance 
with  the  king,  Pope  Martin  V  had,  on  March  i,  1420, 
proclaimed  a  crusade  against  Bohemia,  calling  the  whole 
Christian  world  to  arms  against  that  nation,  and  promising 
the  usual  indulgences.  A  great  number  of  German  princes 
joined  Sigismund  at  Breslau  to  concert  as  to  the  coming 
campaign,  and  volunteers  from  almost  every  country  of 
Europe  rallied  round  the  standard  of  the  cross. 

When  the  news  of  the  intended  crusade  reached  Bohemia 
indignation  was  general.  For  a  time  even  the  most 
moderate  utraquists  were  prepared  to  resist  the  attacks  of 
King  Sigismund.  The  terms  of  crusade,  which,  it  was  said, 
should  only  have  been  employed  in  warfare  against  pagans 
or  Mahomedans,  and  which  stigmatized  the  whole  country 
as  heretical,  incensed  every  Bohemian  against  Sigismund, 
to  whose  influence  the  decree  was  attributed.  The  highest 
official  of  the  land,  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  had  been  present 
at  the  deliberations  of  Breslau,  but  now  thoroughly  aware 
of  the  feelings  of  the  court  of  Sigismund,  he  decided  "as 
a  Bohemian  and  a  Hussite"  to  throw  in  his  cause  with 
that  of  his  country.  He  concluded  an  alliance  with  the 
Praguers,  and  issued  a  proclamation  to  the  country  in  the 
name  of  the  whole  utraquist  nobility.  This  document 
warned  all  Bohemians  and  Moravians  against  obeying  any 
orders  of  Sigismund,  King  of  Germany  and  Hungary,  who 
was  the  enemy  of  the  Bohemian  nation,  and  who  had  not 
been  crowned  king  (of  Bohemia). 

The  consequences  of  this  proclamation  probably  went  far 
beyond  the  expectations  of  Wartenberg.  The  whole  people 
of  Bohemia  rose  in  arms,  and  in  many  places  vented  their 
rage  on  the  papal  clergy.  Large  numbers  of  churches  and 
convents  in  all  parts  of  Bohemia  were  plundered  and  burnt, 
and  in  retribution  of  the  cruelties  of  the  Catholics  at  Kutna 
Hora  and  elsewhere,  several  Catholic  priests  and  monks 
suffered  the  same  death  as  Hus. 

Sigismund,  whose  allies  were  slowly  moving  onward  from 
all  countries,  had  meanwhile  entered  Bohemia  from  Silesia, 
and  captured  the  town  of  Kralove  Hradec  without  much 
resistance.  From  there  he  marched  to  Kutna  Hora,  where 
the  German  inhabitants  had  already  proved  themselves 
zealous  adherents  of  the  papal  cause. 

The  cruelties  practised  on  Catholic  priests,  and  the 
barbarous   destruction   of  churches    and  convents,    which' 


An  Historical  Sketch  125 

contained  most  of  the  finest  art  treasures  of  Bohemia, 
caused  great  displeasure  to  the  more  moderate  opponents 
of  the  papal  cause.  When  Sigismund,  therefore,  sent 
envoys  to  Prague  to  treat  for  a  truce  in  view  of  a  pacifica- 
tion of  the  country,  he  found  a  willing  hearing  with  Cenek 
of  Wartenberg.  Cenek,  deserting  the  party  he  had  so 
recently  joined,  concluded  a  private,  and  at  first  secret, 
treaty  with  the  king.  On  the  conditions  of  an  amnesty  for 
himself  and  for  his  children,  and  the  guarantee  of  freedom 
to  all  the  tenants  on  his  estates  to  continue  to  receive  com- 
munion in  both  kinds,  he  abandoned  the  cause  of  the 
Praguers,  and  even  admitted  the  king's  troops  into  the 
royal  castle  on  the  Hradcany.  The  first  result  of  this  step 
was  a  renewal  of  the  street-fighting  at  Prague,  as  the  citizens 
attempted  to  storm  the  castle,  but  were  repulsed  by  the 
troops  of  Cenek.  An  attack  the  Praguers  made  on  the 
Vysehrad  castle  was  also  repulsed  by  the  garrison  which 
held  it  for  King  Sigismund.  During  these  repeated  struggles 
in  the  streets  a  large  part  of  the  "  small  quarter "  (Mala 
Strana)  of  Prague,  and  of  that  part  of  the  "  new  town  " 
which  lies  at  the  foot  of  the  Vysehrad  were  burnt. 

These  events  inspired  the  citizens  with  a  desire  for  peace, 
and  they  decided  to  send  envoys  to  Sigismund.  The  king, 
who  was  then  at  Kutna  Hora  in  the  midst  of  a  population 
entirely  devoted  to  the  papal  cause,  not  improbably, 
judging  the  general  feeling  by  his  immediate  surroundings, 
over-rated  the  strength  of  that  party.  He  received  the 
deputies  of  Prague  very  haughtily,  and  again  ordered  them 
to  remove  all  the  street  barricades,  and  to  deliver  up  all 
their  arms  to  his  troops  in  the  castles  of  Hraddany  and 
Vysehrad.  It  was  only  after  every  show  of  resistance  had 
ceased  that  the  king  was  prepared  to  let  the  citizens  know 
what  degree  of  mercy  would  be  shown  them. 

This  demand  of  unconditional  surrender  could  not  even 
be  considered  by  the  envoys  of  Prague,  who  were  indeed 
among  the  most  moderate  adherents  of  the  utraquist  party, 
but  who  had  at  home  to  fear  the  opposition  of  a  large  part 
of  the  townsmen,  headed  by  many  of  the  priests,  and  these 
had  from  the  first  declared  all  hopes  of  an  agreement  with 
Sigismund  to  be  futile.  War  to  death  became  t;he  watch- 
word, and  the  Praguers  applied  for  aid  to  all  the  nobles  and 
towns  who  had  not  already  submitted  to  Sigismund.  Their 
most  important  decision,  however,  was  to  sink  all  difference 


126  Bohemia 

of  opinion  in  view  of  the  common  enemy,  and  to  seek  for 
help  from  Tabor.  Messengers  were  sent  from  Prague  to 
Tabor  entreating  the  Taborites,  "  if  they  wished  verily  to 
obey  the  law  of  God,  to  march  to  their  aid  without  delay, 
and  with  the  largest  force  they  could  muster." 

At  Tabor,  thanks  to  Zizka's  foresight,  every  one  was 
ready.  Probably  on  the  very  day  the  message  arrived, 
9000  warriors,  accompanied  by  a  large  number  of  priests, 
women,  and  children,  set  forth  and  soon  arrived  at  Prague 
after  they  had  defeated  some  of  the  royal  troops,  who,  at 
Poric  on  the  River  Sazava,  had  attempted  to  intercept 
their  passage.  Almost  at  the  same  time  a  thousand  horse- 
men, led  by  the  utraquist  knights  BradatJ^  and  Obrovec,  also 
came  to  aid  in  the  defence  of  the  menaced  capital. 

Sigismund  had  at  first  intended  to  march  immediately 
from  Kuttenberg  to  Prague,  where  the  castles  of  Hradcany 
and  Vy^ehrad  were  still  in  the  hands  of  his  adherents. 
Probably  informed  of  the  strength  of  the  forces  now 
assembling  in  the  town,  he  changed  his  intentions  and 
decided  to  await  the  arrival  of  the  whole  force  of  the 
crusaders.  By  the  end  of  June  (1420)  most  of  them  had 
arrived  in  Bohemia.  They  were  led  by  the  Elector  Palatine, 
the  Archbishop-Electors  of  Maintz,  Trier,  and  Cologne, 
Frederick  of  Hohenzollern  (who  had  just  become  Elector  of 
Brandenburg,  which  Sigismund  had  mortgaged  to  him), 
Duke  Albert  of  Austria,  Sigismund's  son-in-law,  and  other 
German  princes.  The  crusaders  comprised  men  of  almost 
every  country  in  Europe,^  and  their  number  is  estimated 
between  100,000  and  150,000.  If  we  believe  Aenaeas 
Sylvius,  the  horsemen  alone  were  70,000  in  number;  in 
that  case  the  higher  figure  probably  more  exactly  indicates 
the  full  strength  of  the  crusading  army. 

On  June  30,  1420,  Sigismund  entered  the  castle  of 
Prague,  on  the  Hradcany,  and  the  enormous  forces  of  the 
crusaders  encamped  round  the  town.  Zizka  had  before 
their  arrival  occupied  and  fortified  the  steep  hill  to  the  east 

1  The  contemporary  chronicler,  Lawrence  of  Brezova,  not  without 
pride  names  among  those  who  then  attacked  his  country  :  Bohemians 
(of  course  Romanists),  Moravians,  Hungarians  and  Croatians,  Dalmatians 
and  Bulgarians,  Wailachians  and  Sicilians,  Cini(j-zV)  and  Jasi(j2V)  Slavon- 
ians, Servians,  Ruthenians,  Styrians,  menof  Meisens,  Bavarians,  Saxons, 
Austrians,  Franks,  Frenchmen,  Englishmen,  men  of  Brabant,  Westpha- 
lians,  Dutchmen,  Switzers,  Lusatians,  Saabians,  Carinthians,  men  of 
Aragon,  Spaniards,  Poles,  Germans  from  the  Rhine,  and  many  others. 


! 


An  Historical  Sketch  127 

of  Prague,  then  known  as  the  Vitkov,  but  which  since  those 
times,  and  up  to  the  present  day,  bears  the  name  of  Zizka's 
Hill.  The  invaders  did  not  immediately  begin  their  attack, 
and  it  was  only  on  July  14  that  Sigismund  made  a  deter- 
mined attempt  on  Prague.  The  attack  was  made  in  three 
directions  :  from  the  castles  on  the  Hradcany  and  on  the 
Vysehrad,  the  districts  of  the  town  nearest  to  those  castles — 
the  Mala  Strana  and  the  Nove  Mesto — were  attacked,  while  a 
third  attack  was  made  on  the  Vitkov  hill,  the  key  of  the 
position  of  the  defenders,  who  depended  on  its  possession 
for  maintaining  their  communications  with  the  country. 
This  hill  was  defended  by  Zizka  and  his  Taborites,  who 
resisted  the  attack  of  the  Germans  ^  with  desperate  courage. 
Even  the  Taborite  women  assisted  in  the  defence  of  the 
very  primitive  fortifications  Zizka  had  hastily  erected.  When 
the  Taborites  were  for  a  time  driven  back,  one  of  these 
women  refused  to  retreat,  saying  that  a  true  Christian 
should  never  give  way  to  Antichrist,  whereupon  she  was 
immediately  killed  by  the  Germans.  The  bravery  of  Zizka, 
who  himself  fought  in  the  front  rank,  at  last  drove  the 
Germans  down  the  hill.  Great  numbers  of  them  were 
killed  or  driven  into  the  river  Vltava  by  the  Bohemians  who 
pursued  them. 

Zizka  did  not  himself  think  that  his  victory  would  prove 
decisive,  for  he  immediately  began  to  strengthen  the  fortifi- 
cations which  had  hurriedly  been  erected  on  the  spot 
formerly  known  as  the  Vitkov,  but  which  since  that  great 
victory  has  been  called  Zizka's  Hill. 

Fortunately  for  the  Bohemians,  dissensions  had  broken 
out  among  their  enemies.  The  Germans  strongly  distrusted 
the  Bohemian  troops  of  Sigismund.  The  utraquist  lords  in 
the  king's  army,  on  the  other  hand,  felt  some  sympathy  for 
the  defenders  of  Prague,  and  were  indignant  against  the 
Germans,  who,  thwarted  in  their  attempt  on  Prague,  scoured 
all  the  neighbouring  country,  burning  as  heretics  all  Bohe- 
mians, without  distinction,  whom  they  could  seize. 

The  utraquist  lords,  therefore,  attempted  to  mediate 
between  the  king  and  the  citizens  of  Prague,  with  whom 
they  thought  an  agreement  more  feasible  than  with  the 
fanatical  Taborites.  The  Praguers,  however,  refused  to 
enter  into  separate  negotiations.     It  was  therefore  decided 

^  They  were  horsemen  from  Meissen  and  Thuringia,  about  9000  in 
number. 


128  Bohemia 

that  an  instrument  should  be  drawn  up,  formulating  every 
point  on  which  all  Bohemians  who  adhered  to  the  com- 
munion in  both  kinds  agreed.  Deliberations  took  place 
between  the  Praguers,  the  Taborites,  and  the  other  defenders 
of  Prague. 

The  principal  points  of  the  belief  of  the  utraquists  of 
all  shades,  the  recognition  of  which  they  considered  an 
indispensable  preliminary  to  all  negotiations  for  peace, 
were  expressed  by  the  theologians  of  the  University  of 
Prague  in  four  articles. ^ 

These  articles,  as  Palack)^  says,  openly  proclaimed 
the  opinions  of  the  Bohemian  nation,  and  became  the 
basis  of  all  subsequent  attempts  of  reconciliation  between 
Bohemia  and  the  Western  Church.  They  became  widely 
known  under  the  name  of  the  Articles  of  Prague.  The 
articles  declared — 

I.  The  word  of  God  shall  in  the  Kingdom  of  Bohemia 
be  freely  and  without  impediment  proclaimed  and  preached 
by  Christian  priests. 

II.  The  sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of  God  shall 
in  the  two  kinds,  that  is  in  bread  and  wine,  be  freely  admini- 
stered to  all  faithful  Christians  according  to  the  order  and 
teaching  of  our  Saviour. 

III.  The  priests  and  monks,  according  to  secular  law, 
possess  great  worldly  wealth  in  opposition  to  the  teaching 
of  Christ.     Of  this  wealth  they  shall  be  deprived. 

IV.  All  mortal  sins,  particularly  those  that  are  public,  as 
well  as  all  disorders  opposed  to  God's  law,  shall  in  all 
classes  be  suppressed  by  those  whose  office  it  is  to  do  so. 
All  evil  and  untruthful  rumours  ^  shall  be  suppressed 
for  the  good  of  the  commonwealth,  the  kingdom,  and  the 
nation. 

These  articles  were  undeniably  in  accord  with  the  wants 
of  the  age  and  formed  the  basis  of  a  possible  agreement. 
The  utraquist  nobles  who,  though  they  were  on  the  king's 
side,  yet  warmly  approved  of  the  four  articles,  unsuccessfully 
attempted  to  obtain  their  acceptance  by  the  papal  legate. 

^  It  is  probable  that  deliberation  on  this  subject  took  place  some 
time  before,  and  that  a  draft  of  the  articles  had  been  made  as  early  as 
in  1417  (see  my  Life  and  Times  of  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  343-344). 

2  ^This  principally  referred  to  the  statement  frequently  made  by  the 
Germans  that  Bohemia  was  a  heretical  country. 


An  Historical  Sketch  129 

The  dissensions  in  Sigismund's  camp  became  intensified 
by  the  failure  of  the  negotiations.  Open  warfare  between 
the  so-called  allies  seemed  more  than  probable.  Sigismund 
therefore  decided  to  abandon  the  siege  of  Prague,  and  to 
dismiss  his  German  allies,  whose  arrival — in  consequence 
of  the  old  hatred  between  the  two  races — had  had  as 
principal  result  the  diminution  of  the  already  scanty  number 
of  the  king's  adherents  in  Bohemia.  Before  leaving  Prague, 
Sigismund  caused  himself  to  be  crowned  King  of  Bohemia 
in  the  cathedral  of  St.  Vitus.^  The  ceremony  of  the 
coronation  of  their  kings  has,  with  the  Bohemians,  as  with 
the  Hungarians,  always  been  surrounded  by  a  peculiar 
sanctity  ;  by  submitting  to  it,  Sigismund  hoped  to  strengthen 
his  claim  to  the  Bohemian  throne.  It  was,  however,  noticed 
that  neither  representatives  of  the  towns  of  Prague  nor  the 
holders  of  many  of  the  great  offices  of  state  were  present. 

On  August  2,  1420,  the  king  left  the  neighbourhood  of 
Prague  and  retired  to  Kuttenberg.  The  crusaders  dis- 
persed to  their  various  countries. 


CHAPTER   VI 

FROM  THE  CORONATION   OF  KING  SIGISMUND   TO   THE  DEATH 
OF    KING    LOUIS    AT   MOHA^    (142O-1526) 

The  skirmish  at  Sudomer  and  the  battle  at  Zizka's  Hill 
mark  the  beginning,  of  the  Hussite  wars. 

The  period  from  the  battle  on  Zizka's  Hill  (1420)  to  that 
fat  Lipany  (1434),  which  decided  the  fate  of  the  Taborite 
I  party,  is  the  most  eventful  one  in  Bohemian  history.  The 
renewed  crusades  against  Bohemia ;  incessant  local  warfare 
between  the  utraquist  nobles  and  townsfolk,  and  those  who 
were  on  the  side  of  Rome ;  occasional  warfare  among  the 
utraquists  themselves,  when  the  Taborites  and  Praguers  fell 
out  with  each  other ;  the  rise  and  fall  of  Tabor ;  the  tem- 
porary hegemony  of  the  city  of  Prague  over  a  large  part  of 
Bohemia ;  the  attempt  to  re-establish  monarchy  under  a 
Polish  dynasty,  are  only  some  of  the  events  and  movements 
crowded  into  these  few  years.  The  intellectual  activity  of 
the  people  (manifested  where,  under  the  given  conditions, 
it  could  alone  manifest  itself,  namely  in  the  field  of  theolo- 

1  The  cathedral  is  situated  close  to  the  castle  on  the  Hradcin,  which 
was  held  by  the  royal  forces. 


130  Bohemia 

gical  controversy)  was  also  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the 
country.  The  theological  disputations  between  the  papal, 
the  Calixtine,  and  the  Taborite  ecclesiastics  were  con- 
stantly renewed,  and,  as  was  inevitable  in  a  country  so 
thoroughly  absorbed  in  religious  controversy,  fanatical  and 
grotesque  doctrines  often  came  to  the  surface.  We  read 
of  preachers  who  asserted  that  the  millennium  had  already 
begun,  and  of  the  Adamite  enthusiasts,  whom  Zizka  almost^ 
immediately  suppressed,  and  whose  importance  has  been 
most  unduly  exaggerated  by  Aenaeas  Sylvius  and  other 
adherents  of  the  papal  cause.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted 
that — as  Palack)^,  the  great  Bohemian  historian,  tells  us — 
contemporary  records  for  these  years  are  scarcer  than  almost 
for  any  other  period. 

King  Sigismund  left  Prague  in  a  state  of  the  most  violent 
irritation  against  the  Bohemian  nation.  He  attempted  to 
organize  the  adherents  of  Rome  by  appointing  certain  of 
the  most  prominent  nobles  who  belonged  to  that  party 
leaders  or  commanders  of  each  district  of  the  country,  in- 
structing them  to  maintain  peace  and  extirpate  heresy. 

This  measure,  which,  as  the  greatest  part  of  the  land 
was  in  arms  against  the  king,  was  of  little  practical  im- 
portance, only  tended  to  increase  the  animosity  of  the 
Bohemians  against  Sigismund.  The  Praguers,  even  before 
the  king  had  raised  the  siege  of  their  town,  had  decreed 
very  severe  measures  against  the  priests  and  Germans  who 
had  left  the  city  before  the  siege.  All  their  property  was 
confiscated  for  the  benefit  of  the  town.  The  once  very 
strong  German  element  in  Prague  was  for  the  time  com- 
pletely annihilated.  Dissensions  had  at  this  moment 
already  broken  out  between  the  citizens  of  Prague  and 
their  Taborite  allies,  whose  fanaticism  in  destroying  churches 
and  convents  caused  great  exasperation.  Zizka  and  his 
followers  therefore  left  Prague  and  marched  to  Southern 
Bohemia,  where  in  a  campaign,  for  which  want  of  space 
makes  any  lengthier  mention  impossible,  they  defeated 
several  of  the  papal  lords  who  still  maintained  the  cause  of 
King  Sigismund.  The  Praguers,  meanwhile,  continued  the 
siege  of  the  Vysehrad,  the  occupation  of  which  by  King 
Sigismund's  troops  was  a  permanent  menace  to  their  town. 
Sigismund,  hearing  that  the  garrison  was  sorely  pressed, 
marched  to  its  relief  with  an  army  of  20,000  .men,  the 
greater  part   of  whom    were  Hungarians.     Many   of  the 


An  Historical  Sketch  131 

utraquist  lords,  exasperated  by  Sigismund's  decision  to 
employ  German  and  Hungarian  soldiers  against  his 
Bohemian  subjects,  now  joined  the  national  cause,  and  one 
of  them,  Hynek  Krusina,  Lord  of  Lichtenburg,  became  the 
commander  of  the  Bohemian  forces. 

A  very  sanguinary  encounter  took  place  in  the  valley 
which  is  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Vysehrad  on  All  Saints' 
Day  (November  i,  1420).  Several  lords,  seeing  that  the 
men  of  Prague  were  well  entrenched,  advised  the  king  not 
to  disturb  them,  as  his  troops  might  suffer  severe  losses,  but 
the  king  said :  *'  I  must  fight  with  these  peasants  to-day." 
The  Praguers  at  first  wavered,  when  Lord  Hynek  called 
out  with  a  loud  voice  :  "  Dear  brethren,  do  not  turn  back, 
but  be  to-day  brave  knights  in  Christ's  battle ;  for  it  is  God's, 
not  our  fight,  we  are  fighting  to-day.  Be  certain  that  the 
Almighty  God  will  deliver  all  His  and  your  enemies  into 
your  hands  to-day."  Before  he  had  finished  his  speech  the 
cry  arose  :  "  The  enemy  is  flying."  ^ 

King  Sigismund's  troops  were  decisively  defeated,  and 
the  losses,  particularly  among  the  Bohemian  and  Moravian 
warriors,  who  still  sided  with  him  were  very  great.  The  king 
was  said  to  have  exposed  them  more  than  his  other  troops. 

The  patriots  deeply  mourned  the  fate  of  their  country- 
men. Though  they  had  adhered  to  the  feudal  system 
which  had  obliged  them  to  war  for  their  liege-lord  King 
Sigismund,  the  dead  men  had  belonged  to  the  national 
utraquist  Church,  and  those  who  had  not  immediately  suc- 
cumbed to  their  wounds  had,  before  dying,  received  com- 
munion in  the  two  kinds.  The  contemporary  chronicler 
Laurence  of  Bfezova  thus  describes  the  mournful  aspect  of 
the  battle-field  :  "  What  man,  who  was  not  more  cruel  than 
a  pagan,  could  pass  through  these  fields  and  vineyards  and 
view  the  brave  bodies  of  the  dead  without  compassion? 
What  Bohemian,  unless  he  were  a  madman,  could  see  these 
dainty  and  robust  warriors,  these  men  so  curly-haired  and 
so  comely  without  deeply  bewailing  their  fate  ?  "  The  castle 
of  the  Vysehrad  surrendered  to  the  Praguers  immediately 
after  the  battle. 

The   intense    animosity   caused   by  the  policy  of   King 

Sigismund  had  led  a  considerable  party  in  Bohemia  to  plan 

his  deposition,  and  to  meditate  on  the  choice  of  another 

sovereign.     Those  among  the  utraquist  nobihty  who   had 

^  Palacky,  quoting  a  contemporary  chronicler. 


132  Bohemia 

abandoned  all  hope  of  securing  from  Sigismund  toleration 
for  their  faith,  as  well  as  the  men  of  Prague,  favoured  this 
project,  which,  on  the  other  hand — probably  through  the 
influence  of  Nicholas  of  Hus — was  opposed  by  most  of  the 
Taborites.  Zizka,  however,  in  this  matter  disagreed  with 
the  larger  number  of  his  party.  It  was  decided  to  offer  the 
Bohemian  crown  to  Vladislav,  King  of  Poland,  under  the 
sole  condition  of  his  accepting  the  Articles  of  Prague,  and 
promising  to  defend  them.  This  declaration  was  signed  by 
many  of  the  utraquist  nobles,  the  magistrates  of  the  town 
of  Prague,  and  of  those  towns  that  accepted  its  direction, 
and  by  Zizka  alone  on  the  part  of  the  Taborites.  Nicholas 
of  Hus,  who  most  violently  opposed  the  choice  of  a  foreign 
king,  died  by  a  fall  from  his  horse  towards  the  end  of  the 
year  (1420). 

Though  he  had  been  one  of  the  earliest  leaders  of  the 
party  of  reform,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  death  of 
Nicholas  of  Hus  at  this  moment  was  advantageous  to  his 
cause,  for  it  made  Zizka  uncontested  leader  of  the  more 
advanced  or  Taborite  party ;  and  as  he  was  then  inclined  to 
act  in  agreement  with  the  Praguers  and  the  utraquist  nobles, 
it  prevented,  at  least  for  the  moment,  a  split  among  the 
Bohemians  opposed  to  Rome. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  year  142 1,  Zizka's  troops  and 
the  Praguers  completely  subdued  Western  Bohemia,  where 
Sigismund's  authority  entirely  ceased.  Even  the  city 
of  Pilsen  concluded  a  truce,  during  which  the  citizens  were 
obliged  to  tolerate  worship  according  to  the  Articles  of 
Prague  in  their  town  and  its  territory.  The  united  utraquist 
forces  now  attacked  Kutna  Hora,  which  was  still  in  the  hands 
of  the  adherents  of  Sigismund,  though  the  king  had  left 
Bohemia  early  in  the  year  (February  142 1).  This  town 
was  more  odious  to  the  utraquists  than  any  other,  because 
of  the  cruelties  its  inhabitants  had  committed.  The  citizens 
were  soon  obliged  to  surrender  and  to  do  public  penance, 
but  the  utraquists  sought  no  further  revenge,  an  almost 
unique  occurrence  on  the  part  of  either  of  the  opponents 
during  the  Hussite  wars.  After  the  fall  of  Kutna  Hora 
many  other  towns  and  castles  surrendered,  and  many  of  the 
utraquist  nobles,  abandoning  Sigismund,  joined  what  had  by 
this  time  become  the  national  cause  throughout  the  land. 
Apiong  these  nobles  was  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  who  now 
again  renounced  the  allegiance  of  King  Sigismund. 


An  Historical  Sketch  133 

It  was  still  a  greater  blow  to  the  papal  party  that  about 
this  time  the  Archbishop  of  Prague,  Conrad  of  Vechta,  "  to 
the  surprise  and  horror  of  all  Christendom,"  solemnly  an- 
nounced his  acceptation  of  the  Articles  of  Prague  (142 1). 
On  the  other  hand,  the  strength  of  the  utraquist  party  was 
weakened  by  the  attitude  of  the  Taborites,  whose  distrust  of 
the  more  moderate  reformers  was  increased  by  the  fact  that 
that  party  had  now  been  joined  by  the  most  eminent  prelates 
of  the  Church  of  Rome.  The  University  of  Prague  attempted 
to  mediate  between  the  different  factions  of  the  reform  party, 
and  numerous  disputations  between  the  rival  divines  took 
place,  in  which  even  the  minutest  questions  of  dogma  and 
ritual  were  discussed  with  the  utmost  thoroughness  and 
obstinacy. 

Having  subdued  nearly  all  Bohemia,  the  utraquists  were 
preparing  to  invade  Moravia,  when  envoys  from  that  country, 
in  which  utraquism  had  many  adherents,  arrived  and  sued 
for  peace.  It  was  agreed  that  the  Estates  of  both  countries 
should  assemble  at  Caslav.  This  Diet  began  its  session  on 
June  i,^  142 1,  and  included  the  Archbishop  of  Prague,  the 
Lords  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg,  Vic- 
torin  of  Podebrad  (father  of  the  future  King  George),  the 
supreme  magistrates  of  Prague,  John  Zizka  and  other  leaders 
of  Tabor,  as  well  as  representatives  of  the  papal  party.  The 
contemporary  records  of  the  assembly  at  Caslav  are  both 
vague  and  contradictory.  It  seems,  however,  certain  that  the 
Articles  of  Prague  were  almost  unanimously  confirmed,  and 
that  King  Sigismund  was  declared  to  be  deposed,  though  not 
without  some  opposition,  especially  on  the  part  of  the 
Moravian  nobles.  It  was  further  decided  that,  pending  the 
negotiations  with  Poland — though  this  reason  was  not 
specially  stated — twenty  regents  should  be  elected.  Of 
these,  five  were  to  be  chosen  from  among  the  nobles,  four 
from  the  citizens  of  Prague,  two  from  the  community  of 
Tabor,  five  from  among  the  knighthood,  and  two  from  the 
other  Bohemian  towns  (/.  e.  with  the  exceptions  of  Prague 
and  Tabor).  This  scheme  undoubtedly  organized  a  coali- 
tion government — to  use  a  modern  phrase — on  the  broadest 
base,  and  even  this  attempt  at  compromise  is  a  proof  of  the 
comparative  political  maturity  of  the  Bohemians  of  that 
period.  Among  the  new  regents  we  find  Ulrich  of  Rosen- 
berg, head  of  the  papal  lords,  Cenek  of  Wartenberg, 
Krusina  of  Lichtenburg,  and  John  Zizka. 


134  Bohemia 

About  this  time  the  castle  of  Prague  on  the  Hrad^any 
Hill  surrendered.  Sigismund's  influence  disappeared  in 
Prague ;  but  Bohemia  was  still  menaced  both  by  internal 
disturbances  and  by  foreign  foes.  New  religious  troubles 
broke  out  in  Prague,  caused  by  the  fanatical  monk  John  of 
Zelivo,  and  at  Tabor  public  order  was  disturbed  by  the 
violence  of  fanatics. 

Zizka  soon  quelled  these  disturbances  in  the  barbarous 
fashion  common  to  all  religious  parties  at  that  period.  He 
caused  about  fifty  enthusiasts,  men  and  women,  to  be  burnt 
for  denying  the  real  presence  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament  of 
the  altar.  They  met  their  fate  bravely.  "  Gaily  laughing, 
they  walked  into  the  flames,  boasting  that  they  would 
that  very  day  take  their  meal  with  Christ  in  heaven."^ 

Zizka's  commanding  influence  at  Tabor  restored  order  in 
the  town,  and  he  was  soon  free  to  continue  the  war  against 
the  adherents  of  the  papal  cause  who  still  held  isolated 
castles  in  many  parts  of  Bohemia.  In  besieging  one  of 
these  castles,  Rabi,  which  belonged  to  the  Romanist  Lord 
of  Riesenburg,  Zizka  was  severely  wounded  in  the  eye  by 
an  arrow.  His  life  was  for  some  time  in  danger,  and 
though  the  doctors  of  Prague,  to  which  town  he  was 
i  immediately  carried,  succeeded  in  saving  his  life,  he  now 
I  became  totally  blind. 

Local  warfare  between  the  Germans  and  Bohemians  had, 
meanwhile,  continued  uninterruptedly  both  on  the  Saxon 
and  on  the  Silesian  frontiers,  but  a  more  serious  danger 
now  menaced  Bohemia.  As  early  as  the  month  of  April 
(142 1)  the  German  princes  decided  to  undertake  a  new 
crusade  against  Bohemia,  and  Sigismund,  though  detained 
in  Hungary  by  the  hostile  attitude  of  Turkey  and  Venice, 

^  Palack;^.  Some  of  these  fanatics  escaped  from  Tabor  before  Zizka 
had  returned  there  from  Caslav,  and  settled  in  an  island  in  the  little 
river  Nezarka.  Here  they  formed  a  separate  community  under  the 
leadership  of  a  peasant  named  Nicolas,  whom  they  called  Adam. 
According  to  the  not  very  reliable  report  of  Aenaeas  '^yWwxs,  {Hu lor ia 
Boheinica,  chap,  xli),  this  leader  "  filium  Dei  se  dixit  et  Adam  vocari." 
Aenaeas  further  tells  us  *'  connubia  eis  promiscua  faere,  nefas  tamen 
injussu  Adami  mulierem  cognoscere.  Sed  ut  quis  libidine  incensus  in 
aliquam  exarsit  eam  manu  prehendit  et  adiens  principem  *  in  hanc ' 
inquit,  'spiritus  meus  concaluit. '  Cui  princeps  respondit,  *ite  crescite 
et  nnultiplicamini  et  replete  terram.' "  These  fanatics  were  exterminated 
by  Zizka  after  a  few  months  (Oct.  142 1).  This  quite  isolated  occurrence 
has  from  the  first  been  greatly  magnified  and  exaggerated  by  writers 
hostile  to  the  Hussite  movement. 


An  Historical  Sketch  135 

approved  of  their  plans,  and  promised  his  aid.  To  give 
Sigismund  time  to  return  to  Bohemia,  it  was  decided  that 
the  crusaders  should  assemble  on  the  feast  of  St.  Bartholo- 
mew (August  24). 

Of  the  second  crusade  against  Bohemia  scanty  and  in- 
sufficient record  has  come  down  to  us.  Five  of  the  German 
Electors  took  part  in  the  campaign,  and  the  whole  invading 
force,  according  to  the  most  trustworthy  sources,  numbered 
200,000  men.  Numerous  volunteers  from  all  parts  of 
Germany  flocked  to  the  standard  of  the  Cross,  and  were 
rewarded  by  the  cardinal  legate  Branda  with  absolutions 
and  indulgences.  It  had  been  decided  that  the  Germans 
should  enter  Bohemia  from  the  west,  by  Cheb  ^  whilst  Sigis- 
mund and  his  son-in-law  Albert,  Duke  of  Austria,  would 
invade  the  country  from  the  east.  The  town  of  Kutna 
Hora  in  Eastern  Bohemia  still  numbered  many  adherents 
of  the  papal  cause,  who  were,  therefore,  also  friendly  to  the 
cause  of  Sigismund. 

The  Germans  marched  through  Western  Bohemia  burning 
the  villages  and  murdering  the  inhabitants  "more  cruelly 
than  heathens  would  have  done."  They  began  the  siege  of 
the  town  of  i^atec,^  and  on  September  17,  1421,  made  an 
attempt  to  storm  it,  but  they  were  beaten  back  by  the  bravery 
of  the  Bohemian  garrison  of  only  6000  men.  The  news 
that  the  army  of  the  Praguers  ^  was  approaching,  and  disgust 
at  Sigismund's  failure  to  fulfil  his  promise  of  creating  a 
diversion  in  Eastern  Bohemia,  caused  the  Germans  to 
retreat  precipitately  and  ingloriously. 

Fortune  here  again  favoured  the  Bohemians.  Sigismund 
had  but  just  completed  his  armaments  when  the  last  German 
soldiers  left  the  soil  of  Bohemia.  His  troops  and  those  of 
his  son-in-law  entered  Moravia  early  in  October.  The 
supreme  command  of  the  army,  which  consisted  of  about 
23,000  men,  was  entrusted  to  the  Italian  condottiere  Pipa 
of  Ozora.  Moravia  was  soon  subdued,  and  the  easy  con- 
quest of  the  sister-land  was  not  without  its  effect  on 
Bohemia.  Many  of  the  Bohemian  lords,  whom  the  excesses 
of  fanatics,  both  at  Prague  and  at  Tabor,  had  alienated  from 

1  In  German,  "Eger."      ^  ^  2  j^  German,  "Saaz." 

^  It  is  uncertain  whether  Zizka  and  his  Taborites  took  part  in  this 
expedition,  though  there  is  evidence  that  the  men  of  Prague  appealed 
to  him  for  aid.  Zizka  himself  can  at  that  time  hardly  have  recovered 
from  his  wound. 


136 


Bohemia 


the  national  cause,  resumed  allegiance  to  King  Sigismund. 
Among  them  was  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  whose  political 
manoeuvres  we  may  consider  typical  of  the  vacillating  policy 
of  the  great  utraquist  nobles  of  his  time. 

Soon  after  entering  Bohemia,  Sigismund  obtained  posses- 
sion of  the  town  of  Kutna  Hora,  by  the  aid  of  a  powerful 
party  among  the  townsmen  who  upheld  the  papal  cause,  or 
at  any  rate  were  opposed  to  the  hegemony  which  Prague  at 
this  period  attempted  to  impose  on  the  Bohemian  towns. 
Zizka,  who  with  his  Taborites  had  now  joined  his  forces 
with  those  of  Prague,  retreated  before  the  invaders  as  far  as 
Kolin,  and  Emperor  Sigismund  spent  Christmas  at  Kutna 
Hora,  feeling  certain  that  he  had  now  at  last  subdued  the 
Bohemians. 

Zizka  had  meanwhile  received  reinforcements  from  various 
parts  of  Bohemia,  and  his  soldiers,  exasperated  by  the 
atrocities  which  the  Hungarian  soldiers  of  Sigismund  had 
committed,  were  even  more  anxious  than  usual  to  encounter 
the  foe.  On  the  other  hand,  Pipa  strongly  advised  the  king 
to  retreat.  When  Zizka's  army,  on  the  "  day  of  the  three 
kings"  (or  Epiphany)  (January  6,  1422),  suddenly  attacked 
the  village  of  Nebovid — between  Kolin  and  Kutna  Hora — 
a  panic  seized  the  king's  forces.  An  immediate  retreat 
became  necessary,  and  though  Sigismund  is  said  to  have 
urged  some  of  the  Bohemian  nobles  who  were  now  on  his 
side  to  attempt  to  hold  the  town  of  Kutna  Hora,  they 
"refused  to  encounter  certain  death."  The  retreat  soon 
became  a  rout,  and  nearly  12,000  of  Sigisrnund's  soldiers 
were  killed,  the  king  only  escaping  by  his  rapid  flight.  The 
town  of  Nemeck)^  Brod,^  where  a  last  stand  was  made,  was 
stormed  by  the  Bohemians  on  January  10,  1422.  Contrary 
to  Zizka's  orders  2  its  defenders  were  put  to  the  sword,  while 
the  town  was  pillaged  and  totally  destroyed. 

This  great  victory  of  the  Bohemians  for  the  time  ensured 
to  them  safety  from  foreign  enemies,  and  it  also  precipitated 
the  result  of  the  negotiations  with  Poland.  King  Vladislav 
had  declined  the  Bohemian  crown,  but  his  brother  Alexander 
Witold,    Prince   of  Lithuania,    was   now   ready  to   accept 

1  In  German,  Deutsch  Brod. 

^  As  a  proof  of  this,  Palacky  quotes  an  autograph  letter  of  Zizka 
preserved  in  the  Bohemian  Museum  at  Prague,  in  which  he,  later  in  the 
year,  ordered  his  soldiers  to  assemble  at  N^mecky  Brod,  **  that  they 
might  repent  where  they  had  sinned." 


An  Historical  Sketch  137 

it,  as  it  had  been  repeatedly  offered  to  him  by  Bohemian 
deputations. 

Witold  assumed  the  title  of  "  acknowledged "  or  "  de- 
manded "  ^  King  of  Bohemia,  and  with  his  aid  and  consent 
his  nephew  Sigismund  Korybut  2"  equipped  an  armed  force 
of  about  5000  men  to  maintain  Witold's  claim  to  the 
Bohemian  throne.  This  enterprise  caused  great  excitement 
among  the  Slav  populations  of  Eastern  Europe.  "  The 
Poles  at  that  time  most  sympathized  with  Bohemia,  and 
desired  a  union  between  the  two  countries ;  still  greater 
enthusiasm  was  shown  by  the  Ruthenian  population  of  the 
districts  near  Lemberg,  who,  belonging  to  the  Greek  Church 
were  themselves  utraquists."  ^ 

Korybut  first  marched  into  Moravia,  from  which  country 
King  Sigismund  retired  on  the  news  of  the  arrival  of  the 
Polish  prince.  Korybut  then  entered  Bohemia,  and 
on  his  arrival  at  Caslav  was  enthusiastically  received  by 
many  of  the  utraquist  nobles.  He  soon  afterwards  (May  16, 
1422)  arrived  at  Prague  and  assumed  the  government  of 
Bohemia,  as  far  as  the  almost  anarchical  condition  of  the 
land  rendered  any  government  possible. 

Ever  since  the  battle  of  Nebovid  and  King  Sigismund's 
retreat  into  Hungary  (which  had  temporarily  secured 
Bohemia  from  foreign  invasion),  the  town  of  Prague  had 
been  convulsed  by  continuous  struggles,  nominally  caused 
by  differences  of  opinion  among  the  priesthood  with  regard 
to  questions,  often  very  trifling  ones,  of  doctrine  or  ritual. 
The  passionate  interest  in  these  matters,  and  still  more  the 
thorough  comprehension  of  them  which  the  Bohemians  of 
that  age  showed,  can  only  be  compared  to  the  condition  of 
the  population  of  Constantinople  during  the  continuance  of 
the  Eastern  Empire.  Still,  these  questions  gradually  tended 
to  become  only  the  pretence  for  struggles  of  which  the 
inevitable  opposition  between  aristocracy  and  democracy 
was  the  real  cause.  As  was  natural,  the  more  aristocratic 
party  at  Prague  relied  on  the  support  of  the  utraquist  nobles, 

^  The  German  term  is  "Postulirter  Konig  von  Bohmen";  according 
to  the  old  Bohemian  traditions  it  was  only  the  coronation  that  fully 
conferred  the  title  of  King  of  Bohemia. 

^  This  prince,  to  distinguish  him  from  Eang  Sigismund,  is  generally 
known  by  his  father's  name  as  Korybut,  or  as  Korybutovic,  i.  e.  son  of 
Korybut.  Following  Palacky,  I  have  adopted  the  former  and  shorter 
denomination. 

3  Palacky. 


138 


Bohemia 


always  the  most  moderate  element  in  the  reform  party ;  the 
democrats  of  Prague,  on  the  other  hand,  found  their  natural 
allies  in  the  democratic  community  of  Tabor. 

Korybut,  whose  principal  supporters  were  the  utraquist 
nobles,  used  his  influence  in  favour  of  the  aristocratic  party 
at  Prague,  which  through  him  obtained  the  important  muni- 
cipal offices  of  the  city.  He  endeavoured,  and  not  without 
success,  to  avoid  a  rupture  with  Zizka^  and  the  more 
moderate  Taborites,  whose  leader  (contrary  to  the  popular 
opinion,  which  represents  him  as  an  extreme  fanatic)  Zizka 
was. 

As  soon  as  order  had  been  re-established  in  Prague, 
Korybut  set  out  to  besiege  the  castle  of  Karlstein,  which 
was  still  held  by  the  forces  of  King  Sigismund,  and  which 
through  its  vicinity  to  Prague  was  a  permanent  menace  to 
that  town.  This  siege  was  unsuccessful,  and  Korybut,  being 
obliged  to  return  to  Prague  because  of  renewed  riots  that 
had  broken  out  there,  concluded  a  truce  with  the  defenders 
of  Karlstein.  The  duration  of  this  truce,  which  Korybut 
concluded  in  his  own  name  and  in  those  of  the  utraquist 
lords,  was  fixed  at  one  year. 

King  Sigismund  had  meanwhile  endeavoured  to  detach 
the  Polish  princes  from  the  Bohemian  cause.  His  efforts 
were  successful,  and  in  consequence  of  an  agreement 
with  Sigismund,  Prince  Witold  recalled  his  nephew, 
who  had  been  acting  as  his  representative  in  Bohemia. 
Prince  Korybut  very  reluctantly  left  Prague  on  December 
24,  1422. 

The  temporary  departure  of  Prince  Korybut,  whose  influ- 
ence on  the  affairs  of  Bohemia  has  been  greatly  under-rated,^ 
was  almost  immediately  followed  by  civil  war.  Probably 
from  distrust  of  the  utraquist  lords,  who  still  held  most  of 

^  In  his  curious  letter  to  the  Praguers,  in  which  he  informed  them  that 
he  would  not  oppose  Prince  Korybut,  Zizka  says  :  "  We — the  Taborites 
— will  willingly  obey  his  Highness  (Prince  Korybut),  and  with  the 
Lord's  help  aid  him  in  all  rightful  things  by  deed  and  by  advice,  and  we 
beg  that  you  all  of  you,  from  this  day  forth,  will  verily  drop  all  the 
discord,  quarrels,  and  bitterness  which  you  have  had  either  during  your 
whole  life  or  during  these  last  years,  so  that  you  may  honestly  say  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  and  pray  :  *  Forgive  us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them 
that  trespass  against  us.'"  Palacky  very  truly  remarks  that  this  letter 
gives  us  a  clearer  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  great  Bohemian  warrior  than 
the  most  elaborate  attempt  to  characterize  him  could  do. 

2  This  is  probably  caused  by  the  fact  that  his  conciliatory  policy  was 
equally  distasteful  to  the  papal  and  to  the  extreme  Taborite  partisans. 


An  Historical  Sketch  139 

the  State  offices  to  which  Korybut  had  appointed  them, 
Zizka  rejoined  the  more  advanced  Taborite  party.  It  seems 
probable  that  the  suspicion  that  these  lords  wished  to 
reinstate  Sigismund — whose  complicity  in  the  death  of  Hus 
Zizka  never  forgave — largely  influenced  the  decision  of  the 
leader  of  the  Taborites. 

The  first  armed  conflict  between  the  Bohemian  parties 
took  place  at  Hofic  (April  27,  1423),  where  Cenek  of  War- 
tenberg  was  decisively  defeated  by  feka.  Almost  at  the 
same  time  the  Praguers,  and  the  utraquist  lords  then  allied 
with  them,  began  the  siege  of  the  castle  of  Kfizenec,  held  at 
that  time  by  the  Taborites. 

The  fact  that  a  new  general  armament  against  the  Bohe- 
mian heretics  was  at  that  moment  being  prepared  in  Ger- 
many was  probably  one  of  the  reasons  why  this  siege  did 
not  last  long.  It  was  agreed  to  by  both  parties  that  a 
disputation  between  Calixtine  and  Taborite  priests  should 
take  place  at  the  neighbouring  castle  of  Konopist  (1423). 
No  decision  was  arrived  at  on  the  principal  question 
whether  the  rites  of  the  Church  of  Rome  which  the 
Calixtines  had  retained,  and  the  use  of  vestments,  were 
permissible  or  not.  It  was,  however,  decreed  that  these 
questions  were  only  a  matter  of  ecclesiastical  regulation, 
and  in  no  wise  dependent  on  divine  law.  A  subsequent 
disputation  (June  24)  between  the  priests  remained  without 
result,  but  the  compromise — such  as  it  was — for  a  time  put 
a  stop  to  the  internal  strife  among  the  Bohemians. 

As  already  mentioned,  a  new  crusade  against  the  Bohe- 
mians was  decided  on  early  in  the  year  1423  ;  but  this 
crusade  was  even  more  unsuccessful  than  its  predecessors. 
The  Slavs  of  Poland,  who  were  to  have  taken  part  in  it, 
were  unwilling  to  go  to  war  with  Bohemia,  in  spite  of  the 
change  of  policy  on  the  part  of  their  king,  Vladislav,  and 
his  brother  Witold.  The  German  princes,  being  engaged 
in  constant  disputes  among  themselves,  only  equipped  a 
scanty  force,  which  soon  recrossed  the  Bohemian  frontier, 
without  having  even  met  the  Hussites  in  the  open  field. 
The  King  of  Denmark,  who  had  arrived  in  Germany  with 
an  army  to  wage  war  against  the  heretics,  also  returned  to 
his  own  country. 

If  we  can  trust  the  contemporary  records  (which  at  this 
time  are  even  more  obscure  than  during  the  other  years  of 
the  Hussite  wars)  the  agreement  of  Konopist  was  of  exceed- 


140  Bohemia 

ingly  short  duration.  Zizka  appears  from  the  first  to  hava 
disapproved  of  it,  and  when  the  Praguers  and  their  allies 
entered  Moravia  (end  of  July  1423)  to  aid  the  utraquists  of 
that  country  against  their  old  enemy  John  "the  Iron,"  now 
bishop  of  Olomonc,  the  Taborites  took  no  part  in  the 
expedition. 

The  Bohemian  arms  were  on  the  whole  victorious  in 
Moravia,  but  troubles  at  home  soon  prevented  the  patriot 
army  from  pursuing  its  advantages.  The  town  of  Kralove 
Hradec  had  from  the  first  warmly  upheld  the  Calixtine 
cause.  The  governor  of  the  castle,  Borek  of  Miletinck, 
who  held  supreme  authority  in  the  city,  was  leader  of  the 
Bohemian  troops  then  engaged  in  warfare  in  Moravia. 

During  his  absence  a  democratic  movement  broke  out 
in  the  town  of  Kralove  Hradec,  and  the  citizens  applied  for 
aid  to  i^izka;  they  asserted  that  Bofek  of  Miletinck  (who 
had  been  appointed  governor  by  Prince  Sigismund  Korybut) 
no  longer  had  any  right  to  claim  lordship  over  their  city, 
since  the  prince  who  had  appointed  him  had  left  Bohemia. 
Zizka  received  their  request  favourably,  and  consented  to 
become  their  leader.  This  caused  an  internal  conflict  more 
serious  than  any  that  had  as  yet  occurred  during  the  Hussite 
wars. 

Bofek  of  Miletinck,  with  his  army  of  Praguers  and  utra- 
quist  lords,  abandoned  their  conquests  in  Moravia,  and 
speedily  returned  to  Bohemia  to  oppose  the  Taborites.  A 
sanguinary  encounter  took  place  near  Kralove  Hradec  (not 
far  from  the  more  celebrated  battle-field  of  1866),^  in  which 
the  Taborites  decisively  defeated  the  moderate  or  Calixtine 
party.  The  contemporary  writers  mention  this  battle  with 
great  sorrow,  as  here  "  ark  was  ranged  against  ark."  ^  One 
of  the  prisoners — a  priest  who  had  carried  the  monstrance 
before  the  soldiers  of  Prague — was  brought  before  Zizka, 
who  exclaiming,  "  Thus  will  I  consecrate  these  priests  of  the 
Praguers,"  struck  him  on  the  head  with  a  club  so  fiercely 
that  he  died.^ 

^  The  battle  of  Kralove  Hradec,  or  Koniggratz,  is,  I  think,  better 
known  in  England  under  the  name  of  the  battle  of  Sadova. 

2  The  utraquist  priests  of  all  denominations  were  at  that  period  in 
the  habit  of  carrying  the  holy  sacrament  before  the  troops  in  the 
moment  of  battle,  and  it  had  become  habitual  to  call  the  monstrance 
•*  the  ark,"  in  conformity  with  the  great  predilection  for  Old  Testament 
expressions  that  was  so  general  in  13ohemia  at  that  time. 

'  Bienenberg,  Geschiclite  der  Stadt  Koniggratz. 


An  Historical  Sketch  141 

It  is  probable  that  the  battle  of  Hralovd  Hradec  was  fol- 
lowed by  one  of  those  temporary  truces  so  frequent  in  the 
history  of  Bohemia  at  this  time.  At  any  rate  we  find  ^izka 
almost  immediately  afterwards  engaged  in  warfare  in  Moravia 
and  in  Hungary,  by  invading  which  country,  the  centre  of 
Sigismund's  power,  it  was  perhaps  hoped  to  induce  him  to 
come  to  terms,  feka's  Hungarian  campaign  was  unsuccess- 
ful ;  but  in  it,  and  especially  during  his  retreat,  he  displayed 
higher  military  ability  than  on  almost  any  other  occasion. 

During  feka's  absence  from  Bohemia,  the  Praguers — 
still  in  alliance  with  the  utraquist  lords,  who  loyally  but 
hopelessly  attempted  the  impossible  task  of  reconciling 
King  Sigismund  to  their  religious  views — again  entered  into 
negotiations  with  the  partisans  of  the  king.  At  a  Diet  that 
met  at  Prague  (October  i6,  1423)  it  was  resolved  that  repre- 
sentatives of  the  papal  and  of  the  utraquist  clergy  should 
meet  at  Brunn  for  the  purpose  of  deciding  all  differences  as 
to  doctrine  and  ritual  in  a  manner  acceptable  to  all.  This 
meeting  never  took  place,  and  the  negotiations  with  King 
Sigismund  do  not  appear  to  have  continued.  The  decision 
of  Sigismund  to  award  Moravia  to  his  son-in-law  Albert  of 
Austria,  whom  he  at  the  same  time  declared  heir  to  the 
throne  of  Bohemia,  was  probably  the  cause. 

On  the  other  hand,  these  negotiations  with  the  papal 
party  exasperated  Zizka,  who,  as'Palackj^  says,  now  suspected 
the  whole  Calixtine  party  of  insincerity,  which  he  hated 
more  than  "  open  godlessness,"  as  adherence  to  the  Church 
of  Rome  appeared  to  him. 

Civil  war,  therefore,  broke  out  in  Bohemia  from  the  very 
beginning  of  the  year  1424,  which,  as  Palacky  says,  was 
^izka's  last  and  bloodiest  year.  Fighting  between  the 
Bohemian  parties  began  early  in  January,  as  soon  as  feka 
had  returned  from  Hungary;  and  several  skirmishes,  in 
which  he  was  invariably  victorious,  took  place.  Later  in  the 
year  he  defeated  the  Praguers  and  utraquist  lords  in  a  very 
sanguinary  and  decisive  battle  at  Malesov. 

It  is  pleasing  to  think  that  the  great  Bohemian  warrior  at 
the  moment  of  his  death  was  again  on  terms  of  friendship 
with  his  countrymen.  In  spite  of  the  strong  sympathy  for 
Bohemia  that  existed  among  the  Poles,  King  Vladislav  had 
definitely  sided  with  the  Pope ;  but  Prince  Korybut,  contrary 
to  the  king's  and  Prince  Witold's  wishes,  again  bravely 
entered  the  turbulent  arena  of  Bohemian  political  life.     He 


142  Bohemia 

undoubtedly  intended  to  obtain  the  Bohemian  crown,^  but 
the  Bohemians  only  recognized  him  as  provisional  governor 
of  their  country. 

It  seems  certain  that  it  was  through  the  mediation  of 
Prince  Korybut  that  peace  between  Zizka  and  the  Praguers 
was  agreed  on.  Zizka,  who  was  by  no  means  the  unreason- 
ing fanatic  such  as  former  history  described  him,  realized 
more  clearly  than  most  of  his  contemporaries  the  hopeless- 
ness of  the  continued  isolated  struggle  of  his  people.  He 
also,  and  no  doubt  rightly,  thought  that  it  was  only  from  other 
Slav  countries  that  his  country  could  hope  for  efficient  aid. 
For  this  reason  Zizka  always  showed  himself  friendly  to  the 
Polish  prince,  through  whom  aid  from  the  people  of  Poland, 
if  not  from  the  king,  could  perhaps  be  obtained. 

On  September  14,  1422,  a  treaty  of  peace  was  signed 
between  Prince  Korybut  and  the  Praguers  on  one  side, 
Zizka  and  the  Taborites  on  the  other.  This  treaty  was 
signed  on  a  spot  then  known  as  the  "Spitalske  Pole" 
(hospital  field),  on  the  spot  where  Karlin,  the  suburb  of 
Prague,  now  stands.  It  was  largely  due  to  the  eloquence  of 
the  young  priest  John  of  Rokycan,  who  afterwards  became 
very  celebrated  as  utraquist  Archbishop  of  Prague. 

The  exact  terms  of  the  treaty  are  not  known  to  us,  but 
the  reconciliation  was  a  complete  one,  for  immediately 
afterwards  the  utraquist  lords  and  Praguers  under  Korybut, 
and  the  Taborites  under  Zizka,  marched  together  against 
Moravia,  then  in  the  power  of  Sigismund's  son-in-law, 
Albert  of  Austria. 

Before  the  allies  had  reached  Moravia,  Zizka  died  of  the 
plague  during  the  siege  of  the  castle  of  Pribislav,  not  far 
from  the  Moravian  frontier  (October  11,  1424). 

Many  untruthful  and  invidious  accounts  of  the  death  of 
the  great  Bohemian  general  were  circulated  by  the  enemies 
of  his  nation,  and  have  been  constantly  repeated  even  by 
writers  as  recent  as  Carlyle.  They  may  be  traced  to  Aenaeas 
Sylvius,  who  states  that  Zizka  died  blaspheming,  and  ordered 
that  his  body  should  be  flayed,  his  skin  used  as  a  drum,  and 
his  body  thrown  to  the  wild  beasts.  In  contrast  to  these 
tales,  so  obviously  in  opposition  to  the  nature  of  Zizka  as 
recent  research  has  revealed  it  to  us,  it  may  be  well  to  quote 

^  Professor  Tomek  quotes  Korybut's  declaration  of  war  against  King 
Sigismund,  in  which  he  calls  himself  "desired  and  elected  King  of 
Bohemia. 


An  Historical  Sketch  143 

the  account  of  a  contemporary  writer,  not  improbably  an 
eye-witness.  He  writes  ^ :  "  Here  at  Pfibislav  brother  2izka 
was  seized  by  a  deadly  attack  of  the  plague.  He  gave  his 
last  charge  to  his  faithful  Bohemians  [saying],  that  fearing 
their  beloved  God,  they  should  firmly  and  faithfully  defend 
God's  law  in  view  of  His  reward  in  eternity;  and  then 
brother  Zizka  commended  his  soul  to  God,  and  died  on  the 
Wednesday  before  the  day  of  St.  Gallus."  Even  had  we  no 
historical  evidence  to  the  point,  this  tranquil  death  would 
appear  a  fitting  end  for  the  great  Bohemian  patriot.  He 
who  had  so  often  fought  what  he  firmly  considered  God's 
battles,  assuredly  did  not  dread  entering  into  God's  peace. 

The  importance  of  Zizka's  position  in  history  can  hardly 
be  exaggerated.  As  has  been  already  noticed,  it  was  en- 
tirely due  to  him  and  to  his  exceptional  military  genius  that 
the  Hussite  movement  did  not  collapse  as  soon  as  large 
armed  forces  were  moved  against  Bohemia.  Had  not  the 
genius  of  Zizka  contrived  to  render  the  Bohemian  warriors  | 
for  the  time  invincible,  the  name  of  the  Hussites  would  be 
unknown  to  history,  in  which  Hus  would  only  appear  as  an 
isolated  enthusiast  like  Savonarola.  ^  The  immediate  conse- 
quences of  the  death  of  Zizka  were  of  great  importance  to 
Bohemia.  He  was  in  command  of  a  large  army.  Had  he 
lived  and  freed  Moravia,  as  Bohemia  had  been,  from  the 
power  of  Sigismund  and  Albert,  a  Diet  of  the  two  lands 
would  have  assembled  and  in  all  probability  have  definitely 
declared  Prince  Sigismund  Korybut  king. 

The  death  of  their  great  leader  did  not  for  the  moment 
weaken  the  Bohemian  armies,  and  able  leaders  formed  in 
Zizka's  school  took  the  command  of  the  utraquist  forces.^ 
"Zizka's   blindness  had  that  advantage,   that   his   military 

^  Stari  Letopisove  Cesti  (ancient  Bohemian  Chronicles). 
^  ^  Zacharias  Theobaldus  {Hussitenkrieg)  records  several  epitaphs  on 
Zizka,  which  are  reprinted  by  Lenfant  in  his  Histoire  de  la  Guerre  des 
Hussites.     They  are  not  older  than  the  sixteenth  century.     The  most 
characteristic  of  them  is  the  following — 

"  Strennuus  in  bellis  hoc  dormit  Zizka  sepulchro 
Zizka  suae  gentis  gloria,  Martis  honos 
Ille  duces  scelerum  monacbos,  pestemque  nefandam 
Ad  Stygias  justo  fulmine  trusit  aquas 
Surget  adhuc  rursus,  quadratae  cornua  cristae 
Supplicii  ut  poenas,  quas  meruere  luant." 
The   "quadratae  cornua  cristae"  are,  of  course,   the  monks,  against 
whom  these  lines  breathe  such  bitter  hatred. 
^  Tomek,  /an  Ziika. 


144  Bohemia 

talents  had  been  already  largely  transferred  to  his  lieutenants 
and  aides-de-camp.  Obliged  to  see  through  their  eyes,  he 
taught  them  all  the  better  to  notice  the  advantages  afforded 
either  by  the  disposition  of  the  ground,  or  by  his  own 
experience  in  the  distribution  of  his  forces."^ 

Divisions  among  Zizka's  followers  arose  almost  imme- 
diately after  his  death,  the  causes  of  which  do  not  appear 
clearly  from  contemporary  records.  One  of  the  parties 
retained  the  name  of  Taborites,  while  the  other,  consisting 
probably  of  Zizka's  more  immediate  associates,  assumed 
that  of  the  Orphans,  thus  indicating  that  they  had,  in  losing 
Zizka,  lost  their  father.  The  two  parties  appear  to  have 
divided  the  captured  towns  and  castles  among  themselves ; 
Tabor  remained  the  head-quarters  of  the  Taborites,  while 
Kralove  Hradec  became  the  principal  stronghold  of  the  Or- 
phans. The  first  commander  of  the  Orphans  was  Kune^  of 
Belovic,  and  of  the  Taborites,  Hvezda  of  Vicemilic.  The  two 
priests  Prokop(who  are  better  known  to  readers  of  history,  and 
whom  Aenaeas  Sylvius  ^  mentions  as  immediate  successors 
of  lizksi)  only  obtained  command  of  the  Hussite  forces 
somewhat  later. 

The  estrangement  of  the  old  followers  of  ^izka  was  merely 
temporary,  but  it  none  the  less  raised  the  hopes  of  the  utra- 
quist  nobles  and  their  allies  of  Prague.  They  believed  that 
if  they  succeeded  in  suppressing  the  more  advanced  faction, 
it  would  become  easier  for  them  to  make  terms  with  their 
foreign  enemies,  and  perhaps  to  secure  the  recognition  of 
Prince  Sigismund  Korybut  as  king.  Warfare  between  the 
national  or  utraquist  parties — the  Taborites  and  the  Orphans 
forming  one,  the  Praguers  and  the  nobles  allied  with  them  the 
other  side — broke  out  in  various  parts  of  Bohemia  early  in 
the  year  1425.  After  the  capture  of  the  castle  of  Wozic  by 
the  Taborites,  whose  leader,  Havezda,  was  mortally  wounded 
during  the  siege,  peace  was  concluded  between  the  con- 
tending parties.  This  time  also  we  are  not  informed  as  to 
the  terms  of  the  agreement.  We  are  only  told  that  it  was 
decided  that  all  the  Bohemians  should  together  undertake  a 
campaign  against  Sigismund  and  his  son-in-law,  Albert  of 
Austria.  Probably  in  consequence  of  the  agreement  of 
Vozic,  a  Diet — presided  over  by  Prince  Korybut — assembled 
at  Prague,  at  which  not  only  members  of  all  the  national 
parties,  but  also  some  of  the  papal  party  were  present. 
*  Palack^.  *  Hisiorica  Bohemica, 


An  Historical  Sketch  145 

Some  members  of  the  latter  party  about  this  date  concluded 
a  truce  with  the  utraquists,  as  their  expectations  of  help 
from  King  Sigismund  gradually  decreased. 

King  Sigismund  had,  however,  by  no  means  abandoned 
his  hopes  of  regaining  Bohemia.  Before  the  treaty  of  Vozic 
had  been  concluded,  the  king  had  collected  a  large  army 
in  Moravia,  intending  to  enter  Bohemia.  The  various 
forces  of  the  utraquists  now  united  according  to  the  agree- 
ment, marched  against  him,  and  forced  him  to  evacuate 
Moravia ;  they  then  pursued  him  into  Austria,  where  they 
besieged  and  captured  the  town  of  Retz.  During  the  siege, 
Bohuslav  of  Schwamberg,  who  had  succeeded  Hvezda  of 
Vicemilic  as  leader  of  the  Taborites,  was  killed ;  and 
Prokop,  surnamed  the  Great,  a  married  Taborite  priest 
who  belonged  to  a  family  of  Prague  citizens,  became  their 
chief. 

The  German  princes  had  meanwhile  begun  again  to  take 
up  arms  against  the  Bohemians,  whom  they  hated  as 
heretics  and  as  belonging  to  a  hostile  race.  An  assembly 
of  German  princes,  presided  over  by  Duke  Frederick  of 
Saxony,  took  place  at  Nuremberg  (end  of  May  1426),  when 
it  was  decided  again  to  invade  Bohemia.  The  matter 
became  more  urgent  when  the  news  arrived  that  the 
Bohemians  were  besieging  the  town  of  Usti,^  which,  though 
situated  in  Bohemia,  had  been  pledged  by  King  Sigismund 
to  the  Dukes  of  Saxony.  Even  before  the  return  of  her 
husband,  the  Duchess  Catherine  equipped  a  large  force,  which 
was  to  march  to  the  aid  of  Usti.  She  herself  accompanied 
the  soldiers  as  far  as  the  Bohemian  frontier,  exhorting  them 
not  only  to  be  brave  but  prudent.  The  German  army  was 
70,000  men  strong,  while  the  Bohemians,  led  by  Prince 
Korybut,  Victorin  of  Podebrad,  Prokop  the  Great,  and 
other  commanders,  only  mustered  25,000  men.  When  the 
Germans  arrived  near  Usti  on  Sunday  morning  (June  16, 
1416),  the  Bohemians  wrote  to  them  begging  them  that, 
should  God  help  them,  they  would  receive  them  (the 
Bohemians)  "  in  good  grace "  (as  prisoners) ;  they  might 
then  expect  the  same  from  them.  But  the  Germans  in 
their  pride  and  haughtiness,  relying  on  the  strength  of  their 
army,  answered  defiantly  "  that  they  would  let  no  heretic 
live."     The  Bohemians   then  swore   to  one   another  that 

^  Generally  known  as  Usti  nad  Labem,  to  distinguish  it  from  Usti 
and  Orlici.     The  German  name  of  the  town  is  Aussig. 


146 


Bohemia 


they  also  would  have  no  mercy  on  any  man.^  The  Bohe- 
mians were  unwilling  to  fight  on  Sunday,  but  seeing  that 
battle  was  inevitable,  they  all  knelt  down  and  prayed  to 
God  with  great  piety  and  humility.  Korybut  in  a  fervent 
speech  entreated  them  to  meet  the  enemy  bravely  and 
with  a  cheerful  mind.  On  the  advice  of  Prokop,  who  here 
adopted  the  defensive  tactics  of  his  master  Zizka,  the  Bohe- 
mian army  occupied  a  hill  named  Behani,  near  the  village 
of  Predlitz,  and  at  no  great  distance  from  the  town  of  Usti, 
where  the  wagon-forts  could  be  firmly  established.  The 
Germans  attacked  bravely,  and  arrived  close  to  the  enemies' 
lines,  when  the  Bohemians,  who  had  reserved  their  fire, 
discharged  all  their  guns  at  close  quarters.  A  panic  among, 
the  German  forces  ensued.  The  slaughter  of  the  Germans 
was  terrific,  and  their  flight  continued  till  they  reached  the 
mountains  that  divide  Bohemia  from  Saxony.  The  Bohe- 
mians, as  had  been  agreed,  took  no  prisoners,  and  twenty- 
four  counts  and  lords  who  knelt  down  before  the  victors 
demanding  grace  were  instantly  killed.  The  Germans  lost 
over  15,000  men  during  the  battle  and  the  rout  that 
followed  it.  The  Bohemian  losses  were  very  slight,  though 
certainly  considerably  greater  than  the  number  of  thirty 
men  which  some  contemporary  writers  give.  The  camp 
and  supplies  of  the  Germans  also  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
Bohemians,  who  mockingly  said  that  their  enemies  had. 
incurred  the  papal  ban,  as  they  had  so  largely  enriched  the 
heretics.  The  town  of  Usti  surrendered  the  day  after  the: 
battle,  and  was  burnt  down  by  the  Bohemians. 

The  news  of  this  great  victory  over  the  Hussites  caused  a, 
panic  in  the  whole  of  Northern  Germany,  where  an  imme- 
diate invasion  of  the  Bohemians  was  expected.  Many 
towns  were  newly  fortified,  and  in  others  the  fortifications, 
were  repaired.  These  apprehensions  proved  unfounded,  at 
least  for  the  moment,  as  internal  dissensions  broke  out- 
among  the  Bohemians  immediately  after  their  great  victory. 
This  quarrel,  in  which  we  again  find  the  Taborites  and- 
Orphans  on  one  side,  the  Praguers  and  utraquist  nobles  on 
the  other,  was,  however,  of  short  duration  ;  only  in  one 
district  did  actual  war  between  the  opposed  parties  take 
place.  It  is  certain  that  before  the  end  of  the  year  1426. 
the  national  parties   in  Bohemia   were   again   on  friendly 

^   Palacky,  quoting  contemporary  records. 


An  Historical  Sketch  147 

terms,  for  we  read  that  early  in  the  following  year  the 
Taborites  and  Orphans  again  entered  Moravia  and  drove 
Sigismund's  son-in-law,  Duke  Albert  of  Austria,  out  of  that 
country.  They  then  followed  him  into  his  own  dominions, 
where  they  defeated  him  in  a  great  battle  at  Zwettl  (March 
12,  1427),  in  which  gooo  Austrians  fell. 

Almost  immediately  afterwards  an  event  took  place 
which  not  improbably  was  decisive  in  determining  the 
future  of  the  Hussite  movement.  Dissensions  again  broke 
out  among  the  clergy  of  Prague  ;  some  priests  had — to 
strengthen  the  alliance  with  the  Taborites — permitted 
greater  deviations  from  the  ritual  and  dogma  of  the 
Roman  Church  than  the  Articles  of  Prague  authorized. 
Among  the  prominent  members  of  this  party  was  John  of 
Rokycan,  v/hom  Archbishop  Conrad  had  consecrated  as 
Vicar- General,  and  Peter  Payne,  an  Englishman  by  birth 
who  was  generally  known  as  "  Magister  Englis."  The 
teaching  of  these  and  some  other  priests  caused  a  reaction 
among  the  more  moderate  Calixtines;  their  leader  was 
Magister  John  Pribram,  and  this  party  enjoyed  the  favour 
of  Prince  Korybut.  It  seems  certain  that  the  prince  had 
entered  into  negotiations  with  Pope  Martin  V.  He  pro- 
bably hoped  that  by  obtaining  from  the  Pontiff  some  such 
concessions  as  were  afterwards  granted  by  the  Compacts  of 
Basel,  he  could  pacify  Bohemia,  and  then  become  its  undis- 
puted ruler.  There  was  no  time  to  mature  these  plans. 
On  April  17,  1427,  Korybut  was  suddenly  seized  in  the 
castle  of  Waldstein;  his  adherents  made  an  unsuccessful 
attempt  to  liberate  him,  but  he  was  afterwards  allowed  to 
return  to  his  own  country.  Magister  Pribram  and  other 
ecclesiastics  of  the  moderate  party  were  also  exiled  from 
Prague. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  retirement  of  Prince  Korybut 
was  a  decisive  blow  to  the  party  which  hoped  to  establish 
an  independent  monarchy  under  a  sovereign  who  accepted 
the  Articles  of  Prague.  It  also — monarchy  being  at  that 
time  the  only  possible  form  of  government  over  an  extended 
area  of  country — ultimately  proved  fatal  to  the  hopes  of 
those  who  wished  to  preserve  the  autonomy  of  Bohemia, 
as  well  as  the  religious  ceremonies  which  had  become  so 
dear  to  its  people. 

A  monarch  of  Slav  nationality — belonging  to  the  reign- 
ing family  of  Poland,  in  which  country  sympathy  with  the 


148 


Bohemia 


Hussites  was  at  that  time  very  strong  ^ — would  perhaps 
have  fully  succeeded  in  a  task  in  which  George  of  Podebrad 
was  only  partially  and  temporarily  successful. 

As  soon  as  the  internal  dissensions  had  for  a  time  ceased, 
the  Bohemians  again  turned  their  attention  to  their  foreign 
enemies.  They  now,  for  the  first  time,  assumed  the  offen- 
sive. An  army  commanded  by  Prokop  the  Great,  Prokop 
the  Less,  leader  of  the  Orphans,  and  by  other  chiefs, 
entered  Lusatia  and  Silesia,  and  after  having  ravaged  the 
country  in  every  direction  returned  to  Bohemia  laden  with 
booty.  This  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  warhke  incursions 
of  the  Hussites  into  Germany,  which  it  will  be  unnecessary 
to  detail.  The  cruelty  of  the  Hussites  during  the  invasions 
of  Germany  long  remained  traditional  in  that  country; 
impartial  judges  will,  however,  have  to  admit  that  the 
Hussites,  on  the  whole,  behaved  with  more  humanity  in 
Germany  than  did  the  crusading  armies  during  their  re- 
peated invasions  of  Bohemia. 

Another  of  these  invasions  was  at  that  time  being  pre- 
pared. King  Sigismund  was  engaged  in  warfare  with  the 
Turks  during  the  whole  of  the  years  1427  and  1428,  but 
Pope  Martin  V  induced  several  of  the  German  princes  to 
undertake  a  new  crusade  against  the  Hussites.  As  leader 
of  the  crusade  the  Pope  chose  Henry  Beaufort,  bishop  of 
Winchester,  who  was  made  a  cardinal  at  the  same  time ; 
this  honour  was  also  conferred  on  the  old  enemy  of  the 
Hussites,  John  "  the  Iron,"  now  bishop  of  Olomonc.  His 
relationship  to  the  royal  family  of  England  ^  gave  Cardinal 
Henry  no  small  influence ;  this,  as  well  as  the  cardinal's 
long  experience  of  secular  affairs,  probably  governed  the 
Pope's  choice.  The  cardinal,  who  was  appointed  apostolic 
legate  for  Bohemia,  Hungary,  and  Germany,  and  received 
full  powers  from  the  Pope,  himself  accompanied  the  in- 
vading army,  though  the  Margrave  Frederick  of  Branden- 
burg assumed  the  military  command.  The  Duke  of 
Bavaria,  the  Archbishops  of  Maintz  and  Trier,  the  Bishops 
of  Bamberg  and  Wiirzburg,  were  among  the  many  temporal 
and  ecclesiastical  princes  who  in  person  took  part  in  the 
crusade.     The  total  force  of  the  invading  army  consisted, 

^  Want  of  space  renders  it  impossible  to  enter  further  into  the  little 
known  subject  of  the  extension  of  the  Hussite  movement  to  Hungary, 
Toland,  and  other  parts  of  Eastern  Europe. 

^  He  was  a  legitimized  son  of  John  of  Gaunt  and  Catharine  Swynford. 


An  Historical  Sketch  149 

according  to  the  lowest  estimates,  of  80,000  horsemen  and 
the  same  number  of  infantry ;  some  contemporary  writers, 
however,  give  much  higher  figures.  Cardinal  Henry  him- 
self was  accompanied  by  a  body-guard  of  1000  English 
archers.  It  was  decided  this  time  to  attack  Bohemia  from 
the  west,  in  which  part  of  the  country — the  district  of  Plzen 
— the  papal  party  had  more  adherents  than  in  any  other. 
The  invading  army  first  laid  siege  to  the  town  of  Stfibro, 
which  was  bravely  defended  by  the  Hussite  leader  Pfibik  of 
Klenau,  though  his  garrison  consisted  of  two  hundred  men 
only.  The  Bohemians,  as  usual,  united  in  the  moment  of 
peril,  immediately  marched  to  his  aid  under  the  command 
of  the  two  Prokops,  but  with  a  very  small  force,^  "  prepared  " 
— to  use  Palacky's  words — "to  defend  the  chalice  against 
the  whole  Christian  world."  When  the  Bohemian  army 
arrived  at  a  distance  of  three  (German)  miles  from  Stfibro 
on  August  27th,  1247,  a  terrific  panic  seized  the  crusaders 
at  the  mere  news  of  their  approach.  The  whole  army  fled 
in  a  wild  rout  till  they  reached  the  town  of  Tachov.  They 
were  met  by  Cardinal  Henry  of  Winchester,  who  entreated 
them,  if  they  valued  their  future  salvation,  not  to  fly  before 
heretic  forces  so  far  inferior  to  their  own.  He  caused  the 
papal  standard  to  be  displayed,  and  put  himself  at  the  head 
of  those  whom  he  had  persuaded  to  attempt  to  rally. 
Through  his  efforts  the  crusaders,  or  more  probably  part  of 
their  army,  remained  at  Tachov,  prepared  to  face  the 
Bohemians.  When  the  latter,  however,  arrived  two  days 
later,  their  appearance  had  the  same  result  as  at  Stribro. 
The  whole  army  fled  in  wild  confusion  in  the  direction  of 
the  Siimava,  or  Bohemian  forest,  which  here  constitutes  the 
frontier  between  Bohemia  and  Germany.  Thousands  of 
Germans  were  killed  by  the  Bohemians,  who  continued  the 
pursuit  as  far  as  the  passes  of  the  Sumava.  The  princes  of 
the  empire,  who  seem  to  have  undertaken  the  crusade  in  a 
very  half-hearted  spirit,  were  unable  to  control  their  men. 
All  the  prayers  and  entreaties  of  Cardinal  Henry  proved  of 
no  avail ;  it  was  in  vain  that  he  seized  the  standard  of  the 
empire,  in  a  state  of  furious  excitement  tore  it  into  shreds 
in  the  presence  of  the  princes,  and  then  with  fearful  im- 

^  Palack^  himself  considers  the  figures  he  gives — 15CX)  horsemen  and 
16,000  infantry — too  low ;  it  will  seem  probable  to  many  that  the 
Bohemian  chroniclers  of  the  Hussite  wars  sometimes  understated  the 
forces  of  their  countrymen  and  exaggerated  those  of  the  crusaders. 


150  Bohemia 

precations  threw  it  at  their  feet.  The  English  cardinal  was 
at  last  obliged  to  join  in  the  general  stampede,  and  narrowly 
escaped  becoming  a  prisoner  of  the  heretics.^ 

This  rout  of  the  invaders  was  again  followed  by  internal 
disturbances,  especially  in  the  township  of  Prague.  A  dis- 
pute arose  between  the  community  of  the  Stare  Mesto  (Old 
Town)  and  the  Nov^  Mesto  (New  Town)  with  regard  to  the 
distribution  of  the  confiscated  ecclesiastical  property.  The 
inhabitants  of  the  new  town  were  aided  by  the  Orphans, 
while  the  more  conservative  burghers  of  the  old  town 
attempted  to  re-establish  their  former  alliance  with  the 
utraquist  nobles,  which  had  been  interrupted  by  the 
deposition  of  Prince  Korybut. 

These  disturbances  do  not  for  the  moment  appear  to 
have  been  of  great  importance,  as  we  read  that  in  December 
of  the  same  year  (1427)  Prokop  the  Great  marched  into 
Hungary  at  the  head  of  a  Hussite  army.  He  ravaged  a 
wide  extent  of  country  apparently  without  experiencing  any 
resistance  from  the  Hungarians.  Prokop  afterwards  returned 
to  Moravia,  where  he  was  joined  by  reinforcements.  He 
then  undertook  a  new  invasion  of  Germany.  Penetrating 
far  into  Silesia  he  burnt  the  suburbs  of  Breslau,  and  forced 
many  of  the  Silesian  princes  to  conclude  treaties  of  peace 
and  even  of  aUiance  with  Bohemia.  The  Bishop  of  Breslau, 
who,  aided  by  some  Silesian  princes  and  towns,  attempted 
to  oppose  the  invincible  Bohemians,  was  defeated  in  a  very 
sanguinary  encounter  at  Neisse  (March  18,  1428),  in  which 
the  Germans  are  said  to  have  lost  9000  men.  During  the 
same  year  other  Hussite  bands  invaded  and  ravaged  the 
districts  of  Austria  and  Bavaria  which  are  nearest  to  the 
Bohemian  frontier. 

The  complete  failure  of  all  efforts  forcibly  to  subdue 
Bohemia  made  Sigismund,  at  least  for  a  time,  seriously 
meditate  on  the  possibility  of  a  peaceful  settlement.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  utraquist  nobles,  among  whom  Menhard, 
lord  of  Jindfichuv  Hradec,  was  now  the  most  prominent, 
after  the  departure  of  Korybut,  began  to  endeavour  to 
reconcile  King  Sigismund  with  the  Bohemian  people.  Men- 
hard  of  Jindfichuv  Hradec  wished  to  arrange  a  meeting 
between  Sigismund  and  Prokop  the  Great,  at  that  moment 
the  most  important  representative  of  the  utraquist  or  Hussite 
cause.  It  was  suggested  that  Prokop  should  visit  the  nominal 
1  Palack^. 


An  Historical  Sketch  151 

King  of  Bohemia,  who  was  then  residing  at  Presburg,  not 
far  from  the  Moravian  frontier.  Prokop  did  not  refuse  this 
proposal.  As  soon  as  a  safe-conduct  had  been  obtained,  the 
Bohemian  leader,  accompanied  by  Menhard  of  Jindfichuv 
Hradec,  by  Magister  Payne,  and  a  few  other  followers,  and 
by  an  escort  of  only  two  hundred  horsemen,  started  for 
Presburg,  where  they  arrived  on  April  14,  1429.  The  de- 
liberations that  took  place  did  not  at  first  appear  hopeless  ; 
both  parties  were  indeed  anxious  to  terminate  the  war. 
Kling  Sigismund,  who  had  assumed  a  conciHatory  attitude 
in  consequence  of  his  many  defeats,  received  the  Hussite 
envoys  graciously.  He  entreated  them  to  return  to  the 
papal  doctrine,  or,  were  that  impossible,  at  least  to  suspend 
all  hostilities  till  after  the  opening  of  the  great  Council  at 
Basel,  which  was  to  meet  within  two  years ;  to  this  Council 
he  wished  them  to  refer  all  disputed  points  concerning 
doctrine  or  ritual. 

The  proposed  truce  was  distinctly  unfavourable  to  the 
Bohemians,  who  by  accepting  it  would  have  lost  the  advan- 
tage of  their  recent  military  successes,  while  affording  their 
enemies  time  to  prepare  new  armaments.  The  Bohemian 
envoys  consequently  declined  to  give  an  answer  to  this  pro- 
posal, stating  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  do  so  before 
the  Estates  of  Bohemia  had  been  consulted.  On  the  other 
hand,  they  entreated  King  Sigismund  to  accept  their  articles 
of  belief,  assuring  him  that,  should  he  do  so,  they  would 
rather  have  him  as  their  king  than  any  one  else.  This 
proposal  irritated  Sigismund,  who  swore  to  God  that  he 
would  rather  die  than  err  in  his  faith. 

These  negotiations  thus  ended  in  failure,  which  became 
still  more  evident  when  the  Diet  assembled  at  Prague 
(May  23,  1429).  The  ambassadors  whom  Sigisitiund  had 
sent  there  questioned  the  Diet  as  to  its  willingness  to  be 
represented  at  the  future  Council  and  to  conclude  a  truce ; 
the  Diet,  however,  made  its  consent  dependent  on  conditions 
which  Sigismund  was  certain  not  to  accept.  The  Estates 
declared  that  they  were  prepared  to  recognize  the  future 
Council  if  the  Greeks,  the  Armenians,  and  the  Patriarch  of 
Constantinople  (all  of  whom  partook  of  the  communion  in 
both  kinds)  were  duly  represented,  A  further  condition  was 
that  the  Council  should  he  held  according  to  the  law  of  God 
and  not  according  to  that  of  the  Pope ;  so  that  not  only  the 
Pope  but  the  whole  Christian  world  could  freely  express  its 


152  Bohemia 

opinion.  Should  such  a  Council  assemble,  they  were  ready 
to  send  to  it  wise,  prudent,  and  pious  men,  and  to  furnish 
them  with  full  powers.  As  to  the  truce,  the  Estates  were 
only  prepared  to  grant  it  should  Duke  Albert  of  Austria 
evacuate  Moravia,  which  country  had  been  ceded  to  him  by 
the  Emperor  and  King  Sigismund.  They  also  made  several 
other  reservations,  of  which  the  most  important  were,  that 
the  truce  should  only  be  valid  for  Sigismund's  own  territories, 
but  not  for  Bavaria  and  Saxony ;  also  that  all  those  who  had 
formerly  accepted  the  utraquist  doctrine  and  then  deserted 
it  should  be  excluded  from  the  truce. 

King  Sigismund,  as  was  inevitable,  considered  these 
proposals  to  be  inadmissible;  he  had,  in  fact,  immediately 
after  the  rupture  of  the  negotiations  of  Presburg,  again 
begged  the  German  princes  to  arm  against  the  heretics. 
Pope  Martin  V,  the  most  indefatigable  enemy  of  Bohemia, 
also  caused  a  new  crusade  to  be  preached  against  the  land. 
Special  reliance  was  placed  on  England.  The  cardinal- 
legate  Henry  of  Winchester  had  equipped  a  force  of  5000 
men,  with  which  he  crossed  the  seas  in  July  (1429).  On  his 
march  through  Belgium  the  cardinal  was  recalled,  and 
ordered,  instead  of  continuing  his  march  to  Bohemia,  to 
proceed  with  his  troops  to  France,  where  the  victories  of 
Joan  of  Arc  at  that  time  rendered  his  presence  necessary. 
The  cardinal  obeyed  reluctantly,  but  was  forced  to  do  so, 
as  his  troops  declared  that  they  would  in  any  case,  even 
against  his  wish,  march  into  France,  as  their  king  had 
ordered  them  to  do  so. 

The  Germans  seized  on  the  abandonment  of  the  English 
expedition  as  an  excuse  for  giving  up  the  intended  crusade. 
They  were  comforted  by  the  hope  that,  after  defeating  the 
English,  Joan  of  Arc  would  appear  in  Bohemia  and  ex- 
terminate the  heretics.     A  very  menacing  letter  ^  which  she 


1  This  curious  letter,  printed  in  Pubitschka's  Bohemian  history,  is 
unfortunately  too  long  in  its  entirety.  Joan  of  Arc  begins  by  saying  : 
"  Jam  dudum  mihi  Johanne  puelle  rumor  ipse  famaque  pertulit  quod  ex 
veris  Kristianis  Heretici  et  Saracenis  similes  facti  veram  religioneni 
atque  cultum  sustulistis  assumpsistique  superstitionem  fedam  ac  nefariam 
quam  dum  tueri  et  augere  studetis  nulla  est  turpido  neque  condeliti 
quam  non  andeatis."  Joan  of  Arc  further  tells  the  Bohemians  thai 
"nisi  in  bellis  anglicis  essem  occupata  jam-pridem  visitatum  vos  venis' 
sem  Verumtamen  nisi  emendatos  vos  intelligam  dimittam  forte  angli 
canos  et  adversus  vos  proficiscar  ut  .  .  .  vosque  vel  heresi  privem  vel 
tiva."     Should  they,  however,  submit  to  the  Roman  creed,  "  Vestras 


'^  Mi 

ni  aM 

is-H 

ii.a 


An  Historical  Sketch  153 

was  supposed  to  have  written  to  the  Bohemians,  and  which 
for  a  time  was  widely  circulated,  confirmed  them  in  their 
hopes. 

The  Germans,  though  they  had  so  easily  abandoned  their 
intention  of  invading  Bohemia,  were  not  long  destined  to 
enjoy  peace.  In  the  same  year  (1429)  the  Bohemians  again 
attacked  them  in  their  own  country.  During  the  summer 
small  detachments  of  Bohemians  had  already  pillaged  the 
neighbouring  districts  of  Lusatia,  but  in  December  Prokop 
the  Great  led  into  Germany  an  army  greater  than  any  the 
Bohemians  had  ever  before  assembled  for  warfare  beyond 
their  frontiers.  This  adventurous  expedition,  of  which 
want  of  space  makes  it  impossible  to  give  a  detailed 
account,  first  marched  into  Saxony,  where  the  Duke  of 
Saxony  and  other  German  princes  had  assembled  an  army 
of  10,000  men  near  Leipzig;  this  army,  however,  dispersed 
at  the  mere  news  that  the  dreaded  Bohemians  were  ap- 
proaching. The  Bohemians  then  continued  their  march 
through  Germany,  burning  down  many  towns,  and  ravaging 
the  country  in  every  direction.  The  general  terror  was  so 
great  that  even  towns  distant  from  their  line  of  march  like 
Hamburg  and  Liineberg  prepared  their  defences.  The 
Bohemians,  however,  marched  southward,  intending  to 
attack  the  city  of  Nuremberg  before  returning  to  their 
country. 

Frederick  of  Hohenzollern,  Margrave  of  Brandenburg, 
and  Burgrave  of  Nuremberg,  who  seems  already  to  have 
been  gifted  with  the  political  insight  which  has  ever  since 
been  characteristic  of  his  race,  saved  the  town  from  the 
danger  that  menaced  it.  At  a  personal  interview  that  took 
place  between  him  and  Prokop  and  other  Bohemian 
generals  at  Kulmbach  (Feb.  6,  1430),  Frederick  concluded 
a  truce  with  the  Bohemians  in  his  own  name  as  well  as  in 
that  of  the  German  princes  and  the  towns  that  were  then 

ad  me  Ambassiatorcs  mittatis  ;  ipsis  dicam  quid  illud  sit  quod  facere 
vos  opporteat."  The  letter  ends  with  renewed  threats  should  the 
Bohemians  remain  obstinate.  This  letter,  the  original  spelling  of  which 
I  have  retained,  is  printed  in  Pubitschka's  Chronologische  Geschichtc  v. 
Bohem  (pf.  vi.  vol.  i).  It  is  dated  from  "  Suliaci  (Sully)  iii  Marci 
1429."  Palacky  also  mentions  it,  and  tells  us,  as  a  proof  of  the  im- 
portance which  was  at  the  time  attached  to  it,  that  he  found  a  copy  of 
it  among  the  documents  of  the  Imperial  chancellory  referring  to  Emperor 
Sigismund's  reign.  Mr.  Anatole  France,  in  his  Vie  de  Jeanne  d  ArCj 
has  republished  this  letter  in  a  somewhat  different  form. 
F2 


154  Bohemia 

allied  with  him.  The  Bohemians  promised,  on  payment  of 
a  large  sum  of  money,  to  return  to  their  own  country.  It 
was  also  agreed — and  this  condition  probably  seemed  the 
most  onerous  to  the  papal  partisans — that  a  meeting  should 
take  place  at  Nuremberg  between  papal  and  utraquist 
ecclesiastics;  and  the  validity  of  the  Articles  of  Prague 
was  to  be  there  discussed.  In  consequence  of  opposition 
on  the  part  of  the  Pope,  this  interview  never  took  place. 
The  Bohemians  meanwhile  returned  to  their  land  "  after  a 
more  glorious  campaign  against  the  Germans  than  any 
(other)  that  is  noted  in  the  chronicles.  Had  they,  like  their 
ancestors,  desired  glory,  they  would  have  marched  as  far  as 
the  Rhine  and  have  subdued  many  countries."^ 

All  contemporary  records  note  the  great  impression 
which  the  victorious  march  of  the  Bohemians  through 
Germany  produced  all  over  Europe.  The  danger  of  the 
Hussite  movement  spreading  to  the  neighbouring  countries 
seemed  an  increasing  one.  The  report  of  the  constant 
victories  of  the  Hussites  reached  France,  and  even  distant 
Spain.  Being  considered  as  a  proof  that  God  was  on  the 
side  of  the  Bohemians,  it  caused  similar  movements  (which 
were,  however,  rapidly  suppressed)  to  break  out  in  those 
countries.  The  more  far-seeing  adherents  of  the  papal 
cause  now  began  seriously  to  reflect  whether,  the  forcible 
suppression  of  the  heretics  appearing  impossible,  a  peaceful 
agreement  with  them  could  be  achieved.  The  German 
princes  were  also  anxious  for  peace. 

Where  political  parties  are  constituted  and  divided  from 
one  another  solely  by  reference  to  social  considerations, 
there  is  no  little  danger  for  the  State.  Such  a  condition  of 
things  did  not  exist  in  Bohemia  at  the  moment,  for  a  large 
part  of  the  utraquist  nobility  were  in  alliance  with  the 
Praguers,  and  a  few  nobles  and  knights  were  even  still 
found  in  the  Taborite  camp.  But  the  Hussite  movement 
constantly  tended  towards  becoming  more  and  more 
democratic. 

The  mere  fact  that  Prokop  the  Great,  a  man  of  modest 
birth,  had  become  the  leader  of  vast  armies  and  negotiated 
on  terms  of  equality  with  dukes  and  princes  could  not  fail 
to  excite  in  Germany  all  those  who  were  dissatisfied  with  the 
existent  order  of  things.  Sympathy  with  the  followers  of 
Hus  had  on  isolated  occasions  manifested  itself  in  Germany, 
^  Palack^,  quoting  from  contemporary  chroniclers. 


An  Historical  Sketch  155 

and  it  did  not  seem  impossible  that,  should  the  Hussites 
continue  their  invasions,  even  the  old  racial  hatred  between 
Slavs  and  Teutons  might  be  insufficient  to  prevent  the 
people  from  fraternizing  with  the  invaders. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Bohemians,  and  especially  the 
utraquist  nobles  and  the  burghers  of  Prague,  were  also 
desirous  of  peace.  A  ten  years'  struggle  against  almost  all 
Europe  had  not  unnaturally  exhausted  the  country.  It  was 
impossible,  without  incurring  the  risk  of  starvation,  to  keep 
the  whole  able-bodied  male  population  constantly  under 
arms.  The  Bohemian  leaders  had,  therefore,  been  obliged 
to  strengthen  their  armies  by  enlisting  foreign  mercenaries. 
The  great  booty  the  Bohemian  armies  obtained  rendered 
this  course  easy.  Large  numbers  of  Poles  and  Ruthenians 
— attracted  not  only  by  the  hope  of  plunder  but  also  by 
affinity  of  race,  and  in  the  case  of  the  Ruthenians  also 
of  religion — flocked  to  the  Bohemian  standards.  Many 
Germans,  even,  were  now  found  in  the  Hussite  armies. 
This  change  in  the  composition  of  the  utraquist  forces,  who 
were  no  longer  Zizka's  "warriors  of  God,"  contributed  to 
further  the  desire  for  peace  among  the  more  moderate 
Bohemians,  particularly  among  the  then  very  powerful 
utraquist  priesthood. 

As  it  was  certain  that  unconditional  subjection  to  the 
Pope's  authority  could  be  enforced  on  the  Bohemians  only 
at  the  point  of  the  sword,  it  was  consistent  with  the  ideas  of 
the  age  that  a  General  Council  of  the  Church  was  the  only 
available  expedient.  The  Hussites  had  all  along  considered 
the  accusation  of  heresy  as  the  greatest  of  insults ;  and  they 
strenuously  maintained  that  they  formed  a  part  of  the  uni- 
versal Church,  and  therefore  could  not  and  did  not  directly 
dispute  the  authority  of  a  General  Council.  They  main- 
tained, however,  as  has  already  been  noted,  that  no  Council 
could  be  considered  as  a  general  one  in  which  the  Eastern 
Church  was  unrepresented.^  They  also  wished  it  to  be 
stipulated  that  the  decision  on  all' disputed  questions  should 
lie  with  the  Council  and  not  the  Pope. 

^  This  point  of  view  seems  greatly  to  have  irritated  the  adherents  of 
the  papal  cause  ;  in  a  letter  of  the  year  143 1,  addressed  to  the  King  of 
Poland,  King  Sigismund  says  that  "the  Bohemians  only  recognize  the 
Council  under  certain  conditions,  demanding  that  the  Indians  [su], 
Greeks,  Armenians,  and  schismatics,  in  fact,  all  who  believe  in  Christ, 
should  be  present  at  the  Council,  as  well  as  other  things  to  write  which 
would  be  more  ridiculous  than  useful."     (Letter,  quoted  by  Palack^.) 


156 


Bohemia 


In  consequence  of  the  general  desire  for  peace,  several 
German  princes,  as  well  as  the  University  of  Paris,  earnestly 
petitioned  Pope  Martin  V  to  comply  with  the  universal 
wish,  and  assemble  a  General  Council  of  the  Church.  The 
Pope  was  strongly  opposed  to  this,  as  he  still  held  the  view 
that  force  of  arms  was  the  only  means  of  ending  the  Hussite 
troubles.  Martin  was  at  that  time  negotiating  with  King 
Vladislav  of  Poland  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  him  to 
attack  the  Bohemian  heretics.  These  negotiations  were 
unsuccessful.  King  Vladislav,  over  whom  his  nephew, 
Prince  Korybut — an  old  friend  of  Bohemia — had  at  that 
moment  great  influence,  assumed  a  less  hostile  attitude 
against  the  Hussites  than  he  had  shown  for  some  time. 

Though  still  hoping  to  organize  another  crusade,  Pope 
Martin  now  gave  a  reluctant  consent  to  the  assembling  of 
the  Council.  It  was  decided  that  it  should  meet  at  Basel 
on  March  3,  143 1,  and  the  Pope  directed  Cardinal  Julius 
Cesarini  to  preside  over  it  as  his  representative.  Cardinal 
Cesarini  was  at  the  same  time  appointed  papal  legate  for 
Germany,  and  instructed  above  all  things  to  urge  the 
German  princes  to  make  one  more  effort  to  subdue  Bohe- 
mia by  force  of  arms.  The  cardinal  therefore  first  pro- 
ceeded to  Nuremberg,  where  Sigismund,  in  the  spring  of 
the  year  1431,  had  assembled  a  Diet  of  the  Empire.  The 
Diet  almost  unanimously  decreed  a  general  armament  of 
all  Germany  against  the  heretics.  Cardinal  Cesarini  sent  a 
message  to  Basel,  w^here  the  members  of  the  Council  were 
already  beginning  to  arrive,  informing  them  that  their 
deliberations  were  to  be  deferred  till  after  the  end  of  the 
crusade,  in  which  he  himself  intended  to  take  part. 

The  Bohemians,  as  usual,  united  in  view  of  the  common 
peril,  though  we  read  of  another  serious  dispute  between 
the  priests  of  Tabor  and  those  of  Prague  about  this  time 
(April  143 1 ).  A  general  meeting  of  the  Bohemian  leaders 
took  place  at  Kutna  Hora,  in  which  twelve  regents  were 
chosen  for  the  provisional  government  of  the  land.  The 
regents  included  members  of  all  the  various  utraquist 
parties,  the  utraquist  nobles  not  excepted.  The  assembly 
soon  transferred  the  seat  of  its  deliberations  to  Prague. 
Ambassadors  of  the  Emperor  Sigismund  appeared  before  it, 
though  Sigismund  had  undoubtedly  already  decided  again 
to  appeal  to  the  fortune  of  war.  It  was  here  agreed  between 
the  regents  and  the  envoys  of  Sigismund  that  the  Bohemians 


An  Historical  Sketch  157 

should  send  ambassadors  to  Cheb,  where  they  were  to  meet 
Sigismund  himself  and  several  of  the  German  princes. 

The  negotiations  at  Cheb — as  all  parties  perhaps  expected 
— met  with  no  result.  Differences  of  opinion  as  to  the 
composition  and  the  powers  of  the  future  Council  were  the 
principal  obstacle. 

The  new  crusade  against  Bohemia,  destined  to  be  the 
last  one,  thus  became  inevitable.  The  Bohemian  ambassa- 
dors returned  to  Prague  (May  31),  informed  the  people 
that  all  hope  of  peace  had  vanished,  and  called  the  whole 
nation  to  arms  against  the  expected  invaders.  Prokop  the 
Great,  for  the  moment,  became  actually,  though  not  nomin- 
ally, dictator  of  Bohemia.  He  assembled  an  army  of  50,000 
infantry  and  5000  cavalry,  to  which  all  the  utraquist  parties 
contributed;  but  it  was  noticed  that  many  lords  of  that 
faith,  though  they  sent  their  contingents,  did  not  themselves 
join  Prokop's  standards.  Prince  Korybut  of  Poland,  how- 
ever, rejoined  the  Bohemian  forces  in  the  hour  of  peril, 
though  only  as  a  volunteer.  The  army  of  the  crusaders, 
commanded  by  Frederick,  Margrave  of  Brandenburg,  with 
whom  was  Cardinal  Cesarini — King  Sigismund  having 
returned  to  Nuremberg — only  crossed  the  Bohemian  frontier 
on  August  I.  The  crusaders,  and  particularly  the  papal 
legate,  were  full  of  hope  that  this  expedition  would  at  last 
succeed  in  extirpating  the  Bohemian  heretics.  The  cardinal 
had  just  received  a  large  sum  of  money  from  the  new  Pope, 
Eugenius  IV,^  to  aid  in  the  expenses  of  the  campaign,  and 
was  so  certain  of  victory  that  he  had  already  written  to 
Sigismund  asking  for  a  grant  of  land  in  Bohemia,  as  soon  as 
the  country  should  have  been  conquered. 

The  army  of  the  crusaders,  according  to  the  lowest 
estimates,  consisted  of  90,000  infantry  and  40,000  horse- 
men. Again  attacking  Bohemia  from  the  west,  they  first 
laid  siege  to  the  town  of  Tachov,  known  already  from  one 
of  the  former  crusades.  Unable  to  capture  the  strongly- 
fortified  city,  they  stormed  the  little  town  of  Most,  and 
here,  as  well  as  in  the  surrounding  country,  committed  the 
most  horrible  atrocities  ^  on  a  population  a  large  part  of 
which  had  never  belonged  to  the  utraquist  faith.  The 
crusaders,  advancing  in  very  slow  marches,  now  penetrated 

1  Eugenius  IV  succeeded  Martin  V  as  Pope  in  the  year  143 1. 
-  This  is  admitted  even  by  Aenaeas  Sylvius  {Historica  Bohemicd)^  a 
writer  who  was,  of  course,  hostile  to  the  Hussite  cause. 


158 


Bohemia 


further  into  Bohemia,  till  they  reached  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  town  of  Domazlice.  On  August  14  Prokop  the  Great 
and  his  troops  also  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that 
town.  "  It  was  at  three  o'clock  that  the  crusaders,  who  were 
encamped  in  the  plain  between  Domazlice  ^  and  Horsuv  Tyn, 
received  the  news  that  the  Hussites  were  approaching  and 
that  the  decisive  battle  was  near.  Though  the  Bohemians 
were  still  a  (German)  mile  off,  the  rattle  of  their  war-wagons 
and  the  song,  "All  ye  warriors  of  God,"  which  the  whole 
army  was  intoning,  could  already  be  heard."  The  cardinal 
and  the  Duke  of  Saxony  ascended  a  neighbouring  hill,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  inspect  the  ground  where  the  battle  would 
take  place.  Suddenly  they  heard  a  great  noise  in  the 
German  camp,  and  noticed  that  the  German  horsemen 
were  dispersing  in  every  direction,  and  that  the  wagons 
were  driving  off  to  the  rear.  "  What  is  this  ?  "  said  the 
cardinal.  "  Why  are  these  wagons  throwing  off  their  loads  ?  " 
Directly  afterwards  a  messenger,  sent  by  the  Margrave  of 
Brandenburg,  arrived,  announcing  that  the  array  was  in  full 
flight :  the  cardinal  should  therefore  think  of  his  own 
safety,  and  fly  to  the  forest  before  it  was  too  late.  The 
cardinal  escaped  with  great  difficulty,  menaced  not  by  the 
Bohemians,  but  by  the  crusaders,  who  threw  all  responsi- 
bility for  the  disaster  on  him.  To  save  him,  the  Bishop  of 
Wiirsburg  induced  him  to  assume  the  dress  of  his  military 
retinue.  He  thus  escaped  disguised  as  a  common  soldier, 
riding  away  very  mournfully,  and  remaining  a  whole  day 
and  night  without  partaking  of  food  or  drink. ^  The  victory, 
though  for  the  Bohemians  an  almost  bloodless  one,  was 
the  most  decisive  they  ever  gained.  The  Hussites  this 
time,  better  provided  with  cavalry  than  usual,  pursued  the 
enemy  far  into  the  passes  of  the  Bohmerwald,  and  inflicted 
immense  losses.  This  victory  for  a  time  put  a  stop  to  all 
attempts  to  coerce  Bohemia.  Cardinal  Cesarini  now 
becam.e  at  the  Council  the  strongest  advocate  of  a  peace- 
ful agreement  with  the  utraquists.  About  the  same  time 
that  the  battle  of  Domazlice  took  place  Bohemia  was  also 
invaded  from  the  north  by  some  of  the  Silesian  princes, 
and  from  the  east  by  Duke  Albert  of  Austria.  Both  these 
attacks  were  successfully  repulsed ;  the  priest  Prokop  "  the 

^  In  German,  "Tauss." 

2  Abridged  from  Palack^'s  account  of  the  battle,  which  is  founded  on 
the  narrative  of  John  of  Segovia,  who,  as  a  personal  friend  of  Cesarini, 
probably  had  many  details  from  the  Cardinal  himself. 


An  Historical  Sketch  159 

Lesser"  (Prokupek),  leader  of  the  Orphans,  specially 
distinguishing  himself  by  his  defence  of  Moravia  against 
the  Austrians.  With  the  exception  of  Plzefi  and  a  few- 
isolated  castles,  the  regents  now  held  undisputed  dominion 
over  the  whole  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  as  well  as  over  a 
large  part  of  Silesia ;  in  the  latter  country,  however,  their 
authority  was  always  contested. 

By  their  victory  at  Domazlice  the  Bohemians  attained 
the  summit  of  their  military  glory.^  At  no  period  was  the 
fate  of  Europe  so  completely  in  their  hands  as  at  that 
moment.  The  idea  of  opposing  them  in  the  field,  which 
even  before  this  crowning  victory  was  scouted  by  many,  now 
became  an  absurdity.  The  Bohemians,  on  the  other  hand, 
still  desired  peace.  It  has,  perhaps,  not  been  sufficiently 
noted  that  they  were  entirely  unaffected  by  the  intoxication 
of  victory.  They  made  no  attempt  to  assert  their  supremacy 
in  Europe,  which  would  not  have  been  impossible  for  them 
at  this  moment,  though  the  limited  extent  of  the  country 
and  number  of  their  population  rendered  the  prolonged 
retention  of  power  impossible. 

When  the  Council  of  Basel,  soon  after  the  arrival  of 
Cardinal  Cesarini,  sent  a  letter  (October  15,  143 1)  to  the 
Bohemians,  inviting  them  to  send  deputies  to  the  Council, 
the  proposal  was  on  the  whole  favourably  received.  The 
death  of  Archbishop  Conrad  (December  1431)  contributed 
to  render  the  moderate  utraquists,  and  especially  the  nobles 
of  that  faith,  desirous  of  an  agreement  with  the  Pope.  The 
archbishop  had  hitherto  consecrated  their  priests,  and  they 
were  now  dependent  on  Rome,  as  they  wished  to  preserve 
the  apostolic  succession  of  their  clergy. 

Very  lengthy  negotiations  between  the  Bohemians  and 
the  Council  now  began;  and  they  at  last  resulted  in  a 
compromise  that  procured  at  least  temporary  tranquillity. 

^  The  great  rejoicing  and  pride  of  the  Bohemians  on  the  occasion  of 
this  brilliant  triumph  appear  very  clearly  in  the  Latin  song  of  Lawrence 
of  Brezova.     He  thus  describes  the  flight  of  the  Romanists — 
'*  Sic  isti  de  Bohemia 
!Metu  palentes  fugiunt 
Et  ignorantes,  quo  eunt 


Suntne  ast  isti  milites 
Papae,  regis  sathalites  [sic']} 
Non  sunt  viri  sed  feminae 
Caprae  fugaces  misere 
Tmo  paventes  lepores 
Aut  exturbatae  volucres." 


i6o  Bohemia 

Even  a  summary  account  of  these  negotiations,  and  of  the 
numerous  embassies  sent  by  the  Council  to  Prague,  and  by 
the  Bohemians  to  Basel,  would  be  beyond  the  purpose  of 
this  book.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  mention  one  or  two  of 
the  most  important  deliberations  and  their  final  result. 

It  is  very  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  but  scanty 
information  concerning  the  internal  condition  of  Bohemia 
immediately  after  the  great  victory  of  Domazlice.  Con- 
temporary records  contain  little  beyond  accounts  of  renewed 
attacks  on  the  neighbouring  districts,  for  the  commencement 
of  the  negotiations  as  yet  involved  no  suspension  of  hostilities. 
Prokop  the  Great  seems  at  that  moment  to  have  exer- 
cised an  informal,  but  none  the  less  real,  dictatorship  over 
Bohemia.  All  the  utraquist  party  (more  or  less  willingly) 
still  recognized  him  as  their  leader.  Prokop  the  Great  is 
one  of  the  most  prominent  characters  in  Bohemian  history. 
This  appears  more  clearly  since  the  modem  historians, 
beginning  with  Palacky,  commenced  to  discuss  the  actions 
and  characters  of  Zizka,  Prokop,  and  the  other  leaders  of 
the  Bohemian  movement  as  they  would  those  of  other 
statesmen  or  warriors  of  that  age.  The  older  writers, 
following  the  example  of  Aenaeas  Sylvius,  generally  re- 
garded them  as  demons  or  magicians  who,  with  the  aid  of 
witchcraft  and  of  the  infernal  powers,  obtained  victories 
that  could  not  otherwise  be  accounted  for.  Prokop  the 
Great  was  distinguished  from  the  other  Taborite  leaders  by 
his  culture  and  love  of  literature  and  learning.  Equal  to 
Zizka  in  his  enthusiasm  for  his  nation  and  his  creed,  in 
force  of  will  and  in  courage,  he  was  his  superior  in  the 
science  of  politics.  Moreover,  he  was  less  of  a  fanatic 
than  his  predecessor.  Though  differing  from  the  Church 
of  Rome  more  widely  than  Zizka,  he  was  more  inclined  to 
compromise,  and  thus  sometimes  incurred  the  suspicions  of 
his  own  partisans.  The  whole  energy  of  the  party  of 
advanced  views — both  as  to  religious  and  social  reforms — 
was  personified  in  this  one  man,  and  it  was  inevitable  that  the 
Romish  party,  the  Calixtines  (or  Praguers),  and  the  utraquist 
nobility  should  at  last  have  united  to  bring  about  his  fall. 

As  already  mentioned,  the  letter  of  the  Council  of  Basel 
proposing  terms  of  agreement  was  on  the  whole  favourably 
received,  though  there  was  some  opposition  on  the  part  of 
the  Taborites,  Prokop  the  Great  at  first  appearing  unde- 
cided.    A  Diet  was  convoked  by  the  regents  at  Prague  in 


An  Historical  Sketch  i6r 

the  month  of  February  (1432).  After  a  long  and  stormy 
debate  it  was  decided  that  the  Bohemians  should  send 
envoys  to  Cheb,  where  they  were  to  meet  the  delegates  of 
the  Council.  A  further  deliberation  w^as  then  to  take  place. 
The  date  of  the  meeting  was  fixed  for  April  27,  but  it  was 
only  on  May  7  that  the  Bohemian  envoys  arrived  at  Cheb ; 
among  them  were  Prokop  the  Great,  John  of  Rokycan^ 
afterwards  utraquist  Archbishop  of  Prague,  Peter  Payne, 
commonly  called  "  Magister  Englis,"  and  a  few  utraquist 
knights;  among  the  delegates  of  the  Council  were 
several  prominent  ecclesiastics.  Though  preliminary  matters 
only  were  discussed,  the  debates  were  very  stormy.  The 
Bohemians  referred  to  the  fate  of  Hus  at  a  previous 
Council,  and  Prokop  the  Great  openly  questioned  the 
security  of  the  safe-conduct  which  was  to  be  given  to  the 
Bohemian  envoys  who  were  to  proceed  to  Basel.  He 
remarked  that  it  was  an  ancient  papal  doctrine  that  no  faith 
need  be  kept  with  heretics.  The  Bohemians  finally  con- 
sented— subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Diet — to  send 
representatives  to  Basel.  An  agreement  was  drawn  up^ 
the  principal  points  of  which  were  a  full  guarantee  of  the 
personal  safety  of  the  envoys,  and  of  the  right  to  express 
their  opinions  freely,  to  censure  the  abuses  of  the  Church, 
and  to  defend  the  four  Articles  (of  Prague).  The  envoys 
were  further  promised  honourable  seats  at  the  assemblies  of 
the  Council.  Finally,  it  was  stipulated  that  the  suspension 
of  Church  services  in  the  towns  through  which  the  envoys 
were  to  pass  (required  by  the  rules  of  the  Church,  as 
Bohemia  was  under  the  interdict,  but  resented  by  the 
Bohemians  as  an  insult)  should  not  be  enforced. 

A  new  assembly  of  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  was  held  at 
Kutna  Hora  in  August  (1432).  The  representatives  of 
Bohemia  at  the  Council  were  then  chosen,  but  the  Diet  did 
not  accept  the  proposal  of  a  truce  with  the  neighbouring 
countries  which  was  suggested  in  consequence  of  the  de- 
liberations at  Cheb.  The  following  months  were  spent 
in  negotiations  for  securing  the  safety  of  the  Bohemian 
ambassadors  during  their  long  journey. 

The  successful  resistance  offered  by  the  Bohemians  to 
the  vast  Romanist  armies,  had  not  only  in  Germany — 
where  hatred  of  the  Slav  is  traditional — but  in  all  Western 
Europe  engendered  a  ferocious  hatred  of  the  heretics.^     It 

^  As  a  proof  of  the   intense  hatred  of  the  Bohemians  that   then 


1 62  Bohemia 

was  therefore  only  after  two  envoys  whom  the  Bohemians 
had  despatched  to  Basel  had  returned  safely,  and  given  the 
most  reassuring  information,  that  the  great  embassy  at  last 
started  for  Basel.  Among  its  members  were  most  of  the 
former  envoys  at  Cheb.  We  again  read  the  names  of 
Prokop  the  Great,  John  of  Rokycan,  and  "  Magister  Englis." 
Of  the  secular  members  of  the  Embassy,  William  Kostka 
of  Postupitz,  Lord  of  Piirglitz,  held  the  highest  rank.  The 
embassy  consisted  of  fifteen  members,  and  was  accom- 
panied by  an  escort  of  three  hundred  horsemen.  They 
assembled  near  the  town  of  Domazlice,  whence  they  pro- 
ceeded to  the  Bohemian  frontier.  They  were  here  met  by 
the  German  troops,  who,  according  to  agreement,  were  to 
assure  their  safety  during  their  journey  to  Basel. 

It  was  on  the  evening  of  January  4,  1433,  that  the 
Bohemian  embassy,  which  had  travelled  from  Schafhausen 
by  water,  arrived  at  Basel.  They  purposely  and  prudently 
omitted  to  give  notice  of  the  exact  time  of  their  arrival,  but 
as  soon  as  the  news  of  their  arrival  spread  in  the  town, 
popular  excitement  was  very  great.  An  eye-witness  ^  tells  us 
that  the  whole  population,  even  the  women  and  children, 
crowded  to  the  house-tops  and  windows  to  watch  the 
strange  visitors,  wondering  at  their  terrific  countenances  and 
wild  eyes.  The  gaze  of  all  was  specially  fixed  on  Prokop 
the  Great.  The  people  said  he  was  the  man  who  had  often 
defeated  great  armies  of  the  faithful,  destroyed  many  cities, 
and  caused  the  death  of  thousands.  They  said  even  his 
countrymen  feared  him,  and  that  he  was  an  energetic, 
unconquered,  and  brave  leader  who  knew  no  fear.  The 
Bohemians  were  hospitably  received  by  the  authorities  of 
the  town  and  the  members  of  the  Council.  Reciprocal 
banquets  took  place,  at  which  the  discussion  was  generally, 
though  not  invariably,  of  an   amicable   nature.      A  slight 

prevailed  in  France,  Palacky  notices  that  the  name  of  **  Bohemians  " 
was  about  this  time  given  to  the  gypsies,  the  most  despised  tribe  known 
in  Western  Europe.  M.  Svatek  has  more  recently  attempted  to  explain 
the  application  of  this  singular  denomination  to  the  gypsies  by  the  fact 
that  many  of  them  arrived  in  Western  Europe  with  safe-conducts 
signed  by  King  Sigismund.  Sigismund  always  retained  the  title  of 
King  of  Bohemia,  even  during  the  time  he  was  excluded  from  the 
government  of  the  country.  The  arguments  of  M.  Svatek  {Cultur- 
Historische  Bildur  aus  Bbhmeii)  do  not  seem  to  me  to  contradict 
Palacky's  conjecture. 

^  Aenaeus  Sylvius  {Hist erica  Bohemica). 


An  Historical  Sketch  163 

difficulty  arose  only  two  days  after  the  arrival  of  the 
Bohemians.  As  had  been  agreed  at  Cheb,  the  Bohemian 
priests,  both  the  Calixtines  and  the  Taborites,  celebrated 
their  religious  services  according  to  their  own  rites. 
Curiosity  induced  many  citizens  of  Basel  to  attend  these 
services.  They  found  little  in  the  Calixtine  service  to 
gratify  their  curiosity,  as  mass  was  said  in  the  ordinary  way, 
and  the  only  novelty  was  that  the  faithful  partook  of  the 
consecrated  wine.  They  were  more  astonished  when  they 
witnessed  the  Taborite  service  conducted  by  Prokop  the 
Great,  for  he  used  neither  altar  nor  vestments,  and  all 
ceremonies  were  suppressed.  The  whole  service  consisted 
of  short  prayers,  a  sermon,  and  the  communion  in  both 
kinds,  of  which  the  whole  congregation  partook.  The 
ecclesiastical  authorities  brought  their  complaints  before  the 
Bohemian  ambassadors ;  they  considered  the  permission 
given  to  the  citizens  of  Basel  to  be  present  at  the  Hussite 
worship  as  an  attempt  to  spread  the  utraquist  teaching  in 
the  town.  The  Bohemians  answered  saying  that  they  had 
invited  no  one  to  be  present  at  their  religious  functions, 
and  that  it  was  not  their  business,  but  that  of  the  authori- 
ties of  the  town,  to  prevent  the  citizens  from  attending 
divine  service  according  to  the  Bohemian  rites ;  the  matter 
was  then  allowed  to  drop. 

On  January  lo  the  negotiations  between  the  Bohemians 
and  the  Council  began.  It  had  been  agreed  that  each  of 
the  four  Articles  of  Prague  should  be  discussed  by  one 
of  the  ecclesiastics  forming  part  of  the  Bohemian  mission. 
John  of  Rokycan  undertook  the  defence  of  the  second 
"  article,"  which  treated  of  communion  in  "  the  two  kinds," 
and  "Magister  Englis"  that  of  the  third  one,  which  re- 
ferred to  the  worldly  possessions  of  the  clergy.  These 
were  obviously  the  two  most  important  points.  After  the 
ending  of  the  pleading  of  the  four  Bohemian  priests,  four 
priests  chosen  by  the  Council  were  to  reply.  The  pro- 
ceedings opened  with  a  touching  exhortation  by  Cardinal 
Cesarini,  at  which  all  present,  including  the  Bohemians, 
were  moved  to  tears.  Rokycan  replied,  complaining 
bitterly  of  the  wrong  done  to  his  country  by  the  aspersion 
of  heresy  that  had  been  put  upon  it ;  he  further  expressed 
sincere  hope  that  the  whole  Christian  world  would  return 
to  the  institutions  of  the  primitive  Church.  On  January  i6 
Rokycan  began  his  argument  for  the  communion  in  two 


1 64 


Bohemia 


kinds,  and  his  speech  was  only  brought  to  a  conclusion 
at  the  meeting  of  the  Council  on  the  19th.  After  Rokycan 
the  other  Bohemian  ambassadors  delivered  their  orations ; 
the  last  of  them,  Peter  Payne,  finished  his  speech  on  the 
28th.  Some  of  these  speeches  caused  great  irritation  among 
the  Romanist  hearers.  This  specially  applies  to  Magister 
Payne.  He  praised  Wycliffe  and  his  doctrines,  and  alluded 
to  the  persecution  that  he  had  endured  at  Oxford,  stating 
that  he  had  been  obliged  to  seek  refuge  in  Bohemia.  Payne 
was  violently  interrupted  by  the  English  ecclesiastics  who 
were  present,  and  a  stormy  altercation  between  him  and 
them  took  place. 

When  the  Bohemian  priests  had  finished  their  speeches, 
Cardinal  Cesarini  caused  a  paper  to  be  read  enumerating 
twenty-eight  points,  or  "articles"  as  they  were  called,  in 
which  the  Hussite  belief  differed  from  that  of  the  Roman 
Church.  The  Bohemians  were  requested  to  define  their 
views  with  regard  to  these  articles.  This  clever  move  on 
the  part  of  the  cardinal  placed  them  in  a  rather  difficult 
position,  as  some  of  these  articles  referred  to  points  with 
regard  to  which  no  complete  agreement  existed  between 
the  Calixtines  and  the  Taborites.  Both  parties,  however, 
agreed  that  only  by  remaining  united  could  they  expect 
to  obtain  concessions  from  the  Council.  They  therefore 
gave  no  immediate  answer.  A  month  afterwards,  John  of 
Rokycan  made  a  statement  in  the  name  of  the  whole 
Bohemian  embassy.  He  declared  that  it  had  been  agreed 
at  Cheb  that  the  four  Articles  of  Prague  should  form  the 
basis  of  the  negotiations;  the  Bohemians  could  therefore 
discuss  no  other  questions  till  an  accord  as  to  the  four 
Articles  had  been  obtained. 

Before  Rokycan  had  made  this  statement,  the  four  priests 
on  the  papal  side  had  delivered  their  orations  in  answer  to 
those  of  the  Bohemians.  Rokycan  now  (March  2)  began 
his  second  speech  in  defence  of  the  communion  in  both 
kinds,  refuting  the  arguments  of  his  papal  antagonist.  After 
him  the  other  Bohemian,  and  then  the  papal  orators,  again 
spoke  in  the  same  order;  it  was  only  on  April  8  that  the 
last  of  these  speeches  came  to  a  conclusion. 

Before  that  date  it  had  become  evident  to  all  that  an 
agreement  was  for  the  moment  impossible.  Duke  William 
of  Bavaria,  who  had  in  the  absence  of  the  Emperor  Sigis- 
mund  held  the  position  of  "  protector "  of  the  Council, 


An  Historical  Sketch  165 

induced  four  of  the  prominent  Bohemians  to  meet  privately 
four  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Council.  Among  the 
latter  was  Cardinal  Cesarini,  at  whose  residence  the  dis- 
cussions took  place.  These  informal  interviews  did  more 
to  further  the  cause  of  peace  than  the  lengthy  display  of 
rhetoric  at  the  general  meetings  of  the  Council.  The 
Bohemians  were  beginning  to  see  that  a  general  reform 
of  the  Church  and  a  return  to  the  order  of  primitive 
Christianity  were  impossibilities.  The  members  of  the 
Council,  on  the  other  hand,  at  last  realized  that  con- 
cessions as  to  the  all-important  question  of  communion 
in  both  kinds  were  inevitable.  During  the  interviews  at 
Cardinal  Cesarini's  residence  it  was  settled  that  when  the 
Bohemian  envoys,  as  now  seemed  certain,  returned  to  their 
country,  they  should  be  accompanied  by  representatives  of 
the  Council;  it  would  thus  be  possible  to  continue  the 
negotiations  at  Prague. 

The  Estates  of  Bohemia  met  at  Prague  in  June  (1433), 
and  the  representatives  of  the  Council,  at  whose  head  was 
Philibert,  Bishop  of  Coutances  in  Normandy,  were  present 
at  the  deliberations.  The  members  of  the  embassy,  which 
had  returned  from  Basel,  reported  to  the  Diet  on  the  result 
of  their  mission.  As  had  probably  been  settled  at  Cardinal 
Cesarini's  residence,  they  announced  that  the  Council  was 
prepared  to  grant  to  Bohemia  the  right  of  receiving  the 
communion  in  both  kinds,  on  condition  of  the  Bohemians 
returning  on  the  Universal  Church  and  conforming  to  its 
regulations  on  all  other  points.  This  proposal  was,  on  the 
whole,  favourably  received  by  the  Diet.  The  Estates,  how- 
ever, demanded  that  the  communion  in  both  kinds  should 
be  obligatory  in  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  and  optional  in 
Silesia  as  well  as  in  Poland,  where  the  Hussites  then  had 
many  adherents.  The  deputies  of  the  Council  were  not 
prepared,  and  indeed  probably  had  no  authority,  to  grant 
these  terms.  They  therefore  left  Prague  (July  14,  1433) 
accompanied  by  the  Bohemian  ambassadors,  who  were  to 
continue  the  negotiations  at  Basel.  On  arriving  there  the 
Bohemians  informed  the  Council  of  the  conditions  of  peace 
which  their  countrymen  were  prepared  to  accept.  They 
formulated  these  terms  in  four  articles  that  constitute  (in  a 
subsequently  slightly  modified  form)  the  famed  "  Compacts  " 
which  up  to  the  year  1567  were  considered  one  of  the 
fundamental  laws  of  the  country.    The  Compacts,  which  are 


1 66  Bohemia 

founded  on  the  Articles  of  Prague,  run  thus  :  i.  The  Holy 
Sacrament  is  to  be  given  freely  in  both  kinds  to  all 
Christians  in  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  and  to  those  elsewhere 
who  adhere  to  the  faith  of  the  two  countries.  2.  All 
mortal  sins  shall  be  punished  and  extirpated  by  those 
whose  office  it  is  so  to  do.  3.  The  word  of  God  is  to  be 
freely  and  truthfully  preached  by  the  priests  of  the  Lord, 
and  by  worthy  deacons.  4.  The  priests  "  in  the  time  of 
the  law  of  grace  "^  shall  claim  ownership  of  no  worldly 
possessions. 

The  Council  refused  to  reply  to  the  demands  of  the 
Bohemian  envoys,  stating  that  its  decision  could  only  be 
made  known  to  a  general  assembly  of  the  Estates  of  Bo- 
hemia. The  Council,  therefore,  again  sent  delegates  to 
Prague,  who  travelled  there  together  with  the  returning 
Bohemian  envoys. 

New  internal  troubles  in  Bohemia  now  for  a  time  turned 
away  public  interest  from  the  negotiations  with  the  Council. 
The  Bohemian  armies  had  not  discontinued  the  warlike 
expeditions  which  the  still  valid  prohibition  against  trade 
with  Bohemia  indeed  rendered  almost  a  necessity.  We  find 
one  of  the  Bohemian  armies  fighting  as  allies  of  Poland 
against  the  Knights  of  the  Teutonic  Order,  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  Baltic  Sea.  At  this  moment,  however,  the  Hussites 
concentrated  all  their  efforts  on  the  capture  of  the  town  of 
Plzen ;  they  naturally  attached  great  importance  to  the 
possession  of  this  considerable  Bohemian  town,  which  was 
still  in  the  hands  of  the  papal  party.  The  most  important 
point  in  the  negotiations  with  the  Council  was  whether 
communion  in  both  kinds  should  be  optional  or  obligatory 
in  Bohemia,  and  it  was  difficult  to  demand  the  latter 
alternative  as  long  as  the  Catholic  town  of  Plzen  remained 
unconquered.  A  large  army  under  Prokop  the  Great  there- 
fore began  to  besiege  the  city  about  July  (1433).  It  was 
noted  that  the  utraquist  nobles  no  longer  joined  Prokop's 
forces. 

The  envoys  of  the  Council  reached  Prague  in  the  autumn 

^  This  may  be  shortly  interpreted  as  signifying  "henceforth."  Before 
acceptation  by  the  Roman  Church  this  article  was  qualified  by  an 
explanatory  note  stating  that  priests  and  monks  should  not  own 
hereditary  estates,  and  that  the  priests  as  "administrators"  of  the 
property  of  the  Church  should  manage  it  faithfully,  according  to  the 
injunctions  of  the  Holy  Father. 

<! 


i 


An  Historical  Sketch  167 

(1433).  They  earnestly  advised  the  Bohemians  to  accept 
the  conditions  which  the  Council  had  authorized  them  to 
offer.  Though  this  had  been  kept  secret  from  the  Bohemian 
envoys,  the  delegates  of  the  Council  had  been  authorized 
by  it  to  accept  the  communion  in  both  kinds  as  permissible, 
and  even  to  consent  to  the  other  Articles  of  Prague  in  a 
modified  form.  The  influence  of  the  delegates,  particularly 
on  the  more  aristocratic  section  of  the  utraquist  party,  was 
evidently  very  considerable ;  probably  through  the  influence 
of  the  utraquist  nobles  a  considerable  number  of  the 
clergy  were  induced  to  accept  the  Compacts  in  the  modified 
form  suggested  by  the  delegates  of  the  Council.  But  the 
agreement,  which  seemed  on  the  point  of  success,  again 
failed.  The  Taborites  from  the  first  were  opposed  to  the 
proposals  of  the  Council,  and  the  opinions  of  the  Calixtine 
clergy  were  divided.  One  party,  headed  by  Magister 
Pribram,  was  strongly  in  favour  of  peace,  and  of  accept- 
ing the  Compacts  in  a  modified  form.  Pribram  even 
declared  that  all  further  strife  was  a  mortal  sin.  On  the 
other  hand,  many  Calixtine  priests,  under  the  leadership  of 
John  of  Rokycan,  strongly  opposed  the  system  of  an 
optional  communion  in  the  two  kinds.  Rokycan  declared 
that  the  system  of  administering  communion  in  both  kinds, 
and  in  one  and  the  same  place,  and  even  in  the  same 
church,  would  prove  a  cause  of  constant  discord.  It  was 
on  this  point  that  the  negotiations  finally  failed,  and  the 
delegates  of  the  Council  left  Prague  (January  14,  1434). 
Before  starting,  they  urgently  exhorted  some  of  the  utraquist 
nobles  with  whom  they  had  become  intimate  to  take  a  more 
active  part  in  the  politics  of  their  country,  and  to  use  their 
influence  in  favour  of  a  future  agreement  with  the  Church 
of  Rome. 

The  formerly  powerful  Bohemian  nobility  had  indeed, 
since  the  departure  of  Prince  Korybut,  played  a  very 
insignificant  part,  the  Hussite  movement  having  acquired  a 
more  and  more  democratic  character.  This  was  felt  by 
many  nobles,  and  the  desire  among  them  became  general — 
were  they  but  assured  of  the  freedom  to  retain  the  revered 
chalice — to  act  in  union  with  the  papal  nobles  and  suppress 
the  turbulent  democracy  of  Tabor.  Before  the  departure  of 
the  envoys  of  the  Council,  the  Estates  had  decided  on 
electing  a  regent,  who  was  to  rule  the  country  with  the  aid 
of  a  council  of  twelve  members. 


1 68  Bohemia 

Ales  of  Riesenburg,  a  member  of  one  of  the  oldest 
families  of  the  nobility,  was  chosen  to  fill  this  difficult  post. 
The  occurrences  in  the  camp  before  Plzen  at  this  moment 
contributed  to  bring  matters  to  a  crisis.  The  siege,  which 
lasted  several  months,  demoralized  the  Taborite  soldiers, 
who  ravaged  the  whole  neighbouring  country.  Prokop  the 
Oreat,  who  attempted  to  maintain  order  in  his  camp,  was 
attacked  by  his  own  soldiers,  and  throwing  up  his  command, 
he  retired  to  Prague.  Perhaps  encouraged  by  this  event, 
several  nobles,  with  the  approval  of  the  regent,  now  formed 
a  league  ^^for  the  restoration  of  peace  and  order  in  the 
country."  The  league  was  joined  by  all  the  prominent 
'Utraquist  lords,  and  somewhat  later  also  by  those  of  the 
papal  party.  The  citizens  of  the  old  town  (Stare  Mesto)  of 
Prague,  who,  as  already  noticed,  constituted  the  conservative 
clement  in  the  town,  also  adhered  to  the  league.  The 
leaders  of  the  league  addressed  an  appeal  to  the  Estates  of 
Bohemia,  calling  on  them  to  join  the  new  coalition. 

The  first  conflict  took  place  at  Prague.  The  citizens  of 
the  Stare  Mesto,  aided  by  the  nobles,  subdued  the  Nove 
Mesto,  which  had  refused  to  join  the  league.  Prokop 
unsuccessfully  attempted  to  aid  the  citizens  of  the  new 
town.  Since  he  had  been  illtreated  by  his  own  soldiers  he 
seemed,  as  VaXsLckf  writes,  to  have  lost  his  self-confidence 
and  the  keenness  of  his  intellect.  The  foreboding  of  his 
tragic  fate  and  the  helplessness  of  the  cause  which  he 
defended  no  doubt  overwhelmed  him.  He  wrote,  however, 
to  the  priest  Prokupek  (Prokop  the  Less),  who  now  com- 
manded the  troops  before  Plzen,  saying  that  "with  the 
permission  of  God  the  false  barons,  aided  by  the  burghers 
of  the  old  town,  had  defeated  the  brethren  of  the  new 
town."  Prokop  the  Great  therefore  begged  him  to  raise 
the  siege  of  Plzen  and  march  with  all  his  troops  in  the 
direction  of  Prague.  Prokupek  acceded  to  his  wishes,  and 
the  leader  of  the  Orphans  joined  his  forces  to  the  troops 
of  Prokop  the  Great  and  of  the  other  leaders  of  Tabor. 
The  combined  forces  then  retired  in  a  direction  eastward  of 
Prague. 

Both  the  contending  parties  now  gathered  all  their  forces 
together,  in  view  of  what  all  foresaw  would  prove  a  decisive 
battle.  The  army  of  the  nobles  was  now  joined  by  almost 
the  whole  nobility  of  Bohemia,  from  the  unflinching  partisans 
of  Rome  to  the  most  faithful  Hussites,  many  of  whom  had 


An  Historical  Sketch  169 

fought  under  ^izka.  The  towns  of  Prague,  Plzefi,  and 
Melnik  were  the  only  ones  that  cast  in  their  lot  with  the 
nobles.  On  the  other  hand,  the  army  of  the  towns,  as  it 
was  called,  besides  the  men  of  Tabor,  Kralov^  Hradec,  and 
the  minor  Taborite  and  Orphan  communities,  contained  the 
levies  of  almost  all  the  Bohemian  cities,  with  the  exception 
of  those  mentioned  above.  A  few  knights  and  nobles,  of 
whom  John  Rohac,  Lord  of  Duba,  and  John  Kolda,  Lord 
of  Zampach,  were  the  most  important,  also  remained  faithful 
to  Tabor. 

It  was  on  the  wide  plain  that  extends  between  Kourim 
and  Cesk)^  Brod,  near  the  centre  of  which  lies  the  village 
of  Lipany,  that  the  world-old  struggle  between  aristocracy 
and  democracy  was  now  once  again  fought  out.^  The  army 
of  the  towns  was  led  by  the  two  Prokops,  Rohdc  of  Duba, 
Kolda  of  Zampach  and  other  chiefs  of  the  Orphans  and 
Taborites.  The  nobles  were  commanded  by  Borek  of 
Miletinek,  an  experienced  general  who  had  formerly  served 
under  Zizka's  orders.  With  him  were  the  Regent  Ales  of 
Riesenburg ;  George  of  Podebrad,  the  future  king ;  Ulrich 
of  Rosenberg,  leader  of  the  papal  party,  and  almost  the 
whole  nobility  of  Bohemia.  Their  army  was  about  25,000 
men  strong,  whilst  the  Taborites  and  townsmen,  weakened 
by  many  defections,  only  numbered  18,000  men.  Both 
armies  formed  behind  the  wagon-entrenchments,  or  "  lagers," 
which  were  then  so  important  a  feature  in  Bohemian 
warfare. 

The  battle  (May  30,  1434)  was  won  by  Miletinek  by  a 
stratagem.  He  ordered  the  van  of  his  army,  which  was 
probably  drawn  up  in  front  of  the  wagon-entrenchment,  to 
simulate  flight.  The  Taborites,  perhaps  rendered  imprudent 
by  their  many  victories,  left  their  entrenchments,  rushing 
out  to  pursue  the  flying  foe.  They  were  immediately 
attacked  by  the  horsemen  of  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  and  put 
to  flight.  While  hastening  back  to  their  entrenchments 
they  were  attacked  by  the  rest  of  the  army  of  the  nobles, 
who  succeeded  in  penetrating  into  their  "lager"  at  the  same 
time  as  the  fugitives.  The  battle  now  became  a  massacre, 
which  continued  through  the  whole  night  until  the  following 

^  Many  detailed  accounts  of  this  great  battle  have  reached  us  ;  they 
are,  however,  very  contradictory.  The  picturesque  account  of  Aenaeas 
Sylvius  is  too  evidently  an  imitation  of  classical  authors  in  the  manner 
fashionable  at  the  time  of  the  Renaissance. 


170  Bohemia 

morning.  It  must  be  considered  as  the  extermination 
rather  than  as  the  defeat  of  the  Taborites  ;  13,000  of  their 
men  perished  in  the  battle,  and  several  hundred  prisoners 
were  cruelly  burnt  to  death  in  the  huts  in  which  they  had 
been  temporarily  shut  up.^  A  small  detachment  only 
escaped.  Prokop  the  Great,  Prokop  the  Less  (Prokupek), 
and  most  of  the  other  leaders  fell  in  this  battle.  "  Thus 
these  Bohemians  could  only  be  conquered  by  other 
Bohemians ;  they  who  had  proved  themselves  invincible 
to  all  Germans,  and  had  spread  the  terror  and  the  glory  of 
their  name  through  the  whole  world."  ^  Though  of  course 
many  Taborites  still  remained,  yet  Falscckf  is  undoubtedly 
right  in  dating  "  the  fall  of  Tabor  "  from  the  battle  of  Lipany, 
rather  than  from  the  capture  of  the  town  itself  (which  only 
took  place  in  1542). 

The  more  warlike  among  the  men  of  Tabor  mostly  left 
their  country.  They  became  mercenaries  in  the  service  of 
foreign  countries,  especially  in  Hungary,  and  the  Ukraine 
and  other  border-lands  between  Russia  and  Poland;  the 
Cossacks  in  these  districts  are  said  to  have  learnt  and 
adopted  the  system  of  warfare  of  the  Taborites.  The  more 
peaceful  and  pious  Taborites,  despairing  altogether  of  a 
world  in  which  their  religious  views  no  longer  prevailed, 
retired  to  secluded  spots,  where  they  gave  themselves  up 
entirely  to  prayers  and  devotion.  They  not  inconsiderably 
contributed  to  the  foundation  of  the  sect  of  the  "  Bohemian 
Brethren  "  (Moravians)  ^  which  arose  about  this  time. 

The  complete  defeat  of  the  more  advanced  party  in 
Bohemia  was  naturally  followed  by  a  reaction  which  ex- 

^  The  people  of  Bohemia  long  refused  to  believe  in  the  death  of  the 
Taborites,  and  maintained  that  they  were  in  hiding  in  a  cave  in  the 
mountain  Blanik,  whence  they  were  expected  some  day  to  reappear  to 
save  Bohemia  in  her  moment  of  greatest  peril. 

2  Bienenberg,  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Koniggrdtz. 

^  The  connection  of  the  Taborites  with  the  Bohemian  Brethren  was 
long  a  disputed  point  in  Bohemian  history ;  all  recent  Bohemian  his- 
torians, however,  maintain  its  existence.  Professor  Goll  {Quellen  zur 
Geschichte  der  Bohmischen  Brilder)  tells  us  that  the  Brethren  did  not 
wish  to  be  considered  as  continuators  of  the  Taborites.  They  protested 
against  this  theory  with  a  degree  of  energy  which  was  not  justified  by 
the  facts  of  the  case.  I  have  preferred  to  call  the  new  sect  "  Bohemian 
Brethren"  rather  than  "Moravians,"  as  the  former  denomination  is 
alone  used  by  German  and  Bohemian  writers  ;  their  doctrines  were  also 
not  in  all  points  identical  with  those  of  the  sect  now  known  as  the 
Moravians. 


An  Historical  Sketch  171 

tended  both  to  political  and  to  ecclesiastical  affairs  ;  and 
the  reconciliation  with  the  papal  Church,  together  with  the 
general  acceptation  of  Emperor  Sigismund  as  king,  became 
certain  from  the  moment  of  the  battle  of  Lipany.  A  meeting 
of  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia  took  place  only 
three  weeks  after  the  battle.  A  truce  was  concluded  be- 
tween the  utraquists  and  the  papal  party,  and  it  was  decided 
to  negotiate  with  Sigismund,  with  a  view  to  his  assumption 
of  the  government  of  the  country.  It  was  further  decided 
to  send  a  deputation  to  Regensburg,  where  the  Emperor 
then  resided,  and  where  he  had  been  joined  by  representatives 
of  the  Council. 

Sigismund  received  the  Bohemian  ambassadors  (August 
1434)  very  graciously.  He  assured  them  that  he  was  no 
stranger,  and  that  he  considered  himself  a  Bohemian  and 
a  citizen  of  Prague.  He  recalled  to  them  his  descent  in  the 
female  line  from  the  man  whom  their  ancestors  had  once 
called  away  from  the  plough  to  their  throne,^  and  referred  to 
the  fact  that  his  father's  (the  Emperor  Charles's)  name  was 
still  revered  by  high  and  low  in  their  country.  A  complete 
agreement  was  not  obtained  at  Regensburg,  though  the  only 
disputed  point  now  was  the  question  to  what  extent  com- 
munion in  both  kinds  should  in  future  be  permissible  in 
Bohemia  and  Moravia.  The  Bohemian  representatives 
declared  that  they  wished  to  be  in  full  accord  with  their  king 
before  negotiating  with  the  Council.  For  this  purpose  the 
Estates  again  met  (October  1434)  at  Prague.  The  utraquists 
here  made  further  concessions.  It  had  become  evident  to 
them  that  communion  in  the  two  kinds  could  not  be  forced 
on  the  adherents  of  the  papal  party  in  Bohemia,  The 
Estates  therefore  decided  to  ascertain  in  what  form  com- 
munion was  at  that  moment  administered  in  all  the  parochial 
and  other  churches  of  Bohemia,  and  to  propose  that  this 
should  be  the  rule  for  the  future. 

The  Estates  further  demanded  that  the  Archbishop  of 
Prague  and  his  suffragans  should,  according  to  the  old 
institutions  of  the  land,  be  elected  by  the  Estates  and  the 
clergy,  subject  to  the  sanction  of  the  king;  they  claimed, 
finally,  that  no  Church  livings  in  Bohemia  or  Moravia  should 
be  conferred  on  foreigners.  These  demands  were  trans- 
mitted to  the  Council,  and  it  was  settled  that  a  new 
deputation  of  the  Estates  should  meet  the  king  and  the 
^  Premysl :  see  Chap.  II. 


172  Bohemia 

representatives  of  the  Council  at  Brno  ^  for  further  negotia- 
tions.    This  meeting  only  took  place  in  July  1435. 

Fresh  difficulties  here  arose,  especially  with  regard  to  the 
nomination  of  a  new  Archbishop  of  Prague.  The  envoys 
of  the  Council  even  made  preparations  to  return  to  Basel. 
They  were  at  the  last  moment  prevented  from  doing  so  by 
the  efforts  of  Sigismund,  who  had  already  arrived  at  an 
agreement  with  his  future  subjects  on  almost  all  points. 
The  Emperor  even  went  so  far  as  to  sign  a  document  by 
which  he  promised  to  lend  the  Bohemians  his  aid  in  main- 
taining the  existing  form  of  communion  as  proposed  by  the 
last  Diet  at  Prague,  and  the  right  of  electing  the  Archbishop 
of  Prague  and  his  suffragans.  An  immediate  agreement 
with  the  representatives  of  the  Council  appearing  impossible, 
further  negotiations  were  deferred  till  a  new  meeting  of  the 
Diet  took  place  at  Prague  (Sept.  1435).  At  this  assembly 
the  Estates  unanimously  elected  John  of  Rokycan  Arch- 
bishop of  Prague.  Sigismund  was  informed  of  this  election, 
but  an  agreement  still  seemed  far  off.  The  Emperor  had 
about  this  time  given  a  verbal  assurance  to  the  envoys  of 
the  Council  that  he  would  not  interfere  in  ecclesiastical 
matters ;  he  thus  practically  cancelled  the  promises  which 
he  had  made  to  the  Bohemians.  The  latter,  on  the  other 
hand,  declined  to  accept  the  Compacts  in  the  modified 
form  suggested  by  the  Council  till  Rokycan  had  been 
recognized  as  Archbishop  of  Prague  both  by  the  Emperor 
and  by  the  Roman  Church.  Another  meeting  between 
the  Bohemians  and  the  Romanist  envoys  at  Jihlava^  in 
Moravia  in  June  1436.  The  representatives  of  the  Council 
still  refused  to  ratify  the  election  of  Rokycan.  They  suggested 
that  Bishop  Philibert  of  Coutances,  who  had  formerly  been 
sent  by  the  Council  as  envoy  to  Bohemia,  should  act  pro- 
visionally as  Archbishop  of  Prague.  This  proposal  greatly 
incensed  the  Bohemians.  The  promises  of  Sigismund  and 
his  son-in-law,  Albert  of  Austria,  that  they  would  use  all 
their  influence  to  obtain  the  recognition  of  Rokycan  by  the 
Roman  Church  to  a  certain  extent  pacified  the  Bohemians, 
particularly  as  the  feeling  in  favour  of  peace  was  constantly 
becoming  stronger  in  Bohemia.  On  July  5,  1436,  the 
Bohemian  deputies  at  last  solemnly  accepted  and  subscribed 
the  Compacts,  with  the  not  very  important  modifications 
on  which  the  Council  of  Basel  had  insisted.  The  repre- 
*  In  German  "Brunn."  '  In  German  "  Iglau.** 


An  Historical  Sketch  173 

sentatives  then  rescinded  the  decree  of  excommunication 
against  the  Bohemians,  declared  them  to  be  faithful  sons  of 
the  Church,  and  proclaimed  peace  between  Bohemia  and 
the  other  nations. 

Immediately  afterwards  Sigismund  issued  a  decree  con- 
firming all  the  ancient  rights  of  Bohemia.  The  regent  Ale§ 
of  Riesenburg  resigned  his  office,  and  Sigismund  was  recog- 
nized as  King  of  Bohemia  by  all  the  Estates  of  the  country. 
Sigismund,  now  undisputed  sovereign  of  the  land,  made  his 
entry  into  Prague  on  August  23,  1436.  He  was  enthusias- 
tically received  by  the  people,  who  now  at  last  hoped  for 
more  peaceful  times. 

King  Sigismund  was  already  sixty-eight  years  old  when  he 
at  last  secured  the  possession  of  the  kingdom.  He  was  only 
to  reign  over  Bohemia  for  a  few  months. 

This  period  of  comparative  tranquillity,  after  so  many 
eventful  years,  may  be  passed  over  with  very  slight  notice. 
Sigismund's  policy,  though  as  reactionary  as  circumstances 
permitted,  was  rendered  cautious  by  his  experiences.  When 
the  necessary  redistribution  of  the  principal  offices  of  State 
and  court  took  place,  Sigismund  attempted  to  exclude  all 
who  were  not  either  Romanists,  or  belonged  to  that  part  of 
the  utraquist  party  which  was  nearest  to  Rome.  His  views 
with  regard  to  heretics  probably  differed  little  from  those  he 
had  expressed  at  Constance  many  years  before,  but  he  was 
thoroughly  aware  of  the  importance  of  avoiding  a  new  out- 
break of  hostilities.  The  towns  of  Tabor  and  Kralove 
Hradec,  still  held  by  the  advanced  party,  were  pacified  by 
treaties  which  guaranteed  to  them  a  certain  amount  of  auto- 
nomy. Of  the  few  opponents  of  the  new  king,  John  Rohac, 
Lord  of  Duba,  was  especially  remarkable.  Even  after  the 
submission  of  the  town  of  Kralove  Hradec  he  continued  a 
guerilla  warfare,  the  centre  of  which  was  the  castle  of 
"  Sion  " — a  name  which,  like  Tabor,  Oreb,  and  so  many 
others,  shows  how  great  was  the  effect  of  the  recently 
acquired  right  of  studying  the  Scriptures.  After  a  lengthy 
siege,  Rohac  of  Duba  was  obliged  to  capitulate  uncondi- 
tionally. He  and  his  followers  were  afterwards  publicly 
executed  on  the  market-place  of  the  old  town  (Starom- 
estske  Namesti)  at  Prague.  This  injudicious  severity 
caused  great  indignation  in  Bohemia,  and  was  probably  the 
principal  cause  of  the  renewed  troubles  during  the  last 
months  of  Sigismund's  life.     Among  others,  John  Kolda, 


174  Bohemia 

Lord  of  Zampach,  one  of  the  few  nobles  who  still  adhered 
to  the  party  of  Tabor,  again  took  up  arms  and  forcibly 
obtained  possession  of  the  town  of  Nachod. 

More  important  than  these  local  disturbances  was  the 
difficulty  with  regard  to  the  appointment  of  an  Archbishop 
of  Prague.  As  already  mentioned,  John  of  Rokycan  had 
been  elected  by  the  Estates,  but  neither  the  Pope  nor  the 
Council  had  confirmed  his  election.  Philibert,  Bishop  of 
Coutances,  also  resided  in  Prague,  in  an  undefined  capacity, 
but  with  the  secret  approval  of  King  Sigismund.  The 
king's  attitude  in  this  matter  was  not  free  from  the  accusa- 
tion of  double-dealing.  "  Publicly  Sigismund  wrote  to  the 
Council  recommending  it  to  confirm  Rokycan's  nomination 
as  archbishop  ;  secretly,  he  advised  the  contrary."  ^ 

Though  no  settlement  of  this  difficult  question  was  arrived 
at,  the  long-expected  sanction  of  the  "  Compacts  "  by  the 
Council  of  Basel  at  last  reached  Prague  (Feb.  1437).  By 
order  of  Sigismund  a  decree  was  read  out  in  the  Bohemian, 
Latin,  Hungarian,  and  German  languages,  in  the  "  Corpus 
Christi  "  Chapel  at  Prague,  declaring  "  that  the  Bohemians 
and  Moravians  who  received  the  flesh  and  blood  of  God  in 
both  kinds  were  true  Christians,  and  genuine  sons  of  the 
Church."  Two  inscriptions  on  stone  were  placed  in  the 
chapel  to  commemorate  this  important  event.^ 

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  (1437)  Sigismund  became 
seriously  ill,  and  perhaps  feeling  that  his  end  was  near, 
decided  to  return  to  Hungary.  He  had  already  expressed 
the  wish  to  be  interred  in  that  country,  at  Grosswardin,  in  a 
vault  which  had  been  specially  prepared.  His  one  remain- 
ing anxiety  was  to  secure  the  succession  to  the  Bohemian 
throne  to  his  son-in-law  Albert  of  Austria.  The  claim  of 
Albert  was  founded  on  the  treaty  concluded  by  the  Emperor 
Charles,  according  to  which  the  houses  of  Luxemburg  and 
Habsburg  had  reciprocally  recognized  each  other  as  heirs, 
should  one  or  the  other  line  become  extinct.  Sigismund 
hoped  to  realize  his  object  more  surely  if  he  could  establish 
Albert  as  ruler  of  Bohemia  during  his  lifetime.  This 
appeared  to  him  all  the  more  necessary  in  consequence  of 
the  intrigues  of  his  consort,  the  Empress  Barbara.     During 

^  Tomek. 

2  The  Corpus  Christi  Chapel  was  demoJished  in  1798.  The  tablets 
containing  the  inscription  mentioned  above  are  preserved  in  the 
Bohemian  Museum  at  Prague. 


An  Historical  Sketch  175 

the  Emperor's  journey  to  Hungary  his  illness  rapidly  in- 
creased, and  he  died  at  Znoymo,  December  9,  1437,  before 
arriving  in  Hungary. 

Contrary  to  the  apprehensions  of  Sigismund  in  his  last 
days,  Albert,  Duke  of  Austria,  obtained  the  recognition  of 
his  right  to  the  throne  of  Bohemia  without  much  opposition. 
This  is  the  more  worthy  of  notice  as  Albert  had  never  made 
a  secret  of  his  sympathy  with  the  Germans.  Even  during 
the  years  when  he  governed  Moravia  in  the  name  of  his 
father-in-law,  he  had  refused  to  learn  the  Bohemian  lan- 
guage. He  thus  naturally  gave  offence  to  the  people  on  a 
point  where  the  national  susceptibility  is  perhaps  none  the 
less  keen  because  the  range  of  the  national  language  is 
somewhat  limited.  He  therefore  appeared  to  the  Bohemians, 
to  use  the  words  of  Palacky,  "  as  the  representative  of  that 
evil  spirit  which  always  claimed  for  the  German  a  certain 
superiority  over  the  Slav,  and  in  fact  despised  everything 
that  was  Slavonic." 

Albert  was  not  able  to  proceed  to  Bohemia  immediately 
after  the  death  of  Sigismund.  He  was  detained  by  negotia- 
tions as  to  the  succession  to  the  crowns  of  Germany  and 
Hungary,  which  had  also  become  vacant  by  the  death  of 
his  father-in-law.  Having  succeeded  in  obtaining  his 
recognition  as  king  by  the  Hungarians,  and  having  also 
been  chosen  as  king  of  the  German  Electors,  Albert  arrived 
in  Bohemia  in  April  (1438).  Sigismund  had  during  his 
short  reign  done  everything  to  facilitate  the  succession  of 
his  son-in-law. 

The  most  prominent  offices  in  the  State  were  held  by 
Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  always  an  unswerving  adherent  of  the 
Roman  cause,  and  by  Menhard  of  Jindfichuv  Hradec,  who, 
though  an  utraquist,  was  entirely  devoted  to  Sigismund  and 
Albert.  The  more  advanced  Hussites — whose  intellectual 
leader  was  Archbishop  John  of  Rokycan — at  first  recognized 
Bofek  of  Miletinek,  the  victor  of  Lipany,  as  their  chief.  He 
had  endeared  himself  to  them  by  affording  a  refuge  to  the 
archbishop  when  he  believed  himself  menaced  by  Sigismund. 
When  Miletinek  died  in  January  1438  Ptacek,  Lord  of  Pirk- 
stein,  became  the  leader  of  the  more  advanced  utraquists  ^ 
this  party,  probably  influenced  as  much  by  national  as  by 
religious  motives,  wished  to  confer  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia 
on  a  prince  of  Slav  nationality.  Their  choice  fell  on 
Casimir,  younger  brother  of  Vladislav  III,  King  of  Poland. 


176  Bohemia 

Albert's  partisans,  who  held  the  more  important  State 
offices,  thought  that  delay  would  weaken  the  chances  of 
their  candidate.  They  therefore  promptly  assembled  the 
Estates  at  Prague,  and  they  elected  Albert  as  king  after  he 
had  promised  to  maintain  the  Compacts.  Albert's  corona- 
tion as  King  of  Bohemia  followed  immediately  afterwards 
(June  29,  1438).  The  party  which  acknowledged  Ptacek 
as  its  leader  disputed  the  validity  of  Albert's  election,  and 
still  wished  to  secure  the  throne  to  Casimir  of  Poland. 
King  Vladislav  gave  his  sanction  to  the  candidature  of  his 
brother,  and  sent  a  Polish  army  to  Bohemia  to  assist  his 
partisans.  Albert,  on  the  other  hand,  obtained  aid  from 
Hungary  and  Austria.  Many  German  princes  also  assisted 
him.  Albert  had  warned  them  that  if  they  had  not  been 
able  to  conquer  the  Bohemians  alone,  during  the  late  war, 
the  danger  for  Germany  would  be  yet  far  greater  were  the 
Bohemians  united  under  a  common  dynasty  with  a  cognate 
nation  like  that  of  the  Poles. 

The  war  that  now  broke  out  was  of  little  importance  and 
short  duration.  Eastern  Europe  was  at  that  moment 
seriously  menaced  by  the  Turks.  Pope  Eugenius  IV  and 
the  Council  of  Basel  therefore  earnestly  entreated  the 
Bohemians  and  Poles  to  abandon  their  internal  dissensions, 
and  to  arm  against  the  infidels.  Albert,  as  King  of  Hun- 
gary, was  more  than  any  other  European  sovereign  exposed 
to  the  danger  of  Turkish  invasion.  As  a  complete  recon- 
ciliation between  him  and  the  King  of  Poland  did  not  seem 
possible,  a  truce  between  the  two  sovereigns  was  agreed 
upon  at  Breslau  (January  1439).  Albert  then  repaired  to 
Southern  Hungary,  which  the  Turks,  who  had  already 
invaded  Servia,  were  preparing  to  attack.  The  climate  of 
those  countries,  to  which  he  was  not  accustomed,  seriously 
affected  his  health.  Albert  fell  dangerously  ill  from  dysen- 
tery, and  decided  to  return  to  Vienna.  During  his  journey 
through  Hungary  he  died  (October  27,  1439). 

The  unexpected  death  of  Albert  left  Bohemia  in  a  state 
of  anarchy.  There  was  for  the  moment  no  heir  to  the 
throne,  though  it  was  known  that  Queen  Elizabeth,  wife  of 
Albert,  would  shortly  give  birth  to  a  child.  The  nobility 
were  divided  into  two  parties.  The  one,  the  utraquist  (or, 
as  Palack)^,  in  dealing  with  this  period,  calls  it,  the  national 
party)  recognized  as  its  leaders  Ptacek  of  Pirkstein  and 
George  of  Podebrad.     Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  was  still  the 


An  Historical  Sketch  177 

leader  of  the  Romanist,  or  Austrian  party.  The  anarchical 
state  of  the  country,  harassed  by  innumerable  local  feuds, 
which  it  would  be  wearisome  to  enumerate,  had  one  advan- 
tageous result.  Both  parties,  when  they  met  at  a  Diet  at 
Prague,  were  in  favour  of  a  peaceful  agreement.  The  terms 
of  this  agreement,  which  were  formulated  in  a  document 
known  as  the  "  Letter  of  Peace  "  ("  List  mirny  "),  included 
the  acceptation  of  the  Compacts,  and  the  recognition  of 
the  validity  of  the  election  of  Archbishop  John  of  Rokycan. 
The  Diet  further  pledged  itself  to  secure  by  all  means  the 
recognition  of  Archbishop  John  by  the  Papal  See.  It  was 
further  decreed  that  all  documents  signed  or  donations 
made  by  King  Albert  which  were  injurious  to  the  rights  of 
the  Bohemian  crown,  or  of  those  nobles  who  had  been 
opposed  to  Albert,  should  be  invalid.  The  terms  of  the 
"  Letter  of  Peace "  were  obviously  very  favourable  to  the 
national  party,  which  probably  was  already  by  far  the  more 
powerful.  The  only  advantage  obtained  by  the  Austrian 
party  was  that  the  question  of  the  candidature  of  the  Polish 
prince  was  not  raised ;  the  national  party,  for  reasons  that 
do  not  clearly  appear,  no  longer  regarded  that  candidature 
with  as  much  favour  as  before. 

On  February  22,  1440,  Queen  Elizabeth  gave  birth  to  a 
son,  who  received  the  name  of  Ladislas,  and  who  became 
the  rightful  ruler  of  the  land  according  to  the  views  of  those 
who  maintained  the  hereditary  character  of  the  Bohemian 
throne.  Various  intrigues  and  the  animosity  of  the  con- 
tending parties  retarded  the  recognition  of  Ladislas.  The 
Bohemian  crown  was  even  offered  to  Albert,  Duke  of 
Bavaria,  but  declined  by  him.  Even  after  this  refusal, 
and  after  the  Bohemians  had  decided  to  accept  Ladislas 
as  their  king,  new  difficulties  arose.  Frederick  of  Habsburg, 
Duke  of  Styria,  who  had  been  elected  king  by  the  Germans, 
claimed  the  guardianship  of  his  nephew,  and  he  even  refused 
to  allow  the  infant  king  to  be  conveyed  to  Bohemia. 

After  the  death  of  Ptacek  of  Pirkstein,  George  of  Pode- 
brad,  son  of  Victorin  of  Podebrad,  who  had  commanded 
the  Praguers  during  the  former  wars,  was  chosen  as  leader 
by  the  national  party.  From  the  moment  that  George  of 
Podebrad  became  the  head  of  the  national  party,  its  policy 
assumed  a  more  decided  and  energetic  character.  The 
struggle  now  became  a  contest  for  the  supremacy  in 
Bohemia  between  the  two  party-leaders,  George  of  Pode- 


178 


Bohemia 


brad  and  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg.  In  the  year  1446  a  great 
meeting  of  the  Estates  took  place  at  Prague.  It  was  one  of 
those  assembhes  known  in  Bohemian  history  as  a  "  Goneral 
Diet "  at  which  representatives  not  only  of  Bohemia  but  also 
of  Moravia,  Silesia,  and  Lusatia  (all  which  countries  at  that 
period  formed  part  of  what  are  technically  known  as  the 
lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown)  were  present.  This  Diet  is 
of  importance  in  the  constitutional  history  of  Bohemia.  We 
here,  for  the  first  time,  find  the  Estates  clearly  divided  into 
three  chambers  (known  as  "curiae,")  namely,  the  lords, 
knights,  and  citizens.  The  "curiae  "  deliberated  separately, 
and  only  met  with  a  final  decision.  The  resolutions  of 
this  Diet  were  similar  to  those  of  previous  assemblies  since 
the  death  of  Albert.  Complaints  were  again  raised  against 
the  detention  of  Ladislas,  who,  it  was  said,  was  being 
brought  up  as  a  stranger  to  the  country  over  which  he 
was  destined  to  rule.  An  attempt  to  establish  a  regency 
failed.  The  country  indeed  remained  without  any  regular 
government,  as  the  authority  of  Menhard  of  Jindfichuv 
Hradec  on  whom  Sigismund  had  conferred  the  dignity  of 
supreme  burgrave — the  highest  office  in  the  country — was 
not  universally  recognized. 

The  Diet  further  complained  of  the  refusal  of  the  Papal 
See  to  recognize  Archbishop  John.  It  also  accused  the 
Romanists  of  secret  agitations  against  the  Compacts. 
It  was  also  decided  that  a  new  embassy  should  be  sent  to 
Rome,  a  mission  which  resulted  in  a  complete  failure.  The 
Papal  See  even  withdrew  from  the  attitude  of  toleration 
which  it  had  formerly  assumed  with  regard  to  the  Compacts. 
The  only  promise  which  Pope  Nicholas  V  (who  had  now 
succeeded  Eugenius  IV)  made  was  that  he  would  send 
Cardinal  Carvajal  as  legate  to  Bohemia  to  inquire  into  the 
state  of  affairs  of  the  country.  The  steps  which  the  Diet 
took  to  secure  the  residence  of  Ladislas  in  Bohemia  were 
also  ineffectual.  When  the  German  King  Frederick  heard 
that  the  Bohemian  Estates  intended  to  send  an  embassy  to 
Vienna  for  this  purpose,  he  immediately  wrote  to  them 
declaring  that  he  entirely  refused  his  sanction  to  the  departure 
of  Ladislas. 

George  of  Podebrad  probably  decided  to  appeal  to  armed 
force  soon  after  the  termination  of  the  Diet  of  1446.  He 
believed  this  to  be  the  only  means  of  ending  the  anarchy 
from  which  Bohemia  was  suffering.     His  adherents  began 


An  Historical  Sketch  179 

to  arm  about  this  time.  Podebrad  seems  to  have  had 
evidence  ^  that  the  efforts  of  the  Bohemian  negotiators  both 
at  Rome  and  at  Vienna  had  been  secretly  opposed  by  the 
Austrian  party,  and  especially  by  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg. 
The  national  party  decided,  however,  to  await  the  result  of 
the  mission  of  Cardinal  Carvajal.  The  cardinal  arrived  at 
Prague  (May  i,  1448),  but  his  mission  proved  a  complete 
failure ;  he  made  no  secret  of  his  conviction  that  the  Pope 
would  never  give  his  sanction  to  the  election  of  Archbishop 
John  of  Rokycan.  The  cardinal  also  openly  expressed  his 
disapproval  of  communion  in  the  two  kinds,  a  rite  which 
almost  all  Bohemians  still  revered  as  the  great  privilege  they 
had  obtained  at  the  cost  of  so  much  blood.  Questioned  as 
to  the  Compacts,  he  denied  all  knowledge  of  them.  George 
of  Podebrad,  who  had  in  his  custody  the  original  of  this 
precious  document,  therefore  forwarded  it  to  him.  When, 
upon  the  failure  of  his  mission,  the  cardinal  left  Prague 
shortly  afterwards,  his  departure  caused  a  great  outcry 
among  the  townspeople.  They  accused  him  of  having 
carried  away  the  original  of  the  famous  Compacts  and 
threatened  him  with  the  fate  of  Hus.  The  cardinal  was 
stopped  on  his  journey  by  horsemen,  but  was  on  his  entreaty 
allowed  to  proceed  as  far  as  Benesov ;  he  here  returned  the 
Compacts,  which  he  had  hidden  among  the  luggage  of  his 
carriage. 

Thus  the  sole  result  of  the  mission  of  Carvajal  was  to 
embitter  yet  more  the  contending  parties  in  Bohemia. 
George  of  Podebrad,  secure  of  his  allies,  who  had  sworn 
to  devote  their  lives  and  their  fortunes  to  his  cause,  no 
longer  hesitated  to  act.  He  assembled  near  Kutna  Hora 
an  army  of  9000  men,  which  was  afterwards  reinforced  by 
troops  from  his  adherents  in  Northern  Bohemia.  With 
these  forces  Podebrad  marched  on  Prague,  before  which 
city  he  arrived  (1448).  He  obtained  possession  of  the 
town  almost  without  resistance  ;  the  citizens  indeed  received 
him  with  enthusiasm.  The  supreme  burgrave  Menhard  of 
Jindfichuv  Hradec,  who  appears  to  have  been  a  mere  pup- 
pet in  the  hands  of  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  was  imprisoned. 
New  city  magistrates  were  chosen  by  the  people  of  Prague, 
and  John  of  Rokycan,  disregarding  the  authority  of  Rome, 
assumed  the  functions  of  archbishop. 

^  Palacky  clearly  proves  this,  quoting  from  the  correspondence  of 
Ulrich  of  Rosenberg. 


i8o  Bohemia 

This  step  on  the  part  of  Podebrad  led  to  civil  war,  for 
which  he  was  no  doubt  prepared.  Ulrich,  son  of  Menhard 
of  Jindfichuv  Hradec,  demanded  the  liberation  of  his  father, 
and  both  he  and  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  declined  Podebrad's 
proposal  that  a  Diet  at  Prague  should  mediate  between 
them.  The  lords  belonging  to  the  Austrian  party  even  con- 
tracted an  alliance  with  Kolda,  Lord  of  Zampach,  and  the 
few  other  remaining  Taborites,  against  the  national  party. 
Desultory  warfare — twice  for  a  short  time  interrupted  by 
negotiations — broke  out  in  various  parts  of  Bohemia,  and 
continued  up  to  the  year  145 1.  Rosenberg,  Ulrich  of 
Jindfichuv  Hradec,  and  other  lords  of  the  Austrian  party 
formed  a  confederacy  opposed  to  that  of  Podebrad.  This 
confederacy  was,  from  the  name  of  the  town  in  which  it  was 
concluded,  known  as  the  league  of  Strakonic.  The  lords  of 
the  league  denounced  the  national  party  as  the  cause  of  the 
new  troubles,  and  called  on  the  Bohemian  towns  to  join 
their  own  confederacy.^  The  result  of  this  local  warfare — 
during  which  hardly  any  important  engagements  took  place 
— was  almost  invariably  favourable  to  the  party  of  Podebrad. 
Rosenberg  gradually  retired  from  the  contest,  and  every- 
thing seemed  to  point  to  the  regency  of  George  of 
Podebrad. 

King  Frederick,  before  starting  for  Rome  to  be  crowned 
as  Emperor,  in  his  capacity  as  guardian  of  King  Ladislas 
entrusted  Podebrad  with  the  administration  of  Bohemia 
(October  145 1).  Frederick  at  the  same  time,  by  a  singular 
agreement,  made  over  the  government  of  Hungary  to 
Matthew  Corvinus.  He  undoubtedly  hoped  thus  to  secure 
tranquillity  in  these  two  turbulent  countries  during  his 
expedition  to  Italy.  A  Diet  which  assembled  at  Prague 
in  the  same  year  (1451)  at  last  formally  conferred  on 
Podebrad  the  regency  which  he  had  de  facto  exercised  during 
the  last  four  years. 

The  negotiations  with  the  Papal  See  concerning  the 
recognition  of  John  of  Rokycan  as  Archbishop  of  Prague 

^  See  the  letter  (published  by  Eachmann,  Urkenden  zta-  Geschickte 
Oesterreichs  ini  Zeit alter  Kaiser  Fredericks  III  und  Kbnig  Georges  von 
Bohmen),  addressed  to  the  citizens  of  Cheb  by  the  lords  of  Strakonitz, 
informing  them  that  **  unfortunately  in  our  land  lately  great  discord 
and  ill-will  have  sprung  up  through  some  of  the  lords  of  Bohemia," 
and  begging  them,  **  as  they  at  all  times  gladly  served  the  crown  of 
Bohemia,"  to  send  a  contingent  to  join  the  troops  of  the  confederacy. 


An  Historical  Sketch  i8i 

and  the  sanction  of  the  Compacts  had  continued  meanwhile. 
Pope. Nicholas  now  openly  opposed  them,  and  the  conviction 
that  an  agreement  with  Rome  was  impossible  gradually 
gained  ground  in  Bohemia,  This  conviction  led  many 
Bohemians  to  contemplate  a  union  with  the  Eastern 
Church.  The  details  of  this  movement  are  unfortunately 
very  obscure.  It  seems  almost  certain  that  Archbishop 
John,  though  he  did  not  oppose  it,  was  not  its  originator. 
There  is  great  probability  in  favour  of  Palacky's  suggestion 
that  the  monks  of  the  Slav  monastery  founded  by  Charles 
IV,  who,  having  immediately  accepted  communion  in  both 
kinds,  remained  unmolested  during  the  Hussite  wars, 
advised  negotiations  with  Constantinople.  The  negotiator, 
Constantinus  Angelicus,  probably  a  Greek,  is  entirely 
unknown  to  us.  The  only  reference  to  him  is  contained  in 
the  letter  which  the  Church  of  Constantinople  addressed 
(1452)  "to  the  priests  and  princes  of  Bohemia,"  and  Con- 
stantinus seems  to  have  had  no  credentials  from  Prague. 
In  this  letter  the  Church  of  Constantinople  expressed  its 
pleasure  at  hearing  that  the  Bohemians  were  treading  the 
path  of  truth,  and  that  they  were  opposed  to  the  dangerous 
innovations  of  Rome.  Hope  was  expressed  that  through 
the  mediation  of  the  Holy  Gospel,  the  truest  of  all  authori- 
ties, the  Bohemians  would  unite  with  "the  Church  of 
Christ"  (the  Eastern  Church).  The  letter  further  states 
that  though  they  (the  Church  of  Constantinople)  had 
formerly  believed  that  the  Bohemians  were  opposed,  not  to 
the  innovations  of  Rome,  but  to  the  old  traditions  of  the 
Universal  Church,  they  had  now  (through  Constantinus 
Angelicus)  found  that  the  Bohemians  had  returned  to  the 
original  Christian  faith,  and  were  anxiously  seeking  their 
true  mother-Church.  The  utraquist  Consistory  of  Prague 
answered  (Sept.  29,  1452)  by  a  letter  which  they  addressed 
to  the  Emperor  Constantine  Palaeologus,  the  Patriarch,  and 
to  the  whole  Greek  Church.^  In  this  letter  the  Consistory 
expressed  gratitude  to  God  for  having  enlightened  the  minds 
of  the  Bohemians,  and  shown  them  the  way  to  return  to  the 
primitive  Church.  In  Bohemia  —  it  continued  —  simony, 
pride,  and  avarice  are,  unknown  among  the  clergy,  and  all 
the  arts  of  Antichrist  are  detested  by  the  people.  "  Even 
when  Antichrist,  enraged  against  us,  attacked  us,  burnt  our 

^  Both  these  letters  are  printed  in  full  in  Palacky's  GeschichU  von 
Bohmen. 


1 82  Bohemia 

brethren,  and  sent  out  innumerable  armies  for  our  destruc- 
tion, God  Himself  fought  for  us  and  drove  the  enemies 
from  our  frontier."  The  letter  concluded  with  an  expression 
of  hope  that  the  Eastern  Church  would  continue  to  show 
favour  and  love  to  Bohemia.  The  fall  of  Constantinople  in 
the  following  year  (1453)  put  an  end  to  these  negotiations, 
which  may  well  be  thought  to  have  attracted  too  little 
attention  in  our  days. 

The  activity  of  theological  speculation  did  not  decrease 
in  Bohemia  with  the  end  of  the  Hussite  wars.  With  the 
possible  exception  of  England  at  the  time  of  the  Common- 
wealth, there  never  was  a  country  where  theology  possessed 
the  all-absorbing  interest  that  we  notice  in  Bohemia  at  this 
period.  Numerous  small  sects  sprang  up  which  had  mostly 
only  an  ephemeral  existence,  and  require  no  notice.  The 
foundation  of  the  Church  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  or 
Moravians,  which  had  already  been  alluded  to,  is  an  excep- 
tion. This  sect,  which  came  into  existence  about  this  time, 
gradually  increased  in  importance,  and  at  a  later  period — 
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  and  the  beginning  of  the  seven- 
teenth century  —  played  a  not  inconsiderable  part  in 
Bohemian  history.  The  intellectual  originator  of  the 
"Unity"  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  though  he  founded  no 
sect,^  was  a  layman  of  the  name  of  Peter  Chelcicky,  as  to 
whom  even  the  laborious  researches  of  recent  years  have 
yielded  us  little  information.  The  year  of  his  birth  was 
probably  some  time  before  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth 
century.^  As  it  is  likely  that  his  latest  writings  are  not  of 
earlier  date  than  the  year  1443,  he  must  have  lived  through 
the  whole  stirring  period  of  the  Hussite  wars.  The  horrors 
of  that  time  may  have  confirmed  him  in  his  most  original 
doctrine,  the  one  most  completely  opposed  to  the  spirit  of 
his  age — that  is,  his  belief  in  the  absolute  and  unconditional 
sinfulness  of  bloodshed.^  He  shared  with  most  reformers 
of  that  period  the  desire  to  return  to  the  primitive  Church, 

^  Palacky  {Bbhniische  Geschichte),  Gindely  {Geschzchte  der  Bohmis- 
chen  Briidei'),  and  more  recently  Dr.  Jaroslav  GoU  {Qiiellen  zur 
Geschichte  der  Bohmischen  Briider),  have  examined  the  conflicting 
evidence  as  to  the  foundation  of  the  "  Unity."  The  last-named  work  is 
to  a  great  extent  founded  on  unprinted  documents  in  the  archives  of 
Herrenhut,  the  present  centre  of  the  Moravian  community. 

2  Dr.  Goll. 

'  Dr.  Goll  quotes  a  passage  from  one  of  his  works  in  which  he  calls 
Judas  Macchabaeus  "  the  Great  Murderer." 


An  Historical  Sketch  183 

and,  as  did  the  Waldenses/  dated  the  beginning  of  the 
ecclesiastical  corruption  from  the — imaginary — donation  of 
the  Emperor  Constantine  to  Pope  Sylvester.  His  views 
with  regard  to  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar — the  point  on 
which  all  religious  controversy  in  Bohemia  in  the  fifteenth 
century  turned — were  opposed  to  those  of  the  Taborites, 
with  whom  he  sympathized  on  some  points.  Chelcicky 
denied  that  the  tenets  of  the  priests  of  Tabor  on  this  subject 
coincided  with  those  of  Wycliffe.  He  seems  to  have  con- 
sidered that  the  English  divine,  rather  than  Hus,  was  his 
own  teacher.  Chelcicky  believed  himself  in  accord  with 
Wycliffe  in  maintaining  the  Real  Presence  of  Christ  in  the 
Sacrament.2 

From  the  very  scanty  and  contradictory  notices  ot 
Chelcicky 's  life,  we  learn  that  he  made  the  acquaintance 
of  Rokycan,  probably  during  the  long  period  1437-1448, 
beginning  in  the  reign  of  King  Sigismund,  when  the 
archbishop  had  absented  himself  from  Prague.  We  are 
told  that  they  once  met  and  conversed  "  on  the  men  who 
are  called  priests,  and  on  the  slight  advantage  they  con- 
ferred on  men."  2  The  archbishop  seems  to  have  been 
impressed  by  the  words  of  Chelcicky.  After  his  return  to 
Prague  (1448),  Rokycan's  preaching  assumed  a  more 
earnest  and  more  impassioned  tone.  Grieved  by  the 
reaction  against  Hussitism,  which  he  feared  would  be  the 
consequence  of  the  accession  of  King  Ladislas,  he  returned 
to  the  views  of  the  earliest  Bohemian  reformers.  He 
proclaimed  that  true  religion  was  extinct,  and  that  the 
influence  of  Antichrist  showed  itself  even  in  the  administra- 
tion of  the  Holy  Sacrament.  Among  Rokycan's  hearers 
was  a  young  man  known  to  us  as  Brother  Gregory,  who 
was  a  nephew  of  the  archbishop.  He  was  deeply  impressed 
by  his  uncle's  teaching,  and  appealed  to  him  for  spiritual 
advice.     The  archbishop — preparing   the   way  for    events 

^  The  question  whether  the  doctx-ines  of  Chelcicky  and  Brother 
Gregory  were  derived  from  the  Waldenses,  and  whether  Waldensiail 
priests  consecrated  the  first  priest  of  the  "  Unity,"  is  one  of  the  most 
controverted  points  in  Bohemian  history.  On  the  whole,  evidence  is 
rather  against  the  influence  of  the  Waldenses  on  the  foundation  of  the 
"Unity,"  though  there  may  have  been  a  connection  between  the  two 
sects  later. 

2  GoU:  "Peter  Chelcicky  und  seine  Lehre"  (Pt.  ii.  of  the  Qtullen 
zur  Geschichte  der  Bohmischen  Brilder). 

2  Goll. 


1 84 


Bohemia 


he  afterwards  regretted — lent  him  copies  of  several  of 
Chelcicky's  writings.  Gregory's  enthusiasm  became  even 
more  inflamed,  and  he  and  his  friends  decided  to  entirely 
withdraw  from  the  corrupt  world,  and  to  retire  into 
solitude.  Rokycan  did  not  discourage  this  plan,  though  he 
refused  to  join  the  enthusiasts.  The  archbishop  indeed, 
after  the  death  of  Ladislas  (1457),  became  more  moderate 
in  his  tone,  and  assumed  a  more  conciliatory  attitude 
towards  the  Roman  Church.  Rokycan,  however,  obtained 
a  refuge  for  Brother  Gregory  in^  the  remote  village  of 
Kunwald,  near  the  small  town  of  Zamberk.^  Gregory  was 
here  joined  by  other  pious  men,  among  whom  were 
Michael,  curate  of  Zamberk,  and  the  priest  Matthew.  An 
attempt  to  organize  the  new  religious  association  was  soon 
made.  Michael,  who  on  insufficient  evidence  is  said  to 
have  been  ordained  by  a  Waldensian  bishop,  confirmed 
the  priest  Matthew  as  head  of  the  brotherhood,  probably 
after  he  had  been  chosen  as  such  by  the  Brethren.  The 
most  noticeable  characteristics  of  the  Union  are,  according 
to  Palack)^,  first,  that  they  attached  more  importance  to  the 
practice  of  Christianity  than  to  the  Christian  doctrine; 
secondly,  that  piety  and  common-sense,  with  them,  always 
appeared  as  acting  in  accord,^  and  thirdly,  that  the  idea  of 
Church  reform  from  the  first  occupied  a  prominent  place  in 
their  teaching.  About  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century 
a  division  took  place  among  the  Brethren.  Two  parties, 
known  as  the  "Great"  and  the  "Small"  party,  were 
formed.  As  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  "  Small "  party,  which 
soon  became  extinct,  maintained  in  its  entirety  the  teaching 
of  Chelcicky,  which  included  doctrines  such  as  non- 
resistance  to  evil-doers  and,  probably,  a  community  of 
goods  founded  on  the  example  of  the  primitive  Church. 
The  "  Great "  party,  on  the  other  hand,  accommodated  its 
teaching  to  a  certain  extent  to  temporal  ideas.  Starting 
from  a  very  humble  origin,  the  "  Unity "  was  gradually 
joined  by  men  of  all  classes,  even  by  members  of  the 
Bohemian  nobility.  The  "  Great "  party  reconciled  itself 
with  the  world,  and  by  partly  abandoning  its  earliest 
principles  secured  the  future  existence  of  the  "  Unity."  ^ 

^  In  German,  "  Senftenberg." 

'^  This,  of  course,  refers  to  the  superstitious  practices  then  so  prevalent 
in  the  Roman  Church. 
^  Goll. 


i 


An  Historical  Sketch  185 

George  of  Podebrad  did  not  long  remain  uncontested 
Regent  of  Bohemia.  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  and  other  lords 
of  the  Austrian  party,  as  well  as  the  towns  of  Tabor  and 
Budejovice,  had  not  been  represented  at  the  Diet  which 
conferred  that  dignity  on  George.  In  July  (1452)  we  find 
Podebrad  again  at  war  with  his  old  antagonists.  The 
most  interesting  event  in  this  petty  campaign  was  the 
capture  of  the  town  of  Tabor,  which,  curiously  enough,  was 
at  last  subdued  by  a  utraquist,  not  by  a  Romanist,  chief. 
Podebrad  treated  the  citizens  graciously,  but  he  forcibly 
established  the  moderate  utraquist  (or  Calixtine)  church- 
service  in  the  town.  The  priest  Venceslas  Koranda,  one 
of  the  chiefs  of  the  Taborites,  was  by  order  of  Podebrad 
imprisoned  in  the  castle  of  Litice.  After  the  capture  of 
Tabor,  Podebrad  besieged  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  in  one  of 
his  castles,  and  forced  that  noble  to  capitulate.  Ulrich  and 
his  partisans  now  recognized  Podebrad  as  regent.  ^  In  the 
following  year  a  new  Diet  met  at  Prague  (in  October),  when 
Ladislas  was  solemnly  received  as  King  of  Bohemia.  It 
was  declared,  however — though  not  without  some  opposition 
from  the  Austrian  party — that  Ladislas  had  been  elected  as 
king  only  on  the  condition  of  his  recognizing  the  privileges 
of  the  country.  Protracted  negotiations  to  secure  the 
arrival  in  Bohemia  and  the  coronation  of  the  new  king  now 
ensued.  These  negotiations  at  first  took  place  at  Vienna,^ 
but  were  at  last  brought  to  a  favourable  issue  by  an  inter- 
view between  Podebrad  and  the  Austrian  guardians  of  the 
young  king  which  was  held  at  Znoymo  (1453).  Ladislas 
solemnly  recognized  all  the  privileges  of  Bohemia,  including 
the  venerated  Compacts.  He  also,  being  too  young  to 
govern,  confirmed  the  powers  the  Diet  had  conferred  on 
George  of  Podebrad.  The  king  at  last  arrived  in  Bohemia 
in  October  (1453),  and  on  the  28th  of  that  month  was 
crowned  at  Prague  as  King  of  Bohemia. 

Very  little  need  be  said  of  the  few  years  during  which 
Ladislas  reigned  over  Bohemia.  In  consequence  of  the 
strong  administration    of  Podebrad,  who   at   first  was  on 

^  I  have  omitted  the  intervention  of  Podebrad  in  the  internal 
struggles  in  Austria,  as  of  little  direct  influence  on  the  events  in 
Bohemia. 

^  According  to  Palacky,  the  young  king  was  at  first  strongly  opposed 
to   the   religious   views   of  the   Bohemians;    he   even   said,    *'If  the 
Bohemians  Hesire  me  for  their  king,  let  them  be  Christians  and  profess 
the  same  faith  as  I  do." 
G  2 


1 86  Bohemia 

terms  of  great  friendship  with  his  youthful  sovereign,  the 
country  enjoyed  comparative  quiet.  Podebrad  succeeded 
in  inducing  the  young  king  to  learn  the  Bohemian  language, 
but  he  seems  to  have  retained  a  dislike  to  the  people,  which 
was  probably  founded  on  the  religious  teaching  which  he 
had  received  from  his  earliest  preceptors.  In  January 
(1456)  Ladislas  proceeded  to  Hungary.  The  danger 
menacing  Eastern  Europe  from  the  Turks,  who  in  1453 
had  taken  Constantinople,  and  the  wish  to  assert  his 
authority  in  a  country  which — though  he  was  nominally 
king — was  in  fact  subject  to  the  absolute  control  of  John 
Hunyady,  were  the  probable  motives  of  Ladislas.  The 
king  returned  to  Bohemia  in  September  of  the  following 
year,  and  was  enthusiastically  received  by  the  people. 
"  Archbishop  Rokycan,  at  the  head  of  his  clergy,  also  met 
the  king,  who  received  him  with  a  stern  countenance 
and  only  returned  his  salute  on  Podebrad's  admonition; 
this  conduct  enraged  many,  but  they  suppressed  their 
indignation." 

It  had  at  this  time  been  arranged  to  marry  Ladislas  to 
Magdalen,  daughter  of  Charles  VII,  King  of  France,  and  a 
sumptuous  Bohemian  embassy  set  out  for  Paris  to  demand 
the  hand  of  the  princess  for  their  sovereign. ^  Only  a  few 
weeks  after  their  departure  the  king  was  attacked  by  a 
singular  illness,  similar  to,  if  not  identical  with,  the  Asiatic 
plague,  which  in  consequence  of  the  war  with  Turkey  had 
at  that  time  spread  through  Hungary  to  Bohemia,  and  even 
further  west.  The  king  desired  to  see  George  of  Podebrad, 
of  whom  he  took  leave  in  touching  words.    He  thanked  him 

*  Barante  {Histoire  des  Dues  de  Botirgogne,  vol.  v,  pp.  92-95)  gives 
a  detailed  and  very  curious  account,  founded  on  contemporary  French 
records,  of  this  embassy.  Want  of  space  unfortunately  prevents  me 
from  quoting  largely  from  it.  This  writer  enlarges  on  the  curiosity 
which  the  Bohemians  aroused:  " Ce  qu'il  y  avait  d'etrange  dans  leurs 
coutumes  etait  un  grand  sujet  de  curiosite.  C'etait  dans  le  fort  de 
I'hiver,  et  ils  allaient  dans  les  rues  en  traineaux,  ce  qu'on  n'avait  jamais 
vu ;  ils  avaient  laisse  dehors  leurs  chariots  de  bagage  attaches  par  des 
grosses  chaines  fermant  a  cadenas  et  chaque  nuit  ils  faisaient  coucher 
dessus  quelques-uns  de  leurs  serviteuis  malgre  la  rudesse  du  froid  qui 
etait  extreme.  Cela  sembla  singulier  aux  Parisiens."  Barante  speaks 
of  the  quite  unfounded  accusation  against  Podebrad  mentioned  above, 
which  proves  that  it  was  soon  and  widely  circulated.  Ladislas,  he 
tells  us,  died  suddenly,  "empoisonne,  disait  on,  par  un  seigneur  nomme 
Pozdziebracki,  ou  comme  on  disait  en  France  Podiegrad  qui  fut  elu 
roi  apres  lui." 


An  Historical  Sketch  187 

for  having  been  his  faithful  servant,  told  him  he  felt  certain 
that  his  own  life  was  doomed,  and  begged  Podebrad  to  pre- 
serve peace  and  order  among  the  people  of  Bohemia  and 
the  dependent  countries,  and  finally  urged  him  to  be  just  to 
rich  and  poor  alike.^  The  king  died  on  the  third  day  of  his 
illness  (Nov.  23,  T457),  not  yet  eighteen  years  of  age.  The 
suddenness  of  the  death  of  Ladislas  gave  rise  to  the  totally 
unfounded  rumour  that  he  had  been  poisoned  by  emissaries 
of  Podebrad.  The  national  hatred  to  the  Slav  race  caused 
this  accusation  to  be  widely  circulated  in  Germany,  especially 
at  Vienna  and  at  Breslau.^ 

According  to  the  treaty  of  succession  concluded  between 
Bohemia  and  Austria  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor 
Charles  IV,  the  Emperor  Frederick,  as  head  of  the  house  of 
Habsburg,  became  the  legitimate  successor  to  the  Bohemian 
throne  on  the  death  of  Ladislas.  Two  other  members  of 
the  same  house,  Albert,  brother  of  Frederick — with  whom 
he  lived  in  a  state  of  constant  enmity — and  Sigismund,  Duke 
of  Tyrol,  also  raised  claims  to  the  Bohemian  crown ;  as 
likewise  did  William,  Duke  of  Saxony,  and  Casimir,  King  of 
Poland,  who  had  both  married  sisters  of  Ladislas.  Another 
candidate  who  had  no  hereditary  claims  to  rely  on  was 
Prince  Charles,  younger  son  of  King  Charles  VII  of  France, 
who  wished  to  secure  the  Bohemian  crown  for  his  son.  The 
decision  of  the  Estates — formulated  at  the  time  of  the 
election  of  Ladislas — by  which  they  had  declared  the 
Bohemian  crown  to  be  elective  de  facto,  justified  all  can- 
didates in  advancing  their  claims.  The  Diet  which  was  to 
elect  the  new  king  assembled  at  Prague  on  February  27, 
1458,  but  unfortunately  no  detailed  account  of  its  proceed- 
ings has  reached  us.  We  only  learn  that  the  ambassadors 
sent  by  King  Charles  of  France  and  Duke  William  of 
Saxony  were  received,  but  that  their  attempts  to  influence 
the  election  were  fruitless.  On  March  2,  George  of  Podebrad 
was  unanimously  chosen  as  king  by  the  Estates,  even  the 
adherents  of  the  Austrian  party  recording  their  votes  in  his 
favour.     The  election  was  immediately  announced  to  the 

^  From  a  contemporary  letter  printed  from  the  Jklunich  archives  by 
Bachmann,  Urkunden,  etc. 

2  Palacky,  in  a  paper  published  by  the  Bohemian  Learned  Society  in 
1856,  and  fortified  by  the  statements  of  medical  authorities,  clearly 
proves  the  true  nature  of  the  illness  of  Ladislas,  and  consequently  the 
falsehood  of  the  accusations  against  Podebrad. 


1 88  Bohemia 

people,  by  whom  the  news  was  enthusiastically  received. 
Podebrad  appears  to  have  been  very  certain  of  his  election, 
which  the  strong  popular  feeling  in  his  favour  indeed 
rendered  secure.  It  was  generally  felt  that  Bohemia  must 
at  any  cost  be  freed  from  the  predominance  of  the  Germans. 
Rokycan,  whose  influence  in  the  country  was  still  great, 
warmly  supported  the  claims  of  Podebrad  to  the  throne. 
We  read  that  he  declared  from  the  pulpit  that  it  would  be 
better,  "following  the  example  of  the  judges  of  Israel,  to 
transform  Bohemia  into  a  republic,  if  there  was  no  native 
worthy  of  bearing  the  royal  crown." 

Moravia  soon  acknowledged  King  George,  though  there 
was  some  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  towns,  especially 
those  which,  like  Brno,  contained  a  population  largely 
German,  and  devoted  to  the  cause  of  Rome.  Silesia  also 
submitted,  though  the  opposition  there  was  of  a  more  serious 
nature,  and  was  promoted  by  the  rejected  candidate,  Duke 
William  of  Saxony.  The  town  of  Breslau,  in  particular 
(where  a  fanatically  Catholic  and  democratic  faction  had 
obtained  the  government  of  the  city),  for  some  time  resisted 
the  authority  of  King  George. 

During  the  first  and  more  successful  part  of  the  reign  of 
King  George,  his  foreign  policy  was  entirely  founded  on  the 
close  alliance  he  had  concluded  with  Matthew  Corvinus, 
King  of  Hungary.  Like  George,  Matthew  had  at  the  same 
time  and  in  a  similar  manner  become  ruler  of  his  country; 
for  in  Hungary,  as  in  Bohemia,  the  legitimate  claimant  to 
the  throne  was  the  Emperor  Frederick,  as  head  of  the  house 
of  Habsburg,  to  whom  family  treaties  (already  referred  to) 
secured  the  succession  in  both  countries.  It  was  through 
the  aid  of  his  ally  that  King  George  overcame  the  diffi- 
culties with  regard  to  his  coronation  which  were  caused  by 
the  anomalous  ecclesiastical  position  in  Bohemia.  King 
Matthew,  with  the  consent  of  Cardinal  Carvajal,  then  papal 
legate  in  Hungary,  sent  the  Bishop  of  Waitzen  and  Raab  to 
Prague,  by  whom  King  George  was  crowned  (May  7,  1458). 
Besides  the  usual  coronation  oath,  the  king  had  the  day 
before  the  ceremony  taken  another  oath,  by  which  he 
pledged  himself  to  obey  the  Church,  to  maintain  its  unity, 
and  to  extirpate  all  sects  and  heresies  in  Bohemia.  The 
Compacts,  and  the  right  of  using  the  chalice,  were  not 
mentioned  in  this  oath,  and  the  Romanists  subsequently 
maintained  that  the  king  had  thus  renounced  the  special 


An  Historical  Sketch  189 

privileges  of  the  Church  of  Bohemia.  The  king  and  the 
utraquists  naturally  retorted  that  the  Compacts  which  had 
been  sanctioned  by  the  Council  of  Basel  could  by  no  means 
be  described  as  heresies,  and  that  the  coronation  oath  by 
which  the  king  had  sworn  to  maintain  the  liberties  and 
privileges  of  Bohemia  referred  to  the  Compacts  also.  It  is, 
however,  possible  that  the  omission  of  all  mention  of  the 
Compacts  was  not  an  accidental  one,  but  that  it  was  a  con- 
cession to  the  representatives  of  the  Papal  See.  Only  thus 
could  King  George  hope  to  secure  his  coronation,  a  cere- 
mony to  which  the  people  of  Bohemia  have  always  attached 
the  greatest  importance. 

The  comparatively  conciliatory  Pope,  Calixtus  III,  died 
in  the  year  of  the  accession  of  King  George,  and  was 
succeeded  by  Cardinal  Piccolomini,  known  in  literature  as 
Aenaeas  Sylvius.  The  new  Pope,  who  assumed  the  name 
of  Pius  II,  had  a  thorough  knowledge  of  Bohemia,  having 
resided  there  while  engaged  on  diplomatic  missions,  and  he 
has,  as  is  well  known,  left  us  a  history  of  the  country.  The 
new  Pope,  however,  became  a  bitter  enemy  to  Bohemia  and 
to  its  king,  as  soon  as  he  realized  the  impossibility  of  carry- 
ing out  his  favourite  plan,  involving  the  suppression  of  the 
Bohemian  Compacts. 

Germany  was  at  that  time  greatly  troubled  by  the  enmity 
which  existed  between  the  houses  of  Brandenburg  and 
Bavaria,  while  the  power  of  the  Emperor  Frederick  had 
sunk  so  low  that  he  was  in  constant  dread  of  his  immediate 
subjects,  the  Estates  of  Lower  Austria.  King  George 
availed  himself  of  this  favourable  political  situation  for  the 
purpose  of  extending  his  influence  in  Germany,  where  the 
contending  parties,  and  at  times  the  Emperor  also,  sought 
his  alliance.  It  would  extend  our  inquiries  too  far  to  give 
an  account  of  the  means  by  which  he  strengthened  his 
position  in  Germany — more  often  by  mediation  than  by 
the  force  of  arms — and  of  the  treaties  which  he  at  this  time 
concluded  with  numerous  German  princes.  We  must,  how- 
ever, briefly  refer  to  what  was  for  a  time  the  dominant 
object  of  the  king's  policy,  the  acquisition  of  the  German 
crown.  This  plan  is  not  easy  to  trace,  for  after  its  failure 
all  papers  concerning  it  were  destroyed.  It  was,  in  fact, 
soon  abandoned  by  the  king,  though  not  before  it  had  given 
rise  to  some  of  the  disasters  of  the  latter  years  of  his  reign. 
In  devising  this  scheme  he  acted  largely  under  the  influence 


IQO  Bohemia 

of  one  of  his  councillors,  Martin  Mayer,  who  undoubtedly 
displayed  diplomatic  capacity  of  the  highest  order.  As  far 
as  we  can  judge  from  the  scanty  evidence,  Martin  Mayer's 
intention,  approved  of  by  King  George,  was  not  to  dethrone 
the  Emperor  Frederick  III,  but  to  place  a  "  coadjutor  "  at 
his  side ;  this  "  coadjutor  "  was  to  receive  the  title  of  King 
of  the  Romans  (or  German  King),  such  as  had  often  been 
conferred  on  the  heirs  of  the  Emperors.  It  seems  that 
Mayer  had  formerly  suggested  a  similar  plan  to  Philip, 
Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  had  declined  the  suggestion. 
Mayer's  proposal,  however,  met  with  greater  favour  from 
King  George  of  Bohemia.  Serious  negotiations  ensued, 
which,  for  the  reason  mentioned  above,  are  now  difficult  to 
trace.  Mayer  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  votes  of  the 
Elector  Palatine  and  of  the  Archbishop  of  Maintz  for  his 
master.  In  February  (1461)  numerous  German  princes,  on 
the  invitation  of  King  George,  assembled  at  Cheb  for  the 
ostensible  purpose  of  organizing  a  general  armament  against 
the  Turks.  Probably  through  the  ability  of  Mayer,  this 
object  was  made  subservient  to  the  purpose  he  had  at  heart. 
The  election  of  George  as  leader  of  the  German  forces 
against  the  Turks,  suggested  by  him,  would  almost  neces- 
sarily have  secured  for  the  king  the  position  of  ruler  of 
Germany.  The  king  was  also  induced  to  favour  this  plan 
of  a  campaign  against  the  Turks  by  the  consideration  that 
the  energy  of  the  fanatical  Papists  would  thus  be  diverted 
from  the  heretical  Bohemians  to  the  infidel  Turks. 

The  complete  failure  of  this  scheme,  which  the  king 
abandoned  almost  as  suddenly  as  he  had  entered  on  it, 
was  probably  due  to  ecclesiastical  influences.  Pope  Pius 
strongly  opposed  it,  and  one  of  the  adherents  of  King 
George,  the  Archbishop  of  Maintz,  had  declared  that  he 
would  not  vote  for  Podebrad's  election  as  King  of  the 
Romans  before  he  had  received  the  sacrament  in  the  same 
manner  as  all  other  Christian  kings.  On  the  other  hand, 
even  the  vague  reports  of  these  negotiations  which  spread 
in  Bohemia  caused  great  dissatisfaction.  The  people  began 
to  ask  what  had  been  the  advantage  of  electing  a  Bohemian 
as  king,  when  he  himself  was  now  anxious  to  become  a 
German. 

One  of  the  consequences  of  the  conciliatory  attitude 
towards  Rome  which  his  attempt  to  obtain  the  government 
of  Germany   obliged    King   George   to   assume,    was    the 


An  Historical  Sketch  191 

persecution  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  of  which  we  read  at 
this  period.  The  founder  of  the  community  of  Kunwald, 
Brother  Gregory,  was  imprisoned  by  order  of  the  king,  and 
even  put  to  the  rack  (1461).  These  endeavours  to  con- 
ciliate the  Papal  See,  by  attempting  to  suppress  all  sects 
that  went  beyond  the  demarcations  of  the  Compacts,  were 
entirely  fruitless.  The  Roman  Church  had  already  decided 
to  revoke  the  concessions  which  Zizka's  and  Prokop's 
victories  had  once  forced  it  to  make. 

The  successful  policy  of  Podebrad — though  his  most 
ambitious  plan  failed — had  secured  Bohemia  against  all 
foreign  enemies,  and  peace  and  order  were  also  maintained. 
The  prosperity  of  the  country  had  greatly  increased  in 
consequence,  and  the  people  began  to  hope  that  the  happy 
times  of  King  Charles  IV  were  returning.  The  University 
of  Prague,  which  had  suffered  greatly  during  the  troublous 
times,  now  again  entered  into  full  activity. 

King  George  was  not,  however,  destined  long  to  secure 
quiet  to  his  country.  The  ever-renewed  religious  struggle — 
an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  antagonistic  position  of 
Bohemia  with  regard  to  the  Western  Church — now  again 
broke  out  more  strongly.  The  Pope  demanded  an  imme- 
diate return  to  the  exact  ritual  of  the  Western  Church ;  he 
founded  his  demand  on  his  interpretation  of  the  king's  oath 
before  his  coronation,  to  which  allusion  has  already  been 
made.  Prolonged  negotiations  took  place,  in  which  King 
George,  who  had  dismissed  Mayer,  was  very  badly  served 
by  his  representatives.  The  king,  seeing  that  a  compromise 
between  the  Pope  and  the  people  of  Bohemia  was  impos- 
sible, rallied  firmly  to  the  Compacts.  In  the  month  of 
August  (1452)  he  specially  assembled  the  Estates  for  the 
purpose  of  hearing  the  demands  of  the  papal  envoys,  who 
had  arrived  at  Prague,  and  the  king's  answer  to  them. 
The  king  made  the  memorable  declaration  that  he  would 
to  his  death  remain  true  to  the  communion  in  both  kinds, 
and  that  he  was  ready  to  risk  his  crown  and  his  life  for  this 
object.1 

This  was  a  direct  declaration  of  war  against  Rome ;  but 

^  Palacky.  According  to  a  not  very  reliable  letter  of  an  unknown 
diplomatic  agent  addressed  to  the  German  Electors  (published  by 
Bachmann,  Urkttnden,  etc.,  from  the  Berlin  archives),  the  king  added 
that  he  considered  communion  in  both  kinds  necessary  for  the  salvaiion 
of  the  s-)ul.     The  king  afterwards  denied  having  said  this. 


192  Bohemia 

Pope  Pius  II,  who  was  then  attempting  to  form  a  con- 
federacy against  the  Ottoman  power,  did  not  immediately 
take  up  the  challenge.  On  his  death  (1464)  his  successor, 
Paul  II,  prudently  awaited  a  favourable  moment  for  securing 
his  revenge  on  the  King  of  Bohemia.  He  had  not  long  to 
wait.  Many  of  the  great  Bohemian  nobles  had  from  the 
first  viewed  with  disatisfaction  the  elevation  to  the  throne 
of  Podebrad,  who  was  but  their  equal  by  birth.  The  king's 
attitude,  not  always  conciliatory,  rendered  this  feeling  still 
stronger.  Even  the  re-establishment  of  order  and  the 
administration  of  justice  by  regular  tribunals  were  by  many 
viewed  with  disfavour.  The  nobles  of  the  Roman  party 
were  the  principal,  though  not  the  only,  opponents  of  the 
king;  they  declared  themselves  no  longer  bound  by  the 
oath  of  allegiance  which  they  had  sworn  to  King  George. 

The  malcontent  nobles  met  at  Zelena  Hora  (November 
28,  1465),  and  formed  an  alliance  against  the  king,  whom 
they  accused  of  having  violated  the  laws  of  the  country, 
especially  with  regard  to  taxation.  Though  the  religious 
question  was  not  at  first  raised,  the  leaguers  immediately 
sent  an  emissary  to  the  Pope,  with  the  view  of  obtaining 
his  support.  King  George  had,  meanwhile,  continued  with 
Pope  Paul  II  the  negotiations  which  had  been  entirely 
broken  off  during  the  last  years  of  Pius  II.  Though  an 
agreement  seemed  to  all  an  impossibility,  the  king  made  a 
last  attempt  towards  that  purpose.  He  addressed  a  letter 
to  Paul  II,  in  which  he  offered  great  concessions.  He 
declared  his  readiness  to  accept  a  papist  as  Archbishop  of 
Prague  if  he  were  a  Bohemian  by  birth,  and  if  he  were  pre- 
pared to  ordain  as  priests  those  who  communicated  "  sub 
utraque,"  as  well  as  those  who  communicated  "  sub  una." 
The  king  further  suggested  that  all  polemical  preaching 
should  be  forbidden  on  both  sides,  and  even  proposed — 
a  concession  of  no  slight  importance — to  restore  to  the 
Church  the  estates  that  had  formerly  belonged  to  it.  No 
ambassador,  but  a  simple  messenger  carried  the  king's  letter 
to  Rome.  His  reception,  when  he  stated  that  he  had  to 
deliver  a  letter  sent  by  the  King  of  Bohemia,  quickly 
demonstrated  the  impossibility  of  an  agreement.  The  Pope 
threw  the  letter  on  the  floor,  and  addressed  the  messenger 
in  the  strongest  language. ^ 

^  It  is  curious  to  note  the  forcible  expressions  used  by  the  Pope, 
which  it  is  perhaps  better  to  leave  in  the  original  Latin  :  *'  Quomodo 


An  Historical  Sketch  193 

The  excommunication  of  King  George,  which  had  long 
become  inevitable,  now  took  place  (December  23,  1466), 
with  the  usual  formalities.  Podebrad  was  deposed  from  his 
rank  as  King  of  Bohemia ;  all  Catholics  were  forbidden  to 
obey  him.  The  Pope  declared  that  one  of  the  leaders  of 
the  League  of  Zelena  Hora  was  to  act  as  provisional 
governor  of  Bohemia,  till  a  new  king  could  be  chosen. 

Hostilities  between  the  king  and  the  lords  of  the  league 
had  meanwhile  already  commenced.  The  king  had  also  to 
defend  himself  against  the  attacks  of  the  fanatical  Catholics 
of  Breslau,  as  well  as  against  the  German  population  of 
Lusatia.  The  German  Emperor  Frederick  and  King 
Matthew  of  Hungary,  George's  former  ally,  also  now  joined 
the  king's  enemies.  The  King  of  Hungary  was,  however, 
forced  by  the  ever-increasing  danger  of  a  Turkish  invasion 
to  defer  his  projected  attack  on  Bohemia.  The  desultory 
fighting  so  usual  at  that  period  continued  for  some  time  in 
Bohemian  territory.  Success  on  the  whole  favoured  the 
arms  of  King  George,  who  (1467)  even  obliged  the  lords  of 
the  league  to  conclude  a  truce,  which,  however,  was  of  short 
duration. 

The  king  availed  himself  of  the  temporary  respite  from 
domestic  troubles  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  war  into  the 
lands  of  his  assailants.  He  (December  1467)  attacked  the 
Emperor  Frederick  III  in  his  hereditary  territory.  Lower 
Austria;  but  he  thus  caused,  or  rather  precipitated,  a  more 
direct  intervention  of  the  King  of  Hungary  into  Bohemian 
affairs.  Recklessly  abandoning  his  eastern  frontiers  to  the 
irreconcilable  enemies  of  Christianity,^  King  Matthew 
decided  that  a  campaign  against  the  heretical  Bohemians 
was   as  meritorious   as   warfare  against   the   Turks,^     He 

es  tu  bestia  audax  in  praesentia  nostra  nominare  eum  regem,  quern  scis 
damnatum  haereticum  ab  ecclesia  Romana.  Vadas  ad  furcas  cum 
iiaeretico  ribaldo  tuo." 

1  Palacky  says  that  if  King  Matthew  had  directed  on  the  Turks  the 
whole  efforts  he  fruitlessly  made  to  extirpate  the  Bohemian  utraquists, 
he  would  very  probably  have  crushed  the  Turkish  power  in  Europe, 
then  still  very  feeble.  The  Turkish  servitude  which  Hungary  endured 
for  two  centuries  was  to  a  great  extent  a  consequence  of  the  mistaken 
policy  of  Matthew. 

^  In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  magistrates  of  Cheb — preserved  in  the 
archives  of  that  town  and  printed  by  Bachmann,  Urkundeti,  etc. — the 
King  of  Hungary  declares  "negotium  arduum  illud  quidem"  (the  in- 
vasion of  Bohemia)  "sed  summi  plane  etiam  in  celo  meriti  et  gloriae 
super  terram  existimantes  non  minus  pium  hoc  fore  helium  quamquod 


194  Bohemia 

issued  a  manifesto  in  which  he  proclaimed  his  intention 
of  defending  the  Catholic  faith  against  the  heretical 
Bohemians. 

War  broke  out  early  in  the  year  1468,  and  King  Matthew 
succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  greater  part  of 
Moravia.  He  occupied  the  castle  of  Spielberg,  the  citadel 
of  the  town  of  Brno,  which  he  chose  as  his  head-quarters. 
From  this  strong  fortress  he  made  repeated  raids  in  Eastern 
Bohemia.  On  May  3,  1469,  Matthew  was  proclaimed 
King  of  Bohemia  by  his  adherents.  He  distributed  the 
offices  of  State  among  his  most  powerful  partisans  the  lords 
of  the  league  of  Zelena  Hora.  Though  Matthew  obtained 
many  advantages  in  Moravia,  which  was  the  principal 
scene  of  the  hostilities,  he  was  not  able  to  secure  a  hold 
on  the  entire  country  for  any  length  of  time;  a  renewed 
invasion  of  Bohemia  {1470)  also  had  little  result. 

I'he  danger  threatening  Bohemia  from  King  Matthew^ 
destroyed  the  favourite  plan  of  Podebrad,  which  he  had 
entertained  during  his  whole  life.  He  had  always  hoped 
to  secure  the  Bohemian  crown  for  his  descendants,  and 
thus  to  found  a  national  dynasty.  He  was  now  forced  to 
abandon  his  favourite  plan  for  the  purpose  of  securing 
the  safety  of  his  country.  Attacked  by  numerous  and 
powerful  enemies,  he  decided  to  obtain  at  any  price  the 
alliance  of  the  kindred  Polish  nation.  He  was  successful 
in  this  attempt,  though  only  by  sacrificing  what  had  been 
the  great  ambition  of  his  life.  He  concluded  a  treaty  with 
Poland,  by  which  the  succession  to  the  Bohemian  throne 
was — after  his  death — secured  to  Vladislav,  son  of  Casimir, 
King  of  Poland.  This  decision  was  shortly  afterwards 
ratified  by  the  Estates  of  Bohemia,  who  recognized  Prince 
Vladislav  as  heir  to  the  throne.  ^ 

tanto  jam  tempore  cum  atrocissimis  omnium  fidelium  hostibus  Thurcis 
gerimus." 

^  The  irritation  of  King  George  against  the  King  of  Hungary  seems 
to  have  been  very  great,  and  he  provoked  Matthew  to  single  combat. 
The  curious  correspondence  between  the  two  kings  on  this  subject  is 
printed  in  Palacky's  B'dhmische  Geschichte. 

2  The  sons  of  King  George,  after  the  death  of  their  father,  assumed 
the  title  of  Dukes  of  Munsterberg,  and  shortly  afterwards  accepted  the 
Roman  Catholic  creed.  They  seem,  however,  to  have  venerated  the 
memory  of  their  illustrious  father,  for  we  read  that  Duke  Henry 
of  Munsterberg  sent  a  message  to  the  abbot  of  the  convent  of  the 
\irgin  at  Breslau,  informing  him  that  he  would  burn  all  his  villages 
if  he   did   not   deliver   his   father   from   hell.      This   referred  to   the 


An  Historical  Sketch  195 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1470  the  Bohemian  arms 
were  more  successful.  King  George  drove  the  Hungarians 
almost  completely  out  of  Moravia,  though  they  continued 
to  occupy  a  few  towns.  He  also  succeeded  in  subduing 
the  lords  of  the  Zelena  Hora  League,  and  matters  seemed 
to  be  assuming  a  more  favourable  aspect  when  King 
George,  who  had  long  been  suffering  from  dropsy,  died 
(March  22,  1471).  Just  a  month  before  (February  22)  John 
of  Rokycan,  the  first  and  last  archbishop  of  the  utraquist 
Church,  w^hich  he  governed  for  nearly  half-a-century,  had 
also  expired. 

King  George  has  always  remained,  next  to  Charles  IV, 
the  sovereign  whose  memory  the  Bohemians  treasure  most.^ 
Even  the  misfortunes  of  the  last  years  of  his  reign,  and 
the  failure  of  his  principal  plans — supremacy  in  Germany, 
and  the  foundation  of  a  national  dynasty — do  not  diminish 
this  feeling.  It ,  is  indeed  possible  that,  had  he  suc- 
ceeded in  obtaining  the  prominent  position  in  the  Empire 
which  his  ambition  marked  out  him,  the  affection  of  the 
Bohemians  would  have  been  alienated ;  for  it  was  the 
knowledge  that  they  were  governed  by  a  man  of  their 
own  race  that  mainly  induced  the  Bohemians  to  love 
Podebrad  and  to  retain  their  affection  for  him  even  when 
his  fortunes  were  at  the  lowest.  Though  the  Estates  had 
already  recognized  Prince  Vladislav  of  Poland  as  heir  to 
the  throne,  his  claim  was  immediately  disputed  by  King 
Matthew  of  Hungary,  whom  his  adherents  had  already 
proclaimed  King  of  Bohemia.  Matthew  still  held  several 
towns  in  Moravia,  while  the  whole  of  Lusatia  and  large 
districts  of  Silesia — specially  the  fanatical  citizens  of  Breslau 
— acknowledged  him  as  their  sovereign.  It  is  probable 
that  the  wish  of  the  Estates  to  establish  the  purely  elective 
character  of  the  royalty  of  the  country,  caused  them  to 
ignore    their   former   decision   and   determine    to   elect   a 

fact  that  the  abbot  had  built  a  new  chapel,  for  which  he  had  caused 
a  picture  to  be  painted  representing  the  Last  Judgment.  In  this 
picture  King  George  was  represented  as  being  carried  to  hell  on 
a  litter  by  two  devils.  The  abbot  immediately  caused  the  picture 
of  the  king  to  be  effaced,  fearing  that  his  villages  might  be  burnt. 
(Eschenloer. ) 

^  It  has  been  impossible  to  give  more  than  a  mere  outline  of  the 
eventful  reign  of  King  George.  Palacky,  with  whom  he  is  a  great 
favourite,  has  given  a  long  and  perhaps  slightly  idealized  portrait  of 
the  KiniT. 


196 


Bohemia 


new  king.  The  diet  assembled  at  Kutna  Hora,  where 
prolonged  debates  took  place.  Besides  the  Hungarian 
and  PoHsh  princes,  Duke  Albert  of  Saxony — who  appears 
to  have  been  supported  by  the  sons  of  the  late  King 
George — also  found  adherents.  It  was,  however,  at  last 
decided  to  elect  as  king  Prince  Vladislav  of  Poland  (May 
27,  147 1 ).  The  new  king  immediately  proceeded  to 
Bohemia,  and  arrived  at  Prague  (August  19),  where  he 
was  received  with  rejoicings  by  the  citizens.  The  doctors 
of  the  university,  who  welcomed  him  in  the  old  town, 
"presented  him  with  a  neatly-printed  and  bound  copy 
of  the  Bible,  so  that  he  might  read  it  and  direct  himself 
and  his  subjects  according  to  t^je  will  of  God.''  The 
king's  coronation  took  place  three  days  later,  but  con- 
temporary records  do  not  report  much  concerning  the 
ceremonies  of  the  occasion. 

King  Matthew  of  Hungary  recommenced  hostilities 
against  Bohemia  as  soon  as  his  hopes  of  becoming  the 
lawful  sovereign  of  the  land  vanished.  War  between  the 
two  kings  continued  up  to  the  year  1478.  We  read  of  no 
great  battles,  though  constant  local  engagements  occurred 
between  the  towns  and  the  castles  that  acknowledged 
Vladislav  and  those  which  sided  with  Matthew.  A  treaty 
of  peace  was  at  last  concluded  at  Olomonc  in  1478. 
Matthew  renounced  all  claims  on  Bohemia,  but  retained 
possession  of  Moravia,  Silesia,  and  Lusatia  ;  these  countries 
were,  however,  to  return  to  the  Bohemian  crown  on  the 
death  of  King  Matthew. 

The  internal  religious  struggle  in  Bohemia  meanwhile 
continued.  It  is  clear  that  the  sympathies  of  King 
Vladislav  II  ^  were  entirely  with  the  papal  party,  and  that 
policy  alone  prevented  him  from  more  openly  manifesting 
them.  Among  other  measures  favourable  to  the  Roman 
Catholics,  Vladislav  appointed  as  magistrates  for  Prague 
men  of  the  party  vv^hich,  though  still  adhering  to  the  use  of 
the  chalice,  opposed  all  the  other  tenets  of  the  old  reform 
party,  and  generally  showed  sympathy  with  the  papists.  By 
order  of  these  magistrates  several  priests  and  others  were 
imprisoned  for  expressing  opinions  contrary  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  Roman  Church.  This  incident  and  other  similar 
ones,   which  took  place  principally  on   the  estates  of  the 

^  Vladislav  was  thus  designated,  as  the  Bohemian  Prince  Vladislav 
(1410-1473)  had  borne  the  title  of  king. 


An  Historical  Sketch  197 

great  nobles  of  the  papal  party,  caused  the  utraquists  to 
unite  for  self-defence.  The  utraquist  nobles  and  knights 
formed  a  confederacy  for  mutual  aid,  of  which  the  high 
burgrave,  John  Tovacovsky,  Lord  of  Cimburg,  became  the 
leader.  The  arbitrary  conduct  of  the  magistrates  of  Prague 
soon  caused  troubles  in  that  town.  The  people,  incensed 
by  the  rumoured  intention  of  the  magistrates  to  imprison  or 
execute  the  leaders  of  the  utraquist  party,  stormed  the 
three  town  halls  and  murdered  several  of  the  magis- 
trates. Great  disorder  prevailed  in  the  town,  and  a  large 
number  of  Germans  and  Jews  were  massacred.  The  king 
was  naturally  greatly  incensed,  but  he  was  unable  to  cope 
with  a  party  to  which  the  great  majority  of  the  people  of 
Bohemia  belonged ;  he  was  even  unable  to  punish  the 
persons  guilty  of  these  murders.  In  1485  one  of  the  many 
temporary  compromises  between  the  Roman  and  utraquist 
parties  was  concluded  at  Kutna  Hora,  and  peace,  or  rather 
a  truce,  was  thus  obtained.  Both  parties  undertook  to 
respect  the  religious  views  of  their  opponents,  by  abstaining 
from  all  insults  to  their  creed.  The  compacts  were  again 
confirmed,  and  it  was  decided  that  each  creed  should  retain 
the  use  of  the  churches  which  it  had  possessed  at  the 
beginning  of  the  reign  of  Vladislav  II ;  a  certain  amount  of 
religious  liberty  was  also  granted  to  the  peasants  whose 
faith  differed  from  that  of  the  lords  on  whose  estates  they 
lived. 

A  few  years  afterwards  (in  1493)  another  attempt  was 
made  to  reconcile  the  utraquists  with  the  Roman  Church, 
of  which  Alexander  VI  (Borgia)  was  then  the  head.  An 
Italian  noble,  Nicholas  Cola  de  Castro,  who  frequently 
journeyed  to  Prague,  assumed  spontaneously  the  office  of 
mediator.  He  assured  the  citizens  of  Prague  of  the  Pope's 
good-will,  and  obtained  a  letter  from  the  magistrates  of  the 
town,  in  which  in  respectful  language,  but  in  a  very  indefi- 
nite manner,  they  asked  the  Pope  for  his  favour.  The  Pope 
also  answered  in  vague  words.  He  expressed  the  hope 
"  that  the  pious  and  sincere  Catholic  King  Vladislav  would 
lead  them  on  the  true  path  of  faith  and  humility."  The 
Pope  said  that  he  would  "  gladly  receive  every  one  whose 
thoughts  were  true  and  upright,  and  that  he  would  be  a 
father  to  all  such."  The  Pope  appears  to  have  been  entirely 
misled  by  Cola  de  Castro,  for  on  appointing  Bishop  Urso 
Orsini  papal  legate  for  Bohemia,  he  informed  him  that  the 


198 


Bohemia 


obstinate  heretics  had  at  last  seen  their  errors.  When  the 
Diet  that  met  at  Prague  (December  20,  1494)  declared 
that  the  Compacts  were  to  form  the  basis  for  the  future 
negotiations,  the  proposed  reconciliation  immediately  fell 
to  the  ground.  The  papal  envoy  never  even  started  for 
Bohemia.^  At  a  later  period  of  his  pontificate  Pope 
Alexander  VI  greatly  irritated  the  utraquists  by  appointing 
a  Dominican  friar  "censor  "  over  all  books  printed  and  sold 
in  Bohemia  and  Moravia.  The  friar  had  orders  to  burn  all 
those  containing  heretical  views  of  which  he  could  obtain 
possession.  The  Dominican  established  himself  at  Olomonc 
— always  a  stronghold  of  the  Catholic  party — and  published 
several  polemical  works  in  which  he  violently  attacked  the 
utraquist  creed. 

The  most  important  feature  of  the  reign  of  King  Vladislav 
is  the  development  of  the  constitution  of  Bohemia  in  an 
aristocratic,  or  rather  oligarchic,  direction.  All  the  enact- 
ments of  the  Diets  of  this  reign  rendered  the  peasantry 
more  completely  dependent  on  their  territorial  lords,  and 
encroached  on  the  privileges  of  the  towns.  The  power  of 
the  crown — very  strong  under  King  George — also  decreased 
during  the  reigns  of  Vladislav  II  and  Louis. 

The  oldest  institutions  of  Bohemia — as  far  as  we  can 
judge  from  the  scanty  records — were  of  a  democratic 
character,  as  indeed  were  those  of  most  Slavonic  countries. 
Slaves  and  serfs  were  unknown.  Through  the  constant 
contact  with  Germany  feudal  institutions  were  slowly  intro- 
duced into  Bohemia,  and  the  peasants  gradually  became 
more  dependent  on  the  nobles.  Still,  this  was  not  so 
entirely  the  case  as  in  Germany,  and  the  armed  peasants,  at 
whose  head  Zizka  and  Prokop  defeated  the  armies  of  half 
Europe,  were  still  freemen. 

The  reaction  against  democracy  in  Europe  at  this  time 
found  expression  in  Bohemia  also.  The  Diet  of  1487  at 
last  practically  established  bondage.  It  issued  an  enact- 
ment, according  to  which  all  were  forbidden  to  give  shelter 
to  servants  or  peasants  who  might  have  left  the  estates  on 
which  they  lived  ;  they  were,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  returned 
immediately — under  penalty  of  a  fine — to  the  owner  of  the 
estate  from  which  they  had  fled. 

This  measure  was  destined  to  have  the  most  fatal  results 
for  the  independence  of  Bohemia.  The  stout  Bohemian 
1  Palacky. 


An  Historical  Sketch  199 

peasantry  lost  its  former  interest  in  its  nation  and  gradually 
became  indifferent  to  the  independence  of  Bohemia. 

The  dissensions  between  the  towns  and  the  nobility, 
which  were  renewed  at  almost  every  Diet  during  the  reigu 
of  King  Vladislav,  at  first  turned  principally  on  a  conflict  of 
material  interests.  The  towns  had  hitherto  enjoyed  almost 
a  monopoly  of  the  trade  of  brewing,  at  all  times  one  of  the 
most  lucrative  undertakings  in  Bohemia.  Many  of  the 
great  nobles  at  this  period  established  breweries,  and  forbade 
the  sale  of  other  beer  on  their  extensive  estates,  thus  greatly 
injuring  the  towns. 

During  these  struggles  King  Vladislav  acted  mainly  under 
the  influence  of  Duke  Bartholemew  of  Miinsterberg,  a 
grandson  of  King  George.  Under  this  influence,  the  king 
— as  far  as  it  was  in  his  power — sided  with  the  townsmen, 
and  endeavoured  to  resist  the  increasing  preponderance  of 
the  nobles.  The  weak  and  vacillating  nature  of  the  king, 
however,  rendered  him  unable  to  take  a  prominent  part  in 
a  great  constitutional  struggle.  During  the  whole  reign  of 
Vladislav,  the  nobles  pursued  their  policy,  which  strove  for 
the  reduction  of  the  rights  of  the  townsmen.  All  the 
decisions  of  the  Diet  during  this  reign  give  proof  of  this 
tendency. 

The  Diet  attempted  to  impose  considerable  limitations 
on  the  right  of  the  towns  (as  the  "  third  curia  ")  to  take  part 
in  its  deliberations,  and  also  to  curtail  the  privileges  of 
special  jurisdiction  which  the  towns  had  for  many  years 
enjoyed.  All  these  innovations  were  formally  promulgated 
by  being  included  in  the  regulation  of  King  Vladislav, 
a  codification  of  the  various  enactments  of  the  previous 
years.  This  code  (published  in  1500)  enumerated  all  the 
privileges  of  the  knights  and  nobles,  while  entirely  ignoring 
those  of  the  towns.  Its  fundamental  principle  was  that 
only  nobles  and  knights  were  freemen,  and  that  the  other 
classes  of  the  population  were  destined  to  servitude.  These 
therefore  had  no  innate  rights,  but  could  only  enjoy  such  as 
were  granted  to  them  by  favour.^  The  towns  appealed  to 
King  Vladislav,  who  was,  however,  unable  to  oppose  the 
nobles.  He  therefore  reluctantly  decided  in  favour  of  the 
new  regulations,  and  duly  ratified  them.  After  this  several 
Diets  composed  only  of  the  nobles  and  knights  were  held, 
and  the  disputes  between  the  different  orders  continued  to 
1  Palacky. 


200  Bohemia 

the  end  of  the  reign  of  Vladislav,  for  a  time  throwing  even 
the  religious  dissensions  into  the  shade. 

Vladislav  had  shortly  after  the  death  of  King  Matthew 
(1490)  been  elected  King  of  Hungary,  and  it  was  in  that 
country  that  he  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  later  years  of 
his  reign.  Constant  absence  from  Bohemia  greatly  reduced 
the  king's  influence,  and,  as  previously  mentioned,  he  was 
quite  unable  to  resist  the  encroachments  of  the  nobles. 

King  Vladislav  died  at  Ofen  in  Hungary  on  March  1 3, 
1 5 16.  He  was  succeeded  by  Louis,  his  son  by  his  marriage 
to  Anna  de  Candale,  a  connection  of  the  French  royal 
family.  1  Louis,  who  had  already  been  crowned  as  King  of 
Bohemia  at  the  age  of  three,  was  only  ten  years  old  at  the 
death  of  his  father.  Shortly  before  his  death,  Vladislav  had 
made  an  agreement  with  his  brother.  King  Sigismund  of 
Poland,  and  with  the  German  Emperor  Maximilian  (who 
had  succeeded  his  father,  Frederick  IK),  by  which  they 
were  declared  guardians  of  his  son  Louis,  should  he  come 
to  the  throne  before  he  was  of  age.  At  the  same  time  mar- 
riages were  arranged  between  King  Louis  and  the  Arch- 
duchess Mary,  grand-daughter  of  the  Emperor,  and  also 
between  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  grandson  of  the  Emperor, 
and  Anna,  daughter  of  King  Vladislav.  It  was  at  the  same 
time  agreed  that  the  Bohemian  crown  should  pass  to  the 
descendants  of  Princess  Anna,  should  King  Louis  die 
childless.  This  agreement  was,  however,  not  brought  before 
the  Estates  of  Bohemia,  and  their  assent  was  not  demanded. 
On  the  death  of  Vladislav  the  Diet  recognized  the  German 
Emperor  and  the  King  of  Poland  as  guardians  of  the  young 
king,  but  it  would  not  allow  them  any  right  of  interference 
in  the  government  of  the  land.  The  Bohemian  nobles,  who 
held  the  great  offices  of  State,  especially  the  supreme  bur- 
grave,  Zdenek  Lev,  Lord  of  Rozmittal,  governed  the  country 
almost  without  control.  At  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
the  new  king  the  disputes  between  the  orders  were  for  a 
time  made  up  by  an  agreement,  which  is  known  as  the 
Treaty  of  Venceslas  (1517).^  By  this  agreement  the  towns 
renounced  their  claim  to  an  exclusive  right  of  brewing,  and 

^  She  was  the  daughter  of  Gaston  de  Candale  and  Catharine,  Coun- 
tess de  Foix.  Her  grandmother  was  a  sister  of  King  Louis  XII  of 
France,  at  whose  court  she  had  been  brought  up, 

*  Because  the  Diet  which  voted  this  agreement  met  on  the  day  of 
St  Venceslas  (September  28). 


An  Historical  Sketch  201 

the  nobility  recognized  their  special  privileges  of  jurisdic- 
tion. Before  this  time  the  representatives  of  the  towns  had 
already  been  again  admitted  to   the   sittings   of  the  Diet 

The  extension  of  Luther's  teaching  in  Bohemia,  which 
began  about  this  period,  revived  the  religious  strife,  which 
had  lately  decreased.  The  new  doctrine  found  adherents 
among  the  utraquists,  many  of  whom  considered  that  the 
compacts  did  not  go  far  enough  in  the  cause  of  Church 
reform.  The  Germans,  who  had  hitherto  been  the  most 
strenuous  opponents  of  this  reform,  now  accepted  the 
teaching  of  Luther  in  great  numbers.  "The  Bohemians 
were  surprised  to  see  the  Germans  now  themselves  receive 
communion  in  the  two  kinds,  and  renounce  the  authority  of 
the  Roman  Church."  ^ 

In  1522  King  Louis,  who  had  up  to  that  date  resided  in 
Hungary,  where  he  had  also  been  accepted  as  king,  arrived 
in  Bohemia.  The  tyranny  and  defraudations  of  Zdenek 
Lev  of  Rozmital  had  caused  great  dissatisfaction  in  Bohemia, 
and  joy  was  great  when  the  king,  shortly  after  his  arrival  in 
Bohemia,  dismissed  him  from  his  office  of  supreme  burgrave. 
The  king  thus  attempted  to  reassert  the  royal  prerogative 
which  had  recently  fallen  almost  into  oblivion.  John  of 
Wartenberg,  a  weak  man,  became  burgrave,  and  the  king 
appointed  as  regent  Duke  Charles  of  Miinsterberg,  a  grand- 
son of  King  George.  Duke  Charles,  whom  after  the  death 
of  his  cousin,  Duke  Bartholomew,  King  Vladislas  had  often 
consulted  on  the  affairs  of  the  State,  was  intellectually  far 
inferior  to  his  cousin,  and  quite  unequal  to  his  difficult 
task.2  He  and  the  burgrave  and  other  officials  of  the  new 
government  appear  to  have  favoured  the  more  advanced 
utraquists,  who  were  then  meditating  a  union  with  the 
Lutherans  of  Germany.  The  new  officials  thus  fell  into 
disfavour  with  the  king,  who  at  that  moment  was  parti- 

1  Public  opinion  at  that  period  so  completely  identified  the  Bohe- 
mians with  the  idea  of  heresy,  that  Luther  himself  was  "  accused  "  of 
being  a  Bohemian.  In  a  letter  to  Count  Schlick,  a  Bohemian  noble, 
Luther  says  :  '*  Odium  nominis  vestri  nullus  vestrum  tanto  onere,  quanto 
ego,  unquam  portauit,  Quoties  rogo  Bohemus  natus  quoties  fugnm 
molitus  ad  Bohemos,  adhnc  hodie  criminor?" 

^  2  The  late  Professor  Rezek,  in  an  interesting  article  published  in  the 
Casopis  Musea  Kralovst-ui  Ceskeho  (Journal  of  the  Museum  of  the 
Bohemian  Kingdom),  deals  with  the  formerly  little  known  relations  ot 
the  dukes  of  Miinsterberg  to  Kings  Vladislav  and  Louis. 


202  Bohemia 

cularly  anxious  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  Papal  See. 
He  had  just  requested  financial  aid  from  Rome  for  the 
purpose  of  defending  Hungary  against  the  Turks.  Lev  of 
Rozmital  was  therefore  reinstated  as  burgrave,  but  he  did 
not  forgive  the  king  for  his  former  dismissal.  Shortly  after 
he  had  resumed  office,  Rozmital  became  involved  in  a  feud 
with  the  powerful  Rosenberg  family,  as  he  claimed  the 
inheritance  of  Lord  Peter  of  Rosenberg.  All  the  Bohemian 
nobles  and  towns  took  sides  in  this  feud,  and  the  whole 
country  was  divided  into  the  Rosenberg  and  the  Rozmital 
factions. 

It  was  at  this  unpropitious  moment  that  the  unfortunate 
King  Louis,  then  again  residing  in  Hungary,  sent  an  urgent 
demand  for  aid  against  the  Turks.  When  the  Diet,  before 
which  the  matter  was  brought,  met,  no  agreement  could  be 
arrived  at.  Rozmital  in  particular  showed  little  zeal  for  the 
cause  of  the  king.  The  heads  of  the  Rosenberg  party  at 
last  resolved,  at  their  own  expense,  to  equip  a  force  in  aid 
of  King  Louis.  Rozmital  thereupon  also  decided  to  send  a 
small  army  to  Hungary.  The  Bohemians  had  been  so  tardy 
in  their  preparations  that  only  a  few  of  their  troops — those 
sent  by  the  lords  of  the  Rosenberg  Confederacy — had 
arrived  when  the  battle  of  Mohac  took  place  (August  29, 
1526).  That  fatal  battle,  in  consequence  of  which  the 
greater  part  of  Hungary  became  a  Turkish  province  for 
more  than  two  centuries,  belongs  to  Hungarian  rather  than 
to  Bohemian  history.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  King 
Louis  foolhardily  attacked  the  Turkish  army  of  300,000  men 
with  a  force  of  only  25,000,  and  was  totally  defeated. 
"When  leaving  the  battle-field  the  king — who  was  then  only 
twenty  years  of  age — was  drowned  while  trying  to  ford  a 
marshy  stream. 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  KINGS  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  HABSBURG  FROM  THE  BATTLE 
OF  M0Ha6  to  THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  WHITE  MOUNTAIN 
(1526-1620) 

"After  the  unfortunate  battle  and  the  death  of  King 
Louis  at  Mohac,  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown  became 
subject  to  an  interregnum.  This  was  the  more  unfortunate, 
as  under  the  feeble  rule  of  the  two  last  kings  anarchy  and 


An  Historical  Sketch  203 

lawlessness  had  already  been  prevalent,  and  had  endangered 
the  welfare  of  the  people.  All  the  native  contemporary 
sources  unite  in  telling  us  of  the  hopeless  moral  decay  and 
the  internal  ruin  of  the  Bohemian  State,  both  with  regard  to 
ecclesiastical  and  political  affairs."  ^ 

But  neither  the  precarious  condition  of  the  country  nor 
the  claims  of  the  Archduke  Ferdinand  (founded  as  they 
were  on  the  treaty  between  the  late  King  Vladislav  and  the 
Emperor  Maximilian)  discouraged  numerous  competitors  for 
the  vacant  throne.  Almost  immediately  after  the  news  of 
the  death  of  the  king  reached  Prague  (September  9),  it  was 
rumoured  that  many  princes  aspired  to  the  crown  of  Bohe- 
mia. Besides  the  Archduke  Ferdinand  we  find  among  them 
the  Bavarian  Dukes  Louis  and  William,  Sigismund  King  of 
Poland,  John  Elector  of  Saxony  and  his  son  John  Frederick, 
and  George  Duke  of  Saxony.  Francis  I,  King  of  France, 
Joachim  Margrave  of  Brandenburg,  Duke  Frederick  of  Leig- 
nitz,  and  the  noblemen  Charles  Duke  of  Miinsterberg, 
Zdenek  Lev  Lord  of  Rozmital,  and  Adalbert  Lord  of  Pern- 
stein,  were  also  mentioned  as  candidates.  There  appear  to 
have  been  two  parties  among  the  Estates,  whose  duty  it  was 
now  to  elect  a  king  and  establish  a  new  dynasty  in  Bohemia. 
The  adherents  of  one  party  were  strongly  opposed  to  the 
choice  of  a  Bohemian  noble,  as  they  objected  to  a  king  who 
was  their  equal  by  birth.  The  other  party,  on  the  contrary, 
declared  that  no  one  should  be  chosen  who  was  ignorant 
of  the  BohemianJ.^guage,  and  it  was  urged  that  if  a  man 
capable "oFruIing  strongly  could  be  found,  it  would  be  of 
minor  importance  if  he  were  poor,  as  the  country  was  rich 
enough  to  allow  its  sovereign  the  means  of  sustaining  the 
regal  dignity."^  This  probably  referred  to  Lev  of  Rozmital, 
who  was  the  most  prominent  of  the  Bohemian  candidates 
to  the  throne,  and  whose  financial  circumstances  at  that 
time  were  very  unsatisfactory.  Archduke  Ferdinand  at  first 
aimed  rather  at  his  recognition  as  King  of  Bohemia — in 
virtue  of  his  relationship  to  the  late  king,  and  of  the  agree- 
ments mentioned  above — than  at  his  election.  The  Bohe- 
mian nobles  were,  however,  immovable  in  their  determina- 
tion to  maintain  the_^ectiye__character  of  the  Bohemian 
crown.  Ferdinand  lost  no  time  in~~sending  his  representa- 
tives to  Bohemia,  and  they  were  soon  followed  by  envoys  of 

^  A.  Rezek,  Geschichte  der  Regierung  Ferdinands  I  in  Bohmen. 
2  Rezek. 


204  Bohemia 

the  other  candidates.  When  the  moment  of  the  election 
approached  many  of  the  competitors  withdrew  their  claims. 
Among  others,  the  agents  of  the  Kings  of  France  and 
Poland  abandoned  all  pretensions  put  forward  on  the  part 
of  their  sovereigns,  though  the  representative  of  King  Sigis- 
mund  of  Poland  had  at  first  made  great  promises  to  the 
Bohemians,  to  induce  them  to  elect  his  master.  The  general 
opinion  in  Bohemia  had  already  made  itself  clearly  felt,  that 
the  remoteness  of  these  countries  rendered  the  election  of 
either  of  the  princes  impossible.  After  the  beginning  of 
October  only  two  candidatures  were  persisted  in,  and  the 
two  opposing  parties  resolved  themselves  into  the  Austrian 
and  the  Bavarian  factions.  The  other  candidates  either 
altogether  abandoned  the  contest,  or  joined  one  or  the 
other  of  these  parties.  On  the  Bavarian  side  we  find  the 
Kings  of  France  and  of  Poland,  Adalbert  of  Pernstein,  and 
Lev  of  Rozmital.  Pope  Clement  VII,  always  an  enemy  of 
the  house  of  Habsburg,  also  brought  all  his  influence  to 
bear  in  favour  of  the  Bavarian  candidate.  On  Ferdinand's 
side  we  only  find  Duke  George  of  Saxony,  and  Ferdinand's 
sister,  the  widowed  Queen  Maria,  also  used  what  little  influ- 
ence she  had  in  his  favour.  The  ambassadors  of  Ferdinand, 
however,  displayed  great  energy,  and  bribery  played  a  great 
part  in  this  election.  Lev  of  Rozmital  was  won  over  to  the 
archduke  by  the  promise  of  payment  of  his  debts — which 
amounted  to  50,000  florins — and  by  the  assurance  that 
those  who  had  not  from  the  first  belonged  to  the  Austrian 
party  should  in  no  way  suffer  for  their  former  opposition, 
but  should  retain  all  their  offices  and  privileges.  Similar 
promises  gained  over  other  of  the  great  nobles,  and  the 
agents  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  acted  with  so  much 
secrecy  that  the  Bavarian  envoys  were  still  hopeful  when 
the  election  of  Ferdinand  was  practically  assured.  On 
October  23,  1526,  the  Diet  elected  the  Archduke  Ferdinand 
King  of  Bohemia.  This  date  marks  the  beginning  of  the 
rule  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  over  Bohemia,  if  we  except 
the  short  reigns  of  Rudolph  and  of  Albert,  who  had  also 
belonged  to  that  dynasty. 

Ferdinand  was  also  chosen  king  by  the  Hungarians,  and 
he  had  already  become  possessed  of  the  hereditary  domains 
of  the  house  of  Habsburg.  The  government  of  Germany 
w^as  also  entrusted  to  him  whenever  his  brother,  the 
Emperor  Charles   V,  was  in  Spain  or  in  the  Netherlands. 


An  Historical  Sketch  205 

Many  of  the  events  of  his  life,  therefore,  do  not  belong  to 
Bohemian  history,  and  the  greater  part  of  his  time,  particu- 
larly during  the  last  years  of  his  reign,  were  spent  away 
from  Bohemia. 

In  matters  of  theological  controversy,  which  then  and  for 
many  years  afterwards  absorbed  the  whole  intellectual 
activity  of  Bohemia,  P'erdinand  showed  greater  moderation 
than  his  Spanish  education  had  led  the  Bohemians  to  expect. 
Thoroughly  grasping  the  intricate  state  of  ecclesiastical 
affairs  in  Bohemia,  the  king  from  the  first  realized  that  the 
abolition  of  all "  heresies  "  and  the  complete  re-establish- 
ment of  the  Roman  creed  and  ritual  were  for  the  present 
not  to  be  sought  for.  He  therefore  attempted  to  establish 
an  aUiance  between  the  few  Romanists  in  Bohemia  and 
those  utraquists  who,  though  strictly  maintaining  the  com- 
pacts of  Basel,  had  little  sympathy  with  the  ideas  of  Church 
[reform  and  of  Protestantism  which  at  that  moment  were 
'spreading  rapidly  through  the  neighbouring  German  coun- 
tries. The  position  of  the  moderate  party  in  the  utraquist 
community  was,  however,  one  of  steady  decadence.  The 
king  was  therefore,  in  the  concluding  years  of  his  reign, 
obliged  to  rely  principally  on  the  Catholics,  and  he  used  all 
his  influence  in  the  country  in  their  favour.  Whenever  cir- 
cumstances permitted,  Ferdinand — whose  time  was  princi- 
pally taken  up  by  the  defence  of  Hungary  against  the  Turks 
— attempted  the  difficult  task  of  uniting  the  Romanists  and 
utraquists,  hoping  thus  to  prevent  the  spread  of  Lutheran- 
ism.  Ferdinand  and  his  advisers  maintained  that  as  the 
Council  of  Basel  had  only  recognized  the  utraquist  com- 
munity, that  community  and  the  Romanists  alone  were 
entitled  to  a  legal  status  :  the  Protestants  and  Bohemian 
Brethren  should  therefore,  they  argued,  be  absolutely  ex- 
cluded from  the  country.  In  1537  Ferdinand  arranged  a 
meeting  between  the  representatives  of  the  Roman  and 
those  of  the  utraquist  parties.  He  declared  that  only  those 
who  either  professed  the  Catholic  faith  or  recognized  the 
compacts  had  a  right  to  be  present.  The  utraquists  forced 
several  members  of  the  community  of  the  Brethren  to  retire, 
but  they  opposed  the  wishes  of  the  king  with  regard  to  the 
Lutherans.  Several  of  the  utraquist  nobles  even  spoke  in  a 
disparaging  way  of  the  compacts,  saying  that  they  had 
never  read  them,  and  that  they  would  only  be  guided  by 
the  word  of  God.     The  utraquist  party  then  proposed  a 


2o6  Bohemia 

compromise  to  the  Catholics  which  cannot  be  called  unfair ; 
for  of  the  four  creeds  that  then  divided  Bohemia,  the  Old- 
Utraquists,  the  Lutherans,  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  and  the 
Romanists,  the  last-named  had  the  fewest  adherents.^ 

These  proposals  were  drawn  up  in  seven  articles.  Accord- 
ing to  them,  papal  and  utraquist  priests  were  henceforth 
freely  to  celebrate  divine  service  in  the  churches  of  either 
confession ;  the  Romanists  were  to  be  allowed  to  embrace 
the  utraquist  faith  without  hindrance,  and  vice  versa; 
Catholic  lords  were  not  to  appoint  priests  to  a  utraquist 
parish  without  the  approval  of  the  authorities  of  the  utraquist 
Church ;  on  the  other  hand,  utraquist  patrons  of  livings 
where  the  population  was  Catholic  were  not  to  make  any 
similar  appointments  without  the  consent  of  the  Roman 
Church.  It  was  further  proposed  that  there  should  be  two 
bishops  for  Bohemia,  one  for  the  utraquist,  the  other  for 
the  Romanist  part  of  the  population.  It  was  finally  declared 
that  utraquist  lords  should  have  equal  rights  to  the  offices 
of  State  with  the  Catholics.  The  Romanists  refused  these 
proposals,  which  would  practically  have  established  religious 
equality  between  the  two  creeds.  The  age  was  perhaps  not 
ripe  for  such  a  settlement,  and  from  a  strictly  Romanist 
point  of  view  it  was  impossible  to  approve  of  the  equality  of 
position  which  the  "  heretics  "  would  thus  have  obtained. 
Henceforth  the  utraquist  Church  became  more  and  more 
Lutheran  in  its  doctrine  and  ritual,  and  almost  abandoned 
the  Compacts,  which  no  longer  sufficiently  represented  its 
religious  views. 

Though  he  was  unsuccessful  in  his  efforts  to  prevent  the 
spread  of  Protestantism  in  Bohemia,  Ferdinand  succeeded 
in  consolidating  his  dynasty,  and  in  strengthening  the  royal 
authority  in  Bohemia.     He  was  able  to  obtain  from  the 

*  The  number  oi  the  adherents  of  the  Church  of  Rome  during  the 
sixteenth  century  is  a  very  contested  point.  Dr.  Gindely  {Geschichte 
der  Ertheitung  des  Bohmischen  Alajestdts brief es),  counting  together 
Bohemia  and  Moravia,  where  the  Koman  Church  never  completely  lost 
its  power,  estimates  them  as  a  third  of  the  population.  This  figure 
is  certainly  too  high.  Gindely  himself,  speaking  of  the  last  years 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  says  that  Catholicism  was  constantly  losing 
ground,  and  would  then  have  been  extinct  had  it  not  been  for  the 
Jesuits.  The  Venetian  ambassador,  Giovanni  Michiel  (writing  in 
1576),  speaks  of  **  questi  pochi  catholici  che  ci  sono"  (in  Bohemia); 
he  adds,  however,  "  che  sono  pero  li  maggior  signori  ed  officiali  del 
regno  "  (from  the  State  Archives  at  Venice). 


An  Historical  Sketch  207 

Estates  the  recognition  of  his  hereditary  right  to  the  throne. 
At  the  moment  of  his  accession  he  had  been  obliged  to 
recognize  the  elective  character  of  the  Bohemian  crown. 
When  a  great  fire  at  Prague  (1541)  destroyed  all  the  State 
documents,  Ferdinand  obtained  the  consent  of  the  Estates 
to  the  substitution  of  a  charter  formulating  the  theory  that 
he  had,  in  consequence  of  the  hereditary  rights  of  his  wife. 
Queen  Anna,  been  accepted  as  king  in  the  place  of  the 
former  charter,  which  had  declared  that  he  had  become 
king  by  election.  This  innovation,  however,  caused  great 
dissatisfaction  in  Bohemia. 

In  the  year  1545  King  Ferdinand,  by  the  Peace  of 
Constantinople,  put  at  least  a  temporary  stop  to  the  war  with 
Turkey,  which  had  continued  almost  uninterruptedly  since 
the  beginning  of  his  reign.  His  brother,  the  Emperor 
Charles  V,  had  in  the  previous  year  concluded  peace  with 
France.  The  Emperor  now  attempted  to  stem  the  tide  of 
Lutheranism,  which  had  risen  very  high  in  consequence  of 
his  inability  to  devote  his  attention  to  German  internal 
affairs  during  the  prolonged  war  with  France.  Hostilities 
broke  out  in  Germany  in  the  summer  of  1546  between  the 
Emperor  Charles  V  and  the  Protestant  princes ;  the  latter 
had  met  at  Schmalkalden  and  formed  a  league,  the  leaders 
of  which  were  John  Frederick,  Elector  of  Saxony,  and  Philip, 
Landgrave  of  Hesse.  Ferdinand  undertook  to  aid  his 
brother  by  attacking  the  lands  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony  from 
the  adjoining  districts  of  Bohemia.  The  Estates  of  Bohemia, 
the  great  majority  of  w^hich  were  either  old-utraquists, 
Lutherans,  or  members  of  the  union  of  the  Bohemian 
Brethren,  were  naturally  opposed  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 
They  were  therefore  now  in  a  very  difficult  position.  There 
was  little  doubt  that  by  aiding  King  Ferdinand  and  the 
Emperor  in  their  attempt  to  suppress  Protestantism  in 
Germany  they  would  greatly  increase  the  power  of  their 
king ;  in  case  of  success  there  was  every  probability  that 
Ferdinand  would  abandon  his  former  moderation,  and 
strive  forcibly  to  re-establish  the  Church  of  Rome  in 
Bohemia.  On  the  other  hand,  many  were  unwilling  to'rise 
in  arms  against  their  "elected  and  crowned"  king,  while  the 
old  dislike  to  the  Germans  rendered  an  alliance  with  the 
Elector  of  Saxony  distasteful  to  others.  The  Estates  there- 
fore adopted  an  undecided  and  vacillating  policy — with  the 
results  that  such  a  policy  almost  invariably  produces. 


2o8  Bohemia 

King  Ferdinand  assembled  the  Estates  at  Prague  (July 
1546),  and  obtained  their  consent  to  a  general  armament  of 
the  country  should  it  be  attacked  by  the  Turks  or  other 
foreign  enemies.  Soon  afterwards,  the  army  of  Ferdinand 
marched  into  Saxony  to  attack  the  Elector.  When  they 
reached  the  Saxon  frontier  Ferdinand's  Bohemian  troops 
refused  to  cross  it,  grounding  their  refusal  on  the  decision 
of  the  Diet.  In  the  following  year  (1547)  hostilities  re- 
commenced in  Germany  between  the  Protestant  princes  and 
the  Emperor  Charles  V,  with  whom  Duke  Maurice  of 
Saxony  had  entered  into  an  alliance  against  the  head  of  his 
house.  Not  discouraged  by  the  experiences  of  the  previous 
year,  Ferdinand  again  called  on  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  to  aid 
him.  By  an  order  issued  at  Prague  (January  12,  1547),  he 
summoned  them  to  join  him  with  their  forces  the  following 
month.  Only  a  few  Romanists  and  old-utraquists  assembled 
there.  The  majority  of  the  people  thought  the  moment 
favourable  for  forcing  Ferdinand  to  recede  from  the  more 
authoritative  attitude  he  had  lately  assumed,  both  as  regards 
temporal  and  ecclesiastical  affairs.  The  citizens  of  Prague 
took  the  lead  in  this  movement,  and  were  soon  joined  by 
many  nobles  and  knights.  They  demanded  that  a  Diet 
should  be  summoned,  and  the  Estates  met  at  Prague  on 
March  18,  without  waiting  for  the  king's  assent.  They  here 
formulated  their  demands  in  fifty-seven  "articles."  These 
articles,  among  other  matters,  re-established  the  elective 
character  of  the  Bohemian  crown,  proclaimed  liberty  for  all 
religious  beliefs  in  Bohemia,  and  in  various  points  curtailed 
the  rights  of  the  sovereign. 

A  committee,  consisting  of  four  members  of  each  of  the 
three  Estates,  was  elected.  No  direct  attack  on  the  king 
was,  however,  attempted.  It  seems,  indeed,  rather  to  have 
been  the  intention  of  the  Estates  to  reduce  the  power  of 
the  king  to  what  it  had  been  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign. 
It  is  noticeable  that  of  the  eight  members  of  the  new 
committee  chosen  from  the  nobles  and  knights,  four  were 
members  of  the  Unity  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren. 

The  Elector  of  Saxony,  who  greatly  overrated  the  chance 
of  receiving  aid  from  the  Bohemians,  entered  into 
negotiations  with  the  Estates.  The  latter  now  decided  to 
equip  an  armed  force,  the  command  of  which  they  gave  to 
Kaspar  Pflug  of  Rahstein ;  his  instructions  were  to  proceed 
to  the  Saxon  frontier  and  there  to  await  further  orders.     The 


An  Historical  Sketch  209 

Estate,  however,  continued  to  be  irresolute  till  the  moment 
when  action  was  possible  had  passed.  Rabstein  marched  to 
Joachimsthal,  close  to  the  Saxon  frontier,  but  he  refused  to 
cross  into  Germany,  where  critical  events  were  impending, 
without  a  formal  order  from  the  Estates.  Soon  afterwards^ 
the  decisive  victory  of  Charles  V  at  Miihlberg  (April  14,  1547) 
for  the  time  crushed  Protestantism  in  Germany.  The 
Bohemian  troops  dispersed,  and  the  Estates,  with  foolish  and 
untimely  servility,  sent  a  deputation  to  Ferdinand  to 
congratulate  him  on  the  victory.  Ferdinand  on  this  occasion 
displayed  his  usual  prudence.  Charles  V  had  after  his 
victory  placed  a  large  force  of  Spanish  and  Walloon  soldiers 
at  his  brother's  disposal.  The  opportunity  of  asserting 
absolute  authority  in  Bohemia  was  certainly  a  tempting  one. 
Ferdinand  was,  however,  not  induced  by  the  weakness  and 
irresolution  which  the  Estates  had  shown  to  underrate  the 
danger  of  a  new  general  uprising  of  the  Bohemian  nation, 
should  that  still  warlike  race  be  driven  to  desperation.  He 
therefore  gave  a  gracious  though  evasive  answer  to  the 
deputation ;  but  he  demanded  a  promise  that  the  Estates 
would  abandon  all  negotiations  with  the  Protestant  princes 
of  Germany.  Ferdinand  then  marched  on  Prague  with  the 
forces  the  Emperor  had  put  at  his  disposal.  The  town 
capitulated  (July  8,  1547)  almost  without  any  show  of 
resistance.  Ferdinand  took  this  opportunity  for  seriously 
curtailing  the  autonomy  of  the  Bohemian  towns,  which  had 
already  been  weakened  through  the  acts  of  the  Diets  during 
the  reign  of  King  Louis.  When  accepting  the  uncondi- 
tional surrender  of  the  town  of  Prague,  Ferdinand  informed 
the  citizens  that  their  former  privileges  would  only  be  renewed 
after  he  had  examined  them.  The  result  of  this  examination 
was  that  all  the  enactments  contained  in  the  privileges  of 
Prague  and  the  other  Bohemian  towns  which  in  any  way 
impaired  the  royal  authority  were  annulled.  To  enforce  this 
change  the  king  appointed  "  royal  judges,"  as  they  were 
called,  who  were  to  exercise  a  general  control  over  the 
municipalities  of  the  provincial  towns  of  Bohemia ;  without 
their  consent  neither  an  assembly  of  the  town  council  nor  of 
the  general  body  of  the  citizens  could  take  place  :  they  also 
had  a  right  of  veto  on  any  decision  which  seemed  to  them 
to  encroach  on  the  royal  prerogative.  Officials  of  higher 
ranks  but  with  similar  functions  were  also  appointed  for  the 
city  of  Prague,  where  they  received   the  name  of  "royal 

H 


2IO  Bohemia 

captains."  Punishment  was  also  meted  out  to  many 
individuals  who  had  taken  a  prominent  part  in  the  ill- 
considered  and  fruitless  attempt  to  resist  the  royal  authority. 
Some  of  those  most  implicated,  among  whom  was  Pflug  of 
Rabstein,  had  fled  the  country,  but  four  of  the  leaders  of  the 
movement,  two  knights  and  two  citizens  of  Prague,  were 
decapitated  in  the  square  on  the  Hradcany  (August  20). 
As  the  king  had  summoned  the  Diet  on  the  day  appointed 
for  the  execution,  the  assembly  afterwards  became  known  as 
the  "Bloody  Diet."  Numerous  landed  estates  were  also 
confiscated. 

King  Ferdinand  undoubtedly  gave  proof  of  his  usual 
sagacity  when  he  attributed  the  insurrection  in  Bohemia 
largely  to  the  religious  sects.  One  of  these,  the  "  Unity  " 
of  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  though  of  humble  origin,  had  by 
this  time  spread  widely,  and  acquired  great  influence  in  the 
land.  The  Unity  was  from  the  first  of  a  very  democratic" 
character ;  it  had,  however,  been  joined  by  a  certain 
number  of  nobles,  and  these  were  among  the  most  promi- 
nent opponents  of  Ferdinand's  plan  of  subduing  the  German 
Protestants  with  the  aid  of  Bohemian  arms.  It  was  at  this 
body,  therefore,  that  Ferdinand  aimed  the  sharpest  blow. 
On  October  8,  1547,  he  issued  a  decree  re-enacting  laws 
formerly  directed  against  the  Brethren.  He  forbad  their 
religious  meetings,  and  ordered  them  to  make  restitution  to 
the  Catholics  or  utraquists  of  the  churches  of  which  they 
had  taken  possession.  At  the  same  time  the  estates  of 
several  nobles  who  belonged  to  the  Unity  were  confiscated ; 
many  of  the  Brethren  were  imprisoned,  and  others  driven 
out  of  the  country.  The  crudest  fate  befell  Augusta,  the 
leader  or  bishop  of  the  Unity.  He  was  unjustly  accused  ^ 
of  having  had  secret  communications  with  the  Elector  of 
Saxony,  and  was  for  some  time  confined  in  the  "White 
Tower  "  at  Prague.  He  was  there  subjected  to  torture  in  a 
manner  that  even  at  that  barbarous  period  appeared  excep- 
tionally horrible.  It  was  hoped  that  he  would  thus  be 
induced  to  confess  his  treason.  When  it  was  found  that 
this  was  impossible,  he  was  thrown  into  the  dungeon  of  the 

1  Dr.  Gindely  {Geschickte  de?-  Bdhmischen  Brilder)  admits  the  inno- 
cence of  Augusta,  but  he  attempts  to  prove  that  the  Lutherans  who 
were  involve!  in  the  supposed  conspiracy  tried  to  obtain  their  own 
security  by  throwing  the  responsibility  on  Augusta  and  other  leaders  of 
the  Unity. 


An  Historical  Sketch  211 

royal  castle  of  Piirglitz,  where  he  remained  a  prisoner  for 
sixteen  years.  Some  years  later,  Ferdinand,  during  one  of 
his  visits  to  Bohemia,  established  the  order  of  the  Jesuits  in 
the  land  (1556).  It  has  been  truly  stated  by  writers  of  the 
most  opposite  views  that  this  measure  had  a  very  decisive 
effect  on  the  future  of  Bohemia,  in  consequence  of  the 
marvellous  intellectual  activity  of  the  Jesuit  order,  and  the 
unequalled  knowledge  of  the  country  which  its  members 
soon  acquired.^ 

King  Ferdinand  left  Bohemia  soon  after  the  suppression 
of  the  disturbances  of  the  year  1547,  leaving  his  second  son, 
Archduke  Ferdinand,  as  his  representative.  The  king  did 
not  then  wish  to  confer  that  dignity  on  his  eldest  son 
Archduke  Maximilian,  though  the  latter  was  about  this 
time — February  1549 — recognized  as  heir  to  the  throne  by 
the  Bohemian  Estates.  It  seems  unquestionable  that 
Maximilian's  sympathy  with  Protestantism  (founded,  as  it 
was  said,  on  the  influence  over  him  which  the  Lutheran 
preacher  Pfauser  had  acquired)  caused  a  temporary  es- 
trangement between  father  and  son.  Maximilian  did  not 
long  continue  to  hold  the  views  in  question.  It  seems 
likely  that  (as  Ranke  has  suggested)  the  death  of  the  Infant 
Don  Carlos  and  the  possibility  of  Maximilian's  succession 
to  the  Spanish  throne  contributed  to  the  abandonment  of 
his  hostile  attitude  towards  the  Roman  Church. 

The  triumph  of  the  Roman  Catholic  cause  in  Germany, 
which  seemed  assured  by  the  battle  of  Miihlberg,  was  of 
short  duration.  Duke  Maurice  of  Saxony,  who  had,  as  a 
reward  for  his  services  to  the  Emperor,  obtained  the  Saxon 
Electorate  in  the  place  of  John  Frederick,  shortly  afterwards 
headed  a  new  confederacy  of  the  Protestant  princes  of 
Germany  against  Charles  V  (1552).  The  Protestants  were 
this  time  more  successful,  and  Charles  V  was  obliged  to 
assume  a  more  conciliatory  attitude.  The  peace  concluded 
at  Augsburg  (1555)  between  the  Emperor  and  the  Protestant 
princes   recognized    the    status    quo    in    Germany.      The 

^  The  views  of  the  more  advanced  utraquist^,  or  rather  Lutherans, 
are  stated  very  forcibly  by  Andreas  ab  Habernfeld  in  his  little  known 
but  valuable  work,  Belluni  Bohemicum.  Lugduni  Batavorum,  1645  • 
"  A  primo  Jesuitarum  in  Bohemiam  introitu  turbari  regnum  coeperat, 
Regum  Sacramenta  Sanctiones  donationesque  vilia  haberi.  Status  rei- 
publicae  optime  constitus  vitiari,  aboleri  consuetudines,  Religionem 
quae  summum  mortalitatis  solatium  est,  intentari,  inquisitionis  Hispani- 
cae  seminaria  inseri." 


212  Bohemia 

religious  reforms  which  the  Protestant  princes  had  intro- 
duced into  their  territories,  and  their  confiscations  of  former 
Church  lands,  thereby  received  the  Emperor's  sanction. 
The  Peace  of  Augsburg  contained  no  reference  to  Bohemia, 
but  it  greatly  encouraged  the  Lutheran  party  in  that 
country. 

After  the  abdication  of  Charles  V  (1558)  Ferdinand 
succeeded  him  as  Emperor.  Shortly  before  his  death  he 
caused  his  son  Maximilian,  with  whom  he  was  now  on 
better  terms,  to  be  crowned  as  King  of  Bohemia  (1562). 
In  the  year  1564  Ferdinand  entered  into  new  negotiations 
with  Pope  Pius  IV  for  the  purpose  of  reconciling  the 
moderate  utraquists  with  the  Roman  Church.  The  death 
of  Ferdinand  in  the  same  year  (July  25,  1564)  interrupted 
these  negotiations. 

Maximilian,  as  mentioned  above,  had  already  been 
crowned  King  of  Bohemia,  and  succeeded  his  father 
without  opposition  as  ruler  of  that  country.  "  Maximilian 
differed  from  most  of  his  contemporaries,  who  were 
generally  either  fiery  adherents  or  bitter  enemies  of 
Catholicism.  During  the  whole  of  his  life  he  was  unable 
to  make  up  his  mind  definitely  for  or  against  the  Catholic 
cause.  He  played  the  part  of  a  discontented  son  as  long 
as  his  father  lived,  opposed  him,  and  surrounded  himself 
with  enemies  of  the  Catholic  Church ;  he  avoided  the 
religious  functions  of  that  Church,  and  the  Protestants 
founded  great  hopes  on  his  accession  to  the  throne ;  but  as 
soon  as  he  succeeded  his  father  he  abandoned  his  former 
attitude,  began  to  favour  the  Catholics,  and  publicly 
conformed  to  their  creed."  ^ 

Maximilian  also  succeeded  his  father  as  Emperor,  and  as 
King  of  Hungary,  and  he  further  inherited  part  of  the  old 
dominions  of  the  house  of  Habsburg,  Upper  and  Lower 
Austria.2  Other  duties  therefore  prevented  him  from  im- 
mediately assuming  the  government  of  Bohemia,  where  his 
younger  brother  Ferdinand  continued  to  act  as  regent. 

It  was  only  in  1567  that  the  new  king  visited  Bohemia. 

*  Gindely,  Rudolph  II  und  seine  Zeit. 

2  Of  Ferdinand  I's  other  sons,  the  one  (Ferdinand)  inherited  the 
Tyrol,  the  other  (Charles)  Styria,  with  Carinthia  Snd  Carniola.  Charles 
was  succeeded  by  his  son  Ferdinand,  who  subsequently  became  Em- 
pt^ror  as  well  as  King  of  Bohemia  and  Hungary,  under  the  name  of 
Ferdinand  II. 


An  Historical  Sketch  213 

He  immediately  assembled  the  Estates,  principally  for  the 
purpose  of  obtaining  aid  against  the  Turks.  The  discussions 
between  the  representatives  of  the  towns  and  the  nobility 
were  very  violent.  Religious  questions  were  also  again 
introduced,  to  the  great  disgust  of  the  king,  who  said  that 
*'  it  did  not  belong  to  him,  and  far  less  to  them,  but  to  the 
Roman  Pontiff  and  to  the  Church,  to  judge  on  religious 
matters."  ^  The  king's  hope  that  the  Diet  would  only  sit  a 
short  time  was  not  fulfilled.  The  Estates  attempted  to 
obtain  his  assent,  if  not  to  the  acceptance  of  the  Lutheran 
creed,  at  least  to  the  suppression  of  the  Compacts  ;  formerly 
so  greatly  revered  in  Bohemia  they  had  now  become  an 
object  of  dislike  to  the  more  advanced  reformers.  The 
king,  on  the  other  hand,  maintained  that  no  doctrines 
differing  from  the  Roman  creed,  except  those  contained  in 
the  Compacts,  were  admissible  in  Bohemia.  The  Estates 
thereupon  sent  a  message  to  the  king  which  greatly  dis- 
pleased him.2  Maximilian  was  finally  obliged  to  abandon 
his  wish  of  excluding  religious  questions  from  the  dis- 
cussions of  the  Diet.  He  also  found  it  necessary  to 
make  a  very  important  concession  to  the  Estates  :  and,  as 
was   wished,  he   declared   that   the   Compacts  no   longer 

^  The  Venetian  ambassador,  Giovanni  Michiel,  writing  from  Prague, 
March  17,  1567,  says  that  the  menaces  of  the  Turks  "con  maggior 
instantia  che  non  si  faceva  fa  Sua  Maesta  sollecitare  la  conclusione  della 
dieta  di  questo  regno  et  essendo  stati  tutti  questi  giorni  gran  divisione 
et  contention!  tra  li  cittadini  da  una  parte  et  li  baroni  et  nobili  dall' 
altra  con  esser  mancato  poco  che  non  sono  venuti  a  romore  d'ahro  che 
di  parola  ;  comparuen  avanti  hieri  inanzi  Sua  Maesta  instando  la  parte 
de'  cettadini  con  molti  nobili  fra  loro  di  poter  far  alteratione  nella 
religiona  volendosi  ridunare  alia  confession  Augustana  benche  non 
I'esprimessero  ;  alii  quali  s'opposero  questi  pochi  catholici  che  ci  sono 
(che  sono  pero  li  maggior  signori  et  ufi&ciali  del  regno)  con  li  quali 
s'unirono  anco  molti  di  questi  Hussiti,  quelli  cioe  de  communicano 
'sub  utraque,'  mostrando  che  per  le  transationi  et  constitntioni 
particolari  del  regno  in  materia  di  religione  non  si  poteva  fare  altera- 
tione dello  stato  presente  ;  sopia  il  quale  articolo  Sua  Maesta  disse  che 
non  apparteue,  a  lei  molto  manco  a  loro  conoscere  sopra  il  fnttb  di 
religione  ma  apparteneva  all  pontefice  Romano  et  alia  chiesa  agoriun- 
gendo  che  non  era  tempo  parlar  di  questo  "  (from  the  State  Archives, 
Venice). 

^  "Hieri  mattina  tornando  Sua  Maesta  de  mezza  presenti  tutti  noi, 
li  fu  presentata  una  scrittura  di  non  molta,  decivano,  sattisfatione  di 
lei,  alia  quale  bisognera  risposta  che  potria  esser  causa  di  maggior 
lunghezza  et  pratration  della  dieta  con  molto  dispiacere  di  Sua  Maesta'* 
(Despatch  of  the  Venetian  ambassador,  Giovanni  Michiel,  dated  Prague, 
April  14,  1567.     From  the  Slate  Archives,  Venice). 


214  Bohemia 

formed  part  of  the  fundamental  law  of  the  land.  He  thus 
authorized  the  progress  of  Church  reform  beyond  the  very 
narrow  limits  which  that  instrument  imposed.  The  real 
importance  of  this  decree  consisted  in  the  implied  sanction 
which  it  thus  gave  to  the  existence  of  the  Lutheran  Church 
and  of  the  Unity  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren. 

This  concession  did  not  insure  religious  tranquillity  in 
Bohemia,  particularly  as  Maximilian  refused  several  other 
demands  of  the  Estates.  The  incessant  warfare  with  the 
Turks  in  Hungary  obliged  him  continually  to  apply  to  the 
Estates  for  aid.  The  king,  for  this  purpose,  assembled  a 
Diet  at  Prague  in  1575.  Matters  affecting  religion  were 
again  promptly  brought  forward  by  the  Lutherans.  It  was 
their  purpose  to  obtain  the  recognition  in  Bohemia  of  the 
so-called  "  Confession  of  Augsburg,"  in  which  the  principal 
points  of  Luther's  doctrine  had  been  enumerated.  This 
effort  was  opposed,  not  only  by  the  Romanists,  but  also 
by  the  old-utraquists.  One  of  the  latter,  John,  Lord  of 
Waldstein,  the  High  Chamberlain,  spoke  strongly  in  favour 
of  maintaining  the  old  national  {i.  e.  utraquist)  Church,  and 
opposed  the  acceptation  of  a  "  German  religion."  The 
Lutherans  now  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the  Bohemian 
Brethren ;  they  presented  to  the  king  a  joint  profession  of 
faith  which  is  known  as  the  "Confessio  Bohemica."  It 
was  in  most  points  identical  with  the  "Confession  of  Augs- 
burg," but  differed  from  it  in  some  important  points.  Among 
these  was  the  doctrine  concerning  the  sacrament  of  the 
holy  communion  :  and  on  this  point  the  Bohemian  profes- 
sion of  faith  coincided  rather  with  the  teaching  of  Calvin  and 
the  Bohemian  Brethren  than  with  that  of  Luther.  The 
*' Confessio  Bohemica"  contained  twenty-five  articles,  and 
included  proposals  as  to  the  organization  of  the  utraquist 
Church.  That  Church  had  never  recognized  the  authority 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  Archiepiscopate  of  Prague,  an 
office  reinstated  by  Ferdinand  in  1561.  It  had,  since  the 
death  of  Archbishop  John  of  Rokycan,  been  ruled  by  a 
Consistory,  at  the  head  of  which  was  an  "Administrator," 
who,  together  with  the  other  members  of  the  consistory, 
was  nominated  by  the  king.  The  new  proposal  maintained 
the  system  of  government  by  a  Consistory  Council,  but  it 
contained  the  important  provision  that  the  "  Administrator  " 
and  the  other  members  should  in  future  be  appointed  by 
the  Estates. 


An  Historical  Sketch  215 

These  demands  placed  Maximilian  in  a  difficult  position. 
At  that  moment  he  required  the  support  of  the  Estates,  not 
only  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  aid  in  the  Turkish  war,  but 
also  to  secure  the  election  of  his  son  Rudolph  as  King  of 
Bohemia.  The  Pope,  on  the  other  hand,  threatened  him 
with  excommunication  should  he  make  any  further  conces- 
sions to  the  "  heretics."  The  Spanish  branch  of  the  house 
of  Habsburg  used  all  its  influence  towards  the  same  end. 
After  protracted  negotiations  a  compromise  was  at  last  de- 
vised. The  old  Consistory,  appointed  by  the  king,  con- 
tinued to  be  the  ruling  body  of  the  old-utraquist  Church. 

The  Lutherans,  however,  who  were  now  far  the  more 
numerous  body,  were  exempted  from  its  jurisdiction. 
They  were  authorized  to  choose  fifteen  "  Defenders  " — five 
from  each  of  the  three  Estates — who  were  to  have  the 
supreme  supervision  over  the  Lutheran  Church.  The 
"  Defenders "  were  authorized  to  appoint  for  each  district 
a  "  Superintendent "  (Moderator),  whose  office  it  was  to 
maintain  order  and  discipline  among  the  clergy. 

In  consequence  of  their  separation  from  the  more  advanced 
reformers  the  old-utraquists  drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  the 
Church  of  Rome.  Through  the  influence  of  the  papal 
nuncio  the  utraquist  Consistory  in  1587  secretly  renounced 
the  entire  teaching  of  Hus  with  the  exception  of  communion 
in  the  two  kinds,  and  in  1593  the  administrator  Rezek,  with 
50  utraquist  priests,  declared  Hus  to  be  a  heretic  and 
acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  the  Pope. 

Though  they  had  not  succeeded  in  securing  the  control 
over  the  Bohemian  utraquists,  the  Lutherans  had  obtained 
a  very  valuable  concession  by  the  recognition  of  their  Church 
as  a  religious  body  under  a  separate  administration.  The 
coronation  of  Archduke  Rudolph  as  King  of  Bohemia 
followed  immediately  afterwards  (September  21,  1575),  and 
Maximilian  almost  at  once  left  the  country.  His  hasty 
departure  was  caused  by  troubles  concerning  the  succession 
to  the  Polish  throne.  Maximilian  was  preparing  for  war 
when  he  died  (October  12,  1576),  only  forty-eight  years  of 
age. 

Maximilian  is  one  of  the  Bohemian  kings  of  the  house  of 
Habsburg  to  whom  history,  perhaps  in  consequence  of  his 
enigmatic  nature,  has  done  scant  justice.  He  has  both 
among  catholic  and  protestant  historians  found  few  friends. 
He  possessed,  what  at  that  period  was  rare,  a  genuine  feeling 


2i6  Bohemia 

of  toleration  and  of  respect  for  the  religious  views  of  others. 
It  is  true  that  this  has  by  many  been  ascribed  to  in- 
difference or  scepticism,  and  it  is  almost  certain  that  the 
king,  when  dying,  refused  to  partake  of  the  last  sacrament. 
His  well-known  remark  that  the  prince  who  would  claim  to 
rule  over  the  consciences  of  men  would  usurp  the  throne  of 
God,  is  at  any  rate  a  proof  of  an  open-mindedness  that  was 
very  rare  in  his  time. 

Rudolph,  who  had  already  been  crowned  King  of 
Bohemia,  was  twenty-four  years  of  age  when  he  succeeded 
his  father  as  ruler  of  that  land.  He  also  succeeded  his 
father  as  Emperor  of  Germany  and  King  of  Hungary,  and 
inherited  from  him  Upper  and  Lower  Austria.  His  ac- 
cession at  first  caused  apprehension  among  the  Lutherans 
of  Bohemia.  Rudolph  had  been  educated  at  the  Spanish 
court,  and  it  was  rumoured  that  he  had  there  acquired 
religious  views  of  a  more  uncompromising  character  than 
his  father's  had  been.  His  attitude  during  the  later  and 
more  eventful  years  of  his  life,  and  the  lack  of  interest 
which  he  always  showed  in  religious  controversies,  render 
it  probable  that  the  teaching  of  the  Spanish  court  made  but 
a  slight  impression  on  him.  From  the  beginning  of  his 
reign  Rudolph  fixed  his  residence  at  Prague,  and  thus  in 
a  manner  that  town  became  the  capital  of  all  the  extensive 
dominions  over  which  the  Austrian  branch  of  the  house  of 
Habsburg  ruled. ^  The  new  king  from  the  first  showed  a 
distinct  tendency  to  melancholy,  and  a  strong  dislike  to 
political  affairs..  The  bent  of  his  mind  engrossed  him  in 
subjects  detrimental  to  his  position  as  an  emperor,  and 
which  would  better  have  befitted  a  wealthy  person  in  private 
life.  Rudolph  from  his  earliest  youth  showed  great  interest 
in  art,  especially  in  painting,  sculpture,  and  mosaic-work, 

^  Dr.  Gindely,  Rudolph  der  Zweite  und  seine  Zeit.  The  fact  that 
Prague  had  virtually  become  the  capital  of  vast  countries,  together  with 
Rudolph's  marked  interest  in  the  arts,  resulted  in  a  great  enlargement 
and  embellishment  of  the  town  duiing  his  reign.  Paul  Stransky — no 
friend  of  the  house  of  Habsburg — quotes  the  following  epigram  to  this 
purpose — 

"Lignea  prima  fuit,  posuit  cum  limina  Pragae 
Jam  tum  surgenti  prima  Libussa  suae 
Marmorea  inde  stetit  postquam  super  aethera  turres 
Extulit  et  magnas  luxuriosa  domos 
Jam  non  marmorea  est  non  lignea  at  aurea  tota 
Conlinua  facta  est  sede  Rodolphe  tua." 


An  Historical  Sketch  217 

while  of  the  sciences,  chemistry  and  astronomy  interested 
him  the  most.^ 

The  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Rudolph  in  Bohemia  was 
uneventful,  and,  had  he  died  in  middle  Hfe,  little  mention  of 
his  name  would  be  required.  Constant  theological  stiife, 
absorbing  the  whole  intellectual  activity  of  the  country,  was 
still  the  characteristic  feature  in  Bohemia.  The  greatly  : 
increasing  importance  of  Lutheranism,  and  the  rapid  decline 
of  the  old-utraquist,  and,  in  a  lesser  degree,  of  the  Roman, 
Church,  have  to  be  noted.  The  extinction  ^f  the  latter 
Church  was — according  to  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Gindely, 
the  standard  modern  writer  on  this  period  of  Bohemian 
history — only  averted  by  the  marvellous  activity  of  the 
Jesuits.  That  order  had  at  first  not  been  numerous  in 
Bohemia.^  Its  members,  none  the  less,  undertook  the 
apparently  impossible  task  of  recovering  for  the  Church  of 
Rome  the  kingdom  of  Western  Europe  which  had  longest 
been  estranged  from  it.  Aided,  it  is  true,  by  the  force  of 
arms,  they  were  in  the  following  century  entirely  successful. 
One  of  the  methods  employed  by  the  Jesuits  was  that  of 
acquiring  influence  over  the  wives  of  the  great  Bohemian 
nobles.  Since  the  accession  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  to 
the  Bohemian  throne,  many  nobles  had  married  ladies 
from  Spain  or  the  districts  of  Italy  subject  to  the  Spanish 
branch  of  the  house  of  Habsburg.  These  ladies,  strong 
Catholics  by  birth,  used  their  influence  in  favour  of  their 
religion;  it  was  said  that  they  aided  the  Jesuits,  Avhen 
their  means  fell  short,  by  gifts  of  money,  clothing,  and 
victuals. 

With  the  exception  of  occasional  disputes  between  the 
various  religious  bodies,  Bohemia  enjoyed  internal  and  ex- 
ternal peace  during  the  first  years  of  Rudolph's  reign ;  and 
it  was  only  after  he  had  ruled  for  sixteen  years  that  the  ever- 
increasing  encroachments  of  the  Turks  on  Hungary  obliged 
him  to  go  to  war  with  them.  The  seat  of  war  was  far  from 
the  Bohemian  frontier,  and  it  did  not  greatly  disturb  the 
tranquillity  of  the  land.  It  was  only  through  the  annual 
contributions,  which  the  Diets  voted,  that  the  weight  of  the 
war  was  felt. 

This  period  of  quiet  in  Bohemia  would  probably  in  no 

^  Dr.  Gindely,  Rudolph  der  Zweite  und  seine  Zeit. 
^  In  1578,  twenty  years  after  their  introduction,  the  Jesuit  order  only 
counted  forty  members. 
H  2 


2i8  Bohemia 

case  have  lasted  long.  The  Lutherans,  through  the  gradual 
accession  of  the  old-utraquists,  now  formed  a  large  majority 
of  the  population ;  they  were  also,  in  any  dispute  with  the 
Catholics,  certain  of  the  support  of  the  Brethren  of  the 
"Unity.'-  It  was  therefore  inevitable  that  the  Lutherans 
should  aspire  to  a  predominant  position  in  the  country. 
They  had,  indeed,  already  expressed  their  dissatisfaction 
when  the  king  appointed  Catholics  to  most  of  the  great 
offices  of  the  State.  The  Catholics,  on  the  other  hand, 
were  impatient  of  the  comparative  freedom  which  the  "  here- 
tics" enjoyed.  This  feeHng  increased  when  Archduke 
Ferdinand  of  Styria  carried  out  what  was  called  a  "  Catholic 
reformation  "  in  that  country.  He  suppressed  all  the  liberties 
which  his  father  had  granted  to  the  Protestants,  and  expelled 
all  their  ecclesiastics  from  his  dominions. 

Events  were,  however,  precipitated  by  the  mental  illness 
of  Rudolph.  Though  he  had  long  had  a  tendency  to 
melancholia,  it  was  only  in  the  year  1600  that  traces  of 
mental  aberration  were  noticed  in  him.  The  other  members 
of  the  Imperial  family  therefore  suggested  to  Rudolph  (who 
had  no  legitimate  descendants)  that  he  should  appoint  a 
successor ;  it  was  further  proposed  that  this  successor  should, 
in  case  of  Rudolph's  being  incapacitated  from  governing,  act 
as  his  representative  as  German  Emperor,  and  as  King  of 
Bohemia  and  Hungary.  The  enjoyment  of  the  full  honours 
of  the  throne  was  left  to  Rudolph.  This  scheme  was  particu- 
larly countenanced  by  the  Archduke  Matthew,  the  eldest  of 
Rudolph's  brothers.  An  improvement  in  Rudolph's  health, 
however,  soon  took  place,  though  he  remained  to  the  end  of 
his  life  subject  to  fits  of  mental  disease.^  Henceforth,  how- 
ever, the  state  of  Rudolph's  health  had  a  very  detrimental 
effect  on  his  policy,  which  became  indeed  more  active,  but 
was  wanting  in  coherence,  and  tended  to  vary  from  one 
extreme  to  another.  About  the  time  of  the  beginning  of 
Rudolph's  illness  a  prophecy  of  the  astronomer,  Tycho 
Brahe,  had  announced  to  him  that  he  would  share  the  fate 
of  King  Henry  III  of  France.  This  greatly  alarmed  him, 
and  inspired  him  with  a  violent  dislike  to  the  clergy,  in 
whose  ranks  he  believed  that  his  murderer,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  French  king,  would  be  found.  He  therefore  for  a  time 
entirely  ceased  to  attend  religious  services. 

Only  two  years  later  Rudolph  issued   a   decree   (1602) 
1  Gindely. 


An  Historical  Sketch  219 

renewing  the  enactments  published  in  1508  against  the 
Bohemian  Brethren  by  King  Vladislav.  This  declaration, 
issued  under  totally  different  circumstances,  menaced  with 
death  all  who  professed  religious  views  other  than  those  of 
the  Catholics,  and  of  the  so-called  old-utraquists,  who  differed 
from  the  Catholics  only  in  maintaining  the  Compacts.  This 
decree  of  Rudolph,  which  indirectly  attacked  the  whole 
Lutheran  community  as  well  as  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  was 
publicly  proclaimed  in  the  streets  of  Prague  with  great 
solemnity ;  it  caused,  however,  more  surprise  than  fear.  "  It 
was  noticed  that  no  preparations  had  been  made  to  enforce 
on  nine-tenths  of  the  population  a  decree  to  which  it  was 
certain  that  the  force  of  arms  alone  would  induce  it  to 
submit.^ 

This  ill-advised  proclamation  appears  to  have  been  sug- 
gested to  Rudolph  by  the  papal  nuncio,  then  resident  at 
Prague.  Though  for  the  present  it  remained  ineffective,  it 
greatly  irritated  the  Protestants. ^  When  the  Diet  met  at 
Prague  (Jan.  9,  1603),  the  king's  policy  was  sharply  attacked 
by  the  leader  of  the  Protestants,  Venceslas  Budovec,  Lord 
of  Budova,  a  noble  belonging  to  the  Unity  of  the  Bohemian 
Brethren.  The  Estates  strongly  protested  against  Rudolph's 
decree.  They  declared  it  contrary  to  the  promise  of  re- 
ligious freedom  which  the  late  King  Maximilian  had  made. 
They  at  first  refused  to  vote  the  grants  of  money  to  obtain 
which  the  Diet  had  been  summoned ;  but  on  the  advice  of 
Budova,  finally  consented  to  do  so.  The  Estates  had 
previously  drawn  up  a  "  Remonstrance,"  which  they  intended 
to  present  to  their  king.  Rudolph,  however,  immediately 
after  he  had  obtained  the  wished-for  supplies,  declared  the 
Diet  closed  (January  15,  1603).  This  step,  as  was  natural, 
still  further  estranged  the  Bohemians  from  their  king,  at  a 
moment  when  he  was  more  than  ever  dependent  on  their 
support. 

^  Dr.  Gindely,  Rudolph  I  und  seine  Zeit,  vol.  i.  p.  68.  In  the  same 
work  (vol.  i.  p.  179),  Gindely  says  that  during  the  first  years  of  the  seven- 
teenth century  certainly  not  a  tenth  part  of  the  nobility  of  Bohemia,  and 
a  still  smaller  portion  of  the  other  classes,  were  Catholics.  Catholicism 
must  at  this  period  have  decreased  rapidly,  if  we  compare  these  figures 
with  those  Gindely  gives  for  the  sixteenth  century.     See  note  I,  p.  206. 

'^  Following  Gindely's  example,  I  give  this  joint  designation  to  the 
Lutherans  and  Bohemian  Brethren  when  they  acted  in  accord.  From 
this  period  to  the  suppression  of  religious  liberty  in  Bohemia  this  union 
was  generally  effective  and  real. 


220  Bohemia 

The  adherents  of  the  Roman  Church  in  Bohemia  were 
fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  king  was  unable  to  afford 
them  efficient  aid ;  still  his  now  openly  avowed  support  en- 
couraged them  to  assume  an  attitude  by  no  means  in  con- 
formity with  the  smallness  of  their  number  in  the  country. 
The  Jesuit  Landy,  whom  the  Romanist  Archbishop  of  Prague 
consulted,  suggested  the  expulsion  of  all  foreigners  from  the 
towns  of  Budejovice  and  Plzeii,  w^hich  still  contained  many 
Catholics ;  by  such  means  only,  he  said,  could  the  contagion 
of  "heresy"  be  prevented.  The  Catholic  nobles,  who, 
though  not  numerous,  owned  large  portions  of  the  land,  now 
began  to  attempt  the  re-establishment  of  Catholicism  on  their 
estates.  Jaroslav  Borita,  Lord  of  Martinic,  was  especially 
noted  for  his  energetic  attempts  to  force  the  peasants  on  his 
estates  to  return  to  the  Church  of  Rome.  He  commanded 
them  to  be  chased  with  his  hounds,  and  thus  forcibly  driven 
into  the  churches  where  the  Jesuits  preached  ;  and  in  order 
to  re-establish  communion  in  one  kind,  he  insisted  that  the 
holy  wafer  should  be  forced  down  the  throats  of  all  his 
peasants  whom  he  suspected  of  heresy.^ 

.  The  attention  of  the  militant  religious  parties  was  now  for 
a  time  diverted  to  the  family  dissensions  in  the  house  of 
Habsburg.  Ever  since  the  failure  of  Rudolph's  health  his 
brother,  the  Archduke  Matthew,  had  expressed  himself  in 
favour  of  depriving  Rudolph  of  his  Imperial  and  regal 
authority;  though  he  had  not  at  first  contemplated  his 
actual  deposition.  The  events  in  Hungary  now  brought 
this  plan  again  to  the  fore.  The  Imperial  armiies  had  at 
that  period  been  successful  against  the  Turks,  and  a  con- 
siderable part  of  Hungary  was  for  a  time  under  Rudolph's 
rule.  These  successes  and  momentary  enthusiasm  for  the 
Church  of  Rome  induced  Rudolph  to  attempt  a  "  Catholic 
reformation  "  in  Hungary.  He  published  a  decree  founded 
on  the  ancient  laws  of  Stephen — the  first  Christian  king  of 
Hungary — by  which  he  menaced  all  who  spoke  in  public 
about  religious  questions  with  the  severest  penalties.  The 
numerous  Protestants  in  Hungary,  no  doubt  justly,  con- 

^  "Baro  de  Martinic  ferreo  instrumento  ore  ad  hiatum  distento 
hostias  injici  snbditis  mandabat  cogique  ad  idolorum  ministerium  " 
(Habernfeld).  Recent  historians,  writing  from  a  strongly  Roman 
Catholic  point  of  view,  have,  not  very  successfully,  attempted  to  deny, 
or  at  least  to  extenuate,  the  violence  of  Martinic  and  other  Catholic 
nobles   at  this  time. 


An  Historical  Sketch  221 

sidered  this  as  an  attack  on  their  creed ;  they  immediately 
entered  into  an  alliance  with  the  Turks  against  Rudolph 
(1604).  The  Imperial  troops  were  totally  unable  to  resist 
the  combined  forces.  Within  a  year  from  the  publication 
of  the  fatal  decree,  Hungarian  bands  had  penetrated  beyond 
the  frontier  of  the  territories  of  the  Bohemian  crown. 
Crossing  from  Hungary  into  Moravia  they  devastated  a 
considerable  portion  of  that  land.  In  this  emergency  the 
princes  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  met  at  Linz  in  consulta- 
tion. They  decided  to  address  a  joint  remonstrance  to 
Rudolph,  begging  him  to  cede  the  government  of  Hungary 
to  the  Archduke  Matthew.  They  also  expressed  the  wish 
that  he  would,  in  the  absence  of  an  heir  to  the  throne, 
appoint  a  successor.  Somewhat  later,  Archduke  Matthew 
succeeded  in  obtaining  a  declaration  from  the  Archdukes 
Ferdinand,^  Maximilian,  and  Maximilian  Ernest,  by  which 
they  recognized  him  as  the  head  of  the  house  of  Habsburg. 
The  reason  for  this  course  was  stated  by  them  to  be  the 
grave  condition  of  Rudolph's  health,  the  loss  of  Hungary, 
and  the  devastation  of  other  lands  which  had  occurred  in 
consequence ;  they  also  expressed  their  willingness  to  exercise 
their  influence  in  favour  of  Matthew's  election  to  the  Imperial 
throne. 

Rudolph  had  remained  in  a  state  of  complete  apathy 
during  the  misfortunes  that  befell  the  countries  of  which 
he  was  the  nominal  ruler.  His  conduct  can  indeed  only  be 
explained  by  the  mental  disease  from  which  he  suffered  at 
times.  Rudolph  strongly  distrusted  his  brother,  the  Arch- 
duke Matthew,  whom,  not  without  reason,  he  suspected  of 
wishing  to  oust  him  from  the  throne.  He  long  refused  to 
authorize  his  brother  to  negotiate  with  the  Hungarians.  At 
last,  partly  through  fear,  he  consented  to  do  so ;  and  Matthew 
concluded  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the  Hungarians  and  with 
Turkey  (1606).  New  difficulties,  however,  arose,  as  Rudolph 
now  refused  to  ratify  the  treaty  which  had  been  concluded. 

About  this  time,  if  not  earlier,  the  Archduke  Matthew 
began  to  contemplate  the  dethronement  of  his  brother. 
There  is  little  doubt  that  Matthew's  conduct  at  this 
moment,  whether  morally  justifiable  or  not,  saved  the 
house  of  Habsburg  from  complete  ruin.  That  dynasty  was 
at  this  period  seriously  menaced  by  the  ambition  of  Henry  IV 

^  Afterwards  German  Emperor  under  the  name  of  Ferdinand  II,  as 
well  as  King  of  Bohemia  and  Hungary. 


222  Bohemia 

of  France,  and  of  his  allies  the  Protestant  princes  of  Germany. 
Prince  Christian  of  Anhalt,^  the  principal  adviser  of  these 
princes,  had  at  this  moment  already  entered  into  close  con- 
nection with  some  of  the  Protestant  nobles  of  Bohemia, 
particularly  with  Peter  V6k,  Lord  of  Rosenberg. 

The  first  impulse  to  combined  action  against  Rudolph 
came,  however,  from  Hungary,  where  his  rule  had  always 
been  unpopular.  His  refusal  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  peace 
with  Turkey,  and  thus  restore  quiet  to  the  land,  caused 
general  dissatisfaction.  The  feeling  against  Rudolph  was 
in  Austria^  and  Moravia  nearly  as  strong  as  in  Hungary, 
and  the  nobles  of  these  countries  soon  entered  into  negotia- 
tions with  the  Hungarian  malcontents.  Their  first  object, 
however,  was  to  come  to  a  complete  understanding  among 
themselves.  With  the  approval  of  the  Archduke  Matthew, 
several  of  the  leading  nobles  of  Moravia  and  Austria  met  at 
Rossitz  (in  Moravia),  under  the  pretext  of  affirming  the 
necessity  of  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  peace  with 
Turkey. 

Subsequent  events,  however,  render  it  certain  that  the 
real  object  of  these  deliberations — which  were  held  in 
secret — was  the  deposition  of  Rudolph. 

Shortly  afterwards  Archduke  Matthew,  still  nominally  as 
representative  of  his  brother,  convoked  the  Hungarian  Diet 
at  Presburg.  Through  the  archduke's  influence  delegates 
from  Lower  and  Upper  Austria  were  also  present.  This 
very  exceptional  event  was  the  result  of  Matthew's  wish  to 
unite-  the  representatives  of  the  various  lands  subject  to 
Rudolph  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  his  deposition.  The 
racial  enmities  at  this  period  for  the  moment  disappeared, 
and  Slav,  German,  and  Hungarian  nobles  acted  in  accord. 

All  present  at  the  deliberations  of  Presburg  solemnly 
pledged  themselves  to  maintain  the  treaty  with  Turkey 
against  all  its  opponents.  The  carefully-worded  declaration 
was  directly  aimed  at  Pvudolph,  who  still  refused  to  sanction 
that  treaty,  and  in  efi'ect  the  authority  of  the  sovereign  was 
by  it  tacitly  suspended.  Moravia  very  shortly  followed  the 
example  of  Austria  and  Hungary,  principally  through  the 

1  Dr.  Gindely's  works,  especially  his  Rudolph  II  und  seine  Zeit,  show 
how  great  was  the  influence  of  Christian  of  Anhalt  on  the  events  in 
Bohemia  at  this  period. 

2  The  term  "  Austria  "  at  this  period,  of  course,  indicates  the  Arch- 
duchy of  Upper  and  Lower  Austria. 


An  Historical  Sketch  223 

influence  of  Charles,  Lord  of  !^erotin.  Carotin  belonged 
to  the  Unity  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  and  the  vastness  of 
his  estates,  combined  with  his  great  learning  and  piety,  had 
raised  him  to  the  foremost  rank  among  the  nobles  of 
Moravia.  On  his  advice,  and  that  of  Charles,  Lord  of 
Liechtenstein,  the  Moravian  Estates  assembled  at  Ivancice. 
They  here  addressed  to  Rudolph  remonstrances — similar  to 
those  of  Austria  and  Hungary — concerning  his  refusal  to 
ratify  the  treaty  of  peace  with  Turkey.  They  also  made 
mention  of  special  grievances  of  their  own,  principally 
referring  to  the  conduct  of  Rudolph's  officials  in  Moravia. 

Archduke  Matthew  had  meanwhile  raised  troops  in 
Austria,  and  at  their  head  he  entered  Moravia.  His 
reception  was  of  a  very  friendly  character.  Some  of  the 
Estates  of  that  country  had  already  been  won  over  by 
Zerotin  to  his  cause.  On  his  arrival  at  the  town  of 
Znoymo,  Matthew  issued  a  proclamation  (April  1608), 
declaring  that  as  the  oldest  member  of  the  house  of 
Habsburg  he  had  assumed  the  government  of  the  countries 
which  the  incapacity  of  Rudolph  had  brought  to  the  verge 
of  ruin.  He  further  stated  that  he  now  intended — accom- 
panied by  delegates  of  the  Estates  of  Hungary,  Upper  and 
Lower  Austria,  and  Moravia — to  march  to  Bohemia.^  He 
called  on  the  Estates  of  that  country  to  meet  him  at  Caslav 
on  May  4,  where  a  deliberation  between  the  representatives 
of  the  various  peoples  and  countries  was  to  take  place. 

V/hile  the  countries  formerly  subject  to  his  rule  were 
gradually  slipping  away  from  his  control,  Rudolph  remained 
at  Prague  in  a  state  of  complete  irresolution.  He  at  last 
decided  to  assemble  a  "  General  Diet "  ^  of  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  Crown  at  Prague.  Only  the  Estates  of  Bohemia, 
however,  appeared  on  March  10,  the  day  fixed  for  the 
meeting.  Contrary  to  expectation,  the  result  of  their 
deliberations  was  favourable  to  Rudolph.  After  having 
given  their  approval  to  the  meeting  of  a  "General  Diet," 
which  was  now  fixed  for  April  14,  the  Estates  authorized 
the  king  to  take  the  necessary  steps  for  the  defence  of  the 
country.  This  declaration,  according  to  the  traditions  of 
the  country,  authorized  the  king  to  call  out  the  whole  armed 
force  of  the  land. 

^  The  ordinary  Diets  consisted  of  delegates  of  Bohemia  only.  The 
"  General  Diet "  at  this  period,  included  also  representaiives  of 
Moravia,   Silesia,  and  Lusatia. 


224  Bohemia 

The  attitude  of  the  Bohemian  Estates  at  this  moment  is 
in  singular  contrast  with  their  former  dislike  to  their  king, 
and  it  is  difficult  to  give  a  satisfactory  account  of  the  reason 
for  it.  It  seems  probable  that  the  independent  aciion 
of  Moravia,  which  had,  though  to  an  ill-defined  and  varying 
extent,  always  been  considered  a  dependency  of  the 
Bohemian  crown,  irritated  the  Bohemian  nobles.  It  is  also 
probable  that  the  influence  of  Peter  of  Rosenberg  encour- 
aged the  Estates  to  support  Rudolph,  and  consequently  to 
decline  meeting  the  Archduke  Matthew.  Rosenberg  was 
on  terms  of  intimacy  with  Christian  of  Anhalt,  who  had 
made  the  destruction  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  the  object 
of  his  life.i  Astute  politician  as  he  was,  Anhalt  cannot  but 
have  seen  that  the  substitution  of  a  more  energetic  prince 
as  head  of  the  German  branch  of  the  Habsburg  dynasty 
would  not  be  favourable  to  his  purpose.  The  prolongation 
of  the  contest  between  Rudolph  and  his  brother  was  pro- 
bably the  object  of  Anhalt's  wishes,  and  it  seems  likely  that 
he  therefore  advised  Rosenberg  and  his  friends,  who  had 
previously  been  in  communication  with  Matthew,  not  to 
support  him. 

Rudolph's  state  of  health,  however,  rendered  him  unable 
to  take  full  advantage  of  the  temporary  feeling  in  his  favour 
among  the  Bohemians  ;  Archduke  Matthew's  forces  had 
meanwhile  entered  Bohemia.  During  the  march  and  after 
his  arrival  at  Caslav,  Matthew  received  repeated  messages 
from  his  brother  proposing  a  peaceful  agreement.  Cardinal 
Dietrichstein,  at  this  moment  Rudolph's  most  influential 
adviser,  made  no  less  than  five  journeys  to  Matthew's  camp 
as  bearer  of  proposals  of  peace.  The  Spanish  ambassador 
at  Prague  also  made  efforts  to  effect  a  reconciliation  between 
the  two  brothers.  But  for  the  present  Matthew  declined 
all  proposals  of  peace,  and  demanded  that  Rudolph  should 
abdicate  and  leave  Bohemia. 

The  Estates  of  Bohemia,  who,  as  already  mentioned, 
had  declined  Matthew's  invitation  to  Caslav,  again  met  at 
Prague.  Though  April  14  had  previously  been  agreed  on 
as  the  day  of  meeting,  the  deliberations  only  began  on 
May  23.  On  this  occasion,  also,  Bohemia  was  alone  repre- 
sented. As  had  now  become  customary,  the  Estates 
immediately  applied  to  the  king  for  the  redress  of  their 

^  The  expression  ''terminus  fatalis  domus  Austriacae"  is  quoted  by 
Gindely  from  Anhalt's  correspondence  of  this  time. 


An  Historical  Sketch  225 

grievances.  Commissioned  by  them,  their  leader  Budovec 
of  Budova  drew  up  their  demands  in  twenty-five  "articles  "  ; 
these  were  presented  to  the  king,  signed  by  three  hundred 
nobles  and  knights,  and  by  the  representatives  of  all  the 
towns  of  Bohemia,  with  the  exceptions  of  Plzef^,  Budejovice, 
and  Kaaden.  The  "  articles  "  demanded  that  the  Bohemian 
Confession  1  should  be  included  among  the  fundamental 
lewi  of  the  land,  and  that  complete  religious  freedom  should 
be  granted  to  all  classes.  This  stipulation  would  have 
conferred  freedom  of  belief  also  on  the  peasants,  who  were 
then  serfs  or  bondmen,  and  it  was  therefore  in  opposition 
to  the  prevailing  ideas  of  the  period.  It  undoubtedly 
originated  from  Budova  himself,  whose  greater  culture  and 
more  enlightened  views  distinguished  him  from  the  other 
members  of  his  party.^  Budova  may  also  have  thought  it 
politic  to  obtain  for  the  Protestants  the  support  of  the 
masses;  for  only  with  that  support  could  they  hope  to 
resist  the  desperate  attack  which — as  he  certainly  foresaw — 
awaited  them  as  soon  as  the  then  divided  strength  of  the 
house  of  Habsburg  was  reunited.  The  other  "articles'^ 
demanded  that  Protestants  and  Catholics  should  have 
equal  right  to  the  offices  of  State,  that  the  right  of  the 
Jesuits  to  acquire  land  should  be  limited,  and  that  foreigners 
should  be  ineligible  for  the  dignity  of  Archbishop  of  Prague. 
The  other  "  articles  "  referred  to  various  grievances  con- 
cerning the  administration  of  the  country,  which  through 
the  apathy  of  Rudolph  had  fallen  into  a  state  of  great 
disorder ;  and  to  several  other  matters  of  minor  importance. 
It  was  practically  impossible  for  Rudolph  to  resist  these 
demands.  Archduke  Matthew  was  marching  rapidly  on 
Prague,  and  there  was  no  doubt  that,  influenced  as  he  then 
was  by  ^erotin,  the  leader  of  the  Unity  in  Moravia,  he 
would  immediately  accept  the  twenty-five  "  articles "  in 
their  entirety  should  the  Bohemians  recognize  him  as  their 
king.  Rudolph,  however,  still  hesitated.  He  finally  gave 
his  approval  to  some  of  the  articles,  but  said  that  others, 
principally  those  referring  to  religious  matters,  should  be 
reserved  for  the  consideration  of  the  next  Diet,  where  they 
should  have  precedence  over  all  other  subjects  of  discus- 
sion.    The  Protestant  Estates,  on  Budova's  advice,  accepted 

*  See  p.  214. 

2  "  Mit    starken    Rauschen "  :    Gindely,    quoting   a   contemporary 
manuscript. 


226  Bohemia 

this  compromise,  and  declined  to  accept  the  advice  of 
Zerotin,  who  had  been  sent  by  Archduke  Matthew  to 
Prague,  not  only  as  envoy,  but  also  to  promote  the  recogni- 
tion of  that  prince  as  king.  A  temporary  agreement 
between  the  king  and  the  Estates  having  been  arrived  at, 
Archduke  Matthew  rightly  judged  that  he  had  no  im- 
mediate hope  of  gaining  Bohemia.  His  army  had  arriv^ed 
close  to  Prague,  and  it  was  at  Liben,  within  a  short 
distance  of  that  city,  that  a  treaty  of  peace  was  concluded 
between  the  two  brothers  (June  25,  1608).  According  to 
this  treaty  Rudolph  remained  sovereign  of  Bohemia ;  but 
Hungary,  Moravia,  and  Upper  and  Lower  Austria  were 
ceded  to  Matthew.  The  restoration  of  peace  was  cele- 
brated in  the  archduke's  camp  by  a  banquet,  to  which  the 
Bohemian  nobles  who  had  sided  with  Rudolph  were  also 
invited  They  returned  to  Prague  "very  intoxicated."^ 
The  archduke's  forces  almost  immediately  after  the  treaty 
left  Bohemia,  where  some  of  them,  particularly  Matthew's 
Hungarian  soldiers,  had  committed  great  depredations. 

The  Diet  which  was  to  regulate  the  religious  affairs  of 
Bohemia  only  met  on  January  28,  1609  :  it  was  one  of  the 
most  momentous  assemblies  with  which  this  sketch  of 
the  country's  history  has  to  deal.  A  detailed  account  of 
the  prolonged  discussions  which  ensued  would  be  beyond  the 
purpose  of  this  book;  the  final  success  of  the  hopes  of 
the  Protestant  Estates  was,  however,  beyond  doubt  from  the 
first.  From  this  moment  until  that  of  his  death,  Rudolph 
displayed  an  implacable  and  perhaps  not  unnatural  enmity 
to  his  brother.  Rudolph  had  attempted  (soon  after  Matthew 
had  obtained  possession  of  Austria)  to  outbid  him  for  the 
favour  of  the  Protestants  of  that  country,  and  he  had  even 
entered  into  negotiations  with  Christian  of  Anhalt.  This 
was  as  well  known  to  the  Bohemian  Protestants  as  was  the 

^  The  influence  of  Budova  sprang  from  his  learning  and  affability  of 
manners.  Long  residence  in  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe,  and 
familiarity  with  many  languages,  alike  contributed  to  distinguish  him. 
Since  his  return  to  Bohemia  he  had  employed  his  time  partly  as  an 
author,  partly  as  leader  of  his  party  in  the  Diet.  Being  one  of  the 
most  ardent  adherents  of  the  Unity  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  he  was 
in  closer  contact  with  the  people  than  most  other  nobles  ;  for  the  nobles 
of  the  Unity  put  no  restraint  on  tlie  consciences  of  their  dependents, 
and  showed  due  consideration  to  creeds  differing  from  their  own. 
Tl)eir  attitude  necessarily  produced  a  favourable  impression  on  the 
masses  (Gindely,  Rudolph  II). 


An  Historical  Sketch  227 

fact  that  Rudolph  had,  in  consequence,  no  hope  of  aid 
from  Spain  or  from  the  Catholics  of  Germany.  Having 
these  facts  in  view,  we  can  only  account  for  his  next  step 
by  the  vacillation  induced  by  his  frail  state  of  health. 
Acting  probably  under  the  influence  of  the  High  Chan- 
cellor i^denek  of  Lobkowitz,  a  fanatical  Romanist,  Rudolph 
at  first  assumed  a  most  uncompromising  attitude  towards 
the  Protestants.  He  demanded  that  the  petition  which  the 
Estates  had  addressed  to  him  during  Matthew's  invasion 
(the  so-called  Twenty-five  Articles),  with  the  signatures 
attached  to  it,  should  be  delivered  up  to  him  for  destruc- 
tion. He  declared  that  he  considered  that  the  contents 
of  that  document  constituted  a  confederacy  formed  without 
his  permission,  and  therefore  an  act  of  rebellion.  The 
Estates,  adroitly  using  this  demand  to  their  own  advantage, 
chose  twelve  of  their  number  who  were  to  present  the 
petition  to  Rudolph  with  its  signatures,  "  so  that  the  king 
might  learn  the  names  of  his  faithful  subjects."  Among 
the  members  of  this  deputation  was  Henry  Matthew,  Count 
Thurn,  a  foreigner  and  a  German,  who  was  not  even 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  Bohemian  language ;  he 
was  none  the  less  now  beginning  to  obtain  influence  in  the 
country,  more  through  his  resolution  and  self-confidence 
than  through  his  talents. 

Rudolph,  seeing  the  impossibility  of  maintaining  his 
former  uncompromising  attitude,  once  more  gave  way,  and 
consented  to  the  religious  question  being  brought  before 
the  Diet.  The  Estates  now,  as  in  the  previous  year, 
demanded  the  recognition  of  the  Bohemian  Confession  of 
1575  ;  they  presented  a  petition  to  this  purpose  by  a  new 
deputation  consisting  of  ten  members.  Rudolph  returned 
no  immediate  answer.  He  demanded  that  a  copy  of  the 
"  Confessio  Bohemica "  should  be  presented  to  him,  and 
then  showed  it  to  the  Roman  Catholic  Archbishop  of 
Prague,  and  to  the  papal  nuncio.  As  was  to  be  expected, 
the  two  ecclesiastics  expressed  unfavourable  opinions  of 
the  rConfession.  Rudolph  at  last  decided  to  reply  by 
letter  to  the  petition.  He  demanded  the  complete  accepta- 
tion of  the  Roman  faith  and  ritual,  with  the  only  exception 
that  communion  might  still  be  received  by  laymen  in  both 
kinds.  He  called  on  the  Estates  to  recognize  the  authority 
of  the  Catholic  Archbishop  of  Prague,  and  to  expel  all 
heretical  preachers.     The  Estates  considered  this  letter  to 


228  Bohemia 

be  contrary  to  the  decree  of  the  Emperor  Maximilian  11,^ 
whereby  the  Compacts  (the  formula  containing  the  views 
of  the  old-utraquist  party)  had  been  suppressed.  The 
first  result  of  the  royal  message  was  the  cessation  of  a 
temporary  disagreement  which  had  arisen  between  the 
Lutherans  and  the  Bohemian  Brethren.  Under  the  guid- 
ance of  Count  Thurn,  who  urged  "  that  since  the  king  had 
only  recognized  the  existence  of  the  Roman  Catholics  and 
of  the  utraquists,  both  the  other  Churches  were  in  equal 
danger,"  they  resolved  to  unite  against  the  common  enemy. 
Practically  ignoring  the  king's  message,  the  Estates  decided 
to  elect  a  committee,  which  was  to  define  more  accurately 
their  demands  with  regard  to  the  religious  question.  The 
Protestants  now  again  not  only  demanded  the  recognition 
of  the  "  Confessio  Bohemica,"  but  put  forward  further 
claims.  They  insisted  that  the  Consistory  (the  governing 
body  of  the  utraquist  Church)  and  the  University  of  Prague 
should  be  placed  under  the  direction  of  the  Protestants  (/.  e. 
of  the  united  Lutherans  and  Bohemian  Brethren).  They 
founded  their  demand  on  the  fact  that  the  Roman  Catholics 
also  had  the  management  of  their  own  religious  institutions. 
It  is  certain  that  the  two  now  united  Churches  comprised 
an  enormous  majority  of  the  population,  while  the  so-called 
"  old  "  or  Catholic  utraquists,  who  still  controlled  the  Con- 
sistory, since  the  year  1593  no  longer  existed  as  a  body 
distinct  from  the  Roman  Church. 

Rudolph's  advisers  replied  in  writing,  and  an  exchange 
of  messages — four  on  each  side — took  place  between  them 
and  the  Estates.  These  communications  in  no  way  advanced 
matters.  Rudolph  at  last  (March  31,  1609)  declared  to  a 
deputation  of  the  Estates  that  addressed  him,  that  he  was 
unable  to  make  any  concessions  with  regard  to  ecclesiastical 
affairs ;  and  expressed  a  wish  that  the  Estates  would  now 
turn  their  attention  to  other  matters.  This  specially  referred 
to  the  king's  pecuniary  requirements,  the  discussion  of  which 
had  been  postponed  till  after  the  religious  matters  had  been 
settled.  The  high  burgrave,  Adam,  Lord  of  Sternberg,  a 
fervent  Roman  Catholic,  made  a  similar  statement  to  the 
full  assembly  of  the  Estates ;  he  added  that  the  king  was 
resolved  to  close  the  Diet  if  the  Estates  did  not  comply 
with  his  wish.  Budova  thereupon  exclaimed  loudly  :  "  Who- 
ever loves  his  salvation,  his  king,  and  the  good  of  his  country, 
^  Maximilian  I  as  King  of  Bohemia. 


An  Historical  Sketch  229 

whoever  desires  to  increase  union  and  mutual  love,  whoever 
remembers  the  fervour  of  our  ancestors,  whoever  holds  his 
honour  precious,  let  him  appear  here  ^  to-morrow  morning 
at  six  o'clock."  Aided  by  some  of  his  friends,  Budova 
during  the  night  drew  up  a  declaration  justifying  the  attitude 
of  the  Estates,  and  couched  in  very  firm  language.  After 
explaining  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  Estates  to  debate 
on  other  subjects  before  the  ecclesiastical  matters  were 
settled,  this  document  announced  their  intention  to  arm 
in  defence  of  their  king,  their  country,  and  their  personal 
safety.  The  Estates  declined  further  correspondence  with 
the  king,  as  he  did  not  appear  to  wish  it :  they  were,  how- 
ever, decided  to  resist  with  force  of  arms  whatever  injury 
might  be  done  to  any  one  of  their  number.  This  declara- 
tion received  the  approval  of  a  large  meeting  of  Protestants, 
which  took  place  in  the  town-hall  of  the  Nove  Mesto  early 
in  the  morning  (April  i).  The  Protestants  then  proceeded 
to  the  Diet,  and  Budova  read  out  their  declaration.  Im- 
mediately afterwards  the  supreme  burgrave  declared  the 
Diet  dissolved. 

This  ill-considered  step  was,  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  Bohemians,  nothing  less  than  a  coup  d'etat.  In  view  of 
the  king's  health,  he  can  by  no  means  be  considered  its 
originator.  The  king's  counsellors,  Lobkowitz  and  Stern- 
berg, and  the  papal  nuncio — for  whom  total  ignorance  of 
Bohemian  affairs  afforded  some  excuse — must  bear  the 
responsibility.  Without  any  previous  preparations  to  en- 
force the  royal  authority,  they  recklessly  attempted  to  resist 
the  will  of  nine-tenths  of  the  Bohemian  people. 

Before  leaving  Prague,  the  nobles  and  knights  of  Bohemia 
decided  to  reassemble  there  within  a  month.  This  resolu- 
tion accentuated  their  revolutionary  attitude,  for  the  old 
customs  of  Bohemia  reserved  to  the  king  the  right  to 
assemble  the  Estates  of  the  realm.  As  early  as  the  end 
of  April,  many  Protestant  lords  returned  to  Prague ;  they 
had  meanwhile  armed  their  retainers  on  their  lands.  The 
Estates  were  soon  assembled  in  great  numbers,  and  it 
was  said  that  never  since  the  Hussite  wars  had  so  many 

^  As  will  be  mentioned  presently,  the  meeting  of  the  Protestants, 
contrary  to  Budova's  words,  took  place  in  the  town-hall  of  the  Nove 
Mesto,  not  on  the  Hradcany,  where  the  Estates  met.  The  cause  of 
this  was  probably  the  desire  to  exclude  the  Roman  Catholic  members 
of  the  Diet. 


230  Bohemia 

nobles  and  knights  been  seen  at  Prague.     The  town-hall  of 
the  Neustadt  had  again  been  fixed  on  as  the  place  of  meet- 
ing, but  the  Estates,  wishing  to  maintain  the  appearance  of 
legality,  petitioned  Rudolph  to  allow  them  to  assemble  in 
the  royal  palace  on  the  Hradcany,i  ^\^q  ^3^^!  meeting-place 
of  the  Diet.     Budova,  accompanied  by  a  large  number  of 
his  supporters,  called  on  the  burgrave  to  urge  this  demand. 
The  answer  was  a  direct  negative.     The  burgrave,  however, 
promised  that  the  king  would   shortly  again  convoke  the 
Estates.     Budova  left  the  palace  on  the  Hradcany  where 
the  interview  had  taken  place,  and  announced  the  failure  of 
his  mission  to  his  adherents,  many  of  whom  had  been  wait- 
ing at  the  gates  of  the  castle.     All  present  thereupon  lifted 
their  hands  to  heaven,  and  swore  to  remain  united  ;  they 
further  decided  to  meet  in  the  town-hall  of  the  Nove  Mesto, 
or  new  town,  and  they  henceforth  held  almost  daily  meet- 
ings there.     Budova  was  for  the  moment  the  undisputed 
leader    of   the    movement,    which    through    his    influence 
acquired   a   devotional,    and,   indeed,   somewhat   puritanic 
character.     When  Budova  presided  over  the  deliberations 
of  the  Estates  he  called  on  all   present  to   join  him  in 
prayer;    all   then   knelt  down   and   sang   a   hymn.      The 
Estates  decided  to  forward  another  message  to  the  king 
in  defence  of  their  conduct,  which,  as  already  noted,  was 
contrary  to  the  constitutional  traditions.     They  also  deter- 
mined again  to  beg  him  to  summon  a  regular  Diet.     To 
draw  up  this  petition  they  chose  four  lawyers,  two  of  whom 
were  Lutherans,  and  two  Brethren  of  the  Unity.     When 
they  had  finished  their  work,  it  was  laid  before  the  king 
by  six  representatives  of  the  Estates.     Budova  was  again 
at  the  head  of  the  deputation.     Great  excitement  reigned 
at  Prague  at  the  moment  of  its  reception  by  the  king.     The 
interview  lasted  very  long,  and  the  report  that  the  delegates 
had  been  imprisoned  in  the  castle  was  circulated  in  the 
town.    A  large  crowd  assembled  round  the  Jesuit  monastery, 
in  the  new  town,  prepared  to  make  reprisals  on  those  who 
were  known  to  be  the  chief  opponents  of  the  wishes  of  the 
country.     The  rumour  was,  however,  false.      Budova  and 
his  companions  returned  unharmed,  and  the  report  now 
circulated  in  the  town  that  the  king  had  acceded  to  the 
wishes  of  the  people. 

1  The  enormous  palace,  or  rather  series  of  palaces,  on  the  Iliadcany 
included  the  residence  of  the  king  and  of  the  great  State  officials,  as 


An    Historical   Sketch  231 

This  report  was  not  unfounded.  The  great  state  of  ex- 
citement at  Prague,  where  the  streets  were  crowded  by  the 
noisy  retinue  of  the  numerous  nobles  and  knights,  had  not 
escaped  the  king's  notice,  even  in  his  seclusion  on  the 
summit  of  the  Hradcany ;  he  had  in  consequence  fallen 
into  a  state  of  complete  nervous  prostration.  Hannewald, 
one  of  the  few  among  his  councillors  whom  the  king 
trusted,  advised  him — contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  papal 
nuncio  and  of  the  Spanish  ambassador — to  come  to  terms 
with  the  Protestants.  The  Spanish  ambassador,  Zuniga, 
had  just  returned  to  Prague  from  Gratz,  where  he  had 
visited  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  who  governed  Styria.  On 
his  return,  Zuniga  had  immediately  laid  before  Rudolph  his 
— or  perhaps  the  archduke's — views,  namely,  that  only  a 
resolute  attitude  would  intimidate  the  Protestants.  The 
ambassador  had  been  confirmed  in  this  opinion  by  the 
panic  which  he  believed  his  entry  into  Prague  at  the  head 
of  a  body-guard  of  fifty  men  had  caused.  Zuniga  therefore 
attempted  to  strike  terror  in  the  hearts  of  the  Bohemians. 
While  waiting  for  an  audience  in  the  antechambers  of  the 
royal  castle,  he,  in  the  presence  of  numerous  Protestants, 
addressed  Count  Sultz,  one  of  the  courtiers,  in  very  strong 
words,  begging  him  to  advise  the  king  to  resist  the  demands 
of  the  Protestants,  and  promising  him  the  full  support  of 
Spain.  This  fooHsh  bravado  had  a  contrary  effect  to  the 
one  desired.  Rudolph  requested  the  ambassador  to  appear 
no  longer  in  the  antechambers  of  the  castle,  and  was  more 
than  ever  inclined  to  rely  on  Hannewald's  advice.  He 
therefore  now  decided  that  the  Estates  should,  with  his 
sanction,  reassemble  on  the  Hradcany  on  May  25,  and  that 
the  religious  question  should  be  the  first  subject  for  debate. 

This  decision,  of  which  Budova  and  his  colleagues  were 
informed,  was  considered  as  satisfactory  by  the  Estates,  and 
the  agitation  among  the  people  of  Prague  for  the  time  sub- 
sided. The  Estates  again  met  in  the  royal  castle  on  the 
Hradcany  on  May  25.^  Rudolph  having  addressed  no  mes- 
sage to  the  Diet,  the  Estates  again  drew  up  a  memorandum 
formulating  their  demands.     The  most  important  of  them 

well  as  the  seat  of  the  supreme  courts  of  justice  and  the  meeting-place 
of  the  Diets. 

^  It  is  worthy  of  notice,  as  a  proof  of  the  decline  of  Romanism  in 
Bohemia  at  this  period,  that  of  the  nobles,  knights,  and  town  represen- 
tatives present,  only  one-tenth  belonged  to  that  Church  (Gindely). 


^32  Bohemia 

again  dealt  with  the  recognition  of  the  "  Confessio  Bohemica" 
by  the  State,  and  of  the  claims  of  the  Protestants  that  the 
Consistory  Council  and  the  University  should  be  placed 
under  their  control. 

Before  the  memorandum  had  been  submitted  to  the  king, 
consideration  hostile  to  the  Bohemians  had  once  more 
prevailed  in  his  vacillating  mind.  Archduke  Leopold,  a 
younger  brother  of  Archduke  Ferdinand  of  Styria,  arrived 
at  Prague  at  this  moment.  He  for  a  time  ingratiated  him- 
self with  Rudolph,  who  (animated  by  his  dislike  to  his 
brother  Matthew)  seriously  thought  of  declaring  Leopold 
his  successor.  It  is  to  this  archduke,  a  fervent  Romanist, 
and  to  the  Spanish  ambassador  Zuniga,  that  the  altered 
tone  of  Rudolph's  message  in  reply  to  the  Estates  (June  5) 
must  be  attributed.  He  declared  that  he  would  extend  to 
the  Protestants  the  same  degree  of  toleration  which  they 
had  enjoyed  under  Ferdinand  I ;  he  thus  withdrew  even  the 
concessions  made  to  them  by  the  more  liberal-minded  sove- 
reign, Maximilian  H. 

The  Protestants  considered  this  decision  as  a  declaration 
of  war.  Count  Thurn  declared  in  the  Diet  that  there  had 
been  enough  useless  talk,  that  the  moment  for  action  had 
arrived,  and  that  the  country  must  immediately  take  up 
arms.  The  committee  appointed  by  the  Estates  had  mean- 
while drawn  up  three  documents.  Ignoring  the  royal 
message,  which  purported  to  decide  the  question,  these 
documents  were  now  brought  before  the  Estates  and  im- 
m.ed  lately  approved  of  by  them.  The  first,  in  the  form  of  an 
address  to  the  king — to  whom,  however,  it  was  never  pre- 
sented— informed  him  that  the  Protestant  Estates,  having 
now  fully  stated  their  arguments,  would  no  longer  appeal  to 
him  in  defence  of  their  creed.  The  second  document  con- 
tained a  severe  and  detailed  criticism  of  Rudolph's  policy : 
this  had  not  been  prepared  with  a  view  to  presentation  to 
the  sovereign.  Written  rather  as  a  proclamation  to  the 
people,  it  ended  with  the  announcement  that  a  general  arma- 
ment of  the  country  would  be  necessary,  and  must  shortly 
take  place.  The  third,  and  by  far  the  most  important  work 
of  the  committee,  was  a  minute  detailing  the  concessions 
which  the  Protestants  considered  necessary  as  guarantees  of 
their  freedom  and  autonomy.  It  is  significant  of  the  confi- 
dence felt  by  the  Protestants  that,  in  spite  of  Rudolph's 
.apparently   uncompromising    attitude,    they  should    have 


An    Historical    Sketch  233 

drawn  up  this  document  at  this  moment.  It  is  this  draft 
that  was  finally  accepted  by  the  king,  and  is  known  as  the 
celebrated  "  Letter  of  Majesty." 

Only  the  last-named  document  was  presented  to  Rudolph 
by  a  deputation  of  the  Estates  (June  13).  The  king's 
answer,  though  more  conciliatory  than  some  of  his  former 
communications,  did  not  satisfy  the  Protestants.  He  pro- 
mised to  continue  to  the  Protestants  the  enjoyment  of  all 
the  rights  which  th6y  had  had  during  the  reign  of  Maximi- 
lian.^  The  king,  however,  insisted  on  retaining  complete 
authority  over  the  utraquist  Consistory  and  over  the  Univer- 
sity. If  we  consider  the  bitter  theological  animosity  of  the 
age,  it  will  not  appear  surprising  that  the  Protestants  were 
not  prepared  to  concede  this  point.  Had  they  done  so, 
they  would  have  admitted  the  right  of  a  sovereign — himself 
a  Romanist — to  appoint  as  rulers  of  their  Church  men  who 
acknowledged  the  authority  of  the  Roman  creed  though  they 
differed  from  it  with  regard  to  communion  in  both  kinds. 
It  was  impossible  for  an  assembly  in  which  an  enormous 
majority  were  Lutherans  and  Brethren  of  the  Unity,  to 
accept  the  king's  demand.  His  message  was,  therefore, 
considered  by  the  Protestants  as  a  refusal  of  their  demands, 
and  it  served  in  fact  only  to  increase  their  opposition.  The 
project  of  arming  the  country  was  further  advanced,  and — as 
it  w^as  difficult  for  such  an  unwieldy  body  as  the  Estates  to 
exercise  executive  functions — thirty  "  Directors"  were  chosen 
from  among  the  members  of  the  Diet.  These,  as  Gindely 
says,  practically  constituted  a  provisional  government. 
Three  generals,  the  foremost  of  whom  was  Count  Thurn, 
were  also  appointed  by  the  Estates,  and  the  enrolment  of 
troops  began,  a  special  tax  having  been  voted  for  this  pur- 
pose. The  Estates  of  Silesia  concluded  an  alliance  with 
those  of  Bohemia  for  mutual  defence,  and  there  also  the 
armament  of  the  people  was  undertaken. 

The  danger  of  civil  war,  which  now  seemed  inevitable, 
induced  the  Elector  of  Saxony  to  attempt  to  mediate. 
Himself  a  Lutheran,  he  had  strong  claims  on  the  confidence 
of  the  Estates.  Dr.  Gerstenberger,  the  Elector's  ambassa- 
dor at  Prague,  in  his  master's  name  proposed  a  compromise. 
The  free  profession  of  the  "  Confessio  Bohemica  "  was  to  be 

^  As  has  been  noticed  previously,  the  position  of  the  Protestants  had 
been  more  secure  during  the  reign  of  that  prince  than  during  that  of  hiS 
father,  Ferdinand  I. 


234  Bohemia 

allowed  to  all ;  Catholics  were  to  be  allowed  to  adopt  :he 
Protestant,  and  Protestants  the  Catholic,  creed ;  all  members 
of  the  Diet  were  to  have  the  right  of  building  churches 
and  schools  without  any  distinction  of  creed ;  the  super- 
vision and  direction  of  the  Consistory  and  of  the  University 
were  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  king. 

These  terms,  if  immediately  accepted  by  the  king,  would 
perhaps  have  satisfied  the  Estates.  Rudolph,  however, 
declared  that  he  would  only  sanction  Gerstenberger's  pro- 
posals if  it  were  agreed  that  the  liturgy  of  the  old-utraquists 
should  be  retained  by  the  Protestants.  This  objection 
naturally  caused  a  fatal  delay.  The  Protestants  disliked  to 
confide  the  direction  of  their  Church  to  a  sovereign  who 
professed  a  creed  different  from  their  own,  and  the  less  con- 
ciliatory party  among  the  Estates  at  last  got  the  upper  hand. 
When  the  burgrave  announced  to  the  Diet  the  king's  de- 
cision, as  mentioned  above,  the  Protestants  declared  that 
the  negotiations  were  fruitless,  and  must  be  broken  off; 
many  even  left  Prague  and  returned  to  their  castles  to  com- 
plete their  armaments.  The  "  Directors,"  who  established 
themselves  in  the  town-hall  of  the  Stare  Mesto  (old  town  of 
Prague)  acted  as  a  provisional  government,  and  directed  the 
general  arming  of  the  country.  Rudolph  was  again  entirely 
helpless,  and — probably  again  on  the  advice  of  Hannewald — 
decided  to  abandon  his  undignified  and  hopeless  resistance. 
By  his  order  the  supreme  burgrave  invited  the  Diet  to  resume 
its  sittings,  and  the  king  on  July  9,  1609,  signed  the  Letter 
of  Majesty.  The  Estates  had  previously  consented  to  the 
substitution  of  the  word  "  utraquist "  for  that  of  "  evangelical," 
which  had  been  used  in  the  draft  submitted  to  the  king. 

By  the  Letter  of  Majesty  the  Protestant  Estates  ob- 
tained the  recognition  of  the  "Confessio  Bohemica,"and  the 
right  of  supervision  over  the  University,  and  were  authorized 
henceforth  to  elect  the  members  of  the  Consistory.  They 
were  further  empowered  to  appoint  "  Defenders,"  who  were 
to  be  chosen  in  equal  number  from  among  the  Protestant 
nobles,  the  knights,  and  town  representatives.  The  ill-defined 
office  of  the  "  Defenders  "  implied  in  reality  the  duty  of  acting 
as  the  guardian  of  the  rights  of  the  Protestants.  On  the  same 
day,  another  equally  important  but  far  less  celebrated  docu- 
ment was  signed.  This  was  an  Agreement  between  the 
Protestants  and  Romanists,  or,  to  use  the  official  designa- 
tion, the  Estates  "  sub  utraque  "  and  those  "  sub  una."     By 


An    Historical    Sketch  235 

this  Agreement  they  guaranteed  to  each  other  full  liberty  of 
religious  worship,  which  was  to  be  extended  to  the  peasants 
also ;  the  full  right  of  the  Protestants  to  appoint  priests  to 
the  livings  in  their  gift  was  recognized,  and  it  was  further 
agreed  that  on  the  lands  of  the  crown  ^  both  religious 
parties  should  be  allowed  to  worship  freely  according  to 
their  creed,  and  to  build  churches. 

This  last  provision  requires  special  notice.  The  great 
Hussite  revolution  had  been  followed  by  a  complete  confis- 
cation of  the  property  of  the  Romanist  Church  in  Bohemia ; 
the  poverty  of  the  clergy  being  one  of  the  most  important 
points  of  the  early  Hussite  creed,  and  one  that  is  specially 
referred  to  in  the  Compacts.  Through  the  good-will  of 
King  Sigismund  and  his  successors — all  of  whom,  with  the 
exception  of  George  of  Podebrad,  were  Romanists — the 
Catholic  Church  had  again  received  gifts  of  land  and  other 
property.  These  gifts  were,  however,  assumed  to  have  been 
made  temporarily  to  individuals,  and  the  Church  property 
continued  legally  to  be  a  portion  of  the  lands  of  the  crown ; 
this  fiction  was  undoubtedly  maintained  out  of  respect  to  the 
strong  feeling  of  the  utraquists  on  this  matter. 

For  the  same  reason  the  clergy  did  not,  till  after  the  com- 
plete reaction  which  followed  the  battle  of  the  White  Moun- 
tain, constitute  one  of  the  Estates  of  the  realm.  The  right 
of  building  churches,  granted  to  those  who  dwelt  on  the 
lands  of  the  crown,  therefore  included  those  who  lived  on 
land  OAvned  by  the  Church.  It  is  this  question  that  was — 
nine  years  later— the  immediate  cause  of  the  Thirty  Years' 
War,  the  Archbishop  of  Prague  having  caused  the  Protestant 
Church  of  Hrob  ^  to  be  destroyed  while  the  Abbot  of  Bfevnov 
closed  a  church  in  the  town  of  Broumov  which  was  under 
his  authority.^ 

^  The  estates  belonging  to  the  king  and  the  towns  under  his  imme- 
diate sovereignty,  and  enjoying  special  immunities,  were  thus  designated. 
They  were  in  this  way  distinguished  from  the  estates  of  the  nobles  and 
the  towns  which  were  built  on  land  belonging  to  nobles. 

'^  In  German  "Klostergrab." 

^  This  important  question  is  fully  elucidated  by  Dr.  Gindely.  In  his 
earlier  work  [Geschichte  der  Ertheihing  des  Bohmischen  Majestdts- 
briefes)  the  great  Bohemian  historian  attempted  to  defend  the  conduct 
of  the  Archbishop  of  Prague  and  of  the  Abbot  of  Bfevnov.  He  then 
only  considered  the  Letter  of  Majesty,  ignoring  the  Agreement 
signed  at  the  same  time.  In  his  Rudolph  II  und  seine  Zeit,  Dr. 
Gindely  with  great  frankness  modifies  his  former  opinion.  The  right  of 
Protestants  to  build  churches  on  lands  owned  by  Roman  ecclesiastics  was 


236 


Bohemia 


The  momentary  settlement  obtained  through  the  Letter 
of  Majesty  and  the  Agreement  signed  on  the  same  day, 
which  afterwards  received  the  king's  approval,  did  not  long 
ensure  peace  to  Bohemia.  Its  provisions  have  consequently 
always  been  subjected  to  very  hostile  comment,  specially  by 
writers  of  strong  papal  bias.  To  those  who  examine  the 
numerous  contemporary  records  with  impartiality,  it  will 
perhaps  be  apparent  that  under  more  favourable  circum- 
stances these  charters  might  have  secured  to  Bohemia  a 
much-required  respite  from  theological  strife.  It  is  certain 
that  from  this  date  the  attitude  of  the  Protestants  ceased  to 
be  an  aggressive,  and  henceforth  became  a  distinctly  defen- 
sive, one.^ 

Neither  the  provisions  of  the  Letter  of  Majesty  nor  the 
conduct  of  the  Protestants  suffice  to  explain  the  fact  that 
troubles  so  soon  recommenced  in  Bohemia.  These  troubles 
are  rather  to  be  attributed  to  the  circumstance  (the  causes 
of  which  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  book)  that  the  policy 
of  the  Spanish  court  became  more  active  and  aggressive 
about  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.  We  must 
also  take  into  account  the  success  with  which  the  Archduke 
Ferdinand  (whose  accession  to  the  throne  of  Bohemia 
appeared  more  and  more  probable)  had  carried  out  the 
"  Catholic  Reformation  "  in  Styria,  a  success  which  raised 
the  hopes  and  increased  the  energy  of  the  Jesuits  and  other 
enthusiasts  for  the  Roman  cause  in  Bohemia. 

The  last  years  of  the  reign  of  Rudolph  are  of  little 
interest,  compared  with  the  momentous  events  of  1608  and 
1609.  The  king's  only  concern  seems  to  have  been  his 
desire  for  revenge  on  his   brother   Matthew,  who  had  de- 

undeniable.     The  Protestant  citizens  of  Hrob  and  Broumov  had  the  law 
on  their  side. 

^  The  Protestants  of  Bohemia,  even  after  they  had  risen  in  arms 
against  King  Matthew  (in  1618),  maintained  that  the  stipulations  of  the 
Letter  of  Majesty  and  the  Agreement,  if  faithfully  carried  out,  would 
have  completely  satisfied  them.  In  the  letter  ad'lressed  to  King  James  I 
of  England  by  the  "  Directors"  (dated  Prague,  Nov.  3  (New  Style), 
1618),  they  stated  that  "post  multa  certaminasingulari  Dei  providentia 
a  Rudolpho  Secundo  Imperatore,  et  Rege  Nostro  beatae  memoriae  non 
modo  libertas  religionis  nobis  evangelicis  concessa  sed  etiam  diplomate 
Caesareo  stabilita  et  a  moderno  etiam  Caesare  domino  nostro  clementis- 
simo  solemniter  confirmata,  sanctaque  pax  et  libertas  religionis  inter 
DOS  Evangelicos  sub  Utr^que  et  Pontificios  sub  Una  vulgo  nominates 
erecta  fuit "  (from  the  copy  of  the  letter  preserved  in  the  Stale 
Archives,  Venice). 


An    Historical    Sketch  237 

prived  him  of  Hungary,  Austria,  and  Moravia.  He  chose 
his  cousin,  the  Archduke  Leopold,  as  the  instrument  of  his 
vengeance.  He  appears  to  have  promised  him  the  succes- 
sion to  the  Bohemian  throne,  thus  infringing  on  the  rights 
of  Matthew,  whom  the  Estates — on  Rudolph's  own  recom- 
mendation—  had  recognized,  as  well  as  on  those  of 
Ferdinand  of  Styria,  Leopold's  elder  brother.  The  king 
and  Archduke  Leopold,  it  is  clear,  also  aimed  at  the 
suppression  of  the  concessions  recently  granted  to  the  Pro- 
testants, and  at  the  forcible  re-establishment  of  the  Catholic 
Church  in  Bohemia.  There  is,  however,  little  positive 
evidence  as  to  the  object  of  Rudolph's  varying  schemes 
at  this  period.  With  his  approval.  Archduke  Leopold,  who 
was  bishop  of  Strassburg  and  Passau,  assembled  an  armed 
force  near  the  latter  town.  The  religious  troubles  then 
prevailing  in  Germany  afforded  a  pretext.  The  troops  of 
Leopold,  commanded  by  Lawrence  Ramees  (or  Romeo) 
in  the  year  1611,  marched  into  Bohemia  and  obtained 
possession  of  Budejovice,  Tabor,  Krumlov  and  other  towns 
in  the  south  of  the  country.  They  committed  great 
cruelties  during  their  march,^  and  after  having  arrived 
before  Prague  stormed  the  Mala  Strana,  the  part  of  the 
town  situated  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Vltava.  Archduke 
Leopold  now  joined  his  troops,  and  they  attempted  to 
obtain  possession  of  the  other  parts  of  Prague.  They  were, 
however,  repulsed  by  the  soldiers  under  Count  Thurn,  whom 
the  Estates — anxious  for  their  recently-acquired  liberties  — 
had  hastily  equipped.  Rudolph's  brother.  King  Matthew 
of  Hungary,  also  came  to  the  aid  of  the  Bohemian  Estates. 
He  not  unnaturally  considered  his  right  of  succession  to 
the  Bohemian  throne  as  imperilled  by  Leopold's  action. 
That  prince  now  (March  161 1)  left  Bohemia  as  suddenly  as 
he  had  appeared  there.  The  Estates  of  Bohemia,  suspecting 
their  king  of  being  the  originator  of  this  sudden  invasion  of 
the  country,  forced  him  to  abdicate.  Matthew  became 
King  of  Bohemia,  and  the  dependent  lands,  Silesia  and 
Lusatia,  also  recognized  him  as  their  sovereign.  Rudolph, 
who  had  been  in  failing  health  for  some  time,  did  not  long 

'■  A  contemporary  French  newsletter  (Arras  161 1)  states:  "Romeo 
continuant  son  chemin  vers  Prague  avec  I'armee  Leopoldienne  donna 
une  telle  espouvante  aux  Bohemiens  par  ou  il  passa  que  craignans  plus 
les  siens  que  les  Turcs  mesmes,  ils  abandonnoient  leurs  maisons  et 
leurs  biens  pour  s'exempter  de  lumber  sous  leur  cruante  !  " 


238 


Bohemia 


survive  his  final  dethronement.  He  died  on  January  20, 
1 61 2.  Matthew  was  then  also  chosen  as  Emperor  by  the 
German  Electors. 

The  policy  of  Matthew  with  regard  to  the  religious  affairs 
of  Bohemia  underwent  a  change  when  the  twelve  years' 
struggle  between  him  and  his  brother  came  to  an  end.  His 
amicable  relations  with  the  Protestant  leaders,  such  as 
^erotin  and  Rosenberg,  were  broken  off  about  this  time. 
Distrust  of  the  new  king  can  easily  be  traced  in  the  de- 
mands which  the  Estates  addressed  to  him  even  before  his 
coronation.  Five  points  were  specially  brought  forward,  as 
embodying  the  wishes  of  the  Estates.  The  most  important 
among  the  concessions  demanded  were  the  right  of  the 
Diet  to  assemble  without  royal  authorization,  and  the  right 
to  levy  troops.  The  king  conceded  only  one  point  of  minor 
importance.  He  gave  his  sanction  to  the  treaty  of  alliance 
which  the  Bohemian  Protestants  had  (1609)  concluded  with 
the  Estates  of  Silesia  in  defence  of  their  faith.  On  the 
other  points,  among  which  were  the  two  of  most  importance, 
the  king  reserved  his  decision. 

The  peace  with  Turkey  which  Matthew  had  concluded 
(in  1606)  did  not  secure  permanent  tranquillity  in  Eastern 
Europe.  Matthew,  forced  to  renewed  warfare  with  the  Turks, 
was  obliged  to  apply  for  aid  to  the  Estates  of  the  many 
countries  over  which  the  German  branch  of  the  house  of 
Habsburg  ruled.  He  first  appealed  to  a  representative 
assembly,  which  consisted  of  deputies  from  all  the  lands  of 
the  Bohemian  crown,^  from  Hungary,  and  from  Upper  and 
Lower  Austria.  Representatives  of  Styria  (which  with 
Carinthia  and  Carniola  was  then  governed  by  the  Archduke 
Ferdinand)  and  of  the  Tyrol  were  also  present.  This 
assembly,  remarkable  as  the  only  one  in  which  representatives 
of  almost  all  the  lands  now  constituting  the  Austro-Hungarian 
Empire  ^  sat  in  one  parliamentary  body,  was  entirely  abortive. 
When  the  deputies  met  at  Linz  (16 14),  it  soon  appeared 
that  their  only  purpose  was  the  further  limitation  of  the 
sovereign  power  in  the  different  States  which  they  represented. 
They  declined  all  contributions  towards  the  expenses  of  the 
war  against  Turkey.  Frustrated  in  this  plan,  Matthew  was 
obliged  to  appeal  to  the  assemblies  of  the  different  countries 

1  See  p.  178. 

2  Dalmatia,  Galicia  and  the  Bukowina  only  became  part  of  the 
Habsburg  dominions  many  years  later. 


An   Historical   Sketch  239 

which,  though  all  owing  allegiance  to  him,  still  possessed 
separate  political  and  representative  institutions.  Limiting 
our  account  to  Bohemia,  we  will  only  mention  the  fact  that 
Matthew  convoked  a  "  General  Diet "  of  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown  at  Prague  in  the  following  year  (1615). 
Here  also  the  king's  attempts  to  obtain  grants  of  money 
and  men  for  the  Turkish  war  were  entirely  fruitless.  The 
attitude  of  the  Estates  was  one  of  direct  opposition  to  the 
king,  and  they  seem  from  this  moment,  if  not  earlier,  to  have 
prepared  for  an  open  conflict  with  the  crown.  Moravia 
being  represented  at  this  "  General  Diet,"  the  Estates  at- 
tempted to  conclude  with  that  country  an  alliance  similar  to 
the  one  that  already  existed  between  them  and  the  Estates 
of  Silesia.  These  negotiations  were  unsuccessful,  as  no 
agreement  could  be  arrived  at  on  the  old  standing  question 
as  to  the  constitutional  relationship  of  Moravia  to  Bohemia. 
The  Diet,  probably  contrary  to  the  king's  wishes,  also  turned 
its  attention  to  the  national  question,  which  the  religious 
troubles  had  recently  thrown  into  the  background.  Special 
enactments  were  framed  to  favour  the  Bohemian  language, 
as  against  the  use  of  German  or  other  foreign  tongues.  The 
Bohemian  language  was  also  by  vote  of  the  Estates  declared 
to  be  the  "  authorized  "  official  language  of  the  country. 

Matthew  was  well  advanced  in  years  when  he  obtained  the 
Bohemian  crown ;  and  being,  like  his  brother  Rudolph, 
childless,  he  was  soon  obliged  to  take  into  consideration  the 
succession  to  the  Bohemian  throne.  It  was  at  that  period 
still  an  unsettled  question  whether  the  crown  was  hereditary. 
In  Bohemia — as  in  Hungary — the  princes  of  the  Habsburg 
dynasty  had  several  times  obtained  the  coronation  of  their 
heirs  during  their  lifetime,  thus  avoiding  a  contest  when  the 
crown  became  vacant.  This  was  now  Matthew's  object. 
As  his  two  surviving  brothers  were  also  childless,  he  resolved 
with  their  consent  to  nominate  the  next  heir,  Archduke 
Ferdinand  of  Styria,  to  be  his  successor. 

The  Diet,  which  was  to  decide  the  momentous  question  as 
to  the  succession,  met  at  Prague  on  June  5,  161 7.  That 
Matthew  knew  well  the  difficulty  of  gaining  his  object  is 
shown  by  the  attempts  at  intimidation  made  by  the  high 
burgrave,  Adam,  Lord  of  Sternberg.  The  burgrave,  before 
the  sittings  of  the  Diet  commenced,  had  requested  all  the 
more  important  State  officials  and  councillors  to  appear  at 
his  apartments  on  the  Hradcany.     With  the  exception  of 


240  Bohemia 

Count  Thurn,  who  held  the  office  of  Burgrave  of  the 
Karlstein,  they  all  accepted  the  invitation.  Sternberg  read 
to  them  the  royal  message,  requesting  the  recognition  of 
Ferdinand's  right  of  succession  to  the  throne ;  he  added 
that  the  king  was  firmly  resolved  to  enforce  the  succession 
of  Ferdinand,  and  it  would  therefore  be  better  for  them  to 
accept  the  royal  decision  peacefully  and  willingly,  and  thus 
secure  their  future  king's  favour,  rather  than  exasperate  him 
by  futile  opposition.^ 

The  officials,  and  subsequently  the  whole  body  of  the 
Estates,  for  the  moment  fell  in  with  Sternberg's  views,  and 
Thurn  was  almost  alone  in  opposing  King  Matthew's 
project.  He  asserted  that  the  Estates  had  the  right  of 
electing  the  future  king,  and  suggested  that  Ferdinand 
should  be  "elected,"  instead  of  "recognized"  as  King  of 
Bohemia ;  he  further  contested  the  validity  of  any  vote  as 
to  the  succession  which  was  taken  in  the  absence  of  dele- 
gates from  Moravia  and  Silesia.  Finally,  the  Estates, 
against  the  two  votes  of  Thurn  and  Colonna  of  Fels, 
"  recognized  "  Ferdinand  as  King  of  Bohemia.  Ferdinand 
then  confirmed  all  the  privileges  of  the  land — among  which 
the  Letter  of  Majesty  was  specially  mentioned — and  he  was 
crowned  as  king  with  great  solemnity  on  June  19,  161 7. 

After  Ferdinand's  election,  and  under  his  influence,  the 
policy  of  Matthew  became  more  aggressive  towards  the 
Protestants;  in  fact,  his  object  was  now  undoubtedly 
the  extirpation  of  Protestantism.  Immediately  after  they 
had  secured  temporary  freedom  by  the  Letter  of  Majesty, 
the  Lutherans  and  Bohemian  Brethren  had  come  to  an 
agreement  by  which  the  new  appointments  to  the  Consistory 
Council  were  equitably  divided  between  the  two  sections 
of  the  party.  This  agreement  on  so  important  a  matter 
naturally  strengthened  the  Protestants,  and  therefore  greatly 
disappointed  the  Romanist  clergy.  The  Jesuits  in  particular 
had  previously  stated  that  "the  Calvinists  and  Lutherans 
were  so  opposed  to  one  another  that  the  Roman  Catholics 
had  good  hope  to  see  their  devilish  craft  perish  through 
their  own  machinations,  and  to  see  the  heretics  destroy  each 
other."  2 

The  Jesuit  advisers  of  Ferdinand  openly  declared  that  the 
present  moment  was  a  "golden  opportunity  for  extirpating 
>the  heretics."     The  menacing  tone  of  the  Roman  clergy 

^  Gindely.  ^  Dr.  Soltl,  Der  Religionskrieg  in  Deutschland, 


An    Historical    Sketch  241 

naturally  caused  grave  apprehensions  in  Bohemia;  and  the 
alarm  was  intensified  by  numerous  Protestant  refugees  from 
Ferdinand's  territory  who  had  sought  refuge  in  Bohemia, 
and  who  vividly  described  the  persecution  which  they  had 
endured. 

The  growing  alarm  and  resentment  of  the  Protestants 
increased  when  it  became  known  that  Count  Thurn,  who 
was  a  strong  Protestant,  had,  probably  in  consequence  of 
his  vote  on  the  question  of  the  succession,  been  dismissed 
from  his  high  office  of  Burgrave  of  the  Karlstein.  Though 
another  less  lucrative  office  was  conferred  on  the  count,  his 
dismissal  caused  great  indignation.  The  archives,  and  with 
them  the  documents  confirming  the  privileges  of  the  king- 
dom, were  preserved  at  Karlstein  :  it  was  believed  that  the 
Government  wished  to  place  the  custody  of  these  valuable 
documents  in  the  hands  of  some  more  pliant  official. 

Archduke  Ferdinand  and  his  councillors,  in  fact,  deter- 
mined to  establish  the  "Catholic  Reformation"  in  Bohemia 
as  soon  as  circumstances  permitted.  King  Matthew,  who 
was  more  moderate  in  his  views,  was  in  failing  health,  so 
that  the  accession  of  Ferdinand  might  be  shortly  anticipated. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  number  and  influence  of  the 
Bohemian  Protestants  rendered  it  certain  that  they  would 
not  submit  to  coercion  as  peacefully  as  their  co-religionists 
in  Styria  had  done.  Civil  war  in  Bohemia  was  therefore 
inevitable,  and  the  smallest  spark  would  suffice  to  produce 
an  explosion. 

Immediately  after  the  publication  of  the  Letter  of 
Majesty,  the  Protestant  citizens  of  the  towns  of  Broumov 
and  Hrob  had  began  to  build  churches ;  the  last-named  town 
formed  part  of  the  domains  of  the  Roman  Archbishop  of 
Prague,  while  the  former  was  subject  to  the  Abbot  of  Breznov. 
Encouraged  by  the  Protestant  Estates,  the  citizens  proceeded 
with  the  building  of  these  churches,  disregarding  the 
remonstrances  of  the  two  ecclesiastics.  The  question  as  to 
their  right  to  do  so  has  been  already  alluded  to,  and  from 
recently-adduced  evidence  it  now  appears  certain  that  the 
citizens  had  right  on  their  side.^  The  archbishop  and  the 
abbot  had  from  the  first  protested  against  the  erection  of 
these  churches,  but  it  was  only  after  Ferdinand's  coronation 
that  they  resorted  to  more  energetic  measures.  In  December 
(16 1 7)  the  Archbishop  of  Prague  caused  the  Protestant 
1  See  note  3,  p.  235. 


242  Bohemia 

church  at  Hrob  to  be  totally  destroyed,  while  the  abbot  was 
satisfied  with  closing  that  at  Broumov.  This  event,  as  was 
inevitable,  was  immediately  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
'*  Defenders,"  to  whom  the  Letter  of  Majesty  had  specially 
committed  the  protection  of  the  interests  of  the  Protestants. 
Previous  attempts  to  remonstrate  with  the  officials  of  King 
Matthew  had  convinced  the  "  Defenders "  that  no  redress 
could  be  obtained  from  them.  They  therefore  decided  to 
convoke  a  General  Assembly  of  the  Protestants.  The 
Agreement  of  1609  had  empowered  them,  if  necessary,  to 
invite  the  Protestants  to  such  meetings.  This  Assembly 
first  met  on  March  5,  16 18,  and  the  knights  and  nobles 
were  present  in  great  numbers,  while  only  a  few  representa- 
tives of  the  towns  had  the  courage  to  appear.  The  State 
officials  had,  in  fact,  used  all  their  influence  on  the  towns- 
men to  dissuade  them  from  attending  the  meeting.  On 
March  6,  Count  Thurn  delivered  a  lengthy  statement  to  the 
Assembly,  in  which  he  enumerated  the  grievances  of  the 
Protestants,  specially  alluding  to  the  events  at  Hrob  and 
Broumov.  After  a  debate  that  continued  for  several  days, 
it  was  decided  to  address  a  remonstrance  to  the  Government 
officials  at  Prague;  should  this  remonstrance  prove  in- 
effective, the  Protestants  resolved  to  bring  their  grievances 
directly  before  Matthew,  who  then  resided  at  Vienna.  The 
State  officials  gave  an  immediate  answer :  they  declined  to 
afford  any  redress  whatever.  The  Assembly  now  voted  an 
address  to  the  king,  reiterating  their  grievances,  and  then 
broke  up ;  but  not  before  they  had  agreed  to  meet  again  on 
May  21,  by  which  date  it  was  considered  that  an  answer 
would  be  received  from  Vienna. 

The  king's  answer  arrived  sooner  than  was  expected.  His 
message,  drawn  up  according  to  the  advice  of  his  favourite, 
Cardinal  Khlesl,  was  of  a  most  uncompromising  character. 
Matthew,  without  entering  into  the  discussion  of  the  alleged 
grievances,  declared  that  he  would  not  permit  a  new  meeting 
of  the  Protestants.  He  further  stated  that  his  forbearance 
was  at  an  end,  and  threatened  with  legal  proceedings  those 
who  had  caused  disturbances.  This,  not  unnaturally,  was 
considered  as  a  menace  to  all  who  had  taken  part  in  the 
proceedings  of  the  Protestant  Assembly.  It  is  needless  to 
state  that  this  answer,  which  was  handed  to  the  "Defenders" 
by  Matthew's  representatives  at  Prague,  caused  general 
excitement  among  the  Protestants.     The  burgrave  and  the 


An    Historical    Sketch  243 

other  officials  who  governed  in  Matthew's  name,  when 
transmitting  the  royal  message  to  the  "Defenders,"  sum- 
moned them  to  obey  the  wishes  of  their  king,  and  to 
countermand  the  intended  Assembly.  The  "  Defenders  " 
demanded  a  delay  of  three  days  before  returning  an  answer. 
They  then  replied  that  the  new  meeting  was  to  take  place  in 
conformity  with  the  decision  of  the  Protestants  during  their 
former  Assembly.  They  stated  that  they  had  no  power  to 
annul  that  decision.  When  this  answer  reached  Vienna, 
the  sovereign  sent  a  second  message  to  the  Bohemian 
Estates,  couched  in  more  moderate  language.  He,  however, 
adhered  to  his  prohibition  of  the  intended  meeting.  The 
"Defenders"  forwarded  a  second  answer,  identical  in  its 
terms  with  their  former  statement. 

The  Protestants  had  already  begun  to  reassemble  at 
Prague.  They  were  even  more  numerous  than  at  the 
previous  meeting,  and  most  of  the  towns  had  this  time  sent 
representatives.  The  leaders  of  the  movement  met  on  May 
1 8,  a  few  days  before  the  date  fixed  for  the  general  Assembly, 
at  the  Carolinum,  which  now  became  the  centre  of  the 
national  movement.  It  was  decided  that  an  appeal  should 
be  addressed  to  the  Bohemian  people,  and  pubUcity  given 
to  it  by  means  of  the  (Protestant)  clergy  of  Prague.  As 
proposed,  this  proclamation  was  read  out  in  all  the  Protes- 
tant parish  churches  of  Prague  on  the  following  Sunday, 
It  stated  that  the  "  Defenders "  had  received  positive 
intelligence  that  certain  persons  in  the  kingdom  intended 
to  destroy  peace  and  unity,  to  oppress  the  Christian  religion 
by  various  artifices,  to  close  and  destroy  the  churches,  and 
abolish  religious  liberty.  They  (the  "  Defenders  ")  had 
informed  the  sovereign  of  this,  but  had  been  wrongly 
accused  by  their  adversaries  of  hostile  intentions  with 
regard  to  his  Majesty ;  and  they  solemnly  protested  against 
this  calumnious  assertion.  The  faithful  were  finally  exhorted 
to  pray  to  God  that  He  might  dispose  the  sovereign's  mind 
favourably  towards  the  Bohemians,  and  to  the  confusion  of 
their  own  and  the  king's  enemies.  This  appeal,  while 
sparing  the  king  himself,  was  a  direct  attack  on  his  council- 
lors, and  particularly  on  the  Burgrave  of  the  Karlstein, 
Jaroslav  of  Martinic,  and  the  chief  judge,  William  of 
Slavata.  These  two  officials,  both  staunch  adherents  of  the 
Roman  Church,  were  special  objects  of  suspicion,  as  having 
influenced  the  king  unfavourably  towards  their  countrj'men. 


244  Bohemia 

The  Protestant  Assembly  met  again  at  the  Carolinum  on 
May  21,  as  had  been  settled.  As  soon  as  the  proceedings 
had  commenced,  Government  messengers  appeared  request- 
ing the  attendance  of  the  Protestants  at  the  castle.  When 
they  arrived  at  the  Hradcany  another  royal  message,  for- 
bidding their  meetings,  was  read  to  them.  They  none  the 
less  again  met  on  the  following  day  to  discuss  the  answer. 
The  answer  had  already  been  drawn  up  by  the  "  Defenders," 
and  it  was  decided  to  present  it  on  the  following  day. 
Thurn  declared  that  it  would  be  advisable  not  to  choose  a 
deputation  for  this  purpose,  and  suggested  that  the  whole 
Assembly  should  proceed  in  full  armour  to  the  Hradcany, 
and  he  alleged  without  hesitation  that  a  small  deputation 
would  not  be  safe  in  the  castle.  The  isolated  position  of 
the  Hradcany  rendered  it  possible  that  once  inside  of  its 
extensive  buildings  a  few  individuals  would  be  entirely  at 
the  mercy  of  the  well-armed  royal  body-guards,  who  could, 
by  closing  the  gates  of  the  castle,  prevent  all  attempts  to 
bring  aid  to  the  delegates  if  they  were  assailed.  Thurn 's 
proposal  was  accepted,  and  the  Government  officials  gave 
permission  that  the  nobles  should  appear  in  the  palace  in 
full  armour. 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  momentous  event  of 
the  morrow,  known  as  the  Defenestration,  was  planned 
on  this  day  (May  22)  by  Thurn  and  his  adherents.  Thurn 
had  undoubtedly  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  moment 
was  a  favourable  one  for  the  Bohemians  to  begin  the 
inevitable  struggle.  The  much-discussed  question  whether 
he  was  influenced  by  personal  ambition  or  zeal  for  the 
Protestant  religion,  or — as  is  most  probable — by  both 
motives  combined,  is  of  comparatively  slight  importance. 
The  indignation  of  the  Bohemians  had  reached  the  highest 
pitch,  and  the  increasing  influence  of  the  Jesuits  had  as  yet 
succeeded  in  bringing  about  but  few  defections  from  the 
ranks  of  the  Protestant  nobility.  Thurn  may  also  have 
thought  it  preferable  to  encounter  the  weak  government  of 
Matthew  rather  than  the  energy  of  a  religious  enthusiast 
like  Ferdinand ;  for  it  was  certain  that  that  prince  would 
soon  succeed  to  the  Bohemian  throne.  An  open  act  of 
violence  against  the  officials  would  also,  by  compromising 
the  whole  Protestant  nobility,  force  the  waverers  to  take 
part  in  a  general  uprising. 

Thurn  and   some  of  his  more   immediate  adherents — 


An    Historical    Sketch  245 

among  whom  were  two  nobles  of  the  Kinsk)^  and  two  of  the 
Ridan  family,  Colonna  of  Fels  and  Venceslas  of  Ruppa — 
met  on  that  day  at  the  Smificky  palace.  After  some  dis- 
cussion, in  the  course  of  which  Ulrich  of  Kinsk^  proposed 
that  the  officials  should  be  poniarded  in  the  council-room, 
it  was  decided  that  the  two  most  hated  of  the  royal  council- 
lors, Martinic  and  Slavata,  should  be  thrown  from  the 
windows  of  the  Hrad^any.^  It  may  be  noted  that  it  was 
an  old  Bohemian  usage  to  punish  traitors  by  this  form  of 
death. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  memorable  23rd  of  Maj', 
the  representatives  of  Protestantism  in  Bohemia  proceeded 
to  the  Hradcin ;  all  were  in  full  armour,  and  most  of  them 
were  followed  by  one  or  more  retainers.  They  first  pro- 
ceeded to  the  hall  where  the  Estates  habitually  met.  The 
address  to  the  king  which  the  "  Defenders  "  had  prepared 
was  here  read  out.  It  protested  both  against  the  attempt 
to  prevent  the  meeting,  and  against  the  threat  of  legal  pro- 
ceedings. The  address  ended  with  the  significant  question, 
what  part  the  king's  councillors  at  Prague  had  had  in  the 
composition  of  the  menacing  message  which  had  been  for- 
warded from  Vienna.  The  Protestants  now  proceeded  to 
the  hall  in  which  the  king's  councillors  were  awaiting  them. 
Of  these,  only  the  high  burgrave,  Adam  of  Sternberg, 
Martinic,  Slavata,  and  Diepold  of  Lobkowitz  were  present. 
Paul  of  Rican  read  out  the  address  to  the  king,  and  a  very 
stormy  discussion  took  place.  The  officials,  especially 
Martinic  and  Slavata,  were  violently  accused  of  having, 
through  their  evil  counsels,  instigated  King  Matthew  against 
their  own  countrymen.  The  fact  that  these  two  officials 
alone  of  all  the  Bohemian  nobles  had  refused  to  sign  the 
Letter  of  Majesty  was  recalled  as  a  proof  of  their  treachery. 
At  last  Paul  of  Rican,  again  acting  as  spokesman,  read 
out  a  declaration  which  he  had  previously  prepared.  It 
stated  that  Martinic  and  Slavata  were  to  be  considered  as 
violators  of  the  Letter  of  Majesty  and  enemies  to  the  Com- 
monwealth. The  Protestants,  questioned  by  Rican,  loudly 
assented  to  his  declaration.  This  sealed  the  fate  of  the 
two  councillors.     The  burgrave's  entreaties  to  spare  them 

^  It  is  curious  to  note  that  Wallenstein  is  alleged  to  have  said  that 
the  greatest  foUy  the  Bohemians  had  committed  had  been  to  thiow 
Martinic  and  Slavata  out  of  a  window  instead  of  thrusting  a  sword 
through  their  bodies. 


246 


Bohemia 


were  fruitless.  He  was  himself  forced  to  leave  the  room. 
Diepold  of  Lobkowitz,  who  attempted  to  assist  Martinic 
and  Slavata,  was  also  induced  to  retire  by  his  cousin 
William  of  Lobkowitz,  one  of  the  Protestant  leaders. 
Slavata  was  now  seized  by  Thurn  and  Martinic  by  William 
of  Lobkowitz.  Aided  by  other  nobles,  Thurn  and  Lobko- 
witz gradually  forced  the  two  councillors  nearer  to  the  wall, 
and  after  a  short  struggle  threw  them  from  two  adjoin- 
ing windows  into  the  moat  below.  Fabricius,  the  secretary 
of  the  Royal  Council,  who  was  unknown  to  the  nobles, 
having  attempted  to  remonstrate  with  them,  was  also 
thrown  from  the  windows  of  the  castle.  To  those  who 
know  the  scene  of  this  drama  (little  changed  at  the  present 
day),  it  seems  well-nigh  marvellous  that  they  should  all 
three  have  escaped  almost  without  injury.^  When  the 
nobles  who  were  watching  them  from  the  windows  above 
noticed  that  they  moved,  numerous  shots  were  fired  at 
them,  but  with  little  result;  Martinic  only  was  slightly 
wounded.  Aided  by  their  servants,  Martinic  and  Slavata 
succeeded  in  making  their  escape,  and  eventually  in  leaving 
Prague  in  safety. 

Immediately  after  the  Defenestration — an  event  memor- 
able not  only  in  Bohemia  but  in  European  history,  for  it 
marks  the  beginning  of  the  Thirty  Years'  War — the  Bohe- 
mians established  what  may  be  called  a  provisional 
Government  consisting  of  thirty  "  Directors,"  chosen  (as 
the  "  Defenders  "  had  been)  in  equal  proportions  by  the 
three  Estates.  Venceslas  of  Ruppa,  one  of  the  ablest  of 
the  Bohemian  nobles,  became  president  of  this  body. 
Thurn  contented  himself  with  the  command  of  the  army. 
His  foreign  origin  and  particularly  his  insufficient  knowledge 
of  the  national  language — which  has  already  been  noted — 
undoubtedly  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  attempt  to 
obtain  a  more  prominent  position.  No  movement  uncon- 
nected with  their  national  aspirations  has  ever  carried  away 
the  whole  mass  of  the  Bohemian  people.  It  was  only  by  a 
general  uprising  that  the  new  Government  could  hope  to 
resist  the  inevitable  attack  of  its  enemies. 

The  new  Government  from  the  first  displayed  consider- 
able diplomatic  activity.     Despatches,  expressed  in  nearly 

^  The  pious  Romanists  afterwards  attributed  their  escape  to  a 
miracle.  The  height  of  the  windows  from  the  ground  is  about  forty 
feet. 


An    Historical   Sketch  247 

identical  terms,  were  sent  to  the  princes  of  Germany,  the 
Kings  of  England  and  France,  the  Republic  of  Venice,  the 
Duke  of  Savoy,  and  others.  These  despatches  all  affirmed 
the  complete  loyalty  of  the  Bohemians  to  the  "  Emperor 
Matthew  their  king,"  and  a  detailed  account  was  given  of 
the  provocations  the  Protestants  had  endured.  It  was 
strongly  represented  that  the  violation  of  the  Letter  of 
Majesty  and  of  the  contemporaneous  Agreement  signed  in 
1609  had  forced  the  Protestants  to  rise  up  in  arms.  The 
entire  responsibility  for  the  troubles  was  thrown  on  the 
order  of  the  Jesuits,  who  were  accused  of  having  stirred  up 
domestic  strife  in  Bohemia. 

It  is  a  proof  of  the  strong  feeling  against  the  Jesuits  then 
prevalent  in  Bohemia,  that  one  of  the  first  acts  of  the  new 
Government  was  a  decree  ordering  their  expulsion  (June  i, 
j6i8).  The  enumeration  of  the  reasons  for  this  decree 
bears  a  singular  resemblance  to  the  accusations  which  were 
brought  forward  against  that  Order  at  the  time  of  its  sup- 
pression by  Clement  XIV  in  the  eighteenth  century.  The 
Jesuits  were  accused  of  "  desiring  to  subdue  all  the 
kingdoms  and  lands  of  the  world  to  their  yoke  and  power ; 
of  having  even  employed  artifices  to  incite  the  potentates 
of  the  world  one  against  the  other ;  and  especially  of 
having,  in  countries  where  various  religions  existed,  stirred 
up  strife  among  the  Estates."  It  was  further  said  that  "  the 
Jesuits  instigated  the  authorities  against  the  subjects  and 
the  subjects  against  the  authorities;  that  they  had  em- 
powered '  parricides '  to  murder  kings  and  the  anointed  of 
the  Lord  who  refused  to  act  contrary  to  their  God  and  in 
accordance  with  their  (the  Jesuits')  counsels ;  that  they  had 
promised  these  criminals  eternal  salvation  and  freedom 
from  the  pains  of  purgatory ;  that  they  had  by  means  of 
confession  obtained  knowledge  of  many  family  secrets  ; 
also  they  had,  'exemplo  templariorum,' become  owners  of 
vast  estates ;  and  finally,  that  they  had  openly  preached 
that  no  faith  need  be  kept  with  heretics,"  ^  At  the  same 
moment  the  Romanist  Archbishop  of  Prague  and  the 
1  Abbot  of  Bfenov  were  also  ordered  to  quit  Bohemia. 
\  The  Jesuits,  shortly  after  their  expulsion,  published  a 
>  written  defence.  They  stated  that  it  was  impossible  that 
different  religions  should  be  tolerated  in  the  same  country ; 
that  they  could  not  spread  the  Catholic  faith  without 
^  I  quote  from  a  MS.  copy  preserved  in  the  State  Archives  at  Venice. 


248 


Bohemia 


incurring  the  hatred  of  their  opponents,  and  that  it  was 
their  endeavour,  for  the  greater  honour  of  God,  to  reduce 
all  Christianity  and  the  whole  world  to  the  obedience 
of  the  Pope. 

While  this  literary  contest  was  being  waged,  the 
"  Directors  "  began  to  equip  an  army  to  meet  the  coming 
attack.  They  succeeded  in  raising  a  force  of  16,000  men, 
but  the  want  of  an  efficient  commander  was  much  felt 
already.  The  new  Government  was,  on  the  whole,  very 
favourably  received  by  the  country,  which  was  then  almost 
entirely  Protestant.  The  towns  of  Budejovice  and  Plzefi 
alone  maintained  their  allegiance  to  King  Matthew. 

The  news  of  the  Defenestration  reached  Matthew  at 
Vienna  while  King  Ferdinand  was  temporarily  absent  at 
Presburg,  where  he  was  anxious  to  secure  his  coronation 
as  King  of  Hungary.  Matthew,  now  entirely  under  the 
influence  of  Cardinal  Khlesl,  at  first  inclined  to  a  peaceful 
policy.  He  had,  during  his  struggle  against  his  brother, 
been  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  Zerotin,  the  leader  of  the 
Moravian  nobility,  and  a  member  of  the  Church  of  the 
Bohemian  Brethren.  It  was  not  impossible  that  that  noble, 
a  staunch  adherent  of  the  house  of  Habsburg,  might  offer 
his  services  as  mediator,  particularly  as  Moravia  had  not 
yet  declared  for  the  new  Government  at  Prague.  Ferdi- 
nand, however,  had  from  the  first  seen  that  war  alone  could 
finally  decide  the  long  contest  between  the  king  and  the 
Estates  of  Bohemia.  He  also  saw  that  if  Bohemia  were 
conquered  by  force  of  arms,  the  pledges  of  religious  liberty 
reluctantly  given  at  the  moment  of  his  coronation  would 
become  void.  With  the  approval  of  the  Emperor  Matthew's 
brother,  the  Archduke  Maximilian,  Ferdinand  caused 
Cardinal  Khlesl  to  be  forcibly  removed  from  the  Imperial 
court  at  Vienna,  and  the  war-party  was  now  in  the  ascend- 
ant. The  Emperor  entrusted  the  entire  management  of 
the  Bohemian  war  to  his  cousin.  As  generals,  Ferdinand 
chose  Bouquoi  and  Dampierre,  who  by  long  service  with 
the  Spanish  armies  in  the  Netherlands  had  acquired  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  war. 

Towards  the  end  of  July  (1618)  the  Imperial  forces — 
about  12,000  men — coming  from  Moravia  and  Austria, 
crossed  the  Bohemian  frontier  at  several  points.  Their 
leaders,  Bouquoi  and  Dampierre,  effected  a  junction  at 
Nemecky  Brod  on  September   9.     The  first  news  of  the 


An   Historical    Sketch  249 

entry  of  the  Austrian  troops  into  the  country  caused  a  panic 
at  Prague.  The  military  reputation  of  the  Imperial  generals 
was  well  known  in  the  country,  while  the  Bohemian  com- 
manders— with  the  possible  exception  of  Thurn — were  little 
trusted  by  their  soldiers.  The  slow  advance  of  the  Imperial- 
ists, however,  partially  restored  confidence  in  Bohemia, 
where  the  Government  now  called  the  whole  able-bodied 
population  to  arms. 

The  Bohemians  were  not  without  aid  from  abroad. 
Charles  Emanuel,  Duke  of  Savoy,  while  at  war  with  Spain, 
had  employed  a  force  of  German  mercenaries  under  the 
command  of  Ernest  of  Mansfeld,  a  natural  son  of  Prince 
Mansfeld.  These  troops  were  returning  to  Germany  after 
the  conclusion  of  peace  with  Spain,  when  the  Duke  of 
Savoy  received  letters  from  the  Bohemian  provisional  Govern- 
ment, announcing  the  revolution  that  had  taken  place  and 
requesting  aid.  The  duke  (who  already  entertained  that 
feeling  of  hostility  to  the  Habsburg  dynasty  which  was  till 
recently  characteristic  of  the  pohcy  of  the  house  of  Savoy) 
immediately  realized  the  importance  of  the  events  at  Prague. 
He  decided  to  use  them  for  the  purpose  of  achieving  the 
downfall  of  the  Austrian  power.  He  despatched  a  message 
to  Mansfeld,  who  was  then  marching  his  troops  through 
Switzerland,  to  say  that  he  would  retain  half  of  Mansfeld's 
mercenaries  in  his  pay,  on  condition  of  their  immediately 
proceeding  to  Bohemia,  to  aid  the  new  Government.  Duke 
Charles  Emanuel  had  already  formed  the  plan — to  which 
further  reference  will  be  made — of  obtaining  the  crown  of 
Bohemia :  but  he  still  wished  his  scheme  to  remain  secret. 
It  was  therefore  agreed  between  him  and  Mansfeld  that 
Christian  of  Anhalt,  the  most  determined  of  the  German 
enemies  of  the  house  of  Habsburg,  the  Elector  Palatine 
Frederick,  then  leader  of  the  German  Protestants,  and  the 
Margrave  of  Anspach  should  alone  be  informed  of  the 
Duke's  designs. 

Mansfeld's  troops  arrived  in  Bohemia  in  September  (i6i 8), 
and  immediately  proceeded  to  besiege  Plzen,  one  of  the 
few  Bohemian  towns  that  had  remained  faithful  to  King 
Matthew.  Thurn  had  meanwhile  assumed  supreme  com- 
mand of  the  Bohemian  forces.  After  a  futile  attempt  on 
the  part  of  Zerotin,  the  leader  of  the  Moravian  Protestants, 
to  mediate  between  the  contending  parties,  the  Bohemians 
assumed  the  offensive ;  they  had  also  been  strengthened  ly 

I  2 


250  Bohemia 

the  levies  from  Silesia  and  Lusatia,  both  which  countries 
now  recognized  the  new  Government  at  Prague, 

Bouquoi,  the  leader  of  the  Imperial  troops,  did  not  con- 
sider his  army  sufficiendy  strong  to  resist  the  now  more 
numerous  forces  of  Thurn.  He  therefore  retreated  south- 
ward. His  retiring  forces  were  defeated  by  the  Bohemians 
at  Pelhfimov  and  more  decisively  at  Lomnice,  three  (German) 
miles  from  Budejovice.  Bouquoi  was  obliged  to  seek  a 
refuge  within  that,  then  fortified,  city.  Leaving  only  a  small 
force  to  oppose  Bouquoi,  the  Bohemians  crossed  the  Austrian 
frontier  (November  25,  16 18),  hoping  to  find  allies  among 
the  Protestant  nobles,  then  in  a  large  majority  in  the  land. 
The  lateness  of  the  season  and  the  state  of  the  roads  rendered 
this  expedition  a  failure,  and  the  Bohemians  took  up  their 
winter  quarters  in  their  own  country.  Before  the  then 
customary  temporary  cessation  of  hostilities  Mansfeld  had 
succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  town  of  Plzen  on 
November  21,  after  a  siege  of  two  months. 

The  Bohemians  had,  on  the  whole,  been  successful  during 
the  campaign  of  the  year  1618,  but  that  success  was  not  in 
the  end  advantageous  to  their  cause.  Thinking  that  victory 
had  already  been  secured,  many  soldiers  returned  to  their 
homes.  This  was  to  a  large  extent  the  result  of  the  faulty 
military  organization.  The  soldiers  received  their  pay  and 
their  rations  from  the  towns  and  nobles  who  had  enrolled 
them.  These,  therefore,  from  motives  of  economy  sanctioned 
the  return  of  their  soldiers  as  soon  as  immediate  danger 
appeared  no  longer  to  threaten  the  land.  "  From  the 
beginning  of  the  war  financial  difficulties  arose  which  con- 
stantly increased,  and  caused  almost  more  harm  to  the 
(Bohemian)  movement  than  did  the  enemy."  ^ 

Before  hostilities  recommenced,  the  political  situation 
changed  completely  through  the  death  of  the  Emperor 
Matthew  (March  20,  16 19).  The  necessary  consequence 
was  the  choice  of  a  new  Emperor,  and  the  fate  of  Bohemia 
largely  depended  on  the  result  of  that  election. 

The  Bohemian  throne  also  became  practically  vacant;  for 
though  Ferdinand's  right  to  succeed  his  cousin  had  been 
recognized,  yet  his  openly  avowed  hostility  to  Protestantism 
could  hardly  fail  to  alienate  the  Bohemian  people,  in  spite 
of  the  validity  of  his  claim  to  the  throne.  Matthew's  death 
was  not  unexpected,  and  negotiations  as  to  the  succession 
*  Gindely. 


An    Historical   Sketch  251 

had  taken  place  during  the  previous  winter.  The  young 
Elector  Palatine  Frederick  was  at  that  moment  the  leader 
of  the  German  Protestants,  a  term  which  was  then  practically 
synonymous  with  hostility  to  the  house  of  Hal)sburg.  His 
father,  who  had  died  when  he  was  only  fourteen  years  of  age, 
had  already — under  the  influence  of  the  talented  Christian 
of  Anhalt — rendered  himself  conspicuous  as  a  supporter  of 
the  Bohemian  Protestants  during  the  troubles  which  pre- 
ceded the  granting  of  the  Letter  of  Majesty.  Ever  since 
Frederick's  marriage  with  Elizabeth,  the  daughter  of  King 
James  I  of  England,  his  councillors  had  suggested  to  him 
that  a  young  prince  of  so  great  influence,  the  son-in-law  of  a 
powerful  king,  should  endeavour  to  obtain  the  crown  of  one 
of  the  elective  kingdoms.  Bohemia  and  Poland  were  alluded 
to,  but  the  former  country  only  was  from  the  first  seriously 
taken  into  consideration.^  In  1615  Frederick  visited  the 
Upper  Palatinate,  of  which  district  Christian  of  Anhalt  was 
then  governor  as  representative  of  Frederick.  During  their 
interviews  the  old  enemy  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  un- 
doubtedly urged  his  master  to  persevere  in  those  ambitious 
schemes,  which  were  also  supported  by  the  Electress  Eliza- 
beth. As  early  as  July  161 8,  we  read  that  Count  Albert 
Solms  visited  Bohemia  on  a  mission  entrusted  to  him  by 
the  Elector  Palatine ;  he  then  had  already  promised  help  to 
the  Bohemians,  and  perhaps  suggested  the  eventuality  of 
Frederick's  election  as  king. 

The  Elector  seems  at  all  events  at  first  to  have  realized 
the  necessity  of  securing  allies  before  he  encountered  the 
enmity  of  the  powerful  house  of  Habsburg.  Shortly  after 
the  death  of  King  Matthew,  Frederick  despatched  Christian 
of  Anhalt  to  the  court  of  Turin,  where  Duke  Charles 
Emanuel  had  already  shown  himself  favourable  to  the 
Bohemian  cause.  That  prince,  however,  did  not  appear 
as  much  inclined  to  join  a  confederacy  against  Austria  as 
Anhalt  had  expected.  Being  himself  desirous  of  obtaining 
the  Bohemian  crown,  it  was  not  his  interest  to  encourage 
the  ambition  of  Frederick.  Anhalt  was  at  last  obliged  to 
offer  the  Bohemian  crown  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  suggesting 
that  his  master  should  content  himself  with  the  districts  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Rhine  which  belonged  to  the  house 

^  Dr.  Sold,  Elizabeth  Stuart:  Gemahlin  Friedrich  V von  der  Pfalz. 
Djt.  Soltl  quotes  from  a  contemporary  manuscript. 


252  Bohemia 

of  Habsburg;^  since  these  lands,  situated  nearer  to  the 
Palatinate  than  Bohemia,  would  be  even  more  valuable  to 
the  Elector.  The  duke,  however,  still  received  Anhalt's 
proposals  coldly.  He  made  his  support  of  the  German 
Protestants  conditional  on  the  approval  of  the  Elector's 
father-in-law,  King  James  of  England.  That  sovereign  had 
little  real  sympathy  with  the  Protestant  cause.  The  English 
ambassadors  on  the  Continent,  however,  appear  to  have 
been  carried  away  by  their  own  Protestant  zeal,  and  to  have 
adopted  an  attitude  more  favourable  to  the  Protestants  of 
Germany  than  their  instructions  warranted.^  It  is  certain 
that  Anhalt  succeeded  in  persuading  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  at 
least  for  a  time,  that  King  James  approved  of  the  ambitious 
plans  of  his  son-in-law.  Hopes  were  also  entertained  that 
the  Republic  of  Venice,  which  had  recently  been  at  war 
with  the  Archduke  Ferdinand  of  Styria,  and  which  was  on 
terms  of  friendship  with  the  Elector  Palatine,^  would  join 
the  enemies  of  the  house  of  Habsburg. 

Anhalt  at  last  succeeded  in  bringing  the  Duke  of  Savoy 
to  his  views,  and  a  treaty  of  alliance  was  signed  at  Rivoli 
(May  1619).  "I'he  Duke  of  Savoy  pledged  himself  to 
prevent  the  passage  of  Spanish  troops  through  his  territory 
on  their  way  to  Germany  and  Bohemia,  and  promised  a 
monthly  subsidy  of  10,000  ducats  to  the  confederacy  of  the 
Protestant  German  princes,  known  as  the  "  Union,"  of 
which  Frederick  was  leader.  The  Elector  Palatine,  on  the 
other  hand,  promised  to  send  an  army  of  10,000  men  to  the 
aid  of  the  Bohemian  Protestants,  and  to  use  all  his  influence 
in  favour  of  the  election  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy  to  the 
Bohemian  throne.  Anhalt  left  Italy  immediately  after  the 
signature  of  this  treaty ;  but  both  parties  seem  almost  from 
the  first  to  have  regretted  it,  and  it  remained  entirely  in- 
operative. The  Elector  Palatine  deplored  the  sacrifice  of 
his  hopes  on  the  Bohemian  crown,  and  continued  secretly 
to  intrigue  in  favour  of  his  own  candidature.  The  Duke  of 
Savoy, when  he  saw  that  England  would  not  join  the  alliance 
against  the  house  of  Habsburg,  began  to  fear  the  enmity  of 

^  This  referred  to  the  Breisj^^au  and  some  adjoining  districts — now- 
forming  parts  of  Baden  and  Wuitemburg. 

2  See  Gindely,  Geschichte  des  Dreissigjdhrigen  Krieges. 

'  The  Venetian  archives  contain  numerous  letters  addressed  by 
Frederick  of  the  Palatinate  to  the  Doges  Antonio  Priuli  and  Francesco 
Contaiini  (1618-1624),  requesting  financial  aid. 


An   Historical    Sketch  253 

Austria,  though  he  did  not  immediately  renounce  his  preten- 
sions to  the  Bohemian  throne,  A  large  party,  especially 
among  the  German  Protestants  of  Bohemia,  wished  to  choose 
as  king,  John  George,  Elector  of  Saxony ;  there  were,  there- 
fore, no  less  than  three  candidates  to  the  throne  besides 
Ferdinand,  who  (in  contradistinction  to  his  rivals)  founded 
his  claim  on  his  previous  election  and  coronation  during 
the  reign  of  King  Matthew. 

Ferdinand's  attitude  from  the  first  proves  that  he  was 
thoroughly  aware  of  the  impossibility  of  gaining  the  Bohemian 
crown  otherwise  than  by  force  of  arms.  He  declared,  indeed, 
that  he  would  keep  the  promises  he  had  made  at  his  corona- 
tion, but  he  confirmed  in  their  offices  the  councillors 
formerly  appointed  by  Matthew,  whom  the  Estates  had 
driven  from  Prague  after  the  occurrence  of  the  Defenes- 
tration. He  thus  impliedly  branded  the  "Directors"  as 
usurpers.  The  continuation  of  the  war  w^as  therefore  in- 
evitable. Hostilities  were  resumed  in  the  spring  (1619),  as 
soon  as  the  state  of  the  weather  permitted  of  it.  Count 
Thurn,  at  the  head  of  a  Bohemian  army,  entered  Moravia, 
where  not  only  the  Catholics,  but  also  a  considerable  party 
among  the  Protestants,  were  opposed  to  the  new  Govern- 
ment at  Prague.  This  party,  headed  by  Zerotin,  attributed 
the  revolutionary  movement  in  Bohemia  to  the  personal 
ambition  of  its  leaders,  and  not  to  their  zeal  for  the  Pro- 
testant creed.  But  on  the  whole  public  opinion  in  Moravia 
was  not  unfavourable  to  the  provisional  Government.  Both 
at  Jihlava,  the  frontier  town,  and  at  Znoymo,  Thurn's  troops 
were  enthusiastically  received,  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
nobility  declared  itself  in  his  favour.  The  Estates  of 
Moravia  at  their  meetings  at  Brno  in  May  16 19  decided 
that  the  country  should,  similarly  to  Bohemia,  be  governed 
provisionally  by  a  body  of  thirty  "Directors";  of  these 
twelve  were  to  be  chosen  by  the  nobles,  twelve  by  the 
knights,  and  six  by  the  representatives  of  the  towns.  The 
all-important  question  of  the  choice  of  a  new  sovereign  was 
deferred  to  a  "  General  Diet "  of  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian 
crown,  which  it  was  settled  should  shortly  meet  at  Prague. 

The  easy  success  of  Thurn's  expedition  to  Moravia 
induced  the  "  Directors "  at  Prague  to  instruct  him  to 
advance  into  Austria.  This  is  perhaps  the  one  moment 
when  a  successful  result  of  the  Bohemian  national  move- 
ment was  not  impossible.     The  strong  Romanist  tendencies 


254  Bohemia 

of  P'erdinand,  already  known  through  his  "  Catholic  Reforma- 
tion "  of  Styria,  had  from  the  first  alienated  the  nobles  of 
Upper  and  Lower  Austria  against  their  new  sovereign.  In 
Vienna,  where  Ferdinand  took  up  his  residence  after  the 
death  of  his  cousin  Matthew,  the  presence  of  the  sovereign, 
and  of  an  armed  force,  restricted  the  revolutionary  move- 
ment within  limits.  At  Linz,  however,  the  capital  of  Upper 
Austria,  the  Estates  openly  opposed  the  new  ruler,  under 
the  leadership  of  the  Baron  of  Starhemberg  ^nd  of  Tscher- 
nembl,  the  latter  of  whom  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of 
exceptional  ability.  They  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the 
Bohemians,  and  Starhemberg  entreated  Thurn  to  march 
into  Austria,  where  he  said  "he  would  be  received  as  a 
Messiah."  Thurn  entered  Lower  Austria  in  May,  and  the 
news  of  his  approach  caused  a  panic  among  the  Catholics 
of  Vienna,  while  it  greatly  raised  the  hopes  of  the  Pro- 
testants, who  were  in  sympathy  with  the  Bohemians.  On 
June  5,  the  leaders  of  the  Austrian  Protestants  were  received 
in  audience  by  Ferdinand.  They  demanded  the  assurance 
of  full  religious  liberty,  a  considerable  increase  of  the  power 
of  the  Estates,  and  the  sovereign's  sanction  to  the  alliance 
with  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  which  they  had  already  con- 
cluded. The  interview  was  at  first  a  very  stormy  one.  It 
is  said  that  at  the  moment  when  the  Protestants  had  become 
most  menacing  towards  Ferdinand,  they  were  reduced  to 
subserviency  by  the  sudden  appearance  of  Dampierre's 
regiment  in  the  court  of  the  palace  (the  "Burg").  The 
arrival  of  this  small  reinforcement  marks  a  turning-point  in 
the  fortunes  of  the  campaign.  It  intimidated  the  Protestants 
of  Vienna,  who,  as  the  State  trials  afterwards  revealed,  had 
intended  to  open  the  gates  to  Thurn's  army.  When  that 
general  appeared  before  Vienna  the  following  night  (June  6), 
contrary  to  his  expectation  he  found  the  gates  closed,  and 
the  fortifications  held  by  troops,  while  no  insurrectionary 
movement  in  the  town  took  place.  Ill  provided  with 
artillery,  Thurn  felt  unable  to  undertake  a  regular  siege,  and 
he  only  remained  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city  up  to 
June  15.  His  return  to  Bohemia  was  precipitated  by  the 
news  that  Mansfeld's  army  had  been  signally  defeated  by 
the  Imperialists  •  under  Bouquoi,  at  the  village  of  Zablati 
in  Southern  Bohemia.  Even  after  Thurn's  return,  Bouquoi 
continued  his  victorious  advance,  and  was  already  menacing 
Prague.     A  mutiny  which  broke  out  among  the  Bohemian 


An    Historical    Sketch  255 

mercenary  troops  at  this  moment  favoured  his  movements. 
It  is  not  improbable  that  Bohemia  would  have  been  subdued 
during  this  campaign  had  it  not  in  September  1619  been 
considered  necessary  to  recall  Bouquoi.  Gabriel  Bethlen, 
prince  of  Transylvania,  had  conquered  a  large  part  of 
Hungary,  and  thus  became  a  rival  of  Ferdinand,  who 
claimed  the  crown  of  Hungary,  a  policy  pursued  by  all  the 
Habsburg  princes  at  this  period.  He  made  a  sudden  attack 
on  Austria,  and  arrived  close  to  Vienna,  to  the  defence  of 
which  city  Bouquoi  and  his  troops  marched  with  all  speed. 

The  weighty  question  as  to  the  succession  to  the  Bohe- 
mian throne  had  meanwhile  been  decided  by  the  "  General 
Diet,"  which  first  met  at  Prague  on  July  8.  This  Diet  from 
the  first  assumed  the  functions  of  a  constituent  assembly. 
It  commenced  its  proceedings  by  declaring  that  Bohemia 
was  an  elective,  not  an  hereditary  kingdom.  Curiously 
enough,  a  few  opinions  were  expressed  in  favour  of  the 
repubhcan  form  of  government.  It  was  then  resolved  (pro- 
bably in  view  of  obtaining  the  support  of  the  dependent 
countries)  that  in  the  election  of  a  king,  Bohemia  should 
have  two  votes,  Moravia,  Silesia,  Upper  Lusatia,  and  Lower 
Lusatia  one  vote  each.  Other  constitutional  enactments, 
subsequently  voted,  defined  and  enlarged  the  powers  of  the 
Estates,  and  limited  those  of  the  future  elective  king. 
"  Defenders  "  were  to  be  chosen  in  each  of  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown,  who  were  empowered  to  exercise  a  supreme 
control  over  the  king,  and  even  to  organize  armed  resistance 
against  him,  should  he  violate  the  new  constitution.  This 
constitution,  which  conferred  enormous  power  on  the  nobles, 
and  placed  beside,  rather  than  above  them,  a  king  whose 
influence  was  strictly  limited,  was  not  unlike  that  of  Poland 
during  the  last  period  of  its  existence  as  an  independent 
country.  The  new  constitution  was  solemnly  promulgated 
at  Prague  on  July  31,  161 9,  but  in  consequence  of  the  com- 
plete collapse  of  the  Bohemian  movement  in  the  following 
year  it  may  be  said  never  to  have  come  into  operation. 
After  having  decided  the  constitutional  question,  the  Estates 
concluded  an  alliance  with  the  Austrian  Protestants,  by 
which  they  mutually  promised  aid  in  the  defence  of  the 
privileges  of  the  Estates  and  of  the  Protestant  faith.  The 
next  measure  that  occupied  the  Bohemian  Diet  was  the 
deposition  of  Ferdinand.  As  the  Estates  had  established  a 
constitution,  the  provisions  of  which  it  was  certain  that  the 


256 


Bohemia 


prince  would  not  accept,  this  was  little  more  than  a  formal- 
ity. The  principal  accusations  against  Ferdinand  which 
were  brought  forward  as  justifying  his  deposition  were,  that 
he  had  obtained  the  crown  through  fraud  on  the  part 
of  King  Matthew,  and  that  he  had  ill-treated  the  Protestants 
in  Styria.  It  was  also  said  that,  should  he  be  accepted  as 
king,  Bohemia  would  herself  become  responsible  for  the 
enormous  debts  which  had  been  incurred  in  raising  the 
military  forces  to  subdue  the  country.^  On  August  13,  the 
nobles,  knights,  and  town  representatives  of  Bohemia  de- 
clared themselves  for  the  deposition  of  Ferdinand,  and  the 
deputies  of  Moravia,  Silesia,  and  Lusatia  on  the  following 
day  concurred  in  that  decision. 

The  next  step  was  the  election  of  a  new  king.  The 
"  Directors  "  wished  to  carry  it  out  as  soon  as  possible,  as  it 
was  known  that  the  election  of  a  new  Emperor  was  shortly 
to  take  place  at  Frankfurt.  It  was  almost  certain  that  there 
the  choice  would  fall  on  Ferdinand ;  and  the  "  Directors  " 
feared  that  the  result  of  the  election  at  Frankfurt  would 
raise  the  hopes  of  the  Catholics,  and  intimidate  those  who 
were  ready  to  support  the  candidate  whom  the  "  Directors  " 
favoured.  That  that  candidate  would  be  the  Elector  Pala- 
tine was  by  this  time  almost  certain.  The  Duke  of  Savoy 
liad  abandoned  his  intention  of  interfering  in  the  affairs  of 
Bohemia  and  Germany.  It  was  now  evident  to  him  that 
King  James  of  England  did  not  intend  to  aid  the  Bohemian 
Protestants ;  and  France,  the  powerful  neighbour  of  Savoy, 
contrary  to  her  traditions,  was  for  the  moment  on  terms  of 
friendship  with  the  house  of  Habsburg.  The  candidature  of 
the  Elector  of  Saxony  would  have  found  many  supporters 
had  that  prince  desired  to  obtain  the  Bohemian  throne.  As 
far  back  as  the  year  16 14  several  disaffected  Bohemian  nobles 
had  offered  the  crown  of  their  country  to  the  Elector; 
after  the  defeat  at  Zablati  they  applied  to  him  for  aid, 
again  proposing  to  elect  him  as  king.  But  the  Elector 
entirely  discouraged  their  advances,  and  refused  to  abet  the 

^  The  Estates  afterwards  published  their  reasons  for  dethroning  Fer- 
di'^and  in  a  thick  volume  (consisting  of  394  pages,  and  an  Appendix  of 
226  pages  containing  documentary  evidence).  In  this  book — entitled 
Deduciio  dcren  Ursachen  warum  .  .  .  Kaiser  Ferdinand  des  Regi- 
vients  171  Bdhmen.  .  .  verlustigt — the  question  is  treated  with  appalling 
thoroughness.  Procopius's  history,  De  Bello  Gothico,  is  made  to  bear 
witness  against  Ferdinand,  and  we  begin  the  history  of  Bohemia  with 
Krokus  and  Libussa  ! 


An    Historical    Sketch  257 

Bohemians  in  any  way.  A  rigid  Lutheran,  the  Calvinism  of 
the  majority  of  the  Bohemian  Protestants  found  Uttle 
favour  in  his  eyes.  Hoe,  the  Elector's  court  chaplain,  used 
his  great  influence  over  that  prince  to  the  detriment  of  the 
Bohemians.  While  preaching  the  Lutheran  creed  at  Prague, 
Hoe  had  been  exposed  to  personal  insults  on  the  part  of  the 
Bohemian  Calvinists,  who  finally  expelled  him  from  the 
country.  He  had  retained  a  violent  hatred  for  the  Bohe- 
mians, and  Ferdinand's  minister  at  Dresden  therefore  found 
no  difficulty,  by  means  of  presents,  in  winning  him  entirely 
to  his  master's  cause.  A  just  appreciation  of  the  political 
situation  of  Europe,  at  that  moment  very  favourable  to  the 
dynasty  of  Habsburg,  may  also  have  influenced  the  Elector 
in  his  decision  to  refuse  all  aid  to  the  Bohemians.  By 
offending  the  powerful  house  of  Austria  he  imperilled  the 
electoral  dignity  which  Charles  V  had  transferred  to  his 
branch  of  the  Saxon  dynasty. 

The  date  fixed  for  the  election  of  the  new  king  was 
August  26,  and  an  attempt  of  the  Saxon  party  to  protract  the 
proceedings  was  frustrated  by  the  efforts  of  Ruppa,  the 
president  of  the  "  Directors."  The  election  began  immedi- 
ately, the  nobles — thirty-eight  in  number — first  recording 
their  votes.  Justifying  his  vote  in  favour  of  the  Elector 
Palatine,  Ruppa,  in  an  eloquent  speech,  dilated  on  the 
powerful  alliances  Frederick  would  secure  to  Bohemia.  As 
such  future  allies  he  mentioned  England,  the  Netherlands, 
the  "  Union  "  of  the  German  Protestant  princes,  Switzerland, 
and  Savoy.  He  also  referred  to  the  great  wealth  of  Fred- 
erick, saying  that  it  would  enable  him  to  give  liberal  aid  to 
the  Bohemians.  Ruppa's  speech  appears  to  have  made  a 
great  impression,  for  thirty-four  nobles  recorded  their  votes 
for  the  Elector  Palatine.  The  further  voting  was  even  more 
favourable  to  that  prince.  Only  three  knights  gave  their 
votes  to  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  and  the  representatives  of 
the  towns  unanimously  declared  for  the  Elector  Palatine. 
On  the  following  day  the  representatives  of  the  dependent 
lands  also  approved  the  choice  of  Frederick  as  king.  The 
result  of  the  election  was  immediately  made  public,  contrary, 
however,  to  the  wishes  of  Frederick's  envoys,  who  had 
suggested  that  the  election  should  be  kept  secret  till  their 
master  had  given  his  decision. 

Weak  and  irresolute  as  he  proved  himself  during  his  whole 
career,  Frederick,   though  pleased  at  having  obtained  the 


258 


Bohemia 


long-coveted  crown,  yet  hesitated  when  the  Bohemian  am- 
bassadors arrived  at  Amberg  to  give  him  formal  notice  of 
his  election.  He  asked  the  advice  of  his  councillors,  Chris- 
tian of  Anhalt,  Camerarius,  the  court  chaplain  Schulze,  and 
he  also  consulted  several  princes  of  the  Protestant  Union. 
Frederick,  following  the  advice  of  the  majority  of  those 
he  consulted,  at  first  decided  to  return  an  evasive  answer, 
saying  he  would  only  accept  the  crown  when  assured  of 
sufficient  aid  from  his  father-in-law,  the  King  of  England. 
It  is  now  well  known  that  the  sympathies  of  James  I 
were  at  that  moment  entirely  with  Ferdinand,  whom  he  con- 
sidered the  legitimate  King  of  Bohemia.  If  James — and  to 
a  far  greater  extent  some  of  his  ministers — at  times  seemed 
to  favour  Frederick's  plans,  this  was  only  done  because  the 
Protestant  opinion  of  England  warmly  espoused  the  cause 
of  the  Elector  Palatine. 

Had  Frederick  adhered  to  his  first  resolution,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  his  expedition  to  Bohemia — equally  disastrous 
to  himself  and  to  the  country  which  he  attempted  to  rule 
— would  never  have  taken  place.  The  fact  that  on  the 
day  following  the  election  of  Frederick,  Archduke  Ferdinand 
was  unanimously  chosen  as  Emperor  by  the  German  electors 
(August  28,  1 6 19)  should  have  been  a  further  inducement 
to  cautious  action. 

Frederick,  however,  soon  abandoned  his  first  decision. 
Christian  of  Anhalt  represented  to  him  that  having  done 
so  much  to  obtain  the  Bohemian  throne,  he  would  incur 
lasting  disgrace  should  he  now  refuse  it.  The  Elector's 
ambitious  consort,  Elizabeth,  is  said  to  have  exercised  her 
great  influence  towards  the  same  end.^  Frederick  finally 
decided  to  accept  the  crown  of  Bohemia  without  waiting  for 
the  approval  of  the  King  of  England.     He  wrote  to  inform 

^  This  is  principally  stated  by  Catholic  authors  of  this  period,  who 
surnamed  Elizabeth  the  Helen  of  Germany,  thus  indicating  that  she 
Avas  the  cause  of  all  the  calamities  which  the  Thirty  Years'  War 
brought  on  Germany.  In  a  letter  which  F21izabeth  at  this  time 
nddressed  to  her  husband,  who  had  sought  her  advice,  she  said  :  "  As 
God  directs  everything,  He  had  undoubtedly  also  ordained  this " 
{i.e.  the  election).  "She  therefore  left  it  to  her  husband  to  decide 
whether  he  would  accept  the  crown.  Should  he  do  so,  she  was  ready 
to  obey  the  call  of  God,  to  suffer  what  God  might  decree,  and  even  if 
necessary  to  sacrifice  her  jewels  and  all  her  worldly  possessions."  This 
letter  can  hardly  be  considered  as  pleading  strongly  in  favour  of 
Frederick's  acceptance  of  the  Bohemian  crown. 


An    Historical  Sketch  259 

his  father-in-law  of  his  decision,  and  by  the  beginning  of 
October  it  was  also  known  at  Prague  that  Frederick  had 
accepted  the  crown.  Immediately  after  this  decision 
Frederick  left  Amberg  to  join  the  Electress  at  Heidelberg. 
Thence  they  both  started  for  Bohemia,  and  reached  the 
frontier  of  that  country  at  Waldsassen  (near  Cheb)  on 
October  25.  The  king  and  queen,  as  they  were  henceforth 
called,  were  here  received  by  a  deputation  composed  of 
representatives  of  all  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown. 
Count  Andrew  Slik  first  welcomed  the  king,  and  the 
deputation  was  afterwards  received  by  the  queen.  Venceslas 
of  Ruppa,  speaking  in  French,  thanked  her  for  having 
shown  herself  friendly  to  the  Bohemian  cause,  and  for 
having  encouraged  her  husband  to  accept  the  crown. 
Speaking  in  the  same  language,  Elizabeth  replied  :  "  What 
I  have  done  for  the  glory  of  God  and  for  the  religion  in  the 
past  has  been  done  with  good  intention  on  my  part,  and  in 
the  future  also  I  shall  not  be  wanting  in  affection  and 
good-will  to  you."  These  words  are  by  most  writers  con- 
sidered as  an  admission  on  the  part  of  the  queen  that  she 
had  persuaded  her  husband  to  accept  the  Bohemian  crown. 

On  October  25  the  king  and  queen  continued  their 
journey,  and  were  enthusiastically  received  by  the  nobility 
and  the  people  of  all  the  towns  through  which  they  passed. 

They  arrived  before  Prague  on  October  31,  and  were 
met  at  the  gates  of  the  city  by  large  deputations  of  nobles 
and  citizens.  Their  solemn  entry  into  Prague  took  place 
on  the  same  day.  On  November  4  the  king,  and  three 
days  later  the  queen,  were  crowned  in  the  cathedral  of 
St.  Vitus  on  the  Hradcany,  Dicastus  (the  Administrator 
of  the  Protestant  Consistory)  officiating  on  both  occasions. 
The  enthusiasm,  both  of  the  nobles  and  of  the  citizens, 
knew  no  bounds.  The  winning  manners  of  the  king  in 
particular  obtained  him  great  popularity,  while  his  incapacity 
and  irresolution  had  not  yet  been  discovered.  The  fact 
that  Frederick  was  ignorant  of  the  Bohemian  language — 
which  he  does  not  seem  even  to  have  attempted  to  acquire 
— very  soon  interfered  with  his  popularity,  and  the 
Bohemians  began  to  speak  of  their  new  king  as  a  foreigner. 
This  designation  was  still  more  freely  applied  to  Queen 
Elizabeth,  who  not  only  was  ignorant  of  the  Bohemian 
tongue,  but  whose  knowledge  of  German  was  also  exceed- 
ingly limited.     A  Chinese  wall,  as  Dr.  Gindely  expresses  it, 


26o  Bohemia 

separated  her  from  the  Bohemian  ladies,  few  of  whom 
spoke  French,  and  none  English.  Her  intercourse  was 
therefore  confined  to  her  own  maids  of  honour,  most  of 
whom  were  English ;  and  it  was  believed  that  in  her 
conversations  with  them  she  spoke  of  her  new  home  in 
a  manner  that  was  far  from  appreciative.  The  queen  thus 
gradually  became  unpopular.  The  habits  of  her  English 
attendants — even  the  low  dresses  worn  by  the  ladies  of  her 
court — excited  the  displeasure  of  the  ladies  of  Prague. 

The  "  Directors  "  resigned  their  office  immediately  after 
the  coronation,  and  it  was  Frederick's  duty  now  to  appoint 
the  State  and  court  officials.  It  is  a  proof  how  limited  the 
king's  power  was,  that  he  was  only  allowed  to  choose 
among  four  nominees  of  the  Estates  in  each  case.  The 
principal  dignities  were,  as  natural,  conferred  on  the  leaders 
of  the  movement — Budova,  Ruppa,  Schlick,  and  William  of 
Lobkowitz.  Thurn  was  reinstated  in  his  office  of  Burgrave 
of  the  Karlstein,  of  which  dignity  King  Matthew  had 
deprived  him.  The  arrival  of  King  Frederick  therefore 
but  little  changed  the  political  position  of  the  Bohemian 
nobles,  who  continued  to  hold  the  real  power ;  though  they 
hoped  by  the  election  of  Frederick  to  obtain  foreign  aid. 
The  Bohemians  were  opposed  to  all  interference  on  the 
part  of  the  German  councillors  who  had  accompanied 
Frederick.  They  specially  resented  the  attempts  of  Camer- 
arius — the  most  able  and  trusted  of  the  king's  councillors — • 
to  examine  the  state  of  the  finances  of  the  country,  which 
had  fallen  into  hopeless  disorder.  Camerarius  rightly  fore- 
saw that  this  circumstance,  and  the  consequent  impossibility 
of  paying  the  troops  regularly,  would  greatly  contribute  to 
the  downfall  of  the  new  king. 

Frederick  was  from  the  first  confronted  by  the  difficulties 
caused  by  religious  strife.  He  had  indeed  declared  himselt 
a  friend  of  religious  liberty,  and  had  promised  the  Catholic 
States,  for  whose  aid  he  still  hoped,  to  refrain  from  all  steps 
hostile   to   the    Roman    faith ;  ^    but    the    narrow-minded 

^  Announcing  his  coronation  to  Antonio  Priuli,  Doge  of  Venice,  on 
the  day  of  that  event  ("In  arce  nostra  Pragensi  Die  iv.  Novembris 
1619"),  the  king  says:  "  Pollicemur  autem  S.V.  nos  hac  in  parte 
privatum  emolumentum  nullum  prorsus  sed  duntaxat  afflictorum  libera- 
tionem  ab  exterminio  et  clade  publica  et  libertatis  communis  patrocinium 
ante  oculos  habere  ideoque  Religioni  Rom?,nae  additos  non  minus  quam 
Evangelicae  professionis  premissam  illis  liheram  ubique  suae  religionis 
exercitionem  tueri  velle"  (Stale  Archives,  Venice). 


An   Historical    Sketch  261 

sectarian  feeling,  common  at  that  period  to  all  religious 
creeds,  rendered  a  policy  of  tolerance  an  impossibility.  On 
the  advice  of  Schulze,  his  court  chaplain,  Frederick  soon 
after  his  coronation  caused  all  the  altars  and  pictures  to  be 
removed  from  the  church  of  St.  Vitus  at  Prague,  the  time- 
honoured  sanctuary  of  the  Bohemian  nation.  This  caused 
a  general  outcry  in  the  whole  country.  The  Bohemian 
Brethren,  whom  Frederick  favoured,  and  whose  doctrine 
was  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Calvinists,  were  alone  in  their 
approbation  of  this  measure.  The  Catholic  and  Lutheran 
clergy  vied  in  their  denunciations  of  the  sacrilegious  king. 
Hoe,  the  Lutheran  court  chaplain  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony, 
was  particularly  active  in  inciting  public  opinion  in  Germany, 
as  well  as  in  Bohemia,  against  Frederick. 

Warfare  had  meanwhile  continued  during  the  months 
that  immediately  preceded  and  followed  the  coronation  of 
Frederick.  As  stated  before,  the  army  of  Bouquoi  had 
retreated  from  Bohemia  in  September  (1619).  During 
Count  Thurn's  presence  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Vienna  in 
June  a  Hungarian  embassy  had  appeared  in  his  camp,  and 
the  foundation  was  then  laid  of  an  alliance  between  the 
Bohemian  and  the  Hungarian  Protestants,  the  leader  of 
these  latter  being  then  Gabriel  Bethlen,  prince  of  Transyl- 
vania. Following  the  retreating  forces  of  Bouquoi,  Thurn's 
army  again  entered  Austria  and  joined  the  forces  of  Bethlen. 
An  indecisive  engagement  took  place  at  Ulrichskirchen  in 
Lower  Austria,  after  which  Bouquoi  retreated  across  the 
Danube,  burning  the  bridges  behind  him.  A  formal  alliance 
had  meanwhile  been  concluded  at  Presburg  between 
Bohemia,  Hungary,  and  Transylvania,  and  it  was  decided 
that  a  joint  embassy  from  the  three  countries  should  repair 
to  Constantinople,  to  request  the  Sultanas  aid  against  the 
Emperor  Ferdinand.  It  was  at  the  same  time  decided  that, 
late  as  the  season  was,  an  attempt  on  Vienna  should  still  be 
made.  Want  of  heavy  artillery,  the  mutinous  state  of  the 
troops,  whose  pay  was  heavily  in  arrear,  and  the  severity  of 
the  weather  would  probably  have  prevented  the  success 
of  the  enterprise;  but  early  in  December  Bethlen,  whose 
army,  together  with  that  of  Thurn,  had  arrived  before 
Vienna  a  few  days  previously,  received  news  that  the 
Hungarian  Catholics,  aided  by  Polish  troops,  had  risen  in 
arms  against  him ;  he  therefore  (December  5)  hastily  left 
the  neighbourhood  of  Vienna  and  returned  to  Hungary. 


262  Bohemia 

Winter,  as  usual  at  that  period,  now  put  a  temporary  stop 
to  hostilities,  and  the  short  respite  was  employed  by  both 
parties  in  attempting  to  secure  allies  for  the  struggle  of  the 
following  year,  which  all  felt  would  be  decisive.  It  can  be 
briefly  stated  that  in  these  negotiations  Ferdinand  was 
entirely  successful,  while  Frederick's  attempt  to  obtain  allies 
resulted  in  complete  failure.  The  spring  of  the  year  1620 
found  Bohemia  almost  isolated,  while  a  large  part  of  Europe 
was  arrayed  in  arms  against  her. 

First  and  foremost  of  the  allies  of  Ferdinand  was  Philip  III, 
King  of  Spain.  As  mentioned  before,  Spanish  diplomacy  ^ 
had  intervened  in  the  affairs  of  Bohemia  in  a  sense  hostile 
to  the  Protestants,  during  both  the  reigns  of  Rudolph  and 
Matthew.  Subsequently,  a  slight  estrangement  between  the 
two  branches  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  had  taken  place. 
Philip,  on  the  death  of  the  Emperor  Matthew,  believed  his 
own  right  to  Matthew's  succession  to  be  superior  to  that  of 
Ferdinand. 

Through  the  able  diplomacy  of  Khevenhiiller,  Ferdinand's 
ambassador  at  Madrid,  this  difficulty  was  soon  overcome. 
Khevenhiiller  strongly  urged  that  the  interest  of  the  Roman 
Church,  menaced  by  the  temporary  triumph  of  the  Bohemian 
Protestants,  preceded  all  other  matters.  When  the  king's 
confessor,  who  possessed  great  influence  over  him,  raised 
some  objection  to  Khevenhiiller's  demands  for  aid  for  his 
master,  the  ambassador  answered  him,  "that  his  place  in 
hell  would  be  deeper  than  those  of  Calvin  and  Luther."  ^ 
Before  the  beginning  of  the  spring  (1620)  the  ambassador's 
efforts  were  entirely  successful.  Spain  engaged  herself  to 
send  a  large  force  to  reinforce  Bouquoi's  army,  and  also  to 
subsidize  the  new  Emperor  on  a  large  scale.  It  was  further 
settled  that  a  Spanish  army  should  invade  the  Palatinate  from 
the  Netherlands,  thus  preventing  the  new  King  of  Bohemia 
from  receiving  any  aid  from  his  hereditary  dominions. 

^  The  intervention  of  Spain  in  Bohemian  affairs  may  be  traced  some 
way  back.  Writing  from  Prague  the  Venetian  ambassador,  Vinceruo 
Gradenigo,  states  (Sept.  6,  1588):  "  Kuischky  (Kinsky),  held  to  be  a 
leading  heretic,  said  the  other  day  that  unless  they  kept  their  eyes  open 
they  would  one  day  find  themselves  under  Spanish  yoke,  but  that  the 
German  princes  had  no  intention  of  allowing  such  a  thing  to  happen  to 
them,  and  were  on  the  lookout "  (Calendar  of  State  relating  to  English 
affairs,  preserved  in  the  Archives  of  Venice,  vol.  iii.  p.  384.  Edited  by 
Mr.  Horatio  F.  Brown). 

2  Gindely. 


An    Historical    Sketch  263 

Among  the  Italian  princes,  the  Pope  naturally  supported 
the  cause  of  the  Church  of  which  he  v/as  the  head.  He  had 
sent  subsidies  to  Matthew  from  the  beginning  of  the  Bohemian 
revolution,  but  now  that  the  decisive  moment  seemed  near 
he  increased  his  efforts.  He  imposed  a  tithe  on  all  Church 
property  in  Italy,  and  was  thus  able  to  forward  large  sums, 
not  only  to  Ferdinand,  but  also  to  the  "  Liga  "  of  German 
Catholic  princes  whose  troops,  in  1620,  invaded  Bohemia. 
The  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany  sent  some  troops  to  the  aid  of 
the  Emperor  Ferdinand,  and  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  whose 
policy  had  completely  changed,  also  offered  to  assist  him 
with  part  of  his  army. 

France  did  not  interfere  with  armed  forces,  but  the 
diplomacy  of  that  power  was  for  the  moment  decidedly 
favourable  to  the  Emperor.  The  French  envoys  dissuaded 
the  Protestant  princes  of  Germany  from  affording  any  aid  to 
the  King  of  Bohemia,  and  the  treaty  of  Ulm,  which  sealed 
his  fate,  was  principally  due  to  their  efforts. 

Turning  to  Northern  Europe,  Poland  had  already,  by 
assisting  the  Hungarian  Catholics  in  their  attack  on  Bethlen, 
afforded  aid  to  Ferdinand.  During  the  winter  (16 19-1620) 
the  Emperor  obtained  King  Sigismund  of  Poland's  per- 
mission to  enlist  a  large  force  of  Cossacks  on  Polish  territory. 
These  savage  troops  spread  general  terror  among  the  people 
of  Austria  and  Bohemia,  to  whom  they  were  known  as  the 
"bloodhounds."  They  specially  contributed  to  the  sup- 
pression of  the  Protestant  movement  in  Lower  Austria. 
The  King  of  Denmark,  though  a  Protestant,  disapproved  of 
Frederick's  expedition  to  Bohemia,  and  Gustavus  Adolphus, 
King  of  Sweden,  who  appears  to  have  had  more  sympathy 
with  the  King  of  Bohemia,  would  by  distance  alone  have 
been  prevented  from  interfering  before  the  speedy  collapse 
of  the  Bohemian  movement  took  place.  He  was  also  at 
that  moment  at  war  with  Poland. 

Far  more  important  than  the  attitude  of  any  of  the  Powers 
hitherto  referred  to,  was  that  of  the  German  princes  and 
towns ;  for  on  that  the  result  of  the  struggle  between  the 
competitors  for  the  Bohemian  crown  principally  depended. 
The  German  States  were  at  that  moment  divided  into  two 
confederacies:  the  "Liga,"  to  which  most  of  the  Catholics 
belonged,  and  the  "  Union,"  which — with  the  exception  of 
Saxony — had  been  joined  by  the  principal  Protestant  States. 
The  heads  of  the  two  lines  of  the  House  of  Wittelsbach, 


264 


Bohemia 


Maximilian,  Duke  of  Bavaria,  and  Frederick,  Elector  Pala- 
tine, were  at  that  time  the  chiefs  of  the  rival  confederacies. 
Though  the  Bohemians  had  chosen  the  leader  of  the  Union 
as  their  king,  the  Protestant  princes,  and  still  more  the 
Protestant  free  towns,  from  the  first  showed  Httle  sympathy 
for  the  Bohemian  cause.  The  records  of  this  period  are 
mostly  written  from  the  point  of  view  of  religious  controversy, 
and  generally  leave  other  motives  in  the  background.  It, 
however,  appears  probable  that  the  hereditary  hatred  between 
Slavs  and  Germans  contributed  to  preventing  the  German 
Protestants  from  co-operating  with  those  of  Bohemia.  The 
princes  of  the  Union  strongly  protested  against  Frederick's 
action  in  leading  some  of  the  troops  of  the  Union  to  Bohemia. 
They  even  wished  to  deprive  him  of  his  position  as  head  of 
their  confederacy,  alleging  that  he  had  by  his  acceptation 
of  the  Bohemian  throne  rendered  himself  unable  to  perform 
the  duties  attached  to  that  office. 

The  ability  of  Duke  Maximilian  of  Bavaria,  assisted  by 
the  efforts  of  the  French  envoys,  was  thus  enabled  to  achieve 
a  diplomatic  success,  which  may  be  said  to  have  sealed  the 
fate  of  Frederick.  The  new  Emperor  had  after  his  corona- 
tion visited  Duke  Maximilian  at  Munich  (October  16 19).  It 
seems  probable  that  at  this  moment  already  the  Emperor 
promised  Maximilian,  in  return  for  his  assistance  against 
Bohemia,  that  the  dignity  of  Elector  should,  after  the  defeat 
of  Frederick,  be  transferred  from  the  Protestant  to  the 
Catholic  line  of  the  house  of  Wittelsbach.  It  was  now  only 
necessary  for  Duke  Maximilian  to  acquire  the  certainty  that 
his  own  dominions  would  not  be  attacked ;  he  would  then 
be  able  to  use  against  Bohemia  the  whole  strength  of  the 
Catholic  "  Liga."  This  result  was  only  obtained  after  pro- 
tracted negotiations,  during  which  Maximilian  received  great 
assistance  from  the  French  ambassadors,  who  were  instructed 
directly  to  menace  the  German  Protestants.  A  treaty  was 
at  last  signed  at  Ulm  (July  3,  1620),  by  Duke  Maximilian 
on  behalf  of  the  Catholic,  and  by  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg 
on  behalf  of  the  Protestant  princes  and  free  towns  of 
Germany.  By  this  agreement  both  parties  pledged  them- 
selves not  to  attack  the  German  lands  belonging  to  the  other 
party.  Bohemia  was  not  included  in  this  treaty,  and  thus 
remained  exposed  to  the  attack  of  the  "  Liga."  The  very 
fair  demand  of  the  Protestants  that  the  Archduke  Albert, 
governor  of  the  Spanish  Netherlands,  should  undertake  not 


An    Historical    Sketch  265 

to  attack  the  hereditary  domains  of  the  Elector  Palatine 
was  rejected  by  Maximilian  ;  he  said  that  the  Archduke  was 
not  a  member  of  the  "  Liga,"  and  that  he  had  no  right  to 
give  him  orders.  The  Protestants  did  not  insist,  and  shortly 
afterwards  the  Archduke  Albert  sent  a  Spanish  army  under 
Spinola  to  the  Palatinate.  The  forces  of  Frederick  were 
unable  to  resist  this  attack,  so  it  hardly  need  be  mentioned 
that  the  King  of  Bohemia  had  no  hope  of  receiving  aid  from 
his  hereditary  territory. 

Almost  all  the  more  important  Catholic  countries,  there- 
fore, for  the  moment  supported  the  Emperor,  either  with 
their  arms  or  at  least  by  their  diplomatic  action.  Ferdinand 
was  also  certain  of  the  neutrality  of  the  German  Protestant 
princes,^  and  it  was  his  good  fortune  even  to  obtain  active 
aid  from  one  of  the  most  important  of  their  number,  the 
Elector  of  Saxony.  It  is  not  easy  to  account  for  the  policy 
of  the  Elector.  A  zealous  Lutheran,  he  was  strongly  op- 
posed to  the  Calvinism  of  Frederick  and  the  Bohemians  ; 
the  intense  dislike  for  that  people  which  the  influential 
court  chaplain  Hoe  entertained  must  also  be  taken  into 
account.  The  feeling  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Electors 
to  aid  their  Emperor  in  retaining  the  Bohemian  crown,  now 
long  connected  with  the  Imperial  dignity,  together  with 
jealousy  of  Frederick's  increased  power,  may  also  have 
influenced  the  Elector.  It  is  also  probable  that  he  enter- 
tained hopes  of  permanently  acquiring  Lusatia  in  return  for 
his  services.  It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year  1620  the  Elector  of  Saxony  had  cast  in 
his  lot  with  the  Emperor,  though  it  was  only  towards  the 
end  of  the  summer  that  a  complete  agreement  as  to  a  simul- 
taneous attack  on  Bohemia  from  Austria,  Bavaria,  and 
Saxony  was  arrived  at. 

The  prospects  of  the  King  of  Bohemia  were  very  differ- 
ent indeed  from  those  of  the  Emperor.  Little  hope  could 
from  the  first  be  placed  on  the  Protestant  princes  of  Ger- 
many, though  the  fatal  treaty  of  Ulm  was  only  signed  in 
July.  The  only  aid  the  Bohemians  could  seriously  rely  on 
was  that  of  the  Protestant  nobles  of  Lower  and  Upper 
Austria,  and   that  of  Gabriel  Bethlen,  Prince  of  Transyl- 

^  They  were  not  precluded  from  aiding  Frederick  in  Bohemia  by  the 
treaty  of  Ulm,  which  had  left  that  country  entirely  outside  the  sphere 
of  its  stipulations  ;  it  was,  however,  clear  to  Ferdinand  that  no  such 
intervention  would  take  place. 


266  Bohemia 

vania,  who  at  that  moment  had  obtained  possession  of  a 
considerable  part  of  Hungary.  Bethlen  had,  in  January 
{1620),  concluded  a  truce  with  Ferdinand  on  terms  very 
favourable  to  himself.  The  Emperor  had  temporarily  sanc- 
tioned his  occupation  of  the  Hungarian  districts  which  he 
had  acquired.  Bethlen's  suggestion  that  Bohemia  should 
be  included  in  the  truce  was,  however,  rejected.  The  Prince 
of  Transylvania,  fortunately  for  the  Bohemians,  soon  broke 
the  truce,  and  as  early  as  March  (1620)  renewed  his  alliance 
with  them ;  a  small  Hungarian  force,  indeed,  remained 
with  the  Bohemian  armies  up  to  the  final  downfall  in 
November. 

The  Bohemians  to  the  end  hoped  for  aid  from  Turkey. 
They  had,  together  with  the  Hungarians,  sent  an  embassy 
to  Constantinople  in  the  autumn  of  16 19,  and  shortly  after- 
wards Mehemed  Aga  was  sent  by  the  Sultan  to  Prague  to 
congratulate  King  Frederick  on  his  election,  and  to  promise 
him  aid  from  Turkey.  The  Sultan  was,  however,  at  this 
moment  engaged  in  war  in  Asia ;  besides,  he  probably 
thought  the  struggle  would  be  a  prolonged  one,  and  rightly 
judged  that  the  weakening  of  the  countries  of  Eastern  and 
Central  Europe  could  but  favour  his  own  plan  of  an  advance 
westward.  Towards  the  end  of  the  summer  (1620)  another 
Bohemian  embassy  started  for  Constantinople,  but  only 
arrived  there  on  November  27,  nineteen  days  after  the 
battle  of  the  "White  Mountain." 

From  the  many  allies  whom  the  Bohemians  believed 
they  would  gain  through  the  election  of  Frederick  little  or  no 
aid  was  obtained.  Foremost  among  these  imaginary  allies 
was,  of  course.  King  James  of  England.  Want  of  space 
renders  it  impossible  to  notice  the  very  curious  remarks 
which  recent  writers  have  made  concerning  the  action  of 
English  diplomacy  in  Germany  and  Bohemia  at  this  period. 
It  appears  certain  that  the  envoys  of  King  James,  contrary 
to  their  instructions,  and  in  consequence  of  their  zeal  for 
the  Protestant  cause,  acted  in  a  manner  more  favourable 
to  King  Frederick  than  their  master  desired.  King  James 
always  declined  to  abet  his  son-in-law  in  his  attempt  to 
seize  Bohemia,  but  he  reluctantly  consented  to  pay  a 
subsidy  to  him  for  the  defence  of  the  Palatinate.  An 
English  envoy  was  sent  to  Brussels  to  dissuade  Archduke 
Albert  from  invading  the  hereditary  domains  of  the  Elector 
Palatine.     Up  to  the  moment  that  the  troops  of  Spinola 


An    Historical    Sketch  267 

had  entered  the  Palatinate  the  English  Government  was 
assured  that  no  such  intention  existed.  King  James  became 
the  "  laughing-stock  and  plaything  of  the  Catholic  powers." 

The  Netherlands — where  Frederick  afterwards  took  refuge 
— afforded  as  much  aid  to  the  king  during  his  short  reign  as 
was  in  their  power.  Precluded  by  their  geographical  situa- 
tion from  any  armed  intervention,  they  to  the  last  sent  him 
subsidies,  though,  irritated  by  the  cold,  not  to  say  hostile, 
attitude  of  King  James,  they  occasionally  threatened  to 
withdraw  their  help  should  the  King  of  England  entirely 
abandon  his  son-in-law. 

The  Republic  of  Venice  was  also  one  of  the  States  on 
whose  aid  the  credulous  Bohemians  had  relied.  King 
Frederick  and  the  Estates  were  incessant  in  their  applica- 
tions for  financial  help  from  the  Republic.  No  such  help 
ever  seems  to  have  been  afforded,  and  the  speedy  termination 
of  the  war  would  in  any  case  have  rendered  it  fruitless.^ 

During  the  one  winter  in  which  he  ruled  Bohemia,  Frederick 
was  not  entirely  unsuccessful  in  securing  the  affection  of  his 
new  subjects.  A  certain  feeling  of  attachment  to  the  new 
dynasty  arose.  When  the  queen  (Dec.  26,  1619)  gave  birth 
to  her  third  son.  Prince  Rupert,  afterwards  so  prominent  in 
English  history,  the  people  of  Prague  cordially  joined  in  the 
festivities  which  took  place  at  court  on  the  occasion  of  this 
event.  In  February  (1620)  the  new  king  visited  Moravia 
and  Silesia.  Both  at  Brno  and  at  Breslau  he  was  enthusias- 
tically received,  so  that  it  appeared  as  if  all  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown  were  united  in  their  devotion  to  the  new 
ruler. 

By  this  time  hostilities  had  already  recommenced.  On  the 
retreat  of  the  Hungarian  forces  from  the  neighbourhood  of 
Vienna  the  Bohemians  had  also  retired.  The  Bohemian 
troops  remained  in  the  part  of  Lower  Austria  nearest  to  the 
frontier  of  their  country.  The  Moravians  took  up  their 
winter  quarters  in  the  Moravian  districts  adjoining  Austria, 
while  the  Silesians  for  a  time  separated  from  the  rest  of  the 

^  One  of  these  letters  addressed  to  Doger  Priuli,  begging  that  he 
would  aid  the  Bohemians,  '*  ad  usum  belli  hujus  insigni  aliqua  pecuniae 
summa  pro  qua  sufficientissimam  cautionem  Serenitati  Vestrae  ac 
inclytae  isti  Reipublicae  praestare  parati  sumus,"  is  dated  from  Prague 
as  late  as  October  20,  1620.  Frederick  had  then  already  left  for  the 
seat  of  war,  and  the  letter  is  signed  by  the  "  Serenissimi  Regis  Bohemiae 
Consiliarii  ac  Supremi  ejusdem  Regni  Ofiiciales"  (State  Archives, 
Venice). 


268  Bohemia 

army.  During  the  winter  a  small  force,  raised  by  the 
Austrian  Protestants,  joined  the  Bohemian  army  in  Lower 
Austria.  The  first  engagement  between  the  Imperialists  under 
Bouquoi  and  the  Bohemians  took  place  (in  February)  near 
I^ngenlois,  in  Lower  Austria  ;  the  troops  of  Ferdinand  were 
entirely  successful.  Soon  afterwards  Prince  Christian  of 
Anhalt  assumed  the  command  of  the  Bohemian  forces,  and 
the  jealousy  between  him  and  Thurn^  the  former  com- 
mander, was  one  of  the  many  causes  that  contributed  to 
the  speedy  downfall  of  Bohemia.  Hostilities  of  an  in- 
decisive character  continued  during  spring  and  summer  up 
to  the  moment  w^hen  the  treaty  of  Ulm  and  the  Saxon 
declaration  in  favour  of  Ferdinand  rendered  a  combined 
attack  on  Bohemia  possible. 

As  soon  as  the  treaty  of  Ulm  had  guaranteed  to  Duke 
Maximilian  of  Bavaria  the  security  of  his  own  dominions, 
he  lost  no  time  in  hurrying  to  the  assistance  of  the 
Emperor  Ferdinand.  His  army  crossed  the  frontier  of 
Upper  Austria  on  July  24,  and  that  country  submitted 
almost  without  resistance.  The  Protestant  Estates,  not 
expecting  so  rapid  an  attack,  had  not  sufficiently  armed 
themselves  and  were  disappointed  in  their  hope  of  aid 
from  Bohemia  and  Hungary.  After  the  submission  of 
Upper  Austria,  Maximilian  was  free  to  direct  his  entire 
attention  to  Bohemia,  as  the  Protestant  movement  in  Lower 
Austria  had  also  already  collapsed.  The  Protestant  nobles 
had  indeed  raised  some  troops,  and  they  now  (August  i) 
proclaimed  Frederick,  King  of  Bohemia,  their  protector. 
They  were,  however,  as  ill-prepared  for  war  as  the  Pro- 
testants of  Upper  Austria,  and  all  resistance  on  their  part  was 
soon  suppressed  with  the  help  of  the  Emperor's  Polish  mer- 
cenaries, whose  ferocity  and  cruelty  spread  terror  through 
Lower  Austria. 

After  some  deliberation  it  was  settled  that  the  army  of  the 
"  Liga  "  should  unite  with  that  of  Bouquoi,  and  that  they 
then  should  conjointly  invade  Bohemia.  Before  crossing  the 
frontier,  Duke  Maximilian  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Estates  of 
Bohemia,  informing  them  that  he  had  received  an  Imperial 
"  patent "  authorizing  him  to  invade  Bohemia  unless  the 
Estates  immediately  recognized  the  authority  of  Ferdinand, 
their  legitimate  sovereign.  The  Estates  answered  (August 
30)  by  a  letter,  the  contents  of  which  would  excite  more  ad- 
miration had  they  not  been  in  such  entire  contradiction  to 


An    Historical  Sketch  269 

the  attitude  of  the  Bohemian  people  during  the  subsequent 
short  campaign.  Returning  the  Imperial  "patent,"  the 
Estates  declared  that  "  they  would — should  an  entirely  un- 
provoked attack  be  made  on  them — defend  their  king,  who 
had  been  elected  and  crowned  in  accordance  with  the  old 
privileges  and  rights  of  Bohemia ;  and  that  they  would  fight 
to  the  utmost  for  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown,  and  for 
their  beloved  country,  at  the  risk  of  their  estates  and  their 
lives ;  they  therefore  confidently  entrusted  the  decision  to 
the  justice  of  God."  On  the  day  he  addressed  his  letter  to 
the  Estates,  MaximiHan  also  wrote  to  King  Frederick,  sum- 
moning him  immediately  to  leave  Bohemia.  The  king 
returned  an  answer  similar  to  that  of  the  Estates.^  On 
September  8  the  army  of  the  "Liga"  united  with  that  of 
Bouquoi  in  Lower  Austria,  and  the  combined  forces,  cross- 
ing the  Bohemian  frontier  (September  20),  marched  on 
Budejovice. 

Bouquoi  nominally  retained  his  separate  command,  but 
he  henceforth  played  a  minor  part,  as  the  influence  and  im- 
portance of  the  Duke  of  Bavaria  were  far  superior  to  his. 
A  few  days  before  (September  13)  the  troops  of  the  Elector  of 
Saxony  had  crossed  the  frontier  of  Lusatia,  to  reduce  this 
dependency  of  Bohemia  to  Ferdinand's  rule. 

Never  was  Bohemia  less  prepared  to  resist  the  vast  forces 
now  on  the  march  against  her.  It  would  indeed  have 
required  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Hussite  times  to  render  a 
successful  defence  possible.  The  Bohemians  of  this  period 
were,  however,  very  different  from  their  heroic  ancestors. 
There  was  nothing  also  in  the  person  of  the  German  king 
whom  they  had  chosen  to  carry  away  the  masses  as  Zizka 
and  Prokop  had  done  in  the  days  of  old.  Frederick, 
though  the  charm  of  his  manners  secured  for  him  a  certain 
degree  of  popularity  to  which  Queen  Elizabeth  never 
attained,  soon  proved  himself  utterly  deficient  as  ruler  of 
the  country  in  a  moment  of  almost  unexampled  difficulty. 
As  already  noted,  the  form.er  "  Directors  "  had,  while  aban- 
doning that  title,  retained  almost  all  their  former  power.  At 
a  moment  when  a  dictator  with  uncontested  authority  could 
perhaps  have  saved  the  country,  constant  quarrels  between 
the  new  German   generals,    Anhalt    and  Hohenlohe,  and 

^  Lontorp (Lontorpius)  {Actapublica der Kaiserlichen undzu Hungan 
und  Bohvien  Koniglichen  Majestdt  weiland  Matthiae  und  Ferdinandiy 
162 1 )  prints  these  four  letters. 


270  Bohemia 

Thurn  and  Mansfeld,  the  earlier  commanders  of  the  Bo- 
hemian forces,  took  place. 

The  king's  notorious  incapacity  in  military  affairs,  in 
which  he  had  as  a  youth  received  no  instruction,^  rendered 
his  position  even  more  hopeless.  The  military  ignorance  of 
the  king  was  probably  one  of  the  reasons  why  about  this 
time  the  supreme  direction  of  the  defence  of  the  country 
was  entrusted  to  a  council  of  war.  Besides  the  princi- 
pal Bohemian  statesmen  and  generals,  Baron  Tschernembl, 
leader  of  the  Protestants  of  Upper  Austria,  and  General 
Hofkirchen,  commander  of  the  levies  of  the  Protestant 
Estates  of  Lower  Austria,  who  had  sought  refuge  in 
Bohemia,  formed  part  of  this  council.  Tschernembl,  aware 
of  the  desperate  position  of  the  country,  advised  desperate 
remedies.  He  demanded  that  the  order  calling  the  whole 
male  population  to  arms  should  be  more  strictly  carried 
out,  and  demanded  a  great  increase  of  the  taxation  and 
the  abolition  of  serfdom.  The  latter  step,  he  justly  urged, 
was  absolutely  necessary  to  interest  the  masses  in  the  de- 
fence of  their  country.  These  proposals,  obviously  opposed 
to  the  landed  interest,  and  therefore  to  the  wishes  of  the 
great  Bohemian  nobles  who  were  the  originators  of  the 
movement  against  the  house  of  Habsburg,  were  rejected 
by  the  council  of  war;  in  fact,  the  deliberations  of  that 
body,  which,  as  Gindely  says  had  been  summoned  at  a 
moment  when  the  possibility  of  its  proving  useful  had  already 
almost  ceased,  led  to  hardly  any  practical  result. 

It  is,  however,  probable  that  it  was  on  the  suggestion 
of  the  council  of  war  that  the  king  at  last  decided  to 
leave  Prague  (September  28)  and  to  join  his  army.  The 
fact  that  his  cousin,  Maximilian  of  Bavaria,  himself  led  the 
Catholic  forces  rendered  the  king's  presence  with  his  troops 
even  more  necessary  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been. 
Before  the  king  had  joined  his  army,  the  enemy  had 
already  achieved  important  successes.  Duke  Maximilian 
and  Bouquoi  had  taken  the  towns  of  Vodnan,  Prachatic, 
and  Pisek  by  storm.  Instead  of  marching  directly  on 
Prague,  they  then  led  their  forces  in  the  direction  of 
Pilsen,  the  most  important  town  of  Western  Bohemia, 
which  was  now  held  by  a  strong  force  under  Mansfeld. 

^  This  circumstance,  very  exceptional  in  the  case  of  a  German  prince 
of  that  period,  is  noted  in  the  Metnoires  sur  la  vie  et  la  mart  de  la 
Princes se  Loyse  Juliatte  Electrice.     A  Leyden,  1644. 


An    Historical   Sketch         271 

On  first  joining  his  army,  Frederick,  perhaps  in  con- 
sequence of  his  ignorance  of  military  matters,  seems  to 
have  taken  a  not  unfavourable  view  of  the  situation.  In 
a  letter  to  Doge  Priuli,  he  informed  him  that  he  hoped 
soon  to  expel  and  totally  defeat  the  invading  arniy.^ 
Events  unfortunately  were  not  in  accordance  with  the 
king's  previsions.  When  the  enemy's  troops  approached 
Plzen,  an  emissary  sent  by  Mansfeld  appeared  and  de- 
manded an  armistice.  Mansfeld  had  long  been  at  discord 
with  the  other  Bohemian  generals,  and  his  troops,  who 
had  received  no  pay  for  a  year,  were  mutinous.  It  is, 
however,  probable  that  a  promise  of  a  large  sum  of  money 
was  made  to  Mansfeld,  and  that  this  was  the  principal 
cause  of  this  act  of  treachery,  which  destroyed  the  last 
hopes  of  the  Bohemians.  The  army  of  the  king  had  in 
the  meantime  arrived  at  Rokycan,  near  Plzen,  and  a 
joint  attack  on  the  Imperial  forces  would  not  have  been 
without  some  chance  of  success.  Treachery  was  indeed 
prevalent  in  the  Bohemian  camp,  as  Frederick  particularly 
noticed  in  a  letter  to  Queen  Elizabeth  written  about  this 
time.2  The  army  at  Plzen  now  no  longer  menacing  their 
flanks,  it  was  natural  that  Bouquoi  and  the  Duke  of 
Bavaria — or  rather  Tilly,  to  whom  he  delegated  the  actual 
management  of  the  campaign — should  have  decided  to 
march  on  Prague.  In  their  opinion,  which  the  events 
justified,  the  surrender  of  the  capital  would  end  the  Pro- 
testant movement  in  Bohemia  as  well  as  in  the  other  lands 
of  the  Bohemian  crown.  Well  informed  as  they  were  con- 
cerning  all   that   occurred   in   the   Bohemian   camp,  they 

1  '*  Nos  potenli  Dei  brachio  confisi  et  nequidquam  copiam  exercitus 
hostilis  metuentes  in  persona  coptis  npstris  militaribus  adesse  voluimus 
hostem  subinde  insequentes  ut  si  qua  praeliandi  occasio  (quam  praeter- 
labi  et  neglegi  serio  cavebimus)  offeratur,  caput  capiti  objiciamus  et 
Deo  conatibus  nostris  propitio  finibus  regni  nostri  arcere  et  peritus 
fundere  valeamus "  (Letter  dated,  "In  Castris  ad  Lnarz,"  October  7, 
1620,  in  the  State  Archives  at  Venice). 

^  "  Depuis  nous  avons  ete  avertis  que  le  Due  de  Baviere  et  le  Comte 
do  Bouquoi  ont  ete  en  bataille  toute  la  nuit  pour  nous  attendre  ;  de  la 
on  peut  juger  qu  nous  n'avons  faute  de  traitres."  This  letter,  dated 
"  Rochesance  (Rokycan)  Le  12/22  Octobre  1620,"  is  printed  in  Sir 
George  Bromley's  Royal  Letters  ;  a  book  quaintly  described  by  Carlyle 
as  "one  of  the  most  curious  books  on  the  Thirty  Years'  War,  'edited' 
with  a  composed  stupidity  and  cheerful  infinitude  of  ignorance  which 
still  farther  distinguishes  it."  The  book  is,  however,  not  without  value 
for  students  of  Bohemian  history. 


272  Bohemia 

probably  knew  that  the  king's  arrival  had  in  no  way  im- 
proved the  situation,  and  that  the  dissensions  among  the 
generals,    and   the   turbulence    of    the    soldiers,    were   on 
the  increase.    A  gain  of  time  was,  therefore — in  view  of 
the  increasing  demoralization  of  the  Bohemian  forces — an 
advantage  for  the  Imperialists,  and   they  decided  against 
marching  on  Prague  by  the  direct  road  which  led  through 
Rokycan,    round   which   town   Frederick's   army   was    en- 
camped.    The    Catholic    army   therefore    advanced    from 
Plzen    to   Kralovic,    as   if    intending   to   attack   Northern 
Bohemia.     After  it  had  arrived  there  it  suddenly  turned 
eastward,  in  the  direction  towards   Prague.     Anhalt,  who 
in  view  of  the  notorious  incapacity  of  the  king  had  assumed 
the  command  of  the  Bohemian  army,  was  not  deceived  by 
the  feint  of  his  adversary.     His  army  marched  on  Prague 
by  the  direct  road,  and  arrived  at  Rakonic  shortly  before 
the  Imperialist  forces.     The  mediasval  fortifications  of  that 
town  still  afforded  some  defence  against  such  artillery  as 
was  then  in  use.     Numerous  skirmishes  took  place  during 
the  days  in  which  the  two  armies  confronted  each  other 
near  Rakonic.     The  demoralization  of  the  Bohemian  army 
daily  became   more  apparent,   and  we   are  told^    that  in 
one  of  the  skirmishes  near  Rakonic  two  hundred  and  fifty 
Bohemian    horsemen   fled    at    the    approach   of   eighteen 
Bavarians.     Frederick  also  gave  himself  up   to   complete 
despondency,    and   hastily   sent    a   messenger   to   Prague, 
requesting  Queen  Elizabeth  to  leave  Bohemia  immediately. 
This  plan  was  frustrated,  not  only  by  the  opposition  of  the 
Bohemian  nobles,  but  also  by  the  courageous  attitude  of 
the  queen.     She  treated  Frederick's  suggestion  with  undis- 
guised contempt;  and,  indeed,  during  the  short  period  of 
their  reign  showed  a  firmness  and  courage  in  which  her 
husband  was  lamentably  deficient.    Though  the  Bohemians 
were  unable  to  oppose  their  enemies  in  the  open  field,  the 
strong   natural  position   of   Rakonic  and   its  fortifications 
rendered  it   difficult  for   the   Catholic   forces   to   dislodge 
Anhalt,  at  least  without  great  loss  of  life.     They  therefore 
— on  the  advice  of  Tilly — decided  again  to  outflank  the 
Bohemians   and   to    march    straight   on   Prague.     Anhalt, 
however,  soon  discovered  that  the  camp  of  the  Catholics 
had  been  evacuated.     He  therefore  also  hurried  to  Prague 
on   parallel   roads,   fearing   that   the   enemy   might   arrive 
*  Gindely,  Geschichie  des  Dreissigjdhrigen  Krieges. 


An    Historical    Sketch  273 

there  before  him.  Near  Unhost,  two  (German)  miles  from 
Prague,  the  armies  were  close  to  each  other,  but  Anhalt 
avoided  a  battle  in  what  appeared  to  him  an  unfavourable 
position.  He  hurried  on  to  Prague,  and  reached  the  out- 
skirts of  the  capital  on  the  evening  of  November  7.  The 
Bohemian  forces  occupied  a  strong  and  judiciously  chosen 
position  on  the  "White  Mountain  "  (Bila  Hora),  a  few  miles 
outside  the  walls  of  Prague.  King  Frederick  immediately 
left  his  army  and  retired  to  the  royal  castle  on  the  Hradcin, 
still  bent  on  urging  Queen  Elizabeth  to  fly;  he  perhaps 
also  wished  to  avoid  the  responsibility  of  commanding  an 
army  over  which  he  no  longer  had  any  authority.  Early  on 
the  following  morning — November  8 — the  Catholic  forces 
arrived  before  Prague,  the  Bavarians  and  other  troops  of 
the  "  Liga "  forming  the  vanguard.  Tilly  and  the  Duke 
of  Bavaria,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  Bouquoi,  decided 
on  an  immediate  attack.  The  great  demoralization  in  the 
Bohemian  army,  which  was  well  known  to  the  enemies, 
together  with  the  fact  that — following  the  example  of  their 
king — many  Bohemian  officers  had  left  their  soldiers  and 
retired  to  Prague,  rendered  an  immediate  assault  advisable ; 
particularly  as  the  Imperialists  wished  to  finish  the  campaign 
before  the  winter.  These  motives,  more  probably  than  the 
eloquence  of  a  Dominican  friar,  to  which  the  decision  was 
afterwards  attributed,  induced  the  Catholics  immediately  to 
begin  their  attack. 

The  numerical  forces  of  the  contending  armies  were 
nearly  equal.  The  troops  of  the  Catholic  "Liga"  num- 
bered about  12,000,  the  Imperialists  about  15,000  men. 
The  forces  of  Anhalt — including  8000  Hungarian  horsemen 
sent  by  Bethlen,  and  the  levies  of  the  Protestant  nobles  of 
Austria — also  amounted  to  about  27,000  men.  Nearly 
equal  in  numbers,  the  armies  were  very  unequal  as  regards 
their  fighting  capacity.  The  Catholic  troops,  well  fed  and 
regularly  paid,  were  thoroughly  prepared  and  eager  for 
battle ;  while  the  numerous  monks,  especially  the  Jesuits, 
whom  the  Duke  of  Bavaria  had  brought  with  him,  inflamed 
the  soldiers  to  fight  bravely  against  the  heretics.  The 
Bohemian  troops,  on  the  other  hand,  who  since  the  beginning 
of  the  war  had  been  irregularly  paid,  and  who  had  suffered 
great  privations,  were  on  the  verge  of  mutiny.  The  generals 
to  the  last  continued  quarrelling  among  themselves,  while 
the  now  notorious  incapacity  of  the  king,  and  his  openly 


274  Bohemia 

displayed  despondency,  contributed  to  render  the  result  of 
the  battle  certain. 

It  was  on  Sunday  (November  8)  that  was  fought  the 
battle  which  terminated  the  existence  of  Bohemia  as  an 
independent  state.  Even  before  the  Romanist  council  of 
war  had  decided  to  attack  the  Bohemian  army  immediately, 
a  small  Bavarian  force — not  yet  supported  by  the  mass  of 
the  allied  army — attacked  the  right  flank  of  the  Bohemian 
position.  Count  Slik,  who  commanded  some  of  the 
Moravian  troops,  hastily  sought  Christian  of  Anhalt,  begging 
his  permission  to  attack  the  Bavarians  on  their  march.  It 
was  a  weighty  and  fateful  moment  in  the  history  of  the 
Bohemian  people.^  Anhalt  at  first  favoured  the  proposal, 
but  on  the  advice  of  Hohenlohe — one  of  Frederick's 
German  generals — finally  refused  his  consent.  The  whole 
mass  of  the  Catholics  had  meanwhile  united,  and  advanced 
along  the  whole  line,  Tilly  soon  succeeding  in  driving  back 
the  enemies  on  the  right  flank  of  the  Bohemian  army.  The 
Imperial  cavalry  attacked  Count  Thurn's  regiment  on  the 
extreme  left  of  the  Bohemian  position.  The  attack  of 
the  Imperialists  was  bravely  repulsed  by  the  Bohemian 
troops,  and  the  cavalry  of  the  younger  Prince  of  Anhalt  ^ 
made  a  successful  attack  on  the  Imperialist  infantry,  of 
which  two  regiments  were  put  to  flight.  The  situation  for 
a  moment  became  so  serious  that  Bouquoi,  who  had  been 
w^ounded  in  one  of  the  skirmishes  before  Rakonic,  and  was 
hardly  able  to  sit  his  horse,  rode  to  the  front  to  encourage 
his  soldiers ;  but  the  news  of  the  complete  success  obtained 
by  Tilly  and  the  troops  of  the  "  Liga  "  over  the  right  wing 
of  the  Bohemian  army  soon  re-established  the  confidence  of 
the  Imperialists.  The  Hungarian  horsemen  on  their  first 
onslaught  defeated  the  cavalry  of  Maximilian,  but  were  soon 
beaten  back  by  his  infantry.  Considering  the  battle  as 
already  lost,  they  fled  in  great  confusion  in  the  direction  of 
the  river  Vltava,  which  they  attempted  to  cross  by  a  ford 
just  above  Prague — near  the  present  suburb  of  Smichov, 
where  more  than  a  thousand  of  them  were  drowned.  The 
combined  forces  of  the  Romanists  soon  stormed  the  small 
redoubts,  which  Anhalt  had  hastily  erected  in  the  night 
preceding  the  battle,  and  the  whole  Bohemian  army,  seized 
by  a  wild  panic,  fled  in  disorder  in  the  direction  of  the  gates 

^  Dr.  Kreb's  Du  Schlacht  am  weissen  Berge. 
2  Son  of  Christian  of  Anhalt. 


An    Historical   Sketch  275 

of  Prague.  There  were  a  few  exceptions  to  the  well-nigh 
general  cowardice.  A  small  body  of  Moravian  troops, 
headed  by  Count  Henry  Slik  and  the  younger  Count 
Thurn,  retired  in  the  direction  of  the  park  known  as  the 
"  hvezda "  (star)  where  they  continued  their  defence  till 
almost  all  had  been  killed.^  The  soldiers  of  the  Palatinate, 
who  formed  Frederick's  body-guard,  died  almost  to  a  man 
in  defence  of  the  cause  of  their  unworthy  sovereign.-  These 
isolated  instances  of  bravery  were,  of  course,  unavailing  to 
avert  the  general  disaster,  and  a  battle  of  a  few  hours 
decided  the  fate  of  Bohemia.^ 

King  Frederick,  as  already  mentioned,  had  proceeded  to 
the  town  of  Prague  as  soon  as  the  Bohemian  troops  arrived 
at  the  White  Mountain.  Weston  and  Conway,  the  English 
ambassadors  sent  by  King  James,  had  arrived  at  Prague, 
and  the  king  wished  to  entertain  them  at  a  banquet.  It 
was  at  this  banquet,  an  eye-witness  ^  tells  us,  that  the  king 
received  the  news  that  his  troops  were  engaged  in  battle. 
He  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  to  the  neighbouring 
Strakov  gate.  By  the  time  he  arrived  there  the  Bohe- 
mian army  was  in  full  flight,  and  the  king,  seeing  that 
everything  was  lost,  hastily  returned  to  the  palace  on  the 
Hradcin,  from  where,  accompanied  by  the  queen  and  the 
court  officials,  he  crossed  the  Vltava,  and   retired  to  the 

^  Of  this  isolated  and  little  known  heroic  defence  Dr.  Krebs  writes 
eloquently :  "  The  south-eastern  wall  of  the  Star  park  thus  became 
the  grave  of  Bohemian  independence.  Every  Bohemian  who  passes  by 
this  spot  should  remember  :  it  is  sacred  ground  on  which  you  tread." 

2  "  Die  Leibguardi  des  Churpfaltzgrafen  zu  Ross  und  zu  Fuss  welche 
blaue  Rustung  gefuhret  seien  bis  aulY  wenige  neben  ihrem  Rittmeister 
von  Wallesheim  geblieben"  (NicoJaus  Bellus,  Osterreichischer  Lorber- 
kraniz.  Frankfurt,  1625).  Bellus  differs  from  most  contemporary 
writers  by  saying  that  the  battle  lasted  during  the  whole  day.  "Das 
TrefFen  hat  von  morgen  biss  Abends  umb  5  Uhrn  gewehrt." 

^  It  is  almost  impossible  that  the  battle  should  have  lasted  one  hour 
only,  as  has  been  often  stated.  The  belief  in  an  almost  instantaneous 
victory  may  have  originated  from  the  circumstance  that  the  Catholics 
attributed  their  victory  to  the  intervention  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 

^  "  Castra  Bohemica  hostem  tentare  rumor  ad  Fredericum  Regem 
defertur,  interrupto,  convivio,  equum  conscendit  propere  castra  periculo 
agitata  visurus,  aderat  globus  eqnstris  quingentorum  capitum  ;  ei-ara  et 
ego  in  isto  comitatu,  turbati  convivii  auctor.  Ad  portam  Strahovensem 
accedente  Rege  clausa  ista  erat,  circumspicit  infelicem  exercitus  sui 
fugam,  vidit  repentes  ad  sublime  valli  Duces,  ipsorum  equos  cum  mille 
aliis  per  aperta  cursitantes,  spectaculum  sane  deplorandum.  Clamore 
mulierum  horrendo  Rex  perterritus  arcem  repetabat  "  (Habernfeld). 


276  Bohemia 

"  old  town  "  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  A  large  part 
of  the  soldiery  also  hastily  sought  refuge  on  the  right  bank 
of  the  Vltava,  while  many  more  dispersed  in  various  direc- 
tions. On  the  same  evening  Frederick  assembled  his 
principal  councillors  and  generals,  to  deliberate  what  steps 
to  take.  The  king  himself  was  strongly  in  favour  of  com- 
pletely abandoning  a  cause  he  believed  hopeless,  and  had 
but  one  wish — to  leave  Bohemia  instantly.  He  displayed, 
however,  a  certain  amount  of  courage,  probably  through 
the  influence  of  the  queen,  and  attempted  to  dissemble  his 
opinion.  Tschernembl  spoke  strongly  in  favour  of  further 
resistance.  Pie  suggested  holding  the  town  at  least  for  a 
few  days,  collecting  the  scattered  troops,  and  then  making 
an  orderly  retreat.  It  was  left  to  Tschernembl,  a  foreigner 
and  a  German,  to  remind  the  Bohemians  of  the  glorious 
victory  which  their  ancestors  had  achieved  on  Zizka's  Hill, 
close  to  the  spot  where  the  deHberation  took  place.  The 
younger  Count  Thurn,  who  alone  of  the  Bohemian  officers 
had  fought  not  ingloriously  during  the  battle,  spoke  in  the 
same  sense  as  Tschernembl.  Christian  of  Anhalt,  the 
originator  of  the  intrigues  and  negotiations  which  had 
raised  Frederick  to  his  precarious  throne,  now  spoke  in 
favour  of  immediate  flight ;  he  had  been  in  constant  con- 
flict with  the  Bohemian  generals,  and  wished  to  leave  the 
country  as  soon  as  possible.  The  principal  argument  of 
Anhalt  was  that  the  mutinous  condition  of  the  troops 
rendered  it  impossible  to  induce  them  to  face  the  enemy 
again.  He  even  suggested  the  possibility  of  their  entering 
into  independent  negotiations  with  the  Catholic  leaders. 
Anhalt's  former  antagonist.  Count  Thurn,  to  whose  influ- 
ence the  Defenestration  and  the  beginning  of  the  war 
were  due,  now  also  lost  all  courage,  and  spoke  in  favour  of 
evacuating  Bohemia.  This  was  the  king's  opinion  also,  but 
he  still  attempted  to  postpone  his  decision.  He  therefore 
requested  the  English  envoys,  Conway  and  Weston,  to 
enter  into  negotiations  with  the  Duke  of  Bavaria  and 
Bouquoi.  The  ministers  undertook  this  mission,  and  sent 
a  message  to  the  Bavarian  camp  requesting  an  interview 
with  Maximilian.  This  message  remained  unanswered,  as 
did  also  a  second  one,  which  they  forwarded  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  It  was  well  known  to  the  Catholic  princes 
that  King  James  had  no  sympathy  with  the  enterprise  of 
his  son-in-law,  or  indeed  with  the  Protestant  cause,  and  at 


An    Historical    Sketch  277 

no  period,^  perhaps,  was  the  prestige  of  English  diplomacy 
so  low.  As  no  answer  was  received,  it  was  decided  at  nine 
in  the  morning  (November  9)  that  the  queen  should  leave 
immediately  with  her  youngest  child.  The  king  still  pre- 
tended to  have  the  intention  of  remaining  in  the  town. 
The  queen's  travelling-carriage  was  prepared  :  "  the  reso- 
luteness he  had  hitherto  displayed  now  forsook  the  king ; 
when  Elizabeth,  carrying  her  son,  entered  the  carriage,  it 
became  impossible  to  hold  him  back.  He  mounted  his 
horse,  and  gave  the  signal  for  a  general  flight." 

Though  Mansfeld  shortly  afterwards  again  attempted  to 
oppose  the  Imperialists,  and  some  slight  resistance  was  still 
offered  by  Moravia  and  Silesia,  the  battle  of  the  Bila  Hora 
was  shortly  followed  by  the  complete  submission  of  all  the 
lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown. 

What  were  the  reasons  which  caused  the  Bohemian  nation, 
that  had  two  centuries  before,  proved  itself  victorious  under 
even  more  difficult  circumstances,  to  succumb  almost  with- 
out a  struggle?  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  universal 
adoption  of  serfdom  in  Bohemia  had  entirely  changed  the 
character  of  the  population.  In  the  Hussite  struggle  large 
armies  of  peasants  had  freely  and  enthusiastically  defended 
their  country,  and  the  democratic  instinct,  innate  in  the 
Slav  race,  had  had  full  play.  The  Bohemian  war  of  1618 
to  1620  was  on  both  sides  waged  by  mercenaries,  and  the 
better  paid  and  better  fed  soldiers  of  Tilly  and  Bouquoi 
easily  prevailed  over  the  troops  of  Frederick,  who  were 
almost  always  on  the  verge  of  mutiny.  The  national 
enthusiasm  which  had  animated  the  Bohemians  on  previous 
occasions  was  also  naturally  absent  in  this,  the  last  of  their 
wars.  The  German  prince,  whom  their  nobles  had  elected 
as  king,  ignorant  as  he  was  even  of  the  language  of  the  land, 
could  not  inspire  them  with  the  confidence  which — in  spite 
of  temporary  differences — they  felt  for  men  such  as  Zizka 
and  Prokop,  born  Bohemians,  thoroughly  in  touch  with  the 
national  feeling.  The  miserable  irresolution  and  weakness, 
not  to  call  it  cowardice,  displayed  by  the  German  prince, 
who  had  undertaken  to  govern  a  headstrong  people,  ill 
disposed  to  all  foreign,  and  especially  to  German,  rule,  made 
his  position  even  more  hopeless.  The  religious  enthusiasm 
on  which  Budova,  Ruppa,  and  other  more  far-seeing  leaders 
probably  reckoned  as  a  substitute  for  the  necessarily  absent 
racial  one,  was  always  found  wanting.     In  Bohemia,  as  in 


278 


Bohemia 


Germany,  Protestantism  was  divided  between  the  Calvinist 
and  the  Lutheran  creed,  and  the  strongest  animosity  then 
existed  between  the  adherents  of  the  two  beliefs.^ 

The  Calvinistic  doctrine,  then  prevalent  in  the  Palatinate, 
and  which  Frederick  and  his  councillors  would  undoubtedly, 
had  fate  favoured  them,  have  established  in  Bohemia,  was 
distasteful  to  many  of  the  Bohemian  Protestants  ;  they  had, 
indeed,  long  diverged  from  the  old  utraquist  Church,  founded 
on  the  Compacts,  but  they  had  retained  much  of  the  ritual 
and  discipline  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  The  religious  party 
most  in  harmony  with  the  doctrine  of  the  divines  of  the 
Palatinate  was  the  "  Unity  "  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren  ;  of 
these,  however,  many  entertained  scruples  as  to  the  right  of 
resistance  to  temporal  authority  under  any  circumstances 
whatever.  It  has  already  been  noted  that  Zerotin,  the 
leader  of  the  "  Unity  "  in  Moravia,  who  also  exercised  great 
influence  over  the  Brethren  in  Bohemia,  totally  refused  to 
join  the  movement  against  the  house  of  Habsburg.  It 
remains  to  allude  to  the  hopeless  situation  of  Bohemia  in 
its  relations  to  foreign  countries.  A  country  such  as 
Bohemia,  neither  very  large  nor  very  rich,  was  at  best  unable 
to  resist  the  entire  power  of  that  absolutist  alliance  between 
Spain,  Austria  and  Rome  which  Fra  Paoli  Sarpi  termed  the 
diacatholicon. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  immediately  after  the  battle  of  the 
^Vhite  Mountain  the  councillors  of  Ferdinand  decided  to 
change  entirely  the  ancient  free  constitution  of  Bohemia, 
though,  as  will  be  noted  in  the  next  chapter,  circumstances 
did  not  permit  of  these  changes  being  carried  out  immedi- 
ately in  their  entirety. 

Before  the  great  changes  in  the  political  and  religious 
condition  of  Bohemia  were  carried  out,  Ferdinand's  govern- 
ment considered  it  advisable  that  the  public  punishment  of 

^  In  a  letter  addressed  to  Count  Slik,  one  of  the  Bohemian  leaders — 
dated  Dresden,  August  23,  1619 — Hoe,  court  chaplain  to  the  Elector 
of  Saxony,  writes:  "Your  Lordship  is  known  to  the  whole  Christian 
world  for  your  zeal  against  the  injurious,  blasphemous,  and  damnable 
Calvinistic  creed.  I  beg  your  Lordship,  'per  amorem  Dei  et  per 
vulnera  Christi,'  to  retain  these  views,  and  to  prove  it,  so  that  posterity 
may  for  ever  have  cause  to  praise  your  zeal.  Your  Lordship  has  not 
been  able  to  endure  the  papal  yoke  ;  verily  that  of  the  Calvinist  is  as 
intolerable  and  indeed  more  so"  (Letter  printed  in  the  pamphlet  entitled  : 
Wohlmeinende  Missiv  von  Herr7i  D.  Hoe,  Oberhofprediger,  16 19).  It 
may  be  added  that  Dr.  Hoe  did  not  deny  the  authenticity  of  this  letter, 
though  he  blamed  Count  Slik  for  publishing  it. 


An    Historical    Sketch  279 

the  leaders  of  the  late  revolution  should  take  place.  Early 
in  the  year  162 1  the  principal  Bohemian  nobles  who  had 
not  fled  from  the  country,  and  other  leaders  were  arrested. 
On  June  21  Budova,  Count  Cernin,  Count  Slik,  Harrant 
Lord  of  Polzic,  the  celebrated  Doctor  Jessenius,  who  had 
negotiated  with  Gabriel  Bethlen  on  behalf  of  the  Bohemian 
Government,  and  others — twenty-seven  in  all — were  executed 
in  the  market-place  of  Prague.  They  all  met  their  fate  with 
great  fortitude.^  On  many  others  imprisonment  and  other 
lesser  punishments  were  inflicted.  "These  melancholy 
executions  mark  the  end  of  the  old  and  independent 
development  of  Bohemia.  Members  of  the  most  prominent 
families  of  the  Bohemian  nobility,  eminent  citizens  and 
learned  men,  in  fact  all  the  representatives  of  the  culture  of 
the  land,  ended  here,  and  with  them  their  cause.  The 
destiny  of  the  country  was  henceforth  in  the  hands  of 
foreigners,  who  had  neither  comprehension  nor  sympathy 
with  its  former  institutions."  ^ 

CHAPTER   VIII 

THE  KINGS  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  HABSBURG  FROM  THE  BATTLE 
OF  THE  WHITE  MOUNTAIN  TO  THE  PRESENT  DAY  (162O- 
I910). 

It  is  certain  that  the  fact  that  all  resistance  to  the  Im- 
perialists ceased  in  the  Bohemian  lands  very  shortly  after 

1  "  When  one  of  these  holy  men  and  martyrs  for  God  was  called  out 
(from  prison  for  execution)  then  to  our  great  astonishment  a  leave-taking 
took  place  in  a  pleasant  manner  which  rejoiced  our  hearts,  just  as  if  they 
were  preparing  to  go  to  a  banquet  or  some  pastime.  '  Now,  my  dear 
friends,  may  our  Lord  God  bless  and  guard  you  ;  may  He  grant  you 
the  consolation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  patience  and  courage  so  that  you  may 
be  able  now  also  to  prove  in  the  moment  of  your  death,  that  you  have 
heartily  and  bravely  defended  the  honour  of  God.  I  go  before  you 
that  I  may  first  see  the  glory  of  Eternal  God,  the  glory  of  our  beloved 
Redeemer:  but  I  await  you  directly  after  me;  already  in  this  hour 
earthiy  grief  vanishes  and  a  new  heart-felt  and  eternal  gladness  begins.' 
The  other  prisoners  who  remained  behind  answered,  '  May  our  Lord 
God  bless  you  on  your  way,  for  the  sake  of  the  guiltless  death  of  Jesus 
Christ  ;  may  He  send  His  holy  angels  to  meet  your  soul.  You  go  before 
us  to  the  glory  of  Heaven.  We  also  will  follow  you,  and  we  are  certain 
because  of  Him  in  whom  we  have  believed,  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  shall 
to-day  all  meet  there  again,  and  that  with  our  beloved  Redeemer,  the 
angels,  and  the  chosen  of  God  we  shall  rejoice  for  ever ' "  {Skdla  zc 
Zhore,  vol.  v.  p.   iio-iii). 

2  Gindely,  Geschichte  des  Dreissigjdhrigen  Krieges, 


28o  Bohemia 

the  battle  of  the  Bila  Hora  is  to  a  great  extent  due  to  the 
incapacity  and  cowardice  of  King  Frederick.  The  negotia- 
tions into  which  the  Imperial  generals  had — as  mentioned 
in  the  last  chapter — entered  with  Mansfeld  soon  failed  after 
the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain,  as  the  victors  were  no 
longer  prepared  to  pay  the  price  he  demanded  for  his 
treachery.  Mansfeld,  who  «till  held  the  important  town  of 
Plzen,  therefore  determined  to  return  to  the  allegiance  of 
King  Frederick,  and  renewed  hostiHties  against  the  Im- 
perialists in  Bohemia.  The  campaign  was,  however,  of 
short  duration.  Frederick,  always  an  unwilling  soldier, 
refused  to  join  his  forces  in  Bohemia,  though  he  forwarded 
a  large  sum  of  money  to  Mansfeld.  The  latter  proceeded  on 
a  short  visit  to  Heilbronn,  where  he  helped  to  obtain  aid 
from  the  German  Protestants  who  were  then  assembled  there. 
During  his  absence  from  Bohemia  a  mutiny  broke  out 
among  his  troops.  On  the  condition  of  receiving  a  large 
sum  of  money,  and  being  allowed  freely  to  leave  Bohemia, 
they  surrendered  the  city  of  Plzen  to  the  Imperialists.  In 
November  162 1  Tabor,  and  in  March  1622  Tfebofi,^  the 
last  towns  still  held  for  King  Frederick,  also  capitulated  to 
the  Austrians. 

As  already  mentioned,  the  other  lands  of  the  Bohemian 
crown  also  offered  but  slight  resistance  to  the  Imperialists. 
Lusatia  had  even  before  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain 
been  subdued  by  the  Elector  of  Saxony.  The  Lutheran 
Elector  immediately  guaranteed  to  his  co-religionists  the 
free  exercise  of  their  religion.  In  the  course  of  the  Thirty 
Years'  War  Lusatia  was  ceded  to  Saxony,  and  its  connection 
with  Bohemia,  always  a  slight  one,  henceforth  ceases 
entirely.  Moravia  for  a  moment  appeared  inclined  to  offer 
some  resistance  to  the  Austrians.  Count  Thurn,  after  the 
departure  of  King  Frederick  from  Bohemia,  proceeded  to 
Moravia  and  endeavoured  to  induce  the  Estates  to  continue 
their  resistance.  He  met  with  no  success.  Charles  of 
Zerotin,^  the  most  eminent  statesman  of  Moravia,  had 
remained  faithful  to  the  house  of  Habsburg,  even  at  a  moment 
when  the  national  cause  appeared  successful.    He  had  done 

^  In  German,  Wittingau. 

2  For  a  sketch  of  the  interesting  career  of  Charles  of  Zerotin  see  my 
History  of  Bohemian  Literature  (2d  ed.  pp.  321-325),  and  particularly 
my  intvcduction  to  my  translation  of  Conienius's  Labyi'inth  of  the 
World. 


An    Historical    Sketch  281 

so  not  without  personal  risk,  as  he  had  at  the  meeting  of  the 
Estates  at  Brno,  which  decided  to  join  the  Bohemians,  been 
threatened  by  nationahsts  with  the  "fate  of  Martinic  and 
Slavata."  Zerotin  now  advised  unconditional  surrender,  and 
hoped  that  some  gratitude  would  be  shown  to  those  Protes- 
tants who  had  risked  their  lives  and  estates  for  the  House  of 
Habsburg.  The  Estates  decided  to  send  a  deputation  to 
implore  the  Emperor's  mercy.  The  deputies  were  indeed 
received  by  Ferdinand,  but  he  did  not  deign  to  answer  their 
address.  The  Moravians  some  days  later  received  a  letter 
from  the  Imperial  chancellory  stating  that  it  was  only  the 
inexhaustible  graciousness  of  the  Emperor  which  had  induced 
him  to  condescend  to  receive  the  envoys.  They  were  also 
told  that  the  Emperor  had  appointed  Cardinal  Dietrichstein 
governorof  Mora  via,  and  that  he  had  been  instructed  to  punish  '" 
mercilessly  all  enemies  of  Rome  and  of  the  house  of  Habs- 
burg. In  Silesia,  also,  the  re-establishment  of  Austrian  rule 
was  carried  out  almost  without  bloodshed.  The  Emperor's 
ally,  John  George,  Elector  of  Saxony,  entered  the  country 
from  Lusatia,  and  in  consequence  of  his  conciliatory  attitude, 
occupied  it  almost  without  resistance.  He  promised  a  full 
amnesty  to  all  concerned  in  the  recent  disturbances,  and 
guaranteed  to  the  Protestants  freedom  of  religious  worship. 
The  Elector  thus  incurred  the  grave  displeasure  of  Ferdinand, 
for  it  had  already  been  decided  in  the  Imperial  councils  that 
in  future  no  heretic  should  be  allowed  to  dwell  in  the  Habs- 
burg dominions.  The  Emperor  also  strongly  disapproved 
of  the  granting  of  a  general  amnesty,  and  he  by  a  special 
decree  excluded  from  it  the  Margrave  of  Jagerndorf.  The 
lands  of  the  margrave,  a  prince  of  the  House  of  HohenzoUern, 
who  had  been  the  leader  of  the  Protestants  of  Lusatia  and 
Silesia,  were  confiscated  and  given  to  one  of  the  Emperor's 
courtiers.  This  fact  is  not  without  importance,  as  the 
wrongs  inflicted  on  his  ancestor  were  one  of  the  reasons — 
or,  as  some  have  called  them,  pretexts — alleged  by  Frederick 
the  Great,  when  he  invaded  Silesia. 

The  complete  reorganization  of  Bohemia  in  accordance 
lo  the  views  of  Ferdinand  and  of  the  Church  of  Rome 
involved  so  many  new  laws  and  enactments,  referring  to 
almost  all  matters  connected  with  the  country,  that  it  is  not 
easy  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  the  "  Catholic  Reformation," 
— to  use  the  official  designation.  The  re-establishment  of 
the  Roman  Church  was  the  matter  that  Ferdinand  had 
K  2 


282  Bohemia 

most  at  heart,  and  it  deserves  to  be  noticed  first  because, 
of  all  the  changes  introduced  after  the  battle  of  the  White 
Mountain,  it  has  proved  the  most  permanent.  Bohemia 
presents  the  nearly  unique  case  of  a  country  which  formerly 
almost  entirely  Protestant,  has  now  become  almost  entirely 
Catholic.  The  popular  optimistic  fallacy  which  maintains 
that  in  no  country  has  the  religious  belief  of  a  country  been 
entirely  suppressed  by  persecution  and  brute  force  is 
disproved  by  the  fate  of  Bohemia. 

It  is  a  proof  of  the  thorough  knowledge  of  the  mind  of 
his  master  which  the  victorious  Bouquoi  possessed  that  he, 
but  a  few  days  after  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain, 
forwarded  to  Vienna  a  large  case  containing  all  the  parch- 
ments which  recorded  the  ancient  rights  and  privileges  of 
Bohemia.  Among  them  was  of  course  the  famed  "  Letter  of 
Majesty,"  the  object  of  Ferdinand's  particular  hatred.  The 
Emperor  greatly  rejoiced,  and  with  his  scissors  cut  through 
the  abhorred  document,  thus  indicating  that  it  had  become 
invalid.^  Ferdinand  had  in  early  life  vowed  to  the  Madonna 
of  Loretto  that  he  would  exterminate  all  heresies  in  the 
lands  which  he  was  destined  to  rule.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  he  never  swerved  from  the  task  which  he  had  under- 
taken. As  soon  as  the  messengers  of  victory  arrived,  he 
determined  to  undertake  a  pilgrimage  to  Mariazell.  The 
first  celebrations  however  took  place  in  Vienna  itself.  The 
Emperor  and  the  whole  court  proceeded  to  the  cathedral  of 
St.  Stephen,  where  a  Te  Deum  was  sung,  and  Cardinal 
Dietrichstein,  in  an  eloquent  sermon,  celebrated  the 
triumph  of  the  Habsburg  arms.  Yet  more  impressive  was 
a  sermon  preached  on  the  following  day  by  a  Capuchin 
friar,  Brother  Sabinus,  who  was  a  great  favourite  of  the 
Imperial  court.  The  Emperor  was  present  at  this  sermon 
also.  Friar  Sabinus  reminded  Ferdinand  of  all  the  insults 
he  had  endured  from  the  Bohemians,  and  insisted  on  his 
duty  now  to  act  mercilessly ;  he  should  conform  to  the 
words  of  the  Psalmist :  "  Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod 
of  iron;  thou  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's 
vessel."  2  The  Emperor — Friar  Sabinus  continued — must 
exterminate  the  nobility  of  Bohemia,  and  he  must  deprive 

^  In  his  recent  interesting  study  on  the  ' '  Letter  of  Majesty  "  Dr.  Krofta 
has  pubhshed  a  facsimile  of  the  famed  document.  The  traces  of 
Ferdinand's  scissors  are  clearly  noticeable. 

*  Psalm  ii.  9. 


An    Historical    Sketch  283 

the  people  of  all  their  liberties,  and  particularly  of  the 
"  Letter  of  Majesty  " ;  then  would  they  become  faithful  and 
submissive  subjects.  Should  the  Emperor  show  any  mercy, 
greater  evils  would  b'efall  him  than  those  which  he  had 
recently  undergone.  "This  moment,"  the  friar  continued, 
"  is  a  decisive  one.  If  the  Emperor  does  not  now  act  with 
energy  the  words  of  the  prophet  will  be  applied  to  him,  who 
said  :  '  Because  thou  hast  let  go  out  of  thy  hand  a  man 
whom  I  appointed  to  utter  destruction,  therefore  thy  life 
shall  go  for  his  life,  and  thy  people  for  his  people.'  "  ^  These 
words  greatly  impressed  the  Emperor.  As  Gindely  has  well 
said,  the  friar  here  expounded  unconsciously  the  system 
according  to  which  Ferdinand  henceforth  ruled  Bohemia. 
The  expulsion  from  Bohemia  of  all  who  did  not  entirely 
conform  to  the  Church  of  Rome  was  decided  as  soon  as  the 
news  of  the  victory  of  the  White  Mountain  reached  Vienna. 
Circumstances,  however,  rendered  it  necessary  that  the 
measures  to  this  purpose  should  be  carried  out  gradually 
and  consecutively.  The  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church 
were  under  the  immediate  protection  of  the  Lutheran 
Elector  of  Saxony,  who  had  been  a  faithful  ally  of  Ferdi- 
nand during  the  recent  campaign.  PoUtical  reasons 
rendered  an  immediate  expulsion-  of  the  Bohemian 
Lutherans  very  difficult,  and  some  of  Ferdinand's  council- 
lors who  became  known  as  the  "Politicians"  strongly 
advised  moderation.  Their  influence,  however,  only  oc- 
casionally succeeded  in  persuading  the  Emperor  to  delay 
some  of  his  extreme  measures.  The  principal  agents 
employed  by  the  Emperor  to  carry  out  the  "  Catholic 
Reformation  "  were  John  Lobelius,  Archbishop  of  Prague, 
and  Caspar  Questenberg,  Abbot  of  the  Strahov  Monastery. 
They  were  both  Germans,  and  were  inspired  by  a  hatred  of 
the  Bohemian  nation  that  was  founded  on  racial  as  well  as 
on  religious  motives.  The  first  measure  suggested  by  these 
men  was  the  expulsion  from  Bohemia  of  all  preachers  who 
professed  the  Calvinist  doctrine  or  belonged  to  the  com- 
munity of  the  Bohemian  Brethren.  This  measure  was 
immediately  carried  out,  and  in  May  1621,  200  preachers 
had  already  been  expelled  from  Bohemia.  It  would  lead 
too  far  to  enumerate  all  the  consecutive  steps  of  this 
relentless  persecution,  by  means  of  which  the  complete 
extirpation  of  all  creeds  differing  from  the  Church  of  Rome 
^  I  Kings  XX.  42. 


284  Bohemia 

was  finally  obtained.  It  can  be  stated  generally  that  the 
policy  of  Vienna  varied  in  accordance  with  the  fluctuations 
of  the  Thirty  Years'  War.  When  the  Imperial  arms  were 
successful,  new  rigorous  measures  were  introduced  in 
Bohemia.  When  the  Protestant  armies  were  victorious, 
the  "  Politicians "  persuaded  the  Emperor  to  act  with 
more  moderation,  and  not  to  increase  the  number  of  his 
enemies. 

Shortly  after  the  first  expulsions  of  Protestants  from 
Bohemia,  the  extreme  Romanists  obtained  a  very  zealous 
and  powerful  ally  in  the  person  of  Carlo  Caraffa,  the  new 
papal  nuncio  at  Vienna.  It  is  only  of  late  years  that  the 
publication  of  his  despatches,  preserved  in  the  archives  of 
the  Vatican,  has  proved  how  great  a  part  Caraffa  played  in 
the  Catholic  Reformation  of  Bohemia.  He  visited  Prague 
before  proceeding  to  Vienna,  and  expressed  strong  dis- 
pleasure at  the  tardiness  with  which,  according  to  his 
opinion,  the  suppression  of  utraquism  was  being  carried 
out.  He  was  also  very  indignant  when  informed  that  in 
many  churches  of  Prague  communion  was  still  administered 
in  the  two  kinds.  On  the  submission  of  the  old-utraquist 
consistory^  in  1587  and  1593,  when  it  renounced  all  Hus's 
teaching,  and  somewhat  later  formally  acknowledged  the 
authority  of  the  Pope,  the  Roman  Church  admitted  com- 
munion in  the  two  kinds  in  Bohemia,  as  it  has  indeed  done 
in  other  countries  also.  Caraffa's  demand  was  not,  there- 
fore, immediately  granted.  Through  his  influence,  however, 
Prince  Liechtenstein,  the  Austrian  Governor  of  Bohemia, 
ceded  to  the  Romanist  priesthood  numerous  churches  in 
Prague — besides  those  of  which  they  had  taken  possession 
immediately  after  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain. 

In  the  summer  of  the  year  1621,  Mansfeld's  troops — as 
already  mentioned — evacuated  Bohemia,  and  the  Austrian 
arms  were  at  that  time  also  successful  in  Germany.  The 
result  was  a  new  decree — dated  December  13,  162 1 — 
which  expelled  from  Bohemia  all  priests  and  clergymen  who 
did  not  conform  to  the  Church  of  Rome.  To  avoid  the 
displeasure  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  the  Austrian  govern- 
ment informed  him  that  these  priests  were  expelled  not 
because  they  were  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  Rome,  but 
because  they  had  tal<en  part  in  the  recent  rebellion  against 
the  house  of  Habsburg.  At  the  meeting  of  the  Imperial  Diet 
1  See  Chapter  VII. 


An    Historical    Sketch  285 

at  Regensburg  in  1623,  the  envoys  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony 
and  even  those  of  some  of  the  Romanist  princes  remonstrated 
against  the  Imperial  decree,  which  was  indeed  a  direct  vio- 
lation of  promises  made  by  the  Emperor  to  the  Elector  of 
Saxony.  In  consequence  of  the  influence  of  CarafTa  these 
remonstrances  had  no  result. 

In  Bohemia  the  policy  of  Caraffa  proved  more  and  more 
successful.  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  was  entirely  sup- 
pressed. As  the  devotion  of  the  people  to  the  chalice  was 
still  very  great,  this  led  to  considerable  disturbances,  particu- 
larly at  Prague.  When  by  order  of  the  archbishop  a 
Romanist  priest  accompanied  by  a  large  number  of  soldiers 
appeared  in  the  Tyn  church  while  Locika,  the  parish  priest, 
was  celebrating  Mass  according  to  the  utraquist  rites,  Locika 
refused  to  interrupt  his  service,  and  the  people  attempted  to 
defend  their  revered  priest.  These  expressions  of  the  popular 
feeling  were  suppressed  with  extreme  severity.  Locika 
himself  w^as  arrested  and  conveyed  to  the  castle  of  Krivo- 
klat,  "  where  it  was  said  that  he  was  decapitated  so  that  he 
should  in  future  cause  no  disturbances  amongst  the  people."  ^ 
The  Roman  ritual  was  now  re-established  in  all  the  churches 
of  Prague.  This  w^as  done  with  particular  solemnity  in  the 
church  of  St.  Martin,  where  Jacobellus  had  in  1414  first 
dispensed  the  sacrament  in  the  two  kinds.  At  this  time 
also  the  statue  of  King  George  of  Podebrad,  which  repre- 
sented him  pointing  with  his  sword  to  the  chalice  of  which 
he  had  been  so  valiant  a  defender,  was  removed  from  the 
facade  of  the  Tyn  church  as  being^  an  "  utraquist  emblem." 
The  indignation  of  the  citizens,  most  of  whom  were  still 
attached  to  their  ancient  faith,  was  naturally  very  great. 

In  consequence  of  the  incessant  expulsions  of  the  clergy, 
very  few  priests  for  a  time  remained  in  Bohemia.  In  many 
villages  and  even  small  towns  the  religious  services  had 
entirely  ceased.  Though  the  Jesuits  flocked  to  Bohemia  in 
great  numbers  immediately  after  the  defeat  of  the  national 
cause,  they  were  not  able  to  occupy  all  the  vacant  parson- 
ages and  curateships.  The  Archbishop  of  Prague  therefore 
declared  that  all  utraquist  priests  could  retain  their  livings, 
if  they  consented  to  administer  the  sacrament  in  one  kind 
only,  and  to  conform  to  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy, 
as  established  by  the  Roman  Church.  As  most  of 
the  utraquist  priests  were  married  men,  the  archbishop 
^  SkaJa  ze  Zhore  Historic  Ceskd,  v.  213. 


286  Bohemia 

declared  that  their  wives  would  be  allowed  to  continue  to 
live  with  them,  if  they  agreed  to  accept  the  name  of  cooks, 
a  word  that  under  the  circumstances  of  course  veiled  an 
opprobrious  designation.  Most  of  the  priests  indignantly 
rejected  this  insulting  suggestion,  but,  forced  by  extreme 
poverty,  some  were  obliged  to  agree  to  it.  This  measure 
which  forced  honest  women,  who  had  been  married 
according  to  the  rights  of  their  Church,  to  choose  between 
starvation  and  disgrace  is  one  of  the  darkest  pages  of  the 
very  black  records  of  the  Bohemian  Catholic  Reformation. 

Though  from  the  moment  that  the  battle  of  the  White 
Mountain  had  been  fought,  many  Bohemian  nobles  and 
citizens  had  been  driven  into  exile,  priests  only  had  in  the 
first  years  after  the  battle  been  expelled  from  Bohemia 
solely  because  they  did  not  conform  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 
In  1623,  Bethlen  Gabor,  prince  of  Transylvania,  again  rose 
in  arms  against  the  house  of  Habsburg,  and  after  defeating 
the  Austrian  troops,  invaded  Moravia.  Moderation  there- 
fore for  a  time  became  necessary.  In  1624,  however,  a 
treaty  of  peace  was  concluded  with  the  Prince  of  Tran- 
sylvania, and  the  Vienna  official  now  considered  the  moment 
opportune  to  continue  the  persecutions  in  Bohemia.  The 
nuncio,  Caraffa,  about  this  time  obtained  a  powerful 
ally  in  the  Jesuit  father,  Lamormain,  who  had  just  be- 
come the  Emperor's  confessor.  Caraffa  and  Lamormain 
declared  it  to  be  an  absolute  necessity  that  all  lyho  did  not 
conform  to  the  Roman  Church  should  be  expelled  from 
Bohemia.  An  exception  was  to  be  made  only  in  favour  of 
the  Bohemian  peasants  whom  serfdom  attached  to  the  soil, 
to  the  cultivation  of  which  they  were  necessary.  It  was 
stated  that  by  means  of  imprisonment  and  corporal  punish- 
ment they  could  be  forced  to  become  at  least  nominal 
Romanists,  and  that  in  the  course  of  time  they,  or  at  least 
their  children,  would  become  true  members  of  the  Roman 
Church.  These  suggestions  appeared  extreme  even  to  such 
a  religious  enthusiast  as  the  Emperor  Ferdinand  was.  La- 
mormain advised  him  to  meditate  deeply  on  this  weighty 
matter,  and  to  prepare  for  this  meditation  by  receiving 
communion.  Lamormain  then,  leaving  the  court  for  a  few 
days,  retired  to  the  Jesuit  monastery  in  Vienna  to  offer 
up  incessant  prayers  that  his  counsels  might  be  favour-/ 
ably  received.  When  he  returned  to  court  the  Emperoij 
declared  to  him  that  after  receiving  communion  the  Holy* 


An    Historical    Sketch  287 

Ghost  had  enlightened  him  and  ordered  him  to  accept  with- 
out hesitation  all  advice  that  his  confessor  might  give  him.^ ' 
By  order  of  the  Emperor  two  new  decrees  referring  to  the 
protestants  of  Bohemia  were  then  published  (May  1624). 
The  first  ordered  the  Imperial  officials  to  pursue  with  greater 
energy  all  preachers  whose  teaching  was  not  in  accordance 
with  that  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  The  second  practically, 
though  not  yet  formally,  excluded  all  Protestants  from  Bohe- 
mia. No  Protestant  was  in  future  to  enjoy  the  rights  of  citizen- 
ship, to  own  or  to  inherit  land  in  Bohemia.  No  marriage 
which  was  not  celebrated  in  accordance  to  the  Roman  rites, 
and  no  marriage  of  a  Protestant  was  henceforth  to  be  valid. 
Baptisms  and  burials  without  the  assistance  of  a  Roman 
priest  were  prohibited.  These  decrees  caused  great  rejoic- 
ing in  Rome.  The  nuncio  was  instructed  to  express  the 
Pope's  special  gratitude,  and  the  College  of  the  Propaganda 
celebrated  Ferdinand  as  a  "  second  Constantine  and  Theo- 
dosius."  2 

It  appears  that  these  draconic  regulations  were  not 
immediately  carried  out  in  their  whole  extent  in  Bohemia. 
Warfare  with  alternating  results  continued  in  Germany,  and 
the  "  Politicians  "  at  the  coui't  of  Ferdinand  may  still  have 
thought  it  advisable  not  to  exasperate  too  much  a  once 
formidable  nation.  In  1625  the  Elector  of  Bavaria  warned 
Ferdinand  that  a  new  confederacy  against  the  House  of 
Habsburg  appeared  probable.  Not  entirely  to  alienate  the 
sympathies  of  the  Germans,  Ferdinand  decreed  that  non- 
Catholics  should  in  the  German  districts  of  Bohemia  be 
allowed  to  hold  baptismal,  marriage  and  burial  services 
according  to  their  "  heretical "  rites,  with  the  tacit  connivance 
of  the  authorities.  To  the  Slavic  majority  of  the  population 
no  such  a  favour  was  to  be  granted,  "  as  it  was  not  likely 
that  their  complaints  would  reach  Germany." 

On  August  27,  1626,  Tilly  decisively  defeated,  at  Lutter, 
near  Wolfenbiittel,  the  army  of  King  Christian  of  Denmark, 
who  had  come  to  the  aid  of  the  German  Protestants,  and 
about  the  same  time  Ferdinand's  general  Waldstein^  de- 
feated the  forces  of  Bethlen  Gabor.  These  victories,  as  usual, 

^  Despatch  of  Carafifa  in  the  Vatican  archives,  quoted  by  Gindely. 

2  Quoted  by  Gindely  from  the  acts  of  the  propaganda. 

2  Even  the  example  of  Schiller  is  not  a  sufficient  authority  for  calling 
the  great  general  ' '  Wallenstein. "  I  use  the  form  of  the  name  which  is 
accepted  by  the  family  and  generally  used  in  Bohemia. 


288  Bohemia 

caused  the  Catholic  reformation  to  be  carried  out  with 
greater  energy.  The  Bohemians  long  opposed  a  tacit 
resistance  to  the  efforts  of  the  Romanist  priests  who  strove 
to  win  them  over  to  their  creed.  The  Romanist  services 
were  held  in  the  presence  of  only  a  few  people,  who  were 
by  force  driven  into  the  churches.  Some  of  the  preachers 
of  the  community  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren  still  secretly 
remained  in  their  country  and  held  secret  services  in  the 
vast  forests  of  Bohemia.  Even  many  professed  Romanists 
attended  these  services.  Ferdinand  was  very  indignant 
at  this,  and  by  his  order  a  Government  official  informed  the 
citizens  of  Kutna  Hora,  who  appear  to  have  been  strong 
opponents  of  the  Catholic  reformation — that  he  considered 
"  as  beasts,  not  men,"  ^  those  who  refused  to  accept  the  teach- 
ing of  the  only  beatifying  Church.  The  Romanist  priests 
also,  seeing  how  firmly  the  Bohemians  clung  to  their  ancient 
faith,  became  impatient.  Thus  the  inhabitants  of  the  small 
town  of  Zebrak  complained  that  their  parish  priest  insulted 
them,  calling  them  "  donkeys,  boobies  and  fools."  ^  Cardinal 
Harrach,  who  had  succeeded  Lobelius  as  Archbishop  of 
Prague,  declared  to  the  Emperor  that  half-measures  had 
proved  unsuccessful  and  that  the  extirpation  of  all  dissidents 
from  the  Roman  faith  could  restore  tranquillity  to  Bohemia. 
The  "  Politicians "  again  advised  moderation,  and  the 
Emperor,  as  was  his  custom,  left  the  final  decision  to  the 
Jesuits.  The  councillors  he  chose'  were  his  confessor, 
Father  Lamormain,  and  Father  Philippi,  the  tutor  of  his  son. 
The  two  Jesuits  declared  that  the  suppression  of  all  heresy 
was  the  Emperor's  first  duty.  They  advised  that  members 
of  their  order  should  visit  all  parts  of  Bohemia  and  preach 
the  true  faith.  They  were  to  be  accompanied  by  soldiers, 
who  were  to  be  quartered  on  the  inhabitants  till  they 
formally  made  their  submission  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 
Should  some  men  subsequently  relapse  into  their  former 
errors,  troops  should  again  be  quartered  on  them,  that 
vexations  might  bring  them  to  their  right  minds,  and  they, 
having  thus  become  wiser,  should  fulfil  their  duty.^ 

^  "  Nicht  Menschen  sondern  Vieh"  (Gindely,  Geschichte  der  Gegen- 
refort/iation  in  Bdkfnt?i). 

-  Ibid. 

•'  The  stern  ferocity  of  the  Jesuits  appears  clearly  in  the  Latin 
oriiinal  of  their  report.  They  wrote  :  "  Si  .  .  .  multi  post  acceptam 
ins  ructionem  perseverant  in  sua  pertinacia,  illi  soli  graventur  milite  et 


An    Historical    Sketch  289 

Ferdinand  did  not  hesitate  to  accept  the  advice  of  his 
councillors,  and  he  shortly  afterwards  issued  the  famed 
decree  of  July  31,  1627.  The  emperor  had  himself  chosen 
this  day,  as  it  was  the  anniversary  of  the  death  of  St.  Ignatius 
of  Loyola.  Its  principal  and  very  simple  enactment  decreed 
that  no  one  not  belonging  to  the  Church  of  Rome  should 
be  allowed  to  live  in  Bohemia,  or  even  to  enter  the  country. 
This  decree  applied  equally  to  all — nobles,  citizens  and 
peasants,  men  and  women.  The  nobles  were  granted  a 
delay  of  six  months,  within  which  they  were  to  conform  to 
the  Church  of  Rome.  Those  who  refused  to  do  so  were 
then  granted  a  further  term  of  six  months  for  the  purpose 
of  selling  their  estates.  No  exceptions  w^ere  made.  Even 
Charles  of  Zerotin,  a  firm  adherent  of  the  house  of  Habs- 
burg,  who  had  risked  his  life  for  that  dynasty,  was  obliged 
to  leave  Bohemia.  Though  a  few  "  heretics  "  still  remained 
in  hiding  in  Bohemia,  the  "  Catholic  Reformation  "  can  after 
this  decree  be  considered  as  having  been  accomplished. 
Bohemia,  at  least  nominally,  became  an  exclusively  Romanist 
State. 

Two  measures  of  minor  importance  are  in  close  connec- 
tion with  this  great  change  in  the  condition  of  the  land. 
One  is  the  suppression  of  the  university  of  Prague,  at  least 
as  a  free  and  scientific  institution.  The  university  had 
strongly  favoured  the  national  cause.  Several  of  the  most 
important  meetings  of  the  patriots  had  been  held  at  the 
Carolinum,  the  principal  building  belonging  to  the  univer- 
sity. The  learned  physician  Jessenius,  who  had  been  rector 
in  the  year  of  the  Defenestration,  a  man  of  great  talent  and 
eloquence,  had  been  employed  by  the  "  Directors  "  on  several 
diplomatic  missions.  He  was  punished  by  the  Imperialists 
with  special  cruelty.  Before  he  was  executed  on  the  fateful 
2ist  of  June  his  tongue  was  cut  out — as  that  of  Cicero  had 
once  been — and  was  nailed  to  the  scaffold.  Some  of  the 
Spanish  generals  in  the  Imperial  army,  men  such  as  Bal- 
thasar  Marradas,  Martin  Huerta,  Caretto  del  Grano,i  who 
were  noted  for  their  excessive  cruelty,   suggested   that  in 

parcatur  conversis  ut  vexatio  det  intellectum  et  tamdiu  graventur  quoad 
escipiscant  et  officio  satisfaciant." 

^  The  names  of  these  men,  on  whom  vast  estates  in  Bohemia  were 
bestowed,  were  long  preserved  in  the  memory  of  the  people.  Hatred 
of  the  Spaniards  long  lingered  in  their  minds,  and  even  during  the 
recent  war  between  Spain  and  the  United  States  many  rejoiced  over  the 
defeats  of  the  Spaniards. 


290  Bohemia 

consequence  of  the  attitude  of  the  university  the  Carolinuim 
should  be  demoHshed.  The  Jesuits,  however,  opposed  this 
scheme. 

Ferdinand  I  had  in  1556  introduced  this  Order  into 
Bohemia,  and  the  college  of  St.  Clement  was  founded  by 
it  shortly  afterwards.  Between  this  new  college  and  the 
ancient  university  of  Charles  IV,  which  had  adopted  the 
utraquist  and  afterwards  the  Lutheran  teaching,  a  spirit  of 
rivalry  soon  sprung  up.  A  struggle  between  the  two  learned 
institutions  began,^  which  ended  only  with  the  battle  of  the 
Bila  Hora.  After  that  victory  Ferdinand  no  doubt  imme- 
diately decided  to  suppress  the  ancient  university  and  to 
transfer  its  funds  and  privileges  to  the  Jesuit  college.  In  this 
case  also  the  great  change  was  only  carried  out  gradually. 
At  the  end  of  the  year  1620  the  estates  belonging  to  the 
university  were  confiscated,  and  German  soldiers,  who  griev- 
ously ill-treated  the  tenantry,  were  quartered  there.  The 
university  vainly  endeavoured  to  avert  the  blow  that  threat- 
ened it.  The  prorector  Campanus,  when  Ferdinand  arrived 
in  Prague,  addressed  the  victor  in  flattering  Latin  verses 
in  a  somewhat  undignified  manner.^  Neither  these  verses 
nor  the  petitions  of  other  members  of  the  university  made 
any  impression  on  Ferdinand,  who  had  already — on  the 
advice  of  Father  Lamormain — decided  to  establish  the 
Jesuits  in  the  university.  Lamormain  disapproved  of  all 
delay;  he  said  that  the  university  had  for  two  hundred 
years  been  in  the  hands  of  the  Hussites ;  teachers  and 
magisters  educated  there  in  the  atheist  doctrine  of  Hussit- 
ism  had  appeared  in  all  towns  and  hamlets;  many  had 
married  rich  widows,  and  the  number  of  heretics  had  thus 

^  I  can  only  allude  briefly  here  to  this  interesting  struggle.  It  is 
well  described  in  Dr.  Winter's  Deje  vys  Kych  skol  (History  of  the  High 
Schools  of  Prague). 

"^  In  conformity  to  their  rather  mean  tendency,  the  verses  of  Campanus 
are  very  indifferent.     He  wrote — 

"  Par  virtute  nepos  et  nomine,  Caesar,  habenas 
Qui  nunc  imperii  temperat  aequus,  adest 
Arma  deses  rapuit  funesta  Boemia  frustra 
Caesaris  ad  tanti  mox  ruitura  pedes 
Victa  tamen  surges  sub  tali  principe,  smges 
Patria,  parcus  erit  sanguinis  ille  tiii. 
Tu  quoque  pone  metus,  Academi  vera  secutum, 
Assuetumque  libris,  innocuumque  genus 
Aurea  sub  docto  sunt  principe  secula  doctis 
Talis  et  ire  viri  sole  cadente,  cadit." 


An    Historical    Sketch  291 

become  greater.^  The  Emperor  finally  decided  that  in  con- 
sideration of  the  memory  of  King  Charles  the  Carolinum 
should  not  be  destroyed  but  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Jesuits,  whose  college  was  to  take  the  place  of  the  old 
university.  The  new  foundation  was  to  be  called  the 
*'  universitas  Carolina  Ferdinandea."  All  the  old  magisters 
and  professors  were  expelled,  even  Campanus,  though  he 
in  the  last  years  of  his  life  professed  the  Roman  creed.  By 
the  end  of  the  year  1622  all  the  buildings  belonging  to  the 
university  had  been  handed  over  to  the  Jesuits,  and — some- 
what later  than  the  teachers — all  students  who  had  not 
conformed  to  the  teaching  of  Rome  were  expelled  and 
exiled  from  Bohemia. 

Closely  connected  with  the  suppression  of  all  teaching 
opposed  to  Rome  was  the  destruction  of  the  ancient 
national  literature  of  Bohemia.  Almost  all  literature  in 
Bohemia  subsequent  to  Hus  had  been  imbued  with  the 
spirit  of  the  great  reformer  and  patriot.  All  this  literature 
was  therefore  doomed  to  destruction,  and  the  Jesuits  were 
certainly  to  a  great  extent  successful.  If  we  except  the 
classical  literatures,  there  is  none  to  whom  belong  so  many 
books  the  existence  of  which  can  be  proved  with  certainty, 
yet  of  which  all  trace  is  lost,  as  to  the  older  literature  of 
Bohemia.  Jesuits  accompanied  by  soldiers — to  prevent  the 
possibility  of  resistance — were  empowered  to  search  for 
heretical  books  in  all  Bohemian  dwellings  from  the  noble- 
man's castle  to  the  peasant's  hut.  The  Jesuit  Andrew 
Konias  is  particularly  mentioned  as  rivalling  the  fame  of 
Omer  or  Archbishop  Theophilus.  He  is  perhaps  the 
greatest  book  destroyer  known  to  history,  and  boasted  of 
having  himself  burnt  60,000  Bohemian  volumes. 

To  such  enthusiastic  Romanists  as  Ferdinand  and  his 
Jesuit  councillors  the  re-establishment  of  the  Roman  Church 
in  Bohemia  and  the  complete  suppression  of  all  so-called 
heresies  no  doubt  appeared  the  principal  result  of  the  Bila 
Hora.  The  complete  transformation  which  Bohemia  then 
underwent  included,  however,  also  an  entire  change  in  the 
constitution  and  even  in  the  language  of  the  country.  In 
the  years  immediately  following  the  great  national  defeat 
Bohemia  was  under  martial  law.  The  German  and  Spanish 
generals  and  the  Austrian  governor  Charles  of  Liechtenstein 

*  Dr.  Winter,  Deje  vys  Kych  skol  (History  of  the  High  Schools  of 
Prague). 


292  Bohemia 

wielded  unrestricted  power.  In  1627  only  Ferdinand  pub- 
lished a  new  fundamental  law  known  as  the  "  renewed  ordi- 
nance of  the  land."  ^  Its  principal  points  may  here  be  briefly 
noted.2  It  had  for  centuries  been  a  moot  point  whether 
the  Bohemian  crown  was  an  elective  or  an  hereditary  one. 
This  point  was  now  settled  for  ever.  The  Bohemian  crown 
was  declared  to  be  hereditary  in  the  house  of  Habsburg, 
both  in  the  male  and  in  the  female  line.  Only  in  the  case 
of  the  complete  extinction  of  that  dynasty  was  the  right  of 
electing  a  sovereign  to  be  reassumed  by  the  Estates.  The 
ancient  ceremony  of  the  "  reception "  of  the  new  king, 
which  had  continued  during  the  rule  of  the  first  Habsburg 
princes,  and  which  preserved  a  semblance  of  a  sanction  to 
the  presence  of  the  new  ruler  on  the  part  of  the  Estates,  was 
abolished.  The  ceremony  of  the  coronation  of  the  kings 
was,  however,  retained.  The  representative  institutions  of 
the  land  were  also  remodelled.  To  the  three  Estates — the 
nobles,  knights  and  townsmen — a  fourth,  the  ecclesiastical 
one  was  added,  and  this  one  was  to  take  precedence  over  all 
the  others.  In  Moravia  the  ecclesiastical  Estate  had  already 
existed  previously.  It  now  obtained  there  also  precedence 
over  the  other  Estates.  It  was  further  decreed  that  all 
privileges  and  rights  granted  to  "  acatholics  " — as  all  who 
did  not  belong  to  the  Church  of  Rome  now  began  to  be 
officially  called — were  revoked.  With  the  exception  of  the 
Jews,  no  one  not  belonging  to  the  Roman  Church  was 
henceforth  to  reside  in  Bohemia.  A  further  very  important 
enactment  declared  that  the  sovereign  henceforth  reserved 
to  himself  the  entire  legislative  power  in  the  Bohemian 
lands.  Most  of  the  ancient  State  offices  continued  to  exist, 
but  the  most  important  of  them,  that  of  burgrave  of  the 
Karlstein,  was  suppressed.  A  great  change  took  place  with 
regard  to  the  appointment  to  the  offices  of  State.  The  king 
had  hitherto  been  obliged  to  be  guided  in  his  choice  by  the 
opinion  of  the  Estates.  He  now  obtained  the  power  of 
appointing  practically  whomever  he  wished.  A  further 
enactm.ent  greatly  restricted  the  powers  of  the  Bohemian 
law   courts,    and   reserved  to  the   sovereign   the   right   of 

^  In  Bohemian  '*  Obnovene  Zrizeni  zemoke." 

^  For  this  very  short  sketch  I  am  largely  indebted  to  the  learned 
I'rofessor  Kalousek.  His  Ceski  Statni  Prdvo  (in  a  rongh  translation, 
*' The  Bohemian  Constitution")  is  the  standard  work  on  Bohemian 
constitutional  history. 


An    Historical    Sketch  293 

revising  and  annulling  all  their  decisions.  It  was  further 
declared  that  the  right  of  granting  citizenship  ^  to  foreigners, 
which  the  Estates  had  formerly  possessed,  should  in  future 
belong  to  the  king.  A  last  and  very  important  enactment 
stated  that  henceforth  the  German  language  should  in  all 
law  courts  and  Government  offices  be  recognized  as  having 
the  same  value  as  the  national  language. 

In  the  preamble  to  this  constitutional  enactment  Ferdi- 
nand declared  that  he  had  conquered  the  Bohemian  lands 
by  the  force  of  the  sword  and  that  "  the  whole  kingdom  had 
rebelled  in  forma  universitatis  " — a  statement  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  then  generally  accepted  views,  involved  the  loss  of 
all  the  ancient  rights  and  privileges  of  the  nation.  In 
apparent  contradiction  to  this  declaration,  the  Emperor 
nineteen  days  after  the  publication  of  the  new  ordinance 
issued  a  decree  stating  that  he  allowed  the  Bohemians  to 
preserve  their  ancient  privileges  as  far  as  they  had  not  been 
suppressed  by  the  new  constitutional  enactments.  This 
contradiction  has  often  been  noticed,  and  the  learned 
Professor  Kalousek — our  principal  authority  on  the  consti- 
tutional history  of  Bohemia — thinks  that  Ferdinand's 
promise  was  never  a  genuine  one,  and  that  it  was  only  made 
to  pacify  the  Bohemians.  This  question  has  of  recent 
times  again  been  discussed  on  several  occasions — in  1847 
when  the  Bohemian  Estates  attempted  to  recover  some  of 
their  ancient  rights,  and  in  187 1  when  that  talented  and  able 
statesman  the  late  Count  Hohenwarth  made  an  attempt  to 
re-establish  the  ancient  constitution  of  Bohemia. 

It  is  significative  of  the  sj5irit  which  animated  the  new 
rulers  of  Bohemia  that  though  it  had  been  decided  that  the 
"new  ordinance  of  the  land"  should  be  published  in 
Bohemian,  German  and  Latin,  only  the  German  version 
was  printed.  This  leads  us  to  consider  another  great  change 
in  the  condition  of  Bohemia,  which  resulted  from  the  battle 
of  the  Bila  Hora,  but  which  has  proved  less  permanent  than 
many  others.  It  is  probable  that  with  the  exception  of  the 
earliest  period  Bohemia  always  had  a  certain  number  of 
German  inhabitants,  and  the  Jews  who  arrived  very  early  in 
Bohemia  at  all  times  preferred  German  to  the  national 
language.  The  number  of  German  inhabitants  in  Bohemia 
varied  according  to  the  political  situation  of  the  country, 
but  the  Germans  were  always  considered  as  foreigners 
1  In  Bohemian  "  inkolat.'' 


294  Bohemia 

dwelling  in  the  land.  The  Diet  of  1615  had  recently 
published  new  enactments  favourable  to  the  national 
language.^  Even  after  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain,  a 
German  prince,  John  George,  Elector  of  Saxony,  had  when 
writing  to  Ferdinand  stated  that  a  German  in  Bohemia  was 
to  be  treated  as  a  "  guest  and  stranger."  ^  In  this  respect  a 
complete  change  took  place.  It  has  already  been  mentioned 
that  the  German  language  was  granted  equal  rights  with  the 
national  one,  and  as- the  new  judges  and  officials  appointed 
by  Ferdinand  often  knew  little  or  no  Bohemian,  the  German 
language  shortly  after  it  had  been  admitted  obtained  prefer- 
ence to  that  of  the  country. 

Another  circumstance  that  contributed  largely  to  the 
decline  of  the  Bohemian  language  was  the  system  of  land- 
confiscation  which  the  Imperialists  carried  out  on  a  gigantic 
scale.  Almost  the  whole  of  the  ancient  nobility  of  Bohemia 
was  deprived  of  its  estates.  The  first  confiscations  touched 
only  those  who  had — sometimes  under  compulsion — recog- 
nized the  government  of  King  Frederick.  The  later 
confiscations,  however,  included  all  who  did  not  conform  to 
the  Roman  creed,  even  if  they  had  always  continued 
faithful  to  the  house  of  Habsburg.  More  than  half  the 
landed  property  in  Bohemia  was  confiscated,  and  of  the 
larger  estates  in  the  country  only  one  hundred  and  forty- 
seven  remained  in  the  hands  of  their  previous  owners.^ 
These  were  principally  Bohemian  Romanists  such  as  Slavata, 
Martinic,  and  Waldstein,  who  at  this  moment  laid  the 
foundation  of  his  vast  fortune.  The  place  of  the  ancient 
Bohemian  nobles  who  were  driven,  often  penniless,  into 
exile  was  taken  by  a  very  motley  company,  consisting  mainly 
of  Imperial  courtiers  and  generals.  We  find  among  these 
men  of  various  nations — Germans,  Spaniards,  Walloons, 
Italians,  and,  after  the  fall  of  Waldstein,  Scotchmen  and 
Irishmen.  All,  however,  shared  a  common  devotion  to  the 
Church  of  Rome,  and  a  common  hatred  of  the  Bohemian 
nation.  These  men  were  almost  all  ignorant  of  the 
Bohemian  language,  which   indeed   they   despised  as  the 

1  See  Chapter  VII. 

2  "  Gast  und    Fremdling."     Letter    of  the   Elector   of  Saxony   to 

Ferdinand  dated  2^^^^^^  1622  quoted  by  Gindely,  Geschichie  der 

November  5 
Gegenrefoviiation  in  Bbhmen. 

'  Dr.  Bflek,  Dejiny  Konfskaci  v  C^echdch  (History  of  the  Confiscations 
in  Bohemia). 


An    Historical    Sketch  295 

language  of  heretics.  It  was  mainly  in  the  interest  of  these 
intruders  and  of  the  members  of  the  Roman  Church  on  whom 
vast  estates  had  been  bestowed  and  among  whom  there 
were  at  first  hardly  any  Bohemians,  that  the  new  regulations 
in  favour  of  the  German  language  were  established. 

A  yet  greater  change  took  place  in  the  Bohemian  towns. 
The  numerous  Protestants,  mostly  of  the  Bohemian  nation- 
ality, who  had  inhabited  these  towns  and  who  had  refused 
to  apostatize  were  driven  into  exile,  and  they  were  replaced 
by  German  immigrants  belonging  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 
Many  Bohemian  towns  such  as  Litomefice  and  Louny,i 
formerly  national  strongholds  during  the  Hussite  wars,  now 
became  German  and  have  continued  so  up  to  the  present 
day. 

While  the  nobles  and  citizens,  who  wished  to  preserve 
their  religious  convictions,  were  at  least  allowed  to  leave 
their  country,  though  often  in  a  state  of  complete  destitution, 
no  such  option  was  granted  to  the  peasants  whom  serfdom 
attached  to  the  soil,  for  the  cultivation  of  which  they  were 
required.  They  were  to  remain  there,  but  to  remain  there 
as  Romanists.  Serfdom  now  only  appeared  in  its  full 
horror.  The  new  landowners  punished  with  fiendish 
cruelty  all  who  did  not  regularly  attend  at  Mass  or  avoided 
receiving  communion  according  to  the  Roman  rites. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  Imperial  arms 
were  generally  victorious  during  the  years  that  immediately 
followed  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain.  These  successful 
campaigns  confirmed  Ferdinand  in  his  plan  of  restoring  the 
Roman  supremacy  not  only  in  Bohemia,  but  also  in  Ger- 
many. Recent  research  proved  that  the  Emperor  began 
about  this  time  to  cherish  such  far-reaching  plans.  The 
Imperial  power  had,  in  Germany,  receded  for  centuries,  and 
the  princes  had  to  an  ever-increasing  extent  assumed  the 
position  of  sovereign  powers.  It  appears  very  probable  that 
the  Emperor,  who  knew  how  completely  the  Spanish  branch 
of  his  family  had  succeeded  in  establishing  absolutism  in 
Spain,  hoped  to  achieve  a  similar  constitutional  change  in 
Germany.  Ferdinand  was  greatly  encouraged  in  these 
ambitious  plans  by  his  powerful  general  Albert  of  Wald- 
stein. 

Though  it  would  be  very  tempting  to  search  for  a  new 
solution  of  the  Waldstein  problem — one  of  the  strangest 
^  In  German  *  *  Leitmeritz  "  and  *'  Laun." 


296 


Bohemia 


enigmas  of  history  ^ — the  purpose  and  scope  of  this  work 
preclude  an  attempt  to  do  so  here.  Yet  the  career  of  the 
great  Bohemian  warrior  must  be  briefly  deUneated  here. 
Albert  of  Waldstein — born  in  1583 — belonged  to  one  of  the 
oldest  families  of  the  Bohemian  nobility,  which  traced  its 
origin  as  far  back  as  the  thirteenth  century.  His  family  had 
accepted  the  utraquist  creed,  but  after  the  early  death  of 
his  parents  he  was  educated  in  the  tenets  of  the  Bohemian 
Brethren,  by  his  uncle.  Lord  Henry  of  Slavata.  After  the 
death  of  this  uncle  another  relation,  who  now  became  his 
guardian,  sent  him  to  the  Jesuit  school  at  Olomouc,  where 
he  soon  adopted  the  Roman  creed.  None  of  these  changes 
of  religion  appear  to  have  been  even  to  the  slightest  extent 
founded  on  conviction.  The  fact  that  Waldstein  was  a 
devotee  to  astrology  renders  it  probable  that  he  was  imbued 
with  the  spirit  of  superstition  which  is  so  often  found  in 
conjunction  with  religious  agnosticism.  Waldstein  then 
visited  several  universities,  staying  longest  at  that  of  Padua. 
It  is  hardly  fanciful  to  suggest  that  the  tales  of  the  great 
Italian  adventurers  and  condottieri  of  the  cinquecento  which 
he  must  have  frequently  heard,  made  a  great  impression  on 
the  mind  of  a  young  man  so  thoroughly  imbued  with 
ambition  as  was  Waldstein.  On  his  return  to  his  native 
land  Waldstein  married  a  rich  widow  and  thus  became 
owner  of  large  possessions  in  Moravia,  and  a  member  of  the 
Estates  of  that  country.  As  he  was  related  to  Charles  of 
Zerotin,  then  the  most  influential  noble  of  Moravia,  Wald- 
stein through  his  protection  was  soon  able  to  play  a  consider- 
able part  in  the  politics  of  the  country.  When  the  Estates 
of  Moravia  took  up  arms  against  Rudolph  II  and  supported 
King  Matthew,  2  Waldstein  was  given  the  command  of  a 
cavalry  regiment.  When,  however,  in  16 19  the  Bohemian 
forces  invaded  Moravia,  Waldstein  did  not  follow  the 
example  of  the  other  nobles,  most  of  whom  joined  the 
Bohemians,  but  remained  faithful  to  the  Imperial  cause. 

1  Since  the  revival  of  historical  study  in  Bohemia,  the  historians  of 
that  country  have  larg^ely  devoted  their  attention  to  the  career  of  their 
great  countryman.  The  late  Professor  Rezek  wrote  that  the  more  he 
studied  the  history  of  Waldstein,  the  less  did  the  great  condottiere 
appeal  to  his  sympathy.  It  is  stated  that  vi^hen  Palacky  was  examining 
a  monument  to  Waldstein,  which  had  then  been  recently  erected  in 
Vienna,  he  long  contemplated  the  statue  in  silence,  and  then  expressed 
his  judgment  in  the  one  word  :  "  darebak  ! "  (scoundrel). 

2  See  Chapter  VII. 


An    Historical    Sketch  297 

The  soldiers  whom  he  commanded,  mostly  utraquists,  joined 
the  Bohemians,  and  Waldstein  was  obliged  to  seek  refuge 
at  the  Imperial  court  of  Vienna,  accompanied  only  by  a 
few  horsemen.  He  thus  laid  the  foundation  of  the  great 
favour  which  he  long  enjoyed  at  the  court  of  Ferdinand. 
He  took  part  in  the  campaign  which  ended  with  the  battle 
of  the  Bila  Hora,  and  was  noted  for  the  great  severity,  and 
indeed  cruelty,  with  which  he  maintained  order  in  Prague 
after  the  city  had  capitulated  to  the  Imperialists. 

Waldstein  seized  the  opportunity  of  the  vast  confiscations 
of  Bohemian  estates  which  took  place  after  the  battle  of 
the  White  Mountain  to  acquire  an  enormous  fortune.  As 
a  favourite  of  the  Emperor  he  was  able  to  purchase  at  an 
almost  nominal  price  vast  estates  which  had  belonged  to 
exiled  Protestants.  The  expense  incurred  by  Waldstein 
was  still  further  diminished  by  the  fact  that  he  had,  together 
with  Prince  Liechtenstein,  Austrian  governor  of  Bohemia, 
and  other  Imperial  courtiers,  authorized  the  Jew  Bassewi  to 
introduce  an  adulterated  coinage  into  Bohemia,  in  which 
all  payments  were  made  by  those  who  enjoyed  the  favour  of 
the  court  of  Vienna.  Though  he  had  thus  become  a  very 
w^ealthy  man  and  one  of  the  greatest  landowners  in  Bohemia, 
Waldstein  continued  to  serve  in  the  Imperial  army,  which 
principally  through  his  military  talent  obtained  brilliant 
victories.  Waldstein  was  successful  against  the  Hungarian 
army  of  Bethlen  Gabor,  and  also  defeated  in  Moravia  and 
Silesia  the  forces  of  the  Margrave  of  Jagerndorf  and  of 
Count  Thurn.  Through  these  victories  the  Imperialists, 
however,  obtained  but  a  short  respite.  The  ever-increasing 
conviction  that  the  total  destruction  of  Protestantism  was  the 
real  aim  of  the  Habsburg  dynasty,  induced  all  Protestant 
princes  consecutively  to  oppose  Ferdinand.  When  in  1625 
the  King  of  Denmark  attacked  the  Emperor,  Waldstein  not 
only  undertook  the  command  of  the  Imperial  forces,  but  he 
also,  by  granting  Ferdinand  a  very  large  loan,  enabled  him 
to  raise  a  considerable  army.  As  Gindely  has  well  pointed 
out,  the  dependence  of  the  Emperor  on  Waldstein  was  a 
result  of  the  continued  financial  difficulties  that  confronted 
Ferdinand.  He  was  always  lavish  of  gifts  to  all  priests 
and  monks,  and  even  in  moments  of  the  greatest  financial 
distress  insisted  on  maintaining  a  large  and  expensive  court 
and  household.  Ferdinand  may  have  been  impressed  by 
the  example  of  his  Spanish  kinsmen  who  had  succeeded 


298 


Bohemia 


in  transforming  into  courtiers  the  former  nobles  of  their 
country — a  result  that  of  course  was  favourable  to  the 
absolutist  policy  of  the  house  of  Habsburg. 

In  the  new  campaign  Waldstein  was  again  victorious. 
He  defeated  at  Dessau  the  army  of  Mansfeld,  who  was 
acting  in  alliance  with  the  King  of  Denmark.  Waldstein 
was  now  at  the  acme  of  his  power.  He  treated  the  German 
princes  with  studied  discourtesy,  when  they  attempted  to 
complain  of  the  depredations  committed  by  his  troops. 
This  was  by  no  means  displeasing  to  the  absolutist  courtiers 
of  Ferdinand.  In  1625  Waldstein  received  from  the 
Emperor  the  title  of  prince,  and  in  1627  that  of  Duke  of 
Friedland.  The  town  of  Jicin  near  Friedland  in  Bohemia 
became  the  centre  of  his  vast  dominions.  He  here  exercised 
almost  sovereign  power  and  obtained  the  right  of  coining 
money ;  disregarding  the  Imperial  decrees,  he  continued  to 
tolerate  Protestants  in  his  territory  and  even  employed 
them  in  his  service.  Of  all  the  fantastic  plans  attributed 
to  Waldstein,  that  of  becoming  King  of  Bohemia,  particu- 
larly according  to  recent  research,  appears  to  be  the  only 
one  that  seriously  entered  into  his  mind.  After  the  defeat 
of  the  King  of  Denmark  the  Emperor  conferred  on  Waldstein 
the  two  duchies  of  Mecklenburg,  as  the  rulers  of  these  lands 
had  been  allies  of  the  Danes.  As  Northern  Germany  was 
Very  shortly  afterwards  overrun  by  the  Swedes  this  gift 
proved  somewhat  a  barren  honour.  It,  however,  granted  to 
Waldstein  the  then  very  extensive  rights  and  powers  of  a 
sovereign  prince  of  the  empire,  and  Waldstein's  defenders 
have  often  laid  stress  on  this  when  attempting  to  justify  the 
negotiations  with  foreign  powers  into  which  he  afterwards 
entered. 

These  repeated  successes  of  the  Imperial  arms  naturally 
encouraged  the  extreme  adherents  of  Rome,  who  were 
always  very  powerful  at  Ferdinand's  court.  The  impetuous 
confessor  Lamormain  assured  his  Imperial  master  that  he 
would  imperil  his  soul  if  he  did  not  at  least  partially  intro- 
duce in  Germany  those  reforms  that  had  already  been 
carried  out  so  successfully  in  Bohemia.  The  result  of  these 
counsels  was  the  famed  "Edict  of  Restitution"  which  the 
Emperor  after  considerable  hesitation  signed  on  March  6, 
1629.  This  enactment  decreed  that  all  monasteries  and 
ecclesiastical  possessions  of  which  the  Romanists  had  been 
deprived  since  the  so-called  "interim"  of  Passau  in   1552 


An    Historical    Sketch  299 

and  the  additional  treaty  of  Augsburg  in  1555  should  be 
restored  to  them.  The  Romanist  owners  after  their  return 
were  to  be  granted  the  right  then  belonging  to  all  territorial 
lords  in  Germany,  of  obliging  their  new  subjects  to  conform 
to  their  creed.  During  a  period  of  nearly  80  years  these 
possessions  had  frequently  changed  hands,  and  the  edict 
would  have  reduced  thousands  of  men  to  beggary  and 
violated  the  religious  convictions  of  hundreds  of  thousands. 
Had  such  a  law  been  carried  out — Gindely  writes — North 
Germany  would  have  been  obliged  to  suffer  a  system  of 
confiscation  and  anti-reformation,  similar  to  that  under 
which  Bohemia  was  then  groaning.  Waldstein  did  not 
hesitate  openly  to  blame  the  edict,  and  the  Jesuits,  Lamor- 
main  in  particular,  henceforth  became  his  bitterest  enemies. 
It  was  largely  in  consequence  of  this  circumstance  that 
when  the  German  princes  at  the  Diet  which  was  held  at 
Regensburg  in  1630  demanded  that  Waldstein  should  be 
deprived  of  his  command,  Ferdinand  consented  to  this 
with  very  little  hesitation.  Waldstein  made  no  attempt  to 
retain  his  command.  He  retired  to  Bohemia,  where  he 
lived  partly  in  the  magnificent  palace  which  he  had  built  at 
Prague,  partly  on  his  vast  estates. 

The  triumph  of  Catholicism  in  Northern  Germany  was 
short-lived.  On  July  6,  1630,  Gustavus  Adolphus,  King  of 
Sw^eden,  landed  on  the  island  of  Usedom  and  in  a  very  short 
time  subdued  a  large  part  of  Northern  Germany.  It  is 
not  my  purpose  to  refer  here  to  the  events  of  the  Thirty 
Years'  War,  except  on  the  not  infrequent  occasions  when 
they  had  a  direct  influence  on  the  fate  of  Bohemia.  After 
the  Elector  of  Saxony  had — abandoning  his  former  allies — 
joined  the  Swedish  king,  the  combined  Protestant  armies 
decisively  defeated  the  forces  of  the  Imperialists  and 
the  German  Romanists  at  Breitenfeld  near  Leipzig  on 
September  17,   1631. 

After  his  great  victory  Gustavus  Adolphus  hesitated  v/hat 
course  to  pursue.  Some  of  his  councillors  advised  him  to 
march  from  Saxony  directly  into  Bohemia  and  Moravia, 
whence  the  road  to  Vienna  lay  open.  Many  of  Waldstein's 
generals  had  followed  their  chief  into  retirement  and  had 
dismissed  their  soldiers.  The  population  of  Bohemia  and 
Moravia,  which  had  endured  ten  years  of  incessant  persecu- 
tion, was  bitterly  disaffected  to  the  Habsburg  dynasty  and 
to  the  Roman  clergy.     There  is  little  doubt  that  an  invasion 


300  Bohemia 

of  the  Habsburg  dominions  would  at  this  moment  have 
proved  successful.  The  very  numerous  Bohemian  exiles — 
sanguine,  as  all  exiles  are — believed  that  their  ancient  inde- 
pendent kingdom  would  now  be  re-established. 

For  reasons  which  it  is  not  easy  to  comprehend,  the  king 
of  Sweden  determined  to  march  into  Southern  Germany, 
and  to  leave  the  task  of  occupying  Bohemia  to  his  Saxon 
allies.  The  Saxon  invasion  of  Bohemia  was  carried  out  in 
a  very  half-hearted  fashion.  The  Elector,  a  worthy  man  of 
very  limited  intelligence,  disliked  the  Swedes  as  being 
foreigners  in  Gerrpany,  and  had  reluctantly  taken  up  arms 
against  the  Emperor,  whom  he  considered  his  liege-lord, 
because  of  the  Edict  of  Restitution  and  because  of  the 
depredations  committed  in  Saxony  by  the  Imperial  troops. 
In  the  autumn  of  the  year  1631  the  Saxon  troops  entered 
Bohemia,  and  on  November  1 1  they  occupied  Prague,  the 
city  surrendering  without  offering  any  resistance.  With  the 
Saxon  troops  many  Bohemian  exiles.  Count  Thurn,  Vences- 
las  of  Ruppa,  chancellor  during  the  reign  of  Frederick,  and 
others  returned  to  Bohemia.  One  of  the  first  acts  of  the 
exiles  after  their  return  was  to  remove  the  heads  of  their 
comrades — executed  on  June  21,  1621 — which  the  Imperial- 
ists had  exposed  on  the  bridge  tower  of  the  old  town.  They 
were  then  solemnly  buried  in  the  Tyn  church.  The  Jesuits 
were  again  expelled  from  Bohemia,  and  eighty  clergymen 
belonging  to  the  Lutheran  Church  and  to  the  unity  of  the 
Bohemian  Brethren  met  at  the  Carolinum  college  to 
deliberate  on  the  re-establishment  of  the  utraquist  Church. 
The  Elector  of  Saxony,  who  now  also  arrived  at  Prague, 
seems  for  a  moment  to  have  intended  to  put  himself  in 
possession  of  the  Bohemian  crown,  which,  both  in  his  own 
time  and  in  that  of  his  ancestors,  appeared  on  several 
occasions  to  be  within  the  reach  of  the  Protestant  princes 
of  the  house  of  Saxony.  Should  such  a  scheme,  however, 
prove  impracticable,  the  Lutheran  Elector  far  preferred  the 
continuation  of  Habsburg  rule  in  Bohemia  to  the  establish- 
ment of  a  Calvinistic  kingdom  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  his  electorate.  The  distinctly  hostile  attitude  which 
Arnim,  who  commanded  the  Saxon  army,  took  up  with 
regard  to  Thurn  and  the  other  Bohemian  exiles,  can  be 
accounted  for  in  this  manner  only.^ 

In  his  desperate  position  the  Emperor  decided  to  appeal 
1  This  is  well  shown  in  Dr.  Irmet's  J^oAanu  Georg  von  Arnim. 


An    Historical    Sketch  301 

again  to  Waldstein.  The  latter  had  left  Prague  before  the 
arrival  of  the  Saxons  in  that  city  and  retired  to  his  estates, 
which  the  enemy  did  not  occupy.  Arnim,  the  Saxon  com- 
mander, had  formerly  served  under  Waldstein's  orders  and 
had  remained  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  him.  Before 
retiring  to  his  estates  Waldstein  had  an  interview  with 
Arnim  at  the  castle  of  Kounic,  between  Prague  and  Nym- 
burk.  Waldstein  informed  the  Emperor  of  this  interview, 
but  we  have  no  reliable  account  of  the  conversation  between 
the  two  generals.  Several  letters  addressed  by  Waldstein 
to  Arnim  at  this  time  have  indeed  been  preserved,  but  they 
have  no  great  importance,  and  contain  little  except  requests 
that  palaces  belonging  to  Waldstein  should  not  be  injured  by 
the  Saxon  soldiers.  From  Prague  Waldstein  first  proceeded 
to  Jicin,  the  capital  of  his  Bohemian  territory,  and  then  to 
Znoymo  in  Moravia.  He  here  met  Prince  Eggenberg,  one 
of  the  most  trusted  councillors  of  Ferdinand.  Eggenberg, 
in  the  name  of  the  Emperor,  begged  Waldstein  to  resume 
the  command  of  the  Imperial  forces.  A  similar  proposal  had 
already  been  made  to  him  in  a  less  formal  manner  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Saxon  invasion.  Waldstein  finally  con- 
sented, but  only  after  the  Emperor  had  agreed  to  sign  a  docu- 
ment which  enumerated  and  accepted  all  the  conditions 
which  the  Duke  of  Friedland  had  made.  The  document 
was  destroyed  after  the  death  of  Waldstein,  and  this  transac- 
tion, like  so  many  other  facts  concerning  the  last  years  of 
the  Duke  of  Friedland,  is  shrouded  in  impenetrable  mystery. 
It  is  supposed  that  the  Emperor  granted  Waldstein  unlimited 
command  over  all  the  Imperial  armies  and  the  right  of  con- 
cluding peace  with  the  enemies  of  the  empire,  and  that  he 
promised  to  grant  the  Duke  of  Friedland  one  of  the  lands  in 
possession  of  the  house  of  Habsburg,  if  he  was  not  able  to 
recover  the  duchies  of  Mecklenburg.  The  land  referred  to 
can  only  have  been  Bohemia,  a  considerable  part  of  which 
was  already  in  Waldstein's  hands. 

I  do  not  belong  to  those  writers  who  have  recently 
attempted  to  defend  Waldstein — some  because  they  see  in 
him  a  friend  of  German  unity,  others  from  the  directly 
opposite  reason  that  they  believe  him  to  have  been  at  heart 
a  Bohemian  patriot.  I  can  see  no  solid  foundation  for 
either  conjecture.  We  have  evidence  to  prove  that  Wald- 
stein attempted  to  enter,  through  the  mediation  of  Count 
Thurn,  into  negotiations  with  King  Gustavus  Adolphus  of 


302  Bohemia 

Sweden,  though  these  negotiations  were  soon  broken  off.  It 
is  equally  certain  that  through  Count  Kinsk)^,  one  of  the 
principal  Bohemian  exiles,  Waldstein  promised  Feuquieres, 
the  French  minister  at  Dresden,  that  he  would  abandon 
the  Imperial  cause  if  the  French  Government  recognized 
him  as  King  of  Bohemia.  It  must  be  admitted,  in  justice, 
that  Waldstein  was  confronted  by  treachery  as  deep  as  his 
own.  If  Father  Lamormain  and  the  other  Jesuits  who,  far 
more  than  his  official  councillors,  were  the  real  advisers  of 
Ferdinand,  approved  of  his  conferring  such  extensive  powers 
on  the  Duke  of  Friedland,  they  undoubtedly  did  so  with  the 
mental  reservation  that  the  duke  could,  when  the  danger  of 
a  Swedish  invasion  had  passed,  again  be  deprived  of  his 
command,  or  be  "  removed,"  should  he  offer  any  resistance. 
There  was  nothing  in  the  Spanish  policy  then  pursued  by 
the  court  of  Vienna  which  was  in  contradiction  to  such  a 
plan.^ 

Immediately  after  Waldstein  had  resumed  his  command, 
the  Imperial  armies  obtained  brilliant  successes.  Entering 
Bohemia  in  April  1632,  Waldstein  attacked  Prague  on 
May  22,  and  recaptured  the  town  after  a  very  slight  resistance. 
The  enemies  evacuated  the  whole  of  Bohemia  except  part 
of  the  mountainous  district  close  to  the  Saxon  frontier. 
From  Prague  Waldstein  marched  to  Cheb,  and  his  army  was 
here  joined  by  the  forces  of  the  Elector  Maximilian  of 
Bavaria.  The  united  Catholic  armies  now  attempted  to  stem 
the  advance  of  Gustavus  Adolphus.  The  King  of  Sweden, 
after  his  victory  at  Breitenfeld,  had  victoriously  overrun 
almost  all  the  south  German  lands.  Numerous  German 
princes,  among  them  Frederick  of  the  Palatinate,  had  joined 
him.  Through  the  influence  of  the  former  King  of  Bohemia 
numerous  English  volunteers  had  taken  service  in  the 
Swedish  army.  Waldstein  unsuccessfully  attempted  to  storm 
the  Swedish  fortifications  at  Niirnberg,  and  he  was  also 
defeated  at  the  battle  of  Liitzen  (Nov.  6,  1633)  when  Gustavus 
Adolphus  fell.  The  great  confusion  in  the  Swedish  army, 
which  was  a  natural  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  king, 
enabled  Waldstein  to  retire  with  his  army  in  good  order  into 

^  The  correspondence  of  Father  Quiroga,  confessor  to  the  empress — 
a  Spanish  Infanta — with  the  Spanish  Government,  relating  to  the  plan 
of  bribing  assassins  to  murder  King  Gustavus  Adolphus,  has  been  pub- 
lished. The  correspondence  only  ceased  after  the  death  of  the  King  of 
Sweden  at  Liitzen. 


An    Historical    Sketch  303 

Bohemia.  He  took  up  his  winter  quarters  at  Prague,  and 
apparently  taking  no  further  interest  in  the  progress  of  the 
war,  busied  himself  with  the  administration  of  his  duchy  of 
Friedland,  which  he  appears  to  have  considered  as  the 
nucleus  of  his  future  Bohemian  kingdom.  Even  when 
spring  began  and  Waldstein  should,  according  to  the  then 
usual  system  of  warfare,  have  resumed  hostilities,  he  for  a 
considerable  time  hesitated  to  do  so.  At  this  moment  the 
intrigues  against  Waldstein  at  the  court  of  Vienna  had  already 
become  very  persistent.  The  Jesuits  bitterly  blamed  the 
Duke  of  Friedland's  indifference  to  religious  matters  and  his 
reluctance  to  free  Southern  Germany  from  its  Protestant 
oppressors. 

Other  meaner  motives  also  influenced  many  of  Waldstein's 
enemies.  The  generals  and  courtiers  of  Ferdinand  viewed 
with  envy  the  vast  fortune  and  the  numerous  estates  of  the 
Duke  of  Friedland.  They  had  decided  to  divide  them 
among  themselves  as  soon  as  Waldstein  had  been  convicted 
of  treason.^  The  latter  was  thoroughly  aware  of  these 
machinations,  which,  according  to  his  views,  justified  him  in 
continuing  his  negotiations  with  the  enemies  of  the 
Emperor. 

In  consequence  of  the  repeated  remonstrances  of  Fer- 
dinand, Waldstein,  on  May  3,  at  last  left  Prague  and, 
marching  by  way  of  Kralove  Hradec,  entered  Silesia,  which 
was  then  occupied  by  Swedish  and  Saxon  troops  under 
Thurn  and  Arnim.  Waldstein's  army  was  considerably 
superior  in  number  to  that  of  his  opponents,  and  the 
Catholics  looked  forward  with  certainty  to  a  great  victory. 
They  were,  however,  disappointed.  Waldstein  sent  Count 
Trcka,  one  of  his  confidants,  to  the  Saxon  camp  with  the 
order  to  suggest  to  Arnim  an  interview  between  the  two 
commanders.  Waldstein  and  Arnim  met  on  June  6,^  but 
it  does  not  appear  that  the  generals  arrived  at  an  under- 
standing. The  Duke  of  Friedland,  however,  declared  him- 
self in  favour  of  religious  freedom  both  in  Bohemia  and  in 
Germany.     An  armistice  of  a  fortnight  was  concluded,  and 

^  This  is  very  clearly  proved  by  Dr.  Schebeck  in  his  Ldsung  der 
Wallensttivfrage. 

2  According  to  Gindely  it  is  only  from  this  moment  that  any  positive 
treason  on  the  part  of  Waldstein  can  be  proved.  In  a  work  of  the 
extent  of  the  present  one,  it  cannot  be  attempted  to  solve  the  mystery 
which  surrounds  Waldstein's  fall. 


304  Bohemia 

it  was  afterwards  prolonged  to  July  16.  This  naturally 
caused  great  indignation  in  Vienna.  The  Emperor  sent 
new  envoys  to  remonstrate  with  Waldstein,  and  these  agents 
succeeded  in  obtaining  from  two  of  his  eminent  generals — 
Piccolomini  and  Gallas — the  promise  that  they  would 
remain  faithful  to  the  Emperor  "  should  Waldstein  for  reason 
of  health,  or  other  causes,  give  up  the  command  of  the 
Imperial  armies."  On  August  22,  Waldstein  had  another 
interview  with  Arnim.  He  here  appears  to  have  spoken 
very  openly.  He  declared  that  it  was  his  intention  to  rise 
in  arms  against  the  Emperor  and  to  restore  to  the  Bohemian 
Estates  the  free  right  of  electing  their  sovereign.  He  also 
offered  to  assist  the  Swedes  should  they  attack  the  Elector 
Maximilian  of  Bavaria — Waldstein's  old  enemy. 

It  is  a  proof  of  the  tortuous  policy  of  the  Duke  of  Fried- 
land  that,  after  having  spent  the  summer  of  the  year  1633  in 
negotiating  with  the  enemies  of  the  Emperor,  he  should  have 
attacked  them  in  the  autumn  of  that  year.  It  is  probable 
that  the  "  perfidia  plus  quam  Punica  "  of  Waldstein  which 
was  noted  even  at  a  period  when  treachery  and  statesmanship 
were  almost  identical,  caused  the  Protestant  leaders  to  meet 
his  overtures  with  some  distrust.  It  appears  certain  that 
Oxenstierna,  who  since  the  death  of  the  king  directed  the 
foreign  policy  of  Sweden,  distrusted  the  Duke  of  Friedland. 
The  latter,  thinking  it  advisable  to  show  that  his  skill  and 
strength  had  not  decreased,  attacked  the  Swedish  forces 
in  Silesia  that  were  then  commanded  by  Count  Thurn. 
Waldstein  was  again  victorious.  He  defeated  the  Swedish 
forces  at  Steinau  on  October  11,  and  then  returned  to 
Bohemia  to  winter  there.  His  success  for  a  time  silenced 
his  enemies,  but  when  it  became  known  that  the  Swedish 
and  German  Protestant  forces  under  Duke  Bernhard  of 
Weimar  had  on  November  15  obtained  possession  of  the 
important  city  of  Regensburg,  Waldstein,  who  had  refused 
to  march  to  the  aid  of  his  old  enemy  the  Elector  of  Bavaria, 
was  doomed.  The  Emperor,  not  entirely  unmindful  of  the 
great  services  formerly  rendered  to  him  by  the  Duke  of 
Friedland,  determined  to  make  an  attempt  to  induce  him 
voluntarily  to  resign  his  command.  For  this  purpose  he 
sent  Father  Quiroga,  the  Empress's  confessor,  to  Waldstein's 
camp,  but  the  latter  absolutely  declined  to  give  his  de- 
mission. He  had  at  this  moment  undoubtedly  already 
decided  to  join  the  Emperor's  enemies.     He,  however,  well 


An    Historical    Sketch  305 

knew  how  important  it  was  for  his  future  plans  that  he 
should  join  the  Saxons  or  Swedes  as  leader  of  a  powerful 
and  devoted  army  and  not  as  a  friendless  fugitive.  On 
January  12,  1634,  Waldstein  gave  a  great  banquet  to  his 
principal  generals  and  officers  at  Plzeii,  which  was  then  his 
headquarters.  He  requested  all  present  to  sign  a  document 
which  stated  that  Waldstein  was  tired  of  his  command,  but 
that  his  generals  formally  declared  that  they  would  accept 
him  only  as  their  commander  up  to  the  moment  when  the 
Emperor  had  fully  satisfied  all  the  claims  of  Waldstein  and 
his  generals  on  the  Imperial  treasury.  This  declaration 
was  signed  by  all  present.  Even  if  we  interpret  it  in  the 
most  lenient  fashion  the  document  declared  that  the 
Emperor's  right  of  dismissing  his  commander-in-chief  was 
dependent  on  certain  conditions.  This  undoubtedly  con- 
stituted an  act  of  mutiny. 

Though  the  declaration  was  signed  by  all  present,  a  con- 
siderable number  of  Waldstein's  generals  had  previously 
entered  into  negotiations  with  the  court  of  Vienna.  Wald- 
stein seems  to  have  felt  that  he  was  not  so  sure  of  his  army 
as  he  had  previously  believed.  The  negotiations  with  Ferdi- 
nand's enemies  also  proceeded  but  slowly,  as  Arnim,  Wald- 
stein's principal  confidant,  had  great  trouble  in*  obtaining 
definite  assurances  from  the  irresolute  Elector  of  Saxony. 
Waldstein  therefore  endeavoured  to  gain  time,  and  to  allay 
the  suspicions  of  the  Emperor.  At  a  second  banquet  at 
Plzen  ^  on  February  20,  a  paper  was  signed  by  the  generals 
declaring  that  they  would  continue  to  be  faithful  to 
Waldstein  and  to  obey  his  orders,  and  that  they — together 
with  him — would  continue  loyally  to  serve  the  Emperor. 

It  was,  however,  too  late.  On  February  13  all  commu- 
nications between  the  Emperor  and  his  general  ceased.  On 
February  18  the  Emperor  declared  Waldstein  and  his 
generals  Illo  and  Trcka  to  be  traitors  and  ordered  the  army 
to  obey  only  Gallas,  Piccolomini  and  Maradas.  At  the 
same  time  the  preachers  in  Vienna  received  the  order  to 
denounce  Waldstein  from  their  pulpits  as  a  "traitor  and 
tyrant."  At  the  last  moment  Waldstein's  new  allies  also 
began  to  move.  On  February  18  the  Elector  of  Saxony 
agreed  to  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  Waldstein  and  sent 
Arnim  to  Plzen.     Waldstein  had,  however,  left  Plzen  before 

^  Many  writers  on  Waldstein  have  overlooked  the  fact   that  there 
were  two  banquets  at  Plzefi. 
L 


3o6 


Bohemia 


the  Saxon  envoy  could  arrive  there.  On  February  i,  King 
Louis  XIII  of  France  instructed  Feuquieres,  his  minister  at 
Dresden,  to  inform  Waldstein  that  if  he  definitely  broke  with 
the  Emperor,  France  would  grant  him  an  annual  subsidy  of 
a  million  hvres  and  support  his  claim  to  the  Bohemian 
throne.  Before  De  la  Boderie,  Feuquieres'  secretar)^,  who 
was  entrusted  with  this  message,  could  reach  Bohemia, 
Waldstein  was  dead. 

The  Duke  of  Friedland  had  undoubtedly  intended  to 
march  on  Prague  as  soon  as  the  complete  rupture  with  the 
Emperor  had  taken  place.  A  born  Bohemian,  he  knew  the 
veneration  which  all  Bohemians  felt  for  the  capital  of  their 
country,  and — no  doubt  rightly — beHeved  that  his  prestige 
would  be  greatly  increased  by  the  occupation  of  Prague. 
He  had  recently  shown  himself  more  favourable  to  the 
national  cause  and  had  entered  into  negotiations  with  the 
very  numerous  Bohemian  exiles,  who  up  to  the  end  of  the 
Thirty  Years'  War  hoped  once  more  to  return  to  their  native 
land.  The  successive  desertions  of  most  of  his  troops  obliged 
Waldstein  to  change  his  plans.  He  sent  a  message  to  Duke 
Bernhard  of  Weimar,  begging  him  to  send  a  small  force  to 
Cheb  which  he  would  join  with  all  the  troops  that  were  still 
true  to  him.  Waldstein  himself  proceeded  to  that  town  on 
February  23,  accompanied  only  by  ten  squadrons  of 
cavalry  and  300  musqueteers.  The  departure  from  Plzen 
appeared  to  the  contemporary  writers  rather  as  a  flight 
than  as  the  march  of  an  organized  army.  At  the  decisive 
moment  of  his  life,  when  only  full  bodily  and  mental  power 
rendered  possible  the  success  of  Waldstein's  perilous  adven- 
ture, he  was  prostrated  by  a  violent  attack  of  gout.  On  his 
arrival  at  Cheb  he  was  unable  to  come  to  a  decision  with 
regard  to  his  future  plans.  An  Imperial  decree  had  mean- 
while set  a  price  on  the  head  of  Waldstein,  and  a  conspiracy 
was  immediately  formed  among  the — mostly  Scotch  and 
Irish — officers  of  the  garrison  of  Cheb.  These  men,  of 
whom  Butler,  Gordon,  Leslie  and  Devereux  were  the 
leaders,  determined  to  invite  the  principal  officers  still  faith- 
ful to  Waldstein — Kinsk)^,  Trcka  and  Illo — to  a  banquet  at 
the  castle.  When  they  arrived  there  the  castle  was  im- 
mediately surrounded  in  every  direction  by  the  Irish 
dragoons,  and  Waldstein's  officers  were  attacked  and  mur- 
dered after  a  short  but  valiant  defence.  Waldstein,  who  was 
still  suffering  from  gout,  had  not  taken  part  in  the  banquet. 


An   Historical    Sketch  307 

but  immediately  after  the  murders  Colonel  Butler  and 
Captain  Devereux  hurried  to  his  residence.  He  was  quite 
unprepared  and  was  immediately  assassinated  by  Captain 
Devereux  (February  25). 

The  fall  of  Waldstein  ^  was  followed  by  a  new  series  of 
extensive  confiscations  in  Bohemia.  The  numerous  estates 
of  the  Duke  of  Friedland  and  bis  principal  adherents  were 
seized  by  the  Imperial  government  and  were  granted  to  the 
generals  of  Waldstein  who  had  remained  faithful  to  the 
Emperor,  and  to  the  officers  who  had  taken  part  in  the 
murder  of  Waldstein.  We  now  find  several  Irish  and 
Scotch  names  among  the  new  owners  of  Bohemian  estates. 

The  events  that  immediately  followed  the  death  of  the 
Duke  of  Friedland  certainly  speak  for  the  wisdom  of  the 
Jesuits  who  had  demanded  his  recall.  King  Ferdinand  III, 
son  of  the  Emperor  Ferdinand,  took  the  command  of  the 
Imperial  armies,  and  it  was  decided  to  pursue  an  energetic 
policy  against  Sweden  and  France  while  endeavouring  to 
negotiate  with  the  Elector  of  Saxony.  The  Swedish  chancellor 
Oxenstierna  attempted  meanwhile  to  unite  the  Protestant 
principalities  and  free  towns  of  Germany  for  the  purpose  of 
combined  action.  Their  representatives  met  under  his 
presidency  at  Frankfurt  on  April  7,  1634.  All  parts  of 
Protestant  Germany  were  represented,  and  the  Bohemian 
exiles  also  sent  envoys  who  requested  aid  against  Ferdinand. 
The  Elector  of  Saxony  was  also  represented,  but  his  envoys 
maintained  an  attitude  of  distrust  to  Sweden,  endeavouring 
to  separate  that  country  from  its  German  allies.  Whatever 
hopes  Oxenstierna  may  have  had  were  dissipated  by  the 
great  victory  which  the  Romanists,  led  by  two  princes 
of  the  house  of  Habsburg — King  Ferdinand  III  and  the 
Cardinal  Infanta  Don  Fernando — obtained  at  Nordlingen 
on  September  5  and  6,  1634.  For  a  moment  it  appeared  as 
if  all  the  results  of  the  victories  of  Gustavus  Adolphus  had 
been  lost. 

^  The  projects  of  Waldstein  have  recently  been  stated  very  clearly  by 
Professor  Pekar  in  his  masterly  work,  Dejiny  Walctstynskiho  Spiknuii 
(history  of  Waldstein's  conspiracy).  Waldstein,  an  unscrupulous  con- 
dottiere,  can  by  no  means  be  considered  as  a  Bohemian  patriot.  Being 
Bohemian  he  was,  however,  fully  aware  of  the  great  disaffection  that 
still  existed  in  his  country,  and  he  intended  to  use  it  to  obtain  the 
Bohemian  crown.  This  is  particularly  proved  by  the  close  relations 
which  he  in  the  last  years  of  his  life  entertained  with  the  Bohemian 
exiles. 


3o8 


Bohemia 


The  Elector  of  Saxony,  always  secretly  opposed  to  the 
interference  of  Sweden  in  the  affairs  of  Germany,  had  even 
before  the  battle  of  Nordlingen  begun  to  negotiate  with  the 
Emperor  in  view  of  a  treaty  of  peace.  His  representatives 
met  those  of  the  Emperor  at  Litomefice  on  June  15.  These 
negotiations  did  not,  however,  put  an  immediate  stop  to  the 
hostilities  between  the  two  countries,  and  the  Saxons  united 
with  the  Swedes  attacked  Bohemia  a  few  weeks  later.  The 
Swedish  general  Baner  marched  as  far  as  the  White  Moun- 
tain near  Prague,  but  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Nordlingen 
obliged  him  to  retreat  hastily  from  Bohemia. 

In  the  following  year  the  prolonged  negotiations  between 
the  Emperor  and  the  Elector  of  Saxony  were  at  last  brought 
to  a  conclusion.  Lusatia  was  definitely  ceded  to  Saxony, 
and  the  Edict  of  Restitution  was,  as  far  as  it  concerned  the 
Lutherans,  greatly  modified.  No  provisions  were  made  to 
secure  toleration  for  the  Calvinists  as  their  bitter  enemy, 
the  court  chaplain  Hoe,  still  had  great  influence  with  the 
Elector.  As  regards  the  Bohemian  Protestants,  Ferdinand 
assumed  the  intransigent  attitude  which  he  afterwards  main- 
tained during  the  negotiations  which  preceded  the  peace  of 
Westphalia.  The  Emperor  positively  refused  to  allow  the 
presence  of  any  Protestant  in  Bohemia  or  Moravia.  In 
Silesia  the  Protestants  were  to  remain  unmolested  and  to 
retain  the  use  of  a  few  churches.  These  assurances  were, 
with  the  tacit  connivance  of  the  court  of  Vienna,  frequently 
violated  by  the  local  officials.  The  agreement  between 
Austria  and  Saxony  was  signed  at  Prague  on  May  30,  1635, 
and  was  followed  immediately  by  a  treaty  of  alliance  between 
the  two  countries. 

Ferdinand  II  died  early  in  the  year  1637,  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  his  son  Ferdinand  III,  who  had  during  his 
father's  lifetime  been  crowned  as  King  of  Bohemia.  The 
Thirty  Years'  War  continued  with  alternating  success  during 
the  first  twelve  years  of  the  reign  of  the  new  ruler.  In  1639 
the  Swedes  under  their  able  general  Baner  again  invaded 
Bohemia.  A  considerable  number  of  Bohemian  exiles  again 
accompanied  the  Swedish  army,  and  when  Baner  declared 
that  he  entered  Bohemia  as  a  protector  of  the  freedom  of 
the  Protestants,  he  was  enthusiastically  welcomed  by  many 
Bohemian  peasants.  After  capturing  Podmokli/  Usti  and 
Litomefice,  Baner  advanced  on  Prague.  The  "Catholic 
»  In  German  "Bodenbach." 


An    Historical    Sketch  309 

Reformation  "  had,  however,  during  the  many  years  that  had 
elapsed  since  the  battle  of  Bila  Hora  made  great  progress, 
and  the  Swedes  were  not  in  all  parts  of  Bohemia  received 
as  well  as  they  had  perhaps  expected.  Though  Baner  in 
the  year  1639  twice  encamped  before  Prague,  he  did  not 
attack  the  city.  The  Swedish  troops  committed  great  depre- 
dations in  Bohemia.  They  spared  only  the  property  of  the 
Bohemian  Protestants,  already  a  minority  of  the  population, 
though  many  returned  to  their  ancient  faith  as  soon  as 
they  were  able  to  do  so  with  impunity.  The  events  of 
the  Thirty  Years'  War  shortly  afterwards  obliged  the  Swedes 
to  retire  from  Bohemia,  and  the  "Catholic  Reformation" 
was  now  carried  out  with  renewed  vigour.  A  war  broke  out 
between  Sweden  and  Denmark  in  1644  and  obliged  the 
Swedes  to  devote  their  attention  to  lands  nearer  to  their 
home.  In  1645,  however,  Bohemia  was  again  invaded  by 
a  Swedish  army  under  General  Torstensohn.  Sweden  had 
then  concluded  an  alliance  with  George  Rakoczy,  Prince  of 
Transylvania,  who  was  marching  on  Vienna.  Should  the 
Swedish  forces  join  him  before  that  city  it  would  be  possible 
— to  use  a  well-worn  expression — "to  strike  a  blow  at  the 
heart  of  the  Habsburg  empire."  ^  Torstensohn  decided  to 
march  from  Saxony  on  Vienna  through  Southern  Bohemia, 
and  he  obtained  a  great  victory  over  the  Imperial  forces  at 
Jankov,  near  Tabor,  on  March  6,1645.  The  few  Protestants 
who  still  remained  in  Bohemia  again  joined  the  Swedes, 
but  their  far-reaching  plans  at  this  moment  prevented  them 
from  intervening  in  the  affairs  of  Bohemia.  Torstensohn 
succeeded  in  joining  the  forces  of  Rakoczy  before  Vienna, 
but  Austria  was  saved  by  the  intervention  of  the  Porte. 
The  Ottoman  Empire  forced  Rakoczy  to  come  to  terms 
with  the  Emperor  by  menacing  him  with  an  attack  on  Tran- 
sylvania should  he  refuse  to  do  so.  In  1648  the  last  events  of 
the  Thirty  Years'  War  took  place  at  Prague— the  city  where 
the  war  had  begun.  A  Swedish  army  under  General  Konigs- 
mark  entered  Bohemia,  and  by  treachery  obtained  posses- 
sion of  the  Mala  Strana,  the  part  of  the  town  situated  on 
the  left  bank  of  the  Vltava.     The  repeated  attempts  of  the 

^  These  words  were  first  used  by  Count  Usedom,  then  Prussian 
minister  in  Florence,  in  1866.  He  advised  the  Italian  government  to 
carry  on  the  war  against  Austria  as  far  as  the  Danube,  where  th-  ir 
forces  could  join  those  of  Prussia,  and  then  "frapper  au  coeur "  the 
Austrian  empire. 


3IO  Bohemia 

Swedes  to  obtain  possession  of  the  other  parts  of  the  city 
were,  however,  unsuccessful.  The  bridge  of  Prague  was 
bravely  defended  by  the  numerous  Jesuits  and  Capuchins 
who  had  established  themselves  in  Bohemia.  They  were 
aided  not  only  by  the  Imperial  troops,  but  also  by  numerous 
German  immigrants,  and  even  by  citizens  of  Prague  who 
had  recently  joined  the  Roman  Church  and  were  more 
mindful  of  their  new  religion  than  of  their  ancient  country.^ 
The  siege  only  terminated  when  the  news  of  the  peace  of 
Westphalia  reached  Prague.  The  last  warlike  occurrences 
in  that  city,  though  very  insignificant,  had  a  very  serious 
political  consequence.  The  late  Professor  Rezek  was  the 
first  to  point  out  that  the  fact  that  Bohemians  had  them- 
selves taken  up  arms  against  those  who  defended  their 
religious  liberty,  greatly  weakened  the  case  of  those  who  at 
Munster  and  Osnabriick  upheld  the  cause  of  the  Bohemian 
Protestants. 

The  peace  negotiations  which  had  begun  in  1643  only 
terminated  at  the  end  of  the  year  1648  by  the  treaty  of 
Westphalia.  It  is  here  only  necessary  to  mention  that  all 
attempts  made  in  favour  of  the  Bohemian  exiles  entirely 
failed.  Though  Ferdinand  III  was  by  the  treaty  of 
Westphalia  obliged  to  make  many  concessions,  he  resolutely 
declared  that  they  would  continue  the  war  rather  than  allow 
the  presence  of  a  single  Protestant  in  Bohemia  or  Moravia. 
The  slight  privileges  granted  to  the  Protestants  of  Silesia 
were,  however,  confirmed. 

The  rapidly  decreasing  band  of  Bohemian  patriots  who 
through  all  turns  of  weal  and  woe  had  remained  faithful  to 
their  national  Church  rightly  saw  in  the  treaty  of  Westphalia 
the  ending  of  all  their  hopes.  Komensky^  has  recorded 
their  despair  in  his  touching  "  Last  will  of  that  dying  mother 

^  This  episode,  whose  consequences  were,  as  mentioned  above,  very 
important,  has  long  filled  with  shame  the  minds  of  many  Bohemian 
patriots.  The  somewhat  servile  pliancy,  occasionally,  though  not  often, 
found  among  Bohemians,  was  acutely  characterized  by  the  Emperor 
Joseph  II,  no  friend  of  Bohemia,  but  one  of  the  most  gifted  princes 
of  the  house  of  Habsburg.  When  visiting  Prague  he  was  shown  the 
church  of  St.  Mary,  erected  on  the  White  Mountain  to  celebrate  the 
victory  of  the  Romanists.  The  Emperor  expressed  great  displeasure, 
and  said  he  wished  to  reign  over  men,  not  over  brutes  (in  German 
"Bestien")  who  celebrated  their  own  defeat. 

2  For  a  brief  account  of  the  career  of  Komensky  (Comenius),  the  last 
bishop  of  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  see  my  introduction  to  my  translation 
of  his  Labyrint  Svela)  The  Labyrinth  of  the  World). 


An  Historical    Sketch  311 

the  unity  of  the  (Bohemian)  Brethren." ^  "I  cannot,"  he 
writes,  "oh  Bohemian  and  Moravian  nation,  my  dear 
country,  forget  thee  now  that  I  leave  thee  for  ever."  .  .  . 
"  I  believe  before  God  that  when  this  storm  of  wrath 
— which  our  sins  have  brought  on  us — has  subsided,  thou 
wilt,  oh  Bohemian  people,  again  obtain  the  control  over  thy 
destiny. "  With  that  intense  devotion  to  the  national 
language  which  is  so  characteristic  of  the  Bohemians, 
Komensky  writes,  "  I  leave  to  thee  (the  community  of  the 
Brethren)  and  thy  sons  the  task  of  refining,  purifying  and 
developing  the  beloved  graceful  language  of  our  ancestors, 
for  the  care  which  our  sons  devoted  to  this  matter  is  known 
from  the  time  when  all  sensible  men  said  that  there  was  no 
better  Bohemian  than  that  spoken  by  the  Brethren  and 
written  by  them  in  their  books."  ^ 

There  are  few  darker  pages  in  the  world's  history  than 
those  in  which  the  state  of  Bohemia  after  the  Thirty  Years' 
War  is  recorded.  Almost  every  part  of  the  country  had  been 
devastated  during  that  war.  Many  towns  and  countless 
villages  had  been  destroyed,  and  even  at  the  present  day 
many  now  deserted  spots  are  known  to  have  once  been 
inhabited.  The  population  of  Bohemia,  which  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Thirty  Years'  War  had  exceeded  3,000,000,  had 
dwindled  to  800,000  at  the  end  of  that  war.  The  country 
had  suffered  more  during  this  war  than  even  during  the 
Hussite  campaigns.  The  towns  had  lost  the  larger  part  of 
their  population.  Among  the  exiled  Protestants  had  been 
almost  all  the  prominent  merchants  and  tradesmen,  who 
now  sought  refuge  in  distant  countries.^  As  of  France 
after  the  edict  of  Nantes,  it  can  be  said  of  Bohemia  after  the 
Thirty  Years'  War  that  it  suffered  by  the  loss  of  its  best  citizens, 
in  such  a  manner  that  it  can  even  now  hardly  be  said  to 
have  recovered.  It  is  true  that  within  the  last  generation 
national  industry  and  commerce  have  again  begun  to 
flourish.  Prague,  recently  the  capital  of  a  vast  empire,  after 
the  treaty  of  Westphalia  acquired  the  aspect  of  a  provincial 

^  **  Ksaft  umirajici  matky  jednoty  bratrske." 

2 -For  the  care  devoted  by  the  Bohemian  Brethren  to  the  development 
of  the  national  language,  see  my  History  of  Bohemian  Literature  (2. 
ed.),  pp.  295-298. 

'^  It  is  only  recently  that  Bohemian  historians  have  made  researches 
concerning  these  exiles  who  proceeded  to  Germany,  England,  the 
United  States,  and  other  countries. 


312  Bohemia 

town,  and  this  continued  throughout  the  eighteenth  century.^ 
The  new  nobility  of  Bohemia  rarely  visited  Prague,  and 
resided  mainly  in  Vienna  in  the  vicinity  of  the  court.  The 
new  nobles,  mostly  men  of  modest  and  often  mean  birth, 
who  owed  their  fortune  to  the  Thirty  Years'  War,  were  greatly 
attracted  by  the  splendour  of  that  court,  which  in  splendour 
rivalled  the  court  of  Madrid.  New  titles  were  widely  dis- 
tributed among  these  men.  The  ancient  nobility  ot 
Bohemia  had  been  somewhat  averse  to  the  bearing  of  titles 
of  duke,  count,  or  baron,  considering  them  as  German 
dignities,  and  they  had  usually  been  merely  described  as 
"  pan "  (lord).  The  generals  and  courtiers  who  now 
replaced  them  naturally  had  no  such  repugnance.  The  fate 
of  the  Bohemian  peasantry  in  the  period  subsequent  to  the 
peace  of  Westphalia  was  an  unspeakably  miserable  one. 
Frequent  insurrections,  which  were  repressed  with  merciless 
cruelty,  were  the  consequence.  I  rejoice  that  the  extent  of  this 
book  relieves  me  from  the  duty  of  giving  a  detailed  account 
of  the  cruelties  committed  by  an  alien  soldiery  against  almost 
unarmed  peasants.  In  a  petition  which  the  peasants  of  the 
district  of  Caslav  addressed  to  the  Imperial  authorities  at 
Prague  they  stated  that  "their  fate  was  worse  than  that  of 
the  slaves  of  the  Tartars  or  Turks."  It  is  but  too  true 
that  there  was  a  considerable  amount  of  truth  in  their  com- 
plaint. The  agents  whom  the  new  Bohemian  nobles — 
almost  always  absentees — entrusted  with  the  control  of  their 
peasants  were  probably  more  cruel  than  the  overseer  of 
Russian  moujiks  or  the  slave-driver  of  the  southern  States  in 
America.  In  Russia  both  master  and  man  were  generally 
Slavs  and  members  of  the  orthodox  Church ;  the  southern 
slave-driver  often  treated  his  slaves  with  contemptuous  good 
nature.  But  the  agent  of  the  German  and  Romanist  nobles 
of  Bohemia  both  hated  and  despised  the  peasants — who 
were  Slavs,  and  often  still  secretly  heretics.  The  Bohemian 
peasants  have  since  the  year  1848  enjoyed  complete  liberty, 
and  the  present  organization  of  the  village  communities 
grants  them  overwhelming  power — often  to  the  detriment  of 

^  In  a  curious  letter  written  from  Prague  on  November  7,  17 16,  Lady 
Mary  Montague  says  that  at  Prague  "  there  were  some  remains  of  its 
former  splendour,"  but  that  it  was  "  old  built  and  thinly  inhabited."  Of 
the  ladies  she  writes  that  they  were  dressed  according  ro  the  fashions  of 
Vienna,  "after  the  manner  that  the  people  of  Exeter  imitate  those  of 
London." 


An    Historical   Sketch  313 

the  landowner.  Yet  the  evil  seed  of  hatred  and  distrust 
sown  by  the  oppressors  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
century  bears  evil  fruit  up  to  the  present  day.  Bohemian 
peasants  even  now  instinctively  distrust  the  nobles  of  their 
country,  even  if  they  belong  to  their  own  race,  and  are  in 
full  sympathy  with  the  national  cause.  This  antagonism 
has  frequently  contributed  to  the  failure  of  the  attempts  of 
the  Bohemians  to  recover  their  autonomy. 

The  wars  and  negotiations  of  the  court  of  Vienna  at  the 
end  of  the  seventeenth  and  during  the  eighteenth  century 
cannot  be  considered  as  forming  part  of  Bohemian  history. 
Some  large  Bohemian  landowners  played  a  considerable 
part  in  the  government  of  the  empire,  but  their  only  con- 
nection V,  ith  Bohemia  consisted  in  the  fact  that  they  drew 
very  large  revenues  from  their  estates  situated  in  that 
country.  Every  trace  of  municipal  self-government  gradu- 
ally disappeared  both  in  the  cities  of  Prague  and  in  the 
other  towns  of  the  kingdom.  The  scanty  contemporary 
references  to  the  internal  condition  of  Bohemia  record 
only  successfully  repressed  revolts  of  the  peasantry,  and 
occasional  religious  persecutions  when  it  was  believed  that 
Protestants  had  secretly  entered  Bohemia.  The  extreme 
zeal  of  the  Jesuits,  who  sometimes  extended  their  persecu- 
tions to  Silesia — where  the  Protestants  possessed  a  limited 
amount  of  independence — occasionally  directed  the  atten- 
tion of  Europe  to  the  almost  forgotten  lands  of  the  Bohemian 
crown.  When  King  Charles  XII  of  Sweden  had  defeated 
King  Augustus  of  Poland  and  pursued  his  enemy  to  his 
hereditary  Saxon  electorate,  he  took  up  his  quarters  for  a 
considerable  time  at  Alt-Ranstadt  near  Leipzig.  It  was  here 
brought  to  his  notice  that  the  Romanist  priests  had  closed 
the  churches  in  Silesia  which  the  treaty  of  Westphalia  had 
guaranteed  to  the  Protestants.  Charles,  who  was  by  inherit- 
ance a  guarantor  of  the  treaty  of  Westphalia,  was  very  indig- 
nant at  this  breach  of  faith,  and,  impetuous  as  he  always 
was,  he  immediately  meditated  on  a  march  on  Vienna.  The 
envoys  of  the  Austrian  government  who  visited  him,  how- 
ever, succeeded  in  pacifying  him,  and  a  treaty  between 
Austria  and  Sweden  was  signed  at  Alt-Ranstadt,  which 
assured  to  the  Protestants  of  Silesia  the  preservation  of 
their  former  privileges. 

About  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  a  great 
constitutional  change  affecting  all  the  lands  subject  to  the 
L  2 


314  Bohemia 

house  of  Habsburg  took  place.  Ferdinand  III  had  in 
1567  been  succeeded  as  Roman  Emperor  by  his  son 
Leopold  I,  who  had  previously  already  been  crowned  as 
King  of  Bohemia.  Leopold's  successors  were  Joseph  I, 
and  after  his  short  reign  Leopold's  second  son  Charles  VI 
— or  II — as  King  of  Bohemia.  Charles  was  a  very  worthy 
prince,  quite  devoid  of  the  cruelty  which  had  stained  the 
reign  of  his  father  Leopold.  A  good  father  and  husband 
he  was,  according  to  the  spiteful  description  of  Frederick 
the  Great,  not  exempt  from  superstition.^  As  he  was  the 
last  male  representative  of  the  house  of  Habsburg,  the 
principal  purpose  of  his  hfe  was  to  assure  the  succession  to 
his  throne  to  his  daughter  and  to  obtain  general  consent  to 
the  future  indivisibility  of  the  Habsburg  domains.  This 
had  not  always  been  the  custom  of  that  house.  Thus 
Ferdinand  I  had  divided  his  dominions  among  his  three 
sons.  In  1 7 13,  only  two  years  after  his  accession,  Charles 
issued  a  decree  stating  that  in  default  of  a  male  heir  all  the 
Habsburg  dominions  should  devolve  undivided,  and  accord- 
ing to  primogeniture  to  his  female  descendants.  In  1716 
a  son  was  born  to  the  Emperor,  but  after  his  early  death 
Charles  again  devoted  his  whole  energy  to  the  purpose  of 
assuring  the  succession  to  his  throne  to  his  daughter  Maria 
Theresa. 

However  absolutist  the  Habsburg  rule  was  at  this  period, 
it  was  yet  considered  necessary  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the 
Estates  of  Hungary,  Bohemia,  and  even  the  so-called  "  here- 
ditary lands,"  to  this  constitutional  change.  The  matter 
was  brought  before  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  in  1720.  The 
"  renewed  ordinance  of  the  land  "  had  already  established  the 
hereditary  right  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  in  the  female  as 
well  as  in  the  male  line.  The  new  rule  as  to  the  succession 
to  the  throne,  therefore,  involved  no  change  in  Bohemia, 
and  the  Estates  retained  their  right  of  electing  a  king,  should 
the  Habsburg  dynasty  become  extinct.  The  decree  which 
declared  the  indivisibility  of  all  the  Habsburg  dominions 
also  found  no  opposition  in  an  assembly  consisting  mainly 
of  Imperial  courtiers  and  generals.  On  October  16,  1720, 
the  Estates  of  Bohemia  unanimously  accepted  the  Imperial 
decree,  which  after  it  had  also  been  accepted  by  the  German 

^  "Bon  pere,  bon  mari,  mais  bigot  et  superstitieux  comme  tous  les 
princes  de  la  niaison  d'Autriche."  {Frederic  II  Histoire  de  men  temps^ 
tome  I,  p.  28,  ed.  1788.) 


An    Historical    Sketch  315 

Imperial  Diet  became  known  as  the  **  pragmatic  sanction." 
Charles  VI,  who  had  also  obtained  the  recognition  of  the 
pragmatic  sanction  by  all  European  powers,  was  at  the 
moment  of  his  death,  in  1740,  justified  in  believing  that  he 
had  assured  the  succession  to  his  daughter  Maria  Theresa, 
who  had  married  Francis,  Duke  of  Lorraine,  and  afterwards 
Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany. 

The  Electors  of  Saxony  and  Bavaria,^  however,  who  had 
both  married  daughters  of  the  Emperor  Joseph  I,  immedi- 
ately refused  to  recognize  Maria  Theresa  as  Queen  of  Hun- 
gary and  Bohemia.  They  were,  in  accordance  with  the 
traditional  Bourbon  policy,  strongly  supported  by  France, 
which  believed  that  the  extinction  of  the  male  line  of  the 
house  of  Habsburg  would  inevitably  be  followed  by  the 
complete  ruin  of  that  dynasty.  The  court  of  Spain,  closely 
connected  by  relationship  with  that  of  France,  also  opposed 
Maria  Theresa,  who  found  in  England  her  only  ally.  A 
considerable  time  was,  however,  required  before  these 
numerous  countries,  whose  interests  were  in  so  many  re- 
spects antagonistic,  could  determine  on  a  joint  action.  Only 
one  prince,  acting  quite  independently,  decided  to  strike 
immediately,  and  h4  alone  eventually  obtained  great  and 
permanent  advantages  by  means  of  the  Austrian  war  of 
succession. 

Frederick  II,  King  of  Prussia,  ascended  the  throne  a 
very  short  time  before  the  death  of  Charles  VI,  and — as 
he  tells  us  in  his  Histoire  de  mon  temps — he  immediately 
determined  to  seize  the  opportunity  which  presented  itself. 
Prussia  had  long  coveted  some  parts  of  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown.  A  prince  who,  like  Frederick,  repeatedly 
expressed  his  contempt  for  the  German  language  in  very 
strong  words  could  find  no  objection  to  the  acquisition  of 
lands  in  which  a  large  part  of  the  population  did  not  speak 
the  language.  The  Prussian  sovereigns  had  to  a  certain 
extent  favoured  the  Bohemian  exiles  who  sought  refuge  in 
their  state,  and  Bohemian  books  were  printed  at  Berlin,  at 
a  time  when  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  do  so  at 
Prague.     These  facts  had  not  been  forgotten,  and  Frederick 

^  The  claims  of  Bavaria  were  also  founded  on  an  older  document,  the 
testament  of  the  Emperor  Ferdinand  I.  The  matter  cannot  be  further 
discussed  here,  but  it  should  be  stated  that  the  claims  of  the  Elector  of 
Bavaria  on  the  Bohemian  throne  were  not  so  entirely  unfounded  as  has 
been  stated  by  the  court-historians  of  Vienna  writing  "to  order." 


3i6  Bohemia 

found  friends  and  secret  sympathizers  not  only  in  Silesia, 
but  also  in  Bohemia  itself,  when  he  afterwards  invaded  that 
country.^  Though  himself  an  agnostic,  Frederick  the 
Great  was  far  too  keen  an  observer  not  to  have  perceived 
how  greatly  the  religious  difficulties  in  the  Habsburg  do- 
minions favoured  his  venturesome  enterprise.  The  treaty 
of  Westphalia  had  granted  the  Protestants  of  Silesia  certain 
privileges,  but  the  Jesuits  constantly  encroached  on  these 
privileges.  After  the  treaty  of  Alt-Ranstadt  and  during 
the  reign  of  Joseph  I,  the  Protestants  had  remained  un- 
molested, but  during  the  last  years  of  the  rule  of  Charles 
VI — and  with  his  tacit  approval — the  Protestants  of  Silesia 
had  been  forbidden  to  build  schools,  and  their  churches 
had  been  coverted  into  barracks.  Prussia  had  also  here- 
ditary rights  on  parts  of  Silesia.  The  Margrave  of  Jagern- 
dorf,  a  prince  of  the  house  of  Hohenzollern,  had  been  de- 
prived of  dominions  at  the  beginning  of  the  Thirty  Years'  War, 
and  Leopold  I  had  in  1675  taken  possession  of  the  duchies 
of  Liegnitz,  Brieg,  and  Wohlan  after  the  death  of  the  last 
Duke.  Leopold  declared  the  duchies  to  be  vacant  fiefs  of 
the  Bohemian  crown,  though  a  treaty  concluded  by  a  former 
Duke  of  Liegnitz  assured  the  succession  to  the  house  of 
Hohenzollern.  Though  Frederick  the  Great  did  not  omit 
to  allude  to  his  hereditary  rights,^  his  principal  motive  for 
immediate  action  was  probably  the  opportunity  of  the 
moment. 

Charles  VI  died  on  October  20,  1740,  and  on  the  13th 
of  December  of  the  same  year  Frederick  and  his  army 
crossed  the  borders  of  Silesia  while  negotiations  were  still 
proceeding  and  without  a  formal  declaration  of  war.  It 
was  customary  among  historians  of  the  older  school  to 
denounce  this  act  with  a  flood  of  virtuous  indignation.  It 
is  certain  that  Prussia  had  adhered  to  the  pragmatic  sanction, 

^  Carlyle  with  the  intuition  of  genius  seems  to  have  grasped  this  fact, 
though  the  extensive  recent  Bohemian  literature  on  this  subject  was,  of 
course,  unknown  to  him.  Thus  he  writes  (under  November  19,  1744), 
*'  This  is  the  circle  of  Koniggratz,  this  that  now  lies  to  the  rear ;  and 
happily  there  are  a  few  Hussites  in  it  not  utterly  indisposed  to  do  a 
little  spying  for  us,  and  bring  a  glimmering  glance  of  intelligence  now 
and  then."  {History  of  Frederick  II  of  Prussia,  commorJy  called 
FredericJz  the  Great,  vol.  viii.  p.  56. ) 

'  "  II  resolut  aussitot  de  revendiguer-les  principantes  de  la  Silesie 
auxquelles  sa  maison  avait  des  droits  incontestables."  {Frederic  II 
Histoire  de  vwn  temps,  tome  I,  p.  125,  edit,  1788.) 


An    Historical    Sketch  317 

but  very  recent  events  have  proved  that  few  statesmen 
attach  much  importance  to  treaties  in  the  absence  of  an 
army  sufficient  to  enforce  their  enactments.  Since  the  times 
of  Frederick  the  Great,  Charles  Albert  of  Sardinia  in  1848, 
and  the  Japanese  empire  in  1904 — to  quote  but  two  examples 
— have  opened  hostilities  without  a  formal  declaration  of 
war.  It  is  probable  that  in  consequence  of  the  exigencies 
of  modern  warfare  this  will  in  the  future  become  more  and 
more  customary.  Silesia  fell  an  easy  prey  to  Frederick.  He 
immediately  decreed  that  the  Protestants  should  enjoy 
complete  equality  of  rights,  but  that  the  Romanists  should 
not  be  in  any  way  molested.  The  Silesian  Protestants 
enthusiastically  welcomed  the  Prussian  troops,  and  the 
Roman  Catholics  seeing  that  Frederick,  whose  agnosticism 
assured  his  impartiality,  did  not  intend  to  pursue  a  policy  of 
retaliation,  soon  found  it  advisable  to  accept  the  rule  of 
Frederick.  Only  the  Austrian  government  officials,  and 
some  members  of  the  nobility  who  were  closely  connected 
with  the  court  of  Vienna,  left  Silesia.  The  country  had  but 
a  small  Austrian  garrison,  and  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
fortresses  fell  almost  immediately  into  the  hands  of  the 
King  of  Prussia,  who,  on  January  3,  1741,  made  his 
solemn  entry  into  Breslau.  In  the  following  spring  the 
Austrians  made  an  attempt  to  recover  Silesia,  but  after  a 
complete  defeat  at  Mollwitz  on  April  16,  they  were  obliged 
to  retire  into  Moravia. 

The  armies  of  France,  Saxony  and  Bavaria  had  meanwhile 
began  to  move  against  the  Habsburg  States.  Frederick  in  a 
masterly  diplomatic  campaign,  which  has  perhaps  only  been 
rivalled  by  his  countryman  Bismarck,  proved  that  he  had  no 
wish  to  establish  a  French  hegemony  in  Germany  in  succes- 
sion to  the  Austrian  one,  or  to  increase  largely  the  power 
of  Saxony — Prussia's  old  rival.  He  therefore  chose  this 
moment  for  concluding  an  armistice  with  Maria  Theresa. 
Under  the  mediation  of  England  a  treaty  was  signed  at 
Klein  Schnellendorf  on  October  9,  1741,  by  which  Lower 
Silesia  and  some  smaller  districts  were  ceded  to  Frederick. 
The  agreement  was  insincere  on  the  part  of  both  contrac- 
tors. Frederick  was  determined,  should  the  enemies  of 
Maria  Theresa  prove  successful,  to  secure  the  whole  of 
Silesia  and  perhaps  other  parts  of  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian 
crown  as  his  share  of  the  spoils.  The  Queen  of  Bohemia 
and  Hungary  had  firmly  resolved,  should  her  armies  be 


3i8 


Bohemia 


victorious,  to  drive  the  Prussians  out  of  Silesia.  As  was 
under  these  circumstances  inevitable,  the  truce  was  of  very 
short  duration. 

In  the  autumn  of  the  year  1741  the  armies  of  France, 
Bavaria  and  Saxony  entered  Bohemia  from  various  directions. 
Their  armies  joined  before  Prague  and  took  the  town  by 
assault  on  November  26.  The  Elector  of  Bavaria  imme- 
diately assumed  the  title  of  the  King  of  Bohemia  and  was 
solemnly  crowned  by  the  Archbishop  of  Prague  in  St. 
Vitus' s  cathedral  on  December  19.  A  general  meeting 
of  the  Estates  also  took  place  and  members  of  most  of  the 
families  of  the  Bohemian  nobility,  such  as  Cernin,  Kolovrat, 
Kinsky,  Liitzow,  Lazansky,  Waldstein  and  many  others  did 
homage  to  their  new  king.  On  this  occasion  great  festivities 
took  place  at  Prague,  and  the  contemporary  records  of 
them  are  not  dissimilar  to  those  which  describe  the 
festivals  on  the  accession  of  the  equally  ill-fated  Frederick 
of  the  Palatinate.  The  new  king — Charles  III,  as  King  of 
Bohemia — soon  after  his  coronation  at  Prague  left  Bohemia 
and  proceeded  to  Frankfurt.  He  was  here  elected  German 
Emperor  and  assumed  the  title  of  Charles  VII. 

Almost  from  the  moment  that  Charles  had  been  crowned 
as  Emperor,  his  armies  and  those  of  his  allies  were  un- 
successful, and  Maria  Theresa,  principally  through  the  aid  of 
the  Hungarians,  was  able  to  recover  part  of  the  lands  which 
she  claimed.  King  Frederick  of  Prussia,  feeling  that  the 
Austrian  victories  might  endanger  bis  possession  of  Silesia, 
determined  to  end  the  short-lived  armistice  which  he  had 
concluded  with  Maria  Theresa.  He  entered  the  county  of 
Glatz,  then  an  integral  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and 
took  Glatz,  the  capital  of  the  county,  by  assault.  From  here 
he  marched  through  Eastern  Bohemia  to  Moravia,  and  joined 
the  Saxon  forces  there.  Saxony  was  at  that  moment  already 
more  suspicious  of  Prussia  than  of  Austria — with  which 
country  it  soon  afterwards  concluded  a  treaty  of  peace  that 
was  at  a  short  interval  followed  by  an  alliance  between  the 
two  countries.  Seeing  that  no  advantage  could  be  obtained 
by  the  junction  with  the  Saxons,  Frederick  returned  to 
Eastern  Bohemia,  where  he  obtained  a  signal  victory  over 
the  Austrian  forces  under  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  at  Chotusic, 
near  Caslav.  Maria  Theresa,  still  menaced  by  numerous 
enemies,  again  decided  to  free  herself  from  the  one  who 
appeared  most  dangerous.     After  preliminary  negotiations 


An    Historical   Sketch  319 

at  Breslau,  a  treaty  between  Frederick  the  Great  and  Maria 
Theresa  was  signed  at  Berlin,  which  ceded  to  Prussia  the 
county  of  Glatz  and  the  whole  of  Silesia,  with  the  exception 
of  the  duchies  of  Teschen,  Jagerndorf  and  Troppau.  A  third 
of  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown  thus  became  subject  to 
the  house  of  HohenzoUern. 

Frederick  the  Great,  who  knew  perhaps  better  than  his 
Austrian  antagonists  that  even  after  the  constitutional  re- 
volution of  1627  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  still  possessed  a 
certain  legislative  power,  demanded  that  the  treaty  of  Berlin 
should  declare  that  all  lands  belonging  to  Prussia,  which  had 
been  held  as  fiefs  of  the  Bohemian  crown,  should  be  freed 
from  that  dependence,  and  that  the  Estates  of  Bohemia  should 
give  their  consent  to  the  cession  to  Prussia  of  the  lands  that 
had  formerly  belonged  to  the  Bohemian  crown.  On  July  i6, 
1743,  the  Bohemian  Diet  gave  its  sanction  to  these  cessions, 
and  it  could  hardly  have  acted  differently.^  The  fact  is  none 
the  less  important  for  the  constitutional  history  of  Bohemia. 

As  will  be  mentioned  presently,  peace  between  Frederick 
the  Great  and  Maria  Theresa  was  again  of  short  duration. 
Principally  in  consequence  of  the  aid  she  had  obtained  from 
Hungary,  Maria  Theresa  was  everywhere  victorious.  The 
Saxons,  giving  up  all  their  former  claims,  had  concluded  an 
alliance  with  the  Queen  of  Hungary.  Prague,  however,  was 
still  occupied  by  a  large  French  garrison  which  held  the 
town  for  Charles  of  Bavaria.  The  troops  of  Maria  Theresa 
besieged  the  city,  and  Marshal  Belleisle,  who  commanded  the 
French  garrison,  cut  off  from  all  communications  with  his 
own  country,  was  in  a  desperate  position.     He,    however, 

^  The  two  paragraphs  of  the  treaty  of  Berlin  which  were  read  to  the 
Estates  of  Bohemia,  and  were  sanciioned  by  them,  ran  thus — 

Article  XI.  S.M.  la  Reine  de  Hongrie  et  de  Boheme  renonce  tant 
pour  elle  et  pour  ses  heritiers  et  successeurs  a  perpetuiie  et  fera  renoncer 
apres  la  pacification  ]es  etats  du  Royaume  de  Boheme  a  tout  droit 
de  relief,  que  la  couronne  de  Boheme  a  exerce  jusqu  apresent  sur  plusieurs 
etats  villes  et  districts  appartenant  anciennement  a  la  mai^on  electorate 
de  Brandenbourg,  de  quelque  nom,  condition  ou  nature  qu'ils  puissant 
etre,  de  sorte  qu'ils  reseront  jamais  plus  regardes  a  I'avenir  comme  fiefs  de 
la  couronne  de  Boheme,  mais  censes  et  declares  libres  de  cette  mouvance. 

Article  XII.  Sa  Majestela  Reine  de  Hongrie  et  de  Boheme  s'engage 
et  promet  d'obliger  les  etats  de  Boheme  apres  la  pacification  de  donner 
un  acte  de  renonciation  a  tous  les  etats  dependans  autrefois  de  la 
couronne  de  Boheme  cedes  par  la  presente  paix  a  Sa  Majeste  le  roy  de 
Prusse  avec  toute  la  ^souverainete  et  I'independance  de  la  susdite 
couronne.  (Kalousek,  Ceski  Stdtni  Prdvo  (the  Bohemian  Constitution), 
p.  63J.) 


320  Bohemia 

succeeded  in  retiring  to  Cheb  (Eger)  after  a  difficult  and  peril- 
ous march  across  Bohemia  in  mid-winter.  A  small  French 
garrison  under  Chevet,  which  for  a  time  remained  in  Prague, 
was  finally  obliged  to  capitulate,  but  as  the  French  general 
threatened  to  blow  up  the  town,  together  with  his  own  posi- 
tions within  it,  he  obtained  favourable  conditions.  He  was 
allowed  to  retire  with  his  forces  to  Cheb  and  secured  the 
promise  of  an  amnesty  for  the  adherents  of  Charles  VII — a 
promise  that  was  not  kept  by  the  Austrian  authorities.  On 
September  7,  1743,  the  French  evacuated  Cheb,  the  last 
Bohemian  town  that  had  remained  in  their  possession. 

Even  before  that  date  Maria  Theresa  determined  to  visit 
Bohemia.  She  well  knew  the  great  importance  which 
Bohemians  attach  to  the  coronation  of  their  sovereigns,  and 
she  was  therefore  crowned  at  Prague  on  May  11.  The 
Queen  declared  the  capitulation  signed  on  Chevet's  depar- 
ture to  be  invalid,  and  a  considerable  number  of  Bohemian 
noblemen  and  citizens  were  arrested.  The  principal  ad- 
herents of  King  Charles  were  severely  punished,  but  it  is 
uncertain  whether  any  capital  executions  took  place.  Maria 
Theresa's  experiences  at  the  beginning  of  her  reign  in 
Bohemia  undoubtedly  influenced  her  mind  against  the 
inhabitants  of  that  country,  which  she  always  somewhat 
neglected  in  favour  of  her  beloved  Viennese.  This  dislike 
to  the  Bohemians  can  be  traced  in  all  the  new  regulations 
and  enactments  which  the  Queen  published  during  the  later 
years  of  her  reign.  During  her  short  stay  at  Prague  the 
Queen  received  the  news  of  great  victories  of  her  armies. 
After  driving  the  enemy  from  Lower  and  Upper  Austria 
the  —  mainly  Hungarian  —  forces  of  Maria  Theresa  had 
victoriously  occupied  Munich  and  the  whole  of  Bavaria. 
Charles  VII  had  sought  refuge  in  Frankfurt,  and  the  French 
troops  were  gradually  retiring  across  the  Rhine.  Frederick 
the  Great  thought  a  new  intervention  on  his  part  necessary. 
He  had  never  wished  to  increase  the  French  influence  in 
Germany  nor  to  render  assistance  to  the  dynastic  ambitions 
of  Ba/varia  or  Saxony,  but  he  rightly  thought  if  the  series  of 
Austrian  victories  continued,  that  country  might  endeavour 
to  regain  Silesia  also.  When  therefore  Charles  VII  appealed 
to  Prussia  for  help,  Frederick  concluded  a  treaty  with  him 
by  which  he  promised  to  assist  him  in  recovering  the 
kingdom  of  Bohemia,  while  the  Emperor  promised  to  cede 
to  Prussia  the  part  of  the  kingdom  situated  on  the  right 


An    Historical    Sketch  321 

bank  of  the  Elbe— a  plan  with  which  we  here  meet  for  the 
first,  but  by  no  means  for  the  last  time  in  the  annals  of 
Prussian  politics.  Frederick's  action  was  as  rapid  as  it  always 
was.  Crossing  through  the  territory  of  Saxony,  that  was  now 
allied  with  Austria,  Frederick  entered  Bohemia  on  August 
15,  1744,  declaring  that  he  appeared  there  to  re-establish  the 
rule  of  the  legitimate  sovereign,  Charles  VII.  He  occupied 
Prague  after  a  short  resistance  and  then  marched  into 
Southern  Bohemia,  perhaps  intending  to  menace  Vienna. 
The  Austrian  armies,  that  had  been  engaged  in  a  campaign 
against  France,  near  the  Rhine,  were,  however,  now  recalled, 
and  Frederick's  position  in  Bohemia  became  a  dangerous 
one.  He  was  also  threatened  in  his  rear  by  a  Saxon  army. 
Frederic  therefore  determined  to  evacuate  Prague  and  to 
retire  into  Silesia  through  the  North-eastern  districts  of 
Bohemia.  He  successfully  accomplished  this  difficult  task, 
not  without  the  aid  of  the  secretly  Hussite  peasants  of 
Bohemia,  who  sympathized  with  Prussia.  The  war  between 
Frederick  the  Great  and  the  allied  forces  of  Austria  and 
Saxony  still  continued  for  some  time,  but  after  Frederick's 
victories  at  Hohenfriedberg  and  Kesselstadt  a  treaty  of 
peace  was  signed  at  Dresden  on  December  25,  1745.  Its 
contents  were  similar  to  those  of  the  treaty  of  Berlin. 
Prussia  retained  possession  of  the  greatest  part  of  Silesia 
and  of  the  county  of  Glatz. 

Almost  immediately  after  the  treaty  of  peace,  Maria 
Theresa — who  became  Empress  when  her  husband,  Charles 
of  Lorraine,  was,  after  the  death  of  Charles  VII,  chosen  as 
Emperor — decided  to  reorganize  and  centralize  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  states  over  which  she  ruled.  To  the  great 
autonomy  and  independence  which  some  of  these  lands 
still  possessed,  she  largely  attributed  the  troubles  which  had 
marked  the  beginning  of  her  reign.  These  constitutional 
changes  were,  however,  necessarily  delayed  by  the  outbreak 
of  the  Seven  Years'  War. 

Though  the  results  of  the  Seven  Years'  War  affected 
Bohemia  very  little,  as  at  its  close  the  stipulations  of  the 
Treaty  of  Berlin  remained  unchanged,  yet  as  this  war  was, 
particularly  in  the  two  first  years,  fought  principally  on 
Bohemian  soil,  it  cannot  remain  quite  unmentioned  here. 
In  1756  Frederick  the  Great,  having  received  information 
that  a  large  coalition  of  the  European  powers  against  him 
was  being  formed,  determined,  with  his   habitual  resolution 


322  Bohemia 

to  anticipate  his  enemies.  On  August  26,  1756,  the 
Prussian  army  entered  Saxony,  where  it  met  with  no  resist- 
ance, as  the  Saxon  army  retired  to  a  strongly  fortified 
position  between  Pirna  and  Konigstein.  They  here  awaited 
the  arrival  of  their  Austrian  allies ;  but  Frederick,  entering 
Bohemia,  defeated  the  Austrians  at  Lovosic,  and  then, 
returning  to  Saxony,  forced  the  Saxon  army  to  capitulate. 
In  the  following  spring  he  again  attacked  Bohemia,  and, 
marching  on  its  capital,  won  the  fam.ed  "  Battle  of  Prague," 
which  was  really  fought  at  the  village  of  Sterbohol,  five 
miles  from  the  city.  The  Austrians  hastily  retired  to 
Prague.  Frederick  besieged  and  bombarded  the  town,  but 
the  Austrian  victory  at  Kolin  obliged  him  to  raise  the  siege. 
Frederick  then  marched  westward  to  encounter  the  French 
armies,  and  the  Austrians  availed  themselves  of  his  absence 
to  invade  Silesia.  Aided  by  the  Roman  Catholic  part  of 
the  population  they  obtained  possession  of  a  consider- 
able part  of  the  country,  including  Breslau.  Frederick's 
brilliant  victory  at  Leuthen,  on  December  5,  1575,  obliged 
the  Austrians  again  to  evacuate  Silesia.  During  the  later 
period  of  the  Seven  Years'  War  only  outlying  districts  of 
Bohemia  were  on  rare  occasions  the  scene  of  a  war  that 
was  mostly  waged  in  Germany.  The  peace  of  Hubertsburg, 
which  in  1763  ended  the  war,  confirmed  the  Prussian 
conquest  of  Silesia  and  the  county  of  Glatz. 

The  return  of  peace  enabled  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa 
to  carry  out  the  plans  she  had  previously  formed  of  re- 
organizing the  vast  Habsburg  dominions.  Even  during  the 
reign  of  Charles  VI,  the  Empress's  father,  these  various 
racially  and  historically  distinct  countries  were,  to  a  great 
extent,  governed  according  to  their  ancient  laws  and  tradi- 
tions. Beside  the  high  officials  of  Prague,  no  longer  indeed 
elected  by  the  Estates,  but  appointed  by  ihe  Austrian 
Government,  Bohemia  was  administered  by  the  "  Bohemian 
secret  court  chancellery "  (Boheimische  Geheime  Hof 
Kanzlei).  The  financial  affairs  of  the  lands  of  the  Bohe- 
mian crown  were  under  the  direction  of  a  council  (Haupt 
Commission  derer  drey  Boheimischen  Landen  in  cameral- 
isticis).  A  supreme  law-court  (Obriste  Justiz  Stelle  in 
Bohemicis)  was  the  highest  tribunal  for  Bohemia,  Moravia, 
and  Silesia.^     Though  these  three  ministries,  as  we  may  call 

^  After  the  signature  of  the  Treaty  of  Berlin  in  1742  the  term 
*« Silesia"  of  course  only   refers  to  those  parts   of   the  country — the 


An    Historical    Sketch  323 

them,  all  had  their  offices  in  Vienna,  their  sphere  was 
entirely  limited  to  the  Bohemian  lands.  Other  officials 
were  charged  with  the  administration  of  Flanders,  Milan, 
Hungary,  Transylvania,  and  the  so-called  German  hereditary 
dominions  of  the  House  of  Habsburg.  This  system  of 
government  was  undoubtedly  a  complicated  one,  but  it  was 
certainly  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the  majority  of 
the  population  of  states  between  whom  the  dynasty  formed 
the  only  genuine  connecting  link.  Maria  Theresa,  however, 
as  already  mentioned,  attributed  the  failures  of  the  Austrian 
armies  at  the  beginning  of  her  reign  to  the  autonomy  which 
the  Austrian  Netherlands,  Hungary,  and  to  a  limited  extent 
Bohemia  also  still  possessed.  The  equipment  of  the  armies 
was,  to  a  certain  extent,  still  dependent  on  the  grants  of 
money  made  by  the  different  Estates.  As  the  events  during 
the  reign  of  Maria  Theresa's  son  afterwards  proved,  it  was 
dangerous  to  encroach  on  the  liberties  of  Hungary  and  of 
the  Netherlands.  The  councillors  of  Maria  Theresa,  there- 
fore, determined  first  to  devote  their  attention  to  Bohemia. 
Of  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa  it  can  be  truly  said  that  she 
was  the  creator  of  what  is  now  usually,  though  not  officially, 
called  "  Cisleithania,"  a  term  which  describes  the  non- 
Hungarian  parts  of  the  Habsburg  domains.  An  imperial 
decree  in  1749  abolished  the  separate  law  courts  of  Bo- 
hemia and  Austria  (/.  e.  the  hereditary  lands  of  the  House  of 
Habsburg)  and  established  at  Vienna  a  central  tribunal  for 
all  the  Bohemian  and  Austrian  territories.  Somewhat  later 
the  administration  of  the  two  previously  separate  countries 
was  also  united,  and  a  common  chancellor  for  Bohemia  and 
Austria  was  placed  at  its  head.  At  Prague  also  the  autho- 
rity of  the  Estates  was  still  further  limited,  and  the  custom 
that  the  State  officials,  though  appointed  by  the  Government 
of  Vienna,  were  chosen  among  the  Bohemians,  fell  into 
desuetude.  These  administrative  changes,  which  all  tended 
to  place  Bohemia  in  closer  dependence  on  Vienna,  con- 
tinued with  increasing  energy  during  the  reign  of  Maria 
Theresa  and  her  son  Joseph,  who  in  the  year  1765  became 
her  co-regent.  An  important  measure  which  imperilled 
the  national  language  even  more  than  the  decrees  published 
after  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain,  was  the  new  system 
of  education    which  was  introduced  by   Joseph   II.     He 

Duchies  of  Jagerndorf,  Teschen  and  Troppau — which  continued  to 
belong  to  Austria. 


324  Bohemia 

founded  a  large  number  of  new  schools,  in  all  of  which — 
even  in  the  village  schools  of  the  lowest  category — the 
teaching  was  to  be  exclusively  in  the  German  language. 
This  decree,  whose  brutality  is  perhaps  only  equalled  by 
the  recent  Prussian  school-regulations  in  Posen,  deprived 
the  wretched  Bohemian  peasants  even  of  the  consolations 
of  religion ;  for  the  religious  instruction  also  was  to  be  given 
in  German  to  children,  few  of  whom  knew  any  language  but 
their  own.  It  should  be  stated  to  the  honour  of  the 
Bohemian  priesthood  that  they,  in  those  districts  where 
German  was  totally  unknown,  generally  disregarded  the 
imperial  decree.  About  the  same  time  a  new  regulation 
decreed  that  the  German  language  should  in  future  be 
exclusively  used  in  all,  even  the  lowest  law  courts  in  the 
Bohemian  lands.  The  many  Bohemians  who,  particularly 
in  country  districts,  had  no  knowledge  of  German,  were 
thus  exposed  to  constant  vexations  and  frauds. 

While  the  new  regulations  of  Maria  Theresa  had  been 
without  exception  injurious  to  Bohemia,  the  more  extensive 
and  more  far-reaching  plans  of  her  son  Joseph  II,  who, 
after  her  death  in  1780  succeeded  her  as  King  of  Bohemia 
and  Hungary,  included  some  reforms  that  were  very 
favourable  to  Bohemia.  Among  these  the  most  important 
was  the  abolition  of  the  system  of  serfdom,  which  still 
oppressed  the  Bohemian  peasants.  This  great  reform  was 
carried  out  in  the  first  year  of  Joseph's  rule,  who  on  this 
occasion  still  acted  in  accordance  with  the  Diet  of  Bohemia. 
In  the  later  years  of  his  reign  Joseph  entirely  suppressed 
these  meetings  of  the  Estates.  Though  the  peasantry  of 
Bohemia  even  now  did  not  obtain  complete  freedom — this 
was  only  granted  them  in  1848 — their  state  was  greatly 
improved  by  this  reform. 

Of  Joseph's  policy  generally  it  can  be  said  that  it  was 
founded  on  the  conception  of  "  enlightened  despotism " 
which  Frederick  the  Great's  example  had  rendered  fashion- 
able among  the  sovereigns  of  the  eighteenth  century.  He 
determined  to  consolidate  the  wide  and  variegated  lands 
over  which  he  ruled  into  one  vast  monarchy,  whose  only 
language  was  to  be  the  German  one.  The  historical  traditions 
of  Hungary  and  Bohemia  Joseph  treated  with  unconcealed 
contempt.  Thus  he  had  planned  to  turn  the  time-honoured 
palace  of  the  Bohemian  kings,  on  the  Hradcany  at  Prague, 
into   barracks.      Joseph  was  entirely  free  from  the   ultra- 


An    Historical    Sketch  325 

clerical  tendency  that  has  been  so  harmful  to  many  princes 
of  his  line.  He  proved  this  by  issuing  in  1781,  the  first 
year  in  which  he  became  sole  ruler,  the  famed  "decree 
of  tolerance  "  (Toleranz  Patent).  This  decree  granted  full 
freedom  to  the  "Helvetic  and  Augsburg  Confessions,"  a 
description  which  included  Lutherans  and  Calvinists.  Ail 
other  Christian  creeds,  even  the  unity  of  the  Bohemian 
Brethren,  which  had  in  the  last  years  before  the  battle  of  the 
White  Mountain  almost  become  the  national  Church,  were 
excluded.  Fearing  that  this  unexpected  amount  of  liberty, 
granted  so  suddenly,  might  lead  to  disorders,  very  draconic 
laws  were  issued  against  other  "sectarians."^  Still  the 
"  Toleranz  Patent "  was  an  enlightened  measure  for  which 
the  people  of  Bohemia — many  of  whom  had  secretly  re- 
mained Protestants — were  very  grateful  to  their  otherwise 
unpopular  ruler. 

It  was  also  in  accordance  with  the  traditional  policy  of 
the  enlightened  despots  of  the  eighteenth  century  that 
Joseph  II  relaxed  to  a  certain  extent  the  extreme  coercive 
regulations  which  had  hitherto  rendered  impossible  in  the 
Habsburg  dominions  the  appearance  of  any  newspaper  or 
book  that  was  not  published — directly  or  indirectly — by 
order  of  the  Government.  Thus  Joseph  allowed  the  publi- 
cation in  Prague  of  a  paper  in  the  national  language,  though 
such  a  permission  has,  since  his  time,  frequently  been  refused 
by  the  Austrian  ministers.  It  was  only  a  consequence  of 
this  comparative  freedom  that  new  editions  of  ancient 
Bohemian  works,  and  translations  from  foreign  languages 
into  the  national  one  now  began  to  appear.  It  was  also 
during  the  reign  of  Joseph  II  that  the  Bohemian  Society  of 
Sciences  was  founded,  and  professorships  of  the  Bohemian 
language  were  established  at  the  university  of  Vienna,  and 
somewhat  later  at  that  of  Prague.  As  the  existence  of 
Bohemia  as  an  autonomous  country  may  be  said  to  stand 
and  fall  with  that  of  the  national  language,  the  policy  of 
Joseph  II — certainly  very  much  against  the  wishes  of  its 

^  We  read  that  a  sect  sprang  up  in  Bohemia  calhng  itself  "deists," 
who  appear  to  have  been  connected  with  free-masonry.  Dr.  Svatek,  in 
his  Cultur  Htstorische  BUder,  quotes  a  curious  decree  published  against 
these  people.  It  states :  "  Should  any  man  or  woman  declare  themselves 
to  be  'deists,'  they  shall  immediately  and  without  previous  cross- 
examination  receive  twenty-four  strokes  witli  a  stick  or  birchrod,  as  a 
warning,  and  then  be  sent  back  to  their  homes." 


326 


Bohemia 


originator — prepared  the  way  for  the  revival  of  the  Bohemian 
language  in  the  following  century. 

The  so-called  reforms  of  Joseph  II  ended  in  a  complete 
failure.  The  population  of  the  Austrian  Netherlands  rose 
in  arms  against  the  Government,  and  that  of  Hungary  was 
on  the  point  of  doing  so  when,  on  the  death  of  Joseph  at 
the  beginning  of  the  year  1790,  his  successor,  Leopold  II, 
withdrew  almost  all  the  reforms  of  his  brother.  In  Bohemia 
also  there  had  been  great  discontent,  but  the  disunited 
people  was  incapable  of  action.  The  nobles  had  become 
mere  courtiers,  the  citizens  were  powerless  and  servile,  and 
the  peasants,  of  all  Joseph's  reforms,  were  interested  only  in 
the  agricultural  measures,  that  had  undoubtedly  improved 
their  condition. 

During  his  short  reign  Leopold  II  endeavoured  to  con- 
ciliate the  different  nationalities  whom  the  hasty  and  head- 
long policy  of  his  brother  and  predecessor  had  deeply 
offended.  Only  a  few  weeks  after  the  death  of  Joseph, 
Leopold  assembled  the  estates  of  Bohemia  who  during  the 
later  years  of  the  reign  of  Joseph  had  never  been  allowed  to 
meet.  He  also  ordered  the  Bohemian  crown,  which  by 
order  of  Joseph  had  been  transported  to  Vienna,  to  be 
restored  to  Prague,  and  he  was  crowned  with  it  at  St.  Vitus's 
Cathedral  on  September  6,  1791.  Leopold  II  died  after  a 
reign  of  only  two  years. 

The  earlier  part  of  the  reign  of  his  son  and  successor 
Francis  I,  which  concludes  the  period  from  1792-1815,  was 
almost  entirely  absorbed  by  the  prolonged  and  obstinate 
contest  of  the  house  of  Habsburg  with  revolutionary  France. 
In  consequence  of  this  struggle  Francis  became,  and  con- 
tinued during  his  long  life,  a  bitter  enemy  of  all  liberal  and 
progressive  ideas,  and  indeed  of  all  changes.  He  was  at 
the  beginning  of  his  reign  crowned  at  Prague  as  King  of 
Bohemia,  and  received  a  deputation  of  the  Estates,  who 
begged  that  a  small  part  of  the  former  autonomy  should  be 
restored  to  their  country.  The  Emperor,  who  was  during  his 
whole  life  influenced  by  his  dread  of  the  French  revolution, 
replied  by  a  decree  which  merely  stated  that  all  administra- 
tive changes  in  Bohemia  must  be  postponed  till  the  termin- 
ation of  the  foreign  wars.  The  almost  uninterrupted  series 
of  wars  with  France  was  with  few  exceptions  ^  waged  outside 

^  In  1 81 3  a  French  army  under  Marshal  Vandamme  crossed  the 


An    Historical    Sketch  327 

of  the  frontiers  of  Bohemia.  The  country  which  gave  to  the 
empire  its  best  and  most  numerous  soldiers  none  the  less 
suffered  grievously,  and  the  hopeless  state  of  the  Austrian 
finances  caused  the  complete  ruin  of  a  considerable  part  of 
the  population  of  Bohemia. 

During  the  whole  revolutionary  period  absolute  internal 
tranquillity  prevailed  in  Bohemia,  as  in  other  parts  of  the 
Habsburg  empire.  The  reactionary  ministers  of  other 
countries  regarded  with  envy  the  conditions  of  these  coun- 
tries where  all  expressions  of  liberal  opinion  could  be  entirely 
and  successfully  suppressed.  Austrian  ministers  also,  as 
Baron  Helfert  has  well  said,^  never  even  appear  to  have 
taken  into  consideration  the  possibility  that  the  desire  for 
liberal  laws  and  institutions  which  showed  itself  so  strongly 
in  neighbouring  countries  might  finally  manifest  itself  in  a 
very  vehement  manner  in  the  Habsburg  dominions  also. 
Two  important  constitutional  changes  in  Bohemia  belong 
to  this  period.  In  1804  Francis  I  assumed  the  hereditary 
title  of  Emperor  of  Austria.  It  was  however  declared  that 
he  would  continue  to  bear  the  titles  of  King  of  Bohemia 
and  Hungary,  and  that  his  successors  would  as  heretofore 
continue  to  be  crowned  as  kings  of  those  countries.  In  1 8 1 5 
the  Germanic  confederacy  began  its  inglorious  career  which 
ended  only  in  1866.  Not  only  the  German  hereditary  lands 
of  the  house  of  Habsburg,  but  also  Bohemia  with  Moravia 
and  (Austrian)  Silesia  were  included  in  this  confederacy.  It 
was  not  considered  necessary  to  submit  this  important  con- 
stitutional innovation  to  the  Diet  or  meeting  of  the  Estates 
of  Bohemia.  There  was  indeed  no  danger  that  that  body, 
then  entirely  lacking  independence  and  initiative,  would  ven- 
ture to  criticize,  far  less  reject,  any  measure  brought  before 
it  by  the  government,  but  it  was  in  accordance  with  the 
policy  then  pursued  at  Vienna  to  suppress  all  semblance  of 
representative  government. 

The  administration  of  the  Habsburg  dominions — with  the 
exception  of  Hungary — was  founded  on  a  system  of  severest  f 
absolutism  during  the  years  that  followed  the  general  pacifi-  / 
cation  of  181 5.  The  liberty  of  the  subject  became  entirely' 
dependent  on  the  arbitrariness  of  an  omnipotent  pohce.  I 
Countless  government  spies  watched  over  even  the  most  [ 

Bohemian  frontier  after  the  battle  of  Dresden.     It  was  however  defeated 
at  Kulm  by  the  Russian  and  Austrian  armies. 

^  In  his  Geschichte  der  oesterreichischen  Revolutiotty  vol  i.  p.  5. 


328  Bohemia 

insignificant  acts  of  the  citizens.  A  double  system  of 
"censure,"  one  political,  the  other  ecclesiastical,^  rendered 
it  impossible  to  express  in  print  any  opinions  that  were  not  in 
strict  accordance  with  the  views  of  the  government  of 
Vienna. 

While  the  despotism  of  Vienna  pressed  heavily  on  all 
parts  of  the  empire,  its  oppression  was  felt  more  heavily  in 
Bohemia  than  elsewhere;  for  not  only  were  individuals 
deprived  of  all  liberty,  but  the  national  language — so 
sacred  to  all  Bohemians — was  excluded  from  every  school, 
law-court,  or  government  office  in  the  country.  The  fact 
that  in  spite  of  all  these  and  of  other  obstacles  the  first  half 
of  the  nineteenth  century  witnessed  a  revival  of  the  Bohemian 
language  is  an  almost  unique  one.  This  event  is  mainly 
due  to  a  small  group  of  literary  men  of  whom  Jungmann, 
Kolar,  Safafik,  and  Palacky^  were  the  most  prominent. 
They  obtained  the  support  of  the  more  enlightened  members 
of  the  Bohemian  nobility.  As  the  Austrian  police  had  at 
that  time  the  power  of  expelling  from  any  town  those  who 
were  not  either  resident  there  or  able  to  prove  that  they  had 
sufficient  means  of  livelihood,  the  patriots  who  were  poor, 
and  some  of  whom  had  come  to  Prague  from  other  parts  of 
the  empire,  were  exposed  to  constant  persecution  on  the 
part  of  the  police.  Several  patriotic  noblemen  assured  the 
safety  of  the  young  enthusiasts  by  conferring  on  them 
appointments  as  librarians  or  tutors  in  their  families. 
Palacky  himself  v^as  appointed  "historiographer  to  the 
Estates  of  Bohemia,"  an  appointment  to  which  the  govern- 
ment of  Vienna  after  much  delay  at  last  gave  a  reluctant 
consent.  The  development  of  the  national  language  was 
greatly  furthered  by  the  foundation  in  181 8  of  the  "Society 
of  the  Bohemian  Museum,"  In  this  museum  many  ancient 
monuments  of  the  period  of  Bohemia's  greatness  were 
collected.  Many  historical  MSS.  of  great  value  also  found 
a  place  in  it  and  were  afterwards  printed  by  the  Matice  ^ 
Ceski,  a  society  founded  in  connection  with  the  museum. 
The  foundation  of  the  museum  was  mainly  due  to  the 
efforts  of  Counts  Sternberg  and  Kolovrat,  the  latter  of  whom 

*  For  a  short  account  of  the  Austrian  system  of  "  censure  "  see  my 
History  of  Bohemian  LiteratJire,  particularly  p.  396-397  (2nd  ed.). 

2  For'a  brief  account  of  the  career  of  these  four  men  see  chapter  VII 
of  mv  History  of  Bohemian  Literature. 

*  In  Bohemian,  "treasury." 


An    Historical    Sketch  329 

held  high  office  in  the  government  of  Vienna  and  was 
therefore  able  to  overcome  the  resistance  which  that 
government  always  opposed  to  all  Bohemian  enterprise. 
Many  Bohemian  nobles  of  the  Klebelsberg,  Kinsky,  Cernin, 
Thun,  Liitzow,  Waldstein,  Wratislaw  families  immediately 
joined  the  new  association.  The  acquaintance  with  the 
ancient  history  of  their  country  contributed  largely  to  revive 
the  patriotism  of  the  people.  Many  ancient  songs  were  re- 
discovered, and — as  happens  so  easily  in  a  musical  country — 
new  ones  treating  of  the  old  and  glorious  time  of  Bohemia 
were  improvised  and  were  soon  in  the  mouths  of  all. 

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  repeat  here  what  I  have  previously 
written    on   the   revival   of    the   Bohemian   language   and 
literature.     One    point,    however,    deserves    notice.     The 
Germans  were  at  that  time  free  from  that  racial  hatred  of 
the  Slav  which  has  lately  been  so  prominent.     The  great^ 
Gothe  became  a  member  of  the  Society  of  the  Bohemian  j 
Museum.    German  poets  rivalled  the  Bohemians  themselves ' 
in  celebrating  the  ancient  glories  of  the  nation.^     It  may, 
however,  be  suggested  that  this  fairness  was  founded  on  the 
supposition  that  Bohemia,  as  a  political  individuality,  was 
dead  for  ever ;  the  fact  is  none  the  less  noteworthy. 

About  the  year  1840  we  perceive  the  beginning  of  a 
political  activity  in  Bohemia.  It  appeared  at  first  only 
among  the  Estates,  as  indeed  there  only  a  semblance  of 
independence  still  existed.   After  the  end  of  the  Napoleonic 

1  Thus   the   poet  Meissner,    a   German   who   resided   in   Bohemia, 
describes  the  Bohemians  of  the  Hussite  time  in  these  words  : 
**  Ja  eines  grossen  Volcks  !    Du  fremdes  Blut 
Du  kannst  es  freilich  nicht  in  Liedern  lesen 
Wie  gross  dies  Volck  in  alter  Zeit,  wie  gut 
Wie  martyrheilig  es  im  Tod  gewesen 
Kein  Dichterherz  hat  solchen  hohen  Tag 
Dass  kund  er's  thate  ganz,  wie  du  gelitten 
Wie  du  da  rings  die  Welt  im  Schlummer  lag 
^_         Hochherz'ges  Bohmen  fiir  cias  Licht  gestritten. 
Das  weiss  nur  der  den  diese  Flur  gebar 
Der  diese  heil'ge  Schc>lle  friih  getreten  ..." 
Lenau,  a  German  poet  of  Hungarian  origin,  describing  the  Hussites 
as  early  fighters  for  freedom  writes  : 

' '  Denn  es  wird  in  spaten  Tagen 
Unseren  Leid  und  Kampfgenossen 
Starkend  aus  Hussitengrabern 
Trost  und  grtiner  Muth  entspiossen." 
It  would  be  easy  to  quote  many  other  examples. 


330  Bohemia 

wars  the  Diets  or  meetings  of  the  Estates  again  took  place. 
These  meetings  had  however  become  a  mere  formality. 
The  governor  ("  high  burgrave ")  stated  what  sums  the 
government  required  and  these  were  immediately  and 
unanimously  voted  without  debate.  It  had  become 
proverbial  to  describe  a  dull  party  as  having  been  "  as  quiet 
as  a  meeting  of  the  Estates."^  When  the  Emperor  Ferdinand 
in  1835  succeeded  his  father  Francis  the  meetings  of  the 
Diet  took  place  somewhat  more  frequently,  and  were  after  a 
time  less  insignificant.  An  unimportant  circumstance  pro- 
duced the  first  note  of  opposition.  In  1845  Count  Chotek, 
then  governor,  disposed  of  a  house  at  Prague,  the  property 
of  the  Estates,  without  waiting  for  the  mere  formality  of  asking 
their  consent.  Count  Frederick  Deym,  a  strong  nationalist 
who  had  begun  to  be  known  as  the  "  Bohemian  O'Connell," 
strongly  protested  against  this  arbitrary  act.  Count 
Chotek  was  recalled  mainly  through  the  influence  of  Count 
Kolovrat  who,  himself  a  Bohemian,  sympathised  with  the 
Bohemians  as  far  as  his  official  position  as  Austrian  minister 
permitted.  Henceforth,  however,  the  claim  of  the  Bohemian 
Estates  to  exercise  some  control  over  the  finances  of  their 
country  became  ever  more  pressing.  At  the  meeting  of  the 
Diet  in  1845  Count  Frederick  Deym  proposed  "that  the 
Estates  should  appoint  a  committee  which  was  to  determine 
in  what  efficient  but  respectful  manner  they  could  defend 
their  menaced  rights  and  privileges."  In  1847  the  Diet 
again  met.  The  committee  mentioned  above  had  drawn  up 
a  statement  declaring  that  the  constitution  of  1627  had  still 
left  the  Estates  considerable  powers.  They  still,  it  was 
maintained,  had  the  right  of  electing  their  king  should  the 
Habsburg  dynasty  become  extinct  both  in  the  male  and 
female  line.  The  document  further  asserted  the  exclusive 
right  of  the  Estates  to  levy  taxes  in  Bohemia,  and  declared 
that  if  the  Estates  voted  no  taxes,  none  could  be  raised  in 
the  kingdom  of  Bohemia.  This  document  gave  rise  to  a 
very  animated  debate  that  lasted  from  the  3rd  to  the  nth  of 
May.  The  hall  at  the  Hradcany  castle  in  which  the  meet- 
ings of  the  Estates  took  place  had  by  no  means  its  usual 
somnolent  appearance.  Some  of  the  members  ventured  to 
defend  the  absolutist  policy  of  the  government  of  Vienna. 
Among  them  was  Joseph  Miiller,  mayor  (starosta)  of  Prague, 
who,  according  to  the  then  existing  regulations,  was  a 
^  Baron  Helfert  Die  oesterreichische  Revolution. 


An    Historical    Sketch  331 

nominee  of  the  government  of  Vienna.  Count  Bouquoi 
interrupted  him  by  saying  :  "  You  are  servile  by  your  origin, 
servile  by  your  education,  servile  by  your  official  position  ; 
nothing  else  could  be  expected  of  you."  This  occurrence 
undoubtedly  constitutes  one  of  history's  little  ironies  ;  for 
at  the  present  time  the  liberal  papers  of  Bohemia — perhaps 
generalizing  rather  unfairly — accuse  the  nobility  of  servility, 
while  the  present  mayor  of  Prague  is  a  strong  upholder  of 
the  autonomy  and  nationality  of  Bohemia.  The  declaration 
proposed  by  the  committee  was  finally  voted  by  a  large 
majority,  and  the  members  of  the  Diet  before  separating 
resolved  that  at  their  next  meeting — which  would,  it  was 
supposed,  take  place  in  1848 — they  would  petition  the 
Austrian  government  to  consent  to  the  increase  of  the 
number  of  town-representatives  at  the  Diets,  to  grant  the 
Estates  full  control  over  the  road-making  in  the  kingdom, 
and  to  allow  the  introduction  of  the  national  language  in 
the  schools.  In  consequence  of  the  events  of  1848  this 
meeting  of  the  estates  never  took  place.  — ' 

The  beginning  of  the  year  1848  was  in  Bohemia,  as  in 
almost  all  continental  Europe,  marked  by  a  revolutionary 
outbreak.  After  the  total  failure  of  this  movement  it, 
particularly  in  Bohemia,  for  a  long  time  became  fashionable 
to  overwhelm  the  idealistic  and  unpractical  reformers  with 
a  torrent  of  virulent  abuse  and  cheap  derision.  Now  that 
the  events  of  the  "  year  of  revolution  "  have  risen  from  the 
level  of  contemporary  controversy  to  the  calm  heights  of 
history,  the  judgment  of  many  will  probably  be  different ; 
they  will  think  that  these  strivers  who  heedless  of  all  diffi- 
culties and  dangers  attempted  to  establish  "  government  of 
the  people,  by  the  people,  for  the  people  "  undertook  no 
ignoble  task. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  since  the  year  1840, 
the  formerly  somnolent  Estates  had  shown  some  tendency  to 
opposition.  This  attitude  at  first  but  slightly  interested  the 
Bohemian  people.  The  aloofness  which  to  a  great  extent 
separates  the  Bohemian  nobility  from  the  other  classes  of 
the  population  caused  the  citizens — very  unjustly,  it  must 
be  admitted — to  believe  that  the  nobles  were  only 
endeavouring  to  obtain  for  themselves  further  favours  from 
the  government  of  Vienna.  It  was  only  the  talented  young 
journalist,  Charles  Havlicek  (or  "  Havel  Borovsky ")  who 
drew  the  attention  of  the  pubUc  to  the  attitude  of  opposition 


332  Bohemia 

taken  up  by  members  of  that  class  which  had  been  con- 
sidered unconditionally  devoted  to  the  government  of 
Vienna.  Havlicek's  paper,  the  "  Prazsk^  Noviny  "  ( "  news 
of  Prague  ")  attacked  the  Austrian  Government  with  great 
ingenuity.  As  the  "  censor-office  "  prohibited  all  allusions 
to  the  internal  affairs  of  Bohemia,  Havlicek  published  in  the 
form  of  reports  on  the  condition  of  Ireland  sharp  criticism 
on  the  government  of  his  own  country.  Thus  originated 
the  comparison  between  Ireland  and  Bohemia  which  has 
since  become  one  of  the  commonplaces  of  political  con- 
troversy. 

It  was  also  with  reference  to  Ireland  that  a  patrotic 
association  in  Bohemia,  formed  shortly  before  the  year  1 848, 
assumed  the  name  of  "  repeal."  Sometime  before  the 
beginning  of  the  year  1848,  the  impressionable  Bohemians 
believed  that  that  year  would  be  of  great  importance  to 
their  country.  It  was  pointed  out  that  in  that  year  occurred 
the  fifth  centenary  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  the 
university  and  of  the  "new  town"  of  Prague.  Even  the 
fact  that  the  spring  of  that  year  was  an  early  and  very  fine 
one  was  interpreted  in  a  mystical  manner.  The  actual 
outbreak  of  the  liberal  movement  in  Prague,  as  elsewhere, 
only  occurred  when  the  news  of  the  revolution  in  Paris 
arrived.  The  news  reached  Prague  on  February  29,  and  on 
March  11,  a  large  popular  meeting  in  the  hall  of  the 
so-called  "  baths  of  St.  Venceslas  "  took  place  under  the 
direction  of  the  "  repeal "  society.  It  was  presided  over  by 
Dr.  Aloysius  Trojan,  afterwards  a  well-known  member  of  the 
parliaments  of  Prague  and  Vienna.  The  assembly  resolved 
to  elect  a  committee  comprising  members  of  all  classes  of 
the  population,  who  were  to  present  to  the  Emperor  the 
demands  of  the  Bohemian  people.  These  were  formulated 
in  fourteen  articles.  The  principal  requests  were  that  the 
national  language  be  granted  complete  equality  with 
German,  that  the  detestable  system  of  "  censure "  be 
abolished,  that  Moravia  and  (Austrian)  Silesia  be  again 
joined  to  Bohemia  as  being  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown, 
and  that  a  thorough  reform  of  the  land-laws  should  alleviate 
the  distress  of  the  Bohemian  peasantry.  The  first  deputa- 
tion which  presented  these  demands  in  Vienna  obtained  no 
result,  as  the  court  was  then  entirely  absorbed  by  the  revo- 
lutionary movement  that  had  just  broken  out  in  Vienna.  A 
second  deputation  which  proceeded  there  somewhat  later  was 


An    Historical    Sketch  333 

more  successful.  It  brought  back  the  Emperor's  answer  in 
the  shape  of  a  letter  addressed  by  him  to  Baron  Pillersdorf, 
then  head  of  the  Austrian  government.^  It  was  stated  in 
this  important  document  that  the  Emperor  would  shortly 
convoke  a  Bohemian  Diet  in  which  not  only  the  nobility  and 
clergy  but  also  the  towns  and  country  districts  would  be 
adequately  represented.  The  Emperor  would  grant  this 
assembly  full  legislative  power.  He  further  promised  that 
the  Bohemian  language  should  in  future  enjoy  complete 
equality  with  the  German  one,  and  that  the  demands  of  the 
Bohemians  with  regard  to  freedom  of  the  press  and  personal 
liberty  would  be  granted.  The  claim  of  the  landowners  to 
demand  forced  labour  ("robota")  from  the  peasants  on 
their  estates  was  abolished  and  the  landowners  were  to 
receive  an  indemnity.  The  right  of  lower  jurisdiction 
possessed  by  the  owners  of  certain  large  estates  (velkostatky) 
that  could  then  only  be  held  by  nobles  was  abolished. 
With  regard  to  the  reunion  of  Moravia  and  Silesia  to 
Bohemia,  the  matter  was  to  be  left  to  the  decision  of  a 
general  assembly  of  representatives  of  all  parts  of  the 
Habsburg  dominions.  This  Imperial  decree  was  enthusi- 
astically received  at  Prague,  and  the  elections  to  the  new 
Diet,  which  would  practically  have  had  the  character  of  a 
constituent  assembly,  took  place  shortly  afterwards.  This 
Bohemian  parliament,  however,  never  met. 

The  events  in  Bohemia  are  at  this  moment  so  closely  con- 
nected with  those  in  Germany  that  it  is  necessary  to  refer 
briefly  to  the  condition  of  Germany  at  the  beginning  of  the 
year  1848.  The  only  link  between  the  numerous  German 
states  had  hitherto  consisted  in  a  meeting  of  representatives 
of  all  the  states  which  formed  part  of  the  confederacy.  This 
assembly  which  met  at  Frankfurt  under  the  presidency  of 
Austria  had  long  become  intensely  unpopular.  All  Germans 
complained  that  no  work,  except  the  occasional  passing  of 
reactionary  measures,  was  done  by  the  worthy  diplomatists, 
who  met  at  Frankfurt.  In  consequence  of  the  revolutionary 
movement  of  the  year  1848,  the  German  Governments 
found  themselves  obliged  to  give  their  reluctant  consent  to 
the  meeting  of  a  national  parliament  at  Frankfurt,  at  which 
all  countries  forming  part  of  the  Germanic  confederacy — 

^  This  document,  dated  April  8,  1848,  which  is  of  great  importance 
for  the  constitutional  development  of  Bohemia,  is  printed  by  Kalousek, 
p.  640-642. 


334  Bohemia 

therefore  Bohemia  also — were  to  be  represented.  Before 
this  parliament  met  it  was  settled  that  fifty  prominent  men, 
belonging  to  all  parts  of  Germany  should  meet  to  deliberate 
on  the  organization  of  the  new  parliamentary  assembly.  It 
was  agreed  that  six  of  these  men  should  be  chosen  among 
the  subjects  of  the  house  of  Habsburg,  and  the  historian 
Palacky  was  invited  to  take  part  in  the  deliberations  as  one  of 
their  number.  Palack)^,  on  April  1 1,  replied  to  this  proposal 
in  a  letter  that  remained,  and  indeed  still  is,  famous  in 
Bohemia.  He  wrote :  "  I  am  not  a  German  but  a 
Bohemian,  belonging  to  the  Slav  race.  Whatever  talent  I 
may  possess  is  at  the  service  of  my  own  country.  My 
nation  is  certainly  a  small  one,  but  it  has  always  main- 
tained its  historical  individuality.  The  rulers  of  Bohemia 
have  often  been  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  the  German 
princes,  but  the  Bohemian  people  have  never  considered 
themselves  as  Germans."  These  eloquent  words  of  Palacky, 
who  now  became,  and  continued  to  the  end  of  his  life,  the 
leader  of  the  Bohemian  people,  found  a  general  echo  in  the 
country.  Only  a  few  representatives  of  Germanized  districts 
of  Bohemia  took  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the  German 
parliament  at  Frankfurt. 

The  meeting  of  this  assembly  was,  however,  one  of  the 
causes  of  an  event  that  had  a  large  and  disastrous  influence 
on  the  future  of  Bohemia.  I  refer  to  the  Slavic  congress  at 
Prague.  The  fact  that  Germans  from  all  parts  of  their 
country  had,  though  they  were  subjects  of  various  rulers, 
met  in  one  large  assembly  naturally  suggested  to  the  Slavs 
of  Austria,  and  particularly  of  Bohemia,  the  idea  of  meeting 
in  one  great  assembly.  The  men  who  undertook  to 
organize  this  assembly  were  by  no  means  enemies  of  the 
Habsburg  dynasty.  The  fact  that  numerous  members  of 
the  Bohemian  nobility,  which  since  the  time  of  Maria 
Theresa  has  been  traditionally  loyal,  took  part  in  the  pro- 
ceedings bears  sufficient  witness  to  this.  On  April  30,  a 
considerable  number  of  Slavic  politicians — here  also  follow- 
ing the  example  of  Germany — met  at  a  preliminary  conference 
to  discuss  the  conditions  under  which  a  Slavic  congress  could 
be  held.  It  was  decided  to  invite  representatives  of  all  the 
Slavs  who  were  under  the  rule  of  the  house  of  Habsburg, 
but  to  admit  as  guests  all  who  belonged  to  the  Slavic  race. 

The  plan  of  the  Slavic  leaders  placed  the  government 
of  Vienna  in  a  very  difficult   position.      The  Hungarian 


An    Historical  Sketch  335 

government  which  was  at  that  moment,  as  in  the  present 
day,  almost  independent  of  Vienna,  raised  an  energetic 
protest  against  the  meeting  of  any  assembly,  at  which 
the  Slavs  of  Hungary  should  be  represented.  The 
attitude  of  the  German  and  liberal  cabinet  which  had 
taken  office  in  Vienna  in  March  was  one  of  hatred  and 
fear  of  the  Hungarians,  of  hatred  and  contempt  of  the 
Slavs.  The  cabinet  of  Vienna  was,  however,  entirely  power- 
less, as  several  government  officials  and  generals,  of  whom 
Prince  Windischgratz — who  at  this  moment  became  com- 
mander of  the  Imperial  forces  in  Bohemia — was  the 
most  important,  had  already  planned  a  return  to  the 
former  absolutist  system  of  government.  In  spite  of 
the  dangers  that  threatened  them,  the  Bohemian  patriots 
determined  to  hold  their  congress.  About  the  end  of 
May  numerous  Slavs  from  all  countries  began  to  arrive 
at  Prague.  The  principal  leaders  met  at  the  house  of 
Baron  Neuberg,  an  ardent  patriot,  on  May  27  and  28.^ 
The  meeting  had  by  no  means  a  revolutionary  character. 
Count  Leo  Thun,  who  was  at  that  moment  at  the  head  of 
the  government  (Zemsk)^  president)  acted  as  chairman. 
Most  of  the  Bohemian  patriots  were  present  as  well  as 
several  Servian  guests,  among  whom  was  General  Zach, 
who  afterwards  became  known  as  leader  of  the  Servian 
armies.  On  May  30  numerous  other  patriots  arrived 
from  the  country  districts  of  Bohemia,  from  Croatia, 
Servia,  Poland,  Moravia,  and  the  Slavic  parts  of  Hun- 
gary. They  were  received  with  great  enthusiasm  by  the 
National  Guard,  which  in  Prague,  as  in  most  continental 
cities,  had  been  formed  in  the  revolutionary  year.  At  a 
meeting  which  took  place  at  the  National  Museum  ^  on 
June  I,  Palack)^  was  elected  president  of  the  congress, 
and  on  the  following  day,  after  a  solemn  mass  at  the  Tyn 
church,  the  first  general  assembly  took  place  on  the 
Sophia  island.  From  the  first  moment,  however,  dark 
clouds,  as  Tomek  writes,  appeared  on  the  horizon. 
Though    the     Russian    Government    had    forbidden*   its 

^  Tomek  Pamety  zroku  1848  (Memoirs  of  the  year  1848).  Professor 
Tomek  took  a  considerable  part  in  the  events  at  Prague  in  184S. 

2  The  large  building  which  now  contains  the  collections  of  the 
National  Museum  had  not  then  been  erected  ;  they  were  then 
housed  in  a  building  on  the  Phkop,  the  principal  street  of  Prague. 
•See  my  Prague. 


336 


Bohemia 


subjects  to  attend  the  congress,  several  Russian  revolu- 
tionists of  a  very  advanced  school  were  present.  Here, 
as  so  often  before  and  since  that  time,  the  extremists 
proved  the  worst  enemies  of  liberty's  true  friends.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  attitude  of  the  troops  at  Prague  was 
a  menacing  one  from  the  beginning  of  the  congress. 
On  June  5,  Prince  Windischgratz,  commander  of  the 
garrison  of  Prague,  held  a  great  review.  The  soldiers,  all 
alien  to  Bohemia,  already  professed  an  intense  hatred  of 
the  citizens  and  particularly  of  the  students.  It  also 
appears  that  here,  as  on  so  many  occasions,  the  Austrian 
Government  employed  the  evil  services  of  secret  agents.^ 
Prince  Windischgratz's  political  views  were  well  known. 
He  had  almost  alone,  when  even  Prince  Matternich's 
colleague  Count  Kolovrat  declared  the  ancient  chan- 
cellor's demission  necessary,  expressed  the  wish  that 
Mettemich  should  retain  office  and  that  the  garrison  of 
Vienna  should  immediately  attack  the  people.  The 
reception  of  Windischgratz  on  the  occasion  of  this  review, 
when  he  was  greeted  with  enthusiasm  by  his  soldiers, 
had  almost  the  character  of  a  pronunciamento.  On  the 
following  day  Windischgratz  ordered  to  Prague  the 
garrisons  of  all  the  smaller  towns  of  Bohemia.  The 
conflicts  between  the  soldiers  and  the  people  daily 
became   more   frequent. 

The  Slavic  congress  had  meanwhile  continued  its 
deliberations.  Several  committees  had  been  elected 
which  were  to  report  on  the  condition  of  the  Slavs 
in  the  different  countries  in  which  they  reside.  It  had 
also  been  determined  under  the  influence  of  two  agitators, 
Bakunin,  a  Russian,  and  Libert,  a  Prussian  Pole,  to 
publish  a  manifesto  which,  almost  ignoring  the  national 
question,  expounded  in  the  then  customary  phraseology 
the  theory  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people.  Palacky 
and  Tomek,  firm  upholders  of  the  historical  rights  of 
the  Bohemian  people,  could  not  approve  of  this  unprac- 
tical and   doctrinaire   resolution.      Wishing,    however,    to 

^  In  a  work  of  this  extent  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  discuss 
adequately  the  causes  of  the  riots  at  Prague  in  1848.  It  appears 
certain  that  the  Austrian  Government  gave  orders  for  a  large  number 
of  unifoims  such  as  were  then  worn  by  the  men  of  the  National 
Guard.  There  is  unfortunately  little  doubt  that  they  were  intended 
to  be  worn  by  agents  of  the  secret  police,  who  were  to  iixsult  the 
soldi  rs  and  thus  cause  a  conflict. 


An    Historical   Sketch  337 

avoid  discord  among  the  members  of  the  congress,  they 
finally  consented  to  its  being  passed.  Palack)^  had 
previously  obtained  the  insertion  of  a  passage  which 
laid  stress  on  the  equality  of  the  Slavic  races  with  the 
Teutonic  and  I^tin  ones  that  had  so  long  oppressed 
them. 

June  1 1  was  in  that  year  Whitsunday.  The  Slavic  con- 
gress interrupted  its  sittings  for  a  few  days,  and  many 
members  left  Prague  for  the  country.  The  assertion  after- 
wards made  by  Government  officials  that  a  vast  conspiracy 
was  planned  at  this  moment  is  undoubtedly  untrue.  On 
Whitmonday  a  solemn  mass  was  said  in  St.  Venceslas"s 
place,  where  prayers  were  offered  up  for  the  success  of  the 
congress.  After  the  end  of  the  service  som^e  of  those  who 
had  been  present  on  their  way  home  passed  through  the 
Celetna  ulice,  where  the  palace  of  the  military  commander 
was  then  situated.  On  passing  the  residence  cries  were 
raised  which  the  soldiers  on  duty  there — who  were  all  ignorant 
of  the  Bohemian  language — believed,  or  pretended  to  believe, 
to  be  insults  against  their  commander.  The  large  force  of 
soldiers  which  was  concentrated  in  the  vast  courtyard  of  the 
palace  immediately  marched  out  into  the  street  and  began 
to  fire  on  the  passers-by.^  A  panic  ensued,  as  a  rumour 
that  Prince  Windischgratz  was  planning  forcibly  to  re-estab- 
lish absolutism,  had  been  widely  circulated.  Barricades 
were  hurriedly  erected  in  various  parts  of  the  town,  and  de- 
sultory fighting  took  place  in  several  directions.  Some  houses 
belonging  to  Bohemian  patriots  were  plundered,  and  the 
soldiers  made  an  attempt  to  destroy  the  collections  contained 
in  the  National  museum.  There  was  no  organized  resistance 
to  the  troops,  as  no  revolution  had  been  planned.  Even  the 
students,  who  had  slightly  fortified  the  university  buildings 
known  as  the  Clementinum,  immediately  released  Count  Leo 
Thun,  whom  they  had  made  a  prisoner.  As  he  had  not 
hitherto  proved  hostile  to  the  national  cause,  it  was  hoped 
that  he  would  act  as  mediator.  The  thought  of  retaining  a 
hostage,  so  familiar  to  more  recent  and  more  ferocious 
revolutionists,  was  never  conceived  by  these  youthful  and 
enthusiastic  patriots. 

When  the  news  of  the  troubles  at  Prague  reached  Vienna 
the  Austrian  Government  immediately  attempted  to  mediate. 

^  I  make  this  statement  on  the  authority  of  men  who  were  present  in 
the  Celetna  ulice  when  this  event  took  place. 


338 


Bohemia 


Composed  as  it  then  was  of  men  of  liberal  views,  it  well 
knew  that  Windischgratz's  plans  extended  far  beyond  the 
borders  of  Bohemia.  Count  Mensdorf  was  sent  to  Prague 
as  Imperial  representative,  and  he  was  instructed  to  replace 
Prince  Windischgratz  as  commander  of  the  troops  in 
Bohemia.  Mensdorf  entered  into  negotiations  with  the 
national  committee,  and  on  June  15  it  appeared  that  these 
negotiations  were  proceeding  favourably.  The  officers  and 
men  of  the  garrison  of  Prague,  however,  refused  to  obey  any 
commander  except  AVindischgratz,^  and  General  Mensdorf 
and  the  Government  officials  who  accompanied  him  were 
obliged  hurriedly  to  leave  Prague.  Windischgratz  had  mean- 
while withdrawn  all  his  forces  from  the  interior  of  the  city 
and  concentrated  them  on  the  surrounding  heights.  Under 
the  pretext  that  shots  had  been  fired  at  his  outposts  he  be- 
gan on  June  16  a  general  bombardment  of  Prague.  During 
the  night  fires  broke  out  in  all  directions,  and  on  the  follow- 
ing morning  the  city  capitulated  unconditionally.  Win- 
dischgratz's plans  had  begun  successfully.  One  of  the 
principal  towns  of  the  empire  was  again  under  absolutist 
rule.  The  short-sighted  and  narrow-minded  Germans  of 
Bohemia,  and  even  of  other  countries,  at  first  celebrated 
Windischgratz  as  a  national  hero.  It  was  only  when  the 
general,  with  even  greater  energy,  re-established  autocracy  in 
Vienna  also  that  their  views  underwent  a  change. 

The  bombardment  of  Prague  marks  in  Bohemia  the  end 
of  the  national  and  liberal  movement  of  the  year  1848, 
though  Bohemian  representatives,  as  will  be  mentioned 
presently,  took  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Austrian 
constituent  assembly  that  met  at  Vienna,  and  afterwards  at 
Kromerize.  In  Bohemia,  however,  absolutism  was  already 
triumphant.  Shortly  before  the  outbreak  of  the  disturbances 
at  Prague  the  national  committee,  which  since  the  meeting 
in  the  hall  of  St.  Venceslas  directed  the  national  movement, 
sent  two  of  its  members.  Dr.  Rieger  and  Count  Nostitz,  to 
Innsbruck,  where  the  Imperial  court  was  then  residing. 
They  arrived  at  Prague  on  their  return  at  the  moment  when 
General  Mensdorf  was  vainly  attempting  to  obtain  a  cessation 
of  hostilities.  Rieger  and  Nostitz  were  bearers  of  good  news. 
The  Emperor  had  received  them  graciously  and  had  con- 
firmed all  the  promises  contained  in  his  letter  of  April  8.  He 

1  The  *'  inspired  "  reports  on  these  events  suppress  all  mention  of  this 
somewhat  prsetorian  attitude  of  the  troops  in  Bohemia. 


An    Historical    Sketch  339 

had  also  promised  to  convoke  the  Bohemian  Parliament  in 
the  course  of  the  month  of  June,  leaving  it  to  Count  Leo 
Thun,  as  representative  of  the  Austrian  Government  in 
Bohemia,  to  fix  the  day. 

All  the  hopes  of  Bohemia  were  destroyed  by  the  action 
of  Prince  Windischgratz.  The  members  of  the  Slavic  con- 
gress immediately  dispersed  ;  the  meeting  of  the  Bohemian 
Parliament  was  indefinitely  postponed  and,  indeed,  never 
took  place ;  the  national  committee  was  dissolved  ;  Prague 
and  most  of  the  Bohemian  towns  were  placed  in  a  state 
of  siege.  At  the  end  of  the  year  1848  Prague  was  for  a 
short  time  freed  from  this  state,  but  it  was  re-established  a 
few  months  later,  as  the  police  spies  again  maintained  that 
they  had  discovered  a  vast  conspiracy  in  Bohemia.  It 
appears  that  the  fact  that  a  few  students  had  incautiously 
spoken  with  disapproval  of  the  Government  was  the  only 
foundation  of  this  denunciation.  The  courts-martial  re- 
sumed their  activity,  which  became  even  greater  than  before. 
As  constitutional  government  had  not  yet  been  formally 
abolished,  the  military  and  police  officials  considered  it 
their  duty  to  prove  the  existence  of  far-reaching  conspiracies, 
which  justified  the  maintenance  of  martial  law.  For  this 
purpose  they  used  means  not  differing  widely  from  the 
customs  of  the  middle  ages.^ 

The  liberty  of  the  press,  after  a  brief  spell  of  freedom 
again  disappeared.  In  Prague  almost  all  the  papers  except 
the  organ  of  the  Government  discontinued  publication. 
The  editors  who  were  sufficiently  venturesome  not  to  do  so 
were  subject  to  bitter  and  persistent  persecution.  Even 
the  tamest  criticism  of  Government  measures  rendered  the 
writer  and  the  editor  liable  to  fines  and  imprisonment.  As 
the  reactionary  movement  was  directed  in  Bohemia  by  men 
whose  sympathies  were  entirely  German,  the  papers  written 
in  the  national  language  were  treated  far  worse  than  the  Ger- 
man ones,  and  they  soon  disappeared  altogether,  while  some 
German  papers  continued  to  be  published  during  the  whole 
period   of  absolutism.     Among   the  Bohemian  journalists 

^  The  regulations  of  the  courts-martial  authorized  the  presidents  of 
such  courts,  should  they  think  that  a  witness  obstinately  refused  to  give 
evidence  or  attempted  to  mislead  the  authorities,  to  have  corporal 
punishment  inflicted  on  such  a  person.  It  was  in  the  case  of  grown 
men  to  consist  of  not  more  than  fifty  strokes  with  a  stick,  in  the  case  of 
youths  and  women  of  not  more  than  thirty  strokes  with  a  birch-rod. 


340  Bohemia 

who  were  at  this  period  persecuted  by  the  Austrian  Govern- 
ment the  most  illustrious  was  Charles  Havli^ek,  whose 
memory  is  still  revered  by  the  Bohemians.  He  had,  as 
already  mentioned,  begun  before  the  year  1848  to  edit 
the  Prazskc  Noviny.  When  the  liberal  movement  of  that 
year  began  Havlicek  broke  off  his  connection  with  it,  thinking 
that  its  proprietors  did  not  allow  him  sufficient  indepen- 
dence. He  founded  a  new  paper  entitled  the  Ndrodni 
Noviny  (National  News),  and  very  courageously  continued 
its  publication  even  after  the  bombardment  of  Prague.  The 
paper  was  constantly  confiscated,  sometimes  entirely  sup- 
pressed for  a  few  months,  then  again  for  a  short  time 
permitted  to  appear.^  Havlicek  finally  saw  the  impossibility 
of  publishing  in  Prague  a  paper  opposed  to  the  Government. 
He  therefore,  in  spite  of  the  difficulties  raised  by  the 
authorities,  and  contrary  even  to  the  advice  of  some  of  his 
friends,  determined  to  found  a  new  paper  at  Kutna  Hora, 
a  town  in  which  the  state  of  siege  had  not  been  pro- 
claimed. The  first  number  of  the  new  paper,  to  which 
Havlicek  gave  the  name  of  Slovan  (the  "  Slav ")  appeared 
on  May  8,  1850.  In  his  new  paper  he  continued 
bravely  to  uphold  the  political  and  national  demands  of  his 
countrymen.  The  reactionary  movement  in  the  Habsburg 
monarchy  was  by  this  time  fully  successful,  and  the  persecu- 
tion of  Havlicek  continued  relentlessly;  almost  every 
number  of  his  paper  was  confiscated,  and  in  those  very 
numerous  parts  of  the  empire  which  were  under  martial 
law  its  sale  was  entirely  prohibited.  Though  Havlicek,  a 
poor  man,  suffered  financially  also,  he  courageously  continued 
the  unequal  struggle  up  to  August  15,  1851,  when  the  last 
number  of  the  Slovan  appeared.  Havlicek  now  determined 
entirely  to  leave  political  life  and  to  seek  to  gain  a  living  by 
farming.  His  sufferings  were  not,  however,  at  an  end.  In 
consequence  of  an  article  contained  in  the  last  number  of 
the  Slovan,  the  public  prosecutor  brought  an  accusation 
against  Havlicek  before  the  law-court  of  Kutna  Hora. 
Trials  by  jury  had,  in  that  part  of  Bohemia  which  was  not 
under  martial  law,  not  yet  been  suppressed ;  its  suppression 
was,  indeed,  one  of  the  consequences  of  the  trial  of  Havlicek. 
He  appeared,  on  November  17,  before  the  jury  of  Kutna 
Hora  and  was  unanimously  acquitted.  His  heroic  attitude 
and  his  eloquence  are  still  remembered  by  the  Bohemian 

^   k'arel  Havlicek  Borovshy ,  by  Adolph  Si  b. 


An    Historical   Sketch  341 

people.  The  Austrian  Government  was,  however,  now  more 
firmly  determined  than  ever  to  silence  Havlicek.  The 
coup-d'Hat  of  Napoleon  III  had  encouraged  the  friends  of 
absolutism  in  all  parts  of  the  continent.  By  order  of  the 
minister,  Baron  Bach,  who  was  just  beginning  to  acquire 
that  influence  which  for  a  time  made  him  almost  omnipotent 
in  Austria,  Havlicek  was  arrested  at  three  o'clock  of  night  on 
December  i6,  1851,  and  conveyed  to  Brixen  in  the  Tyrol. 
He  was  interned  here  and  remained  here  for  some  years 
under  the  strict  supervision  of  the  police.  He  was  only 
permitted  to  return  to  his  native  land  when  his  health  was 
already  failing,  and  he  died  shortly  after  his  return  to 
Bohemia. 

The  persecution  of  Bohemian  patriots  was  not  limited  to 
men  who  like  Havlic^ek  openly  expressed  views  that  were  in 
Austria  considered  radical.  Even  so  conservative  a  states- 
man as  was  Palack/  suffered  from  the  molestation  of  the 
Austrian  Government  and  the  secret  police.  He  had  long 
been  president  of  the  society  of  the  National  Museum,  but 
when  new  elections  took  place  during  the  period  of  renewed 
absolutism  the  committee  did  not  even  dare  to  elect  him  one 
of  its  members.  Yet  even  this  cautious  association  of  noble- 
men and  scholars  incurred  the  suspicion  of  Bach's  agents,  and 
it  was  decreed  that  a  commissioner  of  the  police  should  be 
present  at  the  sittings  of  the  association.  Palacky,  whose 
great  historical  work  had  largely  contributed  to  the  revival 
of  the  national  feeling  in  Bohemia,  incurred  the  special 
hatred  of  the  military  rulers  of  Prague.  The  suggestion  of 
trying  him  by  court-martial  was  seriously  discussed,  but  the 
plan  was  afterwards  abandoned.  Yet  he  continued  under 
constant  and  secret  supervision  by  the  police.  Palackj^  has 
himself  told  us  that  at  this  period  he  avoided  walking 
through  the  more  frequented  streets  of  Prague.  He  did  not 
wish  to  place  his  friends  before  the  alternative  of  either 
ignoring  him  or  incurring  the  disfavour  of  the  police  by 
being  seen  in  his  company.  All  relations  between  Palack}^ 
and  the  Bohemian  nobility,  who  had  so  highly  esteemed 
him,  ceased  for  a  time.  The  nobles,  with  few  exceptions, 
temporarily  withdrew  their  support  from  the  national  cause. 
It  was  only  in  i860,  when  a  new  attempt  was  made  to 
establish  constitutional  government  in  Bohemia  that  this 
ceased  to  be  the  case. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  Bohemian  representa- 
M  2 


342  Bohemia 

tives  took  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Austrian  parliament 
that  met  at  Vienna  in  1 848.  They  have  often  been  blamed 
for  having  done  so.  Yet  it  must  be  remembered  that  as  all 
liberty  had  already  been  suppressed  in  their  own  country, 
the  Vienna  parliament  was  the  only  forum  in  which  they 
could  freely  express  their  views.  It  should  also  be  noted 
that  the  Vienna  parliament  was  a  constituent  assembly,  and 
the  Bohemians  could  therefore  take  part  in  its  deliberations 
without  prejudging  the  question  of  their  autonomy  concern- 
ing which  they  had  recently  received  such  satisfactory 
promises  from  the  court. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  Bohemian 
national  movement  was  at  its  beginning  mainly  a  literary 
one.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  there  should  have  been 
many  scholars  and  men  of  letters  among  the  deputies  whom 
the  Bohemians  returned  to  the  parliament  of  Vienna.  We 
find  among  them  the  names  of  Palacky — who  was  elected 
by  several  constituencies,  and  became  the  leader  of  the 
party — Tomek  the  great  historian,  Havlicek,  Trojan,  and 
Rieger,  who  now  first  gave  proofs  of  his  great  eloquence. 
The  learned  Safafik,  who  was  also  elected,  declined  to 
proceed  to  Vienna.  The  position  of  the  Bohemian  delegates 
in  Vienna  was  from  the  first  a  very  difficult,  indeed  an 
almost  helpless  one.  The  radical  majority  was  thoroughly 
imbued  with  the  extreme  and  nebulous  views  of  the  German 
democracy  of  the  year  1848.  Their  hatred  of  the  Slavic 
"  inferior  "  race  was  as  great  as  that  with  which  they  viewed 
all  authority  and  orderly  government.  An  alliance  with 
such  men  was  impossible.  The  conservative  party  consisted 
largely  of  clericals  from  the  Tyrol  and  Galicia ;  the  latter, 
mostly  ignorant  of  the  German  language,  voting  according  to 
a  signal  given  by  their  leader.  The  short  residence  of  the 
Bohemians  in  Vienna  was  not  a  pleasant  one.  They 
arrived  there  early  in  July  and  on  the  i8th  Rieger  was 
attacked  by  the  mob  in  the  "  Graben,"  the  principal  street  of 
Vienna.  Through  the  intervention  of  some  German  radical 
deputies  he  was  able  to  escape  with  his  life.  The  terrorism 
of  the  populace  of  Vienna  increased  daily,  and  the  Bohemian 
delegates  decided  to  leave  the  city.  On  October  6,  Rieger, 
whose  life  had  again  been  menaced  by  German  workmen, 
succeeded  in  escaping  from  Vienna  together  with  his  friend 
Havlicek.  Shortly  afterwards  Prince  Windischgratz  and  his 
army  arrived  before  Vienna.     On  October  26  the  bombard- 


An    Historical    Sketch  343 

ment  of  the  city  began,  and  it  surrendered  unconditionally 
on  the  31st. 

There  cannot  at  the  present  time  be  much  doubt  that  at 
this  moment  when  two  of  the  largest  cities  in  the  empire 
were  subjected  to  the  state  of  siege,  and  the  attempt  of  the 
Italians  to  secure  their  independence  had  failed,  the 
reactionary  councillors  of  the  court  had  already  determined 
to  re-establish  absolutism  in  a  new  and — as  events  proved — 
even  more  vexatious  form.  Why  it  was  thought  advisable 
to  keep  up  for  a  time  the  pretence  of  continuing  parlia- 
mentary government  will  only  be  known  when  future 
historians  obtain  access  to  the  now  hermetically  secluded 
state  papers  of  this  period.  The  new  reactionary  ministers 
in  Vienna  decided  that  the  parliament  should  continue  its 
deliberations,  but  that  it  should  be  transferred  to  the  small 
town  of  Kromefize  in  Moravia.  The  deputies  met  there 
for  the  first  time  on  November  22,  and  the  Bohemians  again 
took  part  in  the  deliberations.  The  assembly,  in  a  spirit 
that  may  be  called  foolish  or  heroic,  and  perhaps  was  both, 
proceeded  to  discuss  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  citizens. 
Very  radical  but  absolutely  Utopian  measures  were  passed. 
At  a  moment  when  the  prime  minister.  Prince  Schwarzenberg, 
and  the  commander-in-chief,  Prince  Windischgratz,  were 
openly  expressing  views  that  to  a  courtier  of  Louis  XIV 
would  have  appeared  somewhat  extreme,  the  assembly  at 
Kromefize  voted  the  suppression  of  hereditary  nobility. 
Very  liberal  enactments  defining  the  limits  of  the  powers  of 
the  Church  and  of  the  State  were  also  voted.  Rieger,  whose 
eloquence  had  already  rendered  him  conspicuous,  spoke 
strongly  and  brilliantly  in  favour  of  religious  liberty — a  fact 
that  was  often  recalled  when  Rieger  later  in  Hfe  expressed 
somewhat  ultramontane  views.  When  Prince  Schwarzenberg 
— as  events  proved  somewhat  prematurely — believed  that 
the  war  with  Hungary  was  successfully  terminated,  he 
advised  the  Emperor  Francis  Joseph — who  on  December  2, 
1848,  had  suceeded  to  his  uncle  Ferdinand — to  dissolve  the 
parliament  of  .Kromefize.  This  was  done  quite  suddenly 
on  March  4,  1849,  and  when  the  members  on  that  day 
arrived  at  the  building  where  they  met,  they  found  it  closed 
and  all  the  entrances  guarded  by  a  large  force  of  police  and 
soldiers.  The  police  immediately  afterwards  issued  warrants 
against  many  deputies  whose  immunity  now  ended.  Some, 
though  the  dissolution  had  been  purposely   kept   secret, 


344  Bohemia 

received  a  timely  warning  and  escaped  to  foreign  countries. 
The  plan  of  trying  Palack}^  by  court-martial  was — as  already 
mentioned — soon  given  up.  Rieger  for  a  short  time 
retired  to  Paris,  but  was  soon  allowed  to  return  to  his  native 
country.  The  proceedings  taken  against  Havlicek  have 
already  been  mentioned.  Though  the  assembly  at  Krom- 
efize  had  thus  been  unceremoniously  dismissed,  the  pretence 
of  establishing  representative  institutions  was  still  kept  up. 
In  March  1849,  a  new  constitution  for  the  whole  empire, 
including  Hungary,  was  established.  It  requires  no  notice, 
as  no  attempt  was  ever  made  to  carry  out  its  provisions. 
It  was  formally  suppressed  on  December  31,  185 1,  and 
undisguised  absolutism  prevailed  in  all  parts  of  the  Habsburg 
dominions  up  to  the  year  i860. 

An  autocratic  government  such  as  was  now  established 
required  the  support  of  military  prestige.  After  the  disas- 
trous campaign  in  Lombardy  in  1859,  the  government  of 
Vienna  determined  to  make  a  new  attempt  to  establish 
representative  institutions.  After  some  preUminary  delibera- 
tions the  Imperial  councillors  devised  a  constitutional 
scheme,  which,  had  it  been  fairly  and  impartially  carried 
out,  would  probably  have  assured  permanent  concord  and 
harmony  to  the  vast  empire.  It  was  proposed  that  a  central 
parliament,  composed  of  delegates  of  all  the  states  which 
form  the  empire,  should  meet  to  deliberate  on  a  strictly 
limited  number  of  subjects.  The  members  of  this  assembly 
were  to  be  elected  by  the  parliamentary  bodies  which 
represented  the  different  states  of  the  empire.  To  these 
bodies  very  extensive  powers  were  granted.  In  Hungary, 
and  to  a  lesser  degree  in  Bohemia,  their  constitution  was 
modelled  on  that  of  the  ancient  Diets  of  those  states. 

These  reforms  were  contained  in  a  decree  dated  October 
20,  i860.  Its  author,  Count  Goluchowski,^  declared  it  to 
be  henceforth  the  fundamental  law  of  the  country.  It  was 
well  received  in  Bohemia,  but  met  with  bitter  hostility  on 
the  part  of  the  Hungarians.  Even  the  most  conservative 
statesmen  of  that  country — and  they  alone  then  took  part 
in  the  councils  of  the  empire — declared  that  Hungary  was 
still  deprived  of  her  ancient  rights.  Yet  louder  was  the 
outcry  of  the  foolish  and  frivolous  population  of  Vienna. 
The  Viennese,  greatly  to  the  damage  of  the  empire,  have 

^  Father  of  the  Count  Goluchowski,  who  was  recently  Austrian 
minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 


An    Historical    Sketch  345 

always  founded  on  the  fact  that  their  city  is  the  Imperial 
residence,  a  claim  of  supremacy  for  the  German  race  to 
which  they  belong. 

These  evil  influences  prevailed.  Count  Goluchowski 
retired  from  office  and  was  replaced  by  Baron  Schmerling, 
an  Austrian  bureaucrat  of  the  ancient  school.  Baron 
Schmerling  believed,  as  most  men  of  his  class  did,  and 
still  do,  that  a  strong  central  administration  directed  from 
Vienna  by  German  officials  was  the  form  of  government 
most  suitable  to  the  polyglot  state.  Strongly  German  in 
his  sympathies,  he  also  in  view  of  the  foreign  policy  of  the 
empire  considered  it  necessary  that  its  subjects  should,  at 
least  to  the  foreign  observer,  appear  as  Germans ;  thus  only 
could  the  Austrian  hegemony  in  Germany,  which  was 
represented  by  the  presidency  of  the  federal  council  at 
Frankfurt,  be  preserved.  A  certain  amount  of  constitutional 
government  Schmerling,  after 'the  disasters  in  Lombardy, 
considered  a  necessary  evil.  As  the  result  of  these  con- 
siderations Schmerling  published  the  decree  of  February  26, 
185 1,  many  of  whose  enactments  are  still  in  force.  A 
central  parliament,  representing  the  whole  empire  and 
consisting  of  two  houses,  was  to  meet  at  Vienna.  The 
different  parts  of  the  empire  were  granted  representative 
bodies,  to  whom  very  limited  powers  were  assigned, 
though  they  were  entitled  to  choose  from  their  number  the 
members  of  the  central  parliament.  Faithful  to  his  system 
of  maintaining  and  even  extending  the  influence  of  the 
German  element,  Schmerling  established  a  system  of 
election  which — particularly  in  Bohemia — was  outrageously 
unfair.  Some  of  the  deputies  of  the  Bohemian  country 
districts  represented  2500,  others  25000  electors ;  and  it  was 
always  the  German  deputy  who  represented  the  smaller  and 
the  Bohemian  who  represented  the  larger  number  of 
votes.  There  is  in  all  the  records  of  parliamentary  repre- 
sentation no  worse  case  of  gerrymandering  than  that  which 
we  find  in  Schmerling's  electoral  law  for  Bohemia. 

When  the  Bohemian  Diet  met  at  Prague  in  1861  the 
assembly  consisting  almost  entirely  of  Germans  appeared 
rather  as  a  travesty  than  as  a  representation  of  the  opinions 
of  the  nation.  One  of  the  first  duties  of  the  Bohemian  Diet 
was  to  elect  representatives  to  the  central  parliament  at 
Vienna.  The  nationalist  members  took  part  in  this  election 
— an  action  for  which  they  have  been  frequently  blamed. 


346 


Bohemia 


It  has  often  been  stated  that  they  should — following  the 
example  of  the  Hungarians — have  refused  to  be  represented 
in  Vienna.  Yet  their  position  was  quite  different  from 
that  of  the  Hungarians.  In  consequence  of  the  arbitrary 
electoral  ordinances  of  Schmerling,  the  government  would 
easily  have  replaced  the  nationalists  by  German  Bohemians, 
who  would  in  Vienna  have  been  recognized  as  representa- 
tives not  of  a  German  minority  but  of  the  whole  Bohemian 
nation.  It  was,  however,  soon  found  impossible  by  the 
Bohemians  to  take  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the  parlia- 
ment of  Vienna.  Not  only  did  frivolous  sophists  such  as 
Giscra,  afterwards  a  Cisleithanian  minister,  grossly  insult  the 
Bohemian  crown  and  constitution,  but  the  whole  assembly 
— openly  encouraged  by  Schmerling  himself — trenched  on 
matters  which,  as  the  Bohemians  rightly  believed,  had 
been  reserved  to  the  competency  of  the  Bohemian  Diet  by 
the  decree  of  October  20,  i860.  Hungary,  Croatia,  and 
Venetia — then  still  part  of  the  Habsburg  empire — had  from 
the  first  declined  to  take  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the 
parliament  of  Vienna.  Schmerling's  policy  proved  a  com- 
plete failure.  Though  he  long  clung  to  office,  he  was 
finally  and  somewhat  unceremoniously  dismissed  on  July 
27,  1865. 

Schmerling's  successor  was  Count  Louis  Belcredi,  a 
statesman  who  has  probably  been  more  grossly  misrepre- 
sented than  any  other  politician  of  the  present  day.  Having 
always  been  employed  in  the  civil  service — he  was  governor 
of  Bohemia  when  called  to  Vienna — he  had  little  oppor- 
tunity of  studying  the  foreign  policy  of  the  empire.  He  had 
gathered  from  members  of  the  Austrian  diplomatic  service, 
that  a  somewhat  prolonged  period  of  peace  was  probable.^ 
This  was  a  necessity  for  him,  as  he  intended  to  carry  out  a 
complete  system  of  re-organization  of  the  empire — probably 
somewhat  on  the  lines  of  the  decree  of  October. 

It  is  beyond  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  refer  to  the 
causes  which  lead  to  the  war  between  Austria  and  Prussia 
in  1866.  In  the  German  parts  of  Austria  the  war  was 
joyfully  welcomed — particularly  by  the  citizens  of  Vienna 
and  the   officials    of  the    ''Ball    Platz"    (Foreign   Office). 

^  Belcredi  afterwards  expressed  himself  somewhat  bitterly.  He 
writes  in  his  memoirs  :  "  Leider  hat  mich  eine  bittere  Erfohrung 
gelehrt,  dass  niemand  schlechter  informirt  ist  als  die  oesterreichische 
Diplomatic." 


An    Historical    Sketch  347 

The  Viennese  declared  that  the  Prussians  could  easily  be 
driven  off  with  a  wet  rag,i  and  Prince  Metternich, 
Austrian  ambassador  in  Paris,  was  busily  occupied  in 
composing  a  "triumphal  march"  to  celebrate  the  entry 
of  the  Austrian  troops  into  Berlin. 

The  Bohemian  people  did  not  view  matters  in  the  same 
light.  In  a  country  where  the  study  of  history  is  perhaps 
more  general  than  in  any  other,  no  man  underrated  the 
indomitable  courage  and  the  iron  tenacity  of  the  German 
foes.  The  descendants  of  the  Hussites,  "  men  whose 
fathers  braved  the  world  in  arms  "  against  Bohemia,  knew 
how  dearly  won  and  sanguinary  some  of  the  victories  of 
their  ancestors  over  the  Germans  had  been.  The  Bohemians 
were  now  also  prepared  to  defend  their  country.  A  short 
time  previously  gymnastic  societies  had  been  formed  in 
most  parts  of  Bohemia.  The  members  of  these  societies 
soon  became  known  as  the  "  sokols,"  from  the  falcon  (in 
Bohemian,  sokol)  feather  which  they  wore  in  their  caps. 
These  men  were  eager  again  to  meet  in  the  field  the  ancient 
enemies  of  their  nation.  They  begged  to  be  allowed  to 
organize  the  national  defence,  and  to  occupy  and  fortify  the 
mountains  and  often  narrow  passes  that  lead  from  Prussia 
and  Saxony  into  Bohemia,  and  which  they — rightly  as  events 
proved — believed  to  have  been  left  undefended. ^  A  stern 
refusal  was  the  only  answer.  The  Vienna  Government,  still 
pursuing  the  foolish  phantom  of  supremacy  in  Germany, 
wished  the  war — as  the  official  proclamation  stated — to  be 
considered  as  a  "  war  of  Germans  against  Germans." 

It  is  not  my  task  to  describe  here  the  short  campaign 
w^hich,  practically  decided  by  the  battle  of  Kralove  Hradec 
(July  3,  1866),^  was  terminated  by  the  peace  of  Prague  on 
August  23.  Austria  lost  no  territory  to  Prussia  by  this 
treaty.  The  scheme  of  annexing  the  part  of  Bohemia 
situated  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Elbe  was  soon  abandoned 
by  the  Prussians.  Prussia,  however,  obtained  its  principal 
object.  The  dominions  of  the  House  of  Habsburg  were 
entirely  excluded  from  Germany ;  the  link  that  bound  the 
unwilling  Bohemians  to  Germany  was  severed.     During  the 

^  "Mit  einem  nassen  Fetzen." 

2  These  facts  have  been  told  me  by  Professor  Tilser,  who  was  one  of 
the  "sokols"  of  that  time. 

^  I  have  given  a  short  account  of  the  battle  of  Kralove  Ilradec 
(better  known  under  the  German  name  of  Koniggratz)  in  the  Pall  Mall 
Ma^azim  for  November  1904. 


348 


Bohemia 


occupation  of  their  country  by  the  Prussians,  the  Bohemians, 
who  were  defenceless  and  unarmed,  maintained  an  attitude 
of  dignified  reserve.  The  same  cannot  be  said  of  the 
German  inhabitants  of  Bohemia.  Very  competent  author- 
ities state  that  they  on  several  occasions  welcomed  the 
Prussians  with  so  much  enthusiasm  that  it  was  only  the 
loyalty  with  which  the  King  of  Prussia,  even  in  the  time 
of  war,  discouraged  such  manifestations  that  prevented  their 
leading  to  serious  consequences.^ 

It  is,  as  I  have  wTitten  elsewhere,  a  bitter  saying  in 
Austria  that  those  nationalities  which  support  the  Govern- 
ment suffer,  and  those  that  oppose  it  are  rewarded.  The 
Hungarians  had  been  on  the  verge  of  rebellion  during  the 
campaign  of  1866,  and  had  even  formed  a  free  corps  to 
support  the  Prussians.  The  Bohemians,  on  the  other  hand, 
had  remained  loyally  and  undauntedly  faithful  to  the 
dynasty.  Yet  in  the  year  following  the  battle  of  Kralov^ 
Hradec,  Hungary  obtained  almost  complete  independence, 
while  Bohemia's  demand  of  autonomy  was  ignominiously 
rejected. 

Count  Belcredi's  plans  received  a  death  blow  by  the 
Bohemian  campaign.  The  councillors  of  Vienna  deter- 
mined to  call  in  the  assistance  of  Baron — afterwards  Count 
— Beust,  who  before  the  war  had  been  prime  minister  of 
Saxony.  He  claimed  no  knowledge  of  the  internal  politics 
of  the  Habsburg  empire.  It  is  no  longer  a  secret  that  his 
mission  consisted  in  organizing  a  new  active  policy  in 
Germany  which  might  eventually  reverse  the  results  of  the 
battle  of  Kralove  Hradec.  Beust  knew  that  Hungary  had 
been  openly  hostile  to  Austria  during  the  war  that  had  just 
ended,  and  that  Hungary  would  some  years  previously  have 
been  lost  to  the  empire,  had  not  Russia  interfered.  In 
1866  no  such  an  intervention  could  be  expected.  Count 
Beust  also  reflected  that  as  Hungary  had  never  formed  part 
of  the  Germanic  confederation,  its  autonomy  was  by  no 
means  an  obstacle  to  the  re-establishment  of  the  Habsburg 
hegemony  in  Germany. 

The  position  of  Bohemia  was  entirely  different.  On  the 
resignation  of  Count  Belcredi  (February  4,  1867)  Count 
Beust,  who  had  hitherto  only  acted  as  minister  of  foreign 
affairs,  undertook  also  the  direction  of  the  internal  policy 

1  This  is  particularly  mentioned  by  Duke  Ernest  of  Saxe-Coburg  in 
his  Aus  memem  Leben  (vol  iii.  p.  600). 


An    Historical    Sketch  349 

of  the  Habsburg  realm.  He  decided  to  re-establish  in  the 
non-Hungarian  part  of  the  empire  the  so-called  constitution 
of  Schmerling.  The  Bohemian  Diet  was  therefore  again 
called  on  to  elect  delegates  to  the  central  Parliament  of 
Vienna.  According  to  the  electoral  laws  of  Schmerling 
every  Government  was,  and  indeed  still  is,  certain  of  a 
majority  in  the  Diet  of  Prague.  There  was  nothing  left  to 
the  national  party  but  to  record  a  protest.  This  was  done 
in  a  brilliant  manner  by  Dr.  Rieger  in  a  speech  pronounced 
before  the  Diet  of  Prague  on  April  3,  1867.  Addressing 
the  Germans  who  were  to  represent  Bohemia  in  Vienna,  he 
said,^  "  You  are,  gentlemen,  going  to  Vienna  in  accordance 
with  your  political  views.  We  cannot  prevent  your  doing 
this,  but  remember  what  we  have  said  to  you  here ;  you  are 
not  authorized  to  give  up  the  historical  rights  of  this  king- 
dom .  .  .  Remember  that,  though  you  have  the  majority 
here,  you  yet  represent  but  the  minority  of  the  population 
of  the  kingdom,  and  we  the  majority  ...  In  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  Cisleithanian  and  of  a  Hungarian  Parliament, 
I  clearly  see  an  attempt  to  subjugate  the  Slavic  nations  in 
both  parts  of  the  empire.  Over  one  division  the  Germans, 
over  the  other  the  Magyars  are  to  rule.  We  think  such  a 
partition  of  rights  belonging  to  others  cannot  prevail,  for 
'  justitia  est  regnorum  fundamentum  ! ' "  After  the  end  of  this 
speech  the  national  deputies  left  the  Diet  of  Prague  as  they 
had  already,  in  1863,  left  the  Parliament  of  Vienna. 

On  August  22  the  national  deputies  published  a  docu- 
ment which  became  known  as  the  "  declaration."  They  here 
declared  that  even  Ferdinand  II,  after  the  battle  of  the 
White  Mountain,  had  recognized  part  of  the  ancient  privi- 
leges of  Bohemia,  and  that  the  new  representative  institu- 
tions were  directly  opposed  to  them,  and  would  never  be 
recognized  by  the  Bohemian  people. 

The  German  cabinet  established  by  Count  Beust,  after  a 
short  time  found  it  impossible  to  continue  its  system  of 
government.  After  the  short  ministry  of  Count  Potocki, 
Count  Hohenwarth  took  office  on  February  7,  187 1. 
Hohenwarth,  a  very  distinguished  statesman,  immediately' 
attempted  to  establish  peace  with  Bohemia.  By  his  advice 
an  Imperial  decree  was  published  on  September  14,  in 
which  the  sovereign  declared  that  "  in  consideration  of  the 
former  constitutional  position  of  Bohemia,  and  remembering 
*  keci  (Speeches),  Dra  F.  L.  Riegra,  vol.  iv.  pp.  239-240. 


350  Bohemia 

the  power  and  glory  which  its  crown  had  given  to  his 
ancestors,  and  the  constant  fidelity  of  the  people,  he  gladly 
recognized  the  rights  of  the  kingdom,  and  was  willing  to 
confirm  this  assurance  by  taking  the  coronation  oath." 
Hohenwarth's  loyal  attempt  failed,  mainly  through 
German  influence,  and  in  1879  the  Bohemians  entered  the 
Parliament  of  Vienna.  The  events  of  the  last  thirty  years 
cannot  yet  be  considered  as  belonging  legitimately  to  the 
domain  of  history.  It  may,  however,  be  well  to  say  a  word 
on  the  present  condition  of  Bohemia.  The  prospect  of  the 
country  at  this  moment  (October  1909)  appears  very  dark. 
This  is  mainly  a  consequence  of  the  foreign  policy  of  the 
empire.  Bohemia  has  always  had  so  little  influence  on  the 
foreign  policy  of  Austria  that  it  is  only  in  consequence  of 
the  events  of  the  last  year  that  I  may  briefly  allude  to  those 
who  have  recently  directed  the  foreign  policy  of  the 
empire.  The  recent  ministers  of  foreign  affairs  of  Austria 
had  been  men  of  little  importance.  Count  Kalnoky  had 
served  for  some  time  in  the  army  and  then  pursued  a 
diplomatic  career.  He  had  retained  the  manner  and 
appearance  of  a  soldier,  a  ''corporal,"  as  he  was  often 
called.  Of  limited  capacity  and  almost  devoid  of  education, 
he  endeavoured  to  impress  his  adversaries  by  a  peremptory 
manner,  the  result  of  which  was  that  he  was  generally  con- 
sidered ill-bred.  Of  his  successor,  Count  Goluchowski, 
it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  here  what  I  have  previously 
written.^ 

Count  Aehrenthal,  the  present  Austrian  minister  of  foreign 
affairs,  is  in  every  way  superior  to  his  predecessors.  He  is 
perhaps  one  of  the  great  statesmen  of  his  time.  Yet  we 
must  leave  it  to  the  future  to  judge  whether  the  annexation 
of  Bosnia  and  Hercegovina  without  the  previous  consent  of 
the  signatories  of  the  treaty  of  Berlin  was  judicious.  In 
Bohemia  the  measure  was  intensely  unpopular.  The  people 
— rightly,  as  events  have  proved — believed  that  the  empire 
would  become  yet  more  subservient  to  Germany.  The 
annexation  not  having  been  received  as  patiently  as  Count 
Aehrenthal  believed,  Austria  had  to  rely  on  Germany,  and 
with  German  help  the  annexation  was  safely  carried  out.  It 
would  be  attributing  to  Germans  more  generosity  than  they 
claim,  were  we  to  doubt  that  their  influence  in  Austria  will 
become  yet  greater.  That  influence  is  always  used  against 
*  In  the  Nineteenth  Century,  December  1899. 


An    Historical   Sketch  351 

Bohemia  and  in  favour  of  the  German  minority  of  the 
population  of  that  country.  The  policy  of  the  present 
Austrian  prime  minister  is  more  hostile  to  Bohemia  than 
that  of  any  of  his  predecessors.  Dark  clouds  seem  to 
surround  the  future  of  Bohemia. 


PRINCES   OF  BOHEMIA 


Pfemy 

si 

Kfesomysl 

Nezamysl 

Neklan 

Mnata 

Hostivit 

Vojen 

Borivoj  I 

Unislav                     I 

Spytihnev  I 

Vratislav  I. 

Venceslas  I 

928-936 

Bfetislav  II 

1092-1110 

Boleslav  I    . 

936-967 

Borivoj  II    . 

1110-1120 

Boleslav  II  . 

967-999 

Vladislav  I  . 

I I 20-1 125 

Boleslav  III 

999-1002 

Sobeslav  I    . 

1125-1140 

Vladivoj 

I 002- I 003 

Vladislav    II    (asl 

Jaromir 

,     1003-1012 

King,  I)    .         J 

1140-1173 

Ulrich 

.     1012-1037 

Sobeslav  II . 

1173-1189 

Bfetislav  I  . 

.     1037-1055 

Conrad  Otho 

1189-1191 

Spytihnev  II 

.     1055-1061 

Venceslas  II 

1191-1192 

VratislavII(King 

)    1061-1092 

Pfemysl  Ottokar  . 

I 192-1230 

KINGS   OF  BOHEMIA 


tbe\ 


1516-1526 
I 526-1 564 
1 564-1 576 
1576-1612 
1612-1619 

I 619-1620 

1619^1637 
1637-1657 
1657-1705 
I 705-1 71 I 
1711-1740 
I 740-1 780 
1741-1745 
1 780-1790 
I 790-1 792 
1792-1835 
1835-1848 
1848 

I  have  continued  the  list  of  the  rulers  of  Bohemia  (most  of 
whom  were  Roman  and  afterwards  Austrian  Emperors)  up  to 
the  present  day,  as  the  title  of  King  of  Bohemia  has  always 
been  retained  by  these  princes. 

352 


Venceslas  I  .        .     1 230-1 253 

Premysl     Ottokar\  ^^^^   ^^^q 

II       .         .        ./  1253-1278 

Venceslas  II  .     1 278-1 305 

Venceslas  III        .     1305- 1306 

^ta-^  ^f  ^^^"-j  1306-1307 
Henry  of  Carinthia  1307-1310 
John  .  .  .  I 3 10-1346 
Charles  I  (IV)  .  1346-1378 
Venceslas  IV  .  1378-1419 
Sigismund  .  .  I436-I437 
Alben    of    Habs.|,^3^_,^3^ 

Ladi^slas  Posthu-j,^^^,,^^^ 
Vladislav  II  .         .     1471-1516 


Louis  I 
Ferdinand  I  . 
Maximilian    . 
Rudolph  II   . 
Matthew 
Frederick    of 
Palatinate . 
Ferdinand  II 
Ferdinand  III 
Leopold  I 
Joseph  I 
Charles  II  (VI) 
Maria  Theresa 
Charles  of  Bavaria 
Joseph  II 
Leopold  II    . 
Francis 

Ferdinand  IV  (I) 
Francis  Joseph 


INDEX 


Adalbert,  22-3,  28 

Aehrenthal,  Count,  350 

Albert  Adolphus  of  Nassau,  54-5, 

57 
Albert  III,  88,  147,  152,  174-8 
Albik,  loi,  103 

Ales  of  Riesenberg,  16S-9,  173 
Alexander  V,  99 

VI,  197-8 

Alt-Ranstadt,  Treaty  of,  313 
Ambigatus,  2 
Andrew  of  Prague,  40 
Anhalt,    Christian   of,    251,    258, 

272,  274-6 
Anspach,  Margrave  of,  249 
Aries,  80-1 
Arnim,  303,  305 
Arnulph,  King,  17 
Assembly    of    Protestants,     242, 

243-6' 
Augsburg,  Battle  of,  21 

Confession  of,  214 

Augusta,  Bishop,  210-11 

Austi,  John  of,  104 

Austi,  meeting  at,  119;    storming 

of,  121 
Avignr-n,  65,  80 
Azzo  de'  Visconti,  62 

Bakunin,  336 
Balbinus  quoted,  79 
BaUenhagen,  97 
Baner,  General,  308-9 
Barante  quoted,  186 
Bartholomew     of     INIiinsterberg, 

199,  201 
Bartolomeo,  Prignani,  84 
Basel,  Council  of,  151,   159,  162- 

6,  173-4,  176,  205 
Bassewi,  297 
Beatrice  of  Bourbon,  63 
Beaufort,  Heniy,  148 
Bechyn,  Tobias  of,  56 
Bela  of  Hungary,  44-5 


Belcredi,  Count  Louis,  346,  348 

Belloves,  2 

Bellus,  Nicolaus,  275 

Benedict  XIII,  87,  97 

Berlin,  Treaty  of,  319 

Bernabo  de'  Visconti,  81 

Bethlen,  Gabriel,  255,  263-6, 
279,  286 

Beust,  Count,  34S-9 

Bienenberg,  140,  170 

Bielek,  Dr.,  294 

Blanche  of  Valois,  64 

Bohemian  Brethren  {see  Pro- 
testants) 

"Bohemian  Confession,"  225-31 

Boji,  the,  3-6 

Boleslav  I,  19-23 

11,21-4 

Ill,  24-6 

Boniface,  VIII,  54 

— —  IX,  87,  90 

Borek    of    Miietinek,    140,     169, 

175 
Borita,  Jaroslav,  220 
Borivoj,  16,  31-2 
Bouquoi,    248,    250,    254-5,   261, 

268-9,  274,  276,  331 
Bozena,  26,  37 
Brabant,  Duke  of,  6^ 
Bracciolini,  Poggio,  107-8 
Brache,  Tycho,  218 
Brandenburg,  Duke  of,  50,  81 
Brandenburg,   Valdemar    of,    60, 

70 
Breitenfeld,  Battle  of,  302 
Breslau,  1S7-8,  193 
Bietislav  I,  27-31 

II.  31 

Breznov,  Abbot  of,  235,  241 
Bromley,  Sir  George,  271 
Brown,  H.  F.,  262 
Brno,  meetings  at,  253 
Brunswick,  Duke  of,  38-9 
Bryce  quoted,  81 


353 


354 


Index 


Budova,  Budovec  of,  219,  225-6, 

229-30,  260 
Butler,  Colonel,  306-7 

Calixtines,  the,  113-4 
Calixtus  III,  189 
Camerarius,  258,  260. 
Campanus,  290-1 
Candale,  de,  Anna,  200 
CarafFa,  Carlo,  284-5,  287 
Carinthia,  Duke  of,  46,  56-7,  61, 

64 
Carjaval,  Cardinal,  178,  188 
Carlomann,  15-16 
Carlyle,  Thomas,  quoted,  48,  58, 

61,  316 
Casimir,  62,  66,  81,  175 
Caslav,  Diet  at,  133 
Catholics  {see  "Church") 
"Catholic  Reformation,"  282-91, 

Cechs,  the,  6-7 

Cenek  of  Wartenberg,    no,  1 18, 

120,  124,  132-3,  136 
Censorship  of  books,  198 
Cesarini,  Cardinal,  156-8,  164 
Charles  IV,  60,  62-6,  69-82 
V,  204,  207-1 1 

VI,  315-6 

VII,  318-21 

Charles  Robert  of  Hungary,  62 

Ciieb,  156,  306,  320 

Chel^icky,  Peter,  182-4 

Chevet,  320 

Chotek,  Count,  330 

Chotusic,  Battle  of,  318 

Church,  Establishment  of  Chris- 
tian, 13-18,  22  ;  difficulties, 
40  ;  founding  of  convents,  72  ; 
reform,  78,  82,  83-4,  92-99. 
Ill,  213-17,  295  ;  General 
Council,  155-6 

"Cisleithania,"  323 

Clement  VI,  65,  72 

VII,  84-6,  204 

Cola  de  Castro,  Nicholas,  197 
Comenius  quoted,  280,  310 
Conrad  I,  30 

HI,  33 

Conrad  ofVechta,  103,  159 
Conrad  of  Znoymo,  33,  35-9 
Constance,  Council  of,  104-6,  112 
Constance,  Emperor,  181,  183 


Constantinople,  Treaty  of,  207 
Constantinus  Angelicus,  181 
Conway,  276 
Cornwall,  Richard  of,  45 
Cosmas,  9-10 
Cracow,  Siege  of,  66 
Crecy,  Battle  of,  67-9 
Creighton,  Bishop,  quoted,  117 
Croatia,  21 

Dacio,  35 
Dalimil,  37 
Dampierre,  248,  254 
Daniel  Romanovic,  46 
Defenestration,  the,  243-8 
Democracy,    growth    of,     198-9, 

277,  332 
Denmark,  263,  287,  297 
Devereux,  Captain,  306-7 
Deym,  Count  Frederick,  330 
Dicastus,  259 
Dietrichstein,  Cardinal,  224,  28 1- 

282 
Domazlice,  Battle  at,  158-9 
Domitian,  5 
Drahomina,  19 
Dresden,  Treaty  of,  321 
Dubravius,  67 
Dubravka,  21 
Durrenkrut,  Battle  of,  49 
Dusan,  Stephen,  73 
Dvur,  Kralove,  7 

Edward  III,  66-8 
Eger,  meeting  at,  161 
Eggenberg,  Prince,  301 
Elizabeth,  Princess,  58-60 
Elizabeth  (of  the  Palatinate),  258, 

269,  272-3 
Emaus,  Abbot,  in 
Ernest  of  Pardubic,  65,  ']l,  80 
Eugenius  IV,  157,  176 
Everard  of  Brandenburg,  50-I 

Fabricius,  246 

Eels,  Colonna  of,  240,  245 

Ferdinand  I,  203-11 

II,    218,    221,   231-2,   237, 

240,    248,    252,    255-6,  286-7, 
308 

Ill,  307,  308,  310,  314 

IV,  330 

Fernando,  Cardinal,  307 


Index 


355 


Forcheim,  Treaty  of,  17 
PVance,  Anatole,  quoted,  153 
Francis  I,  326-7 
Frankfurt,    meetings   at,    84,  90, 

307,  333 
Frederick  I  (Barbarossa),  34-5 

II,  41-2 

Ill,  190 

Frederick  of  Habsburg,  177-8 
Frederick  of HohenzoUern,  153 
Frederick    (of    the      Palatinate), 

251-2,  256-78,  300 
Frederick  the  Great,  315-21 
Freeman,  Professor,  69 

Galeazzo  de  Visconti,  90 
Gerstenberger,  Dr.,  233-4 
Gindely  quoted,   206,    210,  212, 
216-8,  222,  224,  226,  231,  235, 
240,   250,  252,   259,   262,  270, 
279,  283,  287-8,  297,  299,  303 
Giscra,  346 

Glatz,  Capture  of,  318,  321 
*' Golden  Bull,"  the,  77,  83 
Goll,  Professor,  170,  182-3 
Goluchowski,  Count,  344-5,  350 
Gordon,  306 
Gorlitz,  John  of,  83,  89 
Gothe,  329 

Gradenigo,  Vicenzo,  262 
Grano,  Caretto  del,  289 
Gregory  VII,  29 

IX,  41-2 

XI,  82 

XII,  97 

Gregory,  Brother,  1 83-4 
Guido,  Cardinal,  33 

Habernfeld,  Andreas  ab,  211,  275 
Habsburg  succession,  203-4 
Hannewald,  231 
Harrach,  Cardinal,  288 
Havlicek,  Chas.,  331.  340-1,  344 
Helfert,    Baron,   77-8,   100,   327, 

330 
Henry  I,  19-20 

II,  25-6 

Ill,  27 

IV,  29 

V,  32 

VIII,  58 

Plenry  of  Winchester,    148-9,152 
Hermann,  4,  no 


Hoe,  257,  278,  308 
Hofkirchen,  General,  270 
Hofler  quoted,  86 
Hohenfriedberg,  Battle  of,  321 
Hohenwarth,  Count,  293,  350 
Honorius,  Pope,  40 
Hora,  Helena,  7 
Horic,  139 
Hromadka,  121 
Hubertsberg,  Peace  of,  322 
Huerta,  Martin,  289 
Hungary,  founding  of,  18 
Hus,  John,  72,  92-155,  215 

,  Nicholas  of,  113 

Hvezda,  144 
Hynek,  131 

Illo,  305-6 
Innocent  III,  39 

,  IV,  41 

.  VI,  75 

Irmer,  Dr.,  300 
Ivancice,  223 

Jacobedus,  108,  no,  285 
Jagemdorf,     Margrave     of,    281, 

297 
James  I,  256,  258,  266-7,  276-7 
Jankov,  Battle  of,  309 
Jaromir,  24-6 
Jenstein,  John  of,  86-8 
Jerome,  102,  107 
Jessenius,  Dr.,  279,  289 
Jesuits,  211,  236,  247,  274,   285, 

288-91,  313 
Jihlava,  253 
Joan  of  Arc,  152 
Jodocus,  84,  88,  89,  99 
John  XX II  I,  100,  105-6 
Joseph  II,  323-6 

Kalnoky,  Count,  350 

Kalousek,    Prof.,    72,    94,    292, 

319.  333 
Karlsbad,  75 
Karlstein,  74,  241 
Kathwalda,  4 
Kazi,  10 

Kesselstadt,  Battle  of,  321 
Khevenhliller,  262 
Khlesl,  Cardinal,  242,  248 
Kinsky,  Ulrich  of,  245,  262,  306 
Klingenberg,  Henry  of,  68  : 


356 


Index 


Kolin,  Battle  of,  322 
Kolovrat,  Count,  330,  336 
Komensky,  310 
Konias,  Andrew,  291 
Koniggratz,    Battles    of,     140-1, 

347 
Konigsberg,  45 
Koranda,  185 
Korybut,  Sigismund,  137-9,  142- 

50,  157,  167 
Krebs,  Dr.,  274-5 
Kressenbrunn,  Battle  of,  46 
Krofta,  Dr.,  282 
Krokus,  10 
Kromerize,  343 
Kulm,  Battles  of,  32,  327 
Kulmbach,  Truce  of,  153 
Kumhutta,  51 
Kunes  of  Belovic,  144 
Kutna    Plora,   98,     161,     196-7, 

288 

Ladisl as  of  Bohemia,  177-8,  180, 

1S5-7 
Ladislas  of  Naples,  loi 
Lamormain,  286,  288,  290,  298 
Landy,  220 
Language  in  Bohemia,  71-2,  92- 

3,  294,  328 
Lawrence  of  Brezova,   126,   131, 

159 
Lazan,  Henry  of,  104 
"  League  of  the  Lords,"  88-9 
Lehel,  21 
Leitomischl,   John    of,    91,    105, 

149 
Leopold  of  Austria,  42 
Leslie,  306 
"  Letter  of  Majesty,"  231-6,  402- 

3*448 
"Letter  of  Peace,"  177 
Leuthen,  Battle  of,  322 
Lev,  ZedeiiSk,  201-4 
Levy  Hradec,  church  at,  17 
Leyden,  quoted,  270 
Libert,  336 
Liben,  Treaty  of,  226 
Libussa,  10,  26 
Liechtenstein,   Prince,    284,  291, 

297 
Linz,  meetings  at,  221,  238,  254 
Lipany,  129 
Lippa,  Henry  of,  59,  60 


Lippa,  Henry,  the  younger,  62 
Lithuanian  campaigns,  61,  64,  66 
Liiomerice,  308 
Litomysl,  John  of,  109 
Livy  quoted,  2 
Lobelius,  John,  283 
Lobkowitz,  Diepold  of,  245-6 

,  William  of,  246,  260 

,  Zdenek  of,  227 

Locika,  2S5 

Loder,  Dr.,  quoted,  109 

Lontorp,  269 

Lot  hair,  32-3 

Louis  of  Bavaria,  46-7 

Louis  "  the  German,"  12,  16 

Louis,  King,  64-6,  70,  80- 1 

Ludmilla,  17,  19 

Lusatia,  34,  60,  280,  308 

Lutherans  {see  Protestants) 

Lutter,  Battle  of,  287 

Liitzen,  Battle  of,  302 

Luxemburg,  John  of,  57-69 

Magyars,  the,  18-21 

Mail  berg,  Battle  of,  30 

Maintz,  Diet  at,  78 

Mansfeld,  249,  254,  270-1,   277, 

280,  284 
Marbod,  3-5 
Marcomannic  War,  5-7 
Margaret  Maultasche,  61,  65 
Maria  Theresa,  315-24 
Marradas,  Balthasar,  289 
Martin  V,  124,  148,  152,  156 
Martinic,  245-6 
Mastino  dell  a  Scala,  61 
"  Mater  Verbornm,"  7 
Matthew,  221-39 
Matthew  Cervinus,  180,  188,  193, 

196 
Matthew  of  Janow,  79,  92,  184 
Matthew,  Emperor,  236-7,  247-8, 

250,  255 
Maximilian,  202,  204,  212-6,  228 
Maximilian,  Duke  of  Bavaria,  264, 

268,  270,  273,  276,  302 
Mayer,  Martin,  190 
Mehemed  Aga,  266 
Meissner  quoted,  329 
Menhard,  150,  175,  178 
Mensdorf,  General,  338-9 
Methodius,  14-17 
Metz,  Diet  at,  76 


Index 


357 


Michael  of  Zambeik,  184 
Michiel,    Giovanni,    quoted,   206, 

213 

Mieceslav  I,  21 

Milled  of  Kremsier,  78-9,  91-2 

Milota  of  Dedic,  49 

Mohac,  Battle  of,  202 

Mojmir,  12-13,  17 

MoUwitz,  Battle  of,  317 

Mommsen  quoted,  3 

Monch,  Henry,  67-8 

Montague,  Lady,  312 

Moravia,  John  Henry  of,  73 

Moravian  Church,  182  {st:e  Pro- 
testants) 

Muhlberg,  Battle  of,  209 

Muhldorf,  Bauleof,  58 

Miiller,  Joseph.  330 

Miinsterberg,  Chas,  of,  201 

Nerberg,  Baron,  335 
Nicholas  V,  178,  181 
Niebuhr  quoted,  2 
Niederle,  Dr.,  quoted,  2,  9 
Nostitz,  Count,  338 
Novak,  Dr.,  50,  52 

Olmatz,  55 

Olmutz,  ^  )tho  of,  29,  31 
Orsini,  Bishop  Urso,  197-8 
Oiho  I,  20-1 
Ourschamp,  70 
Oxenstierna,  307 

Palacky  quoted,  13,  20,  27,  30, 
34,  49,  50,  56,  59,  63,  67-8, 
72-4,  82-4,  94,  97,  105,  109, 
112,  115,  120,  128,  131,  134, 
136-7,  141,  144,  146,  149-55, 
160,  162,  170,  175-6,  179,  liii- 
2,  185,  187,  191,  193,  194-5, 
198-9,  328,  334-7,  341-4 

Palec,  Stephen  of,  104-5 

Parracidia,  John,  57 

Pastrnek,  Dr.,  13,  15 

Patera,  7 

Paul  11,  192 

Payne,  Peter,  147,  151,  161-4 

Pekar,  Prof.,  307 

Pelhi-mov,  Battle  of,  250 

Pfauser,  21 1 

Pflug,  Kaspar,  208-9 

Philibcrt,  165,  172,  174 


Philip  of  France,  66 

of  Spain,  262 

of  Swabia,  ^S 

Philippi,  Father,  288 
Photius,  15 

Pic,  Dr.,  quoted,  2 

Pillersdorf,  Baron,  333 

Pisa,  Council  at,  99 

Pius  H,  189,  192  {see  Sylvius) 

Plzeia,  166,  280,  305-6 

Podebrad,  George  of,  169,  176-9, 
180,  185-95,  285 

Podebrad,  Victorin  of,  177 

Podraokli,  308 

Polzic,  Harrantof,  279 

Prague,  Bishopric  of,  22  ;  Diets 
at,  51,  56,  73,  144,  151,  160-1, 
165-6,  176-8,  187,  208,  210, 
223,  22^30,  239-40,  255,  345- 
6,  349 ;  university  of,  73-4,  93, 
III,  191,289;  Articles  of,  128, 
154,  161  ;  Consistory  Letter  of, 
181  ;  attacks  on,  309-10,  318, 
322,  337-8  ;  Peace  of,  347 

Premsyls,  the,  1 1,  17,  26,  36-41, 
43-50 

Presburg,  Treaty  of,  18  ;  meeting 
at,  222  ;  alliance  of,  261 

Press,  state  of  the,  339-40 

Pribram,  John,  147,  167 

Priuli,  Antonio,  260,  267,  271 

Procopius,  256 

Prokop,  84,  89,  91 

Prokop  the  Great,  145-6,  150, 
154-5,  157,  160-1,  170 

Prokop  the  Lesser,  15S,  168,  170 

Protestants,  the,  205-19,  225-9, 
141-2,  254,  277-8,  313 

Protesiatio  Boheniorum,  109 

Ptacek,  175-6,  177 

Pubitschka,  47,  152 

Questenberg,  Caspar,  283 
Quiroga,  Father,  302,  304 

Racek,  87 

Rakoczy,  George,  309 
RakoniCjBaitle  of,  272,  274 
Ramees,  Lawrence,  237 
Ranke,  quoted,  211 
Regensburg,  Diet  of,  47 
Religious    Tolerance,     197,    205, 
325 


358 


Index 


Restitution,  Edict  of,  298-9 
Rezek,  Prof*,  201,  203,  296,  310 
Rican,  Paul  of,  245 
Richard  II,  85-6 
Richenthal,  104 
Richsa,  Queen,  28 
Rieger,  Dr.,  338,  342,  349 
Rivoli,  Treaty  of,  252 
Robert  of  Naples,  62 
RohacofDuba,  169,  173 
Rokycan,  John  of,  142,  147,  161- 

7,  172,  175,  177-9,  180-4,  195 
Rossitz,  meeting  at,  222 
Rostislav,  13-15 
Rundolph  of  Habsburg,  46-56 

II,  215-37 

Ruppa,  Venceslas  of,  245-6,  257, 

259,  260,  300 
Ruprecht,  Elector  Palatine,  90,  99 

Sabinus,  282 
Sadova,  Battle  of,  140 
Sadska,  Diet  at,  33 
St.  Clement,  College  of,  290 
Samo,  9 

San  Felice,  Battle  of,  62 
Sarpi,  Era  Paoli,  278 
Savoy,  Duke  of,  249,  251-2,  256 
Saxony,  Elector  of,  253,  281,  294 
Schebeck,  Dr.,  303 
Schmalkalden,  League  of,  207 
Schmerling,  Baron,  345-9 
Schulze,  258,  261 
Schwarzenberg,  Prince,  343 
Segovia,  John  of,  158 
Sigismund,   83,  88,  90-1,  96,  99, 
loo-i,  104,  112,   117-29,  162, 

171-5,  235 
Sigoves,  2 
Silesia,  316-18,  321 
Skvorec,  Wilfram  of,  90 
Slavata,  245-6 
Slavs,  the,  7-17 
Smoyno,  John  of,  76 
Sobeslav,  32-3 
Solms,  Count,  251 
Soltl,  Dr.,  240,  251 
Sophia,  Queen,  100,  109,  118-20 
Skytihnev,  17-19,  29 
Starhemberg,  Baron  of,  254 
Sterbohol,  Battle  of,  322 
Sternberg,  Adam  of,  228,  239-40, 

245 


Stitny,  Thomas  of,  79 
Strakonitz,  Letter   of    Lords   of, 

180 
Stransky,  Paul,  226 
Sudomer,  Battle  of,  122 
Svatek,  162,  325 
Svatopluk,  15-17 

the  younger,  17 

of  Olmiitz,  31 

Sweden,  263,  299-302 

Sylvester,  Pope,  183 

Sylvius,    Aenaes,    48,    142,     157, 

160,  162,  169  [see  Pius  II) 

Taborites,  meeting  of,  119-20 

Tacitus  quoted,  4 

Tartar  invasion,  42-3 

Teta,  10 

Theobaldus  quoted,  143 

Thietmar,  22 

Thirty  Years'  War,  246,  258  ;  its 

results,  311-12 
Thurn,  Count,  227,   232,  240-1, 

246,    253-4,    260-1,  268,  280, 

300-4 

the  younger,  275 

Tiberius,  4 

Tilly,  271-4,  287 

Tilser,  Prof.,  347 

Tomek,  31,  33,  63,  77,  85,  95-6, 

104,  115,  117,  123,  142-3,  174, 

335-^.  342 
Torstensohn,  General,  309 
Tovac^ovsky,  John,  197 
Trcka,  Count,  303 
Trojan,  Dr.,  332,  342 
Tschernembl,  254,  270,  276 
Turkey,  Peace  with,  238 
Tuscany,  Grand  Duke  of,  263 

Vandamme,  326 
Vannius,  4 

Venceslas,  Treaty  of,  200 
Venceslas  I,  19-20,  36 
Venceslas  II,  39-41,  50-4 

Ill,  54-9 

IV,  83-91,  97-104,  109,  112, 

117-8 
Verdun,  Treaty  of,  12 
Vibilius,  4 

Vienna,  Bombardment  of,  343 
Villari  quoted,  108 
Vladislas  I,  43 


Index 


359 


Vladislas  II,  33-6,  155,  176,  194, 

196-200 
Vladivoj,  25 
Voderie,  De  la,  306 
Vozic,  144 
Vratislav,  17-19,  29-32 

Waitzen,  Bishop  of,  188 
Waldstein,   Albert  of,    245,    287, 

295.  307 
"Waldstein,  John  of,  214 
Walhauser,  Conrad,  78,  91 
Wartenberg,  John  of,  201 
Weimar,  Duke  of,  304,  306 
Weitmil,  Benes  de,  69,  75 
Weston,  276 
White  Mountain,   Battle   of  the, 

275-8 
William  of  Holland,  43 

of  Julius,  7o 

of  Meissen,  88 

of  Saxony,  187-8 


Windischgratz,  336-9,  342-3 
Winter,  Dr.,  290-1 
Witold,  Alesr.,    136-7 
Wurzburg,  Bishop  of,  158 
Wycliffe,  John,  92 

Zablati,  Battle  at,  254,  256 

Zach,  General,  335 

Zampach,  76 

Zampach,    Kolda    of,    169,    174, 

180 
Zasada,  86 
Zavis,  51-3 
Zbyn^k  Zajic,  99-101 
Zderad,  30 

Zelena  Hora,  League  of,  192-4 
Zelivo,  John  of,  114 
Zerotm,   Chas.    of,     223,    225-6^ 
V  238,  253,  280-1,  2S9 
Zizka,  John,  114-44,  160 
Znoymo,  185,  223,  253 
Zwe'ttl,  Battle  of,  147 


Printed    in    Great    Britain     by 

Richard  Clay    &  Sons,  Limited, 

brunswick  st.,  stamford  st.,  s.e.  i, 

and  bungay,  suffolk. 


University  of 
Connecticut 


<^. 


Libraries  ^. 


i  ■  .v.- 


.^'f-S'-    I 


2^kli 


m^iiis^v    .    '^^ 


/Z/ 


::?:5C 


