Title: The Hussite Wars
Creator: Count Francis Lutzow
Publisher: London/New York: J. M. Dent & Sons / E. P. Dutton & Co., 1914
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1914; public domain by date. Archive.org
  item metadata carries no explicit possible-copyright-status tag but
  shows access-restricted-item: None (freely downloadable), checked
  directly against the item's own metadata, 2026-09-25, this
  session; pd-us-by-date applies independently given the 1914
  publication date.
Source: Internet Archive item hussitewars00lt
  (archive.org/details/hussitewars00lt), fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors.
  Secondary history, English, of the Hussite wars specifically.
  Vendored 2026-09-25 as part of a post-Step0-Revision-2 PD
  source-acquisition pass.

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2011  witii  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/liussitewarsOOIt 


PRAESTDIUM 


;, 


Rf.&'Y  ivi^ALC'.;.: 


3Tn 


N^' 


•x*^^ 


^^^^TTof  iViediasu, 


<9/ 


^A 


LIBRARY 


/ 


0 


IP^onto,  On^aliS- 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS 


y //   ^-//k/v/  fi/  //f&-    {y//(f//ry 


/<?  oo    us 


T  H  R 


H 


EV 


THE   COUNT  LUTZOW 

../,  Oftoi^.,  fitm.  Pk.n   Pfflf.,  ^fem>•fr  tyt  the  Rf^-a^  So/-«>*v  ef 


on  iHt  historians  of  Bokemta,'  '  f'rague,    etc. 


■/  CMXJV 


W    YORK:   E.   P.   DUT 


THE 

HUSSITE    WARS 


BY 

THE   COUNT  LUTZOW 

Hon,  D.Litt.  Oxon.,  Hon.  Ph.D.  Prag.,  Member  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Sciences 

in  Bohemia  and  of  the  Bohemian  A  cademy,  A  uthor  of  *  Master 

John  Hus,'  'A  History  of  Bohemian  Literature,'  'Lectures 

on  the  Historians  of  Bohemia,'  'Prague,'  etc. 


MCMXIV 

LONDON:  J.  M.  DENT  &  SONS 
NEW  YORK:  E.  P.  DUTTON  &  CO. 


^  ot  MediaT^ 


UEnARY 

JUL  2 SB'S 


INSCRIBED 

TO   MY   AMERICAN   FRIENDS 

IN     REMEMBRANCE     OF     MUCH     KINDNESS     AND 

HOSPITALITY    RECEIVED   DURING   A   VISIT 

TO  THE   UNITED   STATES   IN   THE 

WINTER   OF    I9I2 


PREFACE 

It  is  impossible  when  studying  the  events  connected  with 
the  hfe  of  Hus  not  to  devote  great  attention  to  the  lengthy 
wars  in  Bohemia  and  the  neighbouring  countries  that  were 
the  inevitable  result  of  his  unjust  condemnation,  and  not  to 
realise  how  great  the  influence  of  these  wars  on  the  develop- 
ment of  Europe  was.  It  is  certainly  due  to  the  miUtary 
genius  of  2izka  and  the  other  Hussite  leaders  that  Hussite 
teaching  and  Hussite  thought  long  prevailed  in  Bohemia 
and  largely  influenced  the  neighbouring  countries.  Had  the 
Bohemians  been  defeated  in  the  battles  of  the  2izkov  and  the 
Vysehrad,  their  doctrines  would  have  been  immediately 
suppressed,  and  Hus  would  have  appeared  in  history  as  an 
isolated  enthusiast,  such  as  Savonarola. 

Yet  the  history  of  the  Hussite  wars  is,  I  think,  little  known  in 
England.  The  late  Bishop  Creighton,  in  his  History  of  the 
Papacy,  gives  an  admirable  outline  of  the  Hussite  movement, 
but  he  stated  that  he  did  not  intend  to  attempt  a  detailed 
account  of  the  Hussite  wars.  In  Bohemia  itself  no  reliable 
account  of  this  great  struggle  existed  before  the  days  of 
Palacky.  For  political  reasons,  into  which  I  do  not  wish  to 
enter,  the  Austrian  Government  which,  after  the  year  1620, 
obtained  absolute  control  over  Bohemia,  wished  to  obliterate 
in  that  country  all  recollections  of  the  time  when  Bohemia 
had  played  a  great  part  in  European  politics,  and  successfully 
repulsed  the  attacks  of  countless  invading  armies.  It  is 
from  this  period  that  date  many  of  the  fables  that  have  long 
taken  the  place  of  historical  facts  in  the  records  of  Bohemia, 
though  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  Historia  Bohemica  of 

vii 


viii  PREFACE 

iEneas  Sylvius  is  responsible  for  the  descriptions  of  2izka 
and  Prokop  as  wizards  or  magicians,  and  for  foolish  tales 
such  as  that  concerning  Zizka's  drum. 

In  this  respect  Palacky's  monumental  history  of  Bohemia 
produced  a  complete  change.  He  was  the  first  to  collect 
in  the  archives  of  Bohemia  and  other  countries  authentic 
evidence  on  the  period  of  the  Hussite  wars.  With  an  amount 
of  courage  which  English  readers  can,  perhaps,  hardly  realise, 
Palacky  published  an  impartial  and  authentic  account  of  the 
Hussite  wars,  regardless  of  the  relentless  molestation  and 
persecution  which  befell  him,  as  having  ventured  to  judge 
unfavourably  the  policy  of  the  papal  see  with  regard  to 
Bohemia.^  Since  the  time  of  Palacky,  the  late  Professor 
Tomek  and  many  others,  whom  I  shall  mention  presently 
as  authors  of  works  which  I  have  used,  have  written  freely 
and  independently  on  the  great  Bohemian  civil  war. 

While  this  great  civil  war  has  thus  comparatively  attracted 
but  little  the  attention  of  historians,  and  those  who  have 
written  of  it  have  very  frequently  misrepresented  both  the 
motives  and  the  events  of  the  struggle,  the  Bohemian  people, 
since  it  has  been  allowed  to  study  the  annals  of  its  country, 
has  been  deeply  interested  in  the  Hussite  wars.  This  feeling 
has  been  so  eloquently  described  by  the  Bohemian  historian 
Gindely,  that  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  his  words.  "  The 
Hussite  battles,"  he  writes,  "  were  fought  for  a  national 
cause;  poets  and  painters  have  chosen  them  as  their  subject; 
the  most  stirring  popular  songs  date  from  that  time;  the 
names  of  the  leaders  of  this  movement  still  linger  in  the  memory 
of  the  people;  the  name  of  no  Bohemian  king  is  as  familiar 
to  them  as  that  of  the  blind  leader  of  the  Hussite  armies. 
The  violent  destruction  of  the  national  constitution  by 
Ferdinand  H,  the  sufferings  which  the  country  endured  during 

*  Those  interested  in  this  matter  will  find  an  account  of  the  annoyances 
caused  to  Palacky  by  the  "censure-office"  of  Vienna  in  my  History  of 
Bohemian  Literature. 


PREFACE  ix 

the  Austrian  war  of  succession  at  the  hand  of  Prussians, 
Bavarians,  and  Frenchmen,  events  that  occurred  but  one  or 
two  centuries  ago  are  forgotten.  On  all  these  occasions  the 
peasant  was  a  mere  sufferer ;  he  was  deprived  of  his  religious 
creed,  or  of  his  worldly  goods,  but  he  never  defended  himself. 
In  the  Hussite  wars  he  had  himself  been  a  fighter ;  he  had  been 
a  victorious  warrior,  and  his  flail  and  fighting-club  had  success- 
fully beaten  back  the  enemies  of  his  country  and  his  faith." 

It  is  necessary  to  refer  briefly  to  the  principal  sources  on 
which  the  historian  of  the  Hussite  wars  has  to  rely.  I  will 
first  mention  the  collections  of  contemporary  chronicles 
published  by  Palacky  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Scriptores 
rerum  Bohemicarum.  These  chronicles,  written  in  the 
Bohemian  language,  are  the  work  of  various  writers.  The 
manuscripts  were  afterwards  collected  and  first  published  in 
the  nineteenth  century. 

Of  other  contemporary  writers  Lawrence  of  Bfezova,  author 
of  a  Latin  work,  de  gestis  et  variis  accidentihus  regni  Bohemice, 
is  the  only  one  who  can  be  considered  as  a  historian.  He 
writes  as  a  moderate  Hussite  or  **  Calixtine,"  equally  opposed 
to  the  tyranny  of  Rome  and  to  the  fanaticism  of  the  advanced 
Taborites.  If  we  make  due  allowance  for  the  personal  sym- 
pathies and  views  of  Bfezova,  his  chronicle  is  very  valuable, 
and  he  may  be  considered  as  almost  the  only  genuine  contem- 
porary historian  of  the  Hussite  wars.^  I  have  here  largely 
used  the  contents  of  his  work.  It  is  deeply  to  be  regretted 
that  Bfezova's  chronicle  breaks  off  suddenly  in  the  middle  of 
his  record  of  the  year  142 1.  Professor  GoU  has  edited,  together 
with  Bfezova's  chronicle,  two  other  contemporary  chronicles, 
that  of  the  university  of  Prague — a  not  very  valuable  compila- 
tion— and  that  of  Bartosek  of  Drahonic.  Bartosek  was  a 
knight  in  the  service  of  King  Sigismund  during  the  Hussite 
wars.     He  writes  as  a  soldier,  little  interested  in  theological 

1  For  a  more  detailed  notice  of  Lawrence  of  Bfezova  see  my  Lectures  on 
he  Historians  of  Bohemia,  pp.  35-47. 


X  PREFACE 

discussions;    but  with  regard  to  the  details  of  warfare — so 
sadly  neglected  by  the  other  writers  of  the  time — his  work  is 
most  valuable.     A  large  collection  of  mostly  contemporary 
records  was  published  by  Professor  Hofier  under  the  title  of 
Geschichtsschreiber     der    hussitischen    Bewegung    in    Bohmen. 
This  collection  was  published  under  the  auspices  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  Vienna,  and  Professor  Hofier  did  not  limit  himself 
to  the  editing  of  these  ancient  records,  but  violently  attacked 
in  his  commentary  the  leaders  of    the  Hussite  movement.^ 
His  collection,  however,  contains  some  very  valuable  docu- 
ments that  were  previously  almost  unknown.     Of  these  the 
Chronicle  of  Canon  Andrew  of  Regensburg  ("  Andreas  presbyter 
Ratisponensis"),    written    from    a    thoroughly   German    and 
anti-Hussite  point  of  view,  and  the  Chronicon  continens  causam 
sacerdotum  Taboriensium,  by  the  T^borite  priest,  Nicholas  of 
Pelhfimov,   one  of    the    few  writings  by  Taborite    divines 
which  have  been  preserved,  require  special  mention.     I  have, 
in  my  notes  to  this  work,  referred  to  other  writers  contained 
in    Professor    Hofier's    collection.     Another    chronicler    who, 
like  Andrew  of  Regensburg,  writes  with  a  strong  Roman  and 
anti-Hussite   bias,   was   the   Professor   of    Theology   at   the 
University    of    Vienna,    Thomas  Eschendorfer  of  Haselbach, 
who  took  part  in  the  negotiations  at    Basel  which  preceded 
the  agreement  known  as  the  "  compacts."     His  chronicle  is 
printed  in  the  second  volume  of  Pez,  Scriptores  rerum  Austria 
carum.     I  mention  last  the  work  of  a  contemporary  writer 
which  has  been  more  largely  quoted  by  later  writers  on  the 
Hussite  wars  than  all  others,  and  has  up  to  lately  been  the 
foundation  of  all  accounts  of  the  Bohemian  religious  warfare. 
I  refer  to  the  Historia  Bohemica  of  ^Eneas  Sylvius,  afterwards 
Pope  Pius  II.      ^neas  Sylvius  had  as  a  young  man  been 
present  at  the  arrival  of  the  Bohemian  ambassadors  at  Basel, 
and  he  was  on  terms  of  friendship  with  Cardinal  Cesarini. 

*  On  the  controversy  which  arose  on  this  subject  between  Palacky  and 
Hofier,  see  my  Lectures  on  Historians  of  Bohemia,  pp.  102-105. 


I 


PREFACE  xi 

That  the  tendency  of  his  work  should  be  strongly  hostile  to 
the  Calixtine  or  Utraquist  cause  was,  no  doubt,  inevitable, 
but  iEneas  often  attacks  his  enemies  in  a  distinctly  unfair 
manner.  Thus  he  lays  great  stress  on  the  appearance  of  the 
Adamite  fanatics  in  Bohemia,  though  they  had  no  connection 
whatever  with  the  Hussite  movement,  entered  Bohemia  as 
strangers,  and  were  almost  immediately  extirpated  by  the 
Hussite  general,  2izka.i  2izka  himself  and  the  Bohemian 
nobles  are  described  as  savages  whom  Providence  permitted 
to  obtain  victories  to  punish  the  sins  of  the  Christian  world. 
I  have  already  alluded  to  the  repulsive  and  untruthful  de- 
scription of  2izka's  death.  The  value  of  iEneas  Sylvius's 
book  is  also  lessened  by  the  humanistic  manner  of  the  author, 
who  is  always  endeavouring  to  imitate  the  historians  of  Greece 
and  Rome.  He  always  strives  to  adorn  and  enliven  his 
narrative  by  often  quite  unauthenticated  anecdotes,  and  he 
follows  the  classics  in  introducing  imaginary  speeches,  which 
the  modem  student  of  Bohemian  history  knows  to  be  quite 
out  of  harmony  with  the  character  of  the  supposed  speaker. 

The  period  of  the  German  reformation  again  shows  a  slight 
revival  of  interest  in  the  Hussite  movement,  which,  after  the 
"compacts"  and  the  restoration  of  King  Sigismund,  had 
for  a  time  attracted  but  little  attention.  Founding  their 
view  on  Luther's  words,  the  early  German  Church  reformers 
glorified  the  Hussites,  whom  they  considered  as  their  pre- 
decessors. The  German  writers  of  this  time,  however,  attri- 
buted all  the  success  which  the  Bohemians  for  a  time  obtained 
to  the  extreme  Taborite  fanatics,  and  quite  ignored  the  merits 
of  the  conservative  Hussite  party — consisting  mainly  of  the 
lords  sub-Utraque  and  the  citizens  of  the  old  town  of  Prague — 
which,  under  more  favourable  circumstances,  would,  perhaps, 
have  established  a  national  church  and  a  national  kingdom  in 
Bohemia.  We  find  the  same  tendency  also  in  the  work  of 
Zacharias  Theobaldus,  entitled  Hussitenkrieg,  which  belongs  to 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus^  pp.  360-361. 


xii  PREFACE 

the  seventeenth  century.  After  the  battle  of  the  White  Moun- 
tain in  1620,  and  the  suppression  of  Protestantism  and  the 
national  constitution  of  Bohemia,  all  literary  activity  in  that 
country  ceased,  and  the  Bohemians  were  prevented  from  obtain- 
ing any  information  on  the  history  of  their  country.  They 
were  even  forbidden  to  read  the  Historia  Bohemica  of  Pope  Pius 
II.  Late  in  the  eighteenth  century  PubiCka's  Chronologische 
Geschtchte  von  Bohmen  was  published.  Though  the  period  of 
the  Hussite  wars  is,  as  was  then  necessary,  treated  with  great 
caution,  yet  it  is  not  without  value,  and  includes  some 
interesting  documents. 

In  the  nineteenth  century  the  monumental  historical  work 
of  Palacky  ^  appeared,  to  which  I  have  already  referred. 
It  threw  an  entirely  new  light  on  the  history  of  the  Bohemian 
revolution.  Palacky  proved  that  the  Hussites  were  not,  as 
had  been  believed,  brutal  and  fanatical  savages,  but  Christians, 
very  zealous  for  their  religion,  disgusted  by  the  corruption  of 
the  period,  and  anxious  to  return  to  the  simplicity  and  fervour 
of  the  primitive  church.  Besides  his  great  historical  work 
and  numerous  minor  works,  Palacky  also  published  two  very 
valuable  collections  of  documents  referring  to  the  life  of  Hus 
and  the  period  of  the  Hussite  wars.  The  volume,  entitled 
Urkundliche  Beitrdge  zur  Geschtchte  der  Hussitenkriege,  is 
invaluable  for  all  who  wish  to  study  the  story  of  the  great 
Bohemian  rising.  Of  the  works  on  the  Hussite  wars  published 
after  Palacky's  history  the  most  valuable  are  those  by  the 
late  Professor  Tomek.  His  great  work,  the  History  of  the 
Town  of  Prague,  becomes,  during  the  period  of  the  Hussite 
wars,  in  which  the  "  Praguers  "  played  so  great  a  part,  a 
complete  record  of  all  the  battles  and  negotiations  that  took 
place  in  Bohemia  at  that  time.  We  are  also  indebted  to 
Professor  Tomek  for  a  most  interesting  biography  of  2iika, 
the  first  record  of  the  great  warrior  that  has  any  historical 

*  For  an  account  of    Palacky's  life  and  work  I  refer  the  reader  to  my 
Lectures  on  the  Historians  of  Bohemia,  pp.  88-105. 


PREFACE  xiii 

value  at  the  present  time.  Though  we,  of  course,  do  not  find 
here  the  grotesque  fables  concerning  Zizka  which  circulated 
at  the  time  when  independent  study  of  the  Hussite  wars  was 
prohibited  in  the  Austrian  Government,  the  tendency  of  the 
book  is  obviously  adverse  to  the  Bohemian  general,  and  its 
motive  was  undoubtedly  to  lessen  the  great  admiration  for  2izka 
which,  as  already  mentioned,  is  general  among  Bohemians. 
It  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate  the  many  recent  writings,  of 
greater  or  lesser  value,  which  have  recently  appeared  in 
Bohemia — particularly  as  they  are  mostly  written  in  the 
national  language,  which  is  almost  unknown  in  England. 
Much  important  information  is  contained  in  the  publications 
of  the  Bohemian  Museum,  of  the  Bohemian  Society  of  Sciences, 
the  Bohemian  Academy,  and  particularly  in  the  Bohemian 
Historical  Review  (**  Cesky  Casopis  Historicky  ").  A  Bohemian 
work  deahng  specially  with  the  Hussite  system  of  warfare 
was  published  recently  by  Dr.  Toman  under  the  name  of 
Husitske  vdlecnictor  {"  Hussite  Warfare  ").  Dr.  Toman  has  made 
very  profound  study  of  the  different  campaigns  of  the  Hussite 
wars,  and  has  visited  most  of  the  battlefields.  The  plans  and 
sketches  contained  in  the  book  have  the  greatest  interest. 
That  Dr.  Toman  was  entirely  devoid  of  all  practical  knowledge 
of  military  matters  is  evident  even  to  one  whose  own  military 
experience  is  founded  only  on  a  short  period  of  service  in  an 
Austrian  regiment  of  lancers.  Some  information  on  the 
military  organisation  of  the  Bohemians  during  the  Hussite 
wars  will  be  found  in  General  Kohler's  very  interesting  work 
Die  Entwicklung  des  Kriegswesen  und  der  Kriegfiihrung  in  der 
Ritterzeit  his  zu  den  Hussitenkriegen.  As  the  title  indicates, 
General  Kohler's  work  ends  with  the  Hussite  wars;  but 
incidentally  the  work  contains  very  interesting  remarks  on 
2izka's  system  of  warfare  which  I  have  frequently  quoted. 
It  is  impossible  to  refer  here  to  the  vast  amount  of  literature 
on  the  Hussite  wars  that  has  recently  appeared.  The  books 
of  some  of  these  writers  are  mentioned  in  my  notes  to  this 


xiv  PREFACE 

work.  I  must,  however,  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to 
two  works  by  Professor  von  Bezold;  they  are  entitled  Zur 
Geschichte  des  Hussitenthims  and  Konig  Sigmund  und  dit 
Reichskriege  gegen  die  Hussiten. 

I  have  dedicated  this  work  to  my  American  friends,  in 
recognition  of  the  great  friendliness  and  kind  hospitality  which 
I  met  with  everywhere  during  a  visit  to  America  in  the  winter 
of  1912.  I  have  retained  a  most  pleasant  recollection  of  my 
countrymen  who  have  settled  in  the  United  States,  and  many 
of  whom  I  met,  particularly  in  Illinois  and  Nebraska.  Their 
energy,  courage,  and  self-reliance  often  recalled  to  me  the 
Bohemians  of  old  times  to  a  far  greater  extent  than  do  those 
of  my  countrymen  who  have  remained  in  their  old  homes. 

When  writing,  in  1895,  the  preface  to  the  first  edition  of  my 
Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  I  wrote  the  following  words  : 
"  I  must  add  one  remark  which  is  only  intended  for  readers 
who  are  my  countrymen,  in  the  unlikely  case  that  this  Uttle 
book  should  come  into  their  hands.  In  no  country  has  the 
habit  of  using  the  events  of  the  past  as  examples  or  arguments 
applicable  to  the  political  dissensions  of  the  present  day 
prevailed  so  extensively  as  in  Bohemia.  Nothing  is  to  my 
mind  more  unscientific,  and,  indeed,  more  reprehensible. 
I  have  exercised  special  care  in  avoiding  any  remark  which 
might  have  even  the  appearance  of  an  allusion  to  the  rehgious 
or  political  controversies  in  Bohemia  at  the  present  time." 

I  find  it  necessary  to  repeat  this  statement,  particularly 
at  a  moment  when  the  largest  Bohemian  party,  abandoning 
its  former  attitude  of  opposition,  endeavours  by  great  sub- 
serviency to  win  the  favour  of  the  present  Ministry  of  Vienna. 

LOtzow 

^ampach, 

December  1913. 


THE   HUSSITE    WARS 


CHAPTER   I 

All  writers  on  the  Hussite  wars  agree  that  these  wars  were 
the  result  of  three  causes,  the  antagonism  of  the  Bohemians 
to  the  Church  of  Rome,  the  revival  of  the  Slavic  national 
feeling,  and  the  rise  of  the  democratic  spirit  which  is,  to  a  greater 
or  lesser  extent,  evident  in  many  European  countries  at  the 
beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century.  Where  these  writers  differ 
widely  is  in  their  opinion  as  to  the  relative  importance  which 
should  be  attributed  to  each  of  these  causes.  The  contem- 
porary chroniclers,  who  hardly  deserve  the  name  of  historians, 
have,  both  in  their  Latin  and  in  their  Bohemian  writings, 
considered  the  Hussite  movement  mainly  from  the  point  of 
view  of  religious  controversy ;  only  occasional  remarks  indicate 
how  great  the  racial  antagonism  was  at  that  period,  and  how 
strongly  democratic,  and  for  a  short  time  even  communistic 
theories  influenced  the  Bohemian  people. 

That  the  contemporary  writers  should  have  laid  so  great  a 
stress  on  the  religious  controversies  is  natural,  if  we  consider 
that  the  immediate  cause  of  the  national  uprising  was  the 
execution  of  Hus.  The  first  manifestation  of  opposition  to 
King  Sigismund,  the  famed  *'  protestatio  Bohemorum,"  which 
was  signed  by  the  principal  Bohemian  nobles,  refers  exclusively 
to  the  life  and  the  doctrine  of  Hus. 

The  revival  of  the  feeling  of  solidarity  between  the  different 
branches  of  the  Slavic  race  undoubtedly  played  a  considerable 
part  in  the  determined  resistance  which  the  Bohemians  offered 
to  the  attacks  of  vastly  superior  armies  of  Germans.  As  will 
be  noted  later,  this  motive  appears  on  several  occasions  in  the 

6 


2  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

slight  fragments  of  2izka's  writings  that  have  been  preserved. 
It  can  be  stated  generally  that  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth 
century  is  notable  as  producing  a  strong  reaction  on  the  part 
of  the  Slavic  race,  which,  since  the  time  of  Charles  the  Great, 
had  constantly  receded  before  the  Teutonic  aggression.  The 
first  symptom  of  the  Slavic  revival  was  the  great  victory 
which  the  Poles  obtained  over  the  Knights  of  the  Teutonic 
Order  at  Tannenberg  in  1410.  According  to  a  well  authentic- 
ated tradition,  2izka  took  part  in  this  great  battle,  and  Hus, 
in  a  letter  which  has  been  preserved,^  congratulated  the  King 
of  Poland  on  his  victory.  It  was  in  consequence  of  this 
feeling  of  solidarity  between  the  different  branches  of  the 
Slavic  race  that  Poland  generally  favoured  the  Hussite  cause. 
The  unswerving  fidelity  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  was 
frequently  disadvantageous  to  Poland,  and  contributed  con- 
siderably to  the  final  downfall  of  that  country,  however, 
prevented  the  Slavs  of  Poland  from  rendering  sufficient  aid 
to  their  Bohemian  kinsmen.  It  should  also  be  mentioned 
that  at  this  period  the  revival  of  the  Slavic  national  spirit 
extended  even  to  already  semi-Germanised  lands,  such  as 
Mecklenburg  and  Pomerania. 

The  third  principal  motive  of  the  Hussite  movement  was 
the  awakening  of  the  democratic  spirit,  which  we  find  in  other 
countries  as  well  as  in  Bohemia  at  this  time.  In  consequence 
of  this  spirit  the  Bohemians  after  their  brilliant  victories — 
whose  fame  soon  spread  over  all  Europe — found  many  friends, 
even  in  traditionally  hostile  Germany  and  in  distant  France. 
It  was,  no  doubt,  the  fear  that  this  democratic  movement 
might  extend  to  their  states  which  induced  the  European 
princes  to  use  their  influence  on  Rome  for  the  purpose  of 
conciliating  the  Bohemians.  In  close  connection  with  this 
democratic  feeling  we  find  among  the  Hussites  a  strong  move- 
ment in  favour  of  the  emancipation  of  women.  The  Czech 
women  of  this  period  not  only  showed  interest  in  the  religious 

*  It  is  printed  in  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  306-307. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  3 

and  political  struggles,  but  they  also  exercised  a  considerable 
influence  on  the  councils  of  the  nation.  Some  even  laid  down 
their  lives  for  the  creed  of  their  country. 

The  faithful  friends  and  adherents  of  Hus  in  Prague  had,  of 
course,  anxiously  and  feverishly  followed  the  development  of 
the  tragedy  of  Constance,  which  ended  in  the  condemnation 
and  execution  of  the  Bohemian  divine.  The  letters  addressed 
*'  to  the  whole  Bohemian  nation  "  and  '*  to  the  faithful 
Bohemians,"  ^  written  by  Hus  during  the  last  weeks  of  his 
life,  soon  reached  Prague,  and  were  read  out  from  the  pulpits 
of  the  churches.  When  the  fatal  news  of  the  death  of  Hus 
became  known,  an  ominous  silence  at  first  prevailed.  Then 
general  lamentation  arose  and  loud  indignation  was  expressed. 
All  saw  that  a  death-struggle  was  imminent,  but  the  statement 
of  some  writers  hostile  to  the  Hussite  cause  that  attacks 
were  at  this  moment  made  on  Roman  Catholic  priests  is  un- 
founded. The  people  crowded  to  the  churches,  and  with  the 
musical  instinct  innate  in  the  Bohemian  nation  hymns  in 
honour  of  the  new  martyr  were  improvised  and  sung.  Pictures 
were  carried  through  the  market-place  representing  on  one  side 
Christ  riding  on  a  mule  and  followed  by  the  barefooted 
apostles,  on  the  other  the  Pope  and  the  cardinals  riding  richly 
caparisoned  war-horses.  The  women  of  Prague,  who  had 
from  the  first  shown  great  interest  in  the  cause  of  Church 
reform,  and  who  had  always  venerated  the  saintly  Hus, 2 
inveighed  strongly  against  the  treachery  of  Rome.  The  ladies 
of  the  court  of  Queen  Sophia — whose  confessor  Hus  had 
been — were  foremost  in  expressing  their  grief  and  indignation.^ 
Even  the  Queen's  generally  apathetic  consort,  King  Venceslas, 
expressed  disapproval.  "  He  (Hus)  should  not  have  been 
executed,  as  he  had  a  letter  of  safe  conduct,"  the  King  is 

^  See  my  Life  and  Times  of  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  263-276. 

^  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  p.  302. 

3  Palacky  quotes  a  contemporary  strongly  anti-Hussite  document,  which 
violently  attacks  the  ladies  of  Queen  Sophia's  court.  One  of  them,  the 
Lady  Anna  of  Mochov,  is  described  as  "  saevissima  Jezabel." 


4  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

reported  to  have  said.  Both  Venceslas  and  his  courtiers  were 
greatly  irritated  by  the  conduct  of  the  Bohemian  clergy, 
whose  complaints  and  depositions  had  largely  contributed  to  the 
condemnation  of  Hus.  The  movement  caused  by  the  execution 
of  Hus,  though  it  had  a  somewhat  revolutionary  character, 
was,  therefore,  not  at  first  anti-dynastic,  as  it  was  favoured 
by  the  Queen  and  the  ladies  of  her  court,  and  at  least  not 
discountenanced  by  the  King. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  secession  of  the  Bohemian  people 
from  the  Church  of  Rome  became  complete.  This  was 
mainly  due  to  the  general  consent  to  the  custom  of  receiving 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  Utraquism,  as  it  was  generally 
called.  Towards  the  end  of  his  life  Hus  had  maintained  the 
necessity  of  Communion  in  the  two  kinds.  He  had  at  Constance 
written  a  tract  in  defence  of  this  practice  as  well  as  a  letter  ^ 
in  which  he  warmly  upheld  it.  After  the  death  of  Hus, 
Utraquism  became  one  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  his 
adherents.  I  have  in  other  works  ^  attempted  to  state  the 
reasons  why  the  Bohemians  attached  such  great  importance 
to  this  tenet.  This  can  to  a  great  extent  be  explained  by  the 
strongly  anti-clerical  feeling  that  was  at  that  time  almost 
general  among  the  Czechs.  They  resented  the  claim  of 
superiority  over  all  laymen  which  Bohemian  priests — often 
verj^  unworthy  priests — raised,  and  they  resented  their  attempt 
to  administer  Communion  in  what  the  Bohemians  considered 
an  "  incomplete  "  form.  Though  recent  research  has  proved 
that  all  traces  of  Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  as  it  had  been 
established  when  Cyrillus  and  Methodius  introduced  Christian- 
ity into  Moravia  and  Bohemia,  had  long  disappeared  in 
Bohemia,  a  sentimental  recollection  of  the  Eastern  Church,  to 
which  the  "  apostles  of  the  Slavs  "  belonged,  may  still  have 
influenced  the  people. 

It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that  the  practice  of  receiving  the 

*  Letter  to  the  priest  Havlik,  printed  in  Palacky's  Docufventa  Mag.  Johanms 
Hus,  p.  128. 

*  Particularly  in  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  56-G2,  266-267. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  5 

Sacrament  in  the  two  kinds  soon  became  the  characteristic 
article  of  faith  to  which  all  Bohemian  friends  of  Church  reform 
conformed.  The  chalice  became  their  emblem,  and  the  whole 
national  party  was  soon  known  as  that  of  the  Utraquists.  The 
two  parties  into  which  the  Bohemian  nobility  divided  are  by 
the  contemporary  chroniclers  always  described  as  the  lords 
*'  sub  Utraque  "  and  the  lords  **  sub  una."  These  distinctions, 
indeed,  continued  up  to  the  time  of  the  suppression  of  religious 
liberty  in  Bohemia  in  1620. 

The  Bohemians,  full  of  zeal  for  the  doctrine  of  Utraquism, 
soon  began  to  expel  from  their  churches  those  priests — they 
were  not  numerous — who  refused  to  administer  the  Sacrament 
in  the  now  established  fashion,  and  acts  of  violence  began 
to  take  place.  The  nobles  '*  suib  Utraque  "  also  now  expelled 
from  their  estates  those  priests  who  refused  to  conform  to 
Utraquism.  Soon  after  Hus's  death  violent  letters  were  sent 
from  Constance  to  Bohemia,  accusing  the  inhabitants  of  that 
country  of  being  heretics.  A  letter  addressed  to  King  Venceslas 
by  Bishop  John  of  Litomysle,^  though  it  was  of  a  somewhat 
conciliatory  character,  greatly  irritated  the  Bohemians,  who 
knew  that  Bishop  John  had  been  one  of  the  principal  in- 
stigators of  the  trial  and  execution  of  Hus.  The  vast  estates 
of  the  very  wealthy  prelate  were  seized  by  the  neighbouring 
Utraquist  nobles.  On  July  26,  1417,  the  Council  of  Constance 
addressed  to  the  nobles  and  knights  of  Bohemia  and  to  the 
citizens  of  the  three  towns  of  Prague  ^  a  somewhat  menacing 
letter.  After  having  severely  censured  the  deeds  of  John 
Hus  and  Jerome,  '*  those  most  wicked  men,  so  dangerous  to 
the  Church,  who  had  followed  Wycliffe  in  many  of  his  most 
damnable  tenets,"  the  letter  ended  by  stating  that  should  the 
Bohemians  audaciously  attempt  to  oppose  in  any  way  the 
Council's  sentence  on  Hus,  which  was  most  pleasing  to  God 
and  most  salutary  for  the  whole  Christian  people,  and  should 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  p.  337. 

^  The  city  pf  Prague  then  comprised  three  distinct  municipalities,  the  Old 
Town,  the  New  Town,  and  the  "  Small  Side  "  (Maid  Strana). 


6  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

they  persist  in  their  damnable  heresy,  or  in  any  way  aid  or 
abet  it,  then,  besides  the  Divine  punishment,  which  they 
should  certainly  expect,  the  Council  would  proceed  against 
them  in  the  deserved  manner  according  to  the  canonical 
regulations,  so  that  such  a  punishment  should  be  a  useful 
warning  to  others. 

This  letter,  which  contained  no  reference  whatever  to  Church 
reform,  the  cause  which  Hus  had  always  had  most  at  heart, 
and  which  had  at  first  been  considered  one  of  the  principal 
tasks  of  the  Council,  caused  great  indignation  among  the 
Bohemians.  It  appeared  to  them  that  their  choice  la}^ 
between  unconditional  surrender  to  Rome  or  a  call  to  arms. 
It  was  not  for  a  moment  doubtful  what  their  decision  would 
be.  The  powerful  Bohemian  nobles  who  at  this  moment 
appear  as  the  leaders  of  the  people  had,  during  the  reign  of 
the  weak  King  Venceslas,  obtained  an  almost  independent 
position,  and  they  bitterly  resented  the  interference  of  foreign- 
ers in  the  affairs  of  their  country.  Bohemia  was  at  that  moment 
intellectually  more  advanced  than  Germany,  and  many  of 
its  nobles,  though  they  were  brave  warriors,  felt  a  genuine 
interest  in  religious  questions,  and  had  anxiously  hoped  for 
the  very  necessary  reform  of  the  Church.  Some  of  the  nobles 
and  knights,  particularly  those  connected  with  the  court,  had 
known  Hus  personally  and  had  greatly  admired  his  saintly 
character.  The  treacherous  conduct  of  King  Sigismund — 
whose  letter  of  safe  conduct  had  guaranteed  to  Hus  the  right 
to  be  judged  in  his  own  country  and  by  his  own  countrymen — 
was  resented  by  the  whole  Bohemian  nation.  Some  of  the 
nobles  already  opposed  the  eventual  succession  to  the  Bohemian 
throne  of  Sigismund,  whose  brother.  King  Venceslas,  was 
childless.  On  the  other  hand,  Sigismund  made  no  attempt  to 
conceal  his  opinion  of  the  religious  vdews  held  by  the  great 
majority  of  the  Bohemians.     In  a  letter  ^  which  he  sent  to 

*  Printed  in  German  translation  by  Hofler,  Geschichtsschreibet  der  Hussit- 
ischen  Bewegung  in  Bohemen,  Vol.  II.  pp.  252-254. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  7 

his  brother  Venceslas  on  December  4,  1417,  he  wrote  :  "  We 
cannot  consider  thee  as  our  beloved  brother  if  thou  doest  not, 
as  did  our  ancestors,  exterminate  all  heretics,"  and  further 
on,  "  Let  every  Bohemian,  German  and  Latin,  know  that  we 
can  hardly  await  the  day  when  I  shall  drown  all  Wyclifhtes 
and  Hussites." 

In  the  last  months  of  his  life  the  weak  King  Venceslas 
entirely  abandoned    the    cause    of    Church  reform    and    en- 
deavoured  to   stem   the   Hussite   movement.     This,   as   was 
inevitable,    precipitated    the    course    of    events.     Venceslas 
issued  a  decree,  declaring  that  all  parish  priests  whom  the 
Utraquists   had  expelled   from   their   parishes   because   they 
refused  to  administer  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  should  be 
allowed  to  return.     On  the  other  hand,  the  Utraquist  services 
were  in  future  to  be  permitted  in  three  of  the  Prague  churches, 
and  all  Utraquist   priests  not  belonging  to   these  churches 
were  to  leave  Prague.     They  suffered  many  indignities  at  the 
hand  of  the  Germans  of  Prague,  who  had  almost  all  remained 
faithful  to  the  Church  of  Rome.    Many  of  these  priests  fled 
to   the  country  districts,   where  they  continued  to    preach 
and  to  administer  the  Sacrament  according  to  the  rites  of  what 
soon  began  to  be  called  the  Bohemian  Church.     The  priests 
who  had  been  expelled  from  Prague  mostly  sought  refuge  in 
the  southern  districts  of  Bohemia,  where,  being  deprived  of 
churches,    they    generally    preached,    celebrated    mass    and 
administered  the  Sacrament  in  the  open  air.     The  movement 
spread  rapidly,  and  large  crowds  flocked  to  the  meeting-places, 
not  only  from  all  parts  of  Bohemia,  but  also  from  the  neighbour- 
ing districts  of  Moravia.     One  of  the  favourite  meeting-places 
was  a  hill  near  the  small  town  of  Usti  on  the  Luznice,  to  which 
they  gave  the  biblical  name  of  Tabor — a  name  which  they 
afterwards  transferred  to  the  neighbouring  hill  of  Hradiste, 
where  they  founded  the  still  existing  town  of  Tabor.     Lawrence 
of  Bfezova  thus  describes  ^  one  of  the  early  meetings  of  the 

1  Bfezova's  Chronicle,  pp.  344-345  of  Professor  GoU's  edition. 


S  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

Hussites  :  "  In  the  year  of  the  Lord  1419,"  he  writes,  "  the 
evangehcal  priests  who  favoured  Master  John  Hus  and  ad- 
ministered the  Sacrament  to  the  people  in  the  two  kinds,  and 
who  were  called  Wycliffites  or  Hussites,  carried  the  Sacrament 
in  procession,  and  assembled  a  large  multitude  of  people  of 
both  sexes  from  all  parts  of  Bohemia,  from  towns  and  villages, 
on  a  hill  near  the  castle  of  Bechyn,  to  which  they  gave  the  name 
of  Tabor.  They  here  administered  the  Eucharist  with  great 
reverence  to  the  people,  particularly  on  feast-days,  as  their 
rivals  ^  did  not  permit  the  people  to  communicate  in  this 
fashion  in  the  neighbouring  churches.  On  the  day  of  St. 
Mary  Magdalene  ^  a  large  multitude  of  people  of  both  sexes 
and  many  children  assembled  on  this  hill  from  all  parts  of  the 
kingdom,  and  more  than  40,000  people  very  reverently  com- 
municated in  both  kinds  according  to  the  tradition  of  Christ 
and  the  custom  and  observance  of  the  primitive  Church. 
On  account  of  this,  Venceslas,  King  of  Bohemia,  became  very 
uneasy,  fearing  that  he  would  be  driven  from  his  royal  throne, 
and  dreading  that  his  place  would  be  taken  by  Nicholas  of 
Hus,^  whom  he  had  shortly  before  banished  from  Prague; 
for  Nicholas  had,  near  [the  church  of]  St.  Apolhnaris,  when 
surrounded  by  a  large  crowd  of  people,  who  were,  however, 
unarmed,  spoken  to  the  multitude  in  favour  of  the  right  of 
both  adult  people  and  children  to  receive  freely  Communion 
in  the  two  kinds." 

It  is  a  proof  of  the  strong  Hussite  sympathies  that  prevailed 
at  the  court  of  King  Venceslas,  that  even  after  their  sovereign 
had  abandoned  the  cause  of  Church  reform  many  of  those 
who  were  nearest  to  him  continued  to  favour  the  national 
cause.  Nicholas  of  Hus,  who  has  just  been  mentioned,  had 
been  a  member  of  the  royal  court,  but  having  been  banished 
from  that  court  because  of  his  Utraquist  or  Calixtine  views,  he 
soon  became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  national  party.     Whether 

^  t.  e.  the  priests  of  the  Roman  Church.  *  July  22. 

*  A  courtier  of  King  Venceslas.  He  was  not,  as  has  often  been  wrongly 
stated,  a  relation  of  John  Hus. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  9 

Bfezova's  statement  that  Nicholas  of  Hus  aimed  at  obtaining 
possession  of  the  Bohemian  throne  has  any  foundation  cannot, 
in  the  absence  of  sufficient  evidence,  be  ascertained.  It  is, 
however,  certain  that  these  popular  meetings,  one  of  which 
Bfezova  has  described,  were  not  entirely  confined  to  religious 
practices,  but  that  men  such  as  Nicholas  of  Hus  and  2izka 
used  the  opportunity  afforded  by  these  vast  gatherings  for 
the  purpose  of  giving  a  certain  military  training  to  the  numer- 
ous peasants,  farmers  and  townsmen  who  assembled  on  these 
occasions.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  at  the  meeting  on 
July  22  the  leaders  of  the  people  determined  soon  to  march 
on  Prague,  should  the  King  continue  to  be  obdurate.  It  is 
certain  that  the  nationalists  determined  that  their  next 
meeting  should  take  place  at  Prague  on  the  day  of  St.  Venceslas 
(September  28). 

Events  at  Prague,  however,  before  that  date  brought  on 
the  inevitable  crisis,  and  2izka  first  appears  in  the  records 
of  the  Hussite  wars  only  a  few  days  after  the  great  meeting 
on  the  Tabor  hill.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  King 
Venceslas  had  limited  the  Utraquist  religious  services  in 
Prague  to  three  churches,  excluding  the  Hussites  from  aU 
the  others.  This  naturally  caused  great  indignation  among 
the  citizens,  and  the  Roman  Catholic  priests  and  monks  who 
had  been  expelled  from  Prague  shortly  after  the  death  of  Hus, 
but  who  had  now  returned,  were  on  several  occasions  attacked 
by  the  people.  In  consequence  of  this  popular  feeling  the 
few  Utraquist  priests  who  had  remained  in  Prague  soon 
obtained  great  influence  over  the  citizens.  The  most 
prominent  of  these  priests  was  John  of  Zelivo  (or  Seclau), 
parish  priest  at  St.  Mary-of -the -Snow.  On  July  30  John 
preached  at  his  parish  church,  narrating,  as  was  his  custom, 
his  various  Apocalyptic  visions.  He  strongly  denounced 
King  Sigismund,  whom  he  described  as  the  dragon  of  the 
Revelation.  The  citizens  of  Prague,  who,  at  that  period,  follow- 
ing the  example  of  Hus,  were  deeply  imbued  with  biblical 


10  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

study,  were  greatly  impressed  by  Zelivo's  fervent  and  eloquent 
sermon.  After  its  conclusion  the  priest  led  the  citizens  in 
procession  through  the  streets,  carrying  before  them  the 
Sacrament  in  a  monstrance,  as  the  Bohemian  priests  had  now 
begun  to  do.  When  the  procession  passed  the  town-hall  of 
the  New  Town  ^  they  met  wdth  a  very  ungracious  reception. 
Zelivo  begged  the  town-councillors  to  release  some  Utraquists 
who  had,  because  of  their  faith,  been  imprisoned  in  the  town- 
hall.  The  priest  and  his  followers  were,  however,  received 
with  derision  by  the  town-councillors,  who  appeared  at  the 
windows,  and  stones  were  thrown  at  the  procession.  One  of 
the  stones  struck  Priest  John,  who  was  carrying  the  monstrance, 
and  the  infuriated  people  immediately  attempted  to  storm 
the  town-hall.  They  found  a  leader  in  John  2izka  of  Trocnov, 
who,  like  Nicholas  of  Hus,  had  formerly  been  a  member  of 
the  royal  court. ^  Directed  by  him  the  citizens  forced  open  the 
gates  of  the  building,  which  had  been  hurriedly  barred.  Then, 
entering  the  council-chamber,  they  threw  the  councillors 
from  the  windows.  Those  who  survived  the  fall  were  killed 
by  the  crowd  which  had  assembled  below. 

The  name  of  2izka,  the  hero  of  the  Hussite  wars,  will,  of 
course,  recur  constantly  in  these  pages,  but  though  his  fame 
really  dates  from  a  somewhat  later  occurrence,  it  may  be  well 
to  refer  here  already  to  the  early  history  of  the  great  warrior. 
The  family  of  the  Zizka's  of  Trocnov,  who  belonged  to  the 
lower  nobility  or  rather  gentr}^  of  Southern  Bohemia,  owned 
a  farm  and  some  land  at  Trocnov  near  Budejovice.^  Even 
the  recent  careful  researches  concerning  2izka's  ancestry 
have  met  with  little  success.  The  name  of  2izka  first  occurs 
in  an  official  document  of  the  year  1378 ;  it  is,  however,  doubt- 
ful whether  the  person  referred  to  is  John.     It  seems,  indeed, 

^  In  the  present  Karlovo  nimesti.  See  my  Prague  ("  Mediaeval  Towns  " 
series). 

•  Lawrence  of  Bfezova,  in  whose  work  he  is  first  mentioned  on  this  occasion 
calls  him  "  regis  Bohemiae  famiUarem." 

^  In  German,  "  Budweis." 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  ll 

probable  that  John  Zizka  of  Trocnov  was  not  born  much 
before  the  year  1378,  as  he  died  in  1424,  when  still  in  the  full 
strength  of  manhood.  Of  his  relations  also  little  is  known, 
though  we  find  a  casual  mention  of  his  brother  and  his  nephew 
in  the  chronicles  of  the  Hussite  wars.  The  many  strange 
tales  told  of  the  birth  and  early  youth  of  2izka  ^  must  be 
considered  as  purely  legendary.  It  is  certain  that  John 
2izka  played  a  considerable  part  in  the  guerilla  warfare 
between  King  Venceslas  and  the  great  Bohemian  nobles,  which 
continued  almost  without  interruption  during  the  early  part 
of  the  King's  reign.  2izka  took  the  side  of  the  King  in  these 
struggles,  which  were  mainly  caused  by  the  dislike  the  nobles 
felt  for  the  democratic  tendency  of  their  sovereign.  Among 
these  powerful  antagonists  of  Venceslas  were  the  nobles  of 
the  Rosenberg  family,  some  of  whose  estates  were  situated 
near  Trocnov.  It  is  probable  that  it  was  during  a  skirmish 
between  the  King's  soldiers  and  those  of  the  Rosenberg 
faction  which  took  place  during  these  wars  that  2izka  lost  the 
use  of  one  eye.  Though  very  probable,  it  is  not  certain 
that  Zizka,  fighting  on  the  side  of  the  Poles,  took  part  in  the 
great  battle  of  Tannenberg.  Polish  as  well  as  Bohemian 
chroniclers  mention  his  presence,  and  it  was  natural  that 
tradition  should  connect  the  great  Slavic  warrior  with  this 
first  manifestation  of  the  Slavic  reaction  of  the  fifteenth 
century.  It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that  2izka  was,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Hussite  troubles,  a  member  of  the  royal  house- 
hold— no  doubt  in  recognition  of  the  services  which  he  had 
rendered  to  King  Venceslas  during  the  civil  wars  at  the  begin- 
ning of  his  reign.     It  is  evident  that  Zizka  was  from  the  first 

*  Thus  it  was  said  that  Zizka  was  born  in  a  forest  during  a  great  storm, 
and  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  Hussite  wars  he  swore,  standing  under  the 
oak  tree  under  which  he  was  born,  to  revenge  the  death  of  Hus,  This  legend 
has  been  chosen  by  the  German  poet  Lenau  as  the  subject  of  one  of  his  finest 
poems.  A  recently  deceased  friend  who  was  interested  in  Bohemia  translated 
this  poem  into  English.  Though  the  translation  by  no  means  does  justice 
to  the  beauty  of  the  original,  I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  publish  it  as 
an  Appendix  to  this  work. 


12  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

a  firm  defender  of  the  national  or  Utraquist  cause,  and  he  was 
one  of  those  who  took  part  in  the  popular  meetings,  at  which 
armed  resistance  against  the  adherents  of  the  Church  of  Rome 
was  first  planned.  It  is  certain  that  2izka  was  from  the  first 
a  fervent  believer  in  the  tenets  of  the  Hussite  Church,  as 
they  were  afterwards  formulated  in  the  so-called  "  articles 
of  Prague,"  and  later  in  the  *^*  compacts."  As  one  of  the 
royal  courtiers  he  accompanied  Queen  Sophia  when  she 
attended  the  sermons  of  Hus,  her  confessor,  in  the  Bethlehem 
Chapel.*  According  to  a  very  ancient  and  not  improbable 
tradition,  2izka  was  personally  acquainted  with  Hus.  It  is 
certain  that  he  felt  the  death  of  the  Bohemian  divine  more 
deeply  than  most  of  the  other  members  of  the  royal  court. 
It  is  stated  that  King  Venceslas,  noticing  one  day  at  court 
that  2izka  appeared  melancholy  and  absorbed  in  thought, 
inquired  what  was  the  cause  of  his  depression.  2izka  answered, 
"  How  can  I  be  gay,  when  our  trusted  leaders  and  the  faithful 
preachers  of  the  law  of  the  Lord  are,  by  order  of  infidel  priests, 
undeservedly  and  unjustly  condemned  to  the  flames?  "  The 
King  answered,  **  What  can  we  do  ?  If  you  know  any  way  to 
do  so,  right  en  it  yourself;  we  shall  be  pleased."  2izka  now 
considered  himself  authorised  to  defend  his  country  against 
its  enemies. 

The  defenestration  at  the  town-hall  of  the  new  city  of  Prague 
first  gave  the  Hussite  movement  a  revolutionary  and,  indeed, 
anti-dynastic  character.  It  is  almost  certain  that  the  attack 
on  the  town-hall  had  been  planned  by  John  of  Zelivo,  who  had 
acquired  almost  unlimited  influence  over  the  people,  to  force 
the  hand  of  the  more  moderate  Calixtines,  who  still  hoped 
that,  through  the  influence  of  the  good  Queen  Sophia,  Venceslas 
would  again  become  favourable  to  the  Utraquist  cause.  The 
anti-dynastic  character  of  the  Hussite  movement  became 
more  pronounced  after  the  death  of  King  Venceslas,  which 
followed  the  riots  at  Prague  at  a  very  short  interval.     The 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  74-76,  161,  300. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  13 

King  was  then  residing  at  his  castle  of  Kunratic  near  Prague. 
On  receiving  the  news  of  the  events  in  that  city  he  was  immedi- 
ately seized  by  an  apoplectic  fit.  Infuriated  against  the 
Bohemians,  he,  after  having  slightly  recovered,  wrote  to  his 
brother  Sigismund,  begging  him  to  march  to  his  aid  with  an 
army  to  exterminate  all  heretics.  Only  a  few  days  later  a 
second  apoplectic  fit,  on  August  16,  ended  his  life.  Though 
the  democratic  tendencies  of  King  Venceslas  and  the  favour 
he  showed  to  his  Slavic  and,  for  a  time  also,  to  his  Hussite 
subjects  have  caused  him  often  to  be  judged  more  severely 
than  he  deserves,  he  was  certainly  quite  unfit  to  rule  a  turbulent 
country,  such  as  Bohemia  then  was,  at  one  of  the  most  critical 
moments  of  its  history. 

As  Venceslas  had  died  childless,  his  brother  Sigismund  was 
now  the  rightful  heir  to  the  Bohemian  throne.  The  state  of 
public  opinion  in  the  country,  however,  rendered  it  impossible 
for  him  to  be  recognised  by  the  people  as  their  sovereign. 
When  Sigismund  permitted — and,  indeed,  abetted — the  execu- 
tion of  Hus  at  Constance,  he  practically  abdicated  the 
Bohemian  throne,  though,  after  twenty-four  years  of  sanguinary 
civil  war,  he  finally  reigned  as  King  of  Bohemia  for  one  brief 
year.  The  vindictiveness  of  the  Bohemians  was  proportionate 
to  the  strength  of  their  devotion  to  Hus.  Even  the  more 
moderate  Hussites,  such  as  2izka,  who  was  by  no  means  on 
principle  opposed  to  monarchy,  abandoned  their  usual  modera- 
tion when  it  was  even  suggested  that  the  Bohemians  should 
enter  into  negotiations  with  Sigismund.  To  the  more  ad- 
vanced Hussites,  whose  leader  was  then  John  of  Zelivo, 
Sigismund  was  the  dragon  of  the  Apocalypse,  the  murderer 
of  the  saint.  Sigismund,  on  his  part,  as  already  stated,  did 
not  attempt  to  conceal  his  detestation  of  the  Hussites,  and, 
indeed,  of  all  Bohemians. 

It  is  not,  under  these  circumstances,  surprising  that  the 
immediate  consequence  of  Venceslas 's  death  was  renewed  and 
more  serious  rioting  in  Prague  and  other  Bohemian  cities. 


14  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

The  counsels  of  the  extreme  party  for  a  time  prevailed,  and 
the  movement  assumed  an  iconoclastic  character.  Several 
churches  in  Prague  were  destroyed,  as  well  as  the  monastery 
of  the  Carthusian  monks.  These  monks  had  incurred  the 
special  displeasure  of  the  people,  as  they  had  spoken  disparag- 
ingly of  Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  and  had  loudly  expressed 
their  approval  of  the  execution  of  Hus.  The  Carthusians 
had  been  informed  of  the  intended  attack  and  had  removed 
most  of  their  treasures,  but  their  monastery  was  destroyed, 
and  many  statues  and  pictures  perished.  The  Roman  Catholic 
priests  and  monks,  who  had  returned  to  Prague  during  the 
last  months  of  the  reign  of  Venceslas,  were  again  obliged  to 
leave  the  city.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  strongly  puritanic  character 
of  the  Hussite  movement  that  the  people,  together  with  the 
churches  and  monasteries,  destroyed  also  all  the  houses  of 
ill-fame  in  the  city. 

Quiet  returned  to  Prague  for  a  short  time  when  the  widowed 
Queen  Sophia  assumed  the  regency.  Her  great  sympathy  for 
the  Hussite  cause  was  well  known,  and  she  had  even  risked 
the  penalty  of  excommunication  by  the  ardour  with  which 
she  protested  against  the  execution  of  Hus.  King  Sigismund 
at  the  moment  raised  no  objection  to  the  establishment  of 
a  regency.  He  was  then  in  Hungary  preparing  for  war  against 
the  Turks,  and  well  knew  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
proceed  to  Bohemia.  Very  shortly  after  the  death  of  Venceslas, 
probably  before  the  end  of  August,  the  leading  Utraquist 
knights  and  nobles,  and  some  of  the  prominent  citizens  belong- 
ing to  the  national  party,  met  at  Prague.  A  message  was 
sent  to  King  Sigismund  at  Buda  in  Hungary  inviting  him 
to  Bohemia,  but  at  the  same  time  formulating  certain  de- 
mands, which  mainly  referred  to  matters  of  religion.  They 
claimed  the  right  to  maintain  freely  the  law  and  word  of  God 
according  to  the  teaching  of  Hus,  and  also  the  right  to  receive 
the  Sacrament  in  the  two  kinds.  They  further  demanded 
that  it  should  be  forbidden  to  call  Hus  and  Jerome  heretics. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  15 

The  designation  of  heretic  always  deeply  offended  the 
Bohemians,  who  maintained  that  they  were  members  of  the 
universal  Church.  The  Bohemians  further  asked  Sigismund 
to  use  his  influence  with  the  Pope  to  induce  him  to  permit 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds  in  Bohemia,  and  finally  demanded 
that  very  severe  measures  should  be  taken  to  check  the  simony 
and  evil  living  that  were  then  very  prevalent  among  the 
Bohemian  clergy.  The  citizens  of  Prague  added  several  other 
demands.  They  begged  the  King  to  condone  the  recent 
riots  and  to  grant  his  sanction  to  the  election  of  the  new 
town-councillors,  whom  they  had,  during  the  disturbances, 
chosen  illegally,  that  is,  without  requesting  the  approval  of 
their  sovereign.  They  lastly  begged  that  the  houses  of  ill-fame 
that  had  been  destroyed  should  not  be  rebuilt.  The  King's 
answer  was  a  short  and  evasive  one.  He  promised  to  maintain 
the  ancient  privileges  of  Bohemia,  and  stated  that  he  could  give 
no  decisive  answer  with  regard  to  Communion  in  the  two  kinds 
till  he  had  returned  to  Bohemia  and  consulted  the  nobles  and 
the  clergy  of  the  country.  The  conciliatory  attempt  of  the 
Utraquist  nobles,  who  had  limited  their  demands  to  the  right 
of  communicating  in  the  two  kinds  and  to  the  King's  consent 
to  regulations  which  would  have  checked  simony  and  the 
immorality  of  the  clergy,  had  thus  failed,  as  attempts  at  media- 
tion on  the  part  of  moderate  men  in  a  time  of  revolution 
generally  do.  Both  the  Romanists  and  the  Utraquist s  very 
soon  resumed  hostilities. 

The  more  advanced  Hussites — who  soon  became  known  as 
the  Taborites — had  from  the  first  placed  no  faith  in  the 
attempted  mediation.  Their  meetings,  therefore,  continued. 
On  September  30  a  large  meeting  took  place  at  a  spot  known 
as  "at  the  crossways  "  ("  U  Kfizku  ")  near  Benesov,  and  not 
far  from  Prague ;  it  had  evidently  been  chosen  for  the  purpose 
of  facilitating  the  attendance  of  the  Praguers,  many  of  whom 
were,  no  doubt,  expected.  The  meeting  was  a  very  orderly 
one.      Several    sermons    were    preached,   one   by    Venceslas 


i6  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Koranda,  parish  priest  of  Plzeii,  afterwards  one  of  the  most 
famous  Hussite  divines,  and  many  received  the  Sacrament  in 
the  two  kinds.  No  one  was  allowed  to  carry  arms,  and  private 
property  was  rigidly  respected.  When  a  poor  peasant  com- 
plained that  his  field  had  been  injured  by  the  crowd  which 
had  crossed  it,  one  of  the  leaders  immediately  collected  suffi- 
cient money  to  repair  the  damage  done.  The  numerous 
priests  who  were  present  engaged  in  theological  discussions, 
and  it  is  probable  that  the  theological  affirmations  afterwards 
known  as  the  "  articles  of  Prague  "  were  drawn  up  on  this 
occasion,^  though  negotiations  on  these  points  had  taken 
place  previously,  and  the  articles  were  only  officially  published 
in  1420.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  military  leaders,  who 
were  well  acquainted  with  King  Sigismund's  intentions,  also 
met  in  council.  They  probably  thought  that,  in  view  of  the 
inevitable  war,  it  would  be  well  to  obtain  possession  of  the 
capital  as  soon  as  possible.  Prague  was  then,  as  it  is  now,  the 
only  large  city  in  Bohemia,  and  it  holds  in  that  country  a 
predominant  position,  which  can  be  compared  only  to  that  of 
Paris  in  France.  It  was  therefore  decided  that  the  next 
meeting  of  the  nationalists  should  be  held  at  Prague  on 
November  10. 

Even  before  that  day  great  excitement  prevailed  in  the 
capital.  It  was  known  that  several  of  the  nobles  who  sided 
with  King  Sigismund  were  determined  to  attack  the  Utraquists 
on  their  march.  The  preacher,  Koranda,  entreated  the  people 
not  to  desist  from  their  intent ;  in  the  then  customary  language 
he  declared  that  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  was  beginning 
to  blossom,  but  that  the  goats  wished  to  gnaw  at  it ;  there- 
fore should  the  faithful  carry  with  them  for  its  defence  not 
sticks  but  arms.^    Several  skirmishes,  in  which  the  Hussites 

*  This  now  appears  to  me  most  probable,  though  Dr.  Dvorsky  places  the 
date  of  the  "  articles  "  as  far  back  as  1417.  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  p.  343, 
n.  I,  also  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  p.   128,  n.   i. 

2  As  already  noted,  the  Hussites  at  their  earlier  meetings  assembled  un- 
armed, carrying  only  cudgels. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  17 

were  victorious,  took  place  before  they  arrived  at  Prague. 
News  of  these  skirmishes,  or  at  least  of  the  intention  of  the 
Romanist  nobles  to  attack  the  Hussites  on  their  march, 
reached  Prague  already,  on  November  4,  and  street-fighting 
immediately  began.  The  priest  Ambrose,  formerly  parish 
priest  of  Kralove  Hradec  (Koniggratz),  exhorted  the  people 
to  attack  the  royal  castle  on  the  Hradcany  hill.  The  bells 
of  all  the  church  steeples  of  Prague  were  rung,  and  large  masses 
of  Utraquists,  led  by  Nicholas  of  Hus  and  Zizka  of  Trocnov, 
crossing  the  bridge  of  Prague,  attacked  the  royal  troops,  which 
occupied  the  Mala  Strana  at  the  foot  of  the  Hradcany.  After 
a  prolonged  and  very  sanguinary  contest  the  Hussites  remained 
victorious,  and  the  royalists  were  obliged  to  evacuate  the  Mala 
Strana — part  of  which  was  burnt  down — and  retire  to  the 
strongly  fortified  Hradcany  castle.  The  victory  was  principally 
due  to  2izka,  and  it  was  here  that  his  brilliant  career  as  leader 
of  the  Bohemian  people  may  be  considered  to  have  begun. ^ 

Almost  at  the  same  time  as  the  Utraquists  had  resumed 
hostilities  the  Roman  party  began  to  attack  them  in  various 
parts  of  Bohemia.  Troubles  first  broke  out  at  Kutna  Hora 
(Kuttenberg) ,  then  the  great  mining  city  of  Bohemia.  They 
are  thus  described  by  Lawrence  of  Bfezova,  almost  our  only 
contemporary  authority.  "  At  this  time,"  he  writes,  "  the 
faithful  Bohemians,  both  priests  and  laymen,  who  favoured 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds  and  reverently  partook  of  it,  and 
who  deeply  deplored  the  unjust  death  of  John  Hus,  of  sacred 
memory — who  had  perished  by  a  terrible  death  because  the 
perverse  clergy  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  and  the  mar- 
graviate  of  Moravia,  principally  the  bishops,  canons,  abbots 
and  parish  priests,  who  had  not  been  able  to  suffer  his  sermons,  in 
which  he  denounced  their  pride,  simony  and  avarice  .  .  .  had, 

1  We  read  ia  the  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum  "  (Vol.  III.  p.  32),  "  The 
Bohemians  occupied  the  end  of  the  bridge  on  the  side  of  the  Mala  Strana, 
and  here  2izka  became  famous  among  the  people,  for  here  he  first  began  to 
tight.  The  Chronica  Universitatis  Pragensis  (p.  581  of  Professor  Goll's 
edition)  states  :  "  Item  Pragenses  spoliaverunt  civitatem  minorem  Pragensem, 
et  ibi  Zizka  cepit  capitaneatum." 
C 


i8  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

by  the  aid  of  gifts  of  money,  procured  false  witnesses  against 
him,  and  had  been  abetted  by  the  Hungarian  King  Sigismund 
— these  faithful  Bohemians,  I  say,  suffered  many  troubles, 
tribulations,  annoyances  and  vexations  from  the  enemies  of 
truth  and  the  blasphemers  who  robbed  them,  and  tortured 
them  by  cruel  imprisonment,  hunger,  thirst  and  death. ^  For 
the  enemies  of  the  truth  pursued  the  clerics  and  laymen  who 
were  zealous  for  the  chalice,  through  various  parts  of  the 
kingdom,  and  delivered  them  over  to  the  miners  [of  Kutna 
Hora],  and  sold  some  men  to  them;  these  miners,  who  were 
Germans,  and  cruel  persecutors  of  the  Bohemians,  and  particu- 
larly of  those  who  loved  the  teaching  of  Christ,  with  much 
blasphemy  tortured  them,  and  inhumanly  threw  them,  particu- 
larly at  time  of  night,  into  the  deepest  pits  and  shafts — some 
still  alive,  and  others  after  they  had  decapitated  them;  and 
they  did  this  principally  at  the  shaft  near  the  church  of 
St.  Martin,  beyond  the  Koufim  gate,  calling  this  shaft  Tabor;  ^ 
and  so  great  was  the  vast  cruelty  of  the  miners  against  the 
faithful  Christians  who  were  zealous  for  God's  law,  that  during 
a  brief  time  more  than  i,6oo  men  who  were  in  favour  of  sacred 
Communion  with  the  chalice  were  miserably  murdered  by 
them  and  thrown  into  the  shaft,  when  the  executioners  had 
become  weary  of  murdering.  But  assuredly  this  inhuman 
raging  against  the  faithful  of  Christ  was  followed  by  Divine 
vengeance ;  for  after  two  years  this  mining  city  was,  in  punish- 
ment of  the  murder  of  many  faithful  there,  thoroughly  de- 
stroyed and  consumed  by  fire."  When  we  read  this  page 
and  many  similar  ones  we  understand  why  the  Hussites — 
though  their  antagonists  far  surpassed  them  in  cruelty — 
sometimes  acted  with  great  ferocity  during  the  Hussite  wars. 
The  severe  fighting  which  took  place  at  Prague,  during 
which  the  entire  Mala  Strana  and  numerous  buildings  in  other 
parts  of  the  city  were  burnt  down,  caused  many  Utraquists — 

^  In  spite  of  its  formidable  length,  I  have  translated  this  period  literally, 
as  it  gives  a  good  idea  of  Bfezova's  style. 

*  Of  course  an  allusion  to  the  meeting -place  of  the  Hussites. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  19 

and  particularly  the  nobles  who  adhered  to  that  party,  who, 
from  dynastic,  or  rather  feudal  motives,  were  reluctant  to 
oppose  the  legitimate  sovereign — to  again  attempt  the  hope- 
less task  of  reconciling  King  Sigismund  with  the  Bohemian 
nation.  Through  the  intervention  of  Lord  Cenek  of  Warten- 
berg,  acting  for  Queen  Sophia,  who,  though  she  had  left  Prague, 
was  still  considered  as  regent,  an  armistice  was  concluded  on 
November  13,  which  was  to  continue  up  to  the  end  of  April 
1420.  The  Queen  and  the  lords  who  sided  with  her  promised 
to  maintain,  as  far  as  it  was  in  their  power,  the  right  of  preach- 
ing freely  and  of  receiving  Communion  in  the  two  kinds.  The 
Praguers,  on  the  other  hand,  agreed  to  surrender  to  the  royal 
troops  the  castle  of  the  Vysehrad,  of  which  they  had  obtained 
possession  during  the  recent  fights,  and  they  also  promised 
to  prevent  all  further  destruction  of  churches  and  monuments. 
Sigismund  did  not  sanction  this  agreement,  and  the  Taborite 
party,  rightly  distrusting  his  future  intentions,  refused  to 
accept  the  armistice.  2izka,  now  the  recognised  leader  of  the 
Taborites,  determined  to  leave  Prague  with  his  men,  and  to 
march  into  South- Western  Bohemia.  As  for  a  short  time  no 
events  of  importance  occurred  in  Prague,  it  is  more  interesting 
to  follow  2izka  and  his  Taborites.  They  first  marched  to 
Plzen  (Pilsen),  on  the  advice  of  Koranda,  a  priest  of  that 
city,  whose  name  has  already  been  mentioned.^  Koranda — 
wrongly,  as  afterwards  became  obvious — believed  that  the 
inhabitants  of  Plzeii  were  almost  entirely  favourable  to  the 
Hussite  cause.  2izka  was,  no  doubt,  more  influenced  by 
the  fact  that  Plzen  was  at  that  time  strongly  fortified.  The 
fortified  places  and  castles  in  Bohemia  were  then  still  almost 
all  in  the  possession  of  the  royalists,  and  2izka  sought  at 
Plzen  what  he  afterwards  found  at  Tabor — a  fortified  centre 

1  Before  the  appearance  of  Palacky's  work,  when  the  only  records  of 
Bohemia  consisted  in  myths  and  legends,  we  were  told  that  2izka  marched 
to  Plzen  because  it  was  one  of  the  five  "  cities  of  refuge  "  or  "  holy  cities," 
and  because  it  was  called  "  the  City  of  the  Sun."  Those  interested  in  such 
matters  will  find  these  visionary  ideas  expounded  in  George  Sand's  quaint 
biography,  or  rather  historical  romance,  entitled  Jean  Zyska,  pp.  78-79. 


20  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

for  the  military  community  of  which  he  had  become  the  head. 
It  is  one  of  history's  ironies  that  Plzeii,  first  chosen  as  the 
centre  of  the  Hussite  party,  should,  in  the  later  period  of  the 
war,  have  become  the  stronghold  of  the  Roman  party,  and  that 
the  unsuccessful  siege  of  Plzeii  should  have  been  the  immediate 
cause  of  the  downfall  of  the  Taborites. 

2izka  and  his  followers  arrived  safely  at  Plzen,  and  he,  by 
a  successful  sortie,  dispersed  the  royal  troops,  who  were  pre- 
paring to  besiege  the  city.  Yet  2izka's  stay  at  Plzeii  did  not 
last  long.  Some  of  the  most  enthusiastic  Tdborites  had — as 
will  be  mentioned  presently — founded  a  new  city,  or  rather 
military  camp  on  a  hill,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of 
Tabor,  situated  close  to  Usti,  w^here  the  early  meetings  of 
the  Hussites  had  been  held.  2izka,  who  had  found  that 
the  inhabitants  of  Plzeii  were  not  as  largely  favourable  to  his 
cause  as  he  had  been  led  to  believe,  sent  part  of  his  troops 
to  the  help  of  the  new  settlers  at  Tabor,  which  his  military 
genius  had,  perhaps,  already  selected  as  his  future  stronghold. 
After  the  departure  of  part  of  his  army  2izka's  position  at 
Tabor  became  a  difficult  one.  The  partisans  of  Sigismund 
and  the  Roman  Church  were  numerous  in  the  city,  and  street- 
fights  between  them  and  2izka's  soldiers  constantly  occurred. 
About  this  time  Lord  Venceslas  of  Duba,  chamberlain  of 
King  Sigismund,  issued  a  proclamation  ^  in  which  he,  in  the 
name  of  his  sovereign,  called  on  all  nobles,  knights  and  citizens 
to  pay  a  special  tax  for  the  purpose  of  equipping  an  army 
which  was  to  extirpate  all  heretics.  It  was  well  understood 
that  this  army  was  to  attack,  at  Plzeii,  2izka,  whom  the  royalists 
rightly  considered  their  most  dangerous  enemy.  Under  the 
circumstances  2izka  decided  to  conclude  a  truce  with  his 
enemies.  Through  the  medium  of  envoys  of  the  city  of 
Prague,  who  visited  2izka  at  Plzen,  an  agreement  was  made, 
according  to  which  2izka  was  to  evacuate  Plzeii,  on  condition 

1  Printed   in   Palacky,    Urkundliche   Beitrdgf  zur  Geschichte  det  Hussiten- 
kriege,  Vol.  I.  pp.  21-22. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  21 

that  the  citizens  who  wished  to  communicate  in  the  two  kinds 
should  be  allowed  to  do  so — a  promise  that  was  not  kept — 
and  that  2izka  and  his  forces  should  be  allowed  to  march 
unhindered  to  Tabor.  He  then  surrendered  the  city  to 
Venceslas  of  Duba  and  started  on  his  march.  He  had  only 
four  hundred  warriors,  twelve  equipped  wagons  and  nine 
horsemen,  but  was  accompanied  by  several  priests,  among 
them  Koranda,  who  no  longer  considered  himself  safe  at 
Plzeii,  and  many  women  and  children.  The  Hussite  women 
were,  however,  by  no  means  to  be  considered  as  mere  en- 
cumbrances. The  women  who  accompanied  the  Hussite 
armies  were  very  fervent  Utraquists,  who  sometimes  fought 
in  the  battles  "  for  the  law  of  God,"  to  use  the  then  general 
designation.  On  the  occasion  of  2izka's  march  to  Tabor  they 
appear  to  have  acted  only  as  nurses.  2izka  was  not  fated  to 
march  unopposed  to  Tabor.  Several  lords  of  the  Roman  party, 
of  whom  the  most  important  were  Lord  Peter  Konopist  of 
Sternberg,  and  Lord  Nicholas  Divucek,  mintmaster  of  Kutna 
Hora — that  great  centre  of  the  royalist  party — had,  by  order 
of  King  Sigismund,  marched  to  Plzen  to  reinforce  the  besiegers 
of  the  city.  On  hearing  of  the  truce  they  rightly  or  wrongly  ^ 
declared  that  they  were  not  bound  by  it.  They  determined 
to  intercept  2izka's  army  on  the  march.  The  danger  was 
indeed  great.  The  royalist  nobles  were  at  the  last  moment 
joined  by  Lord  Hanus  of  Kolowrat  and  by  the  grandmaster  of 
the  order  of  the  Knights  of  Strakonic.  The  accounts  as  to 
the  number  of  their  soldiers  vary  from  2,000  to  8,000 ;  ^  they 
were  all  mounted,  and,  wearing  full  armour,  were  known  as 
the  "  iron  knights,"  and  greatly  feared  by  the  Bohemians. 
They  had  just  obtained  possession  of  the  Utraquist  town  of 
Pisek,  where  2izka  had  intended  to  halt  to  obtain  supphes  and 
perhaps  reinforcements.     He  certainly  did   not — at   least  at 

1  This  matter  has  led  to  much  controversy. 

^  Accounts  concerning  the  number  of  the  royalist  forces  vary  greatly;  it 
is  certain  that  the  Hussite  chroniclers  often  exaggerated  the  numbers  of  the 
hostile  armies. 


22  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

this  early  period  of  the  war — wish  to  encounter  a  force  so 
greatly  superior  to  his  own.  He  therefore  attempted  to  move 
his  men  as  quickly  as  was  possible  and  to  avoid  a  battle. 
The  large  number  of  women  and  children  who  accompanied 
his  army,  however,  rendered  this  very  difficult.  As  soon  as 
Zizka  saw  that  an  encounter  with  the  enemy  was  inevitable, 
he  began,  with  his  customary  energy  and  resourcefulness,  to 
prepare  his  defence.  He  took  up  his  position  on  a  steep  hill 
inaccessible  to  mounted  men,  and  protected  on  one  side  by  a 
steep  dike.  In  this  position,  close  to  a  mill  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  village  of  Sudomef  he  hurriedly  formed  his  armed 
wagons  in  **  lager,"  to  use  the  modern  South  African  expres- 
sion, placing  the  priests,  women  and  children  in  the  centre, 
while  the  warriors  manned  the  "  iron-clad  "  wagons.  The 
royalists  had  previously  declared  that  they  would  not  be 
obliged  to  fight,  as  they  would  merely  have  to  ride  down  the 
Hussites  and  crush  them  under  the  hoofs  of  their  horses. 
When,  contrary  to  their  expectation,  they  were  obliged  to 
dismount,  they  none  the  less  bravely  advanced,  and  their 
attack  began  about  midday  on  March  25,  1420.  The  Hussites 
defended  themselves  with  heroic  bravery,  and  considering  the 
smallness  of  the  forces  engaged,  the  engagement  was  a  very 
bloody  one.  Lord  Bfenek  of  Skala,  one  of  the  Hussite  leaders, 
was  killed,  and  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  partisans  of  Sigismund 
died  of  the  wounds  received  on  this  occasion.  At  nightfall 
the  royalists  retired,  and  2izka's  band  encamped  on  the  battle- 
field that  night;  this  was  at  that  period  the  traditional 
fashion  of  claiming  the  victory.  The  impression  produced  by 
the  victory  of  Sudomer — which  may  be  called  2izka's  first 
considerable  deed  of  arms — was  very  great  in  Bohemia,  and 
many  legends  connected  with  it  afterwards  sprung  up.  The 
sun,  it  was  said,  set  that  evening  eadier  than  is  usual  in 
Bohemia  in  March.  The  pious  Hussites  attributed  this  to  the 
intervention  of  Providence.   A  contemporary  chronicler  writes :  ^ 

*  "  Scriptores  rcrum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  34. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  23 

"  Many  among  the  people  said  that  God  had  been  with 
him  [2izka],  and  that  this  miracle  had  occurred :  when  it 
was  still  early,  it  appeared  as  if  it  were  eventide;  the  sun 
vanished  behind  a  hill,  as  if  it  wished  to  separate  [the  combat- 
ants], and  immediately  deep  darkness  descended  on  the 
battlefield,  so  that  no  man  knew  how  to  strike  at  another. 
When  the  enemies  saw  this,  many  voices  among  them  said  : 
'  My  lance  does  not  stab  them,  my  sword  does  not  strike  them, 
my  gun  does  not  reach  them ; '  and  then  they  retreated  in 
various  directions  with  much  shame  and  great  losses."  In 
consequence  of  his  victory  at  Sudomef  the  fame  of  Zizka,  who 
here  first  proved  his  military  genius  and  his  talent  as  a 
tactician,  spread  widely  in  Bohemia.  The  contemporary 
chroniclers,  therefore,  devote  more  attention  to  2izka's  first 
successful  skirmish  in  the  Mala  Strana  at  Prague  and  his 
victory  at  Sudomef  than  the  importance  of  these  engagements, 
if  we  consider  the  number  of  the  combatants,  would  warrant. ^ 
We  have,  indeed,  more  information  concerning  these  events 
than  we  have  about  more  considerable  battles  at  a  later  period 
of  the  war.  Among  the  many  writers  who  have  described  the 
skirmish  at  Sudomef,  iEneas  Sylvius  deserves  mention,  as  his 
florid  and  picturesque,  though  absolutely  unreliable,  work 
did  duty  as  the  standard  work  on  the  Hussite  wars  for  centuries. 
He  tells  us  that  2izka  ordered  the  Hussite  women  to  spread 
out  their  long  veils  on  the  ground,  so  that  the  spurs  of  the 
attacking  dismounted  horsemen  should  be  caught  in  them.^ 

2izka,  though  his  popularity  among  the  Bohemians  had 
previously  already  been  very  great,  here  for  the  first  time 
appears  as  a  military  leader,  in  fact  as  one  of  the  not  very 
numerous  great  generals  known  to  history.  The  new  system 
of  warfare,  which  rendered  the  Hussites  invincible  for  a  con- 

*  Toman,  Husifske  Vdlecnictoi  {Hussite  War  fare),  pp.  9-10. 

^  [Zizka]  ''  ut  ergo  desilire  ab  equis  adversarii,  mulieres  quae  de  more 
exercitum  sequebantur  projicere  pepla  in  terram  jussit,  quibus  implicati  per 
calcaria  eques  prius  extincti  sunt,  quam  pedes  expedire  valerent  "  (-^neas 
Sylvius,  De  Bohemorum  origine,  chap.  xl). 


24  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

siderable  time,  was  so  entirely  his  work  that  Dr.  Toman — to 
whose  book  I  must  here  acknowledge  my  indebtedness — rightly 
states  that  the  terms  Hussite  system  of  warfare  or  2izka's 
system  of  warfare  are  identical.  It  may,  therefore,  on  the 
occasion  of  his  first  considerable  victory,  be  well  to  refer  briefly 
to  this  system.  The  subject  is  by  no  means  easy,  as  the 
contemporary  chroniclers — principally  interested  in  religious 
controversies — devote  comparatively  little  attention  to  warlike 
events,  and  are  also  often  inaccurate.  They  frequently  ex- 
aggerated the  forces  of  the  enemy,  while  stating  that  the 
small  armies  of  the  Bohemians  were  even  less  numerous  than 
was  actually  the  case;  they  thus  wished  to  render  yet  more 
miraculous  those  victories  which  they  always  attributed  to 
the  direct  intervention  of  Providence.  Among  the  earliest 
leaders  of  the  Hussites  were  several  priests,  such  as  John  of 
Zelivo,  Koranda  of  Plzen,  Ambrose  of  Kralove  Hradec,  and 
others.  As  learning  was  in  those  days  confined  almost  entirely 
to  the  priesthood,  it  has  been  conjectured  that  these  priests 
instructed  the  people  to  fight  according  to  the  system  of  the 
ancients,  a  conjecture  which  is  confirmed  by  the  words  of 
a  contemporary  chronicler.^  Dr.  Toman  has  even  ventured 
a  lurther  conjecture.  He  suggests  that  some  of  the  Hussite 
leaders,  perhaps  2izka  himself,  were  acquainted  with  the  work 
of  Vegetius,  Epitome  rei  militaris.^ 

^  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  writes  (Holier,  Geschichtsschrciber  der  Hussiten- 
kriege)  :  "  bellum  [of  the  Hussites]  cum  magna  fuit  erectum  diligentia  et 
exemplo  ac  yegulis  antiqiiofiim  hononim  bellatorm-ii  yoboyaimn  atque  circum- 
stantio  natum  per  praefatos  Pragenses  magistros  ac  sacerdotes  regni  Bohemias 
qui  tunc  et  ab  initio  dicto  cum  populo  laborarunt.  Quamvis  heic  sub  tempore 
hoc  bellum  per  multos,  qui  se  ipsis  fraudulenter  cum  aliis  applicarunt  in- 
tentionibus  in  magnas  versum  erat  deordinationes  semper  contra  propositum 
atque  intentionem  fidelium  qui  pro  illo  dicto  bono  se  tideliter  et  catholice 
opposuerunt."  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  (see  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  359-363) 
was  bishop  of  the  Tdborites,  but  belonged  to  the  moderate  fraction  of  that 
party,  as  appears  from  the  last  words  I  have  quoted. 

2  The  military  maxims  contained  in  this  work  were  considered  the  founda- 
tion of  military  learning  from  the  time  of  William  of  Orange  to  that  of  Frederick 
the  Great,  and  even  earlier,  if  we  accept  Dr.  Toman's  conjecture.  Dr.  Toman 
has  with  great  industry  selected  a  considerable  number  of  passages  from  the 
book  of  Vegetius,  and  attributed  the  tactics  of  ^izka  on  certain  occasions  to 
their  influence.   I  must  refer  those  interested  in  this  matter  to  Dr.  Toman's  work. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  25 

The  beginning  of  the  Hussite  wars  coincides  with  the  time 
when  fire-arms  had  attained  such  a  degree  of  development  that 
their  judicious  use  had  begun  to  have  tactical  importance. 
The  use  of  fire-arms  is  first  mentioned  on  the  occasion  of  a 
skirmish   between   the   soldiers    of    Archbishop    Jenstein    of 
Prague  and  those  of  Lord  John  Cuch  of  Zasada  in  1384.^ 
During  the  street-fighting  in  Prague  after  the  death  of  King 
Venceslas   hand-guns  or  muskets  were  already  used.     It  was, 
however,  to  2izka  that  the   development   of   the   Bohemian 
artillery  at  this  period    is  entirely  due.-      The  war- wagons 
or  carts,  which  will  be  mentioned  presently,  were  armed  with 
small   field-pieces,    which    could    be   transported    with   great 
rapidity,  and  which  were  immediately  in  position  when  the 
enemies  attacked  the  Hussite  camps.     Closely  connected  with 
2izka's  improvements  in  the  use  of  artillery  was  his  system  of 
forming  his  troops  within  the  hradba  vozova  or  lager-fort, 
which  was  defended    in  every  direction    by  armed  wagons. 
The  wagons  or  carts  were  not,  indeed,  entirely  Zizka's  inven- 
tion, but  he  first  used  them  as  an  important  feature  in  warfare. 
They  were  generally  covered  with  steel  or  iron  (ironclad,  to 
use  a  modern  expression),  and  carried  a  few  small  field-pieces. 
On  the  march  not  only  the  warriors,  but  also  the  women, 
children   and   priests,    found   room   in   these   movable   forts. 
Through  the  genius  of    Zizka  these  wagons  played    so  great 
a  part  in  the  Hussite  war  that  towards  the  end  of  that  war 
the  German  enemies,  though  not  very  successfully,  began  to 
adopt  the  system.     At  the  beginning  of  the  battles  the  Hussites 
used  their  well-served  artillery  against  the  enemies,  till  they 
were  weakened  and  discouraged ;   they  then  issued  from  their 
wagons  and  attacked  them.     In  case  of  a  defeat  the  rows  of 
wagons  formed  a  strong  and  secure  place  of  refuge.     2izka*s 
battles  were  almost  always  fought  against  an  overwhelmingly 

^  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  p.  86,  n.  2. 

-  Captain  C.  F.  Atkinson  writes  very  truly  in  the  National  Encyclopisdia 
under  "  Artillery  "  :  "  The  introduction  of  field  artillery  may  be  attributed 
to  John  Zizka." 


26  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

superior  enemy,  and  his  tactics  were,  therefore,  generally 
defensive.  It  has  often  been  stated,  on  the  always  doubtful 
authority  of  ^Eneas  Sylvius,  that  2izka's  columns  of  wagons 
were  sometimes  used  to  attack  the  enemy. ^  This  would  have 
been  practically  impossible,  and  the  statement  may  be  con- 
sidered as  untrue.  2izka's  wagon-drivers  soon  became  very 
experienced  in  this  manner  of  warfare,  which  was  favoured  by 
the  topographical  condition  of  Bohemia,  whose  vast  plains 
then,  as  now,  were  little  intersected  by  fences  and  ditches. 
The  "  lager,"  in  more  recent  times  a  feature  in  South  African 
warfare,  was  adopted  under  similar  topographical  conditions. 
One  of  the  strongest  proofs  of  2izka's  military  talents 
consists  in  the  manner  in  which  he  succeeded  in  forming  an 
almost  invincible  army  out  of  the  peasants  and  townsmen, 
almost  all  unused  to  warfare,  who  flocked  to  his  standards. 
A  flail  mounted  with  iron,  a  club  or  a  short  spear,  were  the 
only  arms  with  which  2izka's  men  were  acquainted,  and  these 
rough  arms,  under  Zi^ka's  skilful  guidance,  and  carried  away 
by  their  religious  and  national  enthusiasm,  they  used  most 
valiantly.  It  was  for  2izka,  perhaps,  an  even  more  difficult 
task  to  train  his  men  to  use  skilfully  the  hand-guns  and  field- 
guns,  whose  superiority  to  the  fire-arms  of  the  enemies  so  greatl}^ 
contributed  to  his  victories.  It  is  at  the  present  moment  a 
somewhat  unfashionable  theory  that  a  people  can,  under  the 
influence  of  extreme  national  or  religious  enthusiasm,  defeat 
skilled  soldiers  after  having  received  only  a  brief  training. 
Yet  this  proved  true  during  the  Hussite  wars,  as  it  did  during 
the  wars  of  the  French  Revolution  three  and  a  half  centuries 
later.  There  is  also  another  analogy  between  the  two  cases. 
2izka — differing  herein  from  Julius  Caesar  and  Oliver  Cromwell 
— had  been  a  warrior  from  his  earliest  youth;  according  to 
some  accounts  he  is  stated  to  have  been  present  at  skirmishes 
which  took  place  when  he  was  only  sixteen  years  old.    Similarly, 

1  This  statement  is  contained  also  in  the  earlier  editions  ot  my  Boh<^mia, 
a  Historical  Sketch. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  27 

Nicholas  of  Hus,  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg,  Kolda  of  Zampach, 
and  other  knights  whose  names  will  appear  in  these  pages, 
had  received  the  usual  knightly  military  training.  Their 
part  at  the  opening  of  the  Hussite  wars  was,  therefore,  not 
dissimilar  from  that  of  the  former  French  officers  of  the  regular 
army  who  did  so  much  to  train  and  discipline  the  revolutionary 
forces.  The  thorough  knowledge  of  the  knightly  system  of 
warfare  possessed  by  Zizka  and  his  comrades  no  doubt  greatly 
helped  them  in  devising  the  best  manner  in  which  lightly 
equipped  infantry  could  meet  the  attack  of  horsemen  in  heavy 
armour,  who — as  at  Sudomef — generally  formed  a  large  part 
of  the  Romanist  forces. 

It  should  here  be  mentioned  that  in  the  last  years  of  the 
fourteenth  century  a  movement  antagonistic  to  the  extreme 
preponderance  of  the  nobility  and  knighthood  had  already 
begun  to  arise.  This  movement  had  already  tended  to  demo- 
cratise the  system  of  warfare.  In  1386  Swiss  peasants  had 
defeated  the  chivalry  led  by  an  Austrian  archduke,  and  during 
the  reign  of  Venceslas  the  townsmen  of  Southern  Germany 
had  formed  confederacies  which  had  sometimes  successfully 
resisted  the  forces  of  the  German  nobles. 

A  circumstance  which  greatly  contributed  to  the  victories 
of  the  Hussites  was  the  almost  incredible  rapidity  with  which 
2izka  and  his  successors  were  able  to  move  their  armies. 
Thus,  when  in  1420  the  Taborites  hurriedly  marched  to  Prague 
to  aid  the  citizens  of  that  town,  the  whole  force  of  9,000  soldiers, 
with  the  women,  children  and  priests,  arrived  at  the  capital 
on  the  evening  of  the  second  day  of  their  march.  They 
marched,  indeed,  along  level  roads  through  the  central  plain 
of  Bohemia;  yet,  if  we  consider  the  slowness  of  mediaeval 
armies — the  German  armies  during  the  Hussite  wars  are  an 
instance — this  exploit  appears  truly  admirable.  This  extra- 
ordinary rapidity  greatly  surprised  the  Germans  and  often 
caused  them  anxiety.     A  contemporary  German  chronicler  ^ 

1  G.  Fabricii  Ordo  stirpis  Saxoniccs  (quoted  by  Dr.  Toman) . 


28  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

writes :  "  Whatever  military  enterprises  the  Bohemians 
undertake  they  carry  out  with  great  rapidity." 

Very  characteristic  of  the  Hussite  armies,  at  least  while 
they  were  commanded  by  2izka,  is  the  very  severe — puritanic, 
as  we  may  call  it — discipline  which  he  maintained  in  his  camps 
at  a  period  when  almost  every  licence  was  granted  to  soldiers. 
Zizka's  regulations  of  war  ^  bear  witness  to  his  severity,  and 
also  to  the  somewhat  democratic  manner  in  which  he  enforced 
the  same  discipline  on  all,  irrespective  of  all  differences  of 
social  rank.  He  allowed  no  idle  or  disreputable  people  in  his 
camps.  The  women  who  followed  his  armies — where  alone  they 
were  safe  from  the  cruelty  and  violence  of  the  royal  soldiers — 
were  employed  as  nurses  or  cooks,  and  sometimes  even  took 
part  in  the  battles.  Even  the  boys  who  accompanied  their 
parents  on  the  marches  were  taught  to  hurl  stones  from  a 
sling,  and  soon  became  very  skilful  in  the  use  of  these  arms. 
Lawrence  of  Bfezova  calls  them  "  garciones  quos  fundibularios 
seu  praczatas  ^  vulgari  bohemico  nuncupant." 

I  have,  in  several  previous  works,  referred  to  the  utterly 
unjust  manner  in  which  Zizka  has  been  judged  by  most 
historians.  Even  Protestant  writers,  though  approving  of 
the  cause  for  which  he  fought,  have  described  him  as  a  ferocious, 
cruel  and  savage  fanatic,  whilst  to  Roman  Catholic  writers  he 
has  appeared  as  a  bloodthirsty  murderer  and  robber,  a  mediceval 
communist  and  anarchist.  The  Hussite  wars  were  certainly 
waged  with  terrible  cruelty  on  both  sides,  but  now  that  we 
have  more  extensive  knowledge  of  those  times  than  was 
formerly  the  case,  no  unprejudiced  person  can  deny  that  the 
atrocities  committed  by  the  Hungarian  and  German  so-called 
"  crusaders  "  were  far  more  heinous  than  any  act  of  cruelty 
ever  committed  by  a  Hussite.  The  crusaders  undoubtedly 
aimed  at  the  complete  extermination  of  the  Czech  population 
of  Bohemia,  whom  they  wrongly  believed  to  be  all  Utraquists. 

^  I  have  printed  this  interesting  document  as  an  Appendix  to  this  work 
^  "  Prak  "  signifies  a  •'  sling  "  in  Bohemian. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  29 

They  therefore  murdered  all,  without  distinction  of  age  or 
sex.  *'  They  were  determined  to  let  no  heretic  live,"  as  a 
contemporary  chronicler  writes.  The  Hussites  almost  always 
spared  children  and  women,  and  those  who  suffered  most 
from  their  cruelty  were  priests  and  monks,  whom  they  con- 
sidered responsible  for  the  murder  of  Hus,  as  they  termed  it. 
It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  deny  that  2izka  was  cruel;  no 
Hussite  general  could  be  otherwise;  but  he  at  least  on  one 
occasion  severely  blamed  his  men  for  unnecessary  cruelty, 
and  he  sometimes,  on  the  advice  of  others,  withdrew  cruel  orders 
which  he  had  given.  Thus  the  learned  Jesuit  Balbinus,  whom 
no  one  will  accuse  of  partiality  for  Zizka,  states  ^  that  when 
2izka  occupied  the  abbey  of  Sezemic,  near  Chrudim,  he  ordered 
twelve  nuns  who  had  been  found  there  to  be  drowned  in 
the  Elbe;  but  on  some  of  the  soldiers  of  the  Praguers — the 
moderate  Utraquists,  whose  centre  was  Prague — pleading  for 
them  they  were  spared,  and  conducted  to  a  convent  of  their 
order  at  Kralove  Hradec. 

The  true  character  of  2izka  appears  v^ery  clearly  from  his 
few  letters  which  have  fortunately  reached  us.  One  of  these 
letters,  though  written  only  in  September  1422,  may  well  be 
quoted  here  already.  The  citizens  of  Domazlice  (Tauss)  had 
joined  the  national  party,  and  greatly  feared  to  be  attacked 
by  the  Germans.  The  situation  of  the  city,  very  near  the 
Bavarian  frontier  and  in  a  district  partly  inhabited  by  Germans, 
exposed  them  to  such  attacks,  and  they  applied  to  2izka  for 
help.     2izka  sent  the  following  reply  : 

**  To  the  brave  captains  and  citizens  of  the  town  of  Domazlice, 

my  dear  brethren. 

"  May  God  grant  you  to  return  to  your  fervour,  as  at  first, ^ 

that  you  may  first  do  brave  deeds.     Dear  brethren  in  God,  I 

beg  you,  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord  God,  to  remain  in  the  fear  of 

1  Balbinus,  S.J.,  Miscellanea  historica  regni  Bohemici,  Lib.  IV".  p.  144. 
'^  '.  e.  when  they  first  joined  the  national  party. 


30  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

God,  as  His  most  beloved  sons,  and  not  to  complain  if  He 
chastises  you.  Remembering  the  Founder  of  our  faith,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  will  defend  yourselves  bravely  against 
the  wrongs  which  these  Germans  endeavour  to  inflict  on 
you.  You  will  thus  follow  the  example  of  the  ancient 
Bohemians,  who  valiantly  using  their  lances,  defended  both 
God's  cause  and  their  own.  And  we,  dear  brethren,  seeking  the 
law  of  God  and  the  good  of  the  commonwealth,  will  strive 
that  every  one  of  our  men  who  is  able  to  wield  a  club  or  even 
to  hurl  a  stone  should  march  to  your  aid. 

"  And  therefore,  dear  brethren,  be  it  known  to  you  that  we 
are  collecting  our  men  from  all  parts  of  the  country  against 
these  enemies  and  devastators  of  the  Bohemian  land.  There- 
fore instruct  your  priests  that  they  may,  when  preaching,  call 
the  people  to  arms  against  Antichrist.  Let  it  also  be  pro- 
claimed in  the  market-place  that  all,  both  young  and  old, 
must  keep  watch  and  ward  at  all  hours. 

"And  we,  God  willing,  shall  be  shortly  with  you;  have 
bread,  beer,  fodder  for  the  horses  ready,  and  all  weapons  of 
war;  for,  indeed,  it  is  time  (to  march),  not  only  against  the 
internal  enemies,  but  also  against  the  foreigners.  Remember 
your  first  campaign,  when  you  fought  bravely,  humble  men 
against  the  great,  few  against  many,  unclothed  ^  against  men 
in  armour.  For  the  arm  of  God  has  not  been  shortened. 
Therefore  trust  in  God  and  be  ready.  May  the  Lord  God 
grant  you  strength. 

"  John  2izka  of  the  Chalice, 

"  In  the  hope  of  God  leader  of  the  men  of  Tabor."  ^ 

We  meet  with  ideas  similar  to  those  contained  in  this  and 
other  letters  of  2izka,  as  well  as  in  his  regulations  of  war, 
in  a  famous  Hussite  war-song,  "  All   ye  Warriors  of  God,"  ^ 

1  /,  e.  without  armour. 

2  1  have  borrowed  this  translation  from  my  Histary  of  Bohemian  Literature. 
*  1  have  translated  part  of  this  song  in  my  History  of  Bohemian  Littratute. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  31 

often  called  the  Bohemian  Marseillaise,  and  it  has  been  sug- 
gested that  2izka  was  its  author;   this  is,  however,  doubtful. 

Before  ending  this  brief  note  on  2izka,  I  must  lay  stress 
on  the  absolute  purity  of  his  life ;  he  strictly  conformed  to  the 
severe  rules  which  he  enforced  on  others.  Equally  notable 
is  his  entire  integrity.  A  poor  man  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Hussite  wars,  he  died  a  poor  man  in  1424.  Even  if  we  reject 
the  high-coloured  accounts  of  ^neas  Sylvius  concerning  the 
offers  made  to  2izka  by  King  Sigismund,  very  large  bribes  were 
certainly  offered  to  him,  and  it  would  also  have  been  easy  to 
him  to  enrich  himself  at  a  moment  when  so  many  estates  of 
Romanist  nobles  and  houses  of  German  citizens  of  Prague 
became  ownerless.  The  only  token  of  gratitude  which 
Zizka  accepted  from  his  countrymen  was  a  small  castle,  or 
rather  fort,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Chalice.  This 
designation,  which  was  sacred  to  him  as  a  fervent  Calixtine, 
he  always  added  to  his  signature  during  the  last  years  of  his 
life. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  2izka  encamped  on  the 
battlefield  on  the  evening  of  his  victory  at  Sudomef.  On 
the  following  morning  he  crossed  the  river  Vltava  (Moldau), 
and  then  established  his  lager  near  the  castle  of  Ujezd.  Some 
of  the  men  of  Tabor  met  him  here,  and  on  March  27  or  28  2izka 
and  his  victorious  warriors  were  received  with  great  rejoicing 
when  they  entered  the  newly-founded  stronghold.  The 
foundation  of  the  new  Tabor  had  taken  place  some  time  before 
2izka's  arrival  there.  The  small  town  of  iJsti  was  near  the 
castle  of  Kozi  Hradek,  where  Hus  had  stayed  during  his  exile 
from  Prague,  1  and  the  first  meetings  of  the  Hussites,  as  already 
mentioned,  had  taken  place  in  this  neighbourhood.  The  town 
of  Usti  had  gradually  become  a  centre  of  the  more  advanced 
Church  reformers.  These  men,  whose  enthusiasm  had  from 
the  first  led  them  to  judge  King  Sigismund  more  severely 
but  also  more  correctly  than  others  did,  foresaw  that  Bohemia 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  167-176. 


32  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

would  soon  be  attacked  by  vast  hostile  armies,  and  they 
therefore  did  not  consider  the  position  of  iJsti  sufficiently 
strong.  They  determined  to  obtain  possession  of  the  neigh- 
bouring hill  called  "  Hradiste,"  strongly  situated  on  what 
may  almost  be  called  a  peninsula  surrounded  by  a  small  lake, 
to  which  the  Hussite  gave  the  biblical  name  of  Jordan,  and 
the  small  Kosin  stream  which  connects  the  Jordan  lake  with 
the  Luznice  river,  which  flows  through  the  valley  at  the  foot 
of  the  steep  hill  "  Hradiste,"  which  was  to  become  the  new 
Tabor.'  The  priest  Vanek  and  another  ecclesiastic  in  minor 
orders  named  Hromadka,-  led  some  of  their  adherents  to 
Hradiste,  of  which  they  obtained  possession  after  very  slight 
resistance,  and  the  whole  religious  community  of  iJsti  was  soon 
gathered  together  in  this  new  and  stronger  place  of  refuge. 
Hromadka,  who  for  a  time  appears  to  have  acted  as  leader, 
informed  Zizka  of  the  foundation  of  this  new  settlement 
and  asked  for  aid,  which — as  already  mentioned — was  given 
to  him. 

On  arriving  at  Tabor,  2izka  immediately  assumed  supreme 
command,  and  it  was  here  also  that  he  first  had  the  opportunity 
of  organising  an  armed  force,  whose  religious  enthusiasm 
rendered  them  capable  of  the  most  brilliant  deeds  of  arms, 
and  who,  certain  that  they  were  fighting  for  the  law  of  God, 
did  not  know  fear.  This  religious  enthusiasm  gave  them  the 
strength  not  only  to  fight  courageously,  but  also — perhaps  a 
more  difficult  task — to  submit  to  the  military  training  on  which 
2izka  insisted.  This  was,  indeed,  particularly  necessary  at 
a  moment  when  numerous  peasants  from  all  parts  of  Bohemia 
flocked  to  2izka's  standards.  These  men  had  not  even  that 
slight  experience  of  warfare  which  2izka's  earliest  companions 
had  acquired  during  the  street-fighting  in  Prague,  the  defence 

*  For  a  good  description  of  Tabor,  see  Professor  Karel  Thir,  Htadilti  hory 
Tahor. 

2  Bfezova  calls  him  "  campanator."  He  was  aa  acolyte  ordained  to  the 
fourth  of  minor  orders.  These  men  were  at  that  time  often  employed  as 
bell-ringers  in  churches. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  33 

of  Plzefi  and  the  skirmish  of  Sudomef.  2izka  had  not  to  wait 
long  for  an  opportunity  to  try  the  mettle  of  his  new  soldiers. 
Nicholas  Divuc^ek,  one  of  his  antagonists  at  Sudomef,  on  his 
return  to  Kutna  Hora,  marched  through  the  small  town  of 
Oiic,  situated  about  two  German  miles  from  Tabor.  2izka 
attacked  and  defeated  him  on  April  5,  1420,  and  made  a 
considerable  number  of  prisoners.  It  was  agreed  to  exchange 
these  for  the  few  Tdborites  who  had  been  made  prisoners  at 
Sudomef.  2izka  thus  saved  them  from  the  terrible  death  that 
awaited  them  at  Kutna  Hora.  Only  a  few  days  later  2izka 
led  his  troops  to  the  attack  of  the  castle  of  Sedlec,  the  owner 
of  which,  Lord  Ulrick  of  tJsti,  was  one  of  the  nobles  opposed 
to  the  national  cause ;  he  had  cruelly  persecuted  some  of  the 
Hussites  who  had  settled  on  his  estates.  The  castle  was 
stormed,  and  Ulrick  and  all  his  followers  were  killed.  The 
Hussites,  with  strange  cruelty,  spared  the  six  bravest  warriors, 
and  offered  his  life  to  the  one  of  them  who  would  consent  to 
decapitate  his  five  comrades.^  A  man  named  Pinta  agreed 
to  do  this,  and  henceforth  joined  the  Hussite  armies. 

An  important  task  which  2izka  undertook  shortly  after 
his  arrival  at  Tabor  was  the  fortification  of  his  new  stronghold. 
By  his  order  the  whole  circumference  of  the  city  was  surrounded 
by  two  strong  walls,  and  a  fosse  was  dug,  w^hich  could  be 
crossed  only  by  drawbridges  in  the  one  direction  in  which  the 
city  is  easily  accessible  from  the  surrounding  plain.  The  city 
had  at  first  been  a  mere  encampment,  but  houses  rapidly 
sprang  up.  The  centre  of  the  town  was  the  market-place, 
which  played  the  part  of  a  forum  or  agora.  The  narrow  streets 
leading  to  it  were  built  in  a  winding  and  irregular  fashion,  thus 
rendering  the  access  to  the  centre  of  the  city  very  difficult; 
this  was  a  matter  of  considerable  importance  at  a  time  when 
street-fighting  was  very  frequent.  It  was  also  necessary  to 
establish  at  Tabor  what  may  be  called  a  provisional  govern- 
ment.    Four  captains  of  the  people  were  therefore  chosen. 

»  Readers  of  Balzac  will  be  remiaded  of  his  tale  entitled  El  Verdugo. 
D 


34  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

Though  their  authority  appears  to  have  been  equal,  we  find 
Nicholas  of  Hus  mentioned  as  first  of  them.  2izka,  who  well 
knew  the  necessity  of  concord,  in  view  of  powerful  enemies, 
wished  to  conciliate  a  very  ambitious  man,  who  had  organised 
the  first  meetings  of  the  people,  and  who  had  thrown  down  his 
gauntlet  to  the  Roman  party  before  any  other  Bohemian 
knight  had  done  so.  The  second  captain  was  2izka,  and  the 
others  were  Zbynek  of  Buchov  and  Chval  of  Macho  vie.  The 
Taborites  were  thus  thoroughly  prepared  for  the  bloody 
struggle  which  they  considered  inevitable. 


CHAPTER   II 

The  armistice  concluded  in  Prague  on  November  13,  1419^ 
proved,  as  was  perhaps  inevitable,  to  be  of  short  duration.     It 
became  every  day  more  evident  that  King  Sigismund,  who, 
in  spite  of  his  somewhat  scandalous  private  life,  was  a  firm 
adherent  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  had  no  intention  of  making 
any  concessions  whatever  to  those  whom  he  considered  as 
heretics ;  this  ill  will  extended  even  to  matters  such  as  Com- 
munion in  the  two  kinds,  which  the  Roman  Church  has  itself 
on  some  occasions  sanctioned.^    No  man  was,  indeed,  less  likely 
to  favour  a  system  of  compromise  than  Sigismund,  who  was 
devoid  of  all  learning  and  consumed  by  puerile  vanity,  and  who 
possessed  neither  statesmanship  nor  military  talent  nor  even 
personal  courage.     Sigismund,  on  hearing  of  the  disturbances  in 
Prague,  and  of  the  armistice  which  was  afterwards  concluded,, 
determined  to  abandon  the  war  against  Turkey  in  which  he 
had  been  engaged  and  to  proceed  to  his  new  dominions.     He 
arrived  on  December  15, 141 9,  at  Brno  (in  German,  Briinn),  the 
capital  of  Moravia,  one  of  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown.^ 
He  was  met  here  by  the  Dowager  Queen  Sophia — whose  brief 
and  stormy  term  of  government  now  ended — by  the  principal 
nobles  of  Bohemia,  and  by  the  representatives  of  many  towns 
in  the  country.    The  King  maintained  his  evasive  attitude 
with  regard  to  all  religious  questions,  but  the  nobles  and  some 
of  the  town  representatives,  in  whom  the  dynastic  feeling 
was  very  strong,  did  homage  to  their  hereditary  sovereign. 
Somewhat  later  than  the  other  deputations,  the  representatives 
of  the  towns  of  Prague  arrived  at  Brno.    To  the  great  displea- 
sure of  the  King  and  his  courtiers  they  entered  the  city  pre- 

1  For  instance  in  the  case  of  the  Uniates  in  Poland. 

*  Sec  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  p.  i,  and  note  i  on  the  same  page. 

35 


36  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

ceded  by  trumpeters,  and  though  the  town  had  been  declared 
to  be  under  interdict,  because  of  the  presence  of  heretics,  they 
insisted  on  celebrating  mass  according  to  their  rites  in  the  part 
of  the  town  which  had  been  assigned  to  them.  When  they 
were  admitted  to  the  royal  presence  Sigismund  received  them 
very  ungraciously.  He  allowed  them  to  kneel  before  him  for  a 
longer  time  than  was  customary,  and  blamed  them  severely  for 
having  barricaded  their  streets  and  besieged  the  royal  castles 
of  Hradcany  and  Vysehrad.  He  ordered  the  citizens  to 
remove  immediately  all  street  fortifications,  and  no  longer  to 
molest  the  monks  and  nuns  at  Prague.  The  envoys  of  that 
city,  who  belonged  to  the  most  moderate  Hussite  party,  were 
intimidated  by  the  threatening  language  of  the  King,  and 
on  their  return  to  Prague  caused  the  royal  commands  to  be 
immediately  obeyed.  When  the  barricades  and  street  fortifi- 
cations were  removed  the  Germans  of  Prague  greatly  rejoiced, 
saying  :  "  Now  there  will  be  an  end  of  these  Hussites  and 
Wychfhtes."  i 

As  Queen  Sophia  had  gladly  cast  off  the  burden  of  regency, 
Sigismund  appointed  as  regent  one  of  the  high  officials  of  the 
land.  Lord  Cenek  of  Wartenberg;  not,  however,  thoroughly 
trusting  Wartenberg,  he  chose  two  other  Bohemian  noblemen, 
who  were  to  act  as  co-regents.  The  career  of  Wartenberg  has 
often  been  judged  by  historians  more  severely  than  it  deserves. 
He  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  teaching  of  Hus,  and  he  attached 
to  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  the  same  importance  as — for 
reasons  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  elsewhere — most 
Bohemians  of  his  time  did.  He  also,  like  most  of  his  country- 
men, believed  that  it  was  only  by  enforcing  poverty  on  the 
clergy  that  a  true  moral  reformation  of  the  then  very  corrupt 
Bohemian  churchmen  could  be  brought  about.  At  the  same 
time  Wartenberg  shared  with  many  other  Bohemian  nobles 

*  "Jam  heretic!  ille  Hussite  et  Wikleffiste  peribunt  et  finem  habebunt  " 
(Bfezova,  p.  354,  Professor  Goll's  edition).     VVhen  quoting  Brezova  I  have 
■always  preserved  his  somewhat  eccentric  system  of  speUing. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  37 

a  feudal  devotion  to  the  princes  of  the  house  of  Luxemburg, 
the  legitimate  and  hereditary  rulers  of  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian 
crown.  The  position  of  Wartenberg  was,  therefore,  a  very 
difficult  one,  and  even  a  more  talented  and  more  conscientious 
man  would  probably  have  failed  in  attempting  to  conciliate 
two  entirely  antagonistic  points  of  view.  Many  of  the  other 
Bohemian  nobles  were  in  the  same  difficult  position,  though 
there  were  also  among  the  nobility,  and  yet  more  among  the 
knighthood,  many  who  unreservedly  upheld  the  cause  of  Church 
reform. 

After  a  short  stay  in  Brno  King  Sigismund  proceeded  to 
Breslau,  the  capital  of  Silesia,  then  also  one  of  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown.  ^Eneas  Sylvius,  whose  opinion  was  after- 
wards repeated  by  many  writers,  severely  blamed  Sigismund  for 
having  proceeded  to  Silesia  instead  of  marching  from  Brno 
directly  on  Prague.^  The  citizens  of  that  town  appeared  to 
be  momentarily  cowed,  and  many  of  the  nobles  and  town 
delegates  had  done  homage  to  Sigismund.  Yet  the  King's 
decision  proves  that  he  understood  the  feelings  of  the  Bohemian 
people  better  than  did  the  brilliant  Italian  humanist.  Sigis- 
mund knew  that  he  was  indebted  for  the  limited  amount  of 
popularity  he  then  possessed  entirely  to  the  fact  that  he  had 
been  able  hitherto  to  avoid  expressing  his  views  on  the  all- 
important  subject  of  Communion  in  the  two  kinds.  Many 
Bohemians,  beheving  probable  that  which  they  hoped,  thought 
that  Sigismund  would  finally  sanction  the  use  of  the  revered 
chalice  at  the  Communion  of  laymen.  Sigismund,  however, 
knew  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  continue  long  his  policy  of 
silence.  The  Roman  see  had,  on  March  i,  1420,  proclaimed 
a  crusade  against  the  Hussites,  and  the  King,  who  required  the 
aid  of  the  crusaders  to  conquer  Bohemia,  knew  that  this  would 
not  be    granted  to  him  should  he  make  even  the  slightest 

1  "  Nee  dubium  videbatur  quin  tota  Bohemia  labes  Hussitarum  excessisset, 
si  ex  Bruna  Sigismundus  recta  via  se  Pragam  contulisset.  Sed  divertit  ille, 
ut  fortasse  fati  sui  erat,  Vratislaviamque  Silesiae  caput  accessit "  (Historia 
BohemicB,  cap.  xxxix). 


38  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

concession  to  heretics.  The  few  but  somewhat  powerful 
Romanist  nobles  in  Bohemia  would  also  in  this  case  have 
withdrawn  their  support.  Sigismund's  own  sympathies  were 
also  entirely  in  favour  of  an  intransigent  policy.  He  was, 
however,  aware  of  the  bitter  and  implacable  hatred  which  his 
treacherous  behaviour  towards  Hus  had  aroused  in  Bohemia. 
Life  was  not  valued  very  highly  at  that  period  of  incessant 
internal  and  foreign  warfare,  and  the  execution  of  a  heretic 
was  not  an  exceptional  event ;  but  the  Bohemians  rightly 
believed  that  Sigismund's  letter  of  safe  conduct  had  stated 
that  even  if  Hus  were  found  guilty  he  should  be  allowed  to 
leave  Constance  freely,  and  should  be  judged  by  the  ecclesias- 
tical authorities  of  his  own  country.^ 

Sigismund  was,  therefore,  thoroughly  justified  in  believing 
that  he  would  meet  with  desperate  resistance  in  Bohemia, 
where  both  national  and  religious  enthusiasm  were  much 
stronger  than  in  the  sister-lands  Moravia  and  Silesia.  He 
therefore  decided  to  remain  at  Breslau  till  the  vast  forces  who 
were  sure  to  assemble  for  the  crusade  proclaimed  by  the  Pope 
had  had  time  to  meet.  Other  duties  also  awaited  Sigismund 
at  Breslau.  He  had  summoned  an  imperial  diet  to  that  city, 
and  on  his  arrival  there,  on  January  5,  1420,  was  met  by  many 
German  princes,  the  Dukes  of  Saxony,  Silesia  and  Bavaria, 
the  papal  legate  Ferdinand  Bishop  of  Lucca,  the  margraves 
of  Meissen  and  Brandenburg  and  many  others.  The  mar- 
gravate  of  Brandenburg  had  recently  been  conferred  on 
Frederick  Burgrave  of  Niirnberg  by  Sigismund  at  Constance. 
The  new  margrave  was  at  that  moment  an  intimate  friend  of 
Sigismund,  and  certainly  one  of  his  wisest  councillors, ^  but  for 
reasons  that  will  be  mentioned  presently  he  took  no  part  in 

1  I  cannot  enter  into  this  subject  here.  The  question  is  fully  treated  in  my 
Master  John  Hus,  pp.  290-292. 

*  Droysen  in  the  first  volume  of  his  brilliant  Geschichte  der  preussischen 
Politik  lays  great  stress  on  this  point.  Droysen's  work  is  undoubtedly  a 
panegyric  on  the  house  of  Hohenzollern,  but  he  has  shown  more  clearly  than 
any  other  writer  to  how  large  an  extent  the  Hussite  wars  form  part  of  the 
great  struggle  between  Slav  and  Teuton. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  39 

the  first  crusade.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Frederick  strongly 
advised  Sigismund  to  pursue  a  conciliatory  policy  in  the 
Bohemian  question.  Of  the  many  other  matters  of  state 
that  were  discussed  at  the  diet  of  Breslau  only  one  requires 
mention  here,  because  of  the  very  important  part — overlooked 
by  many  historians — which  Poland  played  in  the  Hussite  wars. 
After  their  great  victory  at  Tannenberg  the  Poles  had  overrun 
a  large  part  of  the  territory  of  the  Teutonic  order.  Their 
successes  had  not,  however,  been  maintained,  and  they,  as  well 
as  their  antagonists,  accepted  the  mediation  of  Sigismund 
on  condition  that  he  should  terminate  his  arbitration  not 
later  than  on  January  6,  1420.  The  Polish  envoys  who 
appeared  at  Breslau  were  greatly  displeased  when  Sigismund 
delayed  giving  his  decision  on  the  questions  that  had  been 
submitted  to  him,  and  yet  more  when  he  finally  pronounced 
judgment.  Without  entering  into  details,  it  is  sufficient  to 
state  that  on  all  moot  points  Sigismund's  decision  was  favour- 
able to  the  Teutonic  order.  This  influenced  future  events  to 
a  considerable  extent,  for  in  consequence  of  the  bitter  hate 
they  felt  for  Sigismund,  the  Poles  received  the  offer  of  the 
Bohemian  crown  to  a  Polish  prince  more  favourably  than  they 
would  have  otherwise  done. 

Another  unwise  action  of  Sigismund  greatly  increased  the 
hatred  and  animosity  against  the  King  which  already  prevailed 
in  Bohemia.  John  Krasa,  a  greatly  respected  merchant  of 
Prague,  who  had  arrived  at  Breslau  for  the  annual  fair,  had 
imprudently  blamed  the  execution  of  Hus,  and  spoken  in  favour 
of  Communion  in  the  two  kinds.  He  was  arrested  by  the 
executioners  of  Sigismund,  drawn  by  wild  horses  and  then 
flayed ;  his  body  was  then  burnt. ^    This  public  spectacle  caused 

^  In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Venetians — published  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche 
Beitrdge,  Vol.  I.  pp.  39-42 — the  citizens  of  Prague  wrote  :  "  Novissime  in  Wrati- 
slavia  famosum  virum  Johannem  Krasa  integrum  fide  et  virtute  constantis- 
simum  inclytae  urbis  Prag.  civem  in  notam  et  maculam  regni  nostri  perpetuam 
nonnisi  occasione  communionis  praedictae  [i.  e.  in  the  two  kinds]  jussit  [Sigis- 
mund] inhumaniter  equfs  trahi  et  absiliente  came  ad  nuda  corpora  laniari  et 
tandem  constantem  virum  damnari  et  comburi."     The  letter,  too  long  to 


40  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

general  horror  and  deep  indignation  among  the  Utraquist 
nobles  who  had  followed  King  Sigismund's  court.  Some  of 
them,  such  as  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  now  became  his  bitter 
enemies. 

On  March  i  Pope  Martin  V  published  a  bull  decreeing  a 
crusade  "against  the  Hussites,  Wycliffites  and  their  friends."  ^ 
This  was  done  with  the  full  approval  of  Sigismund,  who 
believed  that  the  enthusiastic  Bohemians  could  only  be  sub- 
dued if  their  country  were  invaded  by  vastly  superior  hostile 
forces.  Experience  had  shown  that  whenever  a  crusade  was 
proclaimed  vast  numbers  of  men  from  all  parts  of  Europe, 
some  inspired  by  religious  enthusiasm,  others  by  the  hope  of 
plunder,  flocked  to  the  papal  standards.  On  the  Tuesday 
following  Easter — April  9 — Sigismund  and  his  army  left 
Breslau  and  marched  to  Schweidnitz,  and  then,  crossing  the 
Bohemian  frontier  at  Nachod,  arrived  before  the  important 
city  of  Kralov^  Hradec  (Koniggratz).^ 

It  was  a  bad  omen  for  the  campaign  that  Sigismund  now 
undertook  that  one  of  his  former  great  friends  at  this  moment 
became  estranged  from  him  and  took  no  part  in  the  crusade. 
The  Elector  Frederick  of  Brandenburg  left  Breslau  even  before 
the  end  of  the  deliberations  of  the  imperial  diet.  He  strongly 
disapproved  of  the  intransigent  policy  of  Sigismund,  which 
had  imperilled  his  rule  in  his  newly  acquired  dominions.  In 
the  then  only  partially  Germanised  lands  of  Pomerania  and 
Mecklenburg  the  Slavic  reaction  was  very  strong  at  that 
moment,  and  the  Pomeranian  Prince  of  Stolpe  treated  the 
papal  bull  of  excommunication  with  contempt.  There  was 
also  the  danger  that  the  Poles,  irritated  by  the  hostile  attitude 

quote  in  its  entirety — throws  a  terrible  light  on  the  unspeakable  cruelty  of 
Sigismund.  It  is  well  to  insist  on  this,  as  most  writers  lay  great  stress  on  the 
cruelties  committed  by  the  Hussites,  while  almost  ignoring  the  far  greater 
cruelty  of  their  antagonists. 

^  "  Wyclifiistarum  Hussitarum  ceterorumque  haereticorum ,  fautorum  re- 
ceptatorum  et  defensorum."  (The  bull  is  printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundlick^ 
Beitrdge,  Vol.  I.  pp.  17-20). 

'  Grimhagen,  Die  Hussitenkdmpfe  dtr  Schlesier,  p.  31. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  41 

of  Sigismund,  might  aid  their  Slavic  brethren,  and  Polish  troops 
had  already  begun  to  attack  the  marches  of  Brandenburg. 
The  Slavic  dynasty  of  the  Obotrites  in  Mecklenburg  also  rose  in 
arms  against  the  new  margrave.  By  a  rapid  and  victorious 
campaign  against  these  numerous  enemies  Frederick  isolated 
the  Bohemians  from  their  possible  allies  in  Germany.  He 
believed — wrongly,  as  events  proved — that  Sigismund  had 
sufficient  forces  to  crush  all  resistance  in  Bohemia.^  Sigis- 
mund had,  indeed,  invaded  Bohemia  with  a  large  army,  and  his 
forces  were  greatly  increased  when,  somewhat  later,  numerous 
crusaders  joined  him  before  Prague.  The  beginning  of  the 
campaign  was  successful.  Kralove  Hradec,  one  of  the  Hussite 
strongholds,  was  occupied  after  very  slight  resistance,  and  the 
royalist  army  then  marched  to  Kutna  Hora,  a  mining  city 
whose  inhabitants  were  almost  all  Germans  and  fervent  ad- 
herents of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Sigismund  was,  therefore, 
enthusiastically  received  at  Kutna  Hora  and,  sanguine  as  he 
sometimes  was,  he  no  doubt  concluded  from  this  friendly 
reception  that  the  feeling  of  the  Bohemian  people  was  not  as 
hostile  to  him  as  he  had  previously  imagined. 

Yet  it  was  just  at  this  moment  that  the  Bohemian  move- 
ment acquired  a  distinctly  revolutionary  character.  Cenek  of 
Wartenberg  had  left  Breslau  deeply  embittered,  and  his  dynastic 
tendency  disappeared,  or  at  least  became  obscured  for  a  time. 
He  formally  renounced  his  allegiance  to  Sigismund,  dismissed 

*  "  Schon  hatte  in  Pommern  die  hussitische  Lehre  Eingang  gefunden,  die 
f  lirstliche  Familie  im  Stolper  Lande  neigte  ihr  zu  und  ertrug  mit  hussitischem 
Gleichmuthe  den  Bann,  den  der  Papst  (iber  sie  verhangte.  .  .  .  Und  wieder 
um  den  Kampf  gegen  die  Marken  desto  entscheidender  zu  machen  kam  ein 
polnischer  Streithaufen  von  5000  Mann  nach  Pommem.  .  .  .  Wahrend  sich  in 
Bohmen  alles  zum  Kampfe  auf  Leben  und  Tod  gegen  den  Konig  und  die 
Deutschen  rustete  und  die  Freunde  Bohmens,  Skandinavien  und  Polen  uber 
Pommern  und  Mecklenburg  sich  die  HSnde  reichten,  brach  Markgraf  Friedrich 
mit  raschem  Entschlusse  gegen  den  Bund  los.  .  .  .  Ihn  [Margrave  Frederick] 
f esselten  dringendere  Sorgen  an  die  Marken ;  nur  erst  der  Anfang  war  gemacht 
Bohmen  zu  isoHeren.  .  .  .  Es  steht  urkundUch  fest  dass  er  wahrend  des 
ganzen  Feldzuges  1420  in  den  Marken  blieb ;  er  hatte  dort  vollauf  zu  schaffen  ! 
Und  das  Kreuzheer  das  sich  vor  Prag  versammelte  war  gross  genug  um  den 
Kampf  zu  stehen."  (Droysen,  Geschtchte  der  preussischen  Politik,  Vol.  I. 
pp.  293   and  ff.) 


42  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

the  former  Romanist  commanders  of  the  castles  of  Hradcany 
and  Vysehrad  and  appointed  Hussites  in  their  stead.  A  few 
days  later — on  April  20 — he  published  a  manifesto  couched 
in  very  strong  language,  in  which  he,  together  with  Lord  Ulrich 
of  Rosenberg,  many  knights  and  nobles,  and  *'  all  who  upheld 
the  freedom  of  God's  law  and  the  commonwealth  of  the 
Bohemian  nation,"  declared  that  Sigismund,  King  of  Hungary, 
could  not  be  accepted  as  King  of  Bohemia.  Then  followed  a 
detailed  enumeration  of  the  grievances  against  Sigismund — far 
too  lengthy  to  be  reproduced  here.  It  was  stated  that  he  had 
induced  the  papal  legate  to  proclaim  a  crusade  against  the 
Bohemians  because  they  maintained  the  custom  of  com- 
municating in  the  two  kinds,  according  to  the  traditions  of 
the  primitive  Church.  The  execution  of  Hus — a  subject  on 
which  the  Bohemians  were  always  implacable — was  then 
mentioned,  as  well  as  the  ruthless  torture  inflicted  on  John 
Krasa.  Complaints  concerning  Sigismund's  political  attitude 
towards  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown  were  also  raised. 
In  opposition  to  the  policy  of  his  father,  Charles  IV,  who  had 
been  a  friend  to  Bohemia,  Sigismund  had  on  several  occasions 
favoured  Germany  at  the  expense  of  Bohemia.  Probably 
contrary  to  Wartenberg's  expectation,  only  part  of  the  Bohemia 
nobility  joined  him  in  declaring  that  Sigismund  had  absolutely 
forfeited  the  Bohemian  crown.  The  citizens  of  Prague,  on  the 
other  hand,  warmly  approved  of  Wartenberg's  act.  They  had, 
a  few  days  before  the  appearance  of  Wartenberg's  manifesto, 
published  a  proclamation  which  is  interesting  as  proving  how 
largely  the  racial  feeling  influenced  that  great  uprising  which 
we  call  the  Hussite  war.  Religious  questions  play  a  secondary- 
part  in  this  proclamation,  and  Sigismund  is  not  even  mentioned 
by  name.  All  the  evils  from  which  Bohemia  had  suffered  are 
ascribed  to  the  Germans,  and  they  are  accused  of  intending  to 
exterminate  the  Slavic  race  in  Bohemia,  as  they  had  already 
done  in  Saxony  and  Prussia.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  memory 
of  those  then  already  ancient  events  still  lingered  among  the 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  43 

Bohemian  people.  After  the  pubUcation  of  the  manifesto 
of  the  Praguers  and  of  that  of  Wartenberg  the  few  Germans 
who  still  remained  in  Prague  were  driven  out  of  their  houses, 
of  which  the  Bohemians  took  possession.  In  view  of  the 
probability  of  a  siege  of  the  city  the  presence  of  Germans  there 
was  impossible. 

At  this  moment  the  extreme  party  among  the  Hussites  for 
a  time  completely  obtained  the  upper  hand.  The  citizens  of 
Prague,  led  by  the  fanatical  monk,  John  of  Zelivo,  committed 
many  cruelties  against  Roman  Catholic  monks  and  nuns. 
Aided  by  the  members  of  the  new  religious  community,  who 
were  known  as  the  Orebites — who  derived  their  name  from  a 
hill  near  Kralove  Hradec,  to  which  they  had  given  the  biblical 
name  of  Oreb — they  plundered  all  the  property  of  the  adherents 
of  the  Roman  Church,  and  destroyed  most  of  the  beautiful 
ancient  cathedrals  and  churches  that  had  been  one  of  the 
glories  of  the  land.  This  greatly  aroused  the  indignation  of 
Wartenberg,  who  upheld  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  and 
demanded  severer  regulations  for  the  Roman  clergy,  but 
abhorred  religious  anarchism.  The  destruction  of  the  ancient 
churches  of  his  country  appeared  to  him — if  I  may  use  an 
anachronism — as  it  would  to  an  English  High- Churchman. 
He  was  also  probably  impressed  by  the  reluctance  of  many  of 
the  Bohemian  nobles  to  join  him,  and  by  the  first  successes  of 
Sigismund's  army. 

Whatever  his  motives  may  have  been  it  is  certain  that 
Wartenberg  abandoned  the  national  party  after  a  few  weeks, 
and — not  for  the  last  time — changed  sides.  He  concluded  a 
truce  with  Sigismund,  according  to  which  a  full  amnesty  was 
granted  to  him  and  his  family,  and  they,  as  well  as  the  tenants 
on  his  estates,  were  to  retain  the  right  of  communicating  in  the 
two  kinds.  Under  these  conditions  Wartenberg  consented  to 
abandon  the  national  cause,  and  on  May  7  he  opened  the  gates 
of  the  Hradcany  and  Vysehrad  castle  to  the  soldiers  of  Sigis- 
mund.    The  Praguers  attempted  to  regain  possession  of  these 


44  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

strongholds.  They  were  aided  by  members  of  the  Orebite 
community,  led  by  Lord  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg  and  the  monk 
Ambrose,  one  of  the  numerous  warrior-priests  of  this  period. 
Their  repeated  attacks  were,  however,  repulsed,  and  the  citizens 
were  even  obliged  to  evacuate  part  of  the  Mal4  Strana. 

A  great  feeling  of  discouragement  now  prevailed  among  the 
citizens  of  Prague.  They  concluded  a  truce  with  the  royalist 
commanders  of  the  Hradcany  and  Vysehrad  castles  and  deter- 
mined to  enter  into  negotiations  with  Sigismund  in  view  of 
peace.  They  elected  six  envoys — two  city  councillors,  two 
doctors  of  the  university  and  two  townsmen — who  were  to 
proceed  to  Kutna  Hora  for  this  purpose.  Their  reception  was 
most  ungracious.  Sigismund  again  subjected  the  envoys  to 
the  indignity  of  kneeling  before  him  for  a  longer  time  than  was 
customary.  He  then  informed  them  that  he  was  bound  by 
oath  to  extirpate  all  heresies  by  fire  and  sword,  and  that  he 
would  not  perjure  himself  even  if  he  were  obliged  to  destroy  the 
whole  Bohemian  kingdom,  reduce  it  to  ashes  and  re-people  it 
with  foreigners.  Then,  brutally  violent  as  he  often  was  when 
dealing  with  those  whom  he  believed  to  be  weak,  he  "  became 
as  hard  as  steel  and  moved  his  limbs  as  one  demented."  ^ 
The  King  finally  again  ordered  the  Praguers  to  remove  all 
fortifications  and  barricades  within  their  city  and  to  deliver 
up  aU  arms  to  the  commanders  of  the  royal  garrisons  of  the 
Hradcany  and  Vysehrad ;  on  his  arrival  at  Prague  only  would 
he  be  prepared  to  tell  them  what  amount  of  mercy  he  would 
grant  them.  This,  as  Palacky  has  well  said,  meant  war  to  the 
knife.  When  the  envoys,  on  their  return  to  Prague,  informed 
the  citizens  of  the  result  of  their  mission  all,  men  and  women, 
rich  and  poor,  began  to  work  incessantly  at  the  fortifications 

'  "  Contra  quas  crudeles  insolentias  nobis  ipsum  [Sigismund]  pie  alloquenti- 
bus  et  omni  subjecta  humilitate  deprecantibus  ut  saltern  aliis  obmissis  ante 
justiciam  ministraret  ac  praestaret  regnicolis  audientiam  expeditam ;  sed  ipse 
cum  sic  a  nobis  humiliter  et  modeste  peteretur  factus  adamante  durior  velut 
si  aculeis  stringeretur  ccepit  ad  furiosi  similitudinem  membra  agitare." 
(From  the  letter  of  the  citizens  of  Prague  to  the  Venetians,  which  has  already 
been  quoted.) 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  45 

of  the  town.  The  works  were  further  strengthened  after  the 
Taborites,  as  will  be  mentioned  presently,  had  arrived  in  Prague. 
About  Whitsuntide,  Bfezova  writes,^  the  Tdborite  women, 
joined  by  the  women  of  2atec  and  Loun  and  a  large  number  of 
women  of  Prague,  dug  a  deep  fosse  from  the  Slavic — now  called 
Emaus — monastery  to  the  Karlov  and  the  church  of  St. 
Apollinaris,  thus  guarding  that  part  of  the  town  that  was 
most  menaced  by  the  neighbouring  fortress  of  the  Vysehrad.* 
We  have,  as  is  so  often  the  case  in  the  annals  of  the  Hussite 
wars,  very  insufficient  information  concerning  the  fortifications 
of  Prague  at  that  period,  but  subsequent  events  prove  that 
they  had  been  erected  with  some  skill.  While  strengthening 
the  defences  of  their  town  as  much  as  the  shortness  of  time 
permitted,  the  citizens  also  attempted  to  summon  to  their  aid 
all  Bohemian  nobles  and  townships  who  had  not  submitted  to 
Sigismund.  The  most  important  step  was  to  appeal  to  the 
rising  community  of  Tabor;  this  resolution  was  not  made 
without  some  reluctance.  The  puritan  severity  and  rigour  of 
the  Taborites  was  displeasing  to  many  citizens,  as  indeed 
became  obvious  when  the  men  of  Tabor  arrived  at  Prague. 
The  teaching  of  the  university  of  Prague,  to  which  the  Praguers 
conformed,  was  opposed  to  the  rules  and  rites  of  Tabor,  as  the 
university  rejected  all  innovations  which  could  not  be  traced 
back  to  Hus  himself.  The  common  danger  for  a  time  silenced 
these  differences.  Immediately  after  the  return  of  the  envoys 
from  Kutna  Hora  the  citizens  of  Prague  sent  messengers  to 
Tabor  begging  the  Taborites,  "  if  they  wished  verily  to  obey 
God's  law,  to  march  to  their  aid  without  delay,  and  with  as 
many  men  as  they  could  muster." 

2izka's  military  genius  had  enabled  him  during  his  short 
stay  at  Tabor  to  organise  his  troops  so  thoroughly  that  they 
were  ready  to  confront  immediately  the  troops  of  Sigismund, 
a  conflict  with  whom  he  had  long  considered  inevitable.     On 

*  Lawrence  of  Bfezova,  p.  373  of  Professor  Goll's  edition.  I  may  here  mention 
that  I  always  quote  that  edition. 

*  See  my  Prague  ("  M«^diaeval  Towns  "  series). 


46  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

the  very  day  on  which  the  messenger  arrived  the  men  of  Tabor 
set    out  on  their  march  to    Prague;    they  numbered  9,000 
warriors,  and  were,  as  had  become  customary,  accompanied 
by  many  priests,  women  and  children.     The  four  captains 
of  the  people  led  the  expedition,  but  supreme  command  was 
here  already  tacitly  granted  to  2izka.     A  considerable  garrison 
was  left  at  Tabor,  which  afterwards  successfully  repulsed  an 
attack  by  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  who  had  now  abandoned 
the  national  party,  and  who  was  aided  in  his  attack  by  some 
Austrian  troops  sent  by  the  Archduke  Albert,  son-in-law  of 
Sigismund.     The  Taborites  did  not  reach  Prague  unmolested. 
When  crossing  the  Sazava  river  near  Pofic  they  were  attacked 
by  a  large  royalist  force  led  by  Lord  Peter  Konopist  of  Stem- 
berg — their  old  enemy — and  by  the  Italian  condottiere  Pipa 
of  Ozora,  who  somewhat  later  played  a  considerable  part  in  the 
Hussite  wars.     The  royalist  forces  were,  however,  routed  by 
2izka  after  a  short  skirmish.     The  Taborites  now  reached 
Prague   on  May  20  without    any  further   hindrance.     Wlien 
the  Taborite  columns,  preceded  by  the  priests  who — as  was  now 
customary — carried  the  Sacrament  in  a  monstrance  before  the 
soldiers,  entered  the  city  gates  they  were  enthusiastically  greeted 
and  welcomed  by  the  townsmen.     Sigismund,   whose  forces 
were  approaching  Prague  in  the  direction  of  the  Sazava,  retired 
on  Stara  Boleslav    (Alt  Bunzlau),  evidently  not  wishing  to 
encounter  the  Hussites  in  a  pitched  battle  before  the  arrival 
of  the  numerous  crusaders,  who  were  expected  from  Germany. 
Shortly  after  the  arrival  of  the  Taborites  the  citizens  of 
Prague    received    another    considerable    reinforcement.     The 
citizens  of  2atec  (Saaz) ,  Loun  and  Slane  sent  to  Prague  an  army 
consisting  of  several  thousand  men.     As  the  Bohemian  peasants 
and  even  the  townsmen  were  then  little  accustomed  to  warfare, 
they,  particularly  at  the  beginning  of  the  Hussite  war,  generally 
chose  knights  or  nobles  as  their  leaders.     Thus  this  small 
army  of  townsmen  was  led  by  the  Utraquist  knights  Bradaty 
and  Obrovec,  who  brought  with  them  a  small  force  of  cavalry, 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  47 

which,  according  to  the  chroniclers,  who  probably  exaggerated, 
consisted  of  about  1,000  men. 

After  retiring  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Prague  Sigismund 
proceeded  to  raid  the  country  districts  of  Bohemia,  hoping  thus 
to  intimidate  the  population.  He  then,  accompanied  by 
his  Queen  Barbara  and  the  Dowager  Queen  Sophia,  proceeded 
from  Stara  Boleslav  to  Melnik,  and  then  to  Slane,  which  had 
already  been  captured  by  some  of  his  adherents.  He  remained 
some  time  at  Slane,  and  summoned  to  that  city  representatives 
of  the  town  of  Loun.  The  citizens  of  Loun  made  their  submis- 
sion to  Sigismund  and  consented  to  receive  a  royalist  garrison. 
It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  more  warlike  citizens  of 
2atec  and  Loun  had  already  marched  to  Prague  to  take  part 
in  the  defence  of  the  menaced  capital.  The  passage  of  Sigis- 
mund's  army  was  everywhere  marked  by  deeds  of  horrible 
cruelty.  At  Slane  the  papal  legate,  Bishop  Ferdinand  of 
Lucca,  who  accompanied  Sigismund,  caused  a  priest  and  a 
layman,  who  claimed  the  right  to  receive  Communion  in  the 
two  kinds,  to  be  burnt  alive.  At  Litomerice,  to  which  city  the 
royal  army  marched  from  Slane,  Sigismund  himself  ordered 
seventeen  town-councillors,  who  had  been  imprisoned  as  being 
suspected  of  Utraquism,  to  be  drowned  in  the  Elbe.  These 
evils  deeds,  when  they  became  known  in  Prague,  caused,  as  was 
inevitable,  terrible  reprisals. 

The  vast  armies  of  the  crusaders  had  meanwhile  begun  to 
arrive  in  Bohemia.  As  had  been  settled  at  the  imperial  diet  of 
Breslau,  the  city  of  Prague  was  to  be  the  rallying  point  for  the 
varied  host  that  was  now  intent  on  destro5dng  the  ancient 
liberty  and  nationality  of  the  Bohemians.  Sigismund,  therefore, 
decided  again  to  draw  nearer  to  Prague;  his  access  to  the 
capital  was  always  assured  by  the  possession  of  the  castles  of 
Hradcany  and  Vysehrad.  On  his  march  Sigismund  halted  at 
the  town  of  Zbraslav  (Konigsaal)  on  the  Vltava,  where  evil 
tidings  awaited  him.  Lord  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg,  leader  of 
the  Orebites,  had  left  Prague  with  the  monk  Ambrose,  and 


48  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

passing  safely  through  a  country  occupied  by  Sigismund's 
troops,  they  arrived  near  Kralove  Hradec.  They  called  to 
arms  the  fervently  Utraquist  inhabitants  of  that  district  and, 
aided  by  them,  recaptured  the  Hussite  stronghold  of  Kralove 
Hradec.  This  was  a  matter  of  considerable  importance,  as  it 
cut  off  Sigismund's  communications  with  Silesia.  To  the 
King  of  Hungary — who  had  none  of  the  talents  of  a  military 
leader — this  appeared  unimportant.  He  limited  himself  to 
sending  to  North-Eastem  Bohemia  an  army  of  10,000  men, 
which  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  obtain  possession  of 
Kralove  Hradec.  At  Zbraslav  Sigismund  had  been  joined  by 
several  German  princes,  who  were  at  the  head  of  considerable 
forces,  and  it  probably  appeared  to  him  unimportant  that  he 
was  obliged  to  detach  10,000  men  from  so  vast  an  army.  Even 
a  more  talented  leader  than  Sigismund  might  at  that  moment 
have  felt  sanguine.  He  had  marched  from  Kutna  Hora  to 
Melink,  Litomef  ice,  Slane,  Loun,  Zbraslav,  and  other  places,  and 
met  with  little  or  no  resistance.  Could  he  but  possess  himself 
of  Prague — which  holds  in  Bohemia  the  position  that  in  France 
belongs  to  Paris — the  conquest  of  the  Hussite  land  was  certain. 
Even  of  the  redoubtable  Taborite  warriors,  the  great  part  were 
shut  up  in  the  capital,  and  the  town  itself  appeared  incapable 
of  resistance.  The  Hradcany  and  Vysehrad  castles  were  in  the 
hands  of  the  royalists.  The  Mala  Strana  had  been  almost 
totally  destroyed  during  the  fighting  at  the  foot  of  the  Hradcany 
hill.  It  remained  only  to  subdue  the  Old  and  the  New  Town.^ 
The  whole  army  of  the  crusaders  encamped  before  Prague  on 
June  29,  and  on  the  following  day  the  King  proceeded  to  St. 
Vitus's  cathedral  on  the  Hradcany  hill,^  where  high  mass  was 
just  being  celebrated. 

The  citizens  of  Prague — though  they  had  long  been  reluctant 
to  break  off  the  negotiations — showed  indomitable  courage 
now  that  the  decisive  struggle  had  begun.  They  elected  new 
magistrates,  who  all  belonged  to  the  party  which  had  long 

*  See  note  2,  p.  5.         *  I  must  here  again  refer  my  readers  to  my  Pra^H.\ 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  49 

considered  war  inevitable.  There  were  occasional  dissensions 
among  the  defenders.  Thus  the  Taborite  women  took  pos- 
session of  a  nunnery  and  expelled  the  nuns  who  had  remained 
there,  and  some  of  the  citizens  complained  that  they  and  their 
wives  and  daughters  had  been  insulted  by  Taborites  whose 
puritanic  feeling  was  offended  by  the  richness  of  their  garb. 
These  occurrences  had  at  the  time  little  importance ;  all  were  at 
that  moment  busy  in  strengthening  the  fortifications.  2izka 
practically  assumed  sole  command  of  the  defending  army. 
His  colleague,  Nicholas  of  Hus,  had  returned  to  Tabor  and 
successfully  repulsed  an  attack  which  the  royalists  made  on 
that  city.  Though  I  find  in  the  scanty  contemporary  records 
little  proof  of  the  antagonism  between  Nicholas  and  2izka 
which  has  been  assumed  by  most  modern  writers,  it  is  certain 
that  the  departure  of  Nicholas  of  Hus  was  favourable  to  the 
unity  of  the  commandership. 

It  was  during  the  defence  of  Prague  that  Zizka  first  gave 
evidence  of  his  military  genius.  With  that  intuition  which 
only  bom  leaders  of  armies  possess,  he  had  found  that  the  key 
of  his  position  was  the  Vitkov  hill,  and  he  immediately  ordered 
that  hill  to  be  fortified,  and  he  placed  his  scanty  artillery  behind 
the  earthworks  which  had  been  hurriedly  thrown  up.  The 
Vitkov  hill  consists  of  a  narrow  ridge  parallel  to  the  Vltava 
river,  which  is  very  steep,  both  in  the  direction  of  the  river,  and 
in  that  of  the  open  country  around  Prague ;  from  the  city  only 
the  hill  is  easily  accessible.  Its  possession  secured  to  the 
defenders  the  possibility  of  communicating  with  the  country 
districts  of  Bohemia,  where  some  cities  were  still  in  the  hands  of 
the  Hussites.^ 

By  the  end  of  June  all  the  vast  army  of  the  crusaders 
had  assembled  around  Prague.    The  strength  of  the  forces 

*  See  General  Kohler,  Die  Entwicklung  des  Knegswesen  in  der  Rittetzeit 
Vol.  V.  pp.  389-390.     Though  General  Kohler  was,  like  all  writers  on  this  cam- 
paign, obliged  to  rely  mainly  on  Bfezova — who  is  here  somewhat  carried 
away  by  national  enthusiasm — Kohler's  account  of  the  attack  on  the  iizkov 
is  far  more  lucid  than  that  of  any  other  modem  writer. 
E 


50  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

cannot   be   determined   with   any   degree   of  certainty.     Dr. 
Griinhagen   states  that   at   the   lowest   valuation   the   army 
must  have  consisted  of  80,000  men.     This  figure  is  probably 
too  low.      Lawrence  of   Bfezova  states  that    the  troops  of 
Sigismund,  including  all  the  German  and   other   crusaders, 
amounted  to  150,000  men,  and  ^Eneas   Sylvius  writes — un- 
doubtedly exaggerating — that   the    cavalry  alone   numbered 
70,000  men.     Among  the  crusaders,  according  to  the  account 
of  Bfezova,  who  writes  with  justifiable  national  pride,  were 
Bohemians  (of  the  Roman  party),  Moravians,  Hungarians  and 
Croatians,  Dalmatians  and  Bulgarians,  Wallachians  and  Szeklers, 
Cini  (sic)  and  Jasi  (sic),  Slavonians,  Servians  and  Ruthenians, 
Styrians,    men    of    Meissen,    Bavarians,    Saxons,    Austrians, 
Franconians,  Frenchmen,  Englishmen,  men  of  Brabant  and 
Westphalia,  Dutchmen,  Switzers,  Lusatians,  Suabians,  Carinth- 
ians,  men  of   Aragon,   Spaniards,  Poles,  Germans   from   the 
Rhine-lands   and   many   others.^    The   princes  and   Church 
dignitaries  who  had  now  joined  Sigismund  were  also  very 
numerous ;  among  the  names  which  the  chroniclers  record  we 
find  Albert,  Duke  of  Saxony,  Frederick  and  William,  margraves 
of  Meissen,  Albert,  Archduke  of  Austria,  many  of  the  Silesian 
princes,  Louis,  patriarch  of  Aquileia,  many  archbishops,  and 
numerous  princes  and  counts  of  the  empire.   The  army  was  one 
of  the  largest  which  ever  at  that  period  assembled  for  battle. 
Palacky,  with  his  usual  sagacity,  greatly  deplores  that  we  find 
very  little  mention  of  the  siege  of  Prague  in  the  writings  of  the 
contemporary  German  chroniclers,  who  perhaps  did  not  care 
to  give  a  detailed  account  of  events  in  which  their  countrymen 
had  not  played  a  very  glorious  part.   We  are,  therefore,  reduced 
to  conjectures,  even  as  regards  many  important  events.^  Of  the 

^  Lawrence  of  Birezova,  p.  384. 

*  The  German  contemporary  chroniclers  are  almost  entirely  silent  as  regards 
the  events  of  the  first  crusade.  Monstrelet  gives  a  brief  account  of  the  siege, 
which  is  interesting  also  as  evidence  of  the  fanatical  hatred  of  the  Bohemians 
that  had  already  sprung  up  in  all  parts  of  Europe.  It  is  this  hatred  which 
induced  the  people  to  give  credence  to  any,  even  the  most  absurd,  accusations 
against    the   Bohemian    nation.     Monstrelet  writes  (Vol.    IV.    chap,    cclix), 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  51 

Bohemian  chroniclers  only  Lawrence  of  Bfezova  gives  a  some- 
what detailed  account  of  the  siege ;  it  is  true  that  at  this  moment, 
when  Bohemia  braved  the  world  in  arms  against  her,  Bfezova's 
national  feeling  and  patriotism  strongly  asserts  itself. 

The  vast  armies  which  had  assembled  around  Prague  did 
not  attempt  an  immediate  attack  on  the  city ;  perhaps  the  first 
symptoms  of  discord  among  these  men  who  had  entered  on  this 
campaign  from  very  varied  motives  already  appeared.  Some 
were  enthusiastic  followers  of  Rome,  eager  to  extirpate  all 
heretics  ^ ;  others  were  glad  to  continue,  under  the  auspices  of 
Rome,  their  habitual  warfare  against  the  Slavic  race ;  others 
had  followed  their  princes  according  to  the  duties  of  feudal 
allegiance ;  others,  mere  mercenaries,  gave  their  services  to  that 
prince  in  whose  pay  they  happened  to  be  at  that  moment.  The 
army  was  established  in  three  large  camps,  which,  as  the 
chroniclers  write,  had  the  appearance  of  three  vast  cities. 
One  of  the  armies  of  the  crusaders  was  encamped  in  that  part 
of  the  then  almost  desolate  Mala  Strana  that  is  immediately 
opposite  the  Vltava  river.  The  crusaders  encamped  there 
frequently  insulted  the  Hussite  outposts  on  the  right  bank  of 
the  river,  by  crying,  "  Ha !  Ha !  Hus !  Hus !  Ketzer !  Ketzer  1 "  ^ 

"  En  cest  an  le  roy  des  Rommains,  empereur  des  Alemaignes,  fist  une  moult 
grande  assembl6e  de  gens  d'armes  de  plusieurs  pays  de  la  chrestient6  pour 
combattre  et  resister  aux  entreprinses  des  faux  puans  heretiques,  qui  se 
tenoient  en  la  cite  de  Prague  et  au  pays  d 'environ  deux  ou  trois  journees. 
Auquel  mandement  alerent  grand  quantite  de  princes,  prelas,  chevaliers  et 
communes  tant  de  pie  que  de  cheval,  des  pays  d'Alemaigne,  de  Liege,  de 
Holande  et  de  Selande,  Haynnau  et  autres  lieux.  Et  y  arriva  tant  de  gens 
que  a  peine  se  povoient  ils  nombrer.  Mais  les  heretiques  tindrent  si  fort  la 
cite  de  Prague,  qu'on  ne  les  povoient  gueres  dommager,  si  non  en  aucuns  rencon- 
tres, ou  il  y  en  eu  plusieurs  mis  a  mort.  Et  etoient  en  si  grand  nombre  et  si 
fort  que  par  faulte  de  vivres  convient  lesdiz  Chrestiens  retourner.  Et  pour 
vray  iceulx  mauldis  heretiques  estoient  si  obstinez  en  leurs  erreurs  qu'ils  ne 
craignoient  nulz  martires  dont  es  les  feist  mourir.  Et  mesmement  se  desgui- 
soient,  armoient  les  femmes  ainsi  que  dyables  pleines  de  toutes  cruaultez 
et  en  furent  trouvees  plusieurs  mortes  et  occises  es  dessusdiz  rencontres."  I 
have  of  course  preserved  Monstrelet's  spelling. 

*  Of  these  men  Bfezova  writes  :  "  Gentes  multe  et  varie  .  .  .  confiuebant 
pro  expugnanda  inclita  et  magnifica  Pragensi  civitate  ac  sic  calicis  communione 
annullanda  et  cassanda  per  hoc  indulgencias  a  pena  et  a  culpa  obtinere  se 
sperantes  quod  spirituales  ipsis  licet  false  promittebant  ad  destruendum  fideles 
Boemos  utriusque  sexus  multipliciter  animando."  '  i.  e.  "  heretic." 


52  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

The  bridge  of  Prague  had  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  national 
party,  and  the  Hussite  warriors,  who  had  strongly  fortified  the 
t^te  de  pont  on  the  left  bank,  often  sallied  out  to  attack  the 
crusaders.  Skirmishes  took  place  almost  daily,  and  the 
crusaders  were  guilty  of  great  cruelties;  they  burnt  alive  all 
the  prisoners  whom  they  could  seize;  only  occasionally  a 
Bohemian  noble  of  Sigismund's  party  was  able  to  interfere 
and  to  save  the  life  of  his  countryman.  The  soldiers  in  the 
other  camps,  whom  the  strong  fortifications  separated  from  the 
Bohemians,  ravaged  the  neighbouring  country  districts  and 
burnt  alive  all  Bohemians  whom  they  met  in  the  villages.  As 
they  murdered  quite  indiscriminately,  there  were  among  their 
victims  many  fervent  Roman  Catholics,  who  had  never  received 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the  crusading  army  so  long 
delayed  its  attack  on  the  capital.  The  delay  was,  of  course, 
very  advantageous  to  the  patriots,  who  continued  to  strengthen 
the  fortifications.  It  is  true  that  the  crusaders  continued  to 
receive  reinforcements.  Thus  the  Archduke  of  Austria,  who  had 
on  his  march  unsuccessfully  attacked  Tabor,  only  joined  the 
army  of  the  crusaders  early  in  July.  It  was  now  finally  decided 
that  a  general  attack  on  Prague  should  take  place  on  July  14. 
Three  simultaneous  attacks  were  planned.  The  army  which 
occupied  the  Hradcany  hill  and  the  neighbouring  part  of  the 
Mala  Strana  was  to  drive  back  whatever  Hussites  might  still 
be  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Vltava,  and  then,  forcing  its  passage 
across  the  bridge,  to  enter  the  old  town.  At  the  same  time 
another  army  of  crusaders  was  to  descend  from  the  Vysehrad 
hill  and  attack  the  new  town,  whose  formerly  weak  defences 
had  recently  been  strengthened  in  consequence  of  the  foresight 
of  2izka  and  by  means  of  the  constant  and  unsparing  labour 
of  the  men  and  women  of  Prague.  The  third  attack  was  to  be 
made  on  the  Vitkov  hill,  which  assured  the  communications 
of  the  city  with  the  country  districts,  in  which  the  poasantr}', 
infuriated  by  the  unspeakable  cruelties  of  Sigismund's  mer- 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  53 

cenaries,  was  everywhere  rising  in  arms  against  the  invaders. 
There  is  Httle  doubt  that  the  attack  on  the  Vitkov  was  the  one 
to  which  the  besiegers  attached  most  importance.  Had  it 
succeeded,  it  was  certainly  possible  to  subdue  the  city  by 
starving  it  out.^  An  unconditional  surrender  would  have 
delivered  Sigismund  from  all  his  enemies,  while,  in  the  event  of 
the  city  being  stormed,  it  was  not  impossible  that  some  of  the 
undaunted  Taborites  and  the  other  bravest  men  of  the  garrison 
might  escape  and  continue  the  war.  The  troops  from  Meissen 
were  chosen  for  the  attack  on  the  Vitkov.  They  numbered 
about  7,000  or  8,000  men,  the  majority  of  whom  appear  to  have 
been  horsemen.  The  contemporary  records  hardly  enable  us 
to  obtain  an  exact  idea  of  the  fortifications  on  the  Vitkov, 
which  had  been  hurriedly  erected  under  Zizka's  direction. 
The  pious  Bfezova  is  too  intent  on  expounding  the  direct 
Divine  aid  which  the  Bohemians  obtained  on  this  memorable 
day  to  vouchsafe  us  much  information.  It  is  certain  that  by 
2izka's  orders  several  blockhouses  had  been  erected  and  pro- 
vided with  some  of  the  rough  field-guns  of  that  period.  These 
improvised  forts  were  defended  by  Taborite  men  and  women, 
whom  national  and  religious  enthusiasm  rendered  for  a  time 
almost  invincible.  One  blockhouse,  defended  only  by  twenty- 
six  men  and  two  women  and  one  girl,  was  only  taken  after 
desperate  resistance ;  one  of  the  women,  though  unarmed,  sur- 
passed the  men  in  bravery,  and  refused  to  forsake  her  post, 
saying  "  A  true  Christian  must  never  retire  before  Antichrist, 
and  thus  fighting  bravely  she  was  killed  and  gave  up  the  ghost.'' ^ 
Seeing  the  peril  of  his  men,  2izka,  who  had  previously  remained 
on  the  part  of  the  Vitkov  nearest  to  the  city,^  now  attacked  in 
the  flank  the  German  soldiers  who  were  ascending  the  hill. 

1  This  method  was  frequently  employed  in  Bohemian  warfare ;  thus  Sigis- 
mund's  father,  Charles  IV,  subdued  the  castle  of  2ampach  by  starvation — to 
quote  but  one  of  many  examples. 

*  Lawrence  of  Bfezova. 

'  General  Kohler  states  that  2izka  remained  within  the  city  walls  during  the 
beginning  of  the  fight ;  this  appears  very  improbable  to  one  who  is  acquainted 
■with  the  topography  of  Prague. 


54  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

A  desperate  hand-to-hand  fight  ensued,  and  2izka,  who,  as  was 
his  custom,  fought  in  the  fronk  rank,  was  for  a  time  in  great 
danger,  till  the  flails  and  fighting-clubs  of  his  Taborites  drove 
back  the  Germans.  Meanwhile  a  new  troop  of  Taborites 
arrived,  led  by  priests  carrying  the  Sacrament,  as  was  customary, 
particularly  in  moments  of  great  peril ;  many  citizens  of  Prague, 
summoned  by  the  ringing  of  the  church  bells  in  the  numerous 
churches  of  the  city,  hurried  to  the  aid  of  the  defenders  of  the 
Vitkov.  The  defeat  of  the  Germans  was  soon  complete,  and 
many  of  them,  rushing  down  the  slopes  of  the  Vitkov — then 
much  steeper  than  at  present — perished  in  the  Vltava.  As  soon 
as  victory  appeared  certain  the  Taborites  and  Praguers  knelt 
down  and  intoned  the  Te  Deum  Laudamus,  while  the  whole  city 
was  filled  with  unspeakable  joy.  About  the  same  time  as  the 
attack  on  the  Vitkov  took  place,  the  crusaders  in  or  near  the 
Vysehrad  and  Hradcany  castles  attacked  the  parts  of  the  city 
which  were  near  those  strongholds ;  they  were,  however,  easily 
repulsed,  principally,  as  it  appears,  in  consequence  of  the 
superiority  of  the  Bohemian  artillery. 

The  battle  of  the  Vitkov — or  rather  of  the  2izkov,  as  the  hill 
since  that  memorable  day  bore,  and  still  bears,  the  name  of  the 
victorious  general — may  be  considered  as  the  turning  point, 
as  the  Valmy  or  Turnham  Green,  of  the  great  Bohemian  civil 
war.  The  Hussites  had  not,  indeed,  obtained  a  decisive  victory ; 
many  of  the  crusaders  had  not  even  been  engaged.  Yet  the 
Bohemians  had  stemmed  the  tide  of  hostile  victories.  The 
large  number  of  men  who,  even  in  times  of  great  political  and 
religious  enthusiasm,  think  mainly  of  their  personal  advantage, 
began  to  consider  the  Hussite  as  the  winning  side.  The  nobility 
in  Bohemia,  though  not  in  Moravia,  began  to  desert  Sigismund. 
The  conduct  of  the  "  Hungarian  King,"  as  the  Bohemians 
always  called  Sigismund,  had  not  been  heroic ;  contrary  to  the 
custom  of  princes  in  that  warhke  period  he  had  taken  no  part 
in  the  fighting.  A  contemporary  chronicler,  who,  being  a  fervent 
Catholic  and  a  canon  of  St.  Stephen's  cathedral  in  Vienna, 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  55 

cannot  be  considered  hostile  to  the  Roman  and  royalist  cause, 
writes  that,  when  Sigismund  viewed  the  defeat  of  the  crusaders, 
he  returned  to  his  camp  "  smiling  at  the  defeat  of  the  faithful 
Christians  who  had  succumbed  to  the  heretics."  ^ 

The  battle  of  the  2izkov  was  immediately  followed  by  an 
attempt  at  reconciliation.  The  doctors  of  the  university  of 
Prague,  who  were  the  leading  theologians  of  the  moderate 
Utraquist  party,  look  the  initiative.  They  had  previously 
drawn  up  a  paper  which  enumerated  the  demands  of  the 
Utraquists ;  should  these  be  granted  by  Sigismund,  the  theolo- 
gians advised  their  countrymen  to  recognise  him  as  their 
sovereign.  These  articles,  as  they  were  called,  were  shown  to 
some  of  the  knights  and  nobles  of  the  national  party,  who 
strongly  approved  of  them.  The  articles  of  Prague  fully 
responded  to  the  wishes  of  these  men,  whose  demands  in  regard 
to  ecclesiastical  matters  were  limited  to  the  right  of  com- 
municating  in  the  two  kinds,  and  of  freely  preaching  according 
to  the  teaching  of  Hus,  and  also  to  the  establishment  of  a  more 
rigorous  discipline  among  the  clergy.  The  possibility  of  an 
agreement  with  Sigismund  also  appeared  most  desirable  to  men 
who  were  always  reluctant  to  take  up  arms  against  the 
descendant  of  their  ancient  kings.  The  citizens  of  Prague, 
however,  declined  to  take  part  in  any  negotiations  from  which 
the  men  of  Tabor  were  excluded.  This  matter,  however,  was 
settled  amicably,  and  both  parties  decided  that  a  conference 
should  take  place  between  the  Utraquist  and  the  Roman 
Catholic  divines.  In  consequence  of  the  intense  mutual 
distrust  and  the  ever-present  recollection  of  the  treachery 
committed  against  Hus,  the  Bohemians  refused  to  meet  their 
opponents  within  the  walls  of  the  royal  Hradcany  castle.  It 
was  finally  settled  that  the  deliberations  should  take  place  in 

*  "  Quod  [the  defeat  on  the  Vitkov]  cum  Sigismundus  rex  cerneret  ad 
castra  revertit  subridens  (ut  fertur)  casum  fortium  Christianorum  suc- 
cumbentium  in  haereticos  qui  contra  eos  triumpharunt  "  {ThomcB  Ehendotf- 
jeri  de  Haselhach  Chronicon  Austriacum  ;  in  Pez,  "  Scriptores  Rerum  Austri?- 
carum,"  Vol.  II.  p.  849). 


56  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

the  open  air,  on  what  may  be  called  neutral  ground,  among 
the  ruins  of  the  Mala  Strana,  in  view  of  both  the  contending 
armies.  The  principal  papal  representatives  were  Louis, 
Patriarch  of  Aquileia  and  Simon  of  Ragusa,  Bishop  of  Trau  in 
Dalmatia.  They  were  accompanied  by  numerous  theologians 
and  some  of  the  Bohemian  nobles  of  the  papal  party.  They 
were  met  by  the  principal  theologians  of  the  university  of 
Prague,  some  of  the  Utraquist  nobles,  and  representatives 
of  the  cities  of  Prague  and  of  the  community  of  Tabor.  The 
famed  articles  of  Prague  were  laid  before  the  Roman  church- 
men, and  it  may  be  well  to  give  their  contents  here.  They 
declared  : 

I.  The  Word  of  God  shall  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  be 
freely  and  without  impediment  proclaimed  and  preached  by 
Christian  priests. 

II.  The  Sacrament  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  God  shall  in 
the  two  kinds,  that  is  in  bread  and  wine,  be  freely  administered 
to  all  faithful  Christians,  according  to  the  order  and  teaching 
of  our  Saviour. 

III.  The  priests  and  monks,  according  to  secular  law,  possess 
great  worldly  wealth,  contrarily  to  the  teaching  of  Christ.  Of 
this  wealth  they  shall  be  deprived. 

IV.  All  mortal  sins,  particularly  those  that  are  pubHc,  as 
well  as  all  disorders  which  are  opposed  to  God's  law,  shall  in  all 
classes  be  suppressed  by  those  whose  office  it  is  to  do  so.  All 
evil  and  untruthful  rumours  ^  shall  be  suppressed  for  the  good 
of  the  commonwealth,  the  kingdom  and  the  nation. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  these  demands  were  very  extreme,  and 
the  contents  of  the  articles  are  very  similar  to  those  of  the 
compacts  which  ended  the  Hussite  wars.  Yet  sixteen  years  of 
almost  incessant  warfare  were  to  pass  before  this  compromise 

*  This  mainly  refers  to  the  statement  frequently  made  by  the  Germans  that 
the  Bohemians  were  heretics;  this  was  considered  a  mortal  insult.  The 
version  of  the  articles  given  above  is  the  one  read  before  the  conference. 
There  is  a  more  extensive  version  containing  further  statements  and  many 
biblical  quotations.  It  is  of  interest  rather  to  theologians  than  to  students  of 
history. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  57 

was  finally  accepted.  Though  both  the  Romanist  and  the 
nationalist  nobles  approved  of  the  articles,  it  was  necessary  that 
a  disputation  between  the  theologians  should  now  take  place. 
Dr.  Peter  Paul  de  Vergeriis,  one  of  the  theologians  attached  to 
the  papal  legate,  acted  as  spokesman  for  the  Roman  Catholics, 
and  Master  John  of  Pribram,  one  of  the  foremost  Utraquist 
divines,  defended  the  cause  of  the  Church  reformers.  It  is 
characteristic  of  the  customs  of  the  period  that  the  chroniclers 
find  it  necessary  to  state  that  the  proceedings  were  carried  on  in 
a  courteous  and  orderly  fashion.  While  the  three  first  articles 
were  being  discussed  it  did  not  seem  impossible  that  the  con- 
tending parties  would  arrive  at  an  agreement.  The  repre- 
sentatives of  the  town  of  Prague  loudly  exclaimed  :  "  God  be 
praised."  They  were  doomed  to  disappointment.  When  the 
Utraquists  suggested  that — as  was  indeed  natural — each  party 
should  make  some  concessions  in  regard  to  the  questions  still 
in  dispute,  the  representatives  of  Rome  absolutely  rejected 
the  proposal.  **  We  cannot  discuss  these  matters  with  you," 
they  said,  **  because  they  have  already  been  decided  by  the 
council ;  even  if  in  our  own  minds  we  were  convinced  by  your 
arguments  we  could  not  agree  with  you  on  matters  which 
are  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  the  Church."  ^  The  conference 
then  immediately  broke  up. 

Almost  immediately  afterwards  the  vast  armies  of  the  crusaders 
began  to  disperse.  All  writers  on  the  Hussite  wars  have  at- 
tempted to  discover  the  causes  of  this  unexpected  event,  and 
it  can  be  affirmed — though  this  may  appear  paradoxical — that 
all  their  various  explanations  contain  a  certain  amount  of 
truth.  It  is  certain  that  immediately  after  the  unsuccessful 
attack  on  the  Vitkov  very  strong  mutual  distrust  between  the 
German  crusaders  and  the  Bohemian  Catholic  nobles  who 
upheld  Sigismund  began  to  arise.  It  is  equally  certain  that 
both  his  German  and  his  Bohemian  soldiers  distrusted  Sigis- 

*  Tomek.  DSjepis  mSsta  Prahy  {History  of  the  Town  of  Prague),  Vol.  IV. 
p.  85. 


58  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

mund.  The  Germans  maintained  that  the  King  had  not  on 
July  14  allowed  the  artillery  to  fire  on  the  town  of  Prague, 
for  fear  of  destroying  a  city  which  he  considered  his  own 
property.  Ebendorffer  of  Haselbach,  who  has  already  been 
quoted,  lays  great  stress  on  this  point. ^  He  was  imbued  with 
that  dislike  of  the  Austrian  for  the  Bohemian  which  has 
endured  for  centuries,  and  is  by  no  means  extinct  at  the 
present  day.  He  and  other  writers  have  even,  quite  unjustly, 
accused  Sigismund  of  having  caused  the  disaster  of  the  Vitkov 
by  withholding  reinforcements.  The  Bohemian  nobles  of  the 
party  of  Sigismund  were  also  incensed  against  him.  They 
thought — and  as  subsequent  events  proved,  rightly — that  the 
King's  influence,  if  effectively  used,  could  have  induced  the 
papal  see  to  make  the  not  very  far-reaching  concessions  which 
then  appeared  to  be  sufficient.  They  also  believed  that  the 
horrible  cruelties  committed  by  German  soldiers  against 
Bohemians,  quite  irrespectively  of  their  religious  creed,  had 
exasperated  the  people,  whom  it  would  be  easier  to  pacify  if 
the  foreigners  departed.  Other  causes  contributed  to  the 
dispersion  of  the  crusaders;  in  the  absence  of  all  sanitary 
regulations  various  epidemics — collectively  described  by  the 
contemporary  chroniclers  as  **  the  plague  " — broke  out  among 
the  vast  agglomeration  of  men  which  surrounded  the  walls  of 
Prague.  Great  fires  broke  out,  which  destroyed  numerous 
tents  in  the  camps.  Their  origin  was  never  known,  but  the 
Germans  strongly  suspected  their  Bohemian  allies.  It  is  more 
probable  that  the  incendiaries  were  Taborite  women,  who 
managed  to  pass  secretly  into  the  enemy's  lines.  Other  diffi- 
culties also  arose.  Many  of  the  crusaders,  at  the  moment 
when  Pope  Martin's  bull  had  caused  great  enthusiasm,  had 
enlisted  for  a  limited  time.  These  men — as  did  the  American 
volunteers  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war — now  began  to 
declare  that  their  term  of  service  had  elapsed,  and  begged 

*  Ebendorffer  of  Haselbach  has  placed  in  Sigismund's  mouth  a  very  eloquent 
harangue  in  which  he  protests  against  the  destruction  of  his  capital  (Pez, 
*'  Scriptores  rerum  Austriacarum,"  Vol.  II.  p.  850). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  59 

permission  to  return  to  their  homes.  When  this  was  refused 
many,  none  the  less,  left  the  camps.  Other  men,  professed 
mercenaries,  were  indeed  prepared  to  stay,  but  demanded  that 
their  pay  should  be  given  them  regularly.^  To  Sigismund, 
who  was  always  in  financial  trouble,  this  was  a  matter  of  great 
difficulty,  even  after  he  had,  following  the  example  of  his 
opponents,  begun  to  sell  the  monstrances  and  other  sacred 
vessels  in  the  churches  that  were  in  his  power. 

As  soon  as  it  appeared  certain  that  the  camps  of  the  crusaders 
would  break  up,  Sigismund  determined  also  to  leave  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Prague.  He  would,  indeed,  still  retain  a  large 
following,  as  the  Roman  Catholic  nobles  of  Bohemia  and 
Moravia  remained  with  him,  and  he  had  also  a  strong  force 
from  Silesia,  which  was  ready  to  continue  the  war.  He  was  in 
that  country  supported,  not  only  by  the  Catholic  nobles,  but 
also  by  the  townsmen,  who  were  mostly  Germans  and  ardent 
Roman  Catholics ;  these  terms  were  indeed  synonymous  in  the 
lands  of  the  Bohemian  crown  at  that  period.  These  con- 
siderations did  not  affect  Sigismund 's  decision,  though  he 
afterwards  again  appeared  near  Prague.  Great  doubt  has 
been  thrown  on  the  personal  courage  of  Sigismund,  who  cer- 
tainly differed  widely  from  his  grandfather  King  John,  "  the 
crown  of  chivalry."  ^  Xhe  annals  constantly  refer  to  the  brave 
deeds  of  2izka,  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg,  Bofek  of  Miletinek, 
and  on  the  Catholic  side  of  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg — to  mention 
but  a  few  names — but  Sigismund  never  appears  in  these  often 
very  picturesque  battle-pieces  except  occasionally  as  a  specta- 
tor. Before  retreating  from  Prague  Sigismund  was,  on  the 
advice  of  the  Bohemian  Catholic  nobles,  crowned  as  King  of 
Bohemia  in  St.  Vitus's  cathedral  on  the  Hradcany  hill.  It  is 
not  my  intention  to  refer  here — I  have  done  so  elsewhere — to 

*  How  greatly  financial  difficulties  contributed  to  the  dispersion  of  the 
crusaders  is  proved  by  a  very  laconic  statement  of  a  contemporary  Bohemian 
chronicler.  He  writes;  "Afterwards  [i.  e.  after  the  defeat  of  the  Vitkov] 
the  King  dismissed  the  Germans,  for  he  had  nothing  more  to  give  them  " 
("  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  IH.  p.  38). 

*  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  pp.  68-69. 


6o  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

the  great  importance  which  the  Bohemians  attach  to  the 
coronation  of  their  kings.  The  ceremony  took  place  on  July  28. 
Sigismund  was  crowned  by  the  archbishop  of  Prague,  Conrad 
of  Vechta,  in  the  presence  of  numerous  German  princes,  among 
whom  was  his  son-in-law,  Albert,  archduke  of  Austria. 
Some  Bohemian  nobles  of  the  Catholic  party  were  also  present. 
Two  days  later  Sigismund  and  his  forces  retired  to  Kutna 
Hora,  where  they  remained  for  a  considerable  time. 

In  Prague  the  citizens,  who  now  enjoyed  temporary  quiet, 
began  to  take  counsel  as  to  the  future  government  of  their 
country.  They  now  already  decided  to  send  an  embassy  to 
Ladislas,  King  of  Poland,  which  was  to  offer  him  the  Bohemian 
crown.  2izka,  who,  though  an  implacable  hater  of  Sigismund, 
was  not  opposed  to  the  monarchical  system  of  government, 
gave  his  support  to  this  scheme.  The  proposal  was,  however, 
rejected  by  King  Ladislas,  who,  a  heathen  by  birth,  had  only 
recently  been  received  into  the  Roman  Church,  and  was  strongly 
averse  to  any  conflict  with  the  head  of  the  Church  which  he 
had  just  joined.  As  appeared  later,  the  Bohemians  would 
probably  have  been  received  more  favourably  had  they  offered 
the  crown  to  Prince  Vitold  of  Lithuania,  a  relation  of  King 
Ladislas.^  Vitold,  also  born  a  heathen,  had  afterwards  joined 
the  Greek  Church,  but  was  now  a  Roman  Catholic.  His 
intense  ambition  was,  however,  little  troubled  by  religious 
scruples.  Though  it  has  been  necessary  to  mention  here 
already  these  plans  of  the  restoration  of  monarchy  under  a 
Slavic  prince,  it  will  be  better  to  refer  again  to  these  negotia- 
tions later,  when  they  had  become  more  fully  developed. 

The  short  period  of  respite  which  the  citizens  of  the  capital 
had  secured  was,  unfortunately,  also  marked  by  the  beginning  of 
discord  between  the  Taborites  and  the  moderate  Utraquists  or 
Praguers,  as  they  began  to  be  called,  that  city  being  the  centre 
of  moderate  Hussitism.  The  presence  of  Taborite  priests 
in  Prague  had  greatly  influenced  many  of  the  citizens  whose 

*  They  were  both  grandsons  of  Gedymin,  Prince  of  Lithuaniaj 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  6l 

religious  views  had  hitherto  conformed  to  the  teaching  of  the 
masters  of  the  university,  particularly  of  those  who,  like  John 
of  Pribram,  Jacobellus  of  Stfibro,  Christian  of  Prachatice,  had 
been  intimate  friends  of  Hus.^    The  teaching  of  the  Taborites 
went  far  beyond  anything  ever  contemplated  by  the  master. 
They  founded  their  doctrine  entirely  on  the  Bible,  and  rejected 
all  later  dogmas  as  human  inventions.     They  rejected  private 
confession  as  a  sacrament,  and  admitted  only  a  general  public 
confession  of  sins.     They  entirely  refused  to  admit  the  exist- 
ence of  purgatory,  and  demanded  an  extreme  simplicity  in  the 
religious  services ;  the  churches  were  to  have  no  altars ;  only  a 
plain  table  was  to  be  used  for  Communion ;  they  also  strongly 
objected  to  the  use  of  vestments  and  of  costly  vessels  at  the 
religious  services.     The  situation  became  very  serious.     The 
demand  of  these  innovations,  which  were  abhorred  by  most  of 
the  Praguers,  was  made  by  an  armed  peasantry  who,  after 
defeating  the  chivalry  of  Europe,  were  not  likely  to  prove 
conciliatory  towards  the  citizens  of  Prague.     Intestine  war- 
fare then  already  appeared  probable.     That  it  was  for  a  time 
averted  is  due  to  the  statesmanship  of  2izka.     He  was  no  friend 
of  religious  anarchism,  and  we  will  shortly  find  him  severely 
punishing  crazy  fanatics.     The  extreme  veneration  which  he 
cherished  for  the  memory  of  Hus  rendered  him  very  reluctant 
to  oppose  the  old  friends  of  the  master.     His  link  with  the 
advanced  party  consisted  mainly  in  their  common  abhorrence 
of  Sigismund,  whose  candidature  to  the  Bohemian  throne  some 
of  the  Utraquist  nobles  and  a  few  conservative  citizens  still 
considered  as  admissible,  should  he  frankly  accept  the  articles 
of  Prague.     Zizka  announced  to  his  followers  that  the  possi- 
bility of  an  attack  on  Tabor  by  Sigismund's  partisans  necessi- 
tated their  presence  in  Southern  Bohemia,  and  on  August  22 
the  Taborites  left  Prague. 

Though,  in  consequence  of  the  very  short  range  of  the  primi- 
tive artillery  of  that  day,  the  citizens  of  Prague  were  in  a 

*  See  my  Master  John  Huss,  passim. 


62  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

state  of  comparative  security,  the  royal  garrisons  in  the 
fortresses  of  the  Hrad^any  and  Vysehrad  were  yet  a  permanent 
menace  to  the  city.  The  Praguers  therefore  determined  to 
Jay  siege  to  the  Vysehrad,  from  which  stronghold  the  neigh- 
bouring parts  of  the  new  town  were  always  open  to  an  attack. 
On  Sunday,  September  15,  some  of  the  troops  of  the  Praguers 
and  their  alHes  left  the  city  and  occupied  the  village  of  Pankrac 
and  the  church  of  that  name,  which  lie  on  the  high  road  that 
then  as  now  runs  from  Southern  Bohemia  to  Prague  by 
way  of  the  Vysehrad.  This  new  position  was  immediately 
fortified  by  earthworks.  Somewhat  later  the  Praguers  also 
succeeded  in  occupying  positions  to  the  left  and  the  right 
of  the  fortress,  thus  joining  the  fortifications  at  Pankrac  to 
those  of  the  city,  and  surrounding  the  Vysehrad  in  every 
direction. 

Before  continuing  the  account  of  the  siege  it  is,  however, 
necessary  to  mention  a  new  attempt  at  mediation.  The 
nobles  of  the  district  of  Kr^ov6  Hradec,  whose  leader  was 
probably  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  attempted  to  persuade  Sigismund 
to  accept  the  articles  of  Prague  and  conclude  a  truce  in  view  of  a 
possible  pacification.  An  envoy  from  Kralov^  Hradec  under- 
took the  mission  of  informing  Sigismund  of  this  proposal. 
The  King,  as  usual,  evading  a  direct  answer,  but  raising  counter- 
demands,  declared  that  it  was  necessary  that  the  citizens  of 
Prague  should  previously  abandon  the  siege  of  the  Vysehrad. 
When  the  envoy  arrived  at  Prague  he  found  the  citizens 
determinately  opposed  to  this  demand.  They,  however,  put 
forth  another  proposal,  which  cannot  be  considered  unfair; 
both  besiegers  and  defenders  were  for  a  time  to  evacuate  the 
Vysehrad  and  its  neighbourhood,  which,  during  the  peace 
negotiations,  were  provisionally  to  be  occupied  by  the  nobles  of 
Kr^love  Hradec,  who  attempted  to  mediate  between  the  con- 
tending parties.  When  the  envoy  returned  to  Beroun  bearing 
this  message,  Sigismund  was  seized  by  one  of  those  attacks  of 
fury  verging  on  madness  to  which,  like  his  brother  Venceslas, 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  63 

he  was  subject.  Using  the  most  filthy  language,^  he  declared 
that  he  felt  far  more  inclined  grossly  to  insult  the  citizens  of 
Prague  than  to  surrender  the  Vysehrad ;  "  rather,"  he  continued, 
"  let  these  peasants  ^  surrender  the  city  of  Kralove  Hradec  to 
me."  He  then  drove  the  envoy  from  his  presence,  after  having 
grossly  insulted  him. 

It  was  again  obvious  that  Sigismund  would  only  accept  the 
unconditional  surrender  of  the  Bohemian  nation,  and  the 
Praguers  continued  the  investment  of  the  Vysehrad  with 
increased  energy.  They  again  appealed  to  their  allies  for  aid, 
and  this  was  readily  granted  them,  as  the  Bohemians  now  felt 
certain  that  the  result  of  the  great  civil  war  depended  on  the 
possession  of  Prague — as  proved  true  at  the  end  of  the  war. 
The  citizens  received  immediate  aid  from  the  men  of  the  Orebite 
community,  who,  led  by  their  gallant  commander,  Krusina  of 
Lichtenburg,  marched  to  Prague  with  a  force  of  7,000  soldiers. 
The  faithful  citizens  of  2atec  and  Loun  sent  a  contingent  to 
Prague,  again  commanded  by  Bradaty,  who  had  previously 
taken  part  in  the  defence  of  the  city.  Victorin  of  Podebrad, 
one  of  the  greatest  territorial  nobles  of  Bohemia  (father  of  George 
of  Podebrad,  who  became  King  of  Bohemia),  now  renounced  the 
allegiance  of  Sigismund,  and  with  a  large  force  marched  to  the 
aid  of  the  capital.  The  Taborites  also  promised  to  send  troops, 
but  did  not  do  so  immediately,  as  they  were  then  engaged  in 
warfare  with  the  Catholic  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  who  was 
raiding  the  country  near  Tabor  and  murdering  mercilessly  all 
whom  he  suspected  of  having  received  Communion  in  the  two 
kinds.  It  was  only  somewhat  later  that  Nicholas  of  Hus 
arrived  at  Prague  with  forty  Taborite  horsemen. 

The  Praguers  and  their  allies  now  encircled  the  Vysehrad  in 
every  direction,  intending — in  the  fashion  so  frequent  in  the 

*  I  do  not  dare  to  repeat  Sigismund's  words,  through  even  the  learned  Professor 
Tomek  has  not  hesitated  to  repeat  (in  the  original  Latin)  the  King's  words  as 
recorded  by  Bfezova. 

*  The  persons  referred  to  being  mostly  knights  and  nobles,  calling  them 
"  peasants  "  was,  of  course,  at  that  feudal  period  a  gross  insult. 


64  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

Bohemian  warfare  of  that  period — to  enforce  by  starvation 
the  surrender  of  the  garrison.  The  encampment  of  the  Praguers 
was  near  the  village  of  Pankrac ;  next  to  them  were  placed  the 
troops  of  Lord  Victorin  of  Podebrad  and  the  men  of  the  Orebite 
community  under  Lord  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg,  who  was 
chosen  as  commander-in-chief  of  the  whole  national  army. 
Close  to  this  encampment  the  men  of  Zatec  and  Loun  under 
Bradaty  took  up  their  position  on  the  declivity  below  the 
Karlov  church.  The  three  camps  were  protected  by  a  deep 
fosse  that  extended  from  the  lines  of  Pankrac  to  the  position 
of  Bradaty  and  the  city  walls.  The  Vysehrad  was  thus  sur- 
rounded in  every  direction,  except  where  almost  perpendicular 
cliffs  descend  from  the  hill  to  the  Vltava.  It  was  attempted 
to  bring  provisions  to  the  castle  from  the  river,  but  this  attempt 
failed,  as  Sigismund's  ill-conceived  plans  generally  did.  The 
last  events  connected  with  the  siege  of  the  Vysehrad  and  its 
capitulation  are  best  told  in  the  words  of  Lawrence  of  Bfezova, 
the  contemporary  chronicler,  whose  narrative  is  here  at  its 
best.  He  shares  with  most  mediaeval  chroniclers  the  defect 
of  great  proUxity,  and  it  is  often  necessary  to  abridge  his 
narration.  He  writes  ^ :  **  By  this  time  John  of  Sembera  and 
the  other  captains  of  the  castle  of  Vysehrad,  having  observed 
that  the  King  still  deferred  supplying  them  with  provisions, 
and  that  many,  tormented  by  hunger  and  not  having  even 
horse-flesh,  appeared  pale  as  the  dead,  while  others  died  of 
hunger,  on  the  day  of  St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude  (October  28) 
held  a  conference  with  Lord  KruSina  and  the  other  barons  and 
commanders  of  the  army  of  Prague,  meeting  in  an  amicable 
fashion  at  a  spot  midway  between  the  VySehrad  and  the 
church  of  St.  Pancrace;  now  while  this  conference  was  pro- 
ceeding a  wondrous  rainbow  appeared  in  the  skies.  While 
some  masters  of  the  liberal  arts  and  bachelors  were  sitting  on 
the  summit  of  a'hill  named  Kavec,  overlooking  the  Vltava  river, 
and  were  waiting  for  a  good  result  of  the  happy  conference, 

*  pp.  435  and  ff.  of  Bfezova 's  chronicle. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  65 

and  were  talking  on  various  subjects,  there  appeared  in  the  air 
a  rainbow  such  as  we  ^  had  never  seen  before.  Its  arc  arose 
almost  at  our  feet  in  the  Vltava  river  and  it  extended  over  the 
city  as  far  as  a  spot  near  St.  Pancrace's  church,  where  soldiers 
were  standing,  awaiting  the  result  of  the  conference.  Thus 
only  in  the  space  between  that  church  and  the  hill  on  which  we 
were  sitting  the  circle  was  incomplete,  and  this  space  was  not 
greater  than  a  fourth  of  the  whole  circle.  And  while  many  were 
giving  various  opinions  as  to  the  significance  of  this  rainbow, 
we  joyfully  sat  down  again,  for  this  miraculous  rainbow  was 
[i.  e.  signified]  that  the  Praguers  would  soon  take  possession  of 
the  Vysehrad ;  and  indeed  it  befell  thus,  as  will  be  told  later. 
For  by  the  will  of  God  a  treaty  was  concluded  between  the 
parties  according  to  which,  if  the  King  did  not  send  sufficient 
provisions  before  the  fifteenth  hour  ^  on  the  ist  of  November, 
which  was  the  day  of  All  Saints,  then  the  possessors  of  the  castle 
were  on  their  faith  and  honour  to  surrender  the  Vysehrad  to 
the  citizens  of  Prague."  Bfezova  then  gives  the  document 
containing  the  details  of  this  conditional  surrender,  as  it  may 
be  called,  as  well  as  the  names  and  titles  of  all  the  warriors  and 
chiefs  of  both  parties  who  signed  the  agreement. 

It  is  interesting  to  quote  again  Bfezova's  account  of  the  last 
events  of  the  campaign  of  the  Vysehrad.  He  continues  : 
"  On  the  vigil  of  the  day  of  All  Saints,  the  King,  who  had 
arrived  at  Novy  Hrad  early  in  the  morning,  was  afraid  of  at- 
tacking the  men  of  Prague  early  on  that  day,  hoping  to  receive 
further  reinforcements  from  the  Moravian  barons.  These 
arrived  at  Novy  Hrad  towards  evening,  and  remained  in  the 
woods  in  full  armour  during  the  night,  that  they  might  be  pre- 
pared in  the  morning  to  repulse  from  their  camp  the  men  of 
Prague  and  all  their  allies.  During  the  night  the  King  also 
sent  a  message  to  his  mercenaries  in  the  (Hradcany)  castle  of 
Prague,  ordering  them  to  be  under  arms  early  next  mornings 

1  Bfezova  was  one  of  the  party  and  therefore  writes  as  an  eye-witness. 

2  That  is,  9  A.M.  according  to  our  present  system  of  counting  time. 
F 


66  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

and,  descending  from  their  fortress,  to  attack  the  bridge-tower  * 
or  the  house  of  the  Duke  of  Saxony  ^  and  burn  them  down  if 
possible ;  he  himself  would,  with  a  large  force  of  soldiers  who 
had  joined  him  on  that  evening,  drive  the  Praguers  from  the 
field  at  the  same  time.  But  God,  who  opposes  the  proud  and 
favours  the  humble,  delivered  the  messenger  with  his  letter  into 
the  hands  of  the  Praguers,  who,  informed  by  the  letter,  fully 
understood  the  plans  of  the  King.  The  captains  of  the  men  of 
Prague,  therefore,  carefully  disposed  their  soldiers,  showing 
each  of  them  which  place  he  would  with  his  men  occupy  on 
the  morrow  and  bravely  defend  against  the  attacks  of  the 
enemy. ^ 

"  Thus  it  happened  that  the  King,  with  15,000  or  20,000  well- 
armed  men,  descending  from  Novy  Hrad,  approached  the  spot 
where  his  army  stood.  Then,  standing  on  the  summit  of  a  hill 
from  which  the  road  descends  in  the  direction  of  St.  Pancrace's 
church,  he  drew  his  sword  and  brandished  it  in  the  air,  thus 
signalling  to  the  men  on  the  Vysehrad  that  they  should  make 
a  sortie  from  their  castle  and  attack  the  enemies,  because  he, 
with  a  large  army,  which  they  could  see  from  the  Vysehrad, 
was  preparing  to  attack  the  Praguers.  But  as  the  King  by  the 
will  of  God  had  neglected  to  arrive  at  the  hour  fixed  by  the 
agreement,  the  captains  of  the  Vysehrad  closed  the  gates  of  the 
castle  and  allowed  no  one  from  the  Vysehrad  to  attack  the 
Praguers,  though  many,  principally  those  who  were  Germans, 
wished  to  do  so.  When  the  nobles  of  the  King's  army  saw  that 
the  troops  on  the  Vysehrad  did  not  stir,  and  that  the  Praguers 
were  well  entrenched,  they  advised  the  King  not  to  attack 
them  if  he  wished  to  avoid  serious  losses  to  his  army.  Then 
the  King  said,  *  Far  be  this  from  me  !  It  is  altogether  necessary 
that  I  should  fight  with  these  peasants  to-day/    Then  Lord 

1  On  the  left  bank^of  the  Vltava. 

*  This  house,  the  former  Prague  residence  of  the  Dukes  of  Saxony,  was 
situated  in  the  Maid  Strana  close  to  the  bridge-tower. 

•  Bf ezova  obviously  refers  to  orders  given  by  the  commanding  general  to 
his  ofl&cers. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  67 

Henry  of  Plumlov,^  courteously  addressing  the  King,  said  : 
*  Be  it  known  to  you,  lord  King,  that  you  will  incur  great 
losses  to-day  and  retreat  in  disorder;  for  I,' — he  said — 'dread 
the  fighting-clubs  of  these  peasants.  Then  the  King  :  *  I  know,' 
he  said,  '  that  you  Moravians  are  cowards,  and  not  loyal  to 
me.'  Then  the  said  Lord  Henry,  with  the  other  barons  of 
Moravia,  speedily  dismounted,  and  said  :  *  Behold,  we  are  ready 
to  go  where  thou  sendest  us,  and  we  shall  be  there,  O  King, 
where  thou  shalt  not  be.'  ^  Then  the  King  assigned  to  them 
the  most  dangerous  post,  ordering  them  to  advance  through 
low-lying  ground,  passing  along  marshes  and  fishponds,  and 
then  bravely  attack  the  Praguers.  He  ordered  the  Hungarians 
to  march  over  higher  ground  along  the  high  road  and  attack 
the  men  of  Prague.  And  when  the  troops  had  formed  in  this 
order  and  attacked  bravely  the  Praguers  in  their  entrenchments, 
these  [the  Praguers]  were  terrified,  and  at  first  began  to  fly,  and 
crowded  round  the  church  of  St.  Pancrace.  Seeing  this  Lord 
Krusina  said  with  a  loud  voice :  '  O  good  brethren,  turn  back 
and  be  to-day  brave  soldiers  in  Christ's  battle ;  for  it  is  not  our 
war,  but  God's  that  we  are  waging ;  for  you  see  that  the  Lord 
God  to-day  delivers  all  our  enemies  and  His  own  into  our  hands.' 
Before  he  had  finished  his  speech  some  one  exclaimed  :  '  The 
enemies  fly  !  they  fly !  '  On  hearing  this  they  all  rushed  forward, 
drove  the  enemies  back  from  the  entrenchments  and  turned  them 
to  flight.  Then  the  Praguers  with  their  nobles, ^  pursuing  them 
cruelly,  killed  some  in  the  marshes  and  fish-ponds,  as  well  as  those 
who  were  flying  in  every  direction,  through  the  vineyards  and 
the  fields.  The  peasants  struck  them  [the  enemies]  down  with 
their  fighting-clubs,  sparing  none,  though  some  surrendered  and 
promised  to  observe  God's  law  *  up  to  their  death.  The  nobles  ^ 
in  armour,  who  had  fought  bravely  during  the  battle,  made 

*  The  leader^of  the  Moravian  nobles. 

2  This  taunt  was,  of  course,  an  allusion  to  the  widespread  rumour  that 
Sigismund  wasTdeficient  in  personal  courage. 

*  i.  e.  the  nobles  who  fought  on  their  side. 

*  i.  e.  the  articles^of  Prague.  »  Of  the  Hussite  party. 


68  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

many  prisoners  and,  even  at  their  own  peril,  saved  many  from 
the  fighting-clubs  of  the  brethren.  Thus  Lord  Henry  of 
Plumlov,  who  had  been  mortally  wounded  and  made  a  prisoner, 
was  carried  to  the  churchyard  of  St.  Pancrace,  made  confession, 
and  died  while  asking  to  receive  Communion  in  the  two  kinds. 
Similarly  Lord  Henry  of  Lefl  ^  died  lying  in  his  tent  after  having 
confessed  and  received  Communion  in  the  two  kinds.  Thus 
few  of  the  barons  of  Moravia  who  opposed  Communion  in  the 
two  kinds  remained  alive.  Here  Lord  Henry  of  Plumlov, 
supreme  captain  of  Moravia,  who,  according  to  his  promise, 
joined  the  King  with  2,000  men,  Jaroslav  of  Veseli,  Vok  of 
Holstyn  .  .  .  with  many  barons  and  knights  of  Bohemia 
and  Moravia,  were  cruelly  killed  like  pigs,  and  deprived  of  their 
armour  and  all  their  clothing  except  their  shirts.  What  man 
who  was  not  a  pagan  could  pass  through  those  fields  and  vine- 
yards and  view  the  brave  bodies  of  the  dead  without  com- 
passion ?  What  Bohemian,  unless  he  were  a  madman,  could 
see  these  dainty  and  robust  warriors,  these  youths  so  curly- 
haired  and  so  comely,  without  deeply  bewailing  their  fate  ^ ; 
particularly  as  many,  by  order  of  the  [Taborite]  priests,  remained 
in  the  vineyards  and  fields,  and  thus  became  the  food  of  wolves, 
dogs,  and  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  the  terror  of  those  who  beheld 
them  ?  Some  of  them  were,  however,  buried  by  faithful  and 
pious  men  at  night-time.  The  number  of  those  killed  was 
counted  as  being  about  400  men  in  armour,  besides  those 
who  were  wounded  and  died  at  Brod  and  on  the  way ;  so  that 
it  was  said  that  about  500  men  of  the  King's  army  had 
perished,  while  it  was  also  said  that  scarcely  thirty  men  of  the 
army  of  Prague  had  been  killed.  Of  these  the  most  important 
was  Jesek,  son  of  Jesek  the  goldsmith,  who,  with  Krusina, 

1  Lefl  had  been  a  friend  of  Hus,  who  mentions  him  in  his  last  letter.  (See  my 
Master  John  Hus,  p.  275.) 

2  This  passage  has  been  greatly  admired  by  all  readers  of  Bfezova.  The 
humanity  and  compassion  expressed  in  it  form  a  very  welcome  respite  in  the 
midst  of  an  almost  uninterrupted  record  of  ferocity  and  cruelty.  Professor 
Denis,  in  his  brilliant  Hus  et  la  guerre  des  Hussites,  expresses  particular 
admiration  for  this  passage. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  69 

Bocko,  and  Nicholas  of  Hus,  figliting  knightly,  deserved  the 
sword-belt  of  knighthood.  Now  there  was  on  this  day  a  strong 
and  very  cold  wind,  which  was  more  harmful  to  the  knights 
in  armour  than  to  the  lightly-clad  footmen.  There  appeared, 
also  in  the  air,  a  column  in  the  fashion  of  a  rainbow,  and  the 
many  who  gazed  at  it  wondered  what  it  signified. 

"  At  the  time  of  the  battle  the  mercenaries  also  descended 
from  the  [Hradcany]  castle  of  Prague  and  attacked  the  Saxon 
house,  but  when  they  saw  that  their  attack  was  useless  they 
burnt  down  a  few  houses  in  the  Mala  Strana  and  then  returned 
to  the  castle  from  which  they  had  descended. 

"  The  King,  as  has  been  said,  during  the  battle  stood  on  the 
summit  of  a  hill,  and  when  he  saw  the  pitiable  destruction  of 
his  men,  struck  by  terror,  and  feeling  with  his  followers,  he 
retired  with  tears.  And,  after  having  placed  the  wounded  on 
carts,  he  evacuated  Novy  Hrad  and  marched  by  the  shortest  road 
to  Brod.  After  having  here  buried  a  Hungarian  nobleman  he 
returned  to  Kutna  Hora  greatly  lamenting.  Wishing,  however, 
to  conceal  the  death  of  so  many  of  his  men,  he  declared  that 
more  Praguers  than  soldiers  of  his  own  army  had  been  killed. 
There,  on  this  day  and  on  the  following  one,  he  and  his  queen 
placed  green  wreaths  on  their  heads,  pretending  to  show  joy 
which  in  their  hearts  they  did  not  feel." 

I  have  devoted  a  considerable  amount  of  space  to  the 
transcription  of  this,  the  finest  of  Bfezova  battle-pieces;  he 
writes,  of  course,  on  some  occasions  as  an  eye-witness. 
Bfezova's  own  views,  which  were  those  of  the  Utraquist  nobles 
and  the  university  of  Prague — what  Dr.  V.  Bezold  has  very 
strikingly  called  the  "  Hussite  High  Church  " — appear  very 
clearly  from  the  passages  which  I  have  quoted.  Bfezova 
firmly  believed  in  the  justice  of  the  Hussite  cause,  and  was 
certain  that  men  such  as  Lord  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg  were 
fighting  God's  battle.  On  the  other  hand,  he  severely  blames 
the  cruelty  of  fanatical  peasants  instigated  by  visionary  priests. 
The  abnormal  condition  of  Bohemia  at  this  period  appears  very 


70  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

clearly  when  we  read  of  knights  and  nobles  who  march  to 
Bohemia  to  extirpate  all  Utraquists,  and  yet  piously  receive 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds  before  dying.  Bfezova's  narra- 
tive also  seems  to  predict  the  future  divisions  among  the 
Hussites  which  afterwards  led  to  bloodshed,  and  finally  to  the 
downfall  of  the  Hussite  cause. 

The  fortress  of  the  Vysehrad  capitulated  to  the  victorious 
army  of  Prague  immediately  after  the  retreat  of  Sigismund ;  on 
this  occasion  also  the  zeal  of  fanatical  peasants  caused  the 
destruction  of  many  ancient  churches  and  monuments.  It  is 
not,  however,  true  that,  as  has  been  often  stated,  all  buildings 
on  the  Vysehrad  hill  were  destroyed,  and  that  it  then  already 
began  to  acquire  that  appearance  of  solitude  and  decay  which 
it  now  wears.  The  last  warlike  events  of  the  year  1420  took 
place  in  Southern  Bohemia.  2izka  had,  as  previously  mentioned, 
returned  to  that  district  as  soon  as  the  safety  of  Prague  had 
been  at  least  momentarily  assured.  He  first  marched  to 
Pisek,  a  city  that  had  already  joined  the  brotherhood  of  Tabor. 
From  this  centre  he  invaded  the  extensive  domains  of  Lord 
Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  and  on  October  12  he  defeated  the  forces 
of  Rosenberg  and  other  Roman  Catholic  nobles.  Before  the 
end  of  the  year  he  had  also  obtained  possession  of  the  important 
city  of  Prachatice. 


CHAPTER  III 

It  is  necessary  to  turn  for  a  moment  from  the  records  of 
incessant  warfare  to  the  study  of  the  internal  condition  of 
Bohemia  during  the  early  part  of  the  Hussite  wars.  These 
wars  have  that  analogy  to  the  great  English  civil  w^ar  in  that 
minor  struggles,  simultaneously  with  the  warfare  of  the  main 
armies,  but  almost  independently  of  it,  took  place  in  several 
parts  of  the  country.  Thus  2izka's  brilliant  campaign  in 
Southern  Bohemia  in  the  autumn  of  1420  had  little  connection 
with  the  war  waged  against  Sigismund  by  the  Praguers  and 
the  Utraquist  nobles  almost  at  the  same  moment.  Up  to 
the  end  of  the  war  there  was  constant  border-warfare  on  the 
frontier  of  Bohemia  and  Silesia,  and  incessant  combats  between 
the  citizens  and  the  neighbouring  Utraquist  nobles  also  took 
place  around  Plzen — the  town  which,  first  occupied  by  2izka, 
became  the  principal  stronghold  of  the  Roman  party  during 
the  later  period  of  the  war. 

As  the  religious  dissensions  were — whatever  other  motives 
may  have  influenced  the  actors — the  principal  cause  of  the 
Hussite  wars,  it  is  well  to  consider  here  the  position  of  the 
different  parties.  It  is  a  mistake  to  believe,  as  many  writers 
have  done,  that  a  fundamental  difference  existed  among  the 
Hussites  from  the  beginning  of  the  movement  and  as  soon 
as  they  attempted  to  obtain  religious  freedom.  All  Hussites 
equally  revered  the  great  name  of  Hus,  and  agreed  generally 
on  many  important  points,  such  as  Communion  in  the  two 
kinds  and  the  necessity  of  a  thorough  reformation  of  the 
clergy.  How  urgent  that  necessity  was  can  only  be  understood 
by  those  who  take  the  trouble  to  study  contemporary  records, 
even  those  written  by  faithful  adherents  of  the  Roman  Catholic 

71 


72  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Church  ^ ;  no  similar  condition  fortunately  exists  in  any 
country  at  the  present  time.  Had  the  Utraquist  or  moderate 
Hussite  Church  been  allowed  peacefully  to  pursue  its  develop- 
ment, it  is  not  impossible  that  a  Bohemian  national  Church, 
conforming  to  Rome  in  most  matters,  might  have  been  estab- 
lished under  the  auspices  of  the  very  influential  university  of 
Prague,  and  of  the  Bohemian  nobility,  then  one  of  the  most 
enlightened  in  Europe.  Had  Venceslas,  who  undoubtedly 
sympathised  with  the  Hussite  movement — as  far  as  his  very 
limited  intelligence  permitted  him  to  do  so — been  a  man  of 
firm  will  and  determination,  such  an  occurrence  was,  perhaps, 
not  an  impossibility.  From  the  moment  that  the  foreign 
invasion  began  the  extreme  party  gained  the  upper  hand,  as 
was  the  case  in  the  French  Revolution  and  on  so  many  other 
occasions. 2  The  terrible  misfortunes  that  befell  Bohemia 
inevitably  raised  to  the  highest  pitch  of  excitement  a  race  in 
which  mysticism  is  innate.  The  example  of  relentless  warfare 
which  the  Bohemians  derived  from  their  study  of  the  Old 
Testament  and  the  Apocalyptic  preaching  of  fanatical  priests, 
such  as  John  of  Zelivo  and  Ambrose  of  Kralove  Hradec, 
undoubtedly  contributed  largely  to  the  brilliant  victories  of 
the  Hussites.  There  is  also  no  doubt  that  these  priests,  as 
the  preachers  of  the  Scotch  Puritans,  were  fully  convinced 
of  the  justice  of  their  cause.  The  priests  John  and  Ambrose 
differed  in  no  respect  from  the  Taborite  woman  who,  when 

1  I  do  not  care  to  enter  here  into  this  matter,  and  must  refer  the  reader  to 
my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  14-16. 

*  Even  the  Tdborites  at  first  hoped  that  the  revolution  could  be  carried 
out  peacefully.  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  writes  in  his  Chronicon  Tabor itarum  : 
"  Illos  articulos  [the  articles  of  Prague]  ac  illas  sanctas  veritates  parati  erant 
rite  scripturis  legis  Dei  fundare  et  munire  sine  omnibus  bellicis  difficultatibus. 
Dum  et  quando  fuisset  eis  data  debita  pacifica  et  catholica  publica  audientia 
quam  multis  annis  minime  habere  potuerunt.  Quia  autem  inimicus  veritatis 
ac  humanae  salutis  diabolus,  nolens  ut  hoc  bonum  augeatur,  suscitavit  membra 
sua  quatenus  hoc  bonum  per  potentiam,  violentiam  ceterasque  crudelitates 
tam  per  saeculares  quam  per  spirituales  impediatur  ut  puta  per  papam  et 
alios  praelatos  per  Sigismundum  regem  tunc  Hungariae,  Teutonicos  et  caeteras 
exteras  nationes  et  domesticos  indigenas  eorum  in  hoc  adjutores  qui  conabantur 
qualiter  hoc  bonum  inceptura  et  cum  BohemiccB  nationis  linguagio  condemnent, 
deleant  ac  extirminent  "  (Hofler,  Geschichtsschreiber,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  p.  481). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  73 

urged  to  take  part  in  a  temporary  retreat  during  the  battle 
of  the  Vitkov,  said  :  "A  true  Christian  must  never  retire 
before  Antichrist."  The  ferocity  with  which  the  Germans 
carried  on  the  war,  of  course,  continuously  strengthened  the 
advanced  party  among  the  Hussites.  To  the  Germans  the 
national  hatred  of  the  Bohemian  Slav  proved  an  even  stronger 
incentive  to  cruelty  than  the  fanaticism  which  urged  them  to 
exterminate  heretics.  It  is  certain  that  among  the  countless 
Bohemian  peasants,  men  and  women, who,  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Prague,were  ruthlessly  slaughtered  by  the  so-called  crusaders, 
there  were  many  who  had  always  been  faithful  to  the  Catholic 
Church  and  had  never  even  heard  of  the  Hussite  doctrine. 
The  unfortunately  well-founded  conviction  that  the  Germans 
intended  to  destroy  their  race  and  extirpate  their  language 
excited  the  Bohemians  to  greater  fury,  and  their  revenge  was 
sometimes  terrible,  though  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that 
the  cruelty  of  the  Hussites  was  never  as  great  nor  as  general 
as  that  of  their  antagonists. 

The  first  symptoms  of  discord  among  the  Hussites  were  not 
of  great  importance,  and  were  founded  on  differences  of  social 
rank,  which  at  a  feudal  period  necessarily  separated  the 
nationalist  nobles  from  the  peasantry,  and  even  from  the 
Utraquist  townsmen.  There  were  certainly  among  the  ad- 
vanced Taborites  levellers,  to  whom  the  distinction  conferred 
by  learning,  as  represented  by  the  university  of  Prague,  was 
as  distasteful  as  were  the  privileges  of  knighthood  and  nobility. 
More  serious,  however,  were  the  theological  dissensions  which, 
almost  immediately  after  the  victory  of  the  Vitkov  had  secured 
temporary  safety,  broke  out  between  Utraquist  and  Taborite 
priests  on  certain  questions  of  ritual  and  doctrine. 

The  prominent  leaders  of  the  two  Hussite  parties  attempted 
to  mediate  in  these  disputes,  which,  within  a  nation  then 
almost  entirely  absorbed  in  theological  controversies,  were 
bound  to  lead  to  a  rupture,  and  eventually  to  civil  war; 
this    apprehension    somewhat    later    became    fully  justified. 


74  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

After  concluding  a  truce  with  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg 
2izka  marched  to  Rican,  a  city  that  was  still  in  the  hands 
of  Sigismund's  partisans.  Some  of  the  men  of  Prague  joined 
in  this  expedition,  and  Rican  capitulated  on  December  4. 
When  the  allies  returned  victoriously  to  Prague,  the  leaders 
began  to  consider  the  possibility  of  organising  a  disputa- 
tion in  which  the  Utraquist  priests  of  both  parties  could 
expound  their  doctrine.  It  was  hoped  that  such  an  ex- 
change of  views  might  lead  to  a  compromise.  The  real 
originator  of  this  plan  appears  to  have  been  Peter  Zmrzlik 
of  Svojsin,  an  intimate  friend  of  Hus,^  who  had  been  mint- 
master  during  the  reign  of  King  Venceslas,  but  had  been 
dismissed  by  Sigismund  because  of  his  Hussite  sympathies. 
Of  the  other  nobles  who  took  part  in  this  attempt  at  recon- 
ciliation the  most  important  was  Ulrich,  Lord  of  Hradec 
Jindfichuv  (Neuhaus).  These  men  succeeded  in  persuading 
the  citizens  of  the  Old  and  New  Towns  of  Prague,  as  well  as 
the  Taborites,  to  send  delegates  to  a  conference  which  was  to 
meet  at  the  church  of  St.  Ambrose  on  the  Pfikop  ^  on  December 
8.  To  further  the  peaceful  development  of  the  negotiations 
the  citizens  had  taken  a  step  which  is  very  characteristic 
of  the  period;  they  had  forbidden  access  to  the  church  to  all 
priests  and  women.  The  proceedings  were  orderly,  and  it 
was  agreed  that  the  deliberations  should  be  continued  two 
days  later  at  the  Carolinum  college  of  the  university.  On  the 
loth  the  aldermen  of  the  old  town  invited  the  disputants  to 
partake  of  a  banquet  at  the  town-hall  before  they  proceeded 
to  the  neighbouring  Carolinum.  2izka,  always  favourable 
to  concord  among  the  Hussite  parties,  readily  accepted  the 
invitation,  as  did  several  other  Taborite  captains.  Nicholas 
of  Hus,  however,  under  the  pretext  that  he  would  not  be 
safe  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  declined  to  proceed  either  to 
the  banquet  or  to  the  subsequent  conference.     When  after 

^  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  p.  275,  n.  i. 

*  See  my  Prague  ("  Mediaeval  Town  "  series). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  75 

the  banquet  the  Taborite  leaders  and  the  Utraquist  nobles 
arrived  at  the  Carolinum,  they  found  there  Master  Prokop 
of  Plzen,  rector  of  the  university,  and  many  theologians 
who  belonged  to  it.  The  priests  of  the  Taborite  community 
failed  to  appear.  Lord  Ulrich  of  Hradec  and  2izka,  how- 
ever, did  not  even  then  despair  of  obtaining  an  agreement, 
and  they  proposed  that  the  disputants  should  meet  at  the 
house  of  Peter  of  Svojsin  in  the  old  town.  All  present  pro- 
ceeded to  that  house,  and  the  Taborite  divines  also  consented 
to  appear  there.  Among  those  present  were  besides  Zrmzlik 
of  Svojsin  many  Utraquist  nobles,  including  Lord  John  of 
Lacembok,  son  of  Lord  Henry,  who  had  accompanied  Hus  to 
Constance,^  the  Hussite  captains  2izka,  Chval  of  Machovic, 
Lord  Rohac  of  Duba,  one  of  the  few  nobles  who  remained 
faithful  to  the  cause  of  Tabor  up  to  the  end  of  the  civil  war, 
and  many  others.  Among  the  theologians  present  were 
Prokop  of  Plzeii,  rector  of  the  university,  and  the  most  learned 
divines  of  Prague,  as  well  as  the  most  prominent  priests  of 
the  community  of  Tabor.  Their  leader  and  spokesman  was 
Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov,  whom  the  Taborite  clergy  had  elected 
bishop,  thus  openly  seceding  from  the  Roman  Church,  while 
the  moderate  Utraquists  always  endeavoured  to  obtain 
Catholic  ordination  for  their  priests.  Among  the  Taborite 
divines  present  was  also  Martin  Loquis,  celebrated  as  an 
eloquent  preacher.  It  had  previously  been  agreed  that  the 
discussion  should  turn  mainly  on  the  question  of  vestments, 
which  then,  as  at  some  other  periods  of  the  development  of 
the  Catholic  Church,  caused  much  controversy.  Prokop  of 
Plzen,  rector  of  the  university,  however,  thought  it  advisable 
to  extend  the  discussion,  and  instructed  Master  Peter  Mladen- 
ovic  2  to  read  out  a  lengthy  paper,  which  formulated  in  seventy- 
two  articles  the  theses  of  the  T^borites  to  which  the  Utraquist 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  p.  208. 

*  The  companion  of  Hus  at  Constance  and  his  biographer,  one  of  the 
principal  moderate  Utraquist  theologians.  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp. 
240-243,  357,  etc. 


76  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

university  of  Prague  objected.  The  accusation  was  undoubtedly 
an  unfair  one.  Some  of  the  articles  recorded  the  Chiliastic 
teaching  of  certain  Taborite  preachers,  their  statement  that 
at  that  period  all  goods  should  be  common  to  all  the  faithful, 
who  were  justified  in  devastating  the  estates  of  those  opposed 
to  the  teaching  of  Tabor,  and  also  of  depriving  them  of  all 
wordly  goods.  The  Taborites  were  further  accused  of  saying 
that  at  that  moment  all  temporal  authority  had  ceased  to 
exist,  and  that  women  were  now  justified  in  leaving  their 
husbands,  if  they  felt  inclined  to  do  so.^  This  terrible  indict- 
ment of  the  whole  Taborite  party  cannot  be  sufficiently  blamed. 
The  Taborites  were  here  practically  accused  of  socialism, 
polygamy,  and  anarchism.  Such  views  had  undoubtedly 
been  expressed  by  fanatical  and  semi-crazy  priests  who  claimed 
to  belong  to  the  Taborite  community.  Other  articles  dealt 
with  more  serious  matters,  and  referred  to  views  that  were 
really  held  by  many  Taborites.  Prokop  of  Plzen  declared  in 
his  articles  that  the  Taborites  rejected  auricular  confession, 
that  they  celebrated  mass  in  the  open  air  and  under  tents, 
that  they  had  maintained  that  those  who,  contrary  to  the 
custom  of  the  primitive  Church,  celebrated  mass  clothed  in 
vestments  were  not  priests  but  hypocrites,  that  their  prayers 
were,  therefore,  vain,  and  that  none  should  attend  their  religious 
services.  It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  enumerate  here  the 
entire  contents  of  the  seventy-two  articles.  These  general 
accusations  caused  great  indignation  among  the  Taborites. 
Bishop  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  declared  that  he  accepted  the 
teaching  contained  in  the  articles,  but  rejected  the  venomous 
insinuations  which  had  been  read  out  together  with  them. 
He  added  that  the  Taborites  had  only  taken  part  in  the  con- 

^  Bfezova,  almost  as  malicious  when  writing  of  the  Tdborites  as  he  is 
when  referring  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  enumerates  all  the  accusations  made 
against  them.  He  writes  that  Prokop  of  Plzen  stated  that  they  believed  in 
a  "  regnum  ecclesiae  militantis  quod  est  domus  novissima  ante  resurrectionem." 
In  this  "  regnum  reparatum  "  "  mulieres  ecclesiae  viantis  parient  tilios  et 
filias  sine  corporali  perturbacione  et  dolore."  "  Est  hieresis,"  the  pious 
Prokop  of  Plzen  adds.     The  whole  document  has  great  psychological  interest. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  77 

ference  to  discuss  the  question  what  vestments  should  be  worn 
by  the  priests  when  celebrating  mass.  It  was  finally  decided 
that  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  as  representative  of  Tabor  and 
Master  Jacobellus  of  StHbro  in  the  name  of  the  university 
should  both  forward  to  Lord  Ulrich  of  Hradec  Jindfichuv, 
who  presided  at  the  conference,  and  to  the  burgomaster  of 
Prague,  a  detailed  written  statement  formulating  their  religious 
opinions.  The  conference  then  separated  with  only  the  nega- 
tive result  that  a  formal  rupture  between  the  Hussite  parties 
had  been  avoided.  On  the  following  day  2izka  and  his  soldiers 
returned  to  Tabor. 

Politics  and  religious  controversy  were  at  that  moment  so 
closely  connected  in  Bohemia  that  it  is  an  easy  transition  to 
refer  now  to  the  political  situation  in  Bohemia  during  the 
early  part  of  the  Hussite  wars.  Public  opinion  was  greatly 
divided.  Of  the  powerful  Bohemian  nobility,  that  part  which 
was  opposed  to  Church  reform  was,  of  course,  entirely  devoted 
to  the  cause  of  Sigismund,  the  champion  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church;  they  formed,  however,  but  a  small  minority.  Most 
Bohemian  knights  and  nobles  fervently  revered  the  memory 
of  Hus,  whom  many  of  them  had  known  personally,  and 
they  were  unanimous  in  demanding  a  thorough  reformation 
of  the  discipline  of  the  clergy  and  the  right  of  receiving  Com- 
munion in  the  two  kinds.  Many  of  these  men,  however, 
hesitated  before  formally  renouncing  their  allegiance  to 
Sigismund,  and  continued  hopeless  attempts  to  persuade  their 
sovereign  to  make  certain  religious  concessions  to  the  Bohemian 
nation.  It  seems  almost  certain  that  these  nobles  had  some 
ground  for  thinking  that  the  compromise  which  they  desired 
was  not  impossible.  The  treachery  and  duplicity  of  Sigismund 
render  all  conjectures  admissible,  even  if  we  remember  the 
virulent  abuse  of  all  heretics  in  which  the  King  of  Hungary 
frequently  indulged.  It  is  not  improbable  that  in  private 
conversations  with  some  of  the  nobles  Sigismund  may  have 
insinuated  that  he  was  prepared  to  make  certain  concessions 


78  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

to  the  Bohemian  people,  should  they  recognise  him  as  their 
sovereign.  This  is  rendered  all  the  more  probable  by  the  fact 
that  in  his  speeches  Sigismund  often  referred  to  the  example 
of  his  father,  Charles  IV,  who,  though  a  very  fervent  Catholic, 
severely  blamed  the  morals  of  the  clergy  of  his  time.^  The 
enforcement  of  rigid  discipline  of  the  clergy  was  one  of  the 
points  on  which  the  Hussites  laid  great  stress.  During  the 
siege  of  Prague  Sigismund's  conduct  had  on  several  occasions 
appeared  suspicious  to  his  German  allies.  It  has  already  been 
mentioned  that  he  was  accused  of  having  prevented  the 
artillery  of  the  crusaders  from  firing  at  the  city,  and  when 
the  German  crusaders  left  the  neighbourhood  of  Prague,  after 
the  raising  of  the  siege,  they  loudly  declared  that  Sigismund 
was  secretly  himself  a  heretic. 

While  thus  the  Roman  Catholic  nobility  remained  faithful 
to  Sigismund,  and  a  certain  number  of  Utraquists  long  hesi- 
tated to  throw  off  entirely  their  allegiance  to  him,  a  large 
party  in  Bohemia  soon  began  to  consider  the  subject  of  electing 
a   new  king.     Among  those  who   principally   favoured  this 
plan  were  the  majority  of  the  Utraquist  nobility,  the  cities 
and  university  of  Prague,  and  the  moderate  Taborites  with 
Zizka  at  their  head.     Only  a  few  extreme  fanatics  dreamt  of 
a   republican,    or   rather   anarchical,    form    of    government. 
Nicholas  of  Hus  immediately  protested  against  the  choice 
of  a  foreign  prince.     He  may  be  considered  as  having  thus 
raised   his   own   claim   to   the   Bohemian   throne.     That   he 
entertained   such   a    plan    is    stated    by   the   contemporary 
chroniclers  even  when  writing  of  the  period  that  preceded  the 
outbreak  of  the  war.     In  consequence  of  the  great  increase 
of  the  racial  hatred  between  Slav  and  Teuton,  which  was  one 
of  the^consequences  of  the  outbreak  of  the  Hussite  wars,  the 
election  of  a  German  prince  was  out  of  the  question.     Many 
soon   began  to  consider  the  possibility  of  raising  a  PoHsh 
prince    to    the    Bohemian    throne.     The    negotiations    that 

*  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  p.  77. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  79 

followed  are  shrouded  in  great  mystery,  as,  in  consequence 

of  the  opposition  of  the  Roman  see,  to  which  the  Poles  have 

always    been    greatly    attached,    they    were    resultless.     The 

Bohemians  had  no  wish  to  record  an  attempt  that  had  proved 

a  failure,  and  the  Poles  were  glad  to  leave  in  obscurity  the 

fact  that  they  had,  even  for  a  moment,  swerved  from  their 

allegiance  to  Rome.     The  Bohemian  chroniclers,  therefore,  give 

but  little  information  on  this  subject,  and  Dlugosze's  Historia 

Polonica,  which  deals  more  fully  with  these  matters,  is  written 

with  so  strong  a  bias  that  it  must  be  used  with  great  caution. 

It  is  stated  that  as  early  as  in  April  1420  some  of  the  Hussite 

leaders  determined   to   offer  the  Bohemian  crown  to   King 

Ladislas  of    Poland.      During  the  following  warlike  events 

these  negotiations  for  a  time  came  to  a  standstill,  but  they 

were — as  already  mentioned — resumed  after  the  victory  of 

the  2izkov.     The  principal  Utraquist  nobles,  as  well  as  the 

citizens  of    Prague  and  2izka — who  signed  the  parchment 

which    accredited    the    Bohemian    envoys — entrusted    Lord 

Hynek  of  Kolstyn  with  the  mission  to  proceed  to  Poland  and 

offer  the  Bohemian  crown  to  King  Ladislas,  and,  in  the  case 

of  his  refusal,  to  his  relation.  Prince  Vitold  of  Lithuania.     It 

may,  indeed,  be  conjectured  that  it  was  Prince  Vitold  on 

whom  the  Bohemians  really  wished  to  confer  their  crown. 

Prince  Vitold,  whose  name  is  now  undeservedly  forgotten, 

was  then  at  the  height  of  his  fame,  which  had  spread  over  all 

the   Slavic   north-east   of   Europe.      Like   King  Ladislas   of 

Poland,  he  belonged  to  the  Lithuanian  dynasty  of  Gedymin, 

which  had  only  recently  accepted  Christianity,  and  he  himself 

was  born  a  pagan.     After  his  conversion  to  Christianity  he 

joined  the  Greek  Church,  and  in  consequence  of  the  vicissitudes 

of  Polish  politics,  to  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  refer  here, 

he  had  recently  conformed  to   the  Church  of  Rome.     The 

Lithuanian   people,   however,   mostly   continued   faithful   to 

the  Eastern  Church,  and  were  therefore  Utraquists.     There 

was  thus  a  natural  link  between  them  and  the  Calixtines 


8o  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

of  Bohemia.  Vitold  himself  was  known  as  a  man  whose 
religious  views  were  by  no  means  fanatical.  Even  after  he 
had  joined  the  Church  of  Rome  he  had  built  a  church  for  his 
subjects  who  conformed  to  the  Greek  rite.  It  was  also  known 
that  Vitold  had  allowed  one  of  his  courtiers  to  declare  publicly 
at  his  table  that  Hus  had  been  unjustly  condemned  and  burnt. 
Vitold,  an  exceptionally  gifted  statesman,^  might  thus  have 
played  a  considerable  part  in  the  history  of  Bohemia,  and, 
indeed,  of  the  Slavic  world,  had  he  not  been  occupied  with 
continual  warfare  on  his  eastern  frontiers,  where  Poland  and 
Lithuania  were  then  constantly  extending  their  territory  at 
the  expense  of  Russia,  and  had  not  advancing  age — he  was 
born  in  1350 — then  already  somewhat  weakened  his  formerly 
indomitable  energy. 

It  is  a  proof  of  the  great  secrecy  which  surrounded  the 
mission  of  Hynek  of  Kolstyn  that  King  Sigismund  was  long 
quite  unaware  of  the  departure  of  the  Bohemian  envoy  for 
Poland.  It  was  only  later  that  he  was  informed  of  it  by  the 
citizens  of  Breslau,  whom  he  thanked  in  a  letter,^  requesting 
them  at  the  same  time  to  arrest  the  "  Wycliffite  "  envoy.  We 
have,  for  reasons  already  mentioned,  very  scanty  information 
concerning  this  first  embassy  to  Poland.  The  Bohemians 
were  received  by  King  Ladislas,  who  was  at  that  moment 
badly  disposed  to  Sigismund,  because  of  his  intervention  in 
the  dissensions  between  Poland  and  the  Teutonic  order.  The 
King  was,  however,  in  view  of  the  great  influence  of  the 
clergy  in  Poland,  obliged  to  act  with  great  caution.  He 
therefore  limited  himself  to  general  assurances  of  good  will, 

1  Dr.  Caro  writes  of  him  :  "  Die  slavische  Welt  hat  kaum  je  wider  einen 
Mann  von  gleichem  Geprage  hervorgebracht,  Zwei  Motive  insbesondere 
machen  den  Character  unter  psychologischem  Gesichtspunkte  bemerkens- 
werth;  erstlich  die  allmahlige  Entwicklung  desselben,  das  geschichthche 
"Werden  und  Aufsteigen,  und  dann  die  ungeheure  Ausdehnung  und  Ausweitung 
der  Personhchkeit,  In  diesem  letzteren  Sinne  ist  er  ganz  besonders  einer 
der  scharfsten  Typen  der  slavischen  Begabung  "  (Geschichte  Polens,  Vol.  III. 
p.  624). 

*  Letter  dated  from  Kutna  Hora,  August  ii,  1420  (published  by  Griinhagen, 
Geschichtsquellen  der  Hussitenkriege,  p.  i). 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  8i 

and  declared  that  he  must  confer  with  his  councillors.  The 
Bohemian  envoy  also  visited  the  Prince  or,  as  he  is  often 
called,  Grand  Duke  Vitold,  but  we  have  scarcely  any  informa- 
tion concerning  the  result  of  the  visit.  Judging  by  subsequent 
events  it  is  not  improbable  that  he  proved  more  favourable 
to  the  Bohemian  cause;  yet  he  also  probably  refused  to  bind 
himself.  Though  the  battle  of  the  2izkov  had  been  fought 
the  castles  of  Hradc^any  and  Vysehrad  were  still  held  by 
Sigismund's  troops,  and  it  appeared  venturesome  to  side  openly 
with  the  Bohemian  "  heretics."  The  not  very  successful 
result  of  this  attempt  to  obtain  allies  among  their  fellow- 
Slavs  did  not  deter  the  Bohemians  from  continuing  their 
negotiations  with  Poland.  The  Utraquist  nobles,  the  Praguers 
and  that  part  of  the  Taborites  who  were  entirely  devoted  to 
2izka,  determined  to  send  another  embassy  to  Poland.  It 
was  finally  decided  that  the  new  embassy  should  start  at  the 
end  of  the  year  1420.  An  unexpected  event  facilitated  the 
mission  of  the  envoys.  On  December  24  Nicholas  of  Hus, 
the  principal  opponent  of  the  establishment  of  a  Polish  dynasty 
in  Bohemia,  died  from  the  consequences  of  a  fall  from  his 
horse.  H5niek  of  Kolstyn  was  again  the  head  of  the  embassy, 
which  started  for  Poland  on  December  26,  but  he  was  now 
accompanied  by  several  other  prominent  nobles,  aldermen  of 
the  cities  of  Prague,  and  several  Utraquist  divines,  among 
whom  was  John  of  Reinstein,  nicknamed  "  Kardinal."  ^  The 
envoys  were,  to  use  Bfezova's  words,^  "  to  visit  the  King  of 
Poland  on  behalf  of  all  who  defended  God's  law,  and  to  ask 
him  to  defend  the  law  of  God  and  accept  the  Bohemian 
crown."  This  signified,  in  the  Hussite  terminology  of  the 
period,  that  the  election  of  the  Polish  King  was  made  con- 
ditional on  his  accepting  the  articles  of  Prague.  The  result 
was  such  as  the  delegates  probably  expected  it  to  be.     Ladislas 

*  He  had  been  an  intimate  friend  of  Hus,  whom  he  accompanied  to  Con- 
stance.    See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  loi,  208. 
2  p.  465  of  Bfezova's  chronicle. 
G 


82  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

declined  the  "  crown  of  a  kingdom  with  articles  condemned 
by  the  Catholic  Church."  The  envoys  then  proceeded  to 
Lithuania  and  entered  into  prolonged  negotiations  with  the 
Grand  Duke  Vitold.  These  negotiations  were  rendered  very 
difficult  by  the  interference  of  King  Ladislas,  who  disapproved 
of  Vitold's  plans,  either  from  jealousy  or  because  he  was 
influenced  by  the  very  powerful  Polish  clergy.^  The  influence 
of  the  Bohemian  envoys,  however,  finally  prevailed,  and  Vitold 
formally  declared  that  he  was  ready  to  accept  the  Bohemian 
crown.  In  June  142 1  Hynek  of  Kolstyn  returned  to  Prague, 
accompanied  by  the  envoy  of  Vitold,  Wyszek  Raczynski,  who 
was  authorised  to  inform  the  Bohemians  of  his  master's 
decision.  The  news  was  received  with  great  joy  by  the 
Bohemians,  who  modestly  attributed  this  happy  event  not 
to  their  own  merit,  but  to  the  special  beneficence  of  Providence.^ 
The  negotiations  between  Poland,  Lithuania,  and  Bohemia 
continued  for  a  considerable  period,  and  finally  led  to  the 
result  that  a  Lithuanian  prince  became  for  a  short  time 
ruler  of  Bohemia.  It  is  now,  however,  necessary  to  refer 
briefly  to  the  numerous  warlike  events  of  the  year 
1421.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  warfare  — 
sometimes  on  a  large  scale,  sometimes  consisting  of  mere 
skirmishes  between  guerillas — continued  in  Bohemia  almost 
without  interruption  from  1420  to  1434.  It  will,  of  course, 
only  be  possible  to  refer  here  to  the  more  prominent  events 
which  considerably  influenced  the  course  of  the  war.  During 
the  winter  of  1420  to  142 1  warfare  never  entirely  ceased. 
On  New  Year's  Eve  the  citizens  of  Prague  laid  siege  to  Novy 
Hrad,  the  stronghold  from  which  Sigismund  had  recently 
attempted  to  relieve  the  Vysehrad  fortress.  On  January  25, 
1421,  the  commander,  Herbort  of  FulStyn,  capitulated,  on 
condition  that  he  and  his  troops  should  be  allowed  to  leave 

*•  It  is,  of  course,  only  possible  to  deal  here  summarily  with  the  complicated 
political  situation  of  Poland  and  Lithuania  at  that  period. 

*  "  Ut  firmiter  creditur,  divinae  benignitatis  instinctu  "  (letter  quoted  by 
Palack^,  Urkundliche  Beiirdge,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  p.  I2i). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  83 

the  fortress  freely  and  take  with  them  all  their  own  property, 
but  not  that  of  King  Sigismund.  When  FulStyn  left  the 
castle  it  was  discovered  that  he  had  concealed  in  the  carts 
which  conveyed  his  goods  many  books  ^  and  other  property 
belonging  to  Sigismund.  The  people  seized  these  objects 
and,  irritated  by  this  deceit,  plundered  everything  they  found 
in  the  fortress.  The  Praguers  then  engaged  workmen,  who 
entirely  destroyed  the  stronghold,  to  prevent  its  ever  again 
affording  support  to  those  mighty  attempts  to  attack  the  city. 
2izka  also  during  these  periods  continued  his  ever- victorious 
campaigns.  Leaving  Tabor  early  in  January,  he  first  marched 
to  the  town  of  Stfibro  (in  German,  Miess) .  Hearing,  however, 
that  Bohuslav  of  Svamberk,  the  principal  leader  of  the  Roman 
party  in  the  district  of  Plzen,  which  always  continued  to  be  a 
stronghold  of  Sigismund's  party,  had  retired  to  the  castle  of 
Krasikov,  2izka  laid  siege  to  this  fortress.  Svamberk  was 
finally  obliged  to  capitulate,  and  became  a  prisoner  of  the 
Taborites.  It  is  one  of  many  instances  of  the  strange  vicissi- 
tudes through  which  the  Bohemian  nobility  passed  during 
the  great  civil  war  that  Svamberk,  in  the  following  year, 
joined  his  former  antagonists,  and  became,  during  the  later 
part,  one  of  the  foremost  leaders  of  the  Taborites.  After 
this  important  success  2izka  marched  to  Tachov  (in  German, 
Tachau),  and  approached  the  frontiers  of  Bavaria.  The 
name  of  the  Taborites  had  already  become  so  formidable  that 
German  cities  such  as  Niirnberg  and  Ulm  became  alarmed, 
appealed  to  Sigismund  for  aid,  and  exchanged  letters  inquiring 
where  the  King  of  Hungary  was.^  Sigismund,  when  informed 
of  the  great  successes  of  2izka  in  the  district  of  Plzen,  feared 
that  his  scanty  adherents  in  Bohemia  would  now  be  entirely 
discouraged,  and  marched  to  Plzen  with  a  considerable  army. 
On  hearing  of  his  arrival  2izka  abandoned  the  siege  of  Tachov 

1  Bfezova  writes  of  "  libri."  It  seems  probable  that  State  papers,  estate 
deeds,  or  patents  of  nobility  are  meant. 

*  Some  of  these  letters  are  printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitrdge.  etc, 
Vol.  I. 


84  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

and  proceeded  to  Tabor  to  seek  reinforcements  for  his  army. 
His  bravery  and  enthusiasm,  indeed,  never  diminished  his 
prudence,  and  he  was  determined  to  meet  the  King  of  Hungary 
at  the  head  of  as  large  a  force  as  possible.  This  was  the 
more  advisable  as  Sigismund  had  received  considerable  help 
from  several  German  princes,  principally  from  the  Duke  of 
Bavaria  and  the  Margrave  of  Meissen.  2izka  had  during  his 
temporary  absence  left  considerable  garrisons  in  the  recently 
conquered  towns.  The  most  important  of  these  cities,  Klad- 
ruby,  was  during  his  absence  besieged  by  Sigismund  and  his 
German  allies,  but,  bravely  defended  by  Chval  of  Machovic, 
one  of  2izka's  most  brilliant  lieutenants,  it  successfully  resisted 
all  attacks.  Before  rejoining  his  troops  2izka  also  succeeded 
in  renewing  the  alliance  with  Prague.  The  Praguers  joined 
2izka  at  Dob f is  with  a  large  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry 
and  320  armed  wagons  on  February  6,  and  the  united  Utra- 
quist  armies  then  marched  by  way  of  Zebrak  and  Horovic 
to  Rokycany,  a  town  that  was  then  under  the  rule  of  the 
Archbishop  of  Prague.  The  Hussites  were  received  within 
the  walls  without  any  resistance.  The  decisive  step  taken  by 
the  archbishop  a  few  months  later  afterwards  explained  an 
attitude  which,  at  the  time,  undoubtedly  caused  great  surprise. 
The  national  army  then  marched  in  the  direction  of  Kladruby, 
where  the  Taborite  garrison  under  Chval  of  Machovic  was 
still  besieged  by  Sigismund  and  his  allies.  2izka  evidently 
now  wished  to  offer  battle  to  the  royalist  army,  but  when 
he  arrived  near  Kladruby  he  was  informed  that  the  King  of 
Hungary  had  already  retired  and  disbanded  his  troops.  Sigis- 
mund retired  to  Litomefice  and  then  to  Kutna  Hora,  but 
early  in  March  he  left  Bohemia  and  proceeded  to  Moravia. 

2izka  was  now  more  than  ever  intent  on  subduing  the  city 
of  Plzen  and  the  surrounding  country.  The  great  importance 
of  that  stronghold  could  not  but  be  obvious  to  a  man  of  his 
brilliant  talent,  and  it  was  undoubtedly  a  great  fault  that  he 
did  not  insist  on  an  unconditional  capitulation.     Some  years 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  85 

after  Zizka's  death  the  fact  that  Plzen  refused  to  accept  the 
articles  of  Prague  proved  one  of  the  great  difficulties  which 
the  Bohemians  encountered  at  the  Council  of  Basel,  and  the 
events  that  occurred  during  the  later  siege  of  Plzen  largely 
contributed  to  the  downfall  of  Tabor.  At  that  moment, 
however,  the  citizens  of  Plzen  by  no  means  felt  disposed  to 
encounter  the  victorious  Bohemian  hero,  though  some  of  the 
neighbouring  towns  where  the  Roman  Catholics  had  the 
upper  hand  and  some  knights  of  Sigismund's  party  had  joined 
them.  A  treaty  was,  therefore,  concluded,  according  to  which 
the  citizens  of  Plzeii  and  their  allies  promised  not  to  molest 
those  inhabitants  of  Plzen  and  the  neighbouring  country  who 
professed  the  articles  of  Prague,  and  also  to  allow  Utraquist 
divines  to  preach  and  celebrate  mass  freely  in  the  territory 
which  was  in  their  power. 

After  having  thus  secured,  at  least  for  a  time,  a  peaceful 
understanding  with  the  citizens  of  Plzeii  and  their  confederates, 
Zizka  marched  to  Chomoutov  (in  German,  Komotau),  probably 
called  there  by  the  citizens  of  the  neighbouring  town  of  2atec, 
who  had  always  been  strong  upholders  of  the  Hussite  cause. 
As  in  Plzen,  in  Chomoutov  also  several  knights  and  nobles  of 
Sigismund's  party  had  joined  the  citizens  in  their  attacks 
on  the  neighbouring  Utraquists.  On  March  15  2izka's  forces 
made  a  first  attempt  to  storm  Chomoutov,  but  they  were 
repulsed  with  great  slaughter.  On  the  following  day — it  was 
Palm-Sunday — 2izka  was  more  successful.  The  Praguers 
attacking  on  one,  and  the  Taborites  on  the  other  side,  both 
forces  succeeded  in  escalading  the  city  walls.  The  defence 
continued  even  then,  and  each  street  was  only  occupied  after 
prolonged  fighting.  This  is  one  of  the  few  occasions  on  which 
Zizka  cannot  be  acquitted  of  cruelty.  By  his  order  all  the 
male  adult  inhabitants  of  Chomoutov  were  killed.  Only  thirty 
men  were  left  alive  to  bury  the  others.  If,  as  has  so  often 
been  done,  we  compare  the  great  Bohemian  warrior  to  Crom- 
well, Chomoutov  was  certainly  2izka's  Drogheda.     It  as  is 


86  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

probable,  the  Utraquists  wished  to  spare  the  women,  their 
intention  was  frustrated  by  the  fanatical  Taborite  women. 
Under  pretence  of  saving  the  lives  of  the  wives  and  children 
of  the  citizens,  they  enticed  them  out  of  the  city,  deprived 
them  of  their  clothing  and  jewels,  and  drove  them  into  a 
farm  building,  where  they  were  burnt  alive. ^ 

Though  the  last-named  atrocity  was  possibly,  and  indeed 
probably,  committed  contrarily  to  2izka's  wish — for  the 
Hussites  generally  spared  the  lives  of  women  and  children — 
no  one  can  acquit  2izka  of  great  cruelty  on  this  occasion. 
His  conduct  can  only  be  defended  in  the  fashion  in  which  all 
reprisals  have  been  defended ;  it  has  been  said  that  the  courage 
of  the  adherents  of  a  party  is  strengthened  by  the  behef  that 
cruelties  committed  against  them  will  become  fewer  if  the 
enemies  know  that  they  are  liable  to  suffer  similarly,  that  acts 
of  cruelty  committed  in  common  will  bind  the  adherents  of 
a  party  more  closely  together,  finally  that  fear  will  attract 
waverers  to  the  party  of  those  who  have  been  guilty  of  deeds 
of  cruelty. 

It  is  certain  that  the  massacre  of  Chomoutov  brought  many 
new  recruits  to  the  Hussite  ranks,  and  that  many  hitherto 
wavering  cities  either  recognised  the  supremacy  of  Prague  or 
joined  the  confederacy  of  Tabor  or  at  least  concluded  treaties, 
similar  to  the  agreement  made  with  Plzen,  by  which  they 
granted  immunity  and  even  a  certain  amount  of  liberty  to 
the  Utraquists.  The  most  important  accession  to  the  Hussite 
party,  which  cannot,  however,  be  directly  ascribed  to  the 
events  at  Chomoutov,  was  the  acceptation  of  the  articles  of 
Prague  by  Conrad  of  Vechta,  Archbishop  of  Prague.  The 
archbishop  has,  by  his  defection  from  the  Church  of  Rome, 

*  Bfezova  thus  describes  this  horrible  scene  :  "  Thaboritarum  vero  iniquae 
mulieres  horrendum  ibidem  scelus  commiserunt,  muheres  enim  et  virgines, 
viros  suos  et  parentes  deflentes  extra  civitatem  deduxerunt  promittentes 
eis  salvas  abire,  quae  cum  extra  civitatem  devenirent,  eas  vestibus  spohant 
et  pecuniis  aliisque  rebus  ablatis  in  quodam  tugurio  vinea?  includentes  ignis 
voragine  consumunt,  nee  pregnantibus  parcunt  ut  hvorem  suae  iniquitatis 
augmentent  "  (p.  477). 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  87 

incurred  much  uncalled-for,  or  at  least  greatly  exaggerated, 
obloquy.  The  great  modern  historian  of  Prague,  Professor 
Tomek,  himself  a  fervent  Roman  Catholic,  wrote  of  Conrad 
that  he  was  neither  better  nor  worse  than  the  majority  of 
the  great  dignitaries  of  the  Church  in  Bohemia  at  that  time. 
Sigismund,  who  appears  to  have  had  a  personal  dislike  to 
the  archbishop,  in  a  letter  sent  in  1416  to  the  Council  of  Con- 
stance in  answer  to  its  complaints  with  regard  to  the  progress 
of  heresy  in  Bohemia,  and  to  the  attitude  of  King  Venceslas, 
wrote  that  his  brother  was  guided  by  the  archbishop,  who  in 
consideration  of  the  authority  of  the  Council  declined  all 
responsibiHty,  desiring  to  be  "  not  a  martyr,  but  a  confessor."  ^ 
It  is  certain  that  Vechta  sympathised  with  King  Venceslas, 
as  long  as  that  prince  was  favourable  to  the  cause  of  Hus 
and  of  Church  reform.  In  the  absence  of  all  unfavourable 
evidence,  very  remarkable  at  a  time  when  theological  contro- 
versy consisted  largely  in  the  grossest  personal  invective,  we 
have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  archbishop.  It 
is  probable,  though  as  on  so  many  matters  connected  with 
the  Hussite  wars  our  information  is  here  scanty,  that  the 
archbishop  had  incurred  the  enmity  of  both  Sigismund  and 
the  papal  legate  Ferdinand,  Bishop  of  Lucca.  Though  Arch- 
bishop Conrad  was  a  Westphalian  by  birth,  he  had  become 
friendly  to  the  Bohemian  people,  and  he  may  have  expressed 
disapproval  of  the  indiscriminate  slaughter  of  the  peasantry 
in  the  country  around  Prague.  It  was,  however,  an  act  of 
hostility  on  the  part  of  one  of  Sigismund's  partisans  that  was 
the  immediate  cause  of  the  secession  of  Vechta.  Lord  Hanus 
of  Kolowrat,  one  of  the  King  of  Hungary's  most  enthusiastic 
followers,  stormed  and  plundered  the  small  town  of  Pribram, 
situated  on  the  archbishop's  estates.  On  April  21  Conrad 
addressed  a  letter  to  the  citizens  of  Prague,  stating  that  he 

1  "  Archiepiscopus  se  excusat  propter  praesentiam  hujus  sacri  concilii  ad 
cujus  examen  et  judicium  hujusmodi  negotium  pertinere  dicit,  cupiens  esse 
non  martyr  sed  confessor  "  (Palacky,  Documenta  Mag,  Joannis  Hus,  p.  652). 


88  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

accepted  the  four  articles  and  had  renounced  the  allegiance 
of  King  Sigismund.  The  Praguers  immediately  answered, 
promising  him  their  aid  should  he  be  attacked  by  the  enemies 
of  Utraquism.  More  interesting  than  these  communications 
is  a  letter  which  the  archbishop,  also  on  April  21,  forwarded 
to  the  King  of  Hungary. ^  He  stated  that  he  had  hitherto 
always  endeavoured  to  serve  and  please  him,  but  that  the 
King  had  listened  to  false  accusations,  such  as  that  he  (the 
archbishop)  was  leagued  with  the  Praguers,  which  was  not 
true.  He  further  stated  that  the  King,  together  with  "  Ferdi- 
nand, the  so-called  papal  legate,"  had  forwarded  false  and 
untrue  accusations  against  him  to  the  papal  see.  He  then 
bitterly  complained  that  Sigismund  had,  in  contempt  of 
Almighty  God  and  of  the  saints,  harassed  the  Church  of  God 
in  his  diocese  by  intolerable  rapines,  affronts,  and  calumnies, 
deeds  which  God's  vengeance  would  not  leave  unpunished. ^ 
The  archbishop  further  declared  that  he  and  all  his  followers 
henceforth  entirely  renounced  their  allegiance  to  King  Sigis- 
mund, and  accepted  the  true  and  Catholic  four  articles  (of 
Prague)  to  which  the  famed  community  of  Prague  and  the 
barons  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  and  of  the  margravate  of 
Moravia  had  conformed. 

The  acceptation  of  the  four  articles  by  the  Archbishop  of 
Prague  naturally  greatly  strengthened  the  moderate  Utra- 
quists,  the  Hussite  High  Church,  as  we  may  call  it.  The 
adherence  of  an  archbishop,  of  course,  ended  the  difficulty 
with  regard  to  the  apostolic  succession  of  the  priests,  on  which 
the  conservative  party  among  the  patriots  laid  great  stress. 
It  also,  though  we  are  here  limited  to  conjectures,  probably 
facilitated   the   enterprise   of   Prince    Korybut,  who   shortly 

1  Printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  pp.  83-84;  the 
two  letters  to  which  I  previously  refer  also  form  part  of  this  collection. 

*  It  may  be  interesting  to  give  the  passage  in  full  in  the  original  :  "  Insuper 
etiam  quia  Ser.  V.  in  contemptum  omnipotentis  Dei  sanctorumque  ejus 
gravem  injuriam  et  offensam  ecclesiaeque  Dei  et  uni verso  clero  dioccesis  meae 
intolerabiles  rapinas  et  injurias  et  calumpnias,  quas  Dei  vindicta  finaliter 
non  patietur  inultas,  intulit  et  arrogavit." 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  89 

afterwards  arrived  in  Bohemia.  The  extreme  fanatics  of  the 
Tciborite  party  alone  showed  displeasure.  They  declared 
that,  as  a  German,  Conrad  was  by  birth  an  enemy  of  the 
(Bohemian)  nation,  and  reproached  him  for  having  crowned 
Sigismund  as  king.^ 

While  the  great  victories  of  2izka  and  of  the  men  of  Prague 
had  almost  silenced  all  hostility  in  southern  and  western 
Bohemia,  the  country,  never  destined  to  enjoy  a  respite  even 
of  a  few  months,  was  now  obliged  to  assure  the  safety  of  its 
eastern  and  northern  frontiers.  Bohemia  here  marches  with 
Silesia  and  the  county  of  Glatz,  which  was  then  still  considered 
as  forming  part  of  the  Bohemian  kingdom.  Silesia  itself,  with 
Moravia  and  Lusatia,  then  formed  the  lands  of  the  Bohemian 
crown,  as  they  were  called.  This  theoretically  and  at  some 
periods  actually  involved  a  supremacy  of  Bohemia  over  these 
lands.  The  population  of  Silesia  at  that  time  consisted  mainly 
of  Germans,  who  were  very  zealous  Catholics,  and  therefore 
hated  their  Bohemian  neighbours  both  as  Slavs  and  as  heretics. 
Incessant  border- warfare,  therefore,  took  place  on  the  frontiers 
during  the  great  civil  war.^  It  did  not  on  the  whole  have 
much  influence  on  the  main  current  of  the  war,  and  therefore 
requires  but  slight  notice  here.  In  consequence  of  the  great 
victories  of  2izka  in  the  spring  of  142 1  some  of  the  Catholic 
frontier  towns  of  Bohemia  appealed  to  their  Silesian  neighbours 
for  aid.  In  May  142 1  a  Silesian  army,  consisting  of  the  levies 
of  the  towns  of  Breslau  and  Schweidnitz  and  numerous  knights 
with  their  followers,  invaded  Bohemia.  According  to  Bfezova 
the  army  consisted  of  about  20,000  men.  Crossing  the  frontier 
at  Trautenau — now  known  as  one  of  the  battlefields  of  1866 
— they  burnt  down  the  small  town  of  Police,  and  a  few  days 
later  stormed  the  fortified  hill  of  Ostas,  where  the  inhabitants 

^  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov,  cap.  25,  iii.  (in  Hofler,  Geschichtsschreiber,  etc. 
Vol.  I.  p.  647). 

*  This  warfare  has  found  a  brilliant  historian  in  Dr.  Griinhagen,  author  of 
Hussitenkdmpfe  der  Schlesier.  He  writes,  however,  with  a  strong  German 
bias,  and  his  statements  concerning  the  cruelties  committed  by  the  belligerent 
parties  must  be  received  with  great  caution. 


90  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

of  Police  and  other  neighbouring  Utraquists  had  taken  refuge. 
The  Germans  here  committed  acts  of  horrible  cruelty.  They 
murdered  all  whom  they  found  on  the  hill,  including  the 
unarmed  men  and  the  women,  and  cut  off  the  noses,  arms,  and 
legs  of  about  forty  boys.  The  Silesian  army  did  not,  however, 
remain  long  on  Bohemian  territory.  When  the  citizens  of  Kra- 
love  Hradec,  commanded  by  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg  and  Bof ek 
of  Miletinek,  marched  to  the  Silesian  frontier,  together  with 
the  men  of  the  Orebite  community  under  the  priest  Ambrose, 
the  Silesians  retired  without  giving  battle.  They  attempted 
another  incursion  later  in  the  year,  but  retired  on  hearing  that 
2izka  was  approaching.  The  chroniclers  record  during  the 
first  part  of  the  year  1421  a  long  list  of  cities,  castles,  and  fortified 
monasteries  which  surrendered  to  2izka.  The  capitulation  of 
Kutna  Hora,  whose  inhabitants  had  committed  great  cruelties 
against  the  Utraquists,  is  of  particular  interest.  When  the 
citizens  of  Prague  on  April  23  marched  from  Kolin  on  Kutna 
Hora,  the  citizens  of  that  town  also  marched  out  to  meet 
them  in  the  field,  led  by  2izka's  old  antagonist,  the  mintmaster 
Divficek.  When  they,  however,  came  in  sight  of  the  Hussite 
army,  they  immediately  retired,  impressed  by  the  strength 
of  the  forces  of  the  enemy.  On  the  following  day  they  sent 
envoys  to  Kolin  offering  their  submission,  and  begging  only 
that  those  who  would  not  conform  to  the  Utraquist  creed 
should  be  allowed  freely  to  leave  their  city.  The  Hussites 
consented,  but  made  it  a  condition  that  all  the  population, 
men,  women,  maidens,  and  children,  should,  leaving  the  town, 
go  in  procession  to  ask  forgiveness  for  the  cruelty  they  had 
committed  by  beheading  guiltless  men  and  throwing  them 
down  the  shafts  of  their  mines.  On  April  25  the  citizens  of 
Kutna  Hora  proceeded  to  the  monastery  of  Sedlec,  where  the 
army  of  the  Praguers  was  drawn  up.  The  people  of  Kutna 
Hora  then  all  fell  on  their  knees,  and  a  prominent  citizen  in 
the  name  of  all  begged  "  the  pardon  of  God  and  of  the 
Praguers."     The  priest  John  of  Zelivo  then  addressed  them 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  91 

and,  reminding  them  of  their  crimes,  exhorted  them  not  to  sin 
any  more.  He  then  declared  that  "  God  and  the  Praguers  " 
granted  them  peace  and  mercy.  Then  all  those  of  both 
parties  cried  bitterly,  and  all  intoned  the  Te  Deum,  the 
miners  of  Kutna  Hora  and  the  Praguers  alternately  singing 
one  verse.  The  citizens  then  joyfully  returned  to  their  town, 
accompanied  by  some  of  the  Praguers,  who  were  to  take 
possession  of  it  and  establish  the  new  order  (i.  e,  Utraquist 
government)  in  it.^ 

The  submission  of  Kutna  Hora  also  brought  many  nobles 
back  to  the  Utraquist  ranks.  The  most  important  of  them 
was  the  ever-fickle  Lord  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  whom  the 
Hussites  obliged  to  do  penance  in  a  manner  similar  to  that 
to  which  the  citizens  of  Kutna  Hora  had  had  to  submit. 
Negotiations  in  view  of  the  capitulation  of  the  Hradcany 
castle  began  in  May,  and  the  garrison,  isolated  in  the  midst 
of  a  vast  country,  now  entirely  occupied  by  their  enemies, 
wisely  consented  to  evacuate  the  stronghold.  The  nuns  of 
the  abbey  on  the  Hradcany  mostly  consented  to  accept  the 
articles  of  Prague;  those  who  refused  to  do  so  were  safely 
conducted  outside  of  the  Hussite  lines.  Immediately  after 
the  departure  of  Sigismund's  garrison  160  soldiers  of  the  Old 
and  100  of  the  New  Town  occupied  the  deserted  citadel  to 
maintain  order  there.  This  unfortunately  proved  very  neces- 
sary, for  immediately  after  the  departure  of  the  enemy  the 
rabble  of  Prague,  led  by  the  priest  John  of  Zelivo,  attempted 
to  plunder  and  destroy  the  churches  and  monasteries  on  the 
Hradcany.  It  is  impossible  not  to  agree  with  Bfezova's 
censure  of  this  priestly  anarchist.  John  himself  may,  in 
consequence  of  his  iconoclastic  views,  have  believed  himself 
justified  in  destroying  images  and  decorations  which  he  believed 
to  be  hurtful  to  true  Christianity;  but  the  rabble  whom  he 
led  on  saw  in  his  conduct  only  a  pretext  for  robbing^and  stealing. 

1  I  have  abridged  this  account,  which  is  very  characteristic  of  the  Hussite 
period,  from  Brezova's  narrative,  which  well  deserves  to  be  read  in  its  entirety. 


92  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

By  the  middle  of  the  year  142 1  by  far  the  largest  part  of 
Bohemia  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Utraquists,  that  is  to  say  of 
all  those  who,  though  differing  on  some  matters,  had  accepted 
the  articles  of  Prague.  A  few  isolated  castles  in  various  parts 
of  the  country  remained  in  the  hands  of  Sigismund's  partisans, 
and  a  few  cities  such  as  Plzen,  though  they  had  unwillingly 
granted  the  Utraquists  permission  to  celebrate  religious  services 
according  to  their  rites,  had  not  accepted  the  teaching  of 
Hus.  Yet  the  country  was  sufficiently  pacified  to  make  it 
advisable  to  deliberate  on  the  subject  of  its  future  government. 
The  cities  of  Prague  had,  since  the  great  victory  of  the  Vysehrad, 
possessed  a  hegemonic  position  in  Bohemia.  It  was,  therefore, 
befitting  that  they  should  take  the  initiative  in  this  matter. 
In  their  own  name  and  in  that  of  the  archbishop  and  of  the 
barons  of  Bohemia  they  invited  the  estates  of  Bohemia  and 
Moravia,  as  well  as  those  of  Silesia  and  Lusatia,  without 
distinction  of  religious  creed,  to  meet  at  a  conference  or  diet 
at  Caslav.  It  was  suggested  that  this  assembly  should  begin 
its  sittings  on  June  i.  It  was  at  the  same  time  formally 
declared  that  letters  of  safe  conduct  would  be  granted  to  all 
adherents  of  the  Church  of  Rome  who  wished  to  take  part  in 
this  Council  of  the  nation.  Considering  the  frequent  cases 
of  treachery  during  this  struggle  between  the  Roman  and 
the  national  Church,  it  deserves  mention  that  this  promise 
was  scrupulously  kept. 

This  step  of  the  Utraquists  was  undoubtedly  statesmanlike, 
and  their  well-intentioned  attempt  deserved  the  success  which 
it  did  not  obtain.  Compromise  has  almost  always  proved  a 
failure  in  Slavic  countries.  Many  of  the  delegates  arrived  at 
Caslav  on  the  June  i,  and  even  earlier,  but  the  sittings  of 
the  Congress  only  began  on  the  3rd.  On  that  day  masses 
were  said  in  all  the  churches  of  Caslav,  and  the  h>Tnn  '*  Veni 
sancte  spiritus  "  was  sung.  The  debates  of  the  first  day 
were  limited  to  attempts  to  adjust  feuds  between  various 
cities  and  nobles,  which  it  was  very  desirable  to  terminate 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  93 

at  a  moment  when  a  general  pacification  of  the  country  did 
not  appear  impossible.  Somewhat  later  a  considerable  number 
of  Moravian  nobles  appeared  at  Caslav,  as  well  as  some 
Bohemians,  who  were  adherents  of  Rome  and  of  Sigismund. 
The  King  of  Hungary  had  requested  some  of  the  nobles  of  his 
party  to  uphold  his  claims  at  Caslav,  thus  putting  his  trust 
in  the  faith  of  those  to  whom  he  had  himself  broken  his  word. 

The  assembly  at  Caslav  was  a  thoroughly  representative 
one.  Among  those  present  were  the  Archbishop  of  Prague, 
Conrad  of  Vechta,  representatives  of  Prague  and  the  allied 
cities,  2izka  and  the  other  Taborite  captains,  among  whom 
Roha^  of  Duba  had  taken  the  place  of  Nicholas  of  Hus,  Krusina 
of  Lichtenburg,  Henry  of  Podebrad,  John  of  Chlum,  who  had 
accompanied  Hus  to  Constance,  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  leader 
of  the  papal  nobles,  as  well  as  the  Lords  Holicky  of  Sternberg 
and  Puta  of  Castolovice,  who  by  desire  of  Sigismund  were 
present  as  his  unofficial  representatives. 

It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  we  are  very  insufficiently 
informed  as  to  the  deliberations  of  the  assembly  of  Caslav. 
It  is  certain,  however,  that  it  was  declared,  though  not  without 
opposition  on  the  part  of  some  of  those  present,  that  all  bound 
themselves  to  accept  and  defend  the  articles  of  Prague.  The 
assembly  further  declared  that  it  would  never  recognise 
Sigismund  as  King  and  rightful  possessor  of  the  Bohemian 
crown,  unless  God  should  will  it  otherwise,  or  the  glorious 
cities  of  Prague,  the  Bohemian  lords,  the  Taborite  community, 
the  knights,  nobles  and  cities  and  all  other  communities  who 
acknowledged  the  four  articles  subsequently  decide  otherwise ; 
for  the  King  had  been  a  blasphemer  against  the  holy  truth, 
and  a  mortal  enemy  of  the  honour  and  of  the  persons  of  the 
Bohemian  nation.  A  further  resolution  decreed  that  the 
assembly  should  elect  twenty  men,  who  were  provisionally 
to  act  as  regents  and  maintain  order  in  the  land.  Their 
period  of  office  was  to  end  on  the  day  of  St.  Venceslas 
(September  28)  unless  the  country  should  recognise  a  king 


94  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

before  that  time.  Of  the  twenty  regents  five  were  to  be 
chosen  among  the  nobles,  four  from  the  citizens  of  Prague, 
two  among  the  members  of  the  Taborite  community,  five 
among  the  knights,  and  four  among  the  representatives  of  the 
towns — except  Prague — and  the  other  communities.  In  all 
cases  where  the  regents  might  be  unable  to  decide  as  to  God's 
will — this  undoubtedly  refers  to  theological  controversies — 
they  were  to  consult  two  priests,  John  of  Pribram,  one  of 
the  most  prominent  theologians  of  the  university  of  Prague, 
and  John  of  Zelivo,  who  had  great  influence  over  the  people 
of  that  city.  It  was  further  decided  that  an  assembly  of  the 
Bohemian  priests  of  all  denominations  should  shortly  take 
place  to  settle  all  theological  dissensions.  It  was  lastly  de- 
clared that  all  those  who  would  not  accept  the  decrees  of  the 
assembly  of  Caslav  should  be  considered  as  enemies  of  the 
commonwealth,  and  should  by  force  of  arms  be  obliged  to 
conform  to  these  decrees. 

The  proceedings  of  the  assembly  of  Caslav,  as  far  as  they 
are  known  to  us,  are  among  the  most  interesting  records  of 
the  Hussite  wars.  The  project  of  establishing  a  provisional 
government  on  a  wide  basis  is  not  devoid  of  greatness.  Its 
failure  has  caused  it  to  have  fallen  into  almost  complete 
oblivion.  Among  the  twenty  regents  were  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg, 
Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg,  John  2izka 
of  Trocnov,  and  other  representatives  of  all  the  political  and 
ecclesiastical  parties  in  Bohemia.  The  manifesto,  as  we  may 
call  it,  published  by  the  assembly,  also  bears  the  trace  of  being 
the  result  of  a  compromise.  Thus  after  violently  denouncing 
Sigismund  and  declaring  him  to  be  excluded  from  the  throne, 
the  document  refers  to  possible,  though  certainly  not  probable, 
contingencies  which  might  render  his  recognition  as  King  of 
Bohemia  admissible.  We  know  that  the  nobles  of  Moravia — 
over  which  country  Sigismund  never  as  completely  lost  his 
hold  as  over  Bohemia — and  even  some  Bohemian  nobles  had 
at  first  refused  to  sign  the  manifesto.     Similarly  the  negotia- 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  95 

tions  with  Poland  were  not  mentioned  directly  in  the  proceed- 
ings at  Caslav,  though  these  negotiations,  as  will  be  mentioned 
presently,  were  being  energetically  pursued  at  that  moment. 
The  injunction  concerning  the  period  during  which  the  regents 
were  to  hold  office,  of  course,  indirectly  referred  to  the  arrival 
of  a  Polish  or  Lithuanian  prince.  An  undoubtable  mistake 
was,  however,  committed  when  it  was  agreed  that  in  certain 
cases  an  appeal  should  be  made  to  two  priests,  of  whom  one 
belonged  to  the  Calixtine,  the  other  to  the  extreme  Taborite 
party.  John  of  Pfibram,^  a  very  learned  theologian,  enter- 
tained that  intense  animosity  against  the  Taborites  which 
we  meet  with  also  in  Bfezova's  great  work.  He  considered 
the  Taborites  more  dangerous  opponents  of  his  lifelong  plan 
of  founding  a  national  Church  in  Bohemia — conforming  mainly 
to  the  Roman  Church,  but  faithfully  maintaining  the  articles 
of  Prague — than  even  the  Roman  Catholics.  This  leader  of 
the  Hussite  High  Church  was  expected  to  deliberate  jointly 
with  an  iconoclastic  fanatic,  such  as  was  John  of  Zelivo.  The 
assembly  of  Caslav,  while  maintaining  a  conciliatory  policy 
with  regard  to  all  Bohemians,  firmly  and  decidedly  rebuked 
the  hostile  attitude  which  perhaps  racial,  rather  than  religious, 
motives  had  induced  the  estates  of  Silesia  and  Lusatia  to 
assume.  The  letter  to  the  estates  of  Silesia,  dated  from  Caslav 
June  I,  1421,  complained  bitterly  of  the  cruelties  committed 
by  the  Silesians  during  their  incursions  into  Bohemia  ^  and 
reminded  them  of  their  allegiance  to  the  Bohemian  crown. 
A  similar  letter  ^  was  on  the  same  day  sent  to  the  estates  of 
Lusatia.  The  question  of  electing  a  Polish  prince  to  the 
Bohemian  throne  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  matters  dis- 

^  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  361-362. 

*  "  Quod  Vos  et  vestri  exercitus  injurias  atroces  innumerosas,  calumnias, 
vastationes  et  exustiones  villarum  et  oppidorum,  inhumanas  et  crudeles 
occisiones  virorum  indifferenter,  mulierum  et  puerorum  parvulorum,  quas 
nefas  est  gentibus  effecisse  contra  honorem  vestrum  in  detrimentum  coronae 
Bohemiae  continue  inferatis."  (Letter  printed  by  Griinhagen,  Geschichtsquellen 
dey  Hussiienkfiege ,  p.  41.) 

'  Printed  in  the  Codex  diplomaticus  Lusatice  superioris,  Vol.  I.  pp.  49-50. 


96  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

cussed  at  the  assembly  of  Caslav,  but  as  far  as  the  very  in- 
sufficient records  inform  us,  no  decisive  step  was  then  taken. 
The  regents  invited  the  representatives  of  all  the  parties  to 
meet  again  at  Kutna  Hora  in  August.  The  menace  of  a  new 
so-called  crusade  had  then  just  arisen,  and  it  was  decided  that 
the  forces  of  all  the  Bohemian  cities  and  nobles  should  assemble 
at  Cesky  Brod  (in  German,  Deutsch  Brod)  to  repulse  a  new 
invasion,  should  it  be  necessary.  The  assembly  then  arrived 
at  a  very  momentous  decision.  On  September  4  Vitold  (or, 
according  to  the  name  he  received  at  baptism,  Alexander), 
Grand  Duke  of  Lithuania,  was  proclaimed  King  of  Bohemia, 
and  it  was  decreed  that  a  new  embassy  should  be  sent  to 
Poland.  Vitold  and  his  councillors  had  given  no  definite 
answer  to  the  former  envoys,  though  their  words  had  been 
encouraging.  The  new  embassy,  consisting  of  some  of  the 
most  important  nobles,  among  whom  were  Lord  William 
Kostka  of  Postupic  and  Lord  Venceslas  of  Jenstein,  imme- 
diately started  for  Poland.  On  their  journey  they  were 
arrested  at  Ratibor  by  order  of  Duke  Hanus  of  Troppau, 
one  of  the  numerous  princelings  who  then  ruled  over  parts  of 
Silesia.  He  probably  acted  by  order  of  Sigismund,  who  had 
in  the  previous  years  already  attempted  to  intercept  Bohemian 
envoys  on  their  way  to  Poland.  This  outrage  was  considered 
a  breach  of  international  law,  even  at  that  lawless  period,  as 
the  Bohemian  envoys  had  Polish  passports  and  letters  of 
safe  conduct.  The  indignation  in  Poland  and  Lithuania  was 
very  great.  Grand  Duke  Vitold  sent  envoys  to  Prague 
requesting  the  Hussites  to  attack  the  Duke  of  Troppau  and 
promising  to  send  troops  under  his  nephew.  Prince  Sigismund 
Korybut,^  who  were  simultaneously  to  attack  the  Silesian 
princeling.  Korybut  himself,  the  leader  of  the  Bohemian 
party  in  Poland,  addressed  a  letter  of  protest  to  the  Duke  of 
Troppau,  informing  him  that  his  action  had  caused  great 
indignation  at  the  Polish  Court,  and  requesting  him  to  liberate 

1  Or  Korybutovic,  *.  e.  son  of  Korybut, 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  97 

the  envoys  immediately.  He  writes  somewhat  as  a  future 
claimant  to  the  Bohemian  throne ;  for  though  his  uncle  Vitold 
was  the  candidate,  it  was,  in  consequence  of  his  age,  certain 
that  Korybut  would  soon  become  King  of  Bohemia  should  a 
Polish  or  rather  Lithuanian  dynasty  be  established.  Prince 
Korybut  lays  great  stress  on  the  racial  afhnity  between  the 
two  peoples. 1  King  Ladislas,  probably  in  view  of  the  general 
indignation,  also  wrote  to  the  Silesian  prince,  informing  him 
that  he  was  sending  an  ambassador  to  him  to  demand  the 
release  of  the  Bohemian  envoys.  He  appears,  however,  to 
have  avoided  taking  any  further  steps.  We  already  find  in 
Ladislas  traces  of  that  fanatical  hatred  of  all  opinions  antagon- 
istic to  Rome  which  later  contributed  so  largely  to  the  downfall 
of  Poland.  The  Duke  of  Troppau  found  it  safest  to  hand  over 
his  prisoners  to  King  Sigismund,  who  basely  ordered  the  servants 
and  followers  to  be  beheaded,  while  he  retained  the  envoys 
as  prisoners — no  doubt  in  hope  of  their  being  ransomed.  The 
negotiations  between  Poland  and  Bohemia  continued,  never- 
theless, but  it  was  only  after  the  great  victories  of  the  Bohe- 
mians, which  I  shall  mention  presently,  that  Grand  Duke 
Vitold  came  to  a  decision. 

The  ignominious  result  of  the  first  crusade  did  not  deter  the 
Germans  from  making  further  attempts  to  extirpate  the 
'*  heretics."  The  papal  legate.  Cardinal  Branda,  used  every 
effort  to  encourage  the  German  princes  who  met  at  an  imperial 
diet  at  Niirnberg  on  April  13,  1421.  Though  Sigismund, 
whom  war  with  Turkey  detained,  was  absent,  the  assembly  was 
numerously  attended.  Among  those  present  were  four  German 
electors,  and  many  other  German  princes,  the  papal  legate, 
and  even  envoys  from  Brabant,  Holland,  and  Savoy.  All 
present  expressed  a  strong,  though,  as  events  proved,  momen- 
tary, determination  to  suppress  all  heresy  in  Bohemia.     The 

1  "  Praedicti  domini  [King  Ladislas  and  Grand   Duke  Vitold]  in  nullum 
eventum  volunt  Boemos  deserere  sed  ipsis  tanquam  linguaio  proprio  et  suis 
subditis  volunt  quomodolibet  cooperari."      (The  whole  letter  is  printed  by 
Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitydge,  Vol.  I.  p.  148.) 
H 


98  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

German  princes  have  been  frequently  blamed  for  their  sup- 
posed apathy  with  regard  to  the  Hussite  movement.  It  is, 
however,  generally  forgotten  that  most  of  these  princes  were, 
in  consequence  of  Sigismund's  ineptitude  and  indifference, 
engaged  in  constant  feuds  with  their  nearest  neighbours.  It 
was  undoubtedly  meritorious  to  exterminate  heretics,  into 
whose  real  tenets  nobody  troubled  to  inquire,  but  it  was 
far  more  important  to  defend  villages,  situated  but  a  few  miles 
from  a  nobleman's  own  castle,  which  a  neighbouring  enemy 
might  attack  at  any  moment.  About  the  beginning  of  May 
the  members  of  the  diet,  now  certain  that  Sigismund  would 
not  appear,  left  Niirnberg;  but  further  meetings  of  the 
German  princes  took  place  at  Wesel,  and  afterwards  at  Maintz 
and  Boppard,  and  it  was  now  settled  that  the  German  crusaders 
should  assemble  at  Cheb  (in  German,  Eger)  on  the  day  of  St. 
Bartholomew  (August  24). 

Local  warfare  continued  uninterrupted  during  the  whole 
summer  of  the  year  142 1.  In  spring  the  Silesians  crossed  the 
Bohemian  frontier  from  the  county  of  Glatz  and,  entering  the 
Orlice  valley,  destroyed  the  castles  of  2ampach  and  Litice. 
They,  however,  again  soon  returned  to  their  country.  On 
the  Saxon  frontier  the  Bohemians  obtained  possession  of 
Bilin  and  several  other  cities.  They,  however,  met  with  a 
reverse  when  attempting  to  storm  the  castle  of  Most  (in 
German,  Briix).  The  defenders  had  received  considerable  aid 
from  the  Margrave  of  Meissen.  2izka  was  not  present  on 
this  occasion.  When  besieging  the  castle  of  Rabi  some  time 
previously  he  was  wounded  in  the  eye  by  an  arrow.  He 
hurriedly  repaired  to  Prague  to  consult  the  doctors.  Though 
they  were  able  to  heal  his  wound,  he  now  became  totally 
blind,  but  he  continued  to  command  the  Hussite  armies. 

In  consequence  of  the  eloquence  and  energy  of  Cardinal 
Branda,  the  German  princes  had  meanwhile  raised  a  vast 
army.  If  Bfezova,  who  is,  however,  somewhat  inclined  to 
exaggerate  the  strength  of  the  hostile  armies  that  invaded 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  99 

his  country,  can  be  trusted,  the  army  of  the  crusaders  consisted 
of  about  200,000  men.  They  were  accompanied  by  the 
Archbishops  of  Maintz,  Coin,  and  Trier,  the  Elector  Palatine, 
the  Margrave  of  Brandenburg,  and  over  a  hundred  princes  and 
counts  of  the  empire.  This  mighty  muster  of  reigning  poten- 
tates no  doubt  rendered  the  progress  of  the  army  very  im- 
posing, but  it  also  caused  it  to  become  almost  impossible  to 
maintain  discipline.  It  was  not  even  attempted  to  appoint  a 
commander-in-chief,  as  none  of  the  princelets  were  prepared  to 
surrender  their  rights  to  the  others.  The  German  crusading 
armies  during  the  Hussite  wars  were,  indeed,  the  prototype  of 
that  "  army  of  the  imperial  circles  "  which,  during  the  Seven 
Years'  War,  became  the  object  of  Frederick  the  Great's  Aristo- 
phanic  wit,^  and  of  the  army  of  the  Germanic  confederacy,  whose 
inglorious  exploits  in  1866  have  already  fallen  into  deserved 
oblivion.  It  had  been  agreed  that  the  crusaders  should  enter 
Bohemia  from  the  west,  where  the  country  marches  with  Bavaria 
and  Saxony.  Sigismund  and  the  Archduke  Albert  of  Austria, 
who  about  this  time  became  his  son-in-law,  were  simultaneously 
to  attack  Bohemia  from  the  east.  Sigismund  was,  however, 
still  occupied  with  the  defence  of  Hungary  against  the  Turks, 
and  the  crusaders,  after  having  waited  for  him  some  time, 
crossed  the  Bohemian  frontier  on  September  10.  On  reaching 
the  frontier  the  electors  and  other  nobles  reverently  dis- 
mounted, knelt  down  ^  and  fervently  prayed  that  God  might 
grant  success  to  their  enterprise.  The  crusaders  immediately 
occupied  the  city  of  Cheb  (in  German,  Eger)  without  meeting 
with  any  resistance.  Another  smaller  crusading  force,  con- 
sisting mainly  of  Saxons,  had  entered  Bohemia  some  time 
previously,  and  had  obtained  some  successes.  The  Hussites 
in  the  neighbouring  small  towns  and  castles  had  all  retired 
to  Zatec  (in  German,  Saaz),  which  appears  then  to  have  been 

^  See  his  "  Conge  de  rarmee  des  cercles  et  des  tonneliers  "  (Supplement  aux 
"(Euvxes  de  Frederic  II,"  Tome  I.  pp.  277-280.     Cologne,  1789). 

'  Bfezova  maliciously  adds,  "  humilitatem  coram  aliis,  licet  simulate, 
ostendentes." 


100  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

strongly  fortified.  The  main  army  of  the  crusaders  marched 
on  2atec  to  join  their  alHes,  committing  horrible  atrocities  on 
its  march.  As  Bfezova  tells  us,  the  crusaders  burnt  down 
all  villages,  castles,  and  forts,  and,  acting  more  cruelly  than 
heathens,  they  either  murdered  or  burnt  alive  all  those 
whom  they  met,  young  or  old,  men  or  women.  There  is 
little  doubt  that  the  Germans  believed  they  could  best  suppress 
Hussitism  by  exterminating  the  whole  indigenous  population 
of  Bohemia.  After  the  crusading  armies  had  joined  before 
2atec,  they  immediately  attempted  to  storm  this  important 
stronghold.  On  Friday,  September  19,  no  fewer  than  six 
determined  attacks  on  the  city  were  made,  but  they  were  all 
repulsed  by  the  heroic  Hussites  who,  knowing  the  fate  of  their 
comrades,  fought  with  the  energy  of  despair.  After  this 
failure  the  German  princes  seem  already  to  have  thought 
of  abandoning  the  campaign,  particularly  as  they  received  no 
communications  from  Sigismund,  of  whom  it  was  expected 
that  he  would  cause  a  diversion  by  attacking  Bohemia  from 
the  east.  The  communications  were,  however,  difficult,  as 
the  intervening  country  was  almost  entirely  in  the  hands 
of  the  Bohemians. 

The  Bohemian  main  army  had  during  this  time  remained 
at  Slane,  not  far  from  Prague.  The  national  leaders  were 
thoroughly  aware  of  the  great  importance  of  assuring  the 
immunity  of  the  capital  from  all  attacks.  The  city,  or  rather 
cities,  of  Prague  had  established  an  autonomous  municipal 
government,  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  certain  towns  in 
Italy  and  the  Netherlands.  Many  smaller  cities  and  some 
nobles  and  knights  had  recognised  the  hegemony  of  Prague. 
No  less  great  was  the  importance  of  Prague  as  the  centre  of 
the  ecclesiastical  administration  of  the  country.  As  early 
as  in  1415  the  estates  of  Bohemia  had  pledged  themselves 
to  recognise  provisionally  the  university  of  Prague  as  the 
supreme  authority  in  all  matters  of  religion.^     The  Hussites, 

1  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  p.  no. 


xe  ot  Mea/aeu 


^/ 


LIOnARY     " 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  loi 

who  enjoyed  the  sympathy  of  almost  the  whole  Bohemian 
people,  were  naturally  well  informed  as  to  the  movements  of 
their  enemies.  As  soon  as  they  had  ascertained  that  no  hostile 
forces  were,  at  least  for  the  present,  menacing  their  Eastern 
frontiers,  they  resolved  to  march  immediately  to  the  relief  of 
2atec.  On  the  approach  of  the  Hussites  a  panic  seized  the 
crusaders,  who  were  also  exasperated  by  the  attitude  of 
Sigismund,  which  they  attributed  to  cowardice.  They  burnt 
the  tents  of  their  besieging  army  ^  and  hurriedly  and  in  great 
disorder  retired  to  the  German  frontier.  Though  the  Hussites 
did  not  pursue  their  enemies  as  they  did  when  they  acquired 
m.ore  experience  during  the  later  campaigns,  they  made  a 
large  number  of  prisoners  and  captured  a  great  part  of  the 
arms  of  the  enemies.  On  their  return  to  Germany  the  crusaders 
cast  all  blame  on  Sigismund,  forgetting,  as  Palacky  rightly 
states,  that  their  forces  had  been  vastly  superior  to  those  of 
the  Bohemians. 

Fortune — or  God's  special  grace,  as  the  pious  Bohemians 
would  have  worded  it — here  again  favoured  Bohemia.  Almost 
at  the  moment  when  the  retreating  crusaders  left  Bohemia 
the  troops  of  Sigismund  appeared  on  the  eastern  frontier  of 
the  country.  The  King  of  Hungary  had  succeeded  in 
assembling  a  vast  army,  consisting  principally  of  his  Hungarian, 
Transylvanian,  and  Croatian  subjects.  With  these  forces  he 
crossed  from  Hungary  into  Moravia  at  the  beginning  of 
November.  In  Moravia  Sigismund  was  joined  by  an  Austrian 
army  of  12,000  men,  which  his  son-in-law.  Archduke  Albert 
of  Austria,  brought  to  his  aid.  Frequent  defeats  had  taught 
Sigismund  to  distrust  his  military  talent.  He  had,  therefore, 
engaged  as  leader  for  his  new  enterprise  an  Italian  soldier  of 

1  Bf ezova,  whose  mysticism  renders  his  book  so  fascinating,  here  also  sees 
the  direct  intervention  of  Providence.  He  writes  :  "  Nam  miro  modo  tarn 
inhumanam  gentem  [the  crusaders]  nuUo  homine  impugnante  Deus  omnipotens 
in  fugam  convertiti.  Die  namque  II  Octobris  divina  providentia  ordinante 
incensa  sunt  in  multis  locis  exercitui  tentoria,  apparuit  namque  una  velut 
flavea  columpna  super  tentoria  transferens  se  de  uno  ad  alterum  et,  ubi 
stabat  columpna,  ibi  ignis  vorabat  tentoria"  (p.  513). 


102  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

fortune,  Pipa  of  Ozora.  Pipa,  with  the  ruthlessness  of  an 
Itahan  condottiere,  resolved  to  intimidate  his  adversaries  by 
wholesale  massacres.  His  instructions  were  but  too  energetic- 
ally carried  out.^  It  is  certain  that  Pipa's  policy  obtained 
a  certain  amount  of  success.  Many  nobles  of  Moravia  re- 
nounced the  articles  of  Prague  and  again  recognised  Sigismund 
as  their  legitimate  sovereign.  Their  example  was  afterwards 
followed  by  a  considerable  number  of  Bohemian  nobles,  whom 
the  murder  of  Sadlo  and  other  internal  troubles  at  Prague, 
which  will  be  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  chapter, 
had  for  a  time  alienated  from  the  national  cause.  Sigismund 
marched  to  Brno,  the  capital  of  Moravia,  almost  without 
meeting  with  any  opposition.  He  summoned  the  estates  of 
the  country  to  a  diet,  which  was  to  have  begun  its  deliberations 
on  November  i,  but  which,  in  consequence  of  delays,  only  met 
on  the  loth  of  that  month.  Sigismund  had  taken  the  pre- 
caution of  filling  the  council-chamber,  where  the  estates  met, 
with  his  Hungarian  soldiery.  It  was  no  more  attempted  to 
keep  up  the  appearance  that  the  assembly  deliberated  freely 
than  when,  in  the  present  year,^  the  Hungarian  Parliament 
voted  in  a  house  that  was  crowded  with  police.  Sigismund 
expressed  his  wishes  very  clearly.  He  told  the  estates  that 
it  was  their  duty  to  renounce  the  four  articles  which  were 
erroneous  and  heretical ;  then,  having  done  penance,  they  would 
receive  absolution  from  the  papal  legate.  The  Moravians 
hesitated,  but  seeing  the  anger  of  the  King,  whose  fits  of  fury 
sometimes  verged  on  madness,  and  knowing  that  the  Hungarian 
soldiers  were  prepared  to  attack  them,  they  obeyed  the  King's 
command.^ 

1  Bfezova  writes :  "  Et  factum  est  quod  nuUi  parcentes  villas  et  oppida 
combusserunt,  virgines  violarunt  et  inhumane  hominesque  utriusque  sexus 
parvulis  non  parcentes,  quos  ceperunt,  combusserunt  aut  ferro  perimerunt  " 

(P-  513)- 

2  1912. 

'  Bfezova  writes:  "  Videntes  ultimate  quod  rex  cum  furia  super  proposita 
materia  ab  eis  optat  adstatim  responsum,  videntes  eciam  Ungaros  cum  armis 
se  invadendos  paratos,  timore  perculsi  se  regis  submittunt  facere  voluntatem  " 
7). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  103 

The  easy  submission  of  Moravia  determined  Sigismund  to 
march    immediately    to    Bohemia.     He    first    proceeded    to 
Jihlava  (in  German,  Iglau),  close  to  the  Bohemian  frontier, 
and  here   received  several  Bohemian  nobles  who  had  aban- 
doned the  national  cause.     The  vanguard  of  Sigismund 's  army 
immediately   occupied   the   small   towns   of   Humpolec   and 
LedeC,  and  the  whole  army  then  proceeded  in  the  direction 
of  Kutna  Hora.     Never  was  Bohemia  in  greater  peril.     2izka 
and  his  Taborites  were  engaged  in  warfare  with  the  royalist 
nobles  in  the  distant  southern  districts  of  Bohemia.     The  troops 
of   Prague  had  recently  been   quartered  in  the  country  near 
Caslav,  but  on  receiving  the  news  of  Sigismund's  approach 
they  retired  on  Prague,  though  not  without  leaving  garrisons 
at  Kutna  Hora,  Kralove  Hradec,  and  other  important  cities. 
On    hearing   of   this   new   invasion   the   citizens   of   Prague 
immediately  sent  messengers  to  2izka  begging  him  to  march 
to  their  aid.     2izka  immediately  consented  to  do  so.     Though 
the  preparations  for  a  new  campaign  necessarily  caused  some 
delay,  the  Taborite  troops,  marching  with  that  rapidity  which 
contributed  so  largely  to  the  Hussite  victories,  arrived  at  Prague 
on  December  i.     2izka's  entry  into  the  city  was  a  triumphal 
one.     When  the  Taborite  forces,  preceded  as  usual  by  priests 
carrying  the  Holy  Sacrament,  and  accompanied  by  numerous 
Taborite  "  sisters/'  arrived  at  the  city  gates,  the  whole  popu- 
lation  hastened   to    welcome  and   greet    them.     Subsequent 
events  render  it  probable  that  the  Taborite  army  was  a  very 
considerable  one.     Besides  a  large  force  of  infantry,  the  Tabor- 
ites on  this  occasion  had  also  a  considerable  number  of  horse- 
men and  numerous  battle-wagons,  so  important  a  feature  in 
the  Bohemian  warfare  of  that  period.     When  the  bhnd  general 
entered  the  city  gates,  the  great  bells  of  the  town-hall  and  of 
all  the  numerous  church  steeples  were  rung,  and  he  was  received 
with  all  the  honours  that  were  usually  only  rendered  to  the 
sovereign  of  the  land.    2izka  spent  a  week  at  Prague,  conferring 
with  the  municipal  authorities  and  also  attempting  to  raise 


104  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

more  troops;  for  he  was  far  too  good  a  soldier  to  under-rate 
the  difficulty  of  the  task  that  now  confronted  him.  It  is  also 
probable  that  some  agreement  was  made  at  this  moment 
between  2izka  and  the  citizens  of  Prague,  according  to  which 
he  obtained  supreme  command  of  all  the  national  forces.  At 
this  time  Zizka  began  to  sign  his  commands  as  "  leader  of  the 
communities  of  the  Bohemian  land  who  are  devoted  to  God's 
law  and  obey  it."  ^  On  December  8  2izka  and  his  Taborites 
left  Prague,  and  on  the  following  day  the  Praguers  also  marched 
out  to  encounter  the  enemies  of  the  Utraquist  Creed. 

The  centre  of  the  new  campaign  was  Kutna  Hora.  The 
King  of  Hungary  naturally  attached  great  importance  to  the 
occupation  of  that  city.  It  has  been  previously  mentioned 
that  when  that  town  had  accepted  the  supremacy  of  Prague, 
those  inhabitants  who  refused  to  conform  to  the  teachings 
of  the  Utraquist  Church  had  been  allowed  freely  to  leave 
Kutna  Hora.  The  Utraquists,  whose  leniency  always  con- 
trasts favourably  with  the  ferocity  of  Sigismund's  partisans, 
had  not  insisted  on  this  stipulation  being  carried  out  very 
strictly.  Many  adherents  of  Rome,  and  particularly  many 
miners  whose  work  caused  them  to  wish  to  continue  near  the 
silver-mines,  had  thus  remained  at  Kutna  Hora.  The  partisans 
of  Sigismund  rightly,  as  the  subsequent  events  proved,  believed 
that  these  men  would  by  no  means  feel  grateful  to  a  conqueror 
who  had  treated  them  with  a  leniency  quite  exceptional  at 
that  period,  but  that  they  would  prove  their  vindictiveness 
as  soon  as  it  was  possible  to  do  so  with  comparative  safety. 
The  campaign  of  Kutna  Hora  is  one  of  the  most  interesting 
episodes  of  the  Hussite  wars.  We  have  unfortunately  even 
less  information  concerning  this  campaign  than  we  have  with 
regard  to  other  far  less  important  events.^     Kutna  Hora,  the 

^  Professor  Tomek,  Dejepis  mesta  Prag  {History  of  the  Town  of  Prague), 
Vol.  IV.  p.  220. 

2  Bfezova's  work  ends  quite  suddenly  in  the  middle  of  his  narrative.  This 
is  usually  attributed  to  the  sudden  death  of  the  author  (see  my  Lectures  on 
the  Historians  of  Bohemia,  pp.  35-47).  I  have  there  incorrectly  called  the 
historian  "  Bfezov." 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  105 

centre  of  the  new  campaign,  has  not  naturally  a  very  strong 
position,  and  2izka,  on  his  arrival  there,  was  confronted  by 
difficulties  that  must  have  appeared  serious  even  to  his 
indomitable  mind.  A  considerable  part  of  the  population  of 
Kutna  Hora  was  undoubtedly  hostile  to  the  national  cause, 
and  it  was  probable  that  the  forces  whom  the  patriots  would 
have  to  encounter  would  be  greatly  inferior  to  Sigismund's 
army.  After  remaining  only  a  few  days  at  Kutna  Hora 
Zizka  repaired  to  Caslav,  where  some  of  his  troops  had  hurriedly 
thrown  up  earthworks.  He  was  here  joined  by  the  forces 
of  the  Moravian  nobles,  Hasek  of  Valdstyn  and  Venceslas  of 
Kravaf,  as  well  as  by  the  Lord  Bocek  of  Kunstatt  Podebrad, 
who  had,  from  his  castle  of  Litice,  brought  a  considerable  force 
to  aid  the  national  casue.  After  leaving  a  considerable  garrison 
at  Caslav,  2izka  returned  to  Kutna  Hora. 

Sigismund,  King  of  Hungary,  had  meanwhile,  avoiding  the 
direct  road  by  way  of  Caslav,  arrived  before  Kutna  Hora  on 
December  19.  His  troops  again  committed  unspeakable 
cruelties  on  the  march. ^  2izka  had  returned  to  Kutna  Hora, 
accompanied  by  his  Moravian  allies,  who  were  burning  to 
revenge  the  cruelties  committed  against  their  countrymen 
by  an  Italian  condottiere  and  semi-savage  Hungarians.  It 
was  2izka's  plan  to  give  battle  to  the  adherents  of  Sigismund 
outside  the  walls  of  Kutna  Hora.  On  December  21 — a 
Sunday — it  was,  in  the  name  of  the  Bohemian  nobles,  Zizka 
and  the  citizens  of  Prague  announced  in  the  churches  and 
afterwards  by  heralds  in  the  streets  that  all  should  be  ready 
to  encounter  King  Sigismund,  and  should  keep  their  faith 
and,  as  they  had  promised,  defend  the  evangelical  truth; 
they  should  also  not  give  way  to  fear  because  the  royal  army 
was  approaching.     The  troops  immediately  marched  out  of 

1  Bfezova  thus  addresses  the  King  "  O  princeps  insensate  cur  domesticos 
tuos  quos  defensare  deberes  gentili  more  persequeris,  cur  nidum  proprium 
stercoriando  defedare  non  cessas  ?  cur  innocentium  sanguinem  fundere  non 
desinis  ?  cur  delere  cupis  qui  pro  lege  Dei  sui  certando  se  tibi  opponunt  ?  " 
(P-  532). 


io6  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

the  town  by  the  Koufim  gate  and  after  proceeding  but  a 
short  distance  ^  came  in  sight  of  the  army  of  Sigismund.  In 
view  of  the  vast  numerical  superiority  of  the  enemy,  2izka's 
army  immediately  formed  a  square,  which  was  defended  in 
every  direction  by  the  iron-clad  wagons.  After  the  priests 
had  briefly  addressed  the  soldiers  and  all  had  knelt  down  for 
a  short  prayer,  the  guns  on  the  wagons  immediately  opened 
lire  on  the  enemies  in  every  direction.  The  position  which 
2izka  had  chosen  was  a  very  strong  one  and  had  a  free  outlook 
almost  in  every  direction. ^  It  seems  probable  that  2izka 
decided  to  give  battle  outside  of  the  town,  which,  as  he  rightly 
believed,  contained  many  secret  enemies.  The  infantry  and 
cavalry  of  Sigismund  immediately  attacked  the  Bohemians, 
but  were  repulsed  with  great  slaughter,  and  at  even-tide  the 
King  of  Hungary  had  obtained  no  advantage,  though  some 
of  his  soldiers  had  succeeded  in  occupying  the  space  between 
the  Koufim  gate  and  2izka's  lager.  Treachery  within  the  city 
walls  now,  however,  entirely  changed  the  situation.  Numerous 
Roman  Catholics,  particularly  miners  who  had  been  expelled 
from  the  city  after  its  capture  by  the  national  party,  had 
returned  with  Sigismund's  army  and  had  entered  into  com- 
munication with  their  comrades  who  had  remained  in  Kutna 
Hora.  The  latter,  while  the  fighting  between  2izka  and 
the  troops  of  Sigismund  was  at  its  height,  treacherously 
opened  the  Kolin  gate,  through  which  the  exiled  miners, 
closely  followed  by  the  royal  troops,  entered  the  city.  A 
massacre  immediately  ensued,  in  which  the  brutal,  fanatical 
miners  surpassed  in  cruelty  even  the  semi-savage  Hungarians. 
As  Palacky  writes,  only  the  day  of  St.  Bartholomew  in  Paris 
surpassed  in  horror  this  evening  at  Kutna  Hora.  2izka's 
position   now   became   an   almost   desperate   one.     He   was 

^  The  contemporary  chroniclers  write  "  two  hons."  The  "  hon,"  an  old 
Bohemian  measure  of  distance,  consisted  of  about  125  steps. 

2  The  position  is  well  described  by  Dr.  Toman  in  his  HusitskS  VdUi'nictvi 
{Hussite  Warfare).  He  also  remarks  that  the  advantage  of  the  wagon-fort 
under  a  leader  such  as  2izka  appears  particularly  clearly  here. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  107 

surrounded  by  the  enemy  in  every  direction,  and  the  loss  of 
Kutna  Hora  rendered  it  impossible  to  provision  his  troops. 
He  therefore  determined  to  abandon  his  position  and  take 
up  another  nearer  to  the  country,  whence  he  could  hope  to 
obtain  food  and  reinforcements.  At  daybreak  on  December  22 
2izka  attacked  the  enemies  and,  principally  in  consequence 
of  his  superior  artillery,  drove  them  from  their  positions. 
He  then  marched  to  the  Kasik  hill  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  city,  and  his  troops  again  formed  in  a  square,  ready 
to  repulse  a  new  attack.  No  such  attack,  however,  took  place, 
as  Sigismund  appears  to  have  hoped  to  force  the  Hussites 
to  capitulate.  They  were,  indeed,  in  a  sorry  plight,  almost 
without  provisions  and  suffering  bitterly  from  the  cold,  as 
the  warm  clothing  had  remained  at  Kutna  Hora.  The  magnetic 
influence  which  Zizka  exercised  over  his  soldiers  enabled  him 
to  induce  them  to  remain  under  arms  and  face  the  enemy 
the  whole  day.  At  midnight,  however,  his  artillery  again 
opened  fire  on  the  enemies  and  2izka  succeeded  in  forcing  his 
way  through  their  lines.  On  December  23  the  whole  army 
had  safely  reached  Kolin.^  2izka  here  granted  his  warriors 
a  few  days  of  well-deserved  rest.  With  the  true  intuition  of 
a  bom  general  he  saw  that  his  army  was  not  then  sufficiently 
numerous  to  oppose  the  advance  of  Sigismund.  He  therefore 
immediately  sent  messengers  to  the  neighbouring  districts  of 

^  We  have  unfortunately  scarcely  any  contemporary  information  concerning 
this  brilliant  deed  of  arms.  We  can  now  no  longer  use  Bf  ezova's  history,  and 
the  chroniclers  devote  but  a  few  words  to  the  event.  The  account  given  by 
the  learned  Jesuit  Balbinus  is  very  interesting,  as  he  seems  to  have  used 
sources  that  are  not  now  at  our  disposal.  He  writes  :  "  2izka  ...  in  monte 
Taurgang  [Kank]  ad  Cuttnam  [Kutna  Hora]  castra  fixit.  Caesar  Cuttnam  20 
[rect.  21]  Decembris  obtinuit.  2izkam  in  monte  stantem  ita  cinxit  ut  evasurus 
non  crederetur ;  hie  caeci  Ducis  et  animus  et  magis  etiam  scientia  rei  militaris 
apparuit;  ita  enim  et  currus  ordinavit  et  aciem  instruxit  nocte  23  Decembris 
ut  omnes  suos,  salvis  omnibus  impedimentis,  per  media  Sigismundi  castra 
traduceret,  pugna  semper  abstinens  et  sola  fronte  dimicans  qua  viam  sibi, 
rejectis  in  latera  hostibus,  faciebat;  ita  frustra  de  die  jam  assilientibus  et 
latera  fodientibus  caesareis  (quos  currus  armatis  instructi  simul  progredientes 
satis  arcebant)  Colinum  salvus  et  illaesus  servatis  ordinibus  evasit ;  quod  opus 
militiae  periti  majus  quam  acie  vincere  existimaverunt."  {Epitome  verum 
Bohemicarum,  Lib.  IV,  cap.  viii.) 


io8  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

Ji^in  and  Turnov  calling  the  people  to  arms.  A  large  number 
of  peasants,  many  of  them,  indeed,  armed  only  with  flails 
and  fighting-clubs,  flocked  to  2izka's  standards. 

Sigismund,  always  a  prudent  warrior,  only  entered  the  gates 
of  Kutna  Hora  on  December  24.  Christmas  was  celebrated 
there  very  festively,  and  the  King  believed  that  the  heretics 
had  at  last  been  definitely  vanquished.  Events  soon  proved 
that  his  hope  was  not  justified.  On  January  6,  1422,  the 
national  army  again  advanced,  and  2izka  established  his 
headquarters  at  Nebovid,  a  village  halfway  between  Kolin 
and  Kutna  Hora.  The  Hussite  soldiers  were  never  so  deter- 
mined as  at  this  moment.  Zealous  readers  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, they  considered  merciless  revenge  their  duty.  Their 
fury  became  yet  intenser  when  they  found  in  a  shed  at  Nebovid 
the  corpse  of  a  young  girl,  who  had  succumbed  to  the  outrages 
inflicted  on  her  by  some  of  Sigismund's  Hungarian  mercenaries. 
"  It  is  our  duty,"  the  warriors  said,  *'  to  avenge  this,  even  at 
the  risk  of  our  lives."  ^  On  the  other  hand,  the  unexpected 
advance  of  Zizka  caused  a  panic  among  Sigismund's  soldiers. 
Even  so  experienced  a  general  as  Pipa  of  Ozora  advised  the 
evacuation  of  Kutna  Hora  and  an  immediate  retreat  to  the 
frontier.  It  is  here  particularly  regretted  thai  we  have  very 
little  contemporary  evidence. ^  The  King  decided  to  leave 
the  town,  but  suggested  that  some  of  the  Bohemian  nobles 
who  had  joined  his  party  should  remain  at  Kutna  Hora  and 
defend  the  city.  They  declined  this  task  as  being  too  danger- 
ous. Men  who  had  so  frequently  changed  sides  can  hardly 
have  felt  great   enthusiasm  for  either  cause.     Not  wishing 

^  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  48. 

2  Professor  Tomek  in  his  Life  of  John  Zizka,  to  which  I  wish  here  to  acknow- 
ledge my  indebtedness,  quotes  on  this  occasion  an  important  passage  from 
the  German  chronicler  Windecke.  Windecke's  German  is  so  rugged  and 
difficult  that  I  will  transcribe  his  words  in  English.  He  writes  :  "  Now  the 
King  had  on  this  evening  [when  2izka's  advance  became  known]  many 
cowards  [Windecke  writes  '  Hollanders,'  but  the  word  had  that  significatioa 
at  this  period]  from  Bohemia  and  Moravia  in  his  camp,  though  they  had 
sworn  to  be  faithful  to  him ;  so  the  King  had  to  retreat.  Yet  Pipo  was 
accused  of  having  caused  the  flight  both  from  the  town  and  from  the  open 
country." 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  109 

that  Kutna  Hora  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  rapidly 
advancing  enemies,  Sigismund  gave  the  order  that  the  city 
should  be  set  on  fire  at  various  places.  The  Hussite  troops, 
however,  entering  the  town  almost  at  the  moment  the  King 
left  it,  succeeded  in  soon  extinguishing  the  flames.  Sigismund's 
departure  was  a  flight  rather  than  a  retreat.  The  terrible 
cold — the  first  half  of  January  is  in  Bohemia  proverbially  the 
coldest  time  of  the  year — demoralised  his  soldiers,  who  fre- 
quently refused  to  face  the  enemies.  The  army  was  followed 
by  large  bands  of  miners  who,  after  their  recent  treachery, 
could  not  hope  for  mercy  on  the  part  of  the  Hussites.  They 
had  brought  their  wives  and  children  with  them,  many  of 
whom  perished  from  cold  and  exhaustion.  The  King  ordered 
some  of  the  town-councillors  of  Kutna  Hora,  whom  he,  probably 
rightly,  suspected  of  intending  to  rejoin  the  national  party, 
to  be  arrested  and  tied  to  some  of  the  wagons  which  followed 
the  army.  On  January  8  Pipa  drew  up  his  forces  on  a  line 
of  hills  near  the  village  of  Habry.  He  hardly  appears  to 
have  hoped  to  be  successful,  but  to  have  wished  to  delay  the 
rapid  pursuit  of  2izka's  army.  This  was  certainly  particularly 
necessary  in  view  of  the  safety  of  the  King,  whose  fate,  had 
he  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  patriots,  was  certain. ^  When 
the  sound  of  trumpets  announced  the  approach  of  2izka  the 
Hungarian  cavalry  refused  to  fight,  and  galloped  away  at  the 
full  speed  of  their  horses.  The  infantry  thus  deserted  also 
fled,  and  the  rout  of  the  army  was  complete.  There  seems  at 
first  to  have  been  the  intention  of  halting  at  Nemecky  Brod, 
a  small  town  favourable  to  the  royalists,  but  the  King  now 
refused  to  enter  the  town,  and  continued  his  flight  in  the 
direction  of  the  Moravian  frontier.  He  crossed  the  River 
Sazava  on  a  bridge,  but  this  bridge  was  insuflicient  to  give 
passage  to  the  panic-stricken  crowd.     Many  were  cut  down 

^  Palacky  mentions  the  fate  of  a  Moravian  knight,  John  of  Lhotsky,  who, 
with  a  few  followers,  made  a  hopeless  attack  on  the  advancing  Bohemians, 
hoping  that  his  death  would  facilitate  the  flight  of  Sigismund  {Geschichte  von 
Bohmen,  Vol.  III.  Part  2,  p.  273,  n.). 


no  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

by  the  pursuing  Hussites.  The  Hungarian  horsemen  at- 
tempted to  cross  the  frozen  Sazava,  but  after  a  certain 
number  had  crossed  safely  the  ice  gave  way  and  a  considerable 
number  were  drowned.^  The  whole  luggage  of  the  King,  as 
well  as  the  rich  plunder  which  the  Hungarians  were  carrying 
away,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Hussites  on  the  occasion  of 
this  miniature  Beresina.  The  remaining  part  of  Sigismund's 
army  sought  refuge  within  the  walls  of  Nemecky  Brod,  where 
they  found  some  sympathisers.  The  respite  was,  however, 
short.  On  January  9,  "  immediately  after  hearing  mass," 
the  Hussites  attacked  the  city  from  all  directions.  At  nightfall 
the  defenders  still  resisted,  but  their  cause  was  already  hope- 
less, and  they  began  to  negotiate  in  view  of  a  capitulation. 
Meanwhile,  some  of  2izka's  soldiers  entered  the  gates,  and  all 
resistance  soon  ceased.  A  general  massacre  of  the  citizens 
and  of  Sigismund's  soldiers  then  began,  though  here  also  the 
women  and  children  were  spared.  2izka  himself  was  on  this 
occasion  unable  to  control  the  fury  of  his  men,  but  he  strongly 
expressed  his  disapproval. ^  Thus  ended  the  campaign  of 
Kutna  Hora.  The  rapidity  with  which  2izka  moved  from 
Kutna  Hora  to  Nemecky  Brod,  in  the  middle  of  winter  and 
through  an  almost  roadless  country,  twice  at  Habry  and  before 
Nemecky  Brod  forming  his  troops  in  battle  order  on  the 
way,  is  a  wonderful  proof  of  2izka's  energy,  and  of  the  will- 
power and  enthusiasm  of  his  men.  On  the  nth  2izka  was 
dubbed  a  knight,  probably  by  one  of  the  Utraquist  knights 
or  nobles  in  his  army.  His  conforming  to  the  custom  of  medi- 
aeval chivalry  proves  that  he  was  by  no  means  an  anarchist 
or  **  leveller,"  as  has  often  been  stated.  On  the  retreat  from 
Kutna  Hora  to  Nemecky  Brod  Sigismund  lost  about  12,000 
men,  not  including  the  458  Hungarian  horsemen  who  had 
been   drowned.     Numerous   men   of  rank  in   his   army   had 

*  According    to    the    "  Scrip  tores    rerum    Bohemicanim,"    "  458   men    in 
armour." 

•  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  p.  136,  n.  2. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  in 

also  been  made  prisoners;  he  was  obliged  to  exchange  them, 
and  it  may  be  mentioned  that  among  those  who  were  now 
enabled  to  recover  their  liberty  and  return  to  their  country 
were  the  Bohemian  envoys  who,  contrary  to  international 
law,  had  been  arrested  at  Ratibor. 


CHAPTER  IV 

The  Bohemian  historians,  who  wrote  of  the  great  civil  war 
as  contemporaries,  all,  not  excepting  Bfezova,  adopted  a  strictly 
chronological  method  which  makes  the  study  of  their  works 
somewhat  fatiguing.     After  reading  an  account  of  the  beginning 
of  the  siege  of  some  castle  we  find  ourselves  suddenly  transferred 
to  the  "  dyogd  "  or  market-place  of  Prague,  or  to  the  university 
colleges,  and  read  the  account  of  a  disputation  on  some  abstruse 
question  of  theological  dogma  or  ritual.     A  page  or  two  further 
we  return  to  accounts  of  warlike  events.     The  patience  of  a 
modem  reader  would  hardly  tolerate  such  a  system.     I  wish, 
therefore,  to  give  here  a  brief  account  of  the  theological  con- 
troversies which  caused  great  discord  and  internal  troubles,  both 
in  Prague  and  at  Tabor,  during  the  years  142 1  and  1422.     As 
noted  in  the  last  chapter  it  had  been  settled  at  the  conference 
in  the  house  of  Zmrzlik  that  both  the    contending  parties 
should  send  a  written  statement  of  their  religious  views  within 
a  month  to  Lord  Ulrich  of  Jindfichuv  Hradec,  who  had  presided 
at  the  conference,  and  to  the  burgomaster  of  the  old  town  of 
Prague.     The  Taborite  priests  immediately  drew  up  a  lengthy 
document    expounding  their  doctrine,  and  entrusted  one  of 
the  most  extreme  members  of  their  community,  the  priest 
Venceslas  Koranda,  whose  name  has  already  been  mentioned, 
with  the  duty  of  presenting  this  paper  to  the  Praguers.     The 
danger  of  a  new  foreign  invasion  then  again  confronted  the 
Bohemians,  and  it  was  certainly  the  duty  of  the  Taborites  to 
further  concord  among  the  Hussite  parties.     If  they  really  had 
this  duty  at  heart  their  choice  of  an  envoy  could  not  have  been 
more  unfortunate.     Koranda  expressed  the  wish  to  deliver  his 

message  at  a  general  meeting  of  the  citizens.     In  consequence 

112 


I 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  113 

of  the  feverish  state  of  excitement  that  prevailed  in  the  city, 
this  would  inevitably  have  led  to  riots  and  to  bloodshed. 
The  town-council,  therefore,  wisely  prohibited  the  meeting. 
Koranda  then  declared  that  he  would  preach  in  the  church 
of  St.  Mary-of-the-Snow,  and  there  expound  the  teaching  of 
the  brethren  of  Tabor.  When  he  arrived  there  unexpectedly 
the  pulpit  was  occupied  by  Martin  of  Volyn,  who  had  been  a 
disciple  of  Hus.  When  Martin  had  ended  his  sermon,  Koranda 
immediately  addressed  the  congregation.  He  began  by  com- 
plaining of  the  conduct  of  the  magistrates  of  Prague,  who,  he 
said,  had  attempted  to  prevent  him  from  obtaining  a  hearing. 
He  then  discussed  the  question  of  vestments,  which  greatly 
interested  a  population  then  entirely  absorbed  by  ecclesi- 
astical controversies.  He  invoked  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ 
to  condemn  the  use  of  any  but  ordinary  clothing  during 
religious  services  and,  speaking  in  a  very  menacing  tone,  added 
that  the  brethren  would  treat  those  men  of  high  rank — he 
obviously  referred  to  the  Utraquist  nobles — who  attempted  to 
defend  the  use  of  vestments  by  falsified  Scriptural  texts  in 
the  same  fashion  as  other  infidels  who  falsified  Scripture.^ 
These  threats  were  unfortunately  carried  into  execution  after- 
wards. Koranda  then  left  Prague,  after  having  transmitted 
to  the  town-council  an  extensive  paper  expounding  the  religious 
views  of  the  Taborites.  The  document  was  an  amplification 
of  the  statements  which  Koranda  had  made  in  his  sermon. 
Great  stress  was  laid  on  the  use  of  vestments,  and  Jesus  was 
quoted  as  witness  to  prove  that  they  were  not  only  useless, 
but  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  the  Gospel. ^     Koranda  further 

1  "  Proposuit  quod  fratres  Thaboritae  contra  homines  altos  pro  ornatis 
scripturas  impertinenter  adducentes  et  fratrum  scripturas  adulterantes  quod 
contra  illos  vellent  agere  sicut  contra  quoscunque  alios  infideles  scripturas 
adulterantes,  sicut  antea  pro  imaginibus  et  consecracione  acquarum  fece- 
runt  "  (Bfezova,  p.  467). 

2  "  Primum  quod  Dom.  Jesus,  Deus  et  homo,  cujus  perfecta  sunt 
opera,  sine  vestibus  exterioribus  jam  ad  hoc  consuetis  et  consuetudine  et 
adinventione  hominum  deputatis  et  sine  ritu  a  modo  sacerdotibus  usitato 
sufficientissime  et  saluterrime  coenam  suam  perigit."  ("  Chronicon  Tabori- 
tarum,"  in  Hofler,  Geschichisschreiber,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  p.  489.) 

I 


114  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

affirmed,  in  the  name  of  the  community  of  Tabor,  that  it  con- 
sidered the  ritual  of  the  CathoUc  Church  as  founded,  not  on  the 
traditions  and  decrees  of  Christ,  but  on  the  authority  of  popes 
and  others  belonging  to  a  far  later  period. ^  The  university  of 
Prague,  representing  the  Utraquist  Church,  replied  in  a  very 
prolix  document .  This  paper  energetically  defended  the  ritual  of 
the  Roman  Church,  which  decreed  the  use  of  vestments,  and  it 
declared  that  he  who  despised  his  mother,  the  primitive  Church, 
to  whom  the  Saviour  granted  power  upon  earth  inferior  only  to 
His  own,  was  not  only  a  publican  and  sinner,  but  was  Satan 
himself.  The  lengthy  document  contained  very  numerous 
quotations ;  those  from  the  Old  Testament  refer  principally  to 
the  ritual  of  the  Jews ;  even  the  distinct  dress  of  the  ancient 
Egyptian  priests  is  adduced  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  vest- 
ments. The  principal  statement  is  that  all  regulations  of  God, 
and  those  of  the  Holy  Church  which  are  not  opposed  to  God's 
law,  and  in  particular  the  use  of  vestments,  must  be  obser\'ed 
by  the  faithful. ^  These  statements  of  the  views  of  the  two 
parties  clearly  show  how  great  the  distance  between  them  had 
already  become. 

The  community  of  Tabor  and  their  allies  in  Prague,  such  as 
the  priest  John  of  Zelivo,  were  at  that  time  carried  away  by  an 
ultra-revolutionary  current,  and  had  it  not  been  for  2izka 
both  cities  might  have  fallen  into  a  state  of  complete  anarchy.^ 

^  "  Supponimus  quod  ritum  humanum  ia  proposito  nolumus  vocare  tradi- 
tiones  sed  decreta  papanim  et  hominum  jam  longe  a  vita  Christi  et  apostolonim 
declinantium,  in  quibus  jam  caritas  refriguerat  iniquitate  superabundante  " 
(Hofler,  as  above,  p.  490). 

*  "  Omnis  institutio  Dei  aut  sanctae  matris  ecclesiae  legem  Dei  non 
destruens  sed  adjuvans,  quam  exequi  non  est  de  se  peccatum  est  a  fidelibus 
observanda ;  sed  institutio  de  vestibus  ad  sacrificandum  specialiter  deputatis 
est  Dei  institutio  et  sanctae  matris  ecclesiae  primitivae  legem  Dei  non  destruens 
sed  adjuvans,  quae  non  est  de  se  peccatum  ;  igitur  talis  institutio  est  a  fidelibus 
observanda  "  (Hofler,  as  above,  p.  504). 

'  Dr.  Krummel  in  his  interesting  work  entitled  Utraquisten  und  Tabor iten, 
in  which  he  generally  upholds  the  Taborite  point  of  view,  yet  writes  :  "  Die 
Taboriten  kamen  damals  in  Gefahr  .  .  .  durch  einen  iibertriebenen  Purismus 
und  die  chiliastischen  Ideen,  welche  unter  ihnen  aufgekommen  waren,  auf 
eine  abschiissige  Bahn  zu  gerathen,  die  gefahrliche  Bahn  auf  welche  im  it>ten 
Jahrhunderte  die  Wiedertaufer  gerathen  und  verdienter  Maszen  untergegangen 
sind  "  (p.  53). 


I 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  115 

It  is  but  fair  to  note  that  this  movement  did  not  influence 
the  entire  Taborite  clergy.  There  were  many  men  among 
them  who,  holding  extreme  puritanical  views,  abhorred  church 
ornaments  and  vestments,  and  differed  from  the  Church 
of  Rome  in  their  doctrine  concerning  the  Sacraments  more 
widely  than  did  the  moderate  Utraquists,  but  who  were  by 
no  means  visionaries,  and  ardently  wished  to  maintain  public 
order.  The  leader  of  these  men  was  Nicholas  of  Pelhf imov, 
whom  the  Taborites  had,  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  1420,  chosen 
as  bishop.  For  a  time,  however,  the  fanatics  seemed  to  prevail, 
and  as  was  natural  in  a  country  where  religious  controversies 
had  become  the  predominant  interest,  the  crimes  and  follies 
of  these  men  were  by  their  opponents  imputed  to  the  whole 
Taborite  community.  Almost  immediately  after  Koranda's 
sermon  in  Prague,  the  people  of  Tabor  and  of  the  neighbouring 
districts  began  to  attack  all  those  who  publicly  approved 
of  the  wearing  of  vestments  by  priests  when  celebrating  mass. 
Some  of  these  men  were  declared  heretics  and  burnt  alive  by 
the  populace.  Among  the  Taborite  priests  whose  fanaticism 
endangered  public  order  was  one  Martin  Houska,  sumamed 
Loquis  who,  in,  a  more  enlightened  age,  would  deservedly  have 
been  confined  in  a  lunatic  asylum.  He  professed  an  insane  and 
fanatical  hatred  of  the  Sacrament  of  Communion,  and  expressed 
his  views  in  a  repulsively  blasphemous  fashion.  Probably 
by  request  of  Zizka  he  was  arrested  by  Lord  Ulrich  of  Jin- 
dfichuv  Hradec,  one  of  the  Utraquist  nobles.  From  his  prison 
in  Lord  Ulrich's  castle  he  wrote  to  his  friends  at  Tabor,  begging 
to  be  allowed  to  expound  his  views  there.  Lord  Ulrich  granted 
him  his  liberty,  probably  thinking  that  he  would  there  be 
punished  by  the  members  of  his  own  community.  At  Tabor 
he  recanted  the  opinions  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  that  com- 
munity which  he  had  previously  professed,  but  not  believing 
himself  to  be  safe  there  he  attempted  to  fly  to  Moravia,  which 
appears  to  have  been  his  home.  On  his  way  he  was  arrested 
at  Chrudim  by  the  commander  of  the  district,  Bofek  of  Mile- 


ii6  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

tinek,  one  of  the  Utraquist  generals.  It  is  a  curious  proof 
of  the  universal  interest  in  theological  controversy  at  that 
period  that  the  general  himself  examined  Loquis  on  his  views 
about  Communion.  They  appeared  to  Miletinek  so  blas- 
phemous that  he  struck  Loquis  on  the  face  and  ordered  him 
to  be  burnt.  The  priest  Ambrose  of  Kralove  Hradec,  leader 
of  the  Orebite  community,  however,  begged  that  the  enthusiast 
should  be  entrusted  to  him,  asserting  that  he  would  convert 
him  from  his  erroneous  views.  After  a  few  weeks  the  priest 
Ambrose  declared  "  that  he  could  do  nothing  with  him."  He 
then  had  the  wretched  man,  who  well  deserved  the  quiet  of  a 
cell  in  a  lunatic  asylum,  conveyed  to  the  castle  of  Roudnice, 
where  the  Archbishop  of  Prague,  Conrad  of  Vechta,  then  resided. 
The  archbishop  consulted  the  citizens  of  Prague,  and  they 
appealed  to  2izka,  who  was  then  practically  the  ruler  of  Bohemia. 
The  great  general  was  at  that  moment  very  much  impressed 
by  the  internal  troubles  caused  by  religious  fanatics,  which 
appeared  to  endanger  the  future  of  the  Hussite  movement. 
He  therefore  declared  that  an  example  should  be  made, 
and  suggested  that  Loquis  should  be  burnt  publicly  on  the 
market-place  of  Prague.  The  magistrates,  knowing  that  the 
fanatic  had  many  adherents  in  their  city,  declined  to  do  this,  fear- 
ing the  outbreak  of  riots.  They  sent,  however,  an  executioner 
to  Roudnice,  who,  after  having  cruelly  tortured  Loquis  and  a 
companion  who  had  followed  him,  burnt  them  alive  in  a  barrel 
into  which  they  had  been  thrust.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  terrible 
ferocity  which  at  that  time  was  general,  even  among  men 
of  moderate  views,  such  as  Lawrence  of  Bfezova,  that  he  should 
refer  to  the  death  of  Loquis  in  the  following  words :  "  Let  praise 
be  given  to  God,  who  seized  the  wolves  who  attempted  to  invade 
His  flock,  and  in  a  wondrous  fashion  repelled  and  destroyed  them 
before  they  could  taint  the  others."  ^  In  consequence  of  the 
chiliastic  prophecies  which,  since  the  year  1420,  had  been  widely 
spread  at  Tabor,  a  feeling  of  recklessness  prevailed  among  the 

^  Bfezova,  p.  495. 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  117 

people,  and  even  the  most  absurd  and  anti-social  theories  found 
believers.  The  best  known  occurrence  in  connection  with 
these  religious  excesses  is  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  so-called 
Adamites.  The  excesses  of  these  obscene  fanatics  have  very 
unfairly  been  used  to  discredit  the  whole  Hussite  movement, 
and  even  Pope  Martin  V  did  not  hesitate  to  do  so.  As  I  have 
previously  written  ^  recent  research  has  proved  that  the  so- 
called  Adamites  had  no  connection  whatever  with  Hussitism. 
The  first  mention  of  Adamites  in  Bohemia  is  contained  in  a 
letter  ^  addressed  to  the  Archbishop  of  Prague  in  the  year  1409 — 
before  the  death  of  Hus  and  long  before  the  beginning  of  the 
Hussite  movement — by  the  priest  John  of  Chvojnov,  in  which 
he  complains  of  the  orgies  which  took  place  at  night-time  among 
his  parishioners.  He  relates  misdeeds  very  similar  to  those  of 
which  Bfezova,  ^Eneas  Sylvius,  and  their  many  copiers  after- 
wards accused  the  Adamites.  This  letter  undoubtedly  contains 
the  first  mention  of  Adamites  in  Bohemia.  That  sect  cannot 
in  any  way  be  connected  with  Hus,  or  even  with  extreme 
fanatics  such  as  Loquis.  It  is  probable  that  though  religious 
insanity  has,  under  various  forms,  existed  at  all  periods,  the 
direct  forerunners  of  the  Adamites  were  the  so-called  Turlupins 
in  France.  From  France  their  doctrines  penetrated  to  Austria 
early  in  the  fourteenth  century,^  and  they  undoubtedly  reached 
Bohemia  from  there  in  the  first  years  of  the  fifteenth  century. 
The  attempt  to  connect  the  deeds  of  these  fanatics  with  the 
actions  of  the  brothers  of  Tabor  was  undoubtedly  inspired  by 
the  writings  of  Bfezova,  whose  hatred  of  the  Taborites  was 
even  intenser  than  his  hatred  of  the  adherents  of  the  Church 
of  Rome.     It  is  sufficient  to  state  that  the  doctrine  of  the 

^  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  360-361 . 

*  Published  by  Dr.  Nedoma  in  an  interesting  article  in  the  Vestnik  Krai.  c. 
spolecnosti  nauk  {Journal  of  the  Roy.  Bohemian  Society  of  Science)  in  1891.  I 
must  here  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  this  valuable  article,  which  throws 
much  new  light  on  the  question. 

*  This  is  proved  by  the  Anonymi  auctoris  hrevis  narratio  de  nefanda  hcsresi 
adamitica  in  variis  Austrics  locis  scbcuIo  XIV  grassante  (printed  by  Pez. 
"  Scriptores  rerum  Austriacarum,"  Vol.  II.  pp.  534-536). 


ii8 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS 


Adamites  did  not  originate  in  Bohemia,  that  it  existed  there 
before  the  time  of  Hus,  and  that  it  endured  after  the  fall  of 
Tabor.  It  is  more  correct  to  state,  as  does  Dr.  Nedoma,  that 
the  Adamite  movement  in  that  troubled  period  rose  to  the 
surface  in  consequence  of  the  universal  political  and  religious 
anarchy.  According  to  Bfezova,  who  is  almost  our  sole 
authority,  but  cannot  be  considered  an  impartial  one,  those  who 
dwelt  in  Tabor  divided  into  two  parties,  that  of  the  Picards  ^ 
and  that  of  the  Taborites ;  the  more  faithful  (/.  e.  moderate) 
Taborite  party  expelled  more  then  200  people  of  both  sexes 
from  Tabor,  and  these,  wandering  through  the  hills  and  forests, 
reached  such  a  degree  of  insanity  that  all,  both  men  and 
women,  walked  in  a  state  of  complete  nudity,  saying  that  they 
were  in  a  state  of  innocence,  and  that  clothing  had  first  been 
assumed  because  of  the  transgression  of  our  first  progenitors. 
Bfezova  then  proceeds  to  accuse  the  Picards  or  Adamites  of 
incest  and  other  horrible  crimes,  and  declares  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  relate  some  of  them.  2izka  was  inexorable  in  his 
treatment  of  these  enemies  of  God's  law.  On  his  return  from 
Beroun  to  Tabor  after  one  of  his  military  raids  he  ordered  fifty 
of  these  fanatics,  belonging  to  both  sexes,  to  be  burnt  in  the 
neighbouring  village  of  Klokot.  Some  of  these  fanatics  had 
escaped  from  Tabor  before  2izka  arrived  there,  and  had  formed 
a  settlement  on  an  island  in  the  River  Nezarka  near  Caslav. 
iEneas  Sylvius  has  given  us  a  very  unedifying  account  of  their 
life  there.  They  were  attacked  by  2izka  in  October  142 1  and 
mercilessly  exterminated. 

Other  less  insane,  but  perhaps  even  more  dangerous,  fanatics 
also  imperilled  the  Utraquist  Church  in  the  year  142 1.  Promi- 
nent among  them  was  the  priest  John  of  Zelivo,  who  has  already 
been  mentioned.     He  was  the  leader  of  the  advanced  party 

^  The  origin  of  the  Bohemian  word  "  pikhart  "  is  very  difficult  to  trace. 
It  was  applied  to  all  extreme  fanatics,  but  particularly  to  the  Adamites.  It 
has  often  been  used  connected  with  the  province  of  Picardy,  as  the  origin  of 
the  Adamites  is  believed  to  have  been  in  France.  Others  have  connected  the 
pikharts  with  the  Beguins,  who  were  often  accused  of  professing  heretical 
opinions. 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  119 

among  the  citizens  of  Prague.  In  his  sermons  he  constantly 
referred  to  the  approaching  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  opposed 
all  temporal  laws  and  regulations.  Though  he  may  himself 
have  been  a  well-meaning  man,  his  following  consisted  mainly 
of  the  most  turbulent  and  violent  citizens  of  the  lowest  class. 
These  men  caused  constant  riots  in  the  city.  Inflamed  by  the 
sermons  of  Priest  John  they  expelled  the  Utraquist  priests 
from  their  parish  churches  and  established  Taborite  preachers 
in  their  places.  Thus  the  rabble,  headed  by  two  Taborite 
preachers  named  Prokop  ^  and  Philipp,  "  fugitive  monks  and 
men  of  evil  repute,"  occupied  the  church  of  St.  Peter  on  the 
Pofic,  drove  away  the  Utraquist  preachers  and  established 
their  two  leaders  in  their  stead.  Similar  events  occurred  in 
other  churches  in  Prague. 

When  in  July  John  of  Zelivo  accompanied  the  army  and 
left  Prague  a  temporary  reaction  took  place.  It  is  very  char- 
acteristic of  the  social  condition  of  Bohemia  at  the  period  of 
the  Hussite  wars  that  women  took  the  lead  in  this  movement. 
Several  widows  and  other  zealous  women  called  many  of  their 
friends  together,  and  walking  in  procession  to  the  town-hall 
requested  a  hearing  of  the  town-councillors.  When  they  had 
been  admitted,  one  of  the  women  read  out  a  letter,  signed  by 
all,  which  complained  of  the  injustice  with  which  the  faithful 
priests  of  the  churches  of  St.  Michael,  St.  Nicholas,  and  St. 
Peter  on  the  Pofic  had  been  treated.  They  then  reminded 
the  councillors  of  the  ordinance  which  the  city  had  passed  in 
March  forbidding  the  propagation  of  heresies  in  Prague,  and 
accused  them  of  partiality  in  their  administration  of  the  town, 
and  specially  of  summoning  only  their  partisans  to  the  meetings 
of  the  citizens  and  of  the  aldermen.  They  ended  by  demanding 
that  all  these  grievances  should  be  remedied.  The  councillors, 
who  all  belonged  to  Zelivo's  party,  were  greatly  displeased 

1  This  Prokop  is,  of  course,  not  to  be  confounded  with  Prokop  the  Great, 
nor  with  Prokop  the  Less,  leader  of  the  "  Orphans  "  during  the  last  part  of 
the  war. 


120 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS 


by  this  demonstration.  They  caused  the  women  to  be  arrested, 
and  ordered  them  to  separate.  Those  who  were  married  were 
to  stand  apart,  and  the  other  ones  also.  All  were  shown  where 
to  stand.  The  women  refused  to  obey  this  order  and  declined 
to  separate.  The  town-councillors  then  ordered  the  women  to 
deliver  to  them  the  letter  which  had  been  read  out,  but  this 
also  they  refused  to  do.  The  councillors  then  became  angry. 
Leaving  the  town-hall,  they  gave  the  order  that  the  crowd  of 
women  should  be  locked  up  in  the  council-chamber.  They 
were,  however,  after  two  hours  allowed  to  leave  the  council- 
chamber  unharmed.^ 

The  courageous  initiative  of  the  Bohemian  women  proved 
successful.  The  priests  of  the  Utraquist  Church  were  reinstated 
in  their  parishes,  while  the  agitators  either  retired  to  Tabor 
or  continued,  led  by  their  ringleader,  the  priest  John,  to  cause 
disturbances  in  Prague.  This  conduct  was  all  the  more 
reprehensible  because  the  country  was — as  already  stated — at 
that  moment  again  attacked  on  all  its  frontiers  by  ferocious 
and  fanatical  foreign  enemies.  One  of  the  principal  objects 
of  Zelivo  and  his  partisans  was  to  impede  and,  if  possible, 
to  break  off  the  alliance  of  the  Praguers  with  the  Utraquist 
nobility.  When  the  assembly  of  the  Bohemian  estates  took 
place  at  Kutna  Hora  in  August,  it  was  found  that  the  envoys 
of  Prague  had  no  credentials.  The  assembly  therefore  declined 
to  admit  them  to  its  deliberations,  but  sent  two  of  its  members, 
Vavak  of  Hradec  and  John  Sadlo  of  Kostelec,  who  had  formerly 
been  private  secretary  to  King  Venceslas,  to  Prague  to  complain 
of  this  omission.  On  their  arrival  in  Prague  the  two  Bohemian 
lords  earnestly  exhorted  the  citizens  not  to  hinder  the  proceed- 
ings of  the  national  assembly  by  their  opposition,  and  they 
very  strongly  rebuked  the  priest  John  of  Zelivo,  telling  him 
that  it  was  not  beseeming  for  a  priest  to  interfere  in  worldly 
matters.  In  spite  of  the  influence  of  the  party  of  priest  John, 
the  magistrates  of  Prague  finally  decided  to  forward  to  their 

*  Tomek,  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  pp.  191-192. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  121 

envoys  the  required  credentials.  As  Professor  Tomek  con- 
jectures with  his  usual  sagacity,  the  fact  that  2izka,  known 
as  a  bitter  opponent  of  all  extreme  fanatics,  was  then  in  Prague 
contributed  largely  to  this  decision o  The  well-deserved  rebuke 
which  he  had  received  undoubtedly  rankled  in  the  mind  of 
priest  John,  and  he  was  able,  as  will  be  mentioned  presently, 
to  wreak  terrible  vengeance  on  John  of  Sadlo.  The  disturbances 
in  Prague  meanwhile  continued  almost  uninterruptedly.  On 
October  19,  John  of  Zelivo,  as  had  now  become  his  custom, 
had  the  large  bells  of  the  church  of  St.  Mary-of-the-Snow 
rung,  and  called  on  the  citizens  to  assemble  in  the  church  of 
St.  Stephen.  He  there  addressed  the  people  and  called  on 
them  to  choose  "  one  man  as  their  capable  and  faithful  captain.'* 
After  he  had  inveighed  against  the  barons  of  the  kingdom 
some  of  his  followers  declared  that  John  Hvezda  of  Vicemilic  ^ 
had  always  proved  faithful,  and  deserved  well  of  the  common- 
wealth, and  that  they  wished  him  to  be  their  captain.  This 
somewhat  irregular  vote  was  sanctioned  by  the  whole  assembly, 
and  very  far-reaching  powers  were  granted  to  the  new  captain 
of  the  people.  Four  town-councillors,  of  whom  two  belonged 
to  the  old  and  two  to  the  new  city,  were  then  chosen  to  assist 
Vicemilic  in  the  performance  of  his  new  duties.  Immediately 
after  this  coup  d'etat — for  it  cannot  be  otherwise  described — 
the  town  council,  in  which  Zelivo 's  adherents  had  the  majority, 
committed  other  illegal  acts,  which  were  severely  blamed  by 
the  moderate  Utraquist  members  of  the  council.  These  men 
had  not  dared  to  protest  on  the  spot  against  the  illegal  election 
of  Vicemilic,  but  they  afterwards  met  at  the  Bethlehem  chapel, 
famous  as  the  scene  of  Hus's  sermons,^  and  from  here  for- 
warded a  protest  to  the  town  council,  which  was,  however, 
practically  ignored.  Priest  John  meanwhile  continued  in  his 
sermons  to  attack  the  Utraquist  nobility  with  increasing 
violence.     He  particularly  affirmed  that  many  of  the  nobles 

*  He  was  after  2izka's  death  for  a  short  time  leader  of  the  Tdborites. 
^  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  y^-77. 


122  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

had  not  obeyed  orders  when  the  Utraquist  forces  had  recently 
been  summoned  to  assemble  at  Slane.  Either  the  priest  John 
or  one  of  his  adherents — the  accounts  differ — stated  that  John 
Sadlo  of  Kostelec  had  been  one  of  those  who  had  failed  to  lead 
their  men  to  Slane.  Sadlo  was  greatly  disliked  by  Zelivo's 
rabble,  as  he  had  sternly  rebuked  their  leader  and  requested 
him  not  to  interfere  in  secular  matters.  When  informed  of 
these  accusations,  which  appear  to  have  been  entirely  un- 
founded, Sadlo  was  naturally  very  indignant.  He  decided 
to  return  immediately  to  Prague,  and  to  justify  his  conduct 
before  the  magistrates  of  a  city  which  then  exercised  a  hegemony 
over  the  greatest  part  of  Bohemia.  Sadlo,  however,  well  knew 
how  untrustworthy  the  ochlocracy  that  then  ruled  Prague  was. 
He  therefore  sent  a  messenger  to  Prague  demanding  a  letter 
of  safe  conduct.  The  town-councillors  in  their  reply  stated 
that  they  by  no  means  believed  in  the  accusations  that  had 
been  made  against  him,  and  that  he  could  safely  proceed  on 
his  journey.  On  October  20  Sadlo,  accompanied  by  a  few 
friends  and  some  followers,  proceeded  to  the  town-hall  of  Prague. 
On  his  entry  he  was  immediately  arrested,  and  his  companions 
were  told  to  leave  the  town-hall.  The  councillors  waited  till 
two  o'clock  in  the  night,  and  then  decreed  that  Sadlo  should  be 
decapitated.  Sadlo,  who  was  a  fervent  Utraquist,  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  receive  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  before  his 
death.  This  was  refused,  and  he  was  buried  secretly  in  the 
neighbouring  church  of  St.  Nicholas  without  any  religious 
ceremonies.  The  fully  justified  indignation  which  this  per- 
fidious act  naturally  caused  among  the  sensible  and  reasonable 
Utraquists  is  well  expressed  in  Bfezova's  words.  He  writes  :  ^ 
"  Now  this  John  [Sadlo],  who  had  been  a  great  favourite  of 
King  Venceslas  and  his  principal  councillor,  and  had  often 
protected  the  priests,  scholars,  and  citizens  against  the  fury 
of  the  King,  had  faithfully  upheld  Communion  in  the  two 

*  p.  515  of  his  Chronicle. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  123 

kinds,  and  had,  as  far  as  it  was  in  his  power,  opposed  all  inno- 
vations that  were  contrary  to  God's  law.  He  thus  incurred  the 
enmity  of  many  who  were  then  powerful  in  the  city.  The 
greater  part  of  the  Praguers,  however,  deeply  deplored  Sadlo's 
sudden  death,  and  the  preachers  faithful  to  the  Lord  both 
privately  and  publicly  blamed  the  town-councillors,  and  declared 
that  by  causing  his  sudden  death  they  had  sinned  grievously." 
Bf ezova's  grave  but  truthful  words  indicate  one  of  the  causes 
of  the  failure  of  the  Hussite  movement,  and,  it  may  be  added, 
of  some  of  the  subsequent  attempts  of  the  Bohemians  to  act 
as  a  united  nation.  There  exists  among  the  baser-minded 
Bohemians  a  tendency  to  behave  in  a  somewhat  servile  fashion 
to  those  who  are  their  acknowledged  enemies,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  cast  suspicion,  distrust,  and  even  obloquy  on  those 
who,  like  John  of  Sadlo,  though  they  belong  to  a  superior 
class,  attempt  to  befriend  the  people ;  for  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  the  differences  of  class,  which  are  now  almost 
extinct  in  Western  Europe,  in  Bohemia  long  continued,  and 
to  a  certain  extent  still  continue  to  be  almost  as  strict  as  in 
the  fifteenth  century. 

The  success  of  John  of  Zelivo  and  his  followers  in  destroying 
one  of  their  most  powerful  antagonists  naturally  encouraged 
them  to  continue  their  turbulent  movement.  Utterly  oblivious 
of  the  constant  external  peril  which  menaced  their  country, 
they  had  reduced  Prague  to  an  almost  anarchical  condition. 
As  was  inevitable,  their  fanatical  madness  led  to  a  reaction 
among  the  more  sensible  townsmen.  In  January  1422  the 
victorious  Hussite  armies,  led  by  2izka,  returned  to  the  capital 
from  Nemecky  Brod,  and  their  arrival  certainly  strengthened 
the  minds  of  those  who  were  opposed  to  anarchy.  Speaking 
generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  new  town 
favoured  Zelivo 's  views,  while  the  party  of  order  had  its 
principal  supporters  among  the  citizens  of  the  old  town.  We 
have,   however,   unfortunately  little  information   concerning 


124  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

these  civic  disturbances.  The  leader  of  the  party  opposed  to 
ZeUvo  was  then  Master  Jacobellus  of  Stfibro,^  Hus's  associate 
and  the  originator  of  Utraquism.  He  was  now  Hus's  suc- 
cessor as  preacher  at  the  Bethlehem  chapel.  In  conse- 
quence of  the  presence  there  of  the  national  army,  many 
Utraquist  nobles  and  Taborite  captains,  including  2izka,  were 
now  in  Prague.  These  men  considered  the  possibility  of  re- 
establishing order  in  Prague.  They  decided  that  nineteen  men 
chosen  from  all  the  national  parties  should  act  as  mediators. 
Among  those  selected  for  this  arduous  task  were  two  nobles 
of  the  house  of  Podebrad,  Hasek  of  Valdstyn,  a  Moravian 
noble  whom  King  Sigismund  had  deprived  of  his  estates, 
2izka,  with  two  other  Taborite  captains,  and  Hvezda  of  Vice- 
milic,  whom  the  Praguers  had  recently  chosen  as  captain  of 
the  people.  The  mediators  began  by  appointing  what  may 
be  called  a  provisional  government,  but  in  view  of  the  resistance 
of  the  advanced  party  soon  decided  to  appeal  to  the  people 
and  to  order  the  election  of  new  town-councillors.  The  elections 
were  to  take  place  separately  in  each  of  the  towns,  and  a  certain 
number  of  representatives  allotted  to  each  of  the  different 
divisions  of  the  city.  These  regulations  were  evidently 
necessary,  because  during  the  mob- rule  of  Zelivo  and  his 
adherents  no  orderly  elections  had  been  possible.  The  elections 
which  were  then  held  resulted  in  a  victory  of  the  moderate 
party.  The  mediators  then  decreed  that  the  new  town-coun- 
cillors should  under  all  circumstances  retain  their  positions 
for  the  term  of  one  year,  and  enjoined  on  them  to  admit  no 
priest  to  the  deliberations  of  the  council  unless  it  should  prove 
necessary  to  consult  him  on  matters  of  ritual  or  doctrine. 
They  further  consented  to  allow  four  ecclesiastics,  Jacobellus, 
Peter  Payne  (surnamed  Englis),  John  Kardinal,  and  John  of 
Zelivo,  to  continue  to  direct  ecclesiastical  matters ;  they  were, 
however,  to  act  on  the  advice  of  a  certain  number  of  laymen, 

^  For  Jacobellus  see  my  Master  John  Hus,  passim,  particularly  pp.  71,  232. 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  125 

who  were  to  be  appointed  by  the  town  council.  After  this 
agreement  had  been  concluded  the  allies  of  Prague  almost 
immediately  left  the  city.  2izka  gladly  returned  to  his  task 
of  repulsing  the  foreign  enemies  of  his  country,  hoping  that  the 
new  regulations,  which  were  probably  partly  his  own  work, 
would  ensure  a  certain  amount  of  tranquillity  to  the  Bohemian 
capital. 

One  of  the  first  steps  taken  by  the  new  authorities  in  Prague  was 
the  destitution  of  the  captain  of  the  town,  Hvezda  of  Vicemilic. 
They  then  appointed  as  his  successor  Lord  Hasek  of  Valdstyn ; 
and  in  view  of  the  base,  incessant  attacks  upon  the  Utraquist 
nobles  which  proceeded  from  Zelivo's  partisans,  they  could  hardly 
have  made  a  better  choice.  Valdstyn,  a  very  fervent  Utraquist, 
had,  during  Sigismund's  invasion  of  Moravia,  sacrificed  his  large 
estates  in  that  country  for  the  sake  of  his  cause,  and  had  after- 
wards taken  a  considerable  part  in  Zizka's  brilliant  campaign  of 
Kutna  Hora.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  inconstancy  and 
ambiguous  attitude  of  Cenek  of  Wartenberg  and  some  other 
Bohemian  nobles  caused  them  to  be  often  suspected  by  the 
Bohemian  people,  but  of  the  countless  writers  on  the  Hussite 
wars  Palacky  alone  has  pointed  out  the  great  difficulties 
which  then  confronted  the  Bohemian  nobles.  The  choice  of 
Valdstyn  was  an  intentional  and  justified  rebuke  of  the 
anarchical  tendencies  of  Zelivo  and  his  associates.  The  theo- 
logical controversies  in  Prague  meanwhile  continued  unin- 
terruptedly. Very  violent  discussions  took  place  among  the 
priests  who  were  still  entrusted  with  the  direction  of  ecclesi- 
astical affairs.  John  of  Zelivo  invariably  opposed  all  the  views 
of  his  colleagues.  At  last  Jacobellus  in  the  presence  of  Zelivo 
openly  declared  that  priest  John  was  the  cause  of  all  the  riots 
and  bloodshed  in  Prague,  and  that  he  had  wilfully  led  astray 
the  Bohemian  and  Moravian  nation.  The  new  conservative 
town-councillors  of  Prague  then  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
it  was  necessary  to  end  the  influence  of  Zelivo  over  the  turbulent 


126  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

citizens  of  Prague,  even  if  this  result  could  only  be  obtained  by 
his  execution.^  Even  if  we  admit  that  in  a  land  menaced 
in  every  direction  by  ferocious  and  implacable  enemies  it  may 
be  necessary  to  remove  a  man  who  sows  discord  among  the 
defenders  of  his  country,  we  must  blame  the  treacherous 
fashion  in  which  the  execution  of  Zelivo  was  carried  out.  On 
March  7  Jacobellus  proceeded  to  the  town-hall  and  here  form- 
ally complained  of  the  conduct  of  Zelivo  and  his  adherents, 
who,  he  said,  were  from  their  pulpits  openly  inciting  the  people 
to  sedition.  He  at  the  same  time  blamed  the  magistrates, 
accusing  them  of  undue  leniency.  The  magistrates  then  decided 
to  act  without  further  delay.  On  March  8  they  sent  two  of 
their  members,  one  representing  the  old,  the  other  the  new 
town,  to  the  dwelling  of  priest  John  near  the  church  of  St. 
Mary-of-the-Snow.  They  intended  to  invite  him  to  the  town- 
hall,  probably  under  the  pretext  of  consulting  him  with  regard 
to  the  coming  campaign;  for  Zelivo,  like  many  Bohemian 
priests  of  his  time,  often  accompanied  the  armies  on  their 
marches,  and  was  even  consulted  by  the  generals.  The  priest 
was  not,  however,  at  home,  and  a  message  was  sent  to  him 
from  the  town-hall  towards  evening  saying  that  it  was  now 
too  late,  but  begging  him  to  come  to  the  town-hall  early  on 
the  following  day.  When  he  arrived  there  he  was  cordially 
received  by  the  burgomaster  and  the  aldermen,  and  they  began 
to  discuss  the  plan  of  the  campaign  which  the  joint  forces  of 
the  Praguers  and  the  Taborites  were  shortly  to  undertake. 
The  burgomaster  then  called  in  a  messenger,  and  ordered  him 
to  request  Lord  Hasek  of  Valdstyn  to  come  to  the  town-hall, 
as  his  presence  there  was  very  necessary.  When  Hasek  had 
arrived  the  burgomaster  said  to  Zelivo,  "  Dear  priest  John, 
let  us  all  be  reconciled  before  we  start  on  our  campaign." 

*  The  best  contemporary  account  of  the  execution  of  Zelivo  is  that  by  a 
priest  who  accompanied  him  to  the  town-hall.  It  has  been  printed  from  the 
original  MS.  in  the  Pontes  Rerum  Bohemicarum,  Vol.  III.  pp.  480-485,  and 
translated  into  German  by  Palacky.  The  document  of  course  is  greatly 
biased. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  127 

The  priest,  always  intransigent,  did  not  receive  this  suggestion 
in  a  conciliatory  manner.  He  complained  of  the  treatment 
of  Vicemilic,  who  had  been  deprived  of  his  captainship,  and  of 
other  men  of  his  party  who,  he  said,  had  suffered  injustice. 
A  somewhat  stormy  discussion  arose,  in  the  course  of  which 
Hasek  left  the  hall.  Shortly  afterwards  a  magistrate  appeared 
in  the  hall  accompanied  by  the  executioner  and  his  aids.  He 
exclaimed  in  a  loud  voice,  "Surrender,  you  are  prisoners!  " 
By  command  of  the  executioner  his  aids  seized  Zelivo's  partisans 
and  bound  them  with  cords.  Two  of  them  rushed  at  Zelivo 
himself  and  attempted  to  lift  him  from  the  bench  on  which 
he  was  sitting.  He,  however,  showed  them  by  a  sign  that  he 
was  prepared  for  death,  and  knelt  down  for  some  time  in  prayer. 
He  then  approached  the  burgomaster  and,  speaking  in  a  low 
voice,  reminded  him  of  the  troubles  which  would  be  the  con- 
sequence of  his  execution.  The  burgomaster  only  answered, 
"  It  cannot  be  otherwise,  priest  John."  Contrarily  to  what 
had  been  done  in  the  case  of  Sadlo,  Zelivo  and  his  companions 
were  allowed  to  confess  to  a  priest  who  had  accompanied  John 
to  the  town-hall,  and  to  receive  Communion  from  his  hands. 
This  priest,  who  was  himself  allowed  to  leave  the  town-hall 
unharmed,  is  the  author  of  the  most  extensive  account  of  this 
event  which  has  been  preserved  to  us.  Zelivo  and  his  followers 
were  then  conducted  to  the  courtyard  within  the  town-hall. 
Zelivo  was  then  bound  with  cords  and  decapitated.  Imme- 
diately afterwards  the  same  penalty  was  inflicted  on  twelve  ^ 
of  his  followers. 

Waldstein  undoubtedly  foresaw  that  this  execution,  and 
particularly  the  treachery  connected  with  it,  would  cause  riots 
in  the  city.  He  had  drawn  up  in  the  market-place  close  to  the 
town-hall  a  considerable  force  of  mercenaries  in  the  pay  of  the 
city,  and  he  had  also  secured  the  assistance  of  some  soldiers 
who  were  in  the  service  of  the  Utraquist  nobles.     The  best 

1  Accounts  differ  with  regard  to  the  number  of  adherents  of  Zelivo  who  were 
decapitated  with  him. 


128  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

account  of  the  riots  which  immediately  followed  the  execution 
of  Zelivo  is  that  given  by  one  of  the  contemporary  chroniclers.^ 
He  writes  :  "In  that  year  [1422],  on  the  Monday  following 
the  Reminiscere  Sunday  during  Lent-time,  the  priest  John,  a 
monk  of  the  Premonstratensian  monastery,  preacher  at  the 
Church  of  St.  Mary-of-the-Snow,  was  beheaded  in  the  town- 
hall,  and  with  him  twelve  other  men,  and  the  hall  was  well 
closed.  Then  the  priest  Gaudentius  carried  his  [priest  John's] 
head  through  the  streets  on  a  dish,  inciting  the  citizens  to 
avenge  him.  Then  also  the  armed  citizens  of  the  new  town 
sounded  the  bells  of  all  their  churches,  scaled  the  walls  of  the 
old  town  2  demanding  that  [the  body  of]  priest  John  should  be 
delivered  up  to  them.  Lord  Hasek  was  then  captain  of  the 
old  town,  and  he  had  ordered  all  young  nobles  from  the  neigh- 
bouring country  to  be  in  Prague  on  this  day.  This  Lord  Hasek 
with  his  men  placed  himself  at  the  corner  of  the  2elezna  Ulice 
(Iron  street)  ^  nearest  to  the  market-place ;  but  when  he  under- 
stood that  he  was  not  safe  there  he  hid  himself  in  Prague,*  so 
that  many  houses  were  afterwards  plundered  by  those  who 
searched  for  him.  Then  the  men  of  the  new  town,  seeing  that 
no  resistance  was  offered  them,  rushed  into  the  market-place, 
forced  open  the  gates  of  the  town-hall  and  found  there  the  bodies 
of  the  decapitated.  They  then  began  with  loud  and  menacing 
voices  to  rail  against  the  murderers.  They  also  searched  for 
the  aldermen  of  the  old  town,  and  plundered  and  destroyed 
their  houses,  wherever  they  found  one  of  them  they  murdered 
him.  They  then  attacked  the  Jews  and  robbed  or  destroyed 
all  their  possessions.  When  there  was  nothing  more  to  steal 
there,  they  attacked  the  [university]  colleges,  forced  open  the 
gates  and  took  away  the  books  of  the  masters  and  other  scholars, 

^  "  Scrip  tores  rerum  Bohemicanim,"  Vol.  III.  pp.  50-51. 

2  The  old  town  was  then  divided  from  the  new  by  fortifications.  See  ray 
Prague  {"  Mediaeval  Towns  "  series),  p.  7. 

^  The  street  still  bears  that  name.     See  my  Prague ,  p.  178. 

*  The  entire  career  of  Vald§tyn  proves  that  this  accusation  of  cowardice 
levelled  against  him  is  a  calumny.  The  whole  account  shows,  indeed,  great 
animosity  against  him. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  129 

and  the  books  of  the  pubHc  hbrary  they  either  carried  away  or 
spoilt  them  and  tore  them  up.  They  then  attacked  the  houses 
of  the  priests  and  destroyed  them,  and  those  masters  who  had 
not  fled  they  arrested  and  brought  to  the  town-hall.  Then 
Master  Rokycan  also  fled  from  Prague.  On  this  day  Prague 
suffered  more  damage  then  when  King  Sigismund  encamped 
around  the  city  with  more  than  100,000  men."  Some  of  the 
town  magistrates  who  were  suspected  of  having  approved 
of  the  execution  of  Zelivo  were  immediately  decapitated. 
On  numerous  other  prisoners  the  people  decided  to  pass 
judgment  later.  "  Thus,"  as  Professor  Tomek  writes,^  "  the 
prominent  companions  and  followers  of  Hus  in  his  endeavour 
to  reform  the  Church,  the  most  zealous  and  most  learned 
leaders  of  the  whole  Utraquist  Church,  were  to  be  judged  by  an 
uneducated  rabble."  The  reign  of  terror  in  Prague,  however, 
Jasted  only  a  few  days,  and  we  find  no  explanation  of  this 
fact  in  the  scanty  contemporary  records.  It  does  not  seem 
improbable  that  2izka,  whom  his  campaign  of  Kutna  Hora 
had  naturally  rendered  very  popular,  interfered.  A  man  of 
sure  judgment  such  as  he  was  could  not  fail  to  see  that  the 
continuation  of  anarchy  in  the  capital  would  soon  be  followed 
by  the  complete  downfall  of  the  Hussite  movement.  New 
town-councillors,  mostly  belonging  to  Zelivo's  party,  were,  how- 
ever, elected ;  and,  probably  by  a  compromise,  it  was  decided 
that  the  priests  and  masters  of  the  university  should  be  sent 
to  Kralove  Hradec  '*  to  do  penance  there." 

It  has  already  been  noted  that  the  protracted  negotiations 
with  Poland  at  last  led  to  a  favourable  result,  when  the  news 
of  the  victories  near  Kutna  Hora  reached  Poland.  The  political 
situation  in  that  country  was  also  at  that  moment  favourable 
to  the  plan  of  founding  a  Pohsh  dynasty  in  Bohemia.  Though 
already  of  the  age  of  seventy-four.  King  Ladislas  had  recently, 
mainly  through  the  influence  of  the  Grand  Duke  Vitold,  married 
again.     His  youthful  bride  Sonka,  grand-daughter  of    Ivan 

^  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  p.  242. 
K 


130  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

Olgimuntovi^,  Prince  of  Kiew,  had  been  brought  up  according 
to  the  teaching  of  the  Greek  Church,  and  though  she  joined  the 
Roman  Church  on  her  marriage  it  is  certain  that  she  used  her 
great  influence  over  the  old  King  in  favour  of  the  Bohemians 
who  were  Utraquists,  as  were  her  own  people.  She  certainly 
acted  entirely  under  the  influence  of  the  Grand  Duke  Vitold. 
This  enigmatical  prince,  one  of  the  most  interesting  figures  in 
early  Slavic  history,  seems  to  have  contemplated  the  foundation 
of  a  Slavic  Utraquist  Church  which  would  have  become  the 
basis  of  a  vast  state,  of  which  he  would  have  been  the  ruler. 
His  intense  ambition,  which  had  not  as  yet  been  diminished 
by  increasing  age,  is  one  of  his  characteristics  on  which  both 
Bohemian  and  Polish  contemporary  chroniclers  lay  great 
stress.  Vitold  now  declared  himself  ready  to  accept  the  Bohe- 
mian crown,  and  charged  his  nephew.  Prince  Sigismund  Kory- 
butovic,  who  was  also  a  nephew  of  King  Ladislas,  to  proceed 
to  Bohemia  as  his  representative.  Pursuing  the  usual  tortuous 
policy  of  the  Lithuanian  princes,  Vitold  wrote  to  Pope  Martin  V 
informing  him  that  he  had  accepted  the  Bohemian  throne, 
as  he  thought  it  easier  to  obtain  the  return  of  the  Bohemians 
to  the  fold  of  the  Church  by  peaceful  means  than  by  warfare.^ 
The  Pope's  answer,^  couched  not  unnaturally  in  somewhat 
menacing  language,  severely  blamed  Vitold,  and  declared  that 
unconditional  surrender  on  the  part  of  the  heretics  was  the 
only  solution  of  the  Bohemian  question  which  the  Church  of 
Rome  could  accept.  This  letter,  which  Vitold  only  received 
after  a  considerable  lapse  of  time,  would  probably  in  no  case 
have  influenced   his  decision   or  that   of   Prince   Sigismund 

1  Vitold  wrote :  "...  quod  dicti  Bohemi  multis  et  variis  commina- 
tionibus  atque  guerris  et  exercitibus  ad  observantiam  fidei  sanctae  Rom. 
ecclesiae  et  obedientiam  sedis  sanctae  V*^"  usque  hoc  reduci  nequivissent , 
quin  imo  post  tot  triumphos  totiens  reportatos  ad  majorem  pertinaciam  deduce- 
rentur ;  quos  nee  gladius  nee  persecutio  terrere  poterant,  sed  ex  crebra  victoria 
et  aspersione  Christi  fidelium  qui,  proh  dolor,  unanimiter  ex  utraque  parte 
funditur  eo  magis  animantur,"  (Letter  of  March  5,  1422,  printed  by  Palacky, 
Urkunden,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  pp.  186-187,) 

*  Printed  by  Palacky,  Urkunden,  etc..  Vol.  I.  p.  206.  The  letter  is  dated 
May  21,  1422. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  131 

Korybutovic.      In  the  spring  of  the  year  1422  he  raised  at 
Cracow  a  small  army,  which  he  entrusted  to  his  nephew,  Prince 
Korybutovic.     The  little  army,  consisting  probably  of  about 
5,000  men,  left  Cracow  about  Easter  and  entered  Moravia  by 
way  of  OsvSti  (in  German,  Auschwitz)  and  Tesin  (Teschen). 
King  Sigismund,  who  after  his  great  defeats  near  Kutna  Hora 
had  retired  to  Moravia,  now  left  that  country,  thinking  himself 
safer  in  his  own  Hungarian  kingdom.     The  nobles  of  Moravia, 
disregarding  the   oath   that  Sigismund  had  recently  forced 
them  to  take,  rejoined  the  Utraquist  party  and  again  accepted 
the  articles  of  Prague.     Korybutovic  first  attempted  to  storm 
Olomouc    (Olmiitz),    then   already   a  strongly  fortified   city, 
but  was  repulsed  with  very  considerable  losses.     He  then 
marched  to  Unicov  (Mahrisch  Neustadt) ,  and  obtained  possession 
of  the  town  after  some  slight  resistance.     He  here,  fulfilling 
the  promise  he  had  made  before  leaving  Poland,  received  Com- 
munion in  the  two  kinds,  thus  formally  accepting  the  four 
articles  of  Prague.    He  remained  some  time  at  Unicov,  and  from 
there  sent  several  letters  to  prominent  Utraquists  both  in 
Bohemia  and  in  Moravia,  informing  them  that  he  had  arrived  in 
their  country  as  representative  of  his  uncle.  Grand  Duke  Vitold, 
the  "  postulated  "  or  "  demanded  "  ^  King  of  Bohemia.     He 
also  summoned  the  nobles  and  cities  not  to  continue  their 
feuds,  and  to  meet  him  at  a  diet  that  was  to  take  place  at  Caslav. 
We  have  scarcely  any  information  with  regard  to  the  proceed- 
ings of  this  assembly.     It  is,  however,  certain  that  Korybu- 
tovic swore  to  obey  God's  law  and  to  defend  the  articles  of 
Prague.     He  was  recognised  as  regent  by  all  present,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  Prague,  where  he  was  joyfully  received  by  the  people, ^ 

*  In  Bohemian  "  pozddany,"  in  German  "  postulirter."  According  to  the 
ancient  constitution  only  the  coronation  conferred  the  full  dignity  of  King 
of  Bohemia. 

'  Even  Dlugos,  whose  strong  Roman  Catholic  feeling  naturally  did  not 
dispose  him  to  judge  Korybutovic  favourably,  writes  :  "  Sigismundus  Kory- 
but  ...  Pragam  advenit  et  a  plerisque  Baronibus  et  Nobilibus  Bohemias  ab 
universis  vero  Pragensibus  civibus  de  adventu  suo  laetantibus  et  claves  civitatis 
Pragensis  et  castri  utriusque  sibi  possessionem  consignantibus  summo  studio 


132  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

though  of  course  the  extreme  fanatics,  whose  leader  John  of 
ZSUvo  had  been,  did  not  share  the  general  joy.  Equally  dis- 
pleased were  the  scanty  adherents  of  the  King  of  Hungary. 
Many  of  the  great  Bohemian  nobles,  though  they  fully  sym- 
pathised with  the  Utraquist  movement,  had  hitherto  hesitated 
entirely  to  discard  King  Sigismund,  whom  they  considered 
the  representative  of  the  monarchical  principle;  for  it  must 
be  remembered  that  the  conception  of  a  republic  as  a  form  of 
government  possible  in  an  extensive  country  was  quite  foreign 
to  that  period.  Only  in  a  separate  city  or  a  small  village 
community  was  the  republican  form  of  government  then 
considered  possible.  The  great  Bohemian  nobles,  with  a  few 
exceptions,  therefore  rallied  round  Korybutovic.  The  same 
can  be  said  of  the  university  of  Prague  and  the  Hussite  High 
Church  generally.  These  elements  were  not,  however,  in  them- 
selves sufficient  to  form  a  firm  foundation  for  the  rule  of  Kory- 
butovic. Much  depended  on  the  attitude  of  2izka  and  his 
Tdborites.  2izka,  as  will  be  remembered,  had  signed  the  first 
letter  offering  the  Bohemian  crown  to  the  King  of  Poland. 
Subsequently  he  seems  to  have  conceived  a  not  unjustifiable 
distrust  of  the  Polish  princes.  He  knew  that  King  Ladislas 
was  entirely  subservient  to  the  Pope,  though  at  moments  when 
he  was  on  bad  terms  with  Sigismund  he  sometimes  appeared  to 
encourage  the  Bohemian  national  movement  for  the  purpose 
of  embarrassing  the  King  of  Hungary.  Grand  Duke  Vitold 
was  undoubtedly  more  genuinely  favourable  to  the  Hussite 
cause,  but  the  mere  fact  that  he  had  written  to  the  Pope  inform- 
ing him  of  the  expedition  of  Korybutovic^  naturally  roused  the 
suspicion  of  Zizka,  whom  the  treachery  once  committed  against 
Hus — which  he  always  bore  in  mind — rendered  distrustful. 
There  had  also  been  personal  dissensions.     According  to  a 

et  favore  summaque  gratulatione  exceptus  est,  et  magni  illi  honores  tarn  de 
Baronibus  quam  a  civibus  Pragensibus  habiti,  summaque  rerum  tradita.  Qui 
civitatem  brevi  ad  justiorem  formam  redegit.  Nobilibus  et  qui  quiete  vivere 
valient  blandus  et  amicus.  In  seditiosos  et  facinoros  asperrimus  vindex." 
*(Dlugossi,  Historia  Polonica,  Vol.  I.  Lib.  xi.  p.  452). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  133 

not  very  reliable  contemporary  chronicler  ^  KorybutoviC 
had  from  Uni^ov  written  to  2izka  in  a  somewhat  imperative 
manner  summoning  him  to  recognise  the  new  King  Vitold, 
and  begging  him  to  desist  from  plundering  the  country.  2izka 
returned  a  sharp  answer,  alluding  to  Prince  Korybutovi^  in  a 
very  disparaging  manner.  The  Prince  wisely  did  not  continue 
the  controversy  when,  to  quote  the  same  chronicler,  he  heard 
"  that  2izka  was  a  great  victor  and  an  invincible  warrior  in 
all  battles."  It  is  to  the  credit  of  both  2izka  and  Korybutovic 
to  add  that  when  they  afterwards  met,  a  sincere  friendship 
sprang  up  between  the  two  generals.  We  are  even  told  that 
Korybutovic  was  in  the  habit  of  addressing  2izka  as  "  father," 
while  the  latter  addressed  the  Lithuanian  Prince  as  "  son." 
Before,  however,  any  personal  meeting  had  taken  place,  2izka 
and  his  followers  had  already  in  a  letter  addressed  to  the  citizens 
of  Prague  recognised  Korybutovic  as  leader.  The  interesting 
document  ^  which  announces  this  decision  well  deserves 
quotation.  2izka  wrote  :  "  With  God's  help  !  Amen.  Be  it 
known  to  you,  my  Lord  and  brethren,  that  we,  with  the  brethren 
of  Tdbor,  Domazlice,  Klatovy,  Susice,  Pisek,  as  well  as  the 
lords,  knights,  nobles,  and  the  communities  of  Prachatice  and 
Horazdovice  who  have  voluntarily  recognised  as  rulers  me, 
Chval  and  Buchovec  ^  and  entrusted  themselves  to  our  guidance,, 
have  accepted  his  Highness  the  Prince  *  as  helper  and  supreme 
administrator  of  the  land.  We  will  gladly  obey  his  Highness, 
and  with  God's  help  aid  him  by  word  and  deed  in  all  rightful 
things ;  and  we  also  beg  you  all  from  this  day  forth  to  discard 
all  quarrels,  dissensions,  and  bitterness  which  you  have  had 
either  during  your  whole  life,  or  during  these  last  years,  that  you 
may  honestly  say  the  Lord's  prayer  and  pray  :  Forgive  us 
our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass   against  us. 

1  "  Scriptores  renim  Bohemicanim,"  Vol.  III.  p.  52. 

'  Printed  in   the   Bohemian   original   in   Cermak,  Listy  [documents]  Jana 
Zizky  z  Trocnova. 

'  The  two  other  captains  of  the  Taborites. 
*  i.  e.  Korybutovic. 


134  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

But  if  you  do  not  act  thus,  and,  banding  together  in  your  com- 
munities, continue  to  nourish  disorder,  Hes,  and  disputes,  then 
by  God's  help  we,  together  with  his  Highness  the  Prince,  the 
magistrates,  the  lords,  knights,  nobles,  and  faithful  commons, 
will  strive  to  wreak  vengeance,  whoever  the  culprit  may  be, 
without  regard  of  person.  Do  you  promise  to  assist  us  in  this 
task  ?  And  should  a  man  have  a  dispute  with  another,  be  it 
on  matters  of  religion  or  on  others,  then  he  is  without  riot  or 
disturbances  to  appear  before  the  burgomasters,  the  town- 
councillors,  or  judges  in  an  orderly  fashion  and  state  his 
case.  The  elders  of  the  communities,  as  well  as  the  burgo- 
masters, town-councillors  and  judges  you  must  hold  in  honour, 
and  you  must  love  one  another.  Then  God  and  His  holy 
grace  will  be  with  us  and  grant  us  His  blessing  for  all  good 
purposes." 

This  manly  letter,  whose  Cromwellian  flavour  will  not  escape 
the  reader,  is  one  of  the  most  striking  and  characteristic  docu- 
ments of  the  Hussite  period  that  have  been  preserved.  It 
throws  a  very  clear  light  on  2izka's  true  character.  The  true 
2izka  had  nothing  in  common  with  the  brutal,  cruel,  and  blas- 
phemous ruffian  whom  the  descendants  of  those  whom  he  so 
often  defeated  conceived  and  somewhat  meanly  called  2izka. 
It  is  one  of  the  principal  merits  of  the  great  historian  Palacky 
that  he  was  the  first  to  point  out  that  the  fables  concerning 
2izka,  first  imagined  by  ^neas  Sylvius  and  by  some  fanatical 
monks  and  then  uncritically  repeated  by  countless  writers,  are 
absolutely  untrue.  It  will  have  been  noted  that  Zizka  in  his 
letter  to  the  Praguers  laid  great  stress  on  the  necessity  of  con- 
cord. This  admonition  was  very  timely.  The  Praguers  had, 
after  the  riots  that  followed  the  execution  of  John  of  ZSUvo, 
chosen  new  town-councillors  belonging  to  the  party  of  the 
decapitated  priest.  It  was  practically  impossible  that  Kory- 
butoviC  should  act  in  unison  with  men  who,  as  Professor  Tomek 
\\Tites,  were  the  intimate  friends  of  the  lowest  rabble  of  Prague. 
The  Lithuanian  Prince  showed  great  tact  and  sagacity  in  this 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  135 

difficult  position.  He  at  first  maintained  amicable  relations 
with  the  municipal  authorities.  He,  however,  suggested  a 
change  in  the  municipal  government,  probably — there  is 
scarcely  any  contemporary  evidence  on  this  matter — pro- 
posing that  members  of  all  Utraquist  parties  should  be 
included  in  the  town  council.  The  fanaticism  of  some 
priests  and  other  former  adherents  of  Zelivo,  however, 
rendered  all  negotiations  fruitless ;  but  the  good  sense  of  the 
moderate  Utraquists  had  at  last  determined  them  to  end  the 
incessant  civic  strife.  On  Sunday,  May  24,  a  week  after  his 
arrival  in  Prague,  when  Korybutovi^  left  his  dwelling  in  the 
New  Town,  a  large  crowd  assembled  around  him  and,  seizing 
the  bridle  of  his  horse,  led  him  amidst  great  enthusiasm  through 
the  Old  Town  to  the  gates  of  the  town-hall.  When  the  town- 
councillors  saw  that  the  city  was  greatly  excited  they  imme- 
diately surrendered  the  seals  and  keys  (thus  signifying  their 
resignation  of  their  offices),  that  new  councillors  might  be 
appointed;  and  this  was  done.  On  the  following  day  the 
whole  community  met  in  the  town-hall  and  elected  new  coun- 
cillors. They  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Prince,  and 
recalled  from  Kralove  Kradec  the  masters  who  had  been  exiled 
there.  ^ 

As  soon  as  order  had,  at  least  momentarily,  been  re-established 
in  Prague,  Korybutovic  attempted  to  obtain  possession  of  the 
Karlstyn  castle,^  situated  not  far  from  the  capital.  This 
decision  has  often,  and  not  unnaturally,  caused  surprise.  The 
castle  of  the  Karlstyn  was  one  of  those  strongholds  which 
the  partisans  of  King  Sigismund  still  occupied  in  various 
parts  of  Bohemia.  Isolated  and  invested  as  it  was,  it 
could  hardly  in  any  case  influence  the  result  of  the 
war.  It  is  therefore  difficult  to  understand  the  importance 
which  Korybutovic  attached  to  its  possession,  particularly 
as  the  ever-present  menace  of  a  German  invasion  was  then 

1  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicanim,"  Vol.  III.  p.  55. 

2  See  my  Prague,  etc.,  pp.  199-200. 


136  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

very  great.  The  Karlstyn  castle  had  been  built  by  Charles  IV 
as  a  refuge  for  the  royal  family  in  time  of  war,  and  also  as 
a  stronghold  where  the  Bohemian  crown  and  other  royal 
jewels  could  be  safely  deposited.  Some  writers  have  therefore 
conjectured  that  Korybutovi^  believed  that  the  Bohemian 
crown  jewels  were  still  in  the  Karlstyn  castle,  and  that  he 
wished  to  obtain  possession  of  them.  This  is  exceedingly 
improbable.  Korybutovic's  Bohemian  advisers  certainly  well 
knew  how  great  an  importance  the  Bohemians,  like  the 
Hungarians,  attach  to  the  possession  of  the  royal  insignia 
and  to  the  coronation  of  their  kings,  but  they  must  have 
known  equally  well  that  King  Sigismund  had  immediately 
after  his  coronation  in  1420  caused  the  crown  of  Bohemia 
and  the  other  crown  jewels  to  be  sent  to  Moravia  and  after- 
wards to  Hungary.  The  siege  of  the  Karlstyn  is,  at  any  rate, 
the  principal  military  event  connected  with  the  first  short  stay 
of  Korybutovic  in  Bohemia.  It  is  here  to  be  particularly 
regretted  that  we  have  but  few  and  short  contemporary  accounts 
of  the  siege,  and  these  have  rather  the  character  of  romance 
than  of  history.  The  attempts  of  modern  writers  to  reconstruct 
the  siege  have  been  but  moderately  successful.  It  is  probable 
that  Korybutovic's  Bohemian  and  Polish  soldiers  began  a 
regular  siege  of  the  Karlstyn  on  May  20,  but  Korybutovic 
himself  only  took  over  the  command  of  the  besieging  army 
on  June  4.  The  castle  of  Karlstyn,  built  by  the  Emperor 
Charles  IV,  King  of  Bohemia,  about  the  year  1350,  had  a 
position  which  could  not  be  considered  strong,  even  if  we  con- 
sider the  very  primitive  condition  of  artillery  at  the  beginning 
of  the  fifteenth  century,  being  situated  on  an  isolated  hillock 
surrounded  somewhat  closely  by  higher  hills.  General  Kohler 
in  his  interesting  work,  which  I  have  already  quoted,  expresses 
surprise  that  Charles  IV,  who  had  been  present  at  the  battle  of 
Cr^cy,  where  fire-arms  had  been  used,  should  yet,  when  building 
the  Karlstyn  a  few  years  later,  not  have  taken  the  use  of  artillery 
into  account.     It  is  certain  that  men  began  only  very  gradually 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  137 

to  realise  the  complete  change  in  the  methods  of  warfare  which 
was  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  use  of  fire-arms.  The 
Bohemian  and  Polish  army,  which  appears  to  have  been  very 
considerable,  occupied  all  the  hills  which  surrounded  the  Karl- 
styn,  and  as  was  then  the  custom,  erected  block-houses  or  small 
forts,  surrounded  by  ditches,  which  were  to  secure  the  besiegers 
against  sorties.  The  Hussite  army  brought  a  considerable 
amount  of  artillery,  according  to  the  ideas  of  the  time,  and 
among  them  four  large  pieces  of  ordnance.  The  names  of  three 
of  these,  the  "  Prazska,"  '*  Jaromefska,"  and  "  Rychlice  " 
(the  "rapid"),  have  been  preserved.  The  Praguers  had  also 
brought  a  considerable  number  of  catapults,  or  large  slings, 
which  appear  to  have  done  more  damage  than  the  guns.  A 
large  ravine  separated  the  Karlstyn  from  the  surrounding 
hills,  which  were  occupied  by  the  national  forces,  and  the  whole 
attack  had  the  character  of  a  bombardment  rather  than  of  a 
regular  siege.  The  artillery  fire,  in  consequence  of  the  clumsy 
and  unwieldy  make  of  the  guns,  was  very  slack.  The 
"  Prazska  "  and  "  Jaromerska  "  could  be  fired  seven  times 
a  day,  and  even  the  "  Rychlice,"  famed  for  its  rapidity,  only 
thirty  times.  The  garrison  of  the  Karlstyn  which,  contrary 
to  the  statement  of  some  chroniclers,  must  certainly  have 
consisted  of  more  than  500  men,  defended  itself  with  great 
bravery.  The  besieging  army,  irritated  by  this  obstinate 
defence,  resorted  to  some  of  those  strange  devices  which  were 
customary  in  mediaeval  warfare.  The  commanders  caused  large 
stink-pots  and  baskets  containing  ordure  to  be  thrown  by  slings 
into  the  fortress,  hoping  thus  to  cause  contagious  diseases 
within  the  citadel.  They  were  to  a  certain  extent  successful. 
The  chroniclers  tell  us  that  the  defenders  of  the  Karlstyn  were 
attacked  by  a  mysterious  malady  which  caused  all  their  teeth 
to  fall  out.  This  method  of  forcing  the  garrison  to  surrender, 
however,  also  failed.  According  to  the  report  of  a  contemporary 
chronicler,  to  whom  I  must  leave  the  full  responsibility  for  a 
somewhat  improbable  tale,  some  of  King  Sigismund's  adherents 


138  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

at  Prague  succeeded  in  conveying  to  the  Karlstyn  certain 
medicaments  which  cured  this  mysterious  disease. 

The  attempt  to  obtain  possession  of  the  Karlstyn  failed. 
Several  circumstances  contributed  to  Korybutovic's  decision 
to  raise  the  siege.  At  the  end  of  September  the  remaining 
adherents  of  priest  John  again  caused  troubles  in  Prague. 
They  were  supported  by  the  former  captain  of  the  town,  Hvezda 
of  Vicemilic,  who  had  joined  the  Taborites,  and  later  became 
one  of  their  captains.  Prince  KorybutoviC  hurriedly  returned 
to  Prague  and  succeeded  in  re-establishing  order  in  the  capital. 
The  fact  that  the  Taborites  had  here  for  the  first  time  intervened 
in  the  internal  troubles  at  Prague  as  allies  of  the  anarchical 
party  greatly  influenced  the  course  of  the  Hussite  war. 
Though  the  two  parties  continued  for  a  time  to  act  together 
both  in  warfare  and  in  diplomatic  negotiations,  the  former  cor- 
dial friendship  disappeared,  and  mutual  distrust  took  its  place. 
Other  circumstances  also  contributed  to  the  decision  of  the 
Hussites  to  abandon  the  siege.  The  north-eastern  frontier  of 
Bohemia,  where  the  country  marches  with  Silesia,  was  now 
again,  as  so  constantly  during  the  war,  menaced  by  the  German 
population  of  Silesia,  whose  hatred  of  the  Bohemians  was 
founded  as  much  on  racial  as  on  religious  motives.  In  the 
year  1422  the  Silesians  again  entered  Bohemia,  but  very  soon 
again  retired.  Another  danger,  which  appeared  to  the  Bohe- 
mians far  more  serious  than  it  actually  was,  consisted  in  the 
decision  of  the  German  diet  then  assembled  at  Regensburg  to 
attempt  another  invasion  of  Bohemia  on  a  large  scale.  The 
Bohemians  concluded  an  armistice  with  the  defenders  of  the 
Karlstyn  which  was  to  last  for  one  year.  All  hostilities 
were  to  be  suspended,  and  it  was  agreed  that  should 
the  Hungarian  King  Sigismund  return  to  Bohemia  during 
the  period  mentioned  the  defenders  of  the  Karlstyn  should 
be  free  to  admit  him  into  their  castle,  but  should  grant 
him  no  armed  aid  if  he  attacked  Prince  Korybutoviil^  or  the 
Praguers.     The  partisans  of  King  Sigismund  greatly  rejoiced 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  139 

over  the  preservation  of  their  stronghold  and  over  the  cessation 
of  the  siege  which,  had  it  continued,  would  inevitably  have 
led  to  the  capitulation  of  the  Karl§tyn ;  for  the  defenders  were 
already  running  short  of  provisions,  and  epidemics  were  raging 
within  the  citadel.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  intense  religious  fanatic- 
ism which  was  common  to  all  parties  in  Bohemia  at  that  time 
that  some  ardent  Roman  Catholics  expressed  strong  disapproval 
of  this  agreement,  though  it  was  obviously  favourable  to  their 
party.i 

As  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  year  1422  some  of  the 
German  princes  had  suggested  a  new  invasion  of  Bohemia. 
On  March  8  King  Sigismund  addressed  a  letter  to  all  the  electors, 
princes,  and  free  towns  of  Germany  summoning  them  to  a  diet 
which  was  to  assemble  at  Regensburg  on  May  31.  He,  how- 
ever, afterwards  adjourned  the  meeting  to  July  i,  but  on 
his  arrival  at  Regensburg  found  that  the  German  princes  had 
already  left  the  town  and  had  proceeded  to  Niirnberg.  They 
had,  however,  left  their  representatives  at  Regensburg,  who  in 
the  name  of  their  sovereigns  invited  Sigismund  to  that  city. 
Sigismund  was  finally  obliged  to  accept  this  invitation,  though 
he  was  greatly  irritated  by  this  proposal  to  change  his  plans, 
and  declared  that  he  as  King  and  Emperor— though  as  yet 
uncrowned — was  alone  entitled  to  determine  the  spot  where 
the  imperial  diets  should  meet.  Very  lengthy  deliberations, 
leading  to  very  slight  results,  took  place  at  Niirnberg,  where 
Sigismund  spent  two  months.  The  German  States,  both  great 
and  small,  were  at  that  moment  almost  exclusively  occupied 

^  Thus  Andreas  Ratisbonensis  writes  in  his  Cronica  de  expeditionibus  in 
Bohemiam  contra  Husitas  hcsreticos  :  "  Sicque  facta  pace  ad  annum  inter  eos 
[the  Hussites]  et  Christi  fideles  de  Carelstein  tandem  ipsi  haeretici  ab  obsidione 
recesserunt.  O  bonum  pacis,  bonorum  omnium  excellentissimum,  tu 
suavis  desiderabilis  hominibus  bonae  voluntatis,  quomodo  nunc  et  dolosa 
advenisti.  Tu  enim  gloria  jocunditatis  nostrse  necessitate  tua  modo  legem 
fregisti  quem  dedit  dominus  Moysi  dicens  :  '  Non  inibis  fcedus  cum  habita- 
toribus  terras.'  "  ''  The  Chronicles  of  priest  John  Andrew  of  Regensburg  " — 
printed  by  Hofler,  Geschichtsschreiber,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  406-457 — contains  much 
interesting  information  concerning  the  siege  of  the  Karlstyn,  mainly  derived 
from  the  narrative  of  another  priest,  who  was  with  the  garrison,  probably  as 
chaplain. 


140  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

with  their  internal  dissensions  and  feuds.  The  overbearing 
manner  and  unrehable  character  of  Sigismund  had  won  him 
few  friends  in  Germany.  He  was  at  that  moment  still  on  bad 
terms  with  the  influential  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  Frederick 
of  Hohenzollem.  The  only  persons  who  spoke  strongly  in 
favour  of  a  new  invasion  of  Bohemia  were  the  ecclesiastical 
electors  and  princes  whose  zeal  was  stimulated  by  frequent 
bulls  of  Pope  Martin  V.  It  was  finally  decided  that  an  armed 
force  should  be  equipped  to  relieve  the  Karlstyn  fortress,^ 
and  that  in  the  whole  empire  a  tax  should  be  levied  for  the 
purpose  of  carrying  on  continuous  warfare  against  Bohemia. 
Disputes  into  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  here  imme- 
diately arose  with  regard  to  the  apportionment  of  this  tax. 
Cardinal  Branda,  who  had  remained  in  Germany,  employed 
all  his  eloquence  to  induce  the  Germans  to  retrieve  the  dis- 
graceful campaign  of  the  previous  year  by  a  new  and  successful 
one.  He  presented  to  Sigismund  in  the  church  of  St.  Sebaldus 
a  battle-flag  blessed  by  the  Pope,  which  the  King  made  over  to 
the  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  who  was  to  take  command  of  the 
crusade. 2  It  was  generally  supposed  that  the  campaign  of 
the  previous  year  had  failed  because  of  the  want  of  unity  in  the 
command,  and  Sigismund  somewhat  reluctantly  consented 
to  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg's  being  commander-in-chief. 
The  Hohenzollern  prince  on  the  other  hand  appears  to  have 
shown  little  enthusiasm  for  the  cause  which  he  was  to  uphold. 
He  was  at  that  moment  greatly  absorbed  by  negotiations  with 
Poland  and  the  Teutonic  Order.  He,  however,  led  his  troops, 
which  do  not  seem  to  have  been  numerous,  as  far  as  Tirschen- 

*  The  idea  of  the  great  importance  of  the  Karlstyn  prevailed  equally  among 
the  Catholics  and  the  Utraquists.  Thus  Andreas  Ratisboncnsis,  who  has 
just  been  quoted,  states  that  the  partisans  of  Sigismund,  when  they  learnt 
by  a  secret  messenger  that  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  had — as  will  be  men- 
tioned presently — abandoned  the  intention  of  relieving  the  Karlstyn,  hurriedly 
concluded  a  truce  with  the  Hussites  before  the  latter  knew  that  the  garrisoa 
could  not  hope  for  any  aid  from  Germany. 

*  As  the  Germans  did  not  in  this  year  enter  Bohemia,  this  expedition  can 
hardly  be  called  a  crusade.  Modern  writers  generally  call  the  invasion  of 
Bohemia  in  1421  the  second,  and  that  in  1427  the  third  crusade. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  141 

rcuth  in  the  Upper  Palatinate,  not  far  from  the  Bohemian 
frontier.  He  here  expected  to  be  joined  by  large  reinforce- 
ments, but  hardly  any  German  troops  appeared.  The  Mar- 
grave of  Meissen,  who  was  to  attack  Bohemia  from  Saxony  and 
thus  create  a  diversion,  did  not  move.  The  annual  Silesian 
raid  was  too  distant  and  too  insignificant  to  affect  the  events 
at  the  principal  theatre  of  war.  When  even  the  Bishop  of 
Wiirzburg,  who  had  joined  the  army,  declared  that  it  was  better 
not  to  enter  Bohemia  at  all  than  to  suffer  another  defeat  there, 
Frederick  disbanded  his  forces. 

While  Sigismund's  hope  of  subduing  Bohemia  by  the  help 
of  Germany  was  thus  again  disappointed — as  indeed  it  con- 
tinued to  be  up  to  the  end  of  the  war — he  about  this  time 
obtained  an  important  diplomatic  success.  Ever  since  the 
arrival  of  Prince  Korybutovic  in  Bohemia  the  Holy  See  had 
constantly  appealed  to  the  Grand  Duke  Vitold  of  Lithuania 
and  his  cousin,  the  King  of  Poland,  attempting  to  induce  them, 
both  by  promises  and  menaces,  to  recall  Korybutovic.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  Vitold,  and  to  a  far  greater  extent 
Ladislas,  acted  disloyally  towards  the  Bohemian  people. 
During  the  short  first  rule  of  Korybutovic  in  Bohemia  the 
Polish  clergy,  led  by  Simon  Olesnicky,  who  had  just  become 
Bishop  of  Cracow,  fully  used  its  vast  influence  against  the  Bohe- 
mians.^ The  implacable  hatred  of  Utraquism  which  has  always 
been  a  characteristic  of  the  Roman  Church  was  in  Poland 
intensified  by  the  vicinity  of  Lithuania  and  Russia,  where 
the  Greek  Church  has  always  maintained  the  right  of  laymen 
to  receive  Communion  in  the  two  kinds.^  Vitold  had  in  a 
letter  which  I  have  already  quoted  attempted  to  describe  the 

*  It  is  impossible  to  enter  here  more  fully  into  the  politics  of  Poland,  though 
their  influence  on  Bohemia  was  far  greater  than  is  usually  supposed. 

*  As  I  have  written  elsewhere,  the  connection  between  politics  and  religious 
controversy  is  in  Eastern  Europe  nearly  as  close  as  it  was  in  the  Middle  Ages, 
and  the  intense  animosity  between  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  Churches  still 
continues.  During  a  recent  debate  in  the  Austrian  parliament  (October  191 2) 
the  priest  Bauchinger  declared  that  he  **  saw  no  difference  between  Islam 
and  schism,"  meaning  of  course  Mahomedanism  and  the  Eastern  Church. 


142  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

mission  of  Korybutovic  as  inspired  by  the  wish  to  reconcile 
the  Bohemians  with  the  universal  Church,  an  expression  that 
obviously  may  have  conveyed  a  different  meaning  to  the  Grand 
Duke  Vitold  and  to  Pope  Martin  V.  We  have  no  information 
with  regard  to  Korybutovic's  correspondence  with  his  Polish 
and  Lithuanian  relatives,  which  undoubtedly  preceded  his 
departure  from  Bohemia.  It  is  certain  that  the  Prince  left 
his  new  country  very  reluctantly,  and  that  after  leaving  Prague 
he  remained  in  Bohemia  up  to  Christmas  Eve,  1422,  and  then 
only  returned  to  Poland. 

The  official  policy  of  Poland  now  became,  and  for  a  consider- 
able time  continued  to  be,  very  hostile  to  the  Utraquist  cause. 
It  appears  that  when  leaving  their  country  Prince  Korybutovic 
had  promised  the  Bohemians  that  he  would  return  and  obtain 
aid  from  his  uncle,  the  Grand  Duke  Vitold.  The  Bohemians, 
trusting  this  promise,  which  was  probably  made  in  good  faith, 
wrote  to  the  Lithuanian  Grand  Duke,  inviting  him  to  come  to 
Bohemia  as  he  had  promised,  and  to  assume  the  government 
of  the  country.  Vitold  sent  an  answer  ^  whose  untruthfulness, 
falsehood,  and  misrepresentation  is  almost  unrivalled  even  in 
the  records  of  diplomatic  dispatches.  He  began  by  stating 
that  he  had  only  permitted  the  mission  of  Korybutovic  because 
the  Bohemians  had  promised  that,  as  soon  as  the  Prince 
arrived,  unity  and  obedience  to  the  Church  of  Rome  would  be 
re-established  in  the  kingdom.  The  Prince  had,  however, 
after  his  arrival  in  Bohemia,  not  been  able  by  his  kind  and 
affable  mediation  to  unite  the  people,  lead  them  away  from 
the  erroneous  articles  (of  Prague),  and  reconcile  them  with 
the  Holy  Roman  Church.  When  we  consider  the  fact  that 
Prince  Sigismund  Korybutovic^  had  both  at  Uni^ov  and  at 
Caslav  received  Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  that  he  had  in 
the  latter  place  sworn  to  defend  the  articles  of  Prague,  and  that, 
during  his  stay  in  the  capital,  priests  of  the  national  Utraquist 
Church  had  been  among  his  principal  councillors,  we  cannot 

1  Printed  in  Palacky,  Urkundliche  BeitYuge,  Vol.  1.  pp.  268-2SS. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  143 

help  being  astounded  at  these  outrageous  misstatements. 
The  Grand  Duke  then  declared  that  he  had  concluded  an  alliance 
with  King  Sigismund,  and  now  intended  to  aid  him  and  all 
the  other  princes  in  combating  the  Bohemians,  and  that  he  had 
therefore  recalled  Prince  Korybutovic  from  their  country.^ 

This  letter  of  the  Grand-Duke,  probably  as  insincere  as  had 
been  his  former  profession  of  friendliness  for  the  Utraquists, 
can  only  be  explained  by  reference  to  the  general  political 
situation  at  that  moment.  In  the  year  1422  there  had  been 
bitter  enmity  between  King  Sigismund  and  the  rulers  of  Poland 
and  Lithuania,  and  Sigismund  had  even  suggested  a  plan  for 
partitioning  Poland.  This  menace,  of  which  they  were  immedi- 
ately informed,  appears  to  have  greatly  impressed  both  Ladislas 
and  Vitold,  who  fully  realised  that  the  fanatical  and  powerful 
Roman  Catholic  clergy  in  their  dominions  could  scarcely 
be  trusted,  should  King  Sigismund,  acting  as  champion  of 
the  Pope,  attack  Poland.  These  considerations  determined  the 
two  princes  to  agree  to  what  may  be  called  an  unconditional 
surrender.  In  the  month  of  March  1423  Ladislas,  Vitold, 
and  King  Sigismund  met  at  Kasmark  in  Hungary.  It  was  here 
decided  that  the  joint  forces  of  the  new  allies  should  attack 
Bohemia.  King  Ladislas,  who  had  never  felt  any  sympathy 
for  the  Utraquist  movement,  though  for  political  motives 
and  also  from  personal  animosity  to  King  Sigismund  he  had 
occasionally  appeared  to  favour  it,  greatly  rejoiced  at  having 
regained  the  favour  of  the  papal  see.  In  a  letter  ^  addressed 
to  the  electors  of  Germany  on  April  10, 1423,  the  King  of  Poland, 
replying  to  a  letter  of  the  electors  accusing  him  of  favouring 
heretics,  declared  that  he  and  the  Grand  Duke  Vitold  had  been 

*  Nos  igitur  gratulanter  cum  ser.  principe  D.  Rom.  Ungariae,  Boemiae  rege 
fratre  et  amico  nostro  carissimo  concordiam  inivimus  et  pacem  perpetuam 
fecimus  inter  nos  inviolabiliter  duraturam.  Nolentes  in  eo  S.  Matre  Rom. 
ecclesiae  et  totius  Christianitatis  universitati  contraire,  sed  potius  cum 
ipsa  S.  Matre  eccl.  Rom.  D.  Rege  et  caeteris  catholicis  principibus  totaque 
Christianitate  contra  vos  velle  stare  et  juvare,  ipsum  ducem  Sigismundum 
[Korybutovic]  de  terris  regni  Boemiae  exire  mandavimus." 

2  Printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc,  Vol.  I.  pp.  286-288,  and  by 
Hofler,  Geschichtsschreiber,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  433-435. 


144  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

falsely  accused.  It  was  true  that  after  the  heretics  had  solemnly 
promised  to  renounce  their  errors  and  return  to  the  Holy 
Mother,  the  universal  Church,  Vitold  had  sent  some  of  his 
followers  to  Bohemia  who,  he  hoped,  would  give  the  people 
good  advice  and  lead  them  on  the  right  path.  When,  however, 
Ladislas  found  that  the  heretics  obstinately  maintained  their 
errors,  he  and  the  Grand  Duke  Vitold  had  determined,  together 
with  Sigismund,  King  of  the  Romans  and  of  Hungary,  to  equip 
an  army  which  was  to  be  commanded  by  King  Sigismund, 
and  which  was  to  exterminate  those  whom  their  wickedness 
blinded.  Finally  King  Ladislas  begged  the  German  electors 
not  to  believe  the  accusations  of  heresy  which  had  been  brought 
against  him  and  the  Grand  Duke  Vitold. 

The  Lithuanian  Grand  Duke  hardly  viewed  this  complete 
change  of  policy  with  the  same  pleasure  as  did  King  Ladislas. 
To  Vitold  it  meant  the  wreck  of  all  his  ambitious  projects. 
His  recently  established  relations  with  some  of  the  Moscovite 
princes,  based  on  the  common  desire  to  defend  Utraquism, 
naturally  ceased  after  this  surrender.^  He  does  not  appear 
to  have  discarded  his  former  sympathies  as  completely  as 
did  King  Ladislas.  It  is  almost  certain  that  he  gave  secret 
approval  and  support  to  the  new  expedition  of  Prince  Kory- 
butovic,  whom  we  shall  shortly  again  find  in  Bohemia.  The 
cause  of  Vitold's  submission  was  undoubtedly  the  fact  that 
Lithuania  was  without  Poland  both  too  weak  and  too  distant 
to  play  a  part  in  the  politics  of  Central  Europe.  After  the 
triumph  of  the  Roman  party  in  Poland,  Vitold  could  not 
hope  for  any  help  from  that  country ;  its  hostility,  indeed,  was 
certain.  Immediately  after  the  meeting  at  Kasmark  arma- 
ments began  both  in  Poland  and  in  Lithuania  in  view  of  a 
campaign  against  Bohemia.  Their  result  was  not  successful. 
It  was  found  almost  impossible  to  find  soldiers  who  were 
ready  to  take  part  in  this  war.  If  the  enthusiasm  when 
KorybutoviC  started  on  his  expedition  was,  perhaps,  not  quite 

*  This  is  well  shown  by  Caro  in  his  Geschichte  PoUns,  Vol.  III. 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  145 

so  great  as  some  Slavophil  writers  have  stated,  it  was  certainly 
entirely  absent  on  the  present  occasion.  The  attempt  to 
attack  Bohemia  in  1423  entirely  failed.  The  fact  that  the 
Poles  showed  great  reluctance  to  take  up  arms  against  Bohemia 
revived  the  former  distrust  of  the  Germans  against  their 
Polish  aUies.  About  this  time  the  municipality  of  the  city 
of  Breslau  received  a  letter  ^  from  its  representative  in  Poland 
stating  that  **  Polish  envoys  were  then  at  Of  en  [in  Hungary] 
because  of  the  Hussites,  but  that  he  had  heard  that  the  Hussites 
intended  to  remain  on  the  side  of  the  Poles  against  our  King 
[Sigismund],  and  that  it  appears  that  the  affairs  will  never  be 
brought  to  an  end."  This  proof  of  intense  distrust  shows  how 
impossible  a  common  war  of  Poland  and  Germany  against 
Bohemia  would  have  been.  Pope  Martin  V  had,  in  this  year, 
planned  a  vast  invasion  of  Bohemia  by  armies  collected  from 
various  parts  of  Europe,  somewhat  similar  to  the  great  crusade 
of  1420.  He  had  hoped  that  not  only  the  Poles  and 
Lithuanians,  but  also  Danes,  Swedes,  and  Norwegians  would 
join  in  this  sacred  war.  It  was,  however,  on  the  attitude  of 
the  Germans  that  the  success  of  the  new  crusade  principally 
depended.  It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  what  has  already  been 
written  on  the  complete  failure  of  the  attempted  German 
invasion.  Of  the  distant  northern  sovereigns  whose  aid  was 
expected  only  the  King  of  Denmark  landed  in  Germany  with 
a  small  force.  On  hearing  that  no  serious  attempt  to  invade 
Bohemia  would  be  made  he  very  soon  returned  to  his  own 
country. 

The  Bohemians  were  thus,  during  the  years  1423  and  1424, 
almost  entirely  free  from  foreign  invasion,  though  warfare 
with  King  Sigismund  and  his  son-in-law,  Albert  of  Austria, 
never  entirely  ceased.  This  respite  was  not,  unfortunately, 
altogether  favourable  to  the  national  cause.  The  religious 
controversies  between  the  Utraquist  parties,  which,  since  the 
time  of  Hus,  had  occasionally  caused  discord,  now  became  far 

I  Griiahagen,  Geschichtsquellen  der  Hussitenkriege,  pp.  38-39. 


146  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

more  envenomed,  and    for  the  first  time  led  to  civil  war. 
During  the  later  months  of  the  year  1422  2izka  did  not  play 
so  prominent  a  part  in  Bohemian  affairs  as  before  and  after 
that  date.     He  does  not,  for  instance,  appear  to  have  taken 
part  in  the  siege  of  the  Karl§tyn,  and  its  failure  was  probably 
partly  due  to  his  absence.      He  had,  as  we  have  seen,  freely 
and  generously  accepted  Prince  Korybutovic  as  his  leader, 
but  appears  afterwards  to  have  become  somewhat  suspicious 
of  the  Lithuanian  prince.      Though  the  negotiations  at  this 
period  are  shrouded  in  great  obscurity,  it  appears  certain 
that  Korybutovic,  during  his  stays  in  Bohemia,  entered  into 
negotiations  with  the  nobles  of  the  Roman  party.     It  is  very 
probable  that  he  hoped  that  the  Pope  would  sanction  the 
articles  of  Prague,  or,  at  least.  Communion  in  the  two  kinds. 
This  idea  was  in  itself  by  no  means  incongruous,  and  a  similar 
compromise  at  the  Council  of  Basel  finally  closed  the  Hussite 
wars.      Korybutovic  probably  hoped  that  in  consequence  of 
his  merits  as  a  peacemaker  he  or  his  uncle  Vitold  would  be 
accepted  as  sovereign  by  the  whole  Bohemian  nobility,  by 
the  Hussite  High  Church,  as  well  as  by  the  powerful  city  of 
Prague,  which  was  then  under  the  influence  of  that  Church. 
He  also  probably  hoped  that  the  influence  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  nobles  would  help  him  to  obtain  the  recognition  of 
Pope  Martin  V,  who  was  not  always  on  good  terms  with  King 
Sigismund.     It  is,  I  think,  certain  that  Korybutovic 's  accept- 
ance of  the  articles  of  Prague  and  of  Utraquism  was  a  genuine 
one,  and  that  his  negotiations  with  the  enemies  of  Utraquism, 
both  during  his  first  and  his  second  stay  in  Bohemia,  had  the 
purpose  outlined  above.     During  his  whole  adventurous  life 
the  Lithuanian  prince  always  remained  faithful  to  Utraquism, 
even  when,  as  occurred  on  several  occasions,  it  would  have 
been  more  favourable  to  his  ambitious  plans  if    he  had  sur- 
rendered   unconditionally   to    Rome.     The   matter   was    not 
viewed  in  this  light  by  the  extreme  TAborites — levellers  who 
could  believe  nothing  but  evil  of  all  princes  and  nobles.     These 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  147 

men  affirmed  that  Korybutovi^  intended  to  force  the 
Bohemians  to  abandon  their  national  Church,  and  hoped  as 
a  reward  to  obtain  the  Pope's  support  for  his  plan  of  obtain- 
ing the  Bohemian  crown.  2izka,  perhaps  uncertain  as  to  the 
fashion  in  which  he  should  judge  the  attitude  of  KorybutoviC, 
remained  for  a  time  almost  inactive,  but  after  the  departure 
of  the  Lithuanian  prince  internal  troubles  broke  out,  in  which 
2izka  played  the  most  prominent  part.  It  is  certain  that 
after  the  departure  of  Korybutovic  the  monarchical  party, 
consisting  of  the  Romanist  and  some  Utraquist  nobles,  who 
placed  the  upholding  of  the  legitimist  principle  before  all 
other  considerations,  again  entered  into  negotiations  with 
King  Sigismund.  This  was  the  one  point  on  which  Zizka 
tolerated  no  compromise.  I  have,  following  the  recent  inde- 
pendent Bohemian  historians,  endeavoured  to  prove  that 
many  unjust  accusations  have  been  brought  against  2izka^ 
and  that  in  true  history  he  appears  totally  different  from  the 
murderer  and  robber  who  is  the  Zizka  of  tradition.^  It  would,, 
however,  be  absurd  to  assert  that,  even  judged  from  the  stand- 
point of  his  own  age,  the  great  Bohemian  warrior  was  faultless. 
A  relentless  and  implacable  hatred  of  King  Sigismund,  the 
murderer  of  Hus,  sometimes  obscured  his  generally  brilliant 
intelligence  and  caused  him  to  deviate  from  his  usual  modera- 
tion. In  March  1423  hostilities  began  in  the  district  of  Kralove 
Hradec  between  the  forces  of  the  Orebite  community  and 
Lord  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  who,  after  having  been  for  some 
time  a  Utraquist,  had  now  again  conformed  to  the  Church  of 
Rome,  and  was  momentarily  an  enthusiastic  adherent  of  the 
Hungarian  King.  There  had  for  some  time  been  a  feud 
between  Cenek  and  the  brothers  Bartos  and  Bernard  of  Valecov, 
who  belonged  to  the  Orebite  community  and  were  on  terms  of 
friendship  with  2izka.     Borek  of  Miletinek,  then  captain  of 

'  I  refer  here  principally  to  German  writers.  I  have  seen  English  books 
of  the  eighteenth  century  which  judge  2izka  quite  fairly,  and  as  correctly  as 
the  limited  information  then  available  permitted. 


148  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

the  Orebites,  took  up  the  cause  of  the  brothers  Vale^ov,  prob- 
ably, as  Professor  Tomek  has  conjectured,  on  the  advice  of 
Prince  Korybutovic,  who,  on  his  way  to  Silesia  and  Poland, 
passed  through  the  district  of  Kralove  Hradec  about  this 
time.  Cenek,  now  a  strong  partisan  of  the  Luxemburg  dynasty, 
was  naturally  particularly  obnoxious  to  the  Lithuanian 
prince.  Zizka  also  took  part  in  this  campaign,  as  an  ally  of 
the  brothers  Valecov,  and  what  had  originally  been  but  a 
local  feud  became  civil  war.  2izka  summoned  his  adherents 
to  meet  him  at  Nemecky  Brod  on  April  8,  and  then  marched 
into  the  district  of  Kralove  Hradec,  devastating  the  vast 
estates  which  Cenek  owned  in  that  part  of  Bohemia.  Some 
of  the  Utraquist  nobles  joined  the  forces  of  Cenek,  and  the 
first  battle  of  the  Hussite  wars,  when  Hussites  were  opposed 
to  other  Hussites,  took  place  at  Hofice  on  April  20.  This 
battle  is  interesting,  as  it  throws  considerable  light  on  2izka's 
tactics.  He  was  here,  as  on  almost  all  other  occasions,  con- 
fronted by  a  force  vastly  superior  to  his  own.  At  the  beginning 
of  his  battles  2izka  invariably  succeeded  in  occupying  a  strong 
defensive  position,  in  which  he  awaited  the  enemy's  attack. 
When,  after  a  time,  the  enemy  was  fatigued  and  his  heart 
began  to  fail  him,  and  particularly  when  2izka's  always 
skilfully  used  artillery  had  weakened  him  and  slackened  his 
advance,  then  2izka  considered  that  the  decisive  moment 
had  arrived.  He  then  flourished  his  fighting-club ;  his  standard- 
bearer  waved  his  flag  as  signal  for  a  general  attack ;  then  the 
gates  of  the  battle-wagons  were  opened  and  with  war-cries 
troups  of  men  armed  with  fighting-clubs  rushed  forth. ^  It 
was  2izka's  practice  to  choose  a  position  on  a  range  of  sloping 
heights  to  which  the  wagons  could  be  easily  conveyed,  and  he 
often  chose  a  small  church  as  the  centre  of  his  position.  The 
church  tower  gave  him  a  good  outlook  on  the  movements  of 
the  enemy,  and  the  wall  which  surrounded  the  churchyard  was 
useful  as  obstructing  the  attack  of  the  enemy's  cavalry.     On 

*  Toman,  Husitske   Valeinictvi  {Hussite  Warfare). 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  149 

this  occasion  Zizka  chose  the  small  church  of  St.  Gothard, 
near  Hofice,  as  the  centre  of  his  position.  A  contemporary 
chronicler  ^  thus  describes  the  battle  which  ensued,  "  In  the 
year  1423,  when  2izka  was  marching  through  the  district  of 
Krdlove  Hradec  subduing  the  people  to  his  rule,  the  lords 
determined  to  attack  him;  and  he,  hearing  of  this,  marched 
before  them  to  Hofice,  having  but  two  columns  of  wagons. 
He  took  up  his  position  with  his  men  near  the  church  of  St. 
Gothard,  to  be  able  to  place  his  soldiers  and  his  artillery  on  a 
height,  and  also  for  the  reason  that,  as  horsemen  were  to  attack 
him,  they  should  be  obliged  to  dismount,  and  should  find 
nothing  to  which  they  could  tie  their  horses.  When  they  [the 
enemies]  then  approached,  and,  having  dismounted,  advanced 
to  attack  the  position,  they  were  more  burdened  by  their 
heavy  armour  than  2izka's  infantry,  who  were  accustomed  to 
fight  on  foot.  When  they  were  near  the  summit  and  at- 
tempted to  attack  the  wagons  he  [2izka]  received  them  with 
fire  from  his  guns  and  constant  attacks  by  his  infantry;  and 
before  they  could  capture  his  wagons  he  beat  them  back  as 
he  pleased;  and  after  he  had  driven  them  away  from  the 
wagons  he  sent  fresh  soldiers  against  them.  And  here  the 
Lord  God  helped  him,  so  that  Lord  Cenek  [of  Wartenberg] 
and  Lord  Ernest  [of  Pardubice]  and  the  other  lords  and  their 
men  were  defeated  by  him  on  the  field  of  battle  and  lost  their 
wagons  and  guns.  Lord  Cenek  himself  fled  from  the  field 
with  only  a  small  number  of  followers.'* 

About  the  same  time  civil  war  also  broke  out  in  another 
part  of  Bohemia.  The  citizens  of  Prague,  in  alliance  with 
some  of  the  nobles  of  King  Sigismund's  party,  began  to  besiege 
the  Taborite  stronghold  of  Kfizenec.  When,  however,  Bohu- 
slav  of  Schwamberg,  once  a  strong  Romanist,  but  now  one  of 
the  most  strenuous  Taborites,  arrived  to  relieve  the  besieged 
fortress  all  parties  agreed  to  conclude  an  armistice.  It  was 
decided  to  hold  previously  one  of  the  many  disputations  on 

*  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p   56. 


150  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

dogma  and  ritual  which  were  so  frequent  during  the  Hussite 
wars,  and  which  generally  led  to  but  slight  and  temporary 
results.  This  disputation  took  place  at  Konopist  in  June 
and  lasted  for  several  days.^  The  representatives  of  the 
Hussite  High  Church  were  the  theologians  of  the  university, 
John  of  Pribram,  Jacobellus  of  Stfibro,  John  Kardinal,  and 
the  young  priest,  John  of  Rokycan,  who  afterwards  became 
famous  as  Utraquist  Archbishop  of  Prague.  The  represen- 
tatives of  the  Tabor ites  were  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  and  the 
English  Lollard,  Peter  Payne,  who  had  fled  from  his  country 
and  sought  refuge  among  the  Taborites.^  Each  party  also 
chose  two  umpires,  probably  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining 
order  during  the  proceedings;  for  it  can  hardly  be  thought 
that  nobles  or  citizens  would  be  competent  to  formulate  a 
decision,  should  learned  and  subtle  theologians  disagree.  The 
question  discussed  on  the  first  day  was  that  of  Communion. 
The  Taborite  representatives  immediately  read  out  a  state- 
ment declaring  that  the  sole  basis  on  which  they  intended  to 
found  their  arguments  were  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  prophets,  and  the  apostles ; 
the  teaching  of  other  holy  men  they  could  accept  if  it  was  in 
conformity  with  Christ's  words  or  obviously  founded  on  the 
Holy  Scriptures.     They  added  that  they  would  die  rather 

1  A  full  account  of  the  proceedings  at  Konopist  is  given  by  Nicholas  of 
Pelhfimov  in  his  Chronicon  Taboritarum  (printed  in  Hofler,  Geschichtsschreibet, 
etc.,  Vol,  II,  p.  574  f.).  Dr.  Krummel  in  his  Utraquisten  und  Tabofiten 
gives  an  excellent  outline  of  the  arguments  of  both  parties  written  from  the 
standpoint  of  a  German  Lutheran  divine.  He  does  not,  however,  appear 
to  me  to  do  justice  to  the  views  of  the  Bohemian  Utraquists.  They  insisted 
on  Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  believing  this  to  be  the  law  of  God,  and  also 
desired  that  the  use  of  the  national  language  in  the  religious  services  should 
be  extended,  and  that  stricter  regulations  regarding  the  conduct  of  the 
priesthood  should  be  established.  They  never  desired  or  contemplated  a 
separation  from  the  universal  Church, 

*  It  appears  probable  that  Payne's  unyielding  temper  and  bitterness  im- 
peded the  proceedings  here  as  they  did  afterwards  at  Basel  when,  as  John  of 
Ragusa  writes :  "  Ipse  Anglicus  tanquam  anguis  lubricus  quanto  strictius 
teneri  videbatur  et  concludi,  tanto  citius,  ad  impertinentes  dilabcbatur." 
("  Tractatus  quomodo  reducti  sunt  ad  unitatem  ecclesiae,"  in  Alonumenta 
.conciliorum  generalium  XV  SecuL,  V^ol.  I,  p,  260. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  151 

than  maintain  or  accept  anything  that  was  opposed  to  the 
wish  of  Christ  and  of  His  primitive  Church.  The  divines  of 
the  university  of  Prague  in  their  reply  declared  that  they  also 
accepted  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  that  the  Bible  of  the  Christians 
which  was  in  common  use  must  be  accepted  by  all  the  faithful 
under  penalty  of  eternal  damnation.  They  added  that  they 
considered  the  Latin  translation  of  St.  Jerome  as  correct  with 
regard  to  all  matters  of  faith,  and  that  they  also  accepted  as 
true  and  authentic  the  books  of  Dionysius,  Clement,  and 
Origen,  as  well  as  those  of  the  four  fathers  of  the  Church 
Augustine,  Jerome,  Ambrose,  and  Gregory.  They  finally 
declared  that  when  these  four  fathers  expressed  a  unanimous 
opinion  on  any  question  of  faith  it  was  safer,  more  useful,  and 
easier  to  agree  to  it  than  to  some  modem  conception.^  The 
Taborites  immediately  answered,  stating  that  they  rejoiced 
in  learning  that  their  opponents  had  the  same  veneration 
for  Holy  Scripture  which  they  themselves  felt;  they  wished, 
however,  to  mention  that  the  divines  of  the  university  had  not 
made  the  necessary  distinction  between  the  canonical  and 
apocr^^hal  books  of  the  Bible.  They  further  stated  that 
many  writings  had  been  falsely  attributed  to  Origen  and  to 
other  ecclesiastical  writers,  and  they  suggested  that  even  when 
the  four  fathers  of  the  Church  had  agreed  on  some  point 
they  might  have  all  four  erred.  The  Taborites  finally  replied 
to  the  allusion  to  the  "  conceptions  of  modem  persons."  There 
is  httle  doubt  that  the  persons  meant  were  Martin  Houska, 
John  of  Zelivo,  and  other  zealots  who  had  claimed  Divine 
inspiration  for  their  teaching.  The  Taborites  maintained 
that  if  God  at  the  present  time  revealed  to  some  man  a  new 
meaning  of  the  Scriptures,  this  man  should  be  believed  rather 

"  Supponimus  quod  praedictis  doctoribus  quatuor  in  quacumque  fidei 
materia  idem  unanimiter  sentientibus,  sed  in  quacunque  alia  sententia  non 
expresse  posita  secundum  formam  propriam  catholicae  saltem  fidei  non  dis- 
sona  nee  in  aliquo  destructiva  amplius,  securius  et  utilius  et  expeditius  creden- 
dum  sit  et  a  Christi  fidelibus  tenendum  et  observandum  quaro  novis  conceptibus 
modernorum  "  ("  Chronicon  Taboritarum  "). 


152  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

than  the  fathers  of  the  Church.*  The  proceedings  of  the  first 
day  then  terminated.  On  the  second  day  the  representatives 
of  Tdbor  raised  the  question  of  the  celebration  of  mass.  They 
demanded  that  the  ceremonies  connected  with  it  should  be 
shortened  and  simplified,  as  their  long  duration  prevented  the 
people  from  listening  to  the  preaching  of  the  Word  of  God 
which  was  so  necessary.  They  strongly  blamed  the  custom 
of  reciting  or  singing  before  the  people  words  in  a  foreign 
language  which  they  could  not  understand.  They  then 
formulated  other  grievances,  and  demanded  the  suppression 
of  the  masses  for  the  dead  (the  ''requiems"),  which,  they 
said,  had  only  been  established  by  the  Pope  Pelagius  in  568. 
They  finally  denied  the  existence  of  purgatory,  and  stated 
that  it  had  been  unknown  in  the  primitive  Church.  In  their 
reply  the  divines  of  Prague  stated  that  under  the  penalty  of 
eternal  damnation  all  were  obliged  to  obey,  not  only  the  laws 
and  regulations  of  the  apostles  and  fathers  of  the  Church, 
but  also  those  of  the  Church,  even  if  they  were  evil  and 
depraved,  as  long  as  they  were  reasonable  and  not  obviously 
opposed  to  God's  law.  It  is  evident  that  the  moderate  party, 
which  wished  above  all  things  to  maintain  its  connection 
with  the  universal  Church,  here  laid  down  a  principle  which 
it  would  be  very  difficult  to  define.  The  Taborites  then  de- 
clared that  the  ritual  of  the  Church  of  Prague  was  in  many 
points  contrary  to  Scripture,  and  that  it  required  to  be  amended. 
They  further  stated  that  the  masters  of  the  university  had 
quoted  in  defence  of  their  ritual  the  words  of  theologians  with 
whom  they  did  not  agree  on  other  points,  and  they  (the  Tabor- 
ites) would  in  future  dispense  with  vestments,  as  the  Praguers 
had  failed  to  prove  that  it  was  obligatory  or  even  lawful  to 
use  them.     The  next  subject  discussed  was  the  Lord's  Supper. 

^  "  Distinguendum  etiam  videtur  de  novis  conceptibus  hominum  moder- 
norum,  si  enim  ex  revelatione  aut  apertione  scripturarum  Dt- us  hodie  sensum 
potiorem  alicui  tribueret  magis  sibi  credendum  esset  quam  doctoribus  ante- 
dictis;  multa  enim  usque  ad  tempus  statutum  sunt  signata  et  clausa,  ut 
dicitur  Danielis  12  "  ("  Chronicon  Taboritarum  "). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  153 

Here  at  least  both  parties  agreed  on  certain  points.  As  this 
was  the  only  positive  result  of  the  very  lengthy  debates,  it 
will  be  well  to  enumerate  these  points  here  : 

I.  All  faithful  Christians  admit  that  both  in  the  species  of 
bread  and  of  wine  the  whole  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  true  God  and 
true  man,  is  with  us  in  true  presence,  both  with  His  own  blood 
and  His  own  body. 

II.  In  the  visible  Sacrament  Christ  is  contained  in  His 
corporal-natural  substance,  which  was  transmitted  to  Him 
by  the  Holy  Virgin  Mary. 

III.  In  the  Eucharist  and  in  the  visibly  sanctified  host  the 
full  Godship  dwells  bodily. 

IV.  The  substance  of  the  body  of  Christ  is  contained  in 
the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  as  regards  body  and  substance, 
but  not  dimension.  1 

V.  The  substance  of  the  body  of  Christ  is  contained  in  the 
Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  only  as  such.^ 

VI.  It  (the  substance)  is,  however,  though  without  material 
extension  present  in  substance  and  in  body. 

VII.  Christ,  true  God  and  man,  is,  as  regards  His  true  natural 
and  substantial  body,  which  lives  in  heaven,  simultaneously 
and  at  the  same  time  present  in  one  and  many  places  and 
with  all  the  communicants,  though  not  in  a  measurable 
extension. 

VIII.  Therefore  this  same  Christ,  true  God  and  man,  in 
whom  we  believe,  should,  in  this  venerable  Sacrament,  be 
worshipped  with  genuflections  and  all  honours  due  to  Christ. 

This  compromise  with  regard  to  one  of  the  most  burning 
questions  of  Bohemian  theological  controversy  secured  at 
least  a  temporary  respite.  Though  most  of  the  theological 
problems  remained  unsolved,  an  armistice  was  concluded 
immediately  after  the  disputation   had   ended.     Though  it 

*  "  Substantia  Corporis  Christi  est  in  sacramento  eucharistiae  in  quantum 
corpus  et  in  quantum  substantia,  non  tamen  est  ibi  dimensive." 

*  "  Substantia  Corporis  Christi  est  in  sacramento  eucharistiae,  in  quantum 
substantia  sit  in  se." 


154  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

had  no  permanent  result  I  have  thought  it  well  briefly  to 
outline  the  theological  discussions  that  took  place  on  this 
occasion.  They  show  very  clearly  how  great  the  differences 
between  the  moderate  Utraquists  and  the  Tdborites  already 
were.  It  appears  surprising  rather  that  the  men  of  the  two 
parties  should  have  joined  together  in  opposing  foreign  in- 
vaders and  even  in  sending  envoys  to  the  Council  of  Basel 
than  that  they  should  so  frequently  have  fallen  out.  We 
have  but  little  information  on  the  agreement  which  followed 
the  disputation  of  Konopist.  It  seems,  however,  certain 
that  the  Utraquist  lords,  the  Praguers,  and  the  Taborites 
determined  to  act  in  common  against  the  common  enemy, 
and  at  least  for  a  time  to  desist  from  internal  strife.  The 
nobles  of  the  Roman  Catholic  party  were  not  included  in  the 
agreement,  and  we  find  2izka  almost  immediately  after  the 
truce  engaged  in  warfare  against  the  inconstant  Cenek  of 
Wartenberg,  who  continued  to  oppose  Utraquism.  It  is 
probable  that  on  the  occasion  of  the  meeting  at  Konopist 
the  military  leaders  deliberated  on  the  future  joint  plan  of 
campaign  and  decided  to  invade  Moravia.  We  are  insuf- 
ficiently informed  as  to  the  condition  of  Moravia  during  the 
Hussite  wars.  The  country  was  always  more  closely  con- 
nected with  Bohemia  than  the  other  lands  of  the  Bohemian 
crown.  During  the  Hussite  wars  a  religious  war  similar  to 
that  in  Bohemia,  but  on  a  smaller  scale,  continued  uninter- 
ruptedly. The  Moravian  nobility,  closely  connected  with 
that  of  Bohemia,  on  the  whole  favoured  Utraquism.  Yet  the 
Church  of  Rome  never  lost  its  hold  on  Moravia  as  completely 
as  it  did  on  the  sister-land.  In  the  powerful  and  energetic 
John,  the  "  iron  "  Bishop  of  Olomouc  (Olmiitz),  who  had  so 
greatly  contributed  to  the  execution  of  Hus,^  the  Moravian 
Catholics  found  a  strong  leader.  The  country  bordering  on 
Austria  was  also  exposed  to  the  constant  attacks  of  King  Sigis- 
mund's  son-in-law,  the  Archduke  Albert.      It  was  therefore 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  particiilarlv  pp.  217  and  234. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  155 

decided  that  Zizka  with  his  Tiborites  was  first  to  attack 
Cen^k  of  Wartenberg  and  march  to  Litomerice,  where  the 
German  part  of  the  citizens  had  declared  for  Rome;  he  was 
then  to  join  in  Moravia  the  army  of  the  Utraquist  nobles  under 
Borek  of  Miletinek,  which  was  immediately  to  march  into  that 
country.  The  invasion  of  Moravia  appears  at  first  to  have 
been  successful.  The  Utraquists  took  possession  of  the  town 
of  Prerov,  and  after  a  victorious  battle  besieged  and  took  the 
town  of  KromSfize,  which  belonged  to  their  arch-enemy,  the 
Bishop  of  Olomouc.  They  did  not,  however,  continue  their 
campaign  long.  One  of  those  strange  sudden  civic  upheavals 
took  place  with  which  we  sometimes  meet  in  Bohemia  as  in 
mediaeval  Italy.  Korybutovic  had,  during  his  short  rule, 
appointed  Bofek  of  Miletinek  captain  of  the  city  of  Kralove 
Hradec.  When  Bofek  started  on  his  expedition  to  Moravia 
he  appointed  his  brother  Detrich  his  provisional  representative. 
For  reasons  which  are  not  clear  to  us,  the  citizens  rose  in  revolt 
against  Detrich  and  expelled  him  from  their  town.  On  hearing 
this  Bofek  evacuated  Moravia  and  marched  on  Kralove 
Hradec.  He  also  wrote  to  the  citizens  of  Prague  asking  for 
aid,  and  they  immediately  sent  troops  to  join  him.  On  the 
other  hand  the  men  of  Kralove  Hradec  sent  messengers  to 
LitomSfice  entreating  2izka  to  come  to  their  help.  Zizka 
immediately  complied  with  their  wish  and  marched  on  Kralove 
Hradec.  This  step  is  very  difficult  to  account  for.  Bofek 
of  Miletinek  had  but  a  few  months  previously  fought  bravely 
at  Zizka's  side  at  the  battle  of  Hofice.  It  has  been  suggested 
that  during  his  Moravian  campaign  Bofek  had  entered  into 
secret  negotiations  with  the  citizens  of  Prague.  This  would 
not,  however,  sufficiently  explain  Zizka's  conduct,  for  he 
himself  always  wished  to  be  on  good  terms  with  the  people 
of  the  capital.  It  is  probable  that  Zizka  had  already  received 
some  information  of  the  secret  negotiations  with  King  Sigis- 
mund  into  which  the  Praguers  and  Utraquist  nobles  were 
just  entering  and  which  were  more  fully  developed  in  the 


156  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

following  year.  This  would  also  account  for  the  exceptional 
ferocity  which  2izka  is  stated  to  have  shown  on  this  occasion. 
The  encounter  between  2izka  and  perhaps  the  best  of  his 
generals  is  well  described  by  a  contemporary  chronicler,  though 
he  is  somewhat  incorrect  as  regards  the  succession  of  the 
events.  He  writes  :  ^  "  Divis  [Bofek  of  Miletinek]  ruled  over 
Kralove  Hradec  and  placed  there  his  brother,  the  Lord  Detrich. 
The  citizens  informed  2izka  of  this,  and  he  marched  from 
Litomefice  to  Kralove  Hradec.  The  citizens  admitted  him 
into  the  town  and  drove  away  Lord  Detrich  and  destroyed  the 
castle.  Then  Divis  left  Moravia,  taking  with  him  the  Praguers, 
and  sought  revenge  on  the  citizens  of  Krdlove  Hradec  because 
they  had  driven  away  his  brother ;  and  with  the  Praguers  he 
drew  near  to  Kralove  Hradec;  and  brother  2izka  with  the 
citizens  marched  out  to  encounter  them;  and  a  battle  took 
place  between  the  two  parties  near  the  Strachov  farm  and 
here  ark  was  ranged  against  ark ;  ^  and  the  Praguers  fled, 
defeated  by  2izka  on  this  field;  and  here  many  people  were 
killed  and  200  taken  prisoners ;  and  Divis  fled  to  Kutna  Hora 
with  his  men ;  and  the  priest  who  carried  the  ark  for  the  party 
of  the  Praguers  2izka  killed  with  his  fighting-club."  From 
Kralove  Hradec  Zizka  marched  to  Jaromef  and  Kralove 
Dvur  and  easily  subdued  these  cities,  which  had  been  allied 
with  Prague.  He  immediately  afterwards  besieged  the  im- 
portant town  of  Caslav.  Soon  afterwards,  however,  a  new 
armistice  was  concluded,  and  it  appears  that  all  Utraquist 
parties  wished  that  the  great  general  should  resume  the 
Moravian  campaign.  Before  starting  on  this  new  enterprise, 
2izka  published  his  famed  regulations  of  war.^  Their  purpose 
was  to  establish  strict  and  rigorous  order  in  the  Taborite 

'  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  57. 

*  The  Utraquist  priests  of  all  parties  carried  the  Holy  Sacrament  in  a 
monstrance  before  the  warriors  when  battle  began.  It  became  customary 
to  call  the  monstrance  "  the  ark."  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch, 
p.  140,  n.  2. 

'  They  are  printed  as  an  Appendix  to  this  volume;  see  n.  1,  p.  28. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  157 

camps  and  to  bind  all  his  warriors  to  the  four  articles  of  Prague. 
To  give  more  weight  to  these  regulations,  they  were  issued 
not  only  on  the  authority  of  2izka,  the  commander-in-chief, 
but  also — to  quote  but  a  few  names — on  that  of  the  Lords 
John  RohaC  of  Duba,  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  John  Potstyn  of 
2ampach,  as  well  as  of  the  burgomasters  of  the  three  towns, 
who,  as  mentioned  above,  had  joined  the  confederacy  of 
Tabor,  and  many  knights  and  nobles.  It  appears  that  many 
of  the  older  Taborites,  among  whom  anarchical  and  visionary 
views  still  lingered,  disapproved  of  Zizka's  attempt  to  enforce 
military  discipline.  They  continued,  indeed,  to  obey  his  orders 
when  engaged  on  a  campaign  against  the  common  enemy,  but 
the  mutual  distrust  and  dislike  between  the  Taborites  and 
2izka's  more  intimate  friends  constantly  increased.  2izka  at 
the  end  of  his  life  incurred  the  hatred  of  at  least  some  of  the 
Taborites.^ 

2izka  immediately  started  on  his  new  campaign  in  Moravia. 
He  first  occupied  Jihlava  (Iglau)  in  that  country,  and  then 
decided  to  invade  Hungary.  King  Sigismund  was  then  re- 
siding at  Buda.  Zizka,  whose  statesmanship  has  often  been 
underrated  by  those  who  saw  in  him  only  a  brilliant  general, 
rightly  thought  that  it  was  only  by  invading  his  Hungarian 
kingdom  that  Sigismund  could  be  forced  definitively  to  re- 
nounce his  claim  to  the  Bohemian  throne.  To  2izka,  a  mortal 
enemy  of  the  house  of  Luxemburg,  but  no  enemy  of  the 
monarchical  principle,  this  naturally  appeared  the  only  way 
by  which  the  pacification  of  Bohemia  could  be  effected. 

2izka's  Hungarian  campaign  was  unsuccessful;  yet  this 
campaign,  and  particularly  his  retreat  from  Hungary,  have 
always  been  considered  one  of  the  greatest  proofs  of  his  military 

^  "Then  the  old  Taborites  truly  already  hated  2izka,  principally  because 
Zizka's  priests  said  mass  in  an  orderly  fashion,  in  vestments,  tonsured,  and 
wearing  a  cope,  and  carried  the  body  of  the  Lord  in  a  monstrance."  {"  Kronyka 
o  Janovi  Zizkovi."  quoted  by  Professor  Tomek  in  his  History  of  the  Town 
of  Prague,  Vol.  IV,^p.  287,  n.)  This  was,  of  course,  by  no  means  their  only 
grievance  against  2izka. 


158  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

genius.^  It  is  here  particularly  to  be  regretted  that  con- 
temporary evidence  is  very  scanty.  We  can  only  conjecture 
that  the  Hungarians  everywhere  retreated  when  2izka  ad- 
vanced, and  that  not  being  able  to  give  battle  he  determined 
to  retreat  when  he  could  not  find  sufficient  supplies  for  his 
soldiers  in  a  country  which  the  Hungarians  themselves  had 
ravaged.  I  will  quote  the  account  of  a  contemporary 
chronicler  ^  which,  though  often  vague  as  regards  topography 
and  chronology,  is  interesting  as  giving  a  good  insight  into 
2izka's  methods  of  warfare.  The  chronicler  writes  :  "  When 
the  brethren  had  remained  some  time  in  Moravia  they  per- 
suaded him  [2izka]  to  undertake  a  more  distant  expedition.^ 
Then  he  fitted  out  four  columns  of  wagons,  and  with  as  many 
guns  as  he  could  collect  crossed  the  hills  and  marched  into 
Hungary.  The  Hungarians  did  not  oppose  his  advance,  nor 
interfere  with  him.  They  wished  to  ascertain  if  some  of  his 
men  would  leave  the  ranks,  hoping  then  to  defeat  him.  For 
they  had  assembled  against  him  a  large  force  of  horsemen, 
and  when  they  had  all  joined  they  marched  against  him,  and 
they  had  a  large  number  of  guns.  And  he  [2izka],  seeing  that 
he  could  do  no  good,  turned  back  his  wagons  in  the  direction 
of  the  land  of  Moravia  and  thus  disposed  them  :  first  he 
assembled  all  the  men  near  the  wagons,  and  then  continued 
his  march  with  closed  wagons.*  And  thus  did  he  dispose 
the  wagons  at  the  flanks,  that  he  placed  between  the 
wagons^  two  shields,  and  behind  each  shield  two  or  three 
shooters;  and  he  did  this  for  this  purpose  that,  should  they 
[the  Hungarians]  on  the  march  attempt  to  jump  into  the 
wagons,    these  men  should    prevent   it.      On   that   day  the 

*  All  contemporary  writers,  even  those  hostile  to  2izka,  write  with  great 
praise  of  this  campaign.  Recently  Professor  Leger  has  compared  it  with 
Xenophon's  Anabasis. 

*  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  jj^  If. 

3  This  is  certainly  incorrect.  2izka  undoubtedly  acted  on  his  own 
initiative. 

*  The  meaning  is  that  the  troops  were  shut  up  in  the  wagons. 

'  That  is,  in  the  space  between  two  wagons  which  followed  each  other. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  159 

retreat  was  very  difficult ;  for,  whenever  he  attempted  to  halt 
even  for  a  moment,  they  fired  heavily  at  his  troops.  He  was 
unable  to  oppose  them,  and  so  marched  on  till  nightfall;  he 
did  this  that  they  might  not  observe  where  he  encamped  and 
fire  at  his  troops ;  and  he  allowed  no  fires  to  be  lit  in  his  army. 
They  [the  Hungarians]  rode  round  his  army,  but  having 
nothing  to  which  to  tie  their  horses  they  had  to  go  to  the 
neighbouring  villages,  and  that  at  some  distance,  to  be  safe 
from  him  [2izka].  Then,  having  rested  as  he  thought  fit, 
he  marched  on  the  next  day  to  a  lake  near  a  hill.  He  here 
took  up  a  position  so  that  one  flank  of  his  army  touched  the 
lake,  and  the  other  was  placed  under  the  hill  for  the  reason 
that  they  should  overshoot  themselves,  if  they  wanted  to 
shoot  at  his  troops.  He  himself  acted  thus  :  he  took  the 
fodder-carts,  and  had  them  driven  up  to  this  height,  and  he 
made  out  of  them  at  the  front  gate  a  bastion  and  another 
one  at  the  back ;  ^  and  he  threw  up  entrenchments  here,  and 
having  done  this  placed  his  guns  on  the  bastions;  and  he 
never  allowed  them  [the  Hungarians]  to  remain  on  these 
heights. 2  Thus  he  remained  safely  encamped  here  on  that 
day  and  the  following  night.  Then  on  the  third  day  he 
marched  from  the  lake  to  another  stream  which  flows  in  the 
direction  of  Narhid,^  and  encamped  near  this  river ;  and  here 
he  greatly  feared  an  attack  while  his  men  were  crossing  the 
river.  During  the  whole  night  he  ordered  the  wagons  from 
one  bank  of  the  river  to  the  other  to  be  secured  by  trenches,* 
surrounded  them  with  ditches  to  enable  his  soldiers  to  resist 
and  on  the  other  side  of  the  stream  he  placed  fodder-carts  and 
a  sudden  attack  of  cavalry.     He  gave  orders  that  the  ground 

1  That  is  to  say,  at  the  two  gates  of  his  camp,  at  the  two  extremities  of 
the  slopes  of  the  hill. 

*  2izka's  fortifications  commanded  the  ridge  and  the  slopes  of  the  hill. 
The  enemies,  therefore,  could  not  establish  themselves  there  and  disturb  him. 
They  could  not  with  any  result  fire  at  the  hill,  as  2izka's  camp  was  on  the 
opposite  side,  and  they  would,  therefore,  have  overshot  themselves. 

'  According  to  Professor  Tomek's  Jan  lizka  this  was  the  river  Nitra. 

*  As  Dr.  Toman  suggests,  this  necessarily  means  that  2izka  had  ditches  dug 
from  the  bank  of  the  river  at  the  left  end  of  his  lager  to  the  right  end. 


i6o  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

on  both  banks  should  be  dug  up,  so  that  he  could  cross  with 
four  columns  of  wagons.  When  they  [the  enemies]  saw  him 
occupied  in  crossing  the  river  with  his  wagons,  they  attempted 
to  attack  the  wagons  that  were  in  the  rear;  then  he  drove 
them  back  from  the  entrenchments,  and  when  many  foot- 
soldiers  and  horsemen  attacked  him,  then  he  wounded  and 
killed  many  of  them,  and  having  beaten  them  off  he  crossed 
to  the  other  bank  with  his  wagons  and  his  men.  Then  he 
thanked  the  Lord  God,  because  the  Lord  God  had  deigned  to 
grant  him  His  help  when  he  crossed  the  river.  From  here 
he  marched  through  wide  woods  where  there  are  marshes 
and  meadows,  and  encamped  in  an  outlying  spot,  that  they 
might  not  fire  at  him,  and  here  he  remained  overnight.  On 
the  fourth  day  ^  he  marched  to  the  fish-ponds  which  are  near 
Tyrnau.  And  here  he  repaired  his  wagons,  removing  some 
from  the  places  which  they  had  previously  occupied  in  the 
columns;  and  this  was  done  because  they  [the  Hungarians] 
had  damaged  the  wagons  at  the  flanks  and  killed  many 
horses;  and  here  they  left  him  undisturbed;  and  having 
encamped  near  the  fish-ponds  and  repaired  his  wagons,  on 
the  fifth  day  he  marched  to  a  sloping  hill.  Then  they  again 
attacked  him  with  horsemen  and  guns.  But  he  marched 
close  to  the  slope,  so  that  he  was  secure  on  one  flank;  for  it 
was  easier  for  him  to  defend  himself  on  one  flank  than  on 
both.  Then  they,  seeing  that  they  could  not  harm  him, 
retired  from  the  proximity  of  his  army;  then  he  encamped 
on  the  hill.  Then,  as  the  people  tell,  there  was  great  misery 
and  distress  in  the  camp,  so  that  for  one  green  cabbage- 
stump  they  would  gladly  have  given  much  money.  The 
reason  of  this  was  that  they  [the  Hussites]  never  ventured 
out  of  their  wagons,  for  the  enemies  were  strong  in  cavalry 
and  they  dared  not  attack  them  on  foot.  WTienever  the 
enemy  prepared  to  attack  him  [2iika]  or  fought  with  him,  he 
always  defeated  them,  and  they  were  beaten  back  by  him ; 

*  It  was  really  the  fifth  day  of  the  retreat. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  i6i 

for  differently  are  horsemen  equipped  and  differently  foot- 
soldiers,  to  whom  it  is  an  unaccustomed  thing  [to  fight  on 
horseback] ;  for  if  you  wish  to  learn  something,  before  you  get 
used  to  it  some  time  is  required  and  a  certain  leisure. '^  On 
the  sixth  ^  day  of  the  march  he  moved  away  from  the  slope, 
as  he  [2izka]  had  to  reach  the  hills ;  ^  and  he  had  on  this  day 
to  form  his  wagons  in  but  one  column,  for  he  could  not  ad- 
vance in  any  other  way.  Then  the  Hungarians,  seeing  this, 
pursued  him  with  large  forces,  hoping  that  neither  his  [military] 
organisation  nor  his  order-of-battle  would  any  longer  avail 
him,  and  that  his  men  would  be  obliged  to  leave  the  wagons, 
and  he  thus  prepared  his  defence  :  he  took  up  a  position  close 
to  some  forests  under  a  hill,  and  this  was  done  that,  should 
they  fire  at  him  from  their  guns,  they  should  overshoot  them- 
selves. He  himself  with  his  artillery  took  up  a  position  on 
the  summit  of  this  height.  Then  he  ordered  the  horses  from 
the  wagons  to  be  unharnessed  and  told  his  men  to  mount 
the  horses,  and  he  armed  them  with  hatchets,  shovels,  and 
spades,  that  they  might  explore  the  road,  whether  it  was  in 
any  way  obstructed;  this  was  done  that  the  [Hungarian] 
horsemen  should  not  attack  his  wagons  from  the  flanks,  and 
he  ordered  the  road  to  be  carefully  repaired.  Then  when  he 
had  to  march  his  men  out  of  the  forest  he  ordered  a  new  road 
to  be  built  at  a  distance  of  i|  *  hons  '  *  from  the  old  one 
on  one  side  and  also  on  the  other,  and  this  was  done  for  the 
reason  that  if  the  enemies  should  overtake  him,  he  could  direct 
his  guns  and  foot-soldiers  to  the  old  road,  and  if  the  enemies 
v/anted  to  dispute  his  passage  through  the  fields,  through  which 
he  intended  to  leave  the  forests,  he  could  in  this  way  fire  at 

1  The  meaning  of  this  passage  is  that  the  distress  in  Zizka's  camp  was  caused 
by  the  fact  that  his  soldiers  were  unable  to  leave  their  wagon-forts  because 
of  the  superiority  of  the  enemy's  cavalry.  The  passage  also  conveys  the 
impression  that  Zizka  may  have  thought  of  establishing  some  sort  of  mounted 
infantry. 

*  Really  the  seventh. 

^  i.  e.  the  mountains  which  divide  Hungary  from  Moravia. 

*  An  old  Bohemian  measure.     See  p.  io6,  n.  i. 

M 


i62  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

them  and  slay  them;  and  thus  did  it  afterwards  befall;  and 
while  at  this  side  of  the  forest  he  thus  disposed  his  wagons, 
out  of  the  four  columns  in  which  he  had  marched,  he  now  formed 
two.  He  then  had  forage-carts  broken  up,  and  made  out  of 
them  four  rows  like  a  palisade  or  a  bastion  from  one  end  of 
the  forest  to  the  other,  and  he  ordered  [the  planks]  to  be 
attached  together  by  cords,  so  that  they  could  not  easily  tear 
them  or  break  them  down.  And  he  did  this  that,  should  they 
attempt  to  jump  into  his  wagons  or  seize  his  cannon,  his  men 
could  defend  themselves  behind  these  planks  as  behind  a 
wall;  and  thus  did  it  afterwards  befall.  And  then  he  sent 
into  the  forest  first  the  guns,  then  some  foot-soldiers,  then 
fifty  wagons  from  his  right  flank.  And  when  these  fifty 
wagons  had  entered  the  forest,  he  again  ordered  some  infantry 
to  follow  them,  as  appeared  advisable  to  him,  and  he  sent  on 
fifty  more  wagons  from  his  left  flank,  and  then  again  infantry. 
Thus  he  again  sent  on  each  time  fifty  wagons,  and  between 
each  column  foot-soldiers,  as  many  as  was  necessary.  And 
this  was  done  for  the  reason  that  if  they  [the  enemies]  at- 
tempted to  kill  the  wagoners,  or  seize  the  wagons,  these 
foot-soldiers  marching  between  the  columns  of  wagons  should 
prevent  this.  Then,  when  the  last  passed,  the  Hungarians 
attacked  the  rear,  wishing  to  seize  his  cannon.  They  then, 
descending  from  the  heights,  attacked  the  fodder-carts  which 
he  had  placed  there,  but  they  [2izka's  men]  remained  sheltered 
by  them  till  the  artillery  had  entered  the  wood  and  the  infantry 
also;  then  they  also  retreated.  And  they  so  little  feared  the 
Hungarians  that  while  they  [the  Hungarians]  took  possession 
of  the  carts  they  partly  destroyed  the  road,  so  that  the  horse- 
men could  not  follow  them.  When  the  Hungarians  saw  this, 
that  they  could  in  no  way  harm  him,  some  rode  on  in  advance, 
wishing  to  oppose  him  [2izka]  when  he  debouched  out  of  the 
forest,  others  rode  home  saying  that  this  was  not  a  man,  but 
that  the  devil  gave  him  this  cimning,  and  that  nothing  availed 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  163 

against  him.  And  thus  did  he  lead  his  army  out  of  the  forest 
again  through  some  fields  that  were  between  slopes.  When 
he  had  arrived  at  the  new  roads  which  he  had  made,  he  first 
ordered  these  fifty  wagons  to  move  along  the  new  road  which 
he  built  to  the  right  [of  the  old  one] ;  and  when  they  marched 
through  the  fields  they  drove  close  to  the  slope  so  that  the 
foot-soldiers  had  on  one  side  the  wagons  and  on  the  other 
the  slope,  so  that  they  did  not  fear  the  horsemen;  and  he 
ordered  the  other  columns  also  to  advance  along  the  other 
[the  new]  road ;  and  he  sent  the  artillery  out  of  the  wood  by 
the  old  road  and  then  occupied  the  fields.  And  so  gradually 
all  the  wagons  were  driven  out  of  the  wood,  and  he  disposed 
them  so  that  they  were  all  in  one  line  and  wound  themselves 
together  like  a  wreath.  And  he  did  this  to  unite  the  two 
columns  in  one  and  drive  them  [the  Hungarians]  from  the 
field  with  a  powerful  hand.  And  thus  the  number  of  wagons 
which  left  the  forest  ever  increased,  till  they  had  all  got  into 
the  open.  And  thus  did  the  Lord  God  help  him  to  retreat 
from  Hungary.  But  from  the  time  that  2izka  had  begun  to 
war  this  had  been  his  heaviest  task." 

This  contemporary  account  of  2izka's  Hungarian  cam- 
paign— which  I  have  thought  best  to  translate  literally  from 
the  rugged  fifteenth-century  Bohemian  of  the  original- — was 
probably  written  by  one  who  took  part  in  the  campaign.  It 
contains  many  inaccuracies  and  obscurities  and,  as  I  have 
mentioned,  leaves  us  in  doubt  with  regard  to  matters  both 
chronological  and  topographical.  Recently  Professor  Tomek 
and  Dr.  Toman,  who  have  thoroughly  studied  this  curious 
document,  have  tried  to  elucidate  some  doubtful  points.  The 
account  gives  but  few  names  of  localities — these  generally  spelt 
in  a  manner  that  renders  them  almost  unintelligible — and  the 
question  arises  :  What  part  of  Hungary  did  2izka  invade  ?  It 
seems  most  probable  that  he  entered  Hungary  from  Moravia 
at  Holic,  and  that  he  marched  by  Tyrnau  and  Neutra  to  the 


i64  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

neighbourhood  of  Gran,  where  he  reached  the  Danube. ^  He 
was  there  not  very  far  from  King  Sigismund,  who  was  then  re- 
siding at  Buda.  The  King  of  Hungary,  though  he  immediately 
left  that  city,  organised  a  large  force  to  oppose  2izka,  who 
had  hitherto  advanced  without  meeting  with  any  resistance. 
It  was  probably  in  the  plains  between  Gran  and  Komorn  that 
2izka  was  first  attacked  by  vast  forces  of  Hungarian  horse- 
men, and  nearly  surrounded  by  them.  He  then  immediately 
determined  to  retire  to  Moravia.  On  his  retreat  he  probably 
took  the  same  route  as  on  entering  Hungary,  but  in  the  absence 
of  all  information  we  are  reduced  to  conjectures.  It  appears 
certain  that  2izka  reached  Moravia  about  October  20,  and 
we  read  of  him  as  being  in  Bohemia  shortly  afterwards. 

Very  serious  events  had  taken  place  in  that  country  during 
2izka's  absence.  It  appears  probable  that  soon  after  the 
armistice  of  Konopist  the  Praguers  and  some  of  the  Utraquist 
nobles  entered  into  negotiations  with  King  Ladislas  of  Poland. 
It  is  even  stated  that  they  entrusted  him  with  the  mission  of 
tending  their,  probably  not  unconditional,  submission  to  the 
Roman  see.  Ladislas,  with  a  perfidia  plus  qiiam  Polonica, 
did  not  hesitate  to  communicate  these  strictly  confidential 
negotiations  to  King  Sigismund.  Polish  envoys  were  sent 
to  the  Hungarian  court  and  were  received  there  with  great 
favour.  Somewhat  later  two  of  the  principal  nobles  of  the 
Roman  party  in  Bohemia  also  proceeded  to  Hungary.  Doubt- 
less realising  that  a  complete  submission  of  their  Utraquist 
countrymen,  after  an  almost  uninterrupted  series  of  victories, 
was  an  impossibility,  they  suggested  another  conference.  A 
meeting  of  the  Utraquists  of  Bohemia  took  place  at  Kolin 
shortly  afterwards.  They  decided  to  enter  into  negotiations 
with  the  Roman  Catholics,  and  it  was  agreed  that  representa- 
tives of  all  Bohemian  parties  should  meet  at  Prague  "  on  the 

*  i^lneas  Sylvius  places  one  of  ?.izka's  semi-mythical  exploits  "  near  the 
Danube  in  Austria."  This  probably  refers  to  his  Hungarian  expedition,  when 
he  reached  the  Danube  near  Gran. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  165 

day  of  St.  Gallus  " — October  16.  At  this  meeting  members 
of  all  Bohemian  parties  except  the  T4borites  were  present. 
Among  those  who  took  part  in  this  assembly  were  Archbishop 
Conrad,  who  occupied  the  first  J  place,  the  Romanist  nobles 
Ales  of  Sternberg  and  Frederick  of  Kolowrat,  as  well  as  John 
of  Opocno  and  Puta  of  Castolovice,  who  had  just  returned 
from  visiting  King  Sigismund  in  Hungary.  Among  the 
Utraquist  nobles  present  were  Lord  Hasek  of  Valdstyn  and 
Lord  Krusina  of  Lichtenburg.  The  rank  next  to  them  was 
assigned  to  the  representatives  of  the  cities  of  Prague.  After 
them  came  the  knights  among  whom  was  Bofek  of  Miletinek, 
and  the  representatives  of  the  other  Bohemian  towns.^  The 
conference  sat  till  November  i.  The  only  information  which 
we  have  concerning  its  deliberations  is  contained  in  a  docu- 
ment that  was  drawn  up  before  the  members  separated.  It 
began  by  stating  that  all  those  present  agreed  to  the  con- 
tinuation of  the  negotiations  with  the  Roman  party  which 
the  meeting  at  Kolin  had  first  suggested,  and  that  all  desired 
that  a  new  conference  should  shortly  take  place  at  Brno  in 
Moravia.  The  document  then  declared  that  the  members  of 
the  conference  had  decided  to  elect  a  provisional  government. 
They  thus  followed  the  precedent  of  the  assembly  at  Caslav 
in  1421.  Twelve  "captains  of  the  people"  were  chosen,  and 
the  list  included  most  of  the  prominent  Roman  and  Utraquist 
noblemen,  whose  names  have  frequently  occurred  in  this  work, 
as  well  as  Borek  of  Miletinek,  who  now  commanded  the  troops 
of  the  Praguers.  One  of  the  duties  of  these  captains  of  the 
land  was  "  to  help  and  defend  the  country  against  all  who 
wished  to  ruin  it  and  to  cause  troubles  and  riots."  If  we 
consider  the  strongly  conservative,  not  to  say  reactionary, 
tendency  of  the  assembly  at  Prague  we  can  hardly  doubt  that 
the  persons  alluded  to  were  the  Taborites.  The  latter  were 
naturally  indignant  at  being  described  as  robbers  and  rioters. 

*  The  members  of  the  assembly  were  seated  at  the  meetings  in  the  order  of 
precedence,  quoted  above  from  the  contemporary  records. 


];66  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

The  official  document  containing  the  results  of  the  deliberations 
at  Prague  avoided  to  mention  King  Sigismund,  yet  immedi- 
ately after  the  meeting  John  of  Opocno  and  Puta  of  Castolovice 
again  proceeded  to  Buda,  where  King  Sigismund  had  now 
returned.  The  ostensible  purpose  of  their  journey  was  to 
obtain  letters  of  safe  conduct  for  the  Utraquist  envoys  who 
w^ere  to  proceed  to  Brno,  which  was  then  in  the  hands  of  the 
Archduke  Albert,  Sigismund 's  son-in-law.  Enough  has  been 
wTitten  of  2izka  to  make  it  unnecessary  to  state  that  these 
renewed  negotiations  with  Sigismund,  as  well  as  the  insulting 
references  to  the  Taborites — whose  military  leader  he  was, 
though  he  disapproved  of  many  of  their  tenets — infuriated 
him  to  the  highest  degree. 

The  year  1424  which  now  begins  is  known  in  Bohemian 
history  as  2izka's  last  and  bloodiest  year.  A  personal  motive, 
which  may  to  a  certain  extent  have  influenced  even  an  abso- 
lutely fearless  man  such  as  was  2izka,  perhaps  contributed 
to  his  not  unjustifiable  indignation.  While  Lord  John  of 
Opocno  was  in  Hungary,  the  town  council  of  Kralove  Hradec 
and  Ambrose,  parish  priest  of  that  city,  wrote  to  Zizka  inform- 
ing him  that  their  soldiers  had  made  prisoner  "  one  of  the 
party  of  Opocno,"  ^  a  man  of  rank,  who  stated  that  some 
one  had  received  a  large  sum  for  the  purpose  of  entering 
2izka's  camp  and  assassinating  him.  It  is  impossible  to 
ascertain  the  truth  of  this  report,  but  it  is  certain  that  on  his 
return  from  Hungary  and  Moravia  2izka  immediately  entered 
the  district  of  Kralove  Hradec  and  attacked  the  estates  of 
Puta  of  Castolovice  and  John  of  Opocno,  who  hurriedly  re- 
turned from  Hungary.  A  battle  took  place  at  Skalice  *  on 
January  6,  1424,  in  which  Sigismund's  partisans  were  signally 
defeated.     2izka,  indefatigable  in  this,  the  last  year  of  his  life, 

*  John  of  Opocno,  who  resided  in  the  castle  of  that  name,  was  the  leader 
of  Sigismund's  party  in  North-Eastern  Boliemia,  and  a  bitter  enemy  ot  tlu* 
neighbouring  town  of  Krdlove  Hradec. 

•  Some  of  my  readers  may  remember  that  Skalice  was  the  scene  of  one  of 
the  first  engagements  in  the  Austro-Prussian  War  of  1860. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  167 

continued,  almost  always  successfully,  his  campaign  in  the 
district  of  Kralove  Hradec.     He  then  marched  to  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Plzen,  which  ever  since  its  evacuation  by  2izka 
at  the  beginning  of  the  war  had  continued  to  be  the  principal 
stronghold  of  the   Royalist  or   Roman   party  in   Bohemia. 
2izka's  expedition  appears  to  have  been  unsuccessful.     Plzen, 
to  the  end  of  the  Hussite  wars,  remained  the  weak  spot  in 
the  position  of  the  nationalists.     From  Plzen  Zizka  returned 
to  central  Bohemia.      The  Praguers,  who  had  sanctioned  the 
new  negotiations  with  Sigismund  and  even  taken  part  in  them, 
had  incurred  his  bitter  hatred.     Zizka  v/ho,  as  must  always 
be   remembered,    was   everywhere   confronted    by   far   more 
numerous  hostile  forces,  entered  the  town  of  Kostelec  on  the 
Elbe,  and  was  here  besieged  by  a  large  army  consisting  of 
Praguers  and  of  nobles  both  of  the  Utraquist  and  the  Roman 
party.     He  is  said  to  have  been  in  great  danger,  and  it  is  even 
stated  on  doubtful  authority  that   King  Sigismund  greatly 
rejoiced,  believing  that  2izka  would  shortly  be  his  prisoner. 
2izka,  however,  with  the  aid  of  Lord  Hynek  of  Podebrad, 
succeeded  in  crossing  the  Elbe  by  a  ford  at  night-time.     On 
the  other  bank  he  was  joined  by  the  forces  of  the  Lord  of 
Podebrad  and  by  fresh  Taborite  troops.     The  army  of  2izka 
and  his  allies  then  marched  along  the  right  bank  of  the  Elbe? 
till  they  reached  Podebrady,  the  principal  castle  of  the  lords 
of  that  name,  who  were  among  Zizka's  staunchest  allies  in  the 
Bohemian  nobility.     The  Praguers  and  their  allies  continued 
to  march  along  the  left  bank  of  the  Elbe,  only  the  river  separat- 
ing the  opposing  armies.     On  arriving  at  Podebrady  Zizka 
with  his  usual  rapidity  suddenly  decided  to  recross  the  river 
and  to  march  in  the  direction  of  Kutna  Hora,  a  country  which 
he  thoroughly  knew  from  the  time  of  his  winter  campaign  in 
1421.     It  is  not  very  clear  what  his  ulterior  plans  were.     It 
has  been  suggested  by  some  writers  that  he  intended  to  retreat 
on  Tabor  and  there  to  gather  reinforcements.     If  this  was  for 
a  moment  his  intention,  he  immediately  changed  his  mind 


1 68  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

when  he  thought  that  his  forces  were  sufficiently  strong  to 
engage  the  enemies.  One  of  the  Taborite  leaders,  Lord  Rohac 
of  Duba,  resided  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kutna  Hora  in  a 
castle  to  which,  according  to  the  Hussite  custom,  he  had  given 
the  biblical  name  of  Sion.  Lord  Rohac  immediately  joined 
2izka  with  a  considerable  force;  some  other  reinforcements 
also  reached  him.  He,  however,  continued  his  seeming  retreat, 
determined  as  usual  only  to  give  battle  on  a  site  where  he 
believed  his  chances  to  be  favourable.  On  June  7  he  halted 
near  the  fort  ^  of  Malesov,  situated  on  the  summit  of  a  hill. 
Here  he  immediately  formed  his  columns  of  wagons  and  his 
soldiers  in  line  of  battle.  As  was  invariably  the  case  2izka's 
position  was  a  very  strong  one.  The  enemies  could  advance 
by  one  road  only ;  the  slopes  of  the  hill  were  then  undoubtedly 
thickly  wooded,  and  a  marshy  stream  crossed  the  road  at  the 
beginning  of  the  ascent.  The  Praguers,  still  vastly  superior 
in  number,  immediately  advanced  to  attack,  anxious  only  that 
2izka  should  not,  as  at  Kostelec  on  the  Elbe,  again  escape 
them.  Zizka  waited  till  about  half  the  forces  of  the  Praguers 
had  crossed  the  valley  through  which  the  stream  flowed  and 
had  begun  to  ascend  the  hill.  He  then  ordered  his  horsemen 
to  attack  the  flanks  of  the  enemies,  but  soon  to  retire.  Shortly 
afterwards  he  gave  the  order  that  his  battle-wagons,  laden 
with  heavy  stones,  should  be  driven  down  the  slope  into  the 
midst  of  the  advancing  Praguers.  Their  appearance  immedi- 
ately caused  a  panic,  which  was,  no  doubt,  all  the  greater 
because  2izka's  exploits  had  already  become  legendary. 
The  flight  of  the  first  columns  prevented  the  advance  of 
the  others,  and  many  soldiers — among  them  the  troops  of 
the  nobles  allied  with  Prague — never  came  into  action.  The 
flight  soon  became  general,  and  1,200  Praguers  were  killed; 
among  them  were  the  knight  Peter  Turkovec,  who  had  carried 
the  standard  of  Prague,  and  many  prominent  citizens. 

It  is  probably  at  this  period  that  an  incident  occurred  which, 
*  The  Bohemian  word  ''  tvrz  "  signifies  a  fortified  house  or  small  castle. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  169 

though  we  have  only  ^Eneas  Sylvius 's  very  unreliable  authority 
for  it,  yet  should,  perhaps,  not  remain  unrecorded.  iEneas 
Sylvius  states  ^  that  King  Sigismund,  seeing  that  2izka  was 
everywhere  successful,  and  that  he  was  the  one  man  on  whom 
the  fate  of  Bohemia  depended,  secretly  attempted  a  reconcilia- 
tion with  him.  He  promised  to  appoint  him  Governor  of 
Bohemia  and  commander  of  the  troops  in  that  country,  and 
to  grant  him  a  large  sum  of  money.  ^  There  is  every  proba- 
bility that  this  tale  is  entirely  untrue.  Had  2izka  become  a 
traitor  to  his  country  and  his  creed  he  would  have  found  his 
only  supporters  in  Bohemia  among  the  not  very  numerous 
Romanist  nobles,  from  whom  the  intense  hatred  caused  by 
four  years  of  incessant  warfare  widely  separated  him.  King 
Sigismund  was  probably  well  acquainted  with  the  dispositions 
of  the  Hussites,  and  cannot  have  been  ignorant  of  Zizka's  ex- 
treme suspiciousness,  which  would  certainly  have  prevented  him 
from  trusting  the  word  of  Sigismund.  Only  one  quite  ignorant 
of  2izka's  true  character  can  have  imagined  this  tale.  The 
certainly  spurious  anecdote  has  only  been  mentioned  here 
because  many  writers  have  even  recently  repeated  ^Eneas 
Sylvius's  tale. 

The  victory  of  Malesov  was  followed  by  a  series  of  successes 
for  2izka.  Immediately  after  the  battle  he  again  obtained 
possession  of  Kutna  Hora,  and  the  cities  of  Cesky  Brod, 
Koufim,  and  Nymburk,  formerly  allies  of  Prague,  voluntarily 
accepted  his  rule.  In  this  his  last  year  we  find  2izka  con- 
stantly moving  with  feverish  activity  from  one  part  of  the 
country  to  another.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the 
Hussite  war,  like  the  great  English  civil  war,  comprised 
numerous  local  struggles,  which  were  dispersed  over  all  parts 
of  the  country.  2izka,  as  if  aware  of  his  imminent  fate,  now 
wished  to  give  his  aid  and  advice  to  his  comrades  in  the  different 
districts.     After  receiving  the  submission  of  the  cities  on  the 

*  Historia  Bohemica,  cap.  xlv. 

2  .'Eneas  Sylvius  writes  :    "  ingens  auri  pondus  quotannis." 


I/O 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS 


Elbe,  which  have  just  been  mentioned,  2izka  hurried  once 
more  to  the  district  of  Plzeii  and  then  proceeded  to  2atec. 
He  here  received  important  news.  The  negotiations  of  the 
Bohemians  with  Poland,  to  which  I  have  frequently  referred, 
had  lately  been  broken  off.  There  is  little  doubt  that  King 
Ladislas  used  the  Bohemians  onl}'  as  a  pawn  in  the  difficult 
political  game  which  he  was  playing  with  King  Sigismund, 
the  Teutonic  order  and  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg.^  The 
King  of  Poland,  at  this  moment  on  good  terms  with  Sigismund, 
endeavoured  to  ingratiate  himself  with  him  by  inducing  the 
Bohemians — by  means  of  promises  which  w^ould  not  be  kept — 
to  at  last  recognise  Sigismund  as  their  king.  The  negotiations, 
as  was  inevitable,  failed.  In  direct  contrast  with  the  attitude 
of  Ladislas  was  that  of  his  nephew,  Prince  Korybutovic.  He 
again  declared  himself  openly  a  friend  of  Bohemia,  and  travelling 
rapidly  through  Silesia  suddenly  arrived  at  Prague  on  June  29 
accompanied  by  1,500  Polish  horsemen.  The  citizens,  greatly 
weakened  by  their  defeat  at  Malesov,  gladly  welcomed  him, 
and  conferred  on  him  wider  powers  than  he  had  possessed 
during  his  first  stay  in  Bohemia.  They  did  not,  however, 
grant  him  the  title  of  king,  though  he  claimed  that  rank.^ 

Meanwhile  2izka  was  at  2atec  equipping  a  large  army, 
determined  to  march  on  Prague  and  entirely  to  suppress  the 
freedom  of  the  city.  Besides  his  own  Taborites  the  men  of 
Loun,  2atec,  and  Klatovy  marched  with  him.  They  started 
at  the  end  of  August  and  arrived  on  September  i  at 
Libochovice,  where  Zizka,  with  his  usual  rigid  puritanism, 
caused  four  monks  who  had  committed  outrages  on  women 
and  maidens  to  be  burnt.  From  there  2izka's  army — accord- 
ing to  Professor  Tomek's  conjecture,  for  the  contemporary 

1  It  is  of  course  beyond  my  purpose  to  enter  into  these  matters  here;  but 
these  negotiations  alone  explain  the  fluctuating  attitude  of  Poland  towards 
the  Bohemians. 

*  The  contemporary  chronicler  Bartosek  of  Drahonic  writes  :  "  Eodem 
anno  circa  festum  sancti  Procopii  revenit  dux  Sigismundus  [Korybutovic] 
Pragam  et  Pragenses  ipsum  pro  donnno  susceperunt  de  facto  sed  non  jure  " 
(P-  593  of  Professor  GoU's  edition). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  171 

chronicles  are,  as  usual,  hopeless  with  regard  to  topography — 
crossed  the  Elbe  at  Veltrus  and  marching  rapidly,  as  was 
2izka's  custom,  arrived  early  in  September  at  Liben,  then  a 
village  near  Prague,  now  a  part  of  that  city.  In  the  camp  at 
Liben  he  received  further  reinforcements;  among  others  the 
men  of  Kralove  Hradec,  always  faithful  to  the  national  cause, 
flocked  to  2izka's  standards.  The  city  of  Prague  was  not, 
however,  regularly  invested,  though  the  Taborite  soldiers  often 
closely  approached  the  walls  of  the  new  town  and  taunted 
the  citizens.  The  latter  sometimes  attempted  sorties,  but 
were  invariably  repulsed  with  great  loss. 

The  Utraquists,  both  within  the  city  walls  and  in  2izka's 
camp,  now  began  seriously  to  consider  the  far-reaching  conse- 
quences which  the  capture  and  perhaps  the  destruction  of 
the  capital  would  have.  Zizka's  irritation,  though  regrettable, 
is  not  inexplicable.  He  had  saved  Prague  in  1420  when  it 
was  menaced  by  the  enormous  forces  of  the  crusaders,  and  he 
had  only  met  with  ingratitude.  Acute  statesman  as  he  was, 
he  well  knew  that  only  the  incredible  apathy  of  the  German 
princes  and  the  failure  of  King  Ladislas  to  induce  his  subjects 
to  take  part  in  a  crusade  against  the  kindred  Bohemian 
nation  had,  both  in  1423  and  1424,  prevented  the  complete 
subjection  of  Bohemia.  It  is  certain  that  at  the  time  of  the 
battles  of  Kralove  Hradec,  Hofice,  and  Malesov  Bohemia 
would  not  have  been  able  to  resist  a  determined  invasion. 
2izka  undoubtedly  thought  that  he  could  defeat  the  foreign 
enemies  more  easily  alone  than  in  the  company  of  unreliable 
allies. 

Even  among  2izka's  most  intimate  friends,  his  intention  to 
attack  and,  as  it  was  said,  to  destroy  Prague  met  with  grave 
opposition.  They  reminded  him  of  the  reverence  that  all, 
even  the  most  uncultured,  Bohemians  felt  for  their  time- 
honoured  capital,  and  of  the  terrible  loss  of  hfe  which  such  an 
assault  would  inevitably  involve.  They  also  alluded  to  the 
increasing  peril  of  Moravia.     Within  the  city  Prince  Kory- 


172  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

butovic  also  exercised  a  moderating  influence.  As  a  friend  of 
2izka  he  warmly  appealed  to  the  citizens,  begging  them  not 
to  offend  the  great  warrior,  but  to  make  all  possible  con- 
cessions. A  deputation  of  the  citizens  of  Prague  arrived  at 
2izka's  camp  at  Libeii  on  September  14.  Its  leader  was  the 
priest  John  of  Rokycan,  afterwards  Utraquist  Archbishop  of 
Prague.  The  citizens  could  not  have  made  a  better  choice- 
Rokycan  was  a  determined  Utraquist,  who  insisted  on  the  right 
to  receive  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  and  on  the  necessity 
to  enforce  discipline  and  poverty  among  the  clergy.  He 
detested,  however,  the  attempts  of  the  extreme  Taborites  to 
introduce  innovations  in  respect  of  doctrine  and  ritual  which 
had  never  had  the  sanction  of  Hus.  These  views  coincided 
entirely  with  those  of  2izka,  who  was  always  irritated  by 
the  endeavours  of  his  enemies  to  render  him  responsible  for 
the  acts  and  views  of  some  of  his  more  unruly  adherents.  The 
chroniclers  tell  us  that  2izka  was  greatly  impressed  by  the 
eloquence  of  Rokycan,  who  afterwards  became  known  as  one 
of  the  greatest  of  Bohemian  preachers.  We  possess,  however, 
no  authentic  contemporary  account  of  his  speech.  It  is  at 
any  rate  certain  that  the  contending  parties  came  to  an  agree- 
ment, and  that  it  was  decided  that  the  Taborites  under  2izka, 
the  Praguers  with  Prince  Korybutovic,  and  the  Utraquist 
nobles  should  henceforth  act  in  common,  and  should  immedi- 
ately march  to  Moravia,  which  had  been  almost  entirely  sub- 
dued by  the  Austrian  Archduke  Albert.  2izka  almost  alone 
did  not  view  the  future  hopefully.  "  This  agreement  will 
not  last  longer  than  that  at  Konopist,"  he  is  reported  to  have 
said.  The  great  warrior's  scepticism  was  no  doubt  caused  by 
the  fact  that  it  had  also  been  settled  at  Liben  to  enter  again 
into  negotiations  with  the  lords  "  sub  una,"  that  is  to  say, 
those  who  belonged  to  the  Roman  party.  These  men  were 
entirely  under  the  influence  of  King  Sigismund,  who  had  long 
before  declared  that  he  could  grant  no  concessions  in  ecclesi- 
astical matters,  as  such  matters  appertained   exclusively  to 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  173 

the  jurisdiction  of  the  Pope.  Some  years  had  to  pass  and 
much  blood  to  be  shed  before  the  Council  of  Basel  accepted 
a  different  standpoint.  The  negotiations  with  the  nobles  of 
Sigismund's  party  led  to  no  very  definite  result,  but  an 
armistice  was  concluded,  and  the  nobles  '*  sub  una  "  pledged 
themselves  to  grant  to  their  peasants  the  freedom  to  receive 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds  during  the  suspension  of  hostilities. 
The  principal  reason  why  2izka  gave  his  consent  to  the 
treaty  of  Liben  was  the  wish  to  terminate  civic  warfare  and 
prepare  for  the  defence  of  his  country,  menaced  by  constant 
raids  and  attacks.  King  Ladislas's  intended  invasion  of 
Bohemia  had  entirely  failed;  many  of  the  Polish  soldiers, 
who  were  to  have  taken  part  in  it  had  even  joined  the  forces 
of  Prince  Korybutovic.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Germans  were 
again  planning  a  new  crusade.  The  most  pressing  danger  at 
that  moment  was,  however,  on  the  Moravian  border.  It  had 
been  agreed  at  Liben  that  the  reunited  forces  of  the  Utraquists 
should  immediately  march  to  Moravia,  and  at  the  end  of 
September  the  whole  force  started  on  its  new  campaign.  Zizka 
was,  of  course,  commander-in-chief,  and  Hvezda  of  Vicemilic, 
who  had  just  brought  reinforcements  from  Tabor,  Prince  Sigis- 
mund  Korybutovic,  Bofek  of  Miletinek,  the  Lords  Kunes  of 
Belovic  and  Victorin  of  Podebrad  commanded  divisions.  It 
was  the  largest  and  most  united  army  which  any  Utraquist 
general  ever  led  to  battle.  Its  commanders  were  all  ex- 
perienced soldiers,  and  2izka's  men  were  prepared  to  follow 
him  anywhere.  Fate,  never  favourable  to  Bohemia,  here  also 
proved  hostile.  The  army  marched  along  the  usual  road  to 
Moravia  by  Kutna  Hora,  Caslav,  and  Nemecky  Brod,  and 
while  the  vanguard,  under  Bofek  of  Miletinek,  immediately 
crossed  the  frontier,  the  rest  of  the  army  laid  siege  to  the 
castle  of  Pfibyslav,  which  occupied  a  somewhat  important 
position.  While  encamped  here  2izka  was  seized  by  a  violent 
attack  of  the  plague,  which  then  raged  in  Bohemia,  and  died 
on  October   11.     A  contemporary  chronicler,  who  probably 


174  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

took  part  in  2izka's  campaigns,  thus  describes  his  death. ^ 
"  After  concluding  peace  with  the  Prince  (Korybutovic)  and 
the  Praguers  2izka  and  the  brethren  marched  into  Moravia, 
and  while  encamped  before  the  castle  of  Pribyslav  brother 
2izka  was  seized  by  a  deadly  attack  of  the  plague.  Then  he 
gave  his  last  charge  to  his  dear  faithful  brethren  and  fellow- 
Bohemians,  Lord  Victorin  of  Podebrad,  Lords  Kunes  of  Belovic 
and  Hvezda  of  Vicemilic,  saying  that,  fearing  their  beloved 
God,  they  should  firmly  and  faithfully  uphold  God's  law  in 
view  of  His  reward  in  eternity.  And  then  brother  2izka 
recommended  his  soul  to  God  and  died  on  the  Wednesday 
before  the  day  of  St.  Gallus."  This  tranquil  and  hopeful 
death  was  very  beseeming  for  the  great  Bohemian  warrior, 
who  had,  according  to  his  views — on  which  the  historian 
cannot  pass  judgment — devoted  his  life  to  the  defence  of  God's 
law.  He  who  had  so  often  fought  what  he  firmly  believed  to  be 
God's  battle  assuredly  did  not  dread  entering  into  God's  peace. 
It  is  only  reluctantly  that  I  refer  to  the  odious  and  abso- 
lutely unhistorical  anecdotes  concerning  2izka's  death  which, 
circulated  by  iEneas  Sylvius,^  have  since  been  repeated  by 
countless  wTiters,  and  no  doubt  greatly  diverted  the  Voltairean 
scepticism  of  Frederick  the  Great  ,^  to  whom  2izka  must  have 
seemed  a  very  inexplicable  personage.  "  2izka's  drum  "  has 
fortunately  at  last  been  relegated  from  the  domain  of  serious 
historical  study.  I  have  in  the  course  of  this  work  referred  so 
frequently  to  2izka  that  little  now  remains  to  be  added.  He 
was  a  very  fervent  Utraquist,  to  whom  it  appeared  certain  that 
the    Sacrament    of   Holy  Communion   according   to   Christ's 

1  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  64. 

*  i^neas  Sylvius  writes  :  "  2izka  .  ,  .  divinitus  ut  par  est  credere,  peste 
tactus  expiravit  monstrum  detestabile,  crudele,  horrendum  inopportunum 
quod  postquam  manus  humana  conticere  non  valuit  digitus  Dei  extinxit. 
Ferunt  ilium  quum  aegrotaret  interrogatum  quo  nam  loco  mortuus  sepeliri 
vellet,  jussisse  cadaveri  suo  pellem  adimi,  carnes  volucribus  ac  feris  objectah 
ex  pelle  timpanum  fieri,  eoque  duce  bella  geri,  arrepturam  fugam  hostes  quam 
primum  ejus  timpani  sonitum  audierint  "  {Histovia  Bokemica,  cap.  xlv.). 

^  In  one  of  his  letters  Frederick  the  Great  announces  that  he  has  captured 
"  2izka's  drum  "  and  that  he  has  had  ?t  removed  to  Glatz. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  175 

ordinance  was  only  valid  when  administered  in  the  two  kinds. 
He  believed  the  reform  of  Church  discipline  as  demanded  by 
Hus  to  be  a  necessity.  He  certainly  entertained  an  undying 
hatred  of  King  Sigismund,  believing — in  accordance  with  his 
views,  derived  from  the  Old  Testament — that  it  was  his  duty 
to  avenge  the  treacherous  murder  of  Hus.  The  opinions  ex- 
pressed by  foohsh  ultramontanes  and  equally  foolish  socialists, 
who  describe  2izka  as  a  communist  or  leveller,  are  absolutely 
unhistorical.  2izka  belonged  to  the  estate  of  the  '*  zemans," 
the  gentry  of  Bohemia,  and  had  in  most  respects  the  same 
views  as  other  men  of  his  rank.  Only  his  unrivalled  military 
genius  and  his  great  gift  of  statesmanship  placed  him  above 
them.  Thus  it  gave  him  much  pleasure  to  receive  the  order 
of  knighthood  after  his  brilliant  victories  near  Kutna  Hora, 
and — absolutely  disinterested  as  he  was — he  yet  did  not 
hesitate  to  accept  the  gift  of  a  small  castle  near  Litomerice, 
which  the  Bohemian  estates  offered  him  in  recognition  of  his 
services  to  the  nation.  He  gave  his  new  castle  the  name  of 
Kalice  (chalice)  as  token  of  his  religious  views.  From  this 
time  he  always  called  himself  **  John  2izka  of  the  chalice,'' 
according  to  the  Bohemian  custom,  as  the  knights  and  nobles 
then  refused  titles  and  took  their  name  from  their  castles. 

According  to  the  contemporary  chroniclers  2izka's  body  was 
conveyed  to  Kralove  Hradec,  where  he  had  many  friends,  by 
Ambrose,  parish  priest  of  that  town,  and  the  priest  Prokupek, 
afterwards  famous  as  a  leader  of  the  "  Orphans."  It  is  stated 
that  his  remains  were  afterwards  transferred  to  Caslav,  and 
according  to  Theobaldus,i  who  writes  as  one  who  had  seen  the 
tomb,  they  were  interred  near  an  altar  on  which  were  placed 
portraits  of  Hus  and  2izka.  Under  the  portrait  of  Hus  were 
written  the  following  lines  : 

"  Husse,  tuus  vindex  jacet  hie  dux  Zizka  Johannes, 
Supplex  Sigmundus  cui  quoque  Caesar  erat, 
Et  quoniam  bustis  clarent  loca  multa,  sepulchrum 
2izka  Caslaviae  fama  perennis  erit." 

^  Zacharias  Theobaldus,  Hussitenkrieg,  1623,  pp.  228-289. 


176  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Under  2izka's  portrait  the  following  lines  were  inscribed  : 

"  Strenuus  in  bellis  hoc  dormit  2izka  sepulchre, 
Zizka,  suae  gentis  gloria,  Martis  honos. 
lUe  duces  scelerum  monachos  pestemque  nefandam 

Ad  Stygias  justo  fulmine  trusit  aquas. 
Surget  adhuc  rursus,  quadratae  cornua  cristas, 
Supplicii  ut  poenas,  quas  meruere  luant." 

All  traces  of  2izka's  grave  undoubtedly  disappeared  during 
the  period  of  reaction  which  followed  the  battle  of  the  White 
Mountain,  though  quite  recently  it  was  rumoured  that  some 
bones  supposed  to  be  2izka's  had  been  discovered  at  Caslav. 


CHAPTER  V 

It  is  impossible  to  overrate  the  influence  of  the  sudden 
death  of  2izka  on  the  course  of  the  events  of  the  Hussite  war. 
At  no  other  moment  had  the  Hussites  been  so  strong  and  so 
united.  At  that  moment  only  it  was  perhaps  possible  to  estab- 
lish in  Bohemia  a  national  Church  and  a  national  kingdom 
under  a  Slavic  dynast^^  After  2izka's  death  Prince  Kory- 
butovic  assumed  the  command  of  the  whole  army,  and  after 
having  rejoined  Bofek  of  Miletinek  obtained  considerable 
successes,  forcing  the  Austrians  to  evacuate  almost  the  whole 
of  Moravia.  The  Hussite  armies,  however,  soon  returned  to 
Bohemia.  It  appears  from  the  scanty  records  which  we  have 
that  the  plan  of  campaign  was  not  methodically  carried  out 
and  that  discord  soon  again  broke  out  among  the  Utraquist 
parties.  Korybutovic,  who,  while  under  2izka's  influence,  had 
acted  strictly  in  accordance  with  him,  now  entered  into  direct 
negotiations  with  the  Roman  see.  Though  it  appears  that  he 
always  considered  the  acceptation  of  the  articles  of  Prague  as 
an  absolute  condition  of  an  agreement,  yet  the  more  fanatical 
Taborites  viewed  these  negotiations  with  suspicion.  That 
party  was  also  now,  at  least  for  a  time,  divided  against  itself. 
Only  the  more  extreme  levellers,  who  had  often  opposed 
Zizka,  continued  to  adopt  the  name  of  Taborites.  The 
moderate  Taborites,  among  whom  had  been  Zizka 's  intimate 
friends,  considered  that  Sigismund  had,  through  his  treachery, 
forfeited  his  right  to  the  Bohemian  throne,  but  they  were  not 
on  principle  opposed  to  monarchy;  as  regards  matters  of 
religion  they  limited  their  demands  to  the  recognition  of  the 
articles  of  Prague.  These  men  now  adopted  the  name  of 
"  Orphans,"   thus   indicating  that   they  considered   no   man 

N  177 


178  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

worthy  to  replace  their  lost  leader.  As  in  all  the  religious 
difference  of  this  period,  questions  of  ritual  here  also  played  a 
great  part.  The  Orphans,  like  2izka  himself,  did  not  approve 
of  all  the  innovations  introduced  by  the  clergy  of  Tabor.  The 
priests  of  the  Orphans  celebrated  the  holy  mass  according 
to  the  ancient  rules  and  wore  vestments.  It  is  certain  that 
with  regard  to  other  matters  also  their  views  were  nearer  to 
those  of  the  Praguers  than  to  those  of  the  Taborites.^ 

As  had  become  customary  during  the  Hussite  wars,  the 
partly  religious,  partly  political  differences  were  now  again 
discussed  at  one  of  those  meetings  which  were  so  frequent 
and  generally  almost  resultless.  As  has  already  been  men- 
tioned, immediately  before  2izka's  death  all  the  Utraquist 
parties  had  agreed  henceforth  to  act  in  common,  and  they 
had  concluded  an  armistice  with  the  lords  *'  sub  una."  The 
alliance  between  Prague  and  Tabor  had  placed  the  nobles 
who  upheld  King  Sigismund  in  a  very  difficult  position,  and 
even  their  religious  and  dynastic  zeal  did  not  prevent  them 
from  making  certain  concessions  for  the  purpose  of  preserving 
their  estates.'^  It  was  settled  that  the  Praguers  and  Taborites 
should  first  meet  at  Beroun  and  the  lords  "  sub  una  "  at 
2ebrak,  and  that  after  these  preliminary  conferences  the 
members  of  all  parties  should  meet  together  at  Zdic.  The  joint 
conferences  at  Zdic  began  early  in  October,  and  were  after- 
wards continued  at  Koufim.  Here  also  no  permanent  results 
were  obtained.  The  members  of  the  conference  limited  them- 
selves to  the  expression  of  a  general  wish  that  peace  should  be 
restored  in  Bohemia,  and  to  a  protest  against  the  false  accusa- 
tion of  heresy  which  had  been  brought  against  the  Bohemians. 

^  Professor  Tomek,  History  of  the  Town  oj  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  p.  318. 

*  The  dilemma  which  confronted  these  nobles  appears  very  clearly  in  the 
correspondence  between  King  Sigismund  and  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  the 
leader  of  these  nobles.  (Published  in  the  Cisky  Archiv,  Vol.  I.)  Rosenberg 
informed  the  King  that  he  was  entering  into  negotiations  with  the  Hussites. 
Sigismund  in  his  answer  blamed  him,  expressing  his  surprise  that  Rosenberg 
.should  allow  "  townsmen  and  common  people  to  sit  in  judgment  on  him." 
Rosenberg  in  his  answer  pleaded  the  necessity  of  making  concessions  because 
of  the  superior  strength  of  the  enemies. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  179 

This  was  a  point  on  which  the  Hussites  of  all  parties  laid  great 
stress.  It  was  also  decided  to  prolong  the  truce  with  the  nobles 
of  Sigismund's  party,  who  again  promised  to  permit  Com- 
munion in  both  kinds  on  their  estates.  The  terms  of  the 
agreement  referred  only  to  the  Bohemians,  and  the  Utraquists 
were  thus  able  to  continue  their  warfare  against  Sigismund 
and  his  son-in-law  without  fear  of  intervention  on  the  part 
of  their  internal  opponents.  The  lords  of  the  Roman  party 
even  agreed  to  allow  their  men-at-arms  to  enlist  in  the 
Utraquist  armies  during  the  time  of  the  armistice.  In  con- 
tradiction to  what  occurred  on  similar  occasions,  no  attempt 
was  now  made  to  establish  a  provisional  government  or  elect 
regents.  The  Praguers,  the  Utraquist  nobility  and  some  of 
the  moderate  Taborites  considered  Prince  Korybutovic  as 
regent,  and  may  have  hoped  that  he  would  eventually  be  recog- 
nised by  the  Roman  party  also.  The  assemblies  of  Zdic 
and  Koufim  are  notable  also  for  the  then  exceptional  cir- 
cumstance that  no  theological  disputations  took  place.  The 
lords  "  sub  una,"  who  were  constant,  though  not  very  self- 
sacrificing,  adherents  of  King  Sigismund,  perhaps  adopted 
his  theory  according  to  which  laymen  had  no  right  to  judge 
questions  of  ecclesiastical  dogma  and  ritual. 

It  would,  however,  have  been  impossible  to  restrain  even  for 
a  time  the  intense  theological  combativeness  of  the  Bohemians 
of  that  age,  which  was  equalled  only  in  the  Constantinople  of 
the  Eastern  Empire  and,  perhaps,  in  the  England  and  Scotland 
of  the  Commonwealth.  It  had,  therefore,  been  settled,  prob- 
ably at  the  Treaty  of  Libeii,  that  representatives  of  the  Utra- 
quist or  Calixtine  Church  should  meet  some  of  the  priests  of 
Tabor  at  the  same  time  as  that  on  which  the  conferences  at 
Zdic  took  place.  It  was  hoped  that  the  disputations  begun  at 
Konopist  would  here  be  continued  and  satisfactorily  ended. 
The  meeting  between  the  clergy  of  the  town  and  university 
of  Prague  and  the  Taborite  divines  took  place  at  the  Hradcany 
castle  of  Prague  on  October  16,  1424.     It  is  sufficient  to  state 


i8o  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

that  here,  as  at  Konopist,  the  divines  found  it  impossible  to 
agree.  The  division  between  the  two  great  Hussite  parties 
continued  as  before.  According  to  the  custom  of  the  time 
the  theologians  of  the  university  formulated  their  views  in  a 
certain  number  of  "articles";  they  referred  principally  to 
the  seven  sacraments,  the  ritual  of  the  mass,  purgatory,  and 
the  invocation  of  the  saints.  The  leader  of  the  Hussite  High 
Church,  Master  John  of  Pribram,  to  whose  authority  the 
articles  were  probably  largely  due,  took  a  prominent  part  in 
the  discussion  which  followed.  He  appears  to  have  spoken 
with  some  violence.  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov,  one  of  the  repre- 
sentatives of  Tabor,  who,  in  his  "  Chronicon  Taboritarum,"  has 
left  us  the  only  detailed  account  of  the  conference,  but  who, 
of  course,  cannot  be  considered  as  an  impartial  witness,  attri- 
butes the  failure  of  the  negotiations  entirely  to  Pribram. ^ 
Both  parties,  however,  in  view  of  the  ever-menacing  attitude 
of  Germany  and  Austria,  were  reluctant  to  accept  the  responsi- 
bility for  a  complete  rupture  between  the  Hussite  parties. 
The  assembly,  therefore,  before  separating  agreed  to  hold 
another  meeting  at  Prague,  which  was  to  take  place  in  the 
university  college.  This  meeting  was  also  resultless.  The 
author  of  the  *'  Chronicon  Taboritarum,"  who,  it  must  be  re- 
membered, was  a  vehement  partisan  of  Tabor,  again  attributes 
the  failure  to  John  of  Pribram.  The  latter  divine,  he  writes, 
stated  that  it  was  from  the  ranks  of  the  Taborites  that  had 
sprung  the  agitators  who  discredited  the  Hussite  movement.^ 
It  must  be  admitted  that  Pribram's  assertion  was  not  entirely 
devoid  of  truth.  One  of  the  other  ever-recurring  questions 
of  theological  controversy  was  then  discussed.     The  Taborite 

^  "  Facta  per  magistrum  Joannem  Pribram  declaratione  terminorum 
positorum  in  propositionibus  in  Konopist  per  magistros  sacerdotibus 
Thaboriensibus  oblatis  blasphemia  et  fratruy.t  Thaborieyisium  niii'tum  et  minus 
juste  confusiva  et  detyactoria  omnes  ad  propria  redierunt  "  (Nicholas  of 
Pelhfimov,  "  Chronicon  Taboritarum  "  in  Hoflcr,  Geschichtsschreibet  der 
Hnssitischen  Beweguri:^,  Vol.  II.  p.  590). 

*  "  Joannes  Pribram  more  suo  in  \'orba  diffamatoria  prorupit,  dicens  quod 
de  numero  sacerdotum  Thaboriensium  hie  assidentium  prodita  pessima 
Picardica  haeresis  "  (Pelhrimov  in  Hoflor  as  above,  p.  590). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  i8i 

clergyman,  Marcold,  declared  that  the  Sacraments,  when  dis- 
pensed by  an  unworthy  priest,  were  invalid.  Marcold  quoted 
many  passages  from  Scripture  and  finally  maintained  that  it 
was  better  for  the  Church  to  have  no  priests  than  unworthy 
ones.i  The  disputation  thus  ended,  both  parties  continuing 
to  hold  their  former  views. ^ 

The  great  historian  Palacky  has  noted  with  his  usual 
penetration  that  if  the  continuous  internal  strife  in  Bohemia — 
which  sometimes  took  the  form  of  actual  civil  war,  sometimes 
that  of  lengthy  and  animated  theological  disputations — did 
not  prove  more  disastrous  to  the  country  than  was  actually 
the  case,  this  was  the  result  of  the  reluctance  of  the  German 
princes  to  act  jointly  against  Bohemia.  King  Sigismund  had 
invited  the  German  princes  and  free  imperial  cities  to  a  diet 
which  was  to  have  met  at  Vienna  on  September  29,  1424,  but 
was  afterwards  postponed  to  November  25.  The  German 
princes,  however,  complained  of  the  remoteness  of  Vienna  and 
declared  that  the  journey  was  a  dangerous  one.  It  appears 
that  the  fear  of  the  Hussites,  which  afterwards  became  so  great, 
here  already  manifested  itself.  Sigismund  expressed  great 
indignation  at  the  attitude  of  the  German  princes,  and  even 
accused  them  of  secret  sympathy  with  the  heretics.  He  thus 
brought  against  them  the  same  accusation  which  they  had 
levelled  at  him  during  the  siege  of  Prague.  It  was  only  after 
the  great  defeat  of  the  Germans  at  Usti  (Aussig)  that  they 
seriously  began  to  plan  a  new  crusade  against  Bohemia.  One 
of  the  consequences  of  the  failure  of  the  attempts  to  organise 
a  new  crusade  was  the  recall  of  Cardinal  Branda  by  the  papal 
see.     Though  he  had  been  very  active,  he  was  thought  not  to 

^  [Marcold]  "  dicebat  quod  utilius  esset  populo  dum  deficerent  in  bonis 
sacerdotibus,  ut  nullum  habeant  talem  quia  si  fuit  expediens  ecclesias  mili- 
tantis  quod  careat  corporali  praesentia  Jesu  Christi,  sicut  contigit  quando 
crevit  ecclesia  post  ascensionem  Domini ;  quanto  magis  prodesset  militanti 
ecclesiae  quod  careat  talibus  qui  non  aequiparantur  Jesu  nostro  "  (Pelhfimov 
in  Hofler  as  above,  pp.  592-593). 

^  "  Et  sic  ilia  praedicta  audientia  eorum  sine  finali  inter  partes  decisione 
est  finita  utrisque  circa  sua  opinata  remanentibus  "  (Pelhfimov  in  Hofler  as 
above,  p.  593). 


i82  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

have  shown  the  skill  which  at  that  period  usually  distinguished 
papal  envoys. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  Taborites,  after  the 
death  of  their  great  leader,  divided  into  two  parties,  one  of 
w^hich  continued  to  bear  the  name  of  Taborites,  while  those 
belonging  to  the  other  called  themselves  the  Orphans.  In 
consequence  of  this  scission  the  two  parties  chose  different 
leaders.  Hvezda  of  Vicemilic  became  the  first  commander  of 
the  Taborites,  while  Kunes  of  Belovic,  who  belonged  to  the 
Orebite  community,  led  the  Orphans,  whose  strength  w^as 
mainly  in  the  north-eastern  district,  of  which  Kralove  Hradec 
is  the  centre.  That  religious  differences  largely  contributed 
to  this  scission  has  already  been  stated.  The  contemporary 
chroniclers,  however,  also  tell  us  that  the  division  among  the 
two  parties  of  the  many  cities  which  had  acknowledged  2izka's 
supremacy  led  to  considerable  troubles. ^  These  dissensions 
appear  to  have  been  temporary  and  not  of  great  importance. 
On  the  other  hand  desultory  warfare  between  the  united 
Taborites  and  Orphans  and  the  Praguers  continued  almost 
uninterruptedly  during  the  greater  part  of  the  year  1425. 
On  this  occasion,  as  on  previous  ones,  the  Taborites  took  up 
arms  because  they  suspected  Korybutovic  and  the  men  of 
Prague  of  negotiating  secretly  with  the  Pope.  In  September 
1425  the  Taborites  besieged  the  castle  of  Vozic,  which,  though 
situated  very  near  the  town  of  Tabor,  was  still  in  the  hands 
of  Sigismund's  partisans.  The  garrison,  commanded  by 
Materna  of  Ronov,  defended  itself  bravely,  even  after  the  forces 
of  the  Orphans,  under  Kunes  of  Belovic,  had  joined  the  Tabor- 
ites. The  Utraquists  here  seem,  according  to  the  account  of 
a  contemporary  chronicler,^  to  have  made  considerable  use 

*  "  In  the  year  1425  after  2izka's  death  there  was  great  discord  between 
the  Tdborites  and  the  Orphans,  and  they  seized  the  towns  (that  had  been 
common  property)  and  fortified  them  against  one  another  "  ("  Scrip  tores 
rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  O4). 

'  Bartosek  of  Drahonic.  See  my  Lectures  on  the  Historians  of  Bohemia^ 
pp.  47-48- 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  183^ 

of  their  artillery,  and  to  have  subjected  Vozic  to  a  regular 
bombardment.^  The  united  forces  of  the  Taborites  and 
Orphans  appear  to  have  been  so  considerable  that  they  were 
able  to  detach  a  force  under  Bohuslav  of  Schwamberg  in  the 
direction  of  Prague.  The  little  army  arrived  at  Vrsovice,  then 
a  village  close  to  the  capital  of  which  it  has  now  become  a 
suburb.  The  Taborites  were  here  met  by  representatives  of 
the  municipality  of  Prague,  who  wished  to  enter  into  negotia- 
tions. The  pourparler  was  afterwards  continued  in  the 
camp  before  Vozic,  to  which  the  Praguers  sent  their  envoys. 
A  treaty  or  armistice  was  here  concluded,  under  conditions 
very  similar  to  those  of  other  truces  that  have  been  previously 
mentioned.  It  was  decided  to  elect  twenty  men  from  all  the 
different  Utraquist  parties,  who  were  to  act  as  judges  in  all 
moot  cases  of  doctrine  and  ritual  and  to  whose  decision  all 
were  to  conform.  The  document  containing  this  agreement 
has  not  been  preserved,  but  we  are  justified  in  conjecturing 
that  a  cessation  of  all  hostilities  between  Utraquists  was 
decreed,  and  that  reciprocal  forbearance  and  tolerance  with 
regard  to  minor  questions  of  ritual  were  enjoined.  Experience 
having  proved  by  now  that  the  Hussites  could  only  remain 
united  when  confronted  by  a  foreign  foe,  it  was  probably  also 
decided  here  to  march  again  into  Moravia,  where  Archduke 
Albert  of  Austria  had  just  defeated  the  Utraquist  party. 
The  garrison  of  Vozic  now,  despairing  of  all  hope  of  relief, 
capitulated  immediately  after  the  signature  of  the  treaty. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  siege  the  Taborite  leader,  Hvezda  of 
Vicemilic,  was  killed  by  an  arrow-shot.  Bohuslav  of  Schwam- 
berg, who  had  commanded  the  forces  that  had  marched  on 
Prague,  succeeded  him  as  commander  of  the  Taborite  army. 

*  [The  Taborites]  "  processerunt  hostiliter  ad  castrum  Vozic  et  ibi  cum 
machinis  et  pixidibus  magnis  per  quinque  septimanas  facentes  et  tres  die5> 
ipsum  castrum  mediante  tractatu  sic  quod  tantum  duo  capitanei  se  in  eorum 
militarem  darent  captivitatem,  lucraverunt,  alios  liberos  dimiserunt  et 
ipsum  castrum  rupuerunt ;  et  ibi  fuit  Bzdinka  [a  nickname  of  Hvezda  of 
Vicemilic]  letaliter  sagittatus  "  {Chronicon  Bartosek  de  Drahonic,  p.  594  of 
Professor  Goll's  edition). 


i84  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

The  united  Hussite  forces  marched  to  Moravia  immediately 
after  the  treaty  of  Vozic.     They  first  undertook  to  reheve  the 
city  of  Tfebice,  which  was  then  besieged  by  King  Sigismund 
and  his  son-in-law.     On  the  news  of  the  approach  of  the 
Hussites  Sigismund,  cautious  as  usual,  retired  from  the  camp 
before  Tfebice  and  was  contented  with  burning  down  many 
villages  belonging  to  Utraquist  nobles  in  the  vicinity  of  Brno. 
Somewhat   later   Sigismund's  son-in-law,   Albert   of  Austria, 
also  retired  in  the  direction  of  Hungary.     Not  heeding  these 
enemies  on  their  flank  the  Bohemians,  under  Prince  Kory- 
butovic  and  Bohuslav  of  Schwamberg,  after  occupying  the 
city  of  Znoymo,  crossed  the  Austrian  frontier.     The  warfare 
in   this   borderland  had   a   distinctly  racial  character.     The 
inveterate  antipathy  between  the  Austrian  and  the  Bohemian, 
which  still  exists,  already  prevailed  in  those  remote  days. 
The  attack  on  Austria  is  noteworthy,  as  being  one  of  the 
earhest  instances  of  the  system  of  offensive  warfare  which  the 
Bohemians  adopted  during  the  last  part  of  the  Hussite  wars. 
The  Bohemians  besieged  the  town  and  castle  of  Retz  in  Lower 
Austria.     The  city  was  obstinately  defended  by  the  Austrians, 
under  John  of  Hardegg,  Count  of  Retz,  who,  though  of  great 
age,  displayed  youthful  energy,  as  the  contemporary  chroniclers 
tell    us.     The    Hussite    losses    were    very    considerable,    and 
Bohuslav  of  Schwamberg  received  a  severe  wound,  in  conse- 
quence of  which  he  died  shortly  afterwards.     The  city  at  last 
capitulated  on  November  25.     The  Count  of  Retz  was  treated 
with  the  comparative  leniency  which  usually  distinguished 
the  Utraquists  from  their  Romanist  antagonists.     He  was  con- 
ducted to  Prague,  where  he  remained  in  honourable  captivity. 
Many  of  the  Austrian  soldiers  were,  however,  killed  by  the 
Hussites,  who  were  exasperated  by  the  loss  of  their  leader, 
Bohuslav  of  Schwamberg.     We  have  unfortunately  but  very 
scant  information  with  regard  to  this  important  campaign.^ 

*  In  Paltrarni  Chronicon  Aitstriactim  we  only  read  :    "  HussitiP  congrega\e- 
runt  fortem  exercitum  nimis  in  Bohemia  et  in  Prasa  et  venerunt  in  Austriam 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  185 

After  this  success  the  Bohemians  returned  to  their  country, 
where  they  remained  during  the  winter. 

As  successor  of  Bohuslav  of  Schwamberg  the  Taborites 
chose  the  priest  Prokop,  surnamed  "  the  Great,"  who  became 
the  protagonist  in  the  later  part  of  the  Hussite  wars  almost  to 
as  great  an  extent  as  2izka  had  been  during  the  earlier  period. 
If  even  as  regards  2izka  the  energy  of  the  Bohemian  scholars 
of  the  last  and  the  present  generation  has  not  entirely  succeeded 
in  elucidating  many  moot  points,  the  events  of  the  life  of  Prokop 
were  up  to  recently  quite  obscure.^  Recent  research,  however, 
shows  it  to  be  nearly  certain  that  Prokop  was  the  son  of  a 
merchant  of  Prague,  named  Andrew,  who  probably  died  during 
Prokop's  infancy.  Andrew's  wife,  Anna,  was  the  sister  of  a 
man  of  knightly  birth,  who  is  mentioned  in  contemporary 
documents  as  "  Jan  de  Aquis  "  or  "  John  Voda."  ^  He  appears 
to  have  owned  the  estate  of  Celakovice,  as  we  sometimes  find 
him — according  to  the  Bohemian  custom  of  that  period — 
described  as  Johannes  de  Celakovice.  John's  sister  Anna  was 
probably  the  mother  of  Prokop,  and  after  the  early  death  of 
his  father  he  was  brought  up  under  the  direction  of  his  uncle, 
John  de  Aquis.  In  his  youth  Prokop  accompanied  his  uncle 
on  extensive  travels  through  France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  and 
even  visited  Jerusalem.  On  his  return  from  these  travels  he 
took  Orders ;  the  Polish  historian  Dlugos  calls  him  "  apostata 
ordinis  Minorum,"  and  we  have  evidence  rendering  it  at  least 
probable  that  he  spent  some  time  in  a  Minorite  monastery  at 
Kralove  Hradec.  It  is  conjectured  that  Prokop  was  born 
between  1370  and  1379,  but  it  is  only  after  the  year  1419  that 

cum  potentia  magna  et  vallaverunt  unam  civitatem  quae  dicitur  Recz  et 
debellaverunt  earn  et  interfecerunt  miultos  homines.  Et  in  eadem  civitate 
ceperunt  Comitem  qui  dicitur  de  Hardegg  et  duxerunt  eum  at  {sic\  Pragam 
et  devastarunt  sibi  omnes  res  circumquaque,  quidquid  habuit  et  ibi  mortuus 
est  in  Praga  "  (Pez,  "  Scriptores  rerum  Austriacarum,"  Tom.  I.  p.  733). 

^  Dr.  Alphons  Neubauer  has,  in  the  C&sky  Casopis  Historicky  {Bohemian 
Historical  Journal)  for  1910,  published  a  series  of  articles  on  Prokop  the 
Great,  which  throw  much  light  on  the  career  of  the  great  Hussite  leader.  I 
wish  here  to  acknowledge  my  great  indebtedness  to  these  valuable  articles. 

*  "  Voda  "  signifies  "water"  {aqua)  in  Bohemian. 


i86  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

we  have  any  reliable  information  concerning  him.  He  was 
then  one  of  that  group  of  priests  which  included  John  of 
Zelivo,  Venceslas  Koranda,  Marcold,  and  others,  who  most 
strenuously  opposed  the  High  Church  Hussitism  of  the 
university  of  Prague.  He  was,  however,  by  no  means  a 
visionary  or  a  fanatic,  as  were  some  of  these  men,  and  it  was 
principally  his  teaching  wdth  regard  to  the  Sacrament  and  to 
the  questions  of  ritual  which  rendered  him  obnoxious  to  the 
masters  of  the  university.  Both  Dlugos  and  ^Eneas  Sylvius, 
contemporary  wTiters,  state  that  great  friendship  united 
2izka  and  Prokop.  We  have  now  no  contemporary  Bohemian 
records  vouching  for  this,  but  as  most  Bohemian  historical 
documents,  particularly  those  referring  to  the  Hussite  period, 
were  destroyed  after  the  battle  of  the  White  Mountain  in  1620, 
Dr.  Neubauer's  conjecture  that  the  writers  mentioned  above 
derived  their  information  from  some  now  unknown  source 
appears  very  plausible.  The  writers  of  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries  general]}'  described  Prokop  as  the  im- 
mediate successor  of  2izka.  The  study  of  the  contemporary 
chroniclers  who  have  now  become  accessible  proves  that  this 
is  untrue,  as  has  already  been  mentioned.  It  is  not  easy  to 
ascertain  the  exact  position  which  Prokop  at  first  occupied  in 
the  Hussite  armies.  From  the  beginning  of  the  war  Hussite 
priests — as  has  been  noted  in  the  case  of  John  of  Zelivo — 
accompanied  the  national  armies.  If  we  consider  the  intense 
religious  fervour  of  the  Utraquists,  it  is  not  surprising  to  read 
that  during  their  campaigns  their  priests  not  only  preached, 
but  also  celebrated  mass  in  a  wagon  specially  fitted  out  for 
that  purpose,  ^  which  constituted  what  may  be  called  a  move- 
able chapel.  In  consequence  of  the  state  of  intense  religious 
excitement    which  then  prevailed  in   Bohemia    these    army 

*  "  Sciant  omnes  et  singuli  quod  falsum  nobis  adscribitur ;  non  enim  in 
communibus  lapidibus  absque  omni  strato  sacramenti  cumulos  conficimus  ut 
experiencia  docet ;  scitur  enim,  quia  in  civitatibus  in  quibus  missamus 
habemus  utensilia  specialiter  distincta  et  in  exercitu  campestri  spec^alettt 
ctirruni  cfistinctum  in  quo  dechwehatihir  "  (Pelhrimov  in  Hofler  as  above,  p.  565). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  187 

chaplains  soon  obtained  great  influence.  When  this  office 
was  held  by  a  man  of  great  political  insight  and  military 
talent  such  as  was  Prokop,  he  soon  and  surely  obtained  what 
was  practically,  though  not  theoretically,  the  rank  of  com- 
mander-in-chief. Some  of  the  many  disputations  among 
the  Utraquist  priesthood  had  dealt  with  the  question  whether 
a  priest  could  take  an  active  part  in  warfare.  Prokop,  accord- 
ing to  the  most  reliable  accounts,  took  no  active  part  in  the 
battles  at  which  he  was  present,  differing  in  this  respect  from 
2izka  and  all  the  generals  of  the  period  with  the  exception  of 
King  Sigismund.  It  is  only  on  the  day  of  the  battle  of  Lipany, 
the  last  day  of  his  life,  that  we  find  Prokop  joining  in  the 
battle.  He  seems  to  have  realised  the  difhculty  of  this  am- 
biguous position,  and  the  credentials  which  he  took  with  him 
to  Basel  describe  him  as  "  Procopius  exercitum  Taboritarum  in 
spiritualibus  rector." 

The  successes  of  the  national  armies  at  this  period  induced 
many  Bohemian  nobles  to  rejoin  the  Utraquist  Church.  Among 
them  was  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  who  now  again  received  Com- 
munion in  both  kinds  and  recognised  Prince  Korybutovic  as 
Regent.  This  was  to  be  the  last  transition  of  the  great  waverer ; 
he  died  shortly  afterwards  in  the  autumn  of  1425.  One  of  the 
motives  which  also  induced  many  nobles  to  rejoin  the  Hussite 
ranks  was  the  fact  that  Prince  Korybutovic,  as  far  as  circum- 
stances permitted,  adopted  a  conservative  policy.  Thus  it 
was  through  his  influence  that  in  the  new  and  old  towns  of 
Prague,  which  had  been  united  on  the  advice  of  the  fanatical 
priest  John  of  Zelivo,  separate  municipalities  were  again 
established.  It  was  hoped  that  the  more  conservative  old 
town  would  counterbalance  the  power  of  the  new  town,  in 
whose  counsels  fanatics  and  demagogues  played  a  consider- 
able part.  It  appears  certain  that  during  the  short  rule  of 
Korybutovic  comparative  order  and  tranquillity  prevailed  in 
Prague.  Though  the  Lithuanian  prince,  as  has  already  been 
noted,  always  remained  firmly  faithful  to  the  articles  of  Prague, 


1 88  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

he  certainly  favoured  the  more  moderate  party  among  the 
theologians  of  the  university.  This  circumstance,  as  well  as 
the  fact  that  the  nobles,  whom  they  hated  with  the  blind 
hatred  of  the  leveller,  now  rejoined  the  Utraquist  in  great 
numbers,  soon  caused  suspicion  among  the  extreme  Taborites. 
It  seemed  probable  that  new  internal  dissensions  would  break 
out  in  Bohemia,  when  the  news  that  the  Germans  were  again 
planning  an  invasion  of  their  country  caused  all  Utraquists  to 
unite. 

The  papal  see  had  replaced  Cardinal  Branda,  whose  recall  has 
already  been  mentioned,  by  Cardinal  Giordano  Orsini.  The 
new  papal  legate  in  Germany  of  course  maintained  the  theory 
— which  prevailed  up  to  the  convocation  of  the  Council  of 
Basel — according  to  which  laymen  could  under  no  condition 
discuss  laws  laid  down  by  the  Church  of  Rome.  He  was  really 
in  this  view  entirely  in  accordance  with  King  Sigismund, 
though  this  has  escaped  most  writers  on  this  period.  If 
Sigismund  and  the  lords  "  sub  una  "  constantly  entered  into 
negotiations  with  the  moderate  party  among  the  Hussites, 
their  purpose  was  to  cause  these  men  to  be  suspected  by  the 
Taborites,  and  thus  produce  disunion  in  the  ranks  of  the 
national  party.  In  the  summer  of  the  year  1426  the  new 
papal  legate  wrote  to  King  Sigismund  from  Niirnberg,  where 
the  imperial  diet  had  assembled  :  "I  think  the  opportunity  " 
(for  attacking  Bohemia)  '*  is  good ;  all  here  are  willing,  and 
necessity  demands  an  immediate  attack.  All  the  princes  are 
ready  for  the  campaign;  nothing  now  remains  but  to  carry 
out  the  design."^  This,  however,  proved  difficult,  and  the 
cardinal,  who  had  just  arrived  from  Italy,  was  obviously 
unaware  of  the  political  situation  in  Germany.  King  Sigis- 
mund had  intended  to  preside  at  the  diet  of  Niirnberg,  and 
had  actually  started  from  Hungary  on  his  way  to  Germany. 
He,  however,  as  early  as  in  May  1426,  informed  the  princes 

"  Reichstagsacten  unter  Kaiser  Siegmund,"  VIII,   nr.   400    (quoted  by 
Dr.  Juritsch,  Dev  dvitte  Kremzug  gegen  cite  Hussiten). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  189 

and  free  cities  of  Germany  that  the  state  of  his  liealth  pre- 
vented his  continuing  his  journey.  Largely  in  consequence 
of  the  absence  of  Sigismund  the  results  of  the  diet  at  Niirn- 
berg  were  very  slight.  The  ecclesiastical  princes  were  naturally 
present  at  the  diet  in  great  numbers.  We  read  that  among 
those  present  were  the  Archbishops  of  Maintz  and  Trier, 
numerous  bishops,  Duke  Frederick  of  Saxony,  the  Margrave 
of  Meissen,  and  representatives  of  many  free  imperial  cities. 
All  present  seem  to  have  used  the  absence  of  King  Sigismund 
as  a  pretext  for  limiting  their  armaments  against  the  Hussites. 
The  imperial  cities  declared  that  the  forces  they  were  asked 
to  supply  were  proportionately  greater  than  those  which  the 
other  states  had  promised  to  provide.  This  caused  much 
controversy  and  long  discussions. ^  The  German  dukes  and 
princes,  occupied  with  intestine  feuds,  also  mostly  proved 
very  unwilling  to  take  part  in  a  new  invasion  of  Bohemia. 
War  had  broken  out  between  the  Duke  of  Holstein  and  the 
King  of  Denmark.  That  sovereign,  therefore,  refused  to  take 
part  in  the  expedition,  though  the  German  princes  appealed 
to  him  for  aid.  Almost  at  the  same  time  a  feud  had  begun 
between  Duke  Bernhard  I  of  Brunswick  and  the  Archbishop 
of  Bremen.  In  Bavaria  civil  war  had  broken  out  between  the 
princes  of  the  house  of  Wittelsbach.  The  feeling  in  Germany, 
except  in  such  lands  as  Saxony  and  Austria,  which  bordered 
on  Bohemia,  was,  therefore,  strongly  in  favour  of  non-inter- 
vention. Somewhat  later,  however,  the  news  of  the  great 
victory  which  the  Bohemians  obtained  at  tJsti  on  June  16, 
1426,  somewhat  impressed  the  Germans.  Now  beheving  their 
country  to  be  really  menaced,  they  in  the  following  year 
attempted  a  new  crusade. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  after  their  victorious 
campaign  in  Moravia  and  Austria  the  Bohemians  returned  to 

^  Dr.  Juritsch  calls  them  "  hochst  unerquickliche  und  langweilige  Verhand- 
lungen  mit  den  Stadteboten  von  Koln,  Mainz,  Strassburg,  Constanz,  Ulm 
und  Niirnberg  "  [Der  dritte  Kreuzzug,  p.  5). 


190  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

their  country  in  the  autumn  of  1425.  Hostilities  entirely 
ceased  during  the  winter,  but  in  the  following  spring  the 
Bohemians  were  obliged  to  defend  their  frontiers  against 
foreign  enemies.  The  Bohemian  city  of  tJsti  nad  Labem 
(Aussig  an  der  Elbe)  had,  by  King  Sigismund,  been  pledged 
to  Duke  Frederick  of  Saxony.  It  is  probable  that  the  ever- 
impecunious  King  had  thus  obtained  a  loan,  and  it  was  certainly 
not  displeasing  to  him  that  an  important  city  situated  on  the 
banks  of  the  Elbe  should  by  a  foreign  occupation  be  secured 
against  the  Hussites.  The  Bohemians,  equally  aware  of  the 
importance  of  the  town,  began  to  besiege  it  in  the  spring  of 
1426.  This  caused  great  apprehension  in  Germany  and 
particularly  in  Saxony.  Duke  Frederick  was  at  that  moment 
taking  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the  diet  of  Niirnberg, 
but  his  energetic  wife,  the  Duchess  Catherine,  succeeded  in 
assembling  in  a  very  short  time  a  large  army  that  was  to  march 
to  the  aid  of  the  menaced  city.  Catherine  accompanied  the 
German  soldiers  to  the  foot  of  the  mountains  which  separate 
Bohemia  from  Saxony,  and  there  took  leave  of  them  **  with 
many  tears."  As  soon  as  the  report  of  the  new  invasion 
reached  Prague  the  Bohemians — for  once  united — determined 
to  march  on  tJsti  with  all  the  forces  they  could  raise.  The 
forces  of  the  Praguers  and  of  the  Utraquist  nobles,  under 
Prince  Korybutovic,  marched  immediately  in  the  direction 
of  Usti,  while  Prokop's  army  of  Taborites,  probably  to  avoid 
the  difficulty  of  victualling,  marched  by  a  less  direct  route, 
and  on  its  way  captured  several  towns  that  were  held  by  the 
partisans  of  Sigismund.  As  soon  as  the  national  forces  had 
united,  an  attack  was  made  on  tJsti  on  June  6,  but  was  repulsed 
by  the  Germans.  Prokop  the  Great  with  the  tacit  assent  of  all 
the  troops,  now  assumed  supreme  command.  Following  the 
tactics  of  2izka  he  placed  his  army  on  the  slopes  of  a  hill 
named  Behani,  between  the  villages  of  Pfedlic  and  Hrbovic. 
He  ordered  his  soldiers  to  await  the  attack  of  the  enemies  here 
under  the  shelter  of  the  wagon-forts.      The  Hussites  here,  as 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  191 

on  almost  all  occasions,  were  opposed  to  vastly  superior  forces. 
The  united  Bohemian  army,  according  to  the  most  trustworthy 
sources,  comprised  only  25,000  men,  while  the  German  forces, 
commanded  by  Boso  of  Vitzthum,  numbered  70,000  men. 
The  Bohemians  had,  however,  the  advantage  of  better  dis- 
cipline. As  was  usually  the  case  with  them  all  dissensions 
among  them  ceased  at  the  moment  when  they  faced  **  the 
enemies  of  God  and  of  the  Bohemian  nation."  A  contem- 
porary chronicler  writes  :  ^  *'  As  soon  as  the  Germans  ^  arrived 
at  tJsti,  the  Bohemians  sent  a  gracious  letter  to  them,  saying : 
*  Should  God  favour  you  receive  us  as  prisoners  in  mercy,  and 
should  God  help  us  we  will  do  the  same  unto  you.'  But  the 
Germans  answered  :  '  This  is  impossible ;  for  we  must,  because  of 
the  papal  ban,  kill  all,  women,  old  men,  girls,  children.'  Then  the 
Bohemians  decided  that  they  would  take  no  German  prisoner, 
but  all  prayed  to  God,  remembering  their  honour  and  their 
faith.  Then  Lord  Vanek  Cernohorsky,  a  field-captain,  said  : 
'  He  who  would  rightly  fight  God's  fight  must  be  reconciled 
with  God.  Then  on  Friday,  early  in  the  morning,  the  Bohemians 
heard  a  sermon  and  received  the  body  and  blood  of  God,  that 
they  might  fight  bravely  for  the  law.  Prince  Sigismund 
(Korybutovic)  also  did  this ;  with  tears  he  prayed  to  God  and 
exhorted  the  soldiers  to  fight  bravely." 

The  Bohemians  expected  to  be  attacked  on  Friday,  June  14, 
but  no  fighting  took  place  on  that  day,  and  on  the  15th  only 
slight  skirmishing  began.  The  following  day — the  i6th — 
being  Sunday  ^  the  pious  Bohemians  hoped  that  no  battle 
would  take  place  on  that  day,  but  the  Germans,  sure  of  victory, 

*  The  two  principal  contemporary  sources  are  the  "  Scriptores  rerum 
Bohemicarum/'  which  I  have  so  often  quoted  and  the  ballad  entitled  "  Bitva 
pred  Ustim  "  ("  The  Battle  before  Usti  "),  published  in  the  Vyhor  z  Literatury 
ceske  {Selections  from  Bohemian  Literature) ,  Vol,  II. 

2  i.  e.  the  German  army  sent  by  Duchess  Catherine  to  relieve  the  city. 

'  The  Catholic  writer  Bartosek  of  Drahonic  shared  his  countrymen's  dislike 
of  engaging  in  battle  on  Sunday,  and  attributed  the  defeat  of  the  Saxons  to 
this  circumstance.  He  writes  :  "  Haec  facta  sunt  ipso  die  dominico,  quare 
nullus  die  dominico  confiictum  sapiens  intret  quia  Misnenses  inceperunt  " 
(P-  595  o^  Professor  Goll's  edition). 


192  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

admitted  no  further  delay,  fearing  that  their  enemies  might 
escape  them.  The  Germans  bravely  scaled  the  hill,  on  which 
the  Bohemians  awaited  their  attack.  Their  wagons  were 
connected  by  chains,  and  a  considerable  number  of  guns  which 
had  been  placed  at  short  intervals  immediately  opened  fire  on 
the  advancing  Germans.  Behind  the  guns  some  of  the  soldiers 
were  placed,  partly  protected  by  large  shields,  whose  pointed 
lower  ends  had  been  driven  into  the  ground.  In  spite  of  the 
incessant  fire  of  the  guns  and  muskets  of  the  Bohemians  the 
Germans  continued  to  advance,  and  reached  the  Bohemian 
encampment,  though  the  great  loss  of  life  and  the  fatigue  of 
the  ascent  had  already  weakened  them.  When  the  Germans, 
almost  blinded  by  the  smoke  caused  by  the  primitive  fure- 
arms  of  those  days,  halted  for  a  moment,  the  Bohemians,  faith- 
ful to  the  teaching  of  their  dead  leader  2izka,  immediately 
assumed  the  offensive.  First  the  Taborites,  then  the  Orphans, 
then  the  Utraquist  nobles  under  Prince  Korybutovic,  then  the 
Praguers  and  the  townsmen  allied  with  them,  closed  with  the 
enemies.  Employing  a  stratagem  that  was  frequently  used 
during  the  Hussites  wars  the  Bohemians  raised  the  cry,  **  The 
Germans  fly,  they  fi^M  "  Some  of  the  German  captains  then 
turned  their  backs  on  the  enemies,  exclaiming  that  everything 
was  lost.  The  mass  of  the  infantry,  hearing  this,  fled  in  great 
disorder,  and  many  were  killed  while  descending  the  hill.  The 
slaughter  was  so  great  that,  as  we  read,  the  stream  that  flows 
from  the  hill  in  the  direction  of  IJsti  and  the  fish-pond  into 
which  it  falls  were  on  that  day  coloured  blood-red.  The  pond 
up  to  the  present  day  bears  the  name  of  "  Blut  Teich  "  (the 
pond  of  blood) .  As  is  so  frequently  the  case  when  an  army  has 
been  unexpectedly  and  signally  defeated,  rumours  of  treach- 
ery were    immediately   rife.^     The   German  nobles  who   had 

*  The  "  Chronicoa  Adami  Ursini  "  (quoted  by  Toman,  Hiisitsrie  Vdlecnictvi) 
states  :  "  Als  nun  das  deutsche  Yolk  .  .  .  kam,  als  was  cs  durch  V'erratherei 
mit  etlichen  Hauptleuten  da  bestellt,  die  sich  da  umkehrten  und  rannten 
diesem  Volke  alles  unter  Augen,  und  niachten  da  eine  Flucht  mit  weni^ 
Behmen  und  schrien  es  ware  alles  Leib  und  Gut  verloren.  Also  war  das  Vollv 
alles  noch  ungeschickt  und  ward  fliichtig." 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  193 

taken  part  in  the  campaign  were  by  the  traditions  of  their 
caste  prevented  from  joining  in  a  disgraceful  rout,  which  began 
long  before  the  result  of  the  battle  was  certain.  Deserted  by 
their  followers,  they  for  a  time  attempted  a  hopeless  resistance. 
They  were  soon  forced  to  surrender,  in  consequence  of  the 
bravery  of  the  Bohemians,  upon  which  the  chroniclers  lay 
great  stress  on  this  occasion.  Prince  Korybutovic^  and  his 
standard-bearer,  the  knight  Vacha  of  Rican,  fought  in  the 
front  rank,  and  the  other  nobles  gathered  around  the  standard. 
Krusina  of  Lichtenburg  and  Victorin  of  Podebrad  are  men- 
tioned by  the  chroniclers  as  the  bravest  of  the  Utraquist 
nobles.  The  German  nobles  were  obliged  to  surrender,  and 
hoped  to  find  greater  mercy  on  the  part  of  men  of  their  own 
rank  than  on  that  of  the  ferocious  Taborites.  In  the  village 
of  Hrbovic  twenty-four  counts  of  the  empire  and  nobles  of 
lower  rank  dismounted,  struck  their  swords  into  the  soil  and 
kneeling  begged  for  mercy.  This  was,  however,  impossible, 
as  the  Germans  had  previously  declared  with  foolish  arrogance 
that  they  would  spare  no  heretic.  The  German  lords  were 
thus  all  mercilessly  cut  down.  Lord  Jakoubec  of  Bilina  at- 
tempted to  save  the  life  of  the  German  lord  of  Wolkenstein. 
He  ordered  him  as  his  prisoner  to  mount  on  his  horse  behind 
him;  the  merciless  Taborites,  however,  did  not  permit  this. 
They  fired  at  Wolkenstein  from  the  back,  and  he  dropped 
down  dead  from  the  horse;  when  falhng  he  nearly  dragged 
down  Lord  Jakoubec  with  him.  This  incident  is  interesting 
as  showing  more  clearly  than  had  been  previously  the  case 
that  disunion  between  the  aristocratic  and  the  democratic 
Utraquists  was  constantly  increasing.  This  disunion  culmin- 
ated in  the  battle  of  Lipany  and  the  subsequent  downfall  of 
Utraquism,  for  which  the  democratic  party  was  as  largely 
responsible  as  the  aristocratic  one.  The  clever  tactics  of  the 
Hussites  had  left  but  one  way  of  retreat  open  to  the  flying 
Germans ;   it  lay  through  the  village  of  Chabofice,  and  led  to 

the  mountains  which  form  the  frontier  between  Bohemia  and 
o 


194  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

Saxony.  Along  this  road  the  pursuit  continued  relentlessly,  and 
the  loss  of  life  was  even  greater  than  during  the  battle.  The 
Utraquists,  however,  always  more  humane  than  their  antagon- 
ists, now  became  more  merciful.  A  considerable  number  of 
Germans  were  taken  prisoners  and  conveyed  to  Lipa  and  to 
Mladi  Boleslav.i  Though  the  figures  vary  greatly,  it  is  certain 
that  the  battle  of  tJsti  was  the  most  sanguinary  one  of  the 
Hussite  wars.  The  Germans,  according  to  the  writers,  who 
minimised  their  losses,  lost  15,000  men.  Other  chroniclers 
state  that  50,000  Germans  were  either  killed  or  made  prisoners. 
We  are  told  that  numerous  members  of  the  greatest  families 
of  the  German  nobility  perished  here.  They  had,  as  previously 
mentioned,  continued  to  fight  when  the  infantry  had  already 
fled.  The  Bohemian  losses  were  very  slight,  though  it  is 
impossible  to  believe  that  they  amounted  to  only  thirty  men, 
as  the  contemporary  chroniclers  write.  The  only  man  of 
importance  whose  death  they  record  is  the  Utraquist  knight 
Bradaty,  who,  since  the  beginning  of  the  war,  had  been  one 
of  the  bravest  defenders  of  the  chalice.  The  contemporary 
ballad  to  which  I  have  already  referred  concludes  its  account 
of  the  battle  with  these  words  : 

"  Now,  all  ye  true  Christians, 
Lords,  knights,  Praguers  and  citizens, 
Follow  the  faith  of  your  ancestors,* 
Show  that  you  sprang  from  their  blood. 
Cling  to  God's  truth; 
Thus  will  you  obtain  praise  from  God, 
Thus  will  your  race  be  blessed  by  God, 
Unto  eternal  life  through  all  times." 

The  first  and  inevitable  result  of  the  battle  of  tJsti  was  the 
capture  of  the  town  of  that  name.     The  German  garrison 

*  Palacky,  in  his  Urkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc.,  publishes  letters  written  by  the 
municipalities  of  Numberg  and  Gorlitz,  which  deal  with  the  ransoming  of 
prisoners  who  were  detained  as  captives  in  Bohemia  (Vol.  I.  pp.  466,  467, 
476). 

*  These  words  are  interesting  as  proving  that  the  belief  that  Utraquism 
was  the  original  form  of  Christianity  in  Bohemia  was  already  general  at  that 
time.  (See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  pp.  94-95  and  my  Master  John 
Hus,  pp.  lo-ii.) 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  195 

attempted  to  leave  the  city  immediately  after  the  defeat 
and  to  join  their  flying  comrades;  but  the  Bohemians  at  the 
same  moment  entered  the  town  walls,  and  burnt  down  the 
city  so  completely  that,  as  we  are  told,  the  site  remained 
entirely  uninhabited  for  more  than  three  years. 

It  may  have  been  noticed  that  very  little  mention  is  made 
of  Prokop  in  the  accounts  of  the  great  victory  of  tjsti.  This 
is  no  doubt  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  the  contemporary 
chroniclers  delighted  in  recording  the  brave  deeds  of  arms  of 
the  Utraquist  lords  and  of  Prince  KorybutoviC  and  his  Polish 
followers.  Prokop's  reluctance  to  appear  as  a  warrior  and 
his  wish  to  accentuate  his  priestly  office  may  also  be  one  of 
the  reasons  why  his  name  is  not  more  prominent  in  the  accounts 
of  the  great  battle.  There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that  the 
Hussites  attributed  their  great  victory  mainly  to  Prokop. 
It  was  he  who,  following  2izka's  example,  chose  admirably  the 
position  which  so  largely  contributed  to  the  success,  and 
Prokop  and  his  Taborites  were  the  first  to  assume  the  offensive 
when  the  Germans  had  reached  the  heights  on  which  the 
national  army  was  entrenched.  Prokop's  military  genius  was 
henceforth  recognised  not  only  by  his  Taborite  followers,  but 
by  the  members  of  all  Utraquist  parties.  As  Dr.  Neubauer 
writes  :  "  A  new  epoch  of  the  Hussite  wars  begins  with  the 
victory  of  tJsti,  the  epoch  of  Prokop ;  it  was  the  epoch  of  great 
victories  over  the  crusaders  and  of  the  successful  incursions 
into  distant  lands.*' 

After  the  great  victory  of  tJsti  the  soundest  policy  for  the 
Bohemians  would  have  been  to  assume  the  offensive  and 
invade  the  neighbouring  German  lands.  They  could,  indeed, 
only  hope  to  secure  peace  if  the  Germans  also  endured  the 
hardships  and  the  horrors  of  incessant  inexorable  warfare  from 
which  Bohemia  had  now  suffered  for  six  years.  The  feeling 
in  favour  of  an  invasion  of  the  neighbouring  countries  naturally 
became  stronger  after  a  course  of  almost  uninterrupted 
victories.    The    soldiers,  particularly  the  Tdborites,  became 


196  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

more  and  more  self-confident,  and  desirous  to  transfer  the 
seat  of  war  from  their  own  exhausted  country  to  other  regions 
where  provisions  and  rich  booty  could  be  obtained.  This 
feeling  was,  however,  much  stronger  among  the  Taborites 
than  among  the  partisans  of  Prince  Korybutovic,  who  wished 
to  found  an  orderly  government  in  Bohemia  and  to  establish, 
if  possible,  friendly  relations  with  the  neighbouring  countries.^ 

It  is  certain  that  in  Germany  everyone  believed  in  the 
danger  of  an  imminent  Bohemian  invasion.  The  German 
townsmen  in  all  parts  of  the  country  began  to  repair  and 
strengthen  the  city  walls,  and  many  towns  such  as  Jena, 
Halle,  and  Magdeburg  erected  new  fortifications.  Even  in  the 
distant  regions  near  the  Rhine  it  was  thought  necessary  to 
arm  against  a  probable  invasion.  The  apathy  of  the  Germans 
disappeared,  at  least  for  a  time.  The  German  princes  were 
unable  to  ignore  this  popular  movement,  and  agreed  to 
attempt  a  new  invasion  of  Bohemia  in  the  following  year. 

Before  referring  to  this  new  crusade  it  is  necessary  to  consider 
the  internal  state  of  Bohemia  at  this  moment,  and  to  allude 
briefly  to  the  domestic  troubles  which  immediately  followed 
the  victory  of  tJsti.  Shortly  before  the  battle  Victorin  of 
Podebrad,  one  of  the  greatest  Utraquist  nobles  and  a  personal 
friend  of  2izka,  had  abandoned  the  Taborites,  joined  the 
moderate  Utraquists,  and  recognised  Prince  Korybutovic  as 
his  sovereign.  It  is  evident  that  the  Utraquist  nobles  had 
not  the  same  confidence  in  Prokop  which  they  had  formerly 
had  in  2izka,  with  whom  many  of  them  had  been  on  terms 
of  friendship.  Victorin 's  step,  which  he  no  doubt  considered 
as  a  defection,  infuriated  Prokop.  He  marched  with  his 
Tdborites  on  Podebrad  and  besieged  this  principal  stronghold 
of  the  lords  who  took  their  name  from  it.  Podebrad  was 
strongly  fortified,  and  in  one  direction  protected  by  the  river 
Elbe.  We  have  here,  as  so  often  in  the  annals  of  the  Hussite 
wars,  little  authentic  information;  but  it  appears  certain  that 

*  See  Griinhagen,  Hussitenkdmpfe  der  Schlesier ,  particularly  pp.  104-105. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  197 

the  attempt  to  capture  the  stronghold  failed. ^  The  abandon- 
ment of  the  siege  may  also  have  been  caused  by  the  news 
that  the  Archduke  Albert  of  Austria,  that  inveterate  enemy 
of  the  Utraquists,  had  again  invaded  Moravia.  He  laid  siege 
to  the  important  Moravian  town  of  Breclava  (in  German, 
Lundenburg),  situated  close  to  the  Austrian  frontier, 
which  had  been  occupied  by  the  Taborites.  Prokop's  vic- 
torious army  easily  defeated  the  Austrians  and  forced  them 
to  raise  the  siege. 

These  incidents  of  local  warfare  are  of  little  interest  in 
comparison  with  the  new  civic  revolution  that  broke  out  in 
Prague  about  this  time.  The  real  plans  and  intentions  of  the 
Lithuanian  Prince  Korybutovic  are  one  of  the  many  enigmas 
which  we  encounter  in  Bohemian  history.  Korybutovic  has 
almost  always  been  judged  severely,  and,  indeed,  unfairly  by 
Bohemian  historians.  He  has  very  frequently  been  accused 
of  treachery  to  the  Bohemians  during  his  second  stay  in  their 
country.  This  accusation  requires  some  definition.  It  is 
certain  that  shortly  after  the  victory  of  Usti  Korybutovic 
entered  into  negotiations  with  Pope  Martin  V.  The  pontiff 
had  informed  Ladislas  King  of  Poland  and  the  Grand  Duke 
Vitold  of  Lithuania,  both  relations  of  Korybutovic,  that  "  he 
was  willing  to  grant  a  hearing  to  the  heretics  "  if  the  princes 
consented  to  act  as  mediators. ^  In  consequence  of  this  a 
Polish  ambassador  started  for  Rome  to  open  negotiations,  and 
his  mission  only  ended  with  the  subsequent  fall  of  Korybutovic. 
It  is  distinctly  unfair  to  describe  these  negotiations  as  "an 
attempt  to  deliver  up  Bohemia  to  the  Pope  and  deprive  the 
people  of  all  the  results  of  their  many  victories."  It  is  far 
more  probable  that  Korybutovic  wished  to  obtain  certain 
concessions  from  Rome,  similar  to  those  afterwards  granted 

1  Bartosek  of  Drahonic  writes  :  "  presbyter  Procopius  .  .  .  cum  sectis 
castrum  Podebrad  .  .  .  circumvallaverunt,  et  ipsum  cum  magnis  pixidibus 
et  machinis  hostiliter  conabantur  expugnare  ultra  quinque  septimanas  et 
nequientes  lucrare  ob  duram  defensionem  et  audacem,  abinde  recessenint  " 
(P-  595  of  Professor  GoU's  edition). 

2  Professor  Goll,  Cechy  a  Prusy  {Bohemia  and  Prussia),  p.  190-193. 


198  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

at  the  Council  of  Basel,  on  which  occasion  the  Bohemian 
leaders,   including   Prokop   the   Great,    did   not   hesitate   to 
negotiate  with  the  Roman  Church.     It  is  probable  that  Kory- 
butoviC,  a  man  brought  up  in  Lithuania,  where  the  majority 
of  the  population  belonged  to  the  Eastern  Church,  cherished 
a  very  genuine  reverence  for  the  tenets  of  Utraquism.     Even 
if  we  set  aside  these  considerations  and  consider  KorybutoviC 
merely  as  an  ambitious  adventurer,  as  some  German  writers 
have  done,  there  could  have  been  no  worse  policy  for  him 
than   unconditional   surrender   to    Rome.     Almost   the   only 
Bohemians  who  desired  this  submission  were  the  lords  *'  sub 
una,"  and  these  men  were  as  entirely  devoted  to  Sigismund, 
whom  they  considered  their  legitimate  sovereign,  as  they  were 
to  the  Church  of  Rome.^    Even  the  statement  that  Korybutovic^ 
favoured,  among  the  clergy  of  Prague,  priests  such  as  Christian 
of  Prachatice  ^  and  Peter  Mladenovic,^  who  were  known  as 
men  of  moderate  views,  proves  rather  the  contrary  of  what  it 
intended  to  prove.     These  men  had  been  the  intimate  friends 
of  Hus  and   were   better  than   others   acquainted   with  his 
views,  which,  as  I  have  written  elsewhere,  were  far  less  an- 
tagonistic to  the  Church  of  Rome  than  is  usually  supposed. 
Christian  of  Prachatice  and  MladenoviC  were  accused  of  using 
vestments  and  of  retaining  part  of  the  Catholic  ritual.     They 
were,  however,  known  as  fervent  adherents  of  the  articles  of 
Prague.     It  is  probable  that  the  accusation  of  negotiating 
with  Rome,  which  then  had  the  same  effect  as  the  cry  of 
"  no  popery  "  once  had  in  England,  was  mainly  raised  by  the 
city   demagogues   of    Prague,    with   whose   anarchical   plans 
KorybutoviC's  endeavour  to  establish  orderly  government  in 

1  Palacky,  with  his  usual  acumen,  noted  that  neither  Korybutovic  nor 
any  party  then  contemplated  unconditional  surrender  to  Rome.  He  writes  : 
"  Soich  eine  Unterhandlung  und  Versohnung,  wo  die  Sieger  als  biissende 
Siinder  und  verirrte  sich  freiwillig  dem  bisherigen  Feinde  auf  Gnade  ergeben 
sollten ;  lag  keineswegs  in  der  Absicht  der  Mehrzahl,  selbst  der  geraSssigten 
Kelchner  "  {Geschichte  von  Bohmen,  Vol.  Ill,  ii.  p.  425,  German  edition). 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  235  and  275. 

•  See  my  History  of  Bohemian  Literature,  particularly  p.  145,  and  Master 
John  Hus,  pp.  241-243,  283-285,  etc. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  199 

Bohemia  greatly  interfered.  It  is  certain  that  KorybntoviC, 
in  agreement  with  the  Utraquist  nobles,  intended  to  maintain 
order  in  Bohemia  with  a  strong  hand  and  to  suppress  the 
seditions  which,  particularly  in  Prague,  were  constantly  caused 
by  fanatics.  Though  all  Bohemians  had  hitherto  rallied  to 
the  national  standard  whenever  the  country  was  attacked  by 
foreigners,  it  was  doubtful  whether  this  would  always  be  the 
case.  It  was,  on  the  other  hand,  certain  that  the  country,  if 
divided  against  itself,  would  eventually  succumb  to  its  numerous 
and  powerful  enemies. 

As  was  invariably  the  case  during  the  Hussite  wars,  renewed 
dissensions  among  the  clergy  led  to  civic  disturbances.  The 
fact  that  John  of  Pribram,^  the  leader  of  the  Hussite  High 
Church,  Peter  Mladenovic  and  Christian  of  Prachatice  enjoyed 
the  full  confidence  of  Korybutovic  greatly  incensed  the  more 
advanced  Utraquists,  whose  leader  was  then  the  priest  John 
of  Rokycan,  who  afterwards  became  Utraquist  Archbishop  of 
Prague.  Rokycan  and  his  followers  denounced  the  priests 
who  used  vestments  and  the  ritual  of  the  Roman  Church  as 
idolaters  who  were  betraying  the  Bohemian  Church  to  Rome. 
Popular  excitement  became  very  great,  and  according  to  the 
generally  accepted  account,  Korybutovic  conceived  a  plot — 
concerning  which  we  are  given  no  information — to  arrest  the 
hostile  Utraquist  priests.  He  is  stated  to  have  invited  to  a 
banquet  one  of  his  pages,  Svojse  of  Zahradka,  and  his  under, 
chamberlain,  John  Rozvoda  of  Stakov,  and  to  have  given 
them  secret  instructions,  which  are  unknown  to  us.  The  two 
courtiers,  we  are  told,  were  to  leave  Prague  at  night-time,  and 
then  to  re-enter  the  city,  and  to  leave  open  one  of  the  gates- 
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  the  vagueness  of  these  state- 
ments. Korybutovic  is  also  said  to  have  been  mistaken  in  the 
choice  of  his  confidants.  The  two  courtiers  immediately  informed 
the  enemies  of  Korybutovic  of  this  plot,  and  though  they  left 
Prague  they  returned  on  the  following  day  (April  17,  1427). 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  361-362. 


200  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Rozvoda,  who  appears  to  have  acted  as  leader  of  the  party 
opposed  to  the  Lithuanian  prince,^  was  accompanied  by 
numerous  partisans.  One  of  the  tumults  so  frequent  in 
Prague  at  that  period  then  took  place,  but  it  was  this  time 
unaccompanied  by  bloodshed.  The  bells  of  all  the  church 
towers  were  rung,  and  the  people  hurried  to  the  market-place. 
John  of  Rokycan,  followed  by  many  priests  of  his  faction  and 
carrying  the  Sacrament,  then  left  the  neighbouring  Tyn  church  ^ 
and  appeared  on  the  market-place.  He  declared  that  a  plot 
against  him  and  his  followers  had  been  discovered,  and  called 
on  the  people  to  defend  him.  Jerome  Srol,  formerly  one  of 
the  adherents  of  John  of  Zelivo,  also  called  the  people  to 
arms.  The  citizens  immediately  began  to  attack  the  residence 
of  Prince  Korybutovic,  who  was  greatly  surprised  at  this 
sudden  invasion  and  quite  unprepared  for  resistance.  He 
was,  therefore,  taken  prisoner,  without  any  struggle  ^  and 
conveyed  in  disguise  to  the  Hradcany  castle  on  the  left  bank 
of  the  Vltavo.  From  here  his  captors  afterwards  brought 
him  to  the  castle  of  Valdstyn,  where  he  remained  a  prisoner 
for  some  time.  The  coup  d'etat  was  carried  out  so  suddenly 
and  secretly  that  even  his  most  intimate  followers  were  for 

^  The  author  of  the  contemporary  ballad  "  O  zajeti  Sigmunda  Korybu- 
tovice  "  C'  On  the  Capture  of  Sigismund  Korybutovic  ")  writes  :  "  First  will  I 
mention  Rozvada,  who  was  the  leader,  and  took  the  part  of  the  deceased 
Judas"  {VyhoY  z  Literatury  cBske — Selections  from  Bohemian  Literature, 
Vol.  II.  p.  311). 

2  See  my  Prague  (''  Mediaeval  Towns  "  series),  p.  155-156. 

^  The  ancient  chroniclers  thus  describe  this  event  :  "  On  Thursday  in 
Passion  Week  there  were  great  disturbances  in  Prague  because  of  a  plot 
made  against  Sigismund  of  Lithuania,  who  was  then  in  his  princely  residence, 
by  Master  John  of  Rokycan,  then  preacher  at  the  church  of  the  Mother  of 
God  at  the  Tyn,  together  with  some  citizens  of  Prague  and  knights,  particu- 
larly Svojse  of  Zahradka  and  Rozvoda,  surnamed  Rames ;  they  seized  him 
[one  of  theMSS.  here  adds  the  untrue  statement  "  because  he  would  not  receive 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds  "]  and  brought  him  by  night  in  disguise  to  the 
castle  of  Prague  [Hradcany],  and  then  conveyed  him  to  the  castle  of  Valdstyn, 
and  [afterwards]  drove  him  out  of  the  country.  Thus  did  the  Praguers  repay 
him  [Korybutovic]  for  his  services  and  his  aid  against  their  enemies.  But  the 
Lord  God  did  not  leave  these  traitors  unpunished ;  for  Rozvoda,  surnamed 
Rames,  was  shortly  afterwards  shot  dead  by  one  of  his  servants,  and  SvojSe 
before  his  death  became  insane,  and  the  others  also  ended  their  lives  miserably  " 
("  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  pp.  70-71). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  201 

some  time  unaware  of    the  place  to  which    he    had    been 
conveyed. 

As  Professor  Tomek  writes,  our  information  concerning  this 
civic  revolution  is  very  scant,  and  it  is  hardly  necessary  to 
point  out  how  very  improbable  some  parts  of  the  generally 
accepted  account  appear.  It  is  scarcely  imaginable  that 
Korybutovic,  whom  his  enemies  describe  as  a  traitor  and 
intriguer,  and  who  had  at  any  rate  much  experience  of  the 
political  life  in  Bohemia  and  other  Slavic  countries,  should 
have  entrusted  two  members  of  his  household  with  a  weighty 
political  mission  without  informing  his  numerous  and  powerful 
allies  among  the  Utraquist  nobility  of  his  intentions.  Yet 
none  of  these  allies  were  ready  to  come  to  his  aid,  and  Kory- 
butovic himself  was  obviously  taken  by  surprise  when  suddenly 
attacked  in  his  dwelling.  In  the  almost  entire  absence  of 
trustworthy  evidence,  it  may  be  at  least  conjectured  that  the 
coup  d'etat  of  April  17  was  not  a  plot  of  Prince  Korybutovic, 
but  a  plot  against  him.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  fact 
that  almost  immediately  after  the  imprisonment  of  Korybu- 
tovic Rozvoda  and  Svojse  obtained  important  offices  under 
the  new  municipality  of  Prague.  As  far  as  we  are  able  to 
judge,  public  opinion  disapproved  of  this  sudden  outrage 
inflicted  on  one  who  had  proved  himself  a  true  friend  of 
Bohemia.  I  have  already  quoted  on  this  subject  passages 
from  the  contemporary  chroniclers  and  from  a  ballad  of  the 
period.  The  author  of  this  ballad  probably  expressed  the 
general  opinion  at  the  time  when  he  wrote  : 

"  Thus  did  they  [the  enemies  of  Korybutovic]  act. 
They  set  us  at  variance  with  the  whole  world. 
We  then  lost  [the  help  of]  Poland, 
Whence  we  formerly  received  aid. 

They  [the  enemies  of  Korybutovic]  did  not  heed  this; 
They  took  good  care  of  themselves  in  Prague." 

As  the  last  lines  of  the  ballad  which  I  have  quoted  indicate, 
great  changes  took  place  in  the  distribution  of  the  municipal 
dignities  in  Prague,  and  the  principal  offices  were  given  to 


202  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

those  who  had  taken  a  prominent  part  in  the  revolution; 
among  these  were,  as  already  mentioned,  Svojse  and  Rozvoda. 
The  imprisonment  of  Prince  KorybutoviC  was  immediately 
followed  by  that  of  the  priests  Christian  of  Prachatice,  Peter 
Mladenovic,  Master  John  of  Pribram,  and  Master  Prokop  of 
Plzen.  They  were  conveyed  to  the  prison  in  the  town-hall, 
where  they  remained  in  safety,  though  the  rabble  demanded 
that  they  should  be  drowned. 

Though  the  deposition  of  Prince  Korybutovic  is  noted  by 
the  contemporary  writers  rather  as  an  incident  of  civic  strife 
than  as  the  turning-point  in  the  Hussite  war,  its  great  im- 
portance is  very  evident  to  the  modern  student.  The  rule  of 
Korybutovic,  though  it  had,  except  in  Prague  and  in  the  cities 
allied  or  subject  to  the  capital,  been  but  a  nominal  one,  had 
yet,  to  a  certain  extent,  united  the  antagonistic  Hussite  parties. 
The  powerful  Utraquist  nobility,  which  had  played  so  great  a 
part  in  the  Hussite  movement,  now  began  to  foresee  that  the 
fall  of  Korybutovic  would  slowly  but  surely  undermine  its 
influence  in  the  country  and  transfer  all  power  to  the  ultra- 
democratic  party.  If  this  evolution  did  not  immediately  take 
place,  the  reason  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  a  new  and — as 
was  then  believed — dangerous  crusade  at  that  moment  menaced 
Bohemia.  In  September  1426  the  Hussite  general  Pfibik  of 
Klenov  had,  almost  without  resistance,  obtained  possession  of 
the  important  city  of  Stfibo  (in  German,  Miess),  which  is 
situated  on  the  direct  road  between  Plzeii  and  Cheb.  The 
occupation  of  this  town,  in  which  the  Utraquists  immediately 
established  a  nationalist  municipality,  was  considered  as  a 
permanent  menace  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring 
German  districts,  as  well  as  by  the  Bohemian  cities  which 
had  remained  faithful  to  King  Sigismund  and  the  Roman 
Church.  The  spot  most  menaced  by  the  Hussites  was  the 
town  of  Tachov,  situated  at  a  short  distance  from  Stribro. 
The  townsmen  of  Tachov  were  greatly  alarmed,  and  \vTote  to 
the  town-councillors  of  Cheb,  begging  them,  '*  for  the  love  of 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  203 

God  and  of  His  dear  mother  Mary,  of  all  Saints,  and  the 
Christian  faith  and  our  beloved  King  (Sigismund),  to  come  to 
their  aid;  they  hoped  with  their  aid  and  with  that  of  the 
knights  and  nobles  and  other  pious  men  to  recapture  the 
town  and  castle  of  Stiribro."  ^  The  Hussite  occupation  of 
Stfibro  certainly  caused  considerable  anxiety  in  Germany, 
and  it  seemed  probable  for  a  time  that  the  Germans  would 
abandon  their  habitual  apathy.  The  German  electors  met  at 
Frankfort  on  November  27,  1426,  for  the  purpose  of  planning 
a  new  crusade.  They  appear,  however,  to  have  arrived  at  no 
conclusion,  and  contented  themselves  with  summoning  all  the 
German  princes  and  free  imperial  cities  to  another  meeting 
in  February  1427,  which  was  again  to  take  place  at  Frankfort. 
This  new  meeting,  however,  proved  a  complete  failure;  not 
one  of  the  German  electors  was  present  in  person. 

In  the  early  spring  of  1427  the  Hussites  again  assumed  the 
offensive   and  invaded   Silesia   and   Austria,   obtaining   con- 
siderable successes  in  both  countries.     In  the  absence  of  King 
Sigismund,  who,  during  the  years  1427  and  1428,  was  entirely 
occupied  in  defending  Hungary  against  the  Turks,  the  Mar- 
grave   Frederick    of    Brandenburg   summoned    the    German 
princes  to  another  imperial  diet,  which  was  again  to  meet 
at  Frankfort  in  April.     This  time  the  proceedings    led    to 
more  serious  results;  the  Germans  were  evidently  impressed 
by  the  fact  that  the  Bohemians  now  assumed  the  offensive 
and  began  to  invade  Germany.     In  a  comparatively  short 
time — the  assembly  broke  up  on  May  4 — it  was  resolved  that 
a  new  crusade  against  Bohemia  should  be  proclaimed,  and  that 
that  country  was  to  be  simultaneously  invaded  by  four  armies, 
who  were  to  start  from  Niirnberg,  Saxony,  Silesia,  and  Austria. 
The  largest   force  was  to  assemble  at   Niirnberg,  the   usual 
residence  of  Margrave  Frederick,  who  held  the  office  of  burgrave 
of  that  city.     The  diet  also  issued  military  regulations  in  view 

^  Letter  printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitvdge  zur  Geschichte  des  Hussi- 
tenkfiegs,  Vol.  I.  p.  473. 


204  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

of  the  new  enterprise.  Knowing  how  greatly  the  indis- 
criminate slaughter  of  the  whole  population  had  exasperated 
the  Bohemians,  the  diet  decreed  that  only  those  who  were  un- 
doubtedly heretics  should  be  killed;  other  enactments  at- 
tempted to  limit  the  indiscriminate  plundering  which  had  taken 
place  during  the  former  invasions  of  Bohemia  by  the  Germans. 
It  is  certainly  somewhat  surprising  that  shortly  before  the 
day  fixed  for  the  meeting  of  the  crusaders  at  Niirnberg, 
Frederick  of  Brandenburg,  who  was  believed  to  be  the  intended 
leader  of  the  crusaders,  should  have  entered  into  negotiations 
with  the  Bohemians.^  In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  citizens 
of  Prague  ^  on  June  25,  Frederick,  after  deploring  the  state 
of  Bohemia  caused  by  incessant  internal  and  foreign  warfare, 
formally  offered  his  mediation.  He  told  the  Praguers  that 
both  he  and  his  ancestors  had  received  many  favours  and 
benefits  from  Bohemia,  and  that  he  was  ready,  as  far  as  his 
God  and  his  honour  permitted,  to  prove  his  gratitude.  He 
promised  to  do  his  utmost  to  obtain  a  peaceful  settlement. 
The  magistrates  of  Prague,  in  a  letter  dated  July  5,  thanked  ' 
the  elector  warmly,  and  also  expressed  an  ardent  desire  for 
peace.  They  declared,  however,  that  only  a  general  assembly 
of  the  nobles,  knights,  and  townsmen  of  Bohemia  was  entitled 
to  enter  into  definite  negotiations  in  view  of  peace.  The 
margrave's  chancery  sent  a  similar  letter  favouring  a  peaceful 
agreement  to  the  citizens  of  2atec.  The  answer  of  the  citizens 
of  2atec  was  more  explicit.*  They  declared  that  they  were 
not  enemies  of  the  holy  primitive  Church,  and  with  God's 
grace  never  would  be ;  they  would,  on  the  contrary,  follow  God, 

^  Though  this  fact  was  long  known  it  is  only  recently  that  Dr.  Juritsch, 
in  his  valuable  monograph  entitled  Der  dritte  Kreuzzug  gegen  die  Hussiten, 
has  attributed  the  failure  of  that  crusade  to  Margrave  Frederick,  and  indeed 
directly  accused  him  of  treachery,  in  a  similar  fashion  to  that  in  which  he 
accuses  Prince  Korybutovic  of  the  same  offence.  It  must  be  said  that  Dr. 
Juritsch — as  was  once  said  of  Mommsen — invariably  ascribes  men's  actions 
to  the  lowest  motives. 

2  Printed  by  Palacky,  Ufkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  p.  516. 

3  Also  printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  p.  319. 
*  Dr.  Juritsch,  Der  dritte  Kreuzzug,  etc.,  p.  22. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  205 

as  far  as  it  was  in  their  power,  according  to  the  laws  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  dear  holy  apostles,  the  dear  holy  fathers, 
and  the  other  saints.^ 

These  negotiations  were  certainly  a  strange  prelude  to  the 
new  crusade.  The  Elector  of  Brandenburg  had  for  some  time 
been  on  very  bad  terms  with  King  Sigismund,  and  for  reasons 
with  which  I  have  not  to  deal  here,  war  between  the  two 
princes  for  a  time  appeared  to  be  imminent.  The  elector, 
therefore,  may  not  have  considered  so  great  a  victory  for 
the  house  of  Luxemburg-Habsburg  as  the  submission  of 
Bohemia  would  have  been  favourable  to  his  own  far-reaching 
plans,  and  it  is  at  least  not  impossible  that  the  first  Hohen- 
zollern  who  became  prominent  in  history  may  already  have 
coveted  the  Bohemian  crown. 

By  the  end  of  June  the  main  army  of  the  crusaders  had 
assembled  at  Niirnberg,  though  many  cities  had  not  yet 
sent  their  contingents,  who  started  on  their  march  slowly  and 
reluctantly.  There  was  no  enthusiasm,  and  never  perhaps 
has  the  term  **  crusade  "  been  so  grossly  misused.     On  July  9, 

*  Dr.  Juritsch,  in  his  endeavour  to  prove  the  Hussite  sympathies  of  the 
Elector  Frederick,  here  quotes  the  well-known  ballad  of  Lawrence  of  Bfezova 
on  the  battle  of  Domdzlice,  to  which  I  shall  again  refer  later.  In  this  ballad 
Frederick  is  made  to  say  : 

"  Queratur  certum  medium 
Per  prudentum  concilium 

Quo  queat  ille  populus  [the  Bohemian  people] 
Vobis  reddi  benevolus 
Mihi  videtur  optimum 
Tanto  morbo  remedium 
Instemus  omnes  seduli 

Ut  ipsorum  articuli  [the  articles  of  Prague] 
Quos  et  scripturis  comprobant 
Pro  quibus  semper  litigant 
Serventur  in  ecclesia 
Tota  certe  KathoUca 
Prout  servarunt  pariter 
Primi  fideles  fortiter." 

Bfezova's  ballad  can  certainly  claim  little  historical  value,  but  it  un- 
doubtedly tends  to  prove  that  popular  opinion  at  the  time  believed  Margrave 
Frederick  to  be  more  favourable  to  the  Hussite  views  than  the  other  German 
princes. 


2o6  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

after  the  arrival  of  the  forces  of  the  Archbishop  of  Maintz,  the 
German  army  at  last  marched  to  the  Bohemian  frontier.     It 
consisted  of  two  divisions,  one  of  which  was  commanded  by 
the  Archbishop  Otho  of  Trier,  while  the  other  had  as  its  leader 
the  Margrave  Frederick  of  Brandenburg.     No  plan  of  cam- 
paign seems  at  first  to  have  existed,  and  the  two  armies 
operated  quite  independently.     Frederick  began  his  campaign 
by  occupying  the  frontier-town  of  Cheb.     As  he  afterwards 
informed  King  Sigismund  in  his  report,^  he  attempted  here  to 
obtain  information  concerning  the  movements  of  the  other 
German   princes   who   had   crossed   the   Bohemian   frontiers. 
Having  heard  that  the  army  of  the  archbishop,  after  crossing 
the    frontier,   had   marched   directly   on   Tachov,    Frederick 
decided  to  have  an  interview  with  Otho  of  Trier  and  agree 
on  a  plan  of  campaign.     Though  this  does  not  appear  very 
clearly  from  Frederick's  report,  Dr.  Juritsch  is  probably  right 
in  conjecturing  ^  that  it  was  decided  at  this  interview  that  the 
crusaders  should  continue  to  form  two  armies,  which  were  to 
advance  separately  on  Prague,  the  centre  of  the  Hussite  move- 
ment and  unite  before  the  city.     The  southern  army,  under 
the  Archbishop  of  Trier,  with  whom  were  the  Duke  John  of 
Bavaria  and  many  temporal  and  spiritual  German  princes, 
was  to  march  by  way  of  Tachov,  Stfibro,  and  Plzen,  and  then 
follow  the  course  of  the  Vltava  river  in  the  direction  of  Prague. 
The  northern  army,  under  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  was  to 
combine  its  movements  with  those  of  the  Saxons,  indefatigable 
enemies  of  the  Hussites,  against  whom  they  were  again  pre- 
paring to  march.     The  northern  army  and  the  Saxons — whom 
the  crusaders  wrongly  believed  to  have  already  crossed  the 
frontier — were  to  unite  at  Podersam  to  march  to  Slan6  (Schlan) 
and  thence  to  menace  the  neighbouring  capital  of  Bohemia. 
The  plan  was  not  unskilfully  conceived,  but  was  founded  on 
entirely  false  premises.     A   diversion   was  expected  on   the 

*  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  pp.  539-542. 

*  Der  dritte  Kreuzzug,  etc.,  p.  30. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  207 

Austrian  frontier,  but  Archduke  Albert,  who  had  been  signally 
defeated  by  Prokop  in  the  spring,  now  considered  himself 
unable  to  take  part  in  the  crusade.  When  Frederick  entered 
into  communication  with  the  Elector  of  Saxony  the  information 
he  received  was  also  unsatisfactory.  The  elector  declared  that 
all  his  North-German  allies  who  had  promised  him  assistance 
had  failed  to  send  their  contingents,  and  that  he  himself  was 
prevented  by  illness  from  taking  part  in  the  coming  campaign. 
He  stated,  however,  that  he  entrusted  his  son,  the  Duke 
Frederick,  with  the  command  of  his  troops.  It  was  then  settled 
that  the  Saxon  forces  should  join  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg 
at  Mastov  (in  German,  Maschau),  a  small  town  near  Karlsbad. 
The  young  Saxon  prince,  however,  after  at  last  crossing  the 
Bohemian  frontier,  halted  at  Kadan.  It  is  a  proof  of  the 
great  terror  which  the  Hussites  then  inspired  in  all  Germany 
that  he  should  here  have  refused  to  continue  his  advance, 
probably  fearing  to  be  attacked  by  the  Bohemians  on  his 
march.  He  begged  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  to  join  him  at 
Kadan,  and  Frederick,  already  somewhat  disgusted  with  the 
campaign — as  appears  from  his  correspondence — reluctantly 
consented  to  do  this.  The  united  forces  then  marched  to 
the  small  town  of  2lutice  (in  German,  Luditz),  which  they 
occupied  without  resistance,  as  the  Bohemian  commander, 
Jakoubec  Bilinsky,  unable  to  resist  the  overwhelming  forces 
of  the  enemy,  hastily  evacuated  the  city. 

The  southern  army  had  meanwhile  marched  on  Tachov, 
where  the  crusaders  were  enthusiastically  received  by  the 
citizens,  who  welcomed  them  as  their  saviours.  They  then 
marched  to  Plan,  no  doubt  to  be  in  closer  contact  with  the 
northern  army.  The  Germans  seem  at  this  moment  to  have 
been  very  confident  of  victory.  Duke  John  of  Bavaria,  in  a 
letter  dated  from  Plan  on  July  14,  announced  to  the  Bishop 
of  Regensburg  that  the  Archduke  Albert  of  Austria,  with  the 
gracious  aid  of  the  King  of  the  Romans  (Sigismund),  had  already 
arrived  at  the  frontiers  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia  with  a  large 


2o8  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

army,^  that  the  Silesians  were  besieging  the  town  of  Nachod 
on  the  Bohemian  frontier,  and  that  he  hoped  that  with  God's 
aid  everything  would  be  well.  A  letter  of  Hans  Stallbogner, 
commander  of  the  Niirnberg  contingent, ^  is  also  written  in 
a  somewhat  hopeful  spirit,  but  he  alludes  to  the  dissensions 
among  the  crusaders.  He  writes  that  *'  the  Duke  of  Saxony 
is  at  the  head  of  a  force  of  20,000  men,  and  he  should  join  us, 
but  he  wishes  rather  than  we  should  join  him;  but  this  our 
Lord  of  Trier  (the  archbishop)  and  the  princes  will  not  do; 
they  wish  rather  to  march  to  the  aid  of  castles  (of  the  Roman 
Catholic  nobles)  in  the  district  of  Plzen." 

The  discord  among  the  Germans  to  which  Stallbogner 
alluded  soon  became  very  serious.  Some  of  the  crusaders, 
among  others  the  Bishop  of  Augsburg  and  the  commander  of 
the  forces  of  the  Suabian  league,  were  already  preparing  to 
return  to  Germany.  Wishing  to  act  in  agreement  with  the 
elector  of  Brandenburg,  the  Archbishop  of  Trier  invited  him 
to  a  conference,  and  suggested  the  former  monastery  of  Tepl, 
situated  between  2lutice  and  Plan,  as  a  meeting  place.  When, 
however,  the  Archbishop  of  Trier,  who  was  accompanied  by 
Duke  Otho  of  Brunswick,  reached  Tepl  it  was  ascertained  that 
the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  had  not  arrived  there.  This  news 
seems  to  have  caused  great  depression  in  the  ranks  of  the 
crusaders.  One  of  the  captains  of  the  Suabian  troops  wrote  : 
"  It  would  have  been  better  if  we  had  never  come  here.'* 
Those  who  were  not  absorbed  by  the  thought  of  the  dangers 
which  menaced  the  army  seem  to  have  been  in  a  state  of 
complete  indifference. ^  The  crusaders  had  also  greatly  over- 
rated the  value  of  the  aid  which  they  hoped  to  obtain  from 
the  owners  of  the  neighbouring  Bohemian  castles  who  were 

*  The  chronicler  Andrew  of  Regensburg,  who  publishes  this  letter,  adds 
the  characteristic  remark  :  "  Hie  [Albert  of  Austria]  isto  tempore  nunquam 
venit  in  campum.     Vide  hie  quomodo  etiam  principes  falluntur." 

*  Palacky  Urkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  pp.  527-528. 

*  Dr.  Juritsch  writes  :  "  Es  herrschte  bei  den  Herrn  in  Plan  eine  grenzenlose 
Sorglosigkeit ;  sie  scheinen  sich  hinter  dem  Bierkruge  ausserordentlich  wohl 
zu  befinden  und  ganz  vergessen  zu  haben  was  der  Krieg  erheischt." 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  209 

Catholics.  These  lords  "  sub  una  "  were  often  closely  con- 
nected with  the  Utraquist  nobles,  and  knew  that  the  religious 
views  of  the  latter  did  not  differ  widely  from  the  Church  of 
Rome.  Many  of  the  lords  "  sub  una  "  were  also  nationalists 
in  their  views,  and  did  not  wish  to  help  the  Germans  to  subdue 
their  country. 

It  was  not,  therefore,  under  very  favourable  auspices  that 
the  crusaders  marched  to  Stfibro  on  July  22.  The  army  was 
not  complete  even  then,  and  troops  of  crusaders  were  still 
crossing  the  passes  from  Bavaria  to  Bohemia.  Much  disap- 
pointment was  caused  by  the  delay  of  the  arrival  of  Cardinal 
Henry  Beaufort,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  who  had  now  been 
appointed  papal  legate,  and  who  was  to  proceed  to  the  site 
of  war  accompanied  by  1000  English  archers,  then  famed 
in  all  parts  of  the  continent.  Cardinal  Beaufort  arrived  at 
Niimberg  on  July  13,  and  remained  there  up  to  the  28th 
of  that  month.  He  then  proceeded  to  Tachov,  but  travelling 
leisurely  only  arrived  there  on  August  4.  On  July  23  the 
siege  of  Stfibro  began.  The  city  was  bravely  defended  by 
Pf ibik  of  Klenov,  who  was  aided  by  the  strong  natural  position 
of  the  town.  In  one  direction  the  Misa  river  and  in  another 
a  stream  that  runs  into  that  river  rendered  it  almost  impreg- 
nable to  the  armies  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  bombard- 
ment appears  to  have  been  carried  out  with  little  energy,  and 
to  have  been  directed  almost  exclusively  against  the  town 
walls.  It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that  the  city,  though  gar- 
risoned by  only  200  men,  remained  in  the  hands  of  the 
Hussites.  On  the  last  days  of  July  the  crusaders  were  joined 
by  the  troops  of  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  and  by  those  of 
the  Saxon  prince.  Almost  immediately  after  his  arrival  in  the 
camp  before  Stiribro  the  Elector  Frederick  was  suddenly  seized 
with  illness.^  According  to  his  report  to  King  Sigismund,  "  he 
was  suddenly  attacked  by  so  great  a  bodily  weakness  that  the 
Archbishop  of  Trier,  who  was  also  there  (in  the  camp),  and 

*  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitrage,  etc.,  Vol.  I.  p.  539-542. 


210  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

other  friends  counselled  and  advised  him  to  go  to  Tachov,  and 
to  remain  there  for  some  days,  according  to  the  advice  of  the 
doctors."  The  Bohemians  were  meanwhile  actively  occupied 
in  preparing  the  defence  of  their  country.  On  July  ii,  the 
first  division  of  the  Tdborites  marched  through  Prague  to  the 
neighbouring  White  Mountain.  Prokop  the  Great  joined  them 
on  the  15th  of  that  month,  and  somewhat  later  the  forces 
of  the  town  of  Prague  and  of  the  Utraquist  nobles  also  met 
there.  The  united  Hussite  army  then  marched  on  Plzen.^ 
They  were  joined  on  their  march  by  the  troops  of  one  of  the 
Utraquist  nobles,  Lord  Benes  of  Kolowrat,  and  this  is  said  to 
have  caused  some  delay.  It  was  only  on  August  2  that  the 
vanguard  of  the  Bohemians  arrived  in  view  of  the  city  of 
Stfibro.  Henry  of  Plauen  was  sent  by  the  Germans  with  a 
small  troop  of  cavalry  to  reconnoitre,  and  the  leaders  of  the 
German  army  immediately  held  a  council  of  war.  Though 
one  of  the  German  princes  suggested  that  they  should  adopt 
the  Bohemian  tactics  and  await  the  attack  of  the  enemies 
under  the  protection  of  their  armoured  wagons,  this  proposal 
was  rejected,  as  the  Germans  had  not — as  the  Bohemians 
generally  had — a  sufficient  number  of  these  wagons.  It  was 
finally  decided  to  abandon  the  siege  of  Stfibro  and  to  march 
with  the  whole  army  in  the  direction  in  which  the  Bohemians 
were  expected.  Though  we  have  fuller  information  concerning 
the  third  crusade  against  the  Bohemians  than  on  other  events 
of  the  Hussite  wars,  it  is  not  very  clear  what  now  occurred. 
It  is  certain  that  as  soon  as  the  news  of  the  approach  of  the 
Bohemians  became  known  among  the   crusaders  great   con- 

*  Bartosek  of  Drahonic  writes  (p.  596  of  Professor  Goll's  edition)  :  "  Pra- 
genses  vero  cum  presbytero  Procopio  et  aliis  sectis  Taboriensium  et  Orphan- 
orum  cum  aliis  eorum  capitaneis  et  eorum  complicibus  inter  quos  nullus 
notabilis  dominus  erat,  congregantes  de  civitatibus  et  villis  ad  xv  centena 
equitum  et  xvi  peditum  cum  curribus  et  pixidibus  eorum  versus  praedictos 
principes,  qui  ut  dicebant  plus  quam  lxxx  milia  equitum  et  tantum  vel  plus 
peditum  processerunt."  The  statement  that  no  territorial  nobles  took  part 
in  this  campaign  is  of  course  incorrect.  Palacky  conjectures  that  Barto§ek, 
a  bitter  enemy  of  the  Hussites,  insinuated  that  the  Utraquist  nobles  followed 
Prokop  reluctantly. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  211 

fusion,  almost  a  panic,  broke  out  among  them.     On  the  evening 
of  August  2  Henry  of  Plauen  returned  to  the  German  camp 
with  the  news  that  Prokop  and  the  whole  Hussite  army  were 
advancing  on  Stf  ibro  by  the  Plzeii  road.     The  German  generals 
ordered  their  troops  to  advance  on  the  following  morning,  and 
also  gave  the  order  that  all  the  tents  in  the  camps  should  be 
burnt.     This  caused  a  panic — as  incomprehensible  as  such 
panics  often  are;    it  began  among   the   wagoners,  but   soon 
spread  among  the  soldiers  also,  and  the  whole  army  fled  in 
disorder  in  the  direction  of  Tachov  before  even  a  single  shot 
had  been  fired.^    The  panic  was  so  great  that  many  of  the 
fliers  did  not  halt  even  at  Tachov,  but  continued  their  hurried 
and  inglorous  retreat  till  they  reached  the  frontiers  of  Germany. 
Abandoned  by  most  of  their  men  the  German  princes,  with  the 
cavalry  and  a  few  guns  which  they  had  retained,  retreated  to 
Tachov  on  the  evening  of  August  3.     The  flight  of  the  crusaders 
was  all  the  more  dishonourable  because  the  Hussites,  exhausted 
by  long  marches,  had  no  intention  of  attacking  immediately. 
The   crusaders,   therefore,   fled   on   that   day  without   being 
pursued,  as  the  chronicler  whom  I  have  just  quoted  wrote. ^ 

On  the  evening  of  August  3  the  German  princes  held  another 
council,  at  which  Cardinal  Henry  of  Winchester  presided. 
This  gave  great  offence  to  the  Germans,  as  the  previous  papal 
legates  who  had  accompanied  their  armies  had  never  claimed 
such  a  right.  The  Germans  may  not  have  known  that  Henry 
of  Beaufort  was  far  more  a  warrior  than  a  dignitary  of  the 
Church.  The  Elector  of  Brandenburg  was  specially  offended, 
as  he  was  considered  the  commander-in-chief,  and  as  he  had, 

1  The  chronicler  Andrew  of  Regensburg  writes  :  "  In  hac  vero  tertia  ex- 
peditione  [the  third  crusade]  quod  dolenter  scribo  nemine  persequente  de 
Bohemia  sic  festinarunt  ut  ad  literam  videretur  adimpletum  illud  Isaiae 
prophetae  :  *  Cuncti  principes  fugerunt.'  "  (Hoj9.er,  Geschtchtsschreiber,  etc., 
Vol.  II.  pp.  452-453.) 

*  Ebendorfer  of  Haselbach  writes  :  "  Dum  Misam  [Stf ibro]  .  .  .  Principes 
Electores  cum  ceteris  obsedissent  Capitaneo  Exercitus  Burgravio  Nurimbergenst 
ipsi  quoque  fugam  iniisent  nemine  persequente  "  [Chronicon  Austriacum 
Pez  Tom.  I.  p.  852).  It  will  be  noted  that  Ebendorfer  describes  the  retreat 
to  Tachov  in  the  same  words  as  Andrew  of  Regensburg. 


212  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

as  already  mentioned,  negotiated  with  the  Hussites  in  the 
name  of  the  German  princes.     The  council  of  war  decided  to 
oppose  the  advance  of  the  Bohemians,  and  made  a  last  attempt 
to   raise   the   spirits  of  the   despondent   crusaders.     It   was, 
however,  fruitless.     While  the  heralds  proclaimed  in  the  streets 
of  Tachov  that  the  army  would  attack  the  Bohemians  on  the 
following  morning,  an  incessant  stream  of  fugitives,  with  many 
provision-  and  ammunition-carts,   was  pouring  through  the 
town,  intent  on  reaching  the  Bavarian  frontier  as  quickly  as 
possible.     When,  therefore.  Cardinal  Beaufort  on  the  following 
morning  appeared  on  a  hill  near  Tachov  bearing  the  banner  of 
the  Church  and  exhorting  the  soldiers  to  defend  their  faith, 
he  must  have  known  that  this  step  would  prove  resultless, 
and  Dr.  Juritsch  is  hardly  too  severe  when  he  describes  the 
cardinal's  attempt  as  an  act  of  theatrical  display.     According 
to  a  German  contemporary  ballad,  the  young  Duke  of  Saxony 
offered  to  lead  his  troops  against  the  Hussites,  while  Frederick 
of  Brandenburg  rightly  foresaw  that  under  the  circumstances 
any  attempt  to  encounter  the   Hussites  would  result  in  a 
disaster  worse  than  that  at  tJsti  had  been.     It  is  probable 
that  a  very  angry  dispute  between  the  two  princes  arose,  and 
the  English  cardinal,  perhaps  to  prove  his  impartiality,  en- 
trusted the  papal  standard  to  neither  of  them,  but  to  the 
Count  Palatine  John  of  Neumarkt,  requesting  him  to  lead  the 
army  against  the  Hussites.     This  caused  further  trouble,  as 
the  German  princes  disputed  the  right  of  an  English  ecclesiastic 
to   appoint   the  leader  of  their  armies.     This  new  quarrel, 
almost  in  view  of  the  enemy,  seems  not  unjustifiably  to  have 
irritated  the  cardinal.     He  threw  the  banner  to  the  ground 
before  the  German,  and  expressed  himself    in    very  strong 
language.^    This  dispute  seems  to  have  continued  up  to  the 
moment  when  the  Bohemian  cavalry  was  approaching.     The 
Hussites  marched  with  their  usual  rapidity,  and  rested  for  a 

*  "  Cardinalis  .  .  .  vexilla  distraxit  et  in   terram   ante  ipsos  Teutonicos 
projecit  et  ipsos  non  modice  maledixit  "  {Bartosek  of  Drahonic,  p.  596). 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  213 

short  time  near  Stfibro  in  the  quarters  where  the  crusaders 
had  encamped  on  the  previous  night.  The  result  of  the  ap- 
proach of  the  enemies  was  immediate,  and  a  general  stampede 
began,  in  which  the  cardinal  was  obliged  to  join.  The  Elector 
of  Brandenburg  only  halted  when  he  had  reached  the  little 
town  of  Wunsiedel  in  Bavaria.  The  Hussites  on  this  occasion 
followed  in  hot  pursuit  and  massacred  a  very  large  number 
of  the  Germans  during  their  flight  through  the  mountain- 
passes  which  here  divide  Bavaria  from  Bohemia.  If  we  include 
the  wagoners,  camp-followers,  and  others  who  followed  the 
mediaeval  armies  in  large  crowds,  it  can  be  stated  that  the 
Germans  killed  during  this  flight  numbered  about  100,000 
men;  this — the  figure  given  by  the  contemporary  chroniclers 
— ^is  probably  but  slightly,  if  at  all,  exaggerated.  A  certain 
number  of  Germans  and  some  Bohemian  Catholics,  who  had 
found  the  roads  blocked  by  the  enormous  crowds  of  fugitives 
who  were  hurrying  in  the  direction  of  the  mountain-passes, 
took  refuge  in  the  city  of  Tachov,  which  was  strongly  fortified 
according  to  the  ideas  of  that  time.  With  their  usual  rapidity 
the  Bohemians  began  immediately  to  bombard  the  city.  The 
siege  began  on  August  5,  was  carried  out  with  great  energy, 
and  within  a  week  the  Bohemian  artillery  had  set  fire  to 
considerable  parts  of  the  town,  and  the  Hussites  had  also 
succeeded  in  undermining  the  city  walls.  Prolonged  street- 
fighting  took  place  after  they  penetrated  within  the  city  walls 
on  August  II.  Some  of  the  defenders  finally  took  refuge  in 
the  castle,  but  they  were  also  obliged  to  surrender  on  the 
14th  from  want  of  provisions.  The  Bohemians  here  also 
showed  that  comparative  humanity  which  distinguished  them 
from  their  German  antagonists.  The  garrisons  of  the  town 
and  castle  were  led  off  as  prisoners,  and  the  woman  and 
children — according  to  the  usual  custom  of  the  Hussites — 
remained    unharmed.^    In    less    than    a    month    after    their 

*  "  Mulieribus  tamen  et  parvulis,  qui  primes  impetus  evaserant  parcentes, 
eos  autem  qui  de  exercitu  Katholicorum  ibi  manserant,  ex  quibus  quamplures 


214  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

departure  from  Prague  Prokop  the  Great  and  his  victorious 
army  returned  to  the  capital  of  Bohemia.  By  no  means 
intoxicated  by  their  brilhant  successes,  the  Bohemians  pro- 
posed to  their  enemies  to  enter  into  fresh  negotiations,  which 
were  to  take  the  customary  but  generally  ineffectual  form  of 
a  religious  disputation.  I  shall  again  refer  to  these  delibera- 
tions in  the  next  chapter. 

It  will,  I  think,  appear  clearly  from  this  account  that  the 
third  crusade,  as  indeed  all  the  crusades  against  Bohemia, 
was  doomed  to  failure  from  its  beginning.  It  is  evident  that 
the  German  princes,  with  the  exception  of  those  of  Austria 
and  Saxony,  countries  which  always  had  much  intercourse 
with  Bohemia,  were  far  more  absorbed  in  their  own  quarrels 
and  rivalries  than  in  the  affairs  of  Bohemia.  The  Germans 
were  at  first  inclined  to  underrate  the  importance  of  the  Hussite 
movement.  When  bitter  experience  taught  them  that  this 
supposition  was  erroneous  they,  with  the  superstition  so 
characteristic  of  that  age,  took  refuge  in  the  idea  that  the 
Hussites  were  superhuman  beings  sent  by  a  demoniacal  power 
to  chastise  mankind,  and  that  it  was  therefore  hopeless  to 
attempt  to  resist  them.  Another  circumstance  which  con- 
tributed largely  to  the  failure  of  these  expeditions  was  the 
incapacity  and  mutual  distrust  of  the  generals.  King  Sigis- 
mund  was  above  all  things  desirous  to  be  recognised  by  the 
Bohemians  as  their  King,  and  then  to  obtain  their  aid  in  his 
incessant  wars  against  the  Turks.  He  was  in  some  respects 
no  very  strict  upholder  of  the  claims  of  the  Church  of  Rome, 
and  it  is  noteworthy  that  while  bitterly  opposing  the  articles 
of  Prague,  which  demanded  the  poverty  of  the  clergy,  he 
himself  acted  in  accordance  with  these  articles  by  largely 
distributing    Church   lands    among   those    members    of     the 


ad  custodiam  civitatis  positi  erant  et  alios  qui  ad  conservandum  se  ad  castrum 
ibidem  confugerant  numero  plus  quam  mcccc,  viros  exulis  omnibus  quae 
habebant  in  captivitatem  ducunt "  ("  Andrew  of  Regensburg,"  Hotler, 
Geschichtsschreiber,  Vol.  II.  p.  454). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  215 

Bohemian  nobility  who  had  remained  faithful  to  his  cause. 
The  fact  that  on  many  other  occasions  Sigismund  appeared 
as  very  subservient  to  the  Church  of  Rome  may  be  attributed 
to  conscientious  remorse  for  his  scandalous  private  life,  the 
record  of  which  it  is  well  to  leave  to  those  who  wrote  in  Latin. 
With  regard  to  the  Elector  Frederick  of  Brandenburg,  the 
official  leader  of  the  third  crusade,  it  is  very  difficult  to  express 
a  positive  opinion.  Dr.  Juritsch  recently,  in  his  study  which 
I  have  frequently  quoted,  practically  accuses  the  Elector  of 
Brandenburg  of  treachery.  It  has  already  been  mentioned 
that  the  elector  had  for  some  time  been  on  bad  terms  with 
King  Sigismund.  He  had  entered  into  an  alliance  with 
Poland  at  a  moment  when  the  rulers  of  that  country  were 
greatly  exasperated  against  Sigismund  because  of  the  judgment, 
favourable  to  the  Teutonic  order,  which  he  pronounced  at  the 
meeting  of  the  imperial  diet  at  Breslau  in  1420.  Frederick 
himself  had  on  several  occasions  been  involved  in  quarrels 
with  that  order,  and  it  appears  clear  from  his  letters  that 
his  policy  had  what  would  now  be  called  an  *'  anti-clerical 
character."  It  should  also  be  mentioned  here  that  in  1430 
Margrave  Frederick  made  an  agreement  with  Prokop  the 
Great  according  to  which  papal  and  Utraquist  divines  were 
to  meet  at  Niirnberg  and  discuss  the  question  whether  the 
articles  of  Prague  could  be  accepted  by  the  Catholic  Church. 
It  is  therefore  certain  that  the  Elector  Frederick  maintained 
a  conciliatory  attitude  and  favoured  a  peaceful  agreement 
with  the  national  Church  of  Bohemia;  this  feeling  naturally 
became  stronger  when  the  elector  observed  the  incapacity  of 
the  German  leaders,  the  discord  among  the  princes  and  the 
complete  absence  of  all  discipline  among  the  soldiers.  German 
writers  have,  however,  gone  much  further,  and  have  accused 
Frederick  of  having  treacherously  attempted  to  obtain  the 
Bohemian  crown.  I  have  already  alluded  to  this  conjecture, 
which  is  at  least  very  improbable.  In  distinction  from  most 
of  the  other  German  princes,  Frederick  was  at  that  period 


2i6  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

well  informed  with  regard  to  the  state  of  affairs  in  Bohemia. 
He  employed  secret  agents  in  Prague,  from  whom  he  received 
lengthy  reports. ^  He  must  have  known  through  these  men 
how  large  a  part  of  the  Bohemian  people  was  then  opposed  to 
all  monarchical  rule,  and  what  great  difficulties  even  Korybu- 
tovic,  a  Slavic  prince  who  had  accepted  the  articles  of  Prague, 
encountered  when  he  attempted  to  obtain  the  Bohemian 
crown.  Frederick  must  also  have  known  through  his  agents 
how  strong  the  anti-German  feeling  then  was  in  Bohemia; 
nor  could  he  be  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  no  assistance  could 
be  expected  from  the  nobles  "  sub  una,"  whose  dynastic 
affection  for  Sigismund  was  as  great  as  their  devotion  to 
Rome.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  extreme  adherents, 
both  of  the  Roman  Church  and  of  Hussitism,  have  in  their 
writings  a  tendency  to  accuse  of  treachery  all  moderate  men 
who  desired  a  peaceful  agreement  and  were  not  carried  away 
by  unreasoning  fanaticism. 

About  this  time  the  career  of  Prince  Korybutovi^  came  to 
an  end  in  Bohemia — at  least  for  a  time.  It  is  evident  that 
the  Lithuanian  prince,  who  had  certainly  succeeded  in  re- 
establishing order  in  Bohemia  to  a  certain  extent,  and  who 
had  been  imprisoned  on  the  strength  of  very  doubtful  accusa- 
tions, still  had  many  adherents  in  Bohemia,  not  only  among 
the  Utraquist  nobles,  but  also  among  the  citizens  of  Prague. 
One  of  the  most  prominent  adherents  of  KorybutoviC,  Lord 
Hynek  of  Kolstyn,  planned  an  attack  on  Prague.  He  hoped 
in  this  fashion  to  force  the  city  magistrates  to  reveal  the  spot 
in  which  they  had  imprisoned  the  Lithuanian  prince,  and  to 
liberate  him.  The  Utraquist  nobles,  no  doubt,  intended  also 
to  expel  the  magistrates  and  to  appoint  new  ones  who  were 
favourable  to  Korybutovi^.  Kolin,  a  city  which,  after  the 
imprisonment  of  Korybutovi(^,  had  thrown  off  its  allegiance 
to  Prague,  became  the  centre  of  the  Utraquist  nobles  who  had 

^  Some  of  these  reports  are  printed  in  Bezold,  Konig  Sigmund  unddie  Reichs- 
kriege  gegen  die  Hussiten. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  217 

entered  into  this  plan.  They  had  numerous  partisans  in 
Prague,  among  whom  were  John  Rak,  chief  judge  of  the  old 
town,  and  several  councillors,  both  of  the  old  and  new  towns. 
The  accounts  of  this  attempt  to  liberate  KorybutoviC  are  very 
contradictory,  but  it  seems  probable  that  the  plan  was  betrayed 
to  the  town-councillors  by  Lord  William  Kostka,  one  of  the 
Utraquist  nobles;  finding  less  support  among  the  Hussites 
than  they  had  hoped  the  Utraquist  nobles  had  confided 
their  plan  to  some  of  the  lords  *'  sub  una."  The  latter  then 
proposed  that  as  soon  as  Prague  had  been  captured  Sigismund 
of  Hungary  should  be  proclaimed  king.  This  was,  of  course, 
opposed  by  the  Utraquist  nobles,  who  were  faithful  to  the 
articles  of  Prague.  When  the  nobles  arrived  at  the  city 
gates  on  September  6  they  found  them  open,  but  as  soon  as  they 
reached  the  market-place  they  were  attacked  by  large  numbers 
of  townsmen.  As  their  force  consisted  only  of  600  horsemen 
resistance  was  hopeless,  and  they  could  only  attempt  to  escape. 
Some  succeeded  in  doing  this,  but  many  were  made  prisoners, 
and  some  of  them  were  afterwards  decapitated. 

Though  this  attempt  had  completely  failed  it  resulted  in 
the  liberation  of  Prince  Korybutovic.  The  leaders  of  the 
advanced  party  in  Prague,  thinking  his  presence  in  Bohemia 
more  dangerous  to  them  than  his  absence,  caused  him  to  be 
liberated  on  September  9  and  conducted  under  escort  across 
the  Bohemian  frontier. 


CHAPTER  VI 

It  is  a  strong  proof  how  great  the  desire  for  peace  had 
already  become  in  Bohemia,  that  during  the  last  days  of  the 
eventful  year  1427  a  religious  disputation  should  have  taken 
place,  as  had  been  settled  earlier  in  the  year.  The  divines  of 
both  Churches  met  at  2ebrak  on  December  29.  Though  Pope 
Martin,  maintaining  his  unvaried  standpoint,  had  forbidden 
this  disputation,  the  Cardinal  of  Winchester  had,  before  he 
had  received  notice  of  the  papal  prohibition,  appointed  as 
representatives  of  the  Church  of  Rome  two  Catholic  priests 
who  had  been  recommended  to  him  by  the  lords  **  sub  una/' 
These  men,  Simon  of  Tisnov  and  Prokop  ^  of  Kladrub,  had  for 
a  time  belonged  to  the  Utraquist  Church,  and  had  lectured  at 
the  university  of  Prague.  The  choice  was  undoubtedly  a  good 
one;  these  priests  were  acquainted  with  the  teaching  of  the 
university  of  Prague  and  were  not  inclined  to  confuse  it  with 
the  ravings  of  fanatics  and  visionaries,  as  former  representa- 
tives of  Rome  had  done  on  previous  occasions,  either  from 
ignorance  or  from  ill  will.  Unfortunately  the  disputation 
remained  resultless.  A  very  futile  discussion  arose  as  to 
which  party  should  open  the  debate.  The  English  Hussite, 
Peter  Payne,  was  one  of  the  representatives  of  Tdbor,  and 
we  may  conjecture  that  he  here  also  displayed  that  rancour 
which  we  so  often  find  in  exiles.  The  discussion  appears  not 
to  have  got  beyond  the  preliminary  question  mentioned 
above,  and  the  conference  broke  up  without  any  result.  The 
truce  previously  concluded  was,  however,  confirmed,  and  the 
Bohemians  were  thus  enabled  to  devote  their  attention  to 

*  He  must,  of  course,  not  be  confounded  with  Prokop  the  Great,  or  Prokop 
the  Lesser. 

218 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  219 

their  foreign  enemies  exclusively.  Prokop  now  extensively 
adopted  that  system  of  assuming  the  offensive  which  charac- 
terised the  Bohemians  during  the  last  years  of  the  war. 
Probably  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1428  the  united  armies 
of  the  Praguers  under  John  Tovacovsky,  the  T^borites  under 
Prokop  the  Great,  and  the  Orphans  under  Prokupek  (Prokop 
the  Lesser),  who  now  first  became  widely  known,  entered 
Moravia  and  then  marched  to  Hungary.  The  Bohemians 
evidently  followed  the  example  of  2izka,  who  some  time 
previously  had  attempted  to  subdue  Sigismund  by  invading 
his  own  kingdom.  We  have  very  little  information  concerning 
this  new  Bohemian  invasion  of  Hungary.  Some  writers,  indeed, 
state  that  no  battles  or  sieges  occurred,  and  that  Prokop's 
principal  purpose  was  to  devastate  Hungary,  thus  rendering 
an  invasion  of  Bohemia  from  that  direction  more  difficult. 
Marching  by  way  of  Skalice  and  Senice  the  Hussites  reached 
the  Danube  at  Pressburg;  they  occupied,  the  suburbs,  but 
were  unable  to  obtain  possession  of  the  strongly  fortified  town 
and  citadel.  For  reasons  not  known  to  us  they  then  retired 
to  Moravia  by  way  of  Trnova  (T5n:nau),i  after  having  burnt 
down  the  suburbs  of  Pressburg.  They  reached  the  Moravian 
frontier  at  Uhersky  Brod,  from  where  they  had  started  on 
their  not  very  successful  expedition  into  Hungary. 

After  a  short  respite  the  Bohemians  determined  to  invade 
Silesia.  That  country  had  from  the  beginning  of  the  war 
been  intensely  hostile  to  the  Bohemian  national  cause,  and 
the  incessant  raids  of  the  Silesians,  which  generally  took  place 
at  the  moment  when  the  Bohemians  were  occupied  in  opposing 
the  main  armies  of  the  Germans,  greatly  incensed  the  people. 
Prokop  the   Great   again  assumed   command  of  the  united 

1  Bartosek  of  Drahonic  writes  {p.  598  of  Professor  GoU's  edition  :  **  [The 
Hussites]  civitatem  Prespurk  suburbium  excremaverunt,  deinde  ante 
Wiennam  processerunt,  sed  illuc  per  Danubium  venire  non  valentes  ex  ista 
parte  in  Austria  per  voraginem  ignis  magnum  monumentum  fecerunt."  It 
may  be  considered  as  certain  that  this  statement,  corroborated  by  no  other 
contemporary  writer,  is  untrue. 


220  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Utraquist  armies,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  among 
those  who  joined  his  standards  were  the  Pohsh^  prince,  Frederick 
of  Ostroh,  who  had  been  chamberlain  of  Prince  KorybutoviC 
during  his  residence  in  Prague,  and  the  Pohsh  nobleman 
Dobeslav  Puchala.  The  Bohemians  arrived  at  the  frontier 
of  the  Silesian  duchy  of  Troppau  ^  probably  at  the  end  of 
February  1428.  It  has  already  been  noted  that  the  longer 
the  Hussite  wars  continued  the  greater  the  terror  became 
which  their  approach  caused  in  the  neighbouring  German 
lands.  This  again  proved  true  on  the  occasion  of  this  invasion 
of  Silesia.  As  soon  as  the  Bohemians  had  crossed  the  frontier 
Venceslas,  eldest  son  of  the  Duke  of  Troppau,  appeared  in 
their  camp.  He  came  there  to  conclude  an  agreement  with 
the  Bohemians,  according  to  which  several  towns  in  the  duchy 
of  Troppau,  which  had  been  entrusted  to  him  by  his  father, 
should,  on  payment  of  a  sum  of  money,  remain  unmolested. 
The  prince  himself  proclaimed  his  neutrality.  His  father,  the 
old  duke,  sought  refuge  in  the  city  of  Troppau,  which  suc- 
cessfully repulsed  the  attacks  of  the  Hussites.  It  was  their 
custom  during  their  offensive  campaigns  not  to  allow  them- 
selves to  be  delayed  by  lengthy  sieges,  and  they  therefore 
soon  abandoned  their  attempt  to  obtain  possession  of  the 
capital  of  the  duchy  of  Troppau.  They  continued  their 
advance  through  Silesia,  and  after  plundering  several  small 
cities  arrived  before  the  city  of  Ober-Glogau  in  the  duchy  of 
Oppeln.  This  was  the  first  Silesian  town  which  the  Bohemians 
took  by  storm,  but  the  resistance  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  very  determined.  This  can  perhaps  be  accounted  for 
by  the  fact  that  the  town  of  Ober-Glogau  had  been  made  over 
by  the  duke  to  his  son  Bolko.  This  prince  is  stated  to  have 
been  educated  at  the  Utraquist  university  of  Prague,  and  it 

^  Or  rather  Ruthenian ;  the  chroniclers  of  the  fifteenth  century  took  httle 
notice  of  these  distinctions  that  have  become  so  important  in  the  present  day. 

*  Very  valuable  information  concerning  this  invasion  of  Silesia  is  con- 
tained in  the  so-called  "  Strehlener  Fragment  "  (published  in  Griinhagen's 
Geschichtsquellen,  etc.,  pp.  155-158). 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  221 

is  certain  that  his  sympathies  were  on  the  side  of  the  Hussites. 
Immediately  after  the  surrender  of  Ober-Glogau  he  proceeded 
to  the  Bohemian  camp  and  concluded  a  separate  treaty  of 
peace  with  them.  Though  Bolko  was  the  only  Silesian  prince 
who  openly  sided  with  the  Hussites,  whose  armies  he  joined 
during  the  last  campaigns  of  the  war,  it  is  certain  that  sym- 
pathy with  the  Hussites  was  widespread  in  Silesia.  German 
writers  have  even  attributed  the  fact  that  Martin  Luther's 
Reformation  found  early  adherents  in  Silesia  to  the  Utraquist 
traditions  that  still  lingered  among  the  people. 

The  Bohemians  were,  however,  also  to  meet  with  bitter 
enemies  in  Silesia.  They  now  invaded  the  lands  of  Bishop 
Conrad  of  Breslau,  one  of  the  most  determined  opponents  of 
the  heretics.  It  was  mainly  through  his  influence  that  the 
Silesians  had  undertaken  their  frequent  incursions  into  the 
Bohemian  district  of  Kralove  Hradec.  They  had  on  these 
occasions  given  proof  of  cruelty  and  ferocity  which  far  sur- 
passed that  of  the  Bohemians,  who  were  now  seeking  revenge. 
The  nationalists,  indeed,  now  plundered  Silesia  mercilessly,  and 
destroyed  many  towns  and  villages  in  a  fashion  which  the 
modern  humanitarian  would  severely  condemn.  They,  how- 
ever, except  on  rare  occasions,  spared  the  lives  of  the  women 
and  children,  and  indeed  often  received  soldiers  as  prisoners. 
The  Silesian  Romanists,  on  the  other  hand,  deliberately  mas- 
sacred, and,  as  far  as  it  was  in  their  power,  exterminated  the 
whole  Slavic  population  of  the  Bohemian  frontier  districts 
which  they  invaded.  The  Bishop  of  Breslau  had  proceeded  to 
Neisse,  one  of  the  principal  cities  in  his  dominions,  where  he 
was  joined  by  a  large  part  of  the  Silesian  nobility  and  by 
some  of  the  dukes  who  ruled  over  the  many  duchies  into 
which  Silesia  was  then  divided.  The  Silesians  chose  as  their 
leader  the  Bohemian  lord  **  sub  una  "  Puta  of  Castolovice, 
captain  of  the  county  of  Glatz,i  who,  as  an  old  antagonist  of 

^  up  to  the  time  of  Frederick  the  Great  the  county  of  Glatz  formed  an 
immediate  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  did  not  form  part  of  Silesia. 


222  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

the  Hussites,  was  supposed  to  have  become  acquainted  with 
their  new  system  of  warfare.  The  Bishop  of  Breslau  and  his 
aUies  had  assembled  a  vast  force,  and  had  pressed  into  their 
service  a  large  number  of  peasants  from  the  surrounding 
country.  The  extraordinary  rapidity  of  the  movements  of 
the  Bohemians  here  again  assured  their  success.  They 
arrived  before  Neisse  quite  unexpectedly,  and  immediately 
attacked  the  Germans,  whose  resistance  was  very  slight.  The 
peasants,  who  had  been  hurriedly  armed,  immediately  fled,  and 
the  bishop  only  with  difficulty  found  a  refuge  within  the 
fortifications  of  Neisse.  Following  the  Germans  rapidly,  the 
Bohemians  penetrated  into  the  suburbs  of  the  city,  which 
they  burned  down.  Though  the  Germans  had  offered  but 
little  resistance,  their  loss  in  this  battle  amounted  to  about 
2000  men.  Neisse  itself  was  not  taken,  in  consequence  of  its 
brave  defence  by  Puta  of  Castolovice,  and,  it  may  be  added, 
because  it  was  the  habit  of  the  Hussites  not  to  delay  their 
advance  by  prolonged  sieges  of  fortified  towns.  From  Neisse 
the  Bohemians  immediately  marched  on  Brieg,  after  receiving 
the  submission  of  several  Silesian  princes  and  cities.  The 
town  of  Brieg,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Oder,  was  then 
one  of  the  most  important  cities  of  Silesia.  It  belonged  to 
Duke  Louis  of  Liegnitz-Brieg,  who  at  first  decided  to  resist 
the  advance  of  the  Bohemians,  and  assembled  a  large  number 
of  troops.  When,  however,  the  news  of  the  defeat  at  Neisse 
reached  Brieg,  the  duke,  changing  his  plans,  hastily  crossed 
the  Oder  and  with  his  knights  retired  to  his  other  duchy  of 
Liegnitz.  The  town  of  Brieg  was  then  immediately  occupied 
by  the  Bohemians,  who  met  with  no  resistance.  The  spiritless 
abandonment  of  Brieg — then  one  of  the  strongest  fortified 
cities  in  Silesia,  and  the  largest  which  the  Hussites  captured  in 
that  country — caused  great  sensation,  not  only  in  Silesia,  but 
also  in  the  neighbouring  countries.  One  of  the  first  to  receive 
the  news  was  Ladislas,  King  of  Poland.  As  has  already  been 
mentioned,  his  policy  during  the   Hussite  wars  was  a   v^ery 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  223 

inconstant  one.  The  Germans  had,  indeed,  on  several  occasions 
accused  him  of  secretly  favouring  the  projects  of  his  nephew. 
Prince  KorybutoviC,  who  was  a  staunch  Utraquist.  The  King 
of  Poland  was  therefore  doubtlessly  not  reluctant  to  address 
severe  and  well-deserved  reproaches  to  the  Germans.  In  a 
letter  to  one  of  the  Silesian  princes,  Duke  Henry  Kantner 
of  Oels,  he  expressed  his  surprise  that  the  Silesians,  though 
they  had  ample  means  of  defence,  should  have  offered  so 
slight  a  resistance,  and  that  they  should  have  abandoned 
cities  such  as  Ober-Glogau,  flying  from  them  without  necessity. ^ 
From  Brieg  the  Bohemian  armies,  following  the  course  of 
the  Oder,  marched  in  the  direction  of  Breslau.  The  rulers 
of  the  different  small  duchies  into  which  Silesia  was  then 
divided  attempted  no  resistance,  but  concluded  treaties  with 
the  Bohemians  according  to  which  they  agreed  to  pay  subsidies 
to  them  and  to  observe  in  future  strict  neutrality  between 
the  contending  parties.  These  treaties  were  naturally  kept 
very  secret,  and,  as  Dr.  Grunhagen  writes,^  no  copy  of  any 
one  of  them  has  been  preserved.  Though  the  Bohemian 
horsemen  arrived  within  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  Breslau 
they  made  no  attempt  to  attack  the  city,  and  shortly  after- 
wards retired  to  the  county  of  Glatz.     It  was  not  their  wish 

^  "  Porro  vero  admiramur  vehementer  de  hominibus  vestris  et  presertim 
nobilibus  quos  fama  bellicos  et  ad  bella  doctos  et  audaces  ubique  in  orbe 
terrarum  perstrepuit,  qualiter  circa  defensionem  dominorum  suorum  et  fame 
sue  dilatationem  ampliorem  tam  desides  et  leves  se  ostenderunt  et  ubi  resistere 
potuerunt,  cur  fuerunt  negligentes  ?  Habentes  enim  loca,  castra  et  civitates 
tam  munita  et  fortia,  potuerunt  hostes  a  se  repellere,  sed  in  ipsis  nee  minima 
resistentia  est  reperta.  Ecce  quomodo  Glogoviam  [Ober-Glogau]  quomodo 
Bregam  civitates  ubi  populum  habuerunt  numerosum  se  juvantem  absque 
necessitate  et  gravi  offensa  hostibus  reliquerunt  et  soli  se  in  fugam  converterunt, 
Adhuc  muri  et  castrorum  presidia  construuntur  ut  hostibus  resistatur  ex 
eisdem  et  periculis  et  incommodis  non  parcatur.  Nam  bona  et  virilis  nobilium 
conditio  sub  sepibus  defendere  se  consuevit  et  castra  sepe  mulienim  vetularum 
fragilitate  defensa  audivimus.  Si  enim  cum  ipsis  campum  belli  portare  grave 
fuisset  saltem  furit  circa  fiumina  et  castra  resistendum.  Re  vera  qua  talis 
concussit  pusillanimitas  ut  suorum  dominorum  et  principum  defensioni  non 
intenderunt  et  tot  dampna  fieri  permiserunt  non  absque  pudore  reputemus." 
(This  interesting  letter  is  published  by  Grunhagen,  Geschichtsquellen  der 
Hussitenkriege,  pp.  60-61.) 

*  Die  Hussitenkdmpfe  der  Schlesier,  p.  140. 


224  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

to  obtain  permanent  possession  of  foreign  countries,  as  they 
well  knew  that  such  an  attempt  would  weaken  them  when 
they  were  called  on  to  repel  the  ever-recurring  German  in- 
vasions of  Bohemia.  They  determined,  however,  to  retain 
in  their  possession  certain  strongholds  which  would  be  useful 
to  them  for  the  purpose  of  securing  their  communications, 
should  they  again  be  obliged  to  invade  Silesia.  They  therefore 
besieged  the  castle  of  Landfried,  or,  as  it  was  called  in  Bohemia, 
Homola,  which  overlooks  the  small  town  of  Reinerz.^  The 
castle  was  captured  after  a  somewhat  prolonged  siege.  It  is, 
however,  certain  that  in  July  it  was  already  in  the  hands  of 
the  Bohemians,  who  left  here  a  garrison  under  Peter  Polak  of 
Volfina.  Part  of  the  nationalist  army  then  returned  from 
Reinerz  to  their  country  by  way  of  the  neighbouring  pass  of 
Nachod,  while  other  detachments  continued  to  ravage  Silesia. 
They  failed  in  their  attempt  to  obtain  possession  of  the  town 
of  Glatz,  which  has  a  naturally  strong  position  and  was  strongly 
fortified  in  accordance  with  the  then  general  custom.  They 
then  marched  to  Reichenbach,  and  without  meeting  with  any 
resistance  occupied  the  neighbouring  castle  of  Zobten,  situated 
on  a  height  and  overlooking  a  vast  expanse  of  country.  The 
Bohemians  here  also  left  a  garrison,  which  was  commanded  by 
Lord  Kolda  of  2ampach.  The  castle  was,  however,  retaken 
by  the  Germans  later  in  the  year,  but  2ampach  and  his  soldiers 
were  allowed  to  return  to  Bohemia. 

It  is  beyond  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  give  a  detailed 
account  of  the  various  marches  and  counter-marches  of  the 
Hussite  armies  in  Silesia  during  the  latter  part  of  the  year 
1428  and  during  the  following  year.  As  the  Silesians  had,  in 
the  early  part  of  the  war,  annually  raided  the  border  districts 
of  Bohemia,  so  the  Hussites  now  constantly  invaded  Silesia 
and  obtained  there  ammunition,  provisions,  and  other  necessary 
articles.     The  frontiers  of  the  neighbouring  lands  had  so  long 

1  Reinerz  has  now  become  a  small  but  fashionable  watering-place. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  225 

been  closed  to  the  Bohemians — all  intercourse  with  the  Hussites 
had  been  forbidden  under  penalty  of  excommunication — that 
the  country  would  have  been  thoroughly  exhausted  had  it  not 
obtained  supplies  from  Silesia.  That  country  also  now  became 
a  great  recruiting-ground  for  the  Hussite  armies.  In  conse- 
quence of  the  necessities  of  agriculture  it  was  impossible  to 
keep  the  whole  peasantry  constantly  under  arms.  Their 
places  were  gradually  taken  by  other,  not  always  desirable, 
recruits.  Many  Poles  and  Lithuanians,  attracted  by  the 
example  of  Prince  Korybutovic,  as  well  as  Ruthenians,  now 
began  to  flock  to  the  Bohemian  standards.  Many  of  these 
men — particularly  the  Ruthenians,  who  belonged  themselves 
to  a  Utraquist  Church — were  genuinely  zealous  for  the  cause 
of  Utraquism,  and  most  of  them,  no  doubt,  possessed  the  innate 
Slavic  hatred  of  the  Teuton.  Yet  many  of  the  new  recruits 
were  influenced  by  other  motives.  In  consequence  of  the 
almost  incessant  warfare  on  the  borders  of  Poland,  Lithuania, 
Russia,  and  the  dominions  of  the  Teutonic  order,  these  lands 
swarmed  with  mercenaries,  always  ready  to  take  part  in  any 
warlike  enterprise.  Such  men  were  mainly  attracted  by  the 
democratic  character  of  the  Hussite  armies,  in  which  the  rich 
spoils  were  distributed  with  the  strictest  impartiality.  It  is 
certain  that  in  consequence  of  the  admission  of  these  new 
elements  the  Bohemian  armies  deteriorated  towards  the  end 
of  the  war. 

When  the  advanced  party  among  the  Hussites  determined 
to  drive  Prince  Korybutovic  from  Bohemia  they  were  certainly 
unaware  of  the  fact  that  they  were  rendering  the  greatest 
service  to  King  Sigismund.  Korybutovic  had  undoubtedly  been 
a  very  dangerous  rival  to  the  claimant  to  the  Bohemian  throne ; 
he  had  accepted  the  articles  of  Prague,  and  he  belonged  to 
the  Slavic  race.  After  his  departure  some  of  those  who  were 
strongly  attached  to  the  monarchical  principle  began  again  to 
turn  their  attention  to  Sigismund.  Fourteen  years  had  elapsed 
Q 


226  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

since  the  tragedy  of  Constance.  2izka  and  many  others  who 
considered  that  Sigismund's  participation  in  the  execution  of 
Hus  excluded  him  for  ever  from  the  Bohemian  throne  were 
dead.  Though  Sigismund  was  at  heart  a  fervent  and  even 
bigoted  adherent  of  the  Roman  Church  his  innate  falseness 
made  it  easy  for  him  to  express  occasionally  opinions  which 
could  be  interpreted  in  a  very  different  sense.  Even  at  the 
time  of  the  Council  of  Basel  he  stated  that  he  was  strongly 
opposed  to  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy,  and  it  will  be  remembered 
that  during  the  siege  of  Prague  the  Germans  suspected  Sigis- 
mund of  secretly  favouring  their  enemies. 

It  was  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Bohemian  territorial  nobles. 
Lord  Menhard  of  Jindfichfiv  Hradec  (in  German,  Neuhaus); 
who  undertook  the  difficult  task  of  mediating  between  King 
Sigismund  and  the  Utraquists.  Menhard's  career  had  been 
a  somewhat  chequered  one.  He  was  the  son  of  John  of 
Jindfichuv  Hradec,  who  had  been  one  of  the  first  Bohemian 
nobles  to  adopt  the  Utraquist  teaching,  but  who  had  died  in 
1417,  before  the  beginning  of  the  war.  Menhard  had  in  1421 
taken  up  arms  against  2izka,  by  whom  he  was  made  prisoner 
and  detained  for  some  time  at  the  castle  of  Pfibenic.  After 
his  liberation  he  again  opposed  the  national  party,  but  was 
defeated  at  Kamenic  in  1425.  Henceforth  he  joined  the 
Utraquists,  as  whose  ally  he  took  part  in  the  campaigns  of 
Stfibro  and  Tachov.  He  now  appears  for  a  time  as  a  genuine 
defender  of  the  articles  of  Prague,  but  he  continued  to  be  a 
strong  monarchist,  and  also  endeavoured  to  restore  the  power 
of  the  Bohemian  nobility,  which  had  greatly  declined  since 
the  departure  of  Korybutovic.  His  well-known  prudence  and 
caution  caused  him  to  become  the  recognised  leader  of  the 
Utraquist  nobility.^  Menhard  found  a  favourable  occasion 
for  his  attempted  mediation  when  Prokop  the  Great,  leaving 
the  castle  of  Bechin,  undertook  a  new  invasion  of  Austria. 
Menhard  of  Jindfichfiv  Hradec,  accompanied  by  other  nobles 

*  Palacky,  Geschichte  von  Bohmen,  Vol.  II.  ii.  p.  473  of  German  edition. 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  227 

of  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  met  him  on  his  march  ^  and  suggested 
to  him  that  he  should,  for  the  purpose  of  a  general  pacification, 
have  an  interview  with  King  Sigismund,  who  was  then  residing 
at  Pressburg  in  Hungary,  not  far  from  the  frontiers  of  Moravia. 
It  appears  probable  that  peace  negotiations  had  already  begun 
some  time  previously,  but  we  have  little  information  on  this 
subject. 

It  is  certain  that  Prokop  did  not  hesitate  to  accept  the 
invitation  as  soon  as  his  safety  and  that  of  his  companions 
had  been  assured  by  means  of  hostages;  for  the  treachery 
once  committed  against  Hus  was  still  in  the  minds  of  many. 
With  him  Menhard,  several  Bohemian  nobles  and  knights, 
representatives  of  the  cities  of  Prague,  and  a  few  divines — 
among  whom  was  the  English  Hussite,  Peter  Payne — rode  to 
Pressburg.  They  arrived  there  on  April  4,  1429.  Perhaps  to 
overawe  the  Bohemian  envoys,  Sigismund  had  invited  many 
German  princes  to  Pressburg  at  this  moment.  Among  those 
present  were  Sigismund's  son-in-law,  Albrecht  of  Austria, 
Wilham,  Duke  of  Bavaria,  several  Silesian  princes,  and  the 
principal  nobles  "  sub  una,"  among  whom  it  is  sufficient  to 
mention  Ulrich  of  Rosenburg,  Puta  of  Castolovice,  and  Hanus 
of  Kolowrat.  A  large  number  of  ecclesiastical  dignitaries  had 
also  been  summoned  to  Pressburg.  Bishop  Conrad  of  Breslau, 
the  "  iron  "  Bishop  John,  formerly  of  Litomysle,  now  of 
Olomouc,  Hus's  bitterest  enemy,  and  the  Archbishop  of  Gran  in 
Hungary  were  present.  Representatives  of  several  universities 
had  also  arrived  at  Pressburg — among  them  four  theologians 
of  the  university  of  Paris.  These  had  no  doubt  arrived  on  a 
special  mission.  During  the  whole  period  between  the  meeting 
of  the  Council  of  Constance  to  the  dissolution  of  that  of  Basel 

1  "  Anno  eodem  videlicet  mccccxxix  presbyter  Procopius  et  secta  Taborien- 
sium  commisso  castro  Bechina  Johanni  dicto  Bleh  se  cum  comitatu  suo  versus 
et  in  Austrian!  transsumpsit  et  equitavit,  ibique  Dominus  Menhart  de  Nova 
domo  [Neuhaus,  Jindfichuv  Hradec]  cum  aliis  baronibus  Boemiae  et  Moraviae 
se  interposuerunt  et  ipsum  presbyterum  Procopium  cum  serenissimo  domino 
Sigismundo  ...  ad  terminum  et  tractatus  conduxit,  qui  in  civitatem  Pres- 
purk  .  .  .  convenerunt  "  {BartoSek  of  Drahonic,  p.  599). 


228  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

the  university  of  Paris  had  always  insisted  on  the  necessity 
of  strengthening  the  authority  of  the  ecumenical  councils  of 
the  Church.  The  council  held  in  Siena  in  1424  had  already 
determined  that  a  new  council  should  be  held  at  Basel  after 
the  lapse  of  seven  years.  The  university  of  Paris,  however, 
in  view  of  the  disturbed  condition  of  the  Christian  world, 
wished  to  advance  the  date  of  the  new  assembly.  It  was  hoped 
that  a  general  council  of  the  Church  would  more  easily  come 
to  terms  with  the  Utraquists  than  the  Pope.  The  Bohemian 
envoys  w^re  received  by  King  Sigismund  on  the  day  of  their 
arrival,  but  the  first  meeting  had  an  entirely  ceremonial 
character.  On  the  following  day  the  King  assembled  the 
princes,  Bohemian  nobles,  and  theologians,  and  consulted  them 
as  to  the  best  manner  in  which  negotiations  with  the  Utraquists 
could  be  opened.  They  advised  him  to  tell  the  Hussites  in  a 
conciliatory  fashion  that  they  had  strayed  from  the  path  of 
true  Christianity  and  that  they  had  abandoned  the  doctrines 
in  which  their  forefathers  had  believed,  and  which  they  them- 
selves had  formerly  accepted.  According  to  the  contemporary 
chroniclers,  Sigismund  then  transmitted  these  remarks  to  the 
Hussite  delegates  "  with  wise  and  kindly  words."  It  is  a  proof 
of  Sigismund 's  intense  vanity  that  he  believed  that  his  con- 
ciliatory words — which  contained  no  concession  whatever — 
would  induce  the  Hussites  to  abandon  doctrines  which  they 
had  successfully  upheld  against  all  Europe  for  nearly  ten  years. 
The  Hussites  answered  that  they  wished  to  be  granted  a 
hearing  by  a  general  meeting  of  the  Christian  people,  at  which 
laymen  also  were  to  be  present.  According  to  Dr.  Neubauer's 
skilful  conjecture,  the  Hussites  had  remarked  that  among 
the  lower  nobility  and  the  townsmen  beyond  the  borders  of 
Bohemia  their  views  had  already  found  many  friends.  The 
germs  of  the  ideas  which  brought  out  the  German  Reformation 
in  the  following  century  perhaps  already  existed  in  the  border- 
lands of  Bohemia.  The  brief  exchange  of  views  at  Pressburg 
soon  proved  that  the  antagonistical  parties  were  at  least  for 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  229 

the  moment  irreconcilable.  On  the  advice  of  his  councillors 
Sigismund  replied  that  the  Catholic  Church  had  been  founded 
by  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  the  teaching  of  the  Hussites  had 
already  been  condemned  at  Constance  by  the  Pope  and 
Council,  and  that  discussions  on  a  matter  which  had  already 
been  decided  were  useless;  the  Hussites  could  only  expect  a 
hearing  and  such  instruction  as  was  befitting  for  those  who 
had  erred;  this,  however,  could  be  better  given  privately  by 
ecclesiastical  or  temporal  princes  and  by  scholars  than  before 
a  large  assembly  comprising  many  plain  men  who  knew  nothing 
of  these  matters.  This  categorical  statement  did  not,  as  might 
have  been  expected,  lead  to  an  immediate  conclusion  of  the 
negotiations.  Sigismund  again  consulted  his  advisers.  They 
declared  that  heresy  in  Bohemia  could  only  be  exterminated 
by  the  sword,  but  that  it  would  be  well,  that  being  for  the 
moment  impossible,  to  propose  an  armistice  which  was  to 
last  up  to  the  moment  of  the  meeting  of  the  new  Council. 
The  condition  of  the  armistice  was  to  be  that  the  Hussites 
should  attend  the  Council  and  submit  to  its  decisions.  This 
advice  was  undoubtedly  astute  if  we  consider  the  constitution 
of  the  Hussite  armies.  It  was  certain  that  during  a  prolonged 
truce  the  Utraquist  nobles  would  retire  to  their  estates  with 
their  followers ;  the  peasants,  freed  from  imminent  peril,  would 
return  to  their  country  homes,  from  which  they  had  so  long 
been  absent;  the  mercenaries,  whose  number  in  the  Hussite 
armies  was  increasing,  accustomed  to  constant  warfare,  would, 
deprived  of  any  immediate  hope  of  obtaining  booty,  have 
sought  service  elsewhere.  It  can  be  considered  as  probable 
that  the  acceptance  of  Sigismund's  proposal  would  have 
deprived  the  national  party  of  the  powerful  weapon  which 
the  Hussite  army  had  now  become,  and  would  have  left  the 
country  at  the  mercy  of  Sigismund  and  his  allies.  It  need 
hardly  be  said  that  Prokop,  whose  military  talent  had  kept 
the  Hussite  armies  at  that  very  high  standard  of  efficiency 
to  which  Zizka  had  brought  them,  did  not  for  a  moment 


230  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

contemplate  such  a  surrender.  The  Hussite  envoys  had 
received  from  the  estates  of  Bohemia  instructions  according 
to  which  they  were  under  no  condition  to  accept  a  general 
armistice,  but  were  to  consent  to  a  truce  with  Sigismund  and 
his  son-in-law,  Albert  of  Austria,  on  condition  that  both  these 
princes  should  surrender  to  the  Utraquist  party  all  the  castles 
in  Bohemia  and  Moravia  which  were  still  held  by  them.^  It 
seems  probable  that  these  propositions  had  been  brought  to 
the  notice  of  Sigismund  at  the  beginning  of  the  negotiations 
at  Pressburg,  and  that  they  had  then  already  been  rejected 
by  him;  the  answer  of  the  Hussites  to  Sigismund's  new  pro- 
posal, therefore,  entirely  ignored  the  question  of  the  proposed 
armistice.  It  was,  however,  on  the  whole  more  conciliatory 
than  their  first  message  had  been.  The  belief  in  the  authority 
of  councils  was  then  at  its  apogee,  and  even  the  Utraquists 
were  not  uninfluenced  by  it.  It  appeared  to  them  a  very 
different  thing  to  obtain  a  hearing  before  the  whole  Christian 
Church  than  to  receive  an  admonition  from  a  number  of  priests 
chosen  by  their  enemies.  They  therefore  declared  that  they 
were  ready  to  appear  before  a  council  of  the  universal  Church, 
but  that  they  would  continue  to  uphold  their  views  till  a 
general  Church  reformation  had  been  carried  out.  Seeing 
that  the  reply  of  the  Hussites  was  evasive  rather  than  negative, 
Sigismund  now  thought  that  he  could  obtain  an  armistice. 
This,  indeed,  appears  to  have  been  his  principal  reason  for 
entering  into  these  negotiations. 

On  April  8  the  Hussites  made  a  somewhat  unexpected 
move.  They  informed  the  King  that  if  he  would  consent 
to  accept  their  creed  they  would  gladly  receive  him  as  their 
sovereign — rather  than  any  one  else.  Should  he,  however, 
decline  their  proposal  they  could  only  repeat  what  they  had 

'  "  Quod  Gratia  Vestra  una  cum  filio  Vestro,  duce  Austrie  disponeret  quod 
castra  que  in  Bohemia  et  Moravia  tenetis,  se  nobiscum  unirent  et  ad  veritates 
Dei  accederent  et  quod    super  illo  vellemus  nos  cum  Gratia  Vestra  et  filio 
Vestro  pacificare  ad  certum   tempus."     {Deutsche  Zeitschrijt  fur  GeschUhts 
wissenschaft,  Vol.  V.  p.  370,  quoted  by  Dr.  Neubauer.) 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  231 

said  before,  that  they  had  drawn  their  swords  and  would  not 
sheath  them  till  they  had  converted  all  men  to  their  faith. 
On  receiving  this  message  Sigismund  was  seized  by  one  of 
those  attacks  of  semi-insane  fury  which  sometimes  overtook 
him.     He  beseeched  all  the  princes  who  were  at  his  court  to 
assist  him  in  exterminating  heresy  and  in  obtaining  posses- 
sion of  the  lands  which  he  had  inherited.     He  added  that  he 
would  immediately  organise  a  new  military  expedition  against 
Bohemia.     The  German  princes,  whose  previous  experiences 
had  not  been  satisfactory,  received  this  statement  silently  and 
without  enthusiasm.     On  April  8  Prokop  and  his  companions 
again  approached  the  King  and  inquired  where  the  proposed 
Council  was  to  meet.     They  also  wished  to  know  whether  it 
was  to  be  entirely  under  the  direction  of  the  Pope  and  the 
cardinals,  or  whether  Sigismund  and  the  other  princes  were 
also  to  exercise  a  certain  control  over  it.     In  his  reply  Sigis- 
mund stated  that  he  would  have  the  same  authority  over  the 
Council  which  the  Roman  emperors  and  kings  had  possessed 
on   similar   previous   occasions.     On   the   following   day   the 
Bohemian  envoys  left  Pressburg  and  rejoined  the  Hussite 
army,  which  was   encamped   six    (German)    miles   from   the 
city.     The  Hussite  envoys,  whose  instructions  did  not  allow 
them  to  express  an  opinion  on  such  vital  questions  as  the 
conclusion  of  an  armistice  and  the  promise  of  attending  the 
future    council,  declared,   before   leaving    Pressburg,    that    a 
general  meeting  of  the  estates  of  Bohemia  would  give  a  definite 
reply.     This  assembly  began  its  sittings  on  May  23,  and  con- 
tinued them  for  a  week.  The  representatives  of  King  Sigismund, 
who  had  on  this  occasion  appeared  in  Prague,  demanded  that 
the  Bohemians  should  submit  to  the  verdict  of  the  Council  of 
Constance,  and  agree  to  a  truce  for  two  years,  or  up  to  the 
beginning  of  the  council,  not  only  with  the  King  and  his 
Bohemian  adherents,  but  also  with  the  foreign  princes  who 
were  allied  with  him.     The  diet  in  Prague,  on  the  advice  of 
some  theologians  and  priests  who  were  consulted,  agreed  to 


232  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

accept  Sigismund's  proposals,  but  only  under  certain  condi- 
tions.    The  diet  demanded  firstly  that  this  assembly  of  the 
whole  Christian  world  should  include  the  Greeks,  the  Armenians, 
and  the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  who  all,  like  the  Bohemians, 
received  Communion  in  the  two  kinds;  secondly,  that  the 
council  should  be  held  according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  not 
according  to  rules  established  by  the  Pope,  and  that  not  only 
the  Pope,  but  all  Christianity  should  be  permitted  to  express 
its  views  freely.     Should  such  a  council  assemble,  the  Bohe- 
mians were  ready  to  send  to  it  wise,  prudent  and  pious  men, 
both  priests  and  laymen,  and  to  grant  them  full  powers.     The 
Bohemians  added  several  other  conditions  of  minor  importance. 
They  declared  that  those  who  had  acceded  to  the  law  of  God 
(i.  e.  the  Utraquist  Church)  and  then  treacherously  abandoned 
it,  and  those  who  had  bound  themselves  by  writing  to  accept 
the  law  of  God  and  then  failed  to  do  so,  should  be  excluded 
from  the  truce.     In  view  of  the  vacillating  attitude  of  some 
of  the  Bohemian  nobles  this  affected  some  men  of  considerable 
importance  in  the  country.     The  Bohemians  further  declared 
that  they  were  ready  to  conclude  a  truce  with  King  Sigismund 
and  his  son-in-law,  but  not  with  Meissen  (Saxony)  or  Bavaria. 
Archduke  Albert  was  to  promise  to  preserve  the  rights  and 
privileges  of  Moravia,  and  the  King  was  to  entrust  the  govern- 
ment of  that  land  provisionally  to  one  who  belonged  to  the 
Bohemian  or  Slavic  nation.^    The  Bohemians  finally  made 
stipulations  in  favour  of  the  Utraquist  peasants  who  lived  on 
estates  of  the  lords  *'  sub  una,"  and  demanded  guarantees  for 
the  safety  of  the  Utraquist  priests  who  resided  in  districts 
occupied  by  partisans  of  Sigismund.     The  Bohemians  were 
naturally  elated  by  their  constant  victories,  and,  having  been 
so  long  isolated  from  other  countries,  they  were  imperfectly 
informed  as  to  the  public  opinion  in  the  rest  of  Europe.     They 
seem  to  have  considered  it  probable  that  Sigismund  would 
accept  their  proposals,  and  indeed  already  began  to  discuss 

*  Or  language.     The  word  **  jazyk  "  has  both  significations  in  Bohemian. 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  233 

the  possibility  of  his  accession  to  the  Bohemian  throne.^  It 
has  already  been  noted  that  some  of  the  new  leaders  of  the 
Utraquists  no  longer  entertained  the  intense  personal  resent- 
ment against  Sigismund  which  Zizka  had  felt,  and  which  the 
Orphans — who  all  cherished  memories  of  their  dead  leader — 
still  preserved.  Prokop  was  not  disinclined  to  recognise 
Sigismund  as  king  should  he  accept  the  articles  of  Prague.^ 
It  was,  however — as  stated  by  the  chronicler  quoted  below — 
decided  that,  in  consequence  of  the  resistance  of  the  Orphans 
and  the  new  town  of  Prague,  the  attempt  to  confer  the  Bohe- 
mian crown  on  Sigismund  should  be  deferred  to  a  later  period. 
At  the  same  time  the  diet  decided  to  inform  Sigismund  of  the 
conditions  under  which  it  would  consent  to  a  truce.  For  this 
purpose  a  new  Bohemian  embassy,  again  headed  by  Prokop 
the  Great,  started  for  Pressburg.  The  delegates  arrived  there 
probably  at  the  end  of  June.  Prokop  informed  Sigismund  of 
the  decision  of  the  diet  and  questioned  him  as  to  the  com- 
position of  the  proposed  council,  at  which,  he  said,  the  Hussites 
could  only  appear  as  one  of  the  contending  parties,  not  as 
contrite  penitents.  Sigismund  had  at  the  time  of  Prokop's 
first  visit  already  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  negotiation 
would  at  that  moment  inevitably  be  result  less;  he  was, 
indeed,  then  already  busily  engaged  in  organising  a  new 
crusade  against  Bohemia.  Yet  both  parties  wished  to  avoid 
the  odium  of  renewing  the  hostilities,  and  no  immediate  rupture 

*  The  ancient  chroniclers  write  :  "  This  year  [1429]  there  was  a  great 
assembly  of  the  Bohemian  nation  in  Prague  (of)  lords,  knights,  gentry  ["  ze- 
mane  "],  Taborites,  Orphans,  and  citizens.  They  met  in  the  house  of  the 
masters  of  the  great  college  [the  Carolinum]  and  debated  as  to  how  they 
could  come  to  an  agreement  with  King  Sigismund  of  Hungary,  and  receive 
him  as  their  Lord  and  the  hereditary  sovereign  of  the  land.  All  agreed  to 
this  except  Valek  Koudelnik,  captain  of  the  Orphans.  He  and  the  citizens 
of  the  New  Town  [of  Prague]  would  not  consent  to  it,  and  opposed  it  "  ("  Scrip- 
tores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  76). 

*  Professor  Goll  writes  :  "  Prakop  had  no  objection  to  the  accession  of 
Sigismund,  should  he  conform  to  the  teaching  of  the  Hussite  Church.  ...  It 
appeared  clearly  that  he  had  not  preserved  that  implacable  hatred  of  Sigis- 
mund which  we  find  in  2izka,  and  which  the  Orphans  preserved  as  his 
inheritance."   Cichy  a  Prusy  {Bohemia  and  Prussia),  p.  179. 


234  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

took  place.  When  King  Sigismund  demanded  that  the 
Hussites  should  abandon  all  sieges  of  castles  belonging  to 
nobles  "  sub  una,"  and  that  the  truce  should  include  all  his 
subjects — an  expression  which  could  be  applied  to  all  German 
states,  even  those  with  whom  the  Bohemians  had  already 
refused  to  negotiate — the  envoys  stated  that  they  had  no 
instructions  to  discuss  these  matters,  but  would  inform  their 
countrymen  of  the  King's  demands.  They  then  left  Pressburg 
and  the  negotiations  were  interrupted  for  a  considerable 
period. 

The  so-called  crusade  of  1429  requires  but  very  slight 
mention.  Cardinal  Beaufort  was  again  to  command  it.  He 
landed  on  the  continent  in  July  with  an  English  army  of  5,000 
men.  While  marching  through  Belgium  he  was  ordered  to 
proceed  to  France  because  of  the  victories  of  Joan  of  Arc. 
The  German  princes  considered  this  a  sufficient  reason  for 
abandoning  the  proposed  campaign.  Some  time  previously 
— in  March  1429 — Joan  of  Arc  addressed  a  menacing  letter  ^ 
to  the  Bohemians,  threatening  to  invade  their  country. 

On  his  return  from  Pressburg  to  Bohemia  Prokop  had,  at 
the  castle  of  Sovinec,  near  Olomouc,  an  interview  with  Prince 
Korybutovic,  who  had  again  appeared  in  the  lands  of  the 
Bohemian  crown.  The  Lithuanian  prince  had,  on  his  return 
from  Bohemia,  been  treated  with  great  severity  by  the  King 
of  Poland,  and  even  imprisoned  for  a  short  time.  Ladislas 
maintained  that  Korybutovic  had  undertaken  his  second 
expedition  to  Bohemia  against  the  King's  order.  In  view  of 
the  profound  duplicity  of  the  King  of  Poland  it  is  perhaps 
impossible  to  judge  how  far  this  was  true.  While  the  failure 
was  blamed,  a  success  would  probably  have  met  with  approval. 
Korybutovic  very  soon  regained  the  King's  favour,  and  now 
made  his  third  appearance  on  the  turbulent  Bohemian  stage. 
He  probably  hoped  that   Prokop  would  act  as  a  mediator 

*  I  have  printed  part  of  this  letter  in  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Shitch, 
p.  152  n. I. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  235 

between  him  and  the  citizens  of  Prague.  From  Olomouc, 
Prokop  proceeded  to  tJsti  nad  Odici  (in  German,  Wilden- 
schwert),  where  the  Hussite  army  was  occupied  in  besieging 
the  neighbouring  castle  of  Lansberk. 

The  question  of  the  recognition  of  Sigismund  as  King  of 
Bohemia,  which  had  been  discussed  at  the  diet  of  Prague,  had 
caused  new  troubles  in  that  city.  It  has  already  been  men- 
tioned that,  roughly  speaking,  the  old  town  contained  the 
more  conservative,  and  the  new  one  the  more  radical,  citizens. 
The  Utraquist  nobles,  who  had  always  demanded  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  monarchical  and  orderly  government,  endeavoured 
to  secure  the  recognition  of  Sigismund  as  King,  and  the 
Tdborites  were  not  opposed  to  this  on  condition  that  the  new 
King  accepted  the  articles  of  Prague.  On  the  other  hand  the 
Orphans  and  the  citizens  of  the  New  Town  of  Prague  were 
bitterly  opposed  to  this  plan.  It  is  one  of  the  strange  vicissi- 
tudes which  we  meet  so  frequently  during  the  Bohemian  civil 
wars  that  the  citizens  of  the  Old  Town  of  Prague — the  strong- 
hold of  the  Hussite  High  Church — should  now  have  requested 
the  aid  of  the  leader  of  the  Taborites.  Though  so  strongly 
antagonistic  as  regards  matters  of  theology,  both  parties  at 
that  moment  seem  to  have  contemplated  a  monarchical 
restoration.  Prokop,  who  was  still  directing  the  siege  of 
Lansberk,  hurried  to  Prague,  but  found  there  that  the  two 
cities  had  already  concluded  peace  or  rather  a  truce.  We  have 
little  information  about  the  causes  of  this  sudden  agreement, 
but  it  is  probable  that  both  parties  had  become  aware  of  the 
fact  that  Sigismund  would  not  accept  the  Bohemian  crown  on 
the  conditions  under  which  it  had  been  offered  to  him. 

The  castle  of  Lansberk  capitulated  shortly  after  Prokop's 
departure,  and  though  during  the  summer  small  detachments 
of  Hussites  raided  parts  of  Silesia,  it  was  only  for  the  following 
winter  that  Prokop  had  planned  an  invasion  of  Germany  on 
a  large  scale.  It  was  not  only  to  provision  Bohemia — as  has 
been  stated  by  many  popular  German  writers — that  these 


236  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

expeditions  were  undertaken.  Prokop  believed  that  by 
frequent  attacks  on  the  border-lands  he  could  employ  sufficient 
pressure  against  them  to  force  them  to  grant  freedom  to  the 
Bohemian  Church,  and  perhaps  even — so  his  sanguine  tem- 
perament led  him  sometimes  to  believe — to  induce  them  to 
accept  the  articles  of  Prague.  In  the  meantime  Prokop,  whose 
matchless  energy  at  this  moment  it  is  impossible  not  to  adm.ire, 
devoted  his  attention  to  the  never-ending  theological  con- 
troversies in  Prague.  The  good  sense  of  the  townsmen  had, 
indeed,  for  the  moment  averted  an  armed  conflict,  but  the 
odium  theologicum  of  the  rival  divines  continued  unabated. 
The  priest  John  of  Pribram,  one  of  the  protagonists  of  the 
Hussite  High  Church,  had  in  his  sermons  strongly  attacked 
some  of  Wycliffe's  views  concerning  the  Sacrament  of  Com- 
munion. This  should  not  have  been  considered  as  an  attack 
on  Hussitism,  as  Hus  himself  had  often  stated  that  he  did 
not  accept  unconditionally  all  Wycliffe's  views.^  In  this  con- 
troversy Peter  Payne,  surnamed  Englis,  strongly  upheld  the 
opinions  of  his  master.  Payne  as  well  as  Master  Nicholas  of 
Pelhfimov  and  the  majority  of  the  Taborite  divines  maintained 
that  Christ  was  not  present  in  the  Sacrament  essentially,  but 
that  in  the  Sacrament  the  bread  and  wine  signified  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ,  who  had  suffered  for  us  on  the  cross. 
This  theory,  which  Dr.  Krummel  calls  the  **  Wycliffite- 
symbolic  "  interpretation, ^  was  not  quite  in  accordance  with 

*  I  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  quote  here  my  own  words — contained  in 
Master  John  Hus,  p.  21 — "  Hus  himself  frequently  protested  against  the 
suggestion  that  he  was  responsible  for  all  the  statements  made  by  Wycliflfe, 
and  shortly  after  the  death  of  the  Bohemian  Church-reformer,  a  controversy 
on  this  subject  arose.  .  .  .  John  of  Pribram,  an  intimate  friend  of  Hus, 
wrote  :  '  It  is  well  known  to  many  that  when  preaching  Master  John  Hus 
said  that  he  would  not  defend  any  error  of  Wycliffe,  or  of  anyone  else.  He 
also  preached  :  **  If  Wycliffe  is  in  heaven,  may  he  pray  to  God  for  us ;  if  he  is 
in  purgatory,  may  God  help  him ;  if  he  is  in  hell  the  Lord  be  blessed."  Also 
in  Constance  before  his  death  Hus  said  openly  before  all :  *'  Why  do  you  blame 
me  because  of  Wycliffe  ?  What  concern  is  it  of  mine  ?  For  neither  was 
Wycliffe  a  Bohemian,  nor  was  he  my  father ;  he  was  an  Englishman ;  therefore 
if  he  wrote  errors,  let  the  English  answer  for  them."  '  " 

"  Die    Wycliffitisch-symbolische    Auffassung  "  {Htissiten  und   Taboriten, 
p.  85). 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  237 

the  theories  of  Prokop,  who  now,  in  view  of  the  ever-recurring 
foreign  peril,  attempted  to  mediate  between  the  contending 
parties.  Prokop  on  this  question  did  not  agree  with  Payne 
and  Pelhfimov  and  the  majority  of  the  Tciborite  divines.  He 
beheved  that  Christ  was  really  present  in  the  Sacrament  of 
Communion,  and  he  held  that  Christians  should  kneel  before 
it,  a  custom  which  some  of  the  advanced  Tiborites  abhorred. 
On  the  other  hand  Prokop's  views  also  differed  widely  from 
those  of  magister  Pribram.  Prokop  believed  in  the  remanence 
of  the  substance  of  bread,  that  is  to  say  he  believed  that  after 
the  consecration,  besides  the  body  of  Christ,  the  substance  of 
bread  also  continued  to  exist.  When  at  a  meeting  of  theolo- 
gians Pribram  attempting  to  refute  the  theories  of  Prokop, 
quoted  the  father  of  the  Church,  Prokop  was  somewhat 
irritated,  and  in  a  letter  written  to  Pribram  shortly  afterwards, 
advised  him  to  cling  to  the  words  of  Christ  and  His  Apostles,^ 
and  to  ignore  the  words  of  the  "  doctores,"  the  fathers  of  the 
Church.  It  was  probably  the  conciliatory  attitude  of  Prokop, 
as  well  as  the  news  that  the  German  princes  had  now  finally 
decided  to  engage  in  a  new  crusade,  which  induced  the  con- 
troversialists to  discontinue  their  deputations,  at  least  for  a 
time. 

In  the  autumn  of  1429  Prokop  left  Prague  and  first  proceeded 
to  Kutna  Hora,  a  city  which  he  appears  often  to  have  visited 
when  he  was  able  to  absent  himself  from  the  Utraquist  armies. 
These  armies  were  at  that  moment  scattered  over  different 
parts  of  Bohemia,  but  were  already  preparing  for  the  new 

*  This  letter  is  so  characteristic  of  Prokop  that  I  will  quote  part  of  it. 
He  wrote  :  "  Mane  in  sententia  Salvatoris  et  ejus  Apostoli  (scilicet  panem 
materialem  remanere  asseverantium)  et  statim  erit  pax  inter  nos  et  te,  et  alias 
non.  Et  noli  attendere  verba  vel  sensus  eorum  de  quibus  propheta  loquitur  : 
Narraverunt  iniqui  fabulationes,  sed  non  ut  lex  tua.  Sin  autem  illud  nolueris 
facere,  scito  quod  contra  te  intendo  pro  posse  clamare  et  omnibus  modis 
licitis  insurgere.  Et  videbis  quod  Veritas  Domini  vincet  te  una  cum  doctoribus. 
Jam  enim  eos  judicat  in  illis  quae  pertinaciter  contra  ipsam  dixerunt  vel 
scripserunt.  Et  vae  illis  si  non  poenituerint.  Et  ideo  doctores  nolo  habere 
pro  (ut  tu  scribis)  Dei  legis  judices,  sed  opto  ut  lex  judicet  doctores  "  (Coch- 
laeus,  Hist.  Hussit.  p.  226). 


238  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

campaign.     It  was  decided  that  the  troops  should  assemble 
at  different  points  along  the  Saxon  frontier.     On  December  3 
Prokop  returned  to  Prague  at  the  request  of  the  magistrates 
of  that  city.     He  was  to  assume  command  over  the  vast  army, 
which,  according  to  the  most  trustworthy  authorities,^  con- 
sisted of  4,000  cavalry,  40,000  infantry,  and  2,500  armoured 
wagons.     Besides  the  Orphans  and  Taborites,  the  men  both 
of  the  Old  and  New  Towns  of  Prague,  and  the  levies  of  many 
Bohemian  cities,  started  for  the  frontier  on  December  4.     The 
burgomaster  and  councillors  entertained  the  generals  at   a 
banquet  at  the  town-hall  before  their  departure,  "  drinking 
to  their  health  as  they  were  taking  leave."     On  its  march  the 
army  was   joined   by  the   troops   of  several    Bohemian   and 
Moravian  nobles,  and  on  the  frontier  by  the  Bohemian  forces 
that  were  already  encamped  there.     The  whole  large  army 
then,  after  crossing  the  frontier,  followed  the  course  of  the 
Elbe  as  far  as  Pirna  and  Dresden.     They  encamped  for  some 
time  before  the  latter  city,  but  faithful  to  the  system  they 
had  adopted  during  their  former  invasions  of  Germany,  they 
did  not  attempt  the  siege  of  the  fortified  town.     Small  detach- 
ments of  Hussites  raided  some  of  the  open  Saxon  towns,  but 
the  Germans  remained  behind  their  fortifications,  not  daring 
to  meet  the  Bohemians  in  the  open  field.     On  the  appeal  of 
Frederick,  Elector  of  Saxony,  some  of  the  German  princes 
promised  to  march  to  his  aid  and  to  arrest  the  triumphant 
progress    of    the    heretics.     The    ecclesiastical    princes    were 
naturally    among    the    most    zealous.     The    Archbishop    of 
Magdeburg,  the  Bishops  of  Naumberg,  Halberstadt,  Merseburg, 
and  Hildesheim  with  their  troops  joined  the  Saxon  army, 
which,   under  the   command   of  the   Elector  Frederick,  had 
assembled    at    Leipzig.     The    Duke    of    Brunswick   and   the 
Landgrave  of  Thuringia  also  marched  to  the  aid  of  the  menaced 
elector.     The  German  army,  according  to  the  most  trustworthy 

*  Bartoiek  of  Drahonic,  p.  600,  and  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol. 
III.  p.  79. 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  239 

accounts,  numbering  about  100,000  men,  was  now  vastly 
superior  in  strength  to  the  Bohemian  forces.  On  hearing  of 
the  approach  of  the  Germans  the  Hussites  marched  in  a  north- 
western direction,  burning  the  towns  of  Oschatz  and  Wurzen 
on  their  way.  They  then  determined  to  cross  the  Mulda 
stream.  Beheving  that  the  German  army  was  concentrated 
on  the  other  bank  of  that  stream  they  kept  their  forces  closely, 
and  overcrowded  the  wagons  to  such  an  extent  that  some 
of  them  were  overturned  and  some  men  were  drowned.  When 
about  half  the  force  had  crossed  the  stream  the  cry  was  raised 
that  the  Germans  were  attacking.  Those  warriors  who  had 
already  reached  the  bank  immediately  formed  in  battle  array, 
but  it  was  soon  found  that  the  alarm  was  unfounded.  A  body 
of  Thuringian  nobles  with  their  followers  had  indeed  ridden 
to  the  ford  where  the  Bohemians  were  crossing.  Their  attack 
was,  however,  speedily  repulsed  by  the  Hussites,  and  the 
knights  retired  with  heavy  losses;  of  their  small  force  of  800 
horsemen  half  were  killed  or  made  prisoners.  On  the  day 
following  the  skirmish  the  Bohemians,  who  had  now  all  crossed 
the  stream,  expected  to  be  attacked  by  the  entire  German 
army.  They  received  a  menacing  letter  from  the  German 
commanders,  telling  them  that  they  would  on  the  following 
day  all  be  killed  as  being  heretics.  No  attack,  however,  took 
place.  The  Elector  of  Saxony  appears  to  have  been  greatly 
impressed  by  the  sudden  flight  of  the  Germans  at  Tachov 
and  to  have  feared  the  renewal  of  such  a  catastrophe.  He 
therefore  suddenly  changed  his  plans,  ordered  the  tents  of 
his  troops  to  be  burnt,  and  dismissed  the  troops  of  his  allies, 
who  returned  to  their  homes.  The  elector  himself  first  retreated 
to  Leipzig,  sharply  pursued  by  the  Hussite  soldiers.  He  then 
continued  his  flight  to  Thuringia,  after  having  ordered  the 
suburbs  of  Leipzig  to  be  burnt  down  to  prevent  their  falling 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemies.  The  Bohemians,  now  unopposed, 
divided  their  forces  into  different  detachments,  which  ravaged 
a  large  part  of  Northern  Germany.     The  inhabitants,  terrified 


240  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

by  the  mere  approach  of  the  Hussites,  forsook  their  dwellings 
and  fled  into  the  woods,  where  many  perished  of  cold  and 
privation.  The  Germans,  whose  practice  it  had  been  when 
they  occupied  Bohemian  towns  or  villages  to  murder  the 
whole  population,  were  surprised  that  the  Bohemian  always 
spared  the  lives  of  women  and  children.  The  German  chroni- 
cler Windecke  writes  that  **  wherever  the  Bohemians  arrived 
the  citizens  and  peasants  fled  into  the  woods,  leaving  their 
wives  and  children  behind  them";  they  evidently  soon 
knew  that  the  Bohemians  did  not  war  against  women  and 
children. 

It  is  beyond  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  give  an  account  of 
the  different  raids  which  the  Bohemians  undertook  during  this 
winter.  Their  principal  army  marched  into  Franconia.  That 
part  of  Germany,  comparatively  distant  from  Bohemia,  had 
hitherto  taken  little  interest  in  the  affairs  of  that  country. 
The  Bohemian  invasion  came  as  a  complete  surprise.  The 
Hussites  attacked  the  town  of  Hof,  of  which  they  easily 
obtained  possession,  but  the  castle  was  bravely  defended  by 
Kaspar  of  Waldenfels.  That  general  appears,  however,  to 
have  been  one  of  the  first  Germans  who  realised  the  necessity 
of  terminating  the  war  with  Bohemia.  Through  his  mediation 
the  Bohemian  leaders  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  Elector 
Frederick  of  Brandenburg,  who  was  also  Burgrave  of  Niirn- 
berg.  I  have  already  referred  to  the  elector's  conciliatory 
tendencies,  and  he  again  gave  proof  of  them  on  this  occasion. 
He  had  just  returned  to  Germany  from  Pressburg,  where  he 
had  taken  part  in  the  fruitless  negotiations  which  have 
already  been  mentioned.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  elector 
returned  from  Sigismund's  court  in  a  hopeful  frame  of  mind, 
and  seeing  that  his  country  was  at  that  moment  quite  unable  to 
resist  the  Bohemians  he  determined  to  negotiate  with  them. 
His  foremost  purpose  was  to  free  Germany  from  the  presence 
of  unwelcome  visitors,  but  he  may  have  also  hoped  to  recon- 
ciliate  the  Utraquists  with  the  Roman  Church,  and  thus  to 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  241 

effectuate  a  general  pacification.  After  having  received 
letters  from  the  Hussite  leaders  inviting  him  to  their  camp  and 
letters  of  safe  conduct,  the  Elector  crossed  the  Bohemian  lines 
accompanied  by  ten  Hussite  horsemen  as  his  bodyguard. 
An  interview  took  place  between  him  and  the  Hussite  com- 
manders at  the  castle  of  Zwernitz,  not  far  from  Bayreuth,  on 
February  6,  1430.  It  was  here  agreed  that  on  condition  of  the 
payment  of  a  considerable  sum  by  the  Bishop  of  Bamberg 
and  by  the  municipalities  of  Bamberg  and  Forchheim,  the 
Hussites  should  undertake  not  to  attack  the  territory  of 
Bamberg.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  larger  and  more 
weighty  questions  were  also  discussed  at  Zwernitz.  The 
Elector  then  proceeded  to  Niirnberg,  no  doubt  to  consult 
his  allies  with  regard  to  the  continuation  of  the  negotiations. 
Having  obtained  their  consent  Frederick  again  met  the  Hussite 
generals  at  the  castle  of  Boheimstein,  near  Niirnberg.  It 
was  here  agreed  that  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  Duke  John 
of  Bavaria,  and  the  city  of  Niirnberg  should  pay  large  sums 
to  the  Bohemians  on  condition  that  the  latter  should  evacuate 
Germany.  Prokop  was  not,  however,  satisfied  by  receiving 
ransom,  rightly  thinking  that  his  victorious  campaign  would 
thus  appear  as  a  mere  razzia.  He  again  brought  forward  the 
question  of  the  reconciliation  of  the  Utraquists  with  the 
universal  Church.  On  this  point  the  elector  made  very  con- 
siderable concessions,  for  which  he  was  much  blamed  by  the 
extreme  partisans  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  For  reasons  which 
it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  the  documents  concerning  the 
agreements  of  Zwernitz  and  Boheimstein  were  destroyed,  but 
it  has  been  possible  to  ascertain  some  facts  from  other  sources, 
particularly  from  the  drafts  of  some  letters  of  the  Elector 
Frederick,  which  have  been  published  by  Dr.  V.  Bezold.  It 
was  agreed  between  the  elector  and  the  Bohemians  that 
on  April  23  both  Cathohcs  and  Hussites  should  send  to 
Niirnberg  "  doctors  and  men  of  learning,*'  not  for  the 
purpose  of  religious  disputations,   but   only  to   attempt   a 


242  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

friendly  understanding  in  view  of  a  future  pacification.^  The 
draft  of  the  letter  of  safe  conduct  which  the  elector  intended 
to  give  the  Bohemian  envoys  proves  that  he  was  ready  to 
permit  a  discussion  on  the  four  articles  of  Prague.^  There  is 
no  doubt  that  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg's  attitude  was  to  a 
certain  extent  favourable  to  the  Bohemians.  It  had  been 
hitherto  thought  necessary  to  start  from  the  standpoint  that 
heretics  should  submit  unconditionally.  An  astute  statesman 
such  as  was  Frederick,  however,  well  knew  that  such  a  sub- 
mission was  out  of  the  question.  He  was,  therefore,  already 
prepared  to  accept  the  articles  of  Prague  as  the  basis  of  the 
future  negotiations.  Frederick  accompanied  the  Bohemian 
armies  to  the  frontier  of  their  country  and  acquired  great 
popularity  among  the  soldiers.  He  was  at  that  time  on  very 
bad  terms  with  the  Emperor  Sigismund.  The  first  Elector  of 
the  house  of  Hohenzollern  and  the  real  founder  of  the  greatness 
of  Prussia,  he  seems  almost  to  have  foreseen  the  long  antagon- 
ism of  the  Hohenzollerns  and  the  Habsburgs,  who  were  to 
succeed  Sigismund — an  antagonism  that  only  ended  on  the 
battlefield  of  Sadova. 

On  February  21  the  victorious  Hussite  armies  re-entered 
Prague,  where  they  were,  of  course,  received  with  the  greatest 
enthusiasm.  A  contemporary  chronicler  writes :  ^  "  The 
Bohemians  had  never  before  carried  out  so  brilliant  a  campaign 

^  "  Wir  haben  auch  unter  einander  [the  Elector  and  the  Hussites]  Rede 
gehabt  von  eines  giitlichen  unverbundenen  Tages  wegen  gegen  Niirnberg  zu 
kommen  auf  St.  Georgs  Tag  [April  23],  dazu  man  aus  den  sechs  [Church] 
Provinzen  dieser  Lande  doctores  und  gelehrte  Leute  bringen  soil,  nicht  von 
dem  Glauben  zu  disputiren,  sondern  unverbindlich  und  giitlich  mit  davon 
zu  reden  .  .  .  mochte  aber  dass  nicht  sein  dass  man  gedachte  nach  Rathe 
etlich  andere  Wege  zu  erdenken  und  fiirzunehmen,  damit  solche  Sachen  zu 
ganzem  Ende  kamen."  (Letter  of  Frederick  to  the  other  Electors.  Bezold, 
Konig  Sigismund  und  die  Reichskriege  gegen  die  Hussiten,  Vol,  III.  pp.  169- 
171).     I  have  somewhat  modernised  the  difficult  German  of  the  original. 

*  .  .  .  Treugamus  et  assecuramus  .  .  .  ut  possitis  libere  et  secure  ad  nos 
versus  Nurbergensem  civitatem  venire  et  in  eadem  demorari,  ibique  in  con- 
cilio  articulos  quatuor,  per  quorum  claritate  instatis  oretenus  aut  in  scriptis 
offere  aut  propallare,  scripturis  sacris  beatorumque  doctorum  verbis  et  sen- 
tenciis  eos  declarare,  astruere  et  persuadere  "  (Bezold,  as  above.  Vol.  III. 
pp.  171-174). 

»  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  Ill  p.  79. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  243 

in  Meissen  (Saxony) ;  nor  is  there  any  man  who  remembers 
anything  similar  before,  neither  is  anything  such  recorded 
in  the  chronicles.  They  numbered,  as  was  commonly  said, 
40,000  men.  Had  they  striven  for  glory  hke  their  ancestors 
they  could  have  marched  as  far  as  the  Rhine  and  have  subdued 
many  countries ;  but  having  obtained  rich  spoils  they  returned 
to  Bohemia."  This  day  marks  the  climax  of  the  glory  of 
the  Taborite  arms.  The  decline  followed  it  very  closely ;  the 
former  rigid  discipline  gradually  disappeared;  greed  for 
plunder  took  the  place  of  the  former  religious  fervour  and 
enthusiasm. 

The  Elector  of  Brandenburg  soon  found  it  difficult,  or  rather 
impossible,  to  obtain  the  Pope's  sanction  for  the  negotiations 
with  the  Utraquists  which  he  had  planned.  It  was  only  the 
great  defeat  at  Domazlice  in  the  following  year  which  at 
last  induced  Pope  Martin  to  abandon  his  previous  point  of 
view,  according  to  which  discussions  of  Hus'  tenets  were  in- 
admissible, as  they  had  already  been  condemned  by  the  Council 
of  Constance.  The  German  princes  also  declined  to  take  any 
part  in  the  negotiations  suggested  by  the  Elector  of  Branden- 
burg, and  Sigismund  again  protested  against  all  conferences 
with  heretics,  now  that  it  seemed  improbable  that  they  would 
turn  to  his  personal  advantage.  The  Elector  reluctantly  broke 
off  all  negotiations  with  the  Bohemians,  but  before  doing 
so  he  sent  to  Domazlice  the  sums  of  money  which  he  and  his 
allies  had  promised  to  the  Bohemians  on  condition  of  their 
evacuating  Germany.  Prokop's  great  winter  campaign  of 
1429-1430  did  not,  however,  prove  entirely  fruitless.  Though 
the  conferences  at  Boheimstein  had  led  to  no  immediate 
result,  yet  the  foundation  of  a  future  agreement  had  been  laid 
there.  There  is  Httle  doubt  that  the  Council  of  Basel  in  some 
respects  considered  the  deliberations  at  Boheimstein  as  a 
precedent. 

The  brilliant  campaign  of  the  Bohemians  in  1430  again 
attracted  the  attention  of  all  Europe  to  their  country.     The 


244  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

Bohemian  question  then  for  the  first  time  became  a  European 
one.  The  panic  caused  by  the  exploits  of  Prokop  and  his 
followers  continued  in  Germany,  where  a  new  Hussite  invasion 
was  constantly  dreaded.  As  has  been  frequently  stated,  the 
annals  of  Bohemia  during  this  short  but  glorious  period  of 
its  history  are  very  scanty.  It  seems,  however,  certain  that 
Prokop  the  Great  returned  to  his  country  greatly  exhausted 
by  the  fatigues  of  a  long  and  arduous  campaign,  and  that  he 
rested  for  a  short  period.  On  April  4  we  read  of  his  presence 
in  Prague,  and  it  is  known  that  shortly  afterwards  he 
proceeded  with  some  of  his  followers  to  Domdzlice  to  take  over 
the  indemnity  which  the  German  princes  had  agreed  to  pay  to 
Bohemia.  As  comparative  internal  quiet  then  prevailed,  and 
as  the  preparations  for  a  new  crusade — which,  as  the  Bohemians 
knew,  was  being  planned — proceeded  but  slowly,  Prokop 
employed  this  period  of  respite  for  the  purpose  of  defending 
his  faith  with  his  pen.  It  had  not  escaped  him  that  the  Bo- 
hemians were  tired  of  incessant  warfare  and  ready  for  peace 
if  their  enemies  would  accept  the  articles  of  Prague.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  knew  that  the  blind  hatred  of  the  Bohemians 
as  "  heretics  "  was  not  as  general  as  it  had  been  at  the  beginning 
of  the  war.  The  comparative  moderation  of  the  Hussites 
during  their  raids,  when  they  indeed  levied  heavy  contribu- 
tions, but  spared  the  lives  of  women  and  children,  and  often 
even  received  warriors  as  prisoners,  had  greatly  impressed  the 
minds  of  the  people.  The  democratic  spirit  of  the  Hussites 
was  also  beginning  to  attract  attention.  Men  could  not  but 
wonder  that  a  citizen  of  Prague  of  modest  birth  and  fortune 
should  negotiate  with  princes  and  great  territorial  nobles. 
The  German  rulers  began  to  fear  that  even  ancient  racial 
hatred  might  not  be  sufficient  to  prevent  the  Germans  from 
joining  the  Bohemian  fighters  for  freedom.  Great  agitation 
spread  among  the  people.  They  said  that  they  had  been  mis- 
led by  the  priests  and  abandoned  by  the  princes  and  nobles, 
who  had  been  unable  to  oppose  the  Slavic  enthusiasts.     This 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  245 

movement  was  not  limited  to  the  parts  of  Germany  that  are 
nearest  to  Bohemia.  In  the  districts  near  the  Rhine  the 
peasants  formed  armed  bands,  which  carried  before  them  a 
banner  with  the  portrait  of  Our  Saviour,  and  raided  the  neigh- 
bouring country  in  every  direction.  It  appeared  as  if  an 
appeal  of  the  Hussites  would  be  sufficient  to  induce  the  whole 
German  people  to  rise  in  arms  against  their  princes. ^ 

Though  this  is  a  matter  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  express 
a  positive  opinion,  it  appears  that  at  this  moment  the  religious 
views  of  the  Hussites,  and  particularly  of  the  Taborites,  were 
beginning  to  find  favour  even  in  countries  very  distant  from 
Bohemia.  Some  traces  of  this  popular  current  appear  even 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Hussite  wars.  Monstrelet  states  ^  that 
at  a  village  near  Douay  some  persons  suspected  of  Hussite 
heresy  were  arrested  and  burnt.  It  was  stated  that  some 
villages  in  the  Dauphine  had  sent  subsidies  to  the  Bohemians, 
and  that  revolutionary  bands  who  were  supposed  to  have 
some  connection  with  the  Hussites  had  appeared  in  the  county 
of  Forez,  and  had  been  exterminated  by  the  Bailiff  of  Macon.' 
The  longer  the  war  lasted  the  more  the  danger  increased, 
particularly  as  in  consequence  of  the  slowness  of  the  com- 
munications  the   news  of  the  great   Hussite   victories   only 

^  Professor  Droysen  has  very  eloquently  described  the  condition  of  Germany 
at  this  period;  the  passage  is  unfortunately  too  long  to  be  quoted  in  its 
entirety  :  "  Schon  begann,"  he  writes,  "  die  wilde  Gahrung  die  die  Massen  in 
so  vielen  Stadten  ergriffen  auch  beim  Landvolk  einzureissen  :  sie  seien  von 
den  Pfaffen  betrogen,  von  ihren  Herrschaften  preisgegeben.  Und  nicht 
bloss  in  den  zunachst  an  Bohmen  gelegenen  Gegenden ;  am  Rheine  traten  die 
armen  Leute  zu  '  Bauernschaften  '  zusammen  unter  gewahlten  Hauptleuten, 
und  eigenem  Banner  mit  dem  Bilde  des  gekreuzigten  Heilandes,  begannen 
nach  Hussitenart  umherzuziehen,  wagten  sich  selbst  an  Worms,  forderten  die 
Auslieferung  der  Pfaffen  und  Juden.  .  .  .  War  es  noch  moglich  sich  iiber 
die  unermessliche  Gefahr  in  der  Deutschland  stand  zu  tauschen  ?  Nur  eines 
Aufrufes  daherziehender  Hussitenhaufen  schien  es  zu  bediirfen  um  die  Masse 
des  deutschen  Volkes  zu  entfesseln "  {Geschichte  der  preussischen  Politik, 
Vol.^  I.  p.  382.     Leipzig,  1868). 

*  "  Et  d'austre  part  furent  trouvez  en  I'an  dessudit  [1420]  plusieurs  hommes 
et  femmes  tenans  ladicte  h6r6sie  [Hussitism]  et  faisant  leur  concile  ensemble, 
en  un  village  pr^s  Douay  nomme  Sains,  dedans  lequel  ilz  furent  trouvez  et 
menez  prisonniers  k  la  court  de  I'evesque  d' Arras  "  (Monstrelet,  Vol.  IV. 
chap,  cclix). 

'  Noel  Valois,  Le  Pape  et  le  concile  (14L1S-14J0),  Vol.  I.  p.  154. 


246  '  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

spread  gradually  in  Western  Europe.  In  a  letter  addressed  to 
the  Council  of  Basel  by  the  Bishop  of  Arras  on  March  30,  1432, 
he  writes  that  Bohemian  heresies  were  spreading  rapidly  in 
his  diocese.^  The  penalties  of  heresy  were  then  so  terrible, 
and  even  the  suspicion  of  not  being  a  firm  Roman  Catholic  so 
greatly  endangered  the  life  of  him  on  whom  such  a  suspicion 
fell,  that  we  have  naturally  but  very  scanty  information  con- 
cerning the  spreading  of  the  Hussite  doctrine  in  Western 
Europe.  It  is,  however,  probable  that  the  cases  mentioned 
above  were  by  no  means  isolated. 

These  considerations  undoubtedly  influenced  Prokop  when 
he  published  in  his  own  name  and  in  that  of  some  of  his  com- 
panions a  manifesto  addressed  to  the  whole  Christian  world. 
This  document,  entitled  *'  Epistola  Procopii  et  aliorum  Hussi- 
tarum  honorabilibus,  providis,  honestis  dominis,  consulibus 
et  toti  communitati,  divitibus  et  pauperibus,"  attempts  to 
justify  the  Hussites  and  very  skilfully  strives  to  create  distrust 
of  the  Catholic  clergy,  whom  the  Hussites  considered  their  most 
dangerous  enemies.  This  manifesto  was  first  published  in 
1430 — Martene  and  Durand's  version  has  no  date — and  again 
in  143 1.  The  two  documents  are,  however,  nearly  identical. 
Prokop  began  by  stating  that  there  had  for  a  long  time  been 
discord  between  the  Bohemians  and  the  Church  of  Rome,  and 
that  the  Bohemians  had  been  frequently  attacked  by  the 
Roman  Catholics.  Yet,  he  continued,  the  partisans  of  Rome 
had  never  granted  them  a  hearing  nor  heard  from  the  mouths 
of  the  Bohemians  what  their  doctrine  was.  This  Prokop 
attributed  to  the  influence  of  the  clergy,  who,  by  granting 
indulgences,  excited  the  people  to  exterminate  the  Hussites. - 

*  "  Pullulant  in  dies  in  dyocesi  ista  haereses  et  zizania  Bohemorum,  quibus 
nisi  viriliter  restitissem  cum  coadjutoribus,  et  modo  jugiter  vigilias  gregis 
custodirem,  in  agro  Domini  non  frumentum  veritatis,  sed  infelix  lolium 
doctrine  erronee  germinasset  "  (Quoted  by  Noel  Valois,  as  above,  Vol.  I. 
p.  158). 

*  "  De  hoc  miramur  valde  quod  vos  papae  et  omni  suo  sacerdotio  tantum 
confiditis  et  creditis  qui  vobis  dant  venenosum  ccetum,  alias  dant  intelligibile 
consulamen  in  eo,  quod  episcopi  vobis  dicunt,  remissionem  omnium  vestrorum 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  247 

Prokop  then  referred  to  the  executions  of  Hus  and  Jerome,  the 
authors  and  advisers  of  which  await  God's  punishment.  He 
then  again  complains  that  the  Hussites  were  not  allowed  to 
expound  their  views,  while  Jesus  Christ  had  even  allowed  the 
devil  to  address  Him.^  The  letter  then  formulates  in  sixteen 
*'  articles  "  the  grievances  of  the  Utraquists  against  the  Church 
of  Rome.  Many  grievances  are  here  alluded  to  which  have 
already  been  frequently  mentioned  in  these  pages.  Great 
stress  is  laid  on  the  poverty  of  the  clergy — a  point  on  which 
even  moderate  Utraquists  agreed  with  the  Taborites.  The 
writer  then  affirms  that  many  priests  enter  the  Church  without 
vocation  and  from  lower  motives.^  He  then  treats  of  the 
prayers  for  the  dead.  It  is  here  interesting  to  note  that  these 
prayers  are  not  absolutely  condemned,  a  circumstance  which 
proves  that  even  the  Taborist,  the  most  advanced  party  in 
the  Bohemian  Church,  approached  far  less  closely  to  modern 
Protestantism  than  has  often  been  stated.  It  is,  however, 
also  maintained  that  no  payment  should  be  taken  for  such 
services.^  The  letter  next  deals  with  the  vexed  question  of 
vestments  and  the  dress  of  priests  generally.  Prokop  himself, 
differing  in  this  respect  from  the  priests  of  the  Hussite  High 
Church,  who  dressed  like  other  Catholic  priests,  officiated  in 
the  clothes  which  he  habitually  wore,  "  a  coat  of  coarse  thick 
cloth."  He  accused  the  Catholic  priests  of  vanity,  and  wrote 
with  disapproval  of  their  "  long  tabards  and  other  garments." 
The  letter  then  referred  to  the  well-worn  subject  of  the 
immorality  of  the  clergy,  a  matter  constantly  discussed  by 


peccatorum.  Contribuunt  propter  hoc  ut  vos  debellare  debeatis  contra  nos 
et  nos  depopulare  "  (Martdne  et  Durand,  "  Veterum  Scriptorum  et  monu- 
mentorum  amplissima,"  Coll.  VIII.  p.  19.) 

*  "Christus  tamen  audivit  diabolum  ut  habetur  Matth.  cap.  10.  Et  ipsi 
[the  Roman  Catholic  priests]  non  sunt  meliores  Christo,  nee  nos  pejores 
diabolo  "  (Martdne  et  Durand,  as  above,  VIII.  pp.  19-20). 

*  "  Propter  vitam  otiosam  et  bene  comedere  et  bibere  et  ut  honorentur  et 
venerentur  super  terram  "  (Martdne  et  Durand,  as  above,  VIII.  p.  20). 

'  "  Quia  si  vellent  orare  pro  mortuis  et  animarum  missas  legere  .  .  .  tamen 
nullum  munus  propter  hoc  capere  debent,  neque  magnum,  neque  parvum  " 
(Martdne  et  Durand,  as  above,  VIII.  p.  20.) 


248  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

mediaeval  writers — even  by  those  who  were  firm  adherents  of 
the  Church  of  Rome.  On  this  subject  Prokop  wrote  with  a 
strong  bias ;  hke  many  priests  of  the  Utraquist  Church,  he  was 
a  married  man.  It  was  further  stated  that  the  priests,  to 
ingratiate  themselves  with  the  people,  told  them  many  tales 
(i.  e.  legends)  which  are  not  contained  in  Holy  Scripture. 
The  letter  finally  demanded  the  recognition  of  the  articles  of 
Prague. 

The  universal  desire  for  peace,  which  was  constantly  growing 
stronger  both  in  Bohemia  and  in  Germany,  manifested  itself 
in  a  somewhat  striking  fashion  towards  the  end  of  the  year 
1430.  All  parties  believed  that  the  only  means  of  obtaining 
peace  could  be  found  in  the  convocation  of  a  ecumenical 
council,  though  there  were  differences  of  opinion  with  regard 
to  its  constitution.  The  principal  obstacle  was  Pope  Martin 
V,  to  whom  even  the  word  "  council  "  was  obnoxious.  Some 
German  princes  imagined  a  somewhat  singular  way  of  intimat- 
ing to  the  Pope  that  the  Christian  world  demanded  that  the 
Council,  which  it  was  proposed  to  hold  at  Basel,  should  meet  as 
soon  as  possible.  On  November  8, 1430,  the  surprised  Romans 
found  that  a  somewhat  lengthy  document  had — according  to 
the  custom  of  the  time — been  affixed  to  the  gates  of  the  papal 
palace.  The  authors,  who  stated  that  they  were  two  illustrious 
princes,  declared  that,  considering  that  innumerable  persons 
had  since  the  Council  of  Constance  seceded  from  the  militant 
Church,  they  forwarded  the  following  statements  to  the 
Christian  princes,  as  all  Christian  laymen  as  well  as  priests  had 
the  duty  to  defend  the  Christian  faith.  The  conclusions  or 
"  articles,"  to  use  the  language  of  the  period,  declared  that 
the  Hussite  heresy  should  be  eradicated  by  a  Council,  as  had 
been  done  on  several  occasions  in  the  early  Church.  It  was, 
therefore,  necessary  that  the  Pope  should  convoke  a  general 
Council  not  later  than  in  March  of  the  following  year.  Should 
the  Pope  without  valid  reason  refuse  to  attend  the  Council, 
the  Council  might,  in  accordance  with  the  powers  given  it  by 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  249 

God,  depose  the  Pope.^  It  is  impossible  to  state  what  princes 
were  the  authors  of  this  strange  manifesto,  which  largely 
influenced  the  convocation  of  the  Council  of  Basel,  and  there- 
fore indirectly  the  termination  of  the  Hussite  wars.  Some 
writers  have  ascribed  this  document  to  the  Archduke  Albert 
of  Austria.  His  lands  had  suffered  severely  through  the 
Hussite  incursions,  and  he  also  had  a  future  claim  to  the 
Bohemian  crown,  as  heir  of  his  father-in-law  Sigismund.  Yet 
this  conjecture  appears  very  improbable,  for  the  Archduke 
Albert  fully  shared  that  feeling  of  intense  devotion  to  the  papal 
see,  which,  with  few  exceptions,  has  influenced  all  the  princes 
of  his  house  from  the  time  of  Rudolph  of  Habsburg.  The 
manifesto,  on  the  other  hand,  though  it  strongly  condemns  the 
Hussites,  is  obviously  the  work  of  a  member  of  the  moderate, 
not  of  the  intransigent  party  within  the  Church  of  Rome. 
Some  Romans  at  the  time  believed  the  manifesto  to  have  been 
drawn  up  by  the  Elector  Frederick  of  Brandenburg  and  by  his 

^  The  contents  of  this  strange  proclamation  are  contained  in  a  letter 
addressed  to  the  chancellor  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  by  a  Roman  corres- 
pondent. It  is  entitled  "  Conclusiones  positae  in  valvis  palatii  principis 
apostolorum  Mercurii,  viii  Novembris  mccccxxx. 

I.  Prima  conclusio.  Fides  catholica  adeo  est  privilegiata  quod  est  omni 
homini  praeferenda  .  .  . 

II.  Secunda  conclusio.  Nedum  ecclesiastici  venim  et  saeculares,  et  maxima 
principes  .  ,  .  adstricti  sunt  fidem  Christianam  defensare,  aliter  alieni  a 
fide  censendi  sunt. 

III.  Tertia  conclusio.  Sicut  haereses  Novatiani,  Arii,  Sabelli,  Macedonii, 
Nestorii  et  aliorum  haereticorum  per  generalia  concilia  exsufflatae  fuerunt : 
ita  necesse  est  pro  eradicatione  haeresis  Hussitarum  concilium  de  mense 
proximo  Martii  inevitabiliter  celebrare. 

IV.  Quarta  conclusio.  Cum  celebratio  concilii  generalis  sit  medium  neces- 
sarium  extirpandi  dictam  haeresin  quisquis  Christianus.  .  .  .  obnoxius  est 
promovere  .  .  .  celebrationem  concilii  generalis  fiendam  dicto  tempore. 

V.  Ubi  papa  vel  cardinales  desistant  promovere  aut  velint  impedire  cele- 
brationem concilii  generalis  dicto  tempore  fautores  haeresis  sunt  censendi. 

VI.  Sixta  conclusio.  Ubi  papa  in  proximo  mense  Martii  concilium  gene- 
rale  .  .  .  non  incipiat  quod  praesentas  tunc  in  concilio  jure  divino  sicut  sunt 
obnoxii  ei  primo  obedientiam  nomine  totius  Christianitatis  subtrahere,  et 
omnes  Christicolae  tenentur  praesentibus  in  concilio  generali  parere. 

VII.  Si  appareat  papam  et  cardinales  nolle  promovere  concilium  ...  ex 
potestate  concilio  data  a  Deo,  concilium  contra  non  promoventes  tenebitur 
procedere  ad  illius  vel  illorum  privationem  et  depositionem  .  .  .  et  alias 
poenas  a  jure  statu tas  contra  fautores  haeresis. — Martdne  et  Durand,  as  above, 
VIII.  pp.  48-49. 


250  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

son-in-law,  Duke  Louis  of  Brieg,  and  most  modern  writers  agree 
with  this  supposition.  It  has  been  pointed  out  ^  that  the 
wording  of  the  manifesto  recalls  the  statements  contained  in 
the  documents  drawn  up  by  the  Elector  during  the  negotiations 
at  Boheimstein.  The  Elector  Frederick  of  Brandenburg  has 
already  been  frequently  mentioned  in  these  pages.  Of  Duke 
Louis  of  Brieg,  a  Silesian  prince,  little  is  known.  During  the 
great  invasion  of  Silesia  he  was  said  to  have  been  somewhat 
half-hearted  when  opposing  the  Hussite  attacks. ^  It  is, 
however,  impossible  to  state  with  certainty  who  were  the 
authors  of  the  document. 

This  manifesto  greatly  impressed  Pope  Martin  V.  He  at 
last  consented  to  the  meeting  of  a  ecumenical  council,  whose 
members  were  to  assemble  at  Basel  in  March  1431.  Still, 
however,  preferring  to  subdue  the  Hussites  by  the  strength  of 
the  sword,  he  endeavoured  by  all  means  to  accelerate  the  new 
crusade  against  Bohemia.  To  accentuate  his  point  of  view 
the  Pope,  on  January  i,  1431,  appointed  Cardinal  Julian 
Cesarini  ^  papal  legate  for  Germany  and  entrusted  him  with 
the  negotiations  to  expedite  the  crusade.  Only  on  February  12, 
when  he  had  already  left  Rome,  the  cardinal  was  also  appointed 
president  of  the  future  Council.  Though  the  Pope  had  re- 
luctantly consented  to  the  meeting  of  the  Council,  it  is  not 
likely  that  his  life-long  aversion  to  these  assemblies — founded 
on  the  proceedings  of  the  Council  of  Constance,  which  in  his 

*  By  Dr.  v.  Bezold,  Konig  Sigmund  und  die  Reichskriege,  etc.,  Vol.  III.  p.  86. 

"  He  was  accused  of  having  surrendered  the  town  of  Brieg  to  the  Hussites 
without  resistance,  and  even  of  having  a  secret  agreement  with  them  (Griin- 
hagen,  Hussitenkdmpfe,  etc.,  pp.  137-139). 

'  At  a  period  when  accusations  against  unworthy  priests  play  so  large  a 
part  in  history,  it  is  well  to  note  the  truly  saintly  nature  of  Cesarini.  Dr. 
Pastor  {Geschichte  der  Pdbsie,  Vol.  I.  pp.  203-204)  writes  :  "  Von  seiner 
[Cesarini's]  Sittenreinheit  und  Frommigkeit  kann  Vespasiano  da  Bisticci 
kaum  genug  Lobenswerthes  erzahlen.  Der  Cardinal  .  .  .  schlief  stets  in 
einem  harenen  Busshemde,  fastete  jeden  Freitag  bei  Wasser  und  Brod.  .  .  . 
Nie  kam  mehr  als  ein  Gericht  auf  seinen  Tisch,  der  Wein  den  er  trank  war 
gefarbtes  Wasser.  .  .  .  '  Ich  habe  sehr  viele  heiligmassige  Manner  kennen 
gelernt,'  ruft  der  ehrliche  Vespasiano  da  Bisticci  aus,  '  aber  unter  ihneu 
keinen  der  dem  Cardinal  Cesarini  gleiche;  seit  fiinfhundert  Jahren  hat  die 
Kirche  keinen  solchen  Mann  gesehen.'" 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  251 

opinion  had  greatly  limited  the  papal  power — had  suddenly 
disappeared.  It  was  specially  displeasing  to  him  that  a  Council 
should  negotiate  with  heretics.  A  victory  in  the  coming  cam- 
paign would,  therefore,  appear  to  him  as  a  victory  not  only 
over  the  Hussites,  but  also  over  the  Council.  Had  the  Hussites 
been  subdued  by  the  strength  of  the  sword  it  would  become 
unnecessary  to  negotiate  with  them,  and  it  was  only  to  obtain 
peace  that  the  German  princes  demanded  the  convocation  of 
a  Council.  If  this  necessity  disappeared  it  would  be  easy  to 
dissolve  the  Council. 

Before  referring  to  this,  the  last,  crusade  against  the  Bo- 
hemians, it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  internal  condition  of 
Bohemia  at  this  moment,  and  also  to  refer  to  the  renewed 
negotiations  between  Bohemia  and  Poland.  The  intense 
dislike  and  distrust  of  ecumenical  councils  which  Pope 
Martin  entertained  inspired  him — as  he  now  no  longer  ex- 
pected much  help  from  Sigismund  and  Germany — with  the 
idea  of  seeking  aid  against  Hussitism  from  the  Polish  nation. 
He  had,  therefore,  before  consenting  to  the  convocation  of  the 
Council  of  Basel,  entered  into  negotiations  with  Ladislas,  King 
of  Poland,  and  his  cousin  Vitold,  Grand  Duke  of  Lithuania. 
In  a  letter  addressed  to  them  on  October  i,  1430,  he  begged  the 
princes  to  undertake  the  task  of  either  converting  the  heretics 
or  destroying  them.  He  gave  them  permission  to  negotiate 
with  those  who  had  deserted  the  Church  and  to  grant  them 
pardon,  and  he  was  even  ready  to  consent  to  any  concessions 
the  princes  might  make,  unless  they  were  contrary  to  the  faith 
and  the  regulations  of  the  Church ;  should  the  Hussites,  how- 
ever, refuse  to  be  converted,  the  princes  were  to  destroy  them 
in  any  manner  possible,  and  they  were  not  to  consider  them- 
selves as  bound  by  any  previous  promise,  even  if  it  had  been 
confirmed  by  oath ;  for  it  was  within  the  power  of  the  Church 
to  annul  all  promises ;  and  every  one  could  neglect  his  natural 
duties,  to  his  father,  son,  brother,  or  other  relation,  and  even 
commit  parricide  if  this  was  to  the  advantage  of  the  Catholic 


252  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

Church.^  This  message,  which  must  of  course  be  judged 
according  to  the  spirit  of  that  time,  was  given  to  a  special  envoy, 
Brother  Andrew  of  the  Dominican  Order. 

When  the  papal  envoy  arrived  at  the  end  of  his  long  journey, 
Vitold  was  already  dead,  but  King  Ladislas  for  a  time  earnestly 
attempted  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation  between  the  Hussites 
and  the  Church  of  Rome.  His  now  well-known  duplicity, 
however,  caused  him  to  be  distrusted  by  all  parties.  It  is 
probable  that  Prince  Korybutovi^ — whose  personality  con- 
trasts somewhat  favourably  with  those  of  the  other  Polish 
and  Lithuanian  dignitaries  of  his  time — suggested  that  some 
Bohemian  generals  and  divines  should  be  invited  to  Poland 
and  should  there  hold  a  disputation  with  some  Roman  Catholic 
theologians.  When  Prokop,  who  was  then  engaged  in  warfare 
in  Silesia,  was  informed  of  this  proposal  he  avoided  giving  a 
definite  answer,  but  deferred  the  matter  to  the  Bohemian 
estates.  They  met  at  Kutna  Hora  on  February  ii,  143 1. 
A  new  attempt  to  establish  a  provisional  government  was  now 
made.  Prince  Korybutovic  had  been  obliged  to  leave  Bohemia, 
and  though  he  had  begun  to  take  part  in  the  border  warfare, 
which  continued  on  the  frontiers  of  Bohemia,  Silesia  and 
Poland  during  the  whole  period  of  the  Hussite  wars,  his 
partisans  in  Bohemia  were  not  numerous.  The  notorious 
duplicity  of  his  uncle,  King  Ladislas,  who  had  expressed 
sympathy  with  Bohemia  at  a  moment  when  he  was  plotting 
the  ruin  of  that  country  in  league  with  King  Sigismund  and 
Pope  Martin,  had  naturally,  though  unjustly,  caused  the 
Bohemians  to  distrust  Korybutovic.  King  Sigismund,  whom 
many  Bohemians,  even  Utraquists,  would  now  have  been 
ready  to  recognise  as  King,  still  persisted  in  demanding  an 
unconditional  surrender  to  Rome.  Even  the  most  moderate 
Utraquist  noble  could  not  accept  this  as  a  possible  result  of  ten 
years  of  victorious  warfare.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
only  alternative  to  complete  anarchy  appeared  to  be  the 

*  Tomek,  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  p.  476. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  253 

establishment  of  another  provisional  government.  It  was, 
therefore,  decided  to  appoint  twenty  regents,  chosen  among 
the  nobles,  knights,  squires  ("  zemane  "),  Praguers,  Taborites, 
and  Orphans.  Immediately  afterwards  it  was  agreed  to  send 
representatives  to  Poland,  who  were  to  take  part  in  the  dis- 
putations which  had  been  proposed.  The  leader  of  this 
embassy  was  Prokop  the  Great,  who,  since  his  victories  of 
Usti  and  Tachov  and  his  triumphant  campaign  in  Germany, 
hadfor  a  time  become  practically, though  not  formally,  Dictator 
of  Bohemia.  Other  priests  who  formed  part  of  the  mission 
were  Frederick  of  Strasnice  and  Peter  Payne.  Among  the 
lay  members  of  the  embassy  the  chroniclers  mention  Lord 
Kostka  of  Postupie  and  several  town-councillors  of  Prague. 
The  delegates  first  proceeded  to  the  castle  of  Sleiwitz  in  Silesia, 
where  Prince  Korybutovic  was  then  residing.  From  there 
they  sent  messengers  to  King  Ladislas  to  inquire  when  and 
where  the  proposed  disputation  should  take  place.  The 
message  found  the  King  at  Cracow,  and  he  immediately  decided 
that  the  deliberations  should  begin  there  on  March  18.  The 
Bohemians  immediately  started  for  Cracow,  accompanied 
by  Prince  Korybutovic  and  the  Polish  nobleman,  Dobeslav 
Puchala,  who  had  lately  been  fighting  in  Silesia  on  the  side 
of  the  Hussites.  Contrary  to  the  then  general  custom  on  the 
occasion  of  theological  disputations,  only  the  Bohemian  and 
the  Polish  languages  were  used  during  the  discussions  which 
now  began.  The  Bohemians,  as  on  previous  occasions,  wished 
to  discuss  and  defend  the  articles  of  Prague.  King  Ladislas 
and  the  Polish  Church  dignitaries,  however,  declared  that 
the  Bohemians  should  obey  the  orders  of  the  Pope.  The  dis- 
cussion, as  was  inevitable,  therefore  remained  resultless.  The 
priests  Prokop,  Frederick,  and  Peter  entirely  refused  to 
recognise  the  papal  decrees  as  absolutely  decisive,  and  Prokop 
maintained  that  the  Utraquists  formed  part  of  the  universal 
Church.  King  Ladislas  himself  addressed  the  Bohemian 
envoys  in  a  courteous  fashion,  and  reminded  them  of  the  great 


254  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

misfortunes  which  had  befallen  their  country  because  of  heresy. 
He  specially  admonished  the  Bohemian  nobles  to  return  to 
the  fold  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade 
them  to  act  independently  of  the  other  national  parties.  On 
April  4  King  Ladislas,  on  the  advice  of  his  councillors,  suggested 
to  the  Bohemians  that  they  should  sign  a  document  stating 
that  they  would  attend  a  ecumenical  council  of  the  Holy 
Roman  Church,  whether  held  at  Basel  or  elsewhere.  The 
document  also  contained  the  promise  that  the  Bohemians 
would  accept  and  observe  indissolubly  all  the  decisions  of  the 
Council.  The  Bohemians  immediately  declined  to  sign  this 
document,  whose  contents,  indeed,  amounted  to  an  uncon- 
ditional surrender.  The  Hussites  had  demanded  to  appear  on 
terms  of  equality  at  a  council  in  which  the  whole  Christian 
world  was  to  be  represented,  and  hoped  that,  should  they  be 
able  to  prove  the  truth  of  their  tenets,  the  Council  would 
accept  them.  The  King  of  Poland  now  suggested  a  Council 
of  the  Roman  Church,  which  was  to  be  entirely  under  the 
direction  of  the  Pope,  and  he  demanded  that  they  should,  as 
erring  sons,  submit  themselves  unconditionally  to  this  papal 
assembly — as  the  Hussites  considered  it.  The  desire  for  peace 
was,  however,  at  that  moment  already  so  strong  that  the 
refusal  was  couched  in  very  courteous  language.  The  Bo- 
hemians begged  the  King  of  Poland  to  intercede  in  their 
favour,  that  they  might  obtain  letters  of  safe  conduct  which 
would  enable  them  to  attend  the  Council ;  they  also  suggested 
that  the  negotiations  begun  at  Cracow  might  be  continued  in 
Prague  at  the  coming  meeting  of  the  estates,  to  which  they 
begged  the  King  of  Poland  to  send  representatives. 

Though  the  Bohemians  showed  great  moderation  on  this 
occasion  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  left  Cracow  greatly  dis- 
appointed and  somewhat  indignant.  It  was  not  the  first,  nor 
by  any  means  the  last,  time  that  the  Bohemians  wrongly 
placed  their  trust  in  the  kindred  Polish  nation.  An  incident 
which  occurred  during  the  stay  of  the  Bohemians  in  Cracow 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  255 

also  caused  great  irritation  among  them.  The  very  zealous, 
but  somewhat  tactless,  Bishop  Zbynev  of  Cracow  had  decreed 
that  all  religious  services  in  the  town  were  to  cease  during  the 
presence  of  the  Hussite  heretics.  When  during  Easter  week 
the  Polish  royal  family  wished  to  assist  at  the  religious  func- 
tions, the  Bohemian  envoys  were  requested  to  take  up  their 
residence  in  the  suburb  of  Kazimef,  situated  outside  the  city 
boundaries.^  The  bishop  obstinately  insisted  on  this  measure, 
though  many  of  the  King  of  Poland's  councillors  disapproved 
of  it.  The  chivalrous  Prince  Korybutovic  declared  that  the 
Bohemians,  whom  he  considered  his  guests,  had  been  insulted, 
and  sent  to  the  bishop  a  letter  "  declaring  his  enmity  to  him."  ^ 
During  the  period  which  begins  with  the  return  of  the 
Bohemian  armies  from  Germany  in  the  spring  of  1430  and  ends 
with  the  march  of  these  armies  to  the  frontier  to  oppose  the 
crusade  of  143 1,  the  warfare  on  the  frontiers  never  entirely 
ceased,  but  it  had  little  influence  on  the  general  course  of 
events.  Probably  as  early  as  in  March  1430,  a  large  Bohemian 
force,  consisting  of  10,000  infantry  and  1,200  horsemen,  again 
invaded  Silesia.  Prokop  himself,  who  was  retained  at  Prague 
by  deliberations  that  were  then  taking  place  there,  took  no 
part  in  this  raid,  of  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  give  a  detailed 
account.  The  Bohemians  were  joined  by  Prince  Korybutovic, 
and  with  their  help  he  obtained  possession  of  the  small  Silesian 
principality  of  Sleiwitz,  which  has  already  been  mentioned. 
In  April  of  the  same  year  another  Bohemian  army  invaded 
Hungary.  This  army  consisted  of  the  soldiers  of  the  Orphans 
and  the  levies  of  the  New  Town  of  Prague.  Commanded  by 
Velek  Koudelnik  and  the  priest  Prokupek  (Prokop  the 
Lesser),  they  marched  on  the  city  of  Tymau,  where  Sigis- 
mund  was  then  residing.  He  was  on  the  point  of  starting  for 
Germany,  intent  on  holding  another  of  his  numerous  imperial 

'  See  Professor  Goll,  Cechy  a  Prusy  {Bohemia  and  Prussia),  p.  220. 

*  This  in  the  language  of  chivalry  signified  a  challenge  to  single  combat; 
there  was  nothing  unusual  in  such  a  challenge  at  a  period  when  bishops  were 
warriors  as  well  as  dignitaries  of  the  Church. 


256  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

diets.  The  King  was  obliged  to  send  a  messenger  to  Niirnberg, 
where  the  German  princes  were  to  meet,  informing  them 
that  he  was  detained  in  Hungary  by  the  attack  of  the  Orphans. 
It  was  necessary  to  meet  the  enemies  in  the  open  field;  but 
Sigismund,  never  a  keen  soldier,  entrusted  the  command  of  the 
Hungarian  army  to  Stibor,  Duke  of  Transylvania,  and  John 
Matik  of  Telovec,  a  Hungarian  magnate.  The  first  attack  of 
Stibor  was  so  spirited  that  his  horsemen  penetrated  into  the 
wagon-entrenchment  of  the  Hussites.  Velek  Koudelnik 
fell  while  endeavouring  to  defend  his  camp.  The  arrival  of 
Bohemian  reinforcements,  however,  obliged  the  Hungarians 
to  retreat,  particularly  as  their  second  army,  under  Matik, 
wrongly  believing  that  their  comrades  had  been  defeated,  had 
already  begun  to  retire.  The  battle  was,  considering  the  small 
number  of  soldiers  who  were  engaged,  very  bloody.  The 
Bohemians  lost  2,000  men,  and  the  losses  of  the  Hungarians 
amounted  to  6,000  dead  and  wounded.  The  Hussites,  as 
was  their  custom  when  waging  offensive  warfare,  did  not 
attempt  to  retain  permanent  possessions  in  foreign  lands. 
Shortly  after  their  victory  at  Tyrnau  they  returned  to 
Moravia.  These  raids  of  smaller  or  larger  Hussite  bands 
into  the  neighbouring  country  continued  during  the  summer 
and  autumn  of  the  year  1430.  On  December  21  the  Orphans 
started  on  another  foreign  expedition,  invading  Lusatia, 
which  had  hitherto  suffered  less  than  the  other  neighbouring 
countries. 

Immediately  after  the  departure  of  the  Bohemian  envoys 
King  Ladislas,  on  April  7,  143 1,  addressed  a  letter  to  King 
Sigismund  informing  him  of  the  results  of  the  disputation  at 
Cracow  and  of  his  intention  to  be  represented  at  the  diet  of 
Prague.  He  also  begged  him  to  consult  the  German  princes 
as  to  the  best  way  in  which  he  could  obtain  letters  of  safe 
conduct  for  the  Hussite  leaders  who  wished  to  attend  the 
Council.  Before  this  letter  reached  Sigismund,  who  had  now 
arrived  at   Niirnberg,  he   had   already  received  secret  com- 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  257 

munications  from  some  Bohemian  nobles  favourable  to  his 
cause.  They  had  advised  him  also  to  send  representatives 
to  the  diet  of  Prague.  The  King  readily  consented.  He  was 
above  all  things  anxious  to  terminate  the  struggle  with  the 
Hussites.  The  Hussite  wars  have  so  great  an  importance 
in  the  world's  history  that  it  is  difficult  to  realise  how  largely 
Sigismund  was,  during  this  period,  occupied  with  other  matters, 
which  even  to  the  historian  now  appear  unimportant.  At  this 
moment  the  King  of  Hungary  was  principally  interested  in 
the  expedition  to  Italy  which  he  had  planned.  He  hoped  to 
be  there  crowned  as  Emperor  by  the  Pope,  and  he  had  already 
sent  in  advance  some  of  his  soldiers  to  Southern  Germany 
along  the  road  by  which  he  intended  to  enter  Italy.  The  fact 
that  the  Germans  had  recently  frequently  fled  at  the  mere 
approach  of  the  Hussites — and  this  applies  not  only  to  some 
of  the  larger  battles,  but  also  to  many  smaller  engagements 
which  it  has  not  been  possible  to  mention  here — naturally 
rendered  Sigismund  reluctant  to  attempt  a  new  crusade.  He 
therefore  gladly  agreed  to  the  suggestion  of  his  adherents  and 
appointed  the  Burgrave  of  the  Karlstyn  Zdislav  of  Bufenic 
and  Nicholas  Lobkowitz  of  Hasistyn  his  representatives  at 
Prague.  The  regents  chosen  in  the  previous  year  had  decreed 
that  the  diet  should  meet  at  Prague  on  May  i,  1431.  They  had 
also  wisely  settled  that  some  time  previously  the  Taborite 
divines  and  those  representing  the  moderate  Utraquists  should 
meet  for  the  purpose  of  exchanging  their  views,  and  if  possible 
arriving  at  an  understanding.  The  regents  thoroughly  under- 
stood that  it  would  be  necessary  that  all  members  of  the 
Bohemian  Church  should  formulate  their  tenets  in  an  identical 
manner.  They  thought — rightly,  as  events  proved — that  any 
appearance  of  disunion  among  the  Hussites  would  be  very 
advantageous  to  their  antagonists.  Somewhat  later  than  had 
been  intended,  on  April  30,  the  Bohemian  divines,  representa- 
tives of  the  moderate  Utraquists  (the  so-called  '*  Praguers  "), 

the  Taborites,  and  Orphans  met  at  the  university  college 
s 


258  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

known  as  the  Carolinum.  Master  John  of  Rokycan  spoke 
first,  in  the  name  of  the  Praguers.  Most  of  Rokycan's  griev- 
ances referred  to  matters  which  had  already  been  frequently 
discussed.  He  said  that  the  Taborites,  who  did  not  recognise 
the  validity  of  some  of  the  sacraments,  reviled  those  who  used 
them,  that  they  did  not  pray  for  the  souls  of  the  dead  and 
dissuaded  others  from  doing  so.  He  maintained  that  they 
did  not  sufficiently  honour  the  holy  hierarchy,  the  angels  and 
saints,  and  the  Virgin  Mary,  that  they  did  not  observe  the  fast- 
days  which  had  been  established  at  an  early  period  of  Christi- 
anity, and  that  they  did  not  prevent  the  faithful  from  engaging 
in  warfare  not  waged  in  defence  of  the  law  of  God.  Some  of  the 
Taborite  priests,  Rokycan  continued,  had  exercised  functions 
of  secular  government  ("  secularis  dominii  "),  and  the  Taborites 
had  entirely  abandoned  the  use  of  vestments  when  celebrating 
mass ;  they  had  omitted  to  make  the  sign  of  the  cross  during 
mass,  as  well  as  to  add  water  to  the  wine  during  mass,  and  the_y 
had  been  guilty  of  other  irregularities. 

Judging  of  Rokycan's  own  views  by  the  objections  he  raised 
to  the  teaching  of  the  Taborites,  it  appears  clear  that  these 
views  were  in  many  respects  closely  connected  with  the  tenets 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  Yet  it  must  be  remembered 
that  Rokycan  cannot  be  rightly  considered  a  thorough  member 
of  the  Hussite  High  Church.  At  the  moment  of  the  rising 
of  the  people  of  Prague  against  Korybutovic  he  had  even 
been  one  of  those  who  demanded  the  expulsion  of  Pribram, 
Mladenovic,  and  other  High-Churchmen. 

The  Taborites  immediately  replied  on  all  the  points  raised 
by  Rokycan.  They  said  that  they  recognised  six  sacraments.^ 
They  denied  that  the  sacrament  of  extreme  unction  had  been 
established  by  Jesus  Christ,  but  they  raised  no  objection  to  the 
practice  of  administering  extreme  unction  to  sick  or  dying 
men  if   they  desired  it.     As  to  the  prayers  for  the  dead  the 

^  This  is  noteworthy,  as  many  German  Lutheran  writers  have  stated  that 
the  Taborites  recognised  only  two  sacraments. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  259 

Tdboritcs  objected  to  them,  as  they  found  in  Scripture  no 
positive  statement  affirming  the  existence  of  purgatory  nor 
any  injunction  to  pray  for  the  dead;  they  also  stated  that 
these  prayers  often  caused  simony  to  be  committed.  They 
disapproved  of  prayers  to  the  saints,  but  declared  that  their 
memory  should  be  honoured  and  respected.  The  Taborites 
did  not  disapprove  of  fasting,  but  said  that  every  Christian 
should  himself  determine  when  to  do  so ;  he  should,  however, 
when  doing  this  take  into  consideration  the  times  mentioned 
in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  specially  suitable  for  fasting. 
The  answer  of  the  Taborites  to  Rokycan's  rather  unfair  accusa- 
tion of  favouring  bloodshed  and  warfare  was  appropriate 
and  dignified.  They  declared  that  originally  none  of  those 
whom  the  teaching  of  Master  John  Hus  had  converted  had 
any  intention  to  fight.  "  But,"  they  continued,  "  when  our 
opponents  began  to  use  violent  means  against  us,  then  our 
whole  nation,  which  did  not  wish  to  abandon  the  good  cause 
and  turn  away  from  the  Catholic  Church,^  out  of  necessity  began 
to  go  to  war,  and  all  the  priests  and  masters  of  Prague  un- 
animously agreed  to  this."  The  Taborites  further  stated  that 
they  could  not  condemn  wars  forced  on  them  by  necessity, 
and  that  such  a  necessity  still  existed.  They  were  ready 
immediately  to  abandon  warfare  if  the  enemies  would  tread 
the  path  of  truth  and  justice,  and  they  had  always  preferred 
to  employ  spiritual  warfare,  that  is,  prayer  and  mild  persuasion, 
for  the  purpose  of  leading  the  enemy  to  concord  and  agree- 
ment. They  could  not  prevent  many  who  had  evil  intentions 
from  joining  their  armies,  but  they  deeply  regretted  it,  and  had 
issued  severe  regulations  to  maintain  order  in  their  camps. 
With  regard  to  Rokycan's  statement  that  Taborite  priests  had 
assumed  the  duties  of  secular  government,  the  Taborites 
declared  that  they  had  decreed  at  their  convocations  that  no 
priest  or  person  who  had  received   the  higher  orders  should 

1  This  is,  of  course,  to  be  understood  in  the  Hussite  sense  of  the  word ;  they 
always  maintained  that  they  belonged  to  the  Catholic  Church. 


26o  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

engage  in  temporal  affairs ;  yet  as  there  were  improvident  and 
careless  laymen,  they  would  not  judge  or  condemn  a  priest 
who,  inspired  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  established  peace  and  order 
among  secular  men,  thus  assuming  functions  which  laymen 
had  proved  incapable  of  exercising.  They  were  also  sure  that 
there  were  no  priests  among  them  who  would  not  gladly 
renounce  such  functions  if  it  were  possible  for  them  to  do  so. 
With  regard  to  the  use  of  vestments,  the  last  point  which 
Rokycan  had  raised,  the  Taborites  maintained  the  views 
which  they  had  previously  held.  They  said  that  concerning 
mass  and  Communion,  certain  matters  were  essential,  these 
were  the  necessary  materials,  bread  and  wine,  the  ritual  words 
at  the  moment  of  consecration,  and  the  presence  of  a  lawfully 
ordained  priest,  who  had  the  intention  of  celebrating  mass; 
other  matters — and  this  referred  specially  to  the  vestments  of 
the  priests — could  be  observed  or  neglected  without  incurring 
sin  in  either  case.^  The  priests  of  the  Orphans  then  expounded 
their  views,  which  were  intermediate  between  those  of  the 
Praguers  and  those  of  the  Taborites.^  Their  statements, 
however,  appear  to  have  been  considered  unimportant,  and 
are  hardly  mentioned  by  the  contemporary  writers.  When 
reading  the  authentic  statements  expounding  the  views  of  the 
different  Hussite  parties,  it  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  by 
the  comparative  moderation  of  the  opinions  expressed.  It  is 
certain  that  the  Hussite  parties,  intending  to  appear  jointly 
before  the  universal  council  of  the  Church,  endeavoured  to 
attenuate  the  differences  which  existed  between  them  as  to 
matters  of  ritual  and  doctrine.  It  is  also  certain  that  during 
the  whole  period  of  the  Hussite  wars  there  were  many  fanatics 
holding  views  that  differed  widely  from  those  recorded  above. 
Yet  every  Bohemian,  to  whatever  branch  of  Christianity  he 

^  I  have  founded  my  account  of  these  discussions  on  the  "  Chronicon  Tabori- 
tarum  "  (Hofler,  Geschichtsschreiber,  etc..  Vol.  II.  pp.  475-480). 

*  "  The  Orphans  on  some  points  agreed  with  the  masters  of  Prague,  on 
others  opposed  them  in  union  with  the  Taborites  "  ("  Scriptores  rerum  B<.>hemi- 
carum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  80). 


1 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  261 

may  belong,  is  justified  in  objecting  to  the  statements  of  those 
writers  who — from  pohtical  rather  than  from  religious  motives 
— describe  lengthily  the  deeds  and  words  of  sometimes  crazy 
fanatics,  but  ignore  the  teaching  of  what  was  for  a  long  time 
the  dominant  Church  in  Bohemia. 

The  meeting  of  the  Bohemian  diet  took  place  immediately 
after  the  disputations  in  the  Carolinum.  The  King  of  Poland 
and  King  Sigismund  had  both  sent  representatives.  The 
proceedings  were  of  short  duration,  and  turned  principally 
on  the  question  whether  the  Bohemians  should  accept  the 
invitation  of  Sigismund,  who  had  asked  them  to  send  repre- 
sentatives to  Cheb,  where  the  conditions  of  the  coming  Council 
were  to  be  again  discussed.  The  Bohemians  were  at  this 
moment  better  disposed  to  Sigismund  than  to  the  King  of 
Poland.  The  conflict  between  Pope  Eugenius  IV — Pope 
Martin  had  died  on  February  20 — and  the  Council,  which  began 
to  assemble  at  Basel  in  the  spring  of  143 1,  had  an  indirect  but 
not  inconsiderable  influence  on  the  course  of  events  in  Bohemia. 
Sigismund  was  at  that  moment  considered  an  upholder  of  the 
authority  of  ecumenical  councils,  which  moderate  men  even 
in  Bohemia  were  inclined  to  recognise.  The  King  of  Poland 
then  was,  or  pretended  to  be,  an  unconditional  supporter  of 
Pope  Eugenius.  Though  there  was  some  opposition  on  the 
part  of  the  Orphans,  who  cherished  their  hatred  of  Sigismund 
as  a  legacy  of  their  dead  leader,  the  Bohemians  decided  to 
send  representatives  to  Cheb.  As  had  become  customary, 
Utraquist  nobles  with  representatives  of  the  communities  of 
Tabor  and  of  the  Orphans  and  delegates  of  the  cities  of  Prague 
composed  the  new  embassy.  Prokop  did  not  form  part  of  it. 
He  joined  the  Hussite  army,  that  was  then  carrying  on  guerilla 
warfare  in  Silesia,  and  undoubtedly  wished  at  this  important 
moment  to  bring  pressure  on  the  enemies  and  convey  to  them 
that  the  negotiations  had  not  yet  advanced  sufficiently  to 
render  the  conclusion  of  an  armistice  possible. 

The  negotiations  which  began  at  Cheb  on  May  24  were 


262  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

similar  in  character  to  those  at  Pressburg  and  Cracow  and 
equally  resultless.  The  principal  speaker  on  the  national 
side  was  Lord  Kostka  of  Postupic,  who  had  already  taken 
part  in  several  similar  discussions.  The  Bohemians  again 
demanded  that  the  Council  in  which  they  were  to  take  part 
should  be  a  truly  ecumenical  one,  to  which  members  of  the 
Greek  and  the  Oriental  Churches  should  be  admitted.  Sigis- 
mund,  who  was  present  at  Cheb  accompanied  by  many  German 
princes,  rejected  this  proposal,  which,  indeed,  he  considered 
ridiculous.^  The  King  then  suggested  that  the  Hussites 
should  leave  to  the  Council  the  final  decision  as  to  what  was 
true  Scriptural  doctrine.  The  Hussites  replied  that  they  would 
die  rather  than  submit  unconditionally  to  the  Council,  and 
they  also  rejected  Sigismund's  proposal  that  an  armistice 
should  be  concluded  which  was  to  last  during  the  time  in 
which  the  Council  continued  its  deliberations.  This  concluded 
the  negotiations,  and  the  Bohemian  envoys  hurriedly  returned 
to  Prague,  where  they  called  on  their  countrymen  to  be  ready 
to  resist  an  immediate  German  invasion. 

Sigismund  had  in  August  1430  returned  to  Germany  after 
an  absence  of  nearly  eight  years.  It  was  now  his  duty  to 
superintend  the  organisation  of  a  new  crusade.  He  did  this 
reluctantly,  remembering  the  failure  of  previous  expeditions, 
yet  it  appears  that  from  the  time  when  he  had  received  Prokop 
at  Pressburg  he  had  been  planning  a  new  invasion  of  Bohemia. 
In  February  1431  the  German  princes  began  to  assemble  at 
Niirnberg,  where  the  long  -  deferred  imperial  diet  was  to 
meet.  The  festivities  on  this  occasion  were  v^ery  brilliant,  and 
the  German  princes  attended  in  large  numbers.  As  soon, 
however,  as  the  serious  deliberation  began  great  difficulties 
arose.     The  free  so-called  "  imperial  "  cities  possessed  great 

*  "  Subjunxerunt  etiam  [the  Hussites]  quod  in  hujusmodi  concilio  totius 
Christianitatis  etiam  Indi,  Grceci,  Armeni,  schismatici  et  breviter  omnes 
Christum  confitentes  interesse  deberent  et  plura  aha  quse  ad  scribendum  magis 
ridiculosa  quam  utilia  forent  "  (Palacky,  Vrkundliche  Beitra^e,  Vol.  11. 
pp.  209-214.) 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  263 

privileges,  and  had  formerly  been  favoured  by  Sigismund. 
Influenced  probably  by  the  Suabian  nobles  the  King  now  took 
up  an  attitude  very  hostile  to  these  miniature  republics. 
When  the  question  of  the  levies  and  financial  grants  which 
were  required  for  the  new  crusade  arose,  these  cities,  therefore, 
proved  more  reluctant  than  on  any  previous  occasion.^  While 
these  discussions  affecting  the  private  interests  of  various 
German  princes  and  cities  were  being  carried  on  with  great 
acrimony  the  papal  legate.  Cardinal  Cesarini,  arrived  at  Niirn- 
berg  on  March  4.  His  religious  enthusiasm  greatly  contrasted 
with  the  indifference  and  egoism  of  the  German  princes.  He 
appeared  before  the  diet  and  stated  that  he  had  been  sent  by 
the  Pope  to  further  the  coming  crusade  by  word  and  by 
deed.  When  shortly  afterwards  the  proceedings  at  Niirnberg 
terminated  and  Sigismund  proceeded  to  Cheb,  as  already 
mentioned.  Cardinal  Cesarini  repaired  to  Germany  and  the 
Netherlands,  calling  on  all  faithful  Christians  to  take  part  in 
the  holy  war.  It  is  evident  that  at  this  moment  the  papal  see 
was  more  intent  on  the  result  of  the  coming  crusade  than  on 
the  meeting  of  the  Council.  Though  Cesarini  had  been  ap- 
pointed papal  representative  at  the  Council  he  avoided  visiting 
Basel,  skilfully  explaining  his  absence  by  the  fact  that  he  had 
not  yet  received  instructions  from  the  new  Pope,  Eugenius  IV. 
The  papal  see  no  doubt  thought  that  should  the  new  warhke 
enterprise  prove  successful  Hussitism  could  be  exterminated, 
and  negotiations  with  the  Hussites  would  become  unnecessary ; 
in  that  case  it  would  be  well  to  close  the  Council  as  soon  as 
possible.  The  cardinal  first  visited  Wiirzburg  and  Frankfort, 
and  then  visited  several  princes  in  the  lands  situated  near  the 
Rhine.  He  received  promises  of  aid  from  the  Elector  Palatine, 
the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  the  town  of  Koln,  and  the  Bishop  of 
Lieges,  and  then  returned  to  Niirnberg,  greatly  pleased  with 
the  results  of  his  mission.     He  was  here,  however,  to  meet  with 

'  The  lengthy  deliberations  of   the  diet  of   Numberg  are  well  described 
in  Dr.  v.  Bezold's  Konig  Sigmund  und  die  Reichskriege,  etc.,  Vol.  III. 


264  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

a  great  disappointment.  The  incessant  bitter  feuds  among  the 
German  princes  and  free  cities  continued  as  usual  during  the 
year  143 1,  and  even  the  princes  who  had  just  promised  their 
aid  to  Cardinal  Julian  forgot  Bohemia  as  soon  as  he  had  left 
them  and  again  engaged  in  civil  warfare.  Thus  the  Duke  of 
Burgundy  took  part  in  the  contest  for  the  succession  to  the 
duchy  of  Lorraine,  and  several  other  German  princes  aided 
each  of  the  two  rival  claimants  to  the  succession  to  the  duchy. 
Internal  warfare  also  began  between  two  rival  candidates  to 
the  archbishopric  of  Trier,  and  a  feud  broke  out  between  the 
Archbishop  of  Magdeburg  and  the  citizens  of  that  town. 
These  were  the  principal,  though  not  the  only,  feuds  raging  in 
Germany  during  the  year  1431.  Though  the  diet  had  decreed 
that  the  crusaders  should  start  on  their  march  in  spring,  it  was 
only  on  June  26  that  King  Sigismund  appointed  Frederick, 
Elector  of  Brandenburg,  commander-in-chief.  On  July  i 
Cardinal  Cesarini  issued  a  proclamation  in  which  he  called  on 
all  Germans  to  start  immediately  on  the  crusade.  About  this 
time  numerous  German  soldiers  began  to  march  through 
Niirnberg  on  their  way  to  the  Bohemian  frontier.  Cesarini, 
who  had  no  knowledge  of  military  matters,  believed  them  to  be 
far  more  numerous  than  was  actually  the  case.  Feeling, 
therefore,  very  confident,  he  addressed  a  proclamation  to  the 
people  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  calling  on  them  to  submit 
at  last  to  the  papal  authority,  and  promising  them  peace  and 
quiet  should  they  do  so.  The  cardinal  then,  as  was  so  often 
done  during  the  Hussite  wars,  appealed  to  the  Bohemian 
nobles,  calling  on  them  not  to  submit  to  the  arrogance  of 
heretical  townsmen  and  peasants.  At  the  same  time  King 
Sigismund  also  published  a  proclamation  throwing  on  the 
Hussites  the  full  responsibility  for  the  rupture  of  the  recent 
negotiations  at  Cheb,  and  protesting  against  the  accusation 
that  he  was  invading  Bohemia  to  burn  the  cities,  ravage  the 
country,  and  murder  women  and  children.  In  answer  to 
these  proclamations  the  united  Utraquists    on  July  21  pub- 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  265 

lished  a  manifesto  addressed  to  the  whole  Christian  world.  It 
began  by  again  enumerating  the  articles  of  Prague,  and  strongly 
maintained  that  the  Utraquists  had  always  been  favourable 
to  a  peaceful  agreement  and  had  proved  this  by  taking  part 
in  the  negotiations  at  Pressburg,  Cracow,  and  Cheb.  They, 
however,  strongly  protested  against  the  attempt  of  the  Roman 
Church  to  assume  in  the  place  of  Jesus  Christ  the  position  of 
supreme  arbitrator  on  the  question  of  true  Christianity.  They 
then  drew  a  contrast,  worded  in  very  bitter  words,  between  the 
life  of  the  Apostles  and  that  of  the  pontiffs  of  the  period.^  The 
bitter  hatred  of  the  Roman  priesthood  and  the  striving  for  a 
return  to  the  primitive  Church,  so  characteristic  of  the  Hussite 
movement,  appear  very  clearly  in  this  interesting  document. 

On  July  7  Cardinal  Cesarini  left  Niirnberg  and  proceeded 
as  far  as  the  town  of  Weiden,  where  part  of  the  army  had 
already  assembled.  The  crusaders,  from  motives  which  it  is 
difficult  to  fathom,  remained  near  this  town  up  to  the  end  of 
July.  New  levies  gradually  joined  them,  but  by  no  means 
to  as  great  an  extent  as  had  been  hoped.  The  long  delay  at 
Weiden,  as  was  inevitable,  slackened  the  discipline  in  the 
German  army,  and  the  usual  discord  arose  among  the  princes. 
Some  princes  began  to  suggest  that  the  campaign  should  be 
abandoned  and  that  the  Council,  which  had  already  begun  its 
sittings  at  Basel,  should  be  called  on  to  negotiate  a  pacific 
agreement  with  the  Bohemians.  The  enthusiastic  Cardinal 
Cesarini  violently  opposed  these  proposals,  and  urgently 
demanded   an   immediate   advance.     Some   German   writers 

^  "  .  .  .  sensate,  attendite,  obsecramus  universi  et  singuli  Christifideles, 
si  isti  episcopi  sedes  Apostolorum  juste  ac  digne  occupant,  qui  illis  vita  et 
moribus  totaliter  adversantur.  Illi  quippe  per  orbem  terrarum  pannosi  et 
contempti  a  populo  migrantes,  veritates  dominicas  cunctis  populis  tribubus  et 
linguis  fideliter  nunciarunt,  easdem  propria  morte  firmantes;  isti  purpura 
vestiti  ac  bisso,  gloriosi  in  populo,  canes  muti  effecti  in  castris  et  urbibus 
tranquille  resident  et  easdem  veritates  eciam  aspernantur  audire,  ac  propter 
earum  observanciam  fidelem  fideles  spoliant  fama,  vita  et  rebus  non  per  se 
quia  cubant  cum  scortis,  sed  per  cruente  crucis  ereccionem,  seculare  brachium 

in  occisionem  fidelium  fallaciter  concitantes  "  (Palack^,  Urkundliche  Beitrdge, 
etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  228-231). 


266  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

have  recently,  not  quite  unjustly,  accused  the  cardinal  of 
being  the  cause  of  one  of  the  most  disgraceful  defeats  which 
any  German  army  ever  suffered. 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  Bohemian  envoys,  on 
returning  from  their  fruitless  mission  to  Cheb,  had  informed 
their  countrymen  that  they  must  expect  an  immediate  new 
attack  of  the  Germans.  With  a  rapidity  and  energy  that 
contrast  strangely  with  the  attitude  of  the  Germans,  who  had 
for  two  years  been  deliberating  on  the  plan  of  this  campaign, 
Prokop  immediately  gave  the  necessary  orders  to  concentrate 
his  troops  and  move  them  in  the  direction  of  the  menaced 
frontier.  All  the  troops  in  Silesia  marched  to  Prague,  leaving 
only  small  garrisons  in  some  Silesian  cities.  In  a  letter  ad- 
dressed to  the  nobles  of  Moravia,  Prokop  and  the  other  Taborite 
captains  called  on  them  to  march  to  the  district  of  Plzen  with 
as  large  force  as  they  could  muster,  "  as  the  King  of  Hungary 
had  assembled  many  foreigners  to  fight  against  God's  truth 
and  for  the  destruction  of  the  inhabitants  of  Bohemia  and 
Moravia  who  believed  in  God's  truth. ^  The  Moravians  readily 
responded  to  the  call;  we  find  among  those  who  hurriedly 
marched  into  Bohemia  the  names  of  two  of  the  greatest 
Moravian  nobles,  Lord  John  of  Tovacovsky  and  Lord  Lacek  of 
Sternberg.  The  Utraquist  nobles  of  Bohemia  did  not  at  this 
moment  show  as  great  a  zeal  for  the  Utraquist  cause  as  on 
former  occasions.  The  strong  distrust,  soon  amounting  to 
hatred,  of  the  advanced  parties  which  the  Bohemian  nobles 
felt,  and  which  finally  caused  the  downfall  of  Bohemia,  was 
already  very  evident.-  Though  a  considerable  number  of 
Bohemian  nobles  sent  their  retainers  to  join  the  Taborite 

*  Letter  published  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitrdge,  etc..  Vol.  II.  p.  215. 

*  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Bishop  Stubbs,  though  he  did  not  devote 
much  study  to  Bohemian  history,  saw  this  point  more  clearly  than  most 
historians  have  done.  "  It  may  be  questioned,"  he  writes,  "  whether  in  the 
long  run  Bohemia  could  not  have  rejected  the  yoke  of  Kome  and  the  rule  of 
the  Luxemburg  family,  had  not  the  national  party  itself  been  divided  and 
the  Hussites — the  Taborites  are  meant — as  the  weaker  gone  to  the  wall  " 
{Germany  in  the  later  Mxddle  Ages,  p,  173). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  267 

forces,  only  Lord  Hanus  of  Kolowrat  is  mentioned  as  having, 
somewhat  reluctantly,  taken  a  personal  part  in  this  campaign. 
The  Taborite  army  was,  however,  joined  by  large  forces  sent 
by  the  cities  of  Prague  and  many  other  Bohemian  towns,  and 
a  large  Polish  contingent  led  by  Prince  Korybutovic  also 
came  to  the  aid  of  the  Bohemians  in  this  moment  of  peril. 
The  forces  of  the  Hussites  in  this  their  last  battle  against  a 
foreign  foe  were  greater  than  on  any  previous  occasion.  The 
Bohemian  army  first  marched  to  Plzen,  and  after  an  unsuccess- 
ful attempt  to  obtain  possession  of  that  stronghold  continued 
its  march  to  the  Bavarian  frontier  ready  to  give  battle  im- 
mediately. The  crusaders,  however,  remained  at  Weiden  on 
the  Bavarian  frontier  without  attempting  to  cross  the  hills 
of  the  Sumava  (Bohemian  forest).  The  districts  of  Western 
Bohemia  had  during  the  last  ten  years  been  the  scene  of  almost 
incessant  warfare,  and  had  been  thoroughly  devastated.  The 
Hussites  soon  found  it  impossible  to  provision  a  large  army 
in  these  regions.  Prokop  the  Great,  anxious  to  prove  the 
conciliatory  attitude  of  his  party,  made  another  attempt  to 
negotiate  with  the  King  of  Hungary,  which,  however,  again 
failed.  The  Hussite  leaders  then  immediately  decided  to 
evacuate  for  the  moment  this  exhausted  district  and  to  retire 
into  the  interior  of  their  country.  The  crusaders,  as  usually, 
entirely  uninformed  of  the  doings  in  the  enemies'  camp,  con- 
cluded that  the  Bohemians  had  given  up  all  hope  of  offering 
resistance  in  the  open  field.  On  August  i  they  at  last  crossed 
the  Bohemian  frontier  and  marched  on  the  small  town  of 
Tachov,  which  had  played  a  considerable  part  in  a  previous 
campaign.  The  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  who  was  commander- 
in-chief,  was  accompanied  by  Cardinal  Cesarini,  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Koln,  the  Duke  of  Bavaria,  and  the  Count  Palatine 
Stephen.  Though  some  of  the  promised  reinforcements  were 
not  forthcoming  a  considerable  number  of  new  crusaders  joined 
the  invading  army  about  the  time  at  which  it  crossed  the 
frontier.     According  to  the  most  reliable  calculations  the  whole 


268  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

force — including  the  numerous  camp-followers — amounted  to 
about  100,000  men.  Instead  of  advancing  immediately  the 
vast  army  remained  for  some  time  close  to  the  Bavarian 
frontier.  The  terror  then  inspired  by  the  Bohemian  name  was 
so  great  that  the  crusaders  probably  thought  it  more  prudent 
to  await  the  results  of  the  movements  of  the  Archduke  of 
Austria  and  the  Silesian  princes,  who  were  to  create  diversions 
by  attacking  Bohemia  from  their  territories.  Contrary  to 
the  judicious  advice  of  Cardinal  Julian,  a  week  was  spent  in 
besieging  the  town  of  Tachov.  The  attempt  to  capture 
Tachov  failed,  and  on  August  8  the  army  continued  its  march, 
following  at  first  the  direct  road  to  Plzeii,  and  then  turning 
southward  in  the  direction  of  Domazlice.  Both  on  this  march 
and  during  the  siege  of  Tachov  the  crusaders  plundered  and 
devastated  the  surrounding  country  to  an  extent  unrivalled 
even  in  the  bloody  annals  of  the  Hussite  wars.  The  entire 
population  was  murdered,  irrespective  of  their  religious 
creed.  The  crusaders  were  undoubtedly  determined  to  extir- 
pate entirely  the  Slavic-Bohemian  race.^ 

The  Hussites,  who  had  only  retired  from  the  frontier  because 
of  the  difficulty  of  provisioning  their  large  army  in  an  exhausted 
country,  had  meanwhile  rallied  their  forces  near  the  Karlstyn 
fortress,  and,  probably  well  aware  of  the  indiscipline  and 
licence  which  prevailed  among  the  crusaders,  now  immediately 
marched  on  Domazlice.  When  the  Elector  Frederick  was, 
on  the  morning  of  August  14,  informed  of  the  approach  of  the 
Bohemian  armies,  he  immediately  determined  to  await  their 
attack  in  a  defensive  position  and  also  to  prepare  for  a  retreat 
which,  he  thought,  might  possibly  be  necessary.  He  therefore 
gave  orders  that  all  the  transport-wagons  and  impedimenta 
generally  should  be  immediately  conveyed  to  the  rear.  This 
measure,  though  undoubtedly  justified  by  the  circumstances, 

*  Even  .Eneas  Sylvius  writes  :  "  Cardinalis  numerosum  exercitiim  ductans 
multas  haereticorum  villas  incendit,  oppidaque  diripuit,  in  quibus  non  avaritia 
tantum,  verum  crudelitas  etiam  militum  grassata  est  qui  mares  cum  foeminis 
obvios  senes  puerosque  passim  necavere  {Historia  Bohemua,  chap,  xlviii). 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  269 

yet  caused  great  alarm  among  the  Germans,  who  had  on 
previous  occasions  distrusted  the  Elector's  conduct.  He  had 
issued  this  order  without  informing  either  the  cardinal  or  the 
German  princes  of  it.  When,  at  about  three  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  the  cardinal,  accompanied  by  the  Elector  of  Saxony 
and  several  other  German  princes,  rode  up  to  the  summit  of  a 
hill  which  overlooked  the  road  by  which  the  Bohemians 
were  advancing,  he  was  naturally  astounded  at  seeing  the  long 
columns  of  provision-wagons  that  were  being  hurriedly  driven 
off  in  the  opposite  direction,  that  of  the  German  frontier. 
Though  the  Hussites  were  not  yet  even  in  sight,  many  wagons 
had  already  thrown  off  their  loads  to  hasten  their  retreat. 
Matters,  of  course,  became  much  worse  when  the  advancing 
Bohemian  columns  were  seen  and  the  war-song  "  All  ye  warriors 
of  God,"  1  which  the  nationalists  intoned,  reached  the  ears  of 
the  crusaders.  No  resistance  was  even  attempted,  and  before 
a  single  shot  had  been  fired  the  whole  German  army,  seized  by 
a  sudden  panic,  fled  in  the  greatest  disorder  in  the  direction 
of  the  mountain  passes  which  divide  Bohemia  from  Bavaria. 
All  discipline  soon  ceased,  and  in  the  narrow  roads  that  lead 
to  the  frontier  fierce  struggles  took  place  among  the  crusaders 
and  particularly  the  wagon-drivers,  each  of  whom  tried  to 
outstrip  the  others.  A  small  number  of  crusaders,  among 
whom  were  some  Italian  troopers  who  formed  the  body-guard 
of  the  cardinal,  attempted  to  arrest  the  advance  of  the  Bo- 
hemians, who,  this  time  well  provided  with  cavalry,  sharply 
pursued  the  flying  Germans.  Cardinal  Cesarini,  who  at  first 
attempted  to  remonstrate  with  the  flyers,  was  soon  obliged 
to  take  part  in  the  general  flight.  The  German  soldiers,  most 
of  whom  had  very  reluctantly  taken  part  in  the  campaign, 
were  infuriated  against  the  foreign  priest  as  the  cause  of  this 
disaster,  and  they  threatened  his  life.  He  was  at  last  obliged 
to  fly  in  disguise,  not  from  the  Hussites,  but  from  the  crusaders. 
During  the  retreat  through  the  mountain-passes  the  losses  of 

See  my  History  of  Bohemian  Literature,  p.  151. 


270  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

the  Germans  were  enormous,  and  almost  all  their  artillery  and 
baggage  were  captured  by  the  Hussites.^ 

^  Lawrence  of  Bfezova,  author  of  a  history  of  the  early  part  of  the  Hussite 
wars  which  has  often  been  quoted  in  these  pages,  wrote  a  quaint  and  very 
interesting  Latin  ballad  on  the  rout  at  Domazlice.  It  is  here  only  possible 
to  quote  a  few  lines.     Bfezova  writes  of  the  flight — 

"  O  quam  turpe  diffugium 
Tarn  strenuarum  gencium  : 
Non  viso  hoste  fugere 
Totque  cara  relinquere 
Suis  in  fructum  hostibus 
Duris  atque  crudelibus." 

Somewhat  later  Cardinal  Cesarini  thus  addresses  the  Pope — 

"  Tandem  illi  scismatici 
Gentis  Boemie  rustici 
Congesserunt  exercitum 
Paucum  inermem  frivolum. 
Mira  tunc  res  peragitur 
Nee  ei  par  conspicitur 
In  tota  sacra  pagina. 

Cum  nobis  appropinquaret 

Ille  malignus  populus 

Spes  fugit  et  consilium. 
Terra  tremente  tremimus, 
Nil  nisi  fugam  querimus, 
Agente  hoc  dyabolo 
Certe  ipsorum  domino." 

(Published  in  "  Pontes  rerum  Bohemicarum/'  Vol.  V,  pp.  545-563.) 


CHAPTER  VII 

The  effect  of  the  victory  of  Domazlice  can  hardly  be  exag- 
gerated. Had  the  Bohemians  now  abandoned  their  system  of 
only  raiding  the  neighbouring  lands  and  not  establishing 
themselves  permanently  in  foreign  countries  nothing  would 
at  that  moment  have  prevented  them  from  founding  a  Slavic 
state  in  Central  Europe,  though  it  is  doubtful  whether  such 
an  enterprise  would  have  met  with  permanent  success. 

It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that  none  of  the  Bohemian  leaders, 
not  even  Prokop,  whose  Taborites  had  contributed  so  largely 
to  the  crowning  victory  of  Domazlice,  entertained  such  plans. 
Their  claims  were,  as  before,  limited  to  the  recognition  of  the 
independence  of  their  country  and  to  the  demands  contained 
in  the  articles  of  Prague.  Even  the  Taborites  energetically 
protested  against  the  accusation  of  heresy,  and  maintained 
that  the  Bohemians  formed  part  of  the  universal  Church. 
Still  greater  was  the  desire  for  peace  among  the  Utraquist 
nobles  and  the  more  conservative  citizens  of  Prague.  The 
Utraquist  nobility,  which  had  played  so  brilliant  a  part  during 
the  earlier  period  of  the  Hussite  wars,  had,  since  the  departure 
of  Prince  Korybutovic,  almost  entirely  lost  its  predominant 
position.  These  men  had  always  demanded  the  establishment 
of  a  Bohemian  national  Church,  which  was  to  form  part  of  the 
universal  Church.  Within  this  national  Church  Communion 
was  to  be  dispensed  in  the  two  kinds,  the  national  language  was 
to  be  used  in  the  religious  functions,  and  very  severe  regulations 
were  to  reform  the  clergy,  whose  worldliness  and  viciousness  at 
that  period  scandalised  even  the  most  fervent  adherents  of  the 
Church  of  Rome.  With  regard  to  temporal  matters,  however, 
these  nobles  held  views  not  dissimilar  from  those  of  the  nobility 

271 


272  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

of  other  countries.  As  did  the  men  of  their  rank  in  Germany 
and  France,  they  also  considered  themselves  the  born  leaders 
of  their  nation.  They  were  not  uninfluenced  by  the  taunts 
of  the  German  nobles  who — now  that  Prokop  had  become 
practically  dictator — described  them  as  "  priest-ridden."  ^ 

Among  those  who  had  been  defeated  the  desire  for  peace 
was  also  almost  universal.  King  Sigismund,  with  the  attitude 
of  foolish  bravado  which  was  habitual  with  him,  affected  to 
consider  the  disaster  of  Domazlice  as  a  matter  of  slight  im- 
portance. He  had  recourse  to  his  usual  universal  remedy. 
He  convoked  the  princes  and  free  cities  to  an  imperial  diet, 
which  was  to  meet  at  Frankfort  on  October  i6,  143 1,  and 
promised  to  be  present  there.  This  promise  he,  however,  as 
usual,  failed  to  keep.  He  was  now  almost  exclusively  intent 
on  his  expedition  to  Italy,  where,  according  to  his  wishes,  he 
hoped  at  last  to  be  crowned  as  emperor  by  the  Pope. 

The  German  princes  were  not  inclined  to  view  the  perilous 
position  of  their  country  with  the  same  indifference  as  the  King 
of  Hungary.  A  strong  democratic  wave  at  this  moment 
menaced  the  rulers  of  Germany.  This  danger,  which  had 
existed  before  the  disaster  of  Domazlice,  now  became  more 
serious.  In  the  cities  of  Constance,  Stettin,  Bremen,  and  others 
democratic  movements  broke  out,  and  it  was  feared  that  they 
might  extend  to  the  neighbouring  country  districts.  In  Passau, 
Bamberg,  and  Wiirzburg  the  citizens  rose  in  arms  against  their 
bishops,  and  a  feeling  hostile  to  the  clergy  spread  over  all 
Germany.  The  most  energetic  friend  of  peace  was  now  the 
formerly  war-like  cardinal,  Julian  Cesarini.  His  short  sojourn 
in  the  German  camp  had  convinced  him  that  the  Germans  were 
at  that  moment  incapable  of  resisting  the  Bohemian  armies. 
He  therefore  undertook  and  carried  out  with  great  skill  the 
difficult  task  of  bringing  about  a  reconciliation  between  the 
Roman   Church   and   the    Utraquists.     On   his   return    from 

^  This  motive,  to  which  the  contemporary  German  chroniclers  frequently 
allude,  has  remained  unnoticed  by  many  writers  on  Bohemian  history. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  273 

Bohemia  the  cardinal  first  visited  King  Sigisrnund  at  Niirn- 
berg.  The  King,  as  already  mentioned,  made  Hght  of  the  recent 
disaster  and  declared  that  he  was  sure  of  final  victory.  He 
did  not,  therefore,  express  a  favourable  opinion  of  Cesarini's 
conciliatory  plans.  He  was  on  the  point  of  starting  for  Italy, 
where  his  coronation  depended  on  the  favour  of  the  Pope. 
He  knew  that  Pope  Eugenius  was — like  his  predecessor — 
strongly  opposed  to  general  Councils  of  the  Church,  and  that 
he  was  at  that  moment  contemplating  the  dissolution  of  the 
Assembly  at  Basel.  The  cardinal,  however,  proceeded  to  that 
town  and  now  at  last  assumed  the  presidency  of  the  Council, 
which  had  been  conferred  on  him  by  Pope  Martin  and  con- 
firmed by  his  successor.  Since  the  spring  of  the  year  143 1 
ecclesiastics  from  various  countries  had  begun  to  arrive  at  Basel, 
though  the  scarcely  veiled  hostility  of  Pope  Eugenius  deterred 
many.  Shortly  after  the  arrival  of  Cardinal  Cesarini  the 
Council  took  the  important  step  of  inviting  the  Utraquists  to 
appear  before  the  assembly.  On  October  10  the  Council 
addressed  a  letter  to  the  clergy,  nobility,  and  the  whole  Bo- 
hemian nation,  1  in  which  it  expressed  the  sincere  wish  that 
peace  and  unity  be  re-established  in  the  Church,  and  it  invited 

1  This  letter  is  published  in  John  of  Ragusa's  "  Tractatus  quomodo  Bohemi 
reducti  sunt  ad  tjnitatem  Ecclesiae  "  (Monumenta  Conciliorum  Geneyalium 
Seculi  Decimi  Quinti,  Tom.  I.  pp.  135-137).  It  states  :  "  Sacrosancta  Basilien- 
sis  Sy nodus  .  .  .  :  universis  viris  ecclesiasticis,  nobilibus  et  toti  populo  regni 
Bohemiae  unitatem  et  pacem  in  Christo  domino  nostro,  Compulit  nos  caritas 
Christi  egredi  de  terra  nostra  .  .  .  et  venire  ad  locum,  quem  ostendit  nobis 
Dominus  pro  pace  ecclesiae  et  salute  populi  Christiani.  Et  quid  mirum  si 
pro  Christo  in  terra  aliena  peregrinari  decrevimus,  cum  ipse  Deus  noster  pro 
nobis  durissimam  usque  ad  mortem  crucis  peregrinationem  pati  dignatus  sit  ? 
Si  Deus  ita  dilexit  mundum  ut  filium  suum  unigenitum  daret  :  et  nos  merito 
ipsum  diligere  debemus  ut  pro  ovibus  suis,  si  oporteat  animas  nostras  libenter 
exponamus.  ...  Si  sciretis  quanto  affectu  salutem  et  pacem  vestram 
optamus  .  .  .  obmissis  omnibus  sine  mora  hue  properantes  projiceretis 
vos  in  ulnas  nostras  confidentes  quod  a  nobis,  qui  vos  propter  Christum  ut 
nos  ipsos  amamus  requiem  animabus  vestris  invenire  possetis.  .  .  .  Licebit 
omnibus  libere  exponere  quidquid  Christianae  religione  expedire  judicaverint. 
.  .  .  Rogamus  autem  ut  viros  tales  mittatis  super  quos  spiritus  domini 
requiescere  speratur;  mites  videlicet  humiles  corde  pacem  optantes  et  non 
quae  sua  sunt  quaerenteas,  sed  quae  Jesu  Christi ;  qui  nobis  et  vobis  et  toti 
populo  Christiano  hie  pacem  et  in  futuro  seculo  vitam  aeternam  donare 
dignetur  qui  vivit  benedictus  in  secula.  Amen," 
T 


274  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

the  Bohemians  to  attend  the  Council,  where  they  would  have 
complete  liberty  of  freely  expounding  their  religious  views. 
They  were  also  assured  that  they  would  be  allowed  to  proceed 
to  Basel  freely  and  safely.  The  Council  finally  begged  them 
to  choose  pious  and  conciliatory  men  as  their  representatives. 
The  embitterment  of  the  Roman  Church  against  the  Utra- 
quists  was  at  that  moment  so  great  that  even  the  question 
how  this  message  was  to  be  transmitted  to  Bohemia  caused 
some  difficulty.  Papal  decrees  had,  under  penalty  of  excom- 
munication, forbidden  all  intercourse  with  Bohemia.  It  was, 
therefore,  decided  to  send  off  three  copies  of  this  invitation, 
one  to  King  Sigismund,  who  was  then  at  Feldkirch  on  his  way 
to  Milan,  another  to  the  municipality  of  Niirnberg,  and  a  third 
to  the  city  of  Cheb,  requesting  that  this  communication  be 
forwarded  to  the  authorities  in  Bohemia. 

This  undoubtedly  wise  step  immediately  met  with  strong 
disapproval  on  the  part  of  Pope  Eugenius.  He  considered  the 
mere  fact  that  the  Council  had  proposed  to  enter  into  negotia- 
tions with  heretics  whose  teaching  had  already  been  con- 
demned by  the  Roman  Church  a  sufficient  reason  for  decreeing 
the  dissolution  of  the  Council.  This  seemed  particularly 
unjustifiable  to  the  members  of  that  assembly  at  a  moment 
when  the  negotiations  for  the  purpose  of  reuniting  the  Eastern 
Church  to  that  of  Rome  had  been  resumed.  On  November  12 
Pope  Eugenius  forwarded  to  the  Cardinal  Cesarini  a  bull 
declaring  the  Council  of  Basel  to  be  dissolved,  and  requesting 
the  cardinal  to  leave  that  city  immediately.  A  later  bull 
dated  December  18  repeated  the  same  orders  in  stronger 
language.  One  of  the  grievances  now  alleged  against  the 
Council  was  that  it  had  invited  to  its  sittings  representatives 
of  the  Bohemian  heretics,  whose  teaching  had  been  condemned 
by  two  Councils — those  of  Constance  and  Siena — and  that  it 
had  thus  seriously  impaired  the  dignity  of  the  Church.  Cardinal 
Cesarini  in  this  difficult  position  maintained  his  conciliatory 
attitude,  and  firmly,  though  courteously,  declined  to  abandon 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  275 

the  peace  conference.  He  refused  to  leave  Basel,  and  in  a 
lengthy  document  attempted  to  justify  the  proceedings  of  the 
Council.  He  pointed  out  that  negotiations  with  other  heretics 
formed  a  precedent  for  the  negotiations  with  the  Utraquists,* 
and  declared  that  in  view  of  the  increasing  opposition  to  the 
Roman  Church  in  Germany  pacification  was  an  absolute 
necessity. 

The  Bohemians  had  meanwhile  received  the  conciliatory 
message  of  the  Council.  The  citizens  of  Cheb  forwarded  it  to 
Prague  by  a  special  envoy,  and  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  also 
transmitted  to  the  Bohemians  the  copy  of  the  letter  which 
King  Sigismund  had  entrusted  to  him.  The  town  council 
of  Prague  received  this  communication  with  great  joy.  The 
letter  was  first  read  out  privately  to  the  members  of  the  Council, 
and  then  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  whole  community 
by  the  eloquent  priest  John  of  Rokycan,  who  read  out  its 
contents  from  the  pulpit  of  the  Tyn  church.  He  then  preached 
a  sermon  on  peace  which,  as  the  chroniclers  write,  was  so 
touching  that  all  present  burst  into  tears  of  joy.  The  munici- 
pality of  Prague,  however,  found  it  difficult  to  give  a  definite 
reply.  The  hegemony  over  a  large  part  of  Bohemia  once 
possessed  by  Prague,  particularly  after  the  victory  of  the 
Vysehrad,  had  almost  entirely  disappeared.  The  Utraquist 
lords  were,  indeed,  still  in  alliance  with  the  conservative  Old 
Town,  but  the  lords  "  sub  una,"  whose  influence  had  greatly 
increased  in  consequence  of  Prokop's  radicalism,  now  de- 
manded the  unconditional  surrender  to  King  Sigismund  and 
absolute  submission  to  the  authority  of  Rome.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  practical  dictatorship  of  Prokop  the  Great,  which 
had  been  confirmed  by  his  brilliant  victory  at  Domazlice, 
rendered  it  impossible  to  enter  into  negotiations  except  in 

*  M.  Noel  Valois  in  his  Le  Pape  et  le  concile,  quotes  a  document  entitled 
"  De  Justificatione  vocationis  Bohemorum  "  (Paris,  Bib.  nat.  MS.  lat.  1548), 
which  justifies  the  action  of  the  Council.  The  author  writes  :  "  Et  pro  illis 
jam  inveteratis  hereticis  [the  Greeks]  novum  indicitur  concilium ;  cur  pro 
istis  novellis,  ex  quibus  majus  timetur  periculum  non  permittitur  manere 
concilium  ceptum  et  longe  ante  indictum." 


276  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

agreement  with  the  Taborites.  The  Praguers  in  their  reply, 
therefore,  hmited  themselves  to  stating  that  they  were  unable 
to  treat  alone  on  such  weighty  matters,  but  that  a  general 
diet  of  the  Bohemian  kingdom  would  shortly  assemble  in  their 
city  and  would  be  able  to  give  a  definite  answer.  The  university 
of  Prague  and  the  moderate  Utraquists  generally  sympathised 
with  Rokycan's  praise  of  peace.  The  demands  of  these  men, 
as  has  been  repeatedly  noted,  were  limited.  Opposition  was, 
however,  to  be  expected  on  the  part  of  the  Taborites,  who 
had  just  published  a  manifesto  violently  attacking  the 
entire  ecclesiastical  institutions  of  the  Catholic  Church.  All 
Bohemian  parties,  however,  agreed  that  it  was  necessary  that 
the  estates  should  meet  as  soon  as  possible.  It  had  at  first 
been  settled  that  the  diet  should  begin  its  sittings  on  December 
6,  but  some  delay  occurred,  as  the  army  of  the  Orphans  had  not 
at  that  date  returned  from  a  raid  in  Hungary ;  though  negotia- 
tions in  view  of  peace  had  begun,  the  Bohemians  still  continued 
these  incursions  into  the  neighbouring  lands ;  they  had,  indeed, 
become  necessary  to  provision  the  exhausted  country.  The 
new  invasion  of  Hungary  had,  however,  proved  very  disastrous; 
and  the  Orphans  returned  to  Bohemia  in  very  reduced  numbers. 
Even  after  their  return  many  died  from  exhaustion  and  ex- 
posure to  the  cold.     The  Orphans  openly  accused  Prokop  ^  of 

1  In  a  letter  sent  by  John  Nider,  prior  of  the  Dominicans,  one  of  the  peace 
negotiators  to  John  of  Ragusa,  on  January  5,  1532,  he  notes  the  report  of  an 
envoy  of  the  Town  of  Cheb  who  was  at  Prague  when  the  Orphans  returned 
there.  "  Dixit  [the  envoy]  quod  xiiii  Decembris  fuit  Pragae  per  viii 
circiter  dies ;  vidit  eadem  die  i.  e.  in  crastino  S.  Luciae  redire  de  Hungaria 
Hussitas  et  intrare  Pragam  non  ut  antea  viderat  ahquando  cum  spoUis,  laetitia 
et  fistulationibus,  sed  cum  magna  tristitia  et  irrisionibus.  Sunt  enim  in 
Praga,  praesertim  Veteri,  quae  in  triplo  vaUdior  est  in  omnibus  Nova  qui 
corde  fideles  sunt  et  cum  summo  gaudio  pcrceperunt  stragem  Orphanorum, 
optantes  ut  maUs  Bohemias  finis  detur.  Fuerunt  autem  praefati  Hussitie 
qui  Pragam  intraverunt  hi  quos  haeretici  percipientes  eorum  confratres 
circumdatos  in  Ungaria  direxerunt  eisdem  fratribus  in  adjutorium.  Sed 
mentita  est  iniquitas  sibi.  Ungaria&  enim  appropinquantes.  perceperunt, 
prout  aUas  audisti,  nedum  multitudinem  Orphanorum  fame  et  gladio  occisam, 
verum  etiam  plures  ignobiles,  nobiles  et  capitaneos  Taboritarum  peremptos. 
Siquidem  postquam  Procopius  cum  suis  et  Orphanorum  exercitus  Ungariam 
intrasset  et  spoUa  multa  coUegisset  captam  praedam  cum  dissidio  et  soditioue 
dividere  coeperunt.      Ex  quo  in  iram  motus  Procopius  cum  paucis,  quibus 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  277 

not  having  sent  sufficient  reinforcements  to  their  army  in 
Hungary.  A  very  bitter  controversy  broke  out,  and  Prokop, 
offended  by  these  accusations,  retired  to  Kutna  Hora,  refusing 
to  take  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the  diet.  That  assembly 
met  at  last  on  New  Year's  Day  1432.  A  few  days  previously 
Archbishop  Conrad  had  died,  and  this  event  greatly  increased 
the  wish  of  the  Hussite  High  Church  to  re-establish  its  con- 
nection with  the  universal  Church,  for  thus  only  could  the 
Apostolic  Succession  of  the  Bohemian  clergy  be  assured.  The 
assembly  met  at  the  town-hall  of  the  New  Town,  probably  in 
accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Orphans,  who  were  close 
allies  of  the  citizens  of  that  community.  Following  the 
precedent  of  other  previous  meetings  the  diet  constituted  two 
committees — if  we  may  thus  describe  them — one  of  which 
was  to  discuss  the  religious  controversies,  while  the  other  was 
to  devote  its  attention  to  the  general  political  situation  in  the 
country.  Among  those  who  were  to  apply  their  attention  to 
religious  matters,  John  of  Rokycan  again  played  a  predominant 
part.  Here,  as  previously,  he  eloquently  advocated  a  peaceful 
agreement,  though  he  continued  to  maintain  the  demands  of 
the  Bohemian  Church  as  they  had  been  formulated  in  the 
articles  of  Prague.  The  priests  of  Prague  and  of  those  cities 
which  were  still  allied  with  the  capital,  the  community  of  the 
Orphans,  and  the  Utraquist  nobles  all  agreed  to  uphold  the 
cherished  teaching  of  the  university,  for  which  they  had  fought 
so  long  and  so  bravely.  They  recognised  the  seven  sacraments 
and  admitted  the  existence  of  purgatory;  they  admitted  the 
right  of  praying  for  the  dead  and  declared  that  the  priests 
should,  when  celebrating  mass,  officiate  in  vestments  which 
were  in  accordance  with  the  rites  of  the  universal  Church. 


vitam  optavit  caute  fugiendo,  reliquit  post  se  multitudinem  gladiis  statim 
praestandam  Ungarorum.  Est  autem  prope  Montem  Cauthnis  [Kutna  Hora] 
in  castro  sine  omni  campestri  exercitu  infamis  fere  apud  omnes  haereticos  qui 
eum  proclamant  fratres  seduxisse  "  {Monumenia  Conciliorum,  as  above, 
Tom.  I.,  p.  140).  It  must  not  be  overlooked  that  the  citizens  of  Cheb  were 
strong  adherents  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 


278  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

In  view  of  the  vacancy  of  the  archiepiscopal  see  they  then 
elected  Rokycan  administrator  of  the  Utraquist  Church 
('*  director  cleri  "),  and  conferred  on  him  the  full  powers  which 
had  been  exercised  by  the  Archbishops  of  Prague. 

The  committee,  which  had  to  deal  with  the  political  situation, 
began  its  activdty  by  sanctioning  all  the  resolutions  made  by 
the  ecclesiastics.  The  members  then  devoted  their  attention  to 
the  necessity  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  indiscipline  of  the  soldiery, 
which  had  recently  greatly  increased,  and  to  their  depredations, 
from  which  the  townsmen  and  peasants  suffered  severely. 
It  was  decided  to  appoint  captains  of  the  people,  who  were  to 
exercise  extensive  powers  in  the  districts  of  Bohemia  and 
Moravia  that  were  entrusted  to  them.  They  were  in  time  of 
war  to  protect  the  Utraquist  people  from  undue  commandeering 
and  plundering,  and  were,  in  accordance  with  the  local  authori- 
ties and  the  nobles  and  knights,  to  determine  what  supplies 
and  provisions  were  required  for  the  continuation  of  the  war. 
The  stress  laid  on  this  matter  proves  to  how  great  an  extent 
the  new  Taborite  levies,  very  different  from  2izka's  **  warriors 
of  God,"  had  already  become  a  burden  ev^en  to  the  Utraquist 
population  of  Bohemia.  As  to  the  all-important  question 
whether  the  Utraquists  should  attend  the  Council  the  diet 
declared  that,  as  the  Bohemians  had  always  desired  peace,  they 
were  ready  to  take  part  in  a  ecumenical  council  if  they 
were  given  the  necessary  guarantees  for  the  safety  of  their 
envoys  during  their  stay  in  Germany;  they  could  not,  how- 
ever, give  a  positive  answer  before  the  leaders  of  the  Taborite 
party,  who  had  not  taken  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the  diet, 
had  expressed  their  opinion.  As  under  the  existing  circum- 
stances a  decision  of  the  diet  which  had  not  been  sanctioned 
by  the  Taborites  would  have  had  little  value  and  could  not 
have  influenced  the  resolutions  of  the  Council,  the  diet  ad- 
journed, after  having  only  sat  for  a  week. 

It  has,  of  course,  been  impossible  to  notice  even  slightly  the 
innumerable  feuds  and  minor  intestine  conflicts  which  con- 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  279 

tinued  in  Bohemia  uninterruptedly  from  the  year  1420  to  1434. 
It,  however,  deserves  mention  that  the  diet,  which  met  in 
Prague  in  January  1432,  decided  that  an  attempt  should  be 
made  to  obtain  possession  of  the  towns  of  Budejovice  and 
Plzeii,  that  were  still  held  by  the  adherents  of  Rome  and  of 
King  Sigismund.  It  was  evident  to  the  Utraquists  that  they 
could  not  ask  the  Council  to  recognise  the  Bohemian  Church 
as  the  national  one  as  long  as  two  important  Bohemian  cities 
refused  their  allegiance  to  that  Church.  Unfortunately  for 
the  Utraquists  the  execution  of  this  plan  was  deferred,  and 
when  a  new  attack  of  Plzeii  was  attempted  two  years  later  it 
caused  a  complete  rupture  between  the  national  parties.  The 
Bohemians  hoped  that  a  new  diet  would  be  able  to  transmit 
to  Basel  an  answer  which  would  be  in  accordance  with  the 
views  of  all  the  national  parties.  The  estates,  therefore,  met 
again  at  Prague  on  February  10,  and  all  the  parties,  including 
the  Taborites,  were  this  time  represented.  Among  those 
present  were  Prokop  the  Great,  Prokop  the  Lesser,  and  the 
principal  leaders  of  all  the  Utraquist  parties.  We  have 
unfortunately  but  very  scanty  information  concerning  the 
deliberations  of  this  diet,  but  it  appears  certain  that  they  were 
very  stormy.  The  Orphans,  joining  the  moderate  parties^ 
not  only  proposed  that  envoys  should  be  sent  to  the  Council 
of  Basel,  but  also  spoke  in  favour  of  drawing  up  "  articles," 
which  were  to  be  presented  to  the  members  of  the  Council. 
In  this  document  the  principal  points  on  which  the  Utraquist 
teaching  differed  from  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome 
were  to  be  enumerated.  The  Taborites  energetically  opposed 
this  suggestion,  as  they  held  many  opinions  which  were  dis- 
tasteful to  the  Hussite  High  Church.  The  dispute  became 
so  bitter  that  some  of  the  Utraquist  lords  already  began  to 
meditate  a  reconciliation  with  the  lords  *'  sub  una  "  for  the 
purpose  of  opposing  the  fanatical  democracy  of  Tabor.  Though 
secret  negotiations  to  this  purpose  probably  now  took  place, 
a  complete  scission  was  avoided  at  least  for  a  time,  and  the 


28o  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Utraquists  appeared  as  a  united  body  at  the  Council  of  Basel. 
The  proposals  to  establish  severer  discipline  in  the  Hussite 
armies,  first  discussed  at  the  previous  meeting  of  the  diet,  were 
again  a  subject  of  debate.  The  Taborites  energetically  opposed 
all  such  regulations.  Though  this  is  scarcely  mentioned  by 
the  chroniclers,  it  appears  certain  that  the  Taborite  generals 
already  knew  that  they  were  powerless  to  enforce  rigid  dis- 
cipline among  their  followers,  whose  conduct  was  becoming 
more  and  more  seditious. 

In  spite  of  these  troubles  and  difficulties  the  deliberations 
of  the  diet  were  on  the  whole  successful.  It  was  decided,  with 
the  consent  of  the  Taborites,  that  Bohemia  should  be  represented 
at  the  Council,  and  also  that  Bohemian  envoys  should  meet  at 
Cheb  delegates  of  the  Council,  where  the  necessary  steps  should 
be  taken  to  assure  the  safety  of  the  Bohemians  during  their 
stay  in  Germany.  On  February  27  the  municipalities  of 
Prague,  in  their  own  name  and  in  that  of  the  Bohemian  nobles 
and  knights  and  in  that  of  the  commanders  of  the  armies  in 
Bohemia  and  Moravia,  addressed  a  letter  to  the  delegates  of 
the  Council,  who  were  then  staying  at  Niirnberg,  begging 
them  to  proceed  to  Cheb  together  with  the  German  princes 
whose  lands  were  near  the  Bohemian  territory.  In  consequence 
of  delayed  communications  this  letter  only  reached  Niirnberg 
on  March  12.  The  delegates  of  the  Council,  John  Nider, 
prior  of  the  Dominican  monastery  of  Basel,  who  has  already 
been  mentioned,  and  the  Cistercian  monk  John  of  Maulbronn, 
immediately  forwarded  this  letter  to  Basel,  and  they  also  wrote 
to  Prague  stating  that  they  had  entered  into  communications 
with  Frederick,  Elector  of  Brandenburg  and  Burgrave  of 
Niirnberg,  Duke  John  of  Bavaria,  and  some  of  the  Saxon 
princes,  begging  them  to  accompany  them  to  Cheb,  where  they 
were  to  meet  the  Bohemian  delegates.  The  Council  then 
appointed  other  delegates,  who  were  to  accompany  Nider  and 
Maulbronn  on  their  journey.  There  was  considerable  delay, 
caused  no  doubt  by  mutual  distrust,  but  the   conferences  at 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  281 

last  began  there  on  May  9,  shortly  after  the  arrival  of  the 
Bohemian  envoys.  The  Bohemian  embassy  on  this  occasion 
was  very  numerous.  It  included  Prokop  the  Great,  John  of 
Rokycan,  Peter  Payne — surnamed  Englis — the  Taborite  Bishop 
Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov,  the  nobles  John  of  Ursovec  and  Benes 
of  Mokrovous,  and  several  prominent  citizens  of  Prague. 
Including  guards  and  followers  the  embassy  consisted  of  seventy 
persons.  The  negotiations  that  ensued  were  necessarily 
difficult  and  delicate.  As  was  inevitable,  when  the  question 
of  the  journey  of  the  Bohemian  envoys  to  Basel  and  the  safe 
conduct  necessary  for  that  purpose  was  raised,  the  Bohemians 
— Prokop  the  Great  acting  as  spokesman — recalled  the  treachery 
that  had  been  committed  against  Hus.  It  seemed  for  a 
moment  probable  that  the  negotiations  would  end  with  a 
failure.  The  general  political  situation,  however,  forced  both 
parties  to  avoid  a  rupture.  Among  the  Bohemian  envoys 
those  who  belonged  to  the  conservative  party — if  we  may  thus 
describe  the  Utraquist  nobles,  the  theologians  of  the  university 
of  Prague,  and  the  conservative  citizens  of  the  capital — were 
becoming  certain  that  their  alliance  with  the  democracy  of 
Tabor  could  no  longer  endure.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Council 
was  constantly  receiving  messages  from  the  clergy  of  Western 
Europe  begging  that  the  Hussite  schisma  might  be  ended  as 
soon  as  possible.  References  was  made  to  the  fact,  to  which 
I  have  already  drawn  attention,  that  Hussite  sympathies  had 
become  evident  even  in  countries  far  distant  from  Bohemia. ^ 

1  John  of  Segovia  writes  {Monumenta  ConcilioYum,  as  above,  Tom.  II. 
pp.  5-6)  :  "  Accidit  rursus  his  diebus  publicatas  fuisse  eciam  ad  Hyspaniam 
plurimas  copias  diversarum  et  difiusarum  epistolarum  Bohemorum  ex  parte 
ad  honorabiles,  providos,  honestos  dominos  in  tota  communitate,  divites  et 
pauperes.  Que  salutacionis  loco  premittebant  se  desiderare,  ut  ilhs  opperiret 
intellectum  Dens  illuminans  corda  eorum  narrantes  quomodo  iam  a  pluribns 
annis  inter  se  et  illos  magna  fuisset  discordia  et  utrimque  nobiles  et  ignobiles 
multi  fatui  sua  corpora  perdissent;  nunquam  tamen  audivissent  de  ore  eorum 
fidem  suam  an  possent  vel  non  ex  scriptura  sacra  probare  earn  et  nichilo- 
minus  reges  et  principes,  domini  et  communitates  magna  interim  ab  eis 
percepissent  damna  ideoque  admirarentur  .  .  .  quod  pape  et  omni  sacerdocii 
suo  tantum  confiderent  dantibus  .  .  .  remissionem  peccatorum  .  .  .  ut 
contra  eos  bellare  deberent." 


282  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

It  is  undoubtedly  mainly  due  to  Cardinal  Cesarini  that  it  was 
after  great  difficulties  at  last  arranged  that  the  Bohemians 
should  appear  at  the  Council  of  Basel.     The  delegates  of  the 
Council,  who  arrived  at  Cheb  somewhat  earlier  than  those  of 
Bohemia,  were  very  numerous.     Among  them  were  John  Nider 
and  John  of  Maulbronn,  who  have  already  been  mentioned, 
Henry  Toke   Canon   of   Magdeburg,  Albert   parish   priest  of 
St.   Sebaldus  at   Niirnberg,  Frederick   of  Parsberg,  Dean  of 
Regensburg,  and    other    ecclesiastics.     Elector    Frederick  of 
Brandenburg,    Duke    John    of    Bavaria,   and   other    secular 
princes  also  joined  the  embassy,  which,  including  the  suites, 
numbered    250  men.      The    deliberations    were    opened    on 
May  9   by  a   very    conciliatory   speech   of   Canon    Toke,    in 
which  he  welcomed  the  Bohemians  and  strongly  advised  a 
peaceful  agreement.     Rokycan,  answering  in  the  name  of  his 
countrymen,  also  spoke  warmly  in  favour  of  peace,  but  added 
that  the  responsibility  for  the  long  and  sanguinary  war  could 
not  be  attributed  to  the  Bohemians,  who  had  only  repulsed 
unjustifiable  and  unwarranted  attacks.     The  discussion  was 
then  continued  with  great  bitterness  on  both  sides,  and  on 
several  occasions  a  rupture  appeared  inevitable.     As  previously 
mentioned  the  question  concerning  the  safety  of  the  envoys 
whom  the   Hussites  were  to  send  to  Germany   always  en- 
venomed the  debates,  as  the  Bohemian  objection,  founded  on 
the  fate  of  Hus,  was  almost  unanswerable.     Mainly  through 
the  influence  of  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  who  personally 
guaranteed  the  safety  of  the  envoys  during  their  stay  in  Ger- 
many, an  agreement  was  finally  drawn  up.     The  representa- 
tives of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  and  of  the  margraviate  of 
Moravia  were  to  proceed  to  Basel  safely  and  unhindered,  and 
were  there  to  express  their  views  freely,  and  in  particular  to 
defend  the  articles  of  Prague.      They  were  to  be  given  seats 
in  the  council-chamber  that  were  appropriate  to  their  rank. 
All  the  previous  decrees,  papal  bulls,  anathemas,  and  excom- 
munications pronounced  against  the  Bohemians,  particularl\' 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  283 

at  the  Councils  of  Constance  and  Siena,  were  to  be  considered 
invalid  during  the  stay  of  the  Bohemian  envoys  at  Basel.     On 
the  occasion  of  the  discussion  of  the  four  articles  (of   Prague) 
only  God's  law,  the  practice  of  Christ  and  the  teaching  of  the 
primitive  Church  and  the  early  councils  should  be  considered 
as  authoritative.     Measures  were  to  be  taken  to  allow  the 
Bohemians  freely  to  celebrate  their  religious  functions  according 
to  their  own  rites,  both  on  their  journey  and  during  their  stay 
in  Basel.     After  these  stipulations  and  others  of  minor  im- 
portance had  been  accepted  by  both  parties,  the  proceedings 
ended  on  May  18,  when  Canon  Toke  again  addressed  the 
assembly  in  so  touching  a  manner  that  many  were  moved  to 
tears.     On  his  return  to  Prague  Prokop  the  Great  immediately 
sent  a  letter  to  King  Sigismund  in  which  he  informed  him  of 
the  results  of  the  negotiations  at  Cheb,  and  urgently  begged 
him  to  proceed  to  Basel  and  assist  at  the  deliberations  of  the 
Council.^     King  Sigismund  had  in  the  autumn  of  the  previous 
year  proceeded  to  Milan,  where  he  had  been  crowned  with 
the  iron  crown  of  the  Lombard  Kings,  and  had  then  continued 
his  journey  in  the  direction  of  Rome.     His  progress  through 
Italy  was  very  slow,  and  he  became  involved  in  the  internal 
struggles  of  that  country.     Venice  had  long  been  at  war  with 
Hungary;    on  the  other  hand,  Sigismund  was  supported  by 
the  powerful  Duke  of  Milan.     The  King  of  Hungary  had  arrived 
at  Lucca,  and  was  preparing  to  march  from  there  to  Siena, 
when  John  of  Maulbronn,  sent  by  the  Council  of  Basel,  appeared 
before  him  and  informed  him  of  the  successful  result  of  the 

^  In  this  letter,  dated  May  21,  1432,  Prokop  wrote :  "  Notifico  Vobis  ex  parte 
mei  et  aliorum  nunciorum  nostrorum  regni  Bohemiae  et  marchionatus  Moraviae 
qualiter  nunc  in  Egra  cum  nunciis  Vestris  et  cum  illustribus  principibus 
Frederico  marchione  Brandeburgensi  et  Johanne  duce  Bavariae  et  doctoribus 
de  concilio  ad  hanc  congregationem  ad  Basileam  pro  conductibus  ac  modis 
sub  quibus  in  Basilea  ad  concilium  stare  debemus,  jam  concordavimus.  Ideo 
studiose  optamus  quatenus  etiam  in  hoc  concilio  personaliter  esse  dignemini 
et  hoc  non  negligere  quia  de  hoc  nobiscum  saepius  loquebamini  quod  utique 
huic  concilio  vultis  interesse."  The  letter  is  signed  "  Procopius  presbyter, 
director  communitatis  Taboritarum  in  campo  laborantis  "  (Martene  et  Durand, 
Veterum  scriptorum  amplissima  coll.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  133). 


\ 


284  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

negotiations  at  Cheb.  Sigismund  had  received  Prokop's  letter 
some  time  previously,  and  he  now  determined  to  send  his  reply 
through  Maulbronn.  He  expressed  his  pleasure  at  hearing 
that  a  peaceful  settlement  of  the  Bohemian  question  appeared 
to  be  probable,  and  promised  to  do  everything  in  his  power 
to  facilitate  the  solution  of  the  difficult  question  of  granting  a 
safe  conduct,  and  also  to  prevent  the  adherents  of  the  Church 
of  Rome  from  impeding  the  journey  of  the  Bohemian  embassy 
to  Basel.  This  was  a  point  to  which  Prokop  had  referred  in 
his  letter.^ 

The  members  of  the  Council  of  Basel  welcomed  with  great 
joy  the  news  of  the  agreement  concluded  at  Cheb.  In  a  letter 
to  Pope  Eugenius  -  Cardinal  Julian  Cesarini  wrote  :  "  The 
gate  through  which  the  lost  sheep  will  return  to  the  fold  has 
now  been  opened.  The  envoys  who  have  returned  from  Egra 
[Cheb]  report  with  joy  and  jubilation  that  through  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  they  have  come  to  an  agreement  with  the 
representatives  of  the  Bohemians,  namely  the  Praguers,  the 
Orphans,  and  the  Taborites,  among  whom  were  also  the  generals, 
especially  Prokop.  According  to  this  agreement  a  solemn 
embassy  of    all  the  estates  of  the  kingdom  will  attend  the 

^  Sigismund  wrote  :  "  Procopi  quemadmodum  nobis  ad  praesens  scripsisti 
parte  tua  et  aliorum  nunciorum  vestrorum  qualiter  cum  principibus  cumque 
doctoribus  per  sacrum  concilium  ad  Egram  missis,  Concordes  sitis  super 
adventu  vestro  ad  Basileam  prosalvis  conductibus  et  modis  ibidem  tenendis, 
et  ita  tibi  notilicamus  quod  memoratum  sacrum  concilium  super  rebus  illis 
etiam  ad  nos  misit  religiosum  fratrem  Jo.  de  Maulbrunno  ordinis  Cisterciensis 
qui  etiam  illi  diaetae  Egrensi  interfuit  informando  nos  de  omnibus  raodis 
conclusis,  (juos  bene  intelleximus  ac  libenter  ac  multum  laetanter  audivimus 
sperantes  in  Deo  omnipotente  quod  res  illae  cadent  ad  laudem  suae  divinitatis 
et  ad  profectum  Christianismi,  et  pacem  et  tranquillitatem  coronae  Bohemiae. 
Et  quicquid  sacrum  concilium  de  salvis  conductibus  et  aliis  rebus  necessariis 
requisivit  a  nobis,  mox  expedivimus,  et  omnia  vobis  mittentur.  Etiam  scripsi- 
mus  Bohemis  de  parte  nostra,  ut  vos  per  regnum  Bohemiae  conducant. 
Super  illo  autem  ubi  desideratis  in  sacro  concilio  personalem  pretsontiam 
nostram,  etiam  clare  praefato  Jo.  mentem  nostram  deteximus,  qui  eam  vobis 
latius  notificabit  quam  possumus  describere.  Nam  in  omnibus  quae  tendunt 
ad  bonum  et  pacificum  statum  regni  praefati  nunquam  deficiemus;  sed  ita 
nos  exhibebimus,  sicut  rex  gratiosus  et  dominus  "  (Mart^ne  et  Durand,  as 
above.  Vol.  VlII,  p.  134). 

*  Letter  printed  by  Palecky  (Vol.  Ill,  iii.  p.  5  of  German  edition),  from  MS. 
in  the  Imperial  Library  in  Vienna. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  285 

Council  of  Basel  as  soon  as  the  necessary  letters  of  safe  conduct 
have  been  received,  which  will  be  the  case  immediately.  The 
holy  assembly  [the  Council]  received  this  news  with  unpre- 
cedented joy  and  with  hands  raised  unto  Heaven;  for  our 
ambassadors  assured  us  that  the  deliberations  at  Cheb  had 
been  carried  on  with  such  complete  sincerity,  and  the  Bo- 
hemians had  shown  so  conciliatory  a  spirit,  that  there  was 
every  reason  to  hope  for  their  conversion.  They  [the  envoys] 
had  finally  been  begged  by  the  Bohemians  with  cordial  em- 
braces and  tears  to  do  all  that  was  in  their  power  to  settle 
matters  peacefully.  They  added  that  such  great  kindness 
had  been  shown  them  during  the  negotiations  that  he  who, 
hearing  of  this,  did  not  burst  into  tears,  would  show  but  little 
love  of  Christ."  It  is  of  course  necessary  to  receive  the 
cardinal's  statements  with  some  reserve.  He  had  to  overcome 
the  Pope's  strong  objection  to  the  Council  of  Basel  and  to  all 
negotiations  with  so-called  heretics.  Having  spent  some  time 
in  Germany  and  taken  part  in  the  recent  disastrous  campaign, 
he  well  knew  how  strong  and  indeed  invincible  the  Hussites 
were  as  long  as  they  remained  united.  He  also  knew  better 
than  the  Pope  and  the  cardinals  in  Rome  how  strongly  the 
democratic  character  which  the  Hussite  movement  had 
assumed  appealed  to  the  German  townsmen  and  peasants. 
He  was  also  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  anti-clerical  move- 
ment, caused  by  the  evil  life  of  many  German  priests,  had 
recently  become  much  stronger,  particularly  since  the  defeat 
of  Domazlice,  which  many  Germans  believed  to  be  a  token  of 
God's  wrath. 

It  was  according  to  the  then  existing  constitutional  organisa- 
tion of  Bohemia  necessary  that  the  agreement  of  Cheb  should 
be  sanctioned  by  a  general  meeting  of  the  estates  of  the  country. 
The  diet  therefore  assembled  at  Kutna  Hora  about  August  30 
and  approved  of  the  decision  that  the  Bohemians  should  take 
part  in  the  ecumenical  council.  It  also  elected  a  large  number 
of  delegates  who  were  to  proceed  to  Basel.     Among  them  were 


286  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

several  nobles,  William  Kostka  of  Postupic,  Benes  of  Mok- 
rovous,  and  George  of  Recic.  The  Prague  citizen  John  Velvar, 
the  Taborite,  Matthew  Louda,  and  George  of  Dvur,  who  repre- 
sented the  Orphans,  also  formed  part  of  the  embassy.  Among 
the  very  numerous  ecclesiastics  who  were  to  proceed  to  Basel 
were  John  of  Rokycan,  who  specially  represented  the  town 
and  university  of  Prague,  Peter  Payne,  surnamed  "  Englis," 
the  Taborite  Bishop,  Nicholas  of  Pelhrimov,  Prokop  the  Great, 
described  on  this  occasion  as  "  exercitus  Taboritarum  in 
spiritualibus  rector,"  Ulrich,  parish  priest  of  Znoymo,  and 
many  others. 

As  Palacky  has  very  truly  stated,  the  negotiations  with  the 
Council  of  Basel  are  at  this  moment  so  vastly  superior  in 
interest  to  all  other  occurrences  in  Bohemia  that  these  scarcely 
deserve  notice.  It  must,  however,  be  mentioned  that  the  diet 
at  Kutna  Hora  also  deliberated  on  the  conditions  under  which 
an  armistice  should  be  granted  to  the  princes  of  Silesia  and 
Lusatia.  Prokop  the  Great  immediately  after  the  victory  of 
Domazlice  had  considered  it  advisable  again  to  invade  the 
neighbouring  countries,  spreading  widely  the  terror  of  the 
Hussite  name.  These  raids,  the  charactei  of  which  was 
similar  to  that  of  those  previously  mentioned,  had  induced 
several  German  princes  to  sue  for  peace.  In  consequence  of 
the  great  prestige  which  the  Bohemians  had  obtained  through 
their  great  victories,  they  had  also  again  been  drawn  into  the 
conflict  which  then  occupied  the  attention  of  Northern  Europe. 
Vitold,  Grand  Duke  of  Lithuania,  who  for  a  moment  had  played 
so  great  a  part  in  the  politics  of  Northern  Europe  and  appeared 
as  the  protagonist  of  the  Slavic  world,  died  on  October  31,  143 1, 
and  the  Russo-Lithuanian  nobility  chose  as  his  successor  the 
Grand  Duke  Svidrigal,  brother  of  King  Ladislas  of  Poland. 
The  state  of  suzerainty  under  Poland  which  had  existed  during 
the  reign  of  Vitold  was  to  continue.  The  Polish  nobility  and 
clergy,  however,  wished  to  establish  their  rule  over  Lithuania 
more  firmly,  and  the  clerical  influence  aimed  specially  at  the 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  287 

Eastern  Church,  to  which  the  larger  part  of  the  population 
of  Lithuania  belonged.  Svidrigal  energetically  resisted  the 
encroachments  of  the  Polish  ecclesiastics,  and  even  contracted 
an  alliance  with  the  Teutonic  order,  long  the  bitter  enemy  of 
Lithuania  as  well  as  of  Poland.  In  this  difficult  position  King 
Ladislas  attempted  to  renew  the  former  amicable  relations 
with  Bohemia  which  he  had  abandoned  under  the  influence 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy.  The  deep-rooted  antagonism 
between  the  Bohemians  and  the  Poles,  which,  like  the  better 
known  hostility  between  Poland  and  Russia,  has  so  greatly 
impeded  the  advance  of  the  Slavic  race,  rendered  such  an 
attempt  difficult,  and  the  Bohemians  could  not  forget  the 
fierce  denunciations  of  their  national  Church  which  the  King 
of  Poland  had  formerly  sent  to  Rome.  It  is,  however,  certain 
that  negotiations  between  the  two  countries  took  place,  and 
that  Prince  Korybutovic,  an  old  and  trusty  friend  of  Bohemia, 
acted  as  mediator.  The  Bohemian  parties  did  not  entirely 
reject  the  proposals  of  King  Ladislas.  The  large  Taborite 
armies,  now  consisting  to  a  great  extent  of  foreign  mercenaries, 
needed  constant  employment,  and  had  no  objection  to  joining 
even  the  Roman  Catholic  Poles  in  an  attack  on  the  knights 
of  the  Teutonic  order,  the  sworn  enemies  of  the  Slavic  race. 
The  conservative  Utraquists  and  the  nobles  of  that  creed,  who 
had  long  been  on  friendly  terms  with  Prince  Korybutovic,  were 
not  averse  to  re-establishing  friendly  relations  with  Poland. 
Some  of  the  most  prominent  Utraquist  nobles,  such  as  Bofek 
of  Miletinek  and  Kostka  of  Postupic,  who  had  been  chamber- 
lain of  Prince  Korybutovic  during  his  short  rule  over  Bohemia, 
took  the  principal  part  in  these  negotiations,  and  a  meeting 
between  King  Ladislas  and  the  Bohemian  leaders  was  planned, 
It  never  took  place,  for  reasons  which  the  contemporary  writers 
do  not  state.  There  is,  however,  little  doubt  that  here,  as  on 
so  many  other  occasions,  the  traditional  subserviency  of  the 
Poles  to  the  Roman  see  influenced  the  councillors  of  the  King 
of  Poland.     It  should,  however,  be  mentioned  that,  though 


288  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

no  alliance  was  concluded,  we  shortly  afterwards  find  a  Bo- 
hemian army  fighting  as  allies  of  Poland  against  the  Teutonic 
order  in  the  lands  near  the  Baltic  Sea. 

The  envoys  of  the  Council  of  Basel  who  had  taken  part  in 
the  negotiations  at  Cheb  wTote  to  the  citizens  of  Prague  and 
to  Rokycan  on  August  13  informing  them  that  they  had  already 
received  from  King  Sigismund  letters  of  safe  conduct  for  the 
Bohemians,  and  that  they  hoped  shortly  to  obtain  similar 
letters  from  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg.  That  prince,  for 
reasons  which  it  is  difficult  to  understand,  raised  objections  at 
the  last  moment,  and  it  was  only  somewhat  later  that  he  for- 
warded the  papers  desired  by  the  Bohemians.  The  latter  also 
appear  to  have  continued  distrustful  for  some  time.  Before 
consenting  to  the  departure  of  their  embassy  for  Basel  they 
thought  it  advisable  to  send  there  two  envoys,  Nicholas  Hum- 
polecky,  notary  of  the  Old  Town  of  Prague,  and  John  2atecky, 
a  member  of  the  community  of  Tabor.  These  men  were  to 
report  on  the  political  situation  of  Germany  and  to  inform  the 
Bohemians  whether  their  embassy  could  start  safely  for  Basel. 
After  receiving  the  necessary  letters  of  accreditation  Hum- 
polecky  and  2atecky  proceeded  to  Germany  in  the  month  of 
September.  They  were  met  at  the  German  frontier  by  the 
Bishop  of  Regensburg  and  several  other  German  prelates. 
During  their  journey  through  Germany  they  were  everywhere 
treated  with  respect  and  courtesy,  and  when  in  the  small  town 
of  Biberach  a  townsman  called  Zatecky  "  a  damned  Bohemian 
heretic"  he  was  immediately  arrested,  and  would  have  been 
punished  had  not  the  Bohemians  themselves  interceded  for 
him.  In  Basel  also  the  envoys  were  most  cordially  received. 
They  appeared  before  the  Council  on  October  10,  presented 
their  credentials  and  then  stated  that  ambassadors  representing 
the  whole  kingdom  of  Bohemia  and  the  margraviate  of  Moravia 
would  shortly  proceed  to  Basel  to  confer  with  the  Council  on 
the  re-establishment  of  peace  and  the  reunion  of  the  Christian 
Church.     They  also  demanded  further  information  concerning 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  289 

the  letters  of  safe  conduct  which  their  ambassadors  to  Basel 
were  to  receive.  The  ever-recurring  insistence  on  this  point 
must,  of  course,  be  attributed  to  the  treachery  once  com- 
mitted against  Hus,  the  memory  of  which  still  rankled  in  the 
minds  of  his  countrymen.  The  envoys  also  begged  the  Council 
to  use  its  influence  to  persuade  King  Sigismund  to  take  part 
in  person  in  the  deliberations  at  Basel,  and  they  also,  in  the 
name  of  the  Bohemian  nation,  expressed  the  wish  that  the 
members  of  the  Eastern  Church  should  take  part  in  the  delibera- 
tions of  the  Council.  The  answer  of  the  Council  was  distinctly 
conciliatory,  and  appeared  satisfactory  to  the  envoys.  The 
assembly  again  assured  the  Bohemians  that  their  embassy 
would  be  perfectly  safe  in  Germany  and  that  the  whole  Council 
fully  sanctioned  the  promises  relating  to  this  matter  which 
its  representatives  had  made  at  Cheb.  The  Council  further 
promised  the  Bohemians  that  it  would  endeavour  to  persuade 
King  Sigismund  to  proceed  to  Basel  as  soon  as  the  state  of 
affairs  in  Italy,  which  detained  him  there,  rendered  this  possible. 
It  also  stated  that  representatives  of  the  Eastern  Church  would 
be  invited  to  take  part  in  its  deliberations.  The  Council, 
however,  added  that  it  appeared  probable  that  King  Sigismund 
would  be  detained  in  Italy  for  a  considerable  time,  and  that 
it  would,  in  consequence  of  the  distance  of  Constantinople  and 
the  difficulty  of  communications,  not  be  possible  to  receive  an 
early  answer  from  the  dignitaries  of  the  Eastern  Church.  The 
Council  therefore  begged  the  Bohemians  to  send  their  embassy 
to  Basel  as  soon  as  possible,  irrespective  of  such  possible 
delays.  The  Bohemian  envoys  were  on  the  whole  satisfied 
with  their  reception  at  Basel,  and  on  their  return  to  their 
country  they  spoke  warmly  in  favour  of  sending  representa- 
tives to  the  Council  at  Basel.  It  was  now  finally  settled  to  do 
so.  The  different  members  of  the  embassy  were  to  meet  at 
Domaihce  on  the  day  of  St.  Nicholas  (December  6),  and  then 
travel  together  to  Basel.     On  November  5  the  municipalities 

of  Prague  wrote  to  the  town  council  of  Cheb  and  also  to  the 
u 


290  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

Elector  of  Brandenburg  informing  them  that  the  Bohemian 
embassy  would  shortly  start  for  Basel,  and  begging  them  to 
send  an  escort  to  Cham  in  Bavaria,  on  the  Bohemian  frontier, 
which  was  to  conduct  the  members  of  the  embassy  to  Basel. 
I  have  already  stated  that  the  embassy  was  very  numerous, 
and  I  have  mentioned  the  names  of  the  most  prominent  men 
among  those  whom  the  diet  had  chosen.     Some  delay  in  the 
departure  of  the  embassy  took  place,  and  its  members  only  left 
Prague  on  December  6.     They  were  accompanied  by  an  escort 
provided  by  the  commander  of  the  Karlstyn  fortress,  which 
was  in  the  power  of  Sigismund's  adherents.     The  embassy 
proceeded  by  way  of  DomcLzlice  to  the  German  frontier,  where 
they   were   met   by   a   larger   German   escort.     The   journey 
through  Germany  was  undisturbed.     When  the  embassy  was 
nearing  Niimberg  Matthew  Louda  displayed  a  Taborite  battle- 
flag  showing  on  one  side  the  portrait  of  Christ  and  on  the 
other  a  representation  of  the  chalice,  bearing  the  inscription, 
"  Veritas  omnia  vincit."     This  caused  great  displeasure  among 
the  Germans,  but  Louda,  when  informed  of  this  by  the  escort, 
acted  in  a  very  conciliatory  fashion  and  removed  the  banner ; 
other  members  of  the  embassy,  fearing  to  give  offence,  followed 
his  example.     From  Niirnberg  the  Bohemians  proceeded  to 
Schaffhausen  by  way  of  Nordlingen  and  Ulm. 

The  members  of  the  Council  of  Basel  anxiously  awaited  the 
arrival  of  the  Bohemian  plenipotentiaries.  Cardinal  Cesarini, 
to  whose  ability  and  foresight  the  favourable  result  of  the 
negotiations  was  almost  entirely  due,  had  persuaded  the  magis- 
trates of  Basel,  in  consideration  of  the  puritanic  character  of 
the  Hussite  movement,  to  issue  regulations  prohibiting  all 
doings  that  might  shock  the  Bohemian  guests.  It  was  decreed 
that  all  ill-famed  women  should  be  forbidden  to  appear  in  the 
streets  during  their  stay,  that  all  gamesters  should  be  expelled 
from  the  city,  and  that  all  music  and  dancing  in  the  inns  should 
for  a  time  be  prohibited.  The  citizens  were  also  instructed  to 
treat  the  strangers  with  great  courtesy,  but  to  avoid  all  intimate 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  291 

intercourse   with   them;    for  the   Council   feared   that   their 
teaching  might  spread  among  the  citizens. 

Cardinal  Cesarini,  with  his  usual  prudence,  succeeded  in 
persuading  the  Hussites  to  make  their  entry  into  Basel  in  as 
quiet  a  manner  as  possible,  thus  avoiding  the  danger  of  both 
hostile  and  friendly  demonstrations.  The  Bohemians,  who 
sincerely  wished  to  avoid  further  difficulties,  gladly  acquiesced. 
On  arriving  at  Schaffhausen  they  decided  to  avoid  publicity 
by  continuing  their  journey  in  a  ship  on  the  Rhine.  They 
thus  arrived  at  Basel  somewhat  unexpectedly  on  January  4, 
1433.  As  soon  as  their  arrival  became  known  it  caused  great 
excitement  and  curiosity  among  the  people  of  the  town  of 
Basel.  Many,  not  knowing  that  they  would  arrive  by  water, 
hurried  into  the  country  beyond  the  city  walls  anxious  to  see 
them.  Crowds  of  people  from  the  roofs  of  their  houses  watched 
the  arrival  of  the  formidable  warriors.  Prokop  in  particular 
was  pointed  out  by  many.^  Immediately  after  the  arrival  of 
the  embassy  Cardinal  Cesarini  sent  John  of  Palomar  and  John 
Stojkovic  of  Ragusa,  the  w^ell-known  chronicler  of  the  Council 
of  Basel,  to  welcome  the  Bohemians  in  the  name  of  the  Council, 
and  to  express  the  joy  of  the  members  of  the  Council  that  the 
Bohemians  should  have  arrived  safely  at  Basel,  and  also  their 
regret  that  the  Bohemians  had  not  arrived  by  land,  as  it  would 
then  have  been  possible  to  receive  them  in  a  more  ceremonious 
fashion.  On  Thursday,  January  8,  eight  members  of  the 
embassy — four  laymen  and  four  priests — called  on  Cardinal 

^  The  passage  in  ^Eneas  Sylvius  describing  the  arrival  of  the  Bohemians 
at  Basel  has  often  been  quoted,  but  well  deserves  to  be  quoted  again;  he 
writes  :  "  Effusus  extra  moenia  urbanus  populus,  ex  synodo  quoque  compiures 
adventum  fortissime  gentis  pro  portis  expectavere.  Alii  frequentes  in  plateas 
qua  transitus  esset  convenire;  matrone,  pueri  puelle  fenestras  atque  tecta 
complere.  Alii  hunc,  alii  ilium  digito  designare,  peregrinos  habitus,  non 
visa  prius  vestimenta  mirari  horribiles  hominum  facies,  truces  notare  oculos, 
non  esse  alienum  dicere  ab  ea  hominum  specie  facta  que  fama  prodiderat.  In 
unum  tamen  cuncti  Procopium  defigere  lumina,  ilium  esse  qui  totiens  fidelium 
fudisset  exercitus,  qui  tot  oppida  subvertisset,  tot  hominum  milia  neci  dedisset, 
quem  sui  pariter  atque  hostes  metuerunt,  invictum  ducem,  audacem  intrepi- 
dum  neque  labore  neque  timore  superandum  "  {Historia  Bohemica,  cap. 
xlix). 


292  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Cesarini  and  thanked  him  for  his  kindness,  and  also  inquired 
when  the  delegates  would  be  received  by  the  Council.  It  was 
decided  that  the  reception  should  take  place  on  the  loth. 
On  the  previous  day  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  with  two 
theologians  of  the  university  of  Paris,  visited  the  Bohemians, 
reminded  them  of  the  ancient  friendship  between  Bohemia  and 
France,  and  assured  them  of  the  goodwill  of  the  King  of  France.^ 
Before  the  Bohemians  appeared  at  the  Council  they  had 
already  discussed  with  its  members  the  rank  and  position 
which  they  would  hold  there.  Firmly  maintaining  their 
standpoint  that  they  formed  part  of  the  universal  Church,  they 
abhorred  every  attempt  to  brand  them  as  '*  heretics."  Here 
also  the  prudence  and  tact  of  Cesarini  removed  all  difficulties. 
In  the  hall  of  the  Dominican  monastery,  where  the  sittings 
of  the  Council  were  then  held,  seats  were  assigned  to  the 
Bohemians  immediately  opposite  those  of  Cesarini  and  the 
three  other  cardinals  who  were  present.  Though  Pope 
Eugenius'  antagonism  to  the  Council  continued,  the  assembly 
had  now  become  very  numerous,  as  all  believed  that  only 
through  an  ecumenical  Council  the  much-desired  reconciliation 
with  the  Hussites  could  be  obtained.  As  soon  as  the  Bohemian 
envoys  appeared  in  the  hall  Cardinal  Julian  addressed  the 
assembly  in  very  eloquent  language.  He  laid  great  stress  on 
the  authority  of  the  universal  Church  and  on  the  infallibility 
of  ecumenical  councils.  The  Cardinal's  speech  was  very 
impressive,  and  many  were  moved  to  tears.  The  assembly 
strongly  approved  of  the  desire  for  peace  which  he  expressed. 
John  of  Rokycan,  who  replied  in  the  name  of  the  Bohemians, 

^  "  Eodem  die  [January  9]  hora  vesperorum  .  .  .  archiepiscopus 
Lugdunensis  cum  duobus  doctoribus  Parisiensibus  in  medium  Bohemorum 
venit,  qui  honorifice  susceptus,  legationem  quam  a  rege  christianissirao  suo 
Francorum  habuit,  sibi  sub  fide  et  honore  et  quasi  juramento  astrictus,  inter 
cetera  retulit,  quod  memor  beneficiorum  per  regem  Bohemiae  Johannem 
caecum,  et  filiam  cujusdam  regis  Bohemiae  in  matrimonium  Francorum 
cuidam  datam,  a  qua  ipse  processit  seu  natus  est ;  ob  hoc  commissit  suis 
legatis,  Bohemis  famulari  et  complacere  quantum  possent.  Cui  pro  tunc 
responsum  non  dabant,  sed  differebant  inde  post  "  ("  Petri  Zatecensis  Liber," 
in  Monumenta  Conciliorum,  etc.,  Tom.  I.  p.  290). 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  293 

regretted  the  wrong  that  had  been  done  to  the  Bohemians  for 
so  long  a  time  by  calHng  them  heretics.  He  described  the 
condition  of  the  primitive  Church  and  regretted  that  men 
should  have  turned  away  from  it  at  the  present  time.  He 
then  thanked  the  Council  for  the  great  efforts  it  had  made  to 
reconcile  the  Bohemians  with  the  universal  Church,  and  finally 
begged  that  the  embassy  be  granted  a  public  hearing,  as  had 
been  agreed  at  Cheb.  The  first  reception  of  the  envoys  being 
a  purely  formal  one,  it  was  necessary  to  enter  into  detailed 
discussions.  In  his  answer  Cardinal  Cesarini,  ignoring  the 
other  points  in  Rokycan's  speech,  said  that  the  Council  was 
ready  at  any  time  to  grant  the  Bohemians  a  hearing,  and  that 
he  begged  them  to  settle  themselves  the  day  when  this  should 
take  place. 

As  was  natural,  both  parties  agreed  that  the  principal  subject 
of  the  discussions  should  be  the  famed  articles  of  Prague. 
The  Bohemians,  on  the  request  of  Cardinal  Cesarini,  chose 
Friday,  January  16,  as  the  day  on  which  the  disputations 
should  begin.  On  that  day  John  of  Maulbronn  and  several 
other  ecclesiastics  conducted  the  Bohemian  embassy  to  the 
Dominican  monastery,  where  the  members  of  the  Council  had 
already  assembled.  Matthew  Louda,  in  the  name  of  the 
Bohemians,  first  addressed  the  assembly.  He  informed  the 
Council  that  the  Bohemians  had  long  desired  to  be  reconciled 
with  the  universal  Church  through  the  mediation  of  King 
Sigismund,  but  that  their  endeavours  had  always  been  fruitless. 
He  then  thanked  the  members  of  the  Council  for  allowing  him 
and  his  countrymen  to  appear  before  their  august  assembly. 
Immediately  afterwards  John  of  Rokycan  opened  his  defence 
of  the  first  article  of  Prague,  concerning  the  necessity  of 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds.  In  his  lengthy  dissertation, 
which  was  continued  on  the  17th  and  19th,  he  referred  to  the 
customs  and  traditions  of  the  primitive  Church  and  maintained 
the  necessity  of  Communion  in  the  form  in  which  the  Sacrament 
had  been  instituted  by  Jesus  Christ.    Though  not  able  to  agree 


294  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

with  all  his  statements,  the  members  of  the  Council  were 
favourably  impressed  by  Rokycan's  speech  and  the  moderation 
which  he  showed.  After  Rokycan's  speech  Prokop  the  Great 
briefly  addressed  the  assembly.  His  tone  was  somewhat 
menacing,  and  he  begged  his  hearers  to  accept  God's  truth 
while  it  was  yet  time.  His  speech  was  received  by  the  Council 
with  marked  displeasure.  Finally  Cardinal  Cesarini  suggested 
that,  before  the  members  of  the  Council  replied  to  the  speeches 
of  the  Bohemians,  the  latter  should  be  allowed  to  expound 
their  views  on  the  other  three  articles.  The  representatives 
of  the  Church  of  Rome  could  then  reply  consecutively  to  all 
the  arguments  of  the  Bohemians.  This  very  fair  proposal  was 
accepted  by  all  parties. 

Before  leaving  their  country  the  Bohemians  had  already,  at 
the  diet  of  Kutna  Hora,  deliberated  on  the  choice  of  their 
spokesmen  at  the  Council.  It  had  been  agreed  that  the  four 
Utraquist  parties,  the  Praguers,  the  nobles  sub  utraque,  the 
Taborites,  and  the  Orphans,  should  each  appoint  one  orator. 
The  choice  both  of  the  Praguers  and  the  Utraquist  nobles  having 
fallen  on  Rokycan,  it  was  agreed  that  he  should  act  as  defender 
both  of  the  first  and  the  third  articles,  though  the  attitude  of 
the  advanced  parties  afterwards  prevented  this  plan  from  being 
carried  out.  On  January  20  the  Taborite  bishop,  Nicholas  of 
Pelhfimov,  defended  the  second  article.  His  speech  was  not 
as  conciliatory  as  that  of  Rokycan  had  been;  he  not  only 
spoke  very  strongly  on  the  treacherous  execution  of  Hus,  but 
he  also  laid  great  stress  on  the  simony  and  depravation  which, 
as  he  said,  were  then  prevalent  among  the  Roman  Catholic 
clergy.  Some  of  the  prelates  who  were  present  loudly  expressed 
their  displeasure.  Nicholas,  referring  to  the  stipulations  made 
at  Cheb,  which  promised  the  Bohemians  full  liberty  of  speech, 
protested  against  what  he  considered  an  attempt  to  intimidate 
him.  It  was  here  again  due  to  the  wisdom  and  conciliatory 
attitude  of  Cardinal  Cesarini  that  this  somewhat  stormy  sitting 
ended  without  a  rupture. 


I 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  295 

The  members  of  the  Council  were  not  alone  in  blaming  the 
conduct  of  the  Bishop  of  Pelhfimov.     When,  after  the  sitting 
of  the  Council,  the  Bohemian  delegates  met  at  the  house  of 
Prokop  the  Great,  John  of  Rokycan  strongly  expressed  his  dis- 
approval of  the  personal  attacks  which  the  Tdborite  bishop  had 
made  against  the  Roman  Catholic  priests.     At  this  meeting  the 
Bohemians  also  discussed  the  question  who  was,  as  their  spokes- 
man, to  defend  the  third  article  of  Prague.     According  to  the 
wishes  of  Utraquist  nobles  and  of  the  Praguers  this  duty  was 
to  devolve  on  Rokycan.     The  Taborites,  however,  raised  strong 
objections  to  this  plan,  and  violently  attacked  the  Utraquist 
nobles,  whom  they  accused  of  no  longer  being  faithful  to  the 
Hussite  cause.     The  Utraquist  nobles,  always  readier  to  make 
sacrifices  for  the  common  cause  than  were  the  Tdborites,  gave 
way,  and  thus  for  a  time  avoided  a  complete  scission  among  the 
Bohemian  parties.     The  priest  Ulrich  of  Znoymo  was  chosen 
to  defend  the  third  article  in  the  place  of  Rokycan.     Ulrich 
spoke  with  great  moderation,  and  his  dissertation,  which  he 
only  concluded  on  January  24,  gave  rise  to  no  disturbing 
incidents.     John    Payne — known    as    Magister    Englis — was, 
according  to  the  agreement,  to  speak  on  the  fourth  article. 
He  had  been  chosen  by  the  Orphans,  the  party  to  which  he 
then  belonged,  though  he  afterwards  joined  the  Taborites. 
Payne's  vehement  speech,  in  which  he  highly  praised  Wy cliff e 
and  lengthily  referred  to  the  controversies  in  which  he  had  been 
involved  at  Oxford  because  of  his  partisanship  for  that  English 
divine,  caused  great  irritation.     Some  of  the  English  prelates 
who  were  present  strongly  protested  against  his  account  of 
the  long-past-over  struggles  in  England  in  which  he  had  taken 
part.     The  oration  of  Payne,  who  evidently  spoke  with  that 
acrimony  so  frequent  among  exiles,  began  on  the  26th  and 
ended    on    the    28th    of   January.     Immediately    afterwards 
Rokycan,  in  a  very  conciliatory  speech,  gave  a  summary  of  all 
the  arguments  which  had  been  brought  out  by  the  Bohemian 
orators.      He  again  thanked  the  members  of  the  Council  for 


296  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

their  cordial  reception,  and  hoped  that  they  would  grant  for- 
giveness should  any  of  the  Bohemian  speakers  in  the  heat  of 
argument  have  offended  some  member  of  the  Council.  Cardinal 
Cesarini  replied  to  Rokycan's  speech.  He  had  obviously 
thoroughly  studied  the  situation  in  Bohemia,  and  the  increasing 
antagonism  which  divided  the  moderate  from  the  advanced 
party  among  the  Bohemians  had  not  escaped  him.  He 
therefore,  speaking  with  his  accustomed  courtesy,  declared 
that  though  the  Bohemians  had  only  enumerated  four  articles, 
it  was  rumoured  in  the  assembly  that  some  of  them  differed 
from  the  Church  of  Rome  in  their  doctrine  on  other  points  also. 
He  then  read  out  twenty-eight  so-called  "  articles,"  the  con- 
tents of  which  were  to  a  considerable  extent  derived  from  the 
speeches  of  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  and  Peter  Payne,  as  well  as 
from  the  writings  of  Wy cliff e,  and  statements  which  were 
attributed  to  the  English  divine.  He  then  put  several  ques- 
tions to  the  Bohemians,  demanding  an  answer  to  them.  Some 
of  these  questions  were  distinctly  invidious.  The  cardinal 
wished  to  know  what  words  the  Bohemians  used  on  the  occasion 
of  the  consecration  of  the  holy  bread  and  wine,  whether  they 
accepted  the  regulations  of  the  Church  with  regard  to  the 
marriage  of  consanguineous  persons,  whether  they  recognised 
the  authority  of  the  ecumenical  councils,  and  specially  whether 
they  considered  as  heretics  those  who  opposed  the  decrees  of 
the  Councils  of  Nicea,  Constantinople,  and  those  of  the  first 
Council  of  Chalcedon.  The  cardinal  finally  wished  to  know 
whether  the  Bohemians  recognised  the  Pope  as  the  true 
successor  of  Christ,  and  whether  they  accepted  the  doctrine 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeded  from  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
Nobody  knew  better  than  Cardinal  Cesarini  that  the  opinions 
of  the  Bohemians  differed  with  regard  to  some  of  the  points 
which  he  had  enumerated.  They  were,  however,  at  that 
moment  still  conscious  of  the  necessity  of  presenting  a  united 
front  to  their  antagonists,  if  they  hoped  to  obtain  some  of  the 
reforms  which  they  desired.     Rokycan,  therefore,  in  the  name 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  297 

of  his  colleagues,  declared  that  the  Bohemian  envoys  would 
require  some  time  to  deliberate  on  the  cardinal's  questions,  of 
which  they  begged  to  be  given  a  written  copy.  The  Bohemians 
obviously  wished  to  gain  time,  and  hoped  that  the  members 
of  the  Council  would  meanwhile  reply  to  the  statements  con- 
cerning the  articles  of  Prague  which  their  spokesmen  had  made. 
The  members  of  the  Council  had,  like  their  Bohemian  an- 
tagonists, entered  into  previous  discussions  with  regard  to  the 
choice  of  their  spokesmen.  The  first  orator  for  the  Council 
was  John  Stojkovi^,  Bishop  of  Ragusa,  whose  lengthy  speech 
occupied  several  sittings  of  the  Council.  He  spoke  with  great 
vehemence  and  animosity,  and  not  only  Prokop,  but  also 
Rokycan,  on  several  occasions  protested  against  his  attacks 
on  the  Bohemian  national  Church.  Conciliatory  as  ever, 
Cesarini  suggested  that  these  grievances  should  be  examined 
by  a  committee  chosen  from  the  members  of  the  Council  and 
the  Bohemian  delegates.  The  cardinal  was  again  successful 
in  preventing  a  rupture  of  the  negotiations.  From  February 
13  to  17  the  Dean  of  Cambrai,  Giles  Carlier,  professor  at  the 
Sorbonne,  spoke  on  the  second  article  of  Prague,  and  was  then 
followed  by  the  Dominican  friar,  Henry  Kalteisen.  Cardinal 
Cesarini  then  again  addressed  the  assembly,  again  referring  to 
the  twenty-eight  articles  which  he  had  placed  before  them. 
Answering  in  the  name  of  his  colleagues,  Peter  Payne  declared 
that  they  were  not  all  present  at  this  sitting  of  the  Council, 
and  that  it  would  be  necessary  that  they  should  consider  these 
matters  more  fully  before  giving  a  definite  answer.  It  was, 
therefore,  thought  advisable  to  continue  the  discussion  of  the 
articles  of  Prague.  On  February  23  John  of  Palomar,  Arch- 
deacon of  Barcelona,  began  to  speak  on  the  fourth  article  of 
Prague,  and  his  elaborate  oration  only  ended  on  the  28th  of 
that  month. 

The  Bohemians  had  now  spent  nearly  two  months  at  Basel, 
and  yet  the  negotiations  cannot  be  said  to  have  made  any  real 
progress.     It  is,  however,  noteworthy  that  amicable  private 


298  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

relations  had  been  established  between  some  of  the  Bohemian 
delegates  and  some  of  the  members  of  the  Council.  This 
circumstance,  which  is  surprising  if  we  consider  the  intense 
hatred  of  so-called  heretics  which  was  general  at  that  time,  was 
undoubtedly  the  result  of  the  conciliatory  policy  of  Cesarini. 
It  is  indeed  in  consequence  of  these  private  relations  that  the 
first  visit  of  the  Bohemians  to  Basel  did  not  prove  entirely 
fruitless,  in  spite  of  the  failure  of  the  public  negotiations  which 
will  be  mentioned  presently.  The  cardinal  himself  seems  to 
have  felt  great  interest  in  the  strong  and  strange  personality  of 
Prokop  the  Great.  A  first  private  interview  between  them 
took  place  on  January  14.  Of  a  later  interview,  that  probably 
occurred  towards  the  end  of  the  stay  of  the  Bohemians  at 
Basel,  we  have  some  information.  Prokop  confidentially 
referred  to  the  corrupt  state  of  the  Church,  and  declared  it  to 
be  a  grave  error  that  those  whose  conduct  diverged  so  widely 
from  the  Holy  Ghost  should  believe  that  whatever  they  did 
was  in  accordance  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  man  of  spotless 
character,  such  as  was  Cesarini,  could  find  no  offence  in  these 
words,  and  he  certainly  agreed  with  Prokop  in  believing  that 
a  reform  of  the  clergy  was  necessary.  He  therefore  only  said  : 
"  The  more  I  converse  with  you.  Sir  Prokop,  the  more  my  heart 
clings  to  you;  therefore  stay  very  long  with  us  that  we  may 
at  last  agree  together."  Prokop  then  pointed  out  how  great 
were  the  expenses  of  their  prolonged  stay  at  Basel.  The 
cardinal,  no  doubt  rightly,  believed  that  this  was  only  a 
pretext. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  Bohemians  had  by  this  time  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  an  agreement  was  at  that  moment  very 
improbable.  During  the  month  of  March  members  of  the 
Bohemian  delegation,  as  was  customary  at  the  theological 
disputations  of  that  period,  again  replied  to  the  four  speeches 
of  the  members  of  the  Council.  The  first  Bohemian  speaker 
was  again  John  of  Rokycan.  On  March  5  the  disputation  was 
interrupted  for  a  short  time,  as  the  Council  wished  to  receive 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  299 

the  envoys  of  Pope  Eugenius.  They  brought  the  Pope's 
proposal  that  the  Council  should  transfer  its  deliberations 
to  Bologna.  This  suggestion  was  rejected  by  the  Council. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  its  acceptance  would  have  immediately 
brought  the  negotiations  with  the  Bohemians  to  an  end,  as  it 
would  have  been  impossible  to  induce  them  to  journey  to  Italy. 
Rokycan  then  resumed  his  oration,  and,  at  its  conclusion  on 
March  10,  expressed  his  views  with  regard  to  the  universal 
Church  and  to  Councils.  He  endeavoured  to  prove  that 
neither  part  of  the  Church  nor  the  whole  Church  could  abrogate 
God's  commands,  and  he  maintained  that  not  all  the  ecumeni- 
cal Councils  had  been  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  John  of 
Ragusa  then  demanded  to  be  heard  immediately,  and  a  some- 
what animated  discussion  began.  Cardinal  Cesarini,  however, 
here,  as  before,  acted  as  peacemaker,  and  it  was  agreed  that 
Nicholas  of  Pelhf  imov,  one  of  the  Bohemian  spokesmen,  should 
next  be  heard.  The  monotonous  and  resultless  debate  on  the 
correct  interpretation  of  the  four  articles  was  then  continued. 
Both  the  members  of  the  Council  and  the  Bohemian  delegates 
listened  with  ever-increasing  distaste,  and  the  discussions  were 
no  longer  carried  on  in  an  orderly  fashion,  as  had  at  first  been 
the  case;  noisy  exclamations  and  interruptions  frequently 
interfered  with  the  debates. 

On  March  13  Cardinal  Cesarini  declared  that  the  Council 
could  not  express  a  definite  opinion  on  the  four  articles  till  its 
representatives  had  again  spoken  on  the  subject.  Rokycan 
replied,  in  the  name  of  his  countrymen,  that  an  agreement 
would  only  have  been  possible  if  the  four  articles  had  been 
favourably  received  by  the  Council ;  otherwise  all  negotiations 
were  vain.  He  said  that  his  countrymen  had  come  to  Basel 
in  the  hope  that  an  agreement  would  be  speedily  concluded; 
but  it  was  now  clear  that  no  progress  whatever  had  been  made. 
He  therefore  declared  in  his  own  name  and  in  that  of  his 
colleagues  that  they  wished  to  return  to  their  own  country, 
and  begged  that  the  necessary  letters  of  safe  conduct  be  given 


300  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

to  them.  The  members  of  the  Council  received  this  statement 
with  surprise  and  not  without  indignation.  Cardinal  Cesarini 
pointed  out  with  undeniable  fairness  that  as  all  the  spokesmen 
of  the  Bohemians  had  been  allowed  to  address  the  Council 
twice,  they  were  bound  to  recognise  the  right  of  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  Council  to  do  the  same.  It  must,  of  course,  be 
considered  that  the  articles  of  Prague  had  been  the  result  of 
a  compromise,  and  that  even  the  most  conservative  Utraquists 
were  not,  after  long  and  victorious  warfare,  prepared  to  accept 
lesser  concessions  than  those  demanded  in  the  articles,  and 
afterwards,  with  slight  modifications,  granted  by  the  compacts. 
Cesarini's  intervention  was  again  successful,  and  the  members 
of  the  Bohemian  embassy  consented  to  defer  their  departure. 
Though  the  cardinal  had  again  prevented  a  complete  rupture 
between  the  antagonists,  no  one  knew  better  than  he  that  the 
continuation  of  the  plenary  sittings  of  the  Council  could  at 
that  moment  but  little  further  an  agreement.  During  the 
prolonged  sittings  of  the  Council  the  debates  became  more  and 
more  embittered.  The  more  extreme  Roman  divines  con- 
tinued to  impress  on  the  Bohemians  the  duty  of  accepting 
unconditionally  all  decrees  of  the  Roman  Church — a  stand- 
point which  obviously  rendered  all  negotiations  superfluous. 
The  Bohemians,  particularly  the  Taborites,  more  and  more 
energetically  protested  against  the  designation  of  "  heretics  " 
which  was  applied  to  them  by  some  members  of  the  Council, 
and  bitterly  reproached  their  opponents  with  the  treachery 
committed  against  Hus,  whom  they  revered  as  a  saint. 
Cesarini,  who,  as  already  mentioned,  had  established  amicable 
relations  with  some  of  the  Bohemian  delegates,  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  private  meetings  between  members  of 
the  Council  and  representatives  of  Bohemia  might  draw  the 
opponents  closer  together.  In  this  plan  the  cardinal  was 
assisted  by  Duke  William  of  Bavaria,  whom  King  Sigismund. 
who  was  still  detained  in  Italy,  had  appointed  "  protector  " 
of  the  Council.     Through  the  duke's  influence  four  prominent 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  301 

members  of  the  Council  met  four  of  the  leading  Bohemian 
delegates  at  the  house  of  Cardinal  Cesarini.     The  discussion 
was  entirely  private,  and  the  accounts  of  it  which  have  been 
preserved  can  lay  no  claim  to  authenticity.      It,  however, 
appears  certain  that  this  exchange  of  views  had  a  moderating 
influence  on  the  men  of  both  parties.     Some  Bohemians  of 
the  advanced  party,  and  Prokop  in  particular,  relying  on  the 
phenomenal    military    successes    of    their    countrymen,    had 
genuinely  believed  that  Bohemia  was  strong  enough  to  impose 
on  Europe  a  reformed  Church  similar  to  that  of  the  early 
Christian  period.     The  more  intimate  intercourse  with  men  of 
Germany,  France,  Spain,  Italy,  and  other  countries,  who  all 
unreservedly  recognised  the  authority  of  the  Church  of  Rome, 
necessarily  convinced  the  Bohemians  that  their  plans  were 
impracticable  and  Utopian.     The  fact  that  sporadic  manifesta- 
tions in  favour  of  Hussitism  took  place  in  some  parts  of  Europe 
could  not  alter  this  conviction.     They  therefore  concluded  that 
it  would  be  impossible  to  obtain  more  than  the  recognition  of 
certain  special  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Bohemian  Church. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  divines  of  the  Council  perceived  that 
an  unconditional  surrender  of  the  Bohemians  was  not  within 
the  range  of  possibility.     Even  the  Utraquist  nobles  and  the 
conservative  citizens  of  Prague,  they  now  knew,  would  never 
return  unconditionally  to  the  Roman  Church.     It  was,  there- 
fore, inevitable  that  concessions  would  have  to  be  made,  and 
the  purpose  of  the  Council  was  henceforth  to  limit  these  con- 
cessions as  far  as  was  possible.     Though  the  elaborate  orations 
pronounced  at  the  public  meetings  of  the  diet  continued  for 
some  time  longer,  it  was  now  already  practically  settled  that 
the  Bohemians  should  return  to  their  country.     It  had,  how- 
ever, also  been  agreed — probably  at  the  meeting  at  the  house 
of  Cesarini — that   they  should   on   their  return  journey   be 
accompanied  by  representatives  of  the  Council.     This  appeared 
all  the  more  plausible  as  the  Bohemians  had  previously  de- 
clared that  any  permanent  agreement  would  only  be  binding 


302  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

when  it  had  been  ratified  by  a  general  meeting  of  the  diet  of 
Bohemia. 

It  is  probable  that  this  decision  did  not  immediately  become 
public,  for  before  the  departure  of  the  Bohemians  several 
foreign  ambassadors  attempted,  in  a  not  always  tactful  manner, 
to  interfere  in  these  negotiations.  Thus  on  April  3  Duke 
William  of  Bavaria  arranged  a  meeting  between  the  Bohemian 
delegates  and  the  envoys  whom  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had 
sent  to  the  Council.  The  Burgundian  ambassador  expressed 
the  hope  that  the  Bohemians  would  conform  to  the  decrees  of 
the  Council;  for,  he  added,  his  master  would  otherwise  be 
obliged  to  draw  his  sword  in  defence  of  the  Council.  Rokycan, 
who  always  studiously  maintained  the  attitude  of  a  prelate, 
answered  in  a  conciliatory  manner,  but  Lord  Kostka  of 
Postupic,  a  Utraquist  noble  and  famed  Hussite  general,  not 
unnaturally  considered  the  threats  of  the  Burgundian  as  an 
insult.  He  replied  :  "  As  to  your  threats,  let  your  duke  come 
to  Bohemia;  we  will  not  fly  from  him,  but  will,  with  God's 
grace,  resist  him,  as  we  resisted  our  other  invaders."  An  inter- 
view which  the  Bohemians  had  shortly  afterwards  with  the 
members  of  the  embassy  sent  by  the  Duke  of  Savoy  to  the 
Council  had  a  more  cordial  character.  The  leader  of  the 
embassy  declared  to  the  Bohemians,  in  the  name  of  his  duke, 
that  that  prince  was  ready  to  assist  the  glorious  Bohemian 
kingdom  both  by  sending  armed  forces  and  by  financial  aid, 
even  at  the  price  of  his  life,  and  that  he  was  sending  an  embassy 
to  Prague.  In  the  name  of  the  Bohemian  delegates.  Lord 
Kostka  of  Postupic  warmly  thanked  the  duke. 

It  had  by  this  time  been  settled  that  the  Bohemian  envoys 
should  leave  Basel  on  April  14,  and  it  was  now  the  duty  of 
the  Council  to  choose  representatives  who  were  to  accompany 
them.  Among  those  chosen  were  Philibert,  Bishop  of  Cou- 
tance  in  Normandy,  Peter,  Bishop  of  Augsburg,  Doctor  Eben- 
dorfer  of  Haselbach,  Canon  of  Vienna,  now  best  remembered 
through  his  historical  writings,  which  have  several  times  been 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  303 

quoted  here,  Giles  Carlicr  and  John  of  Palomar,  who  have 
already  been  mentioned,  and  the  monk  John  of  Maulbronn, 
who  had  been  the  first  to  negotiate  with  the  Bohemians. 
Immediately  before  the  departure  of  the  envoys  King  Sigis- 
mund,  who,  in  the  course  of  the  year  1433,  was  crowned  as 
Roman  Emperor,  announced  to  the  Council  that  he  would 
shortly  proceed  to  Basel.  Cardinal  Cesarini  informed  the 
Bohemians  of  this,  and  expressed  the  hope  that  they  would 
await  Sigismund's  arrival.  The  Bohemians  declined  this 
proposition.  They  said  that  the  King  was  in  the  habit  of 
constantly  changing  his  plans,  on  which  it  was,  therefore,  im- 
possible to  rely ;  they  added  that  they  had  already  announced 
their  return  to  their  countrymen,  and  that  their  presence  would 
be  necessary  in  Prague,  where  the  diet  was  to  meet  on  the  day 
after  Trinity  Sunday.  The  Bohemian  envoys  there  left  Basel 
on  April  14,  as  had  been  settled.  The  leave-taking  was  very 
cordial  on  both  sides.  Cardinal  Julian  blessed  the  delegates, 
raising  his  cross  and  saying  :  "I  commend  you  to  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost."  On  leaving  the  city  gates 
Rokycan  said  :  "  May  the  Lord  preserve  this  spot  in  peace 
and  tranquillity. ' '  Before  leaving  Basel  several  of  the  delegates 
— among  whom  Rokycan  and  Lord  Kostka  of  Postupic  are 
mentioned — visited  some  members  of  the  Council  and  assured 
them  that  they  would,  on  their  return  to  their  country,  do 
everything  that  was  in  their  power  to  further  a  peaceful 
agreement. 

The  Bohemian  delegates  and  the  members  of  the  Council 
who  accompanied  them  arrived  at  S chaff hausen  on  April  16. 
Here  a  somewhat  unpleasant  incident  occurred,  which  for  a 
moment  endangered  the  concord  that  had  lately  prevailed. 
Giles  Carlier  or  Carlerus,  as  he  was  often  called,  tells  us  that  the 
members  of  the  Council  noticed  that  some  of  the  wagons 
which  the  Tdborites  had  left  at  Schaffhausen  bore  emblems 
and  devices  professing  the  Hussite  creed.  They  begged  the 
Bohemians  to  remove  them,  but  met  with  a  refusal.     The 


304  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

matter  was  finally  compromised.  The  Taborites  retained  the 
devices  on  their  wagons,  but  promised  not  to  display  their 
flags  during  their  journey  through  Germany.^  The  envoys 
then  continued  their  journey,  and,  after  a  short  stay  at  Niirn- 
berg,  reached  the  Bohemian  frontier  at  Cheb  on  April  30. 
They  were  here  met  by  a  Bohemian  escort,  and  arrived  in 
Prague  on  May  8.  During  their  progress  through  Bohemia 
they  were  everywhere  joyfully  received  by  the  people,  who 
regarded  them  as  messengers  of  peace.  In  Prague  also  crowds 
of  people  welcomed  them  when  they  entered  the  city  gates. 
They  proceeded  through  the  Mala  Strana  over  the  bridge  to 
the  Old  Town,  where  lodgings  had  been  prepared  for  them; 
and,  as  was  customary  at  that  time,  various  gifts  were  sent  to 
the  representatives  of  the  Council  by  the  citizens. 

The  envoys  of  the  Council,  whose  leader  was  Bishop  Philip 
of  Coutance,  immediately  visited  the  councillors  of  the  Old 
Town  and  informed  them  that  they  had  brought  credentials 
for  the  municipal  authority  of  the  three  towns  of  Prague,  and 
asked  permission  to  deliver  them.  The  antagonism  between 
the  Old  and  the  New  Towns  of  Prague,  which  continued  during 
the  whole  period  of  the  Hussite  wars,  became  evident  on  this 
occasion  also.  The  councillors  of  the  Old  Town  expressed 
their  willingness  to  receive  the  deputation  that  was  to  present 

*  "  Feria  4*  venimus  in  Scafusam,  ubi  altera  die  quievimus  propter  Bohemos, 
ut  suos  possent  adaptare  currus,  quos  ibi  derelinquerant.  Vidimus  tunc  in 
hospicio  Mathei  de  Louda  pendere  arma  in  quibus  stetit  :  '  Veritas  vincit  ' 
et  superius  '  Jhesus  Nazarenus,  rex  Judaeorum  '  et  ad  latera  '  Matthias  de 
Louda.'  Ivimus  in  principio  ad  Procopium  et  suos,  petentes  ut  ilia  et  eciara 
que  in  curribus  habebat,  deponantur.  Respondit  quod  vellent  secum  loqui. 
Ivimus  similiter  ad  Pragenses  et  ipsum  Matthiam  petentes  idem,  quia  non 
deceret  ilia  vice  signa  ostendi  diversitatis,  et  alia  multo  pro  illo  suadentes. 
Qui  post  deliberacionem  dixerunt,  quod  de  hopicio  vellet  removere,  sed  non 
de  curribus ;  promisserunt  tamen  simul  convenire  et  super  isto  nobis  requisiti 
respondere.  Post  dies  forte  sex  requisiti  promisserunt  se  sequenti  die  re- 
sponsuros ;  et  ita  scilicet  fecerunt  mittentes  quatuor  .  .  .  et  dixerunt  *  Peti- 
mus  quod  non  desideretis  a  nobis  que  sunt  contra  honorem  nostrum,'  etc. 
Fuit  responsum  quod  putemus  hoc  esse  pro  honore  eorum,  ut  signa  caritatis 
ostenderent  non  divisionis  "  ("  iEgidii  Carlerii  Decani  Cameracensis  liber  de 
legationibus  Concilii  Basiliensis,"  in  Monumenta  Conciliorum,  etc.,  Tom.  I. 
p.  361). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  305 

the  credentials,  but  the  magistrates  of  the  New  Town  raised 
some  objections.  It  was,  however,  finally  agreed  that  a  meet- 
ing between  the  magistrates  of  the  three  cities  and  the  delegates 
of  the  Council  should  take  place  in  the  town-hall  of  the  Old 
Town.i  An  occurrence  here  again  caused  considerable  irrita- 
tion and  bitterness.  After  Canon  Toke  of  Magdeburg  had 
saluted  the  municipal  authorities.  Bishop  Philibert  was  obliged 
to  inform  them  that  the  embassy  had  lost  its  credentials.* 
Rokycan,  as  usual  acting  as  peacemaker,  replied  in  a  courteous 
manner,  and  the  envoys  received  the  customary  gifts  on  leaving 
the  town-hall.  Only  after  their  departure  the  men  of  the  New 
Town  blamed  the  envoys  for  having  lost  the  credentials,  to 
receive  which  their  councillors  had  been  invited.  It  may, 
indeed,  be  stated  generally  that  in  the  New  Town,  where  the 
Orphans  held  a  predominant  position,  a  spirit  hostile  to  the 
envoys  of  Basel  was  gradually  gaining  strength.  The  fanatical 
priest,  Jacob  Vlk,  preacher  at  St.  Mary-of-the-Snow,  inveighed 
against  the  representatives  of  the  Council  in  very  bitter  lan- 
guage. He  declared  that  the  Council  consisted  only  of  heretics, 
and  that  Basel  (Basilea)  was  a  venomous  basilisk.  The  envoys 
of  the  Council  were  obliged  to  complain  of  the  fanatical 
preacher,  and  Rokycan  promised  to  advise  him  to  moderate 
his  language. 

The  day  when  the  estates  of  Bohemia  were  to  meet  for 
grave  and  weighty  deliberation  had  now  drawn  near.  The  diet 
was  to  have  met  on  the  Monday  after  Trinity  (June  8),  but 
various  circumstances  caused  a  slight  delay,  and  it  was  only 
on  June  12  that  the  assembly  began  its  sittings  in  the  hall 
of  the  Carolinum.  Besides  the  Bohemian  estates,  who  were 
present  in  larger  numbers  than  on  any  previous  occasion,  many 
representatives  of  Moravia  and  Silesia  assisted  at  the  diet,  and 
the  Archduke  of  Austria  and  several  German  princes  had  sent 
envoys.     John  of  Rokycan,  in  a  lengthy  speech,  gave  a  detailed 

^  The  present  town-hall  of  Prague. 

^  Tomek,  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  p.  517. 
X 


3o6  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

account  of  the  negotiations  of  the  Bohemian  delegates  at  Basel. 
It  was  then  decided  that  a  deputation  consisting  of  three  nobles, 
seven  knights,  and  some  other  men  of  distinction  should  call 
on  the  envoys  of  the  Council  and  invite  them  to  take  part  in 
the  deliberations  of  the  diet.  The  envoys  consented,  and  shortly 
afterwards  appeared  in  the  university.  Rokycan  then,  as 
president,  took  his  place  at  the  lecturing  desk  of  the  hall. 
Near  him  were  seated  Bishop  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov  and 
Master  Peter  Payne.  Rokycan  thus  prudently  attempted  to 
maintain  the  appearance  of  unity  among  the  Utraquists;  for 
Peter  Payne  was  then  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Orphans,  while 
Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov,  Bishop  of  the  Taborites,  was  the  natural 
spokesman  of  that  community.  The  whole  assembly  opened 
its  proceedings  by  intoning  the  hymn  **  Veni  creator  spiritus." 
In  his  opening  speech,  which  immediately  followed,  Rokycan 
warmly  praised  the  articles  of  Prague,  and  recommended  their 
acceptation  to  the  assembly.  This  step  was  both  judicious  and 
opportune.  As  has  been  stated,  both  parties  had  perceived 
during  the  negotiations  at  Basel  that  neither  could  maintain 
an  intransigent  standpoint.  Though  some  representatives 
of  the  Council,  such  as  Palomar,  still  demanded  unconditional 
surrender,  the  discussion  was  now  really  restricted  to  the 
question  in  what  sense  the  articles  were  to  be  interpreted,  and 
to  what  districts  the  privileges  contained  in  them  were 
to  be  granted.  After  a  short  speech  of  Philibert,  Bishop  of 
Coutance,  Archdeacon  Palomar  addressed  the  assembly.  He 
praised  the  blessings  of  peace,  and  declared  that  it  was  only 
by  submission  to  Rome  that  the  Hussites  could  obtain  its 
benefits.  Palomar's  lengthy  dissertation  was  continued  at 
the  next  sitting  of  the  diet  on  June  15.  At  the  following 
sittings  and  also  at  several  private  meetings  the  signification 
of  the  four  articles  was  thoroughly  discussed.  In  these  debates 
the  envoys  of  the  Council  had  a  great  advantage  over  their 
opponents.  Though  we  have  no  positive  evidence  on  this 
point,  it  may  be  considered  as  certain  that  these  envoys  had, 


I 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  307 

before  leaving  Basel,  come  to  an  agreement  with  the  other 
members  of  the  Council  as  to  the  limit  of  the  concession  which 
could,  if  necessary,  be  made  to  the  Utraquists.  It  is  certain 
that  among  these  concessions  was  the  permission  to  receive 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds.  This  practice  has  frequently 
obtained  in  countries  professing  the  Roman  Catholic  creed,  and 
is  at  the  present  time  tolerated  by  the  Church  among  the 
uniates  in  Galicia  and  other  parts  of  Poland.  The  Bohemians 
were  in  a  more  difficult  position.  They  were,  of  course,  un- 
aware of  the  fact  that  the  Council  had  roughly  settled  to  what 
extent  it  was  prepared  to  make  concessions;  they  therefore 
endeavoured  to  enforce  their  demands  as  far  as  was  possible 
without  risking  a  renewal  of  hostilities ;  for,  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  fanatics,  all  the  inhabitants  of  Bohemia,  which  was 
exhausted  by  long  and  uninterrupted  warfare,  longed  for 
peace.  It  is  unnecessary  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  the 
prolonged  debates  which  turned  on  the  interpretation  of  the 
articles  of  Prague.  The  proceedings  of  the  diet  were  not 
always  carried  on  in  a  courteous  fashion,  as  had  been  the 
case  at  the  first  sittings.  When  Archdeacon  Palomar  held  the 
Hussites  responsible  for  the  terrible  bloodshed  of  the  recent 
years,  Rokycan  replied  that  the  Bohemians  had  always 
desired  peace,  and  that  not  they,  but  the  prelates  at  Constance, 
had  caused  the  war;  for  they  had  granted  the  Bohemians 
no  hearing  at  Constance,  declared  heretics  those  who  received 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  burnt  their  dear  master  (Hus) 
and  encouraged  King  Sigismund  to  devastate  their  country. 
While  these  vehement  debates,  which  for  a  moment  seemed 
to  render  an  agreement  doubtful,  continued  the  Bohemian 
divines  drew  up  the  first  draft  of  those  stipulations  which 
afterwards  became  famous  under  the  name  of  the  compacts, 
but  which  were  only  brought  before  the  Council  of  Basel 
somewhat  later. 

Far  more  important  than  these  public  debates  were  the 
private  negotiations  which  were  now  carried  on  between  the 


3o8  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

representatives  of  the  Council  and  the  members  of  the  Utraquist 
nobihty.  These  noblemen  have  shared  the  fate  of  almost  all 
men  who,  in  a  stormy  and  revolutionary  period,  attempt  to 
maintain  the  principle  of  compromise.  Menhard  of  Jindfi- 
chuv  Hradec  acted  as  mediator,  and  we  read  of  frequent 
banquets,  to  which  he  invited  both  the  Utraquist  nobles  and  the 
representatives  of  the  Council.  On  other  occasions  also  the 
envoys  of  the  Council  reproached  the  Bohemian  nobles  with 
their  alliance  with  men  of  mean  birth,  and  reminded  them  of 
the  loss  of  their  feudal  rights  and  supremacy.  ^  It  is  certain 
that  these  arguments  were  not  without  influence  on  the 
Utraquist  nobility.  They  remained,  however,  as  is  proved  by 
the  document  just  quoted,  faithful  to  the  demand  that  Com- 
munion in  the  two  kinds  should  be  granted.  They  stated  that 
"  they  would  in  no  case  renounce  Utraquism,  rather  would  they 
all  die."  Their  demands  had  never  gone  beyond  those  formu- 
lated by  the  articles  of  Prague.  The  attacks  made  on  these 
noblemen  by  German  writers,  who  state  that  they  were  in- 
timidated by  the  peasantry  or  influenced  merely  by  the  wish 
to  acquire  Church  lands,  are  therefore  unfair  and  unjustifiable. 
Though,  as  stated,  it  again  for  a  moment  appeared  probable 
that  the  negotiations  would  be  broken  off,  the  universal  desire 
for  peace  prevented  this.     An  immediate  agreement,  however, 

*  The  arguments  of  the  envoys  of  the  Council  are  very  clearly  explained  in 
a  letter  sent  to  the  abbot  of  Tegernsee  by  one  of  his  monks,  brother  Ulrick 
Stockel  (printed  by  Palacky,  Urkunden,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  376-379).  Stockel 
writes  :  "  Die  Landschaft  [the  estates]  hat  gar  einen  grossen  Verdniss  und 
sprachen  alle  gemeinschaftlich,  sie  wollten,  noch  mochten  nicht,  langer  bleiben, 
sie  verzehrten  viel  Gutes  umsonst  und  sie  wollten  dock  den  Artikel  de  communione 
sub  utraque  specie  durch  keinerlei  Sache  wegen  fallen  lassen,  eher  wollten  sie  alle 
sterben.  .  .  .  Die  [ambasioteres  concilii]  nahmen  die  Ritterschaft  auf  einen 
Ort  [25  Jun.]  und  .  .  .  redeten  sie  also  an :  *  Ihr  edelen  Herren  und  Ritter 
und  Knechte,  denket  daxan  dass  Ihr  die  Vordersten  seit  in  dem  Konigreiche 
zu  Bohmen,  und  es  Euch  billig  zugehort  dass  Ihr  das  Konigreich  erhaltet. 
Seht  an  wie  gross  das  Konigreich  vor  Zeiten  gewesen  ist  und  dass  Ihr  nun 
darum  gekommen  seit.  Denn  die  Euere  Vorfahren  als  Diener  verschraaht 
hatten  die  sind  jetzt  Euer  Herren  geworden.'  Darauf  antwortete  die  Ivitter- 
schaft :  mochten  sie  einen  Weg  erdenken  dadurch  in  Concilio  communtonem 
sub  utraque  erlaubet,  so  hofften  sie  es  werde  Einigkeit."  This  valuable  letter 
is  unfortunately  too  long  to  be  quoted  in  its  entirety.  I  have  somewhat 
modernised  the  very  difficult  German  of  brother  Ulrick. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  309 

appeared  impossible,  and  it  was  settled  that  the  envoys  should 
return  to  Basel  and  confer  there  with  the  other  members  of 
the  Council;  representatives  of  the  Bohemian  estates  would, 
however,  accompany  them  to  Basel,  and  it  was  thus  to  be 
clearly  proved  that  the  negotiations  were  not  broken  off. 
Before  leaving  Prague  the  envoys  of  the  Council  suggested  that 
a  truce  should  be  concluded  which  was  to  continue  up  to  the 
time  of  the  general  pacification.  This  proposal,  which  was 
undoubtedly  very  disadvantageous  to  Bohemia  at  a  moment 
when  a  renewal  of  hostilities  was  still  by  no  means  improbable, 
was  rejected  by  the  Utraquists. 

It  was  then  settled  that  the  envoys  of  the  Council,  with 
the  Bohemian  representatives,  should  leave  Prague  on  July  3. 
The  diet  met  early  on  that  day,  and  Rokycan  then  announced 
the  names  of  the  three  Bohemian  representatives  who  were  to 
accompany  the  envoys  of  the  Council  to  Basel.  Prokop  the 
Great  then  declared  that  though  the  Bohemians  were,  in  the 
present  situation,  unable  to  accept  an  armistice,  the  Tdborites 
were  prepared  to  live  in  friendship  and  peace  with  all  men,  if 
the  four  articles,  of  course  as  interpreted  by  Prokop — were 
accepted  by  all.  Bishop  Philibert  replied  in  the  name  of  the 
envoys  of  the  Council,  in  a  very  friendly  and  courteous  fashion. 
He  thanked  the  Bohemians  for  their  kindness  and  hospitality, 
and  expressed  the  hope  that  peace  would  soon  be  concluded. 
Though  it  had  been  settled  that  the  envoys  of  the  Council 
should  start  on  July  3,  they  were  delayed  by  the  preparations 
for  their  long  journey,  and  only  left  Prague  on  the  nth. 
During  these  last  days  the  envoys  had  further  meetings  with 
the  Utraquist  nobles,  and  they  also  conferred  with  the  Roman 
Catholic  nobles  and  the  municipal  authorities  of  Plzeii,  who 
also  belonged  to  that  Church.  After  leaving  Prague  and 
crossing  the  Bohemian  frontier  the  envoys  first  interrupted 
their  journey  at  Niirnberg,  where  they  stayed  three  days. 
In  view  of  the  importance  which  the  city  of  Plzen  acquired 
during  the   events   that   occurred  shortly  afterwards,   it   is 


310  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

interesting  to  note  that  the  envoys,  during  their  stay  at 
Niirnberg,  obtained  from  the  municipahty  a  loan  of  looo 
florins  for  the  city  of  PIzen.  During  the  stay  of  the  envoys 
in  Prague  the  hostilities  between  the  Utraquists  and  the  city  of 
Plzeii  had  been  temporarily  suspended,  but  they  broke  out 
again  immediately  after  their  departure,  as  will  be  mentioned 
presently. 

Before  arriving  at  Basel  the  representatives  of  the  Council 
had  sent  on  in  advance  one  of  their  colleagues,  Martin  Berruer, 
Dean  of  Tours.  On  his  arrival  he  immediately  informed  the 
Council  of  the  results  of  the  mission  in  which  he  had  taken  part. 
He  stated  that  the  Bohemians  were  divided  among  themselves, 
and  that  the  moderate  Utraquists  greatly  desired  peace.  He 
seriously  warned  the  members  of  the  Council  against  interrupt- 
ing the  speeches  of  the  Bohemian  delegates  by  opprobrious 
exclamations  or  cries  of  derision,  as  had  frequently  happened 
during  the  first  visit  of  the  Bohemians  to  Basel.  He  also 
praised  the  dignified  manner  in  which  the  proceedings  of  the 
diet  had  been  carried  on,  and  laid  great  stress  on  the  courtesy 
with  which  the  members  of  the  Council  had  been  received  in 
Prague.  On  August  2  the  whole  embassy  reached  Basel,  and 
shortly  afterwards  Palomar  expounded  his  view  of  the  situation 
in  Bohemia.  He  stated  that  he  and  other  envoys,  who  had 
been  on  intimate  terms  with  the  Bohemians,  had  been  surprised 
by  the  great  diversity  of  opinions  which  they  had  found  among 
the  Utraquists.  Palomar  appears  to  have  thought  that  the 
Utraquist  nobles  were  prepared  to  submit  unconditionally  to 
Rome,  but  were  intimidated  by  the  Tdborites.  What  I  have 
previously  written  is,  I  hope,  sufficient  to  prove  that  this 
supposition  was  absolutely  erroneous.  On  August  ii  the 
representatives  of  Bohemia  appeared  before  the  Council,  and, 
after  presenting  their  credentials,  the  three  envoys,  Master 
Prokop  of  Plzeii,  Matthew  Louda,  and  Martin  Lupad,  ad- 
dressed the  assembly.  They  then  laid  before  the  Council  the 
draft  of  an  agreement  in  which  the  demands  of  the  Bohemians 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  311 

were  formulated;  should  these  demands  be  granted  the 
Bohemians  were  ready  to  conclude  a  permanent  treaty  of 
peace.  The  draft  differed  slightly  from  the  one  drawn  up 
by  the  Hussite  divines  in  Prague,  and  the  compacts — as  this 
agreement  soon  began  to  be  called — were  slightly  modified 
before  their  acceptation  at  Jihlava  in  1436;  yet  it  is  well  to 
give  here  the  wording  of  these  famed  stipulations,  which  ended 
the  Hussite  wars.     They  ran  thus  : 

I.  The  Holy  Sacrament  is  to  be  given  freely  in  both  kinds  to 
all  Christians  in  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  and  to  those  elsewhere 
who  adhere  to  the  faith  of  those  countries. 

II.  All  mortal  sins  shall  be  punished  and  extirpated  by  those 
whose  office  it  is  to  do  so. 

III.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  to  be  freely  and  truthfully 
preached  by  the  priests  of  the  Lord  and  by  worthy  deacons. 

IV.  The  priests  in  the  time  of  the  law  of  grace  shall  claim 
ownership  of  no  worldly  possessions. 

The  compacts  were  declared  invalid  in  1462  by  Pope  Pius  II 
(iEneas  Sylvius),  and  in  1567  the  Bohemian  diet,  then  con- 
sisting mainly  of  Protestants,  thinking  that  they  formed  an 
obstacle  to  their  larger  demands,  decreed  that  the  compacts 
should  no  longer  form  part  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  the 
kingdom  of  Bohemia.^  Most  historians  have,  therefore,  con- 
sidered the  compacts  as  an  attempt  at  compromise  which  was 
bound  to  fail.  The  writer  of  the  present  day  who  judges  the 
events  of  the  fifteenth  century  with  greater  impartiality  than 
was  perhaps  possible  at  an  earlier  period  will  probably  hold  a 
different  opinion.  It  is  certain  that  the  compacts  were 
entirely  adapted  to  the  wishes  of  the  nobles  sub  utraque,  of  the 
citizens  of  the  Old  Town  of  Prague  and  generally  of  the  con- 
servative townsmen  of  Bohemia,  who  at  that  time  almost  all 
belonged  to  the  Utraquist  Church.  It  is  certain  that  later  and 
more  advanced  Church  reformers,  such  as  the  German  Protest- 
ants,  have  greatly  underrated  the  value  of  the  compacts. 

1  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  pp.  213-214. 


312 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS 


They  satisfied  almost  all  the  claims  raised  in  the  articles  of 
Prague,  and  if  the  Bohemian  people  had  consistently  defended 
them  they  could  have  formed  the  foundation  of  a  Bohemian 
national  Church;  they  guaranteed  Communion  in  the  two 
kinds,  a  reformation,  and  stricter  control  of  the  clergy  and  the 
use  of  the  national  language  in  the  religious  services. 

When   this  document  was   presented   to  the  Council  the 
divines  assembled  at  Basel  decided,  on  August  13,  to  elect  a 
committee  which  was  to  deliberate  on  the  proposals  made  by 
the  Bohemians.     A  slight  examination  of  the  compacts  shows 
that  they  could  be  interpreted  in  various  fashions,  and  the 
deliberations  were,  therefore  prolonged.     Some  members   of 
the  committee  were  entirely  opposed  to  the  granting  of  any 
concessions  to  the  Bohemians,  while  others,  laying  great  stress 
on  the  necessity  of  terminating  the  war,  spoke  in  favour  of 
granting  the  Bohemians  such  concessions  as  were  necessary 
for  that  purpose.     The  committee  finally  declined  the  responsi- 
biUty  of  a  decision,  and  the  question  was  brought  before  a 
larger    meeting,    consisting   of    about    160    of   the    foremost 
members  of  the  Council.     They  all  bound  themselves  to  abso- 
lute secrecy.     Palomar,  addressing  this  assembly,  declared  an 
agreement  with  the  advanced  Hussites  to  be  impossible,  but 
thought  that  slight  concessions  would  satisfy  the  moderate 
Utraquists.     He    therefore    proposed    that    they    should    be 
granted  permission  to  receive  Communion  in  the  two  kinds. 
This    concession    had    been,    though    reluctantly,    previously 
granted  by  the  Council.     Palomar,  however,  advised  that  this 
decision  should  be  kept  secret  for  the  present,  and  only  an- 
nounced to  the  diet  at  Prague  by  the  envoys,  who,  as  was  now 
settled,  would  be  again  sent  there  by  the  Council.     These 
proposals  were  accepted  by  all  present,  and  Cardinal  Cesarini 
then  announced  to  the  Council  that  a  new  embassy  would  be 
sent  to  Prague,  that  its  mission  was  for  a  time  to  remain  secret, 
but  that  everything  that  had  been  resolved  was  in  conformity 
with  the  Catholic  religion.     A  similar  declaration  was  made 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  313 

by  Duke  William  of  Bavaria,  who,  in  King  Sigismund's  absence, 
acted  as  "  protector  "  of  the  Council.  The  Bohemian  repre- 
sentatives were  entirely  excluded  from  these  deliberations, 
but  they  were,  in  accordance  with  Berruer's  advice,  treated 
with  great  kindness  and  hospitably  entertained. 

The  Council  had  this  time  chosen  only  four  plenipotentiaries 
who  were  to  represent  it  at  Basel ;  they  were  Philibert,  Bishop 
of  Coutance,  John  Palomar,  Henry  Toke,  and  Martin  Berruer, 
who  had  all  taken  part  in  former  missions.  Leaving  Basel  on 
September  11,  together  with  the  Bohemian  representatives, 
they  arrived,  on  the  20th  of  that  month,  at  Niimberg,  where 
a  short  halt  was  made.  They  were  here  informed  of  the 
important  military  events  that  had  occurred  in  Bohemia  since 
the  first  embassy  of  the  Council  had  left  that  country.  They 
heard  that — as  will  be  mentioned  later — a  Taborite  force  had 
entered  Bavaria,  but  had  been  defeated,  with  great  losses,  at 
the  village  of  Hilkersreuth.  Civil  war  had  again  broken  out 
in  Bohemia,  and  the  envoys  would,  on  their  way  to  Prague, 
have  to  pass  near  the  camp  of  the  Taborite  army,  that  was  then 
besieging  Plzeii.  In  view  of  the  fanatical  hatred  of  the 
Roman  Church  which  characterised  the  Taborites  it  appeared 
somewhat  perilous  to  continue  the  journey.  It  was  at  Niirn- 
berg  also  that  the  Bohemian  delegates  received  letters  from 
the  estates  of  their  country,  announcing  that  the  diet  would 
meet  in  October  to  discuss  the  possibility  of  a  general  pacifica- 
tion, but  that  this  meeting  could  not  take  place  unless  the 
estates  were  assured  that  the  Council  would  accept  the  com- 
pacts in  the  wording  in  which  they  had  been  presented  to  it. 
The  Bohemian  envoys,  as  already  mentioned,  had  at  Basel 
been  kept  entirely  ignorant  of  the  deliberations  of  the  Council. 
They  therefore  consulted  their  fellow-travellers,  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Council,  who,  pledged  as  they  were  to 
secrecy,  gave  an  evasive  answer.  They,  however,  determined 
to  continue  their  journey  to  Prague,  and  begged  the  town 
council  of  Niirnberg  to  allow  one  of  the  citizens,  Sigmund 


314  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

Stromayer,  who  had  been  their  guide  during  their  first  visit 
to  Prague,  again  to  accompany  them  as  far  as  Cheb.  The 
town  council  granted  their  demand,  and  with  Stromayer 
sent  also  '*  a  servant  who  knew  Bohemian  and  Latin  fairly 
well,  so  that  he  could  act  as  their  interpreter."  On  September 
27  the  representatives  of  the  Council  and  those  of  the  Bohemian 
nation  arrived  at  the  Bohemian  frontier.  The  envoys  of  the 
Council  here  again  hesitated  to  proceed  further.  They,  how- 
ever, begged  their  Bohemian  colleagues  to  obtain  for  them 
fresh  letters  of  safe  conduct,  and,  after  having  received  them, 
continued  their  journey  to  Prague,  where  they  arrived  on 
October  22.  November  11  was  finally  fixed  on  as  the  date 
on  which  the  estates  were  to  meet. 

When  the  estates  met  the  very  grave  political  situation  of 
Bohemia  had  first  to  be  taken  into  consideration.  It  has 
already  been  noted  that  the  rigid  discipline  maintained  by 
2izka  in  the  Taborite  armies  had  gradually  declined.  In 
consequence  of  the  prolonged  war  it  had  become  necessary  to 
strengthen  these  armies  by  mercenaries,  who,  for  the  sake  of 
plunder,  flocked  to  the  Hussite  standards  from  all  Slavic 
countries  and  even  from  Germany.  During  the  first  visit  of 
the  envoys  of  the  Council  to  Bohemia  comparative  peace  had 
reigned  in  the  country,  and  even  the  continuous  feud  with 
Plzen  had  been  suspended.  About  that  time  a  large  army  of 
the  Orphans  had  entered  the  service  of  the  King  of  Poland, 
who  was  then  at  war  with  the  Knights  of  the  Teutonic  Order. 
The  Bohemians  here  certainly  fought  as  allies  of  a  kindred 
Slavic  country ;  yet  as  the  Poles,  with  the  exception  of  Prince 
Korybutovi^  and  his  followers,  always  upheld  the  cause  of 
Rome,  this  campaign  was  by  no  means  advantageous  to 
Utraquism.  The  great  military  successes  of  the  Hussites 
naturally  increased  their  pride,  and  it  is  even  now  a  subject  of 
pride  to  Bohemians  that  the  Hussite  armies  once  carried  the 
Bohemian  standards  as  far  as  the  Baltic  Sea.  In  the  autumn 
of  1433  the  victorious  Bohemians  returned  to  their  country. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  315 

Their  brilliant  victories  in  distant  lands  had  not  rendered 
them  more  amenable  to  discipline ;  they  consented,  however, 
to  assist  the  Taborite  forces,  which  had  for  some  time  been 
besieging  the  city  of  Plzeii.  Exhausted  as  Bohemia  already 
was  it  became  impossible  to  provision  these  large  forces.  In- 
subordination became  general,  and  both  Tdborites  and  Orphans 
indiscriminately  pillaged  the  districts  in  which  they  were 
quart  ered.i 

Under  these  circumstances  it  was  natural  that  the  estates 
almost  unanimously  determined  to  take  the  necessary  steps 
to  prevent  their  country  from  drifting  into  anarchy  or  the 
despotic  rule  of  a  pretorian  force.  On  this  point  veteran  enemies 
of  Church  reform,  such  as  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  adherents 
of  Sigismund,  such  as  Menhard  of  Jindfich&v  Hradec — 
then  still  a  Utraquist,  though  he  afterwards  joined  the  Roman 
Church — the  Utraquist  nobles,  the  citizens  of  the  Old  Town 
of  Prague,  and  those  of  other  cities  which  adhered  to  the 
moderate  Utraquist  party  and  the  leaders  of  the  Orphans,  such 
as  Lord  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  were  entirely  in  agreement.  Even 
Prokop  the  Great,  who  had  left  the  camp  before  Plzen  to  take 
part  in  the  debates  of  the  diet,  was  at  that  moment  in  favour 
of  attempting  to  re-establish  order  in  the  land.  As  a  first  step 
to  further  this  purpose  it  was  decided  to  elect  a  regent,  who  was 
to  be  the  head  of  the  government  up  to  the  moment  when  it 
would  be  possible  to  elect  a  king,  according  to  the  ancient 
constitution  of  the  land.  That  this  decision  by  no  means 
signified  an  unconditional  surrender  to  Rome,  as  the  advanced 
T^borites  believed,  or  pretended  to  believe,  is  sufficiently 
proved  by  the  personality  of  the  regent  who  was  elected.  The 
choice  of  the  diet  fell  on  Lord  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  a  member 

1  A  contemporary  chronicler  writes :  [the  soldiers]  "  devastated  the  Bo- 
hemian land  and  caused  a  great  famine  in  the  country ;  for  they  took  possession 
of  all  the  churches  and  dwellings  and  robbed  the  people  of  all  that  they  had/ 
and  carried  it  off,  each  one  to  his  own  home,  and  then  sold  it.  And  therefore 
did  the  Lord  permit  that,  wherever  they  went,  they  were  defeated  "  ("  Scrip- 
tores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  88). 


3i6  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

of  one  of  the  oldest  Bohemian  famihes,  but  a  man  of  small 
fortune.  He  had,  since  the  beginning  of  the  war,  fought  on 
the  Utraquist  side,  and  was  at  that  moment  one  of  the  fore- 
most leaders  of  the  Orphans.  The  powers  granted  him  by  the 
estates  were  very  considerable.  He  was  empowered  to  take 
all  lawful  steps  to  re-establish  peace  in  the  kingdom.  He 
was  given  power  to  convoke  the  estates,  receive  representatives 
of  foreign  countries,  conclude  treaties,  and  take  all  military 
measures  necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  country.  This 
decision  of  the  diet  was  closely  followed  by  important  events 
which  will  be  mentioned  presently. 

It  was  only  after  the  choice  of  a  regent  that  the  estates  were 
able  to  devote  their  attention  to  the  negotiations  with  the 
envoys  of  the  Council.     On  November  17  some  of  the  members 
of  the  diet  visited  the  envoys,  and  Rokycan,  in  a  conciliatory 
speech,  invited  them  to  be  present  at  the  meeting  of  the  diet 
which  was  to  take  place  on  the  following  day.     On  that  day 
the  envoys  appeared  in  the  great  hall  of  the  Carolinum,  where 
the  diet  again  held  its  sittings.     Bishop  Philibert  and  Palomar 
fkst  addressed  the  assembly,  and  a  prolonged  debate  on  the 
interpretation    of    the    compacts    began.     It    continued    for 
several  days,  first  at  the  Carolinum  and  later  at  the  dwelling- 
place  of  the  envoys,  where  they  were  visited  by  Rokycan, 
Prokop   the    Great,    Master    Pribram,    Ambrose    of    Kralove 
Hradec,  and  other  Utraquist  divines.     In  these  discussions  the 
question  of  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  naturally  played  a 
great  part.     The  envoys  of  the  Council  continued  their  system 
of  limiting  all  concessions,  as  far  as  this  could  be  done  safely. 
Lengthy  discussions  began  as  to  the  districts  in  which  Utraquist 
Communion  should  be  permissible,  and  as  to  the  right  of  children 
to  receive  Communion.     Other  questions  of  minor  importance 
were  raised.     The  Utraquists  wished  it  to  be  stated  in  the 
proceedings  that  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  was  "  useful  and 
salutary."     The  envoys,  who  always  gave  only  a  rehictant 
consent  to  all  stipulations  which  sanctioned  Communion  in  the 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  317 

two  kinds,  at  first  opposed  this  proposal,  but  afterwards, 
declaring  this  to  be  "  a  matter  of  minor  importance,"  accepted 
it.  The  knights  and  nobles  who  took  part  in  the  deliberations 
of  the  diet  had  now  become  somewhat  impatient  of  the  slowness 
of  the  negotiations.  Through  their  influence  the  Bohemian 
delegates  consented  to  accept  the  compacts  in  the  form  in 
which  they  had  been  presented  to  the  Council  of  Basel,  on 
condition  that  they  should  not  be  interpreted  in  a  sense  dis- 
advantageous to  the  Bohemians.  The  representatives  of  the 
Council  agreed  to  this,  and  members  of  both  parties  gave  their 
hands  to  one  another  to  confirm  the  agreement.  This  ceremony 
can  by  no  means  be  considered  as  a  formal  treaty,  as  it  was  not 
performed  in  the  presence  of  the  diet,  nor  with  its  consent. ^ 
It  indeed  only  requires  mention  because  the  adherents  of 
Sigismund  afterwards,  when  the  Bohemians  made  demands 
on  behalf  of  the  national  Church,  declared  that  they  had 
already  agreed  to  a  final  settlement.  The  difficult  situation 
caused  by  the  renewal  of  the  siege  of  Plzen  would,  indeed,  at 
that  moment  have  rendered  an  agreement  impossible,  and  it 
is  obvious  that  neither  party  was  prepared  to  bind  itself  till  it 
was  acquainted  with  the  result  of  the  now  inevitable  new 
civil  war. 

It  was  one  of  the  principal  demands  of  the  Utraquists  that 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds  should  be  obligatory  in  the  whole 
kingdom  of  Bohemia;  they  stated  that  if  two  different  rites 
of  Communion  were  admitted  in  the  country  this  would  lead 
to  constant  friction  and  strife.  It  was  an  obvious  answer  to 
this  demand  that  the  important  city  of  Plzen  and  many 
neighbouring  castles  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Roman  party, 
and  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  representatives  of  the  Council 
to  advise  their  co-religionists  to  abandon  rites  to  which  they 
had  continued  faithful  during  the  whole  war.  The  delegates 
of  the  Council  were,  on  the  other  hand,  anxious  to  save  the  city 
of  Plzen,  which  the  Utraquists  had  begun  to  besiege  immedi- 

*  Tomek,  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  p.  6i6. 


3i8 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS 


ately  after  the  first  envoys  had  left  Bohemia  on  their  return  to 
Basel.  They  therefore  demanded  that  the  Utraquists  should 
consent  to  a  truce  with  Plzen.  The  representatives  of  the 
Council,  who  were  in  secret  communication  with  the  city,  had 
received  intelligence  that  it  was  then  on  the  point  of  capitu- 
lating. All  Utraquist  parties  agreed  in  rejecting  this  proposal. 
The  regent,  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  demanded  that  the  citizens 
of  Plzen  should  recognise  his  provisional  government  and 
pledge  themselves  to  accept  the  agreement  which  the  diet 
would  conclude  with  the  Council.  The  advanced  parties,  of 
course,  even  more  energetically  expressed  the  same  opinion. 
Capek  of  San,  one  of  the  best  generals  of  the  Orphans,  who  had 
commanded  their  recent  expedition  to  Prussia,  spoke  strongly 
in  the  diet  against  the  armistice.  The  representatives  of  the 
Council  left  Prague  on  January  14,  1434.  The  negotiations 
were  not,  however,  entirely  broken  off,  and  the  envoys  of  the 
Council  were  on  their  return  journey  accompanied  by  a 
Bohemian  envoy,  Martin  Lupac,  parish  priest  of  Chrudim. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that,  during  the  first  visit  of 
the  envoys  of  the  Council  to  Bohemia,  hostilities  had  tem- 
porarily ceased  in  the  country.  Very  soon  after  their  depar- 
ture, however,  the  Utraquists,  as  already  mentioned,  began 
again  to  besiege  Plzen,  long  the  principal  stronghold  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  party  in  Bohemia.  Since  its  abandonment 
by  2izka  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  the  city  had  always 
continued  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the  Roman  party,  and  its 
immediate  neighbourhood  contained  some  of  the  principal 
castles  of  the  nobles  '*  sub  una,"  who,  though  not  numer- 
ous, were  very  powerful.  The  citizens  of  Plzen  found  in 
them  staunch  allies  and  talented  leaders,  and,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  permanent  danger  to  which  the  attacks  of 
the  Utraquists  exposed  them,  they  had  become  thoroughly 
accustomed  to  warfare.  On  July  14,  1433,  the  new  siege  of 
Plzen  began.  The  first  troops  to  arrive  there  were  the 
Taborite  forces,  under  Frederick  of  Stranic  and  John  Pardus 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  3i9 

Shortly  afterwards  the  levies  of  the  Old  and  New  Towns  of 
Prague,  and  those  of  several  cities  allied  with  Tabor,  arrived 
before  Plzen,  and  they  were  followed  at  a  short  interval  by 
the  army  of  the  Orphans,  under  Capek,  which  had  just  returned 
from  Prussia.     It  is  probable  that  some  of  the  soldiers  of  the 
lords  "  sub  utraque  "  also   took   part   in  this,  the  last  joint 
enterprise  of  the   Utraquists.     At   the   beginning  of  August 
Prokop  the  Great  also    arrived  before   Plzen   and  took  the 
command  of  the  besieging  army.     This  army  was  concentrated 
in  five  separate  camps,  each  of  which  contained  the  levies  of 
one  of  the  Utraquist  parties  who  had  jointly  undertaken  the 
siege.     It  was  not  attempted  to  starve  the  city,  as  the  de- 
fenders had  employed  the  respite  which  they  had  obtained  in 
consequence  of  the  negotiations  of  the  Council  for  the  purpose 
of  strengthening  the  fortifications  of  the  city.     The  Hussites 
therefore  determined  to  invest  the  city  thoroughly,  and  shortly 
afterwards  opened  a  bombardment  from  all  their  positions. 
Many  incidents  prove  that  indiscipline  had  spread  among  the 
Hussite  soldiers,  and  though  their  artillery  had  been  brilliant 
during  the  earlier  part  of  the  war,  it  now  seems  to  have  failed 
entirely.     Though   Catholic   chroniclers   probably  exaggerate 
when  they  write  that  no  one  was  killed  or  wounded  during  the 
bombardment,  it  certainly  caused  scarcely  any  damage  in  the 
city.     It  is,  at  any  rate,  certain  that  the  bombardment  by 
no  means  discouraged  the  defenders.     On  September  i  they 
made  a  vigorous  sortie  at  night-time,  and  occupied  and  de- 
stroyed one  of  the  camps ;    the  losses  of  the  Hussites  were 
considerable.     To  avoid  similar  occurrences  Prokop  decided 
to  join  his  troops  more  closely  together.     The  original  plan  of 
isolating  the  camps  had,  no  doubt,  been  adopted  to  prevent 
conflicts  between  the  different  forces.     The  relations  between 
the   Utraquist   nobles   and   Prokop  the   Great   were  already 
strained  to  the  utmost,  and  the  citizens  of  the  Old  and  New 
Towns  of  Prague,  who  were  to  meet  in  armed  conflict  only  a 
few  months  later,  were  already  on  very  bad  terms.     At  the 


320 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS 


same  time  it  was  also  decided  to  move  the  now  united  camps 
somewhat  further  from  Plzen. 

The  purpose  of  the  close  investment  had  been  to  force  the 
city  to  capitulate  by  starvation,  but  this  became  more  and 
more  difficult,  as  the  neighbouring  German  princes — to  whom 
the  Council  had  appealed  on  behalf  of  the  citizens — constantly 
attempted  to  provision  Plzen,  and,  in  consequence  of  treachery, 
which  had  now  become  frequent,  succeeded  in  doing  so 
on  several  occasions.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  becoming 
increasingly  difficult  to  provision  the  Hussite  armies.  As 
discipline  among  the  soldiers  had  gradually  become  very  lax, 
the  Taborite  soldiers  pillaged  the  neighbouring  country  and 
soon  incurred  the  hatred  even  of  the  peasantry,  who  had 
hitherto  always  been  faithful  to  the  Hussite  cause.  We 
therefore  find  in  contemporary  documents  much  evidence  of 
the  execration  which  the  people  of  Bohemia  and  other  lands 
then  felt  for  the  Taborites,  and  Prokop  the  Great  in  particular. ^ 
A  diligent  study  of  the  contemporary  documents  undoubtedly 
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  Prokop's  brilliant  victories  and  the 
prominent  position  which  he  was  able  to  assume,  even  in  his 


*  It  is  curious  to  note  that  even  at  this  moment,  when  the  power  of  Prokop 
was  more  than  vacillating,  a  letter  should  have  been  sent  to  him  entreating 
him  to  mend  his  evil  ways.  I  refer  to  the  anonymous  letter  sent  "  sub  nomine 
ecclesiae  Anno  1434  ante  30  Maii,"  and  addressed  :  "  Infideli  Procopio  contra 
Christum  in  campis  degenti,  et  hunc  crucilixum  pro  salute."  The  anonymous 
author  writes  :  ' '  Quid  gloriaris  quod  in  virtute  sanguinis  Christi  frequens  tibi 
arridet  victoria  bellorum  ?  O  stulta  aestimatio  !  O  superba  jactatio  !  Nonne 
Alexander  magnus  cui  deus  Jupiter  fuit  totum  mundum  sibi  subjugavit  ? 
Nonne  Romani  omnium  idolorum  cultores  totum  mundum  superarunt  ?  .  .  . 
Dicis  enim  sacerdotes  in  ecclesiis  student  avaritiis  et  vacant  simoniae  in  sacra- 
mentorum  collatione;  quod  tu  asseris  absque  veritate.  Si  tamen  sic  esset, 
quod  alsit,  ob  hoc  domus  Dei  non  debet  tradi  incendiis,  et  Jesus  Christus  cum 
invenit  in  templo  vendentes  et  ementes  non  templum  incendebat;  sed  facto 
flagello  de  fumculis  ejos  ejecit  et  pie  correxit.  .  .  .  Noram  certe  ex  relatu  te 
esse  virum  magni  concilii,  utinam  in  bono.  Sed  proh  dolor  talentum  tibi 
creditum  non  posuisti  ad  negationem.  .  .  .  Totam  enim  intentionem  ostendis 
ad  nova  peccata  mortalia  perpetranda,  in  novis  homicidiis,  rapinis,  incendiis, 
pauperum  oppressionibus.  .  .  .  Obsecro  te  igitur  per  viscera  misericordiae 
Dei  nostri  et  per  effusionem  sui  sanguinis  pretiosi,  obtestor  ac  per  suuni 
tremendum  judicium  ut  ab  ista  vita  damnabili  resilias."  The  length  of  this 
very  interesting  letter  (printed  by  Mart^ne  et  Durand,  as  above.  Vol.  VIII. 
pp.  709-714)  unfortunately  renders  it  impossible  to  quote  it  in  its  entirety. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  321 

dealings  with  the  sovereigns  of  foreign  countries,  had  had  an 
unfavourable  influence  on  the  equilibrium  of  his  mind.  At  the 
time  when  he  was  attacking  the  Church  of  Rome  in  the  most 
virulent  manner  he,  on  several  occasions,  entered  into  negotia- 
tions with  the  Emperor  Sigismund.  After  having  agreed 
with  the  moderate  Utraquists,  who,  at  the  Diet  of  Prague  in 
the  winter  of  1433,  had  declared  that  the  suppression  of  the 
turbulent  and  anarchical  bands  of  the  Orphans  and  Taborites 
was  necessary,  Prokop  almost  immediately  afterwards  rejoined 
the  Taborite  camp  before  Plzen.^ 

Though  the  Taborite  and  Orphan  armies  continued  to 
pillage  ruthlessly  the  country  districts  of  Bohemia,  it  soon 
became  impossible  to  provision  a  large  army  in  the  now  totally 
devastated  land.  Prokop  therefore  determined  to  send  a 
detachment  of  his  troops  across  the  Bavarian  frontier  to  obtain 
provisions.  A  small  force,  commanded  by  John  Pardus,  at 
that  moment  one  of  the  most  prominent  Taborite  generals, 
entered  Bavaria  by  way  of  Domazlice,  and,  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  period,  began  to  pillage  the  country  mercilessly. 
The  Bavarian  Duke  of  Sulzbach,  whose  territory  the  Taborites 
had  invaded,  hastily  assembled  troops,  and  he  received  some 
aid  from  the  neighbouring  Burgrave  of  Niirnberg,  Elector 
Frederick.  After  successfully  concluding  their  raid  the 
Bohemians  were  returning  to  their  country  when  they  were 
attacked  by  the  troops  of  the  two  princes  at  the  village  of 
Hilkersreuth,  near  Waldmiinchen,  close  to  the  Bohemian 
frontier.  The  peasantry,  exasperated  by  the  depredations  of 
the  Tdborites,  rose  in  arms  against  them,  and  in  large  numbers 
joined  the  forces  of  the  two  princes.  The  Bohemians,  as  usual, 
retired  to  their  wagon-forts  to  defend  themselves,  but  they 

1  Dr.  Neubauer,  in  his  interesting  studies  on  Prokop,  to  which  I  have 
already  referred,  notes  a  great  deterioration  in  the  character  of  Prokop,  and 
quotes  several  of  his  denunciations  of  the  Church  of  Rome  couched  in  most 
coarse  and  crude  language.  Dr.  Neubauer  adds  the  very  penetrating  remark 
that  a  long  period  of  brutalising  warfare  affects  the  speech  and  writings  of  the 
people ;  he  alludes  to  the  similar  effect  which  the  thirty  years'  war  had  on  the 
German  language. 
Y 


322  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

were  this  time  unsuccessful.  The  wagons  were  stormed,  and, 
according  to  the  most  trustworthy  account,^  of  the  1800 
Bohemian  warriors  only  130  men  with  their  commanders^ 
Pardus  and  John  Ritka,  Captain  of  Domazlice,  escaped  and 
reached  the  camp  before  Plzen. 

This  defeat  at  a  moment  when  discipline  was  continuously 
becoming  slacker  in  the  Taborite  camp,  and  when  by  no  means 
groundless  rumours  of  treachery  were  rife  there,  would  in  any 
case  have  had  serious  consequences,  but  the  riot  which  broke 
out  when  Pardus  returned  to  the  camp  made  the  situation 
even  more  dangerous.  A  mutiny  broke  out  among  the  soldiers, 
who  accused  Pardus  of  treachery.  The  defeated  general  was 
attacked,  fettered,  and  imprisoned,  and  when  Prokop  attempted 
to  protect  his  comrade,  who  appears  to  have  been  perfectly 
innocent,  he  was  himself  insulted  by  the  soldiers,  wounded  by 
a  stool  that  was  thrown  at  him,  and  confined  in  a  prison. ^ 
Prokop  was  released  almost  immediately,  and  it  appears  that 
he  then  proceeded  to  Prague,  where  his  presence  in  the  autumn 
is,  at  any  rate,  certain.  We  have,  however,  very  scant  informa- 
tion concerning  his  movements  at  that  moment,  and  this  is 
generally  perhaps  the  most  obscure  period  of  the  Hussite  wars. 
We  have  also  only  varying  and,  indeed,  contradictory  state- 
ments concerning  the  doings  in  the  camp  of  Plzen  after 
Prokop's  departure. 

The  proceedings  at  the  Diet  of  Prague  after  the  arrival  of 
the  second  embassy  of  the  Council  have  already  been  noted. 
Prokop  the  Great,  who  took  part  in  these  deliberations,  spoke 
strongly  in  favour  of  re-establishing  order  in  the  country. 
As  it  could  not  be  denied  that  the  principal  disturbers  of  peace 
were  then  the  Taborites,  Prokop  thus  broke  openly  with  his 
party.     It  is  likely  that  the  opprobrious  manner  in  which  he 

*  BartoSek  of  Drahonic,  p.  6ii. 

2  "  Pardus  reversus  ante  Plznam  eadem  septimana  est  a  suis  complicibus 
captus  et  vinctus  et  dominus  et  presbyter  Procopius  tunc  a  quodam  rilxvldo 
dicto  Twaroh  fuit  ad  caput  cum  sede  seu  scabello  graviter  vulneratus  et  captus 
sed  [post]  paucas  dies  liberatus  "  {BarioSek  of  Drahonic,  p.  6n). 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  323 

had  been  treated  by  those  whom  he  had  so  often  led  to 
victory  rankled  in  his  mind.  Later  writers,  whose  authority 
is,  however,  shght,  even  state  that  Prokop  now  entered  into 
negotiations  with  Menhard  of  Jindfichfiv  Hradec  and  other 
Bohemian  nobles,  and  only  rejoined  the  Taborites  when  they 
begged  him  to  do  so.^ 

It  is,  at  any  rate,  certain  that  about  the  middle  of  December, 
1433,  Prokop  returned  to  the  Taborite  camp  before  Plzen. 
The  deliberations  of  the  diet  continued  up  to  the  following 
month,  but  he  had  probably  ascertained  that  the  concessions 
which  the  Council  was  prepared  to  make  would  appear  in- 
sufficient even  to  the  most  moderate  members  of  the  com- 
munity of  Tabor.  He  therefore,  forgetting  former  grievances, 
returned  to  the  army  which  he  had  so  long  commanded.  It 
must  here  again  be  stated  that  the  proceedings  in  the  Taborite 
camp  during  the  last  months  before  the  great  defeat  at  Lipany 
are  shrouded  in  deep  obscurity;  the  contemporary  accounts 
are  few  and  contradictory.  It  appears  certain  that  Prokop 
the  Great  soon  regained  the  confidence  of  the  army.  He  again 
proceeded  to  Prague  in  January  1434  as  representative  of  the 
army  and  bearer  of  what  may  be  called  an  ultimatum.  He 
declared  that  the  Taborites  could  accept  no  agreement  with 
the  Council  which  did  not  declare  that  Communion  in  the  two 
kinds  should  be  obligatory  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  Bohemia. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  among  the  Taborite  warriors  there  were 
many  fervent  Utraquists  who  considered  it  their  duty  to  insist 
on  this  point.  The  Taborite  armies,  however,  at  this  period 
included  many  German,  Polish  and  Lithuanian  mercenaries 
who  knew  no  other  craft  except  warfare.  These  men  were 
certainly  not  anxious  that  a  treaty  of  peace  should  be  con- 
cluded.    It  is  certain  that  the  envoys  of  the  Council,  who  had 

1  Professor  Tomek,  in  his  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague  (Vol.  IV.  p.  60 1 , 
n.  34),  quotes  the  words  of  these  writers.  The  statement,  to  which  the  learned 
professor  himself  does  not  appear  to  attach  much  importance,  appears  to  me 
very  improbable.  It  is,  however,  characteristic  of  the  atmosphere  of  mutual 
distrust  and  treachery  which  marks  the  last  months  of  the  Hussite  wars. 


324  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

secretly  aided  the  defenders  of  Plzen,  could  not  accept  this 
proposal,  and  they,  as  already  mentioned,  immediately  left 
Prague.  The  Roman  Catholic  party  attributed  the  failure  of 
the  negotiations  to  Prokop.^ 

The  political  complications  in  Bohemia  now  began  to  over- 
shadow the  religious  controversies  with  which  they  were  so 
closely  connected.  The  anarchical  condition  of  the  Tdborite 
and  Orphan  armies  became  an  ever-increasing  danger.  Irritated 
by  their  continued  failure  to  obtain  possession  of  Plzeii  and  by 
the  famine  which  had  broken  out  in  the  camp,  the  soldiers, 
now  entirely  beyond  control,  harassed  and  raided  the  country 
near  Plzeii,  robbing  and  murdering  the  peasantry.  Prokop 
the  Great,  who  would,  perhaps,  have  succeeded  in  maintaining 
a  certain  amount  of  discipline,  had  not  returned  to  the  camp. 
The  depredations  caused  by  the  soldiers  had  so  greatly  irritated 
the  population  that  the  people  on  several  occasions  rose  in  arms 
against  them.  At  Horazdovic  the  pillagers  were  attacked  by 
the  soldiers  of  Lord  Menhard  of  Jindfichfiv  Hradec  and 
defeated  with  great  loss,  and  at  Bene§ov  the  Knight  John 
Malovec  of  Pacov  surprised  another  band  of  Tdborites  at  night- 
time and  dispersed  them.  When  the  news  of  these  defeats 
spread  in  the  camp  violent  riots  broke  out,  similar  to  those  that 
had  occurred  on  the  occasion  of  the  return  of  Pardus.  The 
siege  of  Plzen  still  continued  meanwhile,  but  all  hopes  of 
starving  out  the  fortress,  which  was  considered  too  strong  to 
be  stormed,  gradually  disappeared.  In  the  absence  of  all 
discipline  the  investment  was  not  carried  out  thoroughly, 
and  on  several  occasions  the  Catholic  allies  of  Plzeii  found 
means  to  bring  provisions  into  the  city.  The  citizens  also 
received  financial  aid  from  various  quarters.  The  members 
of  the  Council  of  Basel  made  a  collection  of  money  for  the 

*  Brother  Ulrick,  already  quoted,  wrote,  on  February  19,  1434,  to  the 
abbot  of  Tegernsee  :  "  Tunc  isti  de  praedicta  obsidione  [of  PlzeA]  miserunt 
Procopium  inimicum  pacis  cum  ahis  suis  ad  civitatem  l^Vagensem  qui  impedi- 
verunt  hoc  sanctum  opus  unitatis  et  pacis  quod  prius  acceptatum  crat  " 
(Palacky,  Urkunden,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  402-405). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  325 

defenders  of  Plzen.  A  large  sum  of  money  was  collected  and 
safely  remitted  to  the  citizens.  The  depredations  of  the 
soldiery  and  their  anarchical  behaviour  necessarily  caused 
many  defections  from  the  Tdborite  ranks.  Thus  one  of  their 
generals,  Pfibik  of  Klenov,  secretly  assisted  the  Catholics  in 
sending  provisions  to  Plzeii.  Many  Utraquists,  who  did  not 
wish  to  aid  the  enemies  of  their  creed,  but  strongly  disapproved 
of  the  anarchical  conduct  of  the  mercenary  troops,  left  the  camp 
and  returned  to  their  homes. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  was  natural  that  the  plan  of 
ending  the  depredations  of  the  Taborite  and  Orphan  bands, 
which  had  hitherto  only  been  occasionally  mooted,  should  now 
have  been  generally  accepted.     The  regent  Ales  of  Riesenburg, 
whose  election  Prokop  had  approved  of,  and  who  had  been 
entrusted  with  unlimited  authority  over  the  armed  forces  of 
the   country,   was   justly  indignant   that   the  armed   bands 
entirely  ignored  his  commands.     The  Utraquist  lords,  among 
whom  Borek  of  Miletinek  and  Kostka  of  Postupic  acted  as 
leaders,  first  met  secretly — the  locality  has  remained  unknown 
— and  decided  to  force  the  Taborites  to  desist  from  further 
warfare.     The  citizens  of  the  Old  Town  of  Prague  immediately 
joined  the  confederacy  of  the  nobles.     The  many  victories  of 
the  Taborites   had,   however,   rendered  them  so  formidable 
that  the  nobles  did  not  venture  openly  to  oppose  them,  aided 
only  by  the  conservative  townsmen  of  Prague.     They  therefore 
— some  of  them  somewhat  reluctantly — decided  to  form  a 
coalition  with  the  lords  "  sub  una."    It  will  be  remembered  that 
a  similar  coalition  had  once  been  founded  previously,  during  the 
last  year  of  the  hfe  of  Zizka.     These  negotiations  were  mainly 
conducted  by  Menhard  of  Jindfichuv  Hradec,  through  whose 
influence  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg,  leader  of  the  lords  "sub  una," 
joined  the   confederacy  with   the   consent   of   the   Emperor 
Sigismund.     John  Palomar,  whom  the  Council  had  sent  to  the 
Bohemian  frontier  to  watch  the  events  and  to  assist  the  citizens 
of  Plzen,  took  a  large  part  in  these  negotiations,  which  were 


326  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

carried  on  with  great  secrecy.  It  was  also  through  Palomar's 
influence  that  Pfibik  of  Klenov  abandoned  the  Taborite  cause. 

Events  now  proceeded  rapidly,  but  before  referring  to  the 
downfall  of  Tdbor  it  is  necessary  to  allude  briefly  to  an  attempt 
made  by  Sigismund  to  enter  into  direct  negotiations  with  the 
Taborites.  Sigismund,  who  was  at  that  moment  at  Basel, 
sent  a  Bohemian  nobleman,  Habart  of  Adlar,  to  the  camp 
before  Plzeii,  and  proposed  that  the  Taborites  and  Orphans 
should  negotiate  directly  with  the  King.  The  propositions 
made  by  Adlar  are  not  known  to  us,  but  they  appear  to  have 
been  very  favourable,  for  they  were  accepted  not  only  by  the 
Taborites,  but  also  by  the  Orphans,  by  whom  hatred  of  Sigis- 
mund had  always  been  preserved  as  a  legacy  of  their  dead 
leader  2izka.  It  is  also  probable  that  the  Taborite  leaders, 
who  had  knowledge  of  the  formidable  league  which  was  being 
formed  against  them,  welcomed  this  opportunity  of  negotiating 
directly  with  the  King.  Sigismund,  in  whom  duplicity  was 
innate,  undoubtedly  entered  into  these  negotiations  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  Council.  The  Taborites  and  Orphans 
then  chose  envoys  who  were  to  meet  Sigismund  either  at 
Basel  or  at  Niirnberg.  We  are  expressly  told  that  Prokop 
the  Great  was  not  one  of  the  delegates  chosen,  as  he  was  then 
in  Prague ;  but  it  is  probable  that  he  was  in  favour  of  these 
negotiations,  as  he  always  preferred  to  come  to  terms  with 
Sigismund  rather  than  with  the  Bohemian  nobility.  While 
negotiations  concerning  the  time  and  place  where  Sigismund 
should  receive  the  envoys  were  still  continuing,  hostilities 
between  the  Taborites  and  the  Bohemian  nobles  began,  and 
the  negotiations  were  necessarily  broken  off. 

Once  formed,  the  league  of  the  Bohemian  nobles  immediately 
took  very  energetic  steps.  To  obtain  the  aid  of  the  lords 
**  sub  una  "  the  Utraquist  nobles  had  been  obliged  to  admit 
that  the  raising  of  the  siege  of  Plzeii  should  be  one  of  the 
demands  which  the  league  was  to  address  to  the  Tdborites. 
They  certainly  thus  renounced  the   claim  of  the  advanced 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  327 

Utraquists  that  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  should  be  de- 
clared obligatory  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  Bohemia.  Under 
the  given  circumstances  the  concession  was  an  inconsiderable 
and  inevitable  one.  The  siege  of  Plzeii  had  proved  a  complete 
failure.  Treason  and  anarchy  were  rife  in  the  Taborite  camp. 
The  moderate  Utraquists,  particularly  the  nobles,  desired  to 
come  to  an  agreement  with  the  Council  of  Basel,  as  representing 
the  universal  Church.  It  was,  however,  certain  that  the 
Council  would  never  admit  that  a  small  minority  of  the  Bo- 
hemian people  should  be  coerced  into  abandoning  the  practice 
of  the  Roman  Church  and  into  accepting  the  Utraquist  teaching, 
to  which  the  Church  could  at  best  only  give  a  reluctant  consent. 
At  a  meeting  of  the  members  of  the  league  in  March  1434  it 
was  decided  that  all  the  confederates  should  pledge  their  faith 
to  uphold  the  authority  of  the  regent,  and  that  they  should 
summon  the  Taborites  to  disarm  and  cease  to  plunder  the 
country.  If  they  consented  to  do  this,  a  free  pardon  for  all 
past  offences  was  to  be  granted  to  them.  In  case  of  a  refusal 
they  were  to  be  treated  as  enemies  of  their  country.  All 
mercenaries  who  wished  to  continue  their  military  career 
would,  if  they  wished  it,  be  enrolled  in  the  army  of  the  league. 
The  Taborite  movement  has,  like  the  French  Revolution, 
found  some  unconditional  defenders,  who  attempt  to  palliate 
even  its  worst  features.  These  writers  have  declared  that  the 
moderate  Utraquists  were  traitors  to  their  cause  because  they 
opposed  the  continuation  of  the  siege  of  Plzen.  The  same 
writers  also  blame  the  members  of  the  league  for  strongly 
denouncing  the  depredations  of  the  Taborite  bands ;  these  accu- 
sations were,  however,  but  too  well  founded ;  the  Taborite  bands 
at  the  end  of  the  war  were  very  dissimilar  to  the  **  warriors  of 
God,"  whom  2izka  had  once  led  to  victory.  The  impartial 
historian,  though  admiring  the  religious  enthusiasm  and  heroic 
bravery  of  the  Hussites,  is  yet  obliged  to  condemn  many  deeds  of 
the  Taborites  during  the  last  and  least  glorious  months  of  the  war. 
As  an  unconditional  surrender  of  the  Taborites  was  rightly 


328  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

considered  improbable,  no  immediate  attempt  to  negotiate 
was  made,  and  the  summons  of  the  league  was  by  all  considered 
a  declaration  of  war.  The  league  called  on  all  its  members  to 
march  with  their  levies  to  the  Kacin  hill,  near  Kutna  Hora, 
which  was  chosen  as  rallying-point.  The  troops  of  all  the 
Utraquist  nobles  rapidly  assembled  there.  Among  those 
present  were  the  regent,  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  Bofek  of  Mile- 
tinek,  formerly  one  of  2izka's  best  generals,  Henry  of  Wart  en- 
berg,  son  of  Cenek  of  Wartenberg,  who  had  played  so  great  a 
part  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  Kostka  of  Postupic,  George 
of  Podebrad,  a  youth  who  was  once  to  become  King  of  Bo- 
hemia, and  many  others.  The  troops  of  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg 
and  of  other  Catholic  nobles  of  Southern  Bohemia  had  not  yet 
arrived,  and  the  men  of  Plzeii,  who  afterwards  played  a  con- 
siderable part  in  the  battle  of  Lipany,  were  then  still  occupied 
in  defending  their  town  against  the  Taborites.  The  com- 
manders of  the  league  decided  to  make  an  immediate  attempt 
to  obtain  possession  of  Prague.  They  may  have  thought  that 
the  New  Town  would  more  readily  admit  a  Utraquist  army 
than  the  Roman  Catholic  soldiers  of  Rosenberg.  The  Old 
Town,  as  already  mentioned,  had  immediately  joined  the 
league.  The  nobles  now  summoned  the  New  Town  to  do 
the  same,  but,  largely  through  the  influence  of  the  fanatical 
preacher,  Jacob  Vlk,  the  citizens  refused  to  enter  into  negotia- 
tions, and  remained  faithful  to  the  party  of  the  Orphans. 
The  Taborites,  informed  of  the  plans  of  the  league,  hurriedly 
sent  one  of  their  generals,  Andrew  of  Kersky,  to  organise  the 
defence  of  the  New  Town,  in  which  Prokop  the  Great,  who 
appears  to  have  remained  in  Prague  since  the  beginning  of  the 
year  1434,  also  took  part.  The  citizens  of  the  New  Town 
began  the  hostilities.  They  took  possession  of  the  Horska  and 
Pofice  gates  of  the  Old  Town  and  occupied  sev^eral  church 
towers,  from  which  they  opened  fire  on  the  Old  Town.  The 
citizens  of  that  town  immediately  sent  messengers  to  the  army 
at   the   Ka^in   hill   requesting   aid.      This   was   immediately 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  329 

granted,  as  the  generals  of  the  league  had  already  decided  to 
force  the  citizens  of  the  New  Town  to  join  the  coniederacy. 
The  army  of  the  league  arrived  before  Prague  on  May  5,  and, 
after  marching  through  the  Mala  Strana,  crossed  by  the  bridge 
of  Prague  into  the  Old  Town.  They  called  on  the  citizens  of 
the  New  Town  to  demolish  the  fortifications  which  they  had 
constructed,  to  conclude  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  the  Old 
Town,  and  to  cease  troubling  the  public  peace.  It  appears 
likely  that  no  answer  was  given  to  this  summons,  and  none 
was  probably  expected.  On  the  day  of  the  arrival  of  the  troops 
of  the  league  an  artillery  duel  began,  and  on  the  following  day 
they,  with  their  allies  of  the  Old  Town,  took  possession  of  the 
New  Town  without  much  bloodshed.^ 

Though  the  capture  of  the  New  Town  was  no  great  military 
exploit  it  must  be  considered  as  a  great  success  for  the  league 
of  the  nobles.  They  had  thus  deprived  the  Taborites  of  the 
powerful  aid  of  the  New  Town  of  Prague,  and  had  forced  them 
to  abandon  the  siege  of  Plzeii  without  any  further  effort. 
Prokop  the  Great  left  the  New  Town  immediately  after  its 
capture. 2  He  proceeded  hurriedly  to  Tabor,  the  centre  of  his 
community,  where  he  hoped  to  organise  a  new  army  in  view  of 
the  decisive  conflict  which  was  evidently  impending.  On  his 
way  he  sent  a  letter  to  the  priest  Prokop  the  Lesser,  who  was 
then  commanding  the  troops  before  Plzen.  The  letter  ^  is 
interesting,  as  throwing  some  light  on  the  enigmatical  character 
of  Prokop  the  Great.  He  wrote  :  "  Our  Lord  is  omnipotent. 
He  who  after  a  storm  grants  calm  and  consoles  His  faithful 
after  affliction.     My  most  beloved  brother  in  Christ  !    I  wish 

^  A  contemporary  chronicler  writes  :  "  By  God's  dispensation  few  were 
killed  on  this  occasion,  sixteen  or  twenty  at  most,  and  only  one  house,  that  of 
Kucka,  was  burnt  down  "  ("  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum,"  Vol.  III.  p.  88). 

^  According  to  the  "  Scriptores  rerum  Bohemicarum  "  Prokop  the  Great 
and  Andrew  of  Kersky  were  expelled  from  the  New  Town  of  Prague  after  its 
capture  by  the  army  of  the  league. 

'  The  Latin  original  of  this  letter  is  printed  by  Palacky,  Urkunden,  etc., 
Vol.  II.  p.  411.  Its  fate  is  very  curious;  it  never  reached  Prokop  the  Lesser; 
it  was  intercepted  by  the  troopers  of  the  Catholic  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg. 
The  original  is  now  preserved  at  Wittingau  (Tfeboii),  in  the  archives  of  the 
princes  of  Schwarzenberg,  who  are  descendants  of  the  Lords  of  Rosenberg. 


330  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

it  to  be  known  to  you  that,  by  God's  will,  the  false  nobles,  with 
the  Praguers  of  the  Old  Town,  attacked  our  very  dear  brethren 
the  citizens  of  the  New  Town;  they  killed  some  and,  as  we 
have  seen,  took  possession  of  the  city.  It  therefore  seems  well 
to  us  that  you  should,  abandoning  everything,  move  from  the 
city  of  Plzen  in  the  direction  of  Sedlcany ;  for  Capek  is  assem- 
bling large  forces,  and  we  of  Tdbor  will,  we  hope,  do  the  same ; 
for  it  is  better  for  us  to  die  than  to  leave  unavenged  the  innocent 
blood  of  our  dearest  brethren,  which  was  fraudulently  shed. 
Farewell  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  after  our  trials  will 
console  us."  As  mentioned  in  the  letter,  Capek  of  San,  the 
best  cavalry  general  of  the  Orphans  and  Taborites,  was  rapidly 
raising  troops  in  the  district  of  Kralove  Hradec,  where  the 
Orphans  had  their  most  numerous  and  staunch  adherents. 
Prokop  himself  still  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  considerable 
number  of  recruits  in  the  town  of  Tabor  and  its  vicinity. 

Though  the  contemporary  records  are  silent  on  this  subject, 
it  yet  appears  that  the  exhausted  population  of  Bohemia  did 
not  receive  this  new  call  to  arms  with  great  enthusiasm.  This 
is  proved  by  the  fact  that  a  comparatively  small  army  of 
Taborites  encountered  the  enemies  at  the  decisive  battle  of 
Lipany.  The  first  result  of  the  capture  of  the  New  Town 
was  the  final  raising  of  the  siege  of  Plzeii.  It  was  probably 
rather  an  excuse  for  this  decision  than  its  actual  cause  that 
about  this  time  the  Catholics  again  succeeded  in  provisioning 
the  city.^  On  May  9  the  besieging  army  retired  from  Plzen, 
after  having  burnt  their  tents  and  destroyed  the  earthworks 
which  they  had  erected.  Besides  the  permanent  armies  of  the 
Taborites  and  Orphans,  the  levies  of  the  New  Town  of  Prague, 
of  Beroun,  and  of  2atec  took  part  in  the  march.  The  few 
soldiers  of  the  Old  Town  of  Prague  who  were  still  in  the  camp 
were  taken  prisoners.  For  reasons  that  are  not  known  to  us 
the  armies  divided  after  a  short  time ;   the  Tiborites  marched 

^  Some  contemporary  writers  state  that  this  provisioning  was  again  the 
work  of  Pfibik  of  Klenov.     This  is  certainly  untrue. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  331 

on  Tdbor  while  the  Orphans,  after  crossing  the  Vhava,  pro- 
ceeded in  the  direction  of  Kralove  Hradec,  the  great  stronghold 
of  their  community.  We  are  not  well  informed  as  to  the  very 
rapid  movements  ^  of  the  two  contending  armies  during  the 
month  of  May.  Prokop  the  Great's  plan,  that  the  whole  army 
which  had  besieged  Plzen  should  march  together  to  Sedl^any, 
was  not  carried  out — no  doubt  because  his  letter  was  inter- 
cepted. Both  the  Orphans  and  the  Tdborites,  however,  appear 
to  have  agreed  to  attempt  to  regain  possession  of  Prague. 
The  Orphans,  under  Capek  of  San,  were  the  first  to  appear  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  capital.  The  Utraquist  nobles  who 
occupied  Prague,  still  hoping  for  a  reconciliation,  entered  into 
negotiations  with  Capek.  The  leader  of  the  Orphans,  however, 
made  the  surrender  of  the  New  Town  a  condition  of  peace,  and 
an  accord  was  thus  impossible.  Almost  immediately  after- 
wards— on  May  17 — the  Taborite  forces,  under  Prokop  the 
Great,  also  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  Prague.  The  re-united 
Taborite  and  Orphan  armies  appear  to  have  desired  to  give 
battle  to  the  lords  of  the  league  under  the  walls  of  the  capital. 
The  lords,  however,  who  expected  large  reinforcements, 
cautiously  remained  within  the  city  walls.  These  reinforce- 
ments soon  arrived.  The  powerful  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg, 
the  faithful  friend  of  King  Sigismund  and  leader  of  the  Roman 
party  in  Bohemia,  sent  a  large  force.  The  citizens  of  Plzen 
and  the  nobles  allied  with  them  joined  the  army  of  the  league, 
as  did  also  the  garrison  of  the  Karlstyn,  who,  during  the  whole 
course  of  the  war,  had  held  that  stronghold  for  King  Sigismund. 
The  new  army  which  joined  the  Utraquist  lords  consisted 
of  10,000  infantry  and  500  horsemen.^ 

1  The  Lords  of  the  league  occupied  the  New  Town  of  Prague  on  May  6,  the 
siege  of  Plzen  was  raised  on  the  gth,  and  the  decisive  battle  of  Lipany  was 
fought  on  the  30th  of  that  month. 

2  "  Ipso  die  sancti  Urbani  gentes  dominorum  Ulrici  de  Rosenberg,  Johannis 
de  Rabie  et  domini  Menhard  de  Nova  Domo  .  .  .  ante  Pragam  erant  et 
dominus  Johannes  de  Svamberk,  Zdenko  Drstka,  dominus  Alsso  de  Zylberg 
et  de  districtu  Plznensi  kabentes  sexingentos  equites  et  decern  tnillia  vel  circa 
peditum  in  adjutorium  Antique  civitatis  Pragensis  contra  Taborenses  et 
Orfanorum  sectam  venerunt  "  {Bartoiek  of  Drahontc,  p.  613). 


332  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

On  receiving  the  news  that  their  opponents  had  received  such 
strong  reinforcements  the  Orphans  and  Taborites  left  the 
neighbourhood  of  Prague  and  marched  on  Kolin,  to  be  nearer 
to  the  district  of  Kralove  Hradec,  where  they  still  had  many- 
adherents.  Immediately  afterwards  the  Utraquist  nobles 
also  left  Prague  and,  following  their  enemies,  first  marched  to 
Zabehlic,  where,  on  May  26,  their  complete  junction  with  the 
Roman  Catholic  allies  took  place,  though  the  troops  had  already 
previously  been  in  connection.  The  joint  armies  then  marched 
on  Cesky  Brod  and  laid  siege  to  that  city,  which  still  sided  with 
the  Taborites.  Up  to  the  day  of  the  great  battle  both  parties 
continued  to  receive  reinforcements.  At  Kolin  the  Taborites 
were  met  by  a  few  new  recruits  from  the  district  of  Kralove 
Hradec,  while  several  knights  and  nobles,  who  had  hitherto 
wavered,  at  the  last  moment  joined  the  army  of  the  nobles. 
Finding  more  resistance  at  Nemecky  Brod  than  they  had 
expected  the  nobles,  now  vastly  superior  in  number  to  their 
antagonists,  determined  to  attack  them  as  soon  as  possible. 
They  divided  their  forces  into  four  army  corps ;  the  first 
comprised  the  Utraquist  nobles  and  their  followers,  the  second 
consisted  of  the  citizens  of  Plzeii,  and  the  third  of  the  troops 
of  Lord  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg.  The  fourth  corps  was  composed 
of  the  levies  of  the  three  towns  of  Prague — the  men  of  the  New 
Town  only  reluctantly  followed  the  standards  of  their  enemies — 
and  of  those  of  the  city  of  Melnik.  Our  information  concerning 
the  events  that  immediately  preceded  the  battle  is  very  in- 
sufficient and  contradictory.^     On  the  advance  of  the  army 

*  The  three  most  valuable  contemporary  accounts  of  the  great  battle  are  that 
of  Bartosek  of  Drahonic,  whom  I  have  frequently  quoted,  and  those  contained 
in  two  letters,  one  written  by  Martin  Husnik,  a  soldier  who,  like  Bartosek,  took 
part  in  the  battle,  the  other  by  the  citizens  of  Plzeii,  announcing  the  victory  to 
some  Minorite  friars.  Both  these  letters  are  printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche 
Beitrdge,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  414-416.  The  best  modern  accounts  are  those  of 
Professor  Tomek,  in  his  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  and  of  General  Kohler, 
in  his  Entwicklung  der  Kriegskunst  in  der  Ritterzeit.  Dr.  Toman,  Hussite  War- 
fare, is  also  interesting.  Lately  articles  on  some  controversial  matters  con- 
nected with  the  battle  have  appeared  in  the  dasopis  Musea  Krdlovstvi  Leskiho 
{Journal  of  the  Museum  of  the  Kingdom  of  Bohemia)  for  1808  and  1900,  in  the 
Veitnik  Ceske  spolednosti  nauk  [Proceedings  of  the  Bohemian  Society  for  Sciences) 
for  1903,  and  elsewhere. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  333 

of  the  league  the  Taborites  and  their  allies  retreated  from  the 
neighbourhood  of  Kolin  and  took  up  a  strong  position  between 
the  villages  of  Lipany  and  Hrib,  on  the  slopes  of  a  hill  known 
as  Lipske,  which  is,  in  the  southern  direction,  connected  with 
a  line  of  other  hills.  By  this  apparently  retrogade  movement 
the  Tdborite  army  had  come  somewhat  nearer  to  Prague. 
According  to  a  probably  truthful  tradition  Prokop  still  hoped 
that  the  citizens  of  the  New  Town,  who  had  submitted  so  easily, 
might  rise  in  arms  against  the  league.  Well  aware  of  the 
superiority  of  the  forces  of  the  enemy  he  determined  to  remain 
in  this  defensive  position.  Probably  on  the  29th  his  army 
came  in  touch  with  the  troops  of  the  league,  who  occupied  a 
position  the  centre  of  which  was  the  village  of  Hrib.  The 
Utraquist  nobles,  who  here  again  played  the  thankless  though 
meritorious  part  of  mediators,  even  at  this  last  moment 
attempted  to  obtain  a  peaceful  agreement.  They  alone  under- 
stood that  the  victory  of  either  party  would  be  fatal  to  the 
principles  which  were  dear  to  them,  and  which  they  had  so  long 
defended.  The  obstinacy  of  the  Taborites,  who  opposed  all 
compromises,  caused  the  immediate  failure  of  the  negotiations. 
The  Taborites  broke  them  off,  saying  :  "  Then  we  will  settle 
this  matter  with  our  fists." 

The  battle  began  immediately  afterwards.  The  army  of 
the  league  consisted  of  about  25,000  ^  men  on  the  morning  of 
the  battle  (May  30).  The  whole  army  was  under  the  command 
of  Boirek  of  Miletinek,  an  experienced  general  who  had  fought 
under  2izka.  With  him  were  Menhard  of  Jindfichfiv  Hradec, 
the  regent.  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  Nicholas  Krchlebec,  Burgrave 
of  Zvikov,  who  commanded  the  troops  of  the  Lord  of  Rosen- 
berg, John  Malovec  of  Pacov,  and  many  other  nobles  whose 
names  have  frequently  appeared  in  these  pages. ^    We  have  less 

1  I  have  adopted  this  figure  from  Professor  Tomek's  work.  According  to 
Barto§ek  the  Cathohc  forces  amounted  to  10,600  men.  If  we  consider  that 
the  vast  majority  of  the  nobihty  of  Bohemia  was  then  Utraquist,  their  forces 
certainly  amounted  to  15,000  or  16,000  men. 

^  The  contemporary  chroniclers  and,  following  them,  the  Bohemian  his- 
torians give  a  long  list  of  the  nobles  who  were  present.  This  list,  though 
valuable  for  the  records  of  the  Bohemian  nobility,  has  little  interest  for  English 
readers,  and  I  have  therefore  omitted  it. 


334  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

information  concerning  the  organisation  of  the  Orphans  and 
Taborites  at  the  beginning  of  this  their  last  battle.  It  seems 
certain  that  the  supreme  command  was  now  again  assumed  by 
Prokop  the  Great ;  under  him  Andrew  of  Kersky  commanded 
the  Taborites.  The  leader  of  the  Orphans  was  Capek  of  San, 
with  whom  was  the  priest  Prokupek  (Prokop  the  Lesser). 
Besides  the  permanent  mercenary  soldiers  of  the  Orphans 
and  Taborites  the  army  comprised  the  levies  of  thirty-three 
Bohemian  cities,  Tabor,  Kralove  Hradec,  Domazlice,  Pisek, 
Beroun  and  many  others.  A  few  nobles,  among  whom  were 
Lord  Rohac  of  Duba,  Lord  Kolda  of  Zampach,  and  the 
Moravian  lord,  Sezima  of  Kunstat,  still  remained  faithful  to 
the  cause  of  Tabor.  The  united  forces  of  the  Orphans  and 
Taborites  amounted  to  about  18,000  men.  On  this  occasion, 
as  on  many  others  during  the  Hussite  wars,  the  artillery  played 
a  great  part.  As  soon  as  the  army  of  the  nobles  was  within 
range  of  the  Taborite  artillery  the  wagon-forts,  which  had 
been  formed  in  six  columns,^  opened  a  murderous  fire  on  the 
enemy.  Their  losses  were  considerable,  and  the  infantry 
loudly  demanded  to  be  allowed  to  attack  the  strong  position 
of  the  enemy;  this  would  probably  have  been  unsuccessful, 
and  it  would  at  any  rate  have  caused  an  enormous  loss  of  life. 
Nicholas  of  Krchlebec,  commander  of  the  forces  of  the  Lord 
of  Rosenberg,  however,  by  a  skilful  stratagem,  succeeded  in 
enticing  the  Taborites  to  leave  their  almost  impregnable 
position.  He  placed  four  field-pieces  in  front  of  the  vanguard 
which  he  commanded,  placing  the  rest  of  his  guns  on  his  flanks, 
so  that  they  could  continue  to  fire  while  he  advanced.  After 
they  had  been  fired  once  and  the  enemy  had  replied,  he  imme- 
diately advanced  at  full  speed  in  the  direction  of  the  lager, 
before  the  enemy  could  fire  again.  It  need  hardly  be  mentioned 
that  the  slowness  of  the  fire  of  the  primitive  cannons  of  that 
day  rendered  this  possible.     It  was  not,  however,  the  intention 

*  "  Die  Hussen  haben  ihr  Wagen  zugeriistet  mit  6  Zeilen."   (Letter  of 
Husnik.) 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  335 

of  Krchlebec  to  storm  the  wagon-forts.     When  he  had  come 
near   to   them    he   suddenly   retreated.     The   TcLborites   and 
Orphans  raised  the  cry,  "  The  enemies  fly,"  left  their  wagons 
and  rushed  in  pursuit  of  the  troops  of  Krchlebec.     Meanwhile 
the  principal  forces  of  the  league  had  outflanked  the  Taborite 
lager  on  both  flanks,  broken  down  or  climbed  the  chains  that 
secured  it,  and  attacked  the  Tdborites  in  the  rear.     It  is  evident 
that  the  Taborites  no   longer  had   preserved   the   discipline 
which  had   formerly  distinguished   them.     Though  some   of 
their  leaders — according  to  tradition,  also  Prokop  the  Great 
— attempted  to  restrain  them,  they  pursued  the   troops   of 
Krchlebec  till  the  general  of  the  league  ceased  to  retreat  and 
turned  on  the  pursuers.     The  Taborites  now  attempted  to 
return  to  their  camp,  which  had  already  been  invaded  by  the 
main  body  of  the  army  of  the  league.     The  battle  now  became 
a  massacre.     As  soon  as  the  defeat  appeared  certain  Capek  of 
San,  with  his  cavalry,  and  the  Taborite  captain,  Andrew  of 
Kersky,  fled  in  the  direction  of  Kolin.     Capek,  whose  cavalry 
might  at  least  have  attempted  to  cover  the  retreat,   thus 
rendered  the  defeat  even  more  disastrous.     Almost  the  whole 
army  of  the  Orphans  and  Taborites,  except  those  who  had  fled 
with  Capek  and  Kersky,  perished.     The  dead  numbered  13,000 
men  or  more.     Both  Prokop  the  Great  and  Prokupek  fell  in 
this  battle.     We  have  many  accounts  of  the  death  of  Prokop 
the  Great.     Though,  in  consequence  of  his  priestly  dignity, 
he  generally  took  no  active  part  in  battle,  he  is  said  here  to  have 
rushed  among  the  thickest  foes  and  perished  fighting  desper- 
ately.i     It  appears  more  probable  that  Prokop  perished  with 

1  Mneas  Sylvius  writes  :  "  Procopius  ubi  suos  retinere  non  potest  .  .  .  inter 
confertissimos  hostes  dilapsus  .  .  .  aliquamdiu  hostis  impetum  detinet 
multisque  caesis  victoriam  paene  hostibus  eripuit  :  Sed  non  tarn  victus  quam 
vincendo  fessus  telo  in  incertum  misso  transfoditur  {Historia  Bohemica, 
cap.  li.).  I  have,  in  my  Lectures  on  the  Historians  of  Bohemia,  noted  the 
similarity  of  this  passage  to  the  description  of  the  death  of  Catilina  in  Sallust, 
who  writes  :  "  Postquam  fusas  copias  seque  cum  paucis  relictum  videt 
Catilina  memor  generis  atque  pristinae  suae  dignitatis  in  confertissimos  hostes 
incurrit,  ibique  pugnans  confoditur."  The  Historia  Bohemica,  though  a  fine 
specimen  of  Renaissance  Latinity,  is  historically  almost  valueless. 


336  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

many  other  priests  of  his  community,  and  that  his  body  was 
only  recognised  on  the  following  day. 

Dr.  Toman  has  written  very  judiciously  that  the  battle  had 
been  very  skilfully  planned  by  the  leaders  of  the  army  of  the 
league.  It  is  probable  that  the  victory  was  mainly  due  to 
Bofek  of  Miletinek.  His  subsequent  political  career  is  probably 
the  reason  why  most  writers,  particularly  Roman  Catholic 
ones,  attribute  the  victory  principally  to  Menhard  of  Jmdfi- 
ch&v  Hradec  and  to  the  leader  of  the  troops  of  the  Lord  of 
Rosenberg.  Bofek  of  Miletinek  always  remained  a  staunch 
Utraquist,  and  protected  Rokycan  when  he  was  menaced 
during  the  short  reign  of  Sigismund.^ 

It  will  be  my  duty  in  the  next  chapter  to  study  the  momen- 
tous consequences  of  the  battle  of  Lipany.  The  Bohemians 
had  totally  vanquished  their  countrymen,  who  had  been 
victorious  over  all  foreign  enemies.  As  a  Bohemian  historian 
of  the  eighteenth  century  writes  :  *'  Thus  the  Bohemians  could 
only  be  vanquished  by  other  Bohemians,  they  who  had  proved 
invincible  to  all  Germans,  and  had  terribly  spread  their  heroic 
glory  through  the  whole  world."  ^ 

1  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  p.  175. 

*  "  Solcher  Gestalten  konnten  die  Bohmen  nur  durch  Bohmen  bezwungen 
werden,  die  bevor  alien  Deutschen  uniiberwindlich  waren  und  ihren  Helden 
Tuhm  fiirchterlich  durch  die  Welt  verbreiteten  "  (Bienenberg,  Geschichte  der 
Stadt  Koniggrdtz). 


CHAPTER  VIII 

The  battle  of  Lipany  was  primarily  a  victory  for  the  Em- 
peror Sigismund.  All  men  who  now  played  a  part  in  the 
political  life  of  Bohemia  agreed,  some  perhaps  reluctantly, 
that  their  country  must  accept  Sigismund  as  king.  The  King, 
on  the  other  hand,  seems  with  increasing  age  to  have  become 
more  and  more  eager  to  enter  into  possession  of  his  Bohemian 
kingdom.  This  is  proved  by  the  interview  which  he  granted 
to  Prokop  the  Great  at  Pressburg,  and  by  his  negotiations 
with  the  Orphans  and  Taborites  during  the  weeks  that  pre- 
ceded the  battle  of  Lipany.  The  theological  discussions  at 
Basel,  turning  mainly  on  the  interpretation  of  the  compacts, 
continued  uninterruptedly,  though  their  interest  was  for  a 
time  eclipsed  by  that  of  the  civil  war.  In  matters  of  theology 
Sigismund  now  displayed  a  conciliatory  spirit,  and  appeared 
ready  to  use  his  influence  to  obtain  large  concessions  for  the 
Bohemians,  if  they  consented  to  recognise  him  as  their  sove- 
reign. It  is,  however,  more  than  doubtful  whether  these  offers 
were  sincere. 

The  members  of  the  Council  of  Basel  considered,  or  affected 
to  consider,  the  battle  of  Lipany  as  a  great  victory  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church.  A  Te  Deum  was  sung  in  the 
cathedral  of  Basel  as  soon  as  the  news  of  the  battle  arrived 
there.  Their  judgment  was  somewhat  erroneous.  The  Utra- 
quist  nobles,  no  longer  fearing  that  their  country  might  become 
the  prey  of  anarchists,  began  again  to  devote  their  attention 
to  the  religious  controversy.  They  were  determined  to  uphold 
the  articles  of  Prague  and  to  enforce  the  recognition  of  the 
compacts  in  a  shape  as  near  as  possible  to  the  articles  from 
z  337 


338  THE  HUSSITE   WARS 

which  they  had  been  derived.  It  also  appears  probable  that 
after  the  battle  of  Lipany  a  secret  agreement  between  the 
Utraquist  lords  and  the  nobles  "  sub  una  "  was  concluded, 
according  to  which  the  former  consented  to  accept  Sigismund 
as  king,  while  the  latter  agreed  to  support  to  a  certain  extent 
the  religious  demands  of  the  Utraquists.  A  modern  German 
Protestant  writer, ^  therefore,  correctly  states  that  from  the 
religious  standpoint,  not  the  Church  of  Rome,  but  Rokycan  and 
the  Hussite  High  Church  were  victorious  at  Lipany.  The 
greater  part  of  the  life  of  Rokycan,  who  was  elected  Archbishop 
of  Prague,  belongs  to  a  later  period,  but  it  may  be  stated  here 
that  if  any  man  could  have  established  a  Bohemian  national 
Church  forming  part  of  the  universal  Church  it  was  Archbishop 
Rokycan. 

It  was  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter  that  when  the  envoys 
of  the  Council  left  Prague  in  January  1434  Martin  Lupac, 
parish  priest  of  Chrudian,  accompanied  them  as  representative 
of  the  Bohemian  diet.  The  envoys  of  the  Council  at  the 
moment  when  they  left  Bohemia  probably  already  foresaw  the 
downfall  of  the  advanced  party  in  the  country.  They  there- 
fore assumed  a  somewhat  intransigent  attitude.  When 
Lupac,  who  had  left  Prague  somewhat  later  than  the  envoys, 
joined  them  at  Cheb  they  informed  him  that,  if  was  he  pro- 
ceeding to  Basel  to  demand  further  concessions,  it  would  be  as 
well  if  he  did  not  undertake  the  journey.  Lupac,  none  the 
less,  proceeded  to  Basel.  Some  time  before  the  envoys  of 
the  Council  left  Prague  they  had  sent  one  of  their  number, 
Martin  Berruer,  Dean  of  Tours,  to  the  Council  to  report  on 
the  state  of  the  negotiations.  He  stated  that  the  Bohemian 
Diet  had  accepted  the  compacts  in  the  amended  form  in  which 
the  ambassadors  of  the  Council  had  presented  them  to  that 
assembly.  This  was  undoubtedly  untrue,  though  such  a 
statement  may  have  been  made  to  Berruer  by  some  of  the 
envoys.     He  also  appears,  no  doubt  impressed  by  the  general 

^  Dr.  Kruramcl,  Uiraquisten  unU  labor iten. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  339 

indignation  against  the  Taborites  which  he  had  observed  in 
Prague,  to  have  beheved  that  the  disposition  of  the  Utra- 
quists  was  far  more  concihatory  than  was  actually  the  case. 
On  the  February  16  Martin  Lupac  was  received  by  the 
Council.  He  expounded  the  claims  of  the  Bohemians,  which 
at  that  moment  centred  in  the  demand  that  Communion  in 
the  two  kinds  should  be  obligatory  in  the  whole  kingdom  of 
Bohemia  and  in  the  margraviate  of  Moravia.  This  was  the 
point  on  which,  for  reasons  that  I  have  previously  mentioned, 
the  Council  was  determined  to  make  no  concessions.  The 
arguments  of  Lupac,  who  maintained  the  necessity  of  uni- 
formity in  Bohemia  in  this  matter,  were  strongly  opposed  by 
Archdeacon  Palomar.  He  laid  great  stress  on  the  fact  that, 
as  previously  mentioned,  the  negotiators  of  both  parties  had 
in  Prague  given  the  hand  to  one  another.  He  maintained  that 
this  signified  that  an  agreement  had  been  concluded,  though 
the  diet  had  passed  no  act  to  that  purpose,  and  no  agreement 
could  otherwise  be  considered  as  valid.  After  Palomar,  the 
Bishop  of  Coire,  John  Na^,  spoke  in  the  same  sense.  Na^, 
who  was  a  Bohemian  by  birth,  untruthfully  stated  that  King 
Venceslas  had  never  permitted  Utraquist  services  in  three 
churches  in  Prague.  It  was  afterwards  ascertained  that  the 
bishop  had  left  Bohemia  some  time  before  King  Venceslas 
had — as  previously  mentioned — granted  that  permission. 
The  Council  finally  decided  to  accept  the  view  of  Palomar,  who 
still  maintained  that  the  Bohemians  had  promised  to  recognise 
the  Council's  interpretation  of  the  compacts.  They  then  de- 
termined to  write  to  the  regent.  Lord  Ales  of  Riesenburg.  Their 
letter  stated  that  the  Council  had  learnt  with  great  pleasure 
from  Dean  Berruer  that  the  Bohemians  had  pledged  their  word 
to  accept  the  compacts  in  the  form  in  which  they  had  been 
sanctioned  by  the  Council  of  Basel.  As  to  further  demands 
of  the  Bohemians,  no  discussion  was  possible  till  they  showed 
sincere  desire  for  peace  and  abandoned  all  hostilities  against 
the  city  of  Plzeii.     It  is  interesting  to  note  that  when  this 


340  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

message  was  shown  to  King  Sigismund  he  strongly  urged  the 
Council  to  use  more  menacing  language.  The  Council  declined 
to  accept  this  suggestion.  On  February  26  Cardinal  Cesarini 
delivered  this  message  for  the  regent  to  Martin  Lupac  at 
a  plenary  assembly  of  the  Council.  The  Bohemian  envoy, 
after  protesting  against  the  accusation  of  double-dealing 
levelled  against  his  countrymen,  maintained  that  no  definite 
agreement  had  been  made  in  Prague.  He  then  thanked  the 
Council  for  its  hospitality,  and  shortly  afterwards  returned 
to  Prague. 

King — ^now  Emperor — Sigismund  who  had  long  been  ex- 
pected at  Basel,  at  last  arrived  there  on  October  11,  1433. 
According  to  the  contemporary  writers  he  was  during  his  stay 
principally  occupied  with  the  dissensions  that  had  broken 
out  between  the  Council  and  Pope  Eugenius,  in  which  he 
attempted  to  act  as  mediator.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  he 
continued  to  devote  great  attention  to  the  affairs  of  Bohemia. 
His  conduct  was  marked  by  his  habitual  duplicity.  It  has 
just  been  mentioned  that  when  the  Council  transmitted  a 
message  to  the  estates  of  Bohemia  Sigismund  wished  to 
render  its  wording  more  menacing.  Yet  he  was  almost  up 
to  the  day  of  the  battle  of  Lipany  attempting  to  come  to 
a  secret  understanding  with  the  Tdborites ;  these  negotiations 
were,  of  course,  concealed  from  the  Council.  Sigismund's 
intervention  in  the  dispute  between  the  Pope  and  the  Council 
does  not,  of  course,  require  mention  in  this  work.  It  is  suffi- 
cient to  state  that  the  Emperor  departed  from  Basel  on  May 
19,  1434,  somewhat  dissatisfied  with  the  results  of  his  visit. 
Early  in  June  he  arrived  at  Ulm,  where  he  stayed  nearly 
three  months,  and  where  he  received  the  news  of  the  battle 
of  Lipany.  He  had  called  the  German  princes  to  an  imperial 
diet  at  Ulm,  but  as  the  attendance  was  very  small  it  was 
decided  to  defer  the  assembly  to  a  later  period  of  the  year, 
and  to  invite  the  princes  to  meet  at  Regensburg.  The  Emperor 
himself  proceeded  to  that  city  on  August  21. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  341 

Immediately  after  the  victory  of  Lipany  the  Bohemian 
estates  determined  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  re-estabhsh 
order  and  tranquilhty  in  their  country.  This  had  been  the 
principal  inducement  for  men  whose  views  differed  widely 
on  many  matters  to  act  in  common.  Only  a  few  days  after 
the  battle  of  Lipany  the  Taborite  general,  Andrew  Kersky 
and  Capek  of  San,  the  most  talented  of  the  commanders  of 
the  Orphans,  who  had  retired  to  Kolin,  though  refusing  to 
surrender  unconditionally,  agreed  to  take  part  in  the  delibera- 
tions of  the  diet,  which  was  to  meet  at  Prague  on  the  day  of 
St.  John  (June  24).  Several  prominent  nobles  and  the 
municipalities  of  some  towns  concluded  similar  treaties  with 
the  victorious  party.  The  diet  met  on  the  appointed  day, 
and  though  it  only  lasted  for  a  fortnight  its  proceedings  have 
considerable  importance.  The  assembly  was  very  numerous. 
All  the  prominent  Utraquist  nobles,  as  well  as  those  "  sub  una," 
were  present,  and  many  Moravian  nobles,  knights,  and  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Bohemian  towns.  Capek  of  San  and  Nicholas 
of  Padafov  represented  respectively  the  Orphans  and  Taborites. 
It  was  here  decided  to  establish  a  regular  provisional  govern- 
ment, which  was  to  remain  in  office  up  to  the  moment  when 
Sigismund  would  be  recognised  as  king;  that  this  would  now 
happen  very  shortly  was  already  considered  certain  by  all. 
Lord  Ales  of  Riesenburg  was  now  formally  re-elected  as 
regent.  All  present,  including  the  representatives  of  the 
Orphans  and  Taborites,  agreed  to  this.  They  also,  together 
with  the  towns  and  communities  who  were  still  in  alliance 
with  them,  concluded  an  armistice  of  a  year  with  the  members 
of  the  league,  and  it  was  hoped  that  during  this  period  the 
numerous  local  contentions  would  be  settled  by  the  regent, 
to  whom  full  powers  were  granted  with  the  consent  of  all. 

All  contending  parties  further  promised  to  liberate  the 
prisoners  of  war  whom  they  had  made.  The  diet  limited 
itself  entirely  to  the  discussion  of  political  matters,  but  as 
religious  questions  still  largely  absorbed  the  attention  of  the 


342  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

people,  it  was  decided  to  convoke  an  assembly  of  the  clergy 
of  all  denominations,  which  was  to  begin  its  sittings  on  July  25. 
Envoys  of  the  Emperor  Sigismund  were  present  at  the 
diet,  and  on  their  invitation  the  Bohemians  decided  to  send 
an  embassy  to  Regensburg,  where  the  Emperor  was  then 
expected.^  The  members  of  the  diet  then  separated  with 
strong  assurances  of  mutual  good  will.  As  settled  by  the  diet 
the  divines  met  on  July  25.  If  we  consider  the  strength  of  the 
odium  theologicum  of  those  days  we  are  not  surprised  to  read 
that  the  proceedings  at  this  assembly  were  not  as  harmonious 
as  those  of  the  diet  had  been.  Rokycan  read  to  the  assembly 
a  lengthy  statement  ^  consisting  of  nineteen  **  articles,"  which, 
he  stated,  contained  the  true  doctrine  of  the  Bohemian  Church. 
This  extensive  document  declared  that  the  writings  of  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments  were  to  be  honoured  by  all,  and  that  all 
should  in  their  actions  be  guided  by  its  teaching.  The  Bohemian 
Church  accepted  the  Apostolic,  Athanasian  and  Nicean  Creeds 
and  all  the  teaching  of  the  primitive  Church.  The  third  article, 
confirming  the  first  of  the  compacts,  sanctioned  Communion  in 
the  two  kinds  and  maintained  the  true  presence  of  Christ  in 
the  Sacrament.     The  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  articles  were  a 

*  Bartosek  of  Drahonic  writes  (p.  616)  :  "  Item  eodem  anno  videlicet 
XXXIV  .  .  .  fuit  magnus  concursus  baronum,  dominorum,  terrigenarum 
Prage,  ubi  eciam  pars  domini  imperatoris  suprascripti  [Sigismund]  affuit, 
videlicet  dominus  Ulricus  de  Rosenberg,  dominus  Puota  de  Czastolowicz  .  .  . 
et  alii  quam  plures  servitores  domini  imperatoris,  ubi  conclusum  est  ex  parte 
Wiklefistarum,  ut  ad  dominum  imperatorem  equitarent  dominus  Menhardus 
de  Nova  Domo,  dominus  Ptaczko  de  Rataj  et  dominus  Czenko  juvenis  de 
Wartemberg,  militares  vero  Benessius  de  Mokrowous,  Czapko  de  Ssan, 
capitaneus  Orphanorum  .  .  .  feria  iii  ipso  die  sancti  Laurencii  suprascripti 
et  dominus  Wilhelmus  Kostka,  Johannes  de  Smirzicz,  magister  Johannes  de 
Rokycan  et  dominus  Martinus  Lupacz  et  magister  Marcus  ad  dominum 
imperatorem  Ratisponam  transiverunt  equites."  Thomas  Ebendorfer  of 
Haselbach  writes  in  his  "  Diarium  gestorum  per  Legatos  concilii  Basiliensis  '* 
(Monumenta  conciliorum,  etc.,  Tom.  I.  pp.  736  fi.)  :  "  Ambasiata  tercia  ad 
Boemos  [Jun.  24,  1434]  anno  quo  supra  .  .  .  facta  est  generalis  congregacio 
regni  in  Praga,  ibique  decreverunt  solemnem  mittere  ambasiatam  ad  civitatem 
Ratisponensem  ad  habendum  dyetam  cum  invictissimo  Romanorum  im- 
peratore,  desiderantes  suam  pariter  et  ambasiatorum  sacri  concilii  presenciam 
at  diem  assumpcionis  gloriose  semper  virginis  Marie  [Aug.  1 5]  quod  et  factum 
est." 

*  It  is  printed  in  full  in  Mansi  Concil.,  XXXI.  279. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  343 

repetition  of  the  other  stipulations  contained  in  the  compacts. 
The  seventh  and  eighth  articles  declared  that  the  Bohemian 
Church  recognised  the  seven  sacraments,  and  declared  that  the 
holy  mass  should  be  celebrated  in  the  form  accepted  by  the 
Catholic  Church.  Articles  nine,  ten,  and  eleven  sanctioned 
fasting  according  to  the  regulations  of  the  Catholic  Church, 
declared  that  priests  should  be  tonsured  and  should  wear  a 
distinctive  clothing,  and  forbade  priests  to  receive  remuneration 
for  the  exercise  of  religious  functions.  Further  articles  main- 
tained the  existence  of  purgatory,  as  taught  by  the  Catholic 
Church,  exhorted  the  priests  to  read  Scripture  diligently  and 
to  use  the  national  language  in  the  religious  services  as  far  as 
possible.  The  eighteenth  article  sanctioned  the  veneration 
of  the  saints  and  prayers  to  them  for  their  intercession,  but 
severely  forbade  the  rendering  to  them  of  that  worship  which  is 
due  to  God  alone.  The  last  article  declared  that  the  Bohemian 
Church,  conforming  to  Scripture,  would  render  unto  Caesar  the 
things  that  are  Caesar's,  and  formulated  theories  that  appear 
very  advanced  for  that  period.  The  reader  would  almost 
think  that  the  theory  of  a  *'  free  Church  in  a  free  state  "  was 
advocated,  did  he  not  also  read  that  **  the  transgressors  against 
God's  law  must  be  punished  more  severely  than  those  who 
transgress  the  laws  of  men."  Rokycan's  theories,  of  which  it 
has  here  been  only  possible  to  give  a  mere  outline,  are  of  great 
interest,  as  they  to  a  great  extent  indicate  the  views  which  the 
Bohemian  Church  adopted  up  to  its  final  destruction  in  1620. 
It  is  true  that  in  the  last  years  previous  to  that  date  German 
Lutheranism  had  a  considerable  influence  on  the  Bohemian 
Utraquists.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  extreme  moderation 
of  Rokycan's  view  displeased  the  Taborite  divines,  but  it  is 
less  easily  explicable  that  the  faction  of  the  Utraquists  led  by 
Magister  Pribram,  which  was  nearest  to  Rome  in  its  teaching, 
also  raised  objections.  Both  the  Taborites  and  the  doctors 
of  the  university,  who  followed  Pribram,  formulated  their 
objections  in  written  statements.     The  assembly  then  separated 


344  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

without  having  arrived  at  an  agreement.  It  was,  however, 
settled  that  the  disputations  should  be  continued  on  the 
occasion  of  the  next  meeting  of  the  diet  in  Prague. 

On  August  10  the  Bohemian  embassy  started  for  Regensburg. 
It  was  very  numerous,  and  included  members  of  the  nobility 
and  knighthood  and  representatives  of  most  of  the  important 
Bohemian  towns.^  Including  the  armed  escort,  the  whole 
expedition  numbered  about  400  men.  Sigismund,  desirous  of 
at  last  obtaining  the  Bohemian  crown  and  also  of  ending  the 
religious  controversies,  which  were  now  the  only  obstacle  to 
his  accession  to  the  throne,  begged  the  Council  also  to  send 
representatives  to  Regensburg.  The  Council  acceded  to  this 
demand  and  sent  a  very  numerous  delegation  to  Regensburg. 
Among  its  members  were  Bishop  Philibert  of  Coutance  and  two 
other  bishops,  Thomas  Ebendorfer  of  Haselbach,  Martin  Berruer, 
Henry  Toke,  Giles  Carler,  and  others  whose  names  have  been 
frequently  mentioned.  The  delegates  of  the  Council  arrived  at 
Regensburg  on  August  16,  an  hour  before  the  arrival  of  the 
Bohemian  envoys.  The  Bohemians,  who  considered  them- 
selves as  sent  only  to  negotiate  with  the  Emperor  Sigismund, 
were  reluctant  to  confer  with  the  delegates  of  the  Council, 
which  had  so  often  disappointed  them.  Several  minor  inci- 
dents contributed  to  render  the  relations  between  the  antagon- 
ists more  strained.  Palomar  visited  the  Bohemian  envoys  and 
begged  them  not  to  assist  at  the  religious  services  in  the  churches 
of  Regensburg,  as  this  might  cause  scandal.  Rokycan,  as  usual 
acting  as  spokesmen,  said  that  the  Bohemians  had  endured 
much  blame  and  suffering  because  they  had  upheld  the  truth, 
and  that  they  were  prepared  to  suffer  yet  more,  but  that  his 
colleagues  of  the  embassy  said  that  it  would  be  better  to  drive 
out  of  the  churches  degenerate  priests  rather  than  pious  laymen. 
Palomar  replied  that  such  evil  priests  must  be  tolerated  till  the 
Church  had  passed  judgment  on  them.     He  added  that  the 

*  The  names  of  the  most  prominent  members  of  this  embassy  are  given  by 
Bartosek  of  Drahonic. 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  345 

Council  was  considering  a  system  of  Church  reform,  but  that 
this  matter  must  be  dealt  with  cautiously.  John  Velvar,  a 
citizen  of  Prague  and  member  of  the  embassy,  then  said  that  the 
Council  of  Constance  had  already  talked  of  Church  reform,  but 
that  nothing  had  been  done.  In  reply  Palomar  stated  that 
that  Council  had  re-established  unity  in  the  Church,  and  that 
everything  could  not  be  done  at  the  same  time.^ 

On  August  21  Sigismund  arrived  at  Regensburg,  and  on  the 
following  day  he  received  first  the  representatives  of  Bohemia, 
then  those  of  the  Council.  Rokycan  as  usual  spoke  in  the  name 
of  the  Bohemians.  Sigismund  replied  very  graciously,  re- 
minding them  that  he  was  their  countryman,  and  that  he  was 
the  descendant  of  him  whom  they  had  once  called  from  the 
plough  to  their  throne. ^  The  Emperor  then  received  the 
envoys  of  the  Council.  He  again  declared  to  them  that  he  did 
not  wish  to  interfere  in  questions  of  doctrine,  but  would  in 
such  matters  be  guided  by  their  advice ;  on  political  matters, 
however,  he  would  consult  his  Bohemian  councillors.  Such  a 
distinction  after  a  prolonged,  mainly  religious,  war  and  at  a 
time  when  religious  controversies  occupied  the  attention  of  all 
was,  of  course,  inadmissible,  and  in  suggesting  it  Sigismund 
cannot  be  acquitted  of  duplicity.  Long  discussions  on  subjects 
on  which  so  many  previous  debates  had  taken  place  followed. 
The  principal  orators  were  Rokycan  and  Palomar.  The 
Bohemians  still  upheld  their  demand  that  Communion  in  the 
two  kinds  should  be  declared  obligatory  in  the  kingdom  of 
Bohemia  and  in  the  margraviate  of  Moravia,  while  Palomar  and 

^  Tomek,  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  p.  652. 

2  Pfemysl.  See  my  Bohemia,  a  Historical  Sketch,  pp.  lo-ii.  Ebendorfer  in 
his  "  Diarium  gestorum,  etc."  {Monumenta  concliorum,  etc.,  Tom.  I.  p.  37)  thus 
describes  the  interview :  "  Item  die  22,  qui  erat  octava  assumpcionis,  die  domi- 
nica  mane,  vocati  ambasiatores  concilii  et  Boemi  per  dominum  imperatorem 
.  .  .  Expectantes  paululum,  venerunt  ambasiatores  Boemorum  pro  quibus 
Johannes  de  Rokyczano  in  Bohemico  assumens  thema  de  evangelio  '  Vade 
et  fac  similiter  '  deduxit  quomodo  dominus  imperator  a  deo  dodatus  prudenter 
deberet  facere  justitiam  et  misericordiam  ad  instar  Samaritani,  precipue  cum 
regno  Boemie.  Respondit  dominus  imperator  in  Bohemico  se  natum  in  regno 
et  in  Praga ;  si  de  popularibus  agitur  ipse  ex  istis  est ;  succedit  enim  ei  qui  de 
aratro  in  villa  quadam  in  Bohemia  ad  ducatum  electus  est,  si  de  majoribus 
scitur  quia  de  Luczelburg  ad  regnum  illud  vocati  sunt  sui  progenitores." 


346  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

the  other  representatives  of  the  Council  continued  to  maintain 
that  at  the  diet  of  Prague  the  Bohemians  had  already  accepted 
the  compacts  in  the  form  which  had  been  sanctioned  by  the 
Church  of  Rome.  A  further  difficulty  arose  with  regard  to  the 
choice  of  a  new  Archbishop  of  Prague.  Since  the  death  of 
Conrad  of  Vechta,  whom  the  Utraquists  had  only  recognised 
as  archbishop  after  he  had  accepted  the  articles  of  Prague, 
that  high  office  had  fallen  into  abeyance.  As  the  archdiocese 
would  now  comprise  an  almost  entirely  Utraquist  population, 
the  Utraquists  proposed  that  in  accordance  with  the  traditions 
of  the  primitive  Church  the  new  archbishop  should  be  chosen 
jointly  by  the  clergy  and  the  people  (represented  by  the 
estates),  and  that  the  choice  shoidd  then  be  confirmed  by  the 
King.  There  was  some  justification  for  this  demand;  for  at 
that  moment  a  Roman  Catholic  archbishop  would  have  had  no 
authority  over  the  vast  majority  of  his  diocesans ;  many  of  them 
would  have  become  the  prey  of  the  anarchical  and  socialist 
sects  that  were  numerous  at  that  time.  Though  Palomar 
promised  some  minor  concessions,  his  answer  on  this  important 
question  was  evasive.  Several  minor  incidents,  such  as  the 
one  mentioned  above;  caused  the  Bohemians  to  wish  to  return 
to  their  own  country  and  to  leave  Regensburg,  where  their 
reception  had  been  by  no  means  as  friendly  as  formerly  at 
Basel.  As  on  previous  occasions  private  conversations  took 
place  between  the  members  of  the  antagonistic  parties  before 
they  separated.  The  Utraquist  lords  attempted  to  persuade 
Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  and  the  other  lords  "  sub  una  "  to  accept 
Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  rightly  thinking  that  they  would 
by  conforming  to  the  then  universal  custom  of  their  country 
facilitate  a  general  pacification.  The  Utraquists,  however, 
met  with  a  decided  refusal.  When  at  the  end  of  August  the 
Bohemian  delegates  returned  to  their  country  Menhard  of 
Jindhchfiv  Hradec  and  Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  remained  at 
Regensburg  to  confer  with  the  Emperor  Sigismund.  It  is 
probable  that  they  advised  him  to  grant,  at  least  momentarily, 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  347 

large  concessions  to  the  Utraqiiists.  They  may  have  suggested 
to  him  that  his  position  in  Bohemia  would  become  much 
stronger  as  soon  as  he  became  its  acknowledged  sovereign. 
His  advisers  well  knew  that  Sigismund  was  not  very  scrupulous 
as  to  keeping  promises  made  under  different  circumstances. 

Though  the  conferences  at  Regensburg  had  led  to  no  imme- 
diate result,  it  was  probably  at  this  moment  that  the  Utraquist 
nobles  determined  to  abandon  their  demand  that  Communion 
in  the  two  kinds  should  be  made  obligatory  in  the  whole  of 
Bohemia  and  Moravia.  Though  the  destruction  of  the  Taborite 
bands  had  principally  been  their  work,  they  began  to  feel  that 
they  had  lost  a  powerful  ally  should  it  be  necessary  again  to 
take  up  arms.  In  their  own  ranks  defections  were  becoming 
frequent.  Through  the  influence  of  Menhard  and  Rosenberg 
some  nobles  had  already  abandoned  Utraquism,  and  the 
bribes  of  Sigismund,  which  were  as  considerable  as  his  chronic 
impecuniosity  permitted,  had  caused  some  men  to  submit 
unconditionally  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 

The  new  Bohemian  diet  met  on  October  23,  shortly  after 
the  return  of  the  envoys  from  Regensburg.  Its  most  important 
resolution  was  to  send  a  deputation  to  Hungary,  where  Sigis- 
mund was  then  residing,  to  confer  with  him  on  the  conditions 
under  which  the  Bohenians  would  receive  him  as  king.  The 
diet  also  decided  to  enter  into  renewed  negotiations  with  the 
Council  concerning  the  all-important  question  of  the  re-estab- 
lishment of  the  Bohemian  hierarchy.  This  was  an  absolute 
necessity  if  order  was  to  be  permanently  re-established.  Though 
the  battle  of  Lipany  had  been  fought  but  a  short  time  previously 
bands  of  Taborites  had  again  risen  in  arms,  and  in  Silesia  there 
had  been  conflicts  between  Utraquists  and  Roman  Catholics. 
It  was  thought  that  only  priests  belonging  to  the  Utraquist 
Church  would  have  authority  over  the  people.  The  diet 
therefore  demanded  that  the  new  archbishop  and  his  two 
suffragan  bishops  should  be  elected  by  the  estates  and  should 
belong  to  the  Bohemian  nation.     One  of  the  most  important 


348  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

results  of  this  diet  was  the  complete  reconciliation  between 
the  theologians  of  the  university,  who  represented  the  Hussite 
High  Church,  and  the  Orphans.^  The  latter  now  ceased  to  form 
a  separate  community.  Some  members  of  that  community 
who  held  advanced  opinions  declined  to  accept  this  agreement, 
and  preferred  to  join  the  ranks  of  the  Taborites.  Mainly 
through  the  energy  of  Rokycan  the  diet,  however,  succeeded 
in  concluding  a  truce  even  with  the  Taborites.  The  moderate 
Utraquists — whom  contemporary  writers  generally  call  the 
**  Praguers,"  as  their  leaders  were  the  theologians  of  that 
university — and  the  Orphans,  who  had  now  joined  them,  came 
to  an  agreement  with  the  Taborites  according  to  which  Magister 
Peter  Payne,  who,  formerly  a  member  of  the  Orphan  community, 
had  now  joined  the  Taborites,  was  to  act  as  mediator. ^  Both 
parties  bound  themselves  to  accept  his  decision  with  regard  to 
the  seven  sacraments,  purgatory,  the  veneration  of  the  saints, 
and  the  form  in  which  mass  was  to  be  celebrated.  He  was  to 
base  his  decisions  on  the  writings  of  Master  John  Hus,  Master 
John  Wycliffe,  and  his  own,  as  well  as  on  the  stipulations  of 
the  agreement  of  Cheb.  This  referred  to  the  decision  of  that 
conference  that  in  judging  the  articles  of  Prague  only  God's 
law,  the  practice  of  Christ,  and  the  teaching  of  the  primitive 
Church  and  the  early  councils  should  be  considered  as  authori- 
tative. It  was  specially  stipulated  that  the  question  of 
transubstantiation,  which  the  magisters  of  the  university 
upheld  as  an  indisputable  truth,  should  not  be  submitted  to 
the  arbitration  of  Magister  Payne.     In  spite  of  this  clause  the 

*  The  chronicler  in  the  "  Scriptores  rerem  Bohemicarum  "  (Vol.  III.  p.  90-91) 
writes :  "  at  this  diet  the  priests  of  the  Praguers  and  the  Orphans  hke  good 
Christians  came  to  an  agreement  with  regard  to  the  Christian  faith  but  .  .  . 
the  Tdborites  would  not  agree  to  this." 

*  Volumus  et  promittimus  stare  scriptis  magistri  Joannus  Hus,  magistri 
Joannis  Wicleff  et  scriptis  magistsi  Petri  Anglici  in  controversiis  habitis  inter 
nos  Pragenses  ex  una  et  Thaborienses  parte  ex  altera  in  materiebus  sacramen- 
torum  septem  ecclesiae,  suffragii,  invocationis  sanctorum,  rituum  missae, 
et  purgatorii,  sic  quod  magister  Petrus  omnia  secundum  scripta  praemissorum 
et  indicem  pactorum  in  Egra  [Cheb]  faciat."  ("  Nicholai  de  Pelhrimov 
Chronicon  Taboritarum  "  in  Hofler,  Ge'^chichtsschreiber,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  p.  704). 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  349 

agreement  must  be  considered  as  an  important  concession  to 
the  advanced  party.  The  stipulation,  obviously  originating 
from  Payne  himself,  that  he  should  base  his  decision  on  the 
writings  of  Wycliffe  was  necessarily  displeasing  to  the  Hussite 
High  Church.  Hus  himself  had  refused  to  be  rendered  re- 
sponsible for  all  the  statements  of  Wycliffe/  and  the  moderate 
Utraquists  always  resented  the  name  of  "  Wycliffites,"  which 
the  lords  "  sub  una  "  applied  to  them.  Rokycan  now  suffered 
the  fate  of  most  peacemakers.  He  had  at  Regensburg  been 
accused  of  showing  too  great  subserviency,  not  only  to  Sigis- 
mund,  but  also  to  the  representatives  of  the  Council ;  he  was  now 
denounced  as  having  shown  too  much  favour  to  the  extreme 
Taborites.  It  is  certain  that  at  that  moment  the  citizens  of 
some  of  the  towns  who  still  sided  with  the  Taborites  were 
seriously  meditating  a  renewal  of  hostilities.  Rokycan  and  the 
theologians  of  the  university  rightly  thought  that  all  Utraquists 
should  appear  as  a  united  body  during  the  final  discussions  on 
the  constitution  of  the  Bohemian  Church.  Peter  Payne  did 
not  immediately  exercise  his  office  of  arbitrator.  His  decision 
was  only  made  public  two  years  later,  after  the  termination 
of  the  Hussite  wars  and  Sigismund's  entry  into  Prague.  As 
Palacky  suggests,  he  probably  wished  thus  to  obtain  for  the 
Taborites  at  least  a  short  period  of  respite  and  toleration. 

The  envoys  of  the  Bohemian  diet  to  King  Sigismund  arrived 
at  Pressburg  in  November.  The  King  at  that  moment  laid 
great  stress  on  the  cession  of  certain  Hungarian  towns  on  the 
Moravian  frontier  which,  contrary  to  their  usual  practice, 
the  Bohemians  had  continued  to  occupy  since  their  invasions 
of  Hungary.  This  matter  was  settled  amicably,  but  the 
negotiations  for  the  purpose  of  a  general  pacification  appear  to 
have  made  little  progress.  These  negotiations,  which  turned 
mainly  on  the  fashion  in  which  the  compacts  were  to  be  inter- 
preted, and  now  also  on  the  estabhshment  of  a  national  Church 
in  Bohemia,  were  carried  on  by  means  of  the  repetition  of 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  18-22. 


350  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

arguments  that  had  already  done  duty  on  many  previous  oc- 
casions. They  are,  therefore,  excessively  wearisome,  and  it  is 
here  sufficient  to  note  the  principal  occurrences.^  At  Pressburg, 
however,  Sigismund  declared  that  he  could  only  act  in  unison 
with  the  Council,  and  he  requested  the  Bohemians  to  meet  him 
again  at  Brno,  where  he  had  begged  the  Council  also  to  send 
its  representatives.  It  must  be  admitted  that  during  these 
lengthy  deliberations,  which  continued  from  143 1  to  1436,  the 
attitude  of  the  Council  was  franker  and  more  honourable  than 
that  of  Sigismund.  The  Council  had,  though  reluctantly, 
consented  to  permit  Communion  in  the  two  kinds  in  the 
Utraquist  parts  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  and  it  had  openly 
declared  that  it  could  make  no  further  concessions.  Sigis- 
mund, on  the  other  hand,  was  above  all  things  intent  on  rapidly 
obtaining  possession  of  Bohemia,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  make 
promises  which  he  had  no  intention  to  fulfil. ^  At  this  moment 
(about  the  end  of  the  year  1434)  Sigismund  was  again  secretly 
negotiating  with  the  Taborites.  It  is  certain  that  he  received 
envoys  representing  that  community  and  told  them  that  he 
had  always  been  well-disposed  to  their  party;  he  then  spoke 
much  of  the  avarice  and  malice  of  the  priests,  which,  as  he 
said,  he  had  himself  observed  at  the  Council  of  Constance,  at 
his  coronation  in  Rome,  and  recently  at  Basel.  The  Taborites 
appear  to  have  distrusted  the  King's  overtures. 

The  only  positive  result  of  the  visit  of  the  Bohemians  to 
Pressburg  was  the  decision  that  Sigismund  should  proceed  to 
Brno  in  Moravia,  and  that  he  should  there  again  meet  the 
envoys  of  Bohemia,  who  would  now  recognise  him  as  their 
sovereign.  The  Bohemians  would  there  also  confer  with  the 
representatives  of  the  Council.     Before  the  Bohemians  could 

*  Even  the  indefatigable  Palacky  mentions  on  one  occasion  the  "  Vielen 
Schwierigkeitan  iiber  die  wir  uns  hier  nicht  ausfiihrhch  verbreiten  konnen." 
Geschichte,  Vol.  III.  p.  201. 

*  iEneas  Sylvius  writes :  "  Liquet  imperatorem  quum  foedera  cum  haereticis 
paciscit,  necessitate  magis  admissise  quam  voluntate  :  voluisse  ilium  paternam 
hsereditatem  quoquo  modo  intrare,  sensimque  regni  possessione  accepta 
more  majorum  subter  veram  Christi  religiontm  provinciam  reducere  " 
{Histovia  Bohemica,  cap.  lii). 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  351 

send  their  representatives  to  Brno  it  was,  however,  necessary 
that  the  Bohemian  estates  should  meet  in  Prague  to  dehberate 
on  the  conditions  under  which  Sigismund  would  be  received  as 
king.  It  had  been  agreed  that  the  estates  should  meet  on  the 
day  of  St.  Valentine  (February  14),  but,  in  consequence  of  the 
exceptionally  cold  winter,  the  deliberations  of  the  diet  only 
began  on  March  2, 1435.  The  regent,  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  had 
some  time  previously  received  a  short  communication  from 
Bishop  Philibert  of  Coutance  and  other  members  of  the  Council  ^ 
which  proffered  excuses  for  their  delay  in  answering  the  letter 
concerning  the  Bohemian  hierarchy  which  the  estates  had  sent 
in  the  autumn  of  the  previous  year.  The  reply  avoided 
answering  the  questions  contained  in  the  letter  of  the  diet, 
and  limited  itself  to  stating  that  the  Council  would  send  a 
numerous  and  important  embassy  to  Brno,  which  would  take 
part  in  the  deliberations  during  the  stay  of  the  Emperor  in  that 
city. 

The  resolutions  of  the  "Diet  of  St.  Valentine,"  as  it  was  called, 
though  its  sittings  began  somewhat  later  than  the  day  of 
that  saint,  are  very  important.  The  estates  here  formulated 
the  conditions  under  which  they  were  prepared  to  recog- 
nise Sigismund  as  their  king.  Their  demands  were  certainly 
extensive,  and  it  is  obvious  that  the  constant  delays  and  what 
they  considered  the  double  dealing  had  irritated  many.  The 
somewhat  reviving  strength  of  the  Taborites  was  probably 
also  taken  into  account  by  the  assembly.  The  document  ^ 
which  contained  these  demands  consisted  of  twenty-seven 
articles.  The  most  important  stipulations  were  "  that  no  man, 
and  especially  no  German,  should  be  received  as  a  citizen  by  any 
town  unless  he  communicated  in  the  two  kinds,  that  no  one 
should  hold  office  unless  he  communicated  in  the  two  kinds,  that 
the  Emperor  should  have  no  chaplain  who  did  not  communicate 
in  the  two  kinds,  that  the  Emperor  himself  with  his  court 

1  Printed  by  Palacky,  Urkundliche  Beitvage,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  435-436. 
^  Ibid.,  pp.  440-441. 


352  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

should  communicate  in  the  two  kinds,  that  monks  should  not 
be  again  admitted  into  Bohemia,  and  that  all  those  whose 
lands  had  been  confiscated  by  Sigismund  and  his  brother 
Venceslas  should  recover  possession  of  them. 

In  other  articles  the  diet  again  demanded  that  the  Bishops 
of  Bohemia  and  Moravia  should  be  elected  by  the  estates  and 
referred  to  some  minor  grievances  that  do  not  require  mention 
here.     Though  the  estates  well  knew  that  their  demands  would 
meet  with  opposition  at  Brno,  they  yet  determined  to  send 
delegates  to  that  city,  where  they  were  to  meet  Sigismund 
and  the  ambassadors  of  the  Council.     Renewed  feuds  between 
the  Taborites   and  Lord  Ulrich  of   Rosenberg  caused  some 
delay,  and  it  was  only  on  June  19  that  the  Bohemians  started 
for  Brno.     At  the  head  of  the  embassy  was  the  regent,  Ales  of 
Riesenburg,  and  among  the  nobles  and  knights  who  accompanied 
him  were  Menhard  of  Jindfichuv  Hradec,  Ptacek  of  Pirkstyn, 
Boirek   of    Miletinek,   Kostka    of    Postupic,  John  of    Cernin, 
Matthew  Louda  of  Chlumcany.     Numerous  ecclesiastics  ac- 
companied the  mission;  among  them  were  John  of  Rokycan 
and  Martin  Lupac.     Besides  the  towns  of  Prague  the  cities  of 
2atec,  Loun  and  Slane  had  sent  representatives  to  Brno.     The 
prolonged  resultless  negotiations  had  somewhat  embittered  the 
Bohemians,  and  it  was  with  regret  rather  than  with  surprise 
that  they  heard  on  their  arrival  at  Brno  that  the  delegates  of 
the  Council  of  Basel,  who  had  arrived  there  some  time  pre- 
viously, now  maintained  an  entirely  intransigent  attitude.    They 
attempted  by  repetition  of  previous  arguments  to  limit  the 
purport  of  the  compacts  as  far  as  possible,  and  they  also  opposed 
a  stern  negative  to  the  other  most  important  Bohemian  de- 
mand, the  foundation  of  a  national  hierarchy.     They  declared 
that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  accept  a  Utraquist  arch- 
bishop, and  as  it  was  probable  that  an  archbishop  elected  by 
the  chapter  according  to  the  regulations  would  displease  the 
people,  they  suggested  that  the  Council  itself  should  name  a 
distinguished  ecclesiastic  who  belonged  to  no  Bohemian  party. 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  353 

The  Utraquists  interpreted  this  as  signifying  that  the  new 
archbishop  was  to  be  a  foreigner. 

On  July  I  the  Emperor  Sigismund  arrived  at  Brno,  and 
immediately  devoted  his  energy  to  removing  the  obstacles 
which  still  stood  in  the  way  of  his  entering  into  possession  of 
his  Bohemian  kingdom.  On  the  following  day  Rokycan,  in 
the  name  of  the  Utraquists,  and  Palomar  as  representative  of 
the  Council,  expounded  their  views  in  the  presence  of  the 
Emperor.  Rokycan,  who — contrarily  to  the  wishes  of  the 
envoys  of  the  Council,  but  by  desire  of  Sigismund — opened 
the  proceedings,  stated  that  the  Utraquists  made  three 
demands,  namely,  that  the  four  articles  of  Prague  should 
be  recognised  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  Bohemia  and  the 
margraviate  of  Moravia,  that  Bohemia  and  Moravia  should  be 
freed  from  the  accusation  of  heresy  which  had  been  brought 
against  those  countries  because  of  the  articles,  and  that  the 
general  reform  of  the  Church  should  be  carried  out.  In  his 
reply,  Palomar  maintained  his  usual  intransigent  attitude. 
Very  badly  informed  as  to  the  political  situation  of  Bohemia, 
he  thought  that  after  the  battle  of  Lipany  the  Bohemians 
could  easily  be  induced  to  submit  unconditionally  to  the 
Church  of  Rome.  A  complete  rupture  seemed  inevitable, 
and  when  the  envoys  met  again  on  July  4  Rokycan  asked 
the  envoys  of  the  Council  if  they  considered  their  previous 
statements  as  final.  If  this  was  the  case  he  feared  that  they 
(the  envoys  of  the  Council)  could  not  say  "  God  with  us  " ; 
but  "  with  us,"  he  continued,  "  He  always  has  been  and,  we 
hope,  always  will  be."  Palomar  gave  an  evasive  answer, 
and  the  negotiations  continued  for  some  weeks  in  a  desultory 
fashion.  The  representatives  of  the  Council  now  admitted 
that  the  Bohemians  should,  at  least  provisionally,  be  granted 
in  a  limited  form  the  privileges  contained  in  the  compacts. 
The  envoys  of  the  Council,  however,  absolutely  and  consistently 
opposed  the  demand  of  the  Utraquists  that  the  Archbishop  of 
Prague  and  two  suffragan  bishops  should  be  elected  by  the 

AA 


354  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

estates  of  Bohemia.  Towards  the  end  of  July  the  Bohemians 
began  to  leave  Brno,  and  it  became  obvious  that  the  negotia- 
tions would  here  again  be  result  less.  Those  Bohemian 
delegates  who  had  not  already  left  Brno  did  so  on  August  3, 
after  having  declared  that  they  would  again  defer  the  questions 
concerning  the  recognition  of  Sigismund  as  king  and  the  solu- 
tion of  the  religious  controversies  to  the  Bohemian  diet. 

Though  the  religious  disputations  at  Brno  had  again  ended 
in  failure,  the  question  of  the  recognition  of  Sigismund  as 
king  had  made  considerable  progress.  The  negotiations 
between  Sigismund  and  the  Bohemians,  in  which  Menhard  of 
Jindfichuv  Hradec  again  acted  as  mediator,  are  very  obscure. 
It,  however,  appears  certain  that  on  July  6  Sigismund,  when 
conversing  with  some  of  the  Bohemian  envoys,  assured  them 
of  his  friendship  and  his  conciliatory  spirit  and  of  his  intention 
never  again  to  war  against  their  country.  The  Bohemians, 
whom  prolonged  experience  had  not  unnaturally  rendered 
suspicious,  demanded  that  some  written  statement  should  be 
given  them  bearing  witness  to  the  King's  conciliatory  inten- 
tions. The  King  shortly  afterwards,  probably  on  July  25, 
acceded  to  their  demand,  and  signed  a  document  ^  which 
certainly  granted  the  Bohemians  considerable  concessions. 
It  was  kept  secret  for  some  time,  and  for  that  reason  the 
ordinary  writers  of  the  King  were  not  employed,  but  the 
document  was  transcribed  privately  by  one  of  the  Bohemian 
envoys.  It  was  only  made  public  by  Sigismund  when  at 
Stuhlweissenburg  in  Hungary  on  January  6,  1436.  In  this 
important  document  Sigismund  declared  that  no  benefices 
in  Bohemia  or  Moravia  should  be  conferred  on  foreigners, 
and  that  the  King  reserved  to  himself  the  right  of  conferring 
such  benefices.  No  Bohemian  or  Moravian  was  to  be  sum- 
moned to  appear  before  any  foreign  law-court  or  to  be  judged 
by  it.     The  most  important  part  of  the  document  was,  however, 

*  This  document,  entitled  "  Proscriptio  Imperatoris  Sigismundi  Brunnje 
factae  nuntiis  a  Bohemis  ad  euin  missis  pro  aliquibus  articulis  ultra  coai- 
pactata,"  is  published  by  Palacky,  Unkunden,  etc.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  445-448. 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  355 

the  one  containing  the  formal  sanction  of  the  election  of  the 
Archbishop  of  Prague  and  his  suffragans  by  the  Bohemians.* 
The  King  further  declared  that  all  parish  priests  in  Bohemia 
and  in  Moravia  should  dispense  the  Sacrament  in  the  two 
kinds  to  those  laymen  who  claimed  that  privilege;  if  they 
refused  to  do  so  they  were  to  be  removed.^  The  document 
also  contained  regulations  and  promises  concerning  matters 
of  minor  importance,  but  it  is  the  imperial  consent  given  in  it 
to  the  foundation  of  a  Bohemian  national  hierarchy  which 
renders  it  important.  It  is  unfortunately  almost  certain  that 
Sigismund  never  intended  to  fulfil  his  promises.  The  dispute 
on  this  matter  continued  beyond  the  period  with  which  I  am 
now  dealing,  and  as  Professor  Tomek  rightly  remarks  :  "  Sigis- 
mund publicly  wrote  to  the  Council  recommending  it  to 
confirm  Roky can's  election  as  archbishop ;  secretly  he  advised 
the  contrary." 

As  had  been  settled  at  Brno  the  Bohemian  estates  again 
met  in  Prague  in  the  autumn  of  1435.  The  most  important 
act  of  this  diet  was  the  election  of  the  heads  of  the  Bohemian 
hierarchy.  The  assembly  chose  sixteen  of  its  members — of 
whom  eight  were  ecclesiastics  and  eight  laymen — as  electors. 
They  unanimously  chose  John  of  Rokycan  as  archbishop  and 
Martin  Lupac,  who  has  often  been  mentioned  in  these  pages, 
and  Venceslas  of  Myto  as  suffragan  bishops.  The  diet  also 
settled  to  send  a  new  embassy  to  Sigismund,  who  was  expected 
at  Stuhlweissenburg  (Belehrad)  in  Hungary.  The  envoys 
arrived  there  early  in  December  and  were  soon  joined  by  the 
representatives  of  the  Council,  who  had  also  proceeded  to 
Hungary.  The  Emperor  was  then  hunting  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Stuhlweissenburg,  but  he  arrived  in  that  city  immedi- 
ately before  Christmas.  As  on  previous  occasions,  dissensions 
immediately  arose   on  the   question  whether  the   Utraquist 

^  Sed  et  hoc  volumus,  ut  per  dominos  Boemos  generosos,  nobiles,  strenuos, 
famosos,  Pragam  et  civitates  alias  una  cum  clero  archiepiscopus  Pragensis 
cum  aliis  episcopis  titularibus  alias  suffraganeis  eligantur  "  (Palacky,  as  above). 

*  "  Quod  si  non  fecerint,  non  sunt  tolerandi  "  (Palacky,  as  above). 


356  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

Bohemians  should  be  allowed  to  be  present  at  the  Church 
services.  When  Sigismund  insisted  on  their  admission  the 
delegates  of  the  Council  absented  themselves  from  those 
religious  functions  at  which  the  Bohemians  were  present. 
They  were,  indeed,  now  less  conciliatory  than  on  any  previous 
occasion.  Though  this  is  but  slightly  indicated  by  the 
contemporary  writers,  it  is  probable  that  the  election  of 
Rokycan  and  his  suffragans  had  caused  much  displeasure  at 
Basel.  That  these  elections  had  been  sanctioned  by  Sigismund 
was  probably  already  known  to  the  delegates  of  the  Council, 
and  they  devised  a  very  astute  counter-move.  In  the  name 
of  his  colleagues  Palomar  presented  to  the  King  for  signature 
a  document  in  which  he  engaged  himself  to  prevent  that  any 
of  his  subjects  should  be  forced  to  communicate  in  the  two 
kinds  by  direct  or  indirect  threats  that  he  might  lose  rights 
or  privileges.  Another  stipulation  bound  the  Emperor  not 
to  interfere  in  any  way  in  matters  that  concerned  the  doctrine 
or  the  power  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  nor  to  confer  any  dignities 
which  the  Roman  Church  had  alone  the  right  to  grant ;  should 
he  have  secretly  done  so,  such  an  act  was  to  be  considered 
as  invalid.  It  need  hardly  be  pointed  out  that  by  signing  this 
document  Sigismund  would  have  immediately  invalidated  the 
promises  he  had  made  to  the  Bohemians,  particularly  with 
regard  to  the  establishment  of  a  national  episcopacy.  This 
document  was  presented  to  the  Emperor  on  December  28, 
and  some  of  the  representatives  of  the  Council  immediately 
afterwards  consulted  Menhard  of  Jindfichuv  Hradec  on  this 
matter.  Menhard  had  about  this  time — the  exact  date  is 
uncertain — joined  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  and  he  was 
known  to  be  Sigismund 's  most  trusted  councillor  on  Bohemian 
affairs.  When  consulted  as  to  the  promises  which  the  Emperor 
was  rumoured  to  have  made  to  the  Bohemians  Menhard 
confirmed  the  truth  of  these  rumours,  adding  that  he  could 
not  advise  the  sovereign  to  break  his  word.  As  to  the  promise 
that  Sigismund  should  not  interfere  in  matters  concerning  the 


THE  HUSSITE   WARS  357 

doctrine  and  the  authority  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  Menhard 
said  that  if  such  a  promise  were  now  made  pubUcly  the 
Bohemians  would  immediately  break  off  the  negotiations,  if 
it  were  made  secretly  the  King,  after  his  arrival  in  Bohemia, 
would  be  in  great  danger,  if  it  then  became  known  that  he  had 
made  such  a  promise.  During  the  following  days  the  negotia- 
tions continued  uninterruptedly,  the  King  almost  daily  receiv- 
ing either  the  Bohemian  delegates  or  the  envoys  of  the  Council, 
and  sometimes  both  bodies  jointly.  Sigismund,  who  wished 
above  all  things  to  hasten  his  recognition  as  King  of  Bohemia, 
and  who  was  in  his  heart  a  fervent  adherent  of  the  Church  of 
Rome,  considered  these  lengthy  theological  discussions  both 
tedious  and  superfluous.  He  did  not  always  conceal  his 
irritation.  During  one  of  the  audiences  which  he  granted 
the  Bohemians  he  declared  that  he  wished  to  abandon  his 
claim  to  the  Bohemian  throne,  and  advised  them  to  seek  for 
another  king.  On  another  occasion  he  rebuked  the  representa- 
tives of  the  Council  for  attaching  too  much  importance  to 
the  choice  of  a  new  archbishop.  He  said  that,  as  far  as  he  was 
concerned,  he  did  not  care  whom  the  Bohemians  elected, 
even  if  they  elected  a  donkey ;  it  was  not  he  who  would  have 
to  ordain  him. 

On  January  4,  1436,  Sigismund  presented  to  the  envoys  of 
the  Council  a  new  draft  of  a  letter  in  which  he,  acceding  to 
their  demand,  declared  that  he  approved  of  the  suggestions 
of  Palomar.  Though  some  stipulations  had  been  modified, 
the  new  draft  again  contained  the  promise  that  Sigismund 
would  not  interfere  in  matters  that  concerned  the  doctrine 
and  authority  of  the  Roman  Church.  The  Bohemians  rightly 
thought  that  this  was  by  far  the  most  weighty  point.  When 
they  were  admitted  to  the  presence  of  the  Emperor  immediately 
afterwards  and  the  draft  was  read  out  to  them,  John  Velvar^ 
a  citizen  of  Prague  and  a  member  of  the  Bohemian  embassy, 
immediately  protested,  and  in  the  name  of  his  colleagues  begged 
the  Emperor's  permission  to  return  to  Bohemia. 


358  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

Matters  once  again  appeared  to  have  arrived  at  a  standstill, 
but  Sigismund,  not  usually  much  troubled  by  conscientious 
scruples,  devised  a  scheme  by  which  a  rupture  was  avoided. 
The  assurances  demanded  by  the  Council  were  now  formulated 
in  a  revised  draft,  in  which  the  passage  containing  the  Emperor's 
promise  not  to  interfere  in  matters  concerning  the  doctrine 
and  authority  of  the  Church  of  Rome  was  omitted.  On  the 
suggestion  of  Archduke  Albert,  Sigismund 's  son-in-law,  it 
was,  however,  agreed  that  the  Emperor  should  privately  and 
secretly  pledge  his  word  to  fulfil  the  promises  contained  in 
the  passage  which  it  had  been  thought  necessary  to  suppress. 
The  envoys  of  the  Council  reluctantly  consented  to  this 
proposal,  and  on  January  5  the  Emperor,  in  the  presence  of 
his  chancellor.  Count  Slik,  and  of  his  son-in-law,  Albert  of 
Austria,  swore  not  to  interfere  in  any  way  in  matters  that 
concerned  the  doctrine  or  authority  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 
It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  state  what  took  place  at  these 
strictly  confidential  conferences,  but  it  is  probable  that  Sigis- 
mund begged  the  envoys  of  the  Council  not  to  delay  his 
accession  to  the  Bohemian  throne,  and  that  he  at  the  same  time 
promised  them  that  he  would,  as  ruler  of  Bohemia,  further  the 
interests  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  The  events  of  the  short 
reign  of  Sigismund  in  Bohemia — with  which  I  have  not  to 
deal  in  this  work — certainly  render  this  conjecture  very 
probable.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  King's  truly  cynical  duplicity 
that  on  the  following  day  (January  6)  he  at  last  made  public 
the  document  drafted  at  Brno  in  the  previous  year,  which 
granted  the  Utraquists  very  considerable  rights.  It  appears 
inexplicable  that  it  should  under  these  circumstances  have 
been  possible  to  come  to  an  agreement.  The  delegates  of 
the  Council  probably  relied  on  Sigismund's  secret  promises, 
while  the  Bohemians  were  anxious  to  be  reunited  to  the 
universal  Church.  The  more  advanced  Utraquists  may  also, 
in  view  of  Sigismund's  advanced  age  and  failing  health,  have 
thought  that  his  reign  would  be  a  short  one,  and  that  it  would 


THE   HUSSITE  WARS  359 

afterwards  be  possible  to  elect  a  king  belonging  to  their  own 
Church.  As  a  token  of  reconciliation  both  the  Bohemian 
delegates  and  those  of  the  Council  presented  letters  to  the 
Emperor  in  which  they  declared  that  they  accepted  the 
compacts.  It  was  then  decided  that  the  Emperor  should 
again  meet  the  delegates  of  the  Council  and  those  of  the 
Bohemian  estates  at  Jihlava  in  Moravia,  near  the  Bohemian 
frontier.  After  all  moot  points  had  been  settled  there 
Sigismund  was  to  proceed  to  Prague,  accompanied  by  the 
representatives  of  the  diet,  and  to  take  possession  of  his 
Bohemian  kingdom.  The  Bohemian  envoys  then  returned 
to  Prague,  and  on  February  29  the  estates  again  met  there. 
The  elections  of  Rokycan  as  archbishop  and  of  his  two  suffragan 
bishops  were  now  made  public,  for  it  had  previously  been 
attempted,  though  somewhat  unsuccessfully,  to  keep  this 
decision  secret.  The  estates  then  decided  to  send  delegates 
to  meet  King  Sigismund  at  Jihlava.  They  were,  however, 
only  to  recognise  him  as  their  king  and  accept  the  compacts 
after  they  had  received  an  assurance  that  the  election  of 
Rokycan  and  of  his  suffragans  would  be  sanctioned. 

I  have  already  quoted  Sigismund's  own  words  concerning 
the  importance  which  he  attached  to  the  choice  of  an  Arch- 
bishop of  Prague.  He  was,  however,  sufficiently  astute  to 
perceive  the  importance  which  the  Bohemians  attached  to  this 
matter.  Unscrupulous  as  he  always  was  he  determined,  in 
view  of  the  opposition  of  the  Council,  to  enter  into  communica- 
tions with  Pope  Eugenius  IV,  who  for  a  considerable  time  had 
been  engaged  in  a  bitter  conflict  with  the  Council  of  Basel. 
The  Pope  seems  to  have  responded  to  Sigismund's  overtures. 
Early  in  the  year  1436  he  sent  a  very  courteous  letter  addressed 
to  the  *'  Lords,  knights,  Praguers,  and  citizens  of  the  other 
Bohemian  towns,"  in  which  he  stated  that  the  Emperor  had 
requested  him  to  grant  certain  concessions  which  were  favour- 
able to  the  tranquillity  and  glory  of  the  Bohemians  and  their 
kingdom.     He  added  that  he  was  ready  to  grant   these  de- 


36o  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

mands.  Though  this  letter  only  reached  Prague  after  the 
sittings  of  the  diet  had  ended,  its  effect  was  considerable.  It 
strengthened  the  hand  of  those  who,  though  faithful  to  the 
articles  of  Prague,  longed  for  a  reunion  with  the  universal 
Church.  It  was  thought  that  it  would  be  possible  that  the 
Bohemian  Church,  should  the  Council  continue  intransigent, 
might  come  to  an  agreement  with  Pope  Eugenius. 

It  had  been  originally  settled  that  the  meeting  at  Jihlava 
should  take  place  early  in  spring,  but  a  Turkish  invasion  of 
Hungary  delayed  Sigismund's  arrival  for  a  considerable  time. 
He,  however,  arrived  at  Jihlava  on  June  5,  on  the  same  day 
as  the  Bohemian  delegates.  The  envoys  of  the  Council  had 
arrived  in  the  Moravian  town  some  time  previously.  Negotia- 
tions began  immediately,  as  all  parties  were  anxious  to  secure 
the  long-desired  pacification.  The  Bohemians,  according  to 
their  instructions,  demanded  that  Rokycan  and  his  suffragans 
should  be  recognised  by  the  Council  as  holding  the  episcopal 
dignitaries  which  the  diet  had  conferred  on  them.  On  the 
absolute  refusal  of  the  delegates  of  the  Council  to  consent 
to  this,  some  of  the  representatives  of  the  Bohemian  towns 
declared  that  they  must  consult  their  fellow-citizens.  They 
could  not — before  doing  this — accede  to  the  compacts  or  accept 
Sigismund  as  king,  without  having  received  any  assurance 
that  the  Council  would  recognise  Rokycan  and  his  suffragans. 
They  soon  returned,  having  apparently  obtained  the  consent 
of  their  fellow-citizens. 

It  was  only  on  July  5  that  the  compacts  were  accepted  by 
all  parties.  This  was  done  with  great  solemnity  on  the  market- 
place of  Jihlava.  The  Emperor  appeared  there  in  his  imperial 
robes.  He  was  preceded  by  Albert  of  Austria,  who  carried  the 
imperial  globe,  the  Count  of  Cilli — Sigismund's  brother-in- 
law — carrying  the  sceptre,  and  the  Count  of  Schaumburg,  who 
carried  the  sword  of  state.  When  he  was  seated  the  delegates 
of  the  Council  sat  down  on  his  right  side.  On  his  left  side  were 
seated  the  regent.  Ales  of  Riesenburg,  Menhard  of  Jindfichuv 


THE   HUSSITE   WARS  361 

Hradec,  Archbishop  Rokycan  and  his  two  suffragan  bishops. 
John  Velvar  then  read  out  the  compacts  ^  and  presented  a 
document  in  which  the  Bohemians  declared  that  they  accepted 
the  compacts  and  wished  henceforth  to  hve  in  peace  with  the 
whole  Christian  world.  A  similar  document  was  then  read 
out  by  one  of  the  delegates  of  the  Council.  Immediately  after 
this  reconciliation  Bishop  Philibert  of  Coutance  intoned  the 
Te  Deum,  in  which  all  present,  Bohemians,  delegates  of  the 
Council  and  members  of  the  imperial  court,  enthusiastically 
joined.  The  whole  city  of  Jihlava  and  the  surrounding 
country  rejoiced  that  the  long  religious  war  was  at  last  ended. 
It  remained  to  settle  the  differences  between  Sigismund  and  his 
subjects.  It  was  hoped  that  these  matters  would  be  settled 
speedily,  as  religious  questions  had  been  the  principal  cause  of 
the  war.  Though  dissensions  concerning  the  ever-recurring 
question  of  the  admission  of  Utraquists  to  the  religious  services 
of  the  Roman  Church  still  caused  some  delay,  the  Emperor  on 
July  20  granted  the  estates  of  Bohemia  a  so-called  **  letter  of 
majesty."  In  this  document  he  conferred  on  his  Bohemian 
subjects  considerable  rights  and  privileges,  besides  those  already 
promised  at  Stuhlweissenburg.  He  undertook  to  maintain  all 
the  privileges  granted  to  the  Bohemians  by  the  compacts,  to 
have  only  chaplains  belonging  to  the  Utraquist  Church,  to 
force  no  one  to  rebuild  the  churches  and  monasteries  that  had 
been  destroyed  during  the  war,  to  preserve  and  guard  the 
privileges  of  the  university  of  Prague  and  to  restore  to  it  the 
lands  of  which  it  had  been  deprived.  The  King  further 
declared  that  he  had  forgotten  all  that  had  been  done  against 
him  during  the  recent  troubles,  promised  to  maintain  all  the 
ancient  rights  and  privileges  of  Bohemia,  and,  according  to  the 
ancient  custom,  to  employ  no  foreign  officials  in  the  lands  of 
the  Bohemian  crown.     He  also  promised  to  return  to  the 

*  The  wording  of  the  compacts,  as  finally  accepted,  differed  so  sHghtly 
from  the  former  one,  that  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  here  to  their  contents  as 
given  on  p.  311. 


362  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

country  the  venerated  Bohemian  crown,  and  to  retain  at  his 
court  a  certain  number  of  councillors,  who  were  to  be  ap- 
pointed by  the  estates  of  Bohemia.  The  letter  contained  some 
other  stipulations  of  minor  importance  to  which  it  is  unneces- 
sary to  refer  here.  On  July  22  Sigismund  published  another 
decree,  which  granted  certain  privileges  to  the  cities  of  Prague. 
On  July  25  the  nobles,  knights,  and  townsmen  of  Bohemia 
again  appeared  before  the  Emperor,  and  John  Velvar,  again 
acting  as  spokesman,  informed  him  that  the  Bohemians  were 
prepared  to  receive  him  as  their  sovereign. 

All  difficulties  were  now  removed,  and  though  a  short  delay 
was  still  caused  by  the  necessity  of  bringing  the  Bohemian 
crown  to  Jihlava,  Sigismund  started  from  that  city  for  Prague 
on  August  18.  He  arrived  in  the  capital  on  the  25th  of  that 
month,  and  was  received  with  great  enthusiasm  by  the  popula- 
tion.i  He  first  entered  the  Tyn  church,  where  he  was  warmly 
welcomed  by  Archbishop  Rokycan,  and  then  proceeded  to  his 
temporary  residence,  near  the  present  Celetna  Ulice,  as  the 
royal  residence  on  the  Hradcany  had  become  uninhabitable 
in  consequence  of  the  long  war. 

The  entry  of  King  Sigismund  into  Prague  marks  the  end 
of  the  Hussite  war.  The  long  and  bitter  struggle  had  proved 
to  be  a  drawn  battle.  Internal  discord  had  prevented  the 
Bohemians  from  obtaining  a  complete  victory.  Yet  it  is 
certain  that  by  securing  the  recognition  of  the  compacts  the 
Utraquists  had  obtained  a  not  inconsiderable  success.  If  the 
privileges  which  Bohemia  then  acquired  were  always  disputed 
and  the  compacts  were  successively  repudiated  by  the  Roman 
and  the  Bohemian  Church,  this  is  due  to  events  which  occurred 

^  Palomar,  the  delegate  of  the  Council,  thus  describes  Sigismund's  entry 
into  Prague  :  "  Tota  ci vitas  est  plena  populo,  tanquam  ad  spectaculum 
magnum,  et  vere  magnum  et,  non  diu  est,  vix  credibile  :  in  quo  agnoscendum 
est  et  cum  laudibus  et  gratiarum  actionibus  memorandum,  quoniam  in  manu 
domini  potestas  terrae;  ipsius  est  regnum,  et  cui  vult  et  quomodo  vult 
concedit  illud.  Quod  olim  cum  octuaginta  millibus  armatorum  non  potuit 
obtinere,  nunc  sine  gladio,  arcu  et  lancea  pacifice  est  obtentum.  Ipsi  gloria, 
benedictio  et  claritas  in  secula  sempiterna,  amen."  (Letter  to  Council  ol 
Basel,  Palacky,  Urkundcii,  etc.,  pp.  406-408.) 


THE  HUSSITE  WARS  363 

at  a  period  subsequent  to  that  of  which  I  am  now  writing. 
The  modern  historian  of  Bohemia,  Professor  Tomek,  who, 
though  he  was  a  fervent  Roman  CathoHc,  always  wrote  with 
absolute  impartiality,  very  truly  says :  ^  "  The  Bohemian 
religious  movement  stirred  up  by  Hus  and  his  successors,  who 
were  able  to  carry  away  the  majority  of  the  nation,  in  its 
essence  strove  to  reform  the  organisation  of  the  Church,  to 
encourage  a  more  fervent  interest  in  the  doctrine  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  greater  zeal  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  religious 
enactments.  It  therefore  endeavoured  to  weed  out  the  vices 
that  had  sprung  up  among  a  clergy  that  had  become  worldly. 
The  minds  of  the  people  were  also  dominated  by  a  particular 
devotion  to  Communion  in  the  two  kinds,  overrating  the 
importance  of  this  practice,  which  had  prevailed  in  the  primitive 
Church. ' '  It  is,  indeed,  impossible  to  understand  the  importance 
which  the  Bohemians  of  all  classes  at  that  period  attached 
to  Utraquism  if  we  do  not  realise  that  to  the  Bohemians, 
great  readers  of  Scripture,  only  Communion  as  they  believed 
it  to  have  been  instituted  appeared  as  a  true  sacrament. 
Every  other  form  was  *'  incomplete."  ^ 

It  is  certain  that  the  originators  of  the  Hussite  movement 
were  guided  by  very  noble  motives.  The  degeneracy  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  clergy  at  this  period  cannot  be  exaggerated. 
The  study  of  Scripture,  which,  through  the  influence  not  only 
of  Hus,  but  also  of  his  predecessors,  Milic  and  Stitn^,^  had 
become  general,  prevented  the  Bohemians  from  tolerating  these 
abuses  with  the  same  indifference  as  other  countries  then  did. 

In  spite  of  the  bitter  invectives  of  the  enemies  of  Bohemia, 
and  in  spite  also  of  the  perhaps  more  harmful  writings  of 
indiscriminate  praisers  of  Hussitism,  the  period  of  the  Hussite 
war  will  always  appear  to  a  Bohemian  as  the  most  glorious 
epoch  in  the  annals  of  his  country. 

*  History  of  the  Town  of  Prague,  Vol.  IV.  p.  664. 

*  See  my  Master  John  Hus,  pp.  232-233. 

*  See  my  History  of  Bohemian  Literature. 


APPENDIX    I 

JOHN   ZiZKA 

By  Lenau 

Trocnov's  forest  peaceful  lay. 
Bathed  in  fading  sunset's  glow; 
E'en  the  treetops  lay  as  still 
As  their  roots  deep  down  below. 

Lost  in  thought  a  horseman  neared, 
On  his  arm  reins  loosely  wound, 
Pacing  slowly,  dreamily 
Sinks  his  steed's  head  t'ward  the  ground. 

Suddenly  the  rider  halts; 
As  from  dreamland  he  awoke. 
Leapt  his  blade  from  out  its  sheath, 
Haileth  thus  an  ancient  oak  : 

Here  at  this  oak's  gnarled  trunk, 
On  a  stormy  thunder  night, 
By  sharp  birth-pains  overta'en 
Mother  brought  me  forth  to  light. 

Heard  alone  the  wood  her  groans, 
Midwife  was  the  bitter  blast, 
That  as  blessings  on  the  child 
Lightning  flashes  round  it  cast. 

364 


APPENDIX  I  365 

'Gainst  all  dangers  meant  to  brace  me 
For  a  warrior's  hardy  doom; 
Merciless  the  cold  hail  beat  on 
Moaning  mother's  pain-torn  womb. 

Storm  the  first  breath  that  I  drew. 
Thunderclap  first  caught  my  ear; 
Hence  a  storm-bred  suckling,  I 
Plunge  now  on  my  wild  career. 

Hus  !  beneath  this  oak  I  swear 
Vengeance  on  thy  death,  for  lo, 
Hus,  the  earth  soon  crimson-red 
With  thy  torturers'  blood  shall  flow. 

Hus,  so  freely  from  their  wounds 
Shall  their  blood  stream  forth  there  while, 
That  it  could  a  hundredfold 
Quench  at  once  thy  blazing  pile. 

Hus,  the  soil  shall  turn  as  black 
As  their  smouldering  forts,  and  I, 
Wheresoe'er  a  priest  be  found 
I  will  slay  him,  he  shall  die  ! 

From  the  dense  smoke-laden  clouds 
Shall  the  eye  of  God  grow  dim. 
That  they  could  commit  such  crime 
In  the  very  sight  of  Him  ! 

Quenchless,  Hus;  within  my  breast 
Bums  a  spark  from  thy  death-pyre; 
As  their  crime,  so  my  revenge — 
They  shall  dread  my  righteous  ire. 


366  THE   HUSSITE   WARS 

O  Bohemia  !     Wilt  thou  hst 
To  the  oath  I  swear  thee  now? 
Will  my  greenwood  birthplace  hear 
This  my  solemn,  sacred  vow? 

Soul  and  body  here  I  tend 

Freely  for  thy  cause,  until 

Death  o'ertakes  me,  list,  Bohemia  ! 

Stand  thou  still,  my  steed,  stand  still. 


APPENDIX    II 


2lZKA'S   REGULATIONS  OF  WAR,   1423 

We,  brother  John  2izka  of  the  Chalice,  John  Rohac  of  Duba, 
Ales  of  Riesenburg  and  Vfestov,  John  Potstain  of  Zampach, 
Bocek  of  KunStat  and  Jevisovic,  Bartholomew  and  Bernard, 
brothers  of  Valecov  Bartholomew,  John  and  Martin,  brothers 
of  Vysoka,  we,  the  burgomasters,  aldermen,  and  citizens  of 
the  towns  of  Kralove  Hradec  and  Caslav,  we,  Benedict  of 
Mokrovous,    Jaroslav    of    the    Chalice, ^    Venceslas    Horina 
of  Honbic,  Christian  of  2ernosek,  Francis  of  Litoznic,  George 
of  Recic,  John  of  Studena,  we,  burgomasters,  aldermen,  and 
citizens  of  the  town  of  Jaromef ;  we,  Zdislav  Zeman,  Lawrence 
Polak  of  Paiiov,  Blasius  of  Kralupy,  Jacob  of  Bfezova,  Peter 
Kralovec  of  Pribram,  John  of   Domazlice,  John  of  Techov, 
Martin  of  Borovnice,  Gallus  Orebsky,^  and  we,  burgomaster, 
aldermen  and  all  the  citizens  of  the  town  of  Dvfir;  and  we, 
Chfistnik  of    Kosov,  Andrew  of  Studena,  Sarka  of    Slavne, 
Kfiz  the  captain,  Benes  the  captain,  Michael  Breda  Odrany, 
Ales   of   Hostacov,    Polevka   of   Hostka,    Michael   Orebsky,^ 
Veta  of   Chlumcany,   Litobor   of  Trubec,  Linhart   of  Sleza, 
Benes  of  Hofovic,  John  Bastin,  Mafik  Velek  Senk,  George  Roh, 
Nicholas   Brada,   the   captains,   lords,    knights,    squires   and 
citizens  without  exception,  and  no  one  being  excluded  :  We 
all,  whose  names  are  written  above,  rightly  request,  order  and 
demand  of  you  that  there  should  be  orderly  obedience;  for 

^  2izka's  brother.         *  That  is  of  the  Orebite  community.         '  See  n.  2. 

367 


368  THE  HUSSITE  WARS 

through  disobedience  and  riotous  disturbances  we  have 
suffered  great  losses,  both  as  regards  our  brethren  and  our 
estates,  and  we  have  been  shamed  before  the  enemies  of  God. 
Now,  however,  with  the  help  of  God  and  of  all  the  faithful. 
we  hope  to  avoid  this,  and  therefore  lay  down  these  regulations  : 

I.  When  we  march  out  of  some  place  and  move  to  new 
quarters,  no  one  shall  ride  or  walk  or  drive  in  advance  of  the 
army  to  secure  quarters  or  lodgings  for  himself;  neither  shall 
any  one  encamp  without  the  permission  or  order  of  the  older 
captains  or  before  the  said  older  captains  appointed  for  this 
purpose  have  assigned  him  a  place ;  and  should  any  man  encamp 
or  march  or  place  himself  anywhere  without  order  from  these 
elders  we  wish  to  have  revenge  on  him  and  punish  him  in 
goods  and  person,  whoever  he  be,  and  of  whatever  rank, 
^^dthout  exception  in  favour  of  any  man. 

II.  When  they  ^  move  on  from  the  place  where  they  have 
encamped  with  permission  and  by  order  of  the  appointed 
elders,  they  shall  march  to  an  appropriate  spot  and  wait 
there  till  the  whole  army  has  moved  from  its  encampment. 

III.  No  one  shall  on  the  march  or  when  we  encamp  light  a 
fire  or  burn  anything ;  only  those  [shall  do  so]  who  are  ordered 
to  do  so  and  appointed  for  this  purpose,  and  this  under  severe 
penalty  that  no  others  may  do  so  afterwards. 

IV.  Before  we  leave  a  town  or  begin  a  march  or  orders  are 
given,  all  shall  first  pray  to  the  Lord  God,  and  falling  on  their 
knees  before  the  Sacrament  shall  pray  that  the  Almighty  God 
God  may  deign  to  grant  us  His  aid,  that  we  may  carry  on  His 
holy  fight  to  His  holy  glory,  for  the  increase  of  all  that  is  good, 
for  the  salvation  and  aid  of  the  faithful. 

V.  Then,  when  the  men  have  formed  in  order,  each  troop 
under  its  standard,  then  the  watchword  shall  be  given  and 
then  all  shall  proceed  on  the  march  in  that  order  that  which- 
ever troop  is  on  that  day  ordered  to  march  on  first,  shall 
start  first ;  and  others  shall  not  mingle  with  them  nor  impede 

'  7.  e.  the  first  detachments  of  the  Army. 


APPENDIX   II  369 

their  march ;  all  shall,  when  they  have  been  placed  in  a  troop 
and  under  a  standard,  march  together  in  that  troop  in  an 
orderly  fashion,  no  troop  mingling  with  another;  all  shall 
march  carefully,  guarding  the  van,  the  rear  and  the  flanks  of 
the  army  according  to  the  orders  they  will  receive  from  the 
elders. 

VI.  And  should  God  ordain  that  we  incur  losses  through 
some  incautiousness  or  neglect  on  the  part  of  the  captains, 
either  in  the  field  or  at  the  outposts  or  at  the  entrenchments, 
or  at  any  other  post  that  may  have  been  entrusted  to  them 
by  the  elders  or  by  the  community,  then  [the  captains]  shall 
without  exception  be  punished  by  death  and  loss  of  their 
goods,  be  he  [the  guilty  person]  a  prince,  a  lord  or  any  one 
else,  without  excepting  or  excluding  any  one. 

VII.  But  if  the  Lord  God  grants  to  us  to  overcome  and 
defeat  the  enemies,  to  capture  towns,  strongholds,  or  castles, 
and,  either  on  the  march  or  while  encamped,  to  obtain  booty, 
then  shall  these  spoils  and  this  booty  be  collected  and  brought 
together  to  a  spot  appointed  and  chosen  by  the  elders,  be  it 
much  or  little;  and  for  this  purpose  elders  shall  be  chosen 
among  all  communities,  the  lords,  knights,  townsmen,  and 
peasants,  who  will  faithfully  see  that  these  things  are  justly 
distributed  and  divided  among  the  rich  and  the  poor  as  is 
befitting,  so  that  no  one  may  himself  carry  anything  away  or 
keep  it.  But  if  some  one  carries  away  anything  or  keeps 
it  and  he  is  conscientiously  ^  convicted  of  this,  then  such  a 
man  shall  be  executed,  and  lose  his  life  and  goods,  as  one  who 
has  robbed  God  and  the  commonwealth,  whoever  he  may  be, 
without  exception  in  favour  of  any  one ;  for  thus  was  treated 
Achan  ^  because  of  the  cap  and  the  cloak  of  the  king's  daughter, 
or  [such  a  man]  shall  die  by  some  other  death,  be  he  a  prince, 
noble,  knight,  squire,  citizen,  craftsman  or  peasant,  without 
exception  for  any  man  or  regard  to  his  person ;  thus  with  God's 
help  will  we  take  vengeance  on  such  a  man. 

*  /.  e.  justly.  *  Joshua,  Chap.  VII.  vv.  19-26. 

BB 


370  THE   HUSSITE  WARS 

Vni.  There  shall  be  in  our  armies  and  amidst  ourselves 
no  quarrels,  riots,  or  noisy  disputes. 

IX.  If  some  man  should  strike,  wound,  maim  or  kill  another, 
he  shall  be  punished  according  to  God's  law  and  as  God 
permits,  without  exception  of  any  man  and  regard  for  any 
person. 

X.  Be  it  further  known  to  you  that,  should  any  one  steal 
away,  walk,  ride,  or  drive  away  from  the  army  while  we  are 
on  the  march  or  encamped,  without  the  knowledge  of  the 
elders  who  are  mentioned  above  and  without  having  the 
right  watchword,  then  he,  whether  he  be  a  prince,  or  a  noble, 
or  knight,  or  squire,  or  citizen,  or  craftsman,  or  peasant,  or  of 
whatever  other  condition,  shall,  when  arrested,  be,  as  a  faithless 
thief  who  slinks  away  from  God's  battle  and  the  army  of  the 
faithful,  punished  publicly  by  loss  of  his  life  and  goods. 

XL  Also  will  we  not  suffer  among  us  infidels,  disobedient 
men,  liars,  thieves,  gamblers,  robbers,  plunderers,  drunkards, 
revilers,  lewd  men,  adulterers,  prostitutes,  adulteresses,  or 
any  other  sinners,  male  or  female ;  all  these  will  we  banish  and 
drive  away,  or  execute  them  with  the  help  of  the  Holy  Trinity 
and  in  accordance  with  God's  law. 

XII.  Brother  2izka  and  the  other  nobles,  captains,  knights, 
squires,  citizens,  craftsmen,  and  peasants  named  above,  and 
all  the  communities  will,  with  the  help  of  God  and  of  the 
commonwealth,  punish  all  disorders  by  banishment,  by  flogging, 
slaying,  decapitating,  hanging,  whipping,  burning,  drowning 
and  by  all  other  punishments  which  are  befitting  according 
to  God's  law,  with  exceptions  of  no  one,  whether  of  male  or 
female  sex.  And  if  we  observe  and  fulfill  the  salutiferous 
articles  written  above  ^  the  Lord  God  will  be  with  us  with 
His  holy  grace  and  help;  for  it  befits  the  warriors  of  God  to 
live  in  a  truly  Christian  fashion,  loving  discipline  and  fearing 
God,  and  to  place  all  wishes,  desires  and  hopes  in  the  hand  of 

1  The  articles  of  Prague,  which  were  pubhshed  with  2izka's  Regulations 
as  a  sort  of  Preface. 


APPENDIX   II  371 

the  Lord  God  without  hesitation,  expecting  from  Him  eternal 
reward.  And  we  beg  you,  dear  comrades,  of  all  districts, 
princes,  lords,  knights,  squires,  townsmen,  craftsmen,  peasants, 
villeins,  men  of  all  estates  and  generally  all  faithful  Bohemians 
to  agree  to  this  good  work  and  be  skilful  and  helpful  for  this 
purpose.  And  we  again  will  keep,  fulfil  and  maintain  [our 
promises]  because  of  our  dear  Lord  God  and  His  holy  martyr- 
dom, for  the  sake  of  the  freedom  of  the  truth  of  God's  law, 
for  the  glory  of  the  saints,  for  the  help  of  those  who  are  faithful 
to  the  holy  Church,  and  particularly  for  those  of  the  Bohemian 
and  Slavic  race  ^  ["  jazyk  "]  and  all  Christianity,  that  the 
faithful  may  be  glorified  and  all  open  or  secret  heretics  and 
miscreants  be  shamed.  Thus  may  Almighty  God  deign  to 
grant  us  and  you  His  aid  and  lead  us  to  victory  against  His 
enemies  and  ours,  and  fight  for  us  and  with  you  with  His 
might,  and  not  withdraw  from  us  His  holy  grace.     Amen. 

May  the  Lord  God  be  with  us  and  with  you  wherever  you 
are  and  wherever  it  pleases  the  Holy  Trinity  (that  you  should 
be).  And  for  better  knowledge,  confirmation,  and  certainty 
we  who  are  named  above,  together  with  the  clergy,  have  de-^ 
liberately  given  our  consent  to  this  writing  or  letter, ^  and  we 
agree  to  hold,  preserve,  and  defend  it  with  the  help  of  the 
uncreated  and  eternally  blessed  Holy  Trinity.  Amen.  May 
God  grant  this. 

^  Or  language;  the  Bohemian  word  "  jazyk  "  has  both  significations. 
*  /.  e.  the  Regulations  of  War. 


GERMAN  NAMES  OF  BOHEMIAN  TOWNS 

As  the  German  names  of  many  Bohemian  towns  are  more 
famihar  to  English  readers  than  the  Bohemian  ones,  it  may 
be  useful  to  give  here  a  short  list  of  some  of  these  names  with 
their  Bohemian  equivalents  : 

Alt  Bunzlau  =  Stara  Boleslav. 
Ausschwitz  =  Osveti. 

Aussig  =  tJsti  nad  Labem. 
Brunn  =  Brno. 
Budweis  =  Budejovice. 
Briix  =  Most. 
Caslau  =  C§.slav. 
Eger  =  Cheb. 
Iglau  =  Jihlava. 
Komotau  =  Chomoutov. 
Koniggratz  =  Krdlove  Hradec. 
Kuttenberg  =  Kutna  Hora. 
Lundenburg  =  Breclava. 
Miess  =  Stfibro. 
Neuhaus  =  Jindfichuv  Hradec. 
Saaz  =  Zatec. 
Seelau  =  Zelivo. 
Tauss  =  Domdzlice. 
Wildenschwert  =  Usti  nad  Orlici. 

It  has  not  been  considered  necessary  to  include  in  this  list 
towns  whose  German  name  is  nearly,  though  not  quite,  identical 
with  the  Bohemian  one,  for  instance,  Lipan  (Boh.,  Lipany), 
Pardubitz  (Boh.,  Pardubice),  Pilsen  (Boh.,  Plzeii),  etc. 


372 


INDEX 


Adamites,  denial  of  their  identifica- 
tion with  Hussites,  117 

Albert,  Archduke  of  Austria,  joins 
Sigismund  before  Prague,  52 ; 
witnesses  coronation  of  Sigismund, 
60;  joins  Sigismund  in  Moravia, 
loi ;  retires  before  united  Hussite 
forces,  1 84 ;  advances  on  Bohemia, 
207-208;  at  peace  conference  at 
Pressburg,  227,  230,  232 ;  mani- 
festo against  papal  authority  as- 
cribed to,  249-250 ;  his  advice  to 
Sigismund,  358 ;  arrives  at  Jihlava, 
360 

Ales,  Lord  of  Riesenburg,  regent  of 
Bohemia,  315-316,  318;  his  anger 
against  Tdborites,  325 ;  at  Kacin 
hill,  328;  at  Lipany,  333;  receives 
letter  from  Council  of  Basel,  339 ; 
re-elected  regent,  341 ;  envoy  to 
Brno,  352  ;  at  Jihlava,  360 

Ales,  Lord,  of  Sternberg,  157,  165 

Ambrose,  of  Krdlove  Hradec,  joins 
Praguers,  44;  assists  Hussites  in 
recapture  of  Krdlove  Hradec,  47- 
48;  attempts  conversion  of  Martin 
Loquis,  116;  in  discussion  at 
Prague,  316 

Andrew  of  Kersky,  organises  defence 
of  Prague,  328;  commands  Tdbor- 
ites  at  Lipany,  334;  his  flight  to 
Kolin,  335;  takes  part  in  diet  at 
Prague,  341 

Austria,  successful  campaign  of  Bo- 
hemians in,  184-185 

Basel,  Council  of,  demanded  of  Pope 
by  Christian  world,  248-250; 
Cesarini  refuses  to  dissolve,  273- 
275;  its  conciliatory  attitude  to 
Bohemian  envoys,  288-289;  dis- 
putation at,  293-300 ;  forms  com- 
pact with  Hussites  which  ended 
wars,  311-313;  rejoices  over  battle 
of  Lipany,  337-338 


Beaufort,  Henry  of.  Cardinal  of 
Winchester,  presides  at  Council  of 
Tachov,  211 ;  quarrels  with  Ger- 
man princes,  212;  retreats  before 
Hussites,  213;  appoints  repre- 
sentatives at  2ebrdk,  218;  com- 
mands another  crusade,  234 

Benes  of  Kolowrat,  Lord,  joins 
Prokop  the  Great,  210 

Benes  of  Mokrovous,  envoy  to  Cheb, 
281 ;  delegate  of  Council  at  Basel, 
286 

Bohemia,  opposes  Sigismund  on 
account  of  Hus,  i ;  political  and 
religious  condition  of,  at  com- 
mencement of  Hussite  wars,  71- 
82;  internal  condition  after  battle 
of  Xjsti,  196-202 

Bohemians,  their  antagonism  to 
Church  of  Rome,  i,  4;  awakening 
of  democratic  spirit  among,  1-3 ; 
resent  interference  of  Council  of 
Constance,  6 ;  their  protest  against 
simony  and  immorality  of  clergy, 
15;  their  intense  hatred  of  term 
heretic,  15,  51,  56  n.,  300;  German 
crusade  against,  97-101 ;  defeat 
Germans  at  l^Tsti,  190—195 ;  put 
to  flight  German  crusaders,  209- 
214;  raid  Germany,  237-243; 
rout  Germans  at  Domdzlice,  268— 
270;  acknowledge  Sigismund  as 
king,  362 

Bohuslav  of  Schwamberg,  defends 
Tdborite  stronghold  of  Krizenec, 
149;  succeeds  Vicemilic  as  Tdbor- 
ite  commander,  1 83 ;  fatally 
wounded  in  Austrian  campaign,  184 
Bof ek  of  Miletinek,  Utraquist  general, 
arrests  Loquis,  115 ;  delivers  Loquis 
to  Ambrose,  116;  defends  Vale^ov 
brothers  against  Cenek  of  Warten- 
berg,  147-148;  conquered  by  2izka 
at  Krdlov6  Hradec,  155-156; 
chosen    captain    at    meeting    at 


373 


374 


INDEX 


Kolin,  165  ;  negotiates  with  Poland^ 
287 ;  forms  confederacy  against 
Tdborites,  325;  at  Kacin  hill,  328; 
commands  league  at  Lipany,  333  ; 
envoy  to  Brno,  352 

Bradaty,  Utraquist  knight,  leads 
Bohemian  peasants  to  reinforce- 
ment of  army  of  Prague,  46-47; 
assists  Praguers  in  attack  on 
Vysehrad,  63,  64;  killed  in  battle 
of  Usti,  194 

Branda,  Cardinal,  raises  crusade 
against  Bohemian  "  heretics,"  97- 
100;  attempts  to  raise  second 
crusade,  140;  recalled  by  papal 
see,  181-182;  replaced  by  Cardinal 
Orsini,  188 

Bfenek,  Lord,  of  Skala,  killed  at 
skirmish  of  Sudomef,  22 

Breslau,  reasons  for  Sigismund's 
visit  to,   37-38;  imperial  diet  at, 

38-39 

Brieg,  capitulates  to  Bohemian  in- 
vaders, 222 

Brno  (Briinn),  arrival  of  Sigismund 
at,  35-36;  diet  at,  350-355 

Capek  of  San,    318;   leads   Orphans 
against   Plzen,    319;    raises   troop 
of   Orphans,    330-331 ;    conquered 
at   Lipany,    334-335;     takes   part 
in  diet  at  Prague,  341 
Carlier,     Giles,     Dean    of    Cambrai, 
addresses    Council    of     Basel    on 
second    article    of    Prague,     297 ; 
accompanies   envoys    from    Basel, 
303 ;  delegate  to  Regensburg,  344 
Caslav,  assembly  of  Bohemian  parties 
at,  92-96;  visited  by  2izka,  105; 
diet  summoned  by  Korybut  at,  131 
Catherine,  Duchess  of  Saxony,  raises 

an  army  against  Bohemians,  190 
Cenek    of    Wartenberg,    Lord,    con- 
cludes armistice  with  Prague,   19; 
appointed    regent    by    Sigismund, 
36;    his   character    described,    36- 
37 ;  becomes  enemy  of  Sigismund, 
40,  41 ;  publishes  manifesto  against 
Sigismund,   41 ;  his  abhorrence  of 
religious  anarchism,  43 ;  abandons 
national    cause,     43 ;    returns    to 
Utraquism,   91 ;   appointed  regent 
of    Bohemia,    94 ;    his    feud    with 
Valecov    brothers,     147-148;    de- 
feated   at     Horide,     149;     rejoins 
Utraquists,  187;  dies  in  1425,  187 


Cesarini,  Cardinal  Julian,  entrusted 
by  Pope  with  negotiations  for 
crusade  against  Bohemia,  250; 
his  character,  250  n. ;  calls  Ger- 
mans to  arms,  263-265 ;  leads 
crusaders  against  Bohemians,  265- 
268;  his  flight  from  Domdzlice, 
268-270;  his  negotiations  to  effect 
reconciliation  between  Romanists 
and  Utraquists,  272-275;  his  letter 
to  Pope  on  agreement  of  Cheb, 
284-285;  prepares  for  reception 
of  envoys  at  Basel,  290-293;  his 
prudent  guidance  of  Council  of 
Basel,  293-303,  312 
Chalice,  emblem  of  Utraquists,  5 
Cheb,  negotiations  for  Council  of 
Basel  held  at,  261-262;  delegates 
of  Council  deliberate  at,  280-284 
Chomoutov  (Komotan),  captured  by 

2izka,  85-86 
Christian  of  Prachatice,  61,  198,  199; 
imprisoned  by  citizensof  Prague, 202 
Chval  of  Machovic,  appointed  Tabor- 
ite  captain  by  2izka,  34;  at  con- 
ference of  Prague,  75 
Compacts,    accepted    by    Council   of 

Basel,  310—312 
Conrad  of  Breslau,   Bishop,  opposes 
Bohemian  invaders  in  Silesia,  221- 
222 ;  attends  peace  conference  of 
Pressburg,  227 
Conrad    of    Vechta,    Archbishop    of 
Prague,  accepts  articles  of  Prague 
and  renounces  allegiance  to  Sigis- 
mund,   86-88;    consults    2izka   on 
fate     of     Loquis,      116;     attends 
meeting  at  Kolin,  165 
Constance,  Council  of,  its  warning  to 

heretics,  5-6 
Cracow,   negotiations  between   Hus- 
sites and  Ladislas  at,  253-255 

Detrich  of  Miletinek,  expelled  from 
Kralove  Hradec,  155,  156 

Domazlice  (Tauss),  2izka's  letter  to 
citizens  of,  29-30;  rout  of  German 
crusaders  at,  268-270 ;  effect  of 
victory  at,  271 

Eugenius  IV,  Pope,  261 ;  commands 
dissolution  of  assembly  at  Basel. 
273-275;  letter  from  Cesarini  to, 
on  agreement  of  Cheb,  284-285; 
dislikes  Council  of  Basel.  340 ; 
sends  pacific  letter  to  Prague.  359 


INDEX 


375 


Frederick,  Elector  of  Brandenburg 
receives  margravate  of  Branden- 
burg from  Sigismund,  38 ;  advises 
conciliatory  policy,  38-39 ;  his 
estrangement  from  Sigismund,  40- 
41;  unsuccessfully  attempts  to 
invade  Bohemia,  140-141;  plans 
invasion  of  Bohemia,  203-209; 
sends  pacific  letter  to  citizens  of 
Prague,  204 ;  quarrels  with  Car- 
dinal Beaufort,  21 1-2 12;  retreats 
before  Hussites,  213;  conciliatory 
attitude  towards  Bohemia,  215- 
216,  240-243;  manifesto  against 
papal  authority  ascribed  to,  249- 
250 ;  leads  crusade  against  Bo- 
hemians, 264,  267;  his  flight  from 
Domdzlice,  268-270;  attends  con- 
ference at  Cheb,  280-282 ;  his 
reluctance  to  afford  safe  conduct 
of  Bohemian  envoys  to  Basel,  288 

Frederick  of  Kolowrat,  165 

Frederick,  Elector  of  Saxony,  189; 
his  forces  defeated  at  tjsti,  190- 
195 ;  succumbs  to  Bohemian  raid, 
237-240 

Frederick  of  Straanic,  leads  Taborites 
against  Plzeii,  318 

Frederick  of  Strasnice,  envoy  to 
Ladislas,  253 

George  of  Dvur,  delegate  of  Council 
of  Basel,  286 

George  of  Recic,  delegate  of  Council 
of  Basel,  286 

Germans,  attack  Bohemian  frontier- 
towns,  89-90,  98 ;  raise  crusade 
against  Bohemian  heretics,  97- 
loi ;  defeated  by  united  Bohemian 
forces  at  tisti,  190-195;  plan 
another  invasion  of  Bohemia,  203- 
209;  dissensions  among  their  cru- 
sades, 208;  their  flight  from  third 
crusade,  210-214;  succumb  to 
Bohemian  raid,  237-240;  invaded 
by  Bohemians  in  winter  of  1429- 
1430,  240-243;  failure  of  their 
crusade  led  by  Cesarini,  263-270 

Germans  in  Bohemia,  murder  Utra- 
quists  at  Kutna  Hora,  18;  driven 
out  of  Prague,  42-43 ;  defeated 
at  battle  of  Vitkov  hill,  53-54 ; 
quarrel  with  Bohemian  allies  of 
Sigismund,  57-59;  their  national 
hatred  of  Bohemian  Slavs,  73, 
89 


Habart  of  Adlar,  envoy  of  Sigismund, 
326 

Hanus,  Lord,  of  Kolowrat,  attacks 
2izka,  21-22;  attends  peace  con- 
ference of  Prcssburg,  227;  takes 
part  in  campaign  against  Germans, 
267 

Hanus,  Duke  of  Troppau,  intercepts 
Bohemian  envoys  to  Poland,  96; 
delivers  envoys  to  Sigismund,  97 

Hasek  of  ValdStyn,  chosen  medi- 
ator in  disputes  at  Prague,  124; 
appointed  captain  of  Prague,  125; 
his  fervour  for  Utraquism,  125; 
disputes  with  Zelivo,  126-127; 
his  precautions  against  riots  fol- 
lowing execution  of  Zelivo,  127- 
128 ;  attends  meeting  at  Kolin,  165 

Henry,  Lord,  of  Plumlov,  at  siege  of 
Vysehrad,  67 ;  murder  of,  68 

Henry  Toke,  Canon  of  Magdeburg, 
addresses  conference  at  Cheb,  282, 
283 ;  represents  Council  of  Basel 
at  Prague,  305,  313;  delegate  to 
Regensburg,  344 

Henry  of  Wartenberg,  at  Kacin  hill, 
328 

Hofice,  first  battle  between  Hussite 
armies  takes  place  at,  148-149 

Hradcany  castle,  2izka  attacks 
royalist  party  near,  17;  surrenders 
to  Sigismund,  43,  44;  capitulates 
to  nationalists,  91 

Hradiste,  site  of  town  of  Tabor 
founded  by  Hussites,  7,  31-32 

Humpolecky,  Nicholas,  negotiates 
for  safe  conduct  of  Bohemian 
embassy  to  Basel,  288-289 

Hungary,  2izka's  unsuccessful  cam- 
paign in,  157-164;  second  Bo- 
hemian campaign  in,  219 

Hus,  John,  letter  to  King  of  Poland 
on  victory  of  Tannenberg,  2 ; 
effect  of  his  execution  on  people 
of  Prague,   3 

Hussite  movement,  caused  by  three 
motives,  1-3 ;  anti-dynastic  and 
revolutionary  character  of,  12-13; 
its  puritanic  character,  14,  28; 
system  of  warfare  in,  24-29 ; 
battle  of  Vitkov  hill  turning- 
point  in,  54  ;  first  discords  between 
Utraquists  and  Tdborites  in,  60- 
61,  73-77 ;  German  crusade  against 
Bohemians  in,  97-101 ;  first  battle 
in  civil  war  at  Hofice,   148;  im- 


Z7^ 


INDEX 


poitance  of  deposition  of  Korybut 
in,  202  ;  peace  negotiations  between 
Hussites  and  Sigismund  in,  226- 
234;  spread  of  Hussite  doctrines 
throughout  Europe,  245-246,  281 ; 
compact  with  Council  of  Basel 
ending,  311;  final  victory  over 
Tdborites  at  Lipany  in,  333- 
336 
Hvgzda,  John,  of  Vicemilic,  elected 
leader  of  Prague  by  John  of 
Zelivo,  121 ;  chosen  as  mediator 
in  disputes  at  Prague,  124;  loses 
position  as  captain  of  Prague,  125  ; 
subdued  by  Korybut,  138;  be- 
comes first  commander  of  Tdbor- 
ites,  182;  killed  by  an  arrow-shot, 

183 
Hynek,     Lord,     of     Kolstyn,    offers 

Bohemian    crown    to    Ladislas    of 

Poland,  79-82 ;  plans  liberation  of 

Korybut,  216-217 
Hynek,    Lord,    of    Podebrad,    joins 

2izka,  167 

Jacob  Ulk,  inveighs  against  repre- 
sentatives of  Council  of  Basel,  305  ; 
his  influence  on  Praguers,  328 

Jacobellus  of  Stfibro,  his  influence 
on  citizens  of  Prague,  61 ;  repre- 
sents university  at  Hussite  con- 
ference, 77;  opposes  John  of 
Zehvo,  124 ;  directs  ecclesiastical 
matters  in  Prague,  124;  condemns 
rioting  of  Zelivo,  125;  attends 
disputation  at  Konopist,  150 

Jakoubec  of  Bilina,  Lord,  fails  in 
attempt  to  save  life  of  Lord 
Wolkenstein,  193 

Jerome  Srol,  incites  citizens  of 
Prague  against  Korybut,  200 

Jihlava  (Iglau),  meeting  of  delegates 
of  Bohemia  and  Council  of  Basel 
at,  359-361 

John  of  Cemin,  envoy  to  Brno,  352 

John  of  Chvojnov,  117 

John  of  Hardegg,  Count  of  Retz,  his 
brave  defence  of  Retz,  184 

John,  Bishop  of  Litomysle,  his  estates 
seized  by  Utraquist  nobles,  5 ; 
attends  peace  conference  of  Press- 
burg,  227 

John  Malovec  of  Pacov,  disperses 
Tdborites,  324;   at  Lipany,  333 

John  of  Maulbronn,  delegate  to 
Council  of  Basel,  280,  282;    nego- 


tiates between  Sigismund  and 
Prokop,  283-284;  attends  assem- 
bly at  Basel,  293 ;  accompanies 
envoys  from  Basel,  303 

John  Nai,  Bishop  of  Coire,  addresses 
Council  of  Basel,  339 

John  Nider,  delegate  of  Council  of 
Basel,  280,  282 

John,  Bishop  of  Olomouc  (Olmiitz), 
leader  of  Moravian  Catholics,  154 

John  of  Opocno,  165,  166;  defeated 
by  2izka,  166 

John  of  Palomar,  Archdeacon  of 
Barcelona,  welcomes  Bohemians 
at  Basel,  291 ;  speaks  on  fourth 
article  of  Prague,  297 ;  accom- 
panies envoys  from  Basel,  303 ; 
at  diet  of  Prague,  306,  307;  at 
Council  of  Basel,  310,  312,  313; 
addresses  assembly  at  Prague,  316 ; 
negotiates  against  Tdborites,  325 ; 
opposes  Lupac  at  Basel,  339; 
offends  Rokycan  at  Regensburg, 
344-345;  principal  orator  at  Re- 
gensburg, 345  ;  and  at  Brno,  353 

John  Pardus,  leads  Tdborites  against 
Plzen,  318;  pillages  Bavaria,  321- 
322 ;  imprisoned  by  his  troops,  322 

John  Potstyn,  Lord  of  Zampach,  157 

John  of  Pribram,  defends  Utraquism 
at  Prague,  57,  61 ;  appointed 
rehgious  arbitrator  at  assembly  of 
Caslav,  95-96 ;  attends  disputa- 
tion at  Konopist,  150;  censured 
by  Nicholas  of  Pelhfimov,  180; 
imprisoned  by  citizens  of  Prague, 
202  ;  attacks  Wycliffe's  views,  236 
and  n. ;  in  discussions  at  Prague, 
316 

John  of  Reinstein  ("  Kardinal "), 
accompanies  embassy  to  Ladislas 
of  Poland,  81 ;  directs  ecclesiastical 
matters  at  Prague,  124;  attends 
disputation  at  Konopi§t,  150 

John  of  Rokycan,  afterwards  Utra- 
quist Archbishop  of  Prague,  at- 
tends disputation  at  Konopist, 
150;  appeals  to  2izka  on  behalf  of 
Prague,  172;  denounces  ritualists, 
199;  incites  citizens  of  Prague 
against  Korybut,  200;  attacks 
Tdborite  doctrines  at  Prague,  258; 
speaks  in  favour  of  peace,  275,  277, 
282;  elected  administrator  of 
Utraquist  Church,  278;  envoy  to 
Cheb,   281 ;    to  Council  of   Basel, 


INDEX 


377 


286;  his  speeches  in  Basel,  292, 
295,  296,  298-299,  303 ;  defends 
first  article  of  Prague,  293-294 ; 
addresses  diet  at  Prague,  305-307 ; 
309,  316;  his  power  over  Bohe- 
mians, 338;  reads  his  articles  at 
diet  of  Prague,  343-344;  opposes 
Palomar  at  Regensburg,  344-345 ; 
upholds  doctrines  before  Sigis- 
mund,  345-346;  concludes  truce 
with  Tdborites,  348,  349 ;  envoy  to 
Brno,  352 ;  addresses  assembly  at 
Brno,  353 ;  given  archbishopric 
of  Prague,  355,  359;  at  Jihlava, 
361 ;  receives  Sigismund  as  king 
in  Prague,  362 

John  Rohac  of  Duba,  Lord,  75,  157; 
joins  2izka's  army,  168;  fights  for 
Tdborites  at  Lipany,  334 

John  Rozvoda  of  Stakov,  betrays 
Korybut's  supposed  plot  against 
Utraquists,  199-200;  receives  high 
oflSces  in  Prague,  201-202 

John  Sadlo  of  Kostelec,  rebukes  John 
of  Zehvo,  120;  unjustly  accused 
by  Tdborites  and  beheaded, 
122 

John  Tovacovsky,  commands  Pra- 
guers  in  Moravia,  219 

John  Velvar,  delegate  of  Council  of 
Basel,  286;  his  protest  to  Sigis- 
mund, 357;  acts  as  spokesman  at 
Jihlava,  361,  362 

John  Zatecky,  negotiates  for  safe 
conduct  of  Bohemian  embassy  to 
Basel,  288-289 

John  of  Z^livo  (Seclau),  denounces 
Sigismund  in  sermon  at  Prague,  9 ; 
leads  attack  on  the  town-hall,  10; 
is  struck  by  stone,  10;  policy  of, 
12 ;  leads  citizens  of  Prague  in 
crusade  against  Roman  Church, 
43 ;  addresses  inhabitants  of  Kutna 
Hora,  90-91 ;  leads  attack  on 
churches  on  the  Hradcany,  91 ; 
appointed  religious  arbitrator  at 
assembly  of  Caslav,  94-95 ;  his 
influence  on  inhabitants  of  Prague, 
1 1 8-1 1 9,  120;  rebuked  by  Sadlo, 
120;  elects  John  HvSzda  of 
Vicemilic  captain  of  Prague,  121 ; 
compasses  death  of  Sadlo,  122; 
condemned  by  Jacobellus  of  Stfi- 
Ihto,  125;  treacherously  murdered 
at  town -hall,  126-127;  riots  follow- 
ing death  of,  127-129 


Kalteisen,  Henry,  addresses  Council  of 
Basel  on  third  article  of  Prague,  297 

KarlStyn  castle,  withstands  siege  of 
Prince  Korybut,  135-138 

Kolda  of  2ampach,  27 ;  fights  for 
Tciborites  at  Lipany,  334 

Kolin,  meeting  of  Bohemian  parties 
at.  164-166;    332-333 

KonopiSt,  Hussite  disputation  at, 
149-154 

Korybutovic,  Prince  Sigismund,  88; 
sends  indignant  letter  to  Duke  of 
Troppau,  96-97;  appointed  repre- 
sentative of  Prince  Vitold  in 
Bohemia,  130;  accepts  articles  of 
Prague,  131 ;  received  as  regent  in 
Bohemia,  131,  135;  his  relations 
with  2izka,  132-134;  fails  to  cap- 
ture Karlstyn  castle,  135-138; 
subdues  Tdborite  revolt,  138;  re- 
called to  Poland,  141-142;  sin- 
cerity of  his  attitude  towards 
Utraquism,  146-147;  returns  to 
Bohemia,  170;  assumes  command 
of  army  on  death  of  2izka,  177; 
his  successful  campaign  in  Austria, 
184;  his  pacific  influence  on 
Prague,  187-188;  defeats  Ger- 
mans at  tJsti,  190-195  ;  accused  of 
treachery  to  Bohemians,  197-202 ; 
imprisoned  by  citizens  of  Prague, 
200;  results  of  his  deposition, 
202 ;  liberated  and  escorted  from 
Bohemia,  216-217;  returns  to 
Bohemia,  234-235 ;  upholds  Hus- 
sites in  Cracow,  253-255 ;  aids 
Bohemians  against  Germans,  267; 
mediates  between  Ladislas  and 
Bohemians,  287 

Kostka,  Wm.,  Lord  of  Postupic, 
attends  embassy  to  Sigismund, 
253 ;  chief  speaker  at  Cheb,  262 ; 
delegate  of  Council  at  Basel,  286; 
negotiates  with  Poland,  287;  at 
Basel,  302 ;  forms  confederacy 
against  Tdborites,  325;  at  Kacin 
hill,  328;    envoy  to  Brno,  352 

Koufim,  Bohemian  conference  held 
at,  178-179 

Krdlove  Hradec  (Koniggratz),  occu- 
pied by  Sigismund,  41 ;  recaptured 
by  Hussites,  48;  sends  envoy  to 
persuade  Sigismund  to  accept 
articles  of  Prague,  62-63;  Bofek 
of  Miletinek  defeated  by  2izka  at, 
155-156 


378 


INDEX 


Krasa,  John,  sentenced  to  death  by 
Sigismund,  39,  39  n.-40  n. 

Krusina,  Lord,  of  Lichtenberg,  leads 
Orebites  against  Wartenberg,  44 ; 
recaptures  Krdlove  Hradec  from 
royahsts,  47-48 ;  aids  Praguers  in 
attack  on  Vysehrad,  63.  64,  67 ; 
appointed  regent  of  Bohemia,  94; 
attends  meeting  at  Kohn,  165  ;  his 
bravery  at  battle  of  tlsti,  193 

Kune§  of  Belovic,  leader  of  Orphans, 
attacks  Vozic,  182 

Kutna  Hora  (Kuttenberg),  inhuman 
persecution  of  Hussites  by  miners 
at,  17-18;  enthusiastic  reception 
of  Sigismund  at,  41 ;  submits  to 
2izka,  90-91 ;  recaptured  by  Sigis- 
mund, 104-107;  set  on  fire  by 
Sigismund,  109 ;  again  falls  to 
2izka,  1 09-1 10 ;  diet  at,  to  sanction 
agreement  of  Cheb,  285-286 

Ladislas,  King  of  Poland,  refuses 
Bohemian  crown,  60,  79-82 ;  de- 
mands release  of  Bohemian  envoys 
from  Duke  of  Troppau,  97 ;  marries 
wife  of  Utraquist  tendencies,  129- 
130;  fails  in  plan  to  attack  Bo- 
hemia with  Vitold  and  Sigismund, 
143-145;  his  perfidy  to  Bohe- 
mians, 164,  170;  rebukes  Germans 
for  cowardice  at  Ober-Glogau,  222- 
223 ;  imprisons  Korybut,  234 ; 
attempts  mediation  between 
Romanists  and  Hussites,  251-254; 
sends  representatives  to  Cheb,  261- 
262 ;  renews  amicable  relations 
with  Bohemia,  287-288 

Lenau,  German  poet,  his  poem  on 
legendary  birth  of  2izka,  11  n.,  366 

Lipany,  decisive  victory  over  Tdbor- 
ites  at,  333-336 ;  effect  of  battle  of, 
337-338 

Louis,  Duke  of  Brieg,  manifesto 
against  papal  authority  ascribed 
to,  250  and  n. 

Malesov,  scene  of  2izka's  victory  over 
Praguers,  168 

Martin  V,  Pope,  decrees  crusade 
against  Hussites  and  Wycliffites, 
40;  confounds  Adamites  with 
Hussites,  117;  his  letter  to  Vitold 
concerning  Bohemian  heretics, 
130;  fails  in  attempt  to  invade 
Bohemia,  145 ;  consents  to  Council 


of  Basel  under  fear  of  deposition, 
248-252 

Martin  Berruer,  Dean  of  Tours,  in- 
forms Council  of  Basel  of  result 
of  mission  to  Prague,  310,  338; 
represents  Council  of  Basel,  313; 
delegate  to  Regensburg,  344 

Martin  Houska  (sumamed  Loquis), 
at  the  conference  at  Prague,  75 ; 
his  fanaticism  and  hatred  of  Sacra- 
ment of  Communion,  115;  im- 
prisoned by  Lord  Ulrich  of  Jindfi- 
chuv  Hradec,  115;  his  examina- 
tion and  execution,  116 

Martin  Lupac,  envoy  to  Council  of 
Basel,  310,  318,  338;  expounds 
claims  of  Bohemians  at  Basel,  339 ; 
returns  to  Prague,  340;  envoy  to 
Brno,  352 ;  elected  suffragan 
bishop,  355 

Martin  of  Volyn,  disciple  of  Hus,  113 

Materna  of  Ronov,  defends  castle  of 
Vozic,  182 

Matthew  Louda  of  Chlumcany,  dele- 
gate of  Council  at  Basel,  286;  his 
pacific  conduct  in  Germany,  290, 
304 ;  addresses  Council  of  Basel, 
293,  310;    envoy  to  Brno,  352 

Menhard,  Lord,  of  Jindfichfiv  Hra- 
dec, attempts  mediation  between 
Sigismund  and  Utraquists,  226- 
227 ;  between  Utraquists  and 
Council  of  Basel,  308 ;  his  efforts  to 
establish  order  in  Bohemia,  315; 
defeats  Tdborites,  324;  negotiates 
against  Taborites,  325  ;  at  Lipany, 
333 ;  confers  with  Sigismund,  346- 
347 ;  envoy  to  Brno,  352 ;  acts  as 
adviser  to  Sigismund,  354,  356- 
357;    at  Jihlava,  360 

Moravia,  ^izka's  campaign  against, 
155-156 

Neisse,  defended  by  Silesians  against 

Bohemians,  222 
NSmecky  Brod,  retreat  of  Sigismund 

to,  109-110;   capitulates  to  2izka, 

IIO-III 

Nicholas  Divuc^ek,  Lord,  attacks 
2izka,  21-22;  defeated  by  2izka 
at  Ozic,  33 

Nicholas  of  Hus,  advocate  of  Utra- 
quism,  8;  gives  military  training 
to  Hussite  army,  9,  27;  appointed 
Tdborite  captain  by  2izka.  34 ; 
defends    Tdbor    against    royalists. 


INDEX 


379 


49 ;  assists  at  attack  on  Vygehrad, 
63  ;  refuses  to  attend  Hussite  con- 
ference at  Prague,  74 ;  protests 
against  introduction  of  foreigner 
to  Bohemian  throne,  78 ;  dies  as 
result  of  accident,  81 

Nicholas  Krchlebec,  Burgrave  of 
Zvikov,  at  Lipany,  333,  334-335 

Nicholas  of  Padafov,  represents 
Tdborites  at  diet  of  Prague,  341 

Nicholas,  Bishop  of  Pelhfimov,  acts 
as  Tdborite  spokesman  at  Hussite 
conference  at  Prague,  75-77 ; 
pacific  views  of,  115;  attends  dis- 
putation at  Konopist,  150;  cen- 
sures John  of  Pribram,  180;  up- 
holds views  of  WyclifiEe,  236;  en- 
voy to  Cheb,  281 ;  delegate  of 
Council  of  Basel,  286;  defends 
second  article  of  Prague,  294 ; 
again  addresses  Council,  299;  at 
diet  of  Prague,  306 

Niirnberg,  assembly  of  Germans  at, 
to  suppress  heresy  in  Bohemia,  97 ; 
imperial  diet  at,  262-263. 

Ober-Glogau,  captured  by  Bohemian 
invaders,  220-221 

Orebites,  their  outrages  against  ad- 
herents of  Roman  Church,  43  ;  aid 
Praguers  against  Sigismund,  43 ; 
attack  the  Vysehrad  on  behalf  of 
Praguers,  63 

Orphans,  Tdborite  party  formed  after 
death  of  2izka,  177-178,  182;  at 
theological  conference  of  Prague, 
257-261 ;  quarrel  with  Prokop, 
276-277;  fight  for  Ladislas,  314- 
315;  anarchical  conduct  of,  324; 
confederacy  formed  against,  325 ; 
decisive  victory  over,  at  Lipany, 
333-336 

Orsini,  Cardinal  Giordano,  becomes 
papal  legate  in  Germany,  188; 
plans  new  crusade  against  Bo- 
hemia, 188-189 

Otho,  Duke  of  Brunswick,  208 

Otho  of  Trier,  Archbishop,  commands 
German  forces  against  Bohemia, 
206 ;    suggests  conference,  208 

Peter,  Bishop  of  Augsburg,  302 
Peter  Konopist,  Lord  of  Sternberg, 

attacks   2izka,    21-22 ;    routed   at 

Pofic  by  2izka,  46 
Peter  Mladenovic,  75,  198,  199;    im- 


prisoned by  citizens  of  Prague, 
202 

Peter  Payne  (surnamed  EngliS), 
directs  ecclesiastical  matters  in 
Prague,  124;  attends  disputation 
at  Konopist,  150;  and  at  2ebrak, 
218;  at  peace  conference  of  Press- 
burg,  227;  upholds  views  of  Wy- 
cliffe,  236;  envoy  to  Ladislas,  253  ; 
envoy  to  Cheb,  281 ;  delegate  of 
Council  at  Basel,  286;  defends 
fourth  article  of  Prague,  295 ;  at 
diet  of  Prague,  306 ;  acts  as  medi- 
ator in  Prague,  348,  349 

Peter  Zmrzlik  of  Svoj§in,  originates 
plan  for  reconciliation  of  Hussite 
parties,  74 

Philibert,  Bishop  of  Coutance,  302 ; 
represents  Council  of  Basel  at 
Prague,  304-307.  309,  313.  3^6; 
delegate  to  Regensburg,  344;  at 
reconciliation  in  Jihlava,  361 

Philipp,  Taborite  preacher,  expels 
priests  from  Utraquist  churches  in 
Prague,  119 

Pipa  of  Ozora,  routed  by  2izka  at 
Pofic,  46;  institutes  massacres  in 
Moravia,  102;  advises  retreat  from 
Kutna  Hora,  108;  defeated  by 
Zizka,  109 

Pius  II,  Pope,  311 

Plzen  (Pilsen),  advanced  on  by 
Taborites,  19;  surrendered  to 
Sigismund  by  2izka,  21;  capitu- 
lates to  2izka,  84-85  ;  attacked  by 
2izka,  167;  besieged  by  Taborites, 
318 

Poland,  its  sympathy  with  Hussite 
movement,  2 ;  hostile  attitude 
towards  Sigismund,  39;  its  tem- 
porary friendship  with  Bohemia, 
286-288,  314 

Prague,  demonstration  by  inhabit- 
ants on  death  of  Hus,  3  ;  riots  in, 
9-10 ;  renewal  of  riots  on  death  of 
Venceslas,  13;  Carthusian  monas- 
tery destroyed  in,  14;  Taborites 
advance  upon,  16-17;  captured 
by  2izka,  17;  concludes  armistice 
with  Sophia,  19 ;  sends  envoys  to 
Sigismund  at  Brno,  35-36;  pub- 
lishes manifesto  against  Germans, 
42-43 ;  its  envoys  received  with 
hostility  by  Sigismund,  44;  citi- 
zens begin  fortifications,  44-45 ; 
appeals  to  Taborites  for  help,  45 ; 


38o 


INDEX 


its  dissensions  with  Tdborites,  49, 
60-61 ;  repulse  of  enemy  at,  49-55  ; 
offers  Bohemian  crown  to  Ladislas 
of  Poland,  60 ;  its  citizens  victor- 
iously besiege  fortress  of  VySehrad, 
61—70;  triumphal  entry  of  2izka 
into,  103  ;  internal  religious  troubles 
in  1421  and  1422,  112-129;  recog- 
nises Korybut  as  regent,  131, 
135;  ^izka's  letter  to  citizens  of, 
133-134;  citizens  of,  depose  and 
imprison  Korybut,  199-201 ;  di- 
vides on  recognition  of  Sigismund 
as  king,  235 ;  Hussite  theological 
controversy  at,  236-237,  257-261 ; 
diets  at,  275-278,  279-280,  304- 
307.  316,  341,  349;  captured  by 
Bohemian  league,  328-329;  re- 
ceives Sigismund  as  king,  362 

Prague,  Articles  of,  meeting  of 
Utraquists  and  Romanists  for 
discussion  of,  55-57;  accepted 
by  Archbishop  of  Prague,  86-88; 
accepted  by  Korybut,  131 

Prague,  University  of,  its  teaching 
opposed  to  Tdborite  innovations, 
45 ;  its  famous  articles  to  effect 
conciliation  in  Hussite  wars,  55- 
57;  failure  of  its  conciliatory 
attempt,  57 ;  defends  Roman  ritual 
against  Taborite  teaching,  114; 
attacked  by  disciples  of  Zelivo, 
128-129;  its  divines  at  disputa- 
tion of  Konopist,  150—154;  theo- 
logical conference  at,  257-261 

Pressburg,  peace  negotiations  be- 
tween Sigismund  and  Utraquists  at, 
227-234 

Pfibrik  of  Klenov,  Hussite  general, 
captures  Stf ibro,  202-203 ;  defends 
Stfibro  against  German  crusaders, 
209;  his  anarchical  conduct,  325; 
abandons  Tdborites,  326 

Prokop,  Tdborite  preacher,  expels 
Utraquist  priests  from  churches 
of  Prague,  119 

Prokop  "  the  Great,"  commander  of 
Tdborites,  his  early  life  and  char- 
acter, 185-187;  defeats  Germans 
at  Usti,  190,  195  ;  attacks  Victorin 
of  Podibrad,  196-197;  marches  on 
Plzefi,  210;  invades  Silesia,  219- 
225 ;  at  peace  conference  at  Press- 
burg, 226-234 '  ^^s  views  on  the 
Sacrament,  236-237;  his  successful 
winter  campaign  in  Germany,  240- 


243;  writes  defence  of  his  faith, 
244-248 ;  refuses  to  accept  Roman- 
ist decrees,  253-254;  marches 
against  German  crusaders,  266; 
accused  by  Orphans,  276-277; 
attends  diet  at  Prague,  279; 
demands  safe  conduct  to  Cheb,  281 ; 
informs  Sigismund  of  result  of 
conference  at  Cheb,  283-284 ;  dele- 
gate of  Council  of  Basel,  286;  ad- 
dresses assembly  at  Basel,  294 ; 
Cesarini's  admiration  of,  298; 
addresses  diet  at  Prague,  309, 
316;  attempts  to  establish  order  in 
Bohemia,  315;  before  Plzeii,  319- 
326;  imprisoned  by  Taborites  at 
Plzen,  322;  captures  Prague,  328- 
329;  his  letter  to  Prokop  the 
Lesser,  329-330;  assumes  com- 
mand at  Lipany,  334;  falls  in 
battle,  335 

Prokop  of  Kladrub,  attends  religious 
conference  at  2ebrak,  218 

Prokop  of  Plzen,  his  unjustifiable 
attack  on  Tdborites  at  Prague, 
75-76;  imprisoned  by  citizens  of 
Prague,  202 ;  envoy  to  Council  of 
Basel,  310 

Prokupek  (Prokop  the  Lesser),  com- 
mands Orphans,  219;  attacks 
forces  of  Sigismund  at  Tymau, 
255-256;  attends  diet  at  Prague, 
279;  receives  letter  from  Prokop 
the  Great,  329-330;  at  Lipany, 
334 ;   falls  in  battle,  335 

Ptacek  of  Pirkstyn,  envoy  to  Brno, 
352 

Puta  of  Castolovice,  165,  166;  de- 
feated by  2izka,  166;  fights 
against  Bohemians  on  behalf  of 
Silesians,  221-222;  attends  peace 
conference  of  Pressburg,  227 

Regensburg,   340,   342 ;    embassy  to 

Sigismund  at,  344-345 
Rosenberg  family,  their  antagonism 

to  Venceslas,  1 1 

Sacrament,  in  the  two  kinds  {see 
Utraquism),  4;  Hussite  dispute 
concerning  Real  Presence  in,  236- 

237 
St.  Mary  Magdalene,  celebration  by 

Hussites  on  feast  of,  8 
St.  Valentine,  Diet  of,  351-352 
Sigismund.    King,    opposed    by    Bo- 


INDEX 


381 


hemian  nobles,  i,  6;  hostile 
attitude  towards  Hussites,  6-7; 
described  Zfilivo  as  dragon  of 
Revelation,  9,  13;  position  in 
regard  to  Bohemian  throne  on 
death  of  Venceslas,  13;  condi- 
tional invitation  to  throne,  14-15; 
his  evasive  answer,  15;  refuses 
reconciliation  with  Bohemia,  19; 
arrives  in  Brno  to  claim  Bohemian 
throne,  35;  hostile  attitude  to- 
wards envoys  from  Prague,  35- 
36;  proceeds  to  Breslau,  37; 
summons  imperial  diet,  38-39; 
rouses  hostility  of  Polish  envoys, 
39;  supports  papal  bull  against 
Hussites  and  Wycliffites,  40;  his 
estrangement  from  Frederick  of 
Brandenburg,  40 ;  commences 
campaign  against  Bohemians,  40- 
41 ;  his  success  at  Krdlove  Hradec, 
41 ;  denounced  strongly  by  CenSk 
of  Wartenberg,  42 ;  receives  sur- 
render of  Hradcany  and  Vysehrad 
castles,  43-44;  declares  hostility 
to  envoys  of  Prague,  44;  retires 
on  Stara  Boleslav,  46 ;  his  cruelties 
on  march  to  Prague,  47 ;  his  hope- 
ful position  before  Prague,  48; 
his  defeat  at  Vitkov,  52-55;  his 
courage  called  in  question,  54-55, 
59 ;  his  camp  breaks  up  for  various 
causes,  57-59;  crowned  as  King 
of  Bohemia,  59-60;  refuses  to 
accept  articles  of  Prague  and 
insults  envoy  of  Kralove  Hradec, 
62-63;  his  forces  defeated  at 
VySehrad,  63-70;  plot  against 
throne  of,  77-83 ;  makes  in- 
effectual attempt  to  attack  2izka, 
83-84;  his  deposition  announced 
at  assembly  of  Caslav,  93 ;  reduces 
Moravia  to  submission,  101-102; 
enters  Bohemia,  103;  his  victor- 
ious campaign  at  Kutna  Hora, 
104-108 ;  sets  fire  to  Kutna  Hora, 
109;  retreats  to  N^mecky  Brod, 
109-111;  defeated  by  2izka  at 
Ngmeck^  Brod,  iio-iii;  un- 
successfully attempts  invasion  of 
Bohemia,  139-141 ;  forms  alliance 
with  Vitold  and  Ladislas  to  attack 
Bohemia,  143-145;  Bohemians 
renew  negotiations  with,  164-166; 
story  of  his  attempt  at  reconcilia- 
tion   with    2iika,     169;     accuses 


Germans  of  heretical  sympathies, 
i8i;  retreats  before  united  Hus- 
site forces,  184;  his  relations  with 
Germany,  215;  Hussites  attempt 
pacific  negotiations  with,  at  Press- 
burg,  225-234;  sends  representa- 
tives to  Prague,  257;  and  to  Cheb, 
261-262 ;  his  attitude  of  bravado 
after  defeat  at  Domdzlice,  272, 
273 ;  Prokop's  letter  to,  about 
negotiations  at  Cheb,  283-284 ; 
negotiates  with  Tdborites,  326; 
effect  of  battle  of  Lipany  on,  337; 
arrives  at  Basel,  340;  receives 
representatives  of  Bohemia  and 
Council  of  Basel,  345 ;  secretly 
negotiates  with  Taborites,  350; 
attends  diet  at  Brno,  353 ;  con- 
ciliatory negotiations  with  Bo- 
hemians, 354-362 ;  arrives  at 
Jihlava,  360;  received  as  king  in 
Prague,  362 

Silesia,  its  raids  on  Bohemia,  89, 
98;  Bohemian  invasion  in,  219- 
225 

Simon  Olesnicky,  Bishop  of  Cracow, 
141 

Simon  of  Tisnov,  attends  religious 
conference  at  2ebrak,  218 

Slane,  aids  Praguers  against  royalists, 
46 ;   cruelty  of  Sigismund  at,  47 

Sophia,  Queen,  favours  Hussite  cause, 
3-4,14;  becomes  regent,  14;  con- 
cludes armistice  with  Praguers, 
19;    meets    Sigismund    at    Brno, 

35 

Stallbogner,  Hans,  on  dissensions  of 
German  crusaders,  208 

Stara  Boleslav  (Alt  Bunzlau),  Sigis- 
mund retires  to,  46 

Stojkovic,  John,  Bishop  of  Ragusa, 
welcomes  Bohemians  in  Basel, 
291 ;  addresses  Council  of  Basel, 
297,  299 

Stfibro,  captured  by  Hussites  under 
Pfibrik  of  Klenov,  202-203;  held 
by  Pfibrek  of  Klenov  against 
German  crusaders,  209 

Sudomgf,  royalist  party  defeated  by 
2izka  at,  22-23 

Svidrigal,  Grand  Duke,  succeeds  Vi- 
told, 286 

Svoj§e  of  Zahradka,  betrays  Kory- 
but's  supposed  plot  against  Utra- 
quists,  199-200;  receives  high 
ofi&ces  in  Prague,  201-202 


382 


INDEX 


Tdbor,  meeting-place  of  Hussites 
at  Usti,  7 :  name  given  derisively 
to  mine-shaft  at  Kutna  Hora  by 
miners,  i8;  new  stronghold  of, 
transferred  to  Hradiste,  20,  31- 
32  ;   reception  of  2izka  at,  31-33 

Taborites,  their  meeting  at  U  Kfizku 
on  death  of  Sigismund,  15-16; 
advance  on  Prague,  16-17;  march 
to  Plzen,  19;  found  new  city,  20, 
31-32;  their  four  leaders,  33-34; 
aid  Praguers  against  Sigismund, 
45 ;  their  dissension  with  citizens 
of  Prague,  49,  60-61 ;  their  teach- 
ings, 61 ;  vacate  Prague  for  S. 
Bohemia,  61 ;  their  disputes  with 
Utraquists,  73-77 ;  accusations 
brought  against  at  Hussite  con- 
ference at  Prague,  75-77;  send 
Koranda  as  envoy  to  Praguers, 
112-114;  fanatics  among,  118; 
their  statements  at  disputation  at 
Konopist,  150-154;  effect  of  2izka's 
death  on,  177;  divide  into  two 
parties,  177-178,  182;  their  futile 
conferences  at  2dic,  Koufim  and 
Prague,  1 78-1 81;  reply  to  Roky- 
can's  attack  at  Prague  conference, 
257-261 ;  anarchical  conduct  of, 
324;  confederacy  formed  against, 
325;  decisive  victory  at  Lipany 
over,  333-336 

Tachov,  operations  near,  in  German 
crusade,  209-214;  failure  of  Ger- 
mans to  capture,  267-268 

Tannenberg,  victory  of  Poles  at,  2 

Thomas  Ebendorf  of  Haselbach, 
delegate  to  Regensburg,  344 

Tyrnau,  Hussite  victory  at,  255-256 

U  Kfizku,  meeting-place  of  Taborites, 
15-16 

Ulrich,  Lord  of  Hradec  Jindfichuv 
(Neuhaus),  attempts  reconciliation 
between  Hussite  parties,  74-77; 
arrest  Martin  Loquis,  115 

Ulrich,  Lord,  of  Rosenberg,  sanctions 
manifesto  against  Sigismund,  42 ; 
repulsed  by  Hussites  at  Tdbor,  46 ; 
murders  Utraquists  at  Tdbor,  63 ; 
defeated  by  2izka,  70 ;  appointed 
regent  of  Bohemia,  94;  attends 
peace  conference  of  Pressburg, 
227;  attempts  to  establish  order 
in  Bohemia,  315;  negotiates 
against  Tdborites,  325 ;    at   Kacin 


hill,     328;     reinforces     Bohemian 
league,    331,     332;     confers    with 
Sigismund,     346-347;      envoy    to 
Brno,  253 
Ulrich,  Lord,  of  Usti,  killed  by  Zizka, 

33 

Ulrich,  priest  of  Znoymo,  delegate 
of  Council  at  Basel,  286;  defends 
third  article  of  Prague,  295 

Ursovec,  John  of,  envoy  to  Cheb, 
281 

tJsti,  on  the  Luznice,  meeting-place 
of  Hussites,  7,  20 

Usti  nad  Laben,  Bohemians  defeat 
German  forces  at,  190-195 

Utraquism,  fundamental  doctrine  of 
adherents  of  Hus,  4-5 

Utraquists,  their  origin,  4-5 ;  their 
priests  expelled  from  Prague,  7 ; 
send  conditional  invitation  to 
Sigismund,  14-15;  their  first  dis- 
putes with  Taborites,  60-64,  73- 
77;  expulsion  of  their  priests  by 
followers  of  John  of  Zelivo,  118- 
119 

Vacha  of  Rican,  his  bravery  at  battle 
of  tJsti,  193 

Valecov,  Bartos  and  Bernard,  their 
feud  with  Cenek  of  Wartenberg, 
147-148 

Vavak  of  Hradec,  120 

Velek  Koudelnik,  attacks  Sigismund, 
255;    killed  at  Tyrnau,  256 

Venceslas,  King,  expresses  anger  at 
execution  of  Hus,  3-4 ;  his 
treacherous  conduct  towards  Hus- 
sites, 7 ;  abandons  Church  reform, 
7,  8;  begs  aid  against  heretics 
from    Sigismund,    13;     his    death, 

13 

Venceslas,  Lord,  of  Duba,  chamber- 
lain   of    Sigismund,    20;     secures 

surrender  of  Plzeii  from  2izka, 
21 

Venceslas  Koranda,  parish  priest  of 
Plzen,  preaches  at  U  Kfizku,  15-16 ; 
advises  march  on  Plzen,  19;  joins 
2izka  on  journey  to  Tdbor,  21 ; 
chosen  as  Tdborite  envoy  to 
Prague,  112;  preaches  against  use 
of  vestments  in  St.  Mary-of-the- 
Snow,  Prague,   113 

Venceslas  of  Troppau,  attempts  to 
stem  advance  of  Bohemian  in- 
vaders, 220 


INDEX 


383 


Victorin  of  Podobrad,  aids  Pragucrs 
in  attack  on  VySehrad,^  63,  64 ; 
his  bravery  at  battle  of  Usti,  193; 
unites  with  Korybut,  ig6 

Vitkov  hill,  its  strategic  importance, 
49 ;  its  successful  defence  by 
2izka,  52-54 ;  bravery  of  Tdborite 
women  at  attack  of,  53 

Vitold,  Prince  of  Lithuania,  his  ambi- 
tion and  lack  of  religious  scrupulo- 
sity, 60,  79-80,  130;  accepts  Bo- 
hemian crown,  82  ;  proclaimed  King 
of  Bohemia,  96;  appoints  Kory- 
but his  representative  in  Bohemia, 
130;  his  outrageous  letter  to 
Bohemians,  142-143;  forms  alli- 
ance with  Sigismund  to  attack 
Bohemia,  143-145;  dies  in  1431, 
286 

Vozic,  capitulates  to  Taborites  and 
Orphans,  182-183 

Vysehrad  castle,  surrendered  to 
Sigismund  by  CenSk  of  Warten- 
berg,  43-44;  besieged  and  cap- 
tured by  citizens  of  Prague,  61-70 

William,  Duke  of  Bavaria,  attends 
peace  conference  at  Pressburg, 
227 ;  protector  of  Council  of  Basel, 
300-301,  302,  313 

Wolkenstein,  Lord  of,  killed  in 
retreat  from  tJsti,  193 

Women  of  Bohemia,  their  emanci- 
pation, 2-3 ;  their  utility  in  Hussite 
army,  21,  28;  their  assistance  at 
Sudomef,  23 ;  strengthen  fortifica- 
tions of  Prague,  45 ;  expel  nuns 
from  Prague,  49 ;  their  bravery  at 
attack  of  Vitkov  hill,  53 ;  their 
cruelty  at  massacre  of  Chomoutov, 
86;  intervene  on  behalf  of 
Utraquist  priests  at  town-hall  of 
Prague,  11 9-1 20 

2atec,    (Saaz)   successfully   defended 

by    Bohemians    against    German 

crusaders,  99-101 
Zbyndk  of  Buchov,  appointed  Tdbor- 

ite  captain  by  2izka,  34 
Zbynev,    Bishop   of  Cracow,   insults 

Bohemian  envoys,  255 
2ebrak,  religious  conference  at,  218 
2izka,  John,  of  Trocnov,  takes  part 

in    battle    at    Tannenberg,    211; 

leads   citizens   of   Prague   against 

town-hall,    10;     early   history   of. 


iio-ii;       captures     Prague,      7; 
marches   on    PlzeA,    19;     his   cold 
reception  at  PlzeA,  20 ;   marches  to 
Tdbor,  21 ;  is  attacked  by  royalists 
en    route,    21-22;     his    successful 
skirmish  at  SudomSf,   22-23  >    ^is 
system    of    warfare,    22-29 1      his 
character   vindicated,    28-31 ;     his 
letter  to  citizens  of  Domdzlice,  29- 
30;     enters   stronghold   of   Tdbor, 
31 ;      organises     armed     force     at 
Tdbor,  32  ;   defeats  Nicholas  Divu- 
cek  at  Ozic,   33 ;    fortifies  Tdbor, 
33 ;     marches   on    Prague,    45-46 ; 
routs  royalists  at  Pofic,   46;    dis- 
plays military  genius  before  Prague, 
49;     cosmopolitan    nature    of    his 
army,    49-51 ;     his   successful    de- 
fence of  Vitkov  hill  turning-point 
of    war,    52-54;     vacates    Prague 
for     S.     Bohemia,     61 ;       defeats 
Ulrich  of  Rosenberg  and  occupies 
Prachatice,  70 ;  attends  conference 
at    Prague    for    reconciliation    be- 
tween   Tdborites   and    Utraquists, 
74-77;     captures  royalist  fortress 
of  Krasikov,  83 ;    concludes  treaty 
with     Plzen,     84-85;       instigates 
massacre    at   Chomoutov,    85-86; 
secures  entire  surrender  of  Kutna 
Hora,    90-91 ;     appointed    regent 
of  Bohemia,  94;    becomes  totally 
blind,      98;      enters      Prague      in 
triumph,   103;    defeated  by  Sigis- 
mund  at   Kutna   Hora,    104-107; 
his    respite    at     Kolin,     107-108; 
recaptures  Kutna  Hora,   109-110; 
defeats    Sigismund    at     Nemecky 
Brod,  no;  is  dubbed  knight,  no; 
condemns  Loquis  to  death,  117;  his 
inexorable  treatment  of  fanatics, 
118;    attempts  to  establish  order 
in  Prague,  123-125;    his  relations 
with  Korybut,  132-134;   his  letter 
to     Praguers,     133-134;      defeats 
Wartenberg  at  Hofice,  first  battle 
of  civil  war,  148-149;    his  tactics 
in  battle,  148-149;   invades  Mora- 
via,   154-155;     defeats    Bofek    of 
Miletinek  at  Kralove  Hradec,  155- 
156;    publishes  his  regulations  for 
war,  156,  367-371 ;  incurs  hatred  of 
Taborites,    157,    and  n. ;     his  un- 
successful campaign  in  and  retreat 
from  Hungary,   157-164;    defeats 
royalists  at  Skalice,  166;    attacks 


384  INDEX 

Plzeft,  167 ;  defeats  Praguers  at  ceives  deputation  from  Prague, 
MaleSov,  168;  story  of  Sigismund's  172;  marches  to  Moravia,  173; 
attempt  at  reconciliation  with,  169;  dies  of  plague,  173-174;  his  re- 
subdues  cities  on  the  Elbe,  169;  mains  taken  to  Krdlovfi  Hradec 
marches  on  Prague,   170-171;    re-  and  transferred  to  Caslav,  175-176 


Richard  Clay  &*  Sons,  Lin^ittd,  Londcm  and  Bunsay. 


s 


DB  2105  .L8  IMS  .  ^  ,,.  _ 
Lutzow.  Franz  Heinnch  Hiero 
The  Hussite  wars 


POHTifiCAL.  insnrurB 

OF    MED!AtIVAL    STUDIES 

59     OUEEK'S     PARK 

ic^o^'To    "i     Canada 


