Title: Baptist Confessions of Faith
Creator: William Joseph McGlothlin (1867-1933)
Publisher: Philadelphia: American Baptist Publication Society, 1911
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: 1911 publication date places this well out of US
  copyright (115 years before this session, 2026); no explicit
  archive.org copyright-status field present on this item, so the
  determination rests on the stated publication date alone, per this
  project's standing PD-by-date rule.
Source: Internet Archive item baptistconfessio00mcgl
  (archive.org/details/baptistconfessio00mcgl), fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file, 2026-09-24,
  this session.
Content note: A broad compendium of Baptist confessional documents, not
  an Anabaptist-specific work. Vendored for pp. 3-9, the Schleitheim
  Confession (1527) - McGlothlin's own text states this is "a
  translation of his [Zwingli's Latin] translation," not a direct
  German-to-English rendering; the original German articles were never
  printed and survive only in archival manuscript, so this PD English
  version is once-removed from the German original. The rest of the
  volume (other Baptist bodies' confessions, unrelated to Anabaptism) is
  present in this same file but not independently reviewed this pass.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors,
  including badly garbled front-matter running headers (repeated
  library-stamp OCR noise, e.g. "^nJlN 5 1911"); the Schleitheim section
  itself (pp. 3-9) was not individually quality-checked this pass.

!*  JUN  5  1911  ♦] 


BX  6335  .M3  1911 
McGlothlin,  William  Joseph, 

1867-1933 
Baptist  confessions  of  faith 


BAPTIST 
CONFESSIONS 

OF 


^nJlN  5  1911 


'r^** 


FAITH 


y 


By 


W.  J.  McGLOTHLIN,  Ph.  D.,  D.  D. 

Professor  of  Church  History  in  the 
Southern  Baptist  Theological  Seminary 

Author  of 
"A  Guide  to  the  Study  of  Church  History,"  etc. 


t( 


Die  warhayt  ist  untodtlich.'*^ — Hubmater 


PHILADELPHIA 

AMERICAN  BAPTIST  PUBLICATION  SOCIETY 

BOSTON  CHICAGO  ST.  LOUIS 

TORONTO,  CAN. 


^flCJH  SE«t»^ 


Copyright  191 1  by 
A.  J.  ROWLAND,  Secretary 


Published  March,  191X 


PREFACE 


An  effort  has  been  made  to  bring  together  in  the  fol- 
lowing pages  the  most  important  statements  of  doctrine 
put  forth  by  the  various  bodies  of  Baptists  scattered 
throughout  the  world.  Material  was  in  hand  to  make 
the  volume  more  complete,  but  the  limits  of  space  forbade 
the  incorporation  of  a  few  Confessions  and  catechisms 
which  might  have  been  expected.  It  is  believed,  however, 
that  no  Confession  of  much  importance  which  had  any 
large  circulation  in  any  language  has  been  omitted.  The 
volume  presents  all  the  material  necessary  to  acquaint 
one  with  the  doctrinal  position  of  the  Baptists  throughout 
the  world,  and  makes  an  impressive  presentation  of  their 
substantial  unity,  with  some  exceptions,  on  the  more  im- 
portant points  of  our  religion.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that 
doctrinal  differences  have  been  melting  away  until  there 
is  probably  a  greater  measure  of  agreement  at  present 
than  ever  before. 

Special  thanks  for  valuable  assistance  are  due  to  the 
management  of  Colgate  Library,  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  which 
contains  the  best  collection  of  the  sources  of  Baptist 
history  which  can  be  found  in  this  country;  to  Rev.  W. 
T.  Whitley,  D.  D.,  Preston,  England;  to  Rev.  Claus 
Peters,  Hamburg,  Germany;  to  Rev.  C.  E.  Benander, 
Stockholm,  Sweden;  to  Rev.  H.  Andru,  Compiegne, 
France;  and  to  others  who  have  in  one  way  or  another 
aided  in  the  discovery  of  material  or  the  gathering  of 
information.  Some  details  as  to  editions  of  some  of  the 
English  Confessions  have  been  gleaned  from  the  unpub- 


vl  Preface 

lished  work  of  the  late  John  Taylor,  of  Northampton, 
on  **  European  Confessions  of  Faith."  In  the  case  of  the 
English  Confessions  whose  original  editions  could  be 
found  the  effort  has  been  made  to  reproduce  the  text  as 
nearly  as  possible  exactly,  in  all  its  inconsistencies  of  spell- 
ing, punctuation,  capitalization,  etc.  The  desire  has  been 
to  let  the  reader  see  the  Confession  as  it  first  appeared 
to  the  world.  It  would  be  vain  to  hope  that  the  work 
is  wholly  without  mistakes  where  the  reproduction  of 
such  a  mass  of  details  is  involved ;  but  no  labor  has 
been  spared  in  an  effort  to  make  it  as  accurate  as  pos- 
sible.    The  translations,  except  that  from  the  Swedish, 

are  by  the  author. 

W.  J.  McGlothlin. 

Southern  Baptist  Theological  Seminary, 
Louisville,  Ky.,  October,  1910. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

FAGB 

Introduction  ix-xii 

PART  ONE 

The  Anabaptists  1-23 

Earliest  Anabaptist  Articles 2-9 

Other  Articles  from  Bern 9-13 

Peter  Riedemann's  Rechenschaft 13-18 

Appeal  to  the  Lords  of  Lichtenstein 18-23 

PART  TWO 

The  Mennonites  24-49 

Earliest  Confession,  Circa  1580 24-25 

A  Brief  Confession,  etc 26-48 

Other  Confessions   48-49 

PART  THREE 

The  English  Baptists 50-291 

A.  Arminian  Baptists   54-167 

A  Short  Confession  of  Faith 54-66 

Confession  of  Faith  of  Certain  English 

People  Living  at  Amsterdam 66-84 

A  Declaration  of  Faith  of  English  Peo- 
ple Remaining  at  Amsterdam 85-93 

The  Faith  and  Practice  of  Thirty  Con- 
gregations    95-109 

The  Standard  Confession  of  1660 109-122 

vii 


viii  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

The  "Orthodox  Creed,"   1678 122-161 

Somerset  Confession   161 

Trinitarian  Articles   162 

Present  Doctrinal  Position 163 

The  New  Connection 164-167 

B.  Calvinistic  Baptists 168-291 

First  London  Confession 168-201 

A  Confession  of  the  Faith  of  Several 

Churches  of  Christ 202-215 

Assembly  or  Second  London  Confession. 215-289 

Private  Confessions  289-290 

Present  Doctrinal  Position  of  the  Eng- 
lish Baptists 290-291 

PART  FOUR 

American  Baptists   293-329 

A.  Calvinistic  Baptists    293-307 

The  Philadelphia  Confession 293-299 

The  New  Hampshire  Confession 299-307 

Catechisms   307 

B.  Arminian  Baptists 308-329 

A  Treatise  on  the  Faith  of  the  Free  Will 

Baptists 310-329 

PART  FIVE 

Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities 330-368 

German  Baptist  Confession 330-354 

French  Baptist  Confession 354-364 

Swedish   Baptists    364-367 

In  Other  Lands 368 


INTRODUCTION 


Primitive  Christianity  drew  up  no  Confessions  of  Faith. 
Its  interests  and  efforts  were  rehgious,  ethical,  and  prac- 
tical rather  than  theological.  Repentance  toward  God, 
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  right  living  were  the 
requirements  of  early  days.  As  time  passed  the  intel- 
lectual aspects  of  Christianity  came  into  more  and  more 
prominence  as  a  result  of  its  contact  with  Greek  philos- 
ophy and  the  various  religions  of  the  Greek  and  Roman 
world.  As  a  consequence  of  the  struggle  with  this 
thought  without  and  within  the  church  the  first  great 
group  of  creeds  was  produced  in  the  third,  fourth,  fifth, 
and  sixth  centuries.  The  earliest  is  the  so-called  Apostles' 
Creed,  which  is  not  the  product  of  any  ecclesiastical  coun- 
cil, but  grew  up  in  the  daily  needs  of  practical  Christian 
work.  Traces  of  this  creed  can  be  found  as  early  as 
A.  D.  200,  and  it  reached  substantially  its  present  form 
in  the  fourth  century.  It  is  almost  wholly  a  Confession 
of  concrete  facts  rather  than  of  doctrines. 

The  next  creed  was  drawn  up  by  the  first  world  coun- 
cil of  Christians,  held  at  the  call  of  the  Emperor  Con- 
stantine  at  Nicsea  In  Asia  Minor  in  A.  D.  325.  It 
defined  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  the  internal  relations 
of  the  Godhead,  in  that  form  which  has  been  called 
orthodox  by  all  parties  to  this  day. 

The  third  important  creed  was  formulated  by  the  Ecu- 
menical Council  of  Chalcedon  in  Asia  Minor  in  A.  D.  451. 
It  defines  the  interrelation  of  the  human  and  divine 
natures  In  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  in  that  form  which, 

ix 


Introduction 


with  some  variations,  has  been  regarded  as  the  orthodox 
doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ  to  the  present  time. 

The  so-called  Athanasian  Creed  is  a  sort  of  epigram- 
matic expansion  of  that  of  Nicaea,  and  was  widely  in- 
fluential. Its  origin  is  obscure,  but  it  was  probably 
formulated  in  the  sixth  century. 

These  are  the  important  creeds  of  the  patristic  period. 
They  are  all  Oriental  and  Asiatic  in  origin.  They  are 
brief,  dealing  with  only  one  phase  of  doctrine,  making 
no  attempt  to  present  a  complete  system  of  theological 
truth.  They  are  the  product  of  the  Greek  mind,  written 
in  the  Greek  language ;  but  at  the  time  of  their  production 
they  expressed  the  convictions  of  the  great  majority  of 
Christians  in  the  then  known  world.  They  were  the 
proclamation  of  the  great  church,  excluding  heathendom, 
Judaism,  and  the  smaller  Christian  parties.  They  have 
commanded  the  assent  of  the  great  majority  of  Chris- 
tians throughout  the  centuries. 

Creed-making  now  ceased  for  nearly  a  thousand  years, 
till  the  beginning  of  the  theological  controversies  aroused 
by  the  Reformation.  Beginning  with  the  Augsburg  Con- 
fession in  1530,  the  next  century  and  a  half  saw  the 
formulation  of  most  of  the  important  modern  Confes- 
sions. This  group  differs  widely  from  the  former.  They 
are  almost  without  exception  of  European  origin,  written 
in  Latin  or  modern  languages.  They  are  long,  presenting 
a  more  or  less  complete  system  of  doctrine ;  they  are  all 
sectarian,  representing  the  views  of  only  a  party  of  Chris- 
tians, and  intended  to  differentiate  that  party  from  the 
rest  of  Christendom  and  to  justify  its  existence.  The 
Catholic  creeds  of  this  period,  both  Greek  and  Roman, 
were  drawn  to  meet  Protestantism.  Protestant  creeds 
were  drawn  to  meet  the  Roman  Catholics  and  also  other 
Protestant  parties. 


Introduction  xi 


The  Baptist  Confessions  were  among  the  last  to  be 
produced,  coming  out  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Reforma- 
tion period,  and  even  more  recent  times.  Most  of  them 
were  formulated  in  England  after  Catholicism  had  prac- 
tically ceased  to  be  a  religious  force  in  that  country ;  they 
are,  therefore,  drawn  against  the  background  of  English 
Protestantism.  They  constitute  the  latest  group  of  de- 
nominational Confessions,  most  of  the  Lutheran,  Re- 
formed, Presbyterian,  and  Congregational  Confessions 
having  preceded  them.  They  are  not  independent  pro- 
ductions, but  are  the  result  of  grafting  Baptist  views  of 
baptism,  church-membership,  church  government,  and  the 
relation  between  Church  and  State  upon  a  Calvinistic  or 
Arminian  stock.  Such  in  brief  is  the  relation  of  Baptist 
Confessions  to  those  of  other  denominations. 

Being  congregational  and  democratic  in  church  govern- 
ment. Baptists  have  naturally  been  very  free  in  m.aking, 
changing,  and  using  Confessions.  There  has  never  been 
among  them  any  ecclesiastical  authority  which  could  im- 
pose a  Confession  upon  their  churches  or  other  bodies. 
Their  Confessions  are,  strictly  speaking,  statements  of 
what  a  certain  group  of  Baptists,  large  or  small,  did  be- 
lieve at  a  given  time,  rather  than  a  creed  which  any 
Baptist  must  believe  at  all  times  in  order  to  hold  ecclesias- 
tical position  or  be  considered  a  Baptist.  In  the  latter 
sense  there  has  been  no  Baptist  creed.  Churches  at  their 
constitution  have  made  their  own  Confessions,  adopted  an 
old  one  in  its  original  or  in  a  modified  form,  or,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  First  Baptist  Church  of  Providence,  R.  L,  the 
oldest  Baptist  church  in  America,  have  had  no  doctrinal 
statement  whatever.  District  Associations  have  sometimes 
adopted  one  Confession,  sometimes  another,  have  modi- 
fied the  oldest  and  most  notable  Confessions  to  suit  their 
views,  have  formulated  new  statements,  or  have  made  no 


xii  Introduction 


doctrinal  deliverance  of  any  sort.  No  Baptist  individual, 
church,  Association,  or  larger  body  has  ever  felt  per- 
manently bound  by  any  Confession  of  Faith  in  its  original, 
historical,  or  any  other  form.  And  yet  the  Baptists 
have  preserved  a  remarkable  degree  of  doctrinal  agree- 
ment throughout  their  history.  This  is  no  doubt  due  to 
their  insistence  upon  a  converted  church-membership,  the 
authority  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  right  and  duty  of 
every  individual  Christian  to  decide  doctrinal  questions 
for  himself  by  a  study  of  the  Scriptures  under  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Baptist  Confessions  are  almost  numberless,  but  com- 
paratively few  of  them  have  any  historical  significance. 
It  is  manifestly  impossible  and  undesirable  to  repro- 
duce any  but  the  most  important  ones  in  this  work. 

Some  Waldensian  and  Bohemian  articles,  as  represent- 
ing the  most  evangelical  forms  of  Christianity  with  which 
we  are  acquainted  just  prior  to  the  Reformation,  might 
have  been  reproduced  had  such  been  in  existence.  But 
nothing  that  can  justly  be  called  a  Confession  came  from 
these  parties  before  the  Reformation.  Accordingly,  the 
work  begins  with  the  Anabaptists,  who  were  in  many 
respects  the  forerunners  of  the  Baptists. 


Ipart  ©ne 

THE  ANABAPTISTS 

E 

The  Anabaptists  were  not  Baptists  in  the  modern  ac- 
ceptation of  that  term,  since  they  did  not  insist  upon  im- 
mersion as  the  only  acceptable  mode  or  form  of  baptism. 
Some  of  them  practised  immersion  at  least  occasionally, 
but  none  of  them  required  it  as  a  term  of  communion,  and 
apparently  a  majority  practised  affusion.  They  held, 
however,  so  many  fundamental  Baptist  doctrines  that 
their  Confessions  deserve  a  place  here.  So  far  as  known 
the  mode  of  baptism  was  never  a  matter  of  discussion 
among  them. 

The  question  of  their  relation  to  earlier  evangelical 
sects,  as  for  example  the  Waldenses,  is  still  under  discus- 
sion. They  betray  no  consciousness  of  dependence,  stout- 
ly maintaining  the  view  that  their  distinctive  doctrines 
were  drawn  from  a  direct  and  faithful  study  of  the  word 
of  God  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  So  far 
as  the  life  history  of  early  individual  Anabaptists  has  been 
traced,  they  all  came  out  of  the  Catholic  Church,  rather 
than  from  the  sects.  This  is  certainly  true  of  all  their 
leaders,  many  of  whom  had  been  priests  or  monks  in  that 
church.  Nor  did  they  ever,  so  far  as  known,  enter  into 
union  or  communion  with  the  Waldenses.  These  con- 
siderations seem  to  point  almost  irresistibly  to  an  inde- 
pendent origin.  On  the  other  hand,  the  similarity  be- 
tween some  of  their  peculiarities  and  those  of  the  Wal- 
denses points  strongly  to  some  dependence.  The  most 
that  can  be  asserted  with  confidence  in  the  present  state  of 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


investigation  is  that  they  may  have  been  influenced  in 
their  pecuHar  doctrinal  views  by  older  parties,  but  were 
entirely  independent  in  the  origination  of  their  ordinances 
and  other  ecclesiastical  matters. 

Being  the  radicals  and  individualists  of  their  time,  they 
naturally  broke  up  into  many  parties,  differing  more  or 
less  widely  among  themselves  about  various  matters. 
Moreover,  they  were  chiefly  interested  in  practical 
Christianity,  the  following  and  imitation  of  Christ,  the 
reformation  of  the  lives  of  the  people.  Theology  and  ec- 
clesiastical affairs  with  them  took  a  much  more  subordi- 
nate place  than  among  the  Lutherans  and  other  re- 
formers; consequently  they  devoted  little  attention  to 
creed-building.  In  general  they  were  anti-Augustinian, 
i.  e.,  Pelagian  or  Arminian  in  their  views  of  the  plan 
of  salvation,  and  were  in  agreement  in  their  opposition  to 
infant  baptism  and  to  the  State  church.  Their  funda- 
mental principle,  from  which  all  else  sprang,  was  a  church 
composed  of  the  regenerate  only.  On  almost  every 
other  possible  point  of  doctrine  there  were  among  them 
wide  differences  of  opinion.  These  differences  the  vari- 
ous articles  which  have  been  preserved  to  us  reflect. 
As  sources  for  a  knowledge  of  their  views  we  have,  in 
addition  to  their  Articles  of  Faith,  court  records,  writings 
of  Hiibmaier,  Denck,  and  others,  published  accounts  of 
disputations,  their  songs,  and  finally  the  writings  of  their 
opponents.  The  most  important  of  their  articles  fol- 
low. The  fact  that  they  were  written  in  old,  and  some- 
times incorrect,  German,  makes  the  exact  meaning  of 
some  passages  uncertain. 

1.  Earliest  Anabaptist  Articles 

The  earliest  were  a  set  of  seven  articles  drawn  up  by 
the  Swabian  and  Swiss  brethren,  at  Schlatten  am  Ran- 


The  Anabaptists 


den,  near  Schaffhausen,  in  1527.  So  far  as  known,  they 
were  never  printed,  but  Zwingli  says  (Wks.  Ill,  387) 
that  almost  every  Anabaptist  had  a  copy  in  German.  A 
manuscript  copy  in  German  is  found  in  the  Pressburg 
Cathedral  Chapter,  and  has  been  published,  somewhat 
condensed,  by  Beck,  ''  Geschichtshucher  der  Wiedertdu- 
fer,"  p.  41  f.  The  title,  as  it  appears  in  this  MS  is  "  The 
VII  Articles  from  Schlatten  am  Randen,  drawn  up  Feb. 
24,  1527."  The  conclusion  of  this  manuscript,  not  given 
by  Zwingli,  is  as  follows : 

Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  these  are  the  articles  which 

certain  brethren   hitherto   in   error   and   have   not 

understood  alike  and  thereby  many  weak  consciences  have 
been  confused,  so  that  the  name  of  God  has  been  grossly 
blasphemed;  there  has  been,  therefore,  need  that  we  be 
agreed  in  the  Lord.    To  God  be  the  praise  and  glory. 

A  copy  is  also  found  in  Bern,  and  Is  reproduced  some- 
what condensed  by  Miiller,  "  Bernische  Tdiifer,"  pp.  38f. 
Zwingli  translated  them  faithfully,  he  says,  into  Latin. 
A  translation  of  his  translation  follows : 

"  The  Articles,  which  we  have  drawn  up  and  in  which 
we  agree,  are  these:  Baptism,  abstention,  breaking  of 
bread,  avoidance  of  abominable  pastors  in  the  church, 
sword,  swearing. 

First  learn  concerning  baptism!  Baptism  ought  to  be 
administered  to  all  who  have  been  taught  repentance  and 
a  change  of  life  and  in  truth  believe  their  sins  to  have 
been  blotted  out  through  Christ,  and  who  wholly  wish  to 
walk  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  who  wish 
to  be  buried  with  him  into  death  that  they  may  be  able 
to  rise  again  with  him.  To  all,  then,  who  ask  baptism 
after  this  manner  and  make  the  request  of  us  for  them- 
selves we  administer  it.  By  these  means  are  excluded  all 
baptism  of  infants,  the  supreme  abomination  of  the 
Roman  Pontif.  For  this  article  we  have  the  testimony 
and  strength  of  Scripture;  we  have  also  the  practice  of 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


the  Apostles,  which  we  shall  preserve  with  simplicity  and 
at  the  same  time  with  firmness.  For  we  have  been  made 
sure. 

Second :  With  regard  to  excommunication  we  agree  as 
follows :  All  ought  to  be  excommunicated  who,  after 
they  have  given  themselves  to  the  Lord  that  they  might 
follow  him  in  his  precepts  and  who  have  been  baptized 
into  one  body  of  Christ  and  are  called  brethren  or 
sisters,  yet  slip  or  fall  into  sin  and  are  thrown  headlong 
unawares.  People  of  this  sort  ought,  therefore,  to  be 
admonished  twice  in  secret ;  the  third  time  they  ought 
to  be  corrected  publicly  before  the  church  according  to 
the  precept  of  the  Lord.  Moreover,  this  ought  to  be  done 
according  to  the  ordinance  or  injunction  of  the  divine 
Spirit  before  the  breaking  of  bread,  that  all  may  be  able 
to  break  and  eat  the  one  bread  and  drink  from  the  one 
cup  unanimously  and  with  the  same  love. 

Third :  In  the  breaking  of  bread  we  agree  and  unani- 
mously prescribe  as  follows :  That  those  who  wish  to 
break  the  one  bread  in  commemoration  of  the  broken 
body  of  Christ  and  to  drink  from  one  cup  in  commemo- 
ration of  the  poured-out  blood  of  Christ,  should  first  be 
united  into  one,  to-wit,  into  the  one  body  of  Christ,  that 
is,  into  the  church  of  God  in  which  Christ  is  head.  More- 
over that  is  particularly  through  baptism.  For,  as  the 
divine  Paul  teaches,  we  can  not  be  at  the  same  time  par- 
ticipants of  the  table  of  the  Lord  and  the  table  of 
demons ;  nor  can  we  be  at  the  same  time  participants 
in  the  cup  of  the  Lord  and  the  cup  of  demons.  That  is : 
all  who  have  communion  with  dead  works  of  darkness 
have  no  communion  with  those  who  have  been  called 
to  God  out  of  this  world.  All  who  are  sunken  in  evil 
have  no  part  with  good.  Thus,  therefore,  it  must  follow 
that  those  w^ho  have  not  the  call  of  their  God  into  one 
faith,  into  one  baptism,  into  one  Spirit,  into  one  body  with 
all  the  children  of  God,  these  cannot  come  together  unto 
one  bread ;  but  beyond  doubt  this  must  be  done  if  one 
wishes  to  break  bread  according  to  the  precept  of  Christ. 

Fourth:  Thus  we  determine  concerning  the  revolt, 
separation  and  avoidance  which  ought  to  be  made  from 
that  evil  which  the  devil  has  planted,  so  that  we  shall 


The  Anabaptists  5 


have  no  commerce  with  them  nor  concur  with  them  in 
communication  in  those  abominations.  That  is,  since  all 
who  have  not  yet  yielded  to  the  obedience  of  faith  and 
who  have  not  yet  given  [their]  name  to  the  Lord  that  they 
wish  to  do  his  will,  are  exceedingly  abominable  in  the 
sight  of  God;  [therefore]  nothing  can  be  done  by  them 
which  is  not  abominable.  Now,  moreover,  in  the  world 
plainly  there  is  nothing  else,  nor  in  all  creation,  than 
good  and  evil,  faithful  and  unfaithful,  shadows  and 
light,  people  of  the  world  and  those  who  are  now  out  of 
the  world,  the  temple  of  God  and  idols,  Christ  and  Be- 
lial, and  no  one  of  these  can  have  part  with  the  other. 
Known  to  us  also  is  the  precept  of  the  Lord  in  which  he 
commands  that  we  be  separated  from  the  evil,  for  then 
he  is  wilHng  to  be  our  God  and  we  shall  be  his  sons  and 
daughters.  Again  he  prescribed  that  we  should  come  out 
of  Babylon  and  the  Egyptian  land  lest  we  become  par- 
takers of  the  evils  and  punishments  which  the  Lord  is 
about  to  bring  upon  them.  From  all  which  we  ought 
to  learn  that  whatever  is  not  united  with  our  God  and 
Christ  is  nothing  else  than  an  abomination  which  we 
ought  to  avoid.  Here  we  perceive  all  papistical  and 
secundo-papistical  works  and  contentions  of  idolatry, 
processions  to  churches,  houses  of  feastlngs,  states  and 
alliances  of  unbelief  and  many  other  things  similar  to 
these  which  are  held  in  honor  in  the  world,  when  never- 
theless they  fight  and  lead  directly  against  the  precept  of 
Christ  according  to  the  measure  of  unrighteousness  which 
is  in  the  world.  From  all  these  we  ought  to  be  alien 
and  separate,  for  they  are  pure  abominations  which 
render  us  hateful  to  Christ  who  liberated  us  from  the 
bondage  of  the  flesh  and  made  us  fit  for  the  service  of 
God  through  the  spirit  of  God  which  he  gave  us.  By 
the  vigor  of  this  regulation  there  fall  away  from  us  the 
diabolical  arms  of  violence,  such  as  swords  and  arms  of 
this  kind  and  all  use  of  them  whether  for  enemies  or  for 
friends  In  virtue  of  that  word  of  Christ  '  You  ought  not 
to  resist  evil.' 

Fifth :  Concerning  pastors  of  the  church  of  God  we  de- 
termine as  follows :  That  the  pastor  of  the  flock  should  be, 
according  to  the  order  of  Paul  through  all  things,  some 


ixrr  rroc:  raci 


—  -3 


'n 


-Tit     TSIL 


2. 


8  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

be  disposed  toward  him  in  all  things,  lest  there  be  any 
disagreement  in  the  body  by  which  it  could  perish.  For 
every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  perishes.  Since, 
therefore,  Christ  is  such  as  is  written  concerning  him, 
necessarily  the  members  ought  also  to  be  such,  that  the 
body  may  remain  whole  and  united  for  its  conservation 
and  edification. 

Seventh:    We  agree  or  determine 

I.  Concerning  the  oath  in  the  following  manner: 
The  oath  is  a  confirmation  among  those  who  are  in  litiga- 
tion or  make  promises.  And  in  the  law  it  is  taught  11. 
That  it  be  done  by  the  name  of  God  alone,  truly  not  fal- 
laciously. But  Christ  who  teaches  the  perfection  of  the 
law,  forbids  all  swearing  to  his  [followers],  that  they 
swear  neither  truly  nor  falsely,  neither  by  heaven  nor  by 
the  earth  nor  by  Jerusalem  nor  by  themselves.  And  this 
for  the    following   cause,    III.   which   he   adds,    saying, 

*  Because  ye  can  not  make  one  hair  white  or  black.' 
Notice,  therefore,  all  swearing  is  prohibited,  because  we 
are  able  to  perform  nothing  of  those  things  which  we 
promise  with  an  oath  since  we  are  not  able  to  change  the 
least  thing  which  pertains  to  us.  But  there  are  some  who 
do  not  believe  the  simple  precepts  of  God  but  say:  IV. 

*  Since  God  swore  to  Abraham  by  himself  who  was  God, 
when  he  promised  to  be  benevolent  to  him  and  to  be  his 
God  as  long  as  he  kept  his  precepts,  why  may  not  I  also 
swear  when  I  promise  anything  to  any  one  ? '  We  re- 
spond :  Hear  then  what  the  Scripture  says,  when  God 
wished  to  establish  a  promise  to  the  heirs  with  certainty 
that  his  council  would  not  vacillate  he  interposed  an  oath 
that  we  might  have  hope.  Listen  thou  to  the  meaning  of 
this  Scripture:  God  has  the  power  of  taking  an  oath 
which  he  prohibits  to  thee,  for  to  him  all  things  are 
possible.  God  made  an  oath  to  Abraham,  says  Scripture, 
that  he  might  show  that  his  counsel  would  not  vacillate; 
that  Is,  because  no  man  is  able  to  resist  his  power,  there- 
fore, it  is  necessary  that  he  keep  his  oath.  But  we  are 
not  able  as  was  shown  above  by  the  word  of  Christ,  to 
keep  an  oath  or  to  perform  what  we  have  sworn ;  there- 
fore we  ought  not  to  swear.  Again,  there  are  some  who 
say  that  there  Is  no  prohibition  against  swearing  by  God 


The  Anabaptists 


in  the  New  Testament,  but  in  the  Old;  but  in  the  New 
there  is  prohibition  against  swearing  by  heaven,  the  earth 
or  Jerusalem.  To  which  we  reply :  V.  Hear  thou  the 
Scripture,  he  who  swears  by  the  temple  or  heaven  swears 
by  the  throne  of  God  and  by  him  who  sits  upon  it.  Thou 
seest  that  to  swear  by  heaven  is  prohibited  because  it 
is  the  throne  of  God  himself!  O  fools  and  blind,  which 
is  the  greater,  the  throne  or  he  that  sits  upon  it?  But 
further  there  are  those  who  dare  to  say,  *  If  it  is  wicked 
to  swear  even  when  the  Lord's  name  is  added  to  truth, 
Peter  and  Paul,  the  apostles,  sinned,  for  they  swore.  To 
whom  we  reply  thus :  VI.  Peter  and  Paul  testify  this  only, 
that  it  was  promised  by  God  to  Abraham  by  an  oath ;  but 
they  themselves  promise  nothing,  as  the  examples  clearly 
show.  But  to  testify  and  to  swear  are  different;  for 
when  an  oath  is  taken  future  things  are  promised.  VII. 
To  Abraham  as  an  old  man  was  promised  Christ  whom 
we  after  a  long  time  have  received.  But  when  one  testi- 
fies, testimony  is  given  concerning  some  present  thing, 
whether  it  be  true  and  good  or  not.  Just  as  Symeon  was 
saying  and  testifying  to  Mary  concerning  Christ :  '  Be- 
hold, this  one  is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many 
in  Israel,  and  for  a  sign  to  be  spoken  against/  After  this 
manner  Christ  taught  us  when  he  says,  '  Let  your  speech 
be  yea,  yea,  nay,  nay,  for  whatever  is  added  to  this  is  of 
the  evil  one.*  Thus  Christ  warns :  *  Your  speech  ought  to 
be  nay,  nay,*thatwe  may  not  be  willing  to  understand  him 
as  having  permitted  swearing.  Christ  is  simply  yea,  and 
nay.  And  all  who  seek  him  with  simplicity  find  him. 
Amen." 

11.    Other  Articles  from  Bern 

Muller  {"  Bernische  Tdufer,"  p.  37)  found  in  the  ar- 
chives of  Bern  seven  articles  in  manuscript  without  date 
which  come  out  of  the  sixteenth  century  and  describe  the 
order  of  an  Anabaptist  congregation.  A  free  translation 
follows : 

"  First.  The  brethren  and  sisters  should  come  together 
at  least  three  or  four  times  a  week,  and  exercise  them- 


lo  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


selves  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  and 
earnestly  warn  one  another  to  remain  steadfast  to  the 
Lord  as  they  have  covenanted. 

"  Second.  When  the  brethren  and  sisters  are  together, 
they  should  select  something  to  read;  he  to  whom  God 
has  given  the  best  understanding  should  expound  it,  but 
the  others  keep  silent  and  hear,  so  that  no  more  than  one 
should  speak  at  once  and  hinder  the  others.  The  Psalter 
should  be  read  daily  by  them. 

"  Third.  No  one  should  be  frivolous  in  the  congrega- 
tion of  God,  neither  in  word  nor  in  work;  and  a  good 
manner  of  life  should  be  observed  by  them  all,  also  before 
the  heathen. 

"  Fourth.  If  a  brother  sees  his  brother  going  astray, 
he  should,  in  accordance  with  the  command  of  Christ, 
warn  and  chastise  him  in  a  Christian  and  fraternal  way, 
as  every  one  is  obligated  by  love  to  do. 

"  Fifth.  No  brethren  and  sisters  of  this  congregation 
should  hold  any  property  as  their  own,  but  hold  all  things 
in  common  as  the  Christians  at  the  time  of  the  Apostles ; 
and  in  particular  they  should  lay  by  a  common  store  from 
which  the  poor  can  be  helped  as  each  one  has  need,  and, 
as  at  the  time  of  the  apostles,  no  brother  be  allowed  to 
suflfer  want. 

"  Sixth.  All  expenses  should  be  avoided  by  the  breth- 
ren when  they  are  assembled  in  the  congregation — soup, 
vegetables  and  meat  be  given  in  the  most  limited  quanti- 
ties, since  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  eating  and 
drinking. 

"  Seventh.  The  Lord's  supper  should  be  celebrated  as 
often  as  the  brethren  come  together,  thereby  to  proclaim 
the  death  of  the  Lord  and  warn  every  one  to  remember 
how  Christ  has  given  his  body  for  us  and  poured  out 
his  blood  for  us,  that  we  also  might  be  willing  to  give  our 
body  and  life  for  Christ's  sake,  that  is  for  the  brethren." 

IIL  Anabaptist  Articles  from  Moravia 
As  persecutions  thickened  in  Germany  and  Switzerland, 
thousands  of  Anabaptists  made  their  way  to  Moravia, 
where  the  political  conditions  made  it  possible  for  the 


The  Anabaptists  ii 


lords  Lichtenstein  to  protect  them  some  years  on  their 
large  estates.  They  settled  at  Nikolsburg  and  other  places 
in  great  numbers.  Soon  the  various  opinions  held  by 
them  began  to  clash,  and  the  body  was  more  than  once 
rent  by  religious  dissension.  Out  of  these  dissensions 
come  some  articles  in  German  in  MS  form,  found  in 
the  royal  archives  at  Nuremberg  among  papers  belonging 
to  the  years  1527  and  1528,  printed  by  Cornelius,  "  Mun- 
sterschen  Aufruhr,  II,  279f.  "  Beilag,"  VIII.  Nothing 
further  is  known  of  their  origin.    A  translation  follows : 

I.  Some  Brief  Articles 

*' Eight  articles  of  the  preacher  [s]  at  Nikolsburg,  that 
one  [or  those]  at  Lichtenstein,  now  imprisoned  at  Vienna, 
with  many  others,  who  have  had  themselves  baptized  a 
second  time. 

"  The  gospel  should  not  be  preached  publicly  in  the 
churches,  but  only  in  the  ear  and  secretly  in  the  houses. 

"  Christ  was  conceived  in  original  sin,  [that  is  by  a 
natural  birth]. 

"  The  Virgin  Mary  was  not  a  mother  of  God,  but  only 
a  mother  of  Christ. 

"  Christ  is  not  God,  but  a  prophet  to  whom  the  message 
or  word  of  God  was  entrusted. 

"  Christ  did  not  do  enough  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world. 

"  Among  Christian  men  there  should  be  no  power  or 
magistracy. 

"  The  last  day  is  two  years  in  the  future. 

"  The  angels  were  conceived  with  Christ  and  took  flesh 
with  Christ." 

Another  series  at  the  same  place : 

"  Articles  of  the  Anabaptists. 

"  Those  who  can  not  hear  and  confess  ought  not  to  be 
baptized. 


12  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

"  He  who  has  property,  may  not  partake  of  the  Lord's 
supper. 

"  He  who  is  related  to  any  magistracy  can  not  be  saved. 
One  must  understand  that  there  should  be  no  magistracy. 

"  Satan  and  the  godless  will  also  be  saved  finally. 

"  The  holy  Scripture  was  not  given  to  believers,  but 
to  the  godless  that  they  might  be  overcome. 

"  Within  two  years  the  Lord  will  come  from  heaven 
and  will  deal  and  war  with  the  worldly  princes,  and  will 
root  up  the  godless,  but  the  pious  and  unworldly  will 
reign  with  the  Lord  on  earth. 

**  All  who  are  learned  and  preach  the  gospel,  are  per- 
verters  of  the  Scriptures. 

"  In  the  Lord's  supper  is  only  bread  and  wine,  although 
they  [the  Anabaptists]  are  not  agreed  about  this. 

**  God  strengthen  them  with  visions." 

Another  series  is  as  follows : 

"  Articles  discussed  by  the  congregation  at  Nikols- 
burg  in  Moravia. 

"  The  gospel  is  not  to  be  preached  in  the  churches,  but 
in  the  courts  of  princes  and  in  their  own  houses. 

"  Christ  was  conceived  in  original  sin  [that  is  in  a 
natural  way]. 

"  The  blessed  virgin  Mary  was  not  a  mother  of  God, 
but  only  a  mother  of  Christ. 

"  Christ  is  no  God,  but  only  a  prophet  to  whom  the 
secrets  of  God  were  entrusted. 

"  Christ  did  not  do  enough  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world. 

"  There  should  be  no  power  or  magistracy  among  the 
Christians. 

"  The  last  day  is  said  to  be  two  years  In  the  future. 

"  The  angels  with  Christ  were  without  flesh  and  took 
flesh  with  Christ." 

The  same  articles,  with  some  Huterlsh  additions,  are 
found  In  the  archives  of  the  Thomas  Church  at  Stras- 
burg,  under  the  title; 


The  Anabaptists  13 


"Articles  which  the  Anabaptists  at  Augsburg  confessed 
(and  which  are  learned  by  them  with  great  joy),  who  still 
to  the  number  of  twenty-five  lie  imprisoned  there  and  are 
well  to  do."     [Language  not  clear.] 

2.  Peter  Riedemann's  Rechenschaft 

Persecution  of  the  Anabaptists  broke  out  in  Moravia 
in  1535.  The  brethren  suffered  not  only  physical  violence, 
but  also  vile  slander  and  misrepresentation.  In  order  to 
meet  and  refute  these  false  accusations,  Peter  Riedemann, 
one  of  their  pastors  and  their  ablest  literary  representative 
after  the  death  of  Hubmaier,  drew  up  an  account  of  their 
doctrines  and  practices  which  he  called  "  Rechenschaft  im- 
serer  Religion."  (Reprinted  in  Calvary's  " Mittheihmgen" 
I,  256-417.)  It  is  rather  a  treatise  on  doctrine  and  prac- 
tice than  a  Confession,  being  the  longest  and  most  pre- 
tentious production  the  Anabaptists  put  forth  in  the  whole 
course  of  their  history.  Riedemann  belonged  to  the 
Huterite  party  which  gradually  won  complete  ascendency 
among  the  Anabaptists  of  Moravia  and  Eastern  Europe. 
The  ''Rechenschaft''  was  drawn  up  about  1545,  was 
printed  probably  before  1547,  and  a  second  edition  ap- 
peared in  1565.  It  was  never  formally  adopted  by  any  ec- 
clesiastical body  so  far  as  known,  but  gradually  came  into 
wide  usage  and  great  influence.  It  is  diffuse,  full  of  repe- 
titions, and  much  too  long  for  reproduction  here. 

It  bears  the  title,  "Justification  (or  account,  ' Rechen- 
schaft')  of  our  religion,  doctrine  and  faith,  put  forth  by 
the  brethren  commonly  called  Huterish,  through  Peter 
Ryedemann."  After  a  long  preface  stating  the  reasons 
for  drawing  up  the  Confession,  the  body  of  the  work  is 
divided  into  three  parts — an  exposition  of  the  twelve 
articles  of  religion,  then  a  somewhat  orderly  statement  of 
distinctive  Anabaptist  doctrines  and  practices,  and  finally 


14  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

a  third  part,  which  is  largely  a  repetition  of  the  second, 
apparently  by  another  hand.  The  whole  is  supplied  with 
abundant  Scripture  references,  the  Apocrypha  being  con- 
stantly quoted  as  Scripture.  Its  general  theological  posi- 
tion is  in  agreement  with  the  Protestants  of  that  time, 
except  that  a  general  atonement  and  the  salvation  of  all 
infants  dying  in  infancy  in  virtue  of  that  atonement,  is 
taught.  In  these  views  they  stood  over  against  all  the 
other  reformers  of  the  time.  Only  a  brief  summary  of  its 
chief  teachings  can  be  given  here,  and  is  as  follows: 

Only  those  who  truly  repent  are  to  be  baptized;  the 
candidate  kneels  while  the  administrator  pours  water  upon 
him,  repeating  the  words  "  I  baptize  thee  in  the  name  of 
the  Father,  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  according  to 
thy  faith  hath  forgiven  thee  thy  sins  and  drawn  [thee] 
into  his  kingdom  and  accepted  [thee],  therefore  sin 
henceforth  no  more  so  that  no  worse  thing  befall  thee ;  " 
baptism  should  be  administered  in  the  presence  of  the 
congregation  since  "  the  sins  are  remitted  and  forgiven 
the  man  in  baptism,  and  the  congregation  has  the  key  " ; 
teaching  and  baptizing  must  not  be  done  by  all  but  only 
by  those  who  have  been  called  by  the  Lord  and  the  con- 
gregation and  set  apart  thereto ;  the  choice  Is  made  by  lot 
where  more  candidates  are  presented  than  are  needed; 
ordination  is  In  the  presence  of  the  congregation  by  the 
Imposition  of  the  hands  of  the  elders ;  only  those  who  have 
been  tested  are  ordained. 

The  various  officers  of  the  church  are  apostles,  bishops, 
pastors,  helpers,  rulers,  elders — each  of  these  classes  hav- 
ing its  own  more  or  less  distinct  function ; 

The  bread  and  wine  of  the  supper  are  not  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ,  but  only  reminders  of  his  grace. 

Community  of  goods  Is  taught,  because  "  communion 
of  saints  exists  not  only  In  spiritual  but  also  In  temporal 
things." 

The  true  church  Is  composed  of  true  believers,  separated 
from  the  world  and  ruled  over  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  where 
righteousness  dwells;  existing  church  buildings,  having 


The  Anabaptists  15 


been  put  to  idolatrous  uses  ought  to  be  pulled  down  and 
utterly  destroyed — Anabaptists  never  enter  them;  nor  do 
they  have  anything  to  do  with  priests  since  these  were  not 
called  of  Christ  nor  do  they  preach  the  gospel  as  is  shown 
by  their  evil  deeds  and  their  lack  of  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

Marriage  must  be  entered  into  "  according  to  God's 
direction  " ;  woman  being  the  weaker  is  under  the  yoke  of 
the  man  who  should  provide  for  her  in  temporal  and 
spiritual  things;  the  ceremony  should  be  in  the  presence 
of  the  congregation  by  a  qualified  minister  of  the  word. 

"  Magistracy  is  set  up  and  ordained  of  God  for  a  rod  of 
his  wrath  wherewith  to  chastise  and  punish  wicked,  ruth- 
less people.  .  .  Therefore  one  should  be  obedient  and  sub- 
ject to  them  as  ordained  of  God  ...  in  so  far  as  they  do 
not  act  contrary  to  conscience  or  give  commands  against 
God.  .  .  But  when  they  command  and  act  contrary  to 
[the  will  of]  God  one  must  let  their  command  remain  un- 
fulfilled and  obey  God  rather  than  men,  for  the  conscience 
is  free  and  subject  to  God  alone.  .  .  Therefore  wherever 
magistracy  undertakes  to  attack  the  conscience  and  rule 
over  the  faith  of  men,  it  robs  God  of  what  belongs  to  him. 
Therefore  it  is  improper  to  obey  magistracy  in  such 
matters."  Magistracy,  wielding  a  worldly  sword,  is  out- 
side Christ.  "  Among  Christians  He  alone  will  rule  with 
his  spiritual  sword.  .  .  God  in  Christ  is  alone  king  and 
overlord  over  his  people  .  .  .  and  as  he  is  a  spiritual  king, 
so  he  also  has  spiritual  ministers,  wields  a  spiritual 
sword."  In  Christ's  kingdom  all  are  brethren  on  an 
equality  in  service,  therefore  "  no  Christian  is  a  magis- 
trate and  no  magistrate  is  a  Christian,  for  the  child  of 
blessing  can  never  be  the  minister  of  vengeance.  .  .  no 
Christian  can  rule  over  the  world." 

Since  Christ  is  the  Prince  of  Peace  who  is  building  a 
peaceful  kingdom,  all  earthly  war  ends  in  it.  Therefore, 
"  no  Christian  may  either  carry  on  war  or  exercise  ven- 
geance, and  whoever  does  so  has  either  deserted  and 
denied  Christ  or  the  manner  of  Christ." 

"  Since  magistracy  is  ordained  of  God  and  its  office 
commanded,  it  is  also  ordained  and  commanded  to  pay  the 
taxes  necessary  to  it.  .  .  But  for  making  war,  executing 


1 6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

or  shedding  blood  (when  it  is  demanded  especially  for 
that  purpose)  we  give  nothing  .  .  .  that  we  make  not  our- 
selves partners  in  other  men's  sins." 

Since  Christians  must  not  use  the  sword,  so  they  must 
not  make  it  for  others  to  use.  "  Therefore  we  make 
neither  swords,  spears,  guns,  nor  any  weapons  of  this 
kind." 

"  In  the  matter  of  clothes  we  will  make  whatever 
ministers  to  the  needs  of  our  neighbors,  but  whatever 
ministers  to  pride  and  vainglory  in  dress  we  make  for 
no  man." 

"  Christians  should  not  go  to  law  with  one  another.  .  . 
From  which  it  follows  that  no  Christian  can  act  as  judge, 
for  Christians  do  not  go  to  law  "  and  a  Christian  can  not 
judge  those  who  are  without. 

Christians  must  not  swear  since  it  is  forbidden  by 
Christ  and  others. 

Greeting,  that  is  wishing  well  in  God's  name,  must  oc- 
cur only  between  Christians,  and  must  be  given  and 
received  solemnly  and  in  faith,  not  thoughtlessly.  Other- 
wise it  is  sin. 

Giving  the  hand  and  embracing  are  signs  of  unity  and 
fellowship,  and  are  therefore  to  be  practiced  only  in  the 
church.  But  brother  must  embrace  brother  and  sister 
embrace  sister.  Brothers  and  sisters  must  not  embrace 
each  other,  but  only  give  the  hand. 

Prayer  must  be  made  with  a  right  heart,  in  faith  and 
according  to  the  Spirit. 

The  singing  of  spiritual  songs  is  pleasing  to  God  when 
it  is  done  at  the  impulse  of  the  Spirit  and  attention  is 
given  to  the  words.  "  We  permit  no  other  than  spiritual 
songs  to  be  sung  among  us." 

"  Keeping  holy  day  as  the  world  keeps  It  Is  an  abomi- 
nation before  God,  because  the  wickedness  and  shame  they 
can  not  do  the  rest  of  the  week  (on  account  of  work) 
that  they  do  on  holy  days.  .  .  But  we  have  one  day  of  rest 
in  which  we  handle  and  hear  the  word  of  God,  and  with  it 
awaken  our  hearts  to  abide  in  the  grace  of  God.  Now 
because  it  is  customary  for  all  men  to  observe  Sunday,  we 
also  keep  the  same  day  so  as  to  give  nobody  offense ;  but 
not  because  anything  depends  on  it  nor  because  of  any 


The  Anabaptists  17 


commandment;  for  it  is  abolished  in  Christ  (Col.  2c), 
but  as  was  said  [we  keep  it]  to  exercise  ourselves  in  the 
word  of  God." 

'*  Trading  or  merchandising  is  not  permitted  among 
us,  because  it  is  a  sinful  business.  .  .  We  permit  nobody 
to  buy  in  order  to  sell  again.  But  one  is  suffered  to  buy 
for  the  needs  of  his  house  or  hand-work  so  as  to  carry  that 
on;  also  to  sell  and  dispose  of  what  one  has  made  in  his 
hand-work,  we  regard  as  not  improper  but  right.  But 
this  alone  we  hold  to  be  wrong,  viz.  when  one  purchases 
an  article  and  then  sells  the  identical  article  which  he 
purchased,  and  takes  from  it  his  gain  and  thereby  raises 
the  price  of  the  object  for  the  poor  and  cuts  off  bread 
from  their  mouths." 

"  Nor  do  we  allow  any  one  among  us  to  become  keeper 
of  a  public  house,  or  to  sell  beer  or  wine,  because  all 
manner  of  unchaste,  ungodly  and  corrupt  doings  take 
place  there;  and  all  drunken  and  worthless  scoundrels 
congregate  there  and  carry  on  their  shameful  deeds ;  to 
whom  place  must  be  given,  their  orders  taken  and  their 
blasphemy  heard.  Therefore  we  do  not  believe  it  is  per- 
mitted to  one  who  fears  God  to  hear  and  permit  such 
blasphemy  for  the  sake  of  money."  We  render  free  hos- 
pitality to  strangers  who  are  in  need. 

We  do  not  permit  drinking  among  us  for  "  drinking  is 
wicked  at  the  root,  no  matter  how  it  occurs,  invented  of 
the  devil  with  which  to  catch  men  and  draw  them  into  his 
net,  make  them  dependent  on  him  and  fall  away  from 
God,  and  lead  them  into  all  sin." 


Meetings  for  one,  two,  or  three  days  are  held  In  prepa- 
ration for  each  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

Children  were  not  allowed  to  attend  any  but  Anabaptist 
schools.  As  soon  as  they  were  weaned  they  were  put  in 
the  care  of  "  sisters  "  selected  by  the  congregation,  who 
taught  them  to  talk,  read,  and  write,  using  Scripture  as 
much  as  possible;  at  five  or  six  they  were  put  under 
schoolmasters  who  continued  to  make  religious  Instruc- 
tion  prominent;   they   remained   with   the   schoolmaster 

B 


1 8  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

till  they  were  old  enough  to  be  taught  to  work  at  what- 
ever they  were  fitted  by  nature  to  do. 

They  watch  over  each  other,  warn  and  admonish  one 
another.  Gross  or  incorrigible  sinners  are  expelled. 
*'  When  one  is  banned,  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  him ; 
avoid  his  company  altogether,  so  that  he  may  be  made 
ashamed.  But  he  is  warned  to  repent,  that  he  may  be 
thereby  moved  the  more  rapidly  to  return  to  God." 
When  he  has  genuinely  repented,  he  is  received  back  into 
the  church.  ''  But,  as  one  is  received  into  the  church  at 
the  beginning  through  a  sign,  baptism,  so  must  he  who 
has  fallen  away  and  been  cut  off  from  the  congregation, 
be  received  through  a  sign,  the  imposition  of  hands ;  this 
must  be  done  by  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  by  which  it  is 
indicated  that  he  is  again  a  partaker  in  the  grace  of  God 
and  rooted  therein." 

The  true  adornment  of  a  Christian  is  not  outward, 
but  inward,  as  Peter  says.  Christians  should  not,  there- 
fore, indulge  in  expensive  ornamentation,  but  avoid  and 

shun  it.  r  , 

[end  of  second  part] 

The  third  part,  apparently  written  by  another  hand,  is 
but  a  repetition  in  different  form  of  some  of  the  pre- 
ceding articles,  and  is  more  polemical  in  spirit. 

3.  Appeal  to  the  Lords  of  Lichtenstein 

In  1545  persecution  again  threatened  the  brethren  in 
Moravia.  In  order,  if  possible,  to  avert  the  impending 
calamity,  they  sent  to  the  Moravian  nobility  Riedemann's 
''  Rechenschaft,"  and  along  with  it  the  address  which  fol- 
lows. It  is  found  in  Codex  215  in  the  library  of  the 
Pressburg  Cathedral  Chapter  in  MS  form;  also  in  a 
library  at  Grau,  in  MS,  and  is  published  in  condensed 
form  by  Josef  Beck,  "  Geschichtshiicher  d.   Wiedertdu- 


The  Anabaptists  19 


fer,"   pp.    169-173.     The   following   is   a  translation   of 
Beck's  text: 

"  Sent  to  the  Moravian  Nobility,  in  the  year  1545. 

We,  brethren  and  true  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  from  many  and  various  places,  especially  of 
the  German  nation,  have  been  called  through  great  grace 
and  mercy  to  the  wonderful  light  of  divine  knowledge 
which  has  arisen  in  these  times  and  shone  to  all  men,  and 
now  assembled  in  his  holy  name:  wish  you  the  true 
knowledge  of  God  and  of  his  eternal  truth  and  righteous- 
ness.   Amen ! 

Beloved  Lords  of  the  Land  of  Moravia!  It  is  well 
known  to  you  in  part  how  we  have  come  out  of  various 
places  and  lands  into  the  land  of  Moravia  for  no  other 
reason  than  that  we  desire  to  serve  [God]  according  to 
the  known  truth  of  God,  piously  and  agreeably;  which 
heretofore  has  not  been  permitted  to  us  in  many  lands 
on  account  of  the  tyranny  of  the  governments  which  have 
taken  our  possessions  from  us  by  force,  have  plunged  us 
into  misery  and  hunted  us  away,  have  held  many  of  us 
in  long  and  wearisome  imprisonment  and  have  strangled 
a  good  part. 

But  because  the  Lord  God  has  spied  out  for  his  people 
especially  this  place  and  has  so  favored  them  that  they 
have  assembled  here,  and  we  have  received  with  thank- 
fulness and  have  undertaken  to  serve  him  and  walk 
before  him  blameless.  Although  we  have  been  and  are 
still  diligent  to  do  this,  yet  there  has  gone  out  from  the 
fickle  and  especially  from  those  who  have  gone  out  of  our 
midst  [and]  have  left  the  truth  and  made  friends  with 
the  world,  much  evil  report  and  much  of  such  complaint 
has  reached  you,  wherein  we  know  ourselves  to  be  blame- 
less in  all  things. 

Moreover  because  many  of  you  are  little  acquainted 
with  our  doings  or  are  in  error  on  account  of  the  slanders 
against  us,  we  were  moved  to  give  you  information  con- 
cerning and  justification  of  our  doing,  teaching  and  life, 
especially  with  regard  to  certain  articles  as  for  example, 
(a)  magistracy,  (b)  taxes  and  (c)  the  assembly,  which, 
we  have  been  informed,  are  of  special  Interest  to  you. 


20  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

First,  As  the  foundation  and  ground  of  our  faith  we 
unite  to  inform  you,  that  we  beHeve  on  the  only,  eternal, 
living  God — who  created  and  preserves  heaven  and  earth 
and  all  that  therein  is — who  has  power  over  the  hearts  of 
all  men  and  has  begotten  us  again  through  the  word  of 
truth  and  made  us  his  children  through  Jesus  Christ  who 
is  one  with  God  the  Father  in  essence — made  man  in  the 
virgin  Mary  in  order  to  save  the  sinners  who  turn  to 
God — who  after  his  death  again  ascended  to  heaven  to 
represent  us  and  has  poured  out  the  promise  of  the 
Father  in  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  us  his  believers,  which 
Spirit  proceeded  from  the  Father  and  Son  and  is,  with 
the  Son  and  Father  in  power  and  being,  one  God,  who 
still  today  assembles  the  churches  of  Christ  or  his  con- 
gregation, and  makes  therein  the  word  of  truth  living, 
so  that  those  who  serve  God  with  the  heart,  after  they 
have  finished  their  course,  may  rejoice  in  eternal  life  in 
peace  with  him. 

With  regard  to  magistracy  and  the  obedience  which 
we  are  under  obligation  to  render  it  we  say,  first,  that 
of  course  there  must  be  in  the  world  governments,  and 
also  that  they  are  ordained  of  God.  Further,  if  any  man 
opposes  magistracy  in  equitable  matters  he  opposes  the 
ordinance  of  God.  Yet  we  say  with  Peter  that  one  should 
obey  God  rather  than  men,  as  also  many  of  you  yourselves 
know,  and  at  first,  when  we  came  into  the  land,  in  fact 
showed  that  you  feared  to  demand  of  us  anything  con- 
trary to  the  conscience. 

With  regard  to  taxes  we  say  that  if  any  one  objects  to 
paying  the  government  taxes,  interest  or  rent  so  that  the 
office  can  be  carried  on,  he  would  be  found  to  oppose  tlie 
ordinance  of  God.  Therefore  we  also,  as  the  govern- 
ments under  which  we  have  sojourned  and  lived  must 
themselves  testify,  have  never  opposed  due  annual  taxes 
or  interest,  rent,  toll  and  just  socage.  But  if  anything 
which  God  has  not  ordained  be  demanded  [of  us]  as 
war  taxes  and  hangman's  wages  or  other  things  which  are 
not  becoming  to  a  Christian  and  have  no  ground  in  Scrip- 
ture, these  we  can  by  no  means  approve. 

But  in  that  by  many  we  are  compared  in  all  points 
with  the  [Anabaptists]   of  Munster  and  are  accused  of 


The  Anabaptists  21 


being  of  their  kind  [or  spirit]  ;  it  is  known  to  all  men 
who  are  acquainted  with  us  that  nobody  has  less  of  the 
Miinster  kind  [spirit]  than  we  who  hate  the  same  most 
intensely  and  testify  that  it  is  a  v/ork  of  the  devil. 

With  regard  to  our  communion,  wherein  we,  as  we 
have  heard,  can  not  be  tolerated  and  which  is  displeasing 
to  the  king  and  his  rulers,  the  cause  is  perhaps  in  part 
(as  people  daily  charge  us)  that  when  many  of  us  were 
together  we  did  not  act  at  all  like  those  of  Miinster;  but 
we  have  never  had  that  in  mind  and  also  hope  not  to 
undertake  it  forever;  again  in  part  the  cause  is,  and  this 
by  far  the  most  important,  that  we  walk  in  the  truth, 
which,  however,  the  world  has  never  been  willing  to 
receive.  Therefore  it  is  nothing  strange  to  us  that  we 
are  hated  for  such  love  and  unity.  We,  however,  know 
nothing  else  than  that  our  purpose  and  assembly  is  of 
God,  who  has  also  given  us,  as  to  the  first  churches,  a 
mind  and  heart  after  Christ  Jesus. 

But  because  many  are  moved  whom  God  daily  adds 
[to  us],  many  foolish  souls  with  corrupt  purposes  are 
mixed  among  them.  After  they  have  joined  [us]  under 
a  false  pretense  and  have  again  given  up  the  truth,  they 
shamelessly  slander  _  that  which  they  have  never  yet 
known,  while  the  truth  they  have  known  they  misrepre- 
sent. They  say  they  have  been  deprived  of  their  posses- 
sions when  as  a  matter  of  fact  they  had  nothing,  not  even 
enough  food  for  them  to  move  into  this  land  if  help  had 
not  been  given  them.  And  even  if  some  of  them  had 
something,  they  gave  it  of  their  own  accord  for  the  sup- 
port of  the  widows  and  orphans  and  needy.  It  is  there- 
fore our  desire  and  request  to  you  that  you  will  not  assent 
to  such  unknown  faultfinders  in  their  complaint  but  will 
also  hear  our  answer. 

Likewise  with  regard  to  the  place  [stett]  which,  as 
we  hear,  has  made  complaint  against  us  as  if  we  were 
cutting  off  bread  from  the  mouth  of  country  laborers, 
we  know  nothing  else  than  that  in  all  true  work  we  are 
diligent  to  pay  every  man  his  penny,  and  our  honesty  is 
now  known  among  almost  all  the  people.  To  God  be  all 
the  honor  that  the  people  are  now  coming  to  us  in 
great  numbers.     If  now  any  man  makes  complaint  un- 


22  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

justly  we  can  not,  therefore,  cease  to  push  our  work, 
but  desire  to  Uve  honestly  and  be  blameless  toward 
every  man. 

If  any  man  would  see  other  articles  of  our  faith  and 
religion  we  send  you  herewith  a  justification  ["  Rechen- 
schaft"]  and  a  complete  summary  of  our  faith  and  doing 
composed  in  the  German  language  [Riedemann's  "  Rech- 
cnschaft  unserer  Religion,"']  according  to  which  rule  we 
desire  to  serve  the  Lord  with  a  good  conscience  in  this 
land  and  by  faithful  work  to  be  useful  and  helpful  to 
every  man;  and  we  desire  nothing  more  than  that  we 
with  our  children,  old  and  sick  may  sojourn  the  short 
time  we  have  yet  to  live  here  in  the  flesh.  For  we  think 
that  God  did  not  without  cause  lead  us  into  this  land  to 
which  he  has  given  very  much  more  freedom  in  regard 
to  faith  than  to  many  other  lands,  so  that  neither  king 
nor  emperor  now  has  power  to  give  it  rules  and  orders, 
but  every  one  may  rest  on  his  faith  and  serve  God  the 
best  he  knows  how.  If,  however,  any  one  misuses  this 
freedom  and  does  not  obey  God  completely,  he  will  also 
have  his  judge.  Notwithstanding  such  freedom  (you 
have  now  in  response  to)  the  steady  effort  and  action  of 
the  king  to  destroy  the  pious  and  drive  them  apart, 
laid  your  hand  upon  the  peaceable  ones  of  the  Lord  and 
laid  hold  on  God.  Therefore  now  a  faintheartedness 
has  fallen  upon  you  and  [you]  no  more  have  so  much 
earnestness  to  withstand  his  desire  and  demand  with 
bravery  and  boldness,  and  are  now  inclined  to  lay  hand 
anew  on  the  people  of  the  Lord  and  scatter  them  abroad 
at  the  demand  of  the  king. 

With  regard  to  the  multitude  of  our  people  who  are 
reported  to  come  together  in  great  numbers,  even  in 
thousands  as  some  say,  we  must  ever  declare  that  there 
are  of  us,  adults  without  the  children,  in  the  land  here 
and  there  somewhere  about  2000  and  that  they  live  in 
some  twenty-one  places,  and  have  more  houses  in  one 
place  than  another  according  as  it  is  better  located  for 
work.  At  Schackowitz,  however,  about  which  there  is 
special  complaint,  there  are  indeed  several  of  us,  [but] 
many  sick,  aged  and  children,  who  can  do  little  or  noth- 
ing.   This,  therefore,  we  have  determined  to  lay  before 


The  Anabaptists  23 


you  and  therewith  we  commend  us  to  the  care  and  pro- 
tection of  the  Ahiiighty  and  therewith  have  we  warned 
you  and  all  men  that  no  one  escapes  the  judgment  of  God 
by  laying  his  hand  on  the  pious. 

For  it  has  ever  been  the  case  that  where  sympathy 
with  the  people  of  God  has  been  shown  God  has  spared 
that  place  for  the  sake  of  his  people,  as  happened  even 
to  this  land  as  the  Turk  traversed  Austria  through  and 
through  but  did  not  come  into  this  land." 


part  XTwo 

THE  MENNONITES 

The  Eastern  Anabaptists,  who  came  to  be  called  Hu- 
terite  Brethren,  after  Jacob  Huter,  were  finally  scattered 
and  almost  exterminated.  Those  of  Western  Europe 
held  out  through  fearful  persecutions.  The  terrible 
doings  of  the  Miinster  Kingdom  in  1535,  increased  their 
hardships  and  the  disfavor  from  which  they  suffered. 
The  name  Anabaptist,  already  loaded  with  suspicion, 
fear,  and  opprobrium,  became  an  intolerable  stench  in 
the  nostrils  of  Europe.  Persecution  broke  out  with  fresh 
fury,  and  princes  who  had  not  before  persecuted,  laid 
their  hands  to  the  sword.  Frightful  sufferings  followed, 
but  out  of  this  night  of  their  misfortunes  came  one  great 
blessing — wild  millenarian  fanaticism  received  its  death- 
blow. Henceforth  they  were  the  quiet  in  the  land.  They 
were  gathered  together  and  the  work  reorganized  chiefly 
by  a  Dutchman,  Menno  Simons,  a  Catholic  priest  con- 
verted to  Anabaptist  views  in  1536.  He  was  a  tireless 
and  devoted  worker,  a  popular  and  successful  preacher, 
and  a  voluminous  writer.  Because  of  his  great  services 
in  rehabilitating  the  Anabaptist  cause  in  the  Netherlands 
and  North  Germany,  they  came  to  be  called  Mennonites 
in  Germany,  Russia,  and  America,  while  they  are  usually 
called  Doopsgezinde  in  the  Netherlands  and  Taufge- 
sinnte  in  Switzerland. 

I.  Earliest  Confession  c.  1580 

For  many  years  they  drew  up  no  Confession  of  faith, 
some  of  them  being  opposed  to  Confessions  altogether, 
and  others  feeling  that  they  were  unnecessary.    But  about 
24 


The  Mennonifes  25 


the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  body  fell  into  dis- 
agreement and  dissension,  chiefly  over  questions  of  dis- 
cipline and  the  proper  view  of  the  person  of  Christ,  which 
finally  resulted  in  serious  divisions  and  much  strife. 
After  some  time  the  various  parties  began  to  put  forth 
statements  of  their  views  in  the  form  of  Confessions. 
The  earliest  one  was  that  of  the  Waterlanders,  or  Men- 
nonites  of  north  Holland,  the  most  liberal  wing  of  the 
body.  It  has  special  interest  for  Baptists,  because  it  was 
in  the  midst  of  this  party  that  John  Smith  and  other 
Englishmen  became  convinced  of  believers'  baptism  and 
began  the  General  Baptist  work;  and,  further,  because 
Hans  de  Ries  and  Lubbert  Gerrits,  who  drew  up  this  first 
Mennonite  Confession,  were  the  pastors  with  whom  Smith 
and  his  followers  corresponded,  and  who  probably  drew 
up  one  of  the  so-called  Baptist  Confessions.  In  so  far  as 
the  General  Baptists  originated  from  or  were  influenced 
by  the  Anabaptists,  that  influence  was  exerted  by  the 
Waterlanders,  and  especially  by  Ries  and  Gerrits,  the 
authors  of  the  following  Confession.  Naturally  the  early 
English  General  Baptists  approximated  very  closely  the 
views  and  practices  expressed  in  this  earliest  Mennonite 
Confession.  The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  Latin 
text  of  Schyn,  "  Historia  Christian  or  urn,"  etc.,  I,  172-220. 
(Compare  the  Confession  signed  by  Smyth  and  his  fol- 
lowers, p.  54.) 

It  will  be  observed  that  this  and  all  subsequent  Con- 
fessions are  much  more  elaborate  and  complete  and  better 
fortified  with  Scripture  references  than  those  of  the  Ana- 
baptists. This  is  due  to  the  influence  of  the  theological 
work  of  Luther,  Calvin,  and  other  Reformers,  and  to  the 
great  Protestant  Confessions  which  had  been  formulated 
after  the  work  of  the  Anabaptists  had  been  completed, 
but  before  this  Confession  was  drawn  up. 


26  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


A    BRIEF    CONFESSION    OF    THE    PRINCIPAL 
ARTICLES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  FAITH. 

Prepared  by 
John  de  Rys  and  Lubbert  Gerrits,  Ministers 
of   the    Divine    Word   among   the    Protestants 
who,    in   the    Belgian    Confederacy,   are   called 
Mennonites. 


ARTICLE  I. 

OF   THE    UNITY   AND   ATTRIBUTES   OF    GOD. 

We  believe  and  confess,  sacred  Scripture  preceding 
and  proving  it,  that  there  is  (a)  one  God  (who  is  (b) 
a  Spirit  or  (c)  spiritual  substance),  (d)  eternal  (_e), 
incomprehensible  (f),  immense  (g),  invisible  (h),  im- 
mutable (i),  omnipotent  (k),  merciful  (1),  just  (m), 
perfect  (n),  wise  (o),  wholly  good  (p),  the  fountain  of 
life  and  (q)  the  spring  of  all  good,  (r)  Creator  and  (s) 
Preserver  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  things  visible  and 
invisible. 

a.  Deut.  6  :  4;  32  :  39.  b.  John  4  :  24.  c.  Rom.  i  :  10.  d. 
Gen.  21  :  33.  Rom.  16  :  26.  e.  Ps.  129  :  6;  Rom.  11  :  33-  f. 
I  Kgs.  8  :  27.  Mat.  5  :  34-  Act.  7  :  48.  g.  Col.  i  :  15.  h.  James 
I  :  17.  i.  Gen.  17  :  i ;  2  Cor.  6  :  18.  k.  Exod.  34  ^  6,  7;  Luc. 
6  :  36.  1.  Ps.  II  :  7;  Col.  3  :  24,  25.  m.  Lev.  19  :  2;  Mat.  5  :  48. 
n.  Tit.  I  :  17.  o.  Ps.  103  :  8;  Mat.  19  :  I7-  P-  Jer.  2  :  13.  q. 
James  i  :  17.    r.  Gen.  1:1;  Exod.  20  :  11;  Act.  4  :  24.    s.  John 

5  :  17. 

ARTICLE  II. 

HOW  THIS  ONE  GOD  IS  DISTINGUISHED  IN  SACRED 

SCRIPTURE. 

This  one  God  In  sacred  Scripture  is  revealed  and  dis- 
tinguished into  (a)  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  (b). 
There  are  three  (and  yet)  only  one  God. 

a.  Mat.  3  :  16-19.    b.  John  5:7- 


The  Memionites  2y 


ARTICLE  III. 

HOW   THE   FATHER,   SON   AND   HOLY   SPIRIT,   ACCORDING  TO 
THIS  DISTINCTION,  ARE  THREE  AND  ONE. 

The  Father  is  (a)  the  spring  and  principle  of  all  things, 
who  begat  his  Son  from  eternity  (b),  before  all  creatures 
(c),  in  a  manner  which  the  human  mind  cannot  compre- 
hend (d).  The  Son  is  the  Father's  eternal  Word  and 
Wisdom  (e),  through  whom  are  all  things  (f).  The 
Holy  Spirit  (g)  is  God's  power,  might  or  virtue  (h), 
proceeding  from  the  Father  (i)  and  the  Son  (k).  These 
three  are  neither  divided  (1)  nor  distinguished  in  respect 
of  nature,  essence,  or  essential  attributes,  such  as  eternity, 
omnipotence,  invisibility,  immortality,  glory  and  similar 
things. 

a.  Rom.  II  :  2>^',  I  Cor.  8:6.  b.  Mic.  5:2.  c.  Col.  i  :  15; 
Heb.  7:2.  d.  Ps.  2:7.  e.  John  1:1.  f.  I  Cor.  i  :  22;  Col. 
2:3.  g.  John  14  :  26.  h.  Luc.  i  :  31.  i.  John  15  :  26.  k.  John 
16  :  7;  Rev.  22  :  I.    1.  I  John  5  :  7. 

ARTICLE  IV. 

OF   THE   CREATION,   FALL   AND   RESTITUTION    OF   MAN. 

This  one  God  created  man,  good  (a),  according  to  his 
own  image  and  likeness  (b),  for  salvation  or  safety,  and 
in  him  all  men  for  the  same  happy  end  (c).  The  first 
man  fell  into  sins  (d)  and  became  subject  to  divine  wrath, 
and  by  God  was  raised  up  again  through  consolatory 
promises  (e)  and  admitted  to  eternal  life  at  the  same 
time  with  all  those  who  had  fallen  (f)  ;  so  that  none  of 
his  posterity,  in  respect  of  this  restitution,  is  born  guilty 
of  sin  or  blame  (g). 

a.  Gen.  i  :  31.  b.  Gen.  i  :  27.  c.  Rom.  5  :  18.  d.  Gen.  3:6; 
Rom.  5  :  19.  e.  Gen.  3  :  15,  21.  f.  Gen.  12  :  3;  22  :  18;  26  :  4; 
Rom.  5  :  18.    g.  Col.  2  :  22. 

ARTICLE  V. 

OF  THE  FACULTY  OF  MAN  BEFORE  AND  AFTER  THE  FALL. 

There  was  in  man  who  was  created  good  (a)  and  was 
continuing  in  goodness,  a  faculty  of  hearing,  admitting 


28  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

or  rejecting  evil  which  was  offered  to  him  by  the  spirit 
of  wickedness  (b).  Now  in  the  sanie  man,  fallen  and 
perverted,  was  a  faculty  of  hearing,  admitting  or  reject- 
ing good,  occurring  and  offered  by  God  (c).  For  just 
as  before  the  fall  (d),  hearing  and  admitting  occurring 
evil,  he  manifested  the  faculty  of  admitting  it,  so  also 
after  the  fall  (e),  by  hearing  and  admitting  occurring 
good,  he  shows  that  he  has  the  faculty  of  accepting  it. 
But  that  faculty  of  accepting  or  rejecting  the  grace  of 
God  truly  offered,  remains,  through  grace,  in  all  his 
posterity  (f). 

a.  Gen.  i  :  31.  b.  Gen.  3  :  i,  6.  c.  Gen.  38  :  10,  11,  12,  16,  17. 
d.  Gen.  3  :  i,  6.  e.  Gen.  3  :  8,  9,  10,  15.  f.  Gen.  4  :  6,  7;  6  :  23, 
12;  Deut.  II  :  26;  30  :  19;  Ps.  81  :  14;  Isa.  i  :  19,  20;  42  :  18, 
19,  20,  21 ;  Jer.  8  :  7;  25  :  4;  Mat.  11  :  17;  22  :  3;  23  :  36;  Luc. 
13  :  32;  Jhan  5  :  34,  40. 

ARTICLE  VI. 

OF  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD. 

God  foresaw  and  foreknew  (a)  all  things  which  have 
come  to  pass,  are  coming  to  pass,  and  shall  come  to  pass, 
both  good  and  evil,  but  since  he  is  only  perfect  good  (b) 
and  the  fountain  of  life,  we  believe  and  confess  that  he 
is  the  sole  Author,  Origin  and  Operator  of  those  things 
which  are  good,  holy,  sincere,  pure  and  which  agree  with 
his  nature ;  but  not  at  all  of  sins  and  damnable  evils. 
For  God  enjoins  that  which  is  good  (d)  ;  he  desires  that 
we  obey  him  in  that  which  is  good  (e)  ;  he  consults  for 
and  admonishes  to  it  (f),  and  makes  great  promises  to 
those  who  obey  (g).  On  the  contrary  he  forbids  evil  (h), 
exhorts  against  evil  (i),  threatens  evil  doers  (k),  and 
punishes  them  not  rarely  in  this  Hfe  (1),  and  denounces 
against  them  eternal  punishment  (m).  And  by  this 
means  shows  himself  to  be  an  enemy  of  sinners  and  that 
all  iniquity  is  contrary  to  his  holy  nature.  And  therefore, 
not  God  who  is  good,  but  man  who  is  evil,  by  voluntarily 
choosing  sin  to  which  the  spirit  of  wickedness  leads  him, 
which  is  dominant  in  him,  is  the  author  (n),  origin  and 
operator  of  sins  and  all  wickedness,  and  for  this  reason  is 
worthy  of  punishment. 


The  Mennonites  29 

a.  Job  28  :  24-27;  Isa,  14  :  14-16;  48  :  3;  Jer.  i  :  5-  b.  Ps. 
103  :  8.  Mat.  19  :  17.  c.  Ps.  36  :  91  Jer.  2  :  13.  d.  Exod.  20. 
e.  Deut.  5  :  29;  32  :  29;  Luc.  19  :  42.  f.  Rev.  3  :  18.  g.  Deut. 
28;  Mat.  24  :  13.  h.  Gen.  2  :  17.  i.  Gen.  4:6;  Deut.  27  :  15; 
28  :  15.  k.  Ps.  7  :  12.  1.  Gen.  8  :  19,  24.  m.  Mat.  3  :  12;  25  : 
47.    n.  Hos.  13  :  9;  Mich.  9:2;  Eph.  2  :  1-3. 

ARTICLE  VII. 

OF    GOD*S    PREDESTINATION,    ELECTION    AND    REPROBATION. 

The  cause,  therefore,  to  which  man  owes  his  misery 
and  condemnation  is  man's  voluntary  choice  of  darkness 
(a),  agreement  with  sinners  (b),  and  a  Hfe  which  is 
spent  in  sins.  Perdition,  then,  has  its  rise  out  of  man  but 
not  at  all  out  of  the  good  Creator.  For  God,  since  he  is 
the  highest  and  most  perfect  good  (c),  and  Love  itself, 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  highest  love  and  goodness, 
was  not  able  not  to  have  willed  that  felicity  and  salvation 
should  fall  to  the  lot  of  his  creatures.  He  did  not,  there- 
fore, predestinate,  ordain  or  create  any  one  of  them  that 
he  should  be  condemned :  nor  did  he  wish  nor  decree  that 
they  should  sin  or  live  in  sins  that  he  might  subject  them 
to  condemnation.  But  inasmuch  as  this  good  God,  as 
truly  as  he  lives,  does  not  delight  in  the  destruction  of  any 
(f),  nor  wish  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  men 
should  be  saved  (g)  and  attain  to  eternal  salvation,  so 
also  he  decreed  and  created  all  men  for  salvation  (h)  ; 
and  when  fallen,  through  his  ineffable  love  (i)  he 
restored  them  in  Christ  and  in  him  ordained  and  pre- 
pared for  all  a  medicine  of  life  (k),  if  indeed  Christ  was 
given  (1),  offered  (m)  and  died  for  a  propitiation  for 
all.  In  confirmation  of  which  thing  God  willed  that  this 
universal  grace,  love  and  benignity  should  be  announced 
and  offered,  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  to  all 
creatures  or  peoples.  All  who,  being  penitent  and  be- 
lieving, admit  or  accept  that  gracious  benefit  of  God  in 
Christ,  (who  appeared  (o)  as  a  propitiation  for  the  world) 
(p),  and  persevere  in  it  (q),  are  and  remain  (r)  through 
his  mercy  the  elect,  concerning  whom  God  decreed,  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world  was  laid  (s),  that  they 
should  become  partakers  of  the  heavenly  kingdom  and 
glory.     But   those   who   disdain   or   reject  that   offered 


30  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

grace  (t),  love  darkness  in  place  of  light  (v),  persevere 
in  impenitence  and  unbelief,  render  (w)  themselves 
(through  that  wickedness)  unworthy  of  salvation,  and  so 
on  account  of  their  own  wickedness  are  justly  rejected  by 
God  (x),  and  deprived  of  that  end  for  which  they  were 
created  and  in  Christ  destined  (y)  and  called  (z),  and 
therefore  do  not  enjoy  forever  the  Supper  of  the  Lord 
to  which  they  were  invited  and  called. 

a.  John  3  :  19.  b.  James  i  :  15.  c.  Mat.  19  :  17.  d.  I  John 
4:8.  e.  Eze.  33  :  II.  f.  2  Petr.  3:9.  g.  I  Tim.  2:4.  h. 
Gen.  I  :  27.  i.  Gen.  12  :  3;  22  :  18;  Rom.  5  :  19.  k.  Col.  i  :  19, 
20;  I  John  2:2;  Hebr.  2:9.  1.  John  3  :  16.  m.  Eph.  5  :  2. 
n.  Mat.  28  :  19;  Marc.  16  :  15;  Eph.  1:9.  o.  i  John  2  :  2. 
p.  Marc.  16  :  15,  16;  John  i  :  12.  q.  Mat.  24  :  13;  Rev.  2  :  10. 
r.  Mat.  22  :  14;  Eph.  1:4.  s.  Mat.  25  :  34.  t.  Mat.  22  :  5.  v. 
John  3  :  19.  vv.  Acts  13  :  46.  x.  2  Chron.  15  :  2;  I  Kgs.  15  :  23, 
30;  2  Thess.  2  :  10,  11.  y.  I  Pet.  1:2.  z.  Mat.  22;  Luc.  14  :  16, 
17,  24. 

ARTICLE  VIIL 

OF  THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

In  the  fulness  of  time  God  has  executed  (a)  the  plan 
which  was  with  him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world 
was  laid,  namely,  that  he  would  reconcile  to  himself 
the  world  which  he  saw  would  be  subjected  to  divine 
wrath,  and  to  this  end  has  sent  his  eternal  word,  or 
Son  (that  the  promise  made  by  the  Father  might  be 
fulfilled  (b))  from  heaven  (c),  who  in  the  body  of  the 
virgin  Mary  was  made  flesh  or  man  (e)  through  the  ad- 
mirable power  of  God  and  the  incomprehensible  operation 
of  his  Holy  Spirit.  Not  indeed  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
divine  Essence  of  the  Word  or  any  part  of  it  was  changed 
into  visible  and  mortal  flesh  and  thus  ceased  to  be  Spirit, 
Deity  or  God ;  but  so,  that,  remaining  the  eternal  Son  of 
God  (g),  which  he  was  before,  namely  God  (h)  and 
Spirit  (i),  he  was  made  (what  he  was  not  before) 
namely  flesh  or  man  (k).  And  so  this  same  Jesus  is  our 
Emmanuel  (1),  in  the  same  person  true  God  (m)  and  true 
man  (n),  born  of  Mary,  visible  and  invisible,  external  and 
internal,  and  the  true  Son  of  the  living  God.  (o). 

a.  Gal.  4:4.  b.  Gen.  3  :  15;  22  :  18;  26  :  4;  Deut.  18  :  15; 
Isa.  7  :  14;  9  :  5;   II  :  i;  Jer.  23  :  5.     c.  John  13  :  3;   16  :  28; 


The  Mennonites  31 


17  :  18.  d.  Luc.  I  :  27.  e.  John  i  :  14.  f.  Luc.  i  :  31.  Mat. 
I  :  20.  g.  Hebr.  i  :  10-12.  h.  Rom.  9:5.  i.  2  Cor.  3  :  17.  k. 
John  I  :  14.  1.  Isa.  7  :  14.  m.  I  John  5  :  20.  n.  John  8  :  40; 
I  Tim.  2:5.    o.  Mat.  19  :  16;  John  6  :  69;  9  :  35-37. 


ARTICLE  IX. 

OF  THE  FINAL  CAUSE  OF  THE  ADVENT  OF  CHRIST  INTO  THE 
WORLD  AND  OF   HIS   THREEFOLD  OFFICE. 

This  person,  God  (a)  and  Man  (b),  Son  of  the  Hving 
God  (c),  came  into  this  world  that  he  might  save  sinners 
(d),  or  that  he  might  reconcile  the  world,  polluted  by- 
sins,  to  God  the  Father  (e).  On  this  account  we  confess 
him  to  be  our  only  Mediator  (f),  Prophet  (g),  Priest 
(h),  King  (i),  Lawgiver  (k)  and  Teacher,  whose  mis- 
sion into  the  world  (1)  God  promised,  to  whom  it  is 
necessary  to  hearken  (m),  in  whom  to  believe  (n),  and 
whom  to  follow  (o). 

a.  I  John  5  :  20.  b.  John  8  :  40.  c.  Mat.  16  :  16.  d.  Mat. 
9  :  IS;  I  Tim.  i  :  15.  e.  2  Cor.  5  :  19;  I  John  2:2.  f.  I  Tim. 
2:5.  g.  Deut.  18  :  15.  h.  Ps.  no  :  4;  Hebr.  3:1.  i.  Jer. 
33  :  15;  Mat.  22  :  5.  k.  Mat.  17  :  5;  28  :  20;  Gal.  6:4.  1. 
Deut.  18  :  15.    m.  Mat.  17  :  5.    n.  John  3  :  36.    o.  John  8  :  12. 

ARTICLE  X. 

OF  THE  ABROGATION  OF  THE  LAW  AND  OF  LEGAL  THINGS. 

The  intolerable  burden  of  the  Mosaic  law  (a),  with 
all  its  shadows  and  types,  was  brought  to  an  end  in  Christ 
(b)  and  removed  from  the  midst  of  his  people;  namely, 
the  sacerdotal  office  (c)  together  with  temple,  altar,  sac- 
rifices and  whatever  was  typically  connected  with  the 
sacerdotal  office;  and  then  the  royal  office  (d)  and  what- 
ever adhered  to  that  office,  as  kingdom  (e),  sword  (f), 
punishment  agreeable  to  the  law  (g),  war,  and,  in  one 
word,  all  that  which  typically  looked  to  Christ's  person, 
function  or  office  and  was  a  shadow  and  figure  of  him. 

a.  Acts  15  :  10;  2  Cor.  3  :  n,  14.  b.  Col.  2  :  16,  17.  c.  Hebr. 
8  :  4,  5;  10  :  I.  d.  Luc.  i  :  28,  29;  John  18  :  33;  Mat.  20  :  25- 
27;  Marc.  10  :  43-45.  e.  Isa.  2:4;  Mich.  4:3.  f.  Mat.  5  :  38. 
g.  Zech.  9  :  10. 


32  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ARTICLE  XI. 

OF  THE  PROrHETIC  OFFICE  OF  CHRIST. 

And  so  this  true  promised  prophet  (a)  revealed  to  us 
the  will  of  God  and  announced  all  things  (b)  which  God 
demands  and  requires  from  the  people  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment (c).  For  as  God  through  Moses  and  other  prophets 
spoke  with  the  people  of  the  old  covenant  and  declared  to 
them  his  will ;  so  in  the  last  days  he  has  spoken  to  us 
through  this  prophet  (Son)  (d),  and  has  announced 
to  us  the  mystery  which  had  been  silent  from  the  times 
of  ages  (e),  and  has  made  us  certain  of  those  things  (f) 
which  were  to  be  spoken  later.  He  has  preached  the 
promised  gospel  (g),  instituted  and  ordained  sacraments, 
functions  and  offices,  prescribed  by  God  to  that  end  and 
at  the  same  time,  both  by  life  (i)  and  doctrine  (k),  has 
demonstrated  what  the  law  of  Christians  is  (1),  what  the 
rule  and  norm  of  life,  and  what  sort  of  life  and  (m) 
path  [leads]  to  eternal  life. 

a.  Deut.  i8  :  15.  b.  John  17  :  8;  Heb.  1:2.  c.  Deut.  18  :  18. 
d.  Hebr.  1:2.  e.  Mat.  13  :  35.  f.  Heb.  3:5.  g.  Mat.  i  :  14. 
h.  Mat.  26  :  25,  26 ;  28  :  19.  i.  Matt.  5  :  6,  7.  k.  John  10  :  25, 
28;  I  Pet.  2  :  21 ;  I  John  2:6.    I.  Gal.  6:4.    m.  John  8  :  12. 

ARTICLE  XII. 

OF  THE  SACERDOTAL  OFFICE  OF  CHRIST. 

Moreover,  as  the  only  high  priest  (a)  and  mediator 
of  the  New  Testament  (b)  he  prayed  his  Heavenly  Father 
for  all  believers  (c),  even  for  those  who  affixed  him  to  the 
cross  and  killed  him  (d).  And  at  last,  most  obedient  to 
the  Father  (e),  he  underwent  the  most  extreme  and 
severe  passion  and  ofifered  himself  to  the  Father  (f)  on 
the  cross  through  death  as  a  sacrifice  (g)  and  gift  for  an 
odor  of  good  fragrance,  and  indeed  a  universal  sacrifice, 
which  is  of  perpetual  power  (h). 

a.  Heb.  5  :  16,  20.  b.  2  Tim.  2:5.  c.  John  17  :  9,  11,  15,  23. 
d.  Lu.  23  :  33.  e.  Phil.  2:8.  f.  Matt.  27  :  49;  Mark  15  :  39. 
g.  Eph.  5:2.    h.  Heb.  10  :  12, 


The  Mennonifcs  33 


ARTICLE  XIII. 

OF    THE   EFFICACY   AND   DIGNITY    OF    THE   OBEDIENCE   AND 
UNIQUE  SACRIFICE  OF  JESUS  CHRIST. 

We  confess  that  the  obedience  of  the  Son  of  God  (a), 
his  bitter  passion  (b),  death  (c),  effusion  of  blood  (d), 
and  unique  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  is  a  reconciliation  (e) 
and  satisfaction  for  us  all  and  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world:  and  therefore  we,  through  the  blood  of  his  cross, 
have  reconciliation  (f)  and  peace  with  God  (g),  and 
at  the  same  time  a  firm  hope  and  certitude  (h)  of  enter- 
ing into  eternal  life  (i)  if  indeed  we  persevere  in  faith, 
and  with  unshaken  faith  place  hope  in  the  promise  of 
the  gospel. 

a.  Phil.  2:8.  b.  I  Pet.  3  :  18.  c.  Rom.  4  :  25.  d.  Heb.  9  :  13, 
14,  28.  e.  2  Cor.  5  :  19;  I  John  2:2.  f.  Col.  i  :  14,  19,  20.  g. 
Eph.  I  :  13.    h.  Heb.  10  :  19.    i.  Col.  i  :  23. 

ARTICLE  XIV. 

OF   THE   KINGLY   OFFICE   OF   CHRIST. 

Jesus  Christ,  our  prophet  (a)  and  priest  (b),  as  the 
promised  and  only  spiritual  heavenly  king  of  the  New 
Testament,  has  erected  a  spiritual  kingdom  and  has  col- 
lected many  spiritual  and  faithful  men,  whom  he  has 
provided  with  spiritual  and  royal  laws  (e),  and  whom 
according  to  the  nature  of  his  kingdom  he  has  clothed 
with  spiritual  arms  (f).  And  in  it  he  has  ordained  law 
(g),  justice,  and  their  ministers.  Of  this  kingdom  he  is 
the  preserver  (i),  defender,  strong  tower  (k),  firmness 
and  rock  (1),  and  in  it  he  will  remain  King,  ruling  unto 
eternity  (m). 

a.  Deut.  18  :  15.  b.  Heb.  3:1.  c.  Jer.  23  :  6;  Zech.  9:9.  d. 
Matt.  18  :  I ;  3  :  23.  e.  Jer.  33  :  15.  f.  2  Cor,  10  :  4;  Eph. 
6  :  13.  g.  Jer.  23  15.  h.  I  Cor.  12  :  28.  i.  Ps.  121  :  4,  5.  k. 
Ps.  18  :  3;   19  :  2.     1.  Acts  4  :  11.     m.  Luke  i  :  19. 

ARTICLE  XV. 

OF  THE  BURIAL  AND  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST,,  AND  THEIR 

UTILITY. 

Christ,  after  he  was  dead  by  the  office  of  the  cross 
in  the  earth,  and  it  had  imposed  an  end  on  him,  was 
C 


34  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

buried  (a),  a  certain  indication  that  he  was  dead,  and  on 
the  third  day  after  death  he  rose  again  (b).  Thus  he 
conquered  death  and  at  the  same  time  made  it  certain 
that  he  was  Lord  of  death,  and  could  not  be  held  in  its 
chains  (c),  which  to  all  believers  has  been  a  consolatory 
certainty  (d)  that  they  are  to  be  liberated  and  so  finally 
raised  from  the  dead. 

a.  Matt.  27  :  58,  59;  I  Cor.  15  :  4-  b.  Matt.  28  :  6;  Acts  10  :  40. 

c.  Acts  2  :  24.    d.  I  Cor.  15  :  12,  13,  21. 

ARTICLE  XVL 

OF  Christ's  ascent  into  the  heavens  and  his  glori- 
fication AFTER  THE  RESURRECTION. 

For  forty  days  after  the  resurrection,  he  was  seen  by 
his  disciples  (a)  and  manifested  himself  to  them  often, 
lest  anyone  should  in  anywise  be  doubtful  of  his  resur- 
rection; and  at  length,  being  received  by  a  cloud  (b),  he 
ascended  into  the  heavens  and  entered  into  his  glory  (c), 
leading  captivity  captive  (d)  and  openly  making  a  spec- 
tacle of  spoiled  empires  and  powers  (e),  he  triumphed 
over  them  and  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty 
of  God  (f),  made  Lord  and  Christ  (g),  glorified  in  body 
(h),  exalted  (i)  and  crowned  with  glory  and  honor  (k), 
and  so  is  priest  (1)  and  king  over  Mt.  Zion  forever  (m). 

a.  Acts  1:3.    b.  Mark  16  :  19;  Acts  1:9.     c.  Luke  24  :  25. 

d.  Eph.  4:8.  e.  Col.  2  :  15.  f.  Mark  16  :  19;  Heb.  8:1.  g. 
Acts  2  :  36.  h.  John  17  :  5;  Phil.  3  :  21.  i.  Phil.  2:9.  k.  Heb. 
2:7.     1.  Ps.  2:6.    m.  Ps.  no  :  2-4,     Heb.  7  :  2,  3. 

ARTICLE  XVII. 

WHAT    CHRIST,    ACCORDING    TO     HIS    SACERDOTAL    OFFICE, 

PERFORMS     NOW    IN    GLORY. 

The  function  or  holy  office  of  this  glorified  priest  (a), 
king  (b),  Lord  (c),  and  Christ,  in  that  heavenly  and 
glorified  state,  consists  In  this,  that  he  directs,  rules  and 
guards  through  his  Holy  Spirit  (d)  his  holy  church  in  the 
world  through  the  tempests  and  billows  of  the  sea  of  this 
world.    For  by  virtue  of  his  sacerdotal  office,  (as  minister 


The  Mennonites  35 


(e)  of  the  sanctuary  and  of  that  true  tabernacle)  he  is 
our  Intercessor  (f),  Advocate  (g),  and  Mediator  (h) 
with  the  Father.  He  teaches  (i),  consoles,  strengthens 
and  baptizes  us  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  fire  (k),  with 
his  heavenly  gifts  and  fiery  virtues;  he  sups  with  faith- 
ful souls  spiritually  (1),  and  makes  them  partake  of  food 
and  drink  vitalizing  to  souls  (m),  the  efficacious  fruit 
and  worth  of  his  merits  acquired  for  us  through  the  cross, 
and  also  that  true  and  peculiarly  necessary  good  which  is 
shadowed  forth  through  the  sacraments. 

a.  Heb.  8:1.  b.  Rev.  1:5.  c.  Acts  2  :  36.  d.  Acts  2  :  33.  e. 
Heb.  8:2.  f.  Rom.  8  :  34.  g.  I  John  2:1.  h.  I  Tim.  2:5.  i. 
John  14  :  26;  16  :  13.  k.  John  i  :  33',  Matt.  3.  11.  1.  Rev. 
3  :  20.    m.  John  6  :  32-34. 


ARTICLE  XVIII. 

WHAT  CHRIST,  ACCORDING  TO  HIS  ROYAL  OFFICE,  PERFORMS 

NOW   IN   GLORY. 

According  to  his  royal  office  in  that  heavenly  state  (a), 
he  rules  the  hearts  of  believers  through  his  Holy  Spirit 
and  Word  (b).  He  receives  them  into  his  tutelage  (c), 
covers  them  with  the  shadow  of  his  wings  (d),  clothes 
them  with  spiritual  arms  (e)  for  the  spiritual  struggle 
against  all  their  enemies,  the  spirits  of  evil  under  heaven 
and  whatever  in  earth  fights  against  them.  That  glorious, 
omnipotent  (f),  heavenly  king  bears  to  them  in  anxiety 
succors,  frees  them  from  the  hand  of  enemies  (g),  helps 
them  (h)  that  they  may  overcome  and  come  off  victors, 
and  has  prepared  for  them  in  heaven  a  crown  of  right- 
eousness (i).  And  these  are  the  Lord's  freedmen,  who 
dwell  in  the  House  of  the  Lord,  and  upon  the  holy  Mt. 
Zion  (k),  who  beat  their  carnal  weapons,  their  swords 
(1)  into  hoes  and  their  spears  into  pruning  hooks,  who 
do  not  bear  the  sword,  who  neither  teach  the  art  of  war 
nor  give  assent  to  carnal  wars. 

a.  Ps.  2:9.  b.  Rom.  8  :  11,  14.  c.  John  10  :  28.  d.  Matt. 
23  :  36.  e.  2  Cor.  10  :  4;  Eph.  6  :  12,  13.  f.  Matt.  28  :  18.  g. 
Luke  I  :  69.  h.  2  Cor.  2  :  16.  i.  2  Tim.  4:8;  Rev.  2  :  10.  k. 
Heb.  12  :  22.    I.  Isa.  2:4;  Mich.  4  :  2,  3;  2  Cor.  10  :  4. 


36  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ARTICLE  XIX. 

OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  CHRIST  ACCORDING  TO  THE  SPIRIT 

AND    ITS    NECESSITY. 

From  that  which  has  now  been  said  concerning  the  as- 
cension of  Christ  into  heaven,  his  glorification,  offices 
and  functions  in  glory,  we  believe  and  confess  that 
Christ  must  be  confessed,  not  only  according  to  the 
flesh  (a),  or  literally  according  to  history,  as  his  holy  in- 
carnation, generation,  revelation  or  appearance  in  the 
flesh,  passion,  death,  cross  and  whatever  refers  to  him; 
but  we  must  ascend  higher  (b),  know  and  acknowledge 
Christ  according  to  the  spirit,  in  his  exaltation  and 
glorification  (c),  according  to  his  holy  office  in  glory 
(d)  :  what  the  holy  scripture  pronounces  concerning  all 
these  things  must  be  embraced  with  a  faithful  heart; 
and  with  earnest  prayers  God  must  be  supplicated,  that 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  and  his  holy  office  according  to 
the  spirit,  through  his  love  and  kindness,  may  be  con- 
summated in  us ;  indeed  that  the  form  and  image  of 
Christ  (e)  through  him  may  be  born  and  erected  in  us, 
that  he  may  manifest  himself  to  us  (f),  may  live  in  us 
(g),  may  walk  (h),  teach  (i),  preach,  that  miracles  done 
by  him  according  to  the  flesh,  he  may  consummate  in  us 
according  to  the  spirit,  heal  us  from  the  sickness  of  souls 
(k),  from  deafness,  blindness,  leprosy,  impurity,  sin  and 
death ;  that  he  may  baptize  and  wash  us  with  the  Spirit 
and  fire  (m),  that  he  may  nourish  (n)  and  restore  us  (o) 
with  heavenly  food  and  drink  and  may  make  us  partakers 
of  his  divine  nature  (p)  ;  that,  indeed  through  his  virtue 
the  old  man  in  us  (q)  may  be  crucified  with  him,  so  as 
to  have  communion  with  his  sufferings  and  conformity 
to  his  death  (r)  ;  and  that  through  him  we  may  rise  and 
be  restored  to  a  new  life  (s)  and  may  experience  the 
power  of  his  resurrection  (t)  :  And  all  these  things  for  the 
glory  and  honor  of  God,  our  heavenly  Father.  This 
we  call  knowing  Christ  according  to  the  spirit;  without 
which  knowledge,  concerning  which  our  conscience 
ought  to  be  firmly  persuaded,  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
according  to  the  flesh  does  not  at  all  suffice  for  obtaining 
salvation. 


The  Mennonites  37 


a.  2  Cor.  5  :  16.  b.  Phil.  3  :  20;  Col.  3.  i.  c.  Phil.  2:9;  John 
17  :  5.  d.  Heb.  8:1.  e.  Matt.  12  :  50;  Gal.  4  :  19;  James  i  :  18. 
f.  John  14  :  21.  g.  Eph.  3  :  I7;  John  14  :  23.  h.  2  Cor.  6  :  16. 
i.  Rev.  3  :  20.  k.  Isa.  35  :  5.  1.  Matt.  9  :  12;  Isa.  53  :  4,  5. 
m.  Matt.  3  :  II.  n.  Eph.  5  ■  30;  John  6  :  48-50.  o.  I  Cor.  12  : 
13.  p.  2  Pet.  3:4.  q.  Rom.  6:5.  r.  Phil.  3  :  10.  s.  Rom. 
6:5.    t.  Phil.  3  :  10.    V.  2  Cor.  5  :  16,  17. 

ARTICLE  XX. 

OF  TRUE   SAVING  FAITH. 

All  goods  and  benefits  which  Jesus  Christ,  through  his 
merits,  has  acquired  for  the  salvation  of  sinners  we 
graciously  enjoy  through  true  and  living  faith  (a),  which 
operates  through  love  (b).  This  faith  is  a  most  certain 
cognition  or  knowledge  acquired  through  the  grace  of 
God  from  the  sacred  scriptures,  concerning  God  (c), 
concerning  Christ  and  other  heavenly  things,  the  cogni- 
tion and  persuasion  of  which  is  necessary  to  salvation ; 
and  these  things  ought  to  be  accompanied  with  the  love 
of  God  (d)  and  with  firm  confidence  in  one  God  (e),  who 
as  a  kind  loving  heavenly  Father,  will  give  and  donate  to 
us  all  things  which,  in  respect  of  body  and  soul,  are  use- 
fiil  and  effective  for  salvation  (f),  on  account  of  Christ 
and  his  merits. 

a.  John  3  :  19,  36;  Acts  15  •  2;  Rom.  5  :  i,  2.  b.  Gal.  5:6; 
Rom.  10.  c.  John  17  :  3.  d.  Gal.  5:6.  e.  Heb.  11  :  i.  f.  Matt. 
7  :  12;  John  16  :  23. 

ARTICLE  XXI. 

OF   JUSTIFICATION. 

Through  living  faith  (a)  of  this  kind  we  acquire  true 
righteousness  (b),  that  is  (c),  pardon  or  remission  of  all 
our  past,  as  well  as  present,  sins  (d),  on  account  of  the 
poured  out  blood  of  Jesus  Christ ;  as  also  true  righteous- 
ness which  through  Jesus,  the  Holy  Spirit  co-operating, 
is  abundantly  poured  out  upon  or  into  us :  moreover,  as 
out  of  evil  (g),  carnal,  avaricious,  proud  men,  we  are 
made  good,  spiritual,  liberal,  humble,  and  even  out  of 
unjust  men,  truly  just.  And  this  righteousness  has  its 
origin  in  regeneration. 


38  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

a.  Gal.  5:6.  b.  Rom.  5:1.  c.  Ps.  32  :  i.  d.  I  John  1:7.  e. 
I  Cor.  6  :  11;  Rom.  4  :  25;  I  John  z  '-  7-  f-  Tit.  3  :  5,  6.  g. 
I  Cor.  6  :  II. 

ARTICLE  XXII. 

OF  REGENERATION. 

Regeneration  is  a  certain  divine  quality  in  the  mind  of 
a  man  truly  come  to  himself,  an  erection  of  the  image  of 
God  in  man  (a),  a  renovation  of  the  mind  or  soul  (b), 
a  true  illumination  of  the  mind  with  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth  (c),  bringing  with  it  a  change  of  will  and  of 
carnal  desires  and  lusts,  a  sincere  mortification  of  internal 
wickedness  (d)  and  of  the  old  man  delighting  himself  in 
lust,  wickedness  and  sin:  It  is,  moreover,  a  vivification 
which  manifests  itself  in  an  honest  life  according  to  God, 
in  true  goodness,  justice  and  holiness.  It  is  a  removal  of 
the  stony  heart  (e),  full  of  vanity,  stoHdity  (f),  blindness, 
ignorance,  sin  and  perverse  pleasures,  and,  on  the  con- 
trary, is  the  gracious  gift  of  the  promised  heart  of  flesh 
(g),  replete  with  the  law  of  God,  light  (h),  sight,  wisdom, 
understanding,  virtue  and  holy  desires.  This  regener- 
ation has  its  rise  from  God  (i)  through  Christ  (k).  The 
medium  or  instrument  through  which  it  is  generated 
in  us,  is  the  Holy  Spirit  (1)  with  all  his  fiery  virtues, 
apart  from  any  co-operation  of  any  creature.  Here  con- 
cerning the  regenerate,  we  affirm  that  they  are  born  not 
out  of  anything  whatsoever  which  the  creature  does,  but 
from  God  (m)  ;  and  by  it  we  become  children  of  God 
(n),  divine,  heavenly  and  spiritually  minded,  just  and 
holy.  We  believe  and  teach  that  this  regeneration  is 
necessary  to  salvation  according  to  the  words  of  Christ: 
(o)  "Verily,  verily  I  say  to  thee,  except  a  man  be  born 
again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  " ;  and  "  Except 
a  man  be  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter 
the  kingdom  of  God." 

a.  Eph.  4  :  24;  Col.  3  :  9,  10.  b.  Rom.  12  :  2;  Eph.  4  :  23.  c. 
John  8  :  z^-  d.  Eph.  4  :  22-24 ;  Col.  3  :  9,  10.  e.  Eze.  z^  :  26.  f . 
Eph.  4  :  17,  18.  g.  Eze.  36  :  26.  h.  Jer.  31  :  33.  Heb.  8  :  10. 
i.  John  8  :  47;  I  John  4  :  i,  2,  6,  7.  k.  I  Pet.  i  :  3,  23;  James 
I  :  18.  1.  John  3  :  5.  6.  m.  John  i  :  13;  I  John  3:9.  n.  John 
I  :  12.    o.  John  3  :  3,  5- 


The  Mennonites  39 


ARTICLE  XXIII. 

OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

A  man,  in  this  way  regenerated  and  justified  by  God 
through  Christ,  Hves  through  love  (a)  (which  is  poured 
out  into  his  heart  (b)  through  the  Holy  Spirit)  with  joy 
and  gladness  (c),  in  all  good  works,  according  to  the 
laws  and  precepts  and  customs  enjoined  on  him  by  God 
through  Christ.  He  watches,  gives  thanks  (d)  and 
blesses  God  (e)  with  a  pure  heart  and  holy  life,  for  all  his 
benefits  and  especially  for  those  which  pertain  to  the 
soul.  Such  are  holy  plants  of  the  Lord  (f),  trees  of 
justice  who  worship  God  with  good  works  (g)  and 
ardently  expect  the  blessed  remuneration  promised  them 
by  God   (h),  through  his  abundant  goodness    (i). 

a.  John  14  :  23;  Gal.  5.  b.  Rom,  5.  c.  Ps.  1:2;  10  :  2.  d. 
Ps.  103  :  I.  e.  Matt.  5:8.  f.  Isa.  61  :  3.  g.  Matt.  5  :  16.  h. 
Eph.  2:7.    i.  Luke  6  :  23;  I  Cor.  3  :  14. 

ARTICLE  XXIV. 

OF  THE   CHURCH. 

Such  believing  and  regenerated  men,  dispersed  through- 
out the  whole  earth  (a),  are  the  true  people  of  God  or 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  earth,  which  he  loved  (b) 
and  for  which  he  gave  himself  up  that  he  might  sanctify 
it,  which  indeed  he  did  sanctify  through  the  laver,  in  the 
word  of  life.  Of  this  church  (c)  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
Foundation,  Head  (d),  Shepherd  (e).  Leader  (f).  Lord 
(g),  King,  and  Master  (h).  This  alone  is  his  adored 
(i)  spouse  (k),  holy  body,  flock  (1),  and  people  and 
through  regeneration  (m)  his  flesh  and  bones.  But  even 
though  a  huge  multitude  of  deceivers  and  hypocrites  are 
hidden  and  live  among  this  church  (n),  yet  those  alone 
who  in  Christ  are  regenerated  and  sanctified  are  true 
members  of  Christ's  body  (o),  and  for  this  reason  heirs 
of  his  blessed  promises  of  which  great  benefits  the  de- 
ceivers and  hypocrites,  on  account  of  their  own  blame 
and  wickedness,  are  deprived. 


40  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

a.  Matt.  8  :  ii;  24  :  3;  Rev.  7:9.  b.  Eph.  5  :  25.  c.  I  Cor. 
3:11.  d.  Eph.  5  :  2:^.  e.  John  10  :  11.  f.  Phil.  2:11.  g.  Matt. 
21  :  5.  h.  John  13  :  15.  i.  John  3  :  29;  Rev.  21  :  2.  k.  Eph. 
5  :  23.  1.  John  10  :  16.  m.  Eph.  5  :  30.  n.  Matt.  13  :  24,  &c. 
o.  2.  Cor.  5  :  17.    p.  Luke  14  :  24. 

ARTICLE  XXV. 

OF  THE  MINISTRIES  TO  BE  EXERCISED  IN  THE  CHURCH. 

In  this  his  holy  church  Christ  has  ordained  an  evangel- 
ical ministry,  namely,  teaching  of  the  divine  word  (a), 
use  of  the  holy  sacraments,  and  the  care  of  the  poor  (b), 
as  also  ministers  for  performing  these  ministries :  and 
moreover  the  exercise  of  fraternal  admonition  (c),  pun- 
ishment and  finally  removal  of  those  who  persevere  in  im- 
penitence: which  ordinances,  originating  in  the  word  of 
God,  are  to  be  performed  only  according  to  the  meaning 
of  the  same  word  (d). 

a.  Matt.  28  :  19;  Mark  16  :  15.  b.  Acts  6  :  2,  3,  4.  c.  Matt. 
18  :  15;  Luke  17  :  3.    d.  Matt.  17  :  5. 

ARTICLE  XXVI. 

OF  THE  ORDER  WHICH  IS  TO  BE  OBSERVED  IN  THE  CHURCH 

ABOUT  MINISTRIES. 

Just  as  the  body  consists  of  divers  members  and  each 
member  performs  its  own  work,  for  no  member  is  [in 
turn]  hand,  eye  or  foot;  in  the  same  way  (a)  things  are 
done  in  the  Church  of  God.  For  although  every  be- 
liever is  a  member  of  the  body  of  Christ,  not  everyone  is 
for  that  reason  a  teacher,  bishop  or  deacon:  but  those 
only  who  (b)  have  been  set  apart  to  those  ministries 
according  to  order.  Wherefore  the  administrations  of 
those  functions  or  offices  do  not  pertain  to  every  one, 
but  to  the  ordained. 

a.  Rom.  12  :  4;  I  Cor.  12  :  12.    b.  Heb.  5  :  7. 

ARTICLE  XXVII. 

HOW    ELECTION    TO   THOSE    MINISTRIES    IS    ACCOMPLISHED. 

Calling  or  election  to  the  aforesaid  ministries  is  accom- 
plished through  the  ministers  of  the  church  and  its  mem- 


The  Mennonites  41 


bers  conjointly  (a),  and  by  invocation  of  the  name  of 
God:  for  God  alone  knows  hearts,  walks  in  the  midst  of 
the  believers  (b),  who  are  congregated  in  his  name,  and 
through  his  Holy  Spirit  directs  their  intellects  and  minds 
so  that  through  them  he  manifests  and  calls  forth  such  as 
he  knows  will  be  useful  to  his  church. 

a.  Acts  I  :  21 ;  14  :  2.    b.  Matt.  18  :  19,  20. 

ARTICLE  XXVIII. 

OF  CONFIRMATION  TO  THE  AFORESAID  MINISTRIES. 

But  although  the  election  and  call  aforesaid  are  ac- 
complished in  the  method  [aforesaid],  yet  confirmation  in 
the  ministry  itself  is  performed  by  the  elders  of  the  people 
in  the  presence  of  the  church  (a)  and  that  for  the  most 
part  by  the  imposition  of  hands. 

a.  Acts  6  :  6;  13  :  3;  I  Tim.  4  :  14;  2  Tim.  i  :  7. 

ARTICLE  XXIX. 

OF    THE   DOCTRINE    AND   DOCTRINAL    BOOKS    OF    THE   SAME 

MINISTERS. 

The  doctrine  which  ordained  ministers  propose  to  the 
people  ought  to  be  or  to  agree  with  that  which  Jesus 
Christ  brought  from  heaven  (a),  which  he  taught  the 
people  by  word  and  work,  that  is,  in  doctrine  and  life, 
and  which  the  apostles  of  Christ,  at  the  mandate  and  ac- 
cording to  the  spirit  of  Christ,  announced  (c).  It  (as 
much  as  is  necessary  to  us  for  salvation  (d)  is  contained 
in  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  to  which  we  join  all 
that  which  is  found  in  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old 
Testament  and  which  is  consonant  with  the  doctrine  of 
Christ  and  his  Apostles  and  in  accord  with  the  adminis- 
tration of  his  spiritual  kingdom. 

a.  Heb.  2  :  3 ;  12  :  25.  b.  Acts  1:1.  c.  Matt.  28  :  19;  Mark 
16  :  15.    d.  Dent.  4  :  i,  2;  2  Tim.  3  :  16. 


42  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


ARTICLE  XXX. 

OF  THE  SACRAMENTS. 

Jesus  Christ  instituted  in  his  church  two  sacraments 
(whose  administration  he  attached  to  the  teaching  office), 
namely,  Holy  Baptism  (a)  and  the  Holy  Supper  (b). 
These  are  external  and  visible  actions,  and  signs  of  the 
immense  goodness  of  God  toward  us ;  placing  before  our 
eyes,  on  the  part  of  God,  the  internal  and  spiritual  ac- 
tion which  God  accomplishes  (c)  through  Christ  (the 
Holy  Spirit  co-operating)  by  regenerating,  justifying, 
spiritually  nourishing  and  sustaining  the  souls  which 
repent  and  believe  (d)  ;  we  on  our  part,  by  the  same 
means,  confess  rehgion,  repentance  (e),  faith  (f)  and 
our  obedience  (g)  by  earnestly  directing  our  conscience 
to  the  service  (or  worship)  of  God. 

a.  Matt.  28  :  19;  Mark  16  :  15.    b.  Matt.  26  :  25;  Luc.  22  :  19. 

c.  Tit.  3:5.     d.  Eph.  5  :  29;   Rev.  3  :  23.     e.  Acts  2  :  38.     f. 
Acts  8  :  36.    g.  Matt.  3  :  15. 

ARTICLE  XXXI. 

OF  EXTERNAL  BAPTISM. 

Holy  Baptism  is  an  external,  visible  and  evangelical 
action,  in  which,  according  to  Christ's  precept  (a)  and 
the  practice  of  the  apostles  (b),  for  a  holy  end  (c),  are 
baptized  with  water  in  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of 
the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  those  who  hear,  believe 
and  freely  receive  in  a  penitent  heart  the  doctrine  of  the 
holy  gospel  (d)  ;  for  such  Christ  commanded  to  be  bap- 
tized, but  by  no  means  infants. 

a,  I  Pet.  3  :  21.  b.  Matt.  28  :  19;  Mark  16  :  15.  c.  Acts  2  : 
38,  41;  8  :  II,  36,  37;  10  :  45,  48;  16  :  15,  32-34;  18  :  8;  19  :  5. 

d.  Matt.  3  :  15;  Acts  2  :  38;  Rom.  6  :  3,  4;  Col.  2  :  12. 

ARTICLE  XXXII. 

WHAT    BAPTISM     SIGNIFIES    INTERNALLY. 

The  whole  action  of  external,  visible  baptism  places 
before  our  eyes,  testifies  and  signifies  that  Jesus  Christ 


The  Mennonifes  43 


baptizes  internally  (a)  in  a  laver  of  regeneration  (b)  and 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  penitent  and  believing 
man:  washing  away,  through  the  virtue  and  merits  of 
his  poured  out  blood,  all  the  spots  and  sins  of  the  soul 
(c)  and  through  the  virtue  and  operation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  is  a  true,  heavenly  (d),  spiritual  and  living 
water,  [washing  away]  the  internal  wickedness  of  the 
soul  (e)  and  renders  it  heavenly  (f),  spiritual  (g)  and 
living  (h)  in  true  righteousness  and  goodness.  Moreover 
baptism  directs  us  to  Christ  and  his  holy  office  by  which 
in  glory  he  performs  that  which  he  places  before  our  eyes, 
and  testifies  concerning  its  consummation  in  the  hearts  of 
believers  and  admonishes  us  that  we  should  not  cleave  to 
external  things,  but  by  holy  prayers  ascend  into  heaven 
and  ask  from  Christ  the  good  indicated  through  it 
[baptism]  (i)  :  a  good  which  the  Lord  Jesus  graciously 
concedes  and  increases  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  by  true 
faith  become  partakers  of  the  sacraments. 

a.  Matt.  3  :  11;  John  i  :  33.  b.  Eph.  S  '■  26]  Tit.  3:5-  c.  I 
John  1:7.  d.  Isa.  44  :  3 ;  Eze.  36  :  27 ;  Joel  2  :  28 ;  John  7  :  38. 
e.  I  Cor.  6  :  11;  Tit.  3  :  5-7.  f .  Phil.  3  :  20.  g.  Rom.  8:9.  h. 
Eph.  2  :  4,  5.    i.  John  7  :  3i- 


ARTICLE  XXXHL 

OF  THE  HOLY  SUPPER. 

The  Holy  Supper  (as  also  Baptism)  is  an  external  and 
visible  evangelical  action  in  which,  according  to  the  pre- 
cepts of  Christ  (a),  and  the  usage  of  the  Apostles  (b), 
for  a  holy  end  (c),  we  partake  of  bread  and  wine.  The 
bread  is  broken,  the  wine  is  poured  out  and  by  them  are 
sustained  those  who,  believing,  are  baptized  according  to 
the  institution  of  Christ.  The  bread  is  eaten  by  them, 
the  wine  is  drunk.  Thus  Christ's  death  and  bitter  suf- 
fering are  proclaimed  (d),  and  all  these  things  are  done 
in  commemoration  of  him.     (e). 

a.  Luke  22  :  19.  b.  Acts  2  :  42;  20  :  11;  I  Cor.  11  :  22.  c.  I 
Cor.  10  :  15;  II  :  28.  d.  I  Cor.  11  :  25.  e.  Luke  22  :  19;  I  Cor. 
II  :  24. 


44  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ARTICLE  XXXIV. 

WHAT   THE    HOLY   SUPPER   SIGNIFIES. 

The  whole  action  of  the  external  and  visible  supper 
places  before  our  eyes,  testifies  and  signifies  that  Christ's 
holy  body  was  broken  on  the  cross  (a)  and  his  holy  blood 
poured  out  (b),  for  the  remission  of  our  sins;  that  he  is 
now  glorified  in  heaven,  is  the  living  bread,  food  and 
drink  of  our  souls  (c).  It  places  before  our  eyes  Christ's 
office  or  ministry  in  glory  while  he  sups  spiritually  with 
believing  souls  (d)  by  nourishing  and  feeding  souls  with 
spiritual  food  (e).  Through  it  we  are  taught,  in  that 
external  action,  to  elevate  our  hearts  on  high  with  holy 
supplications  (f),  and  to  seek  from  Christ  the  true  and 
highest  good  shadowed  forth  in  this  supper;  (g)  and 
finally  it  exhorts  us  to  give  thanks  to  God  and  to  exercise 
unity  and  love  among  ourselves  (h). 

a.  Luke  22  :  19;  I  Cor.  11  :  23.  b.  Mark  14  :  24.  c.  John 
6  :  51,  55-  d.  Rev.  3  :  20.  e.  Eph.  5  :  29.  f.  Col.  3  :  i,  2.  g. 
I  Cor.  10  :  16.    h.  I  Cor.  10  :  17. 

ARTICLE  XXXV. 

OF    EXCOMMUNICATION. 

Ecclesiastical  discipline  or  extreme  punishment  is  like- 
wise an  external  action  among  believers,  by  which  an 
impenitent  sinner,  after  Christian  conversation  (a)  and 
sufficient  admonition,  is  excluded  from  the  communion  of 
God  and  his  saints,  on  account  of  sins ;  and  against  him 
the  wrath  and  anger  of  God  (until  he  comes  to  himself 
and  amends)  is  denounced.  By  which  external  eccle- 
siastical exclusion  is  shown  how  God  has  already  before- 
hand dealt  with  the  excluded  one  on  account  of  his  sins, 
or  judged  concerning  him.  With  God,  therefore,  the 
judgment  upon  the  fallen  sinner  is  antecedent  (b),  but 
with  the  church  subsequent  judgment.  Wherefore  special 
care  must  be  taken,  that  no  one  be  condemned  in  the 
church  who  has  not  beforehand  been  condemned  by  the 
word  of  God. 

a.  Matt.  18  :  15-18;  I  Cor.  5  :  2,  12.    b.  John  5  :  22;  12  :  48. 


The  Mennonites  45 


ARTICLE  XXXVI. 

OF  WITHDRAWAL  FROM   PERVERSE  APOSTATES. 

Those  excluded  from  the  church  are  by  no  means 
admitted  (as  long  as  they  persevere  in  sins)  to  the  com- 
munion of  the  Holy  Supper  or  other  ecclesiastical  actions, 
but  we  deprive  them  of  these  and  all  other  privileges  by 
which  any  communion,  fraternity  or  spiritual  participation 
in  sacred  things  is  signified.  And  since  the  life  and  daily 
conversation  of  wicked  and  perverse  men  offends  and  is 
hurtful  (a),  and  not  infrequently  a  stumbling  block  to  the 
good,  and  subjects  them  to  calumny ;  for  these  reasons, 
they  withdraw  themselves  from  them,  nor  do  they  wish 
to  have  any  communion  with  them,  their  actions,  words  or 
works,  lest  their  pure  mind  be  polluted  and  contaminated 
and  the  name  of  God  blasphemed :  and  all  this  in  this 
manner,  in  accordance  with  the  word  of  God  as  supreme 
law ;  the  married  do  not  separate  themselves  nor  do  they 
withdraw  themselves  from  marital  privileges,  and  so 
nothing  is  done  in  this  matter  which  is  contrary  to 
love,  mercy,  Christian  justice,  want,  promises  and  other 
similar  things. 

a.  I  Cor.  5  :  5;  2  Tim.  2  :  10,  17,  18;  2  Tim.  3  :  10;  Tit.  3  :  10. 

ARTICLE  XXXVII. 

OF  THE  OFFICE  OF  CIVIL  MAGISTRATE. 

Government  or  the  civil  Magistrate  is  a  necessary  or- 
dinance of  God  (a),  instituted  for  the  government  of 
common  human  society  and  the  preservation  of  natural 
life  and  civil  good,  for  the  defense  of  the  good  and  the 
punishment  of  the  evil.  We  acknowledge,  the  word  of 
God  obliging  us,  that  it  Is  our  duty  to  reverence  magis- 
tracy (b)  and  to  show  to  it  honor  and  obedience  in  all 
things  which  are  not  contrary  to  the  word  of  God  (c). 
It  is  our  duty  to  pray  the  omnipotent  God  for  them  (d), 
and  to  give  thanks  to  him  for  good  and  just  magistrates 
and  without  murmuring  to  pay  just  tribute  and  customs 
( e  ) .  This  civil  government  the  Lord  Jesus  did  not  institute 
in  his  spiritual  kingdom,  the  church  of  the  New  Testament, 


46  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

nor  did  he  join  it  to  the  offices  of  his  church  (f) :  nor 
did  he  call  his  disciples  or  followers  to  royal,  ducal  or 
other  power;  nor  did  he  teach  that  they  should  seize  it 
and  rule  in  a  lordly  manner ;  much  less  did  he  give  to  the 
members  of  his  church  the  law  (g),  agreeable  to  such 
office  or  dominion :  but  everywhere  they  are  called  away 
from  it  (which  voice  heard  from  heaven  (h)  ought  to 
'be  heeded)  to  the  imitation  of  his  harmless  life  (i)  and 
his  footsteps  bearing  the  cross  (k),  and  in  which  nothing 
is  less  in  evidence  than  an  earthly  kingdom,  power  and 
sword.  When  all  these  things  are  carefully  weighed  (and 
moreover  not  a  few  things  are  joined  with  the  office  of 
civil  magistracy,  as  waging  war,  depriving  enemies  of 
goods  and  life,  etc.,  which  [do  not  agree  with]  the  lives 
of  Christians  who  ought  to  be  dead  to  the  world),  they 
agree  either  badly  or  plainly  not  at  all,  hence  we  withdraw 
ourselves  from  such  offices  and  administrations.  And  yet 
we  do  not  wish  that  just  and  moderate  power  should  in 
any  manner  be  despised  or  condemned,  but  that  it  should 
be  truly  esteemed,  as  in  the  words  of  Paul  (1),  the  Holy 
Spirit  dictating,  it  ought  to  be  esteemed. 

a.  Rom.  13  :  i,  3,  4,  6.  b.  Tit.  3:1;!  Pet.  2  :  13,  17.  c.  Acts 
4  :  19.  d.  Jer.  29  :  7;  I  Tim.  2  :  i,  2.  e.  Matt.  22  :  17;  Rom. 
13  17.  f.  I  Cor.  12  :  28;  Eph.  4  :  11.  g.  Matt.  20  :  25-28; 
Luke  22  :  25-27.  h.  Matt.  17  :  5.  i.  John  8  :  12;  10  :  27.  k. 
Heb.  12  :  2,  3;  I  Pet.  2  :  21-23.     1.  Rom.  13  :  1-3. 

ARTICLE  XXXVIII. 

OF  THE  OATH. 

Jesus  Christ,  King  and  Lawgiver  (a)  of  the  New 
Testament,  has  forbidden  to  Christians  every  oath  (b), 
and  for  this  reason  all  oaths  are  unlawful  to  the  believers 
of  the  New  Testament. 

a.  Matt.  28  :  20;  Gal.  6:4.    b.  Matt.  5  :  34;  James  5  :  10. 

ARTICLE  XXXIX. 

OF  MARRIAGE. 

Marriage  we  profess  to  be  an  ordinance  of  God  which 
must  be  entered  into  according  to  the  primal  institution 


The  Mennonites  47 


(a) ;  that  each  man  have  his  own  only  wife  (b)  and  each 
woman  her  own  and  one  husband.  This  marriage  cannot 
be  dissolved  except  for  the  cause  of  adultery  (c).  Neither 
do  we  think  it  allowable  that  any  of  us  should  enter  into 
marriage  outside  the  Church  of  God,  with  wicked,  un- 
believing or  carnal  men  (d),  and  we  condemn  that  (as 
other  sins)  by  the  word  of  God,  the  state  of  the  time 
and  the  reason  of  things. 


a.  Gen.  2  :  22;  Matt.  19  14.    b.  I  Cor.  7:2;  Eph.  5  :  31. 
Matt.  19  :  9.    d.  Deut.  7:3,1  Cor.  7  :  39. 


c. 


ARTICLE  XL. 
OF  Christ's  return,  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 

AND    of    the    last    JUDGMENT. 

Lastly,  we  believe  and  teach  that  Jesus  Christ,  our 
glorious  King  and  Lord,  visibly  just  as  he  ascended  (a), 
will  return  from  heaven  (b)  with  power  and  great  glory, 
and  with  him  all  the  holy  angels  (c),  that  he  may  be 
glorified  in  his  saints  (d)  and  may  be  admired  by  all  be- 
lievers, and  will  manifest  himself  as  the  Judge  of  the 
living  and  the  dead  (e).  At  that  time  (f)  all  men,  just 
and  unjust,  who  have  lived  upon  the  earth  and  have 
died,  will  rise  from  the  dead  (with  incorruption  (g))  and 
live  again,  their  souls  being  reunited  with  their  own 
bodies  in  which  they  had  lived  evilly  or  well  (h).  But 
those  who  are  alive  in  that  day  and  have  not  died,  changed 
in  a  moment  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  will  put  on 
incorruption,  (i)  and  the  whole  multitude  of  the  human 
race  will  stand  before  the  tribunal  of  Christ  (k)  to  report 
(1)  what  each  one  has  done  in  the  body  according  to  that 
which  he  has  done  whether  good  or  evil.  Then  Jesus 
will  separate  the  sheep  from  the  goats  as  a  shepherd 
separates  the  sheep  from  the  goats  (m),  and  will  place 
the  sheep  on  his  right  hand  but  the  goats  on  the  left  (n), 
and  will  give  sentence.  The  just  who  have  lived  here 
holily  and  have  exercised  all  the  works  of  charity  and 
mercy  (o),  as  the  husband  (p)  of  that  Christian  multi- 
tude, he  will  take  to  himself.  They  will  enter  with  him 
into  eternal  life  (q)  and  celestial  joy  and  glory,  where  all 


48  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

will  always  be  with  the  Lord  (r)  and  will  possess  forever 
that  kingdom  (s)  which  God  the  Father  had  prepared  for 
them  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  But  the  un- 
righteous who  have  not  known  God  (t)  nor  regarded  the 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  will  be  condemned  to 
eternal  fire  (v),  which  was  prepared  for  the  Devil  and 
his  angels,  and  there  they  will  undergo  sorrow  and  eternal 
perdition  (x),  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  and  the  glory 
of  his  power. 

Preserve  us,  omnipotent  God,  full  of  grace  and  mercy, 
from  the  punishment  of  the  impious ;  and  concede  to  us 
grace  and  gifts  for  a  holy  life  and  happy  death  and  a 
joyous  resurrection  with  all  believers.    Amen. 

a.  Acts  I  :  11.  b.  Matt.  24  :  30;  2  Thess.  1:7.  c.  Matt.  25  : 
31.  d.  2  Thess.  i  :  10.  e.  Acts  10  :  42;  2  Tim.  4:1.  f.  Matt. 
25  ;  32;  John  5  :  28.  g.  I  Cor.  15  :  42.  h.  2  Cor.  5  :  10.  i.  I 
Cor.  15  :  51,  52.  k.  Matt.  25  :  32.  1.  2  Cor.  5  :  10.  m.  Matt. 
25  :  32.  n.  Matt.  25  :  47.  o.  Matt.  25  :  35,  36,  37,  38.  p.  Matt. 
25  :  10.  q.  John  5  :  29;  Matt.  25  :  47.  r.  I  Thess.  4  :  17.  s. 
Matt.  25  :  34.  t.  2  Thess.  1:8.  v.  Matt.  25  :  42.  x.  Isa.  2  :  10; 
2  Thess.  I  :  9. 

IL  Other  Confessions 

Other  Mennonite  Confessions  were  drawn  up  in  the  lat- 
ter part  of  the  sixteenth  and  early  in  the  seventeenth  cen- 
turies, chiefly  by  the  Dutch  Mennonites,  in  the  Dutch  lan- 
guage. They  were,  for  the  most  part,  union  documents 
drawn  up  in  an  effort  to  heal  the  schisms  that  so  griev- 
ously afflicted  the  body. 

1.  The  Concept  of  Cologne,  drawn  up  May  i,  1591,  and 
signed  by  the  chief  ministers  of  the  Frisian  and  High  Ger- 
man Mennonites.     Schyn,  "  Hist  aria/'  II,  79. 

2.  The  next  Confession  was  drawn  up  at  Amsterdam, 
September  2y,  1625,  and  was  called  "  The  Olive  Branch." 
It  was  an  attempt  to  give  a  scriptural  answer  to  the  ques- 
tion, '*  What  are  the  fundamental  and  unmistakable 
marks  "  by  which  the  children  of  God  may  be  known?  It 
is  found  in  a  condensed  Latin  form  in  Schyn  II,  85f,  and 


The  Mennonites  49 


in  English,  translated  directly  from  the  Dutch  in  Van 
Braght's  "  Martyrs'  Mirror,"  pp.  26-32. 

3.  A  Confession  treating  only  of  the  one  God,  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  and  of  the  Incarnation  of 
the  Son  of  God,  was  presented  to  the  deputies  of  Holland 
October  8,  1626,  and  was  accepted  by  them  as  the  basis  of 
the  policy  of  complete  toleration  of  the  Mennonites. 
Schyn,  "  Historia/'  etc.,  I,  79-85. 

4.  Another  Confession  in  twenty-one  articles  was 
drawn  up  at  Amsterdam,  October  7,  1630,  called  "  A  Brief 
Confession  of  Faith  and  of  the  Principal  Articles  of  the 
Christian  Religion."  Latin  in  full  in  Schyn  H,  87-114; 
English  translated  from  the  Dutch  in  Van  Braght,  32-36. 

5.  The  Confession  in  use  at  present.  The  most  im- 
portant of  all  the  Mennonite  Confessions  was  drawn  up 
in  eighteen  articles  at  a  peace  convention  held  in  Dort, 
April  21,  1632,  and  was  signed  by  fifty-one  ministers, 
representing  the  Mennonite  churches  in  sixteen  of  the 
leading  cities  of  the  Netherlands,  and  two  from  the 
upper  country.  It  was  afterward  adopted  by  the  Ger- 
man and  French  Mennonites  of  the  Palatinate  and  Alsace 
and  translated  into  their  tongues.  It  was  later  translated 
into  English  and  is  still,  with  some  verbal  changes,  the 
Confession  of  the  Mennonites  of  America,  by  whom  it  is 
diligently  circulated.  It  is  found  in  Van  Braght's 
"  Martyrs'  Mirror,"  pp.  36-42. 

These  later  Mennonite  Confessions  had  no  direct  in-^ 
fluence  on  Baptist  Confessions  and,  therefore,  are  not 
reproduced. 


part  ^bree 

THE   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS 

English  Baptists,  from  the  beginning  of  their  history, 
have  been  divided  on  the  basis  of  the  two  great  types 
of  theology  into  two  parties,  Calvinistic  and  Arminian. 
With  the  exception  of  the  Anabaptists,  the  theology  of 
all  parties  of  reformers  was  Augustinian,  emphasizing 
predestination  and  personal  election,  a  limited  atonement, 
the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints,  and  related  doctrines. 
But  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  there 
was  rising  in  the  Netherlands  a  new  theology,  emphasiz- 
ing the  freedom  of  the  will,  the  universality  of  the  atone- 
ment, conditional  election,  possible  apostasy,  and  related 
doctrines.  This  theology  began  as  a  criticism  of  Calvin- 
ism as  it  then  existed  in  the  Netherlands,  and  produced 
a  tremendous  sensation,  little  short  of  a  national  revolu- 
tion. The  English  Baptists  arose  in  the  Netherlands,  and 
possibly  because  of  their  contact  with  this  new  theology 
and  their  affinity  with  the  Anabaptists  or  Mennonites, 
who  held  this  type  of  doctrine,  they  adopted  a  theology 
which,  from  its  leading  representative,  James  Arminius, 
soon  came  to  be  known  as  Arminianlsm.  Because  they 
believed  in  a  universal  or  general  atonement  they  came  to 
be  known  as  General  Baptists.  Of  the  two  parties  or 
wings  of  English  Baptists  priority  of  origin  belongs, 
therefore,  to  the  Arminians,  and  these  we  shall  study 
first.  The  other  party,  or  wing,  will  be  considered  later. 
Of  course,  it  will  be  understood  that  the  whole  matter  is 
viewed  historically. 

SO 


The  English  Baptists  ^l 

I.  Arminian  or  General  Baptist  Confessions 

I.  FIRST  group 

No  Baptist  Confession  before  1644,  3.nd  none  of  the 
General  Baptist  Confessions  till  that  of  1660,  specifies 
immersion  or  dipping  as  the  mode  of  baptism,  and  it  is 
doubtful  if  the  confessions  prior  to  these  dates  ought  to 
be  called  Baptist;  but  such  is  the  custom,  and  it  is  fol- 
lowed here. 

Some  English  Puritans  came,  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  to  regard  the  English  Church  as  un- 
scriptural,  hopelessly  corrupt,  and  incapable  of  reform. 
They,  therefore,  left  it  and  set  up  independent  congre- 
gations, Calvinistic  in  theology  and  life,  but  congrega- 
tional and  democratic  in  church  government.  These  views 
first  appeared  in  eastern  England  where  there  had  been 
Dutch  Anabaptists  for  nearly  half  a  century,  to  whose  in- 
fluence they  may  have  been  in  some  measure  due.  At  any 
rate,  about  1580,  under  the  leadership  of  Robert  Browne, 
the  first  independent  congregation  of  this  type  was  set  up 
at  Norwich.  Similar  congregations  were  soon  gathered  at 
London,  Gainsborough,  Scrooby,  and  possibly  elsewhere 
soon  afterward.  The  rigorous  measures  of  the  English 
government  broke  up  all  these  bodies  of  Independents, 
or  Brownists,  as  they  were  sometimes  called.  For  safety 
and  freedom  most  of  them  fled  to  the  Netherlands. 
Browne  and  some  of  his  followers  went  to  Middleburg, 
whence  he  soon  returned  to  England  and  ultimately  re- 
united with  the  English  Church.  Barrow,  Greenwood, 
and  Penry,  leaders  of  the  London  congregation,  were 
hanged  In  1593,  and  the  congregation  was  broken  up,  a 
part  fleeing  to  Amsterdam,  where  they  again  set  up  the 
congregation.  In  1606  or  the  following  year,  John 
Smyth,  Thomas  Helwys,  John  Morton,  and  the  Gains- 
borough congregation   also  fled  to  Amsterdam,  where 


52  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

they  set  up  a  second  congregation  with  John  Smyth  as 
pastor.  In  1608,  John  Robinson,  WiUiam  Bradford, 
Wilham  Brewster,  and  the  Scrooby  congregation  fled  to 
Amsterdam,  and  thence  in  1609  to  Ley  den,  whence  in 
1620  a  part  came  to  America  in  the  Mayflower  and  laid 
the  foundation  of  New  England.  All  these  were  what 
are  now  called  Congregational  churches.  In  Amsterdam 
they  came  in  contact  with  the  Anabaptists,  or  Menno- 
nites,  with  whom  they  already  had  much  in  common.  Both 
were  suffering  for  their  views,  while  they  aspired  largely 
for  the  same  thing — a  pure  church  of  believers.  These 
circumstances  doubtless  drew  the  two  parties  together 
from  the  first.  As  early  as  1606  we  learn  that  "  divers  of 
them  [English  Independents  in  the  Netherlands]  fell  into 
the  errors  of  Anabaptism."  In  1608  or  1609  John  Smyth, 
the  pastor  of  the  second  church  at  Amsterdam,  and  a 
large  part  of  his  congregation  had  come  to  recognize  the 
unscripturalness  of  infant  baptism  and  had  determined  to 
adopt  believers'  baptism.  It  might  have  been  expected 
that  they  would  go  for  baptism  to  the  Mennonites  with 
whom  they  had  so  much  in  common.  But  there  were  im- 
portant differences  about  such  questions  as  the  oath,  war, 
civil  magistracy,  and  other  things,  and  consequently  these 
Englishmen  began  baptism  anew.  Smyth,  apparently, 
baptized  himself  (probably  by  affusion,  as  was  the  custom 
of  both  the  English  Independents  and  the  Dutch  Men- 
nonites at  this  time),  and  then  some  forty-one  others, 
thus  organizing  the  first  English  Baptist  or  Anabaptist 
church  out  of  members  of  the  second  Congregational 
Church  at  Amsterdam.  Along  with  infant  baptism  they 
also  gave  up  Calvinistic  theology  and  accepted  the  Ar- 
minian  system,  the  type,  as  we  have  seen,  which  had  been 
held  from  the  first  by  the  Anabaptists,  and  which  was 
now  greatly  agitating  the  Netherlands. 


The  English  Baptists  53 

Smyth  soon  came  to  feel  that  he  had  acted  without 
Scriptural  warrant  in  instituting  baptism  anew  when  the 
Mennonites,  which  he  now  regarded  as  a  true  church  of 
Christ,  were  at  hand  to  administer  the  ordinance.  He 
did  not  believe  they  had  succession  from  the  apostles,  for 
he  distinctly  asserts  that  succession  had  been  ''  broken 
off " ;  nor  did  he  believe  succession  was  in  any  sense 
necessary  to  the  existence  of  a  true  church  or  the  validity 
of  baptism.  He  held  that  one  would  be  warranted  in 
beginning  baptism  anew  if  there  were  no  true  church  in 
existence,  or  at  hand,  to  administer  the  ordinance;  but 
where  a  true  church  existed,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  indi- 
vidual to  make  application  to  it.  He  and  some  others, 
therefore,  applied  to  the  Mennonites  for  admission  to 
their  communion.^  Helwys,  Morton,  and  other  members 
of  his  church  disagreed  with  their  pastor  on  this  point, 
and  the  church  was  disrupted  about  1609.  Smyth  and  his 
party  stood  nearer  the  Mennonites,  believing  their  own 
baptism  to  be  unscriptural ;  Helwys  and  his  party  desired 
to  be  on  a  friendly  footing  with  the  Mennonites,  but 
asserted  the  validity  of  their  own  baptism,  and  proposed 
to  preserve  their  independent  organization  and  identity. 
Smyth  died  August,  1612,  and  his  party  seem  to  have 
been  absorbed  by  the  Mennonites;  Helwys  and  his  party, 
in  1612,  returned  to  England,  but  continued  a  friendly 
correspondence  with  the  Mennonites,  while  they  preserved 
their  own  identity  and  founded  the  General  Baptists  in 
England.  The  controversy  between  the  two  parties  and 
the  desire  of  both  to  retain  the  friendship  of  the  Men- 
nonites, produced  the  first  group  of  General  Baptist  Con- 
fessions. These  were  all  drawn  up  in  the  Netherlands, 
but  their  exact  dates,  origin,  history,  and  relations  are 
not  entirely  clear  in  most  cases.     Some  of  them  were 

*  "  Smyth's  Retraction,"  in  Barclay's  Inner  Life.    Appendix  to  Chap.  VI, 
p.   5. 


54  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

never  published,  and  none  of  them,  it  is  hkely,  had  any 
wide  circulation,  since  the  entire  Baptist  body  was  at 
this  time  very  small. 

1.  What  is  perhaps  the  earliest  of  this  group  is  a 
brief  Confession,  consisting  of  twenty  articles  in  Latin 
(never  printed)  signed  by  John  Smyth.  It  has  been 
supposed  that  this  Confession  was  submitted  by  Smyth 
and  his  party  to  the  Mennonite  church  of  Amsterdam  as 
the  basis  for  their  application  for  membership  in  that 
body,  though  there  is  nothing  in  the  manuscript  to  justify 
the  supposition.  (Translated  in  Evans'  "  Early  English 
Baptists,"  I,  253f.) 

2.  Another  Confession  consisted  of  thirty-eight  articles 
in  Dutch,  signed  by  Smyth  and  forty-one  others.  It  was 
drawn  up  by  Hans  de  Ries,  a  Alennonite ;  was  then  signed 
by  the  English  applicants  for  membership  and  sent  by 
Ries  to  other  Mennonite  churches,  with  the  request  for 
advice  as  to  whether  the  English  ought  to  be  received  on 
that  basis.  Recently  it  has  been  translated  into  English  by 
Professor  Miiller,  and  appears  in  Evans  I,  45f.  It  is  in 
complete  accord  with  the  peculiar  tenets  of  the  Men- 
nonites  and  probably  did  not  properly  represent  the  views 
of  the  majority  of  the  English  General  Baptists  as  to 
oaths,  war,  civil  magistracy,  etc.  It  is  almost  a  reproduc- 
tion of  the  Confession  of  Ries  and  Gerrits,  of  1580  (see 
p.  26),  with  two  articles,  XIX  and  XXII,  omitted.  Prof. 
Muller's  translation  follows: 

A  SHORT  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH. 

Article  i.  We  believe,  through  the  power  and  instruc- 
tion of  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  there  is  one  only  God, 
who  is  a  Spirit,  eternal,  incomprehensible,  infinite,  al- 
mighty, merciful,  righteous,  perfectly  wise,  only  good, 
and  only  fountain  of  life  and  all  goodness,  the  Creator  of 
heaven  and  earth,  things  visible  and  invisible. 


The  English  Baptists  55 

2.  This  only  God  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  manifested 
and  revealed  in  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  being 
three,  and  nevertheless  but  one  God. 

3.  The  Father  is  the  original  and  the  beginning  of  all 
things  who  hath  begotten  his  Son  from  everlasting  be- 
fore all  creation.  That  Son  is  the  everlasting  Word  of 
the  Father,  and  his  wisdom.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  his 
virtue,  power,  and  might,  proceeding  from  the  Father 
and  the  Son.  These  three  are  not  divided,  nor  separated 
in  essence,  nature,  property,  eternity,  power,  glory  or 
excellency. 

4.  This  only  God  hath  created  man  good,  according  to 
his  image  and  likeness,  to  a  good  and  happy  estate,  and 
in  him  all  men  to  the  same  blessed  end.  The  first  man 
was*  fallen  into  sin  and  wrath  and  was  again  by  God, 
through  a  sweet  comfortable  promise,  restored  and  af- 
firmed to  everlasting  life,  with  all  those  that  were  guilty 
through  him  so  that  none  of  his  posterity  (by  reason  of 
this  institution)  are  guilty,  sinful,  or  born  in  original  sin. 

5.  Man  being  created  good,  and  continuing  in  good- 
ness, had  the  ability,  the  spirit  of  wickedness  tempting  him, 
freely  to  obey,  assent,  or  reject  the  propounded  evil :  man 
being  fallen  and  consisting  {sic)  in  evil,  had  the  ability, 
the  T — himself  moving  freely  to  obey,  assent  or  reject 
the  propounded  good ;  for  as  he  through  free  power  to  the 
choice  of  evil,  obeyed  and  affirmed  that  evil;  so  did  he 
through  free  power  to  the  choice  of  good,  obey  and 
reassent  that  propounded  good.  This  last  power  or 
ability  remaineth  in  all  his  posterity. 

6.  God  hath  before  all  time  foreseen  and  foreknown 
all  things,  both  good  and  evil,  whether  past,  present,  or 
to  come.  Now,  as  he  is  the  only  perfect  goodness,  and 
the  very  fountain  of  life  itself,  so  is  he  the  only  author, 
original,  and  maker  of  such  good  things  as  are  good, 
holy,  pure,  and  of  nature  like  unto  him ;  but  not  of  sin,  or 
damnable  uncleanness.  He  forbiddeth  the  evil,  he  fore- 
warneth  to  obey  evil,  and  threateneth  the  evil  doer:  he  is 
the  permitter  and  punisher.  But  evil  men,  through  free 
choice  of  all  sin  and  wickedness,  together  with  the  spirit 
of  wickedness  which  ruleth  in  them,   are  the  authors, 

*  Interlined. 


56  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

originals,   and   makers   of   all   sin,   and   so   worthy   the 
punishment. 

7.  The  causes  and  ground,  therefore,  of  man's  destruc- 
tion and  damnation,  are  the  man's  free  choice  of  dark- 
ness or  sin,  and  living  therein.  Destruction,  therefore, 
cometh  out  of  himself,  but  not  from  the  good  Creator. 
For  being  perfect  goodness  and  love  itself  (following  the 
nature  of  love  and  perfect  goodness)  he  willeth  the  health, 
good,  and  happiness  of  his  creatures ;  therefore  hath  he 
predestinated  that  none  of  them  should  be  condemned, 
nor  ordained,  or  will  the  sinner,  or  means  whereby  they 
should  be  brought  to  damnation:  yea,  much  more  (see- 
ing he  hath  no  delight  in  any  man's  destruction,  nor 
willing  that  any  man  perish,  but  that  all  men  should  be 
saved  or  blessed)  hath  he  created  them  all  to  a  happy  end 
in  Christ,  hath  foreseen  and  ordained  in  him  a  medicine  of 
life  for  all  their  sins,  and  hath  willed  that  all  people  or 
creatures,  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  should 
have  these  tidings  published  and  declared  unto  them; 
now  all  they  that  with  penitence  and  faithful  hearts  re- 
ceive and  embrace  the  gracious  benefits  of  God,  mani- 
fested in  Christ,  for  the  reconciliation  of  the  world,  they 
are  and  continue  the  elect  which  God  hath  ordained  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world,  to  make  partakers  of 
his  kingdom  and  glory.  But  they  which  despise  and 
contemn  this  proffered  grace  of  God,  which  love  the 
darkness  more  than  the  light,  persevere  in  impenitence 
and  unbelief,  they  make  themselves  unworthy  of  blessed- 
ness, and  are  rejected,  excluded  from  the  end  whereto 
they  were  created  and  ordained  in  Christ,  and  shall  not 
taste  forever  of  the  Supper  of  the  Lord,  to  which  they 
were  invited. 

8.  The  purpose  which  God,  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  had  for  the  reconciliation  of  the  world  (which 
he  saw  would  fall  into  wrath  and  want  of  grace),  he  hath 
in  the  fulness  of  time  accomplished ;  and  for  this  purpose 
hath  sent  out  of  heaven  his  everlasting  Word,  or  Son, 
for  the  fulfilling  of  the  promises  made  unto  the  fathers 
and  hath  caused  him  to  become  flesh  *  .  .  in  the  womb  of 
the  holy  virgin  (called  Mary)  by  his  word,  and  power, 

*  Word  wanting. 


The  English  Baptists  57 

and  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Not  that  the  essence 
of  God,  the  eternal  Word,  or  any  part  thereof,  is  changed 
into  a  visible  mortal  flesh  or  man,  ceasing  to  be  Spirit, 
God,  or  God's  essence;  but  that  he,  the  everlasting  Son 
of  God,  continuing  that  he  was  before,  namely,  God  or 
Spirit,  became  what  he  was  not,  that  is,  flesh  or  man ; 
and  he  is  one  person  true  God  and  man,  born  of  Mary, 
being  visibly  and  invisibly,  inwardly  and  outwardly,  the 
true  Son  of  the  living  God. 

9.  This  Person,  God  and  Man,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God,  is  come  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  or  to  reconcile 
the  sinful  world  to  God  the  Father:  therefore  now  ac- 
knowledge him  to  be  the  only  Mediator,  King,  Priest  and 
Prophet,  Lawgiver  and  Teacher,  which  God  hath 
promised  to  send  into  the  world,  whom  we  must  trust, 
believe,  and  follow. 

10.  In  him  is  fulfilled,  and  by  him  is  taken  away,  an 
intolerable  burden  of  the  law  of  Moses,  even  all  the 
shadows  and  figures;  as,  namely,  the  priesthood,  temple, 
altar,  sacrifice;  also  the  kingly  oflice,  kingdom,  sword, 
revenge  appointed  by  the  law,  battle  and  whatsoever  was 
a  figure  of  his  person  or  office,  so  thereof  a  shadow  or 
representation. 

11.  And  as  the  true  promised  Prophet  he  hath  mani- 
fested and  revealed  unto  us  whatsoever  God  asketh  or 
requlreth  of  the  people  of  the  New  Testament;  for  as 
God,  by  Moses  and  the  other  prophets,  hath  spoken  and 
declared  his  will  to  the  people  of  the  Old  Testament ;  so 
hath  he  in  those  last  days,  by  his  Prophet  spoken  unto  us, 
and  revealed  unto  us  the  mystery  (concealed  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  world),  and  hath  now  manifested  to  us 
whatsoever  yet  remained  to  be  manifested.  He  hath 
preached  the  promised  glad  tidings,  appointed  and  or- 
dained the  sacraments,  the  offices  and  ministries,  by  God 
thereto  destinated ;  and  hath  showed  by  doctrine  and  life, 
the  law  of  Christians,  a  rule  of  their  life,  the  path  and 
way  of  everlasting  life. 

12.  Moreover,  as  a  High  Priest  and  Mediator  of  the 
New  Testament,  after  that  he  hath  accomplished  the  will 
of  his  Father  in  the  foresaid  works,  he  hath  finally  given 
himself  obediently  (for  the  reconciliation  of  the  sins  of 


58  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

the  world)  to  all  outward  suffering,  and  hath  offered  up 
himself  in  death  upon  the  cross  unto  the  Father,  for  a 
sweet  savor  and  common  oblation. 

13.  We  acknowledge  that  the  obedience  of  the  Son  of 
God,  his  suffering,  dying,  bloodshed,  bitter  passion,  death, 
and  only  sacrifice  upon  the  cross,  is  a  perfect  reconcili- 
ation and  satisfaction  for  our  sins  and  the  sins  of  the 
world;  so  that  men  thereby  are  reconciled  to  God,  are 
brought  into  power,  and  have  a  sure  hope  and  certainty 
to  the  entrance  into  everlasting  life. 

14.  Christ,  our  Prophet  and  Priest,  being  also  the 
promised,  only  spiritual,  heavenly  King  of  the  New 
Testament,  hath  erected,  or  built,  a  spiritual  kingdom, 
and  united  a  company  of  faithful,  spiritual  men;  these 
persons  hath  he  endowed  with  spiritual,  kingly  laws, 
after  the  nature  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  and  hath  estab- 
lished therein  justice,  righteousness,  and  the  ministers 
thereof. 

15.  Having  accomplished  and  performed  here  upon  the 
earth,  by  dying  the  death,  his  office  of  the  cross  he  was 
afterwards  buried,  thereby  declaring  that  he  was  truly 
dead ;  the  third  day  he  rose  again,  and  stood  up  from 
the  dead,  abolishing  death,  and  testifying  that  he  was 
Lord  over  death,  and  he  could  not  possibly  be  detained 
by  the  hands  of  death,  thereby  comfortably  assuring  all 
the  faithful  of  their  resurrection  and  standing  up  from 
death. 

16.  Afterwards,  forty  days  spent,  he  conversed  amongst 
his  disciples,  and  ofttimes  showed  himself  unto  them  that 
there  might  no  doubt  be  had  concerning  his  resurrection ; 
after  that,  being  compassed  by  a  cloud,  he  was  carried 
up  into  heaven,  and  entered  into  his  glory,  leading  cap- 
tivity captive,  and  making  a  show  of  his  enemies,  hath 
gloriously  triumphed  over  them,  and  is  sat  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  of  God,  and  is  become  a  Lord,  and 
Christ,  glorified  in  body,  advanced,  lifted  up,  and  crowned 
with  praise  and  glory,  and  remaineth  over  Mount  Sion 
a  Priest,  and  King  for  everlasting. 

17.  The  holy  office  of  this  glorified  Priest,  King,  Lord 
and  Christ,  in  the  heavenly  glorious  being  is  to  help,  gov- 
ern, and  preserve,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  his  holy  church 


The  English  Baptists  59 

and  people  in  the  world,  through  the  storm,  wind,  and 
troubles  of  the  sea ;  for,  according  to  his  priestly  office,  as 
an  overseer  or  steward  of  the  true  tabernacle,  is  he  our 
Intercessor,  Advocate,  and  Mediator  by  the  Father.  He 
teacheth,  comforteth,  strengtheneth,  and  baptizeth  us 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  his  heavenly  gifts  and  fiery  victims, 
and  keepeth  his  spiritual  supper  with  the  faithful  soul, 
making  it  partaker  of  the  life  giving  food  and  drink  of 
the  soul,  the  fruit,  virtue,  and  worth  of  his  merits  ob- 
tained upon  the  cross ;  the  only  and  necessary  good  signi- 
fied in  the  sacraments. 

18.  And  according  to  his  kingly  office,  in  his  heavenly* 
being  he  governeth  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  by  his  Holy 
Spirit  and  Word ;  he  taketh  them  into  his  protection,  he 
covereth  them  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings,  he  armeth 
them  with  spiritual  weapons  for  the  spiritual  warfare 
against  all  their  enemies,  namely,  the  Spirit  of  wicked- 
ness, under  heaven,  and  whatsoever  dependeth  on  them  in 
this  earth.  He,  their  most  Glorious,  Almighty,  Heavenly 
King,  standeth  by  them,  delivereth  and  freeth  them  from 
the  hands  of  their  enemies,  giveth  them  victory  and  the 
winning  of  the  field,  and  hath  prepared  for  them  a  crown 
of  righteousness  in  heaven.  And  they  being  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord,  who  dwell  In  the  house  of  the  Lord,  upon  the 
Mount  Sion,  do  change  their  fleshly  weapons,  namely, 
their  swords  into  shares,  and  their  spears  into  scythes, 
do  lift  up  no  sword,  neither  hath  nor  consent  to  fleshly 
battle. 

19.  All  these  spiritual  good  things  and  beneficial,  which 
Christ,  by  his  merits,  hath  obtained  for  the  saving  of 
sinners,  we  do  graciously  enjoy  through  a  true,  living, 
working  faith.  Which  faith  Is  an  assured  understanding 
and  knowledge  of  the  heart,  obtained  out  of  the  Word  of 
God,  concerning  God,  Christ,  and  other  heavenly  things 
which  are  necessary  for  us  to  know,  and  to  believe  to 
salvation,  together  with  a  hearty  confidence  In  the  only 
God,  that  he,  as  a  gracious  and  heavenly  Father,  will 
give  and  bestow  upon  us,  through  Christ,  and  for  his 
merits,  whatsoever  is  helpful  and  profitable  for  body  and 
soul  for  salvation. 

*  Interlined. 


6o  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

20.  Through  such  a  faith  we  obtain  true  righteousness, 
forgiveness,  absolution  from  sin  through  the  bloodshed 
of  Christ,  and  through  righteousness,  which  through 
the  Christ  Jesus,  by  the  co-operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
is  plentifully  shed  and  poured  into  us,  so  that  we  truly  are 
made,  of  evil  men,  good ;  of  fleshly,  spiritual ;  of  covetous, 
liberal ;  of  proud,  humble ;  and  through  regeneration  are 
made  pure  in  heart,  and  the  children  of  God. 

21.  Man  being  thus  justified  by  faith,  liveth  and 
worketh  by  love  ( which  the  Holy  Ghost  sheddeth  into  the 
heart)  in  all  good  works,  in  the  laws,  precepts,  ordinances 
given  them  by  God  through  Christ ;  he  praiseth  and 
blesseth  God,  by  a  holy  life,  for  every  benefit,  especially 
of  the  soul;  and  so  are  all  such  plants  of  the  Lord  trees 
of  righteousness,  who  honor  God  through  good  works, 
and  expect  a  blessed  reward. 

22.  Such  faithful,  righteous  people,  scattered  in  several 
parts  of  the  world,  being  the  true  congregations  of  God, 
or  the  Church  of  Christ,  whom  he  saved,  and  for  whom 
he  gave  himself,  that  he  might  sanctify  them,  ye  whom 
he  hath  cleansed  by  the  washing  of  water  in  the  word  of 
life :  of  all  such  is  Jesus  the  Head,  the  Shepherd,  the 
Leader,  the  Lord,  the  King,  and  Master.  Now  although 
among  these  there  may  be  mingled  a  company  of  seeming 
holy  ones,  or  hypocrites ;  yet,  nevertheless,  they  are  and 
remain  only  the  righteous,  true  members  of  the  body  of 
Christ,  according  to  the  spirit  and  the  truth,  the  heirs 
of  the  promises,  truly  saved  from  the  hypocrites  the  dis- 
semblers. 

23.  In  this  holy  church  hath  God  ordained  the  ministers 
of  the  Gospel,  the  doctrines  of  the  holy  Word,  the  use 
of  the  holy  sacraments,  the  oversight  of  the  poor,  and  the 
ministers  of  the  same  offices ;  furthermore,  the  exercise 
of  brotherly  admonition  and  correction,  and,  finally,  the 
separating  of  the  Impenitent ;  which  holy  ordinances, 
contained  In  the  Word  of  God,  are  to  be  administered 
according  to  the  contents  thereof. 

24.  And  like  as  a  body  conslsteth  of  divers  parts,  and 
every  part  hath  Its  own  proper  work,  seeing  every  part  Is 
not  a  hand,  eye,  or  foot ;  so  is  it  also  the  church  of  God ; 
for  although  every  believer  is  a  mem.ber  of  the  body  of 


The  English  Baptists  6i 

Christ,  yet  is  not  every  one  therefore  a  teacher,  elder,  or 
deacon,  but  only  such  as  are  orderly  appointed  to  such 
offices.  Therefore,  also,  the  administration  of  the  said 
offices  or  duties  partaineth  only  to  those  who  are  ordained 
thereto,  and  not  to  every  particular  common  person. 

25.  The  vocation  or  election  of  the  said  officers  is 
performed  by  the  church,  with  fasting,  and  prayer  to  God ; 
for  God  knoweth  the  heart ;  he  is  amongst  the  faithful 
who  are  gathered  together  in  his  name ;  and  by  his  Holy 
Spirit  doth  so  govern  the  minds  and  hearts  of  his  people, 
that  he  by  them  bringeth  to  light  and  propoundeth  whom 
he  knoweth  to  be  profitable  to  his  church. 

26.  And  although  the  election  and  vocation  to  the  said 
offices  is  performed  by  the  aforesaid  means,  yet,  neverthe- 
less, the  investing  into  the  said  service  is  accomplished 
by  the  elders  of  the  church  through  the  laying  on  of 
hands. 

2y,  The  doctrine  which  by  the  foresaid  ministers  must 
be  proposed  to  the  people,  is  even  the  same  which  Christ 
brought  out  of  heaven,  which  he,  by  word  and  work,  that 
is,  by  doctrine  and  life,  hath  taught,  which  was  preached 
by  the  apostles  of  Christ,  by  the  commandment  of  Christ 
and  the  Spirit,  which  we  find  written  (so  much  as  is 
needful  for  us  to  salvation)  in  the  Scripture  of  the  New 
Testament,  whereto  we  apply  whatsoever  we  find  in  the 
canonical  book  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  hath  affinity 
and  verity,  which  by  doctrine  of  Christ  and  his  apostles, 
and  consent  and  agreement,  with  the  government  of  his 
Spiritual  Kingdom. 

28.  There  are  two  sacraments  appointed  by  Christ,  in 
his  holy  church,  the  administration  whereof  he  hath  as- 
signed to  the  ministry  of  teaching,  namely,  the  Holy 
Baptism  and  the  Holy  Supper.  These  are  outward  vis- 
ible handlings  and  tokens,  setting  before  our  eyes,  on 
God's  side,  the  inward  spiritual  handling  which  God, 
through  Christ,  by  the  cooperation  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
setteth  forth  I  the  justification  in  the  penitent  faithful 
soul;  and  which,  on  our  behalf,  witnesseth  our  religion, 
experience,  faith,  and  obedience,  through  the  obtaining 
of  a  good  conscience  to  the  service  of  God. 

29.  The  Holy  Baptism  is  given  unto  these  in  the  name 


62  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  hear, 
beheve,  and  with  penitent  heart  receive  the  doctrines  of 
the  Holy  Gospel.  For  such  hath  the  Lord  Jesus  com- 
manded to  be  baptized,  and  no  unspeaking  children. 

30.  The  whole  dealing  in  the  outward  visible  baptism 
of  water,  setteth  before  the  eyes,  witnesseth  and  signi- 
fieth,  the  Lord  Jesus  doth  inwardly  baptize  the  repentant, 
faithful  man,  in  the  laver  of  regeneration  and  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  washing  the  soul  from  all  pollution 
and  sin,  by  the  virtue  and  merit  of  his  bloodshed;  and 
by  the  power  and  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  true, 
heavenly,  spiritual,  living  Water,  cleanseth  the  inward 
evil  of  the  soul,  and  maketh  it  heavenly,  spiritual,  and 
living,  in  true  righteousness  or  goodness.  Therefore,  the 
baptism  of  water  leadeth  us  to  Christ,  to  his  holy  office 
in  glory  and  majesty;  and  admonisheth  us  not  to  hang 
only  upon  the  outward,  but  with  holy  prayer  to  mount 
upward,  and  to  beg  of  Christ  the  good  thing  signified. 

31.  The  Holy  Supper,  according  to  the  institution  of 
Christ,  is  to  be  administered  to  the  baptized ;  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  hath  commanded  that  whatsoever  he  hath  ap- 
pointed should  be  taught  to  be  observed. 

32.  The  whole  dealing  in  the  outward  visible  supper, 
setteth  before  the  eye,  witnesseth  and  signifyeth,  that 
Christ's  body  was  broken  upon  the  cross  and  his  holy 
blood  spilt  for  the  remission  of  our  sins.  That  the  being 
glorified  in  his  heavenly  Being,  is  the  alive-making  bread, 
meat,  and  drink  of  our  souls:  it  setteth  before  our  eyes 
Christ's  office  and  ministry  in  glory  and  majesty,  by 
holding  his  spiritual  supper,  which  the  believing  soul, 
feeding  and"^'  .  .  the  soul  with  spiritual  food :  it  teacheth  us 
by  the  outward  handling  to  mount  upwards  with  the  heart 
in  holy  prayer,  to  beg  at  Christ's  hands  the  true  signified 
food ;  and  it  admonisheth  us  of  thankfulness  to  God,  and 
of  verity  and  love  one  with  another. 

33.  The  church  discipline,  or  external  censures,  is  also 
an  outward  handling  among  the  believers,  whereby  the 
impenitent  sinner,  after  Christian  admonition  and  re- 
proof, is  severed,  by  reason  of  his  sins,  from  the  com- 
munion of  the  saints  for  his  future  good ;  and  the  wrath 

*  Word  wanting. 


The  English  Baptists  63 

of  God  is  denounced  against  him  until  the  time  of  his 
contrition  and  reformation ;  and  there  is  also,  by  this  out- 
ward separation  of  the  church,  manifested  what  God 
before  had  judged  and  fore-handled,  concerning  this 
secret  sinner,  by  reason  of  his  sin.  Therefore,  first  before 
the  Lord,  the  prejudging  and  predetermining  of  the  mat- 
ter must  pass*  .  .  in  respect  of  the  sinner*  .  .  and  the 
after- judging  and  handling  by  the  church.  Therefore  the 
church  must  carefully  regard  that  none  in  the  church  be 
condemned  with  it,  and  be  condemned  in  the  Word  of 
God.    . 

34,  The  person  separated  from  the  church  may  not  at 
all  be  admitted  (so  long  as  he  proceedeth  in  sin)  to  the 
use  of  the  holy  supper  or  any  other*  .  .  handling,  but  he 
must  be  avoided  therein,  as  also  in  all  other  things  be- 
tokening the  communion  of  saints  or  brotherhood.  And 
as  the  rebellious  life,  conversation,  or  daily  company  of 
the  godless  and  perverse,  or  anything  with  them,  is  dan- 
gerous and  hurtful,  and  oftentimes  promoteth  scandal  and 
slander  to  the  godly,  so  must  they  withdraw  themselves 
from  the  same  rebels,  avoiding  them  in  all  works  and 
ends  whereby  their  pure  souls  might  be  polluted  and 
defiled:  yet  so  that  always  the  Word  of  God  take  place, 
and  that  nothing  take  place  or  be  performed  that  is  con- 
trary to  love,  mercy.  Christian  discretion,  promise,  or 
any  other  like  matter. 

35.  Worldly  authority  or  maglstry  is  a  necessary  or- 
dinance of  God,  appointed  and  established  for  the  preser- 
vation of  the  common  estate,  and  of  a  good,  natural, 
politic  life,  for  the  reward  of  the  good  and  the  punishing 
of  the  evil ;  we  acknowledge  ourselves  obnoxious,  and 
bound  by  the  Word  of  God  to  fear,  honor,  and  show 
obedience  to  the  magistrates  in  all  causes  not  contrary  to 
the  Word  of  the  Lord.  We  are  obliged  to  pray  God 
Almighty  for  them,  and  to  thank  the  Lord  for  good 
reasonable  magistrates,  and  to  yield  unto  them,  without 
murmuring,  beseeming  tribute,  toll  and  tax.  This  office 
of  the  worldly  authority  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  not  ordained 
in  his  spiritual  kingdom,  the  church  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, nor  adjoined  to  the  offices  of  his  church. 

*  Cannot  decipher  the  word. 


64  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Neither  hath  he  called  his  disciples  or  followers  to 
be  worldly  kings,  princes,  potentates,  or  magistrates; 
neither  hath  he  burdened  or  charged  them  to  assume  such 
offices,  or  to  govern  the  world  in  such  a  worldly  man- 
ner; much  less  hath  he  given  a  law  to  the  members  of 
his  church  which  is  agreeable  to  such  office  or  govern- 
ment. Yea,  rather  they  are  called  of  him  (whom  they 
are  commanded  to  obey  by  a  voice  heard  from  heaven) 
to  the  following  of  his  unarmed  and  unweaponed  life,  and 
of  his  cross-bearing  footsteps.  In  whom  approved  noth- 
ing less  than  a  worldly  government,  power,  and  sword. 
This  then  considered  (as  also  further,  that  upon  the 
office  of  the  worldly  authority  many  other  things  depend, 
as  wars"^  .  .  to  hurt  his  enemies  in  body  or  good*  .  .  which 
evilly  or  not  at  all  will  fit  or  consort  with  the  Christ,  and 
the  crucified  life  of  the  Christians),  so  hold  we  that  it  be- 
seemeth  not  Christians  to  administer  these  offices;  there- 
fore we  avoid  such  offices  and  administrations,  notwith- 
standing by  no  means  thereby  willing  to  despise  or  con- 
demn reasonable  discreet  magistrates,  nor  to  place  him 
in  less  estimation  than  he  is  described  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
of  Paul. 

36.  Christ,  the  King  and  Lawgiver  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, hath  prohibited  Christians  the  swearing  of  oaths ; 
therefore  it  is  not  permitted  that  the  faithful  of  the  New 
Testament  should  swear  at  all. 

37.  The  married  estate,  or  matrimony,  hold  we  for  an 
ordinance  of  God,  which,  according  to  the  first  institution, 
shall  be  observed.  Every  man  shall  have  his  one  only 
wife,  and  every  woman  shall  have  her  one  only  husband ; 
those  may  not  be  separated  but  for  adultery.  We  permit 
none  of  our  communion  to  marry  godless,  unbelieving, 
fleshly  persons  out  of  the  church;  but  we  censure  such 
(as  other  sinners)  according  to  the  disposition  and  desert 
of  the  cause. 

38.  Lastly,  we  believe  and  teach  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  both  of  the  just  and  the  unjust,  as  Paul  (i  Cor.  15) 
soundly  teacheth  and  witnesseth :  The  soul  shall  be  united 
to  the  body,  every  one  shall  be  presented  before  the 
judgment  seat  of  Christ  Jesus,  to  receive  in  his  own  body 

*  Cannot  decipher  the  word. 


The  English  Baptists  65 


wages  according  to  his  works.  And  the  righteous, 
whosoever  hath  Hved  hohly,  and  through  faith  brought 
forth  the  works  of  love  and  mercy,  shall  enter  into  ever- 
lasting life  with  Christ  Jesus,  the  Bridegroom  of  the 
Christian  host.  But  the  unsanctified,  which  have  not 
known  God,  and  have  not  obeyed  the  Gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ,  shall  go  into  everlasting  fire.  The  Almighty, 
gracious,  merciful  God,  preserve  us  from  the  punishment 
of  the  ungodly,  and  grant  us  grace  and  gifts  helpful  to 
a  holy  life,  saving  death,  and  joyful  resurrection  with  all 
the  righteous.    Amen. 

We  subscribe  to  the  truth  of  these  Articles,  desiring 
further  information.  [Forty-two  names  are  attached  to 
this  document.  We  cannot  decipher  the  whole,  but  the 
following  are  plain.  A  line  is  drawn  through  some  of 
them.     The  *  marks  them.      f  Uncertain.] 

*John  Smyth,  *Matthew  Pigott, 

Hugh  Broomhead,  Mary  Smyth, 

*John  Grindall,  Janus  „ 

*Samuel  Halton,  Margarett  Staveley, 

Thomas  Piggott,  flsabella  Thomson, 

John  Hardie,  *Jane  Argan, 

*Edward  Hawkins,  Mary  Dickens, 

Thomas  Jessopp,  Bettriss  Dickens, 

Robert  Staveley,  Dorothe  Hamand, 

^Alexander  Fleming,  '''Elnh.  Buywater, 

John  Arnfeld,  Ann  Broomhead, 

Hannah  Piggott,  Alexander  Parsons, 

Thomas   Solphin,  *Joan  Haughton, 

Solomon  Thomson,  *Joane  Brigge, 

Alexander  Hodgin,  Alexander  Pigott, 

Ursula  Bywater,  Margaret  Pigott, 

Dorothea  Oakland,  Alexander  Armfield, 

John  ,  Elnh.  White, 

Fylis  ,  Dorothe  Thomson, 

* ,  Margaret  Morris. 

[We  judge  the  whole  of  these  signatures  autograph.] 

3.  A  third  Confession,  consisting  of  one  hundred  and 
two  articles,  supposed  to  have  been  drawn  up  by  Smyth 
E 


(>(>  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

in  Dutch  (very  imperfect  Dutch,  according  to  Professor 
Miiller),  and  pubHshed,  has  also  been  translated  in 
Evans  I,  2^yi. 

4.  After  Smyth's  death,  August  1612,  and  before  1614, 
this  last  confession,  slightly  modified,  principally  by  a 
rearrangement  of  the  articles  and  the  omission  of  two 
of  them,  was  published  in  English,  along  with  Smyth's 
"  Retraction  of  His  Errors  "  and  an  account  of  his  death. 
The  "Epistle  to  the  Reader"  is  signed  "  T.  P."  (prob- 
ably Thomas  Piggot,  one  of  Smyth's  party).  The  author 
states  that  he  has  "  annexed  a  small  confession  of  faith," 
without  giving  any  information  as  to  its  origin  or  history. 
John  Robinson,  in  commenting  on  certain  articles  of  this 
confession  in  1614,  calls  it  "  The  Confession  of  Faith 
Published  in  Certain  Conclusions  by  the  Remainders  of 
Air.  Smyth's  Company  after  his  death."  (Cf.  Robinson's 
wks.,  Ill,  237,  Ashton  ed. ;  Crosby,  I,  Appendix  IV.) 
What  is  supposed  to  be  the  only  copy  in  existence  was 
discovered  some  years  ago  in  the  library  of  York  minster, 
and  reprinted  entire  in  Barclay's  "  Inner  Life,"  etc.,  Ap- 
pendix to  Chap.  VI.  Barclay's  reprint  of  this  Confes- 
sion, which  has  the  distinction  of  having  been  published 
in  both  Dutch  and  English,  with  slight  differences,  and 
which  probably  represents  the  final  views  of  John  Smyth, 
the  founder  of  the  English  General  Baptists,  is  repro- 
duced below. 

Propositions  and  Conclusions  concerning  True  Christian 
Religion,  containing  a  Confession  of  Faith  of  certain 
English  people,  living  at  Amsterdam. 

I.  We  believe  that  there  is  a  God  (Heb.  xi.  6)  against 
all  Epicures  and  Atheists,  which  either  say  in  their  hearts 
or  utter  with  their  mouths,  that  there  is  no  God  (Psal. 
xiv.  i;  Isaiah  xxii.  13.) 


llie  English  Baptists  6y 

2.  That  this  God  is  one  in  number  (i  Cor.  viii,  4,  6) 
against  the  Pagans  or  any  other  that  hold  a  pluraUty  of 


gods. 


3.  That  God  is  incomprehensible  and  ineffable,  in  re- 
gard of  His  substance  or  essence  that  is  God's  essence 
can  neither  be  comprehended  in  the  mind,  nor  uttered 
by  the  words  of  men  or  angels  (Exod.  iii.  13-15,  and 
xxxiii.   18-21). 

4.  That  the  creatures  and  Holy  Scriptures  do  not  in- 
tend to  teach  us  what  God  is  in  substance  or  essence,  but 
what  He  is  in  effect  and  property  (Rom.  i.  19,  22;  Exod. 
xxxiii.  23). 

5.  That  these  terms,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  do 
not  teach  God's  substance,  but  only  the  hinder  parts  of 
God:  that  which  may  be  known  of  God  (Rom.  i.,  Exod. 
xxxiii). 

6.  That  God  may  be  known  by  His  titles,  properties, 
effects,  imprinted,  and  expressed  in  the  creatures,  and 
Scriptures  (John  xvii.  3). 

7.  That  to  understand  and  conceive  of  God  in  the  mind 
is  not  the  saving  knowledge  of  God,  but  to  be  like  to  God 
in  His  effects  and  properties ;  to  be  made  conformable  to 
His  divine  and  heavenly  attributes.  That  is  the  true 
saving  knowledge  of  God  (2  Cor.  iii.  18;  Matt.  v.  48;  2 
Peter  i.  4),  whereunto  we  ought  to  give  all  diligence. 

8.  That  this  God  manifested  in  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost  (Matt.  iii.  16,  17)  is  most  merciful,  most  mighty, 
most  holy,  most  just,  most  wise,  most  true,  most  glorious, 
eternal  and  infinite  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7;  Psalm  xc.  2  and 
cii.  27). 

9.  That  God  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  did 
foresee,  and  determine  the  issue  and  event  of  all  His 
works  (Acts  xv.  18),  and  that  actually  in  time  He 
worketh  all  things  by  His  providence,  according  to  the 
good  pleasure  of  His  will  (Eph.  i.  11),  and  therefore 
we  abhor  the  opinion  of  them,  that  avouch,  that  all  things 
happen  by  fortune  or  chance  (Acts.  iv.  2y,  28;  Matt.  x. 
29,  30). 

10.  That  God  is  not  the  Author  or  worker  of  sin 
(Psal.  V.  4;  James  i.  13),  but  that  God  only  did  foresee 
and  determine  what  evil  the  free  will  of  men  and  angels 


68  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

would  do;  but  He  gave  no  influence,  instinct,  motion  or 
inclination  to  the  least  sin. 

11.  That  God  in  the  beginning  created  the  world  viz., 
the  heavens,  and  the  earth  and  all  things  that  are  therein 
(Gen.  i. ;  Acts  xvii.  24).  So  that  the  things  that  are  seen, 
were  not  of  things  which  did  appear  (Heb.  xi.  3). 

12.  That  God  created  man  to  blessedness,  according  to 
His  image,  in  an  estate  of  innocency,  free  without  cor- 
ruption of  sin  (Gen.  i.  27;  ii.  17,  25)  ;  He  created  them 
male  and  female  (to  wit)  one  man  and  one  woman  (Gen. 
i.  2y)  ;  He  framed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and 
breathed  into  him  the  breath  of  life,  so  the  man  was  a 
living  soul  (Gen.  ii.  7;  i  Cor.  xv.  45).  But  the  woman 
He  made  of  a  rib,  taken  out  of  the  side  of  the  man  (Gen. 
ii.  21,  22).  That  God  blessed  them,  and  commanded 
them  to  increase,  and  multiply,  and  to  fill  the  earth,  and 
to  rule  over  it  and  all  creatures  therein  (Gen.  i.  28;  ix.  i, 
2;  Psal.  viii.  6). 

13.  That  therefore  marriage  is  an  estate  honorable 
amongst  all  men,  and  the  bed  undefiled :  viz.  betwixt  one 
man  and  one  woman  (Heb.  xiii.  4;  i  Cor.  vii.  2),  but 
whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will  judge. 

14.  That  God  created  man  with  freedom  of  will,  so  that 
he  had  ability  to  choose  the  good,  and  eschew  the  evil,  or 
to  choose  the  evil,  and  refuse  the  good,  and  that  this  free- 
dom of  will  was  a  natural  faculty  or  power,  created  by 
God  in  the  soul  of  man  (Gen.  ii.  16,  17;  iii.  6,  7;  Eccles. 
vii.  29). 

15.  That  Adam  sinning  was  not  moved  or  inclined 
thereto  by  God,  or  by  any  decree  of  God  but  that  he  fell 
from  his  innocency,  and  died  the  death  alone,  by  the 
temptation  of  Satan,  his  free  will  assenting  thereunto 
freely  (Gen.  iii.  6). 

16.  That  the  same  day  that  Adam  sinned,  he  died  the 
death  (Gen.  ii.  17),  for  the  rev/ard  of  sin  is  death  (Rom. 
vi.  23),  and  this  is  that  which  the  Apostle  saith,  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins  (Eph.  ii.  i),  which  is  loss  of  in- 
nocency, of  the  peace  of  conscience  and  comfortable  pres- 
ence of  God  (Gen.  iii.  7,  11). 

17.  That  Adam  being  fallen  did  not  lose  any  natural 
power  or  faculty,  which  God  created  in  his  soul,  for  the 


The  English  Baptists  69 

work  of  the  devil,  which  is  (sin),  cannot  aboHsh  God's 
work  or  creatures :  and  therefore  being  fallen  he  still 
retained  freedom  of  will  (Gen.  iii.  23,  24). 

18.  That  original  sin  is  an  idle  term,  and  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  men  intend  by  the  word  (Ezek.  xviii. 
20),  because  God  threatened  death  only  to  Adam  (Gen. 
ii.  17)  not  to  his  posterity,  and  because  God  created  the 
soul  (Heb.  xii.  9). 

19.  That  if  original  sin  might  have  passed  from  Adam 
to  his  posterity,  Christ's  death,  which  was  effectual  be- 
fore Cain  and  Abel's  birth,  He  being  the  lamb  slain 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  stopped  the  issue  and 
passage  thereof  (Rev.  xiii.  8). 

20.  That  infants  are  conceived  and  born  in  innocency 
without  sin,  and  that  so  dying  are  undoubtedly  saved, 
and  that  this  is  to  be  understood  of  all  infants,  under 
heaven  (Gen.  v.  2;  i.  2y  compared  with  i  Cor.  xv.  49) 
for  where  there  is  no  law  there  is  no  transgression,  sin 
is  not  imputed  while  there  is  no  law  (Rom.  iv.  15  and  v. 
13),  but  the  law  was  not  given  to  infants,  but  to  them 
that  could  understand  (Rom.  v.  13;  Matt.  xiii.  9;  Neh. 
vm.  3). 

21.  That  all  actual  sinners  bear  the  image  of  the  first 
Adam,  in  his  innocency,  fall,  and  restitution  in  the  offer 
of  grace  (i  Cor.  xv.  49),  and  so  pass  under  these  three 
conditions,  or  threefold  estate. 

22.  That  Adam  being  fallen  God  did  not  hate  him,  but 
loved  him  still,  and  sought  his  good  (Gen.  iii.  8-15), 
neither  doth  he  hate  any  man  that  falleth  with  Adam; 
but  that  He  loveth  mankind,  and  from  His  love  sent 
His  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  to  save  that 
which  was  lost,  and  to  seek  the  sheep  that  went  astray 
(John  iii.  16). 

23.  That  God  never  forsaketh  the  creature  until  there 
be  no  remedy,  neither  doth  He  cast  away  His  innocent 
creature  from  all  eternity ;  but  casteth  away  men  irrecov- 
erable in  sin  (Isa.  v.  4;  Ezek.  xviii.  23,  32,  and  xxxiii.  11 ; 
Luke  xiii.  6,  9). 

24.  That  as  there  is  in  all  creatures  a  natural  inclina- 
tion to  their  young  ones,  to  do  them  good,  so  there  is  in 
the  Lord  toward  man ;  for  every  spark  of  goodness  in 


70  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


the  creature  is  infinitely  good  in  God  (Rom.  i.  20;  Psal. 
xix.  4;  Rom.  X.  18). 

25.  That  as  no  man  begetteth  his  child  to  the  gallows, 
nor  no  potter  maketh  a  pot  to  break  it ;  so  God  doth  not 
create  or  predestinate  any  man  to  destruction  (Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11;  Gen.  i.  27;  i  Cor.  xv.  49;  Gen.  v.  3). 

26.  That  God  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  hath 
determined  the  way  of  life  and  salvation  to  consist  in 
Christ,  and  that  He  hath  foreseen  who  would  follow  it 
(Eph.  i.  5;  2  Tim.  i.  9),  and  on  the  contrary  hath  deter- 
mined the  way  of  perdition  to  consist  in  infidelity,  and  in 
impenitency,  and  that  He  hath  foreseen  who  would  follow 
after  it  (Jude,  4th  verse). 

2y.  That  as  God  created  all  men  according  to  His  im- 
age, so  hath  He  redeem.ed  all  that  fall  by  actual  sin,  to  the 
same  end;  and  that  God  in  His  redemption  hath  not 
swerved  from  His  mercy,  which  He  manifested  in  His 
creation  (John  i.  3,  16;  2  Cor.  v.  19;  i  Tim.  ii.  5,  6;  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11). 

28.  That  Jesus  Christ  came  Into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, and  that  God  in  His  love  to  His  enemies  did  send 
Him  (John  iii.  16)  ;  that  Christ  died  for  His  enemies 
(Rom.  V.  10)  ;  that  He  bought  them  that  deny  Him  (2 
Peter  ii.  i),  thereby  teaching  us  to  love  our  enemies 
(Matt.  V.  44,  45). 

29.  That  Jesus  Christ  after  His  baptism  by  a  voice  out 
of  heaven  from  the  Father,  and  by  the  anointing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  which  appeared  on  His  head  in  the  form  of 
a  dove,  is  appointed  the  prophet  of  the  church,  whom  all 
men  must  hear  (Matt,  iii.;  Heb.  iii.  i,  2)  ;  and  that  both 
by  His  doctrine  and  life,  which  He  led  here  in  the  earth, 
by  all  His  doings  and  sufferings.  He  hath  declared  and 
published,  as  the  only  prophet  and  lawgiver  of  His 
Church,  the  way  of  peace  and  life,  the  glad  tidings  of  the 
gospel  (Acts  iii.  23,  24). 

30.  That  Jesus  Christ  is  the  brightness  of  the  glory 
and  the  engraven  form  of  the  Father's  substance,  sup- 
porting all  things  by  His  mighty  power  (Heb.  i.  3)  ;  and 
that  He  is  become  the  mediator  of  the  New  Testament 
(to  wit)  the  King,  Priest,  and  Prophet  of  the  Church,  and 
that  the  faithful  through  Him  are  thus  made  spiritual 


The  English  Baptists  Ji 

Kings,  Priests,  and  Prophets  (Rev.  i.  6;  i  John  ii.  20; 
Rev.  xix.  10). 

31.  That  Jesus  Christ  is  He  which  in  the  beginning  did 
lay  the  foundation  of  the  heavens  and  earth  which  shall 
perish  (Heb.  i.  10;  Psalm  cii.  26)  ;  that  He  is  Alpha  and 
Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the  last, 
He  is  the  wisdom  of  God,  which  was  begotten  from  ever- 
lasting before  all  creatures  (Micah  v.  2;  Prov.  viii.  24; 
Luke  xi.  49)  ;  He  was  in  the  form  of  God,  and  thought 
it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God ;  yet  He  took  to  Him 
the  shape  of  a  servant,  the  Word  became  flesh  (John  i. 
14),  wonderfully  by  the  power  of  God  in  the  womb  of  the 
Virgin  Mary;  He  was  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to 
the  flesh  (Phil.  ii.  7;  Heb.  10.;  Rom.  i.  3) ;  and  that  He 
made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  humbled  Himself,  and  be- 
came obedient  unto  the  death  of  the  cross,  redeeming  us 
from  our  vain  conversation,  not  with  silver  or  gold,  but 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Himself,  as  of  a  lamb  without 
spot  and  undefiled  (i  Peter  i.  18,  19). 

32.  That  although  the  sacrifice  of  Christ's  body  and 
blood  offered  up  unto  God  His  Father  upon  the  cross, 
be  a  sacrifice  of  a  sweet  smelling  savour,  and  that  God  in 
Him  is  well  pleased,  yet  it  doth  not  reconcile  God  unto  us, 
which  did  never  hate  us,  nor  was  our  enemy,  but  recon- 
cileth  us  unto  God  (2  Cor.  v.  19),  and  slayeth  the  enmity 
and  hatred,  which  is  in  us  against  God  (Eph.  i.  14,  17; 
Rom.  I.  30). 

33.  That  Christ  was  delivered  to  death  for  our  sins 
(Rom.  iv.  25),  and  that  by  His  death  we  have  the  remis- 
sion of  our  sins  (Eph.  ii.  7),  for  He  cancelled  the  hand- 
writing of  ordinances,  the  hatred,  the  law  of  command- 
ments in  ordinances  (Eph.  ii.  15 ;  Colos.  ii.  14)  which  was 
against  us  (Deut.  xxxi.  26)  ;  He  spoiled  principalities  and 
powers,  made  a  shew  of  them  openly,  and  triumphed 
over  them  on  the  cross  (Colos.  ii.  15)  ;  by  death  He  de- 
stroyed him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil 
(Heb.  ii.  14). 

34.  That  the  enemies  of  our  salvation,  which  Christ 
vanquished  on  His  cross,  are  the  gates  of  hell,  the  power 
of  darkness,  Satan,  sin,  death,  the  grave,  the  curse  or 
condemnation,  wicked  men,  and  persecutors  (Eph.  vi.  12; 


y2  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

I  Cor.  XV.  26,  54,  57;  Matt.  xvi.  18;  Rev.  xx.  10,  14,  15), 
which  enemies  we  must  overcome  no  otherwise  than 
Christ  hath  done  (John  xxi.  22;  i  Peter  ii.  21 ;  Rev.  xiv. 

4). 

35.  That  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  death  is  only  derived  to 
them,  which  do  mortify  their  sins,  which  are  grafted  with 
Him  to  the  simihtude  of  His  death  (Rom.  vi.  3-6),  which 
are  circumcised  with  circumcision  made  without  hands, 
by  putting  off  the  sinful  body  of  the  flesh,  through  the 
circumcision  which  Christ  worketh  (Colos.  ii.  11)  who  is 
the  minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God,  to 
confirm  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers  (Rom.  xv.  8 
compared  with  Deut.  xxx.  6). 

36.  That  there  are  three  which  bear  witness  in  the 
earth,  the  spirit,  water  and  blood,  and  these  three  are  one 
in  testimony,  witnessing  that  Christ  truly  died  ( i  John  v. 
8)  for  He  gave  up  the  ghost  (John  xix.  30)  ;  and  out  of 
His  side  pierced  with  a  spear  came  water  and  blood  (verse 
34>  35 )»  the  cover  of  the  heart  being  pierced,  where  there 
is  water  contained. 

37.  That  every  mortified  person  hath  this  witness  in 
himself  (i  John  v.  10),  for  the  spirit  blood,  and  water  of 
sin  is  gone,  that  is  the  life  of  sin  with  the  nourishment 
and  cherishment  thereof  (i  Pet.  iv.  i;  Rom.  vi.  7;  i 
John  iii.  6). 

38.  That  Christ  Jesus  being  truly  dead  was  also  buried 
(John  xix.  39,  42),  and  that  he  lay  in  the  grave  the  whole 
Sabbath  of  the  Jews ;  but  in  the  grave  He  saw  no  corrup- 
tion (Psal.  xvi.  10;  Acts  ii.  31). 

39.  That  all  mortified  persons  are  also  buried  with 
Christ,  by  the  baptism,  which  is  unto  His  death  (Rom.  vi. 
4;  Colos.  ii.  12)  ;  keeping  their  Sabbath  Vv^ith  Christ  in  the 
grave  (that  is)  resting  from  their  own  works  as  God  did 
from  His  (Heb.  iv.  10),  waiting  there  in  hope  for  a 
resurrection  (Psal.  xvi.  9). 

40.  That  Christ  Jesus  early  in  the  morning,  the  first 
day  of  the  week,  rose  again  after  His  death  and  burial 
(Matt,  xxviii.  6)  for  our  justification  (Rom.  iv.  25),  be- 
ing mightily  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  by  the'  Spirit 
of  sanctification,  in  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  (Rom, 
i.  4). 


The  English  Baptists  73 

41.  That  these  that  are  grafted  with  Christ  to  the 
simiUtude  of  His  death  and  burial  shall  also  be  to  the 
similitude  of  His  resurrection  (Rom.  vi.  4,  5.)  ;  for  He 
doth  quicken  or  give  life  unto  them,  together  with  Him- 
self (Colos.  ii.  13;  Eph.  ii.  5,  6)  ;  for  that  is  their  salva- 
tion, and  it  is  by  grace  (Eph.  ii.  5;  i  John  v.  11,  12,  13; 
Titus  iii.  5,  6,  7). 

42.  That  this  quickening  or  reviving  of  Christ,  this 
laver  of  regeneration,  this  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
is  our  justification  and  salvation  (Titus  iii.  6,  7).  This 
is  that  pure  river  of  water  of  life  clear  as  crystal,  which 
proceedeth  out  of  the  throne  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb 
(Rev.  xxii.  i) ;  which  also  floweth  out  of  the  belly  of  him 
that  believeth  in  Christ  (John  vii.  38)  ;  this  is  those  pre- 
cious promises  whereby  we  are  made  partakers  of  the 
divine  nature,  by  flying  the  corruptions  that  are  in  the 
world  through  lust  (2  Pet.  i.  4)  ;  this  is  the  fruit  of  the 
tree  of  Hfe  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God; 
this  is  the  white  stone  wherein  there  is  a  name  written, 
which  no  man  knoweth,  save  he  that  receiveth  it.  This  is 
the  morning  star,  this  is  the  new  name,  the  name  of  God, 
the  name  of  the  City  of  God;  the  new  Jerusalem  which 
descendeth  from  God  out  of  heaven ;  this  is  the  hidden 
manna,  that  white  clothing,  eye  salve  and  gold,  and  that 
heavenly  supper  which  Christ  promises  to  them,  that 
overcome  (Rev,  ii.  7,  17,  18,  and  iii.  5,  12,  18,  20). 

43.  That  there  are  three  which  bear  record  in  heaven, 
the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  that  these 
three  are  one  in  testimony,  witnessing  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  The  Father  saith  thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have 
I  begotten  thee  (Acts  xiii.  33-35).  The  Son  testifieth 
of  his  own  resurrection  being  forty  days  with  His  dis- 
ciples (Act.  i.  3).  The  Holy  Ghost  testifieth  the  same 
whom  Christ  sent  to  His  disciples  upon  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost (Acts.  ii). 

44.  That  every  person  that  is  regenerate  and  risen 
again  with  Christ  hath  these  three  aforesaid  witnesses  in 
himself  (i  John  v.  10)  ;  for  Christ  doth  dwell  in  his  heart 
by  faith  (Eph.  iii.  17)  ;  and  the  Father  dwelleth  with 
the  Son  (Joh.  xiv.  23)  ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  likewise  (i 
Cor.  iii.  16)  ;  and  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 


74  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  with  them  (2  Cor.  xiii.  13). 

45.  That  Christ  having  forty  days  after  His  resurrec- 
tion conversed  with  his  disciples  (Acts  i.  3),  ascended 
locally  into  the  heavens  (Acts  i.  9),  which  must  contain 
Him  unto  the  time  that  all  things  be  restored  (Acts  iii. 

21). 

That  they  which  are  risen  with  Christ,  ascend  up  spirit- 
ually with  Him,  seeking  those  things  which  are  above, 
where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  that 
they  set  their  affections  on  heavenly  things,  and  not  on 
earthly  things  (Col.  iii.  1-5). 

46.  That  Christ  now  being  received  into  Heaven,  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  (Mark  xvi.  9),  having  led  cap- 
tivity captive,  and  given  gifts  unto  men  (Eph.  iv.  8)  ;  that 
God  hath  now  highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a 
name  above  every  name ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  in  earth  and  under 
the  earth  (Phil.  ii.  9,  10),  that  He  hath  obtained  all  power 
both  in  heaven  and  in  earth  (Matt,  xxviii.  18),  and  hath 
made  all  things  subject  under  His  feet,  and  hath  appointed 
Him  over  all  things  to  be  the  head  to  the  church,  that  is 
His  body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all  things 
(Eph.  i.  2-23). 

47.  That  the  regenerate  do  sit  together  with  Christ 
Jesus  in  heavenly  places  (Eph.  ii.  6),  that  they  sit  with 
Him  in  His  throne  as  He  sitteth  with  the  Father  in  His 
throne  (Rev.  iii.  21),  that  they  have  power  over  nations 
and  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  as  a  potter's  vessel 
they  are  broken  in  pieces  (Rev.  ii.  26,  27)  ;  and  that  sit- 
ting on  twelve  thrones,  they  do  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel  (Matt.  xix.  28),  which  spiritually  is  to  put  all  their 
enemies  in  subjection  under  their  feet,  so  that  the  evil 
one  doth  not  touch  them  (i  John  v.  18),  nor  the  gates  of 
hell  prevail  against  them  (Matt.  xvi.  28),  and  that  they 
are  become  pillars  in  the  house  of  God,  and  go  no  more 
out  (Rev.  iii.  12). 

48.  That  Christ  Jesus  being  exalted  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  the  Father,  far  above  all  principalities  and  powers, 
might,  and  domination,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not 
only  in  this  world,  but  in  the  world  to  come  (Eph.  i.  21), 


The  English  Baptists  75 

hath  received  of  His  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  He  also  shed  forth  upon  His  disciples  on 
the  Day  of  Pentecost  (Act  ii.  33). 

49.  That  Christ  Jesus,  in  His  resurrection,  ascension, 
and  exaltation,  is  more  and  rather  Lord  and  Christ,  Sav- 
iour, anointed,  and  King,  than  in  His  humiliation,  suffer- 
ings and  death  (Acts.  ii.  36;  Phil.  ii.  7,  11),  for  the  end  is 
more  excellent  than  the  means,  and  His  sufferings  were 
the  way  by  the  which  He  entered  into  His  glory  (Luke 
xxiv.  16),  and  so  by  consequent  the  efficacy  of  His 
resurrection  in  the  new  creature,  is  more  noble  and  ex- 
cellent, than  the  efficacy  of  His  death  in  the  mortification 
and  remission  of  sins. 

50.  That  the  knowledge  of  Christ  according  to  the 
flesh  is  of  small  profit  (2  Cor.  v.  16,  17),  and  the  knowl- 
edge of  Christ's  genealogy  and  history,  is  no  other  but 
that  which  the  Devil  hath  as  well  if  not  better  than  any 
man  living ;  but  the  knowledge  of  Christ  according  to  the 
spirit  is  effectual  to  salvation,  which  is  spiritually  to  be 
grafted  to  the  similitude  of  Christ's  birth,  life,  miracles, 
doings,  sufferings,  death,  burial,  resurrection,  ascension, 
and  exaltation  (Rom.  vi.  3,  6). 

51.  That  Christ  Jesus,  according  to  the  flesh  and  history 
in  His  doings  and  suffering,  is  a  great  mystery,  and  divine 
sacrament  of  Himself,  and  of  His  ministry  in  the  spirit, 
and  of  those  spiritual  things  which  He  worketh  in  those 
which  are  to  be  heirs  of  salvation  (Rom.  vi.  3,  6;  Eph.  Ii. 
5,  6),  and  that  spiritually  He  performeth  all  those  mir- 
acles in  the  regenerate  which  He  wrought  in  His  flesh; 
He  healeth  their  leprosy,  bloody  Issue,  blindness,  dumb- 
ness, deafness,  lameness,  palsy,  fever,  He  casteth  out  the 
devils  and  unclean  spirits.  He  ralseth  the  dead,  rebuketli 
the  winds  and  the  sea,  and  it  is  calm ;  He  feedeth  thou- 
sands with  the  barley  loaves  and  fishes  (Matt.  viil.  16,  17, 
compared  with  Isaiah  lill.  4,  John  vi.  26,  2y). 

52.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Father 
and  the  Son  (John  xiv.  26,  and  xvl.  7)  ;  that  He  Is  the 
eternal  spirit,  whereby  Christ  offered  Himself  without 
spot  to  God  (Heb.  ix.  14)  ;  and  He  Is  that  other  com- 
forter, which  Christ  asketh,  obtalneth,  and  sendeth  from 
the  Father  (John  xiv.  16),  which  dwelleth  in  the  regener- 


y()  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ate  (i  Cor.  iii.  i6),  which  leadeth  them  into  all  truth 
(John  xvi.  13),  He  is  that  anointing  which  teacheth  them 
all  things,  and  that  they  have  no  need  that  any  man  teach 
them,  but  as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  (i  John  ii.  20, 

53.  That  although  there  be  divers  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
yet  there  is  but  one  Spirit,  which  distributeth  to  every 
one  as  He  will  (2  Cor.  xii.  4,  11;  Eph.  iv.  4),  that  the 
outward  gifts  of  the  spirit  which  the  Holy  Ghost  poureth 
forth,  upon  the  Day  of  Pentecost  upon  the  disciples,  in 
tongues  and  prophesy,  and  gifts,  and  healing,  and  mir- 
acles, which  is  called  the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
fire  (Acts.  i.  5)  were  only  a  figure  of  and  an  hand 
leading  to  better  things,  even  the  most  proper  gifts  of  the 
spirit  of  sanctification,  which  is  the  new  creature ;  which 
is  the  one  baptism  (Eph.  iv.  4,  compared  with  Acts  ii.  33, 
38,  and  with  Luke  x.  17,  20). 

54.  That  John  Baptist  and  Christ  are  two  persons, 
their  ministries  are  two  ministries  several,  and  their  bap- 
tisms are  two  baptisms,  distinct  the  one  from  the  other 
(John  i.  20;  Acts  xiii.  25;  Acts  i.  4,  5 ;  Matt.  iii.  11). 

55.  That  John  taught  the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the 
remission  of  sins,  baptizing  with  water  to  amendment  of 
Ufe  (Matt.  iii.  11),  thus  preparing  a  way  for  Christ  and 
His  baptism  (Luke  iii.  3,  6),  by  bringing  men  to  re- 
pentance and  faith  in  the  Messias,  whom  he  pointed 
out  with  the  finger  (saying),  behold  the  Lamb  of  God 
that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world  (John  i.  31,  29; 
Acts  xlx.  4). 

56.  That  Christ  is  stronger,  and  hath  a  more  excellent 
office  and  ministry  than  John  (Matt.  iii.  11);  that  He 
baptiseth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  fire;  that  He 
Cometh  and  walketh  in  the  way  which  John  hath  pre- 
pared; and  that  the  new  creature  followeth  repentance 
(Luke  iii.  6). 

57.  That  repentance  and  faith  in  the  IMessias,  are  the 
conditions  to  be  performed  on  our  behalf,  for  the  obtain- 
ing of  the  promises  (Acts  ii.  38;  John  i.  12);  that  the 
circumcision  of  the  heart,  mortification  and  the  promise 
of  the  spirit,  that  is,  the  new  creature,  are  the  promises 
which  are  made  to  the  aforesaid  conditions  (Deut.  xxx.  6; 


The  English  Baptists  yy 

Acts  ii.  38;  Gal.  iii.  14;  2  Pet.  i.  4,  5),  which  promises  are 
all  yea  and  Amen  in  Christ  Jesus  (2  Cor.  i.  20),  and  that 
in  the  regenerate  (Gal.  iii.  16). 

58.  That  repentance  and  faith  are  wrought  in  the  hearts 
of  men,  by  the  preaching  of  the  word,  outwardly  in  the 
Scriptures,  and  creatures,  the  grace  of  God  preventing 
us  by  the  motions  and  instinct  of  the  spirit,  which  a  man 
hath  power  to  receive  or  reject  (^latt.  xxiii.  37;  Acts 
vii.  51;  Acts  vi.  10;  Rom.  x.  14,  i8j,  that  our  justifica- 
tion before  God  consisteth  not  in  the  performance  of  the 
conditions  which  God  requireth  of  us,  but  in  partaking 
of  the  promises,  the  possessing  of  Christ,  remission  of 
sins,  and  the  new  creature. 

59.  That  God,  the  Father,  of  His  own  good  will  doth 
beget  us,  by  the  word  of  truth  (James  i.  18),  which  is  an 
immortal  seed  (i  Pet.  i.  23),  not  the  doctrine  of  repen- 
tance and  faith  which  may  be  lost  (Luke  viii.  13)  ;  and 
that  God  the  Father,  in  our  regeneration,  neither  needeth 
nor  useth  the  help  of  any  creature,  but  that  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  immediately  worketh  that 
work  in  the  soul,  where  the  free  will  of  men  can  do 
nothing  (John  ii.  13). 

60.  That  such  as  have  not  attained  the  new  creature, 
have  need  of  the  scriptures,  creatures  and  ordinances 
of  the  Church,  to  instruct  them,  to  comfort  them,  to  stir 
them  up  the  better  to  perform  the  condition  of  repentance 
to  the  remission  of  sins  (2  Pet.  i.  19;  i  Cor.  xi.  26;  Eph. 
iv.  12-23). 

61.  That  the  new  creature  which  is  begotten  of  God, 
needeth  not  the  outward  scriptures,  creatures,  or  ordi- 
nances of  the  Church,  to  support  or  help  them  (2  Cor.  xiii. 
10,  12:  I  Joh.  ii.  2y',  I  Cor.  i.  15,  16;  Rev.  xxi.  23), 
seeing  he  hath  three  witnesses  in  himself,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost:  which  are  better  than  all 
scriptures,  or  creatures  whatsoever. 

62.  That  as  Christ  who  was  above  the  law  notwith- 
standing was  made  under  the  law,  for  our  cause :  so  the 
regenerate  in  love  to  others,  can  and  will  do  no  other, 
than  use  the  outward  things  of  the  church,  for  the  gain- 
ing and  supporting  of  others :  and  so  the  outward  church 
and  ordinances  are  always  necessary,  for  all  sorts  of  per- 


7§  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

sons  whatsoever   (Matt.  iii.   15;  xxviii.   19,  20;   i   Cor. 
viii.  9). 

63.  That  the  new  creature  although  he  be  above  the 
law  and  scriptures,  yet  he  can  do  nothing  against  the  law 
or  scriptures,  but  rather  all  his  doings  shall  serve  to  the 
confirming  and  establishing  of  the  law  (Rom.  iii.  31). 
Therefore  he  cannot  lie,  nor  steal,  nor  commit  adultery, 
nor  kill,  nor  hate  any  man,  or  do  any  other  fleshly  action, 
and  therefore  all  fleshly  libertinism  is  contrary  to  re- 
generation, detestable,  and  damnable  (John  viii.  34; 
Rom.  vi.  15,  16,  18;  2  Pet.  ii.  18,  19;  i  John  v.  18). 

64.  That  the  outward  church  visible,  consists  of  peni- 
tent persons  only,  and  of  such  as  believing  in  Christ,  bring 
forth  fruits  worthy  amendment  of  life  ( i  Tim.  vi.  3,  5 ; 
2  Tim.  iii.  i,  5;  Acts  xix.  4). 

65.  That  the  visible  church  is  a  mystical  figure  out- 
wardly, of  the  true,  spiritual  invisible  church ;  which  con- 
sisteth  of  the  spirits  of  just  and  perfect  men  only,  that  is 
of  the  regenerate  (Rev.  i.  20,  compared  with  Rev.  xxi. 
2,23,27), 

66.  That  repentance  is  the  change  of  mind  from  evil 
to  that  which  is  good  (Matt.  iii.  2),  a  sorrow  for  sin 
committed,  with  a  humble  heart  for  the  same ;  and  a 
resolution  to  amend  for  time  to  come ;  with  an  unfeigned 
endeavor  therein  (2  Cor.  vii.  8,  11;  Isaiah  i.  16,  17;  Jer. 
xxxi.  18,  19). 

6y.  That  when  we  have  done  all  that  we  can  we  are 
unprofitable  servants,  and  all  our  righteousness  is  as  a 
stained  cloth  (Luke  xvii.  20),  and  that  we  can  only 
suppress  and  lop  off  the  branches  of  sin,  but  the  root  of 
sin  we  cannot  pluck  up  out  of  our  hearts  (Jer.  iv.  4,  com- 
pared with  Deut.  xxx.  6,  8). 

68.  That  faith  is  a  knowledge  in  the  mind  of  the  doc- 
trine of  the  law  and  gospel  contained  in  the  prophetical, 
and  apostolical  scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament : 
accompanying  repentance  with  an  assurance  that  God, 
through  Christ,  will  perform  unto  us  His  promises  of  re- 
mission of  sins,  and  mortification,  upon  the  condition  of 
our  unfeigned  repentance,  and  amendment  of  life  (Rom. 
X.  13,  14,  15;  Acts  V.  30-32;  and  Acts  ii.  38,  39;  Heb.  xi. 
i;  Mark  i.  15). 


The  English  Baptists  ?9 


69.  That  all  penitent  and  faithful  Christians  are  breth- 
ren in  the  communion  of  the  outward  church,  whereso- 
ever they  live,  by  what  name  soever  they  are  known, 
which  in  truth  and  zeal,  follow  repentance  and  faith, 
though  compassed  with  never  so  many  ignorances  and  in- 
firmities; and  we  salute  them  all  with  a  holy  kiss,  being 
heartily  grieved  that  we  which  follow  after  one  faith,  and 
one  spirit,  one  Lord,  and  one  God,  one  body,  and  one 
baptism,  should  be  rent  into  so  many  sects  and  schisms: 
and  that  only  for  matters  of  less  moment. 

70.  That  the  outward  baptism  of  water,  is  to  be  ad- 
ministered only  upon  such  penitent  and  faithful  persons 
as  are  (aforesaid),  and  not  upon  innocent  infants,  or 
wicked  persons  (Matt.  iii.  2,  3,  compared  with  Matt, 
xxviii.  19,  20,  and  John  iv.  i). 

71.  That  in  Baptism  to  the  penitent  person,  and  be- 
liever, there  is  presented,  and  figured,  the  spiritual  bap- 
tism of  Christ,  (that  is)  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  fire:  the  baptism  into  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ:  even  the  promise  of  the  Spirit,  which  he  shall 
assuredly  be  made  partaker  of,  if  he  continue  to  the  end 
(Gal.  iii.  14;  Matt.  iii.  11;  i  Cor.  xii.  13;  Rom.  vi.  3,  6; 
Col.  ii.  10). 

72.  That  in  the  outward  supper  which  only  baptised 
persons  must  partake,  there  is  presented  and  figured  be- 
fore the  eyes  of  the  penitent  and  faithful,  that  spiritual 
supper,  which  Christ  maketh  of  His  flesh  and  blood: 
which  is  crucified  and  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins  (as 
the  bread  is  broken  and  the  wine  poured  forth),  and 
which  is  eaten  and  drunken  (as  is  the  bread  and  wine 
bodily)  only  by  those  which  are  flesh,  of  His  flesh,  and 
bone  of  His  bone:  in  the  communion  of  the  same  spirit 
(i  Cor.  xii.  13;  Rev.  iii.  20,  compared  with  i  Cor.  xi.  23, 
26;  John  vi.  53,  58). 

73.  That  the  outward  baptism  and  supper  do  not  con- 
fer, and  convey  grace  and  regeneration  to  the  participants 
or  communicants :  but  as  the  word  preached,  they  serve 
only  to  support  and  stir  up  the  repentance  and  faith  of 
the  communicants  till  Christ  come,  till  the  day  dawn,  and 
the  day-star  arise  in  their  hearts  (i  Cor.  xi.  26;  2  Peter 
i,  19;  I  Cor.  I.  5-8). 


8o  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

74.  That  the  sacraments  have  the  same  use  that  the 
word  hath;  that  they  are  a  visible  word,  and  that  they 
teach  to  the  eye  of  them  that  understand  as  the  word 
teacheth  the  ears  of  them  that  have  ears  to  hear  (Prov.  x. 
12),  and  therefore  as  the  word  pertaineth  not  to  infants, 
no  more  do  the  sacraments. 

75.  That  the  preaching  of  the  word,  and  the  ministry 
of  the  sacraments,  representeth  the  ministry  of  Christ  in 
the  spirit;  who  teacheth,  baptiseth,  and  feedeth  the  re- 
generate, by  the  Holy  Spirit  inw^ardly  and  invisibly. 

y6.  That  Christ  hath  set  in  His  outward  church  two 
sorts  of  ministers :  viz.,  some  who  are  called  pastors, 
teachers  or  elders,  who  administer  in  the  word  and  sacra- 
ments, and  others  who  are  called  Deacons,  men  and 
women :  whose  ministry  is,  to  serve  tables  and  wash  the 
saints'  feet  (Acts  vi.  2-4;  Phil.  i.  i ;  i  Tim.  iii.  2,  3,  8, 
II,  and  chap.  v.). 

yy.  That  the  separating  of  the  impenitent,  from  the 
outward  communion  of  the  church,  is  a  figure  of  the 
eternal  rejection,  and  reprobation  of  them  that  persist 
impenitent  in  sin  (Rev.  xxi.  2y,  and  xxii.  14-45;  Matt, 
xvi.  18  and  xviii.  18;  John  xx.  23,  compared  with  Rev. 
ni.  12). 

78.  That  none  are  to  be  separated  from  the  outward 
communion  of  the  Church  but  such  as  forsake  repentance, 
which  deny  the  power  of  Godliness  (2  Tim.  iii.  5),  and 
namely  that  sufficient  admonition  go  before,  according 
to  the  rule  (Matt,  xviii.  15-18),  and  that  none  are  to 
be  rejected  for  ignorance  or  errors,  or  infirmities  as  long 
as  they  retain  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ  (Rom.  xiv., 
and  I  Thess.  v.  14;  Rom.  xvi.  17,  18),  but  they  are  to 
be  instructed  with  meekness;  and  the  strong  are  to  bear 
the  infirmities  of  the  weak;  and  that  we  are  to  support 
one  another  through  love. 

79.  That  a  man  may  speak  a  word  against  the  Son, 
and  be  pardoned  (that  is),  a  man  may  err  in  the  knowl- 
edge of  Christ's  history,  and  in  matters  of  the  outward 
church,  and  be  forgiven,  doing  It  in  an  ignorant  zeal; 
but  he  that  speaketh  a  word  against  the  Holy  Ghost 
(that  Is)  that  after  illumination  forsaketh  repentance 
and  faith  in  Christ,  persecuting  them,  trampling  under 


The  English  Baptists  8i 

foot  the  blood  of  the  covenant :  returning  with  the  dog  to 
the  vomit;  that  such  shall  never  be  pardoned,  neither  in 
this  world,  nor  in  the  world  to  come  (Matt.  xii.  31,  32, 
compared  with  Heb.  vi.  4,  and  chap.  x.  26-29;  2  Pet. 
ii.  20,  22). 

80.  That  persons  separated  from  the  communion  of  the 
church,  are  to  be  accounted  as  heathens  and  publicans 
(Matt,  xviii.),  and  that  they  are  so  far  to  be  shunned,  as 
they  may  pollute :  notwithstanding  being  ready  to  instruct 
them,  and  to  relieve  them  in  their  wants :  seeking  by  all 
lawful  means  to  win  them :  considering  that  excommuni- 
cation is  only  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the 
spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  (i  Cor.  v.  5, 
II ;  Matt.  xi.  19;  Luke  xv.  i,  2). 

81.  That  there  is  no  succession  in  the  outward  church, 
but  that  all  succession  is  from  heaven,  and  that  the  new 
creature  only,  hath  the  thing  signified,  and  substance, 
whereof  the  outward  church  and  ordinances  are  shadows 
(Col.  ii.  16,  17),  and  therefore  he  alone  hath  power, 
and  knoweth  aright,  how  to  administer  in  the  outward 
church,  for  the  benefit  of  others  (John.  vi.  45)  :  yet  God 
is  not  the  God  of  confusion  but  of  order,  and  therefore 
we  are  in  the  outward  church,  to  draw  as  near  the  first 
institution  as  may  be,  in  all  things  (i  Cor.  xiv.  33)  ;  there- 
fore it  is  not  lawful  for  every  brother  to  administer  the 
word  and  sacraments  (Eph.  iv.  11,  12,  compared  with  i 
Cor.  xii.  4,  5,  6,  28,  29). 

82.  That  Christ  hath  set  in  his  outward  church  the 
vocation  of  master  and  servant,  parents  and  children, 
husband  and  wife  (Eph.  v.  22-25,  chap.  vi.  i,  4,  5,  9), 
and  hath  commanded  every  soul  to  be  subject  to  the 
higher  powers  (Rom.  xiii.  i),  not  because  of  wrath  only, 
but  for  conscience  sake  (verse  5)  that  we  are  to  give 
them  their  duty,  as  tribute,  and  custom,  honour,  and  fear, 
not  speaking  evil  of  them  that  are  in  authority  (Jude, 
verse  8),  but  praying  and  giving  thanks  for  them  (i  Tim. 
ii.  I,  2),  for  that  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God,  even 
our  Saviour. 

83.  That  the  office  of  the  magistrate,  is  a  disposition  or 
permissive  ordinance  of  God  for  the  good  of  mankind: 
that  one  man  like  the  brute  beasts  devour  not  another 


82  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

(Rom.  xiii.),  and  that  justice  and  civility,  may  be  pre- 
served among  men :  and  that  a  magistrate  may  so  please 
God  in  his  calling,  in  doing  that  which  is  righteous  and 
just  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  that  he  may  bring  an  out- 
v^ard  blessing  upon  himself,  his  posterity  and  subjects  (2 
Kings,  X.  30,  31). 

84.  That  the  magistrate  is  not  by  virtue  of  his  office 
to  meddle  with  religion,  or  matters  of  conscience,  to  force 
or  compel  men  to  this  or  that  form  of  religion,  or  doc- 
trine :  but  to  leave  Christian  religion  free,  to  every  man's 
conscience,  and  to  handle  only  civil  transgressions  (Rom. 
xiii),  injuries  and  wrongs  of  man  against  man,  in  murder, 
adultery,  theft,  etc.,  for  Christ  only  is  the  king,  and  law- 
giver of  the  church  and  conscience  (James  iv.  12). 

85.  That  if  the  magistrate  will  follow  Christ,  and  be 
His  disciple,  he  must  deny  himself,  take  up  his  cross,  and 
follow  Christ ;  he  must  love  his  enemies  and  not  kill  them, 
he  must  pray  for  them,  and  not  punish  them,  he  must 
feed  them  and  give  them  drink,  not  imprison  them,  banish 
them,  dismember  them,  and  spoil  their  goods ;  he  must 
suffer  persecution  and  affliction  with  Christ,  and  be  slan- 
dered, reviled,  blasphemed,  scourged,  buffeted,  spit  upon, 
imprisoned  and  killed  with  Christ;  and  that  by  the  au- 
thority of  magistrates,  which  things  he  cannot  possibly 
do,  and  retain  the  revenge  of  the  sword. 

86.  That  the  Disciples  of  Christ,  the  members  of  the 
outward  church,  are  to  judge  all  their  causes  of  differ- 
ence, among  themselves,  and  they  are  not  to  go  to  law, 
before  the  magistrates  (i  Cor.  vi.  i,  7),  and  that  all  their 
differences  must  be  ended  by  (yea)  and  (nay)  without 
an  oath  (Matt.  v.  33-37;  James  v.  12). 

87.  That  the  Disciples  of  Christ,  the  members  of  the 
outward  church,  may  not  marry  any  of  the  profane,  or 
wicked,  godless  people  of  the  world,  but  that  every  one  is 
to  marry  in  the  Lord  (i  Cor.  vii.  39),  every  man  one  only 
wife,  and  every  woman  one  only  husband  (i  Cor.  vii.  2). 

88.  That  parents  are  bound  to  bring  up  their  children  in 
instruction  and  information  of  the  Lord  (Eph.  vi.  4),  and 
that  they  are  to  provide  for  their  family :  otherwise  they 
deny  the  faith,  and  are  worse  than  infidels  (i  Tim.  v.  8). 

89.  That  notwithstanding  if  the  Lord  shall  give  a  man 


The  English  Baptists  83 

any  special  calling,  as  Simon,  and  Andrew,  James,  and 
John,  then  they  must  leave  all,  father,  ship,  nets,  wife, 
children,  yea,  and  Hfe  also  to  follow  Christ  (Luke  xiv.  26; 
Matt.  iv.  18-20). 

90.  That  in  the  necessities  of  the  church,  and  poor 
brethren,  all  things  are  to  be  common  (Acts  iv.  32),  yea 
and  that  one  church  is  to  administer  to  another  in  time  of 
need  (Gal.  ii.  10;  Acts  xi.  30;  i  Cor.  iv.  8,  and  chap.  ix.). 

91.  That  all  the  bodies  of  all  men  that  are  dead,  shall 
by  the  power  of  Christ,  be  raised  up,  out  of  his  own 
proper  seed,  as  corn  out  of  the  seed  rotting  in  the  earth 
(i  Cor.  XV.). 

92.  That  these  which  live  in  the  last  day  shall  not  die, 
but  shall  be  changed  in  a  moment :  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye,  at  the  last  trumpet  (i  Cor.  xv.  52),  for  the  trump 
shall  blow,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  up  incorruptible, 
and  we  shall  be  changed,  not  in  substance  but  in  qualities ; 
for  the  bodies  shall  rise  in  honour,  in  power,  in  incorrup- 
tion,  and  spiritual :  being  sown  in  dishonour,  in  weakness, 
in  corruption,  and  natural  (i  Cor.  xv.  42,  44). 

93.  That  the  bodies,  being  raised  up,  shall  be  joined 
to  the  souls,  whereto  formerly  they  were  united;  which 
to  that  time  were  preserved  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord 
(Rev.  vi.  9,  Job  xix.  25-27). 

94.  That  it  is  appointed  to  all  men  that  they  shall  once 
die,  and  then  cometh  the  judgment  (Heb.  ix.  27), 
and  that  the  change  of  them  that  live  on  earth  at  the 
last  day,  shall  be  as  it  were  a  death  unto  them  ( i  Cor.  xv. 
52;  I  Thes.  iv.  15-17). 

95.  That  there  shall  be  a  general,  and  universal  day  of 
judgment,  when  every  one  shall  receive  according  to 
the  things  that  are  done  in  the  flesh,  whether  they  be  good 
or  evil  (i  Cor.  v.  10,  Acts  xvii.  31). 

96.  That  of  the  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man ;  no, 
not  the  Angels  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son  Himself,  but 
the  Father  only.  (Mark  xiii.  32). 

97.  That  Christ  Jesus  that  man,  shall  judge  in  that 
day  (Acts  xvii.  31),  that  he  shall  come  in  the  clouds  with 
glory:  and  all  His  holy  angels  with  Him  (Matt,  xxv.), 
with  a  shout,  and  with  the  voice  of  the  Archangel,  and 
with  the  trump  of  God  (i  Thes.  iv.  16),  and  He  shall 


84  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


sit  upon  the  throne  of  His  glory ;  and  all  nations  shall  be 
gathered  before  Him,  and  He  shall  separate  them  one 
from  another,  as  a  shepherd  separateth  the  sheep  from  the 
goats,  setting  the  sheep  on  His  right  hand  and  the  goats 
on  the  left  (Matt.  xxv.). 

98.  That  the  king  shall  say  to  the  sheep,  ^he  regenerate, 
which  are  on  His  right  hand,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world ; "  and  it  shall  be  performed  ac- 
cordingly (Matt.  XXV.). 

99.  That  the  king  shall  say  to  them  on  His  left  hand,  the 
goats,  the  wicked  ones,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire  prepared  for  the  Devil  and  his  angels," 
and  it  shall  be  accomplished  accordingly  (Matt.  xxv.). 

100.  That  after  the  judgment  ended  and  accomplished, 
and  the  last  enemy  that  is  death  being  put  under  the  feet 
of  Christ,  then  the  Son  himself  shall  deliver  up  the  king- 
dom into  the  hands  of  the  Father,  and  be  subject  unto 
Him,  that  subdued  all  things  unto  Him,  that  God  may 
be  all  in  all  (i  Cor.  xv.  24-28). 

5.  On  the  occasion  of  the  split  in  the  church  Helwys 
and  his  party  also  submitted  a  set  of  Latin  articles  to 
their  Dutch  brethren.  About  1612  Helwys  became  con- 
vinced that  it  was  his  duty  to  return  to  England  and 
begin  Baptist  work  there.  But  before  leaving  the  Nether- 
lands, he  drew  up  and  printed  in  Amsterdam,  in  161 1,  a 
Confession  of  twenty-seven  articles  in  English  (possibly 
a  translation  of  the  Latin  articles)  which  has  been  gen- 
erally recognized  as  the  earliest  Baptist  Confession. 

In  republishing  it,  in  1738,  Crosby  (Vol  H,  389!^)  ac- 
cidentally combined  articles  twenty-four  and  twenty-five, 
thus  reducing  the  number  to  twenty-six.  He  was  followed 
by  Underbill  in  his  reprint,  pp.  i-io.  The  following  text 
is  a  reproduction  of  the  only  copy  of  the  original  known 
to  be  in  existence,  and  now  in  the  library  of  York  Minster. 
The  transcript  was  made  by  Dr.  W.  T.  Whitley,  of  Pres- 
ton, England: 


The  English  Baptists 


85 


DECLARATION  OF 


of 


FAITH 


ENGLISH 


PEOPLE 


Remaining  at  Am  I  sterdam  in  Holland. 


Heb.  II  .  6. 

Without  Faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  |  GOD.  Heb.  1 1. 

Rom.  14  .  23. 
Whatsoever  is  not  off  Faith  is  sin. 


Pry n ted   .    i 6 i i . 


86  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

To  Al  The  Humble  mynded  |  which  love  the  truth  in 
simplicitie  Grace  and  |  peace. 

[This  is  followed  by  two  pages  of  preface.] 

A  DECLARATION,  ETC. 
WEE  BELEEVE  AND  I  CONFESSE  I 


I. 

That  there  are  THREE  which  beare  record  in  heaven, 
the  FATHER,  the  WORD,  and  the  SPIRIT;  and  these 
THREE  are  one  GOD,  in  all  equalitie,  i  Jno.  5.7;  Phil. 
2.5,  6.  By  whome  all  thinges  are  created  and  pre- 
served, in  Heaven  and  in  Earth.  Gen.  i  Chap. 


That  this  GOD  in  the  begining  created  al  things  off 
nothinge.  Gen.  i.  I.  and  made  man  off  the  dust  off  the 
earth,  Chap.  2.y,  in  his  owne  ymage,  Chap.  1.27,  in 
righteousnes  and  true  Holines.  Ephes.  4.24:  yet  being 
tempted,  fel  by  disobedience.  Chap.  3.1-7.  Through 
whose  disobedience,  all  men  sinned.  Rom.  5. 12- 19.  His 
sinn  being  imputed  vnto  all;  and  so  death  went  over  all 
men. 

3- 

That  by  the  promised  seed  off  the  woman,  lESVS 
CHRIST,  [and  by]  his  obedience,  al  are  made  righteous. 
Rom.  5.19.  Al  are  made  alive,  i  Cor.  15.22.  His  right- 
eousness being  imputed  vnto  all. 

4. 

That  notwithstanding  this  Men  are  by  nature  the 
Children  off  wrath,  Ephes.  2.3.  borne  in  iniquitie  and  in 
sin  conceived.  Psal.  51.5.  Wise  to  all  evill,  but  to  good 
they  have  no  knowledg.  Jer.  4.22.  The  natural  ma 
perceiveth  not  the  thinges  oif  the  Spirit  oif  God.  1  Cor. 
2.14.  And  therefore  man  is  not  restored  vnto  his  former 
estate,  but  that  as  man,  in  his  estate  off  innocency,  have- 
ing  in  himselff  all  disposition  vnto  good,  &  no  disposition 
vnto  evill,  yet  being  tempted  might  yeild,  or  might  resist : 


The  English  Baptists  87 

even  so  now  being  fallen,  and  haveing  all  disposition 
vnto  evill,  and  no  disposition  or  will  vnto  anie  good,  yet 
GOD  giveing  grace,  man  may  receave  grace,  or  my 
reject  grace,  according  to  that  saying;  Deut.  30.19.  /  call 
Heaven  and  Earth  to  record.  This  day  against  you,  that 
I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death,  blessing  and  cursing: 
Therefore  chuse  life,  that  both  thou  and  thy  seed  may  live. 

5- 
That  GOD  before  the  Foundatio  off  the  World  hath 
Predestinated  that  all  that  beleeve  in  him  shall-be  saved, 
Ephes.  1.4,  12 ;  Mark  16.16.  and  al  that  beleeve  not  shalbee 
damned.  Mark  16.16.  all  which  he  knewe  before.  Rom. 
8.29.  And  this  is  the  Election  and  reprobacion  spoken 
of  in  the  Scripturs,  concerning  salvacion,  and  condem- 
nacion,  and  not  that  GOD  hath  Predestinated  men  to  bee 
wicked,  and  so  to  bee  damned,  but  that  men  being 
wicked  shallbee  damned,  for  GOD  would  have  all  men 
saved,  and  come  to  the  knowledg  off  the  truth,  i  Tim. 
2.4.  and  would  have  no  man  to  perish,  but  would  have 
all  men  come  to  repentance.  2  Pet.  3.9.  and  willeth  not 
the  death  of  him  that  deith.  Ezec.  18.32.  And  therefore 
GOD  is  the  author  off  no  mens  comdemnacion,  according 
to  the  saieing  off  the  Prophet.  Osaea.  13.  Thy  distruction 
O  Israel,  is  off  thy  selfe,  but  thy  helpe  is  off  mee. 

6. 

That  man  is  justified  onely  by  the  righteousness  off 
CHRIST,  apprehended  by  faith,  Roman.  3.28.  Gal.  2.16. 
yet  faith  without  works  is  dead.  Jam.  2.17. 

7. 
That  men  may  fall  away  from  the  grace  off  GOD, 
Heb.  12.15.  ^^<^  from  the  truth,  which  they  have  received 
&  acknowledged.  Chap.  10.26.  after  they  have  taisted  off 
the  heavely  gift,  and  were  made  pertakers  off  the  HOLY 
GHOST,  and  have  taisted  off  the  good  word  off  GOD, 
&  off  the  powers  off  the  world  to  come.  Chap.  6.4,  5. 
And  after  they  have  escaped  from  the  filthines  off  the 
World,  may  bee  tangled  againe  therein  &  overcome.  2 


88  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Pet.  2.20.  That  a  righteous  man  may  forsake  his 
righteousnes  and  perish  Ezec.  18.24,  26.  And  therefore 
let  no  man  presume  to  thinke  that  because  he  hath,  or 
had  once  grace,  therefore  he  shall  alwaies  have  grace: 
But  let  all  men  have  assurance,  that  iff  they  continew 
vnto  the  end,  they  shalbee  saved:  Let  no  man  then  pre- 
sume ;  but  let  all  worke  out  their  salvacion  with  f eare  and 
trembling. 

8. 

That  lESVS  CHRIST,  the  Sonne  off  GOD  the  sec- 
ond Person,  or  subsistance  in  the  Trinity,  in  the  Fulnes 
off  time  was  manifested  in  the  Flesh,  being  the  seed  off 
David,  and  off  the  Isralits,  according  to  the  Flesh.  Ro- 
man. 1.3  and  8.5.  the  Sonne  off  Marie  the  Virgine,  made 
of  hir  substance.  Gal.  4.4.  By  the  power  off  the  HOLIE 
GHOST  overshadowing  hir,  Luk.  1.35.  and  being  thus 
true  Man  was  like  vnto  us  in  all  thing,  sin  onely  excepted. 
Heb.  4.15.  being  one  person  in  two  distinct  natures, 
TRVE  GOD,  and  TRVE  MAN. 

9- 

That  lESVS  CHRIST  is  Mediator  off  the  New  Testa- 
ment betweene  GOD  and  Man,  i  Tim.  2.5,  haveing  all 
power  in  Heaven  and  in  Earth  given  vnto  him.  Mat. 
28.18.  Being  the  onely  KING,  Luke  1.33,  PREIST,  Heb. 
7.24,  and  PROPHET,  Act.  3.22.  Off  his  church,  he 
also  being  the  onely  Law-giver,  hath  in  his  Testament  set 
downe  an  absolute,  and  perfect  rule  off  direction,  for  all 
persons,  at  all  times,  to  bee  observed ;  Which  no  Prince, 
nor  anie  whosoever,  may  add  to,  or  diminish  from  as 
they  will  avoid  the  fearefull  judgments  denounced  against 
them  that  shal  so  do.  Revel.  22.18,  19. 

10. 

That  the  church  off  CHRIST  is  a  compainy  off  faithful 
people  I  Cor.  1.2.  Eph.  i.i.  seperated  fro  the  world  by 
the  word  &  Spirit  off  GOD.  2  Cor.  6,  17.  being  kint  vnto 
the  LORD,  &  one  vnto  another,  by  Baptisme.  i  Cor. 
12.13.  Vpon  their  owne  confessio  of  the  faith.  Act. 
8.37.  and  sinnes.  Mat.  3.6. 


The  English  Baptists  89 

II. 

That  though  in  respect  off  CHRIST,  the  Qiurch  bee 
one,  Ephes.  4.4.  yet  it  consisteth  off  divers  particuler 
congregacions,  even  so  manie  as  there  shallbee  in  the 
World,  every  off  which  congregacion,  though  they  be  but 
two  or  three,  have  CHRIST  given  them,  with  all  the 
meanes  off  their  salvacion.  Mat.  18.20.  Roman.  8.32.  i. 
Corin.  3.22.  Are  the  Bodie  off  CHRIST,  i.  Cor.  12.27. 
and  a  whole  Church,  i.  Cor.  14.23.  And  therefore  may, 
and  ought,  when  they  are  come  together,  to  Pray, 
Prophecie,  breake  bread,  and  administer  in  all  the  holy 
ordinances,  although  as  yet  they  have  no  Officers,  or  that 
their  Officers  should  bee  in  Prison,  sick,  or  by  anie  other 
meanes  hindered  from  the  Church,   i :  Pet.  4.10  &  2.5. 

12. 

That  as  one  congregacion  hath  CHRIST,  so  hath  all, 
2.  Cor.  10.7.  And  that  the  Word  off  GOD  cometh  not 
out  from  anie  one,  neither  to  anie  one  congregacion  in 
particuler.  i.  Cor.  14.36.  But  vnto  everie  particuler 
Church,  as  it  doth  vnto  al  the  world.  Coll.  1.5.  6.  And 
therefore  no  church  ought  to  challeng  anie  prerogative 
over  anie  other. 

13- 

That  everie  Church  is  to  receive  in  all  their  members 
by  Baptisme  vpon  the  Confession  off  their  faith  and 
sinnes  wrought  by  the  preaching  off  the  Gospel,  accord- 
ing to  the  primitive  Institucion.  Mat.  28.19.  And  prac- 
tice. Act.  2.41.  And  therefore  Churches  constituted 
after  anie  other  manner,  or  off  anie  other  persons  are 
not  according  to  CHRISTS  Testament. 

14. 

That  Baptisme  or  washing  with  Water,  is  the  outward 
manifestacion  off  dicing  vnto  sinn,  and  walkeing  in 
newnes  off  life.  Roman.  6.2,  3,  4.  And  therefore  in  no 
wise  apperteyneth  to  infants. 

15- 

That  the  LORDS  Supper  is  the  outward  manifestacion 
off  the  Spiritual  communion  betwene  CHRIST  and  the 


90  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

faithful  mutnallie.  I.  Cor.  10.16,  17.  to  declare  his  death 
vntil  he  come,  i  Cor.  11.26. 

16. 

That  the  members  off  everie  Church  or  Congregacion 
ought  to  knowe  one  another,  that  so  they  may  performe 
all  the  duties  off  love  one  towards  another  both  to  soule 
and  bodie.  Mat.  18.15.  i  Thes.  5.14.  i  Cor.  12.25.  And 
especiallie  the  Elders  ought  to  knowe  the  whole  flock, 
whereoff  the  HOLIE  GHOST  hath  made  them  overseers. 
Acts  20.28;  I  Pet.  5.2,  3.  And  therefore  a  Church  ought 
not  to  consist  off  such  a  multitude  as  cannot  have  par- 
ticuler  knowledg  one  off  another. 

17. 
That  Brethren  impenitent  in  one  sin  after  the  admoni- 
tion off  the  Church,  are  to  bee  excluded  the  comunion  off 
the  Sainets.  Mat.  18.17.  i  Cor.  5.4,  13.  &  therfore  not 
the  comitting  off  sin  doth  cut  off  anie  from  the  Church, 
but  refusing  to  heare  the  Church  to  reformacion. 

18. 

That  Excommunicants  in  respect  of  civil  societie  are 
not  to  bee  avoided,  2.  Thess.  3.15.  Mat.  18.17. 

19. 

That  everie  Church  ought  (according  to  the  exaple  off 
CHRISTS  Disciples  and  primitive  Churches)  vpon 
everie  first  day  off  the  weeke,  being  the  LORDS  day,  to 
assemble  together  to  pray  Prophecie,  praise  GOD,  and 
breake  Bread,  and  performe  all  other  partes  off  Spirituall 
communio  for  the  worship  off  GOD,  their  owne  mutuall 
edificacion,  and  the  preservacion  off  true  Religion,  & 
pietie  in  the  church  lo  20.19.  Act.  2.42  and  20.7,  i.  Cor. 
16.2.  and  that  ought  not  to  labor  in  their  callings  accord- 
ing to  the  equitie  off  the  moral  law,  which  CHRIST  came 
not  to  abolish,  but  to  fulfill.  Exod.  20.8,  &c. 

20. 

That  the  Officers  off  everie  Church  or  congregation 
are  either  Elders,  who  by  their  office  do  especially  feed 
the  flock  concerning  their  soules,  Act.  20.28,  Pet.  5.2, 
3.  or  Deacons  Men,  and  Women  who  by  their  office  re- 


The  English  Baptists  91 

leave  the  necessities  off  the  poore  and  impotent  brethre 
concerning  their  bodies,  Acts.  6.1-4. 

21. 

That  these  Officers  are  to  bee  chosen  when  there  are 
persons  quahfied  according  to  the  rules  in  Christs  Testa- 
ment, I.  Tim.  3.2-7.  Tit.  1.6-9.  Act.  6.3.  4.  By  Election 
and  approbacion  off  that  Church  or  congregacion 
whereoff  they  are  members,  Act.  6.3.  4  and  14.23,  with 
Fasting,  Prayer,  and  Laying  on  off  hands,  Act.  13.3. 
and  14.23.  And  there  being  but  one  rule  for  Elders, 
therefore  but  one  sort  off  Elders. 

22. 

That  the  Officers  off  everie  Church  or  congregacion 
are  tied  by  Office  onely  to  that  particuler  congregacion 
whereoff  they  are  chosen,  Act.  14.23,  and  20.17.  Tit.  1.5. 
And  therefore  they  cannot  challeng  by  office  anie  aucthor- 
itie  in  anie  other  congregation  whatsoever  except  they 
would  have  an  Apostleship. 

23. 

That  the  scriptures  off  the  Old  and  New  Testament  are 
written  for  our  instruction,  2.  Tim.  3.16  &  that  wee  ought 
to  search  them  for  they  testifie  off  CHRIST,  lo.  5.39. 
And  therefore  to  bee  vsed  withall  reverence,  as  conteyning 
the  Holie  Word  off  GOD,  which  onelie  is  our  direction 
in  al  thinges  whatsoever. 

24. 

That  Magistracle  is  a  Holie  ordinance  off  GOD,  that 
every  soule  ought  to  bee  subject  to  it  not  for  feare  onelie, 
but  for  conscience  sake.  Magistraets  are  the  ministers  off 
GOD  for  our  wealth,  they  beare  not  the  sword  for  nought. 
They  are  the  ministers  off  GOD  to  take  vengance  on  them 
that  doe  evil,  Rom.  13.  Chap,  That  it  is  a  fearefull 
sin  to  speake  evill  off  them  that  are  in  dignitie,  and  to 
dispise  Government.  2.  Pet.  2.10.  Wee  ought  to  pay 
tribute,  custome  and  all  other  duties.  That  wee  are  to 
pray  for  the,  for  GOD  would  have  them  saved  and  come 
to  the  knowledg  off  his  truth,  i  Tim.  2.1.  4.  And  there- 
fore they  may  bee  members  off  the  Church  off  CHRIST, 


92  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

reteining  their  Magistracie,  for  no  Holie  Ordinance  off 
GOD  debarreth  anie  from  being  a  member  oif  CHRISTS 
Church.  They  beare  the  sword  off  GOD, — which  sword 
in  all  Lawful  administracions  is  to  bee  defended  and 
supported  by  the  servants  off  GOD  that  are  vnder  their 
Goverment  with  their  lyves  and  al  that  they  have  accord- 
ing as  in  the  first  Institucion  off  that  Holie  Ordinance. 
And  whosoever  holds  otherwise  must  hold,  (iff  they 
vnderstad  themselves)  that  they  are  the  ministers  of  the 
devill,  and  therefore  not  to  bee  praied  for  nor  approved  in 
anie  off  their  administracions, — seing  all  things  they  do 
(as  punishing  offenders  and  defending  their  countries, 
state,  and  persons  by  the  sword)  is  vnlawful. 

25. 

That  it  is  Lawful  in  a  just  cause  for  the  deciding  off 
strife  to  take  an  oath  by  the  Name  off  the  Lord.  Heb. 
6.16.  2.  Cor.  1.23.  Phil.  1.8. 

26. 

That  the  dead  shall  rise  againe,  and  the  livelngh  being 
changed  in  a  moment, — haveing  the  same  bodies  in  sub- 
stance though  divers  in  qualities.  I.  Cor.  15.  52  and  38. 
Job  19.  15-28.  Luk  24.30. 

27. 

That  after  the  resurrection  all  men  shall  appeare  before 
the  judgment  seat  off  CHRIST  to  bee  judged  according 
to  their  workes,  that  the  Godlie  shall  enioy  life  Eternall, 
the  wickeed  being  condemned  shallbee  tormented  ever- 
lastinglie  in  Hell.  Mat.  25.46. 

Finis 

[The  above  is  followed  by  a  long  controversial  letter 
against  Smith.  It  contains  seventeen  leaves  as  against 
only  four  and  a  half  of  the  confession  itself.  It  charges 
Smith  with  the  following  six  errors :] 

T. 

That  CHRIST  concerning  the  first  mother  off  his 
Flesh,  he  afiirmed  that  all  the   |   Scriptures  would  not 


The  English  Baptists  93 

prove,  that  he  had  it  off  the  virgin  Marie,  but  his  second 
mother  |  which  he  said  v^^as  his  nourishmeet,  that  the 
Scriptures  proved  he  had  of  Marie,  thus  |  making 
CHRIST  to  have  two  mothers  off  his  Flesh 

2. 

That  men  are  justified  parteHe  by  the  righteousness  off 
Christ  apprehended  by  faith,  |  partely  by  their  owne 
inherent  righteousness, 

3- 
That  Adams  sin  was  not  imputed  vnto  anie  of  his  pos- 
teritie,  and  that  all  men  |  are  in  the  estate  off  Adam  in 
his  innocency  before  they  commit  actuall  sin,  and  |  there- 
fore infants  were  not  redeemed  by  Christ,  but  as  the 
Angels  and  all  other  Creatures. 

4. 
That  the  Church  and  Ministery  must  come  by  succes- 
sion contrary  to  his  former,    |   profession,  in  words  & 
writings,  &  that  by  a  supposed  succession,  he  cannot   | 
show,  from  whome,  nor  when,  nor  where 

.  5- 
That  an   Elder  off  one  Church  is  an   Elder  off  all 
Churches  in  the  World.  | 

6. 

That  Magistrates  may  not  bee  members  off  Christs 
Church,  and  retayne  their  |  Magistracie.  | 

[To  these  charges  Smith  replied  in  a  dignified  and 
conciliatory  tone  in  his  "  Last  Book,"  reprinted  in  Bar- 
clay's Inner  Life,  etc.] 


94  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


II.    SECOND   GROUP 

On  his  return  to  England  Helwys  began  work  in  Lon- 
don, and  congregations  are  soon  found  in  other  places 
as  well.  Through  much  opposition  from  all  parties,  and 
persecution  from  the  State  Church,  these  General  Bap- 
tists persevered  and  grew  slowly.  For  some  years  they 
kept  up  correspondence  with  the  Dutch  Mennonites,  with 
whom  they  were  in  substantial  agreement.  (See  Evans, 
11.)  They  were  doubtless  aided  and  stimulated  by  the 
rise  of  the  Calvinistic  Baptists  about  1640.  The  confu- 
sion of  the  period  of  the  Civil  War  and  the  Common- 
wealth afforded  them  as  well  as  all  other  free  church 
parties  an  excellent  opportunity  which  they  faithfully 
utilized.  Beginning  with  this  period  we  have  a  second 
group  of  Arminian  Confessions,  all  of  which  fall  within 
the  latter  half  of  the  century. 

I.  That  of  1651. 

The  earliest  was  drawn  up  in  1651.  Thirty  congre- 
gations in  Leicestershire,  Lincolnshire,  and  adjoining 
counties,  sent  two  representatives  each  to  a  meeting  to 
draw  up  a  statement  of  their  views.  This  is  the  first 
General  Baptist  Confession  to  speak  for  more  than  one 
church.  The  original  is  very  rare,  and  even  a  facsimile 
reprint  by  John  Taylor,  of  Northampton,  is  not  at  all 
common.  This  reprint  is  reproduced  here.  Only  the 
Scripture  references  are  here  given,  while  in  the  original 
the  passages  are  quoted  in  full;  and  the  signatures  of 
the  authors  are  omitted.  The  Confession  thus  abridged 
is  as  follows: 


The  English  Baptists  95 


THE 

FAITH 

AND 

PRACTISE 

OF  THIRTY 

CONGREGATIONS, 

GATHERED  ACCORDING  TO  THE 

PRIMITIVE  PATTERN. 

Published  (in  love)  by  consent  of  two  from 
each  Congregation,  appointed  for  that  purpose. 

1.  To  inform  those  who  have  a  desire  to  know  what 
Religious  Duties  they  hold  forth. 

2.  To  undecieve  those  that  are  mis-informed  thereof. 

3.  To  the  end  that  the  said  Congregations  may  in  love, 
and  the  spirit  of  Meekness,  be  informed  by  any 
that  conceive  they  walk  amiss. 

Rom.  12.  18.    //  it  he  possible,  as  much  as  in  you  is, 
have  Peace  with  all  men. 

London,  Printed  by  /.  M.  for  Will.  Lamar, 
at  the  Blackmore  neer  Fleet-bridge,  165 1. 


g6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


To  all  the  Saints  and  Churches  of  God, 
who  walk  according  to  the  commands 
of  Jesus  Christ,  in  England,  Wales, 
Army,  or  else- where. 

Dearly  Beloved,  and  Fellow  Citizens 
of  the  household  of  God,  Grace, 
Mercy,  and  Peace  be  multiplyed 
unto  you  from  God,  through  Jesus 
Christ ;  The  Lord  preserve  your 
minds  and  hearts  by  his  holy  Spirit,  with  all 
those  gifts  of  his  Free  Grace  which  he  hath 
bestowed  upon  you,  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of 
the  Gospel  in  every  thing  whereunto  ye  are 
called,  to  live  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  his 
Grace. 

Loving  Brethren,  if  we  could  have  con- 
veniently convayed  this  Copie  unto  your 
hands  before  it  went  to  the  Press,  doubtless 
we  might  have  gained  your  Christian  Ad- 
vice and  Assistance  herein,  which  might 
have  been  very  Beneficial  to  the  Truth, 
wherein  you  are  with  us  alike  concerned  and 
engaged ;  but  by  reason  of  the  distance  of 
place,  and  also  being  unacquainted,  hath 
hindred  our  sending;  but  we  hope  our  for- 
wardness herein  will  not  be  any  hinderance 
to  you  for  the  future,  to  manifest  your  con- 
currence with  us,  so  far  as  we  own  the 
Truth ;  for  the  preserving  our  Union  with 
God,  and  our  Joy  and  Peace  with  each 
other,  but  the  rather  to  give  you  occasion  to 
make  use  of  the  Ability  and  Power  God 
hath  betrusted  you  with,  for  our  Informati- 
ons in  what  you  judge  is  wanting,  and  for 
our  further  Confirmation  and  Encourage- 
ment in  those  things  you  approve  of  with  us, 
have  we  published  this  ensuing  Treatise; 
That  so  we  may  agree  with  love  in  peace  and 
truth,  by  the  Assistance  of  our  blessed  Lord 


The  English  Baptists  97 


and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.    So  with  our 
Prayers,  we  subscribe  our  selves 

Your  Servants  in  the  Lord. 
[Signatures  of  its  sixty-one  authors  here.] 

The  Faith  and  Practise  of 
Thirty  Congregations 

Ezek.  43.  II. 

And  if  they  he  ashamed  of  all  that  they 
have  done,  show  them  the  form  of  the  house, 
and  the  fashion  thereof,  and  the  goings  out 
thereof,  and  the  comings  in  thereof,  and  all 
the  forms  thereof,  and  all  the  ordinances 
thereof,  and  all  the  laws  thereof ;  and  write 
it  in  their  sight,  that  they  may  keep  the  whole 
form  thereof,  and  all  the  ordinances  thereof, 
and  do  them. 

Matth.     5.  16. 
Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  &c. 

H  eb  r.  3.  6. 
But  Christ  as  a  Son,  over  his  own  &c. 

I.  That  that  God  whom  we  acknow- 
ledge, ought  to  be  worshipped  by 
all,  and  above  all  that  are  called 

Gods,  and  he  is  Infinite  in  power  and 

wisdom,  universal,  invisible,  eternal.  Ps.  96. 

3.  4.    ler.  23.  24.     Col.  I.  17.     Rom.  i.  20. 

2.  That  God  created  all  creatures  visi- 
ble and  invisible,  by  his  own  wisdome  and 
power.  Col.  i.  16.    ler.  10.  12. 

3.  That  God  preserveth  all  creatures 

which  are  in  being.    Nehemiah.  9.  6.    Rom.  ii.  36. 

4.  That  the  creation  doth  plainly  de- 
clare the  Power  and  Righteousness  of 
God;  Ro'm.   i.  20.     Isa.  40.  26. 

5.  That  God  commandeth  men  to  take 

a  view  of  his  Wise,  Powerful,  and  Righte- 
ous workes  of  creation.    Isa.  40.  26. 

6.  That  God  by  his- good  creatures 
G 


98  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

called   or   calleth   men   to   a   serious   consider- 
ation,  or  meditation,  that  they  may  further 
understand  his  Wisdom  and  Power.    Rom.  I.  20. 

7.  That  God  doth  command  men  to 
speak  or  declare  that  which  they  have 
learned  by  the  teaching  of  the  creatures; 
Psal.    145.   5. 

8.  That  the  consideration  of  the  Lord's 
handyworks  in  creatures,  is  a  means  to  be- 
get thoughts  of  God,  and  of  our  selves, 
sutable  to  his  greatness,  and  our  inferior- 
ity ;  Psal.  8.  3,  4. 

9.  That   whatsoever   good   Meditations, 
or  serious  Considerations  we  have  of  the 
glorious  works  of  Creation,  ought  to  break 
forth  with  admiration  unto  thankfulness  to 
God,  Psal.  136.  from  ver.  5.  to  ver.  p. 

10.  That  those  who  did  refuse  to  wor- 
ship or  glorifie  God  answerably  to  the 
teaching  of  the  Creation,  the  Lord  gave 
them  over,  or  forsook  them  so  far,  that  they 
became  so  desperately  wicked,  that  they 

did  things  contrary  to  nature,  Rom.  i.  26,  27. 

11.  God  created  or  made  Adam  a 
living  soul,  and  in  his  ow^n  Likeness  in 
Soveraignty  or  Dominion;  Gen.  1.  26.  27. 

12.  That  God  gave  unto  Adam 
Lawes  or  commands,  that  he  might  know 
his   Will;   Gen.  2.   16.   17. 

13.  That  God  declared  unto  Adam 
what  penalty  or  punishment  he  would 
cause  to  befall  him,  if  he  disobeyed  his 
Will,  Gen.  2.  17. 

14.  That  Adam  did  sin  or  disobey  the 
righteous  commands  of  the  Lord,  Gen. 

3-  6. 

15.  That  God  told  Adam  very  plainly 
what  death  it  should  be  that  he  would 
cause  to  come  on  him,  and  what  sorrows 
should  attend  him  in  the  meanwhile;   Gen, 

3-  i7>  19. 


The  English  Baptists  99 

16.  That  all  mankind  are  liable  to  par- 
take of  the  same  death  or  punishment  which 
the  Lord  in  his  righteous  judgment  caused 
to  fall  on  Adam  for  his  transgression; 
Rom.  5.  18. 

17.  That  Jesus  Christ,  through  (or  by) 
the  grace  of  God,  suffered  death  for  all 
mankind,   or   every  man;  Heh.  2.   9. 

18.  That   Christ  Jesus,   the   second 
Adam,  will  as  certainly  raise  all  mankind 
from  that  death  which  fell  on  them, 
through  or  by  the  first  Adam's  sin  or  of- 
fence, as  surely  as  they  partake  of  it;  Rom. 
5.  18. 

19.  That  Jesus  Christ,  his  Lordly  or 
Kingly  preheminence  over  all  mankind,  is 
vindicated  or  maintained  in  the  Scriptures 
account,  by  vertue  of  his  dying  or  suffering 
for  them;  Rom.  14.  9. 

20.  That  God's  Word,  Son,  or  Spirit, 

are  one,  i  I  oh.  5.  7.     J  tide   i.     Heh.  10.  29. 
Rom.  15.  16. 

God  and  his  Word  are  one;  I  oh. 
I.   I.     The  Word  quickneth,  Psal.   119.  50. 
The  Son  quickeneth,  Eph.  2.   1. 
And  the  spirit  quickneth  loh.  6.  6^,.    So  they  are  one. 
God  giveth  Gifts,  and  the  Son  doth  the 
same,  also  the  holy  Ghost,  So  they  are  one. 
lam.  I.  71.    Eph.  4.  10,  11. 
Acts  2.  38.    I.  Thes.  1.  5.    loh.  6.  44.    lo.  14.  6. 
Eph.  I.  18.     I  Cor.  12.  3.    Math.  10.  40.    Gal.  3.  2. 

21.  That  the  Lord  of  all  mankind, 
Jesus   Christ,   hath   the   power   of   giving 
Lawes  for  the  governing  or  ruling  every 
man   in  the  World   in   spiritual   worship, 
Isa.  9.  6,  7.     Math.  28.   18.   19,  20. 

22.  That  this   Prince  of  Peace,  Jesus 
Christ,  is  the  only  or  principal  high  Priest, 
which  oflfered  up  sacrifice,  or  made  recon- 
ciliation for  the  Sins  of  the  people,  Heh.  2.  17. 

23.  That  the  high   Priest  Jesus  Christ, 


100  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


is  not  onely  King  or  Governour,  but  also 
the  Apostle  or  Prophet  of  the  Truth  pro- 
fessed, or  the  true  profession  of  Saints 
Heh.  3.   I. 

24.  That  all  the  riches  appertaining  to 

a  spiritual  and  eternal  life,  were  treasured  up 
in  Jesus  Christ.     Col.  2.  3. 

25.  That  there  is  not,  neither  ever  was 
any  man  endued  with  any  abilities  and 
power  to  do  the  revealed  will  of  God,  but 
it  was  given  him  from  above.    lam.  i.  17. 

26.  That  the  gifts  of  God  spring  from 
the  pleasure  of  his  will,  or  of  his  free  grace; 
even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  sprung  from 
thence,  from  whom  commeth  all  spiritual 
mercies:  Rom.  8.  32.     Heh.  2.  9. 

27.  That  lesus  Christ  was  faithfull  in 
all  things  whereunto  he  was  appointed, 
Heh.  3.   I,  2. 

28.  That  lesns  Christ  was  not  only  the 
Lawmaker,  but  the  Law  giver  to  every 
man  that  liveth  in  the  world,  in  that  he 
giveth  every  man  therein  some  measure  of 
light.     Jo.   I.  9. 

29.  That  God  of  his  free  love  giveth 
several  gifts  unto  men,  dividing  severally  as 
it  pleaseth  him,  by  one  and  the  same  spirit; 
I  Cor.  12.  II.    Eph.  4.  7. 

30.  That  the  gifts  of  God  given  unto 
rnen  of  his  own  free  grace,  though  never  so 
richly  they  may  be  furnished  both  with  abilities 
and  power,  yet  those  gifts  of  grace  do  not 
demonstrate,  or  declare  them  to  be  faithfull 
servants;  but  it  doth  very  plainly  prove, 

that  they  are  called  upon  thereby  to  be 
faithfull  Servants;  i  Cor.  4.  i.  2. 

31.  That  those  gifts  which  God  of  his 
free  grace  gives  unto  men  to  the  enabling  or 
impowering  them  to  obey  or  believe  in  his 
name,  are  called  the  grace  of  God,  as  they 


The  English  Baptists  loi 


spring  from  the  spirit  of  grace;  Acts,  i8. 

17- 

32.  That  when  God  of  his  own  boun- 

tifuhiess  hath  given  gifts  unto  men  to  be 
improved  by  them  to  the  praise  of  his  grace, 
as  to  beheve  or  obey,  then  those  so  endued 
are  Stewards  of  the  grace  of  God,  i  Pet. 
4.    10. 

33.  That  God  requireth  or  command- 

eth  service  of  men,  answerable  to  those  gifts 
of  grace  which  he  of  his  good  pleasure 
hath  bestowed  upon  them.  Col.  2.  6. 
loh.  12.  37. 

34.  That  it  is  the  gracious  pleasure  of 
God,  that  lesiis  Christ  his  life,  death,  and 
resurrection,  should  be  made  known  unto 
men,  and  by  men,  as  arguments,  or  motives, 
to  allure  or  provoke  them  to  live  holy  and 
righteous  in  this  present  world;  Eph.  5.  i.  2. 
Rom.  6.  4,  to  ver.  14. 

35.  That    God   requireth   that   man 
should  worship  him  in  Spirit  and  in  truth,  or 
with  all  the  heart,  before  they  outwardly 
make  a  profession  of  him:  Acts  8.  36.  37. 

36.  That  all  actions  performed  by 
man  towards  God,  ought  to  flow  from  a 
principle  of  Love;  i.  Cor.  13.  i,  2,  3. 

37.  That  God  loves  man  first,  and  de- 
clareth,  or  maketh  known  his  love  to  men, 
before  any  man  can  Act  from  a  principle  of 
love  in   obedience   to  him,   lo.    15.    16. 

38.  That  whosoever  obeyeth  God 

with  those  gifts  of  his  free  grace,    (as  a- 
bilities  and  power  to  do  his  will)  never  so 
faithfully.    Evangelically,   or   Unfainedly, 
giving  him  the  glory  of  those  performances ; 
yet  thus  believing  or  obeying  doth  not  pro- 
cure salvation  as  eternal  life,  neither  are  they 
any  cause  at  all  to  move  God  to  bestow  it; 
Ezek.  16.  from  ver.  3.  to  ver,  10. 
Eph.  2.  9.     Rom.  4.  2.     Jo.   15.   15. 


I02  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

39.  That  the  ground  or  principal  end 

of  mens  beheving  or  obeying  God,  ought 
to  be  for  the  advancing  of  the  glory  of 
God,  or  for  the  Praise  of  his  free  grace; 
I.  Cor.  6.   19,  20. 

40.  That  those  who  serve  or   fear  the 
Lord,  honouring  or  glorifying  him  v^ith  his 
gifts  bestowed  on  them,  to  the  praise  of  his 
free  grace,  do  demonstratively  of  openly 
manifest  themselves  to  be  his  faithful  ser- 
vants,  or   children,    i.   lo.   3.    10.     Acts 

10.  35- 

41.  That  those  which  serve  the  Lord 
with   integrity   of  mind  and   spirit,   impro- 
ving their  abilities  and  power  given  unto 
them  of  God,  to  his  glory  and  praise,  are  not 
only  called  faithful  Servants,  or  the  children 
of  the  living  God,  but  they  have  the  pro- 
mises of  God  to  be  intrusted  with  more  of 

the  manifestations  of  himself,  which  is  cal- 
led the  misterie  which  hath  bin  hid  from 
many  ages,  and  generations,  which  the  dis- 
obedient shall  not  in  joy.     Col.  i.  26.  27. 

42.  That  those  which  love  the  Lord 

Jesus  Christ,  so  as  to  walke  in  his  appointed 
ways  with  that  strength  of  ability  and 
power  which  God  of  his  own  mercy  hath 
given  unto  them,   they  shall  have  peace  of 
conscience,  being  freed  from  anguish  of  spirit, 
having  their  hearts  comforted  by  the  holy 
Ghost;  Rom.  2.  10. 

43.  That  all  those  that  continue  sted- 
fastly  unto  the  end  of  their  lives,  pressing 
forward  to  the  mark  (Jesus  Christ)   that  is 
set  before  them,  shall  not  only  have  the 
comfort  and  joy  which  is  a  part  of  their 
portion  in  this  life,  but  they  shall  also  have 

a  Crown  of  eternal  glory  in  the  life  to  come; 
Rev.  22.  14.    2  Tim.  4.  8. 

44.  That  God  of  his  free  grace  or  love, 
called  or  calleth  sinners  to  repentance,  and 


The  English  Baptists  103 

afforded  or  affordeth  them  time  or  oppor- 
tunity to  repent  or  returne  unto  him;  Rom. 
4.  2. 

45.  That  all  those  who  refuse  to  im- 
prove the  gifts  of  grace  which  God  hath 
afforded  them,  so  that  they  repent  not,  nei- 
ther turne  to  him  in  obedience  to  his  com- 
mands made  manifest  unto  them,  they  do 
despise  the  goodness  of  God  or  his  free 
grace,  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them, 
and  so  are  liable  to  destruction,  i  Pet.  2.  I,  2. 

46.  That  whosoever  shall  preach, 
teach,  or  practise  any  doctrine  in  the  wor- 
ship of  God,  pretending  it  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ,  which  is  not  to  be  heard  or 
read  of  in  the  record  of  God,  which  was 
given  by  inspiration  of  the  holy  Ghost;  such 
teachers  are  lyable  to  the  curse  of  God, 
howsoever,  countenanced  by  men,  Gal.  i.  8,  9. 

47.  That  the  Baptisme  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  commanded  his  disciples  to  teach, 
ought  to  be  known  by  every  one,  before 
they  submit  themselves,  or  obey  it;  Acts. 
2.  38.  41. 

48.  That  the  way  and  manner  of  bap- 
tising, both  before  the  death  of  Christ,  and 
since  his   resurection  and   ascension,   was  to 
go  into  the  water,  and  to  be  baptised; 
Math.  3.  6.    Math,  i.  5.  and  8.  9. 

49.  That  when  Baptisme  is  made 
known,  or  any  other  Action  of  obedience, 
then  for  men  to  refuse  it,  they  are  said  to  re- 
ject the  counsel  of  God  against  themselves; 
Luk.  7.   30. 

50.  That  those  which  received  the 
word  of  God  preached  by  the  Ministrie  of 
the  Gospel,  and  were  Baptized  according 

to  the  Counsel  of  God,  at  the  same  time  or 
day  they  were  of  the  visible  Church  of 
God,  Acts.  2.  41. 

51.  That  the  only  foundation  of  the  Church 


104  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

of  God,  is  the  Doctrines  of  the  Apostles  or 
Prophets,  as  they  spring  from  Jesus  Christ 
the  chiefe  corner  stone,  whereon  this  or  any- 
other  people  are  to  be  built  together  as  the 
house  of  God;  Eph.  2.  20,  21. 

52.  That  the  chief  or  only  ends  of  a  peo- 
ple baptised  according  to  the  counsel  of 
God,  when  they  meet  together  as  the  con- 
gregation or  fellowship  of  Christ,  are,  or 
ought  to  be,  for  to  walk  sutably ;  or  to  give 
up  themselves  unto  a  holy  conformity  to  all 
the  Laws  or  Ordinances  of  Jesus  Christ, 
answerable   to  the   gifts   and   graces   received, 
improving   them    for   the    glory    of    God,    and 
the  edification  of  each  other  in  love,  Eph. 
4.  15,  16. 

53.  That  Jesus  Christ  took  Bread,  and 

the  juice  of  the  Vine,  and  brake,  and  gave 
to  his  Disciples,  to  eat  and  drink  with 
thanksgiving;  which  practise  is  left  upon 
record  as  a  memorial  of  his  suffering,  to 
continue  in  the  Church  until  he  come  a- 
gain;  i  Cor.  11.  23,  24,  25,  26. 

54.  That  the  Church  ought  to  call  upon 
God,  seeking  him  by  prayer  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  to  be  thankful  to  him  for 
mercies  received,  sounding  forth  his  praises 
with  understanding.    Eph.  6.  16,  17,  18. 

55.  That  if  any  one  of  the  fellowship 
neglect  the  watching  over  his  own  heart, 
and  so  break  out  into  an  evill  life  and  con- 

'       versation,  and  all  good  meanes  that  God 
hath  appointed  hath  been  used  towards 
such  a  one,   and  that   person  hath  not  per- 
formed, then  ought  not  such  a  one  to  break 
bread  with  obedient  walkers,  to  shew  forth 
the  death  of  Christ,  seeing  he  doth  deny 
him  in  life  and  conversation ;  i   Cor.  5.   12. 

56.  That  the  people  of  God  ought  to  have 
a  tender  respect  towards  them,  as  long  as 
there  is  any  hope  of  being  instrumental  in  the 


The  English  Baptists  105 

use  of  that  means  which  God  hath  appointed 
for  the  recovering  them  out  of  the  snare  of 
sin  or  wickedness.    2.  Thes.  3.  14,  15. 

57.  That  there  be  contributions  made 

for  the  reHef  of  those  that  cannot  help  them- 
selves with  food  and  rayment,  that  are  wil- 
ling to  the  utmost  to  put  forth  their  strength 
and  skill  in  some  lawful  Way  or  Calling, 
especially  those  that  are  of  the  household  of 
Faith;  such  as  through  sickness  or  weak- 
ness of  body  cannot  labour.     GaL  6.  9.   10. 

58.  That  it  is  the  good  pleasure  of 
God,  which  hath  given  gifts  of  his  grace 

to  the  Saints  or  Church  of  God,  that  some 
of  the  gifted  men  should  be  appointed  or 
set  apart  to  attend  upon  the  preaching  of 
the  word,  for  the  further  edifying  of  the 
Churches,  that  they  may  be  enabled  to 
stand  against  all  oppositions  according  as 
necessity  requires,  to  the  glory  of  God  and 
their  comfort.    Eph.  4.  ii,  21. 

59.  That  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  those 
Saints  or  members  of  the  fellowship  which 
are  appointed  so  to  spend  their  labors  in 
teaching  or  exhorting  them  in  the  know- 
ledge of  God  to  their  edification  and  con- 
solation,  ought   to   have   maintenance   of 
those  that  receive  spiritual  food  by  them. 

I  Cor.  9.  II. 

60.  That  the  maintenance  of  the  Min- 
isters which  labour  in  the  Word  of  God, 
ought  to  be  the  free  and  Charitable  Bene- 
volence, or  the  chearful  contribution  of 
those  that  acknowledge  themselves  mem- 
bers of  the  same  fellowship;  2  Cor.  9.  13. 

61.  That  the  servants  of  God,  or  the 
Ministers  of  the  Gospel,  ought  to  be  con- 
tent with  necessary  food  and  rayment, 
and  to  labour  with  their  hands,  that  they 
may  not  be  overchargeable,   i   Cor,  4.    12, 


io6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


because  they  are  to  teach  that  doctrine  to 
every  member.    Heh.  13.  5. 

62.  That  those  servants  of  God  which 
labour  in  the  word  much,  and  well,  ought 

to  be  had  in  very  good  estimation ;  i  Tim.  5.  17. 

63.  That  the  Church  of  Jesus   Christ 
ought  not  to  think  of  any  man  above  what 
is  meet,  lest  that  they  give  that  honour  to 
man,  which  properly  and  alone  belongeth 
to  God\Psal.  115.  I.    2  Cor.  12.  6. 

64.  That  the  Church  hath  directions  of 
God  to  set  apart  some  men  that  are  sute- 
ably  qualified,  to  oversee,  or  order  the  af- 
fairs concerning  the  poor  distressed  mem- 
bers of  Christ,  that  they  may  not  be  neg- 
lected,  and   so  perish   for   want  of   food   and 
rayment,  and  to  take  off  that  work  from  ly- 
ing too  heavy  upon  the  care  of  those  which 
labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine;  Acts.  6.  3,  4. 

65.  That  if  the  poor  fearing  God,  can- 
not conveniently  have  a  competent  mainte- 
nance, for  the  supply  of  their  necessities  in 
that  society  whereunto  they  must  com- 
monly resort,  that  then  those  men  that  have 
the  care  laid  upon  them,  send  or  give  in- 
telligence to  the  other  Churches  or  saints  of 
God,  who  have  ingaged  themselves  by 
declaring  their  willingness  towards  the  re- 
lief of  such  a  distressed  people,  Rom.  15.  26. 

66.  That  those  men  which  the  Church 

of  God  are  to  make  such  uses  of  as  the  set- 
ting them  to  minister  unto  the  saints  in 
things  spritual  or  temporall,  it  is  required 
that  the  Church  judge  those  men  found  in 
the  faith,  that  their  lives  and  conversations 
be  unblameable,  that  those  which  are 
without,  cannot  have  any  just  occasion  to 
speak  reproachfully  of  them,  that  they  be 
not  covetous  of  filthy  lucre,  neither  selfwill- 
ed,  but  loving  and  patient  towards  all  men, 
apt  to  teach,  and  to  do  good  works  answer- 


The  English  Baptists  107 

able  to  their  abilities.     Titus  i.  7,  8.  9. 
Acts.  6.  3. 

67.  That  some  men  amongst  the  brother- 
hood who  are  able  to  judge  in  causes  of 
difference  that  may  arise  betwixt  them  in 
the  Church,  may  be  approved  or  appointed 
to  put  an  end  thereto  without  partiality,  that 
there  may  be  no  unnecessary  strivings  in  the 
Law  to  vex  one  another;  i  Cor.  6.  5,  6,  7. 

68.  That  whosoever  of  the  Society  or 
Church  of  God  which  shall  willfully  or 
carelessly  neglect  any  lawful  way  or  calling, 
and  to  fall  into  hunger  and  nakedness, 
ought  to  be  exhorted  with  love  and  meek- 
ness, to  labour  with  their  abilities  in  some 
honest  way  or  calling  for  their  relief  which 
being  done  orderly,  and  he  or  they  will  not 
reform,  so  that  sutable  exhortations  take  no 
place,  such  an  one  shall  be  excluded  or  ex- 
communicated, as  one  that  hath  denyed  the 
faith;  i.  Tim.  5.  8. 

69.  That  the  offended  ought  to  proceed 
according  to  rule,  not  delaying  or  prolonging 
time,  but  out  of  a  tender  care,  that  their 
hearts  may  not  be  hardned  by  a  custome  in 
sin,  that  thereby  the  reclaiming  of  them  from 
sin  may  be  done  with  less  difficulty ;  Mat. 

18.   15,   16,  17. 

70.  That  if  any  controversie  should  so 
fall  out,  that  the  case  cannot  easily  be  deter- 
mined by  that   society  or  church  where  it  is 
first  presented,  that  then  use  be  made  of 
some  other  society  which  they  are  in  fellow- 
ship with,  for  their  assistance  therein;  Acts 

16.  I,  2. 

71.  That  there  be  an  orderly  improving 
those  gifts  that  God  of  his  free  grace  hath 
bestowed  on  the  Saints,  that  one  may  not 
hinder  another,   but   as   occasion   serveth,   one 
by  one,  speaking  the  things  that  they  have 
learned  of  God,  that  the  hearers  may  be 


io8  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

profited,  and  so  put  in  a  capacity  to  judge  of 
things    concerning   the   glory    of    God,    and 
their  own  peace;  i  Cor.  14.  30,  31. 

y2.  That  if  any  one  which  hath  been  of 
the  fellowship  of  Christ,  and  hath  so  far 
subjected  himself  to  temptations  that  he  de- 
nyeth  to  live  righteously,  or  in  the  fear  and 
love  of  God  and  makes  shipwrack  of  Faith 
and  a  good  Conscience,  for  which  he  hath 
been  excommunicated  according  to  Order, 
that  it  be  recorded,  and  made  known  to 
other  the  Churches,  for  prevention  of  evils 
in  them;  i  Tim.  i.  19,  20. 

73.  That  Fasting  and   Prayer  ought  to  be 
used,  and  laying  on  of  hands,  for  the 
Ordaining  of  servants  or  Officers  to  attend 
about  the  service  of  God ;  Acts  13.  3. 

74.  That  we  ought  to  behave  our  selves 
towards  all  men,  no  otherwise  then  we 
would  freely  and  cheerfully  they  in  the  like 
case  (if  it  should  fall  out)  should  do  toward 
us,  and  that  we  ought  to  seek  a  peaceable 

life  with  all  men,  as  far  as  possibly  we  can, 
keeping  faith  and  a  good  conscience;  Luke 
6.  31.    Rom.  12.  18.     I  Tim.  i.  19. 

75.  That  we  ought  to  clear  our  selves, 
not  only  from  evil  Thoughts  harbouring  in 
our  hearts,  or  the  evils  in  life  and  conversa- 
tion; but  as  far  as  we  can,  vindicate  our 
selves  from  all  those  scandalous  aspersions 
that  daylie  fall  about  our  ears,  setting  our 
good  names  on  fire,  to  the  dishonour  of 
God,  whereof  many  are  the  Instruments  by 
their  wilful  contrivances,  or  by  the  mis-infor- 
mations of  others,  which  father  upon  us  such 
principles  and  practises  as  we  abhor, 
through  ignorant  mistakes  cunningly  sug- 
gested by  some  evil  willers  at  least ;  2  Cor.  2.  17. 


The  English  Baptists  109 


Postscript. 
THat  we  do  own  a  Magistratical  power 
for  the  governing  of  this  our  English 
Nation,  to  be  determined  in  a  just  Parlia- 
mentary way;  and  that  we  ought  to  pray 
for  good  Governors,  and  good  Govern- 
ment; that  we  may  live  a  peaceable  and 
godly  life  in  all  honesty ;  standing  ready  at 
all  times,  as  necessity  may  require,  to  vindi- 
cate such  a  Magistracy  or  Magistrates,  not 
only  with  arguments  of  sound  reason,  but 
also  with  our  Estates  and  Lives;  that 
Righteousness  may  reigne,  and  Vice  may  be 
overthrown,  without  respect  of  persons. 

FINIS. 


2.  The  Standard  Confession  of  1660 
The  standard  Confession  of  the  English  General  Bap- 
tists was  drawn  up  in  March,  1660,  in  the  midst  of  the 
calumnies  and  persecutions  of  the  Restoration.  It  is 
supposed  to  have  been  composed  by  Thos.  Grantham 
(Taylor,  "His.  Eng.  General  Baptists,"  I,  466),  and 
was  subscribed  by  certain  elders,  deacons,  and  brethren 
from  various  parts  of  the  kingdom,  met  in  London  and 
composing  the  General  Assembly  of  the  General  Baptists 


no  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

and  representing,  they  claim,  upwards  of  twenty  thousand 
members.  It  was  formally  presented  to  King  Charles  II 
July  26,  1660,  along  with  an  address  (Crosby,  II,  igi; 
Taylor,  I,  i86f).  It  was  at  once  published  and  was 
often  reprinted.  It  was  also  "  printed  on  a  sheet  to  be 
hung  up  in  a  frame,"  and  in  this  form  adorned  many 
homes.  It  was  reaffirmed  by  the  General  Assembly,  1663, 
edited  by  Thos.  Grantham  in  1678,  with  "  a  few  explana- 
tory supplements,  and  the  testimony  of  many  ancient 
writers  of  Christianity,"  "  to  shew,  that  though  the  com- 
position of  these  articles  be  new,  yet  the  doctrine  con- 
tained therein  is  truly  ancient."  The  changes  were 
numerous  but  unimportant.  In  1691  the  General  As- 
sembly approved  its  republication  ''  with  Brother  Grant- 
ham's explication  of  the  third  article " ;  it  was  again 
approved  by  the  General  Assembly  in  1697  and  1704,  and 
many  later  editions  are  known. 

The  Confession  was  rather  freely  edited  and  reprinted 
by  Crosby,  Vol.  II,  App.  IV,  and  by  Underbill,  pp.  I07f. 
It  represented  the  entire  body  of  General  Baptists  in 
England,  and  is  the  first  of  the  General  Baptist  Confes- 
sions to  prescribe  dipping  or  immersion  as  the  essential 
form  of  baptism.  If  Smyth  and  his  immediate  followers 
did  originally  practise  affusion,  as  seems  most  probable,  it 
is  not  known  when  the  General  Baptists  began  the  prac- 
tice of  immersion.  The  Calvinistic  Baptists  (or,  per- 
haps we  should  say  Anabaptists)  began  immersion  as 
early  as  1640  or  1641,  and  incorporated  immersion  as  the 
only  acceptable  form  of  baptism  in  their  first  Confes- 
sion in  1644.  This  action  would  naturally  influence  the 
General  Baptists,  and  it  has  been  supposed  that  they 
gradually  adopted  immersion  until  it  was  made  the 
only  acceptable  mode  in  this  Confession  of  1660. 

The  following  is  an  exact  reproduction  of  the  original : 


The  English  Baptists  iii 

A  BRIEF 
CONFESSION 

OR 

DECLARATION 

OF 

FAITH 

Set  forth  by  many  of  us,  who  are  (falsely) 
called  Ana-Baptists,  to  inform  all  Men 
(in  these  days  of  scandal  and  reproach)  of  our 
inno  I  cent  Belief  and  Practise;  for  which  we 
are  not  on  |  ly  resolved  to  suffer  Persecution, 
to  the  loss  of  I  our  Goods,  but  also  Life  it  self, 
rather  |  than  to  decline  the  same. 

Subscribed  to  by  certain  Elders,  Deacons,  and  Brethren, 
met  at  |  London,  in  the  first  month  (called  March, 
1660.)  in  the  be  |  half  of  themselves,  and  many  others 
unto  whom  they  belong,  in  |  London,  and  in  several 
Counties  of  this  Nation,  who  are  of  the  |  same  Faith 
with  us. 

After  the  Way  which  men  call  Heresie,  so  Worship  we 
the  God  of  our  \  Fathers;  Believing  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  Law,  and  \  in  the  Prophets,  Acts  24,  14. 

LONDON 
Printed  by  G,  D.  for  F.  Smith,  at  the  Elephant  and 
Castle,  near  |  Temple-Barr,  1660. 
[page  3] 


112  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

A  BRIEF 

CONFESSION 

OR 

Declaration  of  Faith, 

Set  out  by  many  of  Us,  who  are  (falsely)  called 

Ana-Baptists,  to  inform  all  men  (in  these  days  of 
scandal  |  and  reproach)  of  our  innocent  Belief,  and 
Practise :  for  which  |  we  are  not  only  resolved  to  suffer 
persecution,  to  the  loss  of  our  |  Goods,  but  also  to  life 
it  self,  rather  then  to  decline  the  same. 

1.  We  Believe  and  are  verily  confident,  that  |  there  is  but 

one  God  the  Father,  of  |  whom  are  all  things, 
from  everlasting  |  to  everlasting,  glorious,  and 
unword  |  able  in  all  his  attributes,  i  Cor.  8,  6. 
Isa.  40.  28. 

II.  That  God  in  the  beginning  made  |  Alan 

Upright,  and  put  him  into  a  state  |  and  condition 

of  Glory,  without  the  |  least  mixture  of  misery, 

from  which  he  |  by  transgression  fell,  and  so 

came  into  a  miserable  and  mortal  estate,  |  subject  unto  the 

first  death.  Gen.  i.  31.     Eccles.  7.  29.     Gen.  2.  17.  3. 

17,  18,  19. 

III.  That  there  is  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom 
are  all  things,  |  who  is  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  born 
of  the  Virgin  Mary;  \  yet  as  truly  Davids  Lord,  and 
Davids  root,  as  Davids  Son,  and  Da  [page  4]  vids  Off- 
spring, Luke  20.  44.  Revel.  22.  16.  whom  God  freely  sent 
I  into  the  World  (because  of  his  great  love  unto  the 
World)  who  as  |  freely  gave  himself  a  ransonie  for  all,  I 
Tim.  2.  5,  6.  tasting  death  \  for  every  man,  Heh.  2.  9.  a 
propitiation  for  our  sins;  and  not  for  ours  \  only,  but  also 
for  the  sins  of  the  whole  World,  I  John  2.  2. 

IV.  That  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
that  all  I  should  come  to  repentance,  2  Pet.  3.  9.  ajid  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  |  that  they  might  be  saved,  I  Tim. 

2.  4.  For  which  end  Christ  hath  |  commanded,  that  the 
Gospel  (to  wit,  the  glad  tydings  of  remission  |  of  sins) 
should  be  preached  to  every  creature,  Mark  16.  15.  So  | 
that  no  man  shall  eternally  suffer  in  Hell  (that  is,  the 


The  English  Baptists  113 

second  death)  |  for  want  of  a  Christ  that  dyed  for  them, 
but  as  the  Scripture  saith,  |  for  denying  the  Lord  that 
bought  them,  2  Pet.  2.  i.  or  because  they  believe  not  in 
the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  John  3.  |  18. 
UnbeHef  therefore  being  the  cause  why  the  just  and 
righteous  |  God,  will  condemn  the  children  of  men ;  it  fol- 
lows against  all  con  |  tradiction,  that  all  men  at  one  time 
or  other,  are  put  into  such  a  |  capacity,  as  that  (through 
the  grace  of  God)  they  may  be  eternally  |  saved,  John 
I.  7.  Acts  17.  30.  Mark  6.  6.  Heb.  3.  10,  18,  19.  i  John 
I  5.  10.    John  3.  17. 

V.  That  such  who  first  orderly  comes  into,  and  are 
brought  up  I  in  the  School  of  Christs  Church,  and  wait- 
ing there,  comes  to  de|grees  of  Christianity,  rightly  quali- 
fied and  considerably  gifted  by  |  Gods  Spirit;  ought  to 
exercise  their  gifts  not  only  in  the  Church,  |  but  also  (as 
occasion  serves)  to  preach  to  the  World  (they  being  |  ap- 
proved of  by  the  Church  so  to  do)  Acts  1 1.  22,  23,  24. 
Acts  II.  I  19.  20.  and  that  among  such  some  are  to  be 
chosen  by  the  Church,  |  and  ordained  by  Fasting,  Prayer, 
and  Laying  on  of  Hands,  for  the  |  work  of  the  Ministry, 
Acts  13.  2,  3.  Acts  I.  23.  Such  so  ordained,  |  (and  abi- 
ding faithful  in  their  work)  we  own  as  Ministers  of  the 
Gos  I  pel;  but  all  such  who  come  not  first  to  repent  of 
their  sins,  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  so  Baptised 
in  his  name  for  the  remission  of  |  Sins,  but  are  only 
brought  up  in  the  Schools  of  humane  learning,  |  to  the 
attaining  humane  arts,  and  variety  of  languages,  with 
ma  I  ny  vain  curiosities  of  speech,  i  Cor.  I.  19,  21.  2.  i,  4, 
5.  seeking  |  rather  the  gain  of  large  revenues,  then  the 
gain  of  souls  to  God:  |  such  (we  say)  we  utterly  deny, 
being  such  as  have  need  rather  to  |  be  taught  themselves, 
than  fit  to  teach  others,  Rom.  2.  21.  | 

VL  That  the  way  set  forth  by  God  for  men  to  be 
justified  in,  is  |  by  faith  in  Christ,  Rom.  5.  i.  |  [page  5] 

That  is  to  say,  when  men  shall  assent  to  the  truth  of 
the  Gospel,  |  believing  with  all  their  hearts,  that  there  is 
remission  of  sins,  and  e  |  ternal  life  to  be  had  in  Christ. | 

And  that  Christ  therefore  is  most  worthy  their  con- 
stant afifecti  I  ons,  and  subjection  to  all  his  Commande- 
ments,  and  therefore  re  |  solve  with  purpose  of  heart  so  to 

H 


114  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

subject  unto  him  in  all  things,  and  |  no  longer  unto  them- 
selves, 2  Cor.  5.  15.  I 

And  so,  shall  (with  godly  sorrow  for  the  sins  past) 
commit  |  themselves  to  his  grace,  confidently  depending 
upon  him  for  that  |  which  they  believe  is  to  be  had  in 
him :  such  so  believing  are  justifi  |  ed  from  all  their  sins, 
their  faith  shall  be  accounted  unto  them  for  |  righteous- 
ness, Rom.  4.  22,  23,  24.    Rom.  3.  25,  26.  | 

VII.  That  there  is  one  holy  Spirit,  the  pretious  gift  of 
God,  free  |  ly  given  to  such  as  obey  him,  Ephes.  4.  4.  Acts 
5.  32.  that  there  |  by  they  may  be  throughly  sanctified, 
and  made  able  (without  which  |  they  are  altogether  un- 
able) to  abide  stedfast  in  the  faith,  and  to  |  honour  the 
Father,  and  his  Son  Christ,  the  Author  and  finisher  of  | 
their  faith;  i  Cor.  6.  11.  There  are  three  that  bear 
record  in  Hea  |  van,  the  Father,  the  Word,  the  holy 
Spirit,  and  these  three  are  one ;  |  which  Spirit  of  promise 
such  have  not  yet  received,  (though  they  |  speak  much 
of  him)  that  are  so  far  out  of  Love,  Peace,  Long-suffe  \ 
ring.  Gentleness,  Goodness,  Meekness,  and  Temperance, 
(the  I  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  Gal.  5.  22,  23.)  as  that  they 
breath  out  much  |  cruelty,  and  great  envy  against  the 
Liberties,  and  peaceable  living  |  of  such,  as  are  not  of 
their  judgment,  though  holy  as  to  their  conver  |  sa- 
tions. 

VIII.  That  God  hath  even  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world  I  chosen,  (or  elected)  to  eternal  life,  such  as  be- 
lieve, and  so  are  in  |  Christ,  John  3.  16.  Ephes.  I.  4, 
2  Thes.  2.  13.  yet  confident  we  |  are,  that  the  purpose  of 
God  according  to  election,  w^as  not  in  the  |  least  arising 
from  fore-seen  faith  in,  or  works  of  righteousness  done  | 
by  the  creature,  but  only  from  the  mercy,  goodness,  and 
com  I  passion  dwelling  in  God,  and  so  it  is  of  him  that 
calleth,  Rom.  9.  11.  whose  purity  and  unwordable  holi- 
ness, cannot  admit  of  any  unclean  |  person  (or  thing)  to 
be  in  his  presence,  therefore  his  decree  of  mer  |  cy 
reaches  only  the  godly  man,  whom  (saith  David)  God 
hath  I  set  apart  for  himself,  Psal.  4.  3.  | 

IX.  That  men  not  considered  simply  as  men,  but  un- 
godly men,  |  were  of  old  ordained  to  condemnation,  con- 
sidered as  such,  who  turn   [page  6]   the  grace  of  God 


The  English  Baptists  115 

unto  wantonness,  and  deny  the  only  Lord  God,  |  and  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Jitde  4.  God  indeed  sends  a  strong 
de  I  lusion  to  men,  that  they  might  be  damned ;  but  we 
observe  that  they  |  are  such  (as  saith  the  Apostle)  that 
received  not  the  love  of  the  \  truth,  that  they  might  he 
saved,  2  Thes.  2.  10,  11,  12.  and  so  the  |  indignation  and 
wrath  of  God,  is  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doth  |  evil, 
(Hving  and  dying  therein,)  for  there  is  no  respect  of 
persons  \  zvith  God.    Rom.  2.  9,  10,  11.  | 

X.  That  all  Children  dying  in  Infancy,  having  not  ac- 
tually trans  |  gressed  against  the  Law  of  God  in  their 
own  persons,  are  only  sub  |  ject  to  the  first  death,  which 
comes  upon  them  by  the  sin  of  the  first  |  Adaniy  from 
whence  they  shall  be  all  raised  by  the  second  Adam ;  |  and 
not  that  any  one  of  them  (dying  in  that  estate)  shall  suf- 
fer for  I  Adams  sin,  eternal  punishment  in  Hell,  (which 
is  the  second  death)  |  for  of  such  belongs  the  Kingdome 
of  Heaven,  i  Cor.  15.  22.  Mat.  19.  |  14.  not  daring 
to  conclude  with  that  uncharitable  opinion  of  others,  | 
who  though  they  plead  much  for  the  bringing  of  children 
into  the  |  visible  Church  here  on  earth  by  Baptism,  yet 
nevertheless  by  their  |  Doctrine  that  Christ  dyed  but  for 
some,  shut  a  great  part  of  them  out  |  of  the  Kingdome  of 
Heaven  for  ever.  | 

XL  That  the  right  and  only  way,  of  gathering 
Churches,  (accor  |  ding  to  Christs  appointment,  Mat.  28. 
19,  20.)  is  first  to  teach,  or  |  preach  the  Gospel,  Mark  16. 
16.  to  the  Sons  and  Daughters  of  |  men;  and  then  to 
Baptise  (that  is  in  English  to  Dip)  in  the  name  of  |  the 
Father,  Son,  and  holy  Spirit,  or  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  such  only  of  them,  as  profess  repentance 
tozmrds  God,  and  \  faith  tozvards  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
Acts.  2.  38.  Acts  8.  12.  Acts  [  18.  8.  And  as  for  all 
such  who  preach  not  this  Doctrine,  but  instead  |  thereof, 
that  Scriptureless  thing  of  Sprinkling  of  Infants  (falsly 
called\Baptisme)  whereby  the  pure  zvord  of  God  is  made 
of  no  effect,  and  the  |  new  Testament-way  of  bringing 
in  Members,  into  the  Church  by  re  |  generation,  cast  out ; 
when  as  the  bond-woman  &  her  son,  that  is  to  |  say,  the 
old  Testament-way  of  bringing  in  Children  into  the 
Church  I  by  generation,  is  cast  out,  as  saith  the  Scrip- 


Ii6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ture,  Gal.  4.  30,  22,  23,  24.  |  Maf.  3.  8,  9.  all  such  we 
utterly  deny,  forasmuch  as  we  are  com  |  manded  to  haz'c 
no  fellozvship  zuith  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  \  but 
rather  to  reprove  them,  Ephes.  5.  11.  | 

XII.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  all  such  who  are  believers 
Bapti::ed,  \  to  draw  nigh  unto  God  in  submission  to  that 
principle  of  Christs  [page  7]  Doctrine,  to  wit,  Prayer  and 
Laying  on  of  Hands,  that  they  may  |  receive  the  promise 
of  the  holy  Spirit,  Heh.  6.  i.  2.  Acts  8.  12,  15,  |  17. 
Acts  19.  6.  2  Tim.  i.  6.  whereby  they  may  mortifie  the 
deeds  of  \  the  body,  Rom.  8.  13.  and  live  in  all  things 
answerable  to  their  pro  |  fessed  intentions,  and  desires, 
even  to  the  honour  of  him,  who  hath  \  called  them  out  of 
darkness  into  his  marvellous  light.  \ 

XIII.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  such  who  are  constituted 
as  aforesaid,  \  to  continue  stedfastly  in  Christs  and  the 
Apostles  Doctrine,  and  assent  \  bling  together,  in  fellow- 
ship, in  breaking  of  Bread,  and  Prayer,  Acts  \  2.  42.  | 

XIV.  That  although  we  thus  declare  the  primitive  way, 
and  I  order  of  constituting  Churches,  yet  we  verily  be- 
lieve, and  also  de  |  clare,  that  unless  men  so  professing, 
and  practising  the  forme  and  or|der  of  Christs  Doctrine, 
shall  also  beautifie  the  same  with  a  holy  and  |  wise  con- 
versation, in  all  godliness  and  honesty;  the  profession 
of  I  the  visible  form  will  be  rendered  to  them  of  no 
effect ;  for  without  \  holiness  no  'man  shall  see  the  Lord, 
Heb.  12.  14.    Isa.  i.  11,  12,  15,  |  16.  | 

XV.  That  the  Elders  or  Pastors  which  God  hath  ap- 
pointed to  I  oversee,  and  feed  his  Church  (constituted  as 
aforesaid)  are  such,  |  who  first  being  of  the  number  of 
Disciples,  shall  in  time  appear  to  be  \  vigilent,  sober,  of 
good  behavour,  given  to  hospitality,  apt  to  teach,  \  &c. 
not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre  (as  too  many  National  Ministers 
are)  |  but  patient;  not  a  brawler,  not  covetuous,  &c.  and 
as  such  chose,  |  and  ordained  to  office  (according  to  the 
order  of  Scripture,  Acts  14.  |  23.)  who  are  to  feed  the 
flock  with  meat  in  due  season,  and  in  much  |  love  to  rule 
over  them,  with  all  care,  seeking  after  such  as  go 
astray;  |  but  as  for  all  such  who  labour  to  feed  them- 
selves with  the  fat,  more  |  than  to  feed  the  flock,  Esek. 
34.  2,  3.  seeking  more  after  theirs,  |  than  them,  expresly 


The  English  Baptists  117 

contrary  to  the  practise  of  the  Ministers  of  |  old,  who 
said,  we  seek  not  yours,  but  yon,  2  Cor.  12.  14.  All  such 
we  I  utterly  deny,  and  hereby  bear  our  continued  Testi- 
mony against,  |  Ezek.  34. 

XVI.  That  the  Ministers  of  Christ,  that  have  freely 
received  |  from  God,  ought  freely  to  Minister  to  others, 
I  Cor.  9.  17.  and  |  that  such  who  have  spiritual  things, 
freely  Ministered  unto  them,  |  ought  freely  to  communi- 
cate necessary  things  to  the  Ministers,  ( up  |  on  the  account 
of  their  charge)  i  Cor.  9.  11.  Gal.  6.  6.  And  as  for 
[page  8]  Tyths,  or  any  forced  Maintenance,  we  utterly 
deny  to  be  the  Main  |  tenance  of  Gospel  Ministers. 

XVII .  That  the  true  Church  of  Christ,  ought  after  the 
first  and  |  second  admonition,  to  reject  all  Hereticks,  Tit. 
3.  10,  II.  and  in  the  \  name  of  the  Lord  to  withdraw  from 
all  such,  as  profess  the  way  of  |  the  Lord,  but  walks  dis- 
orderly in  their  conversations,  2  Thes.  3.  6.  |  or  any 
wayes  causes  divisions  or  offences,  contrary  to  the  Doc- 
trine I    (of  Christ)   which  they  have  learned,  Rom.  16. 

17-  I 

XVIII.  That    such    who    are    true    Believers,    even 

Branches  in  |  Christ  the  Vine,  (and  that  in  his  account, 
whom  he  exhorts  to  a  |  bide  in  him,  John  15.  i,  2,  3,  4,  5.) 
or  such  who  have  charity  out  of  |  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a 
good  conscience,  and  of  Faith  unfeigned,  |  i  Tim.  I.  5. 
may  nevertheless  for  want  of  watchfulness,  swerve  and  | 
turn  aside  from  the  same,  vers.  6,  7.  and  become  as 
withered  Bran  ches,  cast  into  the  fire  and  burned,  John. 
15.  6.  But  such  tvho  add  un  \  to  their  Faith  Vertiic,  and 
unto  Vertue  Knozvledge,  and  unto  Knozv  \  ledge  Temper- 
ance, &c.  2  Pet.  I.  5,  6,  7.  such  shall  never  fall,  vers.  \  8, 
9,  10.  'tis  impossible  for  all  the  false  Christs,  and  false 
Prophets,  |  that  are,  and  are  to  come,  to  deceive  such, 
for  they  are  kept  by  the  po  \  wer  of  God,  through  Faith 
unto  Salvation,  i  Pet.  i.  5. 

XIX.  That  the  poor  Saints  belonging  to  the  Church  of 
Christ,  I  are  to  be  sufficiently  provided  for  by  the 
Churches,  that  they  neither  |  want  food  or  rayment,  and 
this  by  a  free  and  voluntary  contributi  |  on,  (and  not  of 
necessity,  or  by  the  constraint  or  power  of  the  ]\Ia  | 
gistrate)  2  Cor.  9.  7.     i  Cor.  8.  11,  12,  and  this  through 


Ii8  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

the  free  and  voluntary  help  of  the  Deacons,  (called 
Overseers  of  the  poor)  be  |  ing  faithful  men,  chosen  by 
the  Church,  and  ordained  by  Prayer  |  and  Laying  on  of 
Hands,  to  that  Work,  Acts  6.  i,  2.  3,  4,  5,  6.  So  1  that 
there  is  no  need  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  of  a  Magesterial 
compul  I  sion  in  this  case,  as  there  is  among  others,  who 
being  constituted  in  |  a  fleshly  and  generational  way,  are 
necessitated  to  make  use  of  a  |  carnal  sword,  to  compel 
even  a  small,  mean,  and  short  Maintenance  |  for  their 
poor;  when  as  many  other  Members  of  their  Churches, 
can  I  and  do  part  with  great  and  large  Sums  of  Money,  to 
maintain  their  |  vain  fashions.  Gold,  Pearls,  and  costly 
Array,  which  is  expressly  con  |  trary  to  the  Word  of  God. 
I  Tim.  2.  9,  10.  I  Pet.  3.  3.  Alas,  zvhat  \  zvill  such  do 
when  God  riseth  up,  and  zvhen  he  visitcth,  what  will  they 
I  answer  hinif    Job  31.  14.  |  [page  9] 

XX.  That  there  shall  be  (through  Christ  who  was 
dead,  but  is  a  |  live  again  from  the  dead)  a  Resurrection 
of  all  men  from  the  graves  |  of  the  Earth,  Isa.  26.  19. 
both  the  just  and  the  unjust,  Acts  24.  15.  |  that  is,  the 
fleshy  bodies  of  men,  sown  into  the  graves  of  the  earth,  | 
corruptable,  dishonourable,  weak,  natural,  (which  so  con- 
sidered I  cannot  inherit  the  Kingdome  of  God)  shall  be 
raised  again,  incor  |  ruptable,  in  glory,  in  power,  spiritual, 
and  so  considered,  the  |  bodies  of  the  Saints,  (united 
again  to  their  spirits)  which  here  suffer  |  for  Christ,  shall 
inherit  the  Kingdome,  raigning  together  with  |  Christ,  i 
Cor.  15.  21,  22,  42,  43,  44,  49.  I 

XXL  That  there  shall  be  after  the  Resurrection  from 
the  graves  of  |  the  Earth,  An  eternal  Judgement,  at 
the  appearing  of  Christ,  and  |  his  Kingdome,  2  Tim.  4.  i. 
Heb.  9.  27.  at  which  time  of  judgement  |  which  is  un- 
alterable, and  irrevocable,  every  man  shall  receive  ac  \ 
cording  to  the  things  done  in  his  body,  2  Cor.  5.  10.  | 

XXIL  That  the  same  Lord  Jesus  who  shewed  himself 
alive  af  |  ter  his  passion,  by  many  infallible  proofs.  Acts 

I.  3.  which  was  |  taken  up  from  the  Disciples,  and  carried 
up  into  Heaven,  Luke  \  24.  51.  Shall  so  come  in  like 
manner  as  he  zvas  seen  go  into  Heaven,  \  Acts.  i.  9,  10, 

II.  And  when  Christ  zvho  is  our  life  shall  appear,  we  \ 
shall  also  appear  with  him  in  glory.  Col.  3.  4.    For  then 


The  English  Baptists  119 

shall  he  be  |  King  of  Kings,  and  Lord  of  Lords,  Rev.  19. 
16.  for  the  Kingdome  |  is  his,  and  he  is  the  Governour 
among  the  Nations,  PsaL  22.  28.  |  and  King  over  all  the 
earth,  Zech.  14.  9.  and  we  shall  raign  (with  \  him)  on  the 
Earth,  Rev.  5.  10.  the  Kingdomes  of  this  World,  |  (which 
men  so  mightily  strive  after  here  to  enjoy)  shall  become 
the  I  Kingdomes  of  our  Lord,  and  his  Christ,  Rev.  11.  15. 
for  all  is  yours,  \  (O  ye  that  overcome  this  world)  for 
ye  are  Christs,  and  Christ  is  \  Gods,  i  Cor.  3.  22,  23.  For 
unto  the  Saints  shall  he  given  the  King  \  dome,  and  the 
greatness  of  the  Kingdome,  under  (mark  that)  the  \ 
whole  Heaven,  Dan.  7.  2y.  Though  (alas)  now  many 
men  be  |  scarce  content  that  the  Saints  should  have  so 
much  as  being  a  |  mong  them ;  but  when  Christ  shall  ap- 
pear, then  shall  be  their  day,  |  then  shall  be  given  unto 
them  power  over  the  Nations,  to  rule  |  them  with  a  Rod 
of  Iron,  Rev.  2.  26,  2y.  then  shall  they  receive  a  |  Crown 
of  life,  which  no  man  shall  take  from  them,  nor  they  by  | 
any  means  turned,  or  overturned  from  it,  for  the  op- 
pressor shall  I  be  broken  in  pieces,  Psal.  72,  4.  and  their 
now  vain,  rejoycings  |  turned  into  mourning,  and  bitter 
Lamentations,  as  'tis  written,  [page  10]  Job  20.  5,  6,  7. 
The  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  short,  and  the  joy  \  of 
the  Hypocrite  but  for  a  moment;  though  his  excellency 
mount  up  to  \  the  Heavens,  and  his  head  reach  unto  the 
clouds,  yet  shall  he  perish  |  for  ever,  like  his  ozvn  dung; 
they  which  have  seen  him,  shall  say,  where  \  is  he?  \ 

XXIIL  That  the  holy  Scriptures  is  the  rule  whereby 
Saints  both  in  matters  of  Faith,  and  conversation  are  to 
be  regulated,  they  being  |  able  to  make  men  wise  unto 
salvation,  through  Faith  in  Christ  |  Jesus,  profitable  for 
Doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  instruction  in  |  righteousness, 
that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  throughly  |  furnished 
unto  all  good  works,  2  Tim.  3.  15,  16,  17.  John  20.  31.  | 
Isa.  8.  20.  I 

XXIV.  That  it  is  the  will,  and  mind  of  God  (in  these 
Gospel  I  times)  that  all  men  should  have  the  free  liberty 
of  their  own  Consci  |  ences  in  matters  of  Religion,  or 
Worship,  without  the  least  op  |  pression,  or  persecution, 
as  simply  upon  that  account;  and  that  |  for  any  in  Au- 
thority otherwise  to  act,  we  confidently  believe  is  ex 


I20  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

pressly  contrary  to  the  mind  of  Christ,  who  requires  that 
whatsoe  |  ver  men  would  that  others  should  do  unto  them, 
they  should  even  |  so  do  unto  others,  Mat.  7.  12.  and  that 
the  Tares,  and  the  Wheat  |  should  grow  together  in  the 
field,  (which  is  the  world)  until  the  |  harvest  (which  is 
the  end  of  the  world,)  Mat.  13.  29,  30,  38,  |  39.  | 

XXV.  We  believe  that  there  ought  to  be  civil  Magis- 
trates in  all  I  Nations,  for  the  punishment  of  evil  doers, 
and  for  the  praise  of  them  \  that  do  well,  i  Pet.  2.  14.  and 
that  all  wicked  lewdness,  and  fleshly  |  filthiness,  contrary 
to  just  and  wholesome  (Civil)  Laws,  ought  |  to  be  pun- 
ished according  to  the  nature  of  the  oflfences ;  and  this  | 
without  respect  of  any  Persons,  Religion,  or  profession 
whatsoe  |  ver;  and  that  we  and  all  men  are  obliged  by 
Gospel  rules,  to  be  |  subject  to  the  higher  Powers,  to  obey 
IMagistrates,  Tit.  3.  i.  and  to  |  submit  to  every  Ordinance 
of  man,  for  the  Lords  sake,  as  saith  Peter  2.  |  13.  But 
in  case  the  Civil  Powers  do,  or  shall  at  any  time  impose  | 
things  about  matters  of  Religion,  which  we  through  con- 
science to  I  God  cannot  actually  obey,  then  we  with  Peter 
also  do  say,  that  we  |  ought  (in  such  cases)  to  obey  God 
rather  than  men;  Acts  5.  29.  |  and  accordingly  do  hereby 
declare  our  whole,  and  holy  intent  and  |  purpose,  that 
(through  the  help  of  grace)  we  will  not  yield,  nor  |  (in 
such  cases)  in  the  least  actually  obey  them;  yet  humbly 
pur  [page  11]  posing  (in  the  Lords  strength)  patiently 
to  suffer  whatsoever  shall  |  be  inflicted  upon  us,  for  our 
conscionable  forbearance.  | 

These  things  (O  ye  Sons  and  Daughters  of  Men)  we 
verily  believe  |  to  be  the  Lords  will  and  mind,  and  there- 
fore cannot  but  speak,  |  and  if  herein  we  differ  from 
many,  yea  from  multitudes,  from  the  |  learned,  the  wise 
and  prudent  of  this  World,  we  (with  Peter  and  |  John) 
do  herein  make  our  solemne,  and  serious  appeale,  namely, 
I  whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  hearken  unto 
men,  (of  a  con  |  trary  perswasion)  more  than  unto  Godf 
Oh  let  the  judicious,  |  judge  righteous  judgement!  Acts 
4.  19,  20. 

And  in  the  beleife,  and  practise  of  these  things,  (it 
being  the  |  good  old  Apostolical  way)  our  souls  have 
found  that  rest,  and  soul  |  peace,  which  the  world  knows 


The  English  Baptists  121 

not,  and  which  they  cannot  take  |  from  us ;  of  whom  then 
should  we  be  afraid?  God  is  become  our  \  strength,  our 
light,  our  salvation;  therefore,  we  are  resolved  |  (through 
grace)  to  seal  the  truth  or  these  things  in  way  of  suffer  | 
ing  persecution,  not  only  to  the  loss  of  our  goods,  free- 
domes,  or  I  liberties,  but  with  our  lives  also  (if  called 
thereunto. )   | 

Moreover  we  do  utterly,  and  from  our  very  hearts,  in 
the  I  Lords  fear,  declare  against  all  those  wicked,  and 
divillish  reports,  j  and  reproaches,  falsly  cast  upon  us,  as 
though  some  of  us  (in  &  about  |  the  City  of  London) 
had  lately  gotten  Iknives,  booftcD  If^nives,  &  the  |  like,  & 
great  store  of  Arms  besides  what  was  given  forth  by 
order  of  |  Parliament,  intending  to  cut  the  throats  of 
such  as  were  contrary  |  minded  to  us  in  matters  of 
Religion,  and  that  many  such  ftn(ve0t  and  |  Armes,  for 
the  carrying  on  some  secret  design,  hath  been  found  in  | 
some  of  our  houses  by  search ;  we  say,  from  truth  of 
heart,  in  the  |  Lords  fear,  that  we  do  utterly  abhor,  and 
abominate  the  thoughts  |  thereof,  and  much  more  the 
actions;  and  do  hereby  challenge  both  |  City,  and  Coun- 
try (in  our  innocency  herein)  as  being  not  able  |  to 
prove  the  things  whereof  they  accuse  us ;  and  do  for 
evermore  |  declare  the  Inventors  of  such  reports,  to  be 
lyers,  and  wicked  de  |  visers  of  mischeife,  and  corrupt 
designs :  God  that  is  above  all  will  |  justifie  our  innocency 
herein,  who  well  knows  our  integrity,  in  what  |  we  here 
declare,  the  Lord  lay  it  not  to  their  charge.  | 

In  the  time  of  building  the  decayed  House  of  God, 
Samballet,  &  |  Tobiah,  {zvicked  Counsellors)  hired 
Shemaiah  to  make  good  Nehemiah  |  afraid;  and  la- 
boured against  him,  that  they  might  have  matter  for 
[page  12]  an  evil  report,  that  they  might  reproach  him, 
&  hinder  the  building  |  of  the  house  of  God,  Neh.  6.  12. 
For  I  have  heard  (saith  the  Prophet)  |  the  defaming 
of  many;  report,  say  they,  and  we  zvill  report  it,  Jer. 
20.  I  10.  I 

Suscribed  by  certain  Elders,  Deacons,  and  Brathren 
met  I  at  London,  in  the  first  Month  (called  March, 
1660.)  in  the  |  behalf  of  themselves,  and  many  others 
unto  whom  they  be   |   long,  in  London,  and  in  several 


122 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


Counties  of  this  Nation,   |   who 

with  Us. 

Joseph  Wright, 
William  Jeifery, 
Thomas  Monck, 
John  Hartnoll, 
Benjamine  Morley, 
Francis   Stanley, 
George  Hammon, 
William  Smart, 
John  Reeve, 
Thomas  Parrot, 
John  Wood, 
Francis  Smith, 
Edward  Jones, 
Humphrey  Jones, 
Matthezv  Caff  en, 
Samuel  Loveday, 
John  Parsons,  Senior 
Thomas  Stacy, 
Edward  Stanley, 
Jonathan  Gennings, 


are  of  the  same  Faith 

John  Hammersly, 
William  Riissel, 
Joseph  Keeich, 
Nicholas  Newberry, 
Samuel  Lover, 
George   Wright, 
John  Parsons,  Junior, 
John  Claton, 
Thomas  Seele, 
Michaiel  Whiticar, 
Giles  Browne, 
John  Wells, 
Stephen  Torie, 
Thomas  Lathwel, 
William  ChadweU, 
William  Raph, 
Henry  Browne, 
William  Paine, 
Richard  Bozvin, 
Thomas  Smith, 


THE  END 

3.  The  "  Orthodox  Creed,"  167S. 

Charles  II  had  received  the  Baptist  messengers  who 
presented  the  preceding  Confession  very  graciously,  and 
promised  redress.  But  January  6,  1661,  Thomas  Venner 
and  the  Fifth  Monarchy  men  broke  into  open  rebellion 
in  London.  The  king  at  once  forbade  all  meetings  of 
sectaries,  and  suspicion  of  complicity  in  the  rebellion 
fell  on  the  Baptists.  In  order  to  clear  themselves  from 
such  an  unjust  imputation,  they  presented  to  the  king  and 
then  published  a  noble  apology,  setting  forth  their  loyal 
attitude  toward  the  State  (Crosby  II,  35-49).  As  perse- 
cution continued,  they  published,  on  May  8,  1661,  a 
powerful  plea  for  toleration,  addressed  to  the  king.  Par- 
liament, and  people  of  England  (Crosby  II,  98-146).    It 


The  English  Baptists  123 

is  marked  by  ability  and  learning,  but  accomplished  little 
or  no  mitigation  of  the  severe  persecutions. 

The  common  sufferings  of  all  Dissenters  during  this 
period  drove  them  nearer  together,  and  aroused  a  desire 
for  closer  relations.  They  emphasized  points  of  agree- 
ment, rather  than  differences.  This  tendency  manifested 
itself  in  both  wings  of  the  Baptists  by  the  production  of 
union  Confessions  almost  simultaneously.  In  1677  the 
Calvinistic  Baptists,  in  order  to  show  their  large  agree- 
ment with  Presbyterians  and  Congregationalists,  formu- 
lated a  new  Baptist  Confession  by  slightly  revising  the 
Westminster  Confession,  which  had  also  been  adopted  by 
the  Congregationalists  after  necessary  adaptations.  The 
next  year,  1678,  the  General  Baptists  drew  up  their  so- 
called  "  Orthodox  Creed  "  "  to  unite  and  confirm  all  true 
protestants  in  the  fundamental  articles  of  the  Christian 
religion,  against  the  errors  and  heresies  of  Rome."  It  is 
siipposed  to  have  been  written  by  Thos.  Monk,  and  was 
signed  by  fifty-four  "  messengers,  elders,  and  brethren  " 
from  Buckinghamshire,  Oxfordshire,  and  adjoining 
counties,  Jan.  30,  1678  [9].  In  accordance  with  its 
unionistic  design,  it  approaches  the  Calvinistic  position 
as  nearly  as  possible,  and  is  of  special  interest  as  the  first 
attempt  at  that  compromise  between  the  two  great  systems 
of  theology  which  was  such  a  marked  characteristic  of 
the  work  of  Andrew  Fuller  and  others  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  eighteenth  century.  Moreover,  it  seeks  to  meet 
and  overthrow  the  Socinian  views,  which  had  been  in- 
herited by  the  General  Baptists  from  the  Anabaptists,  and 
had  disturbed  them  somewhat  from  the  beginning  of  their 
history.  Accordingly  it  is  quite  full  on  the  Trinity  and 
Person  of  Christ  and  related  doctrines,  seeking  to  explain 
all  phases  of  these  abstruse  questions.  It  was  reprinted 
by  Crosby  (III,  Appendix  I)  and  by  Underbill  (pp. 
I2if).    Crosby's  text  is  reproduced  here. 


124  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


AN 


ORTHODOX  CREED, 


OR 


A  PROTESTANT  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH, 


BEING  AN 


ESSAY  TO  UNITE  AND  CONFIRM  ALL  TRUE 

PROTESTANTS 


IN   THE   FUNDAMENTAL  ARTICLES    OF   THE 

CHRISTIAN  RELIGION,  |  AGAINST  THE 

ERRORS  AND  HERESIES  OF  ROME. 


London,  Printed  in  the  year,  1679. 


The  English  Baptists 


125 


An  orthodox  CREED. 

I.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  Essence  of  God. 

We  verily  believe,  that  there  is 
but  one,  only  living  and  true 
God;   whose  subsistence  is  in 
and  of  himself,  whose  essence 
cannot  be   comprehended   by 
any  but  himself;   a  most  pure,  spiritual, 
or  invisible  substance ;  who  hath  an  abso- 
lute, independent,  unchangeable,  and  infi- 
nite being;  without  matter  or  form, 
body,  parts,  or  passions. 

For  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not;  God  is 
a  spirit.     Now  unto  the  king  eternal,  im- 
mortal, invisible,  the  only  wise  God,  be  ho- 
nour and  glory,  for  ever  and  ever,  Amen. 
Ye  heard  a  Voice,  but  saw  no  similitude. 


Deut.  6:4;  5  :  a6. 
Ps.  42  ;  2. 
Jer.  10  :  10. 
Exod.  3  :  14. 
Ps.  147  :  5. 
Hab.  I  :  13. 
Deut.  4  :  15,  16. 
Col.  I  :  15. 
Acts  17  :  28. 
Luke  24  :  39. 
Mai.  3  :  6. 
John  4  :  24. 
I  Tim.  I  :  17. 
Deut.  14  :  Z2. 


IL  ARTICLE. 
Of  the  divine  Attributes  in  God. 


Every  particle  of  being  in  heaven  and 
earth,  leads  us  to  the  infinite  being  of 
beings,  namely  God,  who  is  simplicity, 
viz.   one   mere   and   perfect   act,   without 
all  composition,  and  an  immense  sea  of 
perfections;  who  is  the  only  eternal  be- 
ing, everlasting  without  time,  whose  im- 
mense presence,  is  always  every  where 
present,  having  immutability  without  any 
alteration  in  being,  or  will;  in  a  word, 
God   is   infinite,   of  universal,  unlimited, 
and  incomprehensible  perfection,   most  holy, 
wise,  just,  and  good ;  whose  wisdom  is 
his  justice,  whose  justice  is  his  holiness, 
and  whose  wisdom,  justice,  and  holiness, 
is  himself.     Most  merciful,  gracious,  faith- 
ful, and  true,  a  full  fountain  of  love,  and 
who  is  that  perfect,  sovereign,  divine  will, 
the  Alpha  of  supreme  being. 

Is  it  true,  indeed,  that  God  will  dwell  on 
the  earth?     Behold,  the  heaven,  and  heaven 
of  heavens,  cannot  contain  thee :  how  much  less 
this  house  which  I  have  built.     Great  is  the 
Lord,  and  worthy  to  be  praised,  and  his 
greatness  is  incomprehensible. 


John  5  :  26. 

I  John  I  :  5. 

Matt.  5  :  48. 

Exod.  6  ;  3. 

Isaiah  40  :  28. 

Ps.  00  :  2  :  30  ; 
Heb.  6  :  17. 
James  i  :  17. 
Mai,  3  :  6. 

Num.  23  :  19. 

Lev.  20  :  26. 
Rom.  16  :  27. 
Ps.  119  :  68. 
Deut.  32  : 4. 

Exod.  34  : 6. 

Isaiah  41  :  4. 

Job  33  :  13. 

I  Kings  8  :  27. 

Ps.  145  : 3. 


126  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

III.  ARTICLE. 
Of  the  holy  Trinity. 

In  this  divine,  and  infinite  being,  or 

unity  of  the  Godhead,  there  are  three  I  John  5  :  7. 

persons,  or  subsistences,  the  father,  the  John  15  :  26. 

word,  or  son,  and  the  holy  spirit,  of  one  2  Cor.  13  :  13. 

substance,   power,  eternity,   and   will,   each  Gen.  i :  26. 

having  the  whole  divine  essence,  yet  the  Matt.  3  :  16, 17. 

essence  undivided.     The  father  is  of  none,  John  5  :  17. 

neither  begotten  nor   proceeding ;   the   son  Gal.  i :  3. 

is  eternally  begotten  of  the  father;  the  Matt.  16: 16;  12:32. 

holy  ghost  is  of  the  father,  and  the  son,  Heb.  i :  3. 

proceeding.     All  infinite,  without  begin-  Gen.  1 :  2,  26. 

ning,   therefore  but   one   God,   who   is   in-  ?o^hni*-^* 

divisible,  and  not  to  be  divided  in  nature,  1  Co°r.^2^:"6,  n. 

or  being,  but  distinguished  by  several  john  14  :  n. 

properties  and  personal  relations ;  and  we  i  john  5  :  ^,  26. 

worship  and  adore  a  Trinity  in  Unity,  and  Gal.  4  : 6. 

a  Unity  in  Trinit}^  three  persons,  and  but  i  Pet.  i :  n. 

one  God ;  which  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  2  Cor.  13  :  14. 

is  the  foundation  of  all  our  communion    _  i  john  5  :  7. 
with  God,  and  comfortable  dependance  on  him.      Matt.  28  :  19. 

And  there  are  three  that  bare  record  in 
heaven,  the  father,  the  word,  and  the  holy 
spirit,  and  these  three  are  one.    Baptizing 
them  in  the  name  of  the  father,  son,  and 
holy  Ghost,  &c. 

IV.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  divine  Nature,  or  Godhead  of  Christ. 

We   confess   and   believe,   that  the   Son  John  5: 20;  1:1,2,3. 

of  God,  or  the  eternal  word,  is  very  and  Heb.  i :  3. 

true  God,  having  his  personal  subsistance  I  Cor.  15  :  16, 17. 

of  the   father  alone,   and  yet  for  ever  of  Col.  i :  2,  9. 

himself  as  God ;  and  of  the  father  as  the  Mic.  5  : 2- 

son,   the   eternal   son   of   an   eternal   father;  Gnolam,or Eternity, 

not  later  in  beginning.    There  was  never  Matt.  2  : 6. 

any  time  when   he   was   not,   not   less   in  Prov.  8  :  22,  23,  35. 

dignity,  not  other  in  substance,  begotten  Phil.  2  : 6. 
without  diminution  of  his   father  that  be- 
gat, of  one  nature  and  substance  with  the 
father;  begotten  of  the  father,  while 
the  father   communicated   wholly  to^  the 
son,  w^hich  he  retained  wholly  in  himself, 

because   both   were   infinite,   without   in-  John  16  :  27,  28. 
equality  of  nature,  without  division  of  x  :  18. 

essence,  neither  made,  nor  created,  nor  Isaiah  40  :  n,  12, 22. 

adopted,  but  begotten  before  all  time ;  not  Rev.  i :  8,  n. 


The  English  Baptists 


i2y 


a  metaphorical,  or  subordinate  God;  not 
a  God  by  office,  but  a  God  by  nature,  co- 
equal, coessential,  and  coeternal,  with  the 
father   and    the    holy   ghost. 

Jesus  said  unto  them,  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  before  Abraham  was,  I  am.    Jesus 
Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to  day,  and 
for  ever.     David  therefore  calleth  him  Lord, 
how  is  he  then  his  son? 


Phil.  2  :  6. 
John  lo  :  30. 
Isaiah  9  :  6. 
John  17  :  5;  8  :  58. 

Heb.  13  ;  8. 
Luke  20  :  44. 


V.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  second  Person  of  the  holy  Trinity, 
taking  our  flesh. 


We  believe  that  the  only  begotten  son 
of  God,  the  second  person  in  the  sacred 
Trinity,  took  to  himself  a  true,  real,  and 
fleshly  body,  and  reasonable  soul,  being  con- 
ceived in  the  fulness  of  time,  by  the  holy 
ghost,   and  born  of  the  virgin   Mary,  and 
became  very  and  true  man  like  unto  us  in 
all  things,  even  in  our  infirmities,  sin 
only   excepted,    as   appeareth   by   his   con- 
ception, birth,  life,  and  death.     He  was 
of  a  woman,  and  by  the  power  of  the  holy  ghost, 
in  a  supernatural  and  miraculous  manner, 
was  formed  of  the  only  seed, 
or  substance  of  the  virgin  Mary,  in 
which  respect  he  hath  the  name  of  the 
son  of  man,  and  is  the  true  son  of  David 
the  fruit  of  the  virgin's  womb,  to  that 
end  he  might  die  for  Adam. 
Gen.   26 :  17.     Heb.  2. 16. 


I  John  5  :  7. 
Isaiah  7  ;  14. 
John  I  :  14. 
Luke  I  :  31,  32. 
Heb.  2  :  16,  17. 
John  19  :  34,  36. 
Matt.  26  :  38. 
Luke  2  :  6,  7  ;  i  :  35. 

Matt.i :  18,20;  23 :  25. 
Gal.  4  : 4. 

Heb.  4:15;  2:13,14. 
Luke  2  :  52. 
Gal.  4  :  4. 
Rom.  I  :  3,  4. 
Luke  3  :  23,  24. 
Heb.  7  :  14. 


VL  ARTICLE. 
Of  the  union  of  the  two  natures   in   Christ. 


We  believe  the  person  of  the  son  of 
God,  being  a  person  from  all  eternity  ex- 
isting, did  assume  the  most  pure  nature  of 
man,  wanting  all  personal  existing  of  its 
own,  into  the  unity  of  his  person,  or 
Godhead,  and  made  it  his  own;  the 
properties  of  each  nature  being  preserved, 
and  this  inseparable  and  indissolvable  union 
of  both  natures,  and  was  made  by  the 
holy  ghost,  sanctifying  our  nature  in  the 
virgin's   womb,  without  change  of  either 
nature,  or  mixture  of  both,  and  of  two 


Heb.  2  :  14,  16. 
Acts  20  :  28. 


Matt.  I  :  20. 
Luke  I  :  35. 
Rom.  X  :  3,  4. 


128 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


natures  is  one  Christ,  God-man,  or  Imma- 
nuel,  God  with  us.     Which  mystery  ex- 
ceeds the  conception  of  men,  and  is  the 
wonder  of  angels,  one  only  mediator, 
Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  God. 


Matt.  I  :  23. 

1  Tim.  3  :  16 ;  2:5. 


VII.  ARTICLE. 
Of   the   communication    of    Properties. 


John  10  :  30 ;  5  :  26, 

27,  &c. 
I  John  4  :  9. 
Matt.  9  : 6. 
John  7  :  42. 


We  believe  that  the  tw^o  natures  in 
Christ,  continue  still  distinct  in  substance, 
properties,  and  actions,  and  remain  one 
and  the  same  Christ :  For  the  properties 
of  the  Godhead,  cannot  agree  to  the 
properties  of  the  manhood,  nor  the  pro- 
perties of  the  manhood,  to  the  properties 
of  the  Godhead ;  for  as  the  Godhead  or 

divine  nature  cannot  thirst,  or  be  hungry,  no  more  can  the  manhood 
be  in  all,  or  many  places  at  once.  Therefore,  we  believe,  the  God- 
head was  neither  turned  nor  transfused  into  the  manhood,  nor  the 
manhood  into  the  Godhead,  but  both,  the 
divine  nature  keepeth  entire  all  his  essential 
properties  to  its  self,  so  that  the  hu- 
manity   is    neither    omnipotent,    omniscient, 
nor  omnipresent :  And  the  human  also 
keepeth  his  properties,  tho*  often  that 
which  is  proper  to  the  one  nature,  is 
spoken  of  the  person  denominated  from 
the   other,   which   must   be   understood   by 
the  figure  synecdoche,  viz.  a  part  being 
taken  for  the  whole,  by  reason  of  the 
union  of  both  natures  into  one  person. 

Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  be- 
cause he  laid  down  his  life  for  us. 


Acts  20  ;  28 
I  Cor.  2  :  8. 
John  3  :  13. 
Mark  2 


10. 


I  John  3  :  z6. 


VIII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the   holy   Spirit. 

We  believe  that  there  is  one  holy  spi- 
rit, the  third  person  subsisting  in  the  sa- 
cred trinity,  one  with  the  father  and  son, 
who  is  very  and  true  God,  of  one  substance 
or  nature  with  the  father  and  son,  coequal, 
coeternal,  and  coessential   with  the   father 
and  son,  to  whom  with  the  father  and  son, 
three  persons,  and  but  one  eternal  and 
almighty  God,  be  by  all  the  hosts  of 
saints  and  angels,  ascribed  eternal  glory, 
and  Hallelujahs.     Amen. 


John  5  :  7. 
Matt.  28  :  19. 
Gen.  1  :  26. 
Acts  5  :  4. 
2  Cor.  13  :  13. 
I  Cor.  12  :  6,  ix. 
Isaiah  6  :  8,  9. 
Acts  28  :  25,  26. 

Isaiah  6  : 3. 


The  English  Baptists 


i2g 


IX.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Predestination  and  Election. 

The  decrees  of  God  are  founded  on 
infinite  wisdom,  and  situate  in  eternity, 
and  are  crowned  with  infallibiHty,  as  to 
the   event.     Now  predestination   unto   life, 
is  the  everlasting  purpose  of  God,  where- 
by before  the   foundation   of  the  world 
was  laid,  he  hath  constantly  decreed  in 
his  counsel  secret  to  us,  to  deliver 
from  curse  and  damnation,  those  whom 
he  hath  chosen  in  Christ,  and  bring  them 
to   everlasting   salvation,   as   vessels   made 
to  honour,  thro'  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he 
elected  before  the  foundation  of  the 
v/orld,  and  is  called  God's  elect,  in 
whom  his  soul  delighteth,  being  the 
lamb  foreordain'd,  and  so  predestinated 
unto  the  superlative  glory  of  the  hypo- 
statical  union.     And  this  not  for  any  fore- 
seen holiness   in   his  human  nature,   sith  all 
that  did  flow  out  of  the  hypostatical 
union,  being  elected  of  mere  grace,  as 
are  all  the  members  of  his  mystical  body. 
And  God  the  father  gave  this  his  elected 
and  beloved  son,   for  a  covenant  to  the 
people,  and  said,  that  his  covenant  shall 
stand  fast  with  him;  and  his  seed  shall  en- 
dure for  ever.     And  albeit  God  the  father 
be  the  efficient  cause  of  all  good  things 
he  intended  to  us,  yet  Christ  is  the  merit- 
ing cause  of  all  those   good  things   God 
intended  to   us   in   election,  viz.   repen- 
tance, faith  and  sincere  obedience  to  all 
God's  commandments.    And  so  God  the 
father,  that  he  might  bring  about  the 
eternal  salvation  of  his  elect,  chose  the 
man  Christ,  with  respect  to  his  human 
nature,  out  of  the  fallen  lump  of  mankind, 
which  in  the  fulness  of  time,  he  made  of 
a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem 
those  that  were  under  it,  that  we  might 
receive  the  adoption  of  sons.     And  tho' 
Christ  came  from  Adam,  as  Eve  did,  yet 
not  by  Adam,  as  Cain  did,  viz.  by  natu- 
ral propagation.     Therefore   without  any 
stain  of  sin,  and  this  second  Adam,  being 
by  God's   eternal  decree,   excepted   out  of 
the  first  covenant,  as  being  neither  God 


Isaiah  46  :  10. 
Acts  15  :  18;  17  ;  26. 

Eph.  I  :  II. 

Matt.  25  :  34. 

I  Tim.  I  :  9. 

John  6  :  37;  10 :  28,29. 

Eph.  I  :  4. 

Rom,  II  :  33;  8:30; 

9:29. 
I  Thess.  1  :  4. 
Tit.  I  :  I. 
I  Pet.  I  :  19,  20. 
Isaiah  42  :  i. 
Matt  12  :  17,  18. 

1  Pet.  2  :  6. 
Luke  23  :  35. 
I  Pet.  I  :  19. 
John  I  :  14. 
Heb.  2  :  16, 
Col.  2  :  9. 
I  Tim.  I  :  9. 
Ps.  89  :  23,  &c. 
John  3  ;  16. 
I  John  4  :  9,  10,  19. 
Rom.  3  :  24,  25. 

8:3. 

1  Cor.  8  :  30. 
Eph.  2  :  8,  9,  10. 

Heb. 7:14;  io:5,6,&c. 
Gal.  4  :  3. 
Eph.  I  :  5. 
Gen.  2  :  21,  &c. 

4  :  I- 

5  :3- 
Matt.  I  :  18,  19. 
Luke  I  :  35. 

2  Tim.  2  :  5. 
Heb.  9  :  15. 
Eph.  2  :  13,  &c. 

Isaiah  49  :  6,  &c. 
2  Thess.  2  :  13. 
Eph.  I  :  17,  &c. 
I  Cor.  2  :  13. 


130 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


the   father,   who   was  justly  offended,   nor 
yet   sinful   Adam,   who   had   offended   him 
in   breaking   of   it.     Therefore    Christ,   the 
second  Adam,  was  a  fit  mediator  between 
God  and  man,  to  reconcile  both  in  him 
self,   by   the   shedding   and   sprinkHng   of 
his  blood,  according  to  God's  eternal 
purpose  in  electing  of  Christ,  and  of  all 
that  do,  or  shall  believe  in  him,  which  eternal 
election  or  covenant  transaction  be- 
tween the  father  and  son,  is  very  con- 
sistent with  his  revealed  will  in  the  gos- 
pel; for  we  ought  not  to  oppose  the  grace 
of  God  in  electing  of  us,  nor  yet  the 
grace  of  the  son  in  dying  for  all  men,  and 
so  for  us,  nor  yet  the  grace  of  the  holy 
ghost  in  propounding  the  gospel,  and 
persuading  us  to  believe  it.     For  until  we 
do  believe,  the  effects  of  God's  displeasure 
are  not  taken  from  us;  for  the  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  all  them  that  do  not  be- 
lieve in  Christ;  for  the  actual  declaration 
in  the  court  of  conscience,  is  by  faith  as 
an  instrument,  not  for  faith  as  a  meriting 
cause :  for  Christ  is  the  meriting  cause  of 
eternal  life  to  all  that  believe,  but  not  of 
God's  will  to  give  eternal  life  to  them, 
nor  yet  of  God's  decree  to  save  us,  albeit 
we  are  chosen  in  Christ  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world.     Now  faith  is  neces- 
sary as  the  way  of  our  salvation,  as  an  in- 
strumental cause:  but  the  active  and  pas- 
sive obedience  of  Christ,  is  necessary  as 
a  meriting  cause  of  our  salvation;  there- 
fore God's  eternal  decree  doth  not  op- 
pose his  revealed  will  in  the  gospel,  it 
being  but  one,  not  two   diverse  or  contrary 
wills.    For  his  decree  as  king,  decreeth 
the  event,  or  what  shall  be  done  infallibly; 
but  his  command  as  a  lawgiver,   sheweth 
not  what  shall  be  done,  but  what  is  the 
duty  of   man   to   do,    and   leave  undone. 
Therefore  God  hath,  we  believe,  decreed, 
that  faith  as  the  means,  and  salvation  as 
the  end,   shall  be  joined   together,  that 
where  one  is,  the  other  must  be  also,  for 
it  is  written,  he  that  believeth  shall  be  saved ; 
also,  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus   Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved.     Now  here  is  a  great 
mystery  indeed,  for  God  so  administereth 
his  absolute  decree  that  he  leaveth  us 


I  Thess.  1  :  5. 
John  3  :  18,  36. 
Rom.  3  :  30. 
Gal.  3  :  8,  11. 
Phil.  3  :  9- 
Rom.  5  :  I,  2. 


I  John  4  :  9,  10,  19. 
Heb.  II  :  6. 
John  1  :  II,  12. 
Acts  13  :  39 ;  20  :  28. 
Eph.  I  :  14. 

Rom.  5  :  9,  &C. 

John  6  :  40. 

I  Tim.  2  :  3,  4. 
Job  23  :  13. 
Ps.  115  :  3. 
Job  42  :  2. 

Isaiah  33  :  22. 

John  3  :  36. 

Mark  16  :  16. 

Acts  16  :  31. 

Isaiah  14  :  24. 

Ps.  115:3;  32:11,12. 

89  :  30,  31,  &c. 


The  English  Baptists  131 

much  place  for  an  efficacious  conditional 
dispensation,  as  if  the  decree  itself  were 
conditional. 

X.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Preterition  or  Reprobation. 

We  do  believe,  that  known  unto  God 
are  all  his  works  from  eternity;  therefore 
he  foresaw  Adam's  fall,  but  did  not  de-  Acts  15 :  18. 

cree  it,  yet  foreseeing  it  in  his  eternal 
counsel  and  wisdom,  did   elect  and  chuse 
Jesus  Christ,  and  all  that  do  or  shall  be- 
lieve in  him,  out  of  that  fallen  lump  of 
mankind.     And  hath  manifested  his  love 
and  grace  by  Jesus  Christ,  his  elect  or  be- 
loved son,  thro'  the  gospel  means,  to  all; 
and  hath  given  us  his  word  and  oath,  to 
assure  us  that  he  desires  not  the  death  of 
the  wicked,  but  rather  that  they  repent,  Ezek.  18  :  23,  32. 

or  return  to  him  and  live,  and  if  any  do  33 :  n. 

perish,    their    destruction    is    of   themselves  :         Hos.  13  : 9. 
and  hath  decreed  to  punish  all  those  Jam.  i :  13, 14. 

wicked,   or   ungodly,   disobedient,   and  un-  2  Thess.  i :  9, 

believing  or  impenitent  sinners,  that  have,  10;  2;  12 

or  shall  despise  his  grace,  love,  and  woings, 
or  strivings  of  the  holy  ghost,  or  long-  Heb.  10 :  26,  &c. 

suffering,  whether  by  a  total  and  conti- 
nued rejection  of  grace,  or  by  an  univer-  153.30:33; 
sal  and  final  apostacy ;  and  such  persons,  66  :  24. 
so  living  and  dying,  shall  be  punished                       Mark  9  :  45,  46. 
with  everlasting  destruction  in  hell  fire, 
with  the  fallen  angels,  or  devils,  and  shall            Jude  4. 
be  fixed  in  an  irrecoverable  state  of  dam- 
nation, irrevocable  under  the  wrath  of                   Matt.  25  :  41, 46. 
God,  they  being  the  proper  objects  of  it; 
and  shall  remain  under  his  inexpressible                 Rev  20. :  13, 14. 
wrath  and  justice,  in  inconceivable  tor- 
ment, soul  and  body,  to  all  eternity. 

XL  ARTICLE. 

Of  Creation. 

In  the  beginning  it  pleased  god  the  father,  Gen.  i :  i. 

son,  and  holy  ghost,  according  to  his  eternal,  Rom.  n  :  36. 

and  immutable  decree,  for  the  mani-  Rev.  4  :  n. 

festation  of  the  glory  of  his  eternal  power,  Heb.  n  :  3. 

wisdom,  and  goodness,  to  create,  or  make  Col.  i  :  16. 

out  of  nothing,  the  world,  and  all  things  Gen.  5 :  i,  2 ;  2  :  7. 


1^2  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

therein,  whether  visible  or  invisible,  and  Matt.  10:28;  22:31,32. 

created  man  male  and  female,  with  a  i^^w'^'-^'fi 

fleshly  body,  and  a  reasonable,  and  invi-  Acts  7: 59 

sible,  or  spiritual,  angelical,  and  immor-  Gen.  i ':  27;  9  :  6. 

tal  soul,  made  after  the  image  of  God,  Eph.  4 :  24. 

in  knowledge,  righteousness,  and  true  Rom.  2  :  14, 15. 

holiness,   having  the   law  written   in   his  Eccies.  7 :  29. 

heart,  and  power  or  liberty  of  will  to  fulfil 

it,  yet  mutable,  or  under  a  possibility  Gen.  3:6;  2:16,17. 

of  transgressing,  being  left  to  the  liberty 
of  their  own  will,  which  was  subject  to 
change;  and  also  gave  them  command 
not  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  and  while  they  kept  this 
command,  they  enjoyed  most  happy  com- 
munion with  God,  and  had  dominion 
over  the  creatures.     And  all  this  wonder- 
ful work  of  creation,  both  in  heaven  and 
in  earth,  was  finished  in  the  space  of  six 
days,  and  all  very  good,  and  altho'  reason  Gen.  1 ;  i,  2,  31. 

cannot  conceive  nor  comprehend  it,  yet 
God's   word   hath  plainly  revealed   it,   and 
faith    beheves    it. 

XII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Divine  Providence. 

The  Almighty  God,  that  created  all  Heb.  x :  3. 

things,  and  gave  them  their  being,  by  Jo^  28  :  u. 
his  infinite  power  and  wisdom,  doth  sus-  26  :  7,  &c. 

tain  and  uphold,  and  move,  direct,  dis-  P^.  135 :  5,  6. 
pose,  and  govern  all  creatures  and  things, 

from  the  greatest  to  the  least,   according  ^i^"-  ^°  '-  ^9>  &c- 

to  the  counsel  of  his  own  good  will  and  ^^-  ^5  :  8,  &c. 

pleasure,  for  his  own  glory,  and  his  crea-  ^P^-  ^  •  "• 
tures  good. 

XIII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  first  Covenant. 

The  first  covenant  was  made  between 
God  and  man,  before  man  had  sinned  in 
eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  in  which 
covenant  God  required  of  man  perfect 
obedience  to  all  the  commands  thereof, 

and  in  case  he  did  so  obey  he  promised  Hos.  6:7;8:i. 

to  be  his  God.     And  on  the  other  part, 

man  promised  to  perform  entire  and  per-  Deut.  26  :  17, 18,  19. 

feet  obedience  to  all  God's  holy  com- 
mands in  that  covenant,  by  that  strength 
wherewith  God  endowed  him  in  his  first 


The  English  Baptists  133 

creation;  by  the  improvement  of  which 
he  might  have  attained  unto  eternal  Hfe 
without  faith,  in  the  blood  of  the  media- 
tor of  the  new  covenant  of  grace ;  but 
he  sinning  against  this  covenant,  which 

consisted  in  two  roots,  viz.     To  love  God  a-        Matt.  22  :  37,  40. 
bove  all  things  ;  and  his  neighbour  as  him-  Rom.  2  :  14, 15. 

self ;   it .  being  the  substance  of  that  law 
which   was   afterwards    written    in    two  Gen.  3  :  12, 13. 

tables  of  stone,  and  delivered  unto  Moses 

upon  mount  Sinai,  and  fell  under  the  just  Dent.  29  :  19,  20,  21. 

sentence  of  eternal  death,  which  was  the  Eph.  2  :  3. 

punishment  that  God  had  appointed  for  Rom.  i :  20,  32. 

the  breach  of  it.    And  under  this  righteous 
judgment  of  God,  Adam  and  his  natural 
posterity,   had   for   ever   remained,   as 
the  fallen  Angels  do,  had  not  God  of  his 
infinite  grace  and  love,  provided  his  son,  Rom.  5 :  12, 18. 

to  take  unto  himself  our  nature,  and  so  be- 
came a  fit  mediator  between  God  the  fa-  Eph.  2  .- 13, 14. 
ther,  who  was  offended,  and  man,  who 
had  offended  him  in  breaking  his  holy 
law  and  covenant. 

XIV.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  fall  of  man,  of  his  sin,  and  of  the 
punishment  thereof. 

The  first  man  Adam,  in  eating  volun- 
tarily of  the  forbidden  fruit,  incurred  the 
curse  of  God  upon  himself,  and  all  his 

posterity,  that  came  of  him  by  natural  Roi"-  5  :  ".  14- 

propagation,   viz.   corporal   and   spiritual 
death,  in  body  and  soul  eternally ;  but  G^°-  3  : 1°,  iz- 

this  covenant  was  not  only  made  with  Eph.  2  :  i,  3. 

him,  but  with  his  seed  also,  which  should  ^o"i-  s  :  15, 16, 17. 

descend  from  his  loins  by  natural  genera- 
tion ;  he  standing  as  a  publick  person  Heb.  7  : 9,  lo. 
in  the  stead  of  all  mankind.     And,  as  St.            ^^-  5^ :  5- 
Paul  saith,  by  him  came  sin,  and  death  by           G^"-  ^  •  s- 
sin,  &c.  and  so  deprived  himself,  and  all  l^o'"-  7  :  7- 
his  posterity,  of  that  original  righteous-                 James  i  :  14. 
ness,  which  God  created  him  in. 

XV.  ARTICLE. 

Of  original,  or  birth,  sin. 

Original  sin,  is  the  fault  and  corruption  Roi"-  7  :  21. 

of  the  nature  of  every  man,  that  naturally  Gen.  6  :  5. 


134 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


descendeth  from  Adam  by  natural  genera- 
tion, by  means  of  which,  man  has  not 
only  lost  that  original   righteousness,   that 
God  created  him  in,  but  is  naturally  in- 
clined to  all  manner  of  evil,  being  con- 
ceived in  sin,  and  brought  forth  in  ini- 
quity; and,  as  St.  Paul  saith,  the  flesh 
lusteth  against  the  spirit.     And  therefore 
every  man  justly  deserveth  God's  w^rath, 
and  damnation.     And  this   concupisence, 
or  indwelling  lust,  remaineth  even  in  the 
regenerate,  that  they  cannot  love  nor 
obey  God  perfectly  in  this  life,  according 
to  the  tenour  of  the  first  covenant. 


Tit.  1  :  IS. 

Rom.  3  :  23. 
Gen.  5  :  3. 
Jer.  17  :  9. 
Ps.  51  :  4,  5. 
Job  14  :  4. 
Gal.  5  ;  16,  17. 
1  Cor.  15  ;  22. 
Rom.  6  :  23. 

Gen.  2  :  17. 
John  5  :  24. 
Isa.  64  :  6. 
Gal.  3  :  10. 
Rom.  7  :  17,  21,  22. 
2  :  14,  15. 

Gal.  3  :  21,  22. 

Matt.  12  :  33. 


XVI.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  new  covenant  of  grace. 

The  first  covenant  being  broken  by 
mans  disobedience,  and  by  his  sin,  he  was 
excluded  from  the  favour  of  God,  and 
eternal  life,  in  which  deplorable  condition 
of  his,  God  being  pleased,  out  of  his  free 
grace  and  love  to  fallen  man,  in  order  to 
his  recovery  out  of  this  sinful  and  de- 
plorable estate,  hath  freely  offered  him  a 
second,  or  a  new  covenant  of  grace, 
which  new  covenant  of  grace  is  Jesus 
Christ,  in  remission  of  sins,  thro'  faith  in 
his  blood,  which  God  hath  promised  to 
give  to  all  them  that  do  obey  and  submit 
to  the  conditions  of  this  covenant,  which 
covenant  of  grace,   and  eternal   salvation 
annexed  to  it,  is  freely  and  fully  offered 
unto  all  men,  upon  the  terms  of  the  gos- 
pel, viz.  repentance  and  faith.     And  the 
benefits  of  this  covenant,  by  God's  free 
grace,  thro'  the  redemption  that  is  in 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  God  has  set  forth  to 
be  a  propitiation  thro'  faith  in  his  blood, 
to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins  that  are  past  thro'  the  for- 
bearance of  God,  that  he  might  be  just, 
and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in 
Jesus.    Therefore,  we  conclude,  that  a 
man  is  justified  by  faith,  without  the  deeds 
of  the  law ;   for  by  faith  we  receive  that 
righteousness  that  the  law,  or  the  first 
covenant,  required  of  the  first  Adam ; 
which  righteousness  Christ  hath  fulfilled 


Deut,  27  :  26. 
Col.  1  :  13. 
2  Cor.  4  :  4. 
John  3  :  16. 
Jer.  31  :  31,  32. 

Rom.  3  :  23,  24. 
Gal.  3  :  21,  22. 
Rom.  3  :  31. 
Heb.  8  ;  7. 
Gen.  3  :  15. 
Luk.  24  :  47. 
Eph.  I  :  7. 
Ps.  20  :  3, 

Acts  10  :  43  ;  3:19; 
26  :  18;  2  :  37, 38. 
Mark  i  :  15. 
Gal.  3  :  II,  17. 
Jer.  32  :  40. 
Isa.  42  :  6. 
Rom.  3  :  23,  &c. 

Acts  10  :  43. 
Isa.  93  :  II. 
Rom.  5:9;  3  :  20. 
Gal.  3:8;  2  :  16. 
Rom.  s  :  10,  19 ; 

10  :  4. 
Matt.  3. 
2  Cor.  5  :  21. 
I  Cor.  I  :  30. 


The  English  Baptists  135 

in  our  nature  which  he  took  of  the  vir- 
gin Mary,  by  his  active  obedience,  and 
is,  by  God's  free  donation,  made  over  to 
us  by  imputation ;  for  he  hath  made  him 
to  us  wisdom,  righteousness  and  sanctiii- 
cation.     For  as  by  one  man's  disobe- 
dience, many  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the 
obedience  of  one,  that  is  Christ, 
shall  many  be  made  righteous.     For  Christ 
hath  not  only  fulfilled  the  sanction  of  the 
law,  viz.  To  love  God  with  all  his  heart, 
and  his  neighbour  as  himself,  but  hath 
also  voluntarily  suffered  the  curse  of  the  Gal.  3  :  13. 

law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us,  that  we  I  Pet.  2  :  24. 

might  receive  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  Isa,  53  :  e,  7,  8. 

and  the  promise  of  the  spirit  thro'  Phil.  2  :  7,  8. 

faith  in  his  blood.     And  now,  albeit  the  Gal.  3  :  13, 14. 

essential  righteousness  of  Christ,  as  he  Heb.  7  :  26. 

is  God  equal  with  his  father,  be  not  im-  Matt.  3  :  15. 

puted  unto  us,  nor  yet  his  personal  Rom.  5  :  18. 

righteousness,  as  he  was  or  is  man,  only,  Gal.  4  : 6,  7. 

yet   we   believe  his   mediatorial   righteous-  Rom.  4 :  3,  4.  23- 

ness,  as  God  man,  is  imputed,  reckoned,  3  :  25,  28. 

or  made  over  to  us,  upon  the  terms  of  Tit.  3:7;  1:2. 

this  new  covenant  of  grace ;  and  so  being 
justified  by  his  grace,  we  are  thereby 
made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  e- 
ternal  life :  for,  as  St.   Paul  saith,  If 
righteousness  come  by  the  law,  then  Christ  is 
dead  in  vain. 

XVII.  ARTICLE. 

Of   Christ  and  his  mediatorial   Office. 

It  pleased  God,  in  his  eternal  purpose,  Zech.  6  :  12, 13. 

to  chuse  and  ordain  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Gal.  3  :  17. 

his  only  begotten  son,  according  to  the  Ps.  89  :  28 ;  109  :  10. 
covenant  made  between  them  both,  to  be 

the  alone  mediator  between  God  and  Gal.  3  :  19,  20. 

man,  viz.  God  the  father,  who  was  by  Heb.  10  :  15;  12  :  24. 
Adam's  sin  justly  offended,  and  Adam, 

our  common  parent,   the  person   offend-  I  Tim.  2  :  5. 

ing.    Now  in  order  to  reconcile  God  to  Job  9  :  33. 

man,  and  man  to  God,  who  were  at  a  any   days-man    be- 

distance,  Christ  Jesus,  the  second  person  twixt  |  us,  &c. 

in  the  trinity,  being  very  God,  of  the  Gal.  3  :  16. 

same  substance  with  his  father,  did,  when  Gen.  3  :  15. 

the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  take  unto  1  Chron.  17  :  n. 
him  man's  nature,  with  all  the  essential 
properties,  and  common  infirmities,  sin 


136 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


only  excepted,  being  made  of  a  woman, 
of  the  seed  of  Abraham  and  David;  and 
altho'  he  came  from  Adam,  and  had  tru- 
ly the  nature  of  man,  j-et  not  by  Adam; 
and  the  person  of  Christ  took  our  nature 
into  union  with  the  divine  nature,  but  he 
did   not  take   the   person   of   Adam   which 
sinned,  therefore  we  believe  he  was  neither 
the  covenantee,  nor  yet  the  coventanter, 
and  so,  by  consequence,  neither  the  cre- 
ditor   nor    the    debtor.      And    being    con- 
cerned by  this  office  or  appointment  of  the 
father  to  make  peace,   it  plainly  appears, 
that  he  is  the  only  fit  mediator  between 
God  and  man,  who  is  very  God,  and  very 
man;  yet  one  Christ,  who  was  sanctified, 
and  anointed  with  the  holy  spirit  above 
measure,  and  was  superlatively  and  ad- 
mirably fitted  for,  and  called  unto  this 
office  by  his  father,  who  put  all  judg- 
ment into  his  hand,  and  power  to  exe- 
cute the  same,  and  he  willingly  under- 
took the  same ;  and  being  made  under 
the  law,  did  perfectly  fulfil  or  keep  it, 
and  underwent  the  punishment  due  to  us, 
which  we  should  have  suffered;  our  sin, 
and  the  punishment  of  it,  being  reckoned 
or  imputed  to  him,  he  being  made  a  curse 
for  us,  and  underwent  and  trod  the  wine- 
press of  his  father's  wrath  for  us,  in  do- 
lorous pangs  and  agony  of  soul,  and  pain- 
ful sufferings  in  his  body,  was  crucified, 
dead,  and  buried,  or  remained  in  the  state 
of  the  dead,  yet  saw  no  corruption, 
and  on  the   third   day  he  arose   from  the 
dead,  with  the  same  body  in  which  he 
suffered,  with  which  he  also  ascended, 
and  there  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  his 
father,  making  intercession  for  his  saints, 
and  shall  return  to  judge  men  and  angels 
at  the  end  of  the  world.     And  the  same 
Lord  Jesus,  by  his  perfect  obedience  to 
the  whole  law,  and  sacrifice  of  himself, 
which  he,  thro'  the  eternal  spirit  oft'ered 
up  unto  the  father,  hath  fully  satisfied  the 
justice  of  God  and  reconciled  him 
to  us ;  and  hath  purchased  an  ever- 
lasting inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  for  all  those  that  the  father  hath 
given  unto  him,  and  now,  by  a  conti- 
nued act  of  intercession  in  heaven,  doth 


Luke  1  :  35. 

Heb.  7  :  26. 

Rom.  9  :  5. 

Heb.  5:5:7  ;2i,&c. 

Eph.  2  :  14. 

Ps.  42  :  I,  6. 

1  Pet.  I  :  19,  20. 
Heb.  9  :  15;  1:9. 
Ps.  45  :  7. 
Isaiah  61  :  i. 
Col.  2  :  3. 

Heb.  5  :  5. 
John  5  :  22,  27. 

Rom.  10  :  4. 

2  Cor.  5  :  21. 
Gal.  3  :  13. 
Luke  22  :  44,  45. 

Isaiah  53  :  10,  11, 12, 
I  Pet.  2  :  24. 
Matt.  27  :  46. 

26  :  37,  38. 
Acts  13  :  28,  &c. 

Luke  24  :  7. 
John  20  :  25,  27. 
Acts  I  :  9,  10,  II. 

Mark  16  :  19. 
Rom.  8  :  34. 
Matt.  25  ;  31,  &c. 
Heb.  9  :  14,  15. 


Eph.  2  :  14,  &c. 
John  17  :  2. 
I  Pet.  I  :  2,  &c. 


The  English  Baptists  137 

apply  the  benefits  he  hath  purchased  Heb.  7  :  17. 

unto  the  elect.     And  in  this  office  of  Acts  3  :  22. 

mediator,  he  hath  the  dignity  of  three  Ps.  45  :  5,  &c. 

offices,  viz.  Priest,  Prophet,  and  King :  Acts  4  :  n,  12. 

all  which  offices  are  necessary  for  the  benefit 
of  his  church,  and  without  which 
we  can  never  be  saved.     For,  in 
respect  of  our  ignorance,  we  stand 
in  need  of  his  prophetical  office,  and 
in  respect  of  our  alienation  from  God, 
and  imperfect  services,  and  God's  wrath 
and  justice,  we  stand  in  need  of  his 
priestly  office,  to  reconcile  God  to  us, 
and  us  to   God ;   and  in  respect  of  our 
bondage  to  sin  and  Satan,  and  averse- 
ness  to  return  to  God,  we  need  his 
kingly  office  to  subdue  our  enemies,  and 
deliver  us  captives  out  of  the  kingdom 
and  power  of  sin,  and  preserve  us  to 
his   heavenly  kingdom.     And   thus,   in  2  Tim.  4  :  18. 

our  nature,  he  living  the  Hfe  of  the  Col.  i  ;  13,  14. 

law,  and  suffering  the  penalty  due  to  Heb.  4  :  14,  &c. 

us,  continually  presents  us  at  the 
throne   of   grace ;    so   is  a   most   won- 
derful and  compleat  mediator  for  his 
elect. 

XVIII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Christ  dying  for  all  mankind. 

God  the  father,  out  of  his  royal  bounty,  ^o"'-  5  : 8. 

and  fountain  of  love,  when  all  mankind  t>ia.tt.  20 :  28. 

was  fallen  by  sin,  in  breaking  of  the  first  Rom.  8  : 3, 

covenant  of  works  made  with  them  in  Heb.  9  :  15. 

Adam,  did  chuse  Jesus  Christ,  and  sent  ^zek.  18 :  23. 

him  into  the  world  to  die  for  Adam,  or  Heb.  2  : 9. 

fallen  man.     And  God's  love  is  mani-  i  John  2  :  2. 

fest  to  all  mankind,  in  that  he  is  not  ^  Tim.  2  :  3,  &c. 

willing,  as  himself  hath  sworn,  and  abun-  Heb.  10  :  12,  &c. 

dantly  declared  in  his  word,  that  mankind  ^^^^^k  16  :  16. 

should  perish  eternally,  but  would  have  all  Tit.  2  :  n,  12. 

to  be  saved,  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  ^  Thess.  i  :  5,  6,  7. 
the  truth.     And  Christ  died  for  all  men. 

and  there  is  a  sufficiency  in  his  death  and  John  5  :  39,  40. 

merits  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  Matt.  23  :  37,  38. 
and  hath  appointed   the   gospel  to  be  24  :  12. 

preached  unto  all,  and  hath  sent  forth  ^^^~  ^3  :  4^>  48. 
his  spirit  to  accompany  the  word  in 
order  to  beget  repentance  and  faith  : 
so  that  if  any  do  perish,  it's  not  for 


138  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

want  of  the  means  of  grace  manifested 
by  Christ  to  them,  but  for  the  non- 
improvement  of  the  grace  of  God,  of- 
fered freely  to  them  through  Christ  in 
the  gospel. 

XIX.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  agreement  between  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 

The  Gospel,  or  new  Covenant,  was 
held  forth,  or  preached  to  the  fathers, 
from  Adam  to  Christ's  coming  in  the  flesh, 
though  it  was  revealed  by  sundry  degrees,  Gal.  3 :  8. 

and  in  diverse  manners,  in  types  and  sha-  Gen.  12  :  3. 

dows,  darkly ;  yet  it  was  the  same  gos-  Heb.  4  :  2,  3 ;  1 :  i,  2, 

pel,  the  same  Christ,  the  same  faith  for  kind,  10 :  i. 

and  the  very  same  covenant,  that  they 
were  justified  and  saved  by,  before  Christ 
took  flesh  of  the  virgin,  that  we  have 
now,  and  is  to  continue  to  the  end  of 

the  world.     For  as  the  church  of  the  Heb.  9..  10,  and 

Jews,  in  their  gospel  types,  had  a  priest,  "  *=^*P'- 

and  an  altar,  and  a  lamb,  and  a  fire,  and 
without  all  these  no  sacrifice  could,  or 
was  accepted  of  God,  then,  nor  now, 
without  faith  in  the  anti-type,  Christ, 
whose  human  nature  is  the  true  lamb, 
the  union  of  natures,  the  high  priest,  the 
divine  nature,  the  altar,  and  the  holy 
ghost,  the  heavenly  fire.     And  again: 
The  blood  shed  upon  the  brazen  altar,  Heb.  9 :  14. 

may  be  applied  to  our  justification,  and 
the  sprinkling  of  it  upon  the  incense  altar, 
may  be  applied  to  the  work  of  sancti- 
fication  by  Christ's  spirit,  sprinkling  his 
blood  upon  us.    And  the  blood  that  was  Eph.  5 :  2. 

carried  within  the  vail,  into  the  most  I  Pet.  i :  2. 

holy  place,  is  applied  to  our  glorifica- 
tion in  heaven.     And  as  they  had  in  ^ 
their  church  the  ark,  a  figure  of  Christ's 
presence,   so  have  we  the  promise  of  Heb.  9  :  7,  &c. 

his  presence  to  the  end  of  the  world. 
And  as  they  had  the  tables  of  the  old 
covenant  or  law,   in  the  ark,  so   have 

we  the  law  fulfilled  by  Christ ;  and  meet-  Matt.  18  :  20. 

ing  God  in  Christ,  it's  handed  forth  by  28  :  19,  20. 

Christ  now  to  us,  as  the  only  rule  of  our  Rom.  3  :  31 ;  8:3.4 

sanctification  and  obedience  through  his  lo  :  4. 

grace.     And  as  they  had  the  manna  1  John  2  :  6,  7,  8. 

to  nourish  them  in  the  wilderness  to 


The  English  Baptists 


139 


Canaan;  so  have  we  the  sacraments,  to 
nourish  us  in  the  church,  and  in  our 
wilderness-condition,  till  we  come  to 
heaven.    And  as  they  had  the  rod  that 
corrected  them;  so  have  we  the  church 
censures  now  to  correct  us,  when  we  of- 
fend his  law ;  and  their  burnt  offerings 
may  be  applied  to  Christ,  killing  of  o- 
riginal  sin  in  us,  and  their  sin  offering 
may  be  applied  to  Christ,  killing,  or 
taking  away  our  actual  sins,  and  their 
peace  offering  may  be  applied  to  our 
reconciliation  with  God  in  Christ  by  his 
spirit,  and  so  all  the  rest  of  those  gos- 
pel-antitypes may  be  applied.     And  thus 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  like  the 
faces  of  the  Cherubins,  look  one  toward 
another,  and  hold  forth  the  self-same 
gospel,  salvation  to  them  and  us. 


James  4  :  12. 
John  16  :  14,  15. 


I  Cor.  4  :  19,  &c. 


XX.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Free- Will   in   Man. 

God  hath  endued  the  will  of  man  with 
that  natural  liberty  and  power  of  acting 
upon  choice,  that  it's  neither  forced,  nor 
by  any  necessity  of  nature  determined,  to 
do  good  or  evil :  but  man,  in  the  state 
of  innocency,  had  such  power  and  liber- 
ty of  will  to  chuse  and  perform  that 
which  was  acceptable  and  well  pleasing 
to  God,  according  to  the  requirement 
of  the  first  covenant ;  but  he  falling  from 
his  state  of  innocency,  wholly  lost  all 
ability,   or  liberty  of  will,  to  any  spiritual 
good,   for  his  eternal  salvation,  his  will 
being  now  in  bondage  under  sin  and  Sa- 
tan, and  therefore  not  able  of  his  own 
strength  to  convert  himself  nor  prepare 
himself  thereunto,  without  God's  grace 
taketh  away  the  enmity  out  of  his  will, 
and  by  his  special  grace,  freeth  him  from 
his  natural  bondage  under  sin,  enabling 
him  to  will  freely  and  sincerely,  that 
which  is  spiritually  good,  according  to 
the  tenure  of  the  new  covenant  of  grace 
in  Christ,  tho'  not  perfectl}',  according  to 
the   tenure    of   the    first   covenant,    which 
perfection  of  will  is  only  attainable  in  the 


Matt.  17  :  12. 


Eccles.  7  :  29. 
Rom.  5  :  6  ;  8  :  7,  8. 
John  8  :  44. 


Eph.  2  :  8,  &c. 
Phil.  2  :  13. 
Rom.  7  :  14,  &c. 

8  :23. 
Eph.  4  :  13. 


140  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


state  of  glory,  after  the  redemption,  or 
resurrection  of  our  fleshly  bodies. 


XXL  ARTICLE. 

Of  Vocation  and  effectual  Calling. 

Vocation,  or  calling,  general,  or  com- 
mon, is,  when  God  by  the  means  of  his 
word  and  spirit,  freely  of  his  own  grace 
and  goodness,  doth  ministerially  acquaint 
mankind  with  his  gracious  good  purpose 
of  salvation,  by  Jesus  Christ ;  inviting  and  Matt,  n  :  28. 

wooing  them  to  come  to  him,  and  to  ac-  Acts  20 :  21. 

cept  of  Christ  revealing  unto  them  the  Rom.  16  :  25, 26. 

gospel  covenant,  and  those  that  with  cor-  Tit.  2  :  n. 

dial  hearts   do   improve  this  common  grace,         Acts  5  :  31 ;  u  :  18. 
he  in  time  worketh  unfeigned  faith,  and  Rom.  8  :  28,  30. 

sincere  repentance  in  them ;  and  by  his  n  :  5, 7. 

grace  they  come  to  accept  of  Christ,  as 

their  only  Lord  and  Saviour,  with  their  Eph.  i  :  u,  &c. 

whole  heart ;  and  God  becomes  their  fa-  Rom.  5  :  i. 

ther  in  Christ,  and  they  being  then  effec-  Eph.  2  : 8. 

tually  called,  are  by  faith  united  to  Jesus  Rom.  4 :  16. 

Christ   by   grace   unto    salvation. 


XXIL  ARTICLE. 

Of  evangelical  Repentance. 

Unfeigned    repentance,    is    an   inward   and         Tit.  2  :  3,  4,  5. 
true  sorrow  of  heart  for  sin,  with  sincere  Acts  2  :  37, 38. 

confession  of  the  same  to  God,  especially  2  Cor.  7  :  10,  n. 

that  we  have  offended  so  gracious  a  God,  Acts  17  :  30. 

and  so  loving  a  father,  together  with  a  Ps.  51  : 4. 

settled  purpose  of  heart,  and  a  careful  Luke  15  :  17,  &c. 

endeavor  to  leave  all  our  sins,  and  to 
live  a  more  holy  and  sanctified  life,  ac-  Ezek.  18  :  30. 

cording  to  all  God's  commands.     Or  it  is  Eph.  2  :  10. 

a  turning,  or  change  of  the  whole  man  Rom.  8 :  13. 

to  God,  with  endeavour,  thro'  his  grace,  Eph.  4  :  20,  &c. 

to  mortify  the  indwelling  lust,  or  corrup- 
tions, and  obtain  a  great  reformation  both 
in  the  outward  and  inward  man,  accord- 
ing to  the  will  of  God,  and  this  repen- 
tance, for  the  nature  of  it,  must  be  con- 
tinued throughout  the  whole  course  of 
our  lives,  and  is  wrought  in  us  by  the  John  a  :  31,  &c- 

spirit  of  God;  by  the  ministry  of  the  law 
and  gospel,  in  order  to  our  obedience  to  Rom.  8  :  13. 


The  English  Baptists  I41 

Christ,   or   being  baptized   in  his   name,  l  Thess.  i :  s,  6, 

but   this   repentance   unto   Hfe,    is   not  Acts  3  :  19,  26. 
wrought  without  faith  in  the  soul ;  for  by  2  :  38. 

faith  we  receive  that  grace,  that  perfects,  Heb.  n  :  6. 

or  carrieth  on  the  work  of  repentance  in  Gal.  3  :  26,  &c. 
the  soul,   from  first  to  last. 


XXIII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  justifying,  and  saving  Faith. 

Faith  is  an  act  of  the  understanding, 
giving  a  firm  assent  to  the  things  contain- 
ed in  the  holy  scriptures.     But  justifying 
faith  is  a  grace,  or  habit,  wrought  in  the 
soul,  by  the  holy  ghost,  through  preach- 
ing the  word  of  God,  whereby  we  are  en- 
abled to  believe,  not  only  that  the  Messias 
is  offered  to  us,  but  also  to  take  and 
receive  him,  as  a  Lord  and  Saviour,  and 
wholly  and  only  to  rest  upon  Christ,  for 
giace  and  eternal   salvation. 


XXIV.  ARTICLE. 

Of   Justification   by    Christ. 

Justification  is  a  declarative,  or  judicial  Acts  13  :  38,  39. 

sentence  of  God  the  father,  whereby  he  Rom.  8  :  34, 35. 
of  his  infinite  love,  and  most  free  grace,  3  :  23,  &c. 

for  the  alone  and  mediatorial  righteousness  4  :  22,  &c. 

of  his  own  son,  performed  in  our  nature  I  Cor.  i  :  30,  31. 
and  stead,  which  righteousness  of  God 

man,  the  father  imputing  to  us,  and  by  2  Thess.  i  :  3»  4- 
effectual  faith,  received  and  embraced  by        .      Acts  15  :  9. 

us,  doth  free  us  by  judicial  sentence  from  Gal.  5  : 6, 

sin  and  death,  and  accept  us  righteous  in  Rom.  8:1;  4:6,7,1 

Christ  our  surety,  unto  eternal  life ;  the  Gal.  3  :  13,  14. 

active  and   passive   obedience   of   Christ   be-  John  5  :  24. 

ing  the  accomplishment  of  all  that  righte-  Rom.  3:22,  30; 
ousness  and  sufferings  the  law,  or  justice  s  :  19- 

of  God  required,  and  this  being  perfectly  2  Cor.  i  :  30. 

performed  by  our  mediator,  in  the  very  Eph.  1 :  7. 

nature  of  us  men,  and  accepted  by  the  Rom.  5:9;  10:4. 

father  in  our  stead,  according  to  that  Gal.  3  :  13. 

eternal  covenant-transaction,  between  the  Heb.  2  :  9,  &c. 

father  and  the  son.    And  hereby  we  have  2  Cor.  5  :  21. 

deliverance  from  the  guilt  and  punishment  Isaiah  53  :  jo,  &c. 
of  all  our  sins,  and  are  accounted  righteous 


Rom.  10  :  14,  17. 

Matt.  13  :  20,  21. 

Acts  24  :  14. 

Ps.19  :7,&c.;  119 ; 

:72, 

2  Pet.  I  :  I. 

I  John  5  :  4,  5. 

2  Cor.  4  :  13. 

Eph.  2  :  8. 

Acts  31  :  31  ;  15  : 

II 

2  Pet.  I  :  s,  11. 

Phil.  3  :  8,  9. 

Acts  8  :  37. 

142  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

before  God,  at  the  throne  of  grace, 
by  the  alone  righteousness  of  Christ  the 
mediator,  imputed,  or  reckoned  unto  us 
through  faith ;   for  we  believe  there  are 
six  necessary  causes  of  man's  justification, 
or  salvation ;  viz.     First,  The  efficient 
cause  of  our  justification,  is  God's  free 
grace.     Secondly,  The  meritorious  cause  Rom.  3  :  24. 

is   the  blood   of   Christ.     Thirdly,   The   ma-         Rom,  5 : 9. 
terial  cause  is  Christ's  active  obedience.  5:19;  4:6. 

Fourthly,  The  imputation  of  Christ,  his  5  - 1- 

obedience   for   us,   is   the   formal   cause,  Eph,  i :  n,  12 

Fifthly,  The  instrumental  cause  is  faith. 
Sixthly,  God's  glory,  and  man's  salvation, 
is  the  final  cause.     Now  we  princi- 
pally apply  the  first  and  last  to  God  the 
father;  the  second  and  third  to  Christ  the 
mediator ;  the  fourth  and  fifth  to  the  blessed 
comforter,  the  holy  ghost ;  hence  it  Matt,  28  :  19. 

is  we  are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  2  Cor.  13  :  14. 

father,  of  the  son,  and  holy  ghost,  and  I  John  5 : 7. 

so  we  worship  a  trinity  in  unity,  and  unity 
in  trinity. 

XXV,  ARTICLE. 

Of  Reconciliation,  and  Sonship  by  Christ. 

Two  privileges  flow  out  of  our  justifi- 
cation by  faith  in  Christ,  viz,  our  recon- 
ciliation, and  adoption,  or  sonship.    Re- 
conciliation is  a  gracious  privilege,  where- 
by we  that  were  enemies  are  made  friends;  or 
we  that  were   enemies,   rebels,   and 
aliens,  are  received  into  favour,  or  brought 
near  to  God  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus, 
And  adoption  is  that  power  and  privilege  Rom,  5  :  8,  &c, 

to  be  the  sons  of  God,  through  faith  in  Eph,  2  :  12,  &c, 

Christ  our  surety,  who  being  the  eternal  i :  5- 

son  of  God,  became  by  incarnation  our  Gal.  4  :  4,  5, 6. 

brother,  that  by  him  God  might  bring  Rom,  8  :  16, 17. 

many  sons  unto  glory,  according  to  his 

eternal  decree  of  preserving  the  human  Heb.  2  :  10,  &c, 

nature  of  Christ,  that  it  never  fell  in  4  :  is- 

Adam,    And  so  we  are,  by  faith  accord-  Matt,  i :  18. 

ing  to  God's  free  grace,  and  Christ's  pur-  Heb.  7  :  26, 

chase,    or    redemption,    and   the   holy    spi-  Rom.  8  :  16, 17. 

rit's  application  of  it  to  us,  made  heirs 
and  joint  heirs  with  Christ,  our  elder  brother, 
of   the   same   kingdom,   and   stupendous 
and  unutterable  glory,  for  ever  and  ever. 


The  English  Baptists 


143 


XXVI.  ARTICLE. 
Of  Sanctification,  and  good  Works. 


Those  that  are  united  unto  Christ  by 
effectual  faith,  are  regenerated,  and  have 
a  new  heart  and  spirit  created  in  them, 
through  the  virtue  of   Christ  his   death,   re- 
surrection, and  intercession,  and  by  the 
efficacy  of  the   holy   spirit,    received   by 
faith,  and  are  sanctified  by  the  word  and 
spirit   of  truth,   dwelling  in   them,  by   de- 
stroying and  pulling  down  the  strong 
holds,   or   dominion   of   sin   and   lust,   and 
more  and  more  quickened  and  strengthen- 
ed in  all  saving  graces,  in  the  practice  of 
holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see 
the  lord.     And  this  sanctification  is 
throughout  the  whole  man,  tho'  imper- 
fect in  this  life,  there  abiding  still  in  the 
best  saints,  some  remnants  of  corruption, 
which  occasions  a  continual  war  in  the 
soul,  the  flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit, 
and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh ;  yet 
through  the  continual  supply  of  strength 
from  Christ,  which  flows  from  him  to  be- 
lievers by  means  of  the  covenant  of  grace 
or  hypostatical  union  with  our  nature,  the 
regenerate  part   doth   overcome,   pressing 
after  a  heavenly  life,  in  evangelical  obedi- 
ence to   all   the   commands   that   Christ, 
their  king,  and  law-giver,  hath  command- 
ed them  in  his  word,  or  holy  scriptures, 
which  are  the  only  rule,  and  square  of 
our  sanctification  and  obedience  in  all  good 
works,  and  piety.    And  sith  our  only  assist- 
ance to  good  works,  such  as  God  hath  com- 
manded, is  of  God,  who  worketh  in  us  both 
to  will  and  to  do,  we  have  no  cause  to 
boast,  nor  ground  to  conclude,  we  merit 
any  thing  thereby,  we  receiving  all  of 
free  and  undeserved  grace,  and  when  we 
have  done  the  most,  yet  we  are  unprofit- 
able servants,  and  do  abundantly  fall  short; 
and  the  best  duties  that  we  can  now  per- 
form, will  not  abide  the  judgment  of 
God.    Neither  do  any  good  works 
whatsoever,  that  are  done  by  unregene- 
rate  men,  or  without  faith  in,  and  love  to 
Christ,  please  God,  or  are  accepted  of 
him.    Yet  good  works  are  of  great  ad- 


Ezek.  36  :  26. 
Eph.  4  :  24. 
2  Cor.  5  :  17. 
I  John  3  :  9. 
Tit.  3  :  5. 

1  Cor.  4  : 

2  Cor.  3  : 

1  Tim.  2 
Ps.  no  :  3. 

2  Cor.  10  :  4,  5  ;  5  :  17. 
John  17  :  17;  16:14,15. 
Heb.  12  :  14. 

Rom.  7  :  20. 

Gal.  5  :  16,  17, 

I  John  3  ;  8 ;  2  :  20. 


15. 

18. 

:  20. 


Rom.  6  :  14. 
Eph,  4  :  15. 
2  Cor.  3  :  18  ;  7:1. 
Ps,  112  :  I ;   119  :  48. 

John  IS  :  4,  6. 
Isaiah  43  ;  13 ;  26  :  12. 
Phil.  2  :  13. 
2  Cor.  3  :  5. 
Job  9  :  2,  3,  20. 

25  :  4. 
Gal.  2  :  16. 
James  2  :  9, 10 ;  3:2. 
Heb.  n  :  6. 
Isa.  64  :  6. 
Prov.  8  :  17. 
I  Cor,  16  :  22, 
James  i  :  18,  &c. 


144  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

vantage,  being  done  in  faith,  and  love,  Gal.  5  :  22,  23. 

and  wrought  by  the  holy  spirit,  and  are  John  4: 14;  5  :  as- 

to  be  done  by  us,  to  shew  our  thankful- 
ness to  God,  for  the  grace  of  the  new  ^^l-  s  '•  6. 
covenant  by  Christ,  and  to  fit  us  more  and        ^  ^°^-  ^  '•  9.  Sec- 
more  for  glory.     And  in  this  sense  the  Heb.  12  :  28,  29. 
ten  commandments,  as  handed  forth  by 
Christ  the  mediator,  are  a  rule  of  life  to  a        ^  ^°^-  ^3  : «.  3- 
believer,   and    shew   us    our   duty   to    God  ^^-  5° :  «4- 
and  man,  as  also  our  need  of  the  grace 
of  God,  and  merit  of  Christ. 

XXVII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Baptism,  and  the  Lord's-supper. 

Those  two  sacraments,  viz.  Baptism, 
and  the   Lord's-supper,   are   ordinances   of 
positive,   sovereign,  and  holy  institution, 
appointed  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 

only   lawgiver,   to   be   continued   in   his  Matt.  28  :  19,  20. 

church,  to  the  end  of  the  world;  and  to  ^  Cor.  n  :  26;  4  :  i- 

be  administred  by  those  only  who  are 
rightly  qualified,  and  thereunto  called, 
according  to  the  command  of  Christ. 

XXVIII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  right  subject  and  administration  of 
holy  Baptism. 

Baptism  is  an  ordinance  of  the  new 
testament,   ordained  by  Jesus   Christ,   to  be 
unto  the  party  baptized,  or  dipped,  a 
sign  of  our  entrance  into  the  covenant  of 
grace,  and  ingrafting  into  Christ,  and  into  Rom.  6  :  3,  4,  5. 

the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  his  church ;  l  Cor.  12 :  13. 

and  of  remission  of  sin  in  the  blood  of  Gal.  3  :  27. 

Christ,  and  of  our  fellowship  with  Christ,  Mark  16 :  16. 

in  his  death  and  resurrection,  and  of  our  Matt.  3 :  "• 

living,  or  rising  to  newness  of  life.     And  Acts  2  :  38. 

orderly  none  ought  to  be  admitted  into  Rom.  6  :  i,  &c. 

the  visible  church  of  Christ,  without  being  Matt.  28  :  19. 

first  baptized;  and  those  which  do  really 
profess  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  m  I' 

in,  and  obedience  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Hth'e-.i.'a. 

Christ,  are  the  only  proper  subjects  of  this  Acts  2  137.  38; 

ordinance,  according  to  our  Lord's  holy  8  :  35,  36,  &c. 

institution,  and  primitive  practice;  and 
ought  by  the  minister,  or  administrator, 
to  be  done  in  a  solemn  manner,  in  the 


The  English  Baptists  145 

name  of  the  father,  son,  and  holy  ghost,  Matt.  38 :  19. 

by  immersion  or  dipping  of  the  person  in  John  i :  2,  8,  31. 

the  element  of  water ;  this  being  necessary  3  :  22,  23. 

to  the  due  administration  of  this  holy 

sacrament,  as  holy  scripture  sheweth  and  Mark  i :  9, 10. 

the  first  and  best  antiquity  witnesseth  for 
some  centuries  of  years.    But  the  popish  doctrine 
which  they  teach  and  believe,  that 
those  infants  that  die  without  baptism, 

or  have  it  not  actually,  or  in  desire,  ^ 

are  not,  nor  cannot  be  saved,  we  do  not 
believe.      Nor   yet    their   practice    of   ad- 
mitting persons  only  upon  an  implicit 
faith  of  the  church,  nor  their  superstitious 
and  popish  ceremonies  of  salt,  and  spittle, 
and  breathing  on  the  face  of  the  party 
baptized,    together    with   their   chrisoms 
and  hallowed   lights.     Neither   do  we 
believe,  that  infants  dying  in  infancy, 
without  baptism,  go  to  purgatory  or  lim- 
bus  infantum,  as  they  erroneously  teach. 
Nor  do  we  believe,  that  the  Pope  of 
Rome,  or  any  other  persons  whomsoever, 
have  power  to  alter,  or  change,  this  ordi- 
nance of  Christ,  as  they  have  done  by 
this  superstitious,  and  such  like  idolatrous 
inventions  and  practices  of  the  Romish 
church.     All  which  superstitions  of  theirs, 
are   contrary   to   Christ's   institution,   or   the 
apostles  practice  of  holy  baptism. 

XXIX.  ARTICLE. 
Of  the  invisible  catholick  Church  of  Christ. 

There  is  one  holy  catholick  church,  Heb.  12  :  22,  23. 

consisting  of,  or  made  up  of  the  whole  Rev.  14  :  i,  &c, 

number  of  the  elect,  that  have  been,  are,  Col.  i :  18. 

or  shall  be  gathered,  in  one  body  under  Eph.  1 :  10,  22 ; 
Christ,    the    only   head    thereof ;    which  s  :  23,  26,  27. 

church  is  gathered  by  special  grace,  and 

the  powerful  and  internal  work  of  the  John  10 :  16. 

spirit ;  and  are  effectually  united  unto  Gal.  3  :  28. 

Christ  their  head,  and  can  never  fall  Ps.  72:17;  102:28. 

away.  Rev.  13  :  8. 

XXX.  ARTICLE. 
Of  the  catholick  Church  as  visible. 

Nevertheless,  we  believe  the  visible 
church  of  Christ  on  earth,  is  made  up  of 


146  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


several  distinct  congregations,  which  make 
up  that  one  catholick  church,  or  mystical 
body  of  Christ.     And  the  marks  by  which 
she  is  known  to  be  the  true  spouse  of 
Christ,  are  these,  viz.    Where  the  word  of 
God  is  rightly  preached,  and  the  sacra- 
ments truly  administred,  according  to  Gal.  3  :  26,  &c. 
Christ's   institution,   and  the   practice  of  Acts  2  :  41.  &c. 
the  primitive  church ;  having  discipline 

and  government  duly  executed,  by  mini-  Eph,  2  :  19,  &c. 

sters  or  pastors  of  God's  appointing,  and 

the  church's  election,  that  is  a  true  con-  I  Cor.  n  :  23,  &c. 

stituted  church ;  to  which  church,  and  Gal.  3  :  i. 

not  elsewhere,  all  persons  that  seek  for  Eph.  3  :  21. 

eternal  life,  should  gladly  join  themselves.  Acts  18  :  8. 

And  altho'  there  may  be  many  errors  in  I  Cor.  12  :  13. 

such  a  visible  church,  or  congregations,  I  John  2  :  19. 

they  being  not  infallible,  yet  those  errors  Rev.  2  :  2, 14,  &c. 

being  not  fundamental,  and  the  church  in  Tit.  3  :  10,  u. 

the  major,  or  governing  part,  being  not  Jude  17  :  18, 19. 

guilty,  she  is  not  thereby  unchurched ;  Jam.  3  :  13,  &c. 

nevertheless  she  ought  to  detect  those  I  Tim.  4  :  i. 

errors,  and  to  reform,  according  to  God's  2  Tim.  i :  13,  &c. 

holy  word,  and  from  such  visible  church, 
or  congregations,  no  man  ought,  by  any  Acts  20  :  29,  &c. 

pretence  whatever,  schismatically  to  sepa-  i  Cor.  12  :  25. 

rate. 

XXXI.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Officers   in   the   Church   of   Christ. 

The  visible  church  of  Christ,  being 
completely    gathered    and    organized,    ac- 
cording to  the  mind  of  Christ,  consists  of 
officers  and  members;  and  the  officers, 
appointed  by  Christ,  to  be  chosen  by  his 
church,  for  the  peculiar  administration  of 
ordinances,  and  execution  of  the  power 
and  duty  Christ  hath  enjoined  them  to  the 
end  of  the  world,  are  these  three,  viz. 
*Bishops,  or  Messengers;  and  Elders,  or 
Pastors;  and  Deacons,  or  Overseers  of  the 
poor;  and  the  way  appointed  by  Christ, 
for  the  calling  of  any  person  fitted  and 
gifted  by  the  holy  ghost,  unto  the  office  Acts  i :  20,  &c. 

of  bishop,  or  messenger,  in  the  churches,  13:  2*3;  14:23. 

is,  viz.  That  he  be  chosen  thereunto  by  20 :  17.  ^^■ 

the  common  suffrage  of  the  church,  and  6  :  3, 4,  5,  6. 

solemnly  set  apart  by  fasting  and  prayer,  1 :  23, 24,  &c. 

14  :  23. 

*  Or  overseer,  or  shepherd. 


The  English  Baptists 


147 


with  imposition  of  hands,  by  the  bishops 
of   the   same   function,  ordinarily,   and 
those  bishops  so  ordained,  have  the  go- 
vernment of  those  churches,  that  had 
suffrage  in  their  election,  and  no  other 
ordinarily;  as  also  to  preach  the  word, 
or  gospel,  to  the  world,  or  unbelievers. 
And  the  particular  pastor,  or  elder,  in 
like  manner  is  to  be  chosen  by  the  com- 
mon  suffrage  of  the  particular  congrega- 
tion, and  ordained  by  the  bishop  or  mes- 
senger God  hath  placed  in  the  church  he 
hath  charge  of;  and  the  elder,  so  ordain- 
ed,  is   to   watch   over   that   particular 
church ;  and  he  may  not  ministerially  act 
in  any  other  church  before  he  be  sent, 
neither  ought  his  power,  or  office,  any 
way  to  infringe  the  liberty,  or  due  power, 
or  office  of  his  bishop  *,  God  being  a 
God  of  order,  having  ordained  things 
most  harmoniously,  tending  every  way  to 
unity.    The  deacons  are  in  like  manner 
to  be  chosen  by  election  and  ordination, 
and  are  in  their  particular  congregations, 
to  receive  the  charity  and  free  benevo- 
lence of  the  people;  and  the  bisops  and 
elders  so  chosen,  and  ordained,  to  the 
work  of  God,  ought  to  be  enabled  and 
capacitated  thereunto,  by  a  sufficient  and 
honourable  maintenance  of  the  people 
that  chose  them,  answerable  to  the  dignity 
of  their  places,  and  charge  committed  to 
them,  without  which  they  cannot  dis- 
charge their  duty,  as  they  ought  to  do, 
in  studying  to  divide  the  word  of  God 
aright,  as  St.  Paul  adviseth  Timothy,  and 
also  to  give  themselves  wholly  to  it ;  and 
this  maintenance  is  to  be  given  out  of  the 
labours,  profits,  and  estates  of  the  people, 
by  equality,  and  proportionable  to  their 
ability,  in  liberality,   God  having  reserved 
a  portion  for  all  his  labourers,  out  of  all 
the  members  worldly  goods  and  possessions. 

Col.  4  :  II,  17 ;  3  Cor.  8  :  12,  &c.;  2  Cor.  9  :  5,  6,  &c. 


1  Tim.  I  :  3. 
Tit.  I  :  s. 

Rev.  2  :  I,  2,  &C, 
Matt.  28  :  19. 

Mark  16  :  16. 

Acts  I  :  32. 

2  Tim.  4  :  2. 
Acts  14  :  23. 
Rom,  10  :  15. 
Acts  13  :  2,  3,  4. 
I  Cor.  16  :  16. 

I  Tim.  I  :  3. 

Acts  20  :  28. 

I  Cor.  II  :  34. 

Tit.  1  :  5. 
Heb.  13  ;  17. 
I  Cor.  14  :  33. 
Acts  6  :  I,  2,  &c. 
I  Tim.  3  :  8,  &c. 
1  Cor.  3 

1  Tim.  3 

2  Tim.  4 

Tit.  I  :  7. 

I  Cor.  9  :  I,  &c. 

Phil.  4  :  15,  &c. 

1  Tim.  5  ;  17,  18. 

Gal.  6  :  6,  la 
Deut.  25  :  4. 

2  Cor.  II  :  7,  8. 

1  Tim.  3  :  5,  &c. 

II  :  13,  &c 

2  Tim.  1,  2,  &c. 

3  :  14,  &c. 

4  : 1,  2,  5. 


5 ;  4  : 6, 16. 
5. 


XXXII.  ARTICLE. 
Of  Prayer,  with  laying  on  of  Hands. 


Prayer,  with  imposition  of  hands  by 
the  bishop,  or  elder,  on  baptized  be- 


Acts  8  :  12,  &c. 
19  :  6,  7. 


148 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


lievers,  as  such,  for  the  reception  of  the 
holy  promised  spirit  of  Christ,  we  believe 
is  a  principle  of  Christ's  doctrine,  and 
ought  to  be  practised  and  submitted  to 
by  every  baptized  believer  in  order  to  re- 
ceive the  promised  spirit  of  the  father 
and  son. 

XXXIII.  ARTICLE. 


2  Tim.  I  :  6,  7. 
Heb.  6  :  2. 
John  13  :  16,  &c. 

16  :  7. 
Eph.  I  :  13,  14. 
2  Tim.  I  :  6. 
Acts  2  :  38, 39. 


Of  the  End,  and  right  Administration  of  the  Lord's-supper. 


The  supper  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  was 
instituted  by  him  the  same  night  wherein 
he  was  betrayed ;  to  be  observed  in  his 
church,  to  the  end  of  the  world,  for  the 
perpetual  remembrance,  and  showing  forth 
the  sacrifice  of  himself  in  his  death ;  and 
for  the  confirmation  of  the  faithful  be- 
lievers in  all  the  benefits  of  his  death  and 
resurrection,  and  spiritual  nourishment  and 
growth  in  him ;  sealing  unto  them  their 
continuance   in   the   covenant   of   grace,   and 
to  be  a  band  and  pledge  of  communion 
with  him,  and  an  obligation  of  obedience 
to  Christ,  both  passively  and  actively,  as 
also  of  our  communion  and  union  each 
with  other,   in  the  participation   of  this 
holy  sacrament.     And  the  outward  ele- 
ments of  bread  and  wine,  after  they  are 
set   apart   by   the   hand   of  the   minister, 
from  common  use,  and  blessed,  or  conse- 
crated, by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer, 
the  bread  being  broken,  and  wine  poured 
forth,  signify  to  the  faithful,  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ,  or  holdeth  forth 
Christ,  and  him  crucified;  and  the  mini- 
ster distributing  the  bread  and  wine  to  the 
communicants,  who  are  to  take,  or  re- 
ceive,  both  the  bread   and   wine   at   the 
hands  of  the  minister,  applying  it  by 
faith,  with  thanksgiving  to  God  the 
father,  for  so  great  a  benefit,  and  no  un- 
baptized,  unbelieving,  or  open  profane, 
or  wicked  heretical  persons,  ought  to  be 
admitted  to  this  ordinance  to  profane 
it. 

Neither  is  that  popish  doctrine  of 
transubstantiation  to  be  admitted  of,  nor 
adoration  of  the  unbloody  sacrifice  of 
the   mass,   as   they  call   it,   together   with 
their  denying  of  the  cup  to  the  laity. 


Luk.  22  :  17,  &c. 
Matt.  26  :  26,  &c. 
I  Cor.  II  :  23,  &c. 

Matt.  28  :  20. 

Gal.  3  :  I. 


I  Cor.  10  :  16,  17. 
Gal.  3  :  1. 


I  Cor.  II  :  27,  &c. 

Matt.  26  :  30. 
I  Cor.  5  :  7,  8,  15. 

Acts  2  :  41,  &c. 

See  the  popish 
catechism,  p.286,&c. 


The  English  Baptists  149 

and  many  more   idolatrous  and  superstiti- 
ous practices,  decreed  in  the  popish  coun- 
cils of  Lateran  and  Trent.     In  opposition  lb.  p.  197,  &c. 
to  which,  and  such  Hke  idolatry  of  Rome, 
many  of  our  worthy  and  famous  antients, 
and  renowned  protestants,  lost  their  lives 

by  fire  and  faggot  in  England,  whose  See  Mr.  Fox's  Book 

spirits  we  hope  are  now  in  heaven,  as  of  Martyrs, 

worthy  martyrs  and  witnesses  of  Christ, 
in   bearing  a   faithful  testimony   to  this 
holy  ordinance  of  their  Lord  and  master. 
Neither  may  we  admit  of  consubstantia- 
tion,  it  being  not  consonant  to  God's  word. 
Nor  are  little  infants,  that  cannot  examine 
themselves,  nor  give  account  of  their 
faith,  nor  understand  what  is  signified  bj'' 
the  outward  signs  of  bread  and  wine,  to 
be  admitted  to  this  sacrament.    Though 
St.  Austin  taught  so  from  John  6 :  63. 
and  many  of  the  Greek  churches  so  believe 
and  practise  to  this  day.    And  this  holy 
ordinance  ought  to  be  often  celebrated 
among  the  faithful,  with  examination  of 
themselves,  viz.  of  their  faith,  and  love, 
and  knowledge  of  these  holy  and  divine 
mysteries,   lest  they   eat  and   drink  their 

own  damnation,  for  prophaning  of  God's  I  Cor.  n  :  18,  &c. 

holy  ordinance,  as  many,  we  fear,  have 
done,  and  yet  do  at  this  day;  whose  hard 
and  blind  hearts  the  Lord  in  mercy  open, 
if  it  be  his  blessed  will. 

XXXIV.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  Discipline  and  Government  of  the  Church 

of   Christ. 

We  believe  that  the  great  king,  and 
lawgiver,  Christ,  the  universal  and  only 
head  of  his  church,  hath  given  to  his 
visible  church,  a  subordinate  power,   or  Isaiah  9  : 6, 

authority,    for    the    well-being,    ordering,  Matt.  28  :  18. 

and  governing  of  it,  for  his  own  glory,  18 :  17,  n. 

and  the  church's  profit,  and  good,  the  Rev.  2  : 3. 

executive  part  of  which  derivative  I  Cor.  5 :  4. 

power  of  discipline  and  government,  is  Heb.  13  :  7, 17. 

committed  to  his  ministers,  proportionable 
to  their  dignities  and  places  in  the 
church  in  a  most  harmonious  way,  for 
the  beauty,  order,  government,  and  e- 
stablishment  of  the  same,  and  consisteth 


150  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


in  the  exercise  and  execution  of  the 
censors,  or  rod  of  correction,  he  hath 

appointed  therein,  for  the  purgation,  or  2  Thess.  3  : 6. 

pruning  of  the  same,  in  order  to  prevent  I  Thess.  5  :  12,  &c. 

scandals  and  offences,  both  pubhck  and  2  Cor.  2  :  s,  6,  7. 

private.    And  in  case  of  personal  and 
private  trespasses  between  party  and  party, 
that  the  member  so  offended,  tell  his  Lev.  19  :  17, 18. 

offence  to  his  brother,  between  them 
alone;  and  if  he  shall  not  hear  him,  to 
take  one  or  two  more;  if  he  will  not 

hear  him  then,  to  tell  it  unto  the  church :  Matt.  18  :  15,  &c. 

And  the  ministers  of  Christ  ought  to  re-  I  Tim.  5  :  20. 

buke  them  sharply,  that  sin  before  them  2  Tim.  2  -.  14. 

in  the  church ;  and  in  case  there  be  any  Tit.  i :  12, 13, 14. 

wicked,  publick,  and  scandalous  sinners, 
or  obstinate  hereticks,  that  then  the  church 
ought  speedily  to  convene  such  her  mem- 
bers, and  labour  to  convict  them  of  their 
sin   and   heresy,    schism,    and    prophaneness, 
whatsoever  it  be  ;  and  after  such  regular  Lev.  13  :  i,  &c. 

suspension,  and  due  admonition,  if  such  Numb.  12  :  14, 15. 

sinners  repent  not;  that  then  for  the 

honour  of  God,  and  preserving  the  credit  2  Thess.  3  :  6. 

of  religion,  and  in  order  to  save  the  sinner's 
soul,  and  good  of  the  church,  in 
obedience  to  God's  law,  to  proceed  and 

excommunicate  the   sinner,   by  a  judicial  I  Cor.  5  :  4,  &c. 

sentence   in   the   name   of   Christ   and   his  Tit.  3  :  10. 

church,  tendring  an  admonition  of  repen-  Rev.  2  :  14,  20,  &c, 

tance  to  him,  with  gravity,  love,  and  au- 
thority, and  all  this  without  hypocrisy, 
or  partiality,  praying  for  the  sinner,  that 
his  soul  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord ;   and  under  this  second  degree,  of 
withdrawing,  or  excommunication,  to  ac- 
count him  as  a  heathen,  or  publican,  that 
he  may  be  ashamed.     But  upon  the  third  Matt.  18  :  17. 

and  highest  act  of  excommunication,  it  i  Cor.  16  :  22. 

being  a  most  dreadful  thunderclap  of  God's 
judgment,  it  is  most  difficult  for  any 
church  now  to  proceed  in,  it  being  diffi- 
cult to  know  when  any  man  hath  sinned 
the  unpardonable  sin,  and  so  to  incur  a 
total  cutting  off  from  the  church. 

XXXV.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Communion  of  Saints,  and  giving  to  the  Poor. 

All  christians  that  have  been  baptized  Eph.  4  :  5. 

into  one  faith,  and  united  in  one  true  Coi.  3  :  15. 


The  English  Baptists  151 


visible  way  of  worshipping  the  true  God,  Acts  2  :  46. 

by  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  should  keep  Eph.  4  :  3,  4,  &c. 

the  unity  of  the  spirit,  in  the  bond  of  I  Cor.  12  :  12, 13. 

peace,  seeing  there  is  but  one  mystical  Acts  4  :  32. 

body  of  Christ,  and  should  have  fellow-  I  Cor.  12:26;  12:4, 5. 

ship  and  communion  in  each  other's  suffer-  &c. 

ings,   or  afflictions,   for   if   one   member   suf- 
fer, all  are  pained  with  it.     Hence  it  is 
also  they  partake  of  each  other's  gifts  in 
great  variety,   which   make  the  harmony 
of  dependency  on  each  other,  seeing  a 
need  of  every  member,  for  the  publick 
use,  and  common  profit  of  the  whole, 
both  in  the  private  as  well  as  more  pub- 
lick,  and  solemn  worship  of  God's  house; 
as  also  an  interest  in  each  other's  goods 

and  possessions,  so  far  as  comports  with  2  Cor.  8  :  9,  n,  &c. 

necessity   and   charity,   according   to   the  Ps.  37  :  26. 

charter  privileges,  or  law  of  their  king;  Prov.  n  :  25. 

and  tho'  no  equality,  or  property,  be  19 :  17. 

pleaded   for ;  yet  the  works   of  charity  22  :  22. 

and  mercy,  must  be  minded  as  a  duty  to  Deut.  15 :  10. 

lend  to  the  Lord,  and  pity  and  relieve  Eph.  4 :  28. 

the  Lord's  poor,  weekly  laying  out  for  I  Cor.  16  :  i,  2 ; 

them,  as  God  hath  prospered  us,  accord-  -^^^^  jV.^y'&c 

ing  to  our  ability  in  freedom,  liberality,  j^^^^'  ^5  '.  33^  ^^^ 

and  charity,  according  to  our  brethrens 
necessity,  whether  sick,  or  in  prison,  to 
visit  and  relieve  them,  and  not  only  with- 
in the  church,  but  to  all  as  we  have  op- 
portunity, and  ability  to  be  doing  good. 


XXXVL  ARTICLE. 

Of  Perseverance. 

Those  that  are  effectually  called,  ac-  Rom.  8  :  28. 

cording  to  God's  eternal  purpose,  being  Gal.  3  :  14. 

justified  by  faith  do  receive  such  a  mea-  John  i :  12, 13. 

sure  of  the  holy  unction,  from  the  holy  John  17 :  12,  21. 
spirit,  by  which  they  shall  certainly  per-  10  -.  28,  29. 

severe  unto  eternal  Hfe.  Rom.  i :  17. 

Jer.  31  :  33,  34.    Rom.  8  :  30. 

XXXVIL  ARTICLE. 

Of  the   sacred   Scripture. 

The  authority  of  the  holy  scripture  2  Pet.  i :  19,  &c. 

dependeth  not  upon  the  authority  of  any  2  Tim.  3  •-  is,  &c. 


152  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

man,  but  only  upon  the  authority  of  God, 
who  hath  delivered  and  revealed  his  mind  John  20  :  30,  31. 

therein  unto  us,  and  containeth  all  things  21 :  25. 

necessary  for  salvation ;  so  that  whatsoever  Matt.  22  :  29. 

is  not  read  therein,  nor  may  be  proved  John  5  :  39, 46,  47. 

thereby,  is  not  to  be  required  of  any  man,  10 :  35. 

that  it  should  be  believed  as  an  article  of  17 :  12. 

the  christian  faith,  or  be  thought  requi-  Prov.  30  :  5,  6. 

site  to  salvation.     Neither  ought  we,  since 
we  have  the  scriptures  delivered  to  us  Joshua  i :  7. 

now,  to  depend  upon,  hearken  to,  or  re-  Rev.  22  :  18. 

gard  the  pretended  immediate  inspira-  Deut.  12  :  32. 

tions,  dreams,  or  prophetical  predictions,  Isaiah  8  :  20. 

by  or  from  any  person  whatsoever,  lest  we  ^^ohn^'-^s" 

be  deluded  by  them.     Nor  yet  do  we  Mau.°24  •  23,\c?' 

believe,  that  the  works  of  creation,  nor  2  Thess.  2  :  7,  &c. 

the  law  written  in  the  heart,  viz.  natu- 
ral religion,  as  some  call  it,  or  the  light  I  Cor.  i :  20,  &c. 
within  man,  as  such,  is  sufficient  to  inform  2  : 6,  7,  &c. 
man  of  Christ  the  mediator,  or  of  the 

way  to  salvation,  or  eternal  life  by  him  ;  Rom. 15:4,5;  16:25,26. 

but  the  holy  scriptures  are  necessary  to  in-  1 :  16,  &c. 

struct  all  men  into  the  way  of  salvation,  Gai.  5 :  22. 

and  eternal  life.     And  we  do  believe,  that  Rom.  n  :  31,  32. 

all  people  ought  to  have  them  in  their 

mother  tongue,  and  diligently,  and  con-  10  :  13,  &c. 

stantly  to  read  them  in  their  particular  I  Cor.  14  :  4,  9,  &c. 

places  and  families,  for  their  edification,  Coi.  3  :  16. 

and  comfort ;   and  endeavour  to  frame  2  Pet.  i :  20,  21. 

their  lives,  according  to  the  direction  of  Acts  15 :  15, 16. 

God's  word,  both  in  faith  and  practice, 

the  holy  scriptures  being  of  no  private  Matt.  22  :  29,  3°. 

interpretation,  but  ought  to  be  interpreted 
according  to  the  analogy  of  faith,  and  is  Acts  ^^  :  10,  &c. 

the  best  interpreter  of  itself,  and  is  sole  18  :  28. 

judge  in  controversy.     And  no  decrees  of 
popes,  or  councils,  or  writings  of  any 
person  whatsoever,  are  of  equal  authority 
with  the  sacred  scriptures.    And  by  the 
holy  scriptures  we  understand,  the  canoni- 
cal books  of  the  old  and  new  testament, 
as  they  are  now  translated  into  our  English 
mother-tongue,  of  which  there  hath  never 
been  any  doubt  of  their  verity,  and  au- 
thority, in  the  protestant  churches  of 
Christ  to  this  day. 

"  Then  follows  the  names  of  the  books  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testament,  as  acknowledged  in  all  Protestant  con- 
fessions, after  which  follow  these  words  "[Crosby's  note] : 


The  English  Baptists  153 

All  which  are  given  by  the  inspiration 
of  God,  to  be  the  Rule  of  faith  and 
life. 

XXXVIII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  three  Creeds. 

The  three  creeds,  viz.  Nicene  creed, 
Athanasius's  creed,  and  the  Apostles  creed, 
as  they  are  commonly  called,  ought 
throughly  to  be  received,  and  believed. 
For  we  believe,  they  may  be  proved,  by 
most  undoubted  authority  of  holy  scrip- 
ture, and  are  necessary  to  be  understood 
of  all  christians ;  and  to  be  instructed  in 
the  knowledge  of  them,  by  the  ministers 
of  Christ,  according  to  the  analogy  of 
faith,  recorded  in  sacred  scriptures,  upon 
which  these  creeds  are  grounded,  and  ca- 
techistically  opened,  and  expounded  in  all 
christian  families,  for  the  edification  of 
young  and  old,  which  might  be  a  means 
to  prevent  heresy  in  doctrine,  and  prac- 
tice, these  creeds  containing  all  things  in 
a  brief  manner,  that  are  necessary  to  be 
known,  fundamentally,  in  order  to  our 
salvation ;  to  which  end  they  may  be  con- 
sidered, and  better  understood  of  all  men, 
we  have  here  printed  them  under  their 
several   titles   as   followeth,   viz. 

The   Apostles   Creed. 
I  believe  in  God  the  father  almighty,  &c. 

The  Nicene  Creed. 

We  believe  in  one  God,  the  father  al- 
might,  &c. 

Athanasius  his  Creed. 

Whosoever  will  be  saved,  before  all 
things,  &c. 

"  I  have  omitted  inserting  the  creeds  at  length,  they  be- 
ing to  be  found  in  every  common  prayer-book,  and  only 
observe,  that  upon  the  article  in  the  Apostles'  Creed,  he 


154  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

descended  into  hell,  they  thus  comment,  Not  that  he,  to 
wit,  Christ,  went  into  the  place  of  the  damned,  but  that  he 
went  absolutely  into  the  state  of  the  dead.  See  Doctor 
Usher  in  his  body  of  Divinity,  p.  174,  and  Mr.  Perkins 
on  the  creed  "  [Crosby's  note]. 

XXXIX.  ARTICLE. 

Of  general   Councils,  or  Assemblies. 

General  councils,  or  assemblies,  consist-  Acts  15  :  i,  &c. 

ing  of  Bishops,  Elders,  and  Brethren,  of 
the  several  churches  of  Christ,  and  being 
legally  convened,   and  met  together  out 
of  all  the  churches,  and  the  churches  ap- 
pearing there  by  their  representatives, 
make  but  one  church,  and  have  lawful 

right,  and  suffrage  in  this  general  meet-  Acts  15  :  ii,&c. 

ing,  or  assembly,  to  act  in  the  name  of  Matt.  18 :  20. 

Christ;  it  being  of  divine  authority,  and 
is  the  best  means  under  heaven  to  preserve 
unity,  to  prevent  heresy,  and  superinten-  Acts  15  :  30,  31. 

dency  among,  or  in  any  congregation 
whatsoever  within  its  own  limits,  or  juris- 
diction.    And  to  such  a  meeting,  or  as- 
sembly, appeals  ought  to  be  made,  in  case 
any  injustice  be  done,  or  heresy,  and 

schism  countenanced,  in  any  particular  Matt.  18  :  18, 19. 

congregation  of  Christ,  and  the  decisive  I  Cor.  5  :  4.  5. 6. 

voice  in  such  general  assemblies  is  the 
major  part,  and  such  general  assemblies 
have  lawful  power  to  hear,  and  determine, 
as  also  to  excommunicate. 

XL.  ARTICLE. 

Of  religious  Worship,  and  the  Sabbath-day. 

The  light  of  nature  sheweth  there  is  a  Rom.  i :  19, 30;  2 :  15. 

God,  who  hath  a  sovereignty  over  all,  but 
the  holy  scripture  hath  fully  revealed  it ; 
as  also  that  all  men  should  worship  him 
according  to  God's  own  institution  and 
appointment.     And  hath  limited  us,  by 
his  own  revealed  will,  that  he  may  not  be 
worshipped  according  to  the  imaginations 
and  devices  of  men,  or  the  suggestions  of 
Satan,  under  any  visible  representations  I  Chron.  16  :  29. 

whatsoever,  or  any  other  way  not  pre-  Ps.  95  :  6,  7,  8. 


The  English  Baptists 


155 


scribed  in  the  holy  scriptures ;  and  all  re- 
ligious worship  is  to  be  given  to  the 
father,  son,  and  holy  ghost,  and  to  God 
alone,  not  to  angels,  saints,  or  any  other 
creature,  and  since  the  fall,  not  without  a 
mediator,  nor  in  the  mediation  of  any 
other  but  Christ  alone ;  nor  is  this  wor- 
shipping of  God  now  under  the  gospel, 
tied  to  any  place,  or  made  more  accept- 
able by  one  place  than  another.     Yet  the 
assembly  of  the  church,  ought  not  to  be 
neglected  by  any.    And  in  order  to  his 
being  worshipped,  and  served,  God  hath 
instituted  one  day  in  seven,  for  his  sabbath 
to  be  kept  holy  unto  him,  which  from 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  is  the  first  day 
of  the  week,  which  is  called  the  Lord's- 
day,  and  is  to  be  observed  and  continued 
to  the  end  of  the  world,  as  a  christian 
sabbath,  the  last  day  of  the  week  being 
abolished.     And  this  christian  sabbath  is 
to  be  kept  after  a  due  and  reverent  man- 
ner, in  preparing  of  our  hearts,  and  or- 
dering of  affairs  so  beforehand,  that  we 
may  rest  that  day  from  worldly  and  carnal 
employments,  and  frequent  the  solemn 
assemblies  of  the  church,  and  in  all  pub- 
lick  and  private  duties  of  religion,  as 
hearing,  meditating,  and  conferring,  and 
reading  in,  or  of  the  holy  scriptures,  to- 
gether with  prayer,  publick  and  private, 
and  in  the  duties  of  necessity,  charity, 
and  mercy,  and  not  in  any  vain  or  world- 
ly discourse,  or  idle  recreations  whatso- 
ever. 

Luke  21  :  36.    Acts  16  :  13,  16.    Isa.  56  :  2,  6. 


97:  7. 

99:5- 
Deut.  8  ;  6. 
Ps.  103  17;  14:6. 

Mark  7  :  7. 

Ps.  99  :  8,  9. 

106  :  29,  39. 

John  4  :  24. 

Rev.  9  :  20. 

Exod.  34  :  14. 

I  Cor.  8  :  4. 

Matt.  28  :  19. 

Deut.  5  :  26,  &c. 

John  14  :  6. 

Gal.  3  :  9. 

Heb,  9  :  15. 

I  Tim.  2  :  5. 

Matt.  18  :  20. 

John  4  :  21. 

Mai.  I  :  II. 
I  Tim.  2  :  8. 
Heb.  10  :  25. 

Acts  2  :  42. 

Exod.  20  :  8. 
I  Cor.  16  :  I,  2. 

Acts  20  :  7. 

Rev.  I  :  ID. 
Isaiah  58  :  13. 
Neh.  13  :  15,  &c. 
Heb.  10  :  25. 
Rev.  I  :  3. 

James  i  :  23,  25. 

Rom.  10  :  14. 

Ps.  119  :  15. 

Zech.  7  :  2. 


XLI.  ARTICLE. 

Of  publick  and  private  Prayer. 

Prayer  is  an  holy,  religious,  and  sacred 
ordinance  of  God,  and  the  duty  of  all 
men  to  perform,  by  the  law  of  God ; 
and  to  God  alone,  and  no  other,  whether 
saint  or  angel,  and  in  the  name  of  Christ 
the  mediator,  and  in  his  name  alone,  and 
no  other,  whether  saint  or  angel,  or  any 
other  creature.     And  that  for  all  men 
living,  except  they  have  sinned  the  un- 


Matt.  6  :  7. 
Jude  20. 
Heb.  12  :  28. 
Isaiah  55  :  6. 

Jer.  29  :  12  ;  10  : 6,  25. 

Ps.  32  :  6. 
Matt.  26  :  41, 
Isaiah  30  :  2. 
Hos.  4  :  12. 


iS6 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


pardonable  sin,  both  high  and  low;  espe- 
cially for  ministers  and  magistrates.     And 
not  for  dead  saints,  nor  infernal  spirits. 
And  prayer  is  to  be  made  in  a  tongue  un- 
derstood by  the  people :    And  we  ought 
to  pray  for  all  things  necessary  according 
to  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  in  a 
solemn  and  reverent  manner,  every  way 
suitable  and  agreeable  to  the  platform,  or 
manner  of  prayer,  which  Christ  taught  his 
disciples,  and  us,  in  his  holy  gospel, 
which   is  the  only  perfect  rule  of  all 
prayers ;  and  by  the  assistance  of  the  holy 
spirit  of  God,  without  which  we  cannot 
pray  aright.     And  this  religious  worship 
all  men  are  bound,  and  required  to  serve 
God  in,  both  public  and  private,  at  least 
two  times  a  day,  in  all  christian  families, 
by  prayers,   and  supplications,  interces- 
sions, and  giving  of  thanks  to  God  the 
father,  in  the  name  and  mediation  of 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

Ps.  55  :  IS,  i6,  17.     Zach.  8  :  21.     Phil.  1  :  4,  6. 
I  Tim.  4  :  5.     Isaiah  i  :  15.     Rev.  5  :  8. 


James  i  :  5. 
John  14  :  13,  14. 

15  :  16. 

16  :  23. 

I  Tim.  2  :  I,  2,  3. 
James  5  :  16. 

1  Thess.  5  :  17,  25. 

2  Thess,  3  :  I,  2. 
Matt.  9  :  38. 

I  Cor.  14  :  14,  &c. 

Matt.  6  :  6,  &c. 
Rom.  8  :  26,  27. 
I  Thess.  5  :  18. 
Isa.  17  :  65. 
Jer,  18  ;  14,  15. 

Hos,  5 :  4. 
Ps.  69  :  6. 
Dan.  6  :  lO. 
Ps.  5  :  2,  3. 


XLII.  ARTICLE. 
Of   publick   Humiliation,   by   Fasting   and    Prayer. 


Publick  humiliation,  by  fasting  and 
prayer,  is  an  ordinance  of  God,  appoint- 
ed for  his  church  and  people.    And  it  being 
an  extraordinary  duty,  especially  as 
it  hath  respect  to  the  church  generally, 
or  the  nation  as  such,  and  therefore  we 
must  have  due  regard  to  the  grounds, 
ends,  and  manner,  of  its  being  perform- 
ed;  confessing  of,  and  reforming  from 
sin,  both  in  publick  as  well  as  private 
fasts.     Abstaining  from  our  pleasures,  as 
also  our  common  food,  in  a  sensible  and 
real  afflicting  of  our  souls  before  the 
Lord;  or  to  seek  to  God  by  prayer  and 
fasting  for  some  spiritual,  or  temporal 
good,  that  God  hath  promised  us,  or  that 
we  stand  in  need  of  having  due  regard  to 
God's  word  and  glory,  in  this  solemn  or 
divine   ordinance. 

Esther  4  :  16. 


Joel  I  :  14,  15. 

2  :  12,  13,  &c. 
2  Chron,  20  ;  3. 


Lev.  23  :  27,  &c. 
Ezra  8  :  21 ;  9:4. 

10  :  I. 
Neh.  9  :  I,  2,  3. 

Isaiah  58  :  3,  4,  &c. 

Jonah  3  ;  4,  6,  &c. 

Zech.  7  :  5. 
Matt.  6  :  16,  &c. 
2  Sam.  12  :  21,  22. 


The  English  Baptists 


157 


XLIII.  ARTICLE. 
Of  Family,  or  relative  Duties  therein. 


Parents,  and  masters,  are  a  sort  of  sub- 
ordinate governors,  and  rulers,  in  their 
respective  jurisdictions  and  families;   in 
their  respective  relative  places,  according 
to  their  capacities,  and   opportunities ; 
and  are  engaged  from  God's  word,  to 
take  charge  oi  their  families,  and 
rule  and  govern  them  according  to  the 
word  of  God,  jDoth  husbands,  parents, 
masters,   and  all   others   concerned  in   any 
such  relation ;  and  by  their  godly  and  re- 
ligious example,  instruct  their  families ; 
they  being  found  carefully  keeping  of  the 
sabbath-day,  in  the  holy  and  religious 
services  of  hearing  the  word  preached, 
with  publick  and  private  prayer.     As  also 
requiring  and  instructing  their  families 
and  relations,  to  follow  their  godly  and 
religious  example,  in  the  private  and  pub- 
lick  exercises  of  religion ;  and  calling 
them  to  an  account,  how  they  spend  the 
sabbath,  and  other  times,  and  mercies 
they  enjoy;  especially  the  reading  of  the 
scriptures,  and  hearing  the  word  preach- 
ed, with  pubHck  prayer  with  them,  and 
for  them,  in  order  to  a  blessing  for  them, 
and  their  families.    The  neglect  of  which 
duty,  or  power  of  godliness,  and  religion 
in   families,   is   one  main   cause   of  that 
wicked  atheism,  and  impiety  in  the  world 
and   families ;   and  of  the   carnal   luke- 
warmness,  and  ignorance  in  churches,  to 
gether  with  contempt  of  government; 
because  many  professors  make  so  little  ac- 
count, or  conscience  of  performing  any 
duty  at  home  in  their  own  families. 


Gen.  18  :  19. 
I  Sam.  2  :  23,  &c. 
Prov.  30  :  II,  &c. 
I  Tim.  s  :  8. 
Matt.  7  :  9,  10. 
Col.  4  :  I. 
Eph.  4  :  25,  &c. 
5:4- 


Josh.  24  :  15. 
Eph.  5  :  19,  &c. 

6  : 1,  2,  &c. 
Prov.  1:1. 
Acts  10  :  30,  33 
I  Tim.  3  :  4. 
I  Kings  2  :  I,  2,  3. 
Gen.  49  :  28,  29. 

Job  I  :  5. 

1  Chron,  29  :  19. 
Prov.  22  :  6,  15, 

2  Kings  2  :  24. 


Prov.  29  :  15,  21. 
2  Tim  3  :  15. 


XLIV.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Children  dying  in  Infancy. 

We  do  believe,  that  all  Httle  children, 
dying  in  their  infancy,  viz.  before  they 
are  capable  to  chuse  either  good  or  evil, 
whether  born  of  believing  parents,  or  un- 
believing parents,  shall  be  saved  by  the 
grace  of  God,  and  merit  of  Christ  their 
redeemer,  and   work  of  the  holy  ghost. 


Isaiah  7  :  16 ;  8:4. 

2  Sam,  12  :  19,  &c. 
Ezek.  i8  :  4,  &c. 

I  Kings  14  :  13. 
Matt.  18  :  2,  3,  4. 


158 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


and  so  being  made  members  of  the  in- 
visible church,  shall  enjoy  life  everlasting; 
for  our  Lord  Jesus  saith,  of  such  belongs 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.    Ergo,  we  conclude, 
that  that  opinion  is  false,  which  saith, 
that  those  little  infants  dying  before  bap- 
tism, are  damned. 


Jer.  31  :  29,  30, 
Deut.  I  ;  39. 
Matt.  19  :  13,  14. 
Mark  10  :  13,  &c. 


XLV.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  civil  Magistrate. 

The  supreme  lord  and  king  of  all  the 
world,    hath   ordained   civil   magistrates   to 
be  under  him,  over  the  people  for  his 
own  glory,  and  the  publick  good.     And 
the  office  of  a  magistrate,  may  be  accept- 
ed of,  and  executed  by  christians,  when 
lawfully  called  thereunto ;  and  God  hath 
given  the  power  of  the  sword,  into  the 
hands  of  all  lawful  magistrates,  for  the 
defence  and  encouragement  of  them  that 
do  well,  and  for  the  punishment  of  evil 
doers,  and  for  the  maintenance  of  justice, 
and  peace,  according  to  the  wholesome 
laws  of  each  kingdom,  and  common- 
wealth, and  they  may  wage  war  upon 
just  and  necessary  occasions.     And  sub- 
jection in  the  Lord  ought  to  be  yielded 
to  the  magistrates  in  all  lawful  things 
commanded  by  them,   for  conscience  sake, 
with  prayers  for  them,  for  a  blessing  upon 
them,  paying  all  lawful  and  reasonable 
custom,  and  tribute  to  them,  for  the  assist- 
ing of  them,  against  foreign,  domestical, 
and  potent  enemies. 


Rom.  13  :  I,  &c. 
Prov.  8  :  15. 

1  Pet.  2  :  14. 
Prov.  20  :  26. 

2  Sam.  23  :  3. 

Ps.  82  :  3,  4 ;  72  :  4,  7. 
Eccles.  3  :  8. 
Prov.  20  :  i8. 
Luke  3  :  15. 
Acts  10  :  22. 

1  Chron.  5  :  22. 
Prov.  24  ;  6. 
Tit.  3  :  I. 

2  Pet.  2  :  13,  17. 
Eccles.  10  :  20. 
Prov.  21  :  22. 
Rom.  13  :  5. 

1  Tim.  2  :  I,  2. 
Matt.  22  :  17,  21. 

17  :  25,  27, 

2  Sam.  21  :  i6,  17. 

23  :  15.  16. 


XLVI.  ARTICLE. 
Of    Liberty    of    Conscience. 

The  Lord  Jesus   Christ,  who  is  king  of 
kings,  and  lord  of  all  by  purchase,  and 
is  judge  of  quick  and  dead,   is  only  Lord 
of  Conscience ;  having  a  peculiar  right 
so  to  be.     He  having  died  for  that  end, 
to  take  away  the  guilt,  and  to  destroy  the 
filth  of  sin,  that  keeps  the  consciences  of 
all  men  in  thraldom,  and  bondage,  till 
they  are  set  free  by  his  special  grace. 
And  therefore  he  would  not  have  the 
consciences  of  men  in  bondage  to,  or  im- 


I  Tim.  6  :  15. 
Acts  10 :  36 ;  4:i7,&c. 
James  4  ;  12. 
Rom.  14  :  4. 
Acts  5  :  29. 
I  Cor.  7  :  23. 
Matt.  15  :  9;  24  :  9. 
Col.  2  :  20,  &c. 
I  Cor.  II  :  23. 
I  Pet.  5  :  2,  }. 
Matt.  15  :  ii>. 


The  English  Baptists 


159 


posed  upon,  by  any  usurpation,  tyranny, 
or  command  whatsoever,  contrary  to  his 
revealed  will  in  his  word,  which  is 
the  only  rule  he  hath  left,  for  the  consci- 
ences of  all  men  to  be  ruled,  and  regu- 
lated, and  guided  by,  through  the  assist- 
ance of  his  spirit.     And  therefore  the 
obedience  to  any  command,  or  decree, 
that  is  not  revealed  in,  or  consonant  to 
his  word,  in  the  holy  oracles  of  scripture, 
is  a  betraying  of  the  true  liberty  of  con- 
science.   And  the  requiring  of  an  implicit 
faith,  and  an  absolute  blind  obedience, 
destroys  liberty  of  conscience,  and  reason 
also,  it  being  repugnant  to  both,  and  that 
no  pretended  good  end  whatsoever,  by 
any  man,  can  make  that  action,  obedience, 
or  practice,  lawful  and  good,  that  is  not 
grounded  in,  or  upon  the  authority  of 
holy  scripture,  or  right  reason  agreeable 
thereunto. 


Deut.  12  :  32. 
Micah  6  :  6,  7,  8. 
Acts  17  :  25,  &c. 
Deut.  4  :  17,  19. 

I  Cor.  10  :  18, 

1  Sam.  15  :  3,  &c. 
Rom.  14  :  10,  12. 

Gal.  I  :  14. 
Phil.  3  :  6. 
John  4  :  22. 

2  Sam.  3  :  6,  &c. 


XLVII.  ARTICLE. 

Of  Marriage. 

Marriage  is  to  be  between  one  Man, 
and  one  Woman ;  neither  is  it  lawful  for 
any  Man,  to  have  more  than  one  wife, 
nor  for  any  woman  to  have  more  than 
one  husband,  at  the  same  time.    And  it 
is  lawful  for  all  sorts  of  people  to  marry, 
who  are  able  of  judgment  to  give  their 
consent.     But  marriage  must  not  be  with- 
in the  degree  of  consanguinity,  or  affinity, 
forbidden  in  the  word,  nor  can  any  such 
incestuous  marriages  ever  be  made  lawful 
by  any  law  of  man,  or  consent  of  parties, 
to  live  together  as  man  and  wife.     And 
it  is  the  duty  of  christians  to  marry  in  the 
Lord,  and  therefore  those  that  profess 
the  true  religion,  ought  not  to  marry 
with  infidels,  or  idolaters,  nor  prophane 
wicked  persons  in  their  life,  nor  yet  with 
any  that  maintain  damnable   heresies. 


Matt.  19  :  5,  6. 
Gen.  2  :  24. 
Mai.  2  :  15. 
I  Cor.  7  :  36. 
Heb.  13  :  4. 

1  Tim.  4  :  3. 
Exod.  22  :  16,  17. 
Gen.  29  :  23. 
Lev.  18  :  6,  &c. 

2  Sam.  13  :  14. 
Gen.  38  :  16. 
Deut.  22  :  28. 

Eph.  5  :  3. 

I  Cor.  7:2;  5:1,4,13- 

Gen.  6  :  2. 

1  Cor.  7  :  39. 
Numb.  25  :  I,  2; 

2  Cor.  6  :  14,  &c. 


XLVin.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  Lawfulness  of  an  Oath. 

A  lawful  oath,  is  a  part  of  religious 
worship,  wherein  the  person  swearing  in 


Exod.  20  :  7. 

Deut.  6:15;  10  :  20. 


i6o  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

truth,   righteousness,   and   judgment,   so-  Jer.  4  :  2. 

lemnly  calleth   God  to  witness  what  he  Ps.  15 : 4. 

sweareth,  and  to  judge  him  according  to  Zech.  5 : 4. 

the  truth  or  falseness  thereof.     And  we  2  CUron.  6  :  22,  23. 

are  to  swear  by  no  other  name,  but  by  Isa.  65 :  16. 

the  name  of  God  only,  when  we  are  cal-  Jer.  12 :  16. 

led  before  a  lawful  magistrate,  upon  a  law-  Matt.  5 :  34. 

ful  matter,  warranted  by  God's  holy  Neh,  13  :  25. 

word ;  and  an  oath  is  to  be  taken  in  the  2  Kings  n  :  4, 17- 

plain  and  common   sense  of  the  words,  Ps.  24 : 4. 

without  equivocation,  or  mental  reserva-  Heb.  6  :  16. 

tion,  in  a  solemn  and  reverent  using  of  Jer,  23  -.  10. 

God's  holy  name;  and  such  an  oath,  we  Lev.  19:12. 

beheve  all  christians,  when  lawfully  called  Eph.  4  :  28. 

thereunto  by  the  magistrate,  may  take.  fam°es5-'it 

But  the  foolish  monastical  vows  of  papists,  i  sam.  14  :  29. 

and  all  idle  and  vain  swearing,  is  an  abo-  2  Kings  6 :  31. 

minable,  and  wicked  prophaning  of  the  Isaiah  48  :  i. 

holy  name  of  God.  Zeph.  i :  5. 

XLIX.  ARTICLE. 

Of  the  State  of  man  after  Death,  and  of  the 
Resurrection  of  the  Dead. 

The  bodies  of  men  after  death,  return  ^"""'^'^^ 

to  dust,  and  see  corruption ;  but  their  f^cts  13  :  36. 

souls,  or  spirits,  which  neither  die  nor  Eccies.  12  :  7. 

sleep,  having  an  immortal  subsistence,  im-  Acts  7  :  59. 

mediately  return  to  God  who  gave  them ;  Luke  23  :  43. 

the  souls  of  the  righteous  being  then  2  cor.  5  :  i,  0,  ». 

made  perfect  in  holiness,  are  received  ^^^  ^ '-  ^s- 
into  paradise  where  they  are  with  Christ,  t  7  T  '  ^^" 

and  behold  the  face  of  God  in  light  and  J"^^^- 

glory,  waiting  for  the  full  redemption  of  ]  ^^'-  3  =  ^9- 

their  bodies,  and  the  souls  of  the  wicked  Luke  x6  :  23,  24. 

are  cast  into  hell,  where  they  remain  in  J  ):°^-  ^s  •  51,  s^. 

torment  and  utter  darkness,  reserved  to  ;  Y""^^-  \'^''' 

the  judgment  of  the  great  day.     And  i°r'^''        \r 
besides  these  two  places,  for  souls  sepa-  1  cor.  15  :  42,  «c. 

rated  from  their  bodies,  the  holy  scrip-  John  s  :  28,  29. 
ture  mentions  none.     And  at  the  last  day,  l)^°-  "  •  ^^ 

such  of  the  saints  as  shall  be  found  alive,  ^  '-'"'•  ^5  ••  21.  «c. 

shall  not  sleep,  but  be  changed,  and  all 
the  dead  shall  be  raised  up  with  the  self  ^«^-  ^°  '  S'  ^• 

same  bodies  and  none  other,  although  ^^^^  ^'^  '■  ^^^ 

with  different  qualities,  which  shall  be  ™'  ^  '  ""'*  ij, 

united  to  their  souls  for  ever  and  ever,  ^^^v-  ^9 :  ^>  «<=. 

but  the  bodies  of  the  unjust,  shall  by  the  ^"^  •  37- 

power  of  Christ,  as  a  severe  and  just  judge, 
be  raised  to  dishonour;  and  the  bodies 


The  English  Baptists  i6i 

of  the  just  and  righteous,  by  his  spirit, 
as  he  is  head  of  the  cathoHck  church, 
unto  honour,  and  be  made  conformable 
with  his  glorious  body,  and  shall  enjoy 
everlasting   life;   in   singing  perpetual 
praises,  and  hallelujahs  to  God  for  ever 
and  ever.     Amen. 

L.  ARTICLE.  ^ 

Of  the  last  Judgment. 

And  lastly,  we  believe,  God  hath  ap-  -A-cts  17 :  31. 

pointed  a  day,  wherein  he  will  judge  the  ^°^^  s :  22,  27. 

world  in  righteousness,  by  Jesus  Christ,  ^°'"-  ^  :  16. 

to  whom  all  power,  and  judgment  is  2  Tim.  4  :  i. 

given  of  the  father ;  in  which  day,  not  I  ^^^-  ^  '•  3- 

only  the  apostate  angels  shall  be  judged,  Jude6. 

but  likewise  all  persons  that  have  lived  ^c\  ^^■'  o^' 

upon  the  earth,  shall  appear  before  the  Eccies.^2T'i4. 

tribunal  of  Christ,  to  give  an  account  of  Rom.  14 :  10, 12. 

their  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds,  and  Matt.  25  -.  32. 

shall  receive  a  just  sentence,  according  to  Luke  21 :  28. 

what  they  have  done  in  their  bodies,  I  Thess.  4  ;  17. 

whether  good,  or  evil,  when  God,  ac-  Ps.  16  :  n. 

cording  to  his  purpose,  will  manifest  the  Luke  12  :  32, 

glory  of  his  mercy,  in  the  salvation  of  Matt.  25 :  46. 

his  elect,  and  of  his  justice  in  the  eternal  ^Tim'^°'8 

damnation  of  the  wicked  and  disobedient ;  Luke  i6^:"28. 

for  then  shall  the  righteous  go  into  ever-  Rev.  14  :  n. 

lasting  life,  and  receive  the  fullness  of  joy  "^^Thess  ^/' 8  &c 

and  glory,  but  the  wicked,  who  know  Rev.  20":  10, 11,  &c. 
not  God,  nor  obey  the  gospel  offered  22 :  n,  15. 

them  in  Christ,  shall  be  cast  into  eternal 
torments,  and  punished  with  everlasting 
destruction,   from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power. 
Amen. 

4.  Somerset  Confession 

In  1691  the  General  Baptists,  who  lived  in  Somerset 
and  adjacent  counties,  published  a  Confession  in  twenty- 
seven  articles;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  circulated 
extensively  in  other  parts  of  the  kingdom  (Crosby, 
III,  259-261;  IV  Appen.  I;  Taylor,  I,  361).  As  it  was 
comparatively  unimportant  and  the  text  is  accessible  in 
Crosby,  it  is  omitted. 


1 62  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


5.  Trinitarian  Articles 

The  General  Baptists  were  early  troubled  with  doubts 
on  the  doctrine  of  the  trinity  and  the  divinity  of  Christ, 
having  inherited  them  from  the  Dutch.  The  brevity  and 
ambiguity  of  the  Confession  of  1660  on  this  subject  was 
regarded  as  proof  of  uncertainty,  if  not  heterodoxy  among 
them.  Early  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  century,  Matthew 
Cafin,  the  gifted  and  inquisitive  pastor  of  the  church  at 
Horsham,  in  Sussex,  denied  both  the  true  divinity  and 
the  true  humanity  of  Christ.  The  matter  was  brought 
before  the  General  Assembly,  and  after  some  ten  years  of 
fruitless  agitation,  some  brethren,  dissatisfied  with  the 
ambiguity  and  uncertainty  of  the  position  of  the  main 
body,  withdrew  and  formed  the  "  General  Association  " 
in  1696,  on  the  basis  of  a  clear,  distinct  statement  on  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  In  June,  1704,  the  two  bodies 
reunited  on  the  basis  of  two  brief  articles,  entitled,  "  The 
Unity  of  the  Churches."  These  were  immediately  pub- 
lished, and  are  as  follows  (Taylor  I,  47.) : 

First,  respecting  Almighty  God. — We  do  believe,  and 
are  very  confident,  that  there  is  one,  and  but  one  living 
and  true  God,  who  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  and 
changeth  not ;  without  body,  parts,  or  imperfections :  es- 
sentially present  in  all  places ;  of  infinite  power,  wisdom 
and  goodness ;  the  Maker  of  all  things  in  heaven  and 
earth,  visible  and  invisible :  and,  that  in  this  divine  and 
infinite  Being,  or  Unity  of  the  Godhead,  there  are  Three 
Persons,  the  Father,  Word,  and  Holy  Ghost,  of  one 
substance,  power,  and  eternity.  Secondly,  respecting  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ — We  do  believe,  that  there  is  but  one 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  second  Person  in  the  Trinity,  and 
the  only  begotten  Son  of  God;  and  that  he  did,  in  the 
fulness  of  time,  take  to  himself  our  nature,  in  the  womb 
of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary,  of  whom,  in  respect  of  the 
flesh,  he  was  made;  and  so  is  true  God,  and  true  Man, 
our  Immanuel. 


The  English  Baptists  163 


The  union,  however,  lasted  but  a  short  time,  and  the 
General  Baptists  became  deeply  leavened  with  Socinian 
views.  Religion  in  England  was  suffering  a  sad  and 
general  decline  during  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  and  the  General  Baptists  suffered  like  other  de- 
nominations. Lack  of  preachers,  coldness,  strife,  di- 
vision, afflicted  all  their  churches,  many  of  which  be- 
came Socinian  or  ceased  to  exist  altogether.  By  the 
middle  of  the  century  the  cause  lay  in  almost  complete 
ruins. 

6.  Present  Doctrinal  Position 

This  body  still  preserves  its  corporate  existence  under 
the  title,  ''  The  General  Assembly  of  the  General  Baptist 
Churches  in  England."  The  Confession  of  1660  has 
never  been  repudiated,  but  the  Assembly  has  welcomed 
Unitarian  churches  into  its  fellowship,  and  probably  a 
majority  of  its  members  are  now  Unitarian  in  sentiment. 
For  some  years  the  following  summary  of  faith  has  been 
authoritatively  prefixed  to  the  Proceedings  of  the  As- 
sembly as  its  only  statement  of  doctrine: 

The  Assembly  has  borne  from  its  foundation,  in  1653, 
the  designation,  "  General  Baptist." 

It  consists  of  Churches  which  believe  that  the  way 
of  salvation  is  open  to  all,  and  which  also  regard  it  as  the 
duty  and  privilege  of  all  disciples  of  Christ  to  avow  their 
faith  in  their  common  Lord  by  observing  the  Chris- 
tian ordinance  of  baptism  by  immersion,  whereby  they 
signify  their  death  to  sin  and  resurrection  to  newness  of 
life.  They  mostly,  however,  believe  that  the  gates  of 
any  sectional  part  of  Christ's  Church  should  be  as  wide 
open  as  the  gate  of  His  Universal  Church,  and  therefore, 
that  all  His  Churches  may  gladly  receive  into  membership 
any  persons  who  shall  confess  their  personal  faith  in 
Christ,  and  avow  their  determination  to  obey  Him  ac- 
cording to  their  light.     Considerable  difference  on  vari- 


164  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ous  doctrinal  points  also  exists  in  the  Churches  belong- 
ing to  the  x\ssembly,  and  some  of  those  Churches  may  de- 
sire to  add  some  other  designation,  besides  General  Bap- 
tist, to  the  name  of  their  Chapel,  but  these  are  questions 
that  must  be  determined  by  each  Church  for  itself,  as  the 
Assembly  has  no  power  to  interfere  in  the  matter  "  (Min- 
utes of  the  General  Assembly). 

7.  The  Neiv  Connection 

In  the  year  1755,  ^  body  of  people,  who  had  been  con- 
verted to  evangelical,  experimental  religion  under  the  im- 
pulse of  the  Methodist  revival,  and  had  set  up  independ- 
ent societies,  adopted  scriptural  views  of  the  mode  and 
subjects  of  baptism,  and  proceeded  to  institute  the  ordi- 
nance anew  by  baptizing  one  another  (Taylor,  II, 
31).  In  1770  these  churches  united  with  some  of  the  old 
General  Baptist  churches,  which  had  either  preserved 
their  orthodoxy  during  the  general  decline  or  had  been 
revived  by  contact  with  Methodism,  to  form  "  The  New 
Connection  of  General  Baptists,  formed  in  1770,  with 
a  design  to  revive  Experimental  Religion  or  Primitive 
Christianity  in  Faith  and  Practice."  In  order  to  set  forth 
their  views  and  guard  against  the  introduction  of  the 
prevalent  Socinianism  they  drew  up  six  "  Articles  of 
Religion,"  which  the  preachers  were  all  required  to  sign. 
For  five  years  subscription  was  rigidly  enforced  on  every 
preacher  entering  the  connection,  but  in  1775  the  Associ- 
ation decided  "  that  subscription  to  a  creed  was  not  need- 
ful." Instead,  the  candidate  for  ordination  was  allowed  to 
relate  his  experience  before  the  Association,  and  was 
admitted  or  rejected,  according  as  his  experience  was  ap- 
proved or  disapproved.  These  articles  were  composed 
by  the  celebrated  Dan  Taylor,  the  chief  factor  in  the  or- 
ganization of  "  The  New  Connection,"  and  are  given  by 
Taylor,  II,  139-142,  as  follows: 


The  English  Baptists  165 

Article  i.  On  the  Fall  of  Man.  We  believe,  that 
man  was  made  upright  in  the  image  of  God,  free  from 
all  disorder  natural  and  moral ;  capable  of  obeying  per- 
fectly the  will  and  command  of  God  his  Maker;  yet  ca- 
pable also  of  sinning:  which  he  unhappily  did,  and 
thereby  laid  himself  under  the  divine  curse;  which,  we 
think,  could  include  nothing  less  than  the  mortality  of 
the  body  and  the  eternal  punishment  of  the  soul.  His 
nature  also  became  depraved;  his  mind  was  defiled;  and 
the  powers  of  his  soul  weakened — that  both  he  was,  and 
his  posterity  are,  captives  of  Satan  till  set  at  liberty  by 
Christ. 

Article  2.  On  the  Nature  and  Perpetual  Obligation 
of  the  Moral  Lazv.  We  believe,  that  the  moral  law  not 
only  extends  to  the  outward  actions  of  the  life,  but  to  all 
the  powers  and  faculties  of  the  mind,  to  every  desire, 
temper  and  thought;  that  it  demands  the  entire  devotion 
of  all  the  powers  and  faculties  of  both  body  and  soul  to 
God :  or,  in  our  Lord's  words,  to  love  the  Lord  with  all 
our  heart,  mind,  soul  and  strength : — that  this  law  is  of 
perpetual  duration  and  obligation,  to  all  men,  at  all  times, 
and  in  all  places  or  parts  of  the  world.  And,  we  suppose 
that  this  law  was  obligatory  to  Adam  in  his  perfect  state 
— was  more  clearly  revealed  in  the  ten  commandments — 
and  more  fully  explained  in  many  other  parts  of  the  bible. 

Article  3.  On  the  Person  and  Work  of  Christ.  We 
believe,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  God  and  man, 
united  in  one  person:  or  possessed  of  divine  perfection 
united  to  human  nature,  in  a  way  which  we  pretend  not 
to  explain,  but  think  ourselves  bound  by  the  word  of 
God  firmly  to  believe: — that  he  suffered  to  make  a  full 
atonement  for  all  the  sins  of  all  men — and  that  hereby  he 
has  wrought  out  for  us  a  compleat  salvation;  which 
is  received  by,  and  as  a  free  gift  communicated  to,  all 
that  believe  in  him ;  without  the  consideration  of  any 
works  done  by  us,  in  order  to  entitle  us  to  his  salvation. — 
Though  we  firmly  believe,  that  no  faith  is  the  means  of 
justification,  but  that  which  produces  good  works. 

Article  4.  On  Salvation  by  Faith.  We  believe,  that 
as  this  salvation  is  held  forth  to  all  to  whom  the  gospel 
revelation   comes   without   exception,    we   ought   in   the 


i66  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

course  of  our  ministry,  to  propose  or  offer  this  salvation 
to  all  those  who  attend  our  ministry :  and,  having  opened 
to  them  their  ruined  wretched  state  by  nature  and  prac- 
tice, to  invite  all  without  exception,  to  look  to  Christ  by 
faith,  without  any  regard  to  any  thing  in,  or  done  by, 
themselves ;  that  they  may,  in  this  way  alone,  that  is,  by 
faith  be  possessed  of  this  salvation. 

Article  5.  On  Regeneration  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  We 
believe,  that,  as  the  scriptures  assure  us,  we  are  justified, 
made  the  children  of  God,  purified  and  sanctified  by 
faith : — that  when  a  person  comes  to  believe  in  Jesus 
(and  not  before)  he  is  regenerated  or  renewed  in  his  soul, 
by  the  spirit  of  God,  through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
word,  now  believed  and  embraced;  which  renewal  of 
his  soul  naturally  produces  holiness  in  heart  and  life: — 
that  this  holiness  is  the  means  of  preparing  us  for  the 
enjoyments  and  employments  of  the  heavenly  world; 
and  of  preserving  in  our  souls  a  comfortable  sense  of 
our  interest  in  the  Lord,  and  of  our  title  to  glory;  as 
well  as  to  set  a  good  example  before  men,  and  to 
recommend  our  blessed  Redeemer's  cause  to  the  world. 

Article  6.  On  Baptism.  We  believe,  that  it  is  the 
indispensible  duty  of  all  who  repent  and  believe  the  gos- 
pel, to  be  baptized,  by  immersion  in  water,  in  order  to  be 
initiated  into  a  church  state;  and  that  no  person  ought 
to  be  received  into  the  church  without  submission  to  that 
ordinance.  Signed 

Dan  Taylor  William  Smith  Geo.  Hickling. 

David  Wilkin  Samuel  Deacon  John  Tarrott 

W.  Thompson  James  Fenn  Robert  French 

John  Knott  Francis  Smith  N.  Pickering 

John  Stouger  Thomas  Perkins  Charles  Parman 

John  Brittain  John  Grimley  W.  Summers 
Henry  Poole 

These  "  Articles  "  long  continued  to  be  the  recognized 
statement  of  doctrines  among  the  Baptists  of  the  *'  New 
Connection."  They  are  not  a  complete  system,  but  com- 
prise a  very  clear  statement  of  the  views  of  these  Bap- 
tists where  they  differed  from  the  Calvinistic  and  from 


The  English  Baptists  167 

other  General  Baptists.  In  1813  it  was  declared  that 
"  the  design  of  the  Association,  by  the  maintenance  of 
this  institution  [for  educating  ministers]  was  to  pro- 
mote and  cherish  the  sentiments  contained  in  the  articles, 
drawn  up  and  signed  in  the  year  1770,  at  the  formation 
of  the  New  Connection"  (Taylor,  II,  456);  in  1815 
the  articles  were  reprinted  in  the  minutes  in  lieu  of  a*^^ 
circular  letter,  and  the  next  year  the  Association  reaffirm 
these  principles  and  determine  ''  that  all  churches  which 
may  hereafter  be  admitted  into  it,  satisfy  it  that  they 
maintain  the  same;  and  if  any  church  in  the  connection 
depart  from  these  principles  either  in  doctrine  or  practice, 
and  by  proper  steps  cannot  be  reclaimed,  it  shall  be  ex- 
cluded from  the  connection"  (Taylor,  II,  459).  These 
views  were  also  incorporated  by  Dan  Taylor  in  a 
catechism  for  children  and  young  people,  which  was 
widely  used  and  was  reprinted  again  and  again.  A  fuller 
statement  of  their  views  may  be  seen  in  a  Confession 
which  was  laid  before  his  church  by  Dan  Taylor  when  he 
became  pastor  in  London  in  1785,  but  which  was  never 
published  (Taylor,  II,  470-477). 

Prior  to  1800  a  General  Baptist  preacher,  or  church, 
had  now  and  then  gone  over  to  the  Calvinistic  Baptists. 
The  latter  had,  by  that  time,  forged  ahead  into  a  place  of 
influence  and  power.  Moreover,  their  high  and  rigid 
Calvinism  had  been  materially  modified  by  the  Methodist 
revival,  the  rise  of  the  modern  missionary  movement, 
and  the  theological  labors  of  Andrew  Fuller.  As  the 
nineteenth  century  advanced,  these  two  wings  of  English 
Baptists  gradually  approached  each  other  until  the  ma- 
jority of  the  two  parties  united  in  a  common  statement 
of  beliefs  in  1891.  Divisive  names  were  dropped,  and 
their  work  united.  (See  statement  under  Calvinistic 
Baptists.) 


II.  The  Calvinistic  or  Particular  Baptists 

I.    FIRST  LONDON   CONFESSION 

The  Calvinistic  wing  of  the  English  Baptists,  unlike 
the  General  Baptists,  rose  in  England,  and  so  far  as 
known,  apart  from  Mennonite  influences.  In  1616  Henry 
Jacob  and  some  of  the  exiled  Independents  returned  to 
England  from  the  Netherlands  and  began  work  in  Lon- 
don. In  1633,  John  Spilsbery  and  a  few  others  left  this 
church,  apparently  because  they  had  come  to  oppose 
infant  baptism.  In  1638,  others  withdrew,  and  soon 
afterward  a  new  church  was  formed  on  the  basis  of  be- 
lievers' baptism.  There  was  division  of  sentiment  as  to 
the  best  means  of  beginning  scriptural  baptism  again.  A 
part  sent  Richard  Blount  to  Holland  where,  as  they  had 
heard,  there  were  some  who  baptized  believers  by  im- 
mersion. Having  obtained  baptism  in  this  way  from  the 
Rhynsburger  Collegiants,  he  returned  and  baptized  those 
who  sent  him.  *'  But  the  greatest  number  of  the  English 
Baptists,  and  the  more  judicious,  looked  upon  all  this 
as  needless  trouble,  and  what  proceeded  from  the  old 
Popish  Doctrine  of  right  to  administer  sacraments  by  an 
uninterrupted  succession,  which  neither  the  Church  of 
Rome,  nor  the  Church  of  England,  much  less  the  modern 
dissenters,  could  prove  to  be  with  them.  They  affirmed, 
therefore,  and  practised  accordingly,  that  after  a  general 
corruption  of  baptism,  an  unbaptized  person  might  war- 
rantably  baptize,  and  so  begin  a  reformation."  And  so 
it  was  done  (Crosby,  I,  101-103;  Kiffin  MS).  This  was 
not  later  than  1641.  The  members  of  this  first  English 
Calvinistic  Baptist  church  had  all  been,  as  far  as  known, 
168 


The  English  Baptists  169 

Independents.  In  becoming  Baptists  they  needed  only  to 
change  their  views  of  the  subjects  and  mode  of  baptism. 
They  preserved  Calvinistic  theology,  the  independence, 
democracy,  and  officials  of  the  local  churches  as  they 
were  in  the  Congregational  church.  To  the  controversy 
over  the  proper  "  subject "  of  baptism  which  had  been 
agitated  on  the  continent  for  a  century  and  had  been  rag- 
ing in  England  for  twenty-five  years,  is  now  added  one  on 
the  mode  of  baptism,  which  begins  in  1 641  and  soon  be- 
comes violent.  The  distractions  of  the  time  somewhat 
lightened  persecution  and  gave  the  Baptists  a  rare  oppor- 
tunity. Many  of  the  best  minds  of  England  were  at- 
tracted to  their  views,  and  they  gained  important  converts 
from  all  the  religious  parties  of  the  time.  England  was 
at  this  time  almost  solidly  Calvinistic,  and  their  Calvin- 
istic theology  secured  for  these  a  much  more  favorable 
reception  than  was  accorded  the  General  Baptists,  as 
soon  as  the  difference  was  recognized.  By  1644  there 
were  seven  churches  in  London.  They  were  called 
Anabaptists  and  accused  of  all  the  errors  and  enormities 
which  that  sect  had  ever  been  guilty  of  or  charged  ith. 
The  General  Baptists  were  becoming  somewhat  known, 
and  were  Arminian  if  not  Pelagian  in  theology.  In 
order  to  distinguish  themselves  from  both  the  Anabap- 
tists and  the  General  Baptists,  refute  the  slanders  and 
remove  the  misunderstandings  of  which  they  were  the 
innocent  victims,  they  determined  to  draw  up  and  pub- 
lish a  statement  of  their  views.  Accordingly,  the  seven 
congregations  united  in  publishing  the  following  Confes- 
sion, the  first  Baptist  Confession  of  the  Calvinistic  type. 
The  Confession,  as  will  be  seen  on  examination,  was  not 
very  carefully  drawn,  and  is  moderately  Calvinistic.  It  is 
the  first  Confession  of  history  to  prescribe  a  single  im- 
mersion as  the  form  of  baptism.     (''  The  Orthodox  Con- 


170  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

fession  of  the  Eastern  Church,"  drawn  up  in  1643,  pre- 
scribes a  threefold  immersion.) 

It  is  perhaps  the  most  independent  of  the  Baptist  Con- 
fessions, and  is  one  of  the  noblest  productions  ever  put 
forth  by  them.  It  probably  still  represents  the  views  of 
the  Baptists  of  the  world  more  nearly  than  any  other 
single  Confession.  The  following  is  an  attempt  to  re- 
produce exactly  the  original  edition. 


The  English  Baptists  171 

*  'The 

CONFESSION 

OF  FAITH, 

Of  those  Churches  which  are 
commonly  (though  falsly)  cal 
led  Anabaptists; 

Presented  to  the  view  of  all  that  feare 
God,  to  examine  by  the  touchstone  of  the  Word 
of  Truth:     As  likewise  for  the  taking  off  those 
aspersions  which  are  frequently  both  in  Pulpit  and 
Print,  (although  unjustly)  cast  upon  them. 

Acts  4.  20. 

Wee  can  not  hut  speake  the  things  which  wee  have  scene 
and  heard. 

Isai.  8.  20. 

To  the  Laiv  and  to  the  testimony,  if  they  speake  not 
according  to  \  this  Rule,  it  is  because  Jhere  is  no  light 
in  them, 

2  Cor.  I.  9,  10. 

But  wee  had  the  sentence  of  death  in  our  selves,  that 
wee  should  not  \  trust  in  our  selves,  but  in  the  living 
God,  which  raiseth  the  dead;  \  who  delivered  us  from  so 
great  a  death,  and  doth  deliver,  in  whom  \  zvee  trust  that 
he  will  yet  deliver. 

LONDON 
Printed  by  Matthew  Simmons  in  Aldersgate-street. 

1644. 

*  Title  page  of  edition  of  1646  reads,  "A  Confession  of  Faith  of  f  seven  Congrega- 
tions or  Churches  of  Christ  in  London,  which  are  commonly  (but  unjustly)  called 
7\nabaptists.  Published  for  the  vindication  of  the  Truth,  and  Information  of  the 
ignorant;  likewise  for  the  taking  off  of  those  Aspersions  which  are  frequently  both 
in  Pulpit  and  Print  unjustlj'  cast  upon  them.  The  second  Impression  corrected  aud 
enlarged.     Published  according  to  Order,  1646." 

f  For  "  seven,"  subsequent  editions  have  "  the  severall." 


\*J2  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

To 

ALL  THAT  DESIRE 

The  lifting  up  of  the  Name  of  the  |  Lord  Jesus  in 
sinceritie,  the  poore  despi-  |  sed  Churches  of,  God  in 
London  send  greeting,  |  with  prayers  for  their  farther 
increase  in  the  |  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus. 

Wee  question  not  but  that  it  will  seeme  strange  to 
many  men,  \  that  such  as  wee  are  frequently  termed  to 
he,  lying  under  that  \  calumny  and  black  brand  of  Here- 
tickes,  and  sowers  of  di  \  vision  as  wee  doo,  should  pre- 
sume to  appear  so  publickly  as  \  now  wee  have  done:  But 
yet  notwithstanding  wee  may  well  \  say,  to  give  answer 
to  such,  what  David  said  to  his  br other, \when  the  Lords 
bait  ell  zvas  a  fighting,  i  Sam.  29.  30.  Is  there  not  a  cause  f 
I  Surely,  if  ever  people  had  cause  to  speake  for  the 
vindication  of  the  truth  of  \  Christ  in  their  hands,  wee 
have,  that  being  indeed  the  maine  zvhecle  at  this  \  time 
that  sets  us  aworke;  for  had  any  thing  by  men  been  trans- 
acted against  \  our  persons  onely,  zvee  could  quietly  have 
sitten  still,  and  committed  our  Cause  to  \  him  who  is  a 
righteous  Judge,  who  will  in  the  great  day  judge  the 
secrets  of  \  all  mens  hearts  by  Jesus  Christ:  But  being  it 
is  not  only  us,  but  the  truth  pro  \  fessed  by  us,  wee 
cannot,  wee  dare  not  but  speake;  it  is  no  strange  thing 
to  any  \  observing  'man,  what  sad  charges  are  laid,  not 
onely  by  the  world,  that  know  \  not  God,  but  also  by 
those  that  thinke  themselves  much  zuronged,  if  they  be 
not  I  looked  upon  as  the  chicfe  Worthies  of  the  Church 
of  God,  and  Watchmen  of  the  \  Citie:  But  it  hath  fared 
with  us  from  them,  as  fro^m  the  poor  Spouse  seeking  \ 
her  Beloved,  Cant.  5.  6,  7.  They  finding  us  out  of  that 
common  road-zvay  \  themselves  zvalke,  have  smote  us 
and  taken  azvay  our  vaile,  that  so  zvee  may  by  \  them,  be 
recommended  odious  in  the  eyes  of  all  that  behold  us, 
and  in  the  hearts  |  of  all  that  thinke  upon  us,  which  they 
have  done  both  in  Pulpit  and  Print,  \  charging  us  zvith 


The  English  Baptists  173 


holding  Free-zvill,  Falling  azvay  from  grace,  denying 
Origi  I  nail  sinne,  disclaiming  of  Magistracy,  denying  to 
assist  them  either  in  persons  \  or  purse  in  any  of  their 
lawfull  Commands,  doing  acts  unseemly  in  the  dispen  \ 
sing  the  Ordinance  of  Baptism,  not  to  be  named  amongst 
Christians:  All  \  which  Charges  zvee  disclaime  as  notor- 
iously untrue,  though  by  reason  of  these  \  calumnies  cast 
upon  us,  many  that  feare  God  are  discouraged  and  fore- 
stalled I  in  harbouring  a  good  thought,  either  of  us  or 
ivhat  wee  professe;  and  many  that  \  knozv  not  God 
incouraged,  if  they  can  iinde  the  place  of  our  meeting,  to 
get  I  together  in  Clusters  to  stone  us,  as  looking  upon  us 
as  a  people  holding  such  \  things,  as  that  zvee  are  not 
zvorthy  to  live:  Wee  have  therefore  for  the  cleering  \  of 
the  truth  we  professe,  that  it  may  be  at  libertie,  though 
zvee  be  in  bonds,  \  briefly  published  a  Confession  of  our 
Faith,  as  desiring  all  that  feare  God,  seri  \  ously  to  con- 
sider zvhether  {if  they  compare  what  wee  here  say  and 
confesse  in  the  \  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  his 
Saints)  men  have  not  with  their  tongues  in  \  Pulpit,  and 
pens  in  Print,  both  spoken  and  written  things  that  are 
contrary  to  \  truth;  but  wee  knozv  our  God  in  his  owne 
time  will  clcere  our  Cause,  and  lift  \  up  his  Sonne  to 
make  him  the  chief e  cornerstone,  though  he  has  been  (or 
now  I  should  be)  rejected  of  Master  Builders.  And  be- 
cause it  may  be  conceived,  that  \  what  is  here  published, 
may  be  but  the  Judgement  of  some  one  particular  Con  \ 
gregation,  more  refined  then  the  rest;  We  doe  therefore 
here  siibscribe  it,  some  \  of  each  body  in  the  name,  and 
by  the  appointment  of  seven  Congregations,  \  zvho  though 
zvee  be  distinct  in  respect  of  our  particular  bodies,  for  con- 
veniency  \  sake,  being  as  many  as  can  zvell  meete  together 
in  one  place,  yet  are  all  one  in  \  Communion,  holding 
Jesus  Christ  to  be  our  head  and  Lord;  under  whose  go  jl 
vernment  zvee  desire  alone  to  zvalke,  in  follozving  the 
Lambe  wheresoever  he  \  goeth;  and  wee  beleeve  the 
Lord  will  daily  cause  truth  more  to  appeare  in  the  \ 
hearts  of  his  Saints,  and  make  them  ashamed  of  their 
folly  in  the  Land  of  \  their  Nativitie,  that  so  they  may 
with  one  shoidder,  more  studie  to  lift  up  the  \  Name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  stand  for  his  appointments  and 


174  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Lawes;  zvhich  \  is  the  desires  and  prayers  of  the  eon- 
temned  Churches  of  CJwist  in  London  |  for  all  Saints. 

Subscribed  in  the  Names  of  seven  Churches  in  London. 

William  Kiffin.             John  Mabbatt. 
Thomas  Patience.  


John  Webb. 


John  Spilsbery.  Thomas  Killcop. 

George  Tipping. 


Samuel  Richardson.      Paid  Hobson. 

Thomas  Goare. 

Thomas  Skippard. 


Thomas  Miinday.  Joseph  Phelpes. 

Edward  Heath. 

Thomas  Gunne. 


The 
CONFESSION 

Of  Faith,  of  those  Churches 

which  are  commonly  (though  falsly) 
called  Anabaptists. 

I. 

>Hat   God   as   he   is   in   himselfe,   cannot   | 
be  comprehended  of  any  but  himselfe,  i  ^  •pim.  6  .  i6. 

^dwelling  in  that  inaccessible  light,  that     2  j  Tim.  2  !  5. ' 
no  eye  can  attaine  unto,  whom  never  man      ^ph.  4  •  4, 5.  6. 
saw,  nor  can  see ;  that  there  is  but  ^  one       ^    °^'  j"  '  '*'  ^' 
God,  one  Christ,  one  Spirit,  one  Faith,  |  one   John'14.  chap. 

Baptisme;  ^one  Rule  of  holinesse  and  obedience^  ^  Tim.  6  . 3. 

for  I  all  Saints,  at  all  times,  in  all  places  to  be   cai.^i'.  8%. 

observed.  2  Tim.  3 .  15. 

II. 
That  God  is  ^  of  himselfe,  that  is,  neither  from  ^  Esa.^44  •  67^ 
ano-  I  ther,  nor  of  another,  nor  by  another,  nor         ^  ^5 ;  "' 
for  another :  ]  ^  But  is  a  Spirit,  who  as  his  being  is  2  John  4  .  24. 
of  himselfe,    so   he    |    gives   ^  being,   moving,   and  ^  Exod.  3 .  14. 
preservation  to  all  other   |   things,  being  in  hirn- 
selfe  eternall,  most  holy,  every  way  |   infinite  in 
*greatnesse,  wisdome,  power,  justice,  goodnesse,  1  *  Act"i" '28^" 
truth,  &c.     In  this  God-head,  there  is  the  Father, 
the  I   Sonne,  and  the  Spirit;  being  every  one  of 
them  one  and  |  the  same  God;  and  therefore  not 


The  English  Baptists  175 

divided,  but  distingul-   ]   shed  one  from  another  5  ^  (-.g^  g   g^ 
by  their  severall  properties ;  the  |  ^  Father  being  e  Pro.  8 .  22/23 
from  himselfe,  the  ^  Sonne  of  the  Father  |   from   ^eb.  i .  3 
everlasting,  the  holy  ''  Spirit  proceeding  from  the  1 7  joh^iV.^6. 
Father  and  the  Sonne,  Gai.  4  . 6. 

[Page  2] 
III. 

1  Esa.  46  .  TO  That  God  hath  ^  decreed  in  himselfe  from  ever- 

Rom.  II .  34,  lasting  I  touching  all  things,  effectually  to  work 

Mat?^io^  29, 30  ^^'^^  dispose  them  |  ^  according  to  the  counsell  of 

«Eph.  i,ii.'  his  owne  will,  to  the  glory   |   of   his   Name;   in 

which    decree    appeareth    his    wisdome,    con-    | 

8  Col.  2.3.  stancy,  truth,  and  faithfulnesse ;  ^  Wisdome  is  that 

4  Num.  23 .  ig,  where-  j  by  he  contrives  all  things  ;  *  Constancy  is 

2°-  that  whereby   |   the  decree  of  God  remaines  al- 

6  jere.  lo .  lo.  wayes  immutable ;  ^  Truth  \  is  that  whereby  he 
Rom.  3 . 4.  declares  that  alone  which  he  hath  de-   |   creed, 

and    though    his    sayings    may    seeme    to    sound 

some-    I    times   another  thing,   yet  the   sense  of 

them    doth    alwayes    |    agree    with    the    decree; 

« Esa.  44  .  10.         *  Faithfulnesse  is  that  whereby  he  |  effects  that  he 

7  Eph.  1, 3,  4, 5,      hath  decreed,  as  he  hath  decreed.    And  |  touching 

.6, 7.  his  creature  man,  "  God  had  in  Christ  before  |  the 

^^g™"  ^  "J"  foundation  of  the  world,  according  to  the  good 

Rom.  8 '.  zg,  30.  plca-  |   sure  of  his  will,  foreordained  some  men 

8  jude  ver.  4.  to  etemall  life  |  through  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  praise 

&  6.  and  glory  of  his  |  grace,  ^  leaving  the  rest  in  their 

°"i'2?i3"'         sinne  to  their  just  con-  |  demnation,  to  the  praise 
Prov.  16  .  4.         of  his  Justice. 

IV. 

1  Gen.  I,  chap.  1  j^  the  beginning  God  made  all  things  very 
Heb.^I^.  3.  good,  I  created  man  after  his  own  ^  Image  and 
Esa.  45 .  12.  likenesse,  filling   |  him  with  all  perfection  of  all 

2  Gen.  1 .  26.  naturall  excellency  and  up-  |  rightnesse,  free  from 
I  o^n  15 .  45.  ^jj  sinne.  ^  But  long  he  abode  not  in  |  this  hon- 
Eccies.  7 .  31-  our,  but  by  the  *  subtiltie  of  the  Serpent,  which  | 

4  Gen'"*^  I  ^°'  Satan  used  as  his  instrument,  himselfe  with  his 

zCor.^i/.  3.' ^'  Angels    |    having   sinned   before,   and   not   ^kept 

6  2  Pet.  2  .  4-  their  first  estate,  but  |  left  their  owne  habitation  ; 
joh^s^^*^^'  ^^^*  ^  Eve,  then  Adam  being  |   seduced  did  wit- 

»Gen.  3*.Y,  2, 6.     tingly  and  willingly  fall  into  disobedience   |   and 

I  Tim.  2 .  14.       transgression    of    the    Commandement    of    their 

Ga?.  3^*.  22.^^'       great  |   Creator,  for  the  which  death  came  upon 

all,  and  reigned   |   over  all,  so  that  all  since  the 

Fall  are  conceived  in  sinne,   |  and  brought  forth 

in  iniquitie,  and  so  by  nature  children  |  of  wrath, 

7  Rom.  5 .  12,         and  servants  of  sinne,  subjects  of  Meath,  and  all 

&  6^.^23.         [P^g6  3]    other   calamities    due   to    sinne   in   this 
Eph.  2.3.  world   and   for   ever,    |    being   considered   in   the 

Rom.  5 .  12.         state  of  nature,  without  relation  |  to  Christ. 


176  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


V. 

All    mankind    being    thus    fallen,    and    become 
altogether    |    dead  in  sinnes  and  trespasses,   and 
subject  to  the  eternall   |  wrath  of  the  great  God 
by    transgression;    yet    the    elect,    j    which    God 
hath  Moved  with  an  everlasting  love,  are  "re-   j^/f"^''^'^ 
deemed,  quickened,  and  saved,  not  by  themselves,    £ph;  ^ ;  ^^^"^ 
neither   |   by  their   own  workes,    |   lest  any  man         &2.4. 9- 
should  boast  himself e,  |  but  wholly  and  onely  by   iThess,  5.9. 
God  of  ^his   free  grace  and  mer-   |   cie  through  a  i  conV/30, 
Jesus    Christ,   who   of    God    is    made   unto   us    |         31. 
wisdome,    righteousnesse,    sanctification    and    re-   2  Cor.  5.21. 
dempti   |   on,  that  as  it  is  written,  Hee  that  re-   •'^''*  ^ '  ^^'  '*' 
joyceth,  let  him  re-  |  Joyce  in  the  Lord. 

VI. 

^  This   therefore   is   life   eternall,   to   know   the  1  Joh.  17 . 3. 
onely  true   |   God,  and  whom  he  hath  sent  Jesus    ^eb.  5  •  9- 
Christ.     ^And  on  the   |    contrary,  the  Lord  will  2^  Thess.  i .  8. 
render  vengeance  in  flaming  fire   |   to  them  that   Job.  3 .  36.* 
know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  |  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

VIL 

The  Rule  of  this  Knowledge,  Faith,  and  Obedi-   joh.  5 ,  39 
ence,    |    concerning   the   worship   and   service    of   2  Tim.  3 .  15. 
God,  and  all  other  |  Christian  duties,  is  not  mans         ^^>  ^7- 
inventions,  opinions,  devi-  1   ces,  lawes,  constitu-   -^^'V'^'  ^^' 
tions,  or  traditions  unwritten  whatso-  |  ever,  but      ^"  •  ^5  •  9- 
onely  the  word  of  God  contained  in  the  Cano-  | 
nicall  Scriptures. 

VIIL 

In    this    written    Word    God    hath    plainly    re-    Acts  3 .  22, 23 
vealed  |  whatsoever  he  hath  thought  needfuU  for    Heb.  i .  1,  2 
us  to  know,  be-  |  leeve,  and  acknowledge,  touch-   2  Tim.  3 ,  15, 
ing  the  Nature  and  Office  1  of  Christ,  in  whom   2  Cor. 'i\' "20. 
all   the   promises   are   Yea   and   Amen   |    to   the 
praise  of  God. 

[Page  4] 

IX. 

^  ^^\'  ■  ^^    At  Touching  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  whom  *  Moses  and 

fg'l^o^^  the    I    Prophets   wrote,   and   whom   the   Apostles 

Dan.  7.13  &  preached,  is  the  |  ^  Sonne  of  God  the  Father,  the 

2  p  ^  8^'*'  ^^'  ^^  brightnesse  of  his  glory,  |  the  ingraven  forme  of 
jlh!\ .  "1,^2, 3.  his  being,  God  with  him  and  with  |  his  holy 
Col.  I .  i'  15,  Spirit,  by  whom  he  made  the  world,  by  whom  | 

3  „^^  ^^'  ^7-  he  upholds  and  governes  all  the  workes  hee  hath 

4  Heb.V.''i4  made,  |  who  also  ^  when  the  fulnesse  of  time  was 
Rev.  5 . 5  with  come,  was  made  |  man  of  a  *  woman,  of  the  Tribe 
Gen.  49-9»io-  of  ^  JtidaJi,  of  the  seed  of  |  Abraham  and  David, 


49  •  I.  5 
*  Esa.  II  .  2,  3 


The  English  Baptists  177 

Rom.  1 . 3.  &  to  wit,  of  Mary  that  blessed  Vir-   |   gin,  by  the 

Mat?  i  ?  16  with  holy  spirit  comming  upon  her,  and  the  power   | 

Luke  3. 23, 26.  of  the  most  High  overshadowing  her,   and  was 

Heb.  2 .  16  also    in   '^  all    I    things   like   unto   us,    sinne   only 

6  Esa.  53  .  3,  4,  5-      ^vr^nt^H 

Phil.  2  .  8.  excepted. 

X. 

^  \^\^'  ^ '  ^^  Touching   his    Office,    ^  Jesus    Christ    onely    is 

Job.' 14  .6^  made  the  |  Mediator  of  the  new  Covenant,  even 

the   everlasting   Co-    |    venant   of  grace   between 

2  Heb  I.  2.  &  3.  God  and  Man,  to  ^  be  perfectly  |  and  fully  the 
Esl  9^  'eX  Prophet,  Priest  and  King  of  the  Church  of  |  God 
Acts  5 '.  31. '         for  evermore. 

XI. 

1  Prov.  8 .  23  Unto  this   Office  hee  was  fore-ordained   from 

Esa.  42.6  &        everla-   i   sting,  by  the  *  authority  of  the  Father, 

^rid  in  respect  of  j  his  Manhood,  from  the  womb 

4,^5, & 61 '.1, 2, called  and  separated,  and   |   ^anointed  also  most 

3  with  Luk.  4.  fully  and   abundantly  with   all  gifts    |   necessary, 

Joh.^i'.^i,  16.      God  having  without  measure  poured  the  Spi-   | 

&  3 .  34.         rit  upon  him. 

XII. 

In  this  Call  the  Scripture  holds  forth  two 
speciall  |  things  considerable;  first,  the  call  to 
the  Office ;   secondly,   |   the   Office   it  self.     First, 

1  Heb.  5  .  4, 5,  6.     that   ^  none   takes   this   honour   but    |    he   that   is 

called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron,  so  also  Christ,  it  | 
being  an  action  especially  of  God  the  Father, 
whereby  a  |  speciall  covenant  being  made,  hee 
ordaines  his  Sonne  to   |   this  office :  which  Cove- 

2  Esa.  53.10.         iiant  is,  that  ^Christ  should  be  [Page  5]  made  a 
Sacrifice  for  sinne,  that  hee  shall  see  his  seed,  and 

I  prolong  his  dayes,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord 
shall  I  prosper  in  his  hand;  which  calling  there- 3 Esa.  42 .  13 
fore  contains  in  |  it  selfe  ^chusing,  *  fore-ordain- 4 1  Pet.  i ".  20 
ing,  °  sending.    Chusing  re~  I  spects  the  end,  fore-  ^  J^^-  3  •  17  & 
ordaining  the  means,   sending  the  ex-   |    ecution   Esa.^i^.'i.  ^° '  ^ 
it  self,  °all  of  meere  grace,  without  any  condi- e  joh.  3 .  16 
tion  I  fore-seen   either  in  men,  or  in  Christ  him-   *^°"^-  ^  •  3a- 
selfe. 

XIII. 

So  that  this  Office  to  be  Mediator,  that  is,  to  be  i  Tim.  2 . 5. 

Pro-  [  phet.  Priest,  and  King  of  the  Church  of  g^b.  7 .  24 

God,  IS  so  proper   |   to  Christ,  as  neither  in  the  Act^^^.il"! 

whole,  nor  in  any  part  there-  |  of,  it  can  be  trans-  Luke  i .  33. 

ferred  from  him  to  any  other.  J°h-  ^4  •  6. 

M 


178  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

XIV. 

This  Office  it  self  to  which  Christ  was  called, 
is  three-  |   fold,  of  'a  Prophet,  of  "Priest,  &  of  ^  l^«ut.  18 .  15 
'a  King:  this  num-  |  ber  and  order  of  Offices  is         22,23 
shewed;  first,  by  mens  necessi-  |   ties  grievously 2  Psai.  iio.  3. 
labouring  *  under  ignorance,  by  reason  |  whereof   Heb.  3.I.&4- 
they  stand  in  infinit  necessity  of  the  Prophetical  1 8PsaL'*2!^6.  ^  "   ' 
office  of  Christ  to  relieve  them.     Secondly,  alien-^  Acts  26  .  18. 
ation  from  |  God,  wherein  they  stand  in  need  ofj^^j-^-^- 
the  Priestly  Office  to   |   reconcile  them :  Thirdly,    Eph.^2  .^12. 
our  "utter  disability  to  return  |  to  him,  by  which ^ Cant.  i .  3. 
they  stand  in  need  of  the  power  of  Christ   |   in   J°^-  ^  ■  *4« 
his  Kingly  Office  to  assist  and  govern  them. 

XV. 

Touching   the   Prophesie   of   Christ,   it   is   that  ^  Job- 1  •  18  & 
whereby  |   he  hath  ^perfectly  revealed  the  whole         \l'&%^.\ 
will  of  God  out  of  I  the  bosome  of  the  Father,   Deut.  18 .  15. 

that  is  needful  for  his  servants  [Page  6]  to  know, 
beleeve,  and  obey;  and  therefore  is  called  not  | 

2  Matth.  23 .  10.  onely  a  Prophet  and  "  a  Doctor,  and  the  ^  Apostle 
4  M^^  ^ '  ^'  ^^  °^^  profession,  and  the  *  Angel  of  the  Cove- 
6 1  Cor^  i  ^24.  "^"^ '  ^^t  ^^^°  ^^^  I  ^^^y  ^  wisdome  of  God,  and 
6  Col.  2 .  3.    *        ^  the  treasures  of  wisdome  |  and  understanding. 

XVI. 

That  he  might  be  such  a  Prophet  as  thereby  to 
be  every  |  way  compleat,  it  was  necessary  that  he 

1  Joh.  1 .  18&        should  bee  ^  God,  |  and  withall  also  that  he  should 

^ '  ^^'  be   man ;    for   unlesse   hee    |    had   been    God,    he 

could  never  have  perfectly  understood  |  the  will 

2 1  Cor.  2  .  II,  16.    of  God,  ■  neither  had  he  been  able  to  reveale  it  | 

3  . ,     throughout  all  ages ;   and  unlesse  hee  had  been 
^^^yeu^ill^s.  man,  hee  |  could  not  fitly  have  unfolded  it  in  his 

Heb.  I.I.  ^  own  person  to  |  man.* 

XVII. 

*  Jp^-  "  •  19-  Touching  his  Priesthood,  Christ  ^  being  conse- 

Q !  26^'  crated,   |   hath  appeared  once  to  put  away  sinne 

Rom.  5 .  19.         by  the  offering  and  |   sacrifice  of  himself,  and  to 

Eph.  5 .  12.  this  end  hath  fully  performed   |  and  suffered  all 

20.  those  things  by  which  God,  through  the  |  blood 

of    that    his    Crosse    in    an    acceptable    sacrifice, 

2  Eph.  2 .  14, 15,     might    I    reconcile   his   elect   onely;   ^and   having 
R  m^8  broken  downe  the  |  partition  wall,  and  therewith 

om.    .  34.         finished  &  removed  all  those   |   Rites,  Shadowes, 
and  Ceremonies,  is  now  entred  within  |  the  Vaile, 

*  Many  additional   Scriptural   proofs   of   Christ's   deity  and  his   humanity 
were  added  to  this  article  in  subsequent  editions. 


The  English  Baptists  179 

into  the  Holy  of  Holiest,  that  is,  to  the  very  ] 
Heavens,  and  presence  of  God,  where  he  for  ever 
liveth  I  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  Majesty, 
appearing  before  |  the  face  of  his  Father  to  make 
intercession  for  such  as  |  come  to  the  Throne  of 
Grace  by  that  new  and  living  way;  |  and  not  that 
8 1  Pet.  2  . 5.  onely,  but  ^  makes  his  people  a  spirituall  |  House, 

Joh.  4 ,  23,  24.      an  holy  Priesthood,  to  offer  up   spirituall   sacri- 
[Page   7]    lice   acceptable   to    God   through   him; 
neither  doth  the  |  Father  accept,  or  Christ  offer 
to  the  Father  any  other   |   worship  or  worship- 
pers. 

XVHL 

This  Priesthood  was  not  legall,  or  temporary, 
but    ac-    I    cording    to    the    order    ^  of    Melchi- 1  Heb.  7 .  17. 
sedec;  ^not  by  a  carnall  |  commandement,  but  by  2  Heb.  7. 16. 
the  power  of  an  endlesse  life ;  |  ^  not  by  an  order  3  Heb.  7  •  18, 19, 
that  is  weak  and  lame,  but  stable  and  per-  |  feet,         ^°'  ^^' 
not  for  a  *  time,  but  for  ever,  admitting  no  sue-  ^  Heb.  7  •  24,  25 
cesser,  |  but  perpetuall  and  proper  to  Christ,  and 
of  him  that  ever   |   liveth.     Christ  himselfe  was 
the  Priest,  Sacrifice  and  Al-  |  tar :  he  was  ^  Priest,  ^  Heb.  5 .  6. 
according  to  both  natures,  hee  was  a   |   sacrifice 
most  properly  according  to  his  humane  nature :   | 
'  whence  in  the   Scripture  it  is  wont  to  be   at-  ®  Heb.  10 .  10. 
tributed   to   his    |    body,   to   his   blood;    yet   the  qI\\^ ;,^\^'^ 
chiefe  force  whereby  this  sa-   |   crifice  was  made   Esa.  53 .  10. 
effectuall,  did  depend  upon  his  '^ divine  |   nature,  ,M&tth.  20.  28. 
namely,  that  the   Sonne  of  God  did  offer  him- '  ^^J^^^g- ^^• 
selfe   I   for  us:  he  was  the  ® Altar  properly  ac-8Heb."9."ii& 
cording  to  his  di-  |   vine  nature,  it  belonging  to         13  •  10, 12, 15. 
the  Altar  to  sanctifie  that  |  which  is  offered  upon   joh"!?!^;.'^ 
it,  and  so  it  ought  to  be  of  greater  |  dignity  then 
the  Sacrifice  it  selfe. 

XIX.  1  I  Cor.  15  .  4. 

I   Pet     "X       21     22 

Touching   his    Kingdome,    ^  Christ   being   risen   Matth,  28 .  ^8,  ig, 
from  the  |  dead,  ascended  into  heaven,  sat  on  the         2°- 
right  hand  of  God  |  the  Father,  having  all  power   Acts^/f  ii^&  5 . 
in  heaven  and  earth,  given   |   unto  him,  he  doth         30/31. 
spiritually  govern  his  Church,  exerci-   |   sing  his   J°^°  ^9  •  36. 
power  ^  over  all  Angels  and  Men,  good  and  bad,  1 2  MaTk  \^.  27!" 
to   the   preservation   and    salvation   of  the   elect,    Heb.  i  .14.' 
to  the  over-  |  ruling  and  destruction  of  his  ene-   J°^-  ^^  • '''  ^5- 
8  John  5 .  26,  27.      mies,  which  are  Re-  [Page  8]  probates,  ^commu- 

Rom.  5 .  6,  7,  8  &  nicating  and  applying  the  benefits,   |   vertue,  and 

Gal.^5 .' 22,"  23.       ^^^^^   ^^   ^^^    Prophesie   and    Priesthood  to   his    | 

John  i'.  4,'  13.'      elect,  namely,  to  the  subduing  and  taking  away  of 

their  |  sinnes,  to  their  justification  and  adoption 

of  Sonnes,  re-  |  generation,  sanctification,  preser- 


i8o  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

vation  and  strengthe-  |  ning  in  all  their  conflicts 

against   Satan,  the   World,  the   |    Flesh,   and  the 

temptations   of   them,   continually   dwelling    |    in, 

governing  and  keeping  their  hearts  in  faith  and 

4Johni3.i&       filiall   I   feare  by  his  Spirit,  which  having  *  given 

io.28,29&i4.j{-^  he  never  takes   |   away  from  them,  but  by  it 

Rom.  ii!'29.        still  begets   and  nourisheth  in   |   them  faith,   re- 

Psal.  51 .  10,  II.    pentance,  love,  joy,  hope,  and  all  heaven-  ]  ly  light 

Jo^  33  •  29, 30.      in  the  soule  unto  immortality,  notwithstanding  | 

or.  12  .  7,  9-     through  our  own  unbeliefe,  and  the  temptations 

of  Satan,  |  the  sensible  sight  of  this  light  and  love 

be    clouded    and    |    overwhelmed    for    the    time. 

6  Job  I.  and  2.        ^  And  on  the  contrary,  ruling  |  in  the  world  over 

Rom  ^'^^^i  &        ^^^  enemies,  Satan,  and  all  the  vessels  of  |  wrath, 

^.'4", 6 & 9.  limiting,   using,   restraining  them  by  his   mighty 

17, 18.  po-   I  wer,  as  seems  good  in  his  divine  wisdome 

2'Pe"t*2  chap^*     ^  justice  to  the   I   execution  of  his  determinate 

counsell,    delivering   them    |    up    to    a    reprobate 

mind,  to  be  kept  through  their  own  de-  |   serts, 

in  darknesse  and  sensuality  unto  judgement.* 

XX. 

1  Cor.  15 .  24, 28.      This   Kingdome  shall  be  then  fully  perfected 
Heb.  9 .  28  when  hee  |   shall  the  second  time  come  in  glory 

2  Thess.  1 . 9, 10.  to   reigne  amongst   |   his   Saints,   and  to  be  ad- 
I  Thess. 4. 15,16,  mired  of  all  them  which  doe  be-  |  leeve,  when  he 

17.  shall  put  downe  all  rule  and  authority  un-  |  der 

John  17 .  21, 26.    his   feet,   that   the   glory  of  the   Father   may  be 

full  and  I  perfectly  manifested  in  his  Sonne,  and 

the  glory  of  the   |   Father  and  the  Sonne  in  all 

his  members. 

[Page  9] 

XXI. 

That  Christ  Jesus  by  his  death  did  bring  forthi  johms .  13. 
salva-    I    tion    and    reconciliation    onely    for    the   ^^"^-  8 .  32, 33. 
^  elect,  which  were  |  those  which  -  God  the  Father   ^q^*'^  _  „  ^ 
gave  him ;   &  that  the   Gospel    |    which   is  to  be         3'.  25. 
preached  to  all  men  as  the  ground  of  faith,  |  is,  ^  Job  17  .  2  with 
that  ^  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Sonne  of  the  ever-  '  ^''' 

blessed    |    Goo,   filled   with  the   perfection   of   all '  J^^^^f*^^  ^^^  ^6. 
heavenly  and  spi-  |   rituall  excellencies,  and  that   joh.V.  9^&  7, 
salvation  is  onely  and  alone  |  to  be  had  through         3.  &  20 .  31. 
the  beleeving  in  his  Name.  ^  ^°^^  s  •  "• 

XXII-  1  Eph.  2  .  8. 

That  Faith  is  the  ^gift  of  God  wrought  in  the   Joh.^6.29&4. 
hearts  I  of  the  elect  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  whereby   phiK°' .  29. 
they  come  to  I  see,  know,  and  beleeve  the  truth   Gal.  5 .  22. 

*  This  article  was  considerably  shortened  in  subsequent  editions. 


The  English  Baptists  i8i 

of  Hhe  Scriptures,  &  not  |  onely  so,  but  the  ^Jp^?- 1' •  ^7. 
excellencie  of  them  above  all  other  wri-  |  tings  joh.'e^.'e"'  "* 
and  things  in  the  world,  as  they  hold  forth  the 
glory  I  of  God  in  his  attributes,  the  excellency 
of  Christ  in  his  |  nature  and  offices,  and  the 
power  of  the  fulnesse  of  the  |  Spirit  in  its  work- 
ings and  operations ;  and  thereupon  |  are  inabled 
to  cast  the  weight  of  their  soules  upon  this  | 
truth  thus  beleeved. 

XXIII. 

Those  that   have   this  pretious   faith   wrought   Matth.  7 .  24, 25 
in   them    |    by  the   Spirit,   can  never   finally   nor   Jo^°  ^3  •  i- 
totally   fall   away;    and    |    though   many   stormes    Esa^.*4g .' ^3,^14,' 
and  floods  do  arise  and  beat  against  |  them,  yet         15, 16. 
they  shall  never  be  able  to  take  them  off  that   | 
foundation    and    rock    which    by    faith    they    are 
fastened  up-  |  on,  but  shall  be  kept  by  the  power 
of  God  to  salvation,  [Page  10]  where  they  shall 

enjoy    their   purchased    possession,    they    [    being 
formerly  engraven  upon  the  palms  of  Gods  hands. 

XXIV. 

»  Rom.  10  .  17.  That  faith  is  ordinarily  ^  begot  by  the  preaching 

2 1  Cor.  1 .  21.  of  the   I   Gospel,  or  word  of  Christ,  without  re- 

3  RoS.'  t  ■  J,  2.  spect  to  ^  any  |  power  or  capacitie  in  the  creature, 

Ezek".  16  .  6. '  but  it  is  wholly  ^  pas-  |  sive,  being  dead  in  sinnes 

^ Rom.  3.12.  and  trespasses,  doth  beleeve,  and   |   is  converted 

Eph!"/.'i9.'  by   no    lesse   power,   *then   that   which    raised    | 

Col.  2  .12.  Christ  from  the  dead. 

XXV. 

J .  ,  That  the  tenders  of  the  Gospel  to  the  conver- 

i,^]^^]^  sion    of    I    sinners,   ^  is    absolutely   free,    no    way 

Esa.  55 .'  I. '  requiring,  as  absolute-   |   ly  necessary,  any  quali- 

2  Job.  7  .  37.  fications,  preparations,  terrors  of   |   the  La-v,  or 
Rom""4^.  5.^^'  preceding  Ministry  of  the  Law,  but  onely  |  and 

&  5 .  8.  alone  the  naked  soule,  as  a  "  sinner  and  ungodly 

^  ^'^^'i,  '  ^°6^^  ^^    ^^"    I    ceive    Christ,    as    crucified,    dead,    and 

iCor.V.L',  buried,  and  risen  a-  |  gaine,  being  made  ^a  Prince 

23,  24.  and  a  Saviour  for  such  sin-  |  ners. 

XXVI. 

That  the  same  power  that  converts  to  faith  in 

1 1  Pet.  1 . 5.  Christ,    I   the  same  power  carries  on  the  ^  soule 

2  Cor.  12  .  Q.         still  through  all  du-   |  ties,  temptations,  conflicts, 

sufferings,  and  continually   |   what  ever  a  Chris- 

3 1  Cor.  15 .  10.       tian  is,  he   is  by  ^  grace,  and  by  a  con-   |   stant 

3  Phil,  2. 12, 13.      renewed  ^operation  from  God,  without  which  he  | 
^h.  15 . 5,  cannot  performe  any  dutie  to  God,  or  undergoe 

*  *^'  ^'  any  |  temptations  from  Satan,  the  world,  or  men. 


i82  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


XXVII. 

That  God  the  Father,  and  Sonne,  and  Spirit,  is 
one   [Page  ii]  with  ^  all  beleevers,  in  their  "  ful- ^  i  Thess.  i ,  i. 
nesse,  in  ^  relations,  *  as  |  head  and  members,  ^  as   ^°^'^\'  ^°'j^°* 
house  and  inhabitants,  as  ^  hus-  |  band  and  wife,  2  col.  2  .  9, 10.' 
one  with  him,  as  ^  light  and  love,  and  one  |  with         &  i .  19. 
him  in  his  inheritance,  and  in  all  his  ^ glory;  and  |  A°^  ^^  ^^-^ 
that  all  beleevers  by  vertue  of  this  union  and  one-    Heb.  2  .  n." 
nesse  |  with  God,  are  the  adopted  sonnes  of  God,  *  ^o|- 1  •  18 
and    heires    |    with    Christ,    co-heires    and    joynts  £^jj"  ^"  ^°" 
heires  with   him  of  the    |    inheritance   of  all  the    i  Cor.  3 .  16, 17. 
promises  of  this  Hfe,  and  that  which  I  is  to  come.*  *  ^^a.  16 . 5. 

2  Cor.  II  .  3. 
1  Gal.  3  .  26. 
8  Joh.  17  .  24 

XXVIII. 

That  those  which  have  union  with  Christ,  are 
justified    I    from  all   their  sinnes,   past,   ^  present,  ^  J?'?- 1  •  7. 
and   to  come,   by  the  J   bloud  of  Christ;   which         '^^[11 
justification  wee  conceive  to  be  |  a  gracious  and   2 Cor.  5.19". 
free  'acquittance  of  a  guiltie,  sinfull  crea-  |  ture,  ^  ^oi"- 3  •  23. 
from    all    sin    by    God,    through    the    satisfaction      ^\l^ '  ^^' 
that   I   Christ  hath  made  by  his  death ;  and  this   Rom.  "5 .  i 
applyed  in  the  |  manifestation  of  it  through  faith.         &  3  •  25,  30. 

XXIX. 

That  all  beleevers  are  a  holy  and  ^  sanctified  1 1  Cor,  i .  i 
people,    I    and    that    sanctification    is    a    spirituall    i  ^^t-  2  •  9 
grace  of  the  ^  new  |   Covenant,  and  effect  of  the  2  Eph.  i .  4 
"love  of  God,  manifested  |  to  the  soule,  wherebys  i  joh.  4  .  16. 
the  beleever  is  in  *  truth  and   rea-   |    litie   sepa-  •*  Eph.  4 .  24 
rated,   both   in    soule   and   body,    from    all    sinne 
and   I    dead  workes,   through   the  ^  bloud   of  the^^*^'^- 3  •  is- 
everlasting  Co-   |   venant,  whereby  he  also  pres- 
seth  after  a  heavenly  and   |    Evangelicall  perfec- 
tion,   in    obedience    to    all    the    Com-    |    mands, 
^  which  Christ  as  head  and  King  in  this  new  Co-  |  ^  Mat.  28  .  20. 
venant  has  prescribed  to  him, 

XXX.  ,  ^  ^^^  ^    ^^ 

All  beleevers  through  the  knowledge  of  *that   Rom.5  .'9,  io. 

Justi-    [Page   12]   tification   of  life   given   by  the 

Father,    and    brought    forth    |    by    the    bloud    of 

2Esa.54. 10  Christ,  have  this  as  their  great  privi-   |  ledge  of 

■  ^^*       that  new  *  Covenant,  peace  with  God,  and  re-   | 

conciliation,  whereby  they  that  were  afarre  off, 

8  Eph.  2  .  13, 14.      were  |  brought  nigh  by  ^that  bloud,  and  have  (as 

<  Phil.  4.  7,  the  Scripture  |  speaks)  peace  *  passing  all  under- 


Considerably  shortened  in  subsequent  editions. 


The  English  Baptists  183 

standing,  yea,   joy  in   God,    |    through   oiir  Lord 
5  Rom.  5  .  10,         Jesus  Christ,  by  ®  whom  wee  have  re-  |  ceived  the 
i^-  Atonement. 

XXXI. 

That  all  beleevers  in  the  time  of  this  life,  are 
Eph.  6 .  10,  II,      ij^  a  con-   I   tinuall  warfare,  combate,  and  oppo- 
"'  ^^'  sition  against   sinne,   |    selfe,  the  world,  and  the 

2  Lor.  ID .  3.  Devill,  and  liable  to  all  manner  |  of  afflictions, 
•  ^ '  ^'  ^°'  tribulations,  and  persecutions,  and  so  |  shall  con- 
tinue untill  Christ  comes  in^  his  Kingdome,  |  be- 
ing predestinated  and  appointed  thereunto;  and 
what-  I  soever  the  Saints,  any  of  them  doe 
possesse  or  enjoy  of  |  God  in  this  life,  is  onely  by 
faith.* 

XXXII. 

Joh.  16 .  33.  That  the  onely  strength  by  which  the   Saints 

are  ina-  |  bled  to  incounter  with  all  opposition, 
and  to  overcome  1  all  afflictions,  temptations,  per- 

Heb.  2  .  9, 10.  secutions,  and  tryalls,  is  |  onely  by  Jesus  Christ, 
who  is  the  Captain  of  their  salva-  |  tion,  being 
made  perfect  through  sufferings,  who  hath  |  in- 
gaged   his    strength   to    assist    them    in   all   their 

John  15 .  5.  afflictions,   |   and  to  uphold  them  under  all  their 

temptations,  and  to  |  preserve  them  by  his  power 
to  his  ever-   |   lasting  Kingdome. 

XXXIII. 

That    Christ   hath   here   on   earth    a   spirituall 
Kingdome,  [Page  13]  which  is  the  Church,  which  1 1  Cor.  i .  i. 
he  hath  purchased  and  re-  1  deemed  to  himselfe,  ^  ^p^  ^^-  ^• 
as   a   peculiar    inheritance :    which    |    Church,    as    Act!'a6 '.  18 
it    is   visible    to   us,    is    a    company    of   visible    ]    i  Thes.  i .  9. 
'  Saints,  "  called  &  separated  from  the  world,  by   ^°^'^^  •  ^'^• 
the  word  |  and  ^Spirit  of  God,  to  the  visible  pro- 3  acS  2  .  "37  with 
fession  of  the  faith   |   of  the  Gospel,  being  bap-         Acts  10 .  37. 
tized  into  that  faith,  andjoyned  |  to  the  Lord,  and  ^  Jo"»^J°  ^^^°- 
each  other,  by  mutuall  agreement,  in  |  the  prac-   Mat.  is".  19, 
tical  injoyment  of  the  *  Ordinances,  commanded  |         20. 
by  Christ  their  head  and  King.  ^p  •  ^  •  '^^; 

XXXIV. 

To  this   Church  he  hath  ^  made  his  promises,  1  Mat.  28  .  18, 
and  gi-   1   ven  the  signes  of  his  Covenant,  pres-    2Cor%^°*i8 
ence,  love,  blessing,  |  and  protection :  here  are  the 
fountains    and    springs    of    his    \    heavenly   grace 

*  Featley  criticised  this  article  as  denying  real  ownership  to  any  but 
believers.  The  criticism  was  recognized  in  subsequent  editions^  by  adding 
these  words:  "  Outward  and  temporall  things  are  lawfully  enjoyed  by  a 
civill  right  by  them  who  have  no  faith." 


184  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

continually  flowing  forth  ;  '  thither  ought  1  all  men «  Esa.  8  .  16. 
to  come,  of  all  estates,  that  acknowledge  him  to  j    1  Tim.  3 .  15, 
be   their    Prophet,    Priest,    and    King,    to    be   in-         |  J ;  f-^ 
rolled    amongst    |    his    houshold    servants,    to   be   Acts  2 .  41,'  47 
under   his   heavenly   conduct    |    and   government,    p°^^v'^  •  "• 
to   lead  their  lives   in   his   walled   sheep-    |    fold,    Eph.  z'/ig. 
and    watered   garden,    to    have   communion    here 
with  I  the  Saints,  that  they  may  be  made  to  be 
partakers  of  their  |  inheritance  in  the  Kingdome 
of  God. 

XXXV. 

And    all    his    servants    are    called    thither,    to  i  Cor.  12 . 6, 7, 
present  their   |   bodies  and  soules,   and  to  bring         ^2, 18. 

their  gifts   God   hath   gi-    |    ven  them ;    so   being  ^o"^-  ^2 . 4. 5. 6. 

come,  they  are  here  by  himselfe  be-  |  stowed  in  ^  ^^t-  4  •  10. 

their  severall  order,  peculiar  place,  due  use,  be-  |  ^p^-  4  •  ^6. 

ing  fitly  compact  and  knit  together,  according  to  CoU  2 .  5,  6, 19. 

the  ef-   I   fectuall  working  of  every  part,  to  the  ^  ^°''-  "  •  ^^, 

1-r      i-  X    -^    I        i£      •      1  J     f       '  to  the  end. 

edification  of  it  |  selie  in  love. 

[Page  14] 

XXXVI. 

That    being    thus    joyned,    every    Church    has 

^  "^"Vfi  ^*  *  power   gi-    |    ven   them    from    Christ    for   their 

with*  1^5 .  22,25  better  well-being,  to  |  choose  to  themselves  meet 

I  Cor.  16.  3'.    '     persons  into  the  office  of  |  ^  Pastors,  Teachers  (a), 

'^°'^"-7»8       Elders,  Deacons,  being  qualified  ac-   |  cording  to 

I  Cor.  12 '.  8,  28     the  Word,  as   those  which   Christ  has  appoin-    | 

I  Tim.  3.  chap,      ted  in  his  Testament,  for  the  feeding,  governing, 

Heb.  13 .  7.  serving,  |  and  building  up  of  his  Church,  and  that 

e  .  5 . 1,  2,  3.    j^Qj^g  other  have   |   power  to  impose  them,  either 

these  or  any  other. 

xxxvir. 

Heb,  5 .  4.  That   the    Ministers   aforesaid,    lawfully   called 

^Tm  '  ^\  ^^  ^^^   '   Church,  where  they  are  to  administer, 

joh'*^'!  3,^4.  ought  to  conti-   |   nue  in  their  calHng,  according 

Acts  20 .  28.  to  Gods   Ordinance,  and   |   carefully  to   feed  the 

ulh'i2'?'i7  ^°^^    °^    Christ   committed    to    them,    |    not    for 

3-7.  7-  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind. 

(&)  XXXVIII. 

I  Cor.  9  . 7, 14.         That  the  due  maintenance  of  the  Officers  afore- 
Gai.  6 . 6.  said,    I    should   be   the   free   and   voluntary   com- 

I  Thes.  5 .  13.       munication   of   the    |    Church,   that   according   to 
1  Tim.  5 .  17,        Christs  Ordinance,  they  that  |  preach  the  Gospel, 
^^'  should   live   on   the    Gospel    and   not   by    |    con- 

(a)  "  Pastors  "  and   "  teachers  "  are   omitted   in   later  editions. 

(b)  The  final  clause,  beginning  "  and  not  by  constraint,"  was  criticised 
byFeatley  and  consequently  omitted  in  the  edition  of  1646.  The  entire 
article  was  omitted  from  the  editions  of  1651  and  1652,  probably  owing  to 
Quaker   influence. 


The  English  Baptists  185 

Phil.  4 .  15, 16.      straint   to   be   compelled   from   the   people   by   a 
forced  |  Law. 

XXXIX. 

Mat.  28 .  18, 19.        That   Baptisme   is   an    Ordinance   of  the   new 
Mark  16. 16.        Testament,  |  given  by  Christ,  to  be  dispensed(a) 
onely  upon  persons  pro-  [Page  15]  fessing  faith,   Acts  2 .  37,  38 
or  that  are  Disciples,   or  taught,   who  upon    |    a         ^.  ?o3^'37»38 
^profession  of  faith,  ought  to  be  baptized. (&) 


&  18 . 8. 


XL. 

The  way  and  manner  of  the  *  dispensing  of  this   The  word      _ 
Ordi.-  I  nance   {c)  the  Scripture  holds  out  to  be   fytl^'to'di}''" 
dipping  or  plung-    |    ing  the   whole   body   under    underwater, 
water :  it  being  a  signe,  must  an-  |  swer  the  thing   y^*  so  as  with 
signified,  which  are  these:  first,  the  ^wash-  |  ing   garmentTboth 
the  whole  soule  in  the  bloud  of  Christ :  Second-   upon  the  ad- 
ly,  I  that  interest  the  Saints  have  in  the  Meath,    ^^'J^^^'f-'^j; 
buriall,    and    re-    |    surrection;    thirdly,    together   wUh^^i'^mo- 
with  a  *  confirmation  of  our   |  faith,  that  as  cer-   destie.  (^) 
tainly  as  the  body  is  buried  under  water,   |   and  ^  ^^^*-  3 .  ^6. 
riseth  againe,  so  certainly  shall  the  bodies  of  the  |    Acts  I '.  38, 
Saints  be  raised  by  the  power  of  Christ,  in  the  2  Rev.  1.5 
day  of  the  |  resurrection,  to  reigne  with  Christ.  wi?h  Heb 

22. 

^  Rom.  6  .  3,  4,  5, 
XLL  *  I  Cor.  IS  . 

28,  29. 

The   persons   designed   by   Christ,   to   dispense 
this  Or-  I  dinance,  the  ^  Scriptures  hold  forth  to  1  Esa.  8  .  16. 
be  2i{e)   preaching  |   Disciple,  it  being  no  where   Mat.  28 .  16, 17, 
tyed  to  a  particular  Church,   |   Officer,  or  person   john  4' .^i,  2. 
extraordinarily  sent,  the  Commission   |   injoyning   Acts  20.  7. 
the  administration,  being  given  to  them  under   |    Mat.  26 .  26. 
no   other   consideration,   but   as   considered    Dis- 
ciples. 

(a)  Featley  declared  this  article  would  not  be  objectionable  if  the  word 
only  were  omitted,  and  again  strangely  enough  it  was  omitted  in  subse- 
quent editions. 

(fe)  Later  editions  added,  "  and  after  to  partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper." 

(c)  In  criticising  this  article,  Doctor  Featley  denied  that  the  Scripture  de- 
fines baptism  as  an  immersion,  and  in  subsequent  editions  the  phrase,  "  the 
Scripture  holds  out  to  be,"  is  omitted,  as  well  as  :he  words  "  first,  the 
washing  the  whole  soule  in  the  bloud  of  Christ."  To  the  words  "  death, 
buriall,  and  resurrection  "  are  added  "  of  Christ  "  in  later  editions. 

(d)  Editions  1651  and  1652  add  "which  is  also  our  practice,  as  many  eye 
witnesses  can  testifie." 

(e)  Doctor  Featley  ridiculed  the  expression  "  preaching  Disciple,"  and  in 
later  editions  "  preaching  "  is  omitted,  and  the  words  "  being  men  able  to 
preach  the  Gospel  "  are  added  at  the  end  of  the  article.  "  Church,  Officer  " 
is  changed  into  "  Church-officer  ''  in  later  editions,  as  it  appears  in  Doctor 
Featley. 


1 86 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


Acts  2  .  47. 
Rom.  16  .  2. 
Math.  18  .  17. 

1  Cor.  5  .  4 

2  Cor,  2  .  6,  7, 

8. 


XLII. 

Christ  has  likewise  given  power  to  his  whole 
Church  I  to  receive  in  and  cast  out,  by  way  of 
Excommunication,  |  any  member;  and  this  power 
is  given  to  every  particular  |  Congregation,  and 
not  one  particular  person,  either  |  member  or 
Officer,  but  the  whole. 

[Page  16] 

XLIII. 

And  every  particular  member  of  each  Church, 
how  I  excellent,  great,  or  learned  soever,  ought 
to  be  subject  to  |  this  censure  and  judgement  of 
Christ;  and  the  Church  |  ought  with  great  care 
and  tendernesse,  with  due  advice  |  to  proceed 
against  her  members. 


Mat.  18  .  16, 

17, 18. 

Act.  II  .  2,  3. 

I  Tim.  5  .  19, 
20,  21. 


27. 


XLIV. 

And  as  Christ  for  the  ^keeping  of  this  Church 
in  holy  |  and  orderly  Communion,  placeth  some 
speciall  men  |  over  the  Church,  who  by  their 
office  are  to  governe,  o-  |  versee,  visit,  watch;  so 
likewise  for  the  better  keeping  |  thereof  in  all 
places,  by  the  members,  he  hath  given  '^au-  | 
thoritie,  and  laid  dutie  upon  all,  to  watch  over 
one  ano  1  ther. 

XLV. 

That  also  such  to  whom  God  hath  given  gifts, 
being  |  tryed  in  the  Church,  may  and  ought  by 
the  appointment  |  of  the  Congregation,  to  pro- 
phesie,  according  to  the  pro-  |  portion  of  faith, 
and  so  teach  publickly  the  Word  of  |  God,  for 
the  edification,  exhortation,  and  comfort  of  |  the 
Church. 

XLVI. 

Thus  being  rightly  gathered,  established,  and 
still  pro-  I  ceeding  in  Christian  communion,  and 
obedience  of  the  |  Gospel  of  Christ,  none  ought 
to  separate  for  faults  and  |  corruptions,  which 
may,  and  as  long  as  the  Church  con-  |  sists  of 
men  subject  to  failings,  will  fall  out  and  arise 
a-  I  mongst  them,  even  in  true  constituted 
Churches,  untill  |  they  have  in  due  order  sought 
redresse  thereof. 

[Page  17] 

XLVII. 

And  although  the  particular  Congregations  be  ^  Cor.  4  .  17, 
distinct  |  and  several!  Bodies,  every  one  a  com-         |  \l '  f'  ^^• 

pact  and  knit  Ci-  |  tie  in  it  selfe;  yet  are  they  Matth.  28.20. 


1  Acts  20 
28. 

Heb.  13  .  17,  24. 

Mat.  24  .  25. 

I  Thes.  5  .  14. 
^  Mark  13  . 

34.  37- 
Gal.  6  .  I. 
I  Thes.  5.11. 
Jude  ver.  3,  20. 
Heb.  10  .  34,  35. 

&  12  .  15. 


I  Cor.  14.  cha. 

Rom.  12  .  6. 

1  Pet.  4  .  10,  II. 

1  Cor.  12  .  7. 

I  Thes.  5  .  17, 
18,  19. 


Rev.  2.  &  3, 
Chapters 

Acts  15  .  12. 

I  Cor.  I  .  ID. 

Ephef.  2  .  16. 
&  3  .  15,  16. 

Heb.  10  .  25. 

Jude  ver.  15. 

Matth.  18  .  17. 

I  Cor.  5  •  4.  5- 


The  English  Baptists  187 

all  to  walk  by  one  and  the  same  |  Rule,  and  by  1  Tim.  3 .  15. 
all  meanes  convenient  to  have  the  counsell  |  and         &  6 .  13, 14. 

help  one  of  another  in  all  needfull  affaires  of  the  I  coK  a^e/ig/^* 
Church,  as  members  of  one  body  in  the  common         &  4  .'16.' 
faith  I  under  Christ  their  onely  head. 

XLVIII. 

That   a   civill    Magistracie   is   an   ordinance   of   Rom.  13 .  i,  2, 3, 4. 
God    set    up    I    by    God    for   the   punishment    of   i  Pet.  2 .  13, 14. 
evill  doers,  and  for  the  |  praise  of  them  that  doe    i  Tim.  2 .  2. 
well;  and  that  in  all  lawfull  things  |  commanded 
by  them,   subjection  ought  to  be  given  by  us    | 
in  the  Lord :  and  that  we  are  to  make  supplica- 
tion and  I  prayer  for  Kings,  and  all  that  are  in 
authority,  that  under  |  them  we  may  live  a  peace- 
able and  quiet  life  in  all  godliness  |  and  honesty. 

*XLIX. 

The  supreme  Magistracie  of  this  Kingdome  we 
beleeve  |  to  be  the  King  and  Parliament  freely 
chosen  by  the  King-  |  dome,  and  that  in  all  those 
civill  Lawes  which  have  been  |  acted  by  them,  or 
for  the  present  is  or  shall  be  ordained,  |  we  are 
bound  to  yeeld  subjection  and  obedience  unto  in  | 
the  Lord,  as  conceiving  our  selves  bound  to  de- 
fend both  I  the  persons  of  those  thus  chosen,  and 
all  civill  Lawes  |  made  by  them,  with  our  per- 
sons, liberties,  and  estates,  with  |  all  that  is 
called  ours,  although  we  should  suffer  never  so  | 
much  from  them  in  not  actively  submitting  to 
some  Ec-  |  clesiasticall  Lawes,  which  might  be 
conceived  by  them  to  [Page  18]  be  their  duties  to 

estabhsh  which  we  for  the  present  could  1  not 
see,  nor  our  consciences  could  submit  unto ;  yet 
are  |  we  bound  to  yeeld  our  persons  to  their 
pleasures. 

L. 

And  if  God  should  provide  such  a  mercie  for 
I  Tim.  1 . 2,  3,  4.  us,  as  to  I  incline  the  Magistrates  hearts  so  far 
Psai.  126 . 1.  to  tender  our  con-  |  sciences,  as  that  we  might 
Acts  9.  31.  bee  protected  by  them  from  |  wrong,  injury,  op- 

pression and  molestation,  which  long  we  |  for- 
merly have  groaned  under  by  the  tyranny  and  op- 

*  Articles  XLIX  and  L.  somewhat  modified,  are  in  the  second  edition 
added  as  a  note  to  Art.  XLVIII.  Art.  LI  then  becomes  XLIX.  An  Art.  L 
is  added,  expressing  the  lawfulness  of  oaths  and  of  a  Christian's  holding 
civil  oifice;  Art.  LII  becomes  LI,  and  a  final  Art.  LH  on  the  resurrection  is 
added.  All  references  to  the  king  and  Parliament  are  omitted  from  edi- 
tions of  1651  and  1652  when  Cromwell  was  in  control  of  affairs. 


i88  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

pres-  I  sion  of  the  Prelaacall  Hierarchy,  which 
God  through  j  mercy  hath  made  this  present 
King  and  Parliament  won-  J  derfull  honourable, 
as  an  instrument  in  his  hand,  to  throw  |  downe ; 
and  we  thereby  have  had  some  breathing  time,  j 
we  shall,  we  hope,  look  at  it  as  a  mercy  beyond 
our  expe-  |  ctation,  and  conceive  our  selves  fur- 
ther engaged  for  ever  |  to  blesse  God  for  it. 

LI. 

iA^s2.4o  41.         But  if   God   with-hold  the   Magistrates   allow- 

^1^4/.% 20^.* 23!  ^"ce  and  |  furtherance  herein;  ^yet  we  must  not- 

I  Th'ess.  3.3.'     '  withstanding   pro-    |    ceed   together   in   Christian 

Phil.  1 .  27, 2^8, 2£.  communion,  not  daring  to  give  |  place  to  suspend 

6°  7V10. '22,^23.  our  practice,  but  to  walk  in  obedience  to  |  Christ 

in  the  profession  and  holding  forth  this  faith  be-  | 

fore  mentioned,   even  in  the  midst  of  all  trialls 

and    affli-    |    ctions,    not    accounting    our    goods, 

2  Matth.  28  .  18,      lands,  wives,  children, [fathers,  mothers,  brethren, 

19, 20.  sisters,  yea,   and  our  own  lives   I    dear  unto  us, 

1  Tim.  6  .  13,  14,  r:    •   u  -i-i.     •  1 

15.  so    we    mag    finish    our   course    with    joy:    re-    | 

Rom.  12 . 1, 8,  membering    alwayes    we    ought    to    "obey    God 

2  Tim  ^'^ '  ^^8  rather  then  |  men,  and  grounding  upon  the  com- 
Rev.  2,'*io!'  "  mandement,  commissi-  |  on  and  promise  of  our 
Gal.  2  .  4,  5.  Lord  and  master  Jesus  Christ,  who  [Page  19]  as 

he  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth,  so  also 
hath  pro-  |mised,  if  we  keep  his  commandements 
which  he  hath  gi-  |  ven  us,  to  be  with  us  to  the 
end  of  the  world :  and  when  we  |  have  finished 
our  course,  and  kept  the  faith,  to  give  us  the  j 
crowne  of  righteousnesse,  which  is  laid  up  for  all 
that  I  love  his  appearing,  and  to  whom  we  must 
give  an  account  |  of  all  our  actions,  no  man  bein^ 
able  to   discharge  us  of    |    the   same. 

LIL 

And  likewise  unto  all  men  is  to  be  given  what-   Rom.  13 .  5,  6.  7. 
soever  is  |  their  due ;  tributes,  customes,  and  all   Matth.  22 .  ai. 
such   lawful   duties,    |    ought   willingly  to  bee  by   Titus  3. 
us  paid  and  performed,  our   |   lands,  goods,  and    i  Pet.  2  .  13. 
bodies,  to  submit  to  the  Magistrate  in  |  the  Lord,   Ephes.  5 .  21, 22. 
and  the  Magistrate  every  way  to  bee  acknow-   j         &  6 .  i,  9. 
ledged,    reverenced,    and    obeyed,    according    to    1  Pet.  5 . 5. 
godlinesse ;  |  not  because  of  wrath  onely  but  for 
conscience  sake.     And   |  finally,  all  men  so  to  be 
esteemed    and    regarded,    as   is    due    |    and   meet 
for  their  place,  age,  estate  and  condition. 

LII    [sic]. 

And   thus   wee   desire  to  give   unto   God   that    ^ctg  24 "^"s, 
which  is   1   Gods,  and  unto  Cesar  that  which  is         16.  " 


The  English  Baptists  189 

Ccsars,  and  unto  all   |  men  that  which  belongeth   John  5 .  28. 

unto  them,  endevouring  our  |  selves  to  have  al-   2  Cor.  4 .  17. 

wayes    a    cleare    conscience    void    of    offence     |    i  Tim.  6 . 3, 4, 5. 

towards  God,  and  towards  man.    And  if  any  take    i  Cor.  15 .  58, 59. 

this  that  I  we  have  said,  to  be  heresie,  then  doe 

wee  with  the  Apostle  |  freely  confesse,  that  after 

the  way  which  they  call  heresie,  |  worship  we  the 

God  of  our  Fathers,  beleeving  all  things  |  which 

are  written  in  the  Law  and  in  the  Prophets  and 

A-    I    postles,    desiring   from   our   soules   to   dis- 

claime  all  heresies  [Page  20]  and  opinions  which 

are  not  after  Christ,  and  to  be  sted-  |  fast,  unmo- 
veable,  alwayes  abounding  in  the  worke  of  the  ] 
Lord,  as  knowing  our  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain 
in  the  |  Lord. 

I  Cor.  I.  24. 

Not  that  we  have  dominion  over  your  faith,  but 
are  helpers  of  \  your  joy:  for  by  faith  we  stand. 

FINIS 

Second  Edition,  1646 

The  Confession,  which  appeared  in  print  in  1644, 
created  great  surprise  by  its  orthodoxy,  sanity,  and 
moderation.  So  favorable  was  the  impression  made  that 
opponents  of  the  Baptists  could  scarcely  believe  that  these 
articles  fairly  represented  their  views.  They  elicited 
much  favorable  comment,  but  of  course  occasioned  criti- 
cism also. 

In  1645  Dr.  Daniel  Featley  wrote  a  scurrilous  book 
against  the  Baptists,  entitled,  "  The  Dippers  dipt,  or.  The 
Anabaptists  duck'd  and  plunged  Over  Head  and  Eares, 
at  a  Disputation  in  Southwark."  He  was  a  famous 
scholar  and  controversialist,  and  a  preacher  in  the  State 
church  in  London.  He  had  been  a  member  of  the  West- 
minster Assembly,  but  having  fallen  under  suspicion  of 
disloyalty,  he  was  imprisoned  by  the  Parliamentary  au- 
thorities. In  prison  he  furbished  up  the  notes  of  a  dispu- 
tation he  had  had  with  the  General  Baptists  in  1642, 
added  several  chapters  against  the  errors,  extravagancies, 


1 90  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

and  doctrines  of  the  continental  Anabaptists  of  the  six- 
teenth century,  which  he  ascribed  to  the  EngHsh  Baptists 
whom  he  called  Anabaptists,  dedicated  the  whole  to 
Parliament,  and  published  it  in  1645.  The  last  chapter 
was  a  criticism  of  the  Confession  of  1644,  in  which,  how- 
ever, he  could  find  only  six  articles  out  of  fifty-three 
which  he  regarded  as  erroneous.  Such  an  attack  from  a 
man  of  such  prominence  and  fame  demanded  some  reply 
from  the  Baptists,  especially  since  it  was  dedicated  to 
ParHament,  at  that  time  not  only  the  lawmaking,  but  also 
the  ruling  body  of  the  kingdom.  It  seemed  best  to  reply 
by  issuing  a  new  and  improved  edition  of  the  very  Con- 
fession which  Featley  had  criticized.  Accordingly  it  was 
subjected  to  a  careful  revision,  removing  obscurities  and 
infelicities  of  language,  reclassifying  the  material  and  re- 
arranging the  articles,  and  removing  as  far  as  possible  the 
language  objected  to  by  Featley  in  the  six  articles  criti- 
cized by  him.  Indeed,  they  went  so  far  in  this  latter  re- 
spect as  seriously  to  weaken  the  distinctive  Baptist  char- 
acter of  some  of  the  articles.  (See  "Review  and  Ex- 
positor" for  October,  1909.)  This  revised  edition  was 
then  dedicated  to  Parliament,  as  Featley's  attack  had 
been,  in  a  brief  but  vigorous  epistle.    They  begin : 

To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Lords, 

Knights,  Citizens  and  Burgesses  in 

Parliament  Assembled. 

Right  Honorable  and  Most  Noble  Patriots, 

In  as  much  as  there  hath  been  a  Book  [Featley's] 
lately  presented  unto  you,  in  whose  Dedicatory  Epistle 
there  are  many  hainous  accusations  unjustly  and  falsely 
laid  against  us,  we  conceived  it  necessary  to  make  some 
declaration  of  our  innocency,  and  (to  that  end)  humbly 
to  present  unto  your  view  this  our  Confession  of  Faith. 


The  English  Baptists  191 


Here  wee  unfainedly  declare,  what  in  our  hearts  wee 
judge,  and  what  wee  teach,  and  according  to  this  Rule 
wee  desire  and  endeavour,  through  the  grace  of  God, 
to  lead  our  lives.  This  Confession  of  our  Faith  we  send 
forth  to  speak  the  truth  for  us,  and  so  to  make  our 
innocency  to  appeare;  desiring  that  the  same  light  may 
guide  others  also  to  the  same  way  of  truth  and  of  obedi- 
ence both  to  God  and  to  the  Magistrate,  who  is  the 
Minister  of  God  to  us  for  good,  etc.* 

In  lieu  of  the  brief  preface  of  the  original  edition,  there 
was  a  lengthy  address  "  To  the  judicious  and  impartiall 
Reader,"  in  which  it  is  pointed  out  that  all  the  accusations 
made  against  them  were  made  against  Christ  and  the 
apostles,  such  as  stirring  up  sedition,  introducing  nov- 
elties, preaching  in  private  houses,  perverting  the  people, 
sectarianism,  etc.    It  then  continues : 

Not  fearing  to  charge  us,  with  holding  freewill,  falling 
from  grace,  denying  election,  originall  sin,  children's  sal- 
vation, the  Old  Testament,  and  men's  proprietie  in  their 
estates,  and  censuring  all  to  be  damned  that  are  not  of 
our  judgement  and  practice;  all  which  we  disclaime,  be- 
cause they  are  untrue.  And  as  for  the  other  things 
whereof  wee  are  accused,  wee  referre  those  who  desire 
further  satisfaction,  to  the  answers  of  themf;  yet  by 
reason  of  the  many  accusations  that  are  cast  upon  us, 
although  they  cannot  prove  the  things  whereof  we  are 
accused,  yet  the  generalitie  of  the  people  are  incensed 
against  us,  and  are  incouraged,  and  set  on  by  such,  to 
seek  out  the  place  of  our  meetings,  which  are  the  more 
private,  not  because  they  are  private,  but  because  wee 
have  not  any  more  publicke  places ;  but  if  any  shall  please 
to  procure  us  more  larger  places  to  meet  in,  wee  are  will- 
ing to  embrace  them  with  thankfulness  and  joy,  although 
no  man  should  speak  for  us  to  those  in  authoritie,  from 
whom  one  word  were  enough  to  protect  us,  from  the 

*  The  whole,  with  this  edition  of  the  Confession,  in  Underhill,  p.  i3f. 
t  Briefe  Considerations  on  Dr.  Featly,  his  Book,  intituled  The  Dippers  Dippt, 
by  Sajnuel  Richardson. 


192  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

violence  wee  should  be  subject  unto ;  but  as  it  was  then, 
Acts  17.  5,  6,  7,  so  it  is  now;  yet  must  we  beare  all  the 
blame ;  but  our  God  will  in  his  time  cleare  our  innocency, 
although  now  many  stand  looking  upon  us  as  a  people 
(holding  such  things)  not  worthy  to  live,  and  are  in 
danger  by  the  rude  multitude  gathering  together  to  stone 
us :  and  had  it  been  against  our  persons  onely,  we  would 
have  held  our  peace,  and  committed  our  cause  to  God; 
but  considering  it  is  the  truth  that  we  profess  that  suffers, 
we  may  not,  nor  dare  not  be  neuters  in  matters  of  so 
high  a  nature,  but  come  in  and  speak  to  the  help  of  the 
Lord  against  the  mighty. 

Therefore  to  free  ourselves,  and  the  truth  we  profess, 
from  such  unjust  aspersions,  that  it  may  be  at  liberty, 
though  we  are  in  bonds,  wee  have  published  a  brief  con- 
fession of  our  Faith,  (which  wee  conceive  most  void  of 
contention  in  these  sad  and  troublesome  times),  the 
thoughts  of  our  hearts  as  in  the  presence  of  God  wee  here 
declare,  that  it  may  appeare  to  the  consciences  of  them 
that  feare  God,  what  wrong  we  suffer  from  some  who 
have  ability  to  (Jude  14,  15)  cast  mists,  and  dark  clouds, 
which  overshadow  the  glory  of  the  truth,  and  them  that 
profess  it.  And  although  they  acknowledge  with  us, 
that  the  truth  is  not  fully  discovered,  yet  they  will  tie  all 
future  discovery  to  a  former  light,  and  conceive  they  doe 
well  in  so  doing.  But  God  will  by  his  truth  shew  their 
error,  and  exalt  Jesus  Christ  the  chiefe  corner  stone, 
which  the  builders  so  much  reject.  And  lest  this  should 
be  thought  to  be  the  judgement  of  some  particular  per- 
sons, this  is  done  by  the  consent  and  appointment  of 
seven  Congregations  or  Churches  in  London,  with  the 
names  of  some  of  each  of  them  subscribed  in  behalf  of 
the  whole.  And  although  wee  bee  distinct  in  our  meet- 
ings, for  conveniency ;  yet  wee  are  one  in  faith,  fellow- 
ship, and  communion,  holding  Jesus  Christ  for  our  Head 
and  Law-giver,  under  whose  rule  and  government  we 
desire  to  walke,  and  to  follow  the  Lamb  wheresoever  he 
goeth,  that  when  our  Lord  and  King  shall  call  us  to  ac- 
count, we  may  be  found  ready  and  worthy  to  be  received 
into  our  Master's  joy.  Untill  which  time  we  desire  to 
spend  these  few  dayes  we  have  here  to  remain,  to  the 


The  English  Baptists  193 


glory  of  God,  the  honour  of  the  Gospel,  the  Saints  com- 
fort, and  our  Countries  good,  to  our  own  account  at 
(2  TThess.  I.  8)  the  great  day  when  Christ  shall  come  in 
flaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not 
God,  and  that  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

Subscribed  by  us  in  behalf  of  seven  Congregations  or 
Churches  of  Christ  in  London.  As  also  by  a  French  Con- 
gregation of  the  same  judgement. 

Thomas   Gunne       John   Spilsbery  Paul  Hobson 

John   Mabbit  Samuel  Richardson  Thomas  Goare 

Benjamin  Cockes    Thomas  Munden       William  Kiffen 
Thomas  Kilikop     George  Tipping        Thomas  Patient 

Hanserd  Knollys    Denis  le  Barbier 
Thomas   Holms      Christophle  Duret 

The  sense  was  in  no  wise  changed  in  this  second 
edition,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  UnderhilL*  The 
articles  on  magistracy  were  somewhat  condensed  and  also 
altered  to  suit  the  changed  condition  of  the  kingdom. 
The  two  following  articles  were  added : 

Article  Lf  reads: 

It  is  lawfull  for  a  Christian  to  be  a  Magistrate  or 
Civill  Officer ;  and  also  it  is  lawfull  to  take  an  Oath,  so  it 
be  in  truth,  and  in  judgement,  and  in  righteousnesse,  for 
confirmation  of  truth,  and  ending  of  all  strife;  and  that 
by  rash  and  vaine  Oaths  the  Lord  is  provoked,  and  this 
Land  mournes.  Acts  8.  38.  &  10.  i,  2,  35,  44.  Rom. 
16.  23.  Deut.  6.  13.  Rom.  i.  9.  2  Cor.  10.  11.  jer.  4.  2. 
Heb.  6.  16. 

Art.  LII,  also  added  in  this  edition,  is  as  follows: 
"  There  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the 
just  and  unjust,  and  every  one  shall  give  an  account  of 

*  Complete  in  Underbill,  pp.  18-23. 

t  Featley  had  argued  that  Anabaptists  opposed  Christians  taking  the  oath  and 
holding  office.     This  article  is  the  answer. 

N 


194  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

himselfe  to  God,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
done  in  his  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
it  be  good  or  bad."    Acts  24.  15.    Rom.  14.  12. 

The  edition  is  completed  by  the  addition  of  this  noble 
and  touching  conclusion  following  the  Confession: 

The  Conclusion. 

Thus  we  desire  to  give  unto  Christ  that  which  is  his, 
and  unto  all  law  full  Authority  that  which  is  their  due,  and 
to  owe  nothing  to  any  man  but  love,  to  live  quietly  and 
peaceably,  as  it  becometh  Saints,  endeavouring  in  all 
things  to  keep  a  good  conscience,  and  to  doe  unto  every 
man  (of  what  judgement  soever)  as  we  would  they 
should  doe  unto  us,  that  as  our  practice  is,  so  it  may 
prove  us  to  be  a  conscionable,  quiet,  and  harmless  people, 
(no  ways  dangerous  or  troublesome  to  human  Society) 
and  to  labour  and  work  with  our  hands,  that  we  may  not 
be  chargeable  to  any,  but  to  give  to  him  that  needeth 
both  friends  and  enemies,  accounting  it  more  excellent  to 
give  than  to  receive.  Also  we  confesse  that  we  know  but 
in  part,  and  that  we  are  ignorant  of  many  things  which 
we  desire  and  seek  to  know :  and  if  any  shall  doe  us  that 
friendly  part  to  shew  us  from  the  word  of  God  that  we 
see  not,  we  shall  have  cause  to  be  thankfull  to  God  and 
them.  But  if  any  man  shall  impose  upon  us  any  thing 
that  we  see  not  to  be  commanded  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  we  should  in  his  strength,  rather  embrace  all 
reproaches  and  tortures  of  men,  to  be  stript  of  all  out- 
ward comforts,  and  if  it  were  possible,  to  die  a  thousand 
deaths,  rather  than  to  doe  any  thing  against  the  least 
tittle  of  the  truth  of  God,  or  against  the  light  of  our 
own  consciences.  And  if  any  shall  call  what  we  have 
said  Heresie,  then  doe  we  with  the  Apostle  acknowledge, 
that  after  the  way  they  call  heresie,  worship  we  the 
God  of  our  Fathers,  disclaiming  all  Heresie  (rightly  so 
called)  because  they  are  against  Christ,  and  to  be  sted- 
fast  and  immoveable,  always  abounding  in  obedience  to 
Christ,  as  knowing  our  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in 
the  Lord. 


The  English  Baptists  195 

Psalm  74.  21,  22. 

Arise,  O  God,  plead  thine  own  cause.     Remember 
how  the  foolish  man  blasphemeth  thee  daily. 

O  let  not  the  oppressed  returne  ashamed,  but  let  the 
poore  and  needy  praise  thy  Name. 

Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly. 

Finis. 

Nov.  30,  1646,  shortly  after  the  publication  of  this  edi- 
tion, Benjamin  Cox,  an  Oxford  graduate  of  some  culture, 
who  was  one  of  the  signers  of  this  edition,  and  probably 
assisted  in  the  revision,  published  twenty-two  articles,* 
which  he  says  were  "  occasioned  by  the  inquiry  of  some 
well-affected  and  godly  persons  in  the  country,"  and 
which  he  entitles,  ''  An  Appendix  to  a  Confession  of 
Faith,"  "  published  for  the  further  clearing  the  Truth." 
They  stiffen  the  Calvinism,  declare  belief  in  eternal 
punishment,  define  the  Christian's  relation  to  the  law  and 
to  good  works  more  clearly,  and  express  some  other 
points  a  little  more  fully  than  the  Confession.  They  were 
never  published  with  the  Confession  so  far  as  known. 

Later  Editions 

A  third  edition  appeared  in  London  in  165 1,  and  a 
fourth  the  following  year.  These  were  substantially 
reprints  of  the  edition  of  1646.  The  more  important 
changes  from  this  edition  are  indicated  in  the  notes  to 
the  Confession.  In  addition  to  those  there  indicated,  a 
few  minor  verbal  changes  occur ;  there  is  a  slight  soften- 
ing of  the  Calvinism  in  Articles  III  and  XXI,  and  Article 
XXXVIII,  enjoining  the  support  of  the  ministry,  is 
omitted  altogether.  This  last  important  change  was  prob- 
ably due  to  the  criticism  of  the  Quakers  who  sharply  op- 

*  Underbill,  pp.  49-60. 


196  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


posed  all  ministerial  support.  It  marks  the  beginning  of 
that  opposition  to  ministerial  support  among  the  Baptists 
which  has  been  so  hurtful  to  them.  These  two  editions 
were  termed  '*  The  third  Impression  corrected,"  and 
"  The  fourth  Impression  corrected." 

In  lieu  of  the  "  Epistle  Dedicatory  "  and  the  ''  Preface  " 
to  the  edition  of  1646,  these  two  editions  are  introduced 
with  an  "  Epistle  to  the  Reader,"  which  is  of  sufficient 
interest  to  reproduce  entire.  (Reproduced  from  1652 
edition.) 

Courteous  Reader, 

'^Here  is  nothing  zvherein  Saints  should  be 
more  conversant  than  in  promoting  the  hon- 
our of  the  Lord  and  his  Christ,  striving 
and  studying  to  walk  before  him  agree- 
able to  the  truth  recorded  in  his  zvord,  the 
consideration  of  which,  is  a  strong  inducement 
unto  us  to  ingage  (to  the  utmost  of  our 
abilities)  in  this  work,  that  zvhen  other  men  content  them- 
selves by  living  belozv  the  rule,  zve  may  strive  to  walk 
close  thereunto,  (suitable  to  the  pattern  left  us  by  God  in 
his  zvord)  and  when  many  account  it  their  glory  to  turn 
their  backs  upon  what  they  professed  to  have  received 
from  Christ,  we  may  strive  to  honour  God,  by  a  steadfast 
continuance  in  zvhat  zve  have  received,  and  in  a  diligent 
speaking  the  things  which  zve  have  seen  and  heard  from 
him;  the  zveight  of  which  at  first  prevailed  upon  us  to 
declare  unto  the  world  this  our  Confession  of  faith,  and 
faithful  Epistle,  which  we  have  again  reprinted,  and 
made  publiqiie  for  the  reasons  following. 

First,  the  invitations  and  earnest  solicitations  of  several 
of  our  Brethren,  from  all  parts  of  the  Nation,  whose 
hearts  long  to  behold  {in  publique)  our  stability  and 
perseverance  in  the  zvay  and  truth  of  our  God,  that  by  it 
they  may  have  wherezvith  to  put  to  silence  those  who  have 
lately  taken  liberty  to  reproach  and  undervalue  the  truth 
professed  by  us. 

Secondly,   that   the  zvorld  may   behold  that   through 


The  English  Baptists  197 

grace,  (by  which  alone  we  stand)  we  are  preserved  from 
hack-sliding  or  revolting  from  the  way  and  truth,  we  for 
same  years  have  followed  God  in:  In  zvhich  {through  the 
faith  and  obedience)  we  trust  to  be  continued,  unto  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

Thirdly,  that  we  might  prevent  Satan  and  his  accom- 
plices in  their  enterprises,  zvho  have  of  late  abounded 
more  than  ordinary,  with  stratagems  and  inventions  to 
circumvent  poor  Saints,  in  their  stability  and  love  unto 
the  truth,  amongst  zvhich  this  zvas  no  small  one  (in 
several  remote  parts)  that  we  had  cast  off  all  our  former 
profession  and  practise,  so  that  none  remained  together, 
zvorshipping  God  in  his  zvay,  ozvning  themselves  the 
Churches  of  Christ,  but  zvere  grozvn  up  to  a  further  at- 
tainment and  light  (as  they  say)  to  live  more  immediately 
with  God  and  Christ,  than  in  so  lozv,  mean,  and  con- 
temptible a  way  as  Ordinances,  thinking  thereby  to  stum- 
ble and  dishearten  many,  whose  hearts  were  approved  to 
God. 

Fourthly,  That  zve  might  take  off  prejudice  from  the 
hearts  of  those  (many  of  which  zve  have  comfortable 
hopes)  zvho  are  or  may  be  prejudiced  against  us, 
from  these  many  invectives,  and  bitter  unjust  reproaches, 
we  are  or  may  be  (for  worshipping  our  God  accord- 
ing to  our  consciences  and  rule  of  truth)  exposed  unto, 
and  they  (if  it  be  the  good  pleasure  of  our  God)  come 
to  understand  our  practise,  and  subject  themselves  to  the 
Lord  in  his  commands. 

Lastly,  The  remembrance  of  zvhat  good  this  our  under- 
taking hath  formerly  done  in  the  Countries,  where  it 
hath  been  spread  (of  zvhich  zve  have  had  particular  notice 
from  several,  zvhose  hearts  have  been  refreshed  there- 
zvith)  is  no  small  inducement  to  us  to  bring  this  forth 
again  in  print. 

Courteous  Friend,  zve  desire  thee  soberly  to  weigh  and 
consider  what  we  have  professed  before  men  and  Angels, 
out  of  the  simplicity  of  our  hearts,  and  let  not  prejudice 
prevent  thy  profiting,  but  make  it  thy  great  care  and 
study  to  give  up  thy  understanding  to  love  and  receive  the 
truth,  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  delighting  thy  self  in  that  Govern- 
ment, zvhich  is  by  his  own  hand  established  in  his  house; 


198  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


he  not  disheartened  although  thou  shouldst  hear  of  the 
miscarriage  of  so'me,  knozving  that  in  many  things  zve 
sinne  all,  and  come  short  of  the  grace  of  our  God,  or  if 
than  shouldst  be  advertised  of  the  falling  azvay  of  any  one, 
do  but  consider  we  live  in  the  last  ages  of  the  world, 
Wherein  many  shall  bepart  [sic]  from  the  truth,  {neither 
is  it  a  new  thing  for  men  to  relinquish  their  profession.) 
But  strive  thou  to  folloiv  God  fully,  and  to  stand  fast 
in  the  simplicity  of  the  truth;  and  God  our  Father,  and 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  thee,  and  he  thy  guide  and 
Counsellour, 

Signed  in  the  name,  and  by  the  appointment  of  the 
aforesaid  several  Churches,  meeting  in  London. 

William  Kiffin,  Edward  Harrison, 

John  Spilsbery,  Richard  Graves, 

Joseph  Sanson,  Edward   Roberts, 

Hugh  Gosnell,  Thomas  Waters, 

Thomas  Fault,  Henry  Forty, 

Joseph  Fatshall,  Thomas  Young, 

William  Conset,  John  Watson. 

In  the  kaleidoscopic  changes  of  these  years  in  England, 
both  king  and  Farliament  had,  by  1651,  ceased  to  be 
except  in  name.  IMoreover,  the  Baptists  who  had  at 
first  suffered  as  sectaries  were  themselves  suffering  from 
sectaries,  especially  the  Quakers.  In  the  way  of  a  re- 
action against  the  years  of  tyranny  and  oppression,  free- 
dom was  running  into  Hcense.  George  Fox  began  his 
work  in  1646,  emphasizing  the  authority  of  the  inner  light, 
depreciating  if  not  denying  the  authority  of  revelation 
in  Scripture,  the  atoning  work  of  Christ,  the  ordinances ; 
in  short,  historical  and  institutional  Christianity.  This 
was  particularly  hurtful  to  the  Baptists  who,  in  some  re- 
spects, had  already  traveled  a  long  distance  on  the  road 
Fox  was  going.  Many  of  their  members  fell  away  and 
made  shipwreck  of  the  faith.  Rumor,  in  remote  parts  of 
the  kingdom,  exaggerated  the  defection  in  London  into 


The  English  Baptists  199 


the  report  that  all  the  churches  had  fallen  away.  To  cor- 
rect this  impression  among  the  Baptists  outside  London, 
as  well  as  to  state  to  the  world  again  their  views,  the  Bap- 
tist churches  of  London,  of  which  there  were  now  several, 
united  in  pubHshing  these  editions  of  165 1  and  1652.  The 
two  former  editions  constituted  the  answer  of  the  Bap- 
tists to  the  slanders  and  misrepresentations  of  their  ene- 
mies; these  last  two  editions  were  the  answer  of  the 
London  Baptists  to  the  rumor  spreading  in  the  country 
that  they  had  given  up  their  former  views  and  "  were 
grown  up  to  a  further  attainment  and  light."  It  was 
hoped  also  that  it  might  steady  and  confirm  any  who 
might  be  confused  and  wavering  on  account  of  Qua- 
kerism. 

To  fit  the  Confession  for  more  effective  service  in  this 
direction,  there  was  appended  an  address  of  eight  closely 
printed  pages,  "  To  all  the  Churches  of  God  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,  with  all  that  in  every 
place  profess  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  both 
theirs  and  ours."  It  was  entitled  "  Heart-bleedings  for 
Professors'  Abominations."  The  title  sufficiently  indi- 
cates the  spirit  and  earnestness  of  its  authors.  It  is  in 
fact  a  burning  and  powerful  plea  for  biblical  Christianity 
against  the  views  of  the  Quakers  and  Ranters  as  well  as 
an  earnest  denial  of  the  charge  made  by  some  that  Baptist 
views  naturally  run  into  these  extremes.  It  is  maintained 
that  those  who  had  left  the  Baptists  went  out  from  them 
because  they  were  not  of  them  rather  than  as  a  logical 
result  of  the  Baptist  doctrines  they  had  once  held.  It 
closes  with  a  strong  plea  for  steadfastness  and  faithful- 
ness to  the  truth  in  the  midst  of  all  discouragements.* 

What  is  called  "  The  Fourth  Impression,  corrected  " 

*  This  address  had  been  published  by  the  churches  of  London  in  1650  as  a  "  general 
epistle"  of  warning;  it  was  now  and  henceforth  attached  to  this  confession. 


200  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

was  issued  in  ^March,  1653,  at  Leith,  Scotland.  A  brief 
letter  "  To  the  impartiall  Reader "  is  prefixed,  setting 
forth,  as  the  reason  for  the  publication,  the  errors  and 
prejudices  of  the  time.  Apparently  Quaker  teachings  are 
chiefly  in  mind.  It  is  "  signed  in  the  name  and  by  the 
Appointment  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  usually  meeting  at 
Leith  and  Edinburgh  "  by 

Tho.  Spenser, 
Abra.  Holmes, 
Tho.  Powell, 
John  Brady. 

A  "  Fifth  Impression  Corrected  "  was  issued  by  Henry 
Hills,  London,  in  1653.  It  is  a  reproduction  of  the  third 
and  fourth  editions. 

The  ''  Assembly,"  in  1689,  speak  of  "  divers  impres- 
sions "  of  the  Confession,  but  declare  that  it  was  then 
difficult  to  obtain.  It  was  printed  in  Crosby's  *'  His.  of 
the  Baptists,  Vol.  I,  Appendix."  It  was  reprinted  in 
1809,  and  in  1847  appeared  as  No.  86  in  the  series  of 
publications  issued  by  the  Baptist  Tract  Society.  There 
may  have  been  other  editions. 


The  English  Baptists  201 

2.    SOMERSET   CONFESSION 

The  first  Confession,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a  London 
Confession,  drawn  up  and  published  by  the  seven 
churches  of  the  city.  As  is  too  frequently  the  case, 
there  was  some  jealousy  and  fear  of  the  London 
churches  on  the  part  of  those  in  the  country.  Accord- 
ingly the  churches  in  the  west  of  England,  in  Somer- 
set and  adjacent  counties  which  had  formed  an  Associ- 
ation in  1653,  composed  and  published  a  Confession 
of  their  faith  in  1656.  It  is  signed  by  representa- 
tives from  sixteen  churches  in  the  counties  of  Somerset, 
Wilts,  Devon,  Gloucester,  and  Dorset,  and  in  a  special 
manner  by  Thomas  Collier  who,  in  the  year  1655,  had  been 
ordained  to  the  office  of  "  General  Superintendent  and 
Messenger  to  all  the  Associated  Churches,"  and  who 
probably  composed  the  Confession.  In  '*  The  Epistle 
Dedicatory,"  they  disclaim  any  dislike  to  "  the  former 
Confession  of  our  beloved  brethren,  whom  we  own,  and 
with  whom  we  are  one  both  in  faith  and  practice,  neither 
is  there  anything  in  ours  contradictory  to  our  brethren 
that  we  know  of."  The  reasons  given  for  publishing 
this  Confession  are :  to  show  their  agreement  with  the 
London  churches,  especially  in  the  matter  of  Calvinism; 
to  bear  "  a  public  testimony  before  all  men  that 
(through  grace)  we  do  with  one  soul  desire  to  cleave  to 
the  Lord,  contending  earnestly  for  the  faith  that  was  once 
given  to  the  saints  "  (this  in  opposition  to  the  Quakers, 
against  whose  dangerous  errors  there  is  a  long  and  ear- 
nest warning  and  exhortation)  ;  there  is  exhortation  also 
against  formality,  hypocrisy,  and  especially  "  pride  in  ap- 
parel and  covetousness " ;  Underbill,  pp.  61  to  106. 
Crosby's  text  is  reproduced  here,  except  that  the  Scrip- 
ture quotations  are  omitted.  (See  also  Crosby  I,  Ap- 
pendix III,  for  the  text.) 


202  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


CONFESSION 

OF  THE 

FAITH 

OF  SEVERAL 

CHURCHES  OF  CHRIST 

In  the   County  of  Somerset,  and  of 
some  Churches  in  the  Counties  neer  ad- 
jacent. 

I  Peter  iii.  15. 

Sanctifie  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts,  and  be  ready 
alwaies  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you  with  meekness 
and  fear. 

Mattew  X.  32. 

Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him 
will  I  confess  also  before  my  Father,  which  is  in 
heaven. 

Isaiah  viii.  20. 

To  the  Law  and  to  the  Testimony,  if  they  speak  not 
according  to  this  rule  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in 
them. 

Acts  xvii.  II. 

These  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessalonica,  in 
that  they  received  the  word  with  all  readiness  of  minde, 
and  searched  the  Scriptures  daily,  whether  those  things 
were  so. 

London,  Printed  by  Henry  Hills,  and  are  to  be 
sold  by  Thomas  Brewster,  at  the  three  Bibles 
at  the  West  end  of  Pauls,  1656. 
August  10. 


The  English  Baptists  203 

A  CONFESSION  of  the  FAITH  of  several  congrega- 
tions of  Christ  in  the  county  of  Somerset,  and  some 
churches  in  the  counties  near  adjacent.  Printed  at 
London,  Anno  1656. 

I. 

WE  beHeve  that  there  is  but  one  God  (i  Cor.  8:6.), 
who  is  immortal,  eternal,  invisible,  only  wise  (I  Tim. 
i:  17.),  holy  (Lev.  11:44.),  almighty  (Gen.  17:  i.),  in- 
finite (I  Kings  8:27;  Isa.  40:28;  Ps.  147:5);  a  Spirit 
(John  4:24.),  glorious  in  holiness  (Ex.  15:11),  just, 
merciful,  gracious,  long-suffering,  abundant  in  mercy  and 
truth  (Ex.  34:  6,  7.),  faithful  in  all  things  (Deut.  7:9.)- 

IL 

THAT  this  God,  who  is  so  in  himself,  did  according 
to  his  own  will  in  time,  create  all  things,  by,  and  for 
Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  1:2;  Col.  1:16;  John  2:3);  who 
is  the  word  of  God  (John  1:1)  and  upholds  all  things 
by  the  word  of  his  power  (Heb.  1:3.)- 

III. 

THAT  God  made  man  after  his  own  image  (Gen. 
1 :  27),  in  an  estate  of  uprightness  and  human  perfection 
(Eccles.  7:  29.). 

IV. 

THAT  God  gave  Adam  a  just  law,  requiring  obedience 
under  the  penalty  of  death  (Gen.  2:  17),  which  law  he 
brake,  and  brought  himself  and  his  posterity  under  the 
guilt  and  judgment  denounced  (Gen.  3:6;  Rom.  5:  12, 
17,  18,  19.). 

1  .       .        .  ^- 

MAN  being  in  this  undone  estate,  God  did  in  the  riches 

of  his  mercy  hold  forth  Christ  in  a  promise  (Gen.  3  :  15.). 

VI. 

THAT  in  process  of  time  God  gave  forth  his  laws  by 
the  hand  of  Moses  (Exod.  20;  John  i :  17),  to  fallen  man 
(Gal.  3:19),  not  for  justification  to  eternal  life   (Gal. 


204  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

3:  17;  Rom.  3:  20.),  but  that  all  might  appear  guilty  be- 
fore the  Lord  by  it  (Rom.  3  :  19;  5  :  20). 

VII. 

THAT  out  of  this  condition  none  of  the  sons  of  Adam 
were  able  to  deliver  themselves  (Rom.  8:3;  Eph.  2:1,5; 
Rom.  5:6.). 

VIIL 

THAT  God  continued  and  renewed  the  manifesta- 
tion of  his  grace  and  mercy  in  Christ  after  the  first 
promise  made  (Gen.  3),  in  other  promises  (Gen.  22:  18 
with  Gen.  12:  3;  Gal.  3:  16.)  ;  and  in  types,  as  the  pass- 
over  (Exod.  12:8  and  ver.  13  with  I  Cor.  5:7.),  and 
the  brazen  serpent  (Numb.  21:9  compared  with  John 
3 :  14)  ;  with  the  ministry  and  ministration  of  Moses  and 
Aaron,  the  sacrifices,  &c.  being  all  figures  of  Christ  (Heb. 
7 :  8  and  Chap.  9. )  ;  and  in  prophesies  ( as  Isa.  9:6;  11:  i , 
2 ;  53 :  6  compared  with  I  Pet.  2 :  24 ;  I  Cor.  15:3.)- 

IX. 

THAT  God  in  his  son  did  freely,  without  respect  to 
any  work  done,  or  to  be  done  by  them  as  a  moving  cause, 
elect  and  choose  some  to  himself  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  (Eph.  i :  3,  4;  2  Tim.  1:9.),  whom  he  in  time 
hath,  doth,  and  will  call,  justify,  sanctify  and  glorify 
(Rom.  8:  29,  30). 

X. 

THAT  those  that  were  thus  elected  and  chosen  in 
Christ  were  by  nature  (before  conversion)  children  of 
wrath  even  as  others  (Eph.  2:3;  Rom.  3:9.). 

XI. 

THAT  those  that  are  chosen  of  God,  called  and  justi- 
fied, shall  never  finally  fall  from  him,  but  being  born 
from  above  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith 
unto  salvation  (John  6:39;  10:28;  11:26;  I  Pet.  1:5; 
Ps.  89 :  30,  31,  32,  33,  34 ;  I  John  3:9;  John  14 :  19 ;  Heb. 
12:2;  Jer.  31:3;  John  10:29;  Ps.  37:28;  Jer.  32:40; 
Rom.  8 :  39 ;  I  Cor.  1:8,  9 ;  Rom.  8 :  30 ;  Ps.  48 :  14. ) . 


The  English  Baptists  205 

XII. 

THAT  when  the  fuhiess  of  time  was  come,  God  sent 
forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman  (Gal.  4:4,  5.)  according 
to  the  promises  and  prophesies  of  the  scriptures ;  who  was 
conceived  in  the  womb  of  Mary  the  virgin  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  (Luke  1:35;  Matt.  1:20.), 
and  by  her  born  in  Bethlehem  (Matt.  2:  11;  Luke  2:6, 

7.). 

XUL 

WE  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  truly  God  (Isa.  9:6; 
Heb.  1:8;  Rom.  9:5.)  and  truly  man,  of  the  seed  of 
David  (I  Tim.  2:5;  Acts  13 :  23 ;  Rom.  1:3.)- 

XIV. 

THAT  after  he  came  to  be  about  thirty  years  of  age, 
being  baptized,  he  manifested  himself  to  be  the  Son  of 
God  (Luke  3:21,  23  with  John  2:7,  11.),  the  promised 
Messiah,  by  doing  such  works  both  in  his  life  and  in  his 
death  which  were  proper  unto,  and  could  be  done  by  none 
but  the  Son  of  God,  the  true  Messiah  (John  1:49; 
6:9,  &c.). 

XV. 

THAT  this  man  Christ  Jesus  suffered  death  under 
Pilate,  at  the  request  of  the  Jews  (Luke  23 :  24.),  bearing 
the  sins  of  his  people  on  his  own  body  on  the  cross  (I 
Pet.  2:24),  according  to  the  will  of  God  (Isa.  53:6), 
being  made  sin  for  us,  (2  Cor.  5:11)  and  so  was 
also  made  a  curse  for  us  (Gal.  3:  13,  14;  I  Pet.  3:  18.), 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him 
(2  Cor.  5 :  II.),  and  by  his  death  upon  the  cross,  he  hath 
obtained  eternal  redemption  and  deliverance  for  his 
church.  (Col  i :  14 ;  Eph.  1:7;  Acts  20 :  28 ;  Heb.  9 :  12 ; 
I  Pet.  i:  18,  19.). 

XVI. 

THAT  this  same  Jesus  having  thus  suffered  death  for 
our  sins,  was  buried  (Matt.  27:59,  60.),  and  was  also 
raised  by  the  power  of  God  (Eph.  i :  19.)  the  third  day 
according  to  the  scriptures  (I  Cor.  15:3,  4.),  for  our 
justification  (Rom.  4:25.). 


2o6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


XVII. 

THAT  after  he  had  been  seen  forty  days  upon  the 
earth,  manifesting  himself  to  his  disciples  (Acts  i:3.)> 
he  ascended  into  the  heavens  (Acts  1:9,  10,  11;  Heb. 
4:  14.),  and  is  set  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God 
(Heb.  8:1;  Heb.  1:3.))  whom  the  heavens  must  receive 
until  the  time  of  the  Restitution  of  all  things.     (Acts 

3-21. )• 

XVHI. 

THAT  the  Father  having  thus  exalted  him,  and  given 
him  a  name  above  every  name  (Phil.  2:9.),  and  hath 
made  him  who  is  mediator  (I  Tim.  2:5),  priest  (Heb. 
10:21;  8:1),  prophet  (Acts  3:22.),  and  king  to  his 
people  (Ps.  2:6;  Rev.  15:3.).  As  he  is  our  priest,  so  is 
he  our  peace  and  reconciliation  (Eph.  2:14,  15;  Rom. 
5:9,  10.),  and  being  enter'd  into  the  holy  place,  even 
heaven  itself,  there  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God 
( Heb.  9 :  24. ) ,  making  continual  intercession  for  us  ( Heb. 
7:  24,  25.),  he  is  become  our  advocate  (I  John  2:1.)  by 
whom  we  have  boldness  and  access  unto  the  throne  of 
grace  with  acceptance  (Heb.  10:19;  Eph.  3:12;  Heb. 
4:  16.).  As  he  is  our  prophet,  so  he  hath  given  us  the 
scriptures,  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  as  a  rule  and 
direction  unto  us  both  for  faith  and  practice  (John 
5  :  39 ;  I  Pet.  1:10,  11,  12 ;  2  Tim.  3 :  16 ;  I  Pet.  10 :  20, 
21;  Eph.  2:20;  I  Cor.  14:37;  Tit.  1:2,  3.);  and  that 
he  hath  sent,  doth  and  will  (according  to  his  promise) 
send  his  Holy  Spirit  the  Comforter,  by  whom  he  leadeth 
us  into  all  truth  (John  14:26;  16:  13.)  ;  and  by  his  con- 
tinual presence  with  us,  and  in  us  (John  14:16,  17.), 
teaching,  opening  and  revealing  the  mysteries  of  the  king- 
dom, and  will  of  God  unto  us  (I  Cor.  2:  10,  11,  12,  13; 
Rev.  2 :  29;  5:5.),  giving  gifts  in  his  church  for  the  work 
of  the  ministry,  and  edifying  the  body  of  Christ  (Eph. 
4:8,  12;  I  Cor.  12:4,  5,  6.),  that  through  the  powerful 
teachings  of  the  Lord,  by  his  Spirit  in  his  church,  they 
might  grow  up  in  him  (Eph.  4:  15.),  be  conformed  to  his 
will  (Ezek.  36:27;  I  Pet.  1:2.),  and  sing  praises  unto 
his  name  (Heb.  2:12;  I  Cor.  14:15.).     And  as  he  is 


The  English  Baptists  207 

our  prophet,  and  king,  lord,  and  law-giver  (Isa.  33:22; 
55  :  4.),  Prince  of  life  (Acts  3  :  15.),  Prince  of  peace  (Isa. 
9:6.),  Master  of  his  people  (Matt.  23:8.),  Head  of  his 
church  (Col.  1:18.),  the  Almighty  (Rev.  1:8.),  so  he 
hath  given  rules  unto  us,  by  the  which  he  ruleth  over  us 
(Luke  6:46;  John  10:16;  I  John  2:4;  John  14:15; 
Matt.  28:20.),  and  ruleth  over  all  things  for  his  church 
(Eph.  1:22;  Rev.  19:16.)  and  by  the  power  of  love 
ruleth  by  his  Spirit  in  us  (2  Cor.  5:  14;  I  John  2:5.), 
making  us  (in  a  measure)  both  able  and  willing  to 
honour  him  (Phil.  4:  13;  Heb.  13:21;  Eph.  6:  10;  Phil. 
2:13),  and  bow  before  him  (Ps.  95:6;  110:3;  ^^^v. 
4:  10,  II.),  submitting  ourselves  to  him  alone  in  all  his 
commands  with  joy  (John  15:14;  Rev.  14:4;  7:15; 
Ps.  119:2,  47;  Rev.  15:3,  4.). 

XIX. 

THAT  the  Spirit  is  administred  by  or  through  the 
word  of  faith  preached  (Gal.  3:2.),  which  word  was 
first  declared  by  the  Lord  himself,  and  was  confirm'd  by 
them  that  heard  him  (Heb.  2:3.),  which  word  is  called 
the  gospel  of  God's  grace  (Acts  20:24.),  the  word  of 
reconciHation  (2  Cor.  5:19.),  the  sword  of  the  Spirit 
(Eph.  6:  17.),  the  weapon  of  a  Christian  (2  Cor.  10:  4.)  ; 
a  faithful  (Rev.  22:6.),  quick,  powerful  (Heb.  4:12.), 
plain  (Prov.  8:9.),  comfortable  (Rom.  15:4.),  pure 
(Ps.  12:6.),  right,  true  (Ps.  33:4.),  sound  (Tit.  2:8.), 
and  wholesome  word  (I  Tim.  6:3.). 

XX. 

THAT  this  spirit  of  Christ,  being  administer'd  by  the 
word  of  faith,  worketh  in  us  faith  in  Christ  (John  3:5; 
I  Pet.  1 :  22;  Acts  16:  14;  Gal.  5  :  22.)  by  virtue  of  which 
we  come  to  receive  our  sonship  (John  i :  12 ;  Gal.  3  :  26.), 
and  Is  further  administer'd  unto  us  through  faith  in  the 
promises  of  God  (Eph.  i :  13;  Acts  2:  38,  39;  Acts  1:4.), 
waiting  on  him  in  those  ways  and  means  that  he  hath  ap- 
pointed in  his  word  (John  14:15,  16,  17;  Luke  11:9, 
13.),  this  faith  being  the  ground  of  things  hoped  for,  and 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen  (Heb.  11 :  i.). 


2o8  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

XXI. 

THAT  justification  is  God's  accounting  and  declaring 
that  man  justified  from  the  guilt  and  condemnation  of  all 
his  sin,  who  hath  received  Jesus  Christ  and  doth  believe 
in  him  (in  truth  and  power)  according  to  the  record 
given  of  him  by  God  in  scripture  (Rom.  4:5;  I  John 
5:  10,  11;  Joh.  3:36.). 

XXII. 

THAT  justification  from  the  guilt  and  condemnation 
of  sin  is  only  obtained  through  faith  in  that  man  Jesus 
Christ,  crucified  at  Jerusalem,  and  by  God  raised  from 
the  dead  (Rom.  5:1,  9;  Acts  13:38,  39;  Rom.  4:25; 
10:9.).  And  that  those  who  bring  in  any  other  way  of 
justification,  do  therein  make  void,  and  acquit  themselves 
of  having  any  interest  in  the  gospel  and  grace  of  Christ 
(Gal.  2:21 ;  5:4.). 

XXIII. 

THAT  this  faith  being  wrought  in  truth  and  power, 
it  doth  not  only  interest  us  in  our  justification,  sonship, 
and  glory,  but  it  produceth  as  effects  and  fruits,  a  con- 
formity, in  a  measure,  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  his  will, 
graces  and  virtues  (Rom.  5:3,  4;  I  John  3:23,  24;  2 
Pet.  1:5,  6,  7;  Gal.  5:6;  Acts  26:  18;  I  Thess  1:3.). 

XXIV. 

THAT  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man  and  woman,  that 
have  repented  from  dead  works,  and  have  faith  towards 
God,  to  be  baptized  (Acts  2:38;  8:  12,  37,  38.),  that  is, 
dipped  or  buried  under  the  water  (Rom.  6:3,  4;  Col. 
2:  12.),  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  (Acts  8:  16.),  or 
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  (Matt. 
28:  19.),  therein  to  signify  and  represent  a  washing  away 
of  sin  (Acts  22:  16.),  and  their  death,  burial,  and  resur- 
rection with  Christ  (Rom.  6:5;  Col.  2:  12.),  and  being 
thus  planted  in  the  visible  church  or  body  of  Christ  (I 
Cor.  12:3.),  who  are  a  company  of  men  and  women 
separated  out  of  the  world  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
(Acts  2:41;  2  Cor.  6:17.),  do  walk  together  in  com- 
munion in  all  the  commandments  of  Jesus  (Acts  2:42.), 


The  English  Baptists  209 

wherein  God  is  glorified  and  their  souls  comforted  (2 
Thes.  i:  11,  12;  2  Cor.  i  :4.). 

XXV. 

THAT  we  believe  some  of  those  commandments 
further  to  be  as  followeth. 

1.  CONSTANCY  in  prayer  (Col.  2 :  23,  24.). 

2.  BREAKING  of  bread  (I  Cor.  11 123,  24.). 

3.  GIVING  of  thanks  (Eph.  5  :  20.). 

4.  WATCHING  over  one  another  (Heb.  12:  15.). 

5.  CARING  one  for  another  (I  Cor.  12:25)  by  vis- 
iting one  another,  especially  in  sickness  and  temptations 
(Matt.  25:36.). 

6.  EXHORTING  one  another  (Heb.  3  :  13.). 

7.  DISCOVERING  to  each  other,  and  bearing  one 
another's  burdens  (Gal.  6:2.). 

8.  LOVING  one  another  (Heb.  13:  i.). 

9.  REPROVING  when  need  is  one  another  (Matt. 
18:  15.). 

10.  SUBMITTING  one  to  another  in  the  Lord  (I 

Pet.  5: 5.)« 

11.  ADMINISTERING  one  to  another  according 
to  the  gift  received,  whether  it  be  in  spirituals,  or  tem- 
porals (I  Pet.  4: 10.). 

12.  THE  offender  to  seek  reconciliation,  as  well  as 
the  offended  (Matt.  5:23,  24.). 

13.  LOVE  our  enemies  and  persecutors,  and  pray  for 
them  (Matt.  5:44). 

14.  EVERY  one  to  work  if  he  be  able,  and  none  to 
be  idle  (2  Thes.  3:  10,  11,  12. 

15.  THE  women  in  the  church  to  learn  in  silence,  and 
in  all  subjection  (I  Tim.  2:  11 ;  I  Cor.  14:  37.). 

16.  PRIVATE  admonition  to  a  brother  offending  an- 
other ;  and  if  not  prevailing,  to  take  one  or  two  more ;  if 
he  hear  not  them,  then  to  tell  it  to  the  church;  and  if  he 
hear  not  them,  to  be  accounted  as  an  heathen  and  publi- 
can (Matt.  18: 15.). 

17.  PUBLICK  rebuke  to  publick  offenders  (I  Tim. 
5:20.). 

18.  THE  brethren  in  ministring  forth  their  gifts, 
ought  to  do  it  decently  and  in  order,  one  by  one,  that  all 

O 


2IO  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

may  learn,  and  all  may  be  comforted   (I  Cor.   14:31, 

40.). 

19.  A  SPECIAL  care  to  assemble  together,  that  their 

duty  to  God,  and  the  church,  may  not  be  neglected  (Heb. 
10:24,  25.). 

20.  AND  all  things  in  the  church,  done  in  the  name 
and  power  of  the  head,  the  Lord  Christ  Jesus  ( Col.  3 : 
17.). 

21.  THAT  in  admitting  of  members  into  the  church 
of  Christ,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  church,  and  ministers 
whom  it  concerns,  in  faithfulness  to  God,  that  they  be 
careful  they  receive  none  but  such  as  do  make  forth 
evident  demonstration  of  the  new  birth,  and  the  work  of 
faith  with  power  (John  3:3;  Matt.  3:8,  9;  Acts  8:37; 
Ezek.  44 :  6,  7 ;  Acts  2 :  38 ;  2  Cor.  9:14;  Ps.  26 :  4,  5 ; 
101:7.). 

XXVL 

THAT  those  that  truly  repent,  and  believe,  and  are 
baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  are  in  a  fit  ca- 
pacity to  exercise  faith,  in  full  assurance  to  receive  a 
greater  measure  of  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  (Acts  2:38,  39;  Eph.  i:  13.). 

XXVHL  [Sic  Original] 
THAT  it  is  the  duty  of  the  members  of  Christ  in  the 
order  of  the  gospel,  tho'  in  several  congregations  and  as- 
semblies (being  one  in  the  head)  if  occasion  be,  to  com- 
municate each  to  other,  in  things  spiritual,  and  things 
temporal  (Rom.  15:26;  Acts  11:29;  15:22;  11:22.). 

XXIX. 

THAT  the  Lord  Christ  Jesus  being  the  foundation  and 
corner  stone  of  the  gospel  church  whereon  his  apostles 
built  (Eph.  2:20;  Heb.  2:3),  He  gave  them  power  and 
abilities  to  propagate,  to  plant,  to  rule  and  order  (Matt. 
28:  19,  20;  Luke  10:  16),  for  the  benefit  of  that  his  body, 
by  which  ministry  he  did  shew  forth  the  exceeding  riches 
of  his  grace,  by  his  kindness  towards  it  in  the  ages  to 
come  (Eph.  2:y),  which  is  according  to  his  promise 
(Matt.  28:20.). 


The  English  Baptists  211 

XXX. 

THAT  this  foundation  and  ministration  aforesaid,  is  a 
sure  guide,  rule  and  direction,  in  the  darkest  time  of  the 
anti-christian  apostacy,  or  spiritual  Babylonish  captivity, 
to  direct,  inform,  and  restore  us  in  our  just  freedom  and 
liberty,  to  the  right  worship  and  order  belonging  to  the 
church  of  Jesus  Christ  (I  Tim.  3 :  14,  15;  2  Tim.  3:  15, 
16,  17 ;  John  17 :  20 ;  Isa.  59 :  21 ;  Rev.  2  :  24 ;  Isa.  40 :  21 ; 
Rev.  2:5;!  Cor.  14 :  37 ;  Rev.  i :  3 ;  2  Thes.  3 :  14 ;  Rev. 
2:11;  I  Pet.  1 :25;  I  John  4:6;  2  Pet.  i :  15,  16;  Isa. 
58:  II,  12;  2  Pet.  3:2;  Isa.  8:  20.). 

XXXI. 

THAT  the  church  of  Jesus  Christ  with  its  ministry 
may  from  among  themselves,  make  choice  of  such  mem- 
bers, as  are  fitly  gifted  and  qualified  by  Christ,  and  ap- 
prove and  ordain  such  by  fasting,  prayer,  and  laying  on 
of  hands  (Acts  13:3;  14:23.),  for  the  performance  of 
the  several  duties,  whereunto  they  are  called  (Acts  20: 
28;  Rom.  12:6,  7,  8;  2  Tim.  4:2;  Acts  6:3.). 

XXXII. 

THAT  such  a  ministry  labouring  in  the  word  and  doc- 
trine, have  a  power  to  receive  a  livelihood  of  their 
brethren,  whose  duty  it  is  to  provide  a  comfortable  sub- 
sistance  for  them,  if  they  be  able,  to  whom  for  Christ's 
sake  they  are  servants  (I  Cor.  9:  4,  7;  I  Tim.  5 :  17,  18.). 
Yet  it  is  commendable  in  cases  of  necessity,  for  them,  for 
example  sake,  and  that  they  may  be  able  to  support  the 
weak,  to  labour  and  work  with  their  hands  (Acts  20:24, 

25.). 

XXXIII. 

THAT  the  authority  of  Christ  in  an  orderly  ministry 
in  his  church,  is  to  be  submitted  unto  (Heb.  13:  17;  2 
Thes.  3:  14.). 

XXXIV. 
THAT  as  it  is  an  ordinance  of  Christ,  so  it  is  the  duty 
of  his  church  in  his  authority,  to  send  forth  such  brethren 


212  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

as  are  fitly  gifted  and  qualified  through  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  world  (Acts  13:  i,  2, 
3;  11:22;  8:  14.). 

XXXV. 

THAT  it  is  the  duty  of  us  believing  Gentiles,  not  to 
be  ignorant  of  that  blindness  that  yet  lieth  on  Israel, 
that  none  of  us  may  boast  (Rom.  11:25.),  but  to  have 
bowels  of  love  and  compassion  to  them,  praying  for  them 
(Rom.  10:  I.),  expecting  their  calling,  and  so  much  the 
rather,  because  their  conversion  will  be  to  us  life  from 
the  dead  (Rom.  11:  15.). 

XXXVI. 

THAT  it  is  the  will  of  the  Lord,  and  it  is  given  to  the 
saints  not  only  to  believe  in  him,  but  to  suffer  for  his 
name  (John  16:  13;  Phil,  i :  26.)  and  so  to  pass  through 
many  tribulations  into  the  kingdom  of  God  (Acts  14:22; 
2  Tim.  3:  12;  2:  12.). 

XXXVII. 

THAT  the  angels  of  the  Lord  are  ministring  spirits, 
sent  forth  for  the  good  of  those  that  shall  be  the  heirs 
of  salvation  (Heb.  1:14;  Ps.  91:11,  12;  Acts  27:23; 
Luke  22:  43.). 

XXXVIII. 

THAT  the  wicked  angels  (Ps.  78:49.)  kept  not  their 
first  estate  in  which  they  were  created  (Jude  6.),  the 
prince  of  whom  is  called  the  devil  (Matt.  8:28.),  and 
the  great  dragon,  and  the  old  serpent,  and  satan  (Rev. 
12:9.),  and  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  (Rev.  12:  10.), 
and  the  prince  of  this  world  (John  14:  30.),  and  a  prince 
that  ruleth  in  the  air ;  a  spirit  working  in  the  children  of 
disobedience  (Eph.  2:2.),  and  our  adversary  (I  Pet. 
5:8.),  whose  children  the  wicked  are  (Matt.  13:39; 
John  8:  44.)  To  him  we  ought  not  to  give  place  (Eph. 
4:  27.),  whose  power  Christ  hath  overcome  for  us  (Heb. 
2:14.),  and  for  him  and  his  angels  everlasting  fire  is 
prepared  (Matt.  25:41.). 


The  English  Baptists  213 

XXXIX. 

THAT  it  is  our  assured  expectation,  grounded  upon 
promises,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  the  second  time 
appear  without  sin  unto  salvation,  unto  his  people,  to  raise 
and  change  the  vile  bodies  of  all  his  saints,  to  fashion 
them  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  and  so  to  reign  with  him, 
and  judge  over  all  nations  on  the  earth  in  power  and 
glory  (Phil.  3:20,  21;  Heb.  9:28;  Acts  3:19,  20,  21; 
Matt.  19:28;  Rev.  2:26,  27;  I  Cor.  6:2;  Ps.  72:8,  11; 
Dan.  7\2y',  Zech.  14 :  9 ;  Ps.  2:8,  9 ;  Jer.  23  :  5,  6 ;  Ezek. 
21 :  26,  2y ;  Isa.  32 :  i ;  Rev.  11:  15 ;  Ps.  82 :  8 ;  Rev.  5  :  9, 
10;  20:6.). 

XL. 

THAT  there  is  a  day  appointed,  when  the  Lord  shall 
raise  the  unjust  as  well  as  the  righteous,  and  judge  them 
all  in  righteousness  (John  5:28,  29;  Acts  24:  15,),  but 
every  man  in  his  own  order  (I  Cor.  15:23;  I  Thes.  4: 
16.),  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and 
obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose 
punishment  will  be  everlasting  destruction  from  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Lord  (2  Thes.  1:7,  8,  9,  10;  Jude  14,  15; 
Rev.  20:  II,  12,  13,  14.). 

XLL 

THAT  there  is  a  place  into  which  the  Lord  will  gather 
all  his  elect,  to  enjoy  him  for  ever,  usually  in  scripture 
called  heaven  (2  Cor.  5:1;  John  14:  2,  3.). 

XLH. 

THAT  there  is  a  place  into  which  the  Lord  will  cast 
the  devil,  his  angels  and  wicked  men,  to  be  tormented 
for  ever,  from  his  presence  and  the  glory  of  his  power, 
usually  in  scripture  called  hell  (Mark  9:43,  44,  45;  Ps. 
9:17;  Matt.  25:41;   10:28;  23:33;  Luke   10:15;   16: 

230- 

XLHL 

THAT  it  is  both  the  duty  and  privilege  of  the  church 
of  Christ  (till  his  coming  again)  in  their  fellowship  to- 
gether in  the  ordinances  of  Christ,  to  enjoy,  prize,  and 


214  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


press  after,  fellowship  through  and  in  the  Spirit  with  the 
Lord,  and  each  with  other  (Acts  2:42;  I  Cor.  11:26; 
Eph.  2:21,  22;  Eph.  4:3,  4,  5.  6;  I  Cor.  12:  13;  Eph. 
3:9;  Col.  2:2),  which  we  believe  to  be  attained  through 
the  exercise  of  faith  in  the  death,  resurrection,  and  life  of 
Christ  (2  Cor.  5:14,  15,  16;  Col.  2:12;  Phil.  3:9,  10, 
11;  I  Pet.  2:5.). 

XLIV. 

THAT  the  ministry  of  civil  justice  (being  for  the 
praise  of  them  that  do  well,  and  punishment  of  evil- 
doers) is  an  ordinance  of  God,  and  that  it  is  the  duty  of 
the  saints  to  be  subject  thereunto  not  only  for  fear,  but 
for  conscience  sake  (Rom.  13:  i,  2,  3,  4,  5 ;  I  Pet.  2:  13, 
14.)  and  that  for  such,  prayers  and  supplications  are  to 
be  made  by  the  saints  (I  Tim.  2:  i,  2.). 

XLV. 

THAT  nothing  doth  come  to  pass  by  fortune  or 
chance,  but  all  things  are  disposed  by  the  hand  of  God, 
and  all  for  good  to  his  people  (Gen.  45 :  5 ;  50:  20;  Rom. 
8:28;  Eph.  i:  11;  Job  14:5;  Isa.  4:5,  7.). 

XLVI. 

AND  that  a  church  so  believing,  and  so  walking, 
though  despised,  and  of  low  esteem,  is  no  less  in  the  ac- 
count of  her  Lord  and  King,  than  though 

BLACK,  yet  comely,  Cant.  1:5. 
FAIREST,  without  spot,  Cant.  4 :  7. 
PRECIOUS,  Isa.  43 :  4. 
BEAUTIFUL,  Cant.  7:1. 
HOLY,  without  blemish,  Eph.  5 :  27. 
PLEASANT,  Cant,  i :  15. 
WHOSE  soul  loveth  Christ,  Cant,  i :  7. 
RUNNERS  after  Christ,  Cant,  i :  4. 
HONOURABLE,  Isa.  43 : 4. 
THE  desire  of  Christ,  Cant.  7 :  10. 
COMPLEAT  in  Christ,  Col.  2 :  10. 
LOVERS  of  the  Father,  John  16:  27. 


The  English  Baptists  215 

THE  blessed  of  the  Father,  Matt.  25 :  34. 

KEPT  by  the  Lord,  I  Pet.  1:5;  Isa.  2y :  3. 

GRAVEN  on  the  palms  of  his  hands,  Isa.  49 :  16. 

TENDER  to  the  Lord  as  the  apple  of  his  eye,  Zech. 
2:  8. 

TAUGHT  of  the  Lord,  Isa.  54:  13. 

ONE  that  hath  obtained  mercy,  I  Pet.  2 :  10. 

ONE  that  hath  a  redemption,  Eph.  i :  7. 

THE  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it,  Matt. 
16:18. 

IN  that  church  be  glory  imto  God  by  Jesus  Christ, 
throughout  all  ages,  world  without  end.  Amen.  Eph. 
2:  21. 

3.    ASSEMBLY   OR   SECOND   LONDON    CONFESSION 

The  Restoration,  in  1660,  greatly  altered  the  position 
of  the  Baptists  in  England.  During  the  Civil  War  and 
the  Commonwealth,  the  Presbyterians  and  Quakers  and  to 
some  extent  other  parties  had  bitterly  assailed  the  Bap- 
tists, charging  them  with  all  the  errors  and  all  the  calum- 
nies that  had  once  been  heaped  upon  the  Anabaptists. 
But  by  1660  Baptist  writings  and  Confessions  had  largely 
corrected  the  misapprehensions  and  fears  of  their  oppo- 
nents. Moreover,  the  Restoration  put  the  Episcopal 
Church  in  power  again  with  a  Parliament  determined  to 
enforce  uniformity.  Presbyterians,  Independents,  Bap- 
tists, and  Quakers  became  alike  Dissenters.  Common 
hardships  and  sufferings  as  well  as  common  needs  and  a 
better  mutual  understanding  begot  a  kindlier  feeling. 
The  Baptists  now  gave  a  signal  proof  of  their  desire  for 
as  much  harmony  and  fellowship  as  possible  by  the  prep- 
aration of  this  new  Confession. 

The  Westminster  Confession  had  been  published  in 
1648.  It  was  the  product  of  much  labor,  and  is  certainly 
one  of  the  noblest  of  all  the  Protestant  Confessions,  If 
indeed  it  has  a  peer.    It  had  been  at  once  adopted  by  the 


2i6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


Scottish  Kirk  and  Parliament,  displacing  Knox's  Confes-' 
sion ;  slightly  altered,  it  had  been  adopted  by  the  English 
Parliament,  and  was  held  as  authoritative  by  all  English- 
speaking  Presbyterians.     In  addition  to  this,  it  had  been 
adapted  to  their  view  of  the  church  and  its  relation  to  the 
State   by   the   Independents   or   Congregationalists,   and 
adopted  as  their  Confession  at  the  Savoy  in  1658.     The 
Baptists  of  London  and  the  surrounding  country  now  de- 
termined to  show  their  agreement  with  these  two  great 
Christian  bodies  by  making  this  Confession  the  basis  of 
a  new  statement  of  doctrine  by  themselves.    In  1675  the 
political  situation  seemed  to  promise  some  relief  to  Dis- 
senters.   Quick  to  seize  every  opportunity  to  advance  the 
interests  of  the  denomination,  the  London  Baptist  min- 
isters sent  out  a  circular  letter  to  all  the  churches  of  Eng- 
land and  Wales,  inviting  them  to  meet  in  London  the 
following  May  to  devise  some  means  for  providing  an 
adequate  ministry  for  the  churches.    The  letter  was  dated 
October  2,  1675,  and  was  signed  by  most  of  the  London 
ministers,  including  William  Collins  and  William  Kiffin. 
It  is  not  known  that  the  meeting  was  held,  but  in  1677 
such  a  meeting  seems  to  have  been  held,  and  this  West- 
minster Confession,  altered  to  suit  Baptist  views  of  the 
church  and  its  ordinances,  was  adopted.     The  work  of 
adaptation  was  done,  it  is  said,  by  Elder  William  Col- 
lins, pastor  of  Petty  France  in  London.     It  was  pub- 
lished   anonymously,    but    is    said    to    have    been    "  put 
forth   by  the   elders   and  brethren   of  many   congrega- 
tions of  Christians   (baptized  upon  Profession  of  their 
Faith)   in  London  and  the  country."     They  affirm  the 
agreement  of  this  Confession  in  substance  with  that  of 
1644;  but,  as  a  matter  of   fact,  there  are   differences 
of  considerable  scope  and  importance.     After  a  careful 
reading  of  the  former,  one  feels  himself  almost  in  a  new 


The  English  Baptists  217 

world  in  this.  There  are  striking  phrases  and  other 
reminiscences  of  the  former  Confession,  but  in  the  main 
all  is  changed.  To  begin  with,  this  is  much  more  complete 
and  finished  in  form.  New  subjects  are  treated,  e.  g.,  the 
Scriptures,  the  Sabbath,  marriage,  etc.,  the  Calvinism  is 
much  more  pronounced  in  some  respects,  the  view  of 
the  church  is  clearer  and  is  more  Calvinistic,  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  ordinances  is  more  rigidly  the  function  of 
officials,  the  view  of  the  Supper  is  almost  purely  Calvin- 
istic, and  there  is  no  restriction  of  it  to  those  scripturally 
baptized.  The  controlling  influence  in  these  great  changes 
was  undoubtedly  the  Westminster  Confession,  the  increas- 
ing stability  and  regularity  of  the  Baptist  churches,  and 
the  increasing  desire  for  harmony  with  other  Protestants. 
It  is  the  first  Confession  in  which  the  Baptists  of  London 
and  the  country  were  united.  Subsequent  editions  were, 
as  far  as  collated,  exact^reprints  of  this  original  edition 
except  in  minor  details  of  capitalization,  punctuation,  etc. 
After  the  Act  of  Toleration,  in  1689,  the  Calvinistic 
Baptists  of  England  and  Wales  held  their  first  General 
Assembly  in  London.  William  and  Mary  were  proclaimed 
king  and  queen  of  England  February  13,  1689,  and  the  Act 
of  Toleration  became  the  law  of  the  land  May  24.  On 
July  22,  1689,  William  Kiffin,  Hanserd  Knollys,  John 
Harris,  George  Barrett,  Benjamin  Keach,  Edward  Man, 
and  Richard  Adams  united  in  a  circular  letter  to  all  the 
Calvinistic  Baptist  churches  of  England  and  Wales,  in- 
viting them  to  send  from  each  church  two  messengers, 
one  of  whom  should  be  the  minister,  to  a  meeting  to  be 
held  in  London  beginning  September  3,  to  consider  the 
low  estate  of  the  churches,  and  especially  to  devise  means 
for  raising  up  a  more  numerous  and  better  equipped 
ministry.  The  response  was  gratifying.  Messengers 
from  one  hundred  and  seven  churches  in  England  and 


2l8 


Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


Wales  met  in  London,  September  3,  and  continued  in  ses- 
sion until  September  12.  Among  the  many  important 
things  done  by  this  first  Assembly  was  the  approval  of 
this  Confession,  a  second  edition  of  which  had  appeared  in 
1688,  and  the  recommending  of  its  perusal  both  by  other 
Christians  and  by  their  own  members.  It  was  published 
without  the  appendix  of  the  original  edition,  and  with  the 
following,  extracted  from  their  minutes,  prefixed : 

"  We  the  Ministers  and  Messengers  of,  and  concerned 
for,  upwards  of  one  hundred  baptized  congregations  in 
England  and  Wales  (denying  Arminianism)  being  met 
together  in  London,  from  the  third  of  the  seventh  month 
to  the  eleventh  of  the  same,  1689,  to  consider  of  some 
things  that  might  be  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of 
these  congregations;  have  thought  meet  (for  the  satisfac- 
tion of  all  other  Christians  that  differ  from  us  in  the  point 
of  Baptism)  to  recommend  to  their  perusal  the  confes- 
sion of  our  faith,  which  confession  we  own,  as  containing 
the  doctrine  of  our  faith  and  practice,  and  do  desire  that 
the  members  of  our  churches  respectively  do  furnish 
themselves  therewith." 


Hanserd  Knollys 

Pastor 

Broken  Wharf 

London 

William  Kiffin 

Do. 

Devonshire-Sq. 

Do. 

John  Harris 

Do. 

Joiners'  Hall 

Do. 

William  Collins 

Do. 

Petty  France 

Do. 

Hercules  Collins 

Do. 

Wapping 

Do. 

Robert  Steed 

Do. 

Broken  Wharf 

Do. 

Leonard   Harrison 

Do. 

Limehouse 

Do. 

George    Barret 

Do. 

Mile  End  Green 

Do. 

Isaac  Lamb 

Do. 

Pennington-St. 

Do. 

Richard  Adams 

Minister 

Shad  Thames 

Southwark 

Benjamin  Keach 

Pastor 

Horse-lie-down 

Do. 

Andrew  Gifford 

Do. 

Bristol,  Fryars 

Som.  &  Glouc. 

Thomas  Vaux 

Do. 

Broadmead 

Do. 

Thomas  Winnel 

Do. 

Taunton 

Do. 

James    Hitt 

Preacher 

Dalwood 

Dorset 

Richd.    Tidmarsh 

Minister 

Oxford  City 

Oxon 

William  Facey 

Pastor 

Reading 

Berks 

Samuel  Buttall 

Minister 

Plymouth 

Devon 

Christopher  Price 

Do. 

Abergavenny 

Monmouth 

Daniel  Finch 

Do. 

Kingsworth 

Herts 

John  Ball 

Tiverton 

Devon 

The  English  Baptists 


219 


Edmond  White 

Pastor 

Evershall 

Bedford 

William  Prichard 

Do. 

Blaenau 

Monmouth 

Paul  Fruin 

Minister 

Warwick 

Warwick 

Richard  Ring 

Pastor 

Southampton 

Hants 

John  Tomkins 

Minister 

Abingdon 

Berks 

Toby  Willis 

Pastor 

Bridgewater 

Somset 

John   Carter 

Steventon 

Bedford 

James  Web 

Devizes 

Wilts 

Richard  Sutton 

Pastor 

Tring 

Herts 

Robert  Knight 

Do. 

Stukely 

Bucks 

Edward   Price 

Do. 

Hereford  City 

Hereford 

William  Phips 

Do. 

Exon 

Devon 

William  Hawkins 

Do. 

Dimmock 

Gloucester 

Samuel  Ewer 

Do. 

Hempstead 

Herts 

Edward  Man 

Do. 

Houndsditch 

London 

Charles  Archer 

Do. 

Nook-Norton 

Oxon. 

In  the  name  and  behalf  of  the  whole  Assembly." 

In  this  form  this  production  became  the  most  in- 
fluential and  important  of  all  Baptist  Confessions.  New 
editions  appeared  in  1693,  1699,  1719,  1720,  1791,  1809, 
and  there  were  numerous  other  editions.  In  1693  the  As- 
sembly ordered  it  ''  translated  into  Latin  with  all  conve- 
nient speed,"  but  it  is  not  known  that  this  was  ever  done. 
Crosby  says,  in  1738,  that  it  was  at  that  time  "  still  gen- 
erally received  by  all  those  congregations  that  hold  the 
doctrine  of  personal  election,  and  the  certainty  of  the 
saints'  final  perseverance"  (Crosby  II,  317).  (For  its 
influence  in  America,  see  below.)  But  for  a  century  and 
more  it  has  been  losing  ground  in  England.  In  1888  the 
Union  distinctly  declined  to  reaffirm  it,  and  now,  so  far 
as  known,  only  two  small  bodies,  which  have  no  dealings 
with  the  great  body  of  British  Baptists  and  little  with 
each  other,  hold  it. 

[The  following  is  a  reproduction  of  the  original  edition 
of  1677.] 


220  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


CONFESSION 


OF 


FAITH 


Put  forth  by  the 

ELDERS  and  BRETHREN 

Of  many 

CONGREGATIONS 

OF 

Christians  (baptized  upon  Profession  of 
their  Faith)  in  London  and  the  Coun- 
try. 


With  the  Heart  man  believeth  unto  Righteousness,  and  with  the 
Mouth  Confession  is  made  unto  Salvation,  Rom.  lo.  lo. 
Search  the  Scriptures,  John  5.  39. 

Printed  in  the  Year,  1677. 


The  English  Baptists  221 


THE 
CONTENTS. 

Chap.     I.  Of  the  Holy  Scriptures,    page  i. 
2.  Of  God  and  the  Holy  Trinity.  9 

3.  Of  Gods  decrees.  13 

4.  Of  Creation.  17 

5.  Of  Divine  Providence.  19 

6.  Of  the  Fall  of  Man,  of  Sin,  and  of  the 
Punishment  thereof:  23 

7.  Of  Gods  Covenant.  26 

8.  Of  Christ  the  Mediator.  28 

9.  Of  Free-will.  35 

10.  Of  Effectual  Calling.  37 

11.  Of  Justification.  40 

12.  Of  Adoption.  43 

13.  Of  Sanctification.  44 

14.  Of  Saving  Faith.  46 

15.  Of  Repentance  unto  Life  and  Salvati- 
on. 49 

16.  Of  Good  works.  51 

17.  Of  Perseverance  of  Saints.  56 

18.  Of  the  Assurance  of  Grace  and  Salvati- 
on. 59 

[Page] 


222  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

19.  Of  the  Law  of  God.  62 

20.  Of  the  Gospel,  and  of  the  extent  of  the 
Grace  thereof.  67 

21.  Of  Christian  Liberty,  and  Liberty  of 
Conscience.  70 

22.  Of  ReHgious  Worship,  and  the  Sabbath 
day.  73 

23.  Of  Lawful  Oaths  and  Vows.  78 

24.  Of  the  Civil  Magistrate.  81 

25.  Of  Marriage.  83 

26.  Of  the  Church.  85 

27.  Of  The  Communion  of  Saints.  94 

28.  Of  Baptism  and  the  Lords  Supper.    96 

29.  Of  Baptism.  97 

30.  Of  The  Lords  Supper.  98 

31.  Of  the  state  of  Man  after  death,  and 
of  the  Resurrection  of  the  dead.     103 

32.  Of  The  Last  Judgment.  105 
An  Appendix  concerning  Baptism.     109 

[Page] 


The  English  Baptists  223 

TO  THE 

JUDICIOUS  AND  IMPARTIAL 

READER. 

Courteous  Reader, — It  is  now  many  years  since  divers  of 
us   (with  other  sober  Christians  then 
living  and  walking  in  the  way  of 
the  Lord  that  we  professe)   did  conceive 
our   selves   to   be  under   a   necessity   of   Pub- 
lishing  a    Confession    of   our   Faith,    for    the 
information,  and  satisfaction  of  those, 
that  did  not  thoroughly  understand  what 
our  principles  were,  or  had  entertained 
prejudices  against  our  Profession,  by 
reason  of  the  strange  representation  of 
them,  by  some  men  of  note,  who  had 
taken  very  wrong  measures,  and  accord  [page] 
ingly  led  others  into  misapprehensions,  of 
us,  and  them :  and  this  was  first  put  forth 
about  the  year,  1643,  in  the  name  of 
seven  Congregations  then  gathered  in 
London;    since    which   time,    diverse   im- 
pressions thereof  have  been  dispersed 
abroad,  and  our  end  proposed,  in  good 
measure  answered,  inasmuch  as  many 
(and    some    of   those   men    eminent,    both  ^ 

for  piety  and  learning)  were  thereby  sa- 
tisfied, that  we  were  no  way  guilty  of 
those   Heterodoxies   and   fundamental   er- 
rors, which  had  too  frequently  been 
charged  upon  us  without  ground,  or  oc- 
casion given  on  our  part.    And  foras- 
much as  that  Confession  is  not  now  com- 
monly to  be  had;  and  also  that  many 
others  have  since  embraced  the  same 
truth  which  is  owned  therein;  it  was 
judged  necessary  by  us  to  joyn  together 
in  giving  a  testimony  to  the  world ;  of 
our   firm   adhering   to   those    wholesome 
Principles,   by  the  pubHcation  of  this 
which  is  now  in  your  hand. 

And    forasmuch    as    our    method,    and    [page] 
manner  of  expressing  our  sentiments  in 
this  doth  vary  from  the  former   (although  the 
substance  of  the  matter  is  the  same) 
we  shall  freely  impart  to  you  the  reason  and 
occasion   thereof.      One   thing   that   greatly   prevailed 
with  us  to  undertake  this  work,  was  (not  only  to 
give  a  full   account   of  ourselves   to   those   Chris- 
tians that  differ  from  us  about  the  subject 


224  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

of  baptism,  but  also)   the  profit  that  might 
from  thence  arise  unto  those  that  have  any 
account  of  our  labours,   in  their  instruction 
and  establishment  in  the  great  truths  of  the 
gospel;  in  the  clear  understanding  and  stead}'^ 
belief  of  which  our  comfortable  walking  with 
God,  and  fruitfulness  before  him  in  all  our  ways 
is  most  nearly  concerned.     And  therefore 
we  did  conclude  it  necessary  to  express  our- 
selves the  more  fully  and  distinctly,  and  also  to  fix 
on  such  a  method  as  might  be  most  comprehen- 
sive of  those  things  which  we  designed  to  ex- 
plain our  sense  and  belief  of;  and  finding  no 
defect  in  this  regard  in  that  fixed  on  by  the 
Assembly,  and  after  them  by  those  of  the  Congre- 
gational way,  we  did  readily  conclude  it 
best  to  retain  the  same  order  in  our  present 
Confession.     And  also  when  we  observed   [page] 
that  those  last  mentioned  did,  in  their  Confession 
(for  reasons  which  seemed  of  weight  both  to 
themselves  and  others),  choose  not  only  to  ex- 
press their  mind   in   words   concurrent  with 
the   former  in   sense,   concerning  all  those  ar- 
ticles wherein  they  were  agreed,  but  also  for 
the  most  part  without  any  variation  of 
the  terms,  we  did  in  like  manner  conclude 
it  best  to  follow  their  example,  in  making 
use  of  the  very  same  words  with  them  both,  in 
those  articles   (which  are  very  many)   wherein 
our   faith   and   doctrine   is   the   same   with   theirs. 
And  this  we  did,  the  more  abundantly  to 
manifest  our  consent  with  both,  in  all  the 
fundamental   articles   of  the   Christian   re- 
ligion, as  also  with  many  others  whose 
orthodox  confessions  have  been  published 
to  the  World,  on  the  behalf  of  the  protestants 
in  diverse  nations  and  cities ;  and  also  to 
convince  all  that  we  have  no  itch  to  clog  re- 
ligion with  new  words,  but  to  readily  ac-  _ 
quiesce  in  that  form  of  sound  words  which 
hath   been,    in    consent   with   the   holy    scriptures, 
used  by  others  before  us;  hereby  declaring 
before   God,   angels,   and  men,   our  hearty 
agreement  with  them,  in  that  wholesome   [page] 
protestant  doctrine,   which,   with  so  clear 
evidence  of  scriptures  they  have  asserted. 
Some  things,  indeed,  are  in  some  places 
added,  some  terms  omitted,  and  some 
few  changed;  but  these  alterations  are  of 
that  nature,  as  that  we  need  not  doubt  any 
charge  or  suspicion  of  unsoundness  in 


The  English  Baptists  22^ 


the  faith,  from  any  of  our  brethren  upon  the  ac- 
count of  them. 

In  those  things  wherein  we  differ  from  others, 
we  have  expressed  ourselves  with  all  candour 
and  plainness,  that  none  might  entertain 
Jealousy  of  aught  secretly  lodged  in  our  breasts, 
that  we  would  not  the   world   should   be 
acquainted  with;  yet  we  hope  we  have  also 
observed  those  rules  of  modesty  and  humility 
as  will  render  our  freedom  in  this  respect 
inoffensive,  even  to  those  whose  sentiments 
are   different  from  ours. 

We  have  also  taken  care  to  affix  texts  of 
scripture  in  the  margin,  for  the  confirma- 
tion of  each  article  in  our  Confession;  in 
which  work  we  have  studiously  endea- 
vored to  select  such  as  are  most  clear 
and  pertinent  for  the  proof  of  what  is 
asserted  by  us ;   and  our  earnest  desire   [page] 
is,   that   all  into   whose   hands   this   may 
come  would  follow  that   (never 
enough  commended)  example  of  the 
noble  Bereans,  who  searched  the  scrip- 
tures daily  that  they  might  find  out 
whether  the  things  preached  to  them  were 
so  or  not. 

There  is  one  thing  more  which  we 
sincerely  profess,  and  earnestly  de- 
sire credence  in,  viz.,  that  contention 
is  most  remote  from  our  design  in 
all  that  we  have  done  in  this  matter; 
and  we  hope  the  liberty  of  an  inge- 
nuous unfolding  our  principles  and 
opening  our  hearts  unto  our  brethren, 
with  the  scripture-grounds  on  which 
our  faith  and  practice  leans,  will 
by  none  of  them  be  either  denied  to 
us,  or  taken  ill  from  us.    Our 
whole   design   is   accomplished   if  we 
may  obtain  that  justice,  as  to  be  measured 
in  our  principles  and  practice  and  the  [page] 
judgement  of  both  by  others,  according 
to  what  we  have  now  published ;  which 
the  Lord  (whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of 
fire)   knoweth  to  be  the  doctrine,  which 
with  our  hearts  we  most  firmly  believe, 
and  sincerely  indeavour  to  conform  our 
lives  to.     And  oh  that  other  contentions 
being  laid  asleep,  the  only  care  and  con- 
tention of  all  upon  whom  the  name  of 
our  blessed  Redeemer  is  called,  might 


226  ssrtL^  Co^s^cssions  of  Fa^fh 


_:    - 

■-"-■- 

•-     .^.-^ 

- 

,  -       .                 -     - 

ty.  "«   , 

z      -i-:-          _       ijes;    : 

-     • 

. 

■.jj^ 

-cfflj  tbexr  is  one  spnni 
'"^  drray  ci  Rrijeinw  ia 

I  and 
I  our 

5  o€; 

onfcipaf  God 
tbe  <±-r^ 

:  Z- 

Tl  -~  ~ 

-fl       1i:.\   ~ 

T^faffity' 

■  ^ 

-  '             "  -  -  "                           ■     ;      " 

.--; 

Wr    K 

"» 

-    T 

ZZ.z~ 

r  -      I 

'- 

~     - 

~     _     fc 

-       -     ^ 

ri«rf; 

The  English  Baptists 


^2^ 


jea 


tihat  the 
sores  of  : 
OB  of  tr::: 
bflicf,  2^- 

Chr    ■ 


A 

COXTZSSIOX  OF 


Of  Ae  H^lj  Scn^imm. 


^  3- 
-  -I 


iii&  an: 


228  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


Church  against  the  corruption  of 
the  flesh,  and  the  mahce  of  Satan, 
and  of  the  World,  to  commit  the  same 
*Pro.  22.  wholly    unto*    writing; 

Rom°'ir*  which  maketh  the  Holy  Scriptures 

4.°"2' Pet.  I.       to  be  most  necessary,  those  former 
19,  20.  ways   of   Gods   revealing  his   will 

unto  his  people  being  now  ceas- 
ed. 

2.  Under  the  Name  of  Holy 
Scripture,  or  the  Word  of  God 
written;   are  now  contained  all 
the  Books  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament,  which  are  these,   [page] 

Of  the  Old  Testament. 

Genesis,    Exodus,    Leviticus, 
Numbers,  Deauteronomy,  Joshua, 
Judges,  Ruth,  i  Samuel,  2  Sa- 
muel, I  Kings,  2  Kings,  i  Chro- 
nicles,  2   Chronicles,   Ezra,   Ne- 
hemiah,   Esther,  Job,   Psalms,   Pro- 
verbs,  Ecclesiastes,   The   Song  of 
Songs,   Isaiah,   Jeremiah,   Lamen- 
tations,  Ezekiel,   Daniel,   Hosea, 
Joel,  Amos,  Obadiah,  Jonah,  Mi- 
cah,    Nahum,    Habakkuk,    Zepha- 
niah,   Haggai,  Zechariah,   Mala- 
chi. 

Of  the  New  Testament. 

Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  John, 
The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Pauls 
Epistle  to  the  Romans,   i  Corin- 
thians,   2    Corinthians,    Galatians, 
Ephesians,    Philippians,    Colossians,    [page] 
I   Thessalonians,   2  Thessalonians, 
I  Timothy,  2  Timothy,  to  Titus, 
to  Philemon,  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  the   Epistle  of  James, 
The  first  and  second  Epistles  of 
Peter,  The  first,  second,  and  third 
Epistles  of  John,  the  Epistle  of 
Jude,  the  Revelation.     All  which 

6  2  Tim.  3. 16.    are   given  by  the  ^  inspiration 
of  God,  to  be  the  rule  of  Faith 
and  Life. 

3.  The   Books   commonly  called 

eLuk.  24.  Apochypha  not  being  of^  Divine 

p^^',^'^'^;  ->  inspiration,  are  no  part  of  the  Ca- 

Kom.  Z.2.  ^^^  ^^^  ^^j^^  ^^  ^^^  Scripture,  and 


The  English  Baptists  22g 

therefore   are  of  no   authority  to 
the  Church  of  God,  nor  to  be  any 
otherwise  approved  or  made  use 
of,  then  other  humane  writings. 

4.  The  Authority  of  the  Holy 
Scripture  for  which  it  ought  to  be 
beheved  dependeth  not  upon  the 
testimony  of  any  man,  or  Church ; 

but  wholly  upon"  God   (who   [page]  '2  Pet.  i. 

is  truth  it  self)    the  Author  there-  W\m.  V' 
of;  therefore  it  is  to  be  received,  16. 

because  it  is  the  Word  of  God.  2  Thes  2 

5.  We  may  be   moved  and   in-  5?*i9.^        * 
duced  by  the  testimony  of  the 

Church  of  God,  to  an  high  and 
reverent  esteem   of  the   Holy  Scrip- 
tures ;   and   the   heavenliness   of  the 
matter,   the    efficacy    of   the    Do- 
ctrine, and  the   Majesty  of  the  stile, 
the  consent  of  all   the  parts,  the 
scope  of  the  whole   (which  is  to 
give  all  glory  to  God)   the  full  dis- 
covery it  makes  of  the  only  way 
of  mans  salvation,  and  many  o- 
ther    incomparable    Excellencies, 
and  intire  perfections  thereof,  are 
arguments  whereby  it  doth  abun- 
dantly evidence  it  self  to  be  the 
Word  of  God ;  yet,  notwithstand-  ^ 

ing;  our*  full  perswasion,  and  13    14^' 

assurance  of  the   infallible  truth,  i  Cor.'  2. 

and  divine  authority  thereof,  is  10,  n,  12. 

from  the  inward  work  of  the  Holy  ^  20^*27' 

Spirit,   bearing  witness  by  and    [page]  ' 

with  the  Word  in  our  Hearts. 

6.  The   whole   Councel  of   God  ^ 
concerning   all    things^   necessary  1  i^'"  16 
for   his   own    Glory,    Mans    Salvation,  17.    Gal.'i. 
Faith    and    Life,    is    either    expresse-                        8,  9. 

ly   set   down    or   necessarily   contain- 
ed in  the  Holy  Scripture ;  unto 
which  nothing  at  any  time  is  to  be 
added,  whether  by  new  Revelation  of  the 
Spirit,  or  traditions  of 
men. 

Nevertheless    we    acknowledge 
the"    inward    illumination    of  451  Cor 

the   Spirit  of   God,  to  be   necessa-  2.9,  10, 

ry  for  the  saving  understanding  of  ".  12. 

such  things  as  are   revealed  in  the 
Word,  and  that  there  are  some 


230  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


circumstances   concerning  the  wor- 
ship  of    God,   and   government   of   the 
Church   common   to   humane 
actions  and  societies;  which  are  to 
"11  13'  14  ^^^^  ordered  by  the  light  of  na- 

&  "ch.  '14.  *  ture,   and   Christian  prudence   ac- 

26  &  40.  cording  to  the  general  rules  of  the 

Word,  which  are  always  to  be  ob- 
served,   [page] 
^^2  Pet.  7.  AH  things  in   Scripture  are  not 

3- ^^*  alike"  plain  in  themselves,  nor 

alike  clear  unto  all;  yet  those 
things  which  are  necessary  to  be 
known,  believed,  and  observed 
i*Ps.  19.7.  for  Salvation,  are  so  "  clearly 

and  119.  propounded,  and  opened  in  some 

place  of  Scripture  or  other,  that 
not  only  the   learned,   but  the   un- 
learned,   in    a    due    use    of    ordinary 
means,  may  attain  to  a  sufficient 
understanding   of   them. 
15  Rom.  8.  The  Old  Testament  in  \'  He- 

3-  ^'  hrew,    (which   was   the   Native   lan- 

guage of  the  people  of  God  of  old) 
and  the  New  Testament  in   Greek, 
(which    at    the    time    of    the    writing 
of  it  was  most  generally   known  to 
the   Nations   being   immediately 
inspired  by  God,  and  by  his  singu- 
lar  care   and    Providence   kept  pure 
i«Isa.  8.20.  j^  ^jj  ^ggg^  ^j.^  therefore '^  au- 

thentical;  so  as  in  all  controversies 
of   Religion,   the    Church   is   finally 

"Act.  15.15.       to  appeal  unto  them^^     But  be-   [page] 
cause   these   original   tongues   are 
not  known  to  all  the  people  of 
God,  who  have  a  right  unto,  and 
interest  in  the  scriptures,  and  are 
commanded  in  the  fear  of  God  to 

"Johns.  read^^    and    search    them,    there- 

^^'  fore  they  are  to  be  translated  into 

the  vulgar  language  of  every  Na- 

^®i  Cor.  tion,  unto  which  they^*  come, 

Jt  24^28"'       that  the  Word  of  God  dwelling'* 

20  Col.  3'.  16.'  plentifully  in  all,  they  may 

worship  him  in  an  acceptable  man- 
ner, and  through  patience  and 
comfort  of  the   Scriptures   may 

21 2  Pet.  I.  have   hope. 

Actor's  9-  ^^^  infallible  rule  of  inter- 

15,  "16. '  pretation  of  Scripture  is  the  "^ 


The  English  Baptists  231 


Scripture  it  self:     And  therefore 

when  there  is  a  question  about  the 

true  and  full  sense  of  any  Scripture 

(which  is  not  manifold  but  one) 

it  must  be  searched  by  other 

places   that  speak  more  clearly,    [page] 

10.  The  supream  judge  by 
which   all    controversies    of    Rehgi- 
on  are  to  be  determined,  and  all 
Decrees  of  Councels,  opinions  of 
antient  Writers,  Doctrines  of  men, 
and  private   Spirits,  are  to  be  exa- 
mined, and  in  whose  sentence  we 
are  to  rest,  can  be  no  other  but 
the  Holy  Scripture  delivered  by 

the  Spirit,  into  which  '*  Scrip-  ^  ^^^*-  ^^' 

ture  so  delivered,  our  faith  is  fi-  Ep'h.^2.  20. 

nally  resolved.  Acts  28.  23- 

CHAP.  n. 

Of  God  and  of  the  Ho- 
ly Trinity. 

I.  THE  Lord  our   God  is  but'  ^^  e^'^'Deut 
one   only  hving,  and  ^'  4' 

true  God;  whose"  subsistence^  2jer.'  10. 
is  in  and  of  himself,^  infinite  in  lo-    Isaiah 

being,  and  perfection,  whose  Es-   [page]  3  Exo^d.*  3. 
sence  cannot  be  comprehended  by  14. 

any  but  himself ;  *  a  most  pure  *  Jo^-  4- 

spirit,^    invisible,    without    bo-  Si'^Xim. 
dy,  parts,  or  passions,  who  only  1. 17. 

hath  immortality,  dwelling  in  the  Deut,  4. 

light,  which  no  man  can  ap-  e  Mai.'  3.  6. 

proach  unto,  who   is  ^  immuta-  '  i  King. 
ble,^   immense,  *   eternal,    in-  8-  ^7-    Jer. 

comprehensible,^  Almighty,  s  piai.^go.  2. 

every  way  infinite,^^  most  holy,  "Gen.  17.  i. 

most  wise,  most  free,  most  absolute,'**  "P^'i^ifi' 
Vi^orking  all  things  according  3.^^isa.  46. 

to  the  councel  of  his  own  immu-  10. 

table,  and  most  righteous  will,'*  "^"^^Rom 
for  his  own  glory,  most  lov-  3*6^ 

ing,  gracious,  merciful,  long-suffer-  *     j 

ing,  abundant  in  goodness  and 

truth,   forgiving  iniquity,  trans-  i*Exod. 
gression   and   sin,"  the   reward-  34.  6,  7. 

er  of  them  that  diligently  seek  i5N^h   ^^'^' 
him,  and  withal  most  just,'^  32^  33^* 

and  terrible  in  his  judgments,'"  i«Ps.  5/5,6. 
hating  all  sin,  and  who  will 


22)2  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


by  no  means  clear  the"  guilty,   [page] 

2.  God  having  alP^  life," 
glory/"    goodness,    blessedness, 
in  and   of  himself:   is   alone  in, 
and   unto   himself   all-sufficient,   not^ 
standing  in  need  of  any   Crea- 
ture which  he  hath  made,  nor  de- 
riving any  glory  from  them,  but 
onely   manifesting   his   own   glory 
in,  by,  unto,  and  upon  them,  he 
is  the  alone  fountain  of  all   Being,^* 
of   whom,   through    whom,   and 
to  whom  are  all  things,  and  he 
hath  most  soveraign  ^^  dominion 
over  all  creatures,  to  do  by  them, 
for  them,  and  upon  them,  whatsoe- 
ver   himself   pleaseth ;    in    his    sight  ^ 
all  things  are  open  and  mani- 
fest,   his    knowledge    is  ^    infinite, 
infallible,   and    independant   upon 
the  Creature,  so  as  nothing  is  to 
him  contingent,  or  uncertain;   he  is 
most  holy  in   all  his    Councels,   in* 
all  his  Works,  and  in  all  his 
Commands ;  to  him  is  due  ^  from 
Angels   and   men,   whatsoever 

worship,    service,    or   obedience  as    [page] 
Creatures  they  owe  unto  the 
Creator,  and  whatever  he  is  fur- 
ther pleased  to  require  of  them. 

3.  In   this   divine   and   infinite 

*  I  Job-  Being  there  are  three  subsistences,* 

28.^19.       '         the  Father  the  Word   (or  Son) 
2  Cor!  13.  and   Holy   Spirit,   of   one   substance, 

14.  power,   and   Eternity,   each   having 

5  Exod.  3.  the  whole  Divine  Essence,^  yet 

it  II  \^^  Essence  undivided,  the  Father 

I  Cor!  8.  6.        is  of  none  neither  begotten  nor 
8Joh.  I.  proceeding,  the  Son  is®  Eter- 

^'*'  ^^-  nally   begotten   of   the   Father,  the 

Joh.  IS.  holy   Spirit'   proceeding   from 

Gal.  4. 6.  t^?^   Father   and   the   Son,   all   infi- 

nite,  without  beginning,   therefore 
but  one  God,  who  is  not  to  be  di- 
vided in  nature  and  Being;  but 
distinguished  by  several  peculiar, 
relative   properties,   and   personal 
relations;   which  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity  is  the  foundation  of  all 
our  Communion  with  God,  and 
comfortable  dependence  on  him.  [page] 


"  Exod.  34.  7. 

Nahum.  i.  2,  3 

18  Joh.   5. 

26. 

10  Ps.  148. 

13- 

20  Ps.  119. 

68. 

a  Job  22. 

2,  3. 

2*  Rom. 

II-  34,   35, 

36. 

23  Dan.  4. 

25  &  5.  34,  35. 

2«  Heb.  4. 

13. 

1  Ezek.  II. 

5.    Act.   15. 

18. 

2Ps.  145. 

17. 

3  Rev.   5. 

12,   13,   14. 

The  English  Baptists 


^Z2> 


CHAP.  III. 

Of  Gods  Decree. 

1.  GOD  hath*  Decreed  in 
himself  from  all  Eternity,  by  the 
most  wise  and  holy  Coun- 

cel  of  his  own  will,  freely  and  un- 
changeably,  all   things   whatsoever 
comes  to  passe;  yet  so  as  thereby  is 
God  neither  the  author  of  sin,^ 
nor    hath    fellowship    with    any    ther- 
in,  nor  is  violence  offered  to  the 
will  of  the  Creature,  nor  yet  is  the 
liberty,    or    contingency    of    second 
causes  taken  away,  but  rather^ 
established,   in   which   appears   his 
wisdom   in    disposing   all   things,   and 
power,  and  faithfulness  *  in  ac- 
complishing his  Decree. 

2.  Although  God  knoweth 
whatsoever  may,  or  can  come  to 
passe  upon  alP  supposed  condi-   [page] 
tions;  yet  hath   he  not  Decreed  any- 
thing,* because  he   foresaw  it 

as  future,  or  as  that  which  would 
come  to  pass  upon   such   conditi- 
ons. 

3.  By  the  decree  of  God,  for  the 
manifestation  of  his  glory  ^  some 
men  and  Angels  are  predestinat- 
ed,  or   fore-ordained    to    Eternal 
Life,  through  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  ^ 
praise  of  his  glorious  grace ;  others 
being  left  to   act   in  their   sin 

to    their  ^   just   condemnation,   to 
the  praise  of  his  glorious  justice. 

4.  These  Angels  and  Men  thus  pre- 
destinated, and   fore-ordained,   are  particularly, 
and  unchangeably   designed,   and  their " 
number  so  certain,  and  definite,  that  it  can- 
not be   either  increased,   or   diminished. 

5.  Those  of  mankind  that 

are  predestinated  to  life,  God,  be-   [page] 
fore  the  foundation  of  the  world 
was  laid,  according  to  his  eternal 
and   immutable   purpose,   and   the 
secret    Councel    and    good    pleasure 
of  his  will,  hath  chosen  in  Christ 
unto   everlasting  glory,   out  of   his 
meer   free   grace   and   love ;  " 
without  any  other  thing   in  the 


1  Is.  46. 
10.     Eph. 
I.  1 1.     Heb. 
6.  17. 
Rom.  9. 
15,  18. 


3  Jam.   I. 
1  Joh.   I.  5. 


'Act.  4. 
27,  28, 
Joh.  19. 
II. 

*  Numb. 

23.  19. 
Eph.  I.  3, 

4,  5. 

BAct.  15. 
18. 

®  Rom.  9. 
II,  13,  16, 
18. 


7  I  Tim. 

5.  21. 
Mat.   25. 
41. 
^  Eph.  I. 
5,  6. 


»  Rom.  9. 
22,  23. 
Jud.  4. 


"  2  Tim. 
2.  19. 
Joh.  13. 

18. 
12  Eph.  I. 

4,  9,    II. 
Rom.  8. 
30.  . 
2  Tim.   I. 

9. 

1  Thes.  5. 

9. 

*^  Rom.  9. 
13.   16. 
Eph.    I.  6, 

12. 


234  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

creature   as   a  condition  or   cause 
moving  him  thereunto, 

6.  As  God  hath  appointed  the 
Elect  unto  glory,  so  he  hath  by 
the   eternal   and   most   free  purpose 

15 1  Pet.  I.  ^^  h^^  viiW,  fore-ordained  "  all 

2.       '    '  the  means  thereunto,  wherefore 

2  Thes.  2,  they  who  are  elected,  being  fain 

i«\^Thes.  ""^  Adam,^®  are  redeemed  by 

5.9,  10.  Christ,    are    effectually"    called 

17  Rom.  8.  unto  faith  in  Christ,  by  his  spirit 
2\hes.  2.  working  in  due  season,  are  justify- 
13.       '    '  ed,  adopted,  sanctified,  and  kept  by 

18  I  Pet.  his  power  through  faith  ^*  unto 

^' ^'  salvation;   neither   are   any  other 

redeemed  by  Christ,  or  effectually 
i»Joh.  10.  called,    justified,    adopted,    sanctifi-    [page] 

26.  ed,   and   saved,   but  the   Elect" 

Job.  17.  9.  only. 

7.  The  Doctrine  of  this  high 
mystery  of  predestination,  is  to 

be    handled    with    special   prudence, 
and  care ;  that  men  attending  the 
will  of  God  revealed  in  his  word, 
and   yielding   obedience   thereun- 
^  to,  may  from  the  certainty  of  their 

I.  4,  5!'  effectual  vocation,  be  assured  of 

2'Pet.  I.  their ^  eternal  election;   so  shall 

jj^io-  this   doctrine   afford   matter"^  of 

^^  Rom.  praise,    reverence,   and   admiration 

11,33.  of  God,  and^*  of  humility,  di- 

2*  Rom.  ligence,  and  abundant  "^  conso- 

25  Luk,'  fo.  lation,  to  all  that  sincerely  obey 

20.  *     *  the  Gospel,   [page] 

CHAP.  IV. 
Of  Creation. 

1.  IN   the  beginning  it  pleased   God 
the  Father,^  Son,  and  Holy 
Spirit,    for   the   manifestation   of 
the  glory  of'  his  eternal  power, 
wisdom,    and   goodness,    to   Create   or 
make  the   world,   and   all   things 
therein,  ^  whether  visible  or  in- 
visible,  in   the   space  of   six   days, 
and  all  very  good. 

2.  After  God  had  made  all  o- 
ther  Creatures,  he  Created  * 
man,   male   and   female,   with" 
reasonable  and  immortal  souls,  ren- 


ijohn 

Heb. 

Job  ; 

2  Rom. 

I. 

I. 
26. 

I. 

2. 
13 

20. 

3  Col. 
16. 
Gen. 

I. 
2. 

I, 

2. 

*Gen. 

I. 

27. 
5  Gen. 

2. 

7. 

The  English  Baptists  235 


dring  them  fit  unto  that  life  to 
God,  for  which  they  were  Created; 
being  ®    made    after    the    image  « Eccles. 

of  God,  in  knowledge,  righteous-  7-  29. 

ness,  and  true  holyness;  having  the  [page] 
Law  of  God  ^  written  in  their  '  Rom.  2. 

hearts,  and  power  to  fulfill  it;  ^4,  is- 

and  yet  under  a  possibility  of 
transgressing,  being  left  to  the  li- 
berty of  their  own  will,  which 
was^  subject  to  change.  ^  s  Qen.  3. 

3.  Besides  the  Law  written  in  6. 

their  hearts,  they  received^  a  "?^"&  ch 

command  not  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  2^8^  ^^  /, 

knowledge  of  good  and  evil; 
which  whilst  they  kept,  they  were 
happy  in  their  Communion  with 

God,   and   had   dominion"   over  11  Gen.  i. 

the  Creatures,  [page]  ^6,  28. 


CHAP.  V. 
Of  Divine  Providence. 

1.  GOD,  the  good  Creator  of  all 
things,  in  his  infinite  power, 

and  wisdom,  doth  ^  uphold,  di-  ^  Heb.  i 

rect,  dispose,  and  govern  all  Crea-  \\   ^%^  ^^^ 

tures,  and  things,  from  the  great-  10,*  11.    Ps.  ' 

est  even  to  the  "  least,  by  his  2  ?35-  6. 

most  wise  and  holy  providence,  to  29?  '30,%!. 

the  end  for  the  which  they  were 
Created;    according    unto    his    infal- 
lible foreknowledge,  and  the  free 

and  immutable  Councel  of  his^  ^Eph.  i. 

own  will;  to  the  praise  of  the  _  "* 

glory  of  his  wisdom,  power,  ju- 
stice, infinite  goodness  and  mer- 
cy. 

2.  Although  in  relation  to  the 
foreknowledge  and  Decree  of  God, 

the  first  cause,   all   things  come  to    [page] 
pass  *  immutably  and   infallibly ;  Act.  2.  2^. 

so  that  there  is  not  any  thing,  be- 
falls  any^  by  chance,  or  without  ^  Prov.  16. 
his  Providence ;   yet  by  the   same  ^^' 
Providence   he   ordereth   them   to 
fall  out,   according  to  the  nature 

of  second  causes,  either®  ne-  *?f""  ^' 

cessarily,   freely,  or  contingent- 
ly. 

3.  God  in  his  ordinary  Prov- 


22, 


236  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

idence '   maketh   use   of   means ; 
''Act,  27.  yet   is   free^   to   work,   without," 

31,44-  above,    and"   against   tliem 

Isa.  55.  10,         ^^  j^-^^  pleasure. 

8  Hos.  I.  7.  4.  The  Almighty  power,  un- 

» Rom.  4.  searchable   wisdom,   and  iniinite 

n  Dan  %f  ^'  goodness  of  God,  so  far  manifest 

27.  '    '  themselves  in   his  Providence,  that 

12  Rom.  II,  Jiis  determinate  Councel"  ex- 
2"Sam'24'^*        tendeth  it  self  even  to  the  first 

I,    1  Chro,         fall,   and   all   other   sinful   actions 
21- I.  both  of  Angels,  and  Men;    (and 

that  not  by  a  bare  permission)   which 
also  he  most  wisely  and  [page] 

13  2  Kings  powerfully  "  boundeth,  and 

19-  28.  otherwise   ordereth,   and   govern- 

Ps,  76.  10,  gj.j^^  |j^  ^  manifold  dispensation  to 

"  Gen.  50.  his  most  holy  "  ends :  yet  so,  as 

20.    Isa.  10.       the   sinfulness   of   their   acts   proceed- 
^'  7'  '^'  eth  only  from  the  Creatures,  and 

not  from  God;  who  being  most 
holy  and  righteous,  neither  is  nor 

^  1  joh°"2^'         ^^^  ^^'  *^^  author  or^®  appro- 
16.     "    *  ver  of  sin. 

5.  The  most  wise,  righteous, 

and  gracious   God,   doth   oftentimes,   leave 
for  a  season  his  own  children 
to  manifold  temptations,   and  the 
corruptions  of  their  own  heart,  to 
chastise   them   for   their    former   sins, 
or  to  discover  unto  them  the  hid- 
den  strength   of   corruption,   and 
i»2  Chro.  deceitfulness   of  their   hearts,^^ 

32.  25,   26,  that  they  may  be  humbled ;  and 

2^  Sam.  24,         **^  raise  them  to  a  more  close,  and 
1.    2  Cor.'         constant  dependence  for  their  sup- 
12.  7,  8,  9.         port,  upon  himself ;  and  to  make 
them  more  watchful  against  all 
future   occasions  of   sin,   and   for    [page] 
other  just  and  holy  ends. 

So  that  whatsoever  befalls  any 
"  Rom,  8.  of  his  elect  is  by  his  appointment, 

28.  for  his   glory,"   and  their  good. 

6.  As   for  those  wicked  and  un- 
godly men,  whom  God  as  a  righte- 

18  Rom.  I.  ous  judge,   for  former  sin   doth" 

?h!  f ?.'  7,  8,        b^^"^  ^^^  harden ;   from  them 
"  Deut.     '    *        he   not   only   withholdeth   his  ^^ 

29.  4.  Grace,  whereby  they  might  have 

been   inlightened  in  their  under- 
standing, and  wrought  upon  in 


IS 


The  English  Baptists 


^2>7 


their  hearts :  But  sometimes  also 
withdraweth  ^^  the  gifts  which 
they  had,  and  exposeth  them  to 
such^^  objects  as  their  corrupti- 
ons makes  occasion  of  sin;  and 
withal  "*  gives  them  over  to 
their   own   lusts,   the  temptations   of 
the  world,  and  the  power  of  Satan, 
whereby  it  comes  to  pass,  that 
they""  harden  themselves,  even 
under  those  means  which  God 
useth  for  the  softening  of  others,   [page] 

7.  As  the  Providence  of  God 
doth  in  general  reach  to  all  Crea- 
tures,  so   after   a   most   special   man- 
ner it  taketh  care  of  his  ^*' 
Church,  and  disposeth  of  all  things 
to  the  good  thereof. 

CHAP.  VI. 

Of  the  fall  of  Man,  of 
Sin,  and  of  the  Pu- 
nishment thereof. 

1.  Although  God  created  Man 
upright,   and  perfect,   and 

gave  him  a  righteous  law,  which 

had  been  unto  life  had  he  kept  it,* 

and  threatened  death  upon 

the  breach  thereof;  yet  he 

did  not  long  abide  in  this  honour;^ 

Satan  using  the  subtilty  of  the 

serpent  to  seduce  Eve,  then  by  her   [page] 

seducing   Adam,   who   without   any 

compulsion,   did   wilfully  transgress 

the  Law  of  their   Creation,   and 

the  command  given  unto  them,  in 

eating  the  forbidden  fruit;   which 

God  was  pleased  according  to  his 

wise  and  holy  Councel  to  permit, 

having  purposed  to  order  it,  to 

his  own   glory, 

2.  Our   first   Parents   by   this   Sin, 
fell  from  their  ^  original   righte- 
ousness and  communion  with   God, 
and   we   in   them,   whereby  death 
came   upon  all;*  all   becoming 
dead  in  Sin,  and  wholly  defiled,^ 

in  all  the  faculties,  and  parts, 
of  soul,  and  body. 

3.  They  being  the*  root, 

and  by  Gods  appointment,   stand- 


20  Mat.  13. 
12. 

»  Deut.  2. 

30- 

2  King.  8. 

12,  13. 
a*Psal.  81. 

II,  12. 

2  Thes.  2. 

10,  II,   12. 
25  Exod.  8. 

15.  32. 

Is.  6.  9,  10. 

1  Pet.  2. 

7,  8. 

*  I  Tim. 
4.  10. 
Amos  9. 

8,  9. 

Isa.  43.  3. 
4,  5- 


^  Gen.  2. 
16,  17. 

2  Gen.  3. 

12    13. 
2  Cor.  II. 

3- 


'  Rom.  3. 

23. 
*  Rom.  5. 

12  etc. 
5  Tit.  I.  IS. 

Gen.  6.  5. 

Jer.  17.  9. 

Rom.  3. 

10-19. 
®  Rom.  5. 

12-19. 

I    Cor.    15. 

21.  22,  45, 

49. 


238  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ing  in  the  room,  and  stead  of  all 
mankind ;   the  guilt  of  the   Sin 
was  imputed,  and  corrupted  nature 
conveyed,   to   all   their   posterity 
descending  from  them  by  ordina-  [page] 
■^Ps.  51.5.  ry  generation,  being  now'^  con- 

^Job  14.  4.  ceived  in  Siiij  and  by  nature  chil- 

^-P^*  ^'  dren^  of  wrath,  the  servants  of 

» Rom.  6.  Siih  the  subjects"  of  death  and 

20  &  ch.  all   other   miseries,   spiritual,   tempo- 

^Ueh.'  2.  ^^^  ^^^  eternal,  unless  the  Lord  Je- 

14,  "    "  sus^^  set  them  free. 

I  Thes.  I.  4.  From  this  original  corriipti- 

12  l?om.  8.  ^">   whereby   we   are  ^   utterly   in- 

7.  Col,  I.         disposed,  disabled,  and  made  op- 
21.  polite  to  all  good,  and  wholly  in- 

13 Jam.  r.  clined  to  all  evil,  do"  proceed 

14,  IS-  all  actual  transgressions. 

^^*-  ^5-  5^  This  corruption  of  nature, 

1*  Rom.  7.  during  this  Life,  doth  "  remain 

18,  23.  in  those  that  are  regenerated : 

Ixcles.  7.  and  although  it  be  through  Christ 

I  Joh.  I.  pardoned,  and  mortified,  yet  both 

8.  it  self,  and  the  first  motions  there- 
"24^^25'^'  ^^'  ^^^  truely  and  properly ^° 

Gal.  5'.  17.         -S"/;!.    [page] 

CHAP.  VII. 

Of  Gods  Covenant. 

I.  THE  distance  between  God 
and  the  Creature  is  so  great, 
that  although  reasonable  Crea- 
tures do  owe  obedience  unto  him 
as  their  Creator,  yet  they  could 
never  have   attained  the   reward  of 
iLuk.  17.  Life,  but  by  some^  voluntary 

Toij  t;  7  condescension   on   Gods   part,  which 

8.  '  he  hath  been  pleased  to  express,  by 

2  Gen.  2.  way  of  Covenant. 

J7-J       jQ  2.  Moreover  Man   having  brought 

Rom.  '3.  '  himself^  under   the   curse 

20,  21.  of  the  Law  by  his  fall,   it  pleased 

3  Rom.  8.  ^j^g   Lo7'd  to   make   a   Covenant  of 
Mark  16.  Grace  wherein  he  freely  offereth 

15,  16,  unto  Sinners,^  Life  and  Salvati- 
*Eze'k"''^^'  ^^  ^y  Jesus  Christ,  requiring  of 

36.  26,  27.         them  Faith  in  him.  that  they  may 
jfoh.  6.44.         be  saved;  and*  promising  to   [page] 

14"   no  3  ^^"^'^  ""*^  ^^^  those  that  are  ordain- 

ed unto  eternal  Life,  his  Holy  Spi- 


The  English  Baptists 


239 


rit,  to  make  them  willing,  and 
able  to  believe. 

3.  This  Covenant  is  revealed  in 
the  Gospel;  first  of  all  to  Adam 
in  the  promise  of  Salvation  by  the"* 
seed  of  the  woman,  and  after- 
wards by  farther  steps,  until  the 
fulP  discovery  thereof  was 
compleated  in  the  new  Testament; 
and  it  is  founded  in  that  *  Eternal 
Covenant  transaction,  that  was  be- 
tween the  Father  and  the  Son, 
about  the  Redemption  of  the 
Elect;  and  it  is  alone  by  the 
Grace  of  this  Covenant^  that  all 
of  the  posterity  of  fallen  Adam, 
that  ever  were  ^  saved,  did  ob- 
tain  life   and  a  blessed   immortali- 
ty; Man  being  now  utterly  unca- 
palDle  of  acceptance  with  God  up- 
on those  terms,  on  which  Adam 
stood  in  his  state  of  innocency.  [page] 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Of  Christ  the  Media- 
tor. 

1.  IT  pleased  God  in  his  eternal 
purpose,   to   chuse   and   ordain 
the  Lord  Jesus  his  only  begotten 
Son,  according  to  the  Covenant 
made  between  them  both/ 

to  be   the  Mediator  between 
God   and   Man;   the^    Prophet,' 
Priest  and*   King;    Head 
and  Saviour  of  his  Church,  the 
heir  of  all  things,  and  judge  of 
the  world:  Unto  whom  he  did 
from  all  Eternity®  give  a  people 
to  be  his  seed,  and  to  be  by  him 
in  time  redeemed,  called,  justified, 
sanctified,  and  glorified. 

2.  The  Son  of  God,  the  second 
Person  in  the  Holy  Trinity,  being  [page] 
very  and  eternal  God,  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Fathers  glory,  of  one 
substance  and  equal  with  him: 

who  made  the  World,  who  up- 
holdeth  and  governeth  all  things 
he  hath  made:  did  when  the  full- 
ness of  time  was  come  take  upon 
him  ®  mans  nature,  with  all 


B  Gen.  3. 
15. 

«Heb.  I. 
I. 

*2  Tim. 

I.  9. 
Tit.   I.  2. 


'Heb.    II. 

6,    13- 
Rom.   4.  I, 
2,  etc. 
Act.  4.  12. 
Job.   8.  56. 


1  Is.    42.  I. 
I  Pet.  I. 

19,  20. 

2  Act.   3. 
22. 

«Heb.  5. 

S,  6. 
*Ps.  2.6. 

Luk.   I.  33. 

Eph.   I.  23. 

Heb.  I.  2. 

Act.  17.  31. 
s  Is.    53.  10. 

Toh,    17.  6. 

Rom,   8. 

30. 


«Joh. 


I.  I, 


Gal.  4.  4. 


240  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


8Luk.    I. 

27,  31,  35 


the  Essential  properties,  and  com- 
'  Rom.  8.  rnon   infirmities  thereof/  yet 

14  ^6\7'         without  sin:  being  conceived  by 
ch!   4/15.'         the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Womb  of 

the    Virgin   Mary,   the   Holy   Spirit 
coming  down  upon  her,  and  the 
power  of  the  most  High  oversha- 
dowing her/  and  so  was  made 
of  a    Woman,  of  the   Tribe  of  Judah, 
of  the  Seed  of  Abrahani,^  and  Da- 
vid according  to  the  Scriptures : 
So  that  two  whole,  perfect,  and 
distinct  natures,  were  inseparably 
joined  together  in  one  Person: 
without   conversion,   composition,  or 
confusion:  which  Person  is  very 

2,  5.  *  Christ,  the  only  Mediator  between 

God  and  Man.  [page] 

3.  The   Lord  Jesus  in   his   hu- 
man nature  thus  united  to  the 
divine,  in  the  Person  of  the  Son, 

11  Ps.  45- 7-  was  sanctified,  anointed"  with 

Toh    3°34  *^^  Holy  Spirit,  above  measure; 

w  Col".  2.  3.  *  having  in  him  "  all  the  treasures 

13  Q^^    J  of  wisdom  and  knowledge ; "  in 

19."    *  whom  it  pleased  the  Father  that" 

1*  Heb   7  ^^^  fullness  should  dwell :  To 

26.  '  the  end  that  being"  holy,  harm- 

« jo'h.  I.  less,   undefiled,   and   full  ^° 

i«Heb   7  ^^  Grace,  and  Truth,  he  might  be 

22.  '  thoroughly  furnished  to  execute 

1' Heb.  5.  the  office  of  a  Mediator,  and^® 

isj'oh    5  Surety;  which  office  he  took  not 

22,  27.'  upon  himself,  but  was  thereunto  ^^ 

Mat.  28.  called  by  his  Father;  who   also 

A^ct  2  36  put^^  all  power  and  judgement 

i»'Ps.'4o.  7,  in  his  hand,  and  gave  him  Com- 

8.    Heb.  10.  mandement  to   execute  the   same. 

^'^^-  jQ  4.  This  office  the  Lord  Jesus  did 

18.'      '  most"  willingly  undertake, 

20  Gal.  4.  4.  which  that  he  might  discharge  he 

21  Gal*'  3'^^"  "^^^   made   under  the   Law/"   and 

13!'  isa.  53.  did  perfectly  fulfill  it,  and  under-  [page] 

6.    I  Pet.  went  the  "^  punishment  due  to 

24  2  Cor  ^^>  which  we  should  have  born 

5.21.*  and  suffered,  being  made  ^*  Sin 

26  Mat.  26.  and  a  Curse  for  us :  enduring  most 

^7.  38.  grievous  sorrows  ^®  in  his  Soul ; 

L.UK.    22.  °      ,  ,  •     r    1  rr      •  •       u* 

44.    Mat.  and  most  pamful  suffermgs  m  his 

27.46.  body;  was  crucified,  and  died, 


The  English  Baptists 


241 


and  remained  in  the  state  of  the 
dead ;  yet  saw  no  ^'^  corruption  : 
on  the  ^  third  day  he  arose  from 
the  dead,  with  the  same "  body  in 
which  he  suffered;  with  which  he 
also  ®  ascended  into  heaven : 
and  there  sitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  his  Father,^  making  interces- 
sion; and  shall*  return  to  judge 
Men  and  Angels^  at  the  end  of  the  World. 

5.  The  Lord  Jesus  by  his  per- 
fect obedience  and  sacrifice  of  him- 
self,  which   he   through  the   Eter- 
nal Spirit  once  offered  up  unto 
God,^  hath  fully  satisfied  the 
Justice  of  God,  procured  reconci- 
liation, and  purchased  an  Everlast-   [page] 
ing  inheritance  in  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven,^  for  all  those  whom 

the  Father  hath  given  unto  him. 

6.  Although  the  price  of  Re- 
demption was  not  actually  paid  by 
Christ,  till  after  his  Incarnation,^ 
yet  the  vertue,  efficacy,  and  benefit 
thereof  were  communicated  to  the 
Elect  in  all  ages  successively,  from 
the  beginning  of  the  World,  in 

and  by  those  Promises,  Types,  and 
Sacrifices,  wherein  he  was  reveal- 
ed, and  signified  to  be  the  Seed  of 
the  Woman,  which  should  bruise 
the  Serpents  head ;  *  and  the 
Lamb   slain   from  the   foundation   of 
the  World:®  Being  the  same 
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever. 

7.  Christ  in  the  work  of  Medi- 
ation acteth   according  to  both   na- 
tures, by  each  nature  doing  that 
which  is  proper  to  it  self;  yet  by 
reason  of  the  Unity  of  the  Person, 
that  which  is  proper  to  one  na-  [page] 
ture,   is   sometimes   in   Scripture   at- 
tributed to  the  Person "  deno- 
minated by  the  other  nature. 

8.  To  all  those  for  whom  Christ 
hath  obtained  eternal  redempti- 
on, he  doth  certainly,  and  effe- 
ctually" apply,  and  communi- 
cate the  same ;  making  intercessi- 
on for  them,  uniting  them  to  him- 
self by  his  spirit,"  revealing 


2«Act.   13. 

1  I  Cor.  15.  3,  4. 
2Joh.  20. 

25,    27. 
8  Mark  16. 

19. 

Act.   I.  9, 

10,    II. 
*  Rom.  8. 

34. 

Heb.  9.  24. 
B  Act.    I  o. 
42.     Rom. 
14.  9,    10. 
Act.    I.  10. 


«Heb.  9. 
14.     Ch. 
14.     Rom, 
3.  25,  26. 


ID. 


■7  Job.    17. 
2.  Heb.  9. 
IS. 


*  I   Cor.  4. 
10. 

Heb.  4.  2. 
I  Pet.  I. 
10,    II. 


8  Rev.    13. 
8. 

»Heb.    13. 
8. 


"Job.  3.      • 

13- 

Act.   20. 

28. 
"Job.    6. 

37.     ch.    10. 

15,    16. 

&  ch.   17. 

"Joh.    17. 
6.     Epb.   I. 
9.     I  Joh. 
5.  20. 


242  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

unto  them,  in  and  by  the  word, 
the  mystery  of  salvation ;  perswa- 
1*  Rom,  8,  ding  them  to  beheve,  and  obey ;  " 

9'  ^■**  governing  their  hearts  by  his 

15  ps.  no.  word  and  spirit,  and  ^^  over- 

is  2^s    2^  coming  all  their  enemies  by  his 

Almighty   power,   and  wisdom ; 
in  such  manner,  and  wayes  as  are 
most  consonant  to  his  wonderful, 
i«joh.  3.8.  and  ^"^  unsearchable   dispensati- 

Eph.  1.8.  Qj^.   ^^^^  ^jj  q£  £j.gg^  ^j^(j  absolute 

Grace,  without  any  condition 

foreseen  in  them,  to  procure  it.    [page] 

9.  This  office  of  Mediator  be- 
"  1  Tim.               tween  God  and  man,  is  proper  " 

^"  5-  onely  to  Christ,  who  is  the 

Prophet,   Priest,  and  King  of  the 
Church  of  God;   and  may  not  be 
either  in  whole,  or  any  part  there- 
of transfer  ed  from  him  to  any  o- 
ther. 

10.  This  number  and  order  of 
Offices  is  necessary;  for  in  re- 

18  Job.  I.  spect  of  our  ^^  ignorance,  we 

^^'  stand  in  need  of  his  prophetical 

Office;  and  in  respect  of  our  alie- 
ns Col.  I.  nation   from  God,'"  and  imper-  _ 
21.  fection  of  the  best  of  our  services, 
Gal.  5.  17.  ^^  nttd  his  Priestly  office,  to  re- 
concile us,   and  present  us   accepta- 
ble unto  God :  and  in  respect  of 
our  averseness,  and  utter  inabihty 
to  return  to  Cod,  and  for  our  re- 
scue, and   security  from  our  spiritu- 
al adversaries,  we  need  his  Kingly 
2*>Joh.  16.  office,^*^  to  convince,  subdue, 
8.     Ps    no.       draw,  uphold,  deliver,  and  pre- 
3     Luk.  I.         serve  us  to  his   Heavenly  King- 
dome. 

CHAP.  IX. 

Of  Free  Will. 

1.  GOD  hath  indued  the  Will 
of   Man,   with  that  natural 
liberty,  and  power  of  acting  up- 

1  Mat.  17.  on  choice;  that  it  is^  neither 

14     Deut  ^'      forced,  nor  by  any  necessity  of  na- 
30!  19.      *         ture   determined  to  do  good  or 
evil. 

2.  Man  in  his  state  of  innocen- 
cy,  had  freedom,  and  power,  to 


The  English  Baptists 


[page] 


will,  and  to  do  that^  which  was 
good,  and  well-pleasing  to  God ; 
but  yet^  was  mutable,  so  that  he 
might  fall   from  it. 

3._Man  by  his  fall  into  a  state 
of  sin  hath  wholly  lost*  all  abi- 
lity of  Will,  to  any  spiritual  good 
accompanying  salvation;    so   as   a 
natural  man,  being  altogether  a- 
verse  from  that  good,^  and  dead 
in  Sin,  is  not  able,  by  his  own 
strength,  to®  convert  himself; 
or  to  prepare  himself  thereunto. 

4.  When  God  converts  a  sin- 
ner, and  translates  him  into  the 
state  of  Grace,^  he  freeth  him 
from  his  natural  bondage  under 
sin,  and  by  his  grace  alone,  ena- 
bles him^  freely  to  will,  and  to 
do  that  which  is  spiritually  good; 
yet  so  as  that  by  reason  of  his  ® 
remaining  corruptions  he  doth  not 
perfectly  nor  only  will  that  which 
is  good;  but  doth  also  will  that 
which  is  evil. 

5.  The  Will  of  Man  is  made" 
perfectly,    and    immutably    free 

to  good  alone,  in  the  state  of  Glo- 
ry only,    [page] 


243 


CHAP.  X. 

Of  Effectual  Calling. 

I.  THose  whom  God  hath  pre- 
destinated unto  Life,  he  is 
pleased,  in  his  appointed,  and  ac- 
cepted time,^  effectually  to  call 
by  his  word,  and  Spirit,  out  of  that 
state  of  sin,  and  death,  in  which 
they  are  by  nature,  to  grace  and 
Salvation^  by  Jesus  Christ;  in- 
lightning  their  minds,  spiritually, 
and  savingly  to^  understand  the 
things  of  God;  taking  away  their* 
heart  of  stone,  and  giving  un- 
to them  an  heart  of  flesh;  renew- 
ing  their   wills,   and   by   his   Almigh- 
ty power  determining  them  ^  to 
that  which  is  good,  and  effectual- 
ly drawing  them  to  Jesus  Christ; 
yet  so  as  they  come*  most  free-  [page] 


2Eccl.  7. 

29. 

3  Gen.  3.  6. 

*  Rom.  5. 
6.     ch.  8.  7. 

°  Eph.   2. 
I,   s. 

«  Tit.  3.  3, 
4,  5.     Job. 
6.44. 

'Col.  I. 
13.    Job.  8. 
36. 

8  Phil.    2. 
13. 

»Rom.   7. 
15,   18,   19, 
21,  23. 

"Eph.  4. 
13. 

iRom.  8. 
30.      Rom. 
II.  7.      Eph. 
I.  10,    II. 
2  Thes.  3. 
13,    14. 

2  Eph.  2. 
1-6. 

3  Act.  26. 
18.     Eph. 
I.  17,   18. 

*  Ezek.  36. 
26. 

5  Deut.   30. 

6.     Ezek. 

36.  27, 

Eph.     I.  19. 
*Ps.    no. 

3.    Cant.  I. 

4. 


244  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


ly,  being  made  willing  by  his 
Grace. 

2.  This   Effectual   Call  is   of 
God's  free,  and  special  grace  a- 

'  2  Tim.  lone "  not  from  anything  at  all 

1.  9.    Eph.         foreseen  in  man,  nor  from  any  po- 
^*   '  wer,  or  agency  in  the  Creature, 

8  I  Cor.  coworking  with  his  special  Grace,' 

2.  14.  the  Creature  being  wholly  pas- 
f^h'  ^' 2k  ^^^'^  therein,  being  dead  in  sins  and 
^°  •  ^'   5*         trespasses,  until  being  quickened  & 

renewed  by  the  holy  Spirit,  he  is 
thereby  enabled  to  answer  this 
call,  and  to  embrace  the  Grace  of- 
fered and  conveyed  in  it;  and  that 
»  Eph.  I.  by  no  less  ®  power,  then  that 

^9>  20.  which  raised  up   Christ  from  the 

dead. 

3.  Elect  Infants  dying  in  infan- 
"•  Job.  3.  3.           cy,  are  "  regenerated  and  saved 

j2  5,  6.  \yy  Christ  through  the  Spirit ;  who 

^       ^'   '  worketh    when,    and    where,    and  ^^ 

how  he  pleaseth :  so  also  are   [page] 
all  other  elect  persons,  who  are 
uncapable  of  being  outwardly 
called  by  the  Ministry  of  the  Word. 

4.  Others  not  elected,  although 
they  may  be  called  by  the  Mini- 
stry of  the  word,"  and  may 
have   some   common  operations  of 
the  Spirit,  yet  not  being  effectual- 
ly drawn  by  the  Father,  they  nei- 
ther will  nor  can  truly  "  come 
to   Christ;    and   therefore   cannot 
be  saved :  much  less   can  men  that 
receive   not   the    Christian    Religi- 
on" be  saved;  be  they  never  so 
diligent  to  frame  their  lives  ac- 
cording  to   the   light   of   nature, 
and   the   Law   of   that    Religion   they 
do  profess,   [page] 

Chap.  XL 
Of  Justification. 

24°'"'ch.'  8.  I.  THose  whom  God  Effectual- 

2 30.  ly  calleth,  he  also  freely^ 

5   (TV^  justifieth,  not  by  infusing 

Eph!  i'.  7.'  Righteousness  into  them,  but  by  * 

pardoning  their  sins,  and  by  ^ 
accounting,  and  accepting  their 


13  Mat 
14. 
20, 
Heb, 

.  22. 
ch.   13. 
21. 
.  6.4, 

5. 
"Joh.    6. 
44,    45.    65. 
I  Joh.  2. 

24,    25- 

15  Act. 
12. 
22. 

4. 

Joh.  4 
ch.   17, 

3. 

The  English  Baptists  245 

Persons  as '  Righteous ;  not  for  ^  i  Cor.  i. 

any  thing  wrought  in  them,  or  R°onf''s  17 

done  by  them,  but  for  Christ's  18,  19.  '     ' 

sake  alone,  not  by  imputing  faith 
it  self,  the  act  of  believing,  or  any 
other*  evangelical  obedience  *Phil.  3. 

to  them,  as  their  Righteousness;  I?  |'  ^  g 

but  by  imputing  Christs  active  obe-  9,  10.  *   ' 

dience  unto  the  whole  Law,  and 
passive   obedience   in   his   death,   for 
their  whole  and  sole  Righteous- 
ness,  they^  receiving,   and   rest-  °Joh.  i. 
ing  on  him,  and  his  Righteousness,    [page]  ^^^ 
by  Faith;  which  faith  they  have  17. 
not  of  themselves,  it  is  the  gift  of 
God. 

2.  Faith  thus  receiving  and 
resting  on  Christ,  and  his   Righte- 
ousness, is  the  *  alone  instrument  •  Rom.  3. 
of  Justification :  yet  it  is  not  alone  ^** 

in  the  person  justified,  but  is  ever 

accompanied  with  all  other  saving 

Graces,  and  is  no  dead  faith/  ^  Gal.  5.  6. 

but  worketh  by  love.  lV^'26^'  ^^' 

3.  Christ  by  his  obedience,  and  "* 
death,   did   fully  discharge   the   debt 

of  all  those  that  are  justified;  and 
did  by  the   sacrifice   of  himself,   in 
the  blood  of  his  cross,  undergoing 
in  their   stead,   the   penalty   due   un- 
to them:  make  a  proper,  real,  and 

full  satisfaction*  to  Gods  justice  ^Heb.  10, 

in  their  behalf:  yet  in  asmuch  as  I'^'iS^^^*' 

he  was  given  by  the  Father  for  Isa.  53.  5, 

them,  and  his  Obedience  and  Sa-  6. 
tisfaction  accepted  in  their  stead, 

and  both '  freely,  not  for  any-  [page]  "  Rom.  8. 

thing  in  them;  their  Justification  l^'zi^  ^°^* 
is  only  of  Free  Grace,  that  both 
the  exact  justice  and  rich  Grace  of 

God,  might  be "  glorified  in  the  "  Rom.  3. 

Justification  of  sinners.  |^-     ^p^-   ^• 

4.  God  did  from  all  eternity  de-  ^]  ^'    ^  '  ^' 
cree  to  ^'  justifie  all  the  Elect,  and  i^  Gal.  3.8. 
Christ  did  in  the  fulness  of  time  ^  ]^?^-  ^-  ^^ 
die  for  their  sins,  and  rise"  a-  6     ^^'  ^' 
gain  for  their  Justification ;   Never-  "  Rom.  4. 
theless   thev   are   not   justified   per-  ^s- 
sonally,  untill  the  Holy  Spirit,  **  Col.  i. 
doth  in  due  time"  actually  apply  Tit.".' 4,  5 
Christ  unto  them.  6,  7.  '   ' 


^46 Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


''  Mat.  6.  5.  God  doth  continue  to '' 

rjohn  I.  ?o^give  the  sins  of  those  that  are 

7,  9.  justified,  and  although  they  can 

Job.   10.  never  fall  from  the  state  of' 

"Ps.  89.  justification;  yet  they  may  by  their 

31,  32,  33.         sins   fall  under   Gods  "  Fatherly 
displeasure;   and   in   that   conditi- 

18  p  o"'  they  have  not  usually  the 
i-sai   32.  light  of  his   Countenance   restored 
Mat.  26.            unto  them,  until  they''  hum-  [page] 
75.                     ble  themselves,  confess  their  sins, 

beg  pardon,   and  renew  their  faith, 
and   repentance. 

19  p  ,  6.  The  Justification  of  Belie- 
Rom  ^4^*  ^^^s  .""^er  the  Old  Testament 
22,  23,  24.         was  in  all  these  respects,"  one 

and  the  same  with  the  justificati- 
on of  Believers  under  the  New  Te- 
stament. 

CHAP.  XII. 

Of  Adoption. 

'f^^Gal   4  ^^^  ^^°s^  that  are  justified,  God 

4,  5.     ■  vouchsafed,  in,  and  for  the 

=  Joh.  I  12.  sake  of  his  only  Son  Jesus  Christ,  to 

3  2  civ  6'^'  ^^^^  partakers  of  the  Grace' 

18.    Rev.  3.  of  Adoption;  by  which  they  are  ta- 

12.  ken  into  the  number,  and  enjoy 

^gS'1'6^'  ^^^  Liberties,  and  ^'  Privileges 

Eph.  2.  is.  of  Children  of  God;  have  his^ 

«Ps.  103.  name  put  upon  them,*  receive   [page] 

'M-ov    14  ^^^  -^^'^'^  ^f  ^doption^  have 

26.    *  access  to  the  throne  of  Grace  with 

»  I  Pet.  5.  boldness,  are  enabled  to  cry  Abba 

"  Heb    12  Father   are  '  pitied,'  pro- 

6.     '      '  tected,    provided  for,  and" 

"  Is.  54.  8,  chastned  by  him,  as  by  a  Father  • 

9.^    Lam.  3.  yet  never'"'  cast  off;  but  sealed" 

"Eph.  4.  to  the  day  of   Redemption, 

j^.^o.  and    inherit   the    promises,'*   as 

14     ch!  6.  ^^'^^'  °^  everlasting  Salvation. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

Of  Sanctification. 

I.  THey  who  are   united  to 
Christ,  Effectually  called, 
and   regenerated,   having   a   new 
1  .  heart,  and  a  new  Spirit  created  in 

Act.  20.  them,  ^through  the  vertue  of 

Rom.  6.  5,  Christ's  death,  and  Resurrection ; 

6-  are  also'   farther   sanctified,   real- 


The  English  Baptists 


247 


ly,   and  personally,   through   the 
same  vertue,"  by  his  word  and  [page] 
Spirit  dwelling  in  them ;  ^  the 
dominion  of  the  whole  body  of 
sin  is  destroyed,*  and  the  seve- 
ral  lusts    thereof,   are   more   and 
more  weakened,  and  mortified;  and 
they   more   and   more   quickened, 
and^  strengthened  in  all  saving 
graces,  to  the^  practice  of  all 
true  holyness,   without  which   no 
man  shall  see  the  Lord. 

2.  This   Sanctification  is  ^ 
throughout,  in  the  whole  man, 
yet  imperfect*  in  this  life;  there 
abideth  still  some  remnants  of  cor- 
ruption in  every  part,  whence  a- 
riseth  a^  continual,  and  irre- 
concilable war;  the  Flesh  lusting 
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit 
against  the  Flesh. 

3.  In  which  war,  although  the 
remaining  corruption  for  a  time  may 
much"  prevail;  yet  through 

the  continual  supply  of  strength 
from  the  sanctifying  Spirit  of  Christ  [page] 
the  ^^  regenerate  part  doth  over- 
come; and  so  the  Saints  grow  in 
Grace,   perfecting  holiness   in  the 
fear  of  God,^^  pressing  after  an 
heavenly  life,  in  Evangelical  Obe- 
dience to  all  the  commands  which 
Christ  as  Head  and  King,  in  his 
Word  hath  prescribed  to  them. 

CHAP.  XIV. 
Of  Saving  Faith. 

1.  THE  Grace  of  Faith,  where- 
by the  Elect  are  enabled  to 
believe  to  the  saving  of  their  souls, 
is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ^ 
in  their  hearts;  and  is  ordina- 
rily wrought  by  the  Ministry  of 
the^  Word;  by  which  also, 

and  by  the  administration  of  Bap- 
tisme,  and  the  Lords  Supper,  Prayer  [page] 
and  other  Means  appointed  of 
God,  it  is  increased,^  and  streng- 
thened. 

2.  By  this  Faith  a  Christian  be- 
lieveth  to  be  true,*  whatsoever  is 


sjoh.   17. 

17.  Eph. 
3-  16,    17, 

18,  19. 

I  Thes.  s. 

21 
3  Rom 

14. 
*Gal.   5. 

24. 

5  Col.    I. 

®2   Cor. 

I. 

Heb.    12. 

14. 
'  I    Thes. 

5-  23- 
8  Rom.   7. 
18,    2Z. 

»Gal.   5. 

I  Pet.  2. 
II. 


,  22,  23. 
6. 


II. 

7. 


^  Rom.    7. 
23. 

"  Rom,   6. 
14. 

"  Eph.  4. 
15,  16. 
2  Cor,  3, 
18.  ch.  7.  I. 


1  2  Cor. 

4.  13. 
Eph.  2.  8. 

2  Rom.    ID. 
14,    17. 

sLuk.  17. 

I  Pet.  2.  2. 
Act.  20. 
32. 
*  Act.   24. 
14. 


248  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

revealed  in  the  Word,  for  the  Au- 
thority of  God  himself;  and  also 
apprehendeth  an  excellency 
*  Ps.  19.  therein/  above  all  other  IVri- 

Ps .119.  7°2.        tings;  and  all  things  in  the  world: 
as  it  bears  forth  the  glory  of  God 
in  his  Attributes,  the  excellency  of 
Christ  in  his  Nature  and  Offices; 
and  the  Power  and  Fullness  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  Workings,  and  Opera- 
tions ;  and  so  is  enabled 
»  2  Tim.  to  ^  cast  his  Soul  upon  the  truth 

^' ^^'  thus  believed;  and  also  acteth 

differently,  upon  that  which  each 
particular,  passage  thereof  con- 
taineth;  yielding  obedience  to 
•Joh.  IS.  the®   commands,    trembling   at 

'  Is!  66.  2.  ^^^   ^  threatenings,  and  embrac- 

8Heb.  I'l."  ing  the^  promises  of  God,  for  this 

^3-  life,  and  that  which  is  to  come:   [page] 

But  the  principal  acts  of  Saving 
Faith,  have  immediate  relation  to 
Christ,  accepting,    receiving,   and 
»  Joh,  I.  resting  upon  ^  him  alone,  for 

12.    Act.  16.      Justification,  Sanctification,  and 
io.     Act.  ^'       Eternal  Life,  by  vertue  of  the  Co- 

15.  II.     *  venant  of  Grace. 

3.  This  Faith  although  it  be 
different  in  degrees,  and  may  be 
"Heb.  5.  weak,"  or  strong;  yet  it  is  in  the 

U'J\  least  degree  of  it,  different  in  the 

Rom."  4.'  ^9*        kind,  or  nature  of  it  (as  is  all  other 
^20.   '         '        saving  Grace)    from  the  Faith,^* 
^2  Pet.  I.  and  common  grace  of  temporary 

i3Eph.  6.  believers;   and  therefore  though 

16.  '  it  may  be  many  times  assailed,  and 

1  Joh.  5.  weakened;  yet  it  gets"  the 
"Heb.  6.  victory;  growing  up  in  many,  to 

II,   12.*  the  attainment  of  a  fulP*  assu- 

1-  tt"  h  ^'  ^'  ranee  through  Christ,  who  is  both 

2  '^"  the   Author'"  and   finisher   of   our 

Faith,   [page] 

CHAP.  XV. 

Of  Repentence  unto 
Life  and  Salvation. 

1  Tit.  3.  2,  J,  SUch  of  the  Elect  as  are  con- 

^'  '^'  ^'  verted  at  riper  years,  having' 

sometimes  lived  in  the  state  of 
nature,  and  therein   served  divers 
lusts  and  pleasures,  God  in  their 


The  English  Baptists  24g 

Effectual  Calling  giveth   them   Re- 
pentence  unto  Life. 

2.  Whereas  there  is  none  that 

doth  good,  and  sinneth^  not;  2  eccI.  7. 

and  the  best  of  men  may,  through  ^°" 

the  power,  and  deceitfuhiess  of 
their  corruption  dwelling  in 
them,  with  the  prevalency  of 
temptation,  fall  into  great  sins, 
and  provocations ;  God  hath  in 
the  Covenant  of  Grace,  merciful-  [page] 
ly  provided  that  Believers  so  sin- 
ning, and  falling,^  be  renewed  ^Luk.  22. 
through  Repentance  unto  Salva-  ^^'  ^^' 
tion. 

3.  This  saving  Repentance  is 

an  *  evangelical  Grace,  where-  *  Zech. 

by  a  person,  being  by  the  Holy  Spi-  A't^°' 

rit  made  sensible  of  the  manifold  ^^'  "* 

evils  of  his  sin,  doth,  by  Faith  in 
Christ,  humble  himself  for  it,  with 
godly  sorrow,  detestation  of  it, 

and  self-abhorrency  f  praying  5  E^gk. 

for  pardon,  and  strength  of  grace,  36.  31- 

with  a  purpose  and  endeavour  by  ^j   °'^'  ''' 

supplies  of  the  Spirit,  to®  walk  «Ps.  119. 

before  God  unto  all  well  pleasing  6.     Ps.   1x9. 

in  all  things.  '^^• 

4.  As  Repentance  is  to  be  con- 
tinued through  the  whole  course 
of  our  lives,  upon  the  account  of 
the  body  of  death,  and  the  moti- 
ons thereof;  so  it  is  every  mans  tt   k 
duty,  to  repent  of  his^  particu-  g"  /Tim. 
lar  known  sins,  particularly,  [page]  i'.  13,  15. 

5.  Such  is  the  provision   which 
God  hath  made  through  Christ  in 
the  Covenant  of  Grace,  for  the 
preservation  of  Believers  unto 
Salvation,  that  although  there  is 

no  sin  so  small,  but  it  deserves*  sRom.    6. 
damnation;  yet  there  is  no  sin  so  23. 
great,  that  it  shall  bring  damna- 
tion on  them  that*  repent;  »Is.  1. 16, 
which  makes  the  constant  preach-  ^^■ 
ing  of  Repentance  necessary.  ^*  ^^'  '^' 

CHAP.  XVI. 

Of  Good  Works. 

I.  GOod  Works  are  only  such  as  8  ^^iieij.  13. 

God  hath^  commanded  21. 


250  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


in  his  Holy  word ;  and  not  such  as 
without  the  warrant  thereof,  are 

2  Mat.  15.  devised  by  men,  out  of  blind  zeal/ 
9.    Isa.  29.  or  upon  any  pretence  of  good 

I    *3-  intentions,    [page] 

2.  These  good  works,  done  in 

3  Jam,  2.  obedience  to  Gods  command- 

*Ps  ^fi6.  ments,  are  the  fruits,  and  eviden- 

12,'  13.  *  ces^  of  a  true,  and  lively  faith; 

5 1  Job.  2.  and  by  them   Believers  manifest 

2'  Pet.  I.  their  *  thankfullness,  strengthen 

5-1 1.  '    *  their®  assurance,  edifie  their® 

6  Mat.  5.  brethren,  adorn  the  profession 

■^i  Tim.  °^  ^^^  Gospel,  stop  the  mouths  of 

6.  I.     *  the  adversaries,  and  glorifie  ^ 

I  Pet.  2.  God,  whose  workmanship  they 

Phil.    I.  II.  ^'"^'  created  in  Christ  Jesus* 

8  Eph'.  2."     '  thereunto,  that  having  their  fruit 

-10-      ^  unto  holiness,  they  may  have  the 

»Rom.  6.  ^j^^9  eternal  life. 

3.  Their  ability  to  do  good 
works,  is  not  at  all  of  themselves; 

njoh.  IS.  but  wholly  from  the  Spirit ^^  of 

4»  6.  Christ ;  and  that  they  may  be  ena- 

bled thereunto,  besides  the  graces 
they  have  already  received,  there 

^2  Cor.  3.  is  necessary  an  ^"  actual  influence 

13.  ^'      °^  ^h^  ^^^^  ^^^y  Spirit,  to  work 

in  them  to  will,  and  to  do,  of  his 
good  pleasure;  yet  are  they  not   [page] 
hereupon  to  grow  negligent,  as  if 
they  were  not  bound  to  perform 
any  duty,  unless  upon  a  special 
motion  of  the  Spirit;  but  they 
18  Phil.  2.  ought  to  be  diligent  in  "  stir- 

^2.  ring  up  the  Grace  of  God  that  is 

?,^^-  6-"'         in  them. 

Isa.   64.  7.  4.  They  who  in  their  obedi- 

ence  attain   to   the   greatest   height 
which  is  possible  in  this  life,  are  so 
far  from  being  able  to  superrogate, 
and  to  do  more  than  God  re- 
quires, as  that"  they  fall  short 
of  much  which  in  duty  they  are 
bound  to  do. 

5.  We  cannot  by  our  best  works 
merit  pardon  of  Sin  or  Eternal 
Life  at  the  hand  of  God,  by  rea- 
son of  the  great  disproportion 
that  is  between  them  and  the  glo- 
ry to  come;  and  the  infinite  di- 


14  Job 

3. 
17. 

9.  2, 
Gal.   5 
Luk. 

17- 

10. 

The  English  Baptists 


251 


stance  that  is  between  us  and  God, 
whom  by  them  we  can  neither 
profit,  nor  satisfie  for  the  debt  of 
our  ^"  former  sins ;  but  when  we  [page] 
have  done  all  we  can,  we  have 
done  but  our  duty,  and  are  un- 
profitable  servants;   and   because 
as  they  are  good  they  proceed 
from  his  ^"  Spirit,  and  as  they 
are  wrought  by  us  they  are  defil- 
ed "  and  mixed  with  so  much 
weakness  and  imperfection  that 
they  cannot  endure  the  severity  of 
Gods  judgment. 

6.  Yet  notwithstanding  the 
persons  of  Believers  being  accept- 
ed through  Christ  their  good 
works  also  are  accepted  in  ^^ 
him;  not  as  though  they  were  in 
this  life  wholly  unblameable  and 
unreprovable   in   Gods   sight;   but 
that  he  looking  upon  them  in  his 
Son  is  pleased  to  accept  and  re- 
ward that  which  is  ^^  sincere  al- 
though accomplished  with  many 
weaknesses  and  imperfections. 

7.  Works  done  by  unregene- 

rate  men,  although  for  the  matter  [page] 
of  them  they  may  be  things  which 
God  commands,  and  of  good  use, 
both  to  themselves  and^"'  others; 
yet  because  they  proceed  not  from 
a  heart  purified  by*^  faith,  nor 
are  done  in  a  right  manner  accord- 
ing to  the^^  word,  nor  to  a 
right  end  the  "*  glory  of  God ;  they 
are  therefore  sinful  and  can- 
not please  God ;  nor  make  a  man 
meet  to  receive  grace  from "° 
God;  and  yet  their  neglect  of 
them  is  more  sinful  and^*'  dis- 
pleasing to  God.   [page] 

CHAP.  XVII. 

Of  Perseverence  of  the 
Saints. 

I.  THose  whom  God  hath  ac- 
cepted in  the  beloved,  ef- 
fectually called  and   Sanctified  by 
his  Spirit,  and  given  the  precious 
faith  of  his  Elect  unto,  can  neither 


1"  Rom.  3. 
20.     Eph. 
2.  8,   9. 
Rom.  4.  6. 


16  Gal.  5. 
22,  23. 

"Isa.   64. 
6.    Ps.  143. 
2. 


18  Eph.    I. 
6.     I  Pet. 
2.  5. 


i»Mat.  25. 
21,   23. 
Heb.  6.  10., 


20  2   King. 
ID.  30. 

I   King. 
21.  27,   29. 

21  Gen.  4. 

5.     Heb.  II. 
4,  6. 
23  I   Cor. 

13.  I. 

2*  Mat.  6. 

2,  5. 
25  Amos  5. 

21,  22, 

Rom.   9.  16. 

Tit.  3.  5. 
sejob  21. 

14,  15- 
Mat.  25. 

41.  42,  43. 


1  Joh.  10. 

28,   29. 

Phil.  I 

.6. 

2  Tim. 

2. 

19.     I 

Joh, 

2.  19. 

252  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

totall}'  nor  finally  fall  from  the 
state  of  grace  ;^  but  shall  cer- 
tainly persevere  therein  to  the 
end  and  be  eternally  saved,  see- 
ing the  gifts  and  callings  of  God 
are   Avithout   Repentance,    (whence 
he  still  begets  and  nourisheth  in 
them  Faith,  Repentance,  Love, 
Joy,  Hope,  and  all  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit  unto  immortality)   and 
though  many  storms  and  floods 
arise  and  beat  against  them,  yet 
they  shall  never  be  able  to  take 
them  off  that  foundation  and  rock  [page] 
which  by  faith  they  are  fastned 
upon:   notwithstanding   through 
unbelief  and  the  temptations  of 
Satan  the  sensible  sight  of  the  light 
and  love  of  God,  may  for  a  time 

spsal.  89.  be  clouded,  and  obscured  f  rom  ^ 

Vcot'.  II.  them,  yet  he  is   still  the  same,' 

32.     '      *  and  they  shall  be  sure  to  be 

3  Mai.  3.  6.  kept  by  the  power  of  God  unto 

Salvation,  where  they  shall  enjoy 
their   purchased   possession,   they 
being  engraven  upon  the  palms  of 
his  hands,  and  their  names  having 
been  written  in  the  book  of  life 
from  all  Eternity. 

2.  This  perseverance  of  the 
Saints  depends  not  upon  their  own 
free  will;  but  upon  the  immuta- 

*  Rom.  8.  bihty  of  the  decree  of  *  Electi- 

1  li  16. '  ^*         *^"»  flowing  from  the  free  and  un- 

5  Rom.  's.  changeable  love  of  God  the  Fa- 

9.  10.  ther;   upon  the  efficacy  of  the  me- 

^°  "  ^^'         .   rit    and    intercession    of    Jesus    Christ^ 

6Heb.  6.  and  Union  with  him,  the® 

17,  18.  oath  of  God,  the  abiding  of  his   [page] 

I  J°^'  3-  Spirit  &  the '  seed  of  God  with- 

®Jer.  32.  in  them,  and  the  nature  of  the* 

40-  Covenant  of  Grace  from  all  which 

ariseth  also  the  certainty  and  in- 
fallibility thereof. 

3.  And  though  they  may, 
through    the    temptation    of    Satan 
and  of  the  world,  the  prevalency 
of  corruption   remaining  in  them, 

» Mat.  26.  ^^^  the  neglect  of  the  means  of  their 

70,  72,  74.         preservation   fall   into   grievous" 

sins,  and  for  a  time  continue  there- 


The  English  Baptists  253 

in  ;  whereby  they  incur  ^^  Gods  "  Is.  64. 5. 
displeasure,  and  grieve  his  holy  l^-^j^   ^  ^^^ 

Spirit,  come  to  have  their  graces 

and"   comforts    impaired    have  "Psal.  51-10,  12. 
their  hearts  hardened,  and  their 

Consciences  wounded,  ^^  hurt,  "Psa.  32. 
and  scandalize  others,  and  bring  3'  ■*• 

temporal  judgements^*  upon  1*2  Sam. 
themselves :   yet  they  shall  renew  12.  14. 

their  *"  repentance  and  be  pre-  15  LuJ^   22. 
served  through  faith  in  Christ  Je-  32  &  s-  61, 

sus  to  the  end.   [page]  °^* 

CHAP.  XVIII. 

Of  the  Assurance  of 
Grace  and  Salvati- 
on. 

1.  ALthough  temporary  Believ- 
ers, and  other  unregenerate 
men,   may  vainly   deceive  them- 
selves with  false  hopes,  and  carnal 
presumptions,  of  being  in  the  fa- 
vour of  God,  and  in  a  state  of  salvati- 
on,^ which  hope  of  theirs  shall  ^Job  8. 
perish;  yet  such  as  truly  believe  Mat!";.  22, 
in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  love  him                                 zz-  '    ' 

in  sincerity,  endeavouring  to  walk 
in  all  good  Conscience  before  him, 
may  in  this  life  be  certainly  assu- 
red^ that  they  are  in  the  state  ^i  Joh.  2. 
of  Grace;   and  may  rejoice  in  the  ^*g   y^'  21^24. 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God  which   [page]  ch!  5.' 
hope  shall  never  make   them'  i3- 
ashamed.            _         _                                                       l''^-  5- 

2.  This  certainty  is  not  a  bare 
conjectural  and  probable  perswa- 

sion,  grounded  upon  *  a  fallible  *  Heb.  6. 

hope;  but  an  infallible  assurance  "'  ^^' 

of  faith,   founded  on  the  Blood  and 
Righteousness  of  Christ  °  re-  ^Heb.  6. 

vealed  in   the  Gospel;   and  also  ^^' 

upon  the  inward^  evidence  of  *2  Pet.  i. 

those  graces  of  the   Spirit  unto  '*'  ^'  ^°'  "• 

which  promises  are  made,  and  on 

the  testimony  of  the  ^  Spirit  of  'Rom.  8. 

adoption,  witnessing  with  our  Spi-  ^^'  ^^' 

rits  that  we  are  the  children  of 
God ;  and  as  a  fruit  thereof  keep- 
ing the  heart  both  "  humble  and  ^  5  Joh^  3. 
holy. 

3.  This   infallible   assurance   doth 


I,  2,  3. 


^54  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

not  so  belong  to  the  essence  of 
faith,  but  that   a  true  Believer,  may 
wait  long  and  conflict  with  many 
»Isa.  so.  difficulties  before  he  be"  parta- 

lo     Ps.  88.       ker  of  it;  yet  being  enabled  by 
i-iaf"  '^^'  t^^.  Spirit  to  know  the  things  [page] 

which  are  freely  given  him  of 
God,  he  may  without  extraordi- 
nary revelation  in  the  right  use  of 
^  I  Joh.  4.  means  "   attain   thereunto  :    and 

U\  therefore  it  is  the  duty  of  every 

12!  '    *^^'         one,  to  give  all  diligence  to  make 
their  Calling  and  Election  sure, 
that  thereby  his  heart  may  be  en- 
larged in  peace  and  joy  in  the  ho- 
ly Spirit,  in  love  and  thankfulness 
to  God,  and  in  strength  and 
chearfulness  in  the  duties  of  obe- 
"  Rom.  5.  dience,  the  proper  ^"  fruits  of 

I,  2,  5.    ch.       this  Assurance;  so  far  is  it^^ 
1^9.^32.     ^*        from  inclining  men  to  looseness. 
"Rom.  6.  4.  True  BeHevers  may  have  the 

}^.^'  assurance  of  their  Salvation  divers 

12V14. "'  ways  shaken,  diminished,  and  in- 

1*  Cant.  "5.  termitted ;  as  "  by  negligence  in 

15  P  ^'  ^'s  preserving  of  it,  by^^  falling  into 

12^,'  14V   '  some  special  Sin,  which  woundeth 

i«Ps'a.  116.  the  Conscience,  and  grieveth  the 

"*8  "^p ''''*       Spirit,  by  some  sudden  or"  vehe- 
7^,^    •      s.  31.    nient  temptation,  by  Gods  with- 
in Ps.  30.  7.  drawing  the  "  light  of  his  coun-  [page] 
tenance  and  suffering  even  such  as 
fear  him  to  walk  in  darkness  and 
to  have  no  light;  yet  are  they 
IS  I  Joh.  3.  never  destitute  of  the  ^*  seed  of 
i»Luk.  22.  Gody  and  Life  ^^  of  Faith,  that 
32.  "      '            Love  of  Christ,  and  the  brethren, 
that  sincerity  of  Heart,  and  Con- 
science of  duty,  out  of  which  by  the 
operation  of  the   Spirit,  this 
20 Ps.  42.5,           Assurance  may  in   due  time  be"" 
^"*                     revived:  and  by  the  which  in 
L^am.  3.             ^j^g  mean  time  they  are"^  pre- 
27-31.                served  from  utter  despair. 

CHAP.  XIX. 

Of  the  Law  of  God. 

1  Gen   J  I.  GOd  gave  to  Adam  a  Law  of 

Eccl.  7*.  29.         universal  obedience,^ 

written  in  his  Heart,  and  a  parti- 
cular precept  of  not  eating  the 


The  English  Baptists  255 

Fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  [page] 
good  and  evil ;  by  which  he 
bound  him,  and  all  his  posterity  to 
personal   entire   exact   and  perpetu- 
al^ obedience;   promised   life  2 Rom.  10. 
upon  the  tilfilling,   and^  threat-  s^^l 
ened  death  upon  the  breach  of  it,  10,  12.' 
and  indued  him   with  power  and 
ability  to  keep   it. 

2.  The  same  Law  that  was  first 

written  in  the  heart  of  man,*  *  Rom.  2. 

continued  to  be  a  perfect  rule  of  ^'^'  ^5" 

Righteousness  after  the  fall;  &  was 
delivered  by  God  upon   Mount  Si- 
nai,   in®    Ten    Commandments    and  ^  Deut.  10. 
written  in  two  Tables;   the  four  **• 
first  containing  our  duty  towards 
God,  and  the  other  six  our  duty 
to  man, 

3.  Besides  this   law  commonly 
called  moral,  God  was  pleased  to 
give  to  the  people  Israel  Ce- 
remonial   Laws,    containing   several 
typical   ordinances,   partly   of  wor- 
ship,^ prefiguring  Christ,  his    [page]  ®Heb.  10. 
graces,  actions,   sufferings,  and  be-  \l  ^' 
nefits ;   and  partly  holding  forth 

divers   instructions  ^   of   moral  '  ^  Cor.  5. 

duties,  all  which  Ceremonial  Laws  ^* 

being  appointed  only  to  the  time 
of  reformation,  are  by  Jesus  Christ 
the  true  Messiah  and  only  Law- 
giver,  who   was  furnished  with  po- 
wer from  the  Father,  for  that  end,*  ^  Col,  2, 
abrogate  and  taken  away,  Eph.  2!  ^^* 

4.  To  them  also  he  gave  sundry  14,  16'. 
judicial   Laws,   which  expired  to- 
gether with  the  state  of  that  peo- 
ple, not  obliging  and  now  by  ver- 

tue  of  that  institution ;  their  ge- 
neral ^  equity  onely,  being  of  "^  Cor.  9, 
moral  use.  ^'  ^'  '''• 

5.  The  moral  Law  doth  for  e- 

ver  bind  all,"  as  well  justified  11  Rom.  13, 
persons   as   others,   to   the   obedi-  j^^'  ^^8 

ence  thereof,  and  that  not  only  in  10,  n,  12. 

regard  of  the  matter  contained  in  "jam.  2. 
it,  but  also  in  respect  of  the^^  10,  ii." 

authority  of  God  the  Creator,    [page]  "  Mat,  5. 
who  gave  it:   Neither   doth  Christ  Rom   3.^^' 

in  the  Gospel  any  way  dissolve,"  31.       ' 


256  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


but  much  strengthen  this  obli- 
gation. 
1*  Rom,  6.  6.  Although  true  Believers  be 

(^^j   2  16  ^°^  under  the  Law,  as  a  Cove- 

Rom.  8.  i'.         nant  of   Works,^*  to  be  thereby 
cha.  10.4.         Justified  or  condemned;  yet  it  is 
of  great  use  to  them  as  well  as  to 
others :  in  that,  as  a  Rule  of 
Life,    informing    them    of    the    Will 
of  God,  and  their  Duty,  it  directs 
and  binds  them,  to  walk  accord- 
is  Rom.  3.  ingly  ^^  discovering  also  the 
chap   7  7  sinfull   pollutions    of   their    Natures, 
etc.  '    '   '  Hearts  and  Lives;  so  as  Examin- 
ing themselves  thereby,  they  may 
come  to  further  Conviction  of, 
Humiliation  for,  and  Hatred  a- 
gainst  Sin;  together  with  a  clea- 
rer sight  of  the  need  they  have  of 
Christ  and  the  perfection  of  his 
Obedience :   It  is  likewise  of  use 
to  the  Regenerate  to  restrain 
their  Corruptions,  in  that  it  for-  [page] 
bids  Sin ;  and  the  Threatnings  of 
it  serve  to  shew  what  even  their 
Sins   deserve;   and   what  afflictions 
in  this  Life  they  may  expect  for 
them,  although  free'd  from  the 
Curse   and   unallayed    Rigor   there- 
of.   The  Promises  of  it  likewise 
shew  them  Gods  approbation  of 
Obedience,  and  what  blessings 
they  may  expect  upon  the  perfor- 
mance thereof,  though  not  as  due 
to  them  by  the  Law  as  a  Cove- 
nant of  Works;  so  as  mans  doing 
Good  and  refraining  from  Evil, 
because  the  Law  incourageth  to 
the  one  and  deterreth  from  the  o- 
18  Rom.  6.             ther,  is  no  Evidence  of  his  being  ^' 
Vpet.'s^.S         tmder  the  Law  and  not  under 
-13.   '    '            Grace. 

7.  Neither  are  the  forementi- 

"Gal.  3.  oned  uses  of  the  Law"  contrary 

^^'  to  the  Grace  of  the  Gospel ;  but 

do  sweetly  comply  with  it ;  the 

18  Eze.  36.  Spirit  of  Christ  subduing''  and 

inabling  the  Will  of  man,  to  do  [page] 
that  freely  and  chearfully,  which 
the  will  of  God  revealed  in  the 
Law,  requireth  to  be  done. 


27. 


The  English  Baptists  257 


CHAP.  20. 

Of  the  Gospel,  and  of 

the  extent  of  the 

Grace  thereof. 

1.  THE  Covenant  of  Works  be- 
ing broken  by  Sin,  and 
made  unprofitable  unto  Life;  God 
was   pleased   to   give   forth   the 

promise  of  Christ,^  the  Seed  of  ^  G^"-  3. 

the  Woman,  as  the  means  of  call-  ^^' 

ing  the  Elect,  and  begetting  in 
them  Faith  and  Repentance;  in 

this  Promise,  the"  Gospel,  as  to  'g^^^'  ^^' 

the  substance  of  it,  was  revealed, 
and  therein  Efifectual,  for  the  Con- 
version and  Salvation  of  Sinners,   [page] 

2.  This    Promise    of    Christ,    and 
Salvation  by  him,  is  revealed  only 
by*  the  Word  of  God;  neither 
do  the  Works  of  Creation,  or 
Providence,  with  the  light  of  Na- 
ture,* make   discovery  of  Christ,  or 
of  Grace  by  him;  so  much  as  in  a 
general,  or  obscure  way;  much 
less  that  men  destitute  of  the  Re- 
velation of  him  by  the  Promise, 
or  Gospel ;  ^  should  be  enabled 
thereby,  to  attain  saving  Faith,  or  Repentance. 

3.  The   Revelation   of   the    Go- 
spel unto   Sinners,  made  in  divers 
times,  and  by  sundry  parts;  with 
the  addition  of  Promises,  and  Pre- 
cepts for  the  Obedience  required 
therein,  as  to  the  Nations,  and 
Persons,  to  whom  it  is  granted,   is 

meerly  of  the"  Soveraign  Will  *Ps.  147. 

and  good  Pleasure  of  God ;  not  Act.  16.  7. 

being  annexed  by  vertue  of  any 
Promise,   to  the   due  improvement 
of  mens  natural  abilities,  by  vertue 
of   Common   light  received   with-    [page] 
out  it;   which   none  ever  did^  'Js^Ttc^* 

make,  or  can  so  do :  And  there-  ^    ^   ' 

fore   in   all   Ages   the   preaching  of 
the  Gospel  hath  been  granted  unto 
persons  and  Nations,  as  to  the  ex- 
tent, or  streightning  of  it,  in  great 
variety,  according  to  the  Coun- 
cell   of  the   Will   of   God. 

4.  Although  the  Gospel  be  the 

R 


3  Rom, 

.  I. 

17. 

*Ro. 

10. 

14,   I 

5,   17. 

5  Pro. 
18. 
Isa. 
with 
60.  2, 

29. 

25.  7, 
ch. 

.  3. 

8  Ps.  iro. 

3. 

I   Cor.  2. 

14. 

Eph.   I.  19, 

20. 

8  Joh.  6. 

44. 

2  Cor.  4. 

4,  6. 

258  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


only  outward  means,  of  revealing 
Christ,  and  saving  Grace ;  and  is, 
as  such,  abundantly  sufficient  there- 
unto;  yet  that  men   who   are   dead 
in  Trespasses,  may  be  born  again, 
Quickened  or  Regenerated ;  there 
is  morover  necessary,  an  effectu- 
al, insuperable^  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  upon  the  whole   Soul,  for 
the  producing  in  them   a  new   spi- 
ritual Life;  without  which  no  o- 
ther  means  will  effect  ^  their  Con- 
version unto  God.   [page] 

CHAP.  XXI. 

Of  Christian  Liberty 

and  Liberty  of 

Conscience. 

I.  THE   Liberty   which    Christ   hath 
purchased   for   Believers   un- 
der the   Gospel,   consists   in  their 
^  freedom  from  the  guilt  of  Sin,  the 

Gal,  3.  condemning  wrath  of  God,  the 

2  Gal.  1.4.  Rigour  and^  Curse  of  the  Law; 

3  Act.  26.  and   in  their   being   delivered   from 

I'  this  present  eviP  World,  bon- 

^  Rom.  8.  ^^gg  ^Q  3  g^^^j^^  ^^^  Dominion  * 

5  Rom.  8.  of  Sin ;  from  the  ^  Evil  of 

28.  Afflictions;  the  Fear,  and  Sting® 

15  54,'  55,  ^^  Death,   the  Victory  of  the 

56J  57.     '  Grave,  and  ^  Everlasting  Dam- 

'  2  Thes.  nation ;  as  also  in  their  ^  free  ac- 

8  Rom    8  ^^^^  ^'^  God;  and  their  yielding 

15.    "    '  Obedience  unto  ^im  not  out  of  a 

9Luk.  I.  slavish  fear/  but  a  Child-like   [page] 

i'^Toh^"4.  love,  and  willing  mind. 

18.  *  All  which   were   common  also  to 
**Gal.  3.  Believers  under  the  Law"  for 

^'  ^'^'  the  substance  of  them;  but  under 

the  new  Testament,  the  Liberty 
of    Christians   is- further   enlarged 
in  their  freedom  from  the  yoke 
of  the   Ceremonial   Law,  to   which 
the  Jewish  Church  was  subjected; 
"Joh.  7.  and   in   greater   boldness   of   access 

Heb'^^io.  ^°  ^^^  Throne  of  Grace ;  and  m 

19,  20,  21.  fuller  Communications  of  the  ^" 

Free  Spirit  of  God,  then  Believ- 
13  Jam.  4.  ers  under  the  Law  did  ordinarily 

Rom.  14.  partake  Of 

4,  2.  God  alone  is     Lord  of  the 


The  English  Baptists  259 


2  Pet.  2. 


Conscience,  and  hath  left  it  free 
from  the  Doctrines  and  Command- 
ments of  men^*  which  are  in  "i^^*'  '*' ^^' 
any   thing   contrary   to   his   Word,   or  ^  tou'y. 
not  contained  in  it.     So  that  to                                   23. 
BeHeve  such  Doctrines,  or  obey                                 Mat.  15.  9. 
such   Commands   out   of   Consci-                             15  Col  2  20 
ence,^^  is  to  betray  true  Hberty  [page]  22, '23.    ' 
of  Conscience ;  and  the  requiring  of 

an"   impHcit   Faith,   and   absolute  ^*^  ^^^'  3- 

and  blind  Obedience,  is  to  destroy  2  Cor.  i. 

Liberty  of  Conscience,   and  Reason  also.  24. 

3.  They  who  upon  pretence  of 
Christian  Liberty  do  practice  any 
sin,  or  cherish  any  sinfull  lust ;  as 
they  do  thereby  pervert  the  main 

design  of  the   Grace  of  the  Gospel "  ^'^  Rom.  6. 

to  their  own  Destruction;   so  ^'  ^• 

they  wholly  destroy  ^'^  the  end  is  Cal.  5. 

of  Ckristian  Liberty,  which  is,  ^3- 

that  being  delivered  out  of  the    ^  \z-2i. 

hands  of  all  our  Enemies  we  might 
serve  the  Lord  without   fear   in 
Holiness,   and   Righteousness   be- 
fore him,  all  the  days  of  our  Life,  [page] 

CHAP.  XXH. 

Of  Religious  Wor- 
ship, and  the  Sabbath 
Day. 

1.  THE  light  of  Nature  shews 
that  there  is  a  God,  who 

hath   Lordship,   and   Soveraigntye 
over  all;  is  just,  good,  and  doth 
good  unto  all;  and  is  therefore 
to  be  feared,  loved,  praised,  cal- 
led upon,   trusted   in,   and   served, 
with   all   the  Heart,   and   all   the 

Soul,'  and  with  all  the  Might.  ^-^^^m"" 

But  the  acceptable  way  of  Wor-  7^  y;^^' 

shipping  the   the  true   God,   is  ^  in-  2  Deut."  12. 

stituted  by  himself;  and  so  limi-  32. 

ted  by  his  own  revealed  will,  that 
he  may  not  be  worshipped  ac- 
cording to  the  imaginations,   and    [page] 
devices  of  Men,  or  the  suggestions 
of   Satan,   under   any  visible   repre- 
sentations, or^  any  other  way,  ^Exo.  20. 
not  prescribed  in  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures. 

2.  Religious  Worship  is  to  be  gi- 


4,  5,  6. 


26o  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

*Mat.  4.  veil  to  God  the  Father,  Son  and 

Toh°'6.  23.  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  him*  alone; 

Mat.  28~  '  not  to  Angels,  Saints,  or  any  other' 

19-  Creatures;  and  since  the  fall, 

K^om.  I.  j^Q^  without  a''  Mediator,  nor 

Col.  2.  18.  in  the  Mediation  of  any  other  but^ 

Revel.  19.  Christ  alone. 

ejoh.  14.  3-  Prayer  with  thanksgiving, 

6.         '  being  one  special  part  of  natural 

8  p  ^\^'  ^'  ^'       worship,   is   by   God  required  of  * 
rsai.  95.  all  i^ei-,      But  that  it  niay  be 

Psal.  65.  2.  accepted,  it  is  to  be  made  in  the ' 

9Joh.  14.  Name  of  the  Son,  by  the  help '^ 

11  Roni/^8.  ^^  t^^  Spirit,  according  to  ^ 

26.       '  his  Will;  with  understanding, 

"  I  Joh.  5.  reverence,  humility,  fervency, 

^*'  faith,    love,    and    perseverance;    [page] 

^*  I  Cor.  and  when  with  others,  in  a  "  known  tongue. 

14 1'^Tim.  ^'''  4-  Prayer  is  to  be  made  for 

2.  I,  2'.  things   lawful,   and  for  all  sorts  of 

2  Sam.  7.  nien  living,"  or  that  shall  live 

isl^Sam.  hereafter;  but  not^°  for  the 

12.21,22,  dead,   nor   for   those   of   whom   it 

jjj^s-  may  be  known  that  they  have  sin- 

i^Joh.  5.  ^^^^16  ^YiQ  sin  unto  death. 

"  I  Tim.  5.  The  "  reading  of  the 

jg4-i3.  Scriptures,  Preaching,  and** 

I  2!^'  hearing   the   word   of   God,   teach- 

Luk.  8.  18.         ing  and  admonishing  one  another 
in  Psalms,  Hymns  and  Spiritual 
songs,   singing  with  grace   in  our 
i«Col.  3.  Hearts  to**  the  Lord;  as  also 

i6-  the    Administration  ^^    of    Baptism,    and  ^ 

20  Mat"  28^^'         ^^^  Lords   Supper  are   all 

19,  20!  '  parts  of  Religious  worship  of  God, 

21 1  Cor.  II.  to  be  performed  in  obedience  to 

him,  with  understanding,   faith, 
2*  Esth.  4.  reverence,   and   godly  fear ;   more- 

16.  over  solemn   humilitation,"*  with    [page] 

25Exo.  1*5!^"  fastings;    and    thanksgiving  upon"^ 

I'etc.    Ps.  special  occasions,  ought  to  be 

107.  used  in  an  holy  and  religious  man- 

ner. 

6.  Neither  Prayer,  nor  any  o- 
ther  part  of  Religious  worship,  is 
now  under  the  Gospel   tied  unto, 
or  made  more  acceptable  b)^  any 
^Joh.  4.  place  in  which  it  is  "^  performed, 

11!    I  Tim!*       ^^  towards  which   it  is   directed; 
2.  8.  but  God  is  to  be  worshipped  eve- 

ry where  in  Spirit,  and  in  truth; 


The  English  Baptists  261 

as  in*  private  families"  daily,  '  *Act.  10. 

and^  in  secret  each  one  by  him-  2  Mat.  6. 

self,   so  more   solemnly  in   the  pu-  n.    Ps.  55. 

blic  Assemblies,   which   are   not  i7- 

carelessely,  nor  willfully,  to  be  *  I  ^^^-  6.  6. 

neglected,  or  forsaken,  when  ^    •  ^°* 

God  by  his  word,  or  providence  Act.  2.  42. 

calleth  thereunto. 

7.  As  it  is  of  the  Law  of  nature, 
that   in   general   a   proportion   of 
time  by  Gods  appointment,  be  set 

apart    for   the    Worship    of    God;    so    [page] 
by  his  Word,  in  a  positive  moral, 
and   perpetual    commande- 
ment,  binding  all  men,  in  all  Ages,  he 
hath   particularly  appointed   one 

day  in  seven  for  a^  Sabbath  to  be  °l'^°'  ^°* 

kept  holy  unto  him,  which  from 
the  beginning  of  the  World  to 
the   Resurrection  of  Christ,  was 
the  last  day  of  the  week;  and 
from  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
was  changed  into  the  first  day  of 

the  week  ^  which  is  called  the  ®  ^6^°''* 

Lords  day;  and  is  to  be  contin-  Act/^aV. 

ued  to  the  end  of  the  World,  as  Rev.  1. 10. 

the  Christian  sabbath;  the  obser- 
vation of  the  last  day  of  the  week 
being  aboHshed. 

8.  The  Sabbath  is  then  kept 
holy  unto  the  Lord,  when  men  af- 
ter a  due  preparing  of  their  hearts, 
and  ordering  their  common  affairs 
aforehand,  do  not  only  observe  an 

holy^  rest  all  the  day,   from  their  '^Isa.  58. 

own   works,   words,   and   thoughts,  j^glj_  j^. 

about  their  worldly  employment,   [page]  15-23. 

and  recreations,  but  also  are  tak- 
en up  the  whole  time  in  the  pub- 
lick  and  private   exercises   of  his 

worship,   and   in  the  duties^  of  ®Mat.  12. 

necessity  and  mercy.  ^'^^' 

CHAP  XXIIL 

Of  Lawful  Oaths  and 
Vows. 
I.  A  lawful  Oath  is  a  part  of  reli-  lExo   20. 


7,     Deut.   10. 
20.     Jer.  4. 


gious  worship,^  wherein 

the  person  swearing  in  Truth,  2^ 

Righteousness,  and  Judgment, 

solemnly   calleth   God  to   witness  z  2  Cro.  6 

what  he  sweareth ; "  and  to  22,  23. 


3 


262  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


judge   him  according  to   the   Truth 
or   falseness   thereof. 

2.  The   Name  of   God  only  is    [page] 
that  by  which  men  ought  to 
swear;  and  therein  it  is  to  be  u- 
sed,  with  all  Holy  Fear  and 
reverence,   therefore  to   swear  vainly 
or  rashly  by   that  glorious, 
and  dreadful  name;  or  to  swear  at 

^lat-  5-  all  by  any  other  thing,  is  sinful  and 

Jaraf^s.  12.         to  be'  abhorred;  yet  as  in  mat- 
*  Heb.  6.     '         ter  of  weight  and  moment  for  con- 
16.    2  Cor.        formation   of  truth,*  and   ending 
^'  ^^'  all  strife,  an  Oath  is  warranted  by 

the  word  of  God;  so  a  lawful  Oath 
BNeh.  13.  being  imposed,*^  by  lawful  Au- 

^^'  thority,   in  such  matters,   ought  to 

be  taken. 

3.  Whosoever  taketh  an  Oath 
warranted  by  the  word  of  God, 
ought    duely   to    consider   the 
weightiness  of  so  solemn  an  act; 
and  therein  to  avouch  nothing, 
but  what  he  knoweth  to  be  the 
truth ;  for  that  by  rash,  false,  and 

^iQ^il'  ^^^"  Oaths  the^  Lord  is  pro- 

Jei-.^  2*3. 10.         voked,  and  for  them  this  Land 
mournes.    [page] 

4.  An  Oath  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
'  Ps-  24.  4.           plain,  and  ^  common  sense  of  the 

words ;  without  equivocation,  or 
mental  reservation, 

5.  A  Vow,  which  is  not  to  be 

g  made  to  any  Creature,  but  to  God 

f?    r^t*  alone,*  is  to  be  made  and  per- 

il,    Uen.  ,         '  ,       .  ,       11    T-.   !•    • 

28.20,  21,  formed  with  all  Religious  care, 

22.  and  faithfulness;  but  Popish  Mo- 

n  F  h'  ^'  ^'  ^  ^'^(^^^^cal  Vows^  of  perpetual 
28      ^'  single   life,   professed "  poverty, 

and  regular  obedience,  are  so  far 
from  being  decrees  of  higher  per- 
^  „  fection,   that   they   are   superstiti- 

^^'  ous,"  and  sinful  snares,  in  which 

no  Christian  may  intangle  him- 
self. 

CHAP,  XXIV. 


9 


II. 


Of  the  Civil  Magi- 
strate. 

I.  God  the  supream  Lord,  and 
King  of  all  the  World, 


The  English  Baptists  263 

hath  ordamed  Civil  ^  Magistrates  to  be  ^  Rom.  13. 

under  him,   over  the  ^'  ^'  ^'  ^' 

people,  for  his  own  glory,  and  the 
publick  good;  and  to  this  end  hath 
armed  them  with  the  power  of  the 
Sword,  for  defence  and  encourage- 
ment of  them  that  do  good,  and 
for  the  punishment  of  evil  doersi  ! 

2.  It  is  lawful  for  Christians  to 
Accept,  and  Execute  the  Office  of 
a  Magistrate,  when  called  there- 
unto ;  in  the  management  where- 
of, as  they  ought  especially  to 

maintain^  Justice,  and  Peace,  [page]  *2  Sam. 

according  to   the   wholesome   Laws  |4"  ^§2. 

of  each  Kingdome,  and  Common-  3,  '4. 

wealth :  so  for  that  end  they  may 

lawfully  now  under  the  New  Testament '  *  Luk.  3. 

wage   war   upon   just  ^'^' 

and  necessary  occasions. 

3.  Civil  Magistrates  being  set 
up  by  God,  for  the  ends  aforesaid ; 
subjection  in  all  lawful  things  com- 
manded by  them,  ought  to  be 
yielded  by  us,  in  the  Lord;  not  on- 
ly for  wrath*  but  for  Consci-  *Rom. 
ence  sake;   and  we  ought  to  make  i^JPet.  2.  ^* 
supplications  and  prayers  for  17. 
Kings,  and  all  that  are  in  Authori- 
ty,® that  under  them  we  may                                     ^\  Tim. 
live  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life,  in 
all  godliness  and  honesty. 


2. 1,  2. 


CHAP.  XXV. 

Of  Marriage. 

T.  MArriage  is  to  be  between 
one  Man  and  one  Woman;  ^  *^^"*m  1 

neither  is  it  lawful   for  any  man  f^;    l^lt;  ^' 

to  have  more  then  one  Wife,  nor  19.  5,  6.  * 

for  any  Woman  to  have  more  then 
one  Husband  at  the  same  time. 

2.  Marriage  was   ordained   for 

the  mutual  help''  of  Husband  '^^^'   2. 

and  Wife^  for  the  increase  of  ^  »Gen,  1.28. 
Man-kind,    with    a    legitimate    issue, 

and  for  *  preventing  of  unclean-  *  ^  Cor.  7. 

ness.  ^'  ^' 

3.  It  is  lawful  for "  all  sorts  ^  Heb.  13. 
of  people  to  Marry,  who  are  able  ^  3/         ' 
with  judgment  to  give  their  con- 


264    Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


6 

39 


sent;  yet  it  is  the  duty  of  Christi- 
I  Cor.  7.  ar;j^6  ^Q  marry  in  the  Lord, 

'^'  and  therefore  such  as  profess  the  [page] 

true   Religion,   should  not  Marry  with 
TNeh    13.  infidels,^   or    Idolators; 

ll\  ^  '  neither  should  such  as  are  godly  be 

unequally  yoked,  by  marrying  with 
such  as  are  wicked,  in  their 
life,  or  maintain  damnable  He- 
resie. 

4.  Marriage  ought  not  to  be 
within  the  degrees  of  consanquini- 
sLevit.  ty,"  or  Affinity  forbidden  in 

the  word;  nor  can  such  incestu- 
ous Marriage  ever  be  made  law- 
ful, by  any  law  of  Man  bv  consent 
»Mat.  6.  of  parties,^  so  as  those  persons 

5/1^  ^     °^'        may  live  together  as  Man  and 
PVife.  [page] 

CHAP.  XXVI. 
Of  the  Church. 

1.  The  Catholick  or  universal 
Church,  which   (with  re- 
spect to  internal  work  of  the 
Spirit,  and  truth  of  grace)   may  be 
called   invisible,   consists   of  the 

*Heb.  12.  wdiole*  number  of  the  Elect, 

18."    Eph.  ^'       that  have  been,  are,  or  shall  be  ga- 
I.  10,  22,  thered  into  one,  under  Christ  the 

23,  &  ch.  head  thereof;  and  is  the  spouse,  the 

^2^^'  ^7'  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  fil- 

leth  all  in  all. 

2.  All  persons  throughout  the 
world,  professing  the  faith  of  the 
Gospel,  ^  and  obedience  unto  God 
by  Christ,  according  unto  it;  not 
destroying  their  own  profession  by 

any    Errors    everting    the    foundati-    [page] 
'2  ^A't^*  ^"'   °^   unholyness   of   conversation,^ 

26.     ^  •  ^^'       are  and  may  be  called  visible 
3  Rom.  I.  Saints ;  *  and  of  such  ought  all 

7.    Eph.  I.        particular  Congregations  to  be 
constituted. 

3.  The  purest  Churches  under 
*j^  ^°Jj               heaven  are  subject*  to  mixture, 

2^&  c}u\  ^"d  error;  and  som  have  so  de- 

^  Rev.  18.  generated  as   to   become  ^  no 

2  if  Jz^^'  Churches  of  Christ,  but  Synago- 

'    ^'  gues  of  Satan ;  nevertheless  Christ 

/ 


The  English  Baptists  265 

always  hath  had,  and  ever  shall 

have  a®  Kingdome,  in  this  world,  *¥^*-p^^- 

to  the  end  thereof,  of  such  as  be-  J^'  ^  pg  '^^' 

lieve  in  him,  and  make  profession  102.  28. 

of  his  Name.  Rev.  12. 

4.  The   Lord   Jesus    Christ   is   the  ^'^' 
Head  of  the  Church,  in  whom  by 

the  appointment  of  the  Father,^  ''Col.  x. 

all  power   for   the   calling,   instituti-  ^l'  18    19 

on,  order,   or  Government  of  the  20.'     '      ' 

Church,  is  invested  in  a  supream  &  Eph.  4. 

soveraigne  manner,  neither  can  the  ^^'  ^^' 

Pope  of  Rome  in  any  sense  be  head   [page] 
thereof,  but  is "  that  Antichrist,  *  2  Thes. 

that  Man  of  sin,  and  Son  of  per-  ^'  ^'^' 

dition,  that  exalteth  himself  in 
the   Church  against   Christ,  and  all 
that  is  called  God;   whom  the 
Lord   shall  destroy   with  the  bright- 
ness of  his  coming. 

5.  In  the  execution  of  this  po- 
wer wherewith  he  is  so  intrusted, 
the  Lord  Jesus  calleth  out  of  the 
World   unto   himself,   through   the 

Ministry  of  his   word,   by  his   Spirit,'  ^Joh.  10. 

those  that  are  given  unto  him  ^2'  ^f^^^' 

by  his  Father;  that  they  may 

walk  before  him  in  all  the"  "Mat.  28. 

ways  of  obedience,  which  he  pre-  ^°' 

scribeth  to  them  in  his  Word. 
Those  thus  called  he  commandeth     . 
to  walk  together  in  particular  so- 
cieties,  or"   Churches,   for  their  "Mat.  18. 
mutual  edification;  and  the  due  15-20. 
performance  of  that  publick  wor- 
ship, which  he   requireth  of  them 
in  the  World,  [page] 

6.  The  Members  of  these 

Churches  are  ^^  Saints  by  cal-  "  Rom-  i. 

ling,  visibly  manifesting  and  evi-  \\  ^  ^ 

dencing   (in  and  by  their  professi- 
on and  walking)  their  obedience 
unto  that  call  of  Christ;  and  do 
willingly  consent  to  walk  together 
according  to  the  appointment  of 
Christ,  giving  up  themselves,  to  the 
Lord  &  one  to  another  by  the  vj'\\\ 

of  God,"  in  professed  subjection  ^*Act.  2. 

to  the  Ordinances  of  the  Go-  ^.b  ^~;, 

spei.  14.    2  Cor. 

7.  To  each  of  these  Churches  9- 13. 


266  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

thus  gathered,   according  to   his 
mind,   declared  in   his   word,   he 
15  Mat.  1 8.  hath  given  all  that'''  power  and 

17.  1 8.  authority,  which  is  any  way  need- 

4,  s^'with  ^^^^>   ^^^  their  carrying  on  that  or- 
5!  13.                 der  in  worship,  and  discipline, 

which  he   hath   instituted   for  them 
to  observe;  with  commands,  and 
rules  for  the  due  and  right  exert- 
ing, and  executing  of  that  po- 
wer. 

8.  A  particular  Church  gather- 
ed, and  compleatly  Organized,  according  to  the 
mind  of  Christ,  consists  of  Officers,  and   Members ; 
And  the  Officers  appointed  by 
Christ  to  be  chosen  and  set  apart  by 
the  Church    (so  called  and  gather- 
ed)   for  the  peculiar  Administrati- 
on of  Ordinances,  and  Execution 
of  Power,  or  Duty,  which  he 
intrusts   them   with,   or   calls   them 
to,  to  be  continued  to  the  end  of 
i«  Act.  20.  ^^^   World,   are "  Bishops   or  Elders  and 

17,  with  Deacons. 

^•,  ?,^-  9.  The  way  appointed  by 

i-tiii.   1. 1.  Christ  for  the  Calling  of  any  per- 

son, fitted,  and  gifted  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  unto  the  Office  of 
Bishop,  or  Elder,  in  a  Church,  is, 
that  he  be  chosen  thereunto  by  the 
"Act.  14.  common"  suffrage  of  the  Church 

^3-    See  it  self;  and  Solemnly  set  apart  by 

nal  '^"^^'  Fasting  and   Prayer,   with   imposi- 

18 1  f  ira.  tion  of  hands  of  the  ^^  Eldership  of 

4-  14.  the  Church,  if  there  be  any  before  [page] 

Constituted  therein ;  And  of  a 
i»  Act.  6.  3,  Deacon  '^  that  he  be  chosen  by 

5.  6.  the  like  suffrage,  and  set  apart  by 

Prayer,  and  the  like  Imposition 
of  hands. 

10,  The  work  of  Pastors  be- 
ing constantly  to  attend  the  Ser- 
vice of  Christ,  in  his  Churches, 
in  the  Ministry  of  the  Word,  and 
2»Act.  6.  Prayer,^**  with  watching  for 

iieb.  13.  their  Souls,  as  they  that  must  give 

17.        '  an  account  to  him;  it  is  incum- 

bent on  the  Churches  to  whom 
2j     _,.  they  Minister,  not  only  to  give 

5.  1 7!"  1 8.  them  all  due  respect,*^  but  also 

Gal.  '6.   '  to  communicate  to  them  of  all 


The  English  Baptists  267 

their  good  things  according  to  6,  7. 

their  abihty,  so  as  they  may  have 

a  comfortable  supply,  without  ^^2  Tim. 

being  themselves  "*  entangled  in  2.  4. 

Secular  Affairs ;  and  may  also  be  ^ 

capable  of  exercising"^  Hospita-  ^  J'™* 

lity  towards  others ;  and  this  is  re- 

quired  by  the ''  Law  of  Nature,  ^  ^°^' 

and  by  the  Express  order  of  our    [page]  6*-i4. 

Lord  Jesus,  who  hath  ordained 

that  they  that  preach  the  Gospel, 

should  live  of  the  Gospel. 

11.  Although  it  be  incumbent 
on  the  Bishops  or  Pastors  of  the 
Churches  to  be  instant  in  Preach- 
ing the  Word,  by  way  of  Office; 
yet  the  work  of  Preaching  the 

Word,  is  not  so  peculiarly  confin-  ^ 

ed  to  them;  but  that  others  also^  Vg^'zV/zi. 

gifted,  and  fitted  by  the  Ho-  i  JPet.*4. 

ly  Spirit  for  it,  and  approved,  and  io>  ^i- 

called  by  the  Church,  may  and 

ought  to  perform  it. 

12.  As  all  Believers  are  bound 
to  joyn  themselves  to  particular 
Churches,  when  and  where  they 
have  opportunity  so  to  do;   So  all 

that  are  admitted  unto  the  privi-  2  j  xhes. 

ledges  of  a  Church,  are  also^  5.14. 

under  the  Censures  and  Govern-  2  Thes.  3. 

ment  thereof,  according  to  the  '  ^'*'  ^^' 

Rule  of  Christ,   [page] 

13.  No   Church-members  upon 
any  offence  taken  by  them,  hav- 
ing performed  their  Duty  required 
of  them  towards  the  person  they 
are  offended  at,  ought  to  disturb 
any  Church  order,  or  absent  thems- 
elves from  the  Assemblies  of  the 
Church,   or   Administration   of   any 
Ordinances,  upon  the  account  of 
such  offence  at  any  of  their  fellow- 
members;  but  to  wait  upon  Christ J^ 
in  the  further  proceeding  of  the 
Church. 

14.  As  each  Church,  and  all  the 
Members  of  it,  are  bound  to* 
pray  continually,  for  the  good 
and  prosperity  of  all  the  Churches  of 
Christ,  in  all  places ;  and  upon 
all  occasions  to  further  it   (every 


8  Mat. 

18. 

IS,   3 

[6,   17. 

Eph. 

4.2, 

3- 

*Eph. 

6. 

18. 

Ps. 

122. 

6. 

268  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


2,  4,  6.  & 

22,    23,    2$. 


one  within  the  bounds  of  their 
places,  and  callings,  in  the  Exer- 
cise of  their  Gifts  and  Graces)   so 
the  Churches   (when  planted  by 
the  providence  of  God  so  as  they 
may  injoy  opportunity  and  ad- 

6  Rom.  vantage  for  it)    ought  to  hold   [page]" 

3  joL^8  communion  amongst  them- 

9,  10.*    *  selves  for  their  peace,  increase  of 

love,  and  mutual  edification. 

15.  In  cases  of  difficulties  or 
differences,  either  in  point  of  Do- 
ctrine, or  Administration;  where- 
in either  the  Churches  in  general 
are  concerned,  or  any  one  Church 
in  their  peace,  union,  and  edifica- 
tion ;  or  any  member,  or  members, 
of  any  Church  are  injured,  in  or 
by  any  proceedings  in  censures  not 
agreeable  to  truth,  and  order:  it 
is  according  to  the  mind  of  Christ, 
that  many  Churches  holding  com- 
munion together,  do  by  their  mes- 

^^ct-  i_s.^^  sengers  meet  to  consider,®  and 

give  their  advice  in,  or  about  that 
matter  in  difference,  to  be  report- 
ed to  all  the  Churches  concerned ; 
howbeit  these  messengers  assem- 
bled, are  not  entrusted  with  any 
Church-power  properly  so  called; 
or  with  any  jurisdiction  over  the 
Churches   themselves,  to   exercise 
any  censures  either  over  any   [page] 

"^ 2  Cor.  Churches,  or  Persons:  or'  to 

I'joh.  4. 1.         impose   their   determination   on  the 
Churches,  or  Officers. 

CHAP.  XXVII. 

On  the  Communion  of 
Saints. 

I.  All  Saiiifs  that  are  united  to 
Jesus  Christ  their  Head,  by 

*i  ^°^"Toh  ^^^  Spirit,  and  Faith;  although 

i]  16.  "^     '         they  are  not  made  thereby  one 
Phil.  3.10.         person   with   him,   have  ^   fellow- 
Rom.  6.  5,  ship  in  his  Graces,  sufferings, 

2Eph.  4.  death,  resurrection,  and  glory; 

IS,  '16.*  and  being  united  to  one  another 

1  Cor.  12.  jn  love,  they^  have  communion 

3."  21!     ^^'         ^"  ^^ch  others  gifts,  and  graces; 
22,  23.  and  obliged  to  the  perfor- 


The  English  Baptists  269 

mance  of  such  duties,  publick  and 

private,  in  an  orderly  way,^  as  ^  i  Thes. 
do  conduce  to  their  mutual  good,  jj^^^l  j^" 

both   in   the   inward   and   outward  12.   "i  Joh. 

man.  [page]  Ga'/'e'^o 

2.  Saints  by  profession   are 
bound    to    maintain    an    holy    fel- 
lowship and  communion  in  the 
worship  of  God,  and  in  perform- 
ing such  other  spiritual  services,*  *Heb.  10, 
as   tend   to   their   mutual   edifi-  wtth^ch, 
cation;  as  also  in  reheving  each  3.  12,  13. 
other  in^  outward  things  ac-                                     ^ 
cording  to  their   several  abilities,                               ^9,  30.^' 
and  necessities ;  which  communi- 
on, according  to  the  rule  of  the 
Gospel,  though  especially  to  be  ex- 
ercised by  them,   in  the   relations 

wherein  they  stand,  whether  in"  »Eph.  6. 

families,  or^  Churches;  7^' Cor. 

yet  as  God  offereth  opportunity  12. 14* 

is  to  be  extended  to  all  the  hous-  -27- 

hold  of  faith,  even  all  those  who 
in  every  place  call  upon  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus;  nevertheless 
their  communion  one  with  ano- 
ther as  Saints  J  doth  not  take  away 

or^  infringe  the  title  or  pro-  ^^c*.  5.4 

priety,  which  each  man  hath  in  his  ^     ^' 

goods  and  possessions,   [page] 

CHAP.  XXVIII. 

Of  Baptism  and  the 
Lords  Supper. 

1.  BAptism  and  the  Lords  Supper 
are  ordinances  of  positive,  and 
soveraign  institution ;  ap- 
pointed by  the  Lord  Jesus  the  on- 
ly Law-giver,  to  be  continued  in 

his  Church '  to  the  end  of  the  ^  Mat.  28. 

world.  l\^%^- 

2.  These  holy  appointments  are  11.26. 
to   be   administered   by   those   only, 

who  are  qualified  and  thereunto  2 

called  according-  to  the  com-  19  ^'i  Cor 

mission  of  Christ,   [page]  4.  i. 

CHAP.  XXIX. 

Of  Baptism. 

I.  BAptism  is  an  Ordinance  of 
the  New   Testament,   ordain- 


270  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


ed  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  unto  the 
party  Baptized,  a   sign   of  his  fel- 
3  Rom.  6.  lowship   with   him,   in   his   death,^ 

Co\! t.  12.  ^"d  resurrection;  of  his  being 

Gal.  3.  27.         engrafted  into  him ;  of  *  re- 

*  ^^^^'^  \  mission  of  sins ;  and  of  his  ^  gi- 
26.  16.*^ '             ^'"''g  ^^P  u"to  God  through  Jesus 

s  Rom.  6.  Christ,  to  live  and  walk  in  new- 

2.  4.  ness  of  Life. 

«Mar   16  ^'  '^^°^^  ^^^°  ^^  actually  pro- 

16.   "Act.  fess*  repentance  towards  God, 

8.  36,  37*.  faith  in,  and  obedience,  to  our 

Lord  Jesus,  are  the  only  proper 
subjects  of  this  ordinance,    [page] 

3.  The  outward  element  to  be 
'Mat.  28.            used  in  this  ordinance^  is  wa- 

wkh^Act.  ter,  wherein  the  party  is  to  be 

8.  38.      *  baptized,  in  the  name  of  the  Fa- 

ther, and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

4.  Immersion,  or  dipping  of 
^i6^*^*T^'h            ^^^  person*  in   water,   is   necessa- 

23!  ^'       ry  to  the  due  administration  of  this 

ordinance. 

CHAP.  XXX. 
Of  the  Lords  Supper. 

1.  THE  Supper  of  the  Lord  Je- 
sus, was  instituted  by  him, 

the  same  night  wherein  he  was 
betrayed,  to  be  observed  in  his 
Churches   unto  the   end   of  the    [page] 
world,    for   the   perpetual    remem- 
brance, and  shewing  forth  the  sa- 

*  ^  Cor.  crifice  in  his  death  ^ 

25]  26.  ^^'         confirmation   of  the   faith   of  belie- 
vers in  all  the  benefits  thereof, 
their  spiritual  nourishment,  and 
growth   in   him,   their  further  in- 
gagement  in,  and  to,  all  duties 
2 1  Cor.  which  they  owe  unto  him ; " 

21*  ^  '  ^7'  and  to  be  a  bond  and  pledge  of 

their  communion  with  him,  and 
with  each  other. 

2.  In  this  ordinance  Christ  is 
not  offered  up  to  his  Father,  nor 
any  real  sacrifice  made  at  all,  for 
remission  of  sin  of  the  quick  or 

3  Heb  9.  (jead ;  but  only  a  memorial  of  that ' 

^^'  ^  '  ^  ■         one   offering   up   of   himself,   by 


Bl 

Cor. 

II. 

.23, 

24, 

25; 

,    2b, 

etc. 

The  English  Baptists  271 


himself,  upon  the  crosse,  once  for 

all ;  and  a  spiritual  oblation  of  all  *  *  i  Cor. 

possible  praise  unto  God  for  Mat'*26. 

the  same ;  so  that  the  Popish  sa-  26,  '27. 

crifice  of  the  Mass  (as  they  call  it) 

is  most  abominable,  injurious  to 

Christs  own  only  sacrifice,  the   [page] 

alone  propitiation  for  all  the  sins 

of  the  Elect. 

3.  The  Lord  Jesus  hath  in  this 
Ordinance,  appointed  his  Ministers 
to  Pray,  and  bless  the  Elements  of 
Bread  and  Wine,  and  thereby  to 
set  them  apart  from  a  common  to 
an  holy  use,  and  to  take  and  break 
the  Bread;  to  take  the  Cup,^ 
and   (they  communicating  also 
themselves)  to  give  both  to  the 
Communicants. 

4.  The  denyal  of  the  Cup  to 
the  people,  worshiping  the  Ele- 
ments, the  lifting  them  up,  or  car- 
rying them  about  for  adoration, 
and  reserving  them  for  any  pre- 
tended religious  use,®  are  all  ^Mat.  26. 
contrary  to  the  nature  of  this  Or-  26,  27,  28. 
dinance,  and  to  the  institution  of  ^^f^j  ^l'^^' 
Christ.                                                                                4,  5.  ■ 

5.  The  outward  Elements  in 

this  Ordinance,  duely  set  apart  to  [page] 

the  uses  ordained  by  Christ,  have 

such  relation  to  him  crucified,  as 

that  truely,  although  in  terms  used 

figuratively,   they  are   sometimes 

called  by  the  name  of  the  things  7  ^  q^j. 

they  represent,  to  wit^  body  and  Blood  of  11.27.' 

Christ;   albeit  in  substance,  and  nature, 

they  still  remain  truly,  and  only  *  s  i  Cor. 

Bread,  and  Wine,  as  they  were  11.26  & 

before.  _  5.28. 

6.  That  doctrine  which  main- 
tains a  change  of  the  substance  of 
Bread  and  Wine,  into  the  substance 
of  Christs  body  and  blood  (com- 
monly called  Transubstantiation) 

by  consecration  of  a  Priest,  or  by 

any^  other  way,  is   repugnant  not  to  9  jt^^t   3 

Scripture®  alone,  but  even  to  21.  *  Luk, 

common   sense   and   reason ;    overthroweth  24.  6  &  5. 

the"  nature  of  the  or-  Hi^Cor 


dinance,  and  hath  been  and  is  the 


11.24,  25. 


2y2  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


cause  of  manifold  superstitions,  yea,  of  gross 
Idolatries,    [page] 

7.  Worthy  receivers,  outward- 
ly partaking  of  the  visible  Ele- 
ments in  this  Ordinance,  do  then 
also   inwardly  by   faith,   really  and 
indeed,  yet  not  carnally,  and  cor- 
porally,  but  spiritually  receive, 

i«  I  Cor.  and  feed  upon  Christ  crucified  ^"  & 

10.16.    ch.         all  the  benefits  of  his  death:  the 
ll\  ^^'  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  being 

then  not  corporally,  or  carnally, 
but  spiritually  present  to  the  faith 
of  Believers,  in  that  Ordinance,  as 
the  Elements  themselves  are  to 
their    outward    senses. 

8.  All  ignorant  and  ungodly 
persons,  as  they  are  unfit  to  enjoy 

"2  Cor.  communion"  with  Christ;  so 

•  ^'*'  ^^'  are  they  unworthy  of  the  Lords 

Table ;  and  cannot  without  great 
sin  against  him,  while  they  remain 
such,  partake  of  these  holy  myste- 

1*  I   Cor.  ries,"  or  be  admitted  thereun- 

iiaf.^V.  6.  ^^  •  y^^  whosoever  shall  receive 

unworthily  are  guilty  of  the   Bo- 
dy and  Blood  of  the  Lord,  eating 
and   drinking  judgment  to  them- 
selves, [page] 

CHAP.  XXXL 

Of  the  State  of  Man  af- 
ter Death  and  of  the 
Resurrection  of  the 
Dead. 

I,  THE  Bodies  of  Men  after 
iGen.  3.  Death  return  to  dust,' 

J^;  36 Z^*'  and  see  corruption;  but  their 

Souls   (which  neither  die  nor  sleep) 
having   an    immortal   subsistence, 
2Eccl.  immediately^  return  to  God 

^^'  ''•  who  gave  them ;  the  Souls  of  the 

Righteous  being  then  made  per- 
fect in  holyness,  are  received  into 
paradise  where  they  are  with 
Christ,  and  behold  the  face  of  God, 
3  Luk.  2Z.  in  light  ^  and  glory ;  waiting 

5^*1,  ^6,  s!^*         foi"  the  full  Redemption  of  their 
Phil.  i'.  23,         Bodies ;  and  the  souls  of  the  wick-   [page] 
Heb,  12.  ed,  are  cast  into  hell;  where  they 

^^*  remain  in  torment  and  utter  dark- 


The  English  Baptists 


^7Z 


ness,  reserved  to  *  the  judge- 
ment of  the  great  day;  besides 
these  two  places  for  Souls   separa- 
ted from  their  bodies,  the  Scrip- 
ture acknowledgeth  none. 

2.  At  the  last  day  such  of  the 
Saints  as  are  found  alive  shall  not 
sleep  but  be^  changed;  and  all 

the  dead  shall  be  raised  up  with 
the  self  same  bodies,  and  ®  none 
other;  although  with  different^ 
qualities,   which   shall   be   uni- 
ted again  to  their  Souls  for  ever. 

3.  The  bodies  of  the  unjust 
shall  by  the  power  of  Christ,  be 
raised  to  dishonour;  the  bodies  of 
the  just  by  his  spirit  unto  honour,* 
and  be  made  conformable  to 

his  own  glorious  Body,  [page] 

CHAP.  XXXII. 

Of  the  Last  Judge- 
ment. 

1.  GOD  hath  appointed  a  Day 
wherein   he   will   judge    the 
world  in  Righteousness,  by^  Je- 
sus Christ;  to  whom  all  power 
and  judgement  is  given  of  the  Fa- 
ther; in  which  Day  not  only  the" 
Apostate  Angels  shall  be  judg- 
ed; but  likewise  all  persons  that 
have  lived  upon  the  Earth,  shall 
appear  before  the  Tribunal  of 
Christ;  ^  to  give  an  account  of 
their  thoughts,   Words,   and 
Deeds,  and  to  receive  according 
to  what  they  have  done  in  the 
body,  whether  good  or  evil,   [page] 

2.  The    end    of    Gods    appoint- 
ing this   Day,   is   for  the   manifesta- 
tion of  the  glory  of  his  Mercy,  in 
the  Eternal  Salvation  of  the  Elect ;  * 
and  of  his  Justice  in  the  Eter- 
nal damnation  of  the  Reprobate, 
who  are  wicked  and  disobedi- 
ent; for  then  shall  the  Righteous 
go  into  Everlasting  Life,  and  re- 
ceive that  fulness  of  Joy,  and  Glo- 
ry, with  everlasting  reward,  in 

the  presence  °  of  the  Lord : 
s 


*Jud.  6. 
7.     I  Pet. 


3-  19. 
Luk. 

2Z,  24. 


16. 


6 


I  Cor. 

15-  SI,    52. 
I    Thes.   4. 

17. 
«Job   19. 

26,     2J. 

'  I    Cor. 
15.  42,  43. 


8  Act,   24. 
IS-    Joh.  5 
28,   29. 
Phil.  3.  21. 


lAct.   17. 

31- 

Joh.  5.  22, 

27. 

2  I  Cor.  6. 
3.     Jud.  6. 


»2  Cor. 
5-  10. 

Eccles.    12. 
14.     Mat. 
12.  36. 
Rom.    14. 
10,    12. 
Mat.  25. 
32  etc. 

*  Rom.   9. 
22,  23. 


5  Mat.  25. 

2   Tim. 
4.8. 


274  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

but  the  wicked  who  know  not 
God,  and  obey  not  the  Gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ,  shall  be  cast  into  E- 
«  Mat.  25.  ternal  torments,  and  ®  punished 

46.     Mar.  9.      ^^,j^j^  everlasting  destruction,  from 
2  Thes.  I.  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and 

7,  8,  9,  10.        from  the  glory  of  his  power. 

3.  As  Christ  would  have  us  to 
be   certainly   perswaded   that   there 
'2  Cor.  shall  be  a  Day  of  judgement,  both  ^ 

5.  10,  II.  ^Q  deter  all  men  from  sin,  and 

8  2  Thes.  for  the  greater  ^  consolation  of 

1-5.  6,  7.  ^j^g  godly,   in  their  adversity;   so    [page] 

will  he  have  that  day  unknown  to 
Men,  that  they  may  shake  off  all 
carnal  security,  and  be  always 

9  Mar   13  watchful,  because  they  kno\y  not 
35,  36,  37.         at  what  hour,  the"  Lord  will 
Luk.  13.  come;  and  may  ever  be  prepared 

iiRev^^22.  t°  s^y"  ^ome  Lord  Jesus,  Come  quickly, 

20.  '     '  Amen. 


AN 
APPENDIX. 

WHosoever  reads,  and  impartially 
considers  what  we  have   in  our 
foregoing  confession  declared,  may  rea- 
dily perceive.  That  we  do  not  only  con- 
center with  all  other  true  Christians  on 
the  Word  of  God  (revealed  in  the  Scrip- 
tures of  truth)  as  the  foundation  and 
rule  of  our  faith  and  worship.    But  that 
we  have  also   industriously  endeavoured 
to  manifest.  That  in  the  fundamental 
Articles  of  Christianity  we  mind  the  same 
things,  and  have  therefore  expressed  our 
belief  in  the  same  words,  that  have  on 
the  like  occasion  been  spoken  by  other 
societies  of  Christians  before  us. 

This  we  have  done,  That  those  who 
are  desirous  to  know  the  principles  of 
Religion  which  we  hold  and  practise   [page] 
may  take  an  estimate  from  our  selves 
(who  jointly  concur  in  this  work)   and 
may  not  be  misguided,  either  by  undue 
reports ;  or  by  the  ignorance  or  errors 
of  particular  persons,  who  going  under 
the  same  name  with  our  selves,  may  give 


The  English  Baptists  275 


an  occasion  of  scandalizing  the  truth  we 
profess. 

And  although  we  do  differ  from  our  bre- 
thren who  are  Paedobaptists ;  in  the  sub- 
ject and  administration  of  Baptisme,  and 
such  other  circumstances  as  have  a  neces- 
sary dependence  on  our  observance  of 
that  Ordinance,  and  do  frequent  our 
own  assemblies  for  our  mutual  edificati- 
on, and  discharge  of  those  duties,  and 
services  which  we  owe  unto  God,  and 
in  his  fear,  to  each  other:  yet  we  would 
not  be  from  hence  misconstrued,  as  if  the 
discharge  of  our  own  consciences  herein, 
did  any  wayes  disoblige  or  alienate  our 
affections,  or  conversations  from  any  0- 
thers  that  fear  the  Lord ;  but  that  we 
may  and  do  as  we  have  opportunity  par- 
ticipate of  the  labours  of  those,  whom 
God  hath  indued  with  abilities  above   [page] 
our  selves,  and  qualified,  and  called  to 
the  Ministry  of  the  Word,  earnestly  desi- 
ring to  approve  ourselves  to  be  such,  as 
follow  after  peace  with  holyness,  and 
therefore  we   alwaies   keep   that  blessed 
Irenicum,  or  healing  Word  of  the  Apostle 
before  our  eyes ;  if  in  any  thing  ye  be  o- 
therwise  minded,  God  shall  reveal  even 
this  unto  you;  nevertheless  whereto  we 
have  already  attained ;  let  us  walk  by 
the  same  rule,  let  us  mind  the  same  thing.    Phil.  3.  v.  15,  16. 

Let  it  not  therefore  be  judged  of  us 
(because  much  hath  been  written  on  this 
subjedct,  and  yet  we  continue  this  our 
practise  different  from  others)  that  it  is 
out  of  obstinacy,  but  rather  as  the  truth 
is,  that  we  do  herein  according  to  the 
best  of  our  understandings  worship  God, 
out  of  a  pure  mind  yielding  obedience  to 
his  precept,  in  that  method  which  we 
take  to  be  most  agreeable  to  the  Scrip- 
tures of  truth,  and  primitive  practise. 

It  would  not  become  us  to  give  any 
such  intimation,  as  should  carry  a  sem- 
blance that  what  we  do  in  the  service  of  [page] 
God   is   with   a  doubting  conscience,   or 
with  any  such  temper  of  mind  that  we  do 
thus  for  the  present,  with  a  reservation 
that  we  will  do  otherwise  hereafter  upon 
more  mature  deliberation ;  nor  have  we 
any  cause  so  to  do,  being  fully  perswad- 


276  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ed,  that  what  we  do  is  agreeable  to  the 
will  of  God.    Yet  we  do  heartily  pro- 
pose this,  that  if  any  of  the  Servants  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  shall,  in  the  Spirit  of  meek- 
ness, attempt  to  convince  us  of  any  mi- 
stake, either  in  judgement  or  practise,  we 
shall   diligently  ponder  his  arguments; 
and  accompt  him  our  chiefest  friend  that 
shall  be  an  instrument  to  convert  us 
from  any  error  that  is  in  our  ways,  for  we  can- 
not wittingly  do  any  thing  against  the 
truth,  but  all  things  for  the  truth. 

And  therefore  we  have  indeavoured 
seriously  to  consider,  what  hath  been  al- 
ready offered  for  our  satisfaction  in  this 
point;  and  are  loth  to  say  any  more  lest 
we  should  be  esteemed  desirous  of  re- 
newed contests  hereabout:  yet  foras- 
much as  it  may  justly  be  expected  that  we 
shew  some  reason,  why  we  cannot  ac-   [page] 
quiesce  in  what  hath  been  urged  against 
us;  we  shall  with  as  much  brevity  as 
may  consist  with  plainness,  endeavour  to 
satisfie  the  expectation  of  those  that  shall 
peruse  what  we  now  publish  in  this  mat- 
ter also. 

I.  As  to  those  Christians  who  consent 
with  us,  That  Repentance  from  dead  works,  and 
Faith  towards  God,  and  our  Lord  Je- 
sus  Christ,   is   required   in   persons    to    be  Bap- 
tised; and  do  therefore  supply  the  defect 
of  the  (infant  being  uncapable  of  making 
confession  of  either)  by  others  who  do 
undertake  these  things  for  it.     Although 
we  do  find  by  Church  history  that  this 
hath  been  a  very  antient  pra- 
ctise; yet  considering,  that 

the  same  Scripture  (Rom.  xiv.  4,  10,  12,  23)  which 
does  caution  us  against  censuring  our 
brother,  with  whom  we  shall  all  stand 
before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  does 
also  instruct  us.  That  every  one  of  us  shall 
give  an  account  of  himself  to  God,  and  what- 
soever is  not  of  Faith  is  sin.    Therefore  we 
cannot  for  our  own  parts  be  perswaded 
in  our  own  minds,  to  build  such  a  pra-   [page] 
ctise  as  this,  upon  an  unwritten  tradition : 
But  do  rather  choose  in  all  points  of  Faith 
and  Worship,  to  have  recourse  to  the 
holy  Scriptures,  for  the  information  of 
our  judgment,  and  regulation  of  our 


The  English  Baptists  2yy 


practise;  being  well  assured  that  a  con- 
scientious attending  thereto,  is  the  best 
way  to  prevent,  and  rectifie  our  defects 
and  errors.    2  Tim.  3.  16,  17.    And  if  any 
such  case  happen  to  be  debated  between 
Christians,  which  is  not  plainly  determi- 
nable by  the  Scriptures,  we  think  it  safest 
to  leave  such  things  undecided  until  the 
second  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus;  as  they 
did  in  the  Church  of  old,  until  there 
should  arise  a  Priest  with  Urim  and  Thtmi- 
mim,   that   might   certainly   inform   them 
of  the  mind  of  God  thereabout,  Esra,  2.  62,  63. 

2.  As  for  those  our  Christian  brethren 
who  do  ground  their  arguments  for  In- 
fants baptism,  upon  a  presumed  foederal 
holiness,  or  Church- Membership,  we 
conceive  they  are  deficient  in  this,  that 
albeit  this  Covenant-Holiness  and  Mem- 
bership should  be  as  is  supposed,  in  refe-  [page] 
rence  unto  the  Infants  of  Believers;  yet 
no  command  for  Infant  baptism  does  im- 
mediately and  directly  result  from  such  a 
quality,  or  relation. 

All  instituted  Worship  receives  its  san- 
ction from  the  precept,  and  is  to  be 
thereby  governed  in  all  the  necessary  cir- 
cumstances thereof. 

So  it  was  in  the  Covenant  that  God 
made  with  Abraham  and  his  Seed.    The 
sign  whereof  was  appropriated  only  to 
the  Male,  notwithstanding  that  the  fe- 
male seed  as  well  as  the  Male  were  com- 
prehended in  the  Covenant  and  part  of 
the  Church  of  God ;   neither  was  this 
sign  to  be  affixed  to  any  Male  Infant  till 
he  was  eight  dayes  old,  albeit  he  was 
within  the  Covenant  from  the  first  mo- 
ment of  his  life;  nor  could  the  danger 
of  death,  or  any  other  supposed  necessi- 
ty, warrant  the  circumcising  of  him  be- 
fore the  set  time,  nor  was  there  any  cause 
for  it;  the  commination  of  being  cut  off 
from  his  people,  being  only  upon  the 
neglect,  or  contempt  of  the  precept,  [page] 

Righteous  Lot  was  nearly  related  to 
Abraham  in  the  flesh,  and  contemporary 
with  him,  when  this  Covenant  was 
made;  yet  inasmuch  as  he  did  not  de- 
scend from  his  loynes,  nor  was  of  his 
household  family  (although  he  was  of  the 


2^"^  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


same  houshold  of  faith  with  Abraham)   yet 
neither  Lot  himself  nor  any  of  his  poste- 
rity (because  of  their  descent  from  him) 
were  signed  with  the  signature  of  this 
Covenant  that  was  made  with  Abraham 
and  his  seed. 

This  may  suffice  to  shew,  that  where 
there  was  both  an  express  Covenant,  and 
a  sign  thereof  (such  a  Covenant  as  did 
separate  the  persons  with  whom  it  was 
made,  and  all  their  off-spring  from  all  the 
rest  of  the  world,  as  a  people  holy  unto 
the  Lord,  and  did  constitute  them  the 
visible  Church  of  God,  (though  not 
comprehensive  of  all  the  faithful  in  the 
world)  yet  the  sign  of  this  Covenant  was 
not  affixed  to  all  the  persons  that  were 
vi^ithin  this  Covenant,  nor  to  any  of  them 
till  the  prelixt  season;  nor  to  other  faith- 
ful servants  of  God,  that  were  not  of  de-   [page] 
scent  from  Abraham.     And  consequently 
that  it  depends  purely  upon  the  will  of 
the  Law-giver,  to  determine  what  shall 
be  the  sign  of  his  Covenant,  unto  whom, 
at  what  season,  and  upon  what  terms,  it 
shall  be  affixed. 

If  our  brethren  do  suppose  baptism  to 
be  the  seal  of  the  Covenant  which  God 
makes  with  every  believer  (of  which  the 
Scriptures  are  altogether  silent)  it  is  not 
our  concern  to  contend  with  them  here- 
in ;  yet  we  conceive  the  seal  of  that  Cove- 
nant is  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  in  the  particular  and  individual 
persons  in  whom  he  resides,  and  nothing 
else,  neither  do  they  or  we  suppose  that 
baptism  is  in  any  such  manner  substituted 
in  the  place  of  circumcision,  as  to  have 
the  same  (and  no  other)  latitude,  extent, 
or  terms,  then  circumcision  had ;  for  that 
was  suited  only  for  the  Male  children, 
baptism  is  an  ordinance  suited  for  every 
believer,  whether  male,  or  female.     That 
extended  to  all  the  males  that  were  born 
in  Abrahams  house,  or  bought  with  his 
money,  equally  with  the  males  that  pro-   [page] 
ceeded_  from  his  own  loynes ;  but  bap- 
tisme  is  not  so  far  extended  in  any  true 
Christian  Church  that  we  know  of,  as  to 
be  administered  to  all  the  poor  infidel  ser- 
vants, that  the  members  thereof  purchase 


The  English  Baptists  279 

for  their  service,  and  introduce  into  their 
famihes ;  nor  to  the  children  born  of 
them  in  their  house. 

But  we  conceive  the  same  parity  of 
reasoning  may  hold  for  the  ordinance  of 
baptism  as  for  that  of  circumcision ; 
Exodus  12.  49.  viz.  one  law  for  the  stran- 
ger, as  for  the  homeborn :    If  any  desire 
to  be  admitted  to  all  the  ordinances,  and 
priviledges  of  Gods  house,  the  door  is 
open;  upon  the  same  terms  that  any  one 
person  was  ever  admitted  to  all,  or  any 
of  those  priviledges,  that  belong  to  the 
Christian  Church;  may  all  persons  of 
right  challenge  the  like  admission. 

As  for  that  text  of  Scripture,  Rom  4. 
II.,  He  received  circumcision  a  seal  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  had  yet 
being  uncircumcised ;  we  conceive  if  the 
Apostles   scope  in  that  place  be  duly  at- 
tended to,  it  will  appear  that  no  argument  [page] 
can  be  taken  from  thence  to  inforce  In- 
fant baptism ;  and  forasmuch  as  we  find 
a  full  and  fair  account  of  those  words  gi- 
ven by  the  learned  Dr.  Lightfoot   (a 
man  not  to  be  suspected  of  partiality  in 
this  controversie)    in   his  Hor.  Hebrai,  on 
the  I  Cor.  7.  19.  p.  42,  43.  we  shall  trans- 
cribe his  words  at  large,  without  any 
comment  of  our  own  upon  them. 

(Latin  and  English  here  in  parallel  columns.  Latin 
omitted  and  no  attempt  made  to  follow  the  lining  of  the 
English.) 

Circumcision  is  nothing,  if  we  respect  the  time,  for  now  it  was 
without  use,  that  end  of  it  being  especially  fulfilled;  for  which  it 
had  been  instituted :  this  end  the  Apostle  declares  in  these  words, 
Rom.  4.  II,  ac^payiSa,  &c.  But  I  fcar  that  by  most  translations 
they  are  not  sufficiently  suited  to  the  end  of  circumcision,  and  the 
scope  of  the  Apostle  whilst  something  of  their  own  is  by  them 
inserted. 

And  after  the  Doctor  hath  represented  diverse  versions  of  the 
words  agreeing  for  the  most  part  in  sense  with  that  which  we 
have  in  our  bilDles  he  thus  proceeds. 

(Latin  and  English.) 

Other  versions  are  to  the  same  purpose ;  as  if  circumcision  was 
given  to  Abraham  for  a  Seal  of  that  Righteousness  which  he  had 


28o  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

being  yet  uncircumcised,  which  we  wi!l  not  deny  to  be  in  some 
sense  true,  but  we  believe  that  circumcision  had  chiefly  a  far 
different  respect. 

Give  me  leave  thus  to  render  the  words;  And  he  received  the 
sign  of  circumcision^  a  seal  of  the  Righteousness  of  Faith,  which 
was  to  be  in  the  uncircumcision,  Which  was  to  be  (I  say),  not 
which  had  been,  not  that  which  Abraham  had  whilst  he  was  yet 
uncircumcised;  but  that  which  his  uncircumcised  seed  should  have, 
that  is  the  Gentiles,  who  in  time  to  come  should  imitate  the  faith 
of  Abraham. 

Now  consider  well  on  what  occasion  circumcision  was  instituted 
unto  Abraham,  setting  before  thine  eyes  the  history  thereof, 
Gen.  17. 

This  promise  is  first  made  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  be  the  father 
of  many  nations  (in  what  sense  the  Apostle  explaineth  in  that 
chapter)  and  then  there  is  subjoined  a  double  seal  for  the  con- 
firmation of  the  thing,  to  wit,  the  change  of  the  name  Abram  to 
Abraham,  and  the  institution  of  circumcision  v.  4,  Behold  as  for 
me,  my  Covenant  is  with  thee,  and  thou  shaft  be  the  Father  of 
many  nations.  Wherefore  was  his  name  called  Abraham f  for  the 
sealing  of  his  promise.  Thou  shalt  be  the  father  of  many  na- 
tions. And  wherefore  was  circumcision  instituted  to  him?  For 
the  sealing  of  the  same  promise.  Thou  shalt  be  the  father  of 
many  nations.  So  that  this  is  the  sense  of  the  Apostle,  most 
agreeable  to  the  institution  of  circumcision ;  he  received  the  sign 
of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the  Righteousness  of  Faith  which  in 
time  to  come  the  uncircumcision  (or  the  Gentiles)  should  have 
and  obtain. 

Abraham  had  a  twofold  seed,  natural,  or  the  Jews;  and  faithful, 
of  the  believing  Gentiles :  his  natural  seed  was  signed  with  the 
sign  of  circumcision,  first  indeed  for  the  distinguishing  of  them 
from  all  other  Nations  whilst  they  as  yet  were  not  the  seed  of 
Abraham,  but  especially  for  the  memorial  of  the  justification  of 
the  Gentiles  by  faith,  when  at  length  they  should  become  his  seed. 
Therefore  circumcision  was  of  right  to  cease,  when  the  Gentiles 
were  brought  into  the  faith,  forasmuch  as  then  it  had  obtained 
its  last  and  chief  end,  and  thenceforth  circumcision  is  nothing. 
[page] 

Thus  far  he,  which  we  earnestly  desire 
may  be  seriously  weighed,  for  we  plead 
not  his  authority,  but  the  evidence  of 
truth  in  his  words. 

3.  Of  whatsoever  nature  the  holiness 
of   the   children   mentioned,    i    Cor.   7.    12. 
be,  yet  they  who  do  conclude  that  all  such 
children  (whether  Infants  or  of  riper 
years)    have  from  hence  an   immediate 
right  to  baptism,  do  as  we  conceive  put 
more  into  the  conclusion,  than  will  be 
found  in  the  premises. 


The  English  Baptists  281 


For  although  we  do  not  determine  po- 
sitively concerning  the  Apostles  scope  in 
the  holiness  here  mentioned,  so  as  to  say 
it  is  this,  or  that,  and  no  other  thing; 
Yet  it  is  evident  that  the  Apostle  does  by 
it  determine  not  only  the  lawfulness  but 
the  expedience  also  of  a  believers  coha- 
bition  with  an  unbeliever,  in  the  state  of  marriage. 

And  we  do  think  that  although  the 
Apostles  asserting  of  the  unbelieving   [page] 
yoke-fellow  to  be  sanctified  by  the  be- 
liever, should  carry  in  it  somewhat  more 
then  is  in  the  bare  marriage  of  two  infi- 
dels, because  although  the  marriage  cove- 
nant have  a  divine  sanction  so  as  to  make 
the  wedlock  of  two  unbelievers  a  lawful 
action,  and  their  conjunction  and  cohabi- 
tation in  that  respect  undefiled,  yet  there 
might  be  no  ground  to  suppose  from 
thence,  that  both  or  either  of  their  per- 
sons are  thereby  sanctified ;  and  the  Apo- 
stle urges  the  cohabition  of  a  believer 
with  an  infidel  in  the  state  of  wedlock 
from  this  ground,  that  the  unbelieving 
husband  is  sanctitied  by  the  believing 
wife;  nevertheless  here  you  have  the  in- 
fluence of  a  believers  faith  ascending  from 
an  inferior  to  a  superior  relation;  from  the 
wife  to  the  husband  who  is  her  head,  he- 
fore  it  can  descend  to  their  off-spring.    And 
therefore  we  say,  whatever  be  the  nature 
or  extent  of  the  holiness  here  intended, 
we  conceive  it  cannot  convey  to  the 
children  an  immediate  right  to  baptism; 
because  it  would  then  be  of  another  na- 
ture, and  of  a  larger  extent,  then  the  root,  [page] 
and  original  from  whence  it  is  derived, 
for  it  is  clear  by  the  Apostles  argument 
that  holiness  cannot  be  derived  to  the 
child  from  the  sanctity  of  one  parent  on- 
ly, if  either  father  or  mother  be   (in  the 
sense  intended  by  the  Apostle)  unholy  or 
unclean,  so  will  the  child  be  also,  there- 
fore for  the  production  of  a  holy  seed 
it  is  necessary  that  both  the  Parents  be 
sanctified ;  and  this  the  Apostle  positive- 
ly asserts  in  the  first  place  to  be  done  by 
the  believing  parent,  although  the  other 
be  an  unbeliever,  and  then  consequen- 
tially from  thence  argues,  the  holiness  of 
their  children.     Hence  it  follows,  that  as 


2S2  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


the  children  have  no  other  holiness  then 
what  they  derive  from  their  Pa- 
rents; so  neither  can  they  have  any  right 
by  this  holiness  to  any  spiritual  privi- 
ledge,  but  such  as  both  their  Parents  did 
also  partake  of:  and  therefore  if  the  un- 
believing  Parent   (though   sanctified  by 
the  believing  Parent)  have  not  thereby  a 
right  to  baptism,  neither  can  we  con- 
ceive, that  there  is  any  such  priviledge,  derived 
to  the  children  by  their  birth  ho- 
liness, [page] 

Besides  if  it  had  been  the  usual  practise 
in  the  Apostles  dayes  for  the  father  or 
mother,  that  did  believe,  to  bring  all  their 
children  with  them  to  be  baptised;  then 
the  holiness  of  the  believing  Corinthians' 
children,  would  not  at  all  have  been  in 
question  when  this  Epistle  was  written; 
but  might  have  been  argued  from  their 
passing  under  that  ordinance,  which  re- 
presented their  new  birth,  although  they 
had  derived  no  holiness  from  their  Pa- 
rents, by  their  first  birth ;   and  would  have 
layen  as  an  exception  against  the  Apostles 
inference,   else  were  your  Children  unclean, 
&c.    But  of  the  sanctification  of  all  the 
children  of  every  believer  by  this  ordi- 
nance, or  any  other  way,  then  what  is  before- 
mentioned,  the  Scripture  is  alto- 
gether silent. 

This  may  be  also  added;  that  if  this 
birth  holiness  do  qualifie  all  the  children 
of  every  believer,  for  the  ordinance  of 
baptism ;  why  not  for  all  other  ordi- 
nances? for  the  Lords  Supper  as  was  pra- 
ctised for  a  long  time  together?  for  if  re- 
course be  had  to  what  the  Scriptures  [page] 
speak  generally  of  this  subject;  it  will  be 
found,  that  the  same  qualities  which  do 
intitle  any  person  to  baptism,  do  so  also 
for  the  participation  of  all  the  Ordi- 
nances, and  priviledges  of  the  house  of 
God,  that  are  common  to  all  believers. 

Whosoever  can  and  does  interrogate 
his  good  Conscience  towards  God  when 
he  is  baptized   (as  every  one  must  do  that 
makes  it  to  himself  a  sign  of  Salvation)  is 
capable  of  doing  the  same  thing,  in  eve- 
ry other  act  of  worship  that  he  performs. 

4.  The  arguments  and  inferences  that 


The  English  Baptists  283 

are  usually  brought  for,   or  against   In- 
fant baptism  from  those  few  instances 
which  the   Scriptures  afford  us  of  whole 
families  being  baptized;  are  only  con- 
jectural; and  therefore  cannot  of  them- 
selves, be  conclusive  on  either  hand :  yet 
in  regard  most  that  treat  on  this  subject 
of  Infant  baptism,  do  (as  they  conceive) 
improve  these  instances  to  the  advantage 
of  their  present  argument:  we  think  it  meet  (in 
like  manner  as  in  the  cases  before  menti- 
oned so  in  this)   to  shew  the  invalidity 
of  such  inferences,  [page] 

Cornelius  worshipped  God  zvith  all  his 
house,  the  Jailor,  and  Crispus  the  chief 
ruler  of  the  Synagogue,  believed  God  with 
each  of  their  houses.     The  household  of  Ste- 
phanus  addicted  themselves  to  the  Ministry  of  the 
Saints:   so  that  thus  far   Worship- 
ping, and  Believing  runs  parallel  with 
Baptism.    And  if  Lydia,  had  been  a  mar- 
ried person,  when  she  believed,  it  is  pro- 
bable her  husband  would  also  have  been 
named  by  the  Apostle,  as  in  like  cases,  in- 
asmuch as  he  would  have  been  not  only 
a  part,  but  the  head  of  that  baptized 
household. 

Who  can  assign  any  probable  reason, 
why  the  Apostle  should  make  mention  of 
four  or  five  households  being  baptized  and 
no  more?  or  why  he  does  so  often  vary 
in  the  method  of  his  salutations,  Rom.  i.  6. 
sometimes   mentioning  only  particular 
persons  of  great  note,  other  times  such, 
and  the  Church  in  their  house?  the  Saints 
that  were  with  them ;  and  them  belonging 
to  Narcissus,  who  were  in  the  Lord ;  thus 
saluting  either  whole  families,  or  part  of 
families,  or  only  particular  persons  in  fa-    [page] 
milies,  considered  as  they  were  in  the 
Lord,  for  if  it  had  been  a  usual  practise 
to  baptize  all  children,  with  their  pa- 
rents; there  were  then  many  thousands 
of  the  Jews  which  believed,  and  a  great 
number  of  the  Gentiles,  in  most  of  the 
principal  Cities  in  the  World,  and  among 
so  many  thousands,   it  is  more  than  proba- 
ble there  would  have  been  some  thou- 
sands of  housholds  baptised ;  why  then 
should  the  Apostle  in  this  respect  signa- 
lize one  family  of  the  Jews  and  three  or 


284  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


four  of  the  Gentiles,  as  particular  instances 
in  a  case  that  was  common?     whoever 
supposes  that  we  do  wilfully  debar  our 
children,   from  the  benefits  of  any  pro- 
mise, or  priviledge,  that  of  right  belongs 
to  the  children  of  believing  parents;  they 
do  entertain  over-severe  thoughts  of  us : 
to  be  without  natural  affections  is  one  of 
the  characters  of  the  worst  of  persons, 
in  the  worst  of  times.     Wee  do  freely 
confesse  our  selves  guilty  before  the  Lord, 
in  that  we  have  not  with  more  circum- 
spection and  diligence  train'd  up  those 
that  relate  to  us  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord;   [page] 
and  do  humbly  and  earnestly  pray,  that 
our  omissions  herein  may  be  remitted, 
and  that  they  may  not  redound  to  the 
prejudice  of  our  selves,  or  any  of  ours: 
but  with  respect  to  that  duty  that  is  in- 
cumbent on  us,  we  acknowledge  our 
selves  obliged  by  the  precepts  of  God, 
to  bring  up  our  children  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  to  teach 
them  his  fear,  both  by  instruction  and  ex- 
ample; and  should  we  set  light  by  this 
precept,  it  would  demonstrate  that  we 
are  more  vile  then  the  unnatural  Heathen, 
that  like  not  to  retain  God  in  their  know- 
ledge,  our  baptism  might  then  be  justly 
accompted,  as  no  baptism  to  us. 

There  are  many  special  promises  that 
do  incourage  us  as  well  as  precepts,  that  do 
oblige  us  to  the  close  pursuit  of  our  du- 
ty herein :  that  God  whom  we  serve, 
being  jealous  of  his  Worship,  threatens 
the  visiting  of  the  Fathers  transgression 
upon  the  children  to  the  third  and  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  hate  him:  yet 
does   more   abundantly   extend   his  mercy, 
even  to  thousands   (respecting  the  off-   [page] 
spring  and  succeeding  generations)   of 
them  that  love  him,  and  keep  his  com- 
mandments. 

When  our  Lord  rebuked  his  disciples 
for  prohibiting  the  access  of  little  chil- 
dren that  were  brought  to  him,  that  he 
might  pray  over  them,  lay  his  hands  up- 
on them,  and  blesse  them,  does  declare, 
that  of  such  is  the  Kingdom  of  God.    And  the 
Apostle  Peter  in  answer  to  their  inquiry, 
that  desired  to  know  what  they  must  do 


The  English  Baptists  285 


to  be  saved,  does  not  only  instruct  them 
in  the  necessary  duty  of  repentance  and 
baptism;    but    does    also    thereto    encourage 
them,  by  that  promise  which  had  refe- 
rence both  to  them,  and  their  children ;  if 
our  Lord  Jesus  in  the  forementioned 
place,  do  not  respect  the  qualities  of 
children   (as  elsewhere)   as  to  their  meek- 
ness, humility,  and  sincerity,  and  the  like ; 
but  intend  also  that  those  very  persons 
and   such   like,   appertain   to   the   Kingdom 
of  God,  and  if  the  Apostle  Peter  in  men- 
tioning the  aforesaid  promise,  do  respect 
not  only  the  present  and  succeeding  ge- 
nerations of  those  Jews,  that  heard  him  [page] 
(in  which  sense  the  same  phrase  doth  oc- 
curre  in  Scripture)  but  also  the  immedi- 
ate ofif-spring  of  his  auditors;  whether 
the  promise  relate  to  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or  of  eternal  life,  or  any  grace, 
or  priviledge  tending  to  the  obtaining 
thereof;  it  is  neither  our  concerne  nor 
our  interest  to  confine  the  mercies,  and 
promises  of  God,  to  a  more  narrow,  or 
lesse  compasse  then  he  is  pleased  grati- 
ously  to  offer  and  intend  them;  nor  to 
have  a  light  esteem  of  them ;  but  are  o- 
bliged  in  duty  to  God,  and  affection  to 
our  children;  to  plead  earnestly  with 
God  and  use  our  utmost  endeavours  that 
both  our  selves,  and  our  off-spring  may 
be  partakers  of  his   Mercies   and  gracious 
Promises :  yet  we  cannot  from  either  of 
these  texts  collect  a  sufficient  warrant  for 
us  to  baptize  our  children  before  they 
are  instructed  in  the  principles  of  the 
Christian  Religion. 

For  as  to  the  instance  in  little  children, 
it  seems  by  the  disciples  forbidding  them, 
that  they  were  brought  upon  some  other 
account,  not  so  frequent  as  Baptism  must 
be  supposed  to  have  been,  if  from  the  be- 
ginning believers  children  had  been  ad- 
mitted thereto :  and  no  account  is  given 
whether  their  parents  were  baptised  be- 
lievers or  not ;  and  as  to  the  instance  of 
the  Apostle ;  if  the  following  words  and 
practise,  may  be  taken  as  an  interpretati- 
on of  the  scope  of  that  promise  we 
cannot  conceive  it  does  refer  to  infant 
baptism,  because  the  text  does  presently 


2S6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


subjoyn ;   Then   they  that  gladly  received 
the  word  were  baptised. 

That  there  were  some  believing  chil- 
dren of  believing  parents  in  the  Apostles 
dayes  is  evident  from  the  Scriptures,  even 
such  as  were  then  in  their  fathers  family, 
and  under  their  parents  tuition,  and  edu- 
cation ;  to  whom  the  Apostle  in  several 
of  his  Epistles  to  the  Churches,  giveth 
commands  to  obey  their  parents  in  the 
Lord ;  and  does  allure  their  tender  years 
to  hearken  to  this  precept,  by  reminding 
them  that  it  is  the  lirst  command  with 
promise. 

And  it  is  recorded  by  him  for  the  praise 
of  Timothy,  and  encouragement  of  pa-  [page] 
rents  betimes  to  instruct,  and  children 
early  to  attend  to  godly  instruction,  that 
an-b  ^pe<|)a)s  from  a  child,  he  had  known  the 
holy  Scriptures. 

The  Apostle  John  rejoyced  greatly 
when  he  found  the  children  of  the  E- 
lect  Lady  walking  in  the  truth;  and  the 
children  of  her  Elect  Sister  joyn  with  the 
Apostle  in  his  salutation. 

But  that  this  was  not  generally  so,  that 
all  the  children  of  believers  were  ac- 
counted for  believers  (as  they  would  have 
been  if  they  had  been  all  baptised)  may 
be  collected  from  the  character  which  the 
Apostle  gives  of  persons  fit  to  be  chosen 
to  Eldership  in  the  Church  which  was 
not  common  to  all  believers;  among  o- 
thers  this  is  expressely  one,  vis.     If  there 
be  any  having  believing,  or  faithful  chil- 
dren, not  accused  of  Riot  or  unruly;  and 
we  may,  from  the  Apostles  writings  on 
the  same  subject  collect  the  reason  of  this 
qualification,   vis.   That   in   case   the   person 
designed  for  this  office  to  teach  and  rule 
in  the  house  of  God,  had  children  capa- 
ble of  it;  there  must  be  first  a  proof  of  [page] 
his  ability,  industry,  and  successe  in  this 
work  in  his  own  family;  and  private  ca- 
pacity, before  he  was  ordained  to  the 
exercise  of  this  authority  in  the  Church, 
in  a  publick  capacity,  as  a  Bishop  in  the  house  of  God. 

These  things  we  have  mentioned  as 
having  a  direct  reference  unto  the  con- 
troversie  between  our  brethren  and  us ; 
other  things  that  are  more  abstruse  and 


The  English  Baptists  287 


prolix,  which  are  frequently  introduced 
into  this  controversie,  but  do  not  neces- 
sarily concern  it,  we  have  purposely  a- 
voided;   that   the   distance   between   us 
and  our  brethren  may  not  be  by  us  made 
more  wide;  for  it  is  our  duty,  and  con- 
cern so  far  as  is  possible  for  us   (retaining 
a  good  conscience  towards  God)   to  seek 
a  more   entire   agreement  and   reconciliati- 
on with  them. 

We  are  not  insensible  that  as  to  the  or- 
der of  God's  house,  and  entire  communion 
therein  there  are  some  things  wherein  we 
(as  well  as  others)  are  not  at  a  full  accord 
among  our  selves,  as  for  instance;  the   [page] 
known  principle,  and  state  of  the  con- 
sciences of  diverse  of  us,  that  have  agreed 
in  this  Confession  is  such;  that  we  can- 
not hold  Church-communion,  with  any 
other    than    Baptised-believers,    and 
Churches  constituted  of  such ;  yet  some 
others  of  us  have  a  greater  liberty  and 
freedom  in  our  spirits  that  way ;  and 
therefore  we  have  purposely  omitted  the 
mention  of  things  of  that  nature,  that  we 
might  concurre,  in  giving  this  evidence 
of  our  agreement,  both  among  our  selves, 
and  with  other  good  Christians,  in  those 
important  articles   of  the   Christian   Reli- 
gion, mainly  insisted  on  by  us :  and  this 
notwithstanding  we  all  esteem  it  our  chief 
concern,  both  among  our  selves,  and  all 
others  that  in  every  place  call  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
both  theirs  and  ours,  and  love  him  in  sin- 
cerity, to  endeavour  to  keep  the  unity 
of  the  Spirit,  in  the  bond  of  peace ;  and 
in  order  thereunto,  to  exercise  all  lowli- 
ness and  meekness,  with  longsuffering, 
forbearing  one  another  in  love. 

And  we  are  purswaded  if  the  same  me-  [page] 
thod  were  introduced  into   frequent  pra- 
ctise between  us  and  our   Christian  friends 
who  agree  with  us  in  all  the  fundamental 
articles  of  the  Christian  faith  (though 
they  do  not  so  in  the  subject  and  admini- 
stration of  baptism)   it  would  soon  beget 
a  better  understanding,  and  brotherly 
affection  between  us. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  Christian 
Church,  when  the  doctrine  of  the  baptism 


288  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


of   Christ   was   not   universally   understood, 
yet  those  that  knew  only  the  baptism  of 
John,  were  the  Disciples  of  the  Lord  Je- 
sus; and  Apollos  an  eminent  Minister  of 
the  Gospel  of  Jesus. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  reformation  of 
the  Christian   Church,   and   recovery  from 
that  Egyptian  darkness  wherein  our  fore- 
fathers for  many  generations  were  held 
in  bondage ;  upon  recourse  had  to  the 
Scriptures  of  truth,  different  apprehen- 
sions were  conceived,  which  are  to  this 
time  continued,  concerning  the  practise 
of  this  Ordinance. 

Let   not   our   zeal    herein   be   misinterpre- 
ted: that  God  whom  we  serve  is  jealous  [page] 
of  his   worship.     By  his  gracious   provi- 
dence the  Law  thereof,  is  continued  a- 
mongst  us ;  and  we  are  forewarned  by 
what  hapned  in  the  Church  of  the  Jews, 
that  it  is  necessary  for  every  generation, 
and   that  frequently   in  every  generation 
to  consult  the  divine  oracle,  compare 
our  worship  with  the  rule,  and  take  heed 
to  what  doctrines  we  receive  and  pra- 
ctise. 

If  the  ten  commandments  exhibited  in  the 
popish  Idolatrous  service  books  had 
been  received  as  the  entire  law  of  God, 
because  they  agree  in  number  with  his 
ten  commands,  and  also  in  the  substance 
of  nine  of  them ;  the  second  Command- 
ment forbidding  Idolatry  had  been  ut- 
terly lost. 

If  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  had  not  made  a 
diligent  search  into  the  particular  parts  of 
Gods  law,  and  his  worship ;  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles   (which  for  many  centuries  of 
years,  had  not  been  duly  observed,  ac- 
cording   to    the    institution,    though    it    was 
retained  in  the  general  notion)   would 
not  have  been  kept  in  due  order,  [page] 

So  may  it  be  now  as  to  many  things  re- 
lating to  the  service  of  God,  which  do 
retain  the  names  proper  to  them  in  their 
first  institution,  but  yet  through  inadver- 
tency  (where  there  is  no  sinister  design) 
may  vary   in   their   circumstances,   from 
their  first  institution.     And  if  by  means 
of  any  antient  defection,   or  of  that  ge- 
neral corruption  of  the  service  of  God, 


The  English  Baptists  289 

and   interruption   of   his   true   worship,   and 
persecution  of  his  servants  by  the  Anti-christian 
Bishop  of  Rome,  for  many  gene- 
rations ;  those  who  do  consult  the  Word 
of   God,   cannot  yet   arrive   at   a   full   and 
mutual   satisfaction   among  themselves,   what 
was   the   practise   of   the   primitive 
Christian  Church,  in  some  points   rela- 
ting to   the   Worship   of   God :   yet   inasmuch 
as  these  things  are  not  of  the  essence  of 
Christianity,  but  that  we  agree  in  the 
fundamental  doctrines  thereof,  we  do 
apprehend,   there   is   sufficient   ground   to 
lay  aside  all  bitterness  and  prejudice,  and 
in  the  spirit  of  love  and  meekness  to  im-  [page] 
brace  and  own  each  other  therein;   leav- 
ing each  other  at  liberty  to  perform  such 
other   services,   wherein  we  cannot  con- 
cur apart  unto  God,  according  to  the 
best  of  our  understanding. 

FINIS. 


4.    PRIVATE   CONFESSIONS 

Other  Confessions  were  published  by  private  indi- 
viduals in  this  period,  and  attained  some  circulation. 
One  was  by  John  Bunyan,  another  by  the  famous  Welsh 
preacher,  Vavasor  Powell.  In  1697  Benjamin  Keach 
and  his  son,  Elias  Keach,  the  former  pastor  at  Horsley- 
down  and  the  latter  at  Tallow  Chandler's  Hall,  London, 
united  in  a  Confession  of  faith  for  their  congregations. 
The  body  of  the  Confession  and  the  appendix  on  disci- 
pline were  identical  in  both,  but  each  had  a  preface, 
dedication,  and  signatures  appropriate  to  itself.  That  of 
Benjamin  Keach  was  signed  by  members  of  his  church, 
August  10;  that  of  his  son,  five  days  later.  The 
reasons  given  by  Elias  Keach  in  the  letter  "  To  the 
Reader  "  for  publishing  this  Confession  were  the  general 
ignorance  of  Baptist  doctrines  and  usages  on  the  part  of 
the  Baptists  themselves,  as  well  as  others,  the  bulkiness, 
expensiveness,  and  scarcity  of  the  former  Confession,  its 

T 


2gQ  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


omission  of  some  matters  of  importance,  and  the  need  of 
a  treatise  on  discipline,  as  well  as  to  distinguish  them- 
selves from  some  who  bear  the  same  name;  and,  finally, 
to  arm  the  members  against  error  and  show  "  that  the 
Baptists  are  not  such  Scare-Crows  as  some  would  make 
the  unwary  believe."  It  professes  to  be  a  condensation 
of  the  last  Confession,  with  the  addition  of  articles  on 
the  imposition  of  hands  and  the  singing  of  psalms  in 
public  worship.  But  there  are  several  more  or  less  im- 
portant differences  in  doctrine.  It  was  provided  with  an 
appendix  on  discipline,  entitled,  "  The  Glory  and  Orna- 
ment of  a  True  Gospel-constituted  Church,"  written 
by  Benjamin  Keach  and  drawn  largely  from  Doctor 
Chauncey.  Only  one  English  edition  is  known,  but  it 
exerted  a  great  influence  on  the  Philadelphia  Confession 
and  the  Baptists  of  the  middle  colonies  of  America. 

During  the  eighteenth  century  the  English  Calvinistic 
Baptists  published  no  Confessions  of  note.  They  suf- 
fered with  the  general  decline  in  religion,  and  for  three- 
quarters  of  the  century  manifested  little  life  in  any  di- 
rection. In  1764  Dr.  John  Gill's  church,  in  London,  pub- 
lished their  Confession  in  twelve  articles. 

It  is  rigidly  Calvinistic. 

5.    PRESENT   DOCTRINAL    POSITION    OF   THE   ENGLISH 

BAPTISTS 

With  the  rise  of  the  Methodist  movement  and  the  work 
of  Andrew  Fuller,  a  great  change  was  wrought  in  the 
theology  of  English  Calvinistic  Baptists.  It  was  nothing 
less  than  the  grafting  of  the  Arminian  doctrine  of  a  uni- 
versal atonement  upon  the  old  Calvinistic  stock  and  the 
consequent  serious  and  earnest  offer  of  salvation  to  all 
men.  Simultaneously  with  this  change  in  Baptist  the- 
ology came  the  work  of  Carey  and  the  beginnings  of 


Tke  English  Baptists  2gi 

foreign  missions,  with  the  rise  of  the  practical  tasks  of 
the  Sunday-school,  Bible  societies,  tract  societies,  and 
similar  organizations.  Men's  minds  were  turned  to  the 
practical  side  of  Christianity,  and  their  horizon  was  sud- 
denly enlarged  to  include  the  whole  world  in  the  vision 
of  their  obligation  and  opportunity.  They  turned  away 
from  theological  controversies  and  formulas.  The  old 
Confessions  gradually  fell  into  disuse,  but  no  others  took 
their  places.  The  Union  repeatedly  declined  to  draw  up 
any  new  Confession  or  prescribe  one.  The  Arminian  and 
Calvinistic  wings  by  degrees  approached  each  other. 
The  rancors  and  contentions  of  former  years  were  grad- 
ually forgotten  in  the  presence  of  the  great  thrilling  tasks 
of  the  nineteenth  century.  Finally,  in  1888,  the  great 
majority  of  both  parties  dropped  party  names  and  united 
in  a  working  compact  for  the  furtherance  of  the  King's 
business.  The  brief  statement  which  forms  the  doctrinal 
basis  of  The  Baptist  Union  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 
was  formulated  by  the  council  and  adopted  by  the  Union 
April  23,  1888.  It  was  because  of  dissatisfaction  with 
this  statement  that  Spurgeon  withdrew  from  the  Union 
in  1888,  remaining  aloof  until  his  death  in  1892.  The 
statement  was  published  in  regular  order  in  the  proceed- 
ings of  the  Union  for  that  year,  and  has  never  been  re- 
printed. The  statement,  which  was  adopted  with  only 
seven  dissenting  voices  in  a  meeting  of  seventeen  or 
eighteen  hundred  messengers.  Is  as  follows : 

Whilst  expressly  disavowing  and  disallowing  any 
powers  to  control  belief,  or  to  restrict  enquiry,  yet,  in 
view  of  the  uneasiness  produced  in  the  churches  by  re- 
cent discussions,  and  to  show  our  agreement  with  one 
another,  and  with  our  fellow-Christians  on  the  great 
truths  of  the  Gospel,  the  Council  deem  it  right  to  say 
that: 


292  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

A.  Baptized  into  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  have  avowed  repentance  towards 
God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — the  very  ele- 
ments of  a  new  life;  as  in  the  Supper  we  avow  our 
union  with  one  another,  while  partaking  of  the  symbol 
of  the  body  of  our  Lord,  broken  for  us,  and  of  the  blood 
shed  for  the  remission  of  sins.  The  Union,  therefore,  is 
an  association  of  Churches  and  Ministers  professing  not 
only  to  believe  the  facts  and  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  but 
to  have  undergone  the  spiritual  change  expressed  or  im- 
plied in  them.  This  change  is  the  fundamental  principle 
of  our  church  life. 

B.  The  following  facts  and  doctrines  are  commonly 
believed  by  the  churches  of  the  Union : — 

(i),  The  Divine  Inspiration  and  Authority  of  the 
Holy  Scripture  as  the  supreme  and  sufficient  rule  of  our 
faith  and  practice;  and  the  right  and  duty  of  individual 
judgment  in  the  interpretation  of  it. 

(2),  The  fallen  and  sinful  state  of  man. 

(3),  The  Deity,  the  Incarnation,  the  Resurrection  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  His  Sacrificial  and  Medi- 
atorial work. 

(4),  Justification  by  faith — a  faith  that  works  by  love 
and  produces  holiness. 

(5),  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  conversion  of 
sinners  and  in  the  sanctification  of  all  who  believe. 

(6),  The  Resurrection;  the  Judgment  at  the  last  day, 
according  to  the  words  of  our  Lord  in  Matt.  25.  46.* 

Upon  this  statement  the  great  majority  of  the  Baptists 
of  Great  Britain  still  stand.  There  are  still  small  bodies, 
remnants  of  former  parties,  who  stand  aloof;  but  the 
great  majority  of  British  Baptists  stand  and  work  to- 
gether upon  the  basis  of  this  brief  statement  of  facts 
and  doctrines. 

^  *  "  It  should  be  stated,  as  a  historical  fact,  that  there  have  been  brethren 
in  the  Union,  working  cordially  with  it,  who  while  reverently  bowing  to  the 
authority  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  rejecting  the  dogmas  of  Purgatory  and 
Universalism,  have  not  held  the  common  interpretation  of  these  words  of 
our   Lord." 


part  3four 

AMERICAN   BAPTISTS 

A.  Calvinistic  Baptists 

I.  The  Philadelphia  Confession 

In  England  the  Arminian,  but  in  America  the  Cal- 
vinistic Baptists  were  the  earlier  party.  Roger  Williams 
and  his  associates  came  to  America  as  Independents, 
holding  the  type  of  Calvinism  which  prevailed  among 
that  party  at  the  time  in  England.  When  he  became  a 
Baptist  he  carried  his  theology  with  him  into  the  organi- 
zation of  the  First  Church  of  Providence,  the  earliest 
Baptist  church  in  America.  At  that  date  there  was  no 
Calvinistic  Baptist  Confession  in  existence.  The  church 
drew  up  none,  and  has  continued  to  this  day  without  any 
statement  of  doctrine.  A  few  other  Calvinistic  Baptist 
churches  were  organized  in  New  England,  in  the  Middle 
Atlantic  and  Southern  colonies  within  the  seventeenth 
century,  but  no  Confession  of  faith  was  published,  and 
none  adopted,  as  far  as  known.  The  earliest  Association, 
the  Philadelphia,  was  organized  in  1707.  The  Calvinistic 
Baptists  in  this  region  showed  more  vigor,  harmony, 
and  aggressiveness  than  elsewhere.  Moreover,  they 
seem  to  have  been  in  more  constant  and  intimate  relations 
with  their  English  brethren  than  those  of  other  sections. 
Elias  Keach  had  been  converted  in  this  region,  and  had 
then  been  very  active  in  preaching  and  establishing 
churches  in  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey.  He  returned 
to  England  about  1692,  and  became  pastor  in  London. 

293 


294  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

As  we  have  seen,  he  and  his  father  united  in  publishing  a 
Confession  of  Faith  in  London  in  1697.  This  Confession 
is  the  first  one  we  hear  of  in  America.  The  church  at 
Middletown,  N.  J.,  fell  into  doctrinal  confusion  early  in 
the  eighteenth  century,  and  being  unable  to  restore  har- 
mony again,  called  a  council  to  assist  them  in  1712. 
Among  other  things,  this  council  recommended  that  the 
members  "  should  subscribe  to  Elias  Reach's  Confession 
of  Faith,  at  the  least  the  covenant  annexed  to  it,"  and 
that  such  as  subscribed  should  be  regarded  as  the  Baptist 
church.  Accordingly,  this  was  done;  forty-two  of  the 
sixty-eight  members  agreed  to  the  proposition  and  sub- 
scribed, and  in  this  way  the  church  was  reconstituted  on 
the  basis  of  Keach's  Confession. 

The  first  notice  of  the  Confession  of  1689  occurs  in 
1716,  in  connection  with  the  interesting  Welsh  Tract 
Church,  in  New  Jersey.  According  to  the  records  of  this 
church  (I,  i8f)  the  Confession  was  "translated  to  Welsh 
by  Abel  Morgan  (minister  of  the  gospel  in  Philadelphia), 
to  which  was  added.  An  article  relative  to  Laying  on 
of  hands ;  Singing  Psalms ;  and  Church-Covenants.  This 
Confession  (after  being  read  and  thoroughly  considered 
at  our  quarterly  meeting,  February  4,  1716)  was  signed." 
It  is  not  known  that  this  Welsh  edition  was  ever  pub- 
lished. 

The  first  reference  to  any  Confession  of  faith  by  an 
Association  in  America  was  by  the  Philadelphia  Associ- 
ation, in  1724.  In  reply  to  a  query  concerning  the  Sab- 
bath, the  Association  refers  "  to  the  Confession  of  Faith, 
set  forth  by  the  elders  and  brethren  met  in  London,  1689, 
and  owned  by  us."  It  is  not  known  that  the  Confession 
had  been  adopted  by  the  Association  in  any  formal  way ; 
nevertheless,  it  was  evidently  already  regarded  as  their 
standard  of  doctrine.    References  to  "  our  Confession  of 


American  Baptists  295 

faith,"  ''  the  Confession  of  Faith,"  etc.,  in  1727  and  1729, 
almost  certainly  refer  to  the  same  Confession,  Finally, 
the  ^Association  assembled  at  Philadelphia,  September  25, 
1742,  ordered  the  printing  of  a  new  edition  of  this  Con- 
fession, the  first  of  this  or  any  other  Baptist  Confession ^ 
to  be  printed  in  America.  It  was  to  have  two  additional 
articles,  "  concerning  singing  of  psalms  in  the  worship 
of  God,"  and  "  laying  of  hands  upon  baptized  believers." 
Jenkin  Jones  and  Benjamin  Griffith  were  also  requested 
to  "  prepare  a  short  treatise  of  discipline,  to  be  annexed 
to  the  Confession  of  faith"  (Minutes  Philadelphia  As- 
sociation, 1742). 

There  had  been  tremendous  controversy  among  Eng- 
lish Baptists  over  singing  in  public  worship  and  the 
imposition  of  hands  upon  the  newly  baptized,  and  articles 
in  favor  of  both  practices  had  found  place  in  Reach's 
Confession.  Imposition  of  hands  was  not  general  among 
Calvinistic  Baptists  in  England,  or  in  America  in  the 
earliest  times;  but  the  influence  of  Reach's  Confession 
and  of  the  Welsh  Baptists  (Minutes  of  Welsh  Tract 
Church)  had  been  decisive,  and  the  Philadelphia  Baptists 
now  incorporate  the  practice  in  their  doctrinal  statement. 
The  two  articles,  which  are  numbers  XXIII  and  XXXI, 
are  reprints  of  Articles  XXVII  and  XXIII  of  Reach's 
Confession.  The  next  year  the  Association  adopted  the 
Discipline,  prepared  and  presented  by  Benjamin  Griffith. 
Mr.  Jones  had  been  unable  to  give  attention  to  the  matter, 
and  Mr.  Griffith  had  used  a  "  Tract  published  by  Mr. 
Elias  Reach,"  a  manuscript  by  Abel  Morgan,  some  writ- 
ings of  Doctors  Owen  and  Goodwin,  and  previous  actions 
of  the  Association  on  matters  of  discipline.  His  com- 
pilation was  now  added  as  an  appendix  to  the  Confession, 
and  the  whole  was  published  1743  by  Benjamin  Franklin, 
with  the  title: 


296  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

A 

CONFESSION 

OF 

FAITH, 

Put  forth  by  the 
Elders  and  Brethren 
Of  many 

CONGREGAIIONS 

OF 

CHRISTIANS 

(Baptized  upon  Profession  of  their  Faith) 
In  London  and  the  Country. 

Adopted  by  the  Baptist  ASSOCIATION 

met  at  Philadelphia, 

Sept.  25,  1742. 

The  SIXTH  EDITION. 

To  which  are  added, 
TWO  Articles  viz.  Of  Imposition  of  Hands, 
and  Singing  of  Psalms  in  Public  Worship. 

ALSO 

A  Short  Treatise  of  Church  Discipline. 

With  the  Heart  Man  helieveth  unto  Righteous- 
ness, and  imth  the  Month  Confession  is 
made  unto  Salvation,  Rom.   10.20. 

Search  the  Scriptures,  John  5.39. 

PHILADELPHIA :  Printed  by  B.  FRANKLIN. 

M,DCC,XLIII. 


American  Baptists  297 

It  is  an  exact  reprint  of  the  Assembly  Confession  of 
1689,  with  the  addition  of  the  following  articles,  taken 
verbatim  from  Reach's  Confession: 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

OF  SINGING  PSALMS,  &C. 

We  believe  that  '  acts  16  25  eph  5  19  co!  3  16 '  singing 
the  praises  of  God,  is  a  holy  Ordinance  of  Christ,  and 
not  a  part  of  natural  religion,  or  a  moral  duty  only;  but 
that  it  is  brought  under  divine  institution,  it  being  in- 
joined  on  the  churches  of  Christ  to  sing  psalms,  hymns, 
and  spiritual  songs;  and  that  the  whole  church  in  their 
public  assemblies,  as  well  as  private  christians,  ought 
to  *  heb  2  12  jam  5  13  '  sing  God's  praises  according  to 
the  best  light  they  have  received.  Moreover,  it  was  prac- 
ticed in  the  great  representative  church,  by  '  matt  26  30 
mat  14  26  '  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  his  disciples,  after 
he  had  instituted  and  celebrated  the  sacred  ordinance 
of  his  Holy  Supper,  as  a  commemorative  token  of  re- 
deeming love. 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

OF  LAYING  ON  OF  HANDS. 

We  believe  that  (Heb  5  12  and  612  Acts  8  17  18 
and  19  6)  laying  on  of  hands  (with  prayer)  upon  bap- 
tized believers,  as  such,  is  an  ordinance  of  Christ,  and 
ought  to  be  submitted  unto  by  all  such  persons  that  are 
admitted  to  partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper;  and  that  the 
end  of  this  ordinance  is  not  for  the  extraordinary  gifts 
of  the  Spirit,  but  for  (Eph  i  13  14)  a  farther  reception 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  or  for  the  addition  of  the 
graces  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  influences  thereof;  to  con- 
firm, strengthen,  and  comfort  them  in  Christ  Jesus;  it 
being  ratified  and  established  by  the  (Acts  8  and  19  6) 
extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit  in  the  primitive  times, 
to  abide  in  the  Church,  as  meeting  together  on  the  first 
Day  of  the  week  was,  Acts  2  i  that  being  the  day  of 
worship,  or  Christian  Sabbath,  under  the  gospel;  and 
as  preaching  the  word  was,  x\cts  10  44  and  as  Baptism 


298  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


was,  Mat  3  16  and  prayer  was,  Acts  4  31  and  singing 
Psalms,  &c  was  Acts  16  25  26  so  this  of  laying  on  of 
hands  was,  Acts  8  &  ch  19  for  as  the  whole  gospel  was 
confirmed  by  (Heb  234)  signs  and  wonders,  and  divers 
miracles  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  general,  so  was 
every  ordinance  in  like  manner  confirmed  in  particular. 

The  Philadelphia  Association  published  many  editions 
of  the  Confession  in  this  form.  From  this  Association 
it  went  into  the  churches,  and  into  other  Associations,  so 
that  it  is  justly  called  in  America  "  The  Philadelphia  Con- 
fession of  Faith." 

The  Charleston  Association  adopted  it  in  1767.  The 
article  on  the  laying  on  of  hands  was  omitted  from  all 
the  editions  published  by  this  Association,  though  the  one 
on  singing  is  retained.  The  second  edition,  published  at 
Charleston,  1813,  has,  in  addition  to  the  Confession,  a 
"  Summary  of  Church  Discipline "  and  ''  The  Baptist 
Catechism,"  bound  in  leather,  and  making  a  neat  volume. 
In  1 83 1  Rev.  Daniel  Sheppard  issued  an  edition  in  which 
the  Scripture  references  were  quoted  in  full  at  the  bottom 
of  the  page ;  the  summary  of  discipline  was  retained,  and 
an  "  appendix,"  supposed  to  have  been  drawn  up  by 
Oliver  Hart  and  others,  and  treating  various  questions  of 
Baptist  polity  and  practice,  was  added.  The  whole  makes 
a  leather-bound  volume  of  three  hundred  and  three  pages. 
A  fourth  edition  appeared  in  1850,  and  there  may  have 
been  others. 

Many  churches  and  other  Associations,  both  North  and 
South,  adopted  this  Confession.  In  recent  years  it  has 
been  losing  ground,  especially  in  the  North,  but  it  is 
still  widely  used,  and  in  the  South  is  probably  the  most 
influential  of  all  Confessions. 

The  larger  Baptist  bodies  in  America  have,  as  a  rule, 
abstained  from  making  doctrinal  statements  or  formally 


American  Baptists  299 

adopting  existing  Confessions.  Indeed,  the  Southern 
Baptist  Convention,  in  its  address  "  to  the  Brethren  in 
the  United  States,"  at  its  organization  in  1845,  says: 
"  We  have  constructed  for  our  basis  no  new  creed,  acting 
in  this  matter  upon  a  Baptist  aversion  for  all  creeds  but 
the  Bible." 

2.  The  New  Hampshire  Confession 

The  only  Confession  of  any  note  produced  by  Ameri- 
can Calvinistic  Baptists  is  the  so-called  "  New  Hampshire 
Confession  of  Faith."  Indeed,  it  is  doubtful  if  it  ought 
to  be  called  Calvinistic,  since  it  is  non-committal  on  everv 
point  of  difference  between  the  Calvinistic  and  Arminian 
systems.  It  is  brief  and  very  moderately  Calvinistic. 
It  emanated  from  the  region  where  Arminian  influences 
among  American  Baptists  have  always  been  strongest, 
and  it  faithfully  reflects  the  modifying  tendency  of  their 
presence.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  widely  used  and  influ- 
ential statement  of  doctrine  among  American  Baptists  at 
the  present  time.    Its  origin  explains  its  name. 

On  June  24,  1830,  the  Baptist  Convention  of  New 
Hampshire  appointed  a  committee  "  to  prepare  and  pre- 
sent at  our  next  annual  session,  such  a  Declaration  of 
Faith  and  Practice,  together  with  a  Covenant,  as  may 
be  thought  agreeable  and  consistent  with  the  views  of  all 
our  churches  in  this  State."  Next  year  the  committee 
reported  that  it  had  made  some  progress,  but  had  been 
unable  to  finish  its  task.  At  the  request  of  the  members 
they  were  discharged,  and  Rev.  I.  Person  was  "  appointed 
to  finish  the  work  and  report  to  the  Board  of  this  Con- 
vention as  soon  as  convenient."  June  26,  1832,  he  sub- 
mitted to  the  Board  the  draft  of  a  Confession,  which  was 
received  and  referred  to  "  a  select  committee  consisting  of 
[Baron]  Stow,  [J.  Newton]  Brown,  and  [Jonathan]  Go- 


300  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

ing,  with  the  author.  Two  days  later  this  committee  re- 
ported to  the  convention  in  favor  of  adopting  the  articles 
"  with  some  slight  alterations ;  but  after  some  discussion 
it  was  resolved  to  refer  them  to  the  disposal  of  the 
Board."  The  matter  never  came  before  the  convention 
"  again.  The  next  day,  however,  it  came  before  the  Board 
anew.  The  articles  were  presented,  and  after  discussion, 
referred  to  "  brethren  Stow  and  Brown  to  be  revised  and 
presented  at  the  next  meeting  of  the  Board."  October 
10  and  II,  1832,  the  Board  heard  the  report  of  the  com- 
mittee, discussed  it  at  length,  received  it,  and  discharged 
the  committee.  Brown  was  then  appointed  to  prepare  a 
complete  copy  for  the  next  meeting  of  the  Board,  incor- 
porating the  alterations  which  had  been  decided  on  in  this 
discussion.  January  15,  1833,  Mr.  Brown  presented  the 
work.  The  Board  ordered  the  words  "  article  "  or  "  ar- 
ticles "  stricken  out  wherever  they  occurred,  and  the 
word  "Declaration"  substituted.  It  was  then  voted  "  that 
the  Declaration  of  Faith  and  Covenant  prepared  by  Bren. 
Stow  and  Brown,  and  now  read  before  the  Board  of  this 
Convention,  are  entitled  to  their  unanimous  approbation, 
and  are  by  them  cordially  recommended  to  the  adoption 
of  the  churches."  ^  It  contained  sixteen  articles,  and  was 
published  with  the  authority  of  the  Board  of  the  Baptist 
State  Convention  of  New  Hampshire. 

In  1853  Rev.  J.  Newton  Brown,  who  was  then  editorial 
secretary  of  the  xA.merican  Baptist  Publication  Society, 
on  his  own  authority  revised  this  Confession,  adding  two 
articles,  one  on  "  Repentance  and  Faith,"  and  one  on 
"  Sanctification,"  making  eighteen  in  all.  In  this  form  he 
incorporated  it  in  "  The  Baptist  Church  Manual,"  and 
circulated  it  widely.  It  was  copied  in  other  church  man- 
uals and  thus  further  popularized  until  it  has  become  al- 

1  Minutes  N.  H.  Bap.  His.  Soc.  1891. 


American  Baptists  301 


most  the  sole  Confession  used  in  the  North,  East,  and 
West,  where  Calvinism  has  been  most  modified  by  Ar- 
minianism. 

In  1867  Rev.  J.  M.  Pendleton,  who  was  then  pastor 
at  Upland,  Pa.,  incorporated  this  Confession  in  his 
"  Church  Manual."  This  manual  was  widely  circulated 
among  the  "  Landmark "  Baptists,  of  whom  Doctor 
Pendleton  was  a  leader.  It  thus  came  to  be  adopted  as 
the  doctrinal  statement  of  most  of  the  newer  churches 
and  Associations  of  this  type.  It  was  recently  adopted  by 
the  Landmark  Convention,  and  is  said  to  be  the  statement 
recognized  by  most  of  the  Associations.  It  was  adopted 
as  the  "  Articles  of  Faith  "  of  the  Southwestern  Baptist 
Theological  Seminary  after  Article  XIII  had  been 
changed  by  striking  out  the  word  *'  visible  "  and  inserting 
"  particular,"  making  it  read,  "  particular  church,"  in- 
stead of  "  visible  church." 

In  1890  Rev.  E.  T.  Hiscox,  in  his  "  Standard  Manual," 
divided  the  article  on  "  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  " 
into  two,  making  nineteen  articles  in  all.  In  his  "  New 
Directory  "  he  has  further  enlarged  it,  so  that  it  now  con- 
tains, as  published  by  him,  twenty  articles. 

All  efforts  to  discover  a  copy  of  the  original  edition 
have  proved  unavailing.  The  following  is  reproduced 
from  William  Crowell's  "  Church  Members  Hand-Book," 
and  may  not  be  the  exact  original  text,  though  It  is  cer- 
tainly substantially  so.  Additions  made  in  1853  ^^^  ^"" 
closed  in  brackets,  while  other  changes  are  indicated  in 
the  notes. 

Declaration  of  Faith. 

i.  Of  the  Scriptures. 

We  believe  [that]  the  Holy  Bible  was  written  by  men 
divinely  inspired,  and  Is  a  perfect  treasure  of  heavenly 
instruction ;  that  it  has  God  for  its  author,  salvation  for 


302  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


its  end,  and  truth,  without  any  mixture  of  error,  for  its 
matter;  that  it  reveals  the  principles  by  which  God  will 
judge  us;  and  therefore  is,  and  shall  remain  to  the  end 
of  the  world,  the  true  centre  of  Christian  union,  and  the 
supreme  standard  by  which  all  human  conduct,  creeds, 
and  opinions  should  be  tried. 

ii.  Of  the  True  God. 
[We  believe]  That  there  is  one,  and  only  one,  living 
and  true  ^  God,  [an  infinite,  intelligent  Spirit,]  whose 
name  is  JEHOVAH,  the  Maker  and  Supreme  Ruler  of 
heaven  and  earth;  inexpressibly  glorious  in  holiness; 
[and]  worthy  of  all  possible  honor,  confidence,  and  love; 
revealed  under  the  personal  and  relative  distinctions  of  ^ 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit ;  ^  equal  in  every 
divine  perfection,  and  executing  distinct  but  harmonious 
offices  in  the  great  work  of  redemption. 

iii.  Of  the  Fall  of  Man. 

[We  believe]  That  man  was  created  in  a  state  of  *  holi- 
ness, under  the  law  of  his  Maker;  but  by  voluntary 
transgression  fell  from  that  holy  and  happy  state ;  in  con- 
sequence of  which  all  mankind  are  now  sinners,  not  by 
constraint  but  choice,  being  by  nature  utterly  void  of  that 
holiness  required  by  the  law  of  God,  wholly  given  to  the 
gratification  of  the  world,  of  Satan,  and  of  their  own 
sinful  passions,^  therefore  under  just  condemnation  to 
eternal  ruin,  without  defense  or  excuse. 

iv.  Of  the  Way  of  Salvation. 

[We  believe]  That  the  salvation  of  sinners  is  wholly  of 
grace ;  through  the  Mediatorial  Offices  of  the  Son  of  God, 
who  [by  the  appointment  of  the  Father,  freely]  took 
upon  him  our  nature,  yet  without  sin;  honored  the 
[divine]  law  by  his  personal  obedience,  and  made  atone- 

1  "  true  and  living"  in  ed.   1853. 

2  "revealed  ...  of    the    Father,"    is    as    follows    in    ed.    1853,    "that    in 
the  unity  of  the  Godhead  there  are  three  persons,  the  Father,"  etc. 

3  "Ghost"  in  ed.   1853. 

*"a  state  of,"  omitted  in  ed.   1853. 

^  "  wholly  given  .  .  .  sinful  passions  "  is  changed  to  "  positively  inclined 
to  evil  "  in  ed.   1853. 


American  Baptists  303 

ment  for  our  sins  by  his  death  ^ ;  being-  "risen  from  the 
dead  he  is  now  enthroned  in  heaven;  and  uniting  in  his 
wonderful  person  the  tenderest  sympathies  with  divine 
perfections,  [he]  is  every  way  quahfied  to  be  a  suitable, 
a  compassionate,  and  an  all-sufficient  Saviour. 

V.  Of  Justification 

[We  believe]  That  the  great  Gospel  blessing  which 
Christ  of  his  fulness  bestows  on  such "  as  believe  in 
Him,  is  Justification;  that  Justification  consists  in  ^  the 
pardon  of  sin  and  the  promise  of  eternal  hfe,  on  principles 
of  righteousness ;  that  it  is  bestowed  not  in  consideration 
of  any  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done, 
but  solely  through  His  own  redemption  and  righteous- 
ness,^ [by  virtue  of  which  faith  his  perfect  righteousness 
is  freely  imputed  to  us  of  God;]  that  it  brings  us  into 
a  state  of  most  blessed  peace  and  favor  with  God,  and 
secures  every  other  blessing  needful  for  time  and 
eternity. 

vi.  Of  the  Freeness  of  Salvation, 

[We  believe]  That  the  blessings  of  salvation  are  made 
free  to  all  by  the  Gospel ;  that  it  is  the  immediate  duty  of 
all  to  accept  them  by  a  cordial,  [penitent,]  and  obedient 
faith;  and  that  nothing  prevents  the  salvation  of  the 
greatest  sinner  on  earth  except  ^  his  own  [inherent  de- 
pravity and]  voluntary  refusal  to  submit  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,^'^  which  refusal  will  subject  him  to  ^^  an 
aggravated  condemnation. 

vii.  Of  grace  in  Regeneration. 

[We  believe]  That  in  order  to  be  saved,  we  ^-  must 
be  regenerated  or  born  again;  that  regeneration  consists 

«Ed.  1853  reads,  "and  by  his  death  made  a  full  atonement  for  our  sins" 
for  '*  and  made  .  .  .  death." 

■^  "  that  having  risen"  in  ed.   1853. 

a  For  "of  his  .  .  .  such"  ed.    1853  has  "secures  to  such." 

6  For  "consists  in"   ed.    1853   has   "includes." 

8  For  "His  own  redemption  and  righteousness"  ed.  1853  has  "faith 
in  the  Redeemer's  blood." 

»"  But"  in  ed.    1853. 

aopor  "refusal  to  .  ,  .  Jesus  Christ"  ed,  1853  has  "rejection  of  the 
gospel." 

"  "  which  refusal  ...  to  "  changed  to  "  which  rejection  involves  him  in." 

1^"  Sinners  "in  ed.   1853. 


304  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

in  giving  a  holy  disposition  to  the  mind ;  and  ^^  is  effected 
in  a  manner  above  our  comprehension  or  calculation/* 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  [in  connection  with 
divine  truth,]  so  as  to  secure  our  voluntary  obedience  to 
the  Gospel ;  and  that  its  proper  evidence  is  ^^  found  in 
the  holy  fruit  which  we  bring  forth  to  the  glory  of  God. 

viii.  Of  Repentance  and  Faith. 

[This  article  added  in  1853.] 

We  believe  that  Repentance  and  Faith  are  sacred  du- 
ties, and  also  inseparable  graces,  wrought  in  our  souls 
by  the  regenerating  Spirit  of  God ;  whereby  being  deeply 
convinced  of  our  guilt,  danger,  and  helplessness,  and  of 
the  way  of  salvation  by  Christ,  we  turn  to  God  with 
unfeigned  contrition,  confession,  and  supplication  for 
mercy ;  at  the  same  time  heartily  receiving  the  Lord  Je- 
sus Christ  as  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  and  relying 
on  him  alone  as  the  only  and  all-sufficient  Saviour. 

ix.  Of  God's  Purpose  of  Grace. 

[We  believe]  That  Election  is  the  gracious  ^^  purpose 
of  God,  according  to  which  he  [graciously]  regenerates, 
sanctifies,  and  saves  sinners ;  that  being  perfectly  con- 
sistent with  the  free  agency  of  man,  it  comprehends  all 
the  means  in  connection  with  the  end;  that  it  is  a  most 
glorious  display  of  God's  sovereign  goodness,  being  in- 
finitely [free,]  wise,  holy,  and  unchangeable;  that  it  ut- 
terly excludes  boasting,  and  promotes  humility,  [love,] 
prayer,  praise,  trust  in  God,  and  active  imitation  of  his 
free  mercy;  that  it  encourages  the  use  of  means  in  the 
highest  degree ;  that  it  is  ^^  ascertained  by  its  effects  in 
all  who  [truly]  believe  the  gospel ;  [that  it]  is  the  founda- 
tion of  Christian  assurance ;  and  that  to  ascertain  it  with 
regard  to  ourselves,  demands  and  deserves  our  ^®  utmost 
diligence. 

"For  "and"  ed,  1853  has  "that  it." 
^*  "  Or  calculation"  omitted  in  ed.   18.S3. 

1^  "  Is  found  .  .  .  God"  appears  in  ed.    1853  as  follows:   "appears  in  the 
holy  fruits  of  repentance,  and  faith,  and  newness  of  life." 
10  "eternal  "  in  ed.    1853. 
i'^  "  may  be"  in  ed.    1853. 
18  "The"  in  ed.  1853. 


American  Baptists  305 

X.  Of  Sanctification, 
[Added  in  1853.] 

We  believe  that  Sanctification  is  the  process  by  which, 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  we  are  made  partakers  of 
his  holiness ;  that  it  is  a  progressive  work ;  that  it  is  begun 
in  regeneration ;  and  that  it  is  carried  on  in  the  hearts  of 
believers  by  the  presence  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  Sealer  and  Comforter,  in  the  continual  use  of  the  ap- 
pointed means — especially  the  Word  of  God,  self-exam- 
ination, self-denial,  watchfulness  and  prayer. 

xi.  Of  the  Perseverance  of  Saints. 

[We  believe]  That  such  only  are  real  believers  as  en- 
dure unto  the  end;  that  their  persevering  attachment  to 
Christ  is  the  grand  mark  which  distinguishes  them  from 
mere  ^®  professors ;  that  a  special  Providence  watches 
over  their  welfare ;  and  [that]  they  are  kept  by  the  power 
of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation. 

xii.  [Of  the]  Harmony  of  the  Law  and  the  Gospel. 

[We  believe]  That  the  Law  of  God  is  the  eternal  and 
unchangeable  rule  of  his  moral  government;  that  it  is 
holy,  just,  and  good;  and  that  the  inability  which  the 
Scriptures  ascribe  to  fallen  men  to  fulfill  its  precepts, 
arises  entirely  from  their  love  of  sin;  to  deliver  them 
from  which,  and  to  restore  them  through  a  Mediator  to 
unfeigned  obedience  to  the  holy  law,  is  one  great  end  of 
the  Gospel,  and  of  the  means  of  grace  connected  with  the 
establishment  of  the  visible  Church. 

xiii.  Of  a  Gospel  Church. 

[We  believe]  That  a  visible  Church  of  Christ  is  a  con- 
gregation of  baptized  believers,  associated  by  covenant  in 
the  faith  and  fellowship  of  the  Gospel ;  observing  the 
ordinances  of  Christ ;  governed  by  his  laws ;  and  exerci- 
sing the  gifts,  rights,  and  privileges  invested  in  them  by 
his  word;  that  its  only  proper  ^^  officers  are  Bishops  or 

19  "  Superficial  "  in  ed.   1853. 

20  "  Scriptural  "  in  ed.   1853. 

U 


3o6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Pastors,  and  Deacons,  whose  qualifications,  claims,  and 
duties  are  defined  in  the  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus. 

xiv.  Of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper. 

[We  believe]  That  Christian  Baptism  is  the  immersion 
of  a  believer  in  water,-^  in  the  name  of  the  Father  [and] 
Son,  and  Spirit,^-  to  show  forth  in  a  solemn  and  beautiful 
emblem,  our  faith  in  a  -^  crucified,  buried,  and  risen 
Saviour,  with  its  purifying  power -^;  that  it  is  prerequisite 
to  the  privileges  of  a  church  relation ;  and  to  the  Lord's 
Supper,  in  which  the  members  of  the  church,  by  the 
[sacred]  use  of  bread  and  wine,  are  to  commemorate 
together  the  dying  love  of  Christ;  preceded  always  by 
solemn   self-examination. 

XV.  Of  the  Christian  Sabbath. 

[We  believe]  That  the  first  day  of  the  week  is  the 
Lord's-Day,  or  Christian  Sabbath;  and  is  to  be  kept 
sacred  to  religious  purposes,  by  abstaining  from  all  sec- 
ular labor  and  [sinful]  recreations;  by  the  devout  ob- 
servance of  all  the  means  of  grace,  both  private  and 
public ;  and  by  preparation  for  that  rest  which  remaineth 
for  the  people  of  God. 

xvi.  Of  Civil  Government. 

[We  believe]  That  civil  government  is  of  divine  ap- 
pointment, for  the  interests  and  good  order  of  human  so- 
ciety; and  that  magistrates  are  to  be  prayed  for,  consci- 
entiously honored,  and  obeyed,  except  [only]  in  things 
opposed  to  the  will  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the 
only  Lord  of  the  conscience,  and  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth. 

xvii.  Of  the  Righteous  and  the  Wicked. 

[We  believe]  That  there  is  a  radical  and  essential  dif- 
ference between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked;  that  such 


21  "  Immersion  ...  in  "  reads  "  immersion  in  water  of  a  believer,  into.'' 

22  "Holy  Ghost"  in  ed.   1853. 

23  "The"  in  ed.    1853. 

24  por    ''  with    its   purifying   power  "    is    substituted    the    following:    "  with 
its  effect  in  our  death  to  sin  and  resurrection  to  a  new  life  "  in  ed.   1853. 


American  Baptists  307 


only  as  through  faith  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God,  are 
truly  righteous  in  his  esteem;  while  all  such  as  continue 
in  impenitence  and  unbelief  are  in  his  sight  wicked,  and 
under  the  curse;  and  this  distinction  holds  among  men 
both  in  and  after  death. 

xviii.  Of  the  World  to  Came. 

[We  believe]  That  the  end  of  this  ^^  world  is  ap- 
proaching: that  at  the  last  day,  Christ  will  descend  from 
heaven,  and  raise  the  dead  from  the  grave  to  final  retri- 
bution; that  a  solemn  separation  will  then  take  place; 
that  the  wicked  will  be  adjudged  to  endless  punishment, 
and  the  righteous  to  endless  joy;  and  that  this  judgment 
will  fix  forever  the  final  state  of  men  in  heaven  or  hell, 
on  principles  of  righteousness. 

3.  Catechisms 

American  Baptists,  especially  in  the  earlier  period, 
were  diligent  in  training  their  children  and  servants  in 
Baptist  doctrines.  For  this  purpose  they  have  used 
various  catechisms.  The  earliest  and  most  widely  used 
was  "  The  Baptist  Catechism,"  issued  under  the  authority 
of  the  English  Baptist  Assembly  about  1694,  and  adopted 
by  the  Philadelphia  Association  in  1742.  Many  editions 
appeared,  sometimes  erroneously  called  Keach's  Cate- 
chism, sometimes  with  and  sometimes  without  Scripture 
proofs,  and  it  held  its  place  until  catechisms  ceased  to  be 
used. 

Many  others  were  issued  by  individuals;  by  Basil 
Manly,  by  Henry  D.  Brown,  by  Jas.  P.  Boyce,  by  W. 
J.  E.  Cox,  by  John  A.  Broadus,  and  by  others.  More 
recently  the  catechism  has  fallen  almost  wholly  into  dis- 
use, and  efforts  to  introduce  it  into  Sunday-school  liter- 
ature have  not  been  very  successful. 

25  "  The  "  in  ed.   1853. 


3o8  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

B.  Arniinian  Baptists 

As  we  have  seen,  the  earhest  Baptists  on  American  soil 
were  Calvinistic.  However,  the  earHest  Baptist  settlers 
in  North  Carolina  and  Virginia  were  Arminian,  and  very 
early,  Arminian  sentiments  began  to  leaven  and  divide  the 
churches  of  New  England.  They  were  chiefly  emigrants 
from  the  English  General  Baptists,  and  in  North  Carolina 
acknowledged  the  General  Baptist  Confession  of  1660.'^ 
For  a  century  it  seemed  as  if  they  might  become  the 
dominant  Baptist  type  in  America.  Whitefield's  revival, 
with  its  mild  evangelical  Calvinism,  turned  the  tide.  The 
old  Calvinistic  Baptists  in  New  England  and  the  middle 
colonies  were  aw^akened  to  new  life  and  energy,  and  a 
new  type,  the  "  Separate  Baptists,"  arose  to  do  a  wonder- 
ful work  in  New  England  and  the  South.  The  growth  of 
the  Arminian  Baptists  was  thus  checked,  and  the  Calvin- 
istic Baptists  took  the  leadership. 

But  out  of  the  same  Whitefield  revival  arose  another 
and  larger  Arminian  body,  known  as  ''  The  Free-will," 
and  more  recently  as  "  The  Free  Baptists."  Benjamin 
Randall,  a  member  of  a  Congregational  church  in  New 
Hampshire,  was  converted  under  the  preaching  of  White- 
field  in  1770.  He  joined  the  Baptists  at  Berwick,  Maine, 
in  1776,  and  began  a  remarkable  career  of  itinerant 
evangelism  in  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  and  Vermont.  He 
was  soon  excluded  from  the  Baptists  as  an  Arminian,  and 
in  1780  organized  an  Arminian  Baptist  church  at  New 
Durham,  N.  H.  The  new  denomination  grew  rapidly. 
For  a  time  they  opposed  the  use  of  Confessions,  but  in 
1834  found  it  advisable  to  alter  their  policy. 

Their  General  Conference,  organized  in  1827,  took  up 
the  matter  in  1832,  and  "  agreed  that  the  exigency  of 

*  Burkitt  &  Read,  His.  Kehukee  Assc,  p.  28. 


American  Baptists  309 

the  times  renders  it  necessary  that  we  pubHsh  a  Treatise, 
embracing  all  the  leading  points  of  the  doctrine  and  prac- 
tice of  the  Free-will  Baptists,  giving  our  scriptural  rea- 
sons therefor,  also  our  reasons  for  taking  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures as  our  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice."  After 
nearly  two  years  consideration,  the  work  was  finished, 
April,  1834,  and  published  the  same  year.  It  was  pro- 
vided with  an  introduction,  giving  an  account  of  the  rise 
of  the  body,  of  its  attitude  toward  the  Bible,  and  its 
reasons  for  publishing  this  "  Treatise."  Scripture  refer- 
ences, often  quoted  in  full,  and  extended  remarks,  oc- 
cupy much  of  the  page  at  the  bottom ;  finally,  there  is  an 
appendix  on  the  discipline  and  usages  of  the  denomina- 
tion. In  this  form  several  editions  appeared.  In  1848 
the  treatise  on  discipline  was  revised  and  much  enlarged. 
It  was  now  entitled,  "  Usages  of  the  Free-will  Baptist 
Connexion,  Revised  by  order  of  the  Thirteenth  General 
Conference,  assembled  in  October,  1847."  But  the  Con- 
fession of  faith  remained  unchanged,  and  in  this  form 
several  editions  appeared. 

Gradually  the  sentiments,  as  well  as  the  usages  of  the 
connection,  changed  until  it  was  out  of  harmony  with  its 
own  statement  of  doctrine  and  practice.  Accordingly, 
the  General  Conferences  of  1865  ^^^  1868  took  up  the 
question  of  a  revision  of  the  "  Confession  "  as  well  as  the 
"  Usages."  A  committee  was  appointed,  which  finally 
completed  its  work  January  i,  1869.  The  same  year  the 
results  of  their  labors  were  published  as  the  ninth  edition 
of  the  "  Free-will  Baptist  Faith." 

The  text  of  the  original  edition  is  reproduced  here, 
while  the  important  variations  of  the  ninth  edition  are 
indicated  in  footnotes.  This  Confession  has  especial 
interest  in  view  of  the  recent  movement  looking  toward 
the  union  of  Free  Baptists  with  the  larger  body. 


3IO  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


TREATISE 

ON  THE 

FAITH 

OF  THE 

FREEWILL  BAPTISTS: 

WITH  AN 

APPENDIX, 

CONTAINING  A  SUMMARY  OF  THEIR  USAGES 
IN    I    CHURCH   GOVERNMENT. 


Written  under  the  directions  of  their  General  Conference. 


DOVER : 
PUBLISHED  BY  DAVID  MARKS, 
For  the  Freewill  Baptist  Connexion. 

1834. 


American  Baptists  311 


TREATISE. 


CHAPTER  U 
Being  and  Attributes  of  God. 

The  Scriptures  teach  that  there  is  only  one  true  and 
Hving  God,  (a)  who  is  a  Spirit,  (b)  self-existent,  (c) 
eternal,  (d)  immutable,  (e)  omnipresent,  (f)  omniscient, 
(g)  omnipotent,  (h)  independent,  (i)  good,  (j)  wise, 
(k)  holy,  (1)  just,  (m)  and  merciful;  (n)  the  Creator, 
(o)  Preserver,  (p)  and  Governor,  (q)  of  the  universe; 
the  Redeemer,  (r)  Saviour,  (s)  Sanctifier,  (t)  and  Judge 
(u)  of  men;  and  the  only  proper  object  of  Divine  wor- 
ship, (v) 

The  mode  of  his  existence,  however,  is  a  subject  far 
above  the  understanding  of  man.  (w)  Finite  beings  can- 
not comprehend  him.  (x)  There  is  nothing  in  the  uni- 
verse that  can  justly  represent  him,  for  there  is  none  like 
him.  (y)  Such  is  the  character  of  God!^  He  is  the 
fountain  of  all  perfection  and  happiness.  He  is  glorified 
by  the  whole  inanimate  creation,  and  is  worthy  to  be 
loved  and  served  by  all  intelligences,  (z) 

(a)  I  Cor.  8:4;  Jer.  10 :  10 ;  i  John  7 :  28 ;  2  Cor.  i :  18 ;  i  John 
5:20;  Num.  13:19.  (b)  John  4:24;  2  Cor.  3:17.  (c)  Ex. 
3:14;  Ps.  83:18;  John  5:26;  Ex.  6:3;  Rev.  1:4.  (d)  Ps. 
90:2;  Dent.  33:27;  I  Tim.  1:17;  Rom.  1:20;  Isa.  57:15; 
Jer.  10:10.  (e)  Mai.  3:6;  James  1:17;  Num.  23:19.  (f) 
I  Kgs.  8:27;  Jer.  23:24;  2  Chr.  2:6;  Acts  17:14;  Isa.  57:15; 
Ps.  139:7-12.  (g)  Acts  15:18;  I  Tim.  1:17;  Ps.  94:9,  10; 
I  Chr.  28 :  9 ;  Job  42  :  2 ;  Acts  i :  24 ;  i  John  3  :  26.  (h)  Rev.  19  :  6 ; 
Mt.  19:26;  Mk.  10:27;  14:36;  Lu.  18:27;  Job  42:2;  Ps.  135:6. 
(i)  Eph.  4:6;  Isa.  40:  13-15;  Rom.  1:33-36;  Job.  9:  12;  41:  n; 
Dan.  4:35.  (j)  Ps.  119:68;  25:8;  86:5;  100:5;  Ex.  9:27.  (k) 
Rom.  16  :  27 ;  i  Tim.  1:17;  Jude  25  ;  Dan.  2  :  20.  (1)  Lev.  19 :  2 ; 
21:8;  1 1 :  44.  45  ;  Job  6:10;  Ps.  71 :  22 ;  Isa.  i :  4 ;  43  :  3.  (m)  Ps. 
119:137;  Deut.  32:4;  Ps.  92:15;  Zeph.  3:5.  (n)  Eph.  2:4,  5; 
Ps.  100  :  5 ;  103  :  8 ;  Ex.  34 :  6 ;  Neh.  9:17.  (o)  Gen.  1:1;  2:5,  7 ; 
Col.  1 :  16;  Heb.  11 :  3;  Ps.  33:6,  9;  Ex.  20:  11.  (p)  Neh.  9:6; 
Heb.   1:3;  Col.   1:17;  Job  7:20.     (q)    Ps.  47:7;  2  Chr.  20:6; 

^  Ninth  Ed.  inserts  as  "  Chapter  I,  The  Holy  Scriptures.  These  are  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments:  they  were  written  by  holy  men,  inspired  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  contain  God's  revealed  will  to  man.  They  are  a  sufficient 
and  infallible  guide  in  religious  faith  and  practice."  Chap.  I  of  this  edi- 
tion then  becomes  Chap.  II  in  the  revised. 

-  This  sentence  omitted  in  9th  ed. 


312  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Ps.  95:3.  (r)  Isa.  47:4;  41:  14;  59:20;  Prov.  23:  11;  Ps.  78:35; 
Jer.  50:34-  (s)  Isa.  45:21;  43:3,  11;  45:  15,  21;  49:26;  60:  16; 
Hos.  13:4;  John  4:42.  (t)  Ex.  31:13;  i  Thes.  5:23;  Ezra 
37:28;  Heb.  13:12;  Jude  i.  (u)  Heb.  12:22,  2;^',  Gen.  18:25; 
Ps.  50:6;  2  Tim.  4:8.  (v)  Ex.  34:14;  Mt.  4:10;  Rev.  19:10; 
22:8,9.  (w)  Job  II :  7;  Isa.  40:  28.  (x)  Isa.  40  :  25  ;  Rom.  11 :  33. 
(y)  Ex.  9:14;  3:14;  I  Chr.  17:20.  (z)  Ps.  19:1,  2;  150:6; 
145 :  10. 

CHAPTER  II.i 

Creation,  Primitive  State  of  Man, 
and  his  Fall. 


SECTION  L— CREATION. 

1.  Of  the  zvorld.  God  created  the  world  and  all  things 
that  it  contains,  for  his  own  pleasure  and  glory,  and  the 
enjoyment  of  his  creatures,  (a) 

2.  Of  the  angels.  The  angels  were  created  by  God 
(b)  to  glorify  him,  (c)  and  obey  his  commandments,  (d) 
Those  who  have  kept  their  first  estate,  he  employs  in 
ministering  blessings  to  the  heirs  of  salvation,  (e)  and 
in  executing  his  judgments  upon  the  world,  (f) 

3.  Of  man.  God  created  man,  consisting  of  a  cor- 
poreal -  body  and  a  thinking,  rational  soul,  (g)  He  was 
made  in  the  similitude  ^  of  God  to  glorify  his  Maker,  (h) 

(a)  Rev.  4:11;  Isa.  43:7;  i  Tim.  6:17.  (b)  Col.  1:16.  (c) 
Rev.  7:11.  (d)  Ps.  103:20.  (e)  Jude  6;  Heb.  1 :  14;  Dan.  6:22. 
(f)  2  Sam.  24:16;  Rev.  16:1.  (g)  Gen.  2:7;  Mt.  2:11.  (h) 
Gen.  1 :  27 ;  i  Cor.  11:7. 

SECTION  II.— PRIMITIVE  STATE  OF  MAN  AND 

HIS  FALL. 

Our  first  parents,  in  their  original  state  of  probation, 
were  perfectly  righteous :  *  they  naturally  preferred  and 

1  Ninth  ed.  numbers  this  Chap.  IV  and  inserts  before  it  the  following  as 
"  Chapter  III.  Divine  Government  and  Providence.  i.  God  exercises  a 
providential  care  and  superintendence  over  all  his  creatures  and  governs 
the  world  in  wisdom  and  mercy,  according  to  the  testimony  of  his  word. 
2.  God  has  endowed  man  with  power  of  free  choice,  and  governs  him  by 
moral  laws  and  motives;  and  this  power  of  free  choice  is  the  exact  measure 
of  his  responsibility.  3.  All  events  are  present  with  God  from  everlast- 
ing to  everlasting;  but  his  knowledge  of  them  does  not  in  any  sense  cause 
them,  nor  does  he  decree  all  events  which  he  knows  will  occur  ";  with 
Scripture  references. 

2  Ninth  ed.  has  "  material  body." 

2  9th  ed.  has  "  image  "  for  "  similitude." 
*  '•  Upright  "  for  "  righteous  "  in  9th  ed. 


American  Baptists  313 

desired  to  obey  their  Creator,  and  had  no  preference  or 
desire  to  transgress  his  will,  (a)  till  they  were  deceived,^ 
inclined,  and  influenced  by  the  tempter,  to  disobey  God's 
commands.  Previously  to  this,  the  only  tendency  of  their 
nature  was  to  do  righteousness.  In  consequence  of  the 
first  transgression,  the  state  of  trial,^  under  which  the 
posterity  of  Adam  come  into  the  world,  is  so  far  different 
from  that  of  Adam,  that  they  have  not  that  righteousness 
and  purity  which  Adam  had  by  creation ;  ^  are  not  natur- 
ally willing  to  obey  God,  but  ^  prefer  to  disobey  him,  and 
are  naturally  inclined  to  evil  rather  than  good,  (b) 
Hence,  none,  by  virtue  of  any  natural  goodness,^  can  be- 
come the  holy  children  of  God:  (c)  but  they  are  all  de- 
pendent for  salvation  upon  the  redemption  effected 
through  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  upon  being  created 
anew  unto  holiness  ^°  through  the  operation  of  the  Spirit ; 
(d)  both  of  which  are  freely  provided  for  every  descend- 
ant of  Adam,  (e) 

(a)  Gen.  2:7;  Mt.  2:11.  (b)  Ps.  51^5;  Job  14:4;  15:14; 
John  3:6;  Ps.  58 :  3 ;  Gen.  8:21;  Rom.  5  :  12-19 ;  Eccl.  7 :  20 ;  Prov. 
22:15;  Isa.  48:8;  Rom.  8:7;  Gen.  6:5.  (c)  John  6:44;  i  Cor. 
2:14;  Jer.  17:9;  Rom.  3:9-23;  8:8;  John  15:5;  Eph.  2:9;  2 
Tim.  I  :g.  (d)  Rom.  5:  18;  Col.  i :  14;  John  3:3;  Heb.  12:  14; 
2  Cor.  5  :  10;  Titus  3  :  5.    (e)  see  atonement. 


CHAPTER  HI. 
Of  Christ. 


SECTION  I. 

^  The  Son  of  God  possesses  all  Divine  perfections.  As 
he  and  the  Father  are  one,  he,  in  his  Divine  character,^ 
performed  all  the  offices  and  works  of  God  to  his  crea- 
tures, that  have  been  the  subjects  of  revelation  to  us. 

^  "  Deceived  "  omitted  in  9th. 
6  "  Of  trial  "   omitted  in   9th. 

■^  Ninth  ed.  substitutes  "before  the  fall"   for  "by  creation." 
8  The  remainder  of  the  sentence  reads  "  are  inclined  to  evil  "  in  9th  ed. 
*  Ninth  ed.  inserts  "and  mere  work  of  his  own";  and  omits  "holy"  fol- 
lowing. 
1"  Ninth   ed.    substitutes    "  obedience  "    for    "  holiness." 

1  Ninth  ed.  has  "  Jesus  Christ  the  Son,"  etc, 

2  "  Nature  "  for  "  character  "  in  9th  ed. 


314  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

As  man,  he  performed  all  the  duties  toward  God  that  we 
are  required  to  perform,  the  repentance  of  sin  ^  and  from 
dead  works  excepted. 

His  Divine  perfections  *  are  proved  from  his  titles,  his 
attributes,  and  his  works. 

1.  His  titles.  The  Bible  ascribes  to  Christ  the  titles 
of  Saviour,  (a)  Jehovah,  (b)  Lord  of  Hosts,  (c)  the 
First  and  the  Last,  (d)  God,  (e)  true  God,  (f)  great 
God,  (g)  God  over  all  (h)  Mighty  God,  and  the  ever- 
lasting Father,  (i) 

2.  His  attributes.  He  is  eternal,  (j)  unchangeable, 
(k)  omnipresent,  (1)  omniscient,  (m)  omnipotent,  (n) 
holy,  (o)  and  is  entitled  to  Divine  worship,  (p) 

3.  His  zvorks.  By  Christ,  the  world  was  created ; 
(q)  he  preserves  (r)  and  governs  it;  (s)  ^  he  has  re- 
deemed men,  (t)  and  he  w^ill  be  their  final  Judge,  (u) 

(a)  Isa.  45 :  21,  22 ;  Hos.  13:4;  Isa.  43 :  to,  ii  ;  John  4 :  42 ;  Acts 
4:12;  5:31;  Eph.  5:23;  Phil.  3:20;  2  Tim.  1:10;  Tit.  1:4; 
2:  13;  3:  6;  2  Pet.  I :  II.  (b)  Isa.  40:3;  Lu.  i :  76;  cf.  Ps.  68:  17, 
18  with  Eph.  4:7,  8;  Jer.  23 :  6  and  i  Cor.  i :  30 — Isa.  42 :  8.  See 
also  Rev.  1:8.  Cf.  Joel  2:32  with  Rom.  10:3-13;  also  Ex.  6:3 
and  Gen.  17:1  with  Ex.  3:2,  4;  Isa.  63:9;  Mai.  3:1  and  Rom. 
10:4-9;  Isa.  48:8;  Ps.  83:18.  (c)  Isa.  8:13,  14;  i  Pet.  2:4-6. 
See  also  Eph.  2:20-22;  Mt.  21:42.  Cf.  also  Isa.  6:5  with  John 
12:41.  Ps.  24:7-10.  (d)  Rev.  22:13.  Cf.  Rev.  1:8  with  Isa. 
44 :  6.  Rev.  i:ii;  21:6;  (e)  i  Tim.  3:16;  Acts  20 :  28 ;  i  John 
3:16;  Jiide  25;  John  1:1;  20:28,  29;  Heb.  1:8;  Col.  2:9;  Tit. 
2:10;  Heb.  3:4.  (f)  I  John  5:20;  Jer.  10:10,  11.  (g)  Tit. 
2 :  13 ;  Rev.  22 :  12 ;  2  Thes.  i :  7-10 ;  2  Tim.  4 :  i.  (h)  Rom.  9 :  5. 
(i)  Isa.  9:6;  45:5;  (J)  Col.  1:17;  Mic.  5:2;  John  1:1;  8:58; 
Prov.  8:  22-32;  Heb.  i :  12;  13:8;  Rev.  i :  8,  17,  18;  17:5,  24.  (k) 
Heb.  13:8;  1:12;  2  Tim.  2:19.  (1)  John  3:13;  Mt.  28:20; 
Eph.  1:23.  (m)  Rev.  2:23;  John  2:24,  25;  16:30;  1:18; 
10:15;  21:17;  Acts  1:24.  (n)  Col.  2:8,  10;  Ps.  45:3,  cf. 
with  V.  2  and  Rev.  19:16;  Mt.  28:18;  i  Cor.  1:24;  15:24,  25; 
John  10:18;  17:2;  Eph.  1:21;  Heb.  1:3;  Rev.  i :  8 ;  i  Cor.  4 :  5. 
(o)  Acts  3 :  14 :  Mk.  i :  24 ;  Lu.  i :  35 ;  Heb.  7 :  26 ;  Rev.  Z'7-  (p) 
Heb.  1:6;  John  5  :  23 ;  Phil  2:10,  11;  Mt.  28 :  9 ;  Lu.  24 :  52 ;  Mt. 
2:2;  8:2;  9:18;  28 :  19 ;  John  9 :  38 ;  Rev.  1:5,  6 ;  5 : 9-14 ;  7 :  9, 
10 ;  2  Pet.  3:18;  Gal.  i :  5 ;  i  Cor.  i :  2 ;  2  Cor.  13  :  14 ;  Acts  7 :  59, 
60 ;  I  Cor.  1:2;  Acts  i :  24.  (q)  Heb.  1:8,  10 ;  John  1:3,  10 ;  Col. 
1:16;  John  5:19;  Eph.  3:9;  I  Cor.  8:6;  Heb.  :^'.z,  4;  Isa. 
44:24;  45:12;   Heb.  3' 4',  2  Kgs.   19:15.      (r)    Heb.   1:3;   CoL 

3  "  And  from  dead  works  "  omitted  in  gth  ed. 

*  For  "  Divine  perfections  "  9th  has  "  divinity." 

5  Ninth  ed.  has  "  He  has  provided  redemption  for  all  men  "  for  this  clause. 


American  Baptists  315 

1:17;  Mt.  28:18.  (s)  Isa.  9:6;  I  Pet.  3:22;  Col.  2:10;  Eph. 
1:21;  I  Cor.  15:24.  (t)  Eph.  1:7;  Heb.  9:12;  Isa.  54:5;  Gal. 
3:13;  Ps.  19:14;  78:35;  Isa.  43:14;  44:6;  49:26;  60:16;  Jer. 
50:34;  Gal.  4:4,  5;  I  Pet.  1:18,  19;  Tit.  2:14;  Rev.  5:9-  (u) 
2  Tim.  4:1;  Mt.  25:31-46;  John  5:22;  Ps.  50:6;  75:7;  Heb. 
12 :  23 ;  I  Chro.  16 :  33 ;  Ps.  82 :  8 ;  96 :  13 ;  John  5 :  27 ;  Acts  10 :  42 ; 
Rom.  2:16;  Rev.  i :  7. 

SECTION  II.— THE  INCARNATION  OF  CHRIST. 

The  Word,  which  in  the  beginning  was  with  God,  and 
which  was  God,  by  whom  all  things  were  made,  con- 
descended to  a  state  of  humiliation  in  ^  becoming  united 
with  human  nature,  or  a  body  like  ours,  pollution  and  sin 
excepted,  (a)  In  this  state,  as  a  subject  of  the  law,  he 
was  liable  to  ^  all  the  infirmities  of  our  nature;  (b) 
was  tempted  as  we  are;  (c)  but  lived  our  example,  (d) 
and  rendered  perfect  obedience  to  the  Divine  require- 
ments, (e)  As  Christ  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  ac- 
cording to  the  flesh,  he  is  called  "  The  Son  of  Man;  "(f) 
and  as  the  Divine  existence  is  the  fountain  from  which 
he  proceeded,  and  was  the  only  agency  by  which  ^  his  body 
was  begotten,  (g)  he  is  called  the  Son  of  God;  (h)  be- 
ing the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  (i)  and  the  only 
incarnation  of  the  Divine  Being. 

(a)  John  1:14;  I  Tim.  3:16;  Phil.  2:6,  7,  8;  Heb.  2:14,  16; 
Gal.  4:4;  Lu.  2:52;  2  Cor.  8:9;  Isa.  9:6;  Heb.  10:5.  (b)  Mt. 
8:17;  Heb.  2:17;  Mt.  4:2;  21:18;  27:50;  John  6:6;  19:28; 
11:33,  35;  Isa.  53:3;  Mt.  8:24;  Lu.  22:14.  (c)  Heb.  4:15; 
Mt.  4:1-11.  (d)  I  Pet.  2:21;  Rom.  15:5,  6.  (e)  Isa.  42:21; 
Mt.  5:17;  3:15;  Gal.  4:4.  (f)  Lu.  19:10.  (g)  John  16:27, 
28;  Mt.  1:18,  20.  (h)  Lu.  1:35.  (i)  John  3:16;  1:18;  i 
John  4:9. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Holy  Spirit. 

I.  The  Scriptures  ascribe  to  the  ^  Holy  Ghost  the  acts 
and  attributes  of  an  intelligent  being.     He  is  said  to 

®  For    "  becoming  .  .  .  like    ours,"    ninth    ed.    has    "  being    united    with 
human  nature,  and  becoming  like  us." 

■^  "  All  "   omitted  in  ninth. 

8  Ninth  has  for  "  his  body,"  "  he." 

1  Ninth  ed.    has   "  Holy   Spirit "   uniformly. 


3i6  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

guide,  (a)  to  know,  (b)  to  move,  (c)  to  give  informa- 
tion, (d)  to  command,  (e)  to  forbid,  (f)  to  send  forth, 
(g)  to  reprove,  (h)  and  to  be  sinned  against,  (i) 

2.  The  attributes  of  God  are  appHed  to  the  Holy 
Ghost;  such  as  eternity,  (j)  omnipresence,  (k)  omnis- 
cience, (1)  goodness,  (m)  and  truth,  (n) 

3.  The  works  of  God  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
creation,  (o)  inspiration,  (p)  giving  of  life,  (q)  and 
sanctification.  (r) 

4.  The  same  acts,  which  in  one  part  of  the  Bible  are 
attributed  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  in  other  parts  said  to 
be  performed  by  God.  (s) 

5.  The  apostles  assert  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  Lord 
and  God.  (t) 

From  the  foregoing,  the  conclusion  is,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  in  reality  God,  and  one  with  the  Father  in  all 
Divine  perfections.  It  has  also  been  shown  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  God,  one  ^  in  essence  with  the  Father.  Then 
-  in  essence  these  three,  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
are  one ;  ^  though  they  are  three  in  respect  to  their  agency 
and  relation  to  man.  Hence  the  words  found  in  i  John 
5 : 7  are  true :  "  For  there  are  three  that  bear  record  in 
Heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and 
these  three  are  one." 

The  truth  of  this  doctrine  is  also  proved  from  the 
fact,  that  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  are  united  in 
the  authority  by  which  believers  are  baptized,  and  in  the 
benedictions  pronounced  by  the  apostles,  (u)  which  are 
acts  of  the  highest  religious  worship. 

(a)  John  16:13.  (b)  i  Cor.  2:11.  (c)  Gen.  1:2;  Acts  8:39. 
(d)  Acts  21 :  II ;  10:  19;  John  16:  14,  15;  14:  26.  (e)  Acts  13:2. 
(f)  Acts  16:6.  (g)  Acts  13:4-  (h)  John  16:8;  Gen.  6:3. 
(i)  Mt.  12:32;  Isa.  63:10;  Acts  7:51;  5:3,  4,  9',  Eph.  4:30; 
I  Thes.  5:  19.  (j)  Heb.  9:  14.  (k)  Ps.  139:7.  (1)  i  Cor.  2:  10, 
II.  (m)  Neh.  9:20;  Ps.  143:10.  (n)  John  14:17.  (o)  Job 
26:13;  33:4;  Ps.  104:30.  (p)  2  Pet.  1:21;  Acts  28:25.  (q) 
I  Pet.  3:  18;  John  6:  23.  (r)  i  Cor.  6:  11 ;  Rom,  15 :  16.  (s)  Cf. 
Isa.  6:8,  9  with  Acts  28:25,  26;  cf.  Christ  Son  of  God  with  Mt. 
1:18.  (t)  2  Cor.  3:17;  Acts  5:3,  4-  (u)  Mt.  28:19;  2  Cor. 
13:14. 

2  "  In  essence  "  omitted  in  9th  ed. 

8  9th  ed.  has  "  one  God,"  and  omits  the  remainder  of  the  paragraph. 


American  Baptists  317 


CHAPTER  V. 

Atonement  and  Mediation  of 
Christ, 

1.  ATONEMENT.  As  sin  cannot  be  pardoned  with- 
out a  sacrifice,  and  the  blood  of  beasts  could  never  ac- 
tually wash  away  sin,  Christ  gave  ^  his  life  a  sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  the  world,  (a)  and  thus  made  salvation  pos- 
sible for  all  men.  (b)  He  died  for  us,  suffering  ^  the 
penalty  of  the  law  in  our  stead,  to  make  known  the 
righteousness  of  God,  that  he  might  be  just  in  justifying 
sinners  who  believe  in  his  Son.  (c)  Through  the  re- 
demption effected  by  Christ,  salvation  is  actually  enjoyed 
in  this  world,  and  will  be  enjoyed  in  the  next,  by  all  who 
do  not  in  this  life  refuse  obedience  to  the  known  re- 
quirements of  God.  (d)  ^  As  for  the  body,  no  provision 
was  made  for  its  redemption  from  the  consequences  of 
the  fall,  till  the  resurrection,  (e)  Then  the  bodies  of 
the  saints  will  be  raised,  and  made  like  the  body  of 
Christ,  (f)  An  atonement  for  sin  was  necessary,  (g) 
For  present  and  future  obedience  can  no  more  blot  out 
past  sins,  than  past  obedience  can  remove  the  guilt  of 
present  and  future  sins.  Had  God  pardoned  the  sins  of 
men  without  satisfaction  for  the  violation  of  his  law,  it 
would  follow  that  transgression  might  go  on  with  im- 
punity; government  would  be  abrogated,  and  the  obliga- 
tion of  subjection  to  God  would  be,  in  effect,  cancelled. 

2.  MEDIATION  OF  CHRIST.  Our  Lord  not  only 
died  for  our  sins,  but  he  arose  for  our  justification,  (h) 
and  ascended  to  heaven,  (i)  where,  as  Mediator  between 
God  and  man,  he  will  make  intercession  for  *  us  till  the 
final  judgment,  (j) 

(a)  I  John  2:2;  Isa.  53:5,  10,  11;  Rom.  4:25;  Mt  20:28;  i 
Pet.  3:18;  John  1:29;  Heb.  9:26;  Gal.  1:4;  Tit.  2:14;  Eph. 
5 :  25 ;  Rom.  5 :  6,  8.  (b)  Heb.  2:9;!  Tim.  2 :  6;  Tit.  2:11;  Rev. 
22:17;  Isa.  45:22;  2  Pet.  3:9;  Acts  17:30;  2  Cor.  5:14,  15; 
Ps.  145:9;  I  Tim.  2:3,  4;  4:10;  Isa.  55:1,  7;  Ps.  86:15.  (c) 
Rom.  3 :  25,  26 ;  13 :  39 ;  5 : 9,  18 ;  Mt.  26 :  28 ;  Eph.  1:7;  Col.  i :  14, 

1  For  "  his  life,"  9th  ed.   substitutes  "  himself." 

2  9th  omits  "  the  penalty  of  the  law.'' 

^  9th  ed.  omits  the  two  following  sentences  referring  to  the  body. 
*  For  "  us  "  9th  ed.  has  "  men." 


3i8  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

20 ;  Heb.  1:3;  9 :  14,  22 ;  Rev.  5:9.  (d)  Rom.  5  :  18 ;  8:1;  4  •  I5  *, 
2:14;  Lu.  18:26.  (e)  Rom.  8:21-23;  Eph.  1:14.  (f)  Phil. 
3:21;  I  Cor.  15:49,  52-54.  (g)  Heb.  9:22;  Eph.  1:7;  Rom. 
5:19;  John  1:16;  Mt.  26:39.  (h)  Rom.  4:25;  i  Cor.  15:17. 
(i)  Acts  i:ii;  Eph.  4:8;  Mk.  16:19.  (j)  Heb.  9:24;  i  Tim. 
2:5;  Heb.  7:25;  Rom.  8:34;  i  Cor.  15:24;  Isa.  53:12. 

CHAPTER  VI.  ^ 

The  Gospel  Call. 

By  virtue  of  the  atonement,  which  is  designed  to 
counteract  the  effects  of  the  fall,  man  is  placed  in  a  sal- 
vable  state;  (a)  the  grace  of  God,  (b)  the  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  (c)  and  the  invitations  of  the  gospel  are 
given  to  all  men,  (d)  and  by  these  they  receive  power  to 
repent  and  obey  all  the  requirements  of  the  gospel,  (e) 
Hence  it  appears  a  perfect  inconsistency  to  suppose  that 
God  would  provide  salvation  for  a  less  number  than  he 
really  loved.  As  his  love  extended  to  all  mankind,  if  he 
provided  salvation  for  one,  he  must  necessarily  for  all, 
there  being  nothing  in  his  nature,  nor  in  man's  nature, 
whereby  this  provision  should  be  limited,  (f)  The  facts 
being  admitted  that  God  loves  all  men,  that  Christ  died 
for  all  men,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  reproves  all  men,  that 
the  gospel  invites  all  men,  and  that,  by  virtue  of  these, 
all  men  have  the  ability  to  repent  and  believe,  what  other 
conclusion  can  be  drawn  than  that  the  salvation  of  all  is 
possible  ?  We  mean  only  to  say,  that  salvation  is  possible, 
for  though  in  its  provision  it  is  free  and  absolute,  (g) 
yet  in  its  application  it  is  expressly  conditional,  (h)  Sal- 
vation, then,  being  freely  provided,  and  man  being  ca- 
pable, through  grace,  of  obtaining  it,  if  he  perish  whom 
can  he  blame  but  himself?  The  charge  must  fall  upon 
him  with  aggravated  weight,  ''  Thou  hast  destroyed  thv- 
selfr 

(a)  Mt.  18:  II ;  John  17:4;  Gal.  3:  13;  Rom.  5:  18;  John  3:  17; 
I  Tim.  4:10.  (b)  Tit.  2:11;  Rom.  5:20,  15.  (c)  Joel  2:28; 
John  16:8;  1:9;  Acts  2 :  17,  18 ;  Job  32 :  8 ;  Rev.  14 :  6.  (d)  Prov. 
8:4;   Isa.   45:22;    Mk.    16:15;   Rom.    10:18;    Rev.   22:17;    Mt. 

1  For  this  chapter  9th  ed.  substitutes  the  following:  "The  call  of  the 
gospel  is  coextensive  with  the  atonement  to  all  men,  both  by  the  word 
and  the  strivings  of  the  Spirit;  so  that  salvation  is  rendered  equally  possi- 
ble to  all;  and  if  any  fail  of  eternal  life,  the  fault  is  wholly  their  own." 


American  Baptists  319 

24:14;  Col.  1:23;  Isa.  55:  I.  (e)  Phil.  1:29;  i  John  5:3;  Isa. 
5:4;  I  Pet.  1:22.  (f)  Acts  10:34;  Ezek.  18:25;  33:11;  2  Pet. 
3:9;  I  Tim.  2:4.  (g)  John  3:16;  Rom.  5:8;  2  Cor.  5:14,  15. 
(h)  John  3  :  36 ;  Mk.  16 :  16 ;  John  8 :  24 ;  Acts  13  :  39 ;  16 :  31. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Repentance, 

The  repentance  which  the  gospel  requires  is  a  deep 
conviction,  a  penitential  sorrow,  an  open  confession,  a 
decided  hatred,  and  an  entire  forsaking  of  all  sin.  (a) 
This  repentance  God  has  enjoined  on  all  men,  and  with- 
out it  in  this  life  the  sinner  must  perish  eternally,  (b) 

(a)  Rom.  3  :  20 ;  7:9;  2  Cor.  7 :  10 ;  Ps.  51 :  17 ;  Joel  2 :  12,  13 ; 
Prov.  28:13;  Ezek.  36:31;  14:6;  Isa.  55:7;  Ezek.  18:30,  31; 
Ps.  38:18;  Hos.  5:15;  John  12:25.  (b)  Acts  17:30;  2:38; 
3 :  19 ;  Mk.  6:12;  Lu.  13:5;  John  9 : 4 ;  2  Thes.  1:7,  8,  9 ;  Acts 
24:20;  Mt.  4:  17;  II :  20-22;  12:41;  21 :  31,  32. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Faith. 

^  True  faith  is  an  assent  of  the  mind  to  the  great  and 
fundamental  truths  of  revelation;  (a)  an  ^  act  of  the 
understanding  in  giving  credit  to  the  gospel,  through  the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  (b)  and  a  firm  confidence 
and  trust  in  ^  the  living  God.  (c)  The  fruit  of  faith  is 
obedience  to  the  gospel,  (d)  The  power  to  believe  is  the 
gift  of  God;  (e)  but  believing  is  act  of  the  creature, 
whfch  is  required  as  a  condition  of  pardon,  and  without 
which  the  sinner  cannot  *  be  regenerated,  nor  obtain  sal- 
vation, (f)  All  men  are  required  to  believe,^  and  those 
who  yield  obedience  to  the  obligation  become  the  children 
of  God  by  faith,  (g) 

(a)  Heb.  11 : 6;  John  5:46,  47;  Heb.  11:  i;  John  16:27,  30 ; 
Ps.  119:66;  Rom.  10:9.  (b)  Rom.  10:10;  i  Cor.  12:8,  9;  Gal. 
5:22;  Rom.  10:17.  (c)  2  Chr.  20:20;  Prov.  14:26;  Rom.  4:20, 
21;  Eph.  3:12;  I  Tim.  4:10.  (d)  James  2:17,  20-24,  26;  Gal. 
5  :  6 ;  I  Tim.  1:5.     (e)  Phil,  i :  29 ;  Acts  14 :  27 ;  2  Pet.  1:1;  Eph. 

1  For  "  true  "  9th  ed.  has  "  saving." 

2  For  "  act  .  .  .  gospel  ''  gth  ed.  has  "  acceptance  of  the  gospel." 

3  For  "  the  living  God  "  9th  ed.  has  "  Christ." 
*  "  Be  regenerated,  nor  "  omitted  in  9th  ed. 

«  After  "  believe  "  9th  ed.  adds  "  in  Christ." 


320  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

2:8.  (f)  John  6:29;  Mk.  16:16;  Acts  16:31;  John  3:36; 
8:21,  24;  Heb.  11:6;  Mk.  1:15.  (g)  Acts  10:43;  John  1:7; 
Gal.  3:26;  Rom.  16:26;  5:  i;  John  3: 15. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Regeneration. 

^  As  God  is  a  holy  Being  and  heaven  a  holy  place,  man 
must  be  regenerated  before  he  can  enter  a  state  of  happi- 
ness, (a)  This  change  is  an  instantaneous  ^  renovation 
of  the  soul  by  the  grace  and  Spirit  of  God,  (b)  whereby 
the  penitent  sinner  receives  new  life,  becomes  a  child  of 
God,   (c)   and  ^  is  enabled  to  perform  spiritual  service. 

(d)  It  is  called*  a  being  born  again,  born  of  the  Spirit, 

(e)  being  quickened,  (f)  passing  from  death  unto  Hfe, 
(g)  and  a  partaking  of  the  divine  nature,  (h) 

(a)  Heb.  12:14;  Rev.  21:27;  Mt.  5:8;  Gal.  5:19-21.  (b) 
John  3:5;  Ezek.  36 :  26,  27 ;  Tit.  3:5;  Eph.  2  :  10.  (c)  John  5  :  25 ; 
Eph.  2:10;  I  John  3:9;  Rom.  8:16;  John  1:12;  Jas.  i:i8,'  2 
Cor.  5:17;  Gal.  6:15.  (d)  i  Pet.  2:5;  Ezek.  11:19,  20;  Phil. 
2:  13;  I  Pet.  4:  II.  (e)  John  3:6;  i:  13;  3:5,  8;  i  John  3:9; 
4 :  7 ;  5  :  I,  4,  18.  (f )  Eph.  2:1;  Ps.  119:  50,  93 ;  Eph.  2:5;  Col. 
2:13.    (g)  John  5:24;  I  John  3:  14.    (h)  2  Pet.  i :  4;  Heb.  3 :  14. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Justification  and  SanctiUcation. 

Personal  justification  implies  that  the  person  justified 
has  been  guilty  before  God;  and  that,  in  consideration 
of  the  ^  righteousness  of  Christ,  received  by  faith,  the 
sinner  is  pardoned  and  absolved  from  the  guilt  ^  and 
punishment  of  sin.  (a)  Though  the  ^righteousness  of 
Christ  is  the  foundation  of  the  sinner's  redemption,  yet 
without  repentance  and  faith  it  can  never  give  him  justi- 
fication and  peace  with  God.  (b) 

^  In  Qth  ed.  the  first  sentence  reads:  "  As  man  is  a  fallen  and  sinful  be- 
ing, he  must  be  regenerated  in  order  to  obtain  salvation." 

-  "  Renovation  .  .  .  God  "  reads  in  9th  ed.  "  renewal  of  the  heart  by  the 
Holy   Spirit." 

^  "  Is  .  .  .  service  "  reads  "  disposed  to  serve  him." 

*  After  "  called  "  9th  ed.   adds  "  in   Scripture." 

^  For  "  righteousness  "  9th  ed.  has  "  atonement." 

2  "  And  punishment "  omitted  from  9th  ed.,  while  "  and  restored  to  the 
divine  favor  ''  is  added  at  the  end  of  the  sentence. 


American  Baptists  321 


^  Sanctification  is  a  work  of  God's  grace,  by  which 
the  soul  is  cleansed  from  all  the  pollutions  of  sin,  and  is 
renewed  after  the  image  of  God.  (c)  Though  in  re- 
generation the  soul  is  sanctified,  yet,  while  the  Christian 
continues  in  a  state  of  trial,  he  has  to  contend  with  the 
corruptions  of  nature,  and  is  liable  again  to  be  defiled,  (d) 

Sanctification  is  also  a  setting  apart  the  soul  and  body 
for  holy  service,  (e)  It  is  a  progressive  work,  by  which 
the  Christian  obtains  victory  over  every  temptation,  cor- 
ruption, and  sinful  inclination;  and  in  which  his  will  is 
brought  into  entire  resignation  to  the  will  of  God.  (f) 
The  attainment  of  entire  sanctification  in  this  life,  is  both 
the  privilege  and  duty  of  every  Christian,  (g)  For  as 
sin  is  odious  in  the  sight  of  God,  Christ  died  to  save  his 
people  from  it,  and  the  gospel  has  sufficient  power  to 
complete  the  work  during  this  probation,  (h) 

(a)  Rom.  5:16,  17;  Acts  13:39;  Rom.  5:1,  9;  Isa.  53:ii; 
Rom.  8 :  22-26.  (b)  Acts  3  :  19 ;  Heb.  4:2;  11:6;  Rom.  9  :  31,  32  ; 
3:25-30;  Acts  13:38,  39.  (c)  I  Cor.  6:11;  Heb.  10:10;  John 
17:17;  Col.  3:10;  2  Cor.  3:18;  Eph.  5:26.  (d)  Gal.  5:17; 
Rom.  8:13;  7:18-25.  (e)  Ps.  4:3;  Rom.  12:1;  Gen.  2:3;  i 
Tim.  4 :  5.  (f )  Heb.  6:1;  2  Pet.  3:18;  i  John  5:4;  Heb.  13 :  20, 
21 ;  Col.  4 :  12 ;  1:9;  Prov.  4 :  18 ;  Eph.  6  :  12.  (g)  i  Thes.  5  :  23 ; 
4 :  3 ;  2  Cor.  7:1;  Gen.  17 :  i ;  Deut.  18 :  13 ;  Col.  3 :  14.  (h)  5  :  25- 
27 ;  I  John  1 :  7,  9 ;  Mt.  5 :  48 ;  I  Pet.  1:16;  i  John  5:3;  Col.  i :  28 ; 
Phil.  2:  14,  15;  2  Pet.  3: 14;  Jas.  1:4;  John  1:47;  2  Cor.  13:  n; 
Phil.  3 :  15 ;  2  Tim.  3 :  17 ;  Mt.  19 :  21 ;  i  John  2:5;!  Pet.  5  :  10. 

1  CHAPTER  XI. 

Perseverance. 

As  the  regenerate  are  placed  in  a  state  of  trial  during 
this  life,  their  future  obedience  and  final  salvation  are 
neither  determined  nor  certain,  (a)  It  is,  however,  their 
duty  and  privilege  to  be  steadfast  in  the  truth,  to  grow  in 

3  For  the  remainder  of  this  chapter  9th  ed.  substitutes  the  following: 
"  Sanctification  is  a  work  of  God's  grace,  by  which  the  soul  is  cleansed 
from  all  sin,  and  wholly  consecrated  to  Christ.  It  commences  at  regenera- 
tion, and  the  Christian  can  and  should  abide  in  this  state  to  the  end  of 
life,  constantly  growing  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ." 

1  Ninth  edition  has  this  chapter  as  follows:  "There  are  strong  grounds  to 
hope  that  the  truly  regenerate  will  persevere  unto  the  end  and  be  saved, 
through  the  power  of  divine  grace  which  is  pledged  for  their  support; 
but  their  future  obedience  and  final  salvation  are  neither  determined  nor 
certain;  since,  through  infirmity  and  manifold  temptations,  they  are  in 
danger  of  falling;  and  they  ought  therefore  to  watch  and  pray,  lest  they 
make  shipwreck  of  faith,  and  be  lost." 


322  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

grace,   persevere   in   holiness,    and   make   their   election 
sure,  (b) 

(a)  Ezek.  18:24;  33:18;  John  15:6;  Heb.  6:4,  5,  6;  2  Pet. 
2  :  20,  21 ;  Heb.  10 :  26 ;  2  Pet.  i :  10 ;  i  Cor.  10  :  12 ;  2  Pet.  1:9;! 
Cor.  9 :  27 ;  i  Tim.  4:1;  Heb.  12  :  15  ;  4 :  i,  11 ;  12  :  15  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  14. 
(b)  I  Cor.  15:58;  2  Pet.  3:18;  Phil.  3:14;  Mt.  24:13;  Rom. 
2:  7;  I  Cor.  9:24;  2  Pet.  1 :  10,  11;  Rev.  2:  7,  11,  17,  26;  3:  5,  12, 
21 ;  21 :  7. 

^  CHAPTER  XII. 

The  Sabbath. 

This  is  a  seventh  part  of  time,  which  from  the  creation 
of  the  world,  God  has  set  apart  for  a  day  of  sacred  rest 
and  holy  service.  It  was  included  in  the  ten  command- 
ments written  on  tables  of  stone,  and  given  to  Moses  on 
Mount  Sinai,  (a)  Nature  itself  teaches  the  necessity  of 
its  observance.  Its  obligation  is  taught  both  in  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments,  and  is  to  continue  with  that  of  the 
other  commandments  till  the  end  of  time.  As  the  law  of 
the  Sabbath  was  at  first  given  to  the  whole  world,  it 
requires  all  men,  on  this  day,  to  refrain  from  all  servile 
labor,  and  devote  themselves  entirely  to  the  service  of  the 
God  that  made  them,  (b) 

(a)  Gen.  2:3;  Ex.  20:8-10.  (b)  Jer.  17:21;  Lu.  23:56;  Isa. 
58:13,  14;  Ex.  16:23,  29;  Mt.  5:19;  Mk.  10:19;  I  John  2:4; 
Mk.  2:28;  Lu.  24:1,  6;  Acts  20:7;  I  Cor.  16:2;  Rev.  1:9,  10. 

CHAPTER  XIII.2 
The  Church. 

A  Christian  church  is  an  assembly  of  persons  who 
believe  in  Christ  and  worship  the  true  God,  agreeably  to 
his  word,  (a)  In  a  more  general  sense,  it  signifies  the 
whole  body  of  real  Christians  throughout  the  world,  (b) 

\In  ninth  ed.  this  chapter  is  as  follows:  "This  is  one  day  in  seven, 
which  from  the  creation  of  the  world,  God  has  set  apart  for  sacred  rest 
and  holy  service.  Under  the  former  dispensation  the  seventh  day  of  the 
week,  as  commemorative  of  the  work  of  creation,  was  set  apart  for  the 
Sabbath.  Under  the  gospel  the  first  day  of  the  week,  in  commemoration  of 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  by  authority  of  the  apostles,  is  observed  as 
the  Christian  Sabbath.  On  this  day  all  men  are  required  to  refrain  from 
secular  labor,  and  devote  themselves  to  the  worship  and  service  of  God." 

2  Chapter  XIII  is  so  greatly  altered  in  the  ninth  edition  that  it  is  here 
given  entire  as  follows: 

"CHAPTER  XV.  The  Church.  A  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH  is  an  or- 
ganized body  of  believers  in  Christ,  who  statedly  assemble  to  worship  God, 


American  Baptists  323 


The  church  being  the  body  of  Christ,  (c)  none  but  the 
regenerate,  who  obey  the  gospel,  are  its  real  members, 
(d)  Believers  are  received  into  a  particular  church,  on 
their  giving  evidence  of  faith  and  being  baptized,  (e) 

SECTION  I.— OFFICERS  OF  THE  CHURCH. 

The  officers  in  the  primitive  church  were  apostles, 
bishops,  and  deacons,  (f)  The  apostles  were  the  especial 
zvitnesses  of  the  works  and  sayings  of  Christ;  (g)  and  of 
course  this  office  ceased  when  their  w^ork  was  accom- 
plished. The  gifts  perpetuated  in  the  church  are  evangel- 
ists, pastors,  teachers,  helps,  and  governments,  (h) 
These,  however,  do  not  appear  to  be  distinct  officers ;  but 
they  imply  different  kinds  of  duties,  which  are  performed 
by  bishops  or  elders,  deacons,  and  others. 

I.  Bishops  are  overseers,  (i)  who  have  the  charge  of 
souls — to  instruct  and  rule  them  by  the  word,  (j)  They 
are  called  elders,  (k)  and  they  perform  the  duties  of 
pastors,  teachers,  and  evangelists.  (1)  The  qualifica- 
tions required  in  a  candidate  for  this  office,  are  as  fol- 
lows : — He  must  be  guiltless  and  the  husband  of  but  one 
wife.  He  must  be  watchful,  prudent,  and  have  the  regu- 
lar exercise  of  cool,  dispassionate  reason.     His  conduct 

and  who  sustain  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel  agreeably  to  his  word.  In 
a  more  general  sense  it  is  the  whole  body  of  Christians  throughout  the 
world,  and  none  but  the  regenerate  are  its  real  members.  Believers  are 
admitted  to  a  particular  church,  on  their  giving  evidence  of  faith,  being 
baptized,  and  receiving  the  hand  of  fellowship. 

"  CHAPTER  XVI.  The  Gospel  Ministry,  i.  QUALIFICATIONS  OF 
MINISTERS.  They  must  possess  good  natural  and  acquired  abilities,  deep 
and  ardent  piety,  be  specially  called  of  God  to  the  work,  and  ordained  by 
the  laying  on  of  hands. 

"2.  DUTIES  OF  MINISTERS.  These  are,  to  preach  the  word,  ad- 
minister the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  visit  their  people  and  otherwise  per- 
form the  work  of  faithful  pastors. 

"  CHAPTER  XVII.  Ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  i.  CHRISTIAN  BAP- 
TISM.  This  is  the  immersion  of  believers  in  water  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  which  are  represented  the  burial 
and  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  death  of  Christians  to  the  world,  the  wash- 
ing_  of  their  souls  from  the  pollution  of  sin,  their  rising  to  newness  of  life, 
their  engagement  to  serve  God,  and  their  resurrection  at  the  last  day. 

"2.  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  This  is  a  commemoration  of  the  death  of 
Christ  for  our  sins,  in  the  use  of  bread  which  he  made  the  emblem  of 
his_  broken  body,  and  the  cup,  the  emblem  of  his  shed  blood;  and  by  it  the 
believer  expresses  his  love  for  Christ,  his  faith  and  hope  in  him,  and  pledges 
to  him  perpetual  fidelity. 

"  It  is  the  privilege  and  duty  of  all  who  have  spiritual  union  with  Christ 
thus  to  commemorate  his  death;  and  no  man  has  a  right  to  forbid  these 
tokens  to  the  least  of  his  disciples." 


324  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


and  manners  must  be  decent,  orderly,  and  grave.  He 
must  be  a  lover  of  hospitality  and  of  good  men ;  ready  to 
communicate,  and  able  to  teach,  (m)  He  must  be  tem- 
perate; not  quarrelsome;  nor  desirous  of  base  gain.  He 
must  be  meek :  not  contentious,  neither  a  lover  of  money, 
(n)  He  must  govern  his  family  well;  he  must  not  be  a 
young  convert,  but  experienced  in  the  things  of  God, 
and  have  a  character  not  justly  liable  to  reproach,  (o) 
He  must  be  especially  called  of  God  to  the  work;  (p)  ad- 
here closely  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  (q)  and  be  or- 
dained by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  (r) 

The  duty  of  an  elder  or  bishop  is,  i.  To  be  an  ensample 
to  the  flock  in  all  things,  (s)  2.  To  examine  into  the 
spiritual  state  of  all  the  souls  under  his  care,  and  suit  all 
his  instructions,  entreaties,  and  admonitions,  to  their  con- 
dition. In  this  work  is  included  the  duty  of  a  pastor,  (t) 
3.  To  study,  preach  the  word,  baptize,  and  administer  the 
Lord's  Supper,  (u)  4.  To  do  according  to  his  ability 
the  work  of  an  evangelist,  (v)  5.  As  a  steward  he  re- 
ceives authority  from  Christ  to  rule  the  flock  by  the  word. 
Therefore,  he  should  neither  act  as  a  lord  over  God's 
heritage,  nor  yield  to  the  doctrines  and  wickedness  of 
men;  but  see  that  gospel  discipline  and  holiness  are  en- 
forced and  practiced  in  the  church,  (w)  He  should 
assist  in  ordaining  elders  and  deacons,  committing  the 
things  which  he  has  learned  of  God  to  faithful  men,  who 
shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also,  (x)  The  care  and  the 
salvation  of  souls  being  more  important  than  every  thing 
else,  he  should,  as  far  as  possible,  avoid  engaging  in  any 
temporal  concerns  which  w^ill  divert  his  attention  from 
his  great  calling,  and  devote  himself  wholly  to  the 
work,  (y) 

2.  A  deacon  is  a  regular  or  stated  servant  of  the 
church.  As  the  bishops  were  appointed  to  take  the 
charge  of  souls,  it  is  inferred  that  the  seven  appointed  to 
minister  to  the  saints  (Acts  6:1-6)  were  deacons;  and 
that  as  the  former  have  the  oversight  of  the  spiritual  con- 
cerns of  the  church,  the  latter  have  the  charge  of  its  tem- 
poral affairs,  particularly  in  serving  the  tables  of  the 
needy,  (z)  Though  there  is  no  scriptural  evidence  that 
serving  the  Lord's  table  at  communion  was  required  of 


American  Baptists  325 

deacons,  it  appears  that  by  common  consent  they  have 
long  performed  this  service  in  several  denominations. 

The  qualifications  required  in  a  candidate  for  this  office 
are  the  following.  He  must  be  sober,  honest,  temperate, 
not  desirous  of  unrighteous  gain,  holding  the  mystery  of 
the  gospel  in  a  pure  conscience.  Being  first  proved  he 
must  be  found  blameless.  His  v^^ife  must  also  be  serious, 
not  a  defamer,  but  sober,  and  faithful  in  all  things.  He 
must  have  but  one  wife,  and  rule  his  children  and  his  own 
house  well,  (a)  He  should  be  a  wise  man  and  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  (b)  Having  been  selected  by  the  church, 
he  should  be  appointed  by  prayer  and  the  laying  on  of 
hands,  (c) 

Duties  of  a  Deacon.  He  should  attend  to  the  tem- 
poral wants  of  the  poor  members  of  the  church,  that 
those  called  to  labor  in  the  gospel  may  give  themselves 
to  prayer  and  the  ministry  of  the  word.  2.  As  the  design 
of  his  appointment  was  that  the  ministry  might  be  freed 
from  temporal  care,  the  inference  naturally  follows  that 
it  is  his  duty  to  see  that  their  wants  also  are  supplied, 
lest  they  should  be  compelled  to  leave  the  word  of  God 
to  serve  their  ozun  tables.  3.  There  being  no  other 
officer  in  the  church  to  superintend  its  temporal  affairs, 
it  is  inferred  from  the  nature  of  his  office  that  the  deacon 
should  attend  to  all  the  concerns  essential  to  its  pros- 
perity, which  do  not  devolve  on  a  bishop.  4.  From  the 
important  nature  of  his  qualifications,  it  has  been  con- 
sidered his  duty  to  take  the  lead  of  religious  meetings  in 
the  absence  of  the  minister. 

(a)  I  Cor.  1:2;  Acts  2:47;  2  Cor.  8:5;  Rev.  2:1,  7,  8,  12, 
18;  3:  I,  7,  14-  (b)  Eph.  5:23;  1:22;  3:  10;  5:25,  27;  Gal.  i:  18, 
24.  (c)  I  Cor.  12  :  27 ;  Col.  i :  18.  (d)  i  Pet.  2 :  5  ;  2  Cor.  6 :  14 ; 
John  18:36;  Gal.  4:28,  31;  Rom.  9:8;  Ps.  50:16;  John  15:2,  6. 
(e)  Acts  2  :  41 ;  Gal.  3  :  27.  (f )  Eph.  2  :  20 ;  Phil,  i :  i ;  Lu.  6 :  13  ; 
I  Cor.  4:9.     (g)  Acts  10:39;  1:8;  5  :  32;  Lu.  24:48. 

(h)  Eph.  4:11;  I  Cor.  12:28;  2  Tim.  4:5;  Acts  13:1-  (0 
Acts  20:28;  I  Tim.  3:1-6.  (j)  I  Tim.  3:5;  i  Pet.  5:2;  Acts 
20 :  28.  (k)  Tit.  1 :  5-7 ;  i  Pet.  5:1;  Acts  14 :  23 ;  cf .  Acts  20 :  28 
w.  V.  17.  (1)2  Tim.  4:5;  Eph.  4:11,  12;  i  Tim.  3:2,  i;  Jer.  3:^5; 
I  Cor.  4:1;  Ezek.  3:17;  i  Pet.  5:1;  Eph.  4:11;  2  Cor.  5:20. 
(m)  I  Tim.  3:2;  1:8;  2  Tim.  2 :  24,  25.     (n)  i  Tim.  3 :  3. 

(o)  I  Tim.  3:4-7;  Tit.  1:5-7;  2:7,  15.  (p)  Heb.  5:4;  Acts 
20:28;   I  Cor.  9:16;  2  Cor.  3:5,  6;   i  Tim.  1:12;  Acts  13:2; 


326  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Rom.  10:14,  15;  I  Cor.  9:17.  (q)  Tit.  1:9;  2:1,  7,  8;  i  Tim. 
1 :  3 ;  4 :  16 ;  2  Tim.  i :  13 ;  i  Tim.  6  :  3,  4.  (r)  i  Tim.  4:14;  5 :  22  ; 
Heb.  6:2;  Acts  13:3-  (s)  I  Tim.  4 :  12 ;  i  Pet.  5:3;  Tit.  2:7; 
Phil.  3 :  17.  (t)  Heb.  13:17;  i  Pet.  5:2;!  Tim.  4 :  6  Acts  20 :  28 ; 
2  Tim.  4:2;  Jer.  3:15.  (u)  2  Tim.  2:15;  i  Tim.  4:15,  13;  2 
Tim.  4:2;  2  Cor.  4:5;  Mt.  28:19;  Lu.  22:19;  Acts  20:11; 
27:35-  (v)  2  Tim.  4:5;  Mk.  16:15;  2  Cor.  8:19;  10:15,  16; 
Acts  9:32;  15:41-  (w)  Tit.  1:7;  I  Pet.  5:3;  Tit.  2:15;  i 
Tim.  1:3;  4:16,  11;  5:17;  Tit.  1:5;  Lu.  22 :  25,  26 ;  Heb.  13 : 7, 
17,  24;  2  Tim.  2:14;  I  Tim.  4:6.  (x)  Tit.  1:5;  2  Tim.  2:2; 
Acts  6:3,  6. 

(y)  2  Tim.  2:4;  i  Tim.  4:15;  Acts  6:4;  Isa.  62:6;  Ezek. 
3: 17-21.     (z)  Acts  6:  1-4. 

(a)  I  Tim.  3:8-12.     (b)  Acts  6:z,  5-     (c)  Acts  6:6. 


SECTION  II.— ORDINANCES  OF  THE 

CHURCH. 

The  following  ordinances  or  institutions  were  ap- 
pointed by  Christ  or  his  apostles,  and  are  obligatory  on 
the  church. 

1.  Christian  Baptism,  (d)  This  is  the  immersion  of 
beHevers  in  water  (e)  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,  (f )  in  which  are  represented  their  death 
to  the  world,  the  washing  of  their  souls  from  the  pollu- 
tions of  sin,  (g)  their  resurrection  to  newness  of  life,  the 
burial  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  their  resurrection  at  the 
last  day,  (h)  and  their  engagement  to  serve  God.  (i) 

2.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  designed  to  commemorate  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  and  to  represent,  in  the  use  of  bread 
and  wine,  the  communion  which  saints  have  with  him, 
and  with  each  other,  (j)  Every  true  believer  in  Christ, 
being  a  member  of  his  body,  and  a  part  of  his  visible 
church,  has  not  only  a  right  to  partake  of  his  body  and, 
his  blood  in  the  communion,  but  is  under  obligation  thus 
to  commemorate  his  death,  (k) 

3.  Washing  the  saints'  feet  is  an  example  that  was  set 
by  our  Lord,  and  enjoined  on  his  disciples  to  teach  them 
humility.  (1) 

4.  Public  worship.  This  is  that  service  which  the 
church  or  its  members  publicly  render  to  God,  agreeably 
to  his  word,  (m)  Hearing  the  gospel  signifies  "  listen- 
ing, attending  to,  and  obeying  "  the  revealed  will  of  God, 


American  Baptists  327 

as  contained  in  the  Scriptures,  and  preached  by  his  min- 
isters, (n) 

(d)  Eph.  4:5;  Acts  10 : 5,  6,  44-47.  (e)  Col.  2 :  12 ;  Rom.  6 : 4, 5 ; 
Acts  8 :  38,  39 ;  Mt.  3 :  16 ;  John  3 :  23 ;  Mk.  1:5;  Mt.  3:6;  i  Cor. 
10:2;  15:29;  Acts  16:13,  15,  32-34;  Mk.  16:16;  Acts  8:37; 
2:41;  16:33;  Mt.  28:19.  (f)  Mt.  28:19;  I  Cor.  1:13.  (g) 
Col.  3:3;  Tit.  3:5;  Heb.  10:22.  (h)  Col.  2:12;  Rom.  6:4;  i 
Cor.  15:29;  Rom.  6:5.  (i)  Gal.  3:27;  Heb.  6:1,  2.  (j)  Mt. 
26:26-28.  Lu.  22:19;  I  Cor.  11:23-26;  10:16;  Lu.  14:22-24. 
(k)  Eph.  1 :  22,  23 ;  i  Cor.  10 :  17 ;  Col.  i :  24 ;  Acts  2 :  42 ;  20 :  7. 

(1)  John  13  :  14-17 ;  i  Tim.  5  :  10.  (m)  Heb.  10 :  25 ;  Acts  3:1; 
16:  13;  I  Thes.  5:  11;  Heb.  3:  131  i  Cor.  14:31,  3,  5;  Acts  2:  18; 
Phil.  4:6;  Col.  3:16;  Eph.  4 :  1 1-14 ;  Mt.  18 :  20 ;  i  Cor.  1 1 :  18,  20 ; 
Acts  4:31;  1 1 :  26 ;  15  :  25 ;  12:5;  Eph.  6 :  8 ;  i  Thes.  4 :  18 ;  Rom. 
12:6.  cf.  Acts  1:13,  14  with  2:1,  4;  Lu.  2:36-38;  Eph.  5:19; 
Mk.  14:26.  (n)  Mt.  7:24;  I  John  4:6;  Jas.  1:22;  Mk.  4:24; 
Rom.  10 :  14,  17 ;  2 :  13 ;  Jas.  i :  25. 


SECTION   III.— DUTIES   OF  THE  CHURCH. 

The  duty  of  the  church  is  that  obligation  which  the 
revelation  of  God  enjoins  upon  it,  collectively,  or  as  in- 
dividuals, for  the  manifestation  of  his  manifold  wisdom, 
(o)  the  perfection  of  the  saints,  (p)  and  the  conversion 
of  the  world,  (q)  In  this  obligation  are  included  the  ob- 
servance of  the  ten  commandments,  (r)  entire  obedience 
to  the  influences  of  the  Spirit,  (s)  to  the  institutions  of 
the  gospel,  and  to  all  the  instructions  and  precepts  of 
the  Scriptures,  (t)  Among  the  latter  are  the  following 
particular  requirements:  Christian  fellowship,  (u)  secret 
&  family  prayer,  (v)  domestic  and  social  duties,  (w) 
watchfulness,  (x)  administering  to  the  necessities  of  the 
poor  and  afflicted,  (y)  the  support  of  those  that  preach 
the  gospel,  (z)  and  the  exercise  of  church  discipline,  (a) 

(o)  Eph.  3:10,  II.  (p)  Eph.  4:1-13.  (q)  Mt.  5:16;  Rom. 
16:26;  Mk.  16:15;  Mt.  5:13.  (r)  Mt.  5:17,  19;  Lu.  23:56; 
Mt.  22:37-40;  Mk.  10:19;  Rom.  13:8-10.  (s)  i  Thes.  5:19; 
Eph.  4:30;  Rom.  8:1;  Gal.  5:16.  (t)  i  John  5:3;  Mt. 
19:17;  5:48;  Jas.  1:4;  2  John  6;  Isa.  8:20;  i  Cor.  7:19; 
John  14:21;  Eccl.  12:13.  (u)  I  John  1:7;  Acts  2:42;  Eph. 
5:11;  I  John  1:3;  Phil.  1:5.  (v)  Mt.  6:6;  Lu.  6:12;  Dan. 
6:10;  Acts  10:9;  Jer.  10:25;  Acts  10:2,  30;  Ps.  55:i7-  (^v) 
Eph.  5:25;  Col.  3:19;  Eph.  5:28;  Col.  3:18;  Eph.  5:24; 
I   Pet.  3:1;  Eph.  6:4;   Col.  3:21,  20;   Eph.  6:1,  2,  5,  9;  Col. 


328  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

3:22;  Eph.  5:21;  Rom.  12 :  10 ;  Col.  3 :  13 ;  Rom.  12 :  18 ;  Mt. 
5:44;  Mk.  11:25,  26;  Rom.  12:20;  Tit.  3:1.  (x)  Mk.  13:3?; 
Mt.  26:41;  I  Cor.  16:13;  I  Pet.  4:7;  5:8.  (y)  Lu.  18:22;  Alt. 
19:21;  Prov.  28:27;  19:17;  Lu.  11:41;  ^2:33;  Dent.  15:7,  11; 
John  12:6;  Rom.  15 :  26 ;  Gal.  2:10;  i  Cor.  16:1,  2 ;  Jas.  i :  27 ; 
Mt.  25:26;  I  Tim.  5:10.  Acts  6:1;  Phil.  4:14.  (z)  Mt.  10: 
9,  10;  Lu.  10:7;  I  Cor.  9:4,  6,  II,  13,  14;  Gal.  6:6;  2  Cor.  11:8, 
9 ;  Deut.  12  :  19 ;  Phil.  4 :  16,  18.  (a)  Mt.  18 :  15-17 ;  i  Tim.  5  :  20 ; 
Gal.  6 :  I ;  2  Thes.  3:6;  Jas.  5  :  16 ;  i  Cor.  5:11,  13 ;  Rom.  16 :  17 ; 
2  John  10 ;  Tit.  3:10;  i  Tim.  5  :  19 ;  2  Cor.  2 :  6,  7,  8 ;  i  Cor.  5 :  4, 
5;  I  Tim.  1 :20;  6:3-5. 

CHAPTER  XIV/ 

Death. 

The  bodies  of  men  being  Subject  to  the  calamities  of 
the  fall,  all  have  died,  or  will  die,  excepting  Enoch, 
Elijah,  and  the  saints  that  shall  be  in  the  earth  at  the  last 
day.  (a)  But  the  soul,  spirit,  or  the  immaterial  part, 
survives  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  and  immediately 
after  death  enters  a  state  of  happiness  or  misery,  (b) 

(a)  Rom.  5:12;  Heb.  9:27;  11:5;  2  Kgs.  2:11;  i  Thes. 
4:17;  I  Cor.  15:52;  Ps.  89:48;  Eccl.  8:8.  (b)  Eccl.  12:7; 
Lu.  23:43;  Phil.  1:23;  Mt.  17:3;  22:31,  32;  Acts  7:59;  Rev. 
6:9;  Mt.  10 :  28 ;  2  Cor.  5:8;  Lu.  16 :  22,  23,  24 ;  Jude  7. 

CHAPTER  XV.2 

The  Resurrection. 

As  the  transgression  of  Adam  secured  temporal  death 
to  all  his  posterity,  so  the  obedience  and  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  render  it  certain  that  the  bodies  of  all  men 
will  be  raised  from  the  dead,  (a)     The  doctrine  of  the 

1  Ninth  edition  has  this  chapter  as  follows: 

"Death  and  the  Intermediate  State,  i.  DEATH.  As  a  result  of  sin, 
all  mankind   are   subject  to  the   death   of  the   body. 

"  2.  THE  INTERMEDIATE  STATE.  The  soul  does  not  die  with  the 
body;  but  immediately  after  death  enters  into  a  conscious  state  of  happi- 
ness or  misery,  according  to  the  moral  character  here  possessed." 

This  chapter   is   then  added: 

"CHAPTER  XIX.  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  The  Lord  Jesus,  who 
ascended  on  high  and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  will  come  again  to 
close  the  gospel  dispensation,  glorify  his  saints,  and  judge  the  world." 

*  Ninth  edition  has  this  chapter  as  follows: 

"  The  Scriptures  teach  the  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  all  men  at  the  last 
day,  each  in  its  own  order;  they  that  have  done  good  will  come  forth  to 
the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil  to  the  resurrection  of 
damnation." 


American  Baptists  329 

resurrection  is  not  only  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  but  it  is 
intimated  in  the  natural  world,  (b)  The  saints  will  be 
raised  in  the  likeness  of  Christ ;  but  the  wicked  will  awake 
unto  shame  and  everlasting  contempt,  (c) 

(a)  I  Cor.  15:21,  22,  13-19;  Acts  24:15;  Job  19:25,  26;  Isa. 
26 :  19 ;  Mt.  22 :  30 ;  Acts  26 :  8 ;  John  5 :  28,  29 ;  2  Tim.  2:18; 
Acts  26:8;  Rom.  8:11.  (b)  Job  14:7,  14,  15;  i  Cor.  15:36.  (c) 
Phil.  3:21;  I  Cor.  15:53;  I  John  Z'-^',  Ps.  17:15;  Dan.  12:2; 
John  5 :  28,  29 ;  Mt.  25 :  32-46. 

CHAPTER  XVI.i 

The  General  Judgment. 

As  men  do  not  receive  the  due  reward  of  all  their  deeds 
in  this  life,  there  will  be  a  general  judgment,  when  time 
and  man's  probation  will  close  forever,  (a)  Then  all 
men  will  be  judged  according  to  their  works;  (b)  the 
righteous  will  enter  into  eternal  life,  (c)  and  the  wicked 
will  go  into  a  state  of  endless  punishment,  (d) 

(a)  Acts  17:31;  2  Pet.  2:9;  Mt.  11:24;  2  Pet.  ^'.J',  Jude  6; 
Rev.  10 :  6 ;  i  Cor.  15  :  24 ;  Mt.  12 :  41,  42 ;  25  :  31,  32  ;  i  John  4:17; 
2  Pet.  3:  II,  12;  Rev.  20:  II,  12.  (b)  2  Cor.  5:  10;  Rom.  2:  16; 
Eccl.  11:9;  12:4;  Mt.  12:36;  Rev.  20:13;  Rom.  2:6,  7-9; 
14:10,  12;  Eccl.  3:17.  (c)  Mt.  25:34,  46;  2  Pet.  i:ii;  Rev. 
3:  12;  I  Thes.  4:  17;  Rom.  6:22;  Rev.  1:6;  3:4;  Col.  3:4.  (d) 
Mt.  25:41,  46;  2  Thes.  1:9;  Mk.  3:29;  9:44;  Jude  7;  Rev. 
14: 11;  John  8:  21 :  Rev.  20: 10,  15;  21 : 8,  27;  22: 11;  Mt.  13:41, 
42;  Ps.  9: 17;  11:6. 

1  Ninth  edition  has  this  chapter  as  follows: 

"  The  General  Judgment  and  Future  Retributions,  i.  THE  GENERAL 
JUDGEMENT.  There  will  be  a  general  judgment,  when  time  and  man's 
probation  will  close  forever.  Then  all  men  will  be  judged  according  to 
their  works. 

"2.  FUTURE  RETRIBUTIONS.  Immediately  after  the  general  judg- 
ment the  righteous  will  enter  into  eternal  life,  and  the  wicked  will  go  into  a 
state  of  endless  punishment." 


part  five 


CONFESSIONS  OF  OTHER  NATIONALITIES 

All  the  Confessions  thus  far  treated,  which  can  in 
strict  propriety  be  considered  Baptist,  were  drawn  up  in 
English.  But  in  the  course  of  the  nineteenth  century 
Baptist  churches  rose  in  other  lands,  propagated  for  the 
most  part  directly  or  indirectly  from  England  and  Amer- 
ica. Besides  the  mission  fields,  strictly  so-called,  which 
have  been  and  are  still  dependent  on  English-speaking 
Baptists  for  their  vitality,  doctrines,  and  practices,  there 
are  on  the  continent  of  Europe  flourishing  bodies  of  Bap- 
tists, whose  views  and  practices  have  been  formulated 
with  considerable  independence.  The  most  important  of 
these  are  the  German,  French,  Swedish,  Danish,  Hun- 
garian, and  Russian  Baptists.  Some  of  these  bodies  have 
drawn  up  independent  Confessions  of  faith  of  consider- 
able importance.  They  are  all  Calvinistic,  but  their  Cal- 
vinism is  of  a  mild  type. 

I.  German  Baptist  Confession 

Of  these  Confessions,  that  of  the  German  Baptists  is 
most  important,  because  of  the  size  and  vigor  of  the  body, 
and  of  the  further  fact  that  they  have  been  largely  instru- 
mental in  planting  Baptist  bodies  in  the  other  countries 
of  Northern  and  Eastern  Europe.  They  are  in  no  way 
descended  from  the  old  Anabaptists  or  Mennonites, 
alongside  of  whom  they  live  to-day  without  any  inter- 
communior.  The  work  began  at  Hamburg,  in  1834, 
with  the  baptism  of  J.  G.  Oncken,  a  colporter  of  the 
330 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  331 

Edinburgh  Bible  Society,  who  had  been  converted  by  in- 
dependent personal  study  of  the  Bible,  to  the  Baptist  view 
of  the  subject  and  mode  of  baptism.  April  23  the  first 
Baptist  Church  of  Germany  was  organized  in  the  house 
of  Oncken,  in  the  great  commercial  city  of  Hamburg. 
Through  much  persecution  and  over  great  difficulties, 
Baptist  work  gradually  spread  to  all  parts  of  the  country, 
until  at  present  (1909)  there  are  some  forty  thousand 
Baptists  in  the  empire. 

Early  in  the  history  of  the  movement,  Julius  Kobner, 
a  Danish  Jew,  and  G.  W.  Lehmann,  of  Berlin,  were  con- 
verted and  threw  in  their  fortunes  with  the  Baptists. 
These  two,  with  Oncken,  form  the  famous  "  Clover-leaf  " 
of  German  Baptist  history,  and  for  years  shaped  the  views 
and  policies  of  the  body.  They  drew  up  that  statement  of 
doctrines  which  continues  to  the  present  to  be  the  sole 
Confession  of  the  whole  body  of  German  Baptists.  As 
in  the  case  of  the  early  English  Baptists,  their  purpose 
was  to  disprove  the  slanderous  accusations  constantly 
circulated  against  them,  and  to  afford  a  brief  text-book 
for  indoctrinating  the  churches  in  the  teachings  of  the 
Bible. 

As  early  as  1837  such  a  Confession  was  drawn  up  by 
Oncken  and  Kobner  to  be  laid  before  the  government  of 
Hamburg.  When  it  was  presented  to  the  Hamburg 
church,  some  of  the  members  rejected  it  because  of  its 
outspoken  doctrine  of  the  election  of  grace,  and  were  ex- 
cluded in  consequence.  It  was  then  adopted  as  the  doc- 
trinal belief  of  that  church.  A  transcript  copy  was  sent 
to  the  church  in  Berlin,  where  Lehmann  enlarged  and 
modified  the  Confession,  and  the  Berlin  church  then 
adopted  it.  In  this  form  the  brethren  at  Hamburg  would 
not  receive  it.  For  nine  years  it  was  impossible  for  the 
two  parties  to  agree  upon  any  common  statement.     Fi- 


332  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

nally,  in  1845,  during  a  visit  of  Lehmann  in  Hamburg, 
the  brethren,  after  struggHng  for  days  and  nights  with 
the  subject,  reached  a  statement  in  which  all  parties  could 
find  their  views.  The  doctrine  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is 
Calvinistic  rather  than  Zwinglian.  Kobner,  who  was 
the  leading  literary  representative  of  the  Baptists,  was 
charged  with  the  duty  of  giving  literary  form  and  pro- 
viding Scripture  references  for  the  whole.  This  work 
was  not  finished  until  1847,  when  the  Confession  was 
printed,  and  at  the  urgent  demand  of  Oncken,  was  laid 
before  all  the  churches  for  adoption.  This  was  done,  and 
henceforth  all  who  were  received  into  the  churches  were 
required  to  give  assent  to  the  Confession.  Not  only  were 
the  Scripture  references  given,  but  many  of  the  passages 
were  printed  in  full,  thus  placing  before  the  reader's  eyes 
the  Scripture  proof  of  every  position  (Lehmann,  ''  Gesch. 
d.  deittschen  Baptisten,"  I,  254f).  The  opposition  the 
German  Baptists  encountered  not  only  cemented  their 
union  but  made  them  especially  careful  in  regard  to  the 
standards  of  their  faith  which  they  sent  forth. 

When  the  Baptist  Union  was  formed,  in  1848,  it  was 
agreed  that  the  '*  Foundation  of  this  Union  is  the  Con- 
fession of  Faith  adopted  by  all  the  churches  which  enter 
this  Union." 

As  before  stated,  this  Confession  remains  the  common 
bond  of  the  German  Baptists  to  the  present  time.  But  in 
1906  a  committee  was  appointed  by  the  General  Confer- 
ence to  consider  its  revision.  A  carefully  prepared  re- 
vision (printed  in  "  Die  dreijdhrlichen  Berichte "  for 
1909)  was  brought  in  in  1909,  but  after  considerable  dis- 
cussion action  was  postponed  for  another  period  of  three 
years.  The  original  Confession  therefore  continues  in 
force.  A  translation  with  Scripture  references  attached 
follows : 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  333 


CONFESSION  OF  FAITH 


and 


CONSTITUTION 

of  the 

CHURCHES    OF   BAPTIZED   CHRISTIANS 
commonly  called  Baptists. 

With  Proofs 

out  of  the 

Holy  Scripture. 


13th  Edition. 


Kassel. 
Publishing  House  of  the  German  Baptists,  G.  m.  b.  H. 

1908. 


334  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Article  i. 

OF  THE  WORD  OF  GOD. 

We  believe  that  the  holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment [books  named],  together  with  the  holy  Scriptures 
of  the  New  Testament  [books  named],  are  truly  inspired 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  ( i )  ;  so  that  these  books  as  a  whole 
make  the  only  true  divine  revelation  to  the  human  race 
and  the  sole  source  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  they 
must  be  the  sole  rule  and  plumbline  of  faith  and  prac- 
tice (2). 

i)  2  Tim.  3:16.  Ex.  19:9.  2  Sam.  23:2.  Isa.  1:2.  Jer. 
1:9.  John  10:35.  2  Pet.  1:20,  21.  Heb.  1:1,  2.  Lu.  10:16. 
Mt.  10:20.  I  Thess.  2:13.  Gal.  i:ii,  12.  [i  Cor.  2:9,  10].  i 
Cor.  2 :  13. 

2)  2  Pet.  1:19.  Ps.  119:105.  Lu.  16:29-31.  2  Tim.  3:15-17. 
(Jno.  5:39-  Act.  17:11)  Rom.  1:16.  i  Cor.  14:37.  Gal.  1:8. 
(Rom.  16:25,  26.    3:21.    Rev.  22:18.) 


Article  2. 

OF  GOD. 

We  believe  that  there  is  only  one  living,  true  and 
eternal  God  (i)  :  the  Father,  the  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  (2), 
in  their  natures  and  attributes  complete,  eternally  alike 
and  inseparable  (3),  so  that  the  Father  is  true,  eternal 
God  (4),  the  Son  true  eternal  God  (5),  the  Holy  Spirit 
true  eternal  God  (6),  and  yet  we  do  not  believe  on  three 
Gods,  but  only  on  one  eternal  (7),  almighty  (8),  all- 
wise  (9),  omniscient  (10),  omnipresent  God  (11).  To 
the  knowledge  of  this  God  can  man  attain  only  through 
the  divine  revelation  of  the  holy  Scripture  and  the  Holy 
Spirit(i2). 

i)  Deut.  6:4.     (i  Cor.  8:4.  6.     i  Tim.  2,  5.) 

2)  Mt.  28:19.  (Gen.  1:26;  3:22.  Isa.  61:1,  Mt.  3:16,  17. 
Jno.  14:26.    2  Cor.  13:13.    I  Jno.  5:7.) 

3)  I  Jno.  2:23.    Jno.  10:30.    Jno.  14:7-10.     (Jno.  16:  13,  14.) 

4)  Eph.  4:6.     (Mt.  6:9.) 

5)  Rom.  9:5.  Jno.  1:1-14.  Jno.  20:28.  i  Jno.  5:20.  Heb. 
1:3-10.     (Isa.  9:6.    Jer.  23:5,  6.    Jno.  5 :  23.    8:58,59.) 

6)  I  Cor.  2:11.  Mt.  12:32.  Acts  5 :  3,  4.  2  Cor.  3:17,  18. 
(Gen.  1:2.  Ps.  3,Z'-^-  Acts  20:28.  i  Cor.  3:16,  17.  12:11. 
Eph.  4:30.     I  Pet.  4: 14.) 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  335 

7)  Ps.  90:2.     (Exodus  3:14.    I  Tim.  1:17.) 

8)  Rev.  4:8.     (Gen.  17:  i.) 

9)  Rom.  16:27.     (Rom.  11:33,  34-    Isa.  40:28.) 

10)  Acts.  15:18.     Heb.  4:13.     (Ps.  139,  2-4.) 

11)  Jer.  23:24.     (Ps.  139,  7-10.) 

12)  I  Cor.  1:21.  I  Cor.  2:14.  Jno.  14:26.  (Mt.  11:25,  27. 
Rom.  10: 17.) 

Article  3. 

OF  SIN. 

We  believe  that  God  created  the  first  man  after  his  own 
image  (i),  an  upright,  holy  and  innocent  creature  (2), 
able  to  glorify  his  God,  and,  united  with  Him,  to  be  saved 
(3).  Through  the  deceit  of  Satan  (4)  man  sinned,  fell 
away  from  fiod,  lost  the  image  of  his  Creator,  and  fell 
immediately,  body  and  soul,  into  the  state  of  death  (5). 
Since  now  all  men  sprang  from  the  seed  of  Adam,  so 
they  likewise  became  partakers  of  the  same  fallen  and 
wholly  corrupt  nature  (6),  so  that  they  were  conceived 
and  born  in  sins  (7),  are  children  of  wrath  (8),  wholly 
incapable  and  undisposed  to  all  good,  but  susceptible  and 
inclined  to  all  evil.  (9). 

i)  Gen.  1 :  27. 

2)  Eccl.  7:30.     (Gen.  1:31.)     Gen.  2:25, 

3)  Gen.  3:8. 

9)  Gen.  3 :  13.    Rev.  20 :  2.    Jno.  8 :  44. 

5)  Gen.  2:  17.  Mt.  8:22.  Eph.  2:  i.  Rom.  8:6.  (Rom.  6:23. 
Col.  2:  13.) 

6)  Jno.  Z'-^-    Rom.  5:12,  18.    Gen.  6:2- 

7)  Ps.  51 :  7.     58  :  4. 

8)  Eph.  2  :  3. 

9)  Rom.  8:7.  Gen.  8:21.  Jer.  17:9.  Mk.  7:21,  22.  Lu. 
24:25.     Mk.  16:14.     Rom.  3:10-18. 


Article  4. 

OF  REDEMPTION. 

We  believe  that  God  could  redeem  man  from  the 
frightful  consequences  of  his  fall  in  no  other  way  than 
through  a  complete  and  valid  pacification  and  satisfac- 
tion of  his  holy  justice  (i)  ;  therefore  he,  from  eternity, 
destined  his  only  begotten  Son,  Jesus  (Thrist,  to  be  a 


336  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

sin  offering  (2).  As  a  consequence  of  this,  at  the  time 
chosen  by  God,  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  (3) 
appeared  in  the  form  of  sinful  flesh  upon  earth  (4),  and 
united  in  the  same  his  eternal  Godhead  with  human  na- 
ture (5),  a  truly  human  soul  and  a  human  body  (6), 
which,  however,  were  and  remained  completely  pure  and 
spotless,  so  that  never  either  in  the  heart  of  Jesus  or  in 
his  outer  life,  did  sin  appear  (7).  So  he  rendered  an 
active  obedience  in  that  he  fulfilled  for  us  the  whole 
divine  law  (8),  and  a  passive  obedience  in  that  he  laid 
down  his  body  and  his  soul  as  an  offering  for  us  (9). 
He  became  a  curse  for  us  (10),  since  he  bore  the  wrath  of 
God,  the  punishment  of  our  sins  (n). — We  believe  that 
this  eternally  complete  and  valid  redemption  (12)  of  the 
Son  of  God  is  the  sole  cause  of  our  salvation  (13),  and 
that  we  out  of  the  same  forgiveness  of  all  our  sins  and 
transgressions  (14),  become  partakers  of  justification 
(15),  an  eternal  righteousness  (16),  redemption  from 
death,  the  devil  and  hell  (17),  and  of  eternal  hfe  (18), 
as  also  that  we  thereby  attain  power  to  hate  sin,  to  die 
to  it  (19),  to  will  and  accomplish  the  good  (20). — After 
Christ  accomplished  his  redemption  through  his  death 
(21),  he  rose  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day  (22), 
ascended  to  heaven  (23),  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  on  High  (24)  and  sent  us  his  Holy  Spirit 
(25),  who  makes  us  willing  to  accept  the  blessings  of 
this  glorious  redemption  in  faith  (26).  As  high-priest 
he  represents  us  with  the  Father  {2y),  is  with  us  all  the 
days  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  and  will  finally  lead  us 
to  heaven  where  he  has  prepared  the  place  for  us  (29). 

i)  Heb.  9:22.     10:5-7. 

2)  I  Pet.  1 :  20. 

3)  Gal.  4:4.    Mt.  16:16.    3:17. 

4)  Rom.  8:  3. 

5)  Col.  2:9.     I  Tim.  3:16.     (Rom.  1:3,  4.) 

6)  Mt.  26:38.     Heb.  2:14.     (i  Tim.  2:5.) 

7)  Jno.  8:46.     I   Pet.  2:22.     Heb.  4:15- 

8)  Mt.  5:17.  Gal.  4:4.  Rom.  10:4.  5:19.  Ps.  40:8,  9. 
(Mt.  20  :  28.    Isa.  42  :  21.) 

9)  Isa.  53:4.  Heb.  5  :  8.  Phil.  2:8.  Lu.  22:19.  Ps.  22:15, 
16.  Isa.  53:11.  Mt.  26:38.  Lu.  22:44.  Heb.  9:28.  (Heb. 
9:  14,  26.    10:  12,  14.) 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  337 

iq)  Gal.  3: 13. 

11)  Zech.  13:7.    Mt.  27:46.    2  Cor.  5:21.    Isa.  53. 

12)  Heb.  9:12.     (Isa.  45:17) 

13)  Heb.  5:9.     Isa.  53:5. 

14)  Eph.  1:7.  (Col.  1:14.)  I  Jno.  1:7.  Mt.  26:28.  Acts 
20 :  28. 

15)  Rom.  3:24.     5:1. 

16)  Isa.  61:10.    Jer.  23:6.    2  Cor.  5:21.     (Dan.  9:24). 

17)  I  Cor.  15:26,  54,  55.  Jno.  6:40.  Gen.  3:15.  Col.  1:13. 
(Col.  2:15.)  I  Jno.  3:8.  (Heb.  2:14,  15.)  Eph.  4:8.  i 
Thess.  1 :  10. 

18)  I  Jno.  5:  II,  12.  Jno.  11:25,  26.  (Jno.  3:36.  10:28. 
2  Tim.  1 :  10.) 

19)  Titus  2 :  14.    Rom.  6 :  14.    i  Jno.  3 : 3.    Acts  15 :  9. 

20)  Phil.  4 :  13.     2  :  13.     Rom.  7  :  21,  22. 

21)  Jno.  19:30. 

22)  (Mt.  28.     Mk.  16.    Lk.  24.    Jno.  20.).    Acts  2:32. 

23)  Lu.  24:51.     (Mk.  16:19.    Acts  1:9.) 

24)  Mk.  16:19.     Heb.  1:3.    8:1. 

25)  (Acts  2.     Jno.  15:26.     16:7-14.) 

26)  Acts  16 :  14.    Rom.  5:5.    8 :  14.    Jno.  16 :  13,  16.  (Gal.  5 :  5.) 

27)  Heb.  4:  14.    Rom.  8:34.     i  Jno.  2:  i. 

28)  Mt.  28:20. 

29)  Jno.  14:3.     17:24. 


Article  5. 

OF  ELECTION  TO  SALVATION. 

We  believe  that  it  has  been  from  eternity  the  free  and 
independent  good  pleasure  (i),  the  definite  purpose  of 
God  to  redeem  sinners  (2).  Therefore,  as  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  it  was,  out  of  unfathomable, 
compassionate  love,  determined  in  the  Godhead  that  Je- 
hovah, the  Anointed,  should  through  his  incarnation  and 
his  death  be  the  Redeemer  (3),  so  were  the  persons  of  the 
lost  huiiian  race  to  whom  redemption  should  in  the  course 
of  time  be  really  communicated  also  chosen  by  the  Father 
(4),  their  names  written  in  heaven  (5),  they  themselves 
given  over  into  the  hands  of  the  Redeemer  (6),  as  his 
people  (7),  as  the  sheep  of  his  pasture,  for  whom  he 
would  lay  down  his  Hfe  (8),  as  his  inheritance  (9),  as  the 
booty  of  his  death  struggle  (10)  and  as  his  bride  (11). 
To  these  persons  was  the  eternal  life  in  Christ  appor- 
tioned (12),  and  likewise  were  all  the  means  decreed 
which  should  bring  them  to  faith  in  Christ,  to  holiness 
w 


338  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

and  finally  to  eternal  salvation  (13).  Such  decree  of 
God  is  unchangeable  and  eternally  fixed  (14)  so  that 
those  to  whom  it  refers,  the  elect,  cannot  be  torn  out  of 
the  hands  of  Christ  (15)  ;  rather  through  the  power  of 
God  in  faith  and  in  love  to  Christ  they  remain  guarded 
until  they  become  fellow-heirs  of  his  glory. 

i)  Eph.  i:ii.     (Rom.  11:34.) 

2)  Jno.  3: 16. 

3)  Acts  2:23.     3:18.     (Eph.  3:10,  II.) 

4)  Acts  13:48.  Mt.  25:34,  Mk.  13:20..  Jno.  6:37.  6:65. 
15:16.  Acts  16:6.  18:9,  10.  Rom.  8:28,  33.  9:11-16.  9:20. 
11:4,  5,  7.  Eph.  1:4.  2  Thess.  2:13.  2  Tim.  1:9.  Ps.  65:5. 
(Mt.  20 :  16.  Lu.  18 :  7.  i  Cor.  i :  26-29.  Eph-  2 :  8,  10.  Col.  3  :  12. 
Ps.  33:  12.) 

5)  Rev.  17:8.  Dan.  12:1.  (Lu.  10:20.  Phil.  4:3.  Rev. 
20:  12,  15. 

6)  Jno.  17:6,  9,  II,  24. 

7)  Mt.  1:21.    (Acts  18:  10.    Isa.  53:8.) 

8)  Jno.  10:  15,  16,  26,  27. 

9)  Eph.  1:18.     (Ps.  28:9.) 

10)  Isa.  53  :  12. 

11)  Rev.  21  :g.     (Ps.  45.) 

12)  Jno.  17:2.     (Jno.  10:28.    Rom.  5:21.    6:23.    i  Jno.  5:11.) 

13)  Rom.  8:  29,  30.    i  Pet.  i :  3.     (Eph.  i :  19.    Isa.  43  :  5-7.) 

14)  Rom.  11:29.     Phil.  1:6.     Isa.  54:10.     Ps.  89:31-35.     (Isa, 

65:17,  19) 

15)  Rom.    8:35-39.      Mt.    24:24.      Jno.    6:39.      Jno.    10:28. 

(Rom,   7:23-25.) 

16)  I  Cor.  1:8.     I  Pet.  1 : 3-5- 


Article  6. 

OF  THE  MEANS  OF  GRACE  AND  THEIR  ORDER. 

We  believe  that  God  has  ordained  means  of  grace 
through  which  he  draws  sinners  to  himself  and  com- 
municates to  them  the  salvation  which  Christ  has  earned. 
With  respect  to  the  same  God  has  arranged  a  definite 
order  which  can  not  be  changed  by  us  without  transgres- 
sion of  the  divine  will  (i).  There  comes  into  use  (a) 
the  word  of  God  (2).  Those  converted  thereby  under 
the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  then  added  to  the 
church  of  Christ  through  (b)  baptism  (3),  and  the  mem- 
bers of  this  church  celebrate  in  the  same  (c)  the  Supper 
(4)  as  a  proclamation  of  the  death  of  Christ  and  as  an 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  339 


intimate  fellowship  with  him  (5).  In  this  supper  the 
communion  of  saints  likewise  finds  its  highest  expression 
(6).  However,  prayer  is  the  soul  of  all  these  means  (7) 
and  of  the  state  of  grace  in  general  (8).  It  begins  with 
the  first  moment  of  the  new  life  (9)  and  never  again 
ceases. 

1)  Jno.  8:31.    Jno.  14:21,  23.    Mt.  28:20.     Col.  2:5. 

2)  Mk.  16:15.     Acts    2:14.     8:5.     8:35.      16:13.      16:32. 
(Acts  10:34-44,  18:4,  5.) 

3)  Mk.  16:16.     (Acts  2: 41.    8:12,37,38.    16:15,33.    10:48.) 

4)  Acts  2  :  41,  42.    (Acts  20 :  7.) 

5)  Jno.  6:56. 

6)  I  Cor.  10: 17. 

7)  Lu.  3:21.  Acts  22:16. 

8)  Acts  2:21.     (Rom.  10:11-14.) 

9)  Acts  9:6.    9:  II. 


Article  7. 

OF  THE   CONVERSION    OF   THE   SINNER 
THROUGH  THE  WORD  OF  GOD. 

The  way  of  salvation  is  this,  that  man,  through  the 
word  of  God  which  is  living  and  powerful,  (i)  is 
awakened  out  of  his  sinful  sleep;  (2),  recognizes  his  sins 
and  his  guilt  and  heartily  repents  (3).  In  the  feeling  of 
his  danger  he  has  recourse  to  Christ  (4)  as  his  only 
Deliverer  and  Saviour  (5),  and  receives  through  faith 
in  him  the  forgiveness  of  his  sins  (6)  and  the  witness 
in  his  heart  that  he  is  a  child  of  God  and  heir  of  eternal 
Hfe.  (7)  This  great  change  in  the  heart  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  sinner  is  exclusively  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  (8),  who  according  to  the  gracious  will  of 
God  accompanies  the  word  with  his  almighty,  successful 
working  (9),  thereby  effects  the  regeneration  of  the 
fleshly  minded  sinner  (10),  opens  his  heart  (11),  en- 
lightens his  soul  (12),  and  begets  living  faith  in  Christ 

(13)- 

i)  Heb.  4: 12.    Jer.  23  :  29. 

2)  Acts  2:37.    Isa.  55:10,  II.     (Lu.  16:29-31.) 

3)  2  Cor.  7:10.     Lu.   18:13.     Ps,   51:6.     Acts   17:30-     (Lu- 
7:37-48.) 

4)  Jno.  6:  37.     Mt.  11 :28. 


340  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

5)  Acts  4:12.    Jno.  14:6.     (Jno.  3:36.) 

6)  Rom.  3:24,  25,  28.    Acts  26:  17,  18. 

7)  Rom.  8: 16,  17.    Gal.  4:6.    i  Jno.  5: 10,  11.     (Eph.  i :  13,  14. 
4:  30.    2  Cor.  1 :2i,  22.) 

8)  I  Cor.  6:11,  I  Cor.  12:3.    Jno.  6:45. 

9)  I  Thess.  1:5.    I  Cor.  2:4,  5.    Jno.  6 :  63.    Acts  10 :  44,  46. 

10)  Jno.  1 :  13.     3:3,  5,  6,  7.     Jas.  i :  18.     i   Pet.   i :  23.     Gal. 
6:  15. 

11)  Acts  16:  14. 

12)  Eph.  5:8.     I   Cor.  2:  14. 

13)  Eph.  2:8. 


Article  8. 
OF  HOLY  BAPTISM. 

We  believe  that  according  to  the  definite  declarations  of 
the  New  Testament  holy  baptism,  which  was  ordained  by 
Christ,  and  is  to  continue  for  believers  until  his  reappear- 
ance (i),  consists  in  this,  that  the  candidate  is  dipped 
one  time  under  water  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the 
Son  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (2)  and  again  raised  out  of 
the  same  by  a  minister  of  the  Lord  appointed  for  that 
purpose.  Only  so  is  the  divine  command  fulfilled  (3), 
and  the  ordinance  of  Christ  retains  its  deep  original  sig- 
nificance (4).  The  persons  who  should  subject  them- 
selves to  this  ordinance  and  receive  with  thankful  heart 
this  means  of  grace  are  also  very  definitely  defined  in 
Holy  Scripture,  viz.,  only  such  persons,  no  matter  to  what 
people  they  may  belong,  as  have  previously  been  con- 
verted from  their  sins  to  Christ  through  the  gospel  and 
God's  free  grace,  and  believe  with  the  whole  heart  on 
him  as  their  Redeemer  (5). 

Baptism  is  a  first-fruit  of  faith  and  love  to  Christ,  the 
entrance  into  obedience  toward  the  Lord  (6)  and  his 
church  (7).  It  is  the  solemn  declaration,  the  confession 
of  the  sinner  (8),  who  has  recognized  the  f rightfulness 
of  sin  and  the  damnability  of  his  whole  being  (9)  :  that 
he  sets  all  his  hope  solely  on  the  death  and  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  his  Saviour  (10),  and  believes  on  him 
as  the  Redeemer  from  the  curse  and  wages  of  sin  (11), — 
that  he  consecrates  himself  with  body  and  soul  to  Christ 
and  puts  him  on  (12),  as  his  righteousness  and  strength 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  341 

(13), — that  he  gives  his  old  man  to  death  and  wishes  to 
walk  with  Christ  in  a  new  life  (14). 

Baptism  is,  moreover,  the  solemn  declaration  and  as- 
surance of  God  to  the  believing  candidate  that  he  is 
swallowed  up  in  Christ  Jesus  (15),  and  so  with  him  dead, 
buried  and  risen  again  (16);  that  his  sins  are  washed 
away  (17),  and  that  he  is  a  beloved  child  of  God,  in 
whom  the  Father  is  well  pleased  (18).  Baptism  should 
call  forth  the  consciousness  of  his  deliverance  and  sal- 
vation in  the  candidate  more  definitely  and  powerfully 
(19),  and  such  will  God  work  through  a  sealing  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  (20),  though  only  where  he  has  previously 
brought  forth  through  this  Spirit  true  saving  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God  in  the  power  of  his  death  and  his  resurrec- 
tion (21). 

Baptism  has  the  peculiarity  that  it  should  be  adminis- 
tered only  once,  while  the  other  means  of  grace  are 
repeated  and  renewed  throughout  the  whole  life  of  the 
Christian ;  therefore  it  is  especially  necessary  that  this 
ordinance  should  be  rightly  performed. 

i)  Mt.  28: 19,  20. 

2)  Mt.  3 :  13-15.    Mk.  1:9.    Mt.  3 :  16.    Jno.  3 :  23.    Acts  8 :  36, 

38,  39- 

3)  Eph.  4:5.     Rom.  6:5. 

4)  Col.  2 :  12,  13. 

5)  Mk.  16:16.  Acts  2 :  37,  38,  41.  5:14.  8:12.  8:37.  18:8. 
Gal.  3:26,  27.  Acts  10:42-48.  16:13-15,  29-34.  Mt.  3:1,  2,  5, 
6,  7-9.    Mk.  1:5.    Lu.  3  :  3.    Acts  13  :  24. 

6)  Acts  2:38,  41.    9:6.    22:16.    Jno.  15 :  10,  14.     (Mk.  16:16.) 

7)  I  Cor.  12:13.     Acts  2:47. 

8)  I  Pet.  3:21.    Heb.  10:22,  23.    4:14. 

;     9)  Acts  2 :  36,  37.    9-5,6,9.     16:29,30.     (Mt.  3:6.) 

10)  Acts  2  :  38.     Rom.  6 :  3,  8.     2  Cor.  5  :  14. 

11)  Rom.  6:23.    6:10,11.     (Isa.  53:5.    Acts  8:35.) 

12)  Gal.  3:  26,  2y. 

13)  Isa.  45:23,  24. 

14)  Rom.  6 :  4-6. 

15)  Rom.  6:  3. 

16)  Rom.  6:4,  8.     (Col.  2:12,  13.) 

17)  Acts  9:  9.    22:12,13,16.     (Acts  2:  38.) 

18)  Mt.  3:  17.    Eph.  1:6. 

19)  I    Pet.   3:21.     Acts   8:39.     9:19,    20.      16:31-34.     Rom. 

6:3-11- 

20)  Mt.  3:16.    Heb.  1:9.    2  Cor.  1:21,  22.     (Acts  2:38.) 

21)  Eph.  1 :  13. 


342  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Article  p. 
OF  THE  HOLY  SUPPER. 

This  ordinance,  so  full  of  grace,  given  by  the  Lord  to 
his  church,  which  we  regard  as  an  inestimable  means 
of  grace  and  of  which  we  should  make  frequent  use 
(i),  consists  in  this,  that  bread  is  broken  by  one  ap- 
pointed thereto  in  the  church  with  the  pronunciation  of 
the  words  of  institution,  and  after  a  solemn  prayer  of 
thanksgiving,  and  this  then,  as  afterwards  also  wine  out 
of  the  cup,  is  partaken  of  by  the  members  of  the  church 
(2). 

According  to  the  holy  and  blessed  command  given  to 
them  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  should  through  this  meal 
proclaim  his  death,  till  he  come  again,  as  the  sole  ground 
of  their  life  and  salvation  (3).  Through  this  proclama- 
tion the  memory  of  the  Son  of  God  becomes  living  anew 
in  their  hearts,  he  appears  to  their  soul  anew  in  his 
bloody  beauty  (4). 

We  believe  that  in  these  holy  symbols  Christ  gives  his 
body  and  his  blood  to  believers  to  be  partaken  of  in  a 
spiritual  manner  (5).  The  communion  of  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  holy  supper  (6) 
should  be  to  the  believer  a  divine  pledge,  through  which 
the  consciousness  of  his  part  in  Christ  and  his  offering, 
is  heightened  and  strengthened  (7),  and  through  which 
the  forgiveness  of  sins,  appropriated  by  him  in  faith,  is 
constantly  renewed  and  assured  (8). 

The  holy  supper  is  exclusively  and  only  for  such  as 
through  God's  converting  grace  have  become  his  pos- 
session (9),  and  have  received  holy  baptism  (10). 

1 )  Acts  2 :  42,  46.    20 :  7. 

2)  IVIk.  14:22-24.     (Mt.  26:26-28.     Lu.  22:17-20.     I  Cor.  11: 

23-25-) 

3)  I  Cor.  11:26.    Jno.  6:51.    Isa.  53:5. 

4)  I  Cor.  II :  23-25.    2  Tim.  2  :  8. 
5)Ps.  42:3.     Isa.  55:2.     (Jno.  6:57.) 

6)  I  Cor.  10: 16. 

7)  Lu.    22:19,    20.     Jno.    6:57.      I    Jno.    5:12.      Jno.    17:23. 
Rom.  8 :  32. 

8)  Mt.  26:26,  28. 

9)  I  Cor.  10:  16-18,  20,  21.    5:  II.    Mt.  7:6.     (2  Cor.  6: 14-18.) 

10)  Mt.  28 :  19,  20.     I  Cor.  12 :  13. 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  343 

ARTICLE  10. 

OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  THE  LORD. 

Through  baptism  we  are  taken  up  into  the  church  of 
Christ  on  earth  (1),  and  the  Lord  has  ordained  this  as 
a  means  of  grace  for  us  (2).  In  accordance  with  the 
command  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  apostles,  (3)  as  also 
the  example  of  apostolic  times  (4),  and  in  order  to  be 
able  to  bring  all  the  ordinances  of  the  New  Testament 
into  operation  (5),  it  is  the  duty  of  every  believer  con- 
verted to  God  not  to  stand  alone  for  himself,  but  to  unite 
himself  with  other  disciples  of  the  Lord  as  a  member  of 
a  body  (6)  and  as  the  living  stones  of  a  house  of  God 
(7),  in  order  mutually  to  edify  one  another,  to  comfort 
and  help  each  other  on  the  way  of  salvation  (8),  in  order 
to  continue  in  the  apostles'  doctrine,  in  fellowship,  in  the 
breaking  of  bread  and  in  prayer  (9).  Such  a  union  of 
the  true  disciples  of  Christ,  regulated  according  to  the 
word  of  God,  is  a  Christian  church  (10).  The  un- 
changeable rule  and  plumb-line  of  the  church  remains 
the  New  Testament  (11). 

Offices  in  the  Cliurch 

Only  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  the  head  of  the 
same  (12)  ;  it  knows  no  visible  heads  on  earth  (13). 

The  church  itself  chooses  its  elders,  preachers  and 
ministers  (14),  who  are  clothed  with  their  office  through 
ordination. 

By  ordination  we  understand  the  usage,  which  the  holy 
Scripture  teaches  us,  that  the  persons  chosen  by  the  church 
for  service  are  set  apart  by  the  elders  and  preachers  of 
this  or  some  other  church,  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  and 
through  prayer,  to  the  work  of  their  calling  (15). 

With  regard  to  their  manner  of  life  they  remain  after- 
wards as  before,  like  every  other  member,  subject  to  the 
discipline  of  the  church.  This  must  be  done,  however, 
in  accordance  with  i  Tim.  5:  19  (16). 

Elders  and  Preachers 

We  do  not  recognize  any  distinction  in  rank  among 
elders  and  preachers  (17),  but  hold  that  the  designations 


344  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

of  holy  Scripture:  bishops,  presbyters,  etc.,  do  not  indi- 
cate distinctions  in  rank. 

Learning  we  hold  to  be  desirable  for  these  offices,  but 
not  absolutely  necessary  (i8),  but  above  all  the  condi- 
tion in  Jno.  21:15-17  (19)  and  the  characteristics  and 
qualifications  demanded  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul  (20). 

The  elders  preside  in  the  church  meetings  whose  lead- 
ership they  undertake.  They  are  thereby  obligated  to 
carry  into  effect  the  conclusions  of  the  church.  Besides 
this  they  are  obligated  to  a  true  and  special  care  of  souls 
(21). 

The  preachers  are  authorized  and  obligated  to  preach 
in  the  assemblies  for  worship  (22). — In  respect  to  the 
evangelical  purity  of  their  teachings  they  stand  under  the 
oversight  of  the  united  church  (23),  which  in  case  a 
preacher  departs  from  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  as  they 
are  conceived  in  this  Confession  of  faith,  and  persists  in 
his  departure  notwithstanding  all  warnings,  can  remove 
the  same  from  his  office  (24). 

Holy  baptism  and  the  holy  supper  may  be  administered 
as  well  by  the  elders  as  by  the  preachers  (25). 

The  office  of  elder  and  that  of  preacher  are  frequently 
united  in  one  person. 

It  is  entirely  in  harmony  with  his  office  for  an  elder  or 
preacher  also  to  follow  some  temporal  calling;  though 
it  is  under  certain  circumstances  desirable  that  he  should 
devote  himself  exclusively  to  his  spiritual  office  (26).  In 
case  the  church  wishes  this,  it  is  obligated  according  to 
the  divine  commands  to  give  him  a  respectable  support  in 
accordance  with  their  abilities  {2y). 

Servants 

The  deacons  or  servants  of  the  church  must  possess  the 
characteristics  indicated  in  Scripture  (28).  They  assist 
the  elders  and  preachers  in  their  office  and  the  temporal 
affairs  of  the  church  are  specially  committed  to  them 

(29). 

Duties  of  the  Members 

The  duties  of  the  church  members  consist  in  a  mutual 
hearty  love  (30),  in  a  living,  active  participation  as  well 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  345 

in  the  spiritual  salvation  as  in  the  bodily  welfare  of  all 
(31),  and  in  a  conscientious  use  of  the  means  of  grace 
and  a  following  of  those  things  prescribed,  as  the  Lord, 
as  Head  of  the  church,  has  given  them  (32).  Especially 
is  it  the  duty  of  each  member  to  unite  in  the  celebration 
of  the  holy  supper  (33),  and  to  attend  regularly  the 
stated  assemblies  of  the  church  on  Sunday  as  well  as  on  a 
week  day  (34).  Only  in  cases  of  the  greatest  necessity 
or  because  of  sickness  may  a  member  of  the  church  absent 
himself  from  the  celebration  of  the  holy  supper  or  from 
attendance  upon  the  assemblies  for  worship,  but  espe- 
cially upon  the  business  meetings  (35). 

Voting 

In  the  deliberative  assemblies  of  the  church  all  matters 
of  business,  insofar  as  possible,  are  to  be  determined  by 
voting  (36). 

In  voting  all  members  have  equal  voices  (37),  and  the 
decision  will  be  determined  by  a  majority  of  the  votes. 
To  such  a  decision  the  minority  must  then  willingly  sub- 
mit, since  freedom  and  order  in  the  house  of  God  can  be 
preserved  only  in  this  manner  (38). 

Reception  [of  members] 

The  reception  of  a  new  member  can  take  place  only 
by  vote,  after  previous  acquaintance  with  his  spiritual 
condition  and  the  submission  in  person  before  the  church 
of  a  confession  of  faith  (39).  In  such  voting  it  is  highly 
desirable  that  unanimity  of  voices  take  place. 

Discipline  of  the  Church 

The  order  of  Christ  in  the  i8th  chapter  of  the  Gospel 
of  Matthew,  from  the  15th  to  the  17th  verses,  is  to  be 
strictly  followed  by  every  member  without  distinction. 
It  is  the  duty  of  every  one  to  accept  an  admonition  in 
love,  or,  where  it  is  necessary,  to  give  it  in  love,  with- 
out permitting  any  knowledge  of  it  to  come  to  a  third 
party.  Not  until  after  exclusion  may  a  brother  or  a  sister 
be  considered  and  treated  by  the  members  as  no  longer 
belonging  to  the  church  or  to  the  people  of  God  (40). 


34^  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

Exclusion 

The  church  is,  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  its 
Founder,  authorized  and  obhgated  to  exclude  by  an 
orderly  vote  those  of  its  members  whose  walk  contradicts 
their  confession,  who  transgress  some  one  of  the  divine 
commands,  and  will  not  be  led  to  hearty  public  penitence 
and  the  resolution  for  genuine  improvement  through  the 
admonitions  given  them,  but  continue  in  sin,  and  to  with- 
draw from  them  the  rights  of  members  (41).  Members 
who  have  been  guilty  of  gross  sins,  causing  public  re- 
proach, or  oft  repeated  sins,  and  whose  bare  word  for 
the  time  deserves  no  confidence,  are  to  be  excluded  in 
the  same  way  without  regard  to  assurances  of  penitence 

(42). 

The  restoration  of  an  excluded  member,  like  every 
other  reception,  takes  place  by  vote  after  examination  and 
a  confession  of  sins  made  before  the  church  (43). 

i)  I  Cor.  12,  13. 

2)  Eph.  4:15,  16.     Heb.  10:24,  25.     (Rom.  12:5.) 

3)  Jno.  17:22.    I  Pet.  2:5.    2  Cor.  6:16,  17. 

4)  Acts  4:  2>2-     (Acts  1 :  14.    2:1,  41,  46,  47.    4:24.) 

5)  Mt.  18:15-17. 

6)  I  Cor.  12:27.     (i  Cor.  12:12-27.) 

7)  Eph.  2:19-22.     (i  Pet.  2:5.) 

8)  I  Thess.  5:  II,  14.    Col.  2:  18,  19.    (Jud.  20.) 

9)  Acts  2 :  42. 

10)  Jno.  10:  27.    8:  31. 

11)  I  Cor.  3:9-11.     (Eph.  2:20.) 

12)  Eph.  1:22.    Col.  1:18.     (Eph.  4:15.) 

13)  Mt.  20:25-27.    23:8. 

14)  Eph.  4:11,  12.     Acts  14:23.     15:22,  25.     Acts  6:2-5. 

15)  Heb.  6:2.     Acts   14:23.     13:3.     I  Tim.  5:22.     Tit.   1:5. 
Acts  6 : 6. 

16)  I  Tim.  5 :  19. 

17)  Mt.  20:25-27.     Mt.  23:9-11.     (i  Cor.  4:9.    3:8.) 

18)  I  Cor.  1 :  17.    2:  1-5.     (Mt.  4:  18-22.) 

19)  Jno.  21 :  15,  16. 

20)  I  Tim.  3 :  1-7.    Tit.  i :  5-9. 

21)  Acts.  20:28,  31.    Heb.  13:  17. 

22)  Jas.  3:1.    I  Tim.  4:13.    2  Tim.  4:2.    2:15. 

23)  Mt.  7:15.    I  Jno.  4:1.    Rev.  2 :  2.    Col.  2 :  8. 

24)  Gal.  1:8,  9.    Rom.  16:17,  18.     (i  Tim.  6:3-5.) 

25)  I  Cor.  4:  I. 

26)  Acts  18:3.    20:33,  35-     (2  Thess.  3:8.)     i  Cor.  9:13,  14. 
Lu.  10 :  7,  8. 

2y)  Gal.  6:6.     i  Tim.  5:  17,  18.     (i  Cor.  9:7-14.) 


28 
29 

30 
17- 
31 
32 
33 

34 
122: 

35 
36 
37 
38 
Mt. 

39 
40 
41 

20. 

42 
43 


Confcssioits  of  Other  Nationalities  347 

Acts  6:3.     I  Tim.  3  :  8-12. 

Acts  6 :  1-4. 

Jno.  13:34.  35-  I  Jno.  3:11.  i  Pet.  1:22.  (Jno.  15:12, 
as.  2:  8.) 

I  Jno.  3:  16-18.    Rom.  12:  15.     (Gal.  5:6.    i  Thess.  5:  14.) 

Eph.  5 :  24.     I  Jno.  2:4.     2  Jno.  6. 

Mt.  26  :  27.    Mk.  14  :  23. 

Heb.  10:25.  Acts  1:14.  2:1.  2:42.  4:24.  Ps.  27:4. 
[.    84:  I. 

Ps.  116:  18. 

Acts  15:22,25.    21:21-23.     (Mt.  18:17.) 

Mt.  23:8,  II. 

I  Cor.  14:40.  14:33-  Col.  2:5.  Eph.  5:21.  I  Pet.  5:5. 
8:17,  18. 

I  Tim.  6:12.     Heb.  4:14.     Rom.  10:9,  10.     (Mt.  10:32.) 

Mt.  18:  15-17. 

I  Cor.  5 :  1-13.  2  Thess.  3  :  6.  Tit.  3 :  10,  11.  i  Tim.  i :  19, 
I  Tim.  6:3-5.) 

1  Cor.  5  :  1-13.     Mt.  3  :  8. 

2  Cor.  2 :  6-8. 


Article  11, 
OF  SANCTIFICATION. 

We  believe  that  without  sanctification  no  man  will  see 
the  Lord  (i).  It  is  a  consequence  of  the  justification  of 
the  sinner  before  God  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  stands 
in  inseparable  union  with  the  same  (2). 

It  consists  in  this,  that,  after  the  dominion  of  sin  in 
the  heart  of  the  regenerated  one  has  been  brought  to 
an  end  (3),  he  now  through  the  constant  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  (4)  uses  all  diligence  to  die  to  the  sin  which 
still  constantly  clings  to  him  (5),  to  fulfill  the  law  of  his 
God  (6)  and  to  bring  his  soul  as  well  as  his  body  as  a 
living  sacrifice  well  pleasing  to  God  (7),  through  which 
God  is  glorified  (8).  In  this  striving,  however,  he  can 
still  be  overtaken  by  many  weaknesses  and  sins  (9)  which 
he  will  never  excuse  (10),  rather  will  deeply  regret  (n), 
because  he  thereby  offends  his  gracious  God  (12)  and 
destroys  his  peace  with  him  (13).  He  will  in  such  a 
case  find  no  rest  again  until  he  obtains  forgiveness  anew 
(14)  and  will  for  the  future  walk  all  the  more  carefully 

(15). 

A  holy  filial  love  to  God  and  his  commands  is  the  most 
essential  quality  in  sanctification  ( 16),  and  this  love,  which 


348  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

is  begotten,  preserved  and  nourished  in  the  heart  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  (17),  transforms  the  man  by  degrees  into 
the  image  of  God  (18).  We  hold  that  sanctification 
should  go  on  throughout  our  whole  life  (19),  and  that 
we  also  even  in  the  most  holy  living  constantly  need  the 
forgiving  grace  of  God  through  the  blood  of  Christ  (20). 

i)  Heb.  12:  14.    I  Pet.  i:  15,  16.    i  Thess.  4:3,  7.     (Eph.  1:4.) 

2)  I    Cor.    1:30.     Rom.   6:2.     Jno.    15:2.      (Jas.   2:17.     Mt. 
7:17.    Gal.  5:22.    Eph.  2:10.) 

3)  Rom.  6:  14,  22. 

4)  Rom.  8 :  14. 

5)  Rom.  7:21.    8:13.     Col.  3:5-10.    Heb.  12:1.     (Eph.  4:22- 
32.    Tit.  2:  II,  12.) 

6)  Heb.  8:10.     Rom.  7:22.     Ps.  119:29,  111-113.     (Ps.   119.) 

7)  Rom.  12 : 1. 

8)  I  Cor.  6 :  20. 

9)  Rom.  7 :  19,  23,  24.    Gal.  5 :  17.    i  Jno.  i :  8,  9.     (i  Jno.  3 :  3- 
Prov.  20:9.    Eccl.  7:21.) 

10)  Ps.  51  :  5. 

ii)2Cor.7:9.    Ps.  51 :  I9-     (Ps.38:5-7.) 

12)  Ps.  51 :  6.    Mt.  26:75. 

13)  Ps.  38:4. 

14)  Ps.  32 :  z-^.     Mt.  6 :  12. 

15)  Eph.  5:  15,  17.    Ps.  51:14,  15- 

16)  2  Cor.  5:  14.    I  Cor.  13:  i,  3,  13.    i  Cor.  14:  i.    Eph.  4: 15. 
(2  Thess.  3:5.     I  Jno.  4:19;  5:3-) 

17)  Rom.  5  :  5. 

18)  Eph.  4:23,  24.    2  Cor.  3:  18.     (Col.  3:  10.) 

19)  2  Cor.  7:1.     (i  Cor.  9:24-27.    i  Tim.  2: 15.) 

20)  Heb.  4:16.     I  Jno.  1:7.     Jas.  2:10.     Dan.  9:18.     (Rom* 
3:27,  28.    4:4-8.    I  Pet.  I,  2.) 


Article  12. 
OF  THE  DIVINE  LAW. 

Of  Law  in  General 

We  believe  that  although  we  live  under  the  dispensa- 
tion of  the  grace  of  the  new  covenant,  yet  the  divine  law, 
as  already  given  in  paradise  ( i ) ,  further  explained  on  Si- 
nai (2),  and  glorified  in  the  clearest  manner  by  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  (3),  has  not  been  deprived  of  power  and 
effectiveness  (4),  but  now  as  formerly,  has  its  value  and 
right  use  (5).    This  is,  however,  three-fold: 

a.  It  should  put  bit  and  bridle  into  the  mouth  of  the 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  349 

raw,  unruly  passions  of  men,  and  preserve  God's  holiness 
and  righteousness  on  earth  in  respect. 

b.  It  should  give  knowledge  of  sin  (7)  and  become  a 
school-master  to  bring  us  to  Christ  (8),  in  that  it,  in  its 
holiness  and  inviolability  (9),  in  its  great  scope  (10)  and 
its  spiritual  significance  (11),  shows  the  sinful  man  the 
impossibility  of  keeping  it  (12),  and  therefore  awakens 
the  need  of  grace  and  forgiveness. 

c.  It  should  be  a  light  to  the  regenerated  one  (13), 
who  as  such  takes  pleasure  in  God's  law  according  to  the 
inner  man  (14),  so  that  he  may  not  miss  the  right  way 
(15)  nor  fall  into  self-righteousness  (16),  and  that  he 
hold  constantly  in  view  that  glorious  end  to  which  he  was 
destined,  to  be  renewed  completely  in  God's  image  (17)  ; 
all  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  his  flesh  which  still 
constantly  cleaves  to  him  on  earth  (18). 

With  regard  to  the  ceremonial  part  of  the  law  we  be- 
lieve that  the  same  was  completely  fulfilled  by  Christ 
(19),  and  since  in  him  the  essence  for  the  shadow  has 
appeared  (20),  so  this  is  put  aside  (21),  and  in  the  offer- 
ing of  Jesus,  laid  hold  of  by  faith,  lies  the  fulfilling  of 
that  part  of  the  law  (22).  With  regard,  however,  to  the 
ethical,  moral  part  of  the  law,  as  it  is  found  in  the  ten 
commandments,  we  believe  that  therein  the  essence  and 
the  will  of  God  is  expressed  for  all  times  (23),  and  that 
heaven  and  earth  will  pass  away  before  even  one  tittle 
shall  fail  from  the  law  (24). 

Of  the  Sabbath  in  Particular 

All  the  commands  of  God  among  the  ten  are,  therefore, 
of  equal  dignity  and  holiness,  and  this  we  believe  espe- 
cially of  the  4th  commandment  regarding  the  sabbath 
(25).  According  to  its  content  (26)  we  hold  ourselves 
obligated  to  work  for  six  days  with  persevering  diligence 
and  great  conscientiousness  in  the  business  affairs  of  our 
civil  calling,  using  all  the  powers  of  our  body  and  spirit 
for  the  benefit  of  the  world  (27).  But  no  less  does  the 
command  obligate  us  to  sanctify  one  out  of  the  seven  days 
of  the  week  wholly  to  the  Lord  and  on  the  same  to  rest 
from  labor  (28),  i.  e.,  to  cease  unqualifiedly  all  activity 
which  has  to  do  with  our  livelihood,  as  also  from  every 


350  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

other  purely  worldly  work  which  is  not  absolutely  neces- 
sary (29)  or  demanded  by  love,  according  to  the  example 
of  Christ  (30).  The  day  of  the  Lord  shall,  according  to 
the  custom  of  the  first  Christian  churches,  be  kept  as  the 
Christians'  sabbath  (31),  for  the  promotion  of  Christian 
knowledge  and  true  godliness,  for  the  hearty  union  of  the 
members  of  Christ,  as  also  for  work  for  the  kingdom  of 
God.  We  hold  further  that  everyone  should  on  this  day 
frequently  read  the  Holy  Scripture,  that  the  children 
should  be  instructed  out  of  the  same,  and  that  men  should 
attend  church  services  regularly. — We  regard  this  day  as 
a  precious  gift  of  our  God  (32),  absolutely  necessary  for 
the  existence  of  a  Christian  church. 

i)  Hos.  6:7.    I  Jno.  2:  7. 

2)  Rom.  13:9.     (Gal.  5:14.) 

3)  Mt.  5:17.     Gal.  4:4,  5.     Phil.  2:8.     Isa.  42:21. 

4)  Rom.  3:31.    I  Cor.  7  :  19.    Rom.  7  :  25. 

5)  Rom.  7:  12.     I  Tim.  1:8. 

6)  I  Tim.  1 : 9,  10. 

7)  Rom.  3 :  20,    Rom.  5:13.    7:7.    7 :  13. 

8)  Gal.  3 :  24. 

9)  Gal.  3:10.    Rom.  2:23.     (Jas.  2:10.) 

10)  Mt.  5 :  22,  28.    I  Jno.  3 :  15. 

11)  Rom.  7  :  14. 

12)  Rom.  3: 19,  20.    8:  3. 

13)  Ps.  119:  6.    Ps.  I :  I,  2. 

14)  Rom.  7 :  22. 

15)  Ps.  119:101,  104,  128.    (Jos.  1:8.) 

16)  Col.  2  :  18. 

17)  I  Jno.  2:  3. 

18)  Heb.  12:  I. 

19)  Mt.  5  :  17. 

20)  Heb.  10:  I.    Col.  2:  17. 

21)  Heb.  7:18,  19.    Acts  10:  13-15.    15:28,29.   (Eph.  2:  14,  15.) 

22)  Gal.  4:1-5.    Rom.  10:4. 

23)  Mt.  19:17,  18.    22:36-40.     Eph.  6:1-3.     Jas.  2:8,  II,  12. 
(I  Jno.  2:7.) 

24)  Mt.  5  :  18. 

25)  Gen.  2:1-3.    Mt.  24:20.    Isa.  56:1-7.    58:13,  I4- 

26)  Ex.  20 :  8,  9. 

27)  2  Thess.  3 :  10-12. 

28)  Acts.  20 :  7. 

29)  Mt.  24 :  20. 

30)  Mt.  12 :  10-12. 

31)  Jno.  20: 19,  26.    Lu.  24: 13,  33,  34,  36.    Acts  20:  7.    I  Cor. 
16: 1,  2.    Rev.  1 :  10.    Ps.  118:22-24. 

32)  Mk.  2 :  27. 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  351 

Article  13. 
OF  MARRIAGE. 

We  believe  that  marriage  was  instituted  by  God  (i) 
for  mutual  help  between  man  and  woman  (2),  for  the 
increase  of  the  human  race  (3)  and  for  the  avoidance  of 
unchastity  (4)  ;  also  that  the  man  may  take  only  one 
woman  for  wife,  the  woman  only  one  man  for  husband, 
while  both  are  still  alive  (5). 

We  hold  that  Christians  may  marry  only  in  the  Lord 
with  believers  (6). 

As  a  divine  and  civil  ordinance  marriage  must  be  con- 
firmed in  both  ways.  The  last  must  accord  with  the 
laws  of  the  land  (7),  the  first  occurs  through  the  word 
of  God  and  prayer  in  the  church  of  the  Lord  (8). 

We  regard  divorce,  if  it  occurs  on  grounds  which  do 
not  agree  with  the  word  of  God,  and  remarriage  of  such 
divorced  persons,  as  unallowable  (9).  In  cases  of  adul- 
tery, however,  (10)  and  of  malevolent  abandonment  we 
believe  that  a  separation  and  the  remarriage  of  the  in- 
nocent party  may  take  place  according  to  the  word  of 
God.  In  divorce  as  in  marriage  the  provisions  of  civil 
law  must  be  carefully  observed  (12). 

i)  Gen.  2:24.     Heb.  13:4.     (Eph.  5:5,  22-33.) 

2)  Gen.  2 :  18. 

3)  Gen.  1 :  27,  28. 

4)  I  Cor.  7:2,  9. 

5)  Mt.  19:4-6.     I  Cor.  6:16. 

6)  I  Cor.  7:39.  9:5,  6.  Gen.  6: 1-3.  Jos.  23: 12,  13.  (i  Kings 
11:  1-8.    Ezra  ch.  9  and  10.    Neh.  13:23-28.) 

7)  Mt.  1 :  18.    (Mt.  25 :  i-io.)    Jno.  2 :  i,  2,    Mt.  22 : 2-12. 

8)  Col.  3:17.     I  Tim.  4 : 3-5. 

9)  Mt.  19:6-8.     I  Cor.  7:10,  II. 

10)  Mt.  19 :  9. 

11)  I  Cor.  7:12,  13,  15. 

12)  I  Pet.  2 :  13. 


Article  14. 

OF  CIVIL  ORDER. 

We  believe  that  magistracy  is  ordained  of  God   (i), 
and  that  he  clothes  it  with  power  for  the  protection  of 


352  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

the  righteous  and  the  punishment  of  the  evildoers  (2). 
We  hold  ourselves  obligated  to  render  unqualified  obedi- 
ence to  all  its  laws  (3),  if  these  do  not  curtail  the  free 
exercise  of  the  duties  of  our  Christian  faith  (4),  and 
through  a  quiet  and  peaceful  life  in  all  godliness  to  lighten 
their  heavy  task.  Also  we  hold  ourselves  obligated  ac- 
cording to  the  command  of  God  to  pray  for  magistrates 
(5),  that  they  may  so  administer  the  power  entrusted  to 
them,  according  to  his  will  and  under  his  gracious  pro- 
tection, that  peace  and  righteousness  may  thereby  be 
preserved. 

We  hold  that  the  misuse  of  the  oath  is  forbidden  to 
Christians  (6),  but  that  the  oath — viz.,  the  reverent 
solemn  appeal  to  God  as  a  witness  of  the  truth — right- 
fully demanded  and  given,  is  only  a  prayer  of  an  unusual 
form  (7). 

We  believe  that  magistrates,  which  also  under  the  New 
Testament  bear  the  sword  not  in  vain,  have  the  right  and 
the  duty,  according  to  the  divine  law,  to  punish  with 
death  (8)  ;  also  to  use  the  sword  against  the  enemies  of 
the  land  for  the  protection  of  the  subjects  entrusted  to 
them,  and  hold  ourselves,  therefore,  obligated,  if  we  are 
required  to  do  so  by  the  government  to  render  military 
service  (9).  Yet  we  can  also  unite  heartily  with  such  as 
do  not  share  our  conviction  with  regard  to  the  oath  and 
military  service. 

We  do  not  regard  ourselves  as  hindered  by  our  faith 
from  administering  civil  office  (10). 

i)  Rom.  13  :  I,  2. 

2)  Rom.  13:3,  4.     (Deut.  16:18.) 

3)  Rom.  13:  5-7.    Tit.  3:1.     I  Pet.  2:13,  14,  17. 

4)  Mt.  22:21.     Acts  4:19,  20.     5:29,  42. 

5)  I  Tim.  2:  1-3. 

6)  Mt.  5  :  34-37.    Jas.  5  :  12. 

7)  Rom.  1:9.  2  Cor.  i :  23.  Gal.  i :  20.  Phil.  1:8.  i  Thess. 
5:27.  Rev.  10:5,  6.  Heb.  6:13,  16-18.  (Heb.  7:20,  21,  28.) 
Gen.  24:3,  9.  Ezra  10:5.  Deut.  6:  13.  (10:20.)  Isa.  65 :  16,  17. 
(Jer.  12:  15,  16.) 

8)  Mt.  26:52.    Gen.  9:6. 

9)  Lu.  3:14.    Acts  10:1,  2.    23:12-24.     (Mt.  8:5-13.) 

10)  Lu.  3:12,  13.  Rom.  16:23.  Phil.  4:22.  (Acts  13:7,  12. 
16:34-36.) 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  353 

Article  15. 

OF  THE  RETURN  OF  THE  LORD,  THE  RESUR- 
RECTION OF  THE  DEAD  AND  THE 
LAST  JUDGMENT. 

We  believe  in  the  return  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ( i ) 
in  power  and  glory  (2).  We  hold  the  day  of  his  revela- 
tion for  the  crown  of  the  redemptive  work  (3) ;  for  on 
this  day  will  the  eyes  of  all  the  world  behold  the  truth 
and  wonderful  greatness  of  this  work  (4)  ;  they  will 
see  the  King  crowned  with  honor  (5),  and  with  him  his 
bride,  the  Church  (6)  ;  for  the  dead  in  Christ  will  rise 
bodily  (7)  in  incorruptible  glory  (8),  will  see  him  as  he 
is,  be  like  him  and  reign  with  him  (9). 

We  believe  also  in  the  resurrection  of  the  godless  (10) 
and  in  the  judgment  of  the  world  (ii),  that  all  men 
must  be  brought  publicly  before  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ  that  they  may  receive  according  to  that  which  they 
have  done  in  the  life  of  the  body  (12).  As  the  Son  of 
God  will  give  eternal  salvation  to  all  those  who  in  faith 
served  and  followed  him  (13),  so  will  he  pronounce  on 
all  the  godless  the  judgment  of  eternal  damnation  (14). 
We  hold  fast  on  the  definite  and  clear  expressions  of  the 
Holy  Scripture  which  picture  the  salvation  or  lost  con- 
dition of  man  after  this  life  as  unchangeable  and  believe 
that  both  states  are  eternal  (15),  so  that  no  passing  out 
of  the  one  into  the  other  takes  place,  and  no  rescue  is 
possible  after  death  (16). 

We  are  mindful  of  the  word  of  our  Lord :  "  Behold 
I  come  quickly ! "  and  with  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  of 
which  we  regard  ourselves  as  an  essential  member  we  cry 
"  Amen.    Yes,  come,  Lord  Jesus." 

i)  Acts  1:10,  II,  12.  Zech.  14:4,  5.  I  Cor.  11:26.  (Rev. 
1:8.  3:  II.    22:7,  20.) 

2)  Mt.  16:27.    25:31.    2Thess.  1:7.    Ps.  24:7,  8. 

3)  I  Cor.  1 :  7,  8.  Phil.  3 :  20.  Jas.  5 :  7,  8.  Heb.  9:  28.  i  Jno. 
2:28.  Tit.  2:13.  2  Pet.  1 :  16.  i  Pet.  i :  7-9.  5:4.  (Phil.  2:16. 
I  Thess.  1 :  10.    2: 19.    2  Pet.  3:  12,  13.) 

4)  Rev.  1:7.  Mt.  24:30.  Mt.  25:31,  32.  Phil.  2:9-11.  Rom. 
14:  10,  II. 

5)  Rev.  11:15,  17.     Isa.  24:23.     (Zech.  14:9.) 

6)  Lu.  21:27,  28.  2  Thess.  1:10.  Col.  Z'-Z,  4-  Rev.  19:6-9. 
(Jno.  17 :  24.    Rev,  21 :  9-27.) 


354  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


7)  I  Thess.  4:13-18.  Rom.  8:23.  i  Cor.  15:16-20,  23.  Job 
19 :  25-27.  ( Jno.  6 :  40,  54.  Rom.  4:17.  2  Cor.  4  :  14.  Isa.  26  :  19. 
Hos.  13:  14.) 

8)  I  Cor.  15 :  42,  43,  53.    Phil.  3 :  21.     (i  Cor.  15  :  12-57.) 

9)  I  Jno.  3:2.    Ps.  17:15.    Rev.  20:4,  6.    22:5.    Rev.  5 :  10. 

10)  Jno.  5:28,  29.     (Acts  24:  15.    Dan.  12:2.) 

11)  Acts  17:30,  31.     (Jud.  14: 15.    Rev.  20:  H-13.) 

12)  2  Cor.  5:10.  (Rom.  2:6,  14.  10:12.  Gal.  6:8.  Rev. 
22:  12.    Eccl.  12:  14.) 

13)  Mt.  25:34.     (Rom.  9:23.     Rev.  14:13.) 

14)  Mt.  25  :  41.  (Rom.  2:5,  9,  22.  i  Thess.  6 :  10.  2  Pet.  2 :  9. 
Rev.  6: 16,  17.    20: 15.) 

15)  Mt.  25  :  46.  Mt.  3 :  12.  25  :  10-12.  Mk.  9 :  43-48.  Lu.  13 : 
25-28.  2  Thess.  1 :  7-g.  Jud.  7:  13.  Rev.  14:  11.  Rev.  20:  10,  15. 
(Prov.  1:24-32.)  16)  Lu.  16:24-26.     Heb.  9:27. 

2.  French  Baptist  Confession 

The  first  Baptist  church  in  France  was  organized  in 
Paris  in  1835.  Through  much  persecution  and  over- 
whelming difficulties  the  Baptists  have  made  some  prog- 
ress, but  they  are  still  few  in  numbers.  Their  first  Con- 
fession was  very  brief,  and  was  drawn  up  by  Missionary 
Willard,  and  printed  at  Douai  in  1848.  Naturally  it  re- 
flects American  opinion.  A  second  Confession  was  pub- 
lished a  few  years  later,  probably  based  on  the  first,  and 
drawn  up  by  Willard,  assisted  by  some  French  brethren. 
In  1879  a  third  Confession  was  published  at  Chauny 
(Aisne).  It  was  drawn  up  by  six  French  Baptist  preach- 
ers, of  whom  Rev.  A.  Ramseyer  and  Rev.  H.  Andru  were 
the  leading  men.  It  may  be  regarded  as  an  independent 
production  of  the  French  Baptists,  though  the  covenant 
was  taken  from  the  first  Confession.  A  second  edition 
was  printed  by  Pastor  Saillens,  in  Paris,  in  1895,  under 
the  title,  *'  Confession  of  Faith  and  Ecclesiastical  Prin- 
ciples of  the  Evangelical  Churches  called  Baptist."  It  is 
a  reprint  of  the  first  edition,  except  that  the  last  sec- 
tion, "  Of  the  Congregation,"  was  omitted.  This  Confes- 
sion is  now  received  by  all  the  Baptist  churches  of 
France,  Belgium,  and  Switzerland.  A  translation  of  the 
first  edition  of  1879  follows. 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  355 


CONFESSION  OF  FAITH 


AND 


ECCLESIASTICAL  PRINCIPLES 


OF 


THE  UNION 


OF  THE 


BAPTIST  CHURCHES  OF  FRANCE. 


Chauny 
Imprimerie  Bugnicourt,  rue  du  Pont-Royal,  72 

1879 


35^  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

CHRISTIAN  COVENANT. 

In  consequence  of  the  truths  which  we  fully  receive  and  which 
are  expressed  in  the  following  articles,  and  of  the  conviction 
which  we  have  that  we  have  been  brought  by  the  grace  of  God 
to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  to  give  ourselves  to  Him, 
relying  upon  His  aid  we  together  make  a  solemn  covenant,  and 
promise : 

That  we  will  walk  together  in  brotherly  love,  as  is  becoming 
to  the  members  of  a  Christian  church;  that  we  will  exercise  an 
affectionate  watchfulness  over  one  another  and  that  we  will 
warn  one  another  and  exhort  one  another  mutually  and  faith- 
fully on  all  occasions,  in  order  to  stimulate  one  another  to  charity 
and  to  good  works ; 

That  we  will  never  neglect  the  assembling  of  ourselves  for 
mutual  edification,  nor  fail  to  pray  for  one  another  and  for  all; 

That  we  will  always  exert  ourselves  to  bring  up  the  children 
who  have  been  committed  to  us  in  the  discipline  of  the  Lord, 
nourishing  them  with  His  Word,  and  that  we  will  give  to  all  our 
kinsmen  and  friends  the  example  of  pure  conduct  in  order  to 
bring  them  to  the  love  of  the  Savior,  to  holiness  and  to  life 
eternal ; 

That  we  will  rejoice  in  the  happiness  of  each  other  and  will 
strive  with  tenderness  and  sympathy  to  bear  one  another's  bur- 
dens and  sorrows; 

That  we  will  live  with  circumspection  in  the  world,  renoun- 
cing impiety  and  worldly  lusts  and  setting  a  good  example,  re- 
membering that,  since  we  have  been  voluntarily  buried  in  bap- 
tism and  raised  with  Christ,  a  special  obligation  rests  upon  us 
henceforth  to  lead  a  new  and  holy  life; 

That  we  will  do  all  that  is  in  our  power  to  contribute  of  our 
means  to  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  the  midst  of  us ; 

That  according  to  our  power  and  in  all  circumstances,  as  worthy 
stewards  of  the  Lord,  we  will  do  good  to  all  men,  and  especially 
in  aiding  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  in  its  primitive  purity 
and  power  throughout  the  whole  earth. 

Finally,  that,  during  the  whole  course  of  our  earthly  pil- 
grimage, in  evil  report  and  in  good  report,  we  will  seek  humbly 
and  ardently  to  live  for  the  glory  of  Him  who  has  called  us  from 
darkness  into  His  marvelous  light. 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  357 

CONFESSION  OF  FAITH 

AND 

ECCLESIASTICAL  PRINCIPLES 

OF 

THE  UNION  OF  THE  BAPTIST  CHURCHES  OF 

FRANCE. 


DOCTRINES. 


OF  THE  TRUE  GOD. 

We    believe    that    there    is    only    one    God,   t)^^""^V  5'   ^' 
Father,    Son   and    Holy    Spirit,    Creator    of    all   Sam!"  23':  "2";  Job 
things,    infinite,    eternal,    omnipotent,    and   mer-  33  :  '4;   Ps.  '24  : 
iting    in    the    highest    degree    confidence,    love,   ^-lo;  45  :  7,  8;  ^ 
obedience,  praise  and  adoration.  3^;^* Dan.*  ^9  :'^2^\ 

Mt.  12  \  28;"  28: 
19;  Mk.  12  :  29- 
32;  Lk.  2  :  10, 
11;  Jno.  I  :  1-14; 
10  :  30;  14  :  9, 
10  ;  Act.  I  :  16; 
5:3,    4;    Rom. 

8  :  9-11,     14;     2 
Cor.    13  :   13; 
Eph.   4  :  4-8; 
Col.   2  :   10,    11; 
Rev.   4:11, 

n 

OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES. 

We  believe  that  the  canonical   Scriptures  of  y^^^-  ^\'  4'  ^2; 

the  Old  and  of  the  New  Testament  are  the  word  ga^^*  23  :' 2    Ps^ 

of  God  and  are  to  be  the  sole  and  infallible  rule  78  :  '5,'  compared 

of  faith  and  of  Christian  life,  by  which  we  shall  with  Rom.  3:2; 

be  judged,  and  the  sole  touch-stone  for  testing  ^  f'^?  "jo^ '  ^  ; 

every  tradition,   every  doctrine,   and   every   re-  39,  46;  Act.  1': 

ligious  system.  16;  3:  21;  17  ■ 

II ;    Rom.    1:2; 
I    Cor.    14  :  37; 
Gal.    I  :  6-12;   2 
Tim.   3  :   i6;   Rev. 
22  :  18. 


358  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

III 

OF  THE  FALL  OF  MAN  AND  OF  THE  CONSEQUENCES 

OF  SIN. 

We  believe  that  Adam,  our  first  father,  was  pen.  i  :  27,  31; 

created  innocent  and  good,  but  that  having  vol-  f)^^^'  |^'.  ^^."^^s 

untarily  violated  the  commandment  of  his  Cre-  51  :  7;  53  :  4; 

ator,  he  lost  his  first  estate;  so  that  all  his  de-  Isa.  53  :  6;  Dan. 

scendants,  inheriting  his  nature,  are  inclined  to  ^5  •  46-^ 'Rom*'  3  • 

evil.     We  believe,  also,  that  all  those  who  have  19,22; '4  :  15';  5  • 

transgressed  the  law  of  God  are  justly  liable  to  ^3;  2  Cor.  5  :  10; 

eternal  death.  |„Thes.  .  :  ^;^. 

20  :   14,    comp. 
Ezk.  18  :  20. 

IV 

OF  JESUS  CHRIST  AND  OF  HIS  WORK. 
We  believe  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Word  made      '^^^-  S3  :  4,  5; 

flesh,  born  of  a  virgin,  conceived  by  the  power  lJ*"  i^^le^^tl' 

of  the  Highest,  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  after  jno.  i  :  14;'  Act. 

having  been  tempted   in   all  things  as   we   are,  1:11;    3  :  18- 

He  remained  holy,  innocent,  without  spot;  that  ^^'j^  ^i  :  4^*3  • 

He  suffered  and  that  He  died  upon  the  cross  to  25;  14  :  9; '2  Cor. 

make  atonement  for  our  sins;  that  He  rose  again  s  :  m,  is.  19; 

and  ascended  to  heaven,  where  He  is  the  sole  ^  • 's-'^i  Thef  *^^  • 

Mediator  between  God  and  men,  and  whence  He  13';  i'  Tim.  2:5;* 

will  return  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead.  ?^T*"»-  4:1; 

Heb.    1  :  2-6;   4  : 
15;    Rev.    I  :  7. 

OF  SALVATION  BY  FAITH  IN  JESUS  CHRIST. 
We  believe  that,  in  order  to  be  saved,  the  sin-       i  Kgs.  8  :  47, 

ner  must  repent  of  his  sins,  accept  the  work  of  |^y  ^I'.^l  'J'  '*' 

Jesus   and   be   united   to    Him   by   faith.     This  jno.  i  :'  12,  13; 

union    produces   justification,    regeneration    and  3:3,  16   36;  ^Nct. 

sanctification,   without   which   no   one   shall   see  f^p-^i^'cor  ?'•  ^  ' 

the  Lord.     We  believe  also  that  true  faith  al-  30,  31;  Eph.  2  : 

ways  manifests  itself  by  works  pleasing  to  God.  8;  Heb.   12  :  12- 

17;  Jas.  2  :   14, 
18,  26;   I  Pet.  2  : 
1,  2,   II,   12;   I 
Jno.   3  :  4-9;   Mat. 
7  :   17-21. 

VI 
OF  THE  WORK  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 
We  believe   that  it   is  the   Holy   Spirit  who,       ^  Sam.  10  :  6; 
applying  to  the   heart  the  truths   of   Scripture,  zlch  ^7  •  It' 
produces   in   those  who   have   been   elected   ac-  Jno.  "si's,  6;  16: 
cording  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Chris-  8;  Rom.  5:5; 
tian  life  in  its  principle  and  in  its  effects,  and  Cor^^^^'ie^'Cal 
renders  them  capable  of  persevering  therein  to  s  :  16,  18,  22; 
the  end.  Eph.  i  :  4,  5;  5  : 

9;   I   Pet.   I  :  2, 
22,  23. 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  359 

VII 

OF  THE  MINISTRY  OF  THE  WORD 

We  believe  that  God  instituted  a  ministry  of      Deut.  4  :  5; 
the    Word    composed    originally    of    prophets,   yf\l;  ut!  zsT^ 
apostles,  evangelists  or  missionaries,  of  elders  or   18-20;' Mk."  3  :* 
pastors  and  teachers,  for  the  purpose  of  leading   ^^-is;  Lk    10  :  i- 
sinners  to  conversion  and  of  directing  them  in   8°' 5;  13  :  i;^i5  : 
the   Christian   life.     This  ministry,  in  those  of  6/22,' 23, '33;  20: 
its  branches  which  were  to  come  down  to  us,   ^7-28;  21  :  18;  i 
that  is,  the  work  of  pastors  and  that  of  evangel-   ]r°\;  ^g^  30;  Eph! 
ists,  is  to  continue  till  the  return  of  Christ.  4  :*ii;'  i  Tim. 

3  :   1-7;   4  :   15, 
16;  2  Tim.  2:2; 
I   Pet.   5  :  15. 


VIII 
OF  LOCAL   CHURCHES 

We   believe   that   a   local   church   constituted      Mt.   18  :  17, 
according  to  the  Word  of  God  is  an  assembly  of  ^°!  6^2.5."  jf'. 
baptized  believers,  independent  of  all  authority  24,' 26;  14:  23,' 
other  than  that  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  sole  head  of  27;  15  :  3,  22; 
the  Church  universal,  which  is  His  body.  ^|/  ^'qq°  '5-^ '16 

The  members  of  the  local  church,  associated  in   i,  3;  2  Cor.  8  : 
a  voluntary  agreement,  are  governed  by  the  laws   ^9.  23,  24;  Phil, 
of  Christ,  and  exercise,  in  the  general  interest,   J 2*-  2' Tim ^2^'  I-* 
the   duties   which   are   imposed   upon   them   ac-  Tit.   1:5;  Heb.' 
cording  to  the  gifts  which  they  have  received.       13  :  17;  i  Pet.  5  ; 

The  Christians  who  have  a  special  charge  in   ^''*' 
the  local  church  are  the  pastors,  the  deacons  and 
the  deaconesses,  whose  duties  are  indicated  in 
the  New  Testament. 


IX 

OF  BAPTISM 

We   believe   that   baptism   is,    for    Christians  ^^^a*-  28  :  19; 

voluntarily  dead  to  the  world  and  to   sin,  the  ^K"  L".  ^f  ^'  ^°{ 

striking   and   solemn   emblem   of  burial   and   of  i,  2;^Act   2:  38- 

resurrection    with    Christ,    to    whom    they    are  41;  8  :  36-59;  10  : 

united  by  faith,  to  live  in  Him  a  new  and  holy  47;  16  :  33;  Rom. 

life. — We  believe,  after  the  order  of  Christ,  His  j  '.  13-^7;^  Gal*^' 3  : 

example  and  that  of  the  apostles,  that  the  im-  27;  Col.  '2  :  1*2; 

mersion  of  believers  must  precede  admission  into  Tit.  3:5;!  Pet. 

the  local  church  and  participation  in  the  com-  ^  '  ^^' 
munion. 


360  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


OF  THE  SUPPER 

We  believe  that  the  supper,  instituted  by  our      Mt.    26  :  26-29; 
Savior  Jesus   Christ,  is  to   be  observed   in  the  ^^2^.'  ^^'^^.' 
churches  until  He  returns ;  that  the  bread  and  Act.  I  '-.  42;^°  0  : 
the  wine,  in  which  all  the  members  of  the  church   7;  i  Cor.  10  :  16, 
participate,  are  the  symbols  of  the  body  and  the   ^'^''  "  =  ^^-^g. 
blood  of  our  Savior;  that  by  this  communion, 
the  members,  in  participating  therein,  profess  to 
form    the    same   body   with    Christ,   and   to   be 
united  to  one  another  in  the  same  Spirit. 

XI 

OF  THE  RETURN  OF  CHRIST  AND  OF  THE 
RESURRECTION. 

We  believe  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will      Dan.  7  :  13; 
return  from  heaven  as  He  ascended  thither,  con-   ,  ^^'  ^^  •  49;  24  : 
formably  to  the  declaration  of  the  Scripture.   We  46  •  Mk.  ^8  :'  3^8 ;' 
believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  Lk.  21  :  27;  jno. 
the  just  and  the  unjust,  and  in  the  final  judg-   \\''  H  .'^'^^  I' 
ment,   where   will  take   place   the   eternal   sepa-   2  f  st  i  CoV.  if\ 
ration  of  the  good  and  the  evil,  these  going  away   12,  20,  42-58;  i 
to    eternal    punishment    and    the    just    to    life   V^^hts"^  i^%^.U' 
eternal.  2  Pet.  3  :  10- 

XII  13;   Rer.   I  :  7. 

OF  THE  SANCTIFICATION  OF  SUNDAY 

We  believe  that,  conformably  to  the  example      Mt.  28  :  i;  Mk. 

of  the  apostles  and  of  the  first  Christians,  the  \^.  \^l   2o*-^^' 

first  day  of  the  week  is  to  be  considered  as  the  26;  Act.  ^20":  ^7;  i 

day  of  the  Lord,  in  memory  of  the  resurrection  Cor.   16  :  2;  h' 

of  Jesus   Christ,   and  that,   in   consequence,   we  ^  =  3-";  Rev.  i 
ought  to  employ  Sunday  for  the  edification  of 

our  souls  in  our  holy  assemblies  and  for  works  1 
of  charity,  thus  preparing  ourselves  for  the  rest 
which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. 

XIII 

OF  CIVIL  GOVERNMENT 

We  believe  that  civil  government  was  ordained      Mt.  17  :  24,  27; 
of  God  for  the  interest  and  good  order  of  so-  Vt:  gj,'  ^^-  f°  = 
ciety  and  that  it  is  necessary  to  pray  for  magis-  y]\  Tim.  l\' i]' 
trates  and  the  constituted  authorities,  to  honor  2;  Tit.  3  :  i;  i' 
them  and  obey  them  in  all  things  which  are  not   ^^*-  ^  *  ^3-i7. 
contrary  to  the  teachings  of  the  holy  Scriptures, 
according  to  the  words  of  the   Savior:   ''Ren- 
der unto  Caesar  that  which  is  Caesar's,  and  unto 
God  that  which  is  God's." 


Heb. 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  361 


THE    CHURCH 


FORMATION  OF  LOCAL  CHURCHES 

The  apostles,  or  their  companions  in  labor, 
after  having  baptized  the  first  believers,  or- 
ganized them  to  form  the  local  churches,  to 
which  they  communicated  the  divine  laws  which 
they  were  to  follow.  It  is  thus  that  the  churches 
of  Jerusalem,  of  Antioch,  of  Corinth,  of  Philippi, 
of  Ephesus,  of  Rome,  of  Colossae  were  formed. 
This  was  the  apostolic  rule.  Jno   4  :  ^i,  '2-^' 

To-day  still,  in  order  to  form  a  local  church,  Act!  2  I  38,  41, 
it    is   necessary   that   the    missionary   begin    by  47;  s  :  13,  14; 
baptizing  those   who   have    accepted   the   evan-  ^J.  ^'  .^'^l-'  11'  • 
gelical  doctrines.     Once  constituted,   this  asso-   19-30;  13  :' i,  3 
ciation  continues  to  add  to  itself  as  new  mem-   (comp   Act.  14  : 
bers  the  baptized  believers  who  desire  to  unite  ^r^'.^y'\  ^^''  ^^ 

•,i_  'a.  ^5  •   3.  4>  22,   30 

With  It.  _  16  :    14,    40;    18 

Baptism,  which  is  the  entrance  into  the  church,  8,  10;  19  :  1-5; 
constitutes  between  the  new  member  and  the  old  cor^ii^-  'il-     ^ 
ones   a   true   covenant   with   reciprocal   engage-  Phii.  1:1.' 
ments.    The  candidate  in  submitting  to  baptism 
accepts     publicly     the     evangelical      doctrines, 
pledges  himself  to  put  them  in  practice,  in  accord 
with  those  to  whom  he  is  united ;  and  the  church, 
on  its  part  receives  him  into  its  bosom  as  one 
of  its  members  and  makes  him  partaker  of  all 
its  spiritual  privileges. 


II 

NOMINATION  TO  THE  OFFICES  OF  THE  CHURCH 

After    having    founded    in    person    the    first      Act.    i  :  15-23; 

churches  the  apostles  while  still  living  commit-  j.".^'^'.  ^^  ■.^°' 

ted  the  continuation  of  their  work  in  the  Chris-  4;  12^^22,  ^23';  1*6  : 

tian  assemblies  to  pastors  and  teachers,  whom  4';  20  :  17,  28; 

the    Scripture    denominates    without    distinction  s^.'  l^'  ^Spu-i 

bishops,  elders  or  pastors,  who,  as  well  as  their  i  \  i;'coK'  4  :  V7; 

successors,  were  to  build  upon  the   foundation  i  Thes.  5*:  12-14; 

which  has  been   laid.     They   were   installed   in  ^  ^hes.  3-.  12-15; 

their  functions  by  prayer  and  the  imposition  of  4.  J'J:  ^'i^iy'lzz; 

the  hands  of  the  elders.  2  Tim!  i  :'  6;  2  :' 

After  the  death  of  the  apostles  the  choice  and  2;  Tit.  i  :  5,  7; 
nomination  of  pastors  always  appertained  to  the         '  ^  '  ^'  ^^'      " 
churches.     We  preserve  their  principle- 


362  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


III 

PASTORS  AND  TEACHERS 

The    Scripture    establishes    no    distinction    of      Act.   20  :  17-28; 
rank  or  of  authority  between  pastors  and  teach-   J.^^f'g^.  *  ^q'  "*  ' 
ers,    nor    between    bishops    or    overseers    and    \':^2\;  '11  -.V-io; 
elders   or   pastors,   except   such   as   are   due   to  Phil,  i  -.  i{ 2 
greater  age. — The  elders,  as  overseers  chosen  by  V^^^-  3;  9;  i 
the  church,  are  charged  with  the  administration   ii-T6;^5*:^"i,  18;' 
of  baptism  and  the  supper,  direction  of  worship  6  :  s-'io;  Tit.  1': 
and  the   ddiberations  of  the  church,   and  with   5-9;  i  Pet.  5  :  3. 
the  execution  of  its  decisions.     They  are  never 
to  lord  it  over  the  church  of  God,  but  to  make 
themselves  models  of  the  flock,  watching  over 
their  souls  as  having  to  render  an  account. 

Relative  to  their  conduct,  the  pastors  are  sub- 
ject, hke  all  the  other  members,  to  the  discipline 
of  the  church,  but  always  in  accordance  with  i 
Tim.  5 :  19. 

A  pastor  charged  with  the  direction  of  a 
church  can  at  the  same  time  devote  himself  to 
secular  occupations;  but  it  is  desirable  that  he 
give  himself  exclusively  to  his  spiritual  voca- 
tion. 

IV 

DEACONS  AND  DEACONESSES 

Besides  elders  or  pastors,  the  sole  function-      Act.  6  :  1-6 
aries   of   a   local   church   are   the   deacons   and  ^ith^^s  -^5-/3    26- 
deaconesses.    They  should  be  elected  by  the  as-  40,  and  21  :'8);* 
sembly  and  installed  in  their  charge  by  the  im-   Rom-  16  :  i,  2; 
position    of    hands.      They    should   possess    the  ^^  \  \  g'  \ 
qualities  required  by  the  Scriptures;  their  office         •      •    >    ^• 
is  to  assist  the  pastors  in  their  ministry,  to  serve 
the  church  in  consecrating  to  it  the  gifts  they 
have  received  from  the  Lord,  and  in  charging 
themselves  with  all  that  which  has  relation  to 
the  material  wants  of  the  assembly. 


VOTE  AND  ADMISSION 

Each  local  church  ought  itself  to  attend  to  its  Mat.  18  :  17; 

own  affairs  independently  of  all  political  or  re-  ^?^-  -^  16^^27*^ '11  • 

ligious  aiithority.    In  the  reception  of  candidates  2,'  4,  '22,  29;  15  :  ' 

for    baptism,    as    in    questions    for    discussion,  3.  4,  12,  22,  23, 

everything  ought  to  end  as  far  as  possible  by  a  R°om^i6^  \^V-  1 

vote.    All  members,  whatever  may  be  their  sex  Cor. '5  ;  '16':  3; 

or  their  position,   have  the   same  voice   in  the  2  Cor.  2  :  6-8;  8  : 

church,  and  the  decision  is  determined  by  the  ^^■•^^' 
majority  of  the  votes  cast. 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  363 

The  admission  of  a  new  member  coming  from 
another  church  of  baptized  believers  takes  place 
upon  the  presentation  of  a  letter  of  recommenda- 
tion from  the  church  he  has  left.  When  he  has 
no  letter  of  recommendation  the  brother  who  is 
a  stranger  should  confess  his  faith,  make  known 
his  principles,  and  the  church  decides. 

VI 

CHURCH  DISCIPLINE 

According  to  evangelical  teachings,  the  church      Mat.   18  :  15- 
ought  to  exclude  from  its  bosom  all  its  members  f°^or  T-'  2^  Thes^' 
whose  profession  of  piety  is  contradicted  by  their  3  :  6-15;'  i  Tim.' 
conduct;  who  transgress  knowingly  one  of  the  j^'  ^9,. 20;  6  :  3-^ 
commandments  of  God  and  who  reject  the  fra-  xit^s  •  ^o  ^ii-^J' 
ternal  exhortations  which  are  addressed  to  them  jno.  9,11;' Rev. 
with  a  view  of  bringing  them  to  repentance  and  2  ••  n,  20. 
abandonment  of  their  sins. 

The  rejected   member   is   excluded   from   th 
supper   and   deprived   of   all   his    rights    in   the 
church,  but  is  not  rejected  from  the  public  meet- 
ings for  worship. 

VII 

RESTORATION 

The  excluded  member  can,  upon  his  request,      2  Cor.  2  :  i-n. 
be  re-admitted  into  the  church,  if  his  conduct 
proves  that  he  has  become  again  pious  and  faith- 
ful. 

VIII 

INDEPENDENCE    OF    THE    CHURCHES    AND    DUTIES 
OF  THE  MEMBERS  TOWARD   THEIR  PASTORS 

Our   churches   being,   according  to   the   apos-       ]  tT'^^-'k"' 

tolic  example,  separated  from  the  State  and  ac-  e^^   5:  ^i  29; 

cepting  no  pay,  it  is  the  duty  and  the  privilege  Phil'.  4*:  14-16;' 

of   the    members    to    sustain    their    pastors,    to  i  7^^x-^  *  ^^' 

second  them   in  their  efforts,  and  to  have  for  \^:  \  p^'^.'  ^'^' 
them  love,  esteem  and  respect,  for  the  sake  of       ' 
the  work  which  they  do. 


OF  THE  CONGREGATION 
I 

THOSE   WHO    HAVE   PART   IN   IT 

Outside  of  the  church  which  is  composed  of  baptized  believers 
who  participate  in  the  supper,  is  "  the  congregation "  which  is 


364  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

composed  of  all  those  who  are  not  members  of  the  church,  but 
who  attach  themselves  to  the  flock  by  frequenting  the  evangelical 
worship  or  by  requesting  the  visits  of  the  pastor,  without  being 
converted  or  baptized. — All  those  are  admitted  who  declare 
themselves  to  be  attached  to  evangelical  worship,  who  request  to 
be  enrolled  upon  the  register  of  "  the  congregation  "  and  whose 
conduct  does  not  dishonor  the  gospel. 

II 

RIGHTS  OF  THE   MEMBERS   OF  THE  CONGREGATION 

Those  who  are  considered  members  of  the  "  Congregation " 
have  the  right: 

1.  To  the  presentation  or  consecration  of  their  children  to  God 
by  the  prayer  of  the  pastor  and  of  the  church; 

2.  To  the  religious  instruction  of  their  children ;  and  for  them- 
selves, to  the  particular  instruction  given  to  adults; 

3.  To  the  visits  of  the  pastor ; 

4.  To  the  benediction  of  their  marriage; 

5.  To  the  religious  ceremony  of  burial. 

Ill 

DUTIES  OF  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE  CONGREGATION 

The  members  of  the  "  congregation,"  even  as  the  members  of 
the  church,  ought  to  consider  it  a  duty  and  a  privilege  to  con- 
tribute according  to  their  means  to  the  general  expenses  of  the 
worship  and  to  the  work  of  evangelization. 

IV 

EXCLUSION 

In  the  various  cases  mentioned  below  the  name  of  the  member 
is  erased  from  the  register  of  the  "  congregation  " : 

1.  When  he  requests  its  erasure ; 

2.  When  he  abandons  the  worship ; 

3.  If  he  conducts  himself  in  a  disgraceful  manner. 


3.  Swedish  Baptists 

One  of  the  most  vigorous  and  prosperous  of  the 
younger  Baptist  bodies  is  that  of  the  Swedish  Baptists. 
The  first  church  was  organized  in  1848,  and  they  now 
number  nearly  fifty  thousand,  despite  the  fact  that  they 
have  suffered  much  persecution,  and  have  lost  hosts  of 
members  by  emigration.     Their  churches  are  not  legal- 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  365 

ized  by  the  government,  and  there  is,  therefore,  no  legally 
recognized  Confession.  Moreover,  they  have  not  laid 
any  emphasis  on  Confessions,  and  commonly  say  they 
have  no  Confession  but  the  Bible. 

In  1868  a  country  church  sought  and  obtained  legaliza- 
tion from  the  government  on  the  basis  of  a  Confession 
drawn  up  by  itself.  This  Confession  is  described  as 
containing  ''  a  few  meager  statements,  just  barely  suf- 
ficient in  number  and  contents  to  serve  the  purpose  of 
obtaining  legal  sanction  from  the  government  for  the 
church  as  a  Baptist  church.  Besides,  that  church  held 
some  tenets  which  were  out  of  harmony  with  the  views 
of  the  Baptists  in  general."  This  Confession  was  never 
adopted  elsewhere,  and  the  church  has  been  dissolved; 
the  Confession,  however,  figures  with  the  civil  and  ec- 
clesiastical authorities  as  the  Baptist  Confession  because 
it  is  the  only  one  ever  presented  to  them  as  the  basis  for 
legalization. 

Shortly  before  1861  a  Confession  was  drafted  and 
adopted  by  the  First  Baptist  Church  of  Stockholm.  This 
Confession  was  laid  before  the  Conference  of  all  the 
Baptist  churches  in  Sweden,  held  in  Stockholm,  June  23- 
28,  1 86 1,  and  by  them  adopted  as  "  The  Confession  of 
Faith  of  the  Szvedish  Baptists,  adopted  at  their  general 
Conference,  June  28,  1861."  The  above  facts  and  the  fol- 
lowing translation  were  communicated  by  Rev.  C.  E. 
Benander : 

1.  We  believe  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  of  both  the  Old 
and  the  New  Testament  (the  commonly  so-called  Apoc- 
ryphal Books  excepted)  are  inspired  by  God  and  con- 
stitute the  one  perfect  rule  for  our  Christian  faith  and 
practice. 

2.  We  believe  that  there  is  one  only  living  and  true  God 
— who  is  a  Spirit  infinite  in  all  perfections — ;  who  has  re- 


366  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 


vealed  Himself  in  three  equal  persons,  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 

3.  We  believe  that  the  first  man  Adam  was  created 
holy,  in  the  image  of  God,  but  fell  by  voluntary  trans- 
gression of  the  law  of  God  into  a  state  of  sin  and  death ; 
and  that  in  consequence  of  his  fall  all  his  natural  posterity 
have  inherited  his  corruption,  are  void  of  all  will  to  turn 
to  God,  and  without  power  perfectly  to  keep  his  law,  and 
therefore  they  are  guilty  before  the  wrath  of  God  and 
condemned  to  eternal  punishment. 

4.  We  believe  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  his  one 
person  united  true  Godhead  and  true  manhood,  that  he 
through  his  perfect  obedience  before  the  law  of  God  and 
through  his  atoning  death  has  opened  for  all  a  way  to  re- 
demption and  salvation  from  this  lost  state,  and  that 
every  one  who  from  his  heart  believes  in  him  will  become 
a  partaker  of  this  redemption  and  salvation  without  any 
merit  or  worthiness  of  his  own. 

5.  We  believe  that  the  gospel — viz.  the  glad  tidings 
of  the  salvation  which  is  acquired  through  Christ — ought 
to  be  preached  to  the  whole  world;  that  every  one  who 
hears  the  gospel  is  under  obligation  to  repent — viz.  with  a 
sincere  grief  before  God  to  confess  and  abandon  his  sins, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  believe  in  Christ  as  his  only  and 
all-sufficient  Savior — ,  and  that  whosoever  may  refuse 
to  do  so  will  incur  upon  himself  a  worse  condemnation. 

6.  We  believe  that  saving  faith  is  a  gift  from  God  and 
entirely  a  fruit  of  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  through 
the  word;  that  all  who  are  to  be  saved  have  been  given 
by  the  Father  to  the  Son  and  were  chosen  in  him  for 
salvation  and  sonship  before  the  foundation  of  this  world 
was  laid ;  and  that  we  ought  with  utmost  diligence  to  seek 
to  obtain  assurance  of  our  own  election, 

7.  We  believe  that  the  law  of  God  has  for  its  end  to 
be:  i)a  restraint  for  the  ungodly  to  restrain  them  from 
performing  all  the  evil  purpose  of  their  heart;  2)  a 
schoolmaster  to  bring  sinners  to  Christ,  in  as  much  as 
it  sets  before  them  the  just  claims  of  God  and  his  wrath 
over  sin,  shows  them  their  inability  to  fulfil  these  claims, 
and  thus  awakens  in  them  the  need  of  grace  and  forgive- 
ness of  sin;  3)  a  rule  for  the  walk  of  believers  to  be  fol- 


Confessions  of  Other  Nationalities  367 

lowed  in  the  spirit  of  the  new  covenant; — and  that, 
therefore,  with  these  ends  in  view  the  law  ought  to  be 
inculcated  in  all. 

8.  We  believe  that  baptism  ought  to  be  administered 
only  to  such  as  have  personally  by  a  trustworthy  confes- 
sion given  evidence  of  possessing  a  living  faith  in  Christ ; 
that  it  is  properly  administered  only  through  the  im- 
mersion of  the  whole  person  in  water ;  and  that  it  should 
precede  admittance  into  the  fellowship  of  the  church  and 
participation  in  the  Lord's  supper. 

9.  We  believe  that  a  true  Christian  church  is  a  union 
of  believing  and  baptized  Christians,  who  have  cove- 
nanted to  strive  to  keep  all  that  Christ  has  commanded,  to 
sustain  public  worship,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  choose  among  themselves  shepherds  or  over- 
seers, and  deacons,  to  administer  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
supper,  to  practice  Christian  church-discipline,  to  pro- 
mote godliness  and  brotherly  love,  and  to  contribute  to 
the  general  spread  of  the  gospel; — also  that  every  such 
church  is  an  independent  body,  free  in  its  relation  to 
other  Christian  churches  and  acknowledging  Christ  only 
as  its  head. 

10.  We  believe  that  the  first  day  of  the  week  was  kept 
holy  by  the  apostolic  churches  as  the  Lord's  day,  in- 
stead of  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  and  that  we  specially  on 
this  day  are  together  for  common  worship  and  to  exercise 
ourselves  in  godliness. 

11.  We  believe  that  civil  government  is  ordained  by 
God,  and  regard  it  our  duty  to  honor  and  pray  for  the 
King  and  the  magistracy  and  in  all  things  to  obey  the 
laws  of  the  land,  unless  they  plainly  are  in  conflict  with 
the  law  of  Christ. 

12.  We  believe  that  this  world  is  to  come  to  an  end; 
that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  again  appear  on  the 
earth  on  the  last  day,  wake  up  the  dead  from  their 
graves,  and  execute  a  general  judgment  in  which  all 
wicked  men  will  be  irrevocably  condemned  to  eternal 
punishment,  while  all  believing  and  righteous  men  will 
be  solemnly  established  in  their  possession  of  the  kingdom 
which  was  prepared  for  them  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world. 


368  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith 

4.  In  Other  Lands 

Of  Baptist  Confessions  in  other  lands,  there  is  little  to 
say.  On  the  mission  fields  the  churches  naturally  re- 
flect the  opinions  of  the  missionaries  from  whatever 
land  or  party  they  come. 

The  Canadian  Baptists  have  laid  no  stress  on  confes- 
sional statements,  and  now  circulate  no  recognized  Con- 
fession. The  same  conditions  probably  prevail  in  South 
Africa,  New  Zealand,  and  Australia.  Hungary  has  nearly 
twelve  thousand  and  Russia  nearly  twenty-five  thousand 
Baptists,  while  many  other  countries  have  a  few  churches 
and  members,  but  nothing  has  been  learned  as  to  their 
confessions. 


Date  Due 


*^^rT^: 


^ 


A  6 


